| WHEREIN THE - 
SACRED TEXT _ 
b- -- Is FnsenrrT Eo, 
3 | | AND | "T 
VARIOUS READINGS 
ANNE X' D, 

- "Eoponer with.the 


Parallel Scriptures. 


The more Difficult Tex ms in each VERSE are Explained. 


| Seeming ConTraDicTiONs Reconciled. 
QUESTIONS and DOU B T'S Reſolyed. 
And the Wrote Tx x Tr Opened. 


F OL I 


hs 


{Being a Continuation of Mr. POOLE S Work by certain Judictous 


and Learned Divines. 


. + — 
" TR I 
”— —————— 


The Fouxra Evirion. The whole Corrected and Amended by Mc. Sam. Clark, 
and Mr. ces Yeale. With large Contents to each Chapter. 


——C— 
———_—__ 


{7 NEHEM. VIII Verſe 8. Y 
{They read in the Book in the Law of God diftinitly, and gave the Senſe, and cauſed them to under ſtand | 


. the reading. 
ACTS. VIII. Verſe 39, 31. 


| [-—=Underfandeft thou what thow readeſt ? | 1 
| | "Howcanl, » xegpe ſome Man ſpall yy me ? 
| 


FOOT TOY FTE LOTT . - 


-—— — .__— ” th n TY 4. OPT WO 4 "EY II" FT TS IO 2 2.6 hs 


LOND 0 N; 


. Printed for T "MY P, an kbarſt, Jonathan Robinſon, Br abazon Aylmer 7 pin Lawrence, John 
_ Taylor, and 7. homes Cockerill in the wha CC 


5 At. P 


PR” — a EOF on PR rSoo—_—wros + » _— - ” 


QIDDISOIS = 
EEE IF 
179, \. 
M77 
of 
< V 
.L 
; J 
E| 1 
4' _ . 
1 _— E 
{ol =] : 
SY EE 
=| : 
_ 1 = 
i | | = = 
ph 1 g = 
NN 
my 
Ch ff [ 4 
yp Ba 
+ > \ 
i DY.VY 
| ill "A AS 
i h it " " hong 
| INN | 
Ht! 


Ly 


/ 
45; 
- 


Y Jha, 


Mau 


I}! 


j 


: N 


P fo 2 eITIUEEITED 
DOS SY - 
= - -/ 
& ae. EECAGFT/ 
WSRSR>S, 7 
- z - off 


| 
| 
| 


T_T”. 


[ 
1 


I} 
| 


FIEEINL 
L1LALL 


n 
> 
x 


Ls 
FAT 
is Y 
{ E 
"7 i 
*y 
LF. 
4”. 
45S) 
- 


Fs 


THE 


PREFACE 


READER. 


\ E have at lemth, through the Divine Afiſtance, finiſh'd the Annotations upon the Bible, be* 
2un and carried on by Mr. Poole in the firſt Volume ;, whoſe diſcerning Judgment, great Indu- 


try, and pious Spirit,. are conſpicuous in that very uſeful Work. Our ſincere Deſign and En- 
deavours have been to ſearch and unfold the Meaning of the Sacred Oracles ; abhorring the impious Arts of 
thoſe who pervert the Scriptures from their pure and native Senſe to give Colour and Countenance to their 
private Fancies. Wherein we have miftaken their genuine Senſe, ( for who in the preſent State of Infirmity 
and Imperfettion fully knows the Mind of the Lord inthem? ) it has wot been for want of Love to the Truth, 
zor of uſing the beſt Helps within our compaſs for the clearing the Difficulties found in them. There remains 
220 more for us t9 do, but to recommend the Work to the Bleſſing of Heaven, and to the Study of Chriſtians, 
that they would diligently read the Scriptures to underſtand them, and under ſtand to praftice them, and be 
happy for ever. I1t may ſeem needleſs to urge this Duty upon thoſe who profeſs to believe this Divine Book 
20 be the ſole and infallible Guide to bleſſedneſs.” But alas! many who in Title are Chriſtians, are careleſs of 
it. Some ar: captivated by charming Lults, 'and would go oz 'in a voluptuous courſe of ſinning with- 
our Diſturbatice : all ſuch have an Antipathy to the true Glaſs that reflets' upon Conſcience their foul 
Deformity. And by their wretched Neglef® they not only deſerve, but inflift upon themſelves that ſevere 
doom, Their Gns ſhall not be purgedaway till they die ; for the clear Streams of the Spirit flowing in the 
Scriptures, both diſcover the Spots of the Squl, and are efficatious to waſh them off. Others are ſo deeply 
engaged in the Buſineſs of the World, that they have no leaſure to attend to the Counſels and Callgf Ged in 
the Bible ; if Rules were laid down therein, how to obtain ſecular Riches and Honours, they would i2tenſly 
apply themſelves to conſider them, andtreaſure them up in their Minas and Memories, and diligently practiſe 
them : but ſince it propounds a ſpiritual and future Bleſſedneſs to be obtained by per(evering Diligence, 
they connt it miſpent time tobe fludious.of it. Thas the worldly wile, are guilty of Folly above Admira- 
tion; for to gain the Trifles: of Time, they loſe the Pearl of Price, that enriches the Poſſeſſors for ever. 
Beſides theſe Carnaliſts that live without. God in the World, how many that pretend a Veneration for the 
Scriptutes, do but ſeldom or ſuperficially regard them ? *Tis not the bare Reading of them that ts profitable, 
but with a Diſpoſition and Frame of Heart ſuitable to them. An bumble Reverence of the Majeity of God 
appearing in his Word, makes the Heart tenaer and teachable, and receptive of Holy Impreſſions ; ſincere 
Aims to be inſlrutted in the Will of God, with a reſolution to obey it, prepares for the receiving ſpiritual 
Benefit. The Study of the Scriptures from vain Curioſity, and a deſire of knowleage to pleaſe our ſelves, 
and to be valued by others, is tofoment Pride ( the univerſal Diſeaſe of the bumane Mind ) by the Remedy 
that ſhould cure it. And none are in ſuch danger of being ignorant of the Myſteries of Godlineſs, as rhe 
preſumptuous: 'But he that ſeeks for Salvation in the Word, ſhall find it, and the moſt ſublime and ſa- 
tisfatory Knowledge with it. ' And to this muſt be joyned fervent Prayer, That the Divine Spirit, who in- 
aited the Scriptures, would interpret them to us, that his concomitant Virtue and effettual Grace may make 
them to be Light tothe Blind, 4 Remedy to the Diſeaſed, Life to the Dead, axd Strength zo the Living, 
zhe Converſion azd the Conſolation of loft Souls. Now ſince the Word of God hath ſuch a bleſſed Influ- 
ence upon all that cordially apply it, ſhall we be neglizent in converſing with it * How does the Example of 
David «pbraid Chriftians ? His ſuperlative Eſteem and Aﬀections were fet upon the Word of God. It 
was his unyaluable Treaſure ; the moſt precious Gold loft :ts Luſtre, .and was faint in the compariſon with 
it ; it was his deareſt Delight, the ſweeteſt things were diſrelliſbing and ungrateful to his Palat ſet againſt 
it. Thus he expreſſeth himſelf, The judgments of the Lord are true and Righteous altogether ; more 
to be delired are they than Gold, yea than much fine Gold ! ſweeter alſo than Honey or the Honey- 
comb. Into what an: Extaſie of Aﬀeition does he break forth in another Plalm ! O how I love thy law ! 


. 1tis my Meditation all rhe'day. He was encumbred with the Afﬀairs of a Kingdom, yet the Divine Law 


was the continual AttraCtive of his Thoughts, as the needle touch dby the Loadſtone always points to its be- 
/oved Star. And what a ſmall Portion of the Divine Word did he enjoy, to what is richly communicated to 
us? Ve have the bleſſed Goſpel brought down from Heaven by the Son of God, wherein hu Eternal 
Counlels are clearly revealed, to ſatisfy his injured Juſtice by the Sacrifice of the Mediator, that his Mercy 
might te glorified in our Redemption. We have repreſented to us in the Goſpel the Life of Chriſt /o glori- 
015 in Holineſs, ſo exemplary and perſwaſive to make us Holy and Heavenly, for all the Temptations of the 
World are either from the Debire of thoſe things that he deipiſed, or from the Fear of the Evils that he vo- 
lunrarily ſuffered. Iz ſhort, Chriſtians that profeſs themſelves the Children and Diſciples of Chriſt, can- 
-ot without renouncing the Dignity of thoſe Relations,neglet# that Book that contains the Divine Inftrufti- 
ons of their Maſter, aud the Teſtament of their Father, diſpoſing and aſſuring the heavenly Inheritance 
70 them. Let us then every day redeem Time from the V anities and Buſineſs of the World, to read with So- 
lemuity of Spirit this bleſſed Book iz our Families and Cloſets, that we and all ours may partake of its (an- 
Ctifying and ſaving Virtue. Let us come tothe Word, as thoſe in the Goſpel to our Saviour, to hear him, 
and to be healed of their Infirmities. 4d in theſe times of dangerous Seduition from the Truth, let us 
mith the Araency of the Apoſtle, addreſs our ſelves to Chriſt; Lord, to whom ſhall we go ? thou haſt 
the Words of Erernal Lite. 


A 


Vol. II, : 


A Txt of ſome Principal Matters cefitained in the Notes of the Firſt Volume. 


Ctions: Why no AGions of Wicked art pleafing to | 
God ; Pfal, 14. 1. f+ 
Adam, how could a Rib be taken out of him, but it wa 
either ſuperfluous or defeQive, Gen. 2. 21. 
How he knew Eve was taken ont of him 5 Gen. 2. 23. 
Affiidtions, a means of Happineſs , Job 5. 17. 56. 
Angels, why ſome called Seraphims , Iſa. 6.2. k. 


Ark of Noah, how could the Creatures which came out of it 


get into Iſlands, c Gen. 9. 17. 
Ark, in Tabernacle, why call d the Teſtimony ? Ex. 2.5. 16. #- 
Atheiſts, their Cavils anſwer'd ; Gen. 3. 1. & 6. 15. & 


36. 31. tr. Numb. 22. 28. 1 Sam. 13. 5. 2 Sam. | 


15. 7. t Kings 20. 30. 2 Kings 18.2. 1 Chron. 
22, 14. 2 Chron. 2.2. 2. 
Barrenneſs, why a Reproach 3 Gen, 30. 23. 
Birthright, Privileges thereof 3 Gen. 25. 31- | 
Blood, why forbidden to be eaten, Lev- 3.17. I & 17.11. 0. 
Cain, whom did he fear , Gen. 4. 14- 
That there were a Multitude of People in the Earth when 
be ſlew Abel; Gen. 3. 14. FS. 
Canaan, why conquered by degrees; Joſh. 171. 18, 
Fruitfulneſs thereof proved, Exod 3. 8. r. 
Ceremonies, divers obſers'd before Moſes ; Gen. 31. 35+ 
Chariots of Iron, what ; Joſh. 17. 16. 0. 
Children, it's God's uſual Method to take them into Cove- 
nant with their Parents 3 Pal. 22.30. g. 
They ſuffer for their Parents Sins ; Wa. 14, 21. x. 
Chrift, bow he is our Goel z Fob 19. 25. l. 
Concubine, what ; Gen. 22. 24» 
Confeſſion of Sin muſt be particular ; Lev. 5.7» x. 
Confin-germans , whether their Martiage be lawful , Lev. 
I8, I4. t. 
Council ; wy Power of the Sanbedrim, or great Council of 
the Jews, Gen. 44. 20. þ Col. 2. 
Cuſhites, whoz 2 Chron. 21.16, 
David, whether he did well in recalling Abſalom z 2 Sam. 
Iq4 22. 
Whether be did well in the Charge he gave Solomon con- 
cerning Shimei; 1 Kings 2. 8. a. 
Dreams may be eitheir Praiſe - worthy or Blame-worthy , 
r Kings 3. 5,6. 
How they differ from Viſions, Job 3. 13. 
Duty, the Grace of God does not free us from tt, Deut, 20.10. 


Marſlayer, whether his Cauſe was tried in City of Refuge, 
or elſewhere, Numb. 35. 12. 7. 
Marriage, God's Prohibution of unequal Matches with 119- 
| laters, Gen. 24. 3. e, 
* Some are void ipto facto, Ezra 10.3. f. 
Whether Marriage of Coufin-germans be Iomful , Lev. 
18, 14. 4. | 
There may be Exceſs in aſe of Marrizge- bed, Pr. 5 19. 2, 
: Miniſters, God highly reſents Injuries done w them , 
1 Kings 13. 4. ks "9 | 
Moſes, how ccuid be be confirmed in his preſent Calling and 
Work by a thirg future * Exod. 3. 12. | 
Why he negle&:d to circumciſe his Son, Exod. 4. 24, 
Whether it was decent for him to commend hinſelf , 
| Numb. 12. 3. | 
Muſick, its Power on the Spirits and Hfi@ions, 1 Sam 16 16. 
Neightonr is any Man, tho @ Stranger or Fhathcn, Pl.15.3. b. 
Noah's Ark. bow the Creatures that came out of it could 
get into Iſlands, Gen: g. 17; 
Offering ; Difference between Sin- cffering and Treſpa(;- 
__ Offiring, Lev. 5. 6. ering Jpa/s 
Pardoning ef Sin # an AG rf Prrecr, Num. 14 17, 2. 
Parents, Children may ſuffer for their Sins, 1a.1 4.21. x. 
" People, why puniſh'd for Sins of Rulers, 2 Chron, 21, 14; 
PhylaGeries, what, Exod. 13. 9. 
Prayer : The ſame Words may be repeated ſometimes, 
Eccleſ. 5. 2. m. 
Priefts, how far forth their Sentence was valid, Lev.27.14. x. 
Prophets, what, 1 Sam. 10.5. m. | 
Sons of Prophets, what, 1 Sam. 10. 5. m, 
Prophecy ; Means t» attain it, 2 Kings 3. 15. 

Providence, bow far forth to be taken for a Rule of our Judg- 
ment, 2 Sam. 14. 22. Jatter end of the Note. 
Riter, divers Ceremonial Rites obſerved before Moſes, 

Gen. 3. 3F. 
Rulers, why People are puniſh'd for their Sing, 2 Chr, 21. 14. 
Sabbath, whether inſtituted from the Beginning, Gen. 2. e. 
| Neh. 9. 14. © | 

What it's a Sign of, Exc0d. 31. 13. h, 

Three ſorts of Sabbaths,. Exod, 23, 12. y: 
Sanbedrim, their great Power, Gen. 49. 10, Col, 2. 
| Sacrificer, why ſo many ſorts of them, Lev. 1. c, 
Why of Oxen and Sheep, Lev. 1.. d. 


Fat, why forbidden to be eatin, Lev. 3.17. k, 

Firſt born, their Privileges, Gen. 25. Zt. 

Forcknowledge of God, its. abſolute Certainty in the moſt con- 
tingent things, Tt Kings 13. 2. e. 

An infallible Demonſtration thereof, Iſa. 45. 13. k- 
Fruitfulneſs of the Land of Canaan proved, Exod. 3.8. r. 
Gibeonites, whether League made with them was obliging, 

Joſh. 9. 15. 
God, the Cirtaimty of his Foreknow!edg, 1 Kings 13. 2+ & 
la. 45.13. k: 

IFhy be caunot do unjuſtly, Job 34. 13. 5. & 40. 2.. b. 

How far forth h: may love wicked Men, 1fa. 48. 14. 8. 
Grace of God diſcharges not from Duty, Deur. 30. 1O. 7. 
Hebrew Text , its Purity aſſerted, notwithſtanding ſome 

divers Readings, 2, Chron. 22.2. 


Jacl, whether her ſlaying Siſera was warrantable, Jud.4 21. | 


Tdolaters , God's Probibition of bis People to marry with 
them, Gen. 24 3, e- 
Magiſtrates obliged 10 puniſh them, Job 31. 28: e. 
Tephthah, whether he ſacrificed his Daughter, Judg.1x. 9. 
Image of God in Man, wherein it confifts, Gen. 1. 26. 4. 
Infidels , their Cavils anſwer d, Gen. 3.1. & 6.15. & 
36. 31. rt. Numb. 22.28. 1 Sam. 13.5. 2gyam. 
15.7. 1 Kings 20. 30. 2 Kings 15. 2. 1 Chron, 
22.14. 2 Chron. 22.2. 

Intentions, Men are juſtly puniſh'd for their wicked Inten- 
tions, Plal. 22.11. «. 

Forrney, Sabbath-day's Fourney, what, Joſh. 3.4. b. 

Judges, what, Judg, 2.16. 

Leayue, whether that mage with Gibeonites was obliging, 
Jelh. 9. 15. 

Laws , their firſt Violation generally ſeverely puniſh'd , 
1 Sam. 13. 14. f. 


Saul, why God puniſh'd . bim ſo ſeverely for that which 
ſeemed ſo ſmall a Fault, 1 Sam. 12. 14. 
Why God delayed puniſhing bis ſlaying the- Gibeonites till 
after bs Death, 2 Sam. 21. 1. . 
Sentence of the Priefts, bow far valid, Lev. 27, 14. c, 
Seraphim, wby ſome Angels ſo called, 1a. 6. 2. h. 
Serpent, how it could ſpeak, cad why Eve not frighted with 
the Diſceurſe, Gen. 3. 1. c. 
Shekel of Sanduary, why ſo called, Gen. 23. 15, Ex.30.1 3. 0 
Sickneſs, how Perſons are to be dealt withal therein, Job 347. 0, 
Sin, why God puniſh'd the whole Society for the Sin of one, 
Joſh. 7. 1. e. 
Sin-offering ; Differencs between that and Treſpaſs-offer- 
ing, Lev. 5.6. 
Particular Confeſſion of Sin muſt be made, Lev. 5. 5, x. 
Pardon of it an AG of Power, Num. 14. 17. 2. 
Solomon, whether he was ſaved, 1 Kings 11. 42. 
Southſayers, what, Iſa. 2. 6. 2. : 
Tempt, ſeveral Signifieations of the word z Gen. 22. 1; b. 
Teraphim, what, Gen. 31. 19. 
Thoughts , unclean Thoughts forbidden by Law as well as 
Goſpel, Job 31. 1. a. 
Tythes, their ſeveral forts, Deut, 11. 17. g. 
Tongue, why called a Man's Honour, Gen. 49. 6. 1. 
Treſpaſs-offering, bow it differs from Sin-offertng, Lev. 5. 6. 
Vifion, what, and how it differs from a Dream, Job 3. 13, 
Virginity, why counted a Reproach by Fews, Ia. 4. 1. g. 
A Vow, what, Ecclel. 5:4. q. 
Wicked, how far good Men rejvice in their Deſtrudion, 
Job 22.19. s. 
Why their Adions are not pleaſing 29 God, Pl. 14, 1, Ff. 
How far forth God may love them, Iſa. 48. 14.. e. 
| Word of God, its Excellency above God's Works, as 6 


Magiſtrates obliged to puniſh Idolaters, Job 31. 28. x. 


| means of Salvation, Pſal, 19. 7. &. 


yu 
$4: 
FS. 
> 7X 
* 7 
»r Fug ors 
$4 4 
by E 
22 
W- £ 
* IA 
L 
, 
ty 
} 
S, 
7 


bb 4 5 
+ as 
3% + 
£ 
oy 
—_ 
4 
W 
IT 
7 
% 
> » > 
>» 
LA 
F.. 
i 
\ Zn 
"\FV-4 
, 4 HF 
KF 5.5 
” 4% dz 5 
94 
OI 
Wt 
s, ater 
—- | 2, a 
6 
%, 2] 
"»W 25 
<n. 5 


__ we ; : 
"* 2 Kings 

Tas. 8. 
<h. 52. 12. 


Chap, fl 


Annotations on JEREMIAH 


The ARGUMENT T. 


T was the great Unhappineſs of this Prophet to be @ Phyſician to, but could not ſave a dying State, their Diſeaſe fill 
[| prevailing againſs the Remedy ; and indeed no wonder that all things were ſo much out of order, when the Book of 
the Law had been wanting for ſome while. He was called tobe a Teacher in his Youth, in the Days of good Jo- 
fiah, being [andtified, and ordained by God to his Prophetical Office from his Mother s Womb, Chap. 1. 5. in a very evil 
time, though the People afterward proved much worſe upon the Death of that good King. He ſett.mg himſelf againſt the 
Torrent of the Corruptions of the Times, was always oppoſed, and unkind!y treated by his angrateſu! Countrymen, as alſo 
by falſe Prophets, and the Prieſts, Princes, and People, who encouraged ai: their Impieties and Unrighteoa/neſs : At length 
be threatned their Deſtruttion and Captivity by th? Chaldeans, hich he lived to fee, but foretells their Return after 
ſeventy Years : All which accordingly came to paſs : He doth alſo, notwithſt anding his dreadf. Threatnings, imntermix 
divers comfortable Promiſes of the Meſſiah, and the Days of the Goſpel 5 he denounces alſo heavy fudgments againFf 
:he Heathen Nations, that had afflicted God's People, both ſuch as were near, and aljv more remote, as Egypt, the 
Philiſtines, Moab, Edomites, Ammonites, Damaſcus, Kedar, Hazor, Elam, but eſpecially Babylon her ſelf, 
that is made ſo great a Type of the Anti-chriſtian Babylon i the New Teſtament. Upon the Murder of Geda- 
liah, whom the Chaldeans had made Governour of Judea, he was forcibly againſt his Ws ill carried into Egypt, (where 
after he had propheſied from firſt to laſs between forty and fifty Years) probably he died ; [ome ay he was ſtoned. 

Whatever elſe we hear mentioned of bis Writings, they are either counterfeit, as the Prophecies of Baruch, &c. or it is 
likely we have the Sum of them in this Book, though poſſivly ſome of his Sermons might have had ſome Enlargements in 
that Roll which, by his Appointment, was written by Baruch, Chap. 36. 2, &c. | 


and in Egypt afterwards; but only relates to what he prophetied 
while the City and Temple were Fanding, the ref ſeznung rather 
to be added as a Supplement, than to be reduced unto chis vene= 
ral Title of his Propheſies. » Yiz. Of that prefent Year ; tcr, 


C H A P. IL. 
The Pedigree, Time, and Calling of Jeremiah, confirmed againſt his. 


Excnſes, 1 10. His Viſtons of an Almond-Rod and Seething-/ though the Year end notar the fifth Month, yer it might end che 
Pot, 11——14. His heavy Meſſage again} Judah, 15 — 16. Year of Zedekiah's Reign, becauſe he might begin his Reivn ac 
God promiſeth him his Aſſiſtance, 17 —— 19. the fifch Month of the Year. | 


H E words « of Jeremiah cheſon of Hilkiah 5] . 4 Theno the word of the LORD cameunto me 2, 


of the prieſts that ere in Anathoth in the lay ing, "A CERT 
land of Benjamin c. . 6. Wen he was firit called to his Othce : Or, The Lord 

8, i.e. Sermons, or Prophets which he received from God _ — great p A change of the Perſon, a 
(as being his Mouth to declare them unto the People) and com- E I TOpNets. * 


Chai. 


T 


priſed all in the- Volume of this Book going under his Name, as 5 T Before I * formed thee in the belly 9, I knew*Tq 49% 


the Matter and Subſtance of them. See on 1a. 2. 1. + As this] theey : and before thou cameſt forth ont of the wont 4 
' Jy, * 9 . 


ſerves to diſtinguiſh him from other Priefts, ſo his being of 4na- | « . > I Toy : 
thoth ranks hi among the common Prieſts ; not that High I Ny Won, and ] 7 ordained:-thee a propher : 
Prieſt mentioned 2 Kings 22. 8. under whoſe Progeny Jeremiah unto 7 the nations, 
3s not named. 1 Chron. 6. 13. Who, it is probable, would have 


Joſh. 21. 18. OF an ordinary Teacher he was made a Propher, | hath been formerly noted. /7iz. Not with taving Grace tho (that 
not ſo of the reſt. c, i. e. That part of Canaan that fell to Benja- need not to be excluded) bur accordingly prepared and ordein- 
min's Share. . ed thee for this publick Service, and thus it was with Paul. Gal. 

2 To whom the word of the LORD 4 came in the 7; 15- where both are expreſſed. See the like uſe of the Word 


l - | Iſa.13. 3. He ſpeaks thus to Feremiah, nor to the other Prophers 
. Lak T: . S hers, 
days e of Joſiah the ſon of Amon f king of Judah, in becauſe he ſtood in need of greater, and more direct Encourage 


the thirteenth year g of his reign. ment thanthey, both in reſpe& of the Tendernets of his Years 

d Either that Commiſſion from God that did authorize him to | and alſo of thole inſuperable Difficulties, which in rhoſe moitde- 
his Prophetical Work (as it may probably be taken, John 10. 35.) | generate and corrupt times he muſt unavoidably enoatcr wack 
was aftually given unto him, verſe 10- or, Command of God, | which might cauſe him to decline rhe Work Perſe 6, 1 Bither 
(as 'tis uſed, 1 Kings 12. 24.) Or rather, the Materials of which | with reference to Place to other Nations beſides the Jews peagean 
his Prophecies were to conſiſt, for the ſpace of 41 Years ſucceſ- | pears Ch.43. and 46,and 47,&c. taking the Jews in among them, 


——— 


ſively in Fudea, viz. from the 1 3th Year of 7oſiabto the 11th Year | as Chap. 25- 17, 18. and ſo Unto may be taken for Againſt, as it * 


of Zedekiah, beſides the time that he prophetied in Egypr. See] 1s often expreſſed in thoſe places and elſewhere ; or with reference 
Chap. 43. and 44. as 1ſa. 2. 1. e, 7.e.. During the Reign, and| to time, to People of all times, who may be in{tructed by this 
corrupt State of Religion. f Whocorrupred again that Religion| Book, or whoſe Words are mide uſe of, both by ſeveral Pro hers 
by thoſe Idolatries that his Father Manaſſes had in the latter part| of the Old Teſtament, as Daniel, Exekiel, Nehemiah, &: mY = 
of his Reign ſo well reformed by rooting of them out. 2 Chroz.| our Saviour in the New, by Mat:hew, Chap. 2. 17 ; Y By Pri! 
33s 21, 22, 23, g By whichir appears that Jeremiah prophetied| 2 Cor. 6. 18. And by St. John, Rev, 2. XK. DR aa, 


» 
LAGC T, 


9, i. e. Womb, 1ſa. 46. 2. Having ſpoken before of che time wh TOY 


been named, being one of ſo much note, and who always lived | of his Call, Yerſe 4. he now ſyeaks of the minner of it. », 7. e. + Heb: 
at Jeruſalem, not at Anathoth, which was 2 City three Miles from Approved, and appointed thee, as a fir Minitter for this Work. ; ;-; 
7 ;uſalem, lotted out of the Tribe of Benjamin for the Prieſts, | Words of Knowledge among the H:brews note Aﬀetion ; as 


the laſt eighteen Years of Joſiah's Reign ; for he reigned thirty 6 Then ſaid I, Ah, x * Lo:4 GOD, Behold, I can «p;..1 
5 b cit. 3 3 N X01, 6 


one Years,. 2 Kings 22, 1. 


3 h It came alſo in the days of ; Jehoiakim, the ſon | 20t ſpeak y : for I am a child x. rs 


of Joſiah king of Judah, unto the end of the eleventh | * An introdudory Interjetion making way tor mis route in 
. . 2 way of Grief and Comp}ainr, endeavourimg with ali Keverence 
year of Zedekiah & the ſon of Joſiah king of Judah, ro a himſelf of crabs ſuch 2 work ra fly. it Lain 
unto the carry1ng away of Jeruſalem L Captive 7 ” 1 perly the Sigh of one that hath roo great a weight upon his thoul- 
the fifth month 2, ders. y Nor dumb as Zachary, Like 1.20, 22. NOr itammering 
h Viz. The Word of the Lord, as werſe 2. i Called at firſt| #5 Moſes, Exod. 4.10, 14. but not wit that becoming Uraviry and 
by Yofiah Eliakim, 2 Kings 23. 34+ Fehoahaz and Jehoiakin commanding Majeſty as 1s ſuitable ro a Prophet. He modetily 
(whereof the former reigned before him, 2 Kings 23. 31 the Jat- exculeth himſelf, from a coniideration of the weighr of rhe worl:, 
ter ſucceeded, 2 Kings 24. 8.) are conceived not to be mentioned and the tenderneſs of his Age, 25 1n_the next Exprettion. 2 Et: 
becauſe they reigned bur each of them three Months, and there- | her in Years, and fo not ripe, or apt forthe declaring of rear 
fore not conſiderable, the Scripture often taking little notice of a | ©1285, 2nd that ro Princes and Nobles. * Or, 2. In Experience, 
ſmall time, as of fix Months : Compare 2 Sam. 5. 5. with 1 Kings being altogether unski}ful in fach Afzirs, not having been vil 
2+ 11. k See Verſe 2. of whom read 1 Chron. 3. 15,16. 1, i e. 'ro propheſte : and therefore 12 neither reipect likely to be rich 
The Inhabiranrs of Jeruſalem, namely under Zedekiah, 2 Kings regarded. 
25. 17. during all which time, things ſtanding in that ſtate and - But the LORD {aid unto me, Say not T am 5 
5 


condition, Jeremy prophelied. »2 This doth not terminate the F < vj 
child 2 ; for t! 9 þ to all c thar | #41 
VOL. i. A} ” 


3 ' 
C3? {4h + © + 
RIEL FREEGE -, F 


F . m - ; Eo ox t 
time of his Prophelies, for he propheſied alſo both in Judzz, : £27 


JERE 
thou ſhalr 


> p - - 2» "RW  FREOoG, 
tad Pxcules. b This 1s God $ Antwer to Jeriin ts 
nic of his own Tnabiiity x 


I iv nor 
2 % 


ti11s may be by W 4 y 


3/3 TEL JET OE 1HES | 
”y , 1 ' . EE 7 @ x bh Vide Wh be a . a : FR, FEY 
Of CONN and, 213.4 CilTCil ICS 2 Check 09 is £10 eroutnels 3 CRUU 
| A * ENOVY oo) + PIER tif wil «4-1 
(halt co. ricrefare draw not back : Or, by way of Fromile, 2d | 
2 s Say - »' Jxr* £13 F TH Yo Ft Ft $ 5 FER bw 
then IT 1% 2 6 IUSSTA:CLUS Y Ati er tO i11S Excuſe, aS DOUtil DI ICecd CTU 


j 


l 


L 


_ Fear nor, I wil inake 


4 
fi 
CL 


12C, nou 


1: { ©, 101S TN Few 53 an 


I 33O4L 
” 
: 


Wo» 


' 
Ch 


x 
TCP, I 


1 am with 

- 

'®, LW, 

07 of their 
\ 


. U TION 


d 0 ” 


en- 
gg” 


- 
. 


PELL = 
reirect ol 
* 


. 
ir 
, 


a+, /v 
EEE 


oO 


3. 12. and Dent, 31. 


125 cHion for Encouragement. 


- 


from 2 1c:il2 of his own Infuthciency, 4.4 
thee cloguent 2nd couragions, Cc This retares etc 
Things. To al, 4. c.to ail Perions to whom I thall fend 
ſh2jt balk none. Sc2 . Or p37 Fre | 
Tal toOU fait (203 lag.cs ei1ac ] 
See 1{1. 55. 
not afraid of their faces e: fo 
eliver thee g, ſaith the LOR 
2 Looks, Ez-k. 3.9. the Indic 
raged Minds, Pon. 3. 19. Neither when thou UElvere: | 
fagero them, nor when thou mayeit be cirea butore tnem, 3247 10. 
r$, 19. This is God's Anſwer to Jeremy's Fears 11 Te{pect Or ne 
Perions he was to deal with, as the otizer wes 1n his 
own confcioutneS of Infuificiency ; and he mentions their .CES, 
becauſe the majeitick Countenance of Princes and Magititrares 15 
apr to ſtrike a YCAL Awe and Terror upon Children. f Fil nor 
oniy ſend thee, as other kings do toy 
with thee : Thi; God promiles to oſs, 5 
6. $. o Here God promites his Prote 
” Ohan Then the LORD put forth his hand þ, and rouch- 
LIP. 5. Q 1end NC LL P . ag Wn 
L+- ed ; my mouth, and the LORD {aid unto me; Behold, 
I have * put my wordsin thy mouth. 

þ God having before excited rhe Propher to his work by Come 
mand and Promiſe, doth now in « Vition citablith and confirm 
him, either by the Hand of an Ange!, as fa. 6. 6, 7. or rarher, 
by himſelf in ſome vitible ſhape. 7 jt icb. Car? eporr (4s Lhe wW ord 
55 uſed Jed. 20. 41.) hereby enabling him ro tpeak : Or, Thou 
thalt be my Mourh to deliver my Words : partly co ler Jeremy One 
derftand thatthey were God's Words ; and partly to inrimarte, 
that they ſhould be effechuz] : and partly, that he thould never be 
without them, but continually ſupplied. See tne like kind of 
Phraſe Chap. 5. 14. And he adds, B-hold, g. d. attend ro what I 
am about to ſay : Or, look upon this outward Sign, and let ut at- 
fure thee of the things iigmtied. 

ro See, I have this day ſet thee over the nations, 
*Chap.18.and over the kingdoms /, to * root out, and to pul] 
down 2, and to deltroy, and to throw down, to build 


2 Cor. 10. 
Cor. 19. 1nd to plant ». | | $41 
4, 5* [ Having now received his Commuſſion, he is directed to whom 


he is to go, v2. to the greateſt, not only ſingle Perſons, but 
whole Nations, as the Babylonians, Perſians, and Egypiians, and 
exhorted to greatneſs of Mind, as being fent as an Ambaſſador 
from God. to deliver his Meſſage without Flattery or Cowardice ; 
and that he might make that. proud People ſenſible of their Folly, 
that looked upon themſelves above Reproof, he gives unto bis 
Prophet this large Authority. 22, 7. e. To prophetic that 1 will 
pull down ; which I will as certainly effec, as if thou hadſt done 
it thy {elf : for, according to Scripture uſage, the Prophets are 
faid to do thar whichthey forerel ſhall come to paſs, Ger. 4. 7. 
ze. 43. 3. 7-6-to pronounce DeſtruQtion : Hence God 15 {aid 
to flay them by rhe Words of hi; Mouth, Hof. 6. 5. and foare all 
the following ExpieTionsfo be underſtood. » Metaphors taken 
from Archire&s and Gardiners : Either the former Words relate 
to the Enemies of God, ard the Jarter to his Friends; or rather, 
to both conditionally : It they repent, he will build them up, 
7. e. he will encreatc their Families, and plant them, viz. fertile 
them in the Land, ap. 24. 6. I they do. nor, te will root 
them up, and puli them down, &c. He will do the contrary, 
Compare this with cap, 42. 19. and 45, 4. Thereaſfon why God 
uſferh ſo many Words to rlic fame purpoſe, ſeems to be, partly 
to ſkew how deeply all kind of Wickedneſs and Contempt of 
God k:6 rzken root ; which potſibly may be one reaſon why he 
placethi Pulling down and Rooting up, before Building and Plant- 
ing, to ſhew what a deal of Rubbiih there was to be removed, 
before he could reform, and repair his Church and State : Or ra- 
ther, becauſe the Prophet was to begin with theſe in his Prophe- 
- fie, asappears by his ſecond Vilions, wer. 11. 13. and purtly to 
quicken the Propher's Zeal 2gainſt them- 
11 5 Moreover, the word of the LORD cameo un- 
to me, faying, Jeremiah, whar ſeeſt chou ? and I ſaid 


I ſee a rod of an almond-tree p. _ 

o This and the boiling Czuldron, werſe 13. is rhought to be 
at the ſame time, and in the fame Viftion, when he was firſt a»- 
pointed ro his Work. p, Viz. That had Leaves and poſſibly Bloſ 
ſoms on it, like Aaron's, Numb. 17.8. for without Leaves at 
leaſt, 'tis poſſible he had not to readily gueſſed of what kind ir 
had been. This is a Tree thatbloſloms early, and ſpeedily, and 
hence hath irs Name in Hebrew Scaka, ignifying warchful, for- 
ward, nimble, Or quick ; and fo it may point at either God's 
Readineſs to fſmire, woe 12, which is deſcribed elſewhere by 
Summe:r-Fruit, Amos 8-1, 2. Or Iſracls Ripenets to be ſinitten 
as we have the like Ezeh. 7. 10,11. or both ; this Rod being like 
2 POIfentous Comet, thewing to Jereminy the Miterics thar Were 
at hand, as the Dearth of Jo/tah, which ſoon followed this Vitior, 
2 Kings 23. 29.* and the taxing them by Pharaoh Necks, 2 Kings 
23- 3s. and preſently after the breaking in of the Challe; Syri- 
ans, Noabites, and Ammonites, 2 Kings 24.2, and then the Ba ylg- 
ian Captivity, 2 Kings 24. 10. which happened in the 8th Year 
of 7eniahim, 2 Kings 24. 1% when Nebnchannctar took him with 
others, and carricd them away about twenty three Years from 
hence ; and about the goth Year 7F:ruſuol: was taken, and the 
Temple burnt. 


>» 
a2 


4 


— 


+ 
T\ 


thee, and wharfoever I command thee, 
{>0at, | 


: ' - JÞ » SG Fd ) ! 
ates eltier TO F2Luuns OT | 


r 11 v !VECLI” 


Ambatllalors, but EL will go * 


e, 


- 7 © 
M I 4 H. Chap. I, 
12 Then ſaid the LORD unto me, Thou haſt well 


ſeen : for I will haſten r my word / to perform it. 

a Or, thou haſt ſeen and judged right : Or, as the Hebrew, 
hou haſt done well to ſee, 1. e. in teeing fo. 4 Word for Word, 1 
| w/ll Amond-tree it, 7, e T will be upon them ſpeedily, in a ſhort 
ume, and ſuddenly, ere they arc aware : Or, I will warch, and 
| beready to accompliſh this 1n due time. /, z. e. My Word of 
| Threatning againſt 7zdah and its Inhabitants. 
| : And the word of the LORD came unto me the 
| ſecond time, faying, What ſeelt thou ? and I ſaid, I 
| fee a ſeething-pot z, and the face « thereof # f rowards + Heb. 
; the north x. OOO ne 
| 2 Afrer the ſmaller Puniſhment from the Lord, follows this Jace of the 
| of the Boiling-por, by wiuch ynderitand Jrdca and Feruſalem, as orth. 
| may appear by tne Application that they themſelves make of it 
{ina way of Scorn and Derifion, Ezek.11. 3.7. Some put- the 

face of the pot for the Pot it ſelf ; as the face of the cold, - the 

face of his anger for Cold and Anger it ſelf, 9.4. I ſce a Por 
coming, meaning the B1vylozian Army flowing in upon them, 

like boiling or fcalding Water, as ſome interpret it: But this 
feeins not to be fo congruous tothe Viſion ; bur rather thus, The 
Bavylonians thouild beſtege, as a Fire plays round the Furnace when 

Ir is to be m:de boil, ſo thould theſe Chaldeans begirt ir, as vey. 15. 

and reduce the Inhabitants to moſt milerable Extremities, with 
unſpeakable Craeity, as if they were like Fleſh roaſting by. the 

Ire, or boiling 11 2 Por, as their Sufferings are deſcribed, Micah 

3- 3, # Or fron? of the Pot, or Furnace, the place where the Fire 

Vas put 1n, or blowed up to make it boil : as a Pot hanged in che 

form of a Furnace, feems to be all but oneand the ſame Port or 
Vellz}, the face of which may be eaſily conceived to ſtand toward 

the North, nor the mouth of the Por; for that looks dire&ly up- 
ward, unleſs we conceive it to be repreſented in the Viſion lean- 

ing, of which Conceit there is no need. x Indicating from whence 

tzeir Miſery ſhould come, wer. 14. viz. from Chalaea, which lay 
North from Jeraſalcm. | 

14 Then the LORD faid y unto me, out of the 
* north & an evil ſhall + break forth 2 upon all the in- * chap. 4 
habitants of the land 6. 6. and 6. 

7 Explained this Vition. =, 7. e. From. Babylon, a Metonymy 1s 
of the Subject ; for tho” it lie Eaſtward, yet ir is North from t Heb. Bz 
Jaruſaiem, as lying four Degrees more from the Equinottial. See opencd. 
ver.13. #It thall be with-held, or reitrained, no longer in my 
Treaſure ; I will let it our ; wiz. That evil of puniſhment Tepre- 
lenred by the Fire. 5 Though God gave almoſt all the then 
known World to the King of Babylon, yet here he underſtands the 
Land of Juaea, chaps 25. 9. 

15 For, lo, I will *callcall the families 4 of the 
kingdoms e of the north, faith the LORD : and they 
ſhall co:ne, and they ſhall ſet every one his throne f at 
the entring of the gates'g of Jeruſalem, and againſt all 
the walls þ thereof round about, and againſt all the ci- 
ties 3 of Jucah. | | 

c'Or, I am upon calling, Ir is. at band, I am about to incline 
the Northern Countriesto.-joyn together in this Work, chap. 6. 
22. and 10. 22. and 25.9. 26. d Or Kindreds; viz. thoſe di- 
vers Countries and, Nations, that were under one Lord, as a chief 
| Ruler is. called the Father of his Country., e Fiz» The Babylo- 
n:ans, and their Aſſiſtants,. the Medes alſo being in Confederacy 
with them, whoſe King's Daughter Nebuchadnez2ar married. 
/ Their Seats, Pavilions or Tents ſhall be picched, which ſhall be 
as ſo many Thrones, where I will ſee my Judgments execured by 
the Chaldeans, chap. 52.4. g Af the entring to the Gates, or 
way leading to the Gates, 7uag.. 9. 35 2 Kings 7. 3. chap. 43-.9. 
which Befiegers have always a fpecial regard ro, that there be no 
going 1n or coming out, Ja. 22. 7. þ They ſhali begirtir round, 
noting the great Multitude, Power, and Courage of the Chalde- 
o.. 7 There were none of them thould fare any better than 'Te- 
ruſalem. 


| 
i 


4 
' 
' 


| 


| + 
- 


F' 
A 


l 
[ 


* Chap. 5. 
IF 


I 


7 


16 And I will utter my judgments & againſt them 
couching all their wickedneſs, who have forſaken meZ, 
and have burnt incenſe unto other gods x, and wor- 


ſhipped the works of their own hands x. 

& Cauſe Sentence to be paſſed according to my Threatning. 
See chap. 39. 5. Or, I. will phce my Bonnty and rheir Unwor- 
thinzſs before them. Or, I will uobraid them with their Ingratt- 
tude, Rebellion, and breach of Covenant, &c. I will ſpeak with 
them by thee Jeremzah, and others of my Prophets. ! Either no- 
ting the Perſons againſt whom, or rather the Cauſe for which, 
becauſe they have forſaken me ; the ſame Particle being fo uſed. 
chap. 13.25. and elſewhere. Or, their Sins whereby, as it is alo 
expreſled, chap. 16. 11. and 22,9. m,4.e. Worthipoed ſtrange 
Gods, a Synecdoche of the part for the whole. », :. e. Their Ido- 
latrous Images, exprefſed here by a Periphralis, Iſa. 2. 8. 


17 9 Thou therefore gird up thy loins o, and ariſe p, 
and ſpeak unto them all that I coramand thee 4: be 
not diſmayed at their faces r, le!t I | confound thee / 
before them 7. 

o By this Expreſſion God: quickens and haftens him unon his 
Work, norto ſtand helitating, but ro be doing ; Prepare thy ſel: 
for 1t 15 a Speech taken fron the Cuttom of their Countries 
rat wear long Garments ; and therefore tney did gird them 
up about them, that they might not hinder them in ans Week 
that required Expedition. See the Phraſt and PraQtice, Ex 12.148. 
2 K!1/35 4. 294 and 1n many other Texts: It imnlics tio thin; : 
1. Speed and Dilpatch 2 Courage and Reſolution, Job 38. 
2 Another Expreſſion ro the ſme purpoſe : 
bis Work: the like cp, 13. 4. 


”— 


|| Or, bre9% 


$9 pLeces, 


z9- 3+. 


to Ipeed him abour 
q Heb. Shall command 7hee 
Y D:fo 


Chap, II. 


* Ifa.50 
SOT fenced City X, 
2.7. and 


38:2 


}| Or, 
thy ſake, 


\ -,, qHz 


” 


7 Diſcover no Fear, and conceal no Meilage. See verſe 8. _ 
Break thee in picces, either leſt thou prove confuled and ſhattere 
in thy Notions, and unable to deliver thy Meſſage ; lettI leave 
rhee, and forſake thee. Or, Jet I terrifie thee worſe than mw 
are able todo, even to ruin thee. See Mat.10. 28. It _ - © 
ſpoken by way of aggravation, God would thame him, or deſtroy 
him even in their ſight, to become their reproach. Or, think not 
to eſcape any more than Uriah, chap. 26. 23- | 
, ; 3 
18 For behold «, I have made thee this day * a de 
and an iron pillar y and brazen walls z 
againſt the whole land a, againſt the kings of Judah ; 
againſt the princes chereof, againſt che prieſts thereof, 


and againſt the people of the land. | 

Heb. For 1, 1o, 9. d. for my part, I will not fail to do what 
I have promiſed, to ſtand by rhee. x Heb. City of defence; im- 
pregnable, which the rwo following Exprefſions do 1mporr. It 
thould be ſupported with y Pillars, not of Wood, bur of Iron, 
z And encompalled with Walls, not of Stone but of Brais, noting 
hereby both great Uprightneſs, and alfo Strength. a, ze. All its 
Inhabitants in general, none to be ſpared, as he doth particularly 
rank them in their ſeveral Degrees in the following Words, intr- 
mating hereby, that tho' Men of all Degrees ſhould ſr themſelves 
againlt him, yer God would ſupport him againſt them all, and 
that he would carry him through his Work, though his Trou- 
bles and 'Tryals would not be only great, but long, 72. pailing 
chrough ſeveral Kings Reigns, therefore poſhbly faid Kings here 
in the PJural. 


19 And they ſhall fight b againſt thee, but they ſhall 
not prevail c againſt thee : for I am with thee 4, {aith 
the LORD, todeliver thee. 

bþ Make united Attempts upon thee. See Judg. 20. 11- c They 


ſhall not be 2ble by all their Devices to ſhorten thy days, cap. 15. 
20. and 20. 10, It. d Here is the reaſon given of lus Safery, Sod 


will be his Guard. See verſe 8. 2 Tim. 4.17, 18. 


CHAT. 


God's numerous and. continued Mercies rondev the Jews in their Idolatry 
inexctſable, and unparallel” d in any Nation : and themſelves the 
Carſes of their Calamittes, 1 —19. Their groſs Idolatry, 
20---28. Incorrigibleneſs, Blood-ſheading, and Hypocriſie, 29*--37-+ 

FR Oreover, the word of the LORD came unto me, 

eſaying, | 

e Now God begins by Jeremy to deal with the Jews, and to put 

him upon his Work, having fitted him for it. This Seemzng notes 
ſpeed, and quick diſpatch about his Bufinels. 

2 Go f, and cry in theears g of Jeruſalem h, faying, 

thus ſxith the LORD 7z;. Iremember &|| thee, the kind- 


7p neſs of thy youth », the love of thine eſpouſals», when 


thou wentelt after me in the wilderneſs o, in a land 


that was not ſown. 

f Viz. From Anathoth to Jeruſalem. g Proclaim it ſo, that 
they may hear it. þ Declare God's Will to the Inhabirants there- 
of. A Metonymy of the Subje& # The Prophet's uſual Form of 
Words in this Book : whereby he frequently intimates, that. he 
came with God's Meſſage, not his own, and therefore direCts his 
Sermon here, as in God's Name and Perſon, to the whole Body 
of the People. k Trecord, or I mind thee of rhe Kindneſs thar 
was betweenus. Though this be ſometimes taken in a way of 
favour (Ne. 13. 31.) yet not always fo, as Neb. 13. 29. Pſal. 137. 
7. m Either thoſe forward and early Aﬀe&tions, of thine to me 
in thy Youth. Or rather, the Kindneſs that I ſhewed rhee in thy 
Youth, 1/2. 46. 3. for this relates ro the tine of God's bringing 
them out of Ezypt, which is ſometimes called rhe Birth of this 
People, 1/2. 44. 2+ Hof. 2. 3. and their Youth, 1a. 54+ 6. Hoſ.2.15. 
The Story ſeems to favour moſt this latrer Senſe, Deur. g. 6. 24. 
a Viz. When I entred into a Covenant-relation with thee at the 
giving of the Law, Exod. 24+» +, 8. Dcut. 4. 20, 23, 34. Exck. 16. 
8, &c. o Either out of that Love and AﬀeQtion that thuu didſt ſhew 
to me in following my Condutt. Or rather, when thou wert led 
by mein the Wilderneſs, and I took tuch care of thee, both for 
Protection and Proviſion in that howling Wilderneſs, tho” thou 
didſt 1}] deſerve it, where nothing necetlary to thy Subſiſtence 
could have | been expetted : and therefore it is expreſſed in the 
next Words by a Penphrafis, a Land that was not ſowen, and more 
enlarged upon wer. 6. for it plainly appears by the Story,that they 
did not follow him with entire AﬀeCtion, but went a whoring 
from him, Amos 5. 25, 26. and which we have a large account of 
Pſal. 106. 7, &C. 


& Exod. 19 : py T Hrael WA5 holineſs p unto the LORD, and the 


T, 


EY % 
Chap. 


12. 


»Y, 


14. 


firſt fruits of his increaſe q: * all that devour r him ſhall 


oftend / ; evil ſhall come upon them 7, ſaith the 
LORD. 


? Or Hey, the Abſtra&t for the Concrete, 7. e. a People dedi- 
cated ro God. Thns the Word is uſed, Lev. 21. 7. and 29. 14. ſet 
a part from other People tor my ſelf by peculiar Laws, and Rites. 
7 This Supplement and is better left our, it being not in the 
Text, and rendring the Senſe more obſcure ; therefore better 
read, either, being the firſt Fruits, by Appojition : Or, as the firft 


Fruits, 1. e. as the firſt Fruits were Holy to God, fo was J/-acl. | 


- Or rather, devoyrcd : for ir refers to the time 
future, and fo the following Words : all that were injurious to 
him. 5s Or,did offend ; were 00NOX10Us, and liable to Puniſhment 
as he that dzvoured that which is Holy, Prov. 20. 25. t Came 
por them, - Some Evil was inflicted on them from the Lord, that 
was always wont to ſtand up for the Vindication of his people, as 
upon the Egyptians, Amaletites, Sihon, Og, the Midianices, 
7114705, and others, 


as the four leſt Books of Mo 4b! 
ors | x l#{t Books of Moſes do ab 


JEREMIAH 


» (Kings and Princes, as Conductors. See 1 Kings 22. 17. 


! 
' 
I 


Cas Lord, they would ſay. 


| 


IA 


" 4 
oP 


dantly teſtifie ; and by theſe Expreſſions is infinuater!, thar nw 
they are like to find it orherwite, cp. 50. 7. this mindin - of 
them what God had done for them, making vray for the clottr ſer- 
ting home the following Reprouok.. | 

4 Hear ye the word of (6eL.ORD «,O boule of 14- 
cob x, and ali the families y of tlie houſe of liracl. 

z He befpeaks their Attention to whar he is about to ſpear as 
unto the Word of the Lord, telling chem, that he delivers God'- 
Meilage, and vents nor his own Paſſions : The like 7/2. r. 10. and 
e/ewhere frequently, both in the Old and New Teſtament, as 
7 Cor. 11. 23. 1 Thefſ. 4. 15. x, 7. e. His Poſtericy, Jaceb and 1- 
racl here being the ſame, as it is Iſa. 43. i. y #72, Tribes, chap 


Pp 


25; 

5 TI Thus faich the L O R D, what iniquity < have 
your fathers found in me that are gone far from me, 
and have walked after vanity 2, and are become 
vain b 2 

3 God having, as it were, on his own behalf, ſhewn how kind 
he had been, calls upon them to fpcak now, if they knew any 
thing of Injury, either in breach of Covenanr, or SCVELITY, that 
they can charge him with, tharthey have thus apoltatized. See 
on {/z. r. 18. and 5. 3. Compare Mc. 6. 2, 3, 4 By this nan- 
ner of Speech his proceeding appears the more juſticiable, he boch 
makes tacir Conviction the clearer, and the Reproof the ſharper. 
a Fiz. Idols ; ſhewing their Fully in going from: God ro fuch vaia 
things, as Idols are, Dent. 32. 21. 8 Sam. 12. 2%, 21. and fee on 
Ia. 41. 29, The Abſtrat for the Concrete, Ec:!. 1. 2. b 1x. 
In following their Inaginations : Fools, Rom. 1. 25, 22. as fente- 
lets as their Stocks and Stones that they made their Iitols of, P{z/ 
115.8. and herein they are faid to go ſar from God, and cliulc 
their Delufions, Jon. 2. 8. 


brought us up 4 out of the land of Egypt, 
through the wilderneſs, through a land of defarts e, 
and of pirs f: through a land of drought g, and of the 
ſhadow of death +5, through a land that no man paſſed 
through, and where no man dwelt ;? 

c, 7. e. With themſelves, thought nor 4 The Expreſſion may 
have toms reſpett to the lituation of the place, as lying lower 
then Canaan, but the Delign is to reprove their S!ozrh and Sru- 
pidity, charging herein their Apoſtaſte, not upon their Ignorance, 
but Wilfulnefs : Their Deliverance froin &£2yp: (and therefore is 
it here mentioned) being fuch a deliverance, as never greater wis 
wrought for any People ; wherein there was fo muc!) of his Power 
and Love fz:en: bur they never regarde:t the Onerations of his 
Hands, never concerned themiclves about whar God had done 
for them, verſe 8. which ſhould have engaged rhem to a more 
cloſe cleaving to him. e Defvlate places, chap. 50-13. ard then whar 
follows 1s to amplihe the greatnz(5 of their Dangers in the- W1l- 
derneſs, and herein the greatneſs of their Deliverance. f Either 
rhoſe natural dangerous Pats, that were there ; or, put for the 
Grave, where Paſtengers are fo often buried quick in the heaps of 
Sand ſuddenly blown up by the Wind ; or threatning in every 
reſpect nothing bur Death, which may be implied in that Exprel- 
lon ofthe Shadow of Death in this Yerſe, which may allude to !e- 
veral Kinds, or Fears of Death in paſſing through a Wilderneſs. 
See in the Synopſis. 2 Where they had no Water but by Miracle. 
The LXX render it a Land without Water. h See in the Word 
Pits ; the LXN render it a Land without Fruit , bringing forth 
nothing that might have a tendency. to the Support of Life, 
therefore nothing bur Death could be expetted ; and belides, ir 
yielding ſo many venomous Creatures, as Scorpions, and Szr- 


danger of; ali which could not but look formidable, and as the 
Shadow of Death. i As having in it no Accommodation for Tra- 
ve], much Jeſs for Habitation : In theſe Reſpetts may it well be 
called, a waſt howling Wilderneſs, Dexr. 32. 10. 

7 AndI brought you into a plentiful country &, to 
eat the fruit thereof, and the goodneſs / thereof; but 


j- 

179 

f117) 
1 


pents, &c. as alto the many Enemies, that they went in continual: 


that led us 2: 7 


i, 


4 4 


6 Neither ſaid c they *, where xx the LORD that * I. ©; 


I 


lot. i; 4 


when yeentred, ye * defiled my land #7,and made mine *Prf-2 : *. 


heritage » an abomination. 

k Heb. Land of Cernicl, Iſa. 29, 17. underſtand Canrm, Numb. 
13. 27. See on Iſa. 35.2. UTo enjoy all the Blefling of ir. 
7, i.e. Conſecrated to my Name, Lev. 25. 23. and this you have 
defiled by going a whoring after your Idols, chap, 3. 1, and ma- 
ny other Abominations, Pal. 196. 29, 35, 37,38, 39, nTIn the 
ſame Senſe that it is ſaid in the foregoing Clauſe, my Land, and 
which you received from me as vour Heritage, the place rhat 1 
chole for. my Church's preiene Habitarion, and earneſt of their fi1- 
.ure heavenly one. 


8 The Prieſts ſaid not, where is the LORD ? and, __ 


alſo tranſgreſſed againſt me, and the Prophets prophe- 
tied by Baalq, and walked after 7:25 that do not pro- 
fit r. 

0, 9. d. They that ſhould have raught others, knew as little as 
they, or regarded as Jittle ro know, Hof. 4. 6. who are ſaid here 
to handle or teach the Law,y/z.The Prieſts and Levites, who were 
the ordinary Teachers of the Law, not that they did to, but thar, 
either they ought to do fo, or pretended to do lo. This was their 
Othce, Dent. 33. 10. and their Practice, N:b. $. $. The Phrate 


) ls hy . ' Ty 6. 
palt, nor to the 'is a Meraphor taken from Warriours, that are faid irafare bel- 


/z:1n, to handle their Arms. p Either Teachers, as Inſtructors ; or 
q They 
that ſhould have taught the People the true Worſhip of God. 
were themſelves Worthippers of Baal, 1 Kings 18. 22. Or, in- 
ſtead of fetching their Oracles from me, fayiag, Thus ſairh rhe 
Thus ſaith Baal, os tacy did make uſe 


un ' of Jefſer Deitics (for 10 doth Baal or Baz'im agntic) in con- 


[A 2] 


4 ; 2 is 
JUNCU.IR 


v 


raey that handle the * law knew o me nor: the paſtors » Bt 


) 
= Wo ha 


4443+ 


-—} 
(.04P. 


"Lev, 22. LORD, and* with your childrens children - will 1 


bs 


þ Or, 0V:r 
0 


: z | - TEA %Z 17 © which 
Sch 72 f Hath a nation changed z their gods, 


6. . : 
"Chap 16. plory a for that which doth not profit. 6. 


20, 


* pf 36.9. have forſaken me the * fountain of living waters g ; 
Chap. 17. and hewed r'.em out cilterns þ, broken ciſterns, that 
13. & 18. £17, hold no water. 


I 4. 


+ Heb. b.- why is he | ſpoiled & ? 


come a 


ſ, pits 


2 12 * Be aſtoniſhed, O ye heavens c, at this, and 


Il, JERE 


junQtion with Cod, perſuading themſelves, they could konour 
God together with them, as the Calves, 1 Kings 12. 28. r Fiz. 
Edols. A Periphraſs: Things that were never able rodo rhem any 
{rvice, as ver.5. 11. S2e on 1(a. 44. 10. Sure the ſtare mult be ve- 
r/7 bad when Prieſts, Prophets and People were thus Corrupt. 

0 © Wherefore I will yet plead / with you, faith the 


plead. 

« Tliis is to be underſtood, eirher really, by hisJudgments, P/al. 
+. 22, and that with great Severities; or verbally, he w 11 go ons, 
» deal with them, to convince them by his Prophets, as he did 
with their Fathers, thar they mav be left without excule, chap. 7+ 
2c, 26 : Yither for rhe heinouſnets of their Farbers Sin* ;\ for 
God doth often viiicthe Iniquities of the Parents upon their Chil- 
dren, Exe. 20. 5 Or becaute they do rimitate their Parents. 

10 Fir pals || over the 1fles of Chittim :, and fce and 
ſend unto Kedar x, and conlider diligently, and fee 11 
there be fuch a thing z. ; 

« A Synecdockical Exprefſion extending to: all Ifles in tie AY 
terrancan Sea, or any other the neighbouring Coats; for rae 1e- 
brers Call ali People thar are ſeparared from them by the Modir err o- 
an Sea, Iſlanders, becauſe rhey come to rhem by Shipping : »ec 
of Ch::tim, Iſa. 23.1. x Underſtand 4-254, that Jay Eaſt, South- 
Eft of Judca, as Chi:tim did more North or North-Weſt, qd. 
oo from North to South, Eaſt ro Welt, and maze the Experi- 
ment, look to C/it:tim the moſt civilized, or Kelar tne molt 
barbrous, yer neither have changed their Gods. 5 Not Tiuat 
they were to paſs over Jocally, or fend M-ttengers thitter 
a&tazJly, but caſt your Lyes thither, and make your Obſervations, 
by what you have ever feen, or heard,did you ever hear of fuch a 
prodigious thing ? If you ſhould either go, or fend, you will find 
If iO. 


I aY 


are * yet no gods? but my people have changed their 


z, «7. d. No, they are unmoveable and fixed to their Idols, al- 
though they are fille Gods, What they ceccive from tacir Farhers, 
they tenaciouſly hold. a iz. The true God, who was their Glo- 
ry. {A Meterymy of the Adjumn#, Pſal. 156. 25 ) and who always 
d:d them good, giving them cauſe to glory in him, and to 
make their boaſt of him. 6 For thote which never did, or can 
do them . yvood ; that have no Eiſence or Power ; burof whom 
they muſt neceſſarily be aſhamed, as verſe 26. 


be horribly afraid 4, be ye very deſolate e, faith the 
LORD. | 

c Angels, ſay ſome, but rather the vilible heavenly Bodies. A 
pathetical Exprefon in a poerical Proſopopein, as Deut. qe 26. and 


M I A H. Chap. IL, '* © 
[4s verſe 17% 19. He was my Son, if he now become a Slave, he 
may thank himſelf. 


25 The young lions / roared upon him, azd + yel- 4 541 
led mz, and they made his land waſte : his cities are gave or 


burnt without inbabirant ». their 
I Underſtand, the 4ſjrians, Babylonians, and Egyptians, &c. cal- Voice. 

I2d Lions from their Fiercenelſs, and young from their Strengrh. See 

rhis chap. 4. 7. and 50.17. m Noting the terrible voice, that the 

Lion puts forth either in the ſeizing the Prey, ſome ay, in ſport, 

Lam. 2.7. or the devouring it, J/a. 5. 29. A Mctaphor, noting 

the Cruelty of the Enemy, P/al. 74.4. n, 7, e. So conſumed and 

waſted, that they are unhabitable ; or ſhortly he ſhall ſo contume 

and waſte them : See verſe 14. 


16 Alfo the children of Noph and Tahapanes «|| j or, f:e4 
have broken the crown p of thy head. en thy 

o Two ofthe King of Egypt's principal Seats. Concerning Noph. Crown. 
{Ometimes called Memphis, now Cayro : See on 1/a. 19. 13. Con- Deur. 33. 
cerning 7Tahapanes, ſez Exch. 30. 18. probably taking irs Name from 1 2+ 
Tahpcnes Queen of Egypt, i Kings 11. 19. called alſo Hanes : See Ii. 8. 8. 
on //a. 3». 4. And the Inhabitants and Natives of theſe Cities 
are called here their Children, Iſa. 37.12. þp They that take the 
Hebrew Word in the Notion of breaking, underſtand this of de- 
troying whatever is chief or principal among them, either o© 
Pertons or Things: Wounds m the Head being moſt dangerous. 
Or, d-tiling the ciief of rhe Land, either by their corporal Adul- 
reries (and ſo take the Word under the Notion of knowing, as Gen, 
19- 5.) or ſpiritual, namely Idolatries, chap. 44. 17. or their cruet 
tyrannical Oppreſfſions, trampling upon all their Glocy, expreiſzd 
by riding over their Heads, and that univerſally in a moſt intulr- 
ing manner. Burt the Word may be better taken in the Notion of 
feeding, as the Word 1s uſed, chap. 3. 15-7, e. They have fed up- 


j on her moſt fruirful and pleaſant, the top and head of all her Pa- 


{tures that lay in the Southern Borders towards Egypt. See chap. 13. 


18, 19, 20, thus depriving them of all way of Subſiſtence, cap. *[ 
12, 10. Inſhort, they {hall make havock of all rhat is exceilcar in x5. 
thee, 1/a. 28. 4+ The Sum 1s, thy Leagne,O Juden, with Exypr, a- Pi: 


oainſt the Chaldeans will be the cauſe of thy total-Ruin : For the 
Kings of 7udah had not rebelled againſt the Babylonians,but to gra= 


tilie the Egyptians in cxpettation of help from rhem. Lu 
17 Haſt thou not procured this unto thy ſelf q, in x 
that thou haſt forſaken r the LORD thy God, when ; 


he led thee by the way /? 


_ 9 HereGod by his Prophet ſhews, thar they may thank them- 
ſelves for all that is haſtening upon them : See Numb. 32. 23. 
7 Here he ſhews wherein, viz. in forſaking God ; not that he lett 
them, bur they him, and that without any Temptation, or Pro- 
vocation, and therefore the more inexcuſable. { Yiz. By rhe Con- 
duct of his Providence in the Wilderneſs, keeping thee in Safe- 


32+ 1. intimating that it 15 fuch a thing, that the very inanimate 
Creatures, could they be ſenſible of ir, would be aſtoniſhed. 4 The 
Heb. imports as much as, let your hatr be lifted up : Such a Fright,as 
wentvally ſry, makes our Hair ſtand an end : Such a trembling 
property, as ſome dreadful Tempeſt doth ſometirnes cauſe in a 
Man. e Loſe your Brightneſs, Luſtre, and Shining, as the Sun, 
that heavenly body ſeemed to do when Chriſt ſuffered, Marth. 
27. 45+ or wclting ; the heinouſnels of fuch a thing, as it were, 
diſſolving them. 


13 For my people havecommitt=d two evilsf*: they 


{ Fiz. Remarkable ones, and with a witneſs. g A Artaphir 
taken from Springs, called /:ving here, and Gen. 26. ig, and elle- 


ty from all Dangers, Exod. 3o. 21, 22. 1ſa. 63. 12, 13. or inthe 
way of his Counſels, which the ways of their own carnal Wiſ- 
dom were ſo oppoſite unto. 

138 And now what haſt thou to do in the way of E- 
gypt 7, to drink the waters of Sihor ? or what haſt 


thou to do in the way of Afſyria, to drink the waters x 
of the river y ? 

: What bulineſs haſt thou there, or what doſt thon expeC& from 
thence, or what need haſt thou to go, or ſend Metlengers thi- 
ther, if thou wouldſt but keep cloſe ro me. «Viz. Nile It tig- 
nifies Black, from whence called Melzs by the Grecks, either from 
the blackneſs of the Land ir paſſed through, or of the Soil it caſt- 
eth up. See on 1/2. 23. 3. x Here, and by the ſame Words be- 


where, becauſe they never ceate, or intermit, ſuch had God's! 
Care and Kindneſs been over, and ro them. See on 1{2. 58, 11+ 
His Spirit contiaually proceeding from the Father and the Sonto | 
refreſr their Conſciences, Compare John 4. 10. and 7. 38, 39. 
þ It is doubled, to ſh=w the multitude of their Shifts ; and brokcy 
is added, tc: ſhew the helplefnefs of them,as being able ro hold no 
Water, but whea he hath made many hard Shitrs ro get Water, 
he cannor keep it, but it dries away, or, 1t it abide, proves un- 
wholſome ; by which underſtand either their Idols which are 
empty vain things, tlat never anſwer expectation ; or the Alſyri- 
ans and Egyptians, as verſe 18. which proved bur broken Reeds, 
and as all other Supports or Props, Friends, Traditions, Merits,c>c. 
are, that are truſted to, belides God, they are bur Ciſterns at the 
beſt, whoſe Water will putrifte, or brojzen, crackr Vetlels chreugh 
which they will ſoak, and leave nothing bur Mud and Dirt be- 
hind them, 


14 © I; Wſrael a ſervant ? is hea home-born ſlave i ? 


# Did Tever account him ſo, or dil I not rather always reckon 
bim my firſt-born ? ſo ſome, as c:7ſe ;1. But it may better relate 
to his ſad Condition, and Abuſes from others, as chap. 49. 1. which 
God or the Prophet doth here enquire into; and Slave .is here 
rightly added to home-born, (though not in thz Text) to enhance 
the Condition of his Service, becauſe the Maſter had Power to 
make theſe Slaves, who were born of Slaves in his Houſe ; 
which argues his Condition very low, whether he were thus born 
or had been forced to fell himſelf ro be a Slave, & He ſpeaks ei 
rher of the thing that 15 to be, as if it were already done, becauſe 
of the certainty of ir, as of chat Devaſtation made by the Aſſyri- 
2s and Caldeans who uffliftted rhe Remnant of the Jews, or of 
that havock, that was made of them formerly by Senacherib, the 
Af; rians, and Fzyptian: Why is he thus tyrannized over Iſs 
42e 24 * as it Strangers had the ſame right over him, as Owners 
over their Slaves. He remaves here the falſe Cauſes of IſraelÞs 


fore, 1s meant, to ſeek help from either place ; noting. their ol {+ 
Strength : See on 1ſa. 8. 6. A Metaphorical Allzgory, wherein God + 
minds them of rwo of their broken Ciſterns, and ſthews them thcir 7. 


Folly to go ſo far, when they might have been berter [Upplied 
nearer home, asif God were not ablc ro help then -: Compare 
verſe 36. y, i. e Euphrates, often called fo by way of eminency, 
the chief River of 4ſſjria, Iſa. 7. 20. 


19 * Thine own wickedneſs ſhall correct » thee, * if. 3. 9. 
and thy backſlidings ſhall reprove a thee : know b there- | 
fore and ſee, that zt is an evilc thing and bitter, that 
thou haft forſaken the LORD thy God 4, and that 


_ fear e is not in thee, ſaith the Lord GO D of 
hoſts. | | 


2 The meaning is, either, 1. There needs no further Evidence 
againit thee than thine own evi] Courſes, Hof. 5.5. Or rather; mizbe 
corrett thee, z. ez. one would think ſhould be ſufficient ro reci»:m 
thee. See Hoſ. 2. 5, Or. 2. Thy own Wickednefs is the cauſe of 
tay Corredtion. Or, 3.Thy Wickedneſs will be an evidence, that 
whatſoever thou ſuffereſt is juſt. a The ſame with the former, but 
in other Words, after the manner of rhe Hebrews, or a Metonymy 
of the Effet? for the Cauſe ; thou wilt not be periuaded, till rhou 
come to ſuffer; thou wilt nor be inſtrufted, until correSted 5 Or 
rather, as before, thy many buckflidings might reach thee more 
Wiidom, and convince thee of thy Folly; fo doth the Word Re- 


prove f1gnihe, Job 6.25» b, 2. e, Call ro mind thy Experiences, and F UE 
conſider well with thy ſelf, and thou canit not but be convinced = J” 
of thoſe things, what forfaking of God hath coſt thee. c Yiz. ow 


Of Puniſhmenr principally; to 7a. 45. 7. though ir be true allo 
of Sin; therefore he calls ir bitter, becaule the efect of it will be 
ſo ; it will be unplealing, and birrernels in the latrer end. d,7.e. 
Me. e Or the fear of me, or thou haſt nor my fear in thee, this 
being the ground of all thy Sin and Suffering, /,! 36. 1. Rom. 3. 
16, 18. 


20 q For of old time I have broken thy yoke f, 
and burſt thy bands g, and thou ſaideſt, I will not || Or ſwr4 © 


Milcry, that he may the more aggravate, and ſer home the true, 


i tranſgreſs 4 ; when 3 * upon every high hill &, and cb? 7 
under | 


Wag SE OR FEET CE RNS OS 1 Xa 
SE AER BA RI EINE ; 


i] 
nS 


Wh. 


aye, 232 hh 


EI, 5 


be 


\ 


': 


Þ Chap Il. 


under every green tree / thou wandrelt », playing the 


Þ by Nn aa r Ye 


FERE 


harlot ». 


f, i. e. The Bondage and Tyranny, that thou wert under in old 
x as appears through the 


time in Egyp: : as alſo divers times belides 3 as app ORs 
the Book of Judges. The Hebrew Otam, that lignifies everlaſting, 15 
ſometimes uſed for a long time to 
paſt ; fo here, and Ger. 6. 4. Iſa. 5 


come : and alſo for a long rime ' 
7. 11. Z 2 double Ajjullon, el- / 


MI 4 H. 


Chap, IT, 


eſt as it were thy Foot-ſteps, ard Monuments of thy frequent 74o- 
latriess »y Thy frequent Courſes in the Valleys, wherher of H:n« 
om, where they burnr their Childrens Bones 1n Sacrifice, chap. 7. 
21, 31. Orin any Vallies where thou haſt been frequent in cy 
Idolatries-. Ic ieems to be thus larg<'y raken. « Look on and comn- 


lider thy ways, as vzrſe 19. a Or, thu art as, &c. or, O Brome= 
aary: A Beait much uſed by Carriers in Arabia, being rife there» 
. 9CE ON 1/r. Go. 6. b A Metaphor taken from Creatures that ars 


FO I . tloners are wont to | , . . = 
ther ro the Bands and Fetrers, with which —- oe Fn hunted, that keep no dirc& Path ; alluding to the Nature of th 
be bound, chap. 40. 4- Or, thoſe Bands, wherewith thc end: | She Dromedary, which in gendring time runs caperins this way, 


Yole of Beaſts were wont to be bound. See on 1/a. 58. 6. 
2 When the Deliverance was freth, 
lutions. Ec. ſerve, 7. e. Serve or worthip Idols: 
the Feminine Gender, becauſe God Ipeaks of his People, as of a 
Woman promiling Faithfulne{s, bur breaking Covenant. _ 
underſtand, 2hce, I will not _ thee, 9. d. which thou made 

20pear, when xpon every hill, Cc. ; 
v0.8 quran, who owed themſelves to their Redeemer. Bur 
this dorh not ſo well agree with their Engagement, Ex. 19. 8. 
j Or notwithſtanding all thy Promiſes. & Idolaters were wont 
ro ſacrifice upon the rops of high Hills, beczule there rhey thought 
themfelves nearer Heaven : nay,ſfome have eſteemed high Hijls ro 
be Gcds, as the Indians of Peri at this day. { Under thele S114Qes 
Holatcrs thought there lay ſome hidden Derry, witn which they 
converſed. m Viz. Changing the way to gad afcer Idols, as one 
that 1+ Lroken Covenant : See on 1/e. 57. 8. The Word pro- 
perly ſignihes 16 29 from oncs place, as Harlors ule to do, inftigared 
eirher by unbridled Luft, or Coverouſneſs ; 5.2. Making great haſte 
from ene Tree to another, or from one Idol to anorher- Sec vere 
23, 24. Others :hou licſt down, or, thou ſerreſt thy ſelf. # Com- 
mittine Tdotatry, which is a ſpiritual Harlotry, chap. 3. 1, 2. This 
is frequent. Some read the former part ofthe Text otherwiſe, ma- 
king it the daring boaſt of the People, Thou haſt ſaid I have bro- 
ken, &c. and ſaid{t I will not ſerve, 7. 6 I will not obey : But this 
will not ſuic well with the reſt of the Text. 


righc ſeed p: how then art thou turned into * the de- 


*% 


F Deur. 
J2. 32, 


he had as great a care of it as of the choiceſt Plant. See on 1/3. 
27. 2, 3. and allo his ExpeQarion, that ir ſhould prove to, 1/a+ 5. 
4. and then the Senſe 1s, I planted thee, that thou.ſhouldſt bring 
forth choice Fruit to me. 'Þ A right Seed of true Believers, as 1n 
the Days of the Patrinrchs, Abraham, Iſaac, and Facob : Or, tup- 
poling {wirh] to be underſtood before [right Seed] (as it often 1s 
11 the Heb.) we may underſtand it of the Ordinances of his 
Church, which are {aid to be the Plants, or Seed, char God fur- 
niſheth ir wit! all, Maz7h. 13. 24+ and theſe are called right, Neb. 
9. 13. not falſe, or counterfeit. q Though there be only dege- 
rate or declining in the 17:5. Text, yet the Supplement is necelſa- 
ry in regard of the My aphar. » This muſt here be raken in a bad 
Senſe, as the Word d4:2-nerate going before intimates, tho" 1t be 
ſometimes for what is rare and excellent, Here it nores their A- 
poſtacy,and Infidelity, and other Wickednefles; where God ſpeaks 
after the manner of Man, both in a way of Wonder and Repraot. 


*Jobg 39. 22 For though thou * waſh thee with nitre, and cake 
Hob 14. thee much ſope {, yet Þ thine iniquity is marked 7 be- 
i fore me, faith the Lord GOD. 

{ Though Tnrerpreters do greatly vary in deſcribing what 15s 
particularly meant here by Nirre and Sope, and would be fuperiiu- 
ous to mention here, yet all agree they are ſome Materials that 
Acrifts make uſe of for the cleanſing away Spots from the Skin, 
Cloarhs, or other things : and the Senſe is plain, Thar the blot of 
his People is by no Art to be taken vurt: it cannot be covered by 
Excufes. Tho' thou wonuldeſt dilfemble riy Tdolatiies, thou canft 
not deceive me : nor explated! by Sacrthces. Ir is beyond the 
Power of all ſuperſiitious, or relizious VWathings to cleante away; 
which may be underſtood by thets natural and artificial ways of 
cleanſing.. t The meaning ſeems to be, either rhy Filthineſs is 
ſo foul, thatit Jeaves a Brand behind ir, that cannct be hid or 
waſhed out, but will abide : See Jer. 17+ 1. Or, according to a- 
nother acceprtation of the Ward, 7t is laid up with Gud : Sez the 
Iike, Der:t. $2, 34. and He}. 15. 12. Purge thee, wath thee, do 
what thou wilt, thou canſt by no means conceal thy Wickedneſ: 
from me, Job 9. 20. They that would fee greater variety of Inter- 
pretations, Jer them confulr the Synop/7s, 


23 How canft thou fay «, I am not polluted, I 
ave not gone after Baalim »? ſee thy way .*. in the 


# Or, o Valley y, know what thou haſt done z || hex ar; a ſwift 
* faife Dro-dromedary a, traverſing þ her ways. 
& With whar face canſt rhou go about to excuſethy ſelf,or de-, 


ny what 1s fo evident, and ſo truly charged upon thee, verſe 20. 
x The word is plural, ascomprehentive of all their Idols, Hof. 11.2. 
and 1s a Name uſually eiven to ſeveral of them, as Baalzebub, 
2 Kings 1. 16 and Banl-Pcar, Numb. 25.3. and rherefore nores their 
worihipping of many : Becauſe they had the Temple, and Sacrifi- 


thou didſt put on good Reſo- 
The word 1s of 


And thus he accuſeth them of 


and croſſing that way, making many Vagaries to find cut ſome- 


:times one Male, ſometimes another, - withour any Rule or Or- 
der ; ferting forth hereby the Diſpoſition of this People, thar 
were ſo mad upon their Idols, rhar they ran foimerimes after 
this, and fometimes afrer thar : called wandring, vine 20. and 
thar with great eagerneſs ; firly termed traver/ing : much like 
the Deſcriprion of a Whore, Prov. 7. 11, 12+ the Word being 
no where found but here; and being derived from a Word, 
that ſignifies a Shoe-latchir, Tf any be curious, Tet the learned 
conſult Sznop. Critic. and the Englijh Reader the Aſimblies Annor, 
on the place. 


24 || A wild afsc + uſed tothe wilderneſs, har ſnuf- i| Or, © 
ferh up the wind 4 at f her pleaſure e, in her occaſion 77 4 


: ns | TI0O. 
who can || turn her away f? all they that ſeek her will or 
not weary themiclves g : in her month þ they ſhall + Heb. e-- 
find her. deſire vf 1130 

heart. 


c Or, O »w:'! dr, Another Similicude for the more lively De-,, Or »5- 
ſcriprion of the fame thing. Neither need we be tollicirous abour Y 
the variety or extravagancies of ConjeCtures about this Beaſt. 
You may emſu!t as before. It is faid ro be wild and untamed, as 
being uſed ro the Wilderneſs doth alto imply ; and as to ſatisfying 
irs Luſt, much of the nature of the other, d This ſwufirg propers 
ly appertains to the Senſe of Smellinsg, by which certain Crea- 
rures, by a natural Sagacity, find our what they muſs ; which 
Huntſmen expreſs by a proper Term of wining, or having in 
the Wind : and thus itis underſtood here ; For this Creature, by 
che Wind, {mells afar off, which way her Male is ; for there 1s 
another Sente of ſunffing up the Wind, viz tor the ſervice of health, 
as allaying inward heat and droughr, &>c. chap. 14.6. e As her 
Delire, or luſt ſerves, when itruns out afrer the Mile: implying 
alſo, that no choice, or judginent, or meaſure 15 obſerved in theie 
Beaſts, when carried our after their Luſts, , 4. e. When ſhe is ſer 
upon 1t and hath an occaſion, and opportunity to ran impetuoul- 
ly to her Male for the ſatisfying her Pleaſure, the bears dowa all 
oppoſition before her ; there 1s none can ſtop, or put a Bridle uy- 
on her raging Luft. gz, z.e. Eirher they need nor weary them- 
ſelves ; (tpeaking of Zern/alem, to which all the re{t allo is to be 
applied as in an egory).they, that have a mind to be filthy with 
her, may ealily trace her, verſe 23. ſhe refuſes none. Or rather, 
they will not beſtow their Labour in vain, when ſhe is hor up- 
her Luſt, but ler her take her Courſe, until the be ſatisfied, 
and wait their time and opportunity ; and this agrees with the 
next Words. hIfthis relate rothe former Senſe of not wearying 
themſelves, it notes her Impudence and Unſattableneſs, you may 
have her at any time, even in her Months, or New Moons, a 
Seaſon wherein ſuch Ads are abhorrent even to Nature ir (el, 
Some underſtand this of the Idolatry they commirred every New 
Moon : But it more properly points at the Month of her Breed- 
ng, or growing big, and weighty : Month put colleCtively for 
Months, tuch as Feb ſpeaks of, Job 39. 1, 2, Or, in her laſt Month, 
becauſe they grow then unweildy. That this Creature one Mont! 
in the Year, and that is che Month the may be raken, is general- 
ly deemed but a Fancy. The Senſe of the Verſe is, That tho" 
Jeruſalem be now madly bent upon going after her Idols, and 0- 
ther unclean Courſes, that there is no ſtopping or controlling of 
lier, as in the next Verſe, and werſe 31. chap. 22, 21. yer the 
time may cume in their Afﬀictions, - that they may grow 
more tame and willing to receive Counſel, as verſe 27. and Hoſ 
F, 15+ 

25 Withold thy foot from being unſhod 5, and thy 
throat from thir{t : but thou faidſt,]| There is nohope &. y o:; :, 
No, for I have loved ſtrangers /, and after them will ] rh: ca/: 
g0 7, aclner ates 
; Good Counſel given them by the Propher ro tarry at home; 
either that do not go a gadding after. their ſpirirual or corporal 
Adulteries, or ſeek foreign Aids, thereby to wear out their Shooes : 

A Me!oymy of the Effeti, Joſh. 9, 13. Or, that thou pur not off 
thy Shooes to go into the Bed of Luſt; or, uncover nor thy Feet ; 
a modeſt Hebrew Expreſſion, as alio of orher Languages, for expo- 
ſing thy Nakeaneſs, Exek. 16. 25. Or , take nor rhoſe Courlts 
that will reduce thee ro Poverty to go barefoot, and bare-Jegged, 
and to want wherewith to quench thy thirſt, as inthe nexr Clauſe, 
Prov. 6.26 Ija. 20. 2. 4. Sex Iſa. 5.13. k She ſe:ms tro return 2 
croſs Anſwer, the Word pointing at ſomewher tha is deſperare, 
Eccl. 2, 20. it either expretierh the deſperatenets of their Conditi- 
on, 9. d. Weare as bad as we can be, and there is no hope thar 
Cod ſhould recieve us into favour ; or ele by way of interroga- 
tion : Is there no hope ? May we not hold on fill, and provier 3 
Muſt we deſiſt from our ways ? No, we will not; bur we will 
goafrer other Gods, and they ſhall detend us, 4/a. 57. 10. ind 
chap. 18.12. Or the defperareneſis of their Reſolution upon ar, 
i9. 4. Wecare not lince there 1s no Remedy : you {ole your labour 
! ro go about to recl:;m us; which agrees with the next Clauſe, 
{ Viz. Idols, or ſtrange Gods. m Come what will of it. 


26 Asthe thick is aſhamed when he is found », fo is 


F-. 
os Fa "04 


G- ZE  F 4 


i 


ces, cc, they ftill perſuaded rhemſclves, that they worſhipped the 
true God, though they joyned their Idojatrics with ir, as the 
Pupiſts, though they make ule of Idols in Worſhip, yet would 
not be accounted Tdolarers. 


**. The Filthilneſs thou haſt left 


the houſe o of Ifrac] athamedp; they, their kings, 
their princes, and their prieſts, and their propnets q. 

2 Not aſhamed of his fin of Thefe, bur thar he + found ; that his 
Shifts and Bi:inds would ferve kim no longer : c!pecially if he 


behind thee, whereby thou mayeſt be traced, where thou left- | have had the repuraticn cf 2n honeſt Man. «Or Families : rhe 
| j Trwel-s 


— _—_K OC 


Qhap. II. vi ER # 


Twelve Tribes ; a AMetonmmy of the Subj. ?. p Or conſounded, in Dent. 32.13, 14. Exch, 34. 13, 14, is. nay in the Wilderneſs it 
the Paſſive Voice, viz. when they ſhall be taken by Nebuchadnez-| jeit I was nora Wilderneſs unto: you ; an Account whereof, Ne- 
2ar, then their Idols, which they went a whoring after, ſha} be 
diſcovered, and ſo put them to ſhame : In the 4#ive Voice 1t 
notes their Inabiliry to help them, verſe 28. 1/a.1. 29. Ho. 4. 19. 
and their Shame will be the more, becaule rhey had the Repure 
of being my People. 4 Rulers and Teachers, ſuch as ſhould have 
given better Examples, and better InſtruCtion- 


27 Saying roa ſtock, Thou art my father ; and to 


| Or, b-- a ſtoner, Thou haſt || brought me forth / : for they 


gotten we. have turned Þ their back : unto me, and not zheir face : 
but in the time of their * crouble they will ſay, Ariſe, 
- +1, and fave us v. 


T” Heb. the 


hinder 
part 0 
vec | 


"Fla. 45. 


® [Of 


and 9. 13.Ceived no Correction 4: your own {word e hath * de- 
"3 youred f your prophets, likea deſtroying lion g. 


Clip. 
* Mart! 


A a a> 
SY 0, vo 


+ Heb. welangd of darkneſs m * Wherefore ſay z my people, 7 We 
-xveami- are lords o, we will come no more unto thee. 


7 34 
ili 071. 


theſe Materials. Dan. 5.4. J Or, brgorten me, fo is the Word 


to take a lifeleſs Stock or Stone to be their Maker, and to give 


"Word, as of the thing it ſelf, 9. d. You ſhall ſee the thing with 


* thein, as before ver/? 5+ Flave Tbzen like the Wilderncts of Arabia, 


# Idol : a Metonymy of the Matter ; becauſe Idols are made of 
uled, Gen. 4. 18- This nores the fottith Stupidity of this People, 


the Honour of God unto them, 1/2. 44. 17. They that niake them 
are like unto them, as ſenſeleſs as they, P/al. 115+ 8. t They turn 
their Faces wholly towards their Idols. It notes rhe opennets of 
their Apoſtacy, chap. 7. 24. #t The uſual Language of God's 


\ 


MI 4 H. C hap. Vl, 


hemia;; gives, Neh.g. 15. to23. And you have the Story of ir, 
Pſal. 8. m Divers Interpreters derive this Word from a difie- 
rent Rcot, and :ccordingly render the Senſe varioutly. Some + 
trom a Reor that ſignities to Jace or fall, as a Land where Frums | Cl 
tall off before it be ripe, bringing nothing to Perfect;on : And $- 
lo Tremelius and Tunins trantlate it, Jja. 28. 1, 4. 4.4. fave you 
found me to fail your ExpeQations in any thing that I have pro- 
miſled you? Fyyb. 21. 45. and 23. 14. Others derive it from 2 
Word that ſignifies Late ; as a Land that brings forth its Fruit 
late in the Year ; which either ripeneth not, or ripeneth un- 
kindly, 9. 4. Have you found me backward in any thing to do 
you good ? Have I not fed you to the full > Others from dark- 
neſs, properly thick Darkneis, Exod. xo. 22. Jodl 2. 2. And it is 
the more ligniticant, becauſe Jah, the Name of God is addcd to 
It, 4. d. the darkneſs of God, as a /teep of God, for a deep /ieep, 1 Sam. 
26. 12+ flame of God for a vehmentfiame, Cant. 8. 6. as if it were 2a 
Land unhabitable, becauſe of the rota} want of Light, q 4d. Have 
I been a God of no uſe or comfort to them, that they thus leave 
me ? Have they had nothing from me bur Miſery and Affliction ? 
as this Notion of darkneſ5 may import, Iſa. 8. 22. Lam. 3. 2. 


Children in Diftrets, P/a!. 3. 7. and often elſewhere. When they 


they found the vanity of their Idols, and their own Folly in rely- 


ing on them that cannot help, or ſave, and rejetting me, ver. 31. | 
then they will come to me, Jrdg. 10. 10. Hoſ. 5. 15. The fame} 


thing with finding her in her Month, ver. 24. herein abuſing | 
God's Gentlenefs, making him their Neceflity, not their Choice. 

28 But where are thy Gods. that thou haſt made 
thee 2 let them ariſe y, if chey * can ſave thee 1n the 
time of thy + trouble : for according to the number of 
thy citics z are thy gods, O Judah. 

:: Thy Idols, viz. Gods of thy own making ? what do they do 
for thee * Iſa. 31. 3. » Either by way of Challenge, let them 
produce their Idols now, to help them if they can, whom they 
call rheir Fathers and their Makers. Or by way of Scoff, as E!:- 
jzhto Baa!'s Prieſts : See Jug. 10. 14. Beſides, in this Word ariſe 
there is an Infinuation of their Lifeletnels and Deadneſs, 1/a:46. 
7. chap.10.'5.And further, here may be a ſecret Reply couched in 
3t.q.4. in your Trouble you will ſay to me, ariſe, ſave us: now ſay 
ſo to them, and ſee, if they can ariſe and fave you. 2x, 9. &. 
Thou haſt them near ro thee, and enough of them, imitating 
the Heathens, who had, according to Yarro, above 30000 Dei- 
ies. No marvel if I, who am but one, be {lighred, when in 
every City there 1s at leaſt one, 2 Kings 17. 29, 30, 31. and in 
Jeruſalem one in every Street, chap. 11, 13. Ir's a hard Cafe if 
none, or all theſe thy tutelzr Gods, cannot help thee. See Deur. 
32- 37, 38,39. Make tryal if any, or all of them together can 
help thee. 

29 Wherefore will ye plead with me ? ye all a have 
tranſgreſſed againſt me 6, faith the LORD. 


2, 7. c. Some of all forts : There is not any one ſort of you in- 
nocent. 6, g.d. You are all at my Mercy, why will you contend? 
all this that I charge you with 1s clear and evident, and all makes 
againſt you, ver 22, 34. Wherefore do you expoſtuJate, and put 
me to my Proofs * This they were good at, chap. 16. 10. There 
1s nothing that you can juſtly reply, verſe 19+ 


20 In vain have * ſmitten your children c; they re- 


c Eirher your Poſtenity, that you breed up like your {elves ; or 
rather, your Inhabirants in every City ; they being frequently 
called the Children of ſuch a City, or ſuch a Place, Children of Serr, 
2 Chron. 25. 14. Children of the Province, Ezra 2.1. and Children 
of thy People, Lev. 19+18, and abundance more the like : and thus 
it is comprehentive both of Parents and Children. 4, 7. e. 'The 
fruit of Correction, viz, Inſtruction. The fame Word is rendred 
correazon, Prove 23,13. Which ſignifies znſtruFion, Prov. 5. 12.and 
in other places, and ſo to betaken here. Ir notes their refraCtori- 
neſs ; that tho” they were corrected, yer they would nor be in- 
firucted : tho' God did ſmite them, yet the Rod prevailed as lit- 
tle with them, as the Word. e Either the Sword rhar I have ſent 
to deſtroy you, hath deſtroyed your file Prophets together with 


Hence the L XX. exprels it by a Land bringing forth Thorns. Or 
|this Exprefſion a Land of darkneſs may Le pur by appolition to 
the former. 5, 7. e. in their Heatt., o Words of Pride and 
boaſting - God had endeavoured ro make them ſentible, that all 
their Happineſs they owed to him, and now you caſt me oit; or 


rather, we are well enough eſtabliſhed in our Goverment 


by Foreign Aids, and Compatts with the Egyprians and 4:';- 
reans, &C. and have Rulers of our own ; we have no ſuch great 
need of thee ; hence rhe LXX. render it in the Pave Voice, we 
will not be ruPd, which agrees with the next Words of che vere, 
Deut. 32.15, 16, Something of this appeared in Uzziah, 2 Chro;.. 
26, 15, 16. and H:zckiah, 2 Chron. 32. 25. neither was David 
wholly clear, Pſal. 3c. 6. 


32 Can a maid forget her crnaments p, « a bride 

her attire 9 ? yet my people have forgotten me r days 
without number /. 

p How ſeldom is it, and how unlikely, that a Maid ſhould for- 
ger her Ornaments. q Whether ir belongs to rhe Head, or the 
Breaſt, or Arms, whether Bracelets or Jewels where-ever worn, 
15 not worth the diſputing ; but underſtand, thoſe rich Jewels, Fi 
which the Bridegroom was wont to preſent his Bride with, partly Joy, 
for a general Obligation, and partly of particular Signification,and 
all of them ornamental, whatever may render her amiable in the 
Eyes of her Bridegroom ; Virgins, and eſpecially Brides, will nor 
uſually negle& any thing that may make them comely. r 77x. 
in the negle& of my Worſhip, me, who was not only their De- 
fence, but their Glory, verſe 11, &c. that for which other Nati- 
ons honoured them, P/al. 148, 14. Ezeck. 16.10, to 15.s, 7, e. For 2 
long time paſt ; time out of mind ; or, as the Hebrew, Lays of 
which there 1s no number. 


23 Why trimmeſt : thou thy way to ſeek love « * 
therefore haſt thou alſo taught x the wicked ones thy 


ways ||. G 

: Or deckeft, Ezek. 23.40, thinking thereby to entice others 
to thy help : Thus 15 the Word uſed, cap. 4. 30, Or, Why doſt 
thou uſe ſo much Art and Skill, and take ſo much pains to go, 
and ſend here and there to contra a Friendſhip with fore:yn 
People, and to bring them to thy Embraces, iſa. 57. 9, 10. Or 
thinkeſt to ſera good: Face, or Gloſs upon the Matrer, and excuie 
thy ſelf, as if thou couldſt delude God, P/jal. 78. 36, 37- whereas 
a}l thou doſt is to ger acquaintance with other Idolaters. «, 7. e- 
To commur Filthineſs with thy Idols; u Synecdoche of the bind, x,7.c, 
Thou art become fo vile, that even »>trumpers themfſeives may 
come to learn of thee, 2 Chron. 33. 9. Or by thy Example : Nati- 
ons that have been vile enough of themſelves, by thy Example, 
are become more vile. || z. e. Thy Actions. A Metaphor. 


24 Alſo in thy skirts .*. is found the blood of the 

fouls of the poor innoc nts jy: 1 have not found ir 

by Þ ſecret ſearch z, but upon all theſe a. + Heb, 
.*. Viz. Of thy Garments. A Synecdoche of the Kind. The Tor dizging. 


you, Hc/. 4. 5- and ſo 1t 1s both a Prophefie, anda Threatning : 
or rather, You have been ſo far from recciving Counſel, and In- 
ftruQtion, that you have, by the Sword, and other ways of De- 
firuChion, which 1s to be underſtood by the Sword, murdered 
thoſe that IT ſent to reprove your Follies in-the Days of Ala, 7o- 
aſh, Manaſſch, &c. Neh. 9.26. See Matth. 23. 34, 35. f Or eat- 
ei:up. A AMcaph?t, Hence we read of the edge of the Sword, 
which both in H brew and Grak 1s called. the Mozzrh of the 
Sword, chap. 21. 7. Lake 21.24. g Without Reſpett or Pity ; 
with all manner of ſavage Uſage. See Pal. 7. 2. Laying atide al] 
Humanity. 


21 © O peneration h, fee; ye the word of the 
TL. ORD &: have I been a wilderneſs / unto Iſrael ? a 


L Or, Oh ye Men of this Generation. A Note of Admiration. 
Or rather, O Generation ; a Note of Compe/lat ion. It is to you I 
ſpeak. 7, 7. e. Look well to it; conſider it. As the Rod is to 
reach, and therefore ought to be heard, Mic. 6. 9. So the Word 
is to be confidered of, and therefore onght ro be looked into 
/2p.2.29. k He ſpeaketh here,not ſo much ofthe Dottrine of the 


vour L yes, becaufe you give the Dottrine the hearing only, as we 
ule to tay, 7. e. your Lars are ſhut againſt ir. {Here God cha]- 
lengeth them again to tel] him, what Unkindneſs he had ſhewed 


kens of thy Cruelrv may be ſeen openly there ; or in thy hands, as 
the LXX ; or a Metaphor from Birds of rapine, whoſe Wings are 
bloody with their Prey : but not fo well. y, z. e. In thee is found 
the Murders exprefled here by Blood of innocent Perſons, meant 
here by Souls, compriſing both their ſacrificing of their lirtle Chil- 
dren to their Idols, Pjal. 106. 37, 38. Exek. 16. 20, 21, 36. mur- 
dering Souls, as well as Bodies, and alſo all thoſe Cruelties, Op- 
prefſions and Murders, that they executed upon poor innocent 
Perſons, which were not a few, in what Manaſſch did, 2 Kings 
21. 16. Ezek. 7. 23. and 9.9. and in ſpecial the Prophets, wverſz 


30. thatcame in God's Name to reclaim them ; which nores their *G 
deſperate Malice, as well as Cruelty to flay their Phylicians, z Heb, 4 
by digging, as if the Earth had covered the Blood, - or as if they | ; 
had committed their Wickedneſs in ſome obſcure places. a Up- © ' 


on thy Garments, openly enough, as expoſed to publick view : 
There needs no fuch ſtrift Scrutiny to be made. 


35 Yet thou fayſt b, becauſe T am innocent c, ſure- 


ly his anger ſhall curn 4 from me. Behold, I will 
plead with thee e, becauſe thou fayeſt, I have not ſin- 
ned f. 


'b Or, interrogatively, dareſt thou ſay ? Haſt thou the Impu- 
dence to aifirm it ? c Clear of this whole Charge. dShall not 


bave not T accommollated you with all Neceſlities ar all rimes. 


break out againſt me, 1/2. 5. 25- e I will proceed in my Juds- Ne 
ment againſt rhee, werſe 9. chap. 25. 31. Or itis a ſoft Expret- 3,75 
lion, wherein he ſhews, rhat he will nor att like a Tyrant, carried $2 
on rally and furiouſly, bur as a Judge, regularly and righreouſly, 4® 
Uzk. 20, 35. and it ſhews, that he will convince her. f Becauls "I 


thou = 


il, 


JW 


| Chap. Hl, 


* Chap. 
BI. 22. 


+ Heb. 


ſaying. 


*Gen. 48, Where thou haſt nor been lien « with : * In the ways « 


ty, 


thou doſt juſtifie thy elf, as if I had no cauſe to be angry Witt 
thee. God isnot angry with her ſo much becaute ſhe hath finncd, 
a5 becauſe ſhe will noracknowiedge” her S1n- | 
36 * Why gaddeſt chou about fo much to change 
thy way £* chou allo ſhalr be aſhamed of Egypt b, as 
thou wait aihamed of Aſlyria. : 
g,i.c. Thy Aﬀtions: a Metaphor. See on verſe 33. V hy 
Jolt thou ſhuffle chus with me, ro ſeek Auxiliaries any where, 
rather than to cleave to me, ver, 18. See on {/a- 57. 9, 19. Or like 
Strumpets, whoſe Love is never hxed, but lometimes ſer on one, 
ſometimes on another. þ Thou haſt run tro Aſſ7ia, and then ro 
Ez p:,and they ſhall both make thee aſhamed by rheir diſappoint- 
ments of thee: thou ſhalt be aſhamed of Egypr,as others have been, 
Iſa. 36. 6. Or rather, Egypt ſhall ſtand thee in no more ſtead than 
Affria hath done, 1ja. 3o. 3, 5. And how Ti/gath Pelneſer ſerved 
them : See 2 Chron. 28, 20. Before Hezek:ah's time the Jews 
made a League with the Aſjrians, againſt the Syrians, and rhe 
iſraelites, and then againſt the Egyprians : neither proſpered : He 
tells them, they muſt expeC& nc better Succeſs from Egypt. 
37 Yea, thou ſhalt go forth from him z, and thine 
hands upon thine head k: for the LORD hath rejected 


thy confidences /, and thou ſhalt not proſper in 


them 2. 
; Some apply it to the ſad and ineffeual Return of the Am- 


baſſadors, being diſappointed in their ExpeCtations from the King 
of Egypt ; but rather, all the help rhou can{t procure from a= 
broad ſhall not prevent thy Captivity, but from hence thou 1halt 
go. k An uſual Poſture of Sadneſs and Mourning, 2 Sam. 13.19. 
{uited here to her going into Captivity. /Refuted to give Suc- 
ceſs unto them, 2 Chron. 16. 7. Or, reje&ted thee for thy Conh- 
dences ; or hedifapproves thy Confidences, v/x. all thy Refuges 
which thou ſeekeſt out of God. m Yiz. Inthy Refuges and De- 


pendencies. 
C HAPFE mn 


Gods Forbearance with the 1dolatry of Judah, who zs worſe than Tirael 
1—1 I. Both called to repent, with Goſpel Promiſes, 12 - - 197 
Miſery by Sin; Salvation only of God, 20 25. 


+? Hey fay », If a man put away his o wite, 

lh _ ſhe 50 from him, and becomes another 
man's, ſhall he return unto her again p? Shall not 
that land be greatly polluted q? But thou haſt played 
the harlot with many r lovers ; yet return again to me, 


ſaith the LORD. 

 n Or, Menuſe to ſay. If this, with the four following Ver- 
ſes, belong ro the former Chapter, then ir ſeems to expreis God's 
Condeſcenſion to them, q. 4. though, if a Woman forlake her 
Husband, and be married to another Man, the Law will not per- 
mit him to receive her again ; yet God would receive thee again 
upon thy returning to him : but thou chuſeſt rather obſtinately 
to adhere to thy ocher Confidences, wherein thou ſhalt not pro- 
ſper. Bur, if we look upon them as beginning a new Argument, 
then here God declares his Readineſs to receive them again upon 
their Repentance, though it be very unuſual for Husbands fo to 
do, when their Wives have prov'd treacherous unto them, in be- 
taking themſelves to other Husbands : And fo this Chapter may 
very well begin with ſuch a proverbial Speech, they ſay, or men 
uſe to-ſay ; or, it is commonly ſaid. o Or give her a. Bijl of Di- 
vorce, Deut. 24. 1. f, 4. d. He cannot take her again according 
to the Law, Deut. 24. 1, 2, 3, 4+ Or rather, willa Man do ſuch a 
thing ? If the Law were nor againſt it, would any Man be ſo ea- 
fily wrought upon, as to take her again ? No certainly, it 1s an 
Argument from the leſs to the greater, to ſer forth God's great Le- 
nity towards them, 9.9. if an Husband ſhould turn away his Wife 
meerly becauſe ſhe pleas'd him nor, tho' ſhe gave him no juſt 
cauſe?, and the ſhould beſtow her ſelf on another, he would not 
be reconciled to her, neither might he take her again ; but you 
have gone a whoring from me, and ſufficiently provoked me to 
rejeQt and turn you off. Yet T will diſpence with my own Law for 
your ſakes, and will a& by my Prerogative : I am ready ro be 
reconciled, to follow them that fly from me, as in the cloſe of the 
Verſe; and Zec. 1. 3. and Mal. 3. 7, God will pardon Sins of A- 
poſtacy, and falls after Repentance. q Heb. In being profane be 
profaned., Would not- ſo great a Sin greatly pollute a State or 
Nation, Lev. 18: 27, 28. Ir muſt needs be polluted by fuch Mar- 
rlagesto and fro, and promiſcuous Couplings, Deut. 24. 4. r Not 
with one only, as being ſufficient to make thee an Adulrreſs, but 
thou haſt been a common Strumpet, joyning in Fellowſhip with 
divers Aſociates and Companions, or many Idols. 


2 Lift up thine eyes / unto the high places :, and ſee 


' haſt thou ſat for them, as the Arabian y in the wilder- 
neſs : and thou haſt polluted the land with thy whore- 


doms, and with thy wickedneſsz. 

7 1 Do but look and conſider, whether I do charge thee wrong- 
zully or no. 7 He dire&s her to the Places of her Whoredoms 
and Idolatries, called High Places, being principally upon Hills, 
2 Azvgs 21. 3, and divers other places, tho* fometimes in Val- 
lies, chap. 2.23. Which notes alſo her Impudence, that, where- 
as other Whores affe&ted Privacy, ſhe ſhould be filthy in the open 
view. « Thy filthine(s has been every where ſo frequent, that 
thou canſt ſcarce ſhew a Place that hath been free from thy Pol- 
lurions, verſe 6. 13. where there are notthe Footſteps of thy For- 
nications and Idolatries. x 7z. To allure Paſſengers , See Ezek. 
16. 24, 25+ and waiting for them, viz. thy Aiſociates ; not 
drawn by others Allurements, but thine own Laſciviouſnels. 
Y An Alluſion tothe Manner and Cuſtom of that People, either 


L Tali 


rainick, that were wont to Patca time x Quits Dy the way 13925 


that they mighr meer with their Caitomers ro trade, as they jrath 
{cd along, very properly pointing our the PraGtice of Harlors. Sc 
Prov. 7. 11, 12. & Not only thy Idolatries, but 211 other thy 
wicked Courſes. | | 

3 Therefore the * ſhowers have been withholden a, 

$ 6 "os Sd 
and there hath becn no latter rain b; and thon hadit a 
* whores iorehead c, rhou refuſedit to be ahamed. 


—_ 


. Y* . . . 
a Viz. By me, according tro my threatning, Lov. 25 19. 3n4q - 


, ] j# mo fo yo & 
Dent. 28. 23, 24. 2.e. a drought was fent upon thee, ciriier 2s 2 


""TrvT. ll SRIES..S. ATT 'F, yeh A $2 3: 
Puniſhment of thy Wickedne!s ; tis publick Sins bring tnbiick 
Judgmenrs: or,as an aggravation of it ; andthen it muy} 

! 7 B. V + - « WE 
though, as It often 1s, 9. 4. fag 


2c read 

2 notwichPanding the great drouvyh: : 
ana ris the laſt Word; of the Verize {euin TO) favor. þ Ts 20s 
ded to Showers before-mention'd, feems to imply, there had been 
no former nor latter Rain, the former for the {p71NG'Pf OC Ne 
Corn, the latter for tae plumping and ripeaing it ; tais coming 2 


little betore Harveſt. «c For 1] rhis, thoa Oidik Fil remain ins 


' pudent and obſtinate, as aſhamed of nothine, c{2p. 6. 15, rhus 


proverbially expreiflcd, bucaute Sizme dorh firft and moſtly a- 
pear 1n the Forehead. Thus Antichrif's Impudence 15 exyretfed, 
Rev. 17. 5. And lome ancient Herericks were calied £92::45, 

4 Wilt thou not from this time d cry unto me, My 
Father e, thou art the guide of my youth f 
, dC Viz. That T have withholden Showers. Soine refer this, 1. To 
the time to come : Wiit thou not yer be wile * and for the 
future ſeek ro me, having found all thy other ways ſuce lets 
Iſa. 9, 13. chap. $. 14. 2. To the time prefent : 
thou challenge me for my prelent Severicy, and continuing it to 
wards thee, when thou {till retaineſt thy Filthineſs, thy Viores 


[1 


'S MESSE 
£ i »V watiiil 


; Forehead, verſe 3. Thou ſtill continueſt worſhipping Idols, aud 


yer fanlieſt thy ſelf faichfal ro mic. 3. To the time pait, -. e. 
; Haſt rhou nor all along pretended Kindnei5 to ine, and as if thuu 
| hadft walked cloſe with me? 2 Kings 17, 324 33. Exel. 23, 349. 
je Wilt thou not as a Child call upon me, whom thou hatt thus 
| greatly provoked, and own me as a Farther ? verſe 19. tor fuc!; 
' have I been to thee, Pſal. 103..13, Mal. 1.6. and 3- i7. f Li- 
ther on whom I have depended, as being brought up by thee, 


., orthe ſubmiſſive Expreflion of a Wite 1teeking to be reconciled 


to her Husband, that God would be ro her as he had been 1n th - 
\ Days of her Yourh : fucha Caſe as is exprefled 1 Cor. 7. 11. Words 
of Flatrery uſual with Hypocrites ; or - rather, being married to 
'thee in thy Youth ; a Periphrafſis for Husband, Prov. 2. 17. which 
' argues great Tenderneſs towards her, verje. 2- Thus the J'ender- 
nets of this Relation is expretied, Mal. 2. 14. and fo God 1s laid to 
elpouſe them to himſelf, Ezek. 16.8 _ 
5 * Will hereſerve g bs anger for ever ? will he keep 
it tothe end þ ? Behold, thou haſt ſpoken and done ; 


evil things as thou couldeſt, 

Z Here being a Defe& of the Noun, the Jews ſupply ic with 
thy Sin, Iſa, 43. 25+ but by the moit and beſt, as we do, his Jager. 
Compare it with werſ? 12. Pſal. 103. 9. Nahum, 1. 2. in which 
Texrs there is a DzfeCt of the ſame Word. Fhis may ſeem to be 
the Words of the Propher, and fo the Connexion is ealie with the 
foregoing Words, 4.4. If thou wouldit do ſo, try me now, 
Fc. Would he relerve his Anger? Would he not be rec 1nciled 2 
but thou haſt taken quite another Covurte': Or, they may b« the 
Words of God, as it were teaching his People how tivzy thou! zc- 
colt him : God is more forward and earnet!t for Reconciliation, 
than Sinners themſelves. +þ The fame with the former {or evoy. 
i God's Challenge of the people, charging then: either wich their 
refolved Wickedneſs,thar they had made good all their evil Words 
by their evil Aﬀtions; they had even done a5 they tzid ; or rather. 

with their Hypocriſie. 9g. d. Norwithiftanding all thy tormer 
Promiſes, yet thou periiſteſt {till in thy Lewdnets and Obvitinacy, 
Iſa. 58. 2+ Hof. 7. 14 ; 

6 4 The LORD faid alſo + unto me/, in the 
days of Joſiah the king 2, hait thou feen 7547 which 
backſliding Ifraelhad done »? the is gone up upon eve- 
ry high mountain, and under every green tree, and 
there hath played the harlor. 

k Or, again ; thewing thar here begins a new Sermon, in which 
the Propher, from God, 1. Declares 1/rael's Apoſtacy, and how 
it fared with them for ir. 2. Aggravares Fud 2's Sin, for not ta- 
king warning. 3. Ifſues forth an Invitation of chem both ro Re- 
pentance, with a Promiſe of Acceptation,and r:-uniting them un- 
der the Meſſiah. 4. Relates the Compliance of the Faithful among; 
them with this Invitation. ! /7z. By Revelation ; for he peaks 


the King of 4ſſria, 2 Kings 17. 5.to 13. long before Jeremiah was 
born ; therefore he ſaith, Haft thou wot jeen, 7. e. conlidered 
wherefore God gave her a Bill of Divorce, mz When he would 
have purged the Land, and reſtored the pure Worlhip of God. 
n Viz. The ten Tribes who fe!} off from Judah, and fer up a 
diſtin& Kingdom of their own under 7erov22m : Whar they did, 
v12, in their Idolatries, expretied in the next Words, an cap. 2. 
20. See there, when they openly apottatrzed from Gol, and lar 
with one common Conleat ; inlomuch, raar a!! ener Kings pro» 
ved wicked and idolatrous, and poſtibly it may look «s far back 
as Solomon's Defettion, 1 Kings 11. 4, 5, &c, which may nov, 
come in remembrance. | 

7 AndlI ſaid, after ſhe haddone all theſe rhings, turn 
thou unto me o. But the returned not. And her trea- 


cherous ſiſter Judah p ſaw it 7. 

0, Viz. By Repentance, As 3. 19. Altho' {h= had been fo vile 
and abominable, yer the Lord waired in expeQ:tion of her Re- 
[rurn. þ Benjamin 15 allo here comprized ; but Judav bang ine 
\chief is only named, theſe rwo abiding together after rus 0.!ter 


lying in wait by the way for Pafſlengers, as Robbers uſe to do, [Cen revolted ro Fereboarn. Called Hjrat's Siſter, becaute they were 


Ho). 6. 9. they being noted for Robbers. Or rather, 1n a way of; all deſcended from rhe Farriarch Jacob, Exc. 16:46 


LOT? DAre 


fn ph 


/ 


of things that 1ſrael had done when they were carried away by. 


7 E R E M_ Ions. Chap, WM 


CY 
Jp C7, 


iS, 


1 
/ 


Chap, II. 


>. 16. 46, Comp. 23- 
on2., becaule of her freque 
17, 15. :nd many other tm 

4 Fromiles both 1n con 


Ven mnAtS and 
I rives, Deer. «, 23, CC. and 2 


10 fk 


2 eg 


2,4. ard treachcrows, or the treachercus 
at Revoles, 2 Chren, 21. 6, &c. and 24. 
5, and after as frequent renewed Co- 

junction with the reſt of the 
9. 10, I1, 12, &c. and after: 


© 


+3 
hg 
/ . 


I - 


"pe. 5 1 
*17 3 2 . A dl _ _ Fond - ho = P 
wards, 2 Circ. 13+ 9, 10, &c. ang 2 Chron. 15. 12. &C. and 23 
[ . DET a+ it ) 1 ? > RRAth 
16- and 29 10." 9, 7. & They were nor itrangers to it, but knew 


= 


3. They could not but know how ] 


; 
y- 


ir, as the word 1s Pjal. 40. 
had dea:t WIT ljracl. q 
And I faw r. when for all the cauſes / whereby 
S And I ſaw r. when tor all te Ccaulcs,; ereby 
- 1* ; . #1... L 5 Br 
backfliding if, ael commirted adultery, 1 had pur her 
away and given her a bill of divorce :, yet her trea- 
cherous lifter Judah feared not «, but w and play- 
: | 7 Ne 
ed the bariot ailo x. 
- d. Thar which orbers diſcern not, I ſaw well enough, </z. 
r,9. a. That which orbers dilcern Rot, 1 1aWw VO! JUS, Vg 
Both ber Hy pocrifie and D:lumulation, and her 17ncormigiblencts, 
notwithtancing whar had been betaiien I[racl, whole Correctio: 
ſhou!d have been her Initruftion Thus Gol ipeaks or cane NOTICE he 
took of both, Chap. 23.13, 14+ {ral 15 1zid IO be backfliding 
bur \udah treach 


? 2 
1\- 


Peytr 


ite With 


ith 


heros, becaiſe the retained the worthty of God 
6 4 , , 6 WY. RO Is RT 1 3 
though the did often privately and Clotely enmurace laols, and 
ſometimes ublickly under A7:vaſb and Anat, ani Other v; 
Kings. [ Or, notwithſtanding all the ground and rexion I had ro 
dei! fo with 1jracl 10 regard of ber Aduiteries, as ro put her away, 
; Delivercd her up into the hands of the Arian, where God rook 
from her the title of being his Church, 2 Wag 17. 5,6, &C. which 
he cali here 23 Bilk of Divorce ; not tuch 2 one as the” Jews were 
allowed to give upon every {chr ground (tor fuch an one GOy 
denies<,ther ever lie £ hem to produce 1t, 
1a. 50. 1.) but upon jult and great Occation, V2. her playing 
the Adulirehs againſt him in her Ido2tries. 2, 7. e. Was neither 
afraid of civinz me offence, nor of the like puniſhmenr. « A 
tho? the had ſeen the Judvment of God executed upon 1ſracl be- 
. _ as” A . 3 

fore ker Eyes, which made it the more itupendious,that the would 
take no warning by her Silter's Suiterings, Prov. 28. 14+ yet ſhe 
went on {H!l, Ezrk. 23. 11, 12, CC. : 

9 And it came to paſs through the || lightneſs of her 

3 bg : . 

10redom y, that {he defiled the land z, and commit- 

w 3 p, 


ted adultery with ſtones and with Itocks a. 

y Whether of Fadah's or of I'-act's is not agreed upon, but the 
right applying of it doth depend much upon the right acceptation 
of the word Lighrneſs, which Comes trom an Hebrew word that 
ſignifies vo:ce, and 10 it may refer, either to the Noiſe or Fame of 
it, that would fly abroad, and thus ic 1s applied to 1/r2el, 7. e. 
Thovgh 1/rael's Whoredoms were never {o much blazed abroad, 
yer 744ah regarded it not. Or, it may betaken for the heinouſ- 
neſs of it, a crying voice, as Ger. 4, 10. and fo by an hypallnge, 
her Mir. doms of fame or notorious Whoredoms; and 1s not 11] 
ex .reſſ.uU here by Lektneſs of hr Whoredom, noting her Impu- 
den: In it, as weuſero term a common Harlot a light V Voman; 
and ris jt is 4p lied 0 Zudah : Borh the foregoing and following 
words {eeining ro be an «g.ravation of Zadab's RefraGorinels. 
z bk: ou) rthe whole Land under the nnputation of flthineſs. a,7.e. 
With Javh rave of Srone and Wood. A Mcetonymy of the Aat- 
ter, to note the oat2iis > | F rhe Fact. 

i. And y<ct fol all this 5, her treacherous ſiſter Ju- 
dah lata not turned unto me with her whole heart, 


=> 


v0 
” TICK? 
Vz > 4A. 


ie Gave facnmN,anu CNS11CINSgETIL t 


= 
w 


. 
+ « 


l. 
4 


i Or, 6M, 


eq 
Ls 


Heb. in but + feignediy, faich cme LOKD. 
fa:ſchood, þ Though Gol faw whar the did, and tho' ſhe ſaw the ſhame- 


ful Idolatry of 1/rael, and what the had uttered, yet the was not 
warned. (See ver 8. burfell ro Jdolatry under Manaſſey, who un- 
did what Hczachiahb had done, 2 Chron. 33. 3. though under fair 
pretences the dilſembled with God in the days of Joſiah, 2 Chron, 
34. 32, 33. as appeared by her ſudden revolr, v/z. in lets than 
three Months after 7o/i2b* Dearth, 2 Kings 23. 31, 32. 

11 And the LORL faid unto me 5 The backſliding 
Ifrael hath juſtified c her felt more chan treacherous 


Judah. 
c Was leſs vile, hath more to ſay for her ſelf; 7u4ah's Sin being 
orcatly aggravated compared with 1ſrael, Ezck. 16.51. and 23.11. 
See Lyke 18. 14. For, though 1/racl's Sins were more, and their 
Idolatry continued, yet in 72dah it was more heinous. 1. Be- 
cauſs of their unruly headffrongnefs, thar broke the Reins and 
Reſtraint, which their external Worſhip ought ro have had upon 
them. 2. Becauſe of their ſtupid Security, in not being warn'd by 
the Judgments rhar rhey had ſeen befal 1ſ-ae! for the very ſame 
things. 3. Becauſe of their intolerable Pride, boaſting that their 
k State was {t4jI unſhaken. 4. Becauſe of rheir groſs Perfidiouſnels in 
| maſking Promiſes, and breaking them, which J/-2el did nor, be- 
cauſe ſhe brought nor her feIf under fuch ſolemn and frequent oh- 
ligations. See Fer(c 5. Laftly, Becaute they were a'greatdeal more 
zealous in their IdoJatries than Jſrae! was, viz. under AManaſeh, 
when they flew ajl the Prophers of the Lord. 
12 CT God, and proclaim thele words toward the 
north e. and ſay, Return thou backſliding Iſrael, ſaith 
the LORD, and I will not cauſe mine anger f tofall x 
upon you: For I am * merciful þ, faith the LORD, ard 
* Verſe 5-I will not keep angor for ever. 

d It may poſlibly be uſed her: as an Aldyerb of exciting, namely 
$0 to, as is uſual ; or it notes ſpeed, go quickly, our of hand, not 
Jucally, bur ſet thy Face (C4. 2 2 )or Feer thar way, or by thy Of- 
fice addreſs thy ſelf to them, viz. by way of Proclamation, cry- 
ing aloud ; pottibly implying tae diſtance of pjace:This voice may 
in time reach them, tho' a great way off. Or rather, the deafneſs 
of Iſr-acl, or the obdurateneſs of Judah, that they might hear 
what God faith to 1{rae/, conceive hope, and be reclaimed by their 
example, and be excited ro emulztion e, z. e. To Afyria and Me- 

aca, and the Regions thereabouts tiar lay Northward from juden 
whirher the T'cn Tribes were carried by Tiglath-P;lefer, and $2l- 


FEREMIAH. 


Chap. I 


manezer, 2 Kings 15. 29. and 17,6. f Upon condition of re- | 
curuing to their former true Worſhip of God, that rhereby Jndan | 
might be awakened, he promiſeth that he will not let his anger, | 
or his face, as in the Hebrew (becauſe anger principally appears in 
rhe face) ls angry face or countenance to be upon them. So 1t 1s 
aled, Lev. 17. 10. Pfal. 34. 16. and not be inexorable, wiz. for | 
ever, which is tobe ſipplicd from the nexr Words: For orherwiſe 
1:s anger Jay heavy upon them at this zyme. g A Metaphor from 
things on high char drop down to rhe hure of whatever 1s under ; 
and 1o Chsp, 23. 24. compare Gen, 19. 24. h Here is the ground 
of this conditional Promiſe, taken from the nature of God, that 
SINRers may not defpuir, Pjal. 86. 15. and 103. $, 9, &Cc. 
12 Only acknowledpe z thine iniquicy, that thou 
] ky . s % 
naft cranſgretie. againſt the LORD thy God, and haſt 
cattered thy ways to the ftrangers & under every 
green tree, and ye have not obeyed my voice /, faich 


che LORD. 


7 Which will be the evidence of thyRepentance,without which 
thou canſt nor lay claim to any pardon, Prov. 28.13. Iſa. 55. 7. 
This 1s ſpoken by way of limitation, Jelt the Iſraelites ſhould fantie 
: tO eatte a Pardon from God's merciful Nature. Exhortations to 
Repentance ſhould always accompany the exhibition of Promutes. 
þ F772, To other Nations, or rather to other God's, or to Idols,run- 
ning here and there up and down like a light inpudenr Harlor, 
fomerimes7to one, ſomerimes ro another, thus ſucking in divers 
Superſtitions, called ſcattering thy ways, wer.6. 2 Kings 17. 4,9,10. 
nd Chzp. 2, 23; 25. Feet whereby we go on in ways ; a metapho- 
"ical Meronymy, 1 $o that your Sin 1s not a Sin of ignorance. but 
of obſtinacy, thutting your Ears againit my Counſels, which I ſent 
you by my Prophets tor your reciaiming, 2 Kings 17.13, &Cc. 


14 Turn, O backſliding children, # faith the 


5 


- s 


LORD; for I am married unto you : and I will take T1. 
you one of a city, and two of a family, » and I will L. 
bring you to Z0nN 0. hf 


7; Tam in Covenant with you, Dert., 29, r. 10,11, T2,&c. and 
this Covenant notwithſtanding all your unfairhfulneſs, Iam ready 
ro renew with you, Hof 2.19,20. # This word Family is not always 
ts be raken ſtrictly for an Houthold ; for then rhe expreſſion would 
ſeem to imply more ina Family than in a City : bur frequently 
for a Country or Nation-Comp.Gen. 1243. with 22.18, Ezek.14417,18, 
19. See Ch. 1.15. or for a Tribe,and this may partly refpett the few- 
neis of thoſe that will be found Penicencs and return, God will 
have a ſprinkling in every City, and in every Family, or Tribe, 
or. Country ; but chiefly it reſpe&s God's exact care of them, that 
being now married to rhem, there ſhall not be one in a Ciry, or 
two in a Country or Tribe, but he will find them ovrt : If there 
be but one or two, he will not overlook them, this ſeems to be 
intimated, 1ſa. 27+ 12. a Texr that points at the ſame thing. o, 7.e. 
To Jeruſalem a Type of the Church. A double Meronymy of the 
Subgef. Iris the manner of the Prophets, when . they are treating 


of remporal Deliverances, eſpecially from Baby/on, frequently to 
break out abruptly into the ſpiritual Deliverance by Chriit, and 
ſo probably he dorh here ; and therefore bringing rhem to Zion muſt 
be underſtood either of joyning them ro: his Church, under the 
Miah, or bringing them again ro worthip with Judah at Jeruſa- 
[alem; as may ſeem to be intimated Chap. 31. 6. But the ten Tribes 
did never return into their own Land, and therefore that Texr 
mult be underſtood of a ſpiritual going up to Zzor, viz. when all 
Iſracl ſhall be ſaved, Rom. 11, 26. See 1/a. 56. 7, $. and 66. 20, 
and wer. 18. Thus we may Jook upon this part of the 
Prophecy ro have reſpett partly to whet God was at that time 
about todo, in this 7*re, and partly whzr he would heresfter do, 
when they 1hould be again ſfetled in their own Land, vnder the 
Meſſial, ver. 16, 17, 18, 19. 


I5 And I will give you * paſtors p according to *Ezek.34. 
mine heart q, which ſhall feed you with knowledgeand 
underſtanding r. 

þ Either Civil Magiſtrates, which are ſometi-nes ſo call-d, Mzc. 
5. 5. Or rather, Eccleliaſtical, as appears both from the reaſon of 
God's Judgments upon 1/ael, viz. Their Paſtors being generally 
either Thieves, or dumb Dogs ; and alſo from the n:ture of their 
Office in the cloſe ofthe Verſe, and thus they are called,Zph.4.1 1. 
Such as | will both chuſe for you, and approve of, and that 
thall faithbully and skilfully declare unto you my Mind, which in- 
timares nor only a ſingle a& of deliverance, bur his conſtant pre= 
{ſervation of them. r This notes, either the nature of their Food, 
Sze Nez. 8. 8. Mal. 2. 95, Or rather, the manner of their Feeding. 
See Pſal. 78. 72. See 1 Pet. 5. 2. See more of this Promite 
chap. 23. 

16 Andit ſhall come to paſs when ye be mulcipli- 
ed /, and increaſed in the land, in thole days r, ſaith 
the LORD, they ſhall ſay no more, The ark « of the 
covenant x of the LORD : neither ſhall ic come + tot] 
mine, neither ſhall they remember it, neither ſhail cl 
vitit 27, neither ſhalli| ;har be done any more 5 

t After the growr!; of the Churci ur.der the 
at the great Work of Converlion that thould be among thern. e- mag: fied 
ſpecially in the days of the Meſſias, and how great! y the- Church 
ſhould be encreaſed by the acceſſion of the Gertler 2 beginning 
whereof we read As 2. 41. and 4. 4. #u A Stnecdechica! exprete 
t10n tor all the legal Ceremonies, whereof the Ark wi$ 2 chiefyzrr. 

The ſenſe is, That whole Worſhip, with all rhe Rites arid Coping. 
nies belonging to it thould wholly ceaſe, Chritt beings come who 
was the fubſtance of whar the Ark, and il crher Rires did bur 
ſhadow our for a time, he be114Z now our Propitiatory, inftead of 
the covering of the Ark, or Mercy-ſeat, Rom. , 
the uſes and purpoſes thereof. In the Ark was 


39 


- 30 


Teb. 
1CY pon the 
heart. 


clini. CPointine [ Or, it be 


, 
= 


laid up the Ann, 
the 


Aaron's Rod, and the Tables of the Law, Heb.9. 4. He is now 


a PIT 


, HI. 


- 7 Chap 
| bread of Life, Job. 6. 35. 


| in him is the whole Law fulfilled, Rom. 


IJ 
. 


{hall 


. . IJ pe 2 © h.* 
ſo Worthipped without Ceremony, Joby 4. 21,23. For it rhis 
{» eminent, and comprehentive a token of God's pretenc? mutr 
ceaſe ini the days of the Goſpel, much more the Temple Service, 


7 E'R E M In. ( fr21 


heis our Rod of Government, Pſal. 2 

10. 4. and now God 
. . . - . 5 . {0 0 . ! 

reign gloriouſly in his Church by his Word and Spirit, and {hall be 


kg » ' - LY r 2 a 
the LXX render it, the 174117 950 Gi) 1h 


. 7 : " —_ - 
of the Nations, m God comes now to 
do it. Either it 1s a direction, g. 


O71 nat cnt 
: do ] P : # 
2 Telo!uriOn now 
On ris Condition, ru righ 


wiltown megand not return any wore ro Il; this theik ), - 
Or 2 promue, I will cauſe thee ro own ing, and giveriitce per fee 
rance, that thou ſhalt nor depurt trom me {and this is very apnlie 


« ; : » - o ' > 1 1 - Fe N . . "> es £ o 4 p - py 
with all the Rites belonging ro it, For. I. 17. Col. 2. 17. Heb. 10. Cavje to the work of Chriſt, See 15.1. 12. Se alto 2 Cor. 6.1 3,5 
$2.9. x Called alſo the rk of the Teftimony, Exod. 25. 22. and | and the cendition is indeed no more, thay God IOMILETA tu of 


0. 26. and 31. 7. and the reaſon ts, becauſe the two Tables or the | 
Law,which were th Teſtimony,or W:rnets of rhe Covenant were | 
cloſed upin it, Exod. 25. 16, 21.and 49. 20, ), Le. Ir ihall be; 
No more in uſe, neither ſhall there be any miſs of it, or any ring | 
like it, there {hall be no ſuch thing 3 Men ſhall nor trouble their | 
rhoughrs about it, or mention it, compare 1ſ3. 65. 17. Or repair! 
0 ir 25 an Oracle toreceive the anſwers of God ; nor for God's! 
Worthip, compare Jer. 16. 14, 15» Or to the place of 1s relidence, | 
as if no where elſe to be had ; in a word, it ſhall nor art al! be hz] 
in honour or reſye& or made much of. The word IWP 21, | 
done or made, ſignifies ro 1agrifie, as it ſeems to be uted, Dza2. 
32.6. and 1 $21. 12. 6- The whole Church ſhall now be tz 
Throne of God, Ver. 17. to which purpoſe the Ark former!y ter- 
ved. Now God foreſeeing, partly how hard a thing it wou'd be ro 
be believed, and partly the PJeas that rhe corrupt Wir and Inven- 
tion of Man would find out for the retaining of the!e Rires, anc 
by conſequence their loathnels to forgo chem, he ulerh | 
heap, and variety of expreſſions to the ſame thing, tar ht my 
leave no room for doubting in a thing ſo plainly, and tuily prom» 
bired in Goſpel-tmies, 

17 At that time they ſhall call Jeruſalem the 
throne & of the LORD: and all the nations fhall be 
gathered a unto it, to thename of the LORD, to Je- 
ruſalem 5 : neither ſhall they * walk any more atcer 
the F imagination of their evil heart c. 

2 Inſtead of the Ark, whereon was the Mercy-ſ{cat, now the 
meſs. Church typiied by Fernjalem , Gal. 4. 26. and Rv. 2f. 2. {hall 
bethe place of God's Relidence, where by his Spirit he will rule 
and a& in his Word and Ordinances, and in {pectal the Moir. gee 
Chap. 14. 21. and Ver. 16, @ Intimating both their readinels to 
come in, ard their number, a ccording to thar Prophecy of 7acov, 
Gen. 49. 19. See Iſa. 2.2. By Nations here underſtand, either 
the Tin Tri3es who are called many People, both 1/-ae! and Jud 
united, their diſtance being taken away, ſec Yer. 18. or rather lome 
of a)l Nations, thar ſhall flock into the Goſpel Church ; for when 
che Prophets foretel this ſtate, they generally uſher it in with the 
return of this People, at which time the Church ſhall be greatly en- 
larved. 6, i.e. Dwelling in Jeruſalem, or where the Lord placed 
his Name, /z. of old in Jeruſalem, Pal. 122.2, 3, &. but now 
in the Church, Rev, 21. 2, 3- without Ark or Temple, Rcv.21.22. 
where h2 will be known as it were by his proper Name, 1/z. 60.9. 
or as manifeſt in the fleſh. c Both Jew and G2: 7/1) ſhall now £con- 
form themſelves ro the Will of God, Iſa. 2. 3. The word i177- 
nation here comes from a roor, that ſignifies ro ſce, and thus 1t 15 
ſometimes applied to the judgment, P/al. 17. 2. and tometimes to 
the affeftion, Pſal. 66. 18. here it may comprehend both, they 
will follow neither their own judgmenr, or affection, but wholly 
the Word of God. The word is thus phraſed, Nuwv.15. 39. and 
Eccl. 11. 9. ſome read it after :he hardneſs, Deuteremomy 29.19. 


18 Inthoſe days the houſe of Judah ſhall walk [| 4 
with the houſe of Iſrael, and they ſhall come togerher 
out of the land of the north e, to the laid f chat] 
| Oc, ca:- have {| given for an inheritance unto your fathers. 
fed yorr a Thete two Kingdoms ſhall become one, rhat had been iolong 


Y. 


. 
i / 
T/P 
88} » 


3 


_4 gon 
UC 14 


bo) 


- *- 


j} Or, *0. 


i14OFT [12 


fe&t in them. 


20  Sureiy, as feparcerh 
from her 4 husband », * fo have you dealt trea- 
cherouſly with me, O houſe of Itracl , fairly the” 


I a 
LOR D. i. 
72 God hereby reliing her what ſho ha formerly been, endes- 
vours to engage her to what ſhe ountr to be, namely confider ins 
. . by - . . . . - - DEG 
ter former untaichfulne(s in time paſt, | 
a, 


Urnt to Carr) 10 
#15117 » C 2-2 I Pct. 4: -P « 


Midas CS 
» Re - . | FR -* _ +. . n % 1 % 2.x 
21 A voice was hieaid o upon the high places 7 


a wife treachero:fly < 


"ONT th 1 Tv 
5 44\/ \Y 444w $ 4 


, =. © hes {'» 
weeping cud fuppiications q of the children of 1tracl » : 
tor thcy have perverted their way, and they have for- 
gotten the LORD their God / ? 

o ter the Prophet {CMS 79 expreſs ? Repentance, an 
curmngto God; and that, which tizy wereat vrofent imaithclt 
tnemicives tn,(ce word being Dartici 212, nd 1:1 tae preient Te 
delivered in a Prophericil ſtile, a5 thar in C27. 31 15. and that not 
on'y out of a fente of their judgments tha they were unde: < - 
clieily of their fins they were guilty of, and clic pardon of wich 
they were now begging, which 1s tncamated by woeenins and ts 
plication. p Fiz. Thartheir cry night be the more pub ck, botu 
open and Joud, Chp. 22. 20. and M3:t5. ro. 27. pollly allu- 
aing to The utual practice, of prayins onthe tons of hows in TIcar 
calamities, Jia. i5.3. and 22. r. jcr. 5, 20. 4 Or rather wcicdz: 
{upplicarions, ſhewing the intentenels of ir, 5 33745 2 woe Dom, and 
weeping in prayer, Acc. i2, Io. like Poiir's weeping, 25:25. 25. V 
75. + The end of whici might be to provoke :2 alſo wo Re- 
pentince, or otherwite ro charge upon them their frupidity, 20d 


threaten them with the like judgments, if they would nor return 
upon 1/racl's example. s This exvreſſccli, rat! 
their Prayer, than the cante of it, Lam. 5. 
their tins, as allo from their calamities. 


matter ©L 
- y - - 
15. dravnciuctly from 


CATIHET +} -7 
«Toit wl & 2 


22 Recurn z, ye backſliding children, 424 ] will 


heal your backflidings « : Behold, we com: 
tor thou art the LORD our « God. 


17) 


: Viz. Repent for Sin and from Sin ; here God calls upon then, 
end invites them to contider whither they are g010%, and to h 

ken unto the voice of his Minilters, Hy. 14. 1. 5. 3. 19. Sc 
Verſe 12. God doth as it w to ns Meften- 


Dd) L 


witli W 


+4 Ya 


cis »TY 


bil them hearken 
gers, and then he will heal their back{liding. 

rt, 4. e. Iaolatries, whereby you turned from me, and rebe!!cd 
agzinſt me, I will rake you into that fiate, as it you had never 
turned from me, I will make all whole again among you, and re- 
concile you to my {elf. 1/a. 57. 18. Chap. 32. 40. Sce Zh. 10.6. 
and 13-9. I will not only remove your judgments, but your {ins 
1lfothall be forgiven : 'Fhis is either God's framing their 2::iwer for 
them, prelcribing the manner and form of their Repencance by 4 


hgure called M:zzeſis, Hl. 14.2, 3. or it 15 their reply to God by 


Ll, 
Li. 


way of promiſe, whic! they performed under Folia, 2 Kine, 22. 
and 23, whici with their confeſſion, reacherth ro the end of the 
Chapter, #> Words expretling the fronveſt inducements to ic in4s 
gtnadle, becauſe God huh right to them, is willing to acceptthem, 
au avle to fave them, 1/z. 55. 7. Chap. 14. 22, - 


POA7v 


Lil 


fat br. to divided, the enmity that was between them {hall be raken away, 
poll-\-. and they ſhall walk hand in hand in a friendly manner one with a- 
nother, which is implyed in this phraſe of walking rogether, Pſa!. 
$5, 14. Am 3. 3. and this points ar thei incorporating into one 
body united by the ſame Spirit, 25 members of the ſame body un- 
der Chrift their Head, and thac wirhour diſtinction of Nations. 


See 1ſa. 11.12, 13. and Exzek. 37. 16, 17. Eph. 2. 14. 5, 16. and 
3.6. e Viz. Of their Captivity, See the place, verſe 12. f Viz. 


Cana. This 1s both a promite of their enjoying agaur therr an- 
cient poſletſion ar their laſt converiton, and typitying the Church 
of Chriſt, which they .\aull be of, when brought our of their 
ſpiritual Captivity. ; 


19 But I] ſaid, How ſhall I 


FT 


g put tliee among the 


+ Hcb./z:7 children þ, and give thee a F pleaſant land z, ÞF a 
"$s | g£oodly heritage & of the hoſts of nations /? and I ſaid, 
i... mou thalc call me, my father », and thalt not tuin 


away | from me. 


+ p3 wage, s Words that ſpeak, either firſt God's putting thera to their own 
b ORE thoughts, how they could think he thould bring ſuch a perfidious 
Jrom aſter people as they were into the Land, which he had promited * Or 
ne ee &!fe, Secondly his confidering within h:im{elf, how or whar courſe 


he ſhould rake to bring ſuch a tying about, and accomplith it, they 
had ſo greatly degenerated from him, and diiobliged him. See 
Foſ. 6. 4. both implying that ſuch a thing cou!d not be broughr 
about without Repentance and true converſion to him, wrought 
by {is free grace, Eph. 1.5, 6. þ Eſteem thee as my Child, rill 
thou g1vc ſome clearer proof and demonſtratioa of thy Repen- 
tance. # How ſhall T putthee into poſſerſion of that pleatant Land 
of dire, that T have promiſed thee, Canazn is fo called, P{al. 106. 


24. Dan. 8. 9. and 11. 16, 41+ k Heb. Heritage of glory, or 
þ:5ty, See 1ja. 4. 2. { So called either becaule poileſlea by feveral 


potent Nations, Nr». 13. 28. and Deu?. 4. 38. or rather it may 
norte the great hoſts 2nd multitudes of Nations, or Genti!2s, thar 


23 Truiy in Van zs jarvation hoped for from tlic 
mils x, and from the multicude of mountains = - 

rruly 12 the LORD our Gold 5: che ſalvation cf + p71 - - 
[fracl a, 


” ® © ! ' . ” Y o . X 
y, 2.e. Ether from tacir 14's which were worthipped ron Hills, 


a bctonymy of the Sject, Chap. 2, 20. lHo!s of rhe bills, or from 
any other external power whatloever, cither f rorfons, or things 
y | la \ £4 . ' £ \ . i ” 

as the ſtrength of 031!ls, or Forts, High placcs, and trons mlaces, 
Balf 3; - _ 7x * ng oy _ i —_ 2 ae 

and atliftance from KMnZ5, Hof, 14.3. &3 Fiz. Theabundance of 


riem that they have in their Mountains, or the multicude of Sa- 
critices, which they © 'n the Mountains : Or, to multiply Sa- 
ices. reſt. But doth not the Plaliniit hops for Saivation from £112 
Hills, Pſal. 121+ 1. Aujw. Yes the Hills of the Land of Promite. 
which were a pledge of Gods favour to his People, eſpecir'ty 
thote ewo of Zion and Moriah, where God Gid pecuitirly manife!? 
his preſence, Pja/., 87. a Gr our Salvation, which we do nov 
acknowledge 1s only in our God, and not in 1's, of which we 
have had ample experience, Pjal. 44 7. and 132.7, 3. See 
11. Hoſ. 13. 4, 9. 

24 For ſhame b hath devoured the labour of ov: 
fachers c from our yeuth 4d ; their flocks and their 
herds, their ſons and their daughters e. 


4 
4+. ? 
4 + 4 


nel 


F131 Wis 


A 


7 
4 
- 


43. 10, 


b Eirher in general put for fn, which cau/-th ſhame, a Mecty-» 
13my Of the Effect ; for that brought ſhame tult inco che World . 
Ger. 2. 25. Or mn paiticular tiie Idot Baz! called the ſhane. 
thine, Tor. 11. 13. Hy. 9. 10. c, 9.4, This hath been the fruit of 
our Idolatry, to have all things go to ruine, both inretpet ofex- 
pence, that which our Fathers liaving got for theaulelves, and us by 
their induſtry, .they have expended vpon &:2/, and other Idols. 
Ezk. 16. 16.to 21. and alto of the hcivy judements thar God 
broughtupon us for it, Chip. 5. 17. - d Either with 1cfecence to 
the Nation, ever fince they began tirſt ro be a People unto Go3. 
and followed him in the \Wildernets, Cz.:p. 2. 2. or rather ever 


ſhould be joyned to them in the Goſpel Church, viz. Of God's 


= 


F.te&. and fo an heritage of rhe greareſt d2lights, or the defire of 
KS. -* SNNEDS 2A ies 7 EC ; . 
Nations ; a Peopie to whomall rhe Nations would deſire to flock. 


PR 


| 6. 2nd may be 
VF WW LF 


% 
» \& 


ſpoken alſo of the hezveniy Canaan, 


| fince we were born, or rook notice: of any thing, rhus it was from 
[time torime, We find from cur Childhoou, rhat our FE 
[1aboured in vain, and all things þ 


Y os 
d4UNCT3 a4zIVE 


we ſucceeded twin tn 

tg © ICCOCOCCUEUTNI, Will U5,0&C.ute 
i£ their departure from Gncd. e All thei things aTC NIGNTICT) -dty 
} 


LB] 


——— _——— 


Chap. IV, 


FERE 


P!2a4} noon 21} 


Rew, hat hey did thine in nothing, but either a L 
% pI "do f ; 
from Gd, Holi g. 11, to the end. Ain, 2.2,3. Of Idols 
JACTHICE) C03313umed al il, A395 &þ + +, I. the I, lols {f10T [t; aring Q\ hgh 
7. Or the Enemy | [poiled them Of 
$ 


teir very Children, Pal. 1c6. 3 i 
ry Chip. ©... 6/07 all rhis as the fad effect 07 their Iloia- 


Tc Ve lie youu f in our ſhame, and our contutt- 
Mn covercth us for we have finned againſt tne 
LORD oir God, we and our Fathers » "MM O'11 
VOurh even unto this day i, and hare not obeyed tlic 


voice of the L O R D our God. 

f We are perplexed, and confounded witht! 1 our ſelves. Ve : 
ſeck a 46 TR, both to God and Nan, that ve CANNOT bur 11it U;- 
our hands for thame, even we, th:t had once an whores forehe.: 
(7ſe 1) bur muttlie down in our thame : An expretion to fe 
forth the gremnels of their Repenranc?, and Sorrow z as ON 11} 
oreat perplexity, not knowing what to dv, throws himſeit dow: 
1pon hts < ouch or Bed, 1 Kiz7. 21. s A letapiar tron 1 I er- 
foes my ffled up in the Bed-clorhes. 45 KT; 12Med ro be ſeen. 4 I 
Iit:e ex: refiion, Plal. 41 15. + This notes th: univeriacity Wm 
their fins ; the whole Generation of us, like Fataers, Ike (Ciit- 
dren. - True Conſcihon wraps up our owl, and others tins, E277 
9, 7.. N big. 333 34. Plat. 1Þ5. 6 , 7. Chap. 4 20. and k2eP5 115 
from a!l excule by otiiers examp "42 Ky Kings 17. 1» | 
oniirot theirs in this ind 15 Gelcri bed, Chap. 44.17- 7 As my 
mer ſers forth the Univertality © | COnt: 


rrous 


o) 70 

BY 1-5 

7 
( 

A BI FF] -- ga - 
i/ { 4 {iz _— : 
bs 4 SY # - a HWY = i/s - 
[1 L { 
= % n . . "ad .* + PE ?. j \ oy 
t© PZ IN MATTCT Or 31id0&gy 1 I:cature, for the deriiion of con | ( 
£ 


= re 2 Ip I » Yo a4 n 
7071s; deliberate Te y, nd rev ercitly; v. 6! COnftaerinyg 
( horn of the Form, ad Marrer of the Oain, Zu. 5. 4. har Fong 


' w ! ' , as; { ls ks 4 , 
| Sane Ge NE taken 11 Vain cullnauarity. DO #41 MmMatcers NTiviit, 


Deitt. <, 1: 557 abute!! by Oaths that ars rath, and orectpatauntt ; = 
. J 4 : E R . - 
mM "- » 5s 4 5 — "_" I < p DJ, LC by v4 o L , . 
{uc Va 0.2%.5 Wt 1.07%, 14. 3 rnd as fioridgs, AM f. 14. 7. ad 
4 . f $ * 2 , 
WW; 'T! ICUT CCC 7\ py 111 Rizate } [Mc}- ' [14% JACHLC b:+ & 113! :I&d TL y It ” 
E F-+S1 ? : V { T , 
CizaC Care 14300 06 we Cil.5450 [3 Both £1! 3, tIN14 Pottitie * 
< * 3 ' 
Yee I SAM ©. 27, 233. Bt 2d 28. $0» 3-5 RIS Vis 2 Ajid 2. | iu 1 
py -" - (. : Pl " 1; / FIN I 
ve logk tu the perte am Co ne 79. 5. 33. Th 
.v . % = a - ; i 
af E-{ 4 wy CI O wy 131. } C 7 exp YViTa N1C<S TKE Jt al Lond + THL4*® 
(ITY, LEE: Fay 4, <Q T} his ſh all T7 a iN 4115 Tt ) york wa [11'S 
Hathcn Nations, and prevajl wub thin to comme 1nto0 The lus 
iy RS I f ; . FI I LS WE ; 
way of V/o! By 7 tie now fcorn BOtn ViGU, dla NC, LUocaule 3 ail 
TOYCAu TI) Mute nem 7: 30a of wy Ange AGAIN YOU! Hit TEQUL! 
- FE - 4 Yi . 1] 
O. y our LOVOCAUTION:? br £7, :8, 9, Chap, LitCY TILL 


lattafe Th :miclves hapyy LW Us LLCOTRIOFateU WIND THIGS, UGH IE INARY 


7 
} - - 
{ic with them ACCONN? (OHA FHRIRGS Ve? 42. 3 and 22.17, 
F7 J 0 Oat » zo o ! o_ "Ss ” 2 =P : j rp x > wyy 
FS. "F'N ey fhail, as it Were, biels thenielves tr th fike tourin, 
, 5 ' - og 
5 


/ , / y 1.3 4 / 7 fo « i 
A. {18 [.or a 1:16: NM. (131 1 " 3B2 J?e iFs lis, 4 5 bt [{ i C & il; aA 6 T 1 + io & hl 4 


ot It. y } ()r - whom as WW } RR th 43 I1 " 11 0 ir 
1 S171 ih is l ILaLLN2CE, / NEreas -+ Ic 2 - [ Cis's L 
£Y ' "> 1 8 
{ \ 4MONT Gol Hra, 


bl } i of y \ » . > 7 » #2. ”. 
ilois, now, being tak: int he tri: 
1 U [1 . | Hig LO y ov 7% v pt 1 ” T0 1 »,4 ” / =, y 4 
they Inwil Glory in on JO, 7 j.is. 196. .0, Way indeed aiuns 15 
Pay bY 7 4 * "*e 'u, pe PR = —F fo \ Ld » 4 
LilS \_z.O01 b] O!L = Pe: ), | ws» FETTS ov 0, I f of eNdU Ia LS, _—_ 


> 4 For thus ſaith te WORD to the Men / of Ja- 
dall and ful ! 
A 


J 
z, Break up « your fallow ground, 
INOBE -* alageg X. 


ance of then, Pert. 9. 7. 2 Kors 17. $4,1- | F Lie, Mar, 7,e, tO eaco Man, I or to every individual 3-755 -* 
| among you, Ct:k.2 eſs { The Lord naving Foke WHar be nad 
RAD j £0. lay at PFoVtonc tO 'raet, Urs NOW his ip jeech from 7/ 2 &! Ti) Tus 
| Jab, and { contiones ic; hat COnitits of ſeveral Subpetts 
nn Frociarcen fo frrn2 Rodbromnce. by Promiſes 1. ant _ firft begins with Rep ent: #, 3. e. Prepare your H-arts 
Tndomenms enninr om then by the Babyionians, conrrary 594 by making them lufe, tender, and plyable, fr to emtrace my 
the Predidiions of their: fry Prophets, for fre Rn 5,-+8. word ;: A #ict. per riken from Piow-ne: l, rear do EIrner fre are 
A Triew ns Loamentaio For the Mleries of Jugdab, 19, —31: 1c Ground, tout hitnlan —_ Une wake and uniilea, by rears 
# 4 ng up the Surface of the Larch, making it mellow, and for £:2 
z 7 F thon wilt return, O Iſrael, faith the LOR receivethe Seed ; for the Hob, Word 37, {5:05 19 he of lars er extent 
q rettirn unto me ke: ane d ii % T W1:t 44 away een JUFC DT OR (x2 18: the fame word wien he {-ea.. 
thine aboninations 7 dic of my fghe 2, then Nair 529 {2m purpote to 1/ra-), IMs went ll nd - b any Proc. 
3.23... 0r it m1 ty relare to Both, tat <0 Es [At LY DC itt 
thon NOT 7 + 46h wh 7. ; | VuriOa 6; C1 C2! - may C0 tub: ood t * 14 tho 24TTS f1.4 
| & This ſeems to be a continuation cf the former SEO n: 50; thinds of wit may hinder you of embr, ing my SIC Gcd Grit 
tat Zradl having pronated Repentance, they are h-re ireCted u»>2!] rhoſe Briers and Thorns, aud mnitchicoouns Veils chat will 
OW ir inult be qualiited, s be © muſt not be ny; JOcricical oy | NL {LfF-r my Counte!s to tak, Or we Gaces ro Turty:: with you, 
t-15n2, bur real an d tart , GH0p. 24. 75 a$ Jojia's $ Was, 2 Ken. ſuch 2x nf>-ro-oreean eh Nags ESD Prov >< £ 1, 31; Here 
{re 3n:i it muſt be ur to the Lord, not ro tits lavl, ana —_ i the Lord begins ro cali U 0 them to R.: mil T; | at [ons 8 
Sa norand thither, tilting thei way, tur uno me. IF<7.r0 112: mate that the jews Med been Wwour fo 11% Ss Þruchs of 
C647. 2.36 or to my Worthip; and as thoa tit promived Cr2p. j od among their own inventions, 4 $01 amonsz Thorns, and 
Sona And this ſente agrees beſt with the Concrence. Oc :itim:y be? {7 cormuped it. As alſo, thut they recazned mans, ſecrcr. ad 
{4 CN nphatica!, thort, peremptory expreliion, If thou wrt Terurn, | hjlgen fins Like Hy. :0crites, which be c:horrs them To. eru- 
-rern5 make no. longer demur or deJay about it; Jike that a. | jira 
$4: 12. This H. we? cad the words in the turare tenle, { 19; #* Circymciſe 7 your felves to the LORD, z and: 7 
rl returi, the ſha return; and to they may be raken partiy d a. LS © ar he. WL IS +5 the 
a5 a fronmile, and that with reference enncer to tet reeurit- take awa y UNC 107C-SKINS Or Your neart a, YC Men of - 
} 


CONCETA Iixact ; F'ius Deng, 
1 , 


GC rak en Th C's 
. | 
'T, 4v tome K ), Qilt ] 2 Cargo 


4 4 1/ viy - 
YACETIS / ita), A aA. 2 hou Dos « 


Cl g -. + ! e rx » 
If3T INTO THT CW Land 5 


" "MP 


and fothey c 

m1 4 z 
$9. 2, 3,4, 5. $ce Coap. 3Irs. Bur if rib word 
NO 10A GT refiiitg, NOT Fr ng? 


7:2. 35 15. tircn it rater 3c 


Judah, ar 


it 
> 0 
' 


; Come fort like _ anda hun tac noeaccan quench 7; 
'6, becaule of the evil of your doings | 
3 oy Os ii {2} 1\s/ tls 0 a=! 


| 
| 
do quict!y 2 Fob rt and ſha'tnof wind: r into C: wrivity |, / Put away your i Cornnmptions; which was ſignified by. 
And ty may 2 Kith the lati exprefiion in that TIC, 7403 y2 Hot JUCTANL2 nt of Circunicitic 1M, Col. 2:01, SC2 1 Se: i. The ſame 
ee, . Or ali} "wa relurence t the athance thar fod would | #2719233 with te Of ther, but expreiſea in other Words, 2 Or ro me, 
ive them to returo wit ton; (partly, and that racher, as a di- | vis, loas | will approve. RF: Ler your Rep. nc be t [12 W ad. nou 
"tion. { for in I > ther ow hon tie ard Chak rhe KQ-; 0urward, (v. %, IN the beth ined fa wilch you lo much glory) | in 
ture Tenth, yt ir bs often bi imperatively) { 17s. Tots ( SLOERENL of Men, bur pneay way that brow! :inels and ob GORE 
Meter of the 5311nf) Which are ff abonmnable in CGads tighe, j" 040g 0 do Kok ag, who hath rel; z<ct unto the ieoart,) thar 15 
Dent. 2 ze: f $55; 83 called 297 Goat, Doi. 29. 17, Sec hs | Our Hse: mts, D- ut. i 0. 16. Ex:f & 4.9, Act; }.5. Rom.2-29. 
EE rar Tae 87 wn The uoh LoG's eve eevery where; ab ence! NUT ON'Y tierce, and CON, UN. 1g, like Fire, Den... 2 þ. bur un- 
eplvath, tier Tos arino whee ro be winiacd, wither inf <p chabje; Efpectuly Wen 1t gets Mong Your hems Perſe 3. 
- 50h or pub ics, vt rouroth particulagly relate ty tos place of | oP nas ory NIE k1nd e, {U/:, o_ t7 Leait you proceed 
Ws more inunedute prclgce, a> their and and Tempic, 1 Ki, | Off ALYG ur ob{tinac v, ther will not be appeatcd, Chap. 21.12. 


<. 2. and fpritua 
Ui The 


I . 
F& ud Per; I! T5 CY } ik il TH t5, FCHDYNE rOY 


fo Our hearts; tiy Lat 671 1, 
y conceal tivr wickednets fron) Pay 's | eve It ris te 
be read, an i« 
1 26.TEES with $99 as epP: LO! AfP ir: 3:31 1TTFCS db Idols U53021 


Y 


Jiirs 5. 6, there be elng noting car ſtirs wu; God ro Anger bur tt 


AS 18} ne nNexcr Clanie, Witch 1S Ul ©QX plicecto: 1 of tho! AA erty: 210 C 
of Tiaras and Foreshins. 


F Declare ye in Judah, and pubiiſh in FE 


il 


bj 


"I "A ., 100 2401 I. | 9 1157241 a - _ E-= lf __ — | y T? 
Me MOUNT, and 1! "us [road in the furvre Tentle, then it; and {ay, Blow ye the Iiumpert c In the land: cry 4 , 
#ITCES WH Fafn ; trot Forgot v0 it of th it own Lang jon | ap , 
= = in Va. 4 it , 3 © Oy - ARS & [43:24 w \V Aa! 1507 fo '3 tA tA { - * "wh 123% al a pen . , Lg 
"ZINN PIRUOTIY PICYRTAN {ULNET TOgECTNer e, and lay, iemble your foes” Chis 2 
Airs, QT 4 1 IL. Ci:lllc Of ths V &iie. 111 1 let T o into the J . O pes ec 
- ' m_ 4 ' ' ing My 
> x> Ly iS þ I » ITFLE id SC defence ] Cic {2 
© AMIi0 Oh li: ait ſucar 0, CE [,QOR t) fiyoth 11] 90S a 5 Y 
: By - « "In + was 4 ? 1 RR” 
*4s * c o p +: S7v, ' * d [] i "7 '- ” - S7 
CLite, By Jugs, (MC? , and Il moliteoutiets > and tne 6 £86 mn Deng now abour re bring Enzmies vu; 20n them, 
- ka MN a{ng } TE ? } ! 
+ a BS 1 4 4 [ 1391 e . Os ! $1 DgSL1E AZ f Tj] in martial -4x0hnhes : fe Birr 17965 y =} | 1 - \7 £3,-* w 
fRHISLIOLTES Nai HOC o the mt! 98 » 111 him. and in him {nal + CY >" Phgs. (Oat CIC 0 os 
4 RX , n dy 3 FOVIOn, and "art: $44 LICIEE Or The narnre ws hers Ks 
i \ i853; ; 2 So al a =_ 
Fw "MS S \ 43 . _ PTOACOING Jude: IENTt 3 NYC Int 2 CT WETH Ie Within then, bur x 
axe 1% it 1 TRI rit hn; yarelo thu ann 0! ” . "Re" 30 h,  z bu , 
BETTY. WPUrHGOU, oy dy vas rH :ommand, as forcign Enemy from withour, Coxp.6. 1. wit the coming of M2 
pag v4 A - ref To et: 1 —_ 24; N oF , : IS bo 
» lov, ” - \-v «tj;is +34. 5 P Ka.Y ; IT 74 4 4 \ / / , 7 ”w” vyze 23 4 * FF 7 # s be . 
--# 30% wa war yy ” oy a thou !wear, or} 6uc:0.nez2gr and the Chaldians, d That vous Voice may 38 
COR TH -3WECuTcCt; £© "Ur here IG beiocit honed as alt. ws ? 1 ' 5 as As 
> 4 - x os , 7 . F. 1% 1/58 34h O 772: C907 C: MM, for the (AY anole! CGOITh dial a, - Ciaac ai : i may Near. ( Fo eh ar \T%, dI3Vhuk VOUT HO - - 
\ 184 AD Oxi oC: *. Jir-? \'S; ? STTHIOE Ng, \ _ Pg 3g. 5 f ' - = R = 
1254 hap Tcs the RS bw T] a itt! 'S (0d as Fig : | C&S, Or ro fakxe Counſel whit todo, thair OM May te mn ſafety 
(1? R ( :£9:! 2 » 045-4 j i*7 = TRY a4 J Th 475r , ' IS Ms i pu / Rig ; - 4 A m MMI N AN 
: - Wm why  W 6 ed Kaka me v4 k OTHl oO ; the a th, 7 &. 15e fame Chg: with, 4; rants 10:29 Telos HIND V3ge Far Tine 
( J FATS PR” / f EL a / . _ 4 6 "1; 2M "Y. f i #Y : . k _ A 7 AS 2 Tao E3? 0% 
'Y |, ov | p*/ 5. oe \ ſr ! HL 1 i; 0; C; F. BY Tt \ 43 tat Fe >T1 1 vw þs 1TH TE aqtamity 145 General 7 iO; 34 ?OCUTC » J36 rom hole {. -alio NS, oth Ho 
, "I $f | 4, > 4 _ i . 1 _—_ . J »+6d ww TI, 13 C1 va {1 at 
LEY Eh WE ON IWEaring, 1.8372, 14.959, 45. and many other | are £ming u;on us; We 
& , 1 l - L i 
WICTS 1-0 /1 f JA WIS. 0 1 1 6f 31" 9”. Wwcuw An "ER "G95 7 FA ; "4 
bi A Ci ba, a 6 » £5 Ld 2] Fl / [] . F- 
ni EY. + wor T4 ' .? * «th it i uh 56 &h, Na wala Up the Stan: By Qu 7 TAWATCUS £10 N i 5 rEt1NeE }, ft 1% {- 
3: hes Dione rs7 i = 30D TIOY We = 3s Lf VT 37 / Ti C2 ws hs + 7 
SET TED CINE Y Bien Tins VOFiy 2: a7. 2.2, 4, G. and] (}..x not; for *] will biizyey 1 £ Yo Þ | Þ Ss. jet 
' ' - » ! ; F {) o® + [4 : - ' e F ; 7 i Y / 3 > ' v File Tas . p / ” *«. hy 
LE atzes 5 + v0 18 atfo w be unite xclutively, g. d. / Fallg SV.4 350. TC MOTtD 2, and froth 3 
"_ » , - Bs "I | e PP y Fad . o p C? | by ED Pa - 
nor DY any 30 3, ad. Ry 7: SI C3 -RI\TY CICUTUTC, (C. bs, Wer C7 a £. + cat T Qaefl racth31o. f "G0 : E 
- CY 1 = - » 
Ayo; F Py a "I "vo 4 > p ' . na 
EY I «of 7% 0 3) 471 "" b. 13 | 2. . vs Po +: 4x 
"Mi LY  . a” ? » 2 , L ; L pe \ 1! »0 d! at. {)a. 65 ID. £g, 7» P. EE I Tr them tc 6, #Þ Ft Fr 7c ISU5+7 Y -—* Tx7, ; 4 3 I y* NI 
ES Os co. 87% SOL DY THIS INC "£12 WE GECIate ware 1 f 1 Ha —RONTSrr: ores "a , hg FP BELS wn WW ar 7 ai! -T a7 f 2 4 
a * e 4 ED P Of ery ores (3 11! mn, 19 toretore ſaid ro I; gs, SIE : £ - - Mi / ; 
. ; 1 of (SS : 8h] : F4 TE 10, , 43 7 j b F bl | ICation of * 5 - -4 \ 4 MM \ we " OF - Ti JEFEN..: in, ac f Wing A Sip : $1980 
- 48 BN Bn mr Ne Guulicarion of ir, in; nal to ſhew them ' which they thould repair. See Chop. 50. 8. Lrout 
4 2 of 4 4 wv OY iy 199 15z$,: 6 P "a ”, . . C * - A ok he ® \- go/602 a3 \ | 6 WF Fg © , ” £ ls "> 
; \ ict; wha - Ct kf Fs, ti- 3 v1 $1508% t) i tC:ILIQOUS Oh epi] FTA »1 Reino t the PIP [xi1ic f $TH ov; E £ , ' b- & ? ? ACT ETIOS 
# k , { < _ : 3 7 jo4t 4 &/\ al. 8 [211 t 5 ſ#- 914 -] z 4 r ”" * } £ 
[1 v C2 i i 4 y 44 e [] $$3 CIP 5 AT, I Ti1 d *1 **af* yp 4 —_ q 4 = _ * 1 wa v3» c,0 3 i4'% L477 | $$} 
DET A ET I One gencgr, nu particular calling | fironget part of it, 5 at 6% & Or 6. 57 Ee; 
1 il re (8” 104 4 t; : RN OL, . { ? O _ G- | {} . 7 Re. - fo A” FP, 'y SP-# Hs "Wo os - 3 fortille C 1 
ia oy IT@NOr;} 2 _—_ FX Ot gs NY _ 
To Meat Rt £ ; 7 in | HTENTL 12 Y GUT {elves for he Fi: *:;r,.: OY ratacr, nizke hottie avwyy 
. $2 5 6 L C 3s 6 \ te s 07 . þ y a o 
nit ll Roz ha =_ 3 E ty TCazty TUC | as 1 Mc IE - TO do ina ore or rn: . ter your {fecunIityY : Cicb * 
$22 $C ICT, NCP, Oe Fo te: MT EW IHIICD QCICg8 Wit the 13t | ' $TCUIIY 2: Such 
g £4 ©» w, 4 w £ THF 13 ©) r EA 1 - IF © Fa ue < 
Ws ? IR 2 4 0 oe | k : cf the it ! [TY T4 £1 #54 s of the vv Ord, l1a. t* F ard Pos <6 ] \1 f+ | nA iO DA 
#4 ik, . b of }., <& i Til T3282 15} Ciil O1 13:1 tht adininiiters it . nEtn 1c © hs = ) an 8B, . ICH JITHe 
N' , CO! ele! 8 (1 p EY "90 +! * 1 ] p : | 1 it d CY re NCeXcr L\\Y Orgs , [fry 207; CT 2% non $7 $4 7 
4 4 "= * wes I + CCENIUI, a28& UREN (:14) ih. & ©. ob «1 S: 1745 I; + 347 i y»: hi 6 a . OUS WS ah? V & 
ERS: ©. 257 ti) EE 28 Pp . nu ory fete im fin, where You prom:te your | {elves Serriiry For 
> w % > 1 vos +. [PP] 4 S's I 44 ig) S 413 & c da”? Pl is Þ | 7 \ .! 117 > P \ ? ifs - PA , F oY ! - f g F : A 
7 a eds + AAili (0 dh oe 0 tzCart «bis ET IIELE) IEM% 54 244-7, EF:..a1.4 AE 
3 w - «<'444 Fo = 3 Po bw be £5 ; 46 Tot ® 
» Ns 
: »% 
HE , 


Chip IV. 


Ly 


* Pan.7.4- 


* Chap. 2. 
I5- 


SZEREMIAH 


Chap. 1. 13, 14 15. Soine take this and the former Verſe to be ſpo- 


ken Ironically. : £ ; 
* The lion is come up from his thicket &, and 


the deſtroyer of the gentiles / is on his way mz, he 15 
gons forth from his place * to make thy land defo- 
late 73 and thy cities ſhall be laid waſt, without an 


inhabitant 0. | 

k i.e. Nebuchadnezzar ( called here a Lioz, from his herceneſs, 
and itrengrh, Prov, 39. 39. A Metaphor ; eſpecially 1n this ex- 
pedirion, See 1/a. 5. 27, 28, 29. ) thall come. up from Babyloz 
where his chief ſeat is, Dan. 4-30. As Lions are principally among 
the thickets of the Foreſt, in Coverts ; this place being ſo remote, 
arid hid from them that they Jeatt expefted trouble to ariſe from 
! Another deſcription of rhe fame perion ; of whoie de- 
Armues the Nations have had woful experience, 1/4. 1 4. 
called the kawmer of the whole Earth, Chap. 50. 23.9.4: 


thence- 
ftroying 
16, 17 
and how , : . 
ſed in the next clauſe, he is gone torth trom his place ; be 15 al- 
ready upon his march. z 2. e. With a refoJution ſo to do. 0 7. e. 
As places uninhabited, ſoon Jie waft, and are overgrown with 
graſs ; 25 rhe notation of the word ſeems to import. 


: - | 
$ For this gird you with ſackcloth p, lament and; 
howl 9; for the fierce anger of the LORD is not turn-; 


£4 back from us r. : 
p The uſual habit of, mourners, eſpecially in rhofe days, 1/2, 22. 


ſhall you think to efcape him? m» 7.e, As it ts, expret-, 


the Wheat, the bad from the good, but fo boiſterous and viglenr 
chat it thall depopulare, fweep aw and 3 A 
Chap. 51. 1. Ezck. 21.” 

12 Eves || a full 


a gentle wind, which is made choice of to ſenarare the Ch 
' Waice ul tyYIer 
-* - = 

wind i from thoſe »/ 


then. 


: Heb. Fulkr than they. A wind roo ſtrong for them. This is 


Gods words, 9.4. Ir ſhall preſencly come to me, to receive my 
Commullion, . and be at my beck, and do my wil, Pſal. 148. g. 
Or, they relate, as It were, what will be the Language of the Pe 
ple at that time. Unto me, for, arainft me. I q , The comin® of 
this terrible wind, ſhallin effect ſpeak the exvcttion of my judo- 
ment upon them, which is pointed at by chis word now, w; 
the tim of rhe coming of this terrible ſtorm from Chr; Hob, 
n:rer jagsmny, vis not by word, but by deed. My Judgments 


To aC 


| ſhall Tpcek, as well as my Prophets. 
13 Behold, he ſhall come up as clouds w, and * his ' 


chariots fa! ve as a whiriwind 2: * his horſes 
ſwifter than Eagles: Wo unto us, for we 
ſpoiled o. 

m Either noting, the vaſt number of them, 1a. 60. 8. H:b. 12. 1. 


- s af. V ! p '\ po ; I - p4 C ! C ' - tf 
T2. Chad. 6. 26. Ir 16.23 calling Upon them to repent. q E neſet OI the {uddnneis OF ten, Wiicit NUT expected. Clouds Often i:{e 


expreſſions do impecret the 1c: 


Meg : ” WE 0" RENT "ant; HF y EI 
cral ways that men have to j{: forth | 07 2 Tudden, and overfpread the whole face of the Heavens. Or 


- . ; © | -Y x» 42 + s >x 1 ob > Wop E OR _ Kg A / SY - / 
their bitrer complaints, and ſorxows of the mind, burh by tie | Taller, Tile ZLCaT {O5eed and 1w itcnaels, WITH which My: :cna0n!%%ar 


geſtures of the body, Chap. 2.37. Luke 18. 13. and expreiſtons ot 
the Toneue, Pſal.-32. 3. !ſ2.59. 11. r Neither will it, un) it 
have accomplith-d its ends, chap 30. 24. 

9 and it ſhall come to paſs ar that day faith the 
LORD, that the heart of the king hall periſh /, and 
the heart of the princes; and the prieſts {hall be aſto- 
niſked r, and the prophets » ſhall wonder x. 


f The King, viz. of Judah, and the great Men, that ſhould 
hive encouraged the People in ſuch a calamirous day, and been 
their great ſupport, ſhell noronly be afraid, bur their own hearts 
ſhall meir within chem ; they ſhall be even ar their wits end.(See 
Joſh. 5. 1.) They ſh!] have no heart at all ro do any thing : They 
{hall nor be able ro help their People, either by their Counſel, or 
Arms; their Courage will utterly fail, and their Counſel periſh. 
Sec Pſal. 73. 26+ This was fultilled in Zcaeriah, Jeremah 39. and 
52. whoſe flight would nor advantage him. #- Shall bein fuch a 
conſternation, that rhey ſhall nor know what courſe to take. « Viz, 
Falſe Prophets, thar had nothing bur viſions of peace for them, 
Ex:k. 13.16 Zech. 13. 3, 4. chap. 8. 11. See next Verſe. x Not 
ſo much at the diſappointment of their prophecies, (for they knew 
well enough they were falle, chap. 23. 26, 27. ) as thar they ſhould 
be poſſeſſed with theſame horror, and frighrs with the reſt, ncr 
knowing where to ſhew, or rather, to hide their heads for the 
ſhame that would fall upon them, when their 1yes fhould be dif- 
covered. They would be put to ſhame, and periſh with the reſt, 
and whither ſhall rhey cauſe their ſhame ro go ? 


10 Then ſaid I, Ah Lord GOD, y ſurely thou haſt 


orcatly deceived & this people, and Jeruſalem, ſaying, 


* thall march againſt them, 1/3. 19. r. 


| Hyperbelically deicribed by 
rhe ſwiftneis of Eagles, in this Verſe, Clap. 48. 8. » Which, bc- 
{des the fwitenefs, noces allo the confulicn and amazement; rl1ac 
they willcauſe, 7/.x. 66.15, o The ercadful appretentions, that 


the people have of their woful condition : Or poflibly the words. 


of the Propher lainenring their mifcry, 

14 O Jeruſalem, waſh cline heart p from wicked- 
neſs q, thac thou mayelt be ſaved » : how long thail 
thy vain thot:ghts s lodge w thin thee 2 

Pp Cleanſe your inward parts, O ve Men of Feruſa/:m: not your 
hands only, as hypocrites do, but your hears, James 4. 8. The 
fame exhorcation with Yerſe 3, 4. only in another Mz: aphos of 
waſhing, which ſeems to be taken from ſuch Potions, that Phyti- 
c1ans gtve to clear the inward parts from noxious humocrs. See 
Iſa. 1. 16, 17. q Yiz. From all filthine!s of Fleſh and $-irir,2 Cor. 
7.1. Famer 1.21. r This hathreference in this place to T<:npo- 
ral Salvation. Ir is preſcribed as a means to Prevent the judoments 
that are. impending on them; as is plainly expreſſed, Verſe 4 
yer not excluſive of Spiritual Salvation, 2 7Th-ſ. 2.-13. Tit, 3. 5. 
s Wicked thoughts; or rather hopes, or expe&arion from any 
helps, Chap. 2. 5, 37. pleaſing thy ſelf with vain fancies of fafery 
and ſecurity : which thoughts of thine will afſuredly bring ruine 
and mifery upon thee, which 1s inevitably coming ; as 1a the 


next Yerſe. | 
ty Fora voice # declarech from Dan «, and pub- 


liſhech affliction from mount Ephraim. 
# 7.e. Either the voice of the Prophets, hat is till founding ir 


in your ears, and declaring it unto you; or rather, the rumour and 
noiſe ot this Army is already come through your Land. You have 


Ye ſhall have peacz az whereas the ſword reacheth un- | rhe heavy rydings of this great affiifiion, Chap & 16. tor ame 
- to the Soul 5. | 


y The Heb. aha, is a word both of Admiration and Lamentation 
together. They are Jeremiah's words, and complaint breached 
out in the great ſorrow and ſighing of Soul, which he exnreſ- 
ſ-rh more emphatically, chap. 23. 9. z Either, haſt ſuffered them 
ro be thus deluded by theſe falſe Prophets. 1's. 63. 17. Ex:k.14.9. 
compare 1 Kings 7; 23. and 2 Tix/. 2. 12. or poſſibly, ir 
may be read berter by way of iarerrogation, 9. 4, How can it poſ- 
fibly be, thar thou {houldfſt ſuffer thy people ro be thus deluded 
by their falſe Prophets, Num. 23. 19. thou beinga God, thar canſt 
not lye, Titzs 1.2? a "Under the word Peace 1s comprized,and in- 
rended all good ; intimating all things ſhould go on proſperouſly 
with them, Ger. 37; 14+ and it ſeems the rather to be thus expret- 
ſed, becanſe it was the common Language, and phraſe of rhe 
falle Prophets, ch.8.11. and 23.17. 6 The falle Prophets endeavour- 
ed to periwade them, it ſhould be well with them, when as rhe 
ſword is at the door, not only ready to take away the comforts of 
Life, but even Life it ſelf, Sou! being put for Life, Verſe 30. Pſalm 
69. 1. Mat. 16. 25,26. Ir may intimate allo a great cutting off, 
and ſlaughter among them, e{p2cially rheir great ones, they: be- 


* _ 


Ing, asit were, the Soul of the People. 


3 5 39 
ey 


a 7+ 


11 At that time - ſhall it be ſaid to this People, and 
to Jeruſalem 4, A dry wind eof the high places in the 
wilderneſs f toward g the Daughter of my people, 
not to fan, nor to cleanſe 4. 


; 


N22F approach of it. - This is ſaid to-come from Dan and E9hra 
im, becaute Dan was the firſt place theſe Chaldegans mult come ro, 
ir being the utmoſt boundary of Canaan Northward, and Epbraine 
the innermoſt border of 1/rael in the North of judea, intima- 
ting tae march of the Babylonzans through all 1ſrae! toward Jeru- 
[alem. : | 

- 16 Makeye mention to the nations x, b2ho!d, pub- 

: ; : | 
liſh y againſt Jeruſatem, :5a: watchers 2 come « from a 


tar Country 6b, and give out their voice c againſt the 
Cities of Judah. 


x Theſe are either the Nations in 5:4e2; or theſe words are 2 
Proclamation, ſummoning in the Nations by the Chadeans, as it 
were 1n purſuance of a Commiliton from God, to briag great Ar- 
mies together againit Feruſalem : Or they are the Prophers words 

urning away from Judah, as defpairing of doing any good upon 
them, and caliing for the Nations to ex<cute Gods {entence. » Les 
her be acquainted with what is coming upon her. Lether have pub- 
lick notice before hand, that ſhe may be warned. z Mylit:rv watch- 
ers, 27.e. The Chaldean Soldiers, thar ihi1l fo carefully and warch- 
fully encompals Jerzſal, that none ſhall eſcape ; pollibly 2 Me:2- 
phor from Hunters,thar in hunting their Prey, lay wair at every paſ- 


| age, that the game may not eſcape. See 2 Kings 25. 4, 5. Or poſ- 


' 


j 
f 
! 


| 


ſibly, there may be an aluſtion ro Nebuchranezzar's Name. The 
Heb. word for ws:chers being Netferim, which comes from Nar{ar, 
the end cf his Name ; as if they were rermed Nebuchadnezzarians, 


« There fill be rydings brought both to the Country and City , j #3 the Keepers, or Guards of his Perton ; as they were called Ce/s- 


Firſe 5. @ Viz, when Nebuchadnuezzar 1s upon this expedition , 
P.rje 1. e The meaning is, a drying wind, ſuch as ſhall blaſt, and 
fecorch where ir comes; without any Rain or moiſture,or any other 


way for uſe, or refreſhment, as the laſt word in the Verſe inti-: 


mates ; and ir may alſo allude unto' the Coaſt from whence this 
wind comes, vV:z. 
Rain, Prov.25.23. for it points at the ſtormy and furious irruptr 
On of rhe Babylonian Army, deſtroying all before them. A Mera», 
provical All:gzry, Chap. 23. 19 
Plain, where rhere is no ſtop or obſtacle in the way to hinder the 
wind, or to break its fury, Iſa. 21.1. Chap. 13. 24- See on 1/a. 
63.13. g 7. e. Dire&ly and defignedly, coming along in the 
way leading to my Peopl? ; for to we are to underſtand this expreſ- 
fion, rhe Daughter of my People, as, the Daughter of Zion, Iſa. 1.8 


and 3o. 23, 24. f Or in the. 


b 
' 


k 


from Babylon, or the North, which drives away * | 
abour 4; becauſe ſhe hath been rebellious e avainft me, 


or rather,che Davzhrer of Zion, which 25 #5 come]ly and beauriful a 
T7 


; V OL. ty, 


reans irom Cajar. 2 They are now at hand ; you may as it were 
ſee them. 6b From Chaldza, c They will proclaim War againſt 
them : Or, a ſhour, either encouraging Soldiers to the Battie, or 
triumphing atrer the Victory; or the Ourcries that they will 
make ; ſuch as rhe Tur*#s now make in their onlets, Chap.2-15. 

17 As keepers of a field are they agaiult her round 


faith the LORD. 
a They will ſtrialy befiege her, as Keepers of 2 Ficld will be 


careful who go in, and who go out, Zeb. 12, 2. They will ware 
that none go in to relieve them ; and allo, that none 9 curto 
eſcape ; See 2 Ciron. 16. 1. e God doth | not threaten iis judo- 
ments only. buthe Jabours to convince them, rhat there 35 a f:- 
ficient reatcn for it, both here, and in the noxe Verio. 


{B2| F8 * Thy 


my eyes, and tender to me as2 Divghter, Cha2, 0. 1. & Nob Lach 
 ___— 

/1 FT fall CONC 

. 4 34 6 1. - P þ- $: , . 

unto me & : now allo will | I give teatence / againſt © wn 


a farther deſcriprion of the former wind. . It thall bs foil, even + © 
fuller wind ; that ſhall doits work throughly. k Tlefe are either 


Cn 
* Pia! 
C17 


3 


1.4. 
/ 


"3.7.5. 


and 16. 


22: 

+ Heb. 7c 
Ww3l.; 0 JV my 
bcart. 


"Slat. 42. 


_ 


3.94.25. 


* Thy way f and thy doings have procured | 


theſe :4gs unto thee g, this & thy wickedneſs , be- 


caule ir is bitter þ, becauſe it reacheth unto thine 


h-act. 
f'Thy manner of Life, and particularly thy Idolatries. g 9: da 
Thou canft nor lay any blame upon me. þ Thy wickednels hath 
een the cauſe of this thy grievous affliction, 1/a. 50. 1. Chop. 2. 
3, 19. of this thy birrerne!s of bringing fuch a bitter Enemy 
againtt thee, ( A Metonzmy of the efficient) which hath reached un- 
to thy very iAcart, a5 the Cword is ſaid to reach unto the Soul, 
Verje I ©. 
7 * My boweis, my bowels ;. I ined at 
19 E * My boweis, my bowels /. I am pain 
+ my very heart & : My heart maketn a noile / in me, 
L cannot hold my peace 2, becauſe thou haſt heard, 
| a r 4 . 
O my Soul, the ſound of the trumpet », the alarm 


of war. 
; Here begins the woful Complaint of,andche great Trouble the 


£was in, upon the conlideration of thete things, crying out 


Prophe : 4 k 
21S oneeven under great pain and torment, doubling his words for 


want of vent, thereby expreiſing the excels of his torrow, whicth 
in words was inexpreiiible- The like 2 Sam. 18. 33. which ſorrow 
of his he expreſſerh, Chop. 9.1, 19. & Heb. The walls of my heart, 
or my heart ſtrings. are ready. to break he may poſlibly ailude 
to their encompaliing the Walls of Jer/atom : Or, the proper 
meaning is, my Heart 1s ready to break The LXX rendereth it 
doth ba: or pant. 1 Is diſturbed within me, I can have no reſt 
hor quiet within , 706 39. 27. £49. 1.20. mM I Cannor torbear 
my Complaints, I am to troubled and grieved, Job 7. 11. 2.22.4. 
” 7.6. I have heard in the ſpit of Prophecy : Ir 15 as certain, 
ac if T now heard the Tramper founding, and the alarm of War 
bectiizg up, 

20 * Deſtruction upon deitructtion » is cryed, for the 
whale land is fpoiled p : ſuddenly are my tents q ſpoil- 
ed, and my curtains 1h a moment. 

o A farther exprefion of his bitter Lamentation, redoubling his 
complaint ; the end of one, but the beginning of another, 9. . 
worſe and worſe, Deus. 32.23. Ezek., 9, 26. Good Joſiah ſlain, 
and four of his Succeſlors carried away, or lain, or both, 2 Chron. 
36. p This is more particularly deſcribed, ere 23, 24, 25, 26. 
og TheEnemy makes no more of overthrowing my ſtately Cities, 
and magnificent Palaces, (ſometimes deſcribed by Tents, 1/1.54. 2. 
than if he were plundering of a Camp, or overturning of Tents 
made of Curtains, Chap. 49. 29. either alluding to their ancient 
way of living, Numb. 24, 2,5. or their Wilderneſs condition , 
when they abode in Tents: 9. 4, We are reduced to as mean 
2 condition as then, and that ſuddenly, ere we are aware, and 1t 
15s done with as mnch eaſe as overturning a poor Shepherds Cot- 
tage, Lam. 2. 5,6, 7ercmiah poſſibly perſonating a Shepherd, ſpeaks 
in the Shepherds ſite, and may here ſignifhe the deſtruction of 
their whole Country, even all thoſe Places and Fields where Shep- 
herds were wont to pitch their Tents.” 


21 How lone » ſhall T fee theſtandard, and hear the 


ſound of the trumpet ? 

+» He ſeems to have theſe Concomitants of War, ( both of FJ«- 
dea, preparing for defence, and eſpecially theſe of the Enemy pre- 
paring for ruine and deſtruftion,) always in his Eye and Ears, Perſe 
19, and bewailing the continuance of it in taking City after City, 
with the ſeveral fackings of Jeruſalem under her three laſt Kings, 
The LXX read, How long ſhall I ſ-e them flying ® reading mas a Re- 


V FEREMIAH. Chap. IV 


Ic. Jos! 2. 10. 30, 31. Every thing above and below ſcemed to be 
in a mournful poſture, wrapt up in diſmal blacknels. 
24 I beheld the mountains, and lo, they trembled a, 


and all the hills moved lightly 5. 

a He proceeds in his figurative Elegancies, q. d, Behold how the 
Mountains of Judea tremble! A like expreſſion, Pſal. 18. 7, 8. 
Iſa. 5. 25. As if the very ſenſeleſs Creatures were aſtoniſhed ar the 
zreatnets of Goa's Anger. And he mentions theſe as being the moſt 
table part of the Earth, yet ſhake before him. 6 As eatily as 1f 
:hey were ſome very light matter, or as duſt, or feathers in 2 
Whirlwind. See Pal. 114.4, 6. Or theſemay be ſaid hyperbelically 
co tremble, and move by reaſon of the multitudes of rrampling 
ind prancing Horſes and Chariots furioufly paſting over them. 

25 I beheld, and jo, there was no man c, and ail the 


birds of the heavens were fled 9. 

c Quite depopulated and laid waſte, all either flain, or carried 
captive, or fled: For after the flight of Men, Women and Chil- 
dren into Egypt, upon the Death of Geaaliah, ſcarce a Jew was 
leftrin Judea. d Such Birds as are uſed ro inhabited places, that 
live, teed and build among Men ; (others indeed, both Birds and 
Beaſts would continue, which implies but the greater deſolation, 
and walt of the Land, as is threatned againſt Babylon, l[{a. 13. 19, 
20,21,22./ Fled, either to ſeek Provitions, here being no food left 
for them,or frighted wirh the hideous noiſesand clatterings thar do 
attend Armies; as we have read, thartſuch hath been the concuilr« 
on of the Air by the loud clamours and noiſes of Armies, chat 
Birds have fallen down to the earth, Chap 9.10. Zeph.1.2,3. 

26 Ibeheld, and lo, the fruitful place e was a wil- 
dernefs, an all the cities thereof were broken down 
fat the preſence of the LORD, and by his fierce 
anger g. 

e Heb. Carmel, either properly for that part of the Land ſo called 
for its fruitfulneſs, or rather AppeZatively for, not only their moſt 
pleaſant, but moſt fruitful Lands, rhat were kept drefled and oc- 
cupied for food, both for neceflity and delight, Yerſe 27. 1ſa.29.17. 
and 33. 9. f No place left for Men to inhabir, 7a. 1. 7. g That 
which the Enemy cou!d not have done with all his fury and fierce- 
neſs, had it not been for the Anger of the Lord, which by their 
great provocation, they had brought upon themſelves, 2 Kings 
24. 3- Jer- 9.12, 13. 


27 For thus hath the LORD ſaid, the whole 


end h. ey 
h Some expound it, neither ſhall chis puniſhment ſuffice, nor 7? **' 

my fury ſtop here : I will not thus have done with them; and fo 

look to what they were further to endure in their long captivity. 

See Lev.26 36,39. But it ſeems rather ro be a word of comfort, 

that they ſhall nor be utrerly extin&, he will preſerve a remnant, 

Chap. 5. 10- 1ſa-1.9. and 24. 13. 9. d. Though I am greatly mov- 

ed with anger, yet I will not be inexorable, I will remember my 

Covenant, Chap.zo.11. in the midſt of judgment he will remem- 

ber mercy. After 70 years Captivity he brought rhem back again. 


28 For this ſhall the earth mourn, and * the hear * Ifa.5.30. 
vens above be black ;: becauſe I & have ſpoken it , 1 nd 50. 4: 
have purpoſed jr, and will not repent, neither will I 
curn back from it. 

; Expreſſions ro ſet forth the dreadfulneſs, of the judgment. He 
makes the Elements ro perſonate Mourners, a ſad face of things 


above and below, (a Metaphor,) and therein to ſhame the ſtupidiry 
of his People: & 9.4. You would not believe, either that m 


fuge, for nes a Banner, differing only in the Points. 

22 For my people is fooliſh /, they have not known 
me z, they are ſottiſh children, and they have none 
underſtanding : they are wife todo evil, but todogood 


they have no knowledge . 

s Though God ſhew them here, that the cauſe of all theſe Cala- 
mities is their folly, C/'2p. 2. 17, 19. Pſal. 38. 3,5. yet he owns 
them-for his People, Chap. 2.11, 31, 32. t Which is indeed rhe 
only true wifdom. They have not ſtudied my diſpotition, or mild- 
neſs towards them ; they are ſo ſortiſh, thar they have nei- 
ther regarded my Counſels nor Threats, but utterly ſtupid ; they 
know not what 1s for their own good, have no underſtanding. # 
z. e. Their knowledge is as bad, or worle than none. Ir is very 111 
employed in doing evil, only witty here, crafty and ſubtile, ( See 
2 Sam. 13. 3. ) But how to do any good they know not, Chap. 
9. 2. Luke16. 8. this the Apoſtle dehorrs from 1 Cor. 14.20. 


23 * I beheld x the earth, and lo, ir was without 
form and void j: and the heavens, and they had no 


light z. 

x Either I J-rcminh faw all this in a vition, or T fanſied and 
framed ſuchan es of itin my mind. Ir ſeems to be impreſſed up- 
on my thoughts Gr-phical!y, asin a Map, in ſuch a rueful manner ; 
for in this, and the rhree following Verſes, he doth as one tranſ- 
ported with ſorrow, elegantly, and -yperbelirally deſcribe rhe Pheno- 
mnenon, face or appearance of it. y The Land was fo ſquallid, and 
ſo ruined, that he fanlieth it ro be Jikethe firſt Chaos, for which 
reaſon poſſibly he calls F:dea rhe Earth, in alluſion to Gen. 1. 2. 
and herein implying that 7udah's fins werefſuch, that they had even 
overturned the Courſe of Nature, being laid waſte and deſolate, 
not of Inhabitants only, bur of all rhings that might rend either to 
ornamentor uſe, withour Men, without Houſes, without Fruits, 
withour Beaſts or Birds for Food or Service, Yerſe 25, 26. » Syme 
ſay being obnubilared, and darkened by the abundance of ſmoke 
thar would aſcend from the detolating Fires of Towns and Cities, 
1/a. 9.18, 19. of which you may read inthe Hiſtory of this break- 


— 


Prophet ſpake, or what they ſaid, now Ttell you I ſpeak my ſelf, 
and whatT have reſolved upon, T wiil not revoke. See Exzek. 24. 
13,14. and Chap. 15. 6. for Thave purpoſedit, I kave nor ſpoken 
in my heator fury, but upon marure deliberation, An Anrhropopa= 
:by. Or what the Prophets have denounced I wiil ratifie. 


29 The whole City ſhall flee /, for the noiſe of the 
horſemen and bowmen, they ſhall go inco thickets a, 
and climb up upon the rocks: every City » ſhall be for- 
{aken, and not a man » dwell therein. 

! TheInhabirants of all Ranks and Qualities ſh:1] ſeek to eſcape 
the fury of this Chaldean Army, Chap. 39. 4. m Either upon 
the report of their coming, hereby as ir were deriding their conti- 
dence, or rather at the approach of their vait Armies, for they 
were cloſe beſieged before they fled, as appears 2 Kings 25. 4. 
» Such a conſternation there ſhall be upon them, that they thall 
run into every hole to hide themſelves ; rhus Manaſſeh was taken 
among the thorns, 2 Chron. 33, 1. The Heb. is abimthe clouds, pol 
ibly alluding to dark places on the tops of hills,ceaching as ir were 
to the clouds, or among the cloudy ſhades of Trees and Groves 
thar uſually grew there. The LXX render it Caves, and fo the 
Rocks for ſhelter, or the clefts, Caves and hiding places in the 
Rocks. See 1/a. 2. 21. 9. There ſhall be an utter deſolarion, their 
Cities quite forſaken, not any to inhabit them, Yer. 25, 26. 

30 And when thou art ſpoiled p, what wilt thou 
do q: Though chou clotheſt chy ſelf with crimſon r, 
though thou deckeſt thee wich ornaments / of gold, 
chough thou renteſt + 7 chy face « with paincing, in + Heb. 
vain x ſhalt thou make thy ſelf fair, thy lovers will de- £1e5 
ſpiſe thee y, they will ſeek thy life. 

p Which will certainly come upon thee: or, When this deftru- 
Qion ſhall come upon thee, which is very near thee. q Viz. When 
thou, O Daughter of Zzon, ( as Yerſe 31.) art belteged by the 
Babylonians, what courle wilt thou take ? It is not ro be avoid- 
ed : A kind of an inſulring way of ſpeech, as it were upbraid- 


ing in of the Chalzees: But he ſeems ro proceed rather in his Me- ſing them with their pride and confidence, q. d. your condition is 


zaphor of the Chaos, it being an expreſſion, whereby the Scripture | 


deſperate. r Or Scarlet, 2 Sam. 1. 24. See on 1[p. r. 18. 


doth ſer forth rhe ſaddeſt Deiolations, 1a, 13. 9, &s. Exck, 32.7, |{ Thongh chou doſt fuperinduce rhoſe Orgaments, or Jewzl:; of 
Gold, 


land ſhall -be deſolate; * yet will I not make a full * Chap. 5- 


[es 


Chap V. 


| have leſs Patience to bear, having not had former Experience of 


Gold, that may render thy Attire the moſt rich ard ſplendid,! 


7 ER EMEA Char, 


7 


thoſe few. The like he promiſech with reference te tho fps Of 


. . ? bl - / - = a | M ; © 
2 Sam. 1.24. * Iris obſerved, that they that paint much make | ties, Gen,18.24, Oc, 


their Skins withered. « Heb. Ey:s : the wantonneſs thereof 
being poſſibly ſer our more by Painting. ove Ja. 3. 16. 
or rather, Face and Eyes being ſometimes pur one tor the oftner. 


See 1 Sam. 16, 12. and [a 25, *- pra with Rev. a 
- trick!) ie g tre INgratiate tn : | : Ef 8 WE9Y 
x All thy tricking up thy felt, thinking ag ws annie 5 Swearing here we may underftand all their Service nf Cod 


o 


ſelf with the Chaldeans, wil! be to av purpole ; for they wall 
work thy Ruin, as in the Cloſe of rhe Verie, and Chap. 19. 7.! 
3 They will flight theemore than ever. They that have doted on 
thee, thy unchaſt Paramours , the1r Luſt bing fatisfied, ſhall 
abhor thee. See 2 Sam. 13.15. and the Pronoun being NOT IN 
the Origina). It may lignifie, that no Loversatall will look afrer 
thee ; thou ſhalt be cait off by all. oee thus of Tyre, 1/a. 23. 
15, 16. Thoſe that were 11 Confederacy with thee, and thy pro- 
felled Friends, (Hoſea 2. 5. ) thail not only fortake thee, but joyn 
with thine Enemies to deſtroy thee, Lam. 1, 2. And thus 15 Ba- 
bylon to be dealt withal, Rev. 17+ 16, 17. The Sence 1s, Thar 
notwirhſtanding all thy Allurings and Enticements, either to ob- 
tain the help of thy Friends and Allies, the Egyprians, whom 
thou takeſt to be thy Lovers, and didſt forſake me to cleave 
to them, or to ſtop the fury of thine Enemies, the Chaldeans ; 
( poſſibly alluding to Jezabel's practice, in painting her elf to 
ſtop the fury of Jehn, 2 Kings 9. 30. ) yer ſhall it advantage thee 
nothing: thou ſhalt be no more regarded than a forſaken Strum- 


2 And though theyſay, The LORD 7 liveth, furs 
ly they ſwear + falſeiy. ; 

g Though when they fwear, they uſe the form of in 

ſay, the Lord liver} b: 


7, Chop. +- 2. 0x ky tie 5 104 2008 (75, ; fy 
; : p : 71:6 1” Tx) : wy 2 
Synecavcne ; Swearing being a part of God's V/orſhin © T4, o: 

7 mm wh > 6 4 ; Y $210 
rnerefore they ſwear fallly ; either. they Carcar ro this which 5: 


». 


falſe 3 or, if to rhat which is rue, they are fo pe: {dine ro me, 
that they do it deceitfuliy, nct in $:ncerity, and in Rey ren 


«14 Aati% #7 


ro that Holy Name by which they, ſwear. Poſſibly rhoy may of 
ten ſpeak of God, and nor ſwear by Falſe Gods, 1% » bur © 
is ail but Hypocrifie and Deceit, 7ja. 48. i. Char, 12. t. and 45 
5, 20. 2 Tim. 3.5. Ir 5 neither in Trurch nor Righreonmiif,, rw a 


of the principal Quaiifications of a lawful Oath : Thos proline 
ting the Name of God , making themlelves gui: y, 
pocriite only, bur Sacrilege. 


O LORD, are not thine eyes upon the ; tr':th ? 


EET 

FAME FY+ ; / 

Laws VS a {iV 
- 


ved; thou haſt / conſumed them, but * they have 
refuſed co receive correction > They have made thei: 
faces harder than a m rock, they have refuſed to 


pet, Ezch. 16, 36, 37-and 23. fr. . 
21 ForThave heard a voice as of a Woman in z tra- 


vail, and the anguiſh as of her chat bringech forth her 
firſt a child ; the voice of the daughter of 4 Zion, that 
bewaileth her ſelf, har ſpreadeth her hands c, ſaying, 
Wo is med now, for my ſoul is wearied becauſe of e 


murderers. 

z When the Scripture would expreſs any exquilite Sorrow, ex- 
ceeding all other Pains, it doth it by a Woman in travail, 1a. 13. 
8,9. Chap. 6. 24. and 30. 6, 7. 4 Which of all ſeems ro be 
the moſt painful, both from natural Cauſes, and becauſe they 


the like. 6 Viz. Fernſalem, Iſa. 1.8.  c In her great Dittreſs, 
ſhe either reacheth them out ro God for ſome help, 1/a. 1. 15. or 
rather, according tc the Uſe of Perſons in great anguiſh, clapping 
or wringing their hands together, as both the former Expretli- 
on of bewailing her ſelf, fetching of deep Sighs and Lamenrati- 
ons, and the following Wo 5 me, intimates. See Cyap. 2. 37. 
d Or the time of my Woe is at hand ; it draws near, e 'There 
is no more Spirit left within me, I am ready to link under my 
Diſtreſs, conſidering not only that my Deſtruction is ſo near, bur 
that thoſe of whom I have been ſo fond, and whote Idovis I have 
ſo zealouſly ſerved, ſhould become my Murderers, Perſe 30. and 
that I ſhould fall into the hands of ſuch, as will have no Com- 


paſſion, 2 Chron. 36. 17- 


CHAP. V. 


None godly in Judah, 1. They ſwear fallly, though God be a God 
of Truth ; they are incorrigible and ſenſeleſs, and know nut 
the Law , or elſe wilfully violate it, 2, —-6. Their Tavlatry , 
Adultery, 7,— 
which ſhould be ſadly werified, 19,- 18. They forſake, for= 
get, and fear not God, whoſe Power is ſo great, 19 - : 
They are rich through Deceic and Violence ; their Falſe Pro- 


phets, 25, — 3T- 


- 
- 


11D) Unye 4 to and fro through the ſtreets of Je- 

R ruſalem, -and ſee now and know, and ſeek in 
the b broad places thereof, if ye can find a c man, if 
there be any chat executeth 4 judgment, that ſeeketh 


the e truth, and I will pardon f it. 

a Whether this begins a new Sermon, or be part of the for- 
mer, is neither certain nor material 3 but here the Prophetr's cal- 
led upon to go up and down, and ſearch here and there, in every 
part of the City, and to make a diligent Enquiry in every 
Street, and Place of Concourſe ; a Phraſe frequently uted for 
ſearching and enquiring after a thing, Dan. 12.4. Amos 8. 12. 
and it is ſpoken in the Plural Number ; not reſtrained to Jere- 
»y in particular ; 9. d Let who will ſearch, they will find ir 
even ſo. It implies the great Scarcity of good Men, that muſt 
be thus ſearched for : Neither doth God ſpeak this to Jeremiah 
only in particular, but he gives leave to all the Farth ro look 
into the ſtate of Jeruſalem, by which he vindicates himſelf in the 
face of the whole World from all ſeverity towards his People, 
whatever he brings upon them, and ſo ſtops the Mouths of the 
Jews, b Even there, where uſually is the greateſt Reſort for 
Merchants and Merchandizes; where Men meet from,all Quarters. 
c It ſeems -worſe than Sodom and Gomorrah: For God conde- 
ſcends to pardon Feruſalem, if there be but one righteous Man 
found in it ; there he came no lower than ten. But it will be 
objeFfed. If it be underſtood thus individually, What muſt we 
think of Jeremiah himſelf, and Baruch, and Ebeamelech, and 
other few , who were then, no doubt, in Jeruſalm ? Anſwer , 
Either he ſpeaks of the corrupt Body of the People, Courtiers, 
Prieſts, Falſe Prophets, not one, or ſcarce one among them to 
be found, orif any, ſo few as not to be diſcerned : - A Man 
might walk the Streets of Jeruſal:cm long enough before he could 
meet with any one truly Religions; which Univerſality of Cor- 
ruption 1s thus exprefled in divers Places, Pal. 12. 1.2. and 14+ 
2, 3. Ezek. 22. 3o. Mic. 7. 1, 2. Or it may be underſtood Hy- 
perbolically fora few. &d 7.e. Among the Magiſtracy thar rightly 
adminiſter Juſtice. e 7. e. Among the Commonalty that deal 
faithfully and uprightly. Ir ignites, That among them all, there 
are none given to it; fo far from endeavouring and ſeeking it fin- 
terely with their whole Hearr, that they are not inclined to it, 
butare given to Oppreſſions, Falſhoods, and Deceits ; They do not 


3 return. 

7 The Prophet, obſerving rhe Obſtinzcy of this Peopli2 , al- 
ruptly turns hinſelf ro God, yer einpharncally infinuares their 
Incorrigibleneſs. This may refer either ro God's difcernins and 
knowing Truth from Falſhood, as being impollible rhar any thing 
ſhould be hid from him, eſzlm 11. 4. or rather ( more 2grecable 
to the Phraſe ) ro God's approving : And this ſome agniin tofer to 
Perſons , as, Men of truth fos true Mn , ſo a Man of Wiltmm 
for a wiſe Man, Micah 6. 9g. but cthers, betrer, r> Truth and 
Faithfulneſs, as that which God hath a grcat Re1tpeE& for, and 
Delight in, Pjz/m 51.6. and was not th be found among thete 
People. Though none of theſe Senles be improper, this ſeems 
che moſt genuine. k& They have been under ſore Grievances 
that God hath laid them under, yer they ſeem as unconcerned 2row, 
23. 35. 1ſa 42. 25. Or it 1s probable they were griev'd ar their 
Sufferings, bur they have not repented, thereby to turn away the 
Cauſes of his juſt Diſpleaſure. Sce 2 Cor. 7. 9, 109, 1 God had not 
only lightly chaſtiſed them , but waſted them by ſeveral Enc- 
nies, as the Arian , 1/a. 10.5, 6. and 36. 1. and Pharaoh Ne 
cho, 2 Kings 23. 33. and the Chaldees , Syrians, Moabites, and 
the Ammonites, 2 Kings 24. 2. and: Nebuchaunezzar, 2 Kinrs 
24. 13, Oc. All theſe he made ule of zs rhe Rod of kis Indio- 
nation, yet they refuſed to receive Correction. See Chap. 2. 30. 
A Meronymy of the Effeft ; they have profited nothing bv ir 
not at all reformed, 1/4. 1.5,16. Amos 4.6, 8,9,10,11. = AS as 
cheir Obſtinacy and Impudence, laying atide all ſenſe of Jude. 
ments, as pait feeling, Prov.21. 29. Zech. 7. 12, » Wiitully ket 
jeted Counſel, and ilighted Correction, relolving to perfift in 
their Obſtinacy. + ; 

4 Therefore I faid o, Surely theſe are p porr; they 
are fooliſh : for they know not the way of the LORD, 


g. Contempt of Gods Word and Prophets , |nor the judgment of .*. their GOD. 


o Or, perhaps I ſaid with my felf nor ; poſſibly, that he ther 
ſo, bur chat he mighr thus expreſs him!clf, 2s Men wu! ro lc 
p Poor, low-ſpirited, or of the meaneſt rank amoens rhe Vul- 
gar, who underſtand bur Jittle : Eicher Mcn of greater lonorance, 
foim 7.49. and therefore jaid not ro know the way of the Lord 
(See Chap.8.7.) being better $kill'd in Fields and Vineyards cn mn 
the Law ; or of lets Conſcience than the better ſort 11121 be; and 
therefore ſaid to be fooliſh, or infiruared 3 or put won orcwfen 
Temptation by reatfon of their Poverty Yeu 38 7 EG + 
a * 4 p k SS DE AO . ale 
Mcthods or Ways of his Providence, the uſual minner cf lis 
Dealings ; ſo Judgment is to be raken here tor the func with 342 345 
1 Sam, 2.13. asSIt 15 alſo Chap. 8. 7. 
5 I will get meto the q great men, and will {peak 
unto them ; for they have r known the way of the 
LORD, and the judgment of their GOD : bur theſe 


have altogether broken the yoke, ad burſt the 
/{ bonds. 


9 i.e, To the Nobles, both Prizce and Prizt, thir have 
more time to conſider theie things, have becn berczr ravohe and 
educated, Prov. 4. 4. Not that Jermiah had afiy berrer Fhonohrs 
of theſe, bur as carrying a great Probability with jr, + Had ie 
been only among thoſe in the forn:er Verie, jr might have own 
more excuſable ; bur it 1s in the very Nobles themiulves - The 
State is wholly corrupt from ilead to Foor, who cannot nie 
Ignorance, therefore the more jncexcuſible. { The are more r2- 
fraftary than the other, more healy ant obftine ; no Law of 
God is- able ro hold them, P/al. -2. 2, 3, See Lutc 10. ra. ++ 
There 1s not one betcer than another among them, whet "POL 
or rich. 

6 Wherefore a 7 lion out of the foreſt ſhall Cay 
them, * « a wolf of che jj} x evenings ſhall ſpoil* 
them * 


1 1 
. >? - ** = 
3OLI1CGT PUOUT 


backſlidings are F & increaſed. 
t£ Nebuchaduezzar and the Chaideamn- Army from Syria and 


” 


Libauty, woody places, are hore pointed at under the Mzrapbe; ft; 
4 


of Beaſts of Prey of three kinds. The Maiignicy thar is proper 
to each of theſe Creatures ſhajl be pur furth in this Ba! yicnricn 
Army , compared, for inftzace, ro a Lim, Chap. 4.5. which 
notes his grear Pewer, Courage, - Pride, and injulting over h:s 


i2ck the Truth. 7 Or him, I will not deſtroy it tor the fake of 


Prey. « For their Greedinels and Unſutiablenefs ; ons We'f 
will deſtroy abundance of Sheep ; ord faid ro be the x 771,07 

dt . By "XP RR <—_—_ 
Evening, or Deſarts, os Plains, they being the uſual iliwmmnmrs 


{ls 


chou haſt * ſtricken them, bur they have not & grie- * 


Ry ["_ 


, 3 a leopard ſhall warckh over heir Cities: 124 
every one that goeth out thence ſhall be corn in pie. 105 2+ 
ces, becaule their tranfereflio!:s are many, and Tier by 


+. 


- . 


| Ws 


2. 


07S 
— 


"i 


—— 


CINEIET _ CON I OO ER 
b I 


Chap. V. 


the Wolf; or Evriar, becauſe then they are obſerved to be. 
mod ravenous, Has. 1, 8. poſſibly, becauſe lying moſt part of 
the day in their Dens for fear of the Huntlinen, want of Prey en- 
:2gerh their Hunger ar Night, and becauſe of this greedineſs to 
devour, the judges among themielvres are faid ro be Evening 
We! os, deſcribed Zeph. 3 3. They gnaw nor tae Bones till the 
marzo, cirher throngh Hunger or Rage. y The Chaldenn Ar- 
my compared to 2 Leopard , nor for irs ſpeed only, bur eipect- 
aliy for its Vigilancy and Subrilty ; they will be ſo vigilant, tina 
ſcarce any {hall eſcape, according to Verſe 16. z Heb. Strong ; 
Here is the reaſon why God would bring fuch a Devaſtation up- 
on them, becauſe rhey did, as ir were, ttrengrhen themſelves in 
the multirude of their Rebellions againſt him, = in 
7 © How ſhall I > pardon thee for this? thy « cnil- 
dren have forſaken me, and ſworn by them that are b no 
20ds : when I had fed them to the full, they c then 
commirted 4 aduitery, and aflembled themſelves by e 
troo03s in the harlots houſes. 


z Hew can{ thon expe& that I ſhall bearſuch Aﬀeonts* I thall 
exvoſe my ſelf, and ſeem to lay aſide my power, I ſhall be look'd 
upon 25 ons, that either regard not ſuch Injuries, or cannot avenge 
them, as /7rſeg. o Thy Inhabitants both in City and Country. 
b But by Idols. Swearing is here put, not for any part of Wor- 
ſhip, as ſometimes it is, but for a religious Worthip and Service 
of thei, Chap. 4.2, c Here is nored the abuſe of God's Boun- 
ty, or the natural FFe& of our unſanQtified Proſperity, Devr. 32. 
15. Chap. 2. 7. Jude 4, That which in good Men doth oft breed 
Forgertuinels, in bad Men generally breeds Filthinets : riting up 
to play the Wanton, was the Effect of Iſrael's Eatingand Drinking, 
Exod. 32.6. and of Sedom's Sin, Execk. 16. 49. ao Lither 1. Mc- 
ravhoricay to be underitood of their going a Whoriag after 
their Idols; or, 2. Properly for corporal Uncleinnels, they uſua}ly: 
going both together, Nam. 26. 1,2. Hof. 4. 12,14. e It may 
be read in the Nomina!ive Caſe, the Horſe of the Harlot afſum- 
Lied thraſclues, q. d. the whole Houſe of Iſrael, Jeruſalem, and 
Yuan, are but one Stew ; if it refers to thcir Tdolatry, then it 
alludes to their making the Temple a common Houſe of ſpiritual 
Hariotry ; bur rather, as it refers to corporal Uncleannefs , it 
ſeems 79 intimatethat they did not a& their Adulreries clandeſtine- 
Iy or by ſtealth, but laying aſide all Modeſty, they went to Har- 
lors Houſes like brute Bzaſts in company, as aſhamed of nothing. 

$ They were as f fed horſes in the g morning : 


every one h neighed afcer his neighbours wife. 


7 To note the Greatneſs and Unrulineſs of their Luſt, pampered 
Horſes being moſt wanton, like that Dexr. 32. 15. g Iris que- 
fioned, whether Morning relates to Horſes, or to Men; if to Hor- 
Jes, then they are compared to Stallions, that having been fed to 
the full over-night, and lainat eaſe, in the Morning they are moſt 
Iuſty ; being as we uſe ro ſay, Provender-pricks, But rather it 
ſeems torejate to Men, thewing that they were very early in going 
about their Filthinefles,Zeph. 3-7. following their Uncleanneſs with 
as great Eagernefs, as it 15 faid thar Drunkards follow ſtrong Drink, 
Jfa.5.11+þ 3. With an impetvous Earneſtneſs and unwearied Rumt- 
zng, they ſought after the Adulrereſſes to ſatisfie their beaſtly luſts. 
Irnotes, 1. The ſtrength of their Luſt, a thing in Horſes much ta- 
ken notice of by Authors. 2. The Unbridledneſs and Uncontroul- 
ableneſs of it, as 15 ſeen in the pampered Horles hunting after the 
Mare ,of which 1-ghing isa Sign, thus expretled, Chap.1 3.27. Thus 
the Grecians would expreſs Men extreamly libidinons by the Word 
rrTeCwa, and iT707:pret,and that they do imTuar:ir,fothe LXX, 
and thus deſcribed, Ezekiel 22. 17. 


* Ver. 29. 9 * Shall I not 7 viſit for theſe things? ſaith the 
Chip.99-T, OR D: and ſhall not my k ſoul be avengedoa ſuch 
a nation asthis 2? 
? 7.e. Puniſh, Pſa”. 3g. 32. Should T connive at ſuch things 
the wicked would tay, 1 did not ſee them, or take notice of them" 
Pſal. 50. 21. much to the ſame purpoſe with Perſe 7. beginn. and, 
Pimihment may. be termed Viſtiinz, as implying the Equity of 
Gods Procedures, that he firſt ſees and contiders the.caſe, before 
he inflicts Punithments, as in the caſe of Sodom, Gen. 18. 21. 
{poke after thz manner of Man. & Ir ſpeaks the Greatneſs of 
God's Diſpleafure, Shall not my very Soul be in this work of 
Vengeance * Pſal. 11. 5. 


10 © Goye /up upon her walls, and »» deſtroy ; 
but make not a full # end: take away her 0 bactle- 
ments ; for they are not thep LORDS. 


[O ve Babylonians, go now execute my Vengeance on rhem, 

I give them up into your hands; behold, I give you a Com- 
milſon. » I permit and order you nor only to take the City, 
bur make havock of her Inhabitants, 1ſz. 10. 6. = Though God 
give them a large Commilſton to deſtroy, yet he purs in a Limi- 
ration, that he will referve a Remnznt from DeſtruC&ion ; he ſers 
bounds to the moſt raging Adverſery , beyond which he muſt 
not paſs, SeconChap 4. 27. o Lay her and all her Fortificati- 
©ns level with the ground ; rake away her Counterſcarp, or high 
Towers, or whatſoever may tend to the Detence of a Ciry ; to 
ler Jeruſalem know, that ſhe did but in vain truſt to her high 
Wails and ſtrong Towers; and Battlements may as well be taken 
for the foundation of her Walls, which ſpread wider than the 
Wall it ſelf : The Word the Prophet uſeth, ſignifies rhings that 
| ſpread ; and thus it agrees with the Scope, tht is deſcribing the 
utter Overthrow and eradicating of it : Sothe LXX, rake away her 
Supports, p T undertake their Defence no longer ; T Jdilown 
them ; take my Protection from them , and give them up into 
your hands, O ye Chald.errs, though they make their boat thar 
they are theltcred under my Wing and ProteCtion, becauſe there 


YEREMIAH. 


[eſt what they g ſay. 


; 


Chap. \g 


dah have dealt very r treacherouſly againſt me, faith 
the LORD. OS | + | 
@ Whietier Iſrael be pur here for the Ten Tribes, and Juds5 & 
for the rwo, as often they are, Chap. 2. 4. and Junury other pla- 
ces; cr rather, whether Judah here be only exphcitive , and the 
' Word meantof the two Tribes only, read thus, rhe Houfe of It- 
; rae), even the Houſe of Judah, is not much mareria!. » Have apo- 
 larized and dealt perfidioufly beyond meaſure, nor only as ro-the 
Grotineſs, but as to the Univerſality of it. 
12 They have / belyed the LORD, and ſaid, 
not he, neither ſhall evil come upon us; neicher ſhall 
we ſee r: ſword nor famine. mY 


[ This may ſignifie either a denying, viz. a renouncing, ma- 
king little or nothing of him, as ſome; or a denying, 7. e. nor 
believing, that theſe Words of the Propher were God's Words, 
or God did not ſay ſo; he gave the Prophet , nor any other , 
any ſuch Commiſſion, and poſſibly their Atheiſm might grow ro 
ſo high a degree as to deny his Providence, Power, and Juſtice, 
&c. 1o it agrees with the following Words, 7: # not he, or God 
did not ſpeak as he meant; bur he would only fright us, it ſhall 
not be thnas. #: This Siege or Famine, or any other ſuch dreadful 
Judgments, as Jeremiah ſpeaks of, ſhall nor befall us. Serving 1s 
uſed here for Feeling, asit is in Job 7. 7. : 

13 And the prophets ſhall become # wind, and 
the word js not in x them, thus ſhall ic-be done y 
unto them, 

u A proverbial Speech, very frequent, not in common 'Lan- 
guage only, but Scripture allo, Job 6. 26. Eccleſ. 5. 16. and elſe- 
where, z.e. all the Prophet's Threats thall come to nothing : and 
thus they, ſcoffed at them, Tuſh, what do they lignihe ? they are 
but bruta fulmina : See 2 Chron, 36.15, 16. » This, poflibly , - 
they give as the Reaſon that they.apprehend the Yropher's Words | UW. 
to be but as Wind, becauſe they are not from God, they ſpeak 
bur Dreams of their own fanſying. » It ſhall fall upon their 
own heads that have thus threatned us, not upon us; or we will 
kill chem with the Sword, for thus vainly threatning us ; we will 


+*T\? A q - 


uſe them like Falſe Prophets, as they are ; and we ſhall ſee in *C 
the Sequel of rhis Prophecy how they uſed Jeremiah ; or it may T3 
be an Imprecztion, 9.d. may it fall upon their own Heads : Thus 2G 


the Heb. io be 7t unto them. 
14 Wherefore z thus faith the LOR D God of 
a hoſts, Becauſe you ſpeak this b word, * behold, 1-Cyzp.1 5 
will make my words in thy mouth fire, and this people 
wood, and it ſhall devour c them. | 


z Theſe vile Wretches having now done ſpeaking, God begins 
to ſpeak ; and to tell them, that becauſe they had rhus {l:ghted. rhe 
Prophet, and God ſpeaking by him,(as in the next Words,B:cauſe-ye 

ſpeak this word) therefore the Lord here tells them what he will do; 

ne rather, turns himſeJf abruptly to the Propher, as Men uſually 
do ina paſſion. a He makes his Majeſty and Power known, to 
cloath his Words with the greater Terrour. 6 Y/:z. Atthe rate they 
diſcourſed in the former Verſe. « 7.e. Ir ſhall rake place ſuddenly, 
and irrefiſtibly, and fiercely, as Fire is wont to take in dry Wood 
to their utter Ruin and Overthrow, P/a/. 83. 14,15. 1ſa. 9. 18,19. 
They ſhall be but Fuel ro my Wrath which ſhall be executed by 
the Chaldean Army, that ſhall conſume, and ear rhem up like 
fire , they ſhall find my Words to be more than Wind. 


I5 Lo, I will bring a * Nation upon you from + xg, « 
d far, O houſe of e Iſrael, faich the LORD : it x a 26. 


[et / nation, it is an ancient nation, a nation bp. 1. 


and 6 
whoſe language thou knoweſt not, neither underſtand- 5 3% * 


a Viz. From Chaliea. e By theſe are meant Jude ; for 1/- 


ract properly fo-called, //z. the Ten Tribes, were in Captivity y 
before : See on Chap. 4. 1. called the Houſe of 7ſ-ac!; nor only FE 
becauſe they deſcended from 7acob, bur becauſe they were the þ 
chief of that Stock. f Ir is both potent, cr, as the Word is, j 
rough and harſh, and of great Antiquity, ever lince the laying Lf 
the firſt Foundation of Brozliou by Nimrad, about 170 Years af 2 
ter the Flood ; and hence it is called the Land of N:mrod, Mic. ] 
5. 6. And this doth much add to their Cruelty, that they have I 
had Dominion and Rule in their hahds ſo long, whereby o 
they have not only grown more proud and haughry, bur having | 
been brought up 9 long in ways of Blood and Sjaughrer, they 


muſt needs by this time become skilful ro deſtroy. g Which 
makes thy caſe much more deſperate. Ir is a great diladvantage 
when Perſons underſtand not one another ; they will neither 
underſtand thy intreaties, nor thou their offers, being both 
unintelligible, and inexorable , which will render thy condition 
much more {ad and perplexed; ſpeech being that by which Fey 
the affeEtion 15 readily communicated, and is the bond of humane _—_ 
Society : Hence this was part of the Judgment rhreatned, Det. ; 
28, 36, 49, 5o. the Jews not well underſcanding rhe Syrian 
Tongue, which the Chaldeans ſpake, having had no converſe wirh 
them before the Captivity. Ir vas this put a ſtop to all converſe ar 
the building of 'Babel. 

16 Their þ quiver js an open i ſepulchie, they are 
all mighty *F men. 


h ColleFively expreſſed for Quivers; a Synecdoche for the whole 
military preparations, anda a Mc, 9nymy of the cont aining for the con- 
tained, viz, the Arrows, that will be ſhor our of them, called the 
ſons of the Quiver, Lam. 3.13. Bow and Arrow being the chief 
Weapons for War in thoſe Countiies, and in thoſe days. 5 A 
proverbial ſpeech , Pſal. 5. 9. relating to the dreadful havock, 


was the Temple and Altar ; but they will find themſelves decej- 
ved; tor I dilownthem. 
;, 11 For ” the Houlz of Iiracl and the houſe of 4 Ju- 


" Ch3d 
4 


\ i? 


and deſtruction, that will be made devouring the living , "0 
25 the Grave. doth the dead, or making work © for the greedy "OY 
devouring Grave , thaf never faith it hath enough, Prov. 1. 2. © 


| Or, they ſhall deſtroy many with one Quiver, 


as one Grave will be -] 
twallow wa 


<4 
hs 
£ S 
s v 
- , 
| 
b. * 
: 
4 
: 
T3 


F, 


1 Ley, 2H, 


Ut. 


*Fia. 6.4 


Ez2k.12.2 
24 2 
Mat.13.14 


by ' 
ſo. 12 45. 
p 
d] 


8 4" wa 
C RO. a , 4% 
- * ng SAW os 


*Chap. V. 


ſwallow many dead ; which may note their skil , and the ſucces 
they ſhall have ; few of their Arrows thall ſail of doing execut:- 
on. k Theſe Chaldeans are all Mzn of Valour fir for Warriours. 
17 And they ſhall eat up thine * harveſt, and thy 
! bread, hich thy ſons and thy daughters ſhould 7 
eat; rhey ſhall eat up thy flocks, and thine herds ; 
chey thall ear up thy vines and thy z figereesz they 
jhail impoveriſh thy fenced Cities wherein thou crutt- 


e{t, witch the o ſword. 

| They thall make clean riddance, leave thee no ſapporrs of life, 
bur bring-an utrer famine upon thee; it is tiius threarned, ons: 
28. 30, 48, 51. m Or, they thall cat up thy SONS and thy aug! 
ters; bur chis is only a M-ronymy Of the ef2& ; bur properly this 
averavircs the dreaiifulneſs of re Judgment ; Parzirs oxit of the 
tenderneſs of rheir affe&tion,chuling racher tro die themſelves, then 
to liero fee their Children ſtarved before their Eyes, and then no 
v-ays able to relieve them, Zam. 2.10, 11, # A particuler cnu- 
mation of rae D=(olation, that would be made, all rending to rhe 
ore:rnel of the former. 0, 7.e. Beſide the waſte that the Famine 
would mak? among Perſons ; their Cittes 241fo ſhould be de;zopur 
tired by the ſword of the Enemy : Or rather potfibly rhe Siege 
{hould be fo fireight, and ſtrict, as may be implied 11 rhe word 
imrovrifh, that they ſhouid be forced ro ear one another, 11 
they were quire waſted, rhey ſhould be reduced ro fuch Poverty 
and exig2ncies; or the {word .inay relate £0 the mention2d mtr 
chiefs, as the cauie of rnem all, the Sword thall do 4] his. Fn ail 
which he doth nor fb uimich tell chem, that the Chaldeans {halt con- 
quer rhem., for thar is taken as ic were for granted, as, Wat crucl- 
tics they ſhall uſe when the? 

13 
will nor make a full | end with you. 

ſ Yee this Lerje explaines, Cp. 4 37: {ive only, that I chin, 
Hers ic i5 taken in the firſt ſenſe there menrioned; for :t IS not jard 
only, of in ther Vert, / will at make a fil end, or a tull ena vj 
ou, bur 2 full end 1:1 you; 9.4. I have nor dons witil you 

et, See Lev, 26. 14. ad 40. 
F 19 & And it ſhall come to pak when ye ſhall ſay *, 
» Wherefore do h the LORD our God all tliete 


\ £9/mgs unto US? then {hal* thou anſwer them, Like as 


ve have forſaken m2, and ſerved q ſtrange Gods in 
our Land, fo ſhall ye ſerve ſtrangers in a land, rbat 
15 nOt 7 YOUrs. 

p This ſpeaks, either rheir unparallePd infolency, in a manner 
chaliengins God, asf they had not deferved fuci dealing at. his 
hands ; they might have expeCted better uſage from tim ; the 7ew: 
were good at theſe kinds of challenging of God, 1. £8, 3. Or 
roſs ſtupidity, as being luch Sors as not ro be ſentible of what the) 
112d done to provoke him; like to that Chap. 16. 10. q Heb. Goz's 
o/” the ftranzer ; he doth not ſay ſtrange God, but Gads of th. 
trauger , Which aggravated their crime, that while they lived in 
their own land, and the true God among them, they would preca- 
rioutly go ferch in Gods from the Heathens. » Here the Propher, 


1. oppolerh range Lords to rule over them, to tnote ſtrange Gods, 
that they had ſerved, which God calls a forfiking of him. 2, He 
o poſes a land m9? theirs, to their own land; fo that by this the 
Prophet {hews what refenrmenrs God had of their fin ; for it in- 
ries that their fin was much greater, that they ferved ftrange 
dr the tyrzinical impolition of a ftranger, and therefore he 
would accordingly fur rhe punithment, raart they ſhould ferve 
11 a frange land, winch thovld be worle, than to be fervants in 
tizir oven. This 15 a dreadta), bur a juit Reraliacion, 
20 Declare this in the houſe of Jacob, and publiſh 
in / Judah, faying, 
{ See of riis Chr. 4+ 5. By Judah and Jacob we are to under- 
fund the rwo Ti:bes only, as Vir. Lhe which lee. 

21 ilear now this, * O foolith people, and without 
T t underſtanding ; which have eyes and ſee not ; 
ear NOAt 


- 


- Which have ears, and « 


- 


of Inſtruction, or Reformation, but are ſtupid, and ſotriſh, regard- 


is ſail to be the ſimbole, ana according to Galen, the ſear of Wiſ- 
dom; fo the Poer placeth it, Cor ſap/t, & pulmo loquitur, fe! 
commmuet iram, &c. u See Chap. G6. 10. they are wilfully bling, 
and 0:5!tinately deaf, will neither ſee, nor hear the Word, Will, 
or Works of God ; of which he giveth two inſtances in two fol- 
lowing Verſes, Ter. 22,24, vV?z. In governing the Sea, and appoint- 
ir; the ſeaſors of the Near, Tt may be he alludes herein to their 
Iicis, to which they were ſo much addifted. 

22 Fear ye not x ne? faich the LORD : will ye 
not tremble at tay preſence, which have piaced the y 
iand fir the * bound of the Sea, by a & perpetual de- 
cree, that ir cannot paſs it; and though the waves 
thereof tofs « themiclves, yet can they not b prevail ; 
6 i : - - n "RB 
chough they c roar, Yet can they not paſs over it 2 


v* y . . ag - 
* Ether a convincing Argument to periſivade them to ſuhmit 

TO 1M ; will ye norſubmir to me,thart can rule th2 Sea ? which 

15 unruly a tning 25 It 1s, yt quietly yields ro my wilt; Or rather, 


' Very angry Challenge, and ExpoſtuJation ; Do you think, that I, 
That can fame the boiſterous Sea, cannot tame you ? y Thar ſtand 


1:7 in n221 to make Rocks for Walls and Bounds -unto ir, bur can 
give a ci1:ck to it by fo ſnall a matter, as the Sand, rhar of ir (elf 
:$ not only yielding and venerrable, but ſujet ro be blown away 
v'(every wind. 2 Fiche joking backward, that it never conid, 


4 « 


"=" wa Þ'Y v ? ! y Þ : cy N » .- 4 > ? a : Tha "> { LS] - - & » 
or forwwar:! that 1t never ſ\hill. Whether ras decree have rotpect tg 
2:1, Or t9 the Deluge, 


6h 2 8 ts "7+ 
»aicn ALS. 


IT 15 2Ct BUCH Material ; the tors 


SEREMIAYH. 


DJ RE, SG * -0 «4 - £ ny «a 4 7 « 
mer of which times 3t cont jor V2 12:N CON 


. 2 4 GG - 4 p J » - .*  - | 
bounds, neither 11 toe Jarte Could iT have Feed Sad fi, omwv £74 


|Next Clauſe intimates, where God {hews wtizie 


! 


F Ag ak y J _— 4 «> #5 gf x { 

\G20d 3 jnecta) OTacr, 2aSNO time jince. xX T'irc : P ” 
roar, and threaten never fo mui, as if chey would 1s TY 
betore tkem 3 though they forum gi tle Rechs eh yg hop 
their way, yer, when they Come ro tier bonds 3D; wires ; 


ramely yie'd unto the Sand, and retire lik, þ Not or any ord 


' BPON GY e2ainf Gods decics as! Jo 0 MMNCNT. c Kirnge! fine 5 - 
iy» "Mi "Sb, - - SY 
cree or the land, winch mn revars of their form. Kirauericgn vp 
© ? ls RS. "I, £ hy £ by 
lTinets, and huxibiiiry would overflow the whole earth woes 


not for rhe hinits, and refraints that ar lid oo fr Co 3244 


Def. ERS es ooo " Nbpe ' ; * 2 
B\ T1H;S NHLLIMTRCE, God inty fhew witithe contd 4) \w IT} IEECIEIRICE 


Fe - - " > * iſ} 3 7Y f 3 6” 2 . } - 
ro thar enraged, and ravinzs Ariny, that is abuuc lo C21. Uh 3 


them hke a torrent, if his people would repenr. Ur rate; 
hereby upLrtds the Jews with thei wir fowuble for iis et 


they are myvre mad 1m their Reb oijtons ag 
Jing watzrs of the Sea, that as butlierous as they Yo viey 
his Wi. 
23 Bur this people hath a revolting and 2 «© 1b0tlt- 
on> heart; ey are revolted, and / pore, 


, 


{ _c They are nor only revoiccd from ime, and gone bac, bur 
racy continue obſtinate, and wili nor return, Pj. 78 5, ws the 


ij 
L'is 


lie! HITTER. by 
eff of it, 4 Hz. From me; they pertii! tn ihe coiuntrs, wo ics 
clauning of them, for tlicy are nor only revuitid, bur they are 
g01e Quite away, and are ircclaimalle. 


f-arcthe LORD our God, char giveth & rain, bortt cie 
* former and the + latrer in tiis featon: he reiwevech 
unto us tne appointed weeks of the 7 ttarveit. 

e They are 16 carelefs, thar thev nv) er roublerhemicives about 
It: or lo obdurate, and {itf, that they n2ver lay ic co heart, or 
conſider that it 15 God rhar difpolerh of all clings according to his 
own pleajure, both in rhe Earth and 11 the vreat deer, | Or j-rve 
and obey ; all terviczro Uod bury boch performed in ir, ant pro- 
c-eding from 1. eg Without which norhins cou'd fulrift, By chis 
the true God 15 diftinguiſhed from all filte 1dol idads, C9 14 22 
and 11 th:s$ appears net only his power 'in decrevins,';c> 28.25. anc 
and preparing it, Pſal. 147.8. his Sovercignry in withbo!lding it, 
Amos 4.7. but hi; genera] goodneſs in beſftowing ir, Dexr. 28.1 2. Mar. 
5.45. and his ſpecial providence 11 the fealonavic ditpolal of it, 4c: 
cording as there 15 need, and which he gives as a witnzHs of it, ff 
14.17. As inthe former intance Gol ters forth his peoles infor! 
blenzt$ of the works of his grearnefs, and power in 0cally tans 
iuch an unruly Element; 1o here he doth alto furch or munitelt £54, 
fame by inſtances of his providence and goodnels ; implying, ric 
fo itupid, refolnte and obſtinare they are grown, that they are new 
ther afraid of him for his grearnefs, which poflibly may be nnd er- 
ood by the former, fear; norteur hun for his goodne!s, which 
pothbly, may Le the ſenſe of the word in this latter places. £ tie 


ground for Sow1ng, and the Jatrer to prepare the Corn tor plump- 
ing, and ripening, SeeChap 3.3. 1: He vgivesfealonsble Haryefts 
according ro lus appointment. The tum is, God wou'!'d let them 


ods in their own jJaind, than it chey had done 1t in another, un- | 


know by this, what an 1mpudent and feo'th, as we!l as wicked 
ching, 1t 1s, for them to ter theiniclves againſt thar 30d, rhar keens 
the whole crder of Nature at his own ditpofal, which ke can.eirhor 
veitouw or wiratold ; as he fees Men behave themfc!ves wwwargs 
him. ; 
” 7 o * " or Sad : A 5 : - 
25 Your1gquities h:ve turned away theſe 7277s &, 
| / . = » - Þ- - N : by 
{and your fins have withho!den good rhings from you :*. 
f Y, es , ; ay , #4 4 

k, 9.4. Do not ay, your ground is parched up with dreughr, or 
YOur {rues are COrruired and rotted by too much, or unteatonable 
Ling wehave nothing now in fo due a courle, as we were voi: 
tro have 1t, would you know the reaton of it * You have inverced 
the Ordinances and order of Nature, have put iHeiven and E:rthi 
out of their regular courſes by your iniquities. I ie enter 
you have been cutthorr of thelc good things, or denied a blefing 
upon them. By this God would have proptune Men fee tliut unu- 
ſual ſeafons either for better, or worte, Conor come bv cltance, bur 
as he ſees convemient either for tie encouragement cf the uocd is 
ent, or puniſhing the obltinate. 

26 For among my / peop'e are found wicked mc : 

+* ; . ! 2 ' 

they || * lay mz wair as he that ſetretlt fnares 
|a trap, they catch » men. 


even among them rtharare called by my Name.; wheres a] 
People-ought ro have been wholly. » Or contemplate mill; c- 
| VOUS deſigns, under deceits ; as Fow!crs do hide rhemelves, w o:y 


' eh . h ri Wade - . « 7 ; R 

| ney WIrcn Fug Birds coming tro the Snare or Net, Prov. r. 1: 
! y -” IA - of | AYER y_ ; " , FT” o. y FY 4 » eG adi BY 

{ Mit. 7.2. any therefore the nexr expreition he. that jerrerh ſnavc: 


' 15 bur a proip+ nite fora Fowler, the 4.5. word being always !{ ta- 
ken : Pj:!.91. 3. Prov. 6.5, and elewiacrs: Or tuey pry, 2 
they narrowly J.ok, wizre they may ger an advantese ; hence be 


in the Pſalms, Fi{l. 5.8. and 27.11. 56. 2. and 59+ 10. and 92.13. 
a Intimating the fucceſs of their wicked Policies in brinvinc ther 
wicked decrees to pats, Pal. 37. 7.. as faite Wirneilts 
| pznners uſe ro do, when they go abour ro enttarc men, 
'11nAcent ;, fach a Trap did Fiznbc: Hy tor 1Nav9h, 
ſuch an on2 was that Conſpiracy of more than go 7 
| Pavl, Ads 23.13, 14, 15. b | 

; 27 Asa || cage is full of birds, 


full of © deceit : cherefore they are bec me great 
 wax:en þ rich. 


= 


bi ' 


. . o Y - - . , oh F . | 
tnoſe that they deceive, und over-reach ; 1!! gorcen Goods AK 
F W C; p ; RE EI, JM *” B -- " » 
Ny) OL the -/ As ti:e Fowler Cari £5 11S Carne along W; 


RY 
6 .Cifhs, 


w Ea. WA” 22 
Tn - 5 On FRY ?. $| 1 ?! ! * ! ? NP 
bm, wherein he pnes tne Brods which he cacherh, ro keep rate has 
q* 7 7a TP 214 \ 2 TI > 3% {: TY £2 «1, » T8. inc: fee - Pa 7 , 
T1254 { £ TEGL 4) a”, > LI0Ig Wa % ow IRS &' w ps Rd. 45% 3 T0 u\ LING _ 
\ OD LSE wy 


24 Nether fay they ia thr e heart, Let us now f 


| : . ; 4 13 Fr | tk ? 4.6 WY | : £d FY \ 4 3, . - 
6,-T=C; I hey 11} Th Ter BOULeS WITT the {ro0ds 2nd Yo eaith Ct 


. 1 I need nor ſearch for ſuch «mong the Heerhen Nations, Su: 4 


or 


þ4 ; C.- - 


— - 


o—— 


er —— - 


Chap. VI. 


pearance, and ſinging to entice others. p Shewing how, and 11 
whar manner they got their riches, tÞcrefore, or by Uh:5 322ans 3 
ſuch as are gotten by a lying Tongue, Prov. 21. 6.. called rhe 7re2- 
ſurcs of wicxed, Mich. 6. 10. _ OR: 
*Deur.z2. 28 They are waxen * fat, they q imine: Yea, 2c) 
Ls. overpaſs the deeds of the r wicked: they judge not the 
—_ 12.5 / cauſe of the fatherleſs, * yer they : proſper; and 
* > theright of the needy do they not judge. 2 
- 9 Or, ſo fattharthey ſhine ; by reaſon of their wealth and ricnes 
chey pamper themſelves till their cyes ſtan ot with ſatneſs, Pjal. 
73. 7. their wrinkles are filled up with far, which makes their faces 
ſhine. » Either, they go beyond the very Hearhens themſelves 1 
wickednels, Ezek. 5. 6,7, or rather, they eſcape tie hardſhips and 
ſuſſerings that others undergo, Pſal. 73.5, 6, 7, 8. They icape 
betrer than others ; or, they {lightly paſs over.-udgments threar- 
ned. { Such whom even the Law of Nature commits to their patro- 
nage,they eirher difregardthem , or wrongand injure them, cirner 
by refuſing them a fair hearing, 7/2.1.23. or giving Wrong lentence 
avainfſt them in Courts of Judicature, Zech- 7. 10, exprefly forbid- 
den, Exod.22.22, t Things go well with them ; they ive bappt- 
Iy according to their dehire, proſperam feels, Job 27. 7, &c. Or, 
that they wizht profper, v/z. that God might ble1s them. 

29. Shall I not viſe for theſe « things © {aith the 
LORD: jhall not my foul be avenged on ſuch a nation 
as this 7 | 

4 It is expreſſed as a thing taken for granted, he certainly vill, 
Cn I be a God, and wink at ſuch things * Ic cannot be. Sce 
this explained, 7c g. OS 
| Or, 272 . Zo || A wonderful and x horrible thing 15 commit- 

»:ſhmart ted in the 7 land, 
and filthi® «© $9 prodigious, or {tupendious a Crime, that it 1s beyond the 


i? 


LIED thought or apprehenſion of Man to conceive, much more to ex- 


Lc 


:nd fo abominable, that a Man would even loath the 


2: The prophets propheſie » * falſly , and the 


c thereof ? 
2 Fither ſpreading and diſperſing abroad the lies of their Idols, 


(1; T0. , * . . * T 
By 7, particularly, Baal, Chap.2.8. or venting their lies in the Name of 
as 'the true Gd, Chap. 4. 10. a By this means it comes to p:ls, that 


the Princes and P:irſfts are encouraged to do all their nuichiets , 
whether it were in corrupring Judgment by bribes, or countenan- 
cing fravd and op,reilion, and hardening chemſclves againft Gods 
Threatnings, or whatever elſe, they were encouraged by the Lyes 
of rhe falſe Prophets, they and the Prieſts and Princes combining, 
and ferting themſelves againſt the true Prophets of God, Chap. 26. 
$. and thus the Prieſts in effe& take the management of all the at- 
fairs into their own hands ; fo the Heb: take into their hands : which 
intimates the Authority they uſed in their Miniſtry. 6 They are 
very well pleaſed wirh the Flatteries, and Lyes of the falſe Pro- 
phets, not being able to bear the Truths, chat were delivered them 
from God, Mic. 2. 11. c, 9. d. Whither do you think theſe things 
will tend? Yeu muſt look for nothing, bur utter ruin as the fruit 
and «ft of ſuch doings, Mc. 3- 11, 12. when this City» which 
you look upon to be perpetuated, ſhall be overthrown, and you 
utterly periſh inirs ruine, how miſerably will you find your ſelves 
ro be delnded by your falſe Prophets, and diſappointed in your 
hopes? Afad Apoſrepefs concerning the extirminating of the Peo- 
ple by the Chalagans. 


CH A ÞP. YI. 


Grd ſendeth and ftrevgthneth the Babylonians againſt Judah , 
j, ———5, for h:r Oppreſſiion and Spoils, 6G——8. ond OGftina- 
ey ; which provokes Gra's Wrath and their Drſtrudion, 9 =12. 
Their Coveronſncſs , falſe Confidence, and Inpudence; People and 
Pricfts refuſe to obey God, 13 ——17. Their Hypccritical Worſhip 
that not prevent their ſure Drſtrufion, 18 =————25, The Peop!: 
calledto mourn, 26. The Prophet enconragcad under their wicked- 
neſs, and the fruitleſmsſs of bis Miniſtry among' them, 27, 


= Ss] '® X 


3 


Y Ye Children of Benjamin, b gather your 

ſclves to flee our of the midſt of Jeruſalem, 
and blow the trumpet in c Tekoa: and ſet up a ſign 
of 4 hire in Beth-haccerem : for evil appeareth out of 
the e North, and preat deſtruction. 

- He means, either the Inhabitants of Jernſal:m, becauſe part 
of it ſtood In the Jor of Benjamer, Tofh.18.28 or elſe, he means all 
Judah, becauſe, whenthe Ten Tribes fell off, the Tribe of B:nja- 
22:1 adhered to Jrdah, and was incorporated into them ; If it be a5- 
ied why the Propl et rather ſpeaks here ro Benjamin than to Judah, 
the reaſon probably may be, b<cauſe he being of Anathoth was of 
that Tribe, and therefore mentions them as his own Country-men. 
6 Spoken, either 7ronically that rhey ſhould ſet themſelves in Ar- 
*y, andmake head againfſt.the Enemy, that is now at hand ; Or 
rather, tnar they ſhould flee away togerher ar once, make haſte 
wut of Jerulalry in Iropps, as the next expretiions intimate ; 
not countetling them what they thould do, viz. for ſfuccour, Chap. 
4. 5,6. but rather relling them what they muſt expect, viz, ro be 
torced ro flee out of it, if they may eſcape. c, 9.4. Gather your 

cives together by the ſound of the Trumpet at 7ckoa, poſſibly al- 
juding ro the Name, which ſignifies Trampeting ; or rather, it 
being one of thoſe fenced Cities 12 Miles from Jjernl.xlc32 that Re- 
A a7 Vue, and made exceeding ſtrong for, aud with his warlike 

4, 9h : Jo $ Ot pe ” » , . 

Proviions, 2 Clog, 11.5, 11,12. and being built npon the ad- 


FEREMIAH 


vantage of a Hil} towards the North of Fudca in the way that the 
Babylonians were tO come, 9.4. there furniſh your ſelves out 0* 
that Armory, and ſee if you can make head agaiiitthem. An Troy ; 
2 place noted in Scripture, where dwelt that Tikozriſh Woman, 
that interceded with David for Abſalom by the tubornation of 
Joab, 2 $21, 14. 2. and allo for, the Herdimen, of whom Amos 
was, Amos 1.1. and (its probable) a place where in tune of dan- 
ger they were wont, by the ſound of the Trumper, to ſummon 
the People together. a The word uſed is of very large extent ; 
mafſet 15 uſed for any thing that 15 lifred up, neither is there any 
more in the Text. The LXX alto render it only 'a lign, and the 
lign of fire potibly is mentioned, rather than any other, by a Mz« 
touymy of the Subjetz, becauſe, partly in time of danger of Inva- 
on, it 1s the molt uſaal, and conmodious f1gn, being ſeen in re- 
gardof its lifting, or raziing up of irfelt at once afar off, q. d. fire 
a Beacon, and afign, whereby the Benjamites themielves once 
found they were {urprized, Frag. 20.38,40. 2. Iris a tignſooneſt 
SIVEN of any. 3. Pollibly, as being a more proper ſign, than any 
other would be ro the Vine-dreflers, that they thould tecurethems- 
{clves in ſome ſafe place, which ſeems to be pointed at by the nexr 
word Beth-haccerem. It fignifies the Houte of the Vineyard, pro- 
bably tome high Tower built among the Vineyards tor the Keeper, 


| 
| 


4 


or Keepers of rhem ro watch them, that no dainage come to them, 
this ſeeming to be uſua], 1/a. 5. 2. Or, it may be the Name of a 
Town, tuch a one, as fome repurt to he between Jernſalem and 
Tc0o, the ſame mentioned, Neb. 3. 14. though that ſeems to be 
adjoyning to Jeruſalmm ; whichſoever it be, it is probable, ir re- 
lates to ſome place noted for Vineyards, which were wont to be 
planted upon Fills, and lying in the way that the Chal/deans were 
ro come, and by thele rwo we are to underfiand all other places 
thar lie in that Coaſt. e Thar they may know whence” their Mi- 
ſery will come, he doth as it were point it cut with the finger : 
See Chap.-1. 14 & 4. 6. | 


2 T have likened the daughter of Zion, to a {| come- || Or, 
iy and delicat2 f Woman, _ 


hams. 


f This Supplement 15 not in the Text, they that approve it ren- 
der the Epithete comely varioutly, for one dwcling a: home as the 
Hebrew Nava doth alſo lignifie, Hab. 2.5. and fo the word 4e.:- 
cate ſerves to explain it, as ſhewing the reaſon of ber tarrying zt 
home, not as a good Houſwite, difcreerly guiding aud governing 
her affairs at home, as {he is deſcribed, Prov, 31. 10, &c. and 1. 
2. 5. but through her delicacy expoiing her ſelf roall wontonnels, 
and voluptuouſneſs, tarrying at home ro giveentertatnmentto her 
Paramours, or ſhe through her ſtate and pride, is fo delicate and 
nice thatſhe w1ll not ſer her foot our of door, Dewt. 28. 56 potli- 
bly occafioned by the great Wealth and Riches thar God had ble{(- 
ſed Feruſalem with; this may alſo point at Jruaah's efteminacy 
that will be ſo difpirited as not to have courage to oppoſe rhe ad ver- 
ſary, but eaſily taken in ber Dwelling and Habircation. Others, as # 
beautiful Shepherdeſs ; fome there are, that rather chule ro ſupply 
the defeCt by the word Land or Paſture, as being thar, which 15s 
greatly defirable by Shepherds, as it the were ſome comely Sheps 
herdets, folacing her 1eJf in her delightful Paſture : See Ezek. 34. 
14. and fo it may not be without ſome alluſion to the next /7/e, 
where her Enemiesare called by the Names of Shepherds, as being 
enticed by the pleaſantneis cf her Land. 


3. The Shepherds with their g flocks ſhall come 
unto her; they ſhall pitch heir rents againſt her 
round about .*. ; they ſhall feed every one in his + 
place. 


g The Prophet here proceeds in his M:taphor, and poſſibly the 
rather, becauſe hechuſethto ſpeakin the ſtile cfhisown Education 
which may allo give ſome countenance to the Supplement of Pa- 
tre, or Land -1n the tormer Firſe inſtead of Woman; the mean- 
ing 15, the Chaldean Princes, with their Armies, as fo many Flocks 
thall come into this pleaſant Land : Ser Chap. 12. 10. in which cx- 
preſiion there 15 ſomthing of a Scoff, as Chap. «16,47. - x 
thall fo place their warlike Tents, a« to torm a Sies: to beois 1 
round, Chap. 1. 15. Exck, 4.2. þ Heb. hand, 7. e, near han Or 
befiae, or near one another ; thus 2 Chron, 21. 16. and 7b % 4 
thus band 15 taken tor place, 2. e. cach one in his quarter or tation, 
not a Man, but thall do his part, and ſhallbe skilful. and powerful 
to deſtroy whereever he comes : It intimates 216 chat every thing 
ſhall be ſo much at the Enemies own 4dipoſal, that they ſhajl be a- 
ble to chute their own quarters, thzy ſhall place their Army in 
Wings and Troops, and Regiments, as they ce good, to their beſt 


advantage, to be helpful one unto another, as Shepherds are wont 


to do their Flocks ; or, they ſhall fighr in ſeveral Parties, and each 
deſtroy his yart aſſigned him through the whole Cou try, and 
they ſhall joyn as it were in one body againſt Jeruſalem. 


4 Prepare ye ; war againſt her; ariſe, and let us 
go up at & noon. Wo unto us, for the / day 20eth 
away, for the ſhadows of the evening are m2 firecched 
Our. 


UE The Prophet now pafſeth from his Metaphor to te!ll them 
plainly what he means by the Shepherds, Viz. Warriors : ws 
make theſe the words of the Chaldeans making preparations for 
their Invaſion, and it may be by ſome of their accuſtomed Rites 
chat rhey uſed before War ; bur they ſeem more probably ro be 
the Words of God inviting them, and calling them into chis Work 
therefore inthe Heb. it is ſanfif: War againlt her, Chap. 22. 7. 
he ſpeaks unto ſuch, 1s he had fanttitied; or ſer apart for this work 
his ſanitified ones, Iſa. 13.3. k This ſhews how ready they will 
be to obey God's C:11, thelike we read, J/s, 21. 5. and Mics 
they are ſaid ro go or march up at 00, not only to note their da» 


| 


! 
þ 


| 


ringnels, as needing no ſtratagems, or ſtrength, or needing to ſtay 
_ _— Lut RE toſhew their torwardnels ro march on withour 

op or ſtay, they w« '-1 be Ipeedy 1 
[ Y, they would not burn day-l;ghr, but be ipeedy in their 


i VV OY I 7 p ; ralcatha 6 . + I - 7 . 
vork, and they would take the tirſt opportunity, wherher Mor wing 


Of 


Chap. VI 


GN < =: 


to ſtrengthen this ſence; 7/6 unto vs, the 1 day goeth away, KC. 
q.4. We delay, and tarry too long, and the day ſpends apace, 
we loſe tithe; let us inake haſte about our work ; expreſſing 
their Greedineſs after their Prey, as Souldiers uſe to Co, or this, 
IWo unto us, m?y be ſome Form of Lmprecation, either againſt 
God or Men,which kind of Speeches are ulual with Soldiers when 
they are chated, and going apon ſome {uden Onlet, or Exploits 
chough not a few make it the complatar of the Prophet 1n the 
Name of the People, toreſecing how cheir Night ot Amtliftion 
hafted on, their joyful Days being as it were gone, Amos 8. 9, 
10. But the tormer leems belt ro agree with the Scope. m They 
where ſo eagerly ſet upon it, that they watched the very length- 
ning of the Shadow, which ſhews the Approach of the Evening, 
Pal, 109. 2.3. See Hab. 1. 8. o Th 

5 Ariſe, and letus go by night, and let vs de- 
{troy her o palaces. | 

2 Or, this Nizbt. They were ſet upon it; they wonld loſe 
neither Day nor Night; which ſhew's that they were extraordina- 
rily ſtirred up by God in this Expedition. o This was the Bait 
or Motive that they propounded to themſelves 3 viz. to have 
the Spoil of all the ſtately Palaces, and rich Houſes of the No- 


IAHY Chin, Yy. 


bal 


or Noon, Day or Night, as the next Verſ 2: The next words ſeem 'plies the thor6tgh Riddance'that che Chaldgn; fall maſco 5 CON* 


trary tothe Law tor gathering. the Vintage, rough tt may leem 
toallude to it, Lev. 19. io. Fudah: thall be gleaned over and 
over, ti] there bea full End, none left; as the ifraelitts gleaned 
the B:njamites,Fudg.20.45.tor thus they picked them t39 ar leve- 
ral times both before, 2 Kings 24. 2. and alſo at the cime of Zee 
kiah's Reign, > Kings25.6.7,11,18,19.and this {ceris to be intits> 
ted in the next words. See Hab. 1.9. d As much asto fy, they 
ſhould not be content wich one ſpoiling, but they ſhoull go back 
a ſecond anda third time, again and again, to carry away both 
Perions and Spoil, leaving nothing behind them worth carrying 
away, Chap. 52.28, 29, 30. the firſt carrying away being as the 
Vintage,the ſecond the Gieaning.carying away firlt che prucip?l, 
and afterwards the more interiour fort, 2 As the G:ape Ga> 
cherers do, filling one Basket after 2nother. Whether theſe be 
the Words of the Babylotians, Calling upon and flirring up on- 
another to do it, as ſome ; orthe Words of God to che B's: 
naans, 3s moſt ; it comes much to the ſame thing : tor wha: 
they did was by God's Commiſſion. 


ro To whom ſhall I ſpeak and give f warnin 


| 
2090548 


ww 


bles and great ones. of the LORD is unto them a ; reproach ; they have 


6 For thus hath the LORD of hoſts ſaid p, Hew 
i Or pozr ye down 4 trees, and || caſt a 7 mount againlt Jeru- 


no delight in it- 


Heb. Make proteffation, noting with what Earneſtneſs the 
D 7 


out the En-fyJem. This zs the city to be / vilited ; ſhe 2s whol- Prophet would beſpeak them in his warning of them. See C92: 


gines of RP OE . you 
Pt Jy © oppreflion in the midlt of her. 


IT. 7, The Prophet taking notice of their Obſtinacy, 1peaks as 


p Viz. To the Chaldeans : Here God declares whence they have one aſtoniſhed, and highly makes complaint, being greatly grie- 


their Commitlſion, 4: 4. they come not up on their own heads, [ved, that he can find none that will take warning ; the like 


lee Chap. 5.14, 15. God would have the Fews to know, that 
they have not 1o much to do with the Chaldeans as with him 3 
that they are his Rod to ſcourge them for their Sins, Chap, I» 
15, 16, See 2 Kings 18. 25. Andchus God is 1a1d to hits for ſuch 
whom he will employ in ſuch Work, 12.5. 26.and 7. 18, And 
Ln | he ſtiles himleltche Lord of Hoſts, to ſhew that it is in vain to 
contend in Bartel with them Whom he lends forth, and will be 
as it were, the Captain ot their Hoſts. q Heb. A Ty2e collective 


Chap. 7. 23,24. He laboursto perſwade, bat all is 1a vatn3they 
curn a deat Ear to him, as the next Exprefition intimates. g A 
hgurative kind of Speech frequent with the Prophets ;- a1 nc zre 


ciſed heart, an obſtinate and rebe}jious Will. Hence Circumcihon 
was for a Teſtimony of Obedience; and therefore the Fronier 
doth racitly infinuate their falfeneſls ro God, to whorn thev 
had proinited to be obedient, 2 Kings 1i.17.-and 23. 3. 23d 


ly taken, 9. d. Cut them down all as ore Tree, not ſparing their [the Scripture. calls thote thar are void of the fear of Goa, ard 
very Fruit Trees; Which indeed weretobe ſpared in ſuch acale, carried out to ali manner cr. Luſts, wncircu:zciſed 3 Exch. 445 
Deut. 20. 19. Either ſuch as lie in the way of your March,or all] 7.9. for Uncircumſion was aboininable among the Jerys 2 59 thar 
round abour Feruſalem : or, tuch as you may have need of chere| it noces both their Sin and their Srame, their Ear being ſtopped, 
or elſe where for your Ul, eicher to raiſe up Works againſt the unfic tor hearing, as it it were witi a Foreskin or Film over 1t; 
tirong places, Deut. 26. 20. or to mae other Inſtruments off As 7. 51. h Tie Prophet dota nor here leilen their Crims, by 
War. r Throw up one continued Trench, as a Mount rou 1d ſcheir Inability and want of Poxyer, but rather agravares it, inat- 
about it, See on Iſa. 37. 53. Heb. Pour ont the Engine ; of thactee|much as th:y had brought themtelves under that Incapacity by 


a4* 3 


2 Sam. 20,15, | God is laid ro viſie ſometimes 1n mercy, Gen. by their Obſtinacy and Willfulneſs : as a drunken Man that hath 
50. 24. Zeph. 2.7, and ſometimes in Judgment, as hereand Chap, deprived himic1t of his Reafon by Exceſs, renders the Wantot his 
5. 9. and 23.2. They areripe for it, &zek. 7- 10, 11, 12. See Underſtanding the more inexculabie. 7 Either they reproach it 
I Theſ. 2. 16. and it is decreed againſt them, and ready to come in the Meſſengers Mouth, Luke 11. 45. or rather, they laugh at it; 
upon them, Chap. 23. 12. Hoſ. 9. 7- All Attempts have failed,and|and ſcorn it; they cannot bear Counlel : They look upon reproving 
now there is no remedy. t In the Abſtradt ; ſhe doth nothing |chem to be reproachiag chem : They cake ao Delight in hearing 
but opprels; there are found in her, all kinds ot Opprethon and] ſuch things. A tarther Reaſon of thetr Impotency and Odſtinacy, 
Injuſtice 3 A Synechoche, For all ocher Cruelties, 2 Kings 24. 3, 4-]All their Admonicions and Intiuftiors, ſeemed infipid, and there- 
Exeh.7.23. Even in that City, which was once tull of Judgment,] fore were they lo ſtupid, according to the next Words; Prov. 155 


and Righteouſneſs lodged in it, {/a. 1. 21. but now is 1wallowed 
up with Oppreſſion.. 
7 As a fountain caſteth out her waters, ſo ſhe caſt- 


12, See Chap. 5.31. 2 Tim. 4.3. | 
11 & Therefore | am / full of the fury of the 
LORD; I am weary with #2 holding in ; 1 will 


. ; : * * x73 11 1 . . 
Pſal.55.eth out her « wickedneſs: * violence and ſpoil is|,, pour 1t out upon the children o abroad, and upon 


9, 10, 11. x heard in her; before me continually zs grief and 


wounds. | 
u In this Verſe God aggravates their Sin of Oppreſlion, men- 
tion'd in the former. A Metaphor to expreſs how natural all 
manner of Wickednels isto her , how full ſhe is of it, and how 
unceſfant in it, noting her Impudence ; a Fountain being notable 
ro retain its Water. And the Expreſſion of Caſting it out, ſeems 
to imply her Violence in her Filthineſs; as it 1s ſaid of the Sea, 
that it cafteth out Mire and Dirt, 1/a.57-20. and favoured by the 
next Claule, xg. d. This is all ſhee buſteth her ſelf about, Chap. 
20.8, Itis the general Complaint of her Inhabitants. » 2; 
That the Poor ſuſtain. Where-ever I go or look, Ican hear and 
lee nothing but the ſaid Complaints and Grievances of the Poor, 
lamenting over Oppreſſion and Cruelties that are uled againſt 
themy Pſal. 69. 26. this being fo expreſly againſt God's Com- 
mand, Exod. 22. 22,23, 24,0. Iſ4.3. 14, 15. - Fam. $« 4. for 
this refers rather to their Sin, that to their Sufferings trom the 

Enemy, as ſome would carry it, | | 

8 Be thou z inſtructed, O Jeruſalem, leſt my ſoul 
+ Heb. be depart 4 from thee : leſt | 1 make thee deſolate, a 


unlooſed 1and not b inhabired. | 
or di3joint- 2 Heb. Correded. q. d. By the CorreQion thou haſt felt, and 
ed, what is threatned, be perſwaded to Repentance before it be tov 

late, Prov. 29. 15. God doth here in the midſt of Fudgment 


che p aſſembly of young mea cogether : for even the 
husband with the q wite {hall be taken, the aged witli 
him that is r full of days. 

k Heb. And: which tems to be a better Conrexion ; for that 
which pittteth him upon this Work, ſeems rather to Le that 
Spirit of Prophecy that 15 in him, rhanany Conſideration draw 
trom them. / Iam. as it were, filled with the Fire of God's 
Wrath, and Curles againſt this People, which I am forced co dit. 
charge my lelt of 3 a Metonymy of the SubjeF. See Etek. 3. 3: 
Chap. 4. 19. ie doth not only complain of their Stupidity, ac 
in the former Verte, but ſtirs up bis Indignation againſt them, 
m But he can contain himſelt no longer 3 which tnplies his great 
Unwillingneis to denounce thele Curſes g. d. The Wrath of God. 
by the [mpulle of his Spirit, aCting ſo violently with mine, that 
it w1ll break out. Seethe like, Fob 32.18, 19. Whereby jt appears. 
the Propher is not. carried oa by his own private Spirit, bur by 
the Spirit of God ; he hath no Delight in it; bur is forced to be 
the Meſſenger himlelf of his Wrath ; therefore it he be ſharp 
againit them, they muſt not impiite ir to him, bur to the Spiric 
of Gol, that conſtrains him thus to ſpeak, n Viz. In prophe- 
{y1ng, noting the great plenty of ic: A Metaphor trom violen® 
Rains, that we ſay do pour down upon the Earth, Chap. 7. 20. 
Rev. 16.1, 0 The Streets being the places where ulually li:tle 
Children are wont to [port themlelves.2ch. 8:5 .The fame word 


remember Mercy, as it were ſuddenly putting a ſtop to his tury, |uled P/al. 8. 2. p Their fecree Meetings, whether ia Harlocs 
ſeeking, if by any means it may yet be prevented by their Re- | Houles, Chap. 5. 7. or for Mirth and Jollity, or co join either 
pentance, q. 4, Iwould yet willingly ſpare them, if-ic mifhe [thei Strength or Countel together, which Childrea are not ca« 
be. 4 Heb. be disjointed : A moſt emphatical Merapher,whereby | pable of ; for the Hebrews do riot only c{!] them Yourhs, that are 


God would expreſs how great Griet it is to him to withdraw |paſs their Childhood, poſlibly at Fitreen or Sixteen Yeats of Aoe; 
himielt from them, could it poſſibly be avoided ; ( his great |but Men of Twenty or Thitty, grown to their [ill Stretigth and 


Ef AﬀeCtion to them being here expreſſed by Soxt which is the Seat |Maturicy in the flower of cheir Years; yer it thall advartrage 


of it, Pſal. 42. 1,2.) even like the ſeperating one Limb from |them nothing. q Heb. 3f.n with Womat ; the Wite fhall be 


another, Hereby is intimated the near Communion that God |taken as well as the Husband one Sex as well as tif2 ocher, tha!l 
hath with the Faithful, and how ready he is to return, if they be a Prey to the Enemy. # Not only Met) char inav be rermed 
Will return. b Leſt he make them not a People. old, as they may be trom 5oto 30g which ate then laid to be 


9 T Thus ſaith the LORD of hoſts, They ſhall [waxing old, but fuch as had upon the point filled up the number 


throughly c glean the remnant of Iſrael as a vine : 


of their Days, at the edge ot the Grave, 1/z. C+. 20. talled 
very aged; as Bargillaz, 2 $4in. 19. 32,34,35. The lence is, that 


turn d back thins hand as a grape-gatherer into the | aj fores, trom the Children to the decrepid Old wan had to cars 


e baskcts. | #7 | | | rupted their wavs,( ſee Yer.13.) thar their Condicion was detpe- 
c Though Gleaning be 4 Tertf profier for all kidd of Harveſt, | rate, and God would bring an Enemy upon them, which thog!d 
ay, vet the Word ned here is dppropriatsd £8 tHE Vintage; and im- {pare or pity none, of what Sex or -Age loeyer; 


Vol: 1: 


{Ie 


kd ” 
4 - 


they may-hear ? Behold, their * car 7; g uncircomci-* Cup 
ſed, and they h cannot hearken : behold, the word 7+ 2+ 3 


cumetſed Ear fignity 11g the rejecting of Infiruttion ;and nc iroums 


! 


m2... — 


b 


Chap. VL 


* Chap. 
1.418. 


& 123, IT- 


+ Heb. 


ute, Or mitted e abomination ? nay, they were not at all a- 


breach. 


w_ 4- 4-and ſe, and ask for the ; * old paths; where is the 
Uxe I6, 


A 4 
a * x 


[2 And their houſes ſhall be turned unto / others, 
with their fields and t wives together : for I will 
# ſtretch out my hand upon the inhabitants of the 
land, faich che LORD. 


{ j. e. Thei; Houſes and their Lands ſhall be devolved, or eurn- 
ed over to Strangers, Chay. 8 10. Even that Land which they 
thought had been entailed upon them, and they 10 finely fixed 
in for ever, P(al. 132. 13, 14. t Their molt deſirable Things : 
It need not bereſtiained preciſely to Wives, the Heb. fignitying 
Wonen largely, Chap. 7.18. compriſing Maids, Wives, Or —_— 
bines, and this according to the Tohreatning, Deut. 28. 30. an 
Chap. 8. 10 uJix. ro [mite z to give yuua ſorer Blow, Iſa. 5. 
25. A Synechdoche of the k n4; ipoken after the manner of Men. 
Here the Propher gives them tte reaſon of this tneir unexpectec 
Cilamity, that they might not taink it an Impeflibiity 3 becaule 
God was become their Enemy. 

13 For from the x leaſt of them even unto the 
gercatelt of them, every one z5 glven tO y covetoul- 
neſs *; and from the prophet even unto the prielt, 
every one decaleth Z tallly. wh 

x Not reipecting lo much their Age, as Degree and Qua'1ty, 
Pour and Rich. The P:o0p' et notes the generality of tIew Cor- 
ruption as the Reaton of God's Severity againſt them, as Fer. 6. 
obierving al'o, that it was even a-nong the greateſt, who ought to 
have given better Examples. No Scudnels from Head to Foot. 
» In which poſſibly, ail their Wickedreſſes, as Crueity, Oppreſl-| 
on, Injuſtice, ec. ma; be comprized ; it being the Root of 2] 
Evil, 1 7:1. 6.10. and may allo ſpeak the Juſtice of God, in the 
Challetns raking them and all their Subſtance away, that had by 
Viclence and Fiaud wreſted it from others, Mic. 2. 2. 2 Heb. 
Doing Faiſhiod; as if that were their whole Work, the proper 
and pecaliar Sin of the Prieſts and Prophets, to deceive the Peg- 
ple, and to flatrer them by falſe Vitions, as in the next Verſe ; 
nor that they were not alſo guilty of the other Sins, T/a, 56+ 11, 
and the Princes and People of this, Mic. 3. 9. Chap. 5. 31. for 
they were all involved in the tame wickednels ; bur the Prophet 
mentions thole ſins that were moſt peculiar to each party. See 
the lame Chap. 8. 10. 

14 They have healed alſo the hurt of the darghter 
of my people 2 lightly, ſaying, #& Peace, Peace, 
ven 72cre 75 NO PEACE, 

2 This refers peculia: ly to the Prophets ; either ſighting or, 
making itz) of theſe Thi eatnings, tending to the Reproach, 1. 


FEREMIAH 


to continue Mercies, and prevent Judgments, Dext. 32.7, &c 
See 1 Thel. 5. 21. kh; When you have found what was beft, and 
moſt proſperous, keep it, ſtick to-it. 4 You will find God to 
ſtand by you, and bea Sanfuary to you, Deut. 33. 12, 29. See 
Matth. 11. 29. You will find things mend with you; it will be 
well with you, as it hath been with others; you will be ſatisfied 
and quiet ; you wil not doubt any longer which way to follow. 
See 2 Kings 18. 21. m It notes their great Wilfulneſs and Obs 
ſtinacy ; that chough the Prophets had direed them in the right 
way, and though they knew others had experimented it to be lo, 
yet they would not be perſwaded to walk in it, but deliberately 
refuſed theſe Favours offered, Iſa. 8. 11, 12, 13. Chap. 18.11,12. 


17 Alſo ſet » watchmen over you, /zy:»g, Hear- 
ken to the ſound of the o trumpet. But they ſaid, 


We will not p hearken. 

n Viz. Prophets and Meſſengers, that ſought their Good, and 
endeavoured to prevent their Miſer1es, by toretelling what was 
coming upon them, Exek. 3.17. and 33-7. A Metaphor from 
Watchmen, that are uſually fer upon high laces to eſpy out Dan- 
gers afar off. 0 Either the Voice of his Prophets, which is com- 
rared toa Trumpet, I/a. 58. 1. intimating his loud crying upon 
the account of imminent Danger : For Men do not uſe to ſound 
the Trumper til] Danger be approaching ; or the Trumpet of the 
Enemy, Chap. 4. 19, 21, p More of their Obſtinacy, ſuitable 
to their Carriage, Verſe 16. OL 

18 A Thercfore hear, ye q Nations, and know, 
oh » congregation, what zs / among them. 

q He cails upon the Nations round about to be, as ſo many 
Spectators of his Severity againſt Fudab, though they were his 
own People. 1. Partly to vindicate the Juſtice of his Proceed- 
ings, that they may not think him too ſevere. 2. Partly to ſhame 
them, it thereby he may bring them to Repentance ; and there- 
fore he makes them Witneſſes as well of their Sin as of their Pu- 
niſhment, Yerſe 19. Befides, 3. It is a fecret upbraiding them, 
as if the Nations were more ready to underſtand than they. 
7 Either of T/racl, and then the next Words muſt be, which are 
among them ; or rather, of all Nations ; as ſuppoſing them gathe- 
red all together, P{l. 7.7. God is willing, that all the World 
be Witnels of their Equity of his Proceedings. f Or, that which 
# among them; (the Relative put for the Antecedent) either the 
height of their Wickedneſs, or the ſeverity of their Judgments ; 
underſtard it either way, or both ways, and then it is the great- 
m_ of their Puniſhment, as the effect of the greatneſs of their 

ins. 


19 * Hear, O t earth : Behold, I will bring « evil * 1fa. 1. 2. 


1 he Prophers of God, bringing their Meſſage into Con- ; : : 
Ei.her of ihe Prophercs of God, bringing their Meſlage into Con \upon this people, oh SO af chotr > thoughts, 


tzmpr ; or, 2. The People, deceiving of them, and rendring cheir 
hopes vain, Chap 8, 11. Or, herethe Propher ſhzws wherein their 
Eaite-dcal:ng conſiils, viz. in dawbing over their Mitery aad Dan- 
ger that was coming on them, by perſwading them that it ſhould 
not come : or if it did, it would be ealily cured ; as fome Chy- 
1urgions do with their Patients, that make light of a Wound, and 
ſo reg!e the true Metnod of Cure ; but either by Lenitives give 
ſome Ele tor the preſent, by a ſuperficial skinning over a Sore 
while che Corruption is in it 3 or StupefiCtives, making them 
ſeatele(*, not feeling their Pain, Chap. 23.14. Exek. 13. 10, 16, 
22. aad ſo the Prophet makes this the Caule of their laſt Deſtru- 
ion. b The Ch14.ean ſhall no: come, all Things ſhall be proſ- 
perous with you ; all kind of Proſperity being included in the 
Word Peace, They prom fe you Peace, but you ſhall come ſhort 
of it, as in the next Wards. 


15 Wherec they +4 aſhamed when they had com- 


ſamed, neither could they bluſh : therefore they 
ſhall / fall among them that fall : at the time char I 
o vitit them, thcy ſhall be caſt down, faich the 
LORD. 

c Viz. The Faiſe Prophets. d Some rea it Afﬀively, as ſome 
times it is taken, Did thy put ths Pecple ro ſhame ? but thar is 
n«t lv proper here : Irrather notes, how bold and confident, or 
rather impudent they were in their Flatteries, and deceiving the 
People: A great Agegravaticn of their Sin, The Form of the In- 
rerrozation caargeth them home with the Guilt; as do alio che 
next Words, neither coul2 they bluſh, q. d. They had not the leaſt 
ſhew of Shame, utually diſcovered by Bluſhing. e Or, the thing 
70 be abmin.ated ( a Metonymy of the EF:# ) both by encouraging 
rae People, and joining with them in their Idolatries. See Chap. 
2. 23. therefore they ſhall periſh with thoſe whom they have de- 
c.i-ed, as in the following Expreſſions: To fall, ſignifies to be 
Lin, Plal. 63.19. Luke 21, 24. g Fiz. Puniſh chem; inflict Pu- 
niſh:nent on ther. See Ver, 6. 


16 Thus ſaich the LORD, Stand ye in the h ways 


em 
Run — 


good way, and walk & therein, and ye ſhall find [reſt 
for your Souls. Bur they ſaid, we 7 will not walk 
thor ems 

b Having told the Falſe Prophets their doom, he now turns 
His Speech ro the People, and gives them Counſel ( for he rather 
propounds than commands ) by a Metaphor taken from Travellers ; 
ra! being in doubt of their way, do {tand ſt1il, pauſe, and con- 
fitcr, whether the Direction they have received from ſome igno- 
1aut Pe;fon, or fall: Guide, be r:ght or not. #4 Heb. Paths of 
Antiquity ; ſuch as their gcdly Forefathers of old were wont to 
waik is. The ancient Paths, Chap. 13. 15. Or, the Oracles of 
God, what DireGious his Word gives, T1/4.8. 20, Or, the Provi- 
Jerce of God, Ovlerve what hath been God's Ways and Merhod 
in Times paſt, with reference to Sin and Puniſhment, Deus. 4. 
3,4 Jiudg.5.6, 8. Chap. 22, 15, 16, and What have been wont 
to be the belt Courtes; called here che good Way ; or the beſt way 


becauſe they have not hearkened unto my y words, 


nor to my Law, but z rejected it. 

t The Inhabitants of the Earth; or elſe God having ſpoken to' 
the rational, he now ſpeaks to the very ſenſeleſs Creatures to ob- 
ferve his Proceedings, Ezekiel 36. 44 u The Chaldean Army, 
with all the direful Effets of it. x 9. d. They may thank them. 
ſelves for what {is come upon them, being the fruic of all theſe 
Contrivances and wicked Imaginations that their Hearts were full 
of, Prov. I. 29, 30, 31. See TIſatah 59. 7. and Chap. 4. 14. 
by which Phraſe is allo intimated, that their Sins were nat tome 
flight Overſights, bur medicated and digeſted Wickedneſs ; and 
therefore God will bring upon them the juſt Puniſhment for 
their Doings- y Thoſe Meſſages that I ſo frequently and ear- 
neſtly ſent unto them b' my Prophets, Prov. 1. 24, 25. 4 As 
it were bidding open Defiance to me, ſcorning to be ruled by 
me 


nor your ſacrifices ſweet uuto me. 


God by the Prophet meets with their Hypocrifte, who pleaſed 
themſelves with thetr outward Oblations and Sacrifices, and 
chought God would be pleated withthem roo; but he tells them 
plainly, they are to no purpoſe ; as he ſpeaks particularly in the 
Cloſe of the Verſe, Chap. 7. 21, 22. Exek. 20. 39. b That this 
was the Product of Sheba, a Country in Arabia Felix, to which 
Country Frankincenſe was peculiar. See on Tſz, 60: 6. c Or 
Cane, z. e. good, or the beſt Cane. the Article 7 hath the force 
of a Superlacive, for Cane that is beſt ; the Hebrews have no De- 
grees of Compariſon. The ſame that is mention'd as an Ingredient 
in the holy Oyl, Exod. 30. 23. SzeTIſa. 43. 24. d Not that ic 
was brought from the remotelt parts of the World, as from 
india, as lorae ; for it was known to the Fews in Moſes's time, 
Exol. 30. 23+ but becauſe it grew not in their own Land, but 
was tetched or brought to them from Sheba, Iſa. 60.6. where ic 
did grow, as Diodoras teſtifies, lib. 3. p. 125, and Strabo, lib. 16. 
1 Kings 10. 2. compared with Fl 3. 8. whois called the Pucen 
of tbe South, and to come from the uttermoſt parts of the Earth, 
Maith, 12. 4. becauſe the South-Sea did bound the Country, 
q. d. To what purpoſeart thou at this Trouble and Charge to 
terch theſe Ingredients for thy Incenſe > e Not likely to atone 
me, they will not be tor Acceptance. I cannot take delight in 
them, Hof. 9. 4. as the next Expreſſion. q. d. Away with theſe 
childiſh Trifles, whereby you think ro pacifie me, By the'e 
Species he underſtands the whole legal Worſhip. 

21 Therefore thus ſaith the LORD, Behold I will 
lay ſtumbling f blocks before this people, and the 
fathers and the g ſons together ſhall fall upon them : 


the neighbour and his hk triend ſhall periſh. 

f God gives this Name to all the Occaſions of the Fews ruin, 
expoleth them to,or fuffereth ſuch ch1»4,s to be laid in their way, 
as ſhall bethe Occaſion of their De{iruction : Such things which 

they 


Chap. VI. 


26 * To what @ purpoſe cometh there to me in- *Iſa-r. rr. 
cenſe from b Sheba, and the ſweet c cane from a far 30d 66: 3. 
Country 4? your burnt offerings are not e acceptable, ; 


: - Micah 6.6 
a An Interrogatioi; of Expoſtulation, and Contempt, wherein gc. l 


_ 2 22 Thus faith the: LORD, Behold, a people co- 
pg he t 42,meth from the * north k country, and a great aation 
33. fhall be/ raiſed from the 7: lides of the earth. 


Chap. VI. 


they ſhall not get over ; or an HypzRage, I will bring Deſtruction 
upon them ; as the Hebrews uſe to ſpeak, they have lent a City into 
the Fire, i. e. they have ſent Fire into zhe City. Or God doth here 
compare his Judgments to Traps, wherein they ſhall be taxen, 


ng- : | 
As | maylt bring all to thy ({trict Obleryation and Scrutiny, as Gold- 


which they thought eaſily to have evaded : Whar theſe Stumbli 
blocks are, ſeem to be expreſſed in the following Verſes. g 


well the Fathers, that have more Prudence and Policy,as che Chil- 
dren that are more inadvertent, or poſſibly may count chemlelves 
leſs guilty, ſhall periſh by theſe Stumbling-blocks ; no recove- 
ring for themſelves, Iſa. 8. 14, 15- þ Men of all ſorts and cooditt- 
ons,the greateſt Intimatesand Afſociates,tho'all lay their Heads to- 
gether for Counſe], yet ſhall they not beable to help one another, 


but a promiſcuous Deftruttion there ſhall be, Yer.1 1. Cb. 13,14 


; Now the Prophet is ſhewing whar thele deſtructive ſtumbling- 
blocks ſhall be, of which he had propheſied 4o Years already, and; 
yet they would not be warned. k See Yer. 11 1 God ſhall ſtir up 
the Chaldzans like a great Storm or Tempeſt, Chap. 2.15. and 25. 
32. See Exch. 23. 22, m The remote and uttermoſt parts of the 
Babylonian Territories, tho' at the greateſt diſtance, yer God will 
bring them ; which may note the greatnels of God's Dilpleaſure 
againſt Judah, this Circumſtance being noted among the Cut les, 


Deut. 28. 49. See Iſa. 5-25, 26,07. Chap. 5. 15. 


23 They ſhall lay hold on bow and » ſpear : they 
are cruel, and have no o mercy : their voice roar- 
eth like the p ſea, and they ride upon q horſes, ſet 
in r array as men for war, againſt thee, O daugh- 


ter of / Zion, 


n Or they ſhall carry ; they ſhall not want Military Ammunition 


of all ſorts for the diſpatch of this great work ; Synechdochically ex- 


preſſed tor all forts of Weapons. So Pſal. 35. 2, 3. o See Chap.zo. 


42, not beentreated, or have any pity to Sex or Age, Poor or 
Rich, Chap. 21. 7. See the like I/e. 13. 17, 18. And this was as duly 
eXecuted as here propheſied, 2 Chron. 36.17. p Which as it is vei y 
violent, ſo it cauleth great Conſternation by its noiſe, compared 
co the roaring of the Devils, Fames 2. 19. Poſſibly it may inti- 
mate, they would not hearken to the Voice of his Prophets, 
now they ſhall hear the terrifying Noiſe of Armies like che roar- 


ing of the Sea. q Which is a Creature {a eſpecial manner adapred | 


by God for War, as he is deſcribed, Fob 39.19, 20, &c. implying 
their Speed, Strength, and Fiercenels, Chap. 50. 42. r The whole 
Nation ſet as it were in Bztzalia againſt them, that they perceive 
they have to do with Soldiers. The LXX reading WR eb 
fre for UR iſh man, render it as Fire to the War. ſ Or, 
Feruſalem ; tor thele two Titles are promiſcuouſly uſed for 
the ſame place ; and the Term Daughter is often given to 
Cities and Countries, as Pſal. 45. 12. and 137. 8. Iz, 23. 12. 
and 47: I. 

24 We have heard the fame thereof ; our hands 


* o 

2 " 4s wax t feeble: * anguiſh hath taken hold of us, ad 
24: & 50+ Pain, as of a woman in travail. 

43» : The Prophet perſonates the Peoples Aﬀections, q. d. at the 


* Chap. 


25. 34. 
* Zech. 
12, 10s 


*Y 
bY 


* Chap. 1» 


18, 


very Report of the Approach and Fiercenels of this People, we 
are diſmayed, and diſcouraged, our Hearts melt within us; all 
warlike Courage is taken from us, 2 Sam. 4. I, or he modeſtly 
reckons himſelt among the reſt. u A Deſcription of the Exquiſite- 
neſs of their Sufferings, Chap. 13. 21. 

25 Go not forth into the field, nor walk by the 
x way; for the ſword of the enemy and fear is on 


y every ide. 

x Expreſling the great danger that there would be every where, 
there would be no ſtirring out of their fenced Cities or Houles, 
Chap. 8. 14. but great danger to them that go out, and to thoſe 
that come in, they would find Death every where ; now ſeek out 
ſome by-ways, venture not 11 common Roads, Fudz. 5.6. y The 
Language of one ſpeaking to another ; it ſeems to be a proverbial 
Speech, frequently uſed to expreſs unavoidable Dangers, Pſal. 3 t. 
13. Chap. 20.3, 10. and 49. 29. All places will be full of Soldiers, 
ſo that all Attempts will be very difficult, Lam. 5. 9. 

26 O daughter of my z people, * gird thee with 
ſackcloth, and 2 wallow thy ſelf in aſhes : * make 
thee mourning ; ' as for an only ſon ; moſt bitter la- 
mentation: for the b ſpoiler ſhall ſuddenly come 

upon us. 

f z.e, O my People, that art beloved as a Daughter. 4 He 
calls upon themto Mourning in the deepeſt manner wherein they 
can exprels it, girding with Sackcloth, cloſe Mourning, Chap. 4.8. 
wallowing 1 Aſhes, Chap. 25. 34. Mic. 1.10. lying low in Humi- 
liation,and proſtrating themſelves before himhe farther deſcribes 
the Nature of it in the following Expreſſion, ſuch as is for the 
Death ofa Child, a Son, an only Son, Amos 8. 10. and then ſeems 
to ſum ic up1a this bitter, moſt bitter Lamentation, Heb. Wailing 
of Bitterneſſes, noting the higheſt degrees of Lamentation : He 
ſeems to want Words to expreſs it. See Chep. 9-17, 18. And it is 
likely the Prophet doth not ſo defignedly exhort them to repent, 
as rather deſcribe the ſtate of Perſons in a loſt and deſpairing 
Condition. For here the Prophet takes upon himſelf, the Perſon 
of one denouncing War ; and Sackcloth and Aſhes is often menti- 
oned where there is no hope of Converſion or Repentance. b The 
King of Babylon and his Army, Chap. 4, 8. 

27 *1 haveſet thee for a tower, and a c fortreſs 
among my people, that thou mayſt know and try 
d their way. | 

c Here God ſpeaks by way of Encouragement tothe Prophet, 


ns wil him, he had made him a fortified Tower, that ks might 
ol. 11. 


SEREMIAH. 


| both diſcover tze Carriages of his People,which is one uſe ot an 
high Tower, 1/2. 21. 5, $8. Hab. 2. 1. and alto to affure hun, tho* 
they ſha[l make teveral Attemp:cs againſt him,yet he thall be :ept 
late, as ina Caſtie, or Fortreis, Cap. 15. 29, 4 Their Court, 
Actions, ard Manners, and which way they itand affcCted, thou 


Io.and ellewiere:Hereby he (hall be encouraged to reprove them 
more treely, and with Authority, becaute God doth promile to 
detend him, tha: they ſhall not hurt him, God will give hun 
Prudence to lze what is amils, and Undauntedaeis to oppole it. 


| imiths or Reftiers do Metals;tor to is the Word Try uted Pjal. 66. 


with f flanders ; they are brats and g irou; they are+ 


all þ corrupters. 

e Obſi:nare; and refraQory, Iſa. 31. 6. Chap. 5. 3, 23. f Be- 
ing their main Buſinels co detract from thee,. and the oner Pro- 
phets, Chap. 18. 18. and 20. Io. a Sin exprelly forbidden, Lev. 
19. 16, g [his tothe end of the Chapter is all metaphorical, either 
they are impudent, as Braſs doth fomecimes fignihe, or they are 
obſtinate and inflexible, as Iron notes : See born 1/2. 48. 4. or it 
ſignifies their corrupt Eſtate ; they are not pure Metal, as Silver 
or Gold, but bale and mean, as Braſs and Iron mixed together, 
Ezehk. 22.18. b This relates to their Manners ; they propagate 
cheir Corruption, 1/2. 1. 4. They {tiengthen one ariother 10 wicks 
ednels. ; 

29 The bellows afe 7 burnt, the lead 1s & conſu- 
med of the fire ; the founder melreth in / val; for 
the wicked are not plucked m away. p 

i The Prophet protecutes his Metaphor taken from K-faing of 
Metals, jatimating herein, that the Prophets had lpent thelr Luugs 
ro n0 purpole. See the Jixe, Pjal. 22. 15. aud6 3. 3+. aud ther 
Strength was coniumed by their to much Labour and Pains, 4. 4, 
the Terror of the ord 1s asa Flite in my Llhroac. k Some read it, 
the Lead was entire, viz. their Drols did {ti} remain 1n them, the 
Lead put for their Drots ; out 1 tee no realon tor, nur need of 
this reading, bur rather he:eby 1s under{luod, ether that means 
which was uted to prevai: with them, his Words compared tg 
Lead for the Weight of them, and the Ule of them ; or the Judg- 


ments which were heavy, as Lead, thac Goa mixed among them, 
the more eaſily to prevail with them, 1t Was ail upon them, as 
Lead is uſed in melting Silver, that it may melt the eafter, ic 1s all 
waſted, and doth no good. / Let the Actilt ute nts giearett Sk1ll 


Chap, V Il. 


28 They are all grievous e Revolters, * walking * Chap. s. 


and Induitry, yet 1s it all in vain ; he can make nothing of 1t : The 


: Prophets did bu: Joſe their labour 1n all the pai they rook, 


Pſal. 58. 5. atter they had wearied themlecives. m Or, drawnavay, 


:as the Word 15, Feſh. 8. 16. and Fudge 20. 3 2. 


Tier Drcofs 4:4 


Corruption, thew Wicked:rets and Filrhinels, 15 not removed, 


I{a. 32. 6. tor Wicked may be read Wickwinels, 
{ 30 *||z Reprohate filyer ſhall me» o call th 
, becauſe the LORD Hhath p rejected them. 
i # Or. Keful? Siiver ; ſuch as will be rejected 11 Vayments,they 
; are not tov be purged or role med, © Ur, b- caed, 7. e, Vhey 
| ſhail be etteemec tuch, as will not pais for cu ranc betore God or 
good Men, Lam. 3.45. p The Proper gives re Realon of theic 
; being fo accounted {uch refute Stutt, v3. beciule God who knew 
their Hypocritie in boaſting of themiclves, had ejected them, 
Lam. 5. 22. thetetore every one elle would. 


CHAP. VILE 


A Call to true Repentance, 1, —— 7. and gt living in Theſt, Mur- 
der, Alultery, Perjury, 8c. to truſt in the ouzward Worſhip and 
Temple of God, by the Example of Shiloh, $, — 15. the Prophet is 
forbid to pray for them, 16. Their Uolatry, and its Fuigment, 17, 
— 20. Their S :crifi;es rejeffed, and Obedience r-q url, 21, — 
28. They are called to mourn far #h:ir abcminations in Tiphet, and 
their Fudgments, 29, 34- 


HE word that came to ſergniah from the 
a LORD, faying, 
4 See Chap. 1,2. This is the Title of a new Sermon much ofthe 
nature of the former, which reacheth to Chap. 10. 
2 Stand in the b gate of the c LORD*s houſe, and 
d proclaim e there f this word, aud ſay, Hear the 
word of the s LORD, all ye of Judah, that eater in 
at theſe gates to worſhip the LORD. 
 b Viz. The Eaſt Gate, which was chiefly frequented ; this be. 
ing the publick place of golng out and coming in, and where the 
People were wont to aſſemble, Feremiah 26. 2, 10. and he is faid 
to ſtand, becauſe he was to execute the Office of a Preacher,Chap. 
26. 2.not of a Fudge, where the Poſture would rat her have been 
fitting. c The Temple, Ver. 4, 109. de The Place notes the Va- 
nity of their Confidence, who, notwithſtanding all their Prayo- 
cations, yet placed their Safety much in the Privileges of the 
Temple, glorying much in that; and the Manner, Proclaiming 
fgnifies both the Authority by which he ſpake, and the divuleing 
ef what he ſpake plainly and boldly, which, as it was in a publick 
place, v7. the Court of the People, not the Court of the Prieſts, 
(from which it is diſtinguifhed, 2 Chroy. 4. g. ) and therefore jaid 
at theſe Gates, the ſeveral Gates that were in the Wall of the 
Court, of which there were fix, three on the South-fhde and three 
on the North ; ſo poſſibly, ic might be at ſome publick time of the 
Peoples reſorting thither from all Quarters, P/a!. 122-4, 5. when 
all the Males wereto meet ; Ex9. 2 3. 17. See Fob. 7.37. and there- 
fore ſaid All ye of Fudah. f The Meffage that I tend thee with, g See 
Chap. 2. 4+ : 
3 Thus faith the LORD of hoſts the God of Iſrael ; 


f) 
IN, 


* Amend your ways, aud your h doings : and I will : 


cauſe you to dwell in this z place. 


* Ta. 2.22: 
| Or, reſs/e 


{ loer. 


Chap.;s, 
| & 26 


T3 


DD ESE 


Chap. VII. 


h i, e. Mend your Manners. Amending fignifies both to turn 
fron our evil Works, and make our good better. # You hal 
not go into Captivity, implying, that otherwile they ſhould ; he 
will continge their Habitations to them from Age, as Fer. 7. 


ic: Lov. 26. Ls I will ſer my Tabernacle, i. ve. I will contt- 
nue 1t. 

4 Truſt ye not in lying words, ſaying, The & tem- 
ple of the LORD; the temple of the LORD, the 
temple of the LORD are theſe. 


k Becauſe this was God's Houſe, wherein he had promiſed to 
dwell, and that for ever, Pſal. 132. 13, 14. they flattered them- 
{clves, that he could dwell no where elſe, and would got depart, 
and certainly would not luffer the Chaldeans to deſtroy this.,and 
theretore, that no evil could befal them, as they promiſed them- 
{elves, Afic. 3. 11. theretore the Prophet cautions them not to 
deceive themielves, in truſting to the Temple, and its Butldings,as 


the two Courts and Houle,and Holy of Holies implied 1a the word , yered to do all theſe 4 aboininations ? 
theſe, which he doth as ic were point to with his Finger ; ( For | 


*#EREMIAH 


| 


Chap. VII 


2 Here the Prophet mentions divers of thoſe fins, in which chey 
{| were notorious, they were Thieves, Murderers, Adulterers, perjured 
Idolaters, &c. q. d- Can you think, that this can be gratetul unts 


me, or any Whit advantageous to your ſelves, to frequent my 
The d :ing ota thing in Scripture often implies the continuance of! Houle, and yet retain thele odions fins, as if I were a Companion 
: tor Thieves, Murderers, 8c. 4 Such as they had ſet upmew, and 


never had any experience of, and therefore could have no reaſon 


to ſerve them, therefore called new Gods, Deur. 32. 17. Fudg. 
' 5. 8. but of his power, and goodneſs they had had ample proof, 
in their deliverance from Egypt, and the wonCerful Miracles, and 

Signs that God had ſhewn them in the Wilderneſs, and his Vito- 
' rious Arm for them in Canaay, of which things theſe F:ws could 
not be 1gnorant, therefore the more inexcuſable. Four of theſe 
ſins reſpect the ſecond Table, theſe two laſt the firſt. The Name 
of Baal 1s here put tor all Idols. 


10 And come and ſtand before me in this b houſe + Heb. 


+ which is called by my c name, and ſay, weare deli- #h:reupmt 
my name is 


called. 


b In the Temple, either as if they had done no ſuch thing, like 


where the Prophets ſpeak diſtintly of the form of the Temple, the Whore, that wipes her Mouth, and ſaith ſhe hath done no 


they reckon the | 
ly place, or Houſe whereinto the Prieſts only did enter, and the 


Oracle, or Holy of Holies, wherein was the Ark ot the Covenant, 
and into which only the High- Prieſt entred, and that but once a 
Year) which theſe Hypocrites looked upon themſelves ſecured by, 


Court,where the People did facrifice,and the ho-! wickedneſs, Prov. 30. 20, noting their deep Hypocrifie, or elte 


| 


that barely this would expiate for all their abominations,as if they 
could make God amends for their fins by their Duties, and their 


| poſture ot ſtanding notes their Service, 1 Kzngs 1o. 8. Prov. 22. 


ſ 


29. c That is acknowJedged to be my Houle, and bears my Name, 


as it were, by a treble Wall, For: or Bulwark, that they could! gegicated to me. d That is, after they had appeared before God 


not miſcarry ;but he would have them to know that neither theſe, 
nor the ſervices belonging to them will be able to ſecure them, 
v. 8. Ch.a.14. andit is likely, their falſe Prophets did thus per- 
ſwade them, whole Propiecies he calls here thele lying words; but 


God will have them know.that he doth not chule a Nation for the 
aces ſake, but the place for the Nations fake,the Ike caution the, 
Apoſtle gives them, I Cor: 10. 2, &c. The Emphaſis that may be | 
[ 


pl 
in this threefold Repeticion, ſeems rather to relate to the confi- 


! 


| with their Sacrifices, either they thought themlelves ſafe from all 


{ 


danger, and freed from God's Judgments, Mal. 3. 15. Or rather, 


 priviledged to return to all thoſe wickedneſles again, hereby no- 


' 
[] 


ting their impudence. See Iſa. 1. 12, &@c. LXX read it, we have 
abſt tined from all theſe Abominations,as if thele were the lying words 
in which they truſted. 


11 Is * this houſe, which is called by my name, be-* 1.6.7; 


dent, and often reiterated brags and boaſts of the Temple, that ! COME * a den of e robbers in your eyes ? behold, eVEn * Mar. 11, 
| Sa 


were in their Mouths, than the worth and excellency of ic, in re- 
241d of God's owning it- ! The Prophet, ftanding 1n the Gate 
&* which the People entred, doth as it were point at the ſeveral 
Buildings appertaining to the Temple, viz the Courts, Houſe, 
Oracle. &C. 

5 For if ye throughly amend your ways,and your 
»” doings : it you throughly execute Judgment be- 
rween a man and his z neighbour ; 

m He tells them, it is not their vain Confidence 1n their privi- 
ledges, and boaſting of the Temple, bur only their ſerious and 
through Repentance in turning to God both 1n point of Pjety aud 
Equity, than can fecure them. » z.e. Impartially among one ano- 
cher, between Man and Man, without favour or hatred. 


6 If ye opprelſs not the ſtranger, the fatherleſs and 
the 0 widow, and ſhed not 1anocent p blood in this 
4 place, neither walk atcer other r- Gods to your 
hurt. 

o Here they are cautioned againſt three ſins, that this people 
were generally addicted to, Opprellion, Blood and Idolatry ; and 
te inſtance:h in the worſt of Oppreſfions, viz. ot ſuch as God hath 
more eſpecially raken into his immediate proceCtion, becauſe theſe 
are moſt voi! of help, and moſt obnoxtous to injuries. The ftran- 
e-r, Exod. 22.21, the fatherleſs and widow; and Ver, 22, 23, 
24. lee them all three together, Deut. 10. 18. and 27. 19. See 
oa 1{z. 10. 1, 2. and where God ſpeaks of right adminiſtring of 
Juſtice, he uſually makes mention of theſe three to prove the in- 
regrity and impartiality of Juſtice ; and though this may more pro- 
perly reſpect the Princes and great Ones, yet I conceive herethe 
Prophet doth no: ſo reſtrain ir. p Either by Murder, or unrigh- 
reous Sentence, being one of thoſe fins 19 ſpecial mentioned, for 
which God exp efſth his high diſpleaſure, and will ſend the Chal- 
dams upon them, 2 Kings 24: 4 q Either in this City in ſpecial, 
or the whole Land in general ; ſee Fer. 3. and there he would ſhew 
what a fo0!'ſh thing it is that they ſhould boalt of their {ecuriry 
in this place, and yer ſhed blond, which pollutes every place, 
Nuzib, 35.31,0c. r Abliain from your idolatrous courſes, and 
depart not trom my pure and uncorruptea Worſhip, unto your 
1per{titions and hypocritical Service, and he adds to your hurt or 
your own huit; to ſhew that they will be the only Sufferers by 
it, not God, vere 19. Gad is neither benefited nor damaged by 
43y thing that we can do, Fob 35.6, 7, $* 

7 / Then will I cauſe you to dwell in this place rc, 
inthe land that I gaveto your fathers,for « ever and 
4 {+ 

{ i. e. Upon this condition, that you will return unto me, ther 
either I willeſtabliſh, and fix you in the land ; or, as ancient!y 


read Sachanti 1n Kal, L will dwell, viz. amongſt you in this place, | 7 


other wite not- 2 viz. Fudea bot' in Feruſalem, and the wnole 
Country, as the next words manifeſt. u 7. e. From age to age, 
as your Fathers did before you from the days of Zoſhuz, unti. 
DGOW., 

8 x Bchold, ye truſt 1a lying y words that cannot 
profit. 

x Take notice of it, and think of it ſeriouſly. y Either flatter. 
ing your ſelves with your own conceits, whereby, 1n your Diſ- 
courtes, you ſtrengthen one another,or depending upon the delu- 
fions of your falſe Prophets, Chap. 5. 31. and 23. 26, 27. or Ia- 
ther, boulſtering your ſelves upon your Priviledges, or bare Ce- 
remonies which you ſo much boaſt of as ver. 4. all which he te.ls 
them, will profit them nothing. 

9 Wil yez ſteal, murder and commit adultery, 
and ſwear falfly and burn incenſe unto Baal, and walk 


[ have f ſeen zr, ſaith the LORD. 

e Heb. Breaker through. The word is taken in a large notion 
for all ſorts of Plunderers whether in Houſe, Ezek. 7. 22. or Field, 
High-way Men, Dan. tt. 14. Do you look tipon this Houſe as a 


Luk. I 9, 
G6. 


> 


{ Santuary and Refuge for Robbers and Murderers, do you efteem p 


it fo, and is ic ſo in your Eyes, ſo the Phraſe is uſed Num. 13.33 

Wc. hereby making mean Abettor of all your Lewdneſs, Mat.2r, 
13. a Metaphor, taken from wild Beaſts, and miſchievous Perſons. 
that do both ſecure themſelves, and hide their Prey in Holes, and 
Caves of the Earth, Pſal. to. 8, 9. fq.d. As crafty as you are, 
you cannot hide theſe thiugs from me, nor all thoſe workings of 
your thoughts about them, Pſal. 10. 11, 13, 14+ Exch. 18. 12. 
He checks their focliſh vain confidences, whereby they deceive 
themſelves, Iſa. 29. 15. God will not be blinded by all their 
vain OblJations. 


| 12 Butgo ye now unto my * place which was in g* Joſh. 78. 
Shiloh, where I ſet my name art the h firſt, and ſee1- 
what I did 7 to it, for the k wickedneſs of niy peopleJu's: 8. 


[rae]. 

g A place that did belong to the Tribe of Ephraim, P/11. 78.60. 
Comp. 61. The ſituation whereof ſee Fudg. 21. 19. and cailed God's 
Houſe, as the Temple is, 1 $4m. rt. 3, 7. he ſends them hither for 
an Example, which had the ſame Priviledges, and Holineſs with 
the Temple, not to go tchither locally, but to caſt their thoughts 
back, and conſider of it, that they might know, that God's Pre- 
ſence is not tyed to places, Aﬀs 7. 48.þ Where I did at firſt give you 


| 


the Token and Pledges of my Preſence among you, when you firſt 
entred into the pleaſant Land, noting the antiquity of Shiloh be- 
fore the Temple. 7 z.e. He utterly forſook it, he did not only 
deliver up h15 People into the Phzliſtines hands, but the Ark alſo, 
the token of his preſence, which never returned to Sbilþ more, 
aud aft-rwards delivered the 10 Tribes wherein S$h;10h was fituate, 
into Captivity to the AjJjrian. See Ver. 14, 15. Wherein he upbraids 
chem for their fol:y 1n thinking that the Ark or Altar in the Tem< 
ple ſhould any inore priviledge them thar, it did Shiloh. k He 
gives them the reaſon of it in theſe words, The wickedneſs of his 
9-ople, and chiefly the Prieſts, Hophni and Phineas, Eli's Sons, 
1 Sam. 2. 124 2. and why ſhould they think to eicape, wha 
did equal. if not exceed them. 

13 And now, becauſe ye have done all theſe / 
works, ſaich the LORD, and 1 1pake unto you, * rj- 
ſing up #: early, and ſpeaking, but ye heard not ; and 
* | called you, but ye anſwered not. 

{ Either the ſame, or as bad, or worſe than they did at $hzlob, 
or particularly thoſe mentioned, Ver, g. m A Metaphor taken from 
eerſons that are diligent in their Buſineſs, they uſe to riſe up early, 
. 4. I did not only ſpeak by my Prefhers, but they in my Name 
uſed all diligence to reclaim you, Chap. 11+ 7, 8. and a5 3, 4. Calle 
;ng earneſtly unto you, by which he means his Exhortations and 
Menaces, Which ought to have had fome efficacy upon them; bur 
you ſlighted, and diſregarded them, and would not come at my 
Call, Prov. 1. 24. See on 2-Chron. 36. 15,16, and on Iſa. 50. 2. 


14 2 Therefore will I o do unto thi houſe which is 
called by my name ; wherein ye truſt, and unto the 
» place: which I q gave to you and to your fathers, as 
[ have done * to r Shiloh. * 1Sam. 4. 
n Becauſe they have added this their obſtinate refuſing of all 1%», £7" 
Admonitions to the reſt of their Provocations. o Viz. Cauſe the Pla) 78.60 
conſecrated things of the Temple to be taken way by the hand of &!1ap.26.6 
the Babylenians. p See Ver. 7. q Viz. Upon condition of your Obe- 
dience,Pſal, 105. 44,45- and therefore may juſtly, upon the breach 
of the Condition, rake from you again, nay, by virtue of my So- 


F Ver. 24. 


* Ifa. 65. 
$2. and 
66. 4 


@tter other gods whom ye 4 know not, 


| vereignty, Fob I, 21. r See Ver. 12, 


15 And 


te Ea 
Wore” = 


Sw Is Ach —"—_ 


Chap 


*Chap.tT. 
14. 


, VIL 


a6 7 AnJl will caſt you ont of my ſtght, as I have 
caſt oc all your Brechen, ever the whole feed of z 
Ephraim. 

/ You thall have my preſence wich, and watchful eye over you 
no more; bur & will iead you 1nto Caprivity to Babylon, as I did 
your Brethren inco Aſſyria 3 See on 2 Kings 17. 6, 18, And he 
terms them here Brethren, co ler chem know, char they, and 1ſr4e! 


proceeded from the ſame ſtock, and therefore had no realon 10. 


EXPeR, bur it (hyuld fare alike with them, ſeeing their fins were 
alike, 2 Kings 21. 13, 14, &®-. £ Viz, The Ten Tribes, I/z. 7. 
1,2 compared ; calied by this Name often, becauſe thai was the 
matt numerous and potent of all of chem, Fcroboam rheir firſt 
king was of chat Tribe. : 

16 Therefore * x pray not thou for this people, 
neither lift up cry nor prayer for them, neither make 
iaterceſſioa co me: for 1 wilt act hear thee. 

4 Gad tucoids his Propher to pray for vhem in any kind, by 
any Cry or larerceſſion; or running upon me, which thews that God 
15 ceſolved ro root thzm our, ſeeing he will admur of no [ncerceſſ1- 
01: And according as he charged Moſes, Erod. 32. 10, and the 
hike Cbap, 11. £4. For God had beea wont to ſufter himſelf ro be 
prevailed with by the Mediation of his Servants, as of Msjes, Exod. 
32-11, 14. Num). 14. 19, 20+ Burnow he would admir of no [n- 
rercelitan. See Ex2&; 14: 149 20+ and Chap. 15. 1. and the next 
words. This charge ſeems co be laid upoa the Propher, partly 
ro take off ce envy of the People from him, when rhey knew he 
was commanded co do no othe: wiſe, partly ro embolden him 1n 
this unpleafing work, laying aiide all compatiion. Bur certainly 
che Prophec did pray that God would mind his Covenaac in ſaving 
a Remnanc, though nor that God would revoke his Decree 3 and 
x0 fave the body of chem. | : | 

17 Seelt x thou not what they do 1n the cities of; 


Judah, and inthe ſtreets of y Jeruſalem ? 

x q. 4, How canſt chon pats along the Streers, but thou muſt} 
needs be an Eye-wirneſs of chetr ADominarions co thy no ſmall} 
trouble and ſorrow, as Sodom was to Lot, 2 Pet. 2. 8. therefore, 
how cantt chou plead wich me on chelr behalt ? How canft chou e1- | 
ther pray for chem or I pity them ? y In City and Country, See, 
Cap. 2.28. and 11+ 13, | 
18 The children gather a wood, and the fathers! 
kindle the 6 fire, and che women knead cheir dough! 


JOr, frame £0 make c cakes co the || queen of 4 Heaven, and ro 


Chap. 44. 17. See Matth, 24. 38. Every one in the Family doth 
ſomewhat towards 1t. 4 Or ſticks, for the word 15 plural, and fo 
uſed, Numb. 15.32, 33. an employment, if we underſtand ſmall 
Sticks, proper tor Children 3 1f greater Wood, ſuirable ro Youth, 
who excel 1n ſtrength, and may be underftood by Children and 
young ones, b They heat the Oven, Hearth or Stone on which 
chey were baked. © Prepare afl rhe Materials, of which ro make 
Cakes ; probably they were of ſome particular ſhape, or had ſome 
peculiar 1mpretiion of ſome of their Gods {tamped upon them, 


SEREMIAH. 


| þ Pat For 1% Revenge by a Metonymy of the c44ſe for the offe2. 
3 This exprefſerh his anger boiled up to rhe height, Chap. 4. 4. 
þ A Metaphor? raken from viel-nt Reins, See Chap. ©. rr. and 
in4y in particular allude ro thoſe ſhowers. of fire thac were peur- 
ed out upon S910n, Gen. 19. 24, { Theſe particulars are enys 
merared to expreſs an utter deiolation and ruine, See Chap. 4, 
25. and it is chreacned againſt theſe Crearures, which are 10no» 
cent, hecauſe they were made for the uſe of Man, partly thar it 

might ſhew, how greatly God is offended, and that it ſhould work 
. upon chem not only a grearet fear of his Judgments, tur a greater 

ſhame for cheir tin, that they ſhould occation ſuch tufferings upon 
' the Innocent Creature, Ron. 8. 20,22, 1 He follows the thieat= 
; ning with ſhewing the irreſiſtible of 1c, his reſoſution 15 not ro be 

revoked, Chap. 4, 4. and this 1s ſuitable to che Charge he gave 
' the Propher, Ver. 16. 


# The Ivonica! words of one that ſeems to be in a great rage 


£3 _ - A * 
Ha IF 


21 Thus ſaith the LORD of hoſts the God of Iſ-* xa. 14; 
rael; *z Put your burn-offerings unto your o iacri- Chaps. 


fices, and eat fleſh. 2.0. 
AmCcs 8. 


rake thoſe thar are pecoliar, and to be al! burnt to rae, Lev. 1,9. ** 


aud pur them tro your own of what kind ſoever, eac chem, and 
do whar you will with them, I will have none of chem, cake ir all 
and fill your own Bellies, for you ſacrifice nor ro me, but ro your 
ſelves. See Hy. 9. 4. where their Mear-Offerings are called in 
ſcorn, Meat for their Lite to nouriſh their Bodies. o Thar parc 
of your Sacrifices, which you are allowed to ear, they are bur as 
prophane food, do nor you think to be ſancified by chem, be- 
cauſe I accepr- rhem nor. 

22 For I ſpake not unto your fathers, nor com- 


manded them in the day that I brought chem out of 


p ſacrifices. 

p Some would argue from hence, thar Sacrifices were at firſt an 
invention of Men, as Papiſts *and Se:inians, and becauſe they 
ſhould not be uſed ro Idols, God gave w2y for the introducing 
them inro his Worſhip 3 bt it 1s evident in Scriprure tnac chey 
have been of Divine Inſtitution ever fince A4am, Gen. 4. 3,4. &5 
ro the meaning of the words, God doth not condemn them, or 
deny them, fave only comparatively, in reſpeR of oHedience, he re- 
quires not ſo much theſe,as obeying his Commands, r San. 15. 22, 
Hof. 6.6. i. e, Mercy rather than Sacrifice. Negatives are ofren 
pur for Comparatives, Gen. 45.8. Exod. 16. 8. Foh,.s. 44. Hence 
the Heb. is the matter of burnt Offerings, for Sacrifices were not inft1- 


' or work- Pour out e drink-offerings unto ocher gods, that they ; tured for themſelves, bur for ocher uſes, and co be ſigns of Faith in 
manſhip of may provoke me to f anger. his Promifes, and obedlence to his Commands, as in the next #er/2, 
biautn. 3 Here God ſhews how butily they are employed from the where the Condirton, Promiſe and End are all fer down. 

youngeſt ro the oldett, and how induſtrious tor their Idolatry, 23 But this q thing commanded I them, ſaying, X 


the land of Egypt, concerning + burut offerings or + Heb the 
matter 


*Deut.6.3s 


Obey my voice, and I will be your God, and ye ſhall g,,q 
be my people, and walk ye in 1] the ways that l[yg.s5, 


have commanded you, that it may bz r well unto Lev. 2.9. 


YOu. 
4 Or word, which is the Rule by which all Obedience is ro be 
tried, viz. what Commands are there every thing elſe being vur 
meer Superſtirion. » He ſhews whar wou!d be the good effeR of 
their O1<dience, Exod. 15. 26. Dext. s. 25, 33. winch 1mplies, 


like the Popith Wafers, ſome ſay ſtamped with Stars, as being of- 
tered up ro rhe Hoſt of Heaven, or with ſome peculiar Star, Amos 


char their Sufterings are from their Peryerſenels, as it 15 expreſted 
in the nexr Verſe. 
24 But they hearkened . not nor /caclined their 


5.26, Atis 7.43. d Or, jyame, or, workmanſhip of Heaven, this | | | 
em Inary a" 3 ſome os Ic _— Sun, "_— _ _ car, but walked in the counſels and in the || imagi- j|Or, {+ 
ds. 4 of a Feminine Gender, 1/2. 24. 23. and of a fe-; nation of their evil heartz and  * went backward, 997" 

minine uſe, Nah, 3. 17. foine tor che Moon? NY -» JC WAru, 
, 3. 17. toi r che Moon? as the Sun was | 1 +, &rward. T Heb. 


= = : yon my 2 ,- —_ os _ —_ mag = __ f Ir nores ſomething of an higher degree of non-attenion. than gr 
f che largeneſs ot her Body, 1n which ſhe appears, and of the ! . a 4 4%, * Chap. 
Lighc the gives, bur eſpecially by reaſon of the Government ſhe _ 4 we" rg fk gps gr bs. that they mighe obey - 4 
exeraket, over Imeriour Bodies 3 others more protabli, forthe 5h, OT ec liters. + Or fablorne See Chap, 37 
| » Fer. 8. 2. and 19. 13. and lo the : —_—_ i as; Aged tf. dls 
according ro which probably tor their ſakes they received divers "ar _ __ Beaits A ues. on wt + os + of — COOPTRLPE I 
Namps xd umpreions 3 icy char would fee more, may coupling Either, 1 They wire worle by their Admonitons and 
e Englith Annot, and tt . eVig, Wine; j 3 « ITC 
Drinks Rod. 29. ro pr, ow = — my che very ficft rhey have gone farther and farther from me, as Ver. 
Ape, and caught [doiacers to ule the ſame Rites and Ceremonies ih 26. 3. S r elſe OY Ne ag outwad Services, my 
that Were uied in God's Worſhip 3 therefore here theſe Idolaters hi nor my Commands before their Eyes, but caſt my crue Wot- 
. in pouring their Driok-Ofteriogs, which might ſeem to be Blood, |''P behind cheir backs, Mat. 23. 23- 
or at lealt Blood mixed with them. See on Pſal. 16. 4. imitated | 25 Since the day that your x fathers came forth out 
mo Fl megan bing -__ his MO in their —_— of the land of Ezypt unto this day, 1 have even y ſear 
'« 2+ by thele they did furniſh the Table menrioned, 1/2. |11nto you all my ſervants the prophets, daily rifing u 
65. LI, ſee there, 5 Noring rather the proper effects and conſe- earl 4 and Co: ns then Propanty, Gully SUP 
> 49a —_ — oma Apna on As ſeems £O upbraid ther with their ſtock they came of 
end-1 idd) | : — 
open defiance ro pn = cpa ” _— mw of bidding |, perverſe kind, their very Fathers were ſo before them,and chey 
their kdolatries, chey mee = hoe.s pg rey pr pow Kg have continued in their preverſeneſs, Nez. 9. 16, 17. they did not 
upon the Worthip of God, Pal. 16 3 i et now begin ro be reyellioas, bur ir had been their practice all along 
7 never ceaſing from the time their Fathers came our of Egyy? ro the 
Ag LI provoke me to anger ? faith the Days of Feremiah. y God tells chem what carethe had raken to 1n- 
ORD : ao they not provoke themſelves to the con- | form them in their Dury and Happineſs, not once of twice, bur 
tulion of their own g tacey ? ſending Meſſengers to them feaſonably, and conſtantly from firtt 
E Do they think co grieve me, and trouble my Mind? They are | 9 laſt, 2 Chron. 36. 15. Neh. 9.29, 30. Amos 2.10, i1. See on 
deceived, I am withour Paſſion, and can be wichour their Offerings, [/*7. 13+ and Chap. 24. 3, 4, ©c. The Charch of God hath never 
will nor chey chemſelyes teel the (mart of it, Verſe 6 ? Wull they not wanted Teachers raiſcd up and ſent by God- 
procure anger to chemtelves as an Arrow falls onthe Head of him 26 * Yet they hearkened not unto me, nor enclined Sb. 


2. 23 


- 
a _ " CY 9 
" *T TP "We: + as 


7, that thoors, 2 Cor. 10. 22, of the Plicaſe, fee Chap, 3. 2 1 | 'OT Chip | 
Bs Le OS 0 © CP4p, 3. 25+ their ear, but hardened their neck ; they did x worle ? 
; 20 Therefore thus ſaith the Lord GOD ; behold,|rhan chels fathers. * Nch. | 


G C 
my h anger and ny # fury ſhall be k poured out UPp-| x7 Their Farhers had done bad enough, bur they were fo far ;-, 26. 
O11 This place, up2u man and upon bealt, and upon |from reforming, chat they did worſe than che Farhers, Jude 2.19. Chap. 16. 


the trees ot the field, and upoa the fruit of the / = - wenn he ethers _ Ry tif wi _ = 
'T EE . Cc anging 7 c &e 1alt J6bY Partners, AS 1. Ww C a '©. 
grouud ; and it thall burn, and ſhall not be pleaſure turning away from them to the Propher, as one ſpeaking; 15, anda. 


qguacne, but 1n vain, to ſuth a ttupid People. 


RT attic 


| 3: 
27 Therefore 


== es Ugo ORG 
COEL. ad ra_ 
—*- "8. 


Chap. VII 


27 Therefore thou ſhalt ſpeak b all theſe c words, 
naro them, but they will not 4 hearken tO thee : 
thon ſhalt alſo call unto them, but they will nor e 


anſwer thee. 
b Viz. Revive upon them all thou haſt been ſpeaking ow 
from me, theſe 40 Years and upwards. c Whereby -—_ Hs 
erat there is nothing wanting on h1s part; for notwitn "Y I's 
all their Perverſenefs,yet he ſt1]] warns them by his Prophet,w = | 
wi.l leave themthe more inexculable, Ezek. 2+5,7- © TH mw 
| needs be a great Trial to the Prophet, that he 1s aiſured ore 
; ſhall 1peak co them in vain. But chis God acquatnts him on on 
th fore-hand, parily tor J:remiah's ſake, that he ſhould not w_ | 
| couraged, but the more emboldened, rhough he law no _—_ | a 
| vel, 2 .7. and partly tor the Peoples lake, that being "—_— - 
| their Obſtioacy, they might bethink themleives and _ 1 A © 
there might be hope, Lam. 3. 29. e This ſhews thelr fart 4% ah, 
tractorinels, that were not only deat to God's Meſſage by 1s n 0 
phet, but, though he cried loud, followed one Exhortation Wit 
another, yet they would make no Return unto It. ; 
23 But thou ſhalt ſay unto them, this zs a F nation, | 
| that obeyeth not the voice of the LORD their God, 
lj i Or,” In TEccIveth g || correction; truth is periſhed, and 1s 
' {trufior. cut off from their h mouth. ? FRG 
t | f Spoke in a way of Contempt, 9. d. a Nation more than Hea- 
i theniſh, though they protels themlelves a peculiar People to me, 
j vet to be numbred among the Gentiles. & i. e. Anſwer not the 
| Ends of Correction, viz. to be inſtructed, Chap. 5. 3. and ſubmit 
their Necks to the Yoke, which Jaid the Foundation of all their | 
Rebellion. þ There is no truſting or believing them in any thing | 
they ſay or do ; no Veracity or Fidelity, but perfidious both to 
Gol and Men, being all filled with Hypocriſfte, Lyes an 
Deceits. # "9M | 
29 *Cut off thine # hair, O Jeruſalem, and caſt it 
k away, and take up a lamentation on high / places :' 
for the LORD hath rejected and forſaken the gene-| 
ration of his 2 wratlt. | 
; Ir was an uſual Token of Sorrow among the Fews to cut off | 
the hair, Fob 1. 20. Iſ4- 15+ 2. Mic. 1.16. Bur here he _ 
either to Feremiah ; for O Jeruſalem is not in the Text ; or, to the 


*Chap.16. 


Inhebitares of Feruſalem; and ſo ſpeaks to them, asa Woman, 'gf mirth, and the voice of gladneſs, the voice of Chap. 16. 
the bridegroom, and the voice of the bride : for the aq 33+ 


whoſe Hair is tor an Ornament, 1 Cor. I1. 15. Therefore this' 
muſt needs fignifie an higher degree of Sorrow. Cutting the 
Hair among the Aiictents did fignifie, 1. Mourning. 2. Bondage. , 
For the cutting of the Hair in Servants was a Token of Subjecti- | 
on: Sothat this ſpeaks Feruſalem's mournful Condition in her , 
Captivity. k It is to be reſerved, as ſometimes Men, and Wo-: 
men both do for tome uſe, but to be caſt away, and as a thing . 
good for nought. And thus it may agree with the Churches La- : 
mentation, Lam. 5. 16, for it is not here exhorted to, as a Token 
of Repentance, but as a threatning of Judgments. / See Chap. 
3. 3. Lift up thy Voice on high in Lamentation, when thou haſt 
thine Eye or Thoughts upon the High Places, where thou 
wenteſt.a Whoring trom ie, for which thou now goeſt into 
Caprivity. m#: Or of his over-running Anger, as ſome render it, 
z. e. with whom he is extremely vexed, zhis preſent Generation, , 
that by their Provocations have brought themſelves under his | 
Wrath, wer. 18, 20. a Generation deſtin'd to the Wrath of God, 
called elſewhere the People of his Curſe, Iſa. 34.5. and ſuch as 
the Apoſtle calls Veſſels of Wrath, Rom. 9. 22. ſo tar as it concerns | 
the Phraſe. : 

30 For the children of 7 Judah have done evil in' 


* + Kings my o ſight, ſaith the LORD 3; * they have ſet their 
27-4 abomination in the p houſe which is called by my 


! 


| | | op name, to pollute it. | 


EE 2 n Either Zudah's Poſterity, Feſb. 14. 6. or Judah's Inhabitants, 
ZEK. 0. which are often called therr Children ; fy Chap.2.16, 01. e, Tho' 
Dy Oo they will not lee it, yet I ſee 1t, and they ſhall know, that it 


* 
iþ is in my fight, 72. e. that ic diſpleaſeth me. p Here he inſtanceth 
i 11 one Species of their Abominations for ail the reſt, whereby 
, it appears they were grown to a great height of Implety : Ir 
was not enough to have their Idols and Superſtitions abroad in 
the Hills and Groves, nor in private in their own Houſes, 1ſz. 
57.6, 7, 8. Chap. 1g. 13. but they muſt bring them into God's 
{ Houſe, as Manaſſes did, 2 Kings 21. 4+ God having but one Houſe 
in the World-as it were, to confront him, 2 Chron. 36. 14. Chap. 
32.34. Etch. 43.8. : | 
31 Andthey have built the * high places of 4 To- 
Gin rg, Phet, which is in the valley of the ſon of Hi 
Chap. 19. Pet» which z- 1n the valley of the fon of r Hinnom, 
oy to burn their ſons agd their daughters in the / fire : 
+ feb. which I commanded chem not, neither came it  in- 
Upiniry to my rt heart. 
brart. q See on Iſa, 30. 33. It comes from Toph that ſignifies a Drum, 
becauſe they did beat Drums ro hinder the Noiſe of their Chil- 
drens Screeches, when they burnt them in Sacrifice upon the Al- 
tars, Called here high placer, to Molech, which is alfo called 
delchom. vr Tophet was ſituate in a pleaſant Valley near Feruſa- 
/em, a place in the poſleflion of the Children of one Hinnom, 


* 2 Kings 


SEREMIAH 


'or not : Or, which I abhorred from my Heart ; he ſpeaks herein 


after the manner of Men. See Chap. 3. 16. and 32-35. 

32 There behold, the days * come, faith the. chap: 
LORD, that it ſhall - no more be called Tophet, ,;, ;. 
nor the valley of the ſon of Hinnom, but the val- 
ley of ſlaughter : for they ſhall bury in Topher ull 


there be x no place. 

x They were called ſo after this, and, are known, by thoſe 
Names to this day ; but the Meaning is, they ſhall acquire a Name 
from another Occaſion, that ſha) ſuit them as well, vx. tor the 
great Slaughter that ſhall be made there, or rather thereabouts, 
in and about Feruſzlem, and therefore called the Yalley of Slaughter, 
trom the effect of Slaughter ; as Fudab's Field was called Akelda- 
ma, AQts 1. 19. being a place for burying of the Slain, as the 
next Words ſhew. x Either there ſhall be ſo great a Slaugh- 
ter made upon that Spot by the Chaldeans that they fhall bury 
as many as the Place will contain, and the reſt of the Carcaſles 


1 they ſha!l throw on heaps, to rot above Ground ; for to lie un- 


buried, is frequently uſed as a Curſe on ſuch, the Burying of the 
Dead being accounted as a thing ſacred, and a ſignificant Sym- 
bol of the Keſurrefjon: Or, thoſe that are ſlain in and about Fe- 
ruſalem, at the Siege and Taking of it, ſhall be carried thither 


to be buried, either becauſe there ſhall be no Burying-places left 


about Feruſalem, or that Valley ſhall be filled, till there be no 
Place for more,that hereby it may be ſo polluted,that no thoughts 
of Holineſs may remain in it: For a dead Carcaſe under the Law 
was unclean; and that which before was a Valley of Pleaſure 
and great Delight, and they had dedicated to God, ſhall now be 
a Valley of Slaughter. 

33 And the *carcaſes of this people ſhall be meat * p1. -9. 
for the fowls of the y Heaven, and for the bealts uf 2. 


theearth ; and none ſhall fray them z away. Chap. 12. 

» The Birds and Beaſts of Prey ſhall feed on them, being e ps 
poſed to open View for want of Interment, Chap. 19.7. 7( A -ai 34 
piece of Humanity that even Nature it ſelf teacheth ) Either by *** 
reaſon of the Enemies preſence, for fear of whom they durſt not, 
'or rather, becauſe there will be none lef :0do it : And this is 
reckoned among the Curſes, Deut. 28. 26. 

34 4 Then will I cauſe to * ceaſe from the cities of « x(, ,,2 


Judah, and from the ſtreets of Jeruſalem, the voice y, s. 


land ſhall be 6 deſolate. Tanks wat 
a All kind and degrees of mirth ſhall ceaſe, Rev.18.25.a1l Places , , 
ſhall be filled with Lamentations and Woe ;their linging ſhall be x40, 2,5, 
turned into ſighing ; they ſhail lay afide all chings that are tor the 
comfort of Humane Society, which is to be underſtood in this 
Expreſſion. b There ſhall be ſuch an utter Devaſtation, that there 
ſhall be neither Seaſon nor Place for theſe Things, 1/4. 64. 10,11. 
Chap. 25.10. where marrying ſhall ceaſe, without which Man- 
kind cannot ſubſiſt, there muſt needs be Deſolation. y 


CHAP. VIII 


The Calamity of the Jews, both dead and alive, 1, — 3.. Their 
brutiſh Impenitency, 4, 7. Their vain boaft of Wiſdom 
their Covetouſneſs, Security, Impudence, 8, ——— 12, Their 
oo Jadgments, 13, —— 17. Bewailed by the Prophet, 
18, —— 22, 


I T that time, faith the LORD, they ſhall 

bring out the 4 bones of the Kings of Judah, 
and the bones of his Princes, and the bones of the 
Prieſts, and the bones of the Prophets, and the bones 


of the Inhabitants of Jeruſalem out of their graves. 

_ @ This Chaprer being a Contituation of the former, he proceeds 
In carrying on the Threatning with higher Aggravations of the 
Judgment, viz. that when the time ſhall come ſpoken of Chap, 
7. 32. the Chaldeans Rage ſhall reach, not only to the Living, 
bur even againſt thoſe that are in their Graves, and that 
ſparing none of any Degree or Qualicy 3 of the Nobles and Prin- 
ces, as Manaſſeh and others, poſſibly led to it out of Greedineſs, 
ſuppoſing ro find great Treaſure in cheir Sepalchres ; of the 
Prieſts and Prophets, principally the falſe ones, asa juſt judgment 
of God againſt them for deceiving the People ; of the Inhabitants 
of- Feruſalem, out of their ſpight and fury kindled againſt them, as 
Soldiers, or in Contempt and Tgnominy ; and this notes the ut- 
ter Deſolation of the City, not only razing the Walls, but curn- 
1ng the very Sepulchres which were accounted facred, and nor 
c0 be violated. 

2 And they ſhell b ſpread them before the ſun, 
and the moon, and all the hoſt of c Heaven, whom 
they have 4 loved, and whom they have ſerved, and 
after whom they have walked, and whom they have 
ſought, and whom they have worſhipped : they ſhall 
not be gathered, nor be buried ; they ſhall be for 
dung upon the face of the e earth. 

b Not gather them together into Charnel-Houſes, as we uſu- 


F6;h. 15.8. watered by the River of S:loe. { This moſt inhu- ally do out of Humanicy, but ſcatter them about as it were eo 


mane Practice of Burning their Children, even their own Bowels, he turned into Duſt and Dung 
ro Mclech, not their Sons only, but their Daxghters, who were tg ſhew chat they ſhou ; 


_ © Yrs, All thereſt of the Stars, 
|d nor lie out 1n the day-time only, bur 


i moſt tender ; they did exprefly againſt the Command and Cau- njohr al and $ 
if nolt te q { wary night allo, before the Moon and Stars, Chap. 36. 30. Then Carcaſ- 
i tion of God: See on Deur. 18. 10. having learned it of the Hea- jos ſhall be caſt ro their Idols, Lev. — : King 23. 14, 20, 


then, D-ur, 12. 30, 31. the Devil commanding them ſo to do by a kind of L-x Talions, th . 

' ; . ( 7 r 
his Oracles: They took Pattern from the Samaritans, where thoſe thole Creatures God doth, oe Bs roerndeg 
n , 


worſhipped 
appoint them as Spectas 


of every Nation make Gods of their own, 2 Kings 17. 29, tors and Witneſſzs of his Vengeance, and what Contempt he 


4 | 39, 31. t Which wasalways fo far from my approving, that [ 


pours upon them,their Carcales being brought betore they Idols, 


| never let it come into my Thought or Debate, whether 1 ſhould which wlll be fo ſhameful, as if one ſhould draw for th thi Adul. 


£2 " 
ferel-. 


Chap. VIII. 


x. 9. and 16. 


wv 


Chap. VIII 7 E RE 


1 en view, and expoſe them toge- 
- gre — he in eilivg that i510 cheeſe dumb Idols res the ſeveral Seaſons of her going and coming by ſore naturel 
4 This and the following terms 
ſerve to exprels the greatneſs and variety of cheir affection and 
zeal in their worfhipping of them, Deur. 4. 19. 2 Kings 23. 5. Ch. 
7.18. he muitiplies words, as 1t were implying, that mo can 
hardly be words enough to expreſs their tolly and madnels, tix 
Gentiles worſhipping theſe Creatures, not only for their beauty 


cording to their ancient Philoſophy apprehead- 16 , : 
ond py van a Pin Creatures, and that all events were, that Wrath of God that hangs over their heads, Iſt. 5. 12. Lake 


ther, and ir alſo inftquate 
to help them in their Miſery. 


ing them to have bre 
ordered by them. 
care taken of them, 


On the ſuperficies of it, there ſhall be no| 1 | 
'bur they ſhall lie 1n the open Country in the |King their peace with God, compared aiſo onthe ſame account, 


M14 H Chap. V11. 


ſerve the fit time by the temperature of the Air. / 7, e. Oblor- 


iaſtin&t, and this is faid of the Stork; what kind of Fowl is h=re 
meanc 15 diſputable: Sze Engliſh Annot. and Lat. Synop. 8 The 
faine thing diverlified ia thele teveral Fowls, tha: know alſo their 
Seaſons. u This notes the great ſtupidity of his People, ſeeming 
not to have 2s much ſeate in them, as the Birds in the Air, not 
xnowing their Summer of Proſperity, to make a good uſe of God's 
Favours, nor the Winter of Adverfitz, either to prevear or remove 


19. 42, 44. they know not their time for Repentance, and ma- 


Air, till they rot into dung, or dry into duſt, as in the beginning |to the Braſts of the Field, Iſa. 1. 3. and thus Chriſts upbraids 
, 


of the Verſe. See P/al. 83+ 10. Chap. 9. 23. they ſhall be 12nomi- 


nious even afrer Death. 


3 And death ſhall be choſen rather than f life, by 


all che reſidue of them that remain of this evil fami- 
ly, which remain in all the places whither I haveg 
driven them, faith the LORD of h hoſts. 


f A Delcription of the unexpreſſibleneſs of their miſery, that 
notwithſtanding all the barbarilm of the Bubyloniars exercilecd 
both upon the living, and the dead, yet a ſmall ma:ter in com- 
pariſon of what the living would feel, of the greatneſs of which 
miſery there was a double cauſe ; not only there being led into 
Captivity, but God's diſpleaſure following them, even in their 


baniſhment, being ſorely oppreſſed, + choſe threatnings, 


Lev 26.36,39. See Fob 3.20,21. Rev. 9-1 one dilferi:d among 
the Mountains, and hiding Places of Fea, others 10 the De- 
Carr of Moab and Idimes, whither they fl-d for tear of the 
Chaldeans, and all other places, where God would ſcatter them, 
an Hypallaze. h He that bath all the Creatures as an Army at 
his Command, can do this againſt thoſe, with whom he 1s 


diſpleaſed. 


4 Þ Moreover, thou ſhalt ſay / unrothem, Thus! 
Gich the LORU, ſhall rhey fall, and not & ariſe ? ſhall| 
and c taken 1o, they have reje&:d the word of the | Or, heve 
(LORD; and what + wiſdom z in 4 them ? 


work. k An Interrogation that hath the force of a negative, 7. e.! 


he turn away, and not / return ? wo 
c Though poſſibly it be all in vain, yet thou ſhalt keep in th; 


e. or will men, is theieno hope ? And are th«y upon 
chi . Soar deſperate 2 Or rather will Men fall and not arile? Are 
they ſuch Fools ? that having tallen by their ſins, and been foretold 
all that is coming, that they will not accept of a remedy, Chap. 7. 
27. Hoſ. 1.4. 1. 1 A Metaphor taken from one that is out of his way, 
can any imagine tha if one tell him of it, and direct him aright, 
that he will not hearken co him, and turn back ? It is even agatoſt 
Nature it ſelf for a Maa not to ſeek his own good. h 

s Why thenis this people of Jeruſalem ſlidden back, 
by m2 a perpetual backſliding ? They hold falt » de- 


ceit., they refuſe to return. : 

or res univerſal backſliding» Or rather obſtinate!y re- 
ſolved to hold on, though they ſee they are our of the way ; not 
out of levity or inconſiderateneſs, the Heb. word ſignifi. s ſtrength, 
the ſame uſed, Pſal. 13. 1. and tranflated for ever, implying a 
ſtrong, ſtiff, ſtout refulal. See Tſe. 57. 17. Chap. 3. 3. n Eicher 
their injufice and coxenages in circumventing one another, which 
was ſo frequent among them, Gbap. 9. 4, 5, 5. Mic. 7. 3,4. or 
their Hypocriſie whereby they thought to deceive God, but they 
did indeed deceive themlelves; the great impediment of their Re- 
pentance, Iſa. 44. 20. Or rather their ſticking cloſe to their falſe 
Prophets who did deceive chem,thence encouraging chemſe]ves in 
their wickedreſs,and pleaſing themſelves,that their Miſc ries ſhou!d 
not coine upon them. See on {j4. 3o. 10. Chap.5. 31. and 14 
I3, I4, We | 

6 I hearkened and o heard, bur they ſpake not p 
aright, no man repented him of his wickedneſs, ſay- 
ing, What have q I done ? Every one turned to his r 


courſe, as the horſe ruſheth into the battle. 

0 i. e. Toat I might bear, the Words rather of God than of the 
Prophet, which the continuance of the Speech ſeems to ſhew ir, 
the next Verſe, in the cloſe whereof it's plain that God ſpeaks, ex 
prefling himlelf after the manner of Men, who are wont to liſten 
diligently after the things they are very detirous of. See 1 Kings 


20. 33. Mel.3. 16. Or, not ſo as the LXX, and the word is thus |} 


uſed, Ex0.. 10. 11. Pſal. 1.4. not ſo as I would have hadthem, 
fo far from Repentance, that I do not perceive a word from them 
trending that way. q I ſee no tendency to Repentance, I ſee none 
of them ſo much as calling themſelves to account, not recoiling 
upon themſelves, where Repentance uſually begins, 2 Chron: 6. 
37. as Men uſe upon an inconfiderate a&t to ſmite upon their| 
Breaſt, or Thigh, and ſay, What have I done, as 2 Sam. 3. 24. 
1 To their accuſtomed way, committing all wickedneſs without 
reſtraint. See on Iſa. 59. 7. the an and unbridlednels of their 
Luſts, being {purred on by their Wills, is deſcribed in the next 
expreſſion, ſhewing how like a headſtrong Horſe, he runs away 
with his Rider, or compared to the delight, that ari Horſe ſeems 
to take in running violently, and headſtrongly into the Battel, as 
it 15 deſcribed, Fob 39. 21 &c. and this word ruſhing, ſignifying 
properly an inundation of waters; helps to ſhew their uncon- 
troulableneſs in another Metdphor : See this verified of them, 
Chap. 2. 23, 24+ It is ſaidevery one by an hyperbole, as Pſal. 
I4+. 3» and frequently elſewhere. 

7 Yea, the ſtork in the 7 heaven knoweth her ap- 
pointed ſtimes ; and the turtle, and the crane, and 
the ſwallow obſerve the time of their : coming ; but 

* Chap. 5, * my people know # not the « judgment of the 
+) Js LORD: : 

r 7.e; In the Air; which is often called Heaven, where the 
Birds fly, Pſal; 8; 8, cortipare Epap: Fi 23. who poſlibly ob- | 


the Phariſees, Marth. 16. 2, 3. x Either God's Vengea'ce in 
genera', or particularly hovering over Jeruſalem an Fidez, or 
rather the manner of God's Diſpenlations wich them. $9 the 
word is uſed, 1 Sam. 2. 13, and 8. 11. | 
8 How do ye ſay, We are y wiſe, and the law cf 
the LORD zz with us ? Lo, certainly a!{ in vaia ' Or, ## 


. . Y - > / * 
made he z:, the pen of the ſcribes z b in vain. —=— op 
) 9. 4. Theſe things cooftered where is your W.ſdom > Wher:, des 


you lee the very Fow1s of the Air are not fo ſtupid as you ate, om 
he ſpeaks eicher to Princes and Prieſts, or to the whole Body of c 4:1hos | 
he People. 24 This may be underſtood either more gereral off 100 
all, or may have a more ſpecial Eye to the Priefts, with who: it 
was intruſted, Deut. 33, 10. Mal. 2. 7, They were won: to 
boaſt much of the Law, as well as of the Temple, Chap. 18. 13. 
Rom. 2. 17, 23. 4 q- d. tor any ule they .made of it, thzy nad 
as good have been without it, God needed not to have given thean 
[a Law, Hoſ. 8.12. b Neither need it ever have been copied our, 
i divulged and conveighed down to them by the Scribe, Deur: 1 74 
18, or che prevarications and colluſions thele Lawyers uſed in 
the falſe interpretation of che Law, wherein they f14ed with the 
falſe Prophets, ſhould be in vain. A Scribe was a Teacher, onc 
well verted inthe S:ripture, or eſteemed ſo. £2 * Chap. 6 

9 * || The wiſe mer are aſhamed, they arediſmayed, "© 


S, 


they been 4- 
c They truſted to tieic retuges of lyes, bur when God ſha!1/pumed, 
bring the Judgment threatned, the wiſeſt among them will Eng &c- : 
chat they ſhall be contounded among themle!ves, not knowing T Hed. tt 
what to dy for all their wiſclom, bur ſhall be taken with the #1 40m of 
relt, Chap. 4. 9. by Wiſemen, he means the Scribes in the former 97248 7h1ng: 

@rſe. The fame laid of Babylon. Iſz. 47. to. d Or whit & willem 
to them ? How can they ſay they are wile, when they hays no fear 
of God, which is the beginning of Willom, Prov. 1. 7. when 
they have no reſ;ect at al] roche Word of Gcd, as to any holy 
practice which is the fountaia of all Wiſdom, Dui, 4. 6. Pliim 

19- 7. 3 Tit 3- Is. | 

10 Therefore * will I give their wives unto others, * Dent, 
andthcir fields to them that ſhall c inheric 2229: 2 fi 
every one from the leaſt even unco the greatelt is gj- 70 £1 
ven to * fcoverouſneſs, from the Propher even unto 2,yp.,};, 
the Prieſt, every one dealeth g falily. © ifs. 54, 

e A paruphraſtical deſcription of che Miteries of War , G94 x :, 
doth here inſinuate that their miter y $a!l nor be for a ſhore time, 
bot fo long, as that ſtrangers, viz. The Cb114c2ns ſhall enjoy cheir 
Land by Inhet itances; fo far thould they be trom potſeti99 cher 
Land for ever. f So greedy after their own private gain, that they 
took nocare of Equity, or Jaſtice, in which word is compriſed 
all their fraululene Dealings one among another. 2g Oi this and 
the two next Verles, tee on Chap. 6. 13, 14,15. 

11_For they have * healed the hurt of the dangh # Chap. &i 
ter of my people llightly, ſaying, Peace, pzace, when «4. | 
there 1s NO Peace. 

12 Werethey *aſhame{d when they had committed * Chav. 3, 
abomination ? nay,they were not at all aſhamed, nei-3* 21d © 
ther could chey bluſh, rherefore ſhall chey fall amoag **' 
them that fall ; in the time of their vilitation they 
ſhall be caſt down, ſaith the LORD. 

13 || I will ſarely h conſume them, ſaith the 
LORD, There ſhall be no grapes * on the vine, norj Gr, 74 
. - I x 
ngs onthe * fig / tree, and the leaf ſhall fade, and che garho= ns 
things that T have given them ſhall & paſs away from 7 7% cu 
them. ory 

þ Or ingathering I will conſume them 3 q. d. T will fo gather ,- 
them together into their ſeveral Cities to be beſieged, tha: irh* 0 'n. 
ſhall be no hard matter to deſtroy them, Yer. 16. viz. The Body Ef 
of the People, not every one, for theie was a remnaiit. that did * ** *7 
eſcape. i Theſe Fruits, Grapes and Fizs, it is Probable were of Luxe 3 3. 
greateſt account and uſe among chem, 1/a- 36. 16. and fo may be #2 © 
put forall other things, either for neceffity or delizht, whic 
God threatens he will deprive them of by reaſon ot che Siege, 
which a Famine ſhall ſucceed, Chap. 5. 17. Jul 3. 7. Hab. 3. 

17. See the lixe Z2ph, 1. 2, 3. Or poſlibly, it way be ſpoken 
by way of fimilnude, q. d. they ſhall be waſted, 5 when there is 
no Grapes on the Vine, 8c. the Land ſhall be lett as bare, as when 
by Tempeſts vr other violence, there is neither Leaf nor Fruit 
left upon the Tree, P/al. 78. 47. k It this refer to the further 
puniſhment, as ſome, then it 13 as mich as to lay, wha: they 
have already received from me and laid vp, they ſhall alto be de: 
prived of; Hoſ. 2. 8, 9. or though I have given it ta them, yer 
they ſhall not enjoy it, it ſhall be taken an ay by chem Enemies ; if 
it rejate to the reaſon of tie puniſhment, as otFers, then the C9- 
pulative is put tor*the cauſal, g. 4. b+couſe the things that I gave 
them, viz. My Laws, paſs 4way, i.e. they have tianigrefled, 7(g; 
24, 4, F. £ltici tenſe lies fair; 

is Why 


+, », 4 Q * © 
t Ol Or y hd 


*] 


de Fo 11 


Chap. VII. 


- = WRA 


+3 15. Hhocauſe wehave Jinnea againſt the LORD) 


4 ER 


1: Why do we fit / ſtill? * Aſſemble your ſelves, 
2nd Ict us enter into the defenced m2 cities,-and let us 
be : ſilent there ; for the Lord our GOD hath pur us 
zp. 190 filence, and given us * water of p|| gall ro drink, 


! The people ar jengrh leem to bethink themſelves, and thus to 


E M I A IF. 


[come againſt them from a very far Country, Chap. 6. 22. or the 
voice of them that wereCaptives under thoſe of a far Country,now 
they begin ro cry,which would not be perſwaded to it before ; the 
firſt is moſt to be approved of. e Viz. In Jeruſalem, a Meronymy 
of the SubjeF, f Or as King in Zion, -or have we not a King of 
the Seed of David, to whom the Kingdom was granted to be per- 
petual> Eitter the words of God, q.d. was not 1 among ycu to 
provide for you, and proteCt you, but you muſt needs repair to 


b-tpeak'each other. m 11 the lcattered Villages, there 15 n0 lafety 
{or us, let us retire into places of greater ſecurity, Matth.24-16, 
17,3, poſſibly they thought they 1night be ſecured there,as they 
j-o:1 been beto;e in the time of Scnacherib. n Keep clole within 
ear walls,fay or do nothing to provoke the Enemy,but fit down, 
an bewali the deiperatenels of 6ur condition, Lam. 3.25, 29. Or 
cremblingly expect the ifue of this ſad War, for there is go poſh 
b:licv of making head againſt tuch an Enemy, that bears down all 
Letore them. o They now begin to perceive, that the Hand of 
Go:! is in all this,and thar rhereſore they kave not a word to lay 
as it they were wronged.God hath put them to ſhame ; much leſs 
courage to oppoſe the Bahyloniars, their heart fails them, tney 
are as Men in a great terror and conſternation, God hath put 2s 10 
tence, let us be ſilent. p Or Poiſon, probably the name of lome 
po:lo2nous Herb, with the juice or infuſion whereof they were 
wontto kill Pertons,as Hemiock, Nightſhade, 8c. See Hoſ-10.4. It 
no'es thole bitter deſtructive Judgments tiat God was bringing 
upoa them, Chap. 9.15. which did [pring trom that bitter rovt 
of their 1nning againſt him, as in the next words. 


*Cl2p.14 15 We* looked for peace, but no good, came, 
SE 1d tor a time of health, and behold, q :ronble. 


g Viz. Upon tte pertwaſion of our Prophers,we expected that 


the'e Troubles would never come, but all would be well, but we 
hd our ſelves meerly deluded by them, we looked 1o long, till 
even our Eves tailed us, but we ſee no remedy tor us, Lam.4.17. 
A Merayter : Miſeries are often in Sci ipture compared to Diſeaſes, 
and Deliveraiices to healing, Deuts 32. 39. Pſal. 103. 3. Chap. 
JJ» 6, FT 
16 The » ſhorting of his horſes was heard from / 
Dan : the whole land trembled at the ſound of the 
neighing of his z {trong ones : for they are come and 
4 Heb. the have devoured the land and + all that 1s # in It : the 


Idols? the like kind of Speech is in 2 Kings 7. 3. and the cloſe of 
the Verſe ſeems to favour this,or,as others,and a expoſtulatory La- 
mentation of the People, that the cruel adverſary ſhould prevail 
over a people, that had God ſo near them, Pſal. 48. 2, 3.and 76. 
I, 2, nath God now left us? and is the promiſe of his continuance 
here at an end? Pſal. 89. 36, 37, 3%. g As if God ſhould ſeem 
to reply here ; Ler them not think it ſtrange, ſeeing they have 
turned their backs upon me, and truſted to Idols, which are but 
vanity, Chap. 2. 11, 13-Called vanity, not only becauſe Ido!s are 
as nothing, but becavſe all the Confidence that is put in them is 
vain, and becaule Idolaters are vain in their Minds,and want un- 
Cerſtanding. I have not forſaken them, but they me. 

20 The harvelt ih paſt, the ſummer is ended, and 
we arc not : ſaved. 

h And the Winter no time for War,the Peoples continued com- 
plaint, not unlike that Yer. 15. the Year is gone, and we are ſtill 
truſtrared in our expectations, the time that we expected help 
trom Egypt, Tja. 30.3» 5. iViz. By the Egypiians, or any 
other Confederates. WW 

21 For the & hutt of the daughter of my people 
am I hurt ; 1 am / black ; aſtoniſhment hath taken 
hold on me. 

k The Prophet here ſhews how deeply he is affeted with the 
Peoples miſery, he deeply ſympathized with them, it ſignifies 
breach, 1 am broken in my Spirit, and fo it anſwers to the breach 
thatis made upon the People. 1am as thoſe that are clad in 
deep Mourning, Pſal. 38. 6. Chap. 14. 2. m Iam amazed to 
think that my people ſhould fin themſelves beyond help, no reme- 
dy tor them, as the next Veilſe, that no threatnings or Counſels 
ſhould prevail with them. 


22 I:thereno* balm in 7 Gilead ? Isthere no o Phy- 


ſuirſs acity, and thoſe that dwell therein. : 

LIEN CL r 1 he tury of the Chaldgzans March is diſcribed by the ſnorting 
of their Horſes,w hich is a noiſe they make through their Noſtrils 
When they are Chated, and tretted. ſ #. e. Even to Feruſalem,q.d. 
the dread tulnels ot the noite ſhall be heard from far,or rather,tho 
Feruſalem lecms to be ſecure, yet the turtheſt Coaſts of the Land 
are in great conſternation, wi/7- the utmoſt boundary of Canaan 
Northward,throngh which the Chaldean Army was tO March. See 
C'"ap. 4. 15+ Or it is laid 29 be heard, either the noiſe it ſelf, or the 
{-112 of it, Chap. 6. 24. t His choice Horſes or Cavalry, or his 
ſtout and ſturdy ones, asthe word ſignifies,and expreſſed by their 
brisk ti olicktomneſs and courage in the word neighing properly 


* 


= 
CY 


ſician there? why then isnot the health ofthe daugh- 46. 11.and 


| Chap. IX. 


Gen. 37, 
5.chap. 


ter of my people Þ p recovered. 51.8. 
n Gilead was eminent for Balm, Gen. 43. 11. taken for Roſy || Heb. 
or Turpentize, which is a kind of more liquid Rofin, and either gone up. 


flows or drops from certain Trees of its own accord;or their juice 
flows trom feveral holes pierced into them, as from the Pine,Ce- 
dar, Cypreſs, or Terebinth Tree. Heb. Tſeri. Gr. p*#731 from of 
to flow, or run. Lat. Reſina, Engl. Rofin. A near affinity of the 
words in each Language, the nature whereof is to diffolve hard- 
nels, to clear, and cloſe up wounds. o Or Chirurgeon, probably in 
a Country where were ſuch plenty of Remedies, there could not 
| want Atheiſts,whereby their cures might be facilitated,by means 


app! ied to Horſes, under tandirg here the chiet of them.and the of which the Galeadites and Arabians did excel there. pþ Heb. gone 


w 0:d tor ſirong ones is applyed to any thing,that excels,as to Man, ! 
3b 34. 20. to Argels, Pjal. 78. 25. Angels food, or the bread of, 
ihe wtzhty, And tor Horſes as here, and Fudg. 5. 22 Chape47+3- 
2 Heb. he ſuineſs of it, the Trees, and Frutts, and wealth of 
the Land, they are entred upon their |poil, and will leave nothing 
1n the Land, Chap, 4. 20. It is ſpoken ina Prophertical ſtile, who 
ule toexprets the certainty of what ſhall be,as it it actually were 
a.ready, x viz. Jernujalem, or rather the Cities with all their In- 
habitauts, as well as the Country, the ſingular number being put 
jor the plural, as Ija. 27. 10. 
17 For behold, I will ſend ſerpents, cockatrices, 
*P:z'. $8. among you, which w*// not be y * charmed, and they 
435+ \h:411 z bite you, faith the LORD. 
py He proceeds in increaſing of their terrour, q. d. there will be 
no appeaſing, allaying of their tury by any ait or method, 
therefore repreiented by the Cockatrice, called 1n Latine Regulus 
or King of Serpents, as plitting to flight all other Serpents, bur by 
opr:fition to Serpents, ſhewing what kind of Serpent they ſhall be, 
a 19:t that cannot becharmed. viz. ſuch an Enemy as by no 1n- 
treaty can be made exorable : See On Ta. 11, 8, LXX, deadly Ser. 
tents. © They ſhall afiict you with ſore puniſhments, not only 
Stings in their Tails, as Scorpions, bur intheirTeeth, whereby 
thy ſhall devour you, Ferſe 16, 
13 hea would comfort my ſelf againſt 2 ſorrow : 
my heart z- faint | in me. 7 
a The language of the People being long ſhut up in their Citles, 
and finding no relief, at laft faint, Lam 4, 17. But more pro- 
bably the Propher now ſeems to ſpeak his one Reſentments, how 
greatly the Calamity of his People did affect him, the like I{a.22.4. 
when he would ſometimes reireſh himſelf with the comfortable 
Refreſhments cf Nature, the thoughts of his Peoples Miſery do 
{o afMit him, that his Heart is ready to faint, to fink within 
him. | 
19 Behold, the voice of the bcry of the c daughter 
+ 1:1. of my people, #- becauſe of them that dwell in a far 
+, r1+d country : Js not the LORD in e Zion ? z- not her 
$9277 } King in her ? why have they provoked me to f 
ENe ge anger with their graven images, azd with g ſtrange 
Er af .7r It. IS 
£099 yanitics ? | : 

4 i. e. The greatneſs of their Cry,the bitter Cries and Screeches 
2nd Complains that merhinks I hear : The words are abrupt be- 
21fe the Prophet 15 to repreſent ſeveral Perſons ſpeaking ; him- 
ielf, the People, and God. © See Chap. 4. 11.- poſhbly becauſe 
Jer-miab loved them, inſtrufted them, admoniſhed them as a 


f Heb. 


fon. 


up ; the like expreffion, 2 Chron. 24. 13. the work was pertect- 
ed, Heb. the healing, went up upon the Work, and fo Neh. 4. 7, 
| the prophet expreſſeth his grievous complaint by way of admirati- 

on, by a Metaphor,implying the,inveteracy and obſtinacy of their 
Hearts, that either would not come to the Phyſician,or that they 
ſhould be thus incurable,where they wanted not for Prophet and 
Teachers, or for any ſpiritual means, flowing down daily upon 
them ; can Cone and Judea be without ſpiritual Phyſicians : 
Some underſtand it by way of Sarcaſm, q. d. where are your Me. 
dicines, your Arms, your Counjels, your Confederacics > And 
where are your Phyſiczans,your Princes and Priefts that promiſed 
you Reltet > Without God, you ſee no help in any means ; but 
the former more natural, and agrees belt with the beginriiag or 


the next Chapter. 
CHAP. IK. 


The Prophet's Lamentation confinueth over their Adultery, Deceit, 
Tdolairy, which God woull1 certainly puniſh, and they ſhould 
be laid waſte, when they jh1uld ſufficiently lament. 1, —— 22, 
No truſt in our ſ:lves, but in Goa, who will pun:/h all Nations, 
23, —* 26. 


people. 

q Heb. who will give, &c. by way of enquiry becauſe the 
Hebrews do want the Imperative Moo1 ; the Prophet in this Chap- 
ter principally bewailing his poor Country-mens Calamity,whom 
he therefore calls the Daughter of his People, he expreſleth the 
greatneſs and excels of his Sorrows, by wiſhing that his brains 
were as it were diſlolved into water, (for the word is ſingular)as 
if he wiſhed rt were all on water, ſignifying plenty, and that his 
eyes might diſti!! tears like a fountain he ſame word in the Hb. 
for Eye ſignifies a Fountain ; noting the continuance of it, as not 
to be drawn dry, expreſſed by Day and Night, apprehendiog it a 
mifery ſo greatzas never (ufficiently to be bewailed. See Luk. 1 9. 
41- rOr that areto be flain,uiz. by the Babylonians, a prophe- 
tical ſtile, as ſure ro be ſlain, asif they were ſlain already. 

2 © that [had in the wilderneſs a lodging place 
of / way-faring men : thatl might leave my people, 
and go from them : for they be all : adulterers, an 
aſſembly of treacherous men. 

{ He proceeds in his Lamentation,which in the formerVerſe he 
did by way of Compaſſion, in this in a way of Indignation, wiſh- 
ing tor ſome retiring place or torry ſhed,or night-Cottage: See on 


_ 


Laughter, d Vis. The'r Fzemies the Babylonians, that were to 


Iſt. 24+ 20, though 1t were bur foine mean and lorry Hurt inthe 
Wildernets 


I ') H | * that my head were 9 waters, and mine + Heb. 
eyes a fountain of tears, that I might weep who will 
day and night for the 7 ſlain of the daughter of my give my 
head, 8C- 
* Ila. 22.4» 
Chap.4.19- 
and 14.17. 


Chap. *<: 
8 


p] . 


Chap. IX. 


FEREMIAH 


Chap. IX. 


Wilderneſs, as David, Pſal. '55. 6, 7 ſuch as might bur ſhelter| Ctual ; my People will take no warning : They are grown to ſuch 


him from the Injuries of the Weather : The LXX #n ſome remocejt 
Station or Corner, where he might not be an Eye witneſs of the1r 
Miſeries to grieve him ſo atthe heart, Pſal. 119, 136, 158. See 
2 Pet. 2.7,8. and where he might hope to find better Entertain 
ment from the ſavage Beaſts, than from his own Country-men, 
7 4. e. For the molt part, Chap. 5. 8. both Properly and Me- 
 rapborically ; being full of all idolarrous Practices. Or, There 1s 

no Integrity found among them. # That deal perfidiouſly with 
God and Man in all the concerns they are converſant about, I/. 
1. 4. Andthough the Word here for 4ſſembly 15 moſt ordinariiy 
uſed for an Holy Aſſembly, Lev. 23. 36. Numb. 29. 35+ WHICH cau- 
ſeth ſome to underſtand ir of their being moſt vile when they 
ſhould be moſt devout ; yet here it moſt nacurally ſignifies a kind 
of Combination among them, as ſuch that have conſpired one 
among another to a& all manner of Villanies. ; 

Tha. 59. 3 And * rhey bend their tongues {ike their y bow 

+15'5* for z lyes: but they are not valiant forthe 7 truth 
upon the earth : for they proceed from evil toc 
evil, and they know not me, faith the LORD. 

x Heb. Tread, becauſe Bows are uſually kneeled or trod upon 
when they are bent, Chap. 50. 14+ and 51. 3. 'y Their Tongue: 
are herecomparedtoa Bow, and Lyes to Arrows, becaule as 
Bow ſhoots out Arrows, fo doth the Tongue Words, P/l. 64. 3. 
2 i. e. All reproachful, falſe and noxtous Words, to the damage 
of one another : And ſo bending may be preparing, framing, anc 
contriving, that miſchief which they purpoſe to vent with their 
Tongues, Pal. 52. 2, 3 4. and 64. 3. as Bending is preparing tie 
Bow to do Execution with the Arrow. 4 Equity, Fu!'iire, They 
are as eager in the ways of Falfhood as Men engaged in War, 
but ſhew no Valour in maintaining the Truth. b z. e. No Truth 
inthe Earth in them, as we ule to exprels our leives; or rather 
more genuinely, in the Land wherein they live,they have no Cou- 
rage in what is good c Either 19 kind, or in degree: They go or 


from bad to worſe, 2 Tim. 3. 13. which ſpeaks little hopes ct 


their Repentance. The ground of all which is ſaid here to be, 
their zor knowing of God, as in the next Clauſe, Fudg. 2. 19, 11. 
1 Sam. 2.12. The heart cannot work (trongly after God, where 
there be but mean apprehenſtons of him. 


* Chap. 4 * Take ye heed every one of his || 4 neighhour, 
12.6, and truſt ye not in any brother : for every hrother 
Mic. 7.5, will utterly ce ſupplant, andevery neighbour will walk 
| or with f ſlanders. | 

Friend d Better rendred, Friend or Companion, as 2 Sem. 16. 17. and in 


the next Verſe, ſhewing the general Corruption will be fo malig- 
nant, that one Erjend will betray another ; no Faith in Friends. 
e Wholly givento it. Heb. Supplanting will fuptlant, or treading 
down, treadeth down ; trampling them under their Feet, noting their 
Oppreſſion, which they exerciſe all manner of ways, as in the 
next Verſe, both by Frand and Force. Like the Interpretation 
that Eſau puts upon Jacob, Gen. 27. 36 Not only ſuch as are 
near in Habitation, pretending Neighbourhood and Friendſhip, 
but near in Relation, even a Brother will circumyent, no reſþe&t 
to Blood, arguing them to be monſtrous 1n Nature, putting off 
Humanity. The Word is here 1n Alluſfion ro Faceb, who had his 
Name from Supplanting ; a Metaphor taken from the Sole of the 
Foot, Gen. 25. 26. f Carrying Tales and Reports up and down, 
whether erue or falſe, to the diſturbance of the peace ot Neigh- 
bourhood, Chap.6.28. and againſt the Law of God, Lev. 19.16. 

5 And they will g || deceive every one his neigh- 
bour, and will not ſpeak the truth: they have þ 
taught their rongues to ſpeak Ilyes, ard ; weary them- 


ſelves to commit iniquity. 

g Heb. mock or derie; they are Scofters. h They have ſo fra 
med their Tongues to it by Cuſtom, and conſtant Ule, that Lying 
is become ſo familiar to them, that they cannot leave jt. The ſame 
Word is applied to the wild Afs, ufed or taught ro the Wilder- 
neſs, Chap. 2. 24- and 13.23. i They uſe a great deal of Induſtry, 
Diligence and Contrivance in it, P/al. 7. 14. Iſa. 5. 18. They 
ſpare for no Labour, and feel no Wearineſs in it, whereby they 
are become expert. 

6 Thine habitation zs in the midft of & deceit : 


through deceit they retuſe to / know me, faith the 
LORD. 

k This God ſpeaks to the Prophet, either to inform him, that 
there is no hope of this Peoples Reformation, Chap. 8. 5. therefore 
he expreſleth a deceicful people by the Abſtra&t, Deceit, i.e. no- 


thing among them, but Deceit one to another, and Hypocrifieto- | 


wards me, as Pſal. 109. 2. and Vanity for vain Men, Fob 35, T3. 
or to caution and advite him,how to behave himſelf among luch a 
people, that he be very wary, that he be not enſnared by them, 
Chap. 12. 6+ | Either hoping to ſhift well enough by the ſeveral] 
means they think to uſe, Chap. 8. 5. They are careleſs of turning 
to me; or, by hearkening to their falſe Prophets, who have all 
along deceived them, they obſtinately reje&t my Ways and Coun- 
fels, Pſal. 36. r, 2, 3,4. and $2. F. 

7 Therefore thus faith the LORD of hoſts ; Be- 
hold, I will melt them, and »: try them : for how ſhall 


I 2 do for the daughter of my people ? 

m The fame Metaphor uſed Chap. 6. 29. Try them by melting 
them, Z. e. Either I will try what leffer Aflitions will do be- 
fore I do utterly deſtroy them ; or rather, I will bring Judgmear 

' upon them, the Fire and Fury of the Chaldean War, thar fha!l 
clear away their Droſs from among them, and purge away thofe 
Decitsin which they truit, that the Remaa3t may be purined. 
Dn. 11 35. as when the Droſs is ſeparated from Metals, the 
reſt remains pure. See on Tjz. 1. 25. 7 4. d» There is 00 Re- 


_ L have tried all other tneans, and they have been incfte- 
ol, 


an height of Impiety, that I can do no leſs, though they are my 
People, Hof. 6. 4. Or, God doth expoſtulate with them, How can 
you expect that [ ſhould treat you otherwiſe, chat have to pro- 
voked me, and whoſe Impieties have redounded fo much to my 


Diſhonoar 2 

8 Ther tongue zs 44 an 0 arrow ſhot out; it ſyeak- 
eth p* deceit: oze {peaketh * peaceably to his netgh- * pal. 2 
bour with his mouth, but Þ+ in q heart he layerh || 2- and 
his walt. 020.3, 

0 Before, Verſe 3. it was compared to a Bow, 4. 2. ready pre- * P1826, 
pared, and furniſhed with Materials contriving therr Wickedneſs, 3: 
Pſul. 11.2, and hereto an Arrow ſhot out, actually executing T Heb. 
what they have deſigned. Some tranſlate ir, a murthering Arrow. the mudjs 57 


I 


þ Never fpeaking what they mean, that thereby they may the ea. P1/t, 
fter deceive the Credulous. A double Tongue, ipeaking fair wen > 
they mean todeſtroy, Pſal. 55.21. asthe next Word; explain it 47 **”* , 
Intending to do the greateſt Miſchief when they tpeat taireit, 
4 Heb. In midjt of him, i. e. in his very Inwards, with his who!e 
Heart he contrives miſchief. 

9 .*. Shall I not viſit them for theſe :h/-9;, ſaith the 
LORD ; fhall not my foul be avenged on ſuch 4 na- 
19: as this ? 

.*. See Chap. 5 + 9, 29. 

Io For the mountains will I take up a weepinz,and 
7 wailing, and * for the || habitations / of the wilder- I 
neſs a lamentation, becauſe they are {| burat up, io #22 ©-: 
that none can paſs e through them, neither can m7 Ho! 4. 3. 
hear the voice of the z cattel ; | both the fowls of che || Or, p4- 
heavens, and the beaſts are fled, they are gone. ſtares. 

ry The Prophet raving Yer. 1. taken up a Lamencation for the |! Or, _ 

Slaughter of the Peopie, he now re-afſumes it for the Deſolation **** b 
of the whole Land, every part of it being to be laid waſte : Sex F He " 
Chap. 4.23, 26. And it either ſets torth the greatnels of his Grief, —_ 
that ſhall reach to the very mountains, as the Words may be read ow! even 
or rather, the cauſe of his Mourning, - becaute he preſently adds, *9> —_ 
| tor the Habitations of the Wilderneſs. f Plain, or Viiley, as it 


” 7 4 
”» 47 


e I 
*Cjriis 2 


often ſtgnines ; forthe Word 1s uſed T/z. 63. 13, 14. or plea{1nt 
| Plains. The Country of Fudea being mountainons, theſe Plains 
and Vallyes were their chief places tor Paſtorage, which doth 
greatly aggravate the Devaſtation. Thele ſhall be burnt up, rhe 
Herbage fo burnt, that it be left utterly barren, like a parched 
Heath, Yerſe 12. The Mountains ſhall not be able *9 lecure then, 
nor the Vall:ys to feed rhem. t Either there being no ath : 
The LXX render it, On the Paths of the Wilderneſs, or none to 
pals toand fro, and lo leave it deſolate ;or fo parched,and waſte, 
that none can paſs through it, lo far are they trom being inha= 
bired, Chap. 2.6. u There, where once all ſort of Catte; «rd Fowls 
in great plenty were wont to feed and graze, there 1s not fo much 
as the Chirping of a Bird, the Bleating of a Sheep, or Lowing 
of an Ox to be heard. See Chap. 23. 1o, 12,13. and 50. 3. 
They are ſaid ro be fled and gone ; either the Enemy hath (wept 
away all, or they have foriaken the Land, becauſe there was 
no Food, Fer. 12.4. A Figurative Expreſſion of an Univerſal 
Deſolation. : 
11 And I will make Jeruſalem heaps, 4d a * * 144. 34- 
den of y Dragons; and I will make the cities of Ju- £5: 
: , 12D. 10. 
dah -+ deſolate, withour an inhabitant. IN, 
x Viz. Of Stones and Rubbiſh, y Noting a deſolate place, not + Heb, 4:- 
any longer fit for the Habitation of Mankind, as the next words ſolatien. 
do ſpeak ; but for hideous Beaſts; as they had made ule of the 
Temple for a Den of Thieves, Chap, 7. 11. The ſame alſo he after 


. 


wards threatens on Babylon her ſelf, Chap. 51. 37. 

12 * Who is the wiſe-man, that may underſtand *Þfa!.: +. 
z this ? and who 7s he to whom the mouth of the 43- 
LORD hath ſpoken, that he may @ declareir, for 
what the land periſheth , and zs burnt up like a wil- 
derneſs, that noae paſleth through. 

7 Viz. The ground of all theſe Evils, q. 4. Is there not a wiz 
man among you, that will concern himſelf, and ſearch into the 
Cauſe? of all theſe threatned Judgments, which hath provoked God 
to ſogreat Dilpleaſure 2 See Hoſe 14-2, It is a Queſtion that im- 
plies there 1s none, or very few, that confider common Calami: ies 
in the Cauſes of them ; bur rather ſay of Judgments, is is 4 
Chance, 1 Sam. 6. 9- : 

13 And the LORD ſaith, 2 Becauſe they have for- 
ſaken my b law, which I ſect before c them, and have 
not obeyed my voice, neither walked therein; 

2 Either this, and the next Verſe reters to the tormer, vip. he- 
cauſe there are none can give the Reaſon why the Land perithers, 
therefore God will; or eife they refer to the 15 and 16 Fer{cs, 

' as ſhewing the Caules of thole Judgments threatned ; for either ot 
the References do not alter the Sence : See Chao. 5, r9. This Ve. !z 
contains negative Reatons. b He chargeth them with their Ar 

{taſie, and refuſing to obey his Precepts, and conform tiivir Con. 
verſation to them. c Leſt they thould plead they were o>Sicnre 
and hard to be underſtood, therefore he tel!s them, he had mate 


CA? 


ir plain to them, they could not be jpgnocant of ir, except it were 


jour of Wiltulnets and Odſtinacy : The lixe Exprefiion, I-24: 


L1+ 32s MP OS 
14 But have walked after the | 4 imagination of ' Gr 
their own hearr, and after e Baalim, whici their 7 #5rn 
fathers taught them. 
4 Or, Stubbernne(s and Obtiracy : See Ch9. 7. 24. e528 Chap. 2 
23. The Prophet doth uot charge them with new Crimes, rr 
with their tenacious {tickiog to ther Iaojatry, f See Cho. =, 18 
{[D] : 


et. 


34 


d2 


Chap. IX, 


ca 


'and ] will fend a Sword after / them, till I have con- 


E R 


I: ſ-ems they might partly thank their Education for it, as well 
a« (heir own natural perverſeneſs : Hence we ſhould learn to fol- 
low God's Counſe: in the Scriptures, ard not blindly follow 
vir Fathers Countel, Precepts, or Examples, or our own W1ll, 
v |:ich is the worſt Guide. 

15 Therefore thus faith the LORD of hoſts, the 
God of Iſrael, Behold, I will feed them, ever this g 
people, witli * þ wormwood, and give them water 
of gall ic Link, ; 

2 This Supplement [even] ſhews that it is ſpoken emphatically, 
though they be Veoplethat preſume to be my peculiar þ Worms, 
Dutch. Anmot. A Plant to purifie and cleanſe them, ſay ſome; 
but this doth no: ſeem to be ſpoken in favour to them; therefore 
rather ſome poiſonous Plant, which may agree to any other de- 
Aritive Herb, as well as Formwood, and this the Heb. word doth 
intimate, to which purpoſe the water of Gall is mentioned inthe 
next Words both joyned together, Deut. 29. 18. poſbbly the one 
pointing at their Drink, the other at their Bread, both metaphori- 
c:/!y to be underſtood; of which lee Chap. 8. 14. 

16 I will ; * ſcatter them alſo among the Heathen, 
whom neither they nor their Fathers have k known ; 


ſumed them. 

; Either vou ſha!l wander up and down among Strangers, like 
Cain's Curie or rather, you ſhall have no Friend abroad, but be 
ſold as ſo many Slaves trom perion to perſon. k Part of the Curlte 
threatned, Deyr. 28, 64. 1 Neither ſhall this ſerve their turn, but 
I will follow them with the Sword, till they be deſtroyed, pro- 
bably meant of thole that might eſcape our of Feruſalem, and fly 
into Eeyft : The Chaldean ſhould purſue them chither, and either 
take or flay them there, 7z.e. ſuch of them as were appointed for 
Deſt: uction : for otherwiſe, they were not all conſumed, a full 
Lnd was not to be mace, as is promiſed Chap. 5. 19. 

17 Thus faith the LORD of hoſts; »- conſider 
ye, and call for the mourning z women, that they 
may come; aad ſend for o cuaning wemer that they 


may come. | 

m Either in how ſad a Condition you are, what Circumſtances 
yeu are un'ler ; or iather, betl11k your felves wha: Courſe to 
take ; and theretore he puts them upon mourning and bewalling 
their Condi-ion, intimated by the following Expreſſions. n A 
ſort of Perſons, and p1 incipally Women, as more apt tor Paſſions 
in this kind, which they bad among them, 2 Chroy. 35. 25. whole 
Work it was eit) cr to compoſe Fu::eral Elegies, or Panegyvricks 
in praiſe of the Dead, and to act them 1n ſome mourntul manger, 
5 tearing their Hair, and beating their Brea'?s, with other mourn- 
ire poſtures, or to ſing chem io fome doletul Tone, thereby ar- 
tihc/a ly to provoke and excite both Paſſons and Expreſſions of 
Griet in the Friends of the Deceaſed. rather wringing our Tears 
than ſh=diing them, 1:1 which probably they made greater ſeem- 
ins Lawenration, thar choſe thar did really mourn, as being moſt 
cence: ned. Not that God calls upon them to do this as approving 
the Formality. ( though this fooliſh Cuſtom had obtained in 
moſt Ages and Countries) any more, than other Cuſtoms that 
were made uſe of by way 0: Illuſtration ; as the Olympick Games, 
and poſſibly thac PraQtice mentioned, 1 Cor. 15. 29. but makes 
uſe of it, as being cuſtomary, either to excite them to, and 
put them upon true Repentance, or to convince them hereby, 
that they were not able themſelves ſufficiently to bewail fo 
great Calamities as werecoming upon them, intimating hereby, 
that he would give them occaſion for the moſt unfeigned 
Weeping and Lamentation. Such as are moſt skilful in it. 
Anivs 5. 16. Wiſdom being, taken tor Skill in any Arts, as Exod. 


31. 3- ande}ſewhere. 

18 Andlct them make p haſt, and take a wailing, 
7 for us, that our eyes run down with tears, and, 
our eye-hds guſh out with 7 walers. 

þ As by the calling tor their Artificial Mourners, he did inti- 
mate th. grearnets t the Miſery that was coming upon them, 
that wich ..| their Art they could not ſufficiently bewail it ; ſo 
here. by mikirg hafte, heintimates c2e near Approach of it, thar 
1c wascven a' the doors, 9g Pitch upon ſome form of Mourning 
that way be ſuitable to our Condition. r This and the former 
areeach of them a:: Hyferbolical Exprefion, and yet are too little 
to bewa!! the great! els of the Ju./amenc, which ſaics with the 
Prophet's Lamentation, Per. 1. The Prophet would herein inti- 
mate, that they that were ſo ſtupid as to hear the Prophets de- 
nouncing their Judgments with dry eyes, tho' he with'd them to 
have been Fountains of Tears, ſhall now ſuddenly feel, thar they 
ſhall have caule enough to fend for all the Helps, not only real 
but artificial, to {tir up their Mournings. 

19 Fora voice of wailing is heard ont of : Zion, 
How are we x ſpoiled ? We are greatly x confound- 
ed, becauſe we have forſaken the land, becauſe our 


dwellings have caſt zs out. 

t i.e. Feruſalem ; ſpoken in the Preſent Tenſe, after the Pro- 
pherica] Stile, being a frequent way of the Propher's expreſling 
the Certainty of a thing. « How great 1sour Miſery ? or how 
come we. to be in ſuch a deſolate Condition ? poſſibly Expreflions 
of the Artfſial Mourners, or rather their real Sence of it, now it 
1s all too Jate. x Whether thi: be the Complaint of ch? Country 
people forced to fly from their Habication to Feruſalem tor ſhelter, 
or of Feruſalem it ſelf, that could expeR no leſs, it filled them 
with great Conſternation, that they who thought their Houles 
ſhould have continued here for ever, becauie of God's Promiſe. 
Pal. 132. 16, ©. muſt now forlake them, Lev. 18. 25. Either 
their Perſons carried out into Captivity, or have them utter iy 
demoliſhed by the Enemy. 


1 


E M I A EH. 


20 y Yet hear the word of the z LORD, Oye 
a wemen, and let your ear refeive the werd of his 
mouth, ard teach your daughters wailing, ard every 
one her b neighbEour lamentation. 

y Or, therefcre, i. e. 3 Do not thirk I ſpeak words cut of my 
own Mind or Fancy, but vi hat I ſpeak is frcm the Lord. a Either 
thoſe kired Women rrentioned before, or ratker the Werren cf the 
Land, for Gcd would have it cot a ttercenary, but a Fea] Mcurn- 
ing ; and he mertioneth Ween, 1. To upbraid the Men with 
their Stupidity ; 2. As beirg m.cre apt to grieve, thereby to ex- 
preſs the Readineſs that he weu!d bave the Land to be in for 
Mourning ; 3. Beczuſe of the Cecay ard want there would be of 
Men, as is expreſſed in the rext Verſe, by reaſon partly of the 
Slarghter, and partly of tEe Captivity ; therefore here is mention 
of Women with reference to Children in the rext Verſe, after whom 
their Bewels would yearn, and Daughters, either the Scholars of 
the Mourning Worren, or rather, with reference to Tcang-meny 
unto whem they might be given in Marriage 3 4. Becauſe the 
Female Sex is leaft able to he]p themſelves in a Cem:men Caja- 
mity ; Or, 5. Becauſe they wou!d be leſs ſolicitous, but wou1d 1n- 
dulge their Delicacies, Pride, Sloth,and Wantonneſs, 1/4.32.9,11. 
b Heb. 4 Woman her Friend, ramely, that the Grief might ipread 
the farther, and become deeper ; for AﬀeRtions 8nd Paſſions 


_ of what kind ſoever, are aupmented by Company : It notes how 


large and univerſal the Movrning ſhould be, Amos 5. 16. 

21 For death is come up c into our windows, and 
is entred Into our palaces, to cut offthe children trom 
without 4, arc the young-men from the ſtreets. ; 

c The unavoidabl. nels ot the Ruin is expreſſed metaphorically, 
Ezek. 21. 14. Chap. 6.5. moſt likely alluding to the violent and 
univerſal ſtorming of a City, Chap. 5.10. wherein there 1s noTe= 
ſpect had to Sex, Youth or Ape. Several other Alluſions, See 
Engl. Anror. The Chaldears are here underſtcod by death, as 
brirging Death where-ever they come ; a Metorymy of the Effe@. 
4 No ſafety within or without ; the Eremy ſhall cut «all. not 
only thoſe at home, but even.thole that are converſing or play- 
ing in the S:reets, which moſt commonly Toung-men and Chil- 
dren are, wuhap.6.11. 

22 «Speak, thus ſaith the LORD ; even the b ca-- 
caſes of men ſhall fall as dung upon the open c held, 
and as the handful after the d harveſt-man, and none 
ſhall gather e chem. 

4 Leſt they ſhuuld think thefe Things would never be, ceaſe 
not to tell them from me, that they ſhall certainly come to paſs, 
vig, what was ſaid before, and what is ſaid now in this Yerſe (theſe 
Words ſpeak, thus ſaith the Lord, being beſt read ina Parenthe+- 
ſis.) b Heb. A Carcaſs of a Man, noting here and there a ſcattered 
Carcals. c As Feqabel was, 2 Kirgs 9.37. expoſed to all Contempr, 
ſtrewec up and down on the Superficies of the Earth. Heb. Face 
of the Field, and be offenſive by their ſtench to all thar paſs by, 
Chap. 44. 12. 4 Either Jaid in heaps by death, as the Harveſt-man 
doth his Cocks of Hay, or Sheaves of Corn, or rather, they ſhall 
be no more regarded than a few ſcattered Ears that drop our of 
the Reapers hand, which either 1ye on che ground and are eaten 
by Birds, or trod co dirt by Beaſts ; thus God would pour Cons 
tempt upon them, which muſt needs be grievous to ſo proud a 
People as the Jews were. e None ſhall have ſo much reſpeCt to 
chem, or Compaſſion of them, as to afford Burial, Chap 8. 2. 

23 TJ Thus faith the LORD; let not the wiſe 
man glory in his wiſdom, neither let the mighty mar 
glory in his might, nor ler the rich man glory in 
his f riches. 

f The Jews did glory in the Counlel of the” rablggy*1ms, the 
ſtrengh of the Soldiers, and the Wealth of their Cie: 2 1) bore 
God rakes them off from their yain Cor fideric+< that vt oh fey 
Counſels and Policy, Eccl. 9 11, nor thei” Furc-s and 4m, - 
33-16, 17, nor their Wealth, or Riches, P»ov. ! 1 4. Eger. 7.1-. 
ſhould be able to deliver them from being either dettoy4d, or 
carried Captive by the Chal4zans. In thete, cr ſoive of tixcie. Men 
are apt to put their Contidences, and negiect God their only Suc=- 
_ in diſtrets; and therefore he putschem upon that inthe next 

erle. 


24 But * Jet him that glorieth glory in this, that * , og, ;; 


he underſtandeth and g knoweth me, that 7 am the 31, 


LORD which exerciſe loving kindneſs, judgment and = Cor.10. 


righteouſneſs in the hearth : for in theſe things I i de- "7: 
light, faith the LORD. 

g Whether we make any curious Diſtintion between ander- 
ſtanding God,as it that be more ſpeculative,whereby we rightly ap» 
pretend his Nature; and knowing God, as if that be more pradi- 
cal, as direCting the Converſation, we need not here enquire; yet 
certainly both center in this, that we ſo know and underſtand God 
as to truſt in him, and depend on him alone in all Condicions. þ 
Kindneſs,as it relates to his own people, Pſal.5.12. Judgment, with 
refer22ceto his puniſhing the wicked ; Righteouſneſs, namely,as he 
deals juſtly and uprightly with both, Pſal. 92. 15. The meaning 
here, I conceive,is ro ſhew God's orderiy governing and diſpoſing 
of things 1n the World in his diſtributive Juſtice,thar ail things are 
right and equal. 7 Both in himſelf and others, Pſzt. 11. 7. 


25 © Behold the days come, faith the LORD, 


that I will & + puniſhall :h2w2 which are! circumciſed, + Heb. 
vifts Kpor- 


with the uncircumciſed. 

k Viz. By the Babylonians. 1g. 4. Do not think to infiſt 
upon your External Privilege of Circumciſion, that you are Abra- 
hams natural feed,and thereby diſtinguiſhed from other Nations as 
you ſometimes were wont to do of the Temple, that you had God 
in the midſt of you. Do not think that ſhall priviledge you, for 
you ſhall ſee, ic ſhall not be loag &'re I bring the Chaideans, _ 

cnole 


Chap. IX. 


V 


Chap. X. 


thoſe other Nations, which either are circumciiedia the fleſh as 
well as you,an4 upon you alſo who are uncircumctled in heart as 
well as they, or whether Circum:ifion was loſt as being caſt oft 
by them. and ſo they were indeed uncircumciled : God tells them 
they ſhall fare alike : Hence in the Next Perſe, he ranks Fudab 
next to Azypt among the other uncircumciſed Nations; for he 
looks to the Circumciſion of the Heart, not of the Bady ; to 77- 
ward Worſhip, not outward oaly ; therefore ſome read 1t tae cir- 
cumciſed in Uncircumcifion. 


26 Egypt, and Judah, and Edom, and thechil- 

dren of Ammon, and Moab, and all rat are1n rhe 

1 Heb. cut utmoſt m: + coraers, that dwell inthe wilderneſs : 
off into for all rbeſe nations are uncircumciſed, and all the 


corn??s, Of horſe of Irael are n * uncircumciſed in the heart. 
baving 1 Some refer this to the place of their Habitation, as in Cor- 
590 corey ners, remote parts of the \Wildernels, as it were ſeparared 
of their from other Nations and therefore might think themſelves tartheſt 
hair polled. remote from Danger ; bur ſome rather chule to refer it to their 
RET B06 Manners, as in cutting the corners of their Hair, which was for- 
$*- ©  bilden the Fews, Leviticus 19. 27. The like Delcription 1n 
+. Chap. 25.23. n See the foregoing Verſe. God regards not the 
29,29 gutward Sign, bur principally retpe&ts the Circumciſion of the 
Heart. Here ends that Sermon that began at Chap. 7. 


CHAP. X. 


They are forbid to be afraid of the Token of Heaven, an1 cor- 
ſult Tlols which are warm, 1, 5. and no; to be compared 
with th: Majzity ani Power of Gol, who is Jacob's portion 
6, —— 16. The Babylonians deſiroy the Temple; the brutifh 
Paſtors and the Flock are ſcattered, 17, - 22, The Prepher's 
humble Supplications, 23,——25F« 

Ear ye the word which the. LORD ſpeaketh 


unto » you, O houſe of p Iſrael. 

o Here begins another Sermon, moſt probavly relating to 
Fechonias and the Jews that were already in Captivity. p The 
ten Tribes. | 

2 Thus ſaith the LORD, learn not the way of the 
q heathen, and be not diſmayed at the ſigns of 


7 heaven, for the heathen are / diſmayed at them. | 
q The J:ws being to live anong the Chaldeans in theic Cap-| 
tivitr, where many of them were already, the prophet in this 
Sermon admonitheth them againſt the Superſtirions of the Chal- 
dean Idolatries, which he underſtands here by Heathen, who 
were alſo much addicted to AS$rology, and eſteemed the Original 
of Sciences : The Cutoms and their Manners he calls here their 
IWay, as is frequent in Scripture, Lev. 18. 2. and 20. 23. r This 
was a Practice and Scudy fo common among them, that Judz- 
cial Altrclogers, of what nation foever, were genera]ly termed 
Chald.ens ; a practiſe ſo hateful ry God, that ſometimes he po- 
ſitively prohibirs it, Deur. 18. £0, 14. and ſometimes in a way of 
Scorn an:! Derifion, Sarcaſticaliy ſends them to ſuch. TIſ2.47.13. 
and often labaurs to perſwade againſt it ; For though Aſtronomy 
be not only iawful, bur uſeful, as being 
Rules - of Art whereby many Actions of Humane Life are 
direQed, and guided, and proportioned, yet Judiciary Aſtrology 
is indeed oripinally Di2bolical and Heathenith ; and though God 
. do ſuffer their Predictions ſometimes to fall out righe, yet it is 
eo puniſh the Curiofity of the Enquirer. { q. d. Leavethis to 
Heathens ; it doth not become God's People, who do wholly 
depend upon him; for indeed the Heathen, as many ignorant 
Chriſtians do to this dav, where more atraid ol the Signs of Hea- 
ven, and Aſtrological ?reditions, than of God, and what is fore- 
cold in his Word of Prophecy ; as if Things were governed ra- 
ther by the Inflaences ot the Stars than the Providence of God. 
Not :bue that we may be affefted with ſuch preter-natural Ap. 
pearances in the World, whi:h God doth extraordinarily ceuſe 
to appear, as ſome Tokens ot his approaching Judgments, Joel 2. 
30, 31. Maith. 24.7. Luke 21. 11, : 
3 For the | cuſtoms of the pcople are tr vain - for 
+ lHeb. Fore cutteth atrez out of the x foreſt, the work of 


Staturzs the hands of the workman, with the axe. 
or Or4i- t 7. e. Sach Courſes, Inſtitucions, idolatrous Cuſtoms,and Ce- 
Ninces are remoniesas theſe, that many People follow, they are vain, and 
vanity. itis a fooliſhand wicked thing, that any that profeſs the true 
*114. 44. God, ſhould give heed to {u-h lying Vanities. u Here he an- 
9, 12, TC. nexeth their Idolatry to their Aſtrology, q. d. They cut down Tim- 
ber to make the Images and Repreſentations of theſe Stars and 
Plannets, that they fear and Worſhip as Gods, either 1n memorial 
of them, when they could not ſee them, or elſe upon a ſuper- 
ſticious Conceit that the Stars. which they worſkipded, aig by 
iome Magick Art convey ſome Vertue or Spirit into thele Statues 
or Images ; or rather,he doth ſet forth the Folly of the Heathen, 
that whereas for the matter of them, they are but a peice of 
Wool, a Tree out of the Foreſt ; and as to the form of them, 
no other than the Carver, a ſorry Man, is pleated to put them 
into by his Ax.,{which I ſuppoſe is here put for any cutting Tool | 
of the Artiſt, whereby he thapes it ;)yet they are afraid of theſe, 

asif they were Gods, Iſa. 40. 20. See on Fer. 8. 2. 
4 They deck it with filver and with gold; they 
faſten it with nails and with x hammers, that M 


move nor. 

x A {arther Deſcription of their Workmanſhip. Having ro other 
Conelin:(s but what they confer upoa it, and they no greater 
ſecuritz or cert*inty of it, than as they can with hammer and 
Nutl mike it tat, and fix it to ſome place, the woodden God 
being 197 able to preſerve it ſelf from falling ; therefore 1: is ra- 
ther to be m2ant of tatening to ſome Wall, or Pillar, than of 
faſtening cheir parts cogether, becauſe they ſeem to be cut out of 
one «ntire Pizce, anal thzeretore need 1t not. 

Vo!. Il, 


SEREMIAH 


'$S ma - 
2D £2 

5 They areupright as the y palm-tree, * but {peak 21454 25» 
z Not : they muit needs be * born, becauſe they can- - w # 
6 - - o 25, 16. 
not 4 go: Be not afraid ofb them, for they * cat- +1; 45 
not do evil, neither alſo zs i in them to do good. 1, -. 

y The nature of which is to grow upright and call, without * !{a.q ts 
any Branchings, tiilit comes to the top, thereby poliibly rep: e- 2, 
lenuing Majeſty. 4 Looking asif they were abou: to ipeak,{tzn- 

!0g 10 a ſpeaxing poſture, but have not a word to uter, being 
only dumb Stocks, woodden Gods. 4 They move no farther or 
faſter than you life them, either whe1 vou go to fet themup, 


or upon any occation of Removal: As iff as taxes, being it1- 
deed bur ſticks, b They can do you no more narm, than ce 
Signs of Heaven could do.They are bur dead ſtocks. The Hearhens 
worſhipped tome ldos that they might do them good, and others 
that they mighr do them no harm ; but Gods tells them tere, 
they can do rcisver good or barm, as in the next words: Taey can 
neither puniſh nor reward. They can neither hurt their Enemics 
nor help their Friends : By this the true God will be diſtinguiſhed 
trom Idols, that he alone can foretel! things to come, and he 
alone can reward or puniſh, 1/2.48. 5- and therefore the Prophet 
endeavours to run them off from their Idols co the true God. 

6 For c as much as * there 7 none like unto thee, **" 
O LORD: thou art great d, and thy name s great ,''.*.. 
IN e might. Le, 

c This Particle [A Afin isto be taken here cauſally, and reters 
either to what goes before, ſhewing there is no Compariſon be- 
eween God and TIols ; or rather, to what follows, as the Ground 
and Realon of all due Subjeftion to God ; as in the next Y-rſe. 

4 Or, thou art tranicendently great. ez.e. Though Idols may 
have fomething of a Name 10 the World among the Heathe 1, yer 
there was nothing of their real Power or Might ſeen ; or 1t the 


Devil mighe a tomthing through them to delude the Worid, 
yet nothing to be compared with that Mighe that hath manifeſted 
it ſelf in God's Works, Pl. 106. $. and 111. 6. All the Works 
of Idols are either none, or feeble and weak, Yer. $, | 

7 * Who would not fear thee, O king of fnati- * Rev. x7. 
ons ? for || to thee doth ic appertain : for as much #_ ., 
as among all the wiſe cz of the nations, and in all}; ;1g 
their kingdoms zhecre z5 none like g unto thee. 

f He is called a great King, Mal. 1. 14. q. d. Thou, by whom 
all nations are governed, and all Afﬀairs in them di\poſed, and by 
none elle, who would worſhip any bur thee ; or be afraid of anv 
but thee, ſeeing it 1s fic for, and therefore can belong to none, 
beſides, as in the nexr words. It 1s thy right and Cue. Or,who can 
be fo ſtupid as no: to acknowledge one tupream Being, and this 
to be but one, as #monsg the Heathens, Secrates, Plato, Seneca, 
and divers others did ; and rnerefore 15 !t not a prodigious thing, 
'that any ſhould to withheld rhe truth in Unrighteoulnets, be fo 
'groſs as ro worſhip many Gods? g q. 4d. If you fearch among 
all the 1Z/7(e-men and Philoſophers, all the Great Men and Rulers 
'1n their Kingdems. (For theſe the Heachens were wont to wor- 
fhip as Gods ater Deatn, #7{e-men tor their Wiſdom, and Kings 


lubje& to Reaton, and | for their Power.)  Y« u'll find rore to compare with God either , 
| tor Wiſdom or Power : Their Wiſe-men are but as lo many Foals. 


S Burt they are | altogether * þ brutiſhand / fool- f Heb 1 7 
uh : the & ſtock is a doctrine of / vaniries. uy." 


j . NC ?., 
þ The awe that the Idol doth impreſs upon carnal mens minds, + p.-; . 


and thereby taking them off trom a due Apprehenſion of the Eſ- Px 
lence of God,doth keep them between ſuch hope and Fear,that, '* 
they become as fenflets and as inapprehenſive of any true worſhip PA «Aa 
as Brutes, 7 Not only fome ot them, but even al!, both Fews aud mg Ig 
Gentiles, q.d. I need not ftand to particularize, but take them a1} **<* ©<* 
together, they are become ſtupid T0!aters, and have drunk in the Mm 
mot grots ſuperſtitions of the Gentiles,as Rom.1.1 9,21. þ A Synec- ey 
docbe pur for all forts of Idols,of what Materials {oever; anda afe-* ** ©? 
tonymy of the Matter,co render them contemptible. An Idol is called 

a Dodrine of Varjty, either as deluding the ignorant,or in themſelves 
contidered ; they are meer vain,foliſh, helplets things. ! The He- 

brew Word Mylar is taken for bad Inſtruction, Prov.16.22. g. 4, 

[t 1s an eafie Matter to prove them very Fools, and br: 

when they look upon a ſtock, a peice of wood, to be their God, 

which hath neither Knowledge nor Providence, and therefore 

muſt needs be a Doctrine of Vanity,when they think to be :a22he 
Devotion by Images,which 1s a teacher of Lyes ; that faich co rhe 

dunb ſtone it ſhall teach, Hib. 2.18, 19. like that Dotrine of D- 

vils firſt broached by Pope Gregory, who firſt conmended v2r-- 

nus Biſhop of Maſſiliz tor not peimitting Images to be worthin« 

ped, but reproved him for throwing them ou: of the Church e- 

cauſe they ſerve for Orraments,and Lay-mwens Bocks,which tepce 


hath been received as a Catb:!ich DcCrins, that images are Lay- 


mens Books. 

9 m Silyer ſpread into plates 1s bronght from # 
Tarſhiſh, and gokd from » Uphaz, the wort of the 
workman, and of the hands of the p founder : blue 
and purple z- their q clothing : they ae all the work 
of r cunning mer. 

m It was no6 Wood waſhed with G:1?, nor maſly $:/er or 
Gold, but covered over with Plates of Silver or Gold, Excl, 9.3 
n From ſome remote place,prozably from Sra.n, whence ihe beſt 
Gold came ; Tarſhiſh is the pi oper Name of a Sea-Town 1a C:/; 


cit, Exeh. 27. 12,25 Jonah 1.3. and being a noted Port, from 
wheixce they had Vafſige ro Africa, I.i{/2, and other remote 
Coun:ries, it 1s uſually put tor the Ocean, ad may as well (1202 
fie from any Place beyon4 1h Sea, It vou rake ic properly, then 
poſſibly it 15 noted as the beſt Silver coming ti om cnence, as Hr! 25 
for the beſt Gold ; for- theugh we real allo of Gold comin2 
from thence, I KINges to. 22. 2 Chron. g 13. yel, whete the mold 
proper commodities @ it are monmivoned, we read of 19 Gold, Erek, 
27.12, unlels what {eems 741-07 foDg brought : :gher. Per. 23, 

F231 6 7. 8. 


hi! 


, 
"1 


Chap. RY. 


6 5. e. Probably the beſt Gold coming from thence 1n thoſe 
davs : asthe beſt Silver from Tarſhiſh:. And that here was the beſt 
Gold is probable trom Dan. 10. 5. There are various conjectures 
ar what place this points at, whether the ſame with Phas, or Fez 
bv an Athar:{.c; or Ophir a place not far from Tarſhiſh, and divers 
other places are conjeCtured ; and ſome think it refersto 00 place 
at all, but to pointat the excellency of rhe Gold only ; but it 15 not 
the deſign that this Comment ſhould {well with things rather con- 
jectura} than profitable. It is enough to know, that this place in- 
rends the pureſt Gold. p Thus faith he, the Artificer takes it, and 
each, according to his Art, ſhapes it, and adorns it ; fits the S1]ver 
and the Gold for it. q Expoſitors differing about the mater1als 
cur of which they were died, do difler alſo in the colours, which 
here are called Blue or Purple; the diſpute is not worth the while 
in a vul-ar Comment; they that will may conſult the Engl. Annor. 
Either this relates to the further adorning thoſe rich Idols of Szl- 
ver and Gold : or it implies other Artiſts,ſuch as ſhape,or ſew Silk 
or Cloth, Woollen or Linen, made uſe of ro make theſe Garments 
for thoſe Idols of more inferiour materials, as Wood or Stone, 
the other being ſufficiently beautified without them. » 7. e. The 
choiceſt Men in their reſpe&ive Arts were picked out for this 
work, that there might be nothing wanting as to exaCtneſs, rich- 
neſs and curioſity. All this the Prophet ſpeaks the more to ridi- 
cule their Idols, as if all this would put any thing of power, ver- 
rue, or excellency in them. Still deeft aliquzd intus. 


+ Heb.Ged 7, Butthe LORD # theÞ/ true GOD, he #« the 
20% r living GOD, and an « * everlaſting King: at his 
ou of wrath the earth ſhall » tremble, and the nations ſhall 
Ererrity. not be able to abide his y indignation. = 

* Plal. 10. | g. d. All theſeare but falſe Gods: Fehovah 1s the alone true 
16. God ; they are but Iyes, and the teachers of lyes ; God is Truth 


®(3ens 1.6, 
Chap. 51, 
I fy Os - 

* Jobs. $8. 
Pial.104.2 
Iſa. 40.22, 


it ſelf, aud that, both in regard of his Eſſence, as is aſcribed to 
Chriſt, 1.Joh. 5.20. and alſo in regard of his Fazthſulneſs, Numb, 
23.19. Pſal.31. 5. t Theſe are all but dead ſtocks and ſtones, Fe- 
hovah is the only Living God, having Life in himſelf, and giving 
Lite to all things elſe, Fohn 5. 21,26. Hence theſe Idols are not 
only more bale than any other Creature, but even viler than the 
matter it ſelf of which they are made. u Theſe though account- 
ed Kirgs, and counteranced by Kings, yet both they and their 
Kings do all periſh ; time devours them all with worm or ruſt, 
er by injuries, and violence offered to them in the next Verſe, but 
none of thele or any thing elſe car affect the true God ; he is Ever- 
Liſting. x He can with his Look, or Frown make the Foundations 
of the Heaven and the Earth to ſhake ; whereas theſe ſtocks can 
move them no more than they can themſelves ; which 1s not one 
hairs breadth from their Stations. y Not able either to ſtop it, or 
bear it, but muſt ſtoop, and fall under ir, Pſal. 76. 7. The wicked 
will not be able to land in Fudgmenr, Pla]. 1. 5. 

11 Thus ſhall ye ſay z untothem, The Gods that 
have not made 4 the heavens and the b earth, ever 
they ſhall periſh from the earth, and from under theſe 


heavens. 

7 Viz. To your great Lords the Babylonians, when they ſhall 
ſolicite you to Worſhip Idols» a This ſeems to have ſome alluſion 
toa ſaying common among thoſe Greeks, that held one Supream 
Deity, Let him that ſaith he is a God, make another World. 
b Here is noted, both how frail they are, they ſhall periſh, and 
how weak they are, they could not make the Heaven, or the 
Earth. This Verſe is writ in the Chaldean Tongue, and not in 
the Hebrew , that when they came among them that did worſhip 
their Idols, they might openly and plainly profeſs the true God 
in that Janguage which the Enemies underſtood better than they 
did the Hebrew, and that in ſuch kind of bold language as this; 
Let all thoſe Gods periſh from off the Earth, and under the Hea- 
vens, that were not able to make either, It is an Imprecation upon 
their Idols. ; 

12 He * hath made the c earth by his d power, 
he hath e eſtabliſhed the World by his wiſdom, 
and * hath ſtretched out the f heavens by his diſ- 


Cretlon. 

In this and the next Perſe, the Prophet enumerates ſome parti- 
culars, wherein God is tranſcendently above all Creatures, which 
he hath made much more above Idols, which are the works of 
mans hands, e Afﬀs 14.15. i.e. This whole Globe conſiſting of 
Waters, as well as Earth. d It muſt needs ſpeak an Almighty Power 
to make ſuch a vaſt Body. Where would the Idols have found 
Materials, of which to have compoſed ſuch a Body and Bulk. The 
true God was not ata loſs ; he drew them out nothing, and com- 
manded them into a being by the word of his Power, Gen. 1, 1. 
e Either he hath made it firm, ſolid and unmoveable, 7z. e. off 
from its Baſis, or rather Center ( for it is out of our Sphere and 
Province here to meddle either with the fixation, or the motion 
of it ; that is left to the old and new Philoſophers to diſpute among 
themſelves) or elſe by eſtabliſhing we underſtand, he hath appoint- 
ed it its uſe, or hath prepared it to be every way ſubſervient to the 
Inhabitants thereof, both as to delight in proſpe&, and varieties 
of Recreation, by its ornamental parts in Mountains, little Hills, 
Woods, Meadows, Fields, Wc. and neceſſity to accomodate Man 
and Beaſt with all things uſeful, both for Habitation, and Provi- 
f10n to ſuſtain the natural Life, and to praiſe and. magnifie the 
founder of it, Gen. IT. 11, 12. All which cannot chuſe but greatly 
manifeſt the aunſearchable wiſdom of God, f Theſe are ſtretched 
our, 1. e. expanded and ſpread over our head, through the whole 
circumference of the Earth with all their glorious furniture, 
and varieties of motions moving regularly in their ſevera] 
Orbs, 7. e. not varying the leaſt degree, either in time or ſpace 
irom the Order and Law that God hath ſet them, even in thoſe 
which are more excentrick and erratick ; which fnuſt needsargue 
an unparalle!'d $kill, and underſtanding in God, which the word 


JEREMIAH 


| 


diſcretion doth here properly fignifie, Exsd. 36.1, Fub 12. 13. 
all which are his handy work, and do delare bis glory, Plalm 
I9. I. | : 
13 When heuttereth his g voice ?here z- a || mult1- 
tude of waters in the h heavens, and he cauſeth the z 
vapours to aſcend from the ends of the earth : he 


Chap. X. 


Or, noiſe, 


maketh lightnings || with & rain, and bringeth forth pts for 
atm. 


the wind out of his / treaſures. 

g As in the former Verſe he relates Gods unſpeakable Power 
andWiſdom in his creating and fixing the ſtated order of things,ſo 
here he further ſets it forth in his providential ordering and diſpo- 
ſing their accidents, i, e. either at his command when heis pleaſed 
to call for the Rarn ; or rather, when he thundereth in the Heavens, 
Fob 37. 4, 5. Pſal. 77. 18+ Though it often rains when it thunders 
not, and thunders when it rains not, yet when 1t- rains and thunders 
the Rain uſually falls more forcibly from the Clouds, and in 
more ſudden plenty, as it were a more immediate conſequent of it, 
b Viz. The loweſt Heaven, the Region of the Air. i Exhalati- 
ons, whether wet or dry, cauſing Wind or Rain, by the aſcending 
whereof the lower Heavens gather them into Clouds,which,when 
full and burdened, deſcended in ſhowers for the conveniences of 
the Earth and Springs. k Though Fire and Water be contrary, 
yet it opens the Clouds to make way for the Rain, and is produ- 
ced in the midſt of waters,all which is wonderful. / Which parzly 


notes that it is ſecret and hidden, as coming from the Caverns and ' 


hollow parts of the earth. No Man knows from whence they come, 
or whiher they go, Fohn 3.8. and it is wonderful to obſerve how 
ſuddenly at a calm time the Winds will riſe ; how they will whirle 
about, how various, unconſtant, and contrary in their motions ; 
and partly the plenty both for vehemency and continuance3ſignified 
alſo by treaſures; the plenty of Snow and Hail being thus ex- 
preſſed, Fob 38. 22. and parilythat it is at his diſpoſal to bring out 
of his Treaſure when he pleaſes. See Pſal. 135. 7. 


14 Every man || js * brutiſh in hzs m knowledge | g,, ;; 


every founder is - confounded by the graven Image more bru- 
for his molten Image # o falſhood, and rhere 75 no 73/h than 


breath in them, 

m Some limit it to the makers of theſe Idols, that can emplo 
their Artsand Wits to no better purpoſe, than to frame ſuch Stocks 
into Gods: this ſuits the next expreſſion ; Men are bewitched and 
beſotted by theſe things, ſoasto ſee no more into their Folly, 
than if they were Brutes: Ard the reaſon that it hath taken ſuch 
root may be becauſe of Mens ſo much admiring the Art of Carving 
and Painting, or rather through their Ignorance, g. d. It fs for 
want of knowledge, and underſtanding that Men are thus brutiſh, 
Tſa. 44-18. 1 Either it ſhall turn to his reproach, or rather, he 
ſhall tee his folly, and ſhall be aſhamed of it when he ſhall diſco- 
ver it, that ever he ſhould make ſuch a thing, and truſt in it, 
and expoſe 1t to be adored by others. 0 It is not that which it pre- 
tends to be, but a deceitful thing, a Lye ; they turn the truth of God 
into a lye, Rom. t« 25. p They have nothing of life in them, nay 
that very vegetative life, that once was in their Stocks, is now 
loſt, much leſs are they Spirits ſent down from Heaven. 

15 They are vanity and the work of q errors, in 
the time of their viſitation they ſhall » periſh. 

q Either in their riſe, as ſpringing trom Men of corrupt Minds ; 
or the foundation of them . A Metonomy of the effef. Teachers 
and Encouragers of Lyes, Hab.z+ 18. Things rather to be ſcoffed 
at and derided, than adored, and worſhipped ; and it is expreſſed 
in the plural number to note the multiplicity of them. r When 
God ſhall havea controverſie with them, ſhall come to reckon 
with B4bylon and her Idols,they and their Worſhippers ſhall be de- 
ſtroyed ; alluding poſſibly,to the manner of the Pagan Conqueſts, 
who were wont to carry away both Perſons, and the Idols of the 
Country, and either break them to pieces, or burn them : Thus 
were they ſerv'd by the Per;7zns. See on Iſa. 45. 1. This poſſibly 
may be ſpoken by way of Encouragement tothe Fews, that took 
offence at the Chalde2n Idol that were ſet up in their light. That 
God may ſtrengthen their Patience, he tel!s them he viſits them in 
_ and their Enemies in ;Fudgment ; he will deſtroy thoſe 

ols. 


F 


to knew. 


Chap» 51. 


17, 18, 


16 * The /portion of Jacob z- not like them, for * Chap: 
he is the e former of ll things, and Iſrael is the u 57 29, 


rod of his inheritance, the LORD of hoſts - his 
name. 

| A Periphrafis for the true God,who vouchſafeth to be the por- 
tion of his People, and to be ſo called, Deut, 32. 9. Pſal. 16. 5. 
and many other places; becauſe he is in Covenant with his People 
in the Meſſiah, whoſe co-heirs are as dear to him as a Portion is, 
that deſcends to a Man by Inheritance ; and he tells you his Name 
in the cloſe of the Verſe, Iſa.47. 44. one who hath the whole Hoſt 
of Heaven and Earth at his diſpoſal. : Idols are things framed and 
formed, but God is the former of all things, The maker of Heaven 
and Earth, u So called, becauſe the Portions and Inheritances of 
Iſrael were meaſured by a Line, Reed or Rod, and therefore called 
the Rod of his Inheritance, Deut: 32. 8,9. Pſal. 74. 2. and becauſe 
they were his by a continual Line of Succeſſion. Befide, Iſra-! 
i's DAU, Schebet, the Rod, or Scepter of his Inheritance, becauſe 


God did tet up his Kingdom in Iſrael. 


17 Gather up thy y wares out of the land, O + in- t Heb. 7s: 


habitant of the z fortreſs. h 


The Prophet now enters upon another ſubje&, and probably 
begins another Sermon. 2. e, Every thing thou haſt any advan- 
tage by, not only thy Demefickh Concerns, but all thy Traffque 
and Merchazdize, where ever thou haſt any Concerns in the Land, 
as Men uſe to do in caſe of Invaſion by an Enemy, to ſecure them, 
It ſeems to be a Sarcaſm, or kind of Military Deriſim. + This 


[7 


aditrefs. 


Chap. X. 


T I Sam. 
25. 29. 


is underſtood by ſome, as ſpoken to the Babylonians, that they 
ſhould make proviſion for their eſcape, their Idols being not able 
to ſave them 3 but this ſeems to be remote from the Prophet's 
meaning : It is rather therefore direCted tothe Inhabitants of Fe- 
ruſalem, that being the chief place of ſecurity in Fudea, and wy a 
Synecdoche, to all other places that they promiſed themſelves le- 


curity in; the approaching deſtruction being to pals through the 
whole Country» ' 

18 For thus ſaith the LORD, Behold, I will 2 * 
ling out the inhabitants of the land at this once, and 
will diſtreſs them, that they may find z# ſo b. 


2 It notes with how much violence an ſpeed, and with eaſe the 
Chaldeans ſhall hurry away the People into Babylonz as the ſtone 
doth ſwittly, and violently paſs, which isthrown out of a Sling, 
with ſo mnch eaſe, and therefore it is ſaid at this once. I will not 
delay, but make one thorough quick work of it ; noting not only 
the time, but implying the clear riddance that he would make of 
them, 2 Chron. 36. 17, 18, 19. They had been often aſſaulred by 
Enemies, and (ſometimes they redeemed themſelves, ſometimes 
delivered by God, their Enemies being ſometimes divided, but it 
ſhould not be ſo now, but all ſwept away. b That they may ſee 
Tam in good earneſt ; that have not goly ſaid it, but they ſhall 
find that I will execute it, and though they would never believe 
it, yet they ſhall actually find the Truth of my Threatnings. See 
Chap. 5.12, 13. Extk. 6. 10. EE 

19 Wo is me for my hurt ; my wound 1s e griev- 
ous : but I ſaid, Truly this z- a grief, and I muſt 4 
bear It. 

c Here the Prophet doth not ſo much expreſs his own Sorrow, 
though that be great, as perlonate the Sorrow and Complaint that 
the Land, i.e. the People of the Land, manifeſt, or at leaſt oughe 
to do; which becauſe they do not; cauſeth no little grief In the 
Prophet himſelf, who cannot but be affeted with their condition, 
which he calls not only a hurt, but a wound, and both of them ve- 
ry grievous. d Or -rather, but I better conſider it, and faid 
within my ſelf, I were as good be filent. It is indeed a greif grie- 
w045 in it felt, and grievous that I muſt ſmorher it, and uot com- 
plain, but it is my duty to bear it patiently. There is in this ex- 
preſſion a double neceſlary preparation to Repentance, v/F. I. An 
acknowledgment that they had deſervedly brought the Judgment 
upon themlelves, and that therefore, 2. They would patiently bear 
it; and it doth imply ſomething of their ſtupidity, q. d. We could 
not have imagined the damage could have been ſo very great, but 
now we ſee how it is : We will patiently bear the indignation of the 
Lord, becauſe we have ſinned again#t him. If this be not the mean- 
jng,then it is a further obſtinate perſiſting in their Rebelling, 9.4. 
Seeing it muſt be ſo, truly it is very grievous, but I am bound 
now to bear it, and rub through it as well as I can: A further 
perſiſting in their Pertinancy : Bur 1 incline moſt to the former 
Sence. 

20 My tabernacle is ſpoiled, and all my cords are 
e broken; my children are gone forth of fme, an 
they are g not : there is none to ſtretch torth my tent 


h any more, and to ſet up my curtains. 

e He ptoceeds in his proſopopeia to bring in the Land, or the 
Inhabitants thereof enumerating their Calamities, and by a Meza- 
phor ſets out the overthrow of the Land of Feruſalem, by the 
breaking of the Cords of a Tabernacle, the uſe whereof is to faſten 
it on every fide to Stakes in the ground, which Cords being 
broken the Tabernacle falls, implying all the ſupports of City and 
Country were gone, nothing but deſolation to be expected. See 
Chap. 4120. f Either the Inhabitants of the Land ; or the leſſer 
Cities, being frequently called Daughters, viz. the Chaldeans 
have ſnatched them away from me, and carried them into Capti- 
vity. g Of the phraſe and meaning of it, ſee Chap. Zr. 15. h7.e. 
'Tis irrevocable, I am without all help either for Defence or Beau- 
ty, or any thing to regain my priſtine ſtate; which he chuſeth to 
deſcribe here by continuing this Meraphor (rather than any other) 
of a Shepherds Tent ; poſſibly inſinuating the ground of it to ariſe 
principally from their Paſtors, the neglect both of their Civil and 
Ecclefiaftical Governours, which the next Verle favours. 


21 For the Paſtors are become brutiſh, and have 
not ſought ; the LORD &; therefore they ſhall not / 


proſper, and all their flocks ſhall be m2 ſcattered. 

. # Not that the Prophet takes off all blame fromthe People, but 
that he layeth itchiefly upon the Rulers of Church and State ; for 
{ois Paſtor taken frequently. See Chap, 36, 1, 2, 3- k Not ſought 
unto him, and taken him into their Counſels. ! The Prophet gives 
the reaſon why nothing went well with them, namely, becauſe 
there was no regard had to Godljneſs, without which we cannot 
expect a bleſling upon any thing. m 2. e. All that have been com- 
mitted to their care, ſhall be carried unto Babylon, and divers of 
them diſperſed abroad into ſeveral Countries for their ſakes. 


22 Behold, the noiſe of the bruit is come, and a 


.great commotion 7 out of the north-country * o, to 
- makes the cities of Judah deſolate, anda den of dra- 


£0NnsSp. 

7 The Prophet had divers times ſounded thisalarm in their ears, 
bur to very little purpoſe; his words ſeemed but as idle Tales;they 
believed him not: He ſpeaks of it partly, as one conceiving what 


. dreadful Commorions and Concuſfions would be upon the Land by 


the clattering of Arms, pranci 
ing of Trumpets, and ratlin 
Earth to ſhake under them, 


ngs and neighings of Horſes,ſound- 
g of Charriots, making as it were the 
] waen that vaſt Army of the Chaldeans 
ſhould furiouſly break in upon them : Parth, inftauating an An- 
zitheſts oppoſing the voice of God's Prophets, ( that had ſo often 
ipoken of this,bur they would not hear)againſt this dreadful note, 
which they could not but hear, and lee, and feel coo. Sothat they 


SEREMIAH 


that would not learn of God's Prophets, ſhall be ſent to harder 
Maſters, that ſhall reach them in a manner as Gi4esn did the Men 
of Succoth, Fudges 8. 16. 0 See Chap. 1. 10. and 5. 15. p See 
on Chap. 9.11. 


rect his ſteps r. 
b The Prophet finding that all he could ſay prevailed nothing 


to God, r How fartheſe words concern Pelagianiſm, or Free-will, 

either one way or other, or whether at all, concerns not this Com- 

ment ; they ſeem /{rerally to be the words of the Prophet, relating 

either to himſe/fand other Holy Men, g. 4. It is not in our power, 

neither do we preſume to ſtop this Decree of thine againſt Fudez ; 
orelle to the Enemzes in general, or Nebuchadnez3ar in particular, 
q. d- We know all their Marches and Defigns are of thine appoint 
ing, and all their Atchievments of thine Ordering : Ic is thy Pro- 
vidence that directs every ftep they take againſt this Land, withour 
whom no Counſels ſhall proiper ; who alone turneſt Mens Hearts 

which way thou pleateſt, Prov. 21. 1. who canſt bring Men on,or 

turn them back ; as thou ſeeſt good, Tſe. 37. 29. ſo that no Mans 
way 1s properly his own, to give them what ſucceſs he will ; or 

to the People, whereby he doth tacitly infinuate, that all the Coun- 

ſels and Meaſures they think to take, whether by their own 
ſtrength at home,or Confederacies and Alliances abroad will avail 
nothing; however they may think to eſcape by ſome Devices, or 
Stratagems of their own, it is to no purpole, God can overturn all 
in a moment, when Men think their Counſelsare ripe, and they 
wantnothing but execution;or laſtly,as others think, this is by way 
of petition, q. d. Lord we know it is not in our power to divert 
theſe Judgments that are coming upon us by the Chal4zans, bur 
thou canſt moderate, and limit them as thou plealeſt, ſeeing all 
their Deſigns are ordered by thy Providence, they cannot do any 
thing againſt us without thy permiſſion ; this the next Verle 
leems to favour. 


ment f, not in thine an 
to nothing. 


Chap. Xt. 


234 O LORD, q I know that the ® way of man* Prov.re. 
z5 not in himſelf; zx zs nor in man that walketh to di- 71. & 20- 


24. 


upon this People, but they rather grew worſe, he turns himſelf _ 


{ q- d. Seeing thou wilt bring the Cha!4zzrs upon us to puniſh 7 


us for our ſins, let it be a Correfion only, not a D:ſtrufion, and 
utter ruine, # Let it be in meaſure, zn judgment, i, e. in wiſdom, 
proportioning 1t as a Father towards his Children, Chap. 30. 11, 
tor ſo the Hebrew Miſhpaz ſignifies,and thus judgment is taken, Iſa, 
30.18. We refuſe not Correfion, but we caſt our ſelves upon 
thee, therefore in the midſt of judgment remember mercy. u The 
reaſon of this he gives in the next Claule, leſt it thou ſhould 
let out thy fury upon me, thou ſhould bring me to nothing, ie. 
thou wouldſt utterly conſume me, or make me few, as Heb- 
that I ſhould be no more a People, never lift up th: Head 
again. 

25 Ponr out thy fury upon the heathen » that 
know thee not, and upon the families thar call nor, 
on thy namey: tor they have eaten up Jacob, and 
, devoured him, and conſumed him, and have made 


his habitation deſolate z. 

x This may imply both Petition, that God would do ſo, and 
Predifion that God will certainly do fo ; which toward the cloſe 
of the Prophecy we find was fulfilled; God firſt ſending the King 
of Bbylon to overthrow divers of the Heathen Nations, and then 
Babylon ic ſelf deſtroyed with a great deſtru&ion. He will make a 
difference between us and the Heathen, ſuch as know thee nor, z. e« 
;Such as do not acknowledge and ewn thee for their God. The 


; Phraſe is frequent, 1 Sam. 2. 12. Fob 18. 21. 2 Theſ. 1.8. The 


ſenſe is expreſſed here in the next words," that do not call on thy 
| 32me. y A Synecdoche,one part of Worſhip put for the whole,q. d. Tf 
thou wilt be pouring out thy fury, the effe&ts of it be to thine 


| Enemies, not unto thine own People, who worſhip thee. x Here he 


gives a reaſon as a motive to God, why he ſhould do ſo ; which 
. words ſee explained on Pjal. 79.5, 6, 7. whence they are taken. 
and poſſibly Feremiah himſelf was the Author of that Pſalm after 
the City was deſtroyed, and he carried into Egypt ; and for the 
Phraſe of devouring him, ſee Chap. 8. 16. 


CHAP. XI. 


God's Covenant, 1, —— 7. Their Diſsbedience, $, — 19, Evils 
t0 come on them, 11, —— 17. and on the Men of Anathoth, for 
Conſpiring to kill Jeremiah, 18, —— 23. | 


I HE word that came to Jeremiah from the 
LORD, ſaying 2. 
'  e What time, and in what manner this Revelation came from 

God to the Prophet is not expreſſed, whether it were in the days 

of Fofzah or Fehoiakim. | 

2 Hear ye the words of this covenant b, and ſpeak 
unto the men of Judah, and to the Inhabitants 9! 


Jeruſalem, 
; b God ſpeaking in the plural number, not h-ar thou, but h-ar 
ye, makes ſome conjecture,that this was a charge given to ſome 0- 
ther Prophets, either Zphaniah (if it were in Foſcah's time, Zep4- 
1. 1.) or Hriah (if it were in the time of Fehozachim. )) The term 
this alſo manifeſts,that the Book of the Law was before Feremiah's 
time, for all conclude, that the Covenant here ipoten of, was the 
Covenant of the Law of God, delivered by My/es, to which the 
People more than once promiſed obedience. 


3 And fay thou untothem, Thus ſaith the LORD 


- 


of hoſts, * Curſed be the man that obeyeth not the * Gai. -.! 
L4 


words of this covenant 4, 
| 
4 In 


rN 
-t 


24 O LORD, * corre& me /, 'but with judg-*pai. 6.z. 
ger 4, leſt thou | bring me 8: 38. :.. 
t Heb. 4:- 


niſh me. 


j 
'q 
' 
| 


—_— 


Chap. XI. 


* Deut. 4 
JO. 
I King, 8+ 


Let. 7. 


1z.& 8. 


IS.XC9.5. 


= 1 Tel), 


[1 
Am: n. 


=? 
”v ey 3 5 
W;is " 3. Ko 


d In Deuteronomy 27, 26. it is Cnrſed be he that confirmeth nt all 
the Words of this Law t0 do them, and all the People foall fay, 
Amen. The Peoples ſaying Amen teſtified their aſſent, and mace 
the Law a Covenant, but they Fad befides formally and explil- 
citly coveranted with God, Exod. 2.4. 3, 7. with religious Rites 
and Ceremonies uſed in ſtipulations, and afterwards contented 
that God ſhould puniſh thole taat violated tnat Covenat, Deut. 
P. *6. 

« / » - : E 

+ Which I commanded your fathers e in the day 
that | brought them forth out of the land of EgyPt, 
from the * iron furnace, f ſaying, * Obey my Voce, 
and do them according to all which I command 
you g, ſo-ſhall ye be my people, and I will be your 
God h. EE: _ 

e Which Law ( that you by your reſtipulation made a forma 
Covenant ) I that am the Lord, and fo had a foveraign power tO 
lav Laws upon my Creatures, commanded your Fathers. fAnd 
obliged them ro obedience betore I laid my Law upon them, by 


bringing them out ofthe 
in Iron is melted, which may either be taken literally 


at Iron Furnaces, being a very hard, and ſervile Jabour. g For 
which kindneis I required no more of them buta gent] 
them in charge. hNor 1d j | 
but 1 allo encouraged them to the obedience of 1t, 
promtle, that if they would abey tle 


FEREMIAH 


| 


= 


| | to eſcape /: 
'W1lI not hearken unto theme. 


LILY» 


in the tune of their - trouble . 


u Shall here fignitieth Will, and might as well have been ſo tran- 
Land of Zzyps, from the Furnace where- ſlated; denoting the hardnels of the Hearts of this People, whom 
: ( probably {affliction would not reduce to God : Or rather the Indicative Mood 
that was a piece of their work in Aizyp ) or metaphorically, ſerving 1s here put for the Imperative, and the ſenſe, Lce the Cities of Fudah, 
&c. andthe phraſe taken Ironically. So it agreeth with God's 

er ſerviceto anſwer to the People crying to him, Fudg. 10. 14. and what 
me. in oberinz my voice as to the things of this Law whichI gave ; this Prophet had betore ſ1id, Chap. 2. 28. Bur ſaith the Prophet, 
; —_ 1 only lay my Commands upon thern, they ſhall do them no good, then they ſhall underſtand their vanity 
by my gracious {1 their Superſtition and Idolatry,that they have beſtowed a divine 
y ſhould be a People, whom I Homage upon Lies and Vanities, and things able to do them no 


would bleſs,qprotedt and detend. They ſhould bear the Name of good, nor at all to profit them, 


my People, and 1 would be their God to own and bleſs tzem. 

5 That 1 may perform the * oath, which I have 
ſvorn unto your fathers, to give them a Land flow- 
inz with milk, and honey, as zz 7s this days, Then 
anſwered I, and ſaid, + fo be it O LORD &. 

; Trequired their obedience for their own good, I had {wore 
to their Fathers that I would give their Poſterity a Land abound- 
ine with plenty of all good things, the beſt and choiceſt things, 
upon ſuppoſition of their Obedience. I have performed that Oath, 
| have brought them into ſuch a Land, and ſhewed my ſelf faithful 
to them. k God having ended his Speech, the Prophet faith, Amen, 
either afſeiting the truth of what God had ſaid; or wiſhing that 
the People would do according to their Covenant ; or aflenting to 
the Curſe, according as God had commanded, Deut. 27. 26. 

6 Then the LORD ſaid unto me, Proclaim all 
thee Words, in the cities of Judah, and in the ſtreets 
of Jerufilem, ſaying, Hear ye the words of this co- 
venant and do them /. 

{ Let it be thy work to call upon this People, not only to hear, 
but to dothe words which 1 have commanded them,and they have 
ingaged to do. : 

7 For I earneſtly proteſted unto your fathers, in 
the day 74.2: I bronght chem up out of the land of 
Ezypt, cv unto this day, * riting early, and protelt- 
li7, taying. Obey my voIce m. 

m In proteſting I protefted, an ulual way in the Hebrew, by which 
they exprets the feriouſnets, and vehemency of an Action. By 
+rt-fling he mcaneth the ſame with charging, aud commanding, 
w ith promiſes annexed to obedience, and threatnings denounced 
in calz of diſobedience. This God ſaith he hath done with a great 
deal of Patience, and diligenceeven from the time that this People 
were brought by him out of the Land of Zzypt. 


$ * Yet they obeyed not, nor inclined their ear, 


. but walked every one in the | imagination of their 


evil heart -- : therefore I will bring upon them all the 
words of this covenant, which I commanded them 


to do, but they did them not v. 

» Bat had not hearkened unto his Counſels, but every one had 
walked after th: imzgination of his own heart. A phraſe by which 
fin is often expreſſed in Holy Writ, Deut. 29. 19. Chap. 3. 17. 
and 7.2.4. and 9. 14. and 13, 10, and 16.12. and 18. 12, and 
23.17. The imaginations of mans heart are only evil, Gen. 6. 5. 
and 8,21. Hence Holineſs is ſet out by the notion of ſelf-denying, 
not pleafing our ſelves, mortitying our Members, &c. 0 For this 
Go threatneth to bring upon them all his words of threatning, 
annexed to the Covenant of the Law. 

9 And the LORD ſaid unto me, a conſpiracy is 
found amongſt the men of fudah and the inhabitants 
of Jeruſalem p. 

p All forts of People, whether of the City or Country, have 
Gone alike, as if they had conſpired together td break nf Law, 
and to provoke me to wiath, they are all alike and a alike. The 
thing is maniteſt, it js not done ſecretly, nor is it done raſh]y but 


13 For accordingto the number of thy * cities were * Ch.2.28. 
thy gods, O Judah, and according to the number of 
the ſtreets of Jeruſalem, have ye ſetup altars to thar 
+ ſhameful thing «, evez altars to burn incenſe uncoT Heb 


| Baal x. 


| # Not that they had juſt ſo many Idols as were Cities in Judah, 


'or Altars as were Streets in Hzeruſalem, but the meaning is, they 
had very many; and the People who lived in every City and 
Street were guilty. What he calls their ſhame, or the ſhaineful 


; thing, is afterwards expounded Baal ; called a ſhameful thing, be- 


cauſe 1t was what they had reaſon to be aſhamed of, and what 
, would certainly bring them to ſhame and confuſion. x Baal ſigni- 
fieth Lord, and wasa common name givento more Idols than one ; 
. the P}e@ricians uſed the Name Baal, the Chaldzans, Bell. God 

( Hof. 2. 16.) torbad his People to call him by this Name, becauſe 

lo abuſed co Idolatry. Many think that the Sun was what the Pha- 
| nicians worſhipped under this Name ; ſome ſay Saturn was he, Ma- 
naſſes who preceded Foſiah, reared up Altars for Baalim, and made 
Groves and worſhipped all the Holt of Heaven and ſerved them, 
2 Chron. 33.3. Learned Men ſay, that the 4ſians called the ſame 
Idol Baz, whom thoſe of Eurcpe called Fupiter. 1t is not impro- 
bable which learned Men judge, That the Heathens acknowledg- 
ing one ſupream Being, worſhipped him in ſevera] Creatures ; 
ſome miſtaking the Sun, Moon and Stars to be he, Others other 


things ; theſe they called Baalim, Lords, as they called the prin-' 


pal God Baal. The Heathens [dolatry ſeems to be their worſhip- 
ping God zn Creatures, and paying a Divine Homage to Creatures, 
the Sun, Moon and Stars, and other far inferiour to them, not 
believing that thoſe Creatures were the Divine Being, but that the 
Divine Being was in them, and from them would hear their Sup- 
plicants and do them good ; which though the Heathens mighc 
a little be excuſed in, having ho Scriptures ſhewing them the na- 
ture of the true God, and how he would be worſhipped, yet in 
the Fews was inexcuſable, they having the Oracles of God com- 
micted to them, which both ſhewed them the true nature of God, 
and let them know that no Creature could be any fimiliude or re- 
preſentation of him, a'1d that his Will was, thar they ſhould pay 
their Homage to him., without any fimilitudes, or reprelentations 
exciting them to that Homage, fit for nothing but to beget in the 
Minds of People falſe Conceptions and Apprehenfions of the Di- 
vine Being, which is meerly ſpiritual ;notwithſtanding which di- 
reCtion from the Divine Law, the Fews after the manner of the 
Heathens, would pay their Homage to God, before the Sun, Moon 
and Stars,and betore Images wade with hands,and make Altars to 
tuch Creatures and Images, which was the Idolatry God complain 
of, and of which he declaresa greater abhorrence than almoſt 
of any other fin. Ic is likely that Baat here mentioned was the Sun, 
becauſe it was near Manaſſes times,who thus highly offended God, 
and it is probable that though Foſ#ah had begun a famous Refor- 
mation, yet. a great dea] of this leaven was left in the common 
People : Beſides that the fins of Manaſſes, 2 Kings 23. 26. are 
reckoned up as the {ſpecial proximate cauſe of this Wrath of God 
againſt Fudah. 


14 Therefore * pray thou not for this People, nei- * Ch. 7.15, 


ther lift up a cry, or prayer for them, for I will not 
hear them 19 the time that they cry unto me, for their 


upon a Contpiracy, upon Counlel and Deliberation. 


10 They arcturned back to the iniquities of their 
forefathers, which refuſed to hear my words q ; and 
they went after other Gods to ſerve them: the houſe 
of Iſrael and the houle of Judah have broken my co- 


Venant which I made with their fathers 7. 

g They are turned back from me, or they turned back from 
their own better courles in the time of David, to the fins of their 
forefathers that worſhipped the Golden Calf, or the many Idols 
which they worſhipped 1n the time of the Judges. r They are all 
alike, both the Ten Tribes which were the Houſe of Iſrael ; and 
the Two Tribes, which made the Kingdom of Fudah ; they 
hive all broken the Coyeaant Whica I made with theic Fore- 


y Once before, and we ſhall find once after this, Chap. 14. 11. 
God forbiddeth the Prophet to pray for this People, hence arileth 
a Queſtion how.the Prophet 1; excuſed from Sin, in praying for 
them after this Prohibition, eſpecially when God had afſared him 
that he would not hear. Sol. God (ſay ſome) ſometimes forbid- 
deth Prayers for Perſons and People to (tir them up to more fer- 
vent Prayer, We fad the like done by Meſes, Exod. 32. 10. 
and Samnel, 1 Sam. 15.35. and 16, 1, Others ſay, 3. That we 
mult not underſtand thele worcs as ar abſolute prohibition to Fe- 


remy, but for the terrifying of the People. 4. God ſpeaks only 


of a temporal evil, and willethFeremiah not to be too poſitive in 
his Prayers for them, that they might be delivered from chat, but 
he might pray for the pardon of their fins, and their deliverance 


2 £7 Ys 


I 


from the eternal! Vengeance of 504%, 5. He might nct pray for 
+ 
q is 


Chap. XI 


11 © Therefore thus ſaith the LORD, Behold I 
will bring evil upon them which they ſhall not be able 


and * though they ſhall cry unto me I+ Heb, # 


{ A Judgment from which they ſhall by no means be delivered, * Plal, 18, 
by any Counſels of their own, or aſſiſtance of their Friends and 41+ 
Allies. t And though Prayer to me hath been their uſual courſe Ta-1. 15. 
in ſuch caſes, ard I have delivered them, yet I will no more hear Ch. 14 12, 
chem though they cry unto me, Prov. 1. 28, 29. Zech. 7. 11, Ezek.8.18, 
13. God will not hear them crying to him in their Adver- Micah 344. 
ſity, who reuſe to hear him ſpeaking to them in their Proſpe- 


| 12 Then ſhall the cities of Judah, and inhabitants 
'of Jeruſalem go, and * cry unto the gods to whom « py; 
'they offer incenſe, but they ſhall not fave them ar all zz. 37,38. 


- trouble y. ftHeb.evi. 


i I. 


Chap. XL. SEREMIAH : Chap. XU. 


the ebſtinate part of this People, but for the Ele&t of God amongſt | is brought to the Slaughter-houſe, chat knoweth nothing whac 
| deſign 1s againſt its life. 


* il.rzr, 15 *Þ+ What hath my beloved todo in my houſe, 20 Bur, O LORD of hoſts, that judgeſt righte- 
+ ___ ſeeing ſhe hath wrought lewdneſs with many ? z and{ onſly, that * trieſt the reins and the heart, let me ſee + , 5m. 
x41 is tothe holy fleſh is paſſed from thee «: || when thou doelt| thy vengeance on them 3 for unto thee have [revealed 16. 9. 


my beloved .1;1 then thou rejoycelt 5. my cauſe h. | r Chron. 
in my houſe. __ make theſe TED the words of the Prophet, declaring] 6 The P. ophet appealeth to God, and appealeth to him as one 28: 9+ 
[| Or, when; God (whom they ſuppoſe here called the beloved) was about that knew both the innocency of his hearc roward them, and the Pl41.7-9- 
thy evil is.,, torſake- the Temple. Others make them the words of God,| malice, of their hearts, towards, and uſed to deal our juſt 'ce Ch-17+ 19- 
ſpeaking of his Propher, whom he callech his Beloved. Or rather| impartially and commitrteth his caufe unto God ( as we are com-& 20. 12- 
{peaing of his People, whom he calleth his Beloved, upon the ac-| manded, nr Per. 2. 23. ) and deſires that God would avenge him REY. 2-22. 
count of his ancient Union with-them, and. Marriage to them, this and that he might ſee the Vengeance, which words ſome learned 
ſeemeth moſt probable, and agreeth both with Chap. 7. 9, 10. and Interpreters think ſpoken not without ſome paſſion ard mixture of 
allo with the uſual confidence of the Fews, becauſe of the Temple humane frailty. Others, not as a Prayer ſo much as a Pro- 
of the Lord, #ad their forma] Services of God in it, my People| phecy. Others, not out of a Defice of private Revenge, but 
ſaith God,though I was formerly thelr Husband,yer have wrought| out of a pure zeal for the glory of God, whoſe Propher he was, 
Jewdnefs with many,that is, committed Idolatry with many Idols, 1nd Servant in the delivery of thoſe Prophecies thac were ſo in- 
and now what have they todo more in my Houſe, than a baic| gratefu] to them. 
Strumpet which hath turned a Whore, hath to do in the Houſe off 21 Therefore thus ſaith the LORD of the men of je 
her Husband ? a Some by this phraſe underſtand that God would Anathoth, that ſeek thy life, ſaying, * Pr ophelie not frm. 5 > 


them no more as an holy People. Others that their Circumc1-| ; , 
- cages become Uncircumciſion. Others more probably under- ha _ name of the LORD, that thou die not by our , 2.87.13 
; Mich. $5. 


ſtand it of the Fleſh of the Sacrifices they were wont to offer, ei- : 
ther they had been remiſs in offering the Sacrifices God had com-| 2.2 Therefore thus ſaith the LORD of hoſts, Be- 
manded them. on _ ef non ans = Ny rev hold, I will puniſh them ; the young men ſhall die } po V7a 
Sacrifices, being ſet before Idols, as Well as before hi W $ mw | «© fit upon, 
CE: Sk became polluted, and was abomination to the - = _ their ſons and their daughters ſhall die 

daININCs 


Lord. The Learned Author of our Engliſh Anrotations, notes, 
that the words may very fairly be tranſlated, and the boly fleſh] 23 And there ſhall be no remnant of them, for [ 


they ſhall paſs away from thee, lo the words import a threataing,| wil] bring evilupon the men of Anathoth, ever the 
that becauſe chey had polluted and prophaned the Sacrifices, God ar of their viſitation ; 
would make their Sacrifices to ceaſe. b And this the Lord wouid Ye: The Prayers of God's Þ : hete. chena chav mov femmes! 
rather do againſt them. becauſe they were not only evil, but glo. h FSR _ he ” Th _—_ : wy . fon I, CS 
ried in their wickednels, or at leaſt were as full of mirth and jolli- — _—_ per mpg SY bY "Riot oo —_ 
ty, $ it they had done no iniquity terrible things, as to thoſe agrinſt whom they ace directed ; the 
16 The LORD called thy Gs. A abay olive- ſame thing they deſigned to do againſt the Prophet, God threaten- 
tree, fair, and of goodly fruitc : with the noiſe of a| eh to do againſt them, utterly ro conſume them, ſo as no remem- 


Ereat tunmnlt , he hath kindled fire upon It, and the| brance of them ſhould remain. 


branches of it are broken 4. | 
c Toat is, the Lord fxed thee when he brought thee firſt into CHAP. XII. 


Canaan, ina beautiful flouriſhing ſtate and condition, fo as thou| The Prophet complaineth of the Wicked's Proſperity : By Faith ſ-eth 
wert in 4 capacity both to have done thy ſelf much good, and to] their Ruine, 1 —— 4. God admoniſheth him of his Brethren's 
have brought him much glory, like a beautiful fair Olive-Tree,| Treachery againſt him, an1 lamenteth his Heritage, 5, — 13. A 
fit ro bear fair and goodly fruit. 4 But thou haſt ſo behaved thy rerurn from Captivity promiſed zo the Penitent, 14, — 17+ 

felt, that che Lord is altering the courſe of his Providence to thee, *P[.51.4- 
he chac planted thee, iS adout to pluck thee up. God is about tOlx Izhteous * art thou, 0] LORD, when I plead |! Orc, [-t 
kindle a fire which will burn thee up, and to break thy branches 3) R with thee a, yet let mel] ralk with thee of thy = _ ; 


there is nothing more uſual in Prophetical Writings, than to have . 
things, yet to come, expreſſed as if paſt, becauſe of the certaincy judgments b6. * Wherefore doth the way of the 1, ;hee, 


of them ; they being what ſhall as certainly be, as if already | wicked proſper ! whereforeare all they happy that deal *Job. 12.5. 

done. _ : very treacherouſly c? OE 37. 17. 

® Chap. z. 17 For the LORD of hoſts that planted thee, 4 The Prophet begins here with a Recognition of God's unque- Mal. 3.1s, 
21. hath pronounced evil againſt thee, for the evil of the | ſtionable Righteouſneſs and Juſtice, in all his Provideocial Dilpen- 
houſe of Iſrael and of the houſe of Judah, which ſations in the Government of che World. Some read che latter 


| or” 6 part, ſhould T plead with thee ? But let it be ſhould I plead ? or, al- 
they have done againſt themſelves, to provoke me though, or, when T plead, that is, argue with thee, yer the Prophet 
to anger, in offering incenſe to Baal e. 


; _ | doth it not withour a previous refolution to agree the Lord's Djſ- 
e Thi» Verſe expounds what was metaphorically expreſſed in 


them. 


MNOTICAIly penſations juſt, whatſoever he ſhould ſay. b Yer faith he, let me 
the tormer Verſe, viz. that God had declared his Will to his Pro-| talk with thee. not by way ot accuſing thee, but for my own ſats- 
ph-t. That he would deſtroy his People, the blame of which| fa&tion concerning thy judicial Diſpenſation in the Goverament 
mult lie upon the:nſe]ves, tor they had by Hdolatry moſt highly pro-| of the World. c Wherefore doth the way of the wicked prof; per ? 
voked him, and had cherein done againſt themſelves, as indeed aJl| Wherefore all they happy tha: deal treacherouſly 2 by all th:y, he 
firning is but an acting againſt our ſelves,God 1s unvulnerable, we [| means many of them, and is thought co have ſpoken with 2 lpecial 
carinot hurt him, though we may provoke his Juſtice to take ven-| relation to the Prieſts ar Anarhorh, that had conſpired againſt his 
geance upon us for our iniquities. And the Prophet tells them, | Lite. The proſperity of the wicked hath in all cimes been a Riddle, 
that the Lord that planted them would do this, thereby hinting to| and a ſore Tempration to the beſt of God's People, to Fob, Chap. 
them both his power to do it, and alſo thar they had no reaioo| 21. 7, 13. to David, Pſzl. 37. 1. and 73. 2, 12. and 94+ 3, 4, 
to be confident that becauſe God had made them he would not | Hab. 1.4, 5. Lord, faith Feremy, I know thy ways of Providence 
deſtroy them ; or becaule he had planted them 1n that good Land, | are juft and righteous, but they are dark and hidden from me, [ 
Ve ne he would not pluck them up and throw them out of it :| cunnot underſtand why thou doeſt this. 
Vide 7/2. 27, 11. 2 Thou haſt planted them, yea, they have taken 
; - g <a 11 + Heb. ? 
18 Þ And the LORD hath given me knowledge root, | they grow, yea, they bring forth fruit ; rþey es on: 


of it, and I Know #7, then thou ſhewedſt me their do-[chou art near in their mouth, and far from their 


_— may be underſtood either more generally as relating to reins 4. 

2)l the wicked ations of his Countrymen, to obviate their f ing: fas pr tn 1b —odirrar _ _ _ OY 

pe —_— on _ \y. doings? Or elſe ( which ſeemeth they had Communion with thee, but he that oblerveth their Lives 

= he - Eres pectally Foun —_ to that Conſpiracy | 1.1 eaſily diſcern thatthou art far from their inward parts,” thy 

—_ os y Ic ref nan 6 in tne t0llow1ng Verles. have neither fear of thee, nor love for thee, nor defire atter thee, 
- 19 But I was likea lamb, oran ox that is brought | nor delight in thee, nor are they obedient-to thee ; yet thou haſt 
Chap.18. unto the ſlaughter, and I knew not that * they had planted them by thy Power, and by thy Providence they thrive, 

+ Heb ah deviſed devices againſt me, ſaying, Let us deſtroy - [59 0n, and proſper. 0 GR 
flak with the tree with the fruit thereof, and let us cut him off] 3 But thon, O LORD, * knowelt me, thou haſt,,, ' 
bis beard, fromthe land of the living, that his name may be no ſeen me, and tried my - heart toward thee. e Pull + Heb, 

more remembred g. them 'out like ſheep for the [linghter, and prepare ## :-e: 

g We have no other mention of this Conſpiracy in Holy Writ, | them for the day of ſlaughter f. 

bur it is plain both from this Verſe,and what tolloweth to the end | e Here ſeemeth to be ſomerhing underſtood, viz. But Lord 78 

of this Chapter, that the Men of Anathoth 4 which was Fere- | otherwiſe with me, I am maligned, and my life ts hunted after, 

miah's own Town) were offended at his Prophelying fo tharp | yet Lord thou knowelt the fincerity of my heart betore and to- 

things agaiaſt the Land of Fud4h, and had threatne to kill him if | wards thee, thou haſt had experience of me in the dilcharge of my 

he would not leave off that ſtile,and had corſpired tothat purpoſe, | Prophetica! Office, and knoweſt that I have been faichtul in re- 

ſomethink to mix poiſon with his Meat,others by ſtarving of him, | vealing to the People what thou didfſt reveal to me, yer for this ic 

others think by beating of him, into which variety of ſenſe they | is they that ſeek my Life and would have my Bloocs fLord,avenge 

1nterpret that phraſe in this Verſe. Lzx us deſtroy the tree with the | me on this wicked Generation, confirm the words againſt them 

fruit thereof ; but the 1enſe is plain, Let us not only put an end to | which I have trom thee denounced. Concerning the meaning of 

his propheſying, but ro his being alſo ; ler us cut him off ſome [expreſſions of this nacure, and the lawfulneſs of purting up tuch 

way or other, that his Name may no more be remembred. Of | Petitions againſt thoſe who are not only our Enemies, but God's 

{his tne Prophet faich he was as ignorant, asan Ox or a Lamb tha' | alſo. See what was noted on Chap- 11. Ver- 20: 

4 How 


- 


Chap. XII. 


4 How long ſhall the land mourn and the herbs of 

every ſicld wither, for the wickedneſs of them that 

* Chap. 4. dwell therein g? * The beaſts are conſumed, and 

25. & 7. the birds, becauſe they ſaid, He ſhall nor ſee our laſt 
20&9-10- end h, 


JEREMIAH 


derſtood of either, for the Fews were r.otoriouſly 
and it is God that cauſech the Birds to come again 


e The Prophet ſeems to give a reaſon of his former Paſſion,and 
Prayer againſt thole wicked Men before reflected on, becauſe 
ther were the cauſe of the Nations Ruine, which is alſo aſſerted 
by the Pſalmiſt, Pſal. 107. 34. A Land is ſaid ro mourn metapho- 
rically when it is brought roan 11] complexion; and looketh un- 
pleaſantly, the Grais and green Herbs 1n it being deſtroyed by 
Enemtes, or Diought, or Vermine. þ Nay, the effects of their wic- 
ked courles reached to the very Beaſts and Birds, becauſe they 
were {o pretumpruous as to conclude, that they ſhould do wel] e- 
nough, neither the Prophet nor any other ſhould ſee their laſt end 


5 If thou haſt run with the footmen and they have 
wearicd thee, then how canſt thou contend with hor- 
{&s 1? and if in the land of peace nhereinthou truſtedlt 

+ Joſh. 3. they Trearicd thee, then how wilt thou do in * the 
I5. ſwelling of Jordan & ? 

i Tha: theleate the au{wer of God to the Prophet is reaſonably 
wellagreed by the beſt Interpreters,asalſo that this isa Proverbia] 
exprefiion, bur as to the application of it inthis place,there is ome 
difference : Some make it this. 1f thou doſt notunderſtand what 15 
done by the Men of thine own City, how canſt thou think to fa- 
thom my Diſpenſations of Providence 1n the Government of t: - 
World ? Bur this (enſe feemeth not very probable,becaule the lenlc 
of the Prev©b leemeth to be, It thou beeſt not able to encounte! 
lefſer dangers how wilt thou be able to overcome greater ? I rather 
agree with thoſe who make the ſenſe this. Foremy, I have greater 
cangers for thee to encounter than thoſe thou art expoſed to at 
Anathotb,it thou beelt to diſturbed with them,whoare but as Foor- 
men, how wiltthou be able to grapple with thoſe tar greater Ene 
mies whick thou art like to meet with at Hieruſalem. kh Anathor), 
allo ſeen.eth to be underſtood by the Lind of thy peace, that is, the 
Land of thy Friends wherein thou hadſt a confidence: It thy Ene- 
mies thou haſt there met with, tire thee, what wilt thou do zn the 
ſwellings of Fordas ? That is in a place 1n which thouarrt like to 
meet With an increaſe of greater Troubles, [ike the ſwelling of Jor- 
dan ( which in Harveſt uſed to overflow its Banks.) Many other 
things are faid by Interpreters.both with reference to the ſenſe of 
this Texr, and the explication of thele proverbialexpreffions, but 
the ſenſe above-mentioned ſeemeth to me leaſt ſtrained, and beſt 
agreeing with what went before, and what tollows. 


* Ch. 9.4 6 For even * thy brethren, and the honſe of thy 
 TOr.oried father, even they have dealt treacherouſly with thee /, 
after thee vea !| they have called a multitude after thee m7, * be- 


| 44 lievethem not, though they ſpeak Þ fair words unto 
26. 2F« thee N. 


f Heb. | The Men of Anathoth, thine own Town and Country, and 
gc6d things. thole of thy own Family have conſpired Evil againſt thee ſecretly. 
m Either they have expoſed rtliee to the rage and rudenels of a 
mulcitude, or they havexaccuſec thee to a multitude. » Tho' there- 
fore they give thee many Yair words, yet repole no truſt nor corhi- 
dence in them, but look th, thy ſelf. 


7 1 have forſaken my houſe o, I have left mine he- 
+ Heb. the Titage p, I have given + the dearly beloved of my ſoul 


loce, ito the hands of her enewies 9. 

o God by his Houſe here underſtandeth the Temple, which God 
js ſaid here to have torſaken with reſpect to his gracious mani- 
feſtations in it to the people that came thicher to worſhip him. 
p By his heritage he means the whole body of the Iſraelites,called 
God's Heritage not in this Chapter only, but Chap.2.7. Foel 2.17. 
Mic. 7.14. whom God threatneth to leave with reſpect to his [pe- 
cial Providence, by which he had taken care of them, upon which 
account Canaan is called the Land which God cared for, Deut. 11. 
12. that is ſo cared for, 2s in compariſon with them, he might j 
ſeem to neglect all other Countries. q That is, he had given that 
Nation which was once his dearly beloved, into the hands or 
power of :|,cir Enemſes. : 

$ iine heritage is unto me, asa lion in the foreſt, 
T Or, yet- It |} * crieth out againlt me : therefore have I hated 


leth. IT 7. 


Chap. XII 


guilty of both, 
her, and the 
Beaſts of the field to deyour. 

10 Many Paſtors have deſtroyed my vineyard mw, 
they have troden my portion - under foot, they 
have made my + pleaſant portion, a deſolate wil- 


derneſs x. 

w By Paſtors moſt here think Civil Perſons, not Eccleſiaſtical 
Offi cers are meant ; bur they are divided, ſome interpreting it of 
the Rulers and Princes of Nebucha dnez3ar's Army, who took 
Feruſalem, and deſtroyed Fudah, called God's Vineyard, Iſa. 5 - 
r, 2, others underſtanding it of the Rulers of the Fews, who by 
their wickedGovernment,and as wicked example had ruined their 
Country. x And cauſed God to turn the Country which he had 
choſen for his portion, and declared ſuch a pleaſnre in, into a 
Wilderneſs, and ſuch a W:}dernels as was not only thinly inha« 
bited, but wholly deſolate. 


11 They have made it deſolate y, and being de- 
folate it mourneth unto me z, the whole Land 
1s made deſolate, becauſe no man layeth it to 
heart 4. 

y Heb. He hath made it deſolate, but it cannot be meant of God, 
for 1t is God that ſpeaketh, and God is he mentioned in the next 
words ; It muſt either be underſtood of Nebuchadnez2ar, the in- 
{trumental cauſe ; or (one number being put for another) of the 
People or the Rulers as the meritorious cauſe, and in that rueful 
{kate into which their ſins had brought 1t,it cried unto God. a And 
one great cauſe of this fore Judgment upon the Land, was the 
Peoples not Jaying to heart, not ſeriouſly conſidering what God 
had done or was doing againſt it. 


12 The ſpoilers are come upon all high places 
through the wilderneſs b : for the ſword of the 
LORD ſhall devour from the oze end of the land, 
even unto the other end of the land : no fleſh ſhall 
have peace c. 

b The Prophet (as very uſually) ſpeaketh of a thing as already 
done, which was very ſhortly to be cone, he ſaith they were come 
up becauſe they ſhould'come up, and no pJaces ſhould be ſo high 
but they ſkould climb them ; none ſo ſtrong,but they ſhould ſub- 
due them. c The ſword of the Ene:ay is called the ſword of the 
Lord, becauſe he ordereth and ſucceeds it, though the Enemy 
manageth it,and he faith it ſhall be againſt all, of all ranks and 
orders, no fleſh ſhould haye peace ; by no fl:ſh he meaneth no 
ranks, no orders of Men. 


13 * They haveſown wheat, but they ſhall reap * Micah 
thorns 4 ; they have put themſelves to pain, bur 5: 75: 
ſhall not profit e: and|| they ſhall be aſhamed of #8: 7- 6: 
your revenues, becaule of the fierce anger of the * FY 
LORD f. 

d If theſe words be underſtood literally, they only fignifie, 
that God would blaſt the Labours of the Husbandman, and curſe 
them 1n the Field. The Earth bringing forth Thorns and Thiſtles 
was partof the Curle for the firſt tranſgreſlion of Man ; Gen. 3. 
18, God's blaſting the Labours of Husbandmen is often threatned 
as a puniſhment of Sin. Vide Lev. 26. 16. Deut. 28, 38. if it be 
taken metaphorically, it is expounded by the next words. e That 
they ſhould labour in vain,all the Works of their hands, all their 
Countels and Deliberati ons ſhould be ot no profit, or avail unto 
them. f The fierce anger of God againſt them ſhall be ſo ſhewed, 
chat the returns of their Labours or Eſtates, the profits of their 
-—_ &. ſhall be fo ſmall that they ſhall be aſhamed of 
them, 


14 Þ Thus faith; the LORD againſt all mine evil 
neighbours, that touch the inheritance which I have 
cauſed my people Iſrael to inherit 9, behold, I will * * Deut.3o. 
pluck them out of their land, and piuck out the houſe 3: Cape 
of Judah from amongſt them h ? oc 

g God will not be angry for ever with his own People, nor ſut- 
fer the rod of the wicked for ever to ref# upon the back of the 
righteous, for ſaith he for thoſe that are my evil Neighbours, the 


Nations bordering upon Fudea, which God calls his Inheritance, 
upon which account he calleth them his Neighbours, who touched 


+ or 
portion 
cefire. 


+ Heb. 2i- »r That {s, the reaſon why my heart [s alſenated from them, is 
weth out its becauſe they are altered, thoſe that were as my Sheep, following 


VGce. me their chief Shepherd, and the guidance of thoſe Prophets and 
ji Paſtors which I ſet over them,are become like Lions in the Foreſt 
| roaring again{t me, and rending and tearing the Prophets which 
| I ſent unto them. ; 
| ; Or, 2at- , 9 Mine heritage is unto me s a || ſpeckled bird /, 


i tried, the birds round about are againlt her z, come ye, af- 
| || Or, cauſe emble all the beaſts of the field, || * came to de- 


a them tg VOUr 7, 
come. { The word in the Heb. tignifies to die, or colour, and Inter- 
iq * Chap. 7. preters are here divided, whether to interpret it of a Bird coloured 
33s by Nature, (to our Tranſlators underftood it, and therefore have 


franſ]-ted it Ipeckled) or by accident, as ravenous Birds are C0- 
lonred by. the blood of other Birds killed by chem. Hence ſome 
interpret the Text as a reflection upon the Fers tor their Cruelty, 
colourcd by their oppreflioa and innocent bloodſhed. Others of 
their tinture by a variety of Superſtition and Idolatry, the latter 
{eemeth to me moſt probable, becaule of what tollows, it being 
what is ulizal and natural for other Birds t to flock about a ſtrange 
colcured Bird,fuci as they have not been uſed to ſee,but rather to 
fly from, than to come at a Bird of prey. that hath already ſtained 


his Inheritance, not ſo much by contiguity of Habitation, as by 
rapacious Fingers, to do them hurt, inſulting over them when the 
Hand of God was upon them, and contributiog to their affliction 
and miſery, by helping their Enemies againft them, as did the 
Edomites, Philiſtines, Moabites, 8c. h I will alſo pluck them 
out of their Lands, I will bring the ſword upon them alſo, and 
they ſhall be led into Captivity, and though they may have made 
ſome Inroads upon my People, and have carried away ſome of 
them into Captivity, yet I will fetch them out of their Cap- 
vity. 

15 And it ſhall come to paſs, after that 1 bave 
plucked chem our, I will return and have compaſſion 
on them, and will bring them again every man to his 
heritage, and every man to his land z. 

i This ſeergeth not to be a Prophecy only of the Fews return in- 
to their Land after the tulfilling of the Years of their Captivity, 
but alſo of the bringing back of cheſe Nations after that they 
ſhould be plucked vp, and feems to relate to the calling of the 
Gentiles, but this Prophecy muſt be limired by what followeth in 
ns next Verle, and not underſtood of all the Inhabitants of thoſe 
NATIONS. 


16 And it ſhal! come to paſs, if they will diligently 


her Fra'ters with the blogd of other Birds. 4 But,it may be un- 


learn the ways of my people to firear by my name, 


_ 
FE 


Chap. XIII 


FEREMIA H. 


the LORD liveth #, (as they taught my people to| g Waetherthe Proper really made ſuch a journey, or all this 


ſwear by Baal) / then ſhall they be builc inthe mid{t 
of my people m. © | ; 
{ Thy tet peonle be Heathens, yet if they will leavetheir 
Idolarries,a0d luperſticio.:s ways of Worſhip,and learn to worſhip 
an. te:ve me a5 my People do, and ought io wortkhip me. / And 
(w:4r by my Name the Lord liveth, taat 1s, Pay chat Homage 
which they pay to the Divine Being to me, the living and true 


God ; owing me alone as tne fountain of life, and ſearcher of, ] 114 


the hearts (tor there is a great Homage paid to the true God To 
twearing by his Naive only, which ſheweth the great impiety and 
protanenels of other Oaths.) m Then, faich God, I will blels 
ad proper thera alſo, and they ſhall nor on]y have a portion In 
he Earth but amongſt my People, which was eminently ful- 


flled in the Converſion of the Gentiles, Rom. 11. 17. They| 


were originally wild Olives, and grafted in amongſt the Jews, 
20d with them 141e par:akers of ihe root, and fatneſs of the Olive- 
dr Coe | 
17 But if they will not obey, I will utterly 
pluck up, and deſtroy that nation, fſairh the 
LORD 7. | 
n But tor thoſe, whether they be Jews or Gentzles, that ſhall 
continue in their [dolatrous, and Superſtitious courſes 3 that ſhall 
retule the M-ſſias, and continue in unbelief, and go on 1n.courles 
of Rebellion and Diſobedience (faith God) I will utterly deſtroy 
that People, Thus 1/4. 60. 12. The Nation and Kingdom, that 
will not ſerce thee ſhall periſh, y:4, thoſe Nations ſnail be utterly 


wiljted. 
CHAP. XI. 


In the Type of a Linen-Girdle Ged prefigureth their D:-ftrufion, 
1, —— 11. inler the Parable of Botil2s filled with Wine 4s fore 
1014 their Drunkenne(s with Miſery, 12, ——= 14. He exhorteth 
to prevent theſe Judgments by Repentance from their fins, which are 
the cauſe thereof, 15, — 17+ 


7 Hus ſaith the LORD unto me, Go, and get 

F | tace a linen girdle, and pat it upon thy loins, 
and put 1t not 11 Water 4. 

2 God's defizn, by what is recorded in this Chapter, is by two 
Types, as in two Glaſſes, to ler the People underſtand by the Pro- 
phet, how he looked upon them, and what they were in his Eyes, 
and allo what he would do unto them,and tFey might expect from 
him: To this purpoſe he direteth the Prophet to procure himleif 
a Girdle, not woollen but linen made of Flax, or the like, and to 
Put it not. upon his Clothes, but upon his Loins, to fignifie ( as 
tome think) that this people were a people whom God had made, 
near to him. He commands him not to put it 1n water, to foften | 
it, 45 ſome think ; Linen newly made, before 1t 15 wetted in wa- 
ter, being rough ; andthis they conceive the Prophet was forbid- 
den, for a further Type of the ſtiffneſs and roughneſs, and ſtub- 
bornaels of this People. Others think, to typitie that God was 
no cauſe of this Peoples rotting, and growing corrupt. 

2 Sol got a girdle according to the word of the 
LORD 6, and put zr on my loins c. 

b That is, according to God's Command. £ And uſed it as God 


{uch a thing. 

3 And the word of the LORD came unto me the 
ſecond time, ſaying, | 

4 Take the girdle that thou haſt got, which 7 | 
upon thy loins, and ariſe, go to Euphrates, and hide 
it there 1n the hole of the rock 9. 

d God having commanded the Prophet to procure ſuch a Girdle 
as was before mentio: ed, and totie it upon his Loins, he a ſecond 


was bur a Viſion, is very uncertain. b When he came to the p'ace, 
or 19ghis V:{ton, he though: wherd he came to the place, that he 
law all the Girdle rotred, and good tor gothing but ro bethrown 
upon a Dung111l. 

S Then the word of the LORD came unto me, 
ſaying, 


' 9 Thns faith the LORD, After this m1nner will 
r the pride of Judah, and the great pride of Fert- 


ſalem 7. 
: By this it appears that God commanded-Jer2miah to do this 
not only as a repreſentatio7 of the rotten and corrupt ftate of this 
Peop.e, but of his Vengeance which ſhou!d ſuddenly be brouohe 
upon them. Though they were a proud zeotlz lifted up and fwelld 
in the Opinion of themſelves, from the favour which Gol ha4 
ſhewed them, in making them a People near unto him, an. as :* 
were wearing them upon his Lois, -yet thev having corrupted 
thiemtelves by mixing their ſtreams with the ſtreams of Er95r.1er, 
corrupting them'elve; with the Superſtitions, Corruptions 2:16 
[dolatries of Hearthens, God would make uſe of ſome of tho{e M2. 
tions toabate their Pride,and pluck their teathers,and they ſhau d 
rot amongſt tnoſe peopl-,and in lome of tiole nations with wha, 
and by whoſe Examp'e they had ſinned againſt the Lord. This 
lenieof thoſe words is much confirmed by the following words. 


pt - : 7 
and walk after other gods to ſerve thei, and to 
worſhip them ſhall even be as this girdle, which is 
good for nothing, k. 
| k Hitherto the Prophet Fad yielded a blind obedienceto God, 
doing what he commanded i.1m though he poſſibly knew no other 
reaſon for 1t, but becauſe God bade him do {o (which is 3n Ho- 
mage we owe unto God, tho'tonone but him) now God expornds 
himlelf what he meant to teach the Jews by this, viz. Thar he did 
intend thar they ſhould be contumed by the People berond tte 
River Euphrates.as that Girdie was there marred,and he alſo ſhews 
chem, that their own fins 11 difobeying his word, and following 
the 1map1inations of their own hearts, parcicatariy their Idolati y 
was whar had brought this fore judgment upon them. 

11 Foras the girdle clexveth to the loins of a man, 
ſo have I canſed to cleave uito me the whole houte 
of Iſrael, and the whole houſe of Judah, ſrith the 
LORD, that they might beunto me for a people,aund 
for a name, and for a praiſe, and for a glory /: but 
'they would not hear m: 

| Here God openetih to the Prophet, why he command tum 
to put the Girdie about his Loins, vis. to ſhew that te of his f19- 
gular fayour, had uſed the J-ws as a Manuteth his Girdle which 
( he faſtneth about his Loins.and asa Man weareth his Girdle,made 
[up of tome coſtly Materials tor an honour and praileto him, 10 
| God's defign in honouring this people,wearing ot themas a Girdle, 
; was that they might bring him honour and glory,” living to his 
praiſe, in the obedience of 15 Commands, etpecta!ly ſuch Come 


;mands as related to his Woiſh'r, #2 But they would not aniwer 


commanded me, never diſputing the reaſon, why God bid me do | God's deſigns, r.or hearken to any Countels of that nature whic! 


ne gave them, and therefore he was retolved to pluck them tron 
his Loins, ard to ſuffer them torot and conſume ; 2s that Gud'e 
was rotted. See Pſa!. 81. trom Ver/e 8, to the end ; which the 
Author of the Eng/ith Annotations faith well, is an excellent 
Comrent on this Text. 

| 12 © Therefore thou ſhalt fpeak unto them this 
word, Thus faith the LORD the God of Ifracl, E- 
very bottle ſhail he filled with wine, and they ful! 


time comes to him and commandeth him to take this Gird!e 
and carry it to Euphrates, This was one of the four great Rivers | 
that the River out of the Garden of Eden divided it felt into, 
Gen. 2, 10,14. It was the border of the promiſed Land, Gen. 
IS. 18, Deut. I. 7, 11,24. I Chron. 5. 9. Reuben's Lot was 
bounded by it, The Prophet was commanded to hide his Girdle, 
in the hel? of a Rock in that Kiver. But why there? Were there 
not other places nearer, where the Prophet might have hid ic? Ir 
1s judged by ſome, that this Command was alſo to {1gnifie unto 
them, that they ſhould be carried out of their own Borders into 
Captivity ; or rather that they had corrupted themſelves, an 
were become rct*en by doing after the taſhions and manners of 
the Heathens, who lived on the other fide of Euphrates always. 
but having (an hundred years before this) captivated the Ten 
Tribes, lived alſo on the other fide of it. 

5 SoI wentandhid it by Euphrates as the LORD 
commanded me e. . 

e Moſt think that Feremiah did this but in a Viſion ; for it was 
a very long Journey forthe Prophet to take to go from Anarhorh, 
or Hicruſilem as far as Euphrates, Feremiah was obedient to 
God's Command, without ary diſputing or asking God the mean- 
ing of this Injun@ion to him. 

6s Andit came to paſs after many days that the 
LORD ſaid unto me, Ariſe, go to Euphrartes, and 
take the girdle from thence, which 1 commanded 
thee to hide there f. 

f God who had bidden the Prophet go and hide the linen 
Grrdle,after fome conſiderable time {peaks again to him to go and 
take ir away trom the plare where he had lodged it. 

7 Then I went to Euphrates and digged, and took 
the girdle from the place where I had hid it”, and 
behold the girdle was marred, it was profitable for 
nothing þ, 

Vol. +8 


all Orders of Pertons, Kings, Prizjts, Prophers, an all the Fnl;a 
ion to your Kings; I will have no regard to them vp 412 4 


<8, 


+ bur deſtroy them p. 


Spirir ot diviſion amongſt them, tl at they ful 
Lo:cles Cali. d ONE agalt 


ſay unto thee, Do we not certainly know that every 
bottle ſhall befilled with wine # ? 

n God by his Prophet fheweth them their ruine in another glaſs, 
ne bids the Prophet tell them, that every bottle ſbould be filed with 
wine, Wine was what they Celighted in, Hof. 3. 1. Th»y led 
flzgors 0! wine, and were for thole Prophets that would prophefie 
20 them of wine an1 ſtrong drink, Micah z, 11. God theretore lerd- 
eth a Prophecy about W:ne, bids the Prophet ts!l them, 
that every - bottle ſhould be filed with wine, (Giad News to the 
Drunkards among them ! ) but no very ſtrange thing to them who 
often enough were wont both to fill, and empty Bottles of Wine ; 
bur they little underſtood the //7re which God and lis Prophet i::» 
tended, God therefore openeth it to them. 

t3 Then ſhalt thou ſay unto them, Thus ſith the 
LORD, Behold, I will fill all the inhahicants of thi- 
land, even kings that lic upon Davids throne, ain 
the prieſts, and prophets, and all the inhabitaurs ot 
Jeruſalem with drunkenneſs -, 

0 There is a Wine of aſtoniſhment ard confuſion, Pl. co. 7 
A Wine that intoxicateth, ard infameth, and fiup:iicrth, as w [| 


aSa Wine that retrefſheth : Saich God, with that Wine] v1! i 


bitants of Jeruſalem. Nor ſhall the Throne of D:vi{ be a Protes 
[zaT 
Account, nor to the Prieſts though they be Po {ons conleccared 


me. 
14 AndI will daſh them + one 5021ait another 
ven the fathers, and the ſons roveriier, faith 1 
LORD : I will not pity, nor {pare, 407 Kave mere, © 


t; 


: 3 
11C 


p And I will fer them one 2ga:ntr agother, 


ra no v 


P @11 £v1z 
| £&@ j1xe Earthen 


it a3 aig ealiy Droen in 
A > ! T.-C Ay 
a « (4 2 © & ov 


s." if 
» 3, > o£® «x? *7'1 
« \ op VFi.Aavit 
I $18 


Chap. XY1HT. 


10 This evil people which refuſe ro hear my - 

_ . x . [þ ® . . . by ſ __o #2. | 

words,which walk in the || imagination of their hearr, ! Or, tug 
1 Pornreis. 


* * 
” bu 


3 E-F [ict 


* 7 
23.11 6% = 


MM. 


ed. 


Chap. XIIL 


veces. I will kave no pity onthom, thereiore let them not pre- 
{un:c upon my mercy, and pity,and compaſſion, tor 1 am reſolved 
to !h-» them no mercy, but to'bring them to utter rutpe, an 
ceſtructton, 
15 F Hear yeand givecar, be not proud : for the 
LOKHD hath ſpoken 4. ELSE, 
9 Gog ordinarily fubjoineth exhortation and counſe] to his Te» 
proct, if peradventure peopie will change chetr hearts and Ways. 
Havinz threa:ned them, therefore the Prophet ſpeakethto them, 
that they would yet hear, and that not formally but give ear, nut 
exalting themſelves again(! God, and nouriſhing a vain contidence 
or prelumptous hopes, ani going 09 17 thetr red?llious courles, 
delpifing htm, and others who were but the Lord's Prophets and 
his M:Mengersunto them. The word which we bi 1ng 15 not Ours, 
1-15 the Lord hath ſaoken by u*. : 
16 Give glory to the LORD your God r, before 
he cauſe Carknels, and'before your feet ſtumble upon 
* Ifi.s 3.9. the dark mountains, and while ye * look for l1ght, he 
"PE44-15-turn it into *che ſhadow of death, 424 make iz grols 
darknek /. - 
r Glorifie God, by an humble conſeflion” of your fins, Fol. 7. 
19, 20. by ({ibmitting your le]ves unto Goo, Fam. 4. 7- humbling 
your ſelves under his Word, Jam. 4. 10. and under his mighty 
hand, 1 Pr. 5.6, Before God brings upon you his great and 
heavy Judgments before threatned. As a ſtate of proiperity is let 
out ofren in Scripture by the Notion of Light, whici 1s a picatant 
and chearing thing ; fo a ſlate of affliction is often let our to us 1n 
Scripture under the Notion of Darkneſs, Ia. 8. 22. Joel 2.2. Amos 
6. 18.77. andas inthe want of light, which 1s d:rective to Our 
feet, Men are prone to {tumble at any thing that hes in taeir Way, 
ſo a5 they know nor how to direct their feet 9r taketheir ſteps, 10 


'n times of afflitian, elpecially great afictions, Men are ordina-' 


rily perplexcd and know not what courle to take. | In the latter 
part of their Verſe he ſeemeth to threaten God's diſappointment 
of their expectations. The Jews to the laſt appeared highly confi- 
dent looking for light, but they mer with great dilapcintment 


FEREMIAH. 


Chap. XIII, 


22 Anditfthou ſay in thine heart, * Wherctore * Chap. s. 
come theſe things upon me? for the greatneſs of 19. & 16+ 


thine iniquity are thy * skirts diſcovered, ard thy 70 
Natum 
heels || made bare c. ; 


. . 5 Re 5 o Y* © 
c Hypocrites will rarely confels their own ſhame and God's Or, ſhall 


righteoulneſs, but are ready co expoſtulate and diſpute with God, þ, yiolens- 
and to call him to account why he hath dealt fo with them, as if iy taken 
God had dealt unjuſtly» Bur (faith God) if thou ſhouidſt have away. 
any ſuch thoughts in thine heart,” do but remember thine iniqui- 
ties , how many and how great they have been, thy nakednejs is 
diſcovered becaule of theſe, and for theſe thou art expoſed tocon- 
tempt and ſhame. Probably theſe Phraſes are fetched from the 
uſual Practice of Soldiers, when they have conquered a plzce and 
taken Pritoners, to {trip them, and leave thole of either Sex, ej» 
ther no Cloaths to cover their nakedneſfs, or nothing bar their 
own Rags, not ſufficient to cover their nakednels. By Skirts is 7 
meant the lower part of their Bodies covered with the lower part 
ot their Garments. 

23 Canthe Ethiopian change his skin, or the leo- 
pard his ſpots 4? then may ye alſo do good, that are 
| accuſtoined to do evil ec. + Heb. 

d In the Hebrew it is, Can the Cuſhite, &c. from whence it is taught. 
well concluded, as learned Men judge, that the Ethiopians are of 
the poſterity of Cuſh the Son of Cham, Brother to Miſraim, the 
Father of the Egypt:ans, Gen. 10. 6. For theſe were the only 
People of old noted for their black colour in Scripture, as the 
E:h10912ns are now. e God ſheweth that the Jews by their conti- 
nued cuftomary finning had to inured themſelves to wicked pra- 
Ctices, that 1t was as. much labour in vain to endeavour to reclaim 
them, as to g0 abont to waſh a Blackamoor, or to take out the na- 
tural ſpots of the Beaſts called Leopards. 


24 Therefore will I ſcatter them as the ſtubble that 
paſſeth away by the wind of the wilderneſs f. 


f The words denote a great, and clear diſperſion, like that of 
the ſcattering of Stubble by a fierce Wind. 


25 This zs thy lot, the portion of thy meaſures 


even groſs darkneis, | from me, faith the LORD ; becauſe thou haſt forgot- 


17 But if ye will not hear itt, my ſoul ſhall weep 
1.. 1.1n fecrct places for yo Pride ts and mane eye ſhall 
-,15.& 2 weep ſore, and 1un down with tears, becauſe the 
18, Lords flock is carried away capuve Þ. 


ten me, and truſted in falſhood g. 
' & Tiis1s, what thou ſhalt havear the Lord's Hand, the diſpenſa- 
'tion which thou ſhalt meet with, and thou mayeſt thank thy ſelf 
for it ; for hadſt thou remembred either my former kindneſs to 
thee, or the Law that I gave thee, this had not come unto thee ; 


: That is, if you will not liſten to whatT lay, take heed to what! ye thou haſt torgotten me, and truſted in lies, or in idle, vain and 


I ay, and obey the counſel which I give you. «TI ſhall {eriouſly ; 


[i 
1 


preſumptuous hopes, therefore I have given thee but a juſt lot,and 


and ſecretly mourn for your rebellion and obſtinacy which 15 root-j qeaſured to thee a juſt meaſure. 


ed in your pride, and lifting up your {elves againſt the Lord's Mo- | 
nitions and Counlels. + And I ſhall allo mourn for your cala. | 


when it comes upon you. I ſhall have a perſonal and family con. 
ce:n with you, but that will not lo much trouble me as to confi. 


der that you, who are the Church and People of God, ſhould be | 


ied into Captivity. 
18 Say unto the King and to the Queen, Humble 
0.195 Your ſelves x, fit down; for your || principalities ſhall 
come down, ever the crown of your glory x. 
x The Author of Holy Writ 1s diſcernible by th1s as by other, 
things, that the Scripture equally ſpeak; to the greateſt Perſons, as 


whether it was at this time Jehojakim, or his Son Jebojakin, 1$ 
uncertain. x By Principa/ities he means borh their drgniy, and 
their liberty that which he often calleth the Crown of their glory. 


i 
' 


to Perſons of m<aner rank. Got here calls to the King of Judah, J 


26 Therefore * will I diſcover thy skirts upon thy «x ar. 6. 
(face that thy ſhame may appear h. Ezek. 16. 

þ Therefore I will expoſe thee co all manner of ſhame and con- 37. & 23. 
' tempt, without any regard to thy honour. Thoſe that honour 2 9. 

od, God w1ll honour, but thoſe that deſpiſe and diſhonour him, Hol, 2.10: 

ſhall not be able to maintain their own honour, 

27 | have ſeen thy adulteries, and thy * neighings, « Chap. 
the lewdneſs of thy whoredom, zd thine abomina- +. gs. 


'OnS * on the Hills, 1n the fields & : woe unto thee, O * Ifa.c5.6. 


Jeruſaiem, wilt thou not be made clean? + when ſhall Ihe 60s 
it once be | ? + Heb, pl 
| # Some think the Prophet. here refle&ts upon them for their cor- ,,,., yet ? 
poral Adulteries, and their madnels upon them, which he compa- * 

i reth to the neighings of Horſes, but thoſe words on the hills, in the 


Some expound it bead-tires. becauſe the word derlveth from a felds.n the next clauſe ſeem to inform us. k That he means here 


word which fgnifies the Head, 
i9 The citics of the ſouth ſhall be ſhut up, and 
none ſhall open eberry;, Judah ſhall be carried away 


| only their 1dolatries which are in holy Writ often compared to 


' Adulteries, which are the greateſt ſins in their kind, the greateſt 
viojetions of the Marriage Covenant, and provocations of Perſons 


In conjugal Relation, and the only caule of lawful divorce. 1 He 


captive all of it, it ſhall be wholly carried away cap-' concludes with patherical Interrogations,intimating,hat yet there 


tlyvc. 


dea, and therefore their *nemies in the next Verſe are fajd to 
come from the North, and this great evil 151a1d to have come from 
the North; or (as fome would nave 1t) the Cities of Egypr, which! 
{1 yet more Sourbward 1045s the Egyptians ſhould neither come 
« 1:h iufficient force to raile the Siege,nor ſhould there be any San- 
©tuary or refuge for them in E2yps, but they ſhould certainly be 
holly carrie into Captivity. 

20 Lift up your eyes, and behold them that come! 
{rom the north =: where z- the flock tat was given 
ihce, thy beautiful flock a ? 

3 He jpeakstothemas if their Enemy was even then upon their 
March, that ifthey d1d but Jook they might ſee him coming. a The: 
Prophet either ſpeaks to the Ring, or tothe Rulers, or catet of the' 


was hope it they would reform ; and though giving over their caſe 


y Eicher the Cities of Fudab which lay Southward from Cha1-' almoſt as deſperate, and not knowing what would nor be, ler he 


leaves no means untried, bur asks chem if ic was not yet time, or 
when ſuch a thing might be hoped for at their hands ? 


CHAP. XIV. 


A grievous Famine propheſied: It's Miſeries, 1, —— 6. The Prother 
prayeth, but God will not be entreated for them, 7, — 12, Lying 
Prophets no Excuſe for them, 13, —— 16, The Prophet's Com- 
fplaint, 17, — 22. 


[ HE word of the LORD that came to Jeremiah 
concerning the Þ dearth 4. + Heb. 
a Whart Dearth we are not told, nor when it happened; fome jhe wer? cf 
think that it was in the time of the Siege of Hieruſalem 3 others, jhe 
that it was inthe beginning of the Reign of Zedehiah, but they 4+ 2r2/5 wr 


ner po: ' ? 5 1: / . . . / 1 - . . . , . . - . 
Congregation of Fudan, Prov. 14. 28. In the multitude of te! ;udge moſt probably, that think it was in the time ot Feboiakim, yeſtra; o 


reotle 74 the King's honour, fo in the multitude of Subjedts or of, 

Members, lies much of the honour of a Church or State, 
- FA 21 What wilt thou ſay when he ſhall T puniſh; 
7: ice. thee? (for thou haſt taught them 70 be captains, and, 
+ c1.-, 4 Chief over. thee) ſhall not * ſorrows take thee as a 
woman in travail b ? 
-j b That is, thou wilt have nothing to ſay, but be wholly con- 
founded and aſhamed when God ſhall viſit thee with this fore 
judgment or when Nebuchadnezzar's Army ſent by God, ſhall' 
vifht thee; tor thou either by thy commerce and tradiag with 
tm, or by thy fo often calling them to thy affiſtance, or by thy 
Liolatry borrowed from themand other Nations, haſt taught them 
to be Cantains over thee; thy ſorrows and affliftion will come 
upor; thee [aud./enly and r2rribly as pain cometh upon a Woman in 
Travail ; yea, ard as certainly allo, 


” 
.,. oy 


for we read Chap. 36.9. of an extraordirary Faſt by him pro- 


| claimed, which many judge was upon this occaſion: The Heb. 


Phrafe which is here uled ſignifying, The matter of the Reſtraints 
gives Interpreters fome liberty to abound in their ſenſes of rhis 


| Text ; but the following words wake it evident, Ver. 4, 5. that 


the Reſtrazr.ts here mentioned were God's reſtrainins of water 
from them,1ſo that the Dearth was occaſioned froma great drovght, 
which 1s elegantly deſcribed in the five next Verſes and deprecated, 
Der. 7, 8 9. Which make indeed bur a Preface to the Revelation 
of the Mind and Will of God in this Prophecy. 


2 Judah mourneth, and rhe gates thereof languiſh, Y 
they are black unto the ground, and the cry of [eru- n4 
{alem 1s gone up 6. | cal 


b By Fudah is meant the Mey; and Women in te whole Coun- 


try of Judav. The Gates 18 put wr their Citics, or the Men of 
MHICLT 


'3 


Chap. XIV. 


1,for wantof moiſture tor themſelves or their 
Habirs of Mourners, or their Faces 


Jooked ſwarthy, and ſtarvedly, for want of due and wholeſome 
Nouriſhment, and the cry of Hieruſal:m is gone up, eicher cheir 
cry unto God by their Prayers in his Temple ; or their cry by the 
reaſon of their Milery and Grief is gone up to Heaven. 


3 And their nobles have ſent their little ones to 


rers. they came to the pits ard found no wa- 
ge ng ls ith their vellels empty : they 


ter, they returned Wl : 
were aſhamed and confounded, and covered their 


heads c. | 
c This ſcarcity of water affli 


their Cities langaiſhed,tor 
Beaſts. They are all 1n the 


ed not mean Perſons only, who 


have not ſo good means to ſupply their neceſſities as others , but 
their greateſt Perſons ; fo as chey ſent their lictle ones, (it _ 
better tranſlated Servants, for they are meant) to the places made 
co receive and retain Water, but finding no Water 1n che _ , 
they came back again with their Veſſels empty like Men aſhame 

2nd confounded, and troubled upon the ſeeing their expectation 


fruſtrated : 
4 Becauſe the ground is chapt 4, for there was no 


rain in the earth, the plowmen were aſhamed, they 


covered their heads e. 

4 The Heb. word fignitieth more largely then chapr, broken, 
ſpoiled, turn'd into duſt, as is uſual 1n great Droughts. e The 
word alſo which we tranſlate Plowmen, doth not ſtrialy fignihe 
Plowmen, but Hurbandmen, there haveing been nu Rain upon the 
Earth, it brought forth lictle or no Grals for thole chat imployed 
themlelves in breeding or feeding Cartel, and it was lo hard,and 
ſo much wanted moiſture, that they could not Piow nor Sow,bur 
were like Men aſhamed and confounded, who knew not what to 


do. 
\ Yea,the hind alſo calved ia the field and forſook 


5 
ir, becauſe there is no graſs f. _ | 

f Hinds ute nor to ger their Food in Fields, but upon the Moun- 
tainsand in a Wildernefſes, but the Drought was luch,that thele 
wid Creatures came into the lower Grounds,nearer the Habitat1- 
ons of Men than they were wont, and there brought forth their 
Young. The Hinds are loving Creatures, andas all Creatures by a 
natural inſtin&t love their Young,1o the Hinds eſpecially,but cheir 
moilture being dried up, they could not ſuckle them, but were 
forced to leave them, running about here and there to ſeek Graſs 
to eat. 


6 And the wild aſſes did ſtand inthe high places, 
they ſnuffed up the wind like dragonsg : their eyes 


did fail hecauſe there was no graſs h. 

2 Thewild Aſſes wanting water,got upon high places, where 
was the freeſt and cooleſt air, and ſucked in the wind ; and this 1c 
i5 {aid they dill like Dragons,of whom Ariſtotle and Piny report, 
that by reaſon of the great heat of their Bodies, they ordinarily 
ſtand upon high places ſucking in the cool Air, and they tel] us 
thoſe Creatures will live upon it for iome time. The prophet de- 
ſcribing this great Drought, tells us, the wild Aſſes did the like 
þ But for want of Grals their Eyes were either almoſt ſunk in 
their Heads,they being almoſt ſtarved, or etſe the Phraſe ſignifies 
the fruſtration of their expeQation. which this Phraſe allo ſom 


times ſignifies 1n Scripture, Pſal, 69. 3. 


7 © O LORD! though our iniquites teſtifie 
againſt us z, do thon ir & for thy names ſake / : for 
our backſlidings are many; we have ſinned againſt 
thee 27. 

# The Prophet having deſcribed their Miſery,both in the cauſe 
of it, the Drought for want of Rein, and the effects of it, he ap- 
Plieth hmſelfto that God,who he knew was he who alone could 
give the former and the latter Rain ; confeſſing that their fins and 
backſlidings were very many, and teſtifted againſt them,that they 
had deferved God's ſevere Scourge, and God was Righteous in 
what of this.nature he had done againſt them. But yet ſaith he, 
& dothou it ; that is, do thou what we deſire, and what we ſtand 
in need of; give us Rain. 1 Though not for our ſake, we deſerve 
no ſuch kindneſs from thee, yet tor thby Names ſake : Thy Word, 
ſo Iſa. 43.25. and 48. 11. where God promiſeth them to ſhew 
them kindneſs for his Names ſake, foas Feremiah's Prayer is but 
a pleading of God's Promiles, that he would fulfil his word. 
mM ch here ſignifies rhoyugh, and might have been berter ſo inter- 
preted. 

8 O the hope of Iſrael -, Saviour thereof in 


time of trouble o, why ſhouldſt thou be as a ftranger 
in the land: and as awayfaring man, that turneth 


a ſide to tarry for a night p ? 

2 That is, the object of [{rae!'s hope hein whom alone thy 
People Iſrael have been wont to hope;or he in whom alone I(rae! 
hath juſt reaſon to hope.” o Thou who haſt formerly been their 
Saviour in the times of their trouble, who alone canſt fave them 
in ſuch times of trouble,as thou haſt now brought them into. See 
Pſal. 9.9.#nd 46.1- p Why ſhouldſt thou be as one that re- 
 gardeſt thy ancient People no more than a Stranger,or a Traveller 
who taketh no farthec care for the place, or the Houſe where 
he lodgeth, than for .the ſhort time that he isto ſtay or abide 
in 1t. 


'9 Why ſhouldſt thou beas a man aſtvnied 4? as a 
mighty man rhar cannot fave r ? yet thou, O LORD, 


+ Heb. yy #77 10 the midfc of us /} and we are + called by thy 


Name is 
called 


HMODY 08, 


name t, leave us not. .*. 
q The Hebrew word here uſed being found in no place of Holy 
_—_ _— this hath given Interpreters a liberty to cranflate it vari 
oL II. 


FEREMIAH 


oully, flzepy, w2tk, affonith:d, frighted; like a Mart in ſuch dil- 
order through tome Paſlions, that he is able to do uvchin2, 
r Like a Man who in his own nature js ſtrong and mighty enough; 
bur through ficknels or paſſion is fo weakned, that he cannot puc 
torth any ſtrengch for the tuccour and relief of his Friends. { Yet 
faith the Prophet) thou art inthe midſt of us,that is,we have thy 
Temple to which thou haſt promiſed thy ſpecial Pretence, or ra- 
cher it is to be underſtood of the whole Land,according to what 
God had declared, Num, 5 . 3. and 35. 34. Defile not the Land 
which je ſhall inhabit, wherein 1 dwell ; for I the Lord 4well among 
the Children of Tjrael. t That is, we are called the Lord's 
People, and that not only by others amongſt whom we have that 
repute,but by thy ſelf. God often calleth this People in Scripture 
his People, his Portion , .*. Therefore he begs that God would nor 
leave them; he means as tothat ſpecial Providence by which he 
had formerly watched over them, and cared for them, and been 
a protection to them ; nor asto his Ordinances,and his (pecial gra- 
cious pretence with them in his Temple. : 

10 Thus faith the LORD unto this people, « Thus 
have they loved to wander w,they have nor refrained 
their feet » ; therefore the LORD doth not accept 
them y; * he will nowremember their iniquicy, and 


viſit their fins z. 

« Here beginneth that Divine Revelation mentioned, Yr. 7.as 
an anſwer to the Prophet's Complaint and Prayer in the nine ncft 
Verſes. The ſubſtance of which is, thar for their manifold fins, 
he was reſolved to puniſh them, and therefore would not be any 
more ſ9]licized on their behalf.w They have gone aſide out or the 
way of my Precepts, and that out of a principle ot love and de- 
I12ht ; they have been fond of their Idols. x And they have per- 
titted in chole deviations and ſintul courſes, notwithſtanding all 
Counſels,and Arguments uſed with them to the contrary nothing 
could keep their feet in the way of my Teſtimonies. y Therefore 
though they pray,aod cry,and taſt,God will not accept them. 2 Bur 
by his puniſhment of them for their fins, he will let them know 
that as he hath ſeen and taken notice of, ſo he hath not forgot 
what they have done. 


11 Then ſaid the LORD unto me #®. Pray not for 


this people for the; good 4. 

4 Twice before God had given the Prophet this charge, Chat, 
7. 16, and It. 14. how it could conſiſt with the Pierty of Ferem:- 
ah, after thoſe charges to put upthe Prayer we have Yer.7,8, 9. of 
this Chapter. See the Notes on Ch2p. 11. 14. 

12 * When they faſt, I will not here their cry 6, 


I will not accept them, c but* [ will conſume them by 


the ſword, and by the famine,and by the peſtilence 4. 

b The like threatning we have, Prov. 2. 28. 7/4. r. 15. Chap, 
rt. 11. Exech. 8.18, Micah 3. 4- e Men may fo long deſpite 
God's Calls Ex1ortations and Counſels as their caſe may be deſpe- 
rate,as to the prevention of temporal Judgments by ſuch Religious 


applications to God ac ordinarily have their effe&, ro preyenc 


and remove Judgments. See Chap. 15. 1. Exek. 14. 14, 20. d He 
chreatneth to add to their plague three fore Judgments, ordina- 
rily accompanying one another both in Gods Threatnings,and in 
the execucion of them, Chap.29.17,18.and 44, &c. 

13 Thenſaid 1, Ah Lord GOD / Behold the Pro- 
phets ſay unto them, Ye ſhall not ſee the ſword, 


neither ſhall ye have famine, but I will give you -þ aſ; 


ſured peace in this place c. 

e We have many Complaints of this Prophet againſt falſe Pro- 
phets that contradicted his Prophecies, Chap.4.1o. and 23 9g. and 
we ſhall hereafter meet with the Names of fome of them. Cor- 
rupt Governments never want Prophets to their humour, though 
a bolder tranſgrefſion can hardly be imagined, than for Men to 
intitle God to their own Imaginationsand Fancies, and we ſhall 


. .4 


Ver. 15. meet withthe uſual Wages of ſuch Works. 

14 Thenthe LORD ſaid unto me, The prophets 
prophelie lyes in my name}, * I ſent them not, nei- 
ther have I commanded them, neither ſpake unto 
them - they prophetie to you a falſe viſion and divi- 
nation, and a thing of nought,and the deceit of their 
own heart : 

{ They did not only prophefie fa!lſhoods, but lyes, what they 
knew to be falſe ; for they pretended chat God had revealed ſuch 


thitgs unto thern ; for admit the things they ſpake (as to-Men ) 
but future Contingencies,which rhighe be true or falſe,yet it was 
a lye 'for them ro pretend that God had told them any luch. 
things. The things werecertainly falſe in'themlelves,being contra- 
ry to God's Revelation ; but ſetting that aſide; for them to pre- 
tend God had revealed that to them which he had nor revealed, 
was a formed lye. God denieth that he ever commanded them 
to ſpeak any ſuch chings,or fent them upon any ſuch Ecrands, they 
propheſyed what came in their own fooliſh heads, and the deceits 
of their own hearts. ' 
15 Therefore thus ſaith the LORD, concerning 


the prophets that propheſie in my name and I ſenr 
them not, yet they ſay, Sword and famine ſhall not 
be in this land, by the ſword and famine ſhall thoſe 


þ 


prophets be conſumed g. 

g lt is a molt dangerous thing for Eccleſiaſtical Miniſters to de- 
liver that to People as the W1ll of God,which is not lo: God here 
threatneth that theſe Prophets in teftimony of the eruth of the 
Word of God delivered by Feremith, thould dye by theſe very 
Judgments, which they falſly propheſted to this people as from 
God, an immunicy from /id. C'. 6. 25. and 20.6. 1 Kings 22.25: 

CES] 16 And 


Chap. XY. 


* Hoſ:2. 
13.and 
9. 9. 


* Exod. 


33, 10; 


F Tſa.58.7. 


and* whenthey offer burat-offerings and an oblation, zech. >. -; 


I 3, 
* Chap. 
6- 20. 
and 7. 22+ 
22s 

* Chap. 
9.16, 


+ Heb. 


Peace of 


ruth. 


Chap. 


23. 21. & 
27. IF. & 
29. 8,9. 


| "y 

li Chap. XIV. 

#| 16 And the people to whom they propheſie, ſhall 

be cait outin the ſtreets of Jeruſalem, becauſe of 
the famine, and the ſword, and they ſhall have none 
!0 bury them, their wives, nor their ſons, nor their 
daughtersz for I will pour their wickedneſs upon 
them 2. 

o The Security promiſed by theſe falſe Prophets, ſhall be no 
Excule to the People for giving credit to them : The Prophets 
ſhall periſh for prophelying faiſly in my Name, and the People 
tit hearken to, and believe what they fay, and practiſe accor- 
dingly, ſhall perifh for their light and vain Credulity. As the 
fintul Commands of Superiours in things Civil, will not free thoſe 
trom Guilt that execute their Commands ; ſo the Lyes and faile 
Teachings of Miniſters, will not excule thoſe that 1un into Error 
wpon the Credit of their Words: Both the one and the other owe 
their firſt Homage and Allegiance to God, by whoſeWord they 
ouZzht to examine the Precepts of the one, and the Propheſying 
ot the other. 

17 © Therefore thou ſhalt ſay this word unto 

*(#.9 1.them *. Let mine eyes run down with tears night 
and 13.17-and day, and let them not ceaſe, for the virgin 
Lam-1.16-4nghrer of my people is broken with a great breach 
2n@ 2-28. -;th a very grievous blow. 

18 If go forth into the field, then behold the 
lain with the ſword, and if I enter 1nto the city, 
then hchold them that are ſick with famine, p yea 

| Or, 92k? both the prophet and the prieft || go abour into a 
merc®n- land that they know not g. 


5h p The Prophet is by God direRed to ſpeak ſtill of the Cala- 
| -n- > mities of this People as a thing paſt though yet to come 3 ac- 
1 Men ic. Cording to the ulal Stile of Prophetical Writings 3 and to tell 
knoatledge them, that whatſoever their falſe Prophets told them, yet he ſo 
6Y 8 certainly knew the contrary,that he could even wiſh himſelf melt- 


ed into Tears for them, and had even already before his eyes the 
dolelul Spectacle of their Miſeries, ſome in the Field ſlain by 
0 the Enemies Sword, others within the Walls almoſt ſtarved to 
death. q The Word in the H:brew YIMD which we Tranſlate 


jj go about, f19niftes ſo primarily, and in a Second Sence to Mer- 
| chandize, becauſe Merchants go about Countries to trade. This 
hath made that variety of Senſe which the Margents of our Bible 
have; but our Tranſlation is true enough, and the Senſe ſeems to 
be.that Prieſts and Prophets ( though accounted ſacred perſons ) 
ſhould be made Caprives alſo,and wander in a Land wherein they 
were Forreigners. This is thought to relate to the firſt Captivity 
j in the time of Fehozakim, when the People of the beſt Faſhion 
welecarried into Captivity. 


FEREMIAH 


Chap. XV. 


nant with uss id net Feremy then krew that Cod could not 
break his Cevenart > Anf. He &1d kr.ow 1t ; but he aJio knew 
that it is our Duty to pray to God to fulfil it ; or pcthbly Ee 
would extend it a Jittle farther,and for Goo's Coverant lake made 
with the faithful in Iſrae?, he would have obtained mercy tor 
the whole Body of the Nation. 

22 Arecthere 4zy among the vanities of the Gen- 


tiles that can cauſe rain z ? or can the heavens give 
ſhowers ? a* Arr not thou he, O LORD our God ? *Pfal. r3; 


b therefore we will wait upon thee, for thou haſt 7- 

made all theſe rhings c. Ita. 30.23. 
T The preſent Judgment under which they groaned, was g <-10.13. 

Drought, which he had diſcribed in the fix firſt Verles ; the Pro- 

phet imploring God for the Removal of it, argues, from the In:- 

poſſibility of Help in this caſe frem any cther way, none of the 

Idols of the Heathens, which he calls vain things, nothing in 

themſelves, and of no uſe or profit to thole that ran after them, 

could give Rain. 4a The Heavens indeed give it ; but in the or- 

der of fecond Cauſes, if God ſtoppeth thoſe Bottles they cannot 

run. b Lord, art not thou ableto do it ( ſaith the Prophet >) 

yay, art not thou he who alone is able todo it? ( for ſo much 

the Phraſe doth import. ) The Scripture conſtantly giveth God 

the Honour of giving Rain, Gen. 2. 5. Deut. 28. 12, 1 Kings 8. 

36. 2 Chron. 6.27. Job 5. 10. and 38. 26, 28. Pſal. 147. 8. Ch. 

5. 24+ and 51. 16. Foel 2. 23. Zech. 10.1. Marth. 5. 45. Aﬀg 

14. 17. c Therefore ſaith the Prophet, we thy People will wait 

pon thee by Prayer, and the payment of thoſe Homages thou 

requireſt ; for thou haſt made all theſe things, that is ( ſay ſcme ) 

thou haſt cauſed all theſe Judgments, or affliftive Diſpenſations ; 

or rataer, thou haſt made the Rain, laſt mentioned, 


CHAP. XV, 


The Jews Rejefion, and Fudgments, eſpecially of four kinds ; 
the Sins which frocured them, 1, =— 9. The prophet com- 
flaineth, that the Peogle curſe and fperſecute him for theſe 
Prophecies ; they are threatned, and he inflirufted and com- 
forted, lo, ——- 21, 


I _ faid the LORD unto me, * Tho * Mo- * Ek. 
ſes * and Samuel ſtood before me, yer my mind {+ 
could not be towards this people 4 ; Caſt them out of 22, 


1,1 
my light and let them go forth 6. + 7 Sow 
a Weare (though in another Chapter ) yet in the ſame Pro- 7. 9. 
phecy, or Dilcourſe berwixt God and this Prophet. Feremiah ha- 
ving been once denied, ſollicited God again, as we had it in the 
four laſt Verſes of the former Chapter, God here replieth to that 
Prayer ; and the ſum of what he laith is, that he was inexorable 
18 their caſe. Though Moſes who would obtain ſo much of God 
upon their finning, 1n the caſe of the Golden Calf, Exod.32.11,14 | 


19 Haſt thou utterly rejected Judah ? haththy 

| ſoul loathed Zionr ? why haſt thou ſmitten us, and 
*Ch. 8.15. there rs no healing for us /? * we looked for peace 

and rhcre i5 no good, and for the time of healing, 


| and behold trouble 7. 

{4 y The prophet again returns to God, expoſtulating with him 
þy and humbly imploring mercy for his People, which lets us know 
A that he did nut underſiand God's words to him, Ver. 11.as an ab- 
id folute Prohibition of him to pray for this People. Zion was a 


Place whoſe gates God loved,and Fudah was his pleaſant Portion. 
Lord, ſaith the Prophet, is it poſſible thou ſhouldeſt loath a place 
which thou {o much lovedſt, or caſt off a People which thou 
haſt ſo much owned ? { He acknowledgeth God co be he that 
had ſmitten them, and their Condition without him to be help- 
leſs and hopeleſs. # And that all their Hopes and ExpeRtations | 
were fruftrated. q 
20 Weacknowledge, O LORD, our wickedneſs, 
*pſal.1ce, 42d the iniquity of our fathers, for * we have fin- 


6. ned againſt thee. 

Dan 9. 8. u That is, both we and our Fathers have ſinned againſt thee, 
and have given thee a Right to puniſh and deſtroy us ; we deſire 
not to cover or cloak our Sin, we own andacknowledge it. 

21 Do not abhor «s, for thy names ſake w, do 
not diſzrace the throne of thy glory x : remember, 
break not thy covenant with us y. 

* w The Thing which the Prophet deprecateth is,the Judgments 

; 0) come already, and farther coming upon this People, the Famine 

Sword, and Peſtilence, with the Drought, under the ſad Conſe. 

jl quents of which they ar preſent laboured ; but he prays for the 

| Removal ot theſe Judgments, and the Prevention of ſuch as were 

(| yet to coine, in this Phrafe, Do not abhor 2s ; nothing to us. 

that the Love of Gud to a People is the Root of all Good which 

they can expect ; and his Hatred and Diſpleaſure, the Root of al] 
the Evil that can betide them. Here are divers Arguments brought 

T1 to back this Petition. 1. For thy Name's [ake, that is thine Ho- 

Vi nour and Glory fake, an Argument often made uſe of in Holy 

Writ, in the Prayers of God's People, Fo. 7. 9, &c. and upon a 

very good Foundation, whether we conſider God's Concern for 

his own Glory, or the Tenure of God's Promiſes, promiſing mer- 

# ey for his own Name's ſake. x He alſo arguech with God,from 

| kis' former Love and Kindneſs to this People, which he had made 

; the Throne of his Glory. The Words are either to be underſtood 

| of the Throne of the Houle of David, called the Lord's Throne, 

z Chron. 29. 23. or elle the Temple, and the Ark in it, the 

more ſpecial Symbol of God's Preſence : Hence he is ſaid to have 

dwelt betwixc the Chernbims, Pſal. $0. 1. 1o Chap. 17. 12. the. 

Prophet faich, A glorious high Throne from the Beginning is our 

Sanffuary, Lord ( faith the Prophet) we have deſerved all the 

Dilgrace thou canſt throw upon us, but do not thou diſgrace the 

Throne of thine one Glory. y Remember, break not thy Cove- 


and in the caſe of the Peoples MurmuringNumb. 14+ 19, 20. 
and Samuel who was ſo prevalent with God, 1 Sam 7. 9. though 
theſe two formerly ſo potent and prevalent Mediators tor a Pec- 
ple with me, /food before me, waited ( that is ) upon me, and 
ſolicited me on the behalf ofthis People, yet I could not favour 
this People, b 9g. d, Tam not able to abide the fight of them, 
and therefore letthem go forth. ; 

2 And it ſhall cometo pals, if they ſay untothee, 
Whither ſhall we go forth? c then thou ſhalt tell 
them, Thus faith the LORD, * Such as are for Death * Chap. 
to death, and ſuch as are for the ſword, to the 43-11+ 
ſword and ſuch as are for famine, to famine, and wag i 


ſuch as are for captivity to captivity. 4. es 

c If they ask thee what thou meaneſt by going forth ; which g [ 
being a term of motion, implieth a Term to which the Motion *' 
ſhould be, 4d Saith God in the general, it is to Ruin and Deſtru- 
ion, but they ſhall not be deſtroyed one and the ſame way ; 
ſome ſhall be deſtroyed by the Peſtilence ( for that is here to 
be underſtood by Death ) others ſhall be deſtroyed by the Ea- 
mine, others by the {word of Enemies, others ſhall go into Capti- 
_ but one way or other the Land ſhall be quitted of the moſt 
of you. 

3 And I will * appoint over them four -|- kinds, * Lev. 26. | 
faith the LORD e, theſword to ſlay, and the dogs 15: | 
d* the fowIs of th ares 

to tear, and * thetowls of the Heaven,and the beaſts p,,,;1;., 
of the earth to devour and deſtroy f. os EE 

e Four kinds of Deſtroyers,the Enemies ſword ſhall lay them Te. 
ind ſo make Meat for the Dogs,who fhall tear their Carcaſes,and 
for the Birds of prey, who ſhall prey upon their dead Bodies that 
ſhall lie unburied. f And I will alſo ſend amongſt them wild 
Beaſts, who ſhall both tear their living Bodies and their dead 
Carcaſs. 

4 And + I will cauſe them to be * removed into + yeh, 
all kingdoms of the carthg ; becauſe of * Manaſſeh ive ther; 
the ſon of Hezekiah king of Judah, for tas which he for aremv- 
did 1n Hieruſalem h. .- 

g Though: the body of the People were removed into Baly. > 
lon, yet, as it 1s more than probable that many of them fled into v4. 8f 
others Countries to fave chemie]ves, fo there is no doubt. but the _ ht 
king of Babylon removed them into.feveral Kingdoms belonging EzcK. 25. 
ro his large Empite. b What Mansſſ-h did, may be read 2 Kin. 2 Kines 
21.11. He did wickedly,, above all that the Amorites did that © a Ns” 
were before bini, and male alſo Fudah to fin with bis 1s. 
Verſe 16. Moreover he ſhed innocent blood very much, till he 
had filled Ferufſalem frim ene er u0 arother, be lides bis fin 
wherewith he made Juith 10 fin, &c., Some makea Queſtion 
whether God means the pertor.al Sins of Manaſj-h ard his Mint- 
ſters, or only the Sins of the lame kind that the Jews ſtill conti- 


wwe .y* © ww yr 


{ 


nued iN. Manaſſeh lyed F ſ Ye a = 111% SON Toft a\ - P Years: it Vas 
(1G 


Chap. XV. SERE 


now the time of Fehoizkin, the Son of Joſiah, who reigned but 
eleven Years, and it js probable this was his fifth Year, (for 10 that 
Year he proclaimed the Faſt for the Drought, as 15 luppoled 
Chap. 36. 9. ) Tho' the People were bad enough f1]], yet 1t 15 no 
way probable, that they were fo bad es in the time of Manaſſ:h. 
We know all Foſi2h's time, the Father of this Prince, was a time 
of Reformation, though it be certain, much of their old Leaven 
ot Idolatry and Superſtition was yet in them. Whatever therefore 
ſome think, God undoubtedly meaneth the Guile that Manaſj: 5 
and his Subjects contraCted, forty Years betore this time : Nor do 
I ſee any reaſon why any ſhould queſtion, whether it be confi- 
ſtent with the Juſtice of God, to puniſh the'Sins of Parents upon 
their Poſterity, when it is no more than we ſee done every day in 
the Puniſhments of Traytors and Felons, by the ſeizing the Eſtates 
of their Children, and in Wars, upon the Taking of Cities and 
Fortified Places ; and it is no more than God hath threatned jn 
the Second Commandment, Exod. 20. and declared it as a piece 
of his name, Exod. 54- and done in a multitude of Scriptural In- 
{tances. Manaſſeh is here named as the Son of Hezekiah, for his 
ſhame, becaule of his degeneracy from ſo good a Parent. It is ex- 
prefly faid, 2 Kings 23. 6. that notwithſtand Jofzah s Reforma- 
tion yet the Lord turned not from the hercenets of his wrath,kin- 
dled againſt $udah for the provocations of Manaſſeth. 

5 For * who ſhall have pity upon thee, O Hieru- 
ſalem? or who ſhall bemoan thee? or who ſhall go 


+ Heb: alide + to ak how thou dolt z. 

ask ofthy i The tum ofthis is, That this People ſhould be in a moſt mi- 

Peace. ſerable pitileſs ſtate and condition ; none ſhould regard them in 
the day of their Calamity, nor ſo much as once enquire after 
them, how they fared, or what they did. 

6 Thou haſt forſaken me, faith the LORD, thou 
art gone backward, therefore will I [fretch our my 
hand agaiaſt thee, and deſtroy thee, I am weary 
wich repentiug &. ] : 

k God here by more Paraſes of the ſame import with many 
that we have betore met with, declarech his ſteady Reſolution to 
deſtroy them for their Apoſtacy trom him ; and fets out himſelf 
to them as angry Princes or Parents, that had been ofren pro- 


YL 46 
13% 


voked againſt a Subject or a Child, and often reſolved ro puniſh 


the Offender, bur out of their own Clemency, or upon the Me-' © ] r1je ; 
; '1s, thoſe Nations 1n it againſt which God ſent him to denounce 


diatio:1 and Interceilion of others for them, had altered their 
Minds, and reſolved to ſpare them, but at laſt met with ſo many 
freſh Provocations, that they are weary of forgiving them any 
longer ; ſo God declareth himſelf weary of his patient bearing 
with them, and zefolved to bear no lopger. 
7 And IL will fan them with a fan in the gates of 
| Or,what- the land /; 1 will bereave them of || children m; 1 
foever is Will deſtroy my people, ſh they return not from 


dear. their ways #. _ : 

1 Not a purging Fan by Aﬀfiidtion, to ſeparate their Chaff and 
Drofs from them, but a 1. a:tering Fan. Some Tranſlate it into the 
gates of the earth : So it isthe ſame thar God had betore ſaid, that 
he would remove them into all Nations, ( Gates being pur for 
Cities; ) but it is more probable, that chis is added in purſuir of 
the Metaphor of Fanning, Men uſually chooſing Barn-dooys to fan 
at, that they n.ay have the Advantage ofthe Wind. m Of Children 


M1IA4H Chap. XV. 


than the other Word, as it is in the Hebrew; it is I kzvs 
cauſed to fall upon it ſuddenly, the City and Terrors. The Word here 
uled Ty, gnis, commonly figntfiesa City in Scripture, and is 
very rarely Tranſlated otherwiſe. Were it not {or the Advert ſud- 
denly coming berween jt and Cy, the Sence were plain a::d thus 
I will cauſe to fall upon that City Terrors; others read it, ! will 
cauile himto fall upon it, and Terrors upon the City. The Word 
lometimes 1n Scripture ſignifies Enemies, and is fo Tranſlaced 
1 Sam.28. 16. Pſal. 139.20. Dan, 4. 19. In this Signification 
of the Word, the Sence is plain, I will tend upon it the Ecemy 
and Terrors. The Learned Author of our Engl:ſh Annotations 
oblerves it is tranſlated a Watcher, Dan. 4. 13, 23. and thinks the 
Sence may be thus, I have cauled ir to fall upon them ſuddenly, 
a Warcher that bringeth Terrors; to which purpole he tells v5, 
-_ Chaldeans Forces are compared to Watchers, Chap. 4. 16, 17. 
ancF.6, 

9 She that hath born ſeven hlanguiſheth : ſhe hath 
giving up the ghoſt ;* her ſon 1s goue down while it * 4:55 
Ta yet day 7, ſhe hath been aſhamed and confound- 8: 5 
ed k, and the reſidue of them will I deliver to the 


ſword, before their enemies, ſaith the LORD /. 
þ Seven ſignifies many, 1 Sam. 2. 5. Fob 5. 19. The Prophet 
compiains, that Hieruſalem, or the Country of Fu4ah, that had 
been very numerous in People, now grew feeble neither able to 
maintain thoſe ſhe had born, nor yet to bare more. tIn the 
mid!{t of her Proſperity ſhe became thus miſerable. { A part of 
them were confounded by the Judgments of God, whic!1 cam? 
upon them betore their Captivity, 1 For the Remainder of them 
( ſaith God ) they ſhall be deſtroyed by the Sword of che 
Enemy 
lo * Wo is me, my mother, that thou haſt born *3ob 3. 2, 
me a man ſtrife, and a man of contention to the þoth 
whole earth : -| have neither lent on uſury, nor <P: 22» 


isnot inthe H:brew, and 15 needlefly ſupplied ; it may as well ce 
of any, or all their Comforts or good Things. n Their Privi- 
ledge claimed of being my People ſhall not protect them, ſo long 
as they go on in their lewd and fintu] Courles. 
$ Their widows are encreaſed to me above the 
| Or, 4- ſand of the ſeas o, I have brought upon them || againſt 
gainſ! the the mother of the young men, a ſpoiler at noon- 
mother day p: I have cauſed him to tall upon it ſuddenly, 


City, £ 2nd terrours upon the city 9. 
Foungnen Prophet ipeaking in the Name of that God who calleth 
ſpoiling,6eC Things that are not as it they were, ſti!} contiqueth his Stile, 
rs & ſpeaking of Things to corre as if preſent. In Fehojakim's time 
go _— od of as fuck plenty of Widows ; they were multiplied 
Mother hen the City was befieged and taken in Zedekzab's time, to a 
and the great number ; hyferbolically compared to the Sands of the Sea. 
Toung men. þ There is a great Variety amonglt Interpreters, as to their Sence 
of this Phraſe, about which, thole that are curious may conſult 
the Engliſh Annetatiens upon this Verſe. By the Spoiler at 
Noon-day is meant: Nebuchadneqqar, in the Senſe of the beſt 
Interpreters, who came nut like a Thief who cometh by nighe to 
rob and to ſpoil, but with an Army 1n the day time: The Que- 
ftion only is about thoſe Words againſt zhe Mother of the Toung 
men, The Hebrew Word, which our Tranflation renders Toung 
Men, is DA, bachur, which properly ſignifies a chsice Man, or 


a Perton choſen, from the Hebrew Verb which fignifieth to chooſe ; 
ſo that it may as well be Tranſlated, the Mothey of the choſen, as the 
Mother of the Toung Men, becauſe Young men are looked upon 
as the Chotce Men, whether for Beauty, or Strength and Ability 
for any thing, the Word often fignthes a Young-man, Deut. 32. 
25. 2 Sam. 6.1. Cant. 5.15. Pſal. 148. 12. Iſ4. 23.4. Exch. 9.6. 
and in many other Texts. Some will have the Senſe ( as in our 
Margent ) againſt te Mother and the Toung Man, meaning by the 
Young-man Nebuchadnezqar, ana by the Mother Feruſalem. 
The Jews are in the Canticles called the Davghters of Hiruſa- 
lem. and Hiernſalem which # above, 15 by the Apoſtle called the 
Mother of us all. The Hebrew Word is 1n the fingular Number ; 
how we tranſlate it Toung-men I underſtand not. Pagnine 


men have lent to me on uſury, yer every one of © 
them doth curſe me 7. 

m The prophet in this Verſe cannot be excuſed from a grea: 
meaſure of Paſſion and Humane Infirmity ; He almoſt curieth 
the day of his Birth,denouncing himſelf a wotul,miſerable Man ro 
be born a Man of Strifeand Contention to the whole World, tha! 


his Judgments; which Denunciations, how true ſoever, and the 
truth of which they atcerward did effeCtually find, yet they were 
not able to bear, and therefore they ſtrove with him, and con» 


. tended againſt him ; yet it was not for his Sin. n Uſury was for« 


bidden the Z-ws, Dezut. 23. 19. and fo was the more odious; but 
ſaith the Prophet, I have not followed that trade I have neither 
lent nor borrowed upon Uſury, I have done them no wrong, nor 
given them any occaſion againſt me, yet they will not be recon- 
ciled to me, but ſpeak of me all manner of evil; This was the 
Lot of the old Prophets, the Lot of Samuel, of Chriſt, of his 
Apoſtles,and of all the Faithfu], Miniſters of the Goſpel ever fince. 
Let them carry themſelves never ſo innocently and obligingly to 
People, yet it they will be tairhtul, and truly reveal unto Peo- 
ple the Mind and Will of God, that is enough to anger a People, 
whoſe W1lls are not ſubjugated to the Will of God, and they 
w1ll curſe them. !! Or,F wits 

11 The LORD ſaid, Verily it ſhall be well with encreze rhe 
thy remnant o, verily || will cauſe the enemy to en- Enemy for 
treat thee well in the time of evil, and in the time of'%* 
affliction p. | | 

o The latter Words of the Verſe expound the former ; tor by 
Remnant js here meant the Refidue or Remnant of Days that 
Jeremiah had yet to live, not the Remnant ot the People who 
ſhould come out of Batylon. g I will, by my Provicerce, 10 
order it, that how cruelly and feverely ſoever the Enemy deals 
with thy Country-men yet he ſhall uſe thee kindly when he 
ſhall take the City. See the tulfiling of this Prophecy, Chap. 39. 

11. and go. 3, 4. 

12 Shall iron break the northern iron and the 
ſteel q ? 

I Thang a great Variety among Interpreters as tothis Verſe, 
alſo ſome interpreting this as a Prophecy that none ſhould break 
the Prophet, whom God would make as the Northern Iron and 
Stee],whictiwas the hardeſt of all Iron, the Chalybes (from whom 
Steel had its Name Chalybs) being Northern People, and the mo:t 
!amous of any then known in the Worlp, for tempering Iron 
make it hard and tough: Others interpreting it, as denying that 
here ſhould ever be an Agreegeat berwixt the Jew, and the 
Chaldeans ; but to me, the Words of the next Verſe ſeem to 
give us the Senſe, that the Few. ſhould certainly be over-ru: 
and conquered by the Bzbylonians ; tor as the Northern Iroq an. 
Steel is the hardeſt, and no [ron could break that, ſo Go& having 
edged and hardned their Enemies the Cbaldezans, all, their Oppo 
ſition to them would fignitie nothing. 

13 Thy ſubſtance and thy treaſures will I give to * @;.4; 
the* ſpoil without price 7, and 427 tor all thy !ins, 17. 4. 
even inall thy borders /. | 

r All thy Riches and precions Things ſhall be ſpoiled, I wi.l 
have no regard, faith; God,to L.oje or Gaia 1n it, or tnere ſhall be 
no Price taken for the Redempcion of them; for f what tha!] be 
done,ſhall be by me done for 2!! the Sins which thou haſt been 
guiley of in a!l the parts of the Countr 


Tranflates it El-#i the Mother of- the choſen, I do think that 
by the Mcther 1s meant Hzeruſa/em, and that Populi may be un- 
derſtood to Elefii, Hiervſales was the Mother of the Jewiſh 
People, or Fudez at leaſt, againſt whom, Nebuchadnez3ar the 
Spoiler, at Noon-day, was ſeit ; and we know that the Fews 
were Gui's Choſen P:57/8, q This laſt Clauſe is yet mot e ob(cure; 


14 And I will make thee to pats with thine enee 
mics, intoa land which thou knowelt not. for a * fire *Deut. ;2, 
is kindled in mine anger, 72: ſhall bura upon *+ 
you tr. 


is A3 


CAA OE EE I IR me 


Chap. XV. SEREMIAH Chap. XVI. 


* Ezek. 3. 


F 3. 


Rev. 10. 9.0f my heart 7, for | 1 am called by thy name, O 
T Heb. !# ] ORD GOD of hoſts 7. 


name 1s 
called 
npon me. 


* Plal.1.1. 


* Chap. 
30. Ie. 

*, Job 6 
IS. © 
+ Be not 
ſure. 


"oc. 3 


Te 

* Fzek. 

- 3 3 ” 
andga, 22. 


: As the former Verſe, ſo this alſo muſt be underſtood not of | 
che Prophet, tor he was not carried into Babylon, but of the Pe 0- 
pie, whole Captivity is threatned 1n this Place, and the cauſe ot 
i: declared, the Wrath of the Lord againſt them for their Sins, 
the Effects of which are compared to a fire which ſhould burn 
tem, 
tz OLORD, thou knoweſt «, remember me and 
vilit mew, and revenge me of my perſecutors -, take 


ther preach, fo as to diſtinguiſh good and bad Men one from ano- 
ther, then God would contirue him as his Prophet, to ſpeak 1n 
his .Name unto the people. w He chargeth the Prophet to keep 
his ground, and not to go over unto wicked Men, but to uſe 
his endeayour to reduce them to that Obedierice which he yielded 
co him. 
20 AndI will make thee unto this people a fenced, chica 


brazen * wall x, and they ſhall fight againſt thee, gong 


me not away in thy long-ſuffering y: know, that for 


bur * they ſhall not prevail againſt thee y, for I am ,, 
with thee, to ſave thee and to deliver thee, ſaith * Ch. 20. 


thy ſake I have ſuffered rebuke z. 

4 Either thou knoweſt my fincerity, how faithfully I have re- 
vealed thy Will; lo P/al. 139. 1, 23-Or thou knowelt my Suffer- 
ins, how wickedly they deal with me 3 or zhou hnoweſt what 
thou haſt to do, what is in thy purpoſe and reſolution to do, I 
will tay no more unto thee; only for my own fake I beg. 
x That I may not be out of thy Thoughts, nor withour the Vi- 
firations of thy Love, while this People is under the Viſitations of 
thy Wrath, Nehemiah 5. 19, and 13+ 14. Chap.18. 20. Xx Thou 
haſt commanded me not to avenge my ſelf, Lord ! do thouavenge 
me upon my Perlecutors: ( See the Notes on Chap. 11- 20. a0 
17. 18. how the Prophet could thus pray againſt n1s Enemies. ) 
3 Confirm thy Word, let me not be taken away into Captivity 3 
though I be a Sinner, yetexerciſe toward me patience and Jong- 
ſuffering. + Lord, remember that my Reproach, and all that I 
ſuffer, is for thy ſake, becauſe 1 have faithfully publiſhed thy 


the LORD =. IT, 12. 

x Thoſe Words are expotinded by thoſe that follow. y Look 
as Men may throw Stones or ſtrike at a brazen Wall, but do ic 
no hurt, ſo ſaith God, though thou ſhalt have Enemies that will 
be offering at thee, yer if thou continueft ſteady in the doing of 
thy Duty, they ſhall do thee no harm. 4 For thou ſhalt have my 
_ engaged tor thee, to deliver and fave thee from their 
malice. 

21 AndI will deliver thee out of the hand of the 
wicked 4a, and I will redeem thee our of the hand of 
the terrible h. 

a The wicked Fews. b And the power of the terrible Chal- 
deans, in whoſe hands thou ſhalt come, but be preſerved from 
any harm, by the Workings of my Providence for thee. 


Rs. ne 


Truth, and maintained and defended thine Honour and Glory. 
16 Thy words were found 4, and I did * eat them 


b and thy word was unto me the joy and rejoicing 


a Either the Words which from time to time thou didfſt reveal 
to me, were by me b greedily digeſted, and m though ſome of 
them were dreadful and terrible Words, yet becauſe they proceed- 
ed irom chee, I was g'ad to hear them, and to be thy Inſtrument 
eo communicate them to thy People, or, ( which better pleaſeth 
the Learned Author ot our Engliſh Annotations, an poſſibly 
may be more the Senle of the place ) thy Word of Commiſhion, 
( of which fee Chap. 1.) by which I was made thy Prophet, 
was at firſt very grateful and pleaſing to me. I was glad at the 
heart when thou at any time didſt reveal thy Will ro me. m Thou 
art the Lord of Hoſts, and ſo able to protea thy Meſſengers, Lord 
] am called by thy Name ; I became a Prophet by thy Authority, 
theretore do thou own, protect, and defend me. 

17 *] ſat not inthe aſſembly of the mockers, nor 


rejoiced 9: I fat alone becauſe of thy hand, for thou 


haſt filled me with indignation p. 

o tome, and thoſe the moſt, interpret theſe Words, as an Argu- 
ment the Prophet uſeth with God to obtain his Favour; becauſe 
though the Country was full of wicked Men, ſuch as ſcoffed at 
the Denouncings of God's Judgments, yet he had no ſhare with 
them,therefore he defires he might have no ſhare with thoſe wicked 
Men, in whoſe Company he had had no Delight,and in whoſe pro- 
fane contempt of God he had no ſhare : But the Learned Author 
of our Erglifh Annotations thinks ( and that very probably, if we 
conſider what follows) that the Words ſhould rather be Trania- 
red thus, T ſat not in the Aſſemblies of thoſe that made merry ; inti- 
mating, that though he rejoiced in his Heart when God gave him 
Commiſion to be his Prophet, yet God had all along filled his 
Mouth with ſuch dreadful Meſſages to be delivered to his Poople, 
that his whole Prophetical Lite had been to him a time of Monrn- 
ing and Solitude, p a time when he ſate alone, mourning and 
weeping 1n ſecret tor the Wrath of God revealed to him againſt 
his Pcopie, and by him to be revealed unto the People. 

18 Why is iny * pain perpetual ? and my wound 
incurable, which refuſeth, ro be healed q ? wilt thou 
be alr gether to me * as a liar, and as waters | that 
fail r. 

q The Wordsare judged to be the Words of Jeremiah, and that 
with relation to himielt,complaining of the hard Task which God 
had put upon him, continually filling his mouth with ſuch bitter 
Words of Evil againſt the People, as expoſed him to their moſt 
implacab!e Rage againſt and perſecution of him, tfoas his Miſery | 
ſeemed likea Pain and a Wound,for which was no remedy but Pa- 
tience. r Feremiah, though a great Prophet of the Lord,was (as Elj. 

jab) a Man ſubject to like Paſſions with other Men; he here charg- 
eth God with Unfaithfulneſs,as if he had deceived his expettations, 
and had been to ,him as a Pit of Waters that promiſed fair, but 
failed a Manwhen he had moſt need of them. The Servants of God 
have ſometimes been ſurprized with ſuch Paſſions and Temprati- 
ons, I Sam. 27.1. Pſal. 77.7, 9. It is an hard thing not to ſee, 
and yet believe. | : 

19 T Therefore thus faith the LORD, * if thou 
return, then I will bring thee again /, 47d thou ſhalt 
ſtand before mer: and if thou * take forth the pre- 
cious from the vile, thou ſhalt be as my mouth x : 
let them return unto thee, but return not thou unto 


them w. 

{ At the firſt reading of theſe Words, one would take them to 
be 2 Promiſe of God to reſtore this People to their former ſtate, 
it they would reform ; but upon a more nice and diligent Con- 
{deration of what follows, both in this and in the tollowing 
Verle, they ſeem rather God's Words unto the Prophet, rebuking 
his Diffidence and Diſtruſt in God, and promiſing him, that it 
he did return from that his Difidence and Diftruſt in God's Pro- 
miſe and Providence, t he would reſtore him to the former Fa- 
vonr he had had with him, and he ſhould be his Prophet to re- 
veal his Mind to the People. u And if he would ſeparate the 


CHAP. XVI. 


The Prophet is commanded to abſtain from Marrizge, from Mourning, 
or Feſtival Aſſemblies ; hereby repreſenting to them their approach- 
ing Miſery, 1, —— 9. Their Sins which cauſed it, 10, — 13. 
Their ftrange Deliverance from Babylon, 14, 15. Afeer that their 
Iniquity is recompenced, 16, -— 18- The Prophet's Comfort in the 
calling of the Gentiles, 19, — 21. 


I HE word of the LORD came alſo unto me, 
ſaying, | 

2 Thou ſhalt not take thee a wife, neither ſhalt 
thou have ſons nor daughters in this place a. 

4 It is uncertain whether what we have in this Chapter, be # 
new Revelation, or a Continuance of his former Prophecy. God 
commandeth the Prophet 1in it under certain Types, to foretell 
their utter Ruin and Deſtruftion. Firſt, he commandeth him to 
marry no Wife, nor have Sons or Daughters. He expoundeth 
this Command, Verſe 3, 4. 

3. For thus faith the LORD concerning the ſons, 
and concerning the daughters that are born in this 
place, and concerning their mothers that bare them, 
and eoncerning their fathers that begat them in this 


land, *Ch.15.2; 
4 They ſhall die of * grievous deaths, they ſhall + 5 2roug 


not be * lamented, neither ſhall they be buried ; b-t ,,, 
they ſhall he as dung upon the face of the earth, and 

they ſhall He conſumed by the ſword, and by famine, *Pſal.-0; 
and their * carcaſes ſhall he meat for the fowls of, 7” 


heaven, and for the beaſts of the earth b. Chap. 7. 3 
b God in theſe Verſes opens the Reaſon why he would not have 33. and iT 

the Prophet marry nor multiply Relations. In evil and calamitous 15. 3. and .2 

times, thoſe who multiply Relations do but multiply Sorrows 34. 20. 

and Afﬀfiitions to themſelves. The Apoſtle in evil times tells the 

Corinthians, that married Perſons ſhould have trouble in the fleſh, 

I Cor. 7. 28. and Chriſt pronounceth a Woe to thoſe that ſhould 

be with Child, and to thoſe that gave ſuck at the time when Hije- 

ruſalem ſhould be beſieged. God tells the Prophet, he was re- + 

ſolved that the People of this Land, both Young and O19, ſhould * 

die miſerable Deaths, and die to faſt, that there ſhould be none ay 

to bury them. They ſhould die by the Sword and the Famine, 

and be devoured by the Fowls and the Beaſts ; and therefore it 

was better for him to abide free from Relations, for whoſe. Miſe- 

ries he would be as much concerned as for his own Affliction. 


5 For thus ſaith the LORD, Enter not not into 
the houſe of || mourning «6, neither go to lament, norj Or; 
bemoan them : for I have taken away my peace from Mourning 
this people, faith the LORD, ever loving kindneſs - 


and mercies d. | 
c MN, Marzeach, There is ſo great a difference in the Tran- 


flation of this Word, that Amos 6. 7. the very ſame Word fignifieth 
a Banquet, and is ſo tranſlated, yet is there no Contradidtion ; for 
Banquets are now ( and probably anciently were ) in the Houſes 
of Mourning, as well as in the Houles of thoſe that rejoiced, It 
apeareth plainly by the Words that follow, that the Prophet was 
here forbidden togo to Funeral Feaſts, or to lament and bemoan 
any. 4d For ( faith God ) I have, that is, I will take away 
Peace from this People. Poſſibly the meaning of God might 
be this, Do not go to comfort ſuch as mourn for any Relations 
dead, ( for their Feaſtings upon thoſe Occaſions were upon a 
conſolatory account ; thence ver. 7. you read of a Cup of Conſo- 
lation ; ) for ſaith God, they have no need of it ; thoſe that die 
are moſt happy, for I will take away the peace of this People, 
and deprive them of al] my Mercy and Lovingkindneſs which I 
have hitherco ſhewed them. ; 
6 Both the great and the ſinall ſhall die in this n 
land : they ſhall not be buried, neither ſhall mer la- 
ment for them e, nor * cut themſelves, nor * make * cy. 0. 


themſelves bald for them f. 28. 
e There ſhall ſo many of all ranks and ſizes die in this land, Deut. 14- 
that Men ſhall have no time ro bury them, or there ſhall not r. 


precions Truths of Gol from the vile Conceits of Men ; or ra- 


be enough lett living to bury che dead ; nor ſhail Men, for their * Iſa. 22. 
Own T2. 


Chap 


[| Or,bret;; 
breai for 
them, as 
Ezex.. 24 
17. 


* Ia. 24. 
7,8. 


Chap.7. and the voice of gladneſs, the voice of the bride- 


6; 


34+ & 2 
k. 


10.EZe 
26. 13. 


* Chap. 5 
19. & 13. 


2 2, 


* Ch.7.26. 
fl Or, jtab- 
bornne(; 


. XVI. 


own miſeries have leiſure to lament for the Miſertes of other Men, 
f Cutting themlelves in their fleſh, and cutting oft rhexr Hatr, 
were Pagan Cuſtoms, which God torbad his own People, bur yet 
it ſhould teem they practiſed thele barbarous Cuſtoms, bur faith 
God, I will put an end co that practice, Mena ſhall die fo taſtand 
in tuch MuJtitudes, as they ſhall have no letlure to cut themſelves, 
for luch asar2dead,they ſhall r.0: have tuch lolemn mournings as 
they have had. | - 

7 Neither ſhall mee || tear themſelves for them in 
mourning to comfort them for the dead g, neither 
hall »c2 give them the cup of conſolation to driak 
for their tathcr or for their mother . BED 

2 It we allow our Tranflation here of the Word WS) | jippe- 
r-ju, with the word ſupplied themſelves, it will be hard to give a tO- 
jerable tenle of thete words, for chen zearing is the lame with the 
curting themſelu2s mentioned 1n the tormer Verle, which though it 
might be asa paſſionate Expreilion of the pertons forrow that did 
jr, yer how it ſhould comfore the triends of che deceated,will be ve- 
ry hard to conceive. But the Truch is, the word hath but two 113- 
nitications, and we have here given 1t what doth worſt tut this 
Text. It fignifies to Divide, and to Tear or Kend. Both 1n. Kal the 
firſt conjugation,and in Pthel the third conjugation it 15 uſed to f1g- 
nitie d/vidirg in the torimer, Iſa.5 8.7. Where we interpret It deat 3 
to dea), that 1s, divide thy Bread tothe hungry ; which isthe only 
Text (excepting this) where it is uled in this Conjugation. In the 
Other conjugation 1t 15 lo uſed in many Texts, Lev. 1. 4, 5, 7. 
Det. 14.7. to certainly it ought ro have been tranſlated nere, 
Neither ſhall men deat out bread for them in mourning 10 comfort 
them for the dead, and feemeth to hint to us a cuſtom 1n ule a- 
movelt them, when they had any Friend, that had loſt his or her 
Relations, to ſend them tome Meat or Victuals ( tor amonglt the 
Hebrews all things that they ate were called Bread) and then to go 
and Dine or Sup with them, to have opportunity to lpeak comtor- 
tably to them. This douotlels is the ſenile of che words, and {o 1t 
's plain enough, and this is confirmed by the next Phrate. þ Net- 
ther ſha men drink the cup of - conſel11ion for their father, &C. 
As in luch caſes they were wont to have lomething to eat, ſo they 
were allo wont to lend Bottles of Wine, or other chearing Liquor 
to driok, that they might torget their {lorrows ; this 1s called, The 
cup of cenjolarion, trom the end tor which the lending and drink- 
ing of it was intended. God te]ls them that the time ſhould come 
that io many ſhould dre, and fo faſt, and the reſt ſhould be to 
much upon the briok of the Grave, that they ſhould have no lej- 
{ure tor, or heart to thele Ceremonies, 

8 Thou ſhalt not alſo go into the houſe of feaſting, 
to fit with them to ear and to drink ;. 

j; God did not only forbid his Prophet, to go into houſes of 
mourning, to eat and tg drink according totheir Cuſtom, to com- 
fort thoſe who had loft their triends, but he forbad him allo to 
gointo Houſes where they were wont to eat, and rodrink upon 
2 more cheartul account. 

9 For thus ſ:jith the LORD of hoſts, the God of 
Iſrael, Behold * 1 wml cauſe to ceaſe out of this place 
in your eyes, and in your days, the voice of mirth, 


groom, and the voice of the bride k. 

k And he declares that he laid this Injun&tion upon him as a 
Type that his Countrymen, by ſuch his for bearance, might under- 
ſtand, that God in his Providence was about to put anend to all 
their c1v'] mirth in their days» 

io Þ And ir (hall come to paſs when thou ſhalt 


FEREMIAYH 


had the better Example of good Ji the Father of rour preſent 


Chap. 


King, toge:her wich what his Authority could &o to reduce you : 
He hath not been gone now above five years, and you are 1e- 
turned to your oid Vomit, and are all of you lerving me accoi d- 
11g to your own tancies, lo ſtubborn are you, and reſo!v2d azainſt 
obeclence to me. | I 

13 * Therefore wil 


nght, where I will thew you no favour 4. 

p You would not hearken to me to obey my voice in that good 
Land, which I gave you, and which vou have known, and inherj- 
ted now many Years, therefore [will throw you our into a Lind 
which you know not, and which your Fathers knew not. 4 Yuu 
would not ſerve me in this Land, but chote to ſerve other Gocs ::1 
my Land ; you ſhall ferve other Gods in a tirange Land, vou ihz!! 
chere have no luch opportunities as you have here at Hieruſalcm, 
ro worſhi me the true God according ro the preictiption and dt- 
ection of my. Word, ye ſhall there have no Goes elie but Idols to 
worſhip, and what is now matter of choice to you, ſhit then be 
torced upon you, the Goyernors of thoſe Countries into which 
you ſhall be cariied, ſhall force you to tall down, and ro woith » 
chelr Idols, which was veritied afterward by Nebucv.a.ineq2 27, 
Daniel 3, &Cc. : 

14 Therefore - bchold the * days come, faith 
the LORD, that it ſhall no more he ſaid, The LORD 


liveth that brouvht up the children of Iſrael our of 23.7 


the land of Egypt. 

ry It were berter cranflated Nstwithſtandine, tor that is man.- 
teſtly the ſenſe, God ſweetneth the dreadful Threatnings prece- 
ding, with a comfortable promile of their Reſ{auration. 

[5 But the LORD liveth that broughtup the chil- 
dren of Iſrael from the land of the north, and from 


all the lands whither he had driven them /: and I 
will bring them again into their land that I gave un - 
to their fathers r. 

| _ | Which he faith ſhould be fo grateful a Mercy to chem, that 
elther-1n regard of the newnels of this deliverance, or in regard of 
the great Milery they ſhould be in during the Captivity ot Babj- 
ln, when they ſhould be delivered from it, they ſhould not to 
much remember their deliverance from the Houſe of Bondage in 
E:ypt, and magnife God for that Salvation, as this new Delive« 


unto their Fathers, 

16 © Behold I will ſend for many fiſhers, ſuck 
the LORD, and they ſhall fiſh them ; and after I wii] 
fend for many hunters, and they ſhall hunt them from 
every mountain, and from every nll, and out of toe 
holes of the rocks v:. 

u Though lome Interpreters make theſe words 4 Promite ene: 


foo + 
Ke - 


ii 


of God's Reſtaur-tion ot this People and making ule of Cyrits wile? 
as a Fiſherman or Huntſman, by kis Proclamation tercnod 0:16 


Jews out of all parts of his Nominions, to retura to Hierululom 


Li 


; Or of the Calling of God's Ele& by the Apoſtles, who were Gou's 


Fiſhermen, and went np and down preaching the Goſpel in ail 
Places ; yer the next Verſ2 rather guideth us to interpret it as a 
|Threatning, and by thele Fiſhermen and Huntſmen, to underſtand 
all thoſe Enemies whom God made ule of to deſtroy thele F-we, 
hunting them out ot all holes and coverts wheretoever they 


ha 
v4 


ſhew this [people all theſe words, and they ſhall fay ſhould fly, and rake Sanctuary. 


a 


or what z5 our ſin that we have committed againſt the hid from mine eyes w. 


LORD our God »: ? . 
1 Or, all theſe things, When thou ſhall be obſerved by this peo- 
'Ple to refuſe Marriage, and to go to the Houles of Mourners, ac- 
cording to the Cuſtom, to eat or to drink with Mourners, to make 
them to forget their ſorrows, or to go into the Houle of Feaſting 
for Jollity and Mirth, and they ſha!l ask che reaſon of thy ſingula- 


Tity in this Rehaviour, and thou ſhalt give them the reaſon of it,ac-| 


cording as I have inſtructed thee, and they m ſhall pretend to be 
at a lols, to known the realon why God is fo ſevere againſt them, 
for what fin or iniquity it i5,think perhaps that Manaſſes or Fehoz4- 
kim's commanding them to worſhip Ido]s would excuſe them, 
and only leave their Superiours guilty, for orherwile, while there 


was {uch plain Idolatry amongſt them, they could not be ignorant | 
of caule ſufficient that God had, conſidering the multiplied chreats | 


in the Law. 
11 Then ſhalt thou ſay unto them, Becauſe your 
fathers » have forſaken me, and faith the LORD, 


have walked after other Gods, and ſerved them, and | 


have worſhipped them, and have forſaken me, and 
have not kept my law. 

n The Idolatrous Rings of Fudah that were before Manaſſes 
his time, ſince whole time they were hardly forty years yet 
elaplied,. 

12 And ye o have done * worſe than your fathers 
(for behold ye walk every one after the || imagination 
of his evil heart, that they might not hearken unto 


me. ) 


o Ye 11 latter Ages, in the time of Manaſſ-s, have done worſe | ſpeaking to him upon t! pp 
than your l-atiters did, and now in the ti.ne of Fehoiahim, you (for mercy tor himlelt, and tro confirm his Falt!, 
run on much in the ſame courſe of Idolatry and Superſtition, |Natnes ſuited co his hopes 11 VC 
whicirin L215 is Worle in you,vecaule for thirty years togecher you |n him for the vbrr-ming favour from BUn is 2c 


| . w God is of purer Eyes than that he can behold injquity in any 
{o as to approve it, and therefore tho' he be long patient, yet he 


,will at Jatt puniſh evil doers, for his Eyes behold them, their tins ? 


» 


are open in his ſight, and he particularly oblerveth Mens ACt 
ons, that he may render unto every one according iv 11:5 
; Works, 
| 18 And firſt I will recompence their intquity, and 
their ſin double x: becauſe they have defiled my land y, 
They have filled mine inheritance with the carcatlos of 
{nee deteſtable and abominable things =. 
! XxX Before will reſtore them, and return in my wonted favour 
.to them, I will puniſh them tor their ways which 1 have teen, 
Which are ways of iniquity, and will plentifully pumnth them, (tor 
O double here fignifies, not the double of what their {ins delerve.) 
, Becauſe by their Idolatry, Blood and Cruelty, and other tins, 
they have defiled the Land which I own, and uw ici I have given 
'them. x And have defiled that Country which 1 have choten tor, 
and named my Inherirance, with their 2bomimable things, that is 
Practices, or unclean Beaſts offered to their 1do1s 10 Sactitic#s, ar 
innocent perſons fſain by them. : : 
19 O LORD, my ſtrength and my tortrets, ai 
my Refuge inthe day of attliction, the Gentiles |: 
come unto thee froin the ends of the earth, 249 111 2!! 
| ſay, Surely onr fathers have inherited lies 416 vanity 
and this wherein there 25 no profit b. | | 
| 4 TheP: opher hearing God's Relolution, befor? 0 ſhowed this 
Lpcopts any mercy, to ve avenged on them for ety (135, Ieaves oft 
at Arguinent, but appH&* 1:M1e}t rg God 
"* him, erives hin 
him,and which might Gectare fiis tarch 


' 
o 
— 


—__ 
| $48 


ret } 4 
» 1 : | ” 
<Viz 1Y + 


C9: 


b. And 


co a land that ye know nor, either ye, nor your fa- ?7* 
chers p, and there ye ſhall terve other Gods day and 3” ©4455 


+ 


VI. 


| I caſt you out of this land ja- * Deut. a, 


2-3. 


-._ 4 
bt &* 4454 


+. 


= 


- A 
$410 


unto thee, *- Wherefore hath che LORD pronounced | 17 For mine * eyes areupon all their ways : they* jb 4+ 
11 this great evil againſtus? or what zs our iniquity ? are not hid from my face, neither is their iniquity 21, 
" Pro 


and 5. }. 


od. 


(> 


11AP., 


\ 
- 


3 


Chap. X% VI. 


*FEREMIAH Chap. XVIL 


comforreth himſelf with the thoughts of thoſe good days that | knoweſt not : for * ye have kindled a fire in my anger, * Chap. 
vrore coming, ween not only the Jews ſhould De again __ - which ſhall burn for ever h. | IF, I4+ 
their County, but oy -onvay we rim cg »s #4 on! . 6 my | g In the word diſcontinue there is a ſecret promiſe, that they 

(EO 200 ng Of THe Few | ou} accompany) me *PP? | ſhould again come and poſiets and inherit their Land, they ſhould 
themtelyes to God, confeſiing that both they and Frei wes 4g | not 1oſÞ their Inhericance,but only diſcontinue their poſſeſſion and 

in their worſhipping dumb Ifo's, had but inherite LieSand Va-| occupation of it, Some learned Authors conſidering that the tame 

nity, and things that were unprofitable. | word !$ here uled, which is uſed Exod. 23. 11. in the Law concern- 


Fa nw FF I JS 5 0 | 4 $8 -" OY hoy |. ' 8 
* ChaP.2, 20 Shall a man make gods unto himlelt, and ney | ingthe Sabbarzcal Reſt, when they were to let the Land reſt, and 


11, 


arc no Gods c ? | he ftill, Lev. 26. 34. think this Text hath a reference to that, and 
c 1t is doubtful whether theſe be to be underſtood as the words| the meaning is, thou ſhalt diſcontinue thy Ploughing and Tilling 
of Gol, ſhewinz the unreaſonablenets ot the Sin of 1dolatry, or,| the Land. 6 And go into thine Enemies Countrey and ſerve them 
as others who make them, the continued Speech of the Ger'//es,[1na Landot which thou haſt no knowledge. becauſe by thine Ide» 
who atter their Converſion, ſhoul4 lee the unrealouablenels ot| jarry and other fins thou haſt increaſed my Wrath into ſuck a fire. 
worſhipping the Works of their own }an:'s. Whoto owncth aj as ſhail burn for a long time, for ſo the Word Ever is oft taken, 
God, owneth an 3nfinire being, a firſt Caute and Mover, and Crea- | Exod. 21. 6. Deut. 15. 17. P/al. $9. 1. Iſa. 34. 10. 
ror of all things. Now can any be lo lottiſhly ſtupid ww think, 5 Y Thus faith the LORD, Curſed be the man 
that afinice being ſhould give a ny hogs m _— | that truſteth in man, and maketh fleſh his arm, and 
he who is a Creature, ſhould make his Creator, that ne a Sa departeth from the LORD 5. 


23 Cauſe to the firſt Cauſe > (things which are all contradictions | *! * ; "Y ie _—_ 
to the common ſenſe of Men:) A Man is no God himlelt, how| # le was the great f11 of this People, for which they are often 
£ ! : tick tumlf hart taxed in Holy Writ, 2 Chron. 16.7. and 28. 26, 20. I. JO. 1, ts 
C21 he communicate a Divine Nature, wich himleit natn not, 5 ) OE INS. Sy 
> herher > ; and 31. i, 2. when any danger threatned them for their Sins, to 
cTLIW 5 


make Leaf u2s with, and flee to forreign idolatrous Nations to kelp 


Cr STLIETT 


21 Therefore behold, I will this once cauſe them 

to know, T will cauſe them to know mine hand, and 

"£3 33: mv might &, and they ſhall know.that my * name 1s 
the LORDe. 


and fuccour them, and torepole a confidence in them, and ſo bou]- 
{ter up themſelves in their wicked and finful courſes promiſing 
themielves deliverance from the dangers that threatned them, by 
(the power of their Confederates and Allies. This ſin the Propher 


1 Pecauſe atl the goodneſs and mercy that Thave ſhewed them, | here reflecterh upon. That while their heart departed from God, 
will nor learn them to know me, my power and might, I will | (hey would yet encourage themſelves, trom the hoped for help of 
once for all make them to underſtand it, by the dreadtul trokes of | Men: The Prophet from God declares that ſuch are and ſhall be 
my Vengeance. e They ſhall know.that my Name 1s Jehovsh ; that curſed, and mentioned Man, under the Notion of Flef, to ſhew 
Fam not ſuch a one as their Idols, bur one who have my being his frailty and impotency, to help againſt the mighty Power and 
trom my ſelf;andgive Life and Being toall other things,and have | Wrath of God; withal ſhewing us, That God alone Is the true ob- 
all mizht and power in my hand, and can do whatfoever I pleaſe ; ject of our Faith and Confidence, as well as for the things of tris 
and oge that will mike good whatioever I have ſpoken, whether | Life, -as thoſe of another Life, and that none whoſe heart departerb 


13 a way of promile or threatniog, 


CHAP}. XVII. 


The Captivizz ef Judah for her fin, 1, ——= 4. Truſt in May 
Curi-d: In God Bl:ſſel, 5, —— 8. The deceirfui Heart and 
met fecrer Prafices are hnown to God, 9, —— 11. The Salvua- 
ron of God, 12, —= 14. Tye Prophet compleineth of the Mocker. 

' his Prophscies, 15, — 18+» Of keeping the Sabbath, 19, — 27. 


J2D 19. 1 HE 41in of Judah z written with * a pen of 
_ L iron, 44 withthe + nojnt of a diamond 2 ; 
x = /t 75 graven upon the table cf cheir heart b, and upon 
____ the horns of your altarsc : #7 

aThere is much arguing amongft thoſe that are critica] about the 

true fignification of worcs,what is here ignited by TOW Shamir, 

which we tranſlate a Diamond ; moſt agree that it doth not ſtgnthe 

2 Diamond (not uſed in ingraving) but that by the Pen of Tron, and 

©1129 point of 2 Diamord, are mcant lome Tools with which they were 

wont to ergrave things upon hard tubſtances, it may be mace in a 

ftevre relombling the Claw of a Bird, as the word feemeth to 1m: 

port. b It is graven in their hearts they are ſo accuſtomed to ftn, 

'o inured to T:iolatry, that there is no hope of any reclaiming 

them. For how can they that are accuſtomed to do evil,do well ? 

c Nor is it thing done in ſecret, bur it is written or painted, or 

e2graven upon the Horns of their Altars, God's Altar was four- 

{quare, and at each corner there was a riſing part made of Braſs 


% 


joinething high, theſe were called the Herns of the Altar, S-e 
Exod. 27.2, Exrk. 43.15, 16. Now their (tn iseither ſaid to be 
enzraved, or publiſhed, upon the Horns of the Altar, becaule the 
Blood of the Sacrifices which they offered to I6do's was Iprinkled 
there, or becaute their Altars had fame lnicription upon them, 
declaring to w hat Idol that Altar was contecrated, as the Altar 
at Athers had. 
2 Whilft their children rememder their altars, 
{:1.3.7. and their * groves, by the green trees upon the high 
I .'2.96 hills Ale 
Fon 4 Tais ſhewed how inveterate they were in this ſin of Idolatry, 
& P2420 thor they taught ir their Children, andtheir Children remembred 
their Idolatrous Altars, and the Groves, where they were wont 
to worſhip Idols by the green Trees, as they did allo upon the 
high Hills, to their ſta was derived trom ore Age to another. 
O:hers think, that the phrafe rather exprefſeth their fondneſs of 
their Idols, and think it ſhould be read, as therr Children, they re- 
member, &c. that is, they loved their Idols, and their Idolatrous 
Services, a5 they Joved their Children, which alſo was true, yea. 
thev that made their Childien paſs through the fire to Molech, 
loved them better than their Children. 
* C hape 3 Omy mountain in the field e, I * will give 
i5-13- thy ſubſtance, zd all thy treaſures to the ſpoil, 
id thy; high places for fin, thronghout all thy bor- 
ders f. 

e O Mount 29, for though Feruſalem ſtood in a Plain, yet it 
was at the foot of an Hill, and part of it was built upon the fide 
of the HJ], upon the top of which Hills, were many pleaſant 
Fields. Gr, O Fudah, which was a Country full of Mountains, 
God calls it his Mounrain, becauſe of the particular favour he had 
to this Country. f He threatneth to pive all the Riches of the 
Inhabitants of Fudah and Feruſ2/em as a ſpoil, and all the High 

laces where they had commirted Idolatry throughout all their 
1 . Countrey into the Enemies hands. | : : 
« He: , And thou,even Þ thy ſelf ſhalt diſcontinue from 
J F4 thine heritage which ] gave thees, and I will cauſc 


thee to ſorve thine enemies, in the land which thou 


from God, can With any ſecurity look for any help from the Crea- 

tUre, 

| 6 For he ſhall be * like the heath in the deſart, and * Clap, 
!hall not ſee when good cometh, but ſhall inhabit the 4+: <- 

parched places in the wilderneſs, zz a falt land and 


not inhabited þ. 

k The ſym is, he ſhall not thrive, nor proſper, but be like the 
Heath, by which is meant ſome barren Shrub or Tree, about which 
tae various gueſſes of Interpreters (which the Reader that is curi- 
Qus may find in the En21iſh Annotations) are but incertainties, and 
this planted in the Wilderneſs too which isa barren ſoil, which 
Tree or Plant 1s never the better for all the moiſture that comes 
trom Heaven, nor for all the Beams of the Sun but ſtands in a dry 
{alt piace, not inhabited by People. The Scope is to let us know, 
that ſinners who depart from God, and do not placetheir confi- 
dence in him in times of danger, but truſt in Creatures aids.and 
aſliſtances, ſhall miſs oſthoſe very good things which they might 
"ave had if they had expected them trom him,from whom alone 
thy could have been obtained, | 

7 * Bleſſed is the man that truſteth in the LORD, *pg1.z.: 


and whoſe hope the LORD is /. 7 34+ 10. » 
! Truiting in the Lord neceffarily implicth alſo a walking cloſe W227, 2. , 

with him, and nor in heart departing from him; for it is naturally Prov. 16. 

1mpoſi:b/e, that any ſhould repoſe a confidence in another tor any 29+ 

good things, which that other hath promiſed under any condition, 114.30. 18. 

without ſome ſatisfaftion in himſelf, that he hath in ſome mea- 

| [ure fulfilled the condition upon which the promiſe is made. But 

{chat Man that truly truſtethand hopeth in the Lord is, and ſhall 

be a blefſed Man. 

3 For he ſhall beas a * tree planted by the wa- *pob s.16. 
ters, aad that ſpreadeth out her roots by the river, Plal. 1. 5: 
(and ſhall not ſee when heat cometh. but her leaf ſhall 
| be greep, and ſhall not be careful in the year 

\ wd%, . of & 
of | drought, neither ſhall ceaſe from yielding jj Or, re- 
fruit m. ſtraint. 

m The ſum 1s, he ſhall be proſperous and fucceſsful it his Coun- 
fels, and Undertakings; like a Tree plant2d by the fiJe of a Ris 
ver, which is not affeted with drought, but in a time when the 
leaves of Trees ſtanding in dry mountainous places parch and w1- 
cher, 1ts Jeaves ho!d their greennels, and its colour is not a'tered by 
drought, neither doth it ceaſe trom yielding fruic, bur bringeth 
forth much Fruit when other Trees are wholly unfruittul. 

9 4 The heart is deceitful above all things, and 
deſperately wicked z, who can know it ? 

n The words tranſlated deceitful, and deſperately wicked, are 
very varioufly Tranſlated, fraudulent, perverſe, ſupplanting, he 
(peaks tothe Fews, that they might not lean too much to their 
own Counſels, Fancies or Underſtandings ; but it is a propofition 
true concerning the Hearts of a!l the Sons and Dweghters of Men ; 
there is nothing lo talle and deceitful as the Heart of Man ; deceit- 
ful in its apprehenſions of thizgs, in the hopes and promiſes which 
1: nouriſheth, in the aſſurances that it gives us, ©. unſearchable 
by others, deceitful with reference to Our lelves, and abominably 
wicked, fo that neither can a Man know his own Heart, neither 
can any other know our Hearts, | 

10 I the LORD * ſearch the heart, I try the reins, * 1592 
even to give every man accordingto his ways, and kt ene ; 
accordlng to the truit of his dvingso, 28. . 

o Leſt thete Hypoctites ſhould prerend that their Hearts were Plal. 7.9. 
not departed from Go, or ſould fay who then can judze us if Ch.1r. 2: 
none Knoweti the Heart? Saith God,though no Creature knoweth &= a $2 
the heart of another fellow Creature.yer | know the Hearts of al! Raw oY 


7 


Creatures, I {earch tae lecret Thoughts,and Counlcls and Deſgns , * 


ld þt bod 


Chap. % VII. 


j| Or, 94 
pvereth 
young, 
which ſhz 
hath not 
brought 


forth. 


P1al. »r 
233 


Pal. 7 3- 
27. 

Ita. I. 28. 
* Chap. 


a» I3. 


F Heb 


2/ter thee, 


of all my Creatures, for I will judge them accordiag to their 
Thoughts and the ſecret Motions and Aﬀections of their Souls, 


according to all their ways, and che fruit of their doings. You; 


cannot therefore mock me,and tell me your heartSare nor depart- 
ed from me. ; © 

11 A the partridze || ſitteth on eggs, and hatchetn 
them not p : ſo he that getteth riches, and not by 
right, * ſhall leave them ia the midlt of his days 2, 
and at his end be a fool 7. : 

p It is no wonder if we cannot be certain as to the ſence ofthele 
words ſo far as they concern natural Hiſtory, when we are not 
certain what Bird it is to which they relate z we trarflate the 
word Partridge. O:hers will have it the Cuckow 3 but certain It 15, 
that it is the time word which we tranſlate Partridge, 1 Sam. 
26. 20, and Cuckows ule not to be much hunted after. How the 
Partridge is ſaid to fit on Eggs and hatch them nor, 1s yet a greater 


queſtion. It may be occaſioned fo many ways, viz. eirher fitting | 


upon Wind-ezgr, or being killed before the Eggs are hatched, or 
having its Eggs deſtrozzd by the Male Partridge, or by ſome Dog, 
or other Vermine, or its Neſt being found having her Eggs taken 
from her, that it is hard to determine which the Prophet means 3 
of all other I leſt approve of that which Hierome makes the ſence, 
chough the thing be true, (if we may believe Caſſiodorus, and te- 
veral natural Hiſtorians, Aldrovand:s, &c-) That Partridges have 
ſach a love and defireto hatch young ones, that having loſt their 
own Eggs, they will ſteal the Ezgs of other Partridges and hatch 
them, which Birds being hatched, the young ones knowing the 
cry of their proper Dams, hearing them ca}, leave the Pariidge 
that hatched them; (which is one thing quoted by Aldrovandus 
ro ſh-w the ſagacity of that Bird) but if this were the ſence the 
words would be, as the Partridge ſitteth on Eggs, and harcheth 
them, but injoyeth them not, whereas they are, hatcheth them 
nor ; that is, having loſt them either by ſome Man that hath 
taken them from her, or by ſome V-rmine or wild Beaſt- 7 So he 
that perteth an Eſtate by oppreſſion, or any conzenage or unrigh- 
reous Attions,ſhall lole it again before he cometh to d1e,and when 
he comes to die, ſhall underſtand what a Fool he was to cake 1o 
much pains to no more purpoſe. TE 

12 4 Asglorious high throne from the beginning, 


z the place of our ſancuary /. 

ſ It 1s much more hard togive an account of the connexion of 
cheſe words with the former, than of their lence confiderec abſo- 
lurely in themſelves. Some would have them the words of the 
People reckoning up another vain ground of their confidence, be- 
cauie they had amongſt them the Temple of theLord,which we know 
was what they mightily gloried in. Others would have them the 
words of the Prophet, owning his and the good Jews conhdence 
to be only in God, and themſelves to worſhip God not in Groves 
or high places, bur only in that place which he had choſen to be 
worſhipped 1, even 1n his Sanctuary or Temple, many other 
oO jectures there are, but theſe two ſeem to me the moſt proba- 

e. 

13 O LORD ! the hope of Iſrael z, * all they thar 
forſake thee ſhall be aſhamed -, azd they that depart 
from me ſhall be written in the earth w, becauſe they 
have forſaken the LORD, the * fountain of livin? 
waters -x, 

£ That is, he in whom alone the true Iſrael of God can hope. 
u Thoſe who torlake thy Law, anil that rule thou haſt given them 
whereby to diret their Converlations, ficſt or laſt will be a- 
ſhamed of ſuch tlieir diſobedience. w And thoſe that depart from 
what I have, as thy Prophet, revealed tothem as thy Will, ſhall 
have no porti0n beyond the Earth which they ſeem ſo fond of. Or 
their Names and Memories ſhall vaniſh, and periſh, and be pre- 
ſently extinct like words written in Duſt. x Becauſe they have 
forſaken thee who art the alon? certain reliefand comfort of any 
People, the toyntain and original of all that good they can hope 
for. 

14 Heal me, O LORD, and [ ſhall be healed ; 
ſave me, aud I ſhall be ſaved ; for thou art my 
praiſe y. | 

y Moſt Interpreters here underſtand the Prophet ſpeaking in 
theſe words to God for himſelf ; he reprefents himſelf to God as 
a Perſon wounded or fick, either with the ſence of Gods diſhon- 
our by the fins of the People,or with their Reproaches or Threat- 
nings,and beggeth of God to heal him,he being he, in whoſe hand 
or power it was to hea] him, and who could certainly do ic. The 
argument 1$1n thoſe words tor thou art my praiſe, he whom alone 
I have reaſon to praiſe for mercies already received, to whom 
alone I oweall my good things. 


15 Y Behold, they fay unto me, Where 5 the 
word of the LORD z * let it come now 2. 

{ Scoffing at me as if I had threatned them in thy Name with- 
out any order or direction trom thee, as the Scoffers mentioned 
by Peter, ſaid 2 Per. 3. 4. where is the Promiſe of his coming. This 
hath been the pratice of all wicked Men hardened in their finful 
courles, and reſolved to go on, to pur the evil day far from them, 
and to [coff at all denunciations of God's Judgments, Iſa. 5.19. 
Amos 5. 18. @ Daring the Vengeance of God and challenging 
God to Damn them, or to excute the Vengeance with which he 
threatneth them. 

156 As for me, I have not haſtened from being a 
paſtor Þto follow thee 6, neither have I deſired the 
wotul day thou knowelt c, that which came out of 
my l:ps was 7:ght before thee 9. 

6 That the words contain, the Prophets appeal to God upon 
ſomereproaches-caſt upon him by this wicked people,as 1t he had 
thruſt himſelf inco the Prophetical Office, is evident. and reafon- 
ably wellagreed by Interpreters, but they are divided abou: che 


Vol. II. 


SEREMIAH 


- X'S7 

Chap. A VII 
ſence of the word TY)NX A:31i, which yet always in Scripture, 
lignifes to mzke haſte, or to urge, or preſs, the ſence ſeemerh to be 
this. Lord ! As I did rot ſeek the Office of a Prophet, fo when 
thou were pleaſed to call me to it, I did not decline to be a P:ſtor 
after thee. c Neither (ſaith he) have I deſired co be a Prophet 
of thele fad Tidings, thoſe woful Miſeries which thou haſt made 
me thy Meſſenger to foretel, 4 I have ſpoken nothing but what 
was right 1n thy ſight, being what thou commandeſt me to deli- 
ver as trom thee, and fol know was right in thy fight, 


17 Benot aterror unto me ec, * thou az: my hope * Clips, 
1n the day of evil f. 15,12 
e Though theſe wicked rebellious Menafright and terr'fie me, 


yet, Lord, be not thou a terrour unto me, own and detend me as 


thy Prophet. f For thou alone art he in whom I place my hope 
and truſt in a day of trouble. 

18 * Letthem be confounded that perſecute me, 
but ler not me be confounded : let them bediſmayed, 
but let not me be diſmayed : bring upon them the day , = 
ot evil, and + * deſtroy them with double deijtrudti- 54 35: 
on g. H 
g That is with abundant deſtruction. Concerning theſe Pray- þ,. zz che 
ers of the Prophet againſt his Enenues, fee the Notes on Chap. 7 1. ,,;-1. , 
20, dytble 

I9 4 Thus faith the LORD unto me , Go and 54" 
ſtand in the gate of the children of the people, 
whereby the Kings of Judah come in, and by the 
which they go out, and in all the gates of Jeruta- 
lemh. 

h Moſt think that here begins a new Prophecy, and therefore 
this Verſe ſhould have begun a new C! apter. The Prophe:s were 
often commanded to publiſh ſuch Revetations as they had from 
Gad, either at the Gates of the City, or the Gates of the Temple, 
Chap. 7. 2. and 19. 2. It is not agreed what this particular Gate 
was, at which the kings of Fudah were wont molt ordinarily to 
come in, and go out, but the Propher was allo commanded to pub- 
liſh it in all the Gates of Feruſa/em, that all might take nocice of it. 

20 And fay unto chem, Hear ye the word of the 
LORD, ye kings of judah, and all Judah, and all 
the inhabitants of Jeruſalem, that enter in by theſe 
gates z. 

i The word of the Lord equally concernerh the higheſt, and 
the loweit, the greateſt Princes as well as the mcaneſt -Sub- 
jects. 

21 Thus ſaith the LORD*, Take heed to your * Neh. 1+. 
ſelves k, and bear no burden on the {aobath day, nor 79: 
bring ir in by the gates of Jerufalem. 

hk The Hebrew is, 1a%2 heed 19 your Souls, 1ntimating tO us; 
thar the Sanctifica:ion or the Sadvath 152 great thing,whereta the 
welfare of our Souls is concerned, | 


720. 


22 Neither carrv forth a burden ontof your hov- 
ſes on the ſabbath-day, neither do ye any work, but 
hallow ye the ſabbath day, as I commanded your £x- 
thers /. | 

! This Command for the SanCtification of the S1bbath, was zt- 
ven, Exod. 20. 8, repeated Ch4p.23. 12. and 31. 14; 15. Leiit. 
I9. 3. and 23.3. Deus. 5.12, 15. Exek. 20. 12. the bearing of 
burdens forbidden, was ſuch as was for profit; tor in iome caſes 
it was lawful to carry burdens for the faving ot the Lives of 
Men or Beaſts, and fome learned Men juſtifie the poor fick Man 
carrying his Bed when he was cured, not only from the com- 
mand of Chriſt alone who could authorize him to ir, though a- 
gainſt the Rule of the Law, but becauſe he had no further occa- 
ſion himſelt to be there, and was not obliged by the Law of the 
Sabbath to leave Þ1s B-d behind him, himſelf going away ; but no 
unneceſſary Burden, no trading burdens might on the Sabbath- 
day, be either carried out of the Gates of the City, or out of the 
Gates of any of their privace Houles. 

23 * Bat they obeycd not, neither inclined their * Chap, 
ears, but made their neck ſtiff that they might not 7 © 
hear, nor recelve inſtruction m. 

m The Jews were a very covetous People, and their Cove- 
touſnels as well as their other Lufls, were temptations to them 
to prophane the Lord's Sabbaths, Neh. 13. 19. Ezek. 20. 21, 


24 Anditſhall come to paſs, it ye diligently hear- 
ken unto me, faith the LORD, to bring in no burden 
through the gates of this city on the ſabbath 
day, but hallow the ſabbath-day ro do no work 
therein. 


25 * Then ſhall there enter into the gates of this * Chap. 
city, kings and princes litting upon thethrone of Da- 22. 4- 
vid, riding in chariots, and on horſes, they and cher 
princes, the Mea of Judah, and the inhabirznts of Je- 
ruſalem, and this city ſhall remain for ever. 


26 And they ſhall come from the citics of Judah, 
and from * the places about Jeruſalem, and from the , , _ 
land of Benjamin, and from the plain, and from the ; 
mountains, and from the ſouth, briogiag burnt oi- * 
terings and facrifices, and meat-ofterings, and 11- 
cenſe, and briagias ſacrifices of pralie uito the houte 
of the LORD ». 


P_ 
of 
| $,,md 


de { 


ivy 


forts. 


þ VA 


& o 


- ſum 


27] of a! 


[84 
% a4 


nveRingean 
: thou! come 
*r1IHCEFS . ! c 


ly 


; UF: C 
's Sal bt, ;they ſhould ci:Fer continue ir, or be re- 


ſi 


Cra'1 © (11! 


1s Pr 


Jamo! 
1'W. apt; 


bi 


DT 
! PO'Yer TO 


4 } 
% 


® - 
” 


{C5 Pere MENT 


x 
. = 
i ny 


(ye 


\ 
tad ts 
nC, Mi 


x 
1* I 
Tee 


mnto their AUCeNTt. 
{} 


CC 


Tt! 


of the bs 
+. being pur for the w 
” uy tne 01 


FI 


FO” FH. 


b Tf that Nation Jeaveth off etiote 
by my Prophets threatned with Judgments. 


Fw 


Chap. % VHL 


(u] couries, v hich I have 
ji] will a'to tun 
irem the methods of my {eveze Pt ovicerce which I Had reſolved 


#E ] 


' is, that itt i 


44] 


Veri es hey would fag- 

Civ1l, and Ecclefiaſtical c1ile er, they 
$ iotl vir wer er and f vlen: tor, 
the Þo 
all 


[ 
ch71 CU; X 


in caſe oftheir impen'tency to proceed in againſt them, 11] ere 1s 
a difterence betw 15.t Keperrance in Man, apd Keye rrance aSiIt 15 at- 
tributed to God ; Repem ance in Man wult be, ret crlv ackarge 


NO 
All 70 


iv 15 tobe 1 ertonds Synecd 
vw Ot God, ha one as was 17 
bole Las of God. Fnole 
«to the tei Ms ail P:3 


% 
9 3 143 the E Ergliſh 41} nota'i 


2 nc 


ln 


WAI | »: 


| farinE a T' 


m \7 
ef & 


7s t1 Pc n e),- 
ck, 'M 

. , 

4 oredty 


OS. 


PT os 
Bot {i} al}u 


\Y; 21” 


- 


1 
L236” 


11 CHIC x C 
11 
!1evour {Lino 

L-4 ? 
Cu 


| } 
: 


} 


RL 


«4 


hy al 
] 
0, 

e i! 


T COnt A 


e}- 
«vt; 


coninge, and 


{11 
| HULUTS 


ito 
3% © 


114 e Say po I 


8 174 
£ 


1 ng 0 
on $- l.-uft 


C1} T3, 


11] 


or cri 


| 
+4< 


na, (i 1'te contr ary 
© the Duty to wW: 
it i &ro their City * 


T1 
= 


110! 'riſh 4 


Elem, 


» 


1] Te 1S NO MoTE, tian that 


2 '/ YON 4 { 
af 5#, Fi C 5 £ at " E of bn 
in wry orger whitrce 


ik 


the! tft ical 


me to hallow 
1 CVCN CAETINE 
a ith day, then 
; thc reof, and it ſhall 
and 10 foal 


iato 
zurdei 


11 


he ſabb 


to the former Promiſe, upon 
ich that Promile was an- 


in Action, but a change of Heart 3 Repentance as att3iI uted to 
God, never fteniheth a change of Heart, or Pvrpcte, or Ct unſels, 
but only a change in adtion, an alteration of the courte ct his 
Prov:icence. Hence God in Scripture 1s faid to Refert as 13 this 
Text, and Fonah 3 3.10. And it1sallo 1aid ct 11m, that he j« no! 
4 manihat le Poul by or repent, Num. 23.19. 1 Sam. I5S. 29.00 
never changerh | his Counlejs, or Purpoſes, though he ctten vari- 

e:h his actions of Providence. accc:Ging to the Behaviours ot his 
CreAtUTES, 


9 And at what inſtant I ſhall fpeak concern; 
nation, and concerning a £ingdom to b a1ld, and to 
_ it; 

> If itdoevil in my ſight, that it obey not my 
voice, then I will repent of the good wherewith [ 


{1d x would benefit tho 
.*. Speaking. Ver. 9. and 
lood in the fame {ence as 1; 


Za 
v 


ty 6 
rererting Ve muſt be undcer- 
3 Ti;E LUO TOCYMeTr Verjz:s, The rea ſon 


- r. 19, 


ir ſhould be burned with 


7 , 
- - 
, , 


tough the hat; 
Ctr them to uo 


—_ if 


of this 15, becauſe in al: God's Threat n 7g and Premiles of this 


3 JA 


Rl noblcft Strud ures ſhould be burned.anc 
the Enemy (hoy id do this, vet God ſhould or 
It, Y; ) 251: ſhoald be a fre of his kindling, and 


do 


therefore not Jike 1: be quence: cd, 


tl} it kad effected tiza: thing 


UF 
{OT 


the Parc! 
116718 (et 
and hor Tu 
| 


i 


"ITE 


7 


of a 


forth, 


try 7 me 


word which 


; Potter, God's ab) blelure P: wer and Diltolal of Na- 


' 
z 


ny, 


which God to kinaled it, 


3 


3s Con Pr, -atuYs, I dy POET 


zHAP. XVII. 


. Jucal”” 'S urpard ls1'd K o7 volt : 
The Prove t pi rayeth a; 241jt 


il, 


3 5 


ce 
oY 


pature there js a Condition ether expreſſed or underſtood. God's 
Threatning of evi] mu't be unc \-r{tood with this Condition, un- 
lels Men and Women repent a:id turn from their evil ways: And 
his promiſes of good mutt be uncerſtood with this condition, it 
thoſe to whom they are made be a willing and obecient People, 


and keep in the wav of the Lord's Statutes. 

11 | Now therefore go to, ſpeak to the men of 
Judah, and to the inhabitants of Jeruſalem, ſaying, 
Thus faith the LORD, Behold I frame evil 2 gainit | 


ary ſ 
[TL] k 


' Win 
114 ails 


- yo 


1 came to feremiah from the] ; 


| youu, 


C109 


*} 


1 


Aiiſe 
> 17lll | 


HINE1S 


LORD, a 


. © Y 


Fore 20 down to 


Fi by os T0 ear 
> Potter 10 07 near the place.or at ro that though he had by his Prophet denounced his Wrath and 


Ct ule 


! 
there was but on 


\ 


ne 


the potters _, and 


L 
31y WOrds 7 


and deviſe a dow; ice againſt you : * re a ye” 2 Kings 
17. 12,15- 


now every one from his evil way, and make your Cha 

my s, and your doings good þ. 8 _—— 
» The Lord fixeth a particular application tothe more general gr. 6, y > 

os ine wich he had before delivered. God had told this Peo- & 35 


' 
[ 


, t55 


af; 


tharthere worn 


em 


1d 


« Houle the 4 
- 7 1% puryvned 
his Nind and W11l to 


- 
Ci 


told, he wrought a 
b J-remy vields a Pi <| 
ef Gd, though | 


Ie G11 
'e Por! At wv 


£ 


the truc 4 5 of - ft, 
i, ung fuch k1! 


: d at I! 
c 


- 
c 
eEVe {NY y! ITC 
\ v$+$13 
y DJ / 
Ame 


g.4 


2 


. be liked L et. 


C11 L 


v1 
[4 


1 


ww i 
© M 


to t:3E 
Sons and Dae! 
them, 

h; to 49 W 


\ Ki * 
14 L + 
Me pour 


S.TT Fi 


Pr OVECI 


FF, 
b * A 


C ;£4U 
' hat 15 


ere ie 
15 mind wi Tagy ie would hive htm publiſh as | \ro them, 
11s Pe 
Then I went dowi to the potters houſe, and be- 


WO 


»4% 
1 


k 


r0t know 
k, upon 1% 
imo it into that form which he delired. 
vie Frames or Infframents it 15 hard to aflert 


T7 


i4il 


the ws | that he made 
20 of the - PIL rer, 10 ne 
ceiha 43 fecmed good to the potter to 


1 0 


, while it was yet Clay 
i, fo 2s he d not think fic to © 
1Storc to n of the Vellel, but race it 1 


12 word of 


ite 
hat 


Nat he [ 


noted ard eminent than the reft.to Anger, and t} wrearned to pluck them up and deſtroy them, yet if 


,cech the Prophet, intending there 
CPE. 


ik on the. wheels 6b. 

21d free obedience to the Command 
God's meaning 1n It, ant find - 
els of frames W vhich he formed 
For 


uments differing not only according ' 


hn: according to the ſeveral fancies of Work-! 
S Or Engines made htted to their own fan- | 


of clay c, was 


{Cliy may be read (as our Margent 


0 On With his cc. 
11t0 atother torim 


its 


ID 


) CANe nnto me 


2NOL I do with you as thi 
: henoid * as the clay : 
Ye 12 mine haad, O houſe 


, - 


| made It a- 


\1t was fpOtiedin i 


's cannot be1magined that they hould 


they turned from their finful Courſes, he would ſhew mercy 
| alter the co:1ſe of his Providence. N Now he te]!s 
(them, that this was their cate, God had a work _ the Whee]) 
againſt them, and was framing evil againſt them, and bringing 
| rU10e UPON thern, therefore it was their wiſdom, now to return 
from their evil ways, and torrake their doings good. Thoſe who 
think that theſe Exhortations ate vain, if Man hath nota power in 
himſelt to turn from hisevil way . ought to conſider, that none de- 
nieth, that Man hath a power in himſelf, by vertue of that common 
Grace of God which he denieth tono Man, to turr, from ſuch evil 
; Courles as were before mentioned, viz. not to | carry our Burders 
, upon the Sibvath day,not to bow down to,and worſhip Idols, bur 
to worthip the true and living God according to the preter! Iption 
of tits Word In faort, there is no Man bur hath a power to do much 
morethan he d loth do, and to much as may lerve toavert temporal 
Jucgment, and although no Man without ſpecial Grace, beyond 
the outward means of Grace, hath a power to do what{oever God 
requireth in order to his Sz]vation, yet he hath a = er to do {o 
much, as it he doth, no inſtance can be given of a:'y to whom, 10 
doing, God denieth his ſpecial Grace, inabling him to do whatlo- 


ever God requireth of litm in order to Etern al Liſe. 

12 And they faid *, There is no hope but we will * 
walk after our own devices, and we will eyery one © 
do the imagination of his evil heart », 

[ There 15no hope of us, thou doft but labour in vain in talking 
tous mFor we are reſolved tor; 172 0N 1n our former Race. It 
call che Imaginations of their 
own He4it ren unlels it were in derifion. The fun of wha: they 
| faid was this, Jeremy, thou ha#ft as good ſay or do nothing, as talk 
15, we are re{olved upon our Courle, and it tho: calleſt our 


11 


«i: 


a ww an Þ 


rc 


la 1 
Lic 


II 


' Hearts evil, we cannot he!pthar, according to the Purpoles, Coun= 


d now exponnCeth to the Prophet his deſign in birding 


ic Was to 1n1t:ult or confirm num} 


3 


i over kis Creatures, f For, laith he, as 15" 
Pots, 19 15 the houle of Iſrzel (and indeed (0! 


rsof Men) unto God, God hath the 
a Potter Fath oyer the Clav, and a 
Mleatzch with taem, than ary Porter 


jels and 7 Phouphts of choſe our evi] Hearts we are relolve4 to [tee 
our Courſes, we will not be guided by thee 

13 Tuercfore thus ſaith the L, ORD, * Ask ye 
'now among{t the heathen, Who harh heard ſuch 
thin $2? The virgla of Ifracl hath dogae a very hor- 
rible thi 1:19. 


*rCor.s 


i&f 


- 


\hie\w1i'gto thi Clay ; the Ciay 1s but the Potters Purchale,] God was moved at this eſpe; ate obſtinacy and hardneſs of 
Ot Is Creature, bur Man is God's Creature, God by his Pro-|this Peoples Hearts, he apneals to the World whether ever any 
let Taft GenvieOott ie ame ſim1:1tude, Fa. 45+ 9+ SO doth : Heathens behavec themfe! ves fo toward their Idols which were 
1 5 Ken T_ abſointe loveraign; no Gods, as this People hai bh: ive | themſelves to! wards him. Re 
| ch with the Work of bis Hands, can eaſls Tir razl a Virzin, 1£ 151 term given to Z {on, Iſa. 2.3 . 12, and to 
+ of tenie , whether God ule:! tnis his Sove- Babylon, Iſa. 47: 7. The horri h they had done, was 
thm=nt of finners th; at 1s anocher tings! « -heir for ſakins God. their Go: aching no: ut Eatema 207{t the Heas 
+ hanafktart © j 4 ta ads » Lhe FFLE; C & 
"We a 5a jult judg” 3 rendring! , ell hens, as Gor N Ci-ge We 4» 
» bis works ; 
| - el 
hall ſpe ho Ij Will 2 man Ie 
10S BY Jeu sf PLIEY ir 4 
WW:3i0Ci73 CONC) LEO! 11 L 1C TOC 
J!11 L909 pluck . 
cold flowing waters t 
forſaken p. 


peaKetn :ning Nations, and Kingdoms more : - 
o1ne Margins "Of our 
ſom? Variety in the Opin 


word, or more m:diately by his Prophets 
e 2914 Fe remit”. Ct 4a t. 19. thathe had ſet him ho Re TR 
:t1e . Sal: | =..+ / 
vious, that 


#8 l, 
FC onto Ot al 
CV] 1] i & A, , 
19! [ay to $1 J \ 


| -+ 
z 
” A4y? ” a 
q i] s CC 
[13G « MQIT;e, KM. 9Y.:2Q, 


PS: be 
' 
j 


1 F J+, 
o 
; 


: IJ 
p6 KOO CO WH SHEN: 


? Cenied by no Ve 
* in the 
2 19: C1 
X14 acc 


» ' 5 
).8 ins wh: 

ag q 1 a" 
li 


l, 1 


6 o 


$i 19 


7 % "2 oe (YTiny E 

K CONCer n1ng a nation, < uy Ie 110W of I eh1nonN, 
- UN ot ro mill DOGGY 
& | aters laTTINNC From 4n0ther 7 10>; 


eſt 


' 
*L3%% 

. 
"- 


PB 
, 
ALE) 
CV; 


'2t ns know. horn 
Poſt Learned 7 
e1al Sence 


73 to fartai; 


[] % 


- 

L 
"IM 
{ 


Y! 


wrt x 0 fi O17 


* {/s 


ain and Q7- 


11+ 
ur, 0d : 
WO 


METS; N} ia 
0 * T[friat NatLIN A210 ir 
from their evi] -, 1 


912ht 9 02:0 ther 7. 


. . X . 
= P. A 3 - 

wy } e\.*7H 

Fi 4'3 


I 


H_— 
FONT! 
TE! 


14 


oo 1 
Vy 


have Prononn: | 


1t of the 


7} Wi CONC: 
L 4- w 4 


il 


[22 
Lit 


Ce] 


' 
[039 


J 
t laamed wil 
i Named Witil 


r 
[t 


Wat 


i © 


£ | 
kt of t "2 eld of or Mall NC rock : 


nr 


it | 


D_ od AS a 


FEY 


F., m;V 


l 7; fir £ 


5 


(i) 4 


C for the 
ſnow 5f 
. {br 


& > 


js a5 dat! 4, the 


Chap. X VIII. 


* Chap. 2. 


13, 32+ 


and 3.21» 
and 13.25. l j 

nd 17.13. Paths, / to walk iz paths, in a way not caſt up e. 
” Chap. 6, 


16, 


* Chap.1 9. 
8. and 49-hiſſing « : every one that paſſeth thereby ſhall be 


13.and 
FO. I3s 


TChap.12. 


24. 


*Chap.11. 


I 9s 
*Mal. 2. 7 


59+ the word from the prophet «4: Come, and let us ſmite 
Nay La , him (| with the tongue 6, and let us not give heed to 


vices againſt Jeremiah z : *for the law ſhall not pe- 
John 7.48, Fiſh from the prieſt, nor counſel from the wiſe, nor 


Snow of Lebanon fail from th? Roch of the Field ? The Septzagint, 
Shall t"e*{uzs fail from the Rocks ? Or, The Snow from Lebanon. 
The Syrjach Ve-fion followeth them. The Arabick Verſion tranſla- 
eeth it, Shouli the Snow fail from the Mountain of Breaſts, and 
from Lebanon. The Chaldee Paraphraſt thus gloſſeth, Behold, 
as it cannot be, that the Snow-water ſhould fail from Lebanon. 
Pagnine ſeems to make Lebanon the Nominative Cale, and ren- 
ders the Sence thus, Shall Lebnon lezve the Snow from the Roch 
of the Field, Our Tranſlators ſupply theſe Words 4 Man, an 
ſo make that the Nominative Caſe, and make Lebanon the Genitive 
Cale, L-þanon was a mountainous place in which were Rocks, 
it had alto fruitful Vallies : Snow fel] upon thoſe Rocks, and up- 
on a Thaw ran down into the lower Places, and was grateful to 
them as it moiſtned them, and made them more fruitful. p The 
Jatter part of the Verſe ſeems as hard. Pagnine tranſlates them. 
Shall other col4 flowing Waters be forftken* The vulgar Latin, 
or, Can the other cold flowing Waters be plucked up * The LXX 
and the Syriack, or, Shall the water fail, violently ſnatched up, 
or taken away with the wind ? The Arabick, or, Should the for- 
reign cool waters deſiſt ? The Chaldee Paraphraft gloſfeth, $0 zhe 
rain waters that come down, and the waters of the fountain that 
ſpring ſhall nit fail. In this great variety, it is very hard cer- 
rainly to aſſert the particular Senſe of theſe Phraſes, the know- 
ledge of which depends upon fome Aﬀefions, or Cuſtoms of 
thole Places which we are not {o well acquainted with. The 
next Verſe is the beſt Guide we have, where the Sin latd to the 
Charge of this People, is their for/aking God ; which Sin is here 
aggravated by this Topick, That Reaſon teacheth Men not to for- 
lake a greater Good for a leſſer; though that greater Good were | 
buc a poor Creature Comfort, not to be compared with God. 
This is the general Sence, Scope, and Sum of this Verſe ; ſo as 
we ſhall not need be very ſolicitous to be able to affert the parti- 
cular Grammatical Senſe, 

15 Becauſe my People have forgotten* me 9, they 


have burnt incenſe to vanity r, and they have cauſed 


fFERE 


it is not ſo obvious. The valgar Latin tranſlates them, $%ll the | 


them to {tumble in their ways from the * ancient 


q Forgotten and forſaken are much the ſame thing, differing only 
asthe Cauſe and che Effeet ; for it Men remembred God as they 
ought to do, they would not forſake him. r By Vanity he means 
Idols, which are called Vanity, not only becauſe they are in them- 
ſelves nothing of what they are pretended to be, and becauſe 
the worſhipping of them is an high degree of Sin which 15 often 
called Vanity in Scripture, but becauſe the Service of them is of no 
Lie nor Profit, or Advantage ; and any ExpeFations from them 
are idle and vain, for which there isno groundatall. { Whe- 
cher the falſe Prophets or the Idols are here ſaid to cauſe them to 
ſtumble by receding from the ancient paths, is uncertain. The 
Words may either be tranſlated, paths of Eternity, or, paths of 
Antiquity : The moſt and bett tranſlate it as we do, Quod verum 
primum, the ways of Truth are the moſt ancient ways. The 
ways wherein Noah, Abraham, Iſaac, and Facob, and all the an- 
cient Patriarchs did wajk. t To walk in Paths, or in a way nor 
caſt up, not fitting for God's People to walk 1n, Prov. 15. 19. 
The way of the righteous is ſaid to be a way made plain,: Heb. raiſed 

a5 a Cauſey, Wicked Mer, in oppolition to theſe ways, are 
{aid to walk ina way not c48 up. 

16 To make their land * deſolate, anda perpetual 


aſtoniſhed and wag his head w. 

u Not that this was finis operantis, their End which they aimed 
at ; (none wiſheth il], or doth any thing deſignedly to bring Evil 
vpon himſelt ) but it was finis operis, the End of theſe Courſes 
would certainly iſſue in ; they would bring the Land of Fudzh to 
Deſolations, and to be a Reproach. w So as Strangers that were 
wont to admire at the Proſperity of this People above any other 
People, ſhould ſtand aſtoniſhed, and wag their Heads at them 
in Scorn and Derifion. : ; ; 

17 *] will ſcatter them as with an eaſt-wind be- 
fore the enemy x : I will ſhew them the back and not 


the face in the day of their calamity y. 

x The Eaſt-wind is ( or was at leaſt in thoſe parts ) the fier- 
ceſt wind : As the Eaſt-wind ſcatters the Chaff, ſo faith God 1 
will ſcatter them. y And when they ſhall be in great.Calamity 
and Mitery, 1 will not hearken to them» IF will not turn my face 


M I 4 H. 
os Give heed to me, O LORD, and hcarken to 
the voice of them that contend with me 4. 

4 The feveral following Verſes, to the end of this Chawer, 
contain the Prophet's Prayer by way of appeal to God againſt 
thele wicked Men ; Lord (faith he) though they are reſolved to 
take no heed to my Words, yet do thou give heed to them, 
and do thou take notice of thoſe Men that contend with me. Take 
notice of what they ſay, not co confirm, but to crots their De- 
fires, and to be revenged on them for them. 

_ 20 Shallevil he recompenſed for good e? For they 
have digged a pit for my ſoul f- Remember that | 
ſtood betore thee to - na good for themg, and to 
turn away thy wrath from them h. 

e To requite Good for Evil is divine ; God maketh his Sur to 
ſhine, and his Rain co fall upon the juſt and unjuſt. To requite 
evil for evil, or good for g904, is but humane, what the Nature of 
realonable Men prompt them to ; but to requite evil for good is 
diabolical, and the Character of thoſe that are the Children of the 
evil one, f Lord, ſaith the Prophet, theſe Men have done thus, 
they have laid ſnares for my Life. g Though thou knowef?, tha: 
as a Prophet I ſtood betore thee, both preaching and praying for 
their good. h Their Wrath is kindled to a great height againſt 
me, and thou knoweſt my Buſineſs was both in my Preachings 
to them, and Prayers for them, to turn away thy Wrath trom 
them. Lord remember this, both for Good to me, and for Ven- 
geance upon them. 

21 Therefore deliver up their children to the fa- 


children, and be widows, and let their men be pur a. 
to death, Jer their. young men be ſlain by the ſword 
in battle |. 


» A dreadful Imprecation. We meet with more of the ſame 
nature, Chap. 11. 29. and 15. 15, 17, 18. We find alfo ſeveral 


ſuch Imprecations inthe Plalms, Pſal- 35. 4. and 40. 14. and 69. 


22, 23,2425, 27, 28, and 109.6, 7,8, 9, 1o, 2c. Herice a Que» 
ſtiop 1s raiſed, Whether it be lawful for God's Servants to pray 
for Evil againſt their Enemies. That which makes the Doubt 15, 
Chriſt's Command to us, to pray -for ther: that perſecute 25, 
Matth. 5.43, 44. his own Example, and Stephen's, Aﬀs 7. 50. 
See the Notes upon the aforementioned Tex's. It is doubtleſs 
our Duty, to pray for the Converfion, Forgiveneſs and Eterna! 
Salvation of our worſt Enemies: So Chriit prayed, and Srephen, 
but neither of them prayed for their ourward proſperity in their 
Perſecution and Rage; ard without doubt we way pray again? 
God's Enemies, that God would tye their hands, weaken their 
power, confound their Devices. k For ſuch other particula;s a5 
are mentioned In this Verſe, andthe beginning of the following 
Verſe, and ſuch as David mentions, Pal. 69. we muſt know 
they were both Prophets, and did but pray to God ro do char 
thing which God had revealed to them he would do. 

22 Leta cry be heard from their houſes, when 

chou ſhalt bring a troop ſuddenly . upon them, for 
they have digged a pit to take me, and hid ſnares for 
my feet. /. 
{ That 1s, let the Enemy break intotheir houſes, which are in 
an ordinary Courle ot Providence, Mens Caſtles and Sanctuaries, 
and cauſe ſuch Shrieks as uſe to be heard in ſuch caſes, for their 
malicious leeking my life by all ſecret pra&tices. 

23, Yet LORD. thou knowelt all their counſel a- 


them be overthrown before thee ; deal th:zs with 


them 1n the time of rhine anger o. | 
m Lord,thou knoweſt 1 do not charge them falſly, though their 
Counlels have been ſecret azainſt my Lite. n Obj. Will ſome fay, 
doth J-remy here pray for the eternal Damnation of his Adver fa- 
ries ? [s this lawful > Sol, Ido not think this is to be granted 
lawtul, being lo highly againſt Charity : Nor that Feremy in this 
15 to be exculed as a Prophet, tor even Prophets had no ſuch Reves« 
lations; bur I take theſe Phraſes to be expounded by the next 
Words, Let them be overthrown befcre theez and that all which 
the Prophet prayeth for is, God's ſhewing ſome temporal Dit- 
pleaſure and Vengeance againſt them. For forgiving, and xo: ſor- 


to them, or ſhew them my Face, but I will turn my Back upon 
them, I will not regard them Crying, nor hear their Prayers. 


18 © Then ſaid they, * Come, let us deviſe de- 


any of his words c. 

7 This faithful dealing of the Prophet with them, did only en- 
rage them (as is uſual) againſt the Prophet ; they plot againſt 
tne Prophet, how to be revenged on him, becauſe he would croſs 
eheir Humours, and would not propheſie as they would have had 
him. 4 We have the Church on our fide ; the Regular Priefs 
and the Prophets, they know God's mind as well as he ; for there 
is a Promiſe that the Law ſhall not periſh from the Prieſt, nor the 
Word from the Prophet : The Prieſts and Prophets tell us other 
things than this Feremy doth. b Let us ſmite him with the Tongue, 
expole him, by railing on him, telling Lies about concerning 
him. repreſenting him to be what we know the People hate, 
abuſtng him to his face, informing againſt him ; or, in the Tongue ; 


giving ſin, doth not always in Holy Writ fignifie the diſcharging 
or not diſcharging the perſons from the Obligation to eternal 
Death, under which Sin layeth them , but ſometimes, the diſ- 
charging or not diſcharging of them irom the puniſhments in this 
Life, to which Sin doch expoſe the Sinner; and all Feremy's mean- 
ing is, That however it ſhould pleaſe God to dea] with theſe 
wicked Men as to their eternal ſtate, yet he would fo far not for 
give, not blot out their Sins,” as that he would fer ſome mark of 
his Vengeance on them in this Lite, for their Treachery and In- 
gratitude ro him. Whether we in 1: confider Jeremy as an ordi- 
nary Suppliant in this Caule, praying in Faich, or as a Prophet, 
toreknow:ng what God would do, ic ought ro lay a Law upon all 
ro take heed of being milchtevous, ani treacherous to orhers. It 
is ſeldom but God, before they die, repavs ſuch Men into their 
own Bolom, eſpecially it it be againſt any who are Gold's Minj- 
ſters or People ; and that for their 1p23ki35 to, or doing before 
them the W1]l of God. Icisa Sin fcldom etcapes without a tem 
poral Vengeaiice ; and if fuch Men be f(aved at 13it, it will be as 
chrough Fire. God will mind thern char he Fath fail, Touch n63 
mine Annointed, and Jo my Prophets ne bara, 1. 079%» 16,22, Pals 
105. 15» 


let us filence h:m, command him to ſpeak no more; or, for hs 
Tonzue, for propheſying at this rate ; c And for his Words let us 
no value them at'a 1wh, nor at all regard them» 

Vol. II, 


& HAM. 


| 


Chap. X VIII 


mine /, and pour out their blood by the force of + rey, 
the ſword, and let their wives be bereaved of their pur th:m 


gainſt me to Þ flay me 2: forgive not their iniquity,+ Heb; for 
neither blot out their ſin from thy fight », bur let death. 


+ 1b. 


1 Www. 8 i372 
33% &450, 


eſtranged this place g, and have burnt incenle in 1t 


CHAP. XIX. 


Unc the Type of breabing a Potters Veſſel is foreſhewn the Deſolation 
of the fews for their Sins committed in he Valley of Hinnom 
2nd eljewhere, 1, I 5+ 


] Hus ſaich the LORD, Go and get a potters 
earthen bottle a, aad rake of che ancients Ot 
the people, aad of the ancients of the prieſts b. 
a Criticks diſpare the Figure and Faſhion of his Bottle, ( #12. 
the Engliſh Annotations, and Mr. Poa!'s Latia $ynop{rs ) bur that 
is not much material, for God's Deſign was only to ſhew the jr4- 
gility oi this people, how eaſily he could break them, and how cer- 
rainly he would break them in pieces. b -or the more publick 
norice of this typical A&ton, Jeremy is commanded to take for 
Witneſſes, ſome of the graveſt of che people, and of the Priz/ts : 
Whether they were Members of the Sazbedrim,( which was made 
up of thoſe ro ſorts ) or nor, the Scripture ſa!th nor. 


SEREMIAH. 


extraordinary Straits to ſhew their great Obedience tothe Devil, 
chey offered their Children. What Creature they worthipped 
under this Name 1s not certain, bur very probably it wasthe Sun, 
trom 2 Kings 23. s. or ſome ſuperiour Being, whici they own- 
ed as their ſupream Lord and King, which they, ſome of them, 
miſtook the Sun, Moon and Stars © be, they being glorious 
Beings removed out of Mens Knowledge, fo as they had nor ſuſhi 
ciznr means to underſtand their Natures, might, confider:ng their 
Morions, and vatt Influecce they had upon all other Creatures, 
miſtake them for animate and ſupream Beings, ro which as chey 
paid other Homapges, ( ſuch as ſwearing by them, Ze/v. 1.5. 
Durning Incenſe, offering Beaſts, praying to them ) ſo 1n 1mira- 
tion of the Hearhens, and in a pretence of high Devorton, and Hu- 
ma;.e in fome ſpecial Caſes and Straits, they offered their Chil- 
dren, Some think they only made them go through the fire, bur 
did nor burn them ; and indeed, fo moſt of che Scriptures exprels 
this abominable Idolatry ; but ſome Scriptures ſpeak 1t plain 
enough, that they aRually buror them : The Pſalmitt Pai. 106. 
37. ſaith, They ſhed innocent blood, even the blood of thur ſons 
and daughters, whom they ſacrificed to the Idols of Canaan, 


2 And eo forth unto the valley of the ſon of Hin- 
noin c, which 7s by the entry of the | eaſt-gate, and 
proclaim there the words that I ſhall tell thee 9. 


4 We ſha | hereafter hear why God commanded Jeremah tro go, 


and the land was polluted with blood, which it could not have 
been by their Children meerly pafling through the fire ; and.jr is 
Jad ro their Charge, Ezeþ 15. 20, 21. Thou haſt takin thy Sons 
, and thy Daughters, whom thou haſt born unto mt, and thoſe haſt 


thicher rather than to another place, to break this earthen pr. | tou ſacrificed to them to be devoured. 21. That thou haſt lain 
This Valley was a place very near unto Hi?ruſalem, of which one | 7 Chularen, ans delivered them to cauſe them to paſs through 


Hinnoj was Owner in Jo/Þ4's rime, Jof. 15.8. and 18. 16. The 
Valley is in Scripture ſometimes called Ge-)jinnom, from whence 
came the Greek Word Geh-nna, uſed by our Saviour for Hell, 
Matth, 5.22, cis F 14evvav Te mv73s, becauſe of the heiiiſh Tor: 
ments they there pur their Childrea to when they ſacrificed chem, 
and of the helliſh Cries they made, & In the Hebrew it 15 the 
S:1-gate, ſuppoſed to be ſo called, becauſe. the Sun riſerh 1n the 
Eaſt. This Valley is ſaid ro have lien very near to this Gate 3 
thither ]ere#y is commanded to go, and there to proclaim the 
tollowipg Words, 2 

3 And ſay, Hear ye the word of the LORD, © 
Kings of Judah, and Inhabitants of Jeruſalem, Thus 
ſairh rhe LORD of hoſts, the God of Iſrael, Behold 
| will bring evil upon this place, the which whoſoever 
heareth, his ears ſhall tingle e. 


the fire for them, We read of the Idolatry of Feroboam, who 
worſhipped the true God, bur by Calves fer up at Das and Be- 
thel. Ahab exceeded this, bringing in the terminative Worſhip 
of the Creatures, worſhipping the Sun, Moon, and Stars, under 
the Name of Baa! : Bur the firſt in ZFudab, of whom we read, 
that he made his Son to paſs through the fire, was Ahax , the 
Father of Hezehiah, 2 Kings 10. 3- He was followed by his 
Grandchild Afanaſſeh, 2 Kings 21.6. Joſiah, the good Son of a 
bad Farther, 4efi/:4 rhe place where this abominable [dolatry was 
commitred, 2 Kings 23. 10. The place where they commitred this 
horrible Abomiration, was the Valley of the Son of Hinnomn, very 
near the City, and the particular place was called T1phit, There 
was an high place builr for the Ido!, and many think, thar che 
Name Tophet ariferh from their Uſe of a Drum or Tabret, with 


which while the poor Children were burning, they made great noiſes 


| to drown the ſound of the Childrens 7elings; tho' others think, the 


2 That is, a very great Evil ; it isan Hebrew way of expreſ- Word Tophct originally ſignifies Hell, or the place of che Damned, 
fon, which we alſo find, 1 Sam. 3. 11. 2 Kings 21. 12. Asa ve- of which this place, both for the rorments and roarings in ir, was a 


ry great glaring Lighc affe&s oor eyes, and blindeth chem, ſoa ve- 
ry great Sound atteterh rhe Ear, and makes 1t tingle, and for 
ſome time deaf: This God commandeth the Prophet to proclaim, 
as particularly dice&ed to all, both high and low, as well the hings 
of Juqai, as the Inhabitants of Jeruſalem. 

4 Becauſe they have * forſaken me f, and have 


unto other gods þ, whom neither they nor thetr ta- 
thers have known, nor the Kins of Judah, and have 
filed this place with the blood of innocents 7. 

f The Laws, Sctarares, and Ordinances which God had- given 
them, to dire& them both 1n cheir religious Behaviour rowards 
him, and in cheir civil Converſations. g Either this City, or this 
Icmple, ( which ftood very nigh co this Valley ) or this particu- 
far Valley, which they had turned to an uſe quite contrary to 
rhe en1 for which God gave 1rthem; þ for init they had paid 
a religious Homage to Idols, ftrange Idols which their Fathers 
new nor, t and had filled that place with the blood of ſuch as 
bad nor deferved Dearth, either innocent Men, or Children, thar 
they had there ſacrificed ro Idols; of which he afterward ſpeaketh 
more particu}arly, 


-lively Repreſentation. Now of this barbarous and horrible Idolatry 
God faith, | He commanded them not, neither came it into hy mind, 
It was ſo far from jr, thar God had moſt ſeverely forbid ir, 
Lev. 20, 2,3,4, 5. making ita capiral Crime for any to do it, and 
for any to conceal others that they knew did it : So that here is a 
AMeao/rs, leis ſpoken than was true in the caſe z but poſlibly God's 
expreſling a ching of this nature, being an Errour in his Worſhip, 
under theſe ſofr terms, I commanded them net, neither did it 
come into my mind, giveth no fmall ground to conſiderate Men 
to judge, that we muſt have a Command from God, though 


nor for every individua! Act of our Worſhip, nor for every Cir- 
cumſtance of humane Attion which we do in his Worſhip, yer 
for every ſpecifical religious AR, and for any thing whereby we 
pay an Homage to God it being indeed the moſt reaſonable thing 
imaginavle, thar God ſhould have the ſame Priviledge which every 
Prince or great Man amongſt Men claimeth as his Right, to pre» 
(cr1he the As, Modes, and Methods, for his cwn Homage. 


6 Therefore "behold, the days come, ſaith the 
LORD, that this place ſhall no more be called To- 
phet, nor the valley of the ſon of Hinnom, but the 
valley of ſlaughter wm. 


5 They have builr alſo the high places of Baal, to 
byrn their ſons with fire for burnt-ofterings unto Ba-| 
al &, which | commanded not, nor ſpake zt, neither 
came ft into my mind /. 

b This, a::d the following Verſe, contain another great Sin of 
this People, with the Puniſhment which God proportionerh to 1t- 
The Sin in the general was Idolatry, but a moſt barbarous Spectes 
of 1t, menrioned allo Chap. 7.31. and 32. 35. where 1t is aid. 
they made their Sons and their Daughters paſs through the Fire 
to Aolech; the place where they did it 1s called Topher, Ver. 6. 
of which alſo mention 1s made Iſa. 3o. 33. Chap. 7.31, 32, 33. 
For the opening of chis Tex:,as allo of rhoſe other Texts that men- 
tion this Idolatry, we muft open what 1s meant by Baal, aoloch. 
Toj1:it, and the Valley of the Son of Hinnm. There 15 no 
doubr hut 3Baal, and Molrch, or Moloch, figaifie the ſame thing; 
Baazl fipniftetn a Lord, Molech a King. They ordinarily called 
rheir Idols by theſe Names; as alſo Malcbam, Zeph, 1.5. upon 
which account God would not be called Baal, Hoſ. 2. 16. though 
he was called Jehovah, Elohim, and Aconai, all which ſignified 
Lord, as Baal did. Both Baal and Maltch ſeem common Names 
to all Idols, There was more than one Ido] in the Houte of 
Baal. 2 Kiizs 10. 25, The Ammonites called their principal Idol 
Ailcom and M6(cth, as appears from 1 Kings I1.5. 2 Kings 23. 
33. Tochis Idol rhey ſacrificed rheir Children, Ir was a very an- 
cient Idolatry, as appeareth by the very early Law of God, a- 
gainſt ir, Lev. 20, 3,4, 5. Som? ſay it was derived from Sa- 
*,rn, whom they made. contemporary with Debora and Barah , 
who, ro appeaſe the Gods in imminent Danger, ſacrificed his 
Son. Others ſay, it began in the time of Serg rhe Father of 
Nahor, of whom we read G22. 11. 20. and thar it had its Origi- 
na! from the Devil, ſpeaking our of the Belly of ſome dead Per- 
fons, commanaing this Homage, poſſibly 1n Imitation of God, 
who Ger. 22, 2. romy 4brian's Obedience, commanded him to 
offer up 1/2425 up53 the Mount aoriah, We muſt know there 
were other Sacrinices they oftered ro Baa!: They burnt Incenic 
to Bal, 2 Nivgs 23. 5. Toy offered Satrifiies and Bunt-| 
afſirings «f Brats, 1 Kings 18+ 55, 2 Kings 15. 24. only 1n {ore | 


» For this God, by his Propiiet threatnerh, tha: this Place an- 
ctenrly, in Foſh4a's rime called th? Valley of the $03 of Hinzom, 
and more lately Taphet, from the Noiſe of Drums and Tabrets 
there, whilſt Children were burning, ſhould have a new Name, 
and he called the Yallzy of S{2yghter, from the multitude of dead 
Bodies, which upon the raking of the City ſhould be ſlain and 
thrown into this Valley. Ir was expounded Chap. 7. 32, 33. For 


| they {hill bury in Tophet till there be no place; And the (are 


caſſes of this peaple ſhall be meat for the Fowls of the Fheauen, 
and for the Bzaſts of the Earth, aud none ſhall fray them 
away. 

7 AndT will make void the counſel of Judah and 
Jeruſalem 1n this place z, and I will cauſe them to fall 
by the ſword b2tore their enemies, and by the hands 


of them thar ſeek their lives : and * their carcaſſes * Chap: 
will I give to be meat tor the fowls of the heavens, 7 F- 
an 


and for the beaſts of the earth. 

z Tn this place, amongft others, I wiil make void all the Coun- 
ſels thac the Men of F:42h and the Inhabitants of Hitru(z!em 
have taken to eſcape my righteous Judgments. I will fruſtrace 
all their licrle Arcs and Defiens to avoid the Dint of my Judg- 
ments. I will cauſe them to fall by the {word hefore their Ene- 
mites, o as there ſhall be no way of eſcape. for them, 


8- And | will make this city * deiolate, and an* C} 


hifſing : every one that palleth thereby ſhall be aſto- 


iſhed and hiſs, becaule of all the plagues thereofo, 20d43-12: 
o This 1s no more than we mer” with before, Ch.1>, 18, 15, 204 59 
and ſhall again mcer with; Mens Honour and Repuration is or- 13: 


dinarily very dear to cher, it was eſpecially ro the ]:ws, who 
valued themſelves mach uvnon the Reputation their Ciry and 
cheir Temple had, and rhe Sc cvricy they promiſed themſelves 
from their right in che Holy city and [,134, God tells thern, 
he wYl make chem as much a Scorn 2nd Reproach, as ever they 
vere for an Honour or Pratic; as grcar a Wondermet:: ſr the 
\" E.1 hl 


ach and Vengcance he wou'd exccure ppor 5] 


t trails, at 


A 


Chap. XI 


and 34.20 


[FY) I. ——_ = 


[V1] 


, Chap. XX. 


+ Heb. be city, as 9c breaketh a potters veſſel, that cannot Þ be 


healed. 


g 


* 2 Kings phet w, becauſe of all the houſes upon whoſe * roots 


23. I2. 


29. 
I8. 


* Chap. 


17. 23. 


SEREMIAH 


. ' ef f Ay _ »a(] } 1p ta of 2 + » y 4 
been in tae foariſh'ng ſtate for the Mercies which he beſtowes j & The court of Immer was the ſixteenth courſe of the Prieſts, 


upon them. 5 | Bi 
o And I will cauſe them to eat the fleſh of then 
ſons, and the fleſh of their daughters, and they ſhall 
eat every one the fleſh of his friend in the fiege and 
ſtrairneſs, wherewich their Enemics, and they that 
ok their lives, ſhall ſtrairen them p. : 
Theis are the miſerable effe&s or contequents of the Famine, 
with which God had often before threatned them ; the juſt tul- 
filling of God's word chreatned, Lev. 26. 29- Deut. 28. 43. and 
the accompliſhment of which our Prophet hath recorded, Lam. 


as we read 11 1 Chron- 24. 14. Paſhur was his Son,that is, deicend- 


ed from him through many Generations. 6 Ir is neither much 
material for us to know, nor very eafie todetermine in v hat fenle 


' 


he 15 called the chief Governour of the Ter;le, whether he was Do- 


i puty to the High Prieſt, or the head of his con; fe, which at that 


; time waited 11 the Temple, or had fome p!zces as Cart rin of ihe 
Temple, to take notice it any Ditorders ſhould be commi-ted 
there, contrary to the Law. Certain it is he was no Hiph Priett. 

| for then he could not have been one of the courte of Immer. c Ee 

; ther he heard Feremiah himſelf (which is mol? probab!s} or {ome 

body told him what Feremiz» had proplefied wihe Temp!e 


which was within his charge, and jurildiction, 


Song 7 Topher, till there be no place ro bury P. 


4. 10 


2 Then Paſhur {mote Jeremiah the proper &, 


10 Then ſhalr thou break the bottle in the fight 1 Paſhr et 
of the men that go with thee q. * and put him In the ltocks e that crc in the Boz 
q The earthen Bottle which Ferſe 1. he was commanded to car- gare of Benjamin, which was by the houſe of the 


ri with him into che Valley of the Son of Hinnom (where he LORD f. 

now was) in the fight of the ancient of the Prieſts, and of the | 1 x+ 5 not ſaid how he ſtruck him, though fome think it moft 
People, the Men who there were eppwnm ewe Ns ich the _ probable, thar it was with his f/} as the talle Prophet {truck 2. 
phet. Tius ſymbolical, or ſacramental teaching by {1gns, was mucn | .,;,h, ; ng. 22. 24. e Weare as uncertain what is here meant 
in uſe by the Prophets, | by Stocks, whether ſuch an Engine as is 1n uſe amongtt us ro-py. 
11 And ſhalt ſay unto them, Thus ſaith the LORD . niſh Offenders, which we call by that Name. Or as others, 2£; 
of hoſts r, Even fo will - I break this people and this | Engine like our Pillory, where Maletadors are faftred by tz 
Necks. Or, as others with three holes, one for the Neck of te 
. - ! Offender. one for each Hand; or whether merely a Prifen wti;ere 
p > . p - . ] 3 = p 2 . 4 oo: N.1% 
made , whole again /, and they ſhall * bury them in | he was kepe all Night a Priſoner; the H-b:word will not deter- 
ere Ve NC | mine us further than that 1t was a place of reſcraint, and where 
| r - —_— SI to COEINE Lagann dar ur | neg determine, _ Conjectures = 25 Incertatn as 
them know that he ſaid nothing with his Lips, but Wnaa ad | needlels, ere 15 as much uncertainty as to the p.,2ce, where 
res by his _ - A _ __ C _ ag nh this dre yr thefe me were; we are told it was near the Ten:- 
all che Armies of his Creatures. { Go4 by ordering n1s Fropnet gfe, and 1n the High Gare of Benjamin, but whether this was 2 
ro carry no other Veſſel but one of Earth, had a deſig n upon the | Gate belonging to the Temple that opened toward that part ofthe 
breaking of it,not only to ſhewv them that he would bruiſe, wound Country which was the Lot of Benjamin, or a Gare of the City that 
or {ndamage them greatly, but 10 deſtroy them, as there ſhould opened that way, whether in the inner Wall, or outer Wa!l, w1e- 
be no prelent remedy, If a Veſfel of Brals, Silver, Gold, 7c. be ther called the High Gte, becauſe nearer the Temple, or upon 
broken, it may be mended, but an earthen Veſſel it —_— == ' fome other account, are nice and curious Speculations, the dcter- 

not be made whole. See the like 1/aiah 30. 14. t- Hetells them © mjnation of whick 15 of no moment for us to know. 
that chis Tepher, which they had made a place ot barbarous flaugh- 


*Þ- 3*- and * have poured out drink-offerings unto other 
» Chap 7. Gods Xs 


cer for the Children, kill'd for Idolatrous Sacrifices, ſhould con- 
tinue for a Slaughter-houſe, bur of another nature, even for them 
that had committed ſuch wickedneſs in it, who ſhould be flain 
there in ſuch plenty, that they ſhould want ground to bury dead 
Carcaſles 1n. 


12 Thus will I do unto this place, faith the LORD, 


and to the inhabitants thereof, and ever make this ci- | 


ty as Tophet 7. 
7 That is a place of Slaughter and Burials, or a baſe, ignomini- 
ous place, or where the noiſe of Drums ant Trumpets, and Cry- 

ings and Yellings ſhall be heard. as uſed to be 1n Tophet- 
13 And the houſes of Jeruſalem, and the houſes of 


the kings of Judah ſhall be defiled asthe places of To- 


they have burnt incenſe unto all the hoſt of heaven, 


w Under the Judaick Law, perſons and places were defiled by 
couching dead Bodies, or any unclean filthy thing; God threat- 
neth in this ſence to defile Tophst, as ic was ſaid before it ſhould 
be filled with dead Bodies which ſhould be buried, or lie unburi- 
ed there. He ſheweth that the aforementioned Judgment of fil- 
ling places with dead Bodies, ſhouid be reſtrained to Topher in the 
Valley of Hinnom, but reach to the dwelling-houſes at Hieruſalem, 
both their Kings Houles, and the meaner Subjects. x The pro- 
voking cauſe of which ſhould be their Idolatry, -which they had 
alſo brought 1ato their dwelling-houles,for they having flat Roots, 
had upon them, though not burn: Children in Sacriticeto Idols, 
yet poured out Drink-Offerings to the Sun, Moon and Stars, and 
to other Idols, 

14 Then came Jeremiah from Tophet, whither 
the LORD had ſent him to propheſie, and he ſtood 
in the court of the LORD's houſe y, and ſaid to all 


the people. 

y Feremiah had now diſpatched the Errand upon which God 
had ſent h1m to Topher, coming back by God's directions, he {lands 
11 the Court which was common to all people, where the moſt 
might hear. 

15 Thus ſaith the LORD of hoſts, the God of 
Iſrael, Behold I wiltbring upon this city and upon 
all her towns, all the evil that I have pronounced a- 
gainft 1t ; becauſe * they have hardened their necks, 
that they might not hear my words z. 

&@ Heaflureth the people from God, that be would moſt cer- 
tainly juſtihe all his words, and bring to paſs all his Threats a- 
gainſt that Cicy, and that they may thank themſelves for it, for 
hardening their heart, fo as all that he had ſaid made no impreſ- 
lion upon them, nor fout;d any place with them. 


CHAP. XX. 


Paſhur ſmiting Jeremiah for bis Prophecy rece:veth 4 new N1me, 
;n1 a fearſul_Duom, 1, —— 6. *Jeremiah's Impatience under 
their Treachery and Contempt, 7, -—— IO, Rejoyceth in hope of 
PFengeance, 11, —— 13. Curſeth his Birth, 14, —— 18. 

O WW Paſhur the ſon of Immer the prieſt 4» 

vw howas alſo chief governour in the houſe of 

LORD 6, heard thar Jeremiah propheſied theſe 


i 3 Andit came topaſs on the morrovw, that Pa- 
ſhur brought forth Jeremiah out of the ſtocks #- 


' Then ſaid Jeremiah unto him, the LORD hath not 
called thy name Paſhur, but || Magor-mitabit 


} That 
g Pollibly by this time the mad-braig'd Prieſt, thought he had /-47 7955 


done more than he could juſtifie by Law, tor if he were a falſe £5%4* 


Prophet, the Judgment of him belonged not to him bur © the 
Sanhedrim. He had nothing to do to ifmite him, poſſibly je 
brought him forth in order to his bringing him betore the $4 +2. 
drim ; but it doth not appear that he did lo, tho' Jeremiah's to {ow 
ing words to him, might reaſonably be choughr provocati.e e- 
nough if he had deſigned any formal charge againſt him. þ He 
had it ſeemeth no more to ſay to Feremiib, but Feremi.th (to 
whom God had appeared in the Priton that Night, while he was 
ſeparated from Communion with Men, and revealed to him,whar 
end this hot-headed Prieſt ſhould come to) had tomething to tay 
to him. God's meaning was, not that he ſhould by Nen be ng 
longer called Paſhur (for doubtleſsafter this he was called by rh 
ſame Name he had before} but his ſtate and condition ſhould 1-7 
anſwer the name of Pzſhur, which fignifies,. as tome fay, a not lo 
flouriſhing Prieſt ; or as others, one who by kis Authority £m2- 
keth others to tremble ; but Mager-miſſ2bib, that is, fear ax rev- 
ror 0n ll ſides. | 

4 For thus ſaith the LORD, Behold, I will mat; 
thee a terror to thy ſelt, and toall thy friends, and 

- - p 

they ſhall fall by the ſword of their enemies, and 
thine eye ſhall behold zz, and I will give all Judah in- 
to the hand of the king of Babylon, and he ihall car - 
ry them captive wto Babylon, and ſhall flay them 
with the ſword :. | 

7 God now expoundeth the name of Migor-miſſ:b;b, threatning 
to fill this wicked Prieſt with Terrors.that he and his iriends hon! 
be affiighted, reflecting upon his moſt milerable ſtate, and cond; - 
tion ; and his Friends from whom he might poſſibly expect ſome 
relief, ſhould be as miſerable as he, and it ſhould be an addition to 
his miſery, that his Eves ſhould feeir,and ſee his whole Country 
ruined, ſome being ſlain by the Sword of the King of B:bylon, 0- 
thers by him carried into Captivity» 


precious things thereof, and all the treaſures of the 
king of Judah -,. will I give into the hand of their 
enemies, which ſhall ſpoil them, and take them, ant 
carry them to Babylon 7. 

This is but the repetition of what God had often threazned. 
viz. The perfect ruine of Hieruſalem, and the Land of ud, 
Their Military Men, or rather cheir Riches. / And all the tru 
of their Labours. m And whatſoever was valuable in cheir eves, 
or in the eyes of the greateſt perſons amonegtt them. n The Baky= 
loxians ſhould make a [poil, and a prey of them al!. 

6 And thou Paſhur, and all that dwell in thine 
houſe, ſhall go into captivity, and thou ſhale come ta, 
Babylon, and there thou ſhalr die, and halt be burt- 
ried there, thou and all thy friends, :o whom chou 
haſt prophehed Iyes o. - , 

o Thole that teach others to diſobey the Command:rents of 
God,feldom eſcape that Vengeance which comech upontiizm who 
are ſeduced by them, Paſyyr was one whole Office ic was to have 


Ch "T3 
"7 Mc 


words :, 


. s by. . >= 7 % rv % - Seo tan. & oh Bo T7. Y 
reuahy others the tear of the Lord. 2nd obedience to his Wil, he 


< 
» vi» 


Chap, AA, 


F553. 


5 Moreover, I will deliver * all the ſtrength of * 2 Kingz 
this city k, and all the labours thereof /, and-all the 2. 17. 


! 
| 
[| 


FEREMIAH 
rexcheth them what was alſe, and is nor patient ro hear the Will 
WON of God. Ter::42) rells him he ſhould feel rhe Truth of .it, for 
he kimf-1f ſhould be one of thoſe who ſhould be carried into Cap- 
tivicy, and ſhould dic there, ut cfhis own Country, and be 
huricd there. and this alſo ſha!l be the portion of all his Friends 
whom he had ſ:duced by his falſe and lying Prophecies: 

© LORD, thou haſt deceived me, and I was 
| dectived p: thon art ſtronger than 1, and haſt pre- 
vailed 9: 1am in derition daily, every one mocketh 


The 


a <7z%7 
Chap. þ + 1 

11 But the LORD x: with meas a mighty terr1- 
ble one 4: therefore my perſecutors ſhall ſtumble,and 
they ſhall not * prevaile, they ſhall be greatly aſha- 
med e, for they ſhall nor proſper /, * their everlaſt- 2 
ing contulion ſhall never be forgotten g. 

4 The Prophet recovering himſelf out of his fir of Paſſion, in- 
courageth himſelf in his God, whom he calls the mighty and ter- 
rible one, ſo declaring his Faith in the Power of God, as one able 
to ſave him, and in the promiſe and good Will of God toward 
Fo : — [him therefore he ſaith, The Lord is with me, ſuch was the promiſe 
The following part cf the Chapter to the end of it, conrain-|of God ro this Propher, when he firft unde; rook the Propherical 
erh a Complaint or Prayer of the Prophet unto God, made (45 Office, Chap. 1. 8. Be notafraid of their Faces, for I am with t hee , 
tome think) during his impriſonment by Paſhur, bur the certain 7, Jeljver thee ſaith the Lord. e From hence he concludeth, that 
time 15 nor known. Our Tranſlators here might have rranflared ; though he had many rhar purſued after his life, yer they ſhould 
the word JTVMAD Pettitani, more favourably than thou baſt deceiv- [ſtumble in their ways of violence, and ſhou[4 nor prevail. e Thar 


-”y 
/ 


_ 


Or, £4 
rived, 


5 


#1 
n) 


ed #6, It might have been thoz ha/t perſwaded me, or thou haſt al- 
/rred or enticed me, $17 15 tranſlated, Jud. 14. 15. IT King. 22. 
2 1x. 22. Erod 22.16. Prov. 1. 10. and 16. 29. Pſal. 78. 36+ The 
« 0:4 tignifies no more than by words to remove a Man from his 
own Opinion. That 1s doubtlcls, rhe fence here, Lord, | was not 
f-nd of this employmenr as a Prophet, by thy words [ was remov - 


\ ed from my own Opinion of my ſelf, which might be ſpoken by 


F He, 
egnrr m1% 
ont v 

of mp 
TeACEs 

” Pial. 41. 
3-X 55. 
3. 44 


the Prophet without any refletion vpon God ; it only fignifierh 
his undertaking the Oifice of a Propher art God's Command, not 
out of any ambition ot his own, q Burt thou prevailedft againft 
me, [:r:7y ar firſt excuſed himſelf ro God, as we read, Chap. 1.6. 
He faid, Ab Lond God, behold I am a child and cannot ſpeak; but 
the Lord prevaileth upon him, replying, Yer. 7. Saynot, I am 4 
child, for thou ſhalt goto all that I ſhall ſend thee, and whatſoever 
1 command thie thou ſhalt ſpeak, Ver. 6. The Lord pur forth 
his hand, and roucked his mouth, and ſaid, Behold T have put my 
words in thy mouth. This 1s all that 1s here meant by arceiving, vi3. 
Gods overuling of him contrary to his own inclinations. y He com- 
plainerh thar now he was in this Otfice every one mocked him 
and derided him, and thart for the fairhful diſcharge of that Otfice 
ro which God had called him. | 

$ For lince I ſpakeI cried ont /, I cried violence, 
and ſpoil :, becauſe the' word of the LORD was 


inade a reproach unto me, and a deriſion daily z. {| 


{ If the particle he rranſlared ſince, as we tranſlate it, the mean - 
ing is, fince I firſt began to be a Propher, I have faithfully dil- 
charged my Propherical Office, and that with ſome warmth and 
zeal. t Some underſtand it of the violence which he himſelf ex- 
perienced ; others underſtand it of thoſe Ads of injuſtice- and yi. 
vlence which were found amongſt the People, he cried our againſt 
them, Others underſtand it as a denunciation of Judgmenr, He 
prophefied that violence and ſpoil was coming upon them. « Be- 
cauſe of that ſcorn and derifion with which they treated him. But 
others think that it were berter tranſlated ſurely than becauſe, as it 
15 in many Texts, T/a. $0.9. and 63. 15, &c. It 1s not much 
material which way we tranſlate it, for it appeareth from 2 Chror. 
35. 16. That this Peoples mocking of God's Meſſengers, deſpiſmg his 
words, and miſuſmg hs Prophets was one great cauſe Of the wrat 
of God coming upon them ; and it 15 certain that Jeremy was 
made ſuch a ſcorn and derifron to them, 


9 Then Ifaid, I will not make mention of him, 
nor ſpakeany more in his namew. But his word was 


,.In my heartas a * burning fre ſhut up in my bones, 


ay [ was weary with torbearing, and * I could not 
? iy hog 
w This daily ſcorn and reproach which the Prophet ſaw him- 
ſelf cxpoſed unto, for preaching againſt the ſin and wickedneſs of 
the people, was a fore Tempration upon him to lay down his Im- 
pioyment as a Prophet. He did nor (peak this openly, bur heTpake 
1t in his heart, he had (as he corfeſſerh ) many ſuch thoughts in 
his Breaſt. » Bur he faith he 1s nor able ro do what he thought to 
do, he found jn his hearta conſtraint to go on, that when a Reve- 
lation came at anytime from God unto him, 1t was like a fire in 
l;;s Bones which he muſt quench, by uttering what God had re- 
vealed to him. 
to © For l heard the defaming of many, fear on 


every lide y: Report, ſay they, and we will report 


P - . 


= : | *all my familiars watched for my halting -, 
{-yiag, Peradventure he will be enticed, and we ſhall 
prevail againſt him #, and we ſhall take our revenge 
on him c. 

3 The Prophet here rendreth a reaſon why he thought of piv- 
ng over his workas a Propher, his ears are continually filled with 
rhe O'loquies and Reproaches of ſuch as reproached him,and be- 
ſides he was afraid on all hands there were ſo many Traps laid for 
tiim, ſo many Devices deviſed againſt him. They did not only 
rake ail advantages againſt him, bur they ſought advantages and 7 
invited orhers to raiſe up falſe Stories of him, They ſaid ro Men 
hke themſelves, Raiſe bur you the Report, we will blow it abroad. 
a Nor only Strangers, but thoſe that T might have expected the 
greareſt kindnels from, thoſe thar pretended moſt courteſje, 
watched for opportuniries to do me miſchief, and lay in wait for 
my halting. 6 Defiring nothing more than that I might be enriced 
to ſpeak or do ſomerhing which they might make matter of a co- 
lourable Accuſation. c That fo they might ſarisfie their malice 
upon me. This hath always been the genius of wicked Men) Job 
and D214 horh made great complaints much like this, Job. 15.19. 
Pſal. $1.13. and 55.12, 13. 14. Thus 1t fared with Chriſt him- 
ſelf. The ſame Spirit which yer poſſefſerh wicked Men, was found 
in wicked Men inall former times: And this ought to be a great 
rclicf ro the people of God under the like meaſures, ro conſider 
that the Servants are not above their Lord, and wicked Men thus 
0! old perſecuted the Prophets, 


ithey ſhould either be aſhamed of what they had done, or brought 
'to ſhame for what they had done, f For proſper they ſhould nor, 
or they acted like Fools,and did not deal prudently for themſelves, 
(ſo this word 1s tranſlated, Tja. 52.13.) g They ſhould come to 
a reproach and jgnominy, and their reproach ſhould not be ike 
his for a time, butir ſhould be a laſting perperual reproach thar 
ſhould not be forgotten. This was not only written for thar Ge- 
neration, bur for all Generations that are yer to come, and harh 
been made good in the experience of all Ages paſt. The Perſecu- 
ters of God's Miniſters have found that God hath been with his 
' Mimiſters according to his Promiſe, Matth. 28. 20. and that they 
have ſtumbled in their way, and not at laſt prevailed, that they 
have not acted prudently for their own good,and the good of their 
Families ; that a perpetual ignominy clave to the memory of thoſe 
who have been imployed in this work. There flands to this day 
a blot upon the memory of them who perſecuted Iſaiah, Jeremiah, 
2c, The Apoſtles, and ſuch faithful Miniſters as have been ſince 
their time, 


' 12 But, O LORD of hoſts, that trieſt the righ- 
teous, ard ſeeſt the reins and the heart h, let me ſee 


[thy vengeance on them 7: for unto thee have l open- 


ed my cauſe k. 

i b The Prophet had Ch, 17. ro. ſpoken unto God under this 
notionz here he applieth ro him as ſuch, who therefore muſt 
needs ſee as well the Propher's ſincerity, as his Enemies Malice. 
z For this Prayer againſt his Enemies, it 15 of the ſame nature with 
what we meet with Chap. 11. 20, indeed this whole Verſe is the 
ſame with that David, Pſal. 58. 10. propheſieth that the righte- 
os (hould regoyce when they ſee the vengeance which God brings on his 
Enemies ; but yer the Prophet ſeems 1n his Petition ro have ſhew- 
ed himſelf a Man {as the Apoſtle ſpeaks of Elijah) ſubjet ro 
hke Pafſhons with other Men, for although God ſometimes in his 
Providence, cauſerh Vengeance to come upon his, and his Peo- 
ples Enemies 1n their fight, yet whether they may abſolutely pray 
for 1t 15 a queſtion. See the notes on Chap. 11+ 20. 


13 Sing unto the LORD, praiſe ye the LORD, 


for he hath delivered the ſoul of the poor from the * 


hand of evil doers/. 

{ The Prophet here riſerth higher, from prayer to praiſe, it is 
not certain whether this was a rejzoycing of faith. or of ſenſe; a 
Thankſgiving ro God upon his Deliverance out of the tand of Pa- 
ſhur or ſome other Enemies, or a rejoycing in the ſure belief that 
God would deliver his life out of the hands of theſe wicked Men. If 
we takeir in the latter ſenſe, it teacheth us our Daty, ro give God 
the honour of all our Deliverances from the hands of wicked Men. 
If in the former ſenſe ir ſheweth us the power of ſaith, which be- 
ing the ſubFance of things not ſeen, and evidence of things but hoped 
for ; ſhewerh us things ro come as if already preſent, and teach- 
eth ro rejoiyce 1n the hope of thoſe things of which we have no 
preſent poſſeſſion. 


14 < * Curſcd be the day wherein I was born : * cp,p. 
let not the day wherein my mother bare me be bleſ- i;. rc- 


ſed m. 

2» This ſudden change of the Prophet's ſtile, maketh both Mr, 
Calvin, and fome other good interpreters, think thar theſe words 
proceeded from Jeremiah rather 2s a repetition of a former paſſion 
into which the Abuſes of his Enemies had pur him, than as the 
immediate produR of his Spirit at this rime. Whenever they 
were ſpoken, they ſpeak a very extravagant Paſſion, ro ſhery us, 
that tho' Jere#izh was a great Man, yet he was bur a Man, encom - 
paſſed with infirmities,and ſubje& rolike paſſions with other Men. 
We find Job 1n the like paſſion, Chap. 5. 3. Theſe great failures of 
God's People ſtand in Scripture, as Rocks in the Sea appear, ro 
mind Mariners to keep off them, nor to run upon them. 

15 Curſedbethe man who brought tidings to my 
father, ſaying, A man child is born unto thee, mak- 
ing him very glad z. | 

: 3 Parents are uſually rejoyced when a Son is Born to 
them, 

16 And let that man be as the cities which the 
LORD overthrew and repented not, let him hear the 
cry in the morning, and the ſhouting at moon- 
tide o. 

o By the Cities he means thoſe Cities mentioned, Ger, 19. 25. 
Sodom and Gomorrhz, By the cry in the Morning and ſnsting at 


N10n, he means the ſhours and noiſes that Enemies make when 
they break in upon a place in an hoſtile manner. 


17 Becauſe he ſlew me not from the Womb : or 


that my mother might have been my grave, and her 


womb to be always great wath me p. 
p Theſe various expreiſions do only let us ſee to what tid e paſ- 


ſion ſwelled in this good Man's heart,and teach us how much need 


we 


S) 


Chap. » þ.<1 


, , : nat was ans: 0x 
we have to prey to be delivered from our own patli ns 35 rem s 
nce of what 


* Job 5. 
1©O. 


T 1 


T.E A £ 


| *: - himtelf ic one inf! 
feavins thele things recorded by hinlelt 1s one 1N% 


} 
is brought as a rational argumeat to prove that only Men wro'e 
the Scriptures by inſpiration from God, they would never elle 
hive recorded their own grot> failings, Men commonly WI108 
for their o'wn honour, not to their own Gefamation. 
12 * \\hereforecame l forth out of the womb to 
F y +170 2: ! > 2» ; Fe 
our and ſorrow. that my days ſhould be confu 
with ſhame-? q- : 
Thele words let ns know the Prophet's Temptarion to tele 
it was the reproach and ſhame, 


{oe I:2 
mcd 
q 


extravarmant eruptions of patiion, 


2nd aRiftion which he indured tor the faithful diſctarge of Nis! 


Minit y which both Jets us iee the goodiets of God rowards tnole 
whom he ſpare:h as to thele Trials, and what Peel WE have ur 
Ger them to {cepa watt hupon our own hearts. Theie Recorcs 
3!lo of Holy Writ are uletu} to us, if at any time we be overtaken 
with ſach errors, 10 comfort us, in that they are not ſuch Jpots 
Fur have beer: found in the Faces of God's faireſt ones : anc to 
make us charitable towards ſuch as we may lee IOMmet1it.es OVer- 
0:6 with the lize Temptations. 


C H AP. XA 


Kine Zedekiah in the Siege ſendeth t0 J-rem'iah to -»quir? of toe 
Event, 1,2, He forctelleth a hard Stege and miſerable Captrunty. 


2, —— 7, He counſelleth the People 10 fall 19 the Chaldeans, | 


S, — 1o. ard upbraideth the Kirg's Houſe, 11, — 14. 
1 THE word which came to Jeremialiggrom tne 
LORD «, when king Zedekiah featunto nim 


Paſhur the ſon of Melchiah, and Zephaniah the-ſon of 


Maaſeiah the Prieſt, ſaying b, 

a2 God in tuncry times, and in divers manners, 
paſt, to the Fatiiers by the P:ophets, Heb. 1. 7. The two princt- 
pa] were viſions and dreams, Numb. 12. 6, How the following 
word came to Jeremzah 1s not exprelt, 1t 1s enough that he knew 
jr came from the Lord. b i: is apparent, tome Proplecies 1n this 
Book are not put in therig':t orcer as they were dclivered, Chap, 
:5, we ſave an account of the word of the Lord which came to 
$-remiah in the fon th Year of Fehojakim, who was the ſecond Son 
of Foſrah made King by Phzraob-Necbo, puriuing his Viftary 
(mentioned 2 Chron. 35. 22.) upon the Battle. in which Fifth was 
killed, as we read there. The people made Jev02hay Ring, but he 
rejgned bur three Months,and the Conqueror carrying him away, 
made E/jahim his Brother King, changing his Name to Jeboruhim, 
who reigned 11 Years, that 1s 7 atter the word of the Lord men- 
tioned, Chap: 25. came to ]:remi!”; afrer whom Fehotakin his 
Son reigned three Months and 10 Days: Zedekiah was his Uncle, 
rhe Son of Fofiah, h2 reigned 11 Years. Sothar it is plain that 
Feremiah's Prophecy, (mentioned Chap. 25.) was 7 Years and 3 
Months before this, beſides the number of Years that Z21&7ab had 
reigned. But fome think that Jeremiah, Chap. 23-24, 25. doth 
vut make a repetition to Z-4*%rrh's Mefſ-nzers of what he kad 
before propheſted. This Meſſage was (as appeareth by the next 


- . . 
"Aa ”Y 2 ar 
ſfax2 13 e111es 


the City wastaken. The fatal Slege held about a Year and half, as 
appears DY Ch ip, 39. 1,2. The P 1ſhur mentioned here, WAS Aano-! 
ther from him, mentioned Chip. 20. 1. he was the Son of [n:mvry. 
ot the fixree:th Courſe of the Vrielts; and ofa more rugzed 11] 
Temper -; this was the So1 of 3feichith,and fo of the fifth Cour! 

2 Enquire l pray thee of the LORD for us c, (for 
Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon maketh war azain!t 

+ y'SE ak «1 Yb 

!S) it ſo be that the LORD will deal with us accord- 


| 


Ing to all his wondrous works, that he may go up! 
rrom us 4, | 


c Zedekiab,as he was none of the beft, fo he was none cf the 


preflions (poſtib!y from his Education) not worn off, and having} 
lome reverence of God, he ſends to the Prophet to enquire of the | 
Cord, Becaule of the King of Babz/on was come up to make war | 
2painſt them. Tt is true the greateſt Contemners of God and lis] 


taithiul Miniſters, will ſometimes in great ſtraits, chuſe ro ſend. 
for them rather than thoſe who in their Proſperity pleaſed them. | 
Hence we read of Saul wl:en he went to the Witch at Ender, de-| 
l1r1ng that Samuel might be raifed up ; bur in Zedehiah's whole | 
liory weread nn ſuch eminent contempt of God, but a Dilobe- | 
dence to the Commands of God, proceeding rather from his ea-/ 
fineſs to be ruled by his Corrupt Court, than from a ſtubborn-' 
nels ;n himſelf. 4 By mentio! ing God's former wondrous Works, 
poilioly ae may have a reſpect to God's railing Senacherib's Siege 
in the time of his Grandfather He32{52h, The remembring of 
God's former wondrous works, is of uſe to raiſe in us an hope 
and confidence in God for further deliverances, {;ppoſing our 
ſelves under the ſame circumſtances of Obedience to Gods W111, 
otherwiſe not, as we ſhall jee in the caſe of Fu4ab and its King, 
at this time ; therefore Zedekzab faith, if {» be. Guilt of fin hinders 
Conhidence, and hoiy boldneſs in the beſt ; bur as the guilt is 
greater, ſo tne hore or contidence of anv is juſtly lefc. 
3 Then faid Jeremiah uno them, Thus ſhall ye 
ſay to Zedekian, | 
4 Ihnsfith the Iord GOD of Ifrael c, 2enold, | 

willturn back the weapons of war that are in your 
140%, Wherewith ye ſight avain'{t the kings of Baby-' 


O!1, and 


274:jt the Chaldcans which believe you ! 
tie Walls 7, and 1 will ; 
it O!UNS CILY 7. 


| 


l 
| 


Vid. 1 Chron, 24. 9, 14. | 


worſt of the Kings of Ju, he had ſome convictions and im | 


| 
| 


(T": \ 2c a —_— 
almble them 1atoit - 


{= g thaom, 
' & ©, web *21 


: 3 %, ® 
MIAH Chair. > 
L » , | Wh > #8 ot” 

Z 
e The honour that the K'nrof Filzlh had mirnnan tlie > 0. 


N / Kc . A *a «- Sep 
engmers ONACMN IS NI CEMULYTION 


piet in ſending thete ſnecial Mo 


T | 
SEM - 
{ >{4.. 
. 4 
Rig 


+ vo 


to thfis good Prophet to prophetie tinnnth and pleafing tlic o:, 
which he ha no warrant from Cod. The Prophet ftileth Goa 142 
God of Iirctl, becauts the whole Poſterity of Facch were in cove- 
nant with God, notwithſtarding which, ter parts of twelve we: e 
It this time carried fnfoa Captivity from which tie never return-- 
ed ;ver God was the God of Ilr.r2l, for ali were not [rel that 
| deſcended from T{rze!, but thofs only who were [r:2!ies in- 
{teed, withour enile 3 fo that the” Prophet by ht came given ro 
| 0d, doth but afſert God's faithfulneſs to nis Covenant, and allo 
| ſzew the confiilency of that taichfuinets, with thuie Judgments, 
{ which he was now bringins upon that remnant of 1jrat which 
| yer were in their own Jand. f The Meffige which God by tte 
| Prophet fendeth ro Zelekiah, 15 exceeding terrible. Tie tit of ir 
15, Thatas they had not dealt with God accorung to the Worss 
of Iſrael, and the former Generat10n that defcended tron tim, cor 
taoſe at leaſt wno were the true Tjrzel of God, fo they nt not 
| expect that Gall ſhould deal with them accoruin; to his tormer 
| wondrous Works, but that as he with che pure had thewed himielt 
| u8rizht. fo with the froward he ſhould ſhew him{e!f frow 1-7, 
| God hath determiied to turn into the'r own Bow els, and 
| t1emſelves, the Weapons they had in their hands taken upagainte 
; the King of Babylon and the Chaldeans that were now Beicliuy 
!chem. "by which we may learn that this Meſſage was feat dur.vs 


_ 
BY 

i? 
TI! — 
» +4 = 
- 


| 

| the time of the Siege, probably about the bezinniag of it; tor it {a't 
{ed 18 Months) eg Gaod threatneth to bring the Coal.feans 11t9 cn. 
| 14ſt of r!;e Hol; Ci:y, thar their C:ty fronid be broken vp, thet; 
| Arms taken from them, and they killed with thetr own Swords, 
| Ic 1s 00% an E: Cilty 
{:Nat 35 to be feared, but God's ve1ng our Enemy. 


| Fhere 1s a great Emnhaſis 19 tie PT ONOUN [. 


| 5 AndImyſelfwill fight againft you þ with an 
'ourt-ſtretched hand, and witha ftroaz arm, event 
anger, and 11 fury, and in great wrath z. 

þ I will fight againit you, (as a Pricce is fa'd to fizht againlt a 
Nation, whole Captains fight aZainlt ic, tho! himtel; ftrrieth not 


f 


 trem his Roval Palace; Yea, more thai fo) animar'ng and 37 Fits 
 encing the Buby!onians and Chaldears, whom 1 have 1-nt to ftiyat 
 againft you, and &ifcouraging and dilpiriting your Azmies, 
\7 With luch an hand aid PIwer as I maniteffed tor m, ancient /j- 
\ rael,Ex04.6,6.God is here ſpoken of in a Dialect which maketh Fim 
| Tore intelligible ro us. He hath no Hards, no A: ws, neccher 15 
; anger and furv jn him confiderec as turbuleat Patti ns as rhey are 
[1N us ; but as Mn ftrecch ou: tavir Hands and Arms when they 
intend to give ſmart and terrible ſtrokes, and are edged to fuch 
Blows from the'r Pathons and exceſſive wrath, ſo God is let out 
to vs by exprefſi>ns proper to Men, and 17 hum ftanificative only 
of his juſt Will ro be revenged fever-ly upon a ft:tui people. The 
fence 15no more, than that an end was now cm? and Gul was 
relo;ved nog longer to bear with tuch a provoking people, but £9 
bring kis urmoſt winch upon them, and to deal with them no 1011+ 
'ger according to hits wondrons works of Mercy, but mn won.trous 
wars of Jaſttce, which in Mea wouid look like the effects of 


Verſe) when Nebuchadn-33ar was come up to make War againft : Wrath and Fury, 
Hierulale%, Fr. 39-1, Feremy was at liberty, when the Word of 


the Lord at this time came to him, ſo as jt was ſome time before | 


6 And I will ſinite t 


* ” L: {> 0 {> . 
peſt! by f | Sf 
, —_ / CIR Re 36>. FBs EE Xx. 9 . 5h, Ap es , : IIS WS + os 
þ Still] God prociarmenn timieit this peap.cs Laeity, Fe! Yo 
z — 
" [ , San 4 © hy % ! ws 4 » ? * /\ OP 
ces are byt the ut! contermences of 1017 Steres, roms? 


{cantinets, and uni 15 fomrets of Ford, but Get 15 the brit ceuts 
of tfuch tore Jn''gments, though there be other {econ} can: 


The Murrain of B-aſts bears propo: tion to the Peſtiience amone 4 
Men, 2n1 the B-alts are threamned as weil as Men, nn: becatie 


of any f11 in them, but becante Men are puntthed th them, rhey 
being part of their Subliance, and this 1s a part of that Bondage 
of Corruption, fron winca the Creature gt 019eta to be &vjte 
vere, of that Vanity to which they are jubject, witch maketh 
tre irrational pat of we f:pemton to be brought in by tae Apoe 
ftle, Rom. 8. 20,21, 22, likeasa Woman trav4//ing in pin, ant 
deſiring the Day of Juilement, 
. Co ant.  þ TY - > al j 

nd afterwards '$ {ith tho LORD, E wilt d-!t- 
ver Zedetkialh kt. of Judih, and his fervants and t;z4 
q 4 0 of , | ; : i . 1 FP 6. Tg 8 _ Ws a 
people, and {cn as 4it IeEL In LS CIEY FrOM THe No 
{7 ie - OE & 27 SY IT IO 7 137; 
[til cice, # ON LLHIR Fwd rc, and from the fainiins s TITS 
: EMEzqRTT.T.L_D.. LH. 2 - 4 1005 BO 
the hand of Nehuchadrezzar king of Babylon, an 
, ! bo Lrmne IT VI AC 17+ L: a ha. PRs 
139 tne hand of their encmics, and 1nto tlic haad of 
3 } + + jH a|- ;- 2 —> "I a x . 4 —$ box 
thoſe that ſeek their life 2, and he ſhall ſmire then 

' +! " 2 Þ »* > Ho: 
with the edge of the ſword : h2 ſhall not ipare them, 
neither have pity, nor have mercy 2. 

1 After that many of the people of this City, fha't be defrow. 
el, fome by the Eremy affanriring ard «<kirmfh 
others by the Famine that ſha'l be »monegſtt them th: oneh a want 
of Vidtvals, being all ſpent with tic long Siege ; 


6 . , 
131rg WIN tim; 


OfÞers D. tlie 


id . by 1 » ' T 
Peſtilence. mm Zedekizh, who ſhall eicape theſe three Judements, 
together with his Courtiers,2nd the refticu? of the Peopie, tall be 
delivered 1nto the power of tne E105 of. Babylonand ito tne pots 


er of ſich as v.7!] nat be content with the piunuer of ther hovi: 

. , ' } 3 » ls © J 4 6p M0 4 Av v5 | Hes ] pot 
but thirſt a'ter their blood, andy thefe Enemies {tot on by Ne - 
mite them viith che Sword, withoiur 


burhadneq3ar) ſhall 
them any Merc: or Pity. This 1: 
Zedehith himie'f. for God Jet him know, Chap. 2 4. 4. 
ſhouid not dir b 14+ facrd but in frzcr, as he dit after vard 1 Bae 
bylinthough in Prifon ; bur it wis true of his Sons and © nurtier cs 

 - 4 YA. Thi, 


notrto b- underitot of Ring 
that Ne 


and a g;ea: pert of the People, Ch:p. 39. 6,8. and 5 
who went into Captivity, were 03/y 1uch 25 had ror 
the Siege, and many of thoſe rhar were of the poor of the 
Fr the reit there was l1:tle picy had of chem, or mercy Mh-wed 
| 


o }. 4 Fo 4% * x * 2 . —_ 
3< may b- cen. C125 iv e505 FRO CITP. JE. ! 


+ Tel, 


hn.bitreſs. 


PF, 


1K; 2, Oo L\> 


O 


" your all thingsronnd about it þ. 


7” [. 


TFERE 


$ A And unto this people thou ſhalt ſay, Thus 
ſaith the LORD, Behold, 1 fer before you, the way 
of lite, and the way of death o. 

o I reli you the way that you ſhould take, if ycu would ſave 
your lives; and rhe courſe, which if you rake, you will certainly 
loſe your lives. 

o He that * abideth in this city, ſhall die by the 
ſivord, and by the famine, aud by the peltilence : 
but he that goeth ovt, and falleth to the Chalceans 
that betiege you, he ſhall live p, and * his lite {hall 

. be nnto him for a prey 7. | 

p Bur cerrainly, if ever any Man ſpake High Treaſon, this Pro- 
phet now <1d ir, when there was an Enemy beſicging them, 
telling them, thar if they weuld ſave their Lives, they mult re- 
voir from their king, and joyn with their Enemies. All chat can 
be ſ2id in excuſe for the Prophet is, that this was a Divine Re- 
velarion ro him, and a Mefiage ſenr to the king himſelf. q Hz: 
lije (ha!l be given him for a Prey, appearerh ro have been a proverbial 
Expretſion, either figniſying a Man's potlc{ſion of his life as a 
Prev, or Boory recovered from Deach, or the hand of the Enemy. 
2. Or a Man's r5joycing in the ſaving of his Life, asif he had gor 
{ome nortavle Booty, ; 

10 For | have ſet my face againſt this city, for 
evil, and nor for good r, faith the LORD ; it ſhall 
hegiven iato the hand of the king of Babylon, and 
he ſhall burn it with fire /. : 

y Thar 1s, I will ſet my ſelt againſt 1t, I will be an Enemy to 1t. 
S-e the like Phraſe Lev. 17. 10. and 20. 5. Iris a Phraſe fignity- 
ing nor only God's Averſion from them, and the raking his Aﬀe- 
&on off chem, but his determination to bring Ruin upon them, 
2nd chuſing Methods of Providence tending and conducive there- 
unto : and (> it 1s opened inthe following Words, which are ra- 
ther ro be underttood of the Strucure of the City than of the In- 
h:biranrs, for that not the People were burnt with fire, though 
probably many of the People periſhed in ſo great Burnings. 

it And tonching the houſe of the king of Ju- 
dah 7, /y, Hear ve the word of the LORD -:. 

t By the houſe of the King of Fudah he means the Houſe of 
Z-debith, the Court, or thoſe ( as appearcrh by the nexr Verſe ) 
who were the Magiſtrates. # Theſe, how grear. ſoever, are nor 
excuſed from the common Obligation upon al} to liſten co, and 
ro obey the Revclations of the Divine W1ll | 

12 O houſe of David w, thus ſaith the LORD, 
* -| Execute jindgment in the morning -v,and deliver 
him that 1s ſpoiled, out of the hand of the oppreſlor y, 
e# my fury go out like fre, and burn thar none can 
quench 77 <, becauſe of the evil of your doings 4. 

w Hecal!s theſe the Hoſe of David, either checking them, who 
were indeed ſoin a lineal Deſcent, or minding them what the) 
cught to be in 1miration of cheir Farher David, x The only way 
they had to keep oli choſe Divine Judgments which now hang'd 
over ther Heads, was to execute Judgment, that 15, Fuſtice, with- 
eur partiality ; the Prophets Advice to them to exrcute Judgment 
it the Morning, either lets them know” they muſt do ir quick!y, 
er elſe ir hath reſpe# tothe rime when the Courts of Juſtice fare. 
y One Sp<cics of Juſtice, was the Deliverance of the oppreſſed 
from the hands, that js,from the power and malice of the Oppreſ- 
ſors, which it it were not done, q God threatneth certain Ruin 
and Deſtruction to them, which none ſhould be able to hinder or 
avoid. The cauſe of which was, rheir wicked Doings 3 for that 
God who doth People good, and fhewerh them favour, not for 
their ſake, hur for his own names ſake, yer never punitheth them, 
Euitjora caule found in them. : 

13 Behold, I 22 againſt thee, -O inhabitant of 
the valiey &, and rock of the plain c, faiththe LORD; 
which fay, Who ſhall come down againſt us ? or who 


Cl1 ic 
0:1] enter into onr habitations d ? 

þ The Tahavitanrs of the City of Hirryſzlem are thoſe here 1n- 
tended, P[{zl. 125. 2. The Mountains were round about Hieruſa- 
In, nea, Hierilalom nt felf was builded in part upon the rocky 
Mountain of Zim, but a great pare was in the Valley, and the 
hipher Mountains, about Mount Zion, made thar Mounrain it ſelf, 
in compariſon with them, asa Valley. c Though alſo a Rock of 
the Plain, thar 1s, near to the Plain, Which fituarion of this 
place, made the J-ws think it to be 1mpregnable, and ro mock 
at Dangers, or Threats of Enemies, ſaying, Who (5.2/!, that is, Who 
can. 0r #11 rill dare to come againft us? Or, who will be able 
ro enter inro our City ? faith the Lord, I an again? you. I will 
come down againſt you, and 1, by fuch as I ſhall employ, will 
enter into vour Rahitarions, No nacural poſition or fituation of 
Places, no artificial Fortfi.ations, are ſufficient againit an Almigh- 
ty God. 


12 But +I will puniſh you e according to the * 
Fruit Of YOULr af gs, ſajrh the LORD *f: and I will! 


kindle a fire in the forreſt thereof 7”, and ir ſhall de- 


e in the Hebrew 1t is, I will tifit ron you; God's Viſtrations 
are either of Mercy, Pſal. 80. 14. and 106. 4. or of Fudgment 3 
therefore the Sence 1: here rightly given by our Tranſſators,puniſh. 
f The fruit of Mens Doings 1s the produc of their Actions ; God 
pintſherh the truir of our Doings. In ſhewing Mercy, he ads from 
Pretogarive; 1n Pumſhments, he doth bur fill Men with their 
own ways, ard give them according to the fruit of rheir Doings 3 
fo Verſe 12. g By rhe Forreſt he encher meaneth the Forreſt of Le- 
b.:r0z, or their Houſes made up of Wood cut out of that For- 
reſt, or their idolarrous Groves, h And this Fire, he fait], 


MIA RH 


20, 30, 
I Hus ſaith the LORD, Go down to the houſe 
of the king of Judah, and ſpake there this 


word 2. 

a Some by the King of J44ah here mentioned, underſtand ]e- 
hoahaz, made Ring upon the death of Jo{ah by the People, (being 
che ſecond Son of Joſzah) 2 Kings 23. 30. Others underſtand |e- 
hoiakim whom Pharaoh Necho made King, carrying his elder Bro- 
ther Jehoahax, after a ſhort reign of three Months, with him 1nto 
Egypt, 2 Chros. 36. 4. | 

2 And fay, Hear the word of the LORD, O king 
of Judah, that fitteſt upon the throne of David 6, 
thou, and thy ſervants, and thy people that enter 


in by theſe gates c 3 

b None 1s ſo great but he 1s obliged to hear the word of the 
Lord, The Prophets mentioning him under the Notion of him 
that ſat upon the Throne of Darid, both minds him of God's Faith- 
fulneſs, who had promiſed rhat David ſhould not want one to fir 
on his Throne ; and his Duty, to walk in che ſteps of him upon 
whoſe Thegne he ſat ; and alſo of his Errors, he nor walking in 
David's ſteps, though he ſar upon his Throne. c The Word of 
the Lord concerned nor the King alone, bur all his Inſtruments 
in places of Magiſtracy, and alſo all the People of Jeruſalem and 
Judea. 


3 Thns faith the LORD, * Execute ye judgment *Chap.: :. 
and righteouſneſs, and deliver the ſpoiled out of the 22. 


hand of the oppreſſor: and do no wrong, dono vio- 
lence to the ſtranger, the fatherleſs, nor the widow, 


neither ſhed innoceat blood 1nthis place 4. 

4 That1s, Adminiſter Juftice to all your SubjeQs, The Srran- 
ger, the Fatherleſs, and the idow, are particularly named, as 
Perſons who have feweſt Friends, and fo are expoſed to the 
Luſts of great Men, who have a power to oppreſs them. Two 
things are o9ſervable; r, That the Terms upon which God pro- 
miſerh Mercy to them, are ſuch as were in their power to perform. 
2. They are the due performances of relative Duties, to teach us 
how much lteth upon Mens juſt performance of the Duries of their 
Relations, and more particularly, how much God Ioverh Juſtice 
and Judgment, without the impartial Execution of which, no 
Princes, no Magiſtrates, can promiſe themſelves Security from 
remporal Judgments; which much commendeth the Love of God 
co humane Soctery. Injuftice being rhe greateſt Enemy to ir, and 
[uftice rhe great Foundation and Pillar of ir. 


4 Forityedo this thing indeed e, * then ſhall *Chap. 17; 
there enter 1n by the gates of this honſe kings ſitting 25+ 
n Y S S "S + Heb. for 
David upon 
his Thror:. 


+ upon the throne of David, riding in chariots, and 
on horſes, he, and his ſervants, and his people f. 

e If ye w1l; not pretendedly, bur really, give to every one their 
Due, and look that inferiour Magittrates a&ing under you do fo : 


f Then, he dorh nor ſay you ſhall be ſaved; the Promiſe is only 


of a ſecular, temporal nature, of all profperiry, and Continuance 
of rhe Family of David, with great Honour and Splendour ; «x- 
prefſed by thofe Phraſes of riding in Chariors, and on Horſes, 
Though rhe Performance of moral Ags of Juſtice and Mercy, 
which Men may perform without any ſpecial Grace of God, be 
nor enough ro intitle them to the Hopes of [piritua] and eternal 
good Things yer they may ini itle them to the Hopes of outward 
Proſperity and Happineſs in this Life, Dan. 4. 27, Which is (uf- 
ficient ro demonſirare, That Mens outward Infelicities, and Suf- 
ferings under the grievou; Judgments of God upon themſelves, 
is from their ſelves 3 thev might in a great meaſure avoid them by 
doing ſuch Adis as are in their power to do, : 

5 Butit ye will not hear theſe wordsg, I ſwear 
by my ſelf, faith the LORD, that this houſe ſhall 
become a deſolation h. 

g By bearing, the Propher meanerh hearhning to, and obeying. 
God accounterh us to hear no more than we practiſe, þ If (fairh 
the Propher) you will not execute Judgment, &c. I give you the 
greateſt Aſſurance imaginable, that this noble Houje of David ſhall 
become a Deſolation. The Apoſitle ſaith, thar God, becauſe he 
could ſwear by no greater, ſware by himſelf. The end of an Oath 
1s, the Confirmation ofa thing where any doubr of the Truth of 
Ir, or any have Strife ahout 1t. Sinners finding in themſelves a 
Difficulty ro believe God upon his Word, revealing his Will a- 
gainft che Intereſts of their Luſis, the Lord is broughr inas 
(wearing, not by a greater (that 1s impc{lible) bur by himſelf, 
that the Houſe of David, or the Houſe of Iſrael, or his own Hou's he 
Temple, (though the firſt ſeems moſt probable to be here mean 
which ſeemeth ro be rhe Houſe mentioned Verſe 4. through the 
Gates of which, Kings ſhould ent, 3iding in Chariots and Gn 
Horſes) ſhould be made deſolate. 

6 For thus faith the LORD unto the kings houſe 
of Judah, Thou 27r Gilead unto me 7, and the head 
of Lebanon & : yer ſurely Iwill make thee a wilder- 
neſs and cities whichare not inhabited 'S 

z Interpreters are not apreed in what Serice God ſaich, rhar rhe 
Kings Houſe of J4dah was unto him a: Gilzas, + Or the Head 
of Lebanon, Gilead was a Country fertile for Paſtures; upon 
which account the Reybinites and G44itts, being Mcn whoſe 
Eftares lay in Cattle, bryped ir of 39/5 for their Portion, Num. 


A 7 
< OP 


Chap. XXII 


ſhoald nor determine ,in the Deftru&ion only of rhis City, but 
in the tocal DeſtruQion of all che Country adjacent to Hieruſalem, 


GH AT XXIL 
God ſendeth the Prophet to Court with Promiſes, 1, —— 4. and Threats 
again(t the King's houſs and Jeruſalem, 5, — 9. The Judgment of 
Shallum, 10, — 12. of Jehojakim, 13, — 19. and of Coniah, 


T 
/ 8 
x 


for 


bon 
Its 


Chap. % XI. 


_unrizhtcouſnehs, aud his chambers by wrong 3 


32. 2, and Moſes gaveit to the Sons of Manas Verſe 40. It 
was alſo famous tor Spicery, Balm, and Myrrb, Gen. 37. 25. It 
had in it a famous Mountain. Lebanon allo wasa very piealant 
place, famous for Cedars, and indeed whatſoever could gratifte 
the Senſes ; they both were in the Lot of Gadand Manaſſeh. 
Some think God compareth the King of Ju4ah's Houle to thele 
places, in regard of the Height and Noblenels of the Stracture 3 
others.tor the pleaſantneſs and Delighttulneſs of it; others conft- 
der Gilead as the principal part of the Inhericance of the Ten 
Trides, waſted By Tiglath Pilegur, 2 Kings 15. 29. and C:2AT 
God telleth chem, by this Compariſon, that he would certainly 
deftroy them, and make chem as Glead, which was the Head of 
L+binm. Trough Ferufalem, was a noble and pleaſent place, 
vet they might remember fo was Gilead, which yet tor thetr 
Sins was waſteJ, and brought to Ruin. / Soalfo Feruſalem, 
formerly the Garden of Fudea, and Joy of the whole Earth, 
ſhould be made a Wilderneſs, and tne Cities of Fudah ſhould 
not be inhabited, 

7 And I will prepare deſtroyers azain{t thee, eve- 
ry one with his weapons »:, and they ſhall cut down 
thy choice cedars, and caſt zherz into the fire z. 

a They ſhill not only be edged with their own Luſts and Ma- 
lice, but commiſiionated and influenced by me, and ſhall come 
lutfciently prepared for their work. n And they ſhall cur down 
and burn thy Buildings, which are made of goodly Cedars. 

38 And many nations ſhall paſs by this city, and 
they ſhall ſay every man to his neighbour, wherefore 
hath the LORD done thus to this great city o ? 

o According to God's Threatniog, Dent. 29. 24. 1 Kings g. 8. 
Though the Jews would not underſtand that there was a Caule, 
yer others weu!d underſtand it, and enquire into 1t. 

9 Thea they ſhall anſwer, Becauſe they have for- 
ſaken the covenant of tae LORD their GOD p, and 
worſhipped other gods, and ſerved them 4. 

p Some ſhall anſwer them, or they ſhall anſwer one another. 
Surely it is becauſe they have broken the divine Law, which the 
d;jra-lites made a Covenant ; Ex. T5. 8 Chap. 24+ 3,7. Deut. 
5. 27, upon which account :heir Sianing was an Apoltacy, «n1 a 
forlaling their Covtnant. q Their Sinning was not of an ordinary 
nature,but by Idolatry, worſhipping Images and Idols, which in- 
deed were no Guds, but only in the Opinion of thoſe Nations that 
worſhipped them. 

10 A Weep ye not for thedead, neicher bemoan 
him 7, bzzt weep ſore for him that goeth away /; for 
he ſhall return no more, nor ſce his native country r. 

r Not for Foſizh your dead Prince,for whom there was a great 
Mourning, 2 Chron.-35. 25. mentioned Zech. 12. 11. Foftah is 
happy, you need not trouble your ſelves tor him ; but weep for 
Jehoahag, who is to go, or is gone into Captivity ; Jehoabax was 
tet up upon his Father's Death by the People, 2 Kings 23. 30. 
2 Chron. 36. 1. but Verſ-. 3. put down within three Months, and 


carried into Egypr, Verſe 4. where he. died, 2 Kings 23. 34- : 


: So as he no more returned 1ato Judzh, The Participle being 
1nthe Preſent Tenſe, inclinech me to think, that this Prophecy 
was long before that in the former Chapter,ſoon after the Death 
of Joſ:2h, upon the Peoples ſetting up of Fehsahax in his ſtead, or 
preiently after he was carried away. Some interpret this ofthe 
People that were dead, and thoſe that were going into Captivi- 
ty; burthenext Verſe makes it far more probable that it is to 
be under{tood of F:fi2h and Jehoavap. 

11 Forthus faich the LORD tonching Shallum, 
the ſon of Joiiah king of Judah x, who reigned inſtead 
of Joliah his facher mr, which weat forth out of this 
place -v, he {hall nor return thither any more. 

u Who this Shallum was, 1s alittle doubted : Sore think it 
was Jehoahax the Sor; of Joſta', 1 Chron. 3. 15. called Fobanan : 
there js allo menmioned one Shallum, but he is there mentioned 
2s the fourth Son of Fof71, Ir, the Book of Kings we read on- 
ly of three Sons which 7:/25 had, wiz. Fehoahax, Teboiakim, 
and Zedekiah. Mott think chat this Shalum was Fehoahax or 
"my (as he is called 1 Chron, 3.15. ) who was indeed the 

econd Son of J:ftah; tor itis plain trom 2Kirgs 23.31, 36. 
that Fehojahim was two Years older, otherwiſe he could not 
have been 25 Years 01d when he began to reign, after Jehoahax, 
who began to reign at 23 Years of Ape, and reigned but three 
Months; but 1 Chron. 3. 15. he is called Foſcab's firſt-born, be- 
cauſe he was firſt made King and here he 1s called Shallum for 
the ſhortneſs of his Reign, 1n Derifion tothe Jews,who lo called 
him, upon the acccunt of their good hopes of Protperity under 
him; and in Alluhon to Shallum the Son of Fabeſh, one of the 
laſt Kings of the Ten Tribes, mentioned 2 Kings 15. 13. who 
reigned but a Month ; tor this, as ſome think, could not be that 
Shallum mentioned atiezr Zedekiah, as the fourth Son of Foftab, 
1 Chren, 3. I5, for tat Shallum, they ſay, never reigned, this 
as the Text ſaith, did reignthree Months w inſtead of J:ſeah his 
Father ; which Phrale feemeth alſo to conclude, that he imme- 
diately ſucceeded his Father ]-f4b. x Fe was carried away trom 
Jeruſalem preſently atrer he was ſet 8p, 2 Kings 23. 31, 32. im- 
priloned at Riblzh, and Verſe 34. died in Egypt. 

12 But he ſhall die in the place whither they have 

ied him captive, aad ſhall ſee this land no more y- 

y SO as he returred no more to ſee his rative Country, as ts 
here ſzid, But others think this Shallum was Joſiab's tunrth Son, 
that Jobanndied before his Father, and the People male Shal- 
law iis youngeſt Son King, calling him Jeboaha3, io as he 
re!gned immediately after Joſeab. 


13 4 Wo unto him that * buildeth his hoaſe 


Vo; II 


SEREMIAH. 


_uſeth his neighbours ſervice without wages, and gt- 
veth him not for his work 2. 
| #7 We have not here any certain Guidance, to let us us know 
, Wherher the Prophet intended Jeho2haz or J-hojakim 3 boih of 
. them did evil in the fight of the Lord, as we read in their Story. 
; The Sin here reflected upon is manifeſtly Injuſtice and Orpreſſion, 
but poſtioly in the former part of the Verſe, all unjuit and oppret- 
| five Acts, by which either of thele Princes entleavoured to pr 9- 
mote their Grandeur, may be underſtood; tor we need not tuke 
building his houſe in a ſtridt literal Sence, bur ſignifying the pro. 
| motion of his Fami!ly, or eſtablithing his Stare and Digaity, a In 
| the latter part, a ſpectal Oppreilion, withholding Workmens Wa- 
! ges, 15 the Sin upon which the Woe is denounced, a Sin contrary 
to the Law, Lev 19. 13+. Deut. 24.14, 15. and againſt whichiche 
Judgment of God is allo denounced under the New Teſtamenr, 
James 5. 4, An evident Demonſtration of God's Love to'Man- 
kind, ſecuring by his Law juſt Dealings berween Man aad Man, 
and revenging Acts of Injuſtice ; and particuiarly where Men take 
Advantage of the!r Greatneſs above, and Superiority over others. 
to trample them under their feet, and to withhold their ju't 
Rights from them : Though fuch Perſons may be out of the reach 
of humane Juſtice, yer God hath denounced a Woe azain{t them. 


14 That ſaich, I will build me a wide houſe, and 


milion 6. 
b Tha: is Woe to that Man, who ſuffering Opyreftian in his 
Government, or maketh it his Buftneſs kimfelt co opprets, yet 
buildeth himſelf great Hooſes and large Chambers, cieling ther 
with Cedar,promifing himſelf Proſperity and Splendour norwtth- 
Randing his wicked Courtes ; for orherwile, it is lawtul enough 
for Princes to build themſelves ſtately Houtes, cc. Yer tome think 
thar Fehcizkim's Pride, and Luxury, and Magntt:c*nce, 1s here 
blamed ; which alto may be, conftidering what Fate he was under, 
ſo Fudab was reprieved only during Fofrab's Life, 2 Chron. 34.24, 
25,26, 27, 28, And this Prince had fcen Shal!um or Fehoatar his 
Brother carried into Captivity, and he ftiil walked in the {ame 
wicked Courles his Brother had don? ; yer 10 corrempt of the 
Word cf the Lord by Hu#/Jab io his Father's tline, he promiterh 
himſelf all Profpericy and Splendour and.accortingly was builde 
ing himſelf ſtately Houles, and adorning tem, for this the Woe 
is here denounced. : 

15 Shalt thou reign becauſe thou cloſeſt thy fel/ 
in Cedar c ? did not thy father car and drink, and 
do judgment aud juſtice, and then i was well veifln 
him 4 ? 
| £ Art thou ſo vain, asto think that hrave Houſes will continue 
thy Kingdom > Thou art miitzkeoa; m-gnificeat Puildings are 
not thote things which eftabliiha Prince; Throne. 4 How was it 
withthy Father 2 He lived profperovſly, yer had nv tuch ffarely 
Edifices; his Throne was eſtabliſhed by Juſtice and Judgment ; 
' that were the right wa; for the® to fit jure upon thy Throre. 

16 He judged the canſe of the poor and neccy e, 
then 7 was well with ht;z ; was NOT LNLS to KLOW MC, 
faich che LORD? ? 

e By himlelt in perſon; for the Rings of Tfra:l and Fulah of- 
ten {ate perionally to judge Cautes ; or by ferting tuch Judges as 
| £1 1t, adminiftiing Iullice impartially, particularly to tnch as in 
| reſpect of their low Condicica, were moſt expoſed to the Power 
| of others : and doing thys he proſpered, f This was for him 
{truly to own and acknowle:/ge me. They only traly know 
God who obey h1n ; and Men vainly pretend to P:zty who are 10- 
; tortouſly detective in Duties of Jullice and Charircy., : 

' 17 Bur thinecyes and thy heart are nor but tor 
[thy covetouſnelſss, and for to ſhed innocent blood, 
;and for oppreſſion, and for [| violence to do 77 h. 


_—_—— 


+ large chambers, and cutteth him out || windows, Þ Heb.. 
and zr 7s celled with cedar, and painted with ver=**5" 


F 3 


| Or, my 


WHNi97 3, 


|| Or, :«« 


| £g All that thou lookeſt ater, and that thy Heart is ſet upon, £#1-*7 


; 15 thy own Grandeur and Riches. b Andto make thy ſelf great, 
| thou makeit ro Difficulty to deſtroy thy SubjeAs that are inn0- 
cent and have not deferved Death, and to opprels others, uſtug 
all manner of Violence againit chem. Ir 1s not to be choughr 
that Jebc2ihim did all r!:15 in perſon, but by fuck corrupr and un- 
juſt Judges as he ſet up ; fo God accounted that Abab had ki!!-4 
| an{ taken p'f} ſion, 1 Kings 21. 19. though the Elders and Nebles 
| were Uncle that Gd it, Ver. 11, 12,13» P1inces are retpontible to 
God for the fs of their Miniſters and Jrdges. 

18 Therefore thus ſaith the LORD concerning, 
Jehotakim the fon of Joliah king of Judah ;- TT hey 
ſhall nor. lament for him, /:y/z9, Ah my brother, 0: 
ah my lifter : chey ſhall not lament for him, f-1ro, 
Ah Lord ! or, ah his glory x. 

"as El: ih :ms 


i Avery bad fon of agoot Father, whoſe Name 
by Pharzob Necho rurncd to Fobdlahim, 2 Kinzs 27. 34. #10 DY 
him fer up. He reigned wickedly, and infn::-ly oppr fins rhe 
People for Money for P5arzoh N. cho that mate Fr 
' Verſe 35. He reigned but eleven Years; but robe! 
| Nebuchadne33ar King of Babylon, a5 we read, 2 0179 24+ 1s 2 
he was carried by him into {51.0 1 fertors 7. 3& 
where, ior ought we read, h- Ci. 67 th 
San, ſucceeded him, Perle &. rced onty three Ng Ps, 
ten Days. k He died not lamented ; $55 5 OT PT Cur 
Enemies would lament him. is {ce had 09000 119 09 ROBIN 
by Violence and Opprettion t© tr: at agree, 5408 IF 35 Ot iroety 
that thole of them that were .2 Lafrion male any great Ling 
j tation for him, 
19 * He ſhall 
| als [, drawa aid cait tOren 


F® v 
b *JJ3< 7 {TJ a , 
; ] L! ta10H £ «fs 2 


W ; ws WO » 


_+_ 
x 
r 


\ > m1?y tk; ; 4 «i g LEES Sw of bl Cf :» $*® 
DLC DUl iid \ 6 WS1 & FIT WH 1 ws & =Y'F 


Chap, XXIL FERE 


! That is,he ſhall not be buried at all ; or he ſha) be buried in] 
+1 indecent and contemptible manner, none attending him to Nis 
(rave, none mourning for him. m The laſt Words of this Verie 
:netige fome to think that Fehoiakin: was buried near to Jerruſ42/em ; 
but the Scfipture, which mentione:h h's being carried into Baby: 
{vn, faith nothing of his beirg brought back; nor 15 that very 
p:obable which tome ſay, that the King of Buhylos thought to 
hve carried him to Babylor, bur upon ſecond Thoughts alt: red 
lis Purpoſes, and cauſed him to be ſ{zin at Feraſalem, and his 
ody to be ignominiouſly drazged our of the Gates. The Scrip- 
tne faith exprefly, he was carried to Babylon, 2 Kings 24- IF. 
and if he died there, yet this Text remained crue, the {cope of 
which ſemeth to be. to ſhew the Vanity of this Prince in his 
great and fhately Buildings, which he was not Jike long to enjoy 
nor to be buried nigh to them, nor inany degree of Honour 
p: oportiovate to the iplendour of them. 

29 Go up to Lebanon z, and cry, and lift up thy 
voice in Baſhan o, and cry from the paſlagesp: for 
all thy lovers are deſtroycd 9. 

» The Hebrew Verb being ten.inine,. lets us know, that Fery- 
{:/em was the Place to which this Speech is direfted ; to the In- 
hebitanis of which the Prophet here calieth to go up to Lebanor, 
cand ro Brſkan, Both Lebanon and Baſhan were Hills or Places 
that looked towards Aſſyriz, from whence the Jews looxed for 
help, and had it ſometimes, as 2 Kings 16. 7. he calls to them 
zroniculy to go up to the mounta11ous parts of them; where 
ſtanding and crying they might be ſoonelt and beſt hear. 
p What we tranſlate from the paſſages, others Tranſlate from 
the borders, or from the ſides; others from Abarim, which 1s 
the Name of a Mountain, as well as Lebanon and Bafhan ; Vide 
| Numb. 27.12. and 33. 47. Which ſeemech ro me the belt Inter- 
Ii pretation ; the Meaning ts, Go and cry for help trom all Places, 
| but it will be in vain; for qthe Egyptians and Aſſyrians to 
| whom thou wert wont heretofore to fly, chuſing rather to truſt 
[| t© them chan in me, are themſelves in the Power or Danger 0] 
(\ the Chaldaars, who ſhall alio deſtroy them. 

f Heb 21 | ſpeak to thee in thy | proſperity 7, br thou 
| Prof FCC T wil not hear {: * this hath been thy manner 


M I AE. 


return thither they ſhall not return g. 


they be fond of it as their Native Country, and may promiſe 
chemſelves ſuch Favours from the King of Babylon, yer there ſhall 
no ſuch thing be their portion. 

28 [: this man Coniah a deſpiſed broken idol h ? 
's be a veſſel wherein z5 no pleaſure/ ? wherefore are 
they caſt out, he and his ſeed & ? and are cait into a 


land which they know not ? 

h The prophet either ſpeaketh this in the perſon of God, or 
of the People,who are here brought in,affirming that this Prince 
«ho was the Idol of the People, was now through the juſt 
Judgment of God become like a broken Idol. 7 Or like a Vet- 
lel which Men care not for, being either fo crack'd, or ſo tainted 
:13t they can make no ule of it, and admiring at this Cataſtro- 
pae, and enquiring the Cauſe why it fo came to pals. k He, and 
is {eed. It is ſaid Yer. 3o, that no Man of his Seed ſhould pro- 
Fudah: Nor is there anv mention made of any of his Children 
where his carrying into Captivity 1s recorded, 2 Kzngs 24. 12. 
which makes tome think, that by hzs Seed here is meant the 
Poſterity of his Grandfather Foftah ; bur others think, that he had 
Children, either before he went into Captivity, or born while he 
was in Babylon: And Matth. 1. 12. ut 15 faid, that after they 
were brought 10Bbyl9n, Feconiah begat Salathiel. 

29 Ocarth, earth, earth, hear the word of the 
LORD /. 

[By Earth he either means the land of Judzh, to which he 
calls thrice, to fignifie the Dzatnels of this People,and unwilling - 
nels to hear,and believe what God ſpake by him ; or elle he calls 
to the whole Earth; as he calls Heaven and Ezrthto witnels, 
Deuteronomy 30. 9. and 32,1. Iſaiah i. 2, and 34.1. Fer. 6. 19, 


| : ; <<. from thy youth, that thou obeyelt not. my voice 7, 

_— - r I by my Prophets, ſpake to thee while all things went wel] 
] ['s with thee,lo as thou haſt nor ſinned ignorantly or without warn- 
: ig. {1 have not iurprized thee with my Judgments,but thou re- 
_- tatedſt to hearken, and obey my Admonittons and Precepts. 


r E:om the time that I brought thee our of the Land of Egyer, 
thou hat been thus a rebellious People. 

22 The wind ſhall cat upall thy paſtures, and 
thy lovers ſhall go into captivity w, ſurely then ſhalt 
thou he aſhamed, and confounded tor all thy wick- 
cdneſs x. 

u Eicher a vain Hope and Preſumption ſhall deſtroy thy Ru- 

'zr5 and Governors, who flatter thee with Promiles of Proſpe- 

| rity , or a [Judgment ſhall leize them that ſhall be like a violent 
vi Wind.which preſent]y lcattereth the Clouds and the Smoak ; or 
| they ſhall be blaſted by my Judgments, as PJantsare blaſted and 
eaten up by Winds. w And thoſe that have been thy Friends 
and Allies, Sjriz and Eeypr, in whom thou haſt truſted, ſhall 
themlelves be made Captive. x Surely when thou leeſt this,thou 
| wilt be convinced and aſhamed of thy wicked Courſes. 


*11-b, 9 23 O + inhabitant of Lebanon y that makeſt thy 


P4020). reſt in the cedars 2, how gracious fhalt thou __ 


when pangs come upon thee, the pain as of a woman 

1n travall b. 
4 Hiern ilem, Which 1s called an Inhabitant of Lz barnon,either 
: f ; bHecaule their Houles were butit of Wood cut down out of the For-| 
} 1e!t of Lebanon, or becaule they lived in as great Plenty and | 
f Delight as if they lived in Lebazon ; or, becauie they thought | 
BY the Motuntain of Lebanon was a certain Refuge to them. &4 They | 
ly are laid to make their Neſt in the Cedars, either becauſe their 
i Houles were bailt of the Cedars of Lebanon 3 or becauſe of the le- | 
] : curity they piomiled themſelves trom that Forreſt and Mountain | 


fo tull of aid famous for Crdars. a What Favour wilt thou| 
rnd b, when ay Jaigments ſhall come upon thee as ſuddenly and 
35 fartly as the pains of a Woman 1n Travail come upon her: 

. Simil;tude often waie ute of by this Prophet, to expreſs the 
Suldennets, Lnavoruableneis,and Greatnels of Judgments, Chap. 
4.31, 2nd 6.24. and 13.21, and 39.6. and 49. 24. and 5o. 43 
and to in other Scriptures, Pſal. 48. 6. Micah 4. 9. 1Theſſ. 5. 3. 


| 24 A: lThve ſaith che LORD, though Contah the 
if fon of Jchoiakim Kingof Judah © wererthe ligner up- 
h | 0:1 My right hand &, yet would I - pluck thee thence. 
h c By Conzab he meaneth Feborakin, 2 Kings 24 8. whole name 


was J-comiah, 1 Chron. 3. 16. ( for all Jsfab's Sons had two 
Names, and fo had his Grandchild Feconzzb ) here in contempt 
called Coniah. 4d He faith, that though this Conzab were as dear 
} to him as his Signet, which every Man keepeth ſafe, yet this 
} | fi: rot ſecure him itrom civine Vengance. 

; | 2s And I will give thee into the hand of them 
| that Gek thy life e, of chem whoſe face thou feareſt, 
| even iuto the hand of Nebuchadrez:ar king of Baby- 
| | /01 83d into the band of the Chaldeans. 

'Y e Tir is, into the power of the Challeans and Babylonians, 
! | v hom they were airaid of; and juſtly, tor they thirſted after | 
{heir Blood and Run. 


I 26 And1Iwill caft thee out and thy mother that | 
' barc thee, into another country where ye were not | 
1 born, and there ye ſhall die f. | 
Wh. f 7-c0n;2h's Mother was Nchufhtan, the Dayghter of E!nzhan ' 
1L5 

'I; 


| ſtood the Civil Magiſtrates, tor Verſe 9, 


3o Thus faith the LORD, Write ye this man 
childleſs 72, a man zhar ſhall not proſper in his days : 
for no man of his ſeed ſhall proſper, litting upon the 


throne of David, and ruling any more in Judah. 

mThe Word tranflated Childleſs is but thrice read in Holy 
Writ, and by various Inter; rters tranſlated barren, not encre.;- 
ſing, empy, full of ſorrow, wanting Chil4ren, Sec. It is thought 
to be interpreted, by the next Words, No Man of his feed ſhall 
proſper ſitting upon the Throne of D avid, and ruling any more 
in Jud4h ; for there are ſeven of his Sons named 1 Chron. 3. 17. 
So that he is ſaid to be Childleſs either becauſe all his Children 
died before their Father : or (which is moſt probable ) becauſe 
he had no Child that fate upon theTkrone,or ever had any Rulers 
place in Ju4ah, but only ſome that lived ina mean condition in 
Captivity amongſt whom Salatkiel is named, Matth. 3. 12. as 
a Progenitor of Chriſt. 


CHAP. XXIIE 


Wo againſt wicked P aflors, the ſcattered Flock ſhall be gathey« 
ed, Chriſt ſhall rule and ſave them, 1,——8. Againſt falſe 
Prophets, 9, —— 32. and mockers of the true, 55, -=— 40. 


1 * VV? be unto the paſtors that deſtroy and * c:: 


ſcatter the ſheep of my paſture, faith 
the LORD #2. 

4 There is the like Io againſt the Paſtors denounced, Exek. 
34.2. Interpreters judge, that by the Paſtors are to be under- 
te denounceth the 
Judgments of God againſt their Ecclefiaſtical Officers : The Civi] 
Magiſtrates at this time in Jud4h were great Tyrants ; and where- 
as God had committed his People (whom he calls the Sheep of kis 
Paſture ) to them in truſt, that they ſhould protect and govern 
them, and that chey might live 1:nder them golly and peaceable 
Lives in all Proſperity, they had ated quite contrary to their 
Truſt, and worried the People like Wolyes, inflead of teeding 
them like Shepherds. God rook notice of their Oppreſſions, and 
by the Propher denounceth this 1/ againſt them, to verifie that 
of Solomon, Eccleſ. 5.8. 


2 Therefore thus ſaith the LORD God of Iſrael 
againlt the paſtors that feed my people b, Ye have 
ſcattered my flock and driver them away. and have 
not vilited them c ; Behold, I will viſit upon you 


the evil of your doings, ſaith LORD 4. 

b God calleth them þjs People, his Flock, the Sheep of bis 
Paſture, with reſpect to the ancient Covenant which God had 
made with their Fathers, Abraham, Tſaac, and Jacob. They are 
ſaid to have fed this People, becauſe it was their Dutr, and the 
Buſineſs of their Office, fo to have done, though they had tailed 
in it. c And had done the quite contrary, - ſcattering them by 
their Acts of Violence and Oppreſſion, and driving them from their 
places to ſeek ſome more lafe and quiet places of abode > or by 
cheir,prodigious Wickedneſſes, having been the canſe of their be- 
ing carried into Captivity, rot viſiting them, that is, taking any 
due care of their Goo! and Weltare, ſecing what they wanted, 
and ſupplying them, as good Rulers ought to have done. d For 
which Neglet God threarneth ts v5//t upon them the Evil of therr 
Doings. The Hebrew Word figrifierh to vific with a Viſttation 
of Careand Love, and alfo with a Viſitation of Juſtice and Seve- 
rity, and is often fo uied in Holy Writ, 

3 And I will gather the remaant of my flock our 
of all countries iwhither | have driven them ec, and 


Will 


(per fitting upon the Throne of David, and ruling an; more in - 


RR 
& *. 


Chap. XXIIL 


of Hieruſalem, 2 Kirgs 24. 8. Verſe 12. the fulfilling of this 
Prophecy is recorded ; and it 1s faid, that Jehoiachim the King 
of Judah went out to the King of Babylon, he and his Mcther, 
and his ſervants, 8c. fo Verſe 15+ together with eight thouſand 
Pritoners of the meaner tort, beſides Princes and Nobles. 


27 But to the land whereunto they Þ dehire to + 14,4, 


4 life up their 
g That is, They ſhall never come again ro Feruſalem, though mind« 


14Ps 


2TI, 


( 


toy. : x 
: ©: '* 
I 4 
= D 
; Jc 
iS. 
A 
6 \ 
5% 
* 
MES 
FP 
+ 
+ 
: by” 
% FYE 
- 
TH | 
V 3 , 
pn T 
*: | 
= 


Va 


2. - 
TO 


: Chap. RX 


- * Clap 3. 


IF, 
Ezek. 34- 
: 1 I, Co 


S Tſa.11-T- 


KR £E 


will bring them agaia to their folds f, and they ſhall 
be fruitful, and eacreaſe 7. 


2 God purs a difference betwixc thote that were miſled by the 


examples of others, and rhe Rulers who let them ſuch an 11; exam- 


ple. { ,t 
ſhould recurn no more,bu: for the people, he here promilech them 


a return, at leaſt a remnant of them,when he ſhould have puniſhed 
the Gous as he ſpeakerh, Zach. 10. 3. f By their Folds, he 
meaneth Jeruſalem, and other Cities the Towns of Judah which 
they had formerly inhabited. g Wiere they ſhould once more be 
in proſperity. He ſpeaks here concerning the return of this people 
out of the Caprivity of Bzbylon; tho' there be ome that think 
this Text is primarily to be underſtood, Of the gathering together 
in one the p-ople of God ſcattered abroad, in and by Chriſt according 
to the Prophecy of Cataphas, John I1. 52, ; 

4 And I will ſet up * ſhepherds over them which 
ſhall feed them h, and they ſhall fear no more, nor be 
diſmayed 5, neither ſhall chey be lacking faith the 
LORD Kk. 

þ Some think this Prophecy was fulfilled in Nehemiah and Zoro- 
bab:1, who were pious and good Governours, and conſulted in 
cheir Government the good of the people committed to their trult, 
Neh. 2.10. and 5.14. Others rather underſtand it of Chriſtian 
Princes and Governours under the Golpel. 7 Under whom they 
ſhall live peaceably and ſecurely. k And none of them ſhall pe- 
r1:ih. The two laſt paſſages of this Verle incline Interpreters to 
tHink,that this promiſe doth not ſo much reter to their coming out 
of Babylon, as to their ſpiritual deliverance by Chriit; for after 
their return out of B:by/0n they were not lecure long, but feared 
Sanb4llut and Tobiah, the Grecians and Romans and other Enemies; 
beſides that the laſt words exattly agree with Fobn 10. 28, when 
Chriſt ſaith his Sheep ſhould nor periſh, and it appears Ver. 6. that 
the Prophet is ſpeaking of a time, when not Fudah only, but 
Iirzel alſo ſhould be ſaved, and the nexc Verie doth manifeſtly re- 
fer unto'Chritt. 


& 49.11. that I will raiſe unto David,-a righteous branch /, 


Chap. 
I4,1 Fo 


Dan. 9. 24. 
Joh. 1-45» 


* Deut.33. 


<.v.; 

* Chap. 
33. 16, 
T Heb. 
F-hovurh- 


55* a king ſhall reign, and proſper, and ſhall execute ju- 


ſtice and judgment 1a the earth m. 

1 Though fome Interpreters think that Zorobabel may be here 
intended, who was defcended trom David, and ruled the peoplc 
when they came our of Babyl;r, yet, even the Fewiſh Doctors 
themſcelves, as well as the £hri/tian Interpreters, underſtand this 
as a Prophecy, and promiſe of the Meſſiah; the Prophecies and 
Promiſes of whom are uiually uſhered in with this Particle Behold, 
to ſtir up Peoples attention, and who alſo was the Son of David, 
and who is ca)led the branch, Iſa. 4.2, and 53. 2+ Zech.3.8. I/e. 
I1.1. Wherethe reaſon is alto given, he being there called 4 rod 
out of the ſtem of Jeſſe, a branch out of his root. Beſides that, the 
application to him ot the Name K7ng,ordinarily applied to Chriſt, 
never given to Zorobab.!, and the term Righteous makes it evi- 
dent, Chap. 33.15. He iscalled a branch of Rzghteouſaeſs, which is 
the ſame wich the Rzghteous Branch, here mentioned : He is called 
the Righteous Branch, not only becauſe himſelf was Righteozs, 


cauſe he miketh his people Righteous, I/a.5 3.11. 8& 60.21. m Jelus' 
Chriſt anſwering the Type of Mclchizedech the Ring of Salem, and | 
who is the King of Kings, 1 Tim. 6. 15. ſhallreign ſpiritually and | 
ſhall not be like Fecontuh of whom God ſaid he ſhould not proſper, | 
bu: he ſhall proiper and ſhall execute Juſtice and Fudgment, pro- | 
tedting the innocent, and defending his People throughout the 
World, judging the Prince of the World, and by his Spirir go- 
verving his People, $9 as the Prophet relieveth the People of 
God under their Oppreſiions by theie latter Kings of Fudah, with | 
the promile of the Kingdom of Chriſt ; an uſual argument made | 
ute of by the Prophet to comfort the people of God in thoſe days | 
againſt any Evils come, cr coming upon them. | 


6 In his days Judah ſhall he * ſaved, and Iſrael 


ſhall dwell ſafely  : and * this zs his name whereby he 
ſhall be called che THE LORD OUR RIGHTE- 


OUSNESS mw. | 
u During the Reign and Kingdom of the Meſſias ( whoſe King-! 


He threacned Fehoiahim and F-hoiakin or Feconi41, that they 


5 Behold, * the days come, faith the LORD, | 


' 


therefore called the Righteous One, Aﬀs 3.14. & 13. 35. but be-! 


; whole courſe of their aCtions was naught, and particularly the! 


M14 H 


7 Therefore belold the days come, ſaith the 
LORD, that they ſhall no more ſay, The LORD li- 
veth, which brought up the children of Iſcacl cut of 
Egypt. 

8 But the LORD liveth, which hrouzht up, and 
which led the feed of the houſe of Iſr1-i out of th: 
north-country, and from all countreys whether | 
had driven them, and they ſhall divell in their ow: 
land x. 

x See the Notes on Chap. 16. 14, 15. Where much the {4Te 
words are to be found. The Prophet ageravate:th-the greats wt 
that Salvation which ſhould be brought by Chriit co 311 the trus 
Ifratl of God, by comparing it with the deliverance of the ancienr 
{[razl of God out of the Land of Egyp: ; which he faith ir ſhould 
fo far tranſcend and excel, that the Deliverance out of Ezyp: ſhould 
not be named, when this Salvation ſhould appear, which ſhou!4 
be after their return from Babylon, and when God ſhould gather 
them from all Countries, which was fulfiled, when by the preaci:- 
ing of the Goſpel, notthe Gentiles only were converted, but ma- 
ny of the Jews alſo which were ſcattered abroad, J:m-s r. 1. 
r P21. 1. 1. Poſſibly part of this promiſe or prophecy remiins vet 
to be accompliſh-d ; tor the Jews are not yet come to dwell in 55+: 
own Land ; unleis that term be to be expounded of Chriſt ans,v1o 
during the times of perſecution in the prunitive Church, were 
icattered adroad, but upon the ceaſing of choſe perſecutions. 
when Chriſtian Emperours came to have the Governmegt, re- 
turned co their own Countries, where they enjoyed a more 2i'] 
and quiet Habitation. 

9 Y Mine heart within me is broken, becauſe of 
che prophets all my bones thake y - I am like a drun- 
Ken man, and hkea man whom wine hath overcome ; 
becauſe of the LORD z, aud becauſe of the words of 
his holineſs 4. 

y The Prophet having denounced the Wrath of God again the 
wicked Rulers of Jud2h ander the Notion of Paſtcrs, cometh here 
codilcharge the lixe truſt with reference to thole orders of perſons 
a:nongſt the Jews, whole Otfice it was. or at leaſt, who took upon 
caem co reveal the Mind and Will of Godto the people, and who 
were upon that account called Prophets ; for thele he declares 2 
great paſhon and trouble ; eicher tor their fake i proſpect of that 
Vengeance of God which he ſaw was like to be poured out upon 
them, or for the peoples ſake who had been deceived bv their un- 
taichful Revelations of the Divine Will,and led into wick-dnets by 
their vile Examples. For this he faith his heart was broken, his 
bones ſhaked. And he was even aftoniſhed and ftupified, and I:ke 
a drunxen Man he knew not what he did; he was fo ftriken at the 
| apprehenſtons of the Wrath ot che Lord ready to be reveaied a- 
| gainſt them. 4a And to confiier what words the Holy God had 
' put into his Mouth, to ipeak againſt them. 


10 For * the land 1s fult of Adulterers 6, for be-* Chap. 
caule of || ſwearing the land monurneth c *: the HA-ge 
{pleaſant places of the wilderneſs are dried up 4, ; 5, 


Chap. XX 


and their || courle is evil, and their force :5 not ;;--, 


right e. 


b Under that term Adurerers, all Species of uncleanneſs are 10.12 4. 
Or, vio" 


- I 


' 


comprehended. c By talie-{wearing.or by idle and protane lwear- || 
ing, the Land is brought to ruine, The word fignities allo a Curte ! 
or curſing, Many good Interpreters judge, thar the more genniac 
lence and trueTranflation of this Text were, for becauſe of the.C:ir(-, 
( that is, the Curſe of God ) the Land is brought to that Milery 
which is coming upon ic. 4 The Paſtures of the Wilderneſs, or cf 
the Plain; tor lo the word is rendred, I{4.63.13. Lam. 4.15. The 
Wrath of God was extended to ali places whether more or lel's i1- 
habited. e The Prophets did not only err in fingle Acts, but th 


Power, Rule and Governmere was not right. It any fay what 
were the Prophets concerned in the Peoples wickednefs 2 Any. 
They were profane as wei; as the people, as we ſhall find, Ver.1 :, 
but beſides this, the people were thus vile through their conn'i- 
vance ; they did not warn the people of their fins, but ſoothed 
them up 1n their Wicked courijes, and fo were the caute of the 


thdkenus dom jsan everlaſting Kingdom) the people of God typified by | peoples wickednets, who had not been to vile but tor them. 


hen! proot ofthe Godhead of Chriſt. He is here called Jebovah,and 


Fudah and Ifrael, the true Iſrael of God, tnoſe that are Jews in-| 
deed,ſhall be ſaved with a ſpiritual Salvation; for he was therefore | 
called Feſzs, becauſe he was to [ave bis people from their fins, Mar. 
I. 2I. and God w1ll be a ſpecial proteion to them. w The 
Name wherewith this branch ſhall be called, ſhall be, The Lord 0% 
Righteouſneſs. Some have applied this to the people, as if the 
people ſhould be lo called, or ſhould ſay, The Lord hath dealc gra- 
Clouſly with us; or, in the Lord we have Righteouſneſs. But this 
will appear but the new invention of ſome who either cannot, or 
will not underſtand, how Chriſt ſhould be his peoples Righteoul- 
neſs. Thoſe who conſider not, that it is the branch which was be- 
fore ſpoken of, and that the word people is not to be found going 
before, there is indeed a mention of Judah and Ijraet, but turely 
they were' not to be other Mens Righteouſneſs, and it that had 
been the Prophet's meaning, he would not have ſaid the Lord Our, 
but the Lord Tyeir Righteouſneſs, Nor is this the only place where 
Chriſt is called Our Righteouſneſs, 1 Cor.1-30. This place is an emi- 


What is proper to God alone, viz. to juſtifie is here applied to 
Chriſt, The Prophet faith, Chriſt, ſhall be fo called ; that is, by 
his people, who ſhould believe in him and truſt in him alone for 


1 1 For both * prophet 7 and prieſt are . profane 2, * Chzp. +, 


C4F- 


a - 
I NID, be 


yea, * in my houſe have I found their wickednets /, 15: x *, 


ſaith the LORD. 


f Thoſe whole Work was to reveal the Mind of God tothe ; Fg 
people,and who pretended to that Office. z And chote that were __ 
employed 1n oftering Sacrifices, and other works which bejonged ;- 


. 
” i. 


to the Prieſtly Office, according to the Law. The whole Eccle- * * 


ftaſtical Ocder, all their Miniilry were profanz, not meerly hypo- . 
crita], but leud, immoral and debauched. 
grown to that impudence that they made the Temple, which was 
the Lord's Houle, a Den of Thieves ; a place where they commitce 
ted wickedneſs. Thus it was 1n the time of Ely, 1 Sm. 2. 2 
and more generally atterwards, 2 Chror, 35. 14+ See Cha; >. 1 
I1. and Ver. 14. of this Chaprer. There is ao more certain {1191 

a ruining Nation, than when God {uffererh in ic a led and cor 
rupt Miniſtry. 


2» 
O 
0 


2 
r 


12 Wherefore * their way ſhall beuato them, as « pg,: ,. 


ſlippery ways 1a the darkneis - they ſh4ll be driven <, 


that Righteouſneſs, wherein they ſhould ac the laſt day ſtand be-|theM, cver the year of their vilitation, faith the ©* 


fore God, Thus he was to bring in Everlaſting Rightecuſneſs, Dan. 
9.24. He w9 new no fun, was made fin { that is, a Sacrifice tor 
= ) for us, that we might bs made the Righteouſne!s of God in 
"1M. : 


Vol. II, 


LORD p. 


i Astheir ordinary courſe is wicked and fnful, fo they ſhall find 


that it will in the event be to them pernicious, perillous and full of 
danger.as 2 ſi'paery path iSto them that walk ina dai K nigur, That 


oY ” 1 
iy I MH: 


þ Yea, they were © 


IJ 23 7% 


©/* 


4 ' 
I } p Ta 
0 So Sian 


on aud fall therein z, for I will briag evil upon Cp. 23 


4 - * 
hou 4 - ” 6 %» - * - : Mad Cr * . b 
17, zerazso= _ p TIRE LL ETDOERIRATCS. OMA 
6 Ph | oe SN A oa ee : . k Io 
+ ICT a RS COACEE EL WTR On Po 
— Hz aw 5 "0 = 2 fs > Ye V LACS 
kts 4 ak ther Wi J —_ 


A "+ 9. - $8 
» —_ pe 
Bent es wooto nes 


= ry 


_— 


Cha 


"CF: 


"Or, f- | an horrible thing /- * they commir adultery r, and 


» 


Dout.3 


3 
LE, 


—_ 


Fo! of > 


» Jongen O the Ten Trives, whole chict Ciry was Samariz The word 


*_. neſ$m, they are all of themunto me * as Sodom, and 


a 


” 


Y%- 


4 


V7 FI 
? | K; {8 
thail ce driven on nll they fail therein. Courſes of Sin may look 
froth, bur they always prove fiippery. p Forl am reſolved to 
path tor wked courtes 5 and to vitit chem with my Judg- 
mciif, 


1 J 


'3 Andy have ſeen |! + folly in the prophets ol 
S2miria 9; they prophelicd in Baal, and cauſed my 
poople lirael to err r. 

q here was a time, when I ſaw folly in che Prophers that be- 


tranſlated '0!ly fignifies un. 2504 3, of an avſurd thing. Our Sav- 
cur compareih wicked NM:mifters to un{amowy Salt, Maith. 5. 13. 
Salt that 15 rurned foolth as the G+e:6 word figmfies.) The M1- 
niftcrs of Goa's word are, or ought ro be, the Salt or the Eaith 
ro {eafon People with tound Doctrine, and by the good Example 
of an Holy Lite. If they be corrupt in Doctrine, or Manners,they 
become 45200479, and rhe very worſt of Men. Sach God lays 
tne Pi ophets of the Ten Tries were, before they were carried 
away Captive, 7 They propheſied, pretending they had their 
Inttiruzons and Kevela:tons from Baa!, and fo cauſed the Ten 
Tribes to crc, which atrer rhe Diviſion of the Kingdom 1n Jerobs- 
2n's time were calied Trae! 1n contra-diſtin&on to re rwo Tribes, 
a: half cleaving ro the Houle of Datid which were Called Judah 
after rhe Name of their principal Tribe, 


1.4 I have ſeen alſo in the prophets of Jeruſalem 


walk in lyes »: they ſtrengthen alſo the hands of 
evil docrs, that none doth return from his wicked 


the inhabitants thercof as Gomorrha-.v, | : 
{The word ſignifies fi!thineſs, ſtench, or an abominable thing, 
Things every whit az bad, in ſome kind worſe, than what I ſaw in 
the Frophers of the Ten Tribes. t They commit not Spiritual Adul- 
tery only, bur Carnal Adultery 3 they are Whoremongers. « And 
they make it their butineſs ro inſtill talſhoods inro people,and en- 
title me to them, and this 1s their Trade ; nor a tingle ac, bur 
their ordinary practice. w This 1s the great aggravation of the tin 
of thoſe that occupy the place of Spiritual Guides, that they er- 
courage profane Men,cither by their talle Docrine,cxtenuaring 11n, 
and putring a fair gloſs upon them z or ar leaſt by thelr meal) 
Mouths fearing cr forbearing to tell Sinners of their wicked Cour- 
tes 3 Or by their wicked Examples, the moſt of people thinking 
they may do what their Teachers do,by which means Styners 1n- 
ſtead of being brought to a ſenſe of their fins and a repentance for 
them, are kardned 1n their wicked Courſes. Xx By this means al! 
of them. either of their Prophets and Prieſts, or all of the People, 
{ the firit ſeemeth chiefly here intended ) are become ro me as 
contemPrible and abominable as the people of Soom and Gomorrha. 
Ti;ough they were the Sons Aaron,and of the Prietily Order, yer 
livig lewd lives, and ating quite contrary to the end of their 
Holy Calling, God declares himſelf ro va.ue them no more than as 
the vile{t of Men.ſuch were the Sedomites. Or by thoſe words Gcd 
rireatens ther he world deſtroy them with as notorious a deſtru- 
£t10:1, 4s he deſtroyed SoJom ard Gomorrha, Thus the Compariſon 
35 uſed, 7[2, 1. $, and coaſcnant to this are the words 1n the next 
Verie, 


FEREMIAHE 


gation to deceive himſelf. d They preterd to Vificrs.i} at Ced hath 
revealed his Mind to them, 1n the ſame vay as he uteth to reveal 
imſelf ro true Prophets ; but there 1s no fuch thing ; it is bur a 
fiction of their own 3 cur Lord, Mat. 7. 15. gives us the ſame way 
to know falſe Prophets, Ver. 20. By their ſyaits you ſhall bnow theme 
| er their exrernal Miſſion be whar, and which way jt will, if what 
they teach agree nor with the revealed Will of God. they are falſe 
Prophers. Manv of theſe. Pricfts were regularly erough deſcended, 
and the Prophers regvlarly enough educared and conftirured, yer 
by this ſhewed themſelves falſe Prophets, that whar they publiſtcd 
was not from God, nor agreed with his revealed Will; therefore 
che people were under no Religious Obligation ro hearken to 
chem. 
17 They ſay ſtill unto them that deſpiſe me, The 


tion of his own heart f, No evil ſhall come upon 
you. 

e Lewd and corrup: Miniſters are an hatred and abomination 
in the houſe of the Lo:d,ro a'l terious good People, and are there- 
fore obitged to make rnemielves a Party of thefe thatare like 
rhemſec!ve; whote favour tiey cannot have without indulging them 
!n ther Lults, Hence they prophefie Peace to the vileſt and wort 
of Men, who have no patience of being daily alarm'd with hear- 
ing of the Wrath of God due, and like ro come upon them for 
their fins. f Hence they promiſe good to thoſe thar walk accord- 


ng to the Counſels of their own heart 3 that is, firifully ; for Gez. 


5. 5. Every imagination of the thoughts of mans heart, is only evil, and 
car continually : Hence a finful courſe 1s very often expreſſed in 
Scripture, under this Norion of walking afrer the Imaginations of 
our own heart; as Deut 29.19, but it1s moſt in prophecy ; 7ide 
Chap. 3.17. and 7. 24.and 5,14. and 13. 10.and 16, 12. and 18. 
12, Hence a Religious walking is called a Self-denying. None have a 
worſe guide of their actions 1n theirlapſed ſtare, before Regencra- 
tion, than their own hearts, 


13 For * who hath ſtood in the || counſel! of the *Job x 5.8. 
LORD, and hath perceived and heard his word ? || Or,ſt61 #7. 


who hath marked his word, and heard it o. 

g Who beſides us hath known the counſel of the Lord ? Arro- 
gating to themſelves a fellowſhip, and acquaintance with the Mind 
and Will of God. Or, (which I ſhould rather judge the ſence ) 
Which of thoſe Prophets, that propheſie ſuch terrible things againſt 
th1s Ciry 15a Privy-Counſcllor ro God ? The words ſeem rather to 
ve the words of the falſe Prophets, either arrogating to themſelves 
a peculiar acquainrance with God and fellowthip with him, from 
whence chey knew his Mind, or mocking at Jeremy, and other 
true Prophets as arrogating to themſelves ſuch a knowledge of 
the Mind and Counſels of God, as indeed they had nor, then (as 
ſome think) the words of Jeremiah denying them to have ftood 
in God's Counſels, or to have known his Mind and Will. This in 
all Ages hath been the praice of corrupr Prophets and Miniſters 
to charge thoſe Servants of God, who have faithfully publiſhed 
the Will of God againſt Sinners, as making too bold with God's 
—_ Counſels, rhough they publich noching but God's revealed 
Will. 


15 Thcrefore thus ſaith the LORD ot hoſts con- 


*< }ap. 2 cerning, the prophets y, Bchold, I will feed them *. 


t.&5.15.with wormwood z, and make them drink the water 
; Oi, H 


it 


 titt, 


CL 1 ay. 
=. 


3. 


i 4. 


th9ne 
s ” 


of 2all : for from the prophets of Jeruſalem is || pro- 
fanen<ſ gone forth into all the land 4. 


y Under che re; m P:; ophers,he comprehendeth all the Ecclefia- 
tical Guides of Fernſalem ar this rime, whether Prie/?s of Pro-; 
phets, = He threatens to feed them with wormwood. Some think” 
the word 1s better tranſlated Poyſon; by 1ormwood, or poyſon, and 
the water 0! Ga#, he threatens great and faral Judgments that he 
wovld bring upon them. «a And he giveth the reaſon why God 
would dcal fo {everely with that Order of Men, who ſeemed by 
rheir Office and Imployment to have the neareſt Relation ro him- 
{cif becauſe rhey were the Fountain of wickedne(s, thoſe from 
whom wicked:,efs flowed out over the whole Land. Thus was et- 
ther by their conniving at wicked Mens fins,for fear of diſpleafing 


them 3 or by reaching them Licentuous Dottrine, that gave a "my 
erty to the Fleſh 3or by their vile Lives ſerting the people pat- 
rcrn of fin. And indeed rhus it 1s generally, when Miniſters, and 
ſuch 2s are ro teach others, are wicked, either in their Doarine 
or Practice,they are a fountain of Wickedneſs ; Wickedneſs flow- 
©:h from them ro the whole Ciry, Town, Pariſh where they are 1m- 
ployed : And on the contrary it is obſerved,that where God gives 
a place a good Miniſtry, Goodneſs in one degree or other tlow- 
eth from them to the whole Ciry, Town or Pariſh. Though all 
are not Converted, yer the generality are civilized and reſtrained 
from thoſe groſs and brurtiſh Immoralities which other places 
avund with, T1] Miniſters muſt look for the ſevereſt indignation 
af God. Orhers ſing and ſhall die in their fins ; bur they teach 
others to break God's Commandments, and have the ſins of ma- 
ny to anſwer for, who periſh either by their Flatteries, or looſe 
120Erine, or looſer Lives and Examples. 

16 Thus ſaith the LORD of hoſts, Hearken not 
unto the words of the prophets, that prophefie unto 
you b, they make yon vain c, * they ſpeak a vition of 
their own heart, ad not out of the mouth of the 
LORD &. : 

b Peop'e are under no Religious Obligacton to hear any thing 
bur the revealed Wy of God, and are not to obey rhoſe rhat cali 
tc them for what thac dorh nor call to them. r Nor toliiten ro 
them, the Scope of whoſe teaching 1s bur ro make them vain, fin- | 
fu:ly vain 3 or ro deceive their Sculs, No Man is under an OUult- 


fall grievouſly upon the head of the wicked 7. 

h A ſevere Judgment of Gcd, thar ſhould reſemble a Whirl- 
wind, for the ſudden and utrer deſtruction that it ſhall bring. 
See Chap.30.23, 24. The ſame word 1s elſewhere tranſlated a 
ſtorm, Pſal 83. 15. Amos 1. 14. Fonah 1. 4. It is called a whirl- 
wind of the Lord ; either to denore the greatneſs of ir, as P[al. 36. 
6. ortolet us know that the Jud7ment came forth from God and 
was of his ſending. 3 And whatever theſe flattering Teachers ſaid, 
ir ſhould fa!l upon wicked Men, fo as they fhould have no peace, 
but evil ſhould moſt certainly come upon them. 


20 The * Anger of the LORD ſhall not return, * Chap, 
until he have executed, and *till he have performed 30. 24. 


the thoughts of his heart &: in the latter days ye 
ſhall conſider it perfeRly /. | 

þ Ir1s therefore called a continuing whirlwind, Chap. 30. 23. 
The Prophet ſpeaks of the jadgment as ofa Meſſenger, which com- 
ing from God, ſhould not return till it had done 1ts Errand, and 
executed what it came for, even whatever God had reſolved ir 
ſhould ette&. Men are ready to flatter themſclves, that they fhall 
either our-ride or out-live the ſiorms of divine Vengeance 3 no, 


(faith the Propher) the Anzer of the Lord ſhall bring to paſs what - 


ſoever rhe juſt will of God1s. 1! And though you will not now 
believe it, bur flatter your ſelves with idle, vain hopes, yet hereafter 
when 1t ſhall be roo lace (whic!1 is the uſual folly of Sinners) then 
you ſhall conſider it perfefily. 


21 *] have not ſent theſe Prophets, yet they ran : + Chap. 


I have not ſpoken unto them, yet they prophe- 14. 14 & 
27. 15. & 


lied. 


22 But if they had ſtood in my counſel, and had ?® 7: 


cauſed my people to hear my words mz, then they 
ſhould have turned them from their evil way, and 


from the evil of their dotags z. 

1m Theſe falſe Prophers did nor propheſie without the Appro- 
bation of the Rvlers of che Erclefiaftical State amongſt rhe Jews 
in their corrupr <ftare, but fo they might, and yer not ſent be of 
God, The Judgmenr of a Divine Miſlion tor the Revelation of 
God's mind unto People, muſt nor be mecr!y from their exrernal 
miftion (which yer they ougiir to liave 1a a Church that 1s 1n order) 
25ur from the fairhful diſcharge of their Mamiftcy. Thoſe whom 


God ſends, and ivho arc ialy acyuainred with bs Countels, w 1] 


CaUie 


C hap. XA 


LORD hath ſaid, * Ye ſhall have peace e ; and they * Clap. 6. 
ſay unto every one that walketh after the || magina- 14- &8.11, 


10. Tech, 


IO. 2 
|, Or, ft ba 
bornnt(s. 


19 Behold, * a whirlwind of the LORD is gone * Chap. 
forth in fury h, even a grievous whirlwind, it ſhall 75: 3+: 


Chap. RRUP 


*P14!,139 


"KC, 


Li 


SERE 


cauſe his people to hear, nor their own conceits and inventions, but 
the Word of the Lord. God ſendeth none upon any other Er- 
rand, bur to reveal his Will, and tell his Mind unro people. » Then, 
ſairh the Propher, they ſhould nave turned them from ther evil way, 
thar is, they would have made this their Scope, Buſineſs and 
End, to rurn Sinners from their ſinful ways, and though poſſibly 


M 1 4A H Chan. 2% 


29 [not my word likea firez, ſth the LORD? 
and like an hammer 2%ar breaketh the rock 1a pie- 
ces a? 

; Full of Life and Efficacy, Jon 5 53. Hb. a. 12, Vhe a Firs 
that warmeth, and healeth, and melterh, and confumnerch the 


their ſahour would not have had ſogood an effe& upon all, yer they 
would have had an efte&t upon ſome ro turn them from their evil 
dogs. 


23 Am1a God at hand, faich the LORD, and 


1 God afar off o. | ; 

” pars 3s generally rhe foundation of ill Life. Men fay, 
God ſees them nor, the Almighty doth nor regard them. By a 
God at hand many underſtand Heaven : Do you chink that my 
Eyes are limited Ike yours, that T cannot lee their Practices though 
fzr off from me ? thar is, from the place of my glorious Reft- 
dence? Orhers inrerprer the Paxricle with reſpect to time 3; Am T1 
4 God of Yeſterday, hke the 1do!s? Am nor I the Ancient of 
Days? The Erernal God, whole Majefty and Omniſctence you 
ought ro have caken Norice of ? 


24 Can any * hide himſelf in ſecret places that I 
ſhall not ſee him, ſaith the LORD? * do not I fill 


Amo: 9. heaven and earth, faith the LORD p ? 


2; 3' 


What do theſe Atheiftical Prieſts, and Prophets, and People 


* 1 Kings think? Do they think thatT, who am a God of purer eyes than 


3 27, 


to behold Iniquiry, ſee and rake Norice of what DoRrine they 


Dcofs, a And like an Hammer that breaketh tie Fiinrs, ſo my 
Word breaketh hard Hearts, Orhers think, that the Word is 
here comparcd to Fire, and to an Hammer, becaut: of rhe cer- 
rain eff that ic ſhould have upon thoſe t1,at would nor ovey 17, 
to burn them up like Fire, and break them in pieces like an Hag: 
mer, and fo think this Text well expounded by the Apoltle, 2 7or, 
2.16. Cerrain ir 1s, that God's word is like Fire in both Sences ; 
no words of Men have an effe& and ctficacy like 5od's Words ; 
nothing but that rakerh hold upon the Conſcience, and hath ſuch 
an effe& upon the hearts of Men, No Words ſhall ſo certainly 
and infallibly be juſtified and made good. 


ſaith the LORD, that fteal my words, every one 
from his neighbour .-. 

.*. There are various Opinions, as to what the Prophet mean- 
eth here by thoſe Prophers that ſole the Lord's Words from cheis 
Neighbours ; ſome, by their Neighbours, underſtanding che true 
Prophets, from whom they flole rhoſe forms of Speech, Th:s (:i:/ 
the Lord, or, the word of the Lord; or, The Burden of the L:+4. 
Or, ſome of the marrer which they prophetied, though rhev mixed 


{jr with their own Lyes and Deceirs. Others by Neighbours un- 


Piai.139.7 preach, and what Lives they live ? Tf they did, ſurely they would derftanding their Aſſociates, think that thete Falſe Prophers con- 


not dare to do as they do. 


Do they think that 1 do nor ſee, or | ſpired rogerher whar to ſay ro deceive the People, and to tioe 


- s 1 | »| cnet ed 
rake notice of them? Can any hide themſelves our of my fight ?! whar they taid one from another. Or, rhe generality of the Peo- 


7 fill Reaven and Earth, not only with my Influence, bur with 
my Efſence; with the Immenſity of my Being; which, as 1tcan- 
not be circumſcribed by any, ſo 1t 15 ſhut out of no place. 


25 T have heard what the prophets ſaid, that pro- 
phelie lyes in my name, ſaying, I have dreawed, 1 
have dreamed 9. | | 

q Viſions and Dreams, were two uſual ways by which under 
the Law God made himſelf known of old ro his Prophets, ma- 
king them ſomerimes, being awake, to hear a Voice; ſomerimes 
attended with, and proceeding upon, ſome viſible Appearance, 
ſomerimes nor; at other rimes caufing them, being aſleep, to 
dream ; and in their ſleep revealing co them, as ina dream, whar 
his Will was they ſhould declare and publiſh to his People. Theſe 
falſe Prophets ſpeaking what came into their own Heads, and 
ſuired their own Luſts, or the Luſt of a Debauched People to 
whom they ſpake, would prerend, that God had revealed to them 
whart they fo publiſhed, in a Dream; nor in the mean time conf1- 
dering God took notice of theſe their little Arts by which they 
cheated the People, Bur ſaith God, I am a God that know afar oft 
as well as at hand, and I have heard whar they ſay, propheſying Lies 
as from me, and pretending that I had in Dreams revealed them 
to them, 

26 How lang ſhall th:s be in the heart of the pro- 
phets that prophelie lies ? yea, they are prophets of 


the deceits of their own hears r. 

7 Will theſe Prophets never have done ! Have they not deceiv- 
ed People long enough with their Lies, and the Deceit of their 
own hearts; and thar not unwarily, and by involuntary Miſtake, 
but of ſer purpoſe, ir being in their Heart, their Purpoſe and De- 
ſign to do it, Some join it to the following Verſe, and make 
the Sence this; Do theſe Prophers, that publiſh Lies, and the De- 
ceits of their Hearts, for my revealed Will, think ro cheat my 
Pcople always, and to cauſe my People to forger my Name ? as 
it followeth in the next Verſe, 


ple from whom they are faid to ſteal rhe Lord's Word, becauſe 
they withlield ic from them injuriouſly, Or bv their Arts and 
Flarteries brought Men our of love «ich, or ſear of che Words 
of the Lord, which had by the true Prophers becn delivered to 
chem. 

31 Behold, I 2m againft the prophets, ſich the 
L ORD, that || uſe their tongues 6, aud fay, H- 
ſaith c. 

b Some think the H:b»:w Words were more properly tranſlated 
[month their tongues : Vide The Engiih Annotstions. & Bur the next 
\Words ſeem to aſſure us, thar the Crime for which God here by 
the Propher retle&erh upon che Falſe Prophets, was not ſo much 
cheir tlatrering People, and ſpeaking ro them ſuch imoorh things as 
pleaſed them, as their ent:tling of God to their Lyes, ſaying, He, 
that 15, The Lord ſaith, So it may be, though the Word mighr 
he tranſlated ſmoth, yer ir15 here Herter tranſlared V/e. 

32 Behold, 1 2»: againft them that propheſie falſe 
dreams 4, ſaith the LORD, and do cell them, and 
cauſe my people to err by their Iyes, and by their 


chem: Therefore they ſhall not prof this people art 
all, faith che LORD #/. 

d Tharis, Falſe ch1nzs under the notion of rhings which I have 
revealed tinto them 1n their ſleep. & By Lightnels here, ſume 
underſtand Volubility, and Smoorhneſis of Tongue and Speech : 
Others, Laſcivioutneſs : Ochers, Lenicy and Inconſtancy : The laft 
ſeemcth moſt probably che Scnce. f I ſent them nor ( faith 
God ) therefore they {hal} not profic. None can expect God's 
Bleſſing upon cheir Miniſtry thac are not called and fent of God 
into the Mimitry, | 


33 4 And when this people, or the prophet, or 
a prieſt ſhall ask thee, ſaying, What z the burden of 
the LORD g? thou ſhalt then ſay unto them, What 


27 Which think to cauſe my people to forget my 
name / by their dreaws which they tell every man 


burden ? I will even forſake you, ſaith the LORD h. 
 & The true Prophets to let rhe People know how little pleating 
1 was to them to be the Meſſengers of God's Threatnings, ro de- 


"I udg. 3, to his netghbour z, * as their fathers have forgotten | nounce his Judgments, uſually rhus began their Prophecies of 


7. an 


33: 34» 


+ Heb. 


is, 


* my name for Baal . 


ſ Thar 1s, ro forget me, and thoſe things by which I have made 
my ſelf known unto them, my Word, and my Works. t By 
their Dreams which they tell abroad every one to his Neighbour, 
as 1f they were Revelations which I had in their ſleep made unto 
them 3 bur they are indeed Lies, and nothing but the Deceirs of 
their own Hearts, « So that in effe& they are Baal's Pri-(ts ; 
for as Baal's Prophets, bur publiſhing rheir prerended Revelations 
from Baal, ſeduced the People from the Service and Obedience 
of the true God; ſo theſe, by telling their pretended Dreams, 
ſeduced Men from their Ozedience to God in whar he revealed 
tothem by thetrue Prophets : they agreed in the End, the Sedu- 
civg of the People from God, though they differed in the Mean, 
the one pretending Revelations from Baal, the other from the 
true God by their Dreams. - 


28 The prophet that Þ hath a dream w, let him 
Ila dream; and he that hath my word, let him 
ſpeak my word faithfully x : what is the chaffro the 
wheat, ſaith the LORD y ? 


_ W Nor a Divine Dream; a Revelation which I have made to him | 
n his ſleep, ( asappearerh by the following Oppoſition, betwixt 
a Dream, and the Word of the Lord, ) butif any Man hath dreamed ' 
a1 ordinary Dream, let him tell it as a Dream 3 let him nor en- | 
title God roit, x And ler him t5 whom I have revealed my 
Wil, publiſhiand declare Thar in all Truth and Fairhfulneſs, nor 
adding his own Fanctes or Dreams to 1t, 2 Cor. 2.17. 1Pet. 2.2. 
not corrupting my Word. y There is as much difference berween 
my Will and thetr Dreams, as there 1s berwixr rhe Cn4ff and the 
Wheat; the one is of value to make Food for the Soul, as 
Wear doth for the B91y; the other is of no value: The one | 
(vir. my Ward) 1s of a ſolid, abiding Subſtance ; ths orfiex 15 | 
11917 and airy, and eatily fcatrered hy eyery W1nd, 


thar nature, calling them, The burden of the Lori, as may be 
ſeen 1/4. 13.1. and r5.1. and 22. 1, Hab. 1.1. Zech. 9.1. Mat. 
1... The profane People, and falſe Prophets, and corrupt Prieſts, 
nor loving to hear their doom, would ordinarily mock at ihe 
rue Prophets; and in derifion ask chem, what. was t5e burden 
of the Lord ? what 1] News they had for them next ? þ God 
bids the Propher rell them, Thar God would forſake chem, e1- 
ther as ro the Spirit of Prophecy, they ſhould have no more Pro- 
phers z or ( which 1s more probable Jas to his ſpecial Providence, 
by which he had watched over, proreRed, and hirherto defended 
chem ; a Burden heavy enough, Ho/. 9. 12. 

3+ And as for the prophet, and rhe prieſt, and 
the people thar ſhall ſay, The burden of the LORD «, 
I will even Þ puniſh that man and his hoaſe &. 


z That 1s, Thar ſhall in derifion fay thus, mocking at my | 


Threarnings and Judgments. & I will not only punith inm, buc 
his whole Family. 


35 Thus ſhall ye ſay every one to his neighbour, 


{and every one to his Brother, What hach the LORD 


anſwered ? and, What hath the LORD ſpoken ? 

{ I will have you ſpeak more reverertly of mc and my Word 
ro my Prophers. £ ; 

36 And the burden of the LORD ſhalt ye men- 
tion 10 more mz: for every mans wora fhliall be bus 
burden z : for ye have perverted che words oi the 
living God o, of the LORD of hoit our God p. 

m Not in Scorn and Derifion, as not believing there were any 
ſach Juigments as they rhrearen; nor b418y, as it | ſent you na 
other Meſſages bur Burdens. % Ti;elc falle aud iISCYVEFcAL Speech- 
es whitch acc in every man's moutit, ſhall be dard<nfom to rliem, 


 4ripg ſuck, as hall bring dewn divine Yengeance upon them, 


>. 6 


\ $8 > 
<%LL 


7 
$ . 


4,5 


290, 
J\, 
a3 


c- 


[0 = FI, 
"' 

! z Fu a 
7106 *131 


{> 

fanZ2y,oe 

0 XY) 
ey 


A. 
4 


+ He 


* - 4 
- : # 


. £ 
2 Beavis 


14 


{. 


30 Therefore behold, * I az againſt the Prophets, * Dent. i%, 


La. 
- -@_ 


* lightneſs e, yet I ſent them not, nor commanded * Zeph- 3, 


. = 


Chap. XXIV. 


+ {Jeb. 
for ba{nefs, 


FEKRE 


o Becauſe you have Cerided, or miſinterpreted the words of 
God, the living God. þ The fin of which is the more aggravated 
acainft rou, becauſe he is the living, mighty God, and becaulc 
he hath been our God, | 

3- Thns fſhalr thon ſay to the prophet 4, What 
hath the LORD anſwered thee ? aud what hath the 
| ORD ſpoken ? 

7 To my true Prophet. You ſhall ſpeak to them reverent!y, 

ad as becometh you. 


M I 4 H 


e God having cauſed the Prophet to have ſuch a viſible ob*e&t 
appear to him, ask'd him, what he ſaw ? as Fer. 1. 11. 

4 Again the word of the LORD came uato me, 
ſaying, 

5. Thus faich the LORD, the God of Iſrael g,Like  .,, 
theſe good figs; ſo willl acknowledge || them that Captivity, 
are carricd captive out of Judah h, whom l have ſeat ; 
our of this place into the land of the Chaldeans for 


38 But. ſith ye ſay, The burden of the LORD ; 
therefore thus ſaith the LORD, Becauſe you ſay the 
word, the burdea of the LORD », and I have ſeat 
unto you, ſaying, Ye ſhall nor ſay, The burden ot 
the LORD -, =1 

r Becauſe you go On fn your ſcoffing, ant dericing my Word 
2nd my Prophets. { And that when I have exprefly forbidden 
you thoſe profane Speeches, or that deriding torm of Speech; add- 
ing turther contemptro your former protanenels. 

29 Therefore bchold, I, even I, will utterly for- 
get you 7, and I will foriake you z, and the city that 
| gave you and your fathers w, 4d caſt y 
my preſence x. | 

: L will torger you as tomy AﬀeQion, and that is more than if 
a!l your friends torgat you. There is a great Emphaſis 1n the dou. 
bling ot the Pronoun, 1, even T. u I will forlake you asto the pre- 
ſence of my {pccial gracious Providence. w And do not flatter 
your ſelves that I will not do it, becaule of your Fathers, or be- 
cauſe | gave this City to your Farhers, tor that very Ciry 1 Will 
withdraw my ſpecial Providence trom,and that Land,which here- 
tofore was called, The land which the Lord thy God careth for, upsn 
which the «y:s of the Lord are always from the beginning c< the year, 
even to the end of the year, Deut. 11.12. x And I will caſt botk 
City and People out of my gracious preſence : So as I will no 
longer do them goed as 1 have done. 

40 And 1 will bring an everlaſting Reproach up- 
on you y, and a perpetual ſhame which ſhall not be 
forgottreu 2. | 

y And you ſhall be a reproach, and that not for a few days but 
forever. 4 And a perpetual ſhame, which neither you nor thoſe 
that ſee or hear of it ſhall forget. See ſuch Expreſſions, Chap. 
20, Il. 


CHAP. XXIV. 


?nder the T;pe of good and bad Figs, 1, —— 3- He foreſheweth the 


ther good 7. 

g Who have power todo what I pleaſe, and who yet am in Co- 
venant With Iſrael, and have a kindneſs tor the ſeed of my Servant 
Jzcob. h Look as thou approveſt of one of the Baskets of Figs, 
lo 1 do approve of thole that were carried away Captive with Jc- 
coniah, repenting of their finfal Courſes ; and accepting of that 
puniſhment of their iniqui:y. #ZThough Nebuchaneq3 ar car ried 
them away, it was by Commiſſion trom me ; fo that though te 
carried, yer I ſent then, For their good, which words rray either 
refer to the laſt mentioned words, intimaring that God in ſending 
tnem away aimed at either their ſpiritual Good, to bring them to 
Repentance, and an acknowledgment of their ſins : or their tem- 


2:4 Our of | poral good, they being only quietly led away, without tne Miſe- 


ries of Famine, Fire and Sword, beſides carrying away ; which 
thole who remained, and were afterwards carried away with Zede- 
kith, experienced : Or elle they may be referred to the former 
words, T will acknowledge them for their god, that is, I will fhew 
chem favour, being of the number of thoſe who were not leaders 
to fin, but led away by the i1] Example of others, and who be- 
ing carried away grew ſenfible of their tins by which they provo- 
xed me, and ſo accepted of the puniſhment of their Iniqui- 
{IN 
6 For ] will ſet mine eyes upon them for good #, 
and I will bring them again to this land/, and *1* Chap. 
w1ll build them, and not pull :Hem: down ; and I will 33- 7- & 


3 

plant them, and nor pluck tem up 2. wr FP 

k The Soul looking out at the Eye, diſcovereth its Inclinations, 
and Aﬀection, wnether of Love, or Wrath : Hence we read of 
God's ſetting his Eyes upon people for evil, Amos g. 4+. as here of 
his ſetting his Eyes upoa them tor good, Or elle it may fignifie 
Gods ſerting himſelt rodo them good, as a Man when he ſets upon 
doing a thing, ſets his Eyes upon 1t in order thereunto. 1 Some 
of them probably returned before the end of the Captivity, ſome 
at the end of the 70 Years. m The meaning of theſe metaphorical 
expreſions 1s,I will protper them,and provide tor them. We read 
2 Kings 25. 27. that Evil-merolach, King of Babylon, in the 
37th. Year of the Captivity of Fehoiakin, lifted his Head up our 
of Prifon, ſpake kindly to him, 8c. but this Prophecy was allo 


Return of [ome from Captivity, 4, —— 7. and the Ruine of Zede- 
k:ah and the reſt, 8, LO. 


HE Sum of what God by his Prophet revealeth in this Chap- 
{1 ter is, that he would deal more graciouſly with thole carried 
into Captivity, With Jeconiab the Son of J:hojakim; (of which 
read -2 Kings 24. T2. 2 Chron. 36.20.) than with thoſe that 
ſhould afterward be carried into Captivity with Zedekiah. This 
the Prophet hath revealed to him in a Viſton of two Baskets of 
Figs, as followerh, 


1 Thc LORD ſhewed me, and behold, two bas- 


fulfilled in Daniel, Exra, Nehemiah, Mordecai, and others, who 
[are thought to be carried away with Feconiah ; or the Prophecy 
' may be underſtood of the Poſterity of thoſe who were at this time 
| Carried away. 


7 And Iwill give them an heart * to know me, * Peut.zo, 


that I mz the LORD -, and they ſhall be * my peo- © Chaps 
ple, and I will be their God o : for they ſhall return Mo 116 * 


unto me with their whole heart p. | 19. & 36, 
n Uader the term know me, is here (as in many other Texts ) 26, 27. 


Chap. XXIV. 


kets of figs were ſet before the temple of the LORD a, comprehended Faith, Love, Obedience, all thoſe motions of the * Chap. 
after that Nebuchadrezzar King of Babylon had car- | Soul, which rationally ſhould follow a right comprehending of 30. 22. & 


FI. by ay MJ) ty by 


«* 1 Wy 
=» - 


SJaway cant -oniah the ſon of Tehoiakim the God in Mens knowledge. oI will be a God in Covenant with them, 31. 33. & 
ried away Captive Jeco ] As I will fulfil what I have promiſed themto they ſhall do what — * 


is their duty to me. p For or when, or after that they ſhall return 

.t5 me, not feignedly, but with their hearr, not partially, but with 

\thetr whole heart. This 1s promiſed as an effect of ipecial grace, 

not of the meer good inclination of their natural Wills, tor fotke 

, words I will give, in the beg! 1ning of the Verte, muſt be under- 

ſtood ; otherwiſe God gives ſuch an heart no more to ore.Man 

| than another, | 

| 8 © And as the evil * figs, which cannot be * Chap. 

eaten, they are ſo ev1l : (furely thas ſaith the LORD) 25+ 37- 

So will I give Zedekiah the King of Judah, and his 

Princes, and the reſidue of Jeruſalem that remain 

in this -land, and * them that dwell in the land of * Chap. 

Egyptg. 43. & 44; 
q Whither it is probable many. of the Fews had fled, upon the 

coming or noiſe of the coming of the King of Babylon, as they had 

done betore, Ifa. 3o.'z. and 31. 1. 


9 And I will deliver them + to* he removed into + 14cþ, 


King of Judah, and the Princes of Judah, with the 
carpenters and ſmirhs from Jeruſalem, and had 
brought them to Babylon 6. 

a Sore think theie two Baskxers of Figs vere ſuch as the people 
had brought for their tirit fruits, becaule they are mentioned as let 
beiore the Temple, but this might be to more than a Viſion, or 
an appcaraice of two Baskets, b The time of this Vi{ion was ſome- 
tine betwixt the carrying away of Feceniah, ( of which we read, 
2 Kingis24 12,09. and 2 Chren, 36. 10.) and the carrying away 
of Z+4:h44) his Uncle, which was 11 years after, In 2 Kzzes 24. 
:5, there is a particular mention of the King of Babylon's carry- 
ing a 2y the Crafiſmen and the Smiths, 4 thouſand. 

2 One hasket had very good figs, ever like the 
figs that ac firſt ripec: aid the other basket had 
very naughty figs, which could not beeaten, -| they 
were ſo bad 4. 

c Gol alterwards explaineth tothe Prophet,and he to the King's 
Poule, the fignificancy of this Viſion. The Figs firſt ripe ate 
uſually belt : By theſe good Figs, as will appear by the followin 
Verles are intended, Feconiah or Jehozakin, with the ten thouſand 
mentioned, 2 Kings 24.14. and the 7000 mentioned, Ver. 16, 
which went with him into Captivity. d By the other Figs which 
were very bad, not to be eaten, are ſignified Zedekiah and the re- 
{due of the people carried with him into Captivity. Some may 
object, thar Feconizh, and the people then carried away, were 
wicked enough, why eiſe were they carried away, and being lo, 
how are they compared to good Figs> Anſw. Though they were 
3d. yet they might be comparatively goud ; this people for the 
z3 Years they continued intheir own Land, after that their Bre- 
thren were carried away, not only continuing in their former 
courſes, but (t{]] growing worſe and worſe. 2. They ſeem not to 
be called good or bad Figs with reſpect to their Manners or Qua- 
tity, but in reſpect to what God intended to do to them, viz. to ule 
them as bad Figs are uſed, rot fir to be eaten. 


3 Then ſaid the LORD unto me, What ſceſt thou 


Jeremiah e? and1I faid, Figs- the good figs, veryſp 


Slall the kingdoms of the earth, for thr hurt, to be a fur 1emo- 


reproach, and a proverb, a taunt, and a curſe in all vivg 
places whither I ſhall drive them 7, Venus: 

þ The Lord by his Prophet exprefſerh thoſe tremendous Judg- vane 
ments which he had deſigned to bring upon this wicked Prince wt” _ 
and People in the words of 2f{s/-; the Man of God, as well becauſs | *'8* 
the Jews hada great Reverence ( pretendedly ar leaſt ) for Moſes, 2 Ch | 
how little foever chey had for Feremiah; as to let them ſee, thar OP 
what the Lord here threatned, aud ſuddenly would bring to pats, 
was bur in a juſt accompliſhment of what he before had threatned 
in his Law, by which they ought to have taken warning. The 
ſum is, he would make them 2 coinmen Scof, and By-word, that 
their Milery ſhould be a common Proverb, and when Men would 
curſe one another, they ſhould wiſh them like Z24chiuh and the 
Fews. 

10 AndIwill ſend the ſword, the famine, and the 
eſtilence among{!t then, till they be confimed from 
off the land, that i gave uno tem and to their fa- 


* 4 


Chap. 1; 


good; and the evil, very evil, that cannot be catea | 
they are 10 evil. 


thers /. 
[ySiany 


Co ed 24 
* R.-. 


Chap. XXV. 


* Chap. 


11.7,8,z10. ned Cl. | 
; 10, 


S123, 


F7. bs 


Chap. 18. 
It. & 35. 
15- Jonah 


- 


3+ Vo 


# Many of them ſhall not live to be carried into Captivity, but 
ſhall die miſerably in their own Land, if not by the Enemies 
Sword, yer. by the Famine and the P2ſtilence, which ewo things 
ordinarily attend long Sieges : By one of theſe three ſore Judg- 
ments of Gol they ſhall be conſume our of rhe Land, and ſhall 
not hold it by the Title of God's gitc of 1t to their Fathers. No gifts 
of God, except thofe of {vecial Grace,are perperunties : but either 
given, Duan diubene ſe geſſ-rint, ſo long as Men behave themſelves 
well in re uſe of them; or, Durant? bene placito, during Goi's 
good Will and Pleajure, 


CHAP. 


Their Dif b>di-nce to the Prophets regrovel, I, ——= 7. The Seventy 
— 11. and dſter that the D:- 


T:ars of Captivity furenld, 5, it th 
(frution of Babylon, 12, 14. By 4 Cup of u ine is fort= 
Tye howling of 


XXV. 


| — 


} g . = - 4 an; 4 
fhewn the Deftrution of all Nations, Ly, — 33- 


the Shepherds, 34, — 3 


I HE word that came to Jeremiah the Prophet 
concerning all the people of Judah, 1n the 
fourth year of Jchoiakim the fon of Joſiah king of 
Judah , that was the firſt year of Nebuchadrezzar 
king of Babylon 6. | 
1 The fourth Year of Fehc:1him was. ſeven Years and odd 
Months before Jeconiah or Feboiakin his Son was carried into 
Captivity, as appears from 2 K!ngs 23. 36. and Chap. 24. 8, FF. 
and 18 Years before the taking of the City, and the more genera! 
Captivity ; which argueth that this Prophecy 15 mitplaced, and 
ſet after the former, whereas in order of time 1t was 16 or 17 
Years before it. bThis is ſaid to be the firſt Year of Nebuchadnez- 
+4r (called by Prelomy, Nabopollaſſar.) It is ſaid Dan. 1. 1. that 
this Nebuchadrez3ar came up in the third Year of Fehozakim ; to 
which is anſwered, that the firſt Year of Nebuchadnexgar's Reign 
muſt be underſtood of his abſolute Reign, which concurred partly 
with the third, partly wich-the fourth Year of Jeho72him. Tney 
ja he was before a ſharer in the Kingly Government with his Fa- 
ther, bur this was tae firſt Year that he had the Name of King 
intizely given unto him. 
2 The which Jeremiah the prophet ſpake to all 


the pcople of Judah, and to all the inhabirants of | bridegroom and the voice of the bride 7, the found co 55 


Tro7 to 
- 
© 


Jera{alem, ſaying, c. 

c 1tat 1s, the word concerned them all, and he ſpake ir to fo} 
many of them, as he met with in any publick aſſembly at Hzeru- | 
{:1zm, or ellewhere, 

3 From the thirteenth year of Joftah the ſon of | 
Amon king of Judah, even unto this day, that zs the 
three and twentieth year, 4 the word of the LORD 
hath come unto me, and | have ſpoken unto you, ri- 
ſing early and ſpeaking * but ye have not heark- 


4 We read Chap. 1. 2. that Feremiah began to propheſie in the ; 


FEREMIAH 


LORD, chat ye mizht provoke me to 
che works of your hands = to your own hurt -. 


yon, but you did not obey, and hearken. 
't on purpole to incenie me againft you, whoam of my 
co wrath, and mult be provcked to execute vindicariy 
Mens own wicked Works. 
hure me, bur are to theic hurt who do them. 


8 Þ Therefore thus ſaith the LORD of ho{s,! 
cauſe yuu have not heard my words p. 
p That 1s, becaitte you have not hearkne! to, an ob2; 24 


_ T 
CT JLUUTC Q 
<b 


) 
# 3* 
. - 


Prophets. 


the king of Babylon my ſervant 5, and will .brigs 


them againſt this land, and againft the init witants 
thereof 7, and again(t all theſe nations round atour / 


FEY 


aſtoniſhment, and an hiſſing, and a perpetual defo 
ION 5, 

q | will put 1* 11to the heart of all r5oſe Kinzs, whote Ter: itn. 
ries lye Northward of Judea, and patticular!y a 
Nev!-chadrez3ar the King of Babylon, who in this Work tha!l 6e 
my Srvant ; though you will not be my Servants ia obeying mv 
Commands, yer he ſhall ſerve me, Chap. 27. 6, and 43-10. »r 1 
will bring chemand their Armies up againtt this people,and 1 will 
put you out of hopes from your Alliances with other Nations, tor 
ne ſhajl firſt bring them under his Command. Thus we reac, 
2 Kings 24. 7. that the King of Babylon had invaded the Ez prizn 
Domintons, and taken from the River of Egppr, unto the River 
| Kupnrates, all that pertained to the King of E2y9r. | And I will 

make the Inhabitants of Jeru{alem, not only a defolation, but a 
| [corn, and reproach, and wonderment to the World. Iide Chap. 
| I'9. np 
10 Moreover, I will take from them the 


P— 


. 
VOICC 


? 


of the milltones, and the 1:2 hr of the caudle 


(J 
w 


tf w1}l take away all your mirth and jollicy, whether uſed a: ,, 


Weddings, or at any of your merry Meertt9s, 


mourn:ng and Jamentation. 


m Yeheard me, and other the Lord's Prophe: s rh: ſpe-king to 
”» A3 1t you had done 
{o]t flow 
f i.1 > My 


0 Which do not ocherwits afect or 


words; for 1t 15 manifelt they had heard Fer mit and the other 


_— oha tleacoo of 
y*Y D £4 A \ 
tian) LIIC YC a OT 


Mo ” Fg OR Py Fu Th <HA9 <* 541 
u Nav, I will not onjr deprive you . 


9 Behold, I wlll ſend and take * all the families of 
the north ſaich the LORD, aad Nehuchadrez:ar 4. 1; 


7 Yet ye have not. hearkened unto me », ſaich the 


by 1 
ai Yer VIE! 


and will utterly deſtroy them, and * make them 2.2 


= 


Chap. 4.2 


4 
3» 


Res j : vey He 
of mirTh, and the voice of gladacis, the voice of the wit! 


LP ww 
% - 
# 


ft fo 
LOX E 


N, 


F _ 


- [0 . - 
, i 4 ”, .'P , _ 
T Wt: leave YOU &- x 


> 


- 


Fo 
o 


nothing to rejoyce 133 your very Wedding rimes ſhail be riines of p- , _; 


of your mirth, bat of thoſe things chat are necefiiry tor von, 25 x © 


neceffary as Bread and Light, the Milftone ſhall nor ove, vou 
ſhail not have the i13ht fo much as of a Candle. See the 1: Fr 
preſſions, R-v. 18. 22. 1. God here tiireatens, not 0:17 to take 
away their Superflutcies, and what he had hitherto lea: them tor 
their pleaſure and delight, but alſo whac they had for their necvt- 
ſary ſaſtenance, and to capacirate them to do their ordina:y 


16. thirteenth Year of Jefiah. Joſiah reigned thirty one Years, | WOTKs. 


I7.2 Kings 22.1. 
by Ring 


ſo thar raking in the thirteenth Year, Ferem7ab | 
propheſied nineteen Years during the Life of J-{12h, to which add- 


* 1ng the four of Johoiakim's Reign it maketh twenty three. e Thele 
twenty three Years, laith che Propher, 1 have been a Preacher | 


to you, and I have not been negligent in my Work, but like Men, 
that get up early in the Morniag to diſpatch their bulineſs, fo 
have I been 1n the diſcharge of my Prophetical Office. | 
4. And the LORD hath ſent unto you all his ſer- 
vants the prophets, * riſing early and ſending them, 


: but ye have not hearkued, nor inchned your ear to 


hear f. 

f Nor am I the only Prophet whom the Lord hath ſent you, and 
whom you have neglected and deſpiſed : God hath ſent you many 
more, and you have deſpiſed as many as he hath ſent, though the 
Lord hath made it his Buſinefs to fend you one after another from 
time to time. This contempt of the Lord's Meſlengers is made. 
the proximate cauſe of God's Wiath coming upon this people 'ti!l 


there was no remedy, 2 Chron. 36. 16. | 


5 They ſaid, * Turn ye again now every one,from 
his evil way, and from the evil of your doings, and 
dwell in the land that the LORD hath given unto 
you and to your fathers, for ever and ever g. 

g The lubſtance both of their, and my Sermons hath been to 
perlwade you to leave off thoſe ſinful courſes wherein you have 
lived, and which you might have amended by vertue of that com- 
mon Grace which I did not deny you. We have not differed in our 


it, you ſhould enjoy this good Land which the Lord promiſed, | 
and gave to you and your Fathers, and you have now pollefſed 
trom Ape to Age. 


6 And go not after other gods h to ſerve them ; 
and to worſhip them z, and provoke me not to anzer 
with the works of your hands &, andI will do you 
no hurt /. 

h Idols, which indeed are no Gnds, but fo called by Ido!aters. 
z To pay any divine homage unto them. k And provoke me not 
to anger by Idois which are the Work of Mens hands, ( no un- 
created Beings.) Or more generally any Works which are con- | 
trary to the Law of God. {It you do this I will by my Provi- 
—_ do you no harm ; you ſhall yet enjoy your own Land an | 
projper, 


, 
; 


11 And this whole land ſhall be a deflation, az 
an aſtoniſhment, and theſe nations ſhall ferve- the 
king of Bahylon ſeventy years w. 

w [his Propnecy 15a tamous Prophecy in regard cf its fixing 
the particular ſpace of time in which the J:ws above in the Cap- 
tivity of Babylon, vit. leveinty Years. When ther determined we 
are plainly enough told, Exr 1.1. in the firſt Year of C3725 the 
King of Perfi1; but when they commenced 1s more d:!pured ; for 
we read of three carr p1085 into that Captivity, the one in the thir 4 
and fourth year of Jeb ichim, when it ſhou!d. ſeem that N-buck.c4. 
r-773ar, only carried away toine few pertons to be bred in 1:15 
Court, amongſt whom were Daniel and the Three? Chil.fren, Dy, 
I. 1, 2,07, Alecond leven Years after 1n Jeconiah's time, 2 X:»7s 
24.15, 16, The Jaſt an4 moſt general eleven Years atter, in £12 
T 129, Year of Z J+hizb: Ir icemerh moſt probable that the [-v27n:y 
Tears mult be reckoned from the (econd; for Jeremiih, Cap. 2.9: 
I,2, 3- writing to thote then 113 Captivity, telis chem, Thar w hen 
ſeventy Tears ſhould be a-complijhed, God would 6-1nz rem bart, 
This is confirmed by Exz:kz721, Chap. 40. r. where the forrieen: 5 
Tear aftes the taking of the City is expietly 1ai4 co be the twen'y 
fiſth Year of their Captivity, 

12 And it ſhall come to paſs * when the ſeventy 
years are accompliſhed x, 7. T will + puniſh. the 7 
king of Babylon, and that nation, faith the L,GRT. , 
for their iniquity, and the Jand of the Chaideans, and : 
* will make 1t perpetual deſolations y. _ 


% 


_ 


Dor: ef bw2 x Seven Years accounted from the time that the Jews were car-” 
b wy rine, to the practice of which you havealſo been encour aged | ried away in the time of Jeconi2h or Febojahin, 2 Kirgs 24. 15.16. 0 
oth by them and me, with an aſſurance from God that if you did | y This was fulfilled by Darizs the King of Perſ.1, Dar. 4. 31 


$i. 


theſe 70 Nebuchadnezzar reigned 36. 2 Kings 25. 27, Evi! Nevo * 


/ 


dach 32. and Belfhazyar at leaſt two, Dan. 8. 1, 


and ordinarily when he doth puniſh chem, it is with 4 more teverc, 
and grievous deſtruction than that by which he punttheth ns peo- 
ple, Ifa. 27. 7. thus he threatens to make the Chil.fars a prrpe- 
tual delulation, : 
13 AndI will bring vpon that-Iind all my word: 
that I have pronounced azitiilt 17,0707 all rat bs WWE 


ren 18 this book, which jeremat: hath prophtetied 2 
&:11{t 2!] rhe nations. 
I ay ' , oy # Wi, OI En nt T 3-3 

> T:el.3nd of the Bo tlortuns any Ch 


» . 


a 


a » + 
+ 


* T45 
8 Whowis 


& \ 


_ « »> 


Tho' God, 23-2 
whole all the Creation 1s, and who 15 the Lord of all the Hoſts of GC 7.1 
his Creatures, do:hoften make ule of Heathens. and other wicke: dos f9 
Men ro puniſh his own people, vet he will at laſt puniſh they too, & 54+ 33 


Bb * @, 
, 4 « 
« £35: FC. 
"op i508 _ * 
Y 


RALF ethies 


any A TI +> , "ol 
of Vol 4 Ie AW TTL. 


por 


» - 
4 - hs 
— 2% 


Bo mgm wregite FR 
nes =y P; Y wy 
Rn _ __ 


ON PHOnD— ng ere 
wt 


Rn” -- 


we 


a a 47. 
a 


cha 


- 
a 


"Wo —_ = 
4 - 


" 
W 
| 
—y 
S777} 
Jl x 
Ji\lk 
ll! 
1 
nl 
1 
| 
ll 
j 
lh 
| | 
| jþ 
Mo. 
All 
30) 
} 
i 
} "Hh 
"Ty; f} 
+ 
i! 
18 
V 
0 
|] 
i 
L; 4 
44% 
'F 
jt .1 
att 


%Y / J PA , V G7 
I, A AL 0 J 


14 For 1nany nations and great kings ſhall * jerve| 


theini oy es of them allo: and ] w: 71 cos Mary 
them according £0 Ther money _ according To The 


res of their own hands . | 

2 EI eALeNS the t deſt:uction of therr Mor 

fax Jaccordi g cothe P; opnecy of this Prop.3e?, and declareth 

12t their deft [tructiou 25 of themſelves. God «lid but recompeinve 

tiQto then the1r Own Bee. is, 22d the Wor ks of cheir hy 20S, WI: ch 

!3 nt tO w reſtrained To tietr exCells S 111 EXSCUTING g D vine Ven- 

bY NCe nd the Crue; ty th-v ule to the Tjra-lires, DN MOI ge 
tatly interpreted of ali their wicked Courtes. 

5 | Aj For thus ſaith the LORD God of Iſrael nn- 
ro me, Take thewine-cupot this i fary at my haad 6, 
and cauſe all he nations, to whom 1 ſend thee, to 
GK IT Co : 

6 God's Jadgments are often 11 Scripture exp rettec unGer tie 

19tion of a Cup of ſtrong ant uv xicating D: ink, and cheir Sat 
tering is fet outrun der the not! «2 oj #6 king | nk a Cup as Plat: 
75 8. 16h 21.20, Tjt. 51. 17. Pfal. an] 60. 3+ Lim. 4. 
Ex $ 23. 32, 34+ God ma le 7. "wu 2 ti £0 lee the appea; ance of 
{uc $ Cup in a Viſion. 6 And bid In ro carry 1tto the Nat!orns 
7 4 hom he lent him, to gn? Het to them that 145 Wrath ſhould 
drink or it. 


Arc chy by t the Pexy- 


. 
of Tg” 


be pow e4 our 0n them, and they ſhouid 
And * they ſhall drink and.be moved, and 


{11 
be mad, becauſe of the ſword that 1 will toad among , 
them &. 
d Whether they wi. 'T or no, they ſhall drink it, and be 1. 
A171 bed, 1:04 te mad, aid rag? like Men overcome with Vine, |! 


-- 


Oo { | p ' IÞ, 
bcc aufe of thoſe drea-iful Juigments which I ſhall ſeal among! 4 ther the Poſt<rity of Ab-aham by Foksban, Gen. 25. 3. It Car, _— s 
"a CONTIE7S © 
thin E! ie be a City of Lime, Chap. 49.8. { Tema delcenced fiom ek oe 
;5 Then took I the Cn Ip at the LORD's hand,and 1h, Gen.25. 15. his Poſterity in thabited in 4 7 Ha. 21.14 do'' %3 
” 1% 1 0 q* =o 1746 p 71 = i £ "4 t 
NIQQUE AU TIC IN 1010S LO driuk, T0 whom the LORD 6 here tey are Joined with thoie -q Den —_— hone ol C hap.s 9.26 
3% "75 $20 0g the Poiterity of Nahor, Gen. 22, Theſe —_ Veople mixed Ci In 
ng 1 Hank rey ee >, ctr ford with the Saracens or Arallins., Uu # That wel! in the corners or (| "_ 4: 
e INartS,1)t 1 V1100 J for It | tomtoallc = ==. turtheſt parts of the W or] id. Some jaterpler it of the taſkion of 2, <<: 
11 2:16 the ÞÞ 1G! '\Er fo travel 2p and 00 vn Aa; It Ne N21 1110415 a;ters the: 'r cutting their r Bea Ir ls, 25 the Saracens di | Vile Ley a 2.99 ( nap. 4 P, 
© W6p AF! 1 FER . OMG F500 LEV. I 9. B7 
ward named, with a Cup of Wine 10 his Han where God forbad his People that Faſhion, 3b, 3+ 
' WF. & Le py " IO uy ay T,, al 1 p 
18 Tomw:t Jerulalem and the cities of Jt dah and 24 And all the kings of Arabia w, and all the 
0 kings and the princes Lone: cor, to mare "i vChas .; 
tne Kings thereot, and the pr CES DPW kings of the mingled people thar dwell in the de- *Chap. « 
[! TS im a dfolatioa, wn al +: i: ney 41 1 111}1n 1 21d "ot {or +, Cer 
- SING i "me | 4&1 os RE 
Curie, as i 75 this day /. | w There were ſeveral Kinzs in Arabia, 2 Chron. 9. 14 "© OO 


f Ju al ually be -g1nneth at the Houie of God, 1 Pc 
God hath more known them and done tazm motegood ay an a her 
people, tieretore their lins are higher proveocations, and they are: 
I, excutable. By the Kings here mentioned are to ve underſtood 
J* boia'im, Fehoiakin and Z dekiah ; 
pix , God threatens to puniſh to aſtoniſhment. and loas Men thovid 
mack at them, ant curſe them, which expreſſions we have beiore 
ict with in the fame caule. Bur herearileth a doub 5 how the Pro- 
 laith, (.5 72 78 this day) wiereas this Prophecy, Ver. 1. was 
te fourth year of Jeboiahim, but Jeruſalem was not made ſucn 
z celolation, 'till the _ Tear of Ze:dehiah, which was 18 
Some tink that though the thing were yet tO come, 


25'cC after 
-is I 4 » &C © 


ce: the Prophet baker of 1t as palt, becaulz of the certain: y of 

, Which 1s bue what is orditary in the Prophetical Writings. 
C3:11e7fs Ni, Tek t thels words were added atcer che Captivity of 
ſerch. WI ring P; r his former Prophecles. Others trom theſe 
words judoe that this part of the C: apter, was a Prophecy ar foine 
CTRL LYN: follow 7 what was 1N the beginning of this Chapter. 
Q hers think that he aids thete words becauſe the carrying into 
Captiviy was at this tim? begun, though not compleated unti] 
the eleventh Year of Z-1, Py. 

iQ * 1 P! al [<9 ing of Egypt, and hs fervants and; 

F11S PHICES, 2d all his roopleg: 

g ite E2vnyans boing tha: p:ople whom the J-ws moſf truſted 
to tor hop, are named as the firſt to whom the Prophet was 


; 6:9 tie Wie Cup of God's Fury, to let the Fews | KOOW, 
tha "ey tritffe.ito tne 1, their confidence was yain ; for the y 
}u fvivesto be wu: e{troyed ; which was fulfil d wir! 111 the 


8&3 Þ \fi% 
ct LLICLLL 


12 YeerSafter the Death of Jeu, unto the y me of Jehoia\in, as 
13 tro 2 NXres 24.5. for the King of Ezyrt made Jeboiaki in 
Al 2 1\ Mes 23; 3 4. 

25 And all the minoled people, and * all the 
kings of the land of Uz z, and all the Kings of the 
{25d of the Philiſtines-4, and Aſhkelon, and Azzah, 


N, and the remnant of Aſhdod /. 
rat momeat to determine, whether God by the 
tz, here mentioned, intended the various Nations af- 
rs FPETO uagly _—_— : « & :eir Names, or fome People 
Cre na native Exyrilans, but lived mingl:d with them, or 
Cpt Of ſeveral Nations, who lived near 7uda or the 
rabirns, I By the Kin £5 of the Lan id of 1x, it 1s molt probably 
udp are to be underſtood thoſe Kings who ruled over thar 
prople who defcendea from Diſhan, Gen. 36. 28. and are judged 
to ba Ve :n::abired fome part of Arabia Purge , near to Ifymaa, 


/ 16 Cities of the Phuiſtines are reckoned afterward. U A32ab, 
i ron, WT; 'od, -4 | Zjikelon were tour of them, the fifth which 
v.25 Gath 15 not here namecl ; File 1 Sam. 6.17. It had a 


in ior: ar 11:785 *0 Wiom David fled, 1 $S4M. 21. IO. wh 7: 


FRE M1 At 


thele Princes with their Peos | 


to whom God had given a Land which they inFerit cd, and he 
| would not tuffer the 1fraelires to' make their way through them by 
© force, wher, they denied them a paſſage through their "Country ; 
| now he theatens their ruine, as allo Chap. 49. 7. and l 022djaly $ 
prophecy was agatnit ctzem, where their triumpl1n g 11 the Cap- 

tivity of the J: ws, 1s mentioned as one th1ig that had provoke ed 

Gol agall! - chem. n The Motbites and Ammorites were deicended 

trom Lex, b4p. 48. 15an entire prophecy againſt 32h, They had 

Ifved in b—_ proſperity as appears th: ny tr, 12.10 had the An 

; nizes againtt WHOM eco Feremiah prophefl fed particulariy, Chap. 

| 49. 1, tothe 7th. 

22 Andall tlie kings of * Tyrus s, and all the * of "ap, 
kings of Zidon p, and the kings of the i itles which 47 
are heyon id the * ſea <. | 

0 Thrus Ws 2 Wong z City upon the Borders of the Tribe of >* 
Aſh:r, Foſh. 13. 29. 2 Sam. 2.4. 7. a very rich City, and a Kt: g- {+ 
dom, with the k np of which ( who was Hyran ) Solomon it1 his 
tine traded much, 2 Chron. 2.3. Iſaiah prophefted to its ruine, 
Iſa.23. 1. So did Exet, Ch. 27.28, 29. It neroyer by Ne- 

+ D1CÞ; Lirexgar, Exzeh. 29.18. pþ Z:iden was nigh toit; th et 'etore we 
M1 ordinarily find Tjre and Zidon joined together in Sor 

Both I1{:ith and ! Exe voy L, as well as this $ Prop! et, » Þ7 oph 
ruine, 
ind Italy: others Ki ole, - w—-60g C <l4 ; bur t others th 1k Ne 
[9.1C H44n;R3Ar never CO aquered theſe, and rather under {tatid thote 
parts oi Syrz42 that coafted upon the Midland Sea. 


| 3 Dedan, and Tema /, and Buz 7, and all #1 


"27C 1; « the utmoſt corner S Ut. 
1 ws reid ofa Cedan che 1 ive of Cham, Gen. 10.7. 


Yr, re- 


3-2" aa 


efet tet! 


:t Þ Heb or, 
Cul off 1919 
The o. Pers, Or, 


7+ x People of leveral Nations that were got together 1n the De-" 
fart, and had made to themſelves ſeveral Kings or Cliet Ru- 
lers. 

25 And all the kings of Zimri y, and - 
the kings of Elam z,. and all the kings of t 
Medes :. 
| »y Thole deicended from Zimran, Abraham's Son by Keturah, 
Gen. 25.2. (tne Fomnns as lome think, pou by Pliry.) 

3 By the Elites are meant the _ celcended from Ser, 


Gen. 40 2:4. Clu is allo mentioned Iſa. 22. 6, S2e allo C 14s 
49. 34 &4 The Medes came from dradai the Son of Fapher, 
Jer. 10. 2. "They are ulually joyned with the Perſians, Dan. 
f. 28. 


26 Andall the kings of the north, far and near 6, 
one with another, and all the ki! ngdoms of the world, 
which are upon the face of rhe cirth c, and the king 


oi Sheſhach ſhall drink after them 2. 

b Ail under the Governrient ofthe Chat/ecns. or, {:1$0thers) 
all chofe Princes that have Domin'ons , betweer the Norch and 
Eaſt. c That 18, 1n thoſe parts of the Hd ac winch were at that 

me known wich whom t: ETC WAS . 4 Ani the 
Ring of Bbylon, wito was laft of all | 0 drink of gory Cupof the 
(Lord's Fury, That he.1s he:e meant 15 pln from Ch ip. 5 41, 
where $5:/hach 1s t us in erpreted. But why Bakyion 1s C2 $1 She. 
kach 15 an harder queltio3 and not 22fily reſolved. Thoſ: who 
think che Prophet gives Bzbylon he-e another Name to avoid an 

Oium from tae King of Bab3lon, at this tim? their < aint net- 
ther conſider the uſita] Courage of this Prop! ;er, no! that he ſpeaks 
plainly enaueh, oo 51.14. where he mentionerh both Babylon 

land Sheſhach, an. EXPOU indeth the } 


atter habe fermer., I: is 
thought that Babylon is called Sheſhact from the Name of an Idol 
called Shach which they worthipped, to whole honour they yearly 
kept a Feſtival for five Days together, which they called Shace, 
and they ſay that during this Feſtiva! Cyrus took B.bjlon. Bur 
theſe are all incertain gueſſes: It j« enough for vs to know thar 
by the King of Sheſhach 1s meantti;s King of Bzbel, as the Prophct 
expounds himſelf, Chap, 51. 41. 

27 Therefore thon ſhalt ſay nato them, Thus 
ſaith the LORD of hoſts, rhe God of Irael *, Drink * Hat. : 
ye and be drunken, and ipue, and fall, and riſe no 75 
more, becauſe of the ſword which 1 will ſend a- 
monslt YOu. 

28 And it ſhall he if they refuſe to take the cup 
at thine hand to drink, then ſhalt thou ſay unto; 
them, Thus faith the LL ORD of hoſts, Ye ſhall cer- 
tainly drink c. 

e Ti & INCA!11NF, of thefe two Vortes 15 NO mare than [his : God! 
let Jeremiah in a Vion know that ic was tis Will thar he their 

Fe to all thefts Nations, 


p: opheſie a Certain, and twavoidatzl 
etch was brought upea all the reft ty the King, of Bily!on, 


wh OM Go. made þ; 'S Intrnment to execute His Vengeance uport 


botore this rims It vn as Geitroyed, ent! ter by Pſummeticus Farther to 

FE: :rauh- N.:ci3, or by Titan Canal a General to Sarzon King of 

:1+r{4, Oi 1m TEad {ſt. 20.-Is at het took Afpdod, which may 

DO Nevreal Pat here mention 1s made of no more than the Key:- 
fn of Alried, 

21 Fdom 2, and Yoah, and the children of Am 


Re BE kj z 
them And latl of al 1p2t tne King of Bztlon himlelt ty Cyrus 
hoe 3 > Doy!, i I eas _ Hh ! 4 ? C 
Cow 2 1n; 3 0! Perjide Fi::5 Vr3gment WRICN be teillieth fic Should 
De heel Swe | 1 DY-tieefects, Fal! vs "0 NEE 


Chap. * XIV. 


”m The Edomites were the Poſterity of Eſau the Son of Iſaac, 


19 


BL 


| Cnap. RR YV. # 


tProy.I1. 


a l 


12. 


Fzck, 9. 6 
{Dy4d. I 6, 
ſake23.21T 


- 


more, an commands them to rin 7t, tO compari with the _ 
taphor of the Wine cup ot God's Fucy, mentioned er. L5- k 1e 
drinking of Cups of heady 1ntoxicating Wine ordinarily produ- 
cing ſuch effects, as (puing and fa!linz, &c. This Cup of the Lords 


! 4 ! . ; - L ; 1 | 
Fury he aſſures them, they ſhould aor turn by, but ſhould mo t| 


certainly drink 1t. ; : ; 
29 Forlo, I begin to bring evil * on the city 
which is called by my name, and ſhould ye be utterly 


ap. 49- unpuniſhed f? ye ſhall not be unvuniſhed : for 1 will 


call for a ſword upon all the inhabitants of the 


f By the City called by his Name, or upon which his Name) 
was called, he means Feruſalem, .ells where called the Holy Cty. 


j Heb, #p- 1 he Apoſtle, 1 Per. 4. 17- Speaketh much to this purpole, Tye, 


64 which 


my name t * 


6121, 


? Chap. 
IG, +» 


8 6. 26, 
T Heb. 
your days 


for ſlaugh- 


rer. 
T Heh. 


V:if:! of de-Word 1s uled, Chap. 22. 22. and 23. 1. Thele he calls aforehand 


{ 
47 7 


{zbr ſhalt ſhould be like the fall of a Chryſtal Glaſs, or ſome delicate tender 


& 


ei NW <> l . , Þ 
£15 from Veſſel, which wen it falleth breaketh in pieces and cannot azain 


DL ſheps 


imei come that judgement muſt begin at the houſe of God, and if 7t 


firſt begin at 78, what ſhall the ex4 be of them that obey not 108 Goipel 
of Gol. If God ſpared not the green Tree, how ſhall he ſpare 


thoite that are dry and whithered > Atheiſts, and leud and profane 
Perſons have little reaſon to promiſe themſelves an elcape from 
God's righteous Judgment, when they ſee God not {paring thole 
thar make the higheſt profeſſion of him, and ſtand in ſome relatt- 
onto him. g lt is vain for you ro promiſe your lelyes an elcape, 
for God is about to puniſh all your Neighbours. 


39. Therefore propheſie thou againſt them all 
theſe words, and ſay nnto them h, The LORD! 


1 


ſhall roar from on high, and utter his voice from 
his holy habitation z, he ſhall mightily rore upon! 
his habitation &, he ſhall give a ſhout ; as they that 
tread tbe grapes, againſt all the inhabitants of the 


earth /., 

h Reveal my Will,unto them preſeutly, to revenge my ſelf up- 
on them, in words to this ſence or purpole ; tel] them,that I who 
hitherto have been toward them as a Lamb, will now be to them 
as a Lion. So Joel 3. 16. Amos 1. 2. and 3. 8. and, as a Lion,w1ll 
rore from Heaven ; for tho* the Temple be ſometimes 1o called, 
yet the foregoing words from on high expound this term 1n this 
place otherwiſe. kh Or, in b7s habitation, which 1s more likely to 
be underſtood, in Heaven, (as the former) than 1n Jeruſalem as di- 
yers would have it, for God is here revealing his Wrath apainſt 
foreign Nations,upon ſome of which theſe Judgments came after 
God had done roring in or upon feruſalem. { A ſhout, fuch as 
Soldiers uſe to give when they ſtorm a City, or aſſault their Ene- 
mies ; like the ſhout of thoſe that tread the Grapes, tinging one to 
another, or rejoycing and triumphing in the Vintage, 

31 A nolſe ſhall come evez to the ends of the 
earth, tor the LORD hath a controverſie with the 
nations 2: he will plead with all fleſh z, he will 
glve them that are wicked to the ſword o, faith the 
LORD. 

m There ſhall be ſuch Confuſions and Noiſes, as ſhall ring 0+ 
ver all the World ; for Gods Quarrel is not againſt the Fews on- 
Iy, but other Nationsalſo. n Nor will he in any thing he doth, 
alt injuſtly : It they will joyn Iflue with him, he will plead with 
them, and make it appear to all that aCt righteouſly.  o He will 
give up many to the Sword, bur they ſhall be ſuch only as by | 
their wickednels have delerved it, recompenſing to them their 
own Works and evil Doings. 


32 Thus ſaith the LORD of hoſts, Behold, evil 
ſhall go forth from nation to nation, and a great 
whirlwind ſhall be raiſed up from the coaſts of the 
earth p. | 

p Ic 1s much the ſame thing which was faid betore, only re- 
peared for thegreater cerroc in 4 variety of expreſſions. He tells 
them that the Judgment ſhould be like a Contagion, going trom 
one Nation to another, or like a fire catching hold of another 
Houſe before the firſt is burnt down, like a Whirlwind, that blows 
trom all ſides, cometh ſuddenly, and devoureth dreadtully. 

33 And the ſlain of the LORD ſhall be at thar 
day from ozc end of the earth even unto the other end 
of the carth - they ſhall nor be * lamented, neither 
gathered nor buried, they ſhall be dung upon the 
ground 9. 

q That thoſe who ſhould be ſlain by Commiſſion from the 


REMIAH 


Chap. LL £ ) 
py 


u Jn ordinary diſpenſations of Jadgmert, there is tome way 
lefc to eſcape, and it there be any way of eſcape, great Men are 
Itkelieſt to find it,but he telleth them that the er eacelt Men tho1'd 
tod no way to flee rom or elcape this terribleDitpenſation ofGade 

36 A voice of the cry of the thepherds, and 
\an howling of the principal of the dock (hall be 
beard w: tor the LORD hath ſpoiled their pa- 

ſture.x. 

| w That is, there ſhall be heard a great outcry of the Prince: 
'and Rulers. x When they ſhall ſee how the Loid hath (volled the 
; Cities in which,and their people upon which they have lived,and 


; art g, ſiith the LORD of hoſts. ' amongſt whom they were wont to feed {ecurely. 


37 And the peaccable hahitations are cut down he- 
cauſe of the fiery anger of the LORD y. 
y That 1s, the places where thefe great Men were wont to 1:v2 
ſplendidly, and dwell peaceably and ſecurely, ſhall be as furely 
deſtroyed through the Lord's Anger, as it it were already done. 


33 He hath forſaken * his covert as the lion z- for * Chap. 


— 


their land 1s + deſolate, becauſe of the fierceneS of #7: 


2 God had before compared himi-1f toa Lion, Yer. 30, here 
he declares himlelt to be about to move likea Lion, who when 
he goeth out to ſeek his Prey, leaveth his Covert. 7d. Ch. co 44 
2 The eftects of this riſing up of God our of his Cover is che 
ſolation of the Land through the nercenets of the Enemy, cautes 
from the fierce anger of God now ready © 2e pou:ed our up 
this People, 


EH AP. XXVL 


The Prophet. by Goa's CommanA, in the Court of the Temsle, throatn: ie 
that the Tempie ſhail be as Shiloh, and the Land 4 Curie Exvort- 
eh to K epentance, bY —— 7, He i Joprebcnded £r.{ arr: 2.4 OS, 
— 11. His Apology, 12, —— 15. The Princes Clear imo! 406 Zoe 
ample of Micah, 16, —— 15, and of Urijah, 20, —= 25. and 
SS akgk 
by the care of Atikxam, 2 4. 
T1 ? I” ; Ks _ ? 4 . =, %*. [- 2 rv el 
N.che b2gtaning of the retz1 of Jehoiakim tle 
p © Tatith ing © not: ore; els ra 
ſon of Joitih kiag of Judin, came this ward 
from the LORD, ſaying 4. _ 
a The Prophecy, Chap. 25. 15 fatd to have been revealed !1 0 
fourth Year of F2boiuhim, this 1n the begin c| 
makes learned Men think, 1t ought ro have been Placed betn 


yay 


- ; "I y - : 
NS % + y [if jd SIN 7 «6.3 
in; \ tt! I1qs Weds Vo ki 


chat. The affairs of the F:w5 were thea it 4 vecy delperate 
dirion, Pharaoh Nechbo king of Ezytt., -E14 Overcome For | 
killed him in Battle, Feh94bz4 or Shullun, being made kion in 
his ſtead, 2 Kings 23. 30. he had reigned but three Months, «nc; 
Pharaoh Nechbo taketh him and impritoreth him, and lavs a Tri- 
4p 


bute upon the Land of 390 Talents of Silver,and aTalent of Gold, 
and makes El:akim King, changing his Name to Jehorukhim, Ver.z 7, 

34. Now inthe beginning of this King's Reign cometh this Word 

of God to Jeremiah, the People being {t1] hardened and going 

on in their ſinful practices. 

2 Thus ſaith the LORD, Stand inthe court of cho 
LODR *'s houfe,and fj:ukeunto all theciries of Judah, 
which come to worlhip 1a the LORD's houle, all tl. 
words that I command thee to ſpeak uato them & ; 
diminiſh not a word c. | 

b Intne largelt Court of che Temple, where che molt may hea! 
what thou fayeſt,and there {peak toall thote that dwell tn any vi 
the Cities of Juda?, (trom whence they were wont to come 14 
more elpeciaily thrice in a Yearto the Temple to worſhip, 7 
122. 4.) In the Gate or Court of that Houte wherein tkoy have 
tuch a Confidence, do thou ftand. (So Chat: 7. 2.) and deciue 
unto them what I command thee. c Neither ſmoocking wht 
may appear rough, nor wppretling what may offend them;inti: £+ 
ly delivering my Will unto them, not ſkunning to declare itt 
them the whole Countzel of God, as Paul. Aﬀs 20. 27. 

3 If {0 be they will hearken, and turn every in 
from his evil way #4, that I may F repeat me of tho, . 
evil which I purpoic to do untothem, becauſe of tho , - 
evil of their doings c. 

d Not that God was ignorant of their obt{tinacy and the har- 
dening of their hearts, which was che future event ; but to Jet us 
know that their deſtruction would be of themie!ves, he would 


Lord in the time of his Judgments, ſhould be in all places, and ſo |&!Ve them both a time and ipace, anda!lo means for Repentiace, 


numerous, that there ſhould be none left to lament for, or to 
bury the Dead, but the dead Bodies ſhould lie and rot upon the 
ſurtace of the Earth, and be as Muck to it. See the like Phraſes K 
Chap. I6. 4+ 

34 4 * Howl yeſhepherds and cry, and wallow 
your ſelves 2 wwe aſhes, ye principal of the flock r- 
for | thedays of your ſlaughter, and of your diſper- 
tions are accompliſhed /, and ye ſhall fall like + a 
pleaſant veſſel 7. 

r Shepherds and the principul of the Flock, are in this place of 
the ſame ſignificancy, by both he means the Civil Rulers ; ſothe 


to bewail their tate. / For the days were now come, when they 
ſhould be flain and ſcattered. © And hetells them that their fall 


be let rozether, 


35 and Þ the ſhepherds ſhall have no way to flee, 
=> £02 Principal of the flock to eſcape v. 
{> 


bo I 


and the prevention of the Judgments of God coming on them : 
He did give them time, for it was after thiseleven Yerrs before 
the Captivity of Fehojiakim, and rwo and ewenty before that of 
Zedekiah : and for Means, God afforded them the Mininiftry 0: 
this Prophet. e Repentance applyep to Man,ftgnitierh a change o; 
Heart and Counſels, as well as of his courte of 4tions: Inio 
unchangeable God it only ſigniteth the turning ot the court? of 
his Providence, not bringing that evil upon chem tor the evi! of 
their doings, which, ſuppoſing their progrets and ob{t.nicy 11 
their finfu] courſes, he had fully refolved to bring upon rhe. 

4 And thon ſhalt ſay unto them, Tlws {th ti: 
LORD, if ye will not hearken to me to walk 1wmy 
law /, which I have ſet before you 7. 

f A courſe of Actions in Scripture, is ordinart!y call ; 
in which ſence we often read of the w2z of rhe Lord, his wi of 1/4 
wicked, the way of the Righteous, G*c. and a motion 1n this Conrſe 
is uluaily called walking, P{al. 1. 1. Eft 18. 9. aud applied 
borh to God and Men. 'To walk in God's Laws is expounded by 
hearkening uato them or (a5i3 other places) by oblerving.X-ep- 


inz and doiig them. g God is {aid ro have fer his Laws before 


them, bath in :eipect of their tick promulgaiion to them ac 


(x OFEFO 


* Y 7rF CY Z 


ns f Heb. 7 
the oppreſlor, and becauſe of his fierce anger 2. EE ; 


| 


"pot 


4d 


—zS-- aadiay3 20s 
* ; hep agg 


Cn eo} 


ww 


Sx we >.» Kg i 


hk ty! y 
Lact Of 


1 vil Mk ſ; 


Wn 
"I" - a 
$8 > #0, 


prophets 4, * whom 1 ſent unto you, both ring up| 
Toarly, and ſending them i, (but ye have not hear- 


, wH This man 27s worthy to die, for he hath prophe- 
pits '4 Henk vi 


I 


be) . . . , 
and upiute Ct rien upon their practice by his Servants the Pro- 


Piers, 2518 follower, 


s To hearken tothe- words of my ſervants the 


Sinai, and wiiting them in Tables 3 and the daily Expoſitions] 


iened.) 

b Thote Prophets who in Propheſying were my ſervants, re- 
v:aling my Will unto you, Hearkening here is the ſame with hbear- 
ening unto God's Laws, mentioned Fer. 4, i Whom, I have 


4+ 23442 


n2de my bulinets to fend unto you ; and to whom you ought [79 


tiereſule to have hear kened, as unto me, but you have not done 
Jt hicherto, 2 Chron, 36. 12, 16. 
6 then will I makethis houſe b : 
1] make this city a curſe toall the Nations of the, 
earth £ | 
h Shiloh was the City where the Tabernacle was pitched, and 
the Ark, the Symbol of God's prelence, was 3 Judg. 18. 31. and 
21.19. I S{4n. 1. 3,9, 24+ and J-21, Out of it the Ark was car-| 
vicd, 1 $47.4, When itv.astaken by the Philijtin s,and was Care , 
ited no moe thither, bur reſted in Kirjcth-jearim, 1 Sam, 7. 2. 
where it reited 25 Years. David fetched 1t from thence, 2 Sam. 
©. 2. So that as the Plaimiſt tells us, P{al. 78. 60, 61.. God fOr-; 
look the Tabernacle of Shiloh; here he threatneth to do the like as| 
tothe Vemple, becauſe of which they had ſuch a confidence. Fe- | 
er: 9ith, Chap. 7.12. had ſpoken much the ſame thing; 1tis a 
th: eatning that God would deprive them of his Ordinances. ! To 
ich he addeth a threatning of deſtruction tothe City, to that; 
(6,66, that when Men ſhould curle any place, they ſhould fay,| 
(04 Zo unto thee as he did ro Feru/alem. We had the 11ke Phrale, 
Chip, 2.4. 9. and have it again, Chap. 29. 18, 22, GC. 
= So the prieſts, and the prophets and all the peo-| 
vlo heardeJoremiah ſpeaking theſe words in the houſe 
of the LORD mm, 
r2 All the People preſent at that time heard tne Prophet, who 
a-cording to the Commard of God, came into the Court of 
the Lord's Houle, aad ditcharged his Otfhce, 1peaking thele 
V OI'S. 
$ & Now it came to pals, that when Jeremiah 
bad madean end of ſpeaking all that the LORD had 
commanded hi: to ſpeak z unto all the people, that: 
the prieſts, and the prophets, and all the people took 
bm, faying, Thou ſhalt ſurely die o. | 
n Either they had a reverence for the Prophet,or the terror of 
God teli upon them, fo as they did not interrupt him til] he had 
tuliy diſpatched his Errand. o Then the chief of the Prieſts with 
tne eſhiſtance of the People apprehended him, and tell him he 
Lziculd be pur to Death. 
9 Why haſt thou propheſied inthe name of the 
T ORD p, favinz, This houſe ſhall be like Shiloh,and 
411: city ſhall he defolate withour an inhabitant ? and 
z} the people were gathercd againſt Jeremiah in the 
houſe of the LORD q. 
p They charze him with being a falſe Prophet, ſpeaking falſe 
'"4ogs 11 the Name of God ; their pretence feemeth to have been 


* 


f 
from the Promiles of God; ſuch as that, Pſal. 132. 13, 14. For 
! 


he Lord bath choſen Ziom, he hath defired is for his habitation. This 
my reſt for ever, here will T 4well, for I hae defired at; which 
they mterpretcd into fuch a fence, as if they couid not by their 
ſin drive God away from them, and therefore Feremzzh muſt 
p: opheſie falily againſt the will of God before reveaied. p This 
cauted aleditious 1umult of the People in the Temple, wliich 
larmed the Civil Magiitrates. 
io When the princes of Judah heard theſe 
things 7, then they came up from the kinzs houſe, un- 
9 the houſe of the LORD /, and fat down |! atthe 
elitry of the new gateof the LORD's horſe t. 
- When the Nobles, and other Civil Magiſtrates heard of the 
Tumnit, occaſioned by Jeremiah's unpleaſing prophecy. { They 


FEREMIAR. 


to propheſie againſt this liouſe, and againſt this city 
all the words that you have heard z. 

3 The Prieſts havirg given Jeremiah his Charge, he makes his 
Deterce, 3 The ſum of which was, he acknowledgeth that he 
had propkefied agairſt the Temple, and againſt the City, and ra- 
citly acknow ledgeth their power to take cognjzance of fſediticus 
Pertons, and falſe Prophets, and doth not deny bur {uch Per fons 
Geterved to die ;' but denieth that he was a falſe prophet, or oulity 
of any defign ro {tir up edition, for he had ſaid nothing but wha: 
God had fent him to ſpeak ; and therefore could not prophefie 
what was falſe, nor was to be charged with any ſeditious de- 


13 Therefore now * amend your ways and your 


God b, and the LORD will * repent him c of the evil 


chat he hath pronounced againſt you- 


2 It 1s not I that have pronounced Evil againſt you, but the 
Lord who hath made both you and me : You rage againſt me, 
who am but Gods Inſtrument, by whom he lets you know his 
Mind and Will ; it were more m— for you to re/orm cur 
wicked Lives and Practices. b And that by a full obedience co 
what the Lord hath commanded you in this Law, and by me 
ſpeaketh to you. c It you will do his, the Lord will change the 
courte of his Providence, and do that which in Men is calleda re- 
penting, and not bring thole evi] things upon you, which he. 
by me his Servant, hath pronounced againſt you. | 


14. As for me, behold, Iam in your hand 4: do+ yeb, 4; 
2t is g60d and 
a That is, Iam in your power (as hands often ſignifieth in right in 

Scripture.) Feremiah doth not by this acknowledge any power yur eyes. 


with me -| as ſeemeth good and meet unto you e. 


they had juſtly, thus toreſtrain and queſtion him. e Nor doth 
he Care them, to do what they had a natural power to do, by ſay- 
ing, do with me what ſeemeth good unto you ; the phraſe imports 
no more than that he could not hinder their doing with him what 
they pleated. The hands in which he was, were the hands of Vio- 
lence, not of Juſtice, for though they had a juſt power againſt 
falſe Prophets, yet they had no ſuch power againſt any Prophet 
ſent by God, let the matter of his Prophecy be never ſo threaten- 
ing and ungrateful to them. Therefore he addeth. 


15 But know ye for certain, that if ye put me to 
death, ye ſhall ſurely bring innocent blood upon 
your ſelves, and upon this city, and upon the inha- 
bitants thereof .*. : for.of a truth the LORD hath 


ſent me unto you, to ſpeak all theſe words in your 
ears f. 

*. If you make this to be Sedition, and put metoDeath for ic, 
you have a natural power to do it, but you will get nothing by 
it, but further bring down the Vengeance of God upon you by 
ſhedding my Blood without a cauſe, the guilt of which will be ad- 
ded to your other guilt, and lieupon you, and upon your City. 
f For you may think,and talk what you pleaſe, it isa certain truth, 
that i ſpake nothing out of any evil deſign, nor of my own head; 
but only what the Lord ſent me to ſpeak. 


16 E Then faid the princes, and all the people 
unto the prieſts, and to the prophets g, This man zs 
not worthy to die : for he hath ſpoken to us in the 


name of the LORD our God h. 

g The Judges in this cafe with the afſent of the People acquic 
che Prophet, and vindicate him from the Charge of Sedition gi- 
ven againſt him by the corrupt Prieſts, and falſe Prophets, diſtin- 
guiſhing þ betwixt one who of his own Head ſpreadeth falſe News 
and threatneth evil to a p'ace, and one who coth it by Authority 
from God, or by Divine Revelation, which is here meant by, in 
the Name of our Lord God. Thus the Civil Magiſtrate taught the 
Prieſts and Prophets a point of Divinity, which they ought not 
to have been ignorant of. Some may enquire how the Princes 
knew ,that Feremy ſpake what he {pake in the Name of theLord > 
Te which it may be replyed, That Feremy had been a Prophet 
now about 20 Years, for he began in the 13th of Foftah, Chap. 1. 
T, 2. Foſiah reigned 31 Years, 2 Kings 22.1. then Shallum or Fe- 
hoahaz reigned three Months, this was in the beginning of Jehoia- 


came from the king's Court, where the Nobles and great Officers 
111 Nations ulually are, to the Temple- t And ſat downac the 
entry of the New Gate in the Lord's Houſe. Some thjnk it was 
called the New Gare becaule repaired by Fotham, 2 King. 15. 3s- 

Some lay it was the E:jtern, others, that 1t was 
the +: jon Gate It was certathly the place where their 
+ ;xhedrim, who were to judge of falle Prophets were wont to- 


a + 
- Y ” A 
T ['G TG l. "+ 4 


11 Then ſpake the prieſts, and the prophet -, 
unto the Princes, and to all the people w, ſaying, 


/24inft this city, as ye have heard with your 


ed at, 
CaTS Ft. 

« In the corrupt ſlate of all Kingdoms and Cities, the Ecclefi- 
27ical Officers always were the greateft Enemies to the Faithful 
Miniſters of God, as we ſhall find in the whole ſtory both of the 
G11 and New Teſtament. w They ſpeak to the Members of the 
1617 Court who are called Princes, and alſo to the People who 
were in the ccurt charging Jeremy with Sedition, by prophelſying 
falfly, which was a capital Crime. x It was the-charge againſt 
S:ephen, 4s 6.13. that he ſpake blaſphemous words againft 1the holy 
place 3 to prove this they appeal to thoſe of the people that had 
heard hin. : 

12 4 Then ſpake Jeremiah unto all the princes, 


kim's Reign,in which time they had had a large Expeitence both of 
his Dofrzne and Converſation 3 and though the Prieſts and Prophets 
who had had the like experience, were filled with Malice and Pe- 
judice, yet the Princes,and a part of the People were more equal, 
and though the People were many of them led away with the 
Prieſts, yet hearing the Prophets defence, and the Princes judg- 
ment upon it, they concur with them to acquit the Propher. 

17 Then roſe up certain of the elders of the 
land, and ſpake to all the aſſembly of the people, 
ſaying. 

i; Probably theſe Elders were ſome of the Court, or elſe Ad- 
vocates, for they were wont to riſe up, either to plead or to 
judge, Iſa. 3. 13. Afs 5. 34. They rile upand apply themſelves 
to the People to juſtifie their ablolutory ſentence. 

18 Micah the Moraſhite & propheſied in the days - 
of Hezekiah king of Judah, and ſpake to all the peo- 
ple of Judah, faying / Thus ſaith the LORD ot - 
hoſts : Zion ſhall be plowed /:ke a field, and Jeruſa- 
ſalem ſhall become heaps, and the mountain of the 
houſe, as the high places of the foreſt zz. 

h This was that Aicth, whole Prophecies are part of ho]; 
Writ, as appeareth by Azicah 1, 3- and 3, 12, whereare the very 
words of the Prophecy here mentzgned, 7 The ſubſtance cf that - 


and to all the people, ſaying y, The LORD feat me | 


Prophecy was the fame with th14 of F:7emmiah, that 2797 ſhouid be 
Aw al 
p10 Ps 


Chap. XXVI. 


v Chap. 


- 


ke * Shiloh k, and doings 2, and obey the voice of the LORD yours* yer, 19. 


Chap. XXVI 


plowed up, and the place where the Temple ſtood, ſhould be- 
come 1o delolate that Trees ſhould grow there, asin a Wood or 


Forreſt. 
19 Did Hezckiah Ring of Judah and all Judah put 
him at all to death 2? did he not fear the LORD, 


1 Heb faceand belought the || LORD 2? and the LORD re- 
of: e Lyrd pented him of the evil which he hath pronounced 


+ Heb. 


Son. of the 


peofue, 


againſt them 0? Thus might we procure great ev1! 
againſt our fouls p. 

m The Interrogation here hath the force of a Negation ; tha: :5, 
Herckiab, and the Senkedrim in his time d1d not go about ro call 
him in queſtion tor his Life, nor put himto death. His Prophecy 
had a quite contrary effe&t on him. nIt begat in him an awe and 
diead of that God, in whoſe Name the Prophet {pake, and quick- 
ened him to apply himſelf ro God by earneſt Prayer, and the 
courie he took had a very gocd ifſue. oThe Lord did not do what 
he threatned to do, p Now, if we ſhould take a quite contrary 
courſe, and put this Man to death, we ſhould do contrary to what 
that good Prince did, (and that with good ſucceſs) do our ſelves 
no good, but procure great evil againſt our Souls ; that is, againſt 
our {elves both Bodies and Souls ſtrictly taken. 

20 And there was alſo a Man that propheſted 1n 
the name of the LORD, Urijah the ſon of Shemaiah 
of Kirjath-jearim, who prophehtied againſt this city, 
and againſt this land, according to all the words of 
Jeremiah q. | | 

q This isa piece of Story which we have recorded in no other 
part of Scripture. Some judge thele words were the words of the 
{ame that ſpoke before, bur this is not likely, for then they had 
brought one inſtance for acquitting him, another for the condem:.- 
ing of him. They are therefore rather to be interpreted as the 
words of ſome others, either of the Court who were Enemies to 
Jeremiah, or of his Acculer', or their Council, urging a later pre- 
{ident, in the time of Feh:;1kim the King tiat at this time reigned, 
who a'ſo pretended to {peak in the Name of the Lord, and whole 
Prophecy was the ſame in ſubſtance with this of Feremzah, 


21 And when Jehoiakim the King, with all his 
mighty men, and all the princes heard his words, 
the King ſought to put him to death; but when Uri- 
jah heard it he was afraid and fled, and went into 


Egypt 7. ; 

y When Fehoiachim our preſent King, and all his great Men 
heard of it, (probably by the information of others) they judged 
it a capital crime, and u{ed means to apprehend him, in order © 
the putting him to death, upon which the Prophet being adverti- 
ſed of it, and fearing the iffue, fled into Egypz. 

22 And Jehoiakim the King ſent men into Egypt /, 
namely Elnathan the ſon of Achbor tz, and certain men 
with him 1nto Egypt, 

{The innocent Propher conſidered not the King of Fulazh's Alli- 
ance wich the King of Ezyp: (obliging him upon demand to deliver 
up any of his Subje&ts, who being charged with capital Crimes ; 
ſhould flee into his Country for Sanctuary) and fled thirher, but 
the King t ſent after him one of his great Men C mentioned alſo 
Chap. 36. 12.) with ſome others to his aſliſtance. 


23 And they fet forth Urijah out of Egypt, and 
brought him unto Jehoiakim the King, whoſlew him 
with the ſivord,and calt his dead body into the graves 


of the + common people -. 

u Thete Perfons lent by Jeho;akim, brought back the Prophet 
by force. He.was tried and :aſt, judged worthy todie, and putto 
death, and ignomioufly buried, not in the Sepulchers of the Pro- 
phets, or any Men of Repute and Faſhion. but amongſt the vulgar 
People. Which, asalſo his diligence to ſend for Xr:jah (fled into 
a foreign Country to fave his life) ſhewed che great Malice of this 
Prince againſt the Lord's true Prophets ; though it had bur very il! 
effects. The ſumm 1s ( if we take theſe words as the Speech of 
Jeremiah's Enemies ) what do you tell us of what Hezeki2h did, 
you haye a later Inſtance of it in our preſent King's time, the 
caſes of Hrijab and of Jerem;ah are fully parallelled. So as the caſe 
is a judged caſe, 


24. Nevertheleſs w, the hand of Ahikam the ſon 
of Shaphan, was with Jeremiah, that they ſhould not 


FEREMIAH 
| 


» 


| CHAP. XXVI.. 


The F rophet (ende1h Tikes to five neighbour Kinzs, thereky res 
jnewing thetr $ avjection :o Nebuchadaezzar, 5, === 7. tHe ex- 
horteth them 10 yield, and nt to believe falle Prophets, 8, <=— 11 
Toe lik? be doth 10 Zedekith, 12, —-- 18. The Romnant 0 ts 
V-:jj-ls ſhrttbe carried ro Brbylon, and cominue there 15.1 rhe dp- 
pointed 1ime, 19, —— 22, 


: FN the beginning of che reizn of Jetoiakim Us 


C. 


{on of Joliah King of Judah, came this wor 
unto Jeremiah from the LORD, ſaying 2, 

2 Here is a difficuity aritech trom this Verie, which there have 
been various tempts co relolve, a1d whether any hath been fully 
latisfaftory I doubt. lt is ſaid, this word of the Lord came to 
Jeremiah 1n the beginning of the Reign of Jeboiahim, and Yer. 3, 
che Prophet is bid to ſend che Bonds and Tokes, by the had of 
the Meſſengers which came to Hieruſalem unco Ze/etidh King of 
Jdzh, who began not to reign till about 11 Years after the be- 
gianing of the Reign of J:hozachim. To folve this difficulty, 
I. Some think Jebotak;m was a common Name to all the Sor.s ot 
Jofiah, and that Z:4ehz4h is here called Jevcizhin bur I lee ng 
touncarion tor thar conjecture trom Holy Writ. 2, Ochers think 
it1s an error in thole that copied out the Prophecies, but it is dan- 
gerousto admit thar.: 3. Others think, that the Prophecy came 13 
the beginning of the Reign of Jeb9:zkim, but wis to be concealed 
until the Reign of Z-dch/ah. 4. 1 had rather agree with tholz 
who think that this Command came tothe Prophet tirſt in theuime 
of Jehoiakim, but was to be repeated by the- Prophet often, aud 
accordingly was ſo until, and in the time of Zed-hiah 3 not that 
he always went about with Bonds and Yokes about his Neck, buc 
chat by times, he put them on, and went about with them, as a 
Type of thac Bondage, which the Jews were ſuddenly to ege 
dure. 

2 Thus ſaith the LORD to we, Make the bonds 
and yokes, and pur them upoa thy necks; 

b God commandeth the Prophe: to procure. eicher by his own 
labour, or with Money, tome Yokes wich Bonds to make them 


give him into the hand of the people, to put him to 


death x. 

w Though Teremiah's Enemies pleaded this Inſtance of 1ri- 
Jab, which had this advantage of the other, becauſe it was macter 
of fact done lately, and a caſe judged in this very King's Reign ; 
yet the hand, that is, the power and intereſt of one Ahiham, 
( who as appears from 2 Kings 224 12. was one of Jofiah's Coun- 
ſeilors, and the Father of Gedaliah, Chap. 39. 14. who upon the 
taking of the City was made Governour, Chap. 40. 5.) was with 
Jeremiah. x So as through the good Providence of God, Jere- 
mah was not delivered into the hands of the People, ſome of 
whom were mutable, and malicious enough, ready to do any 
thing the Prieſts purthemrupon. And the after advancement of 
the Son of this Abikam to be Governour of Judah, may juſtly be 
1aterpreted a Reward 1n this Life, which God gave him tot his 
kindneſs to his Prophet. 


Vol. Ii. 


more faſt ; and to put ſome one of them upon his own Nec. that 
therein he might be a Type both to his own People, and aifo tie 
People afterward mentioned, that they ſhould be 1a Bondage to 
the King of Bubylon, and there Yoke ſhould be {5 faſtened with 
Bonds, that they ſhould not be able to flip them, or ger them 
trom off tneir Necks. / 

3 And ſend them to the King of Edom, and to the 
King of Moab, and to the King of the Ammouirtes, 
and to the King of Tyrus, and to the King of Zidon, 
by the hand of the meſſengers, which caine to Jeru- 
ſalem unto Zedckiah King of Judah c. 

c Ie was and 15 che cuitomn of neighbour Princes, to ſend Am- 
baſadlors into each octe;s Countries ro relide h-re,-and maintain 
correlpondence on the behalf of their Maſters. Thele N:tions were 
Neighbours tothe Fewps, and their Princes had their Ambailadors 
Reſident at Hzeruſalem, F-remih is direCted to carry each of th:(e 
Ambaſſadors a Yoke with a Bond, as a p:elent from God to ti.cir 
Maſters; the meaning he is alſo ordered to tell them ia the tol- 
lowing words. | ; | 


4+ Andcommand them || to ſay unto their maſters, / 9; ,on- 


Thus faith the LORD of hoſts the God of liraet d, c:: +472 


> 


Thus ſhall ye ſay uuto your maſters. 17 tr md- 
4 The Lord of Hoſts, who ha: htherefore a power vver all the #75 {4577g, 


Creatures; who though he b2 ina ſpecial lenſe the God of [ſ-.:-!, 
yet hits Dominion 1s extended to your Maſters Countries, as we!l 
as unto Iſrael. 

5 I haye made the earch, the man and the beaſt 
that are upon the ground by my great power, and by 


my out-ſtrerched arm, and * have given it unto whoin * Din. 4. 


it ſeemed meet unto ine e. 

e To evince to them that his Dominion extendeth to them, he 
mindeth them, that he was the firſt efficient caule of all rhe (rec- 
tures, and made both all Men, and all B-aſts that are pon the 
Earth, and therefore had a ſpecial propriecy in them, and an uni- 
verſa] power over them, 1t being 1a his power to ditpole of what 
was at firſt the work of his hands, and accordingly in the merhods 
and workings of his Providence he did daily Gitpoſe of Kingdoms, 
and Nations according to his pleatire, without being tor luch di - 
ſpoſal of them accountable unto any Perton. 

6 And now havel given all thele Jands into the 
hand of Nebuchadnezzar the Kingof Babyloa my ſez- 
vant f, and the * bealts of the field have [ given kim * Chap. 
alſo to ſerve him g. 25. Ig. 


f By the former words God gave the Prophet Authoriey to af. 99-2 3: 


1” 


ſert his Dominion, and right to ditpoſe of all Creatures, bv 1:12 
he authorizeth him to reveal his Will, concerning the d{fpotr! of 
the Laads of Edom, Mcitb, Ammon, Tyre and Si, Vi7s the 
he had diſpoſed of them to Nebychadn-g3ar the King of Bubyion, 
whom he calleth his Seryan!. Becauſe ne did the work which le 
would have him to do; though as God faid of the j-rian, Tz. 
10. 7. he meaned nt fo ; he had nothing lets ja h's chougnts than 
to obey any command of God ; wicked Men bets Goa's Sers 
vants,as the Hawk 1s the prudent Fauicongers Servant, who maketth 
uſe of the Ravenous quality of che Hawk to get Gaine for him. 
'Twice more at leaſt we find Nebuchidneptar tus called, Chap. 
25. 9. and 43.10. g God foarcher ads, that the B-aiis ſhoild 


lerve him, by v h:ch Fe eicter means tat tre Cartel which VWCrCc it] 
the pollcfiton of tte Men 0 £ote Netigts Wnguid ailg Come 1559 
Y I : "1 L2 
k SW" a 4 


Chap. XV 


— ' >» & B 
I”, 352355 


- 


bs 
= 
F 21 


* Chap, 


- 3- 12, 


£7 
o 


} 


> tl © 


L% X V I. 


or that God had alſo given the Hor{rs and Oxen and 


FEREMIAH. 
his power, 


| faral ro them, ſo did Ahab's Prophets, thar encouraged him to go 
ES . Lmoth-Guead; and Zedehiah's Prophets, who periwaded 

a | : 4 &'v * : and! vp to Ramoth=Cruead 5 1 P , pe 
LE, And all NATIONS ſhall ſet Ve uM and his ſon a | him norto ſubmir to the King of Babylon; Jeremy perfivades Z2de- 
his ſons {on 7, * until the very time of his land come *:! p;zh, nor ro hearken to them; thar is, nor to. believe them, nor 
and ther many nations and great Kings ſhall fervCc | follow their advice 3 and he gwerh him a good reaſon, becautz: 

themſelves of him /. | Whar-hey RON, a 

þ Thar is, all theſe Nationsz and fome think that is expreſſed] 15 For I have not ſent them faith the LORD, vet 


h1s Conqueſts of thoſe Countries, 


Chap. A&VII 


homey never wanted falſe Prophets, Eccleſiaſtical Minifiers who 
other Beals which he ſhould uſe in his Wars for Carriages or con- | would entitle God ro what they ſpake 13 houmour to their Gover- 
vemency, ro him ſo as they ſhould be really ſerviceable ro him in | nours. Such Miniſters rhey would have, and uſuaily they proved 


In the Article uſed here detnonſtrarively, rhough not fo taken no- 


tice of by our Tranſlators. 3 And Ecil-Meradach his Son, who 


tucceeded him, Chap. 52. 31. and B{{{hazzar his Granchild, 


P21. 5 1, 11+. þ Until the perted of his Kingdom ſhall come,(for 
Nations have their periods ) which was after ſeventy Tears, aC-! 


cording to Uþ4). 29, 10.* during which Years ſome ſay four Prin-' 


ces ruled in Bzby/ar, the Scripture mentions but three. / Afcer 
that he ſhall himſelf be eonquered ; as 1t came to pals in BelÞ13- 
-2"s rime, Dan. 8. 30, Datirs the Emperour of the Medes ta- 
king Ins Kingdom. 

$ And it ſhall come to paſs, har the nation and 
kinzdom which will not ſerve the ſame Nebuchad- 
1e7zar kins of Babylon 2, and chat will not put their 
neck under the yoke of the king of Babylon, that na- 
tion will i puniſh, faith the LORD, with theſword, 
2nd with rhe famine, and with the peſtilence, uptil I 
have conſumed them by his hand z. : = 

7m That is, that 1:1] not upon Nebuchadnczar's coming againſt 
tem freely ſubmit to his power, and yield themſelves ro h1s Suv- 
j2Rion, » 1 will humble them by my fore judgments of Sword, 
P: lence and Famine; and make them vield, and they ſhall nor 
avoid whar through their ſtubbornnels they ſtudy to avoid, bur 
{14 at laſt be brought under by his Power. 

9 Therefore hearken not ye to your Prophets o, 
207 to your diviners p, nor to your || dreamers 4, nor 
to your enchanters, nor to your fſorcerers, which 
ſneak unto you, ſaying, Ye ſhall not ſerve the king 
of Babylon /. 

2 It is uncertain whether theſe words were part of the Meſſage 
which Jeremiah by Command from God, ſent to the Kings above- 
mentioned, or the Prophers words to the Jews; for as thoſe Pagar 
Nations, had Diziners, Dreamers, Enchanters and Sorcerers, fo 
the F:s had chemallo, Tja. 47. 12,13. The meaning is, hearken 
ro none of rhem that pretend as from God to forerel] your eſcape 
from this Judgmenr, and nor being brought into Servitude to the 
King of BIbylon, for you fhall ſerve the King of paby/on. By 
Frophers he means ſuch as prerended ro ſome Diviue Revelations. 
» By Diviners, he means Southſayers, of which were ſeveral ſorts. 
5 By Dreamers, ſuch as pretend to Revelations in their ſleep. » By 
Tn:hanters and Sorcerers, he means their Aſtrologers, and ſuch as 
uſed Necrom2%cy, Or by any uDlawtful ways and means pretended 
to know the Mind and Will of God, 

10 For they propheſtea lye unto you 7, to remove 
you far from your land, and that 1 ſhould drive you 
out, and ye ſhould perth z. 

t Let riiem come by their prerended knowledge which way they 
will, what they (ay 1s falſe, 5 And the 1tJue of your belief of what 
they ſay, will be norhing bar your carrying into Captivity out of 
your own Country, and your ruine and deftruction, 

11 Bur the nations that bring their neck under the 
yoke of the king of Babylon, and ſerve him, thoſe 
will 1 let remain ſtill 1n their own land, faith the 
LORD. and they ſhall till it, and dwell there- 
1N 2P. : 

w Thoſe that upon the firſt Summons, or without making any 
hoftle oppotition, ſhall vicld themſelves Servants to the King of 
Pavzlon, they ſhall remain fiill, and be left in the Land ro till che 
2round, and ſhall dwell therein. Tr1sthe time when God 1s reſolv- 
e« to put an cnd to the Kingdom of J:42h tor a rime, and to the 
erher Nations mentioned for ever : There 1s therefore no reſiſting 
ot God's Counſcls ; thoſe rhat moſt quietly yield will be 1n the 
beſt Condition. 

12 © ] ſpake alſo to Zedekiah King of Judah ac- 
cording, toall theſe words, ſaying, Bring your necks 
under the yoke of the King of Babylon, and ſerve 
511M, and his people, and hve v. 

x Some think this was at another time, bur 1t 1s moſt probable 
1: was the fame time, 

13 Why will yedlie, thou, and thy people, by the 
word, by the famine, and by the peſtilence, as the 
{ ORD) hath ſpoken againſt the nation that will not 
jerve the King of Babylon y. 


tehy prophelic Þ a lye in my name 4, that I mig 


C : . ie : 1 6 :}t 
drive you out, and that ye might periſhb, ye, and; y 
the Prophets that propheſte unto you c. 

4 They make uſe of my Name, and prerend to ſay what they 
ay by Commiſſion from me, ſaith the Lord, but there is no ſuch 
ring, [ never gaverhem authority to ſpeak any ſach things. 6 And 
though poſlibly rey do nor defign your ruine by theſe praRices, 
(for none can be thought to defign their own Ruine) yet thar vill 
Q5e the end of 1t 3 for by this means your hearts are hardned againſt 
the Revelarins of oy Will, by which [ ſhall be provoked ro give 
you up to Ruine 3 nor ſhall rhey eſcape, for they ſhali be ruined 
with you. 

16 AllolI ſpake to the prieſts, and to all this peo- 
ple, ſaying, Thus ſaith the LORD, Hearken not to 
the words of your Prophets thar propheſie unto you, 


ſaying, Behold the * vetſels of the LORD's houſe * Chap. 
ſhall now ſhortly be brought again from Babylon ; #8: 3 


tor they propheſie a lye unto you 4. 

, 4 The Propher, Tike God's faithful Servant, ſpared none, bur 
faithfully give warning to all ſorts, ro take heed of the falle Pro- 
p:1ers, that undertook to forerel that the Vellcls of rhe Temple 
carried away 1n the time of Jehoiaþim, and his Son Jebriabin or 
Jecoman, (of which we read, 2 Chron. 35.7, 10.) thould be brought 
back again ro Hieriſzlem, 1n a ſhort time, 

17 Hearken not unto them ; ſerve the King of Ba- 
bylon and live : wherefore ſhould this city be laid 
walte c ? 

e Belteve them nor, but ſarisfie your ſelves as to God's P;oyi.. 
dence with reſpeR to you, and be conrent to be ſubje& to rhe King 
of Babylon, fo may you have your lives for a prey; though you 
be ſtrairned as to your Accommodations and plenreous and ſplen- 
did way of Life, If you do nor, your City will certainly be laid 
wafte, and why ſhould you pull ſuch a Judgment upon your own 
Heads ? 

18 But if they 6c prophets, and if the word of the 
LORD bewath them #; let them now make interceſ- 
!0n to the LORD of hoſts, that the veſſels which are 
left in the honſe of the LORD, and zz the houſe of 
the king of Judah, and ar Jeruſalem go not to Ba by- 
lon 2. | 

f If they be true Prophets, and: have any Communion wit! 
God, inſtead of forere!ling the bringing back of che Veſſels carried 
away. g& Let them apply themſelves ro hinder the carrying away 
of what Veſſels yer remain, and that either inthe Houle of the 
Lord, or the King's Houſe, or in Hierxſalem, which js to be done 
no other way, than by pleading with God ro turn away his Wrath, 
and nor to bring thoſe ſore Judgments which he is molt certainly 
bringing upon you, t 

i9 4 For thus ſaith the Lord of hoſts concern- 
ing the pillars, and concerniug the fea, and conceru- 
ing the baſes, and conceraing the retidue of the veſ- 
ſels that remain in this city . 

h Theſe were all parts of the Temple or Veilels uſed in ir. 7i.te 
1 Kings 7. 

20 Which Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon took 
not, when he carried away * captive Jeconzh the + 


Babylon, and all the Nobles of Judah and Jeruſa- 
lem z. 

z Concerning the perſons and things which the King of Bady/o;; 
then carried away. See 2 Kings 24. 13, 14, 15. 

21 Yea, thus ſaith the LORD of hoſts, the God 
of Iſrael, concerning the veſſels that remain in the 
houſe of the LORD, and in the houſe of the King of 
Judah,” and of Jeruſalem &, 

k The Prophet enlargech his Prophetical Threatning,and makes 


is extend to all other Veſſels of price, 1n the Houſes of the King, 


the Nobles, or more wealthy Citizens, 
32 They ſhall be carried to Babylon, and there 
ſhall they be /until the day that * I viſit them, ſaith + 


y That is, why wilt thou wilfully not only ruine thy ſelf, bur chem to this place 7. 


T Heh). , 
Dy TOTS 60 


ſon of Jehojakim King of Judah, from Jeruſalem to 4, ;, 


the LORD », then will I bring them up, and reſtore zs, ,,, 
Chap, 2G 


thy innocent People by the Sword, the Famine. and the Pefti-} 
; ce? the word 1s ſpoken by the Lord, that all Nations who w1l} 
nor willingly yield ro the King of Baylor, ſhall be thus de. 
itoyed, 
1.4 Therefore hearken not unto the words of the 
Plonhcts that ſpear nnto you, ſaying, Ye ſhall not 


= 


_ ſerve the King of Babylon: for they propheſie * a lyc 
* © NLO yOu 2. 


? 


- We ſhall find throvghout all the J:ri/7 Story, that —_ 


I See the faltilling of this Prophecy, = Kings 25. 13, 14, 1.5. 10. 


2 Chron. 36. 18, and that they abode in Babylyz rill rhe end of the 
Captivity, appeareth from Dan. 5. 2, where we read of Belſhaz- 
2847's ſending for them ro drink Wine in, at his faral Feaſt. Thar 
is, until rhe expirarion of the rime of the Fewiſh Captivity? which 
was 70 Years. 7 The fulfilling of that part of the Prophecy, we 
have Ezra 1. 7,8, 9 in theſe words, 4/ſo Cyrzs the King brought 


jorth the Veſſels of ee houſe of the Lora, , which Nebduchadnerg 2 
i041 brought jorth out of Hieruſalim 


, BIOS . ' 
aud had fur them in ti 


SY r- Po 7 . 
, 0 F'rwh; g 
Rig of Ee Nji4 VINFR 
: k 

& 


houſe of kis Gods, Evin thoſe did Cyr;s 


Chap. SRV. 


F._ Heb, 


two years 


of 44js, 


T Heb, 
ea uylty, 


/ 


FERE MBH 


forth by th? hand of Mithrea4tn the Treaſurer, and nnd | mo{t ordinarily uſed 65th in this ſingle zorm, and doubled by our 
them unto Shen04334% the Prince of Fudah., And t1S Us the Saviour in the Goſpel; Oc, a3 a Particle of wihics and prajing, 
' nuber of them, thirty COaYgers of god, a thouſand CO AYGETS 6/|upon winch accounr it 1s uſed jn rhe L1ri's-Prayer, though there ic 
' fituer, nine and twenty bnives, thirty baſons of Gold, ſilver Baſons lignifierh more than here, vi7, 4 F4ith or Brit thac God will 
of a ſecond fort jour hundred and ten, and other Veſſels 4 t904-\ grant the Petitions, as well as a 2/rr; rhac he would grant them ; 
(ind, All the weſſils of Gold and of fuver were five thouſand an4\ hereir ſignificth no more chan c:clarer, and js ex70n:1ded by the 
ro Lundred, All theſe did Shezbaxgar bring up with them oft nexr WOrgs : Nor indeed doth ir, or ca9 1: ! pay . 

the captivity, that were brought up from Baby!o/%#0 Hiernſalcm.j an abſolute hearty defire, for J:irenith cold 


wr Fug 
7 


: - 3 : 
(TEA $11. 1ftp 2 1s martyr E 
14-4 VA QSFALLY $s DCNILCT 1.5 


7 N<artily pray for 


$9 pun<ually was Ftemmah's Prophecy in this place fulfilled, and|chac which God had rold him he wouid noo doo 7.7m therefore 

ſo ex4tly doch one parc of Holy Writ agree with another, which muſt be underſtood here,either 7 have takes ouly as a Ne, re. 

are great Arguments fo prove tle Divine Authority of the Holy tiifying the kindnet(s he had for his Councry 3 thea the tens j6.. 
ic be rhe Will of God, or may it be the Will of 324; I «1.2 wie 


SCrIpruces. r  VEOUIG { Il 2 

chou halt (aid mighr come to paG ; or elle in (29 combs, » 4 
The Lord give unto his People at heart ro retorm 21d a wad 
chelr ways, thac che Words which thou hat ſpoken 
pals. 

7 Nevertheleſs, hear thou row this word 
ſpeak in thine ears, and in the ears of 24! 
ple /. 

þ The word which I am no avout ro fecrk concernerh ot oo 
and not thee alone, bur all che people, rtherctore do Gjio4 ihr 16 
well, and ler rhem mark 1t alſo. 

8 The Prophets that have been hefore me, an! 52 - 
tore thee of old, prophefied both agatait may cona- 
tries, and agal!t great Kingdoms, of war, 
evil, and of peſtilence 7. 


CHAP. XXVIIL 


44%h CE ve q 
12) CISILL 0 


Hananiali's falſe Prophecy : Jeremiah's Anſwer, 1, o, Hana- 
niah br2abeth Jeremiah's Tobe 2 He foretelleth an Iron Yoke, and 
Hananiah's Deati, 10, 17. 


Oo 
\ 


I _—_ it came to paſi5 the ſame year, in the be- 

Z A ginning of the reign of Zedekiah King of Ju- 
dab, ia the fourth year a, a4 1n the fitth month, tar 
Hananiah the Son of Azur the Prophet, whicn was of 
Gibeon b, ſpake unto me, in the houfe of the LORD, 
in the preſence of the Pricits, and of all che People, 


faying c 

FR. is a great appearing difficulty, viz. how the forth Tear _ =_ m_ wm -——_— che firſt Prophers fin; have foretoid 
could be called the beginning of Z:4:4i2hs Reign, who reigned in| © HOuntrics and taroOne tle great Judgments of God conuy up- 
all bac 11 Years, which if they ve divided into three parts, the 
fo.7th Year can hardly be in any propriety called che beginning of 
his Reign. Many things are ſaid to unrie this knor, which by ſuch b 

45 are curious, may be read both in the Erglih Annot tions, and| when the word of the propher ihill come to Pats, 
in Mr. Poo!'s Synopf;s,T hall only repeat what leemed ro both them, hen ſhall the prophet be known that the LO RD hath, 
and ſeemerh alſo ro me the beit ſolution. Though ir be ſard zx 252 renly ſer | ALLE 
fourth Tear, yer ir is nor ſaid, in the fourth Year of Z2424179's —_ P, ooh | : ET AS PP es 
Reign; they therefore think, that the fourth Tear of the Sa054-| & # ch b5 —— Av iy, _ $500, ION the 
tical conſe 15 here intended. The ews had a kind of Jubilee every | es al 6 = 7 Ape c mo 7 - —_ ; _—_ _y 
ſeventh Year, it was a Year when the Land was torett, and not bejt...:. " " "ia oo Ns 4s Got Fevealce 1s 
tilled, Lev. 25. 1, 2, 3, 4. and in thar Year rhey were to releaie | ” vn ws IN 3 iv ro _ ry —_ ro _ wherhs ce 
their Debtors aad Servants, Dit, 15. 1. which notion of chis| 00 0PI0 Phra — = x _ L-: or no? { Ie was known 
fourch Year is very probable, if che Year wherein the City 1s be- ay the — 's phage _ Es D if. 19. 22, Ion & 
fieged, was a SabMatical Year, or Year of reſt. For if Zedekiah's ©7999% J02499r0 1t Oe oj toe Lord, if the thing follows 746 
firtt Year were the fourth of the ſeven that made the Sabbatica! © —— iy p45, 4%, "aan - 9g Which the Lord Path ot (99%: 
Circle, his third: Year was another Sabvarical Year, and his rench Bvt £15 k- . whe - He COMER Prs-0E SEXTON 
anorher, preſently after which che Ciry was taken, b Of this Hz- peak a ring, _— ming Mgt com to pls, an'l yer he ve 
u2niah we read no more in Scrip:ure, it is probable from the RAE of rhe LoE S 12-0" way ro be h1<4rkon d r5, a5 aDpea: - 
place where he lived, which was one of the Cities of the Prieſts 3 EN! from _ - il =, quran: TEIN 
thar he was a P-i2/?, bur no more chan a pretended Prophet. £ He COncermmg - i or A FO OFOUSNE-t | i112 Pro 
comes to Jeremy inthe Temple, where he was wont ro deliver his EL true } 15: 96ae 4Þ7 on tz Oteewite tf 1M CL47 13.9,70, 
Prophectes,to confront him in the preſence both of the Prieſts and Prophectes born concerning 800d and evil might nor come fo 

the People, ſaying. 


2 Thus ſpeaketh the LORD of hoſts the God of 


A 


% + 
3:37 4 
ails (O30 


9 The prophet which propheitech of peace &, 


v * 
NAIC PFrO ICC: S 


. 


3 (1 
. % 
CIO Pls 1 112 Fropttet 


and yet che Prophet be a crue Propher, in cale the Manners ©: £12, 
People _ ; for in all FR or Threarnings of T:mo17 

: . - Good or Evil, there 15 2 Condicion to be underſtood. God ach. 

lirael, ſaying, I have broken the yoke of the Kang on by his Promiſes Dindeth himfelf ro do good ro wicked Men, nor t1 
Babylon 2. ; his Threatnings tier up his own hands trom ſhewing mercy to {uci; 
d The falſe Prophet counterfeirerh the ſtile of the true Prophets, as turn good 3 bur ſome obferve yer this dificrence, thir goo. 
both in the Names which he gives unto God, and in ſpeaking of things are in Scripture never abf{glutely promiſed, bur they come 
what God would do, as if already done,  cerrataly to pats, and are fulniled, bur God for terrour often chreac- 
3 Within two P fall Vears Wl bring again into neth evil things without expreiling any condition, when notwith- 
this place all che veſſels of the LORD's houſe, that ſtanding a Condinion 15 underitood, upon rhe fulfilling of which, 
Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon took away from | NERENERENE Br 20 Pals, a5 It Was iy tie Cale DE ARE 


4 s : upon the Prophecy of Jo225. Bur the greater difficulty is ro derer- 
this place, and carried them to Babylon e. mine by what rule rhey could judge one a true or falſe Propher, 1 


e Trappeareth Hy whar we mer with, Chap. 27. 15.-thatthis was they might nor always j.dge by the ever, rhe comins, of nat 
the conſtant Song ofthe Ciry Pcophers ar that time, bur we read coming eo paſs of whar he propheſied. 1 anſxer, they were rn 
no: of any but chis H:1naniah, who was ſo confident as to limit a jadge from the Word of God, as welt as from che Event, 7/. 8. 
crime, nor doch he mention any long time, he ſaith within ewo full 25, therefore Det. 13. 1, 2. the People were commanded no: 5 
Years, bur heſpake falſly, for it appearerh from Chap. 52. 31. that hearken ro char Propher, which ſhould confirm whar he (atd >y 2 
Jeconah was there 37 Years. | Sign or Wonder, if his $:5pe were by it to perſv-ade People co 1: 

4 AndTI will bring again to this place Jeconiah larry. So charif a Prop2cr prophefied good, and profo-ricy 0 2- 
the ſon of Jehoiakim king of Judah, with all the 1 People, the Peopiz WEre to confider whar tits {cop Was, ht 
+ captives of Judah that went into Babylon, faith — oo _m _— oh 
the LORD k 6 1 1] bw k hs ke Ee] [Ki f, WINCN pe tern NO good £01 WICKE PEIENT TELE ; 31 wo 

x25 IOC 1 WHEL DFCAK LIC YORE OT LNE RING O | whar he ſaid came to pas, yer he was to be derevinined no reve 
Babylon F. | Prophe:, if what he ſaid were contrary to Gods revealed Will, 57 

f Only iris admirable, that being ſo nigh the King's Court he his {cope in ſpeaking of ir was t2 harden People in finful courts, 
ſhould mention the rerurn of Jehoizkim, or Jeconiah, which had it or to ſeduce them from the right ways of God. renin ho. w, as 
been true 3 muſt have been to the prejudice of Zedebiab, for Je-| ro the tryal of che truch of his, and #2321425 conmary Prophecies 
c02;29 was the right Heir ro the Crown, being the Son of Jehoza-! appealerit to the Event, telling him, that he as a Man, bcarcily 
kim, Zedekizb his Uncle was pur in by the Canquerour, bur ir is| withed that his Words might prove true. BY 
probable, he ſaiv Jehoiachim was more acceptable to the People,and 
that the FaQton for the Nephew was greater than for the Uncle. 
Falſe Teachers are always on the greateſt fide, either for number, 
or for power, 


5 Then the prophet Jeremiah ſaid unto the pro- 
phet Hananiah 1n the preſence of the prieſts, and in 
the preſence of all the people that ſtood inthe houſe given him by the falſe Propher; in a furcher degree of jmoudenee : 
of the LORD, Being rhus confronted by Jeremiah, he pulis the Yoke off jorracts 

6 Even the prophet Jeremiah ſaid, Amen 9: the' ab's Neck, and —_— in an high and impudent conc<uipr ot 

. ON? is Will revealed by this Prophet, and contiriae2 oy this 
LORD do fo, the LORD perform thy words, which | og = Sen, adding alſo - followtos a In 
thou haſt propheſied, to bring again the veſſels of d Hananiah ſoake in the prefenace of al 
the LORD kong. : : It And Hanamiah fpake 1n the prejeace Ot ul ff 
re-< Bob a, and all that 1s carried away Cap- People, ſaying, Thus faith che LORD, & ven to wit 
Ve ITOM Daby1on into THIS Place. | . . | T break the yoke of Nebuchadnez-ar }122 0t Bal 

g The true Propher Jeremizh, ſpeaks ro this falſe Prophet with 
as mnch Boldneſs as he had ſpoke ro him with impudence, andin ' ,- IE 
the lame preſence ofthe Prieits, and of the People, ur with a pre- tull years 
face of great Cittiity and Modeſty, Amen { faith he ) which Par- 
CIC 1s uſed 1n tot\ Wi. either as a Pz*ticle % Aliriton, 


C ; 
d& iT is } 


It 72. 

nm The Prophet Jerery's coming into the Temple, with a 746: 
upon his Neck, as a Type of the Yoke of che king of 8.51/97, 
under which the J:ws were to came, gave occaſion ro the 3{irone 


Way Gs 


15 Thea Hananiah tne prophet ook the * yoke * ©! 
from off the Prophet Jeremian's Neck, and brake =: 


* from the neck of ail Nations within utc ipace of rwo# 0 
And the prophet Jecemiah veat kis +7 


Chap. NAVI 


. — 


(.n2 P. RALSVS 


1 As God hath his Sactaments to confirm the truth of his Word, 
of which his Miniſters are the Stewards and Adminiſtiators ; fo the 
Fay! hath his Sacraments, of which his Prophets arethe Admint- 
{trators. God by his Prophet Feremy had revealed his Will, as to 
the King of Babzlor's ſucceſs againſt many Nations, and bringing 
them into his Servicude ; as a Sacrament or Sign of this,he had com- 
manded Jeremizh to put ona Yoke with Bonds ; Hznaniah the 
ta!ſe Prophet, cometh in the Name of God, and declares the con 
trary, that within ewo Years God would break the King of Baby- 
l-a, and free the Nations in ſubjeCtion to tim ; and asa Sacrament 
or Sizn td gain credit to this talſhood, he plucks off Feremiah 5 
Yoke, and breaks it, and expounds himſelf, that God ſhould to 
break the Ring of Babylon's Yoke trom the Neck of all Nations,and 
pretends Fe had a Co:mmiſſion trom God to fay this. o FeremiQ9 
not able to entiure to hear Juch Lycs, goeth away in Teſtimony 
of his diſſent from him, and adherence to what he had ſaid. 

12 Then the word of the LORD came unto Jere- 
miuh tLeprophet after that Hananiah the prophet had 
broken the yoke from off the neck of the Prophet 
Jeremiah ſaying p. | 

p Some tine atter this, God taking notice of the affront put 
upon his Prophet Jereny, tor taitatuliy dilcharging the Meſſage 
with wl ich he had entruſted him, revealeth his Mind unto Fere- 
mizh, that he might declare it unto the People, and particularly 
to this talle Prophet. 

' 73 Go and tell Hananiah, faying, Thus faith the 
LORD, Thou haſt broken the yokes of wood, but 
thou ſhalt make for them yokes of iron qe 

g Jeremiah ſeeing the impudence of Hananiab, and that his fur- 
ther diſcourte with him would do no good, bur it may be have 
cauſed more danger to himlelt, propheliying what was more :0- 
grateful to the People,than whatthe falle Prophter propheſted,and 
potlibly defirous turther to know the Will of God withdrew him- 
jeif, Soon #fter God ſends him back to the People, and to Hauna- 
rh with this Meſſage ; That he by his falſe Prophecy had done 
the Peopje no good, but much hurt; further incenſed God againſt 
them, and provoked him to make their Judgment heavier,giving 
them iron yokes inſtead of thoſe of v ood. 


14 For thus faith the LORD of hoſts, the God 


* Deut,22.0f Iſracl, * I have put a yoke of iron upon the neck 


of all theſe nations, that they may ſerve Nebuchad- 
nezzar King of Babylon, and they ſhall ſerve him, and 
* | have given him the beaſts of the field alſo -. 

r For notwithſtanding all ne had ſaid, God was reſolved to ju- 
ſtifie his word, and to br ing them under ſubje&ion to Nebuchad- 
reF34r, andto give ali they had allo into his power. 

15 Then ſaid the prophet Jeremiah unto Hanani- 
ah the Prophet, Hear now Hananiah, The Lord hath 


not ſent thee, but thou makelt chis people to trult in 


a lye /. 

{ Jeremiah being a ſecond time confirmed in the truth of his 
Riyelation, and having likewle a ſpecial Revelation relating to 
this falle Prophet, comes now and tells him his doom, viz. that 
he ſhould dye within a year, becaute he had taught people to be- 
lieve, and to hope for, and truſt to what was talle, and they were 
never like to i2e. 

16 Therefore thus faith the I. ORD, Behold, 1 
will caſt thee from off the tace of the earth : this year 
{halt thou die, becauſe thou halt taught *{| rebellion 


0214t the LORD r. 


wy 


"hap. 29. 7 And becaule by this his DoQrine he had made God a Lyar, 


contradifting his Will revealed by Jeremy, and by it taught Per- 
ple to h01d out againſt Nebuchadnez3.ar, and not quietly to yield 
to him. . 

17 So Hananiah the prophet died the ſame year, 
in the ſeventh month 7. 

4 That is, within the compals of a year after that Jeremiah 
had ſpoken theſe words, within ewo Months after thac Jfremy had 
thus propheſied, as appeareth from Yer. 1. So dangerous a thing 
it is for Miniſters to teach People contrary to the revealed Will of 
Gold. 


CHAP. XXIX. 


Jeremiah's Letter ro the Captives in Babylon, to be quiet there, 


1, —— 7. Not to beljeve falſe Prophets; nor expect 10 return | 


till aſter 50 Tears, 8, —— 14. The Deſtrufion of thoſe who 
remained in Judah for their Diſobedrence, I5, —— 19. The 
fearful end of two Lying Prophets, 20, —— 23+ Shemaiah's 
Letter againſt Jeremiah, 24, —— 29. who readeth his Doom, 


I OW theſe are the words of the letter, that 

Jeremiah the propher ſent from Jeruſalem 
unto the reſidue of the elders, which were car- 
ried away captives, and to the prieſts, and to the 
prophets, and to all the people whom Nebuchad- 
nczzar had carried away captive from Jeruſalem to 
Babylon 4. 


C7 | | / Ty | ; 4 ; 
FEREMI AH. Chap. XXIX, 
ſand captives, and a!l the craftſmen and ſmiths were carried 

away, as we read there, amongſt whom were ſome Prieſts and 
Prophets. 


2 After that Jeconiah the King, and the Queen, 


aud || the Funuchs, the Princes of Judah and Jeruſa-* 2 Kings b 

lem, and the Carpenters, and the Smiths were de- Or Che c, 8 
arted tr >ruſalem b. Fn Wi 

Par ram Jeruſalem 6b er ang EO 


b Atter this Captivity. 
. 3 By the handot Elaſah the ſon of Shaphan, and 1: 
Gemariah the ſon of Hilkiah, whom Zedckiah King 
Judah ſent unto Babylon to Nebuchadnezzar King 


of Babylon, ſaying ec. 

c Zedekiah the Ring oi Judab having ſome occaſion to ſend two 
Meſlengers, named Elaſa and Gemariah to Babylon, whether to 
carry his Tribute Money, or upon what other Errand is not ex- 
preſſed, Jeremiah knowing that as there were ſome falſe Pro- 
phets at Jeruſalem, who fed People with hopes of a ſpeedy re- 
curn, fo there were ſome with them in Babylon, who did the like, 
(two of which he afterwards in this Chapter refle&teth upon) wrt- 
teth the following Letter, and ſends it by theſe rwo Meſſenzers,to 
quier the Peoples Minds, and to help to compole their Spirits, 
diſturb'd by theſe falſe Prophers, ani raiſed up to vain and idle 
hopes for which there was no ground at all. 


4 Thus ſaith the LORD of hoſts the God of 
Iſrael, unto all that are carried away captives, whom /oÞ 
[ have cauſed to be carried away from Jeruſalem to Mos 
Babylon 4. 


4 So as this Letter was not wrote from himſelf adviſing them 
charitably, but he had commiſſion from God, by whom he mind- fi 
eth chem, as the principal efficient cauſe, they were ordered to be 4+ 
carried away by, though their own fins were the meritorious EL gr 


| bitation, (as it is like to be for ſeventy Years, ſay the Prophets, py 


j 


caute, and Nebuchadnezzar With his Captain and Soldiers were the - iy 
inſtrumental cauſe. | 
5 * Build ye houſes, and dwell 7 them, and plant* Ver. 28. NY 
| gardens, -and eat the fruit of them. ph. 9. 
| 6 Iake ye wives, and beget ſons and daughters, : al 
{and take waves for your ſons, and give your daugh- FS 
ters to husbands, that they may bear ſons and daugh- $i 
;ters, that ye may be encreaſed there, and not dimi- ' 3h 
niſhed e. 


{ e Thatis, be not uneaſte 11 your minds, not reſolving waat to wal 

do through the Prophecies of the falte Prophets, that tel] you the PR 
; Captivity ſhall be but two Years, or at leaſt very ſhort; but do all "7 
things which you would do, if Babzlgn were to be your fixed ha- Fes 


#8] 


which they pleaſe.) Marry,and give,and take in Marriage,do what- = 
{oever 1t becometh prudent Men to do, who would accomodate BY 4 
themſelves ina place where they are like to abide, and preſerve I 
their Families, that they might not be utterly extinguiſhed. The 
words mult not be underſtood as a Precept, obliging all in the 
Captivity to do every of theſe things, which it may be they were 
no: all able to do, but asa counſel and advice not to forbear any 
thing of this nature which they would do, if they did fully believe 
they were to abide ina place ſeventy Years, 


7 And ſeek the peace of the city, whither I have 


> XA AQ WH un 


cauſed you to be carried away captives f, and pray 

unto the LORD for it 2, for in the peace thereof 
ſhall ye have peace h. 

f That is, ſeek to God for it, or rather live peaceably in it,and 

by all lawful means ſeek the we'fare of it; do not raiſe any Tumults 


| or Seditions, nor take part with thoſe that do. g And while your b: 
Captivity laſts do you pray for it, (from whence thoſe who think Wo 
that Chriſt bath added new Moral Precepts, and reckon this Pre- BY. 


cept of praying for Enemies, as one may underſtand, that praying 
for Enemies was but a breach of that Love to our Neighbour, 
which God required under the O!d Teſtament ) for it was Jawtul 
for them to pray againſt Babylon at other times, P/al. 137. 8. er. 
5I. 35. but when God hath pur a Yoke upon our Necks, we muſt 
patiently wait until he takes it off. The Lawyers ſay, that Prote- 
Fion requireth Allegiance to Governours ; This Text Jets us know 
alſo thac it requireth our Prayers for them, though they be Con- 
querours and Tyrants. h For God haviag by his Providence; 
caſt us under their power, our Peace dependeth upon theirs. 


$ }| For thus ſaith the LORD of hoſts, the God 
of Iſrael, Let not your prophets, and your divi- 
ners that be in the midſt of you, * deceive you, nei- * Chap. 
ther hearken to your dreams which ye caule to be 14. 14 
dreamed 7z. & 23.21. 
# The Lord knows that you have a Company of falſe Prophets er a 
that tell you other things, and promiſe you a ſudden rerurn out 
of your Captivity, pretending to know 1t by revelation from God, 
or by divination, 29%. or to have it diſcovered to them in Dreams. 
It isthe Will of God that you ſhou}d not hearken to them, for they 
do but deceive you, and ye are acceffary to your own ruine. They 
ſee you are pleaſed to hear {uch Stories, and that cauſeth them to 
dream, as Chap. 5. 31. The prophets prophefie falſly, and the prieſts 
bear rule by their means, and my people love to have it foo Thus 
Iſa. 30. 10, They ſail ts the ſeers, ſee not, and to the prophets, 


propheſie not to us right things, (perth unto us ſmooth things, pro- 


a There were two carryings into the captivity of Babylon, the | pheſie deceits, Falſe Teachers and Guides of Peoples Souls, are 
got $4 2 % of 
larter about 11 or 12 Years after the former, the firſt was in the| the greateſt Plague can berai a Nation, People trom chem expe- 


cime of J:hoja%im, of which we read in 2 Kings 24, 14. When| ing to hear the Mind of G04, 41d tor the moſt pare, People are ac- 
the princes, and all the mighty men of wvalour, even zen thou-| ceſfary to their own ru ne 12 che:n. It caq indeed hardly be imagt- 
b A 


ally; 
i.» 3 


[tug XXIX FEREMIAH Chap. XXIX. 


n*d, what other Temptation, perſons whole office it i5to revea] with the famine, and with the peſtilence, and * will * Deur.28, 
the Mind of God, ſhould have to do otherwiſe, but the humour-| Je]; yer them to be removed to all the kingdoms of the *5- Chap. 


ing and pleaſing of a corrupt People, who through their fondnels +. += OO IR WS 5-4 and 
Y ; vie Luſh ca not Ss of tound Doctrine, lo as though the _ | *ro DC a curle, and an altoniment, and call ... 17, 
4 i Church of. God hath in all Ages been troubled with Dreamers, Iing,and a reproach among all the ations whither + Hed. for 


yet it is a wicked People that cauſerh them to dream, | have driven them z. a Cur(e, 


Ss > a 1 M1 7 Thele Verſes contain no more than the threatnins which we * Chan. 
£0 9 For they propheſie *| =_ pt OE have had more than once before. He nad compared them to vile 42. Ty 
m8 je. name ; I have nor ſenr them, 1altn tne b Figs, Chap. 24+ 8. and Fer, g. and 10. there threatned them with 
ot 10 For thus faith the LORD, that after ſeventy being made a Keproach, a Proverb, a Tunt, and a Curſe; and con- 
years be accompliſhed at Babylon, I will vilit you, _ them with | the Sword, Famine and P:ſtilence ;* the 
and perform my good word towards you, 11 cauling _ thing _ _—_— by word of Mouth to thoſe in Juea, 
| ang = add 1s Nere repeated 1t a Letter to that part ofthe Jews in Babylon, to 
you to return TO THIS PLACE K, p Years Captivity | ke them off from giving credic to their falle Prophets, whether 
k From this Text appears tnat the eventy ou Apt - in Jade or in Babylon, who deluded them wich the Promiles of 2 
were to be accounted from the firſt carrying into _—— —_ ©| ſpeedy return, Believe it (faith the Prophet) you ſhall be {o far 
time of Je5cj2kin, lo that 11 Years of it were —_— b ns wh 3 trom returning Whateyer your idle Prophets tell you, that your 
del-ith was carried away, Whatever, faith the Prophet, tnele| p ..1-n that are here ſhall be brought to you, or deſtroyed wich 
D.eamers tell you, you muſt abide 70 Years 1n Baby On the Sword, the Famine and the Pefiilence, or ſcatteredinto other 
from your firſt going thither, it is therefore your W1 __ 4p Kingdoms, where they ſhall be made a Curfe 21d an aſtoniſhment , 
quielce in the Will of God, and to compoſe your ſelves: and to[ 12 hi/ling and a reproach. 
incourage you, the Lord by me affureth you, that after thoſe 70 : 
Yearsſhall be expired, as he hath now viſited you with ev1l, lone 1 9 Becauſe they have not hearkened ro my words, + c:,,. — 
will viſit you for your good, and tulfil the cope _ rk faith the LORD 2, which * I ſeat unto them by my + ; —_ 
7 7 alem. We ha _ J ILY 25+ 4- 28 
070, and youſhl urn again 0 Juſt, We hav eres rhe prophets riſing up early, and ſeating 31 
Promiſe was before, Chap. 25. 12.and 27. 22. Daniel underſtood them b, but ye would not hear faith the LORD c. 
it from the words of this Prophecy, Dan. 9. 2, which pur him & A contempt of the Word of che Lord wasthe caule of this 
Peoples ruine, and will be the cauſe of ruine toany people. Ste 


upon Prayer, at the expiration of that time. = | 
' : * E :04p* 7. 26, andT1. 7,8.and 17. 23. bLelt they ſhould 1a; 
11 For I kaow the thoughts that I think towards that they only ditobeyed the me, God minderh them, by. 
50; you, {f1ith the LORD, thoug Its of Peace, and not in not hearkening to them,:hey did nor heaar ken to him. The ſame 
i + Heb. 2nd of evil, to give you all 5 expected end /. ; thing Chriſt laith of the Golpel Miniſters, Luke 10.16. The not 
BY ind extecs {| This Deliverance will not depend upon your Merits, but up-| believing, or not obeying, what Miniſters teaCi1, not 11 a due dit 
qui. on my own Mercy, and kind thoughts and purpoſesI have tor the| charge of their Office of revealing the will of God, is no contempt 
Seed of Abraham my Servant, and I am reſolved in my own! of God,but of them who for that caule ceferve to-be contemiet ; 
I intend not the blotting out of the Name | but ſuppoſing that what Miniſters deliver be the Mind and Will 
: h, but togive ſuch an end to their crouble | of God revealed 1n holy Writ,and but a true explication,and appli- 
Ws as themſelves expectand deſire, though not fo ſoon as they may cation of that, not to hearken ro God,and not ro hearken to them 
OE, expect it,being deceived by their Prophets. There ſhall bean end! !Sthe ſamething, c Ye wiltnlly refuted ro belive then ſpeaking the 
$4, of your Captivity in my time, and that is after you ſhall have ful. Truth to you in my Name and to obey thole monicions they gays 
filled 70 Years in that Captivity. you by my direion ; All this wasa not hearing God. - 


'*Dan.'g. 12 Then ſhall ye * call upon me, and ye ſhall go 20 q Hear ye therefore the word of the LORD, 


"3% 2, and pray unto me, and I will hearken unto you all ye of the captivity whom Ihave ſcat from Jeruſa- 
m I will not orly give youa temporal ſalvation and deliverance,| Jem to Babylon. 


28. | | k thoughts what to do. 
: of Iſrael from the Eart 


bo and bring you into your own Land, but you ſhall gothither with] 4 Thoſe Phraſes T have ſent, and I have driven, . &c. are dili- 
W ' new Hearts, you ſhall worſhip Idols no more, but you ſhall wor- gently to be oblervea by us. There 15no ev1l 1n Cities or Nations 
LY ſhip me, and be ſerious and diligent in your Addrefles and Applt-| which jsan evil of py niſhment, bur whoever be the inſtruments 
= - cations to me, aad I will liſten to you in thole Applications. to bring 1t, God 15 the Author of it. Theie Ph:ates allo fignitied ro 
7 N- : . w p ; "> 7; 7 x theoliel \ fr 4 47 
* Lev. 26 13 And* ye ſhall ſeek me, and find me, when ye|*9 thoſe Fc Ws , thit God was likelieſt co know beſt how long 
they ſhould ſtay there, becaute he ſent them thicher. 
40- ſhall ſearch for me with all your heart z. | 


21 Thus faith the LORD of hoſts, the God of 
Iſrael, of Ahab the fon Kolaiah, and of Zedekiah 
ok {on of Maaſeiah, which prophetie 2 1ye uato you 
in my name, Behold [ will deliver tlien into the hand 
of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon,and he ſhall fly 
chem before your eyes e. 


Deut.36:t: © ,, Thar is, ſincerely 3 as Pſal. 119.2. _ | 

* Den. 47, 14 And *I will be found of you, faith the LORD, 
Pfal. 32. 6,40d I will turn away your captivity,and * ] will ga- 
and 46. 2. ther you from all the nations, and from all the places 
Ifa. 55. 6. whither I have driven you, faith the LORD, and I 


* Cha . 2 I - J 1 j L 
22. "ag will bring you again 1nto the place whence | cauſed e Of thele two Perions we read no more in Holy Wric ; thir 


— * you to be carriedaway CaptIve w. : , {they pretended to be prophets,that they abuſed the name of God, 
w This Verſe containeth no more than was ſaid before, only it pretending to reveal h's Wil], when as what they faid was nut 


is repeated ina little different Phraſe, for the further confirmari- 
on of their Faith, and che promite 1s a little inlarged. God faith, 
he will be found of them ; that is, he will anſwer them. It is ex- 
preſſed inthis notion to correſpond with the term ſeeking, by 
which Prayer is exprefled, and let us know, that thoſe that will 
have God's fayour muſt nd it ; which implyeth a ſeeking and 
inquiry after it. The promile which beiore mentioned only their 
return fromBybylon,is inlarged,and made hereto extend to all pla- 
ces Whither they were driven, for though the Body of the People 
were carried to Babylon, yet it is more than probable, thatmany 
of them ſhifted for themſelves into other Countries, and were in 
Exile, but not in Captivity. Cyrus his Proclamation, 2 Chron. 35. 
22, 23. extended to his whole Empire. 


15 © Becauſe ye have ſaid, The LORD hath rai- 
ſed us up prophets in Babylon -, DO FEg 


x The Prophet here turneth his Speech to ſome wicked Jews, 
that were in Babylon, or in Fudea, and more believed ſome talſe 
Prophets, who told them of a much quicker return, than Jeremy 
telling them the cruth from the Mouth of God. 


16 Kzow, that thus ſaith the LORD, of the king 
that ſitteth upon the throne of David y, and of all 
the people that dwell in this city, ard of your bre- 
thren that-are not gone forth with you into capti- 
Vity. -. | 
pi, word know is, as ſome think, needleſly \upplied, for the 
following Particle might be as well tranſlated for, or becauſe, or 


the Will of God, but a fa!ſhood, we learn out of th's Verte, and 
that they were both of them burnt by the Kizg of B.ubylon, we 
find in Yer. 22, Whatthe falſhoods they publithed were, is not 
expreſled, but it is moſt probable they were ſome of thoſe rac 
pretended that God had revealed to them, tht witl1in two yearss 


return out of Bzbylor. God here tells thole that were of the 
Captivity, that thole two wretches ſhould themlelyes be flain by 
che King of Babylan. 


22 * Andofthem ſhall be taken upa curſe by all * 5ee Gen? 
the captivity of Judah, which ae in Babylon, ſaying, 48. 20. 


The LORD make thee like Zedekiah, andltke Ahab, 
whom the king of Babylon roaſted in the href. 

f As falle Teachers are of che higheit ſort of Tranſgreffors, 
ſpeaking lyesin the Name and under pretence of the Auchortty of 
the God of Truth, ſo God in his providence ordinarily makes 
them the greateſt Examples of his Vengeance. God chreatnech to 
bring them to an end that ſhould curn inco a Proverb, that when 
Men had a mind to curſe others, wiſhing them «©!» grearoft evils, 
they ſhould pray to God to make them like 2555 and Z:dehtab, 
whom the King of Bbzlon burnt or roaſted in the tire, the word 
09D, Kalam, tignifieth both, Lev. 2. 14. and roaſting fignitict!: 
only to burn by degrees, which probably was the tpecial punith- 
ment of theſe ewo falſe Prophets, for we learn from che jullancy 
of the three Children, Dan. 3. 19. that the coninming of Per {ons 
ſlowly in a fiery Furnace, was a Kind of puntzſhment to wle a+ 
mongſt the Chaldeans. 


or a ſhort time, the Captives carried away with Fehoiakim ſhould 


therefore, By the King he meaneth Zedekiah, whom he chuſeth * "TOY WY” ,* 
eo expreſs under the notion of him that fitteth upon the Throne] 23 Becauſe * they have committed villany in 1t- 


of David, to take away the vain hopes which the Jews conceived | rael g, and have commutted adultery WICH thelr 
from the promiſes which God had made to David and to his neighbours wives þ, and have ſpoken lying words in ©? 


A 531 : 
G39, 
. x 4. * 
$ 


Seed, 


17 Thus ſaith the LORD of hoſts, Behold I will 


my name, which I have not commanded tem z, even 
I know, andam a witnebs, faith the LORD &. 


g The reaſon here given muſt not be underſtood as the teafon 


' Chap, ſend upon them the * ſword, the famine and the pe-| e Th bur why G 

24 16, Rtilence,. and will make them like * vile figs that of the King of Babylon's puniſhment of _ ue ke gave 
Chap. cannot he cation. them ans an them up into his kands,becauie the} ha committed villary or fil- 
24.8, e » CNey are 10 Cv1t, ly in Ifral, þ Which is expounded by the next. words, they hed 


13 And I will perſecute them with the ſword and 


.ommitted adulters with their neighbours winer, A tin Fs jfc!ly, 


AL 


> 
4 
D w. INI poo 
. od J x* © 
" a : , by 4 Y : - % 
. A y Ta org ts wks” _—_— * 5 —_—_—_— - 
Ws + », * "Y - - a PL Pb a -<- 
» a 4 " I ” > F ured on 


po get im 
_ 


b Re - 
py ws 9 v2 
6 A . - _ = _ 
- . " _ - ” 
* = PER > I " 
wY : __ - -- 
P 7 - i. 
- ant gin, mw 
» : Ay by 
pf 


Chap. XXIX. 


|; Or, the 
Dreamer, 


Pe * 
>. Ix "NRC. 
x ;. Acts 
> E, > 44 
* Chap. 


«4 ©» 20 


A 


- is 


SEREMIAH 


Lo 


aad ſo called in Scripture, urcleanneſs particularly, Gen. 34. 7-|you, and I ſent him not, and he cauſed you truſt in a 


here it is called villany, to denote the hainouſneſs of it, eſpecially 
inthole whoſe Office it was to teach others that they ought not 
todo it, Rom. 2, 22, Falſhood in diſcharge ofatruft is ordinarlly 
attended with a debauchery of Lite, nor indeed can 1t be reaſon- 
ably imagined, that thoſe who humovr Men, have debauched thett 
Conſciences, and declared things as the will of God, which they 
{now are not fo, to ſhou!d be true and honeſt in their Conver- 
{ition towards Men. iThe ſecond Crime of theſe falſe Prophets 
was, What gave them their denomination, teaching People what 
God never bid them ſpeak. h Now this, fairhthe Lord, T nnow, 
22d am a witneſs to, their Adulter tes are in ſecret, but I am a Wit- 
neſs to them 3 the poor People do nct know that they teach 
them lyes, bur I know it. God will deal with Men not according 
to what Men like. themſelves know of them, and can prove a- 
gainſt them, but according to what he know's, and can witneis 
againſt them. : 


24 Y Th: ſhalt thou alſo ſpeak to Shematah the 
| Nehelamire, ſaying /. | : 

{ We have no guidance from any other Scripture, to teach us 
who this Shemaizh was, bur it is very probable that he was one 
of thoſe who at this time were in the Captivity of Babylon, and 
ſo came tothe knowledge of Feremiab's Letter, mentioned 1n the 
beginning of the Chapter, and wrote what fojlowethto Z-pha- 
niah, the. Son of Maz{ciah the Prielt, and the reſt of the Prieſts, 
to have Jeremiab punifhed ; but why ne 1s called th: Nehelamit? 
is not ſo evident, for that the word is derived from DIM, Cholem. 
a Dreamer, is not very probable,we read of no fuch placein Fudea 
as Nehalam or Halem, but we cannot imagine that the Names cf 
all the Towns in Fudah are to be found in Scripture, he is thrice 
in this Chapter called th= N-helamire lo as it is probable that there 
was luch a place as Nebelam, from Whence he was. 

25 Fhus ſpeaketh the LORD of hoſts the God of 
Iſracl, fayins, Becauſe thou haſt ſear letters in thy 
naine te all the people that are at Jeruſalem, and to 
Zephaniah the ſon of Maaſciah the prieſt, and to all 
the priefts, ſaying, : ; 

25 The LORD hath made thee prieſt ”: in the 
{te:d of Jehoiada the prieſt z, that ye ſhould be Ofh- 


Wer 5 
: This 15 the greateſt miſchief of falſe Teachers, they are the 
cauſes of People truſting inlyes, and trom hence the fins of falſe 


. | Prophets are ordinarily aggravated. 


23 Thereforethus {aith the LORD, Behold I will 
puniſh Shemaitah the Nehelamite, and his ſeed » : he 
ſhall not have a man to dwell among this people wr, 
neither ſhall he behold the good that I will do for my 
people, faith the LORD x, becauſe he hath taughr 
rebellion agalult the LORD y. 

u Puniſhments of this lite ordinarily are extended to the Chil. 
dren of {intul Parents, for Parents fake, who are puniſhed in their 
Children, being Res Parentum, a conſiderable part of their Parents 
Goods and Portion. w He and his whole Poſterity ſhall be root- 
ed out ; x And neither he nor they ſhall live to the time of my 
Peoples return from the Captivity of Babylon. y Becaufe by the 
taiſhoods which he hath taught, he hath been an inſtrument ro 
make people diſobey the Commands of God. We had the fame 
clauſe, Chap. 28.-16, and ſuch kind of threatning we find Amos 
7. 17. denounced by that Prophet againſt Amaziah the Prieſt of 
Bethel, forbidding him to prophefie at Bethel, becauſe it was the 
King's Court and Chapel, To obſtruct the Revelation of God's Will 
to People, or to publiſh what is contrary to it, to ſeduce Peop]e 
from believing 1t, or yielding obedience, are both Crimes thar 
have been, and will be of fataij conſequence to them, and their 
Families, who are ſo hardy asto incur the guilt of them. 


CH AP. XXX. 


God ſheweth Jeremiah the Deliverance and Retuyn of the Jews, x, 
—— 9. He comfortetb Jaob, 10, I7. Their return (hall 
be gracious, Wrath onthe Wicked, 18, —— 24. 


Lo, 


HE word that came to Jeremiah from the 
LORD, faying a, 

a This Title is thought to exterd to all we have, both in this 

and the next Chapter, both which multly conſiſt of comtortable 

Promiſes of the reſtauration of this people, and teacheth us what 


ccrs in the houſe of the LORD * tor every man zhat 
i mad, oand maketh himſelf a prophet, that thou 
ſhould{t * put him 1a priſon, and in the ſtocks p. 

m Tat is High Prieſt, as ſome have thought, but it appears 
from 2 Kings 25. 18. that Scratzh was at this time the High 
Prieft, and this Zephaniah was the fecond Prieſt, as he'is there ft1- 


led ; as alto Chap, 52. 24- nor muſt any think, that the Fehoiada 
here meant was the immediate Predeceſſor of Zephaniah, for be- 
fides that Jehozadz was High Prieſt, which Zephaniah never was ; 
there was near 200 Years betwixt the Death of Fehozada, and this 
cime, in the ſtead therefore here fignifieth, that thou ſhouldſt be 
like the good High Prieſt Fehoiala, nnleſs fome other Fehoiada 
was mears who was turned out, and this Zephaniah put 1n his 
room. 0 That thou mighteſt have a care of Religion, and parti- 


cularly take care of Perſons, who being mad or phrenetick make 
themlelves Prophets. p The Prieſts had a power toreſtrain ſuch 
Perſons by imprifoning them, or putting them inthe Stocks, by 
which maſt agree a particular puniſhment is expreſſed, bur for 
the nature and way of it, it is not determined. Thoſe who in fo 
incertain a thing, have a mind to read what hath been ſaid, may 
find it both in Mc. Pool's Synopſes Criticorum, and the Engliſh An- 
notztions upon this Verſe,but theLearned Author of chem reciting 
what Authors have {aid concludes, 1t at laſt nor with any cer- 
eainty to be deterinined, 

27 Now thcrefore, why haſt thou not reproved 
Jeremizh of Anathoth, which moketh himſelf a pro- 
PRet tO you 9. _ 

q He means it of an ative real reproof, as appears by what 
went betore ; he would have had Feremizh impriſoned or put to 
thar puniſhment which they called the Stocks, the nature of which 
we cannot determine, concluding him to be but a mad Man, and 
one who was not made a Prophet by any immediate miſſion from 
God, but had only made himlelt a Prophet. 


ought to be the matter of ourSermons; we ought to ſpeak nothing 

for fubſtance, but what we. can juſtifie to come from the Lord 
| which all Doctrine doth, that is bottomed on Scripture, though 
opened, and made more plain and intelligible by words formed in 
our Own minds. | 


2 Thus ſpeaketh the LORD God of Iſrael, ſaying, 


Write thee all the words that I have ſpoken unto 


thee in a book 6. . 

b It is uncertain whether this wasa Command from God to 
Jeremiah to record all the Revelations which God had made to 
him, or only the Revelation contained in this, and the following 
Chapter, which conſiſts chiefly of Promiſes of the Peoples reſtau- 
ration, and ſo God might command them to be written, that 
they might not be torgotten, but be at hand for the People to 
read during their Captivity, to keep up their faith and hope in 
God. A Book inthe Hebrew Dialect, fignifieth any Parchment or 
Roll ; God would have them recorded to teſtifie his Truth, and 
CEOS of the Prophet when they ſhould fee the things accom<- 
pliſhed. 


3 For lo, the days come, faith the LORD, that- 


I will bring again the captivity of my people Iſrael 
and Judah c, faith the LORD, and [ will cauſe them 
to returnto the land that I gave to their fathers, and 
they ſhall poſſeſs it 4. 


c The reaſon why God would have the Prophecy written,was 
tor a memorial of God's Truth in his Promifes. Iſrael never re 
turned as to tne Body of the People, but thoſe of the Ten Tribes 
which were Gods People did return, We read Luke 2. 36. of 
one Anna who was of the Tribe cf Aſher, and many more doubt- 
leſs did return according to the Promiſes, Chap. 3. 12, 14. and 
23.6. and 31. 1,6, Ezek. 37. 21, 22. dIt is uncertain whether 
this promiſe of returning to their own Land, were fulfilled in 
thoſe few of the Ten Tribes who joined themſelves with thoſe of 
Judah, after they were returned from Babylon, or remaineth yet 


28. For therefore he ſent unto us ;»1Babylon, ſay- 
ins, This captivity zs long, build ye houſes, and dwell 
in them; and plant gardens, and eat the fruit of 


them 7. 

r The matter of fat was true, as appeared, Per. 5,6. but it | 
was falte-that this was the effeCt of Phrenzy, or that he ſpake this | 
of his own Heal, without commiſſion trom God ; for he wrote: 
nothing of this nature, but by order from God, as appeareth from | 
Ver, 4. where he began his Letter with ; Thzs ſaith the Lord of 
hojts the God Iirael, 

29 And Zephaniah the prieſt read this letter in the 
the cars of Jeremiah the propher /. 

{ It is incertain whether Zephaniah did this cut of kindneſs to 
7, emiah, ( for we read he was ſent to Jeremiah upon Meſlages v 
Chat. 214 1- and 37. 3. from the King, ) or becauſe he would nor ; 
apprehend him, before he heard him,and let him know that he 
6id nothing againft him but upon 1ntormation, &c+ ; 

22 Then came the word ofthe LORD unto Jere- 
mah, {aying, a : 

;1 Send to all them of the captivity, ſaying, Thus ' 
ſuith tke LORD, concerning Shemaiah the Nehela-| 


£4 


mite, bzcauſe that Shemaiah hath propheſied unto | 
'tremble. 5 


in part to be fulfilled. The former is moſt probable, and that 
there ſhall be no ſuch time when the Jews ſhall return again tg 
Jeruſalem, and poſſeſs their own Land, for it is hard to give an 
account where the Poſterity of the Ten Tribes be, by whoſe re- 
eurn the Promiſe ſhould be jnſtified. Beſides that the Phrale inthe 
beginning of this Verſe, Fey lo, the days come, ſeem. to import a 
more ſpeedy tulfilling of the Promite, than after ſome thouſands 
of Years, tho' It is certair the Jews feed themſelyes with ſome 
ſuch expectations. 


4 Y And theſe are the words that the LORD 
ſpake concerning Iſrael, and concerning Judah. 

5 For thus faith the LORD, We have heard a 
voice of trembling, || of fear, and not of peacee. 


- 3 


A 
w s, 


Chap. XXX. 


[| Or, 2h? 


e God here ſpeaketh, but whecher perſonating other Nations, ; fear, an: 
or the Jewiſh Nation,is not agreed, nor yet whether this Text re- not peace 


 fers to the times of the Miah, when the Nations ſhould tremble, 


or the time when Darizs invaded Babylon, or the times of Gog and 
Magog (of which read Ezek. 38.) Or the time when the Chales 
ans invaded Judah ; this laſt teemeth moſt probable, and tlzac God 
by this intended only to rowle the Jews ont of thzir fecurity,and 
put them off from expecting peace according to the Alatterics of 
the falſe Prophets, afluring them that the Times that were com- 
ing next Were nCct times of Peace, bur ſich as ſhould make them 


ASK 


] 
F C 
K 

s 


4; 5 


SEREMIAH 


y But yer Gol will noc leth's own People go altogether unpuniſh- 
ed, that by it they may be reclaimed, and the World may takes no- 
tice thac God is of purer Eyes than that he can, in any Pc ſoas, be» 
hold Intquity. 

12. For thus faith the LORD, Thy * Bruiſe is in- 
.curable, azd thy \Vound zs grievous z. 

7 Interpreters generally underſtand by Bruiſe or Wound here, 
'the ſtate that tize Fes ſhoul.l be 1a, 1a the Caprivity of Babylon, 
which wou!d be milerable, and fo miſerable that it would be ia- 
curable from any hand, except the Hani of Gad. Ba: 1 do noc 
'underftand why it may no: as welle interpreced of their fiaful 
fate, with reference to God's purple, and 1ntrpteted by, z Chron, 
. [36. 16, where 1t is laid, the Wrath of God aroje ag4int them, "ill 
are of the colour of blaſted Corn,3s the Word figniterh, Deut.';he,o was no Remedy. They had fianed co that degree tha: God 

28. 22, es | [had reſolved into Captivity they ſhoaid &9, aad there ſhould 
2, * Alas, for that Day zs great, ſo that none 2s abide cill the determination ot 70 Years, 

like ith, It & even the Time of Jacob's Trouble z ,| 13. There is none to plead thy Cauſe + that thou 

but he ſhall be faved our of it k. : mayelſt be bound up: * thou hait no healing Medi- 

þ It is no woader, that there is ſuch a trembling uponall hearts," cjnes @, 
ſuch a conſternation and great complaining 3 for it will be a time 
vf no ordinary Calamity, bur of great Evil and milery,in the lame 
lence as it is called a great day, Foel 2.11, great and zerrible ; and 
Zeph. 1. 14, &%. iThere never was {uch a day before. k It will 
be a day of trouble to thoſe that are the Poſterity of Facob, both, 
good and bad, they ſhall not be delivered from it, but they ſhall 
be delivered out of zt. 


$. For it ſhall come to pak in that Day !, ſaith the 
LORD of Holts, char 1 will break Jus Yoke from off 
thy Neck w, and will burſt thy Bonds z, and Stran- 


gers ſhall no more ſerve themſelves of him o. thoſe who are curious may read luthciencly abouc ir in the Enziſh 

1 Not in that great day before mentioned, but in the day when | Annotations upon the Text, It may be more material to co = 
God ſhould deliver the Seed of Facob our of Troxble, m God | fider whether the Prophet's meaning be, there was none would 
threatens to break the Yoke of the King of Babylon, that is, to do it, or there was none could do ic, or there was none ſhould 
break that power of his, which for 70 Years he ſhould exerciſe in | do it, that is, whom God would admit at preſent to doit, as he 
keeping the Fews under. #2 And he would break the Bonds in| elſewhere faich, though Noh, Dani?! and Fob, and though Avfes 
which they ſhould be kept. o And forreign Nations ſhould no and Samuel ſtood betore him, they ſhould {ave noae bur their own 
more ſerve themſelves upon the Fews. Souls. The Prophet's defign doubtlels was to larisfie this Peop'e, 


9. But they ſhall ſerve the LORD rheir God; hat there was no preſent Remedy for them, but Patience, though 


- Poon” peg | fome would in charity plead for them, and though their talſe 
_ David their King p, whom I will raiſe UP Unto Prophets might promile a Cure; yec in veiy deed God would 
them p. 


admit now of no Flea for them, and all means that could be uted 

p Who is here meant by David is not well agreed. Somethink; for their more ſpeedy Reſtauration, would prove no healing Me- 
this Promiſe was fulfilled in the Rule of Zorobabe!, and thoſe af-| dicines, but like Medicines rhat make the Patients worle, and 
ter the Captivity of Babylon, of the Family of David, who ruled' irritate, iaſtead of allaying the Diſtemper, 


over the Fews, though not uader the Style of Kings : Others think . K 
that Chriſt is intended as in the other Parallel Prophecies, Ezek.' 14+ Allthy lovers have forgotten thee 6 : they ſeek 


a6. 
£3 > 


Jl li 


FAINT 
Chap. 0.0.06 
+ Heb. 6. Ask ye now, and ſee whether a Man doth tra- 
A Male. yail with Child ? wherefore do Iſce every Man with 
* Cup. 1j; Hands 0a his Loins, Fas a Woman in 1 ravall f, 
4. 31+ 4" nd all Faces are turned into Paleneſs g ? 


s. 24, 

: \The Voice which I hear, is not the Voice of Women, but of 
Men, and thole the ſtroageſt and ſtouteſt Men, yer 1t 15a Voice 
like the Voice of Women in Travail, roaring out through their 
Vains,aad che Foltuce I ſee the generality of Men are in,is like the 
poſture of Women in Travail, who hold their Hands upon their 
Loias, hoping: thereby to abare their Paln. | Was Ic ever heard 
that Males had the Pains that uſe to attend Child-bearing Women 2 
g And all Meas Saces look as it they had the TelMow-Faundice ; or 


all Interpreters ſeem agree.| that the Propher's Scope is to bring 
their uneafie thoughts toa reſt, aud make ch+m reſt latiszed vil, 
ere Providence of Gd ; for there was no Refiltance of the Will of 
God, which he metaphorically exprefſzth under the Nation of 062 
miſerably and 1acurably wounded, whom no Phyſician or Chirur- 
g20n could heal, aad for whom there was no effectual Bliilter ; 
buc concerning the particular lence? of the H-brews Words, much 
is critically ſaid, which I conceive not my Wat k to repear, nor i5 
{t of mach moment to us to know, whether the Word more p:ro- 
perly ſignifizs healing Medicines, or Courſes of Cure, or Plaiil:rs ; 


$ F \ 
A - 7 


34+ 23. and 37.22, Hof. 3. 5- and thatthe Deliverance here pro- 
miled was fpiricual ; and indeed unlels we fo underſtand it, it will 
be hard to aſlign a time when the Promiſe of the former and this 
Verſe was made good, for upon the return from che Captivity to 
the Coming of Chriſt,and trom his time to this day, other Nations 
have ſerved themſelves upon the Fews, and they have been in 
perpetual Servitude, firſt to the Perſians, then to the Grecians, 
then to the Romans, in Servitude to whom they wereat the Com- 
ing of Chriſt, and ſoon after miſerably. ſubdued by them, and 
fiace that time almoſt all Nations have ſerved themſelves of the 
F-ws. Either therefore this Prophecy mult be underſtood in a ſpi- 
Ticual ſence of the Kingdom of Chriſt, under which the Fems that 
received him were ſpiritually free: Or elſe there isa time yet to 
come, when this Ancient People of God ſhall be reſtored to a 
turther Civil Liberty than'they have enjoyed ever ſince the Cap. 
tivicy of Babylon, and be more full converted to Chriſt, than they 
yetare; towards which ſence many Texts of Scripture, beſides 

this, look; particularly Kom. 11. 25, 26, 
* la.4i- 40. © Therefore * fear thou not, O iy Servant 
- 33.&4445: Jacob 7, faith the LORD, neither be diſmayed, O 
 Cxtt © lracl; forlo, I will fave thee from afar, and thy 

| TA), 46. wag I 
Y 28, Secd from the Land of their Captivity /, and Jacob 
{hall return, and ſhall be in Reſt and Quiet, and none 
{ſhall make him atraid r. 


r You that are my Servants, and the Poſterity of Facob, tho' 
your Captivity be Threeſcore and Ten Years, yet be not afraid 
that I have quite forgotten you, or my Promiſe made to your Fa- 
thers. {For I will affure you, that though I have for your Sins 
lent you afar off, yet you are not beyond the reach of my ſaving 


Arm. z You ſhall return out of the Captivity of Bebylon, and be | 


at reſt, asthey were for 150 Years during the time of the Perſian 
Monarchy. A ſhort Hiſtory of which we have in the Books of 
Exra and Nehemiah. 


11, For I am with thee, ſaith the LORD to ſave 

*Amos thee: * though I make a full end of all Nations whi- 

9.8. ther I have ſcattered thee, yet will I not make a full 

* Pſal.6.1, end of thee w: butl will corre&t thee *in meaſure *#; 
Chap. 1e.and will not leave thee altogether unpuniſhed y. 

34 & 46. u To ſave thee, with a Temporal Salvation, and Deliverance, 

23, and thoſe of thee who are Iſraelites indeed with a ſpiritual, and 

eternal Salvation; buc the ficſt is what is here principally intended, 

w God puts a difference betwixt the Chaſtiſements of his People, 

and the Puniſhmenc of their Enemies ; the Jatter he deſtroyeth 

With an Utter, and total Deſtruion, to make an End of them ; 

bur he chaſtens his People like a Father for their profic, and will 

not bring them to utter ruine. x He corrects them in meaſure: 

The Hebrew word tigniheth in judgment ; that is,not in Equity only, 

but in Wiſdom, or with Moderation, whereas he is ſaid to puniſh 

his Enemies ln Fury. There are many Texts of Scripture that men- 

t10n this difference which God puts berwixt his puniſhing his Peo- 

— 2" panithing their Enemies, Iſa, 26, 14, 19. & 27+ 7,8. 


thee nor, for I have wounded thee with the wotind * 
of an Enemy. with the chaſtiſement of a *cruel one c, 
for the multitude of thine Iniquiry, * becauſe thy tins 
were increaſed 4. 


b In the time of thy Proſperity thou hadſt many Friends, bur 
now they have torgotten thee. Very probably che Egyprizns and 
Aſſriens, whoſe Helpthe Fews made often ule of, are the Lovers 
here intended, 2 Chron. 28. 21. Hof. 12. 1. indeed the Egyp:i4ns 
were before conquered, or very nic? brought low, by the King 
of Babylon. c They ſee the milecable care they are in, and now 
do not covet thee as formerly, they difcern that I have wounded 
thee with luch a wound, as cruel Men ule to give their Enemies. 
4 Though it be in me no Act of Cruelcy, for it is but ta a juſt pu- 
niſhment of your Iniquities, which were encrealed to a very 
great multitude. 


15. Why crieſt thou for thine Aﬀfiction ? thy Sor- 
row 25 1ncurablee, tor the mulcitude of thine Iniquity : 
becauſe thy Sins were encreaſfed, I have done theſe 
things unto thee f. 


e Why complaineſt thou of my dealings with thee 2 Or as 
Chap. 15.18. The caule of thy Sorrow 1s incurable, or as others, 
Why complaineſt thou that thy Sorrow is incurable. f Though it 
be fo, yer chou haſt no reaſon to complain of my dealings, tor thy 
deſtruftion is of thy ſelf ; I am juſt in what I have done, for I 
have bur given thee that Death which 1s the wages of thy work of 
fin, nor was I ſuddenly provoked, 1t is for the multitude of thine 
[lniquities, and in that Cale the living Man hath no jult reaton to 
complain, Lam: 3. 39. 


them ſhall go into Captivity, and they that ſpoil thee 
ſhall be a ſpoil, and all that prey upon thee will I give 
tor a prey h. 

g The Particle 127 taken, is thought here to be i!! tranſlated 


therefore, for maniteitly it 15 not cauſal or illative, and thoſe who 
interpret it therefore, refer it to what went betore, Yerſe 10, 11- 
It were better Tranfited nevertheleſs, or notwithſtanding yet, to the 
Learned Author of the Engliſh Annotaiians thinks 1: ſhould be 
Tranſlated, I/a- 7. 14. and 3o. 18. and in many other Texts. 5 59 
chis Text is a declaration of God's Free-mercy, though this People 
had juſtly provoked che Lord by their Iniquicies ro puniſh chem, 
yet he would ar length revenge them of cheir Enemies, and thole 
chat ſpoiled them ſhould feel his Juſtice, and be chemtelves lpoiled, 
ſo Iſa. 10.12. and 33.1. God ordinarily puniſhera chole chat 
have been Enemies to his People, more levereiy chan his People 
have been puniſhed by them,the Realons are,becaule though they 
lerve Godin chaftiſiag his People, yer chey do 1© nor delignedly ; 
[{a. to. 7. and commonly they exceed 3 myalure 10 their execu- 
eing God's Vengeaiees 


6-3 


17. For 


b 
, 
FAY I 4 


* Caap. 
L5+ 45, 


F Heb. 


for binds 


278 ip i 


4 Concerning the general Deſign of the Prophet in theſe words,” */4ng. 


T Cnzp. 


$. 3&s 


* Job 12. 
24. & 15. 
9. & 19. 
11, 

* ſob 32. 
21, 

* Cnap. 
S, 6. 


16. Therefore g all they that devour thee * ſhall * Exc. 
be devoured, and all thine Adverſaries, every one of 23- 32- 


Chap. XXX. 


C } 5 
Ta. E 

1- For, I will reſtore hcalth : unto thee, and I will 
heal thee of thy Wounds, faith the LORD, becauſe 
they called thee an Outcaſt, ſaying, This zs Zion, 
whom no man ſecketh after k. 


i As the miſerable ſlate of this People was by the Prophet, 
Verl: 12, 12. deſcribed under the fimilitude of a Man wounded, 


under the ndtion of health, and God's ation in reſtoring them, 
expreſs d under the notion of healing,both here,and in many other 


Texts, Iſa.6. 10. and 19.22. and 57. 18, 19. h; The Particle] 


here Tranfſlater, becauſe, may ſo fignifie here, tor often the ſcorn 
and contempt. of God's Peoples Enemies, cauſeth God to make 
haſte to the!* Salvation and Deliverance : But many think that 1t 
were better Tranſlated although, as it is, Foſ. 17-18. Though the 
Heathens ca!lthee one that I have caſt off,as a Man doth his Wife, 
yet they fhafl ſee the contrary,for I will heal thee of thy wounds. 
k Though they deriding ſay, this Ziov whom none cares for : 
Some think that in this they alluded tothe original Signification 
of the Word Ton, which is a dry or waſt place. 


13 < Thus ſaith the LORD, Behold, I will bring 
again the captivity of Jacob's tents, and have mercy 
on his dwelling places /, aad the city ſhall be builded 
upon her own || heap, and the palace ſhall remain at- 


ter the manner thereof m7. 

{ This Verſe manifeſtly is a promiſe of the rebuiiding of the 
City, and was fulfilled in the times of Ezra, and the Term Capt;- 
vity, Which'in its proper fence relates to Perlons, not to Places, 
being here applyed to Places, {ignifies the miſerable itate of Fe- 
ruſalem, updn the taking it by Nebuchadnez3ar, which God pro- 
miſeth to Ehange or alter under the Notion of bringing again : 
So we read of the Captivity of Fob, who yer ſtrictly was never a 
Captive, Feb 42. 10. m Whether by the term heap be meant the 
heap of Rubbith, into which the City was turned, upon the taking 
of it by the King of Babylon, or the Hill upon which the City was 
builded, is not much material ; by the Palace is meant either the 
King's Houle, or the Templs 3 ſo the Verſes a Promiſe of the 
building again of the City, the Temple, and chief Governours 
Houſe, all which was fulfilled by Exra, Nehemiah and Zerobabel, 
the Hiſtory of which we read in the Books wrote by Ezra and Ne- 
pemiah. 


| Or, t7t- 
il: Hg. 


and bruiſed and ſick, fo their more proſperous ſtate is detcribed- 


” Ow 


F 
6 [E, 
£ 3s 


i A Chap. RX Xl. 


Sons of Aſen as he; fo as for him to be a Mediator betwixt Offen- 
ders, and an offended God : None but he dur ſt look in the Face of 
an angry God. Others underſtand it of God's People, intimating_ 
that inthe Day when they ſhould return out of Captivity there 
would be but few, that with any ſerious purpoſe of Heart would 
apply themtelves unto God, or fignitying the impotency that is in 
Man heartily to draw nigh ro God, till (as it is before ſaid ) God 
cauſeth him ſo to do ; and ſome think the Words have a reterence 
co the Covenant mentioned in the next Verſe. 

22. And ye ſhall be * my People, and I will be * Chap. 
your God q 24.7. & 
q God in theſe words declares, That in that Day he would re- 37* 7> 33: 
new his Covenant with Iſrael, (at leaſt the true Iſraelites ) and ** 33 30 
they ſhould be his People to ſerve, and to obey him, and he would 


be their God, to prote@ and bleis them, with all temporal, and 

all |piritual Bleſſings. 

23. Behold * the whirlwind of the LORD goeth * Chap: 
forth with tury 7, a+ continuing whirlwind /, it ſhall mg EN Os 
| fall with pain upon the Head of the Wicked r. re a 
7 The Vengeance of God compared to a Whirlwind, tor the —_—_ 
ſuddennels of ir, and becauſe it ſhould encompaſs them to tnelr | th va 
ruine, 4 terrible Whirlwind, { Or, a continuing Whirling, not Tolle iy 
ludden blaſt of Wind that ſhall preſently go over, but a Venge- 

ance that ſhall adide. 2 The miſerable Eftes of which, in de- 
{troying ſhall be either upon the Heathen, or upon the wicked 


_ that ſhall continue in their Diſobedience and Stubborn- 
nels. 


24 The fierce anger of the LORD ſhall not re- 
turn, until he have done #7, and until he have per- 
tormed the intents of his Heart «: in the latter days 
ye ſhall conſider it w. 

u He expoundet!1 in theſe Words the continving Whirlwind, 
{poken of, Verſe 2 3. and withal lets them know, that what the fal(6 
Prophets ſaid of a tpeedy return out of Babylon of thoſe already 
there, or of the nor going of thoſe which as yet were ir Fudea was 
all but talſhood ; for the Lord was angry, and was reſoived to fu!- 
fil the purpoſe of his Heart in puniſhing them. w And though ac 
preſent they would ndt conſider, nor believe it, yet afterward, 
when they ſhould ſee things come to paſs according as he had faid, 
then they ſhould confider what he had told them. 


2 & 
of FX 
(WJ 
£74 


19 And * out of them ſhall proceed Thankſgi- 
ving 7, and the Voice of them that make merry o,and 
I will nwltiply them, and they ſhall not be few p ;| 
I will alſo glorifie them, and they ſhall not be 


{mall g. . 

2 Thankfgiving to God, as Chap, 17. 26. either Thank-Offer- 
ings, Lev. 7. 12, 13. or vocal Thanſgivings. o Either in a reli- 
gious Sence, or ina civil Sence: If it be taken in the former it fig- 
nifieth their Mirth at their Religious Feſtivals, of which we read 
much in Scripture, Pſal. 42.4. and 118. 15,0%. ifin thelatter, it 
figniſieth their happy and joyful ſtate after their Reſtauration. 
Though they be diminiſhed in the Captivity, yet I will return to 
them in my wonted Providence, and multiply them according to 
my Promiſe to Abraham, fo as they ſhall be for Number many. 
q And as to their Quality 1t ſhall be honourablez though during 
thoſe 70 Years they ſhall be a People of mean, or no Reputation, 
yet after that time they ſhall recoyer their ancient Reputation, 
and apain be a People great for Honour and Glory. 


20 Their Children alſo ſhall be as aforetime, and 
their congregation ſhall be eſtabliſhed before me /., 


and [ will puniſh all that oppreſs them £. 

r Their Poſterity alſo ſhall be as happy, and inas much repute, 
as they were before this carrying into Babylon, f Their Church, 
or the Body of the People of the Fews, ſhall from Generation to 
Generation be eſtabliſhed. rt And though in thoſe times there 
will be ſome that will oppreſs them, yet they ſhall nor eſcape 
my Vengeance that do it, for 1 will protect and defend them. 


z1 And their Nobles ſhall be of themſelves, and 
their Governour ſhall proceed from the midſt of 
them x, and I will cauſe him to draw near, and he 
ſhall approach unto me 0; for who z- this that en- 
gaged his Heart to approach unto me ? faith the 


SH. 35% 
10. 0 FL. 


If. 


CHAP. XXXI. 


The Reſt auration of Iſrael publiſhed, I, =— 74 Rachel mourne 
ing is comforted, 15, —— 17. Ephraim repenting is brought 
home, 18, ——— zI. Chrift promiſed, 22, 26. His Care 
over the Church, 27, —— 30. His New Covenant, 31, — 34. 
The Stability and Enlargement of the Church, 3 5, — 40. 


I T the ſame time, ſaith the LORD, will I be 
the God of all the Families of Iſrael,and they 
ſhall be my People 4- 


2 When the Lord's Anger fhall turn, he having performed all 
the thoughts of his heart upon the wicked Iſraelites, he will de- 
clare himſelf not unmiadful ol the Covenant which he made with 
Abraham. and his Seed, but will be their God, and they ſhall be 
the People of his Favour whom he will protect and bleſs. Ic is 
uncertain whether 7ſraet here is to be taken in a more large ſence 
as it ſignifieth the whole Twelve Tribes, or only Fudah, being tha: 
part of Iſrael which was before ſpoken of. 


2 Thus ſaith the LORD, The People which were 
left of the ſword, found grace in the wilderneſs ; ever 


Iſrael, when I weat tc cauſe him to relt 6. 

b God confirmeth the atore-me1iitioned Promiſes, and his Peo- 
ples hope and faith in chem, by minding them of what he had an- 
ciently done for ti.is very people. Though God did in the Journey 
which the 1/raelrtes nad from Egypt to Canaan, cut off many of 
them by the Sword for their Iniquittes, fome by the Amalekiter, 
Exod. 17. 8. ſome by the Swords of their Brethren for the Idola- 
try they commitced about the Golden Calf, Exod. 32. 28. yet, 
thoſe that ſur vived that, and other Judgments, found favour in 
God's Eyes, while they were going to Canaan the Land of Reſt, 
or while God going before them, broughtthem into Canaan. God 
parallelleth his future Providences, and gracious Purpoſes with 
his paſt gracious Providences. 


LORD pz. 

u This Promiſe was made good in Zorobabel, and other Go- 
vernours of the Fews after their return out of Captivity, till they 
came to-be ſubdued by the Romans. Some reſtrain this unto 
Chriſt, and make it a Prophecy of Chriſt, being born of the Few. 
iſp Nation : It is he they ſay that was meant by David, Perſe 9. 
and 1t 1s not improbable that the ſence of the Text may reach unto 
Chriſt, but it ſeems literally to be underſtood of Zorobabel, and 
to be oppoſed to ſtrangers ruling over them, which was no ſma]] 
piece of their Calamity, while they were in Captivity. o That is, 
he ſhall ferve me, and I will fayour him, or this People ſhall, 
ſerve me,anJI will tavour them, and not be as one at diſtance, or 
far off tromthem. Some underſtand this of the Civil Governour 
that ſhould be after the Captivity, ſome underſtand it of the Peo- 
ple, ſome underſtand it of Chriſt ; thoſe that underſtand it of the 
Governour,make it to ſignihe the ſpecial Favour that a Governour 
ſhould be in with God, and his Religion. Thoſe that underſtand 
it of the People, make it to fignifie the Religion of the People, 


; 


3 The LORD hath appeared -Fof old unto me, 4 1,5; 
ſaying ce, Yea, I have loved thee with an everlaſting from afar! 
love 4, therefore with loving kindaeſs have ||I drawny or, x 


thee e. have ex- 
c The word, ſaying, being not in the original, hath given advan- #ended 1o- 

tage to ſome to think, that the firſt words, are either the words of ving kind- 

ſome of the people owning that the Lord indeed had of 01d ap- neſs 10 3hee- 

peared toand for them, but doubting whether the kindneſsof God 

ſtill held toward them ; or elſe complaining that theſe were old 

Stories. To which the Prophet replies by aſſuring them that God's 

Love was not a temporary Love, manifeſted to a ſingle Generati- 

on, but it was an everlaſting Love, therefore he had drawn them 

wity loving kindne[s, he had all along dealt graciouſly with them, 

that way attempting to-oblige them to that Duty which they owed 

to him. This drawing witi loving-kindnels he calleth a drawing 

with the Cords of ſen, Hol. 11. 4, who ordinarily are little 


and the favour tney ſhould be in with God. Thoſe who underſtand 
it of Chriſt, interpret it of his favour with God, by whom alſo the 
Saints have their acceſs. p Interpreters are yet moredivided about 
this Phraſe; ſome apply it to Chriſt, either asan admiration of his 
| Excellency, or as denoting that none but he could draw near to 


wrought upon by Force, but won by Loye. 

4 Again * I will build thee, and thou ſhalt be « 1,6. 
built f, O Virgin of Iſrael g, thou ſhalt agaio be a- 33, -. 
dorwd with thy || tabrets, and ſhalt go forth inthe} Or, 7% 
dances of them that make merry h, brels. 


'God in that manner as he did, nor had any ſuch a Delight in the 


f As 


X 


101- 


Chap. 0,000 


f A5 u91 their beinZ carried into Captivity, both their Civil | 


fic to travel 191g Jour ey than any others ; but tith 30 1, Lwill 


&3te 214 Church, wich eirher of them wereas a Building framed | make ſuch Proviſion, tha: tone under choſe Circunſtances ſhall 


roo2ther, were broke and pulled down, and they were lcattered 
here a1l there, like che Stones of a Building palled down, to 
GoJ's bringing them again trozether,and cementing them by a Po- 


; Come, that thefe Phraſes mult 5» interprered 01'y tato whis gene- 
ral Senſe, appears, becaule ti Perton in a little Senfe could 
; not come. And though lone worthy {4;erpreters, underftand it 


lirical and Ecclefiaſtical G »verment,1s fitly compared co a Build-| in a ſpiritual ſenſe of ignorant and impotent Pertons, and Iecl as 


5 #& Thecalling them the Virgin Iſrael, doth not fignifte that 
_ 5, _— Peoplz had not been deflowred by Idolatry,but 
either ſiznifies that this Promile only concerned ſuch as had kept 
their Virginicy;Oc elle ( which it may be 15 more probable)Iſrael 
is here calle a /irzin with relation to the following words, they 
bing Virgins which were Wont to go out with Taorets, 1 Sam. 
18. 6. and to Dunce in the time of thetr mirth and jollicy, Exod. 
5.20. Fud. 11, 34. Þ The Virgins are fatd to be adorned with 
cheir Tabrets or Timbrels, either ( as ſome think ) becauſe they 
were wont to tyeScarfs , or Ribbons about them,or becauſe they 
Jooked comelily with theſe Inftcuments of Muſick inthetr hands 
or ſhould uſe them in a more handſome and comely manner than 
they had done before,when they ule 1 them at unſeaſonable times. 
That which is here prophefied is,a merry,joyful,plealans cime to 
this People when their Mirth ſhould become themzor the Reſtau- 
ration of their Religious Feſtivals at which they uſed Inſtruments 
of Muſick to exprels their inward ſpiritual joy and gladnels. Tae 
Prophets, 1 Sam: L9. 5. came from the High-place with a Tabret 


[OT 


* 1ſ4.65.2- $5 * Thou ſhalt yet plant vines upon the mountains 


+ Heb. 
profane 
them. 


* Is. % 2. 
Mich. 4. 2 


of Samaria 7, the planters ſhall plant, and ſhall Þ cat 
them as common things &. 

i Simaria was the Metropolis of the Ten Tribes, called ſo 
from Shemer who owned the Hill ; Omri King of Iſrael bought it, 
and built Samaria upon it. Mountains in many places are judged 
the molt convenſent places for Vineyards, being free from Shades 
and moſt expoſed tothe Sun. k God promiſeth them a Liberty 
ro plant,and that they ſhouid enjoy their Plantations eating them 
as cemmon things, which they could not do till the fifth Year, as 
appears from Lev. 19. 23. The three fir{t Years it was to be ac- 
counted by them, as uncircumciſed, that is unclean 3 In the fourth 
Year it was to be holy to the Lord; In the fifth Year they might 
eat the fruit of it,as any Common thing that was not unclean,nor 
yet devoted and conſecrated to the Lord. 


6 For there ſhall be a day,that the Watchmen upon 
'the mount Ephraim ſhall cry /, Ariſe ye, * and let us 


g0 up to Zion unto the LORD our God . ' 

! That Mount Ephraim was a part of the Lot of the Ten Tribes 
is out of queſtion ; Whether by Watchmen, be to be underſtooci 
State Centinels, ſet to give warning of dangers approaching, or 
Keepers of Vineyards, teemeth not much material. m2 It 15 laid 
they ſhould call upon Men to go up to Zion, that is, 80 the Tem- 
ple of the Lord at Feruſalem to worſhip the Lord. The only que- 
ſtioa is,whattime this Prophecy was fulfilled>For though Fudzh 
returned from the Captivity of Babylon, yet the Ten Tribes ( that 
weread of) never returned.Some think that it was fulfilled in the 
time of Ezra and Nehemiah, when though the Body of the Ter 
Tribes returned not,yet many particular Perſons of thole Tribes 
did return and joyn themſelves with thoſe who returned out ofthe 
Captivity ot Babylon, and rebuilr both the City and che Temple, 
Beſides it appeareth from Foſephus, 1. 13. cap. 5, $. that the D-- 
metirit gave Samaria, Galilee and Perea to the Fews- But the 
beſt Interpreters judge that this Prophecy was fulfilled under the 
Golpel ; for both G!ilee and Samaria received the Golpel as ap- 
peareth from Aﬀs 8. r, 5. 9, 14. and 9. 3r. 


7 For thus ſaith the LORD, Sing with gladneſs 
for Jacob, and ſhout amongſt the chief of the nations 
publiſh ye, praiſe ye, and ſay » , O LORD, fave thy 
people, the remnant of Iſrael o. 

3 This grave, authoritative Pretace, Thus ſaith the Lord, ſeem 
eth to be prefixed to put the People of God our of fear of the ac 
compliſhment of the good things he had before promiſed,and pro-| 
pheſted of, The Verſe in it ſe]f is either an Exhortation to thoſe 
amongſt the Fews who feared God, or to the Heathen, to ſine 
and rejoyce on the behalf of the Fews, to whom God would cer: 
tainly ſhew ſuch mercy as they might fing for 3 before they had it 
in their hands, they might both publiſh the thing that it ſhould 
certainly be, and alſo bleſs God for it. o But withal he minds 
them, that there would be occaſion for Prayer as well as Praiſe 
there would be a Remnant of Iſrael, that would have at laſt no 
preſent ſhare in theſe Mercies,through their Impenitency, Unbe- 
lief, and hardneſs of Heart. Hereby minding us that we ought 
not ſo to rejoice in our good things, as to forget thoſe who are no 
ſharers with us: The beſt of God's Peoples Lot,while they are in 


this Life, is ſuch as will ſhew them a need of Prayer as well as 
Praiſe, 


8 Behold, I will bring them * from the north- 
country p, and gather them from the coaſts of the 
earth 9, azd with them, the blind, and the lame 
the woman with child, and her that travaileth with 
_ together, a great company ſhall return hi- 

E*, 


Þ By the North-Country, is unqueſtionably meant Babylon 
and the Land of the Chaldzins, and thoſe places which were 
Northward of Hieruſalem 3; and by the Coaſts of the Earth, all 
other parts into which any of the Fews had been driven. r The 
meaning of this is,that nothing ſhould hinder ſuch from returning, 
as had a mind toreturn: Blind Men that could not ſee their way. 
and lame Yerſons, who had no ſtrength to walk in it though they 


are laden with the Burden of their $i:5, and of coming to Ciriſt, 
it ſeems not to be the priniry 1e1t© of the Texc, 
9 They ſhall come with weeping, and | wit! 


1 SUP+ 
\plications wil I lead then 


[ wilt cauſe them to 
walk by the Rivers of Waters 7, in a ſtraight way 
whereltn they ſhall not ſtumble «: for Tam a father to 
Ifracl, and Ephraim is my firſt-born w, 

{Some think that it ha4 been better Tranſlated, chevy wenr 
weeping, for though the Verb be the furvre Tenſe in che Hebrew | 
yet that Tenſe hath often rhe Sianitication of the Preterp-rfeft 
Tenſe; thus it anſwereth, Pjal. 126, $,6. Hz that” goeth forth 
weeping, bearing precious ſeed, ſhi!l doubtleſs come azain re- 
fojcing, &c. but there is no need of it here, tor there isa weeping 
tor Joy, as well as for Sorrow, as we have it ia the Inſtances both 
of Facob and Foſeph, Gen. 29. 11. and 43. 30. and this the Texc 
correſpondeth with that, Zach. 12. 10. 7 will pour upon them 2he 
ſpirit of grace and ſupplications, and they ſhall l1ghe upon him whons 
they bave pierced, and mourn, IWeepins allo here may be un. 
derſtood tor their paſt Sins. r An tiey ſhall have no want as 
they had when they came out of Egy?t, throngh the Wildernets, 
where they often wanted water. « Neither ſhall chey have any 
rough Ways, nor turn backward 34 forward, as God made then: 
to do in their Paſſage througn the Willerneſs, w For as have 
the affeftion of a Father tor all I/ra-!, fo will I (hw the care and 
Kindneſs of a Father to them, and ute them 25 a Ma! vieth his Ref e 
born; fo God anciently called the Ferrs, Exod. 4.22. they being 
the hrit of all Nat1ons, whom Gold owned, and rook 114to Cove- 
nant , who ewned Goc, and worſhipped the crue and living God 
only. 

10 © Hear the word of the LORD, O ye Nations, 
and declarc zt 11 the iſles afar of, and ſay +, He that 
ſcattered Ifracl will gather kimy, and keep him, as 
a ſhepherd 4h his tiock =. 

x God willeth his Promiſes of z00d to his People to be publiſh. 
ed and declared before hand, and that not.to them only, but to 
other People,thatthe hand ct tis Providence when he brings them 
'0 pals may be more conlp'cuous, and it may be tadeniably ow:n- 
e1to bethe Work of God, being no more than what he had fore- 
told long before. y GoG 15 not on!'y the Author of thole funds - 
ments Which come upon his People, but of their Mercies, an his 
Power in ſcattering them 15 en04:h to coutirm us 12a Beltet of his 
Power to gather them. 4 He will not only gather them, but keep 
and protect them when gathered, and thus God ſheweth himfelf 
"their Shepherd ; It is the work oi a Shepherd not oniy to cali, and 
gather h1s Sheep together, but to watch over them, protect and 
reep them, When they are ([o g4:1-rea rogether, 


than he b. 

2 Becaule of the certainty of Divine Prophecies and Promiles, 
things in them are often laid ro be already done, which are not to 
he fulElled of many years after : The Senle is, God will as cer- 
tainly do it, as if he had ajready done it; For whetner ic be under- 
{tood of a Deliverance from B:by{on, or of the Salvation of the 
Goſpel by Chriſt, which by a Metaphor is often alſo called redeen- 
ing and ran{oming, it was to be accompliſhed long after this cime, 
b By him that was ſtronger than he, ſome underſtand the Cha!- 
4-2ns ; others underſtand the Devzl,( interpreting the Text of che 
Spiritual Redemption of God's People by the Blood of Chriſt, be- 
i1g the Ranſom given for them ) but undoubtedly the Text is lite- 
rally to be underſtood of their Deliverance from Babylon, though 
( as the Apoſtle faith) all theſ? things happened 10 them in a fizure. 
In their Deliverance as weil from Babyion as Egybr, they were 
Types of the Deliverance of God's People from ipiritual Babylon, 
and Egzpt by Chrift, as well as in theirentring into Cn4an, they 
| were ( as the Apoſtle proveth, Heb. 3.and 4) Types of the Saints 
entring into Heaven, of which Canaan wasa Type. 


1 2 Therefore they ſhall come and ling in the height 
of Zion c, and ſhall flow together to the goodneſs of 
the LORD 4, for wheat, and for wine, and-for oy1, 
and for the young of the flock, and of the Herd ec ; 


they ſhall not ſorrow any more at all g. 

c The particular Phraſes in this Verſe mult not be ſtrained, nor 
do they need a particular explication all tgnitying but one thing, 
viz. the happy and proſperous ſtate the Fews ſhould be in, after 
their return from the Captivity, both as to their Religious and 
Civil State; the height of Zion may either fignifie Hieruſalem, 07 
the Temple more etpecially where thoſe that returned, as well 
thoſe of the Ten Tribes, as thoſe ſtriftly of J:d4h, ſhould come 
ad fing Praiſes to God 3 4 And ſhou!d there come to beg of God 
good things upon the account of his Goodnels, owning him as the 
God of their Mercies, whether of a Spiritual or Temporal Na- 
ture. e Such as Corn, Wine, Oyl, and 2nencreaſe of their Carte), 
both Flocks and Herds. fAnd they ſhould be 2 beautiful, flou- 
riſhing,growing People,like a watered Garden that looks chearly, 
and in which things grow and thrive ( tor Sou! doth nor ſeem here 
to betaken for Mens ſpiritual and immortal part, but for the whole 


law it, and Women with Child, in regard of their heavinels, and | yan, ) & And they ſhall be ſorrowful no more in that manner as 


Women Travailtog, in regard of their Pain, are Perlons more une| 


Vol. II. 


they have been, and tor that on «1 Generation were z or many 


I 2 | Yeags, 


and their ſoul ſhall be as a * watered Garden f,, and * 
I 


FEARE M 1.4 H Ciap. XXXE 


| with j+- 


Vier): 


11 * For the LORD hath redzemed Jacob 2, and* If. 45 
ranſomed him from the haad of 14 4c was Rronger 2% - 3+ 


<3. 


- 


Chap. XXRXl, 


x Aatth. 2 


17) 


1 8, 


tothe ten Tribes, upon their being captivated by the Aſſprians, or 
to the ſlaughter of the Fews, upon the ſiege and taking ot the City 


FERE 


years, vide Tſa. 35. 10, Some think that under theſe Expreſſions, 
is alſo promiſed the {pit itual Joy which the true 1/racl of God 
ſhou!d have under the Goſpel, and the eternal Joy they ſhall have 
in Heaver, when, and not before, all Tears ſhall be wiped from 
their Eyes; for ina firidt lence it was not fulfilled to the Fews, 
who at the taking of their City by the Romany, f1xty years aiter 
Chriſt met with more Sorrow,than they had ever before met with, 


+ | | 
i 3 Then ſhall the virgin rejoyce in the dance, both 


young men and old men together : for I will turn 
their mourning into joy, and will comfort them, and 
make them to rejoyce trom their ſorrow h. | 

þ This Verſe containeth only a farther variety of Expreſtiors 
all fgnifying che lame thing, v2. their happy ſtate, tor lome time 
after the Cartivity. We may underſtand the Dancings here of all | 
ſorts of People, either oi their religious rejoycing 1n taeir Ho:y 
Feſtivals, (for under the old Teſtament 1n the!r re.1g10us reJoycing 
they uted theſe External Expreflions of Joy, as appears trom 
Pjal. 150. 4. and from Duvid's dancirg before the A 'K ) or of 
their civil] Joy, where Darcing was more uſual : The aft words 
of the Verie expound all the lormer. | 

14 And 1 will ſatiate the Soul of the Prieſts with 
fatneſsz, and my people ſhall be ſatisfied with my 
Goodneſs, faith the LORD k&. | 

i By Prieſts fomeunderftand the Miniſters of the Goſpel, whom , 
Gad here promiſerh liberally to provide for ; or rather by giving! 
a ſucceſs to their Miniſtry, and letting chem ze the fruit of their 
labours, make to rejoice: In which meraphoricat ſence I ſhould 
rather interpret it, applying it firſt tothe Prieits of che Fews aiter 
the Captivity, of whom it is ſaid, Exra 6. 16. that they kept the 
feaſt of the dedicarions of the ſecond Temple with joy 3 and verſe 22. 
the Lord had made the pecple joyful» k Nor were the people for 
a ſhoit time ouly ſatisfied with the Lord's goodncls, Ina lecon- 
dary trpical lence it may allo fignifie the [p11 itua] ſuccels, and re- 
jorcing of good Miniſters under the'Goſpel, and tie {piricual joy 
of Bel evers. This rejoycing is metaphorically expreſſed by fat-eſs, 
witha!lufion to the tat of the Sacritices under the Law. It 1s an, 
uſual thing for God by his Prophets to exprels New Teſtament 
Duties and Priviledges, by Phraſes borrowed fromthe Worſhip 
of God under the Old Teſtament. Vide Iſa. 66. 22,23. 

15 $5 Thus faith the LORD, A Voice was 
heard in Ramah/, lamentation zd bitter weeping :! 
* Rachel weeping for her Children m2, refuſed to be; 
comforted for her children, becauſe they were not 7 | 

{ Interpreters are much divided jn the ſence of theſe words, 
whether they ſhould refer to the ſlaughter of the Fews belonging 


by tbe Kirg of Babylon, or to Herod's killing the Inftarits in Beth- 
l-bem ? Cercain it is, the Evangeliſt, Afar. 2, 8. applieth them un- 
to the latter ; but whether the Evangeliſts application of it be as 
2 li:eral fulfilling of rhe Prophecy, or by way of allufion, or no, is 
the queſtion. Thote that taink that it is primarily to be under- 
{to0d of the laughter of the Infanrs, urge, 1. That Afatthew. 
Chap. 2. 18. ſo applies it. 2+ That womens mourning for chi!- 
dren ſeems rather to be for the lots of Infants, (as was there) than 
expreſtive of the mourning Of all fortsof People in a general defo- 
Jacion. 3. That the place ofthe mourning i-ems to hint it ; for 
Ramahb was near to Bethlkbem, and contained under the Coaſts 
about Butblchem, mentioned by the Evangeliſt. 4. The words 
becauſe they were not, tacy think make for them ; tor by being 
carried into Captivity they 1d not ceaſe to be, though they 


M I 4H 


Children, being tranſplanted and removed into Bztylon. So as I 
take this Text lirecally and primarily to refer to the lamentation 
for the Miſeries the People ſuffered upon the Ring of Babylon's ta- 
king the City : To which Mourning Matthew alludeth, there be- 
ing a lamentation like this, when Herod cauled the Infants of ewo 
years 01d to be ſlain in Bethlzhem, and in the Coaſt about Beth- 
l:hem, of which Ramab was one. 

16 Thus faith the LORD, Refrain thy Voice 

rom Weeping, and thine Eyes from Tears : for 
thy Work ſhall be rewarded, ſaith the LORD o, and 
they ſhall co.ne again from the Land of the Enemy. 

6 The Prophet in this,and the following Verles, is brought inas 
one appointed of God to quiet and comfort the Rachel betore-men= 
tlonec, calling to her to quiet ner ſelf, and not to mourn lo excel- 
tively, tor God would recompenle her for her Aflictions, which 
as here unCeritood by the Term Work ; ( as ſome think ) but the 
Heb. Word ?UD pogni!, is hardly found in Scripture taken for At- 
fiction 3 Others therefore apply jt to Rachel, for whole Piety-{ake 
God wouid fhew Mercy to her Children,as a Reward of Grace,tho' 
not of Debt. The beſt Interpreters think that the Terms of 
Wecri and Reward are here uſed only to expreſs the lucceſſion of a 
comtortable State to their mileravle State in Captivity, { as the 
Wages ule to follow the Work) which ſhould make them amends 
tor their long time of Affliction ; and lo it is expounded by the 
laſt Words of the Verſe. 

17 And there is hope in thine end, ſaith the LORD, 
that ty children ſhall come again to their own bor- 
der p. 

2 Aad again here, where, by end, is meant the end of the ſe- 
ven!y years, and the words are but a repetition of the Promiſe of 
the return of the Fews out of the Captivity of Babylon, of which 
tne Prophet had often before afſured them,and here only repeats it 
as an Argument why they ſhould not be immoderately atHiCted ; 
tor tet Affliction was not endleſs,nor their Captivity tor ever ; 
they ſhould return again into their own Land. 


18 [have ſurely heard Ephraim q bemoaning him- 
ſelf 1hizs, r Thou haltchaſtiſed me, and [ was chaſtiſed 


* 6 
as a Bullock unaccuſtomed zo rhe yoke 5.* turn thou me, * Fat. 5: 


and I ſhall be turned ?, for thou art the LORD my ** 
God #. 


9g The Prophet in this Verſe ſheweth the change that ſhould bs 
wrought in the hearts of the Ijraelites preceding this turn out of 
their Captivity. God had made an ancient Promiſe to this People 
in their Enemies hands, Levit. 25, 40, 41. If they ſhall confeſs 
their Iniquity, and the Iniquity of wheir Fathers, with their trelpaſs 
which they treſpaſſed agairjt me, and that they allo have walked 
contrary unto me. 4te And that alſo I have walked contrary un- 
'0 them, ard have brought them into the Land of their Enemies ; 
if then their uncircumciſed hearts be humbled, and they then at- 
cept of the Puniſhment of their Iniquity. a2, Then will I ye« 
member my Covenant with Jacob, and alſo my Covenant with 
tfaac, and aijo my Covenant with Abraham, will I remember, 
and I will remember the Lind, The Lord to ſhew his Faith- 
zulets ro his Word, and allo to mind them of what muſt firſt be 
done before the aforementioned Promiles could be fulfilled, and 
made good tothem; and to quicken them to their Duty, ſpeaks 
of a thing yet to come as of a thing paſt, foretel]ins that betore 
their Deliverance ſhouid come he ſhould hear Ephraim, that is,the 
Ten Tribes,or rather,thoſe of all the twelve Tribes that feared the 
Lord, r Bemoaning, or Bewailing their miſerable State, or Them- 
ſelves, both for That,and their Sins,which had Srought them into 


ceaſed to be jn that happy Eſtate they were in before. 5. Becaule 
they think that this is 1&ie propounded asa Sign of his Coming, 


fuch a State, and acknowleaging not only what God had done 
unto them ; that it was he w'10 had chaſtiſed them and that juſtly. 


, Fr = "hp - ' P þ 7 AO PAT. A. 
upon whoſe Coming thete Promiles of Felicity to the 7:w+ ſhould ; 9", 5 they were as wanton Bullocks not uſedtothe Yoke, which 


be {wihilled, Tagſe realons are not unantwerable; tor Muthew 
may apply it only by way of al/4ſion, ſpeaking of ſuch a Provi- 
tence, when iuch a thing ſhould happen as happened betoie ; in 
which Sence particular Texts of Scripture, are in Scripture often 
741d to be ſuif7ed, thoug! they had their fulfilling before. 2 Ry 

c2l here doth not fignifhe a fing ls Perſon, no, nor a particular Sex, 
but 1s broug!.t in as a common Parent, lamenting the loſs of her 
Otf-tpring. 3. Ramah was indeed near Berhlehem, but it was a 
City in che Tribe of Benjamin, Fol. 18. 25, 1Kings 15.17. Ra- 
ebet vas buried betwixt it ard Bethlehem, Gen. 35. 19. 1 Sams 
10. 2. and1t was allo the place where Nebuzaraden, atter he had 
taren Hizruſalemdiipoied of his Priſoners, as we read, Chap.q0.1. 
4. Thougathe greater part ofthe Fews were not flain, but carried 
into Captivity ; yer doubtleſs many were ſlain, and thoſe left alive 
wer? not a5 to her, being now carried out of Canazn intoa ſtrange 
Land, 5. Although the Promites in this Chapter, made to the Feros, 
were more eminently and fully made good under the Kingdom of 
Chit; vet it may be doubted whether any of theſe Promiſes were 
prim3i1ly, and ſolely falfilled to them under the Kingdom of 
Chriſt, but literally, betore that time, though more fully and 
largely then. In Ramzh therefore a Voice was heard; that is in 
Candan, and particularly in Ramah, where Nebu aradan, chap. 
45. 1. ifpoſed of the Pritoners he had taken, ſetting ſome at li- 
berty (as Feremiah 1n particular) ordering others to Death, and 
carrying the reſt away to Babyl9n, which c:ulted a bitter weeping 


ordinarily are very unruly when they are firſt put into it, but by 
uſe are more quiet under it. # And praying to God, that he would 
both change their Hearts, and alfo their ſlate ; for without him 
ic could never be done, and by him it would be done ealily., 
u And to this purpoſe laying a claim to God as their God, and 
owing him as their God, promiſing him that though othek Lords 
had ruled over them, yet hereafter he alone ſhould be ownes, 
acknowledged, worſhipped, and obeyed by them, 


[9 Surely after that T was turned] repented , 
and after that I was inſtructed, I fmote upon my 
thigh x: I was aſhamed, yea, even confounded, be- 
cauſe I did bear the reproach of my Youth yy. 


w We muſt conſider that we are not in an Hiſtory or Narratiof 
of things done, but ina Prophecy fore-telling what ſhould come 
to paſs, The Prophet foretelleth, that before this promiſed Del;- 
verance ſhould come, the Iſraelites ſhould be in another Temper, 
that thelr uncircumciſed hearts ſhould be humbled, they ſhould 
accept of the Puniſhment of their Sins, confeſs God's Juſtice and 
Righteouſneſs, and their own Wantonnels and Unrulineſs, pray 
unto God tochange their hearts which would never elſe be chang- 
ed, and change their conditions, which would depend upon that 
change of their hearts,laying claim to God as their God, who had 
promiſed, Deut. 3o. 1, 2. that when the Bleſlings and the Curſes 


and lamentation, m Rachel is here brought in, having been buried 
near that place, as if ſhe were riſen up from the Grave, and lamen- 
ted the Jewiſh Nation which came out of her Loins (tor ſo Benja- 
mm aid. which was one of the two Tribes that made the Kingdom 
of Fudah) all the People of which Tribe are properly enough cal- 
ied her Children. Rachel here fignifieth all the Berjamitiſh Wo- 
men who deſcended from Rachel, n And like a paflionate Wo- 
man the retuſed all Arguments of Comfort, becaule her Children 
either were ro: ablolutely.being ſlain by: the Peſtilence the Famine. 


- 


and the Sword of the King of Babylon, or were no longer her 


{ſpoken of Chap.28, and 29.ſhould come upon them,and They ſhould 
call them to mind among all the Nations, whither the Lord had dri- 
ven them; if they return'd unto the Lord their God, and obeyed 
his woice, according to all that he commanded them, they an4 
their children, with all rh:ir h-art, and with their ſoul, That then 
the Lord their God would turn their Captivity, and have come 
paſſion on them, 8c. Now faith Ephraim after I was turrs1, 
atter God had changed our Hearts, we repented and changed our 
Practices. x After that God had inſtructed us, eittier by his Pro- 
phers, or by Briars and Thorns, by our Aﬀflidtions, or by iis Holy 
Spirit, we {mote upon our Thighs 10 Teſtimony ofour Sorrows and 


þ, +* 1 *374,9% 
© 3H3 a4 4-13 


Chap. XXX, 


Chap. 


| l ? Ly - 4 conſou 


00.08 


| 


FEREMIAH. 


ags of a Min they ſay were as well out of Fulez as init, this 


- Sins, uaderſtanding that L did but bear the juſt Puniſhment} was in Fudza only. s. The Word tranſlated /Foman 1n Scriptures 
— "which [had Jong ago committed in the Time of my | they lay always ſiznihes a particular individual Woman, waich 


Wantonneſs,Rebellion,and Diſobedience to God : This is exprel-| could be no other than the Virgin. 


6. They ſay the whole 


ſed by the Term Tvut!, hecaule ordinarily Men and Women's| Co:text refers to benefits coming by Chriſt, therefore he muſt 
{ot e : " P 


Youth 15* 


Prophet for 


* Deut.3%. 


v- 


lia.63. T Js 


Hol. IL I, I. 


+ Hed. 
lound. 


heir time of Wanconnels ; Perſons ordinarily grow1ng certataly be the Man here intended. 7. They urge that this Pro- 
Hore conſiderate and ſober as years increaſe upon them. Thus the | phecy follows, ver- 15. which Math, 2. 8. | 
cet erelleth tha:Gol would prepare thisPeople for mercy} Evangeliſt to Herod's Murder of the Infants upon the Birth of 


13 applied by the 


inthe next Verles he ſheweth how ready God's ear would be to | Chritt. But on the other ſide it is objeCted tha: the Verb JNAD is 


hear. 


- for ſince I ſpake againit him, I do carneſtly re- 
* therefore my bowels are | 


member him {till 2- *1 l 
-ronbled for him, I will ſurely have mercy upon 


him, faich the LORD. -———_—_ 
> Interpreters run into a very great variety 1n their Explicatt- 
ans of this Text. That which ſeemerh to be the caule of it, 8 that 
amongſt the Hebrews ,affirmativeInterrogations are notes of the _ 
hement denial of the thing, as to which the queſtion is propound- 
ed which leads ſome to interpret theſe words into a denial, that 
Etbraim was his dear $on,0r a pleaſant Chil4,and denying the truth 
of his profefled Repentance. But certainly this 1s quite contrary 
to the whole ſcope of the Prophet. The Reverend Author of the 
Enzliſh Annotations hatn obſerved, that the afirmarive {nterroga- 
rion ſome times in ſcripture doth imply a Negative, or the nega 
tive particle is \uppreſled and 1 is puc tor RY; lo that 1s E- 
phraim my dear Son, here is the lame with, 1s not Ephraim my dear 
Son? He gives for Inſtances, 1S.4m. 2. 27, 28. Where, did I? 
Plainly is the ſame with, did I not ? So Fob 20, 4. where we have 
ſupplied Nor, Knoweſt thou w9t? &7c. SO Chap. 3+ 6. Where Haji 
zhou ſven ? Is the lame with, Haſt thou nor ſezn. SO ETtk, 20. 30. 
Amos 6. 2. $9 that tho' the Particle prefixed 7, be an athrimative 
Particle, yet it is often put for 1777 Halo, and fignifiech Negative- 
1y, the Negative being ſuppreſſed and to be underſtood. I have 
alſo ſometimes thought that even here it may be fairly enoug? 
interpreted,Is Ephraim now become my dear Son ? Is he a pleafant 


} 


. never uſed in Scripture to ſiznine ſuch an incompaſſinz, 2, That 
20 Is Ephraim my dear ſon? »5 hea plcaſant child jthe Word tranſlated a man, tignifving 2 ſtrong Man, oth not Pros 


perly agree to an Infant in the Mother's Belly, But it is a=ain 
replied, that this 1s not the oaly Word in Scripture, that is but 


once read in the ſame fence. 2. That the Word figniticth any {n- 


compaſling, and may be properly applied to the Virgin's Womb 
incompatling an Infant. And for the Word tranſlated Mar, they 
lay it is applied toa new born Infant, Feb 3. 3. Ifa. 9. 6. That it 
is applied to God, Deut. 10. 17. and to Chriſt, zach, 13. 7 

compared with Matth. 26. 31. Ina Matter wherein to many jear- 
ned Mer-are divided, it is enough for me to give their Ovinione 
and Reaſons, leaving my Reader to his own Judgment, in a Mar. 
ter wherein neither his Faith nor Holineſs ar much concerne3 : 
for the Queſtion is not concerning thething, whether Chriſt was 
incompaſſed in the Womb of a Woman, which is plain enouzh 
from other Scriptures, but only whether that be the ſenſe of che 
Phraſe here. 


23 Thus ſaith the LORD of hoſts the God of 
[ſrael &, As yet / they ſhall uſe this ſpeech in the land 
of Judah, and in the cities thereof, when I fall bring 
again thelr captivity, Ihe LORD bleſs thee, O ka- 
bitation of juſtice, 2d mount of holineſs 2. 

k Theſe Prophecies of the Reſtauration of the Z-ws, are very 
ordinarily prefaced with thele two Attributes of God.the one of 
which aflerts his Power to Go the thing promiled ; for what car- 
not be done by the Lord ot Hoſts ? The other afferting his Goog- 
neſs or Good Will to this People, becaule he is their Go&. rela- 


Child ? Is his heart turned fo is mine. @ For fince I ſpeak 42 7-/E [red to them, 1n Covenant with them : Ability and Love, or 


him, or with him, or of him, I do earneſtly remember him, 27 
m2 middei dabberi. Ar. Montanus tranflateth it, from the ſufficiency 


of my ſpeaking with him ; the reaſon of the difference is, \T hg. 
hes to ſuffice, and it ſignifies time. I lee no reaſon to vary from our 
Tranſlation, ſince or from the time, as the ſame Particle ſignifierh 
1 Sam, 18.30. 1 Kings 14.28, Tſz. 28. 19. I ſpake agvinſt him 
by my Threatnings, I do remember him with the affe&tion and 
compaſſion of a Father. b My bowels are troubled for him, 15 as 
much as, I have pitied him ; as the Bowels of Parents are turn- 
ed and troubled for their Children in Calamities ; therefore faith 
God. c I will certai-ly ſhew him favour. 

21 Set thee up way-marks 4,make thee high heaps 
e: ſet thine heart towards the high-way, ever the 
way wh:ic> thou wentelt /: turn again, O virgin of 
Hrael, turn again to theſe thy cities. 

4 The latter part of this Verſe exponds the former. Thou ſhalt 
(faich God) return again to theſe Cities which thou now leaveſt, 
therefore take good notice of the way thou goeſt, ſet up fome 
marks by which thou mayeſt know jc again. e Make thee Pillars, 
or ſome high heaps of Srone in the way, which thou mayeſt know 


Good Will co us, beity the two Pillars of our Faith and Conf. 
dence in God, which requireth no more than tha: we ſhould be 
aſſured that the Perſon whom we truſt is ab!eand willins to &5 
what we truſt ro him tor. 1 The Particle Ty iremeth better 
tranſlated, ver. 5. y2t again they ſpall ule, 8&c. m Three things the 
Prophet here foretelleth, 1. That the Cities which h44 former- 
ly beg the Havitations of bloody. unjuſt, crue! Men, fhould be- 
come the Habirations of Men who ſhon!1 do juſtice ro all, 2. That 
the City which ſtood upon Mount Zn. and had forme: 1s been 
an habitation of Idolaters, and other unko!tr Perions, ſhould be- 
-ome a Place, in which Men ſhauld ina Cue and holy inanner 
ſerve and Worſhip the erue God. 3. That they ſhould be fo tamous 
both for Juitice and Holineſs, -thar Men would take notice of it 
and wiſhthem well under that notion ; and upon that account, 
35 they had for their fins been mate a Cyrſc and a Proverb, fo 
1pon their Reformation they ſhould be for a Blefling. By this we 
may oblerve tnat thoſe who would be bletted by God and Men 
ſhou!d be juſt towards Men; and holy towards God, : 


24 And there ſhall dwell in Judah it ſelf, and in 


all the citics thereot together hushaudmen, and they 


again when thou comeft at them. f Mind well the way that the 
Aſſyrians and the Babylonians carried thee, for thou ſhalt come 
back the ſame way. g Farther to aſſure them they ſhould return, 
he calls to them to zurn again, and doubleth his words, tor the 
farther confirmation of the thing. 

22 4 How long wilt thou go about, O thou back- 
fiding daughter h? for the LORD hath created a 
new thing in the earth,a woman ſhall compaſs a man z. 

h "That the Jews are here meant by the back{liding daughter 1s 
out of queſtion 3 but what going about is here intended, 1s not {0 
Plain. Some interpret it of their running after Idols; ſome of 
their ſeeking help from foreign Nations,inftead of applying them- 
ſelves unto God. Others of their wandring up and down in Cap- 
tivity. 7 But the greater difficulty 1s about this new thing, Whic 
the Lord faith he will create in the new Earth, a Woman compaſ- 
fing a Man. Some by Women underſtand the feeble Perſons that 
ſhould prevail againſt ſtrong Men. But the two interpretations of 
this difficult paſſage, which ſeem moſt reaſonably to contend tor 
preference, are, 1, The Interpretation of thoſe whothink it con- 
eains a Promlle both of the Fewiſh Church in its time, and of the 
Goſpel-Church,after the Fewiſh Church's period, prevailing over 
all 1ts Enemies, whether Temporal or Spiritual ; though, confide- 
ring the paucity of the Church's Members, with the multitude of 
its Enemles, and their power, it ſeemed as ſtrangea thing, as for 
a Woman to prevail againſt a ſtrong and mighty Man. This the 
learned Author of the Engliſh Annotations, judgeth the true and 
genuine ſenſe of theſe Words. Others interpret this Woman to be 
the Virgin Mary, who was to incloſe in her Womb the Lord Je- 
ſus Chriſt, to whom the converted Fews were to adhere 3 which 
ſence neither Mr. Calvin, nor our learned Engliſh Annotator ap- 
rove of. But it being the received fence of many Interpreters, it 
$ fit we ſhould hear their Reaſons, which are, 1. They urge the 
Particle "A, tor God, lay they, here gives the Reaſon why the 
oo ſhould defire to return iato the Country of Fudea, becauſe 
” e M-ſſis was to be born ther?- 2. They urge the Term created, 
the Body of Chriſt being not begotten by Man, but created by 
God, though of the Fleſh of the Virgin. 3+ They fay this indeed 
was 2 new thing. It was a new thing for a Virgin to become a 


Mother, {till remaining a Virgin, and to bethe Mother of him 
vo was God bl: 


Nature ; for to Ch 


Father as Man, without 2f1ther as God, 4. All other incompal 


c{:d for ever, tho' not the Mother of the Divine 
'riſt anſwered the Type of Metchiſedec{, withour 


that go forth with flocks zz. 

n This whole Verte 'is but en Expreſſion of their peaceable 
State atrer their return, they thould live innocently and peacea- 
bly. So chap. 33. 22. : 


25 For lave ſatiated the weary foul, and I havo 
repleniſhed every ſorrowful ſoul x, 

” I have here 15 of tile faine ſignificacy with I will. as ordina- 
rily in prophetical Promiſes, which arethe words of 11m who 
calleth the things that are not as ifchey were, and woutt have 
his People 100K upon the things which he harh promiſed to be as 
certain as if they were already done. The words are only a n-0- 
mile to the ſame ſence as before, that God would give his peop'e 
abundance of eaſe and plenty, and wipe all tears from their eye, 


| 26 Upon this I awaked, and beheld ; and my fleep 
was ſweet unto me o. 

c Either this Revelation was madeto Feremzah in a dream,from 
whence awakening, look'd about him .and he w as very well piea- 
ſed with his fleep at th2t time, becauſe of the gracious promite3 
concerning Fuduh which the Lord had in that Dream revealed to 
him. Or elle 1n a Vition, upon the fightand hearing of vi 5c! he 
was as well piealed,asa Manrthat had ſlept quietiv,and had had no 


A A Ae 


Judah with the ſeed of man and with the ſec! of 
beaſt. | | 

o That is, I will exceedingly multiply them, both with Men 
and with Cattle,they are 26's laid waſte.their Men 216 de219ved, 
or gone into other lands, their proficable Beaſts are deftroyed, 
and kill'd up, but it ſhall nor be fo always. { will azain plant 
them, and there ſhall be as great plenty of eirher, as if they 
were ſown. The multiplying both of Men and of Beaſts in Na- 
tions is God's Bleſling, 


watched over them to * pluck up and to break down 
and to throw dowe, and to deſtroy, and to ati? : 


- LORD. 


2 


ill and unpleafing,but ſweet and celighttul Dreams while he flept- 


27 @ Behold, the days come, ſaith the LOR D. * 
that * I will ſow the houſe of Iſracl and the honi> of ©* 


28. And it ſhall come to paſs, 5-7 like as Thave , 
fo will I watch over them to build aud toplany fark 


,.- E * 
A ISBETTS 

iv » i +> wa 
£ » 


Chap. YXAL 


” _ 
C147. - 
A 


IS. 


* Chap. 
JS. 4 ©. 
| 10, 


97, 
thoult f 
PU? CON 
trnued 1n 
iuiband 
t779 theme 


Chap. XX XL 


' tha 


p Nothing can produce 1n God & change of Countels, Purpoſes 
and Decrees, for ie 's not asa Man that he ſhould ye or repent, he 
is the God that cHangeth ner, but Men's Reformation may produce 
in him 2 cnange of Providential Diſpenſations, God 1s here ler 
out as a Man that i5 vindicative,and his vindicativeNature prompts 
him co watch a;l opportunities of doing hurt to the Perton a- 
gainlt whom it 1s ſer. There is no fury nor revenge in God ; but 
what he doth 15 Jullice ; but here an angry God is tet out as ta- 
king al! opportunities to puniſh ſinners, as if he had watched tor 
them, whereas he never ſlumbercth cor ſleepeth : But the time 
of their Reformation, and his Favour being come, God promi- 
ſeth to be as diligent to do them good, which is here expreft by 
the metaphorical notions of planting and building thein, as he was 
before to execute his Juſtice upon them. 

29 In thoſe days they ſhall ſay no more; The fa- 
thers hare caten a ſowre grape, and the childrens 
teeth are ſet on cdge g. 

a Thet is, we are puniſhed for our Fathers Sins, which yet 
God may juſtly do and none queſtionech the Juſtice of Man 1n 
the caſe, depriving Children of their patrimonial Lftares for their 
Parents Treaſons, no more than God threatneth in the Second 
Commandment. God indeed, Exch. 18. 2. feemeth diſpleated at 
theiruſe of this Proverb; but the realon is, be:aule they fo uſed 
Ir as to acquiir themſelves, intimating they were guiltleſs, and 
{uffered only for the Sins oftheir Parents, whereas that was tale; 
etherwiſe the puniſhment of Children for the Sins of their Pa- 
rents, was no more than God had threatned, Exod. 20. 5. and 
34. 7. Chap. 15. 4+ Bur faith God, your Captivity fhall,as to you, 
expiate your Parents Guilt paſt, and you ſhall no more lay lo. 

309 But cvery one ſhall dyc for his own 1niquity, 
every man that cateth the ſower grape, his teeth ſhall 
be ſet on eaze r, 

» But yer (faith God) you muſt not think that Sinners ſhall 
eſcape my vengeance, but if Men commit Iniquity they ſhall die. 
No Man's Tezth ſhali be ſer oa edge, but his only, who hath eaten 
the ſowre Grapso. 

31 A Behold. * the days come, ſaith the LORD, 
I will make a new covenant with the houſe of 


SEREMIAH. 


'to them, and Care of them . 


Chap. XXX, 


who had for them rhe Love, and 


declared the Care of an Husband, and gave them no temptation 


cogoa whoring from him. 


33 But. this ſhall be the covenant that I will make 
with the houſe of [fracl mw, Afrer thoſe days, faith the 


LORD, *will put my law in their inward parts, 
and write It in their hearts x, and will be their God, 
and they ſhall be my People y. 

w That is, with thole Iſraelites zndeed, who ſhall be without 
Guile, (as Chriſt ſaith of Nathanael, Fobn 1. 47.) with thoſe 
whoare (as the Apoſtle ſaith, Kom. 2. 29.) Fews inwardly, by 


Grace of God, 
phet's defign here istoexprels ti.e difference betwixt the Law and 
the Goſpel. The firſt ſheweth Duty, the latter bringeth'along with 
it the grace of Regeneration, by which the heart is changed, fitted, 
and inabled for, and unto Duty. All under the time of the Law 


[fracl, and with the houſe of Judah /. 

{ Tie Apdoſtle's application of this, Heb. 8. 8, 9, 10+ puts us 
out of doubr, that this Promiſe referred to the Goſpel-rimes. It 
was not only made with the Fews, bur all thoſe who ſhould be 
ingiaffed into that O/7ve ; but 1t is faid ro be made with them, e1- 
ther as thoſe twa Terms fig::1fhe the whole Church with whom 
that Covenant was made, (they being the whole Church which 
God had upon the Earth at that time) or becauſe they were the 
only people that had broken the firſt Covenant, the Gentiles be- 
ing Strangers at that time to the Covenant of Promiſe, Eph. 2. 12. 
Covenants being uſually renewed upon one Parties violation of 
them, or becanſe it was at firfl made with the Fews, tho” it con. 
cernedalſo thoſe that were afar off, even as many as the Lord ſhould 
call, Aﬀts 2. 39. Neither 15 called the New Covenant, becaule it 
was asto the Subſtance new, (for it was made with Abraham, 
Gen. 17. 7. and with the Fews, Deut. 26. 17, 18. And is was then 
confirmed by the Blood of Chriſt, though not actually ſhed, 
yet as he was the Lamb ſlain from the beginning of the World whole 
Blood was typified by the Blood of the Paſchal Lamb, and of al) 
thole living creatures killed tor Sacrifice,) but upon many other 
Accounts thus enumerated by Divines. 1. Becaule it was new 
in the notion of a Teſtament, not confirmed by the aftual Death 
of Chriſt till Goſy+]-Times. 2. Becauſe it was revealed and 
preached after a new manner, more fully and particutariy, plain- 
Iy and clearly, 3. Bzcaule it had no fuch mixture of Promiles 
of temporal Bleſſings, as it had when firſt made with the Jews, 
4+ Nor was the Ceremonial Law any part of it, as jt was to the 
F-we, who were obliged to approve themlielves God's People b: 
+ obſeryance of that. 5. It was inthe Publication extended 
bath to Fews and Gentiles, which the former was not. 6. In re- 

"4 of the efficacy of the Spirit attending the Publication of it, 
2 3 much tuller and larger manner, with the diſtribution of its 
":.{ts and Graces, inabling Souls to fulfil it. See more in the 
Kr z/ifh Annotations upon this Subject. 


1 > 
*? tr 1 - 
+ 46ct 


2. 
” 
. 
'd ” 


that came to Salvation were ſaved, not from the Law or by 
that, but by the Goſpel and this new Covenant ; bur this was nor 
evidently exhibited, neither was the regenerating Grace of God to 
common under the time of the Law, as it hath been under the Go- 
ſpel, which maketh it look like a new covenant with Men, tho? 
it was the ſame Covenant which God was always in with his Peo- 
ple; for what difference is there between the terms of the Cove. 
nant as here recired, Chap. 24. 7. and 30. 22. and as made with 
. Abraham, Gen. 17. 7, Deut. 30. 6. It 15 further obſervable, that 


* Ezek. 


II, 19,26, 
36. 2E, 
270 


2 Cor. 3.3, 


the Circumciſion of the Heart and Spirit, ſpoken of, and pro- 
miſed by God, Dzut. 30. 6. x In the Times of the Goſpel God's 
Law 1s not abrogated and made void. Chrift himſelf came not to 
deſtroy the Law, but to tulfil it ; but it is written in the hearts of 
God's true Trae], by the finger of the Spirit, not in the Tables of 
Stone only ; aud they become obedient to it, not from compulſion 
and force, but from their ſecret approbation of it, and acknow- 
ledgment of it, as holy. juſt and good, the delight they take in it, 
ch1s after the inward man,Rem.30.9. But iome may obje&t,How was 
2 New Covenant? Did not God of old write his Law inthe Hearts 
of his People ? Did not David, and other the Servants of Goo, (of 
whom we read in the OldTeſtament)ſerve God out of a principle 
of Love, and delight in his Law > Anſw. Undoubtedly David and 
others did fo, and the Law of God was writ in their hearts, but 
It was ver: ue of this New Coverant, from the free and efficacious 
Mr. Calvin I think judgeth right, that rhe Pro- 


God maketh the writing the Law in Peoples Heart his own Work. 


; There were no need of God's putting his Law into Mens inward 


parts, if they had ſuch an inward power (as ſome talk of) of them- 


lelvesto do it, and could write it there with a Pen of thetr own 
making. The Papijts allow God a ſhare in this Work, only give 


Man himſelf the greateſt ſhare. Others indeed give God nothing 


but the Honour of giving Man a reaſonable foul, farnifſhed with 


luch a power, and that he hath done to the Heathens as well as 
thoſe within the Pale of the Church, and the Preaching of the G 0- 


{pel and to thoſe within the Church, a further aid and aſſiſtance 


to them than Heathens have, to uſe their natural. power. But let 


any underſtanding perſon judge whether this be probably the 
{enſe of this Text, or comprehenfive of al! within the Covenan: 
ihich God hath made with his People; or ſuppoſing this were 
©: ue, what that is which difforeth 012 Man living under the Goſpel 
from another, but himſelf; and wnether by this Dodtrine Man 
be not made a God to himlelf, rhat 1s the principal cauſe of all 
{piricual and eternal good 2 which how it comporteth with the 
Honour and Glory of God, or with this Text, and many others 
of like nature, I do not underſtand. 


neighbour, and every man his brother, ſaying, Know 
the LORD z, for * racy ſhall all know me, from 
the leaſt of them unto the greatelt of them, ſaith the 
LORD #2, for * 1 will forgive their iniquity, and 1 
will remember their {in no more 6. 

7 This muſt not be ſo interpreted as if under the Goſpel, there 


ſhould be no more need of miniſterial teaching, tor Chrift himſelf 
{ent out his Apoſtles to preach ; nor yet as if there ſhould be no 


32 Not according to the covenant that I made 
With their fathers 1n the day that I took them by the 
hand to bring them our of the land of Egypt :,(which 
ny covenant they brake , || alchough 1 was an hus- 


fignifying the increaſe of knowledge, and of the fear of the 
Lord, that ſhould be after the pouring out of the Spirit. We 
have ſuch expreſſions, 1 Fobn 2. 27. The Learned Author of 
our Engliſh Annotations thinks this Phraſe fignifies, that under 
the Golpel there ſhould be a greater meaſure of means of know- 


band to them, ſaith the LORD w. ) 

t Not in ſubſtance differing from it, but in circumſtances vaſt- 
ly differing, as was ſhewed before, and is farther declared after- 
ward. The Covenant which God made witi the Fews when they 
came cut of the Land of Egype, was on God's part the Law which 
he gave them: with the Promiſesannexed to their oblervacion of 
it ; on their part (which made ita formal Covenant) their Pro- 
mile of Ove.!itence to it, of which fee Exod 24. 7, 8. Deut. 26. 


ledge, and of knowledge got by that means, and of clearneſs of 
underſtanding in Perſons, or ability to concelve things revealed, 
and a greater number of Perſons ,that ſhould be enlightened with 
the ſaving knowledge of God : Others ſay, that by knowing 
the Lord 1s to be underſtood the firſt knowledge of (Got : 
Chriſtians ſhould not need to be raught the firſt Rudiments ; 
bur the Apoſtle ſpeaks otherwiſe, Heb. 5. 12» Others by know- 
l:dge underſtand the fear of the Lord. a God ſaith, They 


17, 18. This Covenant God faith he made with them, when they 
wereen impotent, weak People, the care of whom he took upon 
him,and led them as a parent leadeth the feeble child by his hand 

None mult imagine that this Covenant did not contain the Pro- | 
miſe of Pardon.through the Blood of the Meſſial), upon their ap- 
plication to him, for to what purpoſeelſe was it confirmed by 
Blood, Exod. 24.8. u Which Covenant they are faid to have bro- 
ten, not becauſe of every D:1obedierce to the Law of God, for fo 
every one daily breakethit,bur by their groſs and eminent finnings, 
fo oft repeate!, and continued in without Repentance, and more 
particularly by their [[dolatry which is compared to Whoredom, 
hich breaketh the Covenant and Bond of Marriage, and cauſeth 
£309 t6 lay unto a People, Lo Ammi, you are not my People. 


ſhould all know him ; but it muſt not be underſtood of the 
ſame degree, and meaſure, but in a degree of ſufficiency for 
the Duties which God expected from them upon their no- 
tion and apprehenſion of God, ' b God makes the root of 
all this Grace to be the free pardon, aud remiſſion of their 


fins. 


35 | Thus faith the LORD, which giveth the ſun 
* for a light by day, ad the ordinances of the moon 
and of the ſtars for a light by night, which divideth 
the * ſea c when the waves thereof roar, the LORD 


of hoſts zx his Name. 


w Andth:is Cevenant-breaking is aggravated trom God's Kindnels 


| 


6 The 


more need of Brotherly Teachings,by Inſtruction or Correption ; $4 ak ws 
the contrary 15 commanded, Col. 3. 16, It 1s only an expreſlion , , 


: Py 
* Tia, $1 


34 And they ſhall teach no more every man his 


"Is. £4 
by; 

John 6.45, 
1 Cor. 2. 
10. 
I Joh. 
* Chap. 


a a 
2. 2&2» 


4 ® 


Acts 1s. 


* Ger» 1, 
6, 


I5, 


ks 


1 Chap. RA NI. 


Word V3") Rogeang, is here ill tranſlated divide, which 
hath! Nr bar nn. n. think thatGod here hath a reſpect to 
his dividing the Red Sea,chat the Iſraelites might pals over,which 
ſemeth nor at all here to be intended, The word ſignifieth to 
divide, bur it alſo ſignifieth to quzet and bring to reft, and is foin- 
terpreted, Chap 50. 34+ Iſa. 34+ 14- and in this very Chap. er.z. 
2nd dotibtleſs were better here tranſlated, which quieteth the Sea 
when the Waves thereof roar. All theacts mentioned, are adts 
{peaking the Divine Almighty Power of him who is the Lord of 
all the Regiments in the Hoſts of the Creation. 


£6 * If thoſe ordinances 4.depart from beforeme, 


bs **16.549-faich the LORD, then the ſeed of 1ſrael ſhall alſo 


Chap. 33 
20. 


* Chap. 
33-23. 


J« 28, 


' ceaſe, from being a nation before me for ever. 
—_ are Ordinances of Worſhip, which are God's Laws re- 
Jating to his Worſhip, and Ordinances of Fuſtice, which are God's 
Laws for the executing civil Juſtice, and Ordinances of Nature, 
which are God's Eſtabliſhments for the working of natura] cauſes 
in their order ; theſe are thoſe here ſpoken of, e Which ſhall hold 
and continue to the diſſolution of the World, the continuance of 
which God pawneth as a Pledge of the continuance of Iſrael as a 
Nation all the 4ays (fo it is in the Hebrew) that is many days, or 
21l the days they ſhall keepcloſe with him, or which he hath ap- 
pointed. If we interpret it (as in our Verfion) for ever, it mult be 
underſtood not of Iſrael according to the fleſh, but, of the Caurch 
the true Iſrael of God, which ſhall never fail. 


37 Thus faith the LORD *, if heaven abovecan 
he meaſured, and the foundations of the earth ſearch- 
ed out beneath, Iwill alſo caſt off all the ſeed of Iſrael 
for all that they have done, faith the LORD f. 

f That is, I will never caſt of all the Szed of 1/rae!, (which pro- 
miſe the Apoſtle, Rom. 11. 1, 2. proveth to have been by God 
made good, notwithſtanding the rejeRion of the great Body of 
that People) for none but God can either meaſure the Heayens, 
or pierce into the centre of the Earth, 


28 © Behold the days come, faith the LORD), 
that the city ſhall he built to the LORD from the: 
tower of Hananeel unto the gate of the corner g. 

g Thatis, ic ſha!l be built round, as largely as ever, weread of 
this Tower of Hananeel, Neb. 3.1. and 12. 39. Zech. 14. 20. It! 
was in the South, or rather the Eaftern part ofthe City. We' 
read of the Gate of the corner, 2 Kings 14- 13. Zeoh. 14.10 moſt 
agree that itis in the North-Eaſt part of the City. 


39 And the meaſuring line ſhall yet go forth, o-' 
ver againſt it upon the hill Gareb, and ſhall compaſs 
about to Goah h, | 

þ That {s, it ſhall be built round about upon its old foundatl-! 
ons, Vid. Neh. 3. We are ignorant of the Ancient Situation of the 


City, ſo are the Fews themſelves, therefore it is vain to pretend 
to an exact $sk1ll in theſe names of places. Some ſay Gareb ſigni- 


_- 


*#EREMIAtY 


2 For then the king of Babylon's army hefieged 
Jeruſalem b : and Jeremiah tlie Prophet was ſhut up 


Judals houſe c. 


Chap. 39. 1.) beſieged Hirruſalein inthe tenth Month of the ninth 
Year of Zedekiah, to as he had beſieged it ſome time before the 
Revelation of this Prophecy came to Feremiah, c Feremiah was 
at that timea Priſoner, ina Pciton within the Ring's Houle, The 
King could keep him from revealing God's will ro the People 
but he could not keep God from revealing himſelf ro him. Dri. 
ſons hinder us tiom Communion with Men, but often coor iti» 
to God's . People, treer and tweeter communion with i;m. ba 
the mean time the delperate hardneſs of this Prince and ts; > 
Peoples Hearts appear, in that the tear of an Enemy befieging them 
could not awe them trom luch ou.r2gious ads of Perſecution. 

3 For ZedekiahKing ot Judah, had ſhut him up. 
ſaying 4, Wherefore dolt thou propheſie, and ſay. 
Thus faith the LORD, Behold I will give thiscity 
into the hand of the king of Babylon, and he ſhall 
take it. 

d We no where read that Zedegah immediately commanded 
Feremiah to be impritoed ; he ſeemeth rather to have been ia- 
yourable to Feremiah, and judicious Interpreters think his pre- 
tent Priſon was a tavourzbie Priſon ; but God accounteth Prin- 
ces to do that which their Miniſteis or ſubordinate Magiſtrates 
do with their connivance, adv witiout their hinderance. Tho' 
it be wild Divinity for any to fay, that inferiour Miniſters 
or SubjeQts are excuſed by the command of the ſuperior, and the 
guilt lyeth only on them, yet ir is as wild to ſay, they contract no 
guilt by the extrayagant acts of fuboidinace Magiſtrates whom 
they put in place, and can puniſh, and remove from their places. 
4 And Zedekiah king of Judah ſhallnor eſcape our 
of the hand of the Chaldeans, bur they ſhall ſurely he 
delivered into the hand of the king of Babylon, and 
ſhall ſpeak with him mouth to mouth, and his eyes 


{ ſhall behold his eyes. 


5 And he ſhall lead Zedckiah to Babylon e, and 
there he ſhall be untill I vitit him, ſaith the LORD F, 
Though ye fight with the Chaldeans, ye Hall not 
proſper g. : 

e Here the cauſe of the Prophet's impriſonment {s 'exprefles, 
The things were true which Fer:my prophetied, and fulfilled.Chas. 
39. 5, 6,7. and Feremy could not forbear ſpeaking them, becaule 
he was ſent of God upon the Errand, Chap. 34. 2, 3. yet me 
King and Court con!ld not bear his words. f Interpreters are (:- 
vided, whether the vifiration here mentioned werea viſitation of 
Fudgment, and the lame with until he 472; or of mercy 5 it 15 cer= 
tain Zedekiah was not put to Death, only his eyes put out, and 


fies a Scab, and the Hill had its Name from Leprous Perſons ly- | te carried into Babylon, Chap. 39.7. where lome think he after- 


ing there. 5 
40 And the whole valley of the dead bodies z, and 


; ward found fayour with the King of B2by/on. Certain ic is that he 
| dyed in Babylon, and had an honourable Burial, but whether he 


met with any other favour, or no, the Scripture ſaith not. Some 


of the aſhes k, and all the fields unto the brook of Ki-| will have the words r2ad, until I viſit this People, andthink char 
* Nehem. dron, unto the corner of the * horſe-gate towards the | Zedekzah lived in Prifon in Babylon tillthe Reſtauration ; but te 


caſt /, ſhall be holy unto the LORD mn; it ſhall not 
be pluckt up, nor thrown down any more for e- 


Ver 7. 

; A Valley focalled (as fome think from the Multitude of Se- 
nacheribs Army lain therez or (as others think) from the Bo- 
dies of MalefaCtors put to Death at Golgotha (which was near) 
caſt, or buried there. k So called (as 1s thought) from the aſhes 
of the Sacrifices carried thither. 1 Some think that che Horſe-gate 
had its Name from the King's Horſes led out at it. The ſumis, 
the whole City ſhall be built. #2 All theſe places ſhall be parts of 
the Holy City, and God's Name ſhall be ſantifiedsand he ſhall be 
worſhipped in them all. »And the City for a long time ſhall abide, 
and not be plucked up, nor thrown down ; for we .know after 


| 
} 


was 21 Years old when he began to Reign, and reigned 11 Years, 


| ſo as he was 32 Years old when he was carried to Babylon, 2 Chron, 


36. I1. and muſt be then 92 Years old when he died, which is 
hardly probable, conſidering the delicate Education, and Life of 
Princes, that he having loſt his Eyes, and ſeen ſo much miſery, 
ſhou'd continue 60 Years longer. g Though you make many Sal- 
lies out upon the Chaldeans thatare now befieging you, yet you 
ſhall be beaten in all, and nor be able to drive them from your 
Walls. Hitherto hath been but the Preface to the Propheticai 
Type, and Diſcourſe in this Chapter, which now followeth. 


came unto me, ſaying, 
7 Behold Hanameel the ſon of Shallum thine uncle, 


many years it was plucked up by the Romans. If we interpret 
the word for ever of a perpetuity, the Church of God muſt here 


ſhall come unto thee, ſaying, Buy thee my eld thar 


be underſtood, againſt which the Gates of Hell ſhall never pre- 
vail, as Chriſt hath promiſed. 


CHAP. XXXII. 


Jeremiah 7 the Siege of Jeruſalem being impriſoned by Zedekiah. 
buyeth a Field, taketh Witneſſes, draweth a Writing, (ealeth 
and delivereth it to Baruch to preſerve, as Tokens - of the Peoples 
Return, I——15, He frayeth with admiration of God's Ma- 
jefly and Works ; and repreſenteth hk own Conflif, 16,——25. 
God confirmeth the Captivity for their Sins, 26, 35. but 


zs in Anathoth z, tor the right of redemption z* thine 
to buy zt &. 

h From hence we raay conclude the certainty of future con- 
tingency in God's Eye. The comirg of Hzname?!,was a future co:- 
tingency,yet certainly known to God,ſo as he could tell the Pro- 
phet he would come. 7 Anathoth (as appears from Foſh. 2 1. 18.) 
was one ofthe Cities of the Levires ; hence ariſeth a queſtion, how 
it could be fold to Feremiah, who by the Law might not poſſels 
it, Numb. 18. 20. being a Levite. Some excuſe it from the Com- 
mand of God, who might diſpenie with his own Law, but this 
ſeemeth not enough, becauſe it is faid afterwards, The Right of 
Redemption is thine, 2. Others therefore fay the Levites migizt 


promiſeth 4 gracious Return, 36, 44+ { have ſome ſmall Poſſeſſions, tho? not plowed Land : They might 
; have Houſes,and Orchards.and Gardens,in the Cities and Subut 55. 
I HE word that came to Jeremiah from the, But thar theſe might be fold ſeemeth contrary to the Law, L277. 


LORD, in the tenth year of Zedekiah king 
of Judah, which was the cighteenth year of Nebu- 
Chadrezzar a, | 

a That is ſomething more thana year beforethe City was taken, 
for it was taken in the fourth Month of theeleventh Year of this 
Kings Reign, Chap. 39. 2. This tenth Year concurred with the 
elghteeeth year of the King of Babylon's abſolute Reign, who be- 
gan fo to Reign in the third and fourth Year of Fehoikaim, Dan. 


25. 34. It istherefore rather thought to be meant of ſome tina 
Eftate left to Hanamee! from his Anceſtors. h The right of 
Redemption belonged to the next of Kin, Lev, 25. 25. Ruth 
: '3 So Hanameel my uncles ſon came to me in the 
court of the priſon, according to the word of the 
LORD /, and faid unto me, Buy my field, I prav 
chee that is in Anathoth, which zs in the country of 


i. I foas Feboikaim's laſt Year was the ſeventh and eighth of | Benjamin, for the right of Inheritance z thine, and 


Nebuchadve ar who SA f . | - 
Abad, ; is alſo ſometimes called Nebuchadnez3ar an 


the redemption zs thine, buy 7? tor thy ſelf: then I 
| knew that this w. the word of the LQRD m. 


4 
E H:- 


6 And Jeremiah ſaid, the word of the LORD 


the * court of the priſon, which was in the King of , N 


- 
|S 


obs . 2 
b The King of Babylon (as 2ppears from 2 Kines 25. 1. and * 


Chap. XXXIE 


eN, Jo 


I 


w—_ - 
— wut: - > 


—_ = 


” DIS noon eee 
- ” - 


Aim. _ II. 
Otter ITS = os — EI S TE 
RS OECD AE = 


4 IL 


= ne oe neg 


— - - 


— 


= ne > > IEEE oe 


00.00! 
Chap. MN o 
1 Hanameel came freely, none drave, or forced him, yet he 
came neceſſ.wvily 8s to the event, he could not but go, elle God 
tad not told the Propher truth. m When I ſaw it came to pals, 
knowing that God alone knew what was in Mens hearts, and what 
they would do, 1 kuew my tormer mentioned Revelation Was 
tiom God. 


o And 1honght the ficld of Hanameel my uncles 


ſon, that wa in Anaboth, and weighed him the mo- 
_ nev, ever || ſeventcen ſhekels of filver 7. 


!! Or, fſe- mn That is, about 21. 2 5. 64d. a {mall Purchaſe, which argues | 


wen ſre- the field here mentioned to be but ſome Orchard or Garden ;tho' 

lies, and we muſt allow the price of Land, itrangely tallen at this time, 

ten Pieces when the Enemy was befjeging the chiet City of the Country. 

o ſilver. Tt. ſhould ſeem they were wont there to make their Payments 
more by Weight than by Tale. 


FEAREMIAR 


Chap. XXXI1I A 


Faith as to what they asked. Nothing can further be neceſſary to 
confirm our Faith that we ſhall have what we ask, than for us to 
be Per{waded that the Perfon is able todoit, and alio willing. 


| The Prophet beginnerh witch a Declaration of his Faith 1g God 


as to the firſt, then goes on to the 1econd. 


18 Thou ſheweſt loving kindneſs unto thouſands, 
and recompenſelt the iniquity of the fathers into the 
boſom of their children after them w, the great, 
the mighty God, the LORD of hoſts # his 
ame. 

w This is the Name which God gave himſelf, Exod 34. 7. 
Deut. 5. 9, 10. and of this latter claule declarative of the Ven- 
geance of God in puniſhing Children for their Parents fins, are 
many inſtances in Scripture, Foſ. 7. 24. 1 Sam. 1s 33, 34: 3 King. 
14+ 10, 11, and 21. 24. 


19 Great in counſel x, and mighty in works y., (for 


4 10 And I ſubſcribed the evidence, and ſealed 77, 
f Heb. 2nd took witneſſes and weighed him the money 11, 
wrote Mm 3 EG ans 
Sk | ThE Dalances of - : 
EY o 1 weat through with the Purchaſe, ſetting my hand to, and 
ſealing the Deed, and taking Witneflesto it, (as is ulual.) 

11 So I took the evidence of the purchaſe, borh | 
that which was ſealed according to thelaw and cuſtom, 
and that which was openp. 

p It is molt probable, that upon ſuch Bargains and Sales a- 
monglt the Fews, two inflruments were made, the one ſealed up, 
to be kept by the Purcialer, the other open, to be ſhew'd to the 
Judges, and by them ratified, and that this was the Law and Cu- 
itom ordinarily amonſt the Fees upon Purchaſes; Soth which 
Feremy kept, the one for his uſe, the other to produce 1n Court ; 
for Ratitication. Thete is no certainty 1a the guels that ſome 0- | 
thers make, why there were two Copies: Nothing appeareth | 
buc that the Propher bought this little Purchale with tne ſame | 
Rites aad Circumltances that Men ordiaarily in that Country | 
made Purchales in tinigs of Peace, and c1v1i order, 

12 And 1I gave rhe evidence of the purchaſe unto | 
Baruch the ſon of Neriah, the ſon of Maaſeiah a, 1n : 
the ſight of Hanamcel my uncles /o,, and in the pre- 
ſence of the * witneſſes that ſubſcribed the book of, 


»* ceo 7a, thepurchale, before all the Jews thart fate 1nthe court 


S. 2, Ci tne Prion yr. 
9 This Baruch (as appeareth from Chap. 36. 4, 26.) wasa 
Scribe. atid an attendant upon Feremiah, and one who wrote 
things for him, and from 1s Mouth. r He made this Purchaſe , 
with ail the ujuel Formalities to make it publick, he ſigned and | 
fealed it before Witnelſes, and delivered it to Buruch to keep in 
the preſence of them all, and in the prefence of the Fews, who 
cziually were inthe place when the thing was done. 


13 4 AndI charge Baruch before them, ſay-; 


10g, | 

14 Thus faith the LORD of hoſts, the God of 
Iſrael, Take theſe evidences, this evidence of the ! 
Purchaſe, both which is ſealed, and this evidence { 
which is open, and put them 1n ancarthea veſllel, that 
they may continue many days. 

15 For thus ſaith the LORD of hoſts, the God of 
Ifrael, Houſes and fields ,and vineyards ſhall be poſ- 
ſelled again in this Land /. 

{ Here is nothing of any ſeeming difficulty in theſe Verſes, but 
only why the Prophet commandeth Baruch to put the Evidences 
inan Earthen Feſſel, which himlelfalſo expounds, that they might 
continue many Cays. that 1s, not defaced. Had they been hid 
many days 1n the Earch they would have been rotten ; had they 
been above ground in a Box or Cheſt, they might have been loſt, 
or taken away by the Soldier's plundering houſes, or at leaſt 
burnt with fire. Ver. 15. The Prophet expounds Gad's Meaning 
in this fo ſ:nall a Purchaſe, eſpecially conſidering, that, very 
probably, Feremiah was no great Purchaler, nor very greedy of 
Purchales : He lets them Know that all this was for a fign ot the 
Truth of what God hath revealed to him concecrning the People's 
Return, though atter many days (fixty years from chis time) and 
allo of the firm aſtent he gave to that divine Revelation, That, 
Purchales ſhould one day be enjoyed again in Fudea, and Houſes 
Fields, and Vineyards in 1t, ſhould be again poſſeſſed. 


16 Now when I had delivered the evidence of 
the purchaſe unto Baruch the ſon of Neriah, 1 pray- 
ed unto the LORD, ſaying r, 


men *, to give every one according to his ways, and xr. 

according to the fruit of his doing z.) Plal.33.3 
x Who doſt nothing but in infinite Wiſdom, as if thou hadft Prov.s.2:, 

taken counſel upon it, and art mighty in thy Works of Proyi- Ch. 16.17. 

dence by which thou governeſt the World. 4. Whole Eyes run * Chap. 

toand tro the Earth, beho!ding the evil and the good ; fo that all 17- 3©- 

things are naked before thee, and thou art nota meer curious 

and idle tpeftator of Mens Actions, but lookeſt upon them tor 

that end that thou mayeſt reward or puniſh them, according as 

thou {ſeeſt their actions good or bad in thy fight. 


20. Which haft ſet ſigns and wonders in the land 
of Egypt, even anto this day a, and in liraelb, and a- 
mongſt other men c, and haſt made thee a name as at 
this day, 

4 Who didſt Wonders of Juſtice in the Land of Egypt ſuch as 
are remembred and made matters of aſtoniſhing Diſcourſe evea 


| to this day, b and wroughteſt Wonders of Mercy in I/rael, bring- 


ing them out of Egyp: through the red Sea, raining them down 
Manna and Quails trom Heaven, and fetching Water out otthe 
Rock for them, &c. c And haſt done allo many wondrous Works 
in other places, by which thou haft made thy telf a Glorious 
Name. 

21 And haſt brought forth thy People Iſrael, * out, 

CET | Exod. 

of the land of Egypt with figns, and with wonders, ; 5; 
aud with a ſtrong hand, and with a ſtretched out 2 Sam. 7. 
arm, and with great terror 4. 23» 

d The Hiſtory of this we have in the 11 or 12 firſt Chapters 2 Chron. 
of Exodus. God lent 10 Plagues upon Egypt one atter another, 37+ 21+ 


before Pharaoh would let them go, and when he purſued after 
them, divided the Red Sea for them that they might pals through, 


| and then brought the Waters back upoa the Egyptians, purſuing 


atter them through the Sea. 


22 And haſt given them this land which thou didfſt: 
{wear anto their Fathers to give them 7, a land flow- 
ing with milk and honey m2, 

1God owneth this Oath, Exod. 6. 8. m That is, abounding 
With all neceſſary things, and all pleaſant things. Canaan is often 
thus deſcribed, Exod 3. 8, 17. and 13. 5. and 33.3. Lev. 20, 24 - 
Numb. 14. 8.and 16. 13, 14. Deut. 6. 3. and 11. 9,@c. 


23 And they came in and poſlefſed it x7, but they 
obeyed not thy voice, neither walked in thy law o, 
they have done nothing at all that thou commandeſt 
them to do p: therefore thou halt cauſed all this evil 


to come upon them 9. 

2 In the former paſſage he acknowJedged God's Goodneſs, here 
he owns his Truth and Faithfulnels, in ſo conducting this People 
by his Providence, that they came into the promited Land, and 
polleſſed it. o Having acknowledged God's Power, Omaiſcience, 
Goodneſs, Truth and Faithfulnefs, he comes to his own Juſtice, 
confeſling that this People for whom God had done ſo much, had 
very 1}! requited him, not obeying 45s voice, which he expounds by 
rot walking in his Law; for the Law was God's Voice to them. 
þ This he aggravateth by ſaying they had done nothing of what 
he had commanded, not breaking ſome particular Law, but the 
whole Law of God, q Therefore God was righteous in (bringing 
this Sword, Peſtilence and Famine upon them. 

2.4 Behold the || mounts 7, they are come unto the 1 Or En: 
City tortake it 5, and the city is given into the hand of gines sf 


the Chaldeans that fight againlt it :, becauſe of the ſhvr- 


ſword, and of the famine, and of the peſtilence », 


: What he prayed for, the Matter of his Prayer in the follow- q len iS comme to paſs w 8 
ing Verles will inform us ; but it ſhould ſeem by it, that he was — — - ſpoken pals 7, and be 
p ] * 


not without his perplexities ; though he yielded an abſolutc Obe- 
dience to God's command, yet he prayeth for a clearer Revela- 
£z0a of his meaning in thus thing, 


17 Ah Lord GOD, behold, thou haſt made the 
heaven and the earth by thy great Power and ſtretch- 


* en. 18. ed out arm, 474there 1$ * nothing || too hard for 
4. VET.27%» thee lt. | 


a 

p Ds Fy oh: u He beginneth his Prayer with a Recognition ofGed's Omni- 
ih thee, PRency, and the infiniteneſs of his Power, which was ſhewed 
$4 v714 F//Ees 


in his firſt making the Heaven andthe Earth, as we read, Gen. 1. 
Pſal. 146. 6. God himſelf uſed this inſtance to confirm his Peo- 


r The word fgnifies Ramparts, or rather Battering Rams, En- 
gines of War which thoſe Nations uſed to batter Walls, or to 
ſhoot great Stones into places beſieged. s They are already Be- 
fieging Hiruſalem, and have been for ſome time. ; And the City 
is even ready. to be taken and cannot hold out. #4 So many daily 
are killed, eicher wich the Sword of the Enemy, or by Famine 
for want of Proviſion, or by the Peſtilence. w Thou arc juſt, and 
righteous in all this, and haſt done but according co what thou 
chreatnedſt to do, to a finful People that will not obey thy 
Voice. : | 


25 And thou haſt ſaid unto me, O Lord GOD, 


ples Faith in his ability to do what he pleaſed, Chap. 27. 5. Itis| BUY Thee the field for money, and take witneſſes : 


obiervable char the Servants of God in Holy Writ, uſed in their 
Prayers to give God ſuch Names as might hc)p co confirm their 


ys 


| for the City is give into the hagds of the Chalde- || Or; 
ans x : though. 


x In 


thine * eyes are open upon all the ways of the ſons of + 1,4, - os 


*ERE 
vs | In this Verſe _ the Particle q vau, is ill tranflated Ard and 
WS. Far in dis livter Chauſe. The Learned Author of the Eng. Annota- 


(.n at). d.D.( % | L 


oc #143651 wall that it had been better tranſlated when as in 
- prop Law: re as Gn. 4+ 11, Pſal. 102. 5.0r albeit, or tho as 1t 

Pj is tranſlited, Jiſ. 17.11. Pſal. 23. 4+ and Ter, inſtead of, And in 
the beginning, as It is Chap. 23. 22+ Lord ! faith the Prophet, ex- 
pound thy m2aning to me, why, when the City is upon the matter 
P ready to be yielded up to the Chaldeans, and cannor poſſibly hold 
bY ont long, thou ſhouldeſt ſer me to make Purchaſes for thine 


Enemies to poſleſs. 
26 © Then came the word of the LORD unto 
Jeremiah, ſaying, 
n 27 Behold, 1 am the LORD, the * God of all 
o Ver. 17- , . f - 2 
by fleſh : Is there any thing too hard for me y : : 
y The Lord beginneth this Revelation for the Propher's fatis- 
faction, with the Preface expreſſive of his power, and univerſal 
dominion from which Jeremiah might underſtand tha t he could 
do whatſoever he pleaſed, and Man that was bur fleſh, Gen. 6. 3. 
could not hinder his effecting what he defigned todo. God isallo 
7 tg the God of the Spirits ofall fleſh, Numb. 16. 22. but he exprel- 
#3 TO ſeth Man here only under the notion of fleſh, as Gey. 6. 3. to de- 
Wo js, note his vileneſs and inconficerableneſs as to any grapling 
"ED Bai with God and encountring his Purpoles, 


238 Therefore thus ſaith the LORD, Behold, I 
will give this city into the hand of the Chaldeans, 
and into the hand of Nebuchadrezzar king of Baby- 
lon, and he ſhall take it. 


29 Andthe Chaldeans that fight againft this city, 
ſhall come and * ſet fire on this city and burn it with 
the houſes z,, * upon whoſe roofs they have offered 
incenſe unto Baal,. and poured out drink-offterings 


unto other Gods to provoke me to anger 4. | 

| T Thou judgelt righc, this City ſhall be taken, and that by this 
Wig LW very Army of Cbaldeans which now beſiegeth it, they ſhall ſet 
en. . fireon it, and burn the Houſes ; I have made all fleſh, and I have 
LR power to diſpoſe of it, I will give this City into their hands. 
c But in this execution of my Vengeance [ ſhall not aCt by Pre- 
Togative, but as a juſt and righteous Judge, vindicating the vio- 
lation of my Laws, they have polluted their (Houſes, by Idolatry 
upon the Roofs of them, and they have offered zncenſe, paid a 
Divine Homage to the Idol Baal, and in them they have worſhip- 
ped other Gods, therefore I will watch over, and protect them 
no longer, but ſend the Chaldeans by their Fires to purge them. 


30 For the children of Iſrael, and the children of 
Judah have only done evil before me from their 
youth : for the children of Iſrael, have only provo- 
ked meto anger with the works of their hand, faith 
the LORD 6. 

b It they. had offended me on!y by ſome particular fingle acts, 
or by ſome few Omiſſions, or but for a ſma]l time : I might have 
been judged too ſevere upon them, but from the time they firſt 
began to be a Nation they have maſe it their Buſineſs, Courſe, 
and Trade, paſling from one Idolatry to another, Cc. 


3I For this city hath been to me as | a provocati- 
on of mine anger, and of my fury, from the day that 
they built it, even to this day c, that I ſhould re- 


move it from before my face 4. 

# Solomon finiſhed the Building of Hieruſalem, and he at leaſt 
ſuffered Idolatry init, 1 Kings 11. 4, 8. People have always been 
ſo fond of worſhipping God according to their own Fancies and 
"0A Inventions, that even in Jadah (except in David's time) the 
LN Worſhip of God could hardly be preſerved pure, during the en- 
tire Reignof one King. d As it they had done it on purpoſe to 
provoke me to deſtroy the City, and caſt the People of it out. 
Nothing more eaſfie than for 2eople to keep cloſe to-the Divine 
Rule, as to External Ads in Worſhip; nothing is more provo- 
cativeof God than their doing the contrary. Yet nothing hath 
©. been more rarely done inany Nation, as if Men had ſet them- 
DO ORE ſelves to dare a jealous God. 

Þ 32 Becauſe of all the evil of the children of Iſrael, 
8 and of the children of Judah which they have done, 
bp to provoke me to anger, they, their kings, their 
princes, their prieſts, and their prophets, and the 
men of Judah, and the inhabitants of Jeruſalem e, 

e Still God maketh their deſtruCtion to be of themſelves, as the 
meritorious Cauſe, provoking him to that Wrath he executed 
upon them. The whole Head was fick, the whole Heart fainr. 


All orders of. Men were corrupted, ſo as there was no hope for 
eheir Reformation or growing better . 


A 33 Andthey have turned unto me the Þ * back, 
& + ©. 30d notthe face, f though I taught them, riſing up 
7. and <2T1y, and teaching them, yet they have not heark- 

ned to receive inſtruction g. 

_ f They have behaved themſelves againſt me contemptuouſly, 
like Mer, who when they are ſpoken to, admoniſhed or inſtruc- 
ed, inſtead of looking roward thoſe who inſtru&t or admon]ſh 
7 them, turn their back upon them. g Yet there fin had not been ſo 

X P- Sreatand hainous, if I by my Prophets had not ſo diligently in- 

+ 3% Mftruted them, and they as ſtubbornly refuſed to be taught, or 


Pen ek aids Z 
<p "622 00 ol 


Ye 


©. Nis 
> Ar 
yuE® *<r% - 


be AF E 


= * Chap. 
$7. 16 
ES * Chap. 
' ey Ig I 3. 


| Þ+ Heb. 


FFI tor anger, 


7.246 


: 0 * amended by their inſtruction, 
+ 26, 34 But they * ſer their abominations 4 1n the 


houſe which is called by my name to defile it 7. 


k * ts Th *. 


11 4 H. Chap. 


| h Their Idols,which above ail things the Jealous God abhorreth 

and therefore he calleth them ab3minztion in the abſtract for abo- 
' minable thing, D2ut. 32. 16, 
7 That is, in the Temple, which was ordinarily called the Houlz 
of the Lord, and the Temple of the Lord. 


are 11 the valley of the ſon of Hinnom, to * canſe + o 
their ſons and their daughters to paſs throughthe fire 31.19.47. 
unto * Molech,which I commanded them nort.neither * Lev. 22. 
came Itinto my mind that they ſhould do this abo- 27- 
mination to cauſe Judah to {in k. 


k See the notes on Chap. 19. 5, 6. where all paſſages we mee: 
with here are fully opened. 


36 Þ And now therefore thus ſaith the LORD 
the God of Iſrael, concerning this city; whereof ye 
ſay, Ir ſhall be delivered into the hand ofthe King of : 
Babylon, by the ſword, and by the famine, and by 
the peſtilence 7: | 
n The Fews now began to ſee that the Chaldezrns would take 


tne City, and to be as dead hearted, as before they were fall of 
courage, and to give over themſelves for ever as loſt. 


37 Behold, I will * gather them ont of all coun- «pe; 
treys, whither I havedriven them in mine anger,and 3. Cy 
inmy fury, and in great wrath , and ] will bring 23- 3- £3 
them again unto this Place, and will cauſe them to **: . 
dwell ſafely o. mn 

o Though the city ſhall be taken, ard you ſhall go into Cap- 
tivity, yet you ſhall not be utterly loſt I will gather you again, 
and you ſhall have as quiet an habitation as ever. 


38 And they ſhall be* my People, and I will be * chav 
their God P- : 2.3. 7. and 
p I will renew my covenant with them,and keep my covenant 3». 22. and 
towards them. They ſhall ſerve me more faithfully, and 1 will 31. 33. 
own them, and take care of chem and bleſs them. . 


39 And [will give them * one heart 9, and one * Fze;.. 
way r, that they may fear me for | ever /, for the 11. :- 
good of them, and of their children after themr. * Heb, 
q I will give them union and concord, or an onenets of mind ** #7” 
and judgment; as tote things of God, they ſhallinot be ſome for 
ſuperſtitious and Hola:ro2us worthip, and ſome for my true Wor- 
ſhip. r They ſhall all Worſhip me according to the rule 1 have 
given them. { Thar they may worſhip me in Truth, as a Peop!e 
that have a dread of me upon their hearts. #£ This will be for 
the profit both of them, and their Poſterjty, many days, even to 
long as they ſhall continue foto do. : 


40 And * I will make an everlaſting covenant » g1,,., 
with them, that will not turn away þ trom them ; 1, ;:. 
to do them good x, but I will put my fear into their + Heb. 
hearts that they ſhall not depart from mew. Jrom aſ5zy 
u This Promiſe manifeſtly relateth to thoſe Fews that,hhould ?*** 
receive the Lord Jeſus Chriſt, oc that were Tſraelires indeed , for 

as to others, God Cid turn away from doing them good, when 

their city was taken by Titus. Ualeſs it be to be underſtood of a 
national Converſion of the Fews, not yet affeGed. w My ſpiric 
which ſhall beget in them a dread of me, ſoas they ſhall not de- 

part from me: Hence ſome conclude well,that when once thebody 

of the Fews ſhall be converted, they ſha]l never again apoſtatize 

from God. Ic may well from hence be concluded, that both 
Converſion unto God, and perſeverance in the ways of God are 

the gifts of God ; we are kept by the power of God, through faith 

unto Salvation. | 

41 Yea, * I will rejoice over them, to do them - >. 
good x, and * [will plant them in this land + aſſt- 3. :-. 
redly with my whole heart and with my whole * Cap, 
ſoul py. pre 
x [ will not only do them good, but I will take pleaſure, and **** 
delight indoing them good, and I will y certainly bring them to IS Ox: 
this Land, and conſtantly and freely do them good when they * AE 


ſhall be there. WIN 
: | ; fravi!i?, 
42 For thus ſaith the LORD, like as I have 
brought all this great evil upon this People, fo will I 
bring upon them all the good that I have promiſed 
them z. 
2 Youſhall find me astrue to my Promiſes,as you have found 
me to my Threatnings. 
43 And fields ſhall be bought in this land, where- 
of ye ſay, 1t is deſolate without man and beaſt. 


44 Men ſhall buy fields for money, and ſubſcribe 
evidences and ſeal thc, and take witniſſes * in the, 
land of Benjamin, and in the places abour Jeruſalem, , 
and in the cities of Judah, and in the citics of the 
mountains, and in the cities of the valley, and in the 
cities of the ſouth, for * I will cauſe their CaptViIty tO + cy, 
return, faith the LORD 4. 23s 7+ 11, 
4 Now, Jeremiah,thou under ſtandeft wherefore I commanded 26, 

thee to buy the Field offered thee by Hanamee! 1n Anaihath 13 the 

Lot of Benjamin ; it was to aſſure thee, that though at preſent 


the Chaldeans ſhall prevail againit Feruſalem, and the Fews ſhall 
be carried into Captivity, aud che Fews ſhall neither buy oor el} 


Jap. 7% 


A aS 


- 
p 
. 


Z &.3 2% 
4 


» 


Cli2p. 


7+ 26, 


” 


Vol. II, 


here at preſent, yet Fields ſhall here Þ2 bought again ; Men firall 
_K] buy 


I 4 < X1L f h i 


t Kings Ir, 5. 2 Kang. 23. 13, be 


35 And they built the high places of Baal wbich 0119's 


Chap. RX AL 


* Ila. 37. 
26. 


uy and ſell, and ſeal Evidences in all parts of Judea, as they 
were wont to do in former times, for they ſhall return again out 
of the captivity of Bzbylon into their own Land. and have Com- 
merce one with another as former]y. 


CHAP. XXXIII. 


FERE.MIA.H 


me 72. 
m Here is but one thing expreſſed by two phraſes; the word 


by us tranſlated cleanſe ſignifies to expiare or purifie, with alluſion 
[to the legal purifications ; ſo ascleanſing muſt not be underſtood 
'of Regeneration, but. of that pardon which is mentioned 1n the 


Tie taking of Jeruſalem, carry ing away the People, their Retury, latter part of the Verle. 


1, ——8. 
Chriſt the Branch of Righteouſneſs : His everlaſting Kingdom and 
Priefthood: And Bliſſed Seed, 15, —— 26, 


Jorful State and ſetled Government, 9, --— 14+ 
[ 


9 T Andiit ſhall be to me a name of joy, a praiſe 
and an honour before all che nations of the earth 


| which ſhall hear all the good that I do unto them : 


I Oreover the word of the LORD came unto 2 and they ſhall fear and tremble, for all the g00d- 


. . . { 
Jeremiah the ſecond time. (while he was} 


yet * ſhut up in the court of the priſon, ſaying a. 

a See the Notes on Chap. 32. 2. Jeremiah was torced ont of the 
Temple. God followerh him to thePrilon, and there revealeth 
his mind to him once and again. The wickedneſs of the Jews in 
perſecuting the Prophet could not make Gods Promites of no 
effe& for mercy to be ſhe wed to the People after the captivity, 
which though made before, ere again confirmed a ſecond time, 
for this Chapter in ſubſtance contains no more than Promiſes of 
the like nature with thoſe in the following Chapters. 

2 Thus faith the LORD the # maker thereof, the 
LORD that formed it, to eſtabliſhirt, the LORD -- 


his name b. 

b Toe maker therasf, that is,ſay ſome, of Feruſalem (ſo Mr. Cal- 
vin) or the maker of theſe Promiſes (fo others interpret it) his 
Name is Jehovah, fo as he hatha ſufficiency in himſelf ro make 
good his word to eſtabliſh Jeruſalem, or to eſtabliſh the word 
ipokenby him for the eſtabliſhment of ir. 


3 Call unto me, and I will anſwer thee, and ſhew 


1 Or, .,;4-thee, great and || mighty things which thou kno welt 


diNs 


* Chap. 


notc. 

c Gol either ſpeaketh tothe People to pray unto him , or to 
the Prophet on the behalf of the People to pray, promiſing him 
he would ſhew them great things. ObjeF. But how doth God ſay 
that Jercmzab did not know them, when God before this time had 
revealed them to the Prophet,and the Prophet had revealed them. 
Sol, He did not know them before God had revealed them, and 
though God had revealed them, yet by his Prayer in the tormer 
Chapter it appears he did not tully underſtand them, or firmly 
believe them as he ought to have done. 5 £4 


4 For thus faith the LORD, the God of Iſrael, 


concerning the houſes of this city, and concerning 


the houſes of the kings of Judah, which are thrown 


dovrn by the mounts, and by the ſword 4. 

4 That is,which in Part are thrown down,and ſhall yet further 
be thrown down, by the Engines of War which the Chaldeans ute 
to batter down the City. See before, Chap. 32. 24. Some read, 
for the mounts, as if they were thrown down by the Citizens to 
make room for the-Citizens to caſt up defenfive Mounts. The 
word tranſlated Swerd,may be as welltranflated Hammers or Mat- 
COCKS, as it 15 2 Chron. 24. 6. It is tranſlated Axes, Exek. 26. 9, 

5 They come to fight with the Chaldeans e, but 
zt rs to fill them with the dead bodies of men, whom 
I have flat in my anger, and in my fury f, aud for 
all whoſe wickedneG I have hid my face from this 
CILY 7 

e It is very difficult to determige whether theſe words contain 

an entire ſenſe in themſelves, or what connexton they have with 
the foregoing words. Not to repeat Mens diverſe apprehenſions, 
{of which 2 large account is given by the Author of the Englifh 
Annotations) Ttnink they Judge beſt who think they have an en- 
tire lenle 11 themlelves, and judge that they here mentioned, 
are the Fews of whom the Prophet ſaith zhey come, becauſe he 
Tnew they would ſally out and fight with their Enemies, but to no 
purpote, but to fil] their Houſes with their own dead Bodies, 
whom he would cauſe in hisanger to be ſlain. g For their wick- 
edneſs which they had provoked God by, and cauſed him to hide 
nis face from that City which had ſo much of his countenance 
formerly. 

G5 Behold, I will bring health, and cure, and 
I will cure them +, and will reveal unto them the a- 
bundance o f peace and truthz. 

© Thelatter part of this Verſe expoundeth the former, for by 
hezlth and cure, the Prophet meaneth peace, and truth. We met 
with the like metaphorical expreſſion, Chap, 30. 17. See the note; 
on that place. The miſerable, diſturbed ſtate of a Nation being 


' compared to Wounds and Sickneſs, the reſtoring of it toapeace- 


able, proſperous ſtate, js fitly called its Health and Cure. 7 By 
truth here ſeems to be meant fazthfulneſs, or ſtability ; not truth of 
propoſitions. g-d. I will after this great wound which I have 
given this People, bring them again intoa quiet and peaceab)e 
ſtate in which they ſha)l abide many days. 


7 And1I will cauſe the captivity of Judah, and the 


. captivity of Iſrael to return, * and will build them 


24. 6, and aS at the firſt þ. 
31.4. and #& In this Verlethe latter part is expounded by the former : 


42. I Os 


the reſtoring of them is called buzlding them, in oppoſition to the 
throwing them down by the Mounts mentioned, Ver. 4. unleſs by 
building be to be underſtood not laying the foundation of their 
new Stare, but the further proſpering them inthar Stare. 

S And I will cleanſe them from all their iniquity, 


whereby they have ſinned againſt me, and I will 


neſs, and for all the proſperity that I procure unto 
it 0, 
n I will do ſo well by this People, that other Nations ſhall ho- 


nour and praiſe me for my goodnels to them. o And not only ſo, 


but ſhall fear to ingage againſt a Nation ſo beloved and favoured 


by me, Exod. 15. 14, 16. Others interpret it of a Religious fear, 


and trembling, to which God's Mercy to the Iſraelites ſhould 1n- 
vite thoſe People that ſhould ſee, and hear of it ; but I think the 
tormer is the moſt probable ſenſe of the Prophet here. 

to Thus faith the LORD, Again there ſhall be 
heard in this place, which we ſay p ſhall be deſolate 
without man, and without beaſt, ever in the cities of 
Judah, and in the ſtreers of Jeruſalem, that are deſo- 
late without man, and without inhabitant, and with- 
out beaſt. 

p Thoſe of yon who though you find no great difficulty to be- 
lieve what I have Prophefied concerning the Chaldeans taking this 
City, ſeeing it upon the matter already taken, yer find adifficulty 
to believe what I tell you about the Peoples returning, and the 


rebuilding of it. The Lord ſpeaketh the one as well as the other, 
there ſhall be heard agaia in it, &c 


11 The* voice of joy, and the voice of gladnefs, « cp,p. 
the voice of the bridegroom, and the voice of the z, 34. and 
bride, the voice of them that ſhall ſay *, Praiſe the 16. 5. 


Chap. XXAlIL Fa 4 


* pardon all their iniquities, whereby they have” Cup. 
ſinned, and whereby they have tranſgreſſed againſt j,7.3# 
18. 


LORD of the hoſts, for the LORD #- good, for his * » Cfron- f Rs 


mercy endureth for ever, andof them that ſhall bring 7: # 


the ſacrifices of praiſe into the houſe of the LORD ; 
for I will cauſe to return the captivity of the Land, 
as at the firſt ſaith the LORD g. 

9 The ſum of this Verſe is,that thoſe that ſhould be carried in- 


to captivity ſhould return, and upon their return they ſhould be - 


in their former States, both as to Civil TranſaRions, they ſhould. 
again Marry, and give in Marriage, and as to Holy and Spiritual 
Joy ; they ſhould publickly praiſe the Lord as they were wont 
to do in the words of David, Pſal. 106. 1. and 107. 1. and 1:8. 7. 
and 136. 1. (we havea Record in Holy Writ of the fulfilling of 
this Prophecy upon the laying the foundations of the ſecond 
Temple, Exr4 3.11.) and offer ſacrifices of Thankſgiving, See 
Nebem. 12. 27. 


12 Thus faith the LORD of hoſts, Again, in this 


place which 1s deſolate r without man, and without 
beaſt, and in all the cities thereof, ſhall be an habi- 


tation of ſhepherds, cauſing their flocks to lie down. 


r Thar 1s, a great part of which is, and the other part ſhall 
ſoon be deſolate. In all theſe places there ſhall be Elocks and 
Herds of Sheep, and Goats, which the Shepherd ſhall take care 
of as 1n former times. 


13. * In thecities of the mountains, in the cities, 
of the valley,and in the cities of the ſouth, and inthe 


17. 26.& 


land of Benjamin, and in the places about Jeruſalem, zz, 44. 


and 1n the cities of Judah, ſhall the flocks paſs again 
under the hands of / him that telleth chem, ſaith the 
LORD. 


So as to keep tale of them; as it is ſaidthey were wont to 
do bvth Morning an1 Evening in thoſe Countries. 


14 Behold, the days come, ſaith the LORD, that 
[ will perform that good thing which [ have promi- 
ſed unto the houſe of Iſrael, and tothe houſe of Ju- 
dah f. ; 

e TheLord is not yea, and n4y, he cannot lie nor repent. I 
ſpeak not of the preſent time, but there ſhall be a time when God 
will juſtifie every good word of this nature which he hath ſpoken 
to his ancient People. 

15 4 In thoſe days, and at that time will I cauſe 
the Branch of righteonſneſs to grow up to David «, 


and he ſhall execute judgment and righteouſneſs in 
the land. 


u Whatſoever the Fews and ſome others ſay, the Pranch of 
Righteouſneſs here ſpoken of, can be. meant of no other bur 
Chriſt, who is called a Branch out of the Stem of Feſſe, Iſa. 11. 
1. The Branch of the Lord, Iſa. 4- 2. A Righteous Branch, Chap. 
23+ 5. (See the notes on theſe places) Zerobabel though deſcended 
from David cannot be meant here, but the ſame who is thus cal- 
led in all thoſe parallel Texts, of whom yet Zorobabel (being a 
good Man, and deſcended from the Family of David) may be al- 
lowed to have - been a Type, But this Text tar more concerneth 
Chriſt,as he in whom all the Promiſes are founded,and in whom 


they are all Tea, and Amen. The Kings they had hitherto had of 
the line of Davil, were moſt of them unrighteous Mer, but God 
pro-. 


* Ge 
IG. ( 
Foe an 
28%.4 
3l, 3 


$4 F Wh promiſeth that after che Captivity they ſhould have a Branch of | 


1 that ſhould execute Judgment and Righteouſneſs in 
tho Land for che proteRion and government of thoſe that teared 


him. 

16 [n thoſe days, ſhall Judah be ſaved, and Jeru- 
ſalem ſhalldwell ſafely: w and this the name where- 
with he ſhall be called +, The LORD our righte- 


els x. _ 
_ is the Opinion of ſome that a ſpiritual Salvation and ſe- 


vic nromiled under theſe expreſſions; but the moſt and beſt 
ms an can rather underſtand ic of a temporal Salvation as pr1- 
marily intended, though typical of that Spiritual and Eternal Sal- 
vation which is often promiſed to the true Iſrael of God ; as their 
reſt in Canaan typitied that Reſt which remaineth for the People 
of God- x Our Traoflation of this Phraſe is ſomething ſtrange, 
words inthe Hebrew are 1JPT% mM 17 RIP) NUR NT 
Paenine Tranſlateth them, And he. who ſhall call it the Lord our 
Righteouſneſs, ſupplying the Verb ſubſtantive, #. He who ſhall 
call it is the Lord our Righteauſneſs, We tranſlate it, This & the 
name wherewith it ſhall be called, 8c. that which cauſeth the dit- 
ficulcy is, that the Pronoun IT}- which ſignifieth he,is applied both 


to perſons and things, and tranſlated he or it,and the relative JWN 


js of all caſes, ſo may de tranſlated who, or which, or with which, 
thoſe wores which our Tranſlators have ſupplied,zs the name,are 


mW not in the Hebrew. This hath made a great doubt amongſt In- 
(8 rerpreters whether, The Lord our Righteouſneſs be the name of 
"08 Chriſt, or the name of the Ci:ty. I do incline to their opinſon, 
2" who think that it is here mentioned as the name of Chriſt, In that 
BS ſence there is nothing to be underſtood but a Verb ſubſtantive, 
pb Z, which is ordinarily underſtood ; fo the words are thus. And 
"OR he who ſhall call it, is, the Lord our Righteouſneſs. The context 
8 ſeemeth to favour this, Chriſt being that Ruler mentioned, v. 15, 


1 . as hewho ſhall execute Fuſtice and Fudgment in the Land, be- 
WL Py: 414 ſides that there is no inch Name any where glven , either to the 
Fewiſh or Chriſtian, Church, as the Lord our Righteouſneſs, but 


M1IA4H | Chap. XXXIV. 


Seed of David, unleſs ic be r Kings rt. 39.-where it ſeems a!ſo to 
be underſtood only of the Princes that came from David,nor 1n- 
deed could they be fo called in any proper ſence 3 David being no 
common Head to the whole 7:wiſh Nation, as both Abraham, 
Iſaic and Facob were, but Chriſt is ofte: called the See4 of Dvid, 
Join 7. 42. Aﬀts13. 23. Rom. r. 3. 2 Tim. 2.8. and Chriſt 
himſelf is called Divi, whole Seed and whoſe Levites are multi- 
plied in che mulciplying of Chriſtians and of faithful Miniſters 
under the Goſpel, which certainly are the things here promiled. 

23 Moreover the word of the LORD came ro Je- 
remiah, ſaying, 

24 Conlider thou not what this people have ſpo- 
ken, ſaying c, The two families which the LO&D 
hath choſen, he hath ever caſt them off a ?- thus they 
have deſpiſed my people, that they ſhould be no 
more a nation before them e. 

c This People, that is (ſay ſome) che Enemies of the Fews, but 
it may as well be interpreted either ofthe wicked Fews, wicked 
Men being always full of groundleſs preſumptuous hopes.,or ſunk 
in deſpair ; or of ſuch amongſt them as were better, but weak in 
Faith ; that knew how to give any firm aſſent to Promiſes, the 
fulfilling of which ſeemed co the Eyes of ſenſe and reaſon fo im- 
probable. d By the two Families here mentioned, the Prophet e:- 
ther meaneth the kingdoms of Iſrge! and Fudah,or, which feemeth 
co me much more probable, the Families ot David and Aaron, 
mentioned before. e Thus, faith God, they have 1poken ſcorntul- 
ly of my People as if they ſhould never be a Nation more kaving 
Rulers of themſelves, and a Miniſtry. 


25 Thus faith the LORD, if my covenant be not 
with day, and night, and ifI have not appointed the 
ordinances of heaven and earth. 

26 Then will I caſt away the ſeed of Jacob f, and 
David my ſervantg, /o that I will not take azy of }:; 
ſeed ro be rulers over the ſeed of Abraham, Ifaac and 


the full import of that Name is ſpoken of Chriſt, 1/aiah 45. 23. 
which Text is applied to Chriſt, Rom, 14. It. Phil. 2. 10. heis 
called the Juſt king, Zech. 9. 9. and our Righteoulneſs, x Cor 
X. 30. 
Bom. 17 © For thus faith the LORD, - David ſhall 
6 RM + Heb, Ever * want a: man to lit upon the throne of the 
A BA L Bag houſe of [ſrael Yo : : d ' 
© norbecuroff , I This is — a promiſe relating to Chriſt ; for David's 
W- fromDavid, Line had failed long: ſince, had it not been continued. in Chrilt, 
" [1 * , Sam, Whoſe Kingdom is and ſhall be an everlaſting Kingdom, So long 


OE 7. 16. as Iſreel remained a Kingdom, thoſe of the Line of David ruled 
7% x Kings Over it, when that failed, Chriſt came in the fleſh, who ruleth, 
dhe and ſhall rule over the Iſrae! of God for ever. 


PP 20 4. . ; ; 
Nt 18. Neither ſhall the prieſts the Levites want a 
Man before. me, to offer burat-offerings, and to 
kindle meat- offerings, and to.do ſacrifice continu- 
ally z. 

The beſt Interpreters underſtand this of a Minifiry to abide 
in % Church to, the end of the world, according to Mat- 28. 20. 
nor is it uſual far God in the Old Teftament to expreſs Promiſes 
relating to, and to be fulfilled under the Goſpel by expreſſions 
Ws. - and terms proper to the Old Teſtament, as Iſa. 66. 23. and in 
I $5.0 this ſence it muſt be expounded, or reſtrained to the times imme- 
OR mediately following che Captivity : But it is generally under- 
flood as a Promiſe for a Golpel Miniſtry to ſucceed in the Mini- 
ſtry in the Fewifh Church, and roabideto the end of the World. 

19 And the word of the LORD came unto Jere- 
miah, ſaying, 

20 Thus fajth the LORD, * if you can break my 
covenant ofthe day, and my covenant of the night a, 
and that there ſhould not be a day, and night in 
their ſeaſon. : 

a By the Covenang of Day and Night here 1s meant the ſame 
with the Ordinances mentioned,Chap. 31. 35. God's Law eſtabliſh- 
ed in the courſe of natural cauſes, by vertue of which the Da 
and Night orderly ſucceed one another. Theſe Verſes are but a 
further confirmation of what was ſaid before, and the ſence of 
them no morethan this, That the tucceſſion of the Goſpel- Mini - 
ſtry in the Church of God to abide for ever, and ſhould he as 
certain as the ſucceſſion of darkneſs and light ; God hath efta- 
bliſhed the latter in a neceffary courſe of natural cauſes, and he 
would by his Providence take care for the other, that the 
effect ſhould be every whit a certain. Though the ſecond cauſes 
are widely different, yet God who is the firſt cauſe of both is 
= ſame, and would as certainly bring the one to paſs as the 


21 Then may alſo my covenant be broken with 
David my ſervant, that he ſhould not-have a fon to 
reign upon his throne, and with the Levites the 
prieſts, my miniſters, 


* Gen. 13, 22 As the * hoſt of heaven cannot be numbred, 
16. & 15.nelther the ſand of the ſea meaſured, ſo will I mul- 
5+ and 22. tiply the ſeed -of David my ſervant, and the Levyites 
- - Chap. that miniſter unto me b. 
"37s b The former promiſe was for the ſtability, this for the mul- 
tiplication of the Church, which is here expreſſed under the no- 
Py tion of the Seed of David, that is, the Members of Chriſt, the 
Fews were ordinarilycalled the Seed of Abraham, Iſaac and Fcob, 


Inge 9. 


Jacob ; for *I will cauſe their captivity to return and 


have meicy on them. * Verie 
f By the Seed of Jacob, and of Abraham and T{aac are meant 7, 13. 
the body of the Jews, to whom theſe three Patriarchs were com. 

mon heads. 'g By the Seed of David, Perſons lineaily deſcended 

from David, who ſhould rule over the Iſrael! of God. The ſum 

of theſe two Verſes is plainly no more than God had faid before, 

that a Reſtauration of them to their own Land,ſhould as certainly 
ſucceed their Captivity, as the Night ſucceedeth the Day, or the 

Day ſucceedeth the Night, God had as certainly eſtabliſhed, an 
ordained the one as the other, though not as yec ſo eſtabliſhed ere 

one in the order of natural caules as the other. God would cer - 
tainly have mercy on them, and in ſhewing his mercy wouid 

take care that one of the Seed of David ſhould rbe their Ruler, 
which was fulflled in the Meſſiah. 


CH A P. XXXIV. 


The Captivity of King Zedekiah, and the City, 1 —— 7. The 
Princes and People by Solemn Covenant, according to the Law, 
diſmiſs their Bond-Servants, bur the Babylonians leaving the 
Stege, they reaſſume them, 8, II. For this God threat- 
neth a Return of the Enemy, and Deſtrufion of Jeruſalem, 


IJ, —_—_— zz, 


[ HE word which came unto Jeremiah from 
the LORD a, * when Nebucadnezzar king * > Kine. 

of Babylon, and his army, and all the kingdoms of 2 5. :» <5: 
the earth + of his dominion, and all the people So 4 
fought againſt Jeruſalem, and againſt all the cities 5M G 
thereof) ſaying, of b3s 

4 The Revelationof the Will of God to Jeremiah to be pub. 
liſhed to the People, during the time of the Siege, The leven 


firſt Verſes are plainly a diſtin& Prophefie from that in the lat- 
ter part of the Chapter. It was (as ſome think) for this Sermon 


Y [that the Prophet was impriſoned (for in this Prophecy the Ser- 


mons are much diſordered in the placing of them) ſo as this ſhew- . 
ing the cauſe for which the King impriſoned him, is ſer after 0- 
thers, Chap. 32. which were during the time of his Impriſonmen: . 


2 Thus ſaith the LORD, the God of Iſrael, Go, 
and ſpeak to Zedekiah king of Judah, and tell him, 
Thus faith the LORD, Behold, I will give this city 
into the hand of the king of Babylon, and. * he ſhall 
burn it with fire. _ 
' 3 And thouſhalt not eſcape out of his hand, but?® *-* 
ſhalt ſurely be taken and delivered into his hand,and 
thine eyes ſhall behold the eyes of the king of Baby- 
lon, - and he ſhall ſpeak with thee mouth to mouth, 
and thou ſhalt goto Babylon 6. + Heb, 3 
' 0 We hadall this Chaps 32. 3, 4. See the Notes there.  mowh ſhall 
4 Yet hear the word of the LORD, O Zedekiah/peck i :4y 
king of Judah, Thus faith the LORD of thee, Thou"® = 
ſhalt not die by the ſword. : 

5 But thou ſhall die in peace c, and with the burn- 
ings of thy fathers the former kings which were be- 
fore thee: fo ſhall they bura odours for thee, and 


they will lamenc thee, /aying, Ah Lord! tor 1 have 


but'l do not remember they are any where called the 


NE onouy 
EN I SF 7 en I oRek IO x are 
9s IIs TIES 
EP OR Er Bt ts I dogs gs 08 

<, CR en ad , - Mt re 
be a EN Ry Pf 


| d. ſaith the LORD 4. 
pronounced the word, IS cTid 


of bj and, 


Yin 
u 
x if "4 | 
nt \ #2 Y: 
Ji - » 4 FE, 
8 005-"f 
WW | 
th 
Ig 


Ch 1Þ, VS NIV, 


of Nch. 5 


FERE 


, 

c Thits only place informeth us concerning the manner of Ze. 
i:þ.4//s Dearh,and rhac both negatively and poſitively. Negatively, 
Tiar he did not die by the Sword, the King of Babylon took him, 
killed h1s Sons before his Eyes, then pur our his Eyes, and bound 
him in Chains, C29. 39. 7. bur killed him nor, as we learn from 
thts Texr, bur he died a natural Death, which1s here meant by dy- 


M I A H. 


I brought them forth out of the land of Egypt, out 


of the houſe of bondmen /, ſaying, 

þ The Law of 50d is called often a Covenant, becauſe 1t con- 
taineth the Will of God which he would have them do, ro 
which (whether they expreſs their conſenc or no) they are bound 
to conſent, and agree. But to the Jews all Gods Laws given on 


Chap. XX XIV. 


ing in peace, 4 and had an honourable Burial, _ me pry Pac Mount $in4i were a former explicite Covenant,God explicitley tel- 
inp aim would not allow AR, as " = "4 22.18, Ic ling them whar he would have them to do,and they as explicitely 
_— with wr m__ 9 bor Ron -16! 32mg cog promiſing they would do ir, Exod. 24. 3. ! Here was a double 
of the Gates of Jeruſalem, and no Man lame , aggravation of their fin, in breaking this Covenant made berween 
ro Zedrbizh they burned jw2rt odours for him, (after the manner} 04 anq them. 1. From the conſideration of God's kindneſs in 
of the Burial of Kings, 2 Chr00, 16, 14.) anE made ſolemn Lam*!-\ pringing them out of Feypt. 2. From the conſideration of their 
zation for him. The Jews in their Chronology, Called by them paving been Bondmen in Egypt, which ſhould have taught them 
Seder Olam, giveus the torm of rheir #1 FIRE thus. 4:95 © 'ro now the hearts of Bondmen, fo as to bave compaſſionated 
Zedekiah is dead, wro drank tie dregs of all Ages: That 15, WO | hem whom they kept in thelike diſtreſs in which they had been 
was puniihea for the tins of all former Ages. themſelves, and from which God had'{delivered them. We ftand 
6 Then Jeremiah the prophet ſpake all theſe — ——— _ _—_ we _ ——_— in our _ 
words 2h kins of Indah in Jeruſalem. or willnot forger them, Ger. 35. 1. Asalſo ro compaſſionate 
a + by 298 Zedekiah Ki ” -n ] - dah in L ge ukedd them, who fall into the ſame Diſtreſſes that we have been in, and 
7 \Whenthe king of Babylon's army FOugnt againit] gr of which God hath ſaved us: God expeReth that we ſhould 
Jeruſalem,and againſt all the cities of Judah that were|ſhew the fame compaſſion to others, Matth 18. 33. 
left, againft Lachiſh, and againſt Azekah ; for theſe] 14 At the end of ſeven years let ye goevery man 


defenced cities remained of the cities of Judah e. 


entruſted him with to rhe King,upon which he was impriſoned,as{ 4 1 1 g0 free from thee m2, but your fathers 


weread h<fore, Cha). 32. 3.The time itſhould ſeem was, after that A ad bo ; 
the King of Babylon had Cen the Country, and taken the great- hearkned not unto me, neither inclined thelr ear 7. 
eſt part of it; only three fortified places remained, which he was| #7 This 1s but a Reperition of the Law, Exod. 21, 2. Dext. 15. 
Befreging, viz, Jeruſalem, which was the chief City of that Country, | 12. V hich concerned ſuch Perſons as were ſold by others, or had 
and Zz2-41h, of the Conqueſt of which we read, Joſ. 10. 31. dif- ſold themſelves. God would not have his People rake advanrage 
poſed of to the Tribe of ſudab, Joſh. 15. 39. and 43:4i2b, which of the ſudden and rafh a&s of their Brethren, which were the 
v-a5 a Ciry of J:4ah, of which we read in theſame Chaprers. effeRs of Paſſion. 1 Notwithftanding this Law with che Jews who 
SME CE . , | were always a very covetous griping People, did otherwiſe. 

3 7's is the word that came unto Jeremiah 
from the LOR 
made a covenant with all the people which were at] 171 to his neighbour p, and ye had made a covenant 
Fernſilem to proclaim liberty unto them . 

f This Verſe plainly begnneth a new Prophecy, but at what 
par-icular time, this Revelation, or the publication of 1t was we 
are not told 3 only the occaſion of ir 1s recorded. God had made 
a particular Law reſpe&ing the J-wiſh Nation, That if any had 
bought an Hebrew ſervant, he ſhould ſerve but (x years, and in the 
ſeventh ſhould go out ſvee, Exod. 21.2 Deur. 15 12. Ir came into 

Zedebith's mind ro makea Proclamation for the execution of this 
Law ; what moved him to it we have notrecorded. The learned 


name q; 


your Servants. q And you made a covenant in my preſence to 
that purpoſe, and that'in the Temple, where it ſeemerh this Coye- 
nant was made, 

16 But ye turned, and polluted my name 7, and 


his brother an Hebrew, which hath been ſold || unto | Or, hath 
e The Prophet was not afraid to go and do the Meſſage God had |rhee , and when he hath ſerved thee fix years, thou ſold himſelf. 


15 And ye wereÞ now turned o, and had done Heb. 
, after that the king Zedekiah, had right in my fight, in proclaiming liberty every fo dap. 


before me in the houſe * which is called by my+ Heb. 


0 Thar is, reformed in this particular , in which you had done 7) name #5 
the thing which 1 commanded you, p proclaiming a liberty ro ca#ed. 


Aurhor of the Engliſh Annotations, ovſerverh well that it was 
their uſval courſe, when they were 1n great ſtraits, to make 
ſome parrial Reformation, Jud. 10, 15, 16. Plal. 78. 34, 35: 
Fioſ. 6. I. 

0 * Thatevery man ſhould let his man-ſervant, 


cauſed every man his ſervant and every man his 
handmaid, whom he had ſet at liberty at their plea- 
ſure to return, and brought them into ſubje&tion, to 


be unto you for ſervants and for handmaids 5. 
7 You again licked up your Vomit, aud profaned my Name, 


andevery man his maid-ſervant being an Hebrew, or ſwearing by ir to do that which you have nor done, and ſ forced 
an Hebrewels go free, that none ſhould ſerve himſelf your Servants, though diſmiſſed, ro return again unto their for- 


of them, 79 wit, of a Jew his brother g. 
2 This was the tenour of God's Law mentioned in the above- 
named Texts and it ſeemerh Zedebiab raking norice of the com- 


mon violation of this Law, and the Jews ordinary oppreſling thoſe. 


of their own Nation this way ; judging that this might be one of 
thoſe fins for which the Wrath of God was at this time kindled a- 
gainſt them, he cauſed the People to make a Covenant thar they 


wou!'d give thatliberty to their Servants of etther Sex, which the} 


Lav of God required, of which he made Proclamation. 


10 Now when all the princes, andall the people 
which had entred into the covenant heard that every 
one ſhould let his man-ſervant, and every one his 
maid-ſervant fo free, that none ſhould ſerve them- 
ſelves of them any more, then they obeyed and let 
zvem £0 h. 

þ The Princes and the People, having firſt with the King agreed 
r9 the thing upon the iſſuing our of his Proclamation, they at firſt 
yiclded obedience to it, 


11 But afterwards they turned, and cauſed the 
ſrvants, and the handmaids, whom they had let go 
tree, to return, and brought them 1nto ſubjection 
for {ervants and for hand-maids 7z. 

3 Like a company of wretched Hypocrites, they reformed this 
abute, only to ſerve a turn, which when it was ſerved, they return- 
ed again to their old oppreſſion; and 1n this thing not the People 
alone, ,but the Government was to be blamed ; for cheir Judges 
in their Courts of Juſtice, ought to have executed the Law of the 
Lord and to have reſtrained the covetous and oppreſiive humour 
of the People. The learned Author of the Engliſh Annotations 
7hinketh,chat thar which alrered their minds, was a litcle alteration 
of their Stare, during the Siege; for Chap. 37. <. weread thar the 
Rabylonians and Chaldeans hearing of an Army coming out of 
Feypt ro relieve the City, left the Siege for a cime, and that rhe 
Prophet, Ver. 21. of this Chapter, relares ro that, when he pro- 
pheſied, Thar rhe King of Babylor's Army ſhould retarn : Bur 
rheſe wretched Men, ſeeing the Babylonian Army raiſed from the 
Siege concluded they were now our of God's hands, and repent- 


; mer Bondage and ſubje&ion to you. 
| 17 Therefore thus ſaith the LORD, Yehave not 


| hearkened unto me in proclaiming liberty every one 
to his brother, and every Man to his neighbour t - 
behold I proclaim a liberty for you, ſaith the LORD, 


to the ſword, and.to the peſtilence, and to the fa- 


all the kingdoms of the earth . 


ſelves of God; he faith, they had nor done it, becauſe they did 
not perſiſt ro doit; Inſucha caſe Mens Righteouſneſs ſhall by 
God never beremembred, bur they ſhall dic in the ſins they have 
committed. x Seeing you have refuſed to manumiſe your Ser- 
vants at my command, I will amanuiſe you, and ſer you free from 
my prore&ion and care. You ſhall periſh by the Sword, Famine 
and Peftlence, and thoſe of you who eſcape them, ſhall ſee how 
pleaſant a thing ir is co be Slaves, and in Servitude, for you ſhall 
be diſperſed in many Nations ; and be Servants to the Rulers of 
them. | 

18 AndI will give the men thathave tranſgreſſed 
my covenant, which have not performed the words 
of the covenant, which they had made before me, 
when they cut the calf in twain, and paſſed between 


the parts thereof. 

w. This was a Ceremony which they uſed in making of Cove- 
nants, not without ſomething of a Warrant from a Divine Preſi- 
dent, Gen. 15. 9.10, Iris faid Yer, 19. Thar ſame Day the Lord 
made a Covenant with Abraham (that Covenant was a promiſe 
that Abraham's Seed ſhould poſſeſs the Land of Canaan) Ver. 8. 
Abranam (aid unto God, Whereby ſhall I know that T ſhall inherit 
it, Ver, 9. God bids him take an hrifer of three years old, and 4 
ſhe goat of three years old, and a ram of three years o!d, &c, Fer. 
10. Iris ſaid, thar be toob them, and divided them in the midſt, 
and laid each piece one againſt another, Indeed we read nothing 
there of the Parties covenancing, palling berwixc the parts of the 
Beaſts ſo divided, but this was afterwards uſed in making Cove- 


Servants return into their former Servirude. 
12 A Therefore the word of the LORD came to 
Jeremiah from the LORD, ſaying, | 
13 Thus ſaich the LORD the God of [ſrael, I 
made a covenant & with your fathers in the day that 


ed of their Repenrance 1n this particular,and would make all their | 


- 


nants bewixt Men,” which this had in ira fecrer imprecarion or 
wiſhing that they might be cur in pieces like thoſe Beaſts if they 
did nor keep the Covenants which they made. Tt ſhould ſeem that 
theſe Jews in the making of cheir ſolemn Promiſe or Covenant with 
God about releating their Servants uſed this Rite ; they cauſed a 
Calf, or Heifer to be cut in pieces, and the parts to be laid in the 
Temple right oyer-agarift one anorher,then they recited this Co- 

Vcnant, 


mine, andI will make you | to be * removed, into 4 yp, for 
- a Temoving, 
t They had turned and given a liberty, Fer. 20. how doth God * Deut.22, 
ſay here they had not? So God accounteth none to have done 64. and 
thoſe good as, which they doin a fit or meetly ro ſerve them. 29, 21, 


SLES 


hap. A. XY. 


0 | 
#ERE 
venant, and inthe way of a ſolemn Promiſe, or confirmation of 
their Reſolution ro make their Promiſe good, th ey paſſed berw1Xxt 
the parts of the Calf, or Heifer ſocut; filencly agreeing chart God 
ſhould cur them in pieces like thar Beaſt if they did nor make their 
words good. Hence 1s the Hebrew Phraſe of cutting 4 Covenant, 
for making it. This was a Ceremony ordinarily uſed alſo amongſt 
the Heathens. as We are informed by Cicero, Livy, and 0- 
thers- ; 

19 The princes of Judah, andthe princes of Je- 
ruſalem, the Eunuchs and the Prieſts, and all the 


people of the land, which paſſed betwixt the parts 
of the calf. | : | 
20 1 will even give them into the hand of their 
enemies, and into the hand of them thar ſeek their 
life, and their * dead bodies ſhall be for meat unto 


F Chap. 7-the fowls of the heaven, and to the beaſts of rhe 


carth x- | 
x God doth not threaten all the Jews, bur thoſe only, who had 
made this Covenant, and fermally confirmed ir, by killing a Beaſt, 
and paſſing through the parts of it thus divided, and laid oppoſite 
one to another. Of theſe he ſpareth none bur threatens both the 
King, and Nobles and great Courriers, as well as the People, char 
.he would give them into the hand of their Enemies that thirſted 
after their .Blood, they fhould be ſlain, and their dead Bodies 


ſhould nor be buried, Herein the Righteouſneſs of God appeared | 


by doing to them as they defired (by paſſing betwixr the Calf) 
thar God would do in caſe they did nor keep to the promiſe they | 
had made, and called God to witneſs, and challenging him to de-. 
firoy them if they did not fulfil whar they covenanced for. 

21 And Zedckiah king of Judah, and his princes 
will I give into the hand of their enemies, and into 
the hand of them that ſeek their lite; and 1nto the 
hand of the king of Babylon's army * which are 
gone up from you y.. : 

y Here is nothing in this Verſe, but what was ſaid before, fave 
only in the laſt clauſe, where mention is made of the King of Ba- 
byton's Army which was gone up from rhem, the occaſion of which 
we ſhall meer with Chap. 37. 5. becauſe there was an Army came 
out of Egypt ro aſlift the Jews, 

22 Behold, I will command, faith the L O R D, 
and cauſe them to return to this city z, and they 
ſhall fight againſt ir, and take it, and burn it with 
fire, and I will makethe cities of Judah a deſolation 


without an Inhabitant. 

z F will purit into their hearrs to return ſaith the L ord, and 
they ſhall come back again to the Siege, and ſha!l riſe up no more 
vill they have taken the City and burned it with fire,and made the 
whole Country deſolate. The motions of Armies are under the 
Government of Divine Providence,they arc all atGods Command; 
when he bids them come they come, what he bids them do they 
do, and ſhall certainly effe& what God hath determined. When 
we come to Chap. 39, we ſhallread of the fulfilling of this Pro- 


phecy. 
CH A P. XXXV. 


M 1 A H 


| 4 And I brought them into the houſe of the 
LORD, into the chamber of the ſons of Hanan. the 
ſon of igdaliah a man of God c, which was by the 
chamber of the princes, which was above the cham- 


ber of Maaſeiah the ſon of Shallum, the keeper of . Het . 


the -|- door 4. 


This rerm, the man of Goda, doth in ſcripture Gonif Y 
[phet ſometimes, bur whether it ſo Genifieth dane 5 IF ir Fw 


; whether it relaterh ro Tedaliab or Hananis a queſtion. &4Pro- 


bably by the Chamber of the Princes is meant ſome Chamber where 
the Princes were wont to meet in a Court, or fora Countel : 
thither Jeremiah brings theſe Rechabites , and ſers Veſſels of 
Wane before them, not commanding them to drink it bur only 
inviting them, ; 

5 And I ſet before the ſons of the houſe of the 
Rechabites pots full of wine, and cups, and I ſaid 
unto them, Drink ye wine _ 

6 But they ſaid we will drink no wine: for Jo- 
nadab the ſon of Rechab our father e commanded us, 
faying, ye ſhall drink no wine, zeither ye, nor your 
ſons for ever f. | 

e Tr 15 uncertain whether Father here ſignifies their immediate 


By the Obedience of the Rechabires, 1, 11, God condemn- 
eth the Tews Obedience, 12, ——— 17, The Rechabites are bleſ- 
- yea, 18, I9. 


[ HE word whichcame unto Jeremiah from the 
L O RD, in the days of Jehaiakim the fon 
of Joſiah king of Judah, ſaying 4, 

4 This is another evidence that the Prophecies of this Book 
are not left us in thar order wherein they were dehivered,for rhoſe 
which we had in the tivo or three foregoing Chaprers being in the 
time of Zedebiah muſt needs be ten or eleven years after this. 

2 Gountro the houſe of the Rechabites, and ſpeak 
unto them, aad bring them into the houſe of the 
LORD, into one of the chambers, and give them 
wine to drink 6, 

b Theſe Rechabites chad their name from Rechab their Father, 

who as appears from x Chron.2, $5. deſcended from Hemath, who 
was a Kenite, who 1s alſo called Hobab, Jud. 4.11. (anleſs, it 
may be, Hameth who was the Son of Hobab.) This Hobab was 
Jech10 the Father-1n-Law of Afoſes, as appears from Jud. 4. r1. 
We read ]44d. 1. 16. That is his children went up out of the City of 
Palm-trees, with the chilaren of Judah, which lyeth in the South 
of Arad, and they went, aud dwelt among the People, The 
Rechabites here mentioned deſcended from this Srock. Jehona- 
dab mentioned 2 King. 10. 15. was of this Family, a Man of 
ſome note, as appeareth by Je his taking him there into his 
Charriot. God commandeth the Propher to bring ſome of this 
Family into the Temple, into ſome of the Chambers (for in and 
about the Temple were ſeveral Chambers of the Prieſts,and where 
they diſpoſed of the Holy Garments and ſeveral Oblations, r King, 
6. 5, 6,10, 1 Chron 28, 11, 12.) God commands Jeremiah ro 
bring theſe Rechabires into ſome of theſe Chambers, and to ſer 
wine before them, This was either for the more publickneſs of the 
thing, Or 1t may be for the reproof of the Prieſts who drank roo 
much Wine, 

3 ThenIT took Jaazaniah, the ſon of Jeremiah, the 
ſon of Habaziniah, and his brethren, and all his ſons, 
and the whole houſe of the Rechabites. 


Parent, or (which 1s more probable) their Progenitor z it is moiF 
likely it referrerh ro thar Jon2445 of whom we read, 2 King.:o.18. 
who was the Father (that is the Progenitor of this Family of che 
Rechabitss, at 3oo Years diftance, ) j The reaſon why he lete his 
Poſterity this charge 1s uncertain, probably ro warn them againſt 
the Luxury which he ſaw began to abound in 1/22/, and 5eing de- 
firous that they ſhould inure themſelves ts a more hardy and la- 
bortous Life ; being ordinarily K-nitzr, and uſed tro Husbandry, 
and keeping of Sheep and orher Cattle, he deſired they ſhould 
hve according to their Quality. 

7 Neither ſhall ye build houſe, nor ſow ſeed, nor 
plant vineyard, nor have 2zy ; but. all your days ye 
ſhall dwell 1n tents, that ye may live many days 1a 
the land where ye be ſtrangers s. 

£ The laſt words of the Verſe probably give us a reaſon of the 
former: They were no Native J:ws, but Scrangers amongſt chem 
who commonly are envied, when they arc obſerved to thrive roo 
much or to live ſplendidly ; and that envy of the Natives of the 
place where they ſojourn, expoſerth chem to their Hatred and 
Malice, ſoas their Lives are made uneaſie to them, J9n2445 cthere- 
fore cautions his Sons to avoid rheſe 1nconventencies, by a thrifcy, 
ſober, laborious life, to which they had been bred, in keeping 
Flocks, and to avoid any thing might expoſe them co Envy, or 
Hatred, or Malice of the People amongſt whom they were come 
ro ſojourn. 


8 Thus have we obeyed the voice of Jonadab the 
ſon of Rechab our father in all that he hath charged 
us, to drink no wine all our days, we, our wives, 
nor our ſons, nor our daughters. 

9 Nor to build houſes for us to dwell in : neither 
have we vineyard, nor field, nor ſeed. 

10 But we have dwelt intents h, and have obey- 
ed and done, according to all that Jonadab our father 
commanded us. 

þ Moveable Habijtations, which they could with little labour 
remove from place to place, as they had couvenience to feed 
their Flocks; this was their ordinary way of living uncil neceſliry 
compelled them to come and live in [eruſalem, 

11 Butit came to paſs when Nebuchadrezzarking 
of Babylon came up into | the land z, that we faid, 
Come, and let us go to Jeruſalem, for fear of the 
army of the Chaldeans, and for fear of the army of 


the Syrians ; So we dwell at Jeruſalem. 

- 3 When the Cha/dean Army came inco the Land, they ſaw there 
would be no quier abode for them any where bur in ſome forrified 
place, The Syrians joyned with the Chaldeans in this War, as we 
read 2 King. 24- 2. This they tell the Prophet wasthe reaſon why 
they who never uſed to dwell 1n Cities, nor fixed Houſes, came ro 
dwell at Jeruſalem, to prevent being deſtroyed by the Foragers for 
theſe Armies- 


i2 Þ Thencame the word of the LORD unto 
Jeremiah, ſaying, 

13 Thus faith the LORD of hoſts, the God of 
Iſrael, Go, and tell the Men of Judah, and the in- 
habitants of Jeruſalem, W1ll ye not receive inſtruci- 
on to hearken to my words ? faith the LORD. 

14 The words of Jonadab the ſon of Rechab, that 
he commanded his ſons not to drink wine, are per- 
formed ; for unto this day they drink none, but obey 
their fathers commandment : notwithſtanding I have 


ſpoken unto you, * riſing early, and ſpeaking, but * Chap, 7, 
ye hearkened not unto me. 13. 25. 


5 I have ſentalſounto you all my ſervants the 
prophets, riſing up early and ſending them, faying, 
* Return ye now every man from his evil way, at 


. Ii, 
amend your doings, andgo not after other gods to * 


ſerve them, and ye ſhall dwell 1a the land which I 
have 


Chap. XXXV. 


31 Tutd 
or vefts, 


-— wa, g y pany - 
; ho - - 7 a9; 
E2S5 ” 4 
Ty Kg M_ SW. Ararat 
— 


we yay 
CON Ns 
TEE Boron 
; =4 gn 
Ps RE bows. 
evan 30 27,4 . 
» T : 
* PEE. _ « 
= te os 
& ” 


+ 


$44 = LEED 
iP pn 


SD note" 4-2 
þ > 
w - et ©. 
- _—— — 
—_—_— —_— = 
—— 
+ 4 . 


Chap. XXX V. 


+ Heb. 
There ſhall 
not £ man 
be cut off 


from TFong- 


42b rhe ſon Church ; Whether the Promiſe relates tothe abiding of Jonadab's 
of Rehab roFamily when many Families of the, Jews were quite rooted out, 
fland, 8c, cur off, and extin; or to ſome ſpecial favour that God would 


have given to you,and to your fathers - 


not inclined you ear, nor heakened to me &. 

hk God in this Revelation of his Mind to the Prophet, expound- 
eth to him why he had ſet him to bring the Rechabites into the 
Temple, and commanced him to ſet Wine before them, and 1n- 
vite them todrink of it, viz. that by thelr refuſal of doing ac- 
cording to the invitation, in obedience to their Father Fonadab, 
he might convince the Fews of their Difobedfence to his Com- 
mands, though God's Commands were more advantaged, than the 
Commands of Fonadab, in that, 1. Fonadab was bur an' earthly 
Parent, and ſohad no abſolute univerſal Soveraignty over his 
Children > but God was the Lord of hoſts, the God of Tjrael. 2. Fo- 
nedzb's Commands, was not for the performance of any mora! 
Duty, but the doing of a thing which they might do, or leave 
undone: God required of them what was but their moral Duty, 
ad for which was the higheſt reaſon. 3. Jon«deb's Command had 
no promiſe annexed, God's Precept had a promiſe anrzexed, yet 
they had not yielded him that obedience which the Sons of Jana- 
dab had yielded him : He was the Father, but where was his 
Honour . 


16 Becauſe the ſons of Jonadab the Son of Rechab 
have performed the commandment of their Father; 
which he commanded them, but this people hath 
not hearkened unto me 3 


17 Therefore thus ſaith the Lord God of hoſts, 
the God of Iſrael, Behold, I will bring upon Judah, 
and upon all the Inhabitants of Jeruſalem, all the 
evil that I have pronounced againſt them : becauſe 
I have ſpoken to them, and they have not heard, I 


called unto them, and they have not anſwered /. 

1 This is but the ſame Threatning confirmed, which we have 
often met with before, concerning the ruine of this People ; only 
the meritorious cauſe of it is further amplified ; their not paying 
that Homage to God which thele Rechabites paid to an Earthly 
Parent, and had been ſteady in the Payment of, now for three 
hundred Years together. 


13 And Jeremiah ſaid to the houſe of the Rechab- 
ites, Thus faith the LORD of hoſts, the God of 
Iſrael, Becauſe ye have obeyed the voice of Jonadab 
your father, and kept all his precepts, and done 
according to all that he hath commanded you. 


19 Therefore thus faith the LORD of hoſts, the 
God of Iſrael, * Jonadab the ſon of Rechab ſhall nct 


want 2 man to ſtand before me for ever m. 
m For ever, here fignifies the ever of the Jewiſh State, or 


ſhew them, or to ſome place of Office they ſhould have in, or 
about the Temple (as ſome judge, becauſe 1 Chron. 2. 55. it ap- 
pears they were Scribes) is uncertain: But it is a queſtion of more| 
moment : How God promiſeth a Reward to theſe Sons of Jonadab 
for obeying the Command of their Father, and whether they had 
finned if they had not obeyed this Command of Jonadab ; which 
brings in another Queſtion : Whether Parents have a power to oblige 
their children in matters which God hath left at liberty. To which 
I anſwer, 1. Ged might reward theſe Rechabites, for their Reve- 
erence and Obediznce to Jonadab their Father, though they were 
not ſirifly by the Divine Law ; ob/iged thus fay to have obeyed 
him: as he rewarded David for his thoughts in his heart to build 
him an Houſe, though it was not God's Will that he ſhould do 
it, fo as God's Promiſe of the Reward doth not prove their Q- 
bedience in this particular to have been their Duty. Admit that 
it remained ti!! a matter of Liberty, yet the General Honour, 
and Reverence they teſtited might be rewarded from God. 
2 « Unqueſtionable. Parents have not a power to determine Children 
in all things as to which God hath left them at liberty, for then 
they have a power to make their Children Slaves, and to take 
away all their natural Liberty, To Marry or not, and to this, 
Or that Perſon, is matter of Liberty, Parents cannot in this caſe 
determine their Children, Berhuel Gen. 24. 58. as Rebeccah if 
ſhe would go with Abraham's Servant before he would ſend her. 
3+ In matters of civil concernment they have 4 far greater power than 
mn matters of Religion. All Souls are God's, and Conſcience can 
be under no other Dominion than that of God. 4. In civil things 


FEREMIAH 


but ye have tina 


the Firſt Commandment with Promiſe. 


CHAP. XXXVI. 


[enki cauſeth Baruch to write his Prophecy ; and publickly to 
reed it, I, — Io. The Princes ſend to fetch the Roll and 
read it, 11, —— 18, They adviſe Earuch and Jeremiah to hide 
themſelves, 19. The King Jehoiakim teareth part of the Roll, 
and birned it, 20, 26. Jeremiah denounceth his Judgment, 
27, —— 31, Baruch writeth a new Copy, 32. 


Jehoiakim, the ſon of Joſiah king of Judah, 
that this word came unto Jeremiah from the LORD, 
ſaying a, 

a Jehoia kim was three Years a Tributary to Nebuchadneq+ ar, 
aSweread, 2 Kings 24.1 then he rebelled, which three Years 
are judged to be the 6, 7, and 8th Years of his Reign, for Pha- 
raoh Necho ſet him up, to whom he was firſt a Tributary as we 
read,2 Kings 23. 35. Phoraoh Necho having conquered him, Jehoig» 
kin became Servant to the Conqueror three Years,then rebelledy 
upon which the Armies of the Chaldeans with the Syr;zans, Cc. 
came up againſt him ; and carried him away. This word of the 
Lord came to Jeremiah the firſt Year that he was Tributary to 
che king of Babylon, which was the fourth Year of his Reign. 


[ſrae], and againſt Judah, and againſt all the nations 


* Joſiah even unto this day c. 

b By a Roll of 4 Book is to be underſtood Parchments, which 
anciently were their Books, the Art of binding Books being not 
then known. 6c The Precept is for recording all the Revelations 
he had from God for 22 Years laſt paſt ; for he began co prophe- 
fie in the thirteenth Year of Jofiah, who reigned one and thirty 
Years, ſo as he propheſied 18 Years during Jofsah's Life, and this 
'was the fourth Year of the Reign of Jehozakim, God would 
'havethem recorded, that there might be a Memorlal of them, 
[that ſo the truth of them might appear, when God ſhould bring 
[them to paſs, the time of which now drew very near. 


3 It may be that the houſe of Judah will hear all 
the evil 4 which I purpoſe to do unto them, that they 
may return every man from his evil way, that I may 
forgive their Iniquity, and their fin e. 

4 What we tranſlate it may be "?2R,#Hlaj,others tranſlate if per- 


haps which better expreſſeth the ſence.God knew what would be, 
bur yet he would not be wanting in means by which they migtic 
be informed in his Will,and ſo believe the thing,for believing and 
reforming are here meant by hearing, as the nexe words in pare 
expound this term here. e Forgiveneſs of fin in Scripture fome- 
times fignifieth the acquitting of a finner from the obligation fin 
layeth the finner under to Eternal Death; ſometimes the remifſi- 
on ofa temporal puniſhment : It may here well be underſtood 
as comprehending both, though I think the latter to be whar is 
here principally intended. 

4 Then Jeremiah called Baruch the ſon Neriah, 


him, upon a roll of a book f. 

f We ſhall find this Baruch, being one of Feremiab's Diſciples, 
more than once thus 1mployed as Jeremiah's Secretary or Amanu- 
enfis, None ſhall need ask how Jeremizh could remember all the 
Prophecies he propheſied for 22 Years before paſt, that conſi- 
dereth who it was that commanded him to do this. God undoubt- 
ed]y revived the Prophet's Memory, or he could not have called 
all to mind. ' 

5 And Jeremah commanded Baruch, ſaying , 
[ am ſhut up, I cannot go into the houſe of the 
LORD. 

6 Therefore go thou and read in the roll which 
thou haſt written from my mouth, the words of the 


LORD in theears of the people in the LOR D's 


Parents have agreater power, during the Nonage of Children, and 
after alſo, in matters which concern their Parents good ; as to 
commaad them to aſſiſt them ; to help to ſupply their neceſlities, 
Cc 5. Parents being ſet over Children, and inflead of God to 
them, as it is their Duty to adviſe their Children tothe beſt of theix 
avuity for their good: So it 3s the Duty of Children to receive their 
advice, and not to depart ſrom it, unleſs they ſee circumſtances ſo 
miſtaken by Parents, and ſo altered by the Providence of God, as 
they may reaſonably judge, their Parents, bad they known or ſore- 
ſeen it, would nt have ſo adviſed. But that Parents have an abſo- 
lute power to determine Children in all things as to which God 
hath not forbidden thema,and tharChildren by theLaw of God are 
obliged to an Obedience to all ſuch Commands, however, they 
may fee their Parents miſtaken, or God by his Providence 
may have alcered Circumſtances, I ſee no »reaſon to conclude. 
Jonedab had prudently adviſed his Sons as before mentioned ; 
they were things they might do, and which by experience they 
tound not hurttul co them, but of grear profit and advantage, 
ard that with reference to all the ends of iMan's Life : Herein 
they yielded Obedience, and pay a Reverence to ther Parent ; 


houſe upon the faſting days : and alfo thou ſhalt 


read them in the ears of all Judah, that come out of 


their Cities. 

g We donot read that Jeremiah was a Priſoner in the fourth 
Year of Jehoiakim, and therefore it is very uncertainly gueſſed 
in what fence he here ſaith he wrt ps up. Some think Jehozakim 
had impriſoned him, ora leaſt reſtrained him to his Houſe, tho” 
we do not read of it. Others think he reſtrained h{tnſelf, but-in 
what ſence he was ſhut up is, not certain, That he was ſo {is cer- 
eain. He knew that God had not commanded his Prophecies to 
be written for any other end but that the People might have them 
reci]led to their Memories; he being not in a capacity himſelt 
at preſent to ſpeak any thing tothe People in ſo.publick a place 

ſendeth Barzch to do it in his ſtead, chuſing for ita Day of publick 
Faft, not the Day of the Yearly Feaſt mentioned Lev. 23. z7. bur 
on a Faſt Day (of which weſhall read more;Ver. g.) procliamed 
by Febojakim, probably toavere the Vengeance hanging over them 
from the Chaldeans, or rather fromthe drought. It was undoubt= 
edly, becauſe of the Concourſe of People which the Prophet 
knew would,that Day be in the Temple, that he choſe chat Day 


this pleaſech God, he promiſeth to reward them with the con- | 


when ſome would be preſent from all parts of Judah, 
- It 


Chap. XXXVI | 


nce of their Family, according to what he had laid, Exod. 
20, 12, in the Fifth Commandment, which the Apoſtle calleth 


i A ND it came to paſs in the fourth year of 


* Iſa. 8.1; 
2 Take theea * roll of a book b and write there-* Chap, : 


inall the words that I have ſpokenunto thee, againſt 3o. 2. 


from the day I ſpake unto thee, from the days of OP 


and * Baruch wrote from the mouth of Jeremiah a1] * Chap: 
the words of the LORD which he had ſpoken unto 45: ”* 


0% 
: Pg: 


o» 


, Ws. . fa { = 


« 
*, 
$2 3-4 


"0 


Cha 


== 4d[]o'2, 


> SA 


. 18 


IRE rvetr (pp 


cation f 


"3 4 0 {i > af a *& YT 
+[Te'2. 7 It may be they will preſent their ſupplication acquaine the King wich them. Same, if not il ofchele, provably 


® ir (4ppli- hefore the LORD, and will return every one from had been great Men in Feſtab's time, which was buc four or five 


| ; , | - ..,, Years before, and from him ſucked in io 
carion ſhall y;. evil way, for great is the anger, and the fury, Principles, .v hich ban tan he: Foeplynwts and Religious 


bp: {ill , , ; . . 
= that the LORD hath pronounced againſt this 17 And they asked Baruch, ſaying, Tell us now, 
people þ. FR, How didſt thou write all theſe words at his mouth s 7 
þ We had an expreſſion hike this, Ver. Fe teacheth = that , This now leemed but a rea!onable Queſtion, conlidering they 
that the only means to turn away God's fterce anger ready tO yr. he ſubſtance of what he had been Prophelying tor ſo ma-« 
ta;l upon People, is Prayer and Reformacion. ; . hy Years. Thething ſeemed ſtrange to the Princes, Prophets be- 
$ And Baruch the ſon of Neriah, did according ing not uſed to ſtudy and penfcheir Diſcourſes, bur to ſpeak them 


Lo all that Jeremiah the. prophet commanded him, extempore. | 
reading in = book of the words of the LORD, in! ,,73 Then Baruch agſiwered them, He pronunced 
the LORD's houſe. all theſe words unto me with his mouth, and I wrote 
. : 1 © Tehoj them with :-+ in the book r. 

9. And it came to paſs in the fifth year of Jehola-, , Th;, 114 not bur add to the Princes fear and amazement. 
chim, theSon of Joliah king of Judah, in the ninth, They muſt needs conceive that the thing was done from God, tor 
month that they proclaimed a faſt, before the LORD | without a ſpecial influence of God,it had been a thing impoſlible, 


| to all the peo- |fhat Feremiah ſhould have called to mind all that he had ſpoken 
co all the People in Jeruſalem, and P at ſevera] times in ſo many Years ; and proceeding from hs God 


ple that came from the cities of Judah unto Jeruſa- of Truth, they muſt needs fear, that they would have their cer- 
lem. , tain and juſt accompliſhment in their ſeaſon. 

i This yl was rings ___ a re — 19 Then faid the Princes unto Baruch, Go, hide 
ther ic was for a Famine which was then 1n the , the | : | ey 
the ruine which they juſtly feared from the king of Babylon,who rm Srongy, and Jeremiah, and let no man knory 


had lately brought them under his Servitude, is not certain 3 the ; : 
yearly Sy Fm 23. 27, wastobe kept in the ſeventh Month,nor | # This ſpeaketh- theſe Princes to have been Men of a muck. 


did God ever ordain any Faſt to be kept in the ninth Months gentler Temper, and better Diſpoſition,chan thoſe who ſucceed- 
ed them in Zedekiah's time ; they were not willing that any harm 


10 Then read Baruch in the book the words of[q,,41d come to the Prophet, nor to Beruch, and knew the fierce 
Jeremiah in the houſe ofthe LORD, 1n the chamber Temper of Feboiaghim, and therefore advit:d Baruch, that buck 
of Gemariah the ſon of Shaphan the ſcribe, in the| he and the Propher ſhould hide themſelves, 
higher court, at the * || entry of thenew gate off 30 And they went in to the king, into the court, 
. the LORD's houſe in the ears of all the people #. but they laid up the roll in the chamber of Eliſhama 
# 1 Or, door. h This verſe only atteſteth Baruch's Obedience to the Com-f thu fihe and told all the words in the cars of the 
. mand ol the Prophet Feremy, not only as to the —_ — king w 
"yy ws irc n as PUD11C 0- ; . . 
pt Ain FAR p = ET On - oft likely out| ,» They were obliged by their Office, as Councellors to the 
of ſome Window, or in ſome Balcow. the People being below, King, to acquaine him with what they heard, which might be 
or oebSbegg 3 , , prejudicial ro him, and his Nation ; and indeed this was the very 
I Ss : end why God had commanded the enrolling of theſe Prophecies, 
11 When Micaiah the ſon 6f Gemariah, the ſon| chat both the King and Princes, and People might take notice of 
of Shaphan had hcard out of the book all the words | them, burthey did not carry the Book with them, bur laid it up 
of the LORD in the Secretaries Chamber. | 
12 Then hewentdown into the king's houſe, intof 21 So the king ſent Fehndi to fet the roll, And he 
the ſcribes chamber, and lo all the princes fate there, | took it out of Eliſhama the ſcribes chamber, And Je- 
even Eliſhama the ſcribe, and Delaiah the ſon of She-| hudi read it inthe ears of the king, and in the earsof 
maiah the ſon of Shaphan, and Zedekiah the ſon of| all the princes which ſtood beſide the king x, 


: —— x It apeareti by V. 14. that this Fehudi was a Mefſenger com- 
Hananiah, and all the princes !. monly imployed by the King and Counci! ; him the King ſends 


Rag. _ 


a a.- Ys - 


Sets I WR We, 1>> 2 


eo ms 


ds 2x It 
Way: 4 Para 
Fog 


: . Bio os e this Rela- : 
1 It is uncertain whether this Micaiah went to make this | co fetch the R:1/, (before called a Book) then he imployeth him 


tion tothe Princes who ſate in the Secretaries Chamber, as a nan ys 
Piece of News only, or out of a malicious deſign to accuſe che . | " 
Prophet, and Baruch for what was done, as a ſeditious practice. } 22 Now the king ſate in the winter-bouſe -in the 


13 Then Micaiah declared unto them all the ninth month, and rhere was a fire on the hearth burn- 
words that he had heard when Baruchread the book | ing before him y. 


. Rs . Y The Ninth Month with them anſwered part of our Nover-+ 
——_— ed ore? on. my. e words, for none can imagine ber and December, which was a time of the Year called for Fires. 
that an hearer could remember every word, which ſhews theſ 23 And it came to paſs that when Jehudi had 
_— of thole -=_ ar yo _ univerſal Particles to ſignt- read three or four leaves, hez, cut it with a Nenh- knife, 
FEREF PRCTICHINE WOrG CF PETERG and caſt :t into the fire, that was on the hearth, until 
14 Theretore all the princes » ſent Jehudi the ſon _ 4 Artn, 
of Nethaniah, the ſon of Shelemiah the ſon of Cuſhi "ogg was confumed ia the fire that was on the 
pl] 


a B aruch, ſaying, Take in thy hand the roll, 2 That is, the King not having patience to hear above three 
wherein thou haſt read 1n the ears of the people, and or tour Columns, or Periods, or Titles, took the Pen-knife that 
cone. So Baruch the ſon of Neriah, took the roll| (it is like) Fehud had, and cut it in pieces, and burned it in the 
in his hand, and came unto them. | fire that —_ —_— _ —_— m it ie on 
, : : . in Coun-| *i0n of the Will © , but exalcing himſelf above all that was 

n That is, all the Princes that at that time ſate there 1 called God. This tid ak the wickedneſs and palkanare Tour: 


4 1 h to appear be- . -nere . 
es ger hs Command 1 Hh co Fre oft Pres ard hi ghcomeng of Goda ns: 
ets. 


the People. 
24. Yet they were not afraid, nor * rent their, , Kings 


15 And they faid unto him, Sit down now, and ; | 
read it in our ears. So Baruch read it in their|garments, neither the king nor any of his ſervants ,,, xx. 
, that heard all theſe words 4. 


Ears P. , 
P H he courage of Baruch is admirable ; he was now before] _ £ So har dened were this People Hearts,that though they knew 
the Council, in the King's Houle, the ſubſtance of the Prophectes, that Feremiah was a Prophet of the Lord, upon theexperience 
were threatning both to the king, and Court, andto all the Peo-| 10W of more than 20 years, and the whole ſcope of his Prophe- 
ple. The king as appears by all Hiſtory, was of no good Tem-|C1e5 had been to denounce the juſt judgments of God that now 
per, we read Chap. 26.Ver.23. of his ſending for #rijah the Pro-| Were coming upomthis People, and they could _ but under- 
pher out of Egypt when he had fled thither for fear of the King, | ſtand, that God mult be greatly aſſiſtant ro Feremiah in writing 
and flaying him, and we ſhall find that art this time, the Princes | this Roll, all the matter of whicl1 he could not otherwile have 
adviſed both Feremy and Baruch to hide themſelves, ryet Baruch, kept in mind fo many Yeats, yet they had no ſerious fear of God 
is not afraid, but reads the Prophecy in their Ears: upon their hearts, working upon the hearing the dr eadful mat- 
: ter of theſe Prophecies, nor ſhewed any ſign of remorſe, or ſence 


16 Now itcame to paſs, when they had heard all' of their fins, or God's Judgments coming upon them as indica- 


! 


the words, they were afraid both one and other 9, tions of his Wrath. ; 
and faid to Baruch, we will ſurely tell the king of; 25 Nevertheleſs Elnathan, and Delaiah, and Ge- 
all theſe words r. | \ mariah, had made interceſſion to the king, that he 


q It is hardly to be imagined that all theſe Counſellors ſhould wonld not burn the roll, but he would not hear 
ſit ſtill till they had heard all Feremiah's Prophecies for 22 Years them þ., | X 
read, but all ſignifies many ; or the ſence and ſubſtarice of allthej ' ,, Theſe three Princes ſeemed to have had a greater drea1 of 
Prophecies. r They are all of them afraid. Feremiab had now | 5,1 upon their hearts than the reſt, for fo tar asthey durſt,clity 
been above twenty Years a Prophet to this People,and doubtleſs | ;... poſed, and beſought the King not to burn the Roll ; bur he 
in great eſteem for 18 Years of it, while Fofiab wasalive, and one | ,,.1114 nothearken to their advice. 
—_— Fn they WTI _ —_— _ m_ -— _—_— 26 But the king commanded Jerameel the ſon of 
Pltityed ; therefore they cold not but be atraid tnat teney mou . E 1 bs 
lee theſe words allo fufilled,andtook themſelves bound in Duty to | Hammelech and Seraiah the fon of Azriel, —_— ook ef he 


Chap. KXA VI 


* Chap. 


2, I'S. 


+ Heb. 


VI /at won 


, + D; . 
T i Te i”, 


PIE IA40 


. 7, 
FERE 
lemiah the ſon of Abdeel, to take Baruch the ſcribe, 


and Jeremiah the prophet c : Burt the LORD hid 
them 4. | 


ve King was not ſatisfied with burning the Roll, but gives | 
3nd = þ of the 1and, did hearken to the words of the LORD 
ow b which he ſpake by + the Prophet Jeremiah 4. F Heb. 
Providence kept them both ont of rheir hands. How the Lord 
kid them weare not told, the Princes as (we read before) adviſed ! 
Baruch that they ſhould both hide themſelves. This Phrate (prob- ! 


order to apprehend both Feremizh and Buruch, and commandeth 
the three Perſons named 1n this verſeto do it : 4 But God by his 


ably) imports no more, than that God directed them to find ſuch 
a place of recels as the Kings Meſſengers could by -no means find 
out nor unde: ſtand where they were, till the King's Paſlion was 
a little over. 


27 Then the word of the LORD came to Jere- 
miah after that the king had burnt the roll, and the 
words which Baruch wrote at the month of Jeremiah, 
ſaying, 

28 Take thee again another roll, and write in it 
21l the former words that were in the firſt roll which 
Jehoiakim the king of Judah hath burnt. 


29 And thou ſhalt ſay to Jehotakim, king of Ju- 
dah, Thus faith the LORD, Thou haſt burat this 
roll, ſaying, Why haſt thou written therein, ſaying, 
The king of Babylon ſhall certainly come and deltroy 
this land, and ſhall caule to ceaſe from thence man 


and bealt e ? ; 

e It ſpeaketh nothing but the Impotency, and Paſhon, and de- 
bauchery of humane Nature, - to ſwell againſt any Revelations of 
the Divine Will. The Countels of the Lord ſtall ſtand, and Men 
only further entangle themſelves by fſtrugling in the Lord's Net. 
Tehoitkim burns one Roll, God will have the ſame thing wrote in 
another, f We learn here both what was the matter of Feremiah's 
Prophecy, and rhe caule of the king's anger ; he had propheft'd 
that the Ring of Babylon ſhould come, take Feruſalem, and lay 
the Country waſte, which as to Jehotakims part was fulfilled 
within fix years after this, more fully in 18 Years, but corrupt 
Princes can indure nothing that ſhall make their lives uneafie, 


39 Therefore thus ſah the LORD of Jehoiakim 
the king of Judah, He ſhall have none to {it upon 
the throne of David f, and his dead body ſhall be * 
caſt out in the day to the heat, and in the night to 
the froſt g. 


f That is, none that ſhall be King any conſiderable time, Fe- 
coniah, or Fehoigchin his ſon was ſet up, but kept his Throne but 
three Months, 2 Kjirg.24.8, 9,10. g We no where read of the 
time or manner of this king's Death, but that he had an ignomi- 
nions Burial, Chap. 22. 19. like the Burial ot an Aſs ; none ac. 
company ing, his Corps, none mourning tor him, and it appears 
trom this Text, that where-eyer he dyed, his Body lay tor a 
time unburied, 


31 And I will F puniſh him, and his ſeed, and 
his ſervants, for their iniquity,and I will bring upon 


them, and vpon the Inhabitants of Jeruſakm, and, 


upon the Men of Judah, all the evil that I have pro- 
nounced azainſt them, but they hearkned not h. 

h As to the People God tiareatneth, they ſhould fee), what 
ney were not wil.ing to tear, even al] the evil which God by 
his Prophet had pronounced againſt them. 

39 Then took Jeremiah another roll, and gave 
it to Baruch, the ſcribe, the fon of Neriah, who wrote 
rherein from the mouth of Jeremiah all the words of 
the book, wiuch Jjehotakim the king of Judah, had 
burnt in the fire, and there were added beſides unto 
them many + like words z, 

i Wicked Men get nothing by oppoſing themſelves to the re. 
vealed W:ll of God, how ungrateful foever it be to them, but 
the 2ddition of guilt to their Souls, and the increaſe of Divine 
Wrath, God's Counſels ſhall ſtand, and what he ſpeaks ſhall moſt 
certainly be accompliſhed. Here 1s another Roll written with ad- 
&itional Threatnings confirmative of what God had before ſaid. 


CHAP. XXXVIL 


Te Fey ptians raiſe the Siege of the Chaldeans: And King Zede- 
kiah ſent to Jeremiah, to pray and enquire of the Lord for them, 
1 ——=5. He propheſzed the Chaldeans Return and Vidory, 
6 ———10, He is apprehended for a Fugitive, beaten, and 
put into Priſon, x1 15. He aſſureth Zedekiah of the 
Captiviiyz an, intreating {or Liberty , obtaineth ſome Favour, 


I ———T, 


[ ND king Zedekiah the ſon of Joſjah 4, 
reigned inſtead of Coniah b the ſon of Jcho- 
iakim, whom Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon made 
king in the Land of Judah c. 
« The Hiſtory of this Succeſſion we have, 2 Kings 24. 17. 
2 Chroy, 36. 10. Zedekiah's Name was Mattaniab, the King of 
Babylon cnanged his Name ro Zedekiah. b He reigned in ſtead 
of Fehojachin, the fon of Febotachim who reigned but three 
months, 2 Kings 24. 8. his Name was feconiah, 1 Chron. 3. 16. 
and ina way of derifion or contempr.is here called theConiah.cThe 
King of Bbylon made this Zedekiah King, who is here called the 


A | \ 7 | 
M14 H Chap. XXXV1, a Ch 
Sen of Joſiah, and 2 Kings 24. 17. Jeboakhim's Father's Brother, = 
to diſtinguiſh !him trom another Zedekiah Son of Jehoiakim, as « 
appears from 1 Chron. 3. 16. Li 
2 But ncither he nor his ſervants, nor the people 
+ Heb. 
mae t 
aſcend. 
j Or, 1 
ſlip an 
from th 
in thi 
midſt 0 
p?eple. 


by the bar; 


4 This Zedekiah was little better than Jehojakim,j He ſeemeth of theprot! 


by his Story to be of a little better Temper, nor ſo cruel and 
bloody ; but he no more regarded God's word by his Prophet 
than J:horakim had done. 


3 And Zedekiah t':e king ſent Jehucal, the ſon of 
Shelemuah, and * Zephaniah the ſon of Maaſeiah the * Chay, 
prieſt, to the prophet Jeremiah, ſaying, Pray now un- z9. 25. | 
to the LORD our God for us c. and 52.4. þ 

e This was apparently in the time of the Siege, for v. 5. we | 
read of Pharaoh's Army deing come to relieve the Beſigged. Whe- 
ther it was before the Babylonians were departed,or no, 15 ur.cer- 
rain ; but it is plain, if they were departed, the King was afraid 
they would come back again. That which is moſt oblervable for we 
us from hence, is this, That wicked Men of all ranks are defirous as 
of the Prayers of thoſe Miniſters in their Diſtreſſes, whoſe Coun- i 
ſels and Admonitions they never regard while they are-in a time 
of proſperity ; which is an Evidence of their aRing contrary ta 
the convictions of their Conſciences, in obedience to their Luſts, 
in their contempt of their Inſtructions and Admonitionss When 
Afiction hath cooled their Luſts. then their Coniciences can be 
heard in diftating their Duty to them. 


4 Now Jeremiah came in, and went out amonepft oY 
the people, for they had not put him into pri- = 3 
ſon f. ML 

f We ſhall readafterward, ver. i5.that he was impriſoned, | I 
and we have heard chap. 32. of two Revelations he had while he 
was in priſon, but as yet he walked at liberty. 


5 Then Pharaot's army was come forth out of 
Egypt, and * when the Chaldeans that beſieged Jeru- - 
ſalem heard tidings of them, they departed from Je- « Chap: 
rulalem g. | 

g Zedehiah was ſet up by the Ring of Babylon. inſtead of Je- 
bezakim, whom the King of Babylon had carried into Babylon, 
Zedekiah (as is uſual in thoſe caſes, and as it appeareth, Exzk. 17. 
16.) had taken an Oath of Allegiance to the King of Babylon, bur 
brake it, and the Covenant which he made with him,ver. 16. and F 
ver. 15. rebelled againſt him, and ſent bis Ambaſſador into Egype 
for Horſes and much People, Now the King of Egypt came in 
Perion no more after the great overthrow given him in Car- 
chemiſh by the River Euphrates, of which we read, chap. 46. 2. | 
which was thirteen or fourteen years before this ; yet he ſent an SES T Heb. 
Army at Zeeki2h's requeſt to relieve him, at this time beſieged 2% falſhoo; 
by the Arms of the King of Babylon. The CholJeans that were Dh a lye. 
ta the Stege of Jeruſalem hearing of it, raiſed the Siege for a time, 47 
during which time (probably) it was that Zedekiah ſent to the 
Prophet to pray for them. 


6 Then came the word of the LORD to the pro- 


34+ 21» 


phet Jeremiah, ſaying, mt 
7 Thus faith the LORD, the God of Iſrael, Thus N 
ſhall ye fay to the king of Judah that ſent you unto eb 
me, to enquire of meh, Behold Pharaoh's Army 'N 
which 1s come forth to help you, ſhall return to E- FR 
gypt into their own land 7. We 
þ The word Enquire let 1s know that Zedekiah did not ſend to 'Y 
the Prophet only to pray tor him, but | to enquire of God what NI 
iflue would be of this future contingency ; It may be more de- tg 
firous to know that, than that Jeremiah ſhould intercede with Ne 
God for them, iThe Prophet tells them from God that the Kivg 
of Egypt's Army ſhould do them no ſervice; Ir is expounded, 
Exek. 17. 17. He ſhould not make for bim in the war, by caſting up 
Mounts, and building Forts, to cut off many Perfons. Probably 
the Egyptian Army upon the fight of the flrength of the Chalde- 
ans, and the weak and impotent ſtate of the Jews, were difcou- 


raged, and would not adventure to fight them, but by and by 
returned to their own Land. 


8 And the Chaldeans ſhall come again, and fight 
againft this city, and take it, and burn it with fire. 


9 Thus ſaith the LORD, deceive not your -þ + 14es, 
ſelves, ſaying, The Chaldeans ſhall ſurely depart Souls 
trom us, for they ſhall not depart. 


10 For though ye had ſmitten the whole army of 

the Chaldeans, that fight againſt you, and there re- 

mained | br wounded men among them - yer ould ; 14.1, 

they riſe up every man 11 his tent, and burn this city thruſt 

with fire k&. through. 
k The {ubſtance of the Anſwer returned by the Prophet tothe 

King is this. That whereas they plexfed themſelves with Fancies 

that the Babylonian Army now withdrawn to meet with the Army 

of the Egyptians would return po more to the Siege ; it was a 

Dream. He afſures them from God they ſhould return, beſjege 

the City and take it, and burn it, and cherefore they did bur de- 

ceive themſelves to think otherwiſe;tho'they were gone, yet it was 

but for a very fhort time. He farther afſures them,that the poten- Os 

cy or impntency of the Chalderns was inconfiderable ; for it their ED 

whole Army were mace up of wounded mn, or if they could pre- nw; 

vail ſofar as to wound all their Souldiers, or thruſt them through, 


(as tae word 1s tranſlated, chap, 5r. 4.) yet they ſhould do the 9M 
Work. RY 


+ Heb. 


aſcend. 


mm the 


+ Heb. 


- 


T4 a lye. 


4 Chap. RXRX VII 


made 10 


j| Or, 9 £ 
[ou _ thence in the midlt of the People /. 
rom 


midft of the ſoften, 


falſhood or away to the Chaldeanso : But he hearkned not unto 


, q | 

ork. When God is reſolved up5n an Effect, the Inſtruments 

—— little to be regarded. I is not the Arm of Fleſh, buc the 
Power of God which is in that caſe alone to be conſidered. 


11 And it came to paſs, that when the Army 
of the Chaldeans was - broken up from Jeruſalem 
for fear of Pharaoh's Army, : 

12 Then Jeremiah went forth ont of Jeruſalem to 
go into the Land of Benjamin, || to ſeparate himſelf 


[ PILM, The Word we tranſlate ſeparate ſignifieth to divide, 
or make ſlippery, which hath made Interpreters vary 10 the 
Expoſition of it. Burt the general uſe of ir, eſpecially in Pihel, 
(the conjugation n which 1s here uſed) being to fignifie a diwi 
dizz or ſeparating ; and the Jatter fgnification being ſecondary, 
it ſzemeth moſt reaſonably here tranſlated to ſeparate, or to with- 
draw: Feremiah had no farther Revelation from God, which he 
has under an Obligation to communicate ; and knowing the City 
would ſuddenly be taken, and that he could be no farther uſe- 
ful to the People, taking Advantage of the withdrawing of the 
Chaldean Army, reſolves to provide for himſelf, deſigning to go 
to his own Country, to Anathoth, which was 1n the Land of Ben- 
jamin ; and becauſe he was a noted Perſon, who might probably 
be ſtopt (as be was) if known, he attempts to flip out in the 
crowd of People that were going out ; this ſeemethco me the moſt 
probable lence. 

13 And when he was in the Gate of Benjamin m2 
a Captain of the Ward w.# there, whoſe Name was 
Irijah, the Son of Shelemiah, the Son of Hananiah z, 
and he took Jeremiah the Prophet, ſaying, Thou 


falleſt away to the Chaldeans. 

m The Gate of Benjimin was ſome Gate that looked toward 
the Inheritance of that Tribe : Or where thoſe uſed to go out who 
went that way ; we read of it, chap. 38. 7. n This Man was a 
Captain ofthe Guard that was ſet to watch at the Gates, to keep 
People from going out, or at leaſt ſome Perſons; for it ſhould 
feem by Feremiah's endeavour to go out in the Crowd, they ſuf. 
fered many to go our, as is uſual in Sieges, when Victuals grow 
ſcarce ;and though the Chaldeans were at preſent gone, yet they 
were not out of tear of their coming back. This Captain appre- 
hends Feremiah, as one who was about to deſert the City, and 
fall off to the Challeans, That Hananiah the Grandfather of , 


FEREMIAH 


S:ege of the City > What needed Z-1:hi2h to have asked this, to 
whom God by this Prophet had ſo often revealed his Will in this 
cale? Wicked Men are always more curious to know. than care- 
ful to believe, obſerve, and obey the Will of God. / Bur God 
leJiom or never lpexketh good unto them, F-remizth tells him 
cere was, but it was a ſail word, wit. That God would certainly 
deliver him into the hand or power of the King of Bubzlon, 


18 Moreover, Jeremiah ſaid unto King Zedekiah 
What have I offended againft thee,or againſt thy Ser- 
vants, or againſt this people, that ye have pur in 
priſon t ? | 

t That is, what have I done worthy of Bonds? T have faithfully 
heretofore revealed to you the Mind and Will of God ; it this 


nath offended you, I am not co be blamed ; I could not bur exe- 
cute God's Commands. 


_ I9 Where arenow your Prophets, which Prophe- 
ted unto you, ſaying, The King of Babyloi ſhall nor 
come againſt you, nor again{t this Land « ? 

« You now fee what kin of Prophets they are who fed you 
with hopes that the King of Babylon's Army ſhould return no 
moretothe Siege of the City. I told you they would return; you 
had other Prophets that told you they ſhould not judge,now who 
were the true Prophets. The Devil in all Ages had ſome that con» 
cradicted the true Prophets of the Lore : Three hundred falſe Pro- 
phets contradifted one Mic4izh, as to Abab's g01ng upto Ramoth 
G:lead, and profpering in that Expedition. There were many that 
contradicted Iſaiah and Feremiah, and other true Prophets, as to 
the King of Babylon's coming to befiege Hieruſalem, and his re- 
turn again to the Siege waen he had riſen up from it, to mzet the 
Egyptian Army ; and as to the length of time in which the Fews 
thouid be in Captivity ; yet, ( to jer us fee Mens madnels upon 
their Luſts ) as there ſtill have riſen up in other Generations, talſe 
Teachers, and Flatterers, f'» they have always found more favour 
_ thoſe that have dealt more faithfully in revealing God's 

111» 


20 Therefore hear now I pray thee, O my Lord 


the King w, | let my Suyplication I pray thee be ac- + Heb. /t 
cepted before thee ; that thou cauſe me not to re- my ſapplicd- 
turn to the houſe of Jonathan the Scribe, leſt I die #97 ſalt. 


there x. 
w Though Feremith had dealt very faithfully with the King 


this Irijah, was the falſe Prophet we read of, chap. 28. who died \and Princes, and they had dealt very hardly and cruelly with him, 
according to Feremiah's Prophecy, and this hls Grandchild ap- |caſting him tor no juſt cauſe into a naſty Priſon, and F-rzmiz> 
prehended Feremiah in ſome revenge of his Grandfather, is but | knew well engugh that Zedekizh was very ſoonto be difarmed of 


uncertainly gueſſed. But Feremiah's ſo frequent propheſying 
chat the Chaldeans ſhould take the City, expoſed him to this 
ſuſpicion probably. 


14 Then ſaid Jeremiah, 7: zz Þ falſe, I fall not 


him. So Irijah took Jeremiah, and brought him to 


the Princes. 
Though Feremiah, as the Lord's Prophet, faithfully revealed 
the Will of God, that the Chaldeans ſhould take the City, to 


warn the People ( if poſſible ) to prevent it by ſolemn Addrefl-s 


his power, yet (to learn us our duty) he ſpeaks with all due reſpect 
and reverence to his Soveraign, though a very bad Man, an one 
who had dealt very il with him. x This Petition of Feremiah, 
ſpeaks the Priſon he was in, was ina very inconvenient place, 
Where he was in danger of his Life. 


21 Then Zedekiah the King commanded that they 


ſhould commit Jeremiah inro * che court of the Pri- * Chap, 
ſon y, and that they ſhould give him daily a piece of 32-3 


bread our of the bakers ſtreet, until ail the bread 1n 


} - = < * | -# 1 . = . 
unto God, or at leaſt to prevent what miſchiet might be preven-| tbe City were ſpent z. Thus Jeremiah remained 1n 


ted by a timely Surrender to the King of Babylon, yet he had no! the court of the Prifon #. 


defign to fly to them ; he was fo far from delighting in their com- 

pany, that when the City was taken, and the Captain of the Guard 
offered him either to go along with him to Bubylon, promiſing 

to look well to him, Chap. 40. 4,5. Or to go back to Gedaliah, 
whom the King of Babylon had left as Deputy Governour in Fudea, 
he choſe rather to go and dwell under Gedaliah's Government ina 
poor condition,than to mend his Commons in an Idolatrous Coun- 
try, but the Captain would not believe him but carrieth him be 

fore the Princes» 


15 Wherefore the Princes were wroth with Jere- 
miah, and ſmote him, and put him in priſon, in the 
houſe of Jonathan the Scribe; for they had made 


that the Priſon p. 

p Thele Princes ſeem more fierce againſt the Propher than thoſe 
that were in the time of Fehorakim, for they proceed here upon 
the Captain's Information, caule the Prophet to be beaten, and 
ſend him to Priſon, a Prifon within the compaſs of the Courrt, 
bad enough, as appeareth by Feremiah's Complaint of his Condi- 
tion there to the King, Yer. 20. and by what followeth in the 
next Verſe. 


16 Þ When Jeremiah was entred iato the Dun- 


} Or,6/l7.peon, and into the || Cabins, and Jeremiah had re- 


mained there many days 9, | 

q The Hebrew Words which we Tranſlate Dungeon, fignifie the 
bouje of the lah? ; they certainly ftgnifie fome Pit, or deep hole, 
or place in the Priſon, where were ſome Cells or Apartments, in 
which they were wont to keep thoſe whom they judged great Ma- 
lefaCtors, or againſt whom they had ſome ſpecial anger. How ma- 
ny days the Prophet was forced to abide in this miſerable place it 
js not ſaid, but it ſhould ſeem by Yerſe 19. that it was until the 
Chaldean Army was returned to the Siege. 


17 Then Zedekiah the King ſent and took him 
out, aud the King asked him ſecretly in his houſe, and 
ſaid, Is there any word from the LORD-y ? and Jere- 
miah ſaid, There is : for, ſaid he, thou ſhalr be deli- 
vered 1nto the hand of the King of Babylon /. 


r That is, Hath God revealed any thing to thee, concerning 
_m - be the iflue of the return of the Chaldean Army tothe 
'. "ſs: 


y So as he was a Priſoner {ti1!, but in a freer Air, where he did 
not ſuffer thoſe Inconvenieaces which he endwed in the Hole or 
Dungeon. 7 lt is of no great moment to know whether the por- 
tion of Bread aliowed the Prophet by the King, were a Loaf ( as 
ſome think ) or a piece of a Loaf; ir was ſuch a proportion as 
could be allowed according to the proportion which others had, 
and the ſtraits which the City was in,and ſo much as ſerved to keep 


him alive. 4 Feremiah remained here till upon the Suggeſtion oi 
the Princes, he was removed toa worſe place, as we ſhall 1ead4 
inthe ſixth Verſe of the next Chapter ; where he ſtaid not long, 
but was again removed to the Court of the Priſon. as we ſhall 
read there, Verſe 13. where (as it followeth there Yerſe 28. ) lie 
continued until the City was taken. 


CH A P. XXXVIII. 


Jeremiah Propheſyeth ; & by the Princes, with the Kinz's Pevr- 
miſſion, caſt into a Dungeon ; but i by Ebed-melech, »#h 
the King's Conſent, taken out again, 1, — 13. He hath 4 
ſecret Conference with the King, in which he counſclLeth lim 
by yielding to fave his Life, 14, —— 23. By theKing's Comman4 
be concealeth the Conference from the Princes, 24, —— 27. He 
abideth in Priſon till Jeruſalem js taken, 2e, 


, TY Shephatiah the Son of Mattan, and Geda- 
y fy 
liah the Son of Paſhur, and Jucal the Son 0: 
Shelemiah, and Paſhur the Son of Malchiah, heard the 
words that Jeremiah had ſpoken to all the People, 
ſaying a, | 
4 Here are four of the Great Men, Counce!lors, or Great 
Officers to Zedekiah named, of whom we have no further men- 
tion in Holy Writ, nor are they worthy of much Inguiry after ; 
Feremiah being now removed into a little freer Air, where his 
Friends, or ſuch as had a defire to fee him, came to him, and 
is very likely were inquiſitive to know what God would do wit! 


God in the Caſe, and adviſe them the beſt he could. Some of 
them go to thele Princes, and inform thers of what they had 


heard from the Prophet, 
2 Thus 


L L--1 


Chap. XXX VIIL 


the City,he could not bur tell them what he knew of the Mind of - 


v7 err wr 


mY 


wage *%. 


_ 


5 GS. PRES ES Lites 
Oo rt a Sig Toe nor em IE 
ww - 

* - 


mW 
Po mY med | . 
p of On 
+ 26a 


oor, HE" 
*'& ar % han; ” 


moe I Ire eee ary wane," ns Fo 
a_— ” 144 


Chap. XXXVIII 


+ Heb. 


Peace. 


Or, of 
the King. 


* Chap. 
29.16, 


FEREMIAH 


> Thus faith the LORD, He that remaiaeth injthat they have done to Jeremiah the Prophet, whom 


tis City ſhall dye by the ſword, by the famine, andithey calt inco the dungeon, and Þ hes like to die + Heh, 
by the peſtilence, but he that goeth forth to the Chal-ſfor hunger in the place where he 1s, for there 75 nowill dye. 


4; dye Mol pn, 
deans ſhall live : for he ſhall have his Life for a prey, |more bread in the City /. 
and ſhall live 6. ; ! The courage of this good Eunuch was very remarkable, he 
b As to what is Verſe 3. it is no more than had for ſome time !aid not ſtay till che King came in, but went ro the King, as he 
been the conſtant renour of this Prophet's Prophecies. The Crime |was titting in the Gate of Benjamin, adminiſtring Juſtice, or re- 
ſ-emeth to lie in this, that in ſuch a time of extream danger, he (ceiving and anſwering Peritions,where coubrieis he was not alone, 
ſhould repeat this Prophecy, and allo adviſe the People to leave and pcobably was atrended there by ſome of thole Princes, who 
the City, and ſhift for themielves, by going out to rhe Chaldeans, had thrown Feremiah into this milerable place : Ebe4melech was 
telling them that if they did fo, though che City would be loſt, and not atraidof them, but openly complains ot their Cruelry to the 
their Eſtates in it loſt, yet they ſhould ſave their Lives, which King, and tells him chat Feremiah would be ſtarved to ceath, 
words mightencourage many of low and cowardly {pirits tO defert |thole who were alive in the City could no longer jubfilt, tor the 
their Poſts ; which indeed had been Crime ſufficient 1n an ordinary |Stores were almoſt all ſpent, and though the King had appointed 
time, and under ordinary Circumſtances, but was no Crime now 'the Prophet an allowance, yer being 1n luch an hole, and there 
that God had revealed his Will tothe King, Princes and People, 'being fo little Bread letc in the City, it was not likely there would 
that the City ſhould be loſt : There lay now no iurther Duty upon be much care taken of him, 


) ; OY : | 
2nv to contribute to its defence, but they were obligec: to make as : | 
good Proviſions for themſelves as they could ; but theie wicked | 10 Then the King commanded Ehedmelech the 


Princes believed no ſuch thing, theretore they make this a great Ethiopian, {faying, Take from : hence thirty Men f Heb. in 
'{ with thee, and take up Jeremiah the Prophet out ne band, 


Charge. : 
3 Thus ſaith the LORD, This city ſhall ſurely be of the Dungeon before hedye 
given into the hand of the King of Babylon's Army, | mThere are ſeveral Gueſſes why the King commandeth Ezedme- 
which ſhall take ir. | tech tO _ thirty "_ _ - _ - _ --o —agrvardg or tour 
+ wo % .'s . were ſufficient. I think they judge beſt, who think it was to 
4 Therefore the Princes ſaid unto the King, We gi1ard him againſt any eos. " hings were now in a great 
beſeech thee let this man be put to death : for thus he diſorder, the City being upon the matter taken, and the King 
weakneth the hands of the men of War that remain ' himſelf was much in the Government of his Princes, and, as may 


in this City, and the Hands of all the People in ſpeak- eaſily be judged by what went before,and what we ſhall hereafter 


- | | not i was in ſome fear of the 
ing ſuch words unto them : for this man ſeeketh not T7 with, could not rule them, but was in ſome fear of them, 


4 my = and he did not know but fome of the moſt boitterous of them, 

the -#- welfare of this People, but the hu L Ce Imight oppole the execution of this Command of his. This King 
c The Prophet now ſeemeth under fad Circumſtances, the; hjs whole Story {eemeth ro have been of a much better humouc 
Princes ſeek his Life, though for delivering no other Doctrine .1n this Predecefors, and to have hada kindneſs for the Propher, 
than he had been preaching for 20 years; their pretence was, his 'though he ſuffered himſelf ro be miterably over-ruled by his 
diſcouraging aud weakening the military part of the City, lecting Cur.jers, who were of a much fiercer Temper, and worle at- 


Chap. XXX VII 


them know that they laboured in vain, for the City was not defen- 
fible. This tkey interpret a feeking not the welfare of che People, 
but their kurt, though indeed their welfare was that alone which 
he ſought, knowing that there was no other way for any of them 
ro ſave their Lives, but by ſubmitting to the Chaldeans; though 
the great Men (being Perſons God had determined to ruine) 
would not believe it, and would have the welfare and hurt of the 
place determined by their Opinions. 


s Then Zedekiah the Ring faid, Behold, he is in 


fected to the Prophet. 


11 So Ebedmelech took the Men with him, and 
weit into the hoaſe of the King under the Treaſury, 
and took thence old calt clouts, and o1d rotten rags, 
and let tnem down by cords 1ato the dungeon to [e- 
remiah,. 

12 And Ebedmelech the Ethiopian ſ4id unto Je- 


your hand 4, for the King zs not he that can do ay 
thing againſt you. 

4 That is, in your power; either by the Eſtabliſhed Law againſt 
falſe Prophets, or elſe I yield up my power to you, I ſurrender 
him into your hands. But neither of theſeſeemeth very probable, 
tor here is no mention of the ſitting of the Sarhedrim to judge him 
as a falſe Prophet, nor of any judicial proceedings of that Nature : 
And it ſhould ſeem by Zedekzab's relieving of him ſoon after from 
the Dungeon ; into-which they threw him, that had not ſurren- 
dred Feremiah ſo into their hands, but he reſerved to himſelf a ſu- 
perintendency upon them to correct their too ſevere dealings with 
him. The meaning ſeems rather to be, If you will do any luch 
thing, I ſhall not oppoſe you, but I will not be the Author ot ir. 
el ſeelam as it were no King, I can do nothing againſt you, 
you will do what you pleate. I incline to this ſence from the con- 
fideration of the favour ſ{:2wed him by Zedektiab both before, and 
after this. 


6 Then took they Jeremiah, and caſt him 1nto the 
dungeon of Malchiah the Son of || Hammelech that 
was 1n the court of the priſon 4: and they let down 
Jeremiah with cords e. And in the dungeon there w.s 


no water but mire, ſo Jeremiah ſank in the mire; 

d A place much of the ſame nature witk that of which we read, 
Chap. 37. 16. but in another Priſcn. e It ſhould ſeem there was 
10 paſtage into it by Stairs,ſo as they were forced to let him down 
with Cords. f And in the bottom was nothing but Mire, into 
which the Prophet lank, in repect of which circumſtances, it was 
a much worſe place than the Dungeon in the Priſon, in Jonathan's 
Houſe appeared to be, though Jeremiah feared that he ſhould dye 
there. I: is probable thele Princes thruſt him into this place, de- 
fgning ke ſhould die in this hole a miſerable Death, but God o- 
therwiſe provided for him. 


7 Þ Now when * Ebedmelech the Ethiopian g, 

one of the Funuchs which was 1n the Kings Houfe þ, 
heard that they had put Jeremiah in the dungeon z, 
{the King then fitting inthe Gate of Benjamin ) k. 
_ g Ebedme!ech was unqueſtionably the Name of the Perſon, tho' 
ſome 1nterp:et it appellatively a Servant of the King. It is parti 
cularly note'l that he was an Erþ;opian or a Cuſhite, to let us know 
that this Prophet of the Lord found more kindnets from a ſtran- 
zer that was a Native Heathen, than from his own Country- 
men. 0 Princes were wont to keep Eunuchs in their Houſes in 
thoſe Countries, 2 Kings 9. 32. Dan.1.9. Aﬀs 8.27. It ſhould 
ſeem the Princes had privately put Feremiah into this miſerable 
place, but yet the noiſe of it came to Ebedmelech's Ear, who was 
attending in the Court. k The Gates of che City were places 
where Princes were wont to fit to execute Juſtice, and to receive 
Petitions, aud give Anſwers, 2 Sam. 19. 8. Prov. 31. 32,09. 


8 Ehcedmelech went forth out of the King's houſe, 
and ſpake to the King, ſaying, 
9 My Lord the King, theſe men havedone evilin all 


remiah, Put now ze/e old caſt clouts, and rotten rags 
under thine arm holes, under the cords. And Jere- 
mMiah 1d fo. 

| 13 So they drew up Jeremiah with cords, and took: 
him up out of the dungeon, and Jeremiah remained 
in the court of the pritoa z. 

2 The lence of tne Verſes is obvious. Ebedmelech having re- 
ceived a Commitlion trom the King pretent!y puts it in execution, 
only becaule the Dungeon was deep, and tull of mire, and the 
Prophet pollidly not .over well cloathed, he prudencly takes 
l0:ne 01d Clouts, and Rags, and let them down with Cords, that 
Jeremiah to prevent the galling and macerating his fleſh, might pur 
chem under che Cords by which they drew him up : Thus he was 
reitored ro the Court of the Priſon, where he was before the luge 
geſtion of the Priaces, an4 where he did abide until che Ciry was 
taken. The reſt ot tne Chapter is (pear ina private Conference 
berwixt King iZedekiah and the Prophzt, atter he was reſtored ro 
the Court of the Priſon, | 


14 Y Then Zedekizh the King ſent, and took Je- 
remiah the Prophet unto him into the || third entry 
chat zs 1n The Houſe of the LORD o; and the Kin 
{aid unto Jeremiah, Il will ask thee a Ling : hide no- 
thing trom me p. 


o Some think thar this were better Tranſlated, that is near the 
houſe of the Lord, and that this third Entry or prancifal Emry, was 
that aſcent out 0} the King's houſe into the Temple, mentioned 
1 Kzngs 10.5. Which was one of the things the Quren of Sheba 
admired, tor 1t 15 hardly probable, that Feremiah being in a Pri- 
lon within the compals of the King's Houſe, the King ſhould, eſ- 
pecially at luch a time, go out of his Houle to ſo publick a place 
as the Temple, tor a private Conjerence with the Prophet. p Tie 
King deſires him taithtully to cell him what he knew in a Buſinets 
he thould enquire of him, 


15 Then Jeremiah ſaid unto Zedekiah, if I declare 
24 unto thee, wilt thou not ſurely put me to death? 
and if I give thee counſel, wilt thou not hearken un- 
come 7 ! 


q Feremi1h had reaſon to caution with the King for his Life,con- 
tGdering the eafie Anſwer otthe King to the Princes, moving for 
his Death, Yerſe 4, 5. We muſt imagine Feremiah ar this time un- 
der no Divine Command to reveal God's Will jn this caſe unto 
the King. r Wilt rhou not, is here, as much as thcu wilt not hearken 
unto me. Zedekiab had often been adviied by the Propher 
but would never take his Advice, and the Prophet knew it would 
be the ſame cale ſti]}, that the King would be over-ruled by a 
corrupt Court, and his own ave: tton, to change his ſtate as 2 
King, tor the ſtate of a Pritoner, 


15 SO Zedckiah the Ring ſirare ſecretly unto Jere- 


| ( l ts F 
C 


JF 
© CIP 4b» 


miab, ſaying, As the I.ORD liveth * that made vs x Iſs, 
chis Soul, I will not put thee to death, neither will [ x6. 


+ Heb. 
men of thy 
peace. 


T Heb, 
thou (h't 
burn. & 0, 


7 Chap. XXX VI 
give thee into the hand of theſe Men that ſeek thy 


life /. 


{ Z:dekiab ſaith nothing to the latter part of Feremiah's Speech, 


promiting nothing as to his hearing and obeying his Counſel : As 
to the former he gives him the ſecurity of his Oath,that he wou!d 
neither himleltflay him, by giving any immediate command from 
himſelf, nor ſurrender h1M up into the hands of thoſe malicious 
Princes, who he perceived ſought his Life. The form of his Oath 
15 What was uſual, as the Lord liveth, with an addition, the Lord 
that gave me my Life, if I put thee to death, and if T deliver 
thee, which form carrieth with 1t a concealed imprecation, Let 
the Lord do (o to me, and more alſo, Or letthe Lord that gave methis 
Sou] take it from me, if 1 do either of theſe things. Thus he fe. 
cures Feremidh, as to any hard meaſure for his telling him the 


2ruth, though it ſhould be what might be 1nterpreted a capital 


crime to publiſh, ; : 
j- Then aid Jeremiah unto Zedekiah, Thus ſaith 


TFEREMI AS 


brought upon them, would be no ſmall Azrravation of his Af. 
fliction. TY ; 

24 Þ Then ſaid Zedekiah unto Jeremiah, Let no 
Man know of theſe words, and thon ſhalt not dic 4. 

d Theſe words !{vthciently let us know that Z- 11-549 Rood in 
awe of h!s Courtiei <,4nd we might probably think chatihad it no: 
been tor them, he would have done better. This is the righreous 
Judgment of God, thole that will not ſinCtifie the Lord ot Hoſts, 
and make him thei: tear, ſhall tear Men whom to tear is much 
more bale and jgnoble, 


25 But if the princes hear that I have talked with 
thee, and they come unto thee, and ſay unto thee, 
Declare unto us now what thou haſt ſaid unto the 
King, hide it not from ns, and we will not put thee 


to death ; alſo what the King ſaid unto thee e. 
e It could hardly be imagined that Zedekith ſhould have this 


the LORD, the God of Hoſts, the God of Ifracl, if| private Diſcourſe with Jeremiah, but ſome or other of his Cour- 


thou wilt aſſuredly go forth unto the king of Babylons 
Princes, then thy ſoul ſhall liver, and this city ſhall 
not be burat with fire, and thou ſhalt live, and thine 
houſe . ; ; 

t That is, thou ſhalt live. u And thow ſhalt ſave the City from 
being burned with fire, and thy Wives and Children from Death. 
God did certainly know that Z-d:ki2h would not do tis, though 
it was in his power todo it, yet he doth not judge it vain for him 
ro exhort him todo it, and roannex ſuch a promiſe; for thereby 
he was left inexcaſable, in his not laving tae City, and his Re- 
lations lives. 

13 But if thou wilt not go forth ro the king of Ba- 


bylon's princes, then ſhall this City be given into the 
hand of the Chaldeans, and they ſhall burn it with 


fre, and thou ſhalt noteſcape ont of their hand w. 

w As he before had uſed Exhortations and Promiſes, fo here he 
uſeth Threatnings to periwade him to that which indeed was in 
his power to do, but God infallibly knew that he would not do. 
The end of God in which could be no other than to leave him 
without excuſe, in not obzying what God commanded. 


19 And Zedekiah the king ſaid-unto Jeremiah, 1 
am afraid of the Jews, that are fallen to the Chalde- 
ans, leſt they deliver me into their hand, and 


mock me x. 

x But if Z:dehiah went out according to the Prophet's advice, 
and delivered himſeit, what need2d he to fear his Subjects, ( that 
had delerted the City ) delivering of him ? It ſeems rather there- 
fore to be the lence, leſt the Chaldemns when I have yielded my 
ſelf to them, ſhould deliver me into the hands of thoſe F-ws which 
have fallen to them, and tney ſhould mock mz, ſo as he ſeems to 
be more concerned for his Honour than for his own Life, and his 
Families, and the whole City ; thus often great Perſons are more 
patient of Death, than of Reproach and Dithonour. 


20 But Jeremiah ſaid, They ſhall not deliver 
thee y : Obey, I beſeech rhee, the voice of the LORD, 
which I ſpeak unto thee: ſo it ſhall be well unto thee, 
and thy ſoul ſhall live. : 

» The Chaldeans ſhall not do [o baſe an a, but deal with thee 
2s with a Prince. 7 Let not this therefore bea Temptation to thee, 
to diſobey the Command of God, which if thou doeſt thou ſhalt 
live, though not in that ſplendor in which thou now liveſt, yer in 
2 much more comfortable ſtate, than thou wile do if they take 


tiels would takenotice of it, but yet it argues chat this poor Prince 
was 1n a miſerable ſubjeCtion to tiem, that he could diſcourſe 
with no body, but they muſt come and enquire what he ſaid. 


26 Then thou ſhalc ſay unto them, I preſented my 
ſupplication before the King, that he would not cauſe 
me to reiurn to Jonathan's houſe to dye there /. 

f The Ring inſtructs the Prophet in cafe the Priaces ſhon!d be 
inquiſitive to know what ditcourſe paſſed berwixt the King 
and him,to tell them, that he petitioned him chat he might be ſent 
no more to the Priſon in the Houſe of Jonarhas, of which ke 
complained, and petitioned the King to be freed from it, Char- 
37. 20, | 
27 Then came all the princes to Jeremiah 7, 22d 
aSked him h, and he told them according to all theſe 
words that the Ring hid commanded z : So they left 
Þ off ſpeaking with him, for the matter was uot per- 
ceived &, 


at Court came and inquired of Jeremiah what was the Subſtance 
of his Diſcourle. i Fer:mizh aniwered them according as the King 
had direfted. A Man's not bound 14 all cafesto ſpeak the who!e 
cruch, much leſs to thoſe who have nothing to do to inquire of us 
which theſe Princes had not. k By this means the Princes never 
knew the matter of this Diſcourſe. 


28 So Jeremiah abode in the Court of the Priſon, 
until the day that Jeruſalem was taken, and he was 
there When Jeruſalem was taken /- 

| Thus God hath ſeveral ways to hide his People inanevil day; 
he hid Fofah trom it in the Grave, he hid Noth in an Ark, Lot in 
Zr, Feremp 1n a Priton, which in probability was a later place 
tor him, than the Land of B:njzmin, whither he would have 
gone, had not Irijih ſtop: him, Chap. 37. 12, 13. Conquerours 
have commonly the greateſt kindnels, for thote whom they find 
under the frowns ofthe conquered, eipecially when that which 
hath made them fo hath been ſomething ſpoken, or doce in the 
fayour of che Conquerors. 


CHAP. XXXKIX. 


Jeruſalem zs taken : Zedekiah's Sons are ſlain: His Ey2s put 0:2 
He is [ent to Babylon : All che -N)bles of Judah are /l4in : The 


the City by ſtorming. 
21 But if thon refuſe to go forth, this zs the word 


that the LORD hath ſhewed me : 
22 And bchold all the women that are left in the. 


King of Judah's houſe, ſha/l be brought forth to the 
King of Babylon's princes z,, and thoſe Womez ſhall 
ſay, + Thy friends have ſet thee on, and have pre- 
vailed againſt thee, thy feet are ſunk in the mire a, 


and they are turned away back 6. 

Thou that art afraid of the Inlultings of Men that are thy 
Subjeas,ſhalt fall under the Inſulcings and Taunts of the Women ; 
either the Court Ladies who were lett when. Jehoiachim was car- 
ried away, or the Women belonging to thine own Court ſhal 
be taken and brought forth to the King of Babyl1n's Princes, to be 
diſpoſed of at their pleaſure, and theſe Women ſhall deride thee. 
2 Andtell thee, for this thou mayſt thank thy hearkening to the 
Prielts, and falſe Prophets called in the Hebrew, the Men of thy 
pexce, becauſe they ſoothed up the King with the promiſes of 
Peace. 4 Now they have lett thee in evils out of which thou 
canſt not eſcape. b And as tor them whom thou believedſt and 
truſtedſt to, and by whoſe words thou art brought into theſe 
Snares, they have forſaken thee, every one ſhitting for himſelf. 


23 So they ſhall briag out all thy wives and thy 
children to the Chaldeans, and thou ſhalt not eſcape 
out of their hands, but ſhalt be taken by the hand of 
the king of Babylon : and + thou ſhalt cauſe this city 
to be burnt with fire c. 

c This 15 no more than what was ſaid before,on!y here repeated, 
as an Argument to perſwade his Obedience in furrendring himſelf, 
ifnot tor the City's ſake,vet for his own ſake,and for his Childrens 
lake, for he affures the King that not himlelf only, but his Wives 
and Children allo woul | otherwiſe fall into the hands of the Baby- 
lon'1ns, and their Reitections upon him tor the Miſery he had 


| City % burnt, and the Chief of the People. carried Cafpiive, 


18, 


11,—14. God's Promiſe to Ebed-melech, 15, 


1 FN the ninth year of Zedekiah Kinz of Judah, in 

the tenth month, came Nebuchadrezzar Kin:; 

of Babylon 2, and all his Army, again{t feruſalens 
and they belieged ir. 

a This exactly agreeth with the Hiſtorical part of Scripture, 
2 Kings 25.1, and with the repetition of it, Chap. 52. 4. Tins 
Month was called Tebeth, Eſther 2 16. andanſwers to p1rt of o:r 
December and Fanuary. Princes are laid to do that which is done 
by their great Officers by their Order, yet ſome think Nebuchad- 
rex3.4r came firſt in Perſon, though he quickly lefc his Army, and 
was not there at the taking of the City. 


2 And in the eleventh year of Zedekiah, in the 
fourth month, the ninth day of the month, the City 


was broken up 6. 

b The Siege laſted a year and half, for it was the fourth Monti 
of Z:dekiah's eleventh year before it was taxen, 17 15 laid here to 
be broken up, becaule their way ot takinz torcified places then, 
was by beating down the Walls of the Beſieged with Iron Rams 
and Engines, as we now Jo with great Guns, This Kingdom had 
now held 38 Years, from Kebobozm their tirit King, in whicathey 
had had twenty Kings ( beſides Athatiah. ) The Ten Tribes had 
been now in Captivity 130 Years, fo asthe Kinadom of [-7-itood 
but 250 years after the diviſion, in which time ther hid had 19 
Princes, but of ſeveral Families ; all the Kings o1 Fuda2 were of 
che Houſe of David, lineally deicended froum Mm. 

3 Andallthe Princes of the E11g of Babylon came 
in, and ſate inthe middls gatec; eve, Nergal-thare- 
zer, Samgar-nebo, Sar-ſechimz Rab-faris, Nergal- 
ſharezer, Rab-mag, with all the relidue of the Prin- 
ces of the Ring of Bal 


Vol. Il. 


»1 =. A 
T ' 
GVi0O:!1 &. 
E — * x2 
? T | A 2 
T [| 2 , 
{ T k =) 


Chap. XXNXIZ, 


F Heb. 


Tr ” In>p f 
C/ - , - 


£ As the Kiag ſuſpeted fo it came to paſs ; the. King's private /ilent jrom? 
Diſcourſe with the Prophet took wind, þ and all the Pcinces then þ1m» 


I, — 10, Neouchadrezzar's Charge concerning Jeremiah, 


PR” I} 


ere oo. 4 HH aan 


Chap. XXXIX. 


c All the great Men of Babylon that were imployed inthe _ 
du& of the Babylonian Army ( the Gity being taken by Storm, 
ar ſurprize ) entred intoir, bur refted at the middle Gate, The 
City they ſay was incompaiſed with two Walls before they came 
to the Wall of the Temple ; the Gare in the inner Wall is ſuppo- 
ſed ro have been that which 1s called rhe middle Gate, they would 
not at firſt adventure infurcher,the Ciry being large and well for- 
tified,chere might have been ſome Traps latd for them;they would 
theretore have their Soldiers fuſt clear the Streets, and ſcarch al 
places,that chey mighr enter further into the Ciry withont hazard- 
ing their Perſons. 4 Some Interpreters have examined the iigniti- 
cation of the Names of thcſe Princes, bur I know of no uſe 1t can 
be to us whether they were the Names of the rertons, or fignitt- 
cative of rhe Offices they bare, ; 


4 © And itcame to paſs, that when Zedextah the 
kins of Judah ſaw them, and all the men of war e, 
then they fled, and went forth ont ofthe city by 
mot f, by the wayof the king's garden, by the gate 
betwixt the rwo walls, and he weat out the way of 
the plan g. | 

e lt ſhould ſeem that the City was taken by a Surprize, the 
Chaldeans battering rhe Walls ince Jantly with their Rams and En- 
#ines of War, on a ſudden made {ich a breach as gave them a |1- 
berry to enter in. f The King cicher heard of ir, or poſſibly might 
be in ſoine place where he might ſee it, then he begins to think of 
eſcaping, bur for greater privacy ſtayeth till he had the covert of 
the Night, g and then goeth our rowards the plains of Fericho,for 
there the Chaldeans overtook him, as we read in the nexr Verſe, he 
Is (aid Fere t9 have gone by the way of the King's Garden by the 
Gate bitwixt the twoWalls. Tris very hard for us at this diftance 
of rime, to pretend ro any certainty in determining the way by 
whici1 he made his eſcape, They ſeem to judge moſt probably, 
that rhink rhar rhe King had prepared for himſelf a privare paſſage 
our of his Garden berwixr two Walls, leading to the Wall of the 
Citv, which they had before ſo weakned, as on a ſudden they 


b—— 


#EREMIAH 


Chap. XXXIX 


! Still 1r is obſervable, how punQual the Holy Ghoſt is in re- 
cording the fulfillings of the words of the Lord. This Propher, 
had ar leaft four rimes forerold,that this would be one conſequent 
of the Bings and Nobvles ſtubbornneſs, in not ſubmitting to the 
Ring of Babylon, See Chap. 37.8. and 38.18, 23. 


9 Then Nebuzar-adan the captaia || of the guard, þ or. :;- 
carried away captive into Babylon the remnant of the acar/ha!, 
people that remained ia the city, and thoſe that fell T_ Hev. 
away, that fell to him, with the reſt of the people Pe J 
that remained 27. _— 

This Nebuzara4an what in that place, which we call the Prs- 
voji-Marſhat, with them it was call'd the Captain of the Guar 
and here are two ſorts of Priſoners reckoned up, whom he carried { y, .. 
away. I. Such as after the Armies where come into Fudea had ;1w"Om 
yielded themſelves. 2. Such as when they took the Ciry,remain- * 
£10 1t:not being before conſumed by the Sword, Famine, and Pe- 
ftilence ; and {o were taken upon the ſtorming or ſuprizal of the 
City. Both ſorts were carried away Prifonefs although ir is proba- 
ble,chat the Zonquerour reared the former much more gently than 
he rreated the latter, as 1s uſual in thoſe cales, 


10 But Nebuzar-adan the captain ofthe guard, 
left of the poor of the people whieh had nothing, in 
the land of Judah, and gave them vineyards, and 


fields -+ at the ſame time 7. + Heb, 
n This 15 uſual with Conquerors, for whoſe Prefir it is not that 3x th 

the Countries conquered by them, ſhould lie waſte, like Wilder- ſame aav? 

nefles, bur be peopled, and manured that they may render ſome 

Tribute to them «: withal the Juſtice of God 15 often ſeen in this, 

thus reſtoring to them ofc-rimes with advanrage by the hand of 

Enemies that prove Conquerors, thoſe Eftares which 1n corrupr 

times their proper Magiſtrates by violence and oppretfion took 

from them, or ar leaſt more than conpenſaring their lofles by Atts 

of Violence and Injuſftice. 


11 Now Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, gave 


4+" 
07:4Y'S, or 
I%PEtcy. 


2 
A 4,12» 
* 2e7, and 


might dig it thorough :poſſibly.theſe particulars are the rather ſer 
down, to ſhew as how God verified whar he had revealed 1n this | 
matter to the Prophet, Ex2k. 12. where God ler the Propher 
er. 3, To prepare ſtuff for removing, and to remove by day,in 
the feht ofthe People from his own place to another place, and 
Ver. 4. To g9 out at even in their fight, as they that go ont into 
Capti-ity, To dig through te wall jn their feght, and carry our 
thereby : Is thiir ſight to bear it on his ſhoulders, and carry it 
fo>th in the twilightz to cover his face, ſo as nor to ſee the 
210114, and Ver. 6, he told him, that 1n all this he was tobe 
ſien; and Ver. to, tells him, This burden concerneth the Prince 
77 Feruſalem ( who was thar Zedekiab ) Ver. 12, And the Prince 
that is among them, (hall bear upon his (houlder in the twilight, 


[charge concerning Jeremiah - to Nebuzar-adan the 4 ptcv. 


captain of the guard, ſaying, hy the haz 
12 Take him, and look well to him, and do him %. Heb 
no harm, but do unto him even as he ſhall ſay unto ,,4 :1;1.e 
thee 0. ; eyes p08 
o It is more than probable, that Nebachadnez;ar had been in- him. 


formed by ſome of the chief Commanders of his Army, who had 
1c from ſome of the Fews, that had <ſeaped out of the City to the 


| Chaldean Army, that Jeremiah had conſtantly told the King to the 


the Nobles, that the Chaldeans ſhould rake the City and as ſteadily 
perſwaded both rhe King and Princes and People to ſurrender it to 


and ſhall go forth, they ſhall dig through the Wall, to go 6:t | them, and prevent the effuſion of Blood, and that he was 1mpri- 


thereby be ſhall cover his face, that he ſee not the ground with 
bis eyes. 

s But the Chaldeans army purſued after them, and 
overtook Zedekiah in the plains of Jericho,and when 
they had taken him they bronght him up to Nebu- 
chadrezzar king of Babylon, to Riblah in che land of 


7 Heb. Hamath, were he Þ gave judgment upoi him hb. 


/ Fs 
[Ives W381) 


It 7; f 4 1p- 
HER Se 

| 

| 

| 

Mt» 


þ Thus God by his Providence fulfilled his Threatning by his 
Propher E:ebiel, Char. 17. 12, Rival was upon the Borders of 
Can12% as appeareth from Numv. 34.11. It was in the Land of 
Hin) of which ve read, 2 King. 17. 24. being one of thoſe Pro- 
vince 11 the Dominion of the King of A4ſſ142, from whence he 
brought Men to place them 1n the Land of 1jae! afcer that he had 
eorquered rhe Ten Tribes, It 15 not uſaal for Princes upon Con- 
queſts to (tin Judgment upon Princes conquer'd, but the reaſon of 
1 10 this caſe was, becauſe Zedehizh was a Triburary to the Ring 
of 3:bjlon, and fo fubjeR to his Pover, having made a Covenant 
vich him,and fecured his Allegiance by his Oath to him, and then 
rebelled againſt him, as we read, Ez. 17. 13,14, 15, 16, 
17,18. 

6 Then the king of Babylon flew the ſons of Zede- 
{uh 11 Riblah before his eyes : allo the king of Ba- 
bylon flewallthe nobles of Judah 7. 

; Thus rhe ſtu>bornnels of this Prince, and his Nobles, proved 
the Ruine of h1s Family, and of themſelves, and of the whole 
People, The Nobles were great Authors of this miſchtefand 
brought Z:4ebizs into that ofſtinacy which he ſhewed ro rhe Pro- 
phers admonirions and Exhortations upon them, therefore a more 
cxemplary Puniſhment 15 raken. The #:rew calls rhe Novles 
wwit- $1, either from their white Garments, or from that Can- 
a9! of $144it which ſho:ld be found in Perſons of their Quality, 

- Morcover he put our Zedekiah's eyes,and bound 
him-F with chains to carry him to Babylon k. 
Þ Thus the two Prophecies were fulfilled,that of this Prophet, 


Chaz. 24. 4. that Z:4:h21 (hould nor die by tbe Sword : and that 
of F-chiz!, that ie ſhould not ſex Babylon, though be (hould die 
thr, Eceh.12.13. Riblah was ar a great diſtance from Babylon, 


where the king was at this time probably te be nearer his Army 
while the Siege lafted ar Jrr4{a/?m, and ro give orders abour it 
and :0 divert himſelf, rhe place being a pleaſant place, and the 
King not willing to trouble himſelf abour the Siege to go thither 1n 
Perſon, bur rhe Siege being over, he now removerh to Babylon, 
ind carricth Zedebiab and rhe reft of the Priſoners along with 
him - 


8 & And the Chakdeans burnt the king's houſe, 


ſoned for this,and had been a great ſufferer that way,and thar this 
made this Heathen Prince ſo kind to the Propher as to give this 
order. In the mean time the Hand of God 1s to be taken notice 
of, who undoabredly pur this into the Heart of this Pagan Prince 3 
and we may learn, that none ſhall loſe any thing at laſt by being 
faithful ro the Commands of God, though they may be: for the 
preſent loſers, What we tranſlate, look well to him, 1s 1n the He- 


brew, ſet thine eyes upon him z and expounded by the following 
words, commanded him to do him go harm, and to give or granc 
ro him, whatever he deſired. 


13 So Nebuzar-adan thecaptain of the guard ſent, 
and Nebuſhasban, Rab-ſaris and Nergal-ſharezer, 
Rab-mag, and all the kir.g of Babylon's princes, 

14 Even they ſent, and took Jeremiah out of the 
court of Priſon, and committed him unto Geda- 
liah, the ſon of Ahikam, the ſon-of Shaphan, that 
he ſhould carry him home: So he dwelt among the 
people p. 

p The King of Babylor's Officers were very Religious to their 
Princes order, and take the Prophet our of Priſon ; for che latter 
part of the 14th. Verſe it ſeems by an anticipation of whar we ſhall 
find relared more fully, and parricalarly Ch2p. 40. or elſe ſo ouzhe 
ro be tranſlared yer, as appeareth from the firſt Verſe of the nexr 
Chapter, whence 1: is plain that the Prophet was alſo v0nd in 
chains, amongſt them that were carried away captive z and not 
diſcharged until he came ar Ramahb, which probably might bein 
chart hurry of Affairs, though the Princes art firſt freed him from 
Priſon, the under Officers not ſo diligently obſerving their ſpecial 
charge relating to Jeremiah, the negle& of which the Captain of 
the Guard obſerving when he came as far as Ramah, himlelt rook 
care 1n it, as we ſball find Chap. go. after which, upon his choice, 
he was committed to Ged4aliahrhe Sgn of Ahibkam, whom the 
King of Babylon made Governour over the Country. 


15 < Now the word of the LORD came unto 
Jeremiah, while he was ſhut up in the court of the 
priſon, ſaying 9, 

q Theſe words let us know that theſe four Verſes ( which con- 
rain moſtly a Promiſe to #bedyrelech, for his kindneſs ro Jeremiats 
while he was in the Dungeon of Ma/chizh, of which we read, 
Chap. 38. 6, 7,8, 9, 10, 11.) mentions a matter that happened be= 
fore the things mentioned 1n che fore going Verſes, 


16 Goand ſheak to Ebed-melech the Ethiopian r, 
ſaying, Thus taicth the LORD ot hoſts, the God of 
Iſrael, Behold, I will briag my words upon this city 


for evil and not for good, and they ſhall be 


FOO fv? 
CC UT. 


and the houſes of the people with fire, and _— 
down the walls of Jeruſalem /. | 


pliſhed 18 that day before thee /. 


- 


BES.Cr 


{| Or, 
at anicit 


|| Or, 
= 200% tn; 
| hands, 
7 || Heb. 
| 1 will 
I mn eye 
28 "4101 the 


” & 
——— ESR. 
ALI rs, 
eEO SIE | SRLR 
II IE) 4 I ER 


Chap. XL. 


X Chan, 
12 


ES = 
FERE 
» Ebermelech 1s here again cailed the Ethiopiar to the reproach 
of the Jews, rhar a ſtranger ſhould ſhew more kindneſs to a Pro- 
her of the Lord thanany of thar Nation to whom he was ſpecially 
ſent; which was a Type of the calling of the Gentiles, and reje- 
&ion of the Jews. ſ God allures Ebeamelech, the City ſhould He 
taken and burnt, and the People carried into Eaprivity. 
i7 But I will deliver thee in that day, faith the 
LORD, and thou ſhalt not be given into the hand 
of the Men of whom thou azt afraid r. | 
t Buc promiſech Eb24melech he ſhould be delivered in thar evil 
day. and, whether he feared the Chaldeaxs, that he ſhould loſe 
his Life hy them when they ſhould break up the City, or the Prin- 
ces whom he had anger'd by complaining to the King of their 
hard uſage of the Prophet, he ſhould come into none of their 
Power. 
18 For I will ſurely deliver thee, and thon ſhalt 
not fall by the ſword «, but * thy life ſhall be for a 


21-9. and Prey nnto thee w, becauſe thou haſt pur thy truſt 1n 


45. 5: 


f Or, 


4H aCHES, 


4 


hands. 


| || Heb. 
== 1 will ſit 


mine eyes 


; A p07 tet. 


me, faith the LORD =. 

» For God would deliver him, fo as he ſhould not dye by the 
Sword. w Bur how little elſe ſoever he ſaved, he ſhould ſave his 
Life, x becauſe he had put bis tra} in God, nor fearing the wrach 
of Men in the doing of what was his Dury. We read no more in 
Holy Writ of this Man, and ſo cannor telt how otherwiſe God 
dealt with him ; only may »e affured thar he was nor lain by the 
Chaldeans, And from this we may obſerve, 1, How kind God 
hath always declared himſelf to thofe who have ſhewed the leaſt 
kindneſs to thoſe who have been his true and fairhful Mimfters, 
2. That the root of ſuch good Works as God rewardeth muſt be 
Faith, a truſting in the Lord. 3. Thar thoſe who do good Works 
out of a principle of Fairh, may yer be 1ncumbred with ſhavith 


tcars. 
CHAP. | XE 


Jeremiah being ſt free by Nebuchadnezzar, goeth to Gedaliah, 
1,——6, to who the remaining Jews repair, 9——12, Jo- 
hanan revealing Iſhmael's Conſpiracy, 3s not believed, 13, 


M1I4H 


Go back alfo to Gedalizh the Gn of Ahikm, the ſo: 
of Shaphan g, whom the King of Babylon hath inade 
Governou r over the Cities of Judah; and dwell wita 
tm among the people: or go whereſyever it ſeem- 
cth convenient for thee to go. So the capr2ia of the 
guard gave him Vierals and a Reward, and let him 
£0 h. 

_ f Iris not much material whether we interpret the tre here men. 
tioned of Jeremiah or Gedaliah: if we 1nrerprer it cf J:r2mizh 
the ſence 1s, That before Jer2nizh was gone our of the preience of 
Ne@4z2r-44an, he either by his filence or by ſome declaration of 
11s Mind thar is not here recorded, declaring that he was more in- 
clined to ſtay in his own Conntry, Nebszar-24% bid him, Go 
back, &c, It we underſtand it of Ge4aliah, the ſence muſt he, 
Becauſe Gedaliah is not to come back any more to me, Go tho! to 
him, &c. g We read that-the King of Bzoylon lefr Grdziizh as 
his Vize-Roy or Depury in Judah. What he was, more than rhe 
(on of Ahib2m, and Grandchild of Sha5b41, the Scripture rells us 
nor, only that he was left by the King of B:bylon as Ruler over 
the People he rhought fic ro leave, 2 Kings 25. 22. Probably he 
was one of them, who, during the Siege, had gone our to the Xi; 


of Babylon, ro him the Captain of the Guard dicetcih the Pco- 
pher, bur gives him liberty ro dwell where he pleaſerh. þ So 
lends him away with Victuals and a Reward. Iris more thin 
probable, that the King of Baby!-z had heard from ſome of th1= 
Jews, who, during the Stege had made an efcape co his Ariny,thas 
the Scope of the Propher's Prophecies were for the delivery of hc 
City, and the Fews ſubmiſſion co himas was 5etore ſaid, 

6 Then went Jeremiah unto Gedaliah the fon of 
Aluikam, to Mizpah -, and dwelt with him amoag 
the People that were left in the land. 

: Mizab was built by Aſa, 1 Kings 15. 22. or rather enlarged 
or further built, for we read of it as a City be!9nging ro the Tribe 
of Benjamin, Foſh. 18.25, 


7 * Now when all the captains of the forces which * 


were In the fields, ever they and their Men heard that 


m 


— 10, 


I HE word which came to Jeremiah from the 

LORD 4, after that Nebuzar-adan the cap- 
tain of the guard had let him go from Ramah 6, 
when he had taken him being bound 1n || chains a- 


mong all that were carried away captive of Jeruſalem 


and Judah, which were carried away captive into Ba- 
bylon c. 

2 Theſe Words refer tothe forty ſecond Chapter, where begins 
the Revelation which Jeremiah had from God 3 for all rhis Chaprer, 
and the next are no Prophecy, bur only an Hiſtorical Narration 
of ſome Paſſages after the taking of the Ciry, and ſo cannot be 
called a Prophecy, but area piece of Hiſtory previous to that Pro- 
phecy. b Rama was a City in the Tribe of Benjamin near Gi- 
beon, Vide Chap. 31. 15. © Jeremiah was by miſtake and ex- 
preſly contrary to the King's Orders, Ch4p, 39. 11. manacled and 
carried away amongſt the other Priſoners 3 provably che Cap- 
ttin of the Guard ar that place call'd over his Priſoners, and 
amongſt them he found the Propher contrary to his ExpeQta- 


con. 
2 And the captain of the guard took Jeremiah, 
and aid unto him, The LORD thy God hath pro- 


4 


the King of Babylon had made Gedaliah the ſon of 
Ahikam Goveriovr iq the land, aad had committed 
unto him Men, Women and Children, and of the 
poor of the land, of them that were not carried awai 

captive to Babylon. 

s Then they came to Gediliah to Mizpah, ever 
Iſhmael the {os of Nethaniah, and Johanan 2ad Joaz- 
than the ſons of Kareah, and Seraiah the jou of Tan- 
humeth, and che ſons of Ephai che Nerophathire,aud 
Jezaniah the ſon of a Mazcharhice, they and cheir 
Mea &. 

& Iris moſt likely that theſe Caprains with their Forces, were 
no new]y raiſed and formed Companies, for to whar purpoſe ſhould 
that be when their City and whole Counrry was loft? Bur tome 
Commanders of Parties, which either were within the City c1ill ic 
was taken, and then eſcaped our, or were about before ſomewhere 
in the Country, and were not ſo much regarded by the Ch2ld-2ns, 
who were more intenr upon the Conqueſt of rhe City, than purſu- 
ing theſe liccle Parties, who they knew could do them no hurr, 
Theſe hearing thar che bufine(s was over, and a Deputy Goveraour 
ſer up, who was of their own Country, and a Man-of a good In- 
genuous Temper, our of the love they had to their Narive Coun- 
rry come unto him, Of rheſe Captains weread lictie fave 1 nat, 
(of whom we ſhall afterwards read moreJnor are we ar all concern- 


nounced this evil upon this place. | 

3 Now the LORD hath brought zz, and done ac- 
cording as he hath ſaid, becauſe ye have finned againſt 
the LORD, and have not obeyed his voice, therefore 


ed ro [eek their Genealogy. 

9 And Gedaliah the fon of Ahikam the ſon of Sha- 
phan ſware unto chem, and to their Mea, faying /, 
Fear not to ſerve the Chaldeans, dwell in the land, 


this this thing is come upon you 4. 


4 This Pagan Commander could ſee that which the blind Js 
would not underſtand; thev faid, wherefore 3s ths great evil ; 


come 1pon us ? Nebuzar-adan knew wherefore and gives God the 


olory of his Maſter's Victory, as alſo of his qwn faithfulneſs, ſay- 
ing God had but done wha: he ſaid, brought the evil which he, 
had pronounced againſt thar Ciryz he alſo acknowledgeth God's | 
Juſtice, thar this evil was come upon chem becauſe of their fins. ! 
Thus, the Men of Tyre and Sidon, and of Ninzveh ( according to ' 
our Saviour's words ) ſhall riſe up in Judgmenr, againſt the Jews 
that lived in our Saviour's time; and Neuz47-444% anorner | 
day ſhall riſe up in Judgment againſt thoſe Fews that lived 1n Fere- ; 


niah's time, and ſhall condemn them, 


4 4 And-now behold I looſe thee this day from the. 
© j| Or, are chains which || were upon thine hand: if it ſeemeth 

#01 thine good unto thee to come with me Js 
come, and -| I will look well unto thee: bur it it 


ſeem ill unto thee to come with me into Babylon, 
forbear : bchold, all the laad i before thee : whi- 
cher it ſeemeth good and convenient tor thee to go, 
thicher go e. / | 

? Neb13ar-adan, like a fairthful Servant, remembers his Maſters 
orders to him about the Prophet, Chap. 39. 11. and offers Jere- 
nh greater favour than to any others of his Priſoners 3 he de- 
termined orhers by his right of Conqueſt co whar rhey ſhould do, 
bur he givech the Prophet a liverty to chuſe whether he would go, 
to Babylon, or ſtay at Jersſulem 1n his own Country, he prom1- ' 
fed him that if he would go to Bby/on, he would take a particular 
care of tum, 


into Babylon, 


and ſerve the King of Babylon, and irc ſhall be vee!! 
with you m2. 

{ They mighr reaſonably {uſpeR rhat the Ch.244227r5 would have 
a jealous Eye upon any conilux of P-opleso Jer:j.:!27; efpectally 
Military Men, and therefore be ſomething ſuſpicious of h1-n who 
was the Chaidean Deputy Governour, the ſecuring of chem fron 
fears on this account was the cauſe of this Voluncary Oarh raken by 
Gedaliah. m He encourageth them ro be Servants tothe Cb2idee 
ans, and to dwell in the Land, afjuring them char it.chey would, 
they ſhould fare well. He was well enough affured of the Cha!ge- 
ans favour, thatif they would live peaceably in cheir own Land, 
they ſhould ; they would not come any more to carry. them away 


Captive. 


10 As for me, Bzhold 1 w1ll dwell at Mizpah, -| to f feb, 
ſerve the Chaldeans, which will come unro us z : 72 {4% 


= 


bur ye, gather wine and ſummer-fruits, and oyl,and * 


put them: in your veſſels, and dwell in your cities that 
ye have taken 0. : | | 

1 Thar is, I have made choice of Miz54h, a City upon the 
Frontiers, where [intended to make my refidenc= it 05:12 2 Con- 
venient place for me to receive orders from the Kivg of 529yion, 
and ro manage State matters. 0 Bur do ye live it ihe Country,and 
gather ſuch Fruits as the Country aftordeth 9 097 fear be- 
ing ſtripr or ſpoiled ofthem, bur do as you vic co d9 1n the rims 
of greateſt Peace, and Security. os. 

11 Likewiſe when all che Jews that w2re 10 320ab, 
and amonz{t the Ammonites, and in Edom, and that 
were 1421] the countries, heard that the King of Baby- 

jON 


Chap. AL, 


| 5 Now while he was not yet gone back f,, he faid, 


4a _ 


on leg oeS IeIooo roy 


* F 
-» c wy 5 1 *# ak 4.76 nd. py 
_ F 4 . -} - 
SD 
4 c ' . « = 

—— - ; « — J » 

_ — — AC.” 5 

Y 4 = Rs 7 "= O% 


a RE... : 
ee Ln 


- WET 


Chap. RLI1. 


F Heb. « 
ro {trihe 


thee nn lou] 


*'2 kirgs 


25.25. 
þ 


FERE 


lon had left a remnant of Judah, and thar he had ſet 
over them Gedaliah the ſon of Ahikam, the ſon of 
Shaphan. | 

tz Even all the Jews returned out of all places 
whither they were driven, and came to the land of 
ſudah, to Gedaliah unto Mizpah,and gathered wine, 
and ſummer- fruits very much p. ya 

p Probably upon the King of Babylon's firſt invading Judah, 
many fled, and more as he went on his Corquelts, over-running 
the Conntty,and it is likely at the raking of the City many elcap- 
ed, and fled into feveral Countries as they had opportunity, 0r 
judged this or that Country would be fateſt, ſome fledl to Moas, 


ſome to Ammon, ſome to Edom, ſome one way, lome anotner : 
But when they had heard that the King of Baby/on had let a Go 
vernour of their own Religion and Country over them they came 
back to him, andrhere being few People left 1n the land, which 
was of it felt wondertu!ly fruitful, they gathered a grea:t plenty 
oi Grapes and other Summer-fruits which the country produced. 

13 $ Moreover, Johauan the ſon of Kareah, and 
all the captains of the forces that were in the fields, 
came to Gedaliah to Mizpah 4. | 

g They had been with him before, Fer. 8, 9. but how they 
come to dilcover a conſpiracy againſt his Life. 

14 And ſaid unto him, Doſt thon certainly know 
7 that Baalis the king of the Ammonires hath ſent 
Iſhmael the-ſon of Nethaniah || to flay thee ? / But 


Gedaliah the ſon of Ahikam believed them not 7. 

r Poſt thou, for doſt thou nor, for not is plainly underſtood as 
the lence makes evident. { Whether this Baalis be a proper 
name of the king of the Ammenites, or as tome think an appella- 
tive Naine, ſignifying the Lady or the Queen Regent, 1s 1ncertain, 
What made the prince of theAmmonizes do this can be but gueſſed, 
probab!y the old hatred they had to Iſrael, or hopes they ſhould 
have the better fiſhing in theſe Waters when they were trouved, 
7 Gedaliah feems a Man of a good Humour, not too creculous, 
2nd believes not the information. 


I5 Then Johanan the ſon of Kareah ſpake to Ge-! 
daliah in Mrzpah ſecretly, ſaying, let me go, 1 pray; 
thee, and I will flay Iſhmael the ſon of Nethaniah, 
and no man ſhall know zx : wherefore ſhould he flay 
thee; that all the Jews which are gathered unto thee 
ſhould be ſcattered, and the remnanc of Judah pe- 
riſh z. | | 

u Dilcerning that Gedaliahtook no great notice of his words 
ipoken to him in the preſence of the other Captains, he goeth to 
him ſecretly, oftereth him his" Service to prevent the ſtroke, if 
he might have Commiſſion trom him ; mindeth him that it he 
did not value his own Life, yet he ought to conſider, in what a 
condition the People would be in, in caſe he were cur off, they 
were now but a imall Remnant,and then that Remnant alſo would 
periſh. 

16 But Gedaliah the ſon of Ahikam, faid unto Jo- 
tanan the ſon of Rarcah, Thou ſhalt not do this thing, 
tor thou ſpeakeſt fallly of Iſhmael . 

w Thus God dementates thoſe whom he defigneth to deſtroy. 
Gelaliah inthis ſheweth en excellent Temper, not to be over cre- 
dnlovs and ſuſpicious, Charity thinks no i/1, but not that Prudence 
which became a chiet Magiſtrate. He ought to have been watch- 
tul againſt one.againſt whom he had received ſuch an informarti- 
on,which we ſhall in the next Chapter find he was not, but was 
ſlain by kim. 


CH AP?7XLI. 


Tihmael under a colour of friendſhip Jilleth Gedaliah and others, 
both Jews and Chaleans, 1, -— 9. He fpurpoſeth to carry the 


MIAH 


tj was Deputy Governour to the king of Batylor ; ſo deſperately 


hardened were thele 7ews that they would not yet ſee that God 
had given their Country into the hard of the king of Babylon, 
who having now a right of Conqueſt over them, had authority 
tolet whom he pleated as his Fice-Rey or Deputy,Governour 0- 
ver them, to whom they ought to have yielded all ſubjection and 
obedience. 

3 Iſhmael alſo ſlew all the Jews that were with 
him g, even with Gedaliah at Mizpah, and the 
Chaldeans that were found there, ard the men of 
Ware 

g It appeareth from Ver. 10. that by all the Fews here muſt be 
underſtood only all thole who were about the Court of Gedalzzh, 
for it is there {aid that he carried away many that were with 
him. 


4 And it came to paſs the ſecond day after he had 


flain Gedaliah, and no man knew 7zt h. | 
þ That is, no Man who lived at any great diſtance from 2777+ 
pth, for Ihmzel was concerned what in him lay to keep this 
faughter private for tear the news of it ſhould have reached the 
ears of the King of Babylon, or the Commanders of lone of Nis 


Forces, ſo as he ſhould not have had time to make his elcape. 


5 That there came certain from Sechem, from 
Shilo, and from Samaria z, even fourſcoremen, ha- 
ving their beards ſhaven, and their clothes rent, and 
having cut themſelves #, with offerings and incenſe 
in their hands to bring them to the houſe of the 
LORD/. | | 

i Samariz vias the Name both of a City and a Province, She- 
chem was a City within that Province within the limits of the 
Tribe of Ephr1im, Fof. 20. 7. Theſe places were now inhabited by 
a mixt People, partly Jews, partly ſuch as the King of 4{ſy73. had 
upon his Conqueſt of the ten Tribes brought to inhabir there; 
from thence came $0 Men, k who poſſibly had nor heard of the 
Temple being burar, at leaft when they came out, or if they had 
heard otic, ye: thought, hearing ſome* Fews were lefr, that they 
might tave erected {ome Altar for Sacrifices, or it may be they 
brought no Beaſts, / For the Text ſpeaks only of incenſe and ot- 
ferings, they came with all indications of mourning uſed inthote 
Countries, ſyavn Beards, Cloathes rent, and having cut themſelves 
in a barbarous faſhion uſe1 by the Heathens, and forbidden the 
Jews, but yet practiſed by many of them. 


hikam . Ti 
m He cometh out weeping, the better to deceive them into his 


God's Diipenlations, and inviteth them to the. new Governour 
for Protection ;as if he had been one of his Courtiers and Eriends 5 
by thcle Arts he concealeth his bloody deſign againſt them. 

7 And it was ſo when they came into the midlt of 
the city that Iſhmael the ſon of Nethaniah flew them, 
and caſt them into the midſt of the pit, he, and the 
men that were with him 7. ws 

» When he had thus enticed them into Mizph, he, and bis fol- 
lowers flay them, and throw their dead Bodies into a Pit, with 
aſliſtance of thoſe bloody Men thar were with him. 


8 But ten men were found amongſt them, that ſaid 
unto Iſhmael, Slay us not, for we have treaſures in 
the field, offwheat, and of barly, and of oy], and of 
honey: So he forbare, and flew them not among{t 
their Brethren 0. 


Keſidue Captiv to the Ammonites, but they are reſcued from 
bim by Johanan, whe interdetch to fl:2 into Egypt, 10, 


— _], 


1 * OW it came paſs in the ſeventh month a, 
| tat Iſhmael the ſon,of Nethaniah 

of Eliſhama of the ſeed royal b, and the princes 
the king, even ten men with him c, came unto Ge- 
daliah the fon of Ahikam to Mrzpah, and there they 
Kd cat bread together in Mizpah 4. 

a I nat; three Months after the City was taken, Chap. 39s 2, 
b The tame Iſhma-! that carne to Gedaliah, Verſe 8, 9. to whom 
he {ware Protection ; only here we are told that he was of the 
Ropal Biood, which might both raiſe his Spirits,as having a more 
[ega] pretence to the Government, and rendred him a fitter in. 
itrument, tor Bzalrs the King or Queen of the Ammonites to make 
vie of. © Some of the Princes, who had efcaped the Army of the 
king of Bbylon, they and their Retinue came in pretended Com- 
p.ement ro Gedaliah, 4 Who treated them kindly, they dined or 
inpped with him. 


2 Thenaroſe Iſhmael the ſn of Nethaniah, and 


o He flew 70 of them, but ten of them pleading for their Lives, 


'urged that they had Eſtates in the Country, both of Corn Oy], 


and Honey. His Covetoutnels prevailed over his Cruelty, he 1pa- 
red their Liyes to become Maſter of what they had, 


9 Now the pit wherein Iſhmael had caſt all the 


{laing. 


in the hand of Gedaliah, which hath given Criticks a ſcope to vary 
intheir notion of it, and totranſlate it, in the power of, By occaſion 
of, &*c. Bur the learned Author of our Engliſh Annotations 
faith, the ſence of rhe place is plain enough, Chap. 3g. 10. we 
have the ſame term twice, where we have tranſlated it,with thee, 
{o here it doubtlefs ſignifies thoſe who were with Gedaliah under 
his power or charge. q. What Pir this was isnot ſo well agreed, 
that is upon what occaſion made,theTex: telleth us it was digged 
by Aſz King of Judah, and thac ir was made for tear of Baafha the 
King of Iſrael, but whether it wzs to receive water, or to hinder 
Baaſha's coming near ſome weak part of the Ciry.we are not told, 


the ten men that were with him, and ſmote Gedali- 
ah the ſon of Ahikam the ſon of Shaphan, with the 
word, and flew him ce, whom the king of Babylon 
had madegovernour over the land f. 


© Theſeten Men with their retinue fall upon Gedaliab and bar- 
vIrouſly murder him. f Their Quarrel avainſt him was, that hc 


and it is but in vain to gueſs. We read 1 Kings 15. 22. of Aſa's 
fortity1ng Mizpah with the Stones ot Ramab, but of this Pit we 
read nothing. 


10 Then Iſhmael carried away captive all the reſi- 
due of the people, that were in Mizpah, even the 
king's daughters, and 3!] the poople that remeined in 


' 


— 


Chap. XLI, , - 


6 And Iſhmael the ſon of Nethaniah, went forth + xeþ, 
from Mizpah to meet them, - weeping all along as zn going, 
he went: and it came to paſs as he met them, he and weep- 
ſaid unto them, come to Gedaliah the ſon of A- #"2- 


Trap, that they might believe he was as they equally affefted with | 


dead bodies of the men (whom he had ſlaia || - be- ſ up ; oy 
cauſe of Gedaliah p) was it which Aſa the king had + He 4 n 
made for fear of Baaſha king of Iſrael, 47d Iſhmael ,, ;po j.1nd, 
the ſon of Nethaniah, filled it with hers that were or by the 
fide of Gt- 
þ The word which we tranſlate becauſe of MA B:jadbiſignitieth datia) 


A247 Ar ene 
a & 4X S., 'y 
- 
_— 


Is 


& 


- 


: 
F 
i MY 
"Ch: 


; 
; 
«533k 
2. 
EN) 
Tags 
CLE 
Pſa 
{9 as 
$8 
Obs 
SL) 
ped 
's 
[5 


'Chap. XL. 


Mizpah, whom Nebuzaradan the captain of the 
guard, had committed to Gedaliah the fon ot Alt- 
tam, and Iſhmael the ſon of Nethaniah, carried 
them away captive, and departed to go over to the 
Ammonites /. 

þ By this Verſe appeareth that Al! the Fews, Ver. 3. mult be 
1:derſtood ina reſtrained fence concerning all chole avout Geda- 
!itb, Eor he carried many away as Priſoners, as allo Zedefciah's 
Daug 
the City, or Were 
much to hurt them, an 
abiding long for him t ; YT WING 
_ (as we halic before) imployed him in this Murder. 

11 But when Johanan the ſon of Rarcah, and 

L bo B. . 
all the captains of the forces that were with him, 
heard of all the evil that Iſhmael the ſon of Nethant- 


21 had done. 
12 Then they took all 


- 


with Iſhmael the ſon of Netnan! | 
by the great waters that are 11 (31beon 7. 

j Thele great Waters are ſuppoſed to be a Lake, or ſome great 
Pool in Gibeon, the very ſame that is mentioned, 2 $4m. 2. 13s 
where Foab and the Servants of David mer, the one Keeping 0n 
one fide of the Pool, the other on the otl.er ſide. 


13 Now it came to paſs, that when all the people 
which werewith Iſhmael ſaw tohanan the ſon of Ka- 
reah, and all the captains of the forces that were 
with him, then chey were glad &. | 

k To ſeea probability of their elcape out of the hands of this 
Eloody Man, who had ſlain io many of their Brethren. | 

14 So all the people that Iſhmael had carried a- 
way captive to Mizpah, caſt about and returned, and 
went unto Johanan the ſon of Kareah. 

15 But Iſhmael the ſon of Nethaniah eſcaped from 
Johanan with eight men, and went to the Ammo- 
nites /. | 

1! When the People whom Iſhmael had carried away Priſoners 


hetied about and went to him, only Iſþmael and eight Men 
eſcaped and went to the Land of Ammon. 

16 Then took Johanan the ſou of Kareah, and all 
the captains of the forces that were with him, allthe 
remnant of the people whom he had recovered from 
Iſhmael the ſon of Nethaniah, from Mizpah, (after 
that he had ſlain Gedaliah the ſon of Ahikam) ever 
mighty men of war, and the women and the chil- 
dren, and the eunuchs whom he had brought again 


from Gibeon. : 

17 And they departed, and dwelt in the habita- 
tion of Chimham, which z- by Bethlehem, to £o to 
enter into Egypt »:. 

m When Johanan had (as was before expreſſed) recovered the 
Jews whom Iſhmael had carried away as Priioners, he came an 
dwe!t with them in the Habitation of Chimham. Concerning this 
Chimbam all that we read in Scripture is, 2 Sam. 19+ 37, 38, 40. 
he was the Son of Bargi!!ai,whom David would have had to have 

"gone along with him to his Court, but he being $0 Years old ex- 
cuſed himielf, and deſired that his Son Chimbam might be accept- 
ed in his ſtead, Ver. 38. Dvid agreeth it, and promiſeth to do 
tor him whatſoever his Father ſhould defire on his behalf : Poſſi- 
bly David having aa Eſtate near thereabouts might give a porti- 
on of it to him, which though it returned to the Family of David 
in the year of Jubilee, yet trom Chimbam's Houſe there, might 
retain the name of the Habitation of Chimbam; into thoſe parts 


d having done this, he knew there was no 


the men, and went to fight 


FEREMIAH. 


hters, who either had concealed themſelves at the taking of 
lefr behind by the Conquerors, as not like 


\im there, ſo he haſtneth away tothe Ammonztes, 


| Death of Gelaliah upon all the 


Nethaniah, and found him ; 


hanan coming with greater Forces, they contrived and| 4 


21 SS > T 


4 when 
Cilla » 


7 
a ©< ; | 
el a ed 4- 49 '4 ' 


Chimbam, in order to their going into the land of Ezyvr. Th. iC "M54 
coming to Jeremiah to go and enquire of the Lord tor them, tiis | ; fy 
Enquiry of God with the Reve!ation of the Divize Will into Þ HEAR 
hum ; that they ſhould nor go into Egyzr, promiſing God's Pro- 8 "FR 4 
tection of the, if they did nor go, threatninz their Deſrudtion TRY 
ifthey did go. Their proud anſwer to Feremizh, nd Ry 2 ene Pe " Wi 4 


to go, which they accordingly did.and there tell 1 with the 1c. 
latry of the Egyptians, for which God by his Þ 


| il 7 
' TY'Yo [ q- _- ? 3171 
them with an utter ris. rOpaet tareatneth "86-4 


1 Then all the captains of the forces, and Johan 

_ {on of Kareah, and Jezantah the ſon of Hoſhi - h KF: 

ah, and all the people from the lealt even to the 
. Zreateit came near 4. 

4 After th.t this Captain Fohanzn(whonow had made hime!s 

cad ot-the Jews) had lixed their abode in the Hibitztion of 
reve an 2 the way to Ezypr, with thoughts of going down ro 
.131ad't here for fear of the Ch thdeans, Fae. revenge the 

remaincer of the Jews ; boch 
theſe Captains and many of ce People, or ſome of a!l forts of 
the People, (for it cannot be imagined that every particular Per- 
on care) made their Addreſs to the Prophet Feremiah,who pro- F 
bably was withchem cartied away by Ihmae! and reſcued by | 
this Captain. 
2 And ſaid unto Jeremiah the prophet, '| Let weil 95 | 
; beſeech thee our ſupplication be accepted before thee 56 Ky 
; E $1) þ} —& Abs 
b, and pray for us, unto the LORD thy God, ever 
for all this remnant, (for we have left bt a few of | 
many as thine eves do behold us c.) 

b Thefe Men (though wretched Hypocrites) yet come to the 
Prophet wit} great relpect and reverence, firlt defiring that he 
would allow them to make their requeſt to him ; probably the + 
evidence they had had to lately of his being aPropher of the Lord, 
by the fulfilling of all that he had foreto!d againſt both the Ciry 
and the Temple, might in ſome meaſure occaſion this. c Their 
requeſt was, that he would put up his Prayer to God tor the 
Remnant, tor now thete was but a linall Renmant of Jews lete, 
a iew of many. 

3 That the LORD thy God may ſhew us the way 
whereln we may walk, and the thing that we may 
0 4. 

d The thing they would have him to pray to God for, was Dj- 
re&tion, what they ſhoull do in this deſolate ſtate inro which 
God had brought them. What could be more Pious > A Practice 
tounded upon a Divine Precepr, and encouraged by a Promile, 
Prov. 3. 6. Acknowledge him in all thy ways, and he thall 4 


[ ' dire 
thy ſteps. Bat he maj*vell apply here what God had faid to 
their forefathers, Deut- 5. 29. when they had ſo freely promiſed 
their obedience to the Law of God. O that there were [uch an heart 
in-them, 8c. 

4 Then Jeremiah the Prophet ſaid unto them, I 
have heard you 4, behold I will pray unto the LORD 
your God, according to your words, and it ſha'l 
come to pals r2r whatſoever thing the LORD ſhall 
anſwer you, I will declare zr unto you, I will * KEEP * x Sam. ?, 
nothing back from you e. RO 

4 That 1;,I will do for you according as you deſire. 
w1ll be faithtul in giving you an account of what God ſhall reveal 
ro me to be his Will on your behalf. They called God Feremiab's 
God, here Ferzmizh calls him their Gol, both to mind them of 
God's relation to them, and their Duty towards him. 

5 Then they ſaid to Jeremiah, The LORD be a 
true and ftaithiul witneſs between us, if we do not 
according fo all things, for the which the LORD 
thy God ſhall ſend thee to us. 

6 Whether z# be good, or whether zt be evil f, we 
w1ll obey the voice of ths LORD our God to whom 


- SC _ . 
as ” 


® 
Ws. 


Fohanan retired with a further deſign to go into Egypr. 


4| We tend thee ; * that ic may be well with us, w 


NC x Chap. 


- 


13 Becauſe of the Chaldeans ; for they were afrai 
: o | £ £2 
of them, becauſe Iſhmael the ſon of Nethaniah had, _ _ i NOS co bao _ 8g each, 
flain Gedaliah the ſon of Ahikam, whom the king of! j;%;0 . <1 7 wes ng reg aw, 


+ S3< 2 


Babylon made governor in the land 7. 

n Here was one ſlain whom the Conqueror Nebuchadnez3ar 
had made Governour in the Land of Judah; and it was but rea- 
ſonable for them to think that Nebucadnezgar would take the Afﬀ- 
front done to himſelt, he being conſtituted Governour by him; 
and though Jhanzn had nothing to do in that Murder ,yet he did 
not know but that the King of Babylon being ignorant of any 
Parties amongſt the ſews, might Jook upon themall as guilty 
who were Jews, and revenge Gedaliahs Blood upon all the re- 
mainder of that Nation ; he therefore chuſeth them an Habitati- 
on for the preſent from whence they might 1n a ſhort rime go 
down into Egypr, which was Johanan's deſign, as we fhall read in 
the next Chapter. 


CHAP. XLIL 


Johanan and the People defire Jeremiah to enquire of God, promi- 
fing Obedience i his Will, 1, — 6. Jeremiah aſſureth them 
of Safety in Judea, 7,—12. ' and Deſtruftion in Egypt, 13,18, 


Reproveth their Hypocrifie and Obſtinacy, 1 9, 22, 
HE three following Chapters give us an account of what 


lies in a calling of God to witnels the finceriry of the heart of 
thoſe that ſwear,for a ſecurity tothoſe to whom the Oath is givea 
which alſo includeth a fecrer challenging God, to take Vengeance 
upon the perſons that give that ſecurity, if they ſhould not do ac- 
cordingly as they promiſe ; which ſpeaketh the Atheiſm of the 
heart of the falſe Swearer, tor did a Man beljeve that there is 1 
God, andthat the Divine Bzing is infinite in power, and a 
true and faithful Wicneſs, it were impoſlible that he ſhould 
challenge him to be revenged on him for notdoing what he ne- 
ver ſeriouſly intentls to do, which was the cafe of thele wicked 
Men. The thing they promiſed is a perfect Obedience ro God's 
Will, whether grateful or ingrateful to them, and they turther 
declare a Conviction, that if they did it, it ſhould be wel! wich 
them according to that, Deut. 5. 29. which ſheweth the might 
power of Luſts in unregenerate Hearts, and the mighty operatt- 
ons of the evil Spirit in the Children of Diſovedience, Eph. 2. 2- | 
that altho they be convinced that if they did obey the voice of $1: 
God, it would be well with them ; yer they will not do it in 
things which they have a power to do, 

7 Tf And it cameto paſs after ten days, chat the 


word of the LORD came unto Jeremiah -. 
h The word mentioned, Chap. 40. 1. To which all that we 
have met with from the beginning ot Cþ2p. 40. 1s but an Hiltori- 


| nappenedto Jo»anmnthe Son of Kareab, and thereſt after the 
flaughter of 1/1:{,and their going to dwell in the Habitation of 


cal Preface. 


A e—— 


8 Then uy 


Chap. XLII, 


* Plal. 
106, 46. 


$ Then called he Johanan the ſon of Kareah, and 
all the captains of the forces which were with him, 
and all the people from the leaſt even tothe great- 


eſt. 
o And ſid unto them, Thus ſaith the LORD, 


the God of Iſrael, unto whom ye ſent me to preſent 


your {upplication before him 7 — 

i The Prophet after ten days, a]l which time ſome (but up- 
on what ground I know not) think he ſpent 1n prayer, recelv- 
eth an anſwer from God, which he preleatly communicates to 
the Princes and People, with a Preface that containeth 10 17 ma- 
ny arguments to have induced this compliance with it. 1. Becaule 
it came trom the Lord. 2. From that God who as he was 1n Co- 
venant with Tſrael, ſo inall the courſe of his Providence had lo 
carried himſelf to them, as they had no juſt reaſon to ſulpect el- 
ther his kindneſs, or his power. 3. From their imploying of him 
to ſeek God upon their behalf. ; 

to If ye will ſtill abide in this land &, then will | 
build you and not pull you down, and I will plant 
yon, and not pluck yor up! : for I repent me of the 


evil that I havedoneunto you m. 

& Thar is, if you will not go upinto the Land of Egypt, as you 
are thinking, but abide where you are, or in any part of Judah, 
utder ſubjection of the King to Baby/on,into whoſe power 1 have 
given you. L Then will fee to your ſecurity, and proſperity, 
and wake you an happy People, The Happineſs and Proſperity of 
People is in ſcripture often ſer out under the notion of building, 
and planting, as on the contrary their miſery or deſtruction is 
expreſſed under the metaphorical notions of pulling down and 
plucking up. m For I am ſatisfied with the Puniſhment your 
Nation hath undergone, and as to the remainder, it they do not 
deſtroy themſelves by new diſobedience, I will change the courle 
of my Providence. 

11 Be not afraid of the king of Babylon,of whom 
ye are afraid : be not afraid of him, ſaith the LORD 
2: for I am with you to ſave you, and to deliver 


you from his hand o. | 
2 I know whom ye are afraid of ; you fear that the Ring © 

Babylon would come and utterly root you out, becauſe one of your 
Nation hath murdered his Vice-Roy-Gedatliah, ſuffer not your 
paſſion of fear to riſe too high inthis caſe, and to make you fly 
into Egypt. o For you ſhall have my preſence with you, to pre- 
ſerve and deliver you trom his power ; it ſhall not be in his pow- 
er todo you any harm, 


12 And I will * ſhew mercies unto you, that he 
may have mercy upon you p, and cauſe you to return 


to your own land 4. 
p We are beholden to God for all the pity, and compaſſion 


FEREMIAH 


Chap. XLI. 


which ye feared ſhall overtake you there, in the land 


of Egypt, and the famine whereof ye were afraid 


# In the general the Prophet threatneth them, that in Epytr 
they ſhould meet wich the very lame evils, the fear of which 
made them flee out of their own Country,the Sword and Famine. 
The Sword of Nebucadnezzar, who, after this, fully conquered 
Egypt 3 and a Famine through want of Bread ; tor altho' Egype 
was a fruitful Country, yet we know there was a Famine there, 
againſt which Foſeph provide!l, beſides that ſcarcity of Victua!s 
commonly tolloweth great Armies. Thoſe who ſhun dangers or 
think to ſhun them by a&ts of Dilobedience to God, ordinarily 
are ſuffered by God to take ſuch courſes as they fall into the ſame 
or worle dangers than what they have laboured to avoid, 


17 +So ſhall it be with allthe men thar ſer their 


evil, that I will bring upon them w. 

w Thole words that ſer their face to go, may reaſonably be in- 
terpreted as a Imitation of the univerſal Particle all; tor as 
eventually we can hardly conceive that every individual 
perſon that went into Eeypr did thus periſh, ſo it can hardly ke 
chought that the juſt God ſhould order an equal puniſhmene to 
choſe who were the Ring-leaders in this deſign, and thoſe who 
were forced or over-ruled by them, or perhaps knew not how 


to live when the reſt were gone; but, ſaith God, for thoſe who 
drive on this deſign, and go with their whole heart reſolvedly 
againſt the contrary Revelation of my Will, they ſhall none of 
them eſcape one or other of my ſore Judgments, Sword, Peſti. 
lence or Famine. They ſhall not be the Lot of one or two, but of 
all ſuch Perſons. 


18 For thus ſaith the LORD of hoſts, the God of 
Iſrael, As mine anger and my fury hath been poured 


forth upon the inhabitants of Jeruſalem ; fo ſhall 


ſhall ſee this place no more -. 

x If you would ſee your Doom ina Glaſs, look upon Jeruſg. 
lem, which according to my word I have dealt fo feverely with, 
that amongſt Men it would be called fury, though ia me it was 
but deliberate Juſtice, that my wrath declared againſt ir, (like Ji- 
quid things melted) diffuſed it ſelf into all parts of it : I will 
deal ſo with you ſoon after you ſhall have entered into that Land 
where you promiſe your ſelt ſo much eaſe, reſt, and proſpericy 
and asI threatned to make Feruſalem a Curſe, an Aſtoniſhment 
and a Reproach, Chap. 24. 9. and 29. 18. fo will I deal with you, 
and 1n this I will (faith God) deal worſe with you, that where- 


which we meet with from Men, God inclineth their Hearts, tho' 
we receivethe kindneſs from their hands. q. The mercy which 
God here promiſeth theſe Men, is that the king of Bubylon ſhould 
give them a liberty to go every one of them to his own Iobert- 
rances, for at preſent they were baniſhed by their own fear, 
from their own Houſes, though not from their own Coun- 
trey. 

13 But if ye ſay, we will notdwell in this land, 
neither obey the voice of the LORDour God 7. 


y Our Tranſlation a little darkens the ſence, tranſlating the Heb. 
Particle 91399 Bilvi neirber, which ſignifies no more than wor, or 
by nom-ans,Numb,14.16. I Sam. 1. 2. and 20. 26+ Heſ.13.4. and 
it is certain here is but. one thing ſpoken of, for the thing wherin 
they diſobeyed the Voice of the Lord, was not continuing 1n 
their own Land, but going i1:0 the land of Egypr. 


14 Saying, No, but we will go into the land of 
Egypt, where we ſhall ſee no war, nor hear the ſound 
of the trumpet, nor have hunger of bread, and there 


will we dwell /. YE 
{ The ſence of the words is obvious.they thought that their Lite 
inthe Land of Judah, would be ar beſt an uneaſte life, where they 
ſhould be continually alarm'd, with the noiſe of War, and tho' 
they could not fear the want of Bread in a Land that flowed with 
Milk and Honey, yet they alſo conſidered, that Egypt was a very 
fruitful Country, by the overflowing of Nilus, and the proſpeR 
of this made them quit that uſual fondneſs which People have of 
their Native Country. From whence appears that their great {in 
was unbelief, they would not take the Promiſe of God for a le- 
curity to them for a quiet and peaceable abode in Judah, but 
woul1 fancy noiſes of Drums, and Trumpets, and fear where no 
fear was ; the Prophet ſaw. they were reſolved, into Egypt they 
would go, to live a morecertain eafje Life (as they fancied) he 
therefore tells them, that if after their ſending him to Goc to 
inquire for them, and promiſing a compliance with his Will, and 
hearing now what that will was, this were their reſo]ution, he 
he had another word from God to them. 
15 (And now therefore hear the word of the 
Lord, ye remnant of Judah, Thus ſaith the LORD 
of hoſts, the God of Iſrael, if * ye wholly ſer your 


faces to citer into Egypt, and go to ſojourn 


there tr.) : 
t This Verſe is wholly prefatory to what followeth. If, ſaith 
God, all your mind beupon Egypr, and you be refolved thither 


you will go. 


as thoſe of your Brethren, that were carried from Feruſalem to 
Babylon, ſha]l ſome of them come back again after 60 Years, you 


ſhall ſee this place no more. There was this aggravation of the 
Fews fin, to whom God was now by his Prophet ſpeaking they 
had lately feen the words of the Lord ſpoken by the ſame Pro- 
phet verified, and yet would take no warning, but ran into the 
lame ſin of Unbelief. 

19 The LORD hath ſaid concerning you, O 


ye remnant of Judah, Go ye not into Egypt : 


ay y. 


People to liſten nnto him, and to believe and obey whar he ſaid, 
repeats again the ſame thing which he had ſaid before, affuring 
them that it was the Lord commanded him to ſay this to them. 
Criticks note the word which we tranſlate admoniſh, in this 
form, ſ1gnifteth to admonihh before Witneſſes. 


ye ſent me unto the LORD your God, ſaying, Pray; 


# ſhall tollow cloſe after you there in Egypt, and f Heb. 
there ye ſhall die z. - cleauy 
You, 


taces to go into Egypt to ſojourn there, they ſhall die fo ſhall a 
by the ſword, by the famine, and by the Peſtilence, rhe men 6; 


and * none of them ſhall remain, or eſcape from the *SeeChay, 
44. 14, 20, 


'my fury be* poured forth upon you when you ſhall * Chap; 
enter into Egypt: and * yeſhall be an execration,and 7. 20. 
an aſtoniſhment, and a curſe and a reproach, and ye * ect 


I 3. 


know certainly that I have + admoniſhed you EIS + eb 


: F SB . teflifed a 
y The good Prophet knowing how much it concerned this _ 2h 


iſed deceit 


that the LORD our God ſhall ſay, ſo declare unto Souls. 


us, and we will doit a. 

2 Or, you have uſed deceit, either towards God, dealing falſly 
with him, calling him to be a witneſs to your ſincerity in what 
you never intended any fincerity in, or towards me ; ſending me 
to enquire of God for you, and promiſigg to do according to 
what I ſhould reveal to you from God as his Will, whenas you 
never intended it; or towards your own Souls, as every finner 
doth but deceive his own Soul. You made a pretence of what 
was not in your hearts. a When you ſent me to pray God's di- 
rection for you, and made me ſuch a firm promiſe to d9 whatto- 
ever I ſhould reveal toyou from God as his will in this caſe. 

21 And owl have this day declared :t to you 6, 
Burt yet have not obeyed the voice of the LORD your 
God, nor any rhing tor the which he hath ſent me 


unto you c. 

b I have been faithful to you, I went according to your defire 
to enquire of God tor you, I had his Will revealed to me in your 
caſe, and now TI have as faithfully rold you what it is, c But ye 
have not obeyed, How did Jeremiah know this, for they had not 
yet declared their Minds to him? He had either learned it from 
their Diſcourſes during the ten Days which God had made him 
ro wait tor the Revelation, or he had learned it from ſome con- 
temptuous Behaviour of them when he delivered it, or (which is 
molt probable) God had aforehand told it co him, 

22 Now 


16 Then it ſhall come to paſs, that the ſword 


for us unto the LORD our God,and accordiug to all againſt jur Fe 


ſh is i 
WY 
thug 


20 For || ye diſſembled in your hearts z, when, PREP = 
, bre 


}1-<d fo A 
WH xs: 5 OIA4 
Ly 2.53 


Lg 
$5 =>; Ly 988 
ED, 
IAN 


— 
g (> 
ny OR INS 
#2 on 
a-.. $o 0} - 
- "4 = . 


Chap. RLUL 


i Or,t9 89 to ſojourn 4. 


10 [cjourn. 


' 22 Now therefore know certainly, that ye ſhall 
die by the ſword, by the famine, and by the peſti- 
lence, in the place whither ye delire || to go, ad 


4 The Prophet aſcertaineth that doom unto them, which Ver. 
14, 15, 16.he had threatned them with in caſe they were refoived 
co go into Egypt; we muſt expect nothing but utmoſt dilap- 
pointments upon ations done 1n diſobedience to the revealed 
Willof God : Yon thinkto avoid Death by going thither for a 
little time to ſojourn. but you ſhall die there, and thac by thoſe 
very Deaths which by going thither you ſeek toayoid, +» 


CHAP. XLIHI. 


Johanan and the Commanders diſcredit Jeremiah's Prophecy,1, —— 
3, and with the People, carry him and Baruch into Egypt, 4, 
—7, He Propheſyeth by a Type, the Conqueſt of Egypt by 
the Babylonians, 8, —— 13- 


I ND it cameto paſs, th2t when Jeremiah had 
made an.end of ſpeaking toall the people all 
the words of the LORD their God 4, for which the 


LORD their God had ſeat him to them ever all theſe 
words. 

4 The H.brew word, which we tranſlate words, ſignifieth alſo 
things. The Prophet is very exact in letting us know that he had 
trom the Lord what hedelivered to them, he therefore twice re- 
peats it, the words of the Lord their Grd, and tor which the Lord 
had ſent bim to them, not that the Prophets always limited them. 
ſelves to thole 1{yllabical words they had revealed to them, but 
to the matter only of the Revelaion; which every Miniſter of 
the Goſpel is ſtil] bound to do, delivering the People only whar 
they have received from the Lord, as 1 Cor. 1:. 23. as to the mat- 
ter and ſubſtance of what they deliver, though they cloath it 


FEREMIAH 


6 Even men, and women, and. children, and the 
kings daughters g, and every perſon that Nebuzara- 
dan the captain of the Guard had left with Gedaliah 
the ſon of Ahikam, the ſon of Shanhan ; aud Jere- 
miah the Prophet, and Baruch the ſon of Neri2t. 

g Of che King's D-ughters here mertioned, ſee Chan. 41. 10. 


even to * Tahpanhes :. 

h Egypt at this time, though it was humbled by tlie ins of 
Babylon, by an inroad he had made into ir, of which we read, 
2 Kings 24.7. yet it was a diſtiact Kingdom, and being nezr to 
Canaan, the Fews oftea fied thither tor lanctuary, and borrowed 
aſſiſtance againſt their Enemies trom them. Ot this City we read 
little but in Holy Writ, 1Kjrgs 11. 19. weread of a Queen of 
Ezypt called Tahpenes, in honour to whom probably this City was 
builded, after whoſe name this City was called, of which the 
Scripture ſaith nothing, but 1nthis Prophecy, Chap. 2. 16. in this 
Chapter,and Chap.44. and 46. 14. it appears by Y-r 9 that it,was 
at this time the place where the King of Egypt male his Reſidence 
or at leaſt had a Palace, Thither thele Captains and the J-ws came, 
forcing Jeremiah and Baruch along with ther. 


8 T Thenoame the word of the LOAD to Jere- 
miah in Tahpanhes, ſaying, 

9 Take great ſtones in thy hand, and hid? then 
tn the clay in the brick-kila, which 7x ar the entry 
of Pharaoh's houſe, in Tahpanhes, in the ſight of the 
men of Judah &. 

k God commandeth the Prophet to take theſe $S ones, and to 
place them in the Clay, 8c. for a fign of what we ſhail meer with 
expounded in the next Verſe ; it is piain from hence that the King 
of Egypt, called Pharaoh, either Refided, or at leaſt had a Royal 
Palace in Tuhpanhes, Ferem-4h is directed to fix thele Stones at the 


with words and phraſes of their own. 

2 Then ſpake Azariah the ſon of Hoſhaiah, and | 
Johanan the ton of Kareah, and all the proud men b, 
ſaying unto Jeremiah, Thou ſpeakeſt falſely : the 
LORD our God hath not ſent thee to ſay, Go not 


into Egypt to ſojourn there c. 

b Ot Fohanan we have before heard, but not of AF32riah, un- 
leſs under the name of Fexaniah, Chap. 42. 1. but that is incer- 
tain, Theſe Men are called proud Hen, eicher becaule they were 
the great Men, or becauſe their conceit of themſelves led them into 
this fatalerror. Pride is nothing elſe but a Man's Mind ſwellin- 
in an Opinion of himſelt, and always takes its rile from ſome 
higher ground the perton poſlefled of ic thinks he ſtands upon, 
anda very litele hillock will ſerve the turn, thoſe who have no- 
thing elle of pretence will make a filk Coat, or a piece of filver 
Lace ſerve the turn. One Mans Spirit ſwells upon account of his 
Delceat, another upon account of his Riches, a third upon the 
account of his Learning,Parts, andWit,a fourth upon the account 
of his or her Beauty ; thele Men are called proud Men, poſſibly 
upon account of their greatneſs, they were Caprains, and the 
Chiet of the Fews now left 3 but chiefly upon account of the 
good Opinion they had of their own Reaſon and Wit, by which 
they judged they knew better how to guide themſelves for their 
own lecurity, than Feremiah could teach them ; which Pride or 
good Opinion Men have of themlelves, is a great root of Dilobe- 
dierice, all Men fin either through paſſion or pride,or both, either 
co gratitie their ſenſitive Appetite, or their rational appetite, as it is 
in Man fince the Fall. c Becauſe it had been down right Atheiſm 
and a diſclaiming of God, to have faid, They knew better what 
to do, than God could tell them,they only tell the Prophet God 
had not ſent him. As in theſe times Hypocrites, whoſe Luſt will 
not allow them to do the will of God, think to ſecure themſelves 
by denying that to be the will of God, and finding out other ſen- 
ces to put upon Scripture than are according to truth. 


3 But Baruch the fon of Neriah ſetteth thee on 
againſt us, for to deliver usinto the hand of the Chal- 
deans, that they might put us to death, and carry us 
away captives into Babylon 4. 

d Baruch was but a Clerk or Secretary to Feremiah, ſo not ve - 
ry probable to over-rule the Prophet to a talfifying of his truſt, 
and a betraying ot his Country-men into the hand of their Ene- 
mies ; but ſo fond are wicked Men of their Luſts, that they will 
fay any thing1n juſtihcation of them, rather thandeny them- 
ſelves in them, and become obedient to the will of God. 


4 So Johanan the ſon of Kareah and all the cap- 
tains of the forces, and all the people obeyed not 
the voice of the LORD, to dwell in the land of Ju- 
dah e. 

e Thats, they reſolved not to obey the Meſſage God had ſent 
ehem by Feremiah, 

5 But Johanan the ſon of Kareah, and all the cap» 
talns of the forces, took all the remnant of Judah that 
were returned from all nations whither they had 
been driven, to dwell in the land of Judah #. 

f This relolution they preſently put in practice. Though it is 
certain that Jeremiah and Baruch were not willing to go along 
with them, and probably that many of the People were not w il- 
ling, yet tnele rebellious Captains forced them all along with 


them, ſo as many of them were now a kind of Priſoners to their 
own Country-men. 


entrance into this Palace. This hach male Interpreters dividel 
\bout the true ſence of the word wh'ch is here tranſlated a Bricke 
vi1n. That the word lo ſignifies is out of doubr, and :s lo tiantla- 
ed, 2 Siam. 12. 31. All that troubleth lome, is, that they fancy 
:here ſhould not be a Brick-hiln fo near the Kings Palice; but 
poſſibly thoſe Learned Men 49 not enough conſider the ditference 
of times and places. Great Princes So2s and Daughters, do not 
11e in our Ape to keep Sheep, which yet we know Facyb's Sons 

and Laban's Daughters did ; the Grandure of Princes v 25 not 19 
2reat, bur it might admit of as plain a thing as this. Ocners lag 
the Palaces of their Princes were very vaſt,ſo that the Ecick-kiln 
might be ata diſtance from the entry into the Dwelling hole, 
tho' jt was at theentry of the place calted by the Name © tne 
Palace. Ochers think it might be an Houle uſed not for maktrg 
"2ut poliſhing Earthen Ware. But the greateſt offenliven<ts oj 
ſuch Kilns with us, is from the Smoke, of which they had none, 
drying their Bricks inthe Sun. Bar it {5a nicety not worth {5 

many gueſſes, 


10 And ſay unto them, Thus ſzith the LORD of 
hoſts the God of Iſrael, Behold, I will ſend and take 


Nebuchadrezzar the king of Babylon * my fervant /, 
and w1ll ſet his throne upon theſe ones that I have 
hid 7, and he ſhall ſpread his royal pavilion over 
chem. 

1 Now God expounds his meaning in his former Command,he 
ordered Feremiah to take Stones and hide them in a place near the 
King of Egypr's Palace ; now he tells them tht this was for a 
ſign that N:buchadnezqar ſhould tet his Thi one, and fpread his Pa- 
vilion in that place. This Nebuchadn-73.2r God calls his Servant; 
becauſe he was to obey him in what he ſhould do, though he 
intended not ſo. Thus Aſſjria is called the Kod of his anger, 11a, 
10. 5. and Nebuchadnez2ar is fo called, Chap. 25. 9. and 27. 6: 
m God owneth the Stones to be laid by himleif, becauſe they 
were laid at his Command. 


Egypt, and deliver * ſuch as are for death to death, 


ſuch 25 are for captivity to captivity, and ſuch .z: 


' are for the ſword to the ſword 7. 


n He prophefieth the certain ruine of the Eg3tti27s bv the King 
of Babylon, ſome of whom the King of B.þy/on ſhould {lay, 0- 
thers of them. he ſhould lead away into Captivity as Pritoners ct 
War. See the like Phrales, Chap. 15. 2. 

12 And I will kindle a fire in the houſes of the 


gods of Egypt o, and he {hall burn them, and carr, 


them away captives p, and he hall array himfelt 
with the land of Egypt 9, as a ſhepherd putteth on 
his garments 7, and he ſhall go torth trom Laence 17 
peace 5. oo TD 
o God by his Prophet declares a particular hatred tori 10:3 
of Ezypr, that he would burn up their Temples, 2. . Dy 22 hands 
of Nebuchadnez3ar. p He ſhall carry away both the idols, and 
the Inhabitants of Ezypr Captives. 9. That Is with tne >Pous and 
Plunder of the Land of Egytt, the King of Babtun ihall clot 
his Army. 7 Our unacquaintednets with che Faſhions of Shepiieras 


Vol. 1I, 


| 


cauſeth divers gueſles ac the ſence of this Parele ; fnat kr op te 
beſt Interpreters fiX in as the beſt is, Taat 25 a Shepherd that 
while he hath been attending kis Flocks, goes tn any K2g5, and is 
careleſs ot his Clothes, but when he goes home at Night he pits 
on his Coat; fo the Bab;liniſh Soldlers when they have hothed 
cheir Work in the Conquett of Rn ſka}! go koie clo:hed - 

lf! the 


-4 


1t And when he cometh, he ſhall ſmite the land of , 


* 


* See 


E>ek.25, 


« 


Chap. LH, 


7 So they came 1ato the lind of Egypt h, for they * Lia: 30.4. 


obeyed not the voice of the LORD, this came they _ 
s TL.4s5s 


5 


-- 
A. - I 
dn <a> 
_—_— " => 
3 A AS 
. ” 


1 


_—_— 
Ly 
<a v —_—_ 
" _— —— — = W 


LP” As 27 . . 
Me Yexk 
— - « 

you. 


Chap. ALIV. 


* 46 2 I Aloe 


_ 4 __ 
a 
— -  — 


Do 4 = - 


Oe = _ 


_- 
"——_— 


_ © — 


Ge LS YO 


FERE 


the berter Nabits of the Ezyptians. { And the Armies ſhell 


go home in Peace, as Corguerors not foiled in their under-| of hoſts, the God of Ifracl, Wherefore commit ye 


M 1 4 H. 


7 Thcreforc now thus ſaith the LORD, the God 


taking. '* oreat evil aoginſt 3p ' 
; © Be | this oreat evil azainſt your ſouls ? to cnt off from you 
13 He. break alſo + the imavzes of || Bethſhe-| 777 etc 11 ag OP p69 ous þ 
bs EJ , y 3 -] " d h 
LESS. is che find of Fovir |: and the hou | Man and woman, child and ſuckling -Þ out of Judan, 
149 1d B10 25 HI s BAK 01 > 4 CG -» - 
>: o0 the Yods of the Fay Eo m1 he burn with{52 teave you none to remain bh. | 
EDIT $902 SOR ES PAany an uo Dura % hb Whar prudence can guide you to do ſuch aQionsas theſe, by 
IiVe 7c. which you cannot hurt God, but your ſelves on] 


t Berb fiemeſh Gxnifies rhe houſe of rhe Sun, and it 1sallo the 
* Y2Imeofa City in Eoypr 34o moit take it here as the Name »f a 
City, which had its Name from a tamous Temple builded 1n it to 
te honour of tte Sun. This Idol is called On, Ger. 41. 45- BY 
this it appears, tha tthe Fovrtians, as well as other Pagans, paid 
Divine Aloration to the Creature. u Go4 threatens not only the 
Eeftration of the Lolatrous Temple, bur the Houles of the Inhabi- 
tants of E2ypt, BY the King of Bai;lon ; from whence thel:: J-ws, 
| have believed, mizht have underſtood, that they 


wind tot | 
word nut have the {ſecurity whici they promited themieives 11 
the Lani ol Ezyp:, 


CIH A P. XIV, 


- P ' 7 oO - 5 ood ſ aan . 
Jeremiah repro{- nterb £0 the People in Egypt, the former Sins and 


Pacithnen of Judah, 8, -— 10. He propheſycth their Deſtru- 
ion in Eryrt, 11, I4. Ther Objt:nacy, I ;, o— I9, 
Tioreatzed, 20, -— 28» Fer 4 Sign, the Deſiruction of Egypt 
& foreild, 29, —— 30. 

; "*X— HE word which came to Jeremiah concerning 


3 allthe Jews, which dwellin the land of E- 
E79ta, which dwell at Migdol, and at Tahpanhes, 
arNoph, and 1a the country of Pathros, ſay- 


' 


{61 


3 
*. 


*J 
: 
ca 


I:j7 Ce 

#£ Th Patience and Goodneſs of God to this Remnant of his 
anc'e:t People is very remarkable ; he leaveth them noteven 1n 
cher Rebellion, but fendern J-remiah whom he had before fent 
to prevent their going into this Idolatrous Country, to try If 1n 
F:yp tiicy would be brought to a berter mtuzd. bt ſhould ſeem, 
£i1at the generality of the Jews tat went into Egype had planted 
thermielves at theſe four paces. Ot Migdel weread Exod. 14.2. 
2nd Namb. 53.7. trom wich places we may learn, it was a City 
or Town upon the Eorders of the Red Sea, We ithall read of it 
again, Chap 46.14. It was a place which might have minded 
them better of their Duty and Ovligationsto God, for upon their 
remova! tron treice, God divided the Red Sex for tiieir forefe- 
thers. Neph- ws another Cri:y 1n Egyfr, of which we read, [fz, 
19: 13. Cha% 2. 16.and 46. 14. Fzeks 30. 13, 16. The Gre-ks and 
Latins call it Memphis; it is thoughtto be chat City, which is now 
e2iled Cairo. Pathres wasa Region or Province ; fome think 11 
&-rived its Name from Parbruſim the Son of Mizram, Gen. 10. I4. 
Ir {5 the lame(as lome think) whici 15 fince called Thebats. 


2 Thus ſaith the LORT of hoſts, the God of 
321, Yehave ſeen all the evil that I have brought. 


apon ſerofalem, and upon all the cities of Judah 3 
and bchold, this day, they are a delolation, and no 


ki 


RES. = T9 
112.4408 {t\ 


Weller there c. 

i ete;reth to the late deſtruCtion of it by the King of Ba- 
- this Remnant of the People, was a Brand pluckt out of 
16, a:d cheir Eyes had been Witneſles to the Deſolations 


, » > - . 68 ES& ab 
tat Goy 40 WLrougnt 


: 
T T7 
1 4 
4 2 
+ _ 


[—_ 


3 Becauſe of their wickedneſs which they have 
;ommitted to provoke me to anger, in that they 
vent to bur incenſe, 2d to ſerve other Gods 4, 
whom they Knew BOT, 7ecrrier taey, You, NOt your 
FaLncrs C. : 0 ; 

is they were eve-witneſſes to the effect, fo it was nothing bur 
o'r unbelict that made them ftrangers to the caule ; tor god 
1 4:4 Prophets had told them that the great moving cauſe was 
{ner paving a Divine Homage to Idols: e The ftn of which 1s 
-rravated trom this, that chey were as much ſtrangers to the 
Lols, as to the People with whom they joyned in the worſhip 
of them, neither they nor any of their Fachers having bad any 

«perimental knowledge of what they had done, or could do for 
tuck as adored them. 

4 Howbeit * I ſentunto you all my ſervants the} 
prophets, riling early and ſending tem, faying, Oh 
d9 not this abominable thing that I hate. 

5s Eut they hearkened nor, nor inclined their ear 
0 turn from their wickedaels, to burn no incenſe 
111to other gods f. ; 

f Tile two Verſes contain another aggravation of this Peo- 
pics fin, viz. That they did this again{t 11ght, and admonitions 
ts the contrary. God by. his Prophets Jet them know that this 
25 an abominable thing, a thing which he hated ; and chat not 
with an orcinary degree of hatred, yer they would not hear, fo 

0 yield Obedience to God, but went on intneir Idoſatries. 

5 Wherefore * my fury and my anger was poured 
forth, and was kindled in the cities of Judah, and in 
the ſtreets of Jeruſalem, and they are waſted ard 
deſolate as atthis day g. = 

g For theſe very Reaſons, their Idolatry, and contempt of my 
Word by my Prophet, the very fins you are now committing, I 
have given Fudah and ' Ferufalem into the hand of the King of 
Babylon, ang it is (asyou at this Day lee it ) waſte and delo- 
? : 
adle, 


- 


LAS 
<4 3 v 


| 
[ 


of rhoſe few, fo as there ſhall be neither Man, nor Woman, nor 
Child, nor Suckling remaining of all the Fews. 


8 In that ye provoke me unto wrath with the 
works of your hands z, burning incenſe unto other 
g0ds 1a the land of Egypt whither ye be gone to 
dwell, that ye might cut your ſelves off, and that ye 
mighr he a curſe, and a reproach amoag(t all the na- 
10s of the earth. &. 

i Idols are uſually thus defamed ; And indeed nothing can ar- 
gue agreater ſtupidity than for any to pay an Homage (confelled- 
ly due to the fupream Being) to what is the Work of Mens hands, 
and therefore muſt be made by our Superiour to that order of 
Beings 1n which Idols are. Bu: how doth the Prophet ſay, that 
they worſhipped the Works of Mens hands ? For it is apparent 
from, Ver. 17. that they paid this Homage to the Queen of Heaven, 
which is not the Work of Mens Hands, Sol. It was before Images 
which are but the Works of Mens Hands. And this certainly was 


the Idolatry of the generality of the Heathens, they worſhipped 


an unknown Divine Being betore a Creature, either as repreſent - 
ing it, or rather putting them in mind of it. & The termz. ar doth 
not denote the Idolaters end of intention, for none ever did any 


act intentionally or to ruine themſelves ; it only ſignifies the end 
of their Work, that their utter ruine would be the certain 
conlequent of their work. 


o Have ye forgotten the wickedneſs of your fa- + Heb: 
thers, and the wickedneſs of the kings of Judah,andwicked- 


1 wicked- 7ffes or 
puniſhments 


the wickedneſs of their wives, and your ow! 
nels, and the wickedneſs of your wives, which they 
have committed in the land of Judah, and in the 
I[treets of Jeruſalem / * 

| God accounteth Men and Women to have forgotten that,the 
light and refle&ion upon which hath made no ſuch impreſſion up- 
on them, as to produce a practice ſuttable to thoſe notices, ac- 
cording to the conduct of a reaſonable Soul ; which teacheth 
every Man, having notice of a great evil brought upon a Man by 
luch or ſuch Practices, to avoid running into the like danger. It 
was the aggravation of this Peoples fins, that they were com» 
mitted in the Holy Land, and in a City which God had more ta- 
voured than any other place. To have done theſe things in any 
place had been guilt enough, but more to do it in the Land of Fu- 
dab, and in the Streets of Jeruſalem. 


10 They are not - humbled evez to this day, nei- 


ther havethey feared , nor walked in my law, nor 


in my ſtatutes that I ſer before you, and before your 


fathers. 

m Neither they nor you are humbled; for the Prophets pal- 
ſing from the ſecond perſon to the third, and by and by from the 
third Perſon again to the ſecond, let us know, that he intendeth 
what he ſpake as well to them ro whom he ſpake. as of them 
concerning whom he ſpeaks ; n from whence wealto learn, That 
Reformation and Odedience 1s the fiaſt-fruits of Contr71107, or true 
Humiliation. God accounteth thoſe not humbled, but hardened, 
who are not reformed.and become obedient to his Will, let theic 


not make him quit his relation to Iſrael, but he was and ſtill 
would approve himſelf the God of thoſe who were his true Iſrael. 
p The meaning 1s, my ful] defign againſt you is to bring Evil up- 
on you. This 1s expreſſed under che notion of ſetting his face, and 


Amos 9. 4. ſetting his eyes againit them, 
12 AndI will take the remnant of Judah that have 


ſet their faces to go into the land of Egypt to ſojourn 
there, and they ſhall be conſumed, ard fall in the 
land of Egypt, they ſhall eve» be conſumed by the 
ſword, azd by the famine ; they ſhall die from the 
leaſt even to the greateſt by the ſword, and by the 
famine : and they ſhall be an execration, 2d an aſto- 
niſhmeat, and a curſe, and a reproach 9. 


g This js no more than the Prophec had told theſe very Per- 


ſons betore they went into Egypt, Chap. 42+ 16, 17, Here he dou- 
bleth his words for the confirmation of the truth of them to them, 
now that they were there. 


13 For] will puniſh them that dwell in the land of 
Egypt, as I have puniſhed Jeruſalem, by the ſivord, 
by the famine, and by the peltilence. 

t 450 


Chap. XLIV. 


T Heb. 
Out of the 
onJy? You are now ,,;17 of 
but a tew of many; Whar love have you for your Country, 13 Judah. 
eaking courſes which will certainly tend to rhe utter extirpation 


Heb. 


riie. 


pretended Artritzon, Contrjtzon, or Kumiliation be in outward ap- *Xum 
pearance what it w1ll. 12. $ 
11 © Therefore thus faith the L ORD of hoſts, ,, __ 4 yt 
the God of Iſrael -, Behold 1 will ſet my face a-,,, Chap. frame « 
gainſt you for evil, and to cut of all Judah. 21. 10. heavens 
o Theſe Names are frequently given to God in threatning Pro- * Chaz 
phecies, partly to let this People know that God is able to make 7. 18. 
good his word, and to bring the threatned Evils upon them ; and + Heb 
partly to let them know that the dealing thus with them would bread. 


o EE. 5 CO: o #; 
5, RO Ls _ 
EDT 2.2 bands 
; £ Fett, - 
FE Cu 
ey 
3 


= Chap. XLIV: 
” x4 So that none of the remnant of Judah, which 
are gone into the land of Egypt to ſojourn there,ſhall 
eſcape or remain, that they ſhould return 1nto the 


land of Judah, to the which they | have a detire to 
return, to dwell there : for none ſhall return but 


ſich as ſhall eſcape. | 

r There is a great variety in the reading of the Words, Ver. 14. 
ſome reading, befides ſuch as have a deftre to return. thers, Al- 
though they have a defire to retury. Others, For they have 4 deſire 
70 return. The words ſeem to hint the theſe Fews went 1nto 
the Land of Egypt, not with a deſign to live there always, but to 
ſay for a while till the heat of the Cha/deans 1n enquiring after the 
Blood of Gedaliah ſhould be over, then thinking to return 1nto 
their own Country; which one would think were true, confider- 
ing it not only as their native Soi], buta]ſoa place where was now 
room enough, and they might live in much greater plenty than 
they could in Egypt. The only difficulty is in the laſt Words, 
compared with what in the ſame Verſe went before ; 1t 15 laid in 
the clofe, none ſhall return but juch as ſhall eſcape. Burt Reaſon will 
guide us to interpret the firſt None in a reſtrained ſence, 2. e. 
none of thoſe who have been the Authors of this Counſel and Re- 
bellion againſt God, and who went into Egypt willingly ; for 
WW: none can think that God involved Feremiah and Baruch who were 

Wy in Egypt (at leaſt the firſt of them) in the ſame puniſhment, with 

which he puniſhed the Rebellious Fews. Or none of thoſe who 
in Egypt have burnt incenſe to Idols, and defiled themſelves with 
the Idolatry of Egypt, but there ſhall ſome eſcape, ſuch as have 
been forced into E2ypt againſt their Wills 3 and ſuch as being fo 
pe, forced when they came here did not fallin with the Idolatry of 

Fh the Egyptians ; (forwe may gather from the next Verle, that all 
| of them did not ) theſe Men ſhall again return into the Land of 
Fudth. This to me ſeemeth the taireſt and moſt probable ſence 
of the Words. 


bro BY 15 © Then all the Men which knew that their 
dS Wives had burnt incenſe to other Gods, and all the 
OT Women that ſtood by, a great multitude, even all the 
ER People that dwelt in the Land of Egypt, in Pathros, 


> OO anſwered Jeremiah, ſaying t, 

EY; { The burning of Incenſe was a Religious Rite, which God had 
_ appointed the Jews asa piece of Divine Homage to be paid to him 
alone, and by an ordinary figure is put for Worſhip. So as burn- 
ing Incenſe to other Gods, is the ſame with worſhipping other Gods, 
2 It ſhould ſeem that all rhe Jews had not been thus far guilty,and 
thoſe that did it were moſtly Women, or at leaſt they were the 
Leaders in this Idolatry , and one would think the Phraſe imply- 
eth, that thoſe who were thus culpable did it with ſome privacy, 
ſo as all their Husbands did not know of it; but thoſe that did 
were as bad as their Wives, conniving at them, and juſtifying 
chem in their Idolatry, and joyning with them in the tollowing 
peremptory anſwer to, and contempt of the Prophet. 


16 As for the word which thou haſt ſpoken unto 
us in the Name of the LORD, we will not hearken 


unto thee x; 

u We read Chap. 43. 5. Jobanan and the reſt only denied that 
Gol had ſpoken ſuch things, and told J:remiah, he had ſpoken 
falfly ; but now theſe Women and Men rite higher ; they acknow- 
ledge Jeremiah had ſpoken tothem in the Name of the Lord, but 
tell him in plain and dire& terms they would not obey it. And in- 
deed this is in the hearts ofall finners that are ruled by their Luſts; 
though they will ſometimes pretend,that what they hear is not the 
Will of God, but ſpoken our of Malice and Prejudice ; yet they 
are pre-reſolived they will not do ir, let their Underſtandings be 
never ſo well informed. 


+ Heb. 
Lift 
their ſouls. 


” *Num.3o. 17 But we willcertainly do * whatſoever thing go- 
12. Se eth forth out of our own mouth w, to burn incenſe 


w Here 15the root of all finners diſobedience, their reſo;ution 
to pleaſe and humour themſelves, not knowing how in any thing 
to deny themlelves ; hence it is that denying our ſelves is by Chriſt 
mag? the frit Law or Condition of his Diſciples. x By the Queen 
of Heaven ſome here urdecftand the Sun, which notion is tayoured 
from the words being of the Feminine Gender, which fignifieth 
the Sun in Heb+ others reading it not the Queen, but the frame of 
heaven ; by it underſtanding the Sun, Moon and Stars. y Drink: 
offerings were a Divine Homage which God had commanded to be 
paid to him, Lev. 23. 13. Numb. 6.17. + Their Arguments for 
it were, 1. Cuſtom and Antiquity, they and their Fathers had 
uſed to do it. 2. The Example of their Kings and Princes. 
# 3- The Plenty and Proſperity they had while they did ſo; as 
if their Idolatry had been the cauſe of it. 


19 Bat ſince we left off to burn incenſe to the 
queen ot Heaven, and to pour out drink-offerings 
unto her, we have wanted all things, and have been 
conſumed by the ſword and by the famine b. 

19 * And when we burnt incenſe to the queen of 
Heaven, and poured out drink-offerings unto her, 
dit we make her cakes to worſhip her, and pour out 
crink-offerings unto her without our || Men ? 

Os . 


B< #7: 75* untothe ||* Queen of Heaven , and to pour out 
; l am? of Arink-offerings unto her, as we have done y, we and 
” hexven= Our Fathers, our Kings and our Princes, in the Cities | 
- * Chap. of Judah, and in the Streets of Jeruſalem z : for 
7: _ then had we plenty of -Þ Victuals, and were well, 
i T Hed. "nd ſaw no evil a. 

% bread. 


* * Chap. 
» | 2 7» 18, 


Or, H1s- 
bands. 


SEREMIAH 


leſs we by it mean what is moſt ancient ; as al 


6 Their laſt Argument is drawn fron! the evils that Had befa!ler 
them fince they had lefe worſhipping the Sun, Moon and Stars - 
thus ſtrangely making their omitfion of that, the cauſe of the ſuf- 
ferings, their tormer doing of which was indeed the true cauſe. 
They had loft their Husbands in the Stege, and in Battels, and had 
luffered Famine and Hunger; and all becauſe they had burnt In- 
cenſe to other Gods, they interpret theſe Providences 25 a Paniſh- 
ment of them for not doing it as they had formerly v(eq 0 do. So 
bad Interpreters are thoſe of God's Providences, yho indulge 
their Luſts in oppoſition to God's Law. : 


20 © Then Jeremiah faid unto all the people, to 
the men, and to the women, and to all the people 
which had given him hat anſwer, ſaying, 


21 The incenſe that ye burnt in the Cities of ſu- 
dah, and in the ſtreets of Jeruſalem, yeand your fa- 
thers, your kings and your princes; and the people 
of the land, did not the LORD remember them. and 
came it zot into his mind ? 


22 Sothat the LORD could no longer bear, be- 
cauſe of the evil of your doirigs, ad becauſe of the 
abominations which ye have committed ; therefors 
is your land a deſolation, and an aſtoniſhment, and 2 
curſe without an inhabitant as at this day. * 


2.3 Becauſe you have burnt incenſe, and becauſe ye 
have ſinned againſt the LORD, and have no: obeyed 
the voice of the LORD, nor walked in his law. nor 
in his ſtatutes, nor 1n his teſtimonies, therefore this 
evil 1s happened unto you, as at this day c? 


c There 1s in theſe Verſes nothing of difficulty, nor any new 
Phraſes to be opened. That which is obſervable is, that thoysn: 
the Prophet was but one againſt many, yer he fearerh no: the:r 
Faces : The ſubſtance of what he ſaith is this; That they inter- 
preted God's Voice in his Providences towacd their Country di- 
rely contrary tothe true ſence of it. They concluded that their 
omiſſion of late to burn Incenſe to the Sun, Moon and Stars was 
the cauſe why it was ſo ill with them ;as if theſe were animate Be- 
ings, and the ſupreme Being, whereas they were but Creatures. 
Or as if it were the Will of the ſupreme Being to be 2dored 2nd 
worſhipped in them, or before Statues and Images repreſented by 
them, whereas the Will of God was direly contrary, and as he 
in the ſecond Commandment had forbidden any tuck Worſkip,be+ 
cauſe he was a jealous God, fo he had for the breach of that Con;- 
mandment by their burning Incenle to theſe Creatures, burned up 
their Houſes and Temple, and brought their Nation into that mi- 
ſery into which they were come : From whence may be ob/erved 
how ill an Argument for any Religious Tory Antiquity is, un- 
Ir meat o, that Preſcrittion 
in that which is falſe in the worſhip of God, juſtifieth none. Nor 
is it a good concluſion that thoſe who lived neareſt to the primi- 
tive Inſtitution are molt likely to have done beſt, as having the 
beſt means to know what is truly primitive. Idolatry was 25 01d 
as Laban, and the worlt of Idolatry (offering Children to Molzcb) 
was older than the Levitica! Law, if not as 01d as Serug. In matters 
of Worſhip the Word ot God is a ſufficierit Rule ; we need not 
plead antiquity nor the pradice of our Fathers. Error is not capable 
of being juſtihed by Tradicion or Preſcription. i 
24 Moreover, Jeremiah faid to all the people, and 
to all the women, Hear the word of the LORD, 3!l 
Judah that are 1a the land of Egyyr 4, 

4 That is, all you Men and Women chat belong to Fudah, 2nd 
are now come to inhabit in the Land of Ezypr. : 


25 Thus ſaith the LORD of Hoſts, the God of 
Ifrael, ſaying, * Ye and your wives have both ſ; poken * Ver. 2 5, 
with your mouths, and fulfilled with your hand, ſay- &c.. | 
ing, We will ſurely perform our vows e that we have 
vowed, to burn incenſe to the queen of Heaven, and 
to pour out drink-offeriags unto her ; ye will ſurely 
accompliſh your voivs, and ſurely perform your 
VOWS }. 

e Thoſe words have [oken are in the Hebrew of the Feminine 


Gender,which giveth good reaton to ſomeInterpreters to conclude 
che Women were firſt and principal in this Idolatry, and the Mens 
guilt lay in conniving at them, and ſuffering themſelves to be !ecla- 
ced by them. Ye, faith the Propher, have ſpoken it, and ye have 
been as bigs as your words, and for a Cover you pretent the Kelte 
gion of a Vow, as ifa Yow Cou:d be a bond of Iniguity, and 12 
were poſlible by a Vow to oblige your elves to a toci2king ot 
the trua God, and a commirring of Idolatry. f The latter words 
ſeem Ironical, ſo as to have this ſence, Yo! are ri.i015% uno tf, 
and there is no moving you trom your reſolttic: , Gd ttt re- 
{olved too. 

26 Therefore hear ye the word of the LORD, all 
Judah that dwell in the land of Egypt, Behold 1 have 
ſworn by my great. name, ſaith the LORD g, that my 
name ſhall no more be named in the mouth of any 
man of Judah, i all the land of Egypt, ſaying, the 
LORD God liveth h. 

g Seing you are ſo fixed and peremptory,So0d is as reſolved as 
you are, and as you think you muſt be Rej:gious to your wicked 
Vows, ſo be affured God will be as Religious to his Oath. Becaute 
he can ſwear by nogreater, he hath ſworn by himteif, Heb. 6. 1 2, 


© (for io Name fignifizth here.) þ Toere ſhall not any be left of 
| M 2 tie 


A >. 
ATT, 


av 


— <—_—_— -_ . 


F% 


f Chap. 
Xx 5h I 2, 


+ er. 14+ 


m——_— — nG_ vi oe =o on 


= x s, 
i (13. 


from thi. 


© D—_—_—_— 


| 
[ 
\ 
; 
| 
3 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
] 
| Chap. 
FA 


_ hap. RLV. 


ſr0/1 Me, OT : 


FEREMIA H. 


the ]-57; that arcin Egypt, to ſwear The Lord God [iveth, ( for ic him lament his Condition 1n ſuch hke Exprefſions, of which the 


ſhould fem, that the Jews yer retained ſomething of the Religion 

of their Courtry, and ſwear by the Name of the living God, ac-! 
cording to tlie Frecept, Det. 6.13. and 10. 26.) God threarnerh 

there 1.0y!-i be none of them lefr ative to do it; He would nor 

have his holy Name polluted by thoſe Mouths that had been uſed 

ro blels Idols. 


27 Bchold, * I will watch over them for evil, and , 


not for good 7, and all the Men of Judah that are 10! 

the land of Egypt, ſhall be conſumed by the ſword, | 

and by the famine, until there hea end of them +. 
; God here either ſers our himſelf as one who would be 1nduſtr1- 


cus and f1cirous to bring cvil upon them, as Men who areſoin| | 
t2iCi Opportaniries to do 1t ; Or elſe hederides their |1mpoflivle ro be derermined with any certainty ; they could not 
: {be Honour, or Riches; the time of Jehojachim's Reign was no 

. * . | 
21.28, butasit is in the former part of chat Verſe, ro, 


any bufſine!:, 6 
vain confidence as to his protection of rhem, and care tor them 
( faich God ) T will watch over chem, bur not to $3i/4 and to plant, 
as Chap. | $ 
tluck 1p, and to throw down, and fo deſtroy, and to afftie, & For 
ſo it follows, They (hall b2 conſumed by the ſword and by the fa- 
ne. | 

28 Yet * a ſmall number that eſcape the ſword» 
ſhall return our of the land of Egypt into the land of 
Judah /; and all the remnant of Judah that are gone 
into the land of Egypt to ſojourn there, ſhall know 


Propher had heard, provably by Revelation from God. 


4 Thus ſhalt thon ſay unto him, The LORD 
faith thus, Behold; tar which I have built wull I 


break down, and that which I have planted I will 


pluck up, even this whole Land ; 

5 And ſeekeſt thou great things tor thy ſelf? ſeek 
them not e: for behold, I will bring evil upon all 
fleſh, ſfaich the LORD 7 : but thy life will I give 


rime for any Pioas Rational Man, to expeR any thing of char na- 
ture: He might expe3 ro have heen a Propher, as Eliha was, 
who firſt was bur a Servant to Elijah, Or at leaft he might expect 
reſt and prote&ion, when others mer wich diſturbance, bur it may 
be the meaning is no more than, Doſt rhou expe& whar none 
meereth with, or 1s hke ro meet with who feareth God ? Never 
chink of it, f Tam bringing Calamiries, and Miſery upon the 
whole Nation wheretn thou liveft. g [ will preſerve thy Life, thar 


15 all chou arr ro expeR, and rhou {halt hve to ſee-the time, thar 
thou wilt judge that a grear Boory, thar thon ſhalt have lent thee, 
whicherfoever the Wind of my Providence ſhall happen to dAve 


whoſe word ſhall ſtand, mine or theirs 7. 
! This juftifyerh the reſtrained interpretation of non? of 152 12% , 
nant, Per 14. for here it is plainly ſaid, rhar ſore ſhould eſcape 
and reiurn. > per 

that it would appear wherher God's Word or theirs ſhould ftand, 
avd have ir's accompliſhment ;they promiſing themſelyes ſecurity, 
God threatnitg them wich utcer raine and deſtruction. 

29 ® Aud this ſþall be a fign unto yon, faith the 
LORD, th3ti will puaiſh you in this place, that ye 
may know that my Words ſhall {urely {tand againit 
you tor evil. = T1 

: Signs are uſually antecedent to the thing tiprified, but the 
word 1s taken in a larger notion 1n this place, for that which ſhould 
arrend rhe thing ſignified by it, as Exod. 3. 12, befides though 
their deſtruction, and the deftruction of Pharaoh Hophra, were 
things immediately following one another, yer the larter was 1n 
order before the other, 

30 Thus ſaith the LORD, Behold, I will give 
Phiraoh-hophra King of Egypt into the hand of his 
Enemies, and into the hand of them that feck his life, 
as I gave Zedekiah King of Judah into the hand of 
Nebnchadne77zar King of Babylon his Enemy that 
ſonght his Lite p. 

0 Pharaoh was a Name common to all the Egyptian Kings, as 
my be learned from Ger, 12, 15. and 41 1. Erod 1.8, 11. but 
they had befides thar Name another peculiar to them. Whether 
this Hovbra was Vaphyes or Apries, 15 not much marerial, nor 15 
there any certainry when this Prophecy was fulfilled. Wherhe; 
Pharaoh Hupira were ( as Her0dotrs faich ) flain by Amaſis, one 
of his Subjcds who rebelled apainſt him aud flew him ( as the 
aforemenioned Anthor tells us) or Nebuchadnezzar who Joſephus 
fairh, came abcur ve Years after he had raken Jer:ſalem, and 0- 
ver-ran Eyypt, and flew this Pharach Hophra, whoſe overchrow 
was a Certain fp of the J:ws Defiruftion, 1 being not like thar 
the Ring of 7.:5;/9n ſhould ſpare theſe Jews who had iled ro this 
King of Egvpt for ſhelter; confideting aifo rhar the Jews had ſlain 
Gedaliah his Lepury Governour in Judea, p How Godl delivered 
Z:dibiz aro the hand of the King of Babylon, we read Chap. 9 
Hcor2 now £nds tle Scory of theſe }:ws thar had fled into Egypt. 


PIT 


\ A P, SLY. 


: 
A 4 £ 


V 7 ” 


:rn#t9 and comfortity Baruch, 1, w— 5$. 
; *F* HE word that Jeremiah the Prophet ſpake un- 
% To Barich the ion of Neriah, * when he had 
Vriiien theſe words 12 a book at the mouth of Jere- 
mah 7, in the fourth year of Jehoiakim, the ſon of 
Toliah }King of Judah, ſaying 6, 

a This Chaprer onghrt to have been annexed to the 35 Chap. 
or immesizicly to have followed it, for the writing of Jeremiah's 
Propnecics we read of there, birt was 18 Years before this rime 
that the Prophet rhus {pake to Baruch upon the wriring of rhoſe 
Prophecies, which, as we read there broughr borh Jeremizh and 
Bvich into a great deal of danger, which probably gave Baruch 
the occaſion of tie Complaine we ſhall read of, Yey. 3. 


2 Thus faith the LORD, the God of Iſrael unto 
thee, O Baruchc. 

c [cremiah had in ns former Diſcourſes revealed the Will of 
God concezmng Nations, here he revealeth it as to Barich his Se- 
crcrary or Clerk, upon which account ſome compare him ro Paul 
writing to P/1/emon as well as ro Churches, 


3 Thon didſt ſay, Wo is me now. for the LORD 
hath added grief ro my ſorrow, I fainted in my tigh- 
ing, and I find no reſt 4. 

d Upon Barich's reading the Prophecies afrer he had wrote 
them from the Mouth of Jere7izh, both he and Jeremiah were 
{ent for tefore che Princes, and adviſed ro hide them(eIves, as we 
read Chap. 35. 15, 19. This probably difturb'd Baruch, and made 


0 


# Bur for the rc y ſhoald chere periſh, and by | ee Sv, 
wma hawks A WA ) \nor making to themleives any great promiſes of freedom from 


their ſhare in the publick Calamities of thar Nation or Kingdom in 
{which they are 3 but contenting themſelyes with ſuch allowances 
[as God proportionerh ro them at ſuch a time without diſcontent 


thee, This Mciſage of God to Baruch reacherh us, thar God ex. 
peRs from his People a Spirir ſuired ro his Diſpenſarions, and thar 
they ſhould keep their Spirirs low 1n a time of publick Judgments, 


|or murmuring, and bleſſing God for any marks of gracious Provi- 
dence which he 1n ſuch times will pleaſe to ſet upon them, being 
thankful for chem and farisfhed with them. 


GHAP. XLVL 


by he Overthrow of Pharaoh's Army, r, —— 12. The Conquelt of 
Egypt by Nebuchadnezzar, 13,—-25, God's People comfort- 
el, 27, 3% 


I H E word of the LORD which came to Jere- 
miah the Prophet againſt the Gentiles a ; 

a This Verſe contains the Title toall che enſuing Diſcourſes 
of this Propher,tor.though rtere be ſome particular Verſes in theſe 
Chapters rhar relate to the J:ws, yer they are all concerning theic 
Reſtaurarion. The Prophecies of Judgment from the begiining 
of this Chapter to the $24 Chapter are all againſt forreign Nations, 
which are called Gentlles, to whom God revealed his Will for the 
paniſhmenc of them, for the relief and fatisfaQion of his People, 
ro whom the moſt of them had been bitter Enemies. The $24, 
Chapter 1s by moſt concluded nor to have been wrote by Jereniah, 
who, it 15 not provable, would have repeated what he had related 
before Chap. 39. but it was wrote (as it is ſuppoſed ) by ſome of 
che Captives 1n Babylon, as a;Preface to the Book of Lamentations. 
This particular Chaprer containeth the Revelation of the Will of 
God concerning Egypt, whither ſome of rhe Jews fled for re- 
fuge afrer this rime, and which had been a great occation of fin to 
the Jews beiore, nor only through the Jews too many Leagues 
with them, and confidence 1n them, but from their co:mmunicacing 
in their Idolatry with them, [er. 2.16, The children of Nopb and 
Tahparhes brake the crown of their bead. : 

2 Againſt Egypt, againſt the army of Pharaoh 
Necho King of Egypt, which was by the River Eu- 
phrares 1n Carchemiſh, which Nebuchadrezzar King 
of Babylon {mote in the fourth year of Jehotakim the 
ſon of Joſiah King of Judah b. 

| b Pharaoh Necho was Ring of Egypt in Joſtah's time : Tt was by 
his Army that Joffah was killed at Megiddo, 2 Kings 23. 29, It 
was he that made Jehozachim Ring of ]:44h, taking away Jeboahax, 
Ver. 34. burthough he prevailed ar rhar rime, and that was one 
'rime when he came our againſt Carchemiſh, 2 Chroz. 35. 20. yet 
| he was overthrown by Nebuchadarzgar 11 a Bartle with him after- 
| wards, as appears from 2 Kings 24. 7. and J:hoiabim was made 

Triburary ro Nebucha1nezgay, as we read 2 Kings 24. r. and the 
King ot Zgypt was brought folow by that ViSory, that he ſtirred 
no more out of Egypt, jor the King of Babylon had taken from him all 
from Nulus, the great River of Ezypt ro Euphrates, and this, 
taich rhis /erſe, was 1n the 4th, Year of Jebgiachim. This Prophecy 
muft be before that time. Carchemiſh appearcrh from 1/2. 10. 9, 
t© have been a place in $y7iz where the Egy?tian Army had beenin 
Jofeab's time, and rhen went away Conquerors, as appears from 
2 Chron. 35. 20, &Cc. | 

3 Order ye the buckler, and the ſhicld, and dray 
near to battel. 

4 Harneſs the Horſes, and get 1 
and ſtand forth with your helmets, 
and Pur on the Brigantines c, 

c Art hath ſo much improved all chings 1n latter Ages, that ir is 
1s very hard ro derermine of what torm the ſeveral Weapons, and 
pieces of Armour, whether offenfive or defenfive in uſe at rhis time 
were; the moſt here mentioned ſecm ro have been art-3hve. and 
the whole Speech of the Fropher directed ro the Eerntians, ſeem ro 
be Lronical.calling to rhis Army of Pharaoh Necbs ro ger rcadv to de. 
fend themſelves, for thuy were cÞ9 encounter with an Enemy thar 


! 


; 
urbiſh the ſpears, 


WW 07. F| 


,unto thee * for a prey, in all places wither thou « ;., 


.gocit 4 21.9 ger 
e Whar great things Baruch was ſeeking 15 not expreſſed, and 9. 2, ard 
$9. I&- 


_ Chap. XLVI 


m0 cure [} 
be into t 


FERE 


would pur them very hard ro it, fo as they had need to have cheir | 
He!mets and Buck!ers, and Siz/d4s, and Brigantines, alin a read1- 
neſs, and know the uſc of chem well ; the Horſes for War had need 
be Harneſſcd, the Spears furbithed, and the Riders got up. 

Vherecforchavel ſeen them diſmayed, ad turn- 
ed away back ? and their mighty ones + are beaten 
down, and are + fed apace, and look not back, fo; 
tear was round about, faith the LORD 4. 

1 God hd either in a Viſion ſhewed Jeremizh rhis Army of the 
Foyptians flying, or elſe had revealed to him thar they ſhould he 
pur to flighr, which rhe Propher here publitheth. God made 2 
tcar co fall upon the Egyptians, fo as when the King of Boyion 
came to joyn Bartel with them, they were nor able ar all co ftand, 
bur tarned their Backs,and their greareft Commanders were either 
kill'd, or fled away as faſt as they could. 

5 Let not the ſwift flee away, nor tne mighty man 
eſcape, they ſhall {tumble and fall coward the north 


i: by the river Euphrates e. | 

2; e Thar is, Iris in vain for the ſwift to. flze away, rhe. mighty 
$5: Men ſhall nor eſcape, bur they ſhall flumble, and fall ar Carcv2- 
ER miſh, which was near the River Euphrates, and Northward from 
fe Egypt. | 

X; 7 Who 7« this that cometh up as a flood, whoſe 

3 waters are moved as the Rivers f. 
ay f The next Verſe expoundert this, 

Ws, : hs jp GO CS 
Goh 8 Egypt riſcth up like a flood, and his waters arc 
_ moved like the rivers, and ho faich I will go up, 4/22 

2 will cover the Earth, I will deſtroy the City and the 


” -# _, 
TEN 


ed 
LAS TORT 


7 ” y 
Inhabirants thereof g- 

2 The Prophet compareth the Egyptizns flefhed with their for- 
mer ViRtory obtained againſt Jo/72h in Hegido, and now prepa- 
ring to another Expedition, to a Flood { with alluſion provadly to 


* 
FISSy 
Se 
A 
A 
*E 
by 
© 
"Ta 
Lt 
- 


Fl 
LEE 
Bl 
FT 6. 
v4 


"URL the River Nilzs, who Warers ufed corite toa great height ) both 
BA for the mulcitade of their Soldiers, and'for rheir rage 3 they were 

\ reſolved to carry ſuch numbers as ſhould cover the Earth, and to 
GRE gt rake Carchemiſh, or ſome other City which their Defign was a- 
BIT 2a gainſt. It ſhould ſeem borh by this Text, and that Ex04, 1 5, 9, 10. 
PO ws Thar the Egyptians were a People much given to vaunt and boaſt 


of the grear things they would do; boaſting when they were pur- 
ting on their Harneſs, as if they were purting it off3 not contider- 
ing how uncertain the Events of War were, nor yet that wherein 
they talked proudly chere was one that could be above them. 


S 9 Come up ye horſes, and rage ye chariots, and let 
+ Hey, the mighty men come forth h, - the Echiopians, and 
7 Ch, the + Lybians that handle the ſhield z, and the Lydt- 
THe ans * thac handle and bend the bow +. 

4 _ þ Their ancient way of fighting was with Chariors, and Bows, 
Iſa. 55. The Propher calls in the Name of the Commantlers of the Egpptian 
19. Armies, to the Horſes and Chariots to come on, and ingage in the 


Fight. 7 The Ethiopians were the Cu/hites, who were Neigh- 
boursto the EzypM#ans, ſo were the Lyvians both of them ir ſhould 
ſeem were famous for handling the Shield. The Ly5ians were de. 
ſcended from Pxt. Borh the Cy/hites and the Putites or Lybians 
were deſcended from Ham, Gen. 10,6, & The Lydians were as 
famous for the uſe of rhe Bow in War. They were deſcended from 
Miſraim or Shem, Gen: 10. 13,22. The Ly4ians here meant are 
thoughr ro be thoſe deſcended from Miſraim, and ſome think 
theſe were Ethiopians, They were all Auxiliaries to the Egyptians 
in this Expedition. 

10 For this 7s the day of the Lord GOD of hoſts, 
a day of Vengeance, that he may avenge him of his ad- 
verſaries/: aad the fivord ſhall devour, and it ſhall 
be ſatiate, and made drunk with their blood zz: for 
the Lord GOD of hoſts * hath a ſacrifice 1n the north 
countrey, by the River Eunhrates z. = : 

1 Or, But this is the day of the Lord, &c. Pharaoh 1s miſtaken in 
accounting this day his own, becauſe of the multitude of his 
Forces, this is the day of the Lord, who as he 1s the Lord of all the 
hofts of his Creatures, fo harh a particular riſe and government 
over hoſts of Men ; this 15 further explained by the nexr words, 
a day of vengeance, which God hari ſer apart 1n 1t ro be avenged 
upon his Enemies. » Theſe Phraſes only metaphorically fignifte, 
the great {laughter 5od would make that day among!t the Zgyptz- 


ans, 1 This the Prophet declares thar God would do for his ho- 


declareth his Juſtice in this pamſhment of the Egyptians; and for 
the further repute and credit of his Prophecy, trelleth them to 
whom he ſpake of rhe place it ſhould be in, viz. near the River 
E»pbrates, where 7oſ52» was (lain by him, 2 Kings 23. 29, 

11 Go up into Gilead and take * balm, O virgin, 

the danghter of Egypt o: 1 vain ſhalt thou uſe many 
medicines: for + thou ſhalt not be cured p. 
9 Great States are ordinarily in Scripture ealled Virgins for their 
duty, and pleaſant State 3 Gue2ad was a moſt famous piare for 
Bain : The Propher ironically calls ro the Egyptians to go to Gi- 
lead tor Balm. p Bur tells thera it would be to no purpoſe, God 
Was 20ut tO wound them beyond all heip of Medicines, 


Fi [2 The Nations have heard of thy ſhameq, and 
| thy cry hath filled the land, for the mighty man hath 
[tu:nbled agalult che mighry, and they are fallen 


nour and glory ; therefore he calls it a ſacrifice, by which alſo he | 


# Tx — ” 


—- 


'» A 1 ! 2/* 3;2 2 ! Aa oh, nes © -34 0 * bo ck Pe * & 
trezdy pait, bzcrufe of the corriincy of tiems in ths ſence 1:8 


liwse i:% 


A” - 
Kok vr ES q. WE, x 4 
(tit other Nations pad Gen, becaule they fhowld ſes the ſhame 2nd 


- 


rheir ſlain and wounded Men would fil other Linds. r Sor the 
PTE. " FT ap. bt _ *7 RR ' x98 M4 
& 2y2t;ans ſhould certainly be overthrown, eirhor 144 ho Fovnrigy, 


X : [1 Sis fs 
{tumbling upon the B2bylonians, or the .B:by/o; 45 on them : 


TY they { i!ying ) for haft ttumbviing one upon 415210; £ (6 25 back 
choſe rhar wenr beiore, and rhoſe who followed 3fror, {nyt botin 


fall rogether. 


13 1 Thewerd that the LORD ſake to Tera cf 


the Prophet, how Nebnchadrezzar the kiaz of Bah: . 
. 


. 


lon ſhould come zd * ſmite the land of Exppy ro ig: 


ſ A Revelation different from the former in this, tac the (3: 
mer only foretold the overthrow of the King of F-v5t in a pact! 
lar Bartle in Carchemiſh near E:phrates, of which we read ts 
che thing was done, 2 Kings 24. 7. This foretells che King of Bt. 
9zlon*s over running all the Land of Foyer, and was no: fulfillee 
ill ſome Years after Z2debizh was carried away captive, bur p:o- 
phefied of Chap. 43. 19. and 44.30. to come to pats intis time of 
Pharao Hophra as we heard betore, and more largely foretold by 
che Propher Exzekiz!, Ezek. 29. and 3o, and 32, to happen aft:x 
the overchrow of Tyrzs, Ezek. 29. 18, 19. |: 

14. Declare ye in Egypt, and publiſh in Migdo!, 
1nd pabliſh in Noph, and in Tahpanhes: ; ſay ye, 
Stand taſt, and prepare ye, for the Sword ſhall de- 
7010 r91.1l x50 the? rw. 

: Concerning theſe three Ciries of Egypt, fee the Nores on Cc» 
44. rt. The meaning 1s, Publiſh this Prophecy over ail the Lar 2 >: 
Egypt; or perhaps theſe three were the civef places whithe; the 
]-ws that went wirn Johana? the Son of Kar:2h, &c. rent, and 
where they fixed themſelves. Many more places in £275 are ny 
med by E:-hj:l, Chap. 3v. 14, &c. « Look ro your icives and 
prepare 3 our fclves for Barrle; for rhe Nactons are deftroved round 
abour you, (ſor is1n the Heber) and you have reaton to cn 
that the Sword ſhould come next into your Councries, 

15 Why arethy valiant 22 ſwept away * £5 
ſtood nor, hecauſe the LORD did dive them :. 

t The Pcopher firtt propoundeth a Queition, then retornorty an 
wer ro himſclf, Egyrtt was full of valiant Men, vor faich the 
Prophe: they hall bz fwepr away, or broken dowa 1s frat, og 
grats is heaten down with a violent Storm of Hail, (9 che work 15 
uſed, Prov. 28. +3 How comes this to paſs? ({4:m <- Proniiey”) 
He anſivereth himſelt, hecauſe 1t was of God to deiiroy £4: 7, 
who worketh and none can let him. When he {trite none 01 
ftland before him ; none can ſtand up apzinii im. 


another z, and they faid, Arile, let us go azain ro #- 
our own pcople, and to the j2nd of our naticicy 
from the oppreſſing ſword mw. 

» The Prophet had hefore ſpoken of Mibrchadnigoar, as 27 
inſtrument in the hand of God, who being armed with his Con. 
miftion and Power, made many to fall ; yea God cauied fych 2 foxg 
ro fall vupon them, thar in cher tiighr they fell upon one archer, 


16 He + made many to fall; yea, one foil nmoy Flies 


mM 

ON 
pher ſorerel!s they thould all be glad ro go home apain, 2nd ſhould 
ſpeak to one anocher co char. purpoſe z for the ſucceſs of the King 
of Bayy/on's Sivord fhould be fuch, as they would quickly fee there 
would be no ſtanding before 1t, 


>. 


from Cz/7, and Pit, and Lyviz, yer all was too little, The Þ 
S] 


:7 They aid cry there, Pharach King of Egypr 
bat a nOtiesx; he hath paſſed the time appointed y. 

x That 1s, che Ethionaens and Cubins chat :hould COme rn 
help che King of Egy;t, ihould cry 5 or the Chi/d22:5, nr the Ev. 
tians themſelves, thouid cry; Pharaoh is byt 2 Nile, that te. 
hath made a great noiſe, hur ir cometh to nothing + Ochers ml; - 
the ſence, Pharao\ 1s a Man of noiſe or tumult, thar hath made ; 
great deal of difturhance rs himſelf and us. y Thar is, fry rh 
moſt,he harh paſſed the r1me himſelf fixed whereat he would come 
and fightche Cha/4-2r5. Bur tizeſe words compared with the ner 
Verſe, incline others eo rhin';, rhar eicher Ph27.29)'s Soldiers, or 
his Allies are here brought in mocking at Ph2r20h, promitins 
himſelf that che Ring of 6494/92 would not come, and layotiins 
ar Jeremian's Prophecy, ſaying, 'The tim? aprointed wzs a 25 
thar 1s, the time of his coming mentioned by Feremiah was pat, 
Jeremiah forerel)s char P32r 40's Army and Confederares would ſc 
reaſon tro cry out, Pharaoh, 1n ſaying (o, was bur a $255, 


18 As] live, faich the King whoſe name 7s theo 
LORD of Hoſts, ſurely as Tabor is amonzt the 
Mountains, and as Carinel by the Sega, /5 ihall h2 
COIMNC Z. 

2 Thar is, he ſhall a5 certainly come and incompats you witth 
his Armies, as Tibor is encompaſſed with Mountains, end 25 77 - 
mel is by the S-a, or a: Barah going down to Mount 7:5 deo- 
ſtroyed Siſera's Army, Or a5 lurely as the Rain came winch © 04.2 
firſt diſcovered from Mount Carmel, 1 Kinzs 18,41, 4% There are 
other gueſſes at rhe lence of this compariton, but the tence 15 un - 
doubtedly no more chza that Nebachadnegy oy thould cerretaly 
come againſt Ezypt, how vainly (eever the Feyptiins Hattered 
themſelves ro the contrary, ſuppoting rhe time paſt winch the Pro! 
pher ſpake of, 

&£ 


19 Oh thou daughter dwelling in Egypt a, | inr- + 1rca, 


nifh thy ſelf to gointo captivity b - for Noph fill bs mils +»: 


waſte and deſolate without an Inhabitair c, 


N both together 7. 
2 77 The Prophet keepeth to his old Prophetick Style, ſpeaking of 


2 Thar is, O you Inhabirants in che Land of Egypt, þ Make "J 5094+, 
t:11ags that were to come tO pals ſome Year after, as if they were [ready to go into a00t!:er Country as Prifuners of War, Ior your 


Cict- 


14 tf = F a OE JS F A 
MIAH Chap. SL « 


© 


—— 


= 


. ſe 
- Pugh 7 a9 26s ” 
-owow ora + odbhadtcc. 
phy" nat 2h _—_ 
Sd 


I —————— 

- ” þ A—_— - 
$449) 9% 
_—_— 
= z 


g «4 
= 0 
__ i Lee 
- . : Py I 
dF 
4 4 


: , 
2 WG mw Pr ian eh. At. wn} ">" 


ha P. XLVI. 


FEREMIAH. 


Cities ſhall be deſtroyed. Nopþb particularly ſhall be wholly de- 


Populated, and J2id waſte and have none to dwell in it. 


22 Egypt # #tea very fair heifer ; but deſtrution 


COM0ti: 1t coineth out of the north 4. 


4 That 15, Zeype iS now in a thriving, proſperous condition, ha- 
ving not uled to be under any Yoke like an Heifer, that 1s fair 
2nd fat, but ſhe will not be io long.ſhe is but as a Beaſt fatted for 
ehe Slaughter, and there are Slaughter-men, coming out of Chal- 
&-: that will ki!] this fair Heiter, and make her a Sacrifice to the 


Ju!ice of God- 


21 Alſo herhired men are in the midft of her, like 


Chap. XVII 


27 T * But fear not thou, O my ſervant Jacob, * 16a. a. 
and be not diſmayed, O Iſrael; for behold, I will 53; & 4. 
ſave thee from afar off, and thy ſeed from the * © *++ 
land of their captivity, and Jacob ſhall return, and 
be in relt and at eaſe, and none ſhall make him a- 
fraid. 

28 Fear thou not, O Jacob my ſervant, faith the 
LORD, for I am with thee, for I will make a full 
end of all the Nations whither I have driven thee, 
but I will not make * a full end of thee, but corret * Chap, 


7 1 ++farrcd Bullockse, for they alſo are turned back, a4] thee in meaſure, yet will I || not leave thes wholly ro. 24. 


ba locks ; 4 * . 
Ss fre fled away together : they did not ſtand f becauſe|ynpuniſhed r. 
the day of their calamity was come upon them, ad 


the jte!te. 


the time of their viſitation g. 

e The mercenary Soldiers allo which the Egyptians have hired 
from Cuſh and Pur, and other parts are at preſent in a flouriſhing 
proſperous ſtate. f We have tranſlated ?I here ill, ic had bezn 
better tranſlated but, for that is maniteſt]y the ſence. Though 
they at prefent lying in Garriſons be fat and flouriſhing, like Bul- 
lacks in the S:alls, yet when it cometh to it they ſhall not ſtand 
bur turn back, and flee as well as the reſt, g Becauſe the time 1s 
come when God reſolyeth to puniſh them, and bring calamity up- 
on them. When the time is come which God hath ſet in his Coun- 
fels, wherein he will puniſh Perſons or Nations; no probabili- 
ties to the contrary are much conſiderable. 

22 The voice thereof ſhall go like a ſerpent b, for 
they ſhall march with an army, and come agaiult her 


with axcs, as hewers of wood 7. 

h Ezyp: is now like an Heiter that makes a great b2!lowing,but 
the time ſhall come when ſhe ſhall make a leſſer noite like the hil- 
ſing of a Serpent, when it ſeeth it ſe}t ſer upon. 7 For the Chal 
d-ans ſhall come with a great Army, armed with Bartle- Axes, as 
ifthey cameto fell down tome Wood ina Foreſt, or Wood. 


23 They ſhall cur down her Forreſt, ſaich the 
LORD, though it cannot be ſearched &, becauſe they 
are more than the Graſhoppers, and are 1nnumera- 


ble /. 

k Eeypt 1s compared to a Forreſt either for the multitude of Ct. 
ties, or of People jn that Country, and to a thick Forreſt, becauſe 
35 it isan hard thing to make ones way through a Forreſt, fo it was 
Judged as hard for an Enemy to make his way into that Country ; 
in humane probability Egypt could not be ſearched,yet (faith God) 
the Chaldeans ſhall cut down this Forreſt, and it ſhall be no more 
to them than for Hewers of Wood,with Tools fitted for the pur. 
pole, to make their way through a Forreſt. ! For the Army of 
the Chalicans fhall be as numerous as the Inhabitants of Egypt, 
more than the Graſhoppers which come in ſuch Troops, as in a 
ſhort time they devour every green Herb in a place. 

24 The daughter of Egypt ſhall be confounded, ſhe 
jhall be delivered into the hand of the people of the 
10rth m. 

m That is, into the hand or power of the Chaldeans, it 1s the 
{ame thing which the Prophet had betore ſaia again and again, 
endrepeats it ſo often only for the further confirmation of the truth 
of the Prediction, notwithſtanding the appearing improbability 
ot any ſuch thing. x 

{0 25 The LORD of hoſts, the God of Iſrael faith x, 
' Or, 7% Behold, I will puniſh the || | multicude of No o, and 


19 Pharaoh, and Egypt, * with their Gods, and their 
Amon. Kings, even Pharaoh, and al! them that truſt in 
* Chap. Im pe 

43.12,*3. n Theſe Namesare often in conjun@ion given unto God, the 


tzex. 30. firſt fignitying his Power, or Ability to do what he either pro- 
73 mileth or threatneth,the other {peaking his kindneſs and near rela- 
tion tothe Jews. o There are great critical Diſputes about this 
Phraſe, whether the word tranſlated mir{tizude, fignifies ſo ( as it 
4©:)1 Chat. 52+ 15.) ard if fo whether it ſhould not be the multitude 


f-c: No. Or whether it ſignifies the Nourifber, ( as ſome would [the rumbling of his wheels, the fathers ſhall not look 
e2%cit ) becauſe No { which moſt think 15 the lame City with that | hack to their children for feebleneſs of hands e. 

at rhis time called Alexandria, being a great place of Merchandiſe) | 
nouriſhed all the adjacent parts ; bur it is no eaſte thing to reſolve! ;;hje as ſhould make Parents forget their natural affection, and flee 


the Queſtion, nor is the reſolution of it of much moment to us. 
þ By thoſe that truſted in Pharaoh the Fews are moſt probably 
meant, who all along in their proſperity put too much confidence 
in Fz3;t, and after that Hizruſalem was taken; ſome of them ( as 
we betore heard ) fled into Egypt for Sanctuary. 


26 And I will deliver them into the hand of thoſe 
that ſeek their Lives, andinto the hand of Nebuchad- 


, | Or, T9; 


7 Sze the Notes on Chap. 30. 10, It. where is the ſub{tance of #7775 cut 
what is {aid in theſe two Verſes, and almoſt the very words are*”** off. 


repeated; the great thing to be obſerved by us, is the difference **> Zn Mt. 
which the juſt and righteous God maketh betwixt his Puniſhmears 4/78 *ber 
of his Church and own People, and his Puniſhments of wicked empty I will 
Men who are their Enemies ; as there is a great difference in the 79! 7:4ke 
root of ſuch Diſpenſations, God dealing them out to his People thee empiys 
out of Love, that they might not be condemued with the wicked ; 
lo there is a great deal of difference in the meaſure and duration 
of their Puniſhments, the Rod of the wicked ſhall not always lye 
upon the backs of the righteous, and they are corrected in mea- 
Ure. 
CHAP. XLVII. 
The Deftrution of the Philiſtines, Tyrians, Z:donians, and others 
by the Sea-fide, 1, —— 7. 

I HE word of the LORD, that came to Jere-, 

miah the Prophet * againſt the Philiſtines, | Ci? 


before that Pharaoh ſinote -+ Gaza a. + Heb 
2 In the former Chapter the Prophet foretold the Judgment of ,,. , 

God upon the Egyptians,who were the Fews ſeeming Friends, but it 

their real Enemies, as they were occaſions to them of Idolatry,and 

of a ſinful confidence in them. He comes 1n this Chapter to fore- 


X 
5 
# 


tell che Judgments of God upon the Philiſtines who were invete- Z 


rate Enemies to the Fews, againſt whom alſo Iſaiah, Chap. 14. 
2 9+ of his Prophecy, and Ezekiel and Amos propheſied, Exek. 25. 
is. Amos 1.6. and alſo Zephaniah in Chap. 2. 4, 5. of his Pro- 
phecy. When the King of Babylon took Gaze, one of the five 


rez7ar King of Babylon, and into the hand of his 
Servants : And afterwards it ſhall be inhabited, as in 
the days of old, ſaith the LORD 9. 


q The tormer part of this Verſe is but the ſame which the Pro- 
phet hath often before ſaid. The latter part is a Promiſe for the 
Reſtauration of Egypt to ſome degrees of its former proſperity 
and Liberty. The determinate time for the fulfilling of this Pro- 
phecy is told us, Exek. 2.9. 13, 14. vix. at the end of forty Years ; 
this we are told by civil Hiſtorians fell out in the time of Amafis a 
Kingof Ezyprt coxvous with Cyrus, who was overcome by Cyrus 
his Son Cambyſes, who brought Ezypt to be a Province belonging 
tothe Meles and Perſians, by the tulfilling of which Prophecy 
the truth both of Feremiaþ's and Enekzel's Prophecies are juſti- 
fied, 


| 


Cities of the Philiſtines the Scripture doth not tell us. Some think 
it was either in his way to Carchemiſh, or as he came back a Con- 
querour from the Battel at Megiddo where Joſiah was flain. The 
time when Feremiah had this Revelation is ſet down to let us 
know, that it was in the time of the Phili/tines Proſperity, when 
wenn could ſee no ſuch effect exiſtent, or probable in its 
cauſes. 


up * out of the north 6, and ſhall be an overflowing * Chap, 
flood, and ſhall overflow the land - and all that is 1. 14. | 
therein, the city, and them that dwell therein c, T Heb- _ | 
then the men ſhall cry, andall the inhabicahts of the, nin 
land ſhall howl 4. ; 


b Calamities and AfiQtionsare often in Scripture ſet out under 
the notion of Waters ; and as the Miſeriesof Egypr were ſet out by 
the overflowings of their great River Nzlzs, ſo the Calamities of 
the Philiſtines are expreſſed] by the overflowings of the great Rt- 
ver Euphrates, theſe Miſeries coming upon them by the Cha/deans, 
which were a Northern People,their Waters are ſaid to riſe up our 
of the North. c It is faid to be an overflowing Flood that ſhould 
overflow the Land, becauſe it was to be a ſweeping Judgment, 
which like a Flood ſhould carry all before 1t, d which ſhould pro- 
duce amongſt the Inhabitants of Gaz a great howling, and 1a» 
me ntation. 


3 At the noiſe of the ſtamping of the hoofs of his 
ſtrong horſes, at the ruſhing of his chariots, and at 


0 


e This is all but a deſcription of the march of an Army, fo ter- 


away to ſave themſelves looking upon themſelves as loſt, and un- 
able to protect their Children, ; 

4. Becauſe of the day that cometh to ſpoil all the 
Philiſtines f, and to cut off from Tyrus and Z1don 
every helper that remainethg : for the LORD will 
ſpoil the Philiſtines, the remnant of - the countrey j m_ 
of Caphtor. .*. OT 

f The day which God hath ſet, and appointed for the ruine of 
the Philiſtines. g Tyre and Sidon were neighbouring to the Phz- 
liſtines, as appears trom Gen. 10. 14, I5. Foel 3. 4. and fo were 
often called to their help. God threatneth both to deſtroy them, 
and alſo thoſe that helped them ; .*. it appeareth trom Gen. 10. 14. 
that the Philiſtines and Caphtorims were related, tor their firſt 
Progenitors Philiſtim and Caphtcrim, were both the Sons of Miz- 
raim the Son of Ham one of the Sons of Noah. It appears from 
Deur. 2, 23. that they expelled che Ares, and dweltin Hagerim 
to Az3ah, whether their Country be what was atrer wards called 
Cappadecit or Damiata is not much material for us to know, they 
were a People confederate with the Philiſtines, whom God here 
threatneth to deſtroy with them. 


5 * Baldncf: 


S; ? s 
TOR 
Ee 
Ws OE: 


2 Thus faith the LORD, Behold, * waters riſe * If. 8.7. S 


% 


the fulneſs 


FERE 


"@hap. XLVIIL 


"*Mie.r.15. « * Baldneſs is come upon Gaza z * Aſhkelon 15 cut 
», ofFw;th the remnant of their valley g : how long wilt; 
25+ 20. * cut thy ſelf b? 
" thou * CUT CNY IC p FE . 
Chap. 6. g Both Gaza and Aſhhelon were two principal Cities betonging 


A to the Philiſtimes, taken by Judah, Fud. 1. 18. Weread ot them, 
1 Sam. 6. 19. Both Amos, Zephaniah and Zechariah propheſied 
their ruine, Amos 1. 8. Zephaniah 2 4, 7+ Zach. 9. 5. as well as 
this Prophet. By the remnant of the Valley, moſt underſtand thoſe 
who lived in the Vallies near about Aſhkelon. þ Goncerring the 
aft clauſe inthis Verſe there is ſome difference, whether the 
words ſhould be joyned with the next Verſe, and read, How lorg 
wilt thou cur thy elf, O thox Sword of the Lord? or as tney lie 11 
our Bibles, and then the ſence is, Why will you1n lo deſperate a 
manger afflit your ſelves, when all your mourning will do you 
no good ? - 

6 ©O thou ſword of the LOR D., how long w#/! zt 
ab. be cre thou be quiet? - put vp thy ſelf into thy {cab- 
z@tr' bard ; reſt, andhe ſtill . 
ſelf. i Some meke the words of the 6th. Verſe, to bs the words of 
be] the Phitiſtines in their mourning and curting themſelves, crying 
| to God to ſtop the Sword drawn againſt them, and to return 1t 
again into its Scabbard : Others make them the words of tie 
Prophet, Jainenting che havock which he by the eye of the Pro 
phecy ſaw was like to be made among{t the the Philiſtines by the 
Cha!deans (for goo: Men are affect:d with the Milſeries even ot 
the worſt of Mea.) ; : 

7 + How caa it be quiet, ſeeing the LORD hath 
BET ow given it a charge againſt Aſhkelon, and againlt the 
tea-ſhore ? there hath he appointed 1t &. 

+ The latter Verſe maſt be expounded according to the for- 
mer ; for if the words of the former Verſe be underſtood as the 
words of the Philittines, thole of this vere muſt be underſtood as 


=al- 


EO, the words of the Prophet putting them our of hopes of the 
Wd Swords ſtopping, becauſe what it did was by Commithon from 
42 God which it muſt execute. If the words of the former Verle be 


be to be underſtood as the Prophet's words, the words of this 
Verſe are either the Propher's words correcting himſelf, and con- | 
cluding that this Sword could not be quiet becaule it was edged 


by God himſelf, who had given i tthis Commiſſion which it muſt 
execute : Or the words of God, letting the Prophet Know that 
he had given this Sword its Commiſſion, and therefore it could 


M1AH Chap. XLVIIL 


4 Moab 1s deltroyed, her little ones have cauſed a 
cry to be heard f. 
f Moab was both the Name of the who!- Co:ntry, and of a 
principa! City in it. Some by it here underſtand the City ; by her 
little ones, fome unde: ſtand little Children; others interior Ma- 
giltrates, or the common People. 
- 5 For1a the going up of Luhith + contiaual weep- T Ye. 
ing ſhall go up; tor in the going down of Horonaim F275, 
the enemies have heard a cry of deſtruction 5. ya "hc 
g Of Luhith we read only in this place, and Iſa. 1 5- 5. It was 2 hs 
City of Afoab, and ſituated upon an Hill, as appears both here 
and wherett is mentioned in Iſaz2h. Sone think that to this City 
the Meabites fled for Sanctuary from the Chaldeans, and flying 
made lo great an out-cry that their Enemies who purſued them 
heard their cry. 


6 Flee, ſave your lives, and be like || the * heath || Or, 4 
in the wilderneſs h. nahed prez, 
þ Itis of nogreat moment whether we underſtand theſe as the * CR4Þ- 
words of the Moabites, calling ons to another to fl:e, and fave *7: ©* 
their Lives, though they loſt all they had, and left themlelves as 
dare as a naked Tree ; or as the words of the Prophet ſpeaking to 
the Moabites to the fame ſerie. 


7 «| For becauſe thou haſt truſted in thy works 
and 1n thy treafures, thou ſhalt alſo be takeaz, and 
Chemoſh ſhall go forth into captivity with his * * Chap, 
prielts and his princes together &. 49. 3» 
# Whether by Works 1n this place be meant their Riches got by 
the labour of their hands; or their Ido/s which often are called by 
way of Detamition, The works of their own hands, or their for- 
tifications, is not much conſiderable. A confidence in. Creatures, 
oppoled co a confidence in God, doubtleſs the fin here intended, 
whatever t2e ground of it was, whether their Idols, or Riches or 
tortified places. k Chemoſh was their principal 1dol as appears by 
Numb 21. 29. Fud. 11. 24. 1 King. 11. 7, 33. 2 King. 23. 13. 
God ſheweth them the vanity of this 1dolatry, by telling them 
that this Ido! ſhould go into Captivity, and be to fac from being 
able to protect tem, that he ſhould not be able to prote& him- 
ſelf or his own Prieſts, or the Princes that favoured him, | 


8 And the ſpoiler ſhall come upon every city, and 


PN Opy rot ſtop till ſpkelonaud the People on the Sea-ſhore were deſtroy- no city ſhall eſcape : the valley alfo ſhall periſh, agd 


ed by it. 
yy CHAP. XLVHE 


The Fudgment of Moab, 1, 6. for their Pride, 7, Io. 
for their Securlty and humane Confidence, 11, 25.tſpecially 
for their Contempt of God, and inſolence towards his People, 26, 

46. Their Keftauration, 47» 


* "HE Prophet having Chapter 46. denounced Gods Judgment 
BY againſt Egypr, and againſt the Philiftines, Chap. 47+ in this 
Chapter he cometh to do the like againſt the Mozbires. Moabthe 
Father of theſe Moabires was the Son of Lot, Gen. 19. 37, The 


Vo . "> . . 
- Y Moabites Country lay inthe way the Iſraelites went to Canaan. 
LE Numb. 21. 11,13. near the Countrey of the Ammonites. Bulak 


ESI was King of it when the Tſrazlites paſſed by it, who ſent for the 
ONS. Sorcerer Balaam to curſe them,Numb. 22. 4. who Chap. 24. 5,8. 
bleſſed them. They ſeduced the Iſraelites to Adultery and Tdola- 
try, Chap. 25. 1. : 

: Againſt * Moab, thus ſaith the LORD of hoſts, 


"3-** the God of iſrael, Wo unto Nebo a, for it is ſyoil- 
@. 25. ed : Kiriathaim is confounded, ard taken, || Miſgab 
*3Fand 27.15 confounded and diſmayed. | 
3. Ezek. a Moab was a large Countrey and had many Cities ; we ſha]] 
Fs 9. have divers of them named in this Chapter ; The firſt that we read 
Mos 2.1. of Nebo in Holy Writ is, Numb. 32. 3, 38. Reuben built both that 
$9, and Kiruthaim, as we may read there, Ver 38, 39. It wasalſo the 
b place Name of a Mountain, Deut. 34+ I» It ſhould ſeem that in Jeremz- 
| ah's time, the Meozbites had got both the poſſeſſion of Nebo, and 
Kiriathaim and Miſgab, of which we read no more in Scripture. 
It ſeems ro be a City built upon fome Hill or High-Place : The 
Prophet threatneth ruine to all-theſe three Cities. 


the plain fhall be deſtroyed, as the LORD hath ſpo- 
ken /, 

1 That 1s, all the parts of the Country of Mob, and all the 
Cities, as well 2s thoſe chat ſtood upon Hil!s and mountainous 
places, as thole that ſtyvod ta Valleys ; becauſe or for the Lord hith 
laid it, (for fo the particle we tranflate as is better tranſlated.) 


9 Give wings unto Moab that it may flee, and get 
awaym: for the cities thereof ſhall be deſolate 


with any to dwell therein 7. 

m That is, the Moabites had need of wings like a Bud to e- 
ſcape that ruine which is coming upon them. » Yea, if they had 
wings they ſhould nor eſcape, for the Lord is relolved that the 
Cities of Moab ſhall beall brought to deſolation, fo as no In ha- 
bitants fhall be lefr in them. 


* Coa 
10 * Curſed be he that doeth the work of the ;**_ __ 
LORD || deceirtfully o, and curſed be he that keepeth | De mal 
back his ſword from blood p. gemily. 
0 Theſe words ſeem like the words of the Prophet to the Chal- 
deans, inciting them to go on valiantly againſt the Moabires, cal- 
ling it the work of the Lord, which he would have done, and to 
which lie had called them. p. There isa time to withhold on: 
hands from ſhedding Blood, and that is always when we have 
not a ſpecial Authority, and call trom God to it ; and there is 4 
time when God willCurle thole that do fo withhold their hands, 
that time is when God doch require the ſhedding of it. 


11 4 Moab hath been at eaſe from his youth 7, 
and he hath ſettled on his lees 7, and hath not been 
empried from veſſel to veſſel, neither hath he gone * Zeph. x, 
into captivity * : therefore his taſte + remained in 72+ , 
him, and his ſcent 1s not changed ?. 4 


0 2 There ſhall be no more praiſe of Moab : In Heſh- 
Or, ** hon they have deviſed evil againſt itb; Come, and 


ws let us cut itoff from being a nation c; Alſo thou 


FHeb. go|| ſhalt be cut down, O Madmen ; the ſword ſhall 
iſeer :h:e, | purſue thee 4. 

q b Heſhbon was formerly the City of $ihon. Numb. 271. 26. It be- 
came afterward one of the principal Cities of the Moabites, as 
appeareth from Iſa. 15. 4+ which maketh the learned Author of 
our Engliſh Annotations think our Tranſlation not ſo good, for 
why ſhould they deviſe evil in H:ſhbon againſt Moab, unleſs the 
Enemies fate there in Counſel when they had taken it, againſt 
the other parts.of the Country? But poſſibly the ſence is, They 
ſhallno more in Hefhbon magnitie Moab ; or Moab ſhall no more 
glory of Heſhbon, for the Enemies had contrived the ruine of it. 
Madmen was another City in the Country of Moah.Some think the 
fame with Ptolomy's Madiams. Tothat City alſo the Prophet 
threatneth ruine, and deſtruction by the Sword. 


3 A voiceof crying ſhallbe from Horonaim e, 
ſpoiling and great deſtruction.  , 

e Anotner City of Moab, mentioned only in this place, and in 
T/z. 15. 5. Som? think it the ſame with Horon, where Sanballar 


* q The Moabites ever fince they began to be a Pzople, hol 00d. 
been a quiet People, not exerciſed with Wars, and Enem:es mait- 
ing Inroads upon them. r Like to a Cask of Wine, that hath not 
been Rack'd, but hath continued in the ſame ſtare, » He follows 
the Metaphor of Wine which is drawn out from Veſiz] to Veſlel 
when it is drawn off the Lees ; It is expounded by the next 
words,Neither hath he gore into Captivity. t And this is the reaſon 
why they retain their old fins,Pr.de,Preſump:!on, Luxury,and old 
wickedneſfſes ; as Wine while it remaiceth in the Lees reraineth 
more 1ts nature, ſtrengrh, and colour, than when ic is once racke. 


12 Therefore behold, the days come, faith the 
LORD, that I will ſend unto him wanderers, that 
ſhall cauſe him to wander z, and ſhall empty his vet- 
ſels, and break his bottles o. 

n By the wandzrers here mentioned, the Ch2{121rs are molt 
certainly underſtood ; who wandred trom their own Country 9 
conquer other People. The word is varioufly tranſlated Yagrants, 
Travellers, Removers, &c. who ſhali conquer che Mobites, ar;1 
carry them into captivity, 0 He had before compared the Wat 
biles to Wine ſetcled upon the Lees, here he faith, thr Gay 
would fend thoſe that ſhouJd not galy difturb avs rowl thei, but 


was born, N-h.2. 10. and 13. 28, The Prophet threatens alſo 
rune and deſtruction to this City, 


ruine and deſtroy thein, 
12 And 


—— y 
w*- ir Eb renner egg err 
> 
One Op 


I 
4 I x 
T= —_ 


TY gr 4 "oy 
ES. 
4- b 


—_—_e Ee ts 
<4; 
1» 6 
> 
- _ 
= 


Mes Heat TIT =, = 
ECT” 
CO 


PR _- _ 
Ry 
eaye+ 
ago 
hs. we 
ow ” 1 
— 


> RT 


Chap. XLVIIL. 


13 And Moab ſhall be aſhamed of Chemoſh , as 
* r Kings £c houſe of Ifrael was aſhamed of * Bethel their con- 
12. 29. fidence 4. 

? It i5a natura!,and a Penal ſhame which is here ſpoken of. We 
are naturally aſhamed when we repoſeda greater confidence in, 
and mace great boaſts ot a thing, which when it comes to be 
tr1ed, proveth of no uſe, but miſchievous to us. Chemofh was 
ti.eir great Idol, in which the Afoabires had great confidence, 

and of which they boaſted, the Prophet tells them they ſhould be 
aſhamed of this Idol, or for this Idol; q as the 1ſraelites, that 1s, 
the Ten Tribes were aſhamed of, or for the golden Calves,which 
Ferobom ſet up at Dan and B2thel, which were the caule of ruine 
'# to thole Tribes. Confidences in any thing but in God alone ina 
time of danger will bring both natural and penal ſhame. 

14. T How ſay ye, * We are mighty and ſtrong 
men for the var r ? 

7 How can ye juſtifie what you ſay ; or why 

what purpoſe do you brag of your valour. 

is Moab is ſpoiled s, and gone up ozt of her ci- 
tics 7, and his + choſen young men are gone down 
# Heb, theto the Nlanghter z, ſaith the king whoſe name z the 
chiice of LORD ofhoſts w. | 

{ Your Country will be waſted, and ſpoiled. : The Inhabi- 


% 1j3, 16,6: 


> 


*EREMIAH 


upon all the cities of the land of Moab, far or 


near g. 
g God threatneth Vengeance to come upon all Moab, which 
had great Plains, Numb. 31. 12. and 33.48. For the Names of 
theſe Cities, and thoſe mentioned, Yer. 22,23, 24. Some of them 
we read of in other places of Holy Writ; Others we read not of 
neither is 1t materia] for us to know their ſituation. They are not 
at this day to be known by their own Names. They are all here 
mentioned as Cities at this time belonging to the Moabites, to 
whom this Vengeance [s threatned, and not tothem only, bur to 
all other Cities of the Land of Moab where-ever ſituate. 
25 The hornof Moab is cut off, and his arm is 


broken, ſaith the LORD h. 

h That is, the beauty and the flrength of Mozb. So theſe two 
terms often ſignihe in Holy Writ ;zthe Horn being much the Beau- 
ty of fome Beaſts, and that part of their Bodies by which they 


ſay you ſo, or to, 


tants of it ſhall be all driven out of their Cities. The Heb. is and 
her cities it, or he + goneup: So the ſence may be Mob and her 
Citiesare all ſpoiled, and he (that is) the Enemy 1s gone up. u 
And the ſtrong and mighty Men ſhe boaſted of, and gloried in, 
are gone to the Battle, as Oxen or Sheep to a Slaughter-houſe, w 
I do not ſpeak thisof my ſelf ; I cannot of my ſeit tell things that 


ſhall come to paſs hereafter, but the words I fay are the words 
of him who is the Lord of all the Armies of Heaven and Earth, | 
who both knoweth what ſhall be, and is able to effe&t what he 
faith. 
| | 16 Thecalamity of Moab zs near to come, and his 
| _ affliftion haſteth faſt x. 

x Feoſephus tells us this deſtrution came upon the Moabites 
Eve Years after the Siege of Jeruſalem; bur if it were longer 
we muſt conſider that he who ſpeaketh, is that God to whom a 
thouland years is but as one day, 

17 Allye that are about him bemoan him y, and 
all ye that know his name, ſay, How 1s the ſtrong 
ſtaff broken, and the beautiful rod = ? 

y The Prophet having ſpoken of Moab's Calamity as already 
come upon him, or at leaſt very near, calls to his Friends tocome 
and condole with him, as is uſually done in caſes of ſome Calami- 
ty befallen to a Friend. x. All ye that know how terrible Moab 
hath been to others, and how famous for mizhty and ſtrong 
Men. Say, How is this potent Nation, and this People that hath 
been ſuch a Rod againſt others, or hath ruled over ſo many 0- 
thers, broken; for both a St:zff and a Kod are as well Enſigns of 
Power and Governments,as inſtruments to puniſh Offenders. 


18 Thou daughter that doſt inhabit Dibon, come 


| 


——_— ——— — — — = I 


both do injury to others, and defend themſelves from the af. 
{aults of others. God here declares that Moab ſhould both loſe its 


| Glory and Beauty, and alſo all the power it formerly had to de- 


tend it ſelf, or offend others. 


25 * Make ye him drunken: : for he magnified * Chy 


himſelf againtt the LORD & : Moab alſo ſhall wallow +. 


in his vomit, and he alſo ſhall be in derifion /. 

; Either , make ye him to flagger like a Drunken Man, (the 
cauie being put for the effet) or fill him with the intoxicating 
Wine Cup of God's Vengeance; with the effes of God's 
wrath. k Becauſe of his Pride, and exalting himſelf againſt the 
Lord, as if he had been ſtronger than he, and fo our of the reach 
of God's Power, { As drunken Men vomit,and ſtagger,and fall,and 
wallow in their Vomit ſo let the Moabites fall by the Sword, wallow 
in their Blood, and like drunken Men be mock at, and had in de- 
rifion by all thoſe who ſee what their Vauats come to,and what 
Vengeance they have pulled upon themſelves, 

27 For * was not Iſrael a deriſion to thee 97 ? was* 24% 
he found among thieves x? for ſince thou ſpeakeſt of * *- 


him, || thou skippedlſt for joy o. 
m [tis an ill thing to mock at the mi 
ſuch as we have ſome relation to: The Moabites were deſcended ſelf 
from Lot, who was nearly related to Abraham the Father of the * 
Fews, and ought not to have mocked at them, but to have 
pitied their Neighbours and Kindred. They either mocked at the 
Ten Tribes when they were carried into captivity by Salmanaſar 
or at Fudah captivated by the King of Babylon. God threatneth 
the Ammonites, Exek. 25.6. and the Edomites by Obadiah for the 
ſame miſdemeanour. n Why didfſt thou deal by T{racl as Men deal 
by Thieves, when they are brought to ſhame ? Ought not he to 
have been by thee accounted in a better rank than that of Thieves 2 
0 Inſtead of compaſiionating the Fews in their Calamities, thou 
never ſpeakeſt ofthem but with joy and triumph. Others make 2 
a quite other ſence, viz. For zhoſe words againſt him, thou thy ſelf 
ſhalt wander. But the learned Author of the Engliſh Annotations 
obſerves well, that the word in the form here uſed will not ſo 
_ bear it, though the Verb doth in its primary ſence fignifie to 
wander. 


ſeries of others, PO... 


4 


down from thy glory a, and fit in thirſt b - for the 
ſpoiler of Moab fhall come upon thee c, ard he ſhall 
deſtroy thy ſtrong holds. 
2 Of this Dibsn we read, Numb. 21. 30, It was a Land for Cat- 
tle, Numb. 32.3. Both Dibon and Aroer, and Ataroth were built 
hl by the Children of Ga. to whoſe Lot it fel], Yer. 34. as alſo ro 
the Reabenires in part, Fofh. 13. 17. It ſhould ſeem that the Moa- 
6;res were now come into the poſicfſion of it either by conqueſt, 
or upon the Aſſjrians taking the Ten Tribes. b It was a place 
well watered. (Otherwife 1t kad not been fit for Cattle) God 
threatneth that ſhe ſhould be in thirſt, that is driven into ſome 
dry barren Countries. c For the King of Babylon whom God had 
appointc4 to ſpoil all Moab, and ſhall deſtroy thee alſo, and thy 
{irong holds ſhall not fecure thee. 
+114, 5. 19 O Þ inhabitant of Aroerd, ftand by the way 
»15ir;ſs and efpy ; ask him that fleeth, and her that eſcap- 
eth, and ſay, What 1s done e ? 

d Aroer was a City in the Lot of G24 and Reuben, Numb. 32. 
23. In David's time it was inthe hand of the Fews, x Sam 30-28. 
but in I{aiah's time, it belonged to Syria, Tja. 17. 2+ and here 1t 
is reckoned tothe Moabites. e The Inhabitants of it are called to 
ſtand by the way, and ſeeing the M»4bites flying to ask what 
News > Others think that Aroer was at this time a City of the 
Anmonites ; and here called to ſee their Neighbours the AMoab- 
ites fleeing before thetr Enemies. Ne 

20 Moab is confounded, for it is broken down; 
* howl and cry, tell ye it in Arnon, that Moab is: 
ſpoiled f. | 

f Arnon was the Name ofa River, Numb. 21. 14. Deut. 2. 36. 

of. 12.1. It was the border of | Moab whither Balak went to 
meet Bal2am, Numb. 22. 36. probably the adjacent Country or 
City might take its Name trom the River, 

21 And judgwent is come upon the plain coun- 
try 3 upon Holoa, and upon Jahazah, and upon 
Mephaath, 

22 And uponDibon, and upon Nebo, and upon 
Bethdiblaathm. 

24 And upon Kiriathaim, and upon Beth-gumal 


and upon Beth-meon. 
24 And upon Kerioth, jand upon Bozrah, and 


? Tha. 16:7. 


u There is no truſting to what he ſaith ; his Boaſtings and his 


28 O ye that dwell in Moab, leave the cities, and 
dwell in therockp, and be like the dove that maketh 
her neſts in the ſides of the holes mouth 4. 

p Still the Prophet ſpeaks of the Moabites as a People whoſe 
Armies were routed, and calls to them to leave their Houſes in 
Cities, not promifing themſelves any ſecurity either to or from 
their Houſes, or from the Wallsof their Cities, but to get them to 
Rocks, which are naturally fortified, and from whence (it from 
any place) ſecurity might be promiſed. q And he commends to 
them the natural ſagacity ofa Dove, which being a feeble Crea- 
ture, and not able to encounter an Hawk or Eagle, makes her ſelf 
a Neſt in the fides of ſome Rock where ſhe may be at ſafety, 


29 We have heard the pride of Moab, (he is ex- 
ceeding proud) his loftineſs and his arrogancy, and 
his pride, and the haughtineſs of his heart 7. 

r There isa paſſage, Iſa. 16. 6, &c+ concerning Moab, very lit- 
tle different from this. Iſazah lived fome Years before this Pro- 
phet, who yet complaineth of them for the ſame fins, ſo as they 
were not at all reformed. God faich he had heard of their Pride 
and Arrogancy ; a Vice which commonly attendeth eaſe and 
proſperity, and isexceeding odjous in the ſight of God, ſo as a 
wicked Man is often in ſcripture ſet out under the notion of a 
proud Man. ; 

30 I know his wrath, ſaith the LOR Ds, but 


it U, 
{ T know his Rage, either againſt 1ſrael,or other People, : but 


on 
. we. (1 
he ſhall never execute it, or bring to paſs what he thinks to do./ lf 


his bars 


Confidence are but lies, and ſhal! never effe& his Ceſigns. 


31 Therefore will I how] for Moab, and I will cry 
out. for all Moab ; mize heart ſhall mourn for the men 


of Kir-herez w. 

w Though wicked Men rejoice, and triumph in the ruine of 
good Men, yer their Charity tuffereth them not to do the like, 
but ingageth them to mourn for them inthe day of their AMiRi- 
on. Fer-my declareth his compaſſion towards theſe Moabites, tho 
tney derided the Fews when they were carried into Captivity 2: 
Nay, he mourns upon the proſpect of their mitery at ſome d1- 
{tance, when the hght ofthe Fews preſent Calamity would not 


affect the Moabizes with any compaſlion at all. We find the like 
C02g- 


Fg a 34 
wh > Fae TH? 
J e037 co RTE: 
T's” 
_ Pod 55.4%, ug? Ps 2 
! RE OC IT" 3 
vel) A Rn . 
4 


os 


{2.8 
cage TIN F\ 
S. 
:2 
7 


:t ſhall not be ſo r, || his lies ſhall not fo effect, Or. # 


mhin "il 


nos rig | 


* Ita. 
A, Fo 
F Heb 
deſola; 


* Ta. 
& 16, 


* i 
s1; 


* 11a. 


* Ia, 


bs, ; my: $6 

«3 5 Chap. 
vN T Heb 
= niſl 


J 


Chap. LV 11k 


compailiy A : - Fe 
There it is called K/r-baraſeth, which was a City of 31049, as we 


read, 2 Kin. 3. 25. ; : _ 
32 O vine of Sibmah x, I will weep for thee with 


the weeping of Jazer y ;- thy plants are gone over 


rhe ſea 2, they reach even to the ſea of Jazer 4; the 


ſoiler is faln upon thy ſummer fruits, and upon thy 
a2c. : 

"IX -ead of this Vine of Sibmahalſo, Iz. 16. 8, 9. Both Sib- 
»1 th, and F1þ474 were the places 1n the portion of Keuben, Fol. 13. 
18, 19. $/bnap was doubtlels a place tamous 11 tnole davs for 
Vines, and Vineyards. y This Fahaz.s or Fer was, as 1t ſhould 
ieem, ficlt raken and caried into captivity, which cauſed a great 
Lamentation. The Prophet foretel!s ſuch a weeping for $:b14) 
as was for fazer. 7 By plants he means the Inhabitants of Sibmah, 
which he prophefieth ſhould be carried inro Captivity over the 
dead Sea. a AS an Agegravation of the Judgment that ſhould 
come npon them,God by his Prophets tells rhem that the {pouler 
hould come upon them in their Vinrage and Harvelt time. 

23 And* joy and gladaeſs .is taken from the pien- 


a 16 tjful field, and from the land of Moab; and 1 have 


cauſed wine to fail from the wine-preſlts ; none ſhal 
tread with ſhouting; their ſhouting ſ:a/l be not ihout- 
INS 0. | 

b The tine of Harveſt and Vintage being times when the Hus 
bandmen were wot to reap the fru't of all their labours tne pre” 
ceeding Years, were times of great 10V ordinarily, bur che Pro 


% 


phet forerelis them of a Year when there ſhouid be no tuch re- 


. . : he YY:n I 
Joycing, for they ſhould have no W:ne from tae Wine-prefles,| 


there ſhould be 30 ſhouting, as uſed to be in the time of Harveſt 
and of Vintage, : E- 
34 From the cry' oft Heſhbon ever unto Elealeh, 


and even unto Jahaz have they uttered thetr VOICE, 


. a be , > % ns C _ 3 
* from Zoar eve unro Horonaim,as an helter of eHreo 


6 j 
rears old c : for the waters alſo of Nimrim ſhall be 
| LORD. 


+ deſolate 2. 


deſolartons. 7 Pid. Iſa. 12.5. dHeſhhon, and Elealeb, and Favax, me! 
Zoar, and Horonaim, were all Cities of Moab, who are here a:l; 


threatned with ruine 3 with the Country about Nimrim, whic | 
Nimrim is mentioned no where in Scripture, but here, and Ija. 
15. 6. nor are interpreters well agreed, whether in this place 


it be the Name of a River, or a Lake, or a City. The ſence 1s rhe; 


whole Courtry of A046 ſhall be deſtroyed, the Cry ſhall reach 
from one part of the Country to another; either the Cry of the 
Inhabitants, or of their Enemies purtuing them with a great 
note. ; ; 
35 Moreover, I will cauſe to ceaſe in Moab, faith 


* Ife. 15.2, © LORD, *him that offereth 1n the high places, 


COR PP IAN HELI. 6s 


” AO 
$422 


& 16. 12, and him thar burneth inceaſe to his gods e. 


« 1f, x6, like pipes, and mine heart ſhall ſound like pipes for 
i I l. : 
© *112. 15.7. hath gotten are periſhed 7. 


* Ia, 15+ 
bs 2 


 Chap-47-5.0n the loyns ſackcloth h. 
© T Heb. 4 


miniſh:d, 


+ Heb. 


neck. 


e That is, every ons or ſome of all orders, (tor the Mozbites 
generally were ldolaters' though the expreſſing it under this no- 
tion may hint to us alſo one great caule of this Judgment coming 
upon them, viz. their Icolatry. 

36 Therefore * mine heart ſhall ſound for Moab 


the men of Kir-heres: becauſe the * riches 7/7 he 


g The Prophet means tuch Pipes as they were wont to uſe at 
Funerals, and other lad occaſions, to play doleful Leflons upon. 
See T{a. 15. 5. becaule of the great change in the ſtate of this poor 
People, which had got together a great dea; of Wealth which 15 
all periſhed. 

37 * For every head hall he bald, andevery beard 
+ clipt : upon all the hands ſha! be cuttings, and up- 

?* bh Thele Phraſes are expounded in the beginning of the fo!- 
'owing Verſe, There ſhall be Lamentations generally upen all the 
houſe tops of Moab.Shaving of the Hair, and clippirg of the Beards. 
ayd cutting tnemielves. were Ri.es and Ceremonies of Mourning 
uſed by theſe Heathens, 

38 There ſhallbe lamentation generally upon all 
the houſe-tops of Moab, and in the ſtreets thereof : 
for I have broken: Moab like a veſſel, wherein zs no 
pleaſure, ſaith che LORD. 

i We met with the lame Phraſe applied to Conizh, Chap. 22. 
27. The meaning 1s, I have broken Moab all in pieces,/as People 
uſe to do Veſlels that they care not tor, they never go about to 
_ fuch a Veſlc], but daſh it in pieces againſt ſome Stones or 

alls, 

39 They ſhall howl, ſaying, How is it broken 
down ? how hath Moab turned the back -} with 


SEREMIAH 


1 in anvher Prophet. T/zizh, Cha), 16, 01.Hzr. 7. 


m N-04c5z[1:33 ir hill 2am: 1531 M5 fw tly, att 
Exgle covercth rhe Prev wiichhe nh talen 


4 [ 3 # 2 
«$1,» 4+. AT 4-0 Fu 
OV awk4d tad VE 4:4 » 


| 
| 


[ 


'pir, and he thar getteth up out of The pit ſhall be ta- 
Ken 11 the lnare: for | will bring v Pon it, ever upon 


N-bacha4nez3 ar ſha!l lpread over 44126, 


' r bn. ? jp - 1 p 
41 i Reriotn 1s taken, and che [ron hol4are 


at that Gay ſhall beas the heart of a woman in her cates. 


Per. 24. Or an appellative Noun ſignifying Cities, is doubttul. 
Che latter teems belt to a gree to this place. The cities and r/o throng 
holds are all taken, and s though W»2b hath in it many mighty 
and valiant Men, yet their hearts will be full of tear, or reacty ro 
fail them, like a Womans who is ia her Ccayail and hath great 
and fore pains. 


42 And Moab ſhall he deſtroyed from berzz7 a peo- 
ple p, becauſe he hath magnified h1:/ef avaiuſt the 
RD 49. 


| þ TInat1s,for atime ; ſee Yer. 47, Or being tuck a P-onle 25 


it hath been, ſo full of ſplendor aud glory. 9 The reatoa give is 
ithe ſame with chat Yer. 26. 


43 * Fear, and the pit, and the ſnare » ſb. 


| LORD. 17, 30» 
r Thele three words, Fear, Pit, Snzre, fignifie no morethan 

a variety of dangers trat ſhould beon ali fides of them, fo as it 

{any eſcape one danger he ſhould pretertly meet with another : 

for this was tae time when the Lord was retolved to naaiſh all 

the Inhabitants of the Land of 2046. ; 


4.4 He that fleeth from the fear ſhall fall into the 


Moab, the year of their vilitation , ith the 


45 They that fied ſfood under the ſhadow of 
Heſhbon, becaule of the forces: bur a fire ſhall come 
forth our of Heſhbon, and a flame from the mid of 
Sihon, and ſhi} devour the corner of Moab, and the 
crowa of the head of the -|- cumulcuous ones :. 

s Heſhbon was a great City, andas it ſhould ſeem, a place of x35. 
ſome force ; the War being in the Country, they made H-ſhm * 
che place of their Sanctuary. t But the Prophet applying to the 
Chaldeans what Was {aid 1n Moſes his time, Nanb. 21. 23. pr oplze- 
teth, That H«f5bon alto ſhould be deftroyed and the fire thould 


f Heb. 


09 


devour tte Crown of the head, that is, the glory of the brave re., 


ſhame & ? ſo ſhall Moab he a derilion, anda diſinay- 
10g to all them about him /. | 
k Thote that formerly lived in Moab when it was in its Glory, 
ſhall lament to ſee how the cale is altered with it, how all its Glory] 
1s broken down, and they that were wont to conquer their Ene- | 
mies, turn their backs with ſhame upon theic Enemies. ! And 


"IF *© Deut.2.8. Moab that was wont to be the praile and admiration of all Peo-|c, and his people dwell 11 their cities 4. 
IF 45 Chap. ple, was become an aſtoniſhment, and an object of derifion and 


49. 22, 


+ Pan 7,4, 40 Forthus ſaith the LORD, Behold, * he »2 ſhall 


{cofhng to them. | 


(] 


Hi. 8 Bo ce. at . a | 
0 yy y as an Cagle, andſhall ſpread his wings over Mo- | 


* 4b 2 


Vol. II. 


Izlling Gailants, called inthe H2h-the Children of Noi/e. 


45 X* \Wo be *tO thee, O Moab, the pcople of « v 
Chemoſh periineth, tor thy ſons arc taken | CAPLIVES ; > 1: 


and thy daughters captives z:. + 1]-b. 


- 
av 


wu The Prophet cloting ctze rhreatning part of his Prophecy _ C2214UEÞ 
aint My9zab, rep-atern re l2 me thing, which he 44 otten faid, 


lol i £4 n T; - i | wa "x > _ 2 - ” ® v 
char the Mo.2b1tes thoul be Carried into Captivicy by the King 95 
Babylun, and denouaceth a woe unto thei upon. that account 


47 ® Yct:will bringagain the captivity of Moab 


in the latter days, faith the LORD w. Thus far ;x 


the judgmeit of Moab x. 

w yore think tis Prophecy was fulfilled upon the returtr of 
the -ws out of Babylon, when the Fews had inhabired the Lard 
of Moab, Zeph. 2. 9. but this doth not ſeem to be the brinoins my 
2ain the Captivity of Mob, bur of Pudth ; befides in char place 
it 15 ſaid, taat Moab fhoul4 be 3s Sodomgand the childrey of ug 
Gomorrah, even the breedirg of Neles and Salt pizs, and a peretrna; 
le{olartion. It 1s therefore rather to be underſtood of 2 ipiritual 
reduction of them, by cai!ing ſome of them under the Kino. 
dom of M«/z25 as the Fea:/5 DoCtors themſelves interpret its 
Some think this a promile racher relpedting the Fews than the 
Moabires. It is taid, Ver. 2. 9, That che remnant of the Lords 
People ſhould poſſels Mcab, and Yer. 11. that all the I/les of the 
Deathen ſhould worſhip God. 2 Thele laſt words are doubtle(s ro be 
interpreted rather asa concluſion of this Prophecy againſt Mozb 
than (as lome would haye it) a limitation of the time how 
long this Jadgment on Mob ſhould endure, as if th; far, were as 
much as zh:45 long. 


CHAP. XLIX. 


The Fudement of the Anmonites, 1, —— $g. Their Reftaur:tior. 
6. The Fudgment of Edom, 7, — 22. Of Damaitus, 2:, 
—— 27, Of Redar, end HaZor, 28, -— 33. Or Elan 
and its Reſt auration, 34, 39. 


I || Onceruning the * Ammonites 2, thus taich 
the LORD, Hath lſrael no ſous - hath he ' 97.4 
no heir 6? why then doth i| their king inherit * Gad 395; 


a The Ammonites were the Poitcrity of Ber-Arami, Lo:'s in- , 
ceſtuous Ci1id, by his younger Daughter, Gen. 19+ 38. Their & 


Country was near the Fews Country, the F-ws 1a their Jo ovy | 75, +. 


from Egzz5t to Canaan to poſlels ir, pafſed by their Councrv, aur |... 
were by God forbidden to meddle with it becaule he hag given tt 


'the Children oi £1, Dent, 2. 1 y. but they proved bad Neich ou: 5 


t + to 


”- 


ſurpriſed z, and the * mizhty meus hearts in Moab i Or, rhe 


11} TY + (*h. 
PangS 7, 4 \-d D, 
n Whether K-ri0th here be the proyer Name of a Cirv, as it-is 45+ 32- 


be upon thee, O inhabitant of Moab, faith the * #* 24- 


ch11 dy el o 


« (1713 '* 


GL . - 
©54- x 


” Tr 4 . whe 
8 _ EVEN 
Go Tens 4>-> = 229mm gone <q +4 
s : . 
wv ” 


=. 
Sz 


- 
=_y 


+ 
— 
 __— 
EET 

a we 

4 14 


Lv hath =>. 


ibs 
A 
” 
” 


—_ 
wa 


PAIR 
8-4 
y%" wary eh. fins i.e. wommk,,* 
— = ” . Mo; « 
- 


nas 
". 


{ 18 - 
ng” -y_" 
- >. bs. > _ > 


® I ts 


no 


_ bs 
gods, 
I” 


; 8 "4 --<>ww ne _ 
Fr ! WS” . — n+ age + ides Db 
S ___ . « es 
4 3W-7 os en ne. Fa. "7 a, .-- toi 
boos Or eons mn ent en 


ho Chap. ALIX. 


eefirores them, 2 Sam. It. 1. FJeboſaphar ailo, and FJithum 
fonght with them, 2 Chron. 20.1. and 27. 5. During the Jong 
| that there weie Wars betwixt the Fews and Ammo- 
mire, Co Land of Gad and Reuben which lay beyond Jordan, 
If tel! into the hands of the Syrians , Moabites and Ammonttes 
j (wbence it is that in the former Chapter we read of many C1i1es 
ll of Mob, which were upon the diviſion of Canz2n, in the Lot of 
3 Gd and Renben, ) This Prophecy cannot be well underſtood with- 
out a previous underſtanding this. b Hence it is that the Prophet 
129ich, Path I{ract ns Sons ? God had given that Country of Gilead 
to 2funifſos, and Reuten and Gad, Numb. 52.39. 7']. 13-29, 30+ 
c and a5 1:15 Eſtates onghtto delcended to their Heirs, lo tnis 
| 18 Land.h 11d have continued and deicended to thePoſteriry of thele 
j Tribes, but the Ammonites had by force taken away Aa part; and 
Zelcom polefſed it. Zfelcom is their Ring, or the name of their 
140! to whom they gave the Name of King,as other Heathens cal- 
| | Jed their Idol Bal, that is Loid, 4 And the People of the Ring 
Y: of the Anminitcs, or of Melcom the Ido] of the Ammonitas, 
'* dwelt in the Cities belonging to Gad, which was one of the 
| Tribes cf 1{-2el, 

2 Therefore behold, the days come, faith the 
LORD. thar 1 will caufe an alarm of war to be heard 
in Rabbah e of the Ammonires, and 1t ſhall be adeſo- 
late hean, and her daughters ſhall be burnt with fre: 
then fall Ifracl be heirs unto them that were his 
hcirs, faich the LORD f. 

2 Becaute the Ammnites had violently ſeized upon ſome part 
of the Jos T.and, and (as we have it Amos 1-13, 14.) cruelly 
7:01 m9 the Women with Child inGilead, that they might enlarge their 
xicr. God threatens a War to Rabbah, Amos 1. 14. calls it a 
fire which ſhon!d make Rabbab an heap. Of this Rabbab, as the 
head City of the Ammmnites, we read Deur. 3« 11+ Jof, 13. 25. and 
15. 60. I: was there, where in David's time Hriah was flain 
2 $4. 11+ 1,17, Chap.12.26, It isthreatned by Jeremi/3b 1n 
©:15 Chapter, and Egeh. 25. 5. and Amos 1. 13, 14. we read not 
bow or vhen this Prophecy was fulilled, whether by tte Mac- 
©5205, 1 Mar. 5.6. 05 rather after the coming of, Chriſt, when 
molt of theſe Nations were deſtroyed, f God threatens not only 
their merropolis which was Rabbah their Mother City, bur allthe 
other Cities belonging to the Ammonites which were as 1t were 
| Daughters to Rubbah., Bur how the laſt clauſe of this Prophecy 
was ever fulfilled if it were not 12 the time of the Maccabees I can- 
9: vaderſtand; for though they werel wallowed up afterward by 


L L  _c 
* 4 c 
crack Of 1035 


= 
> 


i arg0iD, 


þ- icattered intoall parts,it 15 not likely that many of them were ſut- 
t . . . m 

| tered to abide in any conſiderable numbers in a Country 1o near 
ener Own. 


* Ia. 32. 3 Howl, O Heſhbon, for A1 is ſpoiledg, cry ye 
11.22p- danghters of Rabbah h, * gird ye with ſackcloth : la- 
-= Pig nent, and T1 to and fro by the hedges z, for their 
Or. 24. king ſhallgo nto captivity,ezd Þ his priefts and his 
A Princes together þ&. 

* Crap o Hefbben was formerly a City of the Ammorites of whom Sihon 


7 


$3. 7. was Ring who reited here, (but it appears by Ver 26: that 1t was 
Amos 1. taken trom Ao4b) it is probable that wes at this time a City of 

AGab, 15.the Prophet callsto them to howl for A! a City of the 
Ammenites , not the fame mentioned, Jof. 7. 2. tor that was on the 
other fide of Jordan. þ It is uncertain whether by the Daughters 
of Rab54h be to be underſtood other lefler Cities, or the younger 
Wonien that inLabited Rabbah, he calls to them all to mourn. 
{ And for allthe indications or figns of mourning, fuch as girding 
with fackioth, running up and down like Perſons diſtracted, by 
the Hedges, where they might be hidden, and not fo eaſily ſeen. 
Þ For they fh:11 ail go together 1n captivity, their Meleom which 
may fgnihe treir Idol ro whom they gave that Name or their 
King, or elſe their ſupream Magiſtrate, with their Prieſts and 
N.bles, all orders of Perſons. 


- 


L 


| 

$1 NU + VWherefore elorieſt thou in the vallies, || thy 

"þ the fig. DOWNS Valley Z, © backſliding daughter mz? that 

f + 2w4;, frulted in ber treaſures, /zy;ing, Who ſhall come un- 
| * Cup. TtOmes2? 


SAEED { It ſhould ſeem that this Country was fnll of very fruitful Val. 
lors, which we know are always the moſt fertile places, lying 
104er a1 at a greater diſtance trom rhe Sun than Mountains,and 
a'{o receiv 149 at lecond hand the moiſtiire that fallsupon the Hills 
anc being utrally watered with Rivers, irom whence they may 
be cailed /.irz Plli-s extner as flowing with receptacles of Wa- 
rer, or p.cuty of Corn and Grafts, though tome read it (andir 
{eems rather more agreeable tothe Hebrew) thy Valley floweth, 
either with the 5/094 of Men {lain. or floxerh away, the fertility of 
if cealerh Or derazeth, Or Fluod of Water: ſhall:deſtroy the truit of 
rich Valites, 2c. m Ammon having never been in Cove-ant With 
Ged, the word inthe Reb. (though it comes from ATW which 
{ianifhes to return) fecmerh 11] tranſlated back-fliding, rhou that 
haft turned thy felt away trom God. » Thou that rruſtedſt jr 
©; Riches, or 1n thy Valleys full of Riches. and promiledſt chy 
iejf ſecurity from the ſiruation of thy rich Countrey thinking none 
c0u1d come art thee, 


5 Behold, Twill bring a fear npon thee, faith the 
Lord GOD of hoſts, from all thoſe rhat be ahonr 


7 thcew, and ye ſhall be driven out every man right 

| forth x, and none ſhall gather up him that wander: 
cth y. 

19 

V's 

, 


FERE M1 Ai 


5.1 BOP F: 
j to the Trarlires when tg Canzzn. They affiſted the King of Moab | 
will againit them, Jude 3. 13- and made War againſt them Tudg. 19.9. 
TH 3nd 11, 4. Na: fþ thei King made an inroad upon chem, 1 Sam. 
[1.8 12. 12. Pavid fought with them in his time, 2 Say. 8. 12. and 


15, Ap Y?” ['Þ JF 
Chap. ALLA 
w As {ecure as you think your ſelves, I will cauſe vou to 9£ 
' afraid, and your Enemics ſhall be all thoſe that are rcund about 
; YOU x And you ſhall be driven out every Man either 11ght forth 
| 1nt0 lome Country oppoſite to you, or apart ore trom ancther, 
or {o that you ſhould be glad ro flee right torth, and never look 
back, L'1t only forward, tor any place of ſafety that appteareth 
next before you. y And when you are wandering, being driven 
by your Enemies, you ſhall find none that will be willing tore- 

Celye Or entertain you. 

s And afterward * I will bring again the* Chap, 
captivity of the children of Ammon, faith the #7: 52 
LORD 2. 

7 Such a promiſe we read of Chap. 48. 47. concerning Moab, 
bur when this was fulklled the Scripture ſaith not : Feſephas tells 
us ſomething, but it is rather thought to reter to the Conver ſ1- 

01 of ſome of the Ammonites as well as Other Heathens unto 
Chriſt. 

7 F Concerning Edom, thus faith the LOR D=* 9448. 
of hoits a, 1: wiſdom no morein Teman » ? 1scoun- V. 8. 
ſel periſhed from the prudent ? is their wiſdom 
niſhed * ? 

a The Edmites were the Poſterity of Eſau theeldeſt Son of 
aac, but difinherited, the Blefling being given to his younger 
Brother Facob who was the head of the twelve Tribes of the 
I(raelites, Gen 27. 29. God there Ver. 39. promited him that ke 
ſhould have a -fat and plentiful Country, though his Brother 
ſhould be his Lord,and foretold,that he ſhould break his Brothers 
Yoke from of his Neck ; the Land of Seir was his Country. 
Gen. 32. 3. The Edomites coaſted ſouthward upon Canaan, the 1/- 
raelites paſſed by their Coaits to go into Canazn, their way lay 
through Edom, but their Ring refuſing to ſuffer them to go thro”, 
God ordered them to go another way. Balaam prophefied their 
ruine, Numb. 24.18. they were Enemtes to the Iſraelites in Saul's 
time, 1 Sam. 14. 47. ard in David's time, 2 Sam.8$. 14. and A4ma- 


ea 


4. tie Reman Empire, yet 1{ract being alſo ſubdued by them, and 


ziab's time, 2 Kings 14+ 7+ Who flew of them ten thouſand, and 
cook Selah and calling it Fckteel, many of the Prophets foretold 
their ruine, Jer2miah 1a this place, Exek. 25. 12,13, 14. Jo 3.19. 
Amos 9. 12, Obadiah 1. 8. 2al.1. 4. b Teman wasa City of Edom 
mentioned alſo Exek 25.13. Amos 1+ 12. Obad 9. Eliphay Job's 
Friend was of this place, Jeb 2. 11. It was a place tamous for 
wiſe and prudent Men, oft which Eliphaq was not the meaneft, c 
The Prophet asks what was become of all their Counlel and Wit- 
dom, for which the Arabians, the Temanites in particular, were 10 
famous 2 Now they were at their wits end. 


8 Fleeye|!|, turn back, dwell deep, O inhabitants | or, ths 
of Dedan, for I will bring the calamity of Eſau up- are returre 
on him, the time that I will vilit him e. \ back. 

4 Dedan was the Son of Joh ſham, 1 Chron. 1. 32. from which 

it is probable that the City Dedan had its Name, it is reckoned 
Chap, 25. 23+ With Tema and Buy, and is mentioned Ezekiel 27, 
15,20. and 38.13. It was a City of Arczbia joyning on Idu- 
mad, Tſa.21. 73, they being Neighbours to the Elomites are cal- 
led to flez, ana to get into Caves and holes of the Earth, where 
they might dwell deep in the Earth and be in ſome ſecurity,which 
they would not bein their own City ſo near tothe Emites 
Country,tor God was relolved to bring mitery upon theEdomites, 
a time of calamity in which he would viſit them with his Judg- 
ments. There are other critical readings of theſe words, but this 
leemeth to be the plain ſence of them. 


9 If grape-gatherers come to thee, would they 
not leave /ome gleaning, grapes ? if thieves by night, 
they will deſtroy + till they have enough f. Heb. 
f We have much the ſame 0badieh 5. the (cope of the Prophet ther ſu 
in this place is only to ſhew that Edom ſhould be totally deſtroy. #79 
ed, their deitruction fhould not be like the gleaning of Grapes, 
where the gatherers content themſelves with taking the principal 
Clufters, but tor ſingle Grapes, or ſome Cluſters they leave them 
{mall: Nor yet like the robbing of Thieves, who take for their 
hunger, and when they have got enough leave the relt, 


Io But I have made Eſau bare g, I have uncover- 
ed his ſecret places h, and he ſhall not be able to hide 
himſelf / : his ſeed 1s ſpoiled &, and his brethren and 
his neighbours, and he z- not /, 

g But the Edomites ſhould be lett bare. þ And though they 
ſought to hide themſelves in ſecret places, yet God would there 
fiad them our. 7 And there ſhould be no places ſufficient to hide 
them. k All cheir Children ſhould be deſtroyed, 1 and the Xoa- 
bites their Rinſmen, and rhe Philiftines their Neighbours ſhou!d 
be rutned as well as they, 

11 Leave thy fatherleſs children, I will pre- 
ſerve ter alivez and let thy widow trult in 
me 7. 

m The only queſtion npont his Verſe is whether in the whole 
of it, be a promiſe,or a threatning ; if it be a promiſe the fence 
is, that though this great deitrnftion ſhould come upon the * 
Body of the Elomites, yet God would take care of ſome of their 
fatherle(s Children, whoſe Perects being carried into captiviry 
they had none to provide for chem: ifir beraken as an rronical 
threatning 1t foundeth ruine to thoſe as well as the reſt,and Twill, 
isas much as I will not ; bur others rhink that theſe are rather to 

2 underſtoo.1 with the ſupply oi fome other words. There & nor, 
OC there ſhall be none to ſay, leave thy fatherleſs Children, 8c. and 
whoſo conſidereth thoſe words in the tenth Verſe, hi feed ſhall be 
(poiled, will fee reafon to judge it rather a threatning (whether 
by way of Irony or 00) than a promite» 


4021 
hal 


Ct 


* Ch 
25.2 


Oba. 


| * Ger 


*s-1 
29.2: 
Amos 
Ki, 


EY of others be? When an Iſraelite hath not eſcaped che Juſtice of 


$i 4 we tound in the foregoing Chapter) and that which he threatens 
BY ir with was not being reproach, a waſte, and a Curſe for a 
TS 5, time, but for ever. 
ER 


Chap. XLIX. 


but thou ſhalr ſurely drink of zr. 


SEREMIAH 


12 For this ſaith the Lord, * Behold, they 
whoſe judgment was not ro drink of the cup », have 
2 Oval. 16.  aredly drunken, and art thou he that ſhalt altoge- 
| ther go unpunuiſhed, thou ſhalt not go unpualſhed, 


n That by the Cup is meant the Wine Cup of the Lord's Wrath, 


| from her a, and who # a choſen 1» the; I may ap- 

Pount over her b ? for * who 5 like me c ? and who* Exod. 
will || appoiat me the time ? and who 5 that ſhep- 15-71 
herd that will ſtand before me 4 ? | _-* JB gnIS 

T This Verle 1s very variouſly interpreted, ſome by he under. COT Os 


ſtand che Jews, fone un« Vert mein 
, lone underſtand Nebuchatnes: p ' 


| a, 13 For I have ſworn by my ſelf, ſaith the LORD, 


and that by thoſe whoſe Judgment was not to drink of it.are meant 
the Jews is not to be doubte( 3 but the Queſtion is how the Pro- 
phe: ſaith, that it was not the Judgment of the Fews to drink of 
this Cup? The word here uled is of ſo various ſigaifications as 
makesthe fixing the ſence of it here difficult, it cannot here fignifiz 
Fuſtice, for in that ſence it was the Fews Fulgments to drink ot 1t, 
nor can it here (as it often doth) ſignifie the effe&t ot Juſtice,God" 
judicial dilpenſatian 3 for they had drank of ir, fo it was their 
judgment. Ic muſt be caken 10 the favourableſt ſence imaginable. 
Fitter they who in regard of their relatioa to God, and God'sre- 
lation to them might have looked upon it as noneof their portion, 
yet have drank of it : Or they who in compariſon with others d1d 
not deſerve to drink of the Cup, yet have drank of it, and can you 
think to eſcape, no thou ſhalt nor eſcape, bur muſt ſurely drink of 
- it, 1 Pet. 4. 17. The time is come, that judgment % b:gyn at 
the houſe of God, and if it firſt begin with that where ſhall the end 


ſari the £4»mites, I think the laſt is molt probable, to be here 
meant, be-aule of the next words. The E tomite, ſhall come Que 
againſt the Ch4ldemns , lik: a Lion, as Lyons lurking abou: xe 
dan when it overfloweth, come out to take their prey. a Theſe 
words are variouſly underſtood, thoſe who by be in the former 
part of the Verte underſtand Nebrchadner7r, interpret the run. 
ning here mentioned, of his running ove: the whole Country of 
Elom ; to me 1t appeareth a much more probable ſence co inter. 
pret 1t of the E lomites running away from N buchadne33ar Out of 
their own Country, which ſeems to be underſtood by hi; 341] that 
makes a difficulty is the particle from, which yec makes the lence 
good enough, if by her we underſtand the Elemit:s own Land 
In the Hebrew it is, I will break them, or I will quiet them, and 
make them to run. b Whom ſhall I ſet over Elom? tnco whoſe 
hands ſhall I give that Countrey that he may rule over it? 5 For I 
can do whatſoever pleaſe. c And who will appoint me a time 
to plead with Men, to Fob 9. 19. or a time to fhght. 4 Whac 15 


God, an Edomite muſt not expect 1t. 


that Bozrah ſhall become a deſolation, a reproach, a 
waſte, and a curſe, and all the ciues thereof ſhall be 
uy perpetual waſtes 9. I | 
o As Men when they wonld confirm their promiſe or threatning 
to do any thing, add an Ozth to ir, fo doth God, who, having 
n> greater to ſwear by, ſwears by himielf, Chap. 44+ 26+ that 
which God would here confirm was his threatning againſt Edom, 
expreſt under the notion of Bozrah, ( a part for the whole) Boxrab 
being ic's principal City, 1/2. 63@ + 35 well as a City of Mab, ( as 


that Ring or Porentate of the Earth that will ſtand before me 2 


25 Therefore hear the counſel of the LORD 
chat he hath taken againſt Edom, and his purpoſes 
that he hath purpoſed againſt the Inhabitants of Te- 
man e: Surely the leiſt of the flock ſhall draw them 
out /, ſurely, he ſhall make their habitatious deſo- 
lace with them g. 5 

e Elom and Teman in this Verſe ſignifie both the ſame thine 
God calls to men to hear the reſolutions he had taken un 2gainſt 
cne Edomites, Refolutions as wile as ſteady as if they had been ta- 
ken upon the wiſe!t countels, and deliberation. f God is reſolved 


Gather ye together, and come againſt her, and ruſe to 


the battel r. | 

þ Obadiab beginneth his Prophecy much with ſuch words. God 
hath revealed his Will to me in a Viſion, or a Dream. q He ſpeaks 
after the manner of earthly Princes, who uſe to ſend their Ambal- 
ſadors to other Princes to declare their minds tro them. The mean- 
ing is, God hath made ſuch impreſſions upon other Nations, he 


14 *I have heard arumour from the LORD p, 
and an Ambaſſador is ſear unto the Heathen 9, ſaying, 


to drive out the E lomizes, and the leaſt of Nebuch1dneqqir's 
Forces ſhail drag them out of their lurking places, and God wi!l 
make the place where they dwell a deſolation. 


21 Theearth is moved at the noiſe of their fall : 
at the cry, the noiſe thereof was heard in the -|- Red-# Heb- 
ſea h. weedy Seg, 
h That is, the ruine of the Edomites ſhall be ſo great, that all 
Nations round about it ſhall be affected ac the noiſe of their fa] 
and though the Ked- Sea, or the weedy Sea be at a great dillance 
trom them, yet their noiſe ſha!l reach chither. 


22 Behold, * he ſhall come upand flie as the eagle, + Cha; 


hath inclined them, or ſet them on work, to get together in Ar-|and ſpread his wings over Bozrah : and at that day 4. 13: 


mies to come againſt Edom in Battel. 


ſhall the heart of the mighty men of Edom be-as the 


15 For lo, I will make thee ſmall amongſt the heart of a woman in her panes : : 


Heathen, and deſpiſed among men /. 

{ Obadiah in his Prophecy againſt Edom, Yer. 2. hath much the 
lame words importing that God would bring the Edomzes very 
low, and make them very contemptible. 

| 15 Thy terriblencſs hath deceived thee, and the 
” pride of thy hearts, O thou that dwelleſt in_the 
_ clefts of the rock «, that holdeſt the height of the 


| 1h, hilt; though thou ſhonldeſt make thy neſt as high as 


ol the eagle, 1will bring thee down from thence, faith 


bo. the LORD w. 


z 0ba4iah in his Prophecy againſt Edom uſeth much the ſame 
expreſſions, Ver. 3, 4. The word that is here uſed being of the 
number of thoſe which are but once found in Scripture hath given 
Interpreters liberty to abound in their ſences oft ; ſome tranſlat- 
ing it Arrogance, ſome, thine 740!, but the beſt Interpreters un- 
derſtand by it their terribleneſs to others, their being fo potent 
that others were all afraid of chem, this deceived them, making 
them to conclude themſelves ſecure, and out of danger; ro which 
is alſo added the pride of the heatt. u The Country of Edom 
being mountainous they are ſaid ro dwell inthe clefts of the Rocks, 
that is, in places impregnable, and inacceſſible as they thought in 
the heights of the Hill. w But the Lord lets them know no place 
wasto his power inacceſſible oc impregnable, for if they dwell as 
high as the Eagle, which the Scripture tells us, Fob 39. 27, 28. 
Maketh her nejt on high, and dwelleth and abideth upon the rock, 
#pon the crag of the rock, yet he would bring down. 


17 Alſo Edom ſhall be a deſolation : every. one 
that goeth by it, ſhall be aſtoniſhed, and ſhall hiſs at 
all the plagues thereof -. 

x The like is ſaid of Babylon, Chap. 5o. 13. it appears from 
7 Kings 9.8. that it was a kind of Proverbial Expreſſion, when 
they would expreſs a great deſolation, or great Plagues, that thoſe 
who paſſed by ſuch a place, ſhould be aſfonifh:4, and hiſs a: 
it, 

* Gen. rg, 18 * As in the overthrow of Sodom and Gomor- 
25. Deut. rah and the neighbour cities thereof, ſaith the LORD: 
77-23 noman ſhall abide there, neither ſhall a ſon of man 
_ dwell in it y, 

y Sodom and Gomorrah, and the Neighbour Cities were utterly 

. deſtroyed, and therefore are {er down both here ard Chap. 50. 40. 
Ws as patterns of an utter ruine and deſolation. 


_ 19 * Behold, he ſhall come uplike a lion from the 
«+ .i# *Fvelling of Jordan, againſt the habitation of the 
> 1:5, ſtrong x: but 1 will ſuddenly make him run away 


Vol. II, 


7 See the Notes on Chap. 48. 40, 41. wherethe very ſame thing, 
and under the ſame Phrales, was ſpoken againſt Mozb, That 
which is chreatned is the Enemies coming {wittly upon the E tc- 
mites and preying upon them, and the fear that ſhould ſurprize 
them which ſhould make their hearts faint as the heart of a Wo- 


| 


[ 


man thar hath an hard labour, 


23 T *Cecncerning Damaſcus k. Hamath 1s con-* 7c. g. 
founded, and Arpad /: for they have heard evil ti- 1» 2-1 


dings, they are Þ faint-hearted, there zs ſorrow || on _ 
the ſea, it cannot be quiet m. — _ - 


k The Prophet comes to denounce the judgments of God againſt", 
Syria, another Nation of the Gentiles, Damaſcus was the head Ci- 
tyof Syria, Tſz.7.8.and 17. 3. or Aram ( as in the Heb. ) becauſe 
it was a Country inhabiced by the poſterity of Aram one of the 
Sons of Sem, part of it lay betwixt Babylon and Arabi, and was 
called Meſoporamiz, lying betwixt the two Rivers of Tjgris and 
Euphrates, Laban and Naaman were of this Country, David 
had War with them, 2 8am. 8.5. and 10. 18. So had Abb, 

1 Kings 20.20, and Foram 2 Kings 8.28. And Abax, Ifa. 7. 3. 
afcer God's long pitience with them he threatens them with ruine, 
as by Feremizh 1n this place. ſo by Amos 1. 5, Damaſcus being the 
head of this Country, 15 ſometimes pur (as here) for the whole 
Countrey. 1 Hamath and Arpad were two Cities alfo of Syriz, 
2 Kings 18. 34. m The Prophet foretels tnat they alſo ſhould 
hear of 11] News, an Enemy that is coming againit them, and char 
they ſhould be melted through fear, and their Courage ſhould 
tail them, they ſhould be as troubled as the Sea is in a Storm, 
” _ Inhabitants that lived near to the Sea ſhould be trou- 
ed. | 
24. n Damaſcus is waxed feeble, and turneth her 
ſelf to flee o, and fear hath ſeized on herp - * anguiſh® chap; 
2nd ſorrows have takea her, as a woman in -tra- 4 ;:. and 
vall q. | 39. 6. 

n Syria whoſe head is Damaſcus, hath loſt her oid Courage and 
Valour ; it was wont to be a formidable County to irs N21gh- 
bours. 0 But now they flee Letore their Enemies. p They are teizedt 
and overpowred by their own fears. q Great Sorrows are ordti- 
narily in Scripture expreffed by the fimilicude of the pains of a 
Woman in Travail, we have met with it often in chis Prophecy, 
| Chap. 6. 24. and 22. 23. fo Pſal. 48. 6. Micah 4. g. 

25 How isthe city of Praiſe not letr, the city of 
my joy 7? | : 

7 It is called the City of Praiſe, hecauſe it was a City ſo much 
praiſed, a City of great Renown, which the Prophet ſeeing like 
co be deſtroyed, lamenterh either inche Perſon of the King of Syric, 


e ICs 


or of the Syrizn Inbatirarts, wondemag that the Gonquerours 
[N 32 ] fhouid 


hd. 
Poa 
= . BY 
*,- : 
++ oo ally + + ' 
gn 


CEE nm 
a mm 


0s _— 
EE F 
£ * . = = 
a OO  wworu 


* r - — 4 - 

. p on -— Wy, a6 
We _ I a Age 
——_ ICSD WS o& 


oY that day, faith the LORD of hoſts /. 


moe. 


_ 


Chap. RLIA. FERE 


ſhould not ſpare ſo {amous and renowned a City in which ſo man 
did rejoycec. | 

26 * Therefore her young men ſhall fall in her 
ſtrects, and all the men of war ſhall be cut off 1n 


* Chap. 


$0, Zo, 


(The Hebrew Particles are not always well rendred in our 
Tranſlation, and our Learned Enzlih ,Anzotator hath rightly ob- 
ſ-rved this piace,as one inftance, for Noe lakzn, cannor be herean 
Warive,buris much better cranſlated [are!y,as a note of aſſertion. You 
threatneth the Sj1i27s witha certain ruine, and detolarion. 

27 AndI will kindle a fire in the wall of Damal- 
cs 7, and it ſhall conſume the places of Benha- 
. ded ve. 

tf will brivg a Judgment that ſhail burn in D2Maſcus like a Con- 
ſuming Fire, # and ir ſhall reach to tl;e Royal Scar of B-nhadadz el- 
ther that which was the Royal Seat of B-nhadad, 2 Kings 8.7.0 
elſe Ben-hadad, ( ſignifying the Son of Hidad ) ( which was ter 
Idol) was the common Name of all the Kings of S;11a, as Pha- 
ra0h was to the Kings of Egypt, Amos 1. 4. 

28 A Concerniag Kedar w, and concerning, the 
kingdoms of Hazor x, which Nebuchadnezzar king 
of Babylon ſhall ſmite, thus faith the LORD y, 

| Ariſe ye, goup to Kedar, and ſpoil the men of the 
ealt. z 

w K:1', Gen. 25. 13. was one of the Sons of Iſhmael, whoſe 
Poſtericy inhabnted part of Arabia Petrea. See Ha. 21. 13, 17. We 
read of 1t, Pſal. 120. 5. Cant 1. 5. Exch 27.21. x Weread of 


MIA H. 


in Scripture but in Ferfa, Dan. 8. 2. and thevgh thef vere indeed 
at 4 great diflance, yet 1t js probable thar Ne{nchadningcy having 
conquered the 4ſſjrians, might alſo make ſome inroads into Fer- 
/z1, rhe Emperour of which atterward conquered Baby/on, This 

'ropiecy being in rhe firit Year of Zedeþiah, muſt needs belong 

beforerhe thing was done, for it was ten Years before the King of 
Babylon took Hitruſalem. 

35 Thus faith the LORD of hofts, Behold, I 
will break the bow of Elam, the chief of their 
might 6, 

b All thoſe Eaſtern People were famous for the uſe of the Bnw, 
the Elamites in ſpecial, Tſziah 22. 6. thoſe Bows were the chizf of 
their offenſive Armour, tho* hy the chief of their might maya'iſo 
be maant their moft mighty and ſtrong Warriours. This Prophecy 
1s probably judged to be fulfilled when the Perſcans made a defec- 
on from the Ring of the aſedzs, who was Son-in-Law to Neb:- , 
chadntzar. Others think that this Prophecy was accompliſhed by 
Alexander the Emperouy of Greece, or rather by his Succet- 
ſors. 

36 And upon Elam will I bring che four winds, 
from the four quarters of heaven,and will ſcatter 
them towards all thoſe winds;and there ſhall be no na- 


tron whither the outcaſts of Elam ſhall not come c. 

c The Prophet threatnerh the deſtruction of the Per/72ns, by a 
Confederacy of Enemies, ſuppoſe Babylonizns, Medes, &c. which 
ſhould affault them on all ſides, as when the wind blows at the ſame 
time from all Quarters, which cauſerh a Whirlwind which driverh. 
the Duft every way hither, and thither, ſo he ſaith the Perſians 
ſhould be ſcattered into all Nations, | 


Hr, Joh. 11.1, Verſe to, it was the head City to ſeveral 
Kingdoms in Feſhra's rime, Fabin was king of 1t in the times of 


37 For I will cauſe Elam to be diſmayed before 


Deb5rah, Fadg. 4. 2. y The Prophet forerels that Nebuch2dnergar| their enemies, and before them that ſeek their life 
fnould alſoconquer tele Kingdoms. I And faith, he heard che and I will bring evil upon them, even my fierce 4n- 


Lord call to Nevachadnerar to go up againſt chem. 


ger , faith the LORD, and I will ſend the ſword af- 


29 Their tents and their flocks ſhall they take a-j ter them, till I have con@{med them 4. 


way 4; they ſhall take to themſelves their curtains 
and all their veſſels, and their camels b, and they 


all cry unto them, Fear z- on every hide c. 

z Thar 15, the Chaldeans ſhall rake away the Kedarens Tents, 
for they being a People whole Cartel were their livelyhood, had no 
fxed Houſes but Tents, which were moveable Hahirations, cover- 
ed with Skins of Beaſts. b And the Curtains which they uſed to , 
draw before rhoſe Tenrs, and ſerved them as fides,as gable ends of 
Houſes ſerve us, and all the Furniture of their Tents or Taberna- 
cles, and their Cartel, and either their Enemies ſhoald fright them 
with tcrrible noiſes and outcrres, or they ſhould themſelves cry out 
that they were ſurrounded with objetts of fear, 

+ Fc. 30 © Flee, + get you taroff, dwell deep, O ye 

fi: greatly. inhabitants of Hazor, faith the LORD 4; for Nebn- 
chadrezzar king of Babylon hath taken connſel a- 
2ainſt you, and hath conceived a purpoſe againſt 
YOU ©, 
4 The words ſeem to be the Prophet's words of advice to this 
People, to make all the haſte rhey could away,and ro ſecure them- 
felve: 35 well 25 they could, becauſe the Ring of Babylon had cer- 
tainly been raking counſel againit them, and was reſslved to di- 
fluch them, See /'*y, 8, where the like counſel is given to the 


\Orth24z- 31 Ariſe, get you up tothe || wealthy nation that 
7 146 © diyellerh without care, ſaith the LORD, which have 
=: 59% neither gatcs nor bars wc dwell alone f. 
fThe ſuppoſed reſuir of Neouchadnezza7's Counſels, giving 
charge ro his armies ro march againit che Kedavens, which lived at 
eaſe and quiet, and took nocare, Thar had no Cries, nor Gates 
nor Bars to keep their Enemies out,nor were near any Neighbours 
thac could afiti them, nor very near to one another living in 
Tents, fo might eaſily be over-run, and conquered, and made.a 
prey to Enemics, » 
22 And their Camels ſhall he a booty, and the 
multitude of their cattle a ſpoil g, and I will ſcatter 
* Chip. into all winds * rhem that areÞ 1n the utmolt coraers, 
9. 25. 23d 4 } will bring their calamity, from all ſides there- 
i fartg of, ſaith the LORD -. 
+ ,#iv7 2 Theſe words found like a part of the King of Bahylon's ſup- 
{vn or Poled Speech incouraging his Soldiers from the Booty they ſhould 


4 We meet with the like threatnings, Ver, 5,24, 29. as to fear, 
and as to their deſtruction we have often mer with the like rhreat- 
nings, 

38 AndI will ſet my throne in Elam e, and will 
deſtroy from thence the king and the princes, faich 
the LORD f. 

e God here calls the Throne of Nebuchadneqzer, or Cyrus, or 
Alexander, ( whoever he was that conquered-the Perſians ) his 
Throne. 1. Becauſe God gave it the Conquerour. 2. Or, be- 
cauſe God ſheived himſelf the Lord of hoſts, or the Lord of the 
whole Earth, by diſpoſing the Kingdom Per/72 at his-Pleaſure. 
f He doth not threaten the deſtruction of the whole Nation but 
che making of it all Tributary, ſo as it ſhould have no Kings nor 
Princes of 1ts own. 


39 | But it ſhall come to paſs in the latter days, 
that | will bring again the captivity of Elam, faith 
the LORD g. 

g We had the like promiſe as to Moab, Chap 48.-47. and as to 
Ammon, Ver. 6. the ſame latter days either fignifie afrer many 
days, or in the time of the AMeſras. In the former ſence it may 
refer to Cy74s, who conquered Perſi2 In the latrer ſence it is re- 
ferred to the ſpiritual liberty, which ſome of theſe poor Heathens 
were brought 1nto by the Goſpel. We read Af, 2. 9. that ſome of 
theſe Elamtes were at Hierujalem at Pentecoſt, and were ſome of 
chole converted to Chrilt, 


CHAP. L. 


The J«dgment of Babel, and the Land of Chaldea, for their I- 
dolatry, Tyranny and Pride ; with gracious Promiſ:s oj the 
Redemption of lirael intermixed, Verſe 4, 5, 19, 20, 34. 


F by Jeremiah the Prophet a. 
a The Prophet having from the 45th. Chapter been denouncing F H*v. 


Hazovites, Elamites, or Perſians, ( the moſt of which had been 
Enemies to the Jews) in tacſe two Chapters he denounceth God's 
Judgments again!t che Chaldeans and Babylonians. Thele were 
ro eXecute God's Vengeance onal! the reſt,and therefore are then - 


get, which ſhould be a great mulrwude of Camels and other Carcel. 
þ The lartcr words are the words of the Prophet, in the Name of 
pthe Lord, threamning ruine to thele Kedarens and Hazorites, tho' 
they lived 1n corners, and mighr upon that account think them- 


*r4t haut 
£117 Corners 
oj th-10 181 


3,64, Ve - 
ſclves ſecure 3 God faith, he would ferch them our of their urmoſt 
corners, and bring calamity from all parts upan them. 
33 And Hazor* ſhall be a dwelling for dragons, 


* Chap, 
:-,22 aid a deſolation tor ever ; there ſhall no man abide 
there, nor azy ſon of man dwell in ir z. 
; Thar1s, rhe whole Countrey ſubje& ro the King of Hazor 
ſhall be defolare. See Tſa. 34. 13. Chap. 9. 11. 


| 34 | The word of the LORD, that came to Jere- 
2p. miahthe prophet againſt * Elam, in the beginning of 
25. the reignof Zedektah king of Judah, ſaying, &. 

k Elam was the Son of Sem, Gen. 10. 22. his poſterity were 
called Z/amites, rheſe were the Perſzans as 1s moſt probable, tho' 
ſome judge thar rhe Perſz2ns were at too prear diſtance from the 
Zews tobe the People meant here, but we read of no other E/2n 


ſelves rhreatned 1n the laſt place to be deftroyed:by the Mea-: ; 
the Prophecy againſt chem, 15 mixed with many gracious promi- 
ſes to the Jews. 


2 Declare ye among the nations, and publiſh, and 
| ſet up a ſtandard, publiſh, and conceal not b : fay 
Babylon is taken, * Bel is confounded c, Mcrodach is + pci: 
brokenin pieces, her idols are confounded, her ima- iijt »p- 
ges are broken 11 pieces d. = * Clu 
b The Prophet calls ro Men to publiſh it amongſt other Nations, 5:44 
and to ſerup a St:ndard ro make ſome fignal, to gather all! Peo- 
ple rogether to hear whar he had to ſay from God againſt Badylor, 
which had been an infirumenr of great miſcihicf unro moſt People 
that lived about them, to whom it would therefore be glad and 
joyful News to hear that Bavyion the common Enemy was ruin- 
ed. c Thar by bel and Meroduch are meant rwo principle 1drls 
of the Bavylonians, molt think , buc whar, is not fo weil agreed, 
Some think thar Bel 15 Gaze! by conmradiction, bur they judge moſt 
probably, who think 1t was the image of one Belvs, who was for- 


%\ 
'T3% 


Chap, [. 


l HE word that the LORD ſpake * againſt Ba- « j;, ,.. | 
bylon, and agalaft the land of the Chaldeans and 21. 
and & 7 1 - 


4 


che Judgments of God againſt the other Gentiles, the Egyptians, by t#7 1: | 
Moabites, Pyiliſtin?s, Ammonites, Edomites, Syrians, Kedarens, of Ji1i"%" | 


H Hel, 
9c 10 11, 
#1001 1s 


oY Heb, 
2:7 10 ie 
$2401 Its 


Chap. L, 


merly a King of Babylon, and they judge the like of Mrro44c9, 


FEREMIAH 


q As they be in the condition of lo& Sheep, fo rhey have teen 


. . ® & bs 0 _ 5 
wef}ad in Scriprure that Merodzch was ſome of their Rinzs Nimes, under the fate of loft Sheep, which every D32, Fox, Wolf de- ! 


I\z. 39. 1- Chap. 52. 31. rhoſe who defire to be furcher ſarisfied a- 


bout theſe Idols, may read rhe Englif Annotations upon Ia. 45.1. deftroying rem rhey have dane no MLy&ctufe rt 
and our A:zotations upon thar Verſe, Ir was an ordinary practice as the fins of the Jews did borh expoſe them to the wi 
amongſt the Heathens when they had any Princes died, that had and alſoem\9ldned their Enemics,and encoura2<11 «1 


vours. r And tnoſe that are their Enemies t 


wa 
2YE 


Leen famous 1n their Government, to pay 4 Divine Homage to that they did God Service in deſtroying them, « Tis 1 264 atdocs a 
their Images and Srarues. Theſe ſdols are ſaid ro be confounded, Jufi.e. Some think this is 2 Name here given ro G24 —_—_ 
2d, 


4 Fither becauſe they fhorld nor be avlear this pinch ro he'p their deed 15 the ha\Mcation of Juſtice, but whether rhe 
Suppliaurs, or beciuſe they ſhould be deftroyed together with the call him ſo may be a queſtion, Orhers therefore think th 


filly People thar adored them. 

3 For ont of the north there cometh np a nation 
azainft her c, which ſhall make hor land deſolate, and 
none ſhall dwcll therein : they ſhall remove, they 
ſhall depart both man and heal . 


e From Mcfia which lay Northward to Babylon and Aſſyria, 


through which Cy'us his way to Babylon lay. f This Prophecy , was a righteous God, in whom Juſtice dwelr, and who would be 
ſeemeth nor rorelare only ro Cyr his firſt raking of Babyloz,who farrhful ro his Promiſes, t And he was their hope, and had een 
dealr very gently with ir, but -ro a ſecond raking of it by Darts he 1n whom their Fathers before them had hoped, and that nor in 


the King of the a27edes, who upon their defeRion from the Perſe2n 
Monarchy, came and made an horrible devaſtation amongſt chem, 
hanging up (as ſome tell us) four thouſand of their Nobles and flay- 
ing multitudes of the common People 3 or of the miſchief done 
them afterward by $elzyczs Nicanor, who 15 ſaid to have built a 


City, which he calied Se{eucia, within fourſcore and Ten Miles of | 


Babylon, by which means he brought Bavylon to an ucrer deſola- 


t10n. 

4 T 1n thoſe days, and in that time, faith the 
LORD, the children of Iſrael ſhall come, they and 
the children of Judah together, going and weep- 
ing” - they ſhall go and ſeek the LORD their 
God þ. 

2 In the davs wherein God ſhall begin ro execute judgment up- 
on Babylon, ( which was in the time of Cy75 Emperour of the 
Medes ) the Children of J:42b fhall come our of Caprivity, and 
ſome of the Children of T/r2! (viz. thoſe of the Ten Trives) 
hearing that their Brethren were gone our of the Captivity of Bx- 
bylon, ſhall go up alio from the ſeveral places into which they were 
diſpoſed by the 4fſjrians: Weeping eirher for ſorrow inthe ſence 
of their ſins which had brought the miſcries of Captivity upon 
them, or for joy that God ever {h2uld ſhew them (uch a Mercy as 
to bring them home again iuto their own Country. + And choſe 
thar feared God, whether of che Ten Tribes, or of the Kingdom 
of Judah, worſhipped God ar Jeruſ2/en, after their old accuſto- 
med manner. ? ; ; 

5 They ſhall ask the way to Zion with their faces 


thitherward, /aying 7, Come and let us joyn our ſelves 
to the LORD in a perpetual covenant, that ſhall ne- 


ver be forgotten k&. | 
z That is, thoſe of Judah and Trae! chat fear the Lord (hall ſer1- 
ouſly and ſteadily ſeek che true God, and the true way of his Wor- 


Chalts 
ALE TE SE 


15 would 
we hte og CT ns ne prepoſi- 
,*10n 22 15* underſtood, making this che 1ggravarion of rhe j:ws 
{ins,that they were commitred in a Land whici: ought co have been 
an habication of Juſtice, az 7/2. 25. 10, it is faid, thar the wicked 
Man in a land of uprightneſs will deal unjutly Mr, Calvin lat 


anorh=rnorion, viz. Thar the Prophet here incourageth himſ-1* 
'2gai0ſt what the Adverſaries had promiſed themſelves becauſe che 


People had offended God : viz, that notwithftanding this, God 


— 
% 


vain, 
| $ Remove onutof the midſt of Babylon z, and £0 
forth out of the land of the Chaldeans, and be as the 
he-goates before the flocks. 

4 Theſe words immedaarely following the orher, conficm Mr 
Calum'snotion, God by his Prophet commanding his People = 
;remove out of Baby!oz, and ro go forth chearfully and <k1pping 
hike the He-goars of the Flock leading the way, and ſerting an Ex- 
ample unto orhers, We find much ſuch a Call, 7/2. 43.; 


to any Rejigious Communion, which alſo was their Daty as ro old 
Bavylon, but that is nor the coming out here ſpoken of. 


9 © For lo, I will raiſe and cauſe to com? un 54 
gainſt Babylod,an aſſembly ofgerett nations from the 
'north-country, and they ſhall ſer themſelves in array 
againft her w, trom thence ſhe ſhall be taken : rheir 
arrows ſbal/beas of a mighty ||-expert man - none ſhall 
rerurn 11 Vain *.* 

w He means the Medes and Per/ezns ( a51t 1s expounded after- 
ward )*. I will ſo direR their Arrows,cthar every Arrow they thoor 
fhall pierce one or orher. Or,/45 ſome rather chuſe co interpret ir 
no Soldier of char afſembvly of grear Nations, rhar thall come ws 
againft B2vby/on ſhall recurn withour ſome Booty or nther. The 


rea{on of the different reading noced in the Margent, 15 the diff. 
rence of a point tn the H:b.which if ſer on rhe right fide of he 
Letrer, the word figmfierh a de/troyer ; 1f on che lefe fide, an: x- 
pert man as we tranilate 1t, 


15 And Chaldea {hill bea ſpoil : all that ſpoil her 
ſhall be ſatisfied, faich che LORD -. 


x Satisfied with ſpoil and plunder, for B:by/3; and Ch:/des was 


ſhip. & And, being ſenfivle that chey had broken the Covenant 
which their Fathers had ſormzrly made with God, with a defire to 
renew their Covenant, and rhar not fora time, but for ever. See 
Cha). 31.31. The only Queſtion 1s, Wherher this Promiſe be yer 
accompliſhed or no, or when 1t was, or ſhall be fulfilled ? Anſy 
It was without douhr in 4 great meaſure fulfilled upon the Jews 
coming out of che Captivity of Bzbylon, when rhoſe of the King- 
dom of «44 rerurned to Jeryſalem, ahd were very Zealous for 
reſtoring the true Worſhip of God, and renewed their Covenant 
wich God, ( as weread in the Books of Exr2 and Nehemiah ) bur 
Mr. Calvin thinks it was more eminently fulfilled under the King- 
dom of the M-/£:", when though many believed nor, yer miny 
others did believe, and were added to the Church, and whether 
a furcier fulfilling of it be nor yer ro come, cime muſt ſhew, 

6s My people hath been loſt ſheep /, their ſhpherds 
have cauſed th:m to go aſtray mz, they have turned 
them away 67 the Mountains z : they have gone from 
mountain to hill o, they have forgattea their Þ reſt- 
ing place p. 

| All Men are compared to ſheep that go aſtray, Tſ/z. 53. 5. here 
it is applied ro the J?ws,who are called rh2 Lord's People by reaſon 
of che ancient Covenant God made with their Fathers : They are 


ſaid to be loſt, either with reſpeR to their Captivity, being caſt out 
of the Land which God gave them for Pattures, or in reſpe& of 


4c thac time one of rhe richeſt places in thoſe parts of the World, 
She was abundant 1n trealure, Cp. 51.13. 


11 Becuuſs ye wore glal,becauſ ye rejoycnd x, © 
ye deſtroyers of mine heritage 


bulls z. 


Human'ty , but behave themſelves decently, and as Perions has 
are ſenfible of the miſeries which chetr Brethren ſuff-r. y God calls 
chem his Herirage, bec uſe rhey formerly were a People whom he 
owned above all other People. There 1s ſome differetice amongit 
crirical Interpreters, wherher the Heifer here mentioned be ro he 
underſtood of a Heifer ar Graſs (as we rranſlare it)or an Heifer 
uſed to tread out the Corn; or wherher the laft words 1e to \1e vn. 
derſtood of a Horſi-ntighing, (45 the words may be interpreted } 
or a' Ball bellowing. Bur theſe are things of very ſmall momenc. 
The cauſe for which P 4by/9z 13 threatned, was doubtleſs cheir Lux- 
ury of all ſorts commonly atrending great Wealth, and Profpericy 
meeting with hearts unfan&fed. | 


12 Your mother ſhall be ſore confounded. He that 


their Idolatry; Their Civil and Eccleſiaſtical Governours have 
been a cauſe of it. The former by their wicked Commands for- 
cing them to Idolatry and Superſtition, or at leaſt by rhelr wicked 
Example ſetting them an Example, and by their ill Government 
conniving art them in their 1dolatrous Practices, for which they are 
gone into Captivity. Their Prieſts, and Ecclefiaftical Governours, 
reaching them ſuch praRices and encouraging them by their own 
Examples, and promiſing them impunity, and ſecurity in them. 
n Either they have been a cauſe of their offering Sacrifices ro Idols 
upon the Mountains, or of their being carried into Caprivity over 
the Mountains, o Either wandring up and down in a ſtrange Land, 
or in their way thither, or running from one ſpecies of Idolatry to 
another, p They have forgotten the Land of Canazr which I give 
them for a reſting place afrer their roilſom Travel in the Wilder- 
nels, or ( as ſome would have it) they have forgotten me who 
am their reſt, 


7 All that found them have devourzd them g, and 
their adverſaries ſaid, We oftend not, becauſe they 


bare you ſhall be aſhamed # : behold, the hindermoit 
of the nations b ſhall be a wilderne(s, a dry land, and 
a deſarts, | 

s Your chief City Babylon, or your Ccuntry, which is the com- 
mon Mother of all the Cyalde2rs ſhail be deitroyed, or ſhall be a- 
ſhamed of you,who are nor able co defend her, b The fence here 
ſeems a little difficulr,becauſe it appears no {uch ftrange thing rhat 
the hindermolt of rhe Nations ſhould be a Wildernefs. Ic is theres 
fore probable that the words ja be, are to be underſtood before 
the hindermoſ? of the Nations, our Tranſlation ſupplierh then: at- 
rer, ſo the reading will be, # ſ2a!l be the hindermal of © 5: nat 
ons, 4 wilderneſs, &c. That 15, Babylon, char hath cen to fa- 
mous, and accounted rhe head of the Nations, ſhall become che 
meaneſt ofall Nations, a meer Wilderneſs, and 2 dry Land,and 4 
Deſarr, 

13” Becauſe of the wrath of the LORD), it ihall net 
be inhabited, but it ſhall be wholly deiolate c: every 


have lianed againſt the LORD r,, the habitation of 
jaitices, evea the LORD, the hope of their fa. 
LICKS / « | 


one that goeth by Babylon, ſhall be aftonithed, and 
hiſs at all her plagues 4, 


prerended that in 
1ey had tinned,to 
rarh of Jod, 
tem ro think 


a ; 0 | ©, Cha), 
51.6. which 1s applied to Spiritual Babylon, Kev. 18. g. where 
the coming our 15 to be underſtood of a ſeparation from th-m 25 


x They rejoyced ar the ruine of che 7-5, the ſame thing js | 
laid to rhe charge of che Edonites, Ov44i2h r2. The Ubaldomns 
were God's Rod ro ſcourge the Fews, bur when Men are mide uſe © 
of by God, as his Rod and Scourge, they oughr nor t1 py1r oft 


, y, becauſe ye/are 
Jrown Þ far, as the heifer at graſs, and || bellow as 7 


(ha Pp. ks 


Chap. L, 


Thall never be inhabited, neither ſhall ir be dreclt in from gene- 
ration to g n:ration. & It ſeemeth ta be a Proverbial Speech 
made ule oito expreſs the miſerable ſtate ot a place ; we had it be- 
foie Chap. 49. 17. applied ro Elom. It is according to the threat- 
ping, Dent. 28.37. See Chap. 25. 9,11. and 29. 18. and 42.18, 
Etch. 5.15. | 

1.4 Put your ſelves in array againſt Babylon round 


about e: all ye that hend the bow, ſhoot at her,! 
ſpare no arrows: for ſhe bath ſinned againſt the | 


LORD 72. 

e The Vrophet callsrothe Medes and Perſians, with thoſe who) 
ſhou!d cone with them to their affiſtance, to put themlelves 1n 
Militzry Order ready to come up againſt Baby/on. f The Perſians 


FEREMIAH 


(as was noted before) were very famous for the Bow, therefore he 
ipeaketh unto them as an Army of Archers, to ſhoot at the Baby - 
lonians, and to lpare no Arrows. g Becaule Babylon had finned 
2gainſt rhe Lord exceedingly, as Gen. 13- 13 by their Idolatry, 
Luxury, and cruel uſage of the Fews, S&C- 


t5 Shout againſt her round about + : ſhe hath gi- 
ven her hand :: her foundations are faln, her walls 


* Chap. arc thrown down &: * forit :- the vengeance of the 
51.6, tt. LORD /: take vengeance upon her zas ſhe hath doge, 
K-.18.6+ do uuto her 2. 


þ Either as Soldiers uſe to ſhout when they fall upon their Ene- 
my, or as they uſe to ſhout and triumph when they are entred a 
City, or when their Enemies fly. {Either acknowledging them- 
ſelves overcome, and yielding rhemſelves to the power of their 
Enemies, or as ſome think confederating with the Ly4ians, but the 
t:rmer is more probable. kh That is, the is wholly ſubJued'and 
conquered, as if her Walls were thrown down, for litterally her 
Walls were not beaten down by Cyrus, for he took the City by 
ſurprize. 1 God is he who brings this Vengeance upon Babylon. 
though it be by your hands. m It1s very obſervable, that there 1s 
hardly any fins which the Lord fo ordinarily puniſheth in the like 
kind, as thoſe which are offences againſt tne Laws of Fuftice and 
Charity. The common fate of cruel and uncharitable Men, 1s to 
meet with others to do tothem, as they have done to others, un- 
merciful Men find no mercy. See Pſal. 137. 8, 9. Fudg. i. 6, 7. 
Adont Beth acknowledged God's Juſtice 12 it. 


15 Cut off the ſower from Babylon, and him that 


- 0:,84:%e, handlerh the || fickle in the time of harvelt z: for fear 


of the opprelliag ſword, they ſhall turn every one to 
kis people, and they ſhall flee every one to his own 
land o. 


n We are told that Babylon was ſo large a City, that within the| 
Walls of it there was much plowed ground ; or elſe the threatning 
imports that God would deal more ſeverely with Babylon, than 
Conguerors ule to do with places which they conquer, who ule to 
{pare and leave behind them, Plowmen, and ſuch as uſe to t11l the 
ground, bur in the deſtruftion of Babylon, it ſhould not be lo. 
6 He ſpeaks either of ſuch Strangers as for Commerce had their 


| 


Abodes in Babylon, or ſuch Afliſtants as the Babylonians had got- 
ten apaiaſt their Enemies, who upon the coming in of the Ene- 
mies ſhould make as much haſt home as they could. 


17 || lirael 7s a ſcattered ſheep p, the lions have 


f 


were rich Grourds tor feeding Cattej, therefore it 1s ſaid they ſtalk 
jeed on Carmel and Baſhan, 8c. 


20 In thoſe days, and in that time, ſaith the 
LORD, the iniquity of Iſrael ſhall be ſoughr for, and 
there fhall be none : and the {ins of Judah, and they 
ſhall not be found w, for I will pardon them whom [ 


reſerve x. 

w Some here reſtrain the term iniquity to zke 74clatry of the 
Fews, which indeed was their great fin, which God did more efpe- 
cially puniſh them for, and after the Captivity of Babylon, we do 
not read of their offending in that kind, which was according to 
the Prophecy of Iſaiah, I/a. 27. 9. that when God ſhould make 
che Stones of the Altar as Chalk-ſtones thatare beaten aſunder, the 
Groves and the Images ſhould not ſtand up. x But the Jaſt words 
teem to guide us to a larger ſence of the term zn:quity, and to 
point us tO another ſence of the whole former phraſe, viz. That 
God would no lopger puniſh the fins of the Jews, they ſhould be 
{ought for as to puniſhment, and not found, And thoſe words 
and none muſt be underſtood as if nene, they ſhall be puniſhed no 
more than it they had none. x For asto thoſe whom 1 ſave from 
the Captivity of Babylon, I will pardonthem, not that they were all 
exXcCuled from the ob!ization the: fins laid them under as to Eternal 
Death, but chat their Temporal Puniſhment was remutted to the 
whole Body of the Fews ; and thoſe that weretruly penitene alſo, 
ſhouldbe diſcharged from their obligation to Eternal Death. The 
obligation that fin layeth che finner under to Eternal Death may be 
remitted, and yet the temporal puniſhment due to them may re- 
main, 2 Sam. 12,13, 14, c. And on the other ſide the puniſh- 
ment in this Life, may be ſuſpended or remitted, and the ob- 
{ization fin !ayeth the finner under to Ecercal Death, may re- 


MAl1!). 


21 Go up againſt the land of || Merathaim y, | or, 1+ 


6 q 
;-# 
3 1." 
fat. 
© hl? ot 
Ip * . 
WE 
PR x $6 
| * WES 
$ 
+ 
[+508 DN 
974" % 
S 
WE J 
& 4 5 


c The fame thing was threarned againſt Baby!on, Ia. 23. 20. It! the Son, we are told by Feſephr.s, 7, 13.6. 5, 8. Theſe places 


even againſt it, and againſt the inhabitants of || Pe- Kuters, of | 37 


kod y, walte and utterly deſtroy after them, faith Rebels. oo 
the LORD, and do according to all that I have com- 5 gs "i 


manded thee z. 

»y There 1s ſome Diſputes amongſt Interpreters, Whether the 
words here Merathaim and Pekod be to be taken as common 
Nouns, the one ſignifying Rebels or Rulers, the other Vi fitation, 
becauſe the Chaldeans were Rebels againſt the Lord,and were great 
Rulers over all the contiguous Nations : Or whether they be pr6- 
per Names of ſome Places which Cyrus paſſed by, or, it may be, 
took 1n, ard conquered in his way to Babylon. x The latter are 
God's Words by his Prophet, like the former commanding him 
with his Armies togo up, and deſtroy them flying away,or them 
that ſhould ſucceed after them, their whole Pofterity ; intimating 
God's deſign utterly to deſtroy them,which deſtruction was gently 
begun by Cyrus, and perfeRed by Darius. 


22 A ſound of Battel 5 inthe land, and of great 


deſtruction 4. 
a That 15 1n the Land of Chaldeg. 


23 How is the * hammer of the whole Earth cut a-” 
ſinder and broken ? how is Babylon become a deſo- 


\lation amongl(t the Nations 6 ? 


b The latter part of the Verſe exponnds the former, God had 


e- made the Bzbylonians his Hammer, to break other Nations in pie- 


 dtiven him away 9, firlt the king of Aſſyria hath de-, 


ces, now 1t was it ſelf broken ; the Particle how may be underſtood 


re IM yr. 7 is} > - -1n9 of \<: : - rae” "dn" 
voured him, and laſt this Nebuchadrezzar king of either as expreſſing triumphand rejoycing, or admiration, or as 


Babylon hath broken his bones. 


'1nquiring how ſuch a thing could be in the laſt ſence. The nexc 


P By Ifrazl 1s here veant the whole T« eive Tribes ( tho' ſome . Verſe iS an anſwer eo this. 


times it fignifieth the Ten Tribes 1n oppofition to Fudah) they 
were all wandering Sheep, they became peaally ſcattered Sheep. 
g Enemies as fierce and cruel as Lions, had ſeized them, and car- 
ric them into Captivity. r Firſt the King of Aſſyriz devoured 
the Ten Tribes which were ſtriftiy call'd Iſrael, 2 Kings 17. 6. 
Then Nebucbadreggar the King of Buby/on rook Feruſalem as we 
h-aid Chap. 39. and carried away the People, and burnt the 
Temple, which the Prophet here calls a breaking of his bones, 


13 Therefore thus ſaith the LORD of hoſts, the 
God of Iſrael, Behold, 1 will puniſh the King of Ba- 
bylon, and his land 7, as I have puniſhed the King 
of Aſſyria £. 

r God may juſtly puniſh thoſe who do the things which he hath 
ermmanded them to do, it they do them not in that manner which 
he directeth, or, if what they do, be not done jn obedience to his: 
Command, but in fatisfaCtion to their own Luſts, which was che 
caſe of the Aſſyrtans, Iſa. 10.7. f Some refer tais to the puniſh- 
ment of the 4ſſjrians in the deſtruction of Senacherib and his Ar- 
my in tke time of H-3kiah. but the Propher ſeemeth here to 


{peak of a deſtruCtion of 4ſſria, which followed after his de- 
youring of the Ten Tribes, from whence we may conclude, that 
Aſſyria was deſtroved betore the time of this Revelation, 

Io And I will bring Iſrael again to his habitati- 
on 7, and he ſhall feed on Carmel and Baſhan, and his 


24 I have laid a ſnare for thee, and thou art alſo 
taken, O Babylon, and thou waſt not aware, thou 
art found, and alfo caught c, becauſe thou halt ftri- 
ven againſt the LORD 4. 

c Wearetold that Cyrus wich his great Army diverted the River 
Euphrates, ſo as his Army paſſed over and ſurprized the Cicy fo 
ſuddenly that thoſe in the mid(t of it, did not know it when part 
ofthe City was already taken. God dire&ted Cyrus to this Stratagem 


for the raking of the City, which the Prophet calls a ſnare, where- 


in the Babylonzans were taken. 4d The reaſon of this unexpetted 
rune to this great People was their finning agaiaſt the Lord, Yer. 
I4. Which 1s here call'd a firiving againſt him, as indeed all fin 
IS. 

25 The LORD hath opened his armoury, and 
hath brought forth the weapons of his indignation : 


for this 7s the work of the LORD God of hoſts, in 


the land of the Chaldeans e. 

& Babylon was 1o rich, and potent a Nation, and had been ſo 
great a Conquerour, that People looking only with the eye of 
ſenſe, and judging according to probabilities in the Eyes of Men, 


Prophet here an{wereth, That the hand of God was to be eyed in 
the caſe, this was the Lord's Work upon the Chaldeans ; God hag 


| opened his Arn.oury, and the Medes were to make uſe of the Wea - 


foul ſhall be farished upon Mount Ephraim and Gi-; pons of his indignation. He who threatned this deſtruction was a-« 


iead . 


: Tiis muſt be underſtood of Fudah, which was part of that' 


People who were called Tirael, for this day we have neither read 
' por heard of the Ten Tribes being brought back again to their ha- 
bication. « The only dithculty is how it is faid that the Jews up- 
on their return ſhould feed upon Carmel and Bzſhan, and Mount 
Etbraim and G:lead, which were places that belon*'d not to the 
Tribes of Ja44h and Berjamin : to which it is anſwered, that 
mhele places were granted to the Jews by Demetrius the Father and 


ble to carry it through, and it was nogreat matter what Weapons 
eicher the Babyloniars had to defend themſelves, or the Medes ro 
—_ ther, God's power and ſtrength was only to be regard- 
ed. 


Chap 


Fl. 20. 


| might well ask how theſe things could poſſibly be > To which the | 


26 Come againſt her + from the utmoſt border 4; + Heb. 
open her ſtore-houſes p : || caſt her up as heaps, and _ 1? 


deſtroy her utterly : let nothing of her be lett, | 
[In 


f Tie 


end. 


Or, 2) 


fFY, 


—_— wo > > = ww 


I ; | "_ = F3 
FN wn, E 7 
pO # The Prophet in the Name of God callethto the Enemies of 
Babylon, the Medes, to come Up, from the furtheſt parts of ther 
Dominions, or from all parts, to fight againſt Baby/9n. g To open 
che Granaries, or Store-houles, or Treaſuries of che Babylonzans, 
i, And to calt up the Cities as heaps of Rubbiſh, and utterly to de- 
troy the Cicy, with luch a total deſtruction that nothing of 1t 
ſhould be let, 

27 Slay all her bullocks : It them go down to the 
laughter g - wo unto them, for their day 18 come, 
the time of their Vitation. 

g By Ballocks in this place Interpreters generally underſtand 
he great and rich Men of Babylon. 

-3 The voice of them that flee and eſcape out of 

& Cl:p- the land of Babylon * to declare 11 Zion the venge- 
19.11 © of the LORD our God, the vengeance of his 
temple. 0 

h Ne Prophet here brings in the poor Jews that had been 
Captives in Babylon going back upon Cyrys his Proclamation of 
Liberty. toward Zion there joyfully to declare the revenge which 


t 


ene Lui 
their God had taken for them, and tor his holy Temple, whict: 
the Chaliears had burnt and deſtroyed. 

29 Call tozether the archers againſt Babylon z: all 
ve that bend the how camp againſt irround abounr ; 
let none thereot eic ompenſe her according to 
her work ; according to all that ſhe hath done, do 

5ug a ? . ' Ar 
unto her : for ke hath been proud againſt the LORD, 
againſt the holy One of Iirael k. : 

i The word tranllated Archers, fignifteth a'lo mary, and is by 
divers fo tranſlated, but the following words more uititte our 
Tranſlation. k The caſe of God's calling for Babylon's Enemies 
ainſt her, is allizned to be her Pride againſt the Lord. 

30 Therefore ſhall her young men fall in the 
ſtreers, and all her young men ſhall be cut oil 1n that 
day /, faith the LORD. . 

l See Chat. 49. 26. where we met with the ſame words. 

31 Behold, I 2m againſt thee, O thou -F moſt proud, 
ſ;irh the LORD God of hoſts, tor thy day 1s come, 
Lie time that I will vitit thee 2. VE 

m Babylon is particularly branded for Pride, which is the ſwel- 
ling of a Man's Heart in a fe!f-opinion, cauſed from ſome thing 
wherein he excelleth, or thinks he excelleth another. We have 
2 large account of the Pride of Babylon, I{z. 14. 12, 13, 14.406 
particularly of one of their Kings, Dan. 5. 20,21. Tae inner 
exalteth himſelf againſt God, and either judgeth himielf wiſer, 
or more mighty than he. 


32 And the moſt proud ſhall ſtumble and fall, 
and none ſhall raiſe him up : and I will kindle a fire 
in his cities, and it ſhall devour all round about 
him 7. 

n Babylon before called the moſt Proud, here Pride inthe abſtract 
(which ſpeaketh this People exceſſively faulty in this thing) ſhai} 
{all, and io fall, as never more to berecovered and raiſed up. 

33 Þ Thus ſaith the LORD of hoſts, The chil- 
dren of If{rac! and the children of Judah were opprel- 
ied together o, and all that rook them captives held 
Lnem falt they retuſed to let them go p. 

o Not together in reſpect of times, for there was 150 years dit- 
ference betwixt che time of Tſra-!'s and Jzlzh's Captivity ; nor by 
the fame Enemy, 1ſraz! was carrie away Captive by the Aſſpriuns, 
Judah by the Couldeans, Together in this place fignifies no more 
chan that they were both oppreſſed, or alike opprefled. p And 
ſome may think that my Prophecies are but Flatteries, and vain 
words, for thote who have them 1n their hands are able to keep 
them, and will not !'e willing to let them go. 

34 Their redeemer 7s ſtrong, the LORD of hoſts 
zs his name 4, he ſhall throughly plead their cauſe 7, 
that he may give reſt to the land, and diſquict the 
inhabitants of Babylon /. 

The Lord whoſe Name is the Lord of Hoſts, 1s he that is 
their Avenger : (for to the word fignifies) and he isas ftrong as 
any of choſe that hold them faſt, and will not let them go. r He 
will plead their caule, not like a Lawyer, but actually, and rea]- 
Iy effect it, as pleading is often taken, as Chap. 25. 31. Exe. 17. 
20. Joel 3.2. { Theſe are thetwo ends which God aimeth at, to 
give his People reſt, and to puniſh Babylon. 

35 4 Aſivord zs r uvon the Chaldeans ſaith the 
LORD, and upon the inhabitants of Babylon, and 
upon her princes, and upon her wiſe zzez. 

£ That is, there ſhall come a Sword, the Sword of the Medes, 


uPon Bzbylon, and all the Land of the Cbaldeans, and all Orders 
of Perſons in it, 


36 A ſword z upon the || + liars, and they ſhall 
dote#: a ſword i upon her mighty men,and they ſhall 
be diſmayed w. 

u The word here tranſlated Liars, is by ſome tranſlated barrs, 
by ſome liars ; and in che Hebrew it hatn both fignifications ; 
which makes ſome think it 15 to be underſtood of the chief Men 
who are the Props, Stays and Bars ot a place whoſe Wiſdom God 
threatens ſhould tail chem, fo as they ſhould do, and ſhew them- 
teives Fools. Others Tranflacing it /zays as we do, underſtand it 


” 


ER 


L4i3 


1 
EE 9 
4ziw 4 


Ne. TC 
i, Lo 


as 


' 
ty a 
14 


Dr, chief 
ſ, 


eb. 


i 3 41 bl : 


{ 


wt 


11. 'Þ F a '} * 


gar Civined fate, and faith they ſhould dote, not foreſeeins 
what ſfrould be. w And though they we '! of valio: nkow 
nu oogathey were full of valiant mighc) 

1 Wen t215 day came, and all be 


4 


4 De. 
Men, v<t their kearts ſhould ta 
deſtroyed among the reft. 

A A ſ\ y rd p . i 2 y © * 

| 37 Alvord 1s upon thetr borſes, and unon their 

| ” .y EO as C 11 ; p I 23 G % ; : , bh: 

| chariots -, and upon all the mingled people that re 
inthe mid{t of her v, and they ſhall become * 95 ww 

mei y, a ſword zs upon her treaflires, and they f 

be robbed -. 

x Tho' they be full of Chariots and Horſes, th 
deſtroy them. » By the mingled People ſome underland : 

whom the Bubylonians had tired to their Atliftance trom 0:05 
Nations, others, ſuch ſtrangers es lived amonzit chem ; others 2 

People under the Power of the Cha/1-4n5, mide us of People of 
leveral Countries, See Chap. 25. 20, 24. Epe\:. 30.5, they frem 

to ſignifie a People that were nor Native Chaldeans, but under 

cheir Domi: ton. y Thacis, faint hexrted, + And thougly B:ibytun 
hath great Trealures, yet thoſe ſh:1] not ſecure her, ſhe £141! be 
robbed of them. 
338 * A drovght 7s upon her waters, and thoy ſha! 
be dried up 4, fer it the land of gray 
po CC 

and they arc mad uponrber idols b. 

_ a Some think that this Phraſe hacha ſpecial reference to Cyrus, 
his Stratagem uled jn the ſurprize of Babylon; one part of it was 
fortified by che great River Evpvratos, runging on one tides 
which Cyrus diver:ed by cutting teveral! Channels, *i!1 he hag 
irained it ſolow, that it became paflible for kis Army to go 0+ 
ver : Others :ninx t32t a want of Rain-is here threatn?d. b God 
gives the reaſon of this Judgment which was their Idolatry, aad 
exceeding zeal for 1*. 

ple a 7 . os * y 
39 Therefore * the wild bealts of the deſerts with * 17. 13. 
the wild bealts of the iflands ſhall dwell chere,and rhe 22. & 34: 


| 
| 


—_ 
p] 


[ 
4 


owls ſhall dwell therein : and ic ſhall he no more in- 14 Cp: 
habired tor ever : neither ſhall it be divelt in from þ.2 fe 
gencration to generation, ES 

40 * As God overthrew Sodoin and Gomorral:, * Ger. : «. 
and the neighbouring ces thereof, ſaith the LORD: 25. 
/o ſhall no man abide there -c, neither ſhall any ſou + 13-7» 

\of man dwell therein. _ 

c The ſubſtance of both there Vertes is, that Bub;!-z frould bs 

totally ruined, as $:4om and Gomrrah, fo as there fhovlk! he vo 
Habitations tor Nen, but wild Beaſts only uf all foris ſhould in 
habit and lodge 13 it. The tulhlling of this we have notin ho!y 
Writ, only the beginning of its accomyl:ſhment, it bejog taken 
by Cyrus who only made them Tributaries, and took away their 
Government. But they rebeliing againſt the Empercur of the AMfriles, 
Darius Hiſt afjis a Iicceedng Emperour pulled down their Walls. 
And abou 250 Years a' er Selenczs Nicanor, a Grecian Prince, 
the Aeles being before corquered by Al-xander ihe Great, ut- 
rerly deflroved Bubylzy, fo as in the time of Hadrian the Roman 
Finperour, there was neting lett ſtanding of chat great City bur 
fome pieces of Walls- 

41 * Behold, a people ſhall come from the north,» c1.;>, 
and a great nation, and many kings ſhall be raijed up. z 2. 

from the coaſts of the earth 2. 

d The Afedes and Perſians with their Armies, who {hall a!fo 
have many other Kings, who from the ſeveral parts of the carth 
ſhall! joyn wth them and help them. 

42 They ſhall hold the bow and the lance e : they 
are cruel and will not ſhew mercy 7- * their voice * i 
ſh1ll roar like the ſeas, and they ſhall ride! pon hor- 
ſes, every oze PUL In array like a man to the battle, 
againit thee, O daughter of Babylon g. | 
e Ticle were the two utyrl weapons of Soldiers ſa thoſe Cour- 


p 
- - 


+ » 
Q 


V's 


I 


”- 


= 
- VC 


” & $ 
<d ) + Sv 

Y 
$ 


15/3 


tries, Chap. 6. 23. f The Perſians were a cruel bloody People. 
g Thnele Phrates {1gnthe 20 more, than that the Enemies ſhould 


come upon Ezb/or in a terrible manner, and prepared co deltroy 
them. | 
? ny 'Þ « I, 
43 The king of Babylon hath heard the report of 


them, and his hands waxed tceble : * anguiſh took | 
hold on him, az Pangs as of a woman in tra- CP, 
49, 2. 


vall þ, 
þ The Aedzs ſhall not be more prepared to deſtroy the Bahylo- 
nians, than they ſhall be unprepared co makeany rehitance ;- as 
God will animate their Eneinies, to he will ditptrir themyto as they 
ſhall faint upon the repoxt of their coming, aud be like a Woman 
upon whom ſtrong pangs of Travail are. 
44. Behold he ihall come up * like a hon from the 
. ". a » 
{\wejling of Jordan uato the habitation of the frons - 


Lane !tt 
bur 1 will make them ſaddenly run away from her , ** 
and who z a choſen mz th. 1 may appoint over her? 
for who z like me ? and who will || appoint me the; Or, cor- 
time ? and who :s chat ſhepherd that will ſtand be- wne m2 cs 
fore me ? treat, 

45 Therefore hear ye the counſel of che LORD, 
that he hath tzkea againtt Babyion, aud kis purps- 
ſes that he hath purpoſed againſt che iand oc che 
Chaldeans - furely rhe leaſt of the Rock (hall draw 


rh 
' Bl ©. 


}-1 


them ont - ſurely he ſhall make: {er habitation deſc» 
late with then z, | : 
i See tie Notes On C74Þ, 49. 19. Ware We RIVe aFP.e4 Unto 


of their Southlayers and Wizzards whom he calis !j ars, becaule 


ir vr 


E iom all that jShere 20 againſt Bah; /cne 


P —— --< 


Chap. LI. 


45 Ar th? noiſe of the taking of Babylon the| 


- EFcry man his own ſoul: be not cur off in her ini- 


4ERE 


carth is moved, and the cry 1s heard among the na- 
tions |. 

k We have much famethe ſpoken with reterence toEdem, 4 9. 20. 
The words are only expreſlive of the greatneſs of the deſtruction 
of Babylon, which ſhould be tuch as ſhould make all that part of 
the World ſhake, aid the noite of 1t would ring throughout all 
the Nations in that part of te Earth. 


CH APELI 


The frere Fulament of Gol againſt Feluptuous, Cevetous, Tyrannt- 
ca! and Idotatrous Babel, ia the Reverge, and for the Kedempiion 
sf Liracl, t, —= 5. Jeremiah delivereth rhe Book, of this Pro- 
hecy 10 Seratah, robe caſt into Euphrates,-7n tclcen of the perpe- 
tu ſinhing of Babylon, 59, 6.J» 


] Hus ſaith the LORD, Behold, I will raiſe up 
azainlt Babylon, and : 221n{t chem that dwell 
in + the midſt of chem that rite up againlt me, a de- 
ttroying wind 2. 
z Inthis Chapter the Prophecy of the deſtruction of Babylon 
is contivued under new Metaphors ; he begins with that of a 
Wind, a deitroying Wind, (as northerly Winds are ordinarily 
very pernicious) but the Hebrew Idiom lo 111 tuite:h thar of other 
Languages, that it is noeafie matter poſirively to aſſert the fenle 
of the worcs uled. In the Hebrew they are and to, or againſt thoſe 
that inhabit the heart of thoſe that riſe up. Son:e would have 1t,thote 
that are wile in their own opinion, and are theretore faid to do 
well in their heart. Others, thoſe that are iecure ; but the beſt 
interpreters judge our Tranſlation to have beſt hit the lence, 
them that dmell in the heart, 1. e. nat 1s 1n the midſt of the 
Chaldeans, who are here ſaid to have rilen up agatalt God, to 
{trive againſt God, Chap. 50. 2.4 
F 


M1IA4H 


7 Babylon #arh been *a golden cup in the LORD's * Rey, ,. 
hand, that madeall the earth druken /: the nations 1: &t7., 


have druken of her wine, therefore the nations arc 
made 17. | 

! A golden Cup, becauſe of her great Riches and Plenty. God 
hitherto had made ule of Bzbylon, asa Rod in his Hand, and had 
given her Richesand Power, and Proſperity proportioned to the 
Service he had for her to do ; what ſhe did ſhe did by commiſti- 
on from God, therefore this Gold?n Cup ts ſaid to have been in 
theLord's Hand; ſhe had made ajl the Nations about her drunken 
with the Lord's Fury. m Conquering them all, and making them 
mad through che mitery and [mart they telr from her. Babylon in 
Daniel 1s compared to an head of Gold ; and Rev. 17. 4. ſhe 1s 
laidto have had a Golden Cup in ber Hand, but the meaning is no 
more than this, That God hath raiſed up Babylon to greet degrees 
of dignity and ſplendour intending to make uſ2 of her to execute 
his Vengeance upon many other People, and he did accordingly 
lo ule her, to give the Cup of his Fury to many Nations to the 
enraging of divers People, but now the courſe of his Providence 
coward her was altering, 7c. 


may be healed z. 


tO no purpoſe. 

9 We would have healed Babylon, but ſhe 1s not. 
healed .*.; forſake her, and let us go every one to his 
own Country oz for her judgment reacheth unto 
heaven, and is litted up eve to the skies p. 

_*- The Prophet here leemeth to perſonate che mercenary Sol- 
d.ers that ſhould come to help the Chaldeans, as it they ſhould lay 
this, They would have helped Babylon, but there was no healing 
tor her. o And therefore they call one tc another to leave her to 
heg ſelf, and return every Man to his own Country. p For her pu- 


2 And will ſend unto Babylon * fanners,tnat ſhall 
fan her, and empty her land6: for in the day of 
trouble they ſhall be againſt her round abour c. 

b Wicked Men are compared to Chaft, P{a!. 2. 4. Sach as exe- 
cuce judgment on them are called Fanners, Fer. 15. 7. So Matth. 
2. 12, becauic as the Fanner keepeth what 1s in the Fan unguiet 
in 4coninusl motion and agiation, by which (advantaged by the 
Wind) heemytieth it of the Chat, to the Executioners of God's 
Vengeance, by a ſucceſſion of jidgments keep a People from 
quiet, till all their Cha be winnowed out, and the Fan be emp- 
tied of all but the more ſolid Grain. c For (he ſaich) as the Fan- 
ner firſt ridleth what he hath in his Fan one way, then another. 
frft throweth it up, then lets it fall into the Fan, ſo the Enemies 
ould be round about Babylon, and God would be on every fide 
and every way deſtroying them. 


s Acuinſt him that bendeth , Iet the archer bend 
hrs bow, and againft him char lifteth up himfelt 1n his 
Brigandine 4? and ſpare ye not her young mea, de- 
ſtroy ye utterly ail her hoſt c. 

4 Vihar ever Arms the Babylonians ſhall be Armed with, they 
fall meer with their Matches, thoſe thatare Archers, ſhall meet 
with Archersto bend the Bow againſt them ; and thoie whoare 
orherwile armed ſhall meet with Perions prepared to 1ncounter 
them at their own Weapons. e Their whole Hoſt thall be de- 
{t:oyed botii young and old Men. 

4 Thus the ſlain ſhall fall in the land of che Chal- 
deans, and zhey that are thruſt through * 1n her 
{ſtreets f. | | 

f thus all of them ſha!i be deftroyed, ſome 1a the Fields, ſome 
in the S.reets of their Cities. 

s For Hrael hh not been forſaken, nor Judah of 


2) 


niſh:nent was very great, her caſe too ſad for them to help. The 
reaching of things to. Heavens, and lifting them up to the Skies 
are Phrales uſed co fignitie high and great mealures, and degrees 
of things ſo expreſſed G-n. 11, 4, and 28, 12+ Deus. 1,28. 1 Sam 
F. 12, 2 Chron. 28.9. Pſal. 107. 26. 


of the LORD our God g. 

q Thele words are ſpoken as 1n the perſon of the Fews own ing 
che deſtruction of Babylon. 1. Tobe the mighty Work of God. 
2. An aCt ot Juſtice and Judgment, pleading the Cauſe and re- 
venging the Wrongs of hits People; and owaing the Fewiſh Re- 
ligion, and calling one to another to go tothe Temple to declare 
what God had done tor them, and to give thanks un to him for 
IT 


the LORD, the vengeance of his temple --. 

r Prepare the Arrows for fighting, whether by feathering, 
ſharpning, or poliſhing and cleanſing of them, is not much ma- 
terial. ſ You that are Chaldeans gather all the Shields you have 
together, you Will have need of them all: or you that are the E- 
nemes of the Chaldeans, gather you together your Shields, x 
For God hath put a Spirit into Cyrus and Darizs, &c. and his 
defign 1s againlt Bzbylon to deſtroy it. u It is a day ia which God 
is reſolved to take vengeance 0:1 Babylon; to take venzeance for 
the indignities they have offered to, and the horrible Protanation 
of his Temple. 


12 Sctup the ſtandard upon the walls of Babylon; 


lis God, of the LORD of hoits 7; though their 
land was filled with Itn againtt the holy one of 
Tfravl &, 

z That is, notutterly forſaken”; for ina ſence they were for-| 
faizen as to lome gradual maniteſtations of God's Love to them, 
Put Fudab and Tfract were not lefr as a Widow. or were not di- 
yorced trom God. The word tranilated fin, fignifies a molt hei- 
nous finning or delolation, and the beſt Interpreters judge thar 
fin here fheniftieth the puniſhment of fin. God hath not forſaken 
the Fows utcerly, though as they were formerly filled with grie- 
vous flas, 16 they be now filled with grieveus Judgments becaule 


Of L261. {101S» 
6 * Flze ont of the midſt of Babylon, and deliver 


quity z: for * this z- the time of the LORD's venge- 
ance, he will render unto her a remembrance k. 

7 It is matter of no great moment wherher we underſtand 
theſe words as ſpoken to the Fews in the Captivity of Babylon, 
as Chap. 50. $- or to thote whom the Chaidezns had hired to help 
them ; or to ſuch ſtrangers as for their tecuiar advantages lived 
in Babylon. By Soul here tcemethto be meant Life, and by Iniqui- 
ty the puniſhm=nr of the Babylonians iniquity : (as the Heb. word 
oft f1gnifies) Though in the New Teftament thete words be uſed 


Chap. [1 


+, 
Hed-þ 


Ita. i; 


ſed and done that which he ſpake againſt the inhabi- #4 


tants of Babyſon. ; 

w Some judge theſe worc's ſpoken to the Medes, declaring the 
Will of God that they ſhould uſe all probable means to conquer 
Babylon, or (as 1ome would have it) diſplay their Banners upon 
the Walls of it, as ftgns of its being already conquered : But cer- 
tainly jt 1s more reaſonable to conclude them the Prophet's words 
to the Babylonians, either rouſing them cur of their ſecurity (for 
it appears they were ſtrangely fecure trom Dan. 5. Hiſtorians tell 
us,that the City was fortihed by Walls fitty Cubits high, and two 
hundred Cubits broad, and by a very deep and Jarge Ditch, be- 
ſides that on one fide it had the River Euphrates) or at leaſt quick- 
ening them to make all the preparation they could, though all 
would beto very little purpole, tor God had refolved upon what 
he would do unto Babylon, and it was already as good as done. 


73 © thou that dwelleſt upon many waters x, a- 
bundant in treaſures y, thine end is come, ard the 
meaſure of thy covetouſacſs z. 

x Babylon 1s (aid to dwell upon many Waters, becauſe upon 
the great River Euphrares, which they ſav did not only run by it 
but almoſt incompaſs it,branching jt 1elt into many imaller Rivers 


as a monition to People ro ſeparate trom the Tdolatries of myſti- 
Cal Babylon, yet they leem here to be only a warning to others to 
remove our of the reach of Babylon's fall. k for the time is come 
When God hath determined to take Vengeance on Babylon, and 
to recompence t0 her all her fin, and that cruelty which ſhe ſhew- 


ed ro the Fews in particular. 


which made jevera! pa-ts of the City, Hlands. y It is a City much 
noted 1n Scripture for Wealth.and made much more wealthy than 
itwas by Traflick, by the Conqueſt ot many Nations. + The 
Prophet tells them that now their gathering time was over:there 
was now a boundary et totheir covctouinets. In the Hebrew it 1s 
the Cubit of 1'y coverovine's, WhICh is by ou; Tranflators well 
:ranflaced a m-aſure, bectule it was amongſt the J-ws the com- 

(41) 


8 Babylon 1s ſuddenly * fallen and deſtroyed x: + 1... on 
howltor her, * take balm for her pain, if ſo be ſhe Rev. 141, 
and Iv; Pros 

n Thar is, ſhe ſhall ſuddenly fall and be deſtroyed ; you may © Clap. iy 
try all the probable ways tor her Cure, but they will all be uled 46+ 1% 


CER oa 


EO 
11 * Make Þ bright the arrowsr, gather the bogs ; 
ſhic:ds /, the LORD hath * raiſed up the ſpirit of 
the king of the Medes 7, for his device zs againſt Ba- * 


bylon to deſtroy it, becauſe it zs the * vengeance of 17. | 


Py 4a v g 
FO, « v 
* 


make the watch ſtrong,fet up the watchmen, prepare + Hev. 
the | ambuſh w; for the LORD hath both deyj-liers i 


10 TheL OR D hath broug't forth our righte- * Chap, 2 .* 
ouſneſs; come and ler * us declare in Zion the work go. 2$. 


a 5g Chap. LI. 

NO mon meaſure of height and depth. The word by us tranſlated 
| covetouſnels, as Exod. 18. 21, may eltier fignifie Riches the ob- 
ject of their covetoulnels, or prolperity, or chat unlawtul defire 
of having more, which is properly called Covetorſre(s , ether be- 
cauſe they ſhould be deſtroyed utterly, or becaule they ſhould 
proſper no more, there wasno end put to the Babylonians Lults, 
-1t there was an end put to the ſatistaQion of their Luſts. 


14 The LORD of hoſts hath ſworn by + himſelf, 
2 Surely 1 will fill thee with men, as with ca- 
and they ſhall -| lift upa ſhout againſk 


ſayins, 
rerpillars vb 3 
thee c. : ; ; 

4 The Lord that is able to bring to paſs what he ſaith, hath 
{-orn by his Life, or by himlelt, fee the like phraſe Chap. 22.5. 
and 44+ 26. and 49. 13 - Amos 4.2. and 6.8. Iſz. 45.23. that 1s 
the thing next mentioned ſhall come to pals as certain as that taere 
© 1 God in Heaven or a God that liveth. b 1 will bring againſt 
thee a great Army, that ſhall be likea {warm of Caterpillars and 
{hall come againſt thee in ſuch numbers as Caterpillars uſe to 
come, and for the ſame end, to eat thee up, and deſtroy thee, and 
+c Soldiers uſe todo when they go on to fight their Enemtes, or 
-0 aſſault Cit ies, they ſhall make a great ſhout againſt thee. 


15 * He hath made the earth by his power, he 
hath eſtabliſhed the world by his wiſdom, and hath 
* ſtretched out the heaven by his underſtanding. 


:16 Whea he uttereth his voice there is a || multi- 
b. ©. *.:n1de of waters in the heavens, and he * cauſeth the 


FRCiap. 19. 
PO h 
136 A:, SE I4, 


« E 


lr5 
7 Kg -- vapours to aſcend from the ends ofthe earth, he ma 
Por. riſe. cth lightnings with the rain, and bringerh forth the 
© #plal. windout of histreaſures. _ | 
m5: 7: 17 * Every Man || is brutiſh by his knowledge, e- 
#5 very founderis confounded by thegraven Image : tor 
Gor; his molcen image # falſhood, and rhere 75 no breath 
"vre brutiſh chem. : . 
8h2n 19 18 They re vanity, the work of errors: 1a the, 
a time of their viſitation they ſhall periſh. 
WE 19 * Theportion of Jacob 7i5 not like them, for he | 
Bic. Is the formerof all things, and I/racl1s the rod of his 
TOE inheritance: the LORD of hoſts zs his name 4. 
MINE 4 We had thele five Verles all in the tenth Chapter, Ver. 12, 
Wo OED 13, 143 15, 16. See there the explication of the (evecal paſſages 
Ee in them, the ſcope of which is only to convince thoſe to whom 
. oY the Prophet ſpoke, that notwithſtanding all the Power and Riches 
| and Greatneſs, and Alliances of the Chaldeans, yet that God who 
had threatned this ruine to them was able to bring it upon them, 
and all their Idols were vanities, things of nought that ſhould nor 
| be able to prote& them, and from whoſe power and impotency, 
| they muſt not mealure or make up a Judgmenc of what God was 
TW: able & do, for I{rae!'s God was that God who made the World, 
; and the Lord of all the Armies of che Creatures whether 1n Hea- 
yen or Earth, , 
- + Chap. 20 * Thou art my battle axe and weapons of war 
” $0.2; for|| with thee will I break in pieces the nations,and 


with thee will I deſtroy kingdoms e. 

2 Interpreters are here divided, whether by thou or thee in this 
and the following Verſes, to underſtand Cyrus whom God made 
vle of to deſtroy Babylon, and many. other places, or Babylon. 
Our Tranſlators underitand it of Cyrus, and therefore {peak of 
the future Tenſe, will I. The Hebrew Text will not reſolve us; I 
rather incline to interpret it of Babylon, as indeed the moſt do, 
and ſo it ſhould be, Thou haſt been, and art, for that 1s the ence, 
Cyrus and Darius were not yet in being. God had made uſe of 
Bzby! on like an Hammer or Battle-Axe, to break many nations in 
Pieces. | 

21 And with thee will I break in pieces the horſe 
aud his rider, and with thee will I break in pieces the 
chariot and his rider : 

22 With thee alſo will I break in pieces man and 
woman, and with thee will I break in pieces old and 
young, and with thee willI break in pieces the young 
man and the maid. 

23 Iwillalſo break in pieces with thee the ſhep- 
herd, and his flock, and with thee will I break in 
pieces the hushandman, and his yoke of oxen, and 
with thee will I break in pieces captains and ru- 
Iers f. | 

fThe ſence of all theſe three Verſes is the ſame, viz. That God 
hath made uſe, and was ſtill making uſe -of the Babylonizns to 
waſte and to deſtroy many Nations, to ſpoil and impoveriſhmuch 


People, waſting their Goods, routing their Armies, killing all 
forts of their Inhabitants, 


24 And Iwill reader unto Babylon, and toall 
the inbabitants of Chaldea, all their evil that they 
have done in Zion, in your ſight, ſaith the LORDg. 


g The particle in the front of this Verſe which our Tranſla- 
tors ( underſtanding the four former Verſes of Cyr)rendred and 
11 a copulative fence, mult be rendred »ow or bur, if the four 
former Verſes muſt be underſtood of Babylon, and the ſence is. 
Tho't nave hitherto made uſe of Babylon, and ſhall yet for a time 
make ule of the Chaldeans and Bubylonians to deſtroy ſeveral 0+ 
ther Nations, yt now the time is come, that I will puniſh them, 


OE Te) _ bY. oy or M 
ls 14) 


FEREMIAH. 


or contiderableneis. 


Chap. LL. 


o the 


dynet 


and recompence to them all the miſchief rney have 
Fews and ſome of the Fews \h:!l fiveto the ic 

25 Bchold, I a agairft thee, O deſtroying monun- 
tain, ſaith the LOR D, which deſtroNft all the 
earth h, and 1 will ffretch out my £404 non thee, 
and roll thee down from the rocks ;, wad will inake 
thee a burnt mountain &. 

þ Babylon 15 not here called a Monntain becaulc ir was {icuared 
upon any Hills or Mountains, tor if appea! s from Genes no, 2, 
that it was fituated ina Plain, and we rcad /*r{e 13. that is gwe!s 
upon many Waters ; but becauſe ic was very "igh Tor Its Pow Cr, 
and Greatneſs, and had very high Walls and Towers, that it look. 
ed at a diſtance like an high Rocky Mountain, and as tome lay, 
(being a very large City).was full of Trees. They had deſtroyed 
many People of the Earth that lay near to them. i Gol threa- 
tens todeſtroy them notwithſtanding their Towers, and g1 eat 
Forttficattons, as many times they threw down Malefactors trom 
high Rocks, Mountains, and Precipices. k Aad to make them like 
Ang or Veſuvius, or like fome other Moutitains of Sulphur, or 
other bituminous matter fired, which are always burning, or elle 
he threatneth that their Cities and Towers which appeared like a 
Mountain ſhould be burnt. 

26 And they ſhall not take of thee a fone tor a cor - 
ner, nor a ſtone tor foundations, bur thuu thuls be 
deſolate for cver ſaith the LORD /. 

| God tkreatneth to Babylon an utter rave and Aftolation 1. 
as they ſhould not have a ſtone letr tic io ly a torn I10!1, or to 


4 
41 


f Hel, 
E407 'rf ng 


—RDETTPLY 


k- |makea corner ſtone: or, as ſome othe:s inte: pret it, thar Oicg 


(ſhould never bebuilr again, there ſhould never tom the tublyih, 
ou it be taken a ſtone to lay the tonndation, tor £0 lay too tr 2 
{Corners of new Houtes, new Walls, new Towers tn ic july 
Foundation! Stones, and Corner Stones, are principal Scones i 
Buildings. Nothing thall bs left in B:bv/on of any wort | 


3 Va lu 
þ 5 LC F) 


27 Set ye up ſtandard inthe land, blow the 
trumpet amongtt che nations »”, prepare the natious 
agalnſt her,call together againſt her the kinodoms of 
Ararat 2, Minn, aad Aſhchenaz. », appoint a C:UPT2in 
agatnlt her p, cauſe the houſes to come up as the 
rough caterpillars q. : 

m Theſe former words of this Verſe are expounded by thoſe 
that follow, ſetting up Standards, aud blowings of '7'rumpets, 
are preparatory to bring Armies together. the {ettiiig up of 
Standards, and blowing of Trumpets, a:e Milicary 214 of the 
Will of thoſe Princes or Captains General whole thoſe Scandards 
are, and to whom thole Trumpets belong, chat chole 521iers 
who a1eunder their Command thould gather cheialelves coperter 
to the places where thoſe Standards are let up, and clioie 1 rus 
pets blown. n What this Kingdom of 1-4/4: was, o Aud chol- of 
Minni and Afhchenax is very hard to J*rermine, we read of a 
Mountain called Ararat, where the At ceflel afrer the Flood, 
Geneſis 8, 4. Of Minni we read no where elle; mott Writers 
think theſe were two Kingdoms within Ariacnr. Ajh: 1; n17 dee 
ſcended from N94h by Faphat, Genftis 10: 3. certain it is that the 
Emperour of the Meter had the Dominion of thete plas es, from 
whence it is very probable chat either Cyrus or Drrius, or bath 
drew out Soliliers to hcipthem to conquer the Chaldeans. Þ Atter 
People aregathered together tor War.the firit thing to be dons is 
ro put them into Military Order, conſtituting a Captain Gene; 2}. 
q Let the Horſes come up like the roug Caerpillars. Others read 
it like the waſting, Caterpillar, or like che horrible atrighting Ca- 
rerpillar. Great Diſputes there are amongit critical interpreters 
what Caterpillars are hee meant, the Caterpillars being generally 
tmooth ; bur as we know not the complexion of inſects over all 
the World, io even amonglt us we ſee ſome Catterpillarsthac 
look a little rough ; chat which alone we are here co atrend is 
why the Median Horſes are compared to theſe inſects ; undoubt= 
edly it is eicher, 1, With celpeCt co their Numbers, for Cater- 
pillars in thote Countries uled to cone in vaſt numbers. 2, Or in 
regard of the horror and crembling cauſed by them in People 
when they came, being a great Plague to the places which che y 
infeſted . 

28 Prepare agalnit her the nations wich the 
kings of the Medes, the captains thereof, and all 
the rulers thereof, and all the land of bis domi- 
nion 7. | 
r Here the Prophet declares thoſe particular Princes,and Nati- 
| ons that ſhould bz God's Infteuments to deſtcoy Bubylon, viz. Cz- 
rus and Darius the Etaperours of the Medes, with all the For- 
ces under their Command, and People under their Dominion, © 

29 And the land ſhall tremble and forrow /; for 
every purpole of the LORD ſhall be perfomed a- 
gainſt Babylon, to make the land of Babyloa a deſo- 
lation without an inhabicanc 7. 

{ That is, Babylon or the Land of Chaldez ſhall tremble and 
ſorrow. t For Gad hath determined to deſtroy it, and to leave 
it wholly deſolate, lo as none ſhould dwell 1n ic, 

30 The mighty men of Babylon have torhborn to 
fight,they have remained in rheir holds, their might 
hath failed *, they became as women / - they kave® If. 
burnt her dwelling places, her bars are brokea i265: Clap. 

{ When God hath determinedan end, he ozdercrh means pro» 30» 37 
portionable ro that end. Buly/on Þatmany vaitint and mighty 
Men,and it is very probable the Babylonirns truſted very much io 
them, but when 1: canie to, God took 4 wan courage, 10 a; oy 

BY H 


{1s 


| 


7? 


$ Jy 


my 


: > 
h ——— ——_ — rr "on 


--—* Chap. LL. 


* Chap. 


ny Oo, 38. 


and, if at any time they came out, their courage failed them, and 
they behaved themſelves more like Women than Men of War,ſo 
as their Enemies burnt theit Cities, brake down their Fortificati- 
ons, and made what havock they pleaſed. 

31 One poſt ſhall run to meet another, and one 
meſſenger to meet another, to ſhew the king of Baby- 
lon that his city is taken at oze end x. 

u We have had occaſion once again to recite what we have 
in Clvil Hiſtorians about the taking of Babylon by Cyras, viz, That 
it was taken by ſarprize, by the Median Emperours unexpecte 
civerting the River Euphrates by divers Channels which he cur ; 
as alſo that Babylon was a very vaſt City, the greatneſs of which 
mizht admit of Poſts, and Meſſengers from one end of the City to 
another to acquaint the King what was done at the other end of 
the City in which himſelt was Reſident, and it is ſaid that che 
King of Babylon when his City wastaken, did not know of his 
danger until the Enemy had entred the Cty. 


32 And that the * paſſages are ſtopt w, and the 
reeds they have burnt with fire.r, . and the men of 


war are afrighted y. 


#ERE 


F, WP. - + 


ling without an inhabitant e. 
4 Heaps of Rubbiſh. e See the Notes on Chop. 5c. 39, 40 
where the ſame thing was betore faid, 


© 33 They ſhall roar together like lions - they ſhall 


| yellas lions whelps m:. 

m It is incertain whecher this be to be underſtood of the Medes 
making horrible roarings ard noiſes when they took Batylon: Or, 
of the B1by/onians, who upon the taking of their City (as is 11- 
ſnal) made horrid Outcries, as being a People quite undone.Some 
think it referreth to the drunken noiſes of the Babylonians at their 
Feſtival, during the celebration of which we are told their City 
was taken ; but to this one would think the compariton of Lions 
Whelps (which ordinarily yell for wapt of Vituals, or for ſome 
miſchief done them, nec when their Bellies are full) ſhould nor 
{0 well agree. 


Chap. on. i 


had no heart to fight, but kept themſelves io their ſtrong Holds, [ ling place for dragons, an aſtoniſhment and an hif- 


| O, , lha, , 
thembcly.; 


| / 


39 In their heat I will make their feaſts », and * ] * Ver. 5; 77 


w1ll make them drunken; that they may rejoyce, and 
ſleep a perpetual ſleep, and not awake, faith the 
LORD o. 


n When they ſhall grow hot with Wine, I will put or give,or 


w This was part of the meſſage which the. Prophet ſaich the 'make them a Feaſt of another nature. Interpreters judge that che 


Meſſenger ſhould carry to the King of Bbylon, thag was in the o- Prophet referrech to the Feaſt made by Belſhaz3ar, Dan. 5. r. To 
ther part of the City, that the paſſages over the River Euphrates, a thouſand of his Lords, when he, and his Wives, and Concubines 
or any other paſſages by which the Babylonian? might, upon the drank Wine in the Veſſels belonging to theTemple,during which 
Enemies entrance,make their eſcape,wereall ſtopped, and guard- Feaſt the City was taken. o So they were made drunk with the 
ed with Soldiers, or otherwiſe ſo as there was no hope of any , Wine Cup of God's Fury, becauſe the Lord hath deſigned them 
making an eſcape. x The word tranſlated Reeds ſignifies alſo ſtand. 'to utter ruine, and deſtruction, that as Men filled with Wine are 
ing Pools of Water, and ſome judge that the ſence, the Water is merry, and ſhout, and then fallaſleep ; fo the Chaldeans being 
drained out of the Pits or Pools, ſo as it could not hinder the drunk with the Wine of the Lord's Wrath, while they were merry 


entrance of the Enemies; thoſe that adhere to the Tranſlation of with their. Cups of Wine, 
it Reeds, ſay that upon the borders of the River Euphrates were ſhould never awake out of. 


vaſt quantities of great and tall Reeds, which with the Mud in| 
which they ſtood, were as another Wall to the City, but the Medes 
had burnt up them ſo as the way was open to the Walls ; and 
the Men of War, y ſeeing theſe Reeds burnt up, and the water 
drained from them, were afrighted ſo as their hearts through 
fear failed them. 


33 For thus ſaith the LORD of hoſts the God of 
Ifrael. The daughter of Babylon zs like a threſhing, 


Or, inthe floor z, || it is time to threſh her : yet a little while, 
: me that he and the tiwe of her harveſt ſhall come 4. 


threſheth 
her, 


7 Heb. 

my violence 
} Or, the 
remainder. 
+ Heb. in- 
habitreſs. 


lia 13. 2f, 


the River Euphrates, that js, turning it into other Channels- 


2 Babylon had been a threſhing inſtrument, by which, and a 
threſhing floor in which God had threſhed many other Nations, | 
God now intended to make it ava Threſhing floor wherein he 
would threſh the Chaldeans. a Some think becaule of the next, 
words that the words were better tranſlated zt 5s time to tread her, 
(fo the word properly ſignifies) as Men uſe to prepare their 
Threſhing-floors againſt the time of Harveſt, for the time of this 
Harveſt was near 3 her Harveſt f:gnifieth the Harveſt which the 
Juſtice of God would have from the ruine of the Chaldeans. 


34 Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon hath de- 


voured me, he hath cruſhed me, he hath made me an]. 


empty veſſel, he hath ſwallowed me up like a dra- 


might fall inco ſuch a Sleep as they 


40 I will bring them down like Iambs tothe laugh- 
ter like rams with he goats p-” 
- þ That is, they ſhall be deſtroyed before they are aware of 
it, 

41 How 1s Sheſhach q taken? and how is the praiſe 
of the whole earth ſurprized 7 ? how is Babylon be- 
come an aſtoniſhment among the nations / ? 


9 We meet with this term Sheſhach only here, and Chap. 25 ; 


26. both places leave it doubtful whether it be to be taxen tor an 

Idol, which they caleld by the name ot Shach,: Or a Name given 
tothe City of Babylon, which worſhipped that Idol, to the honour 
of which the Babylonians kept a yearly Feſtival for ſeveral days, 
in the time of which Feſtival they ſay it was that Cyrzs took the 
City of Babylon. r Babylon that was fo famous over all the World 
for her ſplendor. { And ſo it is interpreted 'in the next words, 
wherein Babylon for the puniſhment brought upon it is ſaidto be 
an aſtoniſhment ro all Nations, which makes it probable that Bz- 
bylon is what it was called Sheſhach, by the doubling of a Letter 
becauſe ſhe worſhipped Shach. 


42 The ſea is come up upon Babylon , ſhe 1s co- 
vered with the multitude of the waves thereof r. 
: A-multitude of Enemies, that are like the Sea in which there 


gon, hc hath filled his belly with my delicates, he{js a multicude of Waters,or-that will.over-run them as the Sea 


hath caſt meout b. | 

b The Prophet ſpeaketh in the Name of the Fews complaining 
of the King of Babylon as the Author of all the Miſeries they 
had indured, which he expreſſeth by ſeveral Phraſes ſignifying 
the ſame thing, vi. That it was the King of Babylon that had ru- 
ined them, and filled himſelf and his Soldiers with their delicate 
things, and caſt them out of their Land, dealing with them as 
Wolves or other Beaſts of Prey,that eat what they pleaſe of other 
Beaſts they have preyed upon, and leave the reſt in the Fields. 


35 The violence done to me, and to || my fleſh, 
be upon Babylon, ſhall the Þ inhabitant of Ziou ſay ; 
and my blood upon the inhabitants of Chaldea, ſhall 


Jeruſalem ſay c: 

c The words are either a Prayer or a Predi&ion of God's Ven- 
geance upon Baby!on, fo Pſel. 137.Ver. 7.8. God hath faid Ven 
geance is his, and he willrepay it. The Church of the Fews here 
commits its cauſe to God, and prayeth to him to execute Venge- 
ance 'for her. How far it is lawful for us topray againſt our 
Enemies, we have heard once and again. 


36 Therefore thus faith the LORD, Behold, I will 
plead thy cauſe, and take vengeance for thee 4, and 
1 will * dry up her ſea, and make her ſprings 


dry e. 

| 4 Nen had need take heed how they give- cauſe of appeals to 
God againſt them, eſpecially the appeals of ſuch asare a People 
that have a Covenant reJation to God. God in thoſe caſes ordina- 
rily ſheweth himlelfa ſwift wicneſs and Judge; and gives a ſpeedy 
Judgment in ſuch cauſes. Behold, faich God, I will plead thy cauſe, 
not with words,but aCtually wirh my judicial diſpenfations,there- 
fore it 1s expounded by taking vengeance. c The Vengeance 
which God threatneth is expreſſed metaphorically under the notion 
of drying up her Sea, and making her Springs dry, which ſignifi- 
eth the depriving her of all Neceſlaries,not only of the abundance 
of her Men, Riches, Treaſures, but of her Springs. Thus I had 
rather, expound it, than as referring to the particular Stratagem 


oyverfloweth the ſhore,or any Land into which it once breaketh, 


43 Her cities are a deſolation, a dry land, and * 
wilderneſs, and a land wherein no man dwelleth; net- 
ther doth ary ſon of man paſs thereby -. 

u See Chap.2.6. and 9.'12, The words areal! of them de- 
{criptive of an utter deſolation that ſhould not only bethe fate ot 
Babylon the head City, but of all the inferiour- Cities:that were as 
Daughters to the Mother City. | | 


44. And I will puniſh 'Bel and Babylon , andI 
w1ll bring forth out of his mouth that which he harh 
ſwallowed up x, and the nations ſhall not flow toge- 
ther any more unto him y, yea the-wall of Babylon. 


ſhall fall x. 

w Bel was the principal Babylonian Idol, of which fee what ts 
noted, Chap. 50. 2. x All the Veſſels of the Temple; 2 Chron, 36. 
7. and whatever Gifts the Babylonians had preſented to him, j It 
was the cuſtom of other Nations to ſend Preſents to the Gods of 


thoſe Nations whom they were in ſubje&ion to, or whom they 


would appeaſe, whence it is that we read the: Philiftines when 
they had the Ark would not ſend it home without a preſent, 1 Sam. 
6. 11, God by his Prophet foretelleth that the time ſhould come 
when the Nations could come no more to Baby!on , either to pay 
an homage to their chief Idol, nor yet to bring offerings unto 
him: + And the city of Babylon ſhovld bealſo ruined. 

45 * My people,'\zo ' ye out of the midſt of her, 


. ws y ks 2b 

* Chip Rn 
a , "ob: pF CE ® 

O $, div : 


and deliverye every man his ſoul from the fierce an- z;,, « 


ger of the LORD 4. 


Theſe words are an exortation tothe Jews to be willing upon 


the firſt Proclamation of Liberty by Cyrus, to go out of Babylon, 


notwithſtanding the pleaſantneſs of the place, and thar now their 
ſtakes had been pitched there many Years, becauſe of the ruine 
which ſhould moſt certainly come on that place. | 

46 And leſt your hearts faint, and ye fear for the 


rumour that ſhall be heard in the land b- a rumour 


by which Cyrus took Babylon, viz. By drying up in ſome mealure 


37 And Babylon ſhall become heaps 4, a * dwel- 


Rey. 15: « : 


ſhall both come oze year,and after thar in arorber year ' 


fall come a rumour, and violence in the land, ruler 
o—_ ruler ec. 


b And 


eo: 
nts 


"+ Obad. 5. 


Chap. Jt. 


m_ x - 
Year atter Year rat ſhou!l come 


SEREMIAH C| 
I f 4 | 

F . E. % £00 7 i 112 
Þ and !efl they ſhould be afrigited by the Succeſſion of Evi1s j of Divine pow er, by hnmane probabilities, rforefore 
me upon B:bjlon. Some think it | to uſe many words tothe lame pwr r:oVe © he Fry te 7 


-" Gy! 5 NI 
N 


* . } 
% —_ . , 


1 4 = is ' } 09 L Seb 3 xv;er 2aoww $1.4 o , ' ' F 
were beter trantlated, And 1:1 rot your hearts faint. Thougi F090 | vn _ 5, 20M Car) tl 1e :15 be 2 DrÞolon nth impream- 
ſhould hear of Cyrus his coming Year atter Yuar, yet faint not (tor | bie Walls, rwo bundred to t hin (( the Bitiorinng renare? ar 
they lay Cyrus was one Year preparing, and that he ſpent the {t- | of a great breadth, and it hach very ſtrong, al (12! 7 

/ wed . y fo bh -- a F «0 14 (43G Y / » 1Y / # 1 = p I [4 —T PO” | SNIEIR Las af i. : 
Cond Year 10 Pali17Z through Ajjjria, t5 neaeh SIT nat ar Reb UN | 70 13 Gs I " EL TELLY 4 7 TA! [1 t 7 ( '4 
c51] che rhird Year } no not though you ſhall lee ' or lea! Ot [uc- : NIN = Heaven, if they could maice their 1 0 ers met (tres 
cefive troubles, and a great deal of violence in tte Land by the 'than they were, yet the $p:lers were to £0292 iray hin, and 
A153  »L oo © — a 1 ' 15 : 2 , "FAS hh 4 = ' p * 4 3 Flioks & 
onpoticion of grea* Princes one to another, for none of them ſhall | conic and would tend Spoilers, who woul:t pull x 3 Wa! 
do you an harm ; but this doth not fo well fuit to che turmer and break down her Towers. 
, : OT OE RI. * "IL - = 
Verie,where they are bidd-n to make haſt out and iave ther own | $1 A ſound of a cry com! trom Banvlgn, an 
AO wotoOre ot > {enc 0! "terprecers an RY . _L Wn ob, : ——_— 
Lives. I do therefore eophart rhe lence ” our Ioter; po ne great deſtruction from the land of the Childey 
"oy Maris mak - 16 tnent Yor tl wade ; © __ ' ' : — 
_ — fl CR hb Wl ns . Sri _ oy” p = p To alltretiem that what Gol rhreatmned thould c | 
2 axe 1; 1c, bLecallle they Would DV realon Ori tile 1. e's 1 ; , 
them t9 make haſte = _ CAll Ce _ P 1byt Ras 7 he calls to the Jews to liſten, as if already thore were @ cry 
. aacti>« 2 11 2 ter e411 CO! - not ttla B40 INI. 4 & ST x FR . S s » HP wy F =. 
fucceflive ev1s hs ordhn VE pe CPE IG LHOTTES zabylon, and a tound of a great ceftruction trom tie Laild ot 1s 
! * apr P if a: { nee 1ViS j 
there veri fs" EY ” Ts E ves _ 11} <paldeans, 
7 Fhereforc foi je UaysS COCNIQ, TRALF LVWIIG; Donnanſh co} hath Gl 7 
_ 47 Therefore bell. Le Uays COME, ED ( ea 2 - Becauſe the Lord hath Goiied Buy ion - ie! 
FE TER ly dazmc 1991 tle grave 122esS OT LUDYIOIN, | 1.nciiil.., Eto ogrowr. was : = 
{ will viſit © jndgment MR ir FOE wh = mT »ideſtroyed out of her the great voice 7, whon }; 
ant hor 2 14nd :na Cf mndcdc, ana aitncri... To % 4 F Y 
498 anu _ whole Jand © ſk. / ans gat ; | WaVCS dO roar, like grcat watcrs, 'd :nOHYE 
13171 ſnall fall 11 the mid! = 8 | PORE TI'S NE 
{14111 Fall fall 12 20 _ ot ae1 —_ 1. 1101 og | VOICC iS Ute) cd s. 
. 11! do, that 7 ecute "ment upon tne Iyois Pp : , 0 = | 
c I will do, tit 1s, I will execute Jud ment upon the 1401s © q The Sword is not to much the Sword of the Af /:e, as 17 


Buiylin, and the whole Land of Ch2{44 ſhall be confounded, 
when they ſhall tee that their Idols will do them no more Service, 
i Sym inſtead of ber ſlain, would haye it read ber dancers {tor | 
the City was taken while Be!ſhatpar and his wiole Court wer | 
Revelliag) but the I-arne 1 Author of th: Engliſh Annotaiions | 
tells us rite word wil not bear 18. X | 


"I S tAhal 11 34 an; all $} 
48 Then * the heaven and rhe carth, and all that 


' 
' 


i.le + <bo y + NOPE t Es "by _—_ . ft » ag . yo + Cr i 1 -4-@ | 

id +4 75 Therein {hl jag for Babylon ce, for the IDourers | 
e jo Vit 49» 8 ay .. 1 Eg NESS FRE 13.75 | 
pay hall comennto her from thenorth, faith the TORT F. | 

3%; 2 e All the Creatures in Heaven and Earth ſhall rejovce at the 


Vengeance which Go hail take upon Babylon, which had been; 
the deſtroyer of to many of their People. f The Median Solciers| 
are thole here called 5 pGilers from the North, ; 
[ Or, bth 49 || As Babylon 5. calcd the flamn of Lirael LO | 
B:by/on 1s fall, fo at Babyion ſnail tall the {lata of | all the) 
69 Jae , carths. _ 
"Gy = ſ- g The words in the Hebrew have ſome difficulty, which 15 not 
rn _— ſo obvious to thofe not icquainted with that Language, but Natl: 
blon Sec. B1vel occaſion to Interpreters to vary in their particular Tranfla- 
| Or. th, £1005 of It, bur they moſtly agree 1n the general lence, VF -_ 
” OG theſe words are given 25 a realon why the wholeEarth ſhould 10 
MEN much rejoyce inthe rnine of Babylon, becaule Babylon had cauſed 


T{raet to fall: The latter term a1 the Exrthmuſt be underſtood 1n a 
reſtrained fence, for thar Earth; the Challeans coming up from 
all parts of Chald:zto help Babylon, ſhould be flain there, as by 
the means of Babylen the Iſraelites were {[ain that came up from all 
paris of Julea ro help Feruſalem, 

5o Yethat have eſcaped the ſword, go away, ſtand 


not {till þ : remember the LORD, afar offs, and It | 


Jeruſalem comme into your mind k. 

h It is hard co retolve whether the Prophet here ſpeaks to the 
Chaldeans, or the 21:des, or the Fews, though moſt underſtand it 
of the Fews whom God would have leave - Babylon as loon as 
ther ſhould havea Liberty proclaimed. i And to remember when 
they came into Fudea the great things both of Juſtice toward the 
Ch.ildzans ani Mercy toward them, which God had done. hk And 
keep Feruſalem in their mind, as the place where rhey were to 
worſhip God according to his direftion, and tor wich God had 
{0 WLOUg It, 

s1 We areconfounded, becauſe we have heard re- 
proach 7, ſhame hath covered our taces ; for ftrans- 
ers are com2 into the ſanctuaries of the LOR 
houſe 

| The words of this Verſe feem to prove that the Fews were the 
P-rions intended inthe former Verle whom God would have to 
£0 away and not ſtand ſtill, for it 1s out of doubt, that it is of 
them the Prophet here ſpeaketh, and whom the Prophet brings 
in here, faying, we are confoundel, that is, aſhamed (as it is ex- 
pounded in the next words) to hear the Enemies reproaching us 
ior our God, or tor our Religion, as P/.l. 137. 3. And m beeanſ- 
Pzgzans that were Strangers to the Commonwealth ot 1/-ael, who 
Numb. 1.51, might not come near the Tabernacle of the Lord, 
were come, and that not to worſhip, but to plunder and rifle in 
the Sanfuaries of the Lord, even in the Court of the Prieſts and 

. of the T/raelits, and inthe moſt Holy Place; thoſe whole very 
preſence i1 thele places had been a pollution of them. 


52 Wherefore behold, thedays come, faith the 


ti 1.ORD, that. I will do judgment upon her graven 


images, and through all her land, the wounded ſhall 
groan 7, 

n For which complaints of my People, or rather for which 
profanation of my Holy Place, I will be revenged on their Gra- 
ven Images, and not oniy upon their Idols, but upon the Wor- 
thippers of them, and cauſe a groaning of wounded Men'over all 
the Country ofthe Chaldeans 3 I xwill cauſe tnem to know that 
their Idols are not able to protec them from my Power and 
Juſtice. 

53 * Though Babylon ſhoukt mount np to hea- 
Ven, and though ſhe ſhould fortifiethe height of her 
ſtrength, yer from me ſhall ſpoilers come unto her, 
{aich the LORD o. 

0 Weare very prone to meaſure things by che meaſures of our 
own Reatons, and to judge of events which are to be the effects 


Yol.- II. 


Sword of the Lord. lt is he who 1s to be jookel ar, 25 111+ Sp 
of Biby/on. r Aud hath made to cerlc ann tiny ph 


to that pf: SAY 
{es canled from Multitudes of People 1 ir wall nw nn and 


x 
+» % 


and trathcking together. »s The noitt of wr: Eiopenies char 54 
breat 1:3 upon ber ſhall be like the notle any roartnes of the 


by / | —Y * +& 


when it dathes wpon the ſhore or upon fore Rooks {hat ce! 


! ] ? Ny a 1 ! Þ p . rc ' [ 4 ; %? 4 
tne Only n011e {hall be heard in lier, initead of tte Noiles 
: | 

there to be 1nade 


lers, 


56 Becauſe the {poiſzr is come n7on ber, exez viy- 
| ; 


anar "> y© 3 j — r% % : q=® 'B « =- \ N\ TTY 
«<CLi) he [TLEA 11% / ITICOI] iI C he iT, TEEN 


ON Babylon, 
one of their bows 1s brokca s, for the LOAD G 
of recompenccs ſhall ſurely requite ::. 

t Little 


m01e 1s {21d here than was betore. only che wor, 
:he taking of Babylon by a lurprize when the King and che Tnly 
rants werenot aware of it, which we hi) bejore alt's 1:3) d 
39, 49. In this the Prophet faith, c har Gol world 25th 


juft God, a Cod of recomperces, Where ( ods Poor's fie 
and eſther cannot revenge themtelyes, of roy nor ch fr 
private Pertons (co whom Golt hath over 06 
Sword) 3f they canexerciic Frith and. Patien 
God a Gol of K-campence, tlacocan and wil requr: 


mw 


k 1 | 54 OY” . 
mes, anu plea CNEMW C2112. 
** - NY . = % = - md ' ! « % \ 0 0 
J7 Am * | will PTGO EPPGLIR 13! CIFAT AS 4t0 
SY. _ © : % ', $4 14 : , ? l 
wile mc;z, her CapLans nc Rer 413-21 


ty me, aid whey 


PN ETTPELE (al Lo Ix: T0 6 
not WAarkC, KIN NC KMS, WROK 1211) 
- . hy F 
wy] nd _—y 
of 191csS W, 
w Drunken Men vie to fall afſe-r, The Drophet ipea;; 
. Pp __—_— 0 , x 1C $4 £3 D's , - Þ 
Mera DNOICALIVE. 11S INGCANIE £5 i1140 l \v OL i 
"ES ' a 9K. 4 DD ns ? y a — as F ' 
with the win? of RI fury; 108101641 Cr 47. 25, 5,15, 3; 
hz 8. S - . 4% 5 7 , - , b, 4}. y. 4 4) - 1 p - % 
enc UrInkyes ot If tiiey Mo11a Loc} LiiCi IyIT 3; TH CT! 4,7 
1 fl! yo Es A {? : 097 LIONPRRTr s, 
inou'd be tre utter rule 334 deitruition Yer thre þ rm 


F $4. 1552 4 i. SE 1 = gy je El PO I LIE. 
be an ailu{ton to the PORUre of the RIng of 2293197, and £12 1 no 


. "P-. _—___ » 4.4 —— TY - PIE, oy FS. = 
tana of nts Lords me: 1f10ie is D1Nn, F- 1. WA4S 17), Waef t£1;zetr C 


val of their Idol Svicb) win they were trinking Wine $7 7 
Bowls that were brought from the Temple at J-ru! 11-32, 1 

Per. 30. It is fatd, In 5548 very nicht. 
Chaldeans /[ain. | 


JS Thus {faith the 7 ORD of nojts, I'h> hg: 


walls of Babylon hall be utteriy j broken, aud! 
high gares ſhall be burat with fire wn, and * rhe } 
ple ſhall labour ia vil, 2nd the folk in the fr 


they ſhall he weary v. 

x Incredible things are rol us by Hiftorians of this roar DO; 
They lay tie compPils of 1: 4.45 threetcore Miles 45our. Thar # 
Walis were in hetziit £40 hnadred toot, in breanr's | | 
Ctartiots might drive a broaf upon the top © t 
the breaking down of tir: Wills, and burmng of cheje 
Gates and towers. y And ©45 though rhe People hon! 
co quench this fre, or r9 rebuild chis Citi, vet ic would 
loſt labour, and chey ſhould give over cheir encerprii2,zs 
weary. 


with ſhould be cranutlaced from 25the fame P2rototun is tn ortho 


S Yy 


tell usa Story of fome lth thing, 
cumſtance of time, lers us Enmwy tae = HCC WAS IN212þ 


Years betore Babzlon was defiroy out inn ne WeATT Ct; 


Jeruſalem was taken; lo as it 112twt) 240 
was fulfilled in the firſt dove. » ! ire a WOT aca NUtS of 
various Later pgetat iuts hor. 500 4 © O\ 

2 ' f# \ 2 2&0 bic! 


7 4 110 OXDUTa 1 f:1S ifs 


' "PEP "Pp aut E i) ; EE RIS Ce 2. PREP 
110M the mMulticy iO QT! COP: - ON ILOM wile 


was taken (which was as betoce 1414) was 13 the time of tne Dottie 


an hundred great Gates, muy of them of Brais, Gol threato- « 


no wy les 4 220227333 31 Ee os TY. 
J9 ll The word Vit Fd Jerom! ; ? LS 4 14 V/ bt 


: j = ? 7A > . Ll + [+ ; 

commanded Seraab, che fon of Nerizh, the 7 0 
Maaſeitah z, when he went | with Zedekiah rhe kin 
of Judah into Babylon 4, the forth year of (is re nd 
b, and this Seriah way 4 quict prince / | 

3 Of this Serazuh we read no inote than we hiyge {9 0h Forte, # 
though Chap. 36. 26. there be tention made 0; a9 is 102th, ME 
4 Weno where read of an; Tourney Zeackigh male wit Goran 
till he was carried a Pritoner thicterar 15 covretore 7 H 


ces, (Far ft 5 {to Te an 44» 4+» It Dems 197 0:24 W191 27 0 1 FMICES 
co make viſits one to another 3 ſich atfiants;, row yt Lge [295 


6. 4 C op, AI ” 
ho f 
- 26 ———_ 
2 a7 IO 


+= 


ENF 
i 
a9 


—" 


e 
if ERP 0 
tr See 


A 
- 


_ 


p34 


__ 
OT: 
+ 
= 


ICIS 


——_— 4, >. ro 


k 
A ns > 
».. 0h, "Rn 
OC... 


25 &:: 
2 1/140 'F 
: "44 "Z » q 
'+*V $d 
WF 
 R40; 
$442 'q 
4 - » 
bs. 
i 's, 
Fl 
i! BE 


o 3 


cm _ 
6 - n D 
an, an 7; 


—- 


yy 
© a -5 : oY 
. 
oo men, 


_ 
aw 


Toys's 


COT DS 


—— 


COD 


Chap. Lil. 


which $2127 had ;ome Authority under Zedehiah, the ſame with 
Aoi 1Chroz, 8.5. Others think it was a Name of Oftice, 
ind fienificd Lo { chanberlein s bur the heſt Interprexers fee no 
realon 10 vary from our Tranſlation,rhe ſence of which 15 that he 
was a Man of a moderate quiet Temper, that periwaded to 
Peace. 

50 So Jeremiah wrote in a book all the evil that 
ſhould come upon Babylon, ever all theſe words 7/2! 
2-6 Written again!t Babylon. 

51 And Jeremiah faid ro Seraiah, When thou 
comelt to Babylon, and ſhalr ſee, and ſhalt read all 
theſe words 7. | 

1 Nor to the Cha!d2ans, nor poſtibly 15 it to be underſtood of a 
mcer private reading of them to himſelf, but to the Fes, that 
were in Baby/0n, acquainting them with what God had ſpoken a- 
onnit B.:5y/on by the Prophet, 


52> Then ſhaltthon ſay, O LORD, thou haſt ſpo- 
ken avainlt this place to cut it off; that none ſhall re- 
main in it, neither man nor bealt,bur that ir ſhall be 
- deſolate tor ever o. 
re j 0-74 gu h2s 5 thou helieveſt what thou haſt read to 
47/9.4:103. 1,e what ſhall moſt certainly come to paſs, by ſpeaking words to 
eli1s Sence. 


63 And it ſhall be when thou haſt made an end of 
-eading this hook, rþat thou ſhalt bind * a ſtone to 1t 
and ca{t it into the midit of Euphrates. 


5.4 And thou ſhalt ſay, Thus ſhall Babylon fink, 
and ſhall nor riſe from the evil that I will bring, upon 
her p: and they ſhall be weary 9. Thus far are the 
words of Jeremiah ». ; 

2 Tr hath been often ſaid that Euphrates was that great River 
which ran by the Walls of Baly/oz 3 into this S:razah 15 com- 
manded by F#1:miah ro throw this Roll of Prophecy againſt B.0y- 
ion, ſymbollically ro reach the Fews, thar ccording rothe Tenor 
of is Prophecy the time ſhall come afrer ſome years, When 8.- 
5y/0n ſhould be deſtroyed never to riſe again-10 any great vie, or 
degree of ſplendor, no more than that Roll with the Stone tied to 
it ſhould riſe from the bottom of Euphrates. q Some read tnough 
they weary themſelves, thar 1s, to do whart they can, or (as 1t 15 
here) and they ſhall be weary with that weighr of Judgment 
which ſhall be upon them, » Either the words of Feremy relating 
ro Baby{3n reach thus far, or all the words of Feremah remaiming 
on ſacred Record {for it 1s rhought that the n: xt Chapter was Ia- 
ther penned by ſome other Holy Man.) Or (which ſeemerh the 
beſt) the Propherical words of Jeremiah, for the marter of the 
nexc Chapres is Hiſtorical, and the Book of Lamentations is 
nor Prophetical 3 as to the manner of 1t, tho" there be 1n ut three 
or four Propherical Paflages, Lun. 4. 21, 22, oc, 


* JoeRev. 
£3,271, 


CHAP. LII. 


A Renting of 4; Reign of Zedekiah : Of the Sirge, Taking, and 
D: ris of Jerutater: i4ith the Cauſes thereof, and what 
further baypenes there, 1,=-— 39. Evil-merodach adtanceth 
Tchoichin, 31, -— 34. 


i 7 Edekiah was one and twenty years old when 
z Hoh, he + began toreian, and he reigned eleven 
reigu's. years 12 Jernſalem 3 and his mothers name was Hamu- 
: tal, che Canghrer of Jeremiah of Libnah. 

> And he did chat which wa evil in the ſight of the 
LORD according to all that Jehotakim had done. 

3 For through the anger of the LORD it came to 
maſin Jeruſalem and Judah, till he had caſt them 
v1 from his preſence, that Zedekahrebelled againſt 
the king of Babylon 4, 

Itis generally thought that what we have 14 this Chapter was 
nor penned by the Prophet F*r:11ia/), who it 15 nor probable would 
have to largely repeated what he had related before Chap. 3 9.and 
could not Hiſtorically relate what happened after his time as tome 
things did which are mentzoned rowards the end of the Chapter, 
from :r.31. rothe end. They therefore rather think 1t penned 
by ſome or other of choſe in Babylon, and pur 1n here as a Preface 
to rhe Book of Lomeatations, What we havein the three firſt Ver- 
ſes 15 entirely raken out of 2 Kings 24. 18, 19, 20, See the Notes 
rhere. 


4 Here the wicked aQings of Zedebiah, and particularly his 
ReHellion againſt che King of 226y/0z who had made him King, as 
2 King 24. 17. and to whom he had given an Oath of Fealty, is 
aicribed ro the wrath of the Lord; God not putting any ſuch 
wickedneſs into Is heart,bur ſuftering him fo to miſcarry, having 
a deſign to ſend F4da! intro Captivity. Princes are often by God 
ſuttered ro miſcarry, for the fins of their People, which fhould 
oblige us when wethink we have cauſe ro complain of the Errors 
of our Ralers, ro conſider whether we have nor by ſome finful 
courſes provoked God, which hach mace him leave our Rulers (2 
:5 miſcarry in order to our ruine and puniſhmenc, 


+ Anditcame to paſs in the ninth yearof his 
reign 1n the tenth month, in the tenth day of the 
montn, 2: Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon came, 


FEREMIAH 


he and all his army againſt Jeruſalem, and pitched 
againlt it, and built forts again{t it round about. 

5 Sothe city was beſieged unto the eleventh year 
of king, Zedckiah, 

6 Andin the fourth month, in the ninth day of 
the month, the famine was ſore in the city, fo that 
there was no bread tor the people of the land. 

7 Thea the city was broken up, and all the men of 


war fled, and went forth out of the ciry by mght.by /okk 
the way of the gate, between the two walls, whictt 
w.zs by the Kings garden, (now the Chaldeans were by 
the city round about) and they went by the way ot 
the plain. 
9 Then they took the King, and carried him up 
unto the king of Babylon to Riblah, in the Jand of 
Hamath ; where he gave judgment upon him. 
to And the king of Babylon flew the ſons of Zede- 
kiah betore his eyes, he llew alſo the princes of Ju- 
dah in Riblah. | - Bob 
11 Then he | put out the eyes of Zedektah, and , ,, ogg 
the king of Babylon bound hum in || chains, and carri- zj;y,ged 
ed him to Babylon, and put him in + priſon till the || Or;fete;r,, 
day of his death 6. ra 
b This Hiſtory is found, 2 King. 25. 1,2, 3, 4 5, 6, 7, 8. much #” *9* 194: 
inthe ſame words, See the Annotations on that Chapter, Fere- 9 *** 
2) alto hath the ſubſtance of 1t, Chap, 35. 1, 2, 2,4, 5, 6, 7, only} ard. 
neither of thoſe places have the laſt words, from whence we learn 
that Zed:biab died 1n Babylon a Priſoner, b wt 
12 © Now in the fifth month, in the tenth day of & thr! a. 
the month, (which was the nineteenth year of Nebu- | 
chadrezzar king of Babylon) came Nebuzaradan 
| | captain of the guard, which + ſerved the King of j or, <1: 
Babylon, into Jeruſalem. Marſhal. 
13 And burnt the houſe of the LORD, and the ob hs 
king's houſe, and all the houſes of Jeruſalem, and all the execy- 
the houſes of the great mer burat he with fire. * ioners 07 
14 Andall the army of the chaldeans, that were PS eo 
with the captain of the guard brake down all the and & 
walls of Jeruſalem, round about. Ver. 14. 
15 Then Nebuzar-adan the captain of the onard rk. $== ; 


carried away captive certain of the poor of the peo- flood befor? 20, 
ple, and the relidue of the people that remained 

in the city, and thoſe that fell away, that fell to 

=_ king of Babylon, and the reſt of the multi- 

tude, 


16 But Nebuzar-adan the captain of the guard 


left cerraiz of the Poor of the Jand ſor vine-drelſers 
and tor husbandmen. 

£ See the Nores on 2 Kings 25, from Ver.s. to the 13. whereall 
this 15 relared, only with a ſmall difference as to the Day of the 
Month when N:b:24r-44an came to Jeruſz/em and burnt the Fem- 
ple. Inche Kings it is ſaid he came the ſeventh Day, here it is 
laid hecame on the tenth Day, See the ſolution of it in the Annota- 
tions on 2 Kings 25. probably he night come into Jeruſalem rhe 
ſeyenth Day, and nor bnrn the Temple ill the tenth. Much of ic 
alſo 13 related by Jeremiah, Chap. 39, The Provoſt-Marſha!l about 
a Month afrer the raking of the City, returned with part of the 
Army, burar the Temple, the great Mens Houſes in the City, 
and many other Houſes, and carried away divers Priſoners, but 
lefr ſome of the poorer ſort of the People to dreſs the Vineyards, 
and Till the Grounds, which 1s a thing very uſual with Conque- 
rors for their owu advantage, that their Conqueits way yield them 
ſome Reyenue, 


17 Allo the * pillars of braſs that were in they Chap: 
houſe of the LORD, and the baſes, and the braſen ,,,;. 
ſea that was in the houſe of the LORD, the Chaldeans 


brake and carried away all the braſs of them to Baby- 
lon c. 


c The particular enumeration of the parts and Lltenfils of the 
Temple mentioned in this, and tn the following Verſes, may be 
concetved to have been to juſtific the Prophecy of Jeremian,Chp, 
27. 15. where there is a particular mention made of the Pi{ ar, 
the Baſes,and the Sea, that chey ſhould all with the reſidue of the 
Veijels of the Temple be carricd to Baby/on, Of theſe Pillars we 
read r Kings 9.15, they were of Braſs cighteen Cubits high, they 
were in the Porch of che Temple, er, 21. of the Bffes we read 3 
there alſo largely from Ver, 27, to Ver. 38. they alſo were all of Et 
Braſs; and of the $ea from Ver. 25, ro Vey. 27. Theſe being all 2 
made of Braſs were- for convenency of carriage broken by che 
Chaldeans. 


F T Heb. 
$breſhouls 


; Ly 7G 
18 The * The Caldrons alfo 4, and the ji ſhovels e, - a. 
and the {nuffers /,and the |, bowls g and the ſpoons .*. |; Or. / Bede 
and all the veſſels of bra wherewich they mini- ©" eatain 
{tred took they away. abs the M1, 
Cr. 


Chap. LIL FEREMIAH 


a Theſe were calted Pots, 2 Kings 25. 14. & Which wereto 
remove the aſhes from the Altar, f Some think that his word 1n 
this place were berrer tranſlated Tongs, becauſe he is ſpeaking of 
Inſtruments of Braſs, and that thote Urenſils are nor here under- 
tiood with which they ſnutted the Lamps, becauſe they were of 
Gold, g Or Bſozs; 1t is uncertain which'1s here intended, there 
being inthe Tem le, both Bowls to drinkin, andalſo Baſors to 
retcive the Blood of the Sacrifices, .*. The word 1s ſuch as may 
{igmfie Ladels, or Cups, or Diſhes. 


1} Or, Cf 10 And the baſons, and the, fire-pans, and the 

wy bowls, and the caldrons, and the candleiticks, anp 
the ſpoons, and the cups: rhar which was of gold 2 
gold, and har which ws of filver z2 liver, rook the 
captain of the guard away h. 

Some of theſe Urentils were only of Braſs; others, were ſome 
cf chem Braſs, ſome of Silver, ſome of Gold, the Captain of 
the guard carried away all,both choſe of Silver, and thoſe of Gold, 
and thoſe of Brals, 


29 The two pillars, one ſea, and twelve brazen 
bulls, that were under the baſes which king Solomon 
7 BY, had made in the houſe of the LORD-= Þ the braſs of 
$6437 245 ij] theſe veilels was without weight 7 
i S0/omon made two Pillars, 1 Kings 7- 15. which Ver, 21. he 
called Fachin and Boaz, /'er. 23.4 motten Se4, ten Cubirs broad, 
this Fr, 25. ſtood upon twelve Oxen, and had ten Baſes, /*r, 2 5, 
27. the making of all thee rook up a vaſt quantity of Braſs, as any 
one will eaſily judge, who 1 Kings 7.27- readerh the dimenſtons 
of theſe things, 


21 And conrernins the pillars , the height of one 
pillar was eighteen cubirs, and a - filletof twelve cu- 
bits did compals ir, and the thickneſs thereof was 
four fingers : it was hollow &. 

This agreeth with 1 Kings 7. 15. where what is called herea 
5/1rt. is called a thread, concerning the height of the Pillars we 
read the ſame 2 Kings 23.17. 2 Chron. 3. 15. 


22 And achapiter of braſs was upon it, and the 
height of one chapiter was five cubits with net-work, 
and pomegranates upon thechapiters round about, ſall 
of braſs, the ſecond pillar allo and the pomegranates 
were like to theſe. 


23 And there were ninety and fix pomegranates 
*<.. ©Ona fide, and*all the pomegranates upon the net- 


t King, 7, WOrk, were an hundred round about 2. 

20 '* 1 Thereare ſome differences as to the meaſure of theſeChapiters 
betwixt 2 Kings 28. 17. and this Text here the height of them 1s 
made to be five Cubits, there is ſaid to be threefir Cubits, thar 
which is ſaid co reſolve this difficulty is, That there were three 
parts in the Chapiter,the Square, the Belly,and the Crown, and that 
this Texrgives an account of the whole z but that the Text 2K3ngs 
25. 17. gives an account only of the Be#y and the Crows which 
were no more than three Cubits. The likke difference there 15 be- 
twixt this Tex, and r Kings 7. 19. and 2 Chron. 4. 13- about the 
number of the Pomsgeranates. In the Book of Kings it 15s ſaid the 
Pomegranates were in number two hundred, 2 Chron 4. 13- they 
arc laid to have been four hundred, The meaning 15, There were 
an hundred in a rovw., in the two rows two hundred, in the four 
rows (two upon each Pillar) four hundred. Some other difference 
alſo there is about the particular number of Pomegranates on 4 
ſide, which are ſaid robe but ninety fix, which make on the 
two fides but one handred and ninety two, on the four 1ides bur 
three hundred eighty four, and comes up neither ro the two hun- 
dred mentioned 1n the Book of Kings, nor to the number of four 
hundred mentioned in the Book of Chroxicles. Vide the Engliſh 
Amotations, where the learned Author hath obferved that in che 
Hebrew what we tranſlate of a fie, 15 word for word //ind-ward, 
that is, towards the four Winds, ſoas the Table was ſquare, and 
there were twenty four on each ſide which made ninety fix 10 all, 
to which four being added, one at each corner, this made an hun- 
dred. But theſe are niceries, a ſatisfa&ion in which 1s of no great 
co icernment to us, unleſs to ſatisfie ſuch as would make uſe of 
theſe lirtle things to queſtion the authority of rhe Scriptures, be- 
cauſe of theſe ſeeming contradictions of how little concernment fo. 
ever they be as to their Faith and Holineſs, 


+ He"). 
£ thriuh,. 


24 4 And the captain of the guard took Seraiah 
the chief prieſt, and Zephaniah the ſecond prieſt, 

"+ Heb. andthe three keepers of the - door m:. 
"ghreſhould, See the Notes on 2 Kings 25. 18. where we have the ſame 
2IF words, This Seraia» was not he mentioned Chzp. gr. 59. but the 
Son of Azaviah, 1 Chron, 6, 14. By the ſtcond Prieſt, Intepre- 
ters underiland "im that ſupplied rhe place of the High Prieſt in 
caſe he were fick, ec. he that was ſent by Zedthiab to the Pro- 
pher, Chap. 21. 1, and whom Shemah choſe by his Letters Chap. 
L 29. 25. for not ſetting Jeremich in the Stocks. Ir is probable 
0 there were more Keepers of the Door,. but the Captain of rhe 
A Heb, Guard took only three of the Principal. 


wy 25 He took alſo of the city, an eunuch, which 
or. 3:8 had the chatge of the men of war, and ſeven men of 
jerib: of the £NEmM That + were near the kings perſon which were 


exptzir of found in the city, and the || principal ſcribe of the 


Poe 
WE: 
Fob, 
ny 
Eh) 
oo 


{c . - a) 47 oP p ſ 
on of the people of tic land, cat were found 
11 the mid{t of the clty x. 


n See 2 I(inzs 25. 19. only there is mention hut of fue my. 
here there 1s mention of leycn, but probably two of tem wer? 
of leſs nore, ; | 22 

26 So Nebuzar-adan the caj tain of the guard 
took them,aud brought them to the king of Babylon 
co Riblah. | 

27 And the king of Babylon ſnote them, and var 
them to death in Riblah, in the land of Hur t- 
'Thus Judah was carried away captive out .of his 
own land ». 

0 See 2 Kings 25. 29, 21, 


_ 2d This zs the people whom Nebuchadrezzar car- 
ried away captive ; in the ſeventh year, three thou- 
land Jev's and three and twenty p. 
 þ Thatis1n the time of Jehotachin, 2 Kings 24. 12, 13, 14. here 
It 15 ſaid to be inthe ſeventh year, there in the eighth year,ie might? 
be in part of both. Bur there is a difference in the number of th: 
captives which are here ſaid to be 3023, and 2 Kings 24. 14,16. 
ſeven thouſand, or eight, Iris thought by ſome that the numer 
here mentioued were ſuch as properly helonged to ]:421, and che 
number mentioned, 2 {ings 24, were the number of che Caprives 
of Jua2/ and Benj2min, See the Eng'th Annotat. 

29 In the eighteenth year of Nebuchadrezzar he 
carried away captive trom Jeruſalem eight huudred 
thirty and two Þ perſons q, 

q Thar was the Year when the City was broken up. 

39 In the three and twenticth year of Nebucihad- 
rezzar, Nebuzar-adan the captain of the guard car- 
ricd away captive of the Jews ſeven hundred, forty 
and five perſons : all the perſons were four thouſand 
{ix hundred 7. 

r Of this we read nothing in Holy Wrir, ſome judge i* ro 
have been upon occaſion of Ihmnae?!'s killing Ged2/i2h , bur rhis 


was four Years after the raking of the City, and we are not certain 
what art this time brought again the Ch2{d; 7 Forces. 

31 Þ Anditcameto pals ia the ſeven and thirti- 
eth year of the captivity of Jehotachin king of [1- 
dah s, inthe twelfth month, in the five and twenti- 
eth day of the month 5, that Evil-merodach king of 
Babylon, in the f:z/7 year of his Reign, lifted up the 
head of Jehotachun king of Judah, and brovght him 
forth out of priſon 7. 

s Jehoiachin began his Reign at eighteen years of Age, 2 Kings 
24. 8. and reigned but chree months, bur that he yielded himic!t 
tro the King of Ba»z/oz Befieging him, Ver, 12. in the ejphtts 
Year of the King of Babvlo?'s Reign. He was a Prifoner in "Bas 
bylon (as appeareth by this Text) in which circumftances he con- 
rinued (as appears from this Texr) about thirty Y ears; which 
was during the whole Reign of Neoxchadverger, ſometimes called 
Neunuchadnizgar, (ometimes Nebuchodonoſor, Ecil-Mrodach was 
Son to this Nebuchadrittay, whon the ewelfih Month of that 
Year, the 25th Day ofthe Month (faith this Texr, bur 2 Kings 
25. 27.1t 1s the twenty jeuinty Day, bur that difference may catily 
be reconcuied, The Penman of this part of Holy Wrir,mighr count 
preciſely from tie Day of his Fathers Death, and the Penman of 
the Book of Kings from the time of the Coronation of £:3/-.M;.. 
rodach, or when he openly ſhewed himſelf as King; or theone 
mighr reckon from theDay that Ezil-Merod2ch decreed the thing 
che other from the Day when he pur it in Execution.) Lite? 
up the head, whicn ſignifies 1n Scripture the altering of ones etiare 
chat 1s in Miſery, Gen, 40. 20. which is all that 1s here meant. for 
his bringing him our of P?i/92 15 mentioned in the next words, 
The reaſon of this favour 15 variouſly geuiſed at. The Reverend 
Aurhor of our Engiih Annotations. fantieth, that Evil-Merodauch, 
might be much of the ſame Age with him, and char ]:hojachis 
got into the Acquaintance of this Evil-Merodach, during his 
Thirty Years Captivity, who conſidering his long Impriſonment, 
and thar now there was no danger of his heading the ]:rs (whoſe 
City had now been defiroyed Twenty five years and upward} 
this Prince out of his Humanity might ſhew him this favour, nor 
are ſuch things unuiual in Nations upon their changes of Princes 
and Counicllors. 


32 And ipake-| kindlyunto him,and ſet his throne 


Babylon UD 

» The King of Baby/on might have other Kings his Pritoners, 
his Father haying been fo great a Conqueror, er he might have 
others Kings, his Subjetts, that might reſide at his Cour: ; and 
either our ofa particular kindneſs he had to ſehoiachin, or in re- 
gard of the Fame David and Solomon, from whom Jhvizchir 
lineally deſcended, he might do him this Honour, 

33 Andchanged his priſon-garments: and he did 
continually eat bread before him all the days of his 
life. 

34 And for his diet, there was a continual diet 
given him of the King of Babylon, + every day a 
portion, unkil the day of his death, all the davs of 
his Ife w. = 


#597, hoſt, who muſtered the people of the land, and three-| 


w He 


Chap. 


LI 


7 He. 


DA 


T Heb, 


above the thrones of the kings thatwere with him ins bing 


W300 iN 


+ Heb, 


he m at tor 


of the aav 


7 31 4% 


F Heb. 
deio;2110n, 


* 5JteecRev 
18. 21 
, 
| 
F 
; 
: 
it) 
þ 
" 
| 
. 
F $ He" 
Yehgu's 
; '| 
| 
[ 
" 
| 
j 
{l 
| 
i 
| 
| 
; 
4 | 
i! 
fl 
! 
| 
j 
j 
f 


Chap. LIL 


which Serzh had tome Authority under Zedehciah, the ſame with 
Arian 1.Chro%. 8. 5. Others think it was a Name of Office, 
and fignificd Lov4 Chanberloin ; bur the beſt Interpreters ſee no 
reaſon 1 vary from our Tranſlation, the ſence of which 15 that he 
was a Man of a moderate quiet Temper, that periwaded to 
Peace. 

5o So Jeremiah wrote in a book all the evil that 
ſhould come upon Babylon, ever all theſe words 7-24! 
2e Written again!t Babylon. 

51 And Jeremiah faid ro Seraiah, When thou 
comelt to Babylon, and ſhalt ſee, and ſhalt read all 
theſe words 7. 1 

1 Nor to the Cha!dens, nor poſſibly 15 it to be underſtood of a 
mcer private reading of them to himſelf, bur to the Fexs, that 
werc 1N Bapyion, acquainting them with what God had ſpoken a- 
ozinlt B.iby/on by rhe Prophet. 


62 Then ſhalt thon ſay, O LORD, thou haſt ſpo- 
ken againlt this place to cut it off, that none ſhall re- 
main in it, neither man nor bealt,but chat 1t ſhall be 
+ deſolate tor ever o. 

" 0 Thou hal reftifie that thou helieveſt what thou haſt read to 
be what ſhall moſt certiinly come to paſs, by ſpeaking words to 
elis Sence, 


63 And it ſhall be when thou haſt made an end of 
reading this book, that thou ſhalt bind * a ſtone to 1t 
"and caft it into the midit of Euphrates. 


5.4 And thou ſhalt ſay, Thus ſhall Babylon fink, 
and ſhall not riſe from the evil that I will bring, upon 
her p: and they ſhall be weary 5. Thus far are the 
words of Jeremiah r. : 

 Trhath been often ſaid that Euphrates was that great River 
which ran by the Walls of Babylon; into this S$:razah 15 com- 
manded by Fe12miah ro throw this Roll of Prophecy againſt Bavy- 
ion, ſymbollically ro reach the Fews, that according rothe Tenor 
of his Prophecy the time ſhall come afrer ſome years, wnen 32- 
5y/on ſhould be deſtroyed never to riſe again 10 any great view, or 
degree of ſplendor, no more than that Roll with the Stone tied ro 
it ſhould riſe from the botrom of Euphrates. q Some read though 
they weary themſelves, thar is, ro do what they can, or (as 1t 15 
here) and they ſhall be weary with that weight of Judgment 
which ſhall be upon them, » Either the words of Feremy relating 
ro B2by{1n reach thus far, or all the words of Feremiah remaining 
on ſacred Record {for it 1s rhought that the nexr Chapter was I - 
ther penned by ſome other Holy Man.) Or (which ſeemerh the 
beſt) rhe Propherical words of Feremian, for the marter of the 
nexc Chapres is Hiſtorical, and the Book of Lamentations 1s 
nor Prophetical 3 as to the manner of it, tho* there be1n ut three 
or four Propherical Paſſages, Lam. 4. 21, 22, UM, 


CHAP. LlI. 


A Repiiitun of 154; Avign of Zedekiah : Of the Siege, Taking, and 
D: fri of Jerulaters: With the Cauſes thereof, and what 
further bappene? there, 1,—>—= 39. Evil-merodach adranceth 
Tehouchin, 31, -— 34. 


i 7 Edekiah was one and twenty years old when 
he + began torel2n, and he reigned eleven 
years 1a Jeraſalem ; and his mothers name was Hamu- 
rl, che Caughter of Jeremiah of Libnah. 
2 And he did that which wc evil in the ſight of the 
LORD according to all that Jehotakim had done. 


3 For through the angerof the LORD it came to 
maſs in Jeruſalem and Judah, till he had caſt them 
V1 from his preſence, that Zedekah rebelled againſt 
ihe king of Babylon 4, | 

itis generally thought chat what we have iu this Chapter was 
nor penned by the Prophet F:r:i2/, who it 15 nor probable weuld 
have io largely repeated what he had related before Chap. 39.and 
could not Hiftorically relate what happened afrer his time as (ome 
things did which are mentioned towards the end of the Chapter, 
from j/:r.31. rothe end. They therefore rather think it penned 
by fome or other of choſe in Babylon, and pur 1n here as a Preface 
to rae Book of L2ntations. What we havein the three firſt Ver- 
ſes 15 entirely raken our of 2 Kings 24. 18, 19, 20, See the Notes 
rhere., 


z Here the wicked aQings of Zedebiah, and particularly his 
Rebellion againſt che King of 225y/0y who had made him King, as 
2 King 24. 17. and to whom he had given an Oath of Fealty, is 
alcribed ro rhe wrath of the Lord; God nor putting any ſuch 
wickedneſs into Ins heart,bur ſuffering him fo ro miſcarry, having 
a deſign ro ſend F4da\ intro Captivity. Princes are often by God 
ſuffered ro miſcarry, for the fins of their People, which ſhould 
oblige us when we think we have cauſe ro complain of the Errors 
of our Ralers, ro conſider whether we have nor by ſome finful 
courſes provoked God, which hach made him leave our Rulers (© 
:5 miſcarry 1n order to our ruine and punithmenc, 


4+ Þ Anditcametopaſls in the ninth yearof his 
reign 1n the tenth month, in the tenth day of the 
monti, tar Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon came, 


FEREMIAH. 


he and all his army againſt Jernſalem, and pitched 
againlt 1t, and built forts againſt it round about. 

5 So the city was belieged unto the eleventh year 
of king Zedckiah. 

6 Andin the fourth month, in the ninth day of 
the month, the famine was ſore in the city, ſo that 
there was no bread tor the people of the land. 

7 Thea the city was broken up, andall the menof 
war fled, and went forth out of the city by night. by 
the way of the gate, between the two walls, which 
ws by tne Kings garden, (now the Chaldeans were by 
the city round about) and they went by the way of 
the plain. 

9g Then they took the king, and carried him up 
unto the king of Babylon to Riblah, in the Jand of 
Hamath ; where he gave judgment upon him. 

10 And the king of Babylon flew the ſons of Zede- 
kiah betore his eyes, he tlew alſo the princes of Ju- 
dah in Riblah. 


inthe ſame words, See the Annotations on that Chapter, Fere- 9) * 


m2) alſo hath the ſubſtance ot it, Chap, 39. 1, 2, 2,4, 5; 6, 7, only 
neither of thoſe places have the Jaſt words, from whence we learn 
that Zed:biab died in Babylon a Priſoner, 


12 © Now in the fifth month, in the tenth day of 
the month, (which was the nineteenth year of Nebu- 
chadrezzar king of Babylon) came Nebuzaradan 


| | captain of the guard, which + ſerved the King of ji or, ci 
Marſhal, 
F Heb. 
cnef of the 
the execuy- 
Fioners 07 


Babylon, into Jeruſalem. 


13 And burnt the houſe of the LORD, and the 
king's houſe, and all the houſes of Jeruſalem, and all 
the houſes of the great mez burnt he with fire. 


Chap. 


LL FJ 


}| Or, 
ja*s. 


| Bob, 
tiztir 


47A. 


+ He". 
E thrt'a: 


j 


14 Andall the army of the chaldeans, that were #**"*- 


with the captain of the guard brake down all the 
walls of Jeruſalem, round about. 


: AP 
15 Then Nebuzar-adan the captain of the guard + Heb. 
carried away captive certain of the poor of the peo- flood befor? 


ple, and the reſidue of the people that remained 
in the city, and thoſe that fell away, that fell to 


= king of Babylon, and the reſt of the multi- 
tude, 


16 But Nebuzar-adan the captain of the guard 


left certain of the Poor of the Jand for vine-drelſers 
and tor husbandmen. 

£ See the Nores on 2 Kings 25, from Ver.8. to the 13. whereall 
this 15 relared, only with a ſmall difference as to the Day of the 
Month when N:buz4r-44a3 came to Jery{a/emand burnt the Fem- 
ple. Inche Kings it is ſaid he came the ſeventh Day, here ir is 
laid hecameon the tenth Day. See the ſolution of it in the Annota- 
t10ns on 2 Kings 25. probably he night come into Jeruſalem the 
ſeyenth Day, and not bnrn the Temple till the tenth; Much of ic 
alſo 13 related by Jer2mizh, Chap. 39. The Provoſt-Marſhall abour 
a Month after the raking of the City, returned with part of the 
Army, burar the Temple, the great Mens Houſes in the City, 
and many other Houſes, and carried away divers Priſoners, but 
left ſome of the poorer ſort of the People to dreſs the Vineyards, 
and Till rhe Grounds, which is a thing very uſual with Conque- 
rors for their owu advantage, that their Conqueits way yield them 
ſome Reyenue, 


17 Allo the * pillars of braſs that were in the 
houſe of the LORD, and the baſes, and the braſen 
ſea that was in the houſe of the LORD, the Chaldeans 


_ and carried away allthe braſs of them to Baby- 
ON c. 


c The particular enumeration of the parrs and Litenfils of the 
Temple mentioned in this, and in the following Verſes, may be 
concetvcd to have been to juſtific the Prophecy of Jeremiah,Chp. 
27. 15. where there is a particular mention made of the Fi{ars, 
che Baſes,and rhe Sea, that chey ſhould all with the reſidue of the 
Veſſels of the Temple be carricd to Baby/on. Of theſe Pillars we 
read r Kisngs 9.15. they were of Braſs eighteen Cubits high, they 
were in the Porch of the Temple, Yer, 21. of the Bees we read 
there alſo largely from Ver, 27. to Ver. 33. they alſo were all of 
Braſs; and of the Sea from Ver. 25, to Vey. 27. Theſe being all 
made of Braſs were for conventency of carriage broken by the 
Chaldeans. 


ſtred took they away. 


a Theſe 


of Fod 

18 The * The Caldrons alſo 4, and the |; ſhovels e, ; 
and the ſnuffers /,and the |, bowls g and the ſpoons .*. | 
and all the veſſels of bra wherewich they mini- #7" 
"Ho 


men, 
And ſo 
Ver. 14. 


* Sce 
x King, - 
20, 


* Chap, 


27,15 


| : T Heb. 
- $breſhouls 


27 Heb, 
Jaw th: þ 
of the by 
[| Or, t 
jeribe 9 
Capt ary 


te 9k, 


- A 
» 6 © 


Or. 1 


fig X41 
{ Or.” 


Chap. LIL FEREMIAH 


}| Or, Cen- 
f9*s, 


7 Bob, 
$ir b1.4fs 


+ Heb. 
£ thruat. 


| : + Heb. 
— $reſhould, 


I 


6's” of 


4 F Heb, 


% 


[! Or, the 


Jevite of the them that + were near the kings perſon which were 


£20t ain of 


the bolt, 


ny fzee 25 He took aloof the city, an eunuch, which 
\ 9% had the charge of the men of war, and ſeven men of 


a Thele were called Pots, 2 Kings 25. 14. e Which wereto 
remove rhe aſhes from rhe Altar. f Some think that this word 1n 
this place were better tranſlated Tongs, becauſe he 1s ſpeaking of 
Inſtruments of Braſs, and that tho!e Urenſils are nor here under- 
tiood with which they ſnufted rhe Lamps, becauſe they were of 
Gold, g Or Biſons; 1tis uncertain which is here inrended, there 
being in che Temple, both Bowls to drinkin, andalſo Bajons to 
retcave the Blood of the Sacrifices. .*. The word 15 ſuch as may 
tignifie Ladels, or Cups, or Diſhes. 


10 And the baſons, and the || fire-pans, and the 
bowls, and the caldrons, and the candleſticks, anp 
the ſpoons, and the cups: thar which was of gold cz 
gold, and char which w.zs of tilver z2 lilver, took the 
captain of the guard away h. 

þ Some of theſe Urenfils were only of Braſs; others, were ſome 
cf chem Braſs, ſome of Silver, ſome of Gold, the Captain of 
the guard carried away all,both choſe of Silyer, and thoſe of Gold, 
and thoſe of Braſs. 


29 The two pillars, oneſea, and twelve brazen 
bulls, that were under the baſes which king Solomon 
had made in the houſe of the LORD = Þ the braſs of 
31l theſe veiſe]s was without weight 7 _ 

i Solomon made two Pillars, 1 Kings 7. 15+ which Ver, 21. he 
called Fachin and Boaz, Ver. 23.4 molten $24, ten Cubitrs broad, 
this Fer, 25, ſtood upon rwelve Oxen, and had ten Baſes, Ver, 25, 
27. the making ofall thee rook up a vaſt quantity of Brals, as any 
one will eaſily judge, who 1 Kings 7.27- readerh the dimenſtons 
of theſe things, | 


21 And concernins the pillars , the height of one 
pillar was cighteen cubirs, and a F fillet of twelve cu- 
bits did compaks ir, and the thickneſs thereof was 
four fingers : zt was hollow &. : 

This agreerth with 1 Kings 7. 15. where what is called herea 
fillet, is1called a thread, concerning the height of the Pillars we 
read the ſame 2 Kings 25.17. 2 Chron. 3. 15., 


22- And achapiter of braſs was upon it, and the 
height of one chapiter was five cubits with net-work, 
and pomegranates upon thechapiters round about; ſall 
of braſs, the ſecond pillar allo and the pomegranates 
were like ts theſe. 


23 And there were ninety and fix pomegranates 
on a ſide, and * all the pomegranates upon the net- 


work, were an hundred round about /. 

| There are ſome differences as to the meaſure of theſeChapiters 
betwixt 2 Kings 28. 17. and this Text ; here the height of them 15 
made to be five Cubirs, there is ſaid to be threefir Cubirs, that 
which is ſaid co reſolve this difficulty is, That there were three 
parts in the Chapiter,the Square, the Belly,and the Crown, and that 
this Text gives an account of the whole z but chat the Text 2K3ngs 
25. 17. gives an account only of the Befy and the Crows which 
were no more than three Cubits. The likke difference there 15 be- 


ſcore men of the people of thc land, {ar were found 
1n the midlt of the clty 7. 

n See 2 Ifings 25. 19. only there is mention hut of fue my. 
here there is mention of leycn, but probably two of tem were 
of [els norte, : 6 

26 So Nebuzar-adan the ca; tain of the guard 
took them,and brought them to the king of Babylon 
to Riblah. j 

27 And the king of Babylon ſnote them, and pur 
them to death in Riblah, in the land of Hur t. 
Thus Judah was carried away captive out of his 
own land ». 

0 See 2 Kings 2%. 29, 21, 


_ 25 Thiszs the people whom Nebuchadrezzar car- 
ried away captive ; in the ſeventh year, three thou- 
fand Jevis and three and twenty p. 
oy Tharis in the time of Jehoiachin, 2 Kings 24. 12, 13, 14. here 
It 15 faid to be inthe ſeventh year, there in the eighth year,ir might 
be in part of both. Bur there is a difference in rhe number of thy: 
captives which ar here ſaid to be 3923, and 2 Kings 24. 14; 16. 
ſeven thouſand, or eight, Iris thoughe by ſome that the number 
here mentioued were ſuch as properly belonged to Jud2), and che 
number mentioned, 2 Kjizgs 24, were the number of che Caprives 
of Jud41 and Benjamin. See the Engliſh Anntat. 


29 In the eighteenth year of Nebuchadrezzar he 
carried away captive from Jeruſalem eight huudred 


30 In the three and twentieth year of Nebuchad- 
rezzar, Nebuzar-adan the captain of the guard car- 
ricd away captive of the Jews ſeven hundred, forty 
and five perſons : all the perſons were four thouſand 
{11x hundred 7. 
| r Of this we read nothing in Holy Writ, ſome judge i* ro 
have been upon occaſion of Ihnae!s killing Ged2/i2h , bur rhis 
was four Years after the raking of the City, and we are not certain 
what at this time brought again the Cha{d;zn Forces. 

31 Þ Anditcameto paſs ia the ſeven and thirti- 
eth year of the captivity of Jehoiachia king of [1- 
dah s, inthe twelfth month, in the five and twenrti- 
eth day of the month 5, that Evil-merodach king of 
Babylon, in the f:/# year of his Reign, lifted up the 
head of Jehoiachun ktng of Judah, and brovght him 
forth out of priſon :. | 

s Jeh014ch3n Degan his Reign at erghteen years of Age, 2 Kings 
24. 8. and reigned but chree months, bur thar he yielded himſelf 
to the King of Bavy/on Befieging him, Ver, 12. in the eighth 
Yeafr of the King of Babvlo?'s Reign. He was a Prifoner in £2- 
bylon (as appeareth by this Texr) in which circumftances he con- 
rinued (as appears from this Text) abour thirty Years; which 
was during the whole Reign of Nebachadrexgar, ſometimes called 


twixt this Texc, and r Kings 7. 19. and 2 Chron. 4. 13+ about the 
number of the Pomseranates. In the Book of Kings it 1s ſaid the 
Pomegranates were in number two hundred, 2 Chron 4. 13+ they 
arc laid to have been four hundred, The meaning 15, There were 
an hundred in a row, in the two rows two hundred, in the four 
rows (two upon each Pillar) four hundred. Some other difference 
alſo there is about the particular number of Pomegranates on a 
ſide, which are ſaid to be but ninety ſix, which make on the 
two fides but one handred and ninety rwo, on the four 1ides but 
three hundred eighty four, and comes up neither to the two hun- 
dred mentioned 1n the Book of Kings, nor to the number of four 
hundred mentioned in the Book of Chrozicles, Vide the Engliſh 
Annotations, where the learned Author hath obferved that in che 
Hebrew what we tranſlate of 4 ſide, is word for word V/ind-ward, 
that is, towards the four Winds, ſoas the Table was ſquare, and 
there were twenty four on each fide which made ninety fix in all, 
to which four being added, one at each corner, this made an hun- 
dred. But theſe are niceries, a ſatisfaRion in which 1s of no great 
co icernment to us, unleſs to fatisfie ſuch as would make uſe of 
theſe little things to queſtion the authority of rhe Scriptures, be- 
cauſe of theſe ſeeming contradiRions of how little concernment fo. 
ever they be as to their Faith and Holineſs, 


24 Þ And the captain of the guard took Seraiah 
the chief prieſt, and Zephaniah the ſecond prieſt, 
and the three keepers of the -þ door mz. 

See the Notes on 2 Kings 25. 18. where we have the ſame 
words, This Seraiah was not he mentioned Chap. g1. 59. but the 
Son of Azariah, 1 Chron, 6, 14. By the ſecond Prieſt, Intepre- 
ters underitand "1m that ſupplied rhe place of che High Prieſt in 
caſe he were ſick, ec. he that was ſent by Zedehiab to the Pro- 
phet, Chap. 21. r, and whom Shemah choſe by his Letters Chap. 
29. 25. for not ſerting Jeremieh in the Stocks, Ir is probable 
there were more Keepers of the Door, but the Captain of rhe 
Guard took only three of the Principal. 


found in the city, and the || principal ſcribe of the 


Nebuchadnizgar, ſometimes Nebuchodonoſor. Ecil- Mrodach was 
Son to this Nebachadretgay, whoin the twelfih Month of that 
Year, the 25th Day ofthe Month (faith this Texr, bur 2 Kings 
25. 27."1t 1s the twenty [euenth Day, bur that difference may catily 
be reconciled, The Penman of this part of Holy Wrir,might count: 
preciſely from the Day of his Fathers Death, and the Penman of 
the Book of Kings from the time of the Coronation of E:i/-.Mc.. 
r04ach, or when he openly ſhewed himſelf as King; or theone 
might reckon from theDay that Ezil-Merodach decreed the thing 
the other from the Day when he pur-it in Execution.) t Litte:; 
up the head, whicn ſignifies 1n Scripture the altering of ones etiare 
that is in Miſery, Gen, 40. 20. which is all that is here meant. for 
his bringing him out of Pri/9n 15 mentioned in the next words, 
The reaſon of this favour 15 variouſly geuſſed at. The Reverend 
Aurhor ot our Engliſh Annotations fantieth, that Evil- Merodach, 
might be much of the ſame Age with him, and thar [ehojachis 
got into the Acquaintance of this Evil- Merodach, during his 
Thirty Years Captivity, who conſidering his long Impriſonmenr, 
and thar now there was no danger of his heading the ]:s (whoſe 
City had now been defiroyed Twenty five years and upward } 
this Prince out of his Humanity might ſhew him this favour, nor 
are ſuch things unutual in Nations upon their changes of Princes 
and Countcllors. 


Babylon . 

« The King of Baby/on might have other Kings his Priſoners, 
his Father having been to great a Conqueror, er he night have 
others Kings, his Subjetts, that might reſide at his Cour: ; and 
either our ofa particular kindneſs he had to [ehoiachin, or in re- 
gard of the Fame David and Solomon, from whom Jeboizcvin 
lineally deſcended, he might do him this Honour, 

33 Andchanged his priſon-garments: and he did 
continually eat bread before him all the days of his 
life. 

34 And for his diet, there was a continual diet 
given him of the King of Babylon, + every day a 
portion, uniil the day of his death, all the days of 
his Ifte w- 


hott, who muſtered the people of the land, and three- | 


w He 


Chap. LII. 


thirty and two | perſons gq, + Heb. 
q That was the Year when the City was broken up. $9.8. 


32 And Ipake + kindlyunto him,and ſet his throne + Heb; 
above the thrones oi the Kings thatwere with him in4 thing? 


T Heb, 
-the mitt2y 
of the aay 
3% 135 dav. 


=. -—"z* 
WO, Tf Wacwmwds 


ns 1 IRA 


: 
py © CS ITage 4 
Me rt, PRES. 
—_ CES + 4% 4%» p >. % 
, ne -y +. 
a Mw Her 


< . Sg - Oe BE 
FS a 
< 
& . bY 


A_IEEERITNT Io. CSS 


Chap. LI. 


w He treated him hke a Prince with reſpeR becoming his ſor- 
mer Stare, took care both for his Habit aud Diet,for his Habitation 
that ir ſhould be decent, ſuch as became a Perſon of his Quality, 
tho' a Caprive : for his Der, that he ſhould have it 1n his Court, 
thereby learning others that Humanity which becometh all Men to 
rreat others with thatare fallen under cheir power; that Decency, 
which becometh them as Men, and as Men whoſe Circumftances 
have been berrer ; doing to others, as we would they ſhould do 
unto us. Thus ]:hoiachin's Lot was different from that of his Fa- 
ther Jehoiachim, whoſe Body was caſt our as we heard before : As 
alſo from rhar of his Uncle Zee kiah, who did nor only dic in Bz- 
bylon, but died a Priſoner , his Nephew Jehoizchim died there, 
and a Captive, but nor in durance. Theſe four laſt verſes 1 found 
alſo 2 Kings 25. 27, 28, 29, 30. and being found here mn a Nay- 
rative form, related as a piece of Hiſtory relating a thing done : 
not in a prophetical ſtyle, are an Argument {as we ſaid before) 
thar this whole Chaprer, is no part ofthe Prophecy of Jeremiah. 
and probably not wrote by him, for he beginning h1s Prophecy 1n 
the thirteenth year of J»ſzah, who reigned thirty one Years, and 
continuing it three Months during the Reign of Jehoahaz, and 
cleven Years during the Reign of Jehotachim, and three Month, 
during the Reign of ]thojachiz (or Jeconiah) and eleven Years 


FEREMIAHE 


| 


during the Reign of Zedebiah; and Jebrjachin, outliving the 
Reign of Zedehiah Twenty five Years, 1 muſt needs be fixty five 
Years and an half after the word of the Lord firſt came to Jeye- 
mah gefore the Death of Jojzclinz fo as the Prophet if he lj- 
ved ro that time muſt be near and hundred years old,which is ror 
probable. Here now enderh the Hiſtory of the Kingdom of Jz- 
aah, I ſhall only note the ſevere Judgment of God upon this 
People, whoſe Kingdom was made up of the two Tribes of Ty- 
4ah and Benjamin, and halt the Tribe of Afanaſſeh In the rum- 
bering of the Perſcrs belonging to theſe two Tribes, Nam. 1, 
(counting half of the rumber of the Tribe of avaſt) we 
find One hundred twenty fix thouſand one b:ndred, Numbers 24 

we find of them One hu nired jorty tight thoy/and for hundred 
and fijty. Here Verſe 30. we find no more of them carried into 
Captivity, than ſour thouſand and fix hundred. Fiom whence 
we may judge what a multitude of them were ſlain bv the Sword, 
or killed by the Famine and by the Peſtilence, though we makea 
great allowance for ſuchas were left in the Land to drefs Vine- 
yards and to till the Ground. Ir 1s a dreadful thivg to fall into the 
hands of the living God, ro mock bis miſſingers, deiviſe his words, 
and muſe his Prophets, till 'there be no remedy, as ts People did, 
2 Chron. 35.16. 


0 VET OO 
— 0 OO Tr II nn IT TIE TPO er TOOL I 


Chap. Lu 


[* Jer. 13- 2 *She weepeth ſore in * the night, and her tears 


I 
* 


4p *3-none to comfort her, all her friends have dealt 


THE 


The ARGUMENT. 


His Book in Greek, Latine, and Engliſh has its name from the Subject matter of it; which is Lamen- 
tation, So alſo among ft the Hebrew IVriters, but in the Hebrew it has its Name from the firſt word of 

f the Boook, as alſa the five Books of Moſes have. | 
That it was Wrore by Jeremiah one can reaſonably queſtion, becauſe in the Hebrew it is ſtiled, The Book of 


Jeremiah. 


There is little controverſie about the Time, or Occaſion of the Writing of it. That the occaſion was the miſeries 
of the People, byreaſon of the Famine, Sivord, and Captivity is evident to thoſe that read any part of it ; but whether 
they were thoſe miſeries whichbegan with the Death of Joſiah, and held on till the City was taken, which was two and 
twenty or three and twenty years after ; Or thoſe only which began with the Siege and followed on many years, hath 
been doubted by ſome. That Jeremiah lamented for Joſiah, and all the finging Men, and ſinging Women 
ſpake of Joſiahin their Lamentations, zs pain from 2 Chron 35. 25. But that theſe were the forms they uſed, 
or that they were compoſed upon that ſad account appeareth not,, and the miſeries which the Prophet mentioneth befell 
not the Peolpe in the time of Joſiah, but during the Siege, more than twenty years after Joſiah*s Death. Nor is 
there any thing, which looks like a Lamentation for Joſiah through the whole Book, unleſs Chap. 4. 20. which (as 
we ſhall ſhew ) may alſo be fairly interpreted of Zedekiah : Some think that Jeremiah began to write them upon the 
Death of Joſiah, and continued his ſtile to the time of the Captivity, ſerting down all the miſeries of thi People ſuffer - 


ed all along that time, 


T he ſcope of the writing as to thoſe to whom it immeaiatly concerned, it is plain and obvious, viz. to affe& the Peo- 
ple with thoſe Judgments which came upon them for their ſins : As to us (upon whom the ends of the World ar? 
come) to mind us to take heed of their Sins, leſt we be ſharers in their Plagues. 

The Book is made up of Complaints of thei lamentable condition ;, Petitions unto God for Mercy, and Pro- 

pheties both of ther bettereſtate,and the ruine of their Enemies. | | | 

In the four firſt Chapters are ſeveral Alphabets of Letters beginning the ſeveral Verſes, each FYerſe beginning 
with a new Letter, only. Chapter 3. every three Verſes begin with a new Letter ; the Myſtery of which we do not 


underſtand, nor poſſibly was there any myſtery intended in 


of onr Memories. 


zt, only the Chapters were ſo compoſed for the a duantage 


T he whole Book lets us ſee from what an height of dignity, to what a depth of miſery ſin may bring Nations, 
how much ſoever intereſted in God ; and likeiviſe direfts us to our duty in ſuch ſtates of Ajflittion and Miſery if 


we would obtain Mercy. 


CHAP. I. 


Jeremiah lanenteth the former Excellency aud preſent Miſery of Je- 
rufalem for her fin, I, —— 12. She complaineth of her Grief, 
12, —— 17. Confeſſeth God's Judgments ts be Righteous ; 
And prayeth unto him, 18, —— 22, 


I OW doth the city ſit ſolitary, that was fall 

H of people a? how is ſhe become as a wi- 
dow b? ſhe that was great among the nations, and 
princeſs among the provinces, how is ſhe become tri- 


butary ? c. : 

4 The interrogative Particle how ? Onee expreſſed and twice 
more underſtood 1n this Verſe, doth not ſomuch inquire the cauſe 
or reaſon of rhe effe&, as <xpreſs admiration, or 'lamenrtation. 
The Prophet admires the miſerable fiare of the City, which was 
full of People, beyond rhe proportion of other Cities, and now 
was ſolitary, fo thin of People that ſcarce any could be ſeen in her 
Streets. b She'that had a King, or rather a God that was an Hus- 
band to her, now was forſaken of God}; her King raken from her, 
and ſhe likea poor Widow, c She that was like a Princeſs amongſt 
the Nations, that ſomerimes (as in Dauid's time) had the Moab- 
oo Ammonites, &c, Tributaries to her, was now a Tributary 

er (elf, 


are On her cheeks 4: among all her lovers ſhe hath 


treacherouſly with her, they are become her ene- 
mies e. 

 d Allherhoursare hours of ſadneſs, ſhe doth not only. mourn 
in the day-time, bur in the night alſo, when ſhe ſhould reſt, her 
Checks are like rhe Graſs in the Morning hanging fall of drops, as 
if her Head were a Fountain of Water, and her cyes Rivers of 
Tears. # In her Proſperity ſhe had a great many Fricuds that 
ſonghr and courted her favour, with whom ſhe made Leagues, 
and confederated (ſuch were the Egyptians, 4/jrians, &c.) bur 
they were now fo far from helping the Jews, that they helped 
their Enermes, and dealt treachereufly with them becoming 
themſelves Enemies inſtead of Aitiſtants ro them. 


_ f This is expounded as the cauſe why the Jews were carried 
into Caprivity, becauſe of the ſervitude, and oppreflion exerciſed 
amongſt chem, oppreſſion by their Rulers, and ſervitude more ge- 
nerally, keeping their Servants beyond the Year of Jubilee, when 
rchey ought to have (et them ar liberty,and that this was one cauſe 
appeareth from Jer. 34. 17. or if becauſe of affliftion, &c. be 
zoined ro the next words, the ſence is plain ſhe awelleth among't 
che Heathen, by reaſon of her low condition, and the fiate of ſer- 
vitude ſhe 15 in, g Where ſhe (thac is the Jews) have neicher any 
frisfaction nor quiet in their own minds, nor are they by their E- 
nemies ſuffered to be at quiet any where. þ Thoſe thac purſued 
them with all violence ro deſtroy them, overtoook them 1n places 
where they could nor efcape them, as Huntſmen and others rake 
their Game by driving them into ſtrait and narrow places. 


4. The ways of Zion do mourn, becauſe none corm- 
eth to the ſolemn feaſts; : all her gates are deſo- 
late &: her prieſts ſigh /, her virgins are afflicted, 
and ſhe z in bitterneſs m7. . 

; The ways thatlead to the Temple, have as unfoyely a Com- 
plexion as Mourners, being overgrown by reaſon thatnone goerh 
up as uſually ro the Feaiis of the Paſſover, of Tavernavles, 7. 
Either all the Gates of Jeruſalem, or the Temple, or all her Ciries 
are very thin of People, the places thar uſe to be fo full. Her 
Priefis-that were wont to be ſo fully imployed at Feſtivals recerv- 
ing the Peoples Oblations, and oftering Sacrifices, thev mourn 
having now nothing ro do. » The Virgins who 1n thole beaſts 
were wont to play with Timbrels, Pſa!. 68. 25. they now mourn, 
and Perſons of all Ages and Ranks are in bitterneſs, 


multitude of her tranſgreſſions, her children are gone 
into captivity before the Enetny 0- 
n God hath fulfilled his threarninss, Det. 23. 43. The Enemy 


b got abov? 145, and we ar Sought 70) fur for thie — 


3 Judah is gone into captivity, becauſe of afflicti- + yez,, 
on, and + becauſe of great ſervitude f : ſhe dwel- for th- 
leth among the heathen, ſhe findeth no relt z : all ereatnds 5 
her perſecutors overtook her between the ſtraits þ. [796543 


Her adverſaries are * the chief, her encinics Pro- * fee, , 4; 
ſper - for the LORD hath afflicted her - ; for the 28, 


9 $ 


os 
- 
oe 
on 
St 
* oh fo. <4 {© 4 
other, c-- 


O_—_— 


A 
Py 


CEE Rs 


Chap. 1. 


able Captivity. i 
6 And from the daughter of Zion all her beauty 
i, departed p: her princesars become like harts that 
fnd no paſture, and they are gone without ſtrength 
before the purſuer 9 | $-1 
A!! the TL bitakrs of Zion have loſt their former Beauty, 
wha: ſoever {plencorthe City had, whether from tre multitude 0! 
gallantry of hci Inhabitants it is all gone, het Nobles are become 
thin, a1] il-tavoured hike beaſts almoſt ftarved, their Enemies 
purlue them to deſtroy them, and they have no firengtn to op- 
Cl ham 

poic or refift them. | ; Ty 2 BP 
- Jernſalem remembred in uhc days ot her afflictt- 

2 2 ba . . . | _ C _ . x - : 
on, aud of her miſcries, all her | plcalant things that 
the hand of the Enemy, and none did help her 7, the 
adverſaries ſaw her, aad did mock at her ſah- 

baths /. | | __ 
7 The Tahabitants of Feruſa/em now, that they are 17 ami nr 
LEE. have time to remember tietr former Mercies, _ 
with 20w many defirablethings God had once blefſed them, an 


compre her former ſtate before ſhe fell into the Enemies hands, 


with her preſ-ar fate now ſhe 15 1n their power. | Now 1t 15an 
>Aiftion ro them to hear her Enemies mock at her Sabbaths, 
which while they injoyed they abuiled. 
bas, 8$ Jeruſalem hath gricvoully tinned : therefore ſhe 
5” + is removed: all that honoured her, delpiled here, 
rming, X* becauſe tacy have teen her nakedaeſs: yea ſhe ſigh- 
or 2 war-Qthand turnaeth backward. 
Aving, t She is cairied out of her own Land intoan Enemies Coun- 
* Jt. 12-trey, and made an hifling and fcora to thoſe who were before re- 
26. 17%. yerencedher, (inall this God is righteous ; for all orders of Men 
1.2. X lavepricvouſly finned; ) becauſe they have ſeen the Lord ſti1p- 
23.2% ping her of ail her Blefings, and expoſing her to the {corn and 
* Der, repr aci of all Mer, as Strumpets are expoled. 
ES» 9 Herfilthiucls z in her skirts w, ſhe * remem- 
brett not her {a end, therefore ſhe came down won- 


derfully » F\he had no comforter: O LORD, be- 


hold ny attiction ; for the enemy hath magnified h17- 
fel y- | 
w ile perfiſteth in his compariſon of the Jewiſh People either 
to a fluttiſh,nafty Woman, or toan impudent Woman that 15 not 
aſhamed to expole her naſtineſs or wickedneſsto the view of all, 
x That is, the Jews never conſidered, or would not belteve what 
thoſe degrees of fin would at laſt bring them to, and that hath 
been the caule of that procigious Calamity into which God had 
brougkt them. y The Prophec turns himſelf to God, whom he 
defires to behold the aflliftion of this People, that 1s, with a pliti- 
{1 compaſſicnare ye I is@ very ulual thing in Holy Scripture 
to bent» theatts of the Heart. by the acts of the inward and out- 
war} Senſes. tnvleefpecially of the afemory, Eye and Ear, becauſe 
Objet; mutt he hi ft brought inly the Senſes before they can 
af-utthe Soul, Hoc (the tcriprare ſpeaking of God after the 
tongs Of Meng the Servants of God defiring God to nave com- 
pathon on them, ſhew them tavour, &#. defire hin to behold and 
took tpon rhevr atll:Clion. 
12 The adverſary hath ſpread out. his hand upon 


(} » X - - 
> If: ther | Mleafing things z : for ſhe hath ſeeq char the 
y ii lr, 1 * Q x # y 
* |, 1, heathen entered into her ſanctuary, whom Thou didft 


command that thev * ſhould not enter into thy con- 
UFCEATION 2. a 
4 That js, hath not got chem into poſſeſſion. By plezſant things 


are here to be underſtood the the Ornamens of the 'lemple upon | 


witch the Enemy hat laid violeot hands, forhis Phrale of ſpread- 
in, out the hand israken Iſa. 25.11. The things of the Sanctuary 
were always nleatant things to thoſe that feared God. Pofibly 
thoſe that little valued them before, now looked upon them in 
their true notion. We leldom know our mercies t1]] we come to 
be he dept fved of them. 4 He means the Ammonites,and Moabites 
whom the Law concerned, Deut. 23. 3. Some of whom probably 
aflitied the Babylonians in the Conqueſt of Fudaa. 
"= P0011 All her People ſigh ®, they ſeck bread b, they 
1 Q., have given their pleaſant things for meat to || relieve 
make the the fonl c > ſee, O LORD, and conſider, for Iamibe- 
rut 19 come CONN vide 1. 
1g 410g h He tpeaketh probably with reference tothe Siege.after which 
the People had icarcely any pleaſant things to exchange for Bread. 
The whole Body of the People was in a fad condition, and in a 
Land that ordinarily flowed with Milk andHoney,they were at a 
loſs for Breail 19 427. c And gave any thing for ſomething to ſatis- 
fie their hunger. 4 The Prophet ſends up a ſudden Ejaculation 
to God much like that Ver, 6, The Argument he uſeth is drawn 
ttom tne miſery the People were in, expreſſed under the notion 
0' being be-ome wile, that 15 miſerable or contemptible. 
Or; x 12 Þ | 7: > nothing to you, all ye that Þ paſs by ? 
mr. - bebold mid fee, * if there he any forrow like to my 
ri 0 foOrroW : which is done no Inc, wherewith the 
+ #9 ORD hath afſifted me tn the day of .his fierce an- 
#: ber c. 
e The Prophet fpeaks inthe name of the Fewiſh Church, as a 
Woman in milery http, by the way f14e, and calling to Paſſen- 
eers that came by to have Cormpaſiroit on hier, luggetting to them 


The Lamentations of 7 EREMIA H. 


«fine, Oreftiy contrary to his promiſe in caſe of obedience, |that her affliction was no ordinary aMiftion, nor the effect of a 
"yp T Hs 6: ol Do and old Men, but the little Chil-| common and ordinary Providence , but the effect of the Lord's 
ff LNOT COU: y 6 , —- *C = . 
dren have been driven like Sheep before the Enemy 1nto a miſer-| fierce anger, a moſt tevere puniſhment. 


(Dr, 2 4 "2 44fi & EY Cy” 4 | 
” ſc had in the days of old, whe: her pcopic tell into 


Chap. | x: '$S h 


13 From above hath he ſent fire into my bones, 
and it prevaileth againft themf; he hath ſpread a 
net for my feet g, he hath turned me back : he hath 


» = | 
made me deſolate, 47d faint all the day. : _ 
f By Fire he means a Judgment as conſuming and as afiQive A 6-07 
as Fire in the Bones, which had conſumed the ſtrength of the 5 SY ol 11. 
Fews. g That is, God had brought them 1nto a condition where- PN: 11. $, 
in they wereentangled, and could not get out. The Holy Man 4 * Dout 
owneth God as the firit cauſe of all the evil they ſuffered, anden- zz 2c E 
cicles God £0 their varioas kinds of afflictions, both in Captivity,  - :c. 


and during the Siege, looking bey ond the Bibylonians who were 
the proxima'e inſtrnmenta! cauſe, 


14 The yoke of my tranſzreſſions1s bound by his 
hand  : they are wreathed, and come upon my neck 
: : he harh made my ſtrength to fall: the LORD 
hath delivered me into their hands, from whom 1 am 
not ableto riſe up k. 

h Still the P: ophet ev=th God in all, and acknowledgeth his 
Juſtice whi.c he cails their affictions tne zoke of cher ranſgrefſions, 


\r-at is, which was put upon i heirNecxs upon the lameaccountythat 


Yoxes are put a50ut the Necks of Reatts that ule to break Hedges, 
7c. and are bound upon them to kcep them fait. 7 My puniſh- 
ments are twiſted as Cords, to make them more ſtrong ; I have a 
complication of Judgments upoa me, Sword, Famine, Peſtilence, 
Captivity, they are not only prepared tor my Neck, but they are 
2]ready put upon it. k All my valiant Men.the ſtrength of myNa- 
tion is broken, and I am fo fallen that I am nor able to rile agains 


15 The LORD hath trodden under foot all my 
mighty mer in the midſt of me / : he hath called an ” Ita. 1 


aſlembly agaiuſt me, to cruſh my young men m - the, | wa = 
LORD hath trodden || the virgin the daughcer of are way q Or, | 
indah, 4s a1n winepreſs z. ray 6'aimsd. 


he bit 
*1 Inthe midſt of me, may be interpretedeither as pleonaſtical, or of 
as denoung the place in which they loſt their valiant Men, ip.” 
in the midſt of the City during the Siege, not in the Field. m2 In- 
ſtead of thoſe ſolemn Aſſemblies that were wont to be called ro. 

(gether within Hieruſalem by ſound of Trumpet for the ſolemn 
\ Worſhip of God ; God had called an Af/ſembly of Chatdeans as 
Advertaries againſt the City, to cruſh the Inhabitants of it. » God 
had trodden upon the Jews as Men uie to ſtamp Grapes in a Wine- 
preſs where they uleto cruſh them to pieces co ger our the Juice, 
and then they throw the husks that are good tor nothing upon 
che Dunghills. Thete are but various expreſſions to ſet out the 
miſery which God hath brought this People for their Sins into. 

16 For theſe things | weep, * mineeye, mine eye *ſer.1;.; 
runneth down with water s, becauſe the comfortey and 14.1 
that ſhould + relieve my ſoul, is far from me Y, M Chap.:.1 
children are deſolate, becauſe the enemy hath pre } Heb. 

— * bring ba 
vailed gq. 

o For theſe fore atflictions, and for my ſins that have cauſed 

them, ard for theſe impreſſions of Divine Wrath which I 
in them, Lord ! I that am thy propher,and we that were 
indeed weep, and that plentifully ; p having nei 
with us as tormer]y to be our hope or comtort, nor any Ee ied 
that will deal by usas Friends tometimes do by other: in "Sh 
ing fits to fetch back their Souls. q Either the orhe; Wirie « of Ju : 

ants, are Walted, deitr Glate. hacid; p 4th 
— » Celtroy T__ made delolate, becauſe the Eneiny 

17 * Zion ſpreadeth forth her hands r, and there 55 + hull 
none to comtort her / > the LORD hath commanded tit 
concerning Jacob war his adverſaries ſhould be round 


about him 7 : Jeruſalem is as a mon{trous' woman 
mongit them . 


ry The ſame in this Verſe is meant by Zion, | - f 
lem, unleſs Zion more eſpecially Ganiberh a Fra | 
Church, becaule of the Temple built upon it. She ſpreadeth © : 

her hands as in a poſture of mourning, and bewailing her lelf \ 
/ But ſhe had-none that could afford her any comfort. : God ha 

commanded concerning the Fews who were deſcended from : 

cob, (their twelve Tribes from his Tw Far 


| elve Sons) th , 
mies ſhould incompaſs them. u They were Ro rol ov ll wh 
filthy even in the Eyes of their Enemies like Women, which were 


ſeparated from the Congregation during their legal Uncleanneſc, 

18 Þ The LORD is * righteous, for [ have * xe- * Dar... 
belled againſt his -} commandment mw : hear, I yray * * 50. 
you, all people, and behold my ſorrow : "beer. (20.4, 15 
and my young men are 2one into captivity x * "I 

w The Prophet either dire&terh thole thar feare,| God 'h - 
they ſhould ay, or exprefſeth what many of them ry m 4 
Name of the reſt, acknowledging both the Lord's Fr _ y 
Faithtulneis, becaule they had {;een dilobedient to A w Wy 
ments of God. x w_ thele words, the Prophet only wevfoban wneth 
paſſonie Woman hxgng Py Of al becue he Chiliren wer 

19 Icalled for my lovers, hut the 
y; my prielts agad mine oder: 
city, while they fon-hir 
fouls :, | 

7 I defired help of my 47 
Eriendſhip and Alliaco ; 


| pectation, none Of then, © 


diſcern 
Tfraclites 
ther thee preſent 


d- 


”, < 
xe * = 
#3} Pans IT) pn 
f; a+ KEEH? 
Hh EE 
3 


y * deceived me , 
7: SAVE up the gholt in the ;; 
C1143” mear to relieve their 


PET % 
Ca® 


-"14:2:,Who courted my 
CY DV. C02 Falicd mine ex- 


| | x 
t.cour me, 3 


LA 
FT a E ?” DÞ 1 Ty 
Chap. Il. E he Lamentations of F ER EZAITA H, Chap. i 
Miſery was {ach throug1 the Famtae. that not only my comma! jo Lord's Foot-ſtool, Is. 66. 1. AMtth. 5. 35. ARS 7. 49. BU! 
P-opl2 bur thoſe of rh? belt rank 1n the City, Magiſtrates an} | here plainly tn? Femple 1s underftood, cailed God's Foor-tioo!, 
Prielts tainted as they went along the Street ſeeking Bread to l4- | L Chron. 28. 2. and We Wai? Temple frems rather to be under - 
fe their hunger. : ; ltood, than the {r/:,for we read of r9 14:gnity offered to thear] 

25 Behold, O LORD -:, for I am in Ciſtreſs ; my Oo Ctdcert, - wy 0t1er part < che Teinp!s 

| * : OT, mart ck. iI2Ve 24:4eans tO DUrn the wine Termnie, ant 

* 16-26 * bowels are croubled . —__— —— _ _— it may juſtly ve donbred whether thoſe other Texts has mention 

11. Jor.qs. in me, for I havegrievoully rebelled. © avroad Me 1 worſhipping at God's Foot-ſtool, #jat. 99. 5. and 122. 7. bs 

36, Cilap ſword bercaycth, at 10Mme IMere iS AS death WW 4 | 40t to be underitood of worſhipping 1 the Teinple, 107 1t was 

2. 11.Hol, a ThePetition is of the ſame nature as betore, a petition for | not the priviledge of all the Fews to come fo rear the Ark as 

. I1. 8, mercy as the produt of that pity and compaſtion which extream |to worſhip before that: The realon of the complaint '5 God's 
: * D-ut-32. mifery begets in good Souls, (and isalcribed unto God, though | permiftion of the Chalde.ins to burn the Temple. Se Fer 52. 13. 

25. Ezek. found in him in a much more perfect degree ; Pat.78.38.ard 86-] 2 The LORD hath ſwallowed upall the habitar; - 

TFT. If, It ts 4-) through the eyes aftecting rhe heart. h 200 Ons of Jacob, and hatn not pitted A Fo he hath MITES 7} 
ment the Prophet uieth 15. drawn trom the miſery e215 F29P'© | own in his wrath the ſtrong holds of the daughte: 
was now in, which he expreffeth metaphorically, telling us tr.etr c - de 
Bawels were troubled, their Heart turned, f13nitfying the more 0 Judah e he hath F brought them down to Le E 
inward Ciſturbance of their mind; or more plainly, and that ground : ne hatn polluted the kingdom 4ad tne Þ ch 1 1369- 
doth generally ſaying they werein diſtreſs, and more particularly | ces thereof t- mY 
by the great Judgments of the Sword and Famine, the Sword IN| 1 a5 he hath had no reſpect to his own Houle, fo he hath * ms 
the Field, the Famine 1n tne City 3 url?(s tne Sword alone be much Jeſs refpect to the common Habitations of the 7. 
meant both without and within tne Gates of the Qty. In al. IS | , Their military Fortifications have been of no uſe to the: (16 
the Church juſtitiech God, confe{ling this that was bur the rip | hath made ther cg rouch the ground, i. e. ſuffered the Enemics - 
teous product of her ſin, by which, ſhe having formerly lubjeCt- [rg batter them to che Earth. Thar is Either deliveced them no 
ed her ſelf to God, had grizvoully rebelled ; for asall Menare | typ hinde of Pires whom to couch they indaed a legal notkek 
born Subjects to God, ſoby their fias they are- become Rebels, 10} 0 0: 1p quale with them as with 2 poliured thing, calf them 
ICIS A great aggravation of Mens Rebeli10n 3gaint the a” off, or break them 14 pieces. All this is made the « fot of G «is 
they have formerly taken an Oath of teaity to the Lord, au as Wrath, and his Work ; for as a Man is faid to do that which 1 
2ſofes (aid, avouched the Lord as ener God. incourageth others to do, and a{liits thein in doing; fo God is 14:6 

21 They have heard that I tighe, there 75 NONC LO tg have done this, becaule he did not only tuffer the C214: 211 9 
comfort me 4 : all mine enemies have heard of my dy it, but uted them as a Rod in his Band,'inclining tnem to d3 
crouble, they are glad that thou haſt done ir e - thou |it, and nh 6 OE _— cbs Wrath, * c 

# Iſa. 13, VICE bring the day that thou haſt] called,and they i : y — ape no ho. __ 
&c. Jer. {hall be like untro me f. : _ ac 5 = - —_ EY DACK 13S ! L,0C LING SOLES © Fog 
45. &C. c The Nations contignous to me, E215t, &c. thole that before 'IOrC The eilcmy ”, and he burnec 2ZAUUL Jacod lite a 
1 Or, pro- courted me, as pretended Friends have been no ſtrangers to my | flaming fire, w/c devourerh round about 2. 
6/aim:d. bitrer afflictions, that have brought forth ſighs from me. d But g That 1s, the beauty and ſtrength of 1ſrael, to Horn {igniferh 
there is none of them can or will comiort me, bur give me over [by an uſual Meraphor in Scripture, P/4!. 75. 4. Jer. 4%. 25, 2 
as in a deſperate cafe. e The Edomites, Ohad. 1, &c. and Moabites |the Horn being much the Beaury ot the Bea??, as allo that Mem- 
and other Heathen Nations, with whom I have had hoſtility,thev |her by which the Beaft puts torch its frength in aTſwultinz i:s 
; are glad at the great miſery that hath betallen me. f But thou halt | Advertary. þ Either God hath drawn back his &3itance . which 
declared thy pleaſure for their deſtruction alſo, and haſt by Me |he was wont to give the Jews again{t their Enemies : Or I{rael, 
proclaimed it, Fer. 4.9. and 50. and thou ſhalc in that day bring jthrough God 5s leaving of them, hath drawn back his right hands 
chem into as ſad a condition as the Church of the Jews are now |hut jt ſeems rather to be underſtood of God's weaning the Ir- 
in. As they ſeldom in theml(elves tec] thole Miſeries, which they |elites riahet hand, fo as they were not able to hold chem up (25 
have felt and compaſſionate in others: So Men hardly eſcape their |before) apainſt cheir Enemies. 7Goil had contumed them, no: in 
own ſhare at laſt in thoſe evils, which they have rejoyced to fee {this or thar part, bit round abour, as 4 fre fiezing -1y honſe, or 
brought upon God's People. heap of combuſtible matrer at once on all {ife- 

22 Let all their wickedneſs come before thee : and | 4 He hzth bear his bow like any caemy - he Food 
do unto them, as thou haſt done unto me tor all my |with his right hand as an adverſary 4, and flew + all 4 e7,6, 
tranſgreſſions - for my lighs are many, and my heart | that were pleaſaur ro the eve !, in the tabernacle of | 
is faint g. the davghter of Zion: he poured out: his jus: 

g.This Verſe is another Prophetical Curſe or Imprecation,ſeve ry like fire me 
ral of which we meet with in Holy Writ, Pſal. 10g. 6,7,8,9- and k That is, God, (wha by their fins thev h14 provoted arr 
137. 8. Fer. 11.20. and 18. 23, and In many other Texts, which made their Enemy ) behaved hintelt as an Enemy, bendige 
would incline us to think that our Saviour's Precept, Mfr. 5. 44- Bow, and firetching our h's rizht hand, Land few their your 
to pray tor thole that perſecute us, back'd by his own Example, | qqeq. and Moiiens who were oloatant oo look 15m mn And nt 
Luke 23. 34. and Stephen s, AAs 7. 60. 15 either to be interpreted \ vrought Judgments 1508 them like fire, which devounrs without 
of praying for the forgiven:ſs of their fins, (we ought to deſire | ,n- Yoni ain, 
theeternal Condemnation of none :) or to be reſtrained to ſuch as j _.. The LOWS, encmy.- he hath Coatlee 
are Our perſonal Enemies.not the commonEnemies of the Church | d "I Ro. _ 7 ou 
of God. Our Saviour's Precept moſt certainly is not tobe ſoin-| ed up [irael, he hath twallowed up ail her placs 
terpreted, that we may lawfully pray tor ſuch evils to the im-| he hath deſtroyed his ſtrong holds, and hath tacreat 
placable Enemies of the Church, and the People of Godas may | cd in the daughter of Judah mournias and lincate- 
reſtrain and weaken their hands, and pur them our of a capacity | tjgn y, 3 M 
ns Lords Hs E _— —_ by ny n See Ver. 2, geveral pathetical expreitons ſhgniving the { N2 

| on 5, anc £0 denre no evIt againit enem out or Pri- ithings properly intimaring the dialect of Mourners,whote p33 3:1 
vate revenge or malice, but only out of Love to God, and Zeal |j\fars them not to {peak accordins to Art, bu: freauenly now 
for his Glory ; but tor their outward Proſperity in their Courles fay the Co things _=_ oh q -eufethodarewm cm. 
of Enmity we cught no more to pray, than againſt their eternal 4 : 12 xv ouiatyine DF I ring 
"0 ea: 7 ? 5 ; | 6: And he hath violently * taken away his | tabcr- 
Salvation ; for this were ta beg of God to encourage his Enemies "= oc Art re Ears 7 : 
/ 1 their enmity againſt him. And though Jeremiah were a preater nacle », asf it were of a garden; he hath deſtroyed Nis, | 
Prophet than any of us can pretend to be, and had revelations of | places of the aſſembly p : the LORD hath canied thy 
particular future Contingences which we have not ; yet every one{{glemn feaſts, and ſabbaths ro be forgotten in Zion 
4 may Prophefie a ruine to the Enemies of God's Church and Peo- | hath deſviſed in the indionario! oa ws 
le, and ſuch "aye me agsr 7 6 "{and hath dcipiſed in the 1udignation of his anger 50 
pie, and asrejoyce in their ruine; God never ufing a Rod a- |} . oe 
gainſt his People, which he doth not at laſt burn, nor ever coun- | 4125 and the prielt 5, Ds 
tenancing Inhumanity in any, but much lefs when it is rooted in | © The word tranſlated Tabernaelo (tay ſome) ſignifies an he tg 
a malice againſt himſelf, and his intereſt in the World. or fence, and they would have it nere fo trauflaced, and to cio 
Phraſe ſhould denote God's withdrawing his Protection from c!:g 
CHAP II i Fews, but it15 no where to tranfliced, Ie1s another word uſed, 
: Pſal. 80. 12, -_ 89. 40. _—_—_— judicious Interpreters thin 
, ; : | that the word here ſigntheth the Terple, and the rather beca.:! 
*m CS nos che _ 174] Frans Cauſes 3 and | what tolloweth. p By the places of 192 Afj-mviy My be 22ders 
Te row and Repentanc: + p As 700 £9 true S0r- ſtood the Synagogues. q By the King and the Pric!t ave moan 
4 OO E, 6 Jervens Fran, 16, SIR Perſons of great Rank and Eminency, tho' it is thought 


I OW hath the LORD covered the daughter 
4 of Zion with acloud in his anger a, aud caſt 
_ from heaven to the earth the daughter of 

racl b, and remembred not his footftool in the day 
of his anger c ! 

a It hath been formerly obſerv'd that great States and Kingdoms 
are often 1n Scripture expreſſed under the notion of Daughters, 
Pjal. 137. 8. Iſ4.47. i ,5. Lament. 4.21, 22.Jer. 46. 11: Iſa. 10, 
32+ te meaning 1s, How hath God obſcured all the beauty and 
ROTY Of the Church and Scate of the Fews. b That is, thrown 


*hem q "wn from the higheſt pitca of Glory and Honour, to the {fo his Service, and ict 107 1 
meanelt degree of Bat-iiels and Servicude. c The Earth is called {and Communion of the Ciuiroh of fe J-ws ; - 5 Altar 1s take, 


y 
%/ Nt 
44 « 


/ 


is a ſpecial reference to Zedehkith che Ring of Fulih; 22 
who was the Hizgh-Prieſt, the formec of witch wis milera 
handled, the latter {[a1n- = | 

-7 The LORD hath caſt ofins altar - he nth us3- 


horred his ſanctuary 7, he hath + given up 1179 TH3+ 17 4 
hand of the enemy the walls of her palaces - 7, * they Ft. 
have made a 10ie in the houje of the LOR, a5 1a a * 1+ 
day of the foleinn fealt r. 4: 

y By Atltar and Sanur} feemeth not tobe ment ftritr hore 


! 


the places or Elillings 16 called, which are t2:d ft be che Lncds, 
= . Y . PLN: =; En #9 4 tron Fog oe 1 
becauſe he GireCted the mak1igs Ot! L1NCin, 1 ard! Carty Vi TS LT FEQS 'Y 


z 1 | | i} 4a. 4 vy7 J 
ta a_—_ td. 4 k {\, 
> (Nei 034 0" OUT TLC IFATRL VV WHILE; 


OE CC CC_ 
> _ 


ER ——_z 


: 
te 
"7 
| : 
xy : 
$1 34 
Rf. 
| | 
[ 
p 
%, 
it 
K ; 


 - 2: 4 Om Li 
\ ' ici tte 1 ol 
& 


| I Cor. 10.18. God by his ſuffering the place to be deſtroyed where, 
| alone they might Sacrifice, ſeemed to have abhorred his own In- 
{titutions, as 1t is ſaid, The Prayers of the wicked are an abommnati- 
1h en tothe Lord, s He faith the Lord alſo had deſtroyed the molt 
| ] tatcly of th:ir Civil Edifices. r And the Enemies with their Trr- 

} umphs and Blaſphemies, had made as great noiſe,to the reproach 
| 3 and diſhonour of God, as before thoſe that ſang holy Songs, or 
Wl! plaid on Inſtruments were wont to make 1n the Tempie «tO the 
| i, Honourand Glory of God. 

*F'%3. $8 TheL ORD hath purpoſcd to deſtroy the wall 


27. F2. n - . - Fr 
* > -. Of the daughter of Zion - ; * he hath ſtretched out a 
WW +4 "line w, he hathnot withdrawn his hand from + de- 
q | triloxing Arovying x - therefore he made the rampart and the 
11.1.8 "Ps voall ro lament ; they languiſhed together y. 
11/8 The term Wall in this Verle ſeemeth to be taken 1n a meta- 
al pghorical ſence, for the ſtrengeh and ſecurity ot the Jews (tne 


{tient and fecurity of a place ly12g much in Irs Walls.) w Ar- 
*{cer< vje with Lines not only to mark out places for building, 
Entaiſo tor deſtraRion, to direct them what to cut off, ſuch a 
Lireis here rreant. x God had gone 0n in deſtroying them. y And 
] 


_—_ 


| 
13d mais their Walls and Ramparts feeble, and to ſhake like a 


jiþ Na: under ſome Janguiſhing Diſtemper, that had no ſtrength left. 
Kinas © Ber gatesarc ſunk into the ground z, he hath 


£ + 
"= 
- 


The Lamentations of F E A E 5311 A BH. 


(iniquity, to turn away th 


Chap. 


People whole miſcrable condition was in any Ceprere p*:allelto 
the miſery of the Fews. It 15 ſome ccmtort to Fer ions in mitery 


to conſider, that others are, and kave been as mi{cr+ble as they, 

but the Prophet Fad nct this Topick from wherce to ferch an 4 
argument oft comfort to the Fews ; there were none to whom he 
could liken them, nor was there any preſent cure for them, their {15 


breach was like aSea-breach where the waters come in with fuch a 
Torrent, that till the Tide abates there 1s no making any bank or 
defence againſt them. 


14 Thy *prophets have ſeen vain and fooliſh * Jer. 2. 
things for thee z,and they have nor diſcovered thine 22% - 
y captivity oz bur have ang ,-;* 
ſeen for the falſe burdens and cauſes of baniſh- and 23 " 
ment p. & 29.8, y 

7 Not the Lords Prophets in thee, but thoſe Prophets to whom Ezck.1;.2, 
you choſe rather to hearken, and whom you believed rather than 
me, and others ſent by God to reveal his will unty you,came and 
told you idle and vain Stories, that thoſe who were carried into 
Captivity, ſhould after two Years return, &c. o And by telling 
you ſuch ſmooth and pleaſant things tickled your Humours inſtead 
of diſcovering your Sins, which were bringing theſe Judgments 
upon you ; whereas they ought to have dealt freely; and faithful- 
ly with you,and have madeyou ſenſible of your (ins,and this niight 
have prevented your miferable Captivity. þ But they rather ſpent 


29d deftroyed aud broken her bars 4, * her king and her 
Fe Princes are among, the Gentiles b; the law 7s no 
eats - * prophets alſo find no viſion from the 
gc Ezek. 7.97076 c, her ® propnets allo nnd n 
ORD A 
That is, the Gates of Jeruſal-m are deſtroyed, and covered 
over with Kubbiſh. 4 Tae Bolts of the Gates are broken. b Zede- 
bidbard the Nobles of Ju{ab that were not ſlain were in milera- 
able Captivity. c The Law was no more reed and opened, nor 
was there any more Sacrifices offered according to the preſcript 
of it, nor any ſolemn Feaſts kept according tothe direCtion of it. 
4 They had but very few Prophets amongſt them from this time 
to the time of the Goſpel, and very ſew of thoſe at this time alive 
had any Revelations from God, we read only of this Prophet, 
Ezekiel, Daniel, and three after the Captivity, Haggai, Zechariah 
and Malachy. | ; 
10 The clders of the daughter of Zion fit upon 


*. 4 
os 


duſt upon their heads; they have girded themſelyes 
with ſackcloth ; the virgins of Jeruſalem hang down 


7 

F: their heads tothe ground e.. | : 

F e Sitting upon the ground, keeping ſilence, throwing Duſt on 
1 their Heads, girding chemielves with Sackcloth, hanging down 

| F the Head, were all of them Poſtures and Actions and Geſtures of 

; Mourners. The meaning of this whole Verſe 1s, that the whole 


City of Hieruſalem was in a very ſad flate and condition, and all 
Perſons in it in a mournful poſture. Not the common People only 
but the graveſt of their Magiſtracy and Miniſtry. Thoſe who 
were wont to fit in the Chairs of Magiſtracy and of Teachers. 
Their young omen allo which nſed to be moſt brisk and trolick, 
thoſe whole condition was furtheſt off from ſorrow, and who 
were leaſt diſpoſed to it, were now, all of them drowned in 
floods of it. - JM | 
= 1 Nine eyesdo fail with tears f, * my bowels 
6 þ ET are troubled g ; my liver is poured upon the earth h, 
j ; for the deſtruction of the danghter of my people z, 
| ' Or, £:z4r becauſe the children and the ſuckling || ſwoon 1a the 
ſtreets of the city k. 

f This whole Verſe is but expreſſive of the Prophets great af. 
fiction for the Miſet jes come upon the Jews. He wept himfelf al- 
moft blind. g His paſſion had diſturbed his bocily Humours,that 
is Bowels were troubled. þ His gall lying under his Liver, upon 
this difturbance was vormited up, they are all no more than Ex- 
preſitons of very great affliftion and ſorrow. # For the miſeries 
{:of1!len tothe Jews, he had mourned tor their ſtns before, and for 
t' cr Plagues too which he had in proſpect, Fer. 9. 1. he now 
m1: ns for them, as being come upon them ; which mourning 
c-:1{idered only as for their Miſeries, ſpake no more than the 
Prophets good Nature and Love to his Country : but conſidered 
25 the Indication of Gods Wrath and Ditpleafure was alſo a godly 
ſorrow. kh The Children and Sacklings fainred and ſwooned, ei- 
-h-r for want of Water, or Bread, or Milk in their Mothers or 
Nurſes Breaſts during the Famine, occaſioned by the long Siege 
of the City. This appears inthe next Verſe. 

12 They ſay to their mothers, Where 7s corn and 
wine ? when they ſwooned as the wounded in the 
ſtreets of the city, when their foul was poured out 
160 their mothers boſom |, 

k The 'i tle Children ignorant of the cauſe of the failure of their 


ulual Food called to their Mothers for it as formerly,being ready 
to faint and die, as Men mortally wounded for want of Spirits 


- _ 


*Job.2-12. the ground, #4 keep filence e - they have * calt up/ 


their breath in telling you falle Stories which they pretended to | 
be the cauſes of the Captivity of yqur Brethren, in the mean time ; 
concealing the true cauſes, and ſuffering you to run on in the 7 
{ame Errors, til] you come to be more miſerable than thoſe that 

went into Captivity before you. 


:5 All that | paſs by, *clap their hands at thee; f Heb.j:' E 7 


they hiſs and wag their head at the daughter of Je- tb 9 * 
ruſalem 9, ſaying, 1s this the city that men call | os - mY 
* the pertection of, beauty, the joy of the whole * pgi. g © 
earth 7 ? 2+ GC. 504 : fs 

q This was acording to God's Threatnings, 1 King. 9. 8. Fer. pe 
18.16. and 19.18. God had poured out all his Bleflings upon bo ij 
this People, whatſoever might adorn them, or make them happy, TY 
lo as all People bleſſed the J:wiſh Nation : But now the caſe was 3p; 
{o altered, that all People {coffed at them, and hifled, and admi- 5; EO 
red at the change which God had made. DEI os 


againſt thee : they hiſs, and gnaſh the teeth : they 3: 4* 
ſay, We have ſwallowed herup : certainly this s the 

day that we looked for : we have found, we have 
ſcen 7t r. 

r As Strangers that had no Quarrels with, nor prejudices a- 
gainſt the Fews, paſſing by their Country, and their great City 
Feruſalem, deſpiſed and ſcorned it, ſo their Enemies with whom 
they had former Quarrels, and who had taken up prejudices a- 
gainſt them, they reproached and abuſed them, and triumphed in 
their ruine, and in the ſucceſs of their Arms againſt them , and 


bleſſed themſelves as having now ſeen the day they had looked 


16 * All thine enemies have opened their mouth * Chap. 77 


F oo I P > 


and wiſhed for. by” 


17 The LORD hath done that which he had devi- 
ſed : he hath fulfilled his word that he had command- 
ed inthe daysof old: he hath thrown down and 
hath not pitied : and he hath cauſed chime enemy to 
rejoice over thee, he hath ſet up the horn of thine 
adverſaries s. 

s God hath not ſurprized 15 by theſe Providences, he gave us 
notice what he would do, an4 hath done no more than what he 
threatned long ſince, Lev. 26. 16, &c. Deut. 28. 15, &c. It is 
true he hath ſeverely puniſhed us, ſo as in his Diſpenſation there 
appear no prints ot pity, he hath ſet up our Enemies and hath 


made them to triumph over h is People, but in all this he hath 
but juſtified his truth, and fulfilled his word. 


18 Their heart cried to the Lord r,/ O wall of the 


daughter of Zion * let tears run down like a river * we 2 
day and night; give thy ſelf no reſt, let not the ap- _ ll 
ple of thine eyes ceaſe . . 
t They cried unto God ſeriouſly, though not fincerely, from - 
their heart, though not with their whole heart ; either by the 
Wall or upon the Wall, or (which is judged moſt probable) by 
occaſion of the breaches made in the Wall. Uponthis he turns 
his Diſcourſe to the Wall it ſelf, and calls to it, or to thoſe that 
were upon 1t, or.near it inceſſantly ro mourn. In the Heb, jr is, 
let nor the daughter of thine Eye ceaſe, we call it the Apple. The 
Latines, the Pupil, or Babe of the Eye» 


19 Ariſe, cry out inthe night : in the beginning 
of the watches pour out thine heart like water before 


14, i 


and Blood uſe to faint, and died in their Mothers arms ; for fo I 
had ratner inrerpret the Phraſe poured out their Souls, than (as 
ſome) underſtanding by Souls the defires of their Souls, for he is! 
ſoealcing of Sucklings as well as more grown Children, the Phraſe 
i5 carable of both lenles. 

13 What thing ſhall I take to witneſs for thee ? 
what thing ſhall I liken to thee, O daughter of Jeru- 
lem? what ſhallI equalto thee, that I may comfort ' 
.112e, O virgin daughter of Zion ? for thy breach 7s, 

1£at like the ſea ; who can heal thee mi? 
z The Sum of this Verſe is, That the miſerable condition of ; 
e People was both incomparable and incurable, There was no 


f 


a_ . - 


” Kod - "5046 
m_— — - 
OY : 
ul Oe OO Ne AA ITE Oy SSIS — 
yp 
DD — * *%n 
— ——— YE 
8 


FR 


the face of the LORD - lift up thine hands toward 
him, for the life of thy young children, that fains 


for hunger in the top of every ſtreet w. 

w The Prophet calls upon the Fews not to be flotaful in this 
their very evil day, bucto rije up trom their Beds, and either at 
the beginning of the four Watches, or at the beginning of each 
Watch, at all times 1n the Night, ro betake themſelves to God by 
Prayer. and that not in a cold lazy manner, but ſo as to pour 
out their hearts with their words ; and he moveth them to 1t, as 
for their own ſake fo for the ſake, of their young Clyldren who 
every where, were ſtarved ro Death. 


20 | Be 


IH their } 


| * Cha 


3+ 43" 


ry + Lev. 26. thou haſt done this x: * Shall the women eat their out / - he hath made my chain heavy k. 
29. Deut. fryir, ad children [| of a ſpan long y ? ſhall che prieſt] 7 Tne uſe of an Hedge about an incloſed Field, is twofo!d : To 


2 


j 


3 


OI FR 99s 
*%} 2.11; 
5 > 08 


Chap. 11]. 


8. 53- 


} Cr. 19. 9. 
ge LORD z? 


woos let called by thy Name, bat co thine own People called thy Portion 
3; 


| ted with 
' their bands 


F * Chap. by the ſword : * thou haſt ſlain chem io the day of 


, 43" 


* Plal. 38. 


h 16, 


20 © Behold, O LORD, and conſider to whom 


and the prophet be flain in the Sanctuary of the 


x That is, not to Heathen who never owned thee, nor were 


and thine Heritage let thy former relation to us, and our former 
acknowledgments of thee, prevail with thee. y Wilt thou ſuffer, 


with the fruit of their own Bodies, and that when they are very 
young. 7 And ſhall chy Miniſters be flain and that in thy Sanctu- 
ary? Any humane Bloo| polluted it, ſhall not the blood of thoſe 
that were the Miniſters of God be judged a pollution, and profa- 


The Lamentations of F EREMIAH Chap. IT. 


| 7 * He hath hedged me about that I cannot get Job 5:23” 
19. 3. 


eep out other Beaſts, which belong nat to the Owner of the 
Ground ; in this ſenſe God ſet an Hedge fometimes about Carazn, 
Iſa. 5.5. 2. To keep in thole Beaſts that are within, thus God 
had now hedzed them in, into a barren place where they had no 
Paſture, but were continually puſhed at by other Beats with 
whom they were mixed, and who were ſtronger than they, aad 


FF , they could nor get out. k God had dealt with them as with grie- 
or ſhould ſuch a thing bz, as for Women to fatisfie thetr Hunger | 


vous Malefa&tois, who are loaded with heavy Chaias. He had 
made their Afliction heavy ani inſupportable. 

8 Alſo whenl cry and ſhout / he ſhutteth our my 
Prayer m. 

{ In the condi:ion I am in, I cannot help my ſelf, no Creatures 


nation of it ? , 
21 The young and the old lie on the ground in 
the ſtreets, my virgins and my young men are fallen 


3 


thine anger, than haft killed, 4nd nor pitied 2. 

4 None of what Age or Sex ſoever are ſpared; though the 
hands of the Chaldems have done this, yet they have been ſet on 
and aſſiſted by thee, and have been but the Executtoners of thy 
wrath and diſpleaſure. ns 
' 22 Thou haſt called as ina folemn day, my terrors 
round about b, ſo that in the day of the LORD's an- 
ger none eſcaped, nor remained : thoſe that I have 


{ſwadled and broughtup,hath mine enemy confumed c. 

b As my People were wont to be called rogether from all parts 
ina ſolemn day, when they were to meet at Feruſalem from all 
parts of Fudea, ſo now by thy Providence my terrible Enemies, 
or terrible things are by thee called together againſt that Holy Ct- 
ty, whither thy People were wont to be called to thy folemn 
Worſhip. c Thou haſt made me as a great mother to bring up 
many inhabirants that weremy Children,and now the Enemy hath 
conlumed the far greater number of them. 


CHAP. II. 


The faithful bewail their Miſery an Contempt, 1, —— 21. They 
nouriſh their hope by Conſideration of the Fuſtice, Providence, 
and Mercies of God, 22, —— 38. They ſtir up themſelves 10 
Repentance, Patience, Prayers and Confidence of Deliverance 
for themſelves, and Divine Vengeance on their Enemies, 
TH — 66. 


I | Am the man a that hath ſeen afflition by the| 


rod of his Wrath 6. 


a Some. underſtand this of the Prophet, ſome of the People 


'can help me,I have no hope but in God,[ take the ordinary cou ſe 


in that cale,which is Prayer, I pray tervently and alond, as thoſe 

that are lerious, and importunate for what they deſire (for ſhouting 

here ſignifies no more than making a loud noiſe, not a loud noiſe 

of Joy and Rejoicing,as it moſtiy ſignifies) but he deals with me as 

great Perſons that have no mind to liften to Suitors, and ſhut their 

Gates againſt them, he ſhutteth out my Supplications, which made 

their caſe wholly deſperate and remedileſs. 

9g He hath incloſed my ways with hewen ſtones z, 

he hath made my paths crooked o. 

n Ways in Scripcure ordinarily fignifies Mens Courſes, and Me- 

thods of Counſels and Actions. It the term ': taken in that ſenſe 

here, it ſtgniheth God's defeating all their Methods and Counſlels 

taken for their own Security, in the purſuit of which they met noc 

with ordinary,but with inſuperable dificulcjes,like walls ot hewer 

ſtone. o Nay, God had noc only defeated -heir Connſels, bur had 

made them prove more fatal and pernicious co themſelves; which 

ſeemeth to be intended, by making their Ways crooked, which 

ſhou'd have led right on to the end intended. 

10 * He was unto me as a bear lying ia wait, and * Job 15, 

as a lion in ſecret places p. 16.12, 3B, 

þ Thats, he hath takenall advantages againſt meto deſtroy me. 7 3* = FY 
11 He hath turned aſide my ways, and pulled me +." *7* 

- 


in pieces; he hath made me deſolate 4. 
q The famething is repeated in other Phraſes, which was be- 
fore ſaid, viz. Thar God had pleaſed by his Providence toltruſtrate 
all the deftgns and counſels ot the Jews, aad miſerably to deſtroy 
chem ; as a Lion, or a Bear (the wild Beaſts mencioned before) 
tear in pieces the Beaſts they prey upon. 7 
12 He hath bent his Bow, and * ſet meas a mark * p 
for the Arrow r. | Gar | 
r He hath prepared himſelf for atts of viadicative Juſtice, and * 


who were before let out under the notion of a Woman, a Daugh- 
ter, here of a nzn. b AfMiction muſt here be taken Emphatically 
for eminent degrees of affliction, cauſed not meerly from the 
power and malice of the Enemy, but from the Wrath of God, 
tho' brought upon them by the Chaldeans who were to the two 
Tribes, the Rod of God's Wrath, as the Aſſjrians are called with 
reference to the Ten Tribes, Iſa. lo. 5+ 7 

2 He hath led me, and brought me zzto darkneſs, 


but not into light c. : 

c Darkne(s in Scripture ( metaphorically taken) ſignifies Igno- 
rance, Sin and Miſery ; and Light fignifies Knowledge, a ſtate of 
Grace, or a ſtate of mirth and jollity ; They are both here taken in 
the latter ſenſe, as light is taken, Eſther 8. 16. Micah 7.8. Fob 
18. 5. Pſal. 97.11.and allo Darkneſs is uſed, Jer. 13. 16. 2 Sam. 
22, 29. Prov.20. 20, Feel 2. 2. Exck. 32.8. The fenle 15, God hath 
not brought me into a joyful and proſperous, but 1nto a ſad and 
calamitous eſtate and condition. : 

3 Surely againſt me is he turned, he turneth his 


hand againſt me all the day 4. 

' d The courſe of God's Providence toward me is quite altered, 
his hand, that is, his power which was wont to be with me, and 
for me againit my Enemies, 15 now turned againſt me, nor is it for 
a moment, or for one ſtroke or two, but his hend is continually 
againſt me. 


4 My fleſh and my skin hath he made old, he hath 
broken my bones e. 

e I was a Virgin, young and fair, but I am quite altered, and 
am now as an old Woman whoſe Fleſh is decayed, and my Skin 
wrinckled ; all my Beauty is goae,and all my Strength is gone,my 
Bones, thoſe in whom my ſtrength conſiſted, are ſlain, and broken. 

5 He hath builded againſt me f, and compaſſed me 
with gall and travailg. 

f He hath not builded with me encreafing my proſperity, and 
proteCting my Houſes, but he hath builded Forts and Batteries 
and Caſtles, military Buildings) to batter down my Walls and 
Houſes, Iſa. 29.2, 3. g Or, with Poiſon, Venom and Miſery 
(as ſome Tranſlate it) and it ſeems more proper than gall and rr4- 
varl, which have no cognation one with another. We are not wel] 


acquainted with the ancient Dialect of other Countries ; the ſenſe| 


is obvious, God had ſurrounded them with Miſery and Calamities. 
6 * He hath ſet in dark places, as they that be 
dead of old h. 


h The Prophet compareth their ſtate in Babylon to the ſtate of 
Bodies in the Graves, or in ſome Charn!! Houſe, which are places 
of darknels, full of rottenneſs and dead Mens Bones. Such was the 
ſtate of the Fews in Jeruſalem durinz the time of the Siege betore 
the City was taken, when Feruſalem was a moſt milerable place by 
reaſon of the Multitudes ſlain by the Enemy, or by the Famine : 
Such was their eſtate in Babylon, where the company of Heathens 


he hath made me the Object of ir. : 
13 He hath cauſed the | arrows of his quiver to f Heb» 
enter into my Te1ns e. ; .""_R 
s That is, he hath made his judgments, to pierce the moſt 1n- 
ward parts of the Nation ; or he hath mortally wounded me. In 
the Heb. it is the daughters of his quiver ; a way of {peaking very 
uſual in Hebrew, to expreſs any thing that comes from another as 
the effe& either of a natura! or moral cauſe ; ſo Sparks are called 
the Sons of the quick c3a!, Job 5.7. and Corn the Son of the floor, 8c. _ | 
14 I was * a derilion to all my People, and * their , aps 
ſong all the day te. | vakan 
: Though ſome think the Prophet ſpeaks this of himſelf, yet , . 
conſidering he hath all along ſpoken in che Name of the People, it yr. 5+, 
is not probable, which makes a difficulty, how the People could © * 
be a derifion to themſelves? Ir ſeemeth therefore ill Tranſlated, 
and that it ſhould have been, I was a deriſionto all the people, leaving 
out my, that is, to all Forreigners, to whom the Fews were made 
a derifion and an hifling : There only wants the laſt Letter in QY 


and ic is well obſerved by the learned Author of the Engliſh Anne 
zations, that the like defect is to be found as to the ſame Word, 
2 Sam. 22+ 44. compared with Pſal. 18. 43. ſo that Vis nota 
Pronoun affix ( upon which ſuppoſal our Tranſlators go ) bur one 
of the Letrersthat form the plural number, the other being left 
out, and WQY put for Rm}, Gnammin. 


15 He hath filled me with þ bitterneſs; he hath T F=>- 
made me drunken with wormwood . bitterneſjes. 
u That is, he hath filled me wich ſevere and bitter diſpenſati. 
ons ; Wormwood is a bitter Herb,bur it is alſo a wholſome Herb, 
and therefore ſome think that the Hebrew word ſhould rather be 
Tranſlated Henbane, and that it fiznifies ſome Herb whoſe juice 
is intoxicating and poiſonous. | 
16 He hath alſo broken my teeth with gravel- 


ſtones, he hath || covered me with aſhes w. || Or; relied 
w Theſe are but more metaphorical Expreſſions ſignifying the m2 mn 1/49 
unpleaſant difficult condition into which God had brought this ajher. 
people. They were like Men that lived upon gritty b:ead, more fi 
to break their teeth than to nouriſh them ; they were in the ſtate 
of Mourners,and no ordinary Mourners,who were wont to throw 
aſhes on their heads, they were all over covered wich aſhes. 
17 And thou haſt removed my Soul far off from 
peace «: I forgat TÞ proſperity y. + Heb, 
x Pezce, here fignifiech Proſperity, rather than a Freedom from good, 
war, Though during the Siege they were far from Peace in a 
ſtri& ſenſe, yet in their Captivity they had chat peace, bur both 
their minds were far off from quier, and their Perlons trom Pros 
ſperity ; the Prophet owneth God, as che caule of this. y They 
had in Canzan lived profperouſly, but now they thought of it no 
more, nor underſtood what ſuch a thing meant. 


made their ſtate, as the ſtate of the living amongſt the dead. 
Vol, Il. 


18 AndI ſaid,my ſtrength and my hope 1s periſhed 
from the LORD. P 2 19 || Re- 


_= CO he 4 * 


g +; b Ty 
S "4" Wi —— - ted ———_ ere epruiion di C# ho h b —_ 

. " 3 2 $o, Horn £ Ty 

- 4 5 ACE Toad {+ --- - 

Y Fa AIP? Af AY -_ 

” a ai. —__ * , - - © I" O—_ PRs —_— = 

mag yes bur _— bs _—— os vs my _ . _—_ ; 
ad” KR. I ——— v w» - 8 PY ” w-— 
"A —- " a - 4 ” 


p—_—_ 


CET 


_— 


# Y ” 45 , "83S - = 4 S == : 
OE I ET I ONE Dn 
” oy m_—_ 


Cn 


$M a 4 4 » 7 om 
- G >” IJ o > 
Ls - CEDIA @ » = x 
toro =Iz3 GER apones 
25S : F ln 06 PR 
Y _ our : *% LL. 
bang; 17 # #7- age 


5 RR 


-<— 
hs -—v " 
$A _— - 


a 
_— 


4 8 - _— - PR——— — - " X - 7 - - ER oo J a __ 
MY + V $4 i 453 7 48 ar _ " 2 om a IE oo - . _ ___ ” _ h 4 Ft 5 a = "LR : £9 . = _ 
' l > NH ; 2 oy — Im : - - - « —+ Jo — 7.7 * Fi x4 nh 4 - : T x es y j- . Fa 4 E: . { £ 
"5" oP e f a. * Re oy $4 - - 4 a * . Dn Targa 194 ap EDIT a9” Fee aide ED EY, 2-4 FL IONS.» ——_— Y " pthc gwangh'> Dy \ lia « - ” Py 6 : s - w- y - - 4 4, DOA, _ 
9 mg, S Ra ——_— ” : ET . Ny T.-AeES « « » : Le —— ,4 ar V Er "—y * , 4 Re - * > >: [+ bh _ ts + 1 « - g E767... 6 Nd ho WE = py He 's. p ” 9 jr ” n - 
& RO» = pu > —- og [oy Rea Dt IJ yy _—_—_ _ hs » - © 74 TRIS , . c t wt = - mY —_— be - _ IO 4 [ "OE a : Gs = yrs = . S . : Wo 
b. 04 7 , 4 reaps Eo F maps | - \ 2 2s SS 2 . T'. _ _ 2" on lp IINBIY Pay s S o- b> RE Oe WAG _ Act - 2 WE ne -f IY$s hen - 4. On £54 9X 4 ls et AATS mae 4 
_—_— AF _- - , ©2204 - . "rs © hſ - 5-4 _ Oe ie de PRA 
9, We _ . _ #4 a - : « > yy "* 5 | . > a 

#-"- | © — pu pry ner I% p / > p pm "id 4 
Bu = hs C » + pw ” . $ hwy . 


Mons 07 NCR II 


ng FIAT 


I EO na 
_— : 
— Or £48 es SG ee 


—_—_—— 


won ne on ring ee me Is 


nm nm En i i are ont A IO ner Io tir nn AI ts pt 
- Om - IS _-_ 2 . ;y " 4 = 


+, 4 7 


hey 
_— 
at 


Cizap. III, 


'-Or, Rc 


BY. 
FieWict!, 


+ Heb. 
Bowea. 


FT Heb. 


turn 10 my 
heert. 


* xal.3.6. 


+ P/al. 15. 


$.& 73, 


26.6 115, 


57-Jer,10 
Is, 


7 21 ThisI+ recall tomy mind, therefore have 1 
irabe to re-NONC h, 


i9 { Rewembring mine affliction and my miſery, 
the wormwond and the gall z. 

2 if accordivg ro our Tranſlati»n we read Remembring, Or 
1:1? I remember, theſe rwo Verſes contain bur one Sentence 3 1n 
the former part the Prophetin the Name of this People expretieth 
heir deſpairing Condition; in re latter he gives rhe reaſon of 1t, 
iz. The Peoples poring upon their great, and heavy affliciions, 
which he compares to wormwood and gall, rwo rhings exceſlively 
bitter, and often made uſe of ro fignifie great affliction, P/a!. 69. 
21. Ter.8. 14. andg. 15. and 23,15. Rev. 8,11, But it may 
as well he read imperaticely, Remember mine affliction, ſo the 
firſt of theſe two Verſes exprefſeth rhe dejecion of the Peop.cs 
Minds in their Captivity cauted through their proneneſs to deſpair 
of any herter condition that their angry God would bring them 
into. The 22th. #e{-15a Prayer direfted ro God, which ſhewed 
that thougit thev were mightily perplexed, yer they were not 1n 


ut:er deſpair; and co this ſence the following Verſes ſecmro incline. 
20 My ſoul hath chem: ftill in remembrance, and 15 
+ humbled within me 4. ; 
a That is, I cannot forger chem, and the thoughts of them fink 
my ſpirits. 


b Tis, nor what was already faid that made them deſpair, and 
taeir Souls ro bow down; but this, that which followerh, con- 
cerning the Nature of God, and other good Providences. I fee 


The Lamentations of F E R E M I A H. 


'I, Ver. 28. 
fair and caſte, for then thoſe words, Ver. 27. It is good that muſt 


nothing in the circumſtances of my condition ro comfort me, but 
I ſee ſomething in God's Nature, and in ſome other Diſpen ſations 
of his Providence, which gives me ground to hope for berter rings 
than an utter ruine and deftrugion. So 

22 @ * 7: ;s of the LORD's Mercies that we are 
not conſumed, becauſe his compaſſions fail not c. 

c Mercy is nothing elſe bur Love flowing freely from any to 
Perſons in miſery, and differs from compaſſion only inthe freeneſs| 
of the emanation. It 1s nqr becauſe God hath not power enough 
utterly to have conſumed us, nor hecauſe we had nor guilr enough 
to have provoked his Juftice,to have putan end to our Lives, as 
wellas to rhe lives of many thouſand of our Countreymen, but 1t 15 
meerly from the Lords free Love and Pity to us in our Miſeries, If 
God had nor a Blefling in ſtore for us, how 1s 1t that we are Cap- 
tives, and nor flain as many others were during the Siege ? 


23 They are new every morning ; great i thy faith- 


fulneſ$ 4. 

4 Theſe Compaſlions of God are renewed Day by Day, to de- 
clare the great faithfulneſs of God in fulfilling his many promiſes 
made for his Mercy co his People. ; 

24 The LORD #s my * portion, ſaith my ſoul, 
therefore will I hope in him e. : 

e God is the portion of his People, and rhey have choſen him as 
-cheir portion: He hath declared himſelf to them as ſuch, and they 
have accepted him as ſuch. This gives them ground both for Pa- 
tience under his Providences, and alſo of expeRation of good from 
him in their loweſt and meaneſt ſtate. : 

25 The LORD is good to them that wait for him, 


to the ſoul that ſeeketh him f. , 

f Good is aterm of a very comprehenſive notion. The nature 
of it lieth in a ſuicableneſs to the thing or perſon ro whom 1t re- 
lareth, ſo it ſignifierh profit and pleaſantneſs. There is in God an 
eſſential goodneſs, which 1s his abſolute perfeRion 3 bur this Text 
ſpeaketh of a communicative goodneſs, which flowerh from him 
to his Creatures, and is ſcenin his ſuiting their various neceſſities 
and deſires with ſatisfactory diſpenſations of Providence, Though 
God be in one degree or other good to all, yet he 15 more eſpecially 
good tothe rrue Worſhippers of him; yer poſſibly nor 1n their ſea- 
ſons or times when they expeR or would have God to ſhew himſelf 
ſo ro them in this or that way, bur always to thoſe who walt for 
him, patiently enduring Trials and Afﬀfligions until God pleaſe to 
ſend them deliverance. 

26 [t is good that a man ſhould both hope, and 


quietly wait for the ſalvation of the LORD g- 

2 Good here either {ſignifies honrtz4, whar becomes Men, and 
35 their Duty 3 or «tile, what is profirable, and will turn ro good 
account to them. Hoping and waiting differ but as the mother 
and davghter. Hope being the Mother of Partence and Waiting, 
or as the Habitand AF, Hoping and Waiting being much the 
ſame, flowing a gracious power and habit given the Soul to wair, 


N«ietneſs is neceflary to waiting, for all turbulency and imparience 

of Spirit under ſad Providences is oppoſed to waiting. The Salvati-; 
on of th? Lord refers to the outward, in preſerving or delivering 
us trom dangers : Or to the Soul and inward Man, in preſery- 

ing us from, and delivering our Souls out of dangers they fear, or 

eyils they are preſſed with.” Now for a Man in the midft of all evils | 
ro hope in God, and wirhour rurbulence or diſorder in himſelf, to } 
wait for a preſervation from, or a delivery our of any evils, 15: 
what becomerh a Man ( a Child of God eſpecially ) and will rurn' 
to a good account to them. 


- wy 
27 It is good for a man that he bear the yoke 1n his 
' dence, either effe&ing it by an immediate influence, or by the in- 


youth h. 

" þ Good here muſt he expounded in the ſame ſenſe as in the fore- 
going Verſe. It isnor pleaſant, butit is profitable, 1t 1s honoura. 
ble, what becomes us, and 1s our Duty, quietly and pariently to 
bear whar afflidions God will pleaſe tolay upon us, to reſtrain our 
wild and wanton Spirits when they are moſt prone to be too brisk 
and laſcivious. Some by 7obe underſtand the Law of God, called 
a Yoke (becauſe indeed irisſo to fleſh and blood ) Matth, ir. 29. 
Itis not fo eafie to bend a Neck ſtiffned with Age, or change an 
Hearr made hard by Cuſtom, Soſsmos bids us to train up one in 
their Youthin the way we would have chem to walk; and whether 


God will tame us when young, by his Word or by his Rod. :: is 
of advantage to a Man : Iris alſo laudable, and whar b«comes a 
Man, early to bear the yoke of God's Law, or to bear zfMiRive 
Providences, to have his heart berimes humbled to the Will and 
Feer of Gcd. 

28 He iitteth alone and keepeth ſilence, becauſe he 


hath born zz upon him kh. 

h Our Engliſh, Annotations ſupplying That, makes the connexi- 
on clear, It is good for a Man, that he fit atone, Jer. 15. 17. nor 
doing what he doth to be (een of Men, bur fitting alone, and when 
he 1:alone, ſupprefling the murinies of his Spirit, and keeping his 
Soul in {ubje&ion to God, Becauſe God hath humbled him by his 
Rod, humbling himſelf ro his Will. 


22 He putteth his mouth in the duſt, if ſo be there 
may be hope z. 

z If [ber] may be ſupplied, or 7when] ( as Pagnine tranlateth 

} rhe connex1on of theſe word: with the former, is very 


be repeated in the beginning of Yey. 28, and 29. However hoth this 
aad the former Verſes, ler us know the Duty of Perſons under Afﬀi- 
Qions in order to thetr ob-aining Mercy at the Hand of God, and 
admirably give us the CharaRer of Perſons under afflitions pre- 
paring for Mercy, They hope, and quietly wait for God's Salua- 
tion, Ver, 26. they bear God's yoke, Ver. 27. becauſe he hath lain 
It upon them. They ſit alone and beep ſilence, Ver. 28. and here 
they pur ther moths in the duſt, that 15, humble themſelves to 
tne feer of God, and to the Will of God ; not being too confi- 
_ of deliverances in this Life, bur if peradventure there may 
e hops. | 

30 He giveth h:s cheek to him that ſiniteth him & : 
he is filled full with reproach. | 

k According to our Saviour's Precept, Matth. 5. 39. he doth 
not rake any private Revenge. He 1s reproached and reviled, bur 
when he 1s ſo he yeuileth not again, 1 Per. 2. 23. He is filled with 
reproach from orhers, but his mouth is not filled with the re- 
proachings of others. 

31 For the LORD will not caſt off for ever mz. 

1 This 15 that which bearerh up his Spirirs,that though the Lord 
may for a time eſtrange himſelf from his people, yer he will nor 
always forſake them, 

32 But though he cauſe grief, yet will he have 
compaſtion according to the multitude of his mer- 
Cles 7. 

2 But though as a prudent Parent he may ſee reaſon to cauſe 
grief in, and ro affli& his own People, yer as a render good Fa- 
ther, that pitieth his Children in Miſery he will have compaſſion 
apon them, having not only Mercies, bur a multitude or abun- 
dance of Mercies. . 


33 For * he doth not affli&t+ willingly, nor grieve, Ezck, 
3 11, 


the children of men 0. 


0 Inthe Hevrew nt 1s, he doth not affli&t from his heart, that is | 
with pleaſure and delight; or (which ſeemerh the beſt ſenſe to me) j 


nor from his own meer motion withour a cauſe given him from 
the Perſons afflifted. Hence Judgment is called God's [range work. 
Shewing Mercy 15 his proper natural Work, which floweth from 


{ himſelf wirhour any cauſe in the Creature 3 Judgment is his {range 


work to which he never proceedeth but when provoked, and as ir 
were forced from the Creature, whence it followeth, that he can- 
not delight 1n 1t. 

34 To cruſh under his feet all tfe Priſoners of the 


earth p- 


35 To turn away the right.of a man before the} Or, 4: 
p:Yioar, 


face of || the moſt High 9. 


36 To ſubverta man in his cauſe, the LORD || ap-|| Or, ſb 


Heb, 
from bi 
eart, 


proveth not 7. nuts 


pþ Here are three things mentioned, of all which it is ſaid, thar 
God approveth them nor, neither all, nor any of them. Ths firſt 
15 to cruſh the priſoners of the earth; he hath power to cruſh all men 
in the World, they are his Priſoners, and cannot fly from him, 
but he delighteth nor in it ; ſome think ir ſpoken with ſpecial refe- 
rence to the Jews who now were all Captives. q A ſecond thing 
which it 1s ſaid God approverh nor, is turning away the right of a 
mar before the face of the moſt High. Some, by the moſt High un- 
derſtand Goa, and make the ſenſe tro be, in the ſzght of God. 
Others think rhat a Superiour Magiſtrate is underſtood, who Eccleſ. 
5.8. 1s called the Higheſt; and that ſeemeth the moſt probable 
ſenſe. The turning away the right of a Man before them, ſignifi- 
eth the uſe of any Arts ro deprive them of their juſt Right by miſ- 
repreſenting their Cauſe, aſperſing their Perſons, &#c. r The third 
thing mentioned 1s the ſubverting 4 man in his cauſe, either by 
Art, and Rhetrorick, making ir to appear bad when ir isnot ſo, or 
by meer Will and Power over-ruling it contrary to Right and Ju- 

ice. 


37 Whois he * that faith, and it cometh to* P - 
$9.5 


paſs, when the LORD commandeth zt not. s. 
s The ſence of theſe words 15 doubred by none, That nothing 
cometh ro paſs in the World but by the diſpoſal of Divine Provi- 


ſ{trumentality of ſecond cauſes, or permitting it : But ro whar end 
tmeſe words are brought in this place, is not ſo generally agreed. 
Some think they are broughr in to check the Blaſ phemy of ſome thar 
ſpake of what had befallen the J?ws as a thing which God had no 
hand 1n, Others think they are brought in as expounding that term 
that went before, The Lord ſeeth not, Tho? God doth nor approve 
of ſinful ations, nor incline any Man's Heart or Will to them, yer 
God nath an hand in the permiſſion of the moſt cruel and unjuſt 
actions, which he could eafily hinder. I ſhould rather incline co in- 
terpret themas an Argument brought by the Prophet in the Name 

ot 


ary $. 
Nig 
v x 
| E's 
{ 
SAN 


zX * Pro 
SR 109. 3 
= || Or 
-.% 0 
Bd ? Mut. 


oy 
s 2" 
£ 


Wo 
(; 
: be. 


A 


—S. 21, 


"Ip Chap. 
F * 164.4 3.7» 


« SAY 19. 3 

2% = |} p / 
Gs {| Or, MY - 
= nu. 


27 1 Cor. 4 
" 3» 


Til. 


of the People of God, arguing themſelves inro 4 quiet ſubmiſſion | 
to the aflidive Providences under which they laboured from we 
confiderarion of the Superiour hand of God in them,as Chritt rold 
Pilate, Thou couldſt nat have had any power againſt me, 1f it had not 


The Lamentations of FER EMIAH 


1 


49 Mineezetrickleth down,and ceafeth not, with- 
out any intermiſſion g ; 


& The Proptter was deeply affeRed upon the proſpe2 of this 
evi] before 1t came, Jr. 9. 1..and_ was now much more affected 


bzen given the from above : Shall there be evil in a City, and the Lord 
hath not done it, Amos 3. 0. - | 

38 Ourtofthe mouth of the moſt High proceedeth 
not * evil and good 7. ! | 

t In the H:5 the form of theſe words is interrogatoryzas muc' 
as if he ſhould ſay, Doth nat evilcome our of God's Mouth from 
his Direfion and Command, from his Providence, as well as 
good? He ſpezks of evils of puniſhments, judicial affl;&ive Diſpen- 
{ations ; ſo it agreeth with [9 2, 10, Amos 3.6. Iris no reproach 
unto God to make him te Aurhor of his own Puniſhments, tho 
we call chem evil. T : 

39 * Wherefore doth a living man || complains ! 
a man for the puriſhmeat of his ſins w ? 

& This Verſe admits of various Senſes, cauſed from the various 
interpretation of the H: brew word, which we Tranſlate complain 
which alſo Ggnifies to mourn or grieve; ſo fome render it, why, 
doth aliving Man grieve or vex himſelf? But the word 15 noted 
moſt generally ro fiznifie complaining or murmuring. w The 
word alſo which we Tan{late Sin, ſomerimes fignifierh thar 05- 
lique a& which we call Sin ; and thole who Incerprer the former 
word grieve or vex, thus underſtand the word Tranſlated Sin, 
ſupplying ſome” ſuch words as theſe, Let him mourn jor his [in ? 
Why doth he mourn for his AffliQions and Plagues,ler him rather 
ſpend his Tears upon his Sins. Bur the word alſo ſignifies the gui!t 
of /in, or o2ligacion ro Death, which it layeth Men under, [in lizth 
at the door, Gen.q.7 ſoalſo Ger. 20. 9. and alſo any puniſh- 
ment brought upon Men for fin, Gez. 4. 13. where we Tranſlate 
it puniſhmenr, This ſenſe our Tranſlarors follow. The Propher 
ti:enin the Perſon of the Fews, checks himſelf in his complaints 
for their Puniſhmentcs from the conſideration, that nothing had 
befallen them, but whar was the ja{t reward of their (ins, 


49 Let us ſearch and try our ways, aad turn again 
to the LORD -. 


x Seeing God doth nor grieve us willingly, nor delight to cruſh 
us though we be his Priſoners, and ſeeing the Hand of God is 1n 
theſe things upon us,and that juſtly ro recomperice our Jniquicies 
1070 our Boſoms, inſtead of murmuring and fretting againſt God 
which is not reaſonable, nor will be of any profit rous, {et us ex- 
amine our Thoughts, Words and Actions, and conſider what tey 
have been,and reform, and turn again to the Lordzby apoſtatizing 
from whom we have brought theſe evils upon us. 


when he ſaw the Judgmenc was come he wept plentifiilly and con- 
{tantly,as for their fins which had broughe theſe Judgmenrs upon 
them, ſo for the Judgments themſelves, as Indications of God's 
Diſpleaſure and. Wrath againſt chem for their Tranſgreflions, 

50 Till the LORD look down, and behold from 
heaven h. | 

h That 15, until the Lord ſheweth me ſome favour. See the 
Nores on Chap. 1. Ver. 9g. : 


51 Mine eyeaffeQeth mine heart, || becauſe of + Heb, my 


Chap: 


all thedaughters of my city &. jor! 


k The Eye and Ear, are thoſe Organs of the Body, by which [| Or, more | 


the Soul exerciſerh irs Senſes to bring 1n all Objeas whether plea- 123 a?, 


ſanr or fad to the underſtanding to judge of them,according co the 
judgment of which upon them it is afteRed with Joy or Sorrow, 
Defire or Averſacion, ec and the Eye is the chiefeſt of theſe He- 
cauſe irs Evidence ts more certain,and leſs tubjecs ro deceit. The 
Propher, and moft of the J-ws, were Eye-witneſs of rhe Evils 
which had befallen the J-ws and which at preſent were upon them 
ſo as their Hearts were the more afteRed, The word Traſlated af- 
feft, 15 by ſome noted ro ſignifie ro waſte and conſume, which are 
the effe&s of a deep affecting the Heart with fad and miſcrale 
Objeas. þ Our Margent tells us, that it may be alſo read more than 
all the Daughters of my City ;, according to which, rhe lenſe is, Thar 
he was more affected with the Stace of Jeruſalem, than rhe ten- 
dereſt Woman that had lived in it ; bur 115 as well if nor berter 
in this place render'd cauſally ; ſhewing the reaſon of his deep 
affliction, viz all choſe Miſeries he had ſcen fa!l upoa all che [e:rih 
Nation, or upon all the Inhabirants of ]eraſzlem. | | 


52 Mine enemies chaſed me ſore like a bird, 
* without caule /. 


53 They have cut off my life in the dungeon; and 
cait a {cone upon rae 77. » 

1 Dungeon (ſeemerh nor to be here taken literally for the loweſt 
and nattieit place in Priſons, which probably was the portion but of 
4 few of the Jews 3 but metaphorically for the loweſt and ſaddett 
condition of Miſery, Their Enemies had broughe them inro the 
deepeft Miſerics to the curring oft their Lives, arid as Men uſe ro 
roll great Stones upon the Mouths of Dens and Pitz where rney 
have ſhut up Perſons, romake chem fure from cfcapmg our, io 


41 Let us lift up our heart with or hands uato 


God in the heavens y. 

y Ler us apply our ſelves unto God by Prayer, often expreſſed 
under this Notion in Scripture from that geſture ordinarily uſed 1n 
Prayer : and let us nor doit in Hypocrifie, but joyning our Hearts 
with our Hands, praying ſeriouſly and fervently. 

42 We have tranſgreſſed and have rebelled, thou 
haſt not pardoned =. 

q The Prophet doth not diftare words, but ſenſe to them 3 
teaching them the marrer of their Prayer firſt by way of Confe//i- 
01. Sin 15 called a Tranſgreſſion, becauſe it is going afide from the 
way of God's Preceprs 3 it is called Rebellion, becaule it is an aR 
contrary to that Allegiance and Duty, which we owe unto God, 
and che Covenant we have made with him. By pardoning here 1s 
meant, the diſcharge of the guilty Perſons from the temporal pu- 
nifſhoment due for fin; (as it 15 often takenin Scripture) ſo irfigni- 
fiesz Thou hat plagued us according to the juſt deſert of our fins. 

4-3 Thou haſt covered with anger a, and perſecu- 


ted us ; * thou haſt ſlaia, thou haſt nor pitied b. 

2 Either thou haſt covered thy ſelf with anger, or covered thy 
own Face with anger,ſo as not to look upon us to move thy City 
or (which1s more probably the ſenſe) thou haſt covered, that 15, 
overw''/med us with thy Wrath. 6b Thou haſt purſued us to a 
fata! ruine, withour ſhewing us any pity, 


44 Thou haſt covered thy ſelf with a cloud, that 


our prayer ſhould not paſs through e. 
c God had covered them with Wrath,overwhelming them with 
Aftiictions, fo as they had no way to eſcape ! and whereas in this 
diſtreſs they had nothing elſe ro do,bur only to apply themſelves 
ro God, he had hid his Face from them, ſo as they could ger no 
comfortable fight of him;he was as one covered with a Cloud thar 
could not be diſcerned through that opacious Body. What is meant 
by rhis Cloud, whether, his fixed reſolution to puniſh them, or 
his freſh remembrance of their fins,or his juſt Will ro be revenged 
on them, ſeems roo curiouſly inquired, The Phraſe is a Metaphor 
and ſignifies no more than that God would not hear their Prayers 


their Enemies had dealt with thera, doing what lay in tem ro 
| make their Condition remedileſ; ard dciperate, 


54 * Warers flowed over mine head , ez * 1+ pai. 69. 
2.8 124, 


'faid, I am cut offs. 


* Plal 44, 


| As Boys beat a Bird from Buſh to Buſh, ſuffering it to reſt no 19 &X 55. 
where, {9 mine Enemies to whom I gave no cauſe purſued me, 4-£109.3: 


S119» 
15 


x AMficions ofren in Scriprure are called Water, 14. 25. 17,18. 4+ 5+ 


andg9. 19. o Thats, I am utterly undone, there 1s ao itope for 
m 


2?. 
the low dungeon p | 22. Iſa, 3" 
pThat 1s, our of my deepeſt affligtion; as Forah our of the © 114! 


© ; 
55 © *I called upon thy name, OLORD ; vat of * prat 


belly of Hell, Fonab 2.2, I cried unto God, and called upon him 139 77” 


for mercy. 

56 Thou haſtheard my voice q, hide not thine ear 
at my breathing, at my cry r. 
q lin former great Afﬀflicions applied my ſelf unto thee, and 
chon didſt hear me. r Shew me now the {zme favour. Our for- 
mer experiences of God's goodneſs to us in hearing our Prayers 
ought to hold up our hands 1n prayer,and beget a confidence in 
us that we perfiiting in out Duty, ſhall find God the ſame God; 
yeſterday, this day, and for ever. 

57 Thou dreweſt near in the day rar I called up- 
on thee 5: thou ſaidir, Fear not 7. | 

s There wasa time when I was 1h diſtreſs, and called apon thee 
and thou didft draw near unto me. God 15 never far off from any 
of us, as to his eſſential preſence , nor 1s it poſſible that he ſhould 
for he filleth al} places, Bur he 1s ſaid to be near us gr tar oft from 
us, as he manifeits or doth not caanifeft 1s goodnels ro us by acts 
of gracious Providence ; of that drawing near the Text (peakect, 
God being infimce in goodnels and imercy, is 1poken of us ab- 
ſent from thoſe Perfons and places, whcre he 15 nor ſhewing mercy 
and preſent only there where he fhewerh forth his godnets,and ig 
be draw]ng. nigh to them ro whom he beginnerh to ſhew Mercy. 
t Thou diditincourage me for.nerly upon my prayer. 

58 O LORD, thou haſt pleaded the cauſes of my 
ſoul » ; thou haſt redeemed my life w. 


in their diftreſs, 
. _ 45 Thou haſt made us «the * off-ſcouring and re- 
fuſe in the midft of the people 4. 

_ AThar is, Thou haſt made us to all Nations extreamly contemp- 
tible,(o as they value us no more than the Sweepings of their hou- 
les, or the moſt vile,refuſe,and contemprible things imaginable. 

46 * All our enemies have opened their mouths 
againſt us e. 
e That 1s, to mock, ſcoff, and reproach us. 


14.24 47 *Fearanda ſnare iscome upon us; deſolation 
MF... and deſtruction f, 
, 4%43- f All manner of miſery was come upon them. They were (ciz- 
= ed firſt with fea's and terrors ; going to eſcape theſe they fell into 
8 a Snare, or ( a5 1t i5in the Heb.) into a Pit, out of which they 
: 0 could norger ; they were waſted, made deſolate and deſtroyed. 
+7 Jerg.ng 


tc 14, 19, 


Fe 
Ah 
wes, 


4 Thou haft been wont to take my part againſt my Enemies, 
not like a Lawyer by word of mouth, bur aQualiy and really 
| pleading my cauſe. w Thou haſt ſaved me from many a danger 
which looked fatally upon me. 2 

59 O LORD, thou haſt ſeen my wrong  z judge 
thou my cauſe y. 

x Thou haſt a perſe& knowledge of Mens perverſe, and un - 
\ righteous dealings with me ac this time. y Do thou judge berwixr 
me and mine Enemies, and deal with them according t wnat 
ſha/l appear jnit to thee, 

60 Thou haſt feen all their vengeance z, ad all 
their imaginations againit me 4. 

4; Thou haſt heena witneſs ro all their far; and rage, 4 And 
all their malicious and bloody contrivaiices agatinfe me, 


61 Thou haſt heard their 1eprcwii, O LORD? 


43 * Mineeyerunneth down with rivers of water, | 44 all their IMAgHAaTIONS 2galilc NiC b. 


tor the deſtruction of the daughter of my people. 


þ What 


- » — = - _— =_ __— _, w_— - —_——_—_—__ ey - VA - &) — a2 v " - 
0» —H - . ve 2 6 _ OTE ” * o_ 
——_ : "ET - - _ k: . nr 4 _ _ © : : _ * -— v3 6" 4 — Q 20 cy 
, E -> re FIFW>" >" s '* te gan " IC Rt us: - i ; , yy era © 71. \ -- Bm: _— G . ; bays: 7 
4 __ Pp: "I : 4 PIR _ "_—_ 2 - - . FP  . _— a——_ on MO: - Pg oe Cog oy : mY p ow 
5 - #S- + - "0 A . = 46S & 7 Y I a 8 - - «x2 Ig - _— 4 v X K 
Sa Ser. 4 $ — $2 F . , - v ſo: ba FR ” $6 J—_ 9: 
- "0 « ws = - ” 1: Z#. og Fs 10 ” df tt | -o_” «44; "PA p40 by % * - as at obs; > . 2077 _ 
Pp — » ” OT 5 I 4 "5 Leh as 9+ - by ab - 
FS Fg w —_— # k. * 4, 4 4g * Ayes a—_ % 
© PE 1 p > a ”— = 14 q C2 = NB —- "_— » * tA AX 
As. __ Wy : l . 6. "Y es : FO IP FORE © © » 8 7 « 
=—_ : — £4 SIE » : 
3 Tow NS on _ _ i $1 4 gr”; v y + > ch ” 4 
- - ” \ 


7 > Gong 
ue F . LAT 
+ << * he © ooh 
ON we q 


Oo re run ET On 
nie thts <<. nv aeee © 


_ 


D 


Chap. IV. 


b Whatever knowledge Men get of things done from their Eye | 
or Far, thou haſt from thy cmniſciency, thou knoweſt not only 
their malicious sEtions, but words and thoughts. | 

62 The lips of thoſe that roſe up againſt me and 


their device againſt me all the day c. 
c That is, thou haſt obſerved and noted the motions, or pro- 
ducts of my Enemies lips, and their ſecret devices, before they 
* Ver. 1 4. ame out of their lips. : : 
#2. **. 63 Behold their ſitting down, and riſing up, *I 


am their mulick 4. 

d That is.at all times when they fit down, and riſe up I am their 

Song. Though probably the words have a ſpecial reterence torheir 

fitting down at Feaſts, and at their merry Meetings, I am all the 

ſubject of their diſcourſe ; they ſpend their time in mocking and 

{coffing at us and at Jeruſalem, Weare they that make them ſporr. 
+Pf.28.4. 64 *Renderuntothem a recompenſe, O LORD, 


according to the work of their hands e. : 

e Theſe three laſt Verſes are all but the ſame general petition, 
though expreſſed in various Phraſes. The Propher had prayed, 
wer. 59. that God would judge his peoples cauſe, here he prayeth 
that he would alſo judge his Enemies ; he only defireth juſtice 
againſt them, a recompence of the work of cheir hands. 

Or, obti- 655 Give them || ſorrow of heart f, thy curſe unto 

727 of them. 

mm f The word tranſlated ſorrow of heart is found no where elſe iD 
Holy Writ, which makes a certain, particular explication of it to 
be difficult, and hath given Interpreters a ſtrange liberty in tran 
Nating it, field, ſorrow, and gri?f, obſtinacy or hardneſs of heart, 
perMl-xity, abjefAion or breaking of heart ; the beſt guides we have 
to direct us in the fence of it are, I. The other things joyned with it , 
perſecuriom, deſtrufion, a recompenſe according to thejr works, 
fo that ſome aflictive evil of an heavy nature is certainly ſignified 
by it, 2. The Analegy of Faith which reſtraiceth us trom wiſh. 
ing or praying for ſpiritual or eternal evils againſt our worſt Ene 


'The Lamentations of 5 E RE MIA H. 


Owls are intended, which for want of Vear cat 1Þ tHeir Yeurg > EO 
Ones, as the Jewiſh Wemen new did, See Ter. 16, 

4 The toneue of the ſucking child cleaveth to the be: 
roof of his mouth for thirſt: the young children ack #4 
bread, and no man breaketh it unto tkem h. 4 

h Asthe fatr.els of the Mothers Mj)Jk rakes it inſtead of Bread 
and Fleſh to the ſucking Ch:1d, io the moiſture of jt wakes it to 
be as Drink to allay its keat, the Chijdten wanting this mciſture 
their Mouths were hot and dry. It was a time of Famine, the 
little Children underſtanding not the cale of the City, were im- 
portunate for ſomething to cat, but none had evough for himſelf, 
much Jeſs tor others. See Chap. 2.12, 13. 


5 They that did feed delicately are deſolate in the 


ſtreets : they that were brought up in ſcarlet, embrace [ 

the dunghills z. 6 
z This Judgment reached not only to the common People, bnt FED 

to Perſons of the higheſt Rank and Order, whoſe miſery was now bg 


lo much the greater, becauſe ſo contrary to their former ſplendid 
ta:eand way of living. They were wont to fare deliciouſly now 7-2; Rue 
they wanted bread to eat, and were deſolate in the Streets. They Thy gh 


mies ; therefore probably fignifies, ſuch perplexity, and breakings 
of mind as commonly attend a ſtate of great affliction. 

66 Perſecute them and deſtroy them in anger from 

* Pal. 8.3.under * the Heavens of the LORD g. 

g Bring them to a remporal r:i11e and deſtruction. How far 
ſuch Petitions are lawful we have berore ſhewed, 1n our Notes on 
Pſal. 69. 22,23.24, &c. and 109. 6,7, 8, 9, 10, &c. Fer. 11. 20. 
& 15.15. See alſo Chap. r. 22. It is hard tointerpret ail paſſages 
of this nature which we meet with as Prophecies, though ſome of 
them are ſo, and others may be both Prophecies and Prayers. 


CHAP. IV. 


Zion bewaileth her Miſery : Confeſſeth her Sins, 1, —— 6. Mz- 
ſeries of the Chief ones : Women who killed and dreſſe1 their 
own Children, 7, — 12. The Sin of the falſe Prophets and 
Prieſts : Their vain hopes, 13, —— 19. Tyeir King taken Pri- 
foner, 20. Edom 7s threained: And Zion comforted, 21, 


m— = 


1 Þ TOW isthe gold become dim ! how is the moſt 
fine gold changed a ! the ſtones of the ſan- 


GHuary arc poured our, ia the top of every ſtreet 6. 

a Though tome take Gold here metaphorically as ſignifying the 
mo precious things, yet the molt and beſt Interpreters take it in 
its native ſen!e, for the Gold which adorned the Temple, either 
in its cieling or in its veſſels. The houſe of the Lord being burnt 
by Nebuzaradan, Jer. 52. 13. the Gold in and about the T2mple 
mu ſt needs be diſcoloured. How! is here a note of ada iration. 
Þ That is, are tumbled down and ſcattered in the head of every 
Street about the City. 

2 The pfecious ſons of Zion c, comparable to fine 
gold, how are they eſteemed as earthen pitchers, the 
work of the hands of the potter 4. 

© Either the Nobles and Great Men, or the Prieſts, or the good 
Men amongſt the Jews 4,that tor their intrinſick worth,and value 
may be compared to Gold, are lookt upon no better than earthen 
Veſſels, che workmanſhip of an ordinary Potter, God carrying 
Feremiah down tothe Potters houſe, Fer. 18. 2. and 19. 1. had 
raught them that they were no more in his hand ; he now proveth 
it by his Providence, they were indeed made fo, and as miferably 
and irzeparably broken in pieces. 


|; Or, Se4- 3 Eventhe || ſea monſters draw out the breaſt,they 
Calves. S . . 
give ſuck to their young ones : the daughter of my 
people :5 become cruel f, like the oftriches in the wil- 
dernels g. 


» The learned Author of our Engliſh Anontatiors, well obſery- | 


eth that whatever Creature is here intended by the word Tranſla- 
ted Sca-monſters, yet our Tranſlation 1s not proper, the Text 
ſpeaking of Creatures of God's making, Monſters, properly ſigni- 
fying ſuch as have ſomething beyond their natural bulk and pro- 
portion, What Creatures are ſignified by the Hebrew term, whe- 
ther Sea-Calves, or Dragons, or Serpents, or Whales, 1s very hard to 
ſay, the Hebrew word ſignifying ſome Creatures, occurring fo 
rarely as it is not eaſfie to determine the Species, from the word 
uſed to expreſs it. He certainly ſpeaks of ſome brute Beaſts, and 
thoſe that are moſt ſavage, he faith there are none ſuch but by a 
natural inſtin& feed and nouriſh their young ones. / But the 
Fewiſh Women were become cruel to their Children, either forced 
to appear ſo, having through the Famine no Milk to give them, 
nor any thing to relieve them? or were indeed fo, killing them to 
make food for themſelves, as Chap. 2.20. g Like Oftriches that 
lay their Eggs, and leave them in the Sand, and are hardved ag inf 
heir young wnes, ( as Fob 39. 14, 15, 16.) Some think a kind of 


were wont to eat upon Scarlet Carpets, or to lodge upon Scarlet BY. 
Beds and Couches, now they ſearcht for their Meat upon, or were " 
glad to ]Jye.vupon Durghills. | : 

6 For the || purziſhment of the iniquity of the daugh- || Or, #*. RE 
ter of my people, is greater than the puniſhment of For i 
the ſin of S:2dom, thar was * overthrown as in a mo- 5 
ment, and no hands ſtayed on her &. Ib 

k The word Tranſlated Puniſhmert, ſignifies alſo Iniquity ( as 7 1 
was ſaid in the Notes on Chap. 3. Ver. 39.) The fins of the Fews are q E - 
compared to the fins of Sodom, Iſa. 3- 9. Exek. 16. 46, 48, 49. E474 Or, ; 
Hence tneir Rulers are called Rulers of Sodom, Tſa. 1. 10. either LE TI 
their ſins were ſpecifically the ſame ( as they were ) as to many P 11 n 
fins, Exek. 16. 49. or they were of an equal magnitude, and pro- EIB rouc; 
vocative Nature. The Prophet here complains, That they were BE: 2 
puniſhed like Sodom, Amos 4. 11. yea, ard their puniſhment was = Oo 


greater, becauſe more lingring, and gravval, whereas Sodom was 

overthrown in a moment, and that by nohumane kands that abode 

upon her, cauſing her a continued torment, as there did upon the "2 

Fews. David aid, It is better to fall into the immediate hand Wo” 

of God, than into the hands of Men. (7,5 
7 Her Nazarites / were purer than ſnow, they 

were whiter than milk, they 'were more ruddy in To 


body than rubies, their poliſhing was of ſapphire n:. 
| By Naxzarites in this place the moſt and beſt Interpreters do 
not underſtand Perſons who were of the Religious Order of Na- 
42rites, (the Laws of which Order are to be read, Numb.6.2. and 
of whom we read Amos 2.11, 12. for here isa Beauty deſcribed 
(under ſeveral Meraphors ) which could never agree tothem; ) but 
Perſons that were nobly and ingenuouſly bred. The word Nezer 
l1gnifying a Crown, or Enſign of Honour, 2 Sam. 1.10. 2 Kings 
II, 12. the Name Natarite was given to Perſons ſplendid tor 
their Breeding, and Education, or Honour and Dignity. It is given 
to Foſeph, Gen. 49. 26. we Tranſlate it ſeparate from hjs Bre- 
thren, Deut. 33. 16. ſo Nabum 3. 17. Her Naxarites in this 
place ({iznifieth her ſeparated ones, who either in reſpect of Birth, 
Education, Eſtate, Places of Magiftracy or the like, were diſtia- 
guiſhed trom the reſt of the People. » He expreſſeth their fermer oP 
{plendid Eſtate by the Metaphors of Snow, Milk, Rubies, and CEE 
Sapphirec, ER : + Heb. Y 
8 Their viſage 1s Þ blacker thana coal»: they are j,,, "m # 
not known1n the ſtreets 9 : their skincleaveth to their btackre:.. 
bones : IT 1s withered, it is hecome like a ſtick p. we, 
# They that inthe protperity of the City were fair, plump and * OE 
ruddy, look now black for want of fit nouriſhment, and through 
lorrowan1 grief. oInfomuci1 that thole who before knew them 
by their Countenances, Garbs, and Habits, did not now know 
them. p Andby reaſon of the Famine, (tor he ſpeaketh wich re- 
lation to the Famine during the Siege ) they are almoſt ſtarved, 
their Skin is withered, and hard, and even fticketh ro their Bones. 
9 They that beſlain with the ſword, are better than | 
they that are ſlain with hunger q: for theſe Þ pine a- f Heb- 
way, ſtricken through for waze of the fruits of the #97 ® 


field r. 

q During the Siege many were killed by the Enemies ſword : 
Many mote periſhed by Famine, the Prophet ſaith the condition 
of thoſe who periſhed by the Sword was much better than the con- Cn 
dition of thoſe who periſhed by Famine,becauſe they hada quicker WS +: X« 
Death, and were ſooner diſpatched and pur out of their pain, WE. ct 
whereas r they who periſhed by Hunger, dyeda miſerable lingring 
Death, gradually pining away, becauſe they wanted Corn and 
Herbs, the Fruits of the Field, to uphold their Souls in Life. 

10 * The hands of the pitiful women have ſodden * Chup.! 
their own children, they were their meat in the de- 20: 
{rruction of the daughter of my people/. 

{ This was according to what God had threatned in caſe of diſo- 
bedience, Deut. 28.57. and a thing which hath often happened 
in Sleges, 2 Kings 6. 29. Such things did happen in the laſt deftru- 

Etion of Feruſalem, as we read in Foſephus, and though we read 
of no ſuch thing happening in the Siege of jt by Nebuchadnexrgar, 
= that there were ſome luch ſad {inſtances appears from this 

ext. be 
11 The LORD hath accompliſhed his fury, he +, "oy 
hath poured out his fierce anger, and hath kindled a VA 


©} Or, ye 
or RE 4 
i pollute 4. 


5% 
MES 
: Aa 


fire in Zion, and ir hath devoured the foundations TE. 
thereof r. | 
7 An unuſual fire, which burns up not only the Roof, and 


ſuperſtructure bur rhe foundations, leaving no. bottom tor hopes! "oY 
ot being reſtored. See Deut. 32. 22. 12 The 


ihe Lamentaiions of F ER E-MI A H, 


| 


Chap. V. 


preſſion) we could no where be (fe, if we ſorght refuge in the 

. o _ » 1 . Py__ by . - . 
Mountatns they followed us thither, if we fled from chem into 
the Wilderneſs, they laid wait for us there, 


Chap. IV. 
; "3 12 The Kings ofthe Earth, and all the Inhabitants 


of the World would nor have believed, that the ad- 


my ſhould have entred into the oy hs ; . 
hoot. "an pas 1110 G 20 The breath of our noſtrils, the anointed of 
gates O eru a 2 Fe 4 - [f e X* vy- STAKe , Th TRICE 5 ans _ : Pa 
Nh F.rulalem was lo naturaily and artificially fortified, and ſo Gi —_ ys MaKen In thei: Pits /, of whom we* ſer.e2-8. 
favoured by God, and taken notice of as a place which the Lord aid, Uncer his ſhadow we {hall live amonglt the 
cared tor, and watched over, that ir could not have entred into heathen s . | 
the thoughts of any of thoſe that were Enemtes to 1t, tha: they! f Thar he calls ſome Prince herethe breath of their noftrils.thie 
ſhould ever have been able to maxe themſelves Maiters of " - bo their Life, Gen, 2. 7+ 1s out ot doubt, ani though ſome of the 
13 T For the lins of her prophets, and the 1n1- bet woul: aye of EOS Frey {o contiderert; 
Sh 7 eſts that have ſhed the blood of the tnat ne Was not rtaxen Duct Hain, anc hat n0t dy the Chalde an, bus 
qu1LICS of _— _ ho d 'by the Egyptions 23 years before the City was taken,will tee reaſon 
juſt IN the MIC Ol . , J {£0 conc'ude that he meanech Zedekiab, who though a bad man yer 
w Nor for their nsaione who atk: the falſe Prophets, and Bi" j 1a 4 K ng, and of David's line, and afforded ſome protedtion to 
al's Prieſts, bur for their fins in an eminent degree, they were "OE tha Jews. g We promiled our felves that though the Land of Zu- 
Ringleaders, either encouraging the People ro the wickedneffes | 1, was encompaſſed wich Pagan Nations, yet through Zedckizh's 
chey committed, or not reſt:aining big and — the y.iour and good conduR in Governmen: we ſhould live comtorra- 
Wrath of God againſt rnem. So paving they were t "= Corrupt bly .he verg a covering and refreſhing to us,but faith the Prophet, 
Magiſtrates that ha1 ſh2d che DN Blood, yetthe = ww and he alſo is talen into Enemies hands. 
{|:v of it, eit! 0] ing the Magiltra-es NEE 
RE ere ane fee farns| | 25 Rejoyce and be glad, O daughter of Edom, 
3 q & + i : ” I - ; ”” Mp , ; . - 2 ” _ 
the Children that were burnt in the Valley of Hinnem. The Eccle- that dwelleſt in the land of Uz b, * the cup alſo ſhall * Je -2.Fs 
faſtical Men were a grea: caute of the firſt and laſt deſtruRtion of! paſs through unto thee 7: thou ſhalt be drunken and 75> 16, 24- 
Feruſalem, and ſo they are of molt other places tht come to rune ſhalt make thy {elf naked k. 
through their negleCt of their Daty, or eacouraging others in their] þ The Edomires were deſcended from Ez the Elder Brother 


wicked courſes, which both ſhe weth us how great a Bleſling to 
a People, a godly, conſcientious Min (try is: And how great a 
Plague and Curſe a Miniltry is which is otherwite. See Jer45. 37. 


of Jacob, and dweiled in a part of Arabia, that obtained the 
Name of +, probably from Xx the Son of Diſhan, who de- 
icended from Seir, Gen. 36. 20, 28. they our of their od hatred 


to the Fews rejoyced at their ruine,as we learn from the Prophecy 
of 004474, who upon this account was fent to Propheſie againſt 
them, the Prophet here ironically faith, R-joyce in the lame lenſe as 
Eccleſ. 11. 9. Solomon bids the young Manrej-yce, bur their joy 
ſhould be but for a little time. ; For God was dea'ing out the Cup 
of his Fury to more than the Fewiſh Nari>n, and amongſt others 
to the Elomites. k And they ſhould be filled, and intoxicated 
with it, and m22he themſelves naked as drunken Men ſometimes do 


* and 23. 2r. : ; 
14 They have wandred as blind m7 in the ſtreets, 


Or, i# they have polluted themſelves with blood, {| {0 that j 


Sy bat they men could not touch their garments 
ould not + A variety of loterpreters hath made this Text much more dif-: 
4 ouch. fioult than it is. Certainly nothing can appear more reaſonable, 
than to interpret the Pronoun in the front of the Verb relatively, 
and to fetch the antecedent from the tormer Verle. They, that is, hr wry Carte 
the Prophets and the Prieſts wandred up and down the Streets like _ ” Ti -q Ct dt ; 
blind Men, being ſpiritually blind, polluting themſelves with] ©2 ll | The pPUununment 0 thine LNQUILY 15 aC-" Iſa.40.25 
blood, either the blood of the Children which they ſlew, or the| compliſhed, O daughter of Zion &, he will no more {i Ot, :bin2 
Juſt men qqongare _— ons = ſlaughter * whom my —_— | carry Tnee 1nto captivity /: he will viſit thine 1ni- 75 a "p 
couraged, or at leaſt did not diſcourage ; ſo as one could not touc : - : i of Ot || Or, ca) 
or or a Prieſt, but he muſt be legally polluted, and there + 8k O daughter of Edom, he will diſcover LNY thee captive 
Ns B+ for thy ſans, 


- >. " «4 T 
n_ Set": - 


S228 
v5. Y 
k A : 
was > - 
"—] Is « 
*i BS Ab Xs 
AT. 
| or, ye 
+ ef Wn». 5 . 3 
*R-IF £7 ; 
"+4 
Fa 
o 


polluted, 


© Or, face. 


® Iſa. 30. 
2 ] [ &) To 


were ſo many of them, that Men could not walk 1n the Streets, but 
he muſt rouch ſome of them. Some thinking the Diſcourle of the 
Prieſts done with, interpret They of the blind Men in the City who 
could not walk up and down the Streets without touching the Bo. 
dies of ſcme that were ſlain, Others in:erpret che words of the 
common People: Who during the Stege, could no more avoid 
rouching Bodies ſlain and ſo polluticg themſelves with blood,then 
blind men could,lo asthey abhorred to touch their own Garments. 
The firſt ſenſe to me ſeemeth moſt natural and eafie, 


15 They cricd unto them, Depart ye || , zt /- un- 
clean, depart, depart, touch not when they fled a- 
way and wandred y: they ſaid amongſt the heathen, 


They ſhall no more ſojourn there. h 
7 The vartous application of the Pronoun They by Interpreters 
makes themas much divided in the ſenſe of this as of the tormer 
Verſe. Either the F-ws that made Conlcience of keeping tothe 
Law apainſt touching dead Bodies, cried to the other Fews to leave 
the City as themſelves did, the City being now fo tull of dead 
Bodies that they could not ſtay in ic without polluting themſelves, 
Or the Prieſts called to them to that purpoſe. Or their Enemies 
ſpake in that Language to them. # For their Enemies had reſolve 
they ſhould not ſtay at Jeruſalem. 
16 The] anger of the L.ORD hath divided them, 
he will no more tegard them 2: they reſpe&ted not 
the perſons of the prieſts, they favoured not the el- 


ders 6. 

4 Theſe words ſeem to be the Language of their Enemies tri- 
um>hing over them, as dilcerning that their God was provoked 
againſt - hoot would have no more regard or reſpe&t unto them : 
and that b they had miſuſed his Prophets which agreeth with 
2 Chyo. 36. 16. But others rather think theſe latter words (if not 
the former alſo) are the Prophets words expreflive of the cauſe of 
their miſeries, viz. The Lords anger who had divided them, &c. 
and the effect of ic. Their Enemies having no regard to the moſt 
grave and venerable Perſons amongſt them. 

17 Asforus, * our eyes as yet failed for our vain 
help : in our watching, we have watched for a na- 


tion that could not ſave us c. 

c That is, 1n expectation of the Ezyptians, whom they waited 
for to raiſe the ſiege, it was a long time before they came, and 
when they did come they could do them no ſervice at all, Fer. 37+ 

7,8 


53 7, 0. 
» Kings 18 * They hunt our ſteps that we cannot go in our 


Se 4z Fo 


ſtreets : ourend is near, our days are fulfilled, for 
our end is come 4. 

4 The Chaldeans employed in the ſiege are ſo cloſe npon u5,that 
we cannot ſtir a foot about our buſineſſes, nor look out at our 
Doors, not walk ſately in the Streets ; we are ruined, there is an 
end of Civil State ; our period is come, and the time of our pro- 
ſperity is elapſed. 

'19 Our perſecutors are * ſwifter than the eagles 
of the heaven, they purſued us npon the mountains, 
they laid wait for us in the wilderneſs c. 

. e Our Enemies who purſued us to deſtroy us were very ſwitt 
inthelr purſuic oft us, (5 [wiſe as an Eagle, 4s a proverbial Ex- 


k O Fudes thy puniſhment i paſt, but the puniſhment of Edem 
's yet to come. The Fews were to abide many Years in Captivity, 
bur they were now tuffering their laſt puniſhment from the Chal- 
deans, they were only for tome Years to continue in that ſtate of 
Captives. / After thy term of Captivi:y ſhall be expired, thou 
ſhalc not for thy old fi2s ſuffer any more puniſhment ; noc that 
cheir preſeht Captivity ſhould be all their puniſhmenc4a cate they 
went on 11 fintul courſes, (as they did in rejecting Chriſt, and cau- 
ſing hint to be crucified) tor thoſe new wickedneſſes atter many 
Years they were de{troyed by the Romans. Bur the Prophet hints, 
that there ſhould at preſent, or tor their paſt fins no more wrath 
be poured out upon them, nor would God ever detain them 1a this 
Captivity. g But for the Edomites, their puniſhment was yer 
wholly tro come, God was yet beginning to puniſh them,and would 
do it, diſcovering their fins, As the pardon of fig is in Scripture 
ſer out under the notion of covering it, P/al. 32. 1. fo the puniſh+ 
ment of fin may be expreſſed by diſcovering it, Job 20, 27, but 
the Learned Author of the Engliſh Annotations, conceiveth the 
Hebrew may be better read, He will diſcover thee for thy ſins, be- 
cauſe of the Particle oy ler before thy ns (though our Tranſl1- 
tion taketh no notice of 1t ) MH will diſcover upon thy fins, ani to 
it an{wereth, Jer. 49. Io. ( as he coficeiveth ) I have made Eſa: 
bare, I have uncovered his ſecret places, and he ſhall not be able 19 
"de himſelf, 


CHAP. V. 


An Humble Prayer, preſenting to the Lord their ereat Miſ-ry, 
I, 15. Conjeſſing their Sins, 16, — 18. Implorins 
Delzverance, 19, —— 22, 


[ Emember, O LORD, what ts come upon us : 
conlider and behold our reproach 4. 

4 It hath been betore obſerved, that ic is very frequent in Scrip- 
ture toexprels thole afts which are reaſonably contequent to tae 
exerciſe of our exterior or interior ſenſes, by terms which fienifie 
the exerciſe of thoſe lenſes. That which the Propher here prayeth 
tor, 1s God's freeing the Jews trom thoſe Calamities whicn o»- 
preſſed them, this he prayeth for under the notion of Goil's remem- 
bring them, and bzbolding their reproach. 

2 Our inheritance1s turned to ſtrangers, our hou- 


ſes to aliens b. 

b What our Fathers inherited as given them by thee, 2nd we 1s 
left to us by them, is come 1nto the hands of the Chaldeans. 

3 We are orphans and fatherleſfs, c our mothers 


are as widows d; 

c We are all of us without a King ( ho is the common Father 
of the Countrey) we are deprived of thy tathely care and pro- 
teaion, many young Children amonaſt us are Jefc wichour a1 
earthly Parent. 4 Either our great Cicies are ike Widows want- 
ing Magiſtrates. Or, our Women that were Married are lefe Wi- 

dows. 
| 4 We have drunken our water for money, our 


; WAcT® it 15 proba let! 
and 


VN 
37 oat ew” 
” p_ © _ : 


; wood Þ is ſold tous ec. R_—_ 
e This ſcemeth to refer to the State of the J-ws in Babrlon, cometh ft 
1Eir Adves faries made them buy boch Water £75ce- 


Chap. V. 


a nd Wood, which in the Land of Canazn they had plentifully and 


= Heb. en 


without any further chargeto them, than fetching the one, and 
cutting down and bringing hometo the other. 
5 + Our necks are under perſecution, we Jabour 


cur n:; 5 and have norelt f. 
we r-*perſe= f Asthe generality of Priſoners of War, are made Slaves and 


cuted. 


* Job 
39. Pia 
L119, 83. 
| Or, 
v0rs Of 
forms. 


T Has 47.6s 


put to hard and inceſſant labour, fo in probability the moſt ot the 
Fews were at firſt at leaſt. : 

6s We have given the hand to the Egyptians, and 
to the Aſlyrians, to be ſatisfied with bread 9g. 

g The ten Tribes were all carried Captives into Aſſ)ri4, many 
of the Kingdom of Fudab, as we have heard, fled into Ezypt after 
the taking of Jeruſalem. Giving tbe hand may either ſ1gnifie 
working with their hands, and labouring for them : Or, yielding 
1p themſelves totheir power,or lifting up the hands as ſupplicants 
to thei, or {triking hands and making Covenants with them, or 
lending them their hands to help them, and all to get any thing to 
live upon. 

= * Qur fathers have ſinned and are not, and we 
have born their iniquities h. 

h We muſt nor underſtand this in the ſame ſenſe, as Ezek. 18.2. 
where God refle&eth upon them for uſing a Proverb to this ſenſe. 
It is the Prophet who here ſpeaketh, and in the Name of the 
Godly Jews who would not excuſe themſelves, as it they ſuffered 
meerly for their forefathers fins. But the Prophet confeſfeth and 
bewaileth that God had puniſhed their Iniquities and the Iniqut- 
ties of their forefathers together, and it was better with their 
forefathers who had ſinned, and were dead and gone, than with 
them upon whom the puniſhment of their iniquicy did abide,and 
was like ſo to do a long time. 

3 Servants have ruled over us : : there z5 none that 
doth dcliver zz out of their hands k. 


i Either thoſe who ſometimes were our ſervants, tributary to 
us, or the Poſterity zof Cham, condemned of 01d to be Servants 


The Lamentations of F ER EM I A H. 


y Our grave Men were wont to fit and execute judgment jn 
the Gates, but now there 1s no ſuch thing. Our young Men were 
wont to play on Muſick, and to have their merry Meetings, but 
they are alſo cealcd. 


is The joy of our heart is ceaſed, our dance is 


turned into MOUrnIng 2. 

{ Eicher our rejoycing at our ſolemn Feſtivals, and Dancings 
there which were uſual as appeareth from many Scriptures. Or 
o | _ joy and Dancings as well as at other times as in our Solemn 

EITLVAIS, 


to us that we have ſinned b. Crown of 


a Or, the crown of our head is fallen, by which is not only to © 
be underſtood the cetlatjon of their Kingdom, but all their Ho. ſlice, 
nour, Splendor and Dignity, (Crown being taken in a Metapho- 
rical Notion.) b We muſt thank our ſelves for all this, this wo 
is come upon us becauſe of our fins. 


our eyes are dim c. 

c Either for our fins theſe Miſerſes are befallen us: or for theſe 
Miſertes our Spirits fail us, and we are almoſt blinded with 
weeping. 


to our forefather Sem. Gen 9. 26. Or the Servants of thoſe Ma- 
ſters whom we ſerve in Babylon. hk; And none will help us and 
give us more liberty. 

o Wegat our bread with the peril of our lives, be- 
cauſe of the ſword of the wilderneſs /. 

! The Enemies lay incamped in all the Plains, ſo as they could 


| ſtir out no way but the Sword of the Chaldeans was upon them, 


and what Victuals they gat they adyentured their Lives for du- 


ring the time of the Siege. ; 
10 Our * skin was black like an oven, becauſeof 


30. 
J the || terrible famine . 


m The want of bread cauſed leanneſs, and palenels, and 111 co- 


J > - 
T:y. ours 1n their Faces . 


11 They raviſhed the women in Zion, ard the 


maids in the eities of Judah 7. 

» Uſual Outrages of barbarous Soldiers. The Heb. 1s, They 
humbled, a modeſt term to expreſs thole actions by. 

12 Princes are hanged up by their hand w - * the 


faces of elders were not honoured. 

w Moſt probably by the Enemies hands, though ſome would 
have it by their hands intimating a more ſharp and lingring Death. 
Hanging was an ancient way 11 the Eaſtern Countries of putting 
Maletactors to death, Gen. 40.19. 

13 They took the young men to grind, and the 
children tell under the wood x. 

x Their baſe ſervile condition is exprefled by the labour they 
were put to, which was either grinding in the Mill Gan ordinary 
employment of Slaves in thoſe Countries) or carrying M1ll- 
ſtones, and the younger Children, in carrying great Burdens of 
Wood under which they fell, as being not able to ſtand under the 
E:rdens aid upon them. EE 

14 The elders have ceaſed from the gate, the 
Y0u02 men from their Mulick y. 


18 Becauſe of the mountain of Zion which is dc- 


ſolate, the foxes walk upon it 4. 

_ 4 Foxes and other wild Beaſts, which fly from places inha- 
bited for fear of Men inhabiting, and are much in deſolate places. 
The Mountain of Zjon, where the Temple once ſtood, and People 
met to worſhip God, was now a deſolate unfrequented place, fo 
as wild Beaſts ran up and down there. 


19 Thou, O LORD, * remaineſt for ever, thy * p#z!,;. 
throne from generation to generation e. and 10.16 

e Thatis, Lord though for our fins thou ſuffereſt theſe things and 29.16 
to be done unto us, and our Throne be throngh thy righteous and 102, 


power is not diminiſhed, nor thy goodneſs abated. Thou ruleſt 145: 13. 
the World, and ſhalc rule it for ever and for ever. 


20 Wherefore doſt thou forget us for ever, and 


forſake us + ſo long time f. 

f Wherefore doſt thou in the Diſpenſations of thy Providence 
carry thy ſelf as if thou hadſt forgotten us, and forſaken us, and 
that fora long time. 


21 * Turn thou us unto thee, O LORD, and we *pg.. 


ſhall be turned g : renew our days as of old h. 3, 72 12 
g See the like expreſſion Fer. 31. 18. Turn thou us unto thee 

by giving us Repentance, and then our condition will be altered, 

or receive us into thy favour, and then it ſhall be well with us. 

h Reſtore us to our former eſtate, that it way be with us as it 

hath formerly been. 


tength «| 


days. 


very wroth againſt us z. 


words ſeem to expreſs ſome diffidence in the Prophet of God's Jed % 
Mercy 1n reſtoring the People to their former flate, ſome exprel- 
ftons of which nature we find talling from the moſt eminent Ser- 
vants of God in an hour of great Temptation : But where ſuch s 
ſenſe is not neceſſary, it is hard to put it upon a Text. Some there- 
fore expound DR 'Y in this place by Buz if. Others tranſlate 
them, Although thou haſt, &c. Mr. Calvin preferreth the Tranſla- 
tion of them by Nifi, unleſs thou haſt utterly rejefed us, and thinks 
that by this expreſſion the Prophet confirmeth kimlelf againſt 
Temptations of diffidence, becauſe it was impoſſible God ſhould 
utterly caſt off his People,Rom.1 1. 2, Others read it Interrogative- 
ly, Haſt thou utterly rejefed us > Which doth not ſuppoſe that the 
Prophet believed he had, though his preſent Providence ſhewed 


him very angry with them. 


ANNOT A- 


Chap. V| 


16 + The crown is fallen from our head a: wo un- + Heb, 1, 


our head ? 


17 For this our heart is, faint, for * theſe things * Plal. 9, 


Providence thrown down ; yet thou art ſtill the fame God, thy 12427. al 


F Heb. { 


22 || But thou haſt utterly rejeted us ; thou art j| Or, Fs | 
wilt thu 


7 Qur Tranſlators have here ſo rendred the Particle that the uterly 7+ | 


=P, 


FER 
SO Þ 
H ; BTR 
- 4 A T5 
d ou £, [1, WEIS 
hb dr Fink 
Ps 


eight! 

. were 
date 
thirti: 
Other 


= thorit 
«© fifth 
= miſtak 
8 Ty, bu 
| reſchug 
unto 7 
119hte 
to Taz 


| * this Ac 


the th 
the Je 
pher; 
tainme 
e Heb. 
lineal 
found 
X tvity 
2 firg.” 
"Pp They 
ag Dar 
Tetirin 
: ruſaley 
> 5Sabbar 
1eqQuire 


ANNOTATIONS 


ON 


EZ EKIETL 


The ARGUMEN T, 


VEOP 


it Zekiel was by Deſcent a Pricſ#, and by Commiſſion a Prophet 3 and received it from Heaven, as will appear from the fir, 
ſecond, and third Chapters. He was, and had been a Captive in Babylon five years when firſt called to this Office, and 


2 rhere he met with many things that were occaſions of grief to himſelf, and occaſion of this Prophecy. For in Babylon there were 
2% many that did repine at ther ſtate, repented they had rendered themſelves, call'd into queſtion the Truth and Integrity of Jeremiah, 
* and binſelf, and were ready to do wiolence to him z and not only this, but they continued ſo to ſin, that the Name of God yas 


blaſphemed becauſe of them : And theſe things both grieved and weakned the heaws of the beſt, and hardned the worſt. To re- 


that they might A, their duties, 


dreſs theſe is Ezekiel both extraordinarily Called, Commiſſioned, Qualified and Aſſiſted in the Prophetick Office, in diſcharge «j 
which be doth reprove and calm the diſcontented, that they might return to 6 right frams of Patience and Hope. He calls the pro- 
phane and wicked 10 acknowledge Gods juſt and equal, and their own unequal ways, He direfteth the honeſt-hearted who enquire 
He encourages that handful of Godly ones among them, with many comfortable Promiſes ef p*2d 
in their own Land, and of more Grace from Heaven, and confirmeth what Jeremiah had preached, adviſed, and foretol4 irs 
Jerulalem, exactly harmonizing with him, though the one at Babylon, and the other at Jeruſalem, deſtitute of all means of 
conferring with each other, 11 all theſe particulars, he w ſometimes very plain, ſometimes ſpeaks in Riddles, in which Rind h+ 
& more frequent than any other of the Prophets, in them all deep and myſterious : to the quarrelling and froward theſe are dark, 
but to the Liumble and teachable, more ſignificant and claar. In his three firſt Chapters he opens his Commiſſion. In .the next 
ene and twenty Chapters he doth ſharply preach againſt the Sins of the Fews, which they diſlike and grow weary of, and wvislent 


2 againſt the Preacher, who for ſome time is ordered to forbear,, and leavethem to that ſevere Sermon which the King of Babylen's 
"=, Army ſhould preach to them in the deſtruction of Country, City and Temple, which ſhould opets the Eyes of ſome, -avd wound the 


heart of all the Fews. So the Prophet doth by order from the Lord preach againſt the Heathen round about, through the 25th Chapter, 
and on to the end of the 324 Chapter; after which he is ſent to preach Repentance and Pardon, with Grace and Frvuonr to 1: a6), 


zo proclaim the Mefliah's Kingdom, and ro aſſure them of the wounderful Overthrow of their Enemies, the Rebrilding the City 


"= i 


MI 

+ 
! 
” 
| 


+ -and Temple in greatneſs beyond whatever Uwas, upon the condition they became a Reformed People, aſnamed for former Sins, 
& loath themſelves, and love the Lord their God, and keep hx Ordinances : which they did not aftar their return, as # evident 
from the Complaints, Fenaces, and Reproofs which do every where ſound in the Mouths of Haggai, Zachary :»d Malachy, 


who lived after the joyful Return from Captivity, and ſaw the ſinful deportment of theſe returned Captives, | Mauch of the Pro. 


phet”s Diſcourſes in the 33d, 34th 36th, and ſo on to the end, are Typical and Myſterious, and refer to the Return, as the 


blem of our Spiritual Deliverance out of Spiritual Captivity, 


CHAP. L 


When and where EMtkiel propheſied, 1 — 3. God ſheweth him a viſion of 
four living creatures, and of four wheels, 4 —=15. The gloriors throne 
whereon the LORD appeared in the greatneſs of his glory, 16——28, 

day of the moneth, (as I was e among the 
| captives f ) by the river g Chebar þ, that 

#- the heavens z were opened &, and I ſaw / viſions 2 * of 

God ». 

a Thbis does not refer to any particular time before mentioned, tho 
ſometimes this Engliſh Particle zow connotes particular time ; Heb. is 
And, ſo the Gr. Lat. but is a Phraſe in uſe on entering upon diſcourſe. 
b Of the Propher's Age, or fromthe finding the Book of the Law in the 
eighteenth Year of Joſiah, when the Threats were read which now 
. were executed on the Jews, according to 2 Kings 22. 16. from which 

date to the fifth Year of the Captivity are thirty years; or. in the 

2 thirtieth Year of the Chaldean Monarchy, founded by Nabopollaſſay. 

-— +. Other Accounts omitted, you are left to your own Thoughts which 

"> of theſe two later are more probable, both have very weighty Au- 

>= thority for them. And indeed they both concur. and meet in the 
+ fifth Year of the Captivity, and fo either Compuration may without 

"22> miſtake be followed. c The Original hath only z» the fourth, conciſe- 

* Ty, bur 'tis certainly the Month; but whether in account from Ma- 

* reſchuan, Ofober with us, to Sebal, Janwary, or from Niſan, March, 

unto Thamuz, July, is more queſtionable ; the latter I gueſs to be the 

11ghteſt Account: ſo from N:ſan, which ts part of onr March and Apr:1, 
== to Tamuz, part of our June and July, will be the fourth Month: and 

| this Account in Church-things beſt ſatesthe Prophets deſign. &4'T'was 
the third Day of our July, probably it was the Sabbath-day, when 
the Jews would be free from labour; and at leiſure to hear the Pro- 
| pher; and indeed ſuch Declerations of the Will of God are an Enter- 

tainment ſutable to the Conſecration of the Seventh Day to God. 

e Hcb. And I, ec. Though a Prieſt and Propher, the firſt by Birth and 

lineal Deſcent, the other by extraordinary Commiſſion, yet I alſo 

found as little Reſpe& as my Country-men. flnthe midit of the Cap. 
=X Uvity, ſo the Heb. Idiom; perhaps the Propher rather uſeth rhe Ab- 

F firz& ir ſelf, than the Concrete, to expreſ* the Grievousneſs of it. 

* They wee Captive, nay Captivity rather, under extream Bondage, 

as Darkneſs for Dark. g Either there commanded to dwell, or thither 

retiring, that more freely they might lament their own Sins, and Fe- 
$2 Puſalem's Deſolation ; or what if it were to keep, as they might, their 
> vabbath,in whichrhef, piteful Baby/onians interrupt chem, and witt: Scorn 
= 7<quire them to ſing a Temple-Song, Pſal. 137. 3. h<h-4ar a Branch 

= O Zphrates, or that part which Chobar adviſed ſhoysd b: -:ade to di- 
vert the Violence of Euphrates, left it damnify the Sir Es53/ouy, Or 


+ Uo . - . bf > M 
a _ w_- new called Gizlap, ailing out of th+ Mountain Maſrs, 
py i O! : 


OW 4 it came to paſs that in the thirtieth 
yeat b, in the c fourth moneth, in the d fifth 


- | S Vide; * 
$: 


\ 


| 


Em. 


and falling into Fuphrates, ſomewhat below a City called by the ſame 
name Giu/7p or Chaboras; as Ferravinus and Hotomon obſerve. 7 The 
Firmament or lower Parts of the Celeſtial Arch either really did,or to 
appearance ſeem to divide, and the contiguous Parts withdrew as a 
Curtain, to give the Prophet a view of what was within; or were 
as folding Doors ſet open that he might look jnto that Apartment 
where this unuſual Sight was prepared. & Expreſt thus in the paſſive, 
to let us ſee that there was a ſupreme, ſovereign, and divine Power and 
Authority, by which this was done; 'tis nor faid the Heavens did 0+ 
Pen, but they were opened. Ir was no Mcreor, Chaſma, or Yawning, 
which isnaturally a figur'd Semblance of a Breach in the viſible Hea- 
vens, whence appears a Gulph, or deep and wide Pir to the eve. Tc 
was not thus, but a ſupernatura] and extraordinary Aperture or Open« 
ing, wrought by the immediate Power of God, who wasnow appear- 
ing to the Prophet, and commiſſioning him. Ir might provably be 
ſomewhat like that which appeared to the Proto-Martyr Strpher!, Af; 
7. 56. {Thad a diſtin&, full, and clear fight of what appeared, I w23 
awake, and with my Eyes diſcerned what I ſhall now write, {tc 
things I am about to publiſh, how ſtupendous ſoever thev are; whar I 
am ſure I faw, and am as ſure they will be accompliſh'd» 2 In the 
plura), either becauſe they were many diſtin& Viſiors, or becaule tt 
was made of many diſtinCt parts, each part might feem to be one Viſt- 
on. » Of God. Excellent and wounderful ; ſo by the Name of God, 
Heb, expreſs any Excellency, as Cedars of Go, Man of God, or of 
God, wherein I ſaw God who appeared to rhe Prophet, or eife of 
God, 3. e. which God did make me to ſee. Je was not a Dream of 
Man's Brain, *twas a Divine Viſion, either Corporcal or Jatellectual, 

2 [In the fifth o day of the moneth p, which was the {tic 


q year of king Jehojachins » captivity /. 

o The 4c. hach only Ffth according to its conciſe Stile, we do wei. 
to ſupply, day, as in verſe 1. p Thamnz, as vzrſe. aniwering tO our 
June and Jiily. q This Account obſerved, will guide us 11 computing 
the times this Prophet referred to wer. 1. theſe five of 7ehojacnm, and 
the eleven of hisPredeceflor added tothe fourteen of 70/72/7's Reign,atrer 
he found the Law, make up 3o years, wer. 1. which likely might be rhe 
Jubilee, the moſt fit for ſo ſolemn a Paſſover as 70/722 kept. » Who is 
alſo called Feromah, and Coniah, whoſe Father 7e-0jachim was flain by 
the Chald:ans, and he after three Months ſhort Reign, voluntarily yield- 
ed up himſelf to the Chaldees, Of which rendition of himlelfe, and 
his, we read 2 Kings 24.12, &c. / Though this Man yielded up him- 
ſelt yet the Babylenians made him Priſoner, and carried him and his 
into Captivity ; and ſo Heb. .tvers, though ſome diſtinguiſh this from 
Captivity by calling it a Tranſmigration, the Heb. calls it Cap:iwiry, 


2 The word # of the LORD # came « expreſſly un- 
to || Ezekiel y the prieſt z, the fon of Buzi a, in the 


hand 4 + of the LOR D was upon him e there, 


£ What was V: cons, Ver. 1. 15 here the word, both as lItgnifying and 


dec Ia. 


land 6b of the Chaldeans, by the river Chebar c, and the {Jeb-z1 ci, 
+ Chap. 2. 


22.037. 


Fwy 7 [ 
_— Lt RW pros one gan Fo CW 
HY nds ni. A . Ro & AI a 
52, __— Os. is Ea, ODE nn, UL, 43 oe at 2 I; - 
_ = p Mes My ITE corny = - . loam. Acamaindnms bo wr 
v + L s 2 g 


Ley” 2 - : . 226" PR 

EIT 5. A 2: Sr ent EK, 5. $i wt "ix ot ol . LY 
- RE 6 » <-> 4 " > 6+ _ c- 
ad - -A Ws - hi - 3X ___ 8 
—_— Gore , ao £X wm A — 2 ” v- "74 ACS =. - 
Id. La Ro - - ” "gc 4 ne © 7 p - 

; " _o” - aa wt X's R jo WR 

, = Pan” 4 _ — —_— 
> - -_— > 3h. (nt 


Gd en og nh 
a. 


—— 9-4 
> 
"al C2er 
5 Fs S BY 
me . : 
2. 


declaring the Mind of God what he would do, and as containing his 
Commands to Ezekiel! and to the People, to whom theſe Viſions ſpake 
by figns. « Leſt the Prophet ſhould want his Warrant, or the Jews 
except to his Advice ; it 1s plainly told them that Jehovah the Sove- 
reign Lord and Eternal God by Ezekiel counſels, warns, commands 
and threatens. z Empharically tranſlated as 'tis emphatically expreſft 


+ H<b. 


in Heb. Bring with him 'twas with him, ſo long he might diſcern, fo 
clear he might underſtand, fo near he could not be deceived, or eafily 
forget what he was to tell them. y Ezckzel ſignifies either the Strength 


of God, or ſtrengthened by God, and in a few Syllablescontains what 1s 


more largely ſet forth, Ch. 3. ver. 8, 9g. He ſpeaks ofhimfelfin athird 
Perſon. z Who therefore ſhall be regarded as one whoſe Intereſt 
among the Prieſts at Jeruſalem would be beſt promoted, if better things 
might be hoped and ſhortly expeQed, than he muſt now tell them ; 
it was likely he dealt truly with them, when he mult ſhare fo much 
in the {ad things forerold. He was of the Prieſts originally, he was a 
Prophet by extraordinary call. a Of a contemned Man, ſo the Ety- 
mology of the H:5. which gave the Rabbies occaſion to apply it to Fere- 
miah, and to account the Prophet either Son or Servant to Jeremiah. 
But 'tis a proper Name. 6 Enemiesto, and now Maſters of poor cap- 


EZEKIEL 


ence; or theuniverſal Dominion of God, and the univerſal Subje&ion 
of the Creatures, a Some would have this not literally underflogd 


Cauſe for it; but as theſe living Creatures had Wings, ſo they hag 
Faces, and what thoſe were the roth werſe does tell us. 5 If "twers 
every Face had four Wings, each living Creature would have ſixteen 
Wings, but *tis every one of the living Creatutes had four Wings. 
e With two they did fly, noting the Speed of their Obedience; and 
with two they cover their Body, denoting the Reverence of their 
Mind and Obedience. 


7 And their feet d 2vere + ſtraight e feet, and the ſole ft 
of their feet as like the ſole of a calves g 
ſparkled h like the colour of burniſhed braſs. 
4 Heb. expreſſeth the Parts below the Belly by Foot, their Thighs 
Legs, and Feet (as by Hand is meant the whole Arm) were of Hu. 
mane Shape. e Not bowing to this or that part, which argues weak. 
neſs; here is moſt elegantly deſcribed the unconquered Firmneſ 
wherewith Angels do the Commands of God: Their Readineſs and 


their Wiſdom in doing ir, nothing low or brutiſh in their Ations, 


tiv'd Jews, Church of God ; their God makes him a Prophet, who|f That which is properly the Foor. g Divided Hoof ſpake the Clean. 


was an ordinary Prieſt in the Land of 7/-az/. c "Cho" a River of Me- 
ſopotamia, yer here ſeems placed in Chaldes, becauſe Meſopotamia was 
part of the Kingdom of the Chaldeans ; fo Chebar, or Chobar, was in the 
Land, z. z. within the Kingdom of Chaldea, but particularly in Meſs. 
potamia a Province of that Kingdom. & The Divine Impulſe moving 
with Power and Efficacy on Ezekze! for the Work, and clearly con- 
firming and demonſtrating in the Captive Jews, that he was the Pro- 
phet of the Lord, and ſpake to them in his Name; «he Spirit of Pro- 
phecy, as the Ch. Par, c God is not confined ; tho' moſt Prophets were 
in the Land of 1jrac!, yet here in Chaldea allo appears a great Prophet, 
and ſhould be hearkned unto. 


4 TT And I looked f, and behold s, a whirlwind 4 


came 2 out of the north &, a great cloud /, anda fire m7 
info!ding - it felf, and a brightneſs » was about it, and 


"I 7, out of the midit thereof o as the colour p of amber 9, 
fetf 


out of the midſt of the fire 7. 


neſs of the Creature, The Ox patient of Labour, a Beaſt for Sacti. 
fice to God, in theſe things Angels Servants of God well reſembled ; 
whatif we ſhould add a Slowneſs in pace ? Blefſed Angels are not over 
forward to Executions, yet ever go when bid. 4. It may refer to ei. 
ther the living Creatures, or to their Feet ; it ſpeaks either their Anger 
againſt an obſtinate ſinful People, or the Terror of executing God's 


Judgments, or the ſelf-diſcovering Light of his Juſtice, or the Zeal of 


Angels 1n a ſpeedy performing the Will of God, in which theic Swi. 
neſs enkindles theſe Sparks. 


I did very diligently ſurvey the thirrgs that were repreſented to me 


in the Viſicm. & This callsus to conſider what he had ſeen and repre- 
b A mighry, ſtormy, and turbulent Wind, a Wind that 
bears away, or bears down all before it; this denotes the Indignation 
and Judgments of God, a quick, impetuous and irreſiſtable Ven- 
Moſt grievous Judgments, repreſented as here, fo 1 Kings 


ſented to us. 


eance 
A 11. Job 38.1. Pſal. 104.4. 7 Came as if it knew its way, and 
notwirhſtanding its Impertuouſneſs and Irregularities, yet held itsdire& 
courſe. k From Baby/on, which in Scripture Geography islaid North- 
ward from 7udear; and the Prophet tho' now in Babylon, does ſpeak 
of the Jews, as if they were in Jerzſalem. 1 Againſt which this Cloud, 
on which an angry God did ride, haſtning Vengeance on them, 
which they ſhould be as little able to divert or withſtand, as to ſtop 
the Courſe of the Clouds, or their breaking wpon us; it was the Ar. 
my of the Chaleans made up of multitudes of People (as the Cloud 
is made by the concourſe of multirudes of Exhaiations and Vapours ) 
Jer. 4.13. » Burning ina dreadful manner, very fierce, fed by Fue] 
within it ſelf, breaking outand flaſhing with terror, tho' it had ſeem- 
ed to rebate, andencircling all things near it, and threatning to devour 
all. Such was. the Anger of God againſt this ſinful Nation. » Tho' 
thus terrible, yet round about it was not Smoak and Darkneſs, but a 
clear Light or Splendor. The Majeſty, Holineſs, Juſtice of God ap. 
peared to the Propher, and migbr be ſeen by the ſuffering Jews to 
humble them, that they might ſeek him. o Either of the Whirlwind 
or Cloud, or the Fire rather, as in the end of the Verſe. _ Þ Heb. As 
the Eye, the Aſpe&, or Appearance. 4 The Hb. word is variouſly 
interpreted. and 'tis loſt labour to ſearch the Rabbins here. Amber 15 
either Natural, which if in the Fire Joſeth its Brightneſs, or Artificial, 
made of Gold and fine Braſs mixt, which will brighten in the Fire, and 
of equal value with Gold (as the D D. Bochart obſerves ) of which 7a. 
ſepbus faith Solomon did make the Sea of Braſs, and the facred Veſſels; 
ſomewhat like the Corinthian Braſs, known now only by its name, ex. 
ceeding ſplendid, and very hard: the one ſpeaking the glorious Ma. 
zeſty to be reverenced, the other ſpeaking the invincible Power of 
God to be f:ared ; both adviſing this People and us to repent and a- 
mend, ond return and meet him. » Which the Prophet ſaw, and in 
which the Jews were to be melted or conſumed. 


{ Of the Fire, or that Amber which appeared, as having four Wheels, 
; Theſe were not indeed living Creatures, but the Appearance of them, 
and fignify with ſome the four Monarchies; with others the four 
chief Leaders in the four quarters of the Camp of 7/-ae! ; with others 
the four Evangeliſts ; with others, more likely, the Holy Angels, 
whoſe Attendance beſpeaks the Majeſty of God, and the Terribleneſs 
of Judgmentsto be executedon the Jews ; and they are four, either to 
denote the ſufficient number of them, or to ſhew God would uſe the 
four chief of his Angels, or perhaps to let the Jews know he had as 
many ways to puniſh, and as many Officers of his Wrath, as they 
could find corners” of the World to fly unto. Or, ſince the Appear. 
ance of a Chariot in the midſt of this Viſion is ſuppoſed, *twas fitteſt 
that four living Creatures ſhould anſwer to the Wheels rhereaf. » 
"The Forme in which theſe four each appeared to the firſt view, or at 
fFome diſtance. :» The Stature, the greater part of them appeared of 
Humane Shape, for they had Face, Hands and Thighs, and the Poſture 
was erect in ſtanding or motion, as Man's 1s 
6 And every y one had four & faces a, and every 
ons b had tour c wings. 
; Of thoſe four living Creatures which appeared to the Prophet. 
z This Hieroglyphic tho' it ſeems to preſent us with a monſtrous 
Sight, yet does not unbecome the Divine Wiſdome, nor dothir want 
like Repreſentations, as ch. 1o. 14. and Reve. 4. 6. & 5. 6. And 
ſpeaks either the full Firneſs of Angels to do God's Commands in all 
"Things and Occaſions, or the PerfeQion of gheir Nature and Obed1- 


| 8 And 7hey ; had the hands of a man 7 under »: their 
wings on the four » ſides, and they four o had thcir 


taces and their wings. 

z Each of the four living Creatures. & Hands in every Langue: 
eſpecially in the Oriental, imply Power; and being the chief Inſtru. 
ments of Aion, are here aſcribed to theſe attive Inſtruments that exe. 
cute the Commands of God. 7 This is added to denote the Wiſdom 
Dexterity and Vigilance wherewith they diſcharge their Miniſtry. 
mM Their Powerand Manner of exerting it, is ſecretand inviſible, and 
"tis put forth as Gad pleaſeth ro move them. » On each ſide of the 
Chariot one of theſe living Creatures ſtood, and fo oneach fide Hands 
were ready to aQt as they were moved; and tho' 'twas to all parts of 
the World, yet were they moſt ready and prepared. 9 *Tis Joubled 


| 


to confirm the Truth and Certainty of the thing, and to intimate ths 
Greatneſs of their Power, Agility and Wiſdom. 


9 Their wings were p joined one to another; they turn- 
ed q not when they went, they went 7 every one ſtraight 


forward. 

p the Wings of the living Creatures, when ſtretcht out to fly, were 
joined rogether, ſo the Wings of thoſe ewo Cherubims which went 
foremoſt, and the Wings of the two hindermoſt were joined together 
when they moved. Ir ſeems to refer to that Exod. 25. 20. Tt ſigni- 
fizs however the equal and uniform Readineſs of Angels, their Con- 
cord, and Union with Conſtancy ro do the Will of God, and it ſhews 
us the exa&t Harmony that is between the works of God. Theſe 
Wings, and their being joined is expreſt, Hz6. by the Union of loving 
Siſters with each other. q They loſt no time in a ditficult or tedious 
Turning, as we ſee in other Chariots ; for which way ſoever they were 
to go, thither they had Faces direQed, and ſo readily moved forward 
on their way, whether Eaſt or Weſt, North or South, and held on 
till chey had finiſht their Courſe, but then were ready for farther Aion, 
and returned as quick to their Station, where they might receive new 
Commands, as Lightning does; ſo this, and that verſe 14. there they 
did return, here they did not, are reconciled. + This explains the 
former, and confirms it to us, aſſuring us that every one of thoſe liv. 
ing Creaturesare ready, faithful and unwearied in doing the Pleaſure 
of their Creator, in his Government of the World. 7:8. v. 12. 


Cha 


of that part of the Body which is properly the Face, tho' I ſee no - 


M's 
LE 
” 


foot, and they , 


' 
WER 
+: 
— MB 
PE 
Fo 
IK->- . 
ao 
= 
16 L 11 
BE: | 
- 2% 1+ 
v.50 Y 
"ENT 
4 


\K LOS: + 
&. NS 
a, we. 5 

kW 

% 

$ 


to As for the * likeneſs / of their faces, they four had*t 


the face of a man, and the face of a lion on the right+ 
ſide, and they four had the face of an oxe on the left fide; 


they four alſo had the face of an eagle. 

/{ Here the prophet doth more expreſly ſet forth what was more 
darkly mentioned in the 6eb werſe, and deſcribeth their Faces both by 
the proper Reſemblances, and by their Reſpe& of the local Diffe- 
rences of Eaſt and Weſt, or right and left Hand. But ſince ſuch Dit- 
ferences are in themſelves of little moment, and undeterminable, un- 
leſs we were certain what proſpe& theſe living Creatures ſtood in, 
whether looking to the Prophet, or to Jeruſalem, or toward Babylon, we 
ſhall fay no more of it; what theſe ſignify is more material. Each 
Face is compared to what is moſt excellent in its kind ; Man excels in 
Wiſdom, Lions in Strength, the Oxe in Patience and Conſtancy of 
Labour, the Eagle in Speed, and high Flight. So in the Miniſtry of 
Angels, and Government of the World by the Providence of God, 
what is moſt excellent may be obſerved: 

1: Thus were their faces 5: and their wings 227 


joined one to another, and two covered y their bodies. 


lug 


: If you make a full Point at Faces, it ſhould ſcem better joined ay 


with the former Verſe, and this Text will be more eaſy : for 'ris ſome- 
what harſh to ſpeak of Faces ſtretchrt as Wings are: bur if their Faces 
as well as Wings muſt be ftretcht upward, we mnſt underſtand their 
Faces looking upward to the great and glorious Governor of the 
World, who fate upon the Throne above the Firmament, which was 
over their Heads, wer. 22, 23,25, 26. admiring, and adoring, 2nd 
waiting his Pleaſure todo it. # Were dividedabove, ſo each Face aP- 
peared diſtin& above the Shoulders, and there the Wings divided from 
each other were united to the Body of the living Creature. x Which . 
ſtretched two upward, joined them to the Wings of that living ow: 
cure which ſtood by its ſide, to teſtify their Readineſs, Concord, and 
Chearfulneſs in tl''ir Office. y Iſaiah 6. 2. With twain they covert® 
their Feet, either in deep Humility, ard for Decency, or becauſe 0: 
Infgmity of Humane Nature ; for whoſe Relief they appear in We 


4 
(16) 


ſtretched « upward X, + two WINGS of every One were 


In 


ap. 


ef 
bi 


rativel 
not, w 
Verſes « 
return 


Vehen 


Ia 


P. T. 


chey do, but muſt not appear what they are becauſe they would 
be too glorious for our Sight. : 

12 And they went every one ſtraight z forward : whi- 
ther the ſpirit 4 was to go b, they went c : and they & tur- 


ned not when they went. 

: 4 werſG o Which way ſoever they wene, each living Creature 
bad gt ut. rt frelghe fowards, and their other Fac-s looking 
toward other Coaſts of the World; if the fore-right were ro the 
Sourh, the other Faces looked one to the Eaſt, one to the Weſt, and 
the other to the North. Thus with ReCtirude, Conſtancy, Wiſdom 
and univerſal Care, Providence rules and guides Afﬀairs of the World, 
and eſpecially of the Church, to the Glory of God. a The Wind mo: 
ved, ſay ſome: but if there were a Gale of Wind, which blowing 
gently on theſe living Creatures, ſtirred them in the Sight of the Pro- 
phet, it was Emblematical ; and repreſented to his View, the Power 
and Influence of the Spirit of God, which moved and aQed theſe admi- 
rable Creatures. The Will, Command, and breathing of che Spirir 
of God, both gave and guided their Motions, to Ends he himſclt de- 
ſign'd. 6 Going 1s attribured here to the Spirit of God by alluſion 
and not properly, for who is ever in every Place, cannot properly be 
ſaid ro go from or toany Place. c The living Creatures readily obſerved 
the Impre:ſions of the Spiric of God,and obeyed. d Yia.verſe 9g, They 
Jook'd not back as unwilling, they turned not out of che way as fro- 
ward, they gave not over till they had compleated their Courle. 


13 As for the likeneſs e of the living creatures, their 
appearance was like burning f coals of fire g, and like 
che appearance of lamps 4 : 1t went up 7 and down among 


EZERKTIE L. 


or Chryſolite, or Hyacinth, but cis better rendred a Sea-green Co- 
lour ; which if it note the inſtability and changeableneſs of tublunary 
Aﬀairs, and of the outward Concerns of the Church, it may note al- 
io the inherent Vigour and Beauty of the Church, and the Frame of 
earthly Things, whenthey are in a calm Courſe, not diſturbed firſt with 
Sin, and then with puniſhment of Sin. c By this it appears what was 
the Numberof the Wheels. & ExaQtly of the ſame Make for Dimen- 
lions, Colour, Frame and Motion, fo that who ſ:2s and knows one, 
ſees and knows all; hereby nocing the Harmony and Likeneſs which is 
in God's Works, which are all framed, managed and governed by the 
ſame Witdom, and conſequently rhe ſame uncertaiary in all things, 
unde: the Sun. e Tis ſomewhat difficult to unfold this. Ir is proba- 
ble rhe Wheels were framed fo as to be an Exa& Sphhre or Globe, 
which is eaſily rolled to any Side or Quarter, ſince it toucheth che 
Earth, or Bafis on which it ſtands, in a Point, and is exaQtly orbicular : 
it 15 fitter we note, 1. 'The unſearchablene(s of Divine Methods. 2. 
The curious Frame of them. 3. The Connexion of one Part with ocher. 
4- The ſeeming Interfering and real Harmony, what would ſeem 
'0 hinder ſhall further God's Work. 5. How eaſily Gd can change 
Afﬀairs, and move for or againſt a People. 


17 When they f went, they went up upon their four g 
tides : and they returned 4 not when they went. 


f The living Creatures ; indeed rhe Wheels moved according to the 
Motion of the living Creatures, but it will as well agree with the 
Truth as it is berter agrees with the Grammar of the Wotds, to ſay this 
(they) 7. e. the Wheels. g The Wheels being ſuppoſed ſpherical or 
round every way as a Globe, by an exaCt and curious framing of two 
Wheels one in the other, the four S<mi-circles which are in rwo whole 


| 


the living creatures, and the fire was bright & and out of Wheels, may be well taken for theſe four Sides on which theſe Wheels 


che fire went forth lightning /. 


He farther deſcribeth what he had more briefly ſpoken of werſe 6. 
Tacre you had their Shap? and Make, here you have their Colour, 
ein which they were ſeen by the Prophet. f Their Aſpe& was of a 
fizry Colour, to afright and alarm ſecure Sinners. That God who had 
hitherto appeared moſt patient and long-ſuffering, now makes diſcove- 
rizs of himi-Ifin dreadtul Diſpleaſure, which would burn, as Num. 17. 
I, 2, 3. orlſa. 10. 17. or Jer. 4. 4 That would conſume their 
Glory, and there be none to quench it, Fer. 7. 20. and 21. 12. g God 
doth by- bis prophet forewarn them of very great Miſeries com- 
ing on them, Wrath, as Fire, as Coals, and Burning, every Word ad- 
ding weight to the phraſe. Ir notes alſo the Zeal and fervent Aﬀ-&ion 
of theſe living Creatures, doing the Will of God. +4 Ir was not a furi- 
ous and unbounded Fire, it wasas that which burneth in the Lamp, li- 
mited, ir ſhould not devour but the Wicked. Or it may note the 
Care and Wiſdom wherewith theſe Executions ſhould be made, as if 
all were done in the light of Lamps, as in dark Places we take Candles 
to light usin ourWork; or it may intimate the hope for the good among 


the Jews, as Lamps doth, 1jaiah 62. I, and the DeſtruQion of Enemies, 


as Zcch. 12.6. Or if it may be interpreted by Dan. 10. 6. where the 
2mp that burneth expreſſeth the Divine Wiſdom and Love, and 


poſſibly the Knowledge and Love of Chriſt. as Rewel. r. 15. *' PF will 


$4 4 
WP 


HER 


well ſute with the whole Viſion, and with what next follows. # This 
Fire, or the burning Lamp, or both, went up and down, ſtood not ſtil], 
nor was carried, but as the Heb. Made it ſelf walk up and down. Ir 
moved it ſeif, which is too much ta aſcribe to Creatures; God only is 
an unmoved Mover, fo 'twill lead our Thoughts to God, who moved 
all theſe living Creatures. & It was not the dark and footy Fire of 
Malice and Hell. Ir ſhined, as always God?s Zeal for his own Glory, 
and as Angels Zeal for the Glory of their God doth. Or *cwas fo 
brighr as to difcover it ſelf in more than ordinary Glory. / With this 
God gave the Law, Exod. 19. 16. contends with Enemies, 2 Sam. 
22.15, Zech.9, 14. Theſe Lightnings as they are terrible to Sinners 
and ſtrike an Aw upon Saints ; ſo they tell both, that there is more 
than ordinary of God to be Jookr to in them. His Judgments, as 
Lightning, call upon us to fear, ſeek, and ſhelter our elves with 
God. 


14 And the living creatures m ran ”, and returned o as 
the appearance of a flaſh of lightning p. 


» Angels, Miniſters of the Divine Pleaſure, as above werſe 5. » 
Were ſpeedy in their Motions; this is ſignified by this Expreſſion figu- 
ratively apply'd to Angels. o Yet w:rſe 9, 12. 'tis ſaid they returned 
not, where this ſceming Contradi&ion is reconciled; the 9th and 1 2th 
Perſes deny their turning aſide from their Work, this 14h affirms they 
returned, ;. e. when they had done their Work. p Very quick, with 
Vehemency, Splendor, and irreſiſtible Efficacy. 


I5 Þ Now gasI beheld r the living creatures,behold /; 


' Ohe wheel 72 upon the earth « by the living creatures x, 


with his four faces y. 
q Or, and, "tis a Tranſition from the former to the latter part of the 


\ Viſion. 7 conſidered and obſerved. Ir calls for our Attention. 


7 Ora certain Wheel] or ſpherical Form, as ſome ; or a circular Form 


. E as the Wheels of Chariots, ſay other. Ir is ons Wheel intimating thar 
. @l] the different Cauſes and Motions, how many ſoerer in themſelves, 


+ yet work the ſame Work, and are governed as eafily in their various 


* Morions, as one ſingle Wheel might be, and that God doth ſo govern 
+ them, « Not that we tread on, but that which in this Viſion was re- 


preſented to the Propher-; for *twas here as 'tis in Landskips or Pi- 
cures drawn, there is that which repreſents the Earth, on which 


KR Trees, Men, or Chariots ſeem to be. x By each of theſe living 


Creatures ſtood one Wheel, ſo that they were four in Number, accor. 
ding tothe Number of the living Creatures. y By this it appearseach 
heel had its four Faces, of which more in the 17, v. where what 


b 15 here called Faces is there called Sides. 


16 The appearance z. of the wheels, and their work 


© © was like unto the colour of a beryl 6: and they four 
«x © had one likeneſs 4, and their appearance and their 


work was as it were a wheel in the middle e of a wheel. 
© The Form in which theſe Wheels were ſeen. a All that was 


7 wrous ht, whether engraved or otherwiſe, was of one Colour. 6 Heb. 
R __— 2 Sea-green; ſome ſay this Colour here was of a Carbuncle, 


do move, and ſuch a Wheel will readily be turned to all Points of 
the Compaſs,as a Ball on a Billiard Table. þ They needed nor go back 
ro turn as wee ſee other Chariots or Coaches muſt do, putting back 
ſomewhat to alter their Courſe; or returned norrill they came to their 
Journey*'s End ; or nothing could divert them, or put them out of 
their Courſe. So firm and ſure are the Methods, fo unalterable and 
conſtant the Purpoſes of God, and fo invariable. the Obedience and 
Obſervance of Holy Angels. So ſubje& to the juſt Soveceign Will 
of God are all ſecond Caules, 


round about them four o. 


#5 The Circumference of the Wheels, the whole Compaſs of the 
Wheels, or the Valleys (as Carter cals the whole roundle of his 
Wheels.) & The two ſtrakes, the thickneſs of Hub and Valleys, give 
us the height of a Wheel from the Earth on which ic ſtands. / Their 
very height impreſt a Fear on the Bcholder, bur if we may ſuppoſe 
one near theſe Wheels which ſo readily changed Courſz, ſo eaſily over 
bearing all, that none could turn them aſide, (which might poſtible bes 
the Propher's Caſe in this Viſion ) *twould increaſe the Terror. m The 
whole Circumference or Circle of theſe Wheels. » This added to the 
dreadfulneſs of their appearance, ſo unuſual and ſupernatural a Sight 
could not but affe& the Prophet, who in ſo mighty a Wheel mighe ex- 
pet Multitudes of Nails, but inſtead thereof diſcovers as great a Mul- 
titude of Eyes ; one Eye ſeen or imagined to be ſeen ſuddenly and in 
the dark, hath amazed many an one, how much more ſo many as 
would fill up the Circumference of theſe Wheels, for they were round 
about ? o Every one of the four Wheels were thus filled with Eyes. 
Now this is too narrowly confined by ſome Interpreters, who would 
have the greatneſs and policy of rhe Chaldeans ſet out hereby ; whereas 
the Wheels, their Motion, their Heighc, and Eyes, ſignify the Heighr, 
Unſearchableneſs, Wiſdom and Vigilance of the Divine Providence, 
in governing the Affairs of the World and the Church. 


19 And when p the living creatures went, the wheels 
went by them q: and when the living creatures were 
life » up from the earth /; the wheels were lit up. 


2 The Wheels, their Motion or ſtanding depended on the Motion 
and Aſſiſtance of ſome higher Agent which excited and guided them ; 
when therefore the living Creatures, the Angels, Miniſters of God's 
Will, moved, then did thoſe Aﬀairs expreſt by Wheels move alſo. 
There was an exaCt accord between theſe, they were as well joined in 
Morion as they were in Station. r Moved higher above our ordinarv 
reach. {That Baſis on which both the Wheels ſeem'd to ſtand, and 
from which ſometime they ſeemed ro lift up themſelves, as if to ferch 
a new Commiſſion and Order from him that ſat upon the Throne. 


20 Whitherſoever the ſpirit * was to go «, they went 
x, thither was their ſpirit y to go, and the wheels z 
were lifted up over againſtt hem: for the ſpirit « of the 4 
living 6 creatures as in the wheels. 


: Either the Wil] and Inclination of the living Creatures, or rather 
the Spirit of God which moved the living Creatures, gave them Mo- 
tion and guided it, theſe Angels in their Miniſtry punQually obſerved 
both the Impulſe and Condu& of God's Spirit. - « Of this Phraſe ap. 
plied to the Spirit, ſee ver. 12. x The Wheels, thoſe inferior Agents 
and ſecond Cauſes. y Theinclination and Will of the Wheels con- 
curr'd with the Spirit of the living -Creatures, ſo that there was z 
hearty accord between thoſe ſuperiour and inferiour Cauſes, they 
agreed in the ſame Deſign. z There ſeems to be an Ellipſis here, the 
latter part of the Speech expreſt, and the former implied only as 
'twas in the progrefſive Motion ; ſo in the Motion vpward they accord- 
ed, and kept the ſame Order. @ One and the ſame Spirit was in both 
the Wheels and living Creatures, and fo the ſame Inclinarion and Mo. 
tion too. 5 Of Life, Heb. the quickning, enlivening Spirit ; hence 
ſome will have the Weels to be living Creatures ; but withour this *tis 
enough to repreſent to the Propher the Frame and Courſe of Provi- 
dence, and who did preſide and manage all. An Undiſcerned, yer 
Divine Mighty, Wiſe, Juſt and Holy, and Everliving Power, Spiric 
and Being, aQtuated all, and governed all, ro the execution of Juſtice 
on the Wicked, and protection of the Godly. 


21 When thoſe went, eſe went ; and when thofe 
ſtood, theſe ſtood ; and m__ thoſe were lifted up from 


e113 


- ha, 


Chap. I. 


18 As for the rings z, they were ſo high & that they .g, 
were dreadfull /, and their * rings m2 were full of eyes » prakes. 


: 4 
4 . bY SOS Ss tf of. ent. ” Zs _ - " 
»4 kt, poo - —_ PT 4 ge ry ” 
. ne OI on S Ia, i 1 oo an gh _ —_ 


Chap. I. 


the earth, the wheels were lifted up over againſt them : 
for the Spirit of the living creature was in the wheels. 


This Verſe is a Confirmation, and farther Illuſtration of what is 
fad in the 20:5, and being almoſt Word for Word the ſame with the 
207h, needs no diſtin& Paraphraſe. TI ſhall only nore how God doth 
fully aſſert his over-ruling, and ever-ruling wile Providence in the Af- 
fairs ot his Church, and the World, both, 1. Agaiaſt the prophane 
Thoughts of Atheiſts and Epicures, which ever abound in thoſe times, 
when Sinners of the World and Church are ripe for Harveſt. 2. A- 
gainſt che Diſtruſt an] Fears of his own ſuffering People. 


22 And the likeneſs c of the firmament 4d upon e the 
heads ot the living creature, was as the colour * of the 
terrible chryſtal f,, ſtretched forth over their heads a- 


bove. | 
c The appearance or reſemblance; of which Word before , ver. 16, 
and 13. d Theliving Creatures, the Wheels and theſe upon the Earth 
our Prophet had ften and mentioned, now he ſpeaks of the Firma- 
ment which muſt be ſuppoſed to be ftretch'd forth above the Earth ; 
as the Prophet ſaw the one ſo he ſaw the other. This Firmament was 
not that we behold, it was Emblematical and repreſentative. Ir ap- 
peared, bur much more auguſt'and wonderful than Natural. e Not 
reſting upon but over their heads ſtretch'd out, and the Heb. were 
better read over in this Place, and on this Occafion. * Heb. Eye, a 
Word twice already here uſed and in the ſame ſence, the Aſpe& and 
Shape or Form, as wer. 8. 16. f For Splendor, Purity, and Solidity ; 
all that was above theſe Creatures and Wheels was beautiful and very 
majeſtical, as indeed 'was meet it ſhould be ; and 'tis therefore called 
terrible, becauſe it imprefſeth a Veneration upon the Mind of the 
Bcholders, it dazleth rhe Eye, and overpowereth it, the ſame Word 
FO gu concerning the Name of God, Hely and Reverend Plal. 99. 3. 
and 111. 9g. 4 70 : 

23 And under g the firmament were their wings ſtraight 


þ, the one toward the other 7; every one had two which 
covered on this {ide &, and every one had two which cove- 


red on thac ſide their bodies /. 

g Below at a great, which is but due, diſtance of Angels, and Crea- 
tures, and Servants to their God, Creatos and Lord, ſtood theſe 1i- 
ving Creatures, z. e. Two of each living Creatures as appeareth by the 
Phraſe one toward the other. + Stretch'd forth ready for Motion if 
commanded, and with equal Streightneſs and Height, in cloſe and af- 
feQtionate Union, joining in the Work appointed them. # Each of 
the four living had two other Wings with which they covered their 
Bodies. & The two living Creatures on the one Side of the Chariot, 
and two living Creatures on the other Side. So that in what poſition 
ſoever the prophet looked towards them, their lower Wings covered 
them. / Bodies here aſcribed to them repreſentatively, and as all the 
relt viſionally. 

24 And » when they went, I heard » the noiſe o of 
their wings, like- the noiſe p of great waters, as the voice 
of the Almighty q, the voice of ſpeech » as the noiſe 


of an hoſt / : when they ſtood 7, they let down their 
wings 

2 So ſoon and as ofcen as they, :, e, the living Creatures moved, 
were on their Work executing God's Commands. » Heard and at 
tended to know what 'twas. o Thoſome of God's Judgmeats are ex- 
ecuted with Silence and are in the Dark, yer here is an Alarm, and 
they may be heard. p When the Sea rageth and ſwells as though it 
would overwhelm the Euwth ; ſo when the juſt and dreadfull Judg- 
ment of God are executed, they threaten the overflowing of all. 
Thunder called God's Voice, Pſalm 29. 3. r The Propher heard the 
Voice in articulate manner declaring the Will of God,as if the Wings 
had Tongues to ſpeak as well as Power to fly. / This Voice was not 
of Friends faluting each other, or comforting, but it was the Voice 
and Noiſe of an Hoſt, a tumultuous Voice of Men, a confuſed Noiſe 
of warlike Weapons and Inſtruments ; ſome ſuppoſe 'tis meant of 
the Army of the Cha/deans, which thoſe winged living Creatures had 
now fetch'd in to ſpoil the Jews, which they did with cerrible Our- 
criet, as enraged, mercileſs adverſaries uſe to do, #t Having done their 
Office, they preſent themſelves before God, and Jet down their 
Wings not out of weatinefs, but out of ſenſe that they muft never 
a&@ but by Commiſſion. And now with Wings let down, and cove- 
ring their Bodies, they do humbly watch as Servants for the Com- 
mands of thcir Lord. 

25 And « there was a voice from the firmament that 
2was over their heads when they ſtood, and had let down 
their wings. 

u Or, for, ſo the Lat. two Senſes may be of theſe Words in this 
verſe, Either 1. Theſe living Creatures thus let down their Wings 
and ceaſed from acting, becauſe they were commanded fo to do by 
the Voice from above the Firmament, which they readily obey. Or, 
2. That they ſtood, ler down their Wings, and huſh'd the Noiſe, that 
the Prophet might hear what was ſpoken from above; the former 
comes neareſt the Senſe of che Lat, the latter nearer to our Engliſh, 
and either may well enough ſute the Text and Context. 


26 And above the firmamene x» that as over their 
heads y was the likeneſs of'a throne z, as the appea- 
rance of a faphire ſtone ; and upon the likeneſs of the 
throne was the likeneſs as the appearance of a man 6 


above it. : ; 
x The Chriſtalline Firmament which appeared in the Viſion, not 


the vaſt Expanſe or Firmament in which are Sun, Moon and Stars, 
5 Heads of the living Creatures which moved the Wheels, and ſtood 
by the Charior, x In view appeared a Saphire Stone, like or in like- 
neſs of a Throne, ſo the Heb. though we tranſpoſe the Word ſome. 
what in our Verſion ; the Sapire ſpeaks Splendor and Pretiouſneſs, 
the Throne ſpeaks the Authority and Power of him who fſitteth there 
on. 6b Chriſt God-Man, who here appears as King and Judge to vin« 
dicate his own Honour, to punish Rebels, and to give warning by his 
Prophet e're he execute his juſt bur ſevere Indignation. 


= #-£VE-x © 


Cha 


27 And I faw as the colour of amber c, as the appea. 
rance of fire 4 round about within it : from the appea. 
ance of his loins even upward, and from the appearance 
of his loins even downward e, I faw as it were the ap. 
pearance of fire, and it had brightneſs f round about. 


c See werſe 4. and what 1s ſaid there to this Phraſe. In this colour 
does Chriſt now appear againſt the rebellious Jews ; he that would 
have been a Saviour to them clothed with the Garmears of Salvation, 
now puts on the Garments of Vengeance, and is clad with that Zeal 
which 1s beſt, bur not fully expreſt by ſuch Metaphors. 4 OF moft 
intenſe Degree, as that Fire which is ſhut up in Oven or Furnace ; 
ſo this was the appearance of a Fire which had a Houſe ro it roung 
about ( as the Heb.) The juſt indignation of Chriſt, and his glorioyg 
Majeſty are hereby ſer forth to us alſo, which appear within the 
Amber. e As was his upward Part, ſo the lower Parts alſo, they ap. 
peared as Fire. Provoked to Wrath aad proceeding to judg, he comes 
in Flames of Fire taking Vengance, 2 Theſſ. 1. 8, f Verſe 4. Where 
rhe Phraſe i; explained, Majeſty, Juſtice and unſtained Holineſ, 
ſhine round about Chriſt, though he comes in greateſt Wrath againſt 
his Enemies. 

28 g As the appearance of the bow + that is in the 
cloud in the day of rain, fo was the appearance of the 
brightneſs round about. This : was the appearance of 
the & likeneſs of the glory of the LORD: and when 
I ſaw it, I * fell Jon my face, and I heard a voice of one+( 


7 that ſpake. t) 

g Here more particularly is deſcribed the Brightneſs before men. 
tioned. þ A Rainbow, the Fire being reſplendent and clear, caſts its 
Rays on the thick Cloud below. And this 1s mentioned no doubt to 
allure the Prophet, and thoſe among the Jews that did tremble and 
wait for God, that God would not forger his Covenant though he 
came to execure ſevereſt Judgments, Gen. 9.-13. A like appearance of 
Chriſt in a ſurrounding Brigheneſs, as of the Rainbow, you have, Rev. 
4- 3. Mercy and Truth, and both according to Covenant and Promiſe, 
are about rhe Throne of Chriſt. This a Brightneſs of Mercy and 
Grace that enlightens, that comforts. 7 This the Concluſion of the 
Viſion. .k It was thenot full Glory of God, it was not the Splendor of 
unvailed Majeſty, it was the likeneſs of his Glery, ſuch as the Pro. 
phet might bear and tell ro us; the fulneſs of his Glory is inacceſ. 
ible Light, the Prophet could not ſee it, and unſpeakable Majeſty, 
and the Prophet could not tell it to us. / i. Aſtoniſhed ar ſuch a 
Sight, as Gen, 17.3. Dan. 7.15. 28. With 2. Deep Humility and 
Reverence he caſt himſelf down. 3. 'Tis a Poſture of Prayer, and 
poſſibly the Prophet might ſue ro know the meaning of all this. Such 
was the Voice and ſuch the things ſpoken, that the Prophet ſeems to 
confeſs he could not ſay whoſe Voice 'twas, but 'twas Divine, Pow. 
erful, Aſtoniſhing, as being ſuch as is deſcribel, v. 25. ſach the 
Voice he hears. 


CHAP. II. 


Ezekiel terrified by the former wiſion ; the Spirit helpeth him up, 1, 2. Bi! 
Miſſion to the rebellious and obflinate Iſraclites,z——5. He is encouraged 
and ftrengthened againſt their obſtinacy,6,7. The meſſage it ſelf, 8. The 
viſion of @ roll, full of woe and Iamentasion, 9g, Io. 


I N D » he faid .unto me, Son o of man, p ſtand 


upon thy feet, and I will ſpeak q unto thee. 
» That fat upon the Throne, Jeſus Chriſt, whoſe Meſſenger Exzeki:! 
muſt be to the Jewiſh Captives, now gone tnto Captivity to Babylen. 


15; 


? 


Fall to the Ground. Fear not my coming to puniſh thee, I come to?” 
ſend thee forth a Prophet ; ariſe therefore and be as other Prophets, 
ready to recive the Divine Oracles, ( which uſually came co Prophets 
ſtanding) and with this Command God ſent forth a Power enabling 
him to ariſe and ſtand. q Get thy ſelf into a fit Poſture and readinels, 
and I will ſpeak; what that was appears in what followeth, wer. 3. 


ſpake unto me, and 
) that ſpake unto me. 

» So ſoon as the encouraging Command went forth, immediately. 
{ The vital Spirit or Soul of the Propher ( ſay ſome ) but theſe ſuppole 
the Viſiori had ſtrook Exekzel dead, which neither can be fuppoſcd, 0o- 
ther prophetick Viſions did not prove deadly, nor did this; others will 
have it the Spirit of Courage, ſome an Ange], but 'tis indeed che Spi- 
rit of God, the Holy Ghoſt, Ezek. 3. 24. The ſame Spiric which 
actuated the living Creatures and Wheels, enters the Heart of the 
Prophet. # Gave the Propher ſpecial and ſutable Qualifications for 
his Office. The Spirit entred, that he might abide with the Prophet 
as a conſtant Aſliſter and Guide to him. « While the Words were 
ſpeaking, or ſo ſoon as they were ſpoken. The Efficacy of the Spirit, 
and his accompanying the Word of Chriſt here appears. x Either 
Chriſt who from the Throne ſpake to the Prophet, or the Holy Spi- 
rit newly entred into the Prophet. y Opened his Ear chat he heard 
what was ſpoken : it is the Spirit which 1s the Fountain of all our 
Abilities, and which alfo aQtuates them ; without it there is neither 
Life, Strength or Motion. 

3 And & he ſaid a unto me, Son b of man, I « ſend 
thee to the 4 children of Iſrael e, to a rebellious f nat 
on + that hath g rebelled againſt me: *chey and cheitt 
fathers have tranſgrelted againſt me, even unto this very” 
day 6. TE. 

z Vid. wer. 2. a Eicher vocally, or by impreſſion upon his Mind , 
þ The Prophet had ſeen, wv. 26. of the former Chapter, a very gloriors 
Peyſon on a Throne above the Firmament, and now the Prophet #5 
called Son of Man, perhaps, as the Jews conjetture, to encourage 5 


Propher in his prophetick Work, and to aflure him he ſhould be 0#7; 


o A'Phraſe very || familiar with Ezekiel in this Prophecy, and he uſeth'" 
it for diſtinCtion, being now among Angels, Perhaps to keep him bum. ”! 
ble who had ſuch great Revelations, which might occafion him ro® 
think of himſelf above what was meer, as, 2 Cor. 12. 7. p Ariſe, re- h | 
ſume thy wonted ſtrength of Soul and Body which ſeem loſt by thy © 


. RN 
; IP FM» 5 
®b WES 
Y SOR 
Po 


i Heb, 
hard of 


Y - @ 


face. 


Fo EVM bs 
* "198 ” 

L FT 9 
'K 1-1 


* Chap. 3. 
TH 

*Ch. 3. 
26, 27. 
*Chap. 
33-33- 


win 
IE $4 4 
IS 432070 IR 
£ - fi BER « 


yet * 


=. for ot! 
, Cs - ning, 


2 And rthe * L_ t entred into me «, when x he (2: 
et me upon my feet, that I heard him* © © 


: 2 oy ; deject 
” GR 
—® ſhewt 


* 2% Natio! 


Fo they tl 


I will 
what t 


'know 


Name 
ſelf an 


_ the Ev 


33> and obey. p They only hear that comply with God's Counſe], and as 
"23+ for others, they hearing, hearnot. 9 Either forbear their ways of Sin- 
"*ZX ning. and ceaſe to do Evil, or forbear to hear thee, be not too much 
*"X deje&ed abour it; ſome perhaps may hear and forbear to fin, others 


<p ſhew themſelves a rebellious Houſe. » Family, Houſe put for the whole 
- 27 Nation; yet wait the Event, do thy Duty. / All of them ſhall know, 
” they that hear and obey ſhall know by the good that I will doto them, 


'know by the Evil which I will bring upon them. *- Thy Truth and 


I... 
Luk.12.4. 
Or,re 


= bear, Counſels, or Words, Miſreporcs, Accuſations, Threats, Flouts, 


b- | fir Emblem of the frowardnefs, and keenneſs of Sinners againſt God 


- and Jrreconcileableneſs of theſe Apoſtate Jews, and of all other Con- 


E £8 


1 ne, who appeared as a Man, and calls Ezekiel Son 
< _ | 1g pears he word never forget what he had ſeen, 
: d "tis likely this INN 72 as off as it was ſpoken would mind the 
Pro het what relation it might have to the Viſion. «c I am ſending, 

c he that ſendeth thee, is whom thou ſaweſt on the Throne advanced 
jeſs Angels who dire&s them in their courſe of Miniſtry ſubſerving 
_ Will of God, and who will give them charge of rhee in thy way. 
Hb. Sons; God gives them fill the Name of Sons and Children, he 
535 not hafty to abdicare, to diſinherit and caſt off, e Now in the low 
eſtate of Captives, the leſſening Name of Facob had been too great 
one might think; but God tells the Prophet they were the Children 
of !ſrael, that Prince who wreſtled with God, and prevailed, Hof. 12. 
3 4 5 Iris very likely they had ſome that feared, and ſought the 
God of Jacob, and aid wreſtle as he had done before them ;-it infi- 
nuateth ſome hope however that God would redeem them, P/al. 25. 
22. would be good unto them, P/al. 73. 1. His Dominion was over 


KIEKE 


repeated, leſt Ezekiel! ſhould forget, or we in like caſe ſhould ſail of 
our Duty, it is four times given in ayes | 

7 And thou ſhalt ſpeak my words 4 unto them, whether 
e they will hear, or whether they will forbear, for they «re 
f moſt f rebellious. 


4 Declaring what I ſhall ſhew thee, and in Words which I will pie 0s 


into thy Mourh. eVid. wer. 5. f Heb. Rebellion in the Abſtra&, by 
which the Heb. (as ſome other Lauguages do) exprefleth the ſuperla+ 
tive Degree, as we have it rightly tranſlated. 

8 Butthou, ſon of man, hear g what I ſay unto þ thee: 
Be not thou rebellious 7 like that rebellious houſe : open & 
thy mouth, and eat * that I give thee. 


deſt declining the Office of a Prophet, wed not thine own Reſolution 


"2. and they were a peculiar People, Pſal. 135. 4. 12. 
boy < xs Jo are hrs; Fray _ diſobedient ; as Rebellion 15 the 
higheſt Crime againſt the ſupream Magiſtrate, So were Ilſrasl's Sins 
againſt God : Hence ſome will have Ezekicl to be commiſſioned a Pro- 
phet to denounce God's Judgments againſt the Heathen, who are in 
Scripture called by the Word here uſed. Bur though Ezekiel did pro- 
phelſy againſt the Nations, as againſt Egypt, Babylon, Gog, and Mazog 3 
yet here cheſe Nations in this third werſe are the Jews, who were like 
*he Nations in their Idolatry and Manners, they had degenerated from 
their Father 1/-ae!, and rebelled againſt 1/-ae!'s God : if the Title 1/rael 
be Comfort to the beſt, the Appellation given to the reſt, they were 
a rebe[lious Nation, is Terror and Menace, as well as Rebuke, to the 
worſt; and God intimates they were what they accounted the Gentiles 
to be, polluted, prophane and hated of God. g This was implied in 
the former-Word, but thus exprefly added to aſcertain the Charge, 
and to aggravate the Crime of this People, who were from theic Fa- 


herein, i Houſe of Rebellion, as verſe 7. & Some take this fioura- 
tively, as if here the Propher had been called to open the Powers of 
bis Soul and Mind, to receive, retain all that God ſpeaks; bur I rathes 
; think that the Prophet is required ro open his Mouth to eat what wzs 
; put into his Hand, 7. e. the Book, infinuating his divine Call and In. 
| ſpiration, and the Bitterneſs of the Jews Calamity. A viſionary Book, 
and a viſionary Eating, here is ſpoken of. 


9 And when I looked /, behold, an hand »z ws ſent » 
unto me, and lo, a roll o of a book was therein. 
1 The Prophet newly come out of hat aſtoniſhing Trance wherein 


' _ the Evil and Wicked. 
+Jer.1.8. 


= *not afraid cof their words, nor be diſmayed at their looks, 
though they be arcbellious houſe. 


+ fo prote& thee. x Caſt away diſcouraging Fear, be not diſmayed at 
their Perſons; Rulers, Prieſts, znd pretended Prophets will oppoſe, 


| It expreſſeth Contumacy, as Exod. 7. 14. of Pharaoh refuſing to let 


' Briars and Thorns when God ſhall ſend his Judgments like Fire a- 


thers Days to this very Day — againſt God. Ir was the Glory of | 
St. Paul. he ſerved God with pure Conſcience; it 15 the ſhame of this | 
Nation they have rebelled from their Fathers. +5 Their Fathers before | 
them, and they with their Fathers, and all ſucceſſively, God was pro- 
voked at once with two Generations of Rebels ; Fathers who gave ex- | 
ample, and Children which took 1t. : 

4 For they are -+ impudent # children, and ſtiffhearted | 
A: 1 1do m ſend thee unto them, and thou ſhalt ſay unto! 
them », Thus ſaith the Lord GOD. 


; Shameleſs, who cannot bluſh, elſe they could never have tranſ- 
greſſed ſo highly, conſtantly, and obſtinately. Sodom in her day did 
not hide her Sin, nor bluſh, ſo did the Jews in 1/aiah sTime, fo they 
didto the Days of their Captivity, and under rhe Caytivity. & Hard 
hearted, reſolute and ſtrongly bent to. do whatever liked them. Of 
Diſpoſition that relenterh nor, but rather more confidently goiag onan | 
Evil. 1 Who appeared in ſo much Glory, and on the Throne. m2 Give | 
thee Authority that thou mayeſt, and I give thee charge that thou 
muſt go to them, and ſay unto them, what I ſhall fay unto thee. ' 


he lay, and gotten upon his Feet, hearing what was ſpoken, and po: 
ſibly looking if he might ſee who ſpake, he diſcovers an Hand. 
, Either of one of thoſe Angels which miniſtred before the Lord, or 
the Hand of God, or of Chriſt : this might fortify the Prophet when 
| he ſaw a Hand fo foon with him, as he was ready to hear and obey, 
Power and Skill ro defend and guide him will ever be as ready. nAn 
Eaſtern Idiom of Speech. o Their Books were not of that Faſhion 
and Make as ours now are, bur written in Parchment, and in che length 
of it, and ſo one piece faſtened to other, till the whole would con- 
tain what was to be written, and then was it wrapt or rolled about a 
round piece of Wood, faſhioned for that purpole : hence Books are 
Volumes. | 


10 And p he ſpread 9 it before me, and it w4s writters 
within » and without, and 7bere was written therein /lamen- 
cations, and mourning, and wo. 


p Yr 9. *'twas the hand, here "tis the Perſon, he who held out 
his Hand. q Unrolled it within that Diſtance the Prophet might read 
what was written therein. » On both ſides, on that fide which was 
inward when rolled upon its Roundle, and on thar 1i:le alſo that was 
outward, and as 'twere the back fide. A long Roll, and full on both 
Sides, ſo would the Sorrows of the Jews be. {Such things as would 
m:ke the ſtouteſt Heart lament, inwardly grieve and mourn, expreſy 


it in viſible Tokens and Wo, ſad Thoughts and Gueſles at worſe to 


They will ſcoff and perſecute, but I command, and remember whom |! come ; ſo this Prophet's Meſſage would be a moſt heavy Burden tothe 
thou haſt ſeen, who is with thee. » Be ſure to tell them who ſends | Jews and other Nations agaiaſt which he propheſieth. 


thee, read the Commiſſion, Thr ſaith &c. 

5 And they o, * whether they will p hear, or whether 
they wilt q forbear, ( * for they are a rebellious r houſe) 
yet * ſhall / know there hath been a prophet #7 among | 
them. 

o Though the Omniſcient God knows which they will do, yet lets 


not the Prophet know, bur enjoins him bis Duty , affords theſe Sinners the 
Mercy of Warnings, and calls and expe&s that they att like Men, hear 


will forbear to hear thee, but not forbear to ſin; the greateſt Part will 


I will bleſs them and bring them back. Thoſe that will neither hear 
what they ſhould do, nor forbear doing what they ſhould not do, ſhall 


Name will I vindicate, and prove thee a Prophet to the Comfort of thy 
ſelf and others who are obedient, but to the Shame and Confuſion of 


6 And thou, ſon « of man, * benot afraid x o them, nei 
ther be afraid of their y words, though [| * briers z and thorns 


be with 4 thee, and thou doſt dwell among ſcorpions b : be 


u Thou a Propher, ſent by him whoſe Throne 3s higheſt, whom thou 
ſaweſt as the appearance of a Man in Glory, and provided with Power 


bur yet in the delivery of thy Meſlage fear none of them. y Heb. will 


or whatever elſe an envious and malicious Heart can ſuggeſt to the 
Tongue. x Here two Words in the Heb. are uſed, the firſt uſed only in 
this Place, though frequently uſed in the Chaldze Paraphraſe, where 


lſracl go, and Jer. 5. 3. obſtinate refuſing to learn. But our Tranſla- 
tors, guided by the proper Signification of the other Word, have ren- 
dred it Briars, which uſually run up among Thorns, and are a very 


and his Prophet, and of the ſure Deſtru&ion which will befal theſe 
mongſt them. a Againſt thee. b Some ſay this is an Herb which 
becauſe it 1s every way armed with ſharp pricking Stings, hath this 
Name given it; but if we retain the more common LInterpretation, it 
ſpeaks the RageandHear, the poiſonous Malice,and the ly lurking Craft, 


temners of God and Religion. Theſe Men, like Scorpions undiſcerned, 


CHAP. III 


The prophet at God's command eateth up the roll, 1—3. His charge, inſiru« 
Fim and encouragement againſt the peoples obſiinacy, 4—14. God in« 
Rruftcth him in the office and uſifulneſs of a faithful prophet, 15—21, 
Sheweth him his glory : and foretelleth his future uſage and treatment, 
22—25. God ſhutteth and openeth the prophet's mouth, 26, 27. 


I Oreover 4he ſaid unto me, Son of man, 6 eat that 
thou c findeſt; 4 eat this roll, and e go f ſpeak 
unto the houſe of Iſrael. 

a Who ſat on the Throne and dire&ted the Chariot or Cherubims, the 
Lord Jeſus Chriſt, who alſo ſpake to him in the Chapter before. 
b This was done in a Viſion. «c In the Hand which was tent to him, 
ch. 2. wv. 9. this explains the former, and being ingeminared, doth re- 
quire the Prophet's greateſt Reſolution and Diligence. « Read attentive- 
ly, meditate throughly, impreſs the things upon thy Soul deeply, 
for thou muſt declare them with very great AﬀcCtion and Tenderneſs, 
with exa& Faithfulneſs and fearleſs Courage. e For then art chou fit- 
ed for, and Commiſſioned to undettake the prophetick Fun&Qion. 
f Publiſh to them of the captivity in Babz/oz, what I have declared to 
them, tell them what they ſhould do, and what I wi!l do. 


2 Sogl bh opened my mouth, and he 7 cauſed me to eat 
that roll. 
£ And Heb. ſo ſoon as he had heard hemuſt eat it. h Not to diſcuſs 
Points, but to obey, ro ſhew my readineſs indeed, and to do what lay 
on meto do. 7 Not by a Force compelling me, but by a concurrent 
Help in whatthe Prophet was ready to do. 
3 And & he ſaid unto me, Son of man, cauſe thy / belly 


ney for ſweetneſs. | 

& In this verſe is confirmed and explained what was ſ'oken wer. 1. 
which fee. 1 The Mouth is the proper Inſtrument of eating, buc 
when Meat is eaten and digeſted, the Belly is ſaid to eat; the Prophet 
muſt not juſt caſte, but he muſt chew, ſwallow down, retain, and fill 
his Belly with God's Word. m»: This is the ſame repeated, unleſs it add 
to the other the Meaſure, the fulneſs of the Meaſure wherewith we 
ſhould read, meditate, and digeſt the Word of God, and his Works. 
And fince Bowelsare the ſeat of Compaſſion, *tis likely the Lord would 
have his Prophet be affeQed with pity towards that Czprive People, 
whoſe Miſeries he muſt forete], and he foreſees they muſt ſuffer. 
7 The Roll and all that was in it came from God, and Ezekiel muſt re- 
member this. o And I did eatit, Heb. p Upon the Palat *twas ſweer 
(this done in Viſion ſtill) as Honey. If you wonder that ſuch bitter 


could be, ſince chap. 2. wer. 19. 'twas full of Lamentation, &c. 
| Reſp. It was ſweet to receive ſuch things by Revelation from God, and 
ſo ro converſe with God ; 'tis ſweet ro foreſee furure Events, and to 
foretel God's juſt Judgments againſt Sinners, and to have proſpe& of a 


wound, torm:nt and kill. c The admonition againſt fntul Fear 1s 


% 10% 


Chap. FLI, 


+ Fieb, «5-4 


* Rv. 16, 
£ Obey when thou heareſt. þ Harden nor thy ſelf in a ſeeming mo. 9- 


to eat *, and fill thy »» bowels with this roll that » I give” Rev. £9. 
thee. o Then didl1 eat /t, and it was in my month as p ho-g 


Tidings could be fweer to the Prophet, 3f it be doubted how this. 


Be. gy h y 4 
ab 4 was. 4 7,1 tg * 
ABR EE 35: 
* 3 ee - - 
- A a et als 


wy 
oy "- > » <, Sardis 
4 :  * 
Þd , SA 
OA 4 RET LC —_ Px 
” - _———— PY Is th, 
- —_ HAS bas 
2 _ d « -, = 
—_ +44 9 4 ” 
Is 6% 
- 4 w* . - 
. I WR 
Woh $9 
. - 4 y 
- 


bl 
—_— 
\ 


= wid 
You he ” ju 
LY in 


Chap. III. 


4 Heb. 


Vindication of the honour of God and credit of the Prophet, who ſeeing 
all theſe rhings with a well-compoſed Mind and juſt Zeal for God, 
could not but approve, and be pleaſed therewith. Or, It was ſweer, 
as uſually the firit part of the Miniſterial Work is pleaſant, but atlaſt 
wicked Mens Oppoſition and Perſecution makerh bitter, as wer. 14. 
And Jer. 15. 16, 17, 18. And Rev. 10. 10. 


4 «T And q he ſaid unto me 7, Son of man s go, get 
cheeunto the 7 houſe of Ifrael, and « ſpeak with = my words 
unto them. 


a See vr. 1, » See <.2.1. 5£ Either the firſt word, go, intimates 
the awakening and rouſing him, and the Jatter, ger hee, direfts him 
whither co go when on bis Legs; orelſe 'tis an Idiom of che Heb. Lan- 
guage,or an &dad:;,anTIngemination of the ſameCommand.* See ch. 2,3. 


EZERKTE L. 


8 Behold », IT have 0 made thy face ſtrong againſt 
= faces, and thy p forehead ſtrong againſt their fore- 
eads. 


n This may be to remove the Obje&ion of the Prophet, who mighe 
plead the ſoftneſs of his own Metal, and pretend ſhameleſs Sinners ill 
ſcoffa young Prophet out of Countenance. Behold, ſays God, conſider. 
0 Given. They have given themſe]ves this impudent Countenance, [ 
| have given thee true Courage, Conſtancy, and manly Carriage. p The 

ſame anſwer in Words very little varying God will qualify and gifc 
| him for this Work among this People, and edg his own Tools to cur 

into the hardeſt Meral. So 1/a 50.7. Jer. 1. 18. and Mic. 3.8. 
9 As an 9 adamant harder then flint have I made thy 


torehead: 7 fear * them nor, neither be s diſmayed at their 


u See v. 1. x In my Name and Authority, ſo ſome, but then it would looks, though they be a * rebellious houſe. 
q If their Foreheads be hard and cutting as the Flint, if chey wound 77. 
the ſofc and tender, if they ſparkle with Fire againſt choſe of harder Chy,, 

Metal, yet be not afraid, I have made thee as the Adamant harde; 6. 


have been in the ſingular Number, not plural. Better and fuller 'cis by 
others thus, Whar Things ſhall ſhew thee, and'in what WordsT ſhall 
declare them to thee; theſe declare to the Captives in Baby/on. They 
perhaps do exp=& to hear ſomewhat elſe, and their flattering falſe 
P:ophets ſuggeſt other matters, but look ro it, thou goeſt on my Er- 
rand, ſpeak therefore, in my Words, as Hc6. 


5 For y thou art not ſent to a people of a z -þ ſtrange 


dep of lip, ſpeech, and of an « hard language, #4; to the houſe of Ifra- 
and beavyel b: 


o f tong iro, 
endo ver. 


6. 


+ Heb 


; Though the Divine Cominand is reaſon enough why we ſhould 
obey readily, yet God is pleaſed to give the Propher Arguments te 
per{ſwade, and uſhers them in here. z Who cannot skill of thy Speech, 
nor thou {peak (without gitt of Tongues) to them ; ſhift not off thy 
work as if with 70:4 ſerit to a People of barbarous Tongue, in which 
are dark and profound Idioms, bur as horrid to thy Ear, as deep and 
dark Precipices and Gulphs to the Eye, as Heb. deep of Lip intimates. 
« The ſame repeated in other Words, they will need no Interpreter 
to tell them what thou ſayeſt to them, nor wilt thou need an Interpre- 
ter to tell thee what anſwer they give. Thy work will be the eaſter, 
neither difficult as Things that lie deep to be dig'd our, nor as Things 
of great weight and hzavinels to be lifted, as both M=taphors imply ; 
this is his fiſt Argument. Next implied in it, I ſend thee to thine own 
Countrey-men, whoſe welfare thou ſhouldſt readily ſeek, and in their 
own Tongne rhou mayſt expreſs thy care for them. 6 They till are 
a Family that God owneth, he hath not broke up Houſekeeping, there 
is fartber Incouragement, and they are 1ſrael's Seed the Poſterity of 


than Flint, able tocut and break it. But what if here ſhould be allu- 
fon tothe Talmudic Rabbinical Tardition about their ſuppoſed Worm 
Schamir, the word here uſed? if the Tradition be as old as Ezekie!'s 
time,'ewill carry ſome Probability with it. This Schamir was, ſay they, 
a Worm, which by ſecret virtue would, when applied, cut or form 
hard Stones, and divide the greateſt ; that Moſes uſed it to prepare the 
precious Stones for the Breaſt-plate ; and Solomon, ſay they, uſed it ro 
fit the Stones without Hammer for the Temple: well then, Exzckiel; fear 
not, thou ſhalt be a Schamir ro the Jews in Captivity, and fit fome of 
them to be either rich Ornaments in the Breaſt-plate, or beauriful 
Stones in the Temple, go about thy work, it ſhall nor be, thd ic ſeem, 
fucceſslefs. 7 Let no prevailing Fear take thee quite off from thy Work. 
5s Letnotany leſſer Surprizes and ſudden Diſcompoſfures of Mind, when 
thou appeareſt before them, unfit thee for this Work I ſer thee about, 
: As a Houſe that is Rebellion it ſelf. 


10 Moreover, he faid unto me, Son of man, all my 
words that I ſhall ſpeak unto thee, « receive in thine heart, 


and hear x with thine ears. 

This Verfe is a Repetition of the Charge given to the Prophet, to 
deal faithfully and undauntedly in the delivering his Meſlage, to deliver 
always what God ſhould ſpeak, to ſpeak nothing elſe, and to ſpeak all 
that. Theſe Repetitions in the abundance of the ſame Words, are from 
the uſage and cuſtom of the People of thoſe Countries ia which the 
Jews were now Captive. « This explains the Viſionary Eating, of which 


Chap. ] 


"Fw.1, 


Mob 2.13. 


Facob, and under Covenant-Mercy ; go therefore readily, for 1ſrel | yer. ;. 


ſhall be gathered. 


6 Not to many c people of a 4 ſtrange ſpeech, and of 
-z an - hard language, whoſe e words thou canſt not under- 
dec» of 1;p, ſtand: # [| ſurely, had I ſent thee to them they would have 


ens heavy hearkened unto thee, 


ef £47 
$980. 


Or, tf 
had jent 
ence, XC. 
world 19)cy 


y 
nor NAV? 


c This Verſe is much what the former, yet ſtrengthens and illu* : 
Many People here may be accor” \ſucceeded his Father Jehojakim, {lain for his Confpiracy with Egype 


frares what 1s laid down here. 


x Hearing is firſt, and receiving into the Heart follows, bur 
with the Jews ſuch Tranſpoſitions are very uſual. 

I: And y po, get thee to them of the z captivity, unto 
a thy people, and b ſpeak unto them, and tell chem, «c 
Thus faith the Lord GOD, # whether they will hear, or 


whether they will forbear. 
3 Vid. werſe 4 z Of the firſt Captivity under Jeconiah's Reign, who 


4 ding to the Comprehenſiveneſs of the H:b. Word, either numerous» [againſt Nebuchadnezzar, as 2 Kings 24. 1. with 6. 7. Theſe are thoſe 
whoſe Multitudes would be their Pride, and tempt them to deride good Figs, Fer. 24. 6, 7,8. of whom ſuch good 1s ſpoken, and to 


thee. Or, Mighty in Valour and Feats of War and Policy, whoſe whom thole Promules are made. a The Sons of thy People, Heb. Some 
Might would harden them. Or, far off, who would wonder a Stran- will have God ſpeaking here of this People as no more his; burTrhink 
ger ſhou'd come to tell them their Deſtiny. Or, diverſe Nations, 


it rather is to be interpreted of ſome that were amidſt them who were 


Rearkrncd that thou ſhouldſt need diverſe Tongues, to ſpeak to them all in their difowned of God, and were now bur Children or Sons of che People, 
$79 720 gwn Language. This difficult Work is reſerved to thoſe whom $hilp | the Apoſtate [dolaters and debauched Sinners, which might poſſibly 
will ſend, 'tis kept to the times when the Spirit poured forth, ſhall, have embraced the Conqueror's Religion and Manners. 6 Here again 


* Joh. r5.* for # they will not hearken unto me: for & all the houſe 


3O. 


+ zleb. 


Dri ef fore 


kiad, ans 


hard of 


h cart. 


enrich with the Gift of Tongues in Goſpel-days. & Deep Lip, &c. 
wid. wer. 5, e Words are articulate and ſignificant, and when under. 
Nood, they are Words to the Hearer, but whilſt not underſtood they 
are bur empty and barbarous Sounds, as the Apoſtle obſerves 1 Cor. 14, 
f Surely in the Heb. the Words occaſion difficulty and variety of Tran- 
flations, but all of no great Moment. Some would refer it to the 
Fews, and make this Senſe, Hadſt thou gone 1n any Name bur mine 
they would have heard, fo parallel it with Jo-n 5. 43. but 'tis better, 
and more agreeable with the Text, to refer it to many Nations men- 
tioned, who would have heard what the Houſe of 1ſ-ae! refuſed to 
hear, (of which Jonah's Ninivites are pregnant Proofs) and to them 
T would have ſent thee, (fay ſome) but that they did not-underſtand 
thee ; this 15 but a very ſlender Gueſs, and ill conſiſts with the Pow- 
er of God, which can give theTongue, if he would haveſenr the Meſ. 
ſage, as he intimared to Msſcs unwilling to go. Our Verſion hath 
well read and referred the Words; with that Aſſeveration, ſurely, they 
have expreſt whar ſome will have the Hcb. dv&5 DN to be, a form 
ofan Oath: God aſſures the Propker the Meſſage is ſuch that any Men 
in their Wits would hear, go therefore to thy People, try whether 
they will a& like Men and hear, eſpecially when their Condition is quite 
otherwiſerhan that I now ſuggeſt of the Nations, for the Jews are few, 
weak, reduced to this by negleEing to hear in reaſon ; they ſhould 
now hear, repeat, ſeek me, do my word, and live. 


-7 But g the houſe of Iſrael b will not hearken unto thee, 


of Iſrael are / + impudent and hard-hearted . 


z And Heb. put adverſatively is righly rendred but. h Have no mind 
Or will; the Original is not here, as moſtly *tis elſewhere, content to 
expreſsit by the word in the Tenſe, which connoteth the Event : Bur 
the Original firſt points our their want of a Will and Inclination, they 
E:ve no propenſity to hear, they are obſtinate in their reſuſal ; next 
a&1s what twas their Wills were obſtinately averſe to, z. e. hearin 
2:d obeying. 7 This Pallage confirms the PrediQion, and withal fore- 
2-ms the Prophet that he ſtumble not at their ſcandalous refuſal and 
zbuſing of him, ſo they have uſed their God, and his; and no wonder 
if they conſent as little to him as they have to God. & z. e. The far 
r:eater part, notevery particular Perſon, there were of the Captives 
ſome few, Jike good Figs. &c, ! Have hardned their Faces, chey are 
not aſhamed, nor can they bluſh now, as Jer. 3. 3. Brazen-faced is no 
new Phraſeor Angliciſm, but.asold as !/2iah 48. 4. nay asold as habi- 
exal Sin. m This the Root whence the other ſprings, and what Hope 
trom ſuch whoſe Hearts are as far from relenting as their Faces from 
bluſhing? How can it be expeRted they will hear, whoſe Hearts are 


the Command is repeated and doubled. c As before chap. 2, wer. 4. 
d Chap. 2.ver. 5. which ſee. 


hind me a + voice of a great ruſhing, /aying, i Bleſſed be 
the glory of the LORD from his & place. 

e The Spirit of God which governed the Wheels and the living 
Creatures, chap. 1.wer. 3. f Either raiſed him up to nearer Approaches 
to ſee and diſcern, to hear and learn; Or, carried him to his 
Countreymen to whom he was to ſpeak. g his Face roward the North 
while he ſaw the Viſion, now that he is carried South ro his People the 
Voice is behind him. h An Articulate Sound and Intelligible, but with 
great Commorion, for ic was the Voice of Angels, attended with the 
ruſhing noiſe of the Wheels added to the noiſe of thetr Wings, and a 
mighty Wind which might likely accompany all this. 7 Praiſed, and 
magnihed be the gloriouſly holy and juſt God, riding on the glorious 
Chariot of his Sovereignty, in preſcribing Laws, appointing Ordinan- 
ces, threatning Sin, and puniſhing Sinners. & Either coming down from 
Heaven, or departing from his Temple. In brief, the glorious Angels, 
and all the Saints of God bleſs, 7. e. praiſe, admire, and juſtify God in 
all the ways ofhis Judgments among the Sons of Men. 

I3 I heard ] alſo the noiſe of the wings of the living 
creatures that 2 -þ touched one another, and the noiſe 
of the wheels » ovzr againſt them, and a noiſe of a great 
ruſhing. 

'#| rh added to conne& the Verſes and to make the reading fu!!, 
hath I think ſomewhat perplext the Words, and occaſioned enquiry al- 
ter two different Sounds or Voices, whereas if we read them as in the 
Heb. and as the Lat. And the noiſe was of the Wings, &«. fo the 13th 
verſe will explain the 12th, and tell you what was thar great ruſhing 
which Ezekzel heard behind him. m1 See chap. 1. wer, g. n See chap. 1. 
Ver. 19. 20. 

14 So 0 the p Spirit q lifred me up, and » took me 
away, and s I went + * in bitterneſs, in the + heat of, 


ON ME. 


wer. 12. which ſee. q Either from thar proſtcation which the terrible 
Viſien had cauſed, when he fell roche Ground: Or, rather caught him, 
who before wason bis Legs and well come to himſelf, up into the Air. 
7 Carried me, (as was Philip when carried away from the Eunuch) and 
brought me to the place where I was to deliver my Meſſage, the plac* 


bcar than their Ears ? 


where the Captive Jews were crouded togezthes. « Hithecto no: hins 
appes: oy 


12 Then the e * Spirit f took me up, and I heard g be- "GÞ 


my fpirit, « but the x hand of the LORD was itgong up- i 


HY: 


0 And Heb. or then, at that very time. p The Spirit of God, 35 


Heb 


(Ch. 1; 


Wu, 


y 


{ 
) 
a 


”ss 3 


Toy FY vu WW Vu T> WW 


no = > Iwo (} es £2 wo Yvw 


1 


© haters 


oO 
_* 
. - re 
f Is, of Sh 
| + He Bos 
"rat 


(hip 


<WLYIF, 

P {% Y 

We? 
< 
ws 


Mob 2.13 


la. 52.5. 


56, 10. 


02. 0, 


6, I7. 


4 
= 
; 4 z 
w 
* 


hs 
. 
ou 


& Ws 
2 


where 


. II. 


appears of the Prophet's Concurrence, but the Verſe ſeems to ſpeak | 

Graintand force, but now you have his voluntary Concurrence wich! 
*f - Motion of the Spirit. He went when fo moved and aſſiſted, 7 Bit 
— the heat of my Spirit, Hb. Grieved, ſad, and my Spirit within me 
was as all in a heat of Anger. Either 1, Enkindled within by the Sym- 

arhy he had with hisCountrey-men in theirSufferings and Calamiries, 
Dr > Becauſe of thoſe Wickedneſles he ſaw and reproved in them. 
Or, 3. Becauſe he muſt be the unwelcome Meſſenger of ſuch unwel- 
cons News. Or, 4. Becauſe the Danger he was expoſed to among 
enraged Deſperadoes: which vay ever you explain it, 2ekiel S weak- 
neſs and diſtempered Humour will appear 1n it, Jonas-like he will be 
angry. t# For, as ſome others ; And, as Heb. x Either in general the 
Power of God, which cannot be reſiſted. Orthe Spirit of prophecy, 
which, as a Fire ſhut up, w1ll break forth, as 1n Jer. 20. 7,8, 9. in- 


deed both concur. 

15 Then [| came to y them of the captivity at z Tel- 
abib, that dwele by 4 the river of Chebar, and I * ſat 
þ they fat, and remained there c aſtoniſhed among 
chem 4 ſeven days. 


7 Verſe 11. See there. x the Name of a Place in that part of Me/6- 
poramia which was ſhut up within Chebar Weſtward, and Savors Eaſt. 
ward. This was divided into Superiour called Gezar, and Inferiour 
-alled here TeZ-abib, a low Country and unprofitable, becauſe ſpoiled by 
\Vaters, and ſecure to keep Captives in, and fo it aforded matter of 
L:ibour and Toil to the Captive Jews, and was as a Priſon to them leſt 
thcv ſhould eſcape, and in both pleaſed the Badbylonians. a Onor near 
to that part of the River Chebar which runs W:ftward of this Tel-abib ; 
h-12 then is no more ContiadiQion than is in this, if I ſhould name a 
Plicc between two Rivers, and ſay the Place 1s near one of thoſe Ri- 
vers. b Sat fad and aſtoniſh'd, where I found and ſaw them fittin 
aftoniſh'd : for Sirting ſometimes is a Poſture of Mourning and Sadneſs, 
as it: Lam. I. I. and Job's Friends, and Pal. 137. 1. c Either at the 
ſight of that woful Change of the Jews from Freedom and Honour to 
Servitude and Shame : Or, aſtoniſh'd at foreſight of that which the 
Ro!l contained, or at the Jews Impenitence and unreformed manner of 
Living underalltheſe aflitions. 4 Mourning no doubt all that while, 
and waiting till the Spirit of Prophecy ſhould open his Mouth, and till 
he might know Perſons, their Inclinations, Vices, and Temper 1a 
them, and till he might ſpeak ſomewhat of perſonal Knowledge a-. 
gainſt cheir Wickedneſles. 


:6 And it came to paſls at the end of ſeven days, that 
the 2rd of the LORD came unto me, ſaying, 
This Verſe gives us ſufficient account why the Prophet ſtayed theſe 
ſeven Days, it was becauſe the particular Word he was to ſpeak ro 
them was not yet declared to him. He had a Call and Commiſſion to 
be x Propher, and comes in this CharaGer to theſe Jews, but till ſeven 
days are ended he receives no particular Word, when by his Carriage 
among the Jews it appeared he was more than a common Maa, that he 
was full of matter more than ordinary ; then came the Word of the 
Lo:d, ſaying. 


17 * Son e of man, f I have g made thee * a watch- 
man to the h houſe of Iſrael: therefore hear the word at 


S|on me, and he ſaid unto me, Ariſe, go forth 


my mouth z, and give them warning & from me. 

e Chap. 2. 1. which ſee. f The Perſon that appeared to him,chap.r. 
26. *Tis the great and glorious One. z Appointed by Commiſſton, I 
have qualified by Gifts, I have aQually ſent thee forth, &c. + Night 
and Day to obſerve whether the Enemy approach, and to give notice 
on pain of Death. 7 See chap. 2.3. K&1I will give thee notice, thou 
art then to give warning unto them, and let them know it comes from 
me, andin Mercy to prevent their final Ruine ; be nor asa Prognoftica- 
tor, as one that conſults the Stars, and foretels from the ConjunCtion 
of them, but own the Things thou art to warn them of as from my 
Mouth. | 


18 When I ſay unto the 2 wicked, Thou ſhalt ſurely 
» die; and thou o giveſt him not warning, nor p ſpeak- 
eſt to warn the wicked from his q way to fave his life » ; the 
{ame wicked man ſhall die s in his iniquity ; but his blood 
will I require #7 at thine hand. 


[ Either by the Menaces of my Law, or by Motion of my Spirit 
ſtirring thee up to reprove and warn. m Any wicked one whatever, 
Rich or Poor, Mean or Mighty. » Such Courſes will certainly end in 
Death, and in Damnation, if not left. o Frequently and with repeated 
Monitions, as the Word ſignifies, and asthe Apoſtle, 4#s 20. 31.this 
to thoſe that will hearken. p Some will profanely ſcoff and deride, 
yer ſpeak to warn them, till it do appear they are ſuch as will turn a- 
gain and rent you. Or elſe 'tis the ſame thing repeated. q Men muſt 
be told of their own Sins, theſe are their Dangers. » That thou muſt 
preſerve his Life, his Soul, and recal him once from Sin and Death. 
s The Man who is not warned by thee willcertainly diein his Sin, the 
S1nner's Ignorance will not be ſufficientto prevent his Death, butthy 
not admoniſhing him will involve thee alſo in Guilt and Death. : 1 
will puniſh thee, who poſſibly mighteſt have ſaved by warning, how- 
ever oughteſt to have warned. 


19 Yet it thou warn the wicked, and he turn not 
from « his wickedneſs, nor from his x wicked way, he 
_ die 1n his y iniquity 3 but s thou haſt delivered thy 
oul. 


# This may denote the Sinfulneſs of his Mind and Heart, which is 
the ſpring of all His a&ual ſinful Courſes, the Praices of Sin, 


+ He" ja and the Habits of Sin muſt be left. » The Puniſhment of his unre- 
$a" Pented Sins ſhall be Death. z Thereis nodangeruntothe Watch-man, 
e the Prophet and Miniſter, who did his Duty and warned the Sinner. 
k "Ob. 13, , 22 Again @ when a * righteous b an dathc turn from 
, + His -f righteouſneſs, and commic 4 iniquity, and I e lay a 
: | iq ſtumbling. block before him, f he ſhall die: becauſe thou 
; &, haſt not given him warning he ſhall die in his ſin, and his 


g righteouſneſs which he hath done h ſhall not be remmem- 
bred; but his blood will I require at thy hand. 


i 
Cinp. 111, WF 
T1ap. 1 3 1 

# What muſt be done to Sinners is ſaid, now for thoſe that have ' 
been righteous take thy Dire&ions. 6 Either one that hath for ſome 
continuance of time profeſſed the Way of Righteouſneſs, but 1s now | 
overcome of Vices: Or, who is righteous only in appearance, as {: Wnt 
Prov. 18. 17. Ezckicl 18. 24,26. and 33. 13. Match. 9. 13. c Gives 2 if 
juſt cauſe to fear he not only hath commited ſome particuJaar Sin, but 
that he hath changed the Courſe of Life, the Thougshrts and Purpoſes 
from Good to Fvil, hath forſaken the Way of Righceouſncſs- d Gives F 1} 
himſelf up to a ſinful Life, wallows in Sin. e Ditpoſe Afairs ſo by 2 _) [i 
juſt and puniſhing Providence, that what did refirtin is raken away,or "Ks: 7 
what will be occation of greater ſinning, is not removed, or any other v 
way ; Igive ſuch an one upto hisown Heart's Luſt, fy that he continue 
in Sin. f Shall periſh in his Sin. g Either external, and ſ:zemins, Or, 
his partial and temporary Righteouſneſs which he himſc}f or others | 
aſcribed to him, and thought to be in him, + ſhall nor be profitable | 40! 
to him: he that apoſtatizeth is the worſt of Men, becauſe he falls 'J 
from known Ways of Goodneſsand Holinels; yer fuch muſt be warned, 8 HA 
elſe their Blood will be required at the hand of thoſe were to warn x {| (Uh 
them, j 
$ 


21 Nevertheleſs, if thou : warn the & righteous mar, 
that the righteous / ſin not, and he #2 doth nor fin, he 
ſhall ſurely » live, becauſe he is warned: alfo thou haſt 
delivered thy ſoul. 


# As often as need. & The truly and really Pjous, the regenerate 


Man. 7 Deliberately, cuſtomarily, habirually. mz Takes warning, 34 
and departs farther from Sin, and keeps better to the Ways of God. ' 8'} 
n Be accepted with God and happy, and both Warner and Warned if Wo 
have delivered their Souls. Bj ff 

22 T And the o* hand of the LORD was p there up- * ch. c. ;. il ; { 


into q the 
plain, and I will there » talk with thee. | 

o See chap. 1.3. and 3. 24. fp At Tel-abib. q Withdraw from the 
Multitude; and retire intothe opener place, likely 'twas ſome {patious 
Level in that low Country which lay between the Rivers. » To 


comfort, encourage, dire& and communicate turther of the Divine 
Will and Counſels to the Prophet. 


23 s Then [I aroſe, and went forth into the plain, and 
behold, the ? glory of the LORD ſtood « there, as the 
glory which 1 * ſaw by the river of Chebar: and I x fe.1 ' Chap. -. 
on my face. 


5 So ſoon as commanded. # See c/ap. 1, 28. with foregoing Ver. 
ſes. #« In the Plain whicher he is now come. » It overpow:r-d 
him now as then, and he cou'd bear it no more now than beture he 
could. 

24 Then the y Spirit entred into me, and fet me upon 
my feet, and ſpake with me, and faid unto me, Go & ſhut 
thy ſelf within thy houſe. | 

3 See chap. 2. 2. » Some ſay this is to be an Intorrogation, wilt 'þ 
thou ? &c. Others add 'tis an Irony, upbraiding him, bur I = 26 Fi: tf 
ground for either ; *cis, as we read it, a plain Command ; which ep. pr 
pears, in that with the Command Gol giveth itrengri to 49 what i, 
commanded, and he is to ſhut up himſeif, to learn vf God whac h, 
mult forete), to fore-figgify the ſhutting up of the Jews in 7crir/alcny, 

25 But thou, O a ſon of man, behold, þ * they {hall - Chas 
put © bands upon thee, and ſhall 4 bind thee with them, a - 
aud thou {halt not go e out among them. 

a See chap. 2. x. b Tis not ſaid who ſhall do this; therefore Tnter. 

preters gueſs variouſly at it ; ſome ſay 'tis figurative, noting the Ma. 
lice of the Jews, who would nor ſuffer him quietly to converſe with 
them, their Malice was ike Bonds. Others underſtand the Words as 
they ſound, and refer to, x. Angels as if they bound him. 2. Tohis 
Friends and Domeſticks, who would take his Intenſaeſs and Ear 
neſtneſs in continued retired Thoughtfulneſs, to be Madneſs ; fo Pro- 
phets were miftaken and miſreported, 2 Kivzs 9. and Mark Y. 2. 
3. To the ruder and more violent of the Jews, who on all Occations 
were ready thus to confine their Prophets, when they foretold un. 
welcome Tidings, and to ſtir up their Governors hereto, as 1 Kings 
22.27. Jer. 32. 2. and 37. 15. and 38. 6,7. 'Tis not improbable 
that the Rabble ſhould incenſe the ( A yu220)Zrva) Prelidents of 
the Captivity to do this. e Signifying the Bonds and Chains of their 
future Captivity who were yer at Jeruſalsm. 4 This I ſuppoſe de- 
notes the Severity with which he Conqueror would treat chem, he 
would bind their Bonds faſt, cloſe, and this will be Pain and Grizsf ro 
the Bounden. e An Helraiſm, thou ſhalt be denied a free Converſe. 


26 * And I will f make thy tongue cleave to the, : 
roof of thy mouth, that thou ſhalt be dumb, and ſhalt | Ch. 24, 
not be to them -Þ g a reprover ; for they are a h rebellious” 


houſe. + Hcb. 2 
7 Either by forbidding thee to ſpeak, T will make thee as dumb, as man repro. A417 
if chy Tongue did cleave to the Roof of rhy Mouth. & Or, poflibly vinge 05 0H! 


God did ſuſpend his Influence, and leave rhe Prophet dumb as one 
who could got move his Tongue, the uſe whereof is rakenaway. #& A 
Man to reprove ( as Heb. ) ſhalt rell them as little of rhc3r Faults and : 
Danger, as a dumb Man can do: God hereby giving the Prepher ſome Wh 
reſpite, ſignifying the future State of the Jews would be ſuch, they S: 
ſhou!d no more dare to mutter or whiſper; and puniſhing the re. | 
fra&ory Deafneſs of the Jews with taking away their Reprover, &c, bIE 
h See Verſe 5, 7. of Chap 2. | 


27 But e when I ſpeak with thee, & I will open thy 
mouth, and thou / ſhalt ſay unto them, "Thus ſaith the 1p 
Lord GOD, He that heareth, let him hear ; and he "Pi 
that forbeareth, lect him » forbear; for they are a re- 


bellious houſe. | fy 
i When-ever I ſhall reveal any thing to thee; Or, when I hall $224 


: ; 

have diſcovered all to thee which chy People ſhould be informed in. RE 14; 
& Then I will open thy Lips and looſe thy Tongue, and give thee R a 4 
power to ſpeak. / In point of Dury thou muſt rel! chem what I 7 ba A 
ſpeak, and te!l chem as from me who am eternal and {oyereiga Lord b! Roh 
of RAS" þ 
a by. HIP 


Chap. IV. 
of Heaven and Farth, and in this Stite the Lord ſpealcs above eighty 
times in this Prophecy. #2 'Tis his Duty and Safety, and 1 propoſe it 
to his Conſideration, Jet him think what he hath to do herein. 7 T1s 
at his own peril, thou haſt warned him, and now trouble not thy ſelt, 
neither be grieved much at it. They, a rebellious Houſe, a& like 
themſelves in finning, and thou haſt aCted like thy felt a faithful Ad- 
moniſher; I will a& like my ſelf in puniſhing and giving them up in- 
r> the hands of cruel ravenous and devouring Enemies, who ſhall de- 
{froy them. 


C H AJP. IV. 


J. 

Gor commmnacth the Propoet 70 pourrray the ſiege of Teruſalem upon a files 

Tan-3. and, by the Prophets [ying 07 his right ana left feds, ſhewetr the 

*:7e of his {orbearance with it; 4 n= &, By the proviſion of the ſiege, is 
ſhawn the greatneſs of the jamming; 9 = nn I7. 


1 Hou alſo ſon of man, take thee a 7 tile, and m lay 
ic before thee, and » pourtray upon 1t the city, 

even Jerufalem. | 
Hitherto the Preface containing the Call and Commiſſion of the Pro- 
phzr, now he begins; this is the firſt Prophecy, and'ris againſt Fernſas 
/c:::, 1Or Brick, or any ſquare Tabl?t on which he might engrave 
or carve. m As Carvers uſe to do, as Engravers and Painters do. 
. Draw a Map of Feruſ2/cnz, delineate or deſcribe the City Teruſalem 


whence they were come, who now are in Babylon, and probably repen- |, 


ted thar they had left 7uc2a and Jeruſalem, and murmured againſt them 
that adviſcd to ir. But Iet them know by this Sign, that Jeruſalcm 
ſhould ſuffer much more than ever they ſuffered, that thoſe who re- 
mained there linning againſt God, ſhould bear a long Siege, a very 
grievous Famine, and cruel Slaughters. 

2 And lay + ſiege againſt it, and o build a fore a- 
eain{t ir, and calt a p mount againſt it: fer the 9 camp 
aiſo againſt it, and ſet [| battering 7 rams againſt it round 

| Or.c7f. about. 

FORTS, + Draw the ſigure of a Siege about the City. o Raiſe a Tower and 
Bu.-warks which may annoy: the Befieged, and defend the Beliegers; 
tom which may be thot cither Darts againſt Men, or mighty Stones a- 
vauſt the Walls and Towers of the Ciry. p Which made large, high, 
and ſtrong,and near as they can,might thence by helpof Galleries get 
over the Wa!ls andenter the Ciry. 4 Lay out the Ground alſo for the 
Army »f the Chaldean: to pitch their Tentsin, and toform their Camp. 
» The Chaidee Paraphraſt underſtands the Caprains and chief Leaders 
an:ong the Souldiers; bur *tis better anderſtood of thoſe Engines 
wherewith Beſicgers bid batter the Walls and Towers of a. beſieged 
Ciry; an Engine of great uſe in days of old among all warhke Na- 
tions, invented ſay fume in the Siege of Try. 

2 Moreover, take thou unto thee an s [| iron 7 pan, and 
| Or,z fa: fer it for a wall « of iron betweeen thee and the city, and 
77277, 02 ſer x thy face againſt it, andit ſhall be beſieged, and y thou 
Dt ſhalt lay ſiege againſt it: this ſoz# be a & ſign to the houle 

of Iracl. 

s To ſignify the Hardneſs and Obſtinacy of the Beliegers. r Pro. 
bably a Fy ing-pan, on the plain part of which the Tile bearing the 
Pourtrait of Jer»ſal:m lying, the Iron Edges or Brims compatled it 
tound about, as a Line drawn round a beſieged City, out of which 
the Diftreſled could not fly, into which no Relief could be brought. 
It plainly noted the Cruelty of the Chaldeans, and future Tortures of 
the Jews, who were like to be fried or boiled in this Iron Pan, as 
Fer. 29. 22. and 2 Mac. 7.5. wu That it may reſemble a Wall of 
Iron ; for as impregnable asſuch a Wall, ſhould the Courage, Refolu- 
tion and Patience of the Chaldcans be in attacking it. « Fix thy diſ- 
pleaſed Countenance againſt it, in token of my Diſpleaſure. » If the 
Prophet do repreſent him that ſent him, then it ſpeaks God's appear- 
ing againſt theſe wicked ones. z All theſe things are Signs and Em- 
blems uſual with all, moſt uſual with this Prophet ; who in this Hie- 
roglyphick foreſhews the State of thoſe that lived at Jerr/alem. 


4 a Lie thou alſo upon thy 6 left ſide, and c lay the ini- 
guity of the houſe of 4 Iſrael upon. it: according to the e 


number of the days that thou ſhalt lie upon it, thou ſhalt F ay 


bear their iniquity. 

a A Poſture which was to ſigmify the ſettled Reſolution of the Be- 
ſiegers, who. had taken up their abode till the Siege were finiſh'd in 
taking Jcruſalem. b To note out the leſs worthy part, the ten Tribes, 
or Samaria, which was from Jeruſalem toward the left-hand, and was 
head of the ten Tribes. c Take upon thee in the repreſentation 
thereof both Guilt and Puniſhment; bear both, not to expiate, but 
ro exemplify what they ſhould ſuffer. 4 Diſtinguiſht from 5r7ah, 
'ris the Ten Tribes. e By that Proportion of time, thou ſhalt know 
and intimate to them how long I have born patiently with their Sins, 
and how long they ſhall bear their own Puniſhment. f Signifying that 
as the Prophet in the Sign, fo God in very deed had patiently born 
with them. 


5 For I have g laid upon thee the years of their ini- 
quity, according to the number of the days, 5 three hun- 
dred and ninety days: fo ſhalt thou bear * the iniquity of 


*Num.14. the houſe of Iſrael. 

34: This Verſe explains the former. g I have pointed out the number 
of years wherein Apoſtate 1/-ae! ſinned againſt me; and Idid bear with 
them according to the number of Days, wherein thou muſtlie on thy 
left-ſide. See wv. 4. there is ſome difference, though of no great 
Moment, in fixing the Periods of begining and ending theſe Prophe- 
tick Nays; Theſe Years ſome begin them at Solo-70n's falling to Idola- 
try, in the 27h Year of his Reign, and ended them in the fifth of Ze- | 
#:kiaj;'s Capriviry. Others begin at the fourth Year of Rebohoam, and 
end them in the 21/2 Year of the Captivity. Others begin them inthe 
firſt of Rchoboam and Feroboam, when the Kingdom was divided, and 
then they muſt end about the 17:5 Year of the Captivity. The 
r{t Supputation to me is much the likelieſt, and agrees, neareſt with 
the Year wherein this Prophet begins his Prophecy. Ir is not alroge- 
ther unlikely, thatthe Prophet may intimate, though abſcurely, rhe 


| 


EZEKIEL. 
Continuance of the Siepe of Jeruſalem, wich the Culncans began on Fl 
the 13:h Day of the 10:+þ Month of the 974 Year of Zedekiah, ang # 


|thy right-ſide, and bear the Iniquity of the Houſe of F444: and that i 


Chap, li 


laſted the remaining two Months of the 9:4 Year, and the whole 10h M 
Year, except ſome five Months wherein the Babylonian; retired to fight FR 
the Egypmans, beat them, ſpoiled them, and returned to the Siege of the 
Fernſalem, which laſted to the 9th Day of the 4th Month of Zedekial'ls, Þ % 


r1:/) Year, So that one whole Year, and three Weeks, and 4 Days; 
or 13 Months, at 3o Days in each Month, takeing up 390 Days; an 
diſcounting the five Months and odd Days inthe £g1ptian Expedition, 
you come to the Continuance of 390 Days in the threatned Sieg2, 
and poſlibly this may be the Intent of the Prophecy. 

6 And when thou haſt ; accompliſh'd them, lie & a. 
gain on thy right ſide, and thou Jhalt bear the iniquity 
of the 72 houſe of Judah » forty days: I have appointed 
thee * -þ each day for a year. | 

i Almoſt accompliſhed, or when about to accompliſh them ; 7. e. 4g V: 
Days, betore the 39o do expire ; at the end of 360 Days turn thou to + 


this 1s the true Account, appears from this Verſe compared with * = 
Chap. 1. two firſt Verſes, and Chap. 8. wer. 1. fay ſome, and thoſe very "RE 
learned Men. Others will have the 4. Days diſtin&t from the 390,” | © 
and reckon them by themſelves ; and lo the better and Grammatical Þ 
ConſtruQtion in the H:b. ſeems to carry it, for it ſpeaks in the Perfe& 
Tenſe, and lying a fecond time. Bur be theſe Numbers diſtinEt, or 
ut one, 15 no great concern, either way they do plainly ſpeak God's 
wounderful Patience with 1/-ae! and Judah, and point out the time of 
; the Miſeries of both for their Sinfulneſs. & A ſecond time Hcb. - 1 Fd, 
ver. f. » of the two Tribes, fay ſome; of the Royal Family, ſay 
others, and countenance it with 7/a. 22. 27, and then Jſ-ac! diſtin- 
guiſhed is the whole body of the two Tribes, and the Remnant of 
the ten T'ribes that eſcaped, and embodied with the two Tribes, as 
ſome did at firſt diviſion; others afterward in 4/2, 7:hoſaphat, Hexen Þ -» » 
kiah and Jofrah's time, left their Places and came to Jeryſ/cm, ; 
» 'Tis plain they are ſo many Years, but not ſo plain where to begin 
them ; whether from Manaſſes, or more probably from 7o/7a/s re. 
newing Covenant, until the DeſtruQion of the Temple, which is 45 
Years; during which time God deferred to puniſh, expe&ing whether 
they would keep Covenant and walk with God, or retain their Ydo. 3 
latries and wicked Ways ; which latter they did for 13 Years of 70/73/'s i 
Reign, for 11 of Jehojakim, and 11 of Zedekial's Reign, and five of 
his Captivity; which amount to juſt 4o Years, and they are mention. 
ed apart ſay ſome from the 390, becaufe they were more wickedly 
abuſed to promote Sin. 

7 0 Therefore thou ſhalt p ſet thy face toward the ſiege q 


J 


of Jeruſalem, aftd thine r arm ſhail be 5 uncovered, and * 
thou ſhalt propheſie againſt it. 


0 And Heb, p While thou lieſt on thy Side thon ſhalt fix thy Conn. 
tenance on the yourtrait of beſieged Jerz/alem, with angry and m<n4. 
Ccing Looks. q Not which was in the Land of 7:d4ah, but on that de. 
{cribed in the Tile, the Emblem of the other. » Thy right-arm, the 
ſtronger and more ready to a&t. +5 Naked and ſtretched our, as being RO 
ready to ſtrike and ſlay. 7 This very Emblem doth threaten, which Þþ 2 
is a vilional Prediction ; and no doubt Zzel/e! unfolded theſe Riddles Y 
on juſt Occaſions; and this was a prophelying to them, ſometime by 
Signs and ſometimes by Words. 

8 And behold, « I will lay x bands upon thee, and thou Þ 7 
ſhale not turn thee + from one ſide to another, till thou ſau 
haſt ended the days of thy y ſiege. | | 

z Who-ever were the Perſons that laid Bonds on Zzelie! in chap. 3," ® 
ver. 25. here 'tis plain that the Lord doth it. » If the Prophet repre. 
ſent the beſieged Citizens who mult be Captives in Bonds,then 'tis like. 
ly theſe Bonds were viſible and material, that they might be a teach. 
ing Sizn and Admonition ; that as they ſaw the Prophet in them, fo 
certainly he ſhould ſee that come to paſs which was fgnified by them 
If he repreſent the Chaldeans as thoſe who were by Divine Power as faft 
bound to this Siege, till the City be taken, as he was tied to the place 
whence he could not ſtir a foot ; then inviſible Bonds, which none feel 
or ſee but the Prophet, may ſuffice; theſe aſſuring him that thoſe 
could move no more from the Siege than he from that Side he lay 
And though the Egyptian Army make ſome Diverſion, yet it is 
[very like the Siege was not quite raiſed ; but they kept the City 
'blockt up, whilſt the Groſs of the Army drew off to fight Pharao!”s 
Army, according to that Jcr. 37. 9. the Chaldeans ſhall not depart. | 
'} Plural Heb. Sieges, either becauſe 'twas like two Sieges by thar little 
Tnterruption of 3 or 4 Months, or elſe becauſe of the Length and 
Soreneſs hereof. 

9 © x Take thou allo unto thee 2 wheat, and barley, 
and bean, and lentlles, and miller, and {| ficches, and put, 
them in 5 one veſle], and make thee bread thereof, a [7 C 
cording to the number of the days that thou ſhalt lie upon Þ * F 
thy ſide ; three hundred c and ninety days ſhalt thou cat 
thereof. 


z Provide thee Corn enough; for a grievous Famine will accompany 
the Siege, a Whereas all ſors of Grain are to be provided, it atlures 


us all would be little enough, Wheat and Barly would not out-laſt the 1 
Siege; coarſer and meaner mult be provided, though leſs fit for Bread. < 
6 Mix the worſt with the beſt ro lengthen out the beſt, that the Mix- p 
ture may render them uſeful in ſuch neceſliry, c He mentions only be 
390, the 4o Days either concur with them, or elſe becauſe they refer rig 
to the time after the City was taken ; whereby ſuch as ſurvived and goc 
ſome liberty to go abroad, found Food for themſelves; if they eſcap'd 
| the Sword of the Enemy, and were got into the Country they wante 
not Bread. | 2h 
10 And thy 4 meat which thou ſhalt eat, ſha be by © P 
weight f twenty ſhekels a day: from g time to time jhait ſy 
thou eat It. s BY 2 
a The mean and coarſe Bread which thou muſt eat, and be co!- -Fr3 
tent with. e Not full, as once, not as much as you will ; but a 1%) Bu © 
Pirtance delivered by weight to all, which beſpeaks the exrream I af If 
nur ® 


1 X- 
bo 

» 

i {1 

Þ 

fd 

I, 

2 

i, 

I. 

'T 


|dles 
e by 


hou 


hou We 


" *9 


Fry 
£74 


4 7 
o voy F- = 
p. 3 * by 


ePree 
likes 
each. 
n, fo 
hem 
s faſt 

lace 
. feel 
thole 
e lay 
- It 1$ 

City 
y.90/1'$ 
part, 
little 
1 and 


ley, 
put(g 
p AC 
1pon 
1 cal 


pany 
{|urc9 
| che 
Tread, 
Mix- 
only 
refer 
d goC 
cap'c 

unted 


by e 
ſhalt 
CON = 


{11a)l 
n Pe» 


iu!) 


3 

4 

S 

FX 

FS 

x 1 

b4S 

S # * 

Wes 

We 

kj 

JO 

LS 
he's 

HSE 

4. 3 


OE 
IR +1 


IS 


” 
3 Tz- 
4 WR 


'* Hh 
) 


" 
% W -»% 
4% 
i 


LE 
42 
ERA 
3,6 ER 
OS 

3 . 
FN 
\ 4 

©-S 
> 


a 


V; 


nury the Ciry ſhould be brought ro. f Some ſay five Ounces, others 


{ay ren Ounces,. the greater of the two fcarce enough to maintain Life, | } 


and yer 'tis probable enough 'twas but five Ounces of Bread which was 
his Allowance. A hard caſe, when the Law of the 12 Tables allowed a 
Pound of Bread ro Priſoners daily for their Diet. But here the Pro- 

er harh but half that Allowance if the rwenty Shekels were Shekel: 
of the SanCtuary ; and he hath bur a quarter of that Allowance if they 
were common Shekels, by which his Allowance was weighed. g Ar 
{-r hours this was weighed our, and no more could be had at any 
ocher time, whether Moraing or Evening, once in four and twenty 
Hours, or once in twelve Hours, ſtil] ar che appointed Hour, and 
poſſibly there might be different Hours appointeg to different Perſons, 
and every one muſt obſerve his ownrime. 


11 Thou ſhalt drink alſo 4 water by meaſure, the 
; fixth part of an hin : from time to time thou ſhalt 


rink. : 
: Not Wine or cordial Drinks, but cold and thin Water, nor a Bel- 
ly full of this. - Abour fix Ounces of Water, and that meaſured out 
by others to bim that drinks it, ſcarce enough to keep the Man alive. 
Such Proportions of Bread and Water rather fed Death than the Man F 
yet more could not be had when the Beſiegers were Maſters of both 


Fields and Fountains, and cut off all from the City. 


12 And thou ſhalt eat it 2s barley & cakes, and thou ſhalt | 


bake ic with dung / that cometh out of man in »2 their 
A 

yr Theſe were Delicacies with them when they could temper and 
make them righr, but now theſe pitiful things ſhould be to theſe half. 
ſtarved Bodies 2s Delicates: or, rather becauſe rhey were greedy, 
could nor ſtay till they were baked : or, leſt any ſhould rake it from 
them : or, becauſe they never had enough to make a Loaf with, they 
eat them as Barley Cakes. / There would be ro Wood left for ſuch 
neceſlary Uſes, nor yet Dung of other Creatures, they would be all con. 
ſumed by the length of rhe Siege too ; what loathſom Food was this ? 
yer if” this ſtrairneſs of the Siege they are brought to ir. m Openly 
that any might ſee it: From this Paſſage ſome conclude this was atu. 
ally done, and not only repreſented in a Viſion. 


13 And the LORD faid, Even » thus * ſhall the chil. 
dren 0 of [Iſrael eat their defiled bread p among the Gen- 
ciles, whither I will drive them. 

This Verſe is a Key to the former. » Scanty, mean, ill dreſy'd, 
and polluted in the very drefling, loathſom to any bur ſtarved Bellies 
o Not only the Houſe of Fuda-, but all the reſt of the Children of 
ljracl, not in the Siege only, bur this Miſery ſhould purſue them. 
p Who wou!d be ready enough ro upbraid them, and twit them as 
breaking the Rules of their Religion, ro fill their Bellies : Thus their 
Sins would bring them to extreameſt Want and Shame. 


14 Then faid I, * Ah p Lord GOD, behold, my 4 ſoul 


hath not been polluted: for from my » youth up even 
'5 till now, have I not eaten of * that which :t dieth of it 


ſelf, or is torn « in pieces; neither came there abomina- 


- ble fleſh into my mouth. 


p He deprecaterh this, and intreats it may not be enjoined him. 
q He propoſeth his legal Purity, as one Argument, in obedience to 
ceremonial Precepts, he had kept himſelf clean ; and now prays that 
he may not have his Obedience cried by enjoining to eat what is abo- 
minable. » He took early care of this. s Had perſevered to this 
Age, therefore prays Mitigation, and ſome Change in his Diet or 
drefling of it. # Forbidden as polluted, Exod. 2 2. 31. Lev. 17. 15. 
and Exzek. 44. 31- # Forbidden by the Law alſo, as Exod. 22.31. 


15 2 Then he ſaid unto me, Lo, I have given thee 
cows dung for mans dung, and thou ſhalt prepare thy bread 
therewith. 

z So ſoon as he prayed God anſwered, and condeſcends to Zzekie! 
that he ſhould uſe what was leſs abominable than Man's Dung, bur it 
was not granted to the Jews, who in the Siege at Jeruſalem did much 
worſe things, and more deteſtable, reduced to it by Straits as chap. 5; 
10, Lam. 1.11. and 2. I1.. 12. 20» 


16 Morzover, he ſaid unto me, Son of man, be- 


I +26. hold, I will break the * Staff-of bread in y Jeruſalem, 


and they ſhall eat bread by weight z, and with + care, 


k and drink water by || meaſure, and with * aſtoniſh- 
7 Fi 
2 ** ment. 


Here the Lord confirms his Threat of Famine by a ſolemn Proteſta. 
tion, that he would break the Staff of Bread ; either take their Har- 
veſts away, and deny them Bread, or withold this Blefling, the 
Strength of Bread, that it ſhouid not nouriſh and refreſh, as Lev. 26. 26. 
5 That ſinful City. z See wer. 10. + Afraid anddoubtfull whether or 
where they ſhall have any more. || See wer. 11. * Amazed at the 
Strangeneſs of their Condition, and the Wounds and Death of many 
that fell by the Enemies Hand, attempting to fetch a little Water ; or 
Mtonied, their very Eyes failing for Thuft. 


17 That they may want bread and water, and be a- 


&, 2c, ſtonied one with another, and * conſume away for their 


iniquity. 

The Lord will take away their Proviſion that they may die with 
want, puniſhed for all their Sins, and diſappointed of all that their 
falſe Prophers promiſed them ; and under ſtrangeſt Diſappointments, 
be filled wich ſtrangeſt Amazements and Horrors, at the woful Miſe- 
ries of one another, and falling dead in each others helpleſs Sight. 


CHAP. V. 


The Prophet being commanded by Grd to ſhave his head, and divide the 
kair, repreſenteth thereby the many dreadful plagues of the Jews for 
their rebellion, 1-11. by famine, ſword and diſperſion, 12--=17, 


1 2 A ND%5 thou ſon of Man, « take thee a d ſharp 
knife, take thee a e barbors raſor, and f * 


_ - ©O paſs upon thy g head and upon thy 4 bea:d ; 
O1, IL, 


EZSEKRTEL 


[then take thee 7 balances to & weigh ard divide the 
pair, | 
@ It is not unlikely that this Command was given to the Prophet ſo 
ſoon as he had underſtood the former Chapter's Viſion. 5 Vid. £5. 2. 1. 
c Procure it by any means. d A Sword or Knife very ſharp, as Heb. 
ſo the grievous Judgment is expreſs'd, ch. 21.9. 19. 11 14. 15 16. 
and here the ſpeedy, irreſiltible, and ſweeping Judgmeat againſt this 
people is aptly ſer forth. e This in different Words is the ſame thing. 
and explains the former, and makes the Emblem more exa& : for by 
Hair ſhaved and deſtroyed, is the Deſtrucicn of 5:+»/:!:w3 and its Peo- 
ple repreſented to us. Now that this may appear in the Certainty of 
ir, both a Sword tor Strength, and ſharp for cuttico, nav, a Ruby 
much ſharper, that ſhaves cloſe, leaves nothing behind 15, and cues 
be reſiſted by the weak Hair, fo ſhall it be here with this Pcovie. f Ar 
Hebraiſm, ſhave cloſe with it. g The Chief, as Kins, and Rul-rs, the 
City. h The common Citizens; or, the Towns round abou:, 7; Jutt 
and exa& Scales, an Emblem of Divine Juſtice and Equiry. & The 
Pcophers weighing repreſents God weighing theſe Men and their ways, 
! Theſe light, vain and worthleſs ones, Inhabirancs of this ſinful City, 
2 Sam. IO 4. 5. Jer. 41.5. & 48. 37. Thus foretel them their mo 11. 
ing, Reproach, and Detormity that 15 coming, for all this is ſignified 
by this ſhaving Head and Beard. ET 
2 Thou ſhalt burn - with fire a third part in the 
midſt of the » city, when the days of the ſiege are 
o fulfilled, and thou ſhalt take a p third part, and {nice 
about it with q a knife, and a r third part s thou ſhalt ſcar. 
cer in # the wind, and 1 « will draw out a x {word alter 


chem. . 

This Verſe tells you into how many Parts the Hair was to be diviled, 
and how to be diſpos'd of, and ſo plain it neels little Explication. 
m Soeither Peſtilence, or Famine, with the Difpleafure of God, and 
che burning of the Ciry, and of the Citizens, is noted our. » DUetcril. 4 
on the Tile, ch. 4. 1. a Type of what would be done in 7-2! 
0 When the 390 Days of the lying againſt the pourtray'd City tha}} be 
ended ; for when Jeruſalem ſhall be raken at the end of che Siege, rhe 
City ſhall be burnt, and who can fay that none of the Inhabitants were 
burnt, as the two falſe Prophets Ahab and Z-4:kia: Jer, 29 22? To 
be ſure many that hid themſelves under ground, in Vaults and C-llats, 
were burnt wath the burning of the City. p "Tis not necetlary this 
part ſhould be equal to the former, if it be proportional 'tts enough, 
perhaps ir might be ſomewhat leſs than the fi:ft third. 4 For theſe 
were ſuch as fell, in either defending che Walls, or fallying out during 
the Siege, or were found in Arms when the Ci:y was taken, or were 
overtaken in their Flight, with their moſt unhappy King, or by Law. 
Martial were adjudged to die by the conqueror ; theſe many yet weak 
ones, Women and Children which dic*l in the Sizge by Famine and 
Peſtilence, might be a greater third. » Thoſe that fell ro the Cha/geusc, 
or fled to Egypt, or other Ccuntreys, though they ſcape ſomewhat lon- 
ger, yet carrying like Sins, are at laſt overtaken with like Evils, 5 Tho 
theſe diſpos'd ot themſelves, yet there was God's Hand a!ſo in it, he 
ſcattered thoſe that of their own accord did fly, 7 Violent, uncer- 
tain, and troubletlome, ſhou'd their Enemies prove to them, » God 
will purſue them. x Figuratively *cis waſting Puniſhmear, liccrally 
'twas fulfilled, Jer. 42 16. 17. 22. & 43. 10. 11. © 44. 27. 


and 4 bind chemin thy # skirts. 
7 i. e. Of the laſt third which were to be diſperſed. z Or ſmall 
Quantity. @ Or by number as it may be read, tell our a ſmall parcel of 
the Hair. bþ As Men tie up in an Handkerchief, or in the Skirr of their 
Garment what they wou!d not loſe: So ſome few ſhall be kepr, God 
will not cut off the whole Houſe of 1/-az!, but reſervesa Remnanr. 

4 » Then take ol them again, and 6 caſt them into 
the midft of the fire, and burn c them in the fire, 4 for 
e thereof ſhall a fire come forth into all the houſe of If. 


rael, 

a Another Diviſion make of that little Number, the preſcrved 
Remnant. 6b Throw ſome of them into the Fire, they are not all to be 
ſaved who are delivered at the end of the Siege, c Literally bucn rhe 
Hair, but ſignify the burning them that are meant by it. 4 Of God's 
Diſplezſure, and of Civil War or private Conſpiracy, as in Ima! 
againſt Gedaliah, Jer. 40. 41. 42. 43 e From their Sin againſt God, 
their Diſcontenrs at their State, and Conſpiracies againſt their Gover-= 
nour, appointed by Nebachadnezzar, Evill, like another Fire, ſhall break 
out, which ſhall devour the moſt, and be near conſuming all che Houſe 
of Iſrael, as happened to them after G:daliah's Death, and their going 
down to Egypt, as Fer 40. 41.42. 43 44. 46. under Johanan's Revolr, 
which the Chaldean did revenge at-laſt. 


5 «f Thus faich the Lord GOD, g This + « Jeruſalem : 
I have # ſet it in & the midſt of the nations and countreys 


that are round / about her. 

f This ſolemn Declaration in God's Name the Prophet uſech by ex- 
preſs Order, << 3. 11. g This pourtrayed Ciry. 4 Is typically 7e- 
raſalem and her Inhabitants. 7 Placed her in a moſt delightiull Situa- 
tion, choſe out the beſt part of the known World for her. k In 2 
Neighbourhood to moſt rich and plenteous Countries, with whom ſhe 
might have convers'd and ſpread forth my Name. / Either as Szr- 
vants about a Miſtreſs: or, as meaner Houſes about the Palace or Ma- 
nour of a Lord: or, as Traders about an Empory, much to advantage 
of Jeruſalem. : ; 

6 And / ſhe hath »» changed my » judgments into 
o wickedneſs more than the p nations, and my q ſtatutes 
more than the countries that are round about her : for r 
they have refus?d 5 my judgmenes and my ſtatutes, * they 
have not walked in them. 

1 Jeruſalem, the Metropolis. where the Temple and the ſolemn 
Feaſts and Sacrifices were, which in likelihood was forwardelt, fulleſt, 
and moſt expenſiveon cther invented Modes of Worſhip, the who was 
moſt obliged tome. m The H:5. includes a Rebellion and Contumacy ; 
and theſe were cauſe of her changing, as Rebels change the Laws of a 
Kingdom. n The Laws of Holy, Righteous, and Sober Living ; che 


] 


exaCt Rules of Manners, o Iimprobity, =_ Injuſtige goward cach _ 


Chap. V. 


3 Thou ſhalt alſo rake y thereof a | tew & in number, fHeb. 


W727, 


"IS © (22- Fudd 
ge ; ah 
Wh 


On" =: 
Wat : 
" 4 — "S md 
| or Pin hs en WS ng 
—— - 
"x 2 
7 
®; —_— 
_ _— 


——— - 


-—0- ww. 
» 


4 


+ 
4 FF 
Fs 
-* Li 
6 


w—__ 


#- : 
VS 
o: ® 


Chap. V. 


* Lev. 26. 
29. 
Deur. 28. 
53- 
2 Kings6. 


* Chap. 7. ſpare, neither will I have pity 5. 
4,9. & 8. m A Formofan Oath becoming none but the living God, uſed often 
18, in Scripture and in this Prophet. #» Violated and prophaned. o My 


but either becauſe they never heeded how they were polluted, but with 
legal Pollutions on them came to the 'Temple :- or, rather brought in 
their Idols, all their deteſtable counterfeit Gods, as Jer. 7. 3o. and in 


naſſeb. All their Idolatry and Wickedneſles exprefled by two words 
of like Emphatis. q Leffen, break to pieces, cut up by the Roots 
ſuch ſtinking Weeds. 7 There ſhall net be the leaſt ſign of Pity in my 
Eye, though Iſee all their Miſery. 5 Nor yet will I retain any Aﬀe&i- 
on of Kindneſs for them ; my Heart, as my Eye, ſhall be far from all 
Pity and Commilſeration towards them. 


"Sev. ©, : 
& Jer. 15. t and with famine # ſhall they be conſumed in the midſt of 


thee, and a third part ſhall fall by the ſword x round about 
thee, and I will ſcatter a third part into all winds, and I will} 
draw y out a ſword after them. 


expreſs Declaration, how God would execute theſe ſevere Judgments 
upon this People. t No doubt, though 'twere not mentioned or threat- 
ned, as Jer. 34. 17. we might conclude it could not bur be in ſuch a 
beſieged City, where Blood putrifying Carcaſſes, &s. anngy. « Sig- 
nified by Fire, for it parcheth and withereth Men. 
their aſlailing the Beliegers round about the Walls, and as they did 
{all under the Aſſault when the Enemy attempted to take the Giry, &«. 


' another, and ſome report ( as I take it) that Children among them un- 


 whenthe very ſmall Remnant with 7ohanan fled into Zgypr. 


and Impiety and fr:eligion againſt God bimfclf. p There ismore Ho- 
neſty, Truth and Righteouſneſs among the Nations than among the 


Jews. þp The Precepts and Rules of Religious Obſervances which I 
gave them, they have leſs valued, been lefs conſtant to, than the Nati- 


ons have been to theirs, received from Men, and invented by Man. So 
Fer. 2. 9. 109. 11, r The Jews. s With Scozn and Abhorrence, as 
what their Mind abominated. So vile were they grown, that they 
foathed the excellent Law of God, and were weary of it, as Heb, im- 
plieth. r As for my Statutes in Matters of Religion, they have refuſed 
to walk in them, and have modelled Religion to their own fancy, built 
Altars, adopted new Gods, and appointed new Worſhip more gay or 
eaſy, as their Humour was. 

7 Therefore thus ſaith the Lord GOD, becauſe ye 
« multiplied more then the nations that are round about 
you, and have x not walked in my ſtatutes, neither have 
kept y my judements, neither 2 have done according 
to the judgmen:;> of the nations that are round about 


YOU, 


with rhe Tex, the reſt may not be excluded. x See. w. 6. y See v.6. z 


Whi!e vou have excecded the Nations in Superſtition and [dolarry, you 
have fallen ſho: tof th:m n the Morahitics of their Life, and done leſs 


good than they taught by a far more 1imperfe&t Law than you, Rom. 
2, 21,23, 24. 


EZERKIE L, 


Chap 
See triore wer. 2. of this Chapter, y When the Babylonian; Sword hath 
cut off all about Jeruſalem, I will draw out my Sword, and purſue the 
reſt which Nebuchadnezzar could not reach. 

13 4 Thus ſhall mine 6 anger be accompliſhed, anq 
I will cauſe my c fury to 4 reſt upon them, and * I will: 
e be comforted: and f they ſhall know that I the LORD 
have ſpoken is in g my zeal, when I have accompliſhed 


my fury in them. 

# In this terrible and relentleſs thanner already declared. 4M 
provoked Juſtice, not Paſhon, ſhall be executed to the full of thatI in. 
tend and have ſpokes c After the manner of Man is this ſpoken, an 
1mplies the great and hot Diſpleaſure of the Lord d My Bowels were 
troubled how to ſpare,and yet to puniſh ; bur now I will reſt from ſuch 
Struglings berween my Mercy and my Juſtice; this ſhall be glorified, 
and I will be at eaſe. e Idid what in reaſon they could expeR, and 
more than I was bound to, for their Preſervation; bur nothing would 
prevail. O Jſ/rae! thou art deſtroyed ; but *tis my SatisfaCtion thou 
haſt deſtroyed thy ſelf, and canſt not charge it on me. f Theſe ruined 


u There is ſome Difficulty in aſſigning what tis tliey multiplied 1n, 
either Numbers of People, Benefi:s received from God, Luxury, Pride, 
Tumultuouſneſs, with Increaſe of your Riches: or, in Idols, Superſti- 
rious, and appendant Wickedneſſes: This Iaſt ſeems moſt agreeable 


ones by ſad Experience ſhall know. g In that Indignation againſt your 

Sins, which the love of my own Glory ſtirred up within me. In my 

provoked Jealouſy I ſpake, and will a& againſt a perſiſting, perfidious 

_ adulterous Wife, and it ſhall be known when I have finiſh'd my 
ork. 

14 Moreover, I will make thee 5 waſte, and a 7 re- 

|proach among the nations that «re round about thee, in 


the ſight of all that paſs by. | 
| h Judgments ſhould empty the Land of Men that ſhould till and mz. 


8 a Therefore thus ſaith the Lord GOD, 5 Behold, | urs it, and ſo your fruitful Land ſhaJlbe turned and continued a waſte 


I even | az againſt thee, and c will execute judgments in 
the midit of thze, in the ſight 4 of the nations. 


a Ir is very juſt what God doth, he hath cauſe more than enough 
given him to do ſo, 6 Take notice and conſider me, not as now for 


you but againſt you; you look to the inſtruments, to the Rod, but be- 


hoid, I am, even I am againſt you; againſt thee O Jeruſalem. cI will 
att in Severiries that ſhall convince you 'tis my Hand that weilds the 
Swo:d; you deſpiſed my Holy Law, my Judgments, Rule of Life, but 
you ſhall now fee] my Judgments that you ſhall die under. The Chal- 
d: ans will kill you, but I condemn you ; they'i be cruel, bur I'll be 
juſt in the execution, znd whocan be for thee when I will be againſt 
thee in this dreadtul manner ? a As notorious as thy Sins, ſo ſhall thy 
Puniſhment be. The very Heathen ſhall ſee my hand in it, and own 
iy Juffice. : 

9 And I will do in thee that which T have e not done, 
and whereunto I f will not do any more the like, becauſe 


of all thine abominarions g. 

e Though the 01d World periſh'd by Water, and the Judgment was 
greater in irs Extent, and Sodemn deſtroyed by Fire, yet neither one or 
other was ſo lingring a Death. Theſe poor Jews were long dying, and 
felt themſelves dying. Read the Lamentations as Commentary on this 
Text, or Jo/-phrs's Wars of the Jews. Though in the Siege of Samaria 
Women ear rheir Chi:dren, yer the City was not taken, ſack'd and 
burnt, as Jeruſalem was atter a long Siege. f No doubt God keeps his 
Word, though we ſhould nor be able to ſhew how. And though the 
Siege of 7crnſalem under Yeſpaſian was grievous, yet not in every thing 
equal with this; the Romans were not ſo cruel to the Jews. g Their 
Sins were Abominations, and God delivers theminto the Hands ef Men 
that did hate, Joath, and abhor the Jews ſo much that they thoyght 
they could not be cruel enough againſt them. 

12 Therefore h the tathers z ſhall * eat the ſons in the 
& mid{t of thee, and the ſons ſhall eat the fathers, and I 
will execute judgments in thee, and the whole / remnant of 


thee will I ſcatter into all the winds. 


and defolate Land. # Jer. 24. and Jer. 29. 22. a Reproach or Curſe; 
| Men ſhould taunt at them, and in wiſhing the worſt they can, wiſh their 
Enemies Jike the Jews. So 'twas, Lam. 2. 15. 16. 


round about thee, when I ſhall » execute judgments in thee 


have ſpoken #7. 

k See Yer. 14. 1 Avery Proverb among Men. m: Sinners like thee 
ſhall learn by thy Miſeries what they may expe& from me, and they 
ſhall acknowledg Divine Juſtice in all. » In higheſt degreesof Severi. 
ty. o I, who can do it becauſe Almighty, who may do it becauſe 
provoked, who will do it becauſe they repented nor, I have fpoken and 
will do it, as Jer. 25. 9. 


16 When I ſhall p * 


5 ſend to deſtroy you: and I will : increaſe the famine up- 
on you, aud « break your * ſtaſf of bread. 


him, and fly like Arrows: or, becauſe like Arrows ſhot forth they 
| pierce deep and kill. » Is mortal], and deſtruCtive in its nature, s That 
1t may be ſureto deſtroy and attain that efte&, I deſign it for that very 
end. :£ To make ſure Work againſt ſuch, I will increaſe the Famine, 
either by ſweeping away the little Supplies expe&ed, or continuing ic 
longer than ordinary : or, I willſummonin Penury as an Army againſt 
you. « Withdraw the ſtrengthning Property of your Bread. See 
ch. 4. 16. 


17 So will I ſend upon you famine, and * x evil beaſts,"[s > 
and they ſhall y bereave thee, and peſtilence and blood: 


ſhall z paſs through thee, and I will bring the ſword upon 
thee: I the LORD have ſpoken #. 


k And this explains what is abore threatned. : No Hiftory that 1 
know of does mention any thing like this; barbarous 14ins ſell one 


naturally murder aged Parents, but they eat them not. & Ir may inti- 
mate theis doing this publickly. 1 This was verified when they were 
ferch'd away who were left at the Departure of the Beſiegers, and 


11 Wherefore, s I live, faith the Lord GOD, Surely 
becauſe thou haſt » defiled my o ſanctuary with p all thy 
deteſtable things, and with all thy abominations, there- 
fore will L alſo q diminiſh zhee, * neither ſhall mine 7 eye 


Temple. p Nor that all they did abominably was done in the Temple, 


2 Kings 16. 10, & 23.12. 13, Their own Altars, as 4haz and Ma- 


12 | *A third part of thee ſhall die with peſtilence, 


From this to the end of the Chapter we have a particular and more 


z As they did in 


of one who is going to ſpeak, look toward them. 
did chap. 12.) upbraiding the Deafneſs of the Jews whom he now left 
to ſpeak to Mountains. Or, rather to the Inhabitants of the Moun- 
tains, who were ſecure in their Faſtneſſes, and great Idolaters; wh9 
choſe the high Hills, &c. for Places of Idolatrous Worſhip. f The 
common Name to all that now remained fince the Ten Tribes were 
captivated by Salmanaſſer. g Declare my Judgments againſt them. 


x Evil Beaſt, Heb. either the King of Babylon, which like a ravenous 
and inſatiable Beaſt tore and devoured all: or, literally, Lions, Bears, 
&c. which axe one of his four ſore Judgments, Ezgk. 14. 21. yOt 
your Children, Friends, and your own Life, when you fly ro Moun- 
tains and Caves for fear of the Chaldees, where you ſeek your ſafety you 
ſhall find your Death, and be torn to pieces. z Thy Laad ſhall be the 
common Road and Highway for Peſtilence and Blood, as the Heb. des 
notes, and they ſhall lodg in thy Cities in, Fer»ſalem, as if they were 
the appointed Receptacles for theſe Guefts,, Here are the four ſore 
Plagues which God waſtes Nations with, all ſent out againſt the Jews, 
and their Commiſſion ſigned from Heaven with a witneſs, Our ſelf. I 
have ſpoken it ſaith the Lord. 


CHAP. VI. 


The defruftim and ruine of the land threatned, fer the abominable i 
of 1dolatry, 1——7. Promiſes of favour t0 a remnant, 8-.--10. Tit 
prophet is commanded to lament the ſins and calamities of che people, 
IHI—14. 


I ND the 4 word of the LORD & came to me, ſay- 

ing F 

a This Revelation or Prophecy. 6b Came in the fxth Year of 7:- 

conia's Captivity on the 21ft Day (being the Sabbath-day) of the fifth 

Month, a Twelve-month and Fortnight after the firſt Viſion, ch, 1. 2- 
and probably it came ſo ſoon as 390 Days were ended. 


of f Iſrael, and g propheſie againſt them. 
c See chap. 2. 1. Put thy ſelf towards the Mountains in a Poſture 
e Hereby (as 1/«i-b 


2 And ſay, Ye 4 mountains of Ifrael, 7 hear the word 
of the Lord GOD, Thus ſaith the Lord GOD to the 
mountains and to the hills, co the & rivers to ©* 


LETS 


IF So it ſhall be a & * reproach and a / taunt, an » 
inſtruction and an aſtoniſhment unto the nations thgg are ;;, 


in anger and in fury, and in furious rebukes: o I the LORD 


p Iris a Meſſenger goes not till God ſends, and ever goes when he 26. Þ * 
ſenderh ; he ſends Cleannefs of Tecth. q Either becaufe Thunder, Ci * 
Tempeſts, Locufts, Blaſtings, &c. which cauſe Famine, are ſent by & 4 - 


2 c Son of man, 4 ſet thy face towards the * mountains'ciþ 


y 


_ 
6.24 
oy” - -- 

i8: 


Ila. 1 oe 


Dir ; oþ 
[ -4 


| ſend the evill q arrow of famine, 1, , 4 
which r ſhall be for their deſtruction, «nd which I will zz, Þ 


34 
5 
4 

< 
= 


*. Ns 
- =D 


TY ds BY ad ond A ca a. 


ap. VI. 


and # 1 will deſtroy o your high places. | 


} Ye that dwell in the Mountains, ye ſecure, fearleſs, and rude 
Mountaineers. i Hear and conſider what God ſpeaks againſt you, 
for thus faith the Lord God to you, on Mountains and Hills of. 1ſrael 
ve dwell and commit Idolatry. k To thoſe who either by Rivers 

| Tides worſhip'd Idols, or who accounted Rivers among their Gods: 
ITo thoſe that worſhip'd their Idols in low and ſhadowy Valleys. In all 
theſe places the Jews had either their ſeveral Gods, or performed a ſe- 
vera] kind of Worſhip, or, contrary ro Command, worſhip'd their 
God, and ſer up Altars to him there. »: Thar ſhall ſlay you Inhabitants, 
waſte your Mountains and Valleys, deſtroy your altars, and aboliſh 
your Worſhip. » I by the Enemy will do this. o Places of your Ido- 
latrous or SuperſtitiousWorſhip; by the Sword of thoſe rhat ſerve Idols, 
your Idols ſhall be deftroyed, and you wich them, unleſs ye repent. 


4 And your p altars ſhall be 4 defolate, and your 7 
F || images ſhall be s broken: and *1 will : caſt down your 

'Þ {lain mer before your altars, | 
6, Þ God's Altar was only at Jeruſalem, theſe were their Altars. q No 
**2- Prieſt to attend, no Sacrifice offered, nor. a Votary come to them. 
7 Statues, and perhaps the particular ImageKmade to the Sun, as the 
Hb. Word including Heat may ſignify. Orgpe open Places on tops of 
; your Houſes where you worſhip'd the Sun, Kings 23. 5. and Iſa. 27. 
, þ. 1-4 9g. mentions this piece of Idolatry. -- Either tore down from their 
Places to be carried Captives, which was a part of Heathen Conque- 
rors Inſolence, or torn in pieces in contempt and to be deſtroyed. 
; My Hand ſhall guide the purſuing Enemy, who ſhall ſlay your Men 


before the Altars of thoſe Idols they worſhip'd formerly, and to 

r whom, as ſenſeleſs as the idols, they fly for refuge, as perhaps Sen4- 
| cherib did, 1ſa. 37, 38. 

? Dn $4 eb, 5 And I will « + lay the Dead x carcafes of the children 

e3). om, of Ifr-=ibefore their idols, and I will y ſcatter your bones 

& | round about your altars. 

) « Expoſe. to open ſhame, while the Carcaſes of Idolaters recall ro 


mind their ſham«ful Folly and Sin. x Either of ſuch as are newly 
ſlain ; or, ſuch as the Chaldcans did dig out of their Graves in Spite, 
Contempt, or Cove:cuſneſs, hoping to find ſome coſtly Ornaments 
buried with them ; 1o God fulfils that of Lev. 26. 3o. » You ſhall 
thus be a Defilement to your ſuppoſed ſacred Altars and Worſhip, 
and an abbhorence to Beholders. z As unworthy to be laid up in 
Earth, who had ſo highly provoked the God of Heaven ; they are 
made dung who ſerved dunghil-Gods- 

6 In & all your dwelling-places the cities ſhall be laid 
waſte, and the b high places ſhall be deſolate ; that 
your altars may be laid waſte and made deſolate, and 
your idols c may be broken and ceaſe, and your ima- 
ges 4d may be cut down, and your e works may be 
aboliſhed. 

a Mountains and Hills with their Altars were doomed, now the Ci- 
ties that were of leſs note than Jeruſalem ſeem particularly to be threat- 
ned, becauſe they were idolatrous; according to the Number of Ci- 
ties were there Gods, Jer. 11. 13. 6 High Places and altars ſet up 
to the Honour of thoſe Idols, ſhall be laid waſte. c The Idols of thoſe 


leſſer Cities ſhall be utterly deſtroyed. 4d Or, Statues that were uſu- 
ally faſtned on ſome Pedeſtal ſomewhat high, ſhall be cut down. e All 


F 


3 
; I 
; 


S,*L8 your coſtly Works for Idols, and your pompous Preparation for them 
\d 22 ſhall, wich your Cities, be aboliſh'd for ever, as your Sins and Abo- 
n minations deſerve. 


PP 7 And the flain ſhall fall in the midſt of you, and e ye 
us |} hall know that I a» the LORD. ; 


s, = Þ When the Slain ſhall fall thus in your Sight, you ſhall know two 
Jt * things you would not regard before : 1. That Idols are Vanity and 
ſhe Snares. 2. That TI am the Lord who doavenge the quarrel of my Co- 
ou | © venant. Or, may it not be turned, and the Prophane ſhall fall, z. e. 
he | the Idols and Altars, and other Implements of Idol-worſhip, made 
lee i holy by unholy Men, ſhall be profaned and caſt down, defiled and trod 
TC £ under foot in the ſight of the Jews, as God threatens ; then they ſhall 
ITE know God is the only Lord and God. I conjeQure at this by Eze- 
'S, ' Kkiels being among the Chaldeans ſome Years, who had gotten ſome. 

I ' what of their Tongue ; and the word hereuſed, whichis readred lain, 


and I render profane, doth in the Chaldes ſignify prophane, and is ſo 
rendred Exzek. 21. 25. if here fo rendred, *twill better ſute with 
the foregoing Verſe, and more fitly ſum up that Diſcourſe and cloſe 
it. e See werſe 10, 12, 


” b 
- Up. 8 * Yet will f I leave a g remnant, that ye may have 
le, + ſore that ſhall eſcape h the ſword among the nations, when 
ye ſhall be 7 ſcattered through the countries. 
Y. L F Ir is the Lord rhat preſerves a remnant, the Enemies Rage would 
6 | CQeſtroy all; and tis an Atﬀof deliberate and voluntary Reſolution, 
Ye not by Chance, but by Choice. g Some few in compariſon with the 
ch greater Mulrtitudes that are cut off. + Tho he promiſeth an handful 
. ſhall remain, yet in that condition that they are little more than e- 
, ſcap'd, a poor and ſmall Remnant lefr, as Zeph. 3. 12 .; Either by your 
own choice ſhifting from Countrey to Country ; Or elſe diſſipared by 
nS*(kj the order of the proud oppreſſing Conquerour, who will ſcatter Fa- 
milies, Jeſt they ſhould be a little Comfort to one another, and great 
re * Jealouſy ro him, and to prevent Conſpiracies. 
ah W.'s. 9 And & they that eſcape of you ſhall remember / me 
a > .; among the »» nations, whither they ſhall be carried 
» I captives, » becauſe I am broken with their + whoriſh 
he ap, ;6, 1eart which o hath departed from me, and * with their 
re * Pþ eyes which go a whoring after their idols: and * they 
M. thall 4 loath themſelves for the 7 evils which they have 
rd committed in all thezr abominations s, 


1e 3 k Some of them, not every one of them; for ſeveral of the eſca- 
he 2 ped did not bethink themſelves, as appears Jer. 42. 43. and 44- 
2l- 4 My Prcecepts which they violated, my Mercies which they abuſed, 


EZEXKIE I. 


1 valleys, Behold, T, zen 1 will bring a ſword upon you, | 


Chap. YL 


my .Threats which they deſpiſcd, my Promiſes which they refuſed, my 
Prophets whom they perſecured, my Judgmencs wich I have executed ; 
and ſhall conſider and return, and ſeek me in their Afliftion. m» In 
their own Land they forgot and fianed, in a range Land they ſhall 
remember and weep; fo the Remnanr is bettered by Afflictions : at 
liberty they were Captive to Sin and Idols, when in Caprivity they 

ſhall thake off thar Bondage, and become my Servants. » Here we 

meet very different Reading. The Chal#e Paraphr. and Sr. Verſion 

read itaCtively, ſo does the Yulg. Latin; Becauſe, or, when, I have 

broken, &c. And if this vary from the Grainmatical ConftruQion, yer 

it carrieth very good Senſe, and agreeable to the foregoing Words. 

Their whoriſh Hearts would ſtill have forgotren God, if he had not 

broken their Hearts with Judgments; bur they remembred, when 

broken; and this breaking was the Occaſion or Cauſe of their remen. 
bring God. Others read this paſſively, as our Verlion, and as che 

Heb. Form moſt uſually bearerh, IT am broken; tis an Allvfion ro 2 
miſuſed Husband whom a treacherous Wife hath broken, cither, 1, 
His Peace and Content; 2. His Love and Tenderneſis; 3. His Purience 
and Forbearance ; 4. His purpoſes; 5. His Offers and Promiles : 1 
that, as overcome with Grief and Anger, he doth, contrary to his 
natural Diſpoſitionſ lay aſide his courting her Love, and in his Jca. 
louſy takes Revenge, and then ſhe bethinks her ſelf. So here. + Their 
Heart of Whoredom, 1. e. Idolatrous Heart which was full of that Sin. 
addicted to it, delighted in it, and wedded to it. » Idolatrous Hearts 
do aQtually depart from. God, as an adulrerous Wife a&ually departs 
from her Husband. þ As it vexeth a Husband to ſee his Wife fixing 
her Eyes with delight on the Adulterer, and turning them with ſcorn 
from him, as this breaks the Husband's Patience; fo in this caſe 1/-a2!'s 
Eyes were to Idols, and delighted in them, expe&Q:d hclp from them, 
were ready to ſerve them : All which broke their Husbands, 7. e. God”; 
Patience, and provoked his ſevere Revenges. q With a mixture of 
Grief towards God offended, of Indignation againſt_themſclves off-n- 
ding, of abhc::r:nce of the Offence, and ſhame before all for ir, ſhall 
thcy ſhew their Repenrance. r Wickedneſſes ; or, as P/al. 32.5. Iniqui= 
ties of Sin, the Deepeſt and darkeſt part of Sin, the complicated Evils 
that were in each A&. £Tis a Hypocrite's Repentance which is - bur 
for ſome, this of the reſerved Remnant fha!! be found, *cis for all 
Abominations, for all kinds of their Abominations 


10 And they ſhall 5 know that I 222 « the LORD 
and that ] have not ſaid in x vain that I would do this 


evil unto them. 

t See, acknowlege, and believe it too. » The only one whom they 
ſhould worſhip, depend on, who can claim their Hearts, their Fear, 
Love and Truſt, as rightfully due. Juſt in my Ways, true borh to 
Threats and Promiſes. x Either, x. Wirhour cauſe, the Sufferers 
gave him juſt cauſe to pronounce all that Evil. Or, 2. Wichour effe& 
and to no purpoſe, I rold them that the Evils I would bring ſhould 
make them know that I am the Lord, and theſe Sufferers art laſt find 
this Efe& wrought in them. Their Sins were the Cauſe, and their 
Inſtruion is the Effe& of their Sufferings. 


11 T Thus faith the Lord G OD, y» Smite * with *Chap. 21, 


thine hand, and ſtamp with thy foot, and s ſay, Alas, '7- 
for all the a evil abominations of the houſe of Iſrael : 


for they ſhall fall 5 by the ſword, by the famine, and by 


the peſtilence 

7 Here are two Atﬀtions commanded, and both ſignify a mixture of 
AfﬀeCion in the Perſon, as Wonder and Amazementr, Indignation and 
Diſpleaſure, Grief and ſorrow, Pity and Commiſeration; all which 
are required in the Prophet, to ſhew both the Evil of Sin he did ſee, 
and the Evil of Sufferings which he did foreſee on 1ſ-ae/. x Tell them 
what thou meaneſt by ſuch unuſual Geſtures, ſpeak with Grief, Alas ! 
a Sins in full growth, ripe to the Harveſt, make him cry out. 5 Grie- 
vous Miſeries coming on his People and on his Kindred ; the Houſe of 
I/-ac! muſt fall, be ruined, laid deſolate, and carried captive. 


12 He that is far c off ſhall die of the peſtilence 4, and 
he that is near e ſhall fall by the {word, and he that remain- 
eth f and is beſiged ſhall die by che famine : thus will 1 
accompliſh g my fury upon them. 

e Either by his early and voluntary Flight from his own Countrey . 
Or, He that is carried away Captive, and fear by the Enemy into 2 
far Countrey. 4 The Arrow I will ſhoot after them. e Who ſtays 
in his own Country, or dwells near to Ferzſalem, or would retire to ic 
when the Babylonians approach, but is taken before he can ger thither. 
f That ſurviveth thoſe ſlain, but is ſhur up and beſieged where he 
ſought ſafety, g I will ſatisfy my yuſt Diſpleaſure, and give them - 
full Meaſures of Puniſhment ; I will fulfill my Threats. 


13 Then ſhall ye know + that I a2 the LORD, when 
their flain men ſhall be among their idols round about 
their altars, upon every high hill in all the tops of the 
mountains, and under every green tree, and under eve- 
ry thick oak, the place ; where they did offer ſweec 
ſavour to all there idols. 

h See wer. 3,4,5,6, 7, 10. i Each of which was accounted a fie 
Place for ſuch ſuperſtitious Rites, and in all which ſome or other of 
you did commit Idolatry, and ſhame to ſpeak it, burnt Sweets, rich 
Spices which God had given them, to Dunghil-Gods, ſtinking Idols, 
which the Devil had commended ro them, Dez. 32. 17. 


14 So will I ſtretch & out my hand upon them, and 
make the land / deſolate; yea, m2 || more deſolate than the | Or, 45+ 
wilderneſs rowards Diblath, in all their habications, and they wa 
ſhall know » that I am the LORD, n f wn 
& This noteth the Greatneſs of the Blow, God ſtriketh hard when *-** 
he ſtrercherh out his Hand, and therefore you find a mighty Hand 
joined with outſtretched Arm. 1 A Deſolation (an Hebraiſm) for moſt 
deſolate. 9» And a Deſolation greater, or above the Deſolation of 
that moſt horrid Wilderneſs of Moab, which is here called Diblath, 
mentioned in a Dual Form, Num, 33. 46. and Jer. 48, 22. as ſome 
think, and deſcribed by Moſes, Deur. 8. 15. "Twas that wherein the 
fiery Serpents ſo much annoyed 1/ra:!. Or, I will lay their Habitations 


watte and deſolate from Feruſalem —_ Diblath the Borders of voy 
2 Al 


LI as 5 


- 1 g 7 


EEC 1 44S p — —_ $57 4 


—_ 


is Ate phi Anat 
_— —— 


«4 1 Rig a. Ce nee ot P23* 


_ 
_ 


-— i eee. a 


_ | _ 
> > ———— 


a. 4 "" . 
= CR LIBRE SS 
> 3 . ws 

wm gen = 


- nn te er entree et SST. oe rr ers nt AC A you of ngrgey* po 4 
honey * þ o 

Y =I : - "—_— —_ 4 gs 

CIS - A _ - > 6) EIA © ? 
— WAL _ - pgs _ - - _—_ —_ - >. 
a dy - 4 "_* —_—  - - _ - - . 
_ Me _y ” = E . _ P ” _ -- " as *: 
” — m—_ - - wt o_ 


Clap. VII. 


4 }Hcb 
& VE. 


+ Heb. 
P, wak 4 FE! 
azainft 
thee. 


i Or, £99, 


+ Heb. vp- 


on thtc, 


2nd the Land all along ſhall be as deſolate as that very Wilderneſs ; 
ſo the Lord will rurn a moſt fruitful Land into Barrenneſs for the Sins 
of the People. 7 Some inſtrutted and bettered ſhall own me and fear 


me. the reft convinced and aſtonied, ſhall confeſs that God hath done 
chis great thing againſt them, 


CHAP. VII 
rophecy of the fnal aud arcadful deſolation of the land, 1—15. The 


I thy 

47 FO%* { his 
p:tiful mourning of them that «ſcape, 16—19. - The ſanifuary, becauſe of 
Ihacl's far, 2022. Under the type of a chain ts repreſented their mi- 


erable and mournful captivity, 2327. 


I 0 Oreover, the word of the LORD came unto 
me, ſaying, 
o This introduceth a Continuation and Confirmation, with ſome 
Tliuftration of what Judgments were denounced in the former Chap- 


Ter, 
2 Alſo thou fon of man, thus faith the Lord GOD un- 
to the land p of Ifracl, An q end, the end r is come upon 


the four corners s of the land. 
p The Inhabirants who had ſinned, and alſo to the Land wherein 


they ſinned. q End of God's Patience, of the Peace and Welfare of 


the People, and of the Plenty, Beauty, and Deſirableneſs of the Land 
it (elf, 1s come, or 1s near at hand. » That dreadful End I threatned 
agzinſt you, and which you will find in the execution of the Menaces 
pronounced againſt you by the former and latter Prophets. - Ir is an 
ove: flowing Miſery that ſpreads over all the Land. 

3 7 Now # the end come upon thee, and I will « ſend 
mine anger upon thee, and x will judge thee y according to 
thy ways, and will + z recompenſe upon thee all thine aho- 
m3nat:ons. 

2? There ſhall be no more Delays, mine Anger 1s upon thee. » It 
is I, who ſend the Chaldeavs, the Peſtilence, Famine, &c. Theſe are 
commiſſioned by me. x Puniſh : y as thou deſerveſt. z Give, Heb. 
unto thee as the Wages of thy Iniquities, or lay all the Guilt, and 
a1] the Puniſhment of all thy Sins upon thee. 


4 * And mine 6 eye ſhall not ſpare thee, neither will I 
have pity : but I will recompenſe thy ways upon thee, and 
thine c abominations ſhall be d in the midſt of thee, and 


ve © ſhall know that I a» the LORD. 

þ Vid. chap 5. 11. c Not only the Puniſhment and Smart, but 
the Vileneſs, Loathſomneſs and Hatefulneſs of thy Sins ſhall be, 4 E- 
ver before thee, and openly known to others alſo, or ſhall reach thy 
very heart. e See chap. 6, 10. 12. 


5 Thus faith the Lord GOD, An e evil, an onely evil f, 


behold 1s come. 

e An Eviland fore AMiQtion, one Miſery enough to ruin the whole, 
ſo chat there will be no need of another. Or, as the Chald. Paraphr. 
one Evil after another : and this beſpeaks the extream ſadneſs of their 
Condition who ſuffer under this Evil. f Open your Eyes, you will 
{ce it is at the Doors, ana breaking 1nupon you. 

6 Angend 1s come, the end is come, it 4 + watcheth 
for thee, hehold, it is come. | 

g Thus frequently it is repeated, to ſhew the certainty of the thing, 
the heavineſs of the Judgment, the great Apprehenlions they ſhould 
have of it, and yet the great Security they are under. h God's Ven- 
gcance ſeems to {lumber, and Sinners dream *twill never awake; but 
here the Prophet atlureth the Sinners of Jeruſa!rm and its People, that 
God hath awaken his Vengeance, which now watcheth to take the 
firſt opportunity, or rather to haſten it 


7 The 7 morning 15 come upon thee, O # thou that 
dwelleft in the land : the time is come, the day of trou- 
ble z / near, and not the || ſounding again of the moun- 


eains. 

; The Word is variouſly rendred, and accordingly variouſly ap- 
plied ; it is, ſay ſome, of a Chald:e Original, and ſignifies to cry our, 
20 encompals, and to riſe betimes in the Morning, very fitly applica- 
ble here. Wirth the Morning-Star which uſhers in the Light, thine E- 
nemies and thy Sorrows are riſen, have compaſſad thee abour, and 
the Cry of their Shoutings, and the Cry of thy diſtreſſed People is 
raiſed ; a long Day of Sorrows threatens theo, is upon thee. & Upon 
every one that dwelleth in the Land. [as the Day near to the Mor- 
ning, ſonear are thy Troubles, thy great, perplexed, and tumultuous 
Troubles, as the Word implies, like that 1/2. 22. 5. and Zeph. 1. 
!4 —17. m Either it means the Eccho which Mountains make, 
and 1s an empty Sound, makes great noiſe and only ſtartles Children ; 
the noiſe and report of your Calamittes are rea], yea dreadful. Or 
=}fe thus, on th2 Mountains were your Vineyards, and in Vintage 
time your Grape-gatherers were wont to ſhout for Joy, and fill the 
Neighbourtiood with their Joys, but no ſuch Soundings ſhall you hear 
now. Or, it may allude to the Muſick with which their Idol-Wor- 
{hip was celebrated in Mountains, high Places, in Vallies, &c. whence 
the Sound was heardand eccho'd from Hill co Hill. Thoſe Soundings 
_ the Moutains ſhall ceaſe, *cis a long Day of Vengeance for thoſe 

ins. 
8 Now will I » ſhortly » pour out my fury upon thee, 
and accompliſh my anger upon thee, and I will p judge 
thee according to thy ways, and will recompenſe thee tor 


all thine abominations. 

# Or from a nearer ditance, as well as in a ſhort time, that the 
Flood of my Wrath may bear all down before ic. oMy Wrath ſhall 
not be poured our as Water from a Cloud at mighty diſtance, bur Jike 
the breaking out of the Sea on the neighbouring Villages, which ſwal. 
lows them up, Houſes, Cattel and Men, without remedy. p See 
chap 5. wer. 13. & vcr, 3, of this Chapter, 

9 And tine eye ſhall not q fpare, neither will I have 


pity : I will recomp2nle + thee according to r thy ways, 


KITES __ Chap. vii 
and ye ſhall know that I am the LORD that * ſmi- & | 


teth. 

a See ehap. 5. 11. r Worſe than the Ways of Heathens, and thy 
Puniſhments ſhall be worſe. s Srill thou recaineſt the old, and ag. 
deft new abominations; theſe to this day are in thee not hidden, bur 
openly. 7 You look only ro the Hand and Sword of the Chaldeans, bye 
I'll not ceaſe till you feel and acknowledg my Hand ſmiting, that you 
may accept Puniſhment, repent and return to me. 

Io « Behold the day, behold it is come, the mornin 
is gone forth, x the rod hath bloſſomed, y pride hath bug- 
ded. | 

« If you will open your Eyes, you may ſee the lowring Day of Ven. 
g2ance, ſee wer. 7. »x This and whar follows may refer either, 1. To 
Nebachadnez.z. ar and his Chaldeans, the Rod of God's Anger,they flouriſh, 
are ſtrong and heavy, like to laſt too long 1n their Strength to break 7/. 
rael. y As they flouriſh in Strength, they exceed in Pride and Arco. 
gance, which buddeth forth in the haughry Deſigas they lay of raiſing 
themſelves on the Ruins of all Countries. 

11 > Violence is « riſen up into a rod of wickedneſs: 
none of bthem 
nor of any of || theirs 
them. 


z With Fierceneſfs, which 1s their natural Temper, a bitter and haſty * 


with Injuſtice and Violence oppreffing all. a Is grown up to be, 
though a Rod to puniſh bad Men, yet to be worſe than thoſe it puniſh- 
'eth; in brief, you may expett the very worſt from the Power, Pride, 
and Violence of thoſe I am now letting in upon you. Or, 2. It may re- 
fer to 1/-ae!; thus your Tribe (or Rod, the ſame word) bloſſometh, 
but 'tis in Sin, and that in Pride and Violence, ſo grown thar 'tis a moſt 
wicked Rod of Injuſtice and Opprefſion to your Neighbours, Bre. 
thren, Servants, &c. as Feremiah, Hoſea, and other Prophets as well 
as Ezekiel complained. And now your Sins thus ripe, your Sorrows 
muſt be very near; as 'tis not many Months between the budding 
of the Tree, and rhe ripening and gathering of the Fruit. 6 This alfo 
is fairly applicable to both Chaldeans and Jews ; the Jews ſhould be 
utterly waſted firſt for their Sins, which God will puniſh by this vio- 
lent, proud, mighty Enemy; and afterwards he will deſtroy Root and 
Branch of that mighty Oppreſlor : and c fo ſad ſhall the Sufferings of 
| both he, that the living ſhall not bewail their dead Friends, becauſe 
they ſhall judg the Dead in better caſe than the living. and tho the 
Words may have this double aſpe&, yet Irake them to refer principally 
and firſt to the Jews, and their near approaching Sorrows. 


12 The dtime is come, the day draweth near, let not 
the e buyer rejoice nor the ſeller f mourn; for g wrath is 
upon all the multitude thereof. 

d See Verſe 2,3,6, 7. e Tho he honeſtly poſſeſs what his Money 
purchaſed, yet let him not hug himſelf in the thought of his Riches. 
7 Men uſually part with their Eſtates, grieving that they muſt cran(- 
mit their Right co others; bur let Sellers now think how little a while 
they could have kept them, and how little time they ſhall keep them 
who have bought them. g Such Wrath from God, an off:nded Judg, 
and from inſolent Enemies, that Buyer and Seller ſhall find cheir State 
much alike. x 

13 For the ſeller 5 ſhall not z return to that which is 
ſold, -f- although they were & yet alive: for the viſion / s 
touching the whole multitude thereof, 2yh:ch ſhall not re, 


quity of his lite. 


any ſhould ſurvive the Captivity, yet the Conqueror waſting and de- 
ſtroying all, would confound all diſtin& Titles, and antient Boundaries. 
' The Evils foreſeen and threatned, are deſigned againſt all the Multi. 
tudeof 1ſrac!, whoſe Sin and Impenitence have 1avolved them in theſe 
Judgmentsand Miſeries, asT amaſlured by a Viſion which cannot fail of 
Accompliſhment, which ſhall not return vain, and nor performed. 
: Nor ſhall any one Man of them all be able to fortify himſelf, and ſe. 
cure his State againſt theſe Threats by his Obſtinacy and Sin, or by 
any ſinful Contrivances. 


I4 » They have blown the trumpet, even to make o all 
ready, but p none goeth to the battel: for my q wrath s 
upon all the multitude thereol. 


2 The Houſe of 1ſraet have publiſh'd their Reſolution for War, and 
ſummoned in all fit for Arms; ſo, if the words be read as here: Or, 
if inthe Imperative Mood 6low ye, 8c. they are a ſmart Trony againſt 
the Preparations the Jews can poflibly make for repelling the Ene- 
my, and defending their City. o Perſons fit for the War, and all war- 
like Proviſions, a thing neceſlary in caſe of Invaſions, but in their caſe a 
vain Attempt. p There 15 not a Man going to the War, (as the Heb.) 
all are backward in this Danger. q That Difpleaſure which takes 
away their Prudence and Courage, that theſe Men of Might {l:ep, and 
none finds his Hands or Weapons, 1/a. 29. 14. 


lence ſhall devour i him. 
In the Coryntries. » The Befieged City. 5s Whoever is in ths 
Field. #£ Of the Chald:an Souldier. « Shall ear him up; you, 


Jews! ſhall be Food for uaſatiable Peſtilence and Famiae, heavy T !- 


dings to ſinful Jernſaler, 
16 T But they that eſcape of them ſhail efcap?2 


and thine abominations 7447 5 are in the midlt of thee, 


RY 
Py 
_- 
i F 


At 
all 


ſhalk remain, nor of their || multitude, |\0;, 
neither ſha there be wailing c for mu. 


Nation, Heb. 1. 6. with Eagerneſs and impetuous Vigor executing, and y ” 


eurn : neither ſhall any »» ſtrengthen himſelf [| in + the ini-;,;4 


Return to antient particular Rights, Eſtates and Poſſeſſions. & For if'”” 8 


15 * Thz ſword « q without, and the peſtilence and p. _ 
the famine » within : 5 he that zx in the field ſhall die with ;:.: 


the t ſword; and he that & in the city, famine and peſti- 1 
20, E + ; 


/ 


| Or,; 
mu, 
| 0: Y I 


tam 


Jer. 6. 
'' #leb. go 


| uw ater. 


'4 
, ry 


2.7. 
24 


if S 
"I , I I6.2, 
1 3 x; 

Jer48-37- 
> 
F 
3 
) 
. 
} 
f 
0 
[2 
y 


_ {it 
&* tim 
Us thr. 


wer: 388 


-1C4 
«If, | 


IT 
iT? 
» 
CIT 


£4 
a —D 
"i 
a * 
1 . 4 F 
" ; bv 
vo 
: vos 
' 
US 


+ Heb. {ir their gold ſhall be 7 + removed : their * filver and their 
foe: £01d ſhall not be »» able to deliver them in the day of the 
or i= wrath of the LORD: they ſhall not » ſatisfie their ſouls, 
= | — oy their bowels : || becauſe it is the o ſtumbling- 
ok 3. 210CK Ol their 1n1quity. 


dg; 
-; - 
: :< 


By 

- T4 
4 8% 
Pay 


. 


Bo 
qt, WE 
- ODE Ae +) 

pa Be 

' oF 


3. VII. 


and might ſtop the Purſuer whom they hope Silver may ſtop a while, 
and give them ſome ſpace to get away : Or, might occaſion Quarrels 
among Souldiers of Fortune, which might ſer them one againſt ano- 
ther til the diſtreſſed Jew could get away from them all, 
Chaldeans, who in this day of their own Rage, and God's Wrath| 
. againſt the Jews, did (as the Meds and Perſians ſhall, Iſa. 13. 17.) not; 

regard Silver or Gold, Prov. 11. 4. | 


coveted immeaſurab 
ſion; this that they 


E 5 EB 

' id ſhall be on the y mountains ke doves z of the 
valleys, all of cham s mourning, 5 every one for his 
INIQUItY» | | 
Ty _ read the Words they are a Prediction ; ſome ſhall eſcape, 
4:4 Promiſe of ſome Mercy in the Eſcape. Bur if we read them, as 
7c may thus, And fly je that are eſcaped of them, in the Imperative, 
they are a Command to, or DireCtion for ſuch as would eſcape, like 
that Jer, 21.9. y Wandring out of their proper place, and uneaſy. 
» That are frighted our of their neſts, and fly among the wilder fort 
of Doves, which give Them trouble and Danger ; ſuch will be the 
State of eſcaped Ones among ſavage Idolaters. a Bemoaning them- 
ſelves, and making a mournful noife, Nah. 2. 7. 6 Either for the Pu- 
niſhment of their Iniquity, ſo the worſt of choſe thar eſcape : Or, for 
their Iniquity cauſe of their Puniſhment, ſo the beſt among them. Or, 
for both together ; the Mourning, though on different Motives, yer 
ſhould be univerſal, every one weeping. 


17 All c *hands ſhall be feeble, and all knees 4 + ſhall be 


weak as water. 

c With which they ſhould hold the Inſtruments of Fortification, 
the Weapons of War, the Tools of Working, and that ſhould carry 
away their Goods, that they ſhall not beable to workat the Ramparts, 
nor fight in the Battel, nor earn their Bread, or carry away their Sub- 
ſtance on which they might ſubſiſt. 4 Which bowed to Idols, ſhall 
now fall under the Puniſhments of Idolatry, ſhall be neither ſtrong to 
ſtand in Bartel, nor to fly from the drawa Sword ; and this Weakneſs 
was on all, as 'tis twice repeated, 


18 They ſhall * alſo gird e themſelves with ſackcloth, 
and f horror ſhall g cover them, and ſhame + ſha! be on all 
faces, and baldneſs : upon all their heads. 


e A very general Uſage in the Eaſtern Parts, in deepeſt Sorrows and 
Diſtreſſes, to put Sackcloth on, and to gird it cloſe to their Bodies. 
f Either dreadfull Apprheenfions of growing Evils, or continued Sha- 
kings from Impreſſions of what formely they felr, according to Lew. 
26. 16. 36. g Be on every ſide ,on no fide Safety or Quiet, and Con- 
fidence. þ Of Diſappointment, which breeds Conſternation, and 
ſhame of conſcious Guilt and unbecoming Deportment, which fills 
the Countenance as much with Bluſhing, as it fills the Conſcience with 
Guilt and Sin. 7 Either by pulling off the Hair amidſt their Sorrows; 
or, cutting off their Hair in token of greateſt Mourning, 7/s. 15. 2. 
Jer. 7. 29. and 48. 37. Amos 8. 10, 


19 & They ſhall caſt their ſilver in the ſtreets, and 


k Either, 1. The Jews themſelves, that they be the lighter to fly, 


&KITEH 
ſhall pollute my ſecret 5 
into it and defile it. | | 
2 Either from the Jews, who cry under ſuch Violence and Profan« 
neſs: Or, from the Cha/deans who a it, neither retievins the onc 
nor reſtraining the other. 6 Either, 1. My encloſed Land of Jud-a Y 
Or, 2. My City Jeruſal:m; Or, 3. The Temple: And, 4 The Hotv 
of Holes; all which the Baby/ouian Conquerors rrampled under their 
conquering feet. c The Souldiers, who in truth robbed the Temple 
and here have their true Scile given them, are Robbers that uſed rhz 
Temple and it, conſecrate Gitrs without any reverence or reſpec. 
They ſhould break all open and ruſh into th: Places, which Jevrs 
Levires and Prieſts might not enter. 


23 4 Make a chain 4: for the land is full of þb! 
crimes, and the city is full of violence. _ 

d Either to ſignify, that like Criminals they ſhould be brought i 
Chains before God their Judge : Or, as guilty and condemned ſho 11d 
be Ied away in Chains : Or, elſe as Captives in Chains carried away 
in Triumph, becauſe Murders and Oppreflions abounded in them. 
=_ e becauſe the Crimes which deſerved Death, abougded among 
them. 


24 Wherefore I will bring the worſt F of the heathen, 
and they ſhal! poſſeſs g their houſes : I will alſo make the 


pomp 4 of the ſtrong z to ceaſe, and * their holy & places* 
!hall be defiled. / 
f The moſt violent, proud and bloody Men; ſuch the Cla'dzans » ps 
ſhewed themſelves. g Nor only dwell in their Houſes, but by right © © 
of Conqueſt account them their own, and deſcending to theirs atter 
them. h The Excellency, Magnificcnce and Glory, whatever they 
boaſted of, either lirerally the Pride, or figuratively the Temple tha: 
the Jews gloried in. 7 Of the Jews who thought Jeruſal:m roo well 
fortified by Art and Nature,and the Divine Preſence,it being the City 
of God, ever to be overthrown. & All thar pertains to their Reli- 
gion, and exerciſe of it, Perſons, Places, Things, which now by thze:r 
abuſe of them are theirs, not mine, ſhall be polluted. ; 


25 f Deltrution / cometh, and they ſhall » ſeek peace, ,;1.1, ..-. 
and therein fhall be none. en 


Chap. VTIL. 


P 


pace : ior the || robbers c ſhall enter t Or, *: 


oody £ 


F 
Or, they 
7, 6.0; 

h a'f.oo7 1. 
4S®be 6 >", 


. 
} 
£1» 


& 


I Such as an angry provoked Power makes, when it cuts off all Root © © 
and Branch, 7 Either by enquiring of Prophets; Or, rather ſuing to 
Nebuchadnczzar, whom,after ſo many Aﬀeonts,they will atrempr to pa- 
cify. » No ſuch thing can be had; they ſhould ſeek it elſewhere, and 
appeaſe their God who could give them Peace ; as for the Cha!dean, he 
will not, becauſe God dorh nor. 


26 * Miſchief o ſhall come upon miſchief, and rumour+..., ... 

p ſhall be upon rumour, * 9 then ſhall they ſeck a viſion of *Þſ-. 9. 
the prophets 7 : but the law ſhall periſh from the pricſt,and Lam. =. 9. | 
counſel from the antients s. Xp 
o Loſs upon Loſs, one Sorrow on the neck of another. þp Dreadful 


News, one Poſt after another, of the Enemies Threats, Preparations, 
Marches, Succeſles and Cruelties, wounding the Heart of the ftouteR. 


Hem pre & a_—_— 
OSes he ” 


——— 
> : OR w 4 
+3 


Or, 2. The; 


[ 


Or, 3. Becauſe Nebuchadnezz.ar 
might poflibly reſerve it all to himſelf, having thoſe vaſt Thoughts ot 


enlarging his Empire by Arms, which could not be done without 
great Treaſures. / Carried away into Babylon tothe Royal Treaſury : 


Or, laid aſide as deſpiſed when cffered as a Ranſom of their Life : 


Or, hid by the Jews in polluted places, which perhaps the Jews 
might think would be ſecureſt from ſearching, foraſmuch as the Chal- 
deans knew their Law forbad them to touch any unclean thing. 2 This 


is the ſum of it; theſe Treaſures ſhall ſtand them in no ſtead. » If 


the ſeIf-flattering Jews ſhould think much Silver and Gold might ran- 
ſom their Life when the City 1s taken, the Prophet removes this Con- 


fidence, and tells them they ſhould not have enough to buy Bread 
to fill their own Bellies. o This Silver and Gold they valued too much, 
ly, abuſed to Pride, Luxury, Idolatry, and Oppreſ- 
fumbled at, and fell into Sin ; this now that they 
ftumble ar, and fall into deepeſt Miſery and Danger. 


20 E As for the p beauty of his ornament, he ſet q it 


in majeſty : but they made r the images of their abomina- 
tions, and of their deteſtable things therein : therefore have 


I || ſer it s far from them. | 


> Their Riches, the Ornament of a Nation, their Silver, Gold,&c. 
Or rather, the Temple and Ark,and all that pertained to it, which was 
the Beauty and Glory of that Nation, and they accounted it ſo. q God 
commanded it ſhould be ſtately, beautiful and rich, very magnificent, 
faid Solomon, great, 2 Chron. 2. 5. and God gave the Riches with 
which 'rwas builr, 1 Chon. 29. 11—16. r Either ſet up their Idols, 
which God ſo much abhorred, in his Temple, and provoked him with 
ſpiritual Adulteries to his Face, as if a Wife ſhould commir Adultery 
before the Eye of her Husband : Or, made their Idols, thoſe abomina- 
ble Images, thoſe deteſtable things, of the Silver and Gold which I 
adorned. them with. 5 T have parted between them, ſent them from 
the Temple, and their Gold and Silver from them. 


21 And I will give it * into the hands « of the ſtrangers 


* for a prey, and to the wicked y of the earth for a ſpoil, 
and they ſhall pollute it z. 


: My Temple. « Power and Poſſeſſion. x Foreigners who, by di- 
rection of my Law, were excluded coming to it, they now ſhall enter 
into 1t,and rake the Riches of ir as lawfulPrey. y This Deſcription of 
theſe Men, Strangers by their diſtance of place, and the worſt of Men 
on Earth by their proud, cruel, and fierce Diſpoſition, z Enter, ſpoil, 
tear down, and uſe the Temple as a vile place, and make no difference 
between this and other places. This I think the proper ſenſe; ſome 
iay, the Text ſpeaks of the rich Idols which the Idolaters accounted 
molt holy, and on which they laid our their Treaſure, and which 
now the CEaldeans ſhould plunder and pollute. 


22 My face will I turn @ alſo from them, and they 


q In this multiplied Perplexicy they will enquire, it's likely, of their 
tilſe Prophets, hating the true ; whom, if they conſulc, they wi!l nor 
like their Anſwer: Or, rather there ſhall be no Prophet, as Pf. 74.9. 
no Revelation from Heaven for them. r 4nd, Heb. rather than Bur. 
When they conſult the Prieſt, their ordinary Dire&or by the Law, 
alas! if any remain, they are 1gnorant of the Law ; nor have they 
Sacrifices to bring to them to offer unto God. Rcligious Men can 
_ them no Comfort. s Nor ſhall their Senators know what co 
adviſe. 


27 The king ſhall « mourn, and the prince ſhall be 


ey s 
—- " > 
_— 44 287 
25S "xx 


Ol” | OPER >. PAROLE = rn 
ONES EI ae WT 


. tn ts ear er 
—— PR 
mou _— . Sm by " FR 
 -» Ayo 


clothed with delolation, and the hands of the people y oi oi 5.6 
the land ſhall be z troubled : I will do 2 unto them after Mp; 
their way, and -| according to their deſerts will I judge # Hzb ff OMY 
them, and they thall know chat I a2 the LORD. with thoiy 0%; 
t Zedekiah. u Droop and deſpair. x Every Magiſtrate ſhall de. j#937%-3-. | he 
ſpond. » See verſe 17. x Hang down, and melt away. 21 will no Wt: 


more forbear what they have deſerved ; I will repay, 


and they ſhall 
know my Vengeance. TION 


CHAP. VIIL 


God bringeth the Prophet into the temple, I—4. ſheweth him the image of 31 
jeal d th beminable i | G me. 
jealouſje, and the Jews abominable idolatry therewith, 5—6. and many THY*8} 
other creeping things, and abominaile beaſts in the chamber of imagery,” 3 [} f 
7—12. The women mourning for Tammuz, 13—14. The worſhippers of F (7 
the Sun, 15—-16. They make light of all theſe abominations, 17, But "4 4 08 
God will puniſh them without mercy, 18, \ 0} EE: 


I A ND it came to paſs in the # ſixth year, in the 5 
ſixth -onth, in the c filth day of the month, s 

I 4 ſat in my houſe, and the e elders of Judah *f fat before 
me, that ? the g hand of the Lord GOD fell there up-*Ch.3. 22. 
on me. 

a Of Jeconiah's Captivity. b They had been almoſt ſeven Years in 
Captivity ; 'twas Elul, or our Auguſt. c The Sabbath-day, as ch. 1.2, | 
4 Abode in my Houſe, probably he Jay on his Side, the 39o Days Me. 
not yer expired. e The Chief of thoſe that were now in Captivity. 
f They were come either to ſpend the Sabbath 1n religious Exerci- 
ſes, ſuch as the preſent ſtate of Afﬀairs permitced, to hear ſomewhat 
from the Propher's Mouth, expounding the Law, or declaring their 
Duty, or to enquire what would become of their Brethren in Feruſa- 
lem, whether they ſhould be ſubdued and captivated, or whether any 
good News for them from Heaven,and how they ſhould behave them- 
ſelves in theſe ſad times. g The Spirir of Prophecy exerted it felf 
with a mighty Divine Power, which enlighrned me at thar very 
Time, and in that very Place. See ch. 1.3. | 


2 Then I beheld, and lo, a + likeneſs as the ap- 
pearance of 7 fire: from the appearance of his loins 
even downward, fire; and from his loins even upward, 


40 


Chap. VIL 


S 


a 


3 


Chap.1. 


Chap. r, 


as the appearance of & brightneſs, * as the colour ol 


amber. 


þ Of a Man; that Man whom he had ſeen upon the Throne, * e. of 
Chriſt. 7 See Chap. 1. 26, 27, 28. This Fire denotes the Wrath of 
God againſt Jeryſa/cw; and it is obſerved 'twas Fire downward, wrath 
already coming down upon the Jews. &4 To ſignify the Majeſty and 
Glory of Chriſt. See more, Chap. r. 27. 

3 And/ he m put forth the form of an * » hand, and 
took me by a lock of mine head, and the ſpirit 9 litt me 
up p between the earth and the heaven, and brought me 
in the q viſions of God to Jeruſalem, to the door of the 
7 inner gate, that looketh 5 towards the north, where 


as the ſeat of the : image of # jealouſie, which provoketh 


to jealoulie. 


] Chriſt. » Viſionally this was a&ed, not corporally or aftually, 
and ſo all that is hereſpoken of to the end of the 16:4 ver 


EIZEKIE L. 


19 So I went » in, and faw, and behold, every x 
form of creeping things, and abominable y beaſts, and all 
& the idols of the houſe of Iſrael 2 pourtayed upon the 


wall 5 round about, 

« According to the Viſion. » Of ſuch Creatures as the Egyprians, 
or any others with whom the Jews had Acquaintance, did worſhip, 
» The Beaſts are here called abominable, becauſe Idolaters had abuſ-g 
them to unlawfull uſes, making Idols of them. z The Jews had mu]. 
t!plied to themſelves Idols of their own, beſides thoſe borrowed from 
their Neighbours; or they are called the Idols of the Houſe of 1/7 act, 
becovſ- they had adopted them, and becauſe 1/rael's Idolatry was {© 
much mote brutjſh and provoking than that of the other nations, 
who had not the Law of God given to them, as to the Jews. # Pofli- 
bly they dil thus piQure their Idols on the wall, vainly thinking this 
was not a Breach of the Law which forbad graven Images, and mo]. 


ten Images ; but every Likeneſs of any thing made for to worſhip 


fe. n Which 115 forbiden, and ſuch PiQures are to be deſtroyed, Numb. 33. 52. 


indeed is the Hand which took him by the Head, gently, but with (6 Poſſibly they had the ſame ſer of Idols by different Givers, and 


mighty Strength. 


were with him. p He ſeemed to fly as a ſwift Bird through the A:-, 
o Carried me to ſee Jeruſalem ; where in Viſions ſtrange and gloriou:, 
I beheld what was done there ; this was no Deluſion but a Revelation 
from Heaven, though all was done in an Extaſy ; yet he was fully af- 
ſured of every Particular he ſaw done in the Temple, whither he was 
carried in his Spirit not Body, by the Hand or Spirit of Chriſt. » To 
the Door of the Gate of the inner Court, or Court of the Prieſts, 
s The Temple-Courts had four Gates towards the four 
Quarters of the World; and this was the North-Gate, which opened 
into the great Court where 4haz had ſet up his Pamaſcen Altar, 
2 Kings 16. 11, and where the Idols were ſer too. 
Manaſſeh had-ſet up, 2 Kings 21. 7. and Joſiah had deſtroyed, and 
ſucceeding Kings had again ſetup. #= Becauſe it was ſo notorious an 
Afﬀeront to God who had maried !ſrae! to himſelf, that above ail other 
it provoked him to Anger againſt this People. 


4 And behold, the x glory of the God of Iſrael was 
7 there, z according to the viſion that I ſaw * in the 


2 Chron. 4. 9. 


ay 


plain. 


ax See chap. 1. 28. and cap. 3. 23. y Wither he carried me, 
and there ir ſhewed me whar I ſaw. z Like that, which gave 
farther Confirmation to the Propher, and encouraged him in his 


Work and Cal). 


5 T @ Then faid he uuto me, Son of man, 5 lift up 
thine eyes now the way towards the north : fol lift up 
mine eyes the way toward the north, and behold, north- 
ward at the gate c of the altar, this image d of jealouſie 


in the entry c. 


a When he had 1g Viſion brought me hither. & Obſerve diligently 
and exaGtly every thing which thou mayeſt ſee Northward firſt. «c So 
called becauſe 4haz had removed it from the middle of the Court, 
where by God's Command *twas placed by Solomon ; but now Ahax ſet- 
ting itnear this North-Gate, it gave name to theGate : Or poſſibly, be 
cauſe of an Altar erected there tofame Idol by Manaſſeh. 4 See wer. 3, 
&-c. e In the very midſt of the Court, is the very Paſlage to the 


Temple,to affront the Worſhip of God. 


6 He ſeid furthermore unto me, Son of man, f ſeeſt 
thou what g they do ? ever the great þ abominations that 
the houſe of Iſrael committeth 7 here, that I & ſhould go 
far off from my ſancuary / ? but turn thee yet again, and 
thou ſhalt ſee greater abominations. 

f Doeſt thou obſerve. g the Inhabitants, the generality of the 
Jews. + The notorious Idolatries. 7 In this Court in view of my 
Temple, and where all that come ( as moſt did ) this Way to worſhip 
me, ce it, ſo ſhameleſs is it ! & Not that they deſigned this, bur 
eventually 'twas ſo, and in all reaſon could be no otherwiſe expeQed. 
7 Thar I choſe, but am not confined to that ; I ſhall leave not by local 
diſtance, but by rejeQting and caſting it off, and laying it deſolate. 

7 T And he brought me to the /door of the 
2 court; and when I 7 looked, behold, a »« hole in the 


wall. 


7 The ſecond Door, for there were two in the North-ſide. m werſe 3. 
- Some ſay 'twas the Court into which the Levites only, not the People 
might enter ; and round about which were the Chambers of the Prieſt. 
z Probably, being at the Door of the Court, he might eſpy ſuch a 
Hole in the oppolite wall that was toward the Temple ; whereon were 
built the Treaſury-Chamber, and Chambers for T'ithes, and for other 
Neceſlaries about the Temple-Worſhip; and for the Prieſts Lodgings, 
in which theſe Abominations were aCted. 
through which he might ſee ſomewhat, though not much of what 


was done within. 


8 Then faid he unto me, Son of man, o dig now in 
the wall: and when I had digged in the wall, behoid a 


door p. 


o Beſide that, the Hole he ſaw in the Wall was not quite through ; 
it was not great enough for him to go through, therefore he is com- 
manded to dig one large enough to ceme at the Door mentioned in this 
Verſe. p Some very private Door by which the idolatrous Prieſts entred 
mto the Chamber of their imagery, to perform idolatrous Worſhi p to 
their Images, or the Door of the Treaſury. 

9 And he ſaid unto me, q Go in, and r behold the s 
wicked abominations that they do * here. , 

9 This was to ſecure him ; he need fear neither the Violence which 
Idolaters uſually ſhew againſt thoſe that diſcover them, nor yer any le- 
gal Impurity by coming ſo near theſe abominable things. » Look dili- 
gently that thou maiſt particularly reprove theſe, and denounce my juſt 
Tudgmentrs againſt them. s The moſt abominable Wickedneiles ; theſe 
are loathſom in their Nature, and multiplied in number before me. 
e Are dving here, Heb. before the evil day appeared fo near, they did, and 
under the Approach of Judgments, they are ſtill doing at this day, 
in this very place under thz Walls of my Temple. 


o Or little blind Window 


— 


o Very probably in the Sight of the Elders who | by difterent Painters, drawn on the Walls of the Chamber or Houſe 


of Idols. 
| I: And there b ſtood before them c ſeventy men of the 


the 4 antients of the houſe of Iſrael, and in the e midſt of 
them ſtood Jaazaniah the ſon of F. Shaphan, with g every 
man his cenſer in his hand, and a + thick cloud of 3 in. 


cenſe went up. 

6 Offering Incenſe before the Idols. c Either the Sanhedrim or 
Council of 70, who ſhould have preſerved Religion pure and untain. 
ted, ty which their Office bound them : or, elſe 70 of the more aged 
Heads of theTribes, or Familes, who ſhould have been Examples by 
their Pureand Conſtant Aﬀe&ion to true Religion, bur theſe are Ring- 
leaders in this Idolatry. d By Age or Office, or both. e Either ac- 
companying them in their Idolatry : or, rather as Chief of the Council 
or Sanhearim in the Chair, the Seat of the Chief Prefect, or Principal, 
next to the High Prieſt. f mentioned 2 Kings 22. $. as molt likely, 
a Perſon that ſeems forward in Reforming under Joſiah, and his Sun 
as forward now in corrupting the Worſhip of God. g All were 
Attors in this Idolatry, and either Prieſts to theſe Idols,or very Bigots 
in the Service. þ Or abundance'of a Cloud, or Rich (as the word 
among Rabbinical Senſes) Cloud; or, ſince the word whence this 
comes ſignifies to pray or ſupplicate, a Cloud of Incenſe offered with 
the Prayers of theſe, deluded Idolaters, who were uſed to put both 
together. i Whether ſimple and uncompounded, or compound, it 
was alway of Sweets, and very coſtly too : indeed Idolatry, as Adul 
tery will be laviſh. 

12 Then ſaid he unto me, Son of man, haſt thou 7 ſeen 


what the & antients of the houſe of Ifarel do in the / dark, 
m every man .in the » chambers of his imagery ? for they 


o ſay, The *þ LORD 9 ſeth us not, the LORD'G Or; 


hath 7 forſaken the earth. 

z; Obſerved and throughly conſidered. & See ver. 11. Whether 
aſhamed to at openly what was moſt abſurd, or whether out of Blind. 
neſs, doting in ſecret on what Heathens ſecretly derided, though for 
Intereſt they a&ed it openly, owning that Religion which awed the 
People among them, and deriding it at home ; bur Idolatrous Jews 
bluſh in publick, and retire into Corners to be Idolaters, as thou ſeeft 
in this Chamber. » Every one of thofe Anrtients, for ſtil] God had 
his remnant that kept cloſe to God. »n Secrer, Cloſer, or Bed-chamber, 
o Moſt ſhameleſs! would give a Reaſon for their unreaſonable PraGti. 
ces. þ Jehwoah the Everlaſting and Almighty God. 9 Either they 
deny his Providence, and a& what they durſt not if they thought rhe 
Lord knew and noted it, as if they accounted Jehovah no better than 
idols that have Eyes, but ſee not. Or elſe they deny God's Care of 
them and their Afﬀairs, traduce him as if he minded them nor, and 
therefore they muſt chooſe ſome other God for Patron, who would 
better help than he had done.” » This ſeems to explain the Meaning of 
that, he ſeeth us not ; and ſo with Atheiſm more than ordinary, they 
would caſt the blame of chooſing other Gods on God himſelf. 

13 J He faid allo unto me, Turn thee yet again, 
and thou ſhall « ſee # greater abominations that they 


# do. 

5 Repreſented to him in this Viſion. * Either becauſe added to all 
the reſt : or, becauſe ſome Circumſtances in theſe make them more 
abominable than what before was repreſented; or, it may be taken for 
very great, as when the word is applyed to Cities, Deur. 1. 28. and 6 
10. and g. 1. To ſtones, Joſh. 10. 11, 27. 1 Kings 7. 10. David's 
Wars, 1 Chron. 22. 8, Kingdoms, Fer. 28. 8. And to the marvelous 
Works of God, Job 5. 9. and g. 10 Pſal. 136. 4. And generally our 
Verſion keeps to the poſitive degree, though here they render it by the 
comparative; and in the 6:h Verſe of this Chapter the very felf-ſame 
Expreflion is rendered great (not greater ) Abominations : We need 
not then perplex our Reader with a long Diſcourſe, to ſhew wherein 
theſe latter Sins are greater than the former meutioned ; they are all 
very great. u Now they ate doing theſe things, inſtead of worſhip- 
ping the true God on the Sabbath, as he required all his People : the 
Leaders of the People are on the Sabbath of the Lord offering Incenſs 
to their deteftable Idols. 

14 Then he » brought me to the door of the » gate 


of the LOR D's houſe, which was towards the || north, 
and behold, there fat z women @ weeping for 6 Tam- 


mUuz. 

x Not by real and corporal Change of Place, bur in Vifion and by 
Repreſentation. y Of the outer Court, or Court of the Women: 10 
called becauſe they were allowed to come into it, as were all the Laity 
of the Jews; but 'tis more likely, the Gate of the Inner Courr, th* 
Court of the Prieſts, next to the Houſe of God, whirher none ſave 
Prieſts might come but in this very great Corruption of the State, 
others were admitted into it, which makes this Sin the greater. {| He 
enters at firſt by the North-Gate, and ſo pafſeth on to what Places ve!® 
next to the Temple on that ſide. z Contrary to the Law were the) 
come thither, led by their blindneſs, becauſe the vileſt and moſt imp! 
dent Superſtition, and waiting (expreſs'd by ſtring) ready to comm 
moſt lewd Wickedneſles as part of their obſcene and beafſtly gore 

s Ti 


Chap. VII 


Fe, 
vga 

WS 
* 
4 oo 
<4 4N 


£ «WF 
Y 
+ 
'* 
, 
+* 


OT 


—* 
FE OS ge. Oe TIE BN : 
Tee Ee ett, A: 


| oa 
[ K. 
| 2 
[ + 
- 
8 
b 
: 
p 


hap. IX. E Z E 


of a Boar, ſay ſome; 


| A Magician, fay ſome: a handſom young Man, but noto. 
che bale SN omen, yy others: an Adulterer (fy _—_ _ 
*- B-other King of Egypt, and mangled in pieces: his torn Mem. 
RO Ro os a River, but gathered up by the fond Adul- 
rereſſes, and Rites of Worſhip fitted to ſolewd an Idol; whoſe Adul- 
teries, laſcivious Prattices, and imnmiodeſt Geſtures theſe ſhe-Prieſts 
Red over before the Idol with Men of like Lewdneſs, of whom whar 
they received, as Rewards of their proſtiruting themſelves, was offer- 
ed to Vines : By this Means God's Temple was turned into a lewd Stews. 


rious for Love of 


15 © Then ſaid he unto me, Haſt thou ſeen th, O ſon 
of man? turn thee yet again, and thou ſhalt ſee greater 


aborinations c than thele.  . 7 

- Brides theſe thou haſt ſeen, thou ſhalt again ſee great Abomina- 
tions: or, if the Expreſſion be ſtritly comparative, then theſe latter 
Wickedneſſes may be accounted greater, becauſe ated ina moreſacred 


Place. 


16 And he brought me into the 4 inner court of the 


> TORD' houſe, and behold, at the -e door of the tem- 


ple of the LORD, between the f porch and the g altar, 


1 *Ch.i1. 1. vere about þ * five and twenty men, with their & backs 


” 
2 


: toward the temple of the LORD, and their faces toward 

Kings the eaſt, and chey worſhipped the 7 * ſun toward the 
*'" caſt. 

| d The inmoſt, that which was next to the Temple, called herethe 

Lord's Houſe. e Before he ſaw Abominations in the Gates of the 

/ Courts, now he is come to the very Houſe it ſelf. f Thar ſtately large 

Porch, beautified with the high curious and mighty brafs Pillars, 7a- 

chin and Boaz,, of which ſee 1 Kings 6. 3. and 7- 15.21. g The bra- 

zen Altar for burnt-offerings, which was placed in the Court before the 


Front-of the Temple, and is here repreſented in its proper Place, 


-- is only part which is ſpecified of their irreligious Religion, 
-— — Sick Tears an infamouſly luſtful and unclean Whore- 
h onger or Votary of Yenws, ſnarch'd from her by an unhappy Woung 
_— chis Weeping implieth all the beaſtly Rites of 


K1IE 
unparalel'd Judgments; fo the Concrete in the ſuperlative degree is 
ſometimes expreſs'd in the Abſtra&; as here 'ris, or theſe Judgments 
are already neat at hand : It may point at the Chief Commanders in the 
Babyloniſh Army : d not thoſe that were now Officers under Z:ad:kiah 
and commiſſioned by him, bit thoſe whom God hath appointed ro 
deſtroy the City ; Angels, ſay ſome; the Chaldean Commanders; think 
others; 7. e. e Every one; 'tis an H brew Idiom. - f each of theſe 
had a Weapon proper for that kind of DeftruQion which he was to ef. 
fe&; and ſo ſome ro ſlay with Sword; another wirki- the Peſtilence, 
another with Famine; each had his proper Work herein; and 'tis 
called his Deſiru#ion: g Denoting both Readineſs unto, Ex pedition in 

and Strength for the Work. | NING: 

2 And g behold, + ſix # men that came from the way oft Heb. 
the & higher gate, which -| lizth toward the ! north, and» is 
every man a - ſlaughter-weapon m»: in his hand: and one; 
man » among them was clothed with » linen, with a wri. Sinepeu of 
ters inkhorn by Mis + ſides and p they went in and ſtood bis 6reate 
beſide the q brazen altar. | in in 

g So ſoon as Command was given out, th:ſe Miniſters of God's juſtÞ/eee? | 
Diſpleaſure appear ready to execute. h That was the preciſe Num. t H-d. »f+ 
ber, neither more nor fewer. # In Appearance and Viſion they were?” 7 loins. 
Men, and the Prophet calls them as he ſaw them ; whether Angels in 
the ſhape of Men, or whether really Men, needs not much Enquiry; 
they come without Delay. & Either becauſe being more inward, 'ris 
higher than the outward, as in all Buildings upon Aſcents where you 
go up by ſteps from the outward Parts rowards the inmoſt Building, 
or becauſe it was built morelofty than the other, enlarged likely by 
Fothan, 2 Chron. 27. 3. [Infinuating whence theic DcſtruQtion ſhould 
come; from Babylon came that Whirlwind, ch. r. v. 4. which was ro 
Overthrow Jeruſalem. And this North Gate was the weakeft both by 
their Sins there committed, and by its Situation, which invited 4:10. 
chus and Tits to pitch their Tents on that ſide when they beſieged ir, 
and on this ſide the Chaldcans did firft enter. » See ver. 1, » Not 
Companion, but as one of great Authority over them, who are as Offi. 
cers waiting on him on every ſide. o A Garment proper to the Prieſt. 


- # 2 Kings 16. 14. This is net contradiftory to that 5:h Verſe, which| hood, whether Ordinary Prieſt, or High Prieſt; Ex9d. 28. 42. 42. 
y, ſpeaks of the Place where Ahaz had wickedly placed the Alrar; but this| Lev. 6. 10. In this Habit appeared the Ange), Dar. 19.5. and 12.6, 7. 
c 16th Verſe ſpeaks of the ſame — nga - be where it ought, | and a very fit Reſemblance of _ who 1s the only Saviour of his 
s God commanded ir ſhould be, and Solomon placed it, 2 Chron. 8. 12-| Ele&, whoſe Names he knows as if written by him. p All the ſeven, 
4 p An indcfinite and undetermined Number, 3 Either ſome Principal | both the ſix Executioners, and the ſignal Man clothed in Linnen, went 
is Men, or elle ſome Prieſts; if theſe, the greater Sin in rhern ro turn | into the Innner Court where they ſtand waiting, till the Word be given 
h Jdolaters; if the otaer, the Idolatry committed by them in a Place | for Execution. 4q Either ſhewing that they were ready to cffer up ma. 
th _y _— not have - prove _— RE EEE— wick- - gr _ the nr ara of _ » to 2 their bes 
it ed. n contempt of God, with an op eligned Abrenuntia-| Zeal, and Conſtancy to God's Appointment ; for they are not where 
5 tion of God and his Worſbip. / Though God had prohibited this, | 4b4z's Altar was, in the middle of the Court, but near the Brazen Al- 
2 Deut. 17. 3. with m__ 4- 17.18. Fat yu - ——_— of __ Cbaldees, | tar of God's own DireC&ion. 
NN es, rs, en, eG 4 ers, theſe Jews! 2 And the » glory of the God of Iſradl was: gone 
k, ; —— wy - 4h created the Sun, and worſhip the Creature up from the # cherub whereupon he « was, to the 
oy. 17 © » Then he » ſaid unto me, Haſt thou ſeen his, |® threſhold of the houſe; and he » called to the man 
D'CRPSF O fon of man? || Is it a o light thing to the houſe of clothed with linnen, which 444 the wiiters inkhorn by 
, bee &:-Judah, that they comtnit the abominations, which they his _ © Gloria SH. fic os Guncetinies appeared oh 
er #: - 2 , . * r Ei 1 rig s, ſu imes appeared aboye 
nd= em here? for p _— 7 _—_ the land wih 7 vio- the Cherubims in the moſt Holy Place, or the Glorious God of 1/2, 
for ? lence, and have s feturned to provoke me to anger; and| who is the Lord that ſpeaks, wr. 4. or that Glory which the Propher 
the - lo, they 7 put the branch to their noſe. ; ſaw, chap. 1. v. 28. and chap. 3. v. 23. and c<. 8. v. 4. which ſee, and 
eWsS : m Aﬀeer the Prophet had ſeen all, and liad time to conſider all he | which brought him into the Temple. / Wirhdrawn in part, departing 
eelt p ſaw. n God appeals to the Prophet. o Doth the Houſe of Judah from the Place he had fo long dwelt in.. * Or Cherubims, for *ris here 
had think theſe no Sins, or bur little Sins, or that I account nor theſe Pro- | Singular inſtead of Plural. « Either wont to ſir and appear, oreiſe on 
ber. Þ ©% vocations to anger? Do they ſo ſortiſhly undervalue me and my Law | which he was when heappeared unto Ezekiel, as ch. 8: v. 4. x Ofthe 
\Ctis : and Ordinances? &'c. p Theſe: Idolaters, as others of the ſame ftamp, Holy of Holies, or of the Temple, towards the Brazen Altar; in token 
chey * are great Oppreſlors. q Every where their Oppreſſions may be found | either of his ſudden Departure from the Jews becauſe of rheir Sins, ot 
the : in great and highdegrees. r All Injuſtice is here meant towards all| that he might come nearer to thoſe ſeven, ro give them Ocders about 
than 2} forts of Men, whom they firſt deſpiſe, and next deſtroy. 5 From In-| waſting the City. y With a plain and loud Voice, declaring his Pur. 
reof : juſtice againſt Man they return to Impiety againſt God. #* Conſecrate| poſe to proceed to Judg and execute his Righteous Judgment ; but yet 
and Þ «| firſt - Branches in the Sun, and _ next prize _— as what had | firſt providing for the Safety of thz Good. 3 
ould Z rouch'd the Idol, and was bettered by it: or, perhaps took ſome f 5 
1g of Z Branches out of 'the Garland, wherewith they deck'd the Idol, the| => LES 0 gry _ Je _ ugh the 
they 7 Altar, the Viftim, or themſelves; and as the Orgyafts, i.e. Worſhip. F F; k y I 5 oo ot Jerulalem, and OY 
4 persof Bacchw, did wave their Thyrſu, the Stalk or Stem wreathed + tet a 4 mar upon the e foreheads of the men that,,,-+ ; 
rain, ; with Ivy about it, carrying it in their Hands whilſt they danced, bow-|f ſigh, and that g cry for + all the abominations that be mart 
they ; ed their Bodies, and often kiſſed the Branches; ſo did theſe Idola-| done in the midſt thereof. * Exod. 
ew Jews. : R : z Spake from the midſt of that Glory, wv. 3: e Man clothed in Li- 12 7- _ 
=— 18 Therefore will I alſo £ deal in V furys mine x Cye| nen, z. e. to Chriſt. 6 Paſs through as Men uſeto go who keep an even REV- 7- 3- 
more -5-ſhall * not ſpare, neither will I have pity : and though they | ſteady Pace. c The chief Screet of the City. & 'Tis too curious, 
n for roy, ? cry * in mine ears with a loud voice, 92 will 1 z not hear and asuſeleſs, to enquire what Mark this was ; it is groundleſs to con- 
nds 5 ' them fine it — _ ſign of the hy 1-1 >eakin ſome diſcourſe of the antique 
P—_ , R , ; , Form of the Letter Thay. Iri cient, thatafcerth : 
evia's 244% z What I will do is greater than to be expreſs'd. 4 They with a ſpeaking the Lord af ny | has ſafe, a wow ge 
'clous ($1631. furious Heat for their Idols provoked me, and I will with a juſt Indig- Seal, which none can or dare break open. e As the faithful Servants 
y our W434. nation provoke them, nay deſtroy them, x See chap 7. 4, 8, 9. Wd: . > 
the 7" The Prophet dorh ie che bl Epravi 1; 2.2 #* |of God, in alluſion perhaps to the Cuſtom in the Eaſt, that Servants 
2/  f 46 © ropet Corn not give it tre. tame of praying, but 'tisa Cry, a | ore their Maſters Name in their Foreheads, or to let us know that 
_ - > JoudCry after the manner of other Idolaters, who think to be heard now this Deliverance would be net as in Egypr by whole Families, but 
ne þ |, +0 the Noiſe they make. « Yer doth nor this at all prejudice the |1,y £, 1. ndfelefted Perſons. f Our of inward Grief for other Mens 
ws | Truth or the Mercy of God to thoſe thar pray, nor may ut diſcourage Sins and Sorrows. g Expreſs their Grief bywvocal Lamentations, who 
fhip- _—_— -__ , yo _ awaken us that we pray with Hearr, and dare openly bewail the Abominations of rhis wicked City, and fo bear 
oo the ny cry 10ud with VOICE. their Teſtimony againſt it. +þ Not as if wheſe Mourners knew every - 
1\cenſs CHAP. I% ; particular Abomination, but they mourned for all the kinds of Wick. | 
| Aviſiom, whereby is ſhewed God's ewengeance on Jeruſalem, 1—J. yet they rn 7 es . 
7 gate that fightd for its abomination are ſaved, 4—7. The Prophet's inter. | 5 q And to che # others & he ſaid in / Þ my hear INS-+ Heb. 
1orth, cefſion for them, 8. God, for their abominations, will ſhew no pity, ||| Go ye aſter him m through the City, and » ſmite : let mine ears. 
Tam- 9—1T. : | _ - [not your »veye ſpare, neither have ye pity. 
W : , EF cried olfs tn 5. mn; . , ; The Six Slaughter-men. & God of Glory or Chriſt who appear'd 
and by 47 wed ied allo iN » mine ears with a loud voice; in great Glory. 1 A Note of Certainty of the thing. || Linger not 
\en: 10 ”"yJ . ſay ing, Cc f Cauſe them that have 4 charge OVer |e're you ſer forward againſt the Wicked; yer ſtill go after, that you 
* Lairy Wt -the city, to draw near, even every e man with F f his|deſtroy none thar are to he ſealed ; fo allo Rev. 7. 3. » This Order 
ct, the Wa p deſtroying weapon in his g hand, mult be obſerved through the whole City, nod chro the whole Exe- 
ne ſav? Bp” 200 Man whom he had ſeen upon the Throne, Chriſt who is Lord as oertke Fog _ Do Mn inp te _ __ 
e State» Wh ve Sovereign, or the Glory of God, or the God of Glory, or an _þ } < P _—_ 1 7 - Ss Renorſe crermes tne 5 4 Diſo1 
WO _ '7 Fr Ne _— from os. 6 Either an Hcbraiſm, he cried ſo, that I —_ bo brig "a ins CO FOE EO 
:es Were ih y heard ; or rather to intimate that Ezekiel only heard what : : 8 1. 
re th*) iy _ ſboken; the Elders who were now with him hearing nothing of | $ p Slay ÞF utterly q old and 7 young, both / Co myo 
t yy po Wat was ſpoken, & Approach ye Viſitations, 5. e. ye fore, waſting, |and little children, and women, : but 5 come got near 
con $0 | 


p 1 16 


any 


+ Heb. a 


þ © > & TIN — q 
__ . : I 7G . bat ; G " 4 - 
Oo "Witten - = </'% ne. . Av% & S TIN 2 
: 2 V _—_— - Conn” _ 4 ® « 05 _ 
Aametete— de pens . ——_ - - aw A Lo etedes oo - <= 2 a ay or ns RY nn CSS 
- —_— — or wn - __ - awe _ ” » —_ 4 k. _ wy — - —_— . 
” Aon oO S . _— 2 7O—— np —ono—y - ny , __ ”- _- _ 2? —_ - —_—_— D = , 
DG” 24a % £4 «> —_—_— 4 *. - 4 _—_— - > *o7 
= We - , Þ. -<! A £ —_— Cs IT my +4 ir Pp, E fs 
__ . S—_— Ch — —_— . - oo - wo _ : s "ones 
ne B05 on BEA 1s = __ pts "Io FE % ing V \ -i 5 os. RY 
= NS —_—_— 44 « - £ RT 23 he”. 3 < 
I _- 4 j.-— 4 bo . _ 
5-4 y .. 
4 a I N 4 . 


ow X « BP ht _ I 
4 _ —— TEE 7 , 
— VE: » - 
5+. IS —_ "1 RANT 98 
= i” * "== ——_ 
_ 5 2 a pP__ —_—__—_ 
> es on FS 17.9: _ 
S-- 3&6 *% HAT + eat 
" Wages A 
. % HU 
PEO "> e® —— KI, d- " 
_—_ — _ % p 
5 7 x) 


any man upot! whom « the mark; and » begin at my 
ſanctuary: then they began at the x ancient men which 


2yere y before the houſe. 

p My purpoſe is to exterminate and make deſolate, therefore ſlay 
all that are deſign'd ro deſtru&tion. q Whoſe venerable Age, if inno- 
cent, might have awed you, whoſe Wiſdom might preſerve ſome and 
themſelves. r Who ſhould be a Seed-p!ot or Nurſery for Poſteriry, cur 
them off too. / Regard no Stateor Sex, neither the Lovelineſs of rhe 
Virgin, nor the Prettineſs of the Infant, nor the Comelineſs and Gra- 
vity of the Matron, ſpare none. z Yer in your Fervours of Revenge 
lock you come nor near to any ſealed Forehead; you may ſee them, 
thovgh they bluſh ſor their own Sins, and for the Sins of others, yet 
they look up to me, and waitfor me in the way of my Judgments; 
they will lift up their Heads, and look you in the Faces. # Both the 
Execution and the DiſtinCtion at the SanQuary : there are the great 
Sinners, and the ab:minable Sins which have brought this on them; 
and that all 7/-asl way know, nothing but Repentance can ſecure them. 
* The Seventy, or Sanhedrim, ch. 8. 10. 11. y Who were Governours 


in the Temple and Houſe of God by Office, bur Idolaters by Prattice 


d Principles. 
we And hs ſaid unto them, 2 Defile the houſe, and 


a fall the b courts with the flain, c go ye forth: and d they 


went forth, and e ſlew in the city. 
z Regard not the Holineſs of the Temple; Idolaters whom you are 
to ſlay, have defiled it with the Blood of Idols Sacrifices; do you 
defile it with the Blood of the Idolatrous Sactificers: Slay them where 
you find them, for there they ſinn'd againſt me. a make a great Slaugh- 
ter, let every Place be ſtained with their Blood. b{ There were the 
Prieſts, the Levites, and the Womens Courrs ) and there will be found 
Perſons of a different CharaQter, but unleſs my Mark be upon them, 
forbear none of them. c Make haſte, do not ye, for I do not delay, 
nor will I. 4 Here, as before, they ſhew thcir ready Obedience. 
e This Slaughter was viltonal in th2 eye of the Propher, anda a Pre- 
face to the {addeſt Butcheries Iſrael ever bled and groaned under. 
8. &' And it came to paſs g while 5 they were z ſlay- 
ing & them, and 1 was left, that I fell upon my face, 
and x cried, and ſaid, o Ah, Lord GOD, wilt thou de- 
{troy all the p refidue of Iſrae], in thy pouring out of thy 
fury upon Jeruſalem? 
f This is a moſt vſual Tranſition and Scripture-Phraſe. g There 
was ſomes Space of time raken up in the Execution. + Theſix Slaugh- 
ter-mecn. : Not bodil. and aQtually, but viſionally, and in propherick 
Repreſentation. k Thoſe about the SanCtuary, and in th- City. Ei- 
ther ſurvived the Slaughter, or left alone ; now both the Sealer, and the 
Slayers were gone, 0: left alone, ſealed of all the Prieſts, the reſt being 
expoſtd tro Deffuttion. In moſt humble and earneſt manner ad- 
dre iling ro God as cn= that-would intreat Mercy for a ruined State. 
» Importunately pray'd, and the Prayer follows. -o An Expreflion of 
th= greateſt compounded Aﬀettion of Pity, Deſire and Zeal for the 
Afﬀicted ; and what follows is a Complex of Arguments for Piry and 
ſparing mercy, from God himſelf, from his . eculiar Hand in this, 
from his Peop'e, the Remnant of them, and from the ſad and mourn. 
ful State Jeruſalem was aiready in ; Muſt 211 1ſract drink thus of the Cup 
of thine Incignation? p So called, becauſe many were already in Cap- 
tivity with Feconzah, and had been ſo about ſix or ſeven Years ; or elſe 
in reſpe@ to the eleCting love of God, who ever reſerved a Remaant 
to himſelf. # 1 
9 q Then ſaid he unto me, The iniquity of the houſe 
+ Heb. ex- of 7 I{rael and s Judah « + * exceeding great, and the 
 eeeding ex-Jand is | « full of blood. and the iwiry full of x [| perverſe. 
_ , neſs - for they y ſay, The * LORD hath z forſaken the 
led _ "earth, and the LORD a ſeeth not. ; 
bloods. || q God gives him a ſpecdy Anſwer. r Of thoſe who either joined 
Or, wrc/z- themſelves to the Houſe of David, when the ten Tribes fell off, or 
ing of thoſe that eſcaped when Sa/manzaſſer carried them Captive. sThetwo 
judgement, Tribes, though only one 1s exprels'd, the other is included. 7 Grown 
* Ch. s. beyond all meaſure that my Juſtice cannot, and my mercy muft not 
12. longer forbear. « Very much innocent Blood is ſpilt, or there are 
many Bloodſhedders among them” x All Judgment is perverted; in 
Judges, ro Injuſtice; in Prieſts, to Idolatry ; 1n all, to Scepticiſm or 
Atheiſm. y They argue and diſpute againſt my concerning my ſelf in 
the Government of the World, and the Church. z Caft off the Care 
of his People, and fo they ſpoil him of his Dominion. a Deny his | 
Omaiſcience, and make him as Idols for Ignorance, juſt as Pſa. 16, 11. 
and 94. 7. 
*"Ch.5. 1, 10 And = as for me alſo, mine « eye ſhall not *fpare, 
& 7. 4. & neither will Þ have pity, b«t I will 5 recompenſe their way 


EZ ERIE L. 


e heard ever to the f utter court, as the voice of the  al- 
mighty God when he þ ſpeaketh. : 


Mouths of Sinners: whether this was an Applauſe of Chiſts righte- 
ous Procedure, or any ſound of Alarum, or both, let your own 
Judgment determine. See chap. 1. wer. 24. e Such as might well be 
heard, and as the Viſion repreſented ſuch a great Sound to the Pro- 
pher, he reports it to the Fews ; not- that the Elders now with Ex:kiz! 
did hear this, or that ſuch an audible Sound was heard in Jeruſalem, but 


Chap. 
phire ſtone, * as the appearance of the likeneſs of a* | 
f throne, 26. 
a Or 41d, which conneCting this with the ninth Chapter, will con. 
note the time, wherein he thus ſaw þ in Spirit or Viſion, and this 
Viſioa is the ſame of chap. r. repeated, or very little differing from ir 
and with ſome particular Deſign, which that of chap. 1 did not ex? 
preſs, viz. a deſign of leaving the Temple and City deſolate. © See 
chap. I. wer. 22. and 26, d Called living Creatures, chap. r. wv. 5, 
_ ſee. e See chap, 1. v. 26. 27. where theſe things are ſpo. 
en to. 


2 And g he ſpake unto the 5 man clothed with linnen, 
and faid, : Go in & between the wheels, even under the 
cherub, and / fill thine F hand with coals of fire from be- +1 
tween the » cherubins, and » ſcatter. cherms over the City. fin 
And he went o in my ſight. © inf 

£ Thar fate on the Throne; 7. e. God who rules the World ang Pay ht * 
Church. 4 To Chriſt as before, chap. g. wv. 2. 57 It is ſaid chap. 1. 1 
ver. 18. that the Rings of the Wheels were dreadful, bur here is a Di. 
vine Command which incourageth and inſureth, and leſſens the Dread 
and Terror. & Whether between the four, or between the two fore. 
moſt, or hindermoſt, or rather between the Wheels, that made 1 
one Wheel, 15 not material to enquire. / This expreſceth the fulneg 
of Vengeance which would overtake them, and the certainty and ſpee. 
dineſs of Judgments; for ſuch a quantity of Coals in the Hand ready 
to be ſcattered abroad, will very ſoon ſet all in a Flame. »: Either 
to intimate to us, that this Fire was the Vengeance of God upon 
them ; for he fits between the Cherubims, and is canſnming Fire to | 
Sin ; or to intimate, that the Vengeance was for Sins againſt the Grace x 
of God, who ſat between the Cherubims, and thence gave our his 
Grace toward Iſrael. Exod. 25. 20. 21. and Heb. 9. 5. But abuſed 
Grace will kindle into Fire » That it may take Fire in all parts 
and none may eſcape ; ſo caſt the Fire, thar the Coals may fall on every 
part. o Which aflur'd the Prophet of the certainty, and intimate( 
too the ſpeed of the Effect which will be within five Years ſpace. 


3 Now the cherubims p ſtood on the q * right ſide of iiÞ. 
the houſe, when 'the 7 man went in; and the s cloud fil. i 
led the 7 inner court. | 


p As Servants, and ready, waiting for Orders. 9 the North {de 
7. e. ſay ſome, -the fide toward Babylon, from whence the Deſolation. 
that Fir2 came which conſumed the City. r Chriſt the Lord of An gels, 
who now attend his Coming and Commands. 5 As the ſign of Gog': Þ - 
Preſence, ſo an Emblem of the Troubles, and Darkneſs of Aﬀliction; ® | 
coming upon Jerxſalem. t£ The Court of the Prieſts, who were, az | 
ir appears, chief in the Apoftacy and Idolatry, and ſhall now he 
chief in the Miſery and Ruine which overwhelmed thens about five Þ 
Years after. 


4 Then the « * glory of the LORD + » went up'4 8 
trom the cherub, and » food over the threſhold of the! 
houſe ; and the z houſe was « filled wich the 5 cloud,” F 
and the c court was of the brightneſs of the LORDS glo. q E 
Iy. | Th 
& Either the viſible Token of the Preſence of the God | 
that which chap. I. ver. 28. and chap. 3. wer. 23. and chap. 
Chriſt, who is the Glory of the Temple, and of his People, nay 
is the Brightneſs of his Father's Glory. '» In Difpleaſure, and jn 
token of his Departure from the Temple. y Shewing both his Un. 
willingneſs to leave, and giving them time to bethink themſelves, and 
return by Repentance; and he ſtands where he might be ſeen both by 
Priefts and People, that both might be moved ro Repentance. + The 
Temple, the moſt venerable and privileged place. a There had been 
a fulneſs of Sin, there 1s now a fulneſs of Sufferings. 6 A very great | 
Darkneſs followed upon Chriſt's Departure from the Houſe. © Nor ro Þ.. ® 
reſide there, but when Chriſt did turn his Back upon the Temple, and [98 
was coming through the Court, a Light of Majeſty ſhines before him. 
Pſal. 18. 12,13. 


5 And the 4 + ſound * of the cherubims wings was; 


Re nog p 


i 
= 
=. y FO 


of Glory . 


8'v3. or 


4 There was a great and and ereadful Noiſe to awaken or ſtop the , 


$. 18. ypon their head. | 
z My Reſolution 1s fixed. a That Eye they thought did not ſee to 
govern, ſhall ſee to puniſh. b They ſhall find me a Sovereign to vin- 
dicate my ſelf, and do Juſtice againſt their Injuſtice. See ch 5. v. x1. 
and ch. 7. v. 4. 


11 And z behold, the a man 6 clothed with linnen, 
which 4ad the inkhorn by his -| ſide, « + reported the 
matter, ſaying, 1 have done 4d as thou haſt commanded 
me. 
z While God gave the Prophet the Account ef the Peoples Sins, 
and of his own Reſoluticns. « Chriſt. 5 Innocent one, and our Prieſt. 
c As*twerecame in, or returned from doing that Work moſt delightſul 
to him. & The Hebrew Text is according, or as, but the Reading is 
with (47) added, according to af that which thou O my Father haſt 
commanded me ; as Job. 14. 3I. | 


CHAP. X.* 


The wiſim of the coals of fire to be ſcattered over the city, r—— 17, Of the 
wheels and chcrubins, with their order anda motion, 8 22. 


I 6 Hen TI 65 looked, and behold, in the c firma- 
ment * that was above the head of the 4 che- 


} Heb. 
tozns. f 
eb. re- 
trrnued the 
worg. 


Chi. 1. 32, 


the Court of the Women. g As a mighty and terrible Thunder. 
which is Pſal. 29. 3. 4. 5. the Voice of the Lord. h As when he 
ſpake on Mount Sinai, which made them all fear, and the Sighs lo 
terrible, that Moſes: himſelf trembled. Heb: 12, 


ed the man clothed with linnen, ſaying, Take fire from 
between the wheels, & from between the cherubims; /then 
he weat in, and »- ſtood beſide the wheels. | 


k What is ſaid to be between the Wheels, is ſaid alſo to be berween 
the Cherubims, which repreſent Angels the Miniſters of God's Pro- 
vidence ; and ſo now is obſerved to be among the Wheels in ths 
Effe&s or Order of God's Providence, is among-or between the A#- 
gels, the Miniſterial Cauſes thereof. /Readily obey'd. m» Either 35 
one that deferr'd Execution, to try whether the City wou'd repent; 9 
as one that was to give ſome farther Order to Angels that were to be 
the Miniſters of his juſt Diſpleaſure : and whereas wer, 3. the Cherv- 
bims ſtood as Servants waiting ; here Chriſt ſtands as a Lord con 
manding, they obey him, he obeys his Father. 


from p between the cherubims unto the 9 fire that V#" 


'ris all repreſented to the Prophet, and by him to them. F This was 


6 And it came to paſs, that when he 7 had command. 


z Verſe 2. See it. For that Yerſe and this are the ſame in effeQ&- 


7 And « one cherub Þ ſtretched forth his hand J 


rubins. there appeared over them, as it were a e fa- 


between the cherubims, and 7 took thereof, and tf pf *! 


110 


th 10 2 


$ 8. #__E. Bro et On 


un 
. 


| been F 

great | 
Nat to 
e, ant 
e him, 


5 Was4| 
g abs 


m 
op the = 


righte- 
Ir Own 
yell bz 
he Pro- 

Exckiel 
lm, but 
"his was 
hunder. 
xhen be 
dight lo 


\mand- 
2 from 
I then 


1 effe& 
betwe*l 
d's Pro- 
ls in ehs 
the An- 
Either 3 
pent; oo 
ere £0 e 
e Chew” 
"rd com- 


o hand y 
that 
+ pu s 


TFRIOg 


N % Fe Mk 
+ gw PO FTI Ns, MORT ha 
1 ph, IP nth Kot A-et355 Tax, tri 45 SG 


| 48 
BY, 
Þ 


& 


I 


L. 6. 4 
- 
BB 


d <, 
"> 

bs; 
7 4 


by them ; and when the cherubims lift up their wings, to 
b- ” mount up from Earth,the ſame wheels alſo turned not from 


bai. 


% 


> 
IF 
_ 
3 
A 
+\£Y 


on 
10 the 5 hahds of 53m that ivas Clothed with lifinen, who 
- took it, and #« Went Our. | | = 
1 One of the four. o Which was under his Wing) 45 chap: I: vcr. 8. 
which fe. p This that reached the Fire to Chriſt, ſtood among the 
: ing forth his Hand, or. exerting his Strength and 


Ny 0 by $ and utt1 . .* } 
Cherubims, anC Þ nd his. q Vid. ver.2. and c<þ.1. v.13. 


owerſerveth Chriſt our Lord,and h 
4 As a Servant that reacheth what his Maſter would have and uſe. s 
f Received it of the An- 


for 'tis in the Plura! Number. 
b__ might employ ir when he would. » From amidſt the 
Angels, and cut of the Temple ; or from the Threſhold, where all 
chis Viſion appear'd as on its Stage z and he goes into the City to pre- 
pare al), that nothing be done tov ſoon or too Jate. 


8 & And there x appeared in the y cherubims, the z form 


of a mans + hand under their * wings. 

«x To the Prophet. » The Miniſtring Spirits. x Shaped to ſpeedy 
accurate working, 'tis therefore a Man's Hand. + One Hand was put 
forth to reach the Fire, and that one is mentioned, tho the Angels 
had Hands under their Wings. * The manner of Angels working is 
hereby infinuated, for 'ris ſecret and ſpeedy ; ſecrer, as hidden under 
wings, and ſpeedy, as elt:&ed by the ſwifreſt Motion ; the very 
Speed hideth it. 


9 And when I a looked, behbld, the 5 four wheels by 


the c cherubims, one wheel by one cherub ; and another 
wheel by another cherub ; and the appearance of the 4 


wheels was'as the colour of a e beryl-ſtone. 
a Artentively viewed. 6b Mention'd chap. 1. wer. I5. 16. and there 
explained. « One Wheel by one Cherub, fo four Cherubims, and 


ſour Wheels. d The Revolutions and Effefts among Worldly and 
Sublunary Aﬀairs, as W heels unſtable, yer governed by a ſure Wiſ- 
dom. e Of Sea-green, to note the Inſtability, in a more pregnant 


Simily. 


10 And as for their f appearances, g they four had 
one likeneſs, as it a wheel had been in the mid(t of a 


wheel. 

f Tho there might be various Aſpe&s and Faces of Things, yet in 
this great Variety there was great Harmony, all of one likeneſs; vid. 
chap. 5. ver. 16. and move to one great End. g Wheels. 


1: + When 7 they went, they & went upon their four 
ſides ; they turned not as they went, but to the place 
whither the / head looked z they followed it ; they » turned 
fot as they went. 

h Whenſoever they did go, what occaſion foever they had to go. 


; The Wheels moved by Chernbims, or that Spitit of Life which mo- | 


ved the living Creatures. & Theſe Wheels were ſo framed, that they 


could not move on all four Sides withour the difficulty and delay of 


turning, See chap. 1 ver. 17. 1 Of the living Creatures looked, the 


not from the deſigned courſe and. work till finiſhed. 


had. 


o Now he deſcribes both Cherubims and Wheels as full of Wiſdom, 
and as governed by an excellent Wiſdom. p Angzls have nor bodies 
of Fleſh, but Body here is figurative, fo Back,and Wings, and Hands ; 
the two larter are expreſly aſcribed ro the Cherubims, wer. 8. the two 
formcr not mentione d before, (as I rhink ) bur all full of Eyes, z. e. 

ifiom, Forelight, Watchſalneſs and Diligence. 9 The four Chery. 


bims had to move, govern and dire, 


T 12 As for the r wheels || ic was s cried unto # them in 

Os þ-y my hearing, © wheel. 

1 6 one who guided as by voca! DireC&ion. 

"8--! by that O Wheel, and the Piophet is Ear-witneſs of it. 
1.1 And every » one had four faces ; the firſt x face as 

the face of a y cherub, and the ſecond & face was the lace 

of a man, and the third the face of a Lion, and the fourth 


y As to their Frame and Motion, however *twas. s Still there wa 


l 


the face of an Eagle. 


Revolution. 
Face, Cc. vid. chap. 1. wer. 6, 10. 


a Or, liited up themlelves, ready ro attend on the Lord of Glory 


who was now departing from his polſuted and impenitent People. 5 


See chaps 3. $3, Ia; If, 19, :20, 21; 22: | 7 
16 And * when the cherubims went, the wheels wen 


beſide them. 


17 When they ſtood, zheſe ſtood ; and when they were 
> lifted up, zbeſe lifted up themſelves alſo : for * the Spirit of 


12, te living creature was in them. 
Subj=ttion to rhe one Infinite, Wiſe, Good, Holy and Juit God. 


Chorulims, 


; b The Jews dream'd that Ged could not depart from his Temple ; 
wdced whillt 'twas his, and uſed as his, he did nor, nor would he de- 
but he will abandon it when profan'd, and thereby made nor 


Par r ; 


0) 


L I 


EZERKIE 


ted up from the earth F in my fight : when they wen: out, 


Spirit, as chap. 1. ver. 12, 20. And admirable Wiſdom did guide and 
manageall. » The Wheels do certainly and orderly tollow. » Divert 


12 0 And their whole p -+ body, and their backs, and 
. their hands, and their wings, and the * wheels were full 
. of eyes round about, evez the wheels that they 94 four 


: To each of them, as appears 


s Of the living Creatures, ch9p. 1. wer. 6. the cherubims 1n this 
Chapter. x Which each had. » In Babylon, at the River Chebar, he 
ſaw fomewhar a different Face; in the Temple liz ſeeth a Cherub, 
one of the faces which leads us to look on Angels imploy'd 1a thoſe 
2 The ſecond which each Checubim had was a Man's 


15 And the cherubinis @ were lifted up : this # the 5 
\; living creature that [ ſaw by the river Chebar. 


Theſe two Verfes are explained, chap. 1, wer, 20. which fee, A 
perfe& Harmony between ſecond Cauſes in their Dependance on, and 


18 Then the glory of the LORD 56 departed from 
off the rhreſhold of the © houſe, and ſtood 4 over the 


Chap, XI. 


" oe. -0, . a , ; 4 k 4 es. S : : p a Pe 
his £ Temple, he had withdrawn ou? 6f the SanRuary, ſtood a while 
at the Door. d On the right ſide of the Houſe, where the che:uzbims 
were in the inner Court, vey, 2. 


19 And the cherubims lift up their wings, and moun- 


'T: 
23% 
it 


the wheels alſo were beſides them, and g every one ſtood at 
the door of the þ eaſt.garz of the LOR DS houſe ; and 
the glory of the God of Ifrael was over them above. 

© The Glory of the Lord, v#. 18, is faid to hve ſtood above the 
Cherubims, and here the Cherubims m unt, ger farther from the 
Earth, and by nearer Acceſs declare .their. readineſs to attend the 
Lord of Glory. f That he might affare the Jews of the danger of 
their loſing God's Preſence. g The Gl:ry, the Cherubims, the W heels 
all ſtood, reſpiting Execution, and giving opportunity of prevenrin# 
the approaching Miſery. + The laſt Courr, che Court of che Peop!e, 
or Laity of 1jracl. | 


_ 20 This s the living icreature that I faw under 
God of Ilrael, by the river cf Chebar, and 1 7 knew cat 
they were the cherubims, | 


o Yet four in Number, but cone 1n Form, Mind, and Wort. + Ap 
pearing as he did, chap. 1. wer. 26, 27, 28. in form of a Man, it leads 
us to conclude it meant of Chriſt. - ! Either by ſpecial Aflucance as 2 
Prophet, or by comparing them with thoſe which he had often, as 
Prieſt about the "Cemple, ſeen there. 


21 Every one had four faces apiece, and every one 


had four wings, and the likeneſs of the lands of a man 
as under their wings. 


22 And the likeneſs of their faces was the ſime faces 
which I ſaw by the river of Chebar, their appearances; 
and themſelves, they went every one ftraight forward. 


7 See verſe 14. and chap. 1, ver. 19. Theſe two Verſes are a full 
repeated Atteftation of the Propher that God had appear+1 ro him, fore- 
ſhewed firy Judgments conung, and ti !o r-peated to awaken a ſtupid 
and ſenſeleſs People. They have been already explained. 


CHAP. XL 


The Spirit ſheweth the prophet the wicked counſel and preſumption of the princes 
of Iſrael, 1—3. A prophecy of their fon and puniſhment, 4 —— 12. Tie 
prophet being troubled, God ſheweth him his purpoſe in ſawing and bleſſing 
a remnant, 13—20. but of puniſhing the obſt.nate, 21. The glory of 
the LORD leaveth the city, 22-23. Exckie! brought in a vifox t0 


his captive brethren in Chaldea. 
X AE the a Spirit 5 life me up,and brought me 

to the c eaſt-gate of the LORDS houſe, which 
looketh 4 eaſt-ward : and behold, at the door of the gate 
e five and twenty men; f among whom I ſaw g Jaazaniah 
the ſon of Azur, and + Pelatiah the fon of Benatah, # 
princes of the people. 


2 The Spirit of God, as chap. 2. we. 2, b As at firſt, fo ſtill it 
ſupports him, and removes him from place to place. e Either of the 
Eaſt-Gates, whether that which leads into the firſt Court, or into the 
ſecond Conrr, or into the Houſe of the Lord, may be here underſtood, 
tho probaly this laſt. For this number you find there chap. 8. v. 16. 
If you will ſuppoſe tae Prophet was brought to the Eaſt-Gate where 
the Glory of the Lord now departing was gone up from the Temple, 
it 1s much at one. d A Pleonaſm or Redundance of Exprefiion. e 
Some enquire whether theſe were the ſame with thoſe 25, chap.$. v.16. - 
To me 'tis moſt like they were; for in that ſame place we find them, 
and likely about the ſame Work, worſhipping Eaft-ward ; nor are the 
ewo Arguments urged by ſome conclutive againſt it, nay one of the 
two 1s plain for it, viz. that quoted from cþ 8. v.16, f As forward 
Ring-leaders and Chief among chem. g This Man by his Father's 
Name added, appears to be another, not he that is menticn:d chap 8, 
ver. 11, h Named here for no geod quality, bur for that dreadful 
ſudden Death whereby he became a warning to others. 7 Either as 
publick Officers, or as Heads of their Familes. 


2 k Then ſaid / he unto me, Son of man, theſe zre 


the -F men that »2 deviſe » || miſchief, arid o give wicked | 79nit7 
counſel in the city : 


k So ſoon as the Prophet had ſeen and obſerved how many, and who 
they were. 1 The Lord fitting on the Cherub, chap. 10. wer. 4. | 
Not the only Men,but indzed the moſt notorious. »: Frame and con- 
trive with Crafc and falſe Reaſonings. n Yaniry ſothe thing was, and ' 
Miſchief the Fruit of it. They perſwade the People that the Ciry 
ſhall not be burnt, but that they may ſafely build, and long dwell in 
their Houſes ; this vain Hope exhauſts that Money with which they 
might have provided for themſelves, and this proves a Miſcief, o This 
may be Explication of that he laſt ſpake. Or, poſlibly ic may note 
their A@tivity and Diligence going about the City,and counſelling their 
Acquaintance to put off the evil Day. Or,perhbaps they treat a Com- 
pliance and Coalition with the Chaldean Superſtitions to fave them. 
{elves.'Tis not impoſſible they might giveCounſel tounhappy Zedekiah, 
The Chaldee Paraphraſt here uſeth a word whoſe firſt Notation 1s to | 
Reign, or be a King, the ſecond ſenſe ro give Counſel; whoſe Counſel- 
lors ſoever they were, their Counſel tended ro Shame and Los. 


3 Which p fay; I: « not q * near, let us build houſes :* per. 3. 
his city x the 7 caldron. and we be the fleſh, 


p What Counſel was by the theſe Men given, appears by thzir words. _ 
7 Either, the threatned Danger and Ruine by rhe C:2ld24xs: Or, elſe 
build, bur not in the Subarbs not near, but 1n t-e Ciry, that your 
Houſes may not ſhelter the Enemy. » This is an 1:0-t0us Scoff, yer 
mixt with ſome fear of the Prophet's, Fer. 1. 13. and Ez:k. 24.6. 
They deride the Prophets ; yet ſecretly dread che thing, Feruſalem is 
the Pot, we the Fleſh that are to be boyled therein, bur chis will rake 
up ſome time however; Ws —_— be fo deſtroyed; than to fall 


by 


"OS h 


Lil V 


| 


| 


$ 


, 


t 


[ 


Chap. XI. 


('Or,which 


A 


.* Yo 
- 


have nt 


walked. 


"and this 


by the Hands of the ©53/Teanr, who periiaps may roaſt what 1s not 
boiled here. 
E& « Therefore * propheſie againſt them, #« prophe- 

" 3. IErC1O! 7 Prop T Og 5 P jp 
fiz. O fon of man. 

«For this their Atheiſtical Temper and Word. t Tell them before 
hand what they ſhall of:r. a The Charge and Command is doubled 
both ro engage the Prophet, and to intimate a Qoubled Mitery coming 
upoa them, a Miſery they ſhall not have Courage to laugh under, 
tho they now dare contemptuouſly laugh at. 


And the * x ſpirit of the x LORD 


kave ye ſaid, O houſe of Ifrac!: 4 for I know the things 
that come into your mind, every one of them. _ 

* The Spirit ofProphecy again moved him. » Which 15 here cal. 
fed the Spirirofrhe Lord; or the Spirit of the Lord, as the Reb. will 
bear. & Deſcended, by its own A& powerfully, fweetly, and pre- 
vailingly entred the Man. &@ Inclined me that I could nor but ſpeak. 
> As thou gocſt by my Appointment, ſo be ſure to ule my Name an 
Authority. c Prophanely with Scoffs, as hath been reported, -7.3. 
4 Ye may be allured all that ariſeth up in your Mind is known to 
me, I fee each one ofthe Imaginations of your Mind to ſoon as ever 
they peep up in your Heart, Your Thoughts I kaow afar off, P/al. 
139. 2. 

6 Ye have emultiplied f your ſlain in this city, and ye 
have g filled the {treets thereof with the ſlain. 

e Many Murders,and great ones ( for the Heb. includeth both ) have 
you commited, either with Frauds or Violence, and fomerimes with 
colour and pretence of Law. f So called becauſe rhey were ſuch as 
God had not commanded to be cut off, but the Jews did it without 
Warrant from God. & Either left them murdered 1n the Streets. Or, 
rather by an Hyperbole. The Streets are full, every where ſome or 
other in every Street you have condemned and killed. *Tis an Expreſ- 
fion the Scriprure much ultth to ſer forth the bloody Effe&s of the 
Tew:ſh Rage, and of others. 


243, 7 þ Therefore thus ſaith the Lord GOD?*, i Your ſlain, 
- whom ye have &laid in the midlt of it, they are the /tleſh, 


city 7s the caldron : bur m1 will zbring you forth 
out of the midlt of ir. 

b Your Murders are the cauſe of my Severity, and ſuch Sins firſt or 
Taft are furely punithed. 7 Scew.6. Or your flain,becautfe when they 
might, and would have faved their Lite by a ſeafonable Submiſſion, 
you perſuaded them to an obſtinate Oppoſition againſt the Chalaeans to 
Their DcſtruCtion. & Or placed (as the word bears; ) 'tis not unlike 
that they who perſuaded all to ſtay.,did provide or at leaſt help as many 
as did ſtay, to Habitations, and placed them in Houſes or Lodgings. 


EZERITE LL 


F 2 fell upon me, down upon my face, and o cried with a * loud' voice, andy. 
nd « 13id unto me, Speak, Thus 6 ſaith the LORD, c Thus ſaid, p Ah Lord GOD, 4 wilt thou make a r full end of 


[ 
' 
[4 


[| 
: 


Civil State where Equity and Juſtice ſhould have been miniſtred 
i In Matters of Relzgion you have turn'd down-righc Iddlaters, ang b, 
with the greateſt Contempt of your God, the only true God, You 
have changed him for Gods of the Heathen round abour, and taken in 
their Modes and Abominations. And as tothe Civils you have been ac 
unjuſt, oppreflive, and perfidious, as theſe Nations that know nct 


my Law. 
13  Andit & came to paſs that / whenT propheſied, 
that Pelathiah the fon of Benaiah »- died: » then f:1] | 


" ee 
Er. ur" .,- 
wi G0 , we? 
_ : GY -) 
= At, "2 th tis EE Fra 
del "MT ap 7% EAGLES, 


the 5 remnant of l{rael ? 

& Either this refers to ſome particular Predi&ion of the Death of 
this Man, as Jercmiah did of Hananial”'s Death, Jer. 28.17. thol d, 
not remember that Ezc{/c1 had ſpoke of it before, and therefore | 
take the Words for a uſual Tranſition 7 If you ſuppoſe the fir 
guels at the meaning of It came r0 paſs, then this will be beſt inter. 
preted by, {cording to, or Even as; if you adhere to the latter, 
then this 1h 15 W67!ft, or, As I was propheſying. m And ſo wasa Pleds 
or Prefage of the following Death ot the other twenty four. = Im. 
meCiately, in moſt humble manner, as that People were uſcd to do. 
Foſh. 7. 10. 2 Chron. 20, 18. He fell down upon his Face in order 9 
pray. o With intenſe and earneſt Mind he prayed, as well as with 2 
loud Voice. See chap. 9.ver. 8. Much like Phraſe is that in Ether 4. x. 
p An Expreſſion of his tender Compaſſions for them. 9 A very uſual 
way of interceding, and ſo common in Scripture, thar 'tis a wonde: 
any ſhould fiad fault with ir, who know the Scripture. r By ſlayins 
all as this Man is cur off 5s This Man's Name implieth one thor «. 
caped, or was delivered by God's good Hand; and perhaps the Po. 
phet alludes ro it however, is very ſolicitous as others were for the 
Remanant,which was ever leaſt, 2 Kings 19.30,31. 1ſa.10,21,22. Jer, 
23.3. and 31. 7. and 1n this manner does Ezetze!, chap. 9. wr.s, 
intercede for the Jews. 


I4 # Again the word of the LORD came unto me, 
ſaying, 
: It was a ſeaſonable Word to ſtop the Mouths of the inſulting 5:. Þ 
ruſalemites, and to encourage the Caprtives at Babylon. 


- o 


15 # Son of man, thy « brethren, even thy x brethren, Þ 
the -# men of thy y kindred, and all the z houſe of Ira). : 
wholly, are they unto whom the inhabitants of Jeruſalem: 
have a faid, || 5Get ye far from the LORD: unto c us i;:: 
this 4 land given in e poſieflion. | 

1 See chap. 2 ver. 1. x Thy neareſt Kindred; which it ſeems were? 


{The pieces which are to be caſt into the Caldron, and here be pu- 


niſhzd. » Thar 15, the mighty, eternal, and juſt God. » Not in 


Mercy, but in Wrath, by the conquering Hand of Ba6z/ow, I will 


draw you out to greater Torment. 


3 Ye have feared the ſword vo, and I will bring a ſword 


upon you, faith the Lord GOD. 


e Sinfully and forgetting God, you would have eſcaped the Sword of 


tne B2b;{o1;ans, and attempted 1t by an Idolatrous Compliance. p For 
this very cauſe will T ſend that Sword upon you, and it ſhall ſlay your 


Wives, Children, and Fellow-Citizens. 


o And qI will bring you out of the midit thereof, 


and 7 deliver you into the s hands of * ſtrangers, and « will 
Execute judgments among you. | 


© Tho the Chalteans are the Means, or Inſtruments by which *ris 
done, yet L will ſo appear againſt you, that it thall be confeſſed thar 
I did it rather than the Chaldcans. r Defeating all your Projetts for 


Eſcape ; ſo was Zedekiah when he ſecretly fled, and his Company with 
him, delivered unto Enemies and Strangers. -It denoteth a ful] 
Power over them. #7 Babylonians and others who 


Impenitence refuted tne Pardon. 


10 Ye ſhal) «fall by the ſword, T wiil y judge you in 


the border of {rac}, and z ye hall know that I 2m che|miſes in the following Verſes. g ſay to them, and of them in Ba/y- 


LORD. | 
x The Enemies Sword fhall flay you. » My juſt Judgments ſhall 
purſue you whitherſosver you fly, and overtake ſome of you. z Zede- 
£:ah and others, who were judged at Rib/a:b, 2 Kings 25. 20. | 
Ii. this ac ſhall b not be your caldron, neither {hal 
ye be the flelh in the mid(t thereof ; 5 I will czudge you 
in the border of [frael. 

a Ferrſalem, tho it ſuffered unparalle'd Hardſhips. 6b Shall not be 
the place of your Sufferings, greater are reſerved for you, you fſhal] 
be tortured in 2 ſtrange Land. c Do more againſt. you at R:#1atb, 
whereas 2 Kings 25.6,7. the Captive King had his Children and others 


_ with them firſt murdered before his Eyes, and then his own Eyes put 


out, and Rzb/ath 1s called here the Border of 1/rael, for that Syria was 
adjoining to Iſrael on the North, and Riblath or Antioch was a pleaſant 
City towards the Frontiers of Syria, upon the River Orextes, which a. 


- riliag in Avrilibanys runs through part of Syria, and for the Delicacy 


of the Seats ir had many Cities built on it. And here Nebuchadnezzar 
in his Royal Stare, and amidit the Pleaſures of the Place, expe&s the 
Iflue of the Siege. 

12 And d ye ſhall know that I 29 the e LORD: || for 
ye have nat f walked in my g ſtatutes, neither executed 
my + judgments, but have done after the 2 manners of the 
heathen that are round about you. 

d Tho you would not believe my Threats, nor fear them, you ſhall 
feel them, and then you ſhall know ; thus the wicked learn. e Whom 
vou ſhould have obeyed, feared and returned to, and who now 
convincerh you of his and his Propher's Truth in all that was foretold 
you. f A $Scripture- phraſe expreſflive of the Courſe of Man's Life. 
g The Rules for Religious Obſervances. h Refer to the Politicaland 


aflifted in the War. jthough + I have caft them # far off & among the + hea-+Þ 4 
x Strangers will uſe you hardly, bur the moſt ſevere part of theJudg- then, and although I have / ſcattered them among the | 
ment will be from a provoked God, who would have pardoned, bur countreys, yet will I be to them as a little fanQuary ia 


' 


left in Jeruſalem, and were grown as bad as the reſt, tho theirs were of 
a Prieſtly Lineage. Their Degeneracy and unjuſt Cenſure is more 
noted in the repetition of the word Brethren. y Of the ſame Paren. 
tage, to whom thou hadſt right of Redemption, if either their Perſon 
or Eſtate was to be fold: Men who ſhould have been as tender in 
AﬀeR&ion, as they were near in Blood. z All that are now in Cap. 
tivity, be they more or leſs, of whatſoever Condition or Rank, the: 
are the Men of whom the Jernſalemites ſpeak. a That is, cenſure and 


condemn as greateſt Sinners, and unworthy longer to dwell in the y 

Holy Land, and tacitely infer that they were better, and ſhould be Þ at CG 
ſafer now they were rid of them. 6 Ye, or they, are gone far from s o! 
the Lord; you are Apoſtates, or irreligious, a Company of Back. I el 


fliders; mugh as the Heathens accus'd rhe Chriſtians of Atheiſm. 7 Je 
c Who keep to the Temple and Holy City, and have not yeildcd to 
the Babyloniſh Tyranny ; who ſtand for our ancient Privileges, are 
not as you, Betrayers of our Country ; thus yow may ſuppoſe they 
boaſt. d Promiſed, Holy, Bleſt Land, Cananrn, where our Fathers 
dwelt. This Land 1s ours. e We ſhallnever be put out of Poſleſlisr, 
but ſtill ic ſhall be our Inheritance. 


16 f Therefore z ſay, Thus ſaith the Lord GOD, Al. 


= 


CELLGPT ne tide Ie 


the countreys whither they ſhall come. 
f In Apology and Vindication of them, back'd with excellent Pro- 


lon. h The obſtinate Fews at Jeruſalcm will call them Apoſtates and 
Renegadoes ; but ler ſuch falfe Accuſers know that they were ſent thi- 
ther, and that I the Lord ſent them thither, and will own them ther: 
too. 7 Not from my ſelf, but from you, your polluted Land, 2nd 
dreadful aproaching Judgments. & "The Ghaldeans, or ſuch as the 
Chaldeans placed them among. / Diſperſed and ſeparated them from 
one another in many Countries which were under the King of Babyin: 
Yer they are dear to me, and my Purpoſes are for them more graci- 
ous than yours are for them, or than mine are for you. 2 For a lit- 
tle while, 7. e. during the Seventy Years Captivity; or for a few of 
them, the Remnant was ever little: Or, as it refers to the SanEtuary, 
a little one, in oppoſition to that great, rich, ſplendid and admires 
Temple at Jcrſalem, which when they need moſt, ſhall help leaft ; 
bur I, ſaith God, will be really to my Captives what the proud ſelt- 
deceiving Jews promiſe their Temple ſhall be to them ; borh for Glo- 
ry, Defence, and for Worſhip, which ſhall with Heart and Love b? 
given by theſe I have ſent away, and where-ever they are,their Pray- 
ers, Synagogue-Worſhip, and Obedience ſhall be to me as well-plez- 
ſing as they ſhall deſire. They at diſtance weep on Chebar Banks* 
You O rebellious! pollute the Temple by your Idolatries ; I wi!! 
comfort the Mourners, I will puniſh you Polluters of my Temple and 
Worſhip. 


17 Therefore ofay, Thus faith the Lord GOD, #\ 
will even 9 gather you from the people, and » aſſemble 
you out of the countreys where you have been ſcattered, 
and I will /give you the land of Ifrael. 


o Add to the former Apology this Promiſe, p The Faithful and ; = anc 
Eternal God, the Supream and Soveraign Lord. q By my Advice 21% Þ 
Hand they were ſcattered, and by my Hand they ſhall be gather'd. 

r And to confirm them, 'tis added in different Words, and che FP!” * 
p 011» . 

q 

3 


ren, 


-f 


(rae 


lem-WA 


US 1562 


{\ \ 
{th 
WJ 


weres” 


re of 


more 


aren. | 


erſon 
er in 
Cap- 
theſ: 


e and 
1 the 
114 be 
from 
Back. 


111m. 


Icd to Þþ 


s, are 
they 
athers 
ſlion, 


A: 
i” 


hea-$3 


* the 
ry 12 


t Pro. 
Baby- 
s and 
© thi- 
there 
, and 
$s the 
from 
byion: 
graci- 
2 lit- 
few of 
tuary, 
mired 
leaſt; 
d ſelt- 
r Glo» 
zve be 


Pray* 


ap. Xl. 


&] + 
ww; VE P 


-* I will x recompence their x way upon their 2 heads, 


C. * repeated, and thus 1twas pun&tually performed, Ezra . 1. x. 2, 
ww eh chap. 8. werſ. 15. s Though your Brethren do ſay you are 
kev to dwell at Jern/alem, nor inherit the Land, yet my purpoſe is 
ocherwiſe, and I do promiſe you that you who followed my Counſel, 
and now are in Babylon, you or your Seed ſhall return and inherit Ca- 
"aan. All this was ſo worded, that ſome have thought ir no ground- 
tef Enquiry whether any of thoſe that went with Zedckiah into Cap- 
tivity or only ſuch as went with Jcconiah, did return out of Captivi- 
q -. and though *tis moſt probable ſome did, yer of the Returners, 
the far greater Part were of thoſe that with Feconiah were gone into 
Captivity. : | 

18 And t they ſhall « come thither, and they ſhall x take 
away all the y deteſtable things thereof, and all the abomi- 
nations &thereof from thence. 


; The gathered, who aſſembled upon Cyrus's Proclamation firſt, and 
then again upon Darius's Proclamation ; of which Ezra chap. t. and 
chap. $. they met together ſomewhere n the Land of their Caprivity, 
and kad a long Journey to Feruſalem. u They ſhall overcome all Difh- 
culties, and eſcape Dangers, and diſpatch the long Journey, andcome 
ſafely to their own Land. Aboliſh Superſtition and Idolatry from 
the Temple, 7eruſalcm, and from the Prieſts. » See ch. 5.11. zOf 
the Land and City ; and who reads Ezra, Nehemiah, and the Prophets 
7ccoariab and Haggai, willſce this Reformation carried on with ſucceſs, 


io a And 61 will cgive them 4onee heart, and I will 
ut a f * new ſpirit within you; and I will take the 
* {tony heart out of their 4 fleſh, and will give them an 
heart of 3 fleſh : 


This may be underſtood caſually, and ſo gives an Account how the 
Reformation, mentioned wer. 18. ſhould be effeed. 5 The Lord 
himſelf, and he aſlumeth it to himſelf thrice in this wer. c Of free 
Gr:c: *tis that this renewed Heart 1s in any one ; length, ſoreneſs, and 
multip!icity of Troubles will not, cannot work it, unlef(s God frame 
and renew it. d They were ſcattered abroad through the Bavylonijh 
Kingdoms, were under various Circumſtances which might dividethem, 
and keep them from each other, and from centring in a return, but I 
will ſtir up their hearr, and with one heart they ſhall gather together, 
when the return ſhall be Proclaimed ; Cyrus ſhall firſt give them leave, 
and I will next givethema heart to return ; and on their way ſhall 
there be great Unity ; and when come to Jeruſalem, they ſhall own me 
and my Laws,&*c. thev ſha)l with one conſent build Feruſalem, the Tem- 
ple, anu reſtore true Religion; as Jer. 32. 39 and Exz-k. 36. 26. e That 
15 Judgment and Underſtanding, Mind and Will, 4f:&ions and Con- 
ſcience; all fixed only on God, and their Obedience to him, as ver. 20 
T bis one Heart 1scalled a new Spirit. f An excellent, regenerate,ho- 
Iy and tincere Soul : they were of baſe, corrupt and hypocritical Spirit, 
divided between God and Idols; but when God brings them back, 
they 1ha)' be of another Frame, quite changed, and made new. g That 
hard, inflexib'e, undutiful, incorrigible Diſpoſition which was in their 
Fathers, who retuſed to be amended; T'll take that away. þh Fleſh 
in Scripture ſometimes ſpeaks an unrenewed, carnal, ſinful State, as 
Rom. 7. 18. ſometimes the Body, as Pſal. 38. 3. ſometimes the whole 
Man; ſo Luke 3. 6. Rom. 3. 20. and thus in this place ſpeaks the Per. 
ſons and whole Man. 7 Notlike the old, hard and ſtony, but coun. 
ſellable, .rra&table, that will hear, conſider, obey, do commandeq 
Good, and forbear forbidden Evils, ſubmit to my Law, and reform 
on Admonitionas. A!l which in part, and fo far as concern'd thoſe 
times, was fulfilled in the Jews that did return from Babylon, and ful. 
ler is made good tous in theſe Goſpel Days. 

20 & That they may / walk in my »-ſtatutes, and keep 
mine 7 ordinances, and do them : and they ſhall be o my 
people, and I will be their p God. 

k This is the End Grace aimeth at, converting us to God, that we 
may walk wich God. 7 See ver. 12, m The Rule of Religious Wor- 
ſhip. = Standard in Civil Afﬀairs and Matters of Right and Wrong 
with Men. o They ſhall give themſelves up ro me for to be my Peo- 
ple, to love me, truſt me, and to worſhip and obey me; and I will 
take them to be mine, I will approve, encourage, bleſs, guide and 
proteCt them, that it ſhall be ſeen they are my peculiar People. This 
contains all Duty and Priviledges as including both, and is again in- 
cuicated in the other part of the Promiſe. p To pardon Sin, give 
Grace, ſupply Wants, guide their Ways, accept their Duties, defend 
theic Perſons, and lead them to Glory. See Exck. 36. 25, 26, 27. 28. 
and Fer. 31. 33. where Jercmiah contemporary to Ezckicl propoſeth 
the ſame promiſe to this People. 

2T 9 But asfor 7 them whole 5s heart t walketh after the 
heart of their deteſtable things, and their « abominations, 


faith the Lord GOD. 


qFor all thoſe promiſes, and in beſt times, ſome there wi!l be who 
will refuſe to own God and obey him, whoſe Stare ſhall as much dif. 
fer as ther PraCtices did from the People of God. r Who e're they 
be. 5 Soul and AﬀeRtions, whoſe Choice and Love, * Either ſecret- 
Iy adhereth to, or provideth for the ſervice of Idols, called here de. 
teſtable things, as wer. 18. chap. 5. 11. and to expreſs the obſtinacy of 
this Idolatry 'tis called a Hrart walking after a Heart. Tdolatry isa be. 
witching Sin, and ſteals away the Heart, and the promoters of Idola. 
fry propoſe the plauſibleſt Arguments, as if Idols had Heartsand Af. 
feftions toward their Worſhippers to do them good : the Expreſſion 
in the Hcb. is ſomewhat unuſual and harſh to our Ear, bur this I take 
fo be the meaning. « Their Idols, and Idol-worſhip and Dependen- 
ces. x Pay them in their own Coin, they forſake me, I will forſake 
them ; they prophane my Name and Temple, I will give them up as 
common to be prophaned by the Chaldeans. y Their way tends to this, 
and ſhall end in this, and nothing more juſt. z. 3. e. On each Man,and 
in ſuch manner as ſhall deſtroy the Contumacious. Or on thoſe that 
are as Heads of the People and Ringleaders in obſtinacy of ſinning, 
fuch 25 in the 25, wer. 1. and who ſhall be Examples.of my ſpeedy and 
ureliſtable Vengeance. as Pelatiah was. 


22 E a Then did the cherubims lift up their Wings, 
an6 the wheels beſides them ; and the glory of the God 


Vol. 11. 


EZEKIE þ. 


of Trae] was over them abore; E 

# The whole 22d ce. is in the ſame Words almoſt you have in 
ch. 10, 19, which ſee. 

23 And the 5 glory of the LORD went up from the 
c midſt of the City, and ſtood 4 upon the e mountain, 
which 1s on the eaſt-ſide of the city. 

b See chap. 3.23. and 8.4. 2nd g. 3. and 10. 18, 19. cTheGlory 
of the Lord removes now our of the Ciry, over whick'ic had food 
ſome ſpace of time waiting for their Repenrance, bur no Fruits of 
this, and God now departed from them. d Above ir e Ir was Mounr 
Oliver, as the Deſcription of it in this Place and elſewhere doth clcar- 
ly ſhew. 

24  f Afterwards the g Spirit took me up, and 
brought me in + viſion by the ſpirit of God into Chaldea, 
to them of the captivity : ſo the viſion that I had ſzen 
z went up from me. 

Ff Aﬀeer all this. g The ſame ſpirir of God which carried him to 
Feruſal:m, and to the Temple, now brings him back in like manner 
to his captive Brethren in Cha/dca. Not corporally, bur in an Extaſy 
or Raptureof his Spirit by the Power of the Spirit of God. 7 Ir was 
a Viſion from Heaven, all that was repreſented ro the Propher was as 
'twere let down from Heaven, and he having fully viewed ir, cis 
taken up again to Heaven. | 

25 k Then I ſpake unto / them of the m2 captivity, 
z all the things that the LORD had ſhewed me. 

& When the Extaſy was paſt. / Either the Elders who came tc 
him, chap. 8. 1. or, to the Body of the People. w Who were in 
thoſe parts where Exz-kicl was, for many were ſcattered into other 
parts of Chaldes, n Here is his Faichfulneſs borh to God, and the 


People who were concerned to know ; for God had ſhewed them to 
the Prophet, that he might ſhew them to the People; and, thar this 
might ſurely be done, God hath commanded liim to ſpeak to vhem 
plainly and fully. 


CHAP. Xl. 


The Prophet in his own perſon repreſenteth the flight and captivity of Ze. 
kiah, and of the People, 1---16. Eateth and drinketh with trembling, 
in token of the Jews deſolation, 17---20. God reproveth their preſumpiog, 
21-25, and foretelleth the ſudden and certain accompliſhment of the vie 
ſion, 26-=-28, 


1*FHE 4 word of the LORD alſo 5 came unto me, 
ſaying, 

a A Divine PrediQion of what was both ſure and near to come to 
paſs. + In the 6:h and 7th Yearsof Jcconiab's Captivity, and of Zcge. 
kiab's Reign, in the latter end of the 387 of. Ezekzc!”s lying on his Side 
three Years before the fatal Siege began. 

2 Son of man, thou c dwellelt in the 4 midſt of a + e * re. 


. o [2 - 
bellious houſe, which have f * eyes to fce, and & fee fHeb.bw' 
not; they havef ears to hear, and g hear not : for h they 7 1% 


are a rebellious hone. Big z 3» 
c The Prophet knowing the Captivity would be long, had ſettled 5; ' - » © 


Chap: XIE. 


his Habication, and probably found ſome favour wich the Enemy, * x(1, c 9. 


that he might be accommodated for his abode. 4 The Jews who gave 
up to the Chaldeans, found that Kindneſs mentioned Fer. 29.4,5, 6 
with 24. 5, 6. and ſo were indifferently well placed together, and” 
the Prophet dwells among them in the Land of Chaldes. e« In their 
Captivity too many of them retained their ſtubborn, murmuring, and 
rebellious Humour; -and blamed, quarrelV'd and condemned them 
who gave them counſel to yield, and themlelves for yielding ; and tis 
likely ſtirred up them at Jeruſalem to hold our, and ſave themſelves 
and reſcue their Brethren : theſe will ridicule thy Words, yetipca'c 
them, for they are mine, and ſhall beaccomplithr. f They have Wir 
enough, they are of a Capacity well enough firred, if they wou'd, to 
underſtand and conlider what thou ſpeakeſt ; expreſt by a double 
Phraſe, which ſignifies one and the ſame thing, Eyes and Ears. 
2 They contemptuouſly refuſe to ſce and hear, they will not conſider, 
lay to heart, repent and reform. h They have conſpired rogerher, 
and all they will reſolve or deſign, 15 to do what-ever is gocd in their 
own eyes, and what-ever their wild Imaginations, raiſed by falſe Pro- 
phers, ſuggeſt. 


& 42. 20, 
» 7. Fer. F. 3k. 


3 i Therefore, thou ſon of man, & prepare thee -t-ſtuff + H-b. s- 
I for || removing, and * remove by »2 day in their fehe, /romzzzs. 
and thou ſhalt remove from thy place to another place Or: 7: 


in their fight; » it may be they will conſider, though 


they be a rebellious houſe. 


i And. k Make ready in the ſightof ſomeof thoſe which live a- 
bout thee, that they may tell others. 7 Veſſels or Inſtruments, where- 
in thou mayeſt put what is portable; and you, with leave from the 
Conqueror, may carry for your conveniencies, pack up what thou 
canſt that may be of uſe in thy Captivity. * Go thy way, leave thac 
place wherein thou now art, and goto another, with thy Pack upon 
thy back, not os Horſes or Aſſes. mAt Noon-tide, when the moſt 
may ſee what thou doeft, and be inſtrufted. » Ir is not impoſſible 
thar ſome may enquire what is the Import and Meaning of all this 
uncouth and obſcure Matter. 


4 o Then ſhalt p thou bring forth thy -f- ſtulf 4 by day + 15.4, ;.. 
in their ſight, as 7 ſtuff for removing : and thou ſhalt gg aunts 


forth at 5 even 7 in their fight, as -- they that go forth or v/:/s. 
7 Heb. 


Te 
: ; *he goings 
o Having made already, as wzrſe 3. thou ſhalt proceed to bear it af ,e, Cs 


? 
P78 


into captivity. 


away. p Not employ Servants and Labourers to do it, burthou thy 
ſelf ſhalt do it. qYerſe 3.r Perſe 3. £ This Circumſtance added ro* 
what was wer.3. ſpeaks the Secrecy and Shame, with the Danger of 
their coming out in the Evening in the dark; when Night may fooa 
conceal them, and they gain a Night's Journey before the Enemy hach 
notice to purſue. 7 Before 'cis quite Night, that thzy, who ſhould 
learn by this Sign, may ſee it and conſider ir. 


F * + Dig thou — 


the Wall in their ſight, and, xx 
2 Carry for thee. 


V1Ty 


2b ig 


-- f 
a. 127 > 


-_ os BY 
v\ SF” $6 o 
- —_—_— men 2 
_ 
A Be = bs 
k a - ——_ 
en he ak wn 
” 


-- - - = —_ hes 9 gp 
SF Ger gr, hed hy TW," 
_ pL”. «on J Fr ” « Viagn . 
St . "a __ : ww SED 5 I. 4 Pay 
"Tha wy - 5 PER a wor ew om 
by by — 
S __ MTS. Pe een» . * = _— 
ro _— Por IC y a a no - - 
« * ” ther at . v.- A, rt 0 by - @ 1 , ol 
F. "i EF ce 4. o 
We. 7 og | =. , 2-120. C C 'X oj thy 
b.4 ih ga Prcd E, IR OIPN 
OT" <w LI .: » T* _ > OO \% 
4 y' ; 4 bj 
4 to p X _ Pp 4 -\ % - 
wy 4 wb —_— 4 - £ 
al — p - WY : s 
" LI —_— wet 


ve Pon ee tore ray ons, 


Chop. NT. 


Cairy It out v thereby | | : 

- Come not throvvh the Door ; but as one who knows there 15a 
Watch znd Guard upon the Door, get to ſome back-part of thy 
Houie, and dig there, wer, 7. thy ſelf, eitaer to make the greater haſte 
gr to keep all ſecret ; for all will be little enough for them that muſ 
at n har chou dvft repreſent. # Through the Hole thou hiaſt dug. 


6& In their ſight ſhalt thou bear it upon « thy ſhoulders ,| 


and || carry it forth in the twilight: thon ihalt y cover 
thy face, that thou ſee not the ground : = for I have ſet 
thee fora ſign to the houſe of Irael. 

t Voirſe 4. let. p. in teſtimony of the Servitude they ſha!l be reduced 
to, who then muſt do what Servants or Beaſts were wont to be em- 


EZEKIEL 


| h Either the Egyptians, who cane to heip him ; ot rather thoſe th q 


Chap, Xq 


2 


Jidfly with him, as the Choice and Flower of his valiant and truſty 
Servants, who would guard him through all Dangers in the Flighr 
till he might reſt ſomewhere in ſafety : This was verified , 2 Kings 25, 
4, 5. and Jer. 39. 5. © Whether Auxiliaries, or his own trained $9]. 
diers. d Send the Enemy after them with drawn Sword, wherewich 


ployed in. {| Either the Stuff or thy ſelf ; thou ſhalr g0 forth 1n the 
ewilight, when there is a little Light ro guide thy Way, but more 
Darkneſs te conceal thy Perſon and thy Flight. y As full of Shame , 
and exceeding unwilling to be ſeen or known. = There is good reaſon 
why thov ſhouldeft do this, how ftrange, unmanly, orridiculous ſoever 
this may ſ.em; the Moral concerns the Houic of 1ſrael and its King ; 
I have {cr thee ſor a Sign to them, and thou ſhalc tell them the Mean- 
ing of theſe Hieroglyphicks in due time. 
7 And I did fo as I was commanded: I brought 4 
forth my ſtuff by day, as ſtuff for captivity , and in the 
Fr . »., even 1 + digged through the wall with 5 mine hand; I 
£2 > h:cughe it forth in the ewilight, 7d I bare zt upon my ſhoul- 
" _ der 1n their fight. | 

a Either out of the Houſe into ſome Court or Yard, through the 
Wall whereof he digged : Or, elſe here is a Tranſpoling of his Ati- 
ons, and rehearſal of that in the firſt plac? which was atted in the 
ſecond place. 6 Yr? 5. ler.r. : 

$ & And in the.c morning came the word of the 
LORD unto me, faying, . 

; In the Evening he pack?, digged through the Wal], and removed 
in the ſight of the People ; next Morning enquiry is made how the 
People rejent 1t. 

9 Son of man, hath 4 not the houſe of Iſrael, the rebel- 
lious houſe, ſaid unto thee, What doſt thou ? 

d What are none come to thee? are they all ſo ſtupid, and regard- 
I: of my Word and Judgments? Do none enquire that they may 
now, and do, what is necellary in their Circumſtances? Do not thy 
t:llow Captives think theſe Aﬀions are ſignificative ? Do they not ask 
whether they in Babylon, or their fellow Citizens at Feruſalem, are Con- 
cerned in what thou doeſt ? 


10. e Saythouunto them, f Thus ſaith the Lord GOD, 
£ This burden cencerneth the þ prince in Jeruſalem, and 7 all 
the houſe of Iſrael that are among them, 

e Though they regard not to enquire , yet give them to know 


what I mean hereby. f This to add Weight and Authority to the, Fears that ſhake them. 
Word. gs This dreadful Prognoſtic, this Prophecy is a Burden | 
which the Kingdom ſhall groan under, and your King and Inhabi- | 


tants of Jeruſalem with him. h Zedckiah. i None may be excepted. 
Ii. Say, & 1 a»zyour ſign: like as I have done, fo ſhall 

: Heb. gy i be done unto them : they ſhall / - remove and go mz into 

Femoving Captivity. 

£9 72% 02) þ My Perſon is the Emblem of your's, and my Ations in theſe 
Caſes are Signs of that you ſhall do; and where you do not attively 
the like, yer the like ſhall be done to you, O Inhabitants of Jeraſalem ! 
/ Change their Habitations, and carry away their Goods, ſuch as the 
emency of a Conquerour will pzrmit. 9 You to whom TI tell theſe 
things, ſhall ſee them come from Jeruſalem unto Babylon as dejeGted, 
iroicd, and naked Captives. 

12 And the » prince that is among » them ſhall pbear 
upon his ſhoulder tn the twilight, and ſhall go forth: 
they ſhall dig q through the wall to carry out thereby: he 
{hall r cover his face, that he ſee not the ground with his 
cYes. | : 

a 7Zidebiah. 0 InfJirujalim. p As a common ordinary Servant, in 
Lope foto eſcape ; bur ro conceal himſelf he flies in a Diſguiſe, and 
chooſeth the Twilight as the time that would beſt favour his Deſign, 
ſo 2 Kings 25.4. 4 Fulfilled when they broke down theWall to fly. 
as Jer. 39 4. probably they had built up ſome flight Wall to blind 
the En:zmy which now they break to fly through. 4 Partly out of 
Grief, partly out of Shame, partly prefiguring Zedekia/'s future Iols 
of his Eyes, and his Blindneſs, which the Inſolency of Neouchadnezzar 
afflicted him with ; bur Zedekiah did by this clhicfly aim at concealing 
hint{elf in diſguiſe, and covering his Face. 


13 5 My net * alſowill : I Ipread upon him, and he 
;: ſhall be taken in my ſnare; and I » will bring him to 
Babylon to the land of the z Chaldeans, yet ſhall he not 
ſee 4 it, though he ſhall die there. 


* In the Diſguiſe this Fugitive might poſſtbly eſcape from the Net 
of Neb: baduerzar, and ofhis Captains. Bur poor Zed:kzah doſt thou 
notat laitſce that the Babylonians are employed of God, and that God 
w1ll bring thee into his own, and into Nebuchaanezzar's Net ? t inal. 
Iuſion to thoſe thattake Birds or Fiſh in Nets, they ſpread it toits ful] 
extent ; ſo will God fpread his Net that it ſhall cover Z:dck:ahand his 
Followers. « Mentioned as the principal, though he was not taken 
a'one, many vere taken with him. « The Chaldeans carried him,and 
God brought him to Babylon 3 fo ſecond-cauſes cowork with the firſt, 
y Which was the Metropolis of the Kingdom. z That ſtrange Land 
where they were Captives whom God {ent before, and whither obſti- 
rate Jer:/a/-mites muſt now go. 2 Neither the Land nor the City , 
though he thall ſpend the reſt of his days there, and there die; bur 
the Bavzlon;jh Tyrant will put out his Eyes at R'vlah, 2 Kings 25. 7. 
and Jer. 39. 7. 


*Chcitc, 14 And *I will ſcatter toward every wind all that 


-- LED 
£8 ui, 25 


< 8 


Cr rr er 


they ſha!l be ſlain, Fer. 42. 22. and 43. 9, io, I. 


15 And they ſhall e know that I am the LORD, when 
[ F ſhall ſcatter them among the nations, and diftreſ: 
chem in the countreys. 


e They ſhall ſee, confeſs, and be ſenſible of my Power , Juſtice 
and Truth, who make good my Threats againſt obdurate Sinners as 
well as my Promiſes to Believers. f Two Expreſſions of the ſame 
thing, which is frequent in Scripture ; and as ituſually magnifi:th the 
Geod or Evil, ſo enſures either. 


16 But g I will leave + a few < men of them from; MM 
che ſword , from the famine, and from the peſtilence, »=:þ 
that they 7 may declare all their abominations among the nmvwF 
heathen whither they come, and they & ſhall know that 1 
am the LORD, 


g I will reſtrain the Rage of the Chaldeans, and move them to ſome 
compaſſion towards fome of the Jews; ſo that ſome, yet bur few 
ſhall remain; the Sword ſhall not {lay them, for I commiſſion ir, and 
'rwill notexceed its Commiſſion : I ſend the Famine, bur fome I wil | 
feed ; and the Peſtilence is my Arrow, and hits but where I direQ ic. | 
h Including the Women alſo. 7 Either by relating thoſe Sins which 
were committed among them in Jeruſalem, for which God wasjuſt!y 
angry, and for which he puniſhed them, though they were his own 
People: Or, elfe that though they ſhould be ſilent , yet the very 
thing ſhould ſpeak ir ſelf, and their Miſeries ſhould proclaim che 
Wickednefles they had ated againſt God in their own Land : Or, by | 
their wicked Prattices, which in Captivity, and under the eye of the | 
Heathen they commit, they will manifeſtly ſhew to the Heathen cha |! 
God was juſt in all his Severity. & Either the Jews, or rather here | 
the Chaldean Heathens. 


17 < ! Moreover , the word of the LORD came to | 
me, ſaying, | 

! Hewasa Sign to them in digging and bearing his ſtuff, now he 
muſt bea Sign to them in another manner. 

18 Son of man, cat thy bread with 2 quaking, and 


_ thy -» water with trembling and with careful- 
neſs : 


» With Commotion or Shakings, as one whoſe Apprehenſion of 


Danger brings as*twere an Earthquake upon him; and this 'Trem- 
bling is the ſamething, bur in other words. = Hereis no mention of 
; thedelicious and genefous Wines, but Water ; ſo low ſhould they be 
reduced, and yet enjoy this very little, becauſe of the great inward 


19 And o fay unto the p people of the q land, Thus 
faith the Lord GOD, of the » inhabitants of Jeruſalem, 
and 5 of. the land of lſrael, They ſhall * eat cheir bread 
with careſulneſs, and drink their water with aſtoniſh- 
ment, that « her land x may be deſolate from -f- all chatiÞ 


1s y therein, becaufe of the-z violence of all them that/*Þ * 
dwell therein. 1 
o Explainthe Meaning of this unuſual and uncomfortable Mann: 
of eating and drinking. p The common ſort of People Giſtingiiiſht 
from Rulers. q Of the Land of Chaldea in which the Jews were Cap.  * ® 
tives, tell thy fellow-Captives who grudge and repent their coming 


= 04" 4 arnaggreey - 


» Can. ce about him to help liim, and all his c bands, and 1 * 
* To * will ddraww out the ſword after them. 


hither, where they have much Sorrow, yer ſome Safety, Plenty and '*2 Þt. 3.C 
Reſt. r» Whoare yer not captivated ; their Sorrows are coming, and }4. *? a 
their State will be worſe than yours. s Nor will it be better with | 3 
thoſe that dwell in the Countries round about Jeruſalem ; they will fiy x 
tor Refuge into Jeruſalem, and there periſh. 7: their very Comforts * 
ſhall be uncomfortable to them. « Jeruſalem's Land, ſo called be- 6 
canſe 'rwas the head Ciry thereof. x Becauſe that 'tis already,, 0: _ 
ſhortly ſhall be waſted. y Emptied, though 'twas full of Inhabitnrs, k 
Wealth and Plenty. & Injuſtice, Oppreſſion and Tyranny of the | 
Jews toward one another, Jer.6, 7. and 20.8. Frzkidl 7. 23. and Þ 
this grown an Epidemical Sin, chap. 22. 9, 12, from higheſt tw | © 
loweſt. m 
20 And the a cities that are b inhabited ſhall be laid | fa 
c waſte, and the land ſhell he deſolate, and ye 4 ſhall : 
know that I 2» the LORD, Fre 
a The lefſer Cities up and down the Land. & Which now are, F © I 
and will be inhabited when Jeruſalem is deſtroyed. o Waſted with " 
the Sword, as the Word ſeems to imply, &d Then ſhall you, who | fe 
are now in Cheldea , know how the Goodneſs of God brought you hi- 
cher ; that you had no real Cauſe to complain, that your Conditien 
was worſe than your Brethren in Judea. You ſhall know the Tcutt 
and Severity of God againſt Sinners. ”" 
21 TT And the word of the LORD came unto me | 
ſaying, | 
22 Sofi of man, e whats that f proverb that g ye have : 


h inthe land of Iſrael, * ſaying, The z days are & prolon-'(Wr: 
ged, and every / viſion m2 faileth. or 

e Aﬀcer the manner of Man God ſpeaks with Man, what is ; or, i , ET 
isa comely Tranſition to a new Subje& of Diſcourſe. F Thar ſhot Þ 
Saying taken up as undoubted Truth, and in a very common manne* 
uſed by all. s He ſeems to include the Prophet as being one of tl 
Body of the. People, though he uſed it nor; nay, ſhewed the Falle- 
hood and Imptety of it, + I ; fo the Prophet and thoſe with him, 
are reckoned as if they were in the Land of 7/-ael, for that is their Bu 
Country : Or, rather, concerning, as the Heb. by here uſed. : Offe- BF 
vere Puniſhments of Wrath and Vengeance, & Are to come a grit ft 
while hence, ler them fear who are like to fee] them; reeſe V:0- | fo 
phecies cannor be imagined to look ro our times : Thus Atheiſts, a7* | 
Contecmners of the Prophers, hardned one another into Sin 4" 

S@cl7s 


s XI | ap- XI. 


mm—— 
ik 


| = tered the People. 


] Threatning Viſion which Jer:21/ah at Jeruſalem, and Exc- 
x. do dieam of, and would fright us with. »2 Comes 
iſhed or dead in the Neſt. | 

ſaith the Lord GOD), 
and they ſhall 
but p ſay un- 


ns 
5. 


Security. 
kict here in Chalden, C 
ro nothing, It 15 per1 

23 Tell » them therefore, Thus fait 
1 will make this proverb to o ceaſe, 
ſe ir as a provetb in Iſrael. : 
days are Þþ at hand, 


F 
b 

A 
* 


no moore Uu 
to them , T1 he q 
of every vitloh- : 
:0 uſe the Proverb, or are ſtumbled at it, tel! the one 
other to inſtruCt rhem. o Thus they abuſe my Pa- 
Truth, and deride my Juſtice : but when my 
Patience is at its Period, it calls in my Juſtice ro vindicat it; and when 
Cuamiries felt, prove my Truth in the Preſenceof theſe Sorrows, there 
can be no more place for ſuch a Proverb, the Groundleſneſs of it be- 
Ing diſcovered to all. p Allure them. q F*r. 22. They draw near 1n- 
Jeed when within ſome three Years and 7eruſz/emſhall ſee the Enemy 
beſieging it, and feel his Sword cutting down ber choſen Men. r All 
chat which the Viſion contained ſhall, c're few Yearsare over, clearly 
appear accomplithed, according to what my Prophets forecold. 

24 For * there ſhall bz /no more any viſion, nor flat 
tering divination 7 within the houſe of Ifrael. 


/ Theſe proverbializing Scoffers compared the true Prophets wich 
the falſe, theſe Predi&t Proſperity and Recurn of the Caprives from Ba- 
bylom within few Years, and before Jernſalem be deſtroyed ; fo they flat- 
The true Prophets foretel long Captivity, bloody 
S;aughters, ſtrair Siege, a burnt City and Temple. Now theſ: Scof- 
fers bear up themſelves on theſe Flatterzes, and argue againſt the Di- 


Lal 027 + 
E x Fither wi 
| to Convince, the 

rience, and affront my 


-- 
eg 


E * 
* nn  II4 
EE Tenn 3 A TR 


f. 
3 
*Ch.13. 


; x 
1 23+ f 
ſ 


* > vine Menaces, and are ready to enquire, why may not Ez: kzels Viſion 

' be as vain as he faith theirs 15; and, 1f one, why not borh ; Well, 
theſe Fools are capable of no better Anſw-r than that which will de-! 
ſtroy at once their Doubts and their Hopes; Judgment executed ſhall 
convince the falle Prophers of their lying Divination, and theſe A- | 


theiſts of their illogical Inferences. 7 For this many Years, for 70 
Years to come, and till Wickedneſs ſhall again take root with the 


Proſperity of the returned Captivity. 
25 For I am the « LORD : I will ſpeak, and the 
word that I ſhall ſpeak x ſhall come to pals : it y ſhall 


to 


houſe, will I ſay the word, and will z perform it, faith 
the Lord GOD. 


u I can diſcover the Vanity of flattering Prophets, and will do it, 
by making good what my true Prophets have foretold. « No length 
ofetime ſhall make me forgertit, no'Pretences of ſelf-flattering Prophets 
or People, ſha!l divert it, no Power can hinder me, nor Counſel de- 
feat me. y What Jeremiah, what Ezzkic! have for2told, I will now ac- 
compliſh in theſe Days, and defer no Jonger. z I will not preach to 
you by my Prophets the fata] Sorrows of your Childrens Children, 
who ſhould cry out of Calamities when you are paſt feeling them, bur 
theſame Age rhat hearsthe Threat ſhall feel che Execution : the Enemy 
I raiſe againſt you ſhall burn your Ciry and Temple, ſpoil your Goods, 
famiſh you in the Siege, and lead you Captives after the Siege; and 
all this and a thouſand rimes more ſhall come upon you in your Days, 
O rebellious Houle ! When all this comes to paſs, your Proverb will 
be ſure tro ceaſe indeed. Hitherto he anſwers the ungodly Uſers and 
Abettors of this Proverb. 


26 E' Again « the word of the LORD came to me, 
ſaying, 

a For inſtructing ſome that were ſeduced by thoſe Scoffers before- 
mentioned. 


: 27 Son of man, 6 behold, rhey of the houſe of Iſrael 
*2Per. 3. < ſay, The 4 viſion that he feeth x5 tor * many days to come, 
' and he prophelieth of times that are far off. 
a © Some of the lcfs judicious, and mor? credulous, are abuſed by 
* theſe fortof Men. c Think and hope, and fo diſcourſe it. @ That 
the Propher 15 a good Man and true Prophet, bur ſurely his Vitions look 
to after-times : we do not think his Viltons vain, but we hope they 
are not to come on us, and inour Days. Now theſe God will have 
kis Propher ro inſtru inthis Matter, which he doth inthe next Verſe. 
28 e [herctore f fay unto thein , "Thus ſaith the Lord 
GOD, "There ſhall none of my words be prolonged any 
more, but the word which I have ſpoken ſhall be done, 
faith the Lord God. 
_ e Since 'tis an erroneous Opinion they are brought into, *tis not 
from Contempt of my Truth, butfrom Weaknets. f Warn them 
mildiy, te] them the Days are very near indeed, and there will be 
no Adjournment. Now 'twill be done asfoon as ſpoken almoſt, and 
God will make a ſhort Work with them in Righteouſneſs, and a very 
tew Days will bring his Judgments to light. 


PET. 
k 


FE. 1 CHAP. alk 


God commanadcth Ezekiel to reprove the falſe prophets and their untempered 
merter, 1—16. and the lying prophetcſſes and their pillows, I 7—20. 
Ther hnnting the ſouls of the People, 21. Their making the heart of the 
rightcous ſad, 22, 

I ND the @ word of the LORD came unto me, 

> ſaying, 
s This fiſt Verſe is the Commiſſion, by virtue whereof Ezckic! 
attethas a Propher, and 'tis in the uſual ſtile near forty times in Eze- 
kiel, as here "tis, 


FH. .;. 4 lfraet * that + e prophelie,, and fay thou unto them 

Pars. that propheſie F out of their own * hearts, g Hear ye 

WT + the word of the LORD. 

E&Z © 56 Declare afore-hand what T will do. c Againſt Prince and People 
firſt, Next againſt Prophets and Propheteſles, againſt tlie former in the 
toregoing Chapters, againlt the latter in this Chapter. . 4 Becauſe ap- 


proved of 1/-ael, enceuraged by 1ſrde!, and followed; but not Prophets | [Infany after the Remo Som Captivity z o7, they ſhalt 


Ciap. ALL 


of the Lord, he ſent ther not ; whether theſe were 1n Ba> jon, or in 
Jerulalem, tome Enquiry 15 mede; probably theſe falie Prophers were 
in both Places. ce Forere} whar 1s pleaſing t9 che Jews, a fadden Re. 
rurn out of Caprivity, with the Veſlelsof the Lord's Houſe, and Pco. 
ſperity In their own Land. 7 Bur all their promiſing Words are of 
themſelves, our of their own deceiving hearts, not from God, and 
ſo all will be Lies. g Ceaſe to deceive my People, and at:end now to 


and the r effect | what God ſpeaks of you. 


'3 Thus faith the Lord GOD, b Wo unto the 7 fooliſh 4 13:5. 
prophets, that -| follow their own & ſpirir, and {! / have walk after. 
feen nothing. Or, ant 

h They ſhall be doubly miſerable, ſuffering with rhe deceived, ang *hings 


ſuffering by rhe Inraged, when their Lies are detecF-d. 7 Eirherin a winch van 
| moral Senſe, j. c. wicked, orina literal Senſe, unwile, *Ti; borh foo- have net 
| lifhly wicked and imprudent to pretend Revelatio 15, and yet have none/** 
from God. &k Jn conrradittinCtion to the Spirit of God, the true Spirit 
of Prophecy, they ſtrongly fancy wharthey would have, and then 
( preſumptuouſly prophecy that it ſhall come to paſs. / God hath ſhe: 
ed theta no Viſion, nothing of all they pretend to is from God. 
4 O m [frael, » thy prophets are like the foxes in 
the p deſerts. 
m A patherical Exclamation to awake 7/-ael, both the Dwrellers at 
Jeruſalem and thoſe at Baby/on. nu Thy Prophersnor mine, as wer. 2, 
|0 Hungry and ravening, crafty and guiletul, and living by ther Wits, 
| bur nor one whir he'ptulro thoſe they deceive; ſuch arc falſe Prophets. , 
' þ Where want of Prey makes them more eager of their Prey, and 
where other devouring Beaſts endanger Trave!lers, but no Dcfence 
to them from Foxes, theſe fly into their Holes berimes, and leave the 
endangered ones, Or taus, Q Iſrael, thou art like the D-lert ſpoiled 
and robbed, and thy faiſe Prophetslike Foxes hungry and huncing for 


2 Sor of man, b propheſie againſt the c prophets of 


ſome Prey, live upon what they can catch, but will bz no mare profi- 
table to rhee than Foxes are to the Wilderaeſs, 


7 Ye have not 7 gone up into the || gaps, neither 


's + made up the hedge for the houfe of lirael, rot ſtand Pl Or, 
in the « batrel in the day of the LORD. _ S 


| 9 Vulpin Prophets. r Asin a beſieged City whoſe Wall is broken hedged up 

'down, and the Enemy ready to enter, a valianr, faithful, and vigilant g hedge. 
Sou'dier would run up into the Breach to repel the Enemy; fo true 

| Prophersdo partly by Prayer, and partly by DoQrine, and partly by 


' 


be no more prolonged : for in your days, O rebellious perſonal Reformation, labour ro preſerve God's People ; bur, Fox. 


like, they have ſhifred our of harms way. s The Houſe of [acl is 
the Lord's Vineyard, throngh the Hedge whereofmany Breaches are 
' made, through which wild and waſting Beaſts come in and devour 
the Grapes, and ſpoil the Vines; but you have not ſtopp'd thoſe 
Breaches, bur, Fox-like, come in and pulled off the render Grapes, 
and done the moſt Miſchief ; you have increaſed Sin and Danger there- 
by. And when the Lord's Wrach ſhall give up the City, you will nor 
ſtand to oppoſe the Enemy breaking in, fouſeleſs will theſe be ar laſt; 
:; Not with Arms but with Faſting, Prayers, Repentance, laying ho!d 
on the Arm of the Lord, and interceding for hits People. « Which 
God will by the Chaldeans fight againit che Houle of 7/-ae! ; in that 
Day of the Lord the Weapons of War will not prevail againſt che 
Chaidemns, unleſs Prayers, Tears, and Amendment, prevail with the 
Load to withdraw the Batte), and be at Peace with 7/rae!. 

6 They have x ſeen 7 vanity and lying divination, ſay- 
ing, The LORD wſaich ; and the LORD hath not a ſent 
them : and they have & made others to hope that they 


wou!ld confirm the word. 

x They pretend to have ſeen, bur ſtill they ſee nothing ; as ver. 2, 
The Prophet ſpeaks as if indeed they had ſeen, bur the very C:nlure 
of the things they ſaid they ſaw, clears it, thar ll was bur Pretence. 
y Things that have no Ground or Foundation, 2nd which will never 
be, and are therefore called Vanity and lying Divinations. = Fore- 
eel[eth and promiteth : a Never revealed any iuch king to them, or 
bad themrell the Jews any ſuch thing. 5 By their Pretences and Ar- 
guments they have wheedled ſome inro a B-lief of cheir Word, and 
into a hope of that they promiſe ; and ſo the credulous Jew is undone 
by his Prophet, who tells him all is well, and needsno Alteration; 
and all will be well, and rhey need fear no Deſolation. 

| 7 c Have ye not ſeen a vain viſion, and have ye not 
ſpoken a lying divination, d whereas ye fay, The LORD 
faith 7r, albeic I have not ſpoken? | 

c Conſider with your own Conſciences, do they nottell you, thac 
all is vain Pretence which you make? can you think Jeraſalem can 
eſcape, or the firſt Captives be returned, and all this ſo ſoon ? Is not 
this vain to be imagined, and they vainer that imagineand believe it ? 
4IFf it ſhould come to paſs, which it never ſhall, yer herein you are 
convifted Lyars ; you fay the Lord faith,. was -as he hath ſaid no 
ſuch thing, nay the contrary hath God ſpoken ro what you ſpeak, and 
the Event ſhall be as contrary to your Exve&ation, which is of God, 
but behold Evil cometh our of the Nocth, ati.l great Deſtruction. 

8 c Therefore thus faith the Lord GOD, Becauſe ye 
have ſpoken vanity, and ſeen lies, therefore behold, - I 
4 am againſt you, faith the Lord GOD. 

c The whole Verſe ſpeaks the dreadful Anger of God againft choſe 
falſe Prophets ; it is unſpeakable Wrath, 'and we are lefc ro gueſs at 
it by the manner of Speech here uſed, which is minatory, Ezek. 21. 3, 
& 26. 3. concealing the greater Part intended, an Apoliop2its. 4 This 
is more particularly exemplified in the next Verſe. 

9 And minee hand ſhall be upon the prophets that 
ſee vanity, and that divine lies : they {hall not be in 
f the aſſembly of my people, neither inallthey be g writ- 
ten in the writing of the houſe of Iſrael, neither {hallthey 
h enter into the land of Iſrael; and ye ſhall ; know that 


[ am the LORD. | 
e My Power ſtriking them ; ſothet ic ſhall be evident they fall undec 
Divine Revenge; as Pelatiah, chap. 11.13. and Hananiaz, J-r. 28. 15, 
16. Or if they eſcape this ſtroke, f Have no Seat among the Rulers, 
nor Voice among the Counfellors, nor Credit among the Judges of 
my Pcopls ; bur as. falſe FeHows, Teachers of Lies, be branded wirk 
nct be ameng 
$hois 


| 


- , D 
MO 


AL, 
———— —_ 
As ; 


© ag." ==. Sethi 
5 ks 


- = "7 bs 2 - b 
EE. 


Cha ); XTII. 


*ſer.6 li. 
atid $. 
” Ch. 22. 


25, 


| | 


 LORD- 


ry and paill'd, and then felt the Strozk of God's Hand, and Truth 
of his Prophet. 


thoſe that return, dead before, or rejeGed as dangerous Seducers 2nd 
blaſ-kemous Abuſersof the Name of God. Ir may alſo refer to the 
excluding them our of the Aſſembly of glorified Oaes in Heaven. 
g Nor reyiitred among thoſe chat retutn, of wich R-giitry, Ezra. 2. 
2, 2. bur b'orced our for their Impiety, this literally ; myſtically It 
may be. an obliterating, or blotting them out of the Bcok of Life, 
they ſhall rot be written with fuch as ſh21l eſcape ; ſpiritually rhey 
Qa!] not be found among the Ele& that ſhall live for ever. þ They ſhall 
never more come into the Land of 72:1, nor ſurvivethe Captivity. 
Or. with Ciſorace caſt off ſhall die in ſtrange Lands. Ta brief, the ap- 
proaching proſperity which they promile the Peopie none {hall ſee, 
Jer. 24. 21, 32. but the Proſperity afcer 70 years Captivity, which I 

omite my People thall ſee, buttheſe falſe Prophers never ſhall ſee, 
1 hand ſhall be ſo againſt them. They ſhall nor be written 1N the 
Books of Eternal Life, which is written for the juſt Ones of ch: Houſe 
of Iſrael, ſaith the Chaldce Paraphralt. 7 See Chap. 17>. Ver. 15. 


p2ople, ſaying, / Peace, 


BEZEKIEL 


ered 145rier, and will þ fay utito you, The 7 wall ; n5 
more, neither they that daubed it z 

fn this dreadful manner by my Hand viſible in doing it. g Fulfit 
what my Prophets foretold, and perform my Word and theirs, and $1. 
ly pour out my Wrath, ſo that it ſhall be fully according to the in$t 
Ditplecaſure they have provoked in me. +I will deride them in the;. 
ruine, as Pfal. 2. 4. and Prov. 1. 26, # God curſeth Confidences ;n 
an Arm of Fleſh, and will deftroy them, for they are ſer up in dires. 
© m—_ to his Juſtice and Sovereigaty, to his Threars and Truth 
of them. 


16 To wit, the prophets of & Ifrael which propheſe 
concerning Jerufalew, and which / ſee viſions of peac: 
tor her, and zhere es no peace, faich the Lord GOD. 


k See wer. 2, 4. 1 See wer. 7. 


»” one  hyilt up a Wall, and lo, others * daubed ic with| pc 


untemperc mortier, 

; The Verſe is a Tranſition to a new Subje&, or rather to a new 
manner of diſcovering and condemning the Sin of the talte Prophets. 
k Made my People to err, both in their apprehenſion of their Sin and 
Danger, ane of my Diſpleaſure and Threats, as it all were leſs than 
*rwas, and there needed no Repentance or ſubmiſſion to the Bavyloniſh 
King. 1 All will be well, no War, or elſe Viftory ; no more going 
into Captivity, but a ſpeedy return of thoſe thar are 1a Captivity ; 
when nothing of all this but the contrary was to be rold them, 
univerſal Calamity was at the Door, and theſe Varlzts promiſe 
univerſal Tranquility and Plenty. m Some one or otlier Chief a. 


»: Now turn thy ſelf and diſcourſe againſt the Propherefles, fear 
them not, ſce the Phraſe, Chap. 4. 3. » Some would have the Pro. 
pher's Words to be intended againſt the effeminate Men who were of 
no value, and by contempr called the Danghters of his People, buc 
I fee no cauſe why the Propher's words ſhould not be direCted againſt 
the Women who pretended ro be Prophetefſes. o Thar were with 
him in Bayou. Or, rather becauſe they were Jews, they are called 
Daughte:s of his People. Or might they not be Daughters of Prieſts 
and fo more nearly of Kin to Ezekiel? p There were Women who 
had the Gift of Prophecy, Exod. 15. 20. Judg. 4 '4. and 2 Kinzs 22. 
14. and Joel 2. 28. and brought Mellages from God, bur theſe in 


mong the falſe Prophets, as Hmananiah, Jer. 28. 15. and Sh:majah, 
Fer. 29. 31. or #hab Son of Kolajyh, for. 29. 21. 22, 7 When the 
State of the Church was ſhattered andready to fall, thelz chief falſe 
Prophets would undertake to repair and build it, bur indeed all was a 
Incer contrived Chea?, like as if a pretended Archice& ſhould promile 
to buii'd a Wall ſubſtantial and found, bur a pack of deceitful Builders 
in confederacy with this one ſerto laying the Stones, and then with 


the Text pretend themſclves to be Prophereſſes, and ſpeak their own 
Iinaginations, and faſten their Lies on the God of Truth. 


18 And ſay, Thus faich the Lord GOD, 4 Wo to the 


t kercheits upon the head of every « ſtatue to x hunt 
y fouls : z Will ye hunt the fouls of my People? and will 


Dirt inftead of Aforter, with m<lting and dillolving Mire inſtead of 
holding and well-terapered Cement, daub the Wall; fo the chief Se- 
ducers cry Peace, Peace, and all the Kennel of lefler Cheats follow full 
cry. Peace, Peace; within two Years ſhall the King of Babylon ceaſe 
ſaith one, Jer. 28. 11. andall the inferiour Prophets applaud rhe Con- 
jeure, and perſwade the People to beleve it : but the end willevince 
them Liars, asin the following Verſe. 

11 Say unto 0 them, that dayub i* with untempered 
morter, that it. ſhall p fall : there ſhall be an 9 overflow- 
ing ſhower, and ye, O r great hailſtones, ſhall - fall, and 
a flormy wiad ſhall rent z7. 

6 The meaner and Iefs noted, who follow the Arch-falſe Prophets, 
and are as under-workers in this Wall. p Moſt certainly its fall hal] 
be the ſhame 8nd lofs of the Builders and thoſe that hoped irs durati- 
on. 9 Abundant, violent and continued Showers ſhall foak into your 
Wall, and. diſſolve the Cement ; and this Shower 1s the B2byloniſh Inva- 


ye ſave the ſouls alive zh2t come unto you ? 

9 Calamirtes of all forts ſhall fall upoa them. » A figutative Speech 
expreſſing their Flatteries and Security, which the Women promiſed 
to every one that came to them to know the Fate of themſelves and 
others; in token of which Safety and Eaſe, either theſe Women did 
put them for tneſe Enquirers to ſleep on ; or, elſe to lean on as they 
lay on their ſide at Meat; or eſe theſe Gypſies, Fortune-tellers, did 

eep or pretend to ſleep on thoſe Pillows, and thereby ſignifie the 
Peace, Safety and Eaſe which this People ſhould have. 5 All Comers 
had the fame Anſwer, theſe Women made nor any difference. 2 Ei. 
ther Vails, or triumphal Hats or Caps, which were made by theſe 
Propheteſles, and thete were put upon the Head of every one Wha 
coniulted them, and by theſe Habits the deceived Enquirer was eicher 
perſwaded he was made fit to receive the Oracle, or was to interprec 
che Sign as promiſe of Viftory: over the Babylonian, and a criumphanc 
reſt in Judea, perhaps they might uſe both : the Vails were put on 
to ſignifie the Shame with which their Enemies Faces ſhould be co. 


ſion, which all your Proviſion ſhall be no moreable to withſtand,than 
Mirein a Wall can keep the tones together when drench'd with Show- 
ers. » ] will ſurnmon 1a the Storms of Hail, which with mighty 
Stones ſhall beat upon the ruinous Wall. s iz. upon the Wall. : A 
Wiirlwind to fhake the tumbling Stones, which wichout much ſhaking 
would ere long drop down ; bur rohaſten the downfall, ſoaking Show- 
Eis, Storms of Hail and violent Winds ſhall meer, ſo ſhall y our crazy 
State, O deceived Jews, come down to ruine. 


12 Lo, when the wall is fallen, ſhall it not « he ſaid 
unto you, Where zs the daubing wherewith ye daubed 
kJ 
p; « Will not Men thenceforth Jaugh youto ſcorn, you that builr, you 
that daubed, you that applauded the Wall, will they not upbraid 
you with your folly ? 

13 Therefore thus fairh the Lord GOD, I will even 
rent it with a ſtormy wind in my fury : and there ſhall 
be an overflowing ſhower in mine anger, and great hail- 
ſtones in my fury to conſume 27. 

Thiscontirms what was ſaid wer. 11. where 'tis explained : this wer. 
addeth that God will do by his Hand andin Anger and Fury, tak- 
ing Vengeacce on this ſcoffting, athciſtical and ſecure Generation in 
his juſt Diſpleaſure ; he will execute the Fierceneſs of his Anger upon 
Prince, Prophets, People, City, and all their Con'ederates, 

14 So will I a break down the Wall that ye havedaub. 
ed with untempered morter, and biing it þ down to| 
the ground, ſo taat the c foundation thereof Jhall be 4 diff 
covered, and it ſhall fall, and ye e ſhall be F conſumed 
in the midſt thereof : and ye ſhall know that I am the 


This Verſe with very little variation repeats the ſame dreadful 
Procedure of God againſt this People and theſe falſe Prophets, and 


vered ; the triumphant Caps to note the Joys of the Jews, but the E- 
vent ſhewed which belonged to the one and other. « 7. e. Of every 
Age, whether younger or elder, which uſually is ſomewhere ſeen by 
ſtature or growth. x All thisis a Pretence, while really "tis ſpread. 
ing a Net, as Hunters do, to catch the Prey and devour it. } The 
Perſons, Life, Eſtate and alltoenrich or maintain themſelves. z Dare 
you promiſe they ſhall live when I do promiſe no ſuch thing ? Oc can 
you preſerve them alive whom you deccive by your Promiſes? Are 
you no whit afraid thus to prophane my Name, and to enſnare my 
People ? 


che fouls that ſhould not die, and to f fave the ſouls 4. 
live that ſhould not live, by your g lying to my people 
that hear your lies ? 


a Prophane contradifting what is indeed ſpoken in my Name, an4 
pretending my Name for that I never ſpake, nor will do, & Who 
are my peculiar, who have my Word and true Prophets, by which 
your Lies are diſcovered, and farther will be : what ſhameleſs Impu- 
dence is this tro abuſe my Name, counterfeit my Hand and Seal to 
them that do or might know both! c For a mean Reward, re!l For- 
tunes for a Penny : but there may be hereina Provition made againſt 
the Famine which was threatned and would come, this Grain might 
be kept. 4d Bread and Morſeis of Bread, mercenary Sorcereſſes ! rhat 
thus make ſale of their Pred;Qtions for to feed their hungry Bellies. 
e You denounce evil to the beſt, perhaps threatned thoſe in Baylor 
with Death, whom God will keep alive there. f Declaring Safety, 
Plenty, Proſperity, Peace without War, or Victory in the War, in- 
cluded in that they live. g Moſt falflely flattering thoſe that come to 
you, and moſt maliciouſly threatning thoſe that come not, becauſe 
they know you ſpeak your own Lies. You fave whom I'll kill, and 
kill whom I'll fave. 


20 Wherefore thus ſaith the Lord GOD, Behold, 1 


their falſe i!|l-grounded Confidences. And this repeating theſe things " againſt your 7 pillows wherewith ye & there hunt 


3«to give us to know the certainty of the thing, the terror wherewich 
God will do ir, and the ſtupidity of the Jews bewitch'd by the flat- 


che ſouls, || ro make them: | fly, and | 2 will tear themj0 
r=ics of their talſe Prophers. @ Pull it down Stone by Stone: b Le-| from 7 your arms, and 0 will let the ſouls gO, even che gu" 


vel it ro the Ground. c The ioundneſs of the Foundation, what-| ſouls that ye hunt to make them fly. 


ever it may ſeem to be. & To every one that will look on it, and 
rhis to the utter ſhame of the Builders. e Who deceive and are 
deceived by it. f Shall periſh in the midſt thereof; fo all that heark- 
nd to theſe falle Prophets, rebelled againſt Ncbucbadnczzar, fortified 
the Cirv, and obſtinately ſtood it our, fell with the Ruines of the Ci- 


7 Thus will T g accompliſh my wrath upon the 
C 


92.7. and Cant. 6G. 11. to grow, as Hoſ. 14. 8. 
obvious; by theſe lying Ceremonies thus applied, you may promiſe a 


b The ſame Phraſe, vr. 8. 7 The Rite, and its Signification to0. 


þ Either ar Jeruſalem, or where ever you give out Anſwers. / In this 
ſenſe the Word is no where elſe uſed; and thus uſed here, renders the 
Interpretation obſcure.; elſewhere'tis to bud, as Num. 17. 8. and Exch. 


7. 10. to bloſſem, 1/a. 27. 6. toſpring up as a Flower or Vine, P/z'! 
Thus the Senſe 15 


flouriſhing growing State to all Enquirers, and this is the Net with 


and upon them that have; daubed.it with untem-{ which you hunt fouls : *tis poſſible theſe Prophersfſes might bring 


els 


Chap. X| 


17 T Likewiſe thou fon of man, »» ſet thy face a-'v: 
S 7 Z +> I o « y 

10 4 Becauſe, even + becauſe they have un pay my gainſt the » daughtersof o thy people, * which p pro- 
and 7cre 225 N9 1 CAace; and! phe gut of their own heart 3 and propheſie thou againſt 


20men that fow 7 pillows to s all [| armholes, and make. | 


PRO IRGS 5. Te OISE Fay =" 
tte 30s Oey: 


Ws {BY RF > ee i 


19 And will ye 2 pollute me among my 6 people * rel 
c handiuls of barley, and for 4 pieces of dethrs C e ſlay ;| 


D * 54H 6 "o# 
ADE STE Seb 


wi + et % EOS 
LI 
== 2 $9 ns et as 4 2.6... 


by BIN LEN os. be 2425 Sx te, Wt 4-H 


RES Iv 


Mt nb ts 


XI 


o F 
£ 
| by 
Gf 
7 
o 
4 V. 
j- | 
Ic £ 
# 
J. : 
nt 
1C | 
{ S 
h FJ: 
: I4 © 
s, Fj Orgzr 
10 I joos 
2 ſave Wi 
Liſte: 


ellies. 
 abylor 
afery, 
IT, 1n- 
me f0 
ecauſe 
1, and 


TT” 


11d, 1 
hunt 
them 0: 
n thegF 


on too. 
In this 
ers the 
id Exch. 
e, Pſu'l 
enſe 15 
omiſe 2 
et with 
Us bring 

els in 


9 A es 


19, XIV. 


s $255. 
EUR IEC 


Cot ER 


= 
= puteth 
P lice, 


.* {trengthened the hands of the wicked, that he ſhould 


8; 1 
7 j11e 3; 


obejr deceived ones into pleaſant Gardens, and (if well pid for it ) 
entertain with all the Pleaſures of flowers and Fruics ; and might not 
theſe Proplieretles be rhe Prieſts of Flora, and ſeduce young, fair, Wan- 
ron Ones to the Idolatry .and brutifh Pleaſures of the Floralis ? m 
With ſome violence and ſuddennefs that may exprets an indignation, 
as 2 Kinzs 5. 7, when the King of 7jracl rent his Clothes at the hear- 
inc the Letter of Bexadad King of Syria, fo in Wrath will God ſud- 


ES ERSEL 


Fa 


ls 


z 
«& 12 # 


3 _ 
\CKL (Pp 
4a... wwnd 


anſwer him that comet, according to the 
of his idols; | 

& Mince nor tliz raatter, leſſen not, neither vary, what I fay unte 
thee, bur declare fully and undJaunredly. ! Tho grear Men, and 
who will complement with thee. 2 Withour Exception, who eve: 
be. the Man among the J/zralites. n That hath his Heart rivered to 


gently tear your enchenting and divining Habits, » Either from the 
Arms of ſuch as put them on when they conſulred with theſe Seducers. 
Or, may be the Seducers might ordinarily wear rzem to be known 
whar they were. o You held rhe Souls of rhoſe that heard you as Cap- 
tives. Or, as bewirched wirh your Enchantments and Pleaſures, bur 
T will ſer them free; ſome I will enlighten to diicover your Frauds, 
ethers I will undeceive by ſending them into Captivity. 

21 Your  kerchiels alſo will I tear, and deliver 4 my 
people- out of your r hand, and they ſhall be no more in 

-our hand to be hunted; and ye ſhall know that 1 am 

the LORD. 

2 See v. 18. 4 God owns them, at leaſt ſome among them ; tho 
all were not his, yet he had a people among them. # Power ot their 
Sed uctions. | . 


22 Becauſe with « lies ye have made the #t heart ol the Cavie, nor can frame a al 
4 ſuch Gods, whar greatrer Tropicty than this roadh=: eto idols, and for- 
take God- the only rrue God and Saviour ? 
their Averineſs to God, Idolatry draws the Man more and mos 
him 'from the 


the « righteous fad, whom | have not x made fad ; an 


not return from his wicked way, by || + promiiig 
] 

« Diametrically oppoſing what my Prophets told to my People in 
my Name. 7 The” Soul, which in weak ones received ſome fadning 


” of Grief, to ſee ſo many contradict the Lord to their own Run.! 


# Who keep my Law, and have r<1peCt ro all my Precepts, tho none| 


Idols, and yet comes to the Prophet, as if *twere to know what were 
; beſt ro be done,and wha: will be the ite of thete Times and Things. 0 
I will anſwer him, bur lirtte to his SatisfaGtion or Safety ; ſuch Ant 
wer ſhall ſech receive, as in ſeeing they ſhall nor fee, Ge. þ 1 will 
declare the Greatneſs of their Sin and Punilhinent, they waltipited 
Tdols, this their Sin, T will multiply their Sorrows : the firft ran 
into Darknets cf Idojatry, I will leave them to the Darknef6 of Nt- 
fery. I wil! give Anſwer but in juſt Judgment, an4 with ſevere Re- 
proots and Menaces, and Commands. 


Chap. XIV. 


ha 


the hone of Tirael in t 
all s eſtranged irom nm 


) 
heart, r. becauſe they are 
enctr idols, 

+ Convince and pierc2 their very Hearts, or lay op2n what 15 11 
their Hearr, and diicover their Hypocriſy, and Enpiety. » LHlave 
ihnnetully fallowed Idols wiich now in their Diltreff, neicher knw 
remedy; and what Folly it is to chooſe 


F That I may 74 take 


s Minds thar 11:reafe 


Lord. 
6 © Therefore fay unto the e houſe of Ifracl, Thus faith 
the Lord G OD, « Repent and x turn || your ſelves trom 


» . . .* * bl y 19 * q '. _ . A s V4... fn V *CN1730 
 Impreflions from your Lies ; in the ſtrongeſt and wilelt twas m tter} kay ido's, and turn away your 7 taces from all your 


130mMInations. 


* To theſe Men, the Elders, who e're they are, give Charge tf:ar 
| 


can fulfil the Law ; cheuprighr and muſt, - avain'” whom you do thun | they repent, avd by them ſend word to the refdue of th e Hoaſe ot 


der out your Woes, bur I know vetcer how to dittribute my Orders ;; 7 


:.05 that they do fo roo. «u Be ſorry and teſtify your Sorrow tor 


I never commiſſioned, nor ever will commiſuon, any Prophet to tad-jfuch yins, x Renounce them for the tuture, ceate to bz Idolaters. » 


den the Heart of a juſt one, vino needs and 15 fit for Encouragment,' L-c your viltble Carriage in reforming all be ſeen coo. 


Amead 


or to threaten where they ſhould promiſe. » Your Fjatteries per-' Heart and Ways, let nor your Heart be towards Idols ia point of 
{wade the worſt to think they are in a good way, need not repent and Religion nor your Prathice in point of outward Deportment bc 
recurn, and fo their Hearts harined in Wickedneſs, their Hands do ' vicious and immoral. 


work ir. God would convince and tura the Wicked,but you confirm 


them that they return not from Sin ; you affure them, but "tis with. 
lying words, that they ſhall nor dic by Peſtilence, nor Famine, nor | 


Sword, but hve and proſper. 
23 Therelore * ye ſhall ſee 2 


and ye ſhall know that I az the LORD. 


z See Chap 12. 24. Either theſe Prophetefſes, wich the Prophets of > 


the ſame ſtainp ſhall periſh in the day of Calamity, and rhe Mileries 


that they perſwaded others to ſlighr and contemn. Or elie, if ihey 


live, they ſhall live to ſee all theic Predictions of Profperity vaniſh, to 
{ce the Righteous, whom they threatned, eſcape, and the Wicked, 
them, they ſhall ceaſe for ever, and pretend no more Vitions. Your 
more be able ro keep up any Power over, or Intereſt in my People. 
Not one juſt righteous Soul ſhall ever grieve, or apprehend cauſe of 
Fear from what you threaten, and the Unrighreovs ſhall no more joy 
in the ExpeCtation of theſe lying Promites. All ſhall know that I am 
the Lord, who fuifil Promiſes to the Juſt, and execute Threats on 
the Bad. 


CRAP. AMV 


fo repent ance for fear ef juagment, 6—11. Goas irrevocnoie 1:nrence of 
bringing faw/ine upon thm, 12—14. Of noijom beaſts, and a d.ſiroing 
ſword, 15—18. Of peſtilrnce, 19—21, A remnaus jhall be prejcied 
Ter the comfort of othcrs, 22-23, 


-FlHcn * came + certain 6 of the elders of c Uraci 
unto me, and & fac before me. 

a And Hb, That we need not enquire the preciſe time of rhis Pro- 
phecy. 6 Men of Note,that were in Office and Power among theJews, 
called here Elders, ©&s. c Who were yet in 7eruſalem,not theElders 
who were now, and had been ſometime in Babylon. & Chap. 8. 1. 

2 And the word of the LORD came unto me 
laying. 

3 Son of men, theſe e men have f ſet up their g idols 


3 1 their heart, and put the + ſtumbling-block of their ini- 
flat Quity before their face : ſhould I be 7+ enquired of at all 
be ing. Dy them £ 

J "y- e Who probably were come from Jeruſalem, ſent by Zedekiah, and 
- 2 mentioned by Jeremiah, Chap. 51. v. 59. ſome of the Courtiers who 
£2 moreout of Curiofity than Religion, give a Vitit to this famous Pro- 
We Phet. f Reſolved Idolaters, their Heart was totally addi&:(d to their 
x I Worſhip and Ceremonies, immerſed in it. g Dunghil-Gods. 


* Their Idols ſo expreſt, becauſe they were both the Obje& of their 
Sin, and Occaſion of their Ruine ; they account theſe Idols to be 
Gods, and Worſhip, fear truſt in, and plead for them ; this is their 
Sin, and ere long this ſhall bring'Ruine on them. 7 Can theſe Men 
Icriouſly conſult me? Is it fir I ſhould give Counſel to obſtinate, re- 
iolved Sinners, who come to enquire but will not hearken ? Should I 


help them in their Diſtreſs, who depend on Idols which I hate ? 

4 Therefore & ſpeak tinto them, and & ſay unto / them, 
bus faith the Lord God, + Every 2 man of the houſe 
[[rael » that ſetteth up his. idols in his heart, and 
the ſtumbling-block of his iniquity before his 
and cometh to the prophet, o I the LORD will 


Credir ſhall be gone, and you found falſe Dreamers, you ſhall never 


1 
1 
[1 


. * a | 
no more vanity, nor divine ' 


C:vinations : for ] will deliver my people out of your hand, 3 


' 


-- 


7 For + every one of the houſe 
 ſtranyer that fojourneth in lfrae), 
himfelt from me, and fetteth up his 
and putteth the ſtumbling-block of 


! 


idols in his heart, 
his iniquity before 
tace, and c cometh to a prophet to enquire of him 
concerning me, I the LORD will anſwer him by 
{eli 

Every Jew of the Sezd of 4rabam. a Every Profelite. 6 With- 
raws himie!7 from me and worſhips Idols, keeps them in his Heart 


w 
[On 


of Ifrae!, or of the 4 Ev. 
which b ſeparateth 248 16%. 


to the increale of their own Sin and my Diſpleature. « Yet forloori: * 


comes to (he Propher to enquire how his God reſenterh what to doy 


» * bas. . . - *f1- (0 '11 -1t } Te [ F 
whom they ſpake good of fall under Mileries ; this ſhall fo confound and what God wiil do with rhem, what they ſhou!d do, what they 


may expect, vet all this while dore on Idols, and refolutely hold on in 
unjuſt Prictices; they ſhall find by the anſwer, *cwas not the Pro- 
pher, but th: God ot the Prophet thar anſwered them, fo dreadful, 
tearching, and zftonithing ſhall my aniwer be. 

8 And I will fzt my &d lace againſt that man, and will 
make him a ec * tign and a f proverb, and I will z cut him 
oft from che 5 midſt of my people, and ye ſhall know 
that I 72 the LORD. 2 

d My diſpleaſed Face, my Wrath, which none can bear, the Phrafe 
Levit. 17. and 20. 3. and Chap. 15. 7. e Of Divine Vengeance pro. 


The ders of Iſrael as counſel of God, he anſwereth them according to the voked by Sin, and executed on rhe Sinner. f Of whom every body- 
multitude of their ido's ; and threatueth their ruin, 15. Exhorteth i thall ſpeak with Taunt and Curſe, Dc. 


| 


28. 37. . g Either by an im- 
mediate Stroke from Heaven, or eiſc in an undeniably vindictive way. 
> Openly, as what 1s done 1n the fight of all, or as one feparared from 
God's People by this dreadful Excommunication, and who ſhall have 
no Portion with them in this or the rext Life. 
o And 1t the ; prophet be deceived when he hath 
ſpoken a thing, 
rophet, and 1 will / ſtretch out my hand upon him, 
_ g will deſtroy him from the midſt of my people 
Itrael. 


7 Viz. The Prophet who makes this his Trade and Gain, the falſe 
Provhet,who ſpeaks all ferene and quiet, in hope of Reward for his kind 
Anſwer to thoſe that deſired to kear what might pleaſe them, more 
than what God commanded, promiſed, or threatned. & Permitted 
him to err, or juitly lefc him in his Bliadnefs, that he ſhall nor diſcerq 
his own ſelf-deceivings ; or elſe when ſuch Prophet promilſeth Good, 
and thinks Concurrence of all ſecond Cauſes rend to it, yet I will 


were in likelihood ſufficient, and *ewere no Preſumprion to hope the 
beſt, and if your prophets on this ground promiſed you Succeſs, yet 
they ſhall deceive you, for I would defeat and diſappoint them and you: 
ſo the ſenſe would not carry a moral and culpable deceiving, but a juſt 
defeating and diſappointing, or diſabling ſecond Cauſes, on which 
diſapointment of Hopes will follow. If Egzp:'s Arms had fo weak. 
ned the Bav3/onian, that none but wounded Men remained, yer the 
promiſe of your Eſcape ſhould fail you, O 7/-22/:tes, tor Fer. 27. 10, 
11. theſe ſhould riſe up and burn your Cirv. / Remarkably puniſh 
his Falſhood, and in Severity deſtroy him, 

19 And they ſhall bear the puniſhment of their iniquity : 
the puniſhment of the prophet ſhall be even as the puniſh. 
ment of him that feeketh unto him: 

There is ſo gieat Parity in the Folly and Impiety of both ſeducing 
Prophets, and the ſeduced People, rhar "tis hard to fay whoſe Sin 1s 
greateſt ; their Puniſhment ſhall be by the Lord made as like as city 
made their Sin, and both ſhall be cur off and deſtroyed. 

11 2 The » houſe of Iſrael may o go no more aſtray 


from p me, neither bs q polluced any more with all their 
7 if 
tant 


I the LORD have & deceived * thar © 


A 


r King? 
22. 23. 


diſappoint and fruſtrate, as 1/a. 44. 25. if the Confederacies to fave _ 


. ec —_——— = b 
wa 9790 OY ITI=— _— — I OO 


| 7 
Clap. XIV. 
trangreſſions : but that they r may be my people, and | 
raay be their God, faith the Lord G OD. 
m Afﬀlitiens ever tend to a good and neceſſary ET:& or End for 
God's Glory, and his Peoples Good ; and ſo 'tis here. » Which are 
the Seed bf Faceb, and my People. o They have wancred as Sheep, 
which natnrally are apt to go out of the way, and much more when 
ſeduced and drawn out of the way,but Afllictions rend to reduce them 
from ſhcepiſh wandrings. p Their only God and Saviour. q Idola- 
try is a great Pollution, and ever attended with other Tranſgreſlions 
and Iramoralicies, which defile alſo; now by their p:etent Calamities 
God will open their Eyes to ſee and abhor them. » In Name and ex- 
ternal Profcflion they were God's People, but they had forgotten their 
R: lation, and the Dury of it to Godward, now by theſe preſent Cor- 
rections they ſhall be diſpoſed to own and love, to obey and walk with 
him as he is their God, and they lis People. 
will have on my own People. 


:2 E The woid of the LORD came again to me, 

ſaying, 
tHeb. pre- 13 Son of man, s when the * land finneth againſt me 
varicating by + treipatling « grievoully, then 7 will T ſtretch out mine 


+. cg hand + upon it, and will break the ſtaff * of the bread 
*T ey. 26, thereof, and will ſend famine upon it, and will cut off man 


26. and & beaſt from it. 

Ia.3.7. 5 At what time foever. ? Put for the Men that dwell in the Land. 

Ch. 4 16. « As an hypocritical back-ſliding People, that give fair Promiſes, but 

and 5. 16. perform them nor, rather a& contrary to their Profeſſions, as the He- 
brew intimareth. « Againſt it. » Scarcity and Famine are Eff-Qs 
of the power of God, which makes rhat barren for the ſins of a 
People, which otherwiſe would be fruitful. z Make the Land utterly 

* Fer.15. 1, deſolate by famiſhing the Catrie as well as their Owners. 


14 Though theſe a three * men, 5 Noah, « Daniel and 
d Job, were in it, they ſhould e deliver 5»: their own 
fuls by their righteouſneſs, ſaith the Lord GOD. 


2 Moſt eminent for holy and upright walking with God, very dear 
to God, exceedingly deſirous of the Welfare of others, powerful in 
Prayer. 6 Who 'tis probable prevailed with God to fpare the World 
for ſome Ycars, and ſaved his near Relations when the Flood came. 
© Who prevailed for the Life of the wite Men of Chaldea, and d who 
dajly offered Sacrifice for his Children, and at laſt reconciled God to 
thoſe that had offended. e Theſe ſhould not prevail for any one of 
this wicked Generation, it ſhould ſuffice them that their Righteoul- 
nets ſaverch themſelves, this contumacious Generation of Sinners I 
would not be intreated for. 


Feb. 15 T If If cauſe f noiſfome beaſts to g paſs through the 

evil beaſt. Jand, and they | ſpoil it, ſo that it be deſolate, and no 

ih * man may + paſs through becauſe of the Beaſts: _ 

On” # Noiſome Beaſts are one of the great Plagues, or Armies that God 
hath aiways at his Command. g To range over the Land and ſpoil 
their Catte], devour thcir Servants and Children, and deſtroy T ravel- 
ters, and make it as a Wilderneſs. þ Without much Danger, and 
great Guards that may repel the the wild ravening Beaſts. 


+ Heb. is 16 Twngh theſe three men were Þ in it, as I : live, faith 
-— "Wig the Lord G OD, they {hall deliver neither & ſons nor 
7 0: «4. daughters ; they only ſhall be delivered, but the land fhall 


be / deſolate. 

i A form of Speech in which God by Oath confirms what ſpeak- 
eh, and *tisſuch an Oath as becomes him only who is Life, and can- 
not die. & Neither Sons that ſhould perpetuate their Families, and 
are the Support of Houſes, nor Daughters, the tenderneſs of whoſe 
Sex and Age does make and keep Parents AﬀeQions fervent towards 
them. No near Relation ſhould eſcape on their account. / 7. e. Moſt 
dcſolate, as the Heb. uſe by an Abſtratt to expreſs the Superlative 
Degree, Iſa. 1. 7. and 64. 10. 

17 & Or if 1 » bring a » ſword upon » that land, and 
ſay, Sword, p go through the land ; fo that q I cut off 


man and r beaſt from it : 

» He is Lord of Hoſts, and hath the Militia of all the World in 
his Hand, the Sword js the Right of the King of Kings. n Raiſe 
War, and ſend Enemies to invade it. « What Land foever it be. þ 
Tho inanimate things have not Ears to hear, yet God ſpeaks of them 
ſomerimes as if they had Ears to hear, and Underſtanding to diſcern ; 
hereby intimating to us his over-rulivg Power, Wiſdom, Juſtice and | 
Sovereignty. 7 Men cut off Men in War, yet here God takes it tO | 
himſelf. he doth it by Men r Tho Wars chiefly deſtroy Men, yer 


ſola:107; 


the Beaſts of the Field go to wrack too, the Beaſts that are ſerviceable ' 
The Eaſtern Na. | Prophet minds them of to humble them, and awaken them to Fruit- | 


tions * have bronghr ſtore of Camels, and many Elephants into che | fulneſs 3 Wil you boaſt your ſelves of this ? 5-One ſingle Branch of | 
Wars; belide the {laughter of theſe in Fight, the Spoiler waſting his ; | 


in Wars are waſte, as Horſes, and Beaſts of Burden. 


Enemy both ofren deftroy whole Herds and Flocks. 

18 Though theſe three men ere in it, as I live, 
faith the Lord G OD, they ſhall deliver neither ſons 
nor daughters, but they only ſhall be delivered chem- 


ſelves, 

19 © Or #f / I ſend a t peftilence into that land, and 
£ pour out- my fury upon it x in blood, to cut off from 
it man and y beaſt - 

« Diſeaſes are ſent whenever they come, eſpecially waſting Diſeaſes, 
which empty Narions and Cities apace. 
God's Bow. #« Not drop, or diſt] on a People in ſmall meaſures and 
by leifure., bur 3n great meaſures amd haſtily, as Waters are poured 
out of a Vetle] all at once almoſt. 
War, bur here, and in many other places, it denotes Death and De- 


rhe fame Petilential Diſeaſe which kills Man, bur, either Dzath of 
Men by Vettilence emprieth che Nation, that there are not Men to 


EZEKIEL 


This EX:& the Rod bk 


g 
Chap.Yi 
30 Though Noah, Daniel and Job, Wwero in it, as | 4 
live, faith the Lord G OD, they ſhall deliver neither ſo 
nor daughter ; they ſhall bat deliver their own & fouls by 
their righteouſneſs. | 
Y hen PUrn OT _ - Not meritins the deliverance bur 
yet the Juſtice and Mercy of God ſhall ſurely keep them fi ons 
in the Puniſhment, who were kept from —— mn _ 


2I For thus faith the Lord GOD, & || How much| 0: þ b: 
more when I ſend my four fore Judgments upon Jeru.** þ * 
ſalem, the ſword, and the famine, and the noiſome 


no a the peſtilence, to cut off from it man ang 
Calrl 7 

a Thoſe three Men with their Feſt Intereſt, ſhould not be able to 
keep off one of the ſour, much leſs able to keep off ell four when | 
commiſſion them all to go ar once, as I will, nay have done againſt $2 
Jeruſulem, to cut off the obſtinate, incorrigible ones amidf it. F 


| 22' © Yet behold, » therein ſhall be left c a remnant 


Jeruſalem, even concerning all that I have brought upon 


that ſhall be 4 brought forth, borb ſons and daughters: Þþ : 
behold, they ſhaii come forth unto e you; and - ſhall J 
f ſee their g way, and their doings: and ye ſhall be 4 
þ comforted concerning evil that I] have brought upon ; 


le, 
6 In Feruſalem it ſelf, and in the Lartl. «c Some that eſcape, for tho 
none could prevail with God to prevent the emptying the City and 
the Land, and cutting off the moſt,yet this was not to extend ro the 
utter cutting off and DeſtruQion of all. 4 By the proud, crue!, and 
barbarous Conqueror bringing them in Nakednels, Chains and in 
Contempt, more grievous than Death it ſelf. e Thoſe naked hunger. 
ſtarved, derided Captives, through Heats and Colds, through Sands 
and redions Travels, ſhall come, ckough with great Regrer, to you, to 
Babylon, whoſe Condition they willeither envy, or wiſh it their own 
f See them, and conſider and know. g What itis hath brought them, 
how finfully evil 'twas againſt God in their own Land, and how miſe. 
rably evil *tis and mult be with them in the Enemies Land. þ Nor 
rejoice 1n your Brethrens Miſery, but comforted in remembrance of 
the good Hour you reſolved to obey God, in yielding up to Chal. 
deans ; comforted in the fenſe of your State much better chan theirs 
and in the Vindication of you from the black Aſperſtons the falſe |Þ 
Prophets and their Followers caſt on you ; and finally comforted in : 
that your Return at ſet-time promiſed, ſhall in its time be as ſurely Þ s 1 
made good, as you ſee the Threats are made good ; God will be as true ; 
in his Merciesas he hath been in his Judgments: this is matter of pre. | 3 
ſent Afiition and Grief, that of Comfort and Hope. 


23 And z they ſhall & comfort you, when ye ſee ! 
their ways and their doings : and ye m: ſhall know » that 


I have not done without cauſe, all that I ! 
faith the Lord G O D. 1ave done in it, 


; That farvive the Siege, Famine and Ruin of Jeruſalem, and arg 
brought to Babylon. k Either confeſling their = - nn 
they had done, juſtifying the wiſe courſe they took who yielded, con 
demning the Folly of hardning themſelves againſt God, his Judgments, 
and his Prophers, or be matter of Comfort, affording to you juſt 
ground of comforting your ſelves. 1 Underſtand it in the Effc&s of 
it upon the ruined Jews. Or, in the Relation whick they will make 
both of their Sins and Sufferings in the Land of Canaan. m You of 
the firſt Captivity, you that obeyed my Voice and ſubmitted to the 
Babylonian Yoke. n Be fully ſatisfied that I have had but too much 
cauſe, and moſt juſt Reaſon for all that I have done againſt Fers/alm 
and its Land, and Inhabitants of both ; you ſhall know my Hand, and 
as you fee] the Weight, ſo Fou ſhall ſet the Juſtice of it too again! 
them, and the Mercy of it towards you. ; 


CHAP. XV. 


By the unmeetneſs of the vine-branch for any work, 1 —— 5, is ſhewed tit 
rejeftion and utter ruin of Jeruſalem for their ſius, G——=8. 


I ND the word of the LORD came unto me, 
laying, 
2 Son of man, What is the @ vine-tree more than any 


tree, or than a b branch which is among the trees of the z 
foreſt 2 


a The Houſe of 1ſrae! is often compared to a Vine, which when 


| TI 


janſt,. tf FP \ Q  Youg FA 


way 


take Care and provide for ths Beafts ; or, rather, becuuſe when Peſti- 


barren or fruitleſs, is very contemptible and unprofitable, This che 


a Tree in the Foreſt, is of moxe uſe and worth than the whole Vine- 
tree 15, except for its Fruit. - 


3 Shall c wood be taken thereof to do any work? 
or will ez take a &d pin of it to hang any veſſel there- 


Tg 2d ha OR A. - 7 
ge} Agree] Lo es *s ; k . 
> l 
k i _— he Wu ___- C / S ” «4 "IL" 
; x PIEF > « as. 3 Drs T5167 \ A ; _”—ae ot Eun en Ti IRS Los G dt 5 ena > 

Ds SO NL Ty RE CO rye $9 NO I Ido 0 |-—* 6 pt Es gee —_ ES . FF * FE Ye hs Pas 2 RE Re WEIS. "8 FAN 

ug Sr © * RATED OY UI LIN” "+ 2 Xx. -; » Be HE BOS Sls. if on 3s SY SO IV EL. FP) gl Vf I 
PE I er nr ORs, I Ee omg — OD ir ET ir $0: 70G Eee Crap. 

REY D ” - 


on ? . 

c Is there one good piece of Timber in the whole Vine fic for buwi- 2 

ding a Houſe, or Ship, as there is in the Oak, Elm, or other wild Fo- t 

reſt-Trees ; Will it furniſh the Husbandman, or Soldier, or Seaman c 

with fit Materials for their uſe, in Peace, War, or Sea ? a Will it af- ( 

ford a Pin to drive into a Wall or Poſt,on which you may ſafely faſten f 

Ipec any weight ? Ir is ſo weak, that 'tis uſeleſs as to this. F T 

t God's Arrow thar flies from 4 Behold, * it is e call ns-vh fie Oc f Copel ; +. fire "0 Z 

devoureth both the ends of. it, and the mialt of ic is burnt: MY » 

x Sometime Blond does denote 15 1t + meet for any work 2? 118 TW < 

e When for its Barrenneſs *tis cut down, 'tis fit only to be burnt. © 7 A 
Arnftion of Men, tho not by the Sword. » Not thar Beaſts die of |f Nor is it a choiſe Fewel neither ; a little Branch of a Tree of the h 
Foreſt is better and affords more Fewel. 8 tf 

5 Behold, when it was whole it was + meet for 104 i : 

work : how much leſs ſhall it be meet yet for ay work,” TE ' 


lence waſterh M-n, Murrains and plague of Catte! from the ſame in- 
fected Air, and from th= Eland of God, waſte the Bealts allo. 


when the fire hath deveured it, and ic is burned ? 
6 The: 


8 


> 
Z 
7 
Ed 
E 
's 
* 


S 
s S 
bi AOL As 


” CE . 
: 2 = - {1 
4 $7 —_ = 2 ; : 4 - = Y , . ILY . 4 hy 5 
+ 2 k F 7 « as Fe S-7 OE. Ny MOTT. VE" ” . 5 
Q =, « - 7 F © td Pe > , =, LET ps LES, A, WS ORE EET 0 >a SE. KS. gh REI 4 MS Went - - 
- Ho . "y "T2 L " # Ca. 3 =S . 6 « RY Oey « + » o > -—I < Se tf - X36 ; —_ - 

A GPPD a a G> b_ NF ln ITO INTO - DRY LE <2 on Rad B81 oy PETE FnY I MET ID. $75 "2% RFP WOT ICE IX 7 poi WES bis oo OE AR ; , og ; > 
I fv Ne rh : BY KATE SA IGIAGER Kt J. B-"Joho! Fr "05 . : who OE Te i > RE ICE ST ON DE ad & —_ _—_ —— "SE FRET : S; 18755 
EE ET TR +. © OD <4 rs SY CORE Ton OP TIER & Sa ; o s £3. 


” * & 0 T v» = c z 8.5 FOB 08, We 6s 
- E LY LY ; ” & 2 7" = a : *, 7 | 
ip. XVI EZ EKIE Ft. Cinp. XVI, 
| 2 refore thus faith the Lord GOD, As the/their Sins, Gen. 15, 16. © Sometimes the iI1 Nature of a Father 7s 
; 6 vil 0 the Z treees of the foreſt which [ have| corrected in the Child by the {weerneſs of the Mother 3 but you Jerrs 
Pg agg =, for fewel, fo will ] ; giv e the ithabi- hea not ſo happy, your Mother as bad every whit as-your Father 5 
g1Ven ; 


tans of Jeruſalem, 

ither thus, when the 
;£ fruitleſs, it is leſs worth than the Foreſt. 
O Houſe of 1/-ael, in my account: Or elſe, as Trees 
for the Fire in all the leſs valuable parts of them,ſo 
ches and Body of the batren Vin i 
Deſigned and doomed for Food to the Fire. 
have kindled a Fire, which ſhall burn every b 
generate and fruitleſs Vine. 


7 And * I will Z ſet my face againſt them 
-/ go out from one fire, and another fire ſhall de 
and z ye ſhall know that I am the LORD 
my face againſt them, 


2 


troubled them, 
I Kings 19. 17, Yer. 48.43 
7 You thatare in Babylon, and hear what miſchiefs 
r/alem one after another, ſhall know 'tis my 
our upon them. 
8 And I will make the land 
they have -f committed a 6 
GOD. 
7 Chap, 6. 14. ſzeeo Not one ſingle Treſpaſs, 


ſo perperually rreſpaſſing that 
with greateſt Aggravation, 


CHAP. Xy. 


a new-born miſerable infant, 
Jeruſalem, 1 —<$, Gods ſpecial love to them, 
unthankfulneſs, their whoragym and idolatronus cont 
Jeere judgment upon them, 35—43. for their 
SaMmariggs, ga—— 59. A promiſe 
the end, C0— 63, 


T » defol 
creſpaſs , 


By the femilitude » 


— 


oth command 
ry elegant Deſcr 


In the moſt Unpa 
God was the moſt unth 

2 Son of man, 
nations, 

c Declare to rt 
ſalem, to theſe d 
State theirs w 
Nation of the J 
know; it was 


ful and rebellious. 


hem thatare with thee, and to t 
E<lare by Letter, to tho 
as in their In 


Called here Ab 
Idolatries, ſpiritual A 


neſs, changing her G usband, Fey. 2, 


7M ruſalem, Thy h F birth 3 


and thy n 
* thy 7 father 


& was an 1 Amorite, 


the Trurh of 


hb Th 
Thy Roo 
, the 
ou did 
frheir 


ſt 


Called him, when he 


» Hof. 24% 14. with Ver . 
» the Jews Anceſtors 


ny of them forgor Abraham's God 
8)Prian Tdolatry, and were 
refer it as 2 


as well we may call ſuch 
» Matth 


© AMOritesas moſt powe 


among them ; ir Was the Amorire; Which were fi 


Vine 15, as the wild Trees of the 


PAtts, IF — 
ſims execeding Sodems and 
of mercy and reſtauration to them in 


c caule Jeruſalem to know her 4 


faith the f Lord GOD unto 
atiVity zx of th 


to a grea- 
2 $4 Amos 5, I9 
are heaped on 7e- 
Anger and Fury poured 


ate, becauſe} P 
? faith the Lord 


but they have been 
it ſeemed a continued AQ, and all done 


s repreſented the ſlate of 
Their contrary 
34. Goa; 


and uncexemplified Folly in her Lew. 


g Je. 
e land 
a 


among them ; 


their 


» 2s vey, 2. Or, Perhaps in more 
roud Ciry, who 
ch the Jews counr. P 
ine Habita. 


t whence 


lace where 
uſe , alll y 
Vitious Na- 
ous things, as vile 
rophet refer |; 


If you 
we reve. 


- 
I 
I- 
a@ 


Fathers; 


ighty, ſo 


Foreſt, 
tree ; ſoere you, 
of the Foreſt are 
ar? all the Bran. 
e, which you are O Feruſalemites, þ 
7 For by their Sins rhey 
arren Branch in the de. 


3 they ſhall 
vour them: 
when I fer 


abomi. 


nd thy | q 


. . 


| was 


3 


nor r ſwadled at all. 


othis for j 


Out in th 
in the day that thou walt 


wide Field, where 
rit, and tear the 

as Unlovely, 

putrifying, 


d 


and worthleſs, - 


I 
and offenſive to th 


# Afﬀeer th 
veller, or 


©|thou art to co 


panying it to effe& what i 
and it was done, 
7 * I's have - cauſed 
d, and thoy haſt z in 
me to 


breaſts are faſhioned 


thou waſt » naked and ba 


of 75 P, 
Years they grew to fix h 
beſide W 
earSold ; fo th 
fulfilled. 


ture thou haſt come to 
and terrible to thy Nej 
a D 


Ineſs of the 
ll thy Nei 


the choiceſt Bleſſings of Divine Providence, 


ling up 


deſcribes the Beaury and 


when p 1 
thee, behold, 7 thy 


L 


vile in thei 


thy nativity, » * 
Vas not Cur, neitl 
|| fupple thee: tho waſt 


2y I called 
you began to mult; 
Egyptian Bonda 
time, it was a helpleſs and miſerab! 


y, and 


thee, to do r an 


tothe &Z loathi 
born. 


e Street of City or Town, no 


Evouring wild Beaſts are 
helplefs Wretch to 


and in abhorrence of thee 
e Beholder. 


- manner of Man God here ſpeaks, aliudin 
ike Pharah 


undance of God's [ 


Z + excellent 
» ande] 
re 


For Multicude they are com 
ihing, they are ] 
the Goodn 


ination, civii Converſe, an4 
| it The Daughters 
. 6, 

Such is your Race, O 
. "roo. 

in the day chou waſt * Ho! Ak 
2r waſt thou p waſh. T 
nDt 7 falted at all, | Or. when 
29% 4 Pi ce ac a4 -9 [lookea Ups 

On Cleo, 

Abraham to leav 
'y into a N 
ge : 
ere 15 greac 
Care of che 
of God to. 
ould nor hele 
d Aliegory. The pre. 
? Born in Blood, unples. 
n, and periſhe,none wa ſhe 
I purged away t 
c< up, n11S'd, provided 
rying, abſterſive an 
ſtrengthen the ne 
Y 
,and 
eceiſary rn be 


2aut'y 
,ThaT 


y of theſe unto 
ut Chou waſt x caſt 
ng of thy perfor, 


e: b 


TS x Gain a the þ word of the LORD came unto me done, if the more needful were done ft might be well enough ; bur 
2 A ſayin 8 poor Infant, ir hears of no Body to do any one of them for irs Healch 
: adre? , jand Life. , To ſhew any Tenderneſ; of Heart towards ir 7 Pur 
a Heb. nd, frequently and properly enough rendred as here £zain,\ our of doors, expoſed to perth 2nd ſtarve with Hunger and Cold. 

nor pointing out any particular time w ren it Came to the Prophet. Y As far from Likelihood of Relief as from the Siohe 


of Men; nor 
Door, but in 
likeſt to comes 
tempt of thee 
as Joathſom , 


Cat fome Man's 


Pieces. » In con 


8 to ſome Tra. 
the good Sama: 


Purpoſed ro fave 
ghr the Efe&, I took care 
"* 15 repeated, both to ſer 
ove, and to work our 
intimate the Stabiliry 
raCc?. f Itfounds like 
» HE gave that Life, he ſpake 
thee ro multiply as the 4 buq of 
creaſed and waxen 4 great, and —_— 77 
, eb. 
ornaments: thy m mb 
15 gr Own, Wher Cas millicn, 


nne hair » 
b t Heb. or. 


I5.sc. 
Pared to rh 


ike the Bud in the 


nd rich Veſtmencs ſet off a 
in Enterpriſes, rich 


grown up and 
ly affianced to 
C, whereas Baldneſ IS2a 
fled, and deſpiſed. 


» and 9 lookeg upon 
the time of lOve; and 7 


« ſpread 


Chap. XVI. 


E Z BE 


« ſpread my ski;t over thee, and covered thy 7 naked- 
neſt yea, 1 nfware unto thee, and *-entred into a CoVe- 
har. with thee, 7 ſaiththe Lord GOD , and thou 6 D6ce-! 


melt mine. 

> See 2, 3, of the Phraſt. This ſecond paſſing by may well be 
urderificed bf God's vifiting them and calling them out of Egypr.. 
» See the Phraſe, vcr. 6, © The Time of thy Miſery was the Time of| 
Love and Pity in me towardsthee,candthe Time ofthy grown beautt- 
lied State was the Tire of my Love of Delight, when I rejoiced in 
thee, and efpouſed thee ro be my Wife- Thy Time, #.e. the Seaſon 
firtelt for the Diſcovery of my Purpoſes towards thee, was the Time © 
Love, which is expreſs'd in what follows in the Verſe. s 7. « Be- 
trethed thee, as Ruth 3. 9. and Dent. 22.39. engaged by Marriageto 
Ive, clieriſh, prote&, and ſafeguard. 5 What was aid would be 
thy Reproach, my Love and Bounty covered ; I clothed thee with 
Sroils of Egypt, and gave thee Flocks, with the Wool whereof thou 
mightcſt cloche thy ſelf. IF you take it figuratively, I covered all thy 
Filthineſs, and wa{h'd itaway. « Gave thee the greateſt, moſt invio- 
Jable, and ſolemneſt Aſſurance of my conjugal Love, Care and Faith- 


fulne%. : This was done at Mount S:nai, Exod. 19. 5. 7 The Truth 


ſo ſhe was a Miſtreſs over Kingdoms, as in David's, Solomon's, 5,1, 
ſhaphat's, and Hezekiah's time, 7 ; 

14 And thy 4 renown went forth among the 5 he. 
then for thy c beauty : for it was 4 perte& through m 
comelineſs which I had - put upon thee, faith the Lorg 
GOD. 

a Thy Name was great and honoured. & Not only next Neigh 
bours, but the uttermoſt Ends of the Earth, as 'cis ſaid of the Queen 


of Sheba, heard thereof. e The excellent Order of thy Governmen: 
Proſperity of thy Country, Riches of thy Merchants, and abundance 


f of thy Peace. «4 The beſt ofany upon Earth, no Nations had ſuch 


Laws as they had, or God fo near them ; it was perfe& in its king 
e The Form of the Civil Government and irs Laws, the Wiſdom. 
Juſtice and Courage of the Governours, the due Compliance of the 
Governed, and the Holineſs, Purity and Truth of their Religion ; a1] 
which concurred to make up this Beauty, and it was that God Put up. 
. on them, or ſet before them, Dent. 4. 7, 8. The viſible, outwarg 
 emblemarick Part of all was beautiful ; the inviſible, inward, and ipi- 
; ritual Part was much more beauriful, and ought to be duly conſfive. 
'red. Thus far what God did for het. 


I2a| 


of a!l which the Lord doth avow in this Form of Afſeveration. z By 
the Obligations of my Kindneſs thou couldſt be no leſs, by thy own vo-| 
izntary Att and Conſent, by Promite and Profeflion, Exod. 19. 7, $. 

0.2 Then b waſhed T thee with water: yea, Ic through: : 
iy waſhed away thy 4 + blood from thee, andI e anointed | 
thee with oi. 

« Hb. 4nd; this continueth the Allegory, and declareth what more | 
was done to prepare this Virgin for Advancement by this Marriage- | 
Covenant. 6 It was a very antient Cuſtom among thoſe Eirſtern Peo- | 
ple, as appears, K::th 3.3. Efin.2.12. tO purify Virgins who were | 
ro be efpouſed ere long ; and *tis likely the Prophet alludes ro that , | 
Exod 19. 10. 


Hev 


c The fame thing by a very uſual Figure repeated to | 
egutirm and illuſtrate what is ſpoken; the word in H:b,notes an abun- 
Gant Waſhing, a rinſing of whar was waſh'd to make it cleaner, it 1n- 
cludes a Bathing, as Lev. 15. 10. d Thy original and Birth-Pollution, 
which rendred thee diſpleafing to the Eye, and unfic for the familiar 
and loving Entertainment of a Husband. e Nor to Royal ſovereign 
Dienity, this isexprelv'd by another Word in the Heb. but anointed as 
they that were ro be married, as Riith 3.3, Efth. 2. 12,07 as thoſe who 
wes to come into the Preſ:nce of gtear and noble Perſonages, as Dar. 
30. 3. or as ſuch who would look with chearfuller Countenances, and 


. » l 4 of 
change their tad and mournful Deportment, as 2 Sam. 12+ 20. tis not 


I5 I g But thou did({t 4 truſt in thine 7 own beauty | = 
and * & playedſt the harlot becauſe 1 of thy renown, and b 43 


3mprobable it may allude to the Bounty of God toward the Jews in a 
Land fowing with Oil. Spiritually theſe refer to our cleantling by 
the Blood of Chriſt, and by his ſan&ifying Spirit. 

to I f clothed thee alſo with y broidered work, and 
ihod thee with þ badgers skin, and I ; girded thee about 


with & fine linen, and I 1! covered thee with fi]k 

£ So miſerably poor was this Creature, that ſhe had not clothes to 
her back ; he gave them who married her. g Rich and beautiful , 
Needlework of divers Colours, much above the State of an abjett In- 
Bnr, and ſuted to the Bounty and Riches of him who gave them. 
Thoſe Eaſtern People had an Art of curiouſly drefling and colouring 
(. Shinsof thoſe Beafts; of which they made their neareſt Feſtival- 
Shoes, and thele were for the richeſt and greateſt Perſonages to uſe. 
/ Both for Strength, Activity and Ornament. & Both ſoft, warm, 
and comely ; ſuch ſoft Raimenr, uſed in Kings Courts, intimates the 
Advancement ofthis Abje& to Royal State, as well as being delicately 
clothed. 1 Either covered, as the upper Garment covers all the reſt, 
or as Curtains of the Bed cover one who is laid to reſt within them : 
the Vail this Virgin was covered with when ſhe appeared abroad, and 
ber Furniture ar home, were very rich, and proportion'd to her Lord's 
Grandcur and Riches. : 

it | #2 decked thee allo with ornaments, and I » put 


bracclets 0 upon thine hands, and a p chain on thy 
nN2ct | 

; Ifthe Inventory of this Virgin's Goods given to her were hitherto 
of ſuch things 25 were nzedful for her Comtort, now follows a particu- 
Jar of whar {zrv<d for State and Magnificence, as the Phraſe, Job 40. 


19. ir alſo expreileth the Bravery of a Bridegroom, 1/4. 61. 10. the 
Carioficy and Fyxatiucls wherewith ſuch do dreſs themlclves. 


u Heb. 1 
mov, 5. 0. freely. o Which uſually were of Gold, as appears, Ger. 24. 
2. and Preſents madeof thele beſpeat oreateſt Reſpects. p Of Gold 
*1 token of Honour and Authority ; Gen. 41, 42. Dan. 5. 16. 
12 And I puta 9 jewel on thy forehead, and 7 ear- 
1 Or, rings in thine ears, and a [| beautiful 5 crown upon thine 
of beau! y. head. 

q It was many times of Siiver, but moſt commonly of Gold, and 
was of circular Fivure hanging by a String faſtned above the Forehead, 
in ſuch manner thar it lay or reſted on the Noſe , much eſteemed 
among the Eaſtern People, though of no account with us. » Golden 
Oriament hanging in the flethy part of the Ear. s A very rich and 
b-an:iful Crown, as Virgins eſpouſed and married had Crowns ſet on 
thei: Heads, Cart. 3. 11. foto complete the Solemnity, and make the 
Marnificence of theſe Nuprials full, a Crown of Beaury 15 ſet on the 
Hcad of this Jewiſh Nation now married to God. 

12 t Thus waſt thou decked with gold and ſilver, and 
thy raiment 225 of fine linen , and filk, and broidered 
work ;-thou didſt cat « fine flour, and honey, and oll : 
and thou x waſt exceeding beautiful, and chou didlt y prol- 
per intoa & Ningdom. 

; The Propher ſums up all again, partly to aver the truth thereof, 
partly to bring it to her remembrance, and partly to afle& her with 
Thainkfulneſs for what ſhe had received, and with Shame for waat ſhe 
had done. « It was the conſtant Courle of thy Dicr, to be provided 
thus with the choiceſt Food, which thou didft not by ſcanty Allowance 


talte of, but waſt filled with; theſe were Royal Dainties, as Gen. 49. 


0. x Snch Dier, with the additional Ornaments, would ſurely ren- 
der a periect Beauty, and to ſuch Perfection did this eſpouſed Virgin 
grow. 3} All Aﬀeirs ſucceeded well, and Events added to thy Great- 
neſs. z Not on'v compatt in at ſelf, but 


victorious over others, and 


7» poured(t our thy fornications on every one that pailed-, 2 M* 
by ; 2 his it was. i % 
z Hear O Heavens, and be aſtoniſhed at the Complaint God doth & 26 
make againſt this unthankſul,forgerful and perfidious Woman ! h Gre 1, to 
proud, laid aſide Humility, which became one raiſed from a moſt ab.(in dev 
ject Scate, caſt off the Modeſty, Chaſtity and Fidelity which became a;,;|* ( 
Wife. # It was not her own, but put upon her ; the owed it to the 8 
Love, Bounty and Care of God; but, forgetting this, ſhe accounts it OS 
her own, and then diſpoſeth ofit as ſhe liſts. k No doubt, with the © #3 | 
Incrzaſe of Wealth and Honour, the Lewdneſs of Harlors and Adul. K*. = £ 
tereſles increaſed too ; but here ſpiritual Harlotry , 5. e. Idolatry, is ©. KR * 
meant ; and to this Courſe did the wanton, unſtable, and ungodly | Yn \ 
Jews berake themſelves betimes from the Days of the Judges, and <ſpe. Þ 
cially, in the Jatter Days oftheir Kingdom, this People went a whoring Þ. # * 
after Idols. ! Some would read it, againſt :hy Renown, to the blaſtins Þ # * 
of thy Honour, but rather her Renown abroad drew to her Idolatrous kk 8 * 
Strangers, who brought rheir Idols with them, and acquainted the Þ "8 3 
Jews with the Pomps of their Idolatrous Worſhip. #2 Didſt readily 3 2” 
and profuſely laviſh thy Wealth, and proſtitute thy ſelf to them ; thy I 3 © 
Land, thy Cities, Jeruſalem it ſelf was full of the Idols, which the Na. ' Wi 
tions far and near did worſhip : every Stranger who paſled througz Þ a 
| thee might find room for his Idol, and Jdolatry ; and very like *twa th 
; thou didft infeCt every one with ſomewhat ofthine, as well as waſt in- ir 
 fe&ed with their Idolatry. » Thy Perſon, AﬀeCQtion, Riches, Reiigi. tf 
| on, all was at the Command and Service of every Adulterer, ſo imnu- A 
 dentiy vile and falſe was ſhe to God. _ 
16 And * ofo thy p garments thou didfſt 4 take , and, fHebllh» . 
7 deckedlt thy 5 high places with divers * colours, and MY ® 
playedſt the harlot thereupon: he # like things ſhall not FM * 
come, neither ſhall it be /o. | 
o Hers they were for uſe, by Gift of God, but ſhe Took'd on them 


as hers, without Reſpett to either the Giver, or Uſe intended. p Thos Þ ® 
coſtly , Royal Robes, the very Wedding-clothes, and Furniture. 7 As 


an Adultreſs that parts with the rich Gifts of her Husband to oblige 3 R 
an Adulterer. 7 By this ic appears how ſhameleſs ſhe was grown, that Þ ,# F; 
bluſh'd not to be known, one thar had turned her Husband's Bounty, Þ - &# x} 


that had abuſed the unparallel'd Kindneſs of her God, to the open and Þþ 


| publick Service of her Adulterer, her Ido]: Thus fhe turned her Glory 5 
into Shame. s Where both the Idol, his Altar, and Workhip, were © 


\fixed. * With thoſe beautiful Clothes and Furniture I put upon thee Þ # 

ro adorn thee, theſe haſt chou made the Carpersand Maalogs for he © « 
Honour and Service of Idols. #« So matchleſs is this Adultreſs, that , 
none ſhall befo impudent, and do like her; as there was none before kk, # 
her thar hath done fo to be her Example, fo ſhall there be none to fol- IR” d 


low her 1n theſe things wherein ſhe hath exceeded. LEOe#- vy 

17 Thou haſt alfo takea thy o - fair p jewels of — bl 
gold, and of my filyer, which I had » given thee, and all ,, 
s madeſt to thy ſelf 7 images of -- « men, and didſt com-;: &f 
mit x whoredom with them, th ch 
| 0 She forgot thePropriety was in God, ſhe reckon'd them her own, {AW » 
2 The word in Heb. is of larger Extent, and includes Veſſels, Inftru- 8 m 
ments, Furniture of all forts, with which ſhe was abundantly ſtord, Rar 
even from their Departure out of Egypt, when they ſpoil'd the £g1p. | 2 © 
tians, Exod. 11.2, where the ſelf-ſame Phraſe isuſed, and more tince Þ. $ m 


Solomon made Gold and Silver ſo common in Jeruſalem, 'with which © #3 © 


they made Veflels for uſe, and Furniture of all forts for Ornament. {© 3: 
9 the greater was the Sin of this Harlor, her Ingratitude, and her In- Þ $ V 
juſtice, that ſhe robb'd God, committed Sacrilege, that ſhe might have | 
Idols with which to defile her ſelf by her Idolatry. » Had ſhere- I & vw 
ceiv'd them of any other hand, the Wrong had been the leſs; bur the ÞÞ 
received then, every one of them, of the hand of God:: He gave her i V 
what the Egyprian; lent, what David won from Enemies, and wha {WE # 2] 
Solomon brought in by Traftique ; ſo Hoſ. 2. aggravates 1f-ae!'s Idolatry, Þ $ 


s Brutiſh Stupidity! to make an Idol, and account ic a God! «& Sta: ME a 
tues, Molten and Graven Images, not one ſingle Image, but many ; ſs T t! 
Idolatry , as Adultery, is boundleſs. # Idolaters had Male and ke- © «6 


male Idols; and this Idolatreſs here, as moſtly they did, doted on E I 


male Idols. Ir is not unlike to that chap. 8. wer. 14. which ſee : And WE fi 
poſſibly the Egyprian Idolatry with Oſiris, or Adonis, may be noted , @ n 
or ſome more lewd Image or Pourtrait of Priapws, which might bt A 


'confirm'd from ver. 26, and ch. 23. v.19, 20. x Provoked by ſuch 
Repreſentations to ſpeculative Uncleanneſs, and prepared for bodily | 
Uncleanneſs alſo, and proceeding to ſpiritual Adultery with thel* lt 
ſhametu] Images. «2 20. 

18 And tookeft thy » broidered garments, and z cove- FR © 
redſt them : and thou haſt ſet mine - oil, and mine # in- FE © 


cenfe before them. Ra”. 4 
» Mentioned wer. 10. given by him who eſpouſ® this Woman. - BK 
z Didſt clothe the Adulterers, with whom thou didſt commit Lewd- * Ur 
neſs, or didft clothe the Images which thou hadſt mrde, as was th: 
Cuffo a 


4 - d 


Y, 
ad 


oth & bo 
ew 29, 


ab. (in 


we 


SY" 
3-208 


£4. doms thou haſt not y remembred the days of thy * z youth, 


$15" 


ap. XVE. 


i-th rae Lord GOD. 


Tels. 
4 


pgs ters ; , whom thouhaſt & born unto me, and / * theſe haſt 


ba of thy whoredoms a ſmall matrer ? 


" livered them to cauſe them to paſs through 7he fire, for 


2 wounto thee, ſaith the Lord GOD ) 


| 23 2Vikeir Wickednefles. When they have filled up the Mcaſure of their 


£3 another upon them, as they proceeded from one Wickedneſs to ano- 


ro burn before them, Or uſed in their ſacrificing to their Idols ; or li- 


EZEKIEL. 


Cuſtom of Idolaters toſute Clothing to their Idols. # Either in Lamps, ing, and the former Words to the height of the Scituation, e 1oi- 
| 


bt 
— 


Temples, and Brothel-Houſes were in every Strect ; fo common 


4444 


terally didſt in thy Feaſt with thine Adulterous Lovets entertain them} W<re theſe Sins with the Jews , in erorv large Street capabi» of, 


with the 0111 gave thee. | 
P.,rr of what they cfered to Idols, or burnt in the private Houſe to 


make it the more grateful to the Adulterer ; as Prov. 7. wer. 16, 17. 
10 My + meat c alſo which I gave thee, 4 fine fioar, 

and oil, and honey, herewith I ted thee, thou hait even 

{:t ir before them for a e + ſweet favour; and f thus it was, 


- The Bread, all that was neteſſary and proper for thy Suſtentation 


b Burnt before the Idol : Incenſe being one; and frequented with much Com pany. 


iT 8s > - cv 0 " a > # _ 
Iims in Feri/ai;22 and her 


Cities. | 
25 Thou haſt buile thy high place at evory head ofthe 
way, and haſt g made thy beauty to be ablocred, and haſt 
þ opened thy feet to every ons that paſſed þ y, and multi- 
pied thy whoredoms. | 
f Not cont«nt with what was done in tlie Ciry, ſhe buile her Idols 
T<mples, and Stews inche Countrey, in Pls wheremany Wars or 


in general, which I gave thee, thou haſt fed thy Paramours withal. 


4 Here are particularly recounted the things God gave,and this Aiul-, 


Roads mer, whereſoever it was l:itzely Pailengers would com. 


A 
» 4 ; - Z 11S 
rhe Beauty of a ſhimeleſs Whor® is abhor'd 54 chem ro whom; 


{! " 58, 
NS O;- 


rereſs mitimploy<d both literaily and myſtically : ForT doubr not the | fers her ſelf. In he: high Plices every Pail-nger might meer hiso wn 
ws were Javiſh of the Fruits of the Divine Bounty, be*ſtowing rhem | God, nd worthip his own Idol, and then fati-fi his Luft wii wd 


borh on Adulterers, and on Idols. 


heir Adulterers, or to provide for the Idolatrous Prieſts, and their 
Families, vv hich could ſpend all rhis,” though the Idoi knew not of ir 
7 All which 15 {c]If-evident, plain, and needs no Pioof ; "tis undenia- 
ble. 
20 Moreover, thou haſt taken g thy bſonsand thy daugh- 


thou 2 ſacrificed unto them to be » - devoured : 1s 0 7his 


7 They were her's by Birth, and ſhou!d have been her's in 4ffettion, 
Care 2nd Preſervation : but as Idolatty is from the Father of Lies, the 


e To reconci'e the Idot, or to| 
prolong the Favour of the Ido}, orto give a pleafing Entertainnient to they wourd have admir'd dreſt in modeſty, 


Womer,, common as a Strrec; and this made AT-n abhor that Braury 
and dwells retir'd, 
Þ A modeſt expreſſing of the moſt iminudeft Pr Shice f jon and in- 
|at1ab'e Adulterefſes and Whores, which are ready tor every Comer, 
and cempt ſuch as tempt not them, v:r. 32, 33- 

26 Thou haſt alſo committed z fornication wich the 
Egyptians thy & neighbours, / great of fleſh, and haſt 
increaled thy whoredoms , to provoke me to #2 an- 
ger. 
{ Boch figuratively and literally underſtood, wor ſhipp'd F2yr:'s 
Gous, made Covenants wich them, keprup a Cominerce of Trade 


cld Murderer, 'tis even cruel, and ſpares neither Sons or Daughters. 
þ Thar are uſvally the Fathers Darlings, are always the Strength and | 
Glory of the Family, without ReſpeCt ro him that begat them, were| 
by this Adultercſ: deſign'd to pleaſe the Ido]. # Uſua'ly the Moth-r $| 
great Delight, whoſe tender Sex required better Uſage, unregarded, 
are by a cruel Mother in Idolatrous Abominations deſtroy'd. k Which 
were mine, born within Covenant, before the lewd Mother was di 

voiced ; born to be of my Family, and to ſerve and love me. / Theſe | 
very Children cf mine, tomy Diſhonour and Grief, to provoke me 
to utmoſt Anger, haſt thou deſtroy'd. #2 Not only conſecrating them 
to be Prieſts ro dumb Idols, Dunghi!-Gods, as ch. 20.26. and 2 Chron, 
33. 6. or IdoJatrouſly purityi.g them, called Luſtration, or which is 
moſt inhumanely cruel, burning them in Sacrifice to Molech, which 
Cruelty the Jews themſelves did barbarouſly imitare; 2 Chren. 28.0. 3. 
» To be conſumed to Alhes, being made a Burnr-Off-ring to the De il :, 
as Pſal. 106. 37. o Were thy Whoredoms a ſmall Matter with rthee,! 
thac thou haſt proceeded to this height of unnatural Cruclty, Or, 1s 
both Face and Heart fo hardned by an impudent Couric of Adultecies, | 
thar thou canſt dothis, asif it were no. great Matter? Wil} ſpiri'ual | 
Adultereſles, as well as bodily, thus hunt the precious Lite ? Could | 
ſuch commit the worſt, who were forbid to commir aiiy Murdei ? 


21 That thou haſt p ſlain my q children F, and r de 


s them” ; 

P Thy blind Superſtition call'd this Religion, and accounted it Sa- 
crifice, but Truth is, *twas unnatural Mu:dcr ; it 15 asif thou hadſt cur 
their Throat, ſomewhat worſe, becauſe it put them to greater Tor- | 
ture. The word is uſed 1/a. 57. 5.and Hof 5. 2. 4 Sons here, arc firſt 
born, which peculiarly were devoted to God ; he reſerved a ſpecial 
Right in theſe, and yet this cruel Mother, this perfidious Wife, this 


with chem, and proſtirured themſelves to their Luſts 00. & By Coha- 
bitation wile the S-rv1rade laſted, and by neara-fs of Place, when 
in Canaan. The Few ſh Nation r<rained too much Inclina: ion io thoſe 
Idolatrous and Luſtfui Neighbours -/ Policical'y they were great in 
Power, and 'ik= ro defend and h-Ip the Jew ; Naturally of big Moke, 
and Men of great Stature, and ſuc as intatiable Adu'rerciles v.ou! co- 
ver; ard theie Conſiderations induced Aiul-crous and F'oiatrons 7% 
rae] to unite with them 1G Loagues and Kel:gioa. m Fo a fiercenzls of 
Anger for 1's D-gree, and to anabhcrring and contemning of the Pere 
ſon, againft » hom this Ange» 1s ſtirr'd 


27 #2 Behold thertetoce, IT have » ſtretched out my 


” \t. FOR Y. 
GC AZ On. Y 


hand 0 over thee, and have: p diminiſhed thine ©rdinary * 2 Chr. 


food, and q 
thee, » * the {] daughters of the 5 Phutittines , w4ich are 
aſhamed ot thy lewd way. 


» Open thine Ey<s thou ſecure and fooliſh Adultereſs, fee what 
hath been done againſt thee, and conſider it is tor thy Lewdneſs , 
2 1 have chaſtis'd and puniſh'd already in foime meaſure. o Ir may 
be read againſt thee, In like Phraſe, 1/a. 5. 25. and 9. 12, 17 21, 
and 10. 4. expreiteth the punithing of this People. p Abated of 
chat p'ent1ful Allowance a kind Husband m:ide,and an unfaithful Wife 
abuſed : Ir refers to Scarcity ard Penury, wich whici. God did puniſh 
Idolairous Tſrarl,and this more than once. q Stirr'd up firlt ſuch to fight 
againtt tnem, and thzn gave Vittory to their Arms, that they might 
uſe the conquered as thev pleas'd ; ſeat them inco Caprivity inco an 
Ea: mics Land, where they that hatred them, ruled over them, ani no 
doubt ſuch would ſatisfy their own Luſts on theſe Captives. » Eirher 
'ris an Hebraiim, the Darghters of the Ph117,' im:s for the who'e Na- 
tion, or elſe ſome particular Citics and Principalicies of the PliiliBines, 


ſacrilegious Adultereſs, ſacrificeth theſe to her Idols. r Either gave 
them to the Idols Pricſts, or rather with her own Hands gave them, | 


which quzrrei'd with, and prevailed agiinſt the Jews, when God had 


been ſe provoked by the Sins ofthe Jews. s ITdoaters, bur in this ho- 
neſt-r than tie Jews : They were conſtant to rheir awn God, and dil 


z.e. led them through the Fire, if luſtrared, or put them inro the Idols! gr as the Jews, lewdly go a whoring wirh every Ido! they ſaw. : Will 


Arms of Braſs or Iron, which greſp'd them faſt whileſt they were con- 
ſumed with Fire, that made the Ido) red hot. s For the Idols Wor. 
ſhip, or po:iibiy for the Parents, whodid wicked!y imagine thisa way 
to preſerve and proſper the reſt of their Chiidien. 

22 And7 in all thine « abominations and thy x whore 


- when thou walt naked and + bare, and waſt poliuted in thy 
blood. 


£ Thou weſt fo intent upon, and delighted in thy lewd Courſes, 
thou never thoaghtr'ſt what unce thou waſt, or what again thou migit- 
eſt be. « Both corpora) and ſpiritual. « T his is the fame thing, cha: ged 
thus on her, becauſe ſhe would not coniider. or lay it ro heart 
3 Thou haſt utterly forgotten. Ir 15 a Form of Speech that contains 
more than the Words ſcem to havein them, ſhe had forgorcen her ſelf 
and her God. z The Miſery and Loathſom: eſs of chy Birth, which is 
expreſs d very elegantly. 1. Naked, as contemptible as Poverty cou!d 
make her. 2. Nay, ſhe was Nakedneſs it ſelf, as the word will bear; 
expoſed to all the Suffering that can befal ſuch poor helpleſs Wretches. 
3: B'eeding to Death in a molt loatbſom defiled Condition, that none 
would come near her, butungrateful, ſhe forgot all. 


23 Andita came to paſs after all thy wickedneſs, ( wo, 


2 It ſhall come to paſs; fo the Heb. may be read, and then this 


therefore reprove, and teack thee ſoms Modeſty and Chaſtity. 
28 * Thou halt z played the whorealſo withthes Aſs 


{latizfied, 
» Courted their Friendſhip and Alliance,and to obtain it haſt eater. 
rain d their R<'1g1on, Manners and Impieties ; been an Iiolarrefy with 


far from thee. When thou didſt wickediy with thy N=ighbours, it 
might admit forme !ictle colour of excuſe, bur it is inexcuſableto run 
to remoteit Nations. p Withour ſatisfying thy ſelf, ( and ſorhe 17:br. 
may be read ) but our Interpreters rcter 1: ro the bound!l:-ſs Lſts of 
this lewd Adu'tercſs, and nor to the ifſue ani evenr of her Pr:Qices ; 
and in the en4kf+ Lulltings of a wicked Hearr,[dolarersand Aculterers 
do agree.  q *1 is repeated ro ſhame her, and make her bluſh, and re. 
p<nt. 7 Or waſt not fati+fizd ; 4ſjrian Gods proved, as other Lo!s, 2 
Snare, and a Li- tothe Jews, 2 Kings 16. 9, 10. Jer. 2. 18, 36. Hoſ. 
7.11, 12+ and chap 14. ver. 3. s 

29 Thou haſt moreover s multiplied thy fornication z 
in the land of Canaan unto Chaldea, and yet thou waſt 
not ſatisfied herewith. 


s Both increxs'd the Number of thy Idolatries, and made them 


Verſe wil! be a dreadtul Threat of Miſery to come upon the Jews tor 


dins, God will fill them with his Judgments, and bring one Woe after 


ther: Bur as we read the Words, rhey are an IntroduGtion to a farther 
declaring of this People's multiplied Wickednefles, with a dreadful 
Menace introduc'd ſomewhat abruptly to expreſs God's great Diſplea- 
ure againſt them ; the Threat 1s doubled, becauſe 'cis certainly co 
mirg, and will be great when come. : 

24 Tyoat thou haſt alſo þ built unto c thee an 4|| emi- 
nent Piace, and * haſt made thee an high place in e every 

reet. 


greater in that thou haſt adopred the Idols of Canaan, and al! that be. 
tween them 3nd the Chaldeans are own d or worſhip'd. ; H 5. may 
be read :owards as well as in: The Idgolatry of che Jews worſhipping 
Canaan's Idols was moſt intoler:ble, becauſe Grd had fo fully declar'd 
the viienels of jt, his abhorrence thereot, and ſo ſtrictly charged the F:ws 
to keep themſelves from it. How monſtroully wicked is it, that in 
proſperity poſ: fled of the Houſes and Wealch which thy God gue 
thee out of the hands of the Canzanites and their To's ; thou forgerreft 
God, ard worſhipp+| their Ido's; and in Advertity and Captiviry 
do,ſ{t the like, and,doteſt on the Idols of thinz Enemies ! y 
32 How « weak is thine heart, faith the Lord GOD, 
ſeeing thou doeſt x all theſe :hings, the work of an y impe- 
ous, whorifſh woman 2? | 
« Unſtable, like Water that melts away. Neither haſt ſtrength 
of Judgment to diſcern rhe truth and purity of Religion,, nor haft 
firengrh of Reſoiurion to ho'd faſt toit. x Chargeſt thy God and 
Religion, or doreſt on all rhe gaudy pompous Religio!1s and [dis thou 
heareſt of, » A Woman. whothink'ſt her [:1f her owa, that knows no 
Superiouz, nor will be either guided and governed ro do good, nor ce+ 
2 proved 


them, and commited Aduit-rics wita cham. o Tiongh they were 


delivered thee unto the will of them chat hate 23: 15- 
, ||Or ,c:7777, 


rians, # becauſe thou waſt unfatiable: q yea, thou hafſt* 2 Chr.:$ 
played the harlot with them, and yet r couldeſt not be ?3-<-23- 


; 
3X, 


A, 
WY 3 


oY ods. 7 


—_ —_ —— ————_ hn 

þ _ - ——_— Bhi 

7 : _ _ —_ — wn. 7 
— = 2 - - —— m— | 5 bo In - 
6 1 Pt 9D een Poe" - 24 -4 4 

— Re ————_——— _— _ ” wt - 
E 8 ” 

_— p_ m 8 6 

= = - —_— pap.) g KA RY ol _——— k 
wn ad - - <> <vy aromas . - > _ - —_— - 5 > 

. - - vv << + -— - gn pr . > 
= — n—_ —_ - wo _ » wks. 
_—— _ — o 

" 


=_————— CC 


— 


EZEKIEL | Chap. X} 


a Woman whoſe Luſt is her Law, Adultery , Idolatry , Murder of her Children, is the Sum of this 
Such will be boundleſs | Charge drawn up againſt her, 
>7 b Behold therefore, * 


Chap. XVJL. 


proved and reclaimed fiom evil ; 
and her Husband her Contempr and Burden. 
: - - . LOC Diſorders, and ſhainelets roo; : | , | 
LOT Y 27 i In that = thou buildeſt thine eminent place inthe 


| Lf 7: | : c 
e fret, and haſt not 4 been as an harlot (in that thous [will even gather them 4 round about againſt thee, ang ha 
e ſcorneit hire.) | 
> See wor, 24. Whereas the Paramours ofotherlewd Women build; / all thy nakednelſs. 


* 8. 


[ will c gather all thy & 10. ,|* 
"ET 4 EM IAC vers, with whom thou haſt taken e pleaſure, and all :hew *.Þ4 
h>1d of every 6 way, and makeſt thine high place in every | that thou haſt loved, with all :herz that thou haſt F hated. b*.F* 


4\.Þ-.-# 
"s £ 


' will; diſcover thy nakednefs unto them, that they may & ſee ti; 


fer thein, as 1t is:reported of Solomon, 1 Kings 11.7,8, 9. Here on| 
the contrary this untairhful Nation forſake their God, commit Forni- ' 
cation with ſtrange Gods, and bear the Charges both of building their. 
Templcs, and furniſhing them with Sacrifices, an maintaining the 
Pricit;. a Fer. 24. + Fr. 25. c Fer. 24. d Common Harlots make | 
Gain cftheir Looſneſs, and live by that Gain, th-{e make a Prey of 
the Men thatcome intothem ; thou doſt worſe, thou laviſheſt out thy | 


b God calls hcr to confider what heavy Judgment he pronouncet}; 
and will execute. c Whole Herds and Droves, for the word impliech 
tucha gathering together. d Chaldeans, Afſyrians, Exyptians, e Unc 
lawful Plealures of Body, Commerce and Idolatrous Featts in their 
Idolatrous Sacrifices. Old pretended Friends now turned vehemen: 
Enemies: And old Enemies who have earneſtly honged forſuch an on. 
portunity to vent their Malice, their Hatred will heap on thee Mii. 


. . 7 >= hp 1 . 0 . . - . > . 
Credir, Wealth, and all forro maintain and pleaſe thine Adulterers. | chiefs, under which real. Friendſhip might fomewhar relieve, + 


s 


ether. for it beazs as cur Tranſlation renders it, Contempt, Slighting, 
or Diſerding ; and fot ſuterh with what follows, Vir. 32, 33» 34: 
It fi9niji-t1 ail to praiſe, value, and regard, as 3r-xto-fobſerves, and 
511 as well, if not better, be {o rendred here, and be the Character 

mon Harlot, which wandreth after ber Lovers with « deſign 


* 
. EET 


1t v 


Of 10 
Tapiraty : 
ticheit; till rhe 32 Ferſe. 
” But as a wile t! mitteth adultery , which ta» 
23  Brir vzy a Wile that COmmittetn W. C/ 
kethRranvers in fte1d of her husband. 
Fore begins the Antithelis, A Wife , Adulrtereſs , ſuch as the 
FP; ophet 1cflmbleth this Nation by, which hath a moſt rich, bounticul 
and kind Husband, the differs from common Harlots in this Poiar, ſhe 
hunts ror Rewards, bur forbidden Pleaſures. 
27 & They give - giits tO / all whores, but thou giveſt 
» > _ : . £ , 
| iribeſt. thy k gilts to# tO all chy lovers, and hireſt -|- them, 
that they may come unto thee on z every fide .ior thy 


i 
- 


whoredom. | 
> | ncean Fornicators anJ Adulterers. + The word is of a re- 


MnSve fenie, ſpeaks not any kind of Gifts in general, bur peculiarly 
ſich Gifts as are preſented by x Woer, or Eſpoalc: of a Woman , 


with which the is enrich and adorn'd, and mzy perhaps imply the 


Arts. Prerences and Arguments, winch are us'd by looſe Men ro ſe- 
In, F . t $ - * I hy - "RM 

duce and corrupt Virgins ; they pretend Marriage deſign d, make 

Preſents, and deceive, / {. e. To the moſt of them, 'ris ufually fo. 


+ Thy Nuprial Gifts, which cby generous and bountiful IHlusband gave 


thee at the Eſpoulals, or on thy Wedding-day. Thote Gifts which 
are mo{t highly valued, moſt carefully preſerved, and moſt unwilling. 
ly p _— 
Wk haſt given to thy Husband s greateſt Enemies, to thy beaſtly 
Adulterers. 1 Thou makeſt }ittle djff-rence, bur as it happens, any 
one of thy lewd Companions way eafily have theſe Gifts of thy 
Hand. m By large Gifts, as Bribes uſually are, and the ward uſed 
here ſignificth, they flight thee, and have no detire afrer thee; like 
deſpiſed Adultereſles, they would hate thee, bur thy Bribes change 
their Behaviour, tho nor their Minds and Thoughts of thee. » Women 
have ſomewhat of Modeſty remaining amidſt rheir Lewdnefs for the 
2nd if Adulterefles, yet have their Lovers 11 ſome Corner 


moſt part, 25 
but thon asunjatiable, haſt them eyery-where round about 


or other ; 
thee. | 
>1 And the o contrary 1s in thee from other women 
111 thy whoredoms , whereas none p tolloweth thee to 
commit whoredoms: and in that thou giveſt a reward , 
and no reward is given unto thee, thereiore thou art 


Comrary, 

o That which ſubverts the Ord:r of Nature, is contrary to the in- 
nate modeſty of thy Sex. P T hou followe it them, treateſt, 1mportu- 
reſt, promileſt, paysR, and careſleſt them. Thus, as a tameleſs 
Advultereſs, 17-acl had carried 1t towards her God, who efpous'd, eN- 
rich'd, beautificd and delighted 1n her ; but the hired te Nations 
round abour her to enter © ovenant with her, entertain'd and Main- 
Find all their :dolatrous Worſhip, gave the Nuprial Gitts to hatefu] 
Ilo!s. 


25 4 Wherefore, O harlot, hear the - word of the 


LORD. : 0 ; 

- Her Inditment and Notoriety of all theCharge againſt her we 
have heard ; her Crimes ſhe was guilcy of, with rhe Aggravations of 
them, now follows Sentence of Condemnation agauft her. 7 Of juſt 
Condemnation which thou mult ſubmit to, tho thou refuſedſt the 
word of Counſe! and Precept. 

36 s Thus ſaith the Lord GOD , Becauſe thy || 7 fil- 

| 7”, thinefs was # poured out, and x thy nakedneſs diſco- 
wii re/rryered #- through » thy whoredoms with thy lovers , 


* 1:þ.2.and with 2 ail the Idols of thy abominatiovs, and b 


ins the Rewards of her Lewdnets; and thus the Chaldce Pa-: 
adit: fo we ſhall need no Parentheſis, nor begin the An- | 


arted with by all virtuous Women, thou moſt unparalled Adul. 


- EL . . . J % » 4 yi . . "= 
* The Hebrew word is of two Significations, and each oppolite tO, counterfeited Friendſhip never will, thou ſhalt not have a Friend tg 


l 


pity or help thes. # So ſhall my Threats be fulfilled, Lev. 26. y. 1 - 
| when I give thee up into their Hands, who remember thy Hatred x. 
; Bainft them, and renew the old Hatred they had againſt thee. Z Ir 
ſhall be very certain, and my Hand, faich God, ſhal} be ſeen doing it 
I will do this. + All the Nations that are on every ſide, that there 
may be Numbers enough ro do this, and that there may be no eſcape 
for thee, when which way ſcever thou flyeſt, ill thou flyett into the 
Mouth of thy Enemies, and who hate thee. 7 Lay open to view al] 
thy ſhameleſs Doings: Thou didſt diſcover thy Nakednels toallure 
and then to ſatisfy thy prodigious Luſt ; now it ſhall be diſcovered tg 
| nauſeare them, and to provoke them to contemn thee, and to uſe thee 
as lo vile a Perſon deſerveth. So God retalMfreth , and puniſheth Sin. 
; Ners, that their Sin may be ſeen in the Puniſhment. & With upbrai-. 
| ding, ſcorning and haring of it, and them. ! The odiouſneſs of thy 
| lintul Courſes , and the Weakeeſs of thy Stare. 


38 And » I willz judg thee, as + 


women »o that break gy 


|the c bloods in fury and jealouſie. 


» Who amthy Lord and Husband, whoſe Authority and Kindn:; 
{thou haſt fo contemned and abuſed. » Both condemn thee to ſuffi; 
; what thou deſerveſt, and execute what thou art condemned tg, 
| o Who were ſometimes ſtrangled, ſometimes ſtoned, ſometimes burar, 
were put to death to be ſnre, Levir. 20. 10. and Det 22. v.22. It 
may intimate the future Deſtruction of her Adulterous Lovers, for 
both the Adulrerer and Adultereſs were to die. p She was guilty of 
the unnatural Murder of her Children, and God will, according to 
his own Law, Gen. 9.5, 6. and Numb. 35. 31, 32. cauſe her Blood to 
be thed. q The like Phraſe you have Revel. 16.6. and elſewhere; 
the like judgment 15 expreſt by watering the Land wich Blood, as 
chap. 32.6. and by preparing one for Blood. Chap. 35. 6. Thou gaveſt 
the Blood of thy Children to Idols in Sacrifice, I will give thee thine 
own Blood to drink ; thou didſt it in Contempt of my Law, I will do 
itin Vindication of my Law. » Paſſions that do uſually appear in the 
Revenges, that abuſed Husbands take on their Wives, which have in- 
,tolerably dilhonourd and wrong'd them, and God exprefleth his 
, great Indignation, and rhe Severity of hisjuſt Diſpleaſure by Alliftoa 
; hereunto. 


39 And -T will alſo give thee 7 into their # hand, and 
they ſhall throw «x down thiney eminent place, ands ſhall 


| wediock, and p thed blood, are judged; and I will q give;.} | 


thy clothes, and take + thy fair 5 jewels, and leave thee; 


naked and bare. | "oi 
s This particularly deſcribes the manner in which God will dow * 


what he threatens. ? Asa Judg delivers the Condemned into the 
hand ofthe Executioner. « Power and exaſperated Age. x Under 
mine andutterly ruin. y Thy Idol-Temples, and thy Stews, wer. 24 
and 31. which fee. z The ſame in other Terms. a Itis opprobry 
to a Man to be ſtript,, more toa Woman; this Jewiſh Adultereſs ſhall 
be ſtript, that her Nakedneſs may appear. God's undeſerved Love 
covered her Nakedneſs, wer. 8. his juit Diſpleaſure will now diſcover 
her Nakedneſs. 6b See wer. 17. 


40 © They ſhall alſo bring upa 4 company againſt thee, 
and they ſhall e ſtone thee with ſtones, and f thrult thee 
through with their g ſwords. 


c The King of Babylon, and his Counſellors and Captains, & A! 
aſlembled Army. You had your Aſtemblies for your Idol-Worthip 
and TI will have alſo an Aflenwbly, bur it ſhall be of Chaldeans, 1. 1. 
6. and others , ro deſtroy you for your Idolatry. e The Puniſhmen: 
by ſtoning was not inflicted on the condemned, but in the fight of 
the Congregation ; ſo here 15 a Congregation of many Nations, bt 
fore whom this juſt Judgment of God ſhaſl be executed on this Adul- 
tereſs. Itintimates the manner of battering ofthe Walls of Fernſa/m 
with Stones caſt out of their Engines. f When the Enemy ſhall al- 
faulr, and take the battered City, he will in his Fury ſlay and deſtioy 
with the Sword. g *Tis ſo called theirs, becauſe it might mind ti? 
Iſraelites, that the Deſtru&tion would be with the Sword of a cruel one, 


the a blood of thy children, which thou didlt give unto 


them 3 = 

s This auguſt Title is a Preface to give weight to the Sentence , 
and tro aF-& her Heart with Pear. r- It might be rendred Money , 
with which ſhe hired and bribed her Lovers, which ſhe ſpent upon 
Bol. as Hof. 2. 8. Her Sorcery, with which ſhe bewitch'd and en- 

3 6 .  < I .* Ci Wn * Fe - os : 
chanred them : Her Poiſon infuſed into them ſhe converſt with : The 
Impud-nce of her Carriage, as 2 Whore with a Fore-head of Brals , 
Ir. 2.3. # Ir includes her Eag-rnels, Conſtancy and abounding in 
her Wickedneſs, and moſt mode!t:y upbraids her with her molt 1N- 
modeſt Laſciviouſneſs, and diſcovery ofit. x Sometime it 15 figura- 
tively taken, ſo it may be here, tho I rather think ſhe is charged with 
ſuch Profticution, as the diſcovering the Parts Nature hath conceal'd, 


of <ither anold profetled Enemy, or a new revolted Friend. 


41 And + they ſhall 7 burn * thine houſes with fire, 
and & execute / judgments upon 2 thee in the fight 011; 
many » women: and 0 I will cauſe thee to ceaſe from 
? playing the harlot, and 9 thou alfo ſhalt give no 7 hire 
any more. =_ 


> That Company mentioned, wer. 40. i As Harlots and Idolaters 
were to be puniſh'd,intimating alſo the burning Jeruſalem, the Temp'? 
and Houſes in it, as 2 Kings 25.9. 2 Chron. 36. 19. k As God's 
Inſtruments to do his Will, and alfo as Men that ſatisfy their own 
Rage. / All kind of Cruelty. m O Jeruſalem, and thine Inbabi- 


and Modeſty ſhould keep ſecret. » In tay playing the harlot thou 
haſt ſhamelelly incired thy Lovers by diſcovery of thy ſecret Parts. 
z As before'was obſerved, ſhe doted on all the Idols of her Neigh- 
bours and Acquaintance, which become h-r Abominations by her Jo- 


rants. » The People that were gathered to beſiege, take and ſpoul. 
Feruſalem, and the Daughters thereof. o *Tis not ſaid how this {hall 
be done, whether by changing their Minds, or by utterly ruining 
them, but this ſhall be done ; this is the Effe& of the Divine Judg- 


ving them, when the ſhould have abhorr'd them. @ Vid. wer, 20, 21. 


ments. p From Idohatry, and Adulteries which attend it. en 
I 


break down thy high places: they ſhall 2 ſtrip thee alfo c,, F 


—_— as oc a a SS 2 


ni A _ Aa - m«© 


PPE jou} OY jag pod en mp mo SY ws ws BY 


Jaya bd » 


i" : 
. wn; 
4. -F 
4 _ 
4 "BB 
SY i 


_ 
23 
= 
< -- 7 
wa 


I: 


7 tg 


ro; 


N 45 2 3 o | 


veſt I 
hine | 
1 do 
the b: 
2 in. © 
bis 3 


TIT")! 


ſalon 
11 at- 
troy 
1 the 
| one, 


ire ,'ſt 

- Ol 13 

"OM ('# 
hire 


aters 

mple 

Is 

own 

abi- oh. 
(hall | 
ING 
udg- 
Who 


&® ...; t-hold cherefore, * I alſo c will recompenſe thy way 
Fo 21. upon thine head 5 {faith the Lord GOD, and d thou |ching ſo plentiful, that they lictle regarded ro cinploy thereives, bit ES: | 
31 #{3!t no; commit this lewdneſs, above all thine abomi- | were idle and floachful, or deeply {{cure intheir Peace, Plenty and ; j 


= 
for t . EE 
y of W8 


b A 3 
$ CoD 
b. »" > 


[4 © 

3 LY 

| jalt ENY: : 
fo 


XVI. 


a, 


aſt not, or fo changed, that thou wilt no more hire Paramours to 
Can , : 


; L.. 

<QME INFO THe, 
: 42 ; So will I makes my fury towards thee to re{t, and 
my jealouſie ſhall depart from ! thee, and I will be quiet, 
and wili he no more 2 angry. 
and will be N Sl, OE 

Ic may admit a Noubr, whether this be ſpoken in way of Pro- 
mite and Kindneſs, or of Menace and Wrath. This latter ſeems in- 
tended, as if God faid, The Jealouſy whereunto you have provoked 
: will never ceaſe till th:1- Judgments have utterly deſtroyed you, 
f: as the Anper of an abuſed Husband ceaſeth in the 
Divorce, and publick Puniſhment of the Adultereſs, 7 I willno more 
concern my {c1f for thee, nor bs troubled at thy Carriage, whatever 
i be, lince thou art RO More Mine. With the Anger, which is in 
the Breaſt of a Husband troubied for, and angry at the Milſcarriages 
of a Wife he loved. 


me 
and cut you © 


EZEKFK#L 


48 As If live, faith TY Fi 
Fra hathg not done, ſhe nor her daughters, as thou Kft * +. 5 +, MW; 
done, thou and thy daughters. if 
7 An Oath which Gol often confirms tis Word by ; 


. 7 - . HS II TIrf6 0 
nit been fo Javiſhy and inclin2d to this courſe. » So poor, thou | 


. 
13 
14” 


Lord GOD, * Sodom 


+ % © T 

I . +23 . 
, . 

« 4 7 2, £4 


; 
-4 


y ; and certain'y ; | } 
that may be believed, which the God of Truth confirms by his 0:71 
Oath : See this Oath explain'd, cap. 5. vor. 11. g Hathnotequal- ky HR 
'd thy Sins, how- little ſoever thou belicyelt his; the Diſparity leth Math 
in this, the che 1cf5, thou the greater Sinner, Wi\-44 

49 Behold, this was the 4 iniquity of thy ſiſter So- b- N 
dom, #z Piide, fulnefs & of bread, and / abundance Wt; 
of idlenefs was in her , and in her daughters , nei- + 17 
ther did ſhe » ſtrengthen the hand of the poor and 
needy. | 

h Ir:gaity either ſor Tnigzitics, or the Fountain and Orciion of all 
amongit the Sodomites. 7# An haughty Mind fwelPd with ce Excyllen 


43 x Becauſe thou haſt not y remembred the days 
of thy youth, but haſt = fretted me 1n all theſe #2 things; 


Nations, Te F 
« This Verſe recapitulates the Cauſes of God's great Diſpleaſure 


avainlt Jernſalem. y Vid. wer, 22. z A mixt Paſſion, in which 1s 
Grief as weil as Anger, ſuch as moves in the Heart of a jealous us. 
band; or ſuch as is the Paſſion of one that is grieved, and angred at 
the Rebukes of her Folly, breaks our 1nto diforderiy Carriage againſt 
the Reprover, and tumultuaticg within her own Breaſt, holds o: her 


courſe. a Already mentioned and charged againſt thee. 6 Lay it}: 


now before thine Eyes, and conliderit. c Or have wcompenſed, for 


the Prophet ſpeaks of the times when all he threatned from God 


,1ng : Their Plenty was not their Sin, bur they made it occaſivn of Sir 
; tO themſelves : 


Cy, Beauty and Grandeur of their State, and vaunring of it 2bov« their F 
(Neighbours, & 7. e. Luxury, and riotous Exceſs in Eating and Drinl. 7309 


They were very 1atemperace in ther Dicer, ! Every mt: 


Honour, neither fear'd God's wrath or Man $s Sword ; the ficit wasthe 
Fault of particular Sinns®s, the Jattcr was rhe Sin and Fault of the #1, 
Community. 7 She refuted to help Strangers, as appeareth in the 
Hiſtory of the Ang:1s Entertaintmenr, G2. 19. nor was the mindful 7 
of helping the poor with Counſel and Defence; they were unmerciful, [is 's L 
and hard-hearred toward the Poor amongit them ; this was a great (118. 
$10 to thoſe that abounded in Wealth, as the $,domices did. ih Ab 

fo And they were » haughty, and * » committed p 4. *cen, x8. "Rs 
bominetion q before me : therefore 1 took them r away as 2-. ; 


ſhould be executed upon this People. d This Paflage is ſomewhat 
intricate, "tis otherwiſe read by ſome, I have not done according to 
what all thine Abominations deſerve, or T have notexecuted ſuch Thoughts 
as all thy lewdneſs calls for. Some read, as we, 1n the ſecond Perton, 
thon haſt nor, &c. 7. e. made account, or thought with thy felt 
what would become of thee, or what thou ſhouldſt do after all thine 
Alwminations, therefore theſe ſore Judgments have overtaken and 
ruin'd thez. As our Verſion rendersthe words, they ſeemro be the 
{me with that, ver. 41. Atter all God's Judgments poured forth, fuch 
ſbould bs their Condition and State, they ſhould be ſo poor and de- 


[ ſaw ba good, R * GceN. 19. j 
n Inſufferably_ arrogant w their D-portment towards good Men ; 24- : 
they vexed the Soul of righteous Lo:, and towards the Angels whom 
they afſaulted in Zoz's Houſe, and towards God himſelf, as both in 
this werſe, and in Gen. 13. 13. o Worked, as if it were their Trade. 
þ The whole of theſe Mens Life waz one contizued AQ of the bigh- 
et Wickedneſs. q Eicher againſt God, or openly 2nd publick!y, as 
1/4. 3.9. r Deftroy'd their State, Cities, People and Country, turi- 
ed them into a Lake of dead and deadly Water ; or rather Bitumen 
and Sulphur. In a way none could have ſuſpe&ed ; and for ought 


ſpis'd, rhey neither ſhould have Opportunity nor Ability to pleaſe 
their Idolarrous and Adultercus Companions. 


I know, none ever aw b<fore or fince : If you enquire how Feruſas 
lem's Sins wwe greater than Sodrrn's, T wou'd anſwer, 1t not in the 


44 Behoid, every one that e uſeth proverbs, ſhall uſe 
this proverb f againſt thee, ſaying, As # the g mother, 
fo is her 4 daughter, 

ce That delights to make Parables, and uſeth to taunt at the Vices 


of notorious Sinners. f This might be read with the former Phraſe, 
2nd render us this Senſe, Evcry one that would ſpeak againſt thee, O 


things done, yet in the aggravating Circumſtances of them, againtt 
; redeeming Mercy, againlt rhe Law of Cod, which forbad whar they 
did; and told them what they ſhould do again Admomtions, by the 
Mouth of Prophets, and againſt Examples of God's Vengeance on 
Sodom, and the Cities of the Plain. 

51 Neither hath £5 Samaria committed #« half of 
thy fins; x but thou haſt multiplied thine abomina- 


"4; »ſalcm, and tartly upbraid thee, ſhall uſe this Proverb. £ Old Je- nee Y more 


r:jalem, when the Seat of the Jebruſitcs, or the Land of Canaan, when 
full of the idolatrous, bloody, barbarous Nations. 
Synagogue of the Jews, which is more like in the Wickedneſles of 
thoſe accurſed Nations, than near them in places of Abode. See 
more, Vver.. 3. 

45 # Thou art thy & mothers daughter, that 7 loatheth 
her husband and her 2 children ; and thou art the fiſter 
of thy ſiſters, which loathed » their husbands and their 
children : your 0 mother was an Hutite, and your father 
an Amorite. 


7 The Nation of the Jews. & As much for her vicious Inclinations, 
as for thy Original derived from her; the moſt wicked Daughter of 
as wicked a Mother. ! That was weary of the beſt Husband ; that, 
while ſhe doted on aboſninable Adulterers, did moſt contemptuouſly 
diſregard het Hnsband, and forſake him. m: Other lewd Women have 
had tome love for their Children, becauſe born of them, bred by 
them, and reſembling them ; ſo much of the Mother was in the Chil- 
dren, that ſome Adultereſles have loved themſelvesin their Children ;; 
but here's a looſe Woman, an unnatural Beaſt, that loaths her own 
Ficſh, perſecuting ſuch as are conſtant to the Law of God their Fa- 


h Feruſalrm, or 'done. 


than they, and haft & juſliticd thy 


ſiſters in all thine abominations which thuu halt 

? The ten Tribes, or Kingdom of 1/-ac!, founded In Rebellion and 
Idolatry. « A proverbial Speech, ufaal 1n comparitoia cO ſer fortit 
the lefler patr, as 1 Kings 10.7. » Thisexplains the former, y More, 
or greater, the H:5rcw word fignifieth both. z Not made themiighs 
reous, bur declared chemſelves leſs unrighteous than thou in thy Abo- 
minations ; of the two they are leſs faulty. _ 

52 a Thou alſo, which haſt 5 judged thy filters, 
c bear thine own 4 ſhame for thy (ins that thou haſt 
committed e more abominable than they : * they are 'J= 
more righteous than thou : yea, be thou confounded 
allo, and bear thy ſhame, in that thou haſt juſtified 


thy ſiſters. 


a Feruſalem, and all the Jews with her. + Haſft pretended 'ewas 
wonder a People ſhould Sin as Samaria, or haſt once condemned rh:ir 
Apoſtacy, whilſt thou ſtoodeſt ; or haſt judged their Puniſhment 
juſt, that they deſerved all they ſuffered. © Shalt ſurely be loaded - 
with Puniſhment. 4 That ſhali be thy Shame as well as Smart. e Sce 
wer. 47, 48, and 51. 


3.12, 


ther, and murdering others in Sacrifice to Devils. »It runsin the 
Blood; as rhe Mother, to thc Sifters loved, and doted on ſtrange 
Fleſh, were as inordinate in their AﬀeCtions to others, as they were 
in theft Diſaff:Qtion tg cheir own Husbands and Children. © See ver. 3. 
He ſpeaks of them colleCively, and as the greateſt part were. 


46 And thine p elder ſiſter # q Samaria, ſhe and her 
r daughters that dwell at thy s left hand : and thy 


ſr [| younger fiſter, that dwelleth at thy # right hand, » 
' x Sodom and her'y daughters. | 


p i.e. The greater for Power, Riches, an4 Numbers of People, 
not the elder for Years. q Metropolis, or Mother-City of the re- 


voited and idolatrous ten Tribes. »r Lefler Cities of the Kingdom of 


i/-ac!, or the People who dwelt in them. s Northward as you look 

toward the Eaſt. 7 Or leſſer, fo the Hb. which conſiſts of fewer 

People, is of leſs Power. « Southward from Jeruſalem. Sodom, as 

chief City, » Either the Cities near in Place, and join'd in Afﬀini- 

7 ER. and other Sins hke Sodom, or the Inhabitants of thoſe 
ities. 


L., 47 & Yet haſt thou not « walked after their ways, 6 nor 
.1 done after their abominations : but [| as if that were a 
very little thing, c thou walt corrupted 4 more than they 


In e all thy ways. 


& Ard Hcb, a Lived and behaved thy ſelf as they did, for they, 


all things conſidered, were leſs Sinners than thou. 5 The ſame in 
other words, their doings were abominable, but thine have been 
worſe. c Thou O Feruſalem! « Art deeper dy'd in Sin. & Theſe 
deep Sins were more univerſal, if not as to the Adfors, for Number, 
yet as to exten of the Wickedneſſes thoſe Ators cammitted. 


53 f When I ſhall bring again their captivity, the 
captivity of Sodom and her daughters, and the cap- 
tivity of Samaria and her daughrers, g then will / 
bring again the captivity of thy captives in the midit 
of them : 


f'Tis diſputed whether this be a Promiſe or Menace ; it is moſt Fi 
like to be a Threat : and if you conſider the difference between a 
Temporal and Spriritual Reſtiturion, and the difference berween an ; 
intire and Partial Reſtitution, it will be evident, Sogn and S11m27/8 " 
never were reſtored to that State they had been in, nor were the two 4 
Tribes ever made ſo rich, mighty, and renowned, though God brought 
ſome of them out of Baby/m; and yet were theſe words promitſlory, E 
both Sodom, Samaria, and the two tribes would have been reftored. i 


hom 


» 
% Ron AI 
4 
> 7 


The words ſeem to confirm irrecoverably a low, afflicted, defpis'd #3 Bhoe! 

State, as the future Conditien of the Jews for everin their Temporals. LTT'S p 

z Then, not before, this doth nor concludea furure full Reſticution ; i - bf 
[ 
b 


but is an Argument that concludes againſt the Conſequence, but a 
Negation of the Antecedent; as if "rwere faid, if ever Sozom and IF 
Samayia may hope, then thou mayeſt hope tor a reſtoring to they for- WE: 
mer Glory; but Sodwmand Samaria never ſhall, theretore neither thou, O 
Jeruſalem, and- deluded Jews! And this may have celpect tothe falle 
Prophets, who deceived this People with Promiſes of Deliverance Jt. 
from being made Caprives, or of fizddenReſticution of all to thern. WI i 

54 That thou + mayeſt bear thine * own ſhame, and t: 
mayeſt be k confounded / in all that choa haſt done, in 0.4, 
that thou art a » comfort unto them. 13 


þ Thou ſhalt ; fo the Hebrew, as well as mayeft. i Punſſhmene for £4: 
Offences is ever reproachtul, and ſome Puuiſhmeants are more fo, than W's 
others, 


1 age 
9 FLA 


1 
-- 
—— 


_—_ _ - vw Ox. —- _ _ 4 (I . ms 2. a _— A. < >——_ x "f - - - 4 _ _ ” - K_ —_— — - bs. _ 
in -- a—y —_ I — _ - y - _ _ » — _ 
3 CE IL - = _ A « = "RM ; ———— s —_ - , ———  —— = E Q 
_ — S = _ h Wo 4 - _ m—_— _ + - E a - 
—_——_——_" = ens : f7 —_ _— _ - o ” : a <————_ — : 4 | < 
_— — > wad > — "_ WI — EE. : Y T - _ . = , 
- — ” - . þ a ” = . ” _ _- pou > _ = my ty — nite ” ; . 0 
E £ - by _— __— * . ; 8 hn __ - ——— _ __—o -— OT— _ = — = py ” n——_——— Chats = 
5 : ar - = —_— ? . - . b. Id : -— - " ; py _ - "=" _— - aki < 
= . . o_ v hy . FR EE A net "- _- yg _—. <> w= mn ——_ EC EIS ; > = — Ee = - >— —- - a Y . — —_ — - Y IXIC< 2 ate. Ade i 
VS © —TTErs _ — - - _ = Wk * - f - : a. : F Lo . _— - - Wc —_—— {A eee 8 , WES x , _ _ —_ 55.8 © - "20 
- p = d « _ L bs ' =<T7S, 24 - Us Iz . p "- s IN A SB _—_ - heh & - = my a + - = - Lo = _ "wy a wo 
_ m a _ _ - — . . - _ * . £32 —_— - —_— - wa. ” ; me ” —_—_ = w_" p - * _ =_ i—__ . » v! 
_ _ _ ay 4 - b FS... I ”: —_— _ _ — g a 4 ” 
_ G - — Pp. * - TAE - —_ , *: 
- 7” _ oy = G —_— r "- < k E _ th 4 _ -__ D—_ = - 
7 —- —_— <8 A ————_— _—_— "4 - - hb ——_ _— - - == 5 p / 4 uy - b, - mo = Mz 4 : 4 ING) 
SWED 2 7 p ERIN _— Þ : « q . "= 20 5 £ P3-Bc - *: - "ADDR yes ; - _ % ———_— FE G - p 4 Sen - ; I © pa Iz ny nn _ —— —_ x + pr 9 . w_ S ban ————= 4 
Jo 5 am” 4 : —_——— - —— ———_ —_—_ $ p <_ TT) my oy "Di = — — os -_—<— —_—_ ——_ . - _ nent anew ogg 7 ores 
= = 4 . A a rr ont ets Ke Ne a 2 _———— > bh... = ——— _ _— - — - Jens —2 "= Fa —— Y bn " 8 j - L "IX = _— ny get we - Ks = : xz to -. 
bas — = - bn ” . _=—_ _ - — p -—_ - & ——_— - — a 0 = 4 > —_ . _ —— —_— —_— oy 8 - [Xo -_ ” ——_ _ _ . —_— - on % ” » __— a SG amd 4.4 -. 
VT__— COTIERD OoOnEirTry——— muon ro —— on — x : : 2 - —_ — _— wa —_—_ . by - T = BED hy Y = = - _ ” —_— _— 7m - _— - be = > comms mat 
4 - T =Y 1 __— : — CH z "-« % x = ys - —_—_ - - —_ =_ - - F—" = = == £ . . — = > — —_—_—_ 3 
_— " STI —_— _ PI * 5 — - © = wit 1. bo — _— = = - bn” » _ - —_ - -- - - - 4 
— ns —_ -- 2 ==> ” a R k —__ = - = .—_—_ —> ea aj res ® —_—_—_ 
- -— — — —— . _ \ - £ i — CEP — " 2. " 
. Ny _ - - __ w- —— __ - " «v4 - = __ 9 _ Pony — — OI .., 
F. — ———_—— > - —__ . CIDER 
I 5 _ -- __ » = : - = SE AE BER. v8 h 


SH - 
—_— .— 


Chap. YVI, E Z E K Ti Chap, XV 


others. Such Mall rhe ew? Poniſhments be. & Some Offenders are | are as much above thee as the elder Children are above the younger, 
hardned to an inſcenlibleneſs of Shame; but God will makethele Jews] ” Thy leſſer or meaner Siſter, 5 They ſhall be to thee as a Gift be. 
to feel the Smart, and bluſh under the Shame of their Puniſhmenrs. | ſtowed in Love. z As Daughters in Duty hearken to, and obey, & 
7 For al the VWickednelſes, from which the Puniſhm<nrs of Sodom and {hall che Gentiles brought into the Church hearken to the Word of God 
$a&ir ſhon'd have deterred them, for imitating and out-doing them, which ſounded out from. the Jews, from Jeruſalem. u Not by that old 
& Encouraging Sinners like thoſe of Sodem and Samarin, and bring Covenant which was violated, not by external Ceremonies which were 
Fellow-fuffereis with them in as great, or greater Judgments. a gr'at part of the firſt Covenant, but by that Covenant which Writey 
55 When thy Siſters, Sodom and her daughters, the Law in the Heart, and putsthe Fear of God into the inward Pares, 
Shall return to their former eſtate, and Samarja and _ _ x I will eſtabliſh » my covenant with z thee ; 
her daughters ſhall return to their former eſtate, then oy —— — IRIIRD - ; 
£ "11S : _ . ; ver. 00. 7 In Diſtinction from thax : 
thou and thy daughters ſhall return to your forme! catled, thy Covenant, wer. G1. z O Iſrael firſt, and then with the Gen. 
Crate, IBaY Rs BY 9 SORE [tiles as thy Children, with all the genuine Childrenof Abraham, Fa. 
 E'bis worſe is explained in the $3 verſe, and nee _—_ « Þ mo therof the baichful. This ſhort Sentence contains the Sum of a1j 
Fap'ication; it threatens a perpetual Continuance of their jow, our Duty and Privileges. tis ſummarily a Promiſe of Grace and Glo. 
j=&t, and miſcrable State in thetr outward Concerns. | h ry ; ic is a ſanQtifying Knowledge to fit us for Obedience; and ';;; 2 
+ Heb. fo 55 n For thy filter o Sodom was not | mentioned by thy juftifyjng Knowledge to deliver us from Puniſhment ; ir 1s Evange!i. 
a 7 part; &- þ mouth inthe day of thy + pride. cal K::owledge of God, a Knowledge which is to eternal Life. 
bearing. » This is thz Reaſon why their State ſhou'd be hopeleſs as that 0) I | 63 That thou mayelſt b remember and be ccontounded 
+ Heb. CSorcm. o The Sins of Sodom, and her Plagues, were nt TIF | and never d open thy mouth any more, becaule of e thy 
predter ex thee, though thou didſt worſt in thy Proſperity, thou didit nor tear ſhame, when | am f pacified toward thee for all that thoy 
excellencies. like Mitery, nor wouldſt forbzar like Sins. p Thou ſhouldſt have; haſt done, faith the Lord GOD 
told thy Chi!dren what Sodcm did againſt the Lord, and what the Lora, __ , A, Ss 
1:d agai | d thy Daughte:s might have repented,| *® 77. ver. 61 ec Ver. 61. d Neither to juſtifie thy ſeIf, or tg 
did againſt them, that thou an y g g pP > j 
©0746. anne - no ſuch things weretold © ing condemn others, or to quzrrel wich thy God; but as a true Pcniregr 
«Kings s _ Bolere thy r wickedneſs was diſcovered. as <font m_— che Judgments thy Sins have deſerved, and God hath 
2. 2.071 , | 2 **. Inflicted, to draw away from Sin, and to bring thee to ſubmit + 
16.5. at the time of hy * reproach of the daughters of, God, and to give him Glory. e Such a Confulion for thy Sin will 
< =_ 28. Syria , and: 5 all hat are round avout ' * her , the' cover thee, thar thou wilt readily juſtifie God, and bluſh ia remen. 
—— daughters of the Philiſtines, which « deſpiſe thee round | Þrance of all thine own Wickedneſſes. f When I have parJoncd 
& 14.28, ——_—_ | when I eats all thy Sins, and am reconciled to thee, thoy 
1:80 , | ; ; : wilt ingenuouſly «acknowledge, remember, and hate whar thy G 
The time of her Pride, Security, and Sin was when they were not : my , y God 
»MiQeg . and deſpiſed by the Syrians. r Thy abominable Doings| 12h, gracioutly P —_— will no more remember againſt thee, or 
were made known to thy ſelf, to thy Friends and Enemies too, by rr has, aps. og 
the Execution of the ſevere Menaces, and fad PrediQtions of my Pro. CH AP. XVIL 
phers, who forctold what Puniſhments, and what Shame this ſinful| Under che parable of two eagles and a wine, is repreſented the captivity of the 
Peopie ſhoutd ſuffer by the hands of the Syrians, who ſhould waſtc king and p- ople of Jeruſalem, for revolting from Brb lon to Egypt. I—21, 
the 7cws, and deride them, burn their Cities, and carry Citizens Cap. A Ins fo. plant the goſpel fer the ſalvationof his Pfople, 22 24, 


tives, a+ in the time of A4haz over Judah, and R:zin over Syria, s The e WO f th ; 
Warions that were round abcut in Vicinity, and combined in League ND af rd of the LORD came unto me, lay. 
againſt the Houſe of David. 7 Either Jersſalem, or $yris, rather this ing, 


Jacter, the chicf whereof were the Philifiizcs, called here the Daugh-{ 2 Son of man, put forth a g riddle, and ſpeak a 5 pa- 
ters of the Philiſtines, as 1/a 9. 12. « Contemn thee, as an importenr,| cable ro the houſe of z Iſrael ; 
as well as wicked People ; a People which had deſerved to be enflaved,] Theſe two Verſes are Preface ro what follows in the Chapter. g A 
and over whom they might at pleaſure mak a King. dark Saying, which calls for thorow Conſiderationto underſtand and 
* Chr, 23. 58 * Thou haſt x -+ born thy lewdnels, and thine a | apply .ir, becaule the Meaning is different to the Sound of the Words. 
49: , buminations, faith the LORD. h The tame thing redoubled in different Words. And 'ris likely the 
tHeb. torr ; F . F {Prophet 15 commanded ro uſe a Parable, becauſe thoſe Eaſtern People 
them, x What thou haſt done I have imputed to thee, thou wilt not Ie-; vere much uſed to and raken with this kind of Diſcourſe. 7 7. e. The 
prat; therefore ] account thee guilty, and I have in part puniſhed | gemainders of the Houſe of Iſracl, whether of the ten Tribes, or 
thee, and though what I have done ſeem grievous, yet worſe is be- | (f (he — "Tl : , 
kind as vey. 59. moe” . | 
: 3 And ſay, Thus faith the Lord GOD, A great & ex- 
59 For y thus faich the Lord GOD, IT will z even deal gle with / great wings, 7 long-winged, » full of feathers, 


with thee as 14 haſt done, which haſt deſpiſed the which had o + divers colours, p came unto q Lebanon, ud 


a oath in breaking the covenant. and » took the - higheit branch of the # cedar. bn: 
+ This is uſhered in with a moſt ſolemn and ſacred Aſſeveration.| þ Nebuchainezzar King of Babylon, as wer. 12. compared to a great [* 
z Eicher thus ; Thou haſt defpiſed the Laws and Privileges of my Co- Eagle, King of Birds, ſwifr, ſtrong rapacious, and of a lofty flight. 
venan!t with thee, and I will deſpiſe all thy Pretenſions to my Favour|/ Mighty Provinces on each fide of his Kingdom. »: His Kingdom 
by virtze cf my Covenant; 'tis mutual, and who breaksit forfeits all| was valtly extended, as Dan. 3. 3- and 4. 1. the greateſt King then 
benefir by it; or deal with thee according as thou haſt done to other living. » His Kingdom was very full of People. o Wereof divers 
' priniſkr Sinners, over which thou haſt inſulted and condemned them. | Nations, Languzgesand Manners,ſo that this Eagle may be wel] thought 
a By wilful and contempruous Deſpite haſt perjured thy ſelf, which is| to be that ſort which is greateſt in the kind, and beſt reſemblerh him 
a Sin the Nations about rhee could not be guilty of; for they were| who was Ch: greateſt Monarch in the World at that time. pInvaded 
not, thou only waſt in Covenant with me: Or elſe, thou haſt con | with a mighty A:my ; he care not as a Traveller, to pleaſe his Cy. 
ter ptuorſly flighted my Bounty, and Grace, and my Faithfu'neſs, riofity, but as an Invader to enlarge his Dominion. 9 Eirher the Tem- 
and Truth, and bound rhy fe!f by Covenant with Idols, and Idoja-| ple built with Cedars of Lrbaxin; or Jernſaiam the chicf City of che 
ters, though 1 had 1o exprefly forbiiden them. 6 Made in Hereb. Country, where this great, frui-ful and pleaſant Hill was; or the whole 
6D e Neverthel<fs, lf will remember g my covenant| Country ſet forth by its chiefeſt Hill, which runs about 125 Miles in 


WE thee > davs of thy vouth. and 1 will ; -(1, | length, and encloſeth the Land of Jwudeaon the North Side. r Took 
with þ thee in the days J) 4 l 4 eſtabliſh captive and carried away with him. s The King of Judah, Fchotachin, 


unto thee an & everlaſting covenant. | t Either the Royal Family, or rather the who'e Nation of the Jews. 
e The Lord having d:nounced a perpetual Puniſhment to the Stub. 4 « Hex crop'd ott the y top of his young twigs, od 


boin impenitent Body of the Jewith Nation, he doth now promiſe to . pf | bo. > . ' 
the remnant, that they ſhall be 1emembred and obtain covenanted. pas into a z land of trathck ; he ſer ir in a city of 


lercy, whidh makes up thelaſt parr of the Chapter. f Proper] : 

aan remen:b11g, Or Ceamibs i in God, who jp IE *A - Nebuchadnezzar, ſirnamed the Great. x As a Gardiner that crops 
after the manner of Man this 1» ſpoken of God, who is ſaid to re. | 7 the goodiieſt Cions, and carrieth them away to graft on ſoine other 
memember, when he makes ir appear that he hath regard to us, as Sock. » Both the King of Judah, now 18 Years old, andthe Nobles 
Pj. 20. 3. ard bleſſeth us. g In which I promiſed I would not utrer. and Chief of the Land. z Into Babylon, which was a City of migh- 
Iy caf? «ff the Seed of Iſra:l, nor fail to ſend the M:ſiah. the Redeem. | ©Y T rade, explained farther by being 2 City of Merchants, and pecu- 
er, who ſhould turn away iniquity from Jac. + In the Loins of| 11arly of Merchants that traded in ſweet Spices and odoriferous Gums. 
Abraham, and ſolemnly renewed after their coming out of Egypt, F 4 He #5 took ailo of the & ſeed of the land, and 
which is the time called the Days of thy Youth, 1/a. 44. 2. and 46. 3.|-f- 4 planted it in a e fruitful field 3 fhe placed #r by it 
and Etek. 16. 43, 7 Conftim and ratife, It ſhall be ſure, and unfail. great waters, and and fer it 45 A willow-tree. " 
ing & Everiafting, 7. e. of a very long {ng hh pork 25 fO that part], Nebuchadn:zz.ar. þ Choſe but one to be King inſtead of Tehojachin.”” 
of the Covenant which reſpeCterh thel! 19n4 EL in the Land of |, a native, and which is more, one of the Royal Family Matraniai, 
Promiſe or Canaan, but in hay Is fpiritus), fan ——— heaven-| hora he called Zedekiah. d Sertled him on the Throne of Juds). 
ly th:cgs Ir ſhall be abſo!utely Everlaſting, Jer. 3. 31—34. e A Field fit forſuch a Deſign in the Land of 5udes. f The Propher go- 
*Ch.22.43z G1 I Then * thou ſhalt 2 remember ; thy ways, and | eth on in his Alluſion,and explains what he meant, compares this new 
be » aſhamed, when thou ſhalt o.receive thy Pp liſters, made King to a Willow, which grows no where ſo well as in a wet 
thine 4 elder and thy 7 younger : and I will 5 giye|S9il, and on Banksof great Waters. OWE 
*Ifa. 54-1 them unto thee # for daighters, * bur not by « thy 6 And g it grew, and became a þ ſpreading vine 0 
60.4. tual 7 |;zlow ſtature, whoſe branches & turned toward / him, and 


+ 3" COVEnant. _ 
Is { When that new covenant, made, and confirmed, ſhall operate the 7 roots thereof were under him : fo » it became 2 


and take effect. m: Confider and lay ro hearr, repent of, mourn for, vine 5 and brought forch 0 branches 9 and ſhot forth 
loa h and abhor, and turn from all chy wicked Ways, all thy evil | Þ ſprigs | 

P:atices and Doings. n Thou whilſt thou waſt an Adultercſs and| g Both the King and Kingdom. . þ Took root, grew up to a tolets- 
fa'ſe ro thy Husband rhou didſt nor buſh, now thou ſhalt with a deep; þJe Condition of Riches, Plenty and Proſperity. # Bur never reached 
Shame r: menier, and deteſt thy Lewdaneſs. o Admit into Church-! rhe Height of the Cedar, Nebuchaanezzar; who though he made Zedekian 
Communicn, own them as Members of the Church of God. p The! King, yet kepr him ſubje& and dependent, & I hey grew and flou- 
Gerale., mw Srrangers, bur then biſters. 9g Or thoſe that aregreater | r;ſh'q, while they owned cheir Stare tributary to Babylow. 1 Nebuchai- 


and migkricr than thou, or that by their Power, Wealth and Honour | y:z247, as their ProreRor, Benetator, and foveraiga Lord. 7: gs the 
| {12s 


= 


IV 


ap. XVIE 


indi; $ It « was planted in a good þ foil by great waters, 


XZ & Nebucraan:zzar. e Utter iy overth: ow this Kingdom which he had 


XZ ſhall it nor utterly wither, when the 2 ealt-wind 


olert- 
ached 
lekian 
 flou- 
ichads 
11 c/28 
Fire 


, UETREE * , _ 
ATV", \ - - - ” ” '9 D [3 w- 
p vt >, - 3 
: - x 4. in - Ved i Ss 
5 3 X SS Engr OI tr Er I I eG ee ES 
of DX Mg 46 «og kf Low. SC L DE 9 SE Ir 48% I pu” ice - 
EN ME LO= 3 399 If oP expands AE Co EET Sa” IT OL 
C ts = WY de ens GEE ay 5 IS 5 8 - 4 EIS Vans 
CE 1s ed Lins War - 3% RIS 4 


EZEKIE L 


Pirmneſs Fruitfulneſs, -nd Life of this Stat2, was in 2 Subjeftion - h Either Nebuch.rdnezza;'s by impoſing, or Zedekinh's by ſubmitting 
IL , 


-:10 of Babylon, 1 T bus, in this Order and Manner of D=pen- 

_— bp Jews and their King had Life, Growth and Verdure. 
Ss and itronger Boughs tor preſet Strength, Beauty and 
Þcuit. p Younger and tenderer Springles, as Children the Hope of 


facure times | ; 

7 q here was alſo 7 another great eagle wich 5 great 
wings and many feathers; and behold, this 7 vine did 
uy bend her roots towards him, and x ſhot forth her 
branches cowards him, that he might water it by the 
& furrows of her plantation. | 

9 This is the ſecond Pait of the Parable. 7 7. e. The King of Zzypr, 
whether .Jpries, or Hop/ra, Or what other was his Name, we need not 
curiouſly enquire, '(was King of Egypt, v. 1 5. 5 Vid. wv. 3. t Zede- 
ia, his Noblcs and People. » Sought the Friendſhip and Help of the 
Kiog of Exypt. x Sent Ambaſſadors, made a Covenant, and cruſted 
to the Power of Ezypt to defend her B; anches. » That they miglit 
add to their Greatneſs and proſperous Condition, as Trees grow by 
due and ſcafonable watering them. z Alluding ro thz manner of Ir- 
rigation uſed in Egypr, by Furrows or Trenches to convey the Water 
unrco their Piantatious from the River Nt. 


chat ic mizke bring forth branches, and that ic might bear 
fruic, that ic might be a goodly vine. I 

a By Nebuchadnezzar 11 2 very hopeful Condition, where it might 
have thrived, been fruirful, and flouriſhed. Bur they, borh King and 
People, were unthankful, and diſcontented, and by ſinful Courles 
ſeek to better themſelves; they had no great or juſt Cauſe to com- 
plain of Nebuchadnezzar's Uſage towards them, bur out of Pride, Am- 
bicion and Ingraticude, joined with Perjury, they revolt, anc pro- 
voke God's Wrath, and Nebuchadnezzar's Rage againſt them. : 

9 b Say thou, Thus faith the Lord GOD, Shall # it 
proſper? ſhall 4 he not e pull up the roots thereof and 
f cur off the fruit thereof, that ir g wither 7 it ſhall wi- 
ther in all the + leaves of her ſpring,” even without 
i great power, or many people to pluck it up by the roots 


thereof. : 
5 Tell them what will be the Iflue of al! this, and tell it to them 1n 

my Name. «c This Vine ; ſhal Zedekiah and his Peoplethrive by this ? 

'tis a Queſtion that muſt be reſolved negarively and with Vehemency. 


to 1t, and cbliging himſelf by it. j The Kingdom of the Jews. 
k Continue and flouriſh. 


ambaſladors into a Egypt, * that they. niight 5 give him 
horfes and c mach people : ſhall he 4 proſper ? ſhall he 


covenant, and be delivered ? 

u Zeazkiah. x Endeavoured to caſt off the Dominion of the Con- 
queror. y Nebuchadarzzar, who had advanced him, and obliged him, 
2 This is that calied bending his Roots toward the ſecond Eagle. 
a An old bitter Enemy, and an impotent and falfe Friend. 6 Belide 
the Perjury, here was a curſed truſting to an arm of flcſh, of which 
Iſa. 31. 1. &c Zedckiah had not Men to fer upon his hired Horſes ; 
Ezypt muſt help here too. How ſortiſhly doth this unhappy Z:d:kish 
act, to run himtelf on the Charge and Hazard of a new War, in 
which whoever is the gainer, he and his are ſure to be the Loſers ? 
d See vr, 9. 10. e Can it be likely Vengeance ſhould not overtake 
fuch Ingratitule ? f Can Perjury be the way for any Man's Deliverance? 
Can ſuch notorious Sinning end in aoy thing but Miſcry ? 

16 g As | live, faith. the Lord GOD, ſurely * 54 in 
the place ; where the king & dwelleth that made / him 
king, #2 Whoſe oath » he deſpiſed, and whoſe covenant 
he brake, eves with him, in the midſt of Babylon he 
0 ſhall die. 

g As ſure asT am God, and live, IT will puniſh this Perjury. þ A 
particular Account of che Puniſhment. # Babylon, k Nebuchain. ar, 
{ Zedekiah. m The Oath Nebuchadnezzar impoſed. » Conrempruonſly, 
without any juſt Cauſe given,and therefore this perfidious Prince could 
never expect more Favour, but muſt in reaſon fear the greareſt Seve- 
rities ; under this Fear Zedekiah ſhall ſpend the reſt of his Days. o He 
ſhall rather be always dying, for though he lived a natural Life, yer 
'rwas 1n ſuch Sadneſs, it is more properly ſtiled a dying, in blindneſs 
under the Mcmo1ialof the moſt affective Sight, the Murder of his 
Children, which was the Jaſt thing his Eye ever beheld. 

17 Neither ſhall Pharaoh with hz p mighty army and 
great q company make r for him in the war, s * by 
caſting up mounts, and building forts, to £ cut off many 
perſons. 


ers, if as many as the Egyptian can vainly promiſe, or the Jews more 
vainly hope. 4 Poſlibly ic may refer ro the Multicudes which uſually 


ſer up, deſtroy the King thereof f Put ro the Sword and flay the 
Children of Zedckiah and of the Nobles. g Never be in poſſibility of 
ſpringing ; ſo much is threatned by the withering of the Branches. 
þ All the promiſing Hope they had ſha!l vaniſh as che hope of a Tre? 
vaniſherh, when all its Buds and Leaves wither in its Spring. # The 
King of Babylon ſhall do this eaſily, and never need to imploy all his 
Power and People to do this, utcerly to root up this Vine. 


10 & Yea, behold, being planted, / ſhall it profper ? 


coucheth it ? it ſhall wither in the » furrows where it 
grew. 

& Nay, ſuppoſe this Contrivance were ſucceſsful, ſuppoſe this Vine 
were planted by the Help of Egypt. 1 Could it poſlibiy proſper? no, 
no. » When the King of Babylon, which like the blaſting Wind 
comes from the North-Eaſt, ſhall but rouch ir, 'twill utterly wither. 


artended rhe March of Armies, or elſe 'ris a doubling the thing in 
doubled Words. r» If Zedekiah be the Perſon, as our Verſion carrieth 
it, it foretells the Unprofirableneſs of the Egyprian Army, thar ſhall 
not do him any Kindneſs, if Nebuchadnezzar be intended, as the Ver- 
ſion waich renders the Heby. particle (againf)then it forerels the lictle 
Hurt that the Egyprians ſhall do to Nebuchadnezzar. 5s When Nebuchad. 
#:22ar ſhall with ſo much Speed and Skill caſt up Forts, and build 
Mounts, wooden Cattles, to annoy Feruſal:m, ſecure his own Forces, 
and terrify the Ezyp:ian King from the Difficulty of raiſing the Siege, 
which could not be done without Expence of much Blood. #- Of the 
beſieged in Ferzſalem, and of the Egyptians. if they attempt to raiſe 
the Sicge; this Senſe it bears in the French Verſton, 

I8 « Seeing he deſpiſed the oath by breaking the cove. 
nant (when lo, x he had y given his hand) and hath done 
all theſe z :hings, he ſhall not eſgape. 


» Even amidſt its greateſt and beſt Helpsro make it flouriſh. This 
Ditcontent, Ingratitude, and Treachery, will occaſion the utter Ru- 
ine of this People. 

11 J Moreover, the word of the LORD came unto! 
me, ſaying, 

12 0 Say now to the p rebellious houſe, q Know ye not 
what theſe :hings mean? tell them, Behold, the 7 king of 
Babylon is come + to Jeruſalem, and hath caken ther king 
thereof, and the piinces thereof, and « led them with 


him to Babylon ; 

o This is the Ocder God gives to his Prophet to explain theRiddle. 
? To the Houſe of Judah, which hav? b:en, and ſtillare rebellious 
agaiuſt me, and arenow entring into Rebellion againſt Nebuchadnezzar. 
q Are ye fo bleckith, that you do not know what ismeant ; or are 
you fo ſecure, that you will not contider it, bur run on your own 
Ruiae ? » The King of Babylon, N:buchadaezzar, 1s that firſt great 
Eagle with part of his Power. s Feruſalem is the Lebanon, which he is 
come to. 7 The King of 1ſrael, and his Sced, and Nobles, are the 
Branches and Twigs cropp'd off; theſe are taken, conquered, made 


S $ Captives. « Judging them unfit to be truſted any more, he will, tho 


1n Chains, carry them to Babylon. 

13 And hath taken of the king's feed, and y made a 
Covenant with him, and * hath ÞF taken an z oath of him: 
he hath alſo taken the a mighty of the 6 land : 


x Firſt taken Jehojachin and his Princes Captives; and next, taken 
our from amidſt rhe Royal Seed Martaniah, and advanced him to the 
Throne in Jeruſalem. » By folemn Agreement, andon terms approved 
and accepted by Mattaziah, tor performance of which Terms he hath 
obliged himfelt by publick Promiſe. z Becauſe Nebuchaduezzar would 
be ſecure, he made Mattaniah enter into an Oath, changed his Name 
no Z:dkiah, as a fit Memorial, who ſhould avenge che Crime, if 
this Caprive reſtored ſhould perjure himſelf. a The rich, honourable, 
F Valianr, wiſe, and who might (if Rebellion ever aroſe among the 


2G {Jews) be able to make head, and do Miſchief againſt the Babylonian 


King. b OF Judea. 

114 c That the 4 kingdom might be e baſe, that it 
mghr not f lift ic ſelf up, + but that by g keeping of 
1 115 covenant 7 ir might & ſtand. 

c So plainly and openly did Nebuchadnezzay dealwith the Jews. aThe 


Xt iburary Kingdom whereof Zedckiah is Roitelzt or Viceroy. c Low in 


Power. f Ritz up into Rebellion, or be ſo confiderable, as to encou- 


| 2 page any Neighbour-King to aflilt and confederare with them againſt 
—X75at/m. g Continuing faithful, and performing the Conditions. 


# This Verſe gives us the reaſon of this unhappy Enterpriſe, which 
is ſummed up in wilfal, preſumprtuous, and moſt unparalelPd Perjury, 
x Zedekia/, y A ſolemn confirming the Qark, or Covenant, and im- 
plies the voluncary At of Zedekiah in ſwearing, which makes the Per- 
jury ſo much the fouler. z Too bad to be named, and moſt unbe. 
coming any one that was a Beneficiary, and had ſo much from the 
Bounty of ore that was not obliged to do any thing for him. 

19 Therefore thns faith che Lord GOD, As I 3 live, 
ſurely 5 mine oath that c he hath 4 deſpiſed, and my co- 
venant that he hath broken, even it wili I recompenſe up- 
on his f own head. 

# Vid ch. 16. 48. b Made in my Name, and of which I am both 
Witneſs and Avenger. c Zedekiah. d Vid. ch. 16. 59.-an4 17. 18. e TI 
will punith as it deſerveth, and it ſhall appear by the Punithment,char 
my Hand doth execute it. f 'Tis probable ſome Courtiersmighr ad. 
viſe to it, bur this will aot excuſe Zedekiah; his Perjury was his own 
att, and on his own Head; as I charge, fo will I puniſh it. 

20 And * I will g ſpread my net upon him, and he 
ſhall be caken in my ſnare, and I will bring him co Ba- 
bylon, and will + plead with him there for his treſpaſs 
that he hath treſpaſled 7 againſt me. 

£ Vide ch. 12. v.13. where the former part of this Verſe is word 
for word. h Or be judged with him, i.e. the Heathen ſhall both ſee 
what I do againſt this Man, they ſhall conſider why I do fo, and be 
[Judge whether I do more than this perjur'd King deſerves, or elſe I 
w1ll puniſh him with continued Puniſhments from my own Hand, or 
by the Hand of Nebuchadnezzar, ſutable to the Greatneſs of his Tref- 
paſs againſt me. 7 Falſhoods to Men in breaking Oaths and Cove- 
nants, arein a high degree Treſpaſſes againſt God. 

21 And & * all his / fugitives with all his »» bands ſhall 
n fall by the ſword, and they that » remain ſhall be ſcat- 
tered towards all winds : and p ye ſhall know that I che 
, LORD have ſpoken 7. | 

k Not ſtri&tly, but in large Senſe : All, 2. e. the greateſt part, as 

Fer. 13. 19. and 44. 20. Mat. 2. 3. and 3. 5. {Whoatthe taking 
of Feru/alem, attempt to fly with their King. »z His Guards probabs- 
ly of ſtouteſt Men reſerved to convey him in ſafety from the purſu- 
'ing Enemy. #» The Enemy ſhall overtake, and cutin pieces. o The 
. few that do eſcape ſhall be ſcatcered abcoad among Strangers, who 
| will ſhew them very little Kindneſs. p The Milcries theſe People 
ſhall fall under, ſhall be of ſu.-h Weight and Continuance, rhar all 
' ſhall know 'ris the Execution of anextraordinary Wrath from Hea- 
[ven againſt them, 


: 


22. T4 


Chap. XVI. 


But « * he rebelled againſt y him in = ſending his* , Ki-gs, 


24. >Q. 
* Rl 2365 


e elcape that doth ſuch rhings ? or ſhall he f break the "> © 


"Jer. 32. 
- X 34- J- 
Ch. 12.13. 


*Jer.52.4- 
fl. 4- 2> 


þ Let his Army be made up of ever ſo many well diſciplined Souldi. | 


# Ch. 22. 


? l 


* Ch. 125 


I. 


—— . _- - : i - : n Pe, ey OY — 
= * > has #7. . Y - . * : «. G”-; mo w7 K—_— 164 2-7 ” — hn eg by - KE;. watts 1%" Por —_ - y ey £ Ty y bon 
% ] > Wn &* We Sa : -%. =. 8 —_ = , Þ We 4s - I. 4 < | Vi ©S X Nr - 
0 ODS; ; = OG RT; z res Jn os a, RR." na I - OOTY i On Gs - a7" Ol ; Sz - GRE. > x mms ae + . - - 
Hh \ i X ny by £ P y Fe »< od COIN i "& -- * edna whey x1 —_— = y D » SRL 3-346. WI -- - - — — . 
, 4 z a - » < Wr " CY *» *- on 4 Ko - 0 ww; : Ws, 3 T 14 - _—_— = 
2 > PRE - _-_ w X - Ss EX a I ? ok . - X L» p Re: 90, Kg . 43 
L on ; - p : VR EET x I Ws 4 WY : . ; "—__ oy o Pe" jon y "PS -—406" VA >> _- Z 
*. vas it & "I © - *2 7 Dog les. p< Bi ſy TAS a - wa" 4 q , , BA > 4 ian foe <2 - — _ ” <> 


DIM 
WHS 


rhod.opur 


EEOIOY ; _— OE " : —__ FRO po = =: DES — ' = <" BE. __ PI. FEISS --—o = pen» Wi 
—_ F > 4th > xt 7 . _— a 5 Eons = _—_ 4 An oa m— -- can” 
SG I, of ye now hb ws Le ED _ ISIS af - LD ee ages 1" gar Gs age , 
oe; ab C09 0s : $2 - WEITEE —— 5.4 i" $2 0x 8 —_— . " \ of; | AGS<IM8 l 
A. : WT 6 oe 3 = WO» by 5 IL, © noe "oo | TEA : 4.204 : go £7 « "4 & Aw 2 
= — ——_p m_—_ —_—_ y A = 6 __ - Hat q ak, nd 6 _—_— - _ in” Ss ES bs. ren ms Pong a - - 
= < —_— ws DB ae > 7 A - wo; _—_— ow _ —— _ - - = , w_ L —., — —__— »* ——_ "fag. ww _ = _— 
Se ——— ws —— — po $2 n —_ > _— - _ > — - - - : - mw o av 2m G s p P TE" : - "a "A G———_—_——_— c— . 
Bo nn OI £::I354 3+ 6D: AER > Ss LR LITE ; ti GS : LAS. WWEZ-in< NY pt LORA ht ta Ht obo rh fem BEL et 4 DOSS hes dt, inn. 7 D ; - —_—_— Rogen 
EO SE NE 6 — . "I 7 onde eng. »Aqz> $45 ” wal! At ® *> ' — Is Rar == "YL pf ALY LG os : _=_ = S 4 _ -  - —Snngns A - 195 —— 
: Yr + : y -,- — a= q — _ —_ 2 " rr % - > pac It» RT A 57 "$> ys - 4 ERS . :- "SE" BN 3 L. 
a Z he b 4 - 


OE, 
n= 


be - 
we 
a; 


5 v. . 3F6-ae, EF, mY 


vom ©T 5 : here” 
ID GRe 
PREY . b 
> i , 
Ke age 
woo — mg 


f 


a. pied. 
- es. oe. A 
beg BE. ITT. STI : 
22667 2 AtScZa a2 $4 by ys -- "MM 
_ oo _- Pp" ; mage” ids "6 = 
= 4 iX* ak —T- p +02 
—;, FN. k 


_ 4 - 
ons —'v ws 
_ 5 wn Ir IR 
= "1 + 


wy 
— 
4 Bs 


MLA LANCE 
$50 Yr Yin om 
ge 


Cj:ap. XVIII. 


22 & 4 Thus faith Lord GOD, 71 will alſo take s of 


the higheſt branch of the high cedar, and # will fer 
it; I will crop off from the top of his young twigs a 
render one, and will platit if upon an high « mountain 


and x eminent. 


q Whereas the Judgments threatned might ſeem to threaten the ot- 


ter Extirpation of the Seed of David, now the Lord is pleaſed to af- 
{ure irs Continuance, and the raiſing of the Meſſiah from that Houſe 
according to Promiſe. r Nebuchaduezzar took and Planted, and I will 
alſo take and plant ſaith the Lord. s Of the Royal Seed of the Houſe 
of David; of the higheſt Branch that is Heir ro the Throne, 1n the 
Type Zcrobabl, in the Antitype Miah. t Both ſer or plant, and give 
Increaſeto his Kingdom, that from a tender one he ſhould grow up to 
greatStrength, Vittory and Glory. u Upon Mount So, Pſal. 2. 6. 
or as Iſa. 2. 2, 3. x Notfor outward Splendor, but for ſpiritual Ad- 
vantages above other Nations in the Church eminent. 

23 In the 7 mountain of the height of Iſrael will 1 
plant it: and it ſhall z bring forth boughs, and bear 
fruit, and be a 6 goodly cedar : and undet it ſhall dwel| 
all c fowl of every wing, in the 4 ſhadow of the branches 


echereof ſhall they dwell, 

3 Either rhe Church, or Jeruſalem, whence the Law of Chriſt was to 
be publiſhed, and where the Preachers of the Goſpel were ro continue 
till furniſh'd with Abilities for that Work. = Like a Tree thattaketh 
Roor, and ſpreadeth forth into Branches, ſo the Kingdom of Chriſt 
ſhould grow. &@ Befruitrtul in good Works, nor flouriſhing inBoughs 
ard Leaveson)y, but much morein excellent Fruits of Holineſs Juſtice 
and Temperance, and in Joy, Peace and Love. 6 The goodlicſt that 
ever grew, moſt excellent and moſt durable. c All Nations, the 
Gentiles as well as the Jews ſhall build, breed and multiply under the 
Kingdom of Chriſt ; it ſhall be no more confined to the Jews, but ex- 
tend to the Gentiles alſo. d There they ſhall find Peace and Safety, 
and this repeated confirmsthe Certainty of the Promile. 


24 And all thee trees of the field ſhall f know that} 


I the LORD have brought down the g high tree, have 
exalred the + low tree, # have dried up the green tree, 
and have made the drie tree to flouriſh : I the LORD 


have & ſpoken, and have done z:. 

e The great ones on Earth, all conſidering Perſons. f See and con- 
fels. g Zedekish that would neither hearken ro me, my Prophets, or 
to Nebuchadnezzar, or the Kingdom of Ba5ylon, which was brought 
low indeed, when overthrown by Darius and Cyrus. + Either Fchoia- 
chin's Lineage, or the Church which, of low, was exalted by the Lord. 
bending Cyrus to that Work of reſtoring the Captivity from Babylon,and 
building the City and Houſe of God ; its meaning is the advancing the 
Kingdom of Chriſt, and ſupprefling the Enemies thereof. 7 The ſame 
thing expreſs'd in ſomewhat different Words. & The Power, Good- 
neſs and Faithfulneſsof God, who can do what he pleaſeth, and will 
do what he promifeth, is the Afſurance of the future Accompliſhment 
of his Word. 


CH AP. XVIIL 


God reproveth th:ir uſing the proverb of ſowr grapes, whereby the Jews ace 
cuſe him of injuſtice, 1———4. ſhewech how he dealeth with a righteous 
father, ana with the wicked ſon of ſuch a father, 5—13. and with a 
juſt ſon of a wicked father, 14—18. with a wicked man repenting, aud 
with a righteous man back/liding, 19—24. God drfendeth his juſtice, 
and cx/orie:h ro repentance, 25--=-32. 7 

I 1 By" I word of the LORD came unto me m2 again, 

ſaying, 

1 He did not entertain them with a Dream of his own Head, but 
the Holy Spiritof Prophecy ſuggeſts this cohim, which now he ſpeak= 
eth on God's b:half, and againſt the Jews. -: He had often before ſpoke 
God's Word in his Name, as chap. 6. 7, 13. and 12. 25. and now 
once more he is commanded ſo to do. 


2 What mean » ye, thato ye p uſe this 9 proverb con: | 
cerning the land of 7 Iſrael, ſaying, The s fathers have 


z eaten ſowr grapes, and « the childrens teeth are ſet on 
edge? 

n What Cauſe have you, or what would you have men thiak of your 
Carriage. tome, and of mine towards you ? o You that are now in Ba- 
»y/on. p Openly, unjuſtly, and impudently juſtify your ſelves, and 
condemn your God. q Tart, but falſe Accufation of his Ways. r The 
two Tribes, not the ten. s Our fore fathers. : Have ſinned. « We 
their Children, who were unborn, do ſufter now for their Sins, and 
this was grown common both in Babylon, and alſoin Jervſalem,Yer. 31 
29. you would be thought innocent, and my Proceedings againſt you, 
unjuſt and crue]. 


3 As x I live, faith the Lord GOD, ye ſhall not 


have y occaſion any more to uſe this proverb in Iirael. 

x See ch. 17. ver. 16. y Either you who uſe it ſhall die for it, or be. 
cauſe I wi!l vindicate my Proceedings ſo, that all who conſider your 
Puniſhments, ſhafl ſee you deſerve all that you ſuffer. 


x Behold, all « ſouls are mine, as the foul of the 
father, ſo alſo the ſoul of the Son is mine : the & foul 


that c ſinneth, it 4 ſhall die. 

2 There can beno Colourof partial Judgment in the Proceedings 
of God, who is equally God to all; who hath as great Intereſt in the 
Son as in the Father, and as kindly wonld deal with the Son as with 
the Father; and how canit be thought likely I ſhould pnniſh the Son 
for the Father's Offence, or the Father for the Son's Offence ? a All 
Perſens, which are frequently called Souls, Lev. 7. 18, 20, 21, and 
Jejh. 20. 3. and ſ@ it is, wer. 20. and Fer. 31. 30. 6 ThePerſon, whe. 
ther Father or Son, ſhall die, ſhall bear his own puniſhment : This 
Text gives no colourfor the Opinion of the Mortality of Man's Soul. 
c. i.e, Obſtinarely, and yet will pretend his own Innocency ; who ſo 
f:nneth ſhall ſuffer for his own Sin. &d You queruleus Jews ſuffer then 
ſor your own Sin. d and had you been, as youſay youare, innocent, 
the Sins of your Fathers ſhould not have hurt you; and for the future | 


e 
1 


e 


z 


EZEKTITE L. 


Continuation; or elſe when the Buyer is required to increaſe tho 
Price, or return the thing he bought, which growing dearer thanat Þ 7 
thetime he received it, provesan oppreſſion to him. And this I ſup. © 
poſe was uſual among the Covetous Traders, who fold and gave Dy #3 
for Payment; but if the Commodity grew dearer, they exa&tced the ® 
thing again, or the increaſed Price. & This I think is not here tob: 
taken in the larger Senſe asif it referr'dto all Iniquity, but ina tt 
ſtritive Senſe, and as it refers to the Iniquity and Injuſtice of Len- 
ders and Sellers; he that with Care and Conſcience hath withdrawn 
his Hand from all indire@ or dire& ways of forbidden Uſury. «This 
refers to this particular Caſe of Uſury and taking Increaſe ; as if the 
Prophet would make every Man judge of the Caſe e're he takes s- 
ny thing, and requires him to judge according to truth, whether any, 
or how much may be expetted and received, whether no wrong b? 


mount to this, He that in his lending hath truly weigh'd the Borrow- 


Man is no Uſurer. 


f judgments to deal g trul 


good, juſt and holy Ordinances of God. e In Matters of Relig", | 
hath kept to the dire&ion of God's Law. fIn Mattersof civil Con: 
ecrn between Man and Man. g To aQ ſincerely, with an honeſt H*z* 


know, | will keep to tht zule of Equity, No inhocent Perſon ſhall 
be prejudiced by the Guilt of nocent Ones. Andif one thar 1s, for 
ought we can diſcern, abſolutely innocent, yer ſuffers for another 
Man's Sin, ,tis moſt certain ſuch a Sufferer is not abſolutely innocent 
but ſomeway or other is guilty of the Sin, for which he ſuffers. : | 

5 Je Butif a f man be g juſt, and do 4 that which k 
is -#- lawful and right, ws 

eSo far is Gud from perverſe and froward Partiality in his Judg.” *pz 
ments, that none ever had cauſe to complain hereof. f Without re. "hn, 
ſpeQt of Perſons every one, who eyer he be. g If faultleſs and un. : 
ſtained, which may refer to his temper anddiſpoſition of Mind, þ]f 
his Converſation hath agreed with the Law of God, and Rule of Ju. 
ſtice in all Points, in private and publick Aﬀairs among Men. 

6 And hath norti eaten upon the mountains, neither 
hath lift up & his eyes to the Idols of the houſe of If. 
rael, neither hath * defiled his »2 neighbours wife, 5 
neither hath come « near to a * menſtruous o wo. ,” WM 


mat. " 
; Hath not committed Idolatry, firſt offering Sacrifice, and eating 19. | 
of the things ſacrificed ro Idols, whoſe Temples and Altars were on :,, 
Mountains, chap, 20. and 28. Hof. 4- 13- and where the Idolaters diduſs 7 
to feed one another in honour of the Ido]. k Neither adored, nor ex. 
peQted help from the Idols; thisis a religious Poſture, as P/al. 121, 1, 
They had Idols of their own, and ſome that deſpis'd the Heatheng 
Idols, yet were polluted with their own Idotatry, which was a grezr 
Sin, whatever the blind Idolater thought of ir. »: Hath not broken 
out into Adultery an#defil'd another Man's Wife, for every Man i; 
here included in Neighbour, as Luke 10. 36. = Abſtain'd from both 
familiar Converſe, and from conjugal Atts obſerving the Law of Gog 
herein, Levit. 15. 19, and 18.19, o Whois, and ought to be ſer 
apart becauſe of her monthly Courſes. 4 
7And hath.not p oppreſſed * any, 5: hath 9 reſtored, 
to the debtor his pledge *, hath r ſpoiled none by vio-1.| 
lence, hath / given his bread * to ther hungry, and hath; 


I; 
# Covered the naked with a garment. 2. 
Þ By rigorous dealing, grieve, injure, or damniſy and cauſe them * 
to cry out; chap. 22. 9. Zech. 7. Io. which is done many ways, and * 
how lily ſoever tis done, yet tis a crying Sin, Exod. 22. 21, 22,” 
23, 24. 94 Much of oppreſſion is in detaining what was laid in pawn,,' 
which was alwaysof greater Value than the thing that was taken up. © 
on it; and the Poor often pawn'd their moſt neceſſary Utenſils, and 1. 
often-times needed them e're they could redeem them; in ſuch Caſes" | 
God willnot have the Pledge detain'd ; as Exod. 22. 26. and Det. 24 "* 
6, 10,11, 12, 13, 17. but here Mercy ought to be preferred above 
Profit ; nor might the Pledge be any way leſſened by imbezelling it, F- 
r Nor by force robbed any one, and taken our of the Hand of the #7 
Owner, as the Thief doth : Whoſo hath forbore theſe Courſes of Jx- | 3 
humanity and Injuſtice. {With compaſſion hath given to the Neceſ. | * 
fitous, communicating to them as their Caſe required, and our Abili. | 


N 
bl PAL.” 
T 


by 
(© 
v 

. > « 
Lp LN 

_ 

> 
v 
* 


ty will reach. Bread here is largely tobe taken, 7/a. 58. 7.r Such astru- + 
ly want, are not able to help themſelves ; and we may with reaſon Ws 
think, have none to help them if we do not. « Clothed the naked, | M8 1;;. 
who elſe are like to periſh for want of Clothing; as70b 31. 19. Who 7 __ 
are ſuch, and live ſo juſt, ſo holy, ſo inoffenſive, fo beneficent a Life a | af 
mong Men, ſhall not ſuffer for the Sins others commit. FX by 
8 He that hath not * given forth upon » uſury, Þall i 
* neither hath taken z any #@ increaſe, that hath with." _ 
drawn his hand from 6 iniquity, hath executed c tus FM 5; 
judgment between man and man; > 9 
x Lent or put into anothers Hand, on condition of returning not | 8 bv! 
the ſame, or equal Value, but much more. » Biting Uſury (asthe | 8 #© 
Word implieth) which no doubt is prohibited, becauſe of the ol. Ma% 
ir coth to the Borrower, and the undue Gain it brings to the Lender, | 8 1-2 
A r1gorous impoſing Conditionsof Gain for the Loanof Money or þ © ficd 
Goods, and exaQting them without reſpe& to the condition of the þ * ſuc] 
Borrower, whether he gain or loſe ; whether Poverty occaſioned his | ® Jud 
Borrowing, or whether viſible likelihood of Gain by imploying the Þ Dy 
borrowed Goods ; which ſort of Uſury is againſt both the Law of | WM 272} 
Charity, as well as againſt the expreſs Willof God, who prohibits it, Þ his 
Exod. 22. 25. Lev. 25. 35, 36, 37. Deut. 23. 19, 20. z Any, is not Þ © and 
in the Hebrew, though Interpreters here inſcrt it for the greater Em- niry 
phaſis and weight. This increaſe here mentioned is by che Criticks ſelt 
in the Hebrew ſaid to be, either a receiving of the Borrower ſom: © © I 
Gratuity for lending that, for which the Borrower muſt pay Uſe alſo; ® MF fath 
a kind of oppreſſion too common among us, called Procuration, o: Þ + nor 


o the Lender or Borrowerin the Cafe. And fo the whole wil! i 


rs Caſe, and uſed bim with kindneſs as he would be uſed himſalf, th 7 


o Hath 4 walked in my e ſtatutes, and hath kept 1 - = 
y; he #4 juſt, he ſhall ſfureiy IT ;-* 
live, faith the Lord GOD. s T7 


4 Framed his Life, and managed his Converſation conform'd to che 


ACC 


EZEKEIKL 


as forgotten : ſo when God promiſerh 
' that he will not remember our Sins, 


\ 7 

1 TH8 JVI 
_ x according to the beſt of his Knowledg and Judgment, & Is juſt corn- | 
w» payatively, fo far righteous, that he ſhall not feel, nor needs he fear 
e;: " fuſf:r what others Sins bring upon chem, he ſhall not ſaffer what he 

I hath nor deſerved. # Shall be delivered from Famine, Peſtilence and 
* o1]. fee 7! al. 34. . his Teeth ſhall not 
þ b- Curord, thail ſez good Days, on Pſal 2h: 706 FEY . 
th b. ft on edge, whatever quarelling Sinners fay,or think; bur the Righ- 
fright ecomnefs of the Righteous ſhall be upon him. 
© au je 10 © If & he begeta fon 7hat ;5a || / robber, a m ſhed. 
n+ 5" or of blood, and r44t doth the 7 || like to ary o one of 

If . theſe things, 

Us : + The juſt Man before deſcrib'd, who tranſmits his Nature, bnt 
p: cangitt tranſmit his Vertues to his Son. / That by force and violence 

ICT - eats over the Law of God and Man, takes away what is another 
lf-, ? Man's; ſuch a Thief as ſticks not to deſtroy, thar he may rob. » 
fe, ly That is a murderer ; for ſhedding of blood here, is not leſs than Mur- 
Wy) der, as by the Phraſe, -Ger. 9. 6. Deut. 21.7. 1 Sam. 25.33. Pal. 79. 
V. |; 10. »u The thing that is Brother to one of theſe, as the Hebrew may 

-- "M tear, There are things like theſe, which deſtroy either the Life or 
INg Ig. ; Eftares of our Neighbour ; for there are many Methods and Arrtifices, 
0n <9, which fuck violent Ones uſe, 6 Ir might ſeem to ſpeak one ſingle 
uſe Ac unpardonable : but I refer this Text to that Gen. 9. 6. and Num. 

TXo 15 31, The Law doth condemn ſuch to Death ; Man muſt nor,tho” 
: be God my pardon ſuch a one. ; 
wo: 11 And that p doeth not 94 any of r thoſe duties, but 
ken even hath eaten s upon the mountains, and z defiled his 
ns neighbours wite, | | | 
oh p In the former Verſe, Sins which ace Violations of the Law by a 

. Man's doing the Evil which was forbidden ; in the former Part of this 
[et V-rle, the Sins which are omiſſions of Good required, are mentioned, 
yy Negle&s all, frames not to dothem. » Vid. wer. 6,7, 8. } Vid. 
lod fr. 6, 7 Fer, 6. | : 

$- 12 Hath « oppreſſed the x poor and needy, hath » ſpoil-/ 
Al Me ed by violence, hath not = reſtored the pledge, aud hath 
ws, a lite up his eyes to the idols, 5 hath committed abomi- 
and” nation, 

22, « Vid. on vcr. 7, & In the ſeventh Perſe the Words are more large, 
awn, condemning the opprefling of any one ; here they do more particular- 
| Ups; iy condemn opprefling the Poor, which have little to maintain, and 
, and ;, Icſ5 to defend themſelves; and needy 1s added, to render us more ſen. 
Caſes | fible of the greatneſs of this Sin, which takes away Right where we 
1.24 ſhould ſhew Charity. » See wer. 7. let. vr. z See wer. 7. let, 9. a See 
bove wer. G. let. k. 6 7. ce. Come near to a menſtruous Woman, which is 
agit ver. 6, exprefly named, and here pointed at, or elfe Idolatry. 

f rhe 13 Hath c given forth upon ufury, and hath d taken in- 
: ” "© creaſe : ſhall he thene live 2 he ſhall f not live : g he hath 
but. | - done / all theſe & abominations, he ſhall 7 ſurely die, his 
«try. {Sf biocd (hall be upon him. 
eaſon c See wv. 8. let. x,and y, d See v.8. let. z, and s. e Do you think 
aked, his Father's Righteouſneſs ſhall preſerve him from the Puniſhment his 
Who own Unrightcouſneſs deſerveth, my Law threatneth, and my Juſtice | 
ife 2 inflicteth ? Shall he not. with other Sinners be ſpoiled, beſieged, die 
» by the ſword or Famine, or languiſh in a Jong Captivity, and there 
fury P: dic? f A dccilive Anſwer to the former Queſtion ; Such a one ſhall 

Ta not proſper, nor long eſcape the Stroaks of my Juſtice, and the An. 
with. Px 1wcr is parallel with chat chap 17. 10. g ls perſonally involved in the 

true | 8 Sins which are worthy of Death, and which are fo expreſly threat. 

Se ned by Law and Prophets. + Not only wink'd ar, or not hindred, 
2 bur hath been a forward, voluntary, aCtive doer of them. 7 That 
18 0 | ite here, and elſewhere in this Prophet, and in others, charged 
asthe | on the Jews as the Caule of their Calamities at this _ k Great 
njury " *&Þ Fnormities, Sins to be abominated and hated, not pratiſed and juſti- 
ender, IF ficd by ſhamelels Sinners. / Moſt certainly die, or if you ſuppoſe 
Wy YT 28 ſuch an one finally impenitenr, he ſhall ſurely die under Temporal 
pf the " & Judgments ; and fo by firſt Death fall under the ſecond Deata alto : 
ed lis L388 Dying he ſhall die, a Hcbrew Phraſe, and very full. m Heb. ,Tis plu- 
3g the " "& 731, Bloods ; both the Blood of the Innocent which he murdered, and 
_ of | 2 his own Blood which thereby he forfeited ; the Blood of his own Soul 
1KS If, and Life; that is, the whole blame of his Miſery in Time and Erer- 
1s not niry, ſhall lie upon himſfeif, who brought all thoſe Sorrows on him- 
_ ſelt by his own Wickednefles.. 
gy 14 < Now » lo, if he beget a ſon that » ſeeth p all his 
e allo; father*s ſins which he hath done,and'q conlidereth,and doeth 
on, or not the like, 
ſe tho n A third Inſtance in a ſuppoſed Son's Son to clear the Caſe fully : 
hana The juſt Father lives, his unjuſt Son dieth, but the Grandſon of the 
I ſup- juſt, ſeeing his Father's Sias, and fleeing them, ives, olt is rare that 
e Day the Children of debauched Parents do think, or diſcern evil in theit 
ed the Parents Courſes, but blindly fo!low them, withour putting difference 
e tobe between what is good, and what is bad, in that the Father doth : ſuch 
na ft ſuff.r for their own Sins more than for their Fathers. But if it be ſo 
f Len- that the Son of a Wicked Father a& like a Man, bring his Father's 
drawn doings to the Rule, and thereby diſcover the Wickedneſs and Danger 
c Tis of them, and do not the like, he ſhall not ſuffer for his Father's Sins. 
if tie *# 2? Th: kinds, or many of the ſeveral ſorts of his Sins; for 'tis not poſſi. 
akess RES ble the Son ſhould ſee all the particular As of Sin done by his Father. 
2c anſ; Ree JLooks throughly into theſe things, and weighs the Importance of! 
on by = them conſiders God is our Sovereign, ought to be obeyed, will bleſs | 
vill a the Obedieht, will piniſh the Diſobedient ; that his bleſſing is the 
orroW- | Life and Welfare, his Curſe is the Death and Miſery of Souls; that e- 
if, 15 27 very Man ſhould look particularly to his own Duty and Happineſs ; 
877 bat 'ris berter be happy with God, obeying him, than to periſh 
pt my | . with a Father by imitating his Vices; that God will be gracious to the 
Firely : | Obcdient, according to his rich Grace, though they be the Children of | 
EE Pilegious Idolaters rnd Adulterers, &c. on which, or ſuch like Con- 
(11erations, if the Son chooſe Holineſs, and walk in it, he ſhall live, 
ro the tis End ſhall not, becauſe his doings were not, be like his Father's. 
_— ..15 T5at hath nor eaten upon the mountains, neither hath 
+ Heart ltr up his eyes to the idols of the houſe of Iſrael, hath not 
cords defiled 


&d his neighbours wite. 
Y ol, IT. 


Chap. AVIL 


16 Neither hath oppreſſed any, hath +: not with-ho!dent Heb. er 
the pledge, neither hath ſpoiled by violence, bt hath given? _ wn 
his bread to the hungry, and hath covered the naked with a Sg 
garment, pleage, 

Theſe two Verſes are explained already in the fame Words, {2 
ver. 6, and 7. 

17 That hath r taken off bis hand from t&- poos, 5 
that hath not received uſury nor increats, hath executed 
my judgments, hath walked in my [tatutes ; he ſhall not 
die for the iniquity of his father, he ſhall ſurely live. 

r,WithdraWn his Hand. from hurting or wronging the Poo -ho' he 
had Power and Might to do it ſecurely. 5 Ses wer: $, 9. where theſe 
Particulars are explain'd. ) 


18 As for his father, becauſe he # cruelly oppreſicd, 


ſpoiled his brother by violence, and did har which 7s not 
good among his people, lo, even he ſhall dic in his 
iniquity. | | 

z Oppreſſing, he oppreſt ; and ſpoiling, ſpoiled ; did ail the Mig 
chief he could, he ſhall die. 

19 T = Yet fay x ye, Why ? doth nat the y» fon 
bear the iniquity of che father ? when the ſon hat; done 
chat which is lawful and righe, and hath & kent all iay 


*. 
r*< 
81 


ho 
4 Le 


| ſtatutes, and hath done them, he ſhall fare; i. 


« Notwiſtanding this Method of the Divine Jul:;-- ENG: 
ders to every one his own Work, and gives to every on: -..- 
his own Doings. x Proud, quarreling, f/f-juſtifying LU: 

Idolaters, Adulterers, Murderers, Ulurers, Opprefſors wii: 

your own Sins, for which you are puniſh'd, bur cry you ace inno; + 
that your Fathers ſinn'd and you Suffer. y Th: Propher here br; 
in what he met with among them, til] every wh-re they in{i{} on'r, 
that they deferved not by any Sin of their own what they now 1i:iF2r- 
ed,and ſo would caſt the Sin and Guilr on their Fathers,and the Rigerr 
and Severity on God, and clear themſelves to all, which the Proper 
anſwers by a Recapitulation of what he had more largely ſpoken, 
and avows it, That the righteous Son of an unrighteour Father ſhall 
live, and not die. & As P/al. 119, 44. 

20 The 4 ſoul that ſinneth, it ſhall die: * the fon ſhall *Dcur.24. 
not bear the 5 iniquity of the father, neither ſhall the 16- 
father bear the iniquity of the fon ; the c righteouſneſs of Et. 
of the righteous ſhall be upon him, and the 4 wickednefs "civon 
of the wicked ſhall be upon him 5 


s Vide w#F. 4. let. b. b This isa moſt ufqueſtionable Truth ; andJ*"-3 29 
tho' perhaps ir may ſe:m otherwiſe in ſome caſes, yet could wee ſee 3” 
perfeQly the Connexion between Perſons and Perſons, and how they 
are one; could we ſee the Connexion of Sins and Sins,and how eafi} ,, 
ſecretly, and undiſcerned Men become guilty of the ſame Sins, we 
ſhould,'tis likely, ſee Father and Son, tho' perhaps one of them might 
not do the Evil, both guilty, and neither puniſh'd for the Sin farther 
than the Sin was his own : nor do the Scriptures, Ed. 20. 5. and 
Deut. 28. 18, »» Menace innocent Children, nor doom Perſons to Pt. 
niſhment for Sins from which they are fully and wholly fre ; bur if 
Children ſhall follow their Fathers in Sin, or juſtify chem in ic, or 
not mourn for it, or not deprecate, or whatever way there is by 
which Children may make the Sins of Progenitors become their own - 
then if they die for thoſe Sins,'tis for them as they are their own Sins, 
not as they are their Fathers. c 7/a. 3. 10. will fully exp'ain this 
Paſſage, Ir ſhall be well wlth the Righteous, for he ſhall eat the Bryir 
of his doing,he ſhall be rewarded as a righteous one, &d The Roverd 
of Wickedneſs, /. e. woful Punithmenc ſhall be executed upon ci22 
Wicked, as ſa. 3. 11. 


2T e But * the f wicked will g turn from + all 7 fins" Ch. 
that he hath committed, and keep & all my ſtatntes, and do ** 
that which is lawful and right, he ſhall / ſurely live, he 


| ſhall not die, | 


' e So far 1s God from puniſhing the Sins of nocent Parents on inno- 
cent Children, as in the laſt Inſtance, v. 14, to the ead of ». 25. 
appears, that he doth nos puniſh the Gnilty for their own Sins, 
which they repent of and forſake. Our God, who merciu'ly par. 
donerh the Penitent all their own Sins, will not, cannor be ſuppoſed 
to charge innocent ones with the Sins that are not their own. f Or 
a wicked Man, any wicked Man among you, O 7:ws-! who charge mz 
with ſuch Severity: If the moſt notorious Sinner. g 7. e. Rejcnry, 
for *tis expreſt by that word rrhich implies Repentance, and by th 
ſubſequent Fruits of Repentance. þ Ir muſt be a total rencvacing 
of Sin. 3 The Penitent are moſt afflited with the Remembrin:- of 
their own Sin, that which they committed, and watch'd moſt 2 7aintt 
it for the furure. & Reſolved to endeavour ſeriouſly an4 diiizncly, 
(For in God's merciful Judgment, a gracious peaitenc S041 keeps what 
he would keep, keeps all his Statutes in that he world crangret; nons 
of them.) 1 He ſhall be pardoned, «ſcape Puinithin nt, ic tha!t bs 
well with him : and this 1s the conſtant Mcthod of Goi's Proctzedings 
with his People ; He calls ta them to himſelf by Promiſes of Pardon, 
he never frights them from him by threatainy to punith others 
Faults 02 their Backs. Leave your own, and you ſhall aever juffer 
for others S1ns. 


22 # All » his tranſgreſlions that » he 1atn cor 
they ſhall not be 4 mention'd unto him: 1n his ” rig! 
neſs that he hath done, he ſhall live. 

1m Not one of all, ſo the Hebrai(#2 1s, every one ſhall be forgiven: 
» Perfonal, a&ual Sins, in which he was not acceflary, but principa). 
o Tho' great Sins. p Formerly did commir bur now repeateth tor. 
q Not remembred, 7. e. impurced to, or puni{h'd oa him, they ſhalt he 
co parJon, he promileth char 
or This Penitent, whoſe lat 
Works are Righteouſnes, proper Fruits of Repentance, ſhall live, be 

[V] rewatded, 


L 


rtath commicted, 


J 23 FY? 


FOSITS, Se 


\ 


TSR 


reward, and bleſſed for his Righteouſneſs, yet without Meric. Life 
ſhould be the Fruit of his Repentance, and Righteouſneſs. 
* Ch. 33. 23 Have* I anyr pleaſure at all that the wicked ſhould 
71. die? faith the Lord GOD : and s not that he ſhould return 
from his ways, and live ? 
- Now, O ye perverſe Jews ! if by theſe Truths you will judge of 


EZEKIE L, 


me, could it enter the Thoughts of any one of you, that I ſhould, 
23 delighring in the Death of Sinners, impute other Mens Sins to you 
that you might die for them, when I could not ilay you for your own ? 
Think not thus of the God of Mercy, who pities, forbears, and 
tho at laſt hath puniſh'd obſtinate Sinners, yet nevergdelighted in 
their Death. 5s Is it not my Command that you and oth@' Sinners re- 
pent ? Have nor you and others found Mercy upon ſeeming Repen- 
tance ? And as for that Repentance which is ſound, it ever had a full 
Pardon : And the Promiſe of Life and Pardon hath been repeated and 
confirmed to you again and again; ſo that 'tis the moſt unjuſt, un- 
reaſonable and impious Quarrel, you O Jews, have taken up againſt 
your God, who would have you repent of your own Sins,and you 
ſhould live ; but if you repent not, you ſhall die burfor your own 
Sins, not your Fathers. Since therefore T have no pleaſure in the 
Death of him that dieth, ſaith the Lord God, turn your ſelves, and 
live ye, as 'tis ver. 32. for this 23d Verſe equally declares God's 
Mercy, and our Duty ; the one in his Pleaſure at our Return, the 


other in our pleaſing him here in. | 


24 T ? But * « when the x righteous y turneth away from 
= his righteouſneſs, and « committeth iniquity, 2d doth 
þ according to all the c abominations that the 4 wicked 
2zay doth, e ſhall he live? f All his righteouſneſs that he 


hath done ſhall not be g mentioned : in his treſpaſses that he 
hath 4 treſpaſſed, ws in his ſin that he hath ſinned, in z 


them ſhall & he die. 

: After the ſtating the Equity of God's Ways in his dealings with 
Parents and Children, and his Mercy in dealing with Sinners that 
return, according to his own Promiſe, he proceeds to vindicate the 
Equiry of his Ways in another caſe. « Or zf ; ſhould it fo happen 
at any time. x One who really had obſerv'd the Commands of the 
Law, not done the abominations the Wicked do, but done the Good 
which the righteous doth, and in the ſight of man appears as righ- 
teous and as good as any one ; whoſe Apoſtacy is firſt full Proof of 
his Unſoundneſs and Hyprocriſy. y Changeth his courſe into ſinful 
PraCtices, like the wicked. z There is a Righteouſneſs which is of 
God, and there is a Righteouſneſs which is a Man's own,fuch as does 
ariſe from a Man's own Reaſon and Will, improved by common Grace, 
ar Education, or awed by Fears, or ſway'd by Intereſt, or maintain'd 
by ſome failing Spring which may eaſily dry up ; theſe righteous ones 
eaſily fall away, and of ſuch the Prophet ſpeaks. a Makes Sin his 
Work and Buſineſs, John 8. 34. 1 John 3.8, 9. b Forgets all better 
Rules, derides his own former Preciſneſs, and ſhakes off all Re. 
Nraints, that he may run to the exceſs of Sin. c Recounted wer, 10, 
IT, 12, 13- d See ver. 21. e Do you think I will be partial asto 
acquit him from real Wickedneſs committed with his whole Heart, 
from his laſt Works which are abominable ? Do you think his firſt 
heatleſs, partial, temporary Righteouſneſs will counter-ballance his 
laſt and final Apoſtacy ? I tell you nay, but he ſhall die in it. f Tho 
he could produce his own Righteouſneſs ( as Heb. ) and theſe multi- 
plied to many. all, and that they were really done ; yer theſe ſhould 
not avail be fore a juſt judg, who by a Law that requires Man ſhould 
ever be and do what he was and did at beſt, is to determine his Re. 
wards or Puniſhments, according to what the Man is at laſt, not ac. 
cording to what he was or ſeemed to be at firſt. s The Parable tells 
us, Mat. 25. *44. 45. ſome will plead that they did what they had op- 
portunity of doing ; and others, Mar. 7. 22. will mention what they 
have done : but,tho they may mention theſe, the juſt Judg will nor, 
nor the Law by which they are to be judged, will not allow it for a 
good and ſufficient Plea : See the Phraſe, ver. 22. hþ This Expreſſion 
ſhews that this Man's Heart was on his Sin : In his Trangreſſion he 
trangrefſed with tull bent of Mind, with Delight and Conſent he did 
what he did, and could not ſay, 7 do what I would not; or, ſo then "tis 
20 more 1 that do it, but Sin that dwelleth in me : as Rom. 7. 17, Leſtany 
ſtumble at Sight of Infirmities in all, or needleſly diſquier themſelves 
with Fears of Wrath at laſt, becauſe they cannor be finleſs, yet they 
do not fall under the CharaGter of ſuch as here are threatned. 7 In 
theſe great, wilful, continued, and multiplied Sins. & Every ſuch ob- 
durate and final Apoſtate ſhall be condemned and puniſhed temporally 
and eternally ; and therefore look to it ye wicked Jews, and conſider 


ye ſinful Chriſtians. 
Ch.33, 25 © !Yet ye * ſay, The 2 way of the» LORD is not o 
17, 22 equal. p Hear now, O q houſe of lfrael,Is r not my way 


equal ? are not your s ways unequal ? ; 

I You perſiſt in your hard, unjuſt, and ungodly Sentiments of an 
Inequality in my ways, and are not afraid to ſpeak as much, » 
*T'weretoo much for Sinners to charge God with Inequality in a ſingle 
A&,but here are fome dare cenſure the Way, the whole Management 
of Aﬀairs. n Strange Frowardneſs, own him for Lord,yet condemn 
his Government; grant his Sovereign Authority, and yet arraign the 
Exerciſe of it. o Not right, teddy, or conſiſtent with his own De- 
claration and Law ; ſo the word Heb. This prodigiouſly wicked Afler- 
tion they build upon a moſt groſs Ignorance, and intolerably proud 
Conceit of their own Righteouſneſs ; We, ſay they, are righteous, 
not wicked, yet puniſh'd : Unheard of Pride, to condemn God, with 
whom is no Iniquity, and acquit themſelves, in whom is all Iniquity! 
p Canſider what I have propos'd to clear my Juſtice, hear me and my | 
Defence e're you condemn me, weigh well my Defence. 9 Both you 
that are in Jeruſalem, and you allo that are in Babylon at Tel-abib. 
+ Do you ſpeak what you think ? Does your Judgment thus conclude, 
when you know or might know, that this is the Genera] RuleI pro- 
ceed by ; the Righteouſneſs of the Righteous is upon him,and the Wic- 
kedneſs of the Wicked is upon him ? Can there be Inequality here ? 
s Which you chooſe, keep, plead for, and obſtinately hold to ; theſe 
are the crooked, unſteddy, and unjuſt Ways : for the Queſtion 1s to be 


*Ch. 3.20. 
and 32. 
$2, 33. 


26 t When a righteous #4 turneth away from hi: 
righteouſnels, and committeth iniquity, and dieth bi 
them ; for his iniquity that he hath done, ſhall he 
die. 


t See ver. 24. where the whole of this Verſe is explained. 


27 « Again, when the wicked 7a» turneth aw; 
from his wickedneſs that he hath committed, and doth, 
co which is lawful and right, he ſhall fave his ſoy 
alive. ; 
u See ver. 21, 22. Where this Verſe is interpreted. 
25 x Becauſe he y conlidereth, and & turneth away from 
all his crangreflions that he hath committed, he « ſhall {ure] 
live, he ſhall nor die. d 
x God's Promiſe 1s to pardon, ſpare, and V ; 
ſuch therefore ſhall not "%y See ny I4. agg Ao hetar wk 
ver. 28. let. g. a Secure ſelf-juſtifying Sinners miſapprehend the 
Juſtice of God, as we have heard; and repenting Sinners are Apt to 
miſtruſt the Mercy of God, and therefore 'cis doubly aſſured in this 
Promiſe. 
29 b Yet faith the houſe of Iſfael, The way of the 
LORD is not equal. O houſe of Iſrael, are not my ways 
equal ? are not your ways unequal ? | 

6 This is the third or fourth Appeal to the very Conſciences of 
Iſrael, on whoſe fide the Injuſtice lieth. The words are already un. 
folded, wer. 25. and the Juſtice of God, and the wickedneſs of ſich 
Quarrellers declared. 
' 30 c Therefore T will 4judg you, O e houſe of Ifae! 

every one according to g his ways, faith the Lord IK 
GOD: h repent, and #7 turn * || your ſelves from alli: 
your trangreffions ; ſo & iniquity ſhall not be your |: 


Tune. 

c Since You perſiſt to implead me of Iniquiry in my Judsme 
after all I have ſaid to clear my ſelf; there king Nh bien 
I may be cleared, but this, to proceed with you according to your 
doings. 41 will debate, determine with you. e Who do keep up 
this Opinion of me ; the Proud contemners of God, and Juſtifiers of 
themſelves. f None ſhall be overlook'd or excuſed, every one ſhall 
be judged. g Your Ways ſhall be the ſtandard and Meaſure if 
they are good, you ſhall receive good ; if evil, you ſhall ſuffer evil - 
and then there can be no colour of Complaint. +h *T'will be ſafeft fo; 
| you that are proud Quarrellers, be therefore adviſed, repent, and ven. 
ture not your Life and Welfare on ſelf-juſtification : ſome others there 
were of better Temper, they are exhorted by Repentance to pre. 
vent Wrath, and prepare for the Mercy which the Lord ever ſhewth 
to the Penitent, as wer, 21.22. # Or, return your ſelves, perſwade 0. 
thers alſo. ( Tour ſelves is not in Hebr.) & Neither your ungodiy 
PraCtices, nor your unjuſt Opinions of me and my ways, ſaith the 
Lord. 1 The cauſe of your Temporal and Eternal Miſery : or thu, 
Ceaſe from Sin, then you'l judge aright, and not be ſtumbled ar the 
ſuppoſed Inequality of my Judgments : Who leave Sin, can ſee what 
Mercy ſpared, pardoned, ſave them ; but who live in Sin, will haye 
ſoft thoughts for Sin, and hard Thoughts of God. 

31 Y » Caſt away from you all » your trangreflion 
whereby ye have tranſgreſſed, and. o make you a new *'| 
heart, and a new fpirit 3 for why p will ye die, O houſ3 
of Iſrael ? | ; 

7 Not only ceaſe from Sin, but with Indignation throw it away a*Þ 
a loathſome, pernicious thing, or as a Burden that will ſink you. 
s As God requires, ſo 'tis the Property of true Repentance, that it 
does frame the Heart againſt its own Sins. o Open your Eyes, and 
let the clear convincing Light of my words, Arguments, and Pro. þ * 
ceedings ſhine upon you : do not obſtinately harden your Hearts, th | 
you ſhould retain your old Prejudices againſt my Juſtice and Mercy; 7 
but receive.new Opinions and Tenents concerning the things I have 
been clearing to you, that new Judgment may produce a renewed and 
reformed Courſe of Life. Your old Heart 1s made upof ſtrange No- 
tions of your Innocence, and the Inequality of the Ways of your 
God, and this influenceth your Spirit to Pride, quarreling with God, 
who might have convinced you by ſeverer Methods which ſhould 
have put you as far out of doubt about the Cauſe of your Puniſhmenr, 
as out of hope of Deliveragce from it : Or elſe thus, I have propoſed 
enough to change a conſidering Heart, to renew the Spirit of any 
thinking Man,co-operate with me. See your Sin, Guilt, Puniſhment, 
all yours, and from your ſelves ; repent of Sin, confeſs your Guilt, 
deprecate your Puniſhment. p There is no other way for you to b:! 


reſolired into 2 vehement Aſeveration. 


delivered ; your old Ways and Heart will end in Death : this is anAr 
gument taken from their Danger by old Sins. . 
32 q ForT haveno * pleaſure in the Death of him thit 


dieth, faith the Lord GOD: wherefore » turn || your ſebws,|, 


and - live ye. . 

q Another Argument to perſwade to Converſion, tak?n from the grt-1? 
cious Nature of God, who taketh Pleaſure in the return of a Sinner : for;(; 
that 1s the meaning of the Words. Sinners diſpleaſe God when they 
undo themſelves; they pleaſe him when they rerurn. » Do what you 
can, leave what Sins you have loved. 5s Tis a Promiſe. 


CHAP. XIX. 


A lament ation for the wicked adminſtration and miſerable end of the Prints 
of Iſrael, under the parable of lions whelps, 1 9. and for Feruſaie, 
under the parable of a wine waſted by the eaſt-wind, and a fire out 
her branches, 10—14. 


I & 


F Oreover, take b thou up a c lamentation for th! | 
þ princes of e Ifrae], | | 


a Aud Heb. b Son of Man, Ezekiel, declare what Iamentable St2'* 6 
the Princes of 7ſae! are fallen into. Propound it by Parable. 1% 
uſually expreſt in Verſe, as Jeremiah did in his Lamentations, and a 
appears, 2 Chron, 35. 25. but the Prophet is here dire&ecd "- 's 


o 


Aj aD. NI Y. 


as vv. 2. « Tho they were Kings, yet, becauſe ſub- 
or Egypt, they are by a diminurivelefſening Term, 
and theſe were Jehoahzz, Jehoiachim, Fehojachin, and 
dckiah. e Tho they had but the ewo Tribes under them, yet be- 
cauſe ſome of 1ſracl, that eſcap'd the captivating Power of Salma- 
naar, were joined with the two Tribes, they are called by the name 


f Iſrg'l, Fn | | E 
; " fay, f What « g thy 5 mother? a # lioneſs * 
ſhe & lay down among lions, ſhe / nouriſhed her »2 whelps 


among young ” 110ns. - 

f What Reſemblance ſhall I uſe to ſet out the Nature, Deportment, 
ard State of the Mother of thele. Princes? An unhappy Mother of 
unhappy Children : Or, alas! chy Mother, &:. £ One of theſe was 
en the Throne at once, and therefore the Prophet ſpeaks to one at 
a time in the ſingular Number. +4 The Land of 7Juden and Jeruſalem, 
the chief Ciry of it, the Royal Family of David. i Though choſen 
of God to execute Juſtice, defend the Poor, to be his Vice-gerents, 
and to delight in Mercy ; yetonceadvanced, they ſoon degenerated 
into the fierce and ravening Nature of the Lioneſs, and as violently 
ſeized the Prey. & Aflociated, coucl'd, and rew familiar with, by 
Leagues, Commerce, and Intermixture of Marriages with neigbour 
Kings, call'd here Lions; thou didft learn their Manners, and grew- 
et fierce and bloody, as they, 1 The Heb, includes both her bring- 
ing forth many, and her advancing them to Greatneſs, The Royal 
Family of that. Nation had many Kings, and ſome very great : but 
the time the Prophet points now at 1n particular, was after Joi, 
whoſe CharaCter, given, Fer. 22. 16. 1s, that he judged the Peor and 
Needy ; but his Succeſſors were of another temper, as Jer. 22. 13, 14, 
15,17, 24.e. her Sons, Succeſſors to the Crown, which could be 
call'd nothing e}ſe, to keep the Decorum of the Parable. 7 Either fo- 
ceign Princes and Kings, or elſe ſome of the fiercer, unjuſter, aſpiring 
and tyrannizing Princes athome; for ſome ſuch there were in theſe, 
as well as in Rehoboam's time, who would have the Son's Finger thicker 
than the Father's Lqyns. 


3 And o ſhe p brought up 9 one of her r whelps : it 
s became a young lion, and itz learned to « catch the 
prey, it, x devoured y men. 


o See wer. 2. let h. p Not as a Nurſe, (the word is of other im- 
port) but advanced, promoted, or cauſed him to take the Throne af. 
ter the Slaughter of Jofah. q This was Jehoahaz the ſecond Son of 
Feſiah, of whom *'ts ſaid, 2 Kings 23. 3o. and 2 Chron. 36. 1. the Peo- 
ple made him King; for God hath not made him ſo by Primogeni- 
ture, and Right of Succeſſion, r They lookt upon him as a warlike 
Prince, fitter for ſuſtaining the Troubles of thoſe martial Times, 
than his eldeſt Brother, and therefore ſtrain a Point of Law and Right. 
5 Soon ſhewed his fierce, haughty, cruel, and bloody Diſpoſition, as 
appears 2 Kings 23. 30, 31, 32. tho he continued but three Months, 
and ſome odd Days, wherein to play his Pranks. # Had Tutors, and 
Councellors that ſhew'd him the Method, and he an apt Scholar in an 
evil, School, learnt apace. « To ſeize firſt, and then to tear the Prey, 
by Frauds and Violence to hunt, take, and devour that he took, as 
Lions uſe. » Eat up, as the word notes, livedupon. y Man, Adam 
the weaker ſort ; or it may be in thoſe divided times 44am may im- 
ply ſuch as were cruſht, becauſe- they were not of the tyrannizing 
Faction; at that time Pharaoh had ſome that inclined to him, and 
perhaps theſe were uſed hardly by Jehoahaz. 


: Hieroglyphict;, 
ject to Babylon, 
Called Princes, 


EZERTITE L.. 


late , and the fulnef thereof by the noſe of his 
ing. | 


revolt which are mentioned, 2 K:ngs 24. I, 2. 


7 he was taken in their pit. bye” 
7 Which were Feudatory to Nebu:hadnczzar,and were bound to afliſt : has 


G roar- 


I choiachivr, tm On viewz2ot only heard-of ther, butſetting upo' 


them - violently, and taking them, he came to know their Palaces, 
which are here called, what he made them, deſolare; ſo the word 


Iſaiah 13. 22. n Or it may be rendred Widows, and then'ewill refer 
to ſuch whoſe Husbands this Lion devoured, and thereby occaſioned 
their petitioning to him ; and thus he knew them, whom he had made 
deſolate; but the former beſt ſures what follows. « Pilling, polling. 
and by ExaCtions driving the Inhabicanrs out by his Cruelty and Ty- 
ranny. p The -whole Land, or the Country fped as ill as the Ciries; 


and fo 'twas empried of Men, Riches and Strength. q By the perpe- 


tual violent Threats of this cruel King, which are called his roaring ; 
and fo Prov. 19. 12. which terrified his Neighbours in the three Years 


8 Then * the » nations fer 5 againſt him on 7 er 
from the « provinces, and * 


him in his Wars. s By Orderof the King of Babylon, gathered roge- 
ther to hunt this Lion, to make War onthis revolting King. #Sur- 
rounded him thar he might not eſcape. 4 Which belonged to the Bx- 
byloniſh Kingdom, and were governed by Prelidents, or perry Kings, 
Vatlals to Nebuchadmczzar. x Soon got him -into their  Toils, as 
Hunrſmen get a Lion, or other wild Beaſt into their Net. »y See 
Ver. 4: let. 8. 


9 And z 
c brought him to the 4 king of Babylon ; they brought 
hira into e holds, that his f voice ſhould no more be 
heard on the g mountains of Iſrael. 


z The Armies of the ſeveral Nations, or the chief Commanders of 
thoſe Armies. &# In Grates, or great Cage, as wild Beaſtsare convey- 
ed. 6 'Tis reported. they put an Iron Collar about his Neck; and faſt. 
ned en lon Chain to it. c He was carried that long Journey in Chains. 
enough to change his roaring Lion-like into the Roaringsof a deſpe- 
rate miſerable Captive. 4 Where-ever he was (for ſome diſpute is 
wherher now in Babylon, or elſewhere with ſome of his Armies). How 
ever, 'tis this unhappy King was carried to Ncbuchadnezzar, or died on 
the way perhaps, by Command of Nebuchadnezzar fo uſed, that hard 
Uſage killed him, and then they caſt him outunburied, as Fer. 22. 18, 
19. forerold. e Kept him ſafe that he ſhould not eſcape, or brought 
him to Babylon, which, tho one City, yet ſo large;and had ſo greatand 
many Forts about it, that it ſeemed to be made up of many ſtrong 
Holds. f That he might never more cither afright, or kill, or devour 
any of his People and Subjetts in the Land of 1/-ael. g In a comely 
Obſervance of the Parable, the Kingdom isthe Mountains, when the 
King is the Lion that rangeth and roareth on them. T'womore Li- 
ons of the ſame temper, and alike miſerable in their end I doubr not 
are included in this Emblem ; and by theſe the Jews might know 
what would become of Jeconiah, called alſo Jehojachin, and of Zeackiah, 
who was called Mattaniah | 


10 © þ Thy # mother « like a & vine in /thy || blood; 
planted by the » waters ; ſhe was # fruitful and full o of 
branches by reaſon of many waters. 


The 10th Verſe begins the ſecond part of the Chapter. h O thon 
Prince of Iſrael. iSee wer. 2. k Frequently {o compared, P/zl. 80.8, 


4 The & nations alſo heard of him, he was taken in 


their 2 pit, and they brought him with 5 chains unto the 
land of Egypt. 


x The Egyptians heard and Conſidered what he did ; they had Intel- 
ligence of Jchoahaz's Rigours againſt them, and all that abetted their 


Intereſt ; this made them (as Neighbours do when a Lion is reported 
ro waſte their Flocks) gather together againſt him. @ Or, in their 
Ner, as Hunters in thoſe Parts dig Pits, and ſpread Nets; into which 


they drive the hunted Lion, or Bear. So here, or elſe thus : This 
Lion was taken at Jaſt tho he did ſome Miſchief firſt to the Egyptians, 


ſo the word may bear. & The Story of it you have 2 Kings 23. 33. 


theic barbarous Conquerors uſed himas Men uſe a Lion, put and keep 
Egypt, where he died, Jer. 22 


him in Chains, carried him Captive into 
Io, 11, 12. with's Kings 23. 34. 


5 Now c when ſhe ſaw that ſhe had waited, and her 
hope was loſt, then 4 ſhe took another of her whelps, and 


made him a e young lion, 


c Upon the ill Succeſs of Jehoahaz, Jeruſatem, and the Jews in the 
Land, fell from ther Hopes, under great Diſappointments ; for Fehoa- 
haz is taken, depoſed, carried Captive by the Egyprians, inſtead of 
ſhaking off the Egyptian Yoke. &d Yet 'tis ſaid, 2 Chron. 36. 4. and 
2 Kings 23. 34: that theKing of Zzypr made the next King, both true ; 
the Jews with Pharaoh's liking, or Pharaoh with the Jews Conſent, 


eKing, and 


auvance him, whether 'twere Jehoiachim, or Jehoiachin, 
infuſed the Lion-like Maxims for his Rules, 


6 And f he went g up and down among the 5 lions, he 
became a young 4 lien, and learned to catch theprey, 


and devoured &k men. 


} Jchoiachim. g This is ſaid of him, becauſe he continued 11 Years 
, and ſo many Years, 98a Lion, tore and devoured ; 
has was taken as ſoon almoſt as he firſt ventured our to! 
Manners and Uſages of the 
thoſe ;barbarous Tyrants, with whom he entred 
as he ſaw good, laid aſide the Law of God, which was to 
g and People. ; Grew ſtrong, fierce, ravenous, unſatiable: 
4 wherethe reſt is explained. & Either his Neighbours the 
_ ; Or he devoured his own Subje&s, impove- 
D » and eat out their Eſtates, ſpared not the Prophets, or their 

rophecy, Jer, 36. and Uriah he ſlew, ch. 26: 23. What Jehorachim 


on the Throne 
whereas Joboa 
bunt the Prey. hCarried it after the 
Heathen Kings, 
Leagues, 
| guide Kin 
Vid. wer. 
Ammonites and Moabites ; ot 


was, appears Jer. 22. T3, I4, IS, 17. 


7 And! he m khew 


laid 0 waſte their 
Vol. II 


7 their || deſolate » palaces, ahd he 
cities; and the p land was dgſo- 


14, 15, 17. {ſs. 3.14 ands.2.and 27, 2, {Either when thou waſt 
firſt-born, as Ezekiel 16. 6: or the Royal Line thy Kingly Race, or 
in the Vigour of thy Strength. mn a very fruitful Soil. » And ac- 
cordingly ſhe did thrive, and brettght forth much Fruit, ſee ch. 17, 8. 
Tho ſhe loſt many thouſands carried away, yet mbre were born, bred 
up, and trained up to uſeful Arts and Employmenits, fay ſome, bur 
this too general. The Royal Family did ſpring like a Vine well was 
tered, o Full of Children; when 7of4hb died ; he left four bekind 
him, beſide other Branches of the Royal Line. 


ir And ſhe had ſtrong p rods for the ſcepters 
of them that bear rule, and her q ſtature was r ex- 
alted among the thick s branches, and ſhe * ap- 


peared in her height with the nuwltitude of her bran- 
ches. 


p Many excellent Perſoris endowed with Qualifications befitting 
Kings, that ;they might ſway the Scepter, and rule the People with 
Equity. 4 The Grandeur of the Kings and Kingdom, r Exalted 
above the ordinary Majeſty of other Kingdoms, 5 The goodly Cedars 
and their thick. Branches, i, e: This Kingdom equalled, if rior ex- 
celled, the greateſt .neighbour Kingdoms, and her Kings, as Davis, 
Solomon, Exc. exceeded all their neighbour Kings in Riches and Power, 
; Like a mighty Tree that over-tops all the Foreſt, fo did this goodly 
Kingdom over all Kingdoms; and it was ſeen and noted according to 
God's Promiſe, that it ſhould be the Head, and not the Tail, and to 
that Dent. 4, 6, 7,8. 


12 But « ſhe was » plucked up in fury; » ſhe was caſt 
down to the ground; and & the * eaſt-wind # dried up het 
fruit 2 her ſtrong b rods were c broketi and withered, the 
d fire conſumed them, 


ſelf, not to God, and grew prod, abiiſed God's Merciestoall manner 
of Sin. x Wasviolently, ſuddenly, and totally rooted vut, tore up by 
the Roots ; ſo was the once flouriſking Kingdom of the Jews over- 
thrown. » Had ſhe been again ſer, theremight have been ſome hope ; 
but pluckt up Root ad Branch together, cis periſht for ever, z To 
haſten the utter DeſtruQion hereof, an Eaſt-wind, that blaſting, piec- 
cing Wind blows upon her, the King of B4by/bn, with all his Power 
raiſed of God to pull up thisfinful Kingdom, & Blaſted all her Fruie, 
depoſed her King, captivated lim, bis Family, and the whole Kings 
dom. 6 All the choice Men, the Counſellors, 


24r's Hand pluckt away, and removed into Babylen, where they lay as 


withered Branches, 4 Called my 3 3 former part of rhe 
2 


Chap. RIX. 


_© _— - - $#) >. <m_ 74 [A 
_ - ot ON 
eps. 
+ of - ny er ere 
_  - bi - ſ 6 o_— a 
I We, , ©-I! k 

> : - A 
"= WWE RRN0G7 TC ITY = - 
= dA Be Do _ ” It ane _—_ 


"7,406 Liu | Og A aw" 
bs 7 You 


FAY _ 
p pen 4% = - +. < - = 
. ? 2 = of < mn ” I” o _—_ hs - 
= £ : OP 0 l = 4 "I 4 => a8 
7 - _— - b - : . fe = Sy RB - I _ 
% I. pig —_— p__ "_ 
PR Fo _—_ = : TEETH F. ors *; > 2 C—_ " 
Ls ate & «4 a  D_ Ps PI, gi > __ - , —_— b p a: . I ng ; 
\ ” S TY mn Y py wa ” 4c _ . Sy — - > 
_ = a 27 | ” Oy. oy nn 5p T0 : 
rok ERS. : . p "4 f F K , % DID 7 = has - z "7-7 4 C * > _— . £2. 
= ; . . a. " y OECD. - 4 4 a ur » jd —_—_—_ —_ > v Yn p S » 
n 1 - TCAKAGTHT a - p "SIND ACER tones We > Tg < ' : C——_ 
x ond®: Wu tf _ 4 = < A ws ng 9” EOS” 
>e# «ez . I 
hy 


very fide * 2 King; 
x ſpread their net over hum 26S 
2 


age 
— 


$923. © » e 
IS 


— 
” : V + < 
EIT? S hw io 
v2 
2 ate” y + — 
U—_ - pr 


4'> 
CC ETS 


they put him in @ ward in [| þ chains, and 1 Or;"0%%? 


pg Y, 
v8 


lt En SF 
— 


$4 4» ro 
tens © bo RT Er TO _ = "2 = 
Andie DI. 4 ene” po hk £38 pg = > EE TI - + Ru » pa be — E<0 % o_ p 
p - br" 1 ad. "T. x. , s, £5 WET « 7 > wp > p 0 O—— 


Ws + 


- : 
þ Me 
F Þ..-+2 
RAT. Yang) ge 


> elk $9538 
- abs . j 
x" £ _- 
- mT W* 
> Is * Þ _ 


.. % This flouriſhing Vine firſt degenerated, brought forth EF:uic to it 15. 


| ' arriors, Artificers, all 
that were like to be the Strength of the Kingdom. c By Nebzchadnez< 


erle 
Ghd's 


EZEKIEL 
of . \ wF "s 
77 L/ '\ i; 2s 8 


2 
- 


2 


Nurſery a 
faid, deſtroy- 
ro conjecture 


They 


fo:lorn, dangerous, | 
ful Place, yet the 
made it to 


the Nature of a Wilderneſs, and illuſtrate what t 

ken, or may be paraphraſed by that of David, P/al. 63.1. T f 
and thirſty, where no one ſtream ran from that River which made 
S'ad the Ciry of God, Pſal. 46: 4. : 

14 & And / fire is gone out of a red of her branches, 
which hath » devoured her fruit, fo that the hath no ſtrong 
o red to be a ſeepter to rule. p This is a lamentation, and 
g ſhall be for a lamentation. 

{ This Verſe Coth give you account of the immediate Cauſe of this 


haſty, furious, total pulling zp of this Vine. / Of Rebellion wil be 
kinited by »» Zedetiah, who is of the Blood Royal, made King by Ne. 
bricpadrotiar, and who ſrore Allegiance to him. Brought the Land, 
Ciry, King's Palaces, and God's Temple to utter Deſolation. o The 
Reval Dignity is ceaſed, and ſhall no more riſe, you ſhall never have 
2 crowned Head to rule you more, p This I have told you 1s the Sub- 
5: of my meurnful Thoughts. 9 And the Execution of theſe things, 
which ſhall be much more terrible, ſhall make you lament at ſight of 


th:m, and at remembrance of them as long as you live. 


CHAF. XX 


God veſnſ.th tobe conſulted by the elders of Tſracl, 1-<=4. ſetteth before them 
kis forbearance, and their father; rebellion in Egypt, 5 — 9. mthe wil- 
dorneſs aud in Canaan, 10 32. promiſetb to gather and reſtore his peo= 
ple by the goſpel, 33—44- Under the name of a foreſt, is foretold the de- 
firuXion of Ferrjulem, 45—49. 

ND ir came to paſs in ther ſeventh year, in the 
s fifth momth, the t tenth day of the month, zhar 

u certain of the x elders of Iſrae] came to y enquire of the 

z LORD, and a fat before me. 

7 Of Jecomiat's Captivity and Zedckiah's Reign, two Years and five 

Months before Nebuckadnezzar did beftege Jeruſalem. Auguſt. t Which 

an%ers to our 27:5. u Men Heb, Some of note among the Elders, and 


o Atthe Time, the Seaſon. Ir ſpeaks not of that preciſe Portion gf 
Hours which m3ke vp the natural Day ; burof the Time wherein Gog 
began to ſhew them great Mercy. plt includes Mercy withour 
Merit in them, and it refers to God's declaring bv his Kindneſ; tg 
them, that he had choſen them. Ir ſuppoſeth the free eternal EleQian, 
bur ir expreſly refers to a Temporaland ſeaſonable ſele&ting them fra, 
others; choſen, as 1/a. 14. 1. again Dent. 7.6, 7. or poflibly thy, 
When I went to make them a choice People by refining them from 
their Drofs and Idolatries contratted in Ezypr, fo the word 1/2. 48 1c, 
and feleting them. q Not perſonally confidered, bur nationali; 
r Either afluring them by Oath, tharc he wou!d now make good iii; 
Promiſe, and bring them out of Bondage ; 'tis the Geſture of one thar 
ſolemnly ſweareth, and Scriptures frequently mention it, as wer, 1;, 
and Deut. 32. 40. Or elſe ſtretch'd out, and made baremy Arm, 
i.e. magnified my Power for your Deliverance. s This explaineth 
and tellsus who 1/-ae! was. £ By the Miracles which he wrought : for 
'tis not to be underſtood of making known or diſcovering hisEllence 
and incomprehenſible Being. #« *Tis not unlikely that many of them 
either were ignorant, or forgot God; now by his Wonders wrought 
for their Deliverance he brings them to remember him, and look to 
him : Moſes his Queſtion in Exod. 3. 13. ſeems to intimate this Igno. 
rance of this People. x As this expreily directs us to the Place, fit 
points out the Time too, when 7J/7ae! was choſen, ſeletted. » Shewed 
my Power 1n performing my Oath and Promiſe in what was now tobe 
done, and aſſuring them of doing what was farther p:omiſed by him, 
and expeCted by them; and to aſſure them the more, 'ris doublet, 
z So Exed. 3.13.16, 17. Yours from your Progenitors, yours by Pro. 
miſe, by Covenant, and now am come to be your God by a&tual and 
PunCtual performing my Word to you, bringing you out of the 
Land of Egypt by a lifted up Hand and Arm. 

6 In the day 7hat 1 lifted up mine hand unto them to 
bring them forth of the land of Egypt, into a land that] 
had «c efpied for them, flowing with f milk and honey, 
* which z the g glory of all lands : "m 

e After the manger of Man God fpeaks, as if he had been the Spy q, 
to go from Piaceto Place to ſearch our the beſt, and to appoint ir tors; 
them : It washis wiſe and good Providence which aſligacd this Land 
to them. f Literally, Milk and Honey in abundance were in the 
Land of Canaan, and continued till this fruitful Land was turned in 
to Barrenneſs, for the Sinsof its Inhabitants. Proverbially ir ſpeaks 


Rulers of 7ſ-ae! : Either ſome of the Caprtives in Bab;lon, as moſt likely 

they were, who chap. 8. 1, came to him, or ſome of thoſe who were 
ſeat from Zedekiah to complement,or carry Tribute to Nebuchadnezzar , 
as moſt like they were, chap 14. 1. x Not of the Prieſts, or Levites, 
bur of the Laity, civil Magiſtrates and Officers, who might beſentto 
vicw the State of Babylon, and to obſerve what poſture things were 
in, the better to reſolve on that Zedekiah and his Counſels were form- 
in7, whether *ewill be adviſable to ſhake of the Yoke of the King of 
Bavylen by a Rebellion, or patiently bear it: And I conjeQture this 

might bethe main Enquiry they made now, which was two Years and 

five Months before the Siege began; during which two Yearsand 

five Months, I fuppoſe the Deſign was reſolved on, framed, Proviſion 

made of all forts, and at laſt a Rebellion raiſed. y Yet reſolved before. 

hand what they would do, as wi'l appear. z Prophets neither did 

pretend to, nor could they reſolve fuch Enquiries, but the Lord whom 

the Prophetsdid conſult. Whether it ſpeak the Quality of the Per- 

ſons that did notſtand as mean Perſons, or their reſolution to wait for 

anſwer, or be a Phraſe proper with the Jews to expreſs the common 

Deporrment of the Country, I leave you ro gueſs. 

2 6 Then came the word of the LORD unto me, fay- 


11 ; 

White theſe Men were with Ezetiel, God gives him Inftruftion 
what to ſay to them. 

3 Son of c man, 4 ſpeak unto the e elders of Iſrael, and 


ſay unto them, Thus f faith the Lord GOD, * Andg ye 


- come to enquireof me? 2s 1 + live, faith the Lord GOD, 
I will not be enquired of by 2 you. 


* } + Þ 


y * 
ER 
( 


s 
4% _—_ 
., J/E&ER 


EE. 


c See chap. 2. 3. d Speak plainly, boldly, and to their Faces. 
e Fear nor cheir Frowns, if they are Depuries from Zedekiah, yet let 
rotthar Charater make thee meal-mourh'd. f This Expreſſion car- 
ries enough to encourage him. - z Are ye in good earneſt ? Nay but 
you a& a deep Hypocriſy, bing already reſolved on your own Courſe, 
and yet now pretend you would know my Counſel: it is a ſharp Re- 


proof of their Wickedneſs, and God utterly refuſeth to be enquired | 


of by ſuch. + See chap. 14. 16. i Prophane Hypocrites, that abuſe 
my Prophet, and tempt his God ; they are, as all Politico's who have 
Tets of Religion than worldly Wiſdom, willing to hear whether the 
Propker will fatter and fawn, and encourage them; if ſo, then he is 
2 Wie, able, honeſt Man; elſe a Sor, tobe flighted. 

4 Wile chon * & judge them, fon of man? ! wilt thou, 
* judge rem? m cauſe them to know the » abominations 
of their fathers : 

E Either wilt thou judgecharitably, and ſuppoſing they are upright 
ac: teachable, wiltthou plead with me for them, as cap. 14. 3. or as 


—_ 


the choiceſt, beſt, the moſt uſefuland pleaſant, and the Plenty and A- 
bundance of all theſe Bleſſings for Life, and ſo to be here taken; and 
though the whole Country, in the utmoſt Extent of it, as propoſed fo 
Iſracl, (whoſe Sins kept them out of much of it) was naturally 2 
fruitful Land, yer this great Plenty was more fiom the ſpecial Favour 
and Blcfling of God. g Makes every Country deſirable. 

7 Then +4 ſaid I unto them, iCaſt ye away every 
man the & abominations of his eyes, and defile / not your 


_ with the idols »z of Egypt : I a: the LORD » your 
od. 


/ Heb. And. which conneQ&s the Words; and though we read ic 
Then, this doth not point out the Time when God ſpakethus, though 
tis certain, when he had brought them our of Egypt he gave them his 
Ordinances and Laws of Worſhip : Nay, tis ſufficiently included, in 
that they were to go out that they might ſerve the Lord. 7 Let every 
one of you, Man by Man, and Family by Family, caſt away with 
Abhtorrence and Indignation ; the word is uſed. ch. 18, 31. & Whick 
your Eyes ſhould have abhorred, but you rather lifted up your Eyss 
to them, and looked for Help from them, and it includes their own 
voluntary AR in this Idolatry. / This explains the former Paſlige. 
7 Which were in Veneration among the Egyp:ians, and with whoſe 
Worſhip too many of them had been enſnared and polluted whilethcy 
were iN Ezypr. z The only true God, and therefore you ſhould wor- 
ſhip none other. « See wer. 6. let. 2. You are my Covenant-People, 
and therefore ought to have no other God, as Exod. 2o. 3. Thus God 
prepared them by his Mercies, and by his Law, for himſelf. 

8 But they p rebelled againſt q me, and r would not 
hearken unto me : «they did not every man caſt away ti 
abominations of their Eyes, neither did they forſake the 
idols of Egypt. Then TI faid, 7 I will » pour out my fury 
x upon them, to y accompliſh my anger againſt them in 
the midlt of theland of Egypt z. 

? So great a Sinis Idolatry, 'tis againſt God, as open Hoflility 15 
againſt a Soveraign whom Subje&s fight againſt. 9 All Sin is againlt 
God, but Idolatry is much more ſo. r Their Wills were alienate 
from God, they refuſed to hear and obey in this. s*Tis probable 
there were ſome among them that carried with them (as Rache/did 
her Father's) the Idols of Egypt. & I was juſt upon reſolving, I w# 
very near ſaying. « As a Storm or mighty Shower. x Juſt and {ever* 
Wrath. » To make an end of them. « That they ſhould have p*- 
riſh'd in Egypt, and never comeout. ] 

9 But I 2 wrought for my names fake, that ': 
ſhould not be c polluted before the 4 heathzn, amo!- 


whom they were, in whoſe fight I made my feif kno" 


unto 


d.1 


o 


J* 


dP, KY 


*. , = 
ec|iplc 


hem forth out of the land of 


p”. 


i770 them, in bringing | 
E2ypt. | : : bh 

3 According to my Promiſe, my iniinite Mercy , and the Hopes of 
whoſe few that heard and obeyed. 6 For my Glory, had you been 
mie as you deſerved ; you had died Slaves in Egypt, and there had 
b--n your Graves, but the Glory of God's Mercy and Faithfulneſs 1s 
the Motive of his ſparing them. c Reproached, blaſphemed, and lefle. 
ned among the Heathen. d The Egyptiany, among{t whom 71/-ael had 
ſojourned 215 Yeats, 1n which time many of the Children of Jſract , 
0 Coubr, had Ciſcours'd of tnzir Hopes of going out of Egypr to the 
Land promiſed to Abraham for them, and were apt to boaſt of their 
God, and that Country ; 


and to render the thing credible in the Eyes; 
of the Ezyptians, would ipeak of ths Mercy, Power, Faithfulneſs and | 
Wiſtom of the Lord toeffe& this, the Glory of which would have been | 
a, and the Heathen blaſpizemed, 1t God had not brought them | 


out; when ir was thus God wrought for his Names fake, 

10 T e Wherefore I f cauſed * them to go forth out] 
of the land of Egypt, and g brought chem into the! 
h wiidernels, 1 

e Heb. And. f Removed all Obſtacles, furnifh'd them with all Ne- 
eeiics, went before them, and ſhewed them the way they ſhould go, | 
as is expretied, Exo-. 13.17. g I brought; *twas not Moſcs's Error | 
thonrh Pharaoh thought ſo, Exo1. 14.3.4. but the peculiar Condut&t 
of God, Exod. 14.2. þ A barren, ſandy part of the Country, the, 
Bo:ders of Ezypt towards the red Sea ; yethaving Mountains, which: 


EZEKITER 


| 


C1247 
11 44 . 
k Merecver alſo, as the ſame Particles are rendred, wer. 12. 1 Sec 
wer. 5. let. r. ſware in his Wrath againſt them, Pſa!. 95. 11. » Of 
Paran, v.here the Iſraelites pitched and abode in ſeveral Parts of it ma- 
ny Days, during which time they uſt for Eluth, Numb 11. 4 5.and 
murinur againft rhe Lord, Moſes, and tue two fairhful Spies, who had 
{ca:cheg out the Land : Here*twas chzy wov'd make them a Captain, 
and return to Egyps, Numb. 14.4. 3 $01; recorded, N+:25. 14 ts, 
12, and Ver. 21, 22, and agait, VEr. 28, 29,30, JI, 32s fo a'! rhe mUur- 
muring , df: bedienr, unbelieving Generation, vas exctuded , a-:d 
their Children were brought in ; which, weilnoced, reconcilerh rhe 
ſeeming Contrari-ry berween the Oaths of fHod. o» Thoſe rebellio: 
and murmuring ones. p Pronued to rh Seed of 45r2544, bur not 
confined ro tha: (z=-neration ; the Promiſe was male s 
the next Generation. q See ver 6 tr, 5. 


» 


16 Becauſe they » deſpiſed my jud2ments, and walked 
not in my ſtatutes, but poliuted my fabbaths : tor their 
s keart went atter tnelC 1do!s. 

7 Seethe whol- former part of this Verſ= explained alrerdy, wv. 13; 
lr.c,d,e,g. £ Their Wiland AﬀeCtions, their Zeal and R-ſfolution 


ood , chough to 


were for their [dols which they ſerved in Egypr, and which they had 


brought with rhem out of Ezypr. 

17 Nevertheleſs, 7 mine eye ſpared « them from de- 
ſtroying them, neither did I make an end of them in the 
wilderneſs. | 

: Though they 0:d highly prov. ke God, and deſerved to be cur off 


0.0 


ft them in on both ſides, and Frontier Gariſons near them; and as Yet his Eye piticd them : They provok'd his Wrath, he ſtir'd up his 
44k L - - - ; . 7 . . . . » _ 
he br-vchtthemin, ſo he conduted them our of theſe Straits, though Compatlions. « Notallof them, formany did die in the Wilderneſs, 


, 


93 


1a9 them. 
$.5 


tore itis not mentioned, 


11 And:I & gave them my / ſtatutes, and + ſhewed mz 
them my » judgments, which zf a « man * do, he ſhall plive 


; Who ſpared rhem in Ezyp?, had brought them forth, and owned 


o.c. them as the Children of Abraham my Friend. God gave his Law by 


I 


20, 


\ Atiſcs, and now Iſrael's Laws are realiy of Divine Origine, when others 


2id bur pretend ir. & Appointed and commarded by my Anthority, 
and communicated ont of my Love and Kindyeſs to them. 1 The Law 
on Mount Sinai, containing th.ir Duty. » Plainly declared,ſpake fo 
that they might know. = Not the terrible Execution of his Wrath, 


bur Judgments hers are the Rules thar God gave themto walk by. oIf 


any one withour Partiality ; whoſoever ſhould keep theſe Statures and 
Judgments, for with God is no Reſpett of Perſons. p Not that any 
ever did os could by ſinleſs keeping the Law, attain the Erernal Blet- 
{edneſs; Grace gives that : but it ſurely points out a future Proſperity, 
and flouriſhing State in this Life, to all that are careful to ke-p rheſe 
Statutes and Judgments as they can ; ſuch ſhould not be cut off, nor 
brought into Captiviry, but live and rejoice in their own Land. q Borh 
in the Frufr of them already obeyed, and in the Coutinuance to do 
them for the future. . 

z2 Moreover alſo, I » gave them my s * ſabbaths, 


. to be a #t ſign between me and them, that they migiu « 


- 
A 


know that 1 a the x LORD that y ſanRifie them. 


+ Both commanded, and alſo fan&ified thoſe Portions o® time to he 
holy Reſts. s Either the week'y Sabbath , which recurring every ſe- 
venth Day, ſoon mulriplicd into many, and was to be th: Comm: mo 
ration of God's Reſt from his Labour, 1/-ac!'s Delivery out of £2167, 


Deut.5. 15. and anawakening of their Hopes of the Eternal Reſt with | 


God : Or it may, as moſt like it doth, inciude all the folema Days of 
God's Worſhip, every of which was a Sabbath, and no work to be 
done in it. # Oftheir being peculiarly my Peop'e ſele& from al} o- 
ther, to walk with me, to reſt in me, and receive mor: Grace from me. 
# This was a teaching Sign, they might by other ways kaow, and by 
thisalſo. & In this fee my Authority and my Holineſs, who by ſuch 
means do promote, and attain ſuch holy Purpotes and Ends. » Thar 
have withdrawn them from the prophanz and common Herd oft the 
Heathen, and made them by this, relatively ho!y ; or elfe, that have 
changed the Heart, and filied it with holy, pure, and gracious Inclina- 
tions, and ſo made them really holy. 

13 Bu: the & houſe of Iſrael a rebelled againſt me 
in the 6 wiiderneſs: they wajtzed c not in my ſtatutes. 
and they 4 deſpifed my judgin-nts, e which if a man 
do, he thall even f live in them ; and my fabbaths they 
greatly g * polluted : 
my tury upon them .in the wilderneſs to * conſume 


4; them. 


v, 


> 


z Not a few,(this T might have born inSilence,) but moſt of them ; 
they were,, as we are, a rebellious Houſe. a Provoked me bitterly to 
Indignation by their Contumacies, and that frequently, as Exoz. 37.7. 
Numb. 20. 24. Deut. 1.26+43. aſtubborn and rebellious Generation ; 
P/:/.-78. 8. with wer. 40. 6 Where they moſt needed my Care and 
Favour, where the preſerving their Life from DeſtruRion by the noxi- 
ous Creatures, and from Famine by the barrenneſs of the Wilderneſs, 
was acontinued Miracle, which required their Obzdience and Depen- 
Uance, c& Made not them the only Rule of their Religion, and Exer- 


[an 


þ then I ſaid I would pour out; 


,a2d among theſe ſome by immediate Wrzrh but how many ſoever 
| they were, yet the growing Generation was ſpared, and the Nation was 
nor extirpated, 

; 18 x Put I faid y unto their children in the z wilder. 
'neſs, Walk ye rfot 4 in the ſtatues of your b fathers, nei- 
ther obſerve their c judgments, nor defile your ſelves with 
their idols 4, 

| x And, or, Then Tſaid; the Fathers were refraftory, and deaf , 
would not hearken, therefore God turns his Advice to Children. 
3 Thoughthe parcicular Place isnot ſpecified, yer inong the Calami. 
ties of that mournful Age, and at the Funerals of fo many as then did, 
there were ſome that had Piety, Z2al and courage enough to warn the 
Survivers,and Pſal. go. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 Verſes aftord us ground enough 
to believe Moſes did warn and adviſe. z In that pa'r of it where 
their Fathers murmured,and where ſome were cuc oft by che Hand of 
God, and in other Parrs through which they rraveiled and fuffered. 
a *Tis both Conuſel, as from Love ; 'tis a Command as from Power z 
live not as your Fathers, tor rkey waljkd contrary to Reaſon, Religi- 
on, and their own Good, as much as they wa'k'd contrary to me. 
'6 Though Fathers, they may not command contrary to God's Com- 
mand, nor be imitated in what they do contrary to God « Law. c 'Tis 
obſervable, the Propher forbids them to imirare the Cuſtoms, Rights 
| aid Uſages of their Fathers, theſe included in Judgments ; and thence 
| paſlerh to forbid their imitating their Fathers in their Idolatry. d Ido- 
latry is fruitful, when it fo multiplied in Egyptian Bondage, and in the 
deſolate State of a People in the Wilderneſs. 

19 I am the e LORD your f God ; waik in my ſtatutes, 
d keep my judgments, and dothem : 

e The only God; Idols, though your Fathers Ido!s, are no Gods, 
therefore let them never be that to you they arenor, cannot be in then. 
ſe ves, the Obje&s of Worſhip, and Trudt, and Love. f By Covenanr, 
by Redemprion out of Egypt, by Adoption, and giving you the Law ; 
, therefore own me as ſuch,by keeping mine Ordinances and Judgments 
ro do them. I am moſt your Father. 

25 And f hallow my ſabbaths; and they ſhall be a gfgn 
between me and you, that ye may know + that I az the 
LORD your God. 

f Remember to keep them holy, imploy them on holy Works of 
God's ſolemn and publick Worſhip, and ceaſe from ſervile and world- 
ly Buſtnefles. g See wer. 12. |.t. t. As the Friday obſerved a Reſt is 
the ſign of a Turk, rhe ſev-ath Day obſerved is the ſign of a Few, and 
diltinguiſheth : So *twas ofold, fo'tis now : The Chriſtian Sabbath is 
align berween Chriſt and us. þ More jully, acknowledge ir more op-n- 
ly, and 1a waiting on mine Ordinances, may know by experience what 
the Almighty Grace of your God can do. 

21 # Notwithſtanding the children rebelled againſt me: 
they walked not in my ſtatutes, neither k2pt my judgments 
todo them, which if a man do, he ſhall even live in them 2 
they polluted my ſabbaths. Then | faid I would pour out 
my fury upon them, to accomplilh my anger againſt them 
in che wilderneſs. 

7 Theſe unhappy Children do eyen as their Fathers in all Points of 
Difobedience to God, are as deaf to his Counſel, and as aveifc to his 
Law, which here is Point by point recounted, and is the ſame with 
Verſe 13. where ſce it explained. 


cife of it, as they ſhould have done, bur framed Religion to their own 
or their Neighbours Idolatrous Inclinations. 4 Shlighted firſt, as of 
little Excellency, refuſed next, and caſt off with Diſdain and Loathing. 
e The equitable and necelliry Rules for Government of their civil 
Aﬀairs, which were framed to the Safety and Welfare of a People. 
j See ver, 11. lt. 6. g. Profaned with working what was prohibited, 
miſunploying thoſe Days on Idols, or on any common ordinary Buſi- 
neſs, as Exod. 16. 27. Numb. 15. 32. and Fer. 17.22, 23+ h Seever. 8. 
{er. 7. 5 To cutthem off from being a People, as Numb. 16. 21. 


14 But | wrought for my names ſake, that it ſhould not 
be polluted before the heathen, in whoſe fight I brought 
tem out, 

See Verſe 9. where theſe Words are paraphraſed, 

i5 & Yet alſoI / lifted up my hand unto them in the 
7 wilderneſs, that» I would not bring othem into the land 


WW 1 | - . . - 
”w ich [ had p given them, q flowing with milk and honey, 
which is the glory of ali lands: 


22 * & Nevertheleſs, I withdrew ! mine hand, and 7 
wrought for my names fake, that ir ſhould not be polluted 
in the ſight of the heathen, in whoſe fight I brought them 
forth. 

k Heb. 4nd. 1God ſeems to take to bimſelf the Poſture of one that 
was juſt going to ſmite, yet draws back that he mighc ſpare, and a&” 
like his own infinite Goodnefs, not ſurable to the Sin of this Generati= 
on. This isexplained wer. 9. let. -. which tee. 


23 I »lifted up mine hand unto them alſoin the wilder- 
neſs, that *I would » featter them among the heathen, and 


diſperſe them through the countrey*3 

# This ſolemn Geſture and Signification ; ſee vez. 5. let. r. and [7 
Here 'tis aa Oath added roa Threat,to make it more dreadful to them, 
and to make it ſucceſsful in keeping them from the Sin threarned. 
o Foretold them ofa Captivity which ſhould come upon them for theic 
Sins, which 'tis probable was often inculcated intheir hearing before 
Xoſes penn'd it for them, Dev?. 32.15. and fo £0 ver. 43, and Lev. 26. 


205 
- 


*Pſ:58.39 


Clip. XX. TEEKIA £. Chap. x) 


+1; +2, 33. and 'tis infethinated t6 Make it pierce the deper, and |ſented to their Idoi, was a Provecation ufito God,” « Burne Fweet 
affect them the more. | ; Odours to their Idols, which did ſtink in the Noſtrils of Go 
24 Becauſe q they had > riot executed my judg-[2 Wine was a part of the Offering that Sacrificers offered, anq fo 


ments ; but had deſpiſed my ſtatutes, and had polluted [414 theſe idolatrous Jews here; they violated the whole L 
cangeT 4 Y : P Sacrifice, and did all that to Idols hey thould have done only - 


my fſabbaths, and their eyes were after their - fathers| 04 


OY 29 Then q || I faid » unto them , What « isthe high 


o The whole 24h; Verſe 15 already explained, wry. 5. which ſee. 7 he aus 4 
a That travelled through the Wilderneſs. r In all that 4o Years, place whereunto ye 7 £07 and the name thereof iScalled jy 
t 


wherein their Fathers were to be goa and Ey. which their Chil-} Bamah « unto this day x. — 
dien ſhould have learn'd , kept, and done God's Judgments, but did Wh a "07 A" ET... 
them not. s Which their Fathers choſe in Egypr, and rerain'd with loded _ I III —_ - Im. » Godfle 
me , end now their Children ſerve the fame, even the Egypriar: No. 5 _ m_=_ yu that ye goto the high Place ? fone "Y 
4 | : 7 0U not gotothe Altar of God, and bring your Sacrifices t 
25 t Wherefore I « gave them alſo x ſtatutes zhar|ple? Or, what God better than jane A you (none 5 ware rw 
were not 7 good , and judgments z whereby they ſhould |profir by attending upon thofe Sacrifices offered daily > How often 
not live. ave you by ſuch like means, poured contempt on God and his Lawd 
t Becauſe they did by ſuch perverſe Obſtinacy rejet the StatutesI s Leaving my Temple and the Service I preſcrib'd, and in other Plz. 

did in Mercy give them; my good Laws and Judgments, ſaith God, wW —_ doing their ſuppoſed Duties. « High Place, the very 
they deſpiſed ; for this Cauſe God proceeds to puniſh them in'a dread. Will tellsthem their Wickedpeſs, that they ated againſt the exprek; 

ſul kind and mannier. s Not by appointing or enjoining, but by per- - of God, and fram'd themſelves to Idolaters of the Nation. 
mirting them to make ſuch for themſelves ; much like that Rom. 1. 24. |* nd this they did with obſtinacy continue in to the days of 70/4 
Living tp to a reprobate Scnſe, or that 2 Theſ]. 2. 11; and Pſal. 81. 11, 2 Chron. 34, 3. thus far the Narrative of their great Wickedneſles, * 
, a 04408 won beer _ _ 57 6 arg ws = Gio Wherefore ſay unto the 9 houſe of Iſrael » Thus 
obitinateand unrily xou g1VCS cIels, and Calts |jaith [ , : | 
off the Care and Guidance of him. « Ocders and Rules abour their|,@.. LO _ GOD », Are ou polluted after the _ 
Religious Worlhip, which they firſt invented, next approved, and en e9= Ks and commit ye whoredom aſter their 

NATIONS 7 


Jaſtly made their eſtabliſh'd Religion, where all they could love in it ; 
EET fant: FG: tenet |» fie cone a ge pr, hh 
gocy, pious, or ſuted ro the ipiri CUTE z tnat were un- .-o Make enquiry, ana now the rropnet enquires of 
ET and 9966 wy _— P the ng ul m—_— = Men; _ # _- _ _ neg RE _ — and fell fa 
nor could commend the Uſers of them to God ; that were indeed per- expeCt : Your Fathers, where are they ? at became 
nicious to the Uſers, and increas'd their Sins, being ſuperſtitious and ſome that bore their Iniquity ? And what had become of the reſt, p 
Ido)atious : So the zot good, is, very bad, Inconvenient, and hurtful. | God had not withdrawn his Hand ? And all this hath been no warn- 
z If it be notexplicatory of the former, ut may, tis poſſible, refer |1Ng to you, but as they, ſo you have polluted your ſelves, and been 
diſtinQly to the inconvenient, ay rr and upaF _; Decrees, | {dolaters. 
and Edi&s, about civil Matters, which were {uch as they could never 1 For w | 1 
thrive under ; for however ſome Heathen Nations have thrived under _—_ ſons _ mo —_ _ —_ _ 
bY ſ 


an evident Bleſſing from Heaven, though their Religion were Idola- {: : - 4 
trous, yer T do not remember that an Apoſtate Nation ever retain'g |\©Ives with all 5 your idols even unto this c day : and 


their good Govergiment and civil Proſperity under their Apoſtacy * ſhall I be enquired d of by you, O houſe of Irael2+y, 
frotn God : thus the Judgments given were ſuch they could not live| As T live, faith the Lord GOD, I will not be enquired of 
in them; they made grievous and deſtruQtive Laws for themſelves and by you. : | 


theirs. | 

l 1 | , . | 4 Seewver. 26, b It ſeems they took a compendious W in- 
26 And I polluted them in their own 5 gifts, in| creaſe Sin and Wrath; they worſhipp'd —_ irs. MM py 
that they cauſed to pals " through the c fire all 4 that|c This they did ſtill to Exekie!'s Time, to that very Day. d Are you 
* + Kings openeth the womb, that I might make them deſolate .|fit to come, and ask counſel of me, whom you have ſo ſhameleſly , 
17.17. &e to the end that they might know + that I am the; {2 obſtinately forſaken and reproach'd ? Can youexpet& I ſhould an- 
ed. hy” LORD o_ oy My Prophet knew you not to be Hypocrites ; but his God 

 MWaciicy *v . : : w © . - . 
2 Chron. , FitherT permitted them to pollute themſelves; or diſcovered that] ,, hi. —. m_ huts 00900 ad orgy was: 
28 3. they had polluted themſelves, or treated them with Loatking and Ab-| j;rtje as you regard me. So God refuſeth them : | hk: 
& 33,6. horrence, as polluted Perſons. 6 Either in their Gifts which they 32 And e that which cometh into your mind, ſhall 

3 


retended tobring to me; or rather in their Sacrifices they offered, to 
bines , Or at Jexft in what manner they, not I, had nw or , |20t be f atall, that ye ſay g, We will be as the heathen , 
which is moſt likely , Gifts are here their firſt-born, which are more[a5 the families of the countreys, to ſerve wood and 
than other Children, accounted Gifts. c Seech. 16. 26, 21. d Moſt|ſtone. : 

inſufferable Aﬀront to God, to ſee thoſe Children inhumanely offered ro] + Gog by his Prophet, to convince and recover them, tells them 
the Devil, which, in remembrance of his redeeming the Fathers, were | whar they think and have purpoſed. f Shall be quite” fruſtrated, 
confecrate to God, Exod. 13.2. And poſſibly this was firſt done when g You have conſulted, and come to a Reſolution herein. þ Unite in 
they offer'd ro Baal-Peor, Numb. 25. 3. e To + 75g God fo to{Fqabiration, Covenants; Marriages, Commerce and Religion too; and 
afflift, wezken and waſte by his Judgments, till > _—_ undeniably | hen ye ſhall be more ſafe among them, thrive with them, and all the 
appear that God had, by ſignal Diſpleaſure againſt them tor their Sins, | H;CjeaGure they have againſt you, willceaſe ; theſe are your Imagi- 
broughr them ro Deſolation. + Be convinced, and forced ro own, that | {1% and Contrivancesof youar the Court of Zedekiah in Feruſalm, 
the Lord is a mighty King in puniſhing thoſe fy * rr 3 Ann would | But Itell you, that this ſhall not be at all. This defign'd Apoſtacy to 
not, have him a gracious King by governing ag guicing tnem. Gentiliſm, if you do att it, ſhall not proſper with you, or help you, 

27 T c Therefore, ſon of man, ſpeak unto the houſe|ye blind, hardned, ſenſeleſs Agheiſts. ; 
of 4 Iſrael, and fay unto them Thus ſaich the Lord| © 33 4s 71 live, faith the Lord GOD , ſurely with 
GOD, e Yet -in this your fathers have blaſphemed|a k mighty hand, and with a ltretched out / arm, 
F. me, in that they have + committed a treſpaſs g againſt |arid with 7» fury poured out, will I o rule over 
you. 

s See wer. 3. k So mighty, that you ſhall never wreſt your ſelvesout 
of it ; you think to revolt, and get out of my hand, but you ſhall here. 
by diſcover your own Folly, Malice and Weakneſs* 1 Which reacheth 
every-where, whence you can never flee, which ſhall be moſt viſible, 
» In hot, but juſt Indignation. » As an Inundation from a mighty 
River,or like a violent Storm poured from the Clouds, or as a full Vel- 
ſclempried all at once. o Retain my right over you, and exerciſe it on 
you, as on combined Rebels, ſince you will refuſe my Rule, as over- 
loyal Subje&s. If you will nor be my free SubjeQs, you ſhall be fette- 
red Slaves ; the Chains of Affliction, the reſtraints of Providence croſ- 
ſing you, the Execution of my Menaces ſhall be tao ſharp and thick an 


i Heb. * me. 
rrcſpaſjea. c Since all this Evil and wicked Carriage in Egypt, in the Wilder- 
neſs. is tootrue, and cauſe of a Divine Wrath againſt them, go on : 
rell whatthe Deportment of thoſe was whom I brought into the Land. 
4 To thoſe Elders that were now come to him, that they nughr tel] 
others at Jeruſalem. e Or farther jet, beſide all the reſt, this is ad- 
ded by them. f Profanely and frowardly leflened my Mercy , my 
Law, my Worſhip, caſt a Repioach upon it all, as leſs deſirable than 
thar of their own; theirs more auguſt and ftately , more taking and 
pleaſing ; or thus, reproached my Wiſdom, as if it needed their Addi- 
tions to compleat Religion and Divine Worſhip ; or reproach'd my 


1 their Idols gave them what they enjoyed, as 

_ \ £7 Zrox ſpeaks a Reproach and Blaſpheray Se comes Hedg for you to break through ; Pl] make every place where you ars 
from an Heart full of Enmity ; as where 'tis uſed, Numb. 15. 30.|a Priſon for Strength to confine you, and I will make it a Priſon ; 
2 Kings 19 22. Pſal. 44. 16. 1/2. 37. 23- and 43- 28. they ſpitefully | for the Sorrows and Hardſhips you ſhall there endure, and allchis 13 Youir 
reproached. g Grievouſly finhed, as the Phrale is rendred, ch. 14, 13. my fury. ; : firſ 
what this was in particular the next Verſe will account to us. 34 And I will bring you out from the people p, and b m 
28 For when + I had brought them into the land ,|will gather 4 you out of the countreys wherein ye are ſcat nf 
for the which I lifted 3 up mine hand to give it tothem ,|tered 7, with a mighty hand p , and with a ſtretched out rat 
chen they faw k every high hill , and all the thick trees , arm, and with fury poured out 5. W- 1; 


-and they offered there / their facrifices 7, and there they p Sidenians, Ammonites, Moabites, &c. whoever they were, to who 
/ the Houſe of the Apoſtate Jews betook- themſelves , where they nova 
( 


they preſented the provocation of their » offering : there tate | n 
. chought colurk, God will bring them thence into Babyloniſh Captivity: 
alſo they made their * ſweet o lavour , and poured out there 9 The ſame thing doubled fb greater Emphaſis. » You diſpel ed ; « 


your ſelves for your ſuppoſed Safety and Welfare. - See 47 then, 
h So ſoon as ſetled in the Land promiſed to Abraham and his Seed. |33. My Power and Arm ſhall execute my juſt Diſpleaſure 91 | 
; See wer. 5. let »and y, and wer. 23- let. & Lookeſt after them, | you x T 


x 0 . « - q ; a pure 
and whien ſeen, liked, and prepared afcer the manner of the Heathen; 35 And I will * bring you into the wilderneſs « 0 BB 
rhough this was forbidden, yer this thou did'ſt, build'{t their high| (he people, and there will I plead x with you z face (0 cogk 


Places,and thou ſer'& up rheir Groves every where. ! Not where God face. SS fichf, 


7 here they lifted. m Either to God, as ſometimes | . 
qr ws os 6 woos. Lioll, as the moſt did, which is here called} *': Drive you, and ſince you think of ſuch a Courſe of Eaſe to = 3+ and pr 


che preſentingthe Provocation of their Offering. 7 Which being Per ſelyes by caſting me of among the Nations, I will bring you ay” 4 


£h.16.19. their p drink-offerings. 


T 


$, SIT ; } 
A | 1s RA. E A E 


ſich 5 you ſhall be ſoon weary of. » Into the moſt horrid, barbarous 
and faivage Parts of the inhabited World; into the mountainous bar- 
ren Parts of Media, Hyrcanta, lberia, Caſpia, Albania, and Scythia, _ 
hoſpitzb!e Nations and mortal Enenues ro Strangers. + Debate, pals 
Sentence, and execute it alſo on you. » Not, as Rabbins dream, to 
conceal the Diſhonour of the Jews, but indeed plainly, openly, and 
ſo as my Hand ſhall be ſeen. 


Ot; 35 Like as I pleaded with your fathers & in the ye 
lems nets a of the land of Egypt, fo will I plead with you, 
the lis > 

""Þ faith the Lord GOD. ; 

lar z who dizd there, and never entred Canaan. aWhich lay on the 


firther Side of the Red Sea, over againſt the land of Egypt, and 1s 
from it called, as here, though it be .{rabia Deſerta; in which, with- 
in t » Space of leſs than 40 Years, all the rebellious Murmurers died, 
ſo will I plead with you, 


37 And I will 5 cauſe. you to paſs under the c rod, 


2and I will bring you into [| the bond of the cove- 


- nant, 


þ I will bring you out by Number, yetſo as you ſhall, either by a 


| voluntary Submiſlion own my Scepter and Government, or by a con- 
| | quered SubjeRion yield ro my Sword and Power. £c Either referring 
to the manner of Shepherds in that Country, which did tell their 
N Sheep in, and out of the Fold ; or rather as a king, whoſe Scepter 
| Y protets tome, and daſheth orhers, and maintains his own Righe. I 
| will diflerence Perſons and Perſons, that I may deal with each ſuta- 
; 6 ble to their Stare and Carriage. & 4. e. thevoluntary and obedient 
iato Covenant with my ſelf. 
. = 38 And 1 will e purge out from among you the f re- 


f WW bes, and them that tranſgreſs againſt me : I will bring 
s them forth out of the country where they ſojourn, and 
7 * they {hall not enter into the land of Iſrael, and ye ſhall 
j- + og know that I aw the LORD. 
n e Cull and pick out that they may be rejefted, as they deſerve, or 
brought forth to ſhame and Puniſhment. f The contumacious Sin- 
@ | ners, who harden themſelves againſt God, his ſevere waſting Judg- 
ments ſhall find them out intheir hiding Places, and drag them our, 
-_ but not to return them to Canaan, they ſhall no more return thither. 
d g By which it ſhall appear, that though Apoſtates may change their 
12*, Religion, and deny their God, yet he hath notleſs Power to reſtrain, 
of nor leſs Right to govern, nor leſs Soveraignty to diſpoſe of them. 
39 hþ As for you, O houſe of Iſrael, thus faith the 
n- RX Lord GOD, z Go ye, ſerve ye every one his idols,. and 
nd k hereafter alſo, if ye will not hearken unto me : but 
on pollute / ye my holy name no more with your gifts, and 
A with your idols. | 
"od þ In ſhort, you have done as wickedly as you could, and IT have done 
in. what was ſufficient to reclaim you, I have foretold you what will be 
108 the final Event, O Houſe of 7ſrae!, and farther I will not ſtrive with 
| you, #Ironically ſpoken, or, as 1s uſually ſaid tounreclaimable Ones, 
Jall take' your Courſe, which allows nor, nor commands, but threatens 
| 7 the evil Courſeof ſuch a one; or *tis a Divorce, of this adulterous 
1%, Houſe, an utter caſting them off for their Idolatry. & Irſeems an 
ind abrupr, vehement Speech, which includes ſome heavy Sentence, but 
*ris ſuppreſt as too great to be uttered, or to leave room for doing 
em more than the Offender expeCted, Eccleſ. 11. 9. Amos 4. 4.'Matth. 23. 
ited, 23- You take yours, I will take my Courſe, and ſee whoſe Word 
ein | ſhall ſtand. / But while ye are ſuch Idolaters, and notorious Sinners, 
and torbear to take my Name into your Lips, bring me none of your 
| the Gifts and Sacrificesto your Idols, and pretend you bring them ulti- 
ai mately to me. 


lem, 
y to 
you, 


49 For mz * in mine » holy mountain, in the moun- 
"tain of the o height of Iſrael , faich the Lord GOD, 


in the r land, ſerve me /: there will Is accept them, 
and there will I require your offerings, and the 
(| firſt-fruits of your oblations, with all your holy 
things. | 


with 
rn, 
over 


_— The Giits of Tdolaters, and all their painted Stuff God rejeQed 
here- in the former Verſe ; now he encourageth the Uprighr, thoſe that 
cheth ſeared, and obeyed, and waired on him. » Sion, Holy Hill, Pſal. 2. 
(ible, 6. Holy by Defignation, and God's own appointingit for his Tem- 
ighty ple and preſence. o You Hypocrites, you have your high Places, I 
1 Vel. abhor them ; my Church hath its high Place, bur 'tis the Mount S:- 
*© ON 01: I have loved and choſen, called the height; "was the Glory of 
over» I/rael, and rhough lower than many other Hills, yet *rwas above them 
otte- all for God's peculiar preſence there. p Redeemed ones, whom I have 
cath broug hr out of Babyloz according to promiſe, the returned Captivity. 
ok a 7 Tis doubled to enſure them. » Their own Land, andtheir Fathers 
2U ars Land. e Not Idols, but the God of their Fathers. : Delightin them, 
>cifon and in their Sacrifices, u When I have brought you into, and bleſt 


youin the Land,then I will require your Offerings as formerly ; your 
firſt Fruits, your Tithes, in a word, all your holy Gifts : You ſhall 
fee my Temple built, Feruſalenr filled with Inhabitants, the Land 
of 1/rae! planted with Seed of Man and Beaſt, my Worſhip reſtored, 
and you ſhall goup with Joy, carrying your holy things, and' I will 
there accept them; 


- 41 x I will accept you with your - y ſweet favour, 


[11518 


| and 
d {cat- 
4 out 


wm - waen I bring you out from the & people, and 4 gather 
Civity: you out of-the countreys wherein ye have been ſcater- 
iſpesſt ed ; and I will be fandtified in you before c the hea- 
ee hy” then, 

are 0 


* Theſame gracious Promiſe for ſubſtance repeated. » Incenſe of 

| 2 Pure and obedient Heart. x From Babylon, and the Parts of that 
Ringdom, where they had been ſcattered theſe ſeventy Years. a By 
-}ru5$ Proclamation, and my ſecret Impulſe on the Spirits of the 


; 0 | 
ce (9 


KIEL Chap. X XI. 


Love, Fear and Obedience to me. «c Heathens ſhall ſee and ſay, as 
Pſal. 125. 1. God hath dons great things for :hem, their God is 
the great, the merciful and faithful God, who hath remembred his 
Servants. 

42 And ye ſhall 4 know that T am the LORD, when 
I e ſhall bring you into the land of Ifracl, into the coun- 
try for the which 1 lifted up mine hand to give it to 
your fathers. 

« More fully by experience that he is your God, who is the great, 
good, wiſe and faithful God, who performs his Word; you ſhall know 
and Jove, fear, obey and worfhip him alone, and according to his 
Will, e Of the reſt of the Verſe, ſee wer. 5, 23. and 28. where 
theſe Paſlages were ſpoken to. 

43 And f * there ſhall ye g remember your h ways, + (4, 
and all your doings, wherein-ye have been defiled ; and _ # 
* ye ſhall ; loath your ſelves in your own & ſight, for all«j qv. 25. 
your evils that ye have committed. 39. Chap. 

f In your reſtored State, and in your Proſperity, in the Land whi- 6. 9. 
ther you are returned. g Review your former ways with Sorrow, re- 
member and grieve. hþ Of your Folly explained by theſe Doings 
which defiled them, 7. e. all their more notorious Sins. i See chap. 6. 
ver. 9, k Your own Heart and Conſcience ſhall ſee what you haye 
done, andthey ſhall take Shameand be humbled chough noneelle ſee ir. 

44 And ye ſhall know & that I am the LORD whery 
/ T have wrought with you for my name ſake, not ac. 
cording to your wicked = nor according to your 
_— doings, O ye houſe of Ifrael, faith the Lord * 


This 44th Verſe doth ſummarily acquaint us, that all God did for 
this People was of free meer Mercy, and forhis own Sak-, not rheirs. 
& Experimentally with AﬀeCQtionand Obedience. 7 The Hypocrite ſe- 
cretly thinks ſomewhat in kimſelf and Works that God hath regard 
to; butan honeſt good Heart, when God hath wrought, ovrneth the 
Mercy wrought to be free and undeſerved. 

45 T Moreover, #z the word of the LORD came un- 
to me, ſaying, 

» A new Prophecy, and which pertains, ſay ſome, to thenext chap. 


there ſhall p all the houſe of Uſrael, q all of them. 


which is a large Comment on this ſhort Prophecyia the three laſt Ver- 
ſes, for the 45 and 46 are introduory. | | 

46 Son of man, * » ſet thy o face toward the ſouth, # 
and p drop thy word toward the fouth, and prophecy a- * Chap: + 
gainſt theq foreſt of the ſouth field; 2+ 2:8 

» He was now in Babylon North from, Jeruſalem, and being command- 
ed to look toward the South, *tis toward Jeruſalem, and the Land of 
Canaan. o Thy Courage and undaunted Mind manifeſt in prophelying 
as thou art commiſſioned. þp Let thy Word diſti], begin with ſofter 
Words, e're thou ſhower dowa with the vehemency of a Storm ; pro- 
pheſie ſo, Amos 7. 16. and Mich. 2.6. q 7. e. Jeraſalim, which was 
becomelike a Foreſt for multitude of Inhabitants, for barrenneſs, wild- 
neſs, degeneracy, and ſhelrring wild Beaſts, Murderers lodged in her. 


47 And ſay to the foreſt of the 7 ſouth, 5s Hear the 

t word of the LORD, Thus faith the Lord GOD, 

Behold, I « will kindle a fire in thee, x and it ſhall 

devour every y * green tree in thee, and every dry «x, 23. 
tree : the z flaming flame ſhall not be 2 quenched, and ; x. 

all þ faces c fram the ſouth to the north ſhall be 4 burnt 

therein. : 

r Fudeah and Jeruſalem. 5Hearken diligently, and conſider. : What 
God foretels, ſhall be done. « I will bring an Evil like Fire, the Cha!- 
dean Forces. x In the midſt of the Land. y All thatflouriſh, and all 
chat are poor. zIt will be a raging and ſwift Fire. a All Means 
that can be uſed, will not avail to quench this Fire, till ic hath burnc 
up all. 6 Perſons and Orders of Men, expreſt by Faces. c From one 
end of the Land to the other; the length of 51d:ah did ſolie from 
South to North. 4 with Terrors, Labours, Flight, Famine aad Sick- 


neſs, occzfioned by this mighty Invaſion; all Perſons ſhall wither, and 
be as parched, or burnt. 


48 And all e fleſh ſhall f ſee that I the LORD have 
kindled it : it ſhall not be quenched. 
e That 1s, all the Nations round abour, near to them. f Clearly 
ſee, openly own it as God's own Work, both kindling this Fire, and 
continuing 1t tillit hath conſumed all which God would deſtroy by ic. 
49 g Then faid I, Ah Lord GOD, they ſay of me, 
Doth not he ſpeak parables? 
g When the Prophet hath done his Duty, and propheſied, and chey 
ſhould have heard and underſtood, he returns with a complaint of 
their quarrelling, cenſuring, flouting, and reproaching him for it : 
One while they account. him mad, our of his Wirs, taken up with 
Raptures and Extaſies, or elſe otherwiſe doting and dreaming; Thus 
they fortifie themſelves in their Athieſm, Infidelity, Idolatry, and 
all other Sins, and fear not thy Word, hurt contemn thy Servant. 


CH AP. XXI. 


A bitter prophecy againſt Jeruſalem and the whole land, under the ſign of 
fighting, 1---7. A prophecy of the bright and ſharp ſword, 8---17. againf 

Feruſalem ; the Kingdom : antl againſt the Ainmonites, 18 —— 32, 

I \ ND the 4 word of the LORD came unto me, 

| laying, 

h A Command or DireQtion to ſpeak plainly, that none might 

quarrel with his Obſcurity. 

2 Son of man, # ſet thy face & toward Jeruſalem, apd 

drop ! thy word toward the holy mz places, and propheſie 

againſt the » land of Iſrael, 


5. 2. 'and 
13. 17. 


= Rubiet ond conſtant Jews, while Apoſtates ſtay behind. + Magnified 
to ya wo © praiſed for the Good I do to my People, and on occaſion of their ! 
am? 3 


fucd. 


; Put thy ſelf in a Poſture may beſpeak thy going to propheſie. 
k Or againſt Jeruſalem; called chap. 20, 46. Foreſt of Seurle. field, 
Of 


a mY 
gr _ Boats ts - —_— Oy 0 
- was,» __ _ > - y — = 6 __ > —— 
we Z : as Pe cap: er - = _—_ - 
> " iP _—- Ay Ny gy >. Ms n 2 4p * -_ - . 
« *g OB ITT, ' _” 54 - —_ — <4 - - wo = . 3) D. -, - 
- - - - Fg p , * My "ep. 7 Sf p; : XY = Kd 2 ; 
<+t, SE LIT ny 4 _ WE”, : « <3? oy St W Bf _- 


. 
F ww <5 vw * 
» rt pines n 
EO —-- B 
afro” otros 
ne nt 


+. 
_— — — 
* _ _ >) 


_ 


« _ 
_ 

” ? ” 7: oe _— » — I EB in oy A . 38,” 

< em = _ *-2t7. PE p A Tr _ _—__——_ 
as. b_—_——_— o -4 Pn __ _ « 3 b, : 

5 . 7 "= 2 ES” £. SY TER et cs 5. 7 Be * a dan, ring o 
<L% * W-- < 2” 1ahnþ + v7 #4 —_ ey - - PAS uit. \ by 
> ated > « ny, ons yo S By > %* 4 ax-- 0 1 o 
wo k ” - 4s wy *.-1 ne 7 i 7 * wu I AM ww . mo 


he 3 ey 


i on 9 Ire: 


MIB 


4.5 


a 


FS 
42+ yy 
4 9 "IÞ:-—- <_ 
_—— RR. + 


m_—_ 


hap. XXT 

$313P. ALY 22> 

7 Of the Phe, fre chav. 20, ver, 46. et, p. 3s Rain from Fzaven, | 

fo Gig) my Word. » Either the Temple, and a] the Parts of ir, 

which were three, the Porch, the Holy. and Ho'y of Iolies ; or their 

Bynagogues, in which they met to worſhip, and read the Law, which 

were burnt up by this Fire, Pſal. 74. 8. » Not only againit Teruſa- 

j-1n, but the whole Lind of 1ſracl, from the South thereof to the 
North, as cafe. 20. Ve. 47 : ; 

3 And fay to the o land of Ifrae!, Thus foith tne 


LORD , 9 Behold, I am againſt 7 thee, and s wii 


eraw 2 forth my # ſword out of his ſheah, ang 
will cut off x from thee the y righteous and tie < WIC- 
ked. | 

o Publiſh ir to all the People of the Land, if any will confider it. 
p Tis not the ſev<:e and moroſe ConjeQureof a diſturbed an injured 
Man, let them knov: God the Lord ſpeaks it. 9 Weigh this I fay, 1s 
of great Importance. r You think your ſelves more righteous rhan 
thole thar come againſt you ; that they are Heathen, you my peculiar 
People, that my Temple is, with you, and that I will be on your 
ſide ; bur be wor deceived, for I am and I will be againſt you. 
s As an Enemy reſolved to flay, r The Chaldean Army under Caprains 
that zre $kilful to deſtroy. # I will bring them our of their Land, 
where they are now quiet, and at reſt. x This Army ſha!l nor va- 
niſh, but effe& what 'tis raiſed for, it ſhall make a general Havock. 
3 Gr take away ont of the midſt of thee, partly by the Sword, 
and parcly by Czprivity, or by Famine. = Some ſay here's meant 


_ 
” 


EZEKIEL. 


Chap. xl 


In a word, the Danger 1s as near, asf an Army come Up 1 array. 
and their Svrords in their Hands ready to go on, and fighr. = 

10 It is ſharpned to make a lore ſlaugnter , 6 it is fur. 
biſhed that it may ©c glitter : ſhould we d then make 


ley [ ” 


cree. 
b To flay many, and with aslittle regard as Men kall Beaſts, 0,1, 


ſtice of God ; much after this Stile both Dawid, Pſal 44. 22. ang 4M 
Iſaiah chap. 34. 6. c And ſtrike a Terror intothe Enemy. & $hzjj A 
we allow our ſ[:Ives in Jollity ,.in Feaſts, or Dances, or Songs? This 
wou!d be v:ry uncomely. e This grear, ſharp, and glittering Swarg 
appointzd is cut off, f Slights and defpiſcth all the Reſiſtance thay 
can te mad? arvainft it, and reckons all former Chaſtiſements were 
but 2s the ou wherewnth 4 Son 1s correfted, but now the Sword of 
an Enemy 15 drawn out, and will cut off all : Qr, N:buchadnezzar de. 
piferh your King, the Royal Family, and Nobles which are compa. 
red to Gods, chap. 9. ro, I1. and woutd _ as he would eve. 
ry common Tree of the Wo2d, as it appears IF*l:i!, when he put our 
Zeca:kish's Eyes, ant bound him in Chaias as a $'zv- 

11 And ie g hath given it to be lurbilhed, that it may 
be handled + : the ſword is ſharpned, and it is furbiſheq 


to give it into the hand of the ſlayer. 

Z Either God, whoſe Sword it 15, or N:buchadnezzar, God's Servan; 
herein. Some refer ir to Chriſt who is Lord and Sovercign of his 
Church, and Governour of the World. + Be the fitter for uſe in the 


fuch as ſezmed to b-,bur were nor juſt ; but tis no unuſual thing that 
in outward Tronb!es, and publick Calamities, thoſe who are igdeed 
Righteous ſhould te involved with others : nor does this contradict a- 
ny Places whi:h ſeem to promiſe a Security to them ; they may be 
chaſtiſcd, but ſhall not be condemned. #@ Profane, ungod]y, and vi- 
cious Ones, who ſhall be cutoff with double DeſtruCtion. 


Se 
go forth cut of his ſheath againſt f all fleſh frm the 
{1h to the north ! 
2 Tis beth my Purpoſe and Threat. & To do that by the Chaldeans 
in ſich minncr as it ſh2!l appear I did ir. c Signified by the green 


Fe) 


oo 


ad 


Hand of the Slayer, 7z. e- the Chaldean. 

12 i Ciy and how!l, fon of. man, for & it ſhall be 
upon my people, it ſha/l be upon all the princes of 
Ifrael : / | terrours, by reaſon of the #2» ſword, ſhalliq, 
be _ my people : * ſmite therefore upon thy wr 
7% TNIgN. ivr; 

7 " nt great Diſtreſs, nay how unſeemingly ſoever ic may ap- Jan 
pear, how! that they may by this know what Sorrows are coming on !: 
them, and how they, like wild Beaſts taken in the Toils and Gins, k 
ſhall how!. &k the devouring Sword of Babylon ſhall certainly be * 
upon all, high and low. /Surrounding Terrors, out of which no 


T'ree, c-45. 29. wir. 47. d The dry Tree, cp. 20. ver. 47. e Have 
a Commillion, ſuch as I gave Nebuchadnezzar, as Jarge as is neceſſa- 
1y for this Work. f All. the Jews that dwell in the Land; it may 
ſomewhat refic& upon the Nationsnear about the Jews, as Moab and 
Limit. @ The who'ie Land of Judea from Beer ſh:ba to Dan. It may 
pofſibly- point at Baby/on which ftood Northward from 7udca, and was 
the Riſe of their Evils. 

5 That + all fleſh may know that I the LORD have 
drawn forth my {word out of his ſheath - it 5 ſhall not re: 
turn any more. 722 0 

h They that ſmart and ſuffer may ſee, and own God in their juſt 
Si firrings, they that ſec and hear it may confeſs God's Doings here. 
in. 7 In chap. 20. 48. 'tis expreft thus, it ſhall nor be quenched, for 
there *twas a Fire, here, it ſbaY not return wito the Scabbard till it hath 
done fu] Execution. 

6 & Sigh therefore, thou fon of man, with the / break. 
ivg of :4y loins ; and with bitternels m2 ſigh before 7 their 


eyes 


& Thereby expreſs to them deepeſt Sorrows for what is preſent, 
8nd moſt piercing Fears of what is to come. / like a Woinan in 
Travail, or as one whole Griefs are ready to break his Heart, 1/a. 21. 
wer. 3, m with bitterneſs, with all forts of che moſt birter Cries and 
Tears. » Who were now with him in Bebz/on, and who, as they eaſily | 
cou'd, ſo ſurely would ſend word to them in 7cruſa/cm and Judea. 


7+ And it thall o be, when they fay unto chee, 

p Wheretore figheſt thou ? that chou ſhalt anſwer, q For 

the tidings, becauſe it r cometh : and every s heart 

fall melt; and all hands ſhall be feeble, and every tpi. 

+ Hb. it iholl faint, and ail knees ihall + be weak as water : 
"behold, ic £ cometh, and # ſhall be brought to paſs, ſaith 


inis warty. 


o Tifis Gire&ts the Prophet what account to give them, when they 
ſhall, as c-rtainly they will, enquire What he meaneth by ſuch unuſu. 
al Soriows, p Is it any private Mitery that makes thee ligh thus, or 


way to eſcape. 2 That Sword God will draw againſt them. »] 
token of the ſenſe of what they muſt ſuffer, and to preſignifie what 
their Sorrows ſhall be, when they muſt expreſs them by Signs, be- 
cauſe too great for Words. 

| 13 0 || Becauſe # « a trial, and what p if rhe anc; 2 il: 
contemn even the rod? it ſhall be no more, faith the! 
Lord GOD. - 


oIt is a fore Trial, therefore ſhew all the ſigns of Grief and Sor. ;.. 
1 . Maul 
row : Or it may refer to what follows in the Verſe thus; inc: this is,, 
che Exploration or Trial, which I will make in ſo ſevere manner to, 
bring them to Repentance, mourn for them, leſt they ſhould harden ,;, 
themſelves. p The addition of Sword, which is not in the Origina, ;, 
hath perplexed the words in my Thoughts. I wouldread them thus.” 
And what if the Rid conremn ? It ſhall be ne more, that the ſenſe run 
thus; But if the King arid Kingdom of Judah deſpiſe this Trial, and 
harden themſelves againſt this.Sword, both ſhall be deſtroyed and ly 
no more, for nothing bur a right uſe of this laſt Trial could help 
them. Or elſe, if we muſt adhere to our Verſion, whar if it 4. 
mount to this, All this 1s for Probation and Trial, got for utter ex. 
tirpating 1ſ-2el, ſairh God to his Prophet, who might p:opoſz this, 
What if the Sword contemn thoſe Bounds, and deſpiſe the King and 
Kingdom, and reſolve to deſtroy them from being a Nation ? as /z, 
ro. 6,7, To this God gives anſwer thus; This he ſhallnever ef:&, 
and in due time ths Sword ſhall be no more, Babylon ſhall be de. 
ſtroyed ; in ſo perplex'd a place I rather conje&tare than affirm. 
| 14+ Thou therefore, fon of man, propheſie, and 9 finite 
thine F hands together, and Jet the ſword be doubled the ti 
y third time, the ſword of the ſlain; s it the ſword of'** 
the great men t that are ſlain, which entreth « into their "IE 
privy chambers. £ 
9 Either in token of Amazement and Sorrow, or elſe to ſigniji: 
what Pleaſure it ſhould be to ſee Juſtice executed on obſtinare Reb:'s, 
or rather, as wer. 17. clap thy hands to awaken and hearten the 3/1 
/ans on to the Slaughter. » Perhaps 'tis too curious to ſearch out 
what particular Calamities are pointed out by this trebled Sword ; 
whether, I. Zedekiah's Captivity with many of the Princes. And, 


EI 


does it bode Evil to others, orto us? « for the news that 1s ro! me 
from Heaven, for the certaia Rumour of Nebuchadnz2ar's Prepa- 
rations, and tarch againſt y ou. » The ſaddeſt News you ever heard 
53 coming. "will molt afſured!ly come. s The Courzge of the ſtout. 
eft Hes: t ial! fail, which ſhall appear in the fecbleneſs of their Hands, 
dejcHedncts of thiir Spirit, and their Knees not able to fupport the 
Body; ſuch Terrors thall ſeize them as ſhall make them unable to 
ſhifc from, or ro make Head againſt the Evils that come againft chem. 
; None can prevent it. t It ſhall have its ſull Efett, nothing ſhal! 
be wanting to yeur compleat undoiog, and then, as I do for a Sign 
to you, fo you and yours ſhall do under the Sorrows ſignified, ſigh, 
and weep, to their breaking your very Hearr. 

8 Apain, x the word. of the LORD came unto me, 
f:ying, ; =: | 

x ] bis I ſuppoſe is a farther Explication of what was faid already 
of rhe Sword God draweth out againſt them ; with a farther DireC&1i- 
en. or: Command how the Propher ſhould note out the nearnets of the 
Ev1!, is bad to ſpeak phinly, and rell them that they may ſee 2. 

© Son of man, prophelie, and ſay, "Thus faich the 
LORD, Say, * A y ſword, a 15 ſharpned, and 
alſo 2 furbilhed. 

y Ax if hepointed to it, crying out 2s one that ſuddenly ſeerh ſome | 


ng 
ied 


[neſs of the Afﬀi&ion. s Wherewith many ſhall be ſlain. 


2. Taking of the City. 3. Killing of Gedaliah, and thoſe with him, 
To be ſure it ſpeaks both the certainty of the Thing, and the greir- 
e Which 
were Princes, and Captains, and Rulers. « Searcheth the moſt {ecr:r 
Rooms, where they ſlew ſuch as they found hidden in hope to eſcap:. 
is I x have ft the || point of the ſword againſt  al'i0 
cheir gates, that zheir heart may & faint, and rbeir ruines'®” 
be 4 muitipled : ah, i 7s made bright, 5 it is || wraptc up” 
for the ſlaughter. 0 
x The Lord hath gathered them together round abqut 7ernſa'tm, 
with cheir Swords ſharpned and drawn at every Gate to ſlay whoiv 
attempt to come out, or to flay all they meer with when rhey take 
the City. y Both of meaner Cities, of their Palaces, and privat? 
Houſes. z As what Heart can be thought able to retain its Courag? 
when beſet with Death by an Enemy's Sword, which killeth all that 
come out, and entreth to kill all char ſtay within. » For Nunmb*r 
made many, for Nature made very great. 6 Prepared, brightn*d. 
and ſharpned. c And haty been caretully kept in the Scabbaid, thi! 
it might keep its Edge, and not be blunted. 


15 Go thee 4 ons way or other, either on the nit 
hand, - or on the Icft, whitherſoever thy face # fer. #6 


ad O Sword, take thy own courſe ; O ye Slaughter-men, ze Baby"! 
/on: an Souldiers, all is open b:fore you, go which way you wil! ; 3” 


a. 


drcadful fight. A mighty Sword or many, ſorhe Ingemination may | 
1nply the Forces of Nebuchadnrzzar and ls Confederares. z Prepared 
to wont, flay, and thar with greatsr Speed and Sureneſs.- z To 
teriifie the weaker Courage, to dazie rhe Eyes of ſuch as encounter 1t: 


have brought you to waſte the Land from South to North, begin 
where yau will, and progeed as you will, none ſhall be able to revilt 
you.. 


mirth ? || « ic contemneth f the rod of my fon, as every; q,, x 


ro offer whole Herds of wicked Men in Sacrifice to the offended }y. 4, 


a 


OR "7 OG ES CF 


WW 4 


ig ..* to + appoint þ + captains 


. the ſlaughter, 


Fl 


TYx | | 
28 OG 
ro I will alſo Imite my hands © together, and I will 

cauſe my fury f to reſt : I che LORD have ſaid it. | 
In token of my Approbation, and Well-pleaſedneſs in thoſe Exe. 


; Hands that 
ions, which the Chaldeans ſhall finiſh againſt you, thoſe 
— reſtrain and check, thall excite and encourage your 


Enemies. f See chap. 5. 13. let. c, d. | 

18 & The Word of the LORD came unto mo again, 
wn thou fon of man, appoint, g thee two ways, 
that the ſword of the king of Babylon may come : both 


ewain + ſhall come forth out of one # land, and chooſe 


k thou a place, chooſe 3t at the head / of the way to the]: 


gs. 7 mark out, or deſcribe on Tile or Tablet, as chap. . 4. 1. 
two Roads, and ſet 1t before rhy Country-men in Ba6ylos, and ler 
them know that the Arms and Svord of Nebuchaduezzar are deſigned 
for Exp'oits, where thoſe Ways Jead them : thus Typically Ezekiel 
forerels the Invaſion the King of Babz/on would make. + The Ways, 
tho two in the courſe, they lead as Streams that divide and multiply ; 
yer ; muſt rake their Riſe from one and the ſame Land, that is Baby- 
lon; there the Prophet muſt begin to mark out that Way, which 15.t0 
be drawn out till it divide into two. &k& Pitch on ſome convenient 
place, where thou mayeſt place Nebuchadn:zzar's Army, he and his 
Council of War conſulting where this one Way divides into rwo, 
which 'was on the Edge of the Deſert of Arabia, as N-buchadnezzar 
purſued his March from Babylon. Either where the Way begins at 
Babylon; Or rather at the Head where each diſtin& Way runs out, 
roward either Rabbath of the Ammonites, or Jeruſalem ; for there Ne- 
buchadnezzar will caſt Lots. 


29 Appoint a way, that the ſword may: come to 
Rabbath »» of the Ammonites, » and to Judah, o in Jeru- 
ſalem p thedefenced 9, 

» This Royal City of the Ammonites, it ſeems, the King of Babylom 


KizH 


more eaſily be broken, and beat down, þ In 2 Siege of forte length, 
Mounts muſt be raiſed to vffend the belieged by ſhooting from the 
Tops of them into the City, and to defend the B:liegers, and the 
Toll and Danger hereof ſeem; here to be caſt on both Overſeers, and 
Labourers too by Lot. # Wooden Towers. Now all theſe Works 
being thus by Lot diſpoſed, the wary Tyrant prevents the Murturs 
of his Commanders and Soldiers, and inſinuares a Courage into them 
by the Pretences of aſſured Succeſs, and his 1dols approving them, . 

23 And ir ſhall be unto them & as a falſe divination in 
their ſight, || to them that have ſworn 1 oaths : but 7 hey Or, for 
will call to remembrance » the iniquity, o that they the oaths. 
? may be taken. i. _ EE #14de unto 

& The Jews, who ſhall either not believe that Nebuchadnezzar dig thews. 
ſo conſult, or elſe that 'tis a vain, falſe and lying Divination which 
will delude him that believes ir, but never hure them who deride it 
I Zedekiah his Princes, and Nobles who ſwore Allegiance to the King 
of Babylon firſt, and afterwards conſpired with Egypt, and by new and 
;Contrar Ives, provok'd as wellasdiſkonoured 
'G buchadnezzar to revenge their Perfidiouſneſs, 
ions of the Prophet ; 
g 0 4. 2 Nebuchadnezzar, 
2 Will ; art it alſo to his 
. Council, as the ground great Wickedneſs of their 
\Perjury and Rebellion. Þ Both Zmdekiah, and the Jews with him, 


; may be ſubdued, taken Caprives, and the Kingdom overthrown, the 
City burnt, ard they ſent into Babylon, 


24 Therefore thus faith the Lord GOD, Becaiiſe ye 
have 9 made your iniquity to be remembreg » in that 
your tranſgreſlions r are diſcovered, s ſo that in all 
your doings * your ſins do appear; becauſe, u 7 ſay 
that ye are come to remembrance, ye ſhall be taken with 


the hand x. Mb 
ſaw fill their 


[] 


wicked Perjuries, 
eferring to Nebn« 


had a Quarrel with, as: well as with Jeruſalem, and he was reſolved 
when he came out of Babylo, to ſet upon one of them There were 
two or three Cities of this Namie Rabba, or Rabbath, one in rhe Tribe 
of Fudah, ofie in Iſachar, one in Moab, but this in the Text is di- 
ſtinguiſhed by Rabbathof the Ammonites. n They were the Children 
of Lor's Daughter by inceſtuous Mixture. 0 7. e. The ſews, the 
Land for the People of the Land. þp Particularly againlt Fern/alem, 


to whoſe Memos« 


gainſt the King of 
with promiſed Obedience, 
: Publick manage of 

add Sin to Sin, and 


q Whoſe Fortifications do now as little diſcourage as they ſhall e're 
long hinder Nebuchadnezzar from taking the Ciry and deſtroying ir. 


21 For the king of Babylon r ſtood at the + parting 
Of the way, 5 at the head of the two ways, to uſe : divi- 
nation : he made his || arrows « bright, he conſulted x with 

7 images, he looked y in the liver, 


i r The Prophet, by reaſon of the Certainty of t thing, ſpeaketh of 
what ſhall be as if *twerte already ; he ſtood, 7.e. he will make a Hale, 
pitch his Camp, and conſult. s On the Borders of 4r3b;a the De. 
fert, to which one Road brings Travellers from Babylon, but hence. 
forward it divides and becomes two, one leading to Feruſalem, the 
other to Rabbath, t To conſult with his Gods, and to caſt Lots; and 
here the Prophet foretels what Divination he uſeth. « This, the firſt 
kind of Divination he uſed by Arrows (42:425]d2) either writing 
on them the Names of the Cities and Countries, then putting them 
into a Quiver, and there mixing them, and thence drawing them out, 
and concluding according as the Names were which were on the Ar. 
rows ; or perhaps by ſhooting the Arrows and judging by the flight; 
or caſting them up 1n the Air, and divinirg by their Fall, as Beggars 
are ſaid to go as their Staff falls. So then if Jeruſalem were on the firſt 
Arrow drawn out of the Quiver, or if the Arrows beſt flew, or moſt 
tell that way toward Jeruſalcm, Nebuchaan:zzar Will take that way. 
x The next way of divining was by asking Counſel ot his Idol, or 
Image, which being made artificially by the Skull of their jugling 
Prieſts and Conjurere, with little help they could give Anſwers, and 
the Image ſpake aloud what the Sorcerer ſpake more ſoftly, ſomewhat 
like the artificial whiſpering Places which convey the Voice from un- 


that without bl 
ſumm'd 
in the 


g them. «© The whole 
x As Birds, or Beaſts taken 
ey Cannot get away, are 

and be carried into Babylon. 
25 Y And thou y profane z wicked prince @ of If-. 
end, | | 
” Zedekiah, z Tainted with ſecret, deep irreligious O iniong 
whence hz deſpiſed God, arid his Oath, and profaned the "aw of 
God. a So much was his _— Dignity leflened, that indeeg he was 
rather a Prince ſubje&, and ependent, than a King. 5 Day of Sor. 
rows and Sufferings, and Puniſhment is at hand. £ The Irreligion 
which is ſpread by thee among thy Courtiers ſhallceaſe to fpread ic 
ſelf, becauſe of thy low Eſtate. Or, when Iniquity ſhall bring the 
fatal Ruine of King and Kingdom, and both ſhall bs deſtroyed, and 


wich the Overthrow of your State the Opportunities and Means of 
ſinning ſhall end too. 


26 Thus faith the Lord GOD, Remove the diadern 4; 
and take off the crown e : this ſhall not be 
alt &im g that is low h, and abaſe 
d Either God ſpeaks ro the Prop 
Nebuchadnezzar to do the thin 
Tireof the Head 
e Which was a R 


e thing in doub] 
ingdom and Cro 


ſeen Perſons; or by a Divine Permiſſion, the Devil gave them An. 
ſwers from thoſe Images. » The third Divination is by Sacrifice, and 
Judging of future proſperous or unproſperous Events by the Entrails, 
and more eſpecially by the Liver, its Poſition and colour. Al theſe 
he uſed, that with greater Confidence of Succeſs he might procceed. 


22 At his right hand 2 was the divination for Jeruſalem 
c to open the mouth 4 in 
to lift up the voice with ſhouting, 
appoint battering rams f againſt the gates, £ to ca 
mount, 4 and to build a fort 5. 


4 Either the Divination which concerned Jeruſalem was managed 
on his Right-hand ; thar way the Arrows thrown, the Images ſtood, and 
Vacrifices were offered; or elſe the Lot drawn with the Right-hand of 
the Prieft came forth for Jeruſalem. The promiſing Lot, encouraging | 
Tokens were thoſe which dire&ed this ſuperſtitious idolatrous King to 
attack Feruſalcm firſt, and this by the over-ruling Providence of God, 
who determined by infinite Wiſdom what ſeemed to blind Men to be 
the Event deſigned by their Divinations. Z Now Nebuchadnezzar ſets 
al in order puſuant to his Obſervance of the Diviners. c The Com- 
manders of his Forces, and their particular Charges in the Match and 


; ſelf ; fo here, this ſha 


; riſhing, but hereaf: 
'& Jeroniah, 'tis 
Captive King, 

tivity, in the 

$3. 98. 

bh Now 


..25. 27, 28, 2 
Ca 
3 Zedekiah, 
h the Confederacy of Egypr on 
| If, and bears himſelf high againſt 
g of Babylon, and which is moſ} infolent, againſt 


27 + I will overturn 7, overturn, overturn it, antl it Het) 
ſhall be no more 4 until he come whoſe rigfitic is, and | Heb. , 
I will give it bi", 

_ As this Triplication of the Threar 
Event, ſo the gradual, ſucceſſive Troubles and 
Kingdom ſhould ever after be a 

former Glory and Strength, bur 


perverted; 


Siege, he did 'tis probable aſſign them by Lot, as is ordinary where 
greateſt Dangers attend the Charges. 4 To aſſault the City where 
Breaches were made, and ſtorta the battered Walls, to ſlay the De- 
tenders, and to run the hazarg of being ſlain by them. e fo all the 

arbarous fierce Nations did wich Shouts and hideous Noiſes affatilt 
and fight their Enemies, znd with this they hoped to tettifie and amaze 
them, and ſo more eaſily Maſter them ; and theſe Babylomians did, 
© May be colleed from Pſal. 137. 7. and Jer. 51, 14: where Babylon 

Ut be repaid her Shouts. f Engines made to beat down Walls, 
and they had this Name trom the Iron or Braſs Head, which uſually 
Was rf ry "ms of it like unto the Head of a Ram. £ which might 

Ol. 


28 T'Ahd thou, fon of man, » propheſie, and 
Thus faith the Lord GOD * concerning 
monites, and concerning their reproach p : even lay g. E 
thou, The ſword, q the ſword « drawn r : for the 
laughter s i is furbilhed, to conſume becatiſe of the 
glittering : - TY b 

X ] 


ſay; 
the o Fs i 75.4: 


In + 


Chap. XXL 


"PIO 


rael, * whoſe day 6 is come, when iniquity c ſhall have an* Vet."2+: 


Perverted, 


ABEL. 
Oo «+ 


_—_— 


YaulSn, nb aet 4 
—_— - 


> 
= >> + worwrtes 


aL Es - d -x a 


Y 4 
_— go =- 
tags” Fe. > 7 < 4 > a Fs 4.  - 
o oy 
Neſs = _—_— A = % 
- 2 - 


— Ly . TIE: 
oo . "Mn. a6 $2 pot ET ee Es - - 4 4 
x *. *o p = - 8 — * Pt 4M Ed, z _ 
COEg TT WYTSMAG ery Yu I +, . I ” eee, Pann - 
SO ER Log ' Wd 5 II PIO 0 eine. — a 
OJ * | »g +. wh 


— IF 
Px. "I > 


- 7 arg wo Ihnay. 


— FORE. *_ 
Chap, XXIE. Z 
+ In ve. 19, and 20. you had the mention of Ravbsrh, chief City 
of the 41mite, incqual danger with Jeruſalem ; but while Feruſalen: 
55threatned, Rabbethis nc farther minded, till now God direCts the Pro- 
pher to declare the ruin thereof. o A ſtout, but proud, injurious, and 
inſulting People. p Wherewith they reproacht 7/-ac! in theday of 1/- 
rae!'s Afﬀlittions, as Jer. 49. T. and chap. 25. 3, 5, 6. and blaſphemed 
re God of 7jrac/., q All warlike Preparations are made againſt you. 
* The War is declared, and your Enemy hathdrawn the Sword, vid 9. 
10, 11. s To make waſte, by avenging former Quarre!s and Afﬀeronts; 
the B-bylozi/b King comes out with bloody mind againit you, O Ame 
zites! you countenanced Iſmael, who flew Gedaliah, Viceroy by Nrbu- 
chaantz2.ar's Appointment,and you would have ſet 1/7a:! on the Throne; 

this Aﬀeront you ſhall ſatisfie for with your Blood. 7 7:7, 2, 10, 


= PDT 7 RE RP WOE 
4 E K 13 £6 
thon haſt * ſhed o, and haſt defiled thy 
thine : 
cauled r thy days to draw near, and art come s evzez Þ* 
unto thy years ; therefore : have I * made thee a'9..þ4 
reproach # unto the heathen, and a mocking to ali: oj 
countries x. ; 5 


Chap, NF 


ſelf P in*:| | 


idols 4 which thou haft made, and thou ha: 


2 Greatly, or deeply guilty. oIn abundance, cruelly and pergq. 


ouſly. > As a polluted thing, loathſome to be ſeen or touch'q ; 
94 Dunghil Gods. r Haſtned the days of thy Sorrows, and Puniſhmens Bb 
of thy Deſolation in Frudea, and of thy Captivity in Babyloz ; M 
haſt ſhortned thine own Peace, and my Patience. 
tO the eldeſt Years in Sin, beyond which thou wert not to go ; 'tis th W 3 


z ""— 
thoy 3; ij 


_ ES ++ thao  Whiles they * ſee vanity unto thee, whues they di-| fame in eff:& with that went before. 7 For thy old Sins thou att oi. 
vins a lie unto thee, to bring x thee upon the necksof 7h-| ven up to be a Reproach. « To be ſcorned by them, to be brandeg * 
ehies ave lain, of 7 the wicked whoſe d ay is come, when j © Poſt perfidfous, irreligions, unconſcionable ſort of People, not wo:. 
their iniquity ſhall have an end z cy fo live: Orelſeto be a taunr, and by-word among all Nations, # * 

u War and Deſolation indeed haſten on thee, tho in the mean while _ —_= # "On. _ f L_ - A 24. 9. x That were round abyy: | 7 
thy Aſtrologers and Soothſayers promiſe Peace and Profperity, and de- 'Th -_ } 0 , Ne CONE I TOrunNs : * 
ceive thee with fair, but falſe Divinations, of which Jeremiah warns| , 3 ofe that be near y, and thoſe that be far % from 3 
thcm, Jer. 27.9. x To bring thee under the Sword cf the Chalazans, thee, ſhall mock thee which art T infamous a, and much+1# = 
and ro deſtroy thee as the Jews are, who already are fallen under the | vexed 6, mo 
deſtroying Sword, to make thee ſtumble and fall on their Necks, as | » As the 74:mcans or Edomites, who inſulted over WY 

A , . » 4 EI” 0 " " ”3 4 l 111 Nin RS 
Men that fall among a Multitude of Slain. / :. e. both Jews, and their | *ewas taken, Awmonites and and Moabites, and P/ili Om The ay '+ Th 
King, as wer. 25. let. b. x See Ver. 25. let. c. : : | barous Mcdes, Iberians, Hircanians, &c. to whom thou ſhale be carried qe 
' Or,covſ, 32 @ || * Shall I cauſe #to return into his ſheath ? I | Caprive, whoſe Land is far off. Of a molt infamous Name. } Af 3 
77 zorcturu Will judge b thee in the place where thou waſt created c, oy impoveriſhed, and ruinated above what was ever done to any F 
'Jer-47: in the land of thy nativity. ay | 3 
Ke a Some read it without Interrogation, as an Advice to the Ammonites | , 6 Behold c, the princes s of Ifrael, ever y one ewere ® © 
to put up the Sword they had drawn for their defence, as being to no | 1 thee to their -- power f to ſhed blood fo tl 5 
purpoſe toreſiſt;; if it be an Interrogarion, 'tis ſuch as more vehement- | c He was, ver. 2. commanded to ſthew the Jews all their Abominz. Þ 2 
ly denieth. God will by no means ſuffer the Sword to be ſheathed ; | tions. a Now he isdireCed to begin with the greateſt firſt, either thoſ: FS 
in this ſenſe it refers to the Sword of the Chalzeans bPlead, condemn, | of the Royal Family ; or elſe, ſuch as adhered cloſe tothe Intereſt of : 
and execute too. c Explained by that which follows, tho they might | them, and were advanced. to Places of great truſt : Or, who were  ; 
boaſt of their antient Original, and their ſafe and impregnable heads of Families. e Not one to be found of a juſter, or more mer. 5 
Strengths; yet God would bring a Sword iato thoſe very Places, and | ciful Temper. f According to theis Ability and Opportunity. z For N L 
there chey ſhould periſh. RAY ; murdering all they hated, or that ſtood in«their way. n= 

31 And I will pour out 4 mine indignation upon thee,| 7 In thee þ have they z fer light by & father and mo. b 
I will blow e againſt thee in the fire of my wrath, and|ther : in the midſt of thee they 7 have dealt by [| oppreſ.0h-&8s. © 

? Or,5ury. deliver f thee into the hand of | brutiſh men, and $kilful | ſion 2 with the ſtranger : in thee have they » vexed the W-@ 1 
ng. to deſtroy. fatherleſs and the widow. : 

a As a Flood ſweeps all away, ſo God willler out his Indignation| + In Jeruſal-m, 7Tt's plural, and agrees with Princes, they whoſe al 
to overwhelm the Ammonites. e As thoſe who melt down Metals blow | betrer Diſpoſition, whoſe Education and Greatneſs (beſide the Con. by 
upon the Metal in the Fire, that the Fire might burn the fiercer, and| mand of God) ſhould have advanced their venerable Thoughts and os 
conſume the Droſs. f Or, as there is no hope to one delivered up to| Deportment towards Parents. & Have contemned Pather and Mo. an 
barbarous mercileſs Ruffians, whoſe Trade is to deſtroy, ſo will God | ther, tho God threatens to curſe ſuch as do ſo, Deur. 27. 16. 1 The nn 
deal with theſe Ammonites. Princes ſtill, as the ConſtruQion in the Original carrieth it. »; By M1 

22 Thou g ſhalt be for fewel þ to the fire ; thy | Force and Praud ; for the Oppreſſion here mentioned is made up of thi 
blood ſhall be in the midit of the land z, thou ſhalt be en A where — _ or Lion _— apart, os ” both joined, 

; : ave oppreſied the Stranger, exprelly againſt God's Command 1 
-"g more remembred &: for I the LORD have ſpoken _ pooch Srlche Ge ras _ Rulers, whatheuls, a; | "Js 
> 4. I. 17. have defe , Pleaded for, relieved, , ; 

g Rabbath, and thy People. 4 Which is ſoon, and unavoidably Batherlefs Ho Widow EE ar arnces —_— ” L l 
conſumed in ſuch a Furnace. 7 Thou ſhalt no where be fate, or thy | makea Prey of them. : = ROY  D: 
"x ſhall not be covered, nor thou buried. & Thy Name (hall pe- n Thou o _ deſpiſed p mine holy 94 things, and haſt J - 

; profaned r my ſabbaths. + thi 

CHAP. XXIL o All the Land, or thou O a or thou O Zedekiah the chief of , t, : 
i entaloue of rhe abbninable farkf Jeruſalem, 112. God feretelleth = Princes; or elſe, having ſpoken of them all in the plural, now 7 we 

Wb aber for, 173 16, rhhe be might "mele them in the farnace of |© angeth number, and fo ſpeaks to each in particular. p Haſt had Ss 5Q 

his auger, 17 22, God complaineth of the great wickcaneſs of pro- very low eſteem of them asif mean, and ridiculous. 4 All my 2 oy 

fs rince and people, ng=—3.1, Inſticurions, Temples, Sacrifices, Feaſts and Prieſts, &'c. » Spent py T 

_ in prophane Work, os beſtowed them upon Idols, and their # fayi 
ervice. | 8 
A» >) "__ ] 
I PN 20a the word of the LORD came unto me, £ 9 In thee are + men that * carry tales s to ſhedoB*- con 
| , . . ood : and in thee the ' ins : in! 
*C , 2 Now thou fon of man, * wilt thou !| judge, 5 wilt thou the midſt of thee they _— 2 ola ANANEDE "y = 
all, 2©.4. 4 - « ; 
& 23. = * judge c the - bloody city 4 ? yea thou ſhalt + ſheweher| ; Informers and Trapanners, or Perſons that corrupted with Money, 
f Or; p/.az} All ber abominations. ; give in falſe Witneſs againſt the Innocent, and Princes of 1/-a-l had [* N n 
for. b Some would have the Prophet here to be queſtioned, whether he | hand in it. : Offer Sacrifice on the Mountains, and feaſt there, ce T 
* Ch. 24, would, and why he would plead for ſuch a Ciry : Other, that God | lebrating the Honour of their Idols. See chap. 18. 6, 11, 15. « "voy _ 
6, 9. 7 _ my ___ for it, or be ſolicitous about _— Gps 0+ m"_ mous, contrived Milſchiefs, as the word imports, 2 5 nl 
2h. 2. 3, God doth awaken him to more VIgOrous TEProving O ISunrulreople, : * , : Mm 

+ Heb ciry and threatning them for Sin. c The Queſtion is doubled to awaken , af ” L th _ - % they * diſcovered their fathers l - pude 
of bleeds, © the Prophet more fully, and to quicken him to his Work. & Feruſa. | NANCONCEBS Þ 1N tnee nave they humbled ) her that was ®ppr 
+ Heb. Jem, which is guilty of the Murde:isof innocent Ones, of Prophets ſet apart for pollution Vo ws $ this | 
mak: bx and holy Men. e Make her know, at leaſt tell her by writing : For| # Like wild Arabians, worſt of Heathens there have been, and are Judg 
know, the Prophet was at Babylon now, and could not ſpeak to them at Je. ſome that inceſtuouſly defile their Fathers Bed. »y Ir ſeems wo imply = , 
ruſalem, but he might, and muſt ſend word to them what their | a Force and Violence offered to the Perſons; whether Virgins, o” Þ gs 

Abominations were. f All the Kinds, not all individual Aﬀts of married, whom art unſeaſonable time they forced to ſatisfie their Lufts. Y 
them. Y — 2_ 18. 19. and chap. 20. 18. and that on very jult oi, 

3 Then fay thou, Thus faith the Lord GOD, The city — — many Milcuels, which follow fuch us Silver 

g ſtheddeth 5 blood in the midft ; of it, that her- time] __ hat 3-2 hath © TG - [l 4 Fg 
& may 1 come, and maketh idols m2 againſt her ſelf to de },.. ne 4 hath committed abomination 5 wit)? all ; 
ee (IE _— CO wite, and {| another c hath. ſllewdly de- rag 
4 . ! R ed hi 7 4 > hath ;; f 
g Jeruſalem. þ Is ſhedding Blood, *tis her preſent Pratice as well humbled his —_— f. os _ - oa ou thee hath * 1 F 
as her former. Murders are commitred by her, and tis faid the City . : = anners © daughter. - of, I y 
did it; *rwas done with publick Conſent, and probably, under pre- T "h De Some, or the Man of Quality, State, and ſuch as were ofC into % 
textof judiciary Proceſs to colour it, as in Naborh's Caſe, and as they ng gree, as the word 1s tranſlated, Pſal. 62. 9. Or what ita: ſumed 
would have done to Fercmiah. i This aggravates their Murders, and — agg tranſlated, as wer” 6. every one, "twas grown a moſt general {C: | 
makes them more bloody, in that 'twas done where fo many were, ICC, as Fer. 5. 8. 6 Adultery, which God doth, and Man ſhould/:s 20 
that ſhould have been Safety to the Innocent; *twas not done in a abhor. c Horrible ſhameleſs Doings, the Father-in-law commirting and lc 
Wilderneſs. & The Time of Ripeneſs in her Sins, and of Execution Inceſt with the Wite's Daughter. 4 And Brothers defile their 095 p the 
of Fudgments on her for them. / Thisthey did not deſign; they ra- Siſters ; all this againſt che Light of Nature, the Law of civilized! m1 
ther took away Innocents, whom they ſurmiſed were dangerous to | ations, and the Law of God. And, if our Conjefture be r ight,all' yh 
their State, to prevent, (bur this haſtned) the Puniſhment. % Either this done 1n their lewd idolatrous Feaſts kept to the Honour of Ter $7 and n 
maketh new Images of their old Idols, or repaireth the decayed Beau- muz,, and in the very Temple, or near toir; compare this with tn: Wo n Fe 
ty of them : Or, tak<th in new Gods of their Neighbours, who might 9th ver. and with chap. 8. wer. 14. RE *rent| 
help them ; bur all this is againſt themſelves, for this doth more defile 12 In thee * have they e taken giſts to ſhed blood ©, 8m ace, 1 
her d voked God h :1aſt th k > . 1 "BE If it be 
them, and provoked God ro wrath againſt them. thou haſt taken f uſury and increafe, and chon 12"; wp yy, by 
a 4 Thou art become » guilty in thy blood that| greedily g gained of thy neighbours by extortion, "408 ſpeak 
F211 ty | 22 Ott e 


haſt forgotten me ſaith the Lord GOD. © 
- Judges who ſhould have ſaved, have fold the Life vf Innocents 
who fare on God's Tribuna!, have afted the Devil there, and mur- 
dered Innocents, contrary tO Exed. 23.8. f Vid. chap. 18, vey. 8: 
let. x, 1,% 4. g With unſatiable thirſt of Gain, torn to pieces and 
AZevoured thy Neighbour ; ſo haſt thou been an opprefſing Extortioner 
where thou houldeſt not have been a moderate Uſcrer, and thus forgot- 
reſt thy God. EET 
13 @T + Bchold therefore, I have * ſmitten # mine 
" harid ar thy diſhoneſt & gain which thou haſt made, 


':BY 


thee. | 

þ Hear therefore, and mark ye wicked Jews. # In teſtimony of 
my Abhorrence of your Ways, as threatning to puniſh you, and ſet- 
| ring on the fierce Babylonian upon you to execute my juſt Diſplea- 
2. ſure. k Thy Covetouſneſs, the roor of all the Evils in thee , thy 
” curſed, inſariable Hunger for Wealth. ] Which thou didſt ſhed , 
that thou mighteſt then ſieze their Eſtates , kill Naboths, and take 
Poſletiion. I : 

14 Can m thine heart endure ”», or can thine 


hands o be ſtrorg in the days p that I 4 ſhall deal 
with thee? * Ithe LORD have ſpoken r z#, and will 


do zt, 

» This Queſtion is a vehement Negation ; thou canſt by no means 
endure. » Withſtand , and repe! the Evils that are coming, or bear 
them when come z will thy Courage hold out, and conquer ? Nay, 
"twill be with thee, as chap. 21. 7. your Hearts ſhall melt. o To hold 
the Sword, and manage the warlike Proviſions againſt Nebuchadnezzar 


and bis Army : Your Hands ſhall be excecding feeble, chap. 21. 7. your 
a Weapons fall outof your Hands, your Hearts firlt melting with fear. 
i |  p The Times of long and multiplied Sorrows, and furious Indignation. 
of ® © 4g The Babylonians are but Men, butI the Lord your God, whom you 
re > have provoked, am with them, they are my Weapons of War, and I 
r | * firike by them, and thou ſhalt never be able toſubſiſt under it. » Flat- 
or Þ ter rotthy ſelf, the Lord will do it as he hath ſpoken it. 
15 And * 1 will ſcatter 5 thee among che heathen r, and 
{16 diſperſe thee in the countries #, and * will conſume thy fil- 
* s thineſs out of thee x. 
: s A« the Wind ſcatters Chat, 2: Worſt of the Babyloniſh Vaſſals. 
,  Donbled for certainty ofthe thing, + Some take it for a Threat 
Mk - by a Fire that ſha!) conſume the filthy Sinners, the filthy Sins will 
_ caſe; or elſe, rhatby removing them our of Jersſalem into Captivity, | 
nd and reducing them toa very low Condiridn, they ſhould not any more 
fo. commit, bur for ever loath their Wickedneſs: Some ta&o it for a Pro. 
[he miſe of purging Mercy.tobetter them, 7. e. the Remnant of them when 
y-/ the reſt are deſtroyed, and waſted. | 
2s $3 16 And || thou ſhalt take thine inheritance y in thy ſelf 
nd, NO - in the ſight z of the heathen, and thou ſhalt know that | 
, n PZ 'an the LORD. 
ne . +46 


y Whereas I was thine Inheritance, and thou enjoyed(t all Riches, 
Delight, Safety, Peace and Honour in me, ſb long as thou wert a holy 
obedient Peopie : Now that you ate polluted, a very Sink of all Fil- 
thineſs, for which LThave caſt thee off, and ſent thee into Captivity. 
There to be to thy ſelf what thou canſt be ; for I will nor be thine 
Inherirance. z And this forlorn, abje&, helpleſs State, ſhall be ſo viſi- 
ble, that the very Heathen ſhall diſcern, and know, that you are re- 
je&cd of your God, and he very juſt in doiag fo. 

* 17 And the word of the LORD came unto me, 
2 ſaying, 

3 18 Son of man, the * houſe « of Iſrael b is to me be- 
B22 come c drofs ; all they 4 are braſs e, and tin f, and iron g, 


hed , 

W: and lead 9, in the midlt of the furnacez; they are ev.nthe 
; f droſs of (iiver &. 

ney, a Not a few amo1g many, but univerſally the whole Houſe of Jr eel. 

' had b The Secd of nim that was a Prince with God, the Covenant-peo- 

, Ce ple of God «© Are ſtrangely degenerate and corrupted, as if purer 

-nOt- and richer M<r:!. ſhould by worſe and worſe turn to Droſs. 4 From 

the King to the Peaſart, the Prieſts, and Prophets, and People. e Im- 

hers'l pudent in Sin. f Hypocrites, and mixt as Tin. g Hard, cruel, and 

wash opprefſiveas Iron + Stupid and ſenfleſs as Lead : TholT rather think 
i 


this particular . ccommodating theſe Metals, ſomewhat too curious. I 
judg the Propher chargeth them with a continued Degeneracy from 


d are bad 'o worſe, by this Gradation. ; The Afflictions I have laid upon 
np'y 2 them have nor bettered them they retain their Corruptions and Vices ; 
$, Or k While they kept Covenant, adhered to my Law, kept my Worſhip 
,uſts. 8 Pure, and loved Mercy, did juſtly, walkt humbly with their God, they 
y jult £3 were as Silver; now they are degenerated, and are but the Droſs of 
1 UN- 1 L& Suver, vile of price, and of little uſe. 

" = 19 Therefore thus ſaith the Lord GOD, becauſe ye are 
- 1. all / become drofs, betiold therefore I will gather »» you 


into the midſt of Jeruſalem, 
{| From one end of the Land to the other, 9: From all parts there. 


fg of, I will by a ſecret over-ruling Providence, bring you together 
= 7M ons I as into a Furnace where you may be melted and con- 
al umed. 
neral [0 : 
nould ls 20 ++ As they » gather o ſilver, and braſs, and iron, 


EZEKTIE L. 


the Fire., 4 Tillitbe melted. 


and at thy blood / which hath been in the midſt of| 


| y See wer. 19. lt. 9, 's In great, but 
juſt Dilplcaſure called Fxry too here, and elſewhere ; ſuch were the 
Sins of this People, that they had kindled 2 Fire againft them, which 
ſhould ſurely conſume them. : Or 1 wiil fit down, and reſt me, as 
the Founder, when he hath taken pains ro gather inthe Mecal, heap'd 
up the Wood, kindled the Fire, and blown it to its full height, reſts 
himſc|f obſerving how the Meral melts down: God will ſo reſt himſelf 
After the manner of Man 'tis ſpoken: the like Phraſe chap 5. 13. and 
chap. 16. 42. which ſee. « He will rake care the Fire go nor out t11l 


you are melted, either to the purging away, 
your Droſs. ; purging away, or conſuming you with 


21 Yea, Þ will gather you , and blow upon you in the 
= ” my wrath, and ye ſhall be melted in the midſt 
thereof. 


22 As filver x is melted in the midſt of the farnace; 
fo ſhall ye be melted in the midſi thereof 3 and ye ſhall 
know y that I the LORD have poured out my Fury upen 


You &. 


T heſe Verſes are an ingeminating of the ſame, Menaces the more to 
affe& the Jews with Fear, and due Apprehenſions of their Danger; 
and make them think of returning to God. » This ſeems to iati- 
mare the Divine Care over ſome few that in the mid{ of the reſt were 
precious, and God would purify, not d:ſtroy them. y See, own, 
and ſubmit ro God's affliting hand, and comply with him, putting 
away your Dioſs, z Promilcuouſly wich others amoag which you 
have ſuffered the ſame outward Troubles, tho the end be differen: 
which intimates the Eſcape of a Remnant. : 


23 T And the word of the LORD came unto me, 
ſaying, | 


24 Son of man, ſay unto her, 4 Thou art the land 


that 1s not cleanſed b, nor rained c upori in the day of 
indignation 4. 


a The Land of I{-ae!. & Tho God's Judgments have beeh as vio- 
lent Storms and Floods, thothey have been as hotteſt Fices c Yet 
neither thy Filth hath been carried away, noc thy D efs m-!t:d wut 
of thee by them, ſtill thou retaineſt both, 4 Therefore is Indig1as 
tion kindled againſt thee, and thou ſhalr be deprived o®the Dews 
of Heaven, the Rain that ſhould cool thy thirſty Land ſhall be 
boron ; that Rain that ſhould make the Ground fruicful ſha'l not 

eſcend. 


25 * There #s a conſpiracy e of her f prophets in, 
the midſt thereof g, like a roaring 4 lion ravering 
the prey: * they have 5 devoured fouls: * they* Math. 
have taken the treaſure & and precious / things: 23 . '4- 


they have made m her many widows in the midlc,, ch-3i 
thereof. eph.3. 


e A Contrivance, or framing among themſelves a Deſign to ſpeak __ 
allalike flattering ſmooth words ; and give out Promiſ-s of Peace and 
Safety, when there was no Peace : they would have the Jews believe 
inlitcle time, the Veſſels of the Lord's Houſe, and th: Lord's People 
in Ba5yloz fhould be brought back; as Jer. 28. 1, 2, 3. And whereas 
Je 'em:ah faithfully toid them, that it would be no ſuch thing, but thar 
the reſt of che Veſſels, and Zedekiah, and the People ſhould be carried 
away into Babylon ; they conſpire againft him and ſuch as he was, 
Jer. 20. 2. and 26.8. and 29. 25, 26. and perſecute th:m with 
one Conſentand Mind. f Her's, not Gods Prophets ; the falſe Pro- 
phets, fuch as Hanaz!ah, Jer. 21. 1,2. g Of the Land, bur princi- 
pally in Jeruſalem, the Merropolis and Reſidence of che Court , where 
were ſuch as lo:zed to be flattered ; and of whom F:atterers might 
make gain. + Whom Hunger enragerh, and maketh roar in meſt 
dreadful manner, as ſome obſerve ot ther, when they hunt their 
Prey, and when they have ſeizzd, and are teatingit; fo di? thee 
falſe Prophets with Cruelty and Fierceneſs. purſue the true Prophets, 
and ſuch as believed their Word, feared the Judgments, and monr- 
ned for the Sins of a ſelf-ruining People. i Have eat up, impovetiſhr, 
and ſuckt dry, Men that relieved and maintained them, the Guiſe of 
all falſe Prophets ; or they have taken in their complotting, and 
ſwallowed down whole, the Perſons that disbelieved arid oppoſed theit 
Lies. k They did nor, wichout reward, tell their Lies, nor would 
propheſy without a Reward out of the Treaſures of thoſe that advi. 
ſed with them ; ſo they drained the People of their Riches: ! Either 
'tis a farther Explication of what he had ſaid, or pollibly it may tell 
us, that where Money was not to be had, theſe falſe Prophets would 
demand ſom<thing of value z and if 'twere Mon-y's-worth ; they 
were then for battering the Prophecies, ſo they gull'd theſe Sors, 
% One while by raiſing Petſecutions; and cutting off Husbands from 
their Wives; another while, and which moſt agrees with the Place, 
perſwading, encouraging, and bewitching Z:dekiah, and rhe Princes 
and People, to hold out the War, and run all Hazards and Extremiries 
- - Siege, which filled Jeruſalem with dead Husbands and forlorn 

idows. 


26 Her » prieſts o have -+ violated p my law; and. _.. 
have profatied q mine holy » things : they have put 0 Parprk 
difference 5 between the holy and prophane, neither have',,;, ;v. © 
they ſhewed difference t between the unclean » and the 
clean, and have hid x their eyes, from y my ſabbaths, and 
I am z profaned among them. 

» God owns them not as his ; they were Prieſts thar ſuted ſuch a 


Hoſ' 6.9! 


and lead, and tin into the midlſt of the furnace, to blow 

* f the fire upon it, to melt## q ; ſo will I gather 7 you in! 

; mine anger s, andin my fury, and I will [| leave yox zhere, i 
and melt « you. | 


" Founders, who melt down Metals to prove them. » If theſe dif- 
ferent kinds of Metals be to be gathered into one and the ſame Fur-' 
nace, it ſpeaks the involving all promiſcuouſly in the ſame Aflitions ; 
: it be meant,as each diſtin& Meral is tried by the Fire in the Furnace, | 
= by Fire proportion'd to the ſtubborneſs of the Mettal, then it be- | 

peaks the future Afiiftion ſhall be ſuch,as ſhall melc down the hardeſt 
ot the degenerate Idolaters and Sinners. 2 Toraiſe the Fierceneſs of. 


| they 


People. o Men by Office bound to reverence the Law, to ſtudy it, 
and ro preſerve it from Mens Corruptions. p Wreſted it to oppreſ- 
ſion and Impiety, and to maintain Errors, and made it ſpeak whar 
would, not what it did. q Lightly eſteemed, as it they had 
been but common things; and accordingly uſe them. + Sacrifices 
and Oblations, which were conſecrated to holy Uſes, flinu'd beoffered 
with holy Hearts and Hands, and be eaten by holy Perſons in due 
time and place: Allthis negle&ed with protane Spiries: 5s This, and 
the following Clauſe, may bean Exegetis or Explicarion of the former ; 
or elſe thus; Neicher have they in their own PraQiicediff-tented Holy 
and profane, nor in their teaching acquainted the People with the 

X 2 } Diffecence, 


Chap. XXII. 


TT: 


NE EE ITE 


$ _ _ "TE q L . ” " * ' | INE by 
- E - > £* 4 . > oF _ : . i x : 
”_ ee gt _ ſn <a OE « a Y ” - _* _— [3 Gras bs >a. B hw” payrmno pont T7 X Pre” F 20 wig ee” Loy m : > F"READ < 5d - 
4 by - Is Pay, 2 p we. ' + =_ a == _— ——_ 2 (ERS pry _—_ = > Pe Wu Fan a __ —— - F = : —_ - . F en Io 5 
. * _—_ — LS > 00" Fond Ke * Tandon F Fl. « : _ OS. So re $ | Leer 4 - wang 4 >. 3, a 1 ; mm po | . 
kg Ws ” £ <4 Fa. » . of _—__— p = 5 Fi be y 4 J v T9. - - ; G IIs . . » me —_- -_ 07 HE Wet (Sts ; E 
” - / -__ — 4 4 ack = wed rb hos nat IT . * r o#6dv = 7 0 wa Bag en” Tg — þ- in” 8 _ Wu: _— Kt, kx *- _ = wn Say” -- » wats [1 l : . cl As v —IPEI 2 . 
pen * - wag: > ha_— => > _ - _ : "—_—— Taree ad oo md . 0 Ds «ro Von ibs..." « _ Na OL Is, _ ee. + ti be . —s IR : - 1 - -—= _ 
Wt _—— a L w o 2 In - —_— =_ —__—_ — page . =_ cs, tp . V yn —_ ten a I - ATVAY _ — = ” ———_— - "Li » —_ a " _ - —— . 
Pq. ——- Tg gs == —_— AX #4 k a _ 4 ans, ” > —_— _— . Io Wha. — - —— h —_ ————— —_ — x Cams <3 ODE 8 - >. —— C3 * us ” —_— - - Pin 69 - —— -, RICO = = +=, ” = - = R all 
as w- a 75 Ya . LA —_ Ke. a o : k s wt, q 7 { 4 be; > Hh wh i x 54 8 7 wi - A TA, £ —_ - &.-_; &. kia te ®; _ = fm lag34 il" ” If _— I ER 1 pant T 5 : —_— RI —_—y 
: ——_ n ©. Bos L ky 7t'de ob s $_"'T me” . SEL | J 0 —- 1 pe v4 as : P TS Re” A Pon” A > N 4 8 L A : RR l Ee E 6127Ig : , _— . - _ ——— —_ —_—_ - TE : 
X by XL n - _ reared! 4 _ * Wn > - . : - 46% hn <> —_ . i. i fo 4» 5 Ka ——_— =T £ WF « A 4 As ors KC adie k Y Wl +> 8 tho ak a ns oe. A © A "Is z = . =. ne penn "_ 
« o” 7 yo EY Gow . "7 _— +2020 hat mY Er”. M "Rs ny 4 -_ L Daw CACMKED: at "OY » 44s GA. any '. ax Pe wh” at > TR-ES Fog, - « v CF 1 4 — . "r/o 4 ” oy 3X - > —Y y - 4 q 
W——_—_— . - ; 4 + *, "1 "> W Oo. - Ws 6 > 4 & by a. D a, - , — _ : - . «ae 4 q , & pap; VG "V% - po ; %4.. ka dV | - " = a _ Kh, FRO | ' = © ILE; 
—_ Lon 420 any Cate S I: apc WRT La, 12 "- . * I's ; 2 pe 3 "It "EE es AS ES. no . EEG —— —_ _—_ xc => <—p— Us DEG , 
Poet Woe ge = _ WT, _ wm Peet D . 436 ">< p- / = 648 : 27 mh « þ- — = - * wT + "R__— 6600. 5 AY LEST: . —_—_ by : a. 2 — . o- 
# -% A c : yr Ne” net" RA ys FP y ' - > = LI « - "EY wa os - T'27 a oY +4 | wy 
bY —_— gone  - £* hs . _—_ (RE 
FS b . s . | ry: ” 
_= Ro "a 
w - 


> 74 - 
5 a ITCY 7, x" 


_ _ 
- ;_ 

wo 4 

"> 


Chap, XXII. 
Difference, nor in the Exerciſe of their Anthority ſeparared the Pro- 
fane from the Holy, either Perſons or Things ; but with promiſcu- 
ous Intermixtures of every thing, and all Perſons have been alike to 
them, whether holy or profane, 3. e. of common and ordinary uſe. 
what Perſons might not be approach'd to, and converſed with , and 
what might ; all which was the Duty of the Pricſts, rhe negleCt 
z Have net made the People know, ſo the word. s Things and Per- 
ſons, what Things might be touch'd, cr eaten, or whar might not ; 
whereof ſpread the uncleanneſs of the Jews over the whole Land. 
* Deſpiſed, and would nor ſee the Holineſs of the Sabbaths, nor 
would look on ſuch as obſerved thein aright ro encourage them, or 
en thoſe that prefan'd them to reprove them, ſo they did nor ſee 
what they v;ould not fee, » Tho they are expreſly commanded to 
be kept holy, and with great Care and ExaQtneſs, 1/s. 58. 13. Jer. 17. 
24 25. tho the Portion of Time I conſecrated to my Service,they ſa- 
crilegiouſly dire& to other Uſes, and grudg it me, nay rob me of it. 
z Contemned, diſhonoured, diſobeyed, and all my Laws tepreſented 
as trivial and light things. 


27 Her a* princes 6 in the midſt thereof are like wolves 


EZEKIEL 


not Jong bfter their coming down into Zgyp?. 1 This,and what follows 

is an Alluſion, which illuſtrates what was before ſpoken ; while they 

were conſtant to God and his Worſhip, they were as beautiful, chag 
\ and lovely Virgins ; when ſeduced to Idolatry, they became ag loath. 
ſom Harlots, or Strumpets. 


| 4 And the names of them were Aholah » the g. 


and they 


libah. | 

7 That we might know tliem, they are deſcribed. » Which ren- 
dred in Engliſh, is his own Tabernacle ; for 1ſ-ael falling off from the 
Houſe of Davzd , fell alſo off from the Tabernacle, or Temple of Gog 
ſo that all the Temple, and Worſhip they had amongſt them, was of 
their own making. o Greater for niimber of Tribes, being Ten of 
z welve, and greater for Power, Wealth, and Mulcitudes of People 
f This rendred in Engliſh, 7»y Tabernacle in her: The Two Tribes 
tiad the Temple and Worſhip of God with them ; God's own Tene 
was pitcht there, and his ſolemn Services. 9 By ſolemn Marriage. 
Covenant. Ezek. 16. 18. » Were fruitful, and brought forth Chil. 
dren to me ſaith God, they increaſed in numbers of People; and amon 


*Mich. 3. c ravening the prey, to ſhed blood, 4d and to deſtroy fouls 
te "þ + . © © getf diſhoneſt gain. | | 
P-3-3* 2 As before, wer-26. let. d. and ver. 23. let. f, b Rulersof all ſorts 


who thould have cruſh'd Oppreffors, and defend the Oppreſled. c Crea- 
ture: greedy, bloody and crafty, reſembling Dogs that Men make uſe 


lem, tlis chief City of the two Tribes. 


theſe, ſome there were that were Children of God by Faith, Love ang 
Obedience. s The chief City of the Apoſtate Ten Tribes. : Feruſa. 


of to defend their Folds ; ſo Authority which God had givea to de- : . 
fend, is byohels Hy adcrices perverted A fatisfy the bloody and geeedy And Aholah played the « harlot x when ſhe Was mine y, 
frp2tite of tyrannical Governours among the Jews; poiltbly the Pro. and ſhe doted z on her lovers a, on the Aſlyrians b her 


paer way tax the Degeneracy, and Baſeneſs of theſe Rulers hereby. 
& In:ccent blood, a crying Sin in Princes who have God's Power com- 
miited ro them to reſerve the Innotent. e Undo, and ruin Families, 


neighboursc. 


The Kingdom of jſ-aet, or the Ten Tribes. « United inConfede. 


racy 1n civil Concerns, andin Idolatry as to religious Concerns with 


Chap. XX1 


der o, and Aholibah p her ſiſter ; and * they were mine 9%. FY 
bare » ſons and daughters : thus were their Gl # 
names, Samaria 5 # Aholah , and Jeruſalem : Ahg. "1 * 


cvtting cffthe Fathers, and impoveriſhing the Widow and Fatherleſs. 
F Conhſcating Eſtates not forfeited. 


28 And * her prophets g have daubed 5 them with un- 


the 4/jrians. y When under my Government and ProteQion, orin 
my Preſence, or before I had abdicated, and caſt her off. x Were 
madly enamoured with the 4fhrian Idols, Temples, and Manner of 


> 


* Ch.13.10, . I. . . ning lies þ Worthip. a Whom ſhe loved that I find they h h - th 
* Ch. z;, t-miper'd morter z, *ſeeing vanity, and divining lies & unto _— ag nw e loved, not nd they ſo much loved her, af 
ES, . 2 ned nothing needs to be ſaid of them- © So the 2 0 
29. them 5 laying, Thus faith the Lord GOD, when the were now by their ſeizi of $yris, and poſiefii it thei ! Ws bs CO 
LORD hath not / ſpoken: : 2 Kings 15 ug EE AIIIRg 4s ther own, 4 þ 
Falſe Prophets. h Flattered their oppreſſing bloody Princes 1n : . . z Ki 
their ways of Sin and Violence. i With Promiſes and "ao Be nnoqacbay l - _ » CR _— with blue 4, pen E and in WW: = vt 
that like ill-rempered Morter, will deceive them, tho all ſeems for pre- ers f, all ofthem deſirable g young men, horſemen 4 x iding Wors. 
{ent ſmooth and 1afe. k Pretending they had by Viſion from God all| Upon horſes, = ſh 
the good they promiſed , wherea: it was all a notorious Lie and d Richly apparelled, and as the humour of that Nation, in rich and 6». int 
Falſhood. 7 God never ſpake ro thoſe Prophets; and what by his |and beautiful Blue, very magnificent to the Eye. e Daring valiant , 
own Prophets he ſpake, was of quite anether Tenor, 'twas Evil not | Men, and fit for Wars, who might defend the Jews intime of danger, : of 4c? 
Good. f of A and fit a” ys 1 timesof Peace. g Young, * fon 
| | | | <4 | z [and vigorous, full of Beauty, and Strength to commend them to the Þ © © 
jOr,decezs 29 The people »» of the land have uſed 7 | _ deſire and choice, þ Skilful in riding, and well furniſhe wich choice | J 2** 
on, and exerciſed robbery e, and have vexed p the Poor {uo on which theſe deluded apoſtatizing 1/aclites relied for help, Þ X ang 
and needy q: yea, they have opprefled the ſtranger|as appears af. 14. 3. = Fw 
+ Heb. + wronglully, . Ys Thus & ſhe -} committed her whoredoms / with them, , law 
withous AN The —_— People. - greatly, Oc” cont of with all them » char were the - choſen men of Aſſyria, and . of 
way {t one another, wrong each other rauds . : - on : 
_ every Occaſion turned ri. angry 1: Thieves and Robbers. p By theſe _ = far whom ſhe doted 0 3 with all her idols ſhe de. anc 
Oppreſſions. 9 See chap. 18. wer. 7. let. s. 8. Without any colour | 160 ner elf. iS Ne T a 
of Juſtice, Reaſon, or ſo much as hearing of him, as the Phraſe ſeems| # By the Bye, and familiar Converſe, ſhe fell to Idolatry./ See wer. t1 Ef 
to import. let. i. m She embraced the Friendſhip and Religion of all of them, and anv1 
30 And * I fought t for a mans among them x, that a ES Hy Deliverance = _ ” 7. e, Other #8 dors 
Fer. cx. * . ations with whom ſhe had Commerce, and made Leagues. o Like {FF WM 2 
fy es ſhould * make up the hedge y, and ſtand in the BOP an Adulterous Wife, ſhe was mad in her Love to Fang to their Per. * poll 
*Pr ics before me for the land that I ſhould not deſtroy it ; but Ions, Cuſtom, Idols and Religion ; with all which ſhe polluted hes | & Com 
23. lound none 4. ſelf. ; FF Dif 
e Very earneſtly and diligently : ſpoken of God after the manner off 8 Neither left p ſhe her whoredoms brought g from | © eerie 
Man. « Any one. x Among Princes, Prophets, Prieſts or People. Egypt: for in her youth they lay r with her, and they W icat 
y Torepair che Breach, and prevent farther miſchief. z That might bruiſed the breaſts of her vireinit d d h - 4 n M: 
interpole between a ſinful ſuffering People, and their offended God, h gINKYy , and poured their whore- 8 ly de 
and intreet for Mercy, that the Land might not be deſtroyed. a All dom upon her. ; # Adyu' 
were corrupted, not one, but obſtinately went on to fin, and pro-| Tho ſhetook in ſo many Gods of the 4fjriax, yer ſhe did notre eth ] 
voke me. Rounce , or caſt off the Gods of Egypr, but kept them too. q Ir is plain Wear 
31 Therefore b have I poured «c out mine indignation _ Fo in Egypr, carried it with them out of Eg, of 
vpen them, I have conſumed 4 them with the fire of my |*" "Who c ak wok. --+—=. whe vere 
wrath: their own way e have I recompenſed upon their| .? herelore s I have delivered # her into the hand * ir 
heads f;, faith the Lord GOD. - _ —_— intothe hand of the * Aſſyrians, upon whom, fiſte; 
b Thus provok'd by all. c as a Flood to ſweep them away. d Kind- |!2& COted. 4 7 E 
Jed a Fire dns * vb het wil! deſtroy "1 e Sinful abomina-| , *. For this boundleſs Idolatry and Lewdneſs.  : Long agone 1 hare & to all 
ble Ways. f Brought theſe as a Net on them, as wild Beaſts caken delivered the Ten Tribes: Firſt, P#/ put them under Tribute, 2 Kins Þ Þ per. 
inthe Pit. tobe deflcoved I5. 19, 20, about 200 Years before our Prophets time : Then Tiz/ath- mpu 
, yeG. Pileſer, 2 Kings 15. 29. and finally into Sa/manaſſer's hand, who deſtroy- with, 
C H A P. XXIIL ed the Kingdom, 2 Kings 17. 6.{s Puniſkt them for their Sins by thoſe, of 7u 
| | were fellow Sinners with her, 3 and 1 
Under the w/ vredoms of Abolah and mr y (you the fn ;& _ 10 Theſe* diſcovered her nakedneſs x, they took y her hm | 
= Ga wa 0 1p 4 whe tan pf piagnedt Oy ner meverts 36 35: flons and her daughters, and flew her with the ſwords: WY ,. 6 
Juagens 3 49: : and ſhe became + famous « among women, for they + had} had 
1 HE word of the LORD came again unto me >|executed czudgment upon her. Hh P 
laying, x Uſed her as lewd Women deſerve, ſtript her naked, and expoſcl ” latry « 
2 Son of man, there were two women g the daughters | ker to ſhame, as wer. 26. God her Husband had clothed her, and co- 2 ther to 
of one mother 4. — — bur = lightly eſteemed her God, doted on [dols I Do 
Sheds 26.41 the + hd þ Sorung fi ke"? and Idolaters ſtript her. x Made them Captives, and carried them#- © Joivest 
Fe el en ts rom 39 ct10 | wa 5 Sareres fre te Lats of brroe Congurrs 6166 Wd med 
theſe two were daughters, that is, parts, and the Mother is the whole Sexes were uſed. z As a Perſon ſlain with the Sword ceaſeth to be, (0 ' | nil blc 
Policrity of the 12 Tribes. this Kingdom of 1ſrae! under Hoſhea, was by. the Sword of Salmausſs ; 29 
| ; 2s utterly deſtroyed. # Her Lewdneſs made her Infamous, and God's;  feſh ; 
pee ies 3 And 4 they committed whoredoms : 1n Egypt, they Judgments for it made her more known in the World. b The Aſſyrian, , FA z 
Ch - g commucted whoredoms 10 their youth & : there were their | a proud, bitter, and violent Enemy. «c Had executed their own mal; ue of 
b ' breaſts preſſed /, and there they bruiſed the teats of their | <i9us Revenges, but God's juſt Diſpleaſure upon her. nn e Ver, 
virginity. 1x And * when her ſiſter Aholibah 4 ſaw this e, * ſhe; Pan, 
+ ” . . | r, 
# When they came down into Egyp?, and ſojourned there, poſſibly ee won f corrupt in her inordinate love than wr IP. x 
they might commit Bodily Whoredoms; bur Spiritual Whoredoms , | 2d 1n her whoredom + more than her ſiſter g in # of the 
z.c. Idolatry they did certainly commit, as appears Joſh. 24. 14, and | whoredoms. þ for ouj 
Ezck. 20. 7, 8. which ſee; in alow Condition by converſe with the] 4 Fudah, yet Two Tribes, e Both the Sins and Puniſhments of che' Wome 
Lojatrous Egyprians, they fell in with their Idolatry. & Early, tho| Kingdom of 1/-ae!, which ſhould have been her Admonition. f Rai p 1 ſeems ( 
'©5 no where ſaid when they began, yer by thus it appears, that twas| more violently inte both Friendſhip, Confederacies and Idolarrity PR, fitteſt & 


with | 
4 


bY "I ER Samaris, Jeruſalim, had tore Idols n it, and 
_ h_ (dotarry than any we read of in Samaris, that at 
I n remember. . F "THE 2 IN 054 Os 
ps ow She doted upon the * Aſſyrians her neighbours, 
o. captains and ralers clothed moſt gorgeouſly , horle- 
26-7en riding upon horſes , all of them deſirable young 
GD Verſe is the fame with wer. 6. which ſee; only the Clothing. 
there of Blue is here Clothing of Beauty, z. e. moſt beautiful. 
13 Then | ſaw that ſhe was defiled s, that they took 
Z one « way. | 
: — Whin Nis took not warning, neither feared. 5 Her Heart was 
already on her Jdols. 5 Sameris and Feruſalem. u Choſe the ſame Idols 


and Idolatry. ; GD | | : 
D I4 And that The increaſed x her whoredoms : for 


when the ſaw y men pourtrayed upon the wall , the 


© ES & & 
lt 4 E- TLWT, 


| 


e 
1 
f 
f 


wh ak x L Bs, " Þpc>7 


TX VYDW 
ow - 


KIEL 


21 Thus thou calledlt to remembrance + the lewdnef 
jof thy youth z,in bruiſing thy teats & by the Egyptic:us, for 
j/ the paps of thy yourh. | 
h See wer. 19. let. c. i See wer. 3. let. k & Vid. v. 3.1et!, 1 The 
Beauty and Lovelineſs of whom when God had formed them, allured 
the Exytrans. This may be underſtood both politically of the growing 
State of the Jewiſh Commonweal, or literally of the Beauty of their 
young Women. EW ; : 
22 T Therefore, O Aholibah, » thus ſaith the Lord,  _. 
GOD, * Behold, I will raife up thy lovers » againſt thee, Ch. Ic5 


[from whom chy mind is alienated o, and I will bri:gpthem ** 


againſt thee on every ide 9. | 

 m See wey. let. rs. » Thy Confederates. o Whom thou haſt firſt 
loathed and forſaken, and thereby enraged th:-;n a+ inſt thee. p Be 
not only an Exciter toſtir them up againſt che, bur { will be a Guide 
and ConduQter of them. 9 So no way left for thy Eſcape. 

23 The Babylonians, and all che Chaideans r, Pekod x, 


images & of the Chaldeans pourtray'd with vermili- 
on 4. 


ed to the Numbet of her Idolatries. » Where-ever *twas 
Fe = ſaw, there 'twas they doted on their Perſons and Habits ; it] 
is probable enough they might ſee them in the Idol-Temples, or in the 
Houſe of the King of Judah, or of the great Men, who promoted 
the Frienſhips and Leagues with theſe Nations. z The Counterfeits 
of Strangers, and ſuch as were far off, as the Chaldeans WEre. 4 Which 
as 'tis a very gloſly and ſhining Colour, fo duly mixt with Ceruſe 
doth lively expreſs the Colour of Man's Fleſh. : 
15 Girded with girdles 5 upon their loins, exceeding 
e | _ indyed attire c upon their heads, all of them princes to 
h * look to, after the manner e of the Babylonians of Chal. 


n Þ | deaf, the land of their nativity : | | 

rt | | 54With Soldiers Belts about their Loins, which includesthe reſt of 

f þ 2 the Garb, Dreſs, ,or Habit of Soldiers. c Both rich, comely, large, 
; and of divers Colours, and thoſe of the choic:ſt that Art or Money 

could prepare. d Of princely Aſpe&t and Majeſty. « Agreeable to 

the Graments of the rich and proud Babylonians. f Which probably 

was the moſt fruitfu) part of that Kingdom, and moſt pleaſant, and 

where the Pride and Luxury of the Inhabitants exceeded others. 

: 16 * And - as ſoon as ſhe ſaw them g with her eyes, 

7 ſhe doted upon them 4, and fent meſſengers 7 unto them 


6a». into Chaldea &. : 
ied. # g The Pourtraits of them. h Like an inſatiable and moſt impu. 


\ —— -< 
a > 
v6 ONES of fe TIO » 


2 6a-GCh 2 2 


= 


- oe h , 
- + <a. Eggs. Ages 
EIA Ex » 6= Wes oe £ x T7 RE b LOTS 
0s? = Wi: rm. wB Sy; 3 as 


oa 
__ 
F* 


a x — £ k . ” 
- ih, "8 OL Iu 0 3 * A 
EEG ns + 
[) 


mv 
og 
Le 


er. Wh faltef dent Adultereſs ſhe fell into moſt inordinate Aﬀection for their Per- 
is; (rgw fonson ſight of their Piftures. 7 Conrted the Love of thoſe Strangers, 
he Z and woo'd their Embtaces, ſent to make Alliances with them, proſti- 
ice | cuted her ſelf ro them. & Though 'twas a long Journey, troubleſom 
Ip, and coſtly ; all this hinders not this extravagant lewd Woman, ſhe 


ſends to theſe remote Parts, and forgets her God. 
17 And the + Babylonians came / to her into the bed 
. of love, 2 and they defiled » her with their whoredom o, 
and ſhe was polluted p with them, and * her mind was 
. + alienated q from them» 


- invited , and here che Chaldeays comply with it; they came Ambaſla. 


= , dors no doubt firſt to make a Confederacy, and then free Intecconrſe 
' of in Trade and Religion too. m2 So the impudently laſcivious call the 
4s polluted forbidden Bed, as the Harlor, Prov. 7.18. It 1s like with this 


' 1 The Prophet proſecuteth the Allegory ; the Adultireſs ſens, and |\y 


and Sho rt, and Koa «, and all x the Affyrians with 
them : all of chem deſirable y young men, captains and 
rulers, great lords and renowned s, all of thei riding 

upon horſes. | | | 

7 Theſe are known, 5 Some reckon theſe the Titles of ſome of the 

great Commanders in this Army, which come againſt Jeruſalem, but 

they are Names of diſtin& Countries or Provinces under the Babyloniſh 

Government, and fo Pekod is the Province between Tygris and Lycas 

Rivers in this was old Niniveh, and was the principal Province of the 
Kingdom ; though ſome others think 2:k34 was Ba#rians, now called 
Usbeek, and Corafſan, fierce, thievilh, and barbarous of old. : Ei- 
ther Sia in Armenia, or the Sohai, among which were the Adiaben;, 
and this contained the middle part of the Kingdom of B:5y.oz, and 
was Aſhris Med:iana, u This bordered on Media, the Inhabitants : at> 
led Kohai, and dwelt about Arbe!, or 4rbelis, or Arbela, and compre» 
hended Ganyamela, where the Fortreſs Gangs looks like this Kohs, be= 
ing eaſily changed from Koa to Ganga, by changeof the original Let- 
ters into G. and\Jinto G. a People too like enough to be cruel 
and barbarousby their very Situation. x Alltheſe Sons or Subje&s of 
the Arian Monarchy or Confederates. y Moſt of theſe are alrcady- 
explained, wer. 6. where theſe were ObjeQ&sof Love, now they are 
Objeas of Terror ; ſo God turns the Occaſions of Mens Sins into Ct» 
caſionsof greater Terror and Puniſhment. z Hz. called, or ins ir-4 

firſt by the Jews to ſin with them, wer. 16, let. i, now called of God 
to puniſh their Fellow-ſinners. : | 

| 24 And they 4 ſhall come againſt 5 thee with cha- 
riots c, wagons 4, and wheels e, and with anaſſembiy f 
of people, which ſhall ſet againſt thee buckler, and ſhieid, 
and helmet g round about : and I will fee 45 judg. 
ment before them, and they {hall judge 7 thee accord. 
ing to their judgments &. 

# Mentioned before, wer. 23. 6b Or upon thee, ſurprize thee with 
2 ſpeedy March, for they were ſwift in their Courſe. «c H:4. is of 
larger Senſe, and more properly ſpeaks all kind of Arms for the War, 
a cthorow Furniture; ſo the Chaldee Parariraft, with Inſtruments of 
ar or Arms. d Heb. Chariot, and is ofcner ſo rendred, for Expedi. 


tion, for eaſe of their Commanders on their March, and for Srrength 


againſt the Enemy in the Battle. e Whether diſtin& from all other 
or whether prepared, leſt in their March the Carriage-W heels ſhou! 
break, and they be at a ſtand, therefore before-hand ſtore of theſe 


Commerce and Confederacy the Juſtful Bebylonians did ſpread that 
X Diſeaſe. 'The -wiſh Nation were too much inclined to corporal Adul. 
| 3 teries and Fo: nications, but meraphorically it is a delightful commii- 
2 nicating with them in their Idolatry in then: Idol-Temples and Feaſts. 
3 = Made her unclean and loathlom. o Spiricual and corporal. p Great- 
"Tre | Þ& ly defiled, as the doubling the Expretizon imports. q Like an arrant 
# Adulterefs, wearied, bur not ſatisfied with ker Adulterers, ſhe chang- 
| Z eth Mind and Friendſhips, and ſeeks new ones. So did this People, 
| 3 weary of the Chaldears, icck new Confederates. 
* 18 So r ſhe diſcovered s her whoredoms, and diſco. 
Z vered her ni:kedneſs : ; * then « my mind was alienated 
&$8:x from her y, like. as my mind was alienated from her 
= filter z. 


» By this Unſatiableneſs and change of Lovers. 5s Made it appear 
2 toall far and ri:ar, thatſhe was a moſt notoriousand infamous Strum- 
Z pet. 7 Her Weakneſs, and her Shame. o When I ſaw the Lewdneſs» 
I Lats, and Boundleſneſs ot her Adulteries. x Turned from her 
with Abhorreticy, I could no longer endure it. y Jeruſalem, the Land 
| 2 of Juan, the Kingdom of the rwo Tribes.z Samaris the ten Tribes, 
3 and I reſolved to deſtroy them both alike by their Lovers. 


hers; 19 Yet «4 ſhe multipiied & her whoredoms, in calling 
J &:, to remembrance c the days of her youth 4, wherein ſhe 
hadty had played the harlot in ths land of Egypt. 


"* «3 And Hb. b Added more and greater to her former Sinsof Ido- 
2 latry and Whoredoms, and perſifted in them. c This may refer ei- 
| > therto the Jewiſh Nation remembring their Idolatries in Egypr, their 
| * Alliances with and Reliance upon it in Days paſt, which ſhenow re- 
| folvestoact over again; or it may refer to God, who, by theſe conti- 


both nued Courſes of judah's Lewdneſs, is provok'd to remember and pus 
be, ſo, niſh old perfidious and idolatrous Prattices. « Yer. 3. let: &. 

_ . 29 For ſhe doted e upon their paramours, f * whoſe 
” 0 f<fh is 2s the fleſh g of aſſes, and whoſe iflue is like the il- 


lue of horſes. | | 
eVer, 5.let z. f Egyptians, and the Nations, that were Confede- 

rate with the Egyptians, looking on them as able to defend by their 

Power, enrich by their Trade, and make proſperous by their Friend- 


= hip. gIn theſe Terms the Prophet expreſſcrhthe vehement Deſire 
1 #8 of the Jews to Egyptian Idolatry compared to Whoredom, and may, 

jy for ought I know, tax the luſtful Impudence of ſome of che Jewiſh 
of che" omen in their corporal Uncleannefles with the Ezyprions,who were it 
f Rat} ſeems (by Report of Authors) naturally diſpoſed for that Vice, and 
ecies) fitteſt for unſatiable luſtful Women. See ch. 26. 26. let: 1. 


were provided. f A mighty Confluence of People, and a Mixture, 
where the worſt and cruelleſt are the moſt numerous. g Yer for their 
own Defence well armed, and with Armature fitted to defear the Ar. 
rows, and offenſive Weapons of their Enemy,and co maintain a Siege, 
ſuch as they ſhould weary Feruſalem with. þ Give them a Power by 
their ViRory, and in right of Conqueſt over their Rebels, as well as 
mine, and I will give them a ſpirit of Judgment to diſcern the Great. 
neſs of this Peoples Sins: + Plead with thice, convince, condemn and 
execute Sentence upon thee. & To their Will, Power, Wrath and 
Cuſtom againſt. Rebels; for theſe are cheir Rules of Judgment; all 
which appeared when the chief of all the People were conderiined co 
Slavery; the wiſe Counſellers and valiant Commanders ſentenced to 
die, Zedekiab's Children flain, his own Eyes put out, and Ciry and 
Temple to be burne. 


25 And I will ſet ! niy jealouſie againſt thee, and 
they ſhall deal furiouſly 2 with thee : chey ſhall cake 
away thy noſe, » and thine ears, and thy remnanc 
o thall fall by the ſword : they fhall take p thy ſons and 
chy daughters, arid thy reſidue 9 ſhall be devoured by 
the fire. 4 

1 As a jealous provoked Husband, I will be as much againſt thee as 
they are, their Fury ſhall avenge my Quarrel. » Their Diſpoſicion 
naturally is to furious Wrath, my Jealouſie ſhall enkindle ic more. 
» As thou haſt proſtituted thy Beauty like an Harlot, ſo they ſhall uſe 
thee as ſuch, and marr thy Beauty, and brand thee for ever, as thou 
deſervedſ}; and that thou mayeſt be as loattiſom in thy Deformity, as 
ever thou waſt thought lovely in thy Beauty ; chis Puniſhment of A- 
dultereſſes is known to have been .uſed, and is yer in uſe. o Orelſe 
at laſt, thy latter end fhall beto fall by the Sword, thoſe thardo nor 
live under ſuch Reproach ſhall die by the Sword of the Enemy. þ Fot 
Captives and Slaves for Work, and ſomewhat a thouſand times 
worſe. q Either the People who did hide themſelves in Vaults and 
Cellars, and carhe notout; or elſe what remains of that the Chaldean; 
cannot carry away ; all this ſhall be devoured by Fire, as when the 
City was burar. 


take away thy 5 F fair jewels. WI OO flraientoof 
r Both as lewd diſgraced Harlots, atid as Captives are uſed, ch. 16. ;þy d.ckng 
39. let. a: 5 All thy rich beautiful Ornaments, «. 16. v. 19. let. p. 
They ſhall be a Prey and Plunder to che Enemy, | 
27 Thus? will I make they lewdneſs # to ceaſe from 
thee, and thy whoredomi brought from the land of E- 


| gypr 


Chap. XXIIL 


26 They ſhall alſo ſtrip 7 thee Out of thy clothes, and; jje, i». 


pypt * + fo thatthou ſhalt not liſt upthine eyes unto them, 
- nor remember Fgypt any more z. . 
0't By theſe deſtroy fire hun which ſhall make thee ceaſe to be a 
People, I will put an end ro the Jewdneſs thou wouldſt never have put 
end to; thou ſhalt never have opportunity if thou hadſt Heart to do 
the like. * Idolatriess x When thou camel: out under my hand. 
3 With Deſire and AﬀeCtion roward them, as once when thou dotedſt 
on them. » With Love, Truſt, Imitation and Dcfire of Commerce 
with her; bur allthy Remembrance of Zgype ſhall be with deep Shame 
and Loathing. ; 
28 For thus faith the Lord GOD, Behold, I will we 
liver 4 thee into the hand & of them whom thou on 
teſt, into the hand 4 uf them * from whom thy mind 15 


alienated. | 

a Give thee up. 5 To the Power and Will. c Thoſe _ =_ 
Maſters, and domineer over thee, whom of 2}] Mcn wr ! b 
deſire might not. 4*Tis doubled for Certainry of ther ng, _ o 
make deeper Impreſſion ; They ſhall certainly lord 1t over thee, whom 

f all men thou doſt moſt loath. ; 
: 29 And they ſhall deal e with thee hatefuly f and 
ſhall rake away all thy labour g, and * ſhall leave thee 
naked & and barez and the nakedneſs of thy whore 
doms ſhall be diſcovered, both thy lewdneſs and thy 
whoredoms. 

e Uſe thee, andever demean themſelves toward thee, f In Hatred; 
wharever Drudgery, Hardſhip, baſe and vile Employment their Spite 
and Hatred can invent, they ſhall caſt on thee. g Spoil thee of all thou 
hadſt gor in Judes (as they did when they conquered and plundered) 
and dcprive thee of all the Right and comforcable Uſe of all thy 
Labour, which they will exa& of thee in Captivity, and make thee 
know a Slave hath no Right to any thing. + Both literally, thou 
ſhalt not have Clothes to cover thy Nakednets; and figuratively, thou 
ſhalt be left in a moſt diſgraced State, and the Shame of all thy Sins 
ſhall cover thee : All this, as this Prophet uſuaily doth, is doubled 
to affe&t thee more. 

30 I will do theſe rhings unto thee, becauſe thou haſt 
gone a whoring after the heathen, nd becauſe thou art 


polluted with their idols. ; : 

T his Verſe gives the ſame Reaſon which hath been often given, why 
the Lord proceeds in this Severity, becauſe as an obſtinare, lewd, un- 
trattable Adultereſs abuſerh the beſt Husband, till nonecan forbear ; 
ſo had the Jews dealt with God, and God will deal with them. 

31 Thou # haſt walked & in the way of thy ſiſter /, 
therefore will I give her cup m2 into thine hand. : 

i O Jeruſalem and Judah. k Haſt run into the ſame ſinful Enormi- 
ties. /Samaria, and the Ten Tribes, both great Idolatrreſſes. »» Of 
Judgments and So10w, expreſs'd frequently by a Cup, P/al. 75. 8. 
and Jer. 25. 85. I will puniſh thee with Puniſhments like hers, fince 
thou haſt made thy ſelf in Sins like her. | 

32 Thus faith the Lord GOD, Thou ſhalt drink = 
of thy fiſters cup deep 0 and large p thou ſhale be 
laughed 9 to ſcorn and had in derition ; it » containeth 
s much. 

#» Thou ſhalt not put it by, and ſhiftir off » Towards the Dregs 
where the bictereſt Poiſon of it lieth. p In great Quanticy ; thy Pu. 
niſhment ſhall be moſt grievous why muſt drink ſo deep of this Cup 
of Aſtoniſhment. q When ſick, as Heart can hold, and needeſt Piry 
and help to relieve, inſtead hereof thov ſhalt be derided and abuſed ; 
theſe will be crue! Mockings. r The Cup. +Is large, and contains 
what will laſt many Years till the 50 Years be expired, and of this 
Cup thou ſhalt ſti 1 drink, and be derided. 

| 33 Thou ſhalt be filled s with drunkenneſs and ſorrow, 
with the cup of aſtoniſhment and deſolation, with the cup 
of thy ſiſter Samaria. 

et Thy Afflictions ſhall be as grear as thou canſt hold, as a Veſſel fil- 
led with Liquor. 2: Nt : 

*Pfal. 7 34 Thou ſhalt * even drink it « and ſuck 7t out x, 
s ** and thou ſhalt break z the ſherds thereof, and pluck off 


*Ch: 16s 


&Q - 
35 hs 
Ver. 17: 


4 Ch. 16: 
39: 


Iz 51.17. thine own breaſts z : for I have ſpoken #r, ſaith the Lord | 


GOD. 

« Thou ſhalt ſtagger with Sorrows that ſhall intoxicateand aſtoniſh : | 
in the Verſe cach Part explains the orher, Sorrow explains Drunken. 
neſs, Atoaiſhment explains Sorrow, Deſolation explains Aſtoniſhment 
and the Cup of Samaria, (cl{cwheae called the Line of Samaria,) ex. 
Plains all : Samaria was madea Heap, Mic. 1. 6 fo ſhall Jeruſalem be. 
« Nothing ſhall divert the Puniſhment. x Th: Dreg- ſhalt thou d:ink, 
and mu'tiply thineown Sorrows. y Eirber out of Indignation, or to 
ſuck out what was imbibed. z Which rempred others, and undid th 
{If for which cauſe thou now revengeſt thy ſc1f upon thy ſelf. 


35 Therefore thus faith the Lord GOD, Becauſe 
*T-5.2 32. thou * haſt forgotten a me, and * caſt me behind thy 
& 3 21. back, therefore 'bear 6 thou alſo thy lewdnefs and thy 
& 13.25. Whoredoms. 
"i Kings +2 Chap. 22. 12. which is here explained by what follows, 'twas a 
"4.9 _ wilful forgetting of God, and voluntary deſpiſing his Law, Ordinan- 
Nch.g.26. ces, Worthip, Favour and Preſence; fo God is caſt behind a Sinner's 
back. 65 The Gail, I will impute it; the Puniſhment, I will not par- 
don it ; and the Shame, for I will pour out Contempt upon thee; bear 
both Sorrow and Reproach of thy Sins. 
36 F The LORD aid moreover unto me, Son of 
"Ch.20.4. man, wilt thou * f judge c Aholah and Aholibah ? yea, 
$Or,p{ad declare 4 unto them their abominations ; 
for. c Excuſe or plead for ſuch Adultereſſes? So ch. 22. 2. let. 6. 4 Piain- 
iy, fully tell them what they have been, and what they muſt expe& 
for all their Abominarions. 
37 That they have 


committed adultery e, and 
", ts, * blood f is In their 
Ft, 


hands, and with their idols have 


EZEKIE TD. 


they coramitted adultery g, and * have alſo cauſed 4 
ſons whom they bare unto me, to paſs for them through 36, 
the fire co devour #7 ther. | | 0 

e This ſeems to refer ro corporal Uncleanneſſes. f Innocene Bloog 
of the murdered Prophets and juſt Men. g Spiritual Adultery, ;, , 
Idolatry. þ Moiſt unheard of cruelty and unnatural Murders, under 
Pretext of Religion; thus, ch. 16, 20. # They deſtroyed, took 
the Life of their Sons in barbarous manner. | 

38 Moreover, this & they have done unto me : the 
have defiled my ſanctuary 7 in the fame »* day, 
* have prophaned my ſabbaths ». | | 

& Which is declared in the following Words, *twas ſome great ſn. 
jury or Aﬀe ont done te God. 7 My holy Things, Hobuſe, Altar, $2. 
crifices and Oblations ; one Parr of the Temple put for all Parts of 
the holy things cf God. »» When they had newly polluted Fhemſzlve; 
with moſt horrid Crimes. Tdolatry and Murder, they thruſt into the 
Temple; whereas by rhe Law, if they had been butunclean by Touch 
of a dead Body, they muſt have been cleanſ:d by Sacrifices before 
they oughr to come into Company with the Jews, » By offcring $4. 
crifices to Idols, and doing that on thoſe Days which God, Nature 
and allcivi! Nations abhor, only the Devil is pleaſed with, (who is 
Murderer froin the beginning) promotes ſuch bloody Cruelties 

39 For when they had ſlain » their children to their 
idols, then they came the ſame day into my ſanctuary 
to prophane pit; and lo, * 
midſt q of my houſe. 

0 See chap. 16. wer. 20. Jet. m,n. p Uſing my holy Temple as if 
twere a common and unclean Place. q Nay, theſe things have been 
done irt my Houſe; they have offered tothcir Ido!s 1n the Houſe where 
my Name alone ſhou!d be called upon, 

42 And furthermore, that ye have ſent r for men 
+ to come from far «s, 
lent ; and lo, they came, « for 
x thy ſelf, paintedſt thy eyes y, 
with ornaments, 

r See wer. 16. let.:. s From Chaldea. 
King of 7udah, with Advice of his Princes, no dowbt. « See wer. 19, 
let. /and nm, x Afﬀer the manner of Harlors, gott'ſt all fine, clean and 
delicate againſt thy Paramours came; ſo Idol.Temples built, Altars 
beautified, Sacrifices prepared, all to commend thy {cIf to their Alli. 
ance and Help. » Like a decayed Harlot, madeſt up thy D-feRs with 
Paint. &« Purſt on the rich Clothing I gave thee, and with thy Huſ. 


band's Bounty allured Adulterers to thy Bed ; ſo ch. 16. 1 
was God abuſed and provoked. # 3, 14- thus 


41 And fateſt 2 upon a + ſtately b bed, and a cable t it 
c prepared before it, 


cenſe and mine oil. 


# 'Tis a Table-geſture, as appears ſhe wag prepared to feaſt them. hs 
6 A magnificent rich Bd, on which Women far to feaſt, when Men 
leant on their fides, which would not have been a comely Poſture to a 
Woman. c Table furniſhed with choiceſt Proviſion, ſuch 45 made for 
Feaſts when Solemn Sacrifices were offered, or when Vows were paid; 
as the Har!or, Prov. 7. 14, 15. d This aſſures us that Idolarrcns Wore 


Way 


and deckedſt z thy ſa 


f An Embaſſy from the 


* Prior 


ſhip was aCtcd by her in compliance wich the Cbaldeans ; the off:redto 
their Idols, and then feaſted the Idolaters with whar God had given 
her, when they confirm'd their Leagues, and ſwore by falſe Gods. 


42 And a e voice of a multitude being at caſe f wat 
wich her g, and with the 4+ men of the + commonmiii 
i ſort 2vere brought | Sabeans from the wilderneſs, which" 
put bracelets upon their hands, and beautiful crowns upon;,. 
their heads. _ 
e A ſhoutfor Joy, that there was Treaty of Peace between the Jews 
and the Chaldeans; or Songsof Gladneſs for the Peace made and con- 
firmed, not in God's Name, but in the Name of the Idols. f Free 


now from the Fears of any Wars to diſquict them. g About the Al- 
tar firſt, where the Peace was ſworn ; about her Bed next, where ſhe 


» | Properties in Geographers : ef theſe were they that deſtroyed Job's 


the beſtowed upon this Harlor. 


ing him. 


been long ſpiritual Adultereſſes, and one would think her Lovers 
would be weary of her, 


woman that playeth the harlot : 
lah and unto Aholibah the lewd women. 


phor the Propher expreſſeth the Confeds f th - (Co's 
expreſs Command, with the Nations r racy of the Jews againſt Cu 


ter League wtth theſe Robbers, and 
whoredom with them ; 


Jews Idols too, and fo commir whoredom with her: © is 
laſt Words of the 434 Verſe th her; expreſs'd in 


feaſted her new Allies that were great Princes and Nobles. + And to 
theſe worthy the Name of Mea, or -befide theſe great and famous 
ones, (Er aves ces hommes) as the French Verſion. ; Meſleogers were 
ſent to, or received, or entertained, and careſſ:.q from the roaring 
Sabeaxs who lived on Robberies and ſpoiling the Merchants, theſe 
were brought to Feruſelrwm from the Wi (derneſs, Deſerts of- Arabia ; a 
rude, barbarous and idolatrous Scum of Men, deſcribed by their ill 


Servants; in this Verſe deſcribed by their Orna 


« ments, Bracelets about 
their Necks and - 


Arms, and Crownson their Heads, which ſome think 


| 43 Then ſaid & I unto herl that was old m in Adulte- 
ries, Will they now commit + whoredoms with her, and yi 
ſhe with them? pins 
k After the mannerof Man God ſeems to and muſing, or ſaying 
to himſelf, or it may be ſuppoſed that God ſpeaks to his Propher, ask- 


{ Or rather of her, concerning her. mz Such uſually are 
outof Requeſt with Adulterers, and now Samaris and Jeruſalem had 


if ſhe were nor weary of them. 
44 Yet » they went in 0 unto her, as they goin unto a 
ſo went they in unto Aho- 


» This reſolves the doubt of the former Verſe. 


0 In this Meta» 
ound about them. The j<ws en- 

admit their Idols, and ſo commit 
and theſe Sabeays probably admit ſome of the 


45 Y And the righteous p men, they ſhall * judge'C 


them aiter the manner of adultereſles 9, and after the? 
\ 


nan- 


_ Chap. Xx 
their? Ch, If 
% 


and *Ch,y 


thus have they done in the '2Kiy 
Mg 


unto whom a meſſenger # wa: +jh; 
whom thou didlt Waſh «mig, 


* whereupon thou haſt ſet mine in." 


F, 


3, 


dh 
A 


P. ;. 


B* 


# piece, 
Ice b 


! 
| te Inhabj 


hap. 


lin. 
To 


the B 


them 
C 


LE 

land. 
lewd 

f'$ 
ſhall r 
afrer t 
Cities 
to fear 


ON Yo 
thall k 
2 T 

' juſt Ve 
are wo1 
& The 
ing upo 
by the | 
| By w| 
your S11 
Det. 8. 
0%/)er Gog 


The jeay. 
The | 
Toe P; 
preſſb 

A 

Canie 1 

a Ofrh 

him ; it 

phet, at 
former. 

our 294 

« The 
2 So 

even of 

againſt 
e Set: 
be prove 

In Perfor 

Siege, th 

ceived 

Whereof 1 

to beliege 


pot, ſer 


: In 
What the; 


On the Fj 


Vater on 
alim be fi 


4 Gat 


5 Whic 


aiton 


bp. 


A 


To 


hh, 


A 
LE 


hap. XXIV. 


";,moved # and ſpoiled x. 


! 
693 !6 


/, 1nd [| diſpatch them a with their b {words ; they ſhall ſlay 


' land, that all women g may betaught not to do after your 


,3gainſt Jeruſalem * this ſame day. 


3. Pot, fer it on, and alſo pour water 7: into it. 
K 


EZEKIEL, 


+ fi J. they - [!:m, The moſt warlike, who will betaice themſelves to Toraſulom for 
Janner of women that ſhed blood: becauſe they are adul its Defence. q As theſe are the prin. 5a] Parts for Copannr, Motion, 
| Deferice and Strengrh ; fo thoſe Citize15, Souldiers, Ru'ers, that ars 
the Strength, Defence and Glory ofthis People, are here ſignified by 
thoſe Parts. » Fill the Pot, Fernſalers, let no pizce be empty s With 
thoſe Pieces that are biggeſt, fatteſt, full:& of Marrow, aid wh* © are 
divided according to thc Bones; theſe are the piincipal Mem? ; is 
Jewiſh State, King, Princes, Prieſts, Magiſtretes and wea -': -' 2.608 


5 Take *# the choice of the flock, and || buin « alſo the 


Seal and blood x intheir hands. | | 

' » Men that kept the Law of their God : ( for ſome ſuch there were 
about 4bolibah her ſeIf,) or Pcophets, ſuch as Jeremiah and Ezekiel, and 
ſore few more; or elſe the Baby/onians, who in the preſent Contro- 
verſy between Jeruſalem and its King on the one part and Nebachad- 
12247 and rhe Babylonians on the-other part, were comparatively the 
righteous Men. q Which wasto be putro death by ſtoning, Lev. 20. 
10. and Murder was puniſh'd with Death. 


46 For thus faith the T.ord God, * TI will bring up a bones x under it, and make it boil :vell », and ler then {' Or, #7 


NIST ſeeth the bones & of it therein 
inany 7 2M, and will give them 7 Þ to bere- | : | 
company 7 upon s chem, a Þ | N : Pick our rhe very beſt in the Flock, that is, the greateF, richeſt, 
; : _ | moſt powerful for Authority and Intereſt in the Nation and City. « Or. 
» The Babylonian Army. 5 Apainſtthe Jews, the Chiltren of this | heap ro;cther, in order to burn, to make a Fire with. = The Bones. 


I '© ” _ FRA pa O D.. _ . . 
it, Abel:banh. : The Inbabirants of Juden, the Citizens of Feruſalem with 'Not Of rhe Picces to be boiled, buc the Bones of the miny I :nocenrs 


Princes and Royal Family. #« To be carried away Captive inte tr murdered in Jeruſa':m, and in the Land ; for their Blood crierth for 
Land of Chaldea. x By the rapine of the Sonldiers in their own | Vengeance, and their Bones ſcattered on the Face of the Earth, will 
Land, and by thecruelty of their Maſters ro whom they ſhall be Slaves both make and maintain this Fire. y Ler the Fire be © gre2t, and the 
ina firange Land ; this is the plain Senſe of the Verſe, though poſt Por ſo long over, till a!] within: it be boiled throughly, till boiled that 
by there may be an Allufion to the folemn Proceedings of a Court of all rhe Strength and Marrow be waſted, and the very Fleſh drop to 
Judicature couch'din the proper Import ofmany of the Hebr. Words. | "Oy L - —_ this ro mo by this Judgwent. . _ ne + 
Z them wit det. s. 1s 1s doubled to aflure us, however the meaner ſort did, the 
7 And the company y ſhall ſtone z them with ſtones, more conſiderable Pare of hl wer clear. Het 
, , | there may lie conch'l an exa& Correſpondence between the Sins and 
ctheir ſons and their daughters 4, and burn up their hou- | puniſhments of thi; 1 cople ; their Sin was the Daying the beſt, or by 
j2se with fire. | opprefling them, broke th. r Bones, \1iled out the Marrow,fuck'd the 
7 Congregation Hebr. the Babylonian Army. 2 The Puniſhment of an 'dry, and How God w1!: retalltat. to theſe Men. | 
Adu'tereſs, and this was in manner done, when the Engines, which | 6 E< Wherefore thus ſaith the Lord GOD, Wo 2 tothe 
caſt mighty Stones into the beſieged City, daſh d out the Brains of bloody b city, to the pot whoſe ſcum « z therein , and 


fome ; and when Chimneys, or Walls, or Towers beatdown by thoſe | . age DN ! | 
Srones caſt out of the Engines, fell on others, and buried them alive. | whoſe ſcum is not g0Ne out 4 of it . bring it out pIece by 


s Some of them whoſcaped the Stones, fell under the Sword, 5 Of, PISCES ©, let no lot f all upon if, £ OR 
the Babylonian Souldier. c Either in Fight, or when they break into| _ ® All this Allegory contains wofu] and heavy Tydings, Miſery and 
the City, or light on them wandring on Mountains, or hiding in| Deſolation to them that are repreſented by ir. 5 Chap. 22. 2, 3- Je 
bens and Caves. d Either in ſacking the City, when they regard no ruſalem, which is this Pot. « Filthineſs, her Abominations, all her 
Sex, or becauſe they chooſe to die, rather than yield to the Luſt of Lewdaeſsare ſtili vithin her, they havenor been puaiſh'd, reſtrain'd, 
thoſe vile Ones. As the Cities and Houſes abroad in the Countrey ; ſo | ®r Caſt our by the Execution of juſt and good Laws; but the Citizens 
the Babylonſþ Army deſtroyed what they could not carry away with | have with Obſtinacy, Impenitence, and with Impudence continued in 
them ; as ver. 25. let. 9. , pe eter. mas Pas 
ny” - e m kno e alingring Deſtru&iontothem, yet a tota), 
48 Thus * will 1 cauſe lewdneſs to f ceale out of the one piece after another, till all ' confumed. f Lots ar: For ſaving 
ſome, and determining who they ſhall be, bur here ſhall no fuch 
lewdnefs. ; . . [Diſcrimination be made, no ſparing any, and flaying others by Lot ; 
f See wer. 27.ler. t, Hereafter in this Land ſuch like Abominations | who do not die, ſhall gointo Captivity. 
ſhall never be committed more, as indeed we donor readof any ſuch | - Fgr her blood 7 is inthe midl(t of her, ſhe ſet it upon 


afrer their return out of this Captivity. g Countries, Kingdoms and , , 
_ | . |tbe top of a rock 2, ſhe poured it not upon the ground to 
it Examples of Sorrows, DeſtcuCtion aaclar* k 

Ciries may be wars @oy your Examples - uction, | over & it with duſt : 


: ; y, and hate Violence. 
mo _—_ pe Lang, re ea. ence # your lewdneſs up= | £ Innocent Blood which ſhe hath ſhed. þ Openly and publickly 
T9 y 1 L <Jols * d without Fear, or Shame, or ReluQtancy. : Where it might be long 
on you, and ye ſhall bear the fins & of Y Our 1909; 200'FE ; ſeen, cared not to hide her Mnrders, as the next Words clear it. 
thall know /thatI am the Lord God.  & Wit Cruelty and Inhumanity they did murder, for when the Law 
2» The Babylonians and their Confederates. 7 As God's Miniſters of, direQ2J, that the Blood of Beaſt or Fowl kill'd ſhould be poured on 


| | juſt Vengeance ſhall judg you worthy, and execute on you what you the Z:1th, and covered with Duſt, Lev. 17. 13. theſz Butchers of in- 


are worthy of, all that may make you deſolate, a deriſion and ſcorn. | noce.at Oaes leave their Blood uncovered, whether in boaſting manner, 
& The Guiltof the Sins you committed in worſhipping of, and rely- | ; {cr terror, I will not ſay, but this aggravatesthe Sin. 


ing upon Idols, and you ſhall bear the Puniſhment of Idolaters, which | bad ke ven- 
by the Law of God is Death withour Mercy, Dexr.13; 6,5; 8:950. 1. Rn cauſe fury / to come up » to take ven 


9 E s > 
! By what you ſuffer you ſhall know thatT am juſtly diſpleaſed wir# | 5#-aNCE 7: I have ſet 0 her blood upon the top of a rock, 
your Sinsp am true to my Threats, and have made good my Ward , ha tp ſhould not be covered q. 


Deut. 8. 19, 20. If thou do at all forget the Lord thy God, and walk after 1 This provoked the Anger of the Lord, and raiſcd his Fury againſt 


her Gods, and ſerve them, &c, ye ſball ſurely periſh. | them. » Into the Face ot God, ( after the manner of man) as Ezek. 
38.18. n. To Gadd ir appertains to take vengeance, to puniſh ſuch 
I bl 
CHAP, XXIV. Sinners according to the nature of their Sin. o God will openly pu- 
The jear, day and month of the Babylonians coming before Jeruſa 'em, I, 2.]nitb, and inſuch manner as ſhall not be ſoon forgotten; they ſer it on 
The parable of boiling pot, ſhewing th: ?. af! ca'amity of it, 3—14.|a Rock when they ſhed it wich Cruelty, God will ſer it oa a Rock 
The Prephet being ſorbidden to mourn for his 0304; +::f7,, repreſenteth the uxex=| when he puniſheth it with ſeverity. p That it be nor forgottenor go 
preſſivle calamity of Jeruſalem, 16 27. unpuniſhed. 4 Nor yet puniſh'd in a Corner. All this Inquiſition 
Gain in the ninth year a, in the teiith month 6, in and Execution ſhall be publick in the ſight of many Nations. 
the tenth 4ay c ofthe month, the word of the LORD 
came unto 4 me faving, . oreat 
a Ofthe Captivity of Jeconiab and thoſe that were carried a'wray with | gat. | _ 
him it falls in alſo with the Year of Zedeial's Reign, though the Pro-| » Verſe 6. let. a 5 God's hand ſhall be ſeen infliting all thoſe ſore 
pher, and the Captives now in Babz{on reckon not by this, but by the | Atflictions on them. . * Judgments are a Fire, the Fuel whereof is to 
former. 5 Which anſwers to part of D-c-mber and Januciry. 6 Abour | be great ; for *tis a Fire ro conſume the Wicked, and God will make 
our 29th of December; when the Winter was well ovec with them. | It ſofficiently great to dothis; I will bring the mighty Army of the 
4 The Prophet was now in Ba5y/oz many Leagues from Jeruſalem. Chatdeans, which, aa pile of Wood fer on fire, ſhall burn them up. 
2 Son of man, write ce thee the name f of the day,| 10 Heap « on wood: X, kindle Jy the fire, conſume 
even of this {ame day: the king £ of Babylon {et þ himſelf b __ and ſpice a it well, and let the bones be 
wot 2, 


e Set it dawn, and in ſuch manner with ſuch voitneſs, that it may | « Either God's Word, what he will do purſuant of the 8:5 Verſe, 
be proved. f Moſt punCtually ſer it down. g INebuchadnczzar who | or his Word to the Prophet to typify to the People what ſhould be 
in Perſon 'tis like was there at firſt, to encourage, dire and ſertle the | done, or to the Chaldean Army to haſten what they were to do in de- 
dicge, though he withdrew from it for his DeJights , when he per- ſtroying the City. x Make full Preparations. y Begin che Executi- 
ceived 'rwould be a long Siege; as on chap. TI. 11, let d. the Iflue| on of Judgment. z 'Tis a Fire, not gently to dreſs or prepare Mear, 
Whereof be expeCted at Antioch on the Banks 'of Orontes, þ Sat down | but to de{troy and burnup. » Either totake away thenoiſom Smell,or 
to beliege. | to expreſs the pleaſing Savour of this Juſtice to God, and Men whom 

3 And utter a parable ; unto the rebellious & houſe, and | he appointed to this Work. + In ſuch Fires the Bones hold out Iong- 


a : *| eſt, but this Fire ſhall at laſt conſume theſe alſo, rhat the Deſtruction 
7 unto then, Thus ak the Lord "GOD, Irs may be univerſal, the greateſt, ſtrongeſt and firmeſt of theſe Jews ſhall 


| Al Pe periſh in this firy Indignation, | 

: In ſomewhat a dark yet apt Similitude, or in an Allegory declare : | we | 
thatthey ſhould rhe w4 obbder. k Chap. 2. ver. 3.6. 1 Setup-|, IT Then ſer itc empty 4 upon the ene 6 — m 
0 the Firea Pot; or Caldron. ». Do it quickly, be ſure to do it; the bras f of it may be hot g, and may ourn -, and #247 
this Pot is Feruſalem, n Fill it with Warer ; for as the Pot full of | the filthineſs 2 of it may be molten # in it, that the ſcum / 
Water on the Fire, till the Water be throughly heated, fo ſhall Zerz-| of jt may be conſumed, 


J . 
ſalem be filled with the Judgments of God. _ | c The Hieroglyphick Pot. 4 The Water, Fleſh, Bories, all conſumed, 
+ Gather the pieces 0 thereof inxto it , ever every 800d}, . the Citizens all waſted with Sword, Famine, or Peſtilence, ths 
7 Piece, the thigh, and the ſhoulder 9, fill 7 i* with the | Ciry lefr asan empty overboil'd Pot. e Signifying the burning of the 
Moice bones s. City it ſelf, after the emptying of its Inhabivanrs, b; Perhaps he al. 
© Which are to be put into this Pot. þ. 5. e. All the chief of | hades to the Impudence of their Sins, in thar the City is likened to a 
the Inhabitants of the Land, the wealthieſt, who in the time of this | Pot of Braſs: g God's Judgments would increaſe upon them, as Heat 
tnvation will fiy from their Country-Houſes to live in fafery in Jer- | doth in a Pot ſet on Coals. + Which is the higheſt Degtee, © ſhould 


theſs 


Chap. XXIV. 


9 Therefore thus faith the Lord GOD, * Wo »r to* Nah. 2.1. 
the bloody city, I s will even make the 7? pile for fire H:b-2.15- 


4 
5 


KN _—_— 7 m—_ "_ EI 
« SUR at roo err tr eg I rear eos 45 on - - - > me” - 
=_ - a _ 
IT —_ I —_— p 
5 ane : SI 
A 
»-, 


—_—— _ 


"2 LS at, R 4 , : 
. - Regs op — - 
- © = Is > 
> %& FR + —_ 9 
- : < Bol — : = E 
P . ” % % S, 4 LS 
, HATS £5 of - .gk A hog 4 : _— 
no io oa EO .. | 
os - Ye wT.. - 
- #101 2 wo_ 
-_ — -— - —» = 


theſe Miferies increaſe. i Typeoft Ls 1 
fr eG of wy rg Type of the Sinfulnefs, tl E 
a* their Wickedneſs may be , —_— _ 
aken away with 


their Perſo 
ns and City ; they ſhould have been purged b 
rged by gentler! 


K1ZE I 


A Some of h - : ; 0D 
h Explain pond, e ordinary Sort the Pe F 
: 8} 
; eſe are Types, bur wh hf 1 __ it is that "__s 
y mean ? are 


209 Then I anſwer 
ed them, 'Th 
e word of the LO 
RD 


fied, now they ſh 
ver. 6, let c. y ſhall be melted to the utter DeſtruCtion of thei 
I , | | em. { id. 
2 She # hath wearied » h . came unto me, fayi 
great ſcum went n her ſeif with tic: _— _ 
in the p not forth out of her : th lies 0, and her 21 Speak c unt 7 
r fire. her : her ſcum q ſpall be; the Lord GOD _— houſe of Iſrael 4. T uf 
iis che } Gol by her rep of the Jews, and the City Jeru/ the excellency of your > kans: ap. agg © bby : 
French 1-14. and . __ Sins, and « toner os why 2 Either wel 2 and þ that which rength f ', the Fw 4 lanctuary, | _- 
Tran, againit SD * and 43. 24: Or wearied whe s elſewhere, Iſa. and your daughter your ſoul pitieth ; a J of your b 
great Pains, laid ar hs wg it, 9 ſpent much ns done | [word. s whom ye have teft aj pl Fro ſons} Hi 26.2. th 
curitY. * Her Alli - reaiure 1n makin Alli z an taken [ Now he is &5 i a y th pi: x : thc 
cn which theſe u hap their Promiſes, their Fo iances for her Se. | * To them at B mmiſſioned to declare th WH 
l Orce: : . Joul, pre 
Judah. p She re nhappy Jews relied, all ces, and their Idols Letter, or M Babylon by word of M the meaning of tl 
. he repented not 9 ih prove a Lieto the H p , or Meſſenger. e C Mouth, but to th that he did det 
repentet Sins r ſhall be » Nor id ſhe reform h he Houſe of who will regard i . e Caſt off}, and ; them at Feruſal a 
puniſh'd in the Fi er Ways. 9 Her u and} bath any it no more chan put intothe Hands of alem by we 
T3 In thy bickinele « ire that burns their Ci N-|-. 4. een long my SanR any other common Buildi Heathen 
neſs i5 lewd ITY. iT with your IJ! ancetuary ; bu n Buildin he 0 0 
* thee, and neſs s : becauſ: ſuffer i ins, and now 1 ; but you, O Jews, fi 8, fo (15 1. 
thou waſt cauſe I have pu er it to be proph in my juſt Diſpl s, firſt proph 1 Jike 
purged J from not purged X thou P rged ; Preſence was of; P aned by the Chald P eaſure againſt you P aned Let 
my fury to r thy filthynels any more; tl ſhalr not be | Confidence, nd of ig che Jews kep are whillt "_ Can 
eſt lll th t G 
i In thy finnin _—_—_ 1ave cauſed | 7” 7% 8 An truſted in it, tho To undefiled ; Tr was a _ 
and Boldnefs, a % Deliberate Reſolution grow 3 rophet; moſt dear to your deſire, as my Wike = fallen from God p 2 
_ of proper | on that will nor be 6 bs. Nor yergrr by CO which hs $ ſhe to rhe, bur this | pur the FE. 
reats of ſor $ to purge, Advi ed. u« Uſe in waom veto you aft Ss INall be bur Or / 
= Arran Sufferings, by Propher: 4 MT; Chaſtiſements Conqueror's + you hop ed fot Cormifort —_— grievous "x urro_g - beer 
not part from ena gters 2 Chron, 36. 15 i y the Rod, ſometimes | 22 And bao, Tha $36 7 ofterity, ſhall die by the Ho 
5, 6,7. » All b ins, and purify thy Hea er. 18. 11, 12,x Wouldſt ver your 11 yo ſhall do 3 as I have dc ; 2 
| ne CO ST Nt thas of pups rn, ; Lens 5 &, nor eat the reed of ne: * ye ſhall not c Fu 
or not repentin thee to Repentance n; I'll preach no| own C you are in Captivi men /. 0-"]: rate 
deſtroying Jud g. God will from hencefe , bur to condemn th n Cuſtoms and Ri ity, where you ca .- Sacri 
YZ . . orth refer tl - thee | 17. lct.k. 1S ites on theſe, © nnot, may not l Fi þ : 
when this Gofl Ring: which are his Fur r them To his ſore . I See Verſe 17. let , Or any other occaſi me Your F whe! 
they had d ingdom deſtroyed y, and which ſhall c 23 And your ti dn hr” 10nS. & See Yer{ | dom 
17. and -4* "84 . 2 Yee Chap. =p ; 9 or- 4 Corean _ _— upon — be y_ your heads » j Lg ] _ 
. I4 J the T. or, . 10. 42. and 21. ww” ye {hall i i ye all not mou s An your E an a, 
- hap. 5-and I will do z: ' Loi ſpoken 4%, it ſhall com one towards Ss a 4 iniquities «4 _—_ TP, t RC 
| 4, neicher will 1 r ill not goback c, * neither wo? pabs, 1 Verſe 17. let r. «V. | » and mourn zz. WF um: 
ng eo th | my : according to th Sams [ ſpare ok let. n. 9. You Ag 17. let. s. oVid. Verſe 16 | "nn vr 
Lord GOD y doINgs f {hall they Fa ju de wy w/-4 4 and —— not dare to bo. odaray Grief whe FA 5 PYid bob, 4. 
Thi« Veri: ; : e, laith the |joi aſters, who will enly, leſt you trri orrow, 
doth it chm y we" its ike T think in the B ah a. r The BE awd hing CE your Ty. wb 
1 Þ Lis is Ezckiel's Scoops Ne fem cnobeand ugg > + mu nr { a _ Families act qr which havemak hy 
ut p21 haps it m : Nay, 'tis the Lord eir Evaſions.| 24 T w : you ſhall bewai eſolate and mil: : : 
tave ſpoken i ay not be ; yea, butit ſha thar hath ſpoken it. 24 Thus Ezekiel is wail, what you durſt erable. 51 milk 
he will not it. c Bur God hath re! it ſhall, for I will doi n it.| that he hath d unto you a ſignz : rit not openly. j 
go back from this W elaxed, as in N: 1do it, who] ſþ one ſhall yedo : gnz: accord s | 
midſt of Jud ; m this Word, a But » ineveh 5s Caſe _ b all know x th ye O . and wh s ing to all proa 
Wach. e Yer _— Nay, but God will on > hy merciful in hs t In whathe : ns the Lord GOD en this cometh 5, Je and 0 
willnot repent : vour bi conſumed, _henok 2 , or mitig:te his and 12. chap. 6. AT may ſee what you h linian; 
plealing vv his Juſtice 7 Bi Fleſh and City ſhall - oe 7. 3 ? No, he ties, and Enemies {6 lf Iſa. chap. $. 18 all do, ſee chap. 4. wer ſay ot! 
ur then we ſthali be . hi inally, as thou od ry a piced Sacrifice write after ohite C a force you to FR » 4 When your Ne 3 their ] 
mies, ſhall j in his Hand, eſt, God willr Truth sS Copy. x Conf as I have d ceſſ1. _ 
1 q - = g Nay they, Gy ons wa _ 25 Tk in all threatned = the Jullice Power. Wiſlen aw 3 The 
$1 Iſo ate Ene-| o thou cured. aoatnld iſdem 3nd e 
laying, the word of the LORD cam day z when I nie = __ ir __ "i , ; o — 
16 Son of man e unto me ,|J9Y of their glory, th rom them their 6 ſt e ) in the = mo 
os Gefire 4 of thine behold þ, I take ; aw whereupon they A aq brug "1 wir rength, the _ 
+ Heb thou mourn 2 nor OI with a ſtroke / : wy y irom thee | daughters 3 their minds , 4 YA and -|- thatti ful as t 
- £9. down. CEP 7, neither {hall th neither ſhalt | J The Queſtion 15 to b ons and theirii and 1s 
h Conſider what I y tears 0 | run the day ofthe raking oy te - th fortifie 
WE. 3 rhe Lo no and will do. i By D Wo the Means or Ei of Jeruſalem. a 4] it ſhall be. z h I add 
k rpoenor ic fie bs = 8 _— bf +3 rh —_— thee _ * Ty lus own. > TheKen oo at by hs 97 wane = 
ers to the amiable caury ofher Pe 'r 7 ough Irom the ; ack' 5 the Temp! - ingdadom diſflol Fl oO did God' = | 
hei oth. Pro 1 leneſs of her Diſpoſitt r{on or no, 1t certai e. | raters deſcribed ple burnt, which j olved, the Ki : might 
4 oak : poſition q , rtainly re-|1 as the only thi , ich 1s by th ing taken Frui 
+——"2r ty ary 1 A ſulden S*roke 3 che agreeableneſ: ars may beapplied to $ y thing they wr hey y the followin Cha, ruit | 
WES > LE 5 ared ar 8 E-chink whether Peſtilence, or wo However, it amounts ons and Daughr ed. Tho thoſ $ Ca. f Whic 
an. 7 MAKs to gu 7 : 2 : Sto this: I ers 1n the cloſe e Particy- fr 
ovly in the 91 tc 101emn Movurnin = yi God's own 1unmed! at | and private Joys and H n that day, wherei ofe of the Verſ: om tt 
from th=« gut of thv Peop's, » IX for her, though it wi iate| the Kingdom arid thei ofes ſhall be deſtro erein all thei yu with th 
= cv-hod © p's, E ough it will 1 arid their Chi eſtroy their pub 
p-:y an; -rtburd _ 4+ Tay ii 008RIRg 3 ay” A wy Os Voice be Rk News to the Prophet. ir Children, one that -— wank Den F | 
run don ; if one 4 Moms even Tears uſo by mo let thy Eyes| + 26 | That he cthat eſcapeth 1 : peth ſhall bring the and th 
+ Heb. be 17 þ Forbe:r a o drop, check the reſt. , let them not o thee, to cauſe thee tohea 0 that day, ſhall : | ſhall k 
fit, _ bind the «he A _ q no mourning for th —_ = —_— — with 7&ine ears? ates: rf 4 
ot: 2. ehtne heed . or the on Deſtrugi et ſeems t ; Philad 
+ Het: up- oes upon th; fe upon thee clare h ion when Jeruſalen o confine 1 nies 
| » J cet 5 d » and puc . ow God had alem Was fack' it fo one. 4d he hb Tu 
per des. t- bread off , and cover not :6y F Ii ON | rative of all he h made good his Th ack'd. e Purpoſe! T Drj rn 
} Or, ſor. P bee Wer 1 men #. Y IPs "= and which 1 d e had ſeen, aad obſer | reats. F To 8; poſely fo de« river 
row} 1 men. thou Catiic 27 ” rb thy Sorrows, neither ſigh Was CE Exckiel on a. and this — thee a Nar- AGE 
and r:im up thy Head: burial, makeno «5s, I or —_— 9 When the Monte ; - in the twelfth * rr. Pen might = Poli ot uſi 
as Lev. 10. ; aS nou wa 1g tor her. : , Exek. 33. 21. wi , tenth M e it fulfilled, eople 
a 166.1016. and 21108 Morne, In gen our a | Ce Regaant - with or 5. 6. alter the Cl mew le ler 
prt «r thy Shoes o_ 15.30. and Jſa ournings the Je *| Month eign, and Feconiah' 2 an fourth M was taken, eto 
the epper Li . t *'Twas a Cuſt . 47. 2. but do not tl ws s, and twenty four d s Captivity } | onth, ninth day % 6 FE 
"5 p, or Muſtach om among th thou ſo 27 In th ays. one whole | F 
X.ich. 2 « achoe em to STE : at d Year, fivs hs 
3. 7. and . » AS Lev. cover . ay ſh Word Cl 
wp cher of thy Ne Forbidden the Propher win aa Gid, and Fry "wy eſcaped, —_— th cut be opened : Ker. and fe 
nd feaſt thcir mo 1g1D00Urs and "ke - u LINED of Mour 5 and thou " | ait peak g to nm Weu!. | | 
- 0gh= gee iffrecifpn to the Friend:, and fe s who were wont to v5 ſhall know that I alt be a ſign z un and be no more ii and 9 
nas your | ; to th 
n with Scy:hians Is their Houſes, Jer nt in both choice and g To \; am the LORD them, and th m Ex 
_ gfx , Grecians, s, Jer. 16.7, and thi a. peak freely to hi D. 5 chey of 
18 2S if no mourning Is and Romans. Bae wow —_ C—_ » From dg rs brings the New How we 
l 18 Sol ſpake x unto # thy Family. ou thine hep he doth not prophef\ oph ecy for eighteen Yo to the Jew! þ ? Hatred 
Ces ethos; coll hd ir che, . he Deo, GY COOL Ne ef ocke fonchs during the BF {0 00 
commanded. ; and1 did in thes morning 21 OPT fora hers 4 OTIS wal __ | deſerved 
x Tvuid them wha ng as I was h ing to thy Word iscoming ; and eE Jews, thou ther the 
xe + * T3 t God had paet ſent of me , they ſhall : and when 'ti e 
e. + * Tis] na told ; , and the confel; tis come (0 of th 
_ hob Donn beck EE 9 Og © expend” would f dl Go tharkemthe Loeg *: B 
intaFing away his - yp in the Morn: Night, or Evening be-| 4 ©? "'M CHAP. % : Une , 
_ 0 be buried, z T e, and what he muſt ing what God would d q age of God's vengeance agai . XV. x Pon e] 
hi s Command, and - next Morning —4 ay. wg when ſhe is Jead, Gul. omites, and the _—_— the Ammonites, agai cathe 
bs pe Lab: » and without any fign of |: mp obſerved | 1 __ and people, 117, for their comes dugg po wron and ] 
Zad4 And ' or Mournin | IE Wor b the deflruFfims Will def 
tell > us what ne a faid unto me, Wil yy p ſaying n of the LORD came & agai the Io 
rhings are to us, that | nh S gre: Sm had order no tapas wi 
10u doelt ſo ? forete] j 4” was to be ha yet a while to " OO, 
ad Tidings to othe as tothem, ) yet h propony againſt ti? "eat, fo 
r Nations round ab ehath Commiſſion © "ke th 
out the Jews. ! Babylo 
£2,201, 


2 So 


XV EZE 
: > Son of man; Tet thy face 7 againſt * the Ammonites 

t +, 2nd prophelie » againſt them; _ En 
_ uh ] The Phraſe you have, sþ2p. 20. 46. let 0. It includeth Anger, Me- 
1Tntention of Mind. mz The Poſterity of Lor by the younger 


near Neighbours, but bitter Enemiesto the Jews. » Leave 
heavy things ſhall befal them in after-days. 


recorded what | | 

And ſay 0 uto the Ammonites, Hear the word of 
hs Lord GOD p, Thus faith the Lord GOD, * Becauſe 
hou ſfaidſt, Aba, 9 againſt my ſanctuary 7, when It was 
profaned ;, and againſt the land of Ifrael t, when it was 


I 

deſolate s, and againſt the houſe of Judah x, when they 
went into Capmivity 7; | 

, Either tell Ammonite Merchants or Travellers,of which ſome might 
likely be in Babylon for Trade, or to ſee its Stare : or elſe, ſend by 
Letter to them of their Nation, who may ſerve in Nebuchadnezzay's 
Camp, which was in that time a School of Arms, that they may tel] 
ochers : or elſe, ſo plainly declare it, that in time they may know this. 
2 'Tis not the Ambiguous, or deluſive Oracle of your Idols, but the 
plain, and true, and unfailing Word of the only true God, the God 
of Iirael, as Z-ph.2.8. q When thou ſhouldeft have pitied, and 
been ſorry, thou djdit rejoice, and proudly didft inſulr,magnifiedſtthy 
{-]f, and reproachedſt my People, wert glad that ſo great Calamities 
were come upon them. » Both the Temple, and the Worſhip of 
God; 'tis like in their Pride, they boaſted their Idols Power to pre- 
ſerve their Temples, and blaſphemed God as unable to preſerve his 
G:cred Rites and Worſhip. -s When the Heathen entred into, and 
when they burntit. * They inſulred on the Ten Tribes, the King- 
dom of 1/rael when afflicted. © Waſted by Pal and Tiglath Pileſer, 
and captivated by Salmanaſſar. » The two Tribes, the Kingdom of 
7ndah. »y Firſt with Jehojakim, then with Jeconieh, and which was 
worſe than both theſe, when jt was captivated with Zedckiah, and 
the City burnt ; a moſt mournful ſight, and at which none but in- 
human barbarous Men could do leſs than weep; but theſe rejoice, and 
I cry, Ana. : wy , 
£4 4 Bchold therefore, I z will deliver thee to the 4 men 
of the Eaſt afor a poſſeſlion 5, and they ſhall fer their 


2 28. 
” © Daughrer; 


A 
þ F: = 
TL 


l'y oy 


—- 7 p , Lops. ey. | Ty. 
KT EL. Chap. X XV. 
ceaſe from being a People, y So ſhalt thou be deſtroyed. z Vile 

wer. 5. ler. /. | 

8 | Thus faith the Lord GOD, * Becauſe that Moab * jg. re; 
2 and vSeir. 6do ſay, Beheld, the houſe of fudah « 7s like ani 16. 
4 unto. all the heathen :  Amos2.7, 
a The Children of Lot by the elder Daughter, the whole Nation 


going under the Name of the firſt Father of them, near, but evil 


Ne1ghbours to 1ſrae! and Judah. b The Sexd of Ejau, who are *:/am, 
Idumeans, or Seir, from the Mountain where they firſt planred them 
ſelves; near of Kin in Blood, bur bitter Enemies tothe Jews. Tho 
both here joined, yet Moab is firit doomed here, ver.g, ro, tx. and 
Seir nexr, ver. 12,3, 14. c The peculiar People of God, who had 
his Law, Temple, Worſhip of his own Appointment among them. 
4 Are no more a ſe]e& People than others, their Religion no better, 
nor their God but as the Gods of their Neighbours; and they no 
more benefited by their worſhipping of him : Thus, Atheiſt like, they 
derhrone God. and debaſe him to an Equality with their own Kdols, 
more particularly Mo3b's Sin is {et out, Fer. 48. ror. 


9 Therefore behold, I will open ethe -f ſide f of Moab + Heb. 
from the cities g, from his cities which are on h his frontiers, Pou(der- 
che glory 7 of the country Beth-jeſhimoth &, Baal-meon 7, 
and Kiriathaim », 
e When the Lord will open the Gates of Iron, and fay, the Gates 
ſhal: not be ſhut, as 1ſa. 45. 1, 2, every Arcempt ſhall be eaſy, and 
his Souldiers ſhall break through the Defences that were vainly 
boaſted impregnable. f That part ofhis Country which was beſt for- 
tified for the Safeguard of the whole. g From the Cities of Strength, 
called here his, becauſe he gloried and truſted in them ; ſuch as 4- 
and Aroer ſeated on Arnon, very ſtrong Garifons. h Or from his 
Frontiers, { for 'tis the ſame Conſtruction Hcbr.) or from his out- 
moſt Bounds ; I will lay all open to the Chalde:ans; they ſhall over-run 
it, as 1f'twere an open Country, as eafily as if no. Fortrefſes to im« 
pede them. 7 So the great, ſtrong, and beaucitul, or r- gularly bailr, 
and fortified Cities are ever accounted tne G!ory of the Country, and 
theſe are reckoned beſide fr and Aroer, k B:rh-jeſirmoth, an antient 
City, and formerly Renbens's Lor, Joſh. 13. 20. its Name tells you, it 
was a Fortreſs toward the Deſert, which watched leſt any ſhould 
chrough thoſe Waſtes make an Inroad on the Country. ! Called alſo 


palaces c in thee, and make their dwellings 4 in thee: 
they ſhall eat thy e fruit, and they ſhall drink thy 
milk f. | Ko 

2 The God whom thou haſt deſpiſed, whoſe People thou haſt re- 
proac'hd, whoſe Worſhip thou haſt vilified, I will avenge my ſet# 
and deliver thee up. s The Medes and Perſians fay ſome, the Baby. 
linians fay others, but this ſutes not well with Geography ; Arabian: 
ſay others, Aſociates of Nebuchadnezzar, who 'tis 'tkely recompenſed 
their Labour and Service with giving them this Country when it 
was conquered, as *'twas five Years after the Deſolation of Fernſalem. 
5 They ſhall ſettle on it, as a very convenient Country for their Sheep 
and Camels, and poſſeſs it as their Inheritance. c The word Pala- 
ces ſeems 'ittleto agree with Arabians who dwelt in Tents, but thi: 
manner of dwelling many of them would be ready to change, where 
they might to ſo great advantage as in that Country, which was fruit- 
ful as this was : befide the word ſignifieth what 7s fenced, as 1/a. 2. 15. 
and ts paraphraſed by Camp, and Arabians had their Munitions and 
fortified Camps, and theſe they ſhall ſer here, while they ſtay. And 
I add this allo that the next words explain theſe. 4 They ſhall fer 
up their Tenrs, as the word properly ; their Tents and Habitations 
they would fortify in ſome manner or other, that in their Cathp they 
might be fafe if they did nor build Ciries in the Country. e Th: 
Fruit of that Land was once thine, of rhe Trees thou plantedſt. 
f Which in fo fruitful Land, and rich Paſtures, they had in abundance 
from the multitude of their Kine, and 'twas a Drink that well ſured 
with thoſe hot Regions. 


5 And I will make Rabbah g a ſtable 5 for camels 7 
and the Ammonites & a couching-place for flocks : and ye 
ſhall know / that I am the LORD. 


g The Royal City, and Seat of the Kings of Ammon ; called ſince 


| 


F Philadeiphia, from Prolomeus Philadelphus, King of Egypt, who built it. 
| þ Turnit fiom a Royal Palace to be a Receptacle of Camels, and their 
he Drivers. i Wherewith not only the Chald:ans and Ba#rians, but the 


Arabiansalſo were well ſtored ; all the Men of the Eaſt, as appears in 
70b, uſing them for conveying Merchandize, and for Travels. & The 
People for the Land they dwelrin. / Then ſhall you know Þ was as 
able to have defended my own People, Houſe and Worſhip, as I was 
ab/e to deſtroy your Gods, your Cities, and your People 


6 For thus faith the Lord GOD, Becauſe thou haſt 
Wniclapped thine - hands m, and ſtamped with thy -f- feet », 


: "1 and rejoiced in -þ heart o with all thy deſpite p againit the 


nites q * may not be remembred among the nations. 


ſenſe is plain, or as our Tranſlation reads it, with, 7.e. as I have gi- 


Meon, and Baiith, and Beth-Baal-Meon, Manſion-Houſe of Baal, word for 
word ; it was fituate on the North-Coaſt of Moab, as the other on the 
Weſt. » A City which probably conſiſted of two Ciries, or princi- 
pal Parts, a very ſtrong Frontier Town; but not able to keep our thoſe 
that God would lead in. 


10 Unto the men » of the eaſt || with 0 the Ammoni- j oc, ;. 
tes, and will give them in poſleflion p, that the Ammo. gain/ yo 
children 0 


and fo the H br. and the £7997. 
* Ch. 28. 


3 ar 


n See wer. 4. let, s. o Rather againſt, 
ven Ammon, ſol will with them give Mcab to the CEa!deans firſt, who 
will give Moab to the Arabians. p Per. 4. l:t.b. 9 I ſuppoſe here is 
either an E/:pſis, thus, that as the Ammonites ſhould fo perith as nor ro 
be remembred, fo ſhould Moab alſo; or elſe 4nmon 15 appellative here, 
and ſpeaks the Numerouſneſs of Mozb, which yer ſhould ſo ceaſc as to 
be forgotten. | : 

Ir And TI 7 will execute judgments s upon Moab, and 
they #t ſhall know that I 272 the LORD. 

r Tho the Chaldeans do it, *tis by God's Dire&ion, and he is prin- 
cipal therein, 5s The Judgment paſſed by my Propher. * Thoſe bru- 
iſh Nations ſhall know this is my Hand. 


12 < Thus faith the Lord God, * Becauſe that Edom » Jolla 
z hath dealt againſt the houſe of x Judah by taking ven- — 
geancey, andhath greatly offended z, and revenged himſelf Ch. 35. 2. 
upon them + Amio.i.11, 

# The laumeans, Children of Eſau. x The Kingdom of David aftet 
the Diviſion of the Tribes, when but two remained conſtant to the 
Houſe of David. » For the old Quarre), becauſe Zacov got the Blefſing 
from E/ar ; or rather in revenging a later Quarrel which they had 
againſt 7zaah for the Slaughter, Spoil, and Caprivity they ſuffered by 
David's conquering Sword. z Both in the thing it ſelf, for Vengeance 
belongs to God; and in the manner and meaſures of executing it, as 
appears both from P/al. 137. 7. and the Prophecy of O684iah wer. 10. 
tO IF. 


13 Therefore thus faith the Lord GOD, I will alſo 
ſtretch out a mine hand upon Edom, and will cut off 
man 4 and beaſt c from it; and I will make it deſolate 
4 from Teman e atid || chey of Dedan f ſhall fall by the; ge, :2; 
{word- ſhall fall by 

a See wer. 7. let. s. and chap. 16. wer. 27. let. u,o. 6 By the Sword tbe ſword 
of the Chaldeans, and by other waſting Evils, which accompany wntoDedsn. 
Wars, as Famine, Peſtilence and other D:ſeaſes. «c Either thric Cactel 
ſhould be d:iven away by the Plundering Souldier,or devoured by rhe 
mighty numerous Army of Nezuchadnezzar, or waſted with Murrain, 
or all ſhould concur to unſtock their Paſtures, 4 A Delolation, 7. e. 


m land 4 of Iſrael » : 

re »m Expreſt thy Joy in that infolent manner. » And added this ſign 

I oſmore than ordinary Joy at this. o It was thar which affe&ed thy 
Heart with Gladneſs ; thy Soul and Mind were in this thy rejoicing. 

wy ? Hatred and Contempt ; thou waſt heartily glad ſuch vile People as 

he | taou countedſt them, were made what thou choughteſt they beſt 


deſerved, Slaves, Beggars and Captives, 


jtil q For the People. » Ej- 
©00 ther the ten Tribes, or rather the two Tribes with the ſmall Remnant 
0 of the others, that kept to the Houſe of David. 

c0- 7 Behoid therefore, I will ftreech s out mine hand 


«,"Pon thee, and will deliver thee for a || ſpoil * to the 
heathen z, and I will cut thee off x from the people. 
and I will cauſe thee to periſh out of the countries : 1 


moſt deſolate. e From the Sonth, fo the Chals. Paraph but 'tis rather 
the Name of the Rgion, called by che Name of Eſzu's Grandſon Te- 
man, who alſo gave Name to the * "nnindery of Idum'a, and probably 
'twas in the Southern Coaſt of Edow's Countrey. f The Dedan:tes, who 
were of Abraham by Kerurah, Gen. 25. 3. and theſe were Neighbours 
to Edem, on Arabia ſide, or elſe intermixt with the Edormites in Habitg. 
tion and Commerce, ſo that ir might be a Ciry reckoned either ro 
Edom, or Arabia; from Teman to Dedan, the Chald:an Sword thould 
waſte all. 


14 And I willlay my vengeance y upon Edom by the 
hand of my people Iſrael z, and they a ſhall doin Edom 
according b to mine anger, and according to my fury c; 
and they 4d ſhall know my vengeance, faith the Lord 


GOD. £5228 anare 5 
7 Which as 'tis great, ſo juſt, ſurs, and opportune ; thar Foot :* * 


tf, - ,; 
= will deftroy y thee, and thou ſhalt know & that I am 
| the LORD. 
ne £ Thou ſtretchedſt outthy Hand in Joy, I will ſtretch out mine in 
Vrarh ; thou againſt my People, I againſt thee. r For a Prey, or for 

4 ear, fo the word will bear. The greedy covetous Souldier ſhall 

_ "ke thy Wealth his Prey, the hungry Enemy ſhall eat th: up 

a " Babylonians, and their Confederates. x Explained by that follows, 

Cod 42:01, thou ſhalt no more be accounted among the Nations, bur | 


Cidet& in due time, Devr. 32.35.  » No Hiſtory mentions the fulfil. 
[Y] ling 


ferpetual 
haired, 


= 
j9- 


geances. 


" Ifa, 23. 
Jer.25.22 
and 47. 4 
Amos1 9 
Z<ch.yg 2. 
"EDIF..3+ 


TSS. 2. ? y.* MY ( | leſs 1 Mac. 5. 3- and 
\& of this 4s it ſounds in the Letter of it, unleſs 3 
RE TH) therefore interpret by the Hand, by the ſame 


6 Jo £5» 
20.&47.2.ſtines e have , 
Amos 1.6. peance with 2 deſpiteful g heart, to Uc 


[ . Sal, . 
Orwitho)a # hatred ; 


' 4Heb.ven- 


Fernfdem, * Aha e, ſhe is broken f rhat was the gates g of 


Joy, which was impious, injurious, and inhuman to rejoice in the 


th m cown, as Men pull down Buildings. q Watch-Towers,and thoſe 


2 Mac. 10. 16, 17. ſome 


EZERIELDL. 


715.7 that I uſed in puniſhing my People 7ſrae! ; others refer it to a 


ſpiricnal meaning, 2s 1a. 18. I4. and Jer. 49. 2. ba 
a the Inftraments God uſed, whether Maccabees 10 afrer-times, 
Ghalacons in that preſent Age. | 
22 work, ſhall give them their Screngrh and Mealures ; 
as much as 1 intended againſt Edom. | 
and confirm the Prediction. d Both Zaom, 


and Obad. wer. 21. 
or the 
b My juſt Diſpleaſure, as ir fer them 
they ſthall do 
cRedoubled to af:& the more, 
my People and thoſe I 
<mploy ſhall ſce this was my Quarrel which I threatned to avenge, 


and now have done it, and Edom ſhall know I am nor like their Gods, 


tho they ſaid fo, wer. 8. 


15 E Thus faith the Lord GOD, 


* Becauſe the Phili- 


dealt by revenge f, and have taken ven- 
Iſpiref . Fehr ſtroy + ir || tor the 


e Next Neighbours to the Jews, between whom many Quarrels, 


Wars, and mntual Spotl, 
among Borderers, who 


Slaughter and Injuri-s happened, as ever 
make all their own they can catch. f Took the 


opportunity to revenge themſelves when the Jews were weak and low. 
5 \Wich Hatred to them, and Contempt of them. + This rells us what 


<1 r in, 'twas a Hatred to the Name and Being of 
their Harred appeared 1n, += 7" ſparSnom. Her 


7/rae!, they would cut them off, as P/al. 83. 7. 
endleſs Enmity purſuing them. 


16 Therefore thus ſaith the Lord GOD, behold, I 


will ſtretch our & mine hand upon the Philiſtines, and 


1 will cut of the Cherethims /, and deſtroy the rem- 


1 Or ha nant m” of the || ſea coaſt ». 
ve of rhe 


k See chap. 7. wer. 5. let 5. and chap. 16. wer. 27. let. n, 0. ] Either 
a Name for all the Philiſtines, 1 Sam. 30. 14. or elſe the principal 
Soldiers, expert Bowmen, the Strength of Philiſtia. mm Which had 
eſ:ap'd the Sword of Samwl, David, Hezekiah, and of Pſammetichus 
King of £gyp'. n Mediterranean about Azoru-. 

17 And I will execute great | vengeance 09 upon 
them with furious p rebukes 3 and they ſhall know that 
] a» the LORD, when I ſhall lay q my vengeance 
vpon them. | © © 

This Verſe is a Confirmation of all ſpoken againſt the Phl;N ines, 
and 1+ in all the Particulars explained in what went before. o Great 
for Meaſure, and many for Number, YVengeances, as Heb. 4 In Fierce- 
neſs of Anger, and without Pity. q They, as other ſtupid Nations, 


willnor ſce till chey feel, and then they ſhall confeſs 'tis rhe Hand of 


an angry, but juſt and mighty God. 
C H A P. XXVI. 


The time of this prophecy, 1. The diftrudion of Tyrus for their vejorcing at 
the calami:y of Frrufalem,threatned by the Chaldeans, I———14. A ae- 
ſerip.ion of the mourning aud afton:ſhment tha; ſþall be at the fall of Tyrus, 


15 ——21. 


i A ND it came to paſs in the elcventh year a, in the 
firſt day of the month 5b, that the word of the 


LORD came unto me, ſaying, ; 

a Of 7:cmiab's Captivity, the Year wherein Yeruſalem, was taken. 
b That Monch which followed the taking of Jeruſalem, 7. e. the fifth 
M -nth ; for Jeruſalem was taken on the fourch Month, ninth Day, and 
in txeacy days after the News was brought to Tyrus, which behaved 
h=r {:If, as the Prophet will declare. 


2 Son of man, * becauſe that Tyrus c hath ſaid dagainſt 


the people : the bis-turned unto me, I ſhall be reple-| 
niſhed 7, now ſhe is laid waſte &: 

c The City for rhe People; "tis probable it was an univerſal Joy, 
rhercfor: aſcribed ro che whole Ciry. Built on a Rock, and Itland ot 
tle im? Name, not far diſtant from the Continent, a very great 
t12ded Porr and Ciry. d Either God revealed this to the Prophet ſo 
foon as theſe inſulting Tyrians ſpoke it, or elſe Exckic! ſpeaks of it 
proplerically, and as if'*rweredone. e Shew'd great Joy at the fall 
of 7-ryſalem, and triumpht over her. f By Nebuchaanezzar's Army. 
£ N-ar t-; the Gatesof the Cities w-r2 uſually the great Merchant; and 
fo here Jern/z! 22 1s called the grear Mart of Nations, and People from 
all Parts reforting to her for Trade, or Religion. þ Trading Intereft 
willturnto me;tney that did carry Merchandize to Jerujalem,will now 
bring it tome. z# Have full Trade, my Haven full of Ships, Streets 
full or Buyers and S-llers, Shops full of Wares, Honſes full of Lodgers, 
and Purſes full of Money. k She r-:flc&ed on waſted Fcruſalem with 


Ruin of her Neighbour. 


3 Therefore thus faith the Lord GOD, Behold, I am 
t againſt chee, O Tyrus, and will cauſe many m nations 
to come up againſt thee, as the fea cauſeth his waves to 
come 2 vp. | 

? And it God be againft them, they'll ſoon have Enemies enough 
too agairt them 5 God purpoſeth, threatneth, and afſureth them, he 
15,and will be againſt them. m For Number, and mighty for Strength, 
Riches, Autkority,and Feats of War already done. » With ſuch Vio. 
tence, Conſtancy, ſwelling in height, and making thee fear the Iſſue, 
{9 ſhall rhe Baby/onians come. 

4 And they ſhall deſtroy 9 the walls of Tyrus, and 
break p down her towers 9 : I will alfo ferape 7 
ler duſt from her, and make her like the top of a 
rGck 5s. 

o Batter and demoliſh with their mighty Engines, whiah ſhall ſhake, 
di:joinr, and bear down the ſtrongeſt parts of their Walls. p Under- 
mine, that they may tumble at once or; elſe employ Hands to rake 


that were for Defence and Safety of their City, which from their 


ſhalr be ſcrapt, and bruſht, and ſwept, that not ſo mucti as Duſt ſha! 
remain to thee. s As bare as was the Rock on which thy City is 
built before Wealth, Beauty, Building, and Strength were brought tg 
ic by Man's Induſtry. = 
5 Ir ſhall be @ place for the ſpreading 7 of nets 

in the midſt of the ſea: for I have ſpoken z, ſaith 
the Lord GOD ; and it ſhall become a ſpoil « to the 
Nations s 

* As barren ſandy Iflets in the midſt of the Sea, good for nothing 
but to dry Fiſhermens Nets,ſhalt thou be. « A Prey; Though the Con. 
texture of the words place this after its being made ſo bare and poor, 
yet we are to obſerve, that theſe laſt words give us account how this 
Proverty and Barrenneſs ſhall come upon this rich City : the Nations 
ſhall ſpoil her with thirteen Years long Sicge, Interruption of Trade, 
living on the quick Stock, and finally taken on ſurrender. + ga. 
lonians, and their Confederates, who made the 7yrians pay the Rec. 
koning. : 

6 And her daughters y which are in the field = ſhall be 
ſlain by the ſword 4, and they ſhali know that I am the 


LORD 5. 

y Either the leſſer Cities, which were as Danghters to Tyre, a Phraſe 
moſt familiar to the Scripture; or elſe their Virgins, and Daughters of 
the family. z On the firm Land, if you mean Czrzes ; or 1urprized 
in the Fields, whether taking the Air, or ſeeking to eſcape, if yay 
mean Daughters in the latter ſenſe. @ Barbarous Souldiers ſhall ſpare 
none. 6 Chap. 25. ver. 17. 

7 For thus faith the Lord GOD, Behold, I will bring 
2 upon Tyrus Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon, a king 
[of kings, from the north c, with horſes 4, and with cha. 
riots e, and with horſemenf, and companies g, and. much 
people h. 


Chap. XXy 


a Vid. Chap. 23. ver. 46. 6b So he tiled himſelf according to the 
| vaunting manner of thoſe Countries ; and indeed, by the Right of 
Conqueſt he was King of Kings, having many Tributary Kings under 
him, and many Captive Kings with him in Babylon, 2 Kings 18. 28, 
Jer. 52.32. © So was Babylon accounted to lie, as obſerved, chap. x. 
ver. 4. tho it did not lie full North, but had ſome Points of the North 
from Tyre. d Thoſe Eaſtern Kings had ſtore of Horſes, and uſed many 
in their Wars ; fee wer. 11. e See chap. 23. wer. 24. let. d. f Se 
chap. 23. ver.12 g An Aſſembly of all forts, from all parts of the 
large Kingdom of Babylon. h A mighty Army for fighting,and mighty 
Train of Hangers on, who were ready enough to do Miſchief to the 
Country, tho not very fit to afliſt the Army, if need required ; theſe 
would {weep all before them where e're they came. 


ſthee. | 
7 See wer, 6. let.y. k See chap. 4. wer. 2. let. o. and chap. 17, 
] ver. 17. let. s, 1 He ſhall draw a Line round about thee, and bnild 
Baſtions, raiſe Sconces to defend the Lines, to keep in the Beſieged, 
and ſecure the Beſiegers ; or he ſhall pour out the Shor,mighty Srones, 
or the like, out of the Engines framed, and placed on the Forts 
| before-mentioned : for ſo di! they of old build mighty wooden 
Towers, there placed Engines ; out of which they could fling mighty 
Stones, or Darts, againſt the Befieged, who were much annoyed from 
theſe high Towers, over-looking their Walls and Streets that none 
could ſtir out. m See chap. 23. ver. 24. let. g. 


| 9 And he fſhal ſet engines » of war againſt thy 
walls, and with his axes o he ſhall break down thy 
towers. 

» Theſe were mighty Engines, what-ever Form made of, and had 
their Deſcription here from the irreſiſtable Force wherewith they caſt 
Stones, and beat down all before them. o Whatever made of Iron, 
and framed to demoliſh Buildings ; ſee chap 16. wer. 39. 

19 By reaſon of the abundance of his horſes, their 
duſt p ſhall cover q thee, thy walls ſhall ſhake » at 
the noiſe of the horſemen, and of the wheels -, and 
of the chariots, when he 7 ſhall enter « into hy 


breach ». 
their Riding to and fro ; but whether while on the Land,or when they ? 


City. » As Buildings do with great noiſe, motion, or beating on the 
Ground, s Of their Engines, or Waggons, or Chariots. £ Nebuchas- 
nezzar. u Without fear ſhall enter and polleſs his Conqueſt, which 7 
at aſt yieJded to him after thirteen Years bard ſiege. x Whoſe Walls 
battered and levelled ; there is nothing left to defend the Citizens, 
who a yield, or offend the Beſieger, who therefore fearle!s 
entreth. 


11 With the hoofs of his horſes ſhall he tread down 7 
all thy ſtreets; he ſhall flay z thy people by the 
ſword, and thy ſtrong gariſons a ſhall go down to the 
ground 6, 

3 In proud, ftately, and menacing Poſture ſhall the King of Babi 
ride through all the Streets of thy City, to the Grief and Sorrow of 
the Tyrians ; and as he, fo ſhall his Troops do too. & In the Wars 
ſome of thy People ſhall fall by his Sword, but that no wonder ; I 14- 
ther think that *tis meant of giving Judgment againſt ſome of the molt 
valiant, conſtant, and aGiive Citizens which were the Cauſe of the 
City's holding ſo long out againſt Nebuchagnezzar, as he did with ſom® 
of the Nobles of 7:ru/alem. a Baſtions, or Forts about the City, 0 
Triumphal Arches built by Tyrians, or Statues ere&ed in honour £9 
ſome eminent Citizens, or to the Kings of Fgypr, their antierft Allies: 
Enemies to the Chaldeaxs, or the Statues of their Gods Hercules and 
Apollo chain'd, -that neither in ill nature and angry, nor yet charmed 
with other Mens Songs, ſhould depart, and leave their Pupils withov! 


Greatneſs have their Name Migdel. r I will leave thee nothing ; thou 


a Guard, 5 Shall be all caſt down together. ad 
313 AN 


8 He ſhall ſlay with the ſword thy daughters in the 
field ;, and he ſhall make a fort & againſt thee, and || caſt''f 
a mount / againſt thee, and life up the buckler »2 againſt 


gates, - as men enter into a city wherein is made ati 


Þ The Duſt they raiſe in their Marching, or in their Execiſing, in ” 
entred the City, may be doubted. q As a Cloud it ſhall cover che #1 


4 
'y 


1 


| are broker 


| When thy 


y . 


| 1:\cend 


| 


of wth 
El 


and f 


$. them( 
®;:. groun 


niſhed 
a W 


wooder, 
the Cro) 
ken of « 
1s added 
this fad 
Gallant 
lence, b 
niſht in 
;-o* 
thee, : 
that 22 
b city 
bitants 
haunt | 
x Pri 
days be\ 
a diſmal 
be true 
Friends, 
dom. c 
on thee, \ 
18 N 
yea, the 
departu 
e Or$ 
thing for t 
bending t 


9 


| gertoo. 


perplext, 


, thy People 


I9 Fc 


| *thee a 


great 7 
x Have 
ame Stare 


COme at pl 


that the Sg 
of thine 


29 W 


hp VEE - 
12 And they c ſhall make a ſpoil 4.of thy riches, and 
Make a prey of thy merchandiſe e, and they ſhall break 
_ - down thy wallsf, and deſtroy + thy pleaſant houſesg, and 
E they ſhall lay 5 thy ſtones, and thy cimber, and thy duſt 
in the midſt .of the water. PS 
- Chaldeans Souldiers. d Hinder thy Trade during the War, and 
Junder thee in the end of the War.. e Intercepting much, as tis 
Coming to thee whilſt beſieged, and raking what they find, when they 
conquer. f See ver. 4, 9. there be ſpeaks of the Walls of the City, 
hore of the Walls of private Houſes, as appears by that which. follows. 
That the Tyrians dwelr-in with delight, or diverted themſelves in,as 
Houſes of Pleaſure, Summer-Houſes. + It-had.been a quicker. way, 
and ealier to have burnt all ; but 'tis like the greedy Souldier might 
dream of Treaſure hid in Walls, or under the Timber, and therefore 
they take the pains to pull all down, and throw it into the Sea, the 
very Duſt too; thus God falfils his Word, and ſcrapt Tyrvs, 
.s 13 And *1I will cauſe the noiſe 7 of thy ſongs & to 
-czaſs ; and the found of thy harps / ſhall be no more 


6 9. hcard. 
i A popu 


lows, wealthy, antient, and much frequented City in the 
midft of great Security, no doubr, had all ſorts of Muſick, and loud 
Muſick on the Water eſpecially. & And Songs to their Muſick, but 
God will daſh itall. 1 This particular Muſick mentioned as one 0 
the nobleſt, and moſt in requeſt ; but no more ſhall be heard, in Tyre 
after it is taken by Nebuchadnezzar. 

14 And I will make thee like the top of a rock #2 3 thou 
ſhaic be @ place to ſpread nets upon »; thou ſhalt be buile 
no more Þ: for I the LORD have ſpoken zr, faith the 
Lord GOD. | EO 

mm See wer. 4. # See wer. 5. Jet. *, o Kither not this long time, 
or elſe not built in Greatneſs and Glory, or not raiſed to bea King- 
dom, or not by the Inhabitans of old Tyre, or not with the ſame Laws, 
Cuſtoms and Uſages; indeed, tho there was a City of that name buulr, 
yet 'twas built on the Continent, and in propriety of Speech was ano« 
ther City, not Q1d Tyrus. 


15. T Thus faich the Lord GOD to Tyrus , Shall 
not the iſles p ſhake at the ſound of thy fall, when the 


wounded cry, when the ſlaughter is made in the midit of 


thee 2 | 

? Iſles, which are Places freeſt from the danger of Invaſions, and 
in thole Days thought themſelves ſafe, will think themſelves in danger, 
and ſhake with fear, when they hear that Tyre is fallen :' *twill amaze, 
and frivht them all, when they hear thy Men were wounded, and {lain 
in the midſt of thee who dwelleſt in the Sea. 


16 Then * all the princes 9 of the ſea ſhall come 
down » from their thrones, and lay 5 away their robes, and 
2nd put off their broidered * garments: they ſhall clothe 
& themſelves with + trembling «, they ſhall fic upon the 
ground, and ſhall tremble at every moment, and be aſto. 
nilbed at thee, | 
* 49 Who were Lords ofthe Iſlands in that Sea, and who traded with 
: Hrus, and there were many ſuch ; or Sea-Commanders who, in their 
| wooden World, are ſo many petty Princes ; but rather the former, 
the crowned Heads, whoſe Kingdom were ſo many Iſlands. » In to- 
ken of Sadneſs and Condolence. 5s As farther ſign of Grief. *: This 
is added alſo to ſhew, how greatly they were affected with Sorrow at 
this fad Fall of their Ally, and Friend. « This laying aſide -of their 
Gallantry ſhall not be in compliment, as now in ſuch Caſes of Condo. 
lence, but they ſhall be heartily afraid of their own Concerns, and aſto- 
niſht in the nudſt of their Fears. 


17 And they ſhall take up - y a * lamentation for 


19, 


Wir 


} 9, 


that waſt inhabited of ſea-faring men, the renowned 
b city which waſt ſtrong «c in the ſea, ſhe and her inha. 
bitants , which cauſe their terrour to be on all that 
haunt it? : 

x Princes of the Sea, vr. 16. y Solemnly; heartily, and for many 
days bewailthee. = By a Proſepopeia, or Filtion of Perſons, perſonare 
a diſmal,ſorrowtu] Congreſs with fallen Tyre. @ Alas, itis ſo? Can it 
be true? How is it that thou art deſtroyed, who hadſt ſo many 
Friends, ſo much Riches ? &c. 6 For thy Strength, Wealth and Wit: 
dom. ©c Strong indeed, and thoughr impregnable. 4 Who durſt ſer 
on thee, who over-awdit all the bold Adventurers at Sea ? 


18 Now ſhall the Iſles e tremble in the day of thy fall F; 
yea, the Iſles that are in the fea g ſhall be troubled + at thy 
departure z. 

e Or Ships, ſo it might be rendred ; whether one or other, 'tis the 
thing for the Men, as 1/es for 1fanders, or Ships for Mariners. f Appre- 
bending that nothing can ſtand if Tyre fall, and thar they ate in dan- 
| gertoo. g Ar great diſtance, and farther from Land. + Grieved and 
perplext. 7 Leaving thy antient Dwelling, which from eldeſt Ages 
{ thy People had enjoyed with liberty, to go into Captivity. 

E 19 For thus faith the Lord GOD, When I ſhall make 

| thee a deſolate city, like y the cities that are not inhabi- 
| ted, when IT ſhall bring up the deep % upon thee, and 
great a waters ſhall cover thee; 

x Have made thee what now I threaten IT will make thee. y In the 
ame Stare with Cities that have not any to dwell in them; whoſe Walls 


ſt { are broken down, and into whoſe Streets all ſolitary wild Beaſts may 
he | Cmeat pleaſure. x Figuratively, Nebuch adnez2ar's Army; literally, 
ne WE hen thy Walls and Ramparts are ſo broken down by the Chaldeans, 
ot that the Sea at high Tides, and in ſtormy ſwelling Seas overflows part 
£0 | Ofthine Antient Seat. « Either literally, as the deep coming up; or 
cs. WW '©0fforically, great Aﬀiitions ſhall flow over thee. 

20 When I ſhall bring thee down 6b, with theni that 
e def "Y . A ; « 

vt cend into the pit c, with the people of 4 old time, 


thee, and ſay to - z thee, How - 4 art thou deſtroyed} 


nor ſhall we find any ſuch Coinpan 


KITE L. Chap. XXVII. 


and {Fall ſet thee in the low e parts of the earth, in. places 
defolate of old, with them chat go: down to. the pit, that 


thou be not inhabited, and I ſhal ſer f glory in the land 
of the living g : 


6 Deſtroy thee, ſlay thee ; and. c bury thee, throw thee into the 
Grave. d Who are long ſince dead, and gone ta Eternity, the Peo- 
ple of Eternity. e Another Deſcription of the Grave, from the Si- 
tuation, and from the Solitudes, or Deſolation of ir. In brief, when 
Tyre, as adead Man, ſhall be buried, forgotten, and periſh utterly, and 
and my Hand hath done it, then it ſhall be known my Hand hath 
avenged and puniſh'd all her Infolence, Inhumanicy, and Coverouſneſy 
that ſhe diſcovered when ſhe rejoiced at Feruſalem's Fall. - f Reftors 
the Beauty, Strength, Wealth of 1/-ae!, bring them hack to Fernſalems, 
to worſhip in a rebuilt Temple, where they ſhall enjoy me. 7 Land 
of Fudea,called Land of the Living, becauſe a Land where God will bleſs, 
and give Life by his Word, Ordinances and Spirit: Thus different 
ſhall Tyre's Captivity and Jeruſalen,s be. | 

21 * I will makethee a + terrour.h, and thou ſhalt be 
no »2ore, 7 - though thou be ſought. & for, yet ſhalt thou +5. & 
7 never be found again, faith the Lord GOD. "a 
| . 6 Or Conſumption, T will utterly conſume thee, with more than one | Heb. te+- 
kind of Deſtruion will I deſtroy thee, and make thee thereby a Ter. 724r-- 
ror to all that hear the Bruit of thee. z See wer. 14. let.o. & If any 
| Wall be ſo curious as to enquire, if come to ſeek our the Footſteps of 
'this Antient Tyre, they ſhall loſe their labour ; no Signs of it on the 
| Rock, where once it ſtood. 1 Rich, populous, potent, wiſe, renowned 
; Tyre, as once thou waſt, ſhalt never more be found ; and alas, that 
which is now on the Continent, is not fit to bear its name, much leſs 
to be counted the ſame City. 


CHAP. XXVII 
A Deſcription of the glory and accommodations of Tyrus, 12 5.the great and 


terrible fall thereof, to the loſs and aſtoniſhment of ether kings and nations. 
26—36. 


28. 


I HE word of the LORD came again unto me, 
laying, _ | | 
2 Now thou ſon of man, take 4 up a lamentation for 
Tyrus 6, . | 7 
a Pen a mournfu] Narrative at Tyrus's Fall ; .tell the World what 
ſhe was, and what ſhe is come to. 6 Both City and Citizens too. 


3 And fay unto c Tyrus, O thou that art ſituate 
4 at the entry e of the ſea, which art. a merchant F of 
the people for many iſles, Thus faich the Lord GOD, 
O Tyrus, thou haſt faid g, I am * of + perfet» (4, .g. 
þ beauty. | 12. 

ce Perſonate Tyrus asinear thee, and hearing what thou ſay*ſt unto, + Heb.per- 
or of her. Deſcribe her,that ſhe may know thou ſpeakeſt to her. 4 That fe# ofbeaus 
awell:t, ſo Heb, e Entrances Heb. the was but tour Furlongs, or five zy. 
hundred Paces, or half our Engliſh Mile from the Continent, as'twere 
in the very door of the Sea ; far enough off ro have convenient Har. 
bours between her and the Cantinenr, and to be out of danger of ſud. 
den, or eaſy Surprizes. f A rich and populous Empory, or Mart tor 
all Commodities, either to vend or buy to I{landers, or thoſe ther 
dwellon firm Land. g In thy Riches, Strength,Alliances and Trae, 
thou art grown proud, thou haſt thought and faid too a great deal 
more than becomes a changeable State. þ Thou haſt boaſted of the 
Excellency of thy Government, the Strength of thy Cicy, the Inac- 
ceſſibleneſs of the Situation, Nearneſs, Strength, and Obligations of 
thy Allies; and asif nothing were wanting to perpetuate thy Glory 
and Happineſs, poor ſelf-flatrering Tyre. Bur let's view Particulars, 


4 Thy borders 2 are in the -- midlt of the ſeas, thy buil- 4 11,4 
ders & have perieGed thy beauty. | | . 
; Weak Borders, which an Enemy eafily breaks through, area greic 
Defe&t in a State : Well Tyre, thou art well ſecured here, thine are in 
the Sea that ſurrounds and ſecureth thee. . þ Thy firſt Founders, 
whoever they were : Agenor King of Phenice choſe wiſely to build a 
City in ſafety ; or by Builders may be meantſuch, who in after-times 
did add to the firſt Foundation : Theſe were Maſters of theic Art, and 
added this to the natural Strength and Beaury of the Place. Thus thon 
art perfeCted at home. 


5 They 7 have -þ made all thy ſhip-boards of fir- : 
trees » of Senir 0 : they have taken cedars p from Leba- Ly 
non f to make maſts for thee. | 

1'Th 


y Shipwrights. #» The Planks and Benches,or Tranſl mes for 
their Ships. » Of the beſt and fineſt Fir-trees. o Seniy, i. e. Hermon, 
Deur. 3.9. p For Height, Strength, Durableneſs, and pleaſing Smell, 
beſide Smoothneſs of Grain, and Fitneſs for curious C arvings, beſt of 
Trees. 4 Whoſe Cedars excelled others. 


6 Of the oaks r of Baſhan have they made thine | or, 
oars : || the s + company of the Aſhurites have made have 


heart. 


Heb. 


they 


maads 


thy branches of ivory, Grought out of the illes of 'by hatches 
Chittim. : of ivory well 
r Of Pines, ſay ſome; of Cheſant-trees, ſay others : but ſince froden. 


Oaks, and thoſe of Baſban, are famous in Sacred Dendrology, I know 
not why we ſhould not keep to our own Verſion, fince the primary 
Notation of the Heb. leads us toit, s As weread theſe words, there 
ariſe many Difficulties in the expounding them ; If the Conje&ure of 
the Learned Bochare be well conſidered, 'twill ſeem very probable , 
the words would be better rendred thus, 7by Benches they have made 
of Ivory with Box brought out, &c. For the Hles of Chirtim affor- 
ded much and large Box-trees ; whereas Ivory, or the Elephant's 
Tooth, we know, is the Merchandize of other Countries, and the 
Elephant a Foreigner to all the parts of Europe; nor ate the Teeth of 
Elephants of that Largeneſs to afford Breadrh for Sears and Benches ; 
y of Aſburites ; if we enquire for 


them. I ſhall thetefore — m 


tliat Learned Mania the Opi- 
] ach 3 


_ — = 
—— <ns. _e— === + 3 —— 
S——_ —= ——— — romnmeteg -- _—_—— : = 
- — — > —— — _ i, EI cy -= - 
Pg _ - 222 oma 
Fx I 5 - - —- - a => . 4 - 
_ CRE YL + - IS» . = - _ 
> 


Chap. XXVIL. E GE 
be ls Aion, that here are two Words read divided and by Miſtake tranilated| 
> 8 asdivided Words, which ought to have been read in one Word, and ſo 
tranſlated, as 'tisin iſs. 41. 19. whete we tranſlare CO\WINT) box, 
«*, 92am. then all is plain, and the Senſe this, that from the Iſles and Parts about 
&is dinviſim the Tncan, Azean, and other Seas of the Mediterrane where this Box- 
(cribatriy , Tree is a Native, as ia Corſica, Apulia, &c. and of great Growth and 
it ali# nog. Firtanefs, fir to ſaw into Boards for Benches, they were conveyed to 
Biull.e, T1rus where their Artiſts inlaid theſe Box: boards with Tvory,and made 
Jer.46. 20. them beautiful Seats in their Galliesand Ships. | 

& alibi le- 7 Fine linen * with broidered « work from Egypt x, 


1 '- 


wox Loc une 


C1HL 
12 Tarſhiſh 4 was thy merchant, by reafon of the muy. 
titude of ail kind of riches 3 with ſilver e, icon f, tin 2 and 
lead þ, they traded in thy fairs. | | 
a4 The City or Countrey for the Inhabitants, ſome ſay Carthag;. 
21:/ans ; others Tarſus in Cilicia; others with more Probability fay it is 
Tartefſs, an antient Town on the Mouth of the River Betts, or rather 
over againſt ir, in an Iſland where Gades (now Cadiz) a convenieng 
Port to export the rich Metals that were brought down Bets from the 
Country abounding with them,and through which their Bzrs ran; ang 
the Inhabitants ofthis Tarteſu furniſh'd the Tyriayy with them. + Spair 
was full of. f Iron they had, Spaniſh Iron is well known; theſe were 


genium. was that thou ſpreadeſt forth to be thy fail ; || blue » and 
DPS) purple from the iſles of z Eliſhah, was that which covered 


a thee. 

ex SuXi7, 7, Whereas Thrift teaches us to uſe the coarſe Linen for like Purpoſes, 
j' Or, p#ur-theſe prodigal Tyrians uſed the fineſt ſilken Sails, as we may render the 
fie and Words. « Divers. Figures, curiouſly drawn with rhe Needle :n this 
/carict. fine Linen, which made exceeding coſtly Sails, yer Pride and Wanton- 
neſs in ſome ofthem went to the Charges of it. x» Where was much 
of this fine Linen, and many of theſe neat Embroiderers. y Or, Violet 
Co/our and Purple, both rich and noble Colours: The Garments of 
Great Men and Princes were made hereof, Gen. 41.42. P#9. 31. 22. See 
eh. 16. 10. let. i. z Either from the Sea-Coaſt of Zo/:s in the Leſſer 
Aſia,the Inhabitants whereof were excellent in the Skill of dying Wool, 
or from Peloponneſus, in which is one Country called E's, famous for 
fine Linen, and about the Mouth of the River Ezro as. The fiſhing for 
the Purple Fiſh was famouſly known, ſo chat it might bethis Place be- 
fide the Ifles of the #zcan and Gretian Seas, as Coa, Neſirus (called 
from its Purp!es Porphyris) Cythera, and the Cyclades, which ari many ; 
ſome 12 of better Note we might name, as now called Andro, Pario, 
Zea, Sdilli, Micoli, &c. a He ſpeaks not here of Garments, but of the 
Coverings they uſed in their Ships or Gallies ; their TiJcs, as our 
Boatmen call them, the Clothes they ſpread over their Heads on Ship 
board, to keep them from Sun and Weather, were ſuch as beficted 
Kings and Princes for Coſtlineſs and Beauty. 

$ The inhabitants of Zidon 6b and Arvad c were thy 


mariners 4: thy wiſe me e, O Tyrus, that were in thee, 


were thy pilots. 

6 An antient Town and Haven of Pkexicia, not far from Tyre, c Bet 
ter known'by its other Name Aradus, an Iſland belonging to Phenicia, 
ſome ſay twenty,others ſay ſeven Furlongs from the Continent. 4 Row- 
ers inthy Gallies. The rich Tyrians would not employ their own inſuch 
ſervile Works, they hired Strangers ; theſe Ziaonians and Arvadeans, 
or Aradins, once thy Equals, thou haſt now outſtripp'd and makeſt 
thy Servants, with Pride enough. e Thy learned Men ; for Naviga- 
tion was the great Study of the Tyrians, and who were beſt killed in| 
this, werethe learned or wiſe Men among them,«whom they had o 
their own, and truſted to be Pilots, which Employment carried Ho- 
nour in it to ſute the proud Humour of the T1rians.. 

9 The antients f of Gebal g, and the wiſe ez h there- 


the Produt of the Country. g Ir 1s probable they fetch'd this from 
ſome Iſlands over againſt the Spaniſh Coaſt called Cafiterides, one of 
wich a late Geographer names Zigarga. h Lead they had from the 


Cornwal, torender the thing difficult, or che Conje&ure improbable, 
13 Javanz, Tubal &, and Meſhech /, they were thy 
merchants : they traded the || 


veſſels of braſs » in thy || market. 
; The Grecians, particularly the Tonians. k The 
Cc. The Albanians toward the Caſpian Sea, / Th 


Mengrelia. m Brought Men to fell for Slaves, fo the Greeks did : the 
( Mancipia mica ) Ionian Slaves were known, and valued in the Ex 
eſpecially the handſom Girls to waic on great Ladies; the too great 
Deſire hereof in Atofſa, Darius his Queen, is ſaid to be the chief Cauſe 
of his War on Greece; and as fo the other, beſide their ſervile Incling. 
tions, they were ſo barbarous and inhumane, and had Opportunitiesto 
ſeize Men, Women and Children to ſell chem, char no doubt the Mar. 
ket at Tyre was full of them. = Ofwhich Meral there was great Store 
they ſay, in Cappadocia and Iberia, which they brought with them. * 


14 They of the houſe o of Togarmah þ traded in thy 
fairs with horſes q, and horſemen r, and mules 5. 

o Ofthe Country. p Armenia, the leſler, or Phrygia, Gallatia, ot 
Cappadocia, or Paphlagonia. q All which Countries,as they are Neigh. 
bours to each other, ſo they abounded in Horſes; and as they had ma- 
ny for Number, ſo they had good for Quality, and furniſh'd their 
Neighbours: *tis reported the Cappaarcians paid 2600 Horſes yearly 
Tribute to the Perſians. And as they bordered on each other,'tis like. 
ly they might be reckoned thus together. » It is like with either mz. 
ny Horſes, or ſome choice ones which they ſold, they might ſell their 
Grooms, as beſt able tomanage and keep thoſe Horſes. s The Coun. 
tries above-mentioned, eſpecially Cappadocia, had many Mules, which 
they ſold to their Neighbours ; Mules which are a mix'd Creature of : 


{| Or, fop- of were in thee thy 2 [| + calkers &, all the ſhips 7 of the 


wg ſea with their matiners were in thee to occupy thy 
+ Heb. merchandiſe. 

ftrength Ff Old experienced Workmen. g A Town of Phenicia near the Sea, 
_—_ one of the four principal Towns, to which belonged a Juriſdiftion over 
a fourth part of Phemcia, mentioned Pſz!. 83. 7. among the Conſpi. 
rators againſt 1ſrael ; and the Giblites, 1 Kings 5.18. Natives of Getal 
are called Stone-{quarers, People fitted for hard and ſervile Works. 
þ Skilful in their Trades. z Hired and dwelt in Tyrw for Gain ſake, 
that they might be Nill imployed. & Shipwrights to build no doubt, 
as well as repair and ſtrengthen their Ships. ! Ships from all Parts of 
the Sea, full of Mariners, not only to manage the Shipsat Sea, bur to 
offer their Service to the Tyr/ans for bringing in or carrying outof their 
Wares, ſo that they might reap the Profit whileſt others did undergo 
T:ouble and Danger of trafficking by Sea, Fattors, and Warehouſe. 
Keepers, and Brokers. 


10 They of Perſia 2, and of Lud », and of Phut o were 
in thine army, thy men, p of war: they hanged 9 the 


Mare and He-ASs. 


I5 The men of Dedan * were thy merchants, many 
iſles « were the merchandiſe of thine hand : they 
_ thee for a preſent x, horns y of ivory & and 
ebony. 

e Vid. chap. 25. ver. 13. let. f. This Dedan was in Arabia, built 
by Dedan the Son of Regma, not far from the Perſian Gulf, and now 
called Da#en, whence through the Red Sea they might convey their 
own Merchandiſe. « In the Indiax Seas, and in thy Red Sea, traded 
with thee. x Knowing how acceptable they were to get thy Favour, 
they either made Preſents, and gave theſe things, or brought them to 
ſell. » Elks Horns, or wild Goats ; ſome think 'tis meant of the 
Unicorn, bur the firſt is likeſt. z Ivory, not of, the Heb. is not in 
Regimine, but " mon, mw ſhould beread, they brought the Preſents, 
Horns, Tvory, aud Ebony, which is a very ſolid, heavy, ſhining and black 
Wood, fit for many choice Works. l ; ” «pi 


ſhield r and helmet 5 in thee, they * ſet forth thy come- 


linefs. 

m Perſians, excellent Archers. » Lydians, not thoſe Cr eſis was King 
over, but thoſe that dwelt in Egypt about the Lake Mareo:z5, or higher 
towards Erhiophis, if they were not of that Country Ahiophians them. 
ſelves. 0 Libiaxs, a Peope of Africa, theſe were their hired Souldiers, 
and ever ſerved in their Army under Tyria» Commanders, p Statio- 
nary Souldiers in time of Peace, and who were ſent out by Sea or 
Land, as occaſion required ina timeof War. 9 Intimeof Peace; or 
might they not ſo often as they came off the Guards bring each Man 
his Armour, and hang it up inthe publick Armory ? » Which defen- 
ded the Body. s Which covered the Head. # Theſe ſtout, expert, 
well armed Guards were an Honour to the State they ſerved, and their 
Arſenal eſpecially did prove the Gallantry of this Tyrian State. 

11: Themenof Arvad « with thine army x were upon 
thy walls round about y, and the Gammadims z, we- 
re in thy towers, « they hanged their ſhields upon 


thy walls round about 5: they have made thy beauty 


16 Siria & was thy merchant by reaſon of the multi. 
tude of - the wares of thy a making : they occupied in th 
fairs 6 with emeralds, purple c and broidered work 4 
and fine linen e, and coralf, and + and agate g. 


for all Uſes, which the Syrians could have no where elſe. 


d Or Violet-coloured Clothes. e Yid. ver. 7. let. wu, f See wer. 3. 
let. *. g Men gueſs this may be Rubies, Carbuncles, or Chalcedonies, 
or Cryſtal, with which they made Looking-Glafſes. þ A Stone well 
known to us, but not ſo well known, whether it exaQly tranſlate the 
Heb. 1373 here uſed ; ſome ſay 'tis the Chryſopraſe, a Stone mix'd 
with Gold Colour and Green, and ſome ſuch Mixture may be ſeen in 
ſome Agares. 


7 Judah +h and the land of Iſrael 5 they were thy 
merchants : they traded in thy market wheat of Min- 
nith &, and Pannag /, and honey mz, and oil », and 


[| balm 0. 
þ Thetwo Tribes, or Kingdom of fudah. 


c perfect. 

z See wer. 8. Jet. c. « Mix'd with other hired Souldiers made up 
thy military Forces. q Kept Guard upon the Walls. z ſome ſay 
Pegmies or Dwarfs, becauſe the word Heb. is a Cubir, but the whole 
Story of fuch Cubir-men is fabulous, Others think it is Men bold and 
couragious, and the word af Syriac Origine and Senſe, and fo fitly ex. 
prefling the Temper of Syrian or Syrophenigian Souldiers. Or elſe the 
Meg who came from Gammade, a Town of Phenicia. Or poſſibly ſuch 
as came from Ancon another Town of Phenice, and this Town had its 
Fame from itsSituation on a piece of Land that reſcmbles the Cubir, 
Greck *Aſ;,v, and in the Hebrew INI) a Which were many 
ereced for Strength and Defence. b By this it appears theſe Towers 
were aifo publick Armories, whence they fetched Arms, when need. 
ful, and where they laid them up, when no farther Uſe ;of them. 
e Added much to her Beauty, a well-armed State being among States 
as beautiful 25a proper well-armed Souldier among Men. 


rael, or the ten Tribes until their Diſperſion. 
rich and excellent Wheat-Country , *tis mentioned in Judg. 11. 33. 01 
occaſion of Zephrab's ſlaying the Ammonites, as lying on their Borders, 
and tis ſaid there is a Town of that Name fill in being about four 
Miles from E:bu-(or Sabaſant as now called) in the way toward Phila 
delphia, formerly Rabbath, 1 Some doubr whether this be a proper 
Name of any Country or Region, but if *cis they conclude it muſt be 
Phenicia, but do not tell us how Judah and Iſrael ſhould trade their 
Wheat in Tyre Market. It may be *twas ſome more obſcure Place, 
which now is forgotten, »: With which Canaan flowed. n In making 
and ſelling whereof, the Labour, Care and Profit of that Country did 
lie. o The choiceſt Balms were thoſe of Gilead, whence 'ris probable 
'ewas carried to Tyre ; or it may be "twas Roſim, of which they had 
great Uſe. The Cbaldee Paraphraſt interprets it by the word chat de- 


4- 


notes Wax, and ſo it may poſſibly be a good Commodity in _ ” 
I 


ſame Place, and carried all to Tyzws, and ſold it to them; for they kepe 2. 1, 
Marker, and traded inthe Fairs of Tyrws. Ar this Day ourown Cay.  ; 
try is moſt noted for Tin and Lead, which fome ſay was fetch'd by the an, 
Phenicians ; if ſo, for ought I ſee to the contrary, the Tarteſſans, wh iti; 
were a People before ever the Tyrians came into thoſe Parts, mj hes, 
firſt trade here, and fetch it hence, and carry it to Tyre, the Voyage *; 
being neither long or dangerous enough between that Ifland and oy; #1: 


perſons »» of men, and iiq, 

the X 
Afeatick Iberians, gy 
e Cappadecian; V4 
with the Moſhi, who dwelt about Cholcis, the Country now called har. 


Ys 


3 —__ 


# Well known to all. 6 The abundance ofthe Tyri9n ManufaQure | 
. c Rather,'"! 
for Emraulds, a rich and lovely Stone, or Carbuncles, as others have it." 


5 The Kingdom, of /{|' 
k The Name of ſome/# 


Chap. XX) h 11 


Solomon 
- anothe 
- ſettled 
E orew | 
- ticks c 
forts, -; 
| ? 


* chants 
2 merch 
. g Ha! 
where « 
afterwa 
Seleucia 
Winter 
put of 
to Aa; 
& Jon. k' 
| Other, 5 
E ſhar, th 
: try or 
Gaala 0] 


£ "4 

3 things 

and in 
Made 
E 2kith 
- Conjeftu; 
 Ous Naric 
3 thoſe Nat 
? Boughe 
| TOUS, ye 
bought y 
Aſlyrian E 
belts .m1 
and boun( 
heſt; we 


800d Mer 


25 Tl 
Market x 
plorious : 

t The 
Of Praiſe, 
| 7: he Poy 
| a One 

thee ; 
[nth 
| 10 Wert 
Hitherto t 


| ®r Pall, & 


141. VYXVIL. Fl A E 
: 13 Damaſcus r was thy Merchant in the multitude of 


ne wares of thy s making, for : the multitude of all riches: 


in che wine of Helbon «, and white wool. No 
- A very antient and wealthy City of Syria, and the Royal City. 
- See the Phraſe, wer. 16. let. b, : Though the Tyrians had many rich 
1 lovely Commodities, yet ir pleaſed rhe Damaſcens to bring chiefly 
_ of th:ir Commodities in exchange, richeſt Wines to pleafethe Pa= 
Jat of the luxurious Tyrians, and fineſt Wool to clothe their Pride. 
This Place I meet no where elfe ; Prolomy hath Chalibonis in Syria, 
perhaps that may be ir. Others, to fave Travel, make it a common 
Name, ſweet or {mooch, or fat Wine ; for He/bon comes from a word 
ſignifies far. bp : 
'9 Dan x alſo and || Javan y going to and fro, occupi- 
ed in thy Fairs : bright iron 2, cafiia and calamus were in 


thy market, : 

* If *ewere the Tribe of Day, it muſt be underſtood of a time be- 
fore the Captivity of the ten Tribes; but there is a learned Man tells 
us of Dans a City of Taprobana, or the Ifland Zeilan mentioned by Pro. 
ſemy, and this learned Man will have this meant. » Not 7avan or 
Grice:, fairh that learned Man, but another 7avan in the Ifle Meroe, in 
remote Parts of Egyp?, where is a principal Town Uzal, or Aſcl, from 
whence theſe Merchants came, and therefore tiled 7avan of Uzal, or 
Javan Minza!s; and if the Caſlia or Calamus mentioned in the Verſe 
Tere the Wares brought in by the Danites and Jawanites, I ſhould go 
as far a5 Meroz and Taprobang to ſend them ; but 1f the Cafſia and Cala» 
-nus were brought up ar Tyre, I would believe they lived nearer, thar 
they were Grec!an P=dlars, or in a Northern Diale&t Merchants that 
bought them, and were meant 1n the Text. z Poliſhed, as we ſee 
now an Art which ſo much betters the common ſort of Iron, and 


| Mi cha 


20 Dedan « was thy merchant in T precious clothes tor 


chariots 6. | : 
a The Poſterity of Abraham by K:turah, who dwelt in 4rabia, and 


/ 


their Wool. 6 With which they lined their Chariots, and covered 
them; alſo they uſed them for Saddle-Clothes, Fc 

21 Arabia c, and all the princes 4 of Kedar, they + oc- 
cupied with thee in lambs, and rams, and goats : in theſe 


: 'S were they thy merchants. : : 
bm © A large Country, and diſtinguiſh'd into Deſert, or Sandy, which 
' cankot keep an honeſt Man, ir affords Thieves enough : Next 1s the 
Stony or .'ctrea, which afforded good Paſturage for Sheep and Goats ; 
and rhe third Felix, or happy, moſt remote from Tyre. &d For there 
were many ſuch among thoſe Kedarens or Scenites who dwelt in Tents, 
bred and fed Catrel, and carried them to Tyre Marker, furniſh'd the 
Shambles ar Tyre, and their Altars too for Sacrifices. 

22 The merchants of Sheba c and Raamah d, they 
were thy merchants : they occupied in thy fairs with 
chief e of all ſpices, and with all precious ſtones f\, and 
gold. 


c A Country in Arabia Felix, whence the Queen came that viſited 


\/ Solomon. d Tis read Rhegma by change of Y incog, (as itt Gomorrah) 
y another People of the ſame Arabia. This Rhegma Brother to Sheba, 
Fl & ſettled near him in that fruitful Land, and buile Towns there, and 
” grew to Fame. e This Country affords all forts cf the beſt Aroma- 
" ” ticks or Spices, which were carried to Tyre. f Rich Jewels of all 
lt | forts, and Gold too, : 
WW 23 Haran g, and Canneh 5, and Eden 3, the mer. 
ed E- chants of Sheba k, Aſhur 1 avd Chilmad m, were thy 


ur, WW. merchants, 


refines it, rhat tis of great Value. Caſſia and Calamus are ſweet Drugs. | 


were Sheep-maſters, and no doubt knew how to make fi11< C'othes of; 


& # & L 


26 T Thy rowers @ have brought thee 5 into great 
waters 6 : the caſt-wind 4 hath broken e thee in the _ 
+ midſt f of the ſeas g. | + Heb, 
a Thy Governors and Counſellors. b Unadviſedly. c Dangers #6477 
and Difficulties, in which thou art like to be ſhipwrack'd; in which 
thou wilt periſh. 4 Which is very tempeſtuous and dangerous to Ships 
in thoſe Seas: By thisis meant the King of Babz/on with his Army, 
whoſe March was ſomewhat by Eaſt to Tyre. e As ſurely will, as if 
he had already done it, he heth broken, it is the Prophetick Scile. 
f Where thou art far from Shore, and muſt therefore fink and drown, 
or where thou thovghreſt thy 1elf impregnable. g Wheremany S2as 
meer, 'tis impoſſible for a half:ſtarved Creature to ſwim out ; ſo ſhal) 
T:rus periſh in the violent Currents of many Seas ; many Nations, 
fierce and cruel, under N:buchadn.22ar, ſhall ſwallow thee up. 


thy mariners /, and thy pilots , thy calkers », and the 9 X<- 

occupiers 0 of thy merchandiſe, and all thy menof war 

p that are in thee, || and in all thy company 9 which z 

in the midſt of thee, ſhall fall » into the -+ midſt of the + tyeb. 

ſeas - in the day 7 of thy ruine »«. heart. 
þ The vaſt Treaſuresof the publick, nor the great Wealth of pri- 

vate Citizens ſhall purchaſe Tyrws a continual Proſperity. ; Theſe thall 

be inter1upted by the Siege, and none thar frequented them ſha!l pre. 

vail for Acceſs to them. & The Stock of Goodsof all forts now in 

thy Warehouſes, and what thou haſt cruſted out. / Yr. 8. let. d. mVid, 

vir. 8. ler. e. n Vid. ver. g. let. k. o See wer. g.let.1 p Vid. ver. 10, 

and 11, tot. Allthat are Men fit for War q in the Multitudes of Peo. 

ple that are in thee, or all thy own Citizens, that are thy Militia, 

Trained Band., or Artillery Company. r*Tis plural; theſe all ſhall 

at .once fall rogether. 5 See ver. 26. let. g. t The time indeed was 

long preparing for the Fall, but a Day finiſh'd it. « Utter Deſolation. 


z of thy pilots. 

x Thelefler Cities on Terra frma, alarmed with Summons of theic 
Governors to put themſelves in a Poſture of Defence : Or, the Waves, 
an Elegant Hyperbole thus read; the very Waves which roar and ter- 
rifle, ſhall hear and trembl: at a ſtranger and more doleful Cry than 
their own. Or, as our Verſion, the Suburbs, which are neareſt the 
| Sea, ſhall firſt hear the outcries of Pilots and Mariners deſpairing of 
| Eſcape, when their Ship, brokea to pieces,ſhall at once ſhrick cur; So 
| ſhall thy Cicizens cry and fall. 


29 And all that handle the oar, the mariners, and all 
the pilots of the ſea, ſhall come down from their ſhips, 
they ſhall ſtand upon the land ; | | 

In the Allegory of a miſerable Shipwrack; the Prophet ſers forth 
Tyrws's Fall, and in this Verſe he repreſents them all ſhifting out of 
the ſhattered ſinking Ship, in great Confuſion, and greatet Fear ; the 
Slaves quit the Oars, the Mariners throw up the Tackliogs, Pilots 
leave the He!m, all make for the Long-Boat and the Land, where they 
bewail! their undone Codition, Or, it may be more literally under. 
ſtood thus, all ſeafaring Men who got their Living by Service done 
for Tyrus at Sea, ſeeing her utterly broken, ſhail leave che Ships, get 
to Land, that elſewhere they may get Employment, or by a timely 
Flight fave themſelves, and bewail their old Maſter's Fall. ' | 

39 And ſhall cauſe y their voice to be heard againſt 
Z thee, and ſhall cry bitterly «, and ſhall caſt up duſt 5 


_ their heads, they ſhall wallow «c themſelves in the 
aſhes. 


7 With greateſt Cries they ſhall make the Country eccho forth their 
Sorrows.z Either ſtanding on higher Groundover againſt the ſhip- 


to #7 Haran or Charran in Meſopotamia, where Abraham dwelt. h No wrack d City : Or rather, for thee ; thoſe Eaſtern People did uſeto lift 
the where elſe mentioned, ſuppoſed to be rheſame with Calneh, Gen. 10, 10. up their Voice in Mourning, Jeb 2. 12. Jer. 31. I5. Zech. 11. 3, 
-in WW afterwards Cre/iphon, a pleaſant Ciry on Tygris, ſome three Miles from | 4 Their weeping ſhall be from a deep Senſe of the Miſery of theic 
a», Wo $:{encis ; *rwas built by the Parthians, whoſe King reſided there inthe | Friends, and this expreſsd by bitter Cries; ſo ſuch Sorrow is ex- 


ack WF Winter, b<cauſe of the Mildneſs of the Air. 7 A pleaſant Country, 
 putof Bab1lonia, the Chaldee Paraphraſt calls it Hadiab, and leads us 


preſ*'d, Zeph; 1. 14. 1/a. 22.4 and 33. 7. 6 Another Expreſſion of 
great Diſtreſs and Sorrow, proper to thoſe Countries, Joſh. 7. 6. Fob 


ti ” to Adiabne, which Trajan conquered in his Expedition againſt Baby-j 2. 12. Lam. 2. 20 and Jer. 6 26. c Roll themſelves in Aſhes, which 
Ute Im. k Whether the ſame mentioned, wer. 22. which ſee, or ſome ; they uſed todo in their greateſt Mournings, as Mic. 1. 10, and Fey. 6* 
thy, | other, is not certain, perhaps it may be Saba, whence Sabeans. 1 4-| 26. asevery Country hath its peculiar Manners and Cuſtoms in Moutn» 
@ 4, i ſur, the Nam: of the Father of the Nation, for &/jria. w A Coun-|ing, ſo had theſe, Cuſtoms that expreſs d moſt yehement Sorrows in 

2 $ try or part of Media, between Aſyris and Parchia, moſt likely to be Geſtures, which we are not accuſtomed unro. | 
we WE Gaols of Mecca. ; 31 And they ſhall make themſelves utterly bald 4 
cher, 24 Theſe 9» were thy merchants in || all ſorts «f|for thee, and gird them with fſackloth es, and they ſhall 
eit” WF 15i»gp5s », in blue + clothes o, and broidered work p,|weep for thee with bitterneſs of heart f, and bitter wail- 
T.7 . 


| made of cedar among s thy merchandiſe. 


- ous Nations traded with Tyre. # Of rich precious things. 


of Ii 


, 
ſome good Merchandiſe. 


plorious & in the midſt of the ſeas. 


| **1 Fall, foretold asif already come. 


| and in cheſts q of rich apparel, bound 7 with cords, and| in 


7 It was the Cuſtom of the Heathen, either to pull of with thei 


þ = Either laſt named, or all that have been mentioned, though I| Hands, or cut off the Hair of their Heads in great Mournings, which 
” conjeCture rhe firſt is che true Meaning ; thoſe rich, ſtately and ſumptu- _ forbad —_ Copy _—_ 9. as Deut. - ,- ., Thus ”y _—_— 
o Which| Mourners in Baldneſs expreſs their Sorrow and Deſpair. e Another 
> thoſe Nations delighted in,eſpecially the Chaldeans and 4ſhrians ch. 23.6, uſnal Ceremony of Mourners well known to all. f Ic ſhall be a hear- 
| þ Bought of Egyprians, ſold to 4ſyrians, &c. q Cieſtsof Cedar, cu-|ty Mourning, not a counterfeit one, this referring to the inward . 
| rious. yer ſtrong, made on purpoſe to carry ſumptuous Appars],| Grief, the next bitter Wailing refers to the outward expreſling it. 
| bought up ar Tyre, and in thoſe Cheſts conveyed to all Parts of the] 
4ſyr/an Empiie, and to the Northern — It may _—_ + the 
Chelts .mentioned, or to other ſorts of rich Wares neatly made up, |= , . ; , | 
and bound for Szcurity with Cords. 5 By this it ſhould ſeem theſe | city s like 5 Tyrus, like the deſtroyed & in the midlt of 
Cheſt: were nor like our ordinary Boxes, bur as chiace Cabinets and | the fea / ? 


32 And in their wailing g they ſhall take up 4 a la- 
mentation for thee, and lament over thee, /2zing, What 


z In their ſorrowful Speeches of Tyr. h Into their Mouths, or 


25 The ſhips of Tarſhiſh *£ did ling « of thee in thy with a compoſed,. ſignificant, and comprehenſive Form of Speech, ro 
market x, and thou waſt repleniſhed y, and miade very 


ſhew much Grief in few Words. # A few Years ſince no City like 
her in Beauty, Righes, Glory andJoy ; now none like her in all the 
Contraries: k Now no more Tyrus the Flouriſhing, the Renowned, 


t The Ships from all Parts of the Sea, which came to thee, and |the Mart of Nations, and the ſtately built; but now che defroyed, 
traded with thee, praiſed thee, boaſted of thee. « Had their Songs | the filent, overwhelmed with Grief, which was full of Songs 1 Alas? 
of Praiſe, which were made to commend thy State. x As Mariners |what was once her Safeguard is now her Grave, what enrich'd her 
| the Ports where they arrive uſually do with Mirth and Songsenter- | once hath now ſwallowed allup at once. 
| 41 one another, ſo at Tyre. y All Trading came to thee, none like 
thee in thy Warehouſes and-publick-Stores: #z Andto do thee right, 


| 10 wert very glorious, magnificent and beautifu), none like thee : g . . 
Itherto the Prophet bad covered Tyris's Greatneſs, now cometh |£h& carth 7, with che multitude of thy riches s, and of 


33 When thy wares m went forth out » of the ſeas, thou 
filledſt o many people p, thou didſt enrich the kings 9 of - 


thy merchandiſe, 


* Brought 


Chap. RSX VII. 


27 Thy * riches h, and thy fairs ;, thy merchandiſe &, * Rev: 18, 


||Or, even 
with all. 


28 'The || ſuburbs x ſhall ſhake at the ſound of the Cry ||Or,vave 


a 
c 
. 
PRI 
A Ly og oo nn 
- Wok _ FR - 5 * 
nv J =, 
6 — p ” 
mm \ 4. 4 -DD.. - 
I S - 
bt bs TI I . 
WE - tre > + - 


* Y-. 0 F od 
£ hap. AX VILE. 
» Brought home fromall Coaſts. « Were landed, broughr on Shoar 
For the Mart. o There was enOugh to ſupply ro the 1ull. » Nu- 
merous, Pfarely, ſumptuous Nations, though their Prodigality was 
great, thou furnifhedſt them, hadſt Wares rich, and ſtately enough 
for all of them. q Such Influence had thy vaſt Trade, that not only 
meaner Men and Srbjeas, but Kings themſelves were made more 


-ealthy by it. r 4. e. All Kingsof the known World, or Kings of 
Nations far off, as well as Neighbouring Kings. - The Greatneſs of 
thy Trade, the variety of rhy Wares, brought from all Parts, were 
thy own Riches, and enrich'd allthou didſt Trade with ; Kings were 
enrich'd by Cuſtoms, and Tolls paid to them 3 by che enriching their 
Subje&s, whothereby were fitter topay Taxes, or by furniſhing cheir 
Treaſuries with all the peculiar Treaſures of Kings, the rare and 2 
cious Jewels, which they eſteem; and ſince we know ſome Kings d1 
trade too, by this Tr increas'd their Wealth. E ' 

34 In the time # when thou ſhalt be broken « by the 
ſeas y in the depths of the waters =, thy merchandiſe a 
and all thy company 6 in the midlt of chee ſhall fall. 

# So ſoon as, or ever after the unhappy Day. Shattered to pieces, 
7 The Powers of the Babylenians, that like Seas ſhall ſwell, roar, and 
hawk in upon thee. z In the deepeſt afflictions, and by foreſt Op- 
preſſions and Violence. a All chy Trade. b The Multitude o on 
Citizens, of thy hired Soldiers, of thy Allies abroad, and of rhoſe 
that came into thy Markets for Trade, ſhall ceaſe, wither, aid pe- 
riſh too. 


35 All the Inhabitants of the iſles c ſhall be aſtoniſhed 
4 at thee, and their kings ſhall be ſore afraid e, they ſhall 


be troubled F in 74-ir countenance. bet 
c Striftly, # in a larger Senſe, the Sea-Coaſts. 4 Wondring it 
ever ſhould be effeQed, that Tyr ſhould fall. e Knowing how they 
are much leſs ableto reſiſt, and defend themſelves, and not knowing 
Where that mighty Conqueror would next try his Arms and Fortune. 
F They ſhall not be able to conceal the Diſcompoſure of their Mind, 
but in their Countenance a Trouble made up of Grief, Fear and In- 
dignation ; Grief for their Friends, Fear for themſelves againſt that 
Cruelry and Inhumanity, which, without Reſpe& to any thing dear 
ro Mankind, ruined the Glory of the World, deſtroyed what could 
not be repaired by all the Riches, and Witdom, and Bounty of the 
Babyloniſh Kingdom. ; 
36 The merchants among the people {hall hiſs g at thee, 
* Ch. 26. * thou ſhalt be -- a 5 terrour, and - never ſhalt be any 


21. more z. 

+ Heb.zer- g This uſually is an Expreſſion of Scorn and Contempt poured 
rOUTS. forth on the Perſon hiſs'd at : if thus undetſtood, the Meaning Is, 
+4 Heb. there ſhould be ſome among Ty:w's Cuſtomers that would rejoice at 
ſhalt noe 


her Fall, and flout at her, either perhaps wronged by her in their 
be for ever. Trade, ch. 28. 16. or elſe with Etivy and ExpeQation of her Trade 
ro turn to them, return to her the wicked Carriage ſhe ſkewed Jeruſa- 
lem fallen and ſacked ; if it be a Sign of ought elſe, 'ris of wonder, 
as 1 Kings 9.8. h Matter of many Fears, and to many People, who 
do or ſhall hear how terribly thine Enemies have raged againſt thee, 
and prevailed. : id. c. 26. 14. let. 0. 


CHAP. XXVIIL 


The deftrufiion of the king of Tyrus, for his prias, foretold, t=——10, 4 
lamcit ation for his beauty and glory, tompared with his future fall and 
miſery, 11——19. 4 prophecy of judgment againſt Zidon, 29—23. 
with a promiſe of the churche's reſt#uration, 24— 26. 


I HE word of the LORD came again unto me, 
ſaying, | 

2 Son of man, ſay unto @ the pririce b of Tyrus, 

Thus ſaith the Lord GOD, Becauſe thine heart « lifted 

c up, and thou haſt faid 4, I am aGod e, I ſit 7» the feat 

+ Heb, of God f, in the + midft of the ſeas; * yet thou arr a 

h:arz. man g, and not God, though thou fet thine heart + as 
*Ifa 31.3.the heartof God : 


a Of. 5 King, whoſe Name was either E:hbaal or 1:hobaal. e Thou | 


art waxen proud, and aſpireſt above all Reaſon, and boaſteſt extrava. 
gantly in thy ſelf, State, Policy and Power. Thought, imagined, 
or flattered thy ſeIlf. « Or the mighry and ſtrong one, for ſo the Heb. | 
is, and perhaps were better ſo rendred, he gloried in hisStrength, as | 
if he were a God; the like you have, 1/2. 14. 14. f As a Magiſtrate ; 

he did bear the Name and Authority of God, but he thought not | 
. of this, he dreams of the Statelineſs, Strength, Convenience, Safety | 

and Inacceſſibleneſs of his Seat, as if he were ſafe and impregnable as 
Heaven it ſelf. 2 Subje@ io all the Caſualties, Sorrows and Diſtreſſes 
of Man's Stateand Life; thou art 44am of Earth, not E!, nor likeun-! 
to the mighty one in Heaven. h Thon haſt entertained Thoughts 
which become none but God ; thou haſt proje&ed things which none! 
but God can cftett; thou haſt promiſed thy ſelf perpetual Peace, Safe.' 
ty, Riches and Happineſs in thy ſelf, and from thy ſelf. 


3 Behold, * thou art # wiſer than & Daniel ; 
no ſecret that they / can hide from thee : 

; In thy own Thoughts of thy ſelf. k Who was then famous for | 
his Wiſdom, which was imparted to him from Heaven, chap. 14. 29. 
Dan. 1. 20. and 2. 20,48. 1 That any fort of Men can concea), thar ' 
thine Adverſaries ſhall contrive againſt thee to thy Danger or Hurt ; 
all this Ironically faid. 

4 With thy wiſdom 2, and with thine underſtanding 
thou haſt gotten »» thee riches », and haſt gotten o gold 
and ſilver into thy treaſures. | 

! By thy Policy in Government, and by thy Skill in Trading, for 
he ſpeaks of that kind of Prudence to which theſe Names are given. 
»» Or made, ſothe word. » Power and might, ſo the Heb. as well as 
Wealth and Riches ; and ſo the Gal. Verſionreads Puiſancethe Princes 
of Tyr: had been prudent, and ſo increas'd their Power and Intereſt. 
o Or made, procured. p Into both his own private Purſe, and into 
the publick Treaſuries too. 


— 9 there is 


1 
! 


EZEKIEL 


5 T By thy great 9 wiſdom, and» by thy traffick haſt 
thou increaſed.s thy riches 7, and thine heart is liſted « up 
becauſe of thy riches x : 

-might as well be ſpared ; foras'tis not in the Heb. fo it rather ob. 
ſcures than clears the Text ; letir be read, By the great Wiſdom in 
thy Traffick, and 'tis very plain, and fo the French reads it. , Made 
great or enlarged. 7 Thy Power, as wer. 4 let. « Exalts jt If, 
carrieth 1t Joftily and proudly above thy Neighbours, which js ae 
good ; above thy ſelf, which is worſe; and above God too, which is 
worſt of all, as wer. 2. x Thy Puiſlance at home and abroaq, by 
Nature and Art. 

| 6 Therefore thus faith the Lord GOD, Becauſe tho 
haſt Tet thine heart y as the heart of God xz ; 

3 Vide ver. 2. let. h., z Who doth, as juſtly he may, deſign him. 
ſelf his own Glory in all he deſigneth and worketh, and take the Glo. 
ry to himſelf; thou haſt done ſo too, deſigned thy own Greatneſs 
and gloried in it. ; : 

7 Behold therefore, I will bring @ ſtrangers b upon 
thee, * the terrible of the nations c : 


ſhall defile e thy brighcneſs. 

a Cauſe t5 come. 6 A foreign People, called 
Mulrtitude in the Plura), and to intimate how little Regard they would 
have to the Tyrian Glory ; theſe Strangers were the Babylonian Forces, 
c A fterce, violent and cruel Nation, Hab. 1. 7, 8. d Thoſe beauriful 
things in which thy Wiſdom appeared ; either thy noble, regular and 
ſtrong Buildings, or thy beautitul well-ſtored Arſenal and Army, or 
the unparalel]'d Rarities, which all but rudeſt Soldiers would eſteem, 
and ſpare theſe Monuments of thy Wiſdom. «< Pour Contempt and 
Stain. f Thy Royal Dignity, Depoſe thee from thy Throne, and 
kill thy Authority and thy Perſoa. 

8. They f hall bring thee'down to the pit g, and thou 
ſhalt die the deaths 4 of rhers 7hat are Nlain in the midit ; of 
the ſeas. | | 

f Theſe Strangers ſhall ſlay thee, which is a Blemiſh to the Honour 
of a King thus to be brought to the Pir. g A uſual Periphraſis of Death 
and the Grave hIn the Plural, becauſe of the many Terrors, Dan. 
gers and Woundsſuch meer with, the ſucceſſive Deaths, flain, drown. 
ed, eat of Fiſh, caſt upon ſhoar, and become Meat to Sea-Fowl. : If 
literally underſtood, Thou ſhalt die as other Common Mariners, arid 
be caft overboard ; if figuratively, Seas for great Diſtrefles, then a. 
midſt multitude of deep Diſtreſles thou ſhalt meet with more than one 
Death, be often dying. 

9 Wilt & thou yet fay I before him that ſlayeth thee, 1 
am God ? but thou ſhalt be m a man, and no God, in the 
hand of him that || ſlayeth thee. |; 

k A cutting Taunt or Sarcaſm, what will become of thy Godſhip ** 
then ? { Wilt thou then dream of Immortality and Almighty Power, 
when thine Enemy iscutting thy Throat ? m Appear then to thy (elf 
and others te be a mortal weak, conquered Man, who dieth a Sacri. 
fice to the Conqueror's Pride and Cruelty. 

10 Thou fhale die the deaths » of the uncircumciſed 0, 
by the hand of ſtrangers : for 1 have ſpoken 7, ſaith the 
Lord GOD p. 


z Ver. 8. let. h. A twofold death, tempotal and eternal. » Of thy 
wicked, or an accurſed Death; the Jews do expreſs a vile and miſc- 
rable Death thus ; or the uncircumciſed, 5. e. Heathens, cruel and 
mercileſs Men ſhall ſlay thee, and this ſutes with whar follows in the 
| Verſe, and this was ignominious with the Jews, 1 Sam. 371. 4. p20 
thou proud, ſelf-admiring Prince ! Slight not what is threatned, for 
God, the God of Truth, hath ſpoken it. 

11 Moreover, the word of the LORD came unto 
te, ſaying, 

12 Son of mari, take up a lamentation q upon the king 

r of Tyrus; and fay unto him, Thus faith the Lord GOD, 


Thou ſealeſt up the ſum s full of wiſdom, and perfect 
In beauty, 


q See chap. 27. ver, 2, let. 8,6. » Called Ptince; wer. 2. letb. 5 [n 
the Search into the Frame of thy Government, the Manage of it, the 
Proſperity thereof, and its Glory, Power, Riches and Confederacies; 
thou doeſt think thy ſelf bur juſt to thy Kingdom to account it the 
perfet Idea of a good Government, that in the Tyrian State nothing 18. 
wanting that might be required in a good Government, in the beſt Go« 
vernment, and fo ſealeſt to the Premiſes; thus vainly puffc up thou wil 
have it, that Fulneſs of Wiſdom and PerfeQion of Beauty are inthee, 
but neither thy Wiſdom ſhall prevent or defeat the -Atcempts of chins 
Enemies, nor thy Beauty charm their Rage, thou ſhalt fall by them. 


I3 Thou haſt been 7 in Eden # the garden of God x; 
every y precious ſtone was thy covering %, the || ſardins 4,1; 
topaz 5, and the diamond «, the || beryl 4, the onyx Mr 
and the jaſper f, the ſaphire g, the { emerald h, and the/s 
carbuncle z, and gold & : the / workmanſkip of thy tabrets'* 


and of thy pipes was prepared in thee in the day thatthou 
m Walt created. 


t Thou haſt dwelt and reigned. « In the midſt of all Delights; 
and though Nature made thy Lot a very barren Rock, thy Artand 
Induſtry, added to that of thy Progenitors, have made it as pleaſant, 
rich and beautiful as Een, that Place of all deſirable Enjoyments. 
x This is explicative of the former ; a Garden is a Place of Delight, 
and Men have made ſome delightful to a Wander, but none ever like 
that God planted : This of Tyre came as near as any, and yet ungrate 
ful and athieſtical Tyre dreamsof Divine Power and Stability, forget- 
ting humane Frailty and Uncertainty, Every ſort of rich Ston6s- 
z Bought te adorn thy Crown, thy Robes, thy Bed, &c. 4 Of 3 
red, and by ſome ſaid to be the Ruby. 4Of a yellowiſh Green. c Of 
clear, wateriſh, ſparkling Colour. 4 Of a Sea-green Colour, the bell. 
e Reſembles the Whiteneſs of the Nail of a Man's Eand. fof dir 
vers Colougs, but the beſt greon. g Of $ky-colous or blue, + Green 


16%fs 


I Hb, 
the gu, 
weſs of th 
9 Here the eminent Degree of this Prince's Wiſdom is pwned. » Ang Jam, 


and they ſhall draw *(1, 
their ſwords againſt the beauty 4 of thy wiſdom, and they i. 4 


I2. 4; 


Strangers for their '% 


Our. 
bs p. or thy 
 fcr ſuch « 
© the aſpirir 


| Myſt be a $ 


h= 


_- 
Ew 


on SS a> = 4 CA = or, +. 


would 
And rt 
: But ; 
createc 
and Ta 
- this P, 
> things 
= this Pri 
” Alluſior 
” thair L 
Truth. 
: IH | 
- filled 
© linned 
I the m 
E O cove 
re, 
07 
; Grentanl 
- TY great, 
 Merchan 
Craft wo 


This In } 


© City witf 


ding amo; 


-- and their 


' fed all th 
them in t 
gers, the 


* like to C 


Stranger, 
haſt thou 
a |. 


dee wer, 


I7 Th 


| brightnef 


ay & & 
thee /. 

e Yee wer 
g Depraved 
own Glory, 
art a Man; 

ings, ZI] 
lit in the 
efore Men 
themſelves, 
Atheiſt like 


May ſee thee 


ap. XXVIIL, 


wich golden Spots. ; Of Flame-colour. 


:nrerſperied 
abundance © ; 
- Clothes and Robes of this proud Prince. 


: in Gold that they might the ſafer be put upon his Gar- 
_—_ oF rg the rn hows. of elenaniton, eſpecially of the 
ti as appears .in Cloſe of the Verſe. 1 Now. the Prophet 
pw Toys, Muſick and Songs, both to Windor loud Mulick, 
| —_ to ſotter Muſick, as the , Lute and Tabret inthe Day of their 
King's. Coronation, and all this Muſick on Inſtruments of moſt exqui- 
ite Make, and of their own Artiſts Work too, in this they exceeded 
in the other. » Either born, for Birth of Princes hath been cele- 
beared with great Joys, or rather in the Day of this King's Coronatt* 
2n or Inveſtiture in the Kingdom and Royal Dignity. 
74 Thou art the 7 anointed cherub that covereth : and 
] have {et 0 thee /o; thou Pp waſt upon the holy mountain 
of God ; thou haſt walked up and down q in the midlt ot 


R {tones 7 of fire. 
'h gy 1 would rather keep the Order of the Words in Hs. whichthe 


” French alſo keep, Thou art a Cherub, Anointed, a Proteflor, or one who 
a. covercth for Defence. Forthy Wildom, Power and Excellency, like 
_- 2 Cherub or Angel ; for rhe Sacredneſs of thy Perſon and Office, as 

a Þ:' Anointed of God; for the Exerciſe of rhy Power and Office, as 
+ Shield, as a ProteQor of the weak ; thus thou arr, or thinkeſt thy 
7.1f to be, and prideſt thy ſelf herein. oT, whom thou forgettcſt, I 
gave nade thee fo, ſer thee above others; this ſhould have been Matter 
of Thanks and Humiiity, not of Pride and Atheiſm. Thus the Sar. 
af: is continued, and he is upbraided for his Infolence. þ Or thus, 
ty the Holy Meuntain a God thou haſt been, ſo tis an Irony, and ſutes the 
et; or elſe, in purſuance of our Verſion, thou waſt advanced to 
kingly Dignity - (which David calls a Mountain, P/al. 30. 7. Jer. 51, 
25. Dan. 2.35.) a Sacred Office,and of Divine Inſtitution and Conſe- 
cration, and thou haſt in Pride exalted thy ſelf above me, as well as 
above Men. q In proud and ſtately manner. r Surrounded every 
way in thy Chambers, and Beds, and Clothes, with Stones that ſpar- 
kle like Fire; the Crown, thy Throne, thy Chariots, thy Umbrella's 
or Canopies gliſterirg, and dazling Beho!ders; as if thus alſo thou 
wouldeſt contend with God, who is clothed with Light. 

15 Thou weſt perfect 5 in thy ways? from the day thou 


waſt created, till iniquity was found in thee. = 
51 think the Prophet continues his Trony : The Prince of Tyrus 
would be a God, yes. Now God 1s perfett in all his Ways or Works : 


EZEKIEL, 


| Beſide the along from the 14th. Verſe I think there hath been, much of an 7o1y 
f which in their publick Treaſures, much was uſed about | deriding this proud Prince, an Alluſion tohis pretended Godſhip. A 
'Tis like theſe precious | God hath his SanCuaries, and rhouthine, bur thy naſty polluted Onzs 


0 By the greatneſs as well as number. þ Impierties, Irreligion and A- 
theiſm of thy Merchants, as well as by their Injuſtice. Falſhood and 
Opproſlions, by their Perjuries, breaking Covenants confirmed in the 
Temples ar the Alrars; or in the Nam: of their Gods; when thy 
Trace thrived by theſe, thou and they haverhonhtrhere was nothing 
Sacred, nor any God aboye thee. q Some civi! Difſenſion or Occaſion 
of thy Injuſtice ſhall, like a Fire, riſ:. r Among thy injured Male. 
contents. s Which like Fire in the Houſe, ſhall burn up all and waſte 
a.l, thou ſhale never quench it; thy diſcoatenred Subjetts applying 
themſelves ro Nebuchadnezzar with Addreſſes for his Favour, Power 
and Royal Juſtice to relieve them, and to right his ova Subjetts op- 
preſt by Tyre 1n rheir Trade, fhall enkindi'e NbAuchodnzzars Rage,and 
he ſhall never be appeaſed but in thy Ruine. * Chou ſhalc be burn 
to Aſhes, theſe caſt on the Earth co be ſcattered abroad, and trampled 
under Feet. » All this done that all about thee may ſee, - fear and re- 
verence the Juſtice, Power and Holineſs of the God of Heaven, who. 
rulecth among men, and knows how to abaſe proud Atheitts. 


I9 All they that know y thee among the people, ſhall 


be aſtoniſhed & at thee : * thou ſhalt be + a terrour a, and * Ch. 27. 
36 


never ſhalt thou be any more. 

Y All that have heard, ſeen or formerly known thy Riches, Power, 
Allies, Wiſdom, and Vigilance. z Be amazed at the certain News 79#* 
of thy great fall from greateſt Glory to greatzſt Reproach. a To all 
that hear the Bruit hereof, 7hough thou haſt been a Terror, (to the Heby.) 
to others by thy Puifſance and Arms, thou iha't never be fo again 

or ever, and this Word hath been made good ; Tyre never roſe to 
that Greatneſs, as to be feared by her Neighbours. 

20 < Again the word of the LORD cane unto me, 
laying» 

21 Son of man, ſet thy face 5 * againſt Zidon c, and 
propheſie d againſt it, 

b Vid. chap. 21. 2. let. i. and chap. 20, ver. 46. let. o. c N<ighbour * If, 2+. 
and Confederate of 7,rus. d Declare her Sins, approaching Sorrows, 4, 12. 
and my Judgments againſt her. 


22 And ſay, Thusfaiththe Lord GOD e, Behold, 1 «773 
againſt theef, O Zidon g, and I will be glorified 4 in the 
raidſt of thee : and they z ſhall know & that I am the 


And thou, O Prince, wert ſo too; wert thou,and from thy Original? 
; But remember what a God is he that hath a Beginning, that was 


this Prince to his great Miſcarriages If any elſe will think all theſe 


created, that at laſt was found full of Iniquity ? And this Reproof | 
and Taunt leads us to look with the Prophet from the proud Claim of | 


LORD, when / I ſhall have executed judgments m in her, 
and ſhall be ſan&ified » in her. 


e To theſe Heathen, yet Neighbours of the Jews, thePcophermgglir 
well ſuppoſe the Name and Greatneſs of the God of 1{-ac! was ſo 


Chap, XXVIIL 


I ' 
+ Heb. tc: 


Jer.25.22 


- things ia the 14th and 15th Verſes to be Allertzrsof God's Bounty to | known, as to command their attention when he ſpeaketh. f Provo- 
© this Prince, and of his great Magnificence and State in Hyperboles and  ked by thy Sins, T am an Adverſary to thee, andas ſuch determine ro 
” Alluſions, nothing I have ſaid ſhall contradi& them, for they have ' proceed with thee. g A City in the North-Weſt from Canaan, at the 
© their Liberty as I have mine, to think what ſeems moſt like the | foot of Mount Libanus, a King's Seat of old, and from which Tyrm de- 
D Trach ſcended, as a Swarm caſt out of that Hive, 7/2 23. 2. for 'twas « 
15 By the multitude « of thy merchandiſe they have great City in 7efbuab's Time, 70h. 11. 8, and 19. 28. and built by 
E filed x the midſt of thee with violence, and thou haſt S749 Canaan's Son, Gen. 10. 15. and 1 Chren. 1, 13. a famous Mart 


| ſinned y : therefore I will caſt z thee as profane out of 
the mountain # of God : and I will deſtroy & thee, 
© 0 covering cherub c, from the midft of the 
© fire, 


| Greatneſsof thy Trading ; In Tjruswere Merchants that traded in ve- 
| ry great Advenrures, with vaſt Stocks, and in mighty Cargoes. x Thy 


Craft would not, compaſled their unjuſt Deſigns, as noted, ch. 27.49.36. 
This Injuſtice and Violence grew, as their Trade did, and filled the 
' City with Guilt as . 
ding among them, thou haſt violated Juſtice to promote thine own 


them in their Violence, and judged for rhem againſt oppreſſed Stran- 


| hke to. God, who hates Violence, loves Juſtice, and relieveth the 


hy Stranger, and righteth the Oppreſſed ? z Theſe abominable things 
ns WW haſt thou done, ani now, as an abominable thing, I willthrxow thee 
5; WW. out. 4Either of thy Throne and kingly Dignity, vid. ver. 14. let. o. 
he WF ». or thy fanſied and imagined Heaven where thou wouldſt be a God; 
2s. WW tir ſuch Gods of Violence and Injuſtice deſerve to be caſt out with 
0 WW the aſpiring Angels. b Utterly deſtroy. c /id. ver. 14. let. n,' o,, 
= bd See ver, 14. let. r. 

ht | 


17 Thine heart was lifted e up becauſe of thy beauty f, 
- ; thou haſt corrupted thy wildom g, by reaſon of thy 
© brightneſs + : IT will z caſt thee to the ground, [ will 
2 k thee before kings, that they may behold 

thee /, | 

evee wer. 2. let. &, d, e. and ver. 5. let. u. f See wer. 12. let. 5. 
$ Depraved, or loſt thy Wiſdom. þ By refle&ting and gazing on thy 
own Glory, State, Wealth and Magnificence, and haſt forgotten thou 
at a Man; Thou exa.lteſt thy ſelf above Man, above thy Neighbour. 
Kings. ; 1 will bring down thy Pride, dethrone thee, and make thee 
lit in the Duſt; ſuliy, and darken all thy Brightneſs. & Or ſet thee| 


themſelves, and God, as he, who, though he ſaid not I am God, yer, 
Arheiſt like, ask'd, Who is God that 1 ſhould obey him ? I Or that thou 


ioht | *M2yſt be a Spe&acle, an Example and Warning to them, or that they 
like may ſee thee in Chains, oran abuſed Captive, and deſpiſe thee. 
reates 18 Thou haſt defiled thy ſanQuaries » by the 
get» EF Pultitude o of thine iniquites p, by the _—_ of thy 
4 affick; therefore will I bring forth a fire 4 from the 
of WW "dit 7 of thee, it ſhall devour s thee, and I will bring 
\ beſt. "2 to aſhes? upon the earth, in the ſight « of all them 


of di- WF Fiat behold thee. 


ones d of | 
' which by thy Sins thou haſt ecclipſed, and I by Judgments will il1v. 
u By, or in , or according to(as the Gal. Verſion) the Multitude or 


Merchants have by Craft, where that would, and by Violence where Majeſty. 


faſt as that did with Wealth. » Either as one tra- , 


| 22 For I will ſend » into her, peſtitence 
* and their Gain; or haſt connived at thy Merchants when they oppreſ- 'br » peſt 


fd all they could ; or haſt, contrary to Juſtice and Equity, ſupporred '; 
gers, thou whowerr a King, and wouldſt be thought a God : Is this, 


before Men of thy Quality, who are, as thou, apt to forget Men, 


full of Merchants like Tyre, and asful] of Sin asRiches. h& When my 
Judgments make my Juſtice, Power, Holineſs, Sovereignty and Truth 
appear, both you Sidonians, and others about ſhall confeſs my Glory, 
and aſcribe Honour to me. Iwill vindicate my Honour and Glory, 


ſtrate, as Exod. 14. 4, 17. # That dwell in thee, and round about 
thee, all that are concerned for thee. & See chap. 6. wer. 10. 1 So 
late do Sinners come to any due Senſe of God's Power, Juftice and 

The hardned Sinners learn not by any other way but 
this, and bs this too in the Rigours and repeated Executions of it 
n Owr'd as holy, reverenced as juſt, obeyed as ſovereign, and ſub- 
mitted toas Wiſe, and mighty, and a hater of Violence 


, and. 
ood ' q into her ſtreets; and the wounded ſhall be” 


judged 7 in the midſt of her by the ſword 5 upon her 
_ ny ſide 55 and they ſhall know that I am the 


o The Peſtilence 1s one of God's Arrows, and he ſends it whereſo- 
ever it walks; 'cis one of his fore Judgments, and wafteth where it 
cometh. p The moſt dreadful of Diſeaſes, becauſe moſt deadly, 
'ſwift, and comes ſo immediately from the Wrath of God off:aded 
' with Men ; this Peſtilence attends on War,and ſeldom faileth to make 
| Havock in beſieged Towns or Cities. q Bloody War by an Enemy 
that ſhall bring the War to the Gates, nay into the ſtreets of Zo. 
| 7 Fall, be caſt down, puniſh'd in the midſt of the Ciry. 5 By her 
| Enemies Sword prevailing and conquering. #t A Deſcription either 
| of the Siege that Zidon ſhould ſuffer by, or pointing out rhe Multicude 
of her Enemies on every ſide agreeing againſt her, 


x unto the houſe of Iſrael, nor any grieving thorn of all 23-73: 
that are round about y them that deſpiſed them z ; and / 
they ſhall know || that I a2 the Lord GOD. 


z The time intended here 1s, when after 70 Years Crptivity, loath. 
ing themſelves for their Iniquities, and repenting, they return and 
ſettle in their own Land. x By theſe two Metaphors the Propher 
points out the troubleſome Neighbours of the Jews. » Such as Moab, 
Ammon, Edom, Tyre, and this Zidon, which on all occationsd:d grieve 


' wound and reproach the Jews, and triumph in theic Fall, and were 


ever ready, being near. z Contemniyg both in Word and Carriage, 
the Jews, their Religion , Manners, Laws, and cheir God. || See wer. 
22. Jet. & | 


25 Thus faith the Lord GOD, When 4 I ſhall have 
gathered þ the houſe c of Iſrael from the people 4 among 
whom they are ſcattered e,” and ſhall be fanified f in 
them in the ſight g of the heathen, then ſhall they 
dwell bin their land 3, that I have given & to my fer- 


reen ri, Thou who ſhoutdſt have kept all pure in Religion, as thou art! 
"0s, pretending to Divinity, haſt polluted it. » Still there is, as all 


vant / Jacob 7. 


& When 


"Num.33- 
24 T And there ſhall be no more « a * pricking briar 55. Joſh. 


2 


> 9,4 
$-_ TI kk 
< - 02 opIu— —_ 
4 a 
wwe ws -c_ ct 
wo - a 
= 


il pF: 
[1 | WB 1188 
WEIL! 
WOW Met 
| f WH'r1 
| WINFLE | 
Abt. yh " 
(OAT NN 
[1408-10 ''g 
oh 4, Mit KS. 
F: Yi | j | it 
l Wi jk ly 
Y. b, | 
os WW? 
LIOF 


_ — 
— 
— 
yn —_ 
——  ——_— > — 
—— = >. = —— 
LS 


be 
1h 
[46 (1b 
. wh | i 
nn | i! 
ic : 4 
/ 4441 
11 W 
4 Fi 4 
| 4/38 
: "oy. | 
: #3 = ! (. 
\ "ll. i | ' 
RIF! ||; 4 
iba (WIG 
1 
25 J 1 | 
y ' Wo 
4  UN0F 
t > 8 4 hd 
: id *R 43 
v $1116 
GT 10; 401 
+ 4404 7] 
: \ PR 
3+ +) (ff 
3 l 
W114 
o .! Ninh 
j | 
4 ONLY: 
{$1 1 ' 
li 
T8 il 
ſj: 
? i 
| 
: 


4 
M.. bh 
_ 
+. &Y 
G "_ 
$3 G 
..; 
*þ 
Et [$f 
? 
a F 
OTE ih 
| 48 
” - 4 
oo 
: 
{ 


# 
ks: 
) 44 
| 
[|] 
ſ 
li 


RS * 

Chap. XXIX. & Z E 
& When Seventy Years is expired, which is the Term of their Cap- | 

tive Stare. 5 Move the Hez:rts of my People to come together upon 

Cris Proclamation, and from all Parts of that vaſt K:ngdom, prepare 

tor a return to the Country moſt of them never ſaw. It was God who 

moved _ Cyrus to give them leave; 'twas as much. God's Work to ſtir 

up the Pcople to return. c The generality of them, thoſe that were 

1/raelites indeed. d Several Nations SubjeCs to the King of Bavylon. 
- By the Babyloniſh King at firſt, and afterward by incident neceſlicy, 
or their own choice. f Have vindicated my Name, which by them 
was blaſphemed. g I was diſhonoured by the Jewvs in the Sighr of the 
Heathen, and I will be honoured by the Jews in their Sight, they 
(hall be Witneſfles of my Vindication. þ Sertle in Peace, and for con- 
tinuance. i In a Land that is theirs, their own, as *tis often called. 
+ Their Title is of me by Deed of Gifr, not of Jate ; Bur / to one 
that was long ſince my Servant. m» to Jacob, Father to thele returning 
Captives. The H 56. repeats the Propoſition, To my Servant, to J4= 
ie. awed cob, with an Emphaſis, to mind them of God's Faithfulneſs. Fn 

' £12 P26 And they ſhall dwell || ſafely » therein, and iha 


Nere31 5. build houſes, and * plant vineyards : yea, they ſhall 


K 1 & Lo 
in the Head of the Cyreneans and Grecianr, and the Event of it, ig ex- 
atly repreſented in this Hieroglypick in the Text. Amafis with thoſe 
Forces maſtered Libya ; the King thereof applies for help to his pj. 
raoh ; he gathered all the Power of Egypt out of Ezyp! with him ints 
Cyrene, where he was defeated, loſt all, but a few that fled with him, 
and on this occaſion the Ezyprians rebelled againſt him ; now this ſhort 
Hiſtory opens the Parable. The firſt Hook you ſze in the Chawy of 
this Dragon, this drew him out of his River, z. e. his Kingdom, 
# Theſe are the People of Egypt, the Subje&s of his Kingdom. : To 
adhere to theirKing in thar War. » Both the King and his Subjeq; 
which made up his Army, go out of the Rivers, leave Egypt, and march 
into Cyrene (which was part of that Kingdom now called Barca) with 
their King, as if they had been little Fiſhes on the back of a mighty 
One. Thus far the Emblem, the reſt follows. _ 

5 And I will leave & thee thrown into the wilder. 


neſs a, thee and all the fiſh 6 of thy 1ivers : thay 


brought together, nor gathrred 4: I have given thee for oth 
meat to the beaſts of the field, and to the fowls of the © * 


| dwell with confidence when 9 I have executed judg- 
f Or, ſ29%: nents upon all thoſe that {| deſpiſed them round about 
them ; and they p ſhall know that I 4» the Lord their 


» Which is to be inderſtood comparatively, ſaferthan before ; 1t 
muſt be accommodated to the Circumſtances of humane Conditionin 


heaven. : 

z When thus brought out, as a Fiſh ofit of the Water, I willleaye 
thee. God left this King. # The Deſerts of Lybis and Cyrexe. 4 The 
whole Army of Egyprians. c There was this King and his Army ry. 
in'd. d As uſually the Slain areto be buried, theſe were nor buried 
but left in the Wilderneſs, whete he fel] to bea Prey to wild Beaſts, 
and Birdsof Prey which haunted che Wilderneſs, and woull ſoon gz. 


{uch ſafety, as excludes continual inward Cares, and Fears, and Per- 
picxiries; as "tis ſaid of Laſh, Fudg. 18.7. or as 1 the days of Solge 
702, 1 King. 4. 25- Or as Job 11. 18, 19. o That ſeems to intimate 
that there might be ſome Attempts as by S2nballat and Tobias, but 
God blalted theſe : or it may refer more properly to the Deſtru&ion 
of Bab;lm, and the Nations Confederate with chem, who ruined and 
deſpiſed the Jews. p Returned Captives. 9 ſhall own and know by 


ther to their Prey. 

6 And all the Inhabitants of Egypt ſhall e know that 
I am the LORD, becauſe they f have been a * ſtaff of',; 
reed g to the houſe of Iſrael. 18. 
e This mighty Overthrow ſhall be known through all Egypr; andlli.; 


experience, that I am not only the Lord, bur their Gcd too. 


CH A P. XXIX. 

A prophecy of judgment againſt Pharaoh for his treachery to Iſrael, 1—7: 
Ana the dcſolation of Egypt foretald, 8 — 12. its reſtoratgon aftcr forty 
years ; but no confid.nce for Iſrael, 1316. brt a reward to Nebuchad. 
nezzar for deſtroying Tyrus, 17 — 20. A promiſe of Iſrael's reſtoration, 21, 


1 FN the tenth year 4, in the tenth 9nth b, in the 
twelfth 4zy of the month, the word of the LORD 


came unto me, ſaying, | 1 
a Of Jcchenial's Captivity. & Which anſwers to part of our De- 
c:mber, and part of Jansary. 


2 Son of man, ſet thy face c againſt Pharaoh 4 king 

* Ifa. 19.1 of Egypt, and propheſie e againſt him, and againſt all 

Jer. 25.19f Feypt. 

& 46. 2. c Vid. chap. 20. ver. 46. let. 0. and chap. 21. wer. 2. let. /. d Hophra, 

as the Scripture ſtiles him, Jr 44+ 3®. the Greek Authors call him 

Aprees and Yaphres; moſt like he was Grandfon to Necho, who flew 7o- 

ſiah in Fight, 2 Chron. 35. 23, 24- eIn propherick Stile and Au- 

thority declare what ſhall be done ro him in his Perſon. f The 
whole Multitude of Egyprians ; for 'tis the Place for the Pegple dwel. 

Ing 1 It. 

z Speak and fy, Thus faich the Lord GOD, Be- 
hold, 1 a» againſt thee g, Pharaoh 4 king of Egypt, the 
. oreat + * dragon k that lieth /in the midlt of his rivers mz, 
_ 71+ which hath ſaid », My river 0 is mine own p, and I have 
Iſa. $4 made 2t 9 for my ſelf r. 

1, Oc. f That God that drowned one of thy Predeceffors with his Army, 
Horſemen and Horſes in the Red Sea, at whole Naine thou ſhouldeſt 
tremble; who ever fulfilled his Word, and isthe fame ; 'tis he foretels 
thee by my Mouth what 1s to be. g See chap. 28. ver, 22, let. f. h See 
wer. 2. 1et. d. i Ie may refer, either to the Grandeur of this King, as 
*f he had been P/arach the Great, or to the Jargeneſs of this Creature, 
ro which he is by this Hieroglyphick compared. & Some would have 
it the Whale, but that lies nor in Rivers, as in his own plac? 'tis 
furely the Crocodile, of which Nilzs hath many ; and chap. 32. 2. 
our Prophet doth, and fo 7/3. 51. 9. compare rhe Egyptian King to 
that devouring Serpent or Dragon. 7 Notonly at reſt, but waiting 
for a Prey, which never ſcapes, if this devourer lay any conſiderable 
hold of it. m N:{us was the chief River of Egyyr, but either there 
were ſome leſs Rivers that runinto Ni/w, or ſome Diviſionsof it, where 
it made ſore Iflands, or the ſeven Mouthsof it, where it falls into the 
Sea, which may give the Name of Rivers to it, or thoſe Channels 
that were cut large and deep to convey Warer into the Country, in 
all which theſe Crocodiles bred, and reſted, and waited for their 
Prey. » Which hath thought, accounted and boaſted; by which it 
appears the Prophet {peaks of a Dragon in a figurative Sence. 
o Kingdom, Power, Richzs and Forces ſignified here by a River : 
All the Strergth and Glory of Egypt are mine, faith this proud King. 
p Ar my diſpoſe and will : 'tis probable thar this King of Egypr was an 
aſpiring Kiog, who aimed at abſojute Power, amd thought he had ſe- 
cured 1t to himſelf; for the River, the Emblem of the Kingdom, is 
mine, ſairh he. 9q This ſeems to give ſome credit to the ConjeQture, 
that this King had raiſed the Prerogative Royal, and done what others 
b-fore him would but could not, and therefore aſſumes it to himſelf as 
hisown Work, forgetting God who gives Kingdoms, and whoſe they 
are. 7 Somewhat like the proud Boaſt, 1h3ve built for the Glory of my 
Name, Dan. 4+ 39. and like to meet as ſad an End. 


Bur * T s will put hooks 7 into thy chaws, and I will 


* Us 3* cauſe the fiſh « of thy rivers to ſtick x unto thy ſcales, and 
- TI will bring thee up out of th? midlt of thy rivers, and 
bh. 38. © 411 the fiſh of thy rivers ſhall ſtick unto thy ſcale. 


: Thou art ſecure againſt all, but God will draw thee out of thy 
River to thy Ruine. #£ The AMcgory is continued ; Fiſh are drawn our 


as it ſhall fill them with Fears and Troubles, fo it ſhould be a convin. 
ecing Argument to them, that God had done this, and puniſh'd them 
and theit proud King, whouſed to ſay, as Herodote reports, That God 
could not turn him out of his Kingdom. f Both King, Princes, Coun. 
ſellers and People of Ezypr. g Treacherouſly, as next Verſe, dealr 
with the Jews, whom they ſeduced to truſt, and depend on them, 
and then perfidionſly broke promiſe with them; it was the Sin of 
the Jews to truſt Egypt, it was Egypr's great Sin to falſify promiſe with 
the Jews, and for this God now puniſheth Egype. 

7 When they + took hold of thee by thy hand ;, 
thou didſt break #, and rent / all their ſhoulder : and 
when they leaned 2 upon thee, thou brakeſt, aud madeſt 


all their loins » to be at a ſtand. 

b The Jews unable to ſtand on their own Legs, - as Men ready to 
fall. i Catch thine Hand to lean on, as when belieged by the Chalde. 
ans. k Tt includesa deſigned and voluntary Failure : Egypt would not 
ſupport. 7 Didſt tear, and pierce, and wound Arm and Shoulder, 
didit them much miſchief inſtead of benefiting them, as thou had| 
promiſed, Jer. 37. 7. and 42. 17. : The ſame thing in Words lictle 
different. n Theſe are the Strengthof a Man, thou haſt put them to 
uſe all their Strength to repel the Enemy, thou haſt been chief Oc. 
caſion of their engaging againſt. 

8 © Theretore 0 thus ſaith the Lord GOD, Behold, I 

will bring a ſword p upon thee, and cutoff man 9 and 
beaſt » out of thee. 
o For thy Atheiſtical Pride, and thy perfidious Miſchief to the 
Houſe of 1/rac!, and other thy Sins. p War and the effe&s of it. Firſt, 
aCivil War aroſe againſt this King Hphra, who weak and contemned, 
and fallen under the Jealouſies and Diſguſts of his Subje&s after his 
overthrow in the Deſerts of Libya and Cyrexe, was again overthrown 
by his Rebel-Subje&s in a bloody Battel at Memphis, was taken in his 
flight towards Sain his Royal Seat, and ſome time after ſtrangled by the 
enraged Rout, The next$word brought on Hophra's Succeſſor, and 
on the Land of Egypt, was the Sword of Nebachadnezzer in the ſame 
Year after the overthrow of Tyrws, the Civil War of Egypt inviting 
him to take the occaſion, and ſome few Requeſts, 'ris likely from the 
Rebellious ro aſſiſt them, .q By the Sword in Batte), and Sieges, and 
by Famine. + Eaten up by a numerous Army invading and prevail. | 
ing, and which will drive away what they eat not, The ſame Phraſe 
you have chap. 14. ver. 12. let. z. and wer. 17. let. r. 


9 And the land s of Egypt ſhall be |} deſolate * andy 
waſte; and they ſhall know that I a»: the LORD; be 


cauſe « he hath ſaid, The river is mine, and I have made 
it 


s That part here intended, ſay ſome, and in the 10th Verſe boun- 
ded from Syene to the Borders of Ethiopia; nor is this inconſiſtent with 
that wer. 2. againſtall Egyp?, for all Egypr ſuffered much, rhough all 
were not equally waſted and turned into a deſolation, as theſe parts 
ſhall be. s A Deſolation, 7. e. moſt deſolate and waſted by the Sword 
of the Enemy ,and by Drought, (as the Word imports both) and this 
latter part of the Judgment was executed by theFolly of the 12£- 
gyptian Roirolets, who made a mighty Lake Mzr:s, to fill which they 
much drained and weakned Nils thatit could not, as before it did, 
water and fertilize the Land, ſutable to 1ſs. 19. 5. * See ver. 3- If: 


A, 0, ÞP> 9, ”r, 


10 Behold therefore, I am againſt x thee, and againſt 

thy rivers yz, and I will make the land of Egypt + utt' 
terly waſte z, and deſolate, * from the Tower #s of t Sy” 
ene b even unto the border of Ethiopia tn 


x Chap. 28. werſe 22. let. f. y Perſe 4. let.y x Virſeg. It "il 
s Thus 25a common Name, we, and the French, and others read! , 
but ſome account it a proper name of a Town or City, called M9z5* 
lum, for ought I know, the old Migaol. Exod. 14. 2. and Nun. 33-'" 
8. 'twas on the Red-Sea-fide, North-Eaſt of Egyp:, from this part 87 
to Syene. b A City on the Eaſtof Nils over againſt Arabia, faith 07*; 
a City thar is juſt below the great Cafaratt or fallof N:/4 ro?" 


with hooks and Lines, and God hath Hooks for this proud Dragon, 


fiſt maſs, and next the Babyloniſh King : The expedition of 4m#ſis| diſpute to which ir belongs. c Now to diſpute nothing of ©15 (26 


F 


Ethiopis, and ſuch a Boundary beween Erhiopia and Ep yp! 35 admi” 


graſ 


Chap. Xx 


ſhalt fall upon the -f open fields c, thou ſhalt not be +11. 


( FB 


19.23. 1 
6,26. fort 


ple 


tor the 
Cries, [4 

I4 
Will c 
;. the la 
is. 2 | b 


Kingdo, 
yet was 
I5. 

it exall 
minith 
nations 
Þ Th 
Kings, 1 
how dar 
* Greatne 


V the King 
k >, h . 
= Check 1c. 


which x 
follow t 
5 Tho Or 
inthe tin 
a Kingdc 
upon the! 


16 A 


l houſe of 


| brance 


E & ſhall ki 
} fOn © 
© tion, tox 


| 9 them, a; 
9. vid. vey, 
_ God 
"1s, VIZ, l 
kderates, 

Judgeth a | 
Mmbrance 
'.?. With di 
With Confid 


| they forgot i 
{anOW that | 


$1) him. Pſal 


"* T @ 


Feth 2 ye 
| - Vai? 


XI} [4 2), KXIX. 


raphy , it ſ:ems likely to "1, that what we rende 
my well and plainly rendreg » for Syene being fo near 
we muſt look ſome place of Expt at ſo 
Syere than this Ethiopia is ; if then 'twer 
C:jh, ro whom Moſes aſſigns Arabia, Gen. x 
Magia'um inſtead of the Tower as one 
Eto:ci3 as another, and the © | 
Aracta, and then almoſt all EZ7pt is compriſe 
to South Eaſt down the Reg Sea, thence to the 
£15:0%;2, and thence UP the Nile 

11 * No 4 foot of m 
'" of beaſt e ſhall paſs thi ugh 


f torty years. 


Term, 
Ppolite Point 


from 


Weſt 


nd 
are found. It's 


thar no Foottteps or Tratts of 
tale, as Luke 19. 44 
table, uſeful, and 
Beaſts roo many 
f Accounting the 
civil Dillenfions 
fſubduz « 
of tisReign, or th 
about the 3orh Year of Feconiah's Captivity, 
Year ofthe Capti was the firſt of Cree: 


e the land © 


Men 
« Ja. 14, 


tractable, as Shee 
are in the d 


cities among the Cities 
folate forty years : 
among the nations 
che countreys, 

2 farther 
eds n9 new F 


orc 
th 
9:3. 13 T Yetthus faith the Lord GOD, At the * 


46:6 forty + years will I ; gather the Egyptians from t 
ple & whither they were ſeattereq 


ww ME +8 fom 


e eminent 


the Wa 


ſtes, obtain 
lanters, 


k Babylon, 
Jetured to h 


he, 3 7 bale 0 kingdom, 
| Nebuchadge 
of Egypr. 


Ciry Thebe, or Thebs 
nat Habirac 


ZZar led awa 
or Counrry 


the tamous 
» The antie 


it exalt it ſe1f 
minith » them 
nations. 

Þ The moſt abje&, debaſed, 


INgs, to whom 


5, neither ſhall 
: for 1 will di- 
all no more Tule 5 over 


ſh 


and moſt underling ; 
K 4s tributary, kept them 1o 
Ingdom mghe b 


ntne times of the Ptolomy's, 
2 Kingdom that ruled th 
| Upon them, 


it expreſ Prohi. 
ke Leagues for Defence 


pr. 
am the Lord, and whoſo 
+9. 10. 
7 T And it came to 


FR , In ch 
Vol. Ix, 


* paſs in th 


e ſeven and 
e ficlt monch *. 1 


wen. 
In the 


firſt day of 


ted ſenſe,or compa. 
! paffing to and fro, 
2 Scripcure Hyper. | k 


Mong their | C 
e forty Years 


Z E 
F Erhiopia is 
to EZ thiop "a, 
from 


North-Eaſt | Sluled © 
ward as far as 
Magaalum. 


T9 
give 


2I F 


{to ſpeak, to open t 
to give Praiſe to 
know him as the [, 


gainſt je 


e1ge, or 


In that day rwillIc 
Iſrael to by 


me mouth : 


KIE 7, 


the mont 


h, the word 
laying, 


Oi the LORD Caine nn 
Jeconinh's 


5th of 0. 
Is Son of 


Captivity, 


the Ver afrer the 
buchadnzzzur > Þ 


* Pact of our 213%; and pr} 
Man, Nebuchadne--; xing of Babylon 
his *1My to ſerve a n erVice. againſt 
YIUS : every head 245 mads bald © and every ſhout. 

had he ng 


4s peeled yet VaSeS &,- nor his 
rmy tor Tyrus, for the ſervice that be had forveg 


Conguett of 7... 


the inferiour Offic 


es, and 
eary of the vizge 


Irions by rhe 
amy thing. to 
ineſs of Wort: 


Siege,rhir 


Ambition of 7 bu. 
ſtang againſt him. 
, lieavineſg ot Burdens, 
feen Years fogether. e Either 
bald): or COntinued 
mongft 
ad, thy they 


Wearing 


a» 


Therefg 


re thus faith the Lord GO 
the 


Egypt unto N ebuch 


| take her muleity 
Il, and take he 
A 


rmy, 


D, Beho! 


adrezz 


de 7, and 
r Prey /; andit ſhall be «& 


=5 


[contents of x 27 gave Occaſion, and 
jets from "Rx Apries, and their 7% 
im E779: ; but theſe were the Irregula- 
wiſely and juſtly manage, to eff:& whar 
g4ve,and Men gave OO ; as the ten Tribes gave, 
Jeroboam ; io the firſt and ſecond 
#-&. ; 


N » Who ſhall bs 


im the hand of Epyyt || for 
ſc againſt j 


IC 0 


Lord GOD.” 


bis [a- jj 


Ot, for 
cauſe they 


hu hire. 


d dig 


work for the 
lent 


ey deſigned 
Ends, his Work 


her, higher, 
m who thought 


the houſe 
Pening of 
em ; and they ſhall know 


Nebuchaanczs ay returned 


given rg 
oſe Authoriry 
that had Liſc 
the more imme. 
5 ar? ſyre 
racity, who had 
when h 


nd own 
nd Cauſe 
mong them, and 
nd made theny 


y Mouth in comtorting the Good a 
God, who revived 
ord their God. 


CB] CHAp. 


$332 
24a» 


"Sons 


IC Wagers /poil hey 
© Jpoil, and 
Prey hey 


Chap, XX IX 


—_ _ — m—__ 


Chap. XXX. 


' Or fear. 


+ Heb. 


Ph: E. 


+ Feb. 


1 e# , 
CiTLAYVER, 


* Ch. 29, 


2, 


. 4 Heb, 


vr oken., 


E Z E 


KIEE 


Chap. Xy 


Ifent by me. # Ships tl irhes * , 270 
L C0 zee # Ships that either carried them over into Per: a7; 1:47 
CqMAT. AXX. png the m—_ N. ls, or rather going down the River CES, ane 
aiterrancan et ; Me. 
Toe deſtrufrion of Ezypt and hey confcdepates Joretola t—25. The break- vy Ship NN ey tx irony bp -_ Oe hog po Otiters | 
Sort #lp þ: IS ' Oe. : 7h ' p 3,* Ek riglany... pas *F.40Di © 
— ah 4g of Ezypt S arm: and 700 ſtrengthning tre king of Bavylan's to hag wg meant, though e1s poſliblein thoſe Days the Þ "oat 2 
featter the Egyptians among the nations, 20 26. oE OE ay range it did, extend quite to the Mouth of the Req "__ 
, HE : : | _ xn = _—_ Anceſtors muſt needs firſt land out of Prog | 
word of the LORD came again unto rae, | nur the Habeſſnes, who are. our preſent Erh:opians, do own their 
ſayin 7, arms =_ —— by r_ might carry the News to both = 
FF ans, A[:ansan þ , do , —_—_ 
bs Son of man , propheſie and ſiy, Thus faich the|rhey had hicherro lived, the moſt = nag ler ble Nei 
ord GOD, Howl ye a, wo 6 worth the day. having been their antient Allie, till the News of { i ki Neighbour 
Se nts of Egypt, and whoſo are near enough in Friendſhip |* their very Doors. o Apprehenſions of We he OIRny 
i fog rage BY angler the like Calamities. 6 Ah the day ! O fad jor armor er ye Kg C"_ an _ in Perplexity both ſick 
{ 24 . ither likethat, which when their Hoſt wa: = 
3 For the day c & near d, even the day of the LORD ed - _ Red Sea ſeiz'd all Egype, or racher like this latter m4 
e i nearf, a cloudy g day, it ſhall be che time ot the aaa the mighty Havock made by the Cha/dean. 97 A Stor : ki 
heathen þ. ike m_—O— cometh againft you. " ©. 
4 : O o £ 0 
2 The time of ſuch Diſtreſſes as never the like known by you. a Ir ; . gn laich the Lord GOD, I will alſo make the - 
will begin in your Overthrow in the Cyreniac and Lybic Deſerts 1n very multitude rot Egpyt to ceaſe s by the hand # of Neby a 
0K —_— Ay your Civil War, and finally end in chadnezzar king of Babylon. R Bs 
ne Bay; ion onaueſt. Some tv 1y | 7 EM » The Rs " og as 
routed in the ork of Aa myo omuar BprM bo +} Wi = t By the Home: COTS b - qo ——_ Ai 
nog Years together ſhall waſte you, and then N:buchadancz.zar's Forces IT He «and his * people with bien '* th - "1b! ' 6 
will be upon you : ſo that, whereas there may bz about 16 or 18 Years|the nations, ſhall b Þc P 1 him, * the terrible 7 of @ Ha 
between the Prophecy and its fu!filling, here is 13 or 14 of them taken {they ſhall T on brought 2 tO deſtroy the land : and; by 
up with Sorrows and Afflictions, Fore-runners of the laſt. - Ofrhe # Ee their Iwords 2 againlt Egypt, and {ili the {iy 1 
Lord's ſore Diſplzaſure againſt Zgzpr and irs Allies. f Within two land with the lain, . * ” 
Pate 'Þ 1K x g jo _ Day, & times of Trouble are called, |. þ nay mes pf His own Subjects, not hired Souldiers. yThi; ; Foo 
| s Proſperity is a iohr. Yes lik . e Deſcription of t . : 
Storms are black.” þ Of e 6h, yak —_ = be ppp my mg Pſal. 137. 7+ z By rap” Rr —_— f prey n tate 
{oni 3.5 to waſte them ; the day of the Pride, Cruelty and Revenges to before-noted, ch. 29. wv. 4. a Readily, = with She ods . 
the one, the day of falling, Spoil and DeſtruQion rothe ocher. ſheath them, till Egypt be filled with ſlain. : _, 
4. And the ſwoid ſhall come upon Egypt, and great 12 And *1I will make the rivers -f- dry 5, and ſell cthe.,. this 
|| pain ſhall be in Ethiopia &, when the flain {hall fall /in land into the hand of the wicked 4; and I will make hes ; lie 
Egypt, and they ſhall take away her multitude #2, and he land waſte, and -f- all that is therein, by _— —— __ 
Cindati Oy pr (} 5 15 TNErEnm, DY tNC hand of»; 11 1t 
_o_ —_ ihall be broken down ». _— e: I the LORD have f ſpoken zz. + hi the | 
# Sce Chap. 29. wer. 8. let. p. k Next Neighl d Alli ROI ither by ſomeext di ! &, 
Tile a9.am-8. tp. Nene Neighbor and Aer Ep. |mighey Lhe! hee eh en nee We or ee oY 
ther *ewill come on them, but very EE be titled if ir cock come their Canals were ever after ſhallow ; and the Lak rom = 5, that all 
and as ceitain that they have Cauſe ro ſuſpe&t ir will come on them, |©21d, help'd their Enemy, and hurt their Frie 1; 4g = -—wbgs elſe 
[ When the Egjptians, under che Eye of the Arhiopians ſhall fall "yh migt divert them, and FA their fortified Tor pa ; _ rne Chalds an ſhall 
Batte], andat the taking of their Towns. 2 In miſcrable Captivit Defence. c God gaveit, here he ſells ; ho af the cher Ligh 
wid them to Baby/o by whole Droves. » Their LG Laws, a borrowed Expreſſion : indeed God ſeems to pay ap Rryg _" ng 
"A 9g _ 43 an which areto a Nation as Foundations to a Had - pe _—_— _— that as Sellers deliver into the _— 
2 i & 1 . Bk ; r, Oo O VIOU e ver Egypt into the Hand of Nee /QIC 
5 Erhiophia 0, and + Libia p, and Lydia 9, and all _ a5 ſurely asif he had boughric ; and we may conclude the WA 
the mingled r people, and Chub s, and the + men of 6h n ON will make the moſt of all he buys. & Not of Ncbue 
ES £ © lone 2 Gal £4 wich them =by the [feave nothing chey ene carey awe Gr One FT the be ny 
> Wi | g they can carry away, eat up, or ſpoil. f 'Tis th rate 
Iword x. : crec, an Edi& of Heaven, which can't b br = | ITO ON Towe 
o Heb. Cuj:h, which are commonly thought to be the A£rhiopi 13 Thus fai ps | 
: *N , L 5 . the F 
mM Africa; but fome more 11quiarive - og have found > 0 IEY g Me, - lots þ _ _ _ _— I - _—_ ene : ith 
ginally, and chicily in &a6:a, which was eicher ſubje&t or allic to [Noph 4 5 2, an will cauſe rheir images 7 to ceaſe out of /| {z, ber 
Ezypr in its Proſperity ; and theſe were, as wer. 4. in a pannick Fear v4.4 : and there ſhall be no more a prince l of the, deſtroy 
leſt the Baby/onzan ſhould paſs the Sea, and take them 1n his way home. land of Egypt : and I will put a fear 92 in the land (Te __ 
p _ _ hence the Puteans or Phutaans, who afterwards were Egypt. ; , ſhall k 
etter known by Lis; ans, a part of whoſe Country was to Egy God did TEN" "SO" - 3 E 
- Lydians, not the AſiatiCk, m the Africans liked otra aint P Paruears gh or oa again £ thoſe proud and 1MP1ous Nation; 20 
of Cyrcne and Egyp?. r The hired EEOTTE Soc © moto fat them brat them, or - : O _ conquered, and out of Contempt of the fi 
Mixture of Nations, ſuch as the Lybians had got together .” or all ra. | threatned, 2 Chro roke them, as 1s well known ; ſo Senachrrib word 
biz, fo the word, 2 Chro: ek - K; . p >” 1/a. 37-19, 24. againſt the true God, a 
« , 2 Chroa.9.14. 1ja. 13.20. or all that ravenous ſort [he did to Idol-Gods. þ Dunghil-God h ; : Of 
f Sa % oo. m__ *y ws fly to Slaughters, ſo Souldiers of Fortune trod under foor than to be DT ot — tory cen ay n $f ow wr 
vilow the Wars, and the word Heb. is Crow, Lev. 11. 15. Devt. 14. 14. | 35 the 4; . #7 Theſe Nothing: F 
Pſal. 147.9. as well as mix'd s Ethiopians beyond Ezy - Sourt 4 for Sac apa weve SOIT Image Ceſtroyed the God, +40, 1. oy 
ce ofthe 3 i 7.7 : 71 , IS 12g but an Image. kt Memphis, now Grand Cair, the | king ( 
perhaps "i oi the ys a iy a reached tothe Negrite, N:groes ; | chiefCiry of the Country, the Seat of their Kings firſt, of their Prieſts healed 
erhaps they may be the Nub/ans at this day, a Letter ealil changed | Dy Conſeque 1] eb o; _ " 
F The Sons of rhe Land of the Covenant ; ſome refer to reg de Ckil- Sw wg Fad wy" =_ —_ _ = ns hold rl 
dren of the Covenant, but this is forced, tis all the People of Egypt's pendent, or over all Ezypr, or that Pe C vg -x4; "lon born, or inde. x I | 
ag eng Oe mules; we Kingdom. « Wirth the Ezypri- Honour, like a former brave Egyptian "Eqs — > ae” Thorn i _ 
5. x In Warby the Sword of Baby/on. S "ta 7 . | nation an c/0 ; pa 
ty n Thus ſaith the LORD, They alſothat uphoid y Egypt ——— * _ IIOrnnT Aion in this raiſe th 
all jail, and the pride = 'r + T4 # ; : ay 2 
from the tower ; of oy yon bk r hall come down a: 9 ry - | will make Pathros » deſolate, and will fee firs curable, 
faith the I ord GOD yene ſhall chey fall in it by the ſword, n vl omg: and will ——_ judgments in No p. 0 te tron 
he 1. J chap. 29. ver. 14. ler.m, o Ir may be literally underſtood 22." 
 licher che Pri : hs | bs. , erally underſto00 1, 2. 
ar te Princes, Counſelors, end martial Men in Exp, or or meepaieuly of War and civil Dlendons. p A very great pe i the 
Strength, of which ſhe was p! oud. #1 BSE) » - Fomgraih —=_ _y pulous City, ſituate on one of the Mouths of " Sn = great m_ 1 the ſtro 
—_— in the North-caſt part of Egypt toward the Red = ” Nam 2s, Now Alexandria ſtands where that did, but ewas greater : the five 
443 in the moſt South-weſt part of Egyp:. See chap. 29. wer. 10, / RE 8 - than in People, andit was viſited with very great and dreadiu! : ant 
» 8c. Judgments; Nahum 3. 8,9, 10, 11. which ſee. breakthe 
$5 _ they fawn be defolate din the midft of the . IF _ I will pour q my fury upon || Sin 7, the|0 _— 
countries 74: are delolate. and her cities e af rength 5s of 7 . . "ta a s.. 
1 Peer gage 6c es e ſhall be in the Ne c Egypt, and || I will cut off the z mulcitude/, _—_" 
c A'] thoſe before-mentioned. d As much waſted as any of th 9 Seech. 21.v : . [is Pas 
. . 21.v.31, let. d. r Either Sain, © likely Pel um: An 
that are moſt waſted. Eryp: W . tas — OM ' : , Or more likely Pet f pi 
+ ep 4 Rand > 2 ,  Madeb. & 00; Cm ear —_ _ mm _— = of Egypt ny" che® yew ” 
, lem, Tyre, 8 , &c. 5 a t Egypr, and therefore always well ort!- p 
. - -_ o_ F = know that I aw the LORD, when I arr mirc, I it wasCalled Damiatas .s One efthe pria- and will 
ave {et a fire gin Egypt, and when all her helpers {hall Ny _—_ ns of Egypt ; for ewas a good and large Haven, and was Vid, ch 
be -# deſtroyed 5. CE NE _ Fay os rea t Or the Riches and rumui- Expreſſior 
© Niſchar af, and altchar ſafcr in this Tragedy, ſhall by the Evi. | Margin =_ _ - gs thereof made. » If we read, as tit 24 At 
EEE etrnbs coforced clown God's Hed Me +4 oa 6 , tis plain God does threatern Peluſium after No is cut off; bylor 
and Truth, and Glory to hi C770 2 "—_ 4 ain our own Tranſlation we muſt think of another City of tit wan >. 
: ory to him. g Tha: War, which, like increaſing | Name, which - opens Ph 
Fire, conſumeth all. 4 Th ui "th e ing | Name, which God threatens with $:7 : Now this may be Thebe E512: raohs 
; 4 The Deſtruftion of fo many and powerful Aids | tiace, or this C ay 9/e [1 
ſhall prove, that *ewas God s Hand did ir. wn "poſſibly eh _-_ A No, called Disſpolis, the City of 7 | tie groa 
2 P | | x 2 e the ſame ment1 
ſhips = _ =s A [ _ ml 6" q g0 forth _ oe lin | repeated to confirm it. Sealy, Gd che Th | *o, " 
ps 7, areleis Etinopians 7 afraid, and 16 And - . , Fn? 
great pain ſhall come upon them, as in the day pof Egypt: oreat pain . ” = =_ 7 in Egypt, Sin & ſhall hav? | /tall kno 
for lo, it q cometh. 13 y, , obſ all be rent aſunder c, and Nop" F Iword int 
- Th D fG *Y l 7 . Þ ſha AVE diſtreſles E daily. {tre I 3 
7 The Day of God's ſevere but juſt Judgments, and Eg1pt's fatal De. $ | DA 
{olation. k Such as having ſeen and ſcaped the Sword ſhall tell theſz Per yo 47-4 14. let.o, and chap. 20. wer. 47. let. u, x. and wv. 8.) Theſe x 
News. 7 By my Permiſlich and Providedce'they ſhall go, as a .I5.&r, a Seever.g. leto. 6 See wer, 14. let. p. and v-'* "gainſt Pha 
any ang every t 


let. x. c Her Walls, and "Towers, and Fortrefles battered, torn, 
broken 


Vol. I 


F 'p-4 
A 13:3, VXX - E b-4 E 
M "aki chrongh by the continued Violence of Engines, and by the Af- 
ulrs of the Souldiers. d See wer. 13. let k. e Being the chief City 
where King and Councilsfat, whence Orders ſhould be given, whither 
a1! Intelligences were brought ; all ſhould be ſo bad abroad, that no- 
thing bur Fears and Diſtreſſes fill rheir Ears, Mouths and Hearts, be- 
(ide rhe Wants thitt would increaſe daily on them. BE} 
17 The young men f of || Aven g and of |j Pi-beſeth 5, 
(ha!l fall by the ſword : and theſe ciries 3 ſhall go into 
2623 Captivity #. . —_ 
| 7 'Tis probable theſe might be aſele& Army of valiant Youths in one 
Body, colie&ed out of theſe two Cities that reſolved to break the Chal. 
ican Army .or fall in the Enterpriſe ; or elſe that they did to rhe ut- 
moſt d:fend the Walls, and were pur to the Sword when the City was 
takenby Afﬀſult. g Bethfhemeſh and Hel:opolis an 1dolatrous City that 
worthipp'd the Sun, and in which was a ſtately Temple built ro the 
Sun ; its Greatnefs was 150 Furlongs, 6 Miles, and 3 quarters in com- 
pals, 2 very vain and finful City, as its name Aver intimates. þ Buba- 
/15, and ſfomerime called Fepheſtus, no inconſiderable Place, and I 
believenotfar from Aven ; it ſhould ſeem to be ſome convenient Paſs , 
as I conjeEure. # The Citizens, Cities put for Citizens. k Some of the 
firſt, ir may be the very firſt which put Mc»phis, at Report of it, into 
aiick Fir, with great pain ; this being the firſt Fruits ofthe fad coming 
Harveſt. 
: *, 18 At Tehaphnehes / alſo the day ſhall be || dark- 
WE. 1d », when I ſhall break » there the yokes o of Egypt : 
#:.10d the pomp p of her ſtrength {hall ceaſe in herq : as for 
” her, a cloud 7 ſhall cover her, and her daughters s ſhall go 
intO Captivity. | 
| A grear and good!y City of Ezy9: ; Tachapanes, Tachpanes, Tahapa- 
nos, Tahpanes, Chanes, and Hanes, Ifa. 30. 4. aygnames given it, and ' 
this from a Queen of Fgypr of that name in Solomon's time, 1 K?ngs 
11.19,20 It ſtood not tar from Sin or Peluſtum, and by the Greeks a: 
litcle foftning the Name, call'd Daphne Pelaſisca; 'twas a Royal City, | 
in it Pharaoh had a Houle, to it many Jews fled , when forbidden of 
the Lord by the Prophet Feremy, ch. 44. *twas one of the firſt Cities | 
you come to out of the Deſert of $:n, and was one of the Keys of Egyp:. | 
-m A Night ſhall come upon ir, and ſuch a Night of Sorrow as ſhall: 
grow darker and darker, till the Day, z. e. their Day be Darkneſs, or 
elſe word for word, Darkneſs ſhall be che Day; and may bear this Senſe, 
” ſhall be more welcome, more uſeful, more deſired than the Day whoſe 
. , Light would diſcover their Flight, which the Night concealed. » As: 
| ' IntoShivers. o The Scepters ; for there was one of Pharaoh's Houſes, | 
and/probably ſome Scepter, and other Regal Ornaments; or the Bars, 
which kept Enemies out, and ſecured the Citizens and Country ; ſuch 
was this Frontier Town ; or when by giving this ſtrong Place into 
: | Nbounadnezzar's Hand, I ſhall break the Kingdom of Egypt thatir no 
; | more oppreſs with Yokes, 7.e. Burdens. p The Beauty and Goodli- 
| neſs with which the Strength of this City was ſet outin her Buildings, 
. * Towers, Forts, 9 ſhallbe buried in her own Ruines. y Sorrow by 
tie Succeſs of the Chaldears againſt her, compared often to a Cloud. 
+ - Lither metaphorically, i. e. the Townsand Villages about her, or /iteral- 
{z, her Children, her Daughters only mentioned, becauſe her Sons were 
deftroyed and lain. : 
2 9 Thus will I execute judgments in Egypt : and they 
. ME ' {ball know that I 22 the LORD. 


= 20 Þ And it came topaſls in the eleventh year 7, in 


_ NED 
v8 if 
Þ: i. 


48 


"8+ | 


me 
" , 
vkts 


__ thee ; they had longeſt time of Growth through 1340 or 1260 


FE i: Chap, XXXI 

a Give the firſt Strength, and continue it with new Sunn; 

2 15p'1es, fo 
that with Strength from God he ſhal] proceed. e His Scameh ſha!; 
have a Weapon ſured and proportion'd to it , and what wi!l be harg L 
where God's Sword and his Strength are engaged to effef it? f Hphra. 
Z Notonly as the ſtouteſt muſt, when Nature breaks. bur cry our, and 
ſigh or how}, nor becoming a brave Man, + King of Pnbylcy. 5 who 
hath given him his deadly Wound,under which he roars while he hath 
any Strength, and groans when his Voice fails him. Ic ſpeaks fore Griefs 
and deep Senſe? of them, as Exod, 2. 24. Judg-2. 26, Fib. 24. 12, 

26 And I will ſcatter the Egyptians among the nations, 
and diſperſe them among the countries, and they ſhall know 
that 1 az the LORD. 

« Viae ver. 23. Eo 

CH AP. XXXI. 
The Prophet ſheweth unto Pharaoh the glory of Aria, 1t—— 9, foretellerh 
their ruins for their pride, 10 17. and 362 like deſolation falleth 072 
im and his people, 18 — 32. 


1 A ND it came to paſs in the eleventh 2 year , in 
the third month b, in the firſt Jay of the 
month c bat the word of the LORD came unto me ;, 
ſaying, | | 

& As ch. 20. ver. 20, let. ft, 6 Our June, 26th Day Old $:ile, the 
16:h Day New Stile ; juft one Month and eight Days before the taking Calwiſins, 
| of the City on the 27:4 of 5uly, wete Sil. but 19:h of July, New Stile, Huſſeric:, 
Cc Tamu%. | 
2 Son of man, ſpeak unto Pharaoh 4 King of Egyper 
and to his multitude e, * 
greatneſs f ? 


' 4Apries or Hophra. e His numerous Subje&s, with the Power and 
Riches they glory in. f Bethink thy ſelf, whar King of all beiore thee 
art thou equal with, or elſe greater? On what ſurer and more immo- 
vable Foundation doth thy Greatneſs ſtand, that chou drezmesſt of a 
perpetual Quiet and flourithing State in the midft of all thy Sins aid 
Wickedneſles ? 


3 © Behold, the Afyrian g was a cedar 6 in Lecba. 
non z - with fair branches &, and witha ſhadowing / fl;roud.... . hb. 
and of an high ſtature »-, and his top was among the thick 177*-757 


ef branches. 
z boughs. 
g Kingdom and its Kings were the greateſt the World ere knew be. 


. . 3 * Yer. 1s, 
Whom art thou like in thy 


Years from Belus, who was Nimrod, or Belus Afſyrins, to Sardanapats , 
from 1716, or 1717, 0r1718, to 3059 of the World. And they had 
as fair Advantages,as reaching a Foreſight, and as unwearied Diligencz 
to advance the Kingdom ; yet I brought ir down. + Like a Cedar! 
Kings and Kingdoms oft compared to Trees, both in profane and ſacred 
Emblems ; or like the moſt goodly Cedar for Strength - and Bzaury, 
; A great mountainous Tratt from Eaſt ro Weſt, 125 Milesin length, 
encloſeth Canaanon the North, & Which are the Beaury, Greataeſs, 
Strength of the Tree, ſo had this mighty Kingdom fair Provinces, as 
Branches ſpringing frem it. / What we render ſhadowing in the Heby,, 
may ſignify either {lent and quiet, or framing and modelling, intimating 
that this Kingdom, like a ſhady Tree, gave ſhzlter to the weak, as if 
fram'd artificially ro this, and 'twas a ſikn? quie: Repoſt its Subje&s 


had ; as weak Creatures find Shelter in a mighty Wood, fo theſe, 
m This Kingdom grew to great Height while its Branches were { be. 
neficial. » Or, Clouds, for fo the word will wichout Violence bear - 
Clouds : being called ſo from their Thickneſs ; however, the Head among 
rh thick Boughs ſpeaks the Magnificence and Greatneſs of this Kin g 


compaſled about with Tributary Kings, and Princes,and migaty Men. 


if the firſt 707th u, in the ſeventh day of the month, that the 

þ word of the LORD came unto me, ſaying, 

5 : Of Zeconzah's Captivity, three Months and two Days before Ferg. 

jo ſalem was taken, Jer. 52. 4. # The fourth Day of our April. 

» W... 21 Son of man, I have broken x the arm of Pharaoh y' 

, "king of Egypt; and lo, * it ſhall not be bound up to be 

s WF healed =, to put a roller to bind it, to make it ſtrong to 

(5 hold the ſword. 

2. x I have often tald thee I would break, now I tell thee T have 

ys broken ; partly by the ViEory of the Chald:ans over Pharaoh Ne 

d c-0 ; partly by the Victory the Cyreneans got over Pharaoh Hophra, to 

ir raiſe the Stege, trom which Attempt he fell with Shame and Loſs, bur 
more by Civil Wars. » Hophra or Apries. 2 And this Wound is in- 

2 curable, it ſhall r;ever be bound up to be healed; his Arm ſhall never 
te ſtrong and {ir ro ancounter a potent Enemy, as once it was. 

is 22 [herefore thus ſaith the Lord GOD, Behold, I am 

; *gainft Pharaoh king of Egypt, and will break his arms #, 


> WW tte ſtrong 6, and that which was broken c ; and I will cauſe 


WW tie ſword to fall out of his hand. 
” \ 4 In the former Verſe God had broken the Arm ; in this he will 
n © breakthe Arms of Pharaoh; he will ſhew he is Qtill againſt Pharaoh, and 
will break him more and more. 6 Thar part of his Kingdom which 
«| 0 remains intire, 6 That which was ſhattered before, that Part of his 
Jo 105 Kingdom in Syria , taken from him from Enphrates to the River of 
10 £2yp', that once was a ſtrong Arm, but now broken, and uſeleſs to 
« p | lim: And Egypt, whatever Strength it now hath, ſhall be as weak and 
Wt uc]eFs too ; thus all his Power and Strength ſhall be deftroyed. 
q 23 And I will ſcatter the Egyptians among the nations, 
$ adwill diſperſe themthrough the countreys. 
15 Fid, ch. 29. v. 12, let.g. and ch. 20. wer. 23. let. ov. where the ſame 
le Expreſſions are. 
ie 24 And I will ſtrengthen 4 the arms of the king of Ba- 
- 7-00, and put my ſword e in his hand : but I will break 
n "naraohs arms, and he f ſhall groan g before him 5 with 
A { 22 groaningsof a deadly wounded i may. 
a 25 Bur I will ſtrengthen the arms of the king of Baby- 
| © and the arms of Pharaoh ſhall fall down ; and they 
78 | all know thatT am the LORD, when I ſhall put my 
h WF !o:d j ing 0 
) , 20 into the hand of the king of Babylon, and he ſhall 
<iC1 1t out upon theland of Egypt. 
— Theſe two foregoing Verſes are a Repetition .of God's Threats 
! "gainſt Prarach, and of his Promiſes to afliit Nebnckhadneszar in the War, 
 _ Wo eng Plain in them. , 


The Sca ſent out her 


4 The wate:s o || made him great, the deep p !! ſet him 
up on high with her rivers running round about his plant; 4. 
and ſent out her || little rivers » unto all the trees 5 of che 
field. 


. Or, nou« 
Fiſhed 

j Or, | 
borough 01% 


o As Cedars grow great by the Water-courſes, ſo this Kingdom, by %/- 


Multitades of People, Convenience of Trade, by the Plenty of rhg\! Ot, C- 
Country if no Trade, for 'twas firſt planted in the fruicful Fields, 44:*- 
among the ſweer Rivers Euphrates, Tigris. Lycus, Diava, and others; 
Warers, which gave Being to the Rivers that 
water'd him, and improved him ; whereas, Esypr, thy Rivers arile ouc 
of a Lake, which, though great, nor to be compared with the deep. 
4 The ProvinceSofthis mighty Kingdom, that are like Plants abour a 
ow Tree. 7» Beneficence, Juſtice, ProceQion, Encouragements that 
ubjetts need, and good Princes diſperſe among them, © the deep 

filled this King , and he ſent out his Streams. 5 To all his Subje&s in 
his Kingdom. | 

5 Theretore his height was exalted : above all the trees 
of « the field, aad his boughs were muitiplied x, and his 
branches became long y becauſe of the multitude of waters j Or, 
&, || whenhe ſhot forth. 

: His Power, Glory, and his Pride too, run up on high 
Adminiſtration of Laws for Benefit of the Publick, ard a kind Ulage 
of the Subje&, while 'twas here, made rhe King great,and his Kingdom 
famous. # Above all his Neighbour-Kings, among whom oppretled 
Weaklings ſti}] came to this Kingdom; while juft, for ſhelter. x Ma- 
ny became his Subjetts by voluntary Choice, and his Native Subje&s 
increas'd in Numbers and Wealth. y The Provinces reach'd far and 
wide, by the Conqueſt of his Arms, or AttraQives of his Kindneſs 
brought ro unite with him, z The many Streams of Royal Juſtice 
and Beneficence ſent forth from the Throne of this Kingdom; 1o his 
Throne was advanced and eſtabliſh:d. 

6s * All the 2 fowls of heaven made their nefts 5 in his 
bonghs c, and under his branches 4 did all the beaſts of the * D42. 4: 
field bring forth their young, and under his ſhadow e dweit *** 


all great nations. 

a Not every Individual, but all ſorts and kinds of Men and Peop'e, 
Nobles, Merchants Husbandmen, likened to Fowls. & Did ſettle rhci- 
Habitations and Families, expeCting what they found, Safery and Ref ; 
and hoping what did enſue, an w——_ —_ Children anJ Poſtericy, 

7 2 hy 


7 
W.7eH 


P y 
ii ſent 678 


. A juſt #® tl. 


vs - —_ . 
ponds Dos 2 "ens hy wats yo ngh.c - ® &.+ urns & 
6 A008 1 = 7 12 aged 0 ___ _ . _ _ 
aw 7 DH _ C234 4 F* 4-4 C24 WT $a whe. Ye 
N f G +> - 
[0 —— wr ————_ - oi - 
v= S Au ad 4,2 _—_— ER IG _ * F Tb ” 
. S 2 wow 22.7 "IS PE_ - —_ ———— _ — a——_—_ >a wo ” - =? Mn” 
- F. 4 - IS . > RePEY "= MAD pas v2 ” : "$5 95% - 
Rs P, wo + 7 25 oy i £ - A 2 4 nw \ 
»PO-<g. _ "wp. « : 
S 


I. 


- - m—_— 14 
SIS I 
_ aug” - RI 
2. BL ane TS io: x 
do, - - 
6X.» »© 
» + I - 
p SS} — 
4 ve 
$00 -— ” 
CO 4 5 
o _, , 
x ls VII - » 
EG. EP 
Gn —_—_—_ 


ao 


Ry 


+, 


- . 4 My - tac . 2 —— . ow -ſ 
" 4 "7 - WK, ae <a ” LEI b : co Wa, 1 ” 4 © 
"0 hs : Es T0 at ds n 4 wt a - - \ ? 4 = _— : «4. Arts 9h I #———=— bc APR res os — hs Ie . Cl” 4 YL =P -4 f — d.; | = 
” > —_ - - < " ba ps . me Se PE WR . ” Y - w- - © on —— os vs n—_ be h —_ Y b 2 —_— En - 
o » « LP WRIT x " ee Dr = On proggons oo UD'S.. 4Xn.7 - > — : | , y wa Te. To n__—— rey = " : by = LOW Þ, en "0 we £7) = - "= 0073". mutagy 
xt <= 26. +K 2; FR 6 : "s b — ; 5. - "1 £2 $7, = - —_ ——_— © S—_ .: - J ———- - ws. Þ "5. we - u -- Apu'® 4 CEE : . -- _ —_ 
- %%,. bg 7 96:80 pEIE5 A -» s oe h —_ ww 2.5 We 4. > LS A . » 4 - _ 4 . - Y vor? AG rnomgt ele = Mead, ann — ak == - oy ng 51 \ gg ene. h_ ” "yy - - : 2 \ _ 
= _ 1 $0 Im = - 4B "ew Xt 44 <a . - Bn l , P $ $- 7 » OS WER 2M 7 - £ - 7 - » WK %5 2 2 - - __ _ F 0 mm A X - — s 
wg ps. o *- SS LO SES ts ELLIS » — CON » TIC — wo. ' <.. ol - p_ : * of - - ary - as +; —da TS PLY -, q ye v6 be ES i "OR 21 . ee © 40 ES . he pcs 
= ES, » ar ate © Hb FF oP "a * ax 4 : - = £ - mee ee - : - A —_ X eory 2 os , _ - . ON . = . Pet _—_ __ OE + > P —_— cw m—_ 4 : "IQ ww. 2 YM < 4." - ” : : "$3 os 
/ a 3 p » © eo _ - Þ = o S423 ws -” - $5" - mo” - _— PI - yy n yer ” ry * ©_ ” wm oy + G_—_ - S - by Tas : _ = oY + L -»' # a ; : 
2 ; l : bs - . n w. 7 yy EE x on pu * 4 ons : > _ _. £ L +a & — _ Wa + z _ - __ . - 27 4 ar & CY ad : o_ "+ . P -- C $2 *; 4 " a th a D 4 oc . w — _ -— - T J _ 
uy} "I" : 4 -L5- = X 24 > k >, » < I 4 2.3% ob, ” <4 : : mo " « = -1 —_— : 4 I = . ; * « HBSS - a x - Mn - —— — wo, Wo —_ Ki , * SAFES wy = LE amy < 
—_ > ie... - ; US be. wm : Vs wor” Ks - 0 v F* Trane » y og . RP 7 bes 2. <1. I 4 "OO ra _ —_ _——_ EL , S7 "a + 85" wy # I — y rn . 7 2 " © 68 ' « - 97 te er : f _ » ;. "$5 = - —_ + bg o = 7" MEE . 
v3 —_ 1 Y y wad. I ? w——_ > : x __ : p « in” i . « __ = 77 \ ' rt Ix f 17 4 p PEC-= _— Ga, ke » 47 > Ds a I : — ie Ing oo 
S_— - — LIN + Y 4 - a -— —_ - _ Fe = . = . * bd O& « A »- ">; A 54 - dj __ 4 » oj 4 be — = — T5 yy w - o od oy _ _ XD. - bu SD 2 bY = = -_ _—_ J - E C 
_ w 7 o x PS ne EE 4 _ + 4 0 * {a 1% Wa - Py _, ..- oQ "4 « ws t ” _ _-_” ad - ho ER.” - % "'L T4 = ar a 33T.. - p - < an — *z- ” y y —_ "Y 7 Mt wey _ : 5-556 = ,com. > =y C5 i 
_ _— " 4 ES NT ee, ” Es; A=toe he ne 2 3 WIN 3. - Y Res TTY, kt; — _—_— , "- wa bes 7 .. | -3 4 IST . ) oi. Þ oy. -v tg. PIR u9 ma + Fo * ws = 64 £ $ ny, phi atv - op ” _ +; = _—_— - 6% . © —— 
4 C , wy - "* Te wes -- V5 . p =_ « Wy 2 nes Wh = - 4 \ OE q -} a " v4.0 b uL : B15 by » —_ Y A LE hf b — os > [EI as — q - _ A _—_ B —- - mg at” , <4 4» 4 r- 4 - #4 + o : 2 "=. þ ff ” Jos "_ —— 
- - - þ p, x © : ” .: - þ } Z q " ws © x - 1 ” *4 P — \ £ j " £ ns £45 4 4 . Y £2 "3" SIS ED . b =. "= a = $ a7; —> FJ Po > —_- a «4 [1 > whos F o I , Tab (> 2 - - vi D * how _—_ : "ee - os I _ Rs 
—_—_ tho ODD "— + S Pim _ _”, bY lat KN CS 2 ak” F i - fe Tp o_ > Fol > _ L gn hg —— D « —_ 4 as y ——— _ Te . - 09m Þ. 1 _ 7 x" EF —_— s we ed? _— - LON AS... v Rn 
A 6 Iv _-= 4 ,E A oy 15 gb "* = *S RE ” , 2g : ty __ Ke 0-4 - as Long d : p- Es b- _— — _ TE A = - by oy . .  L_ oo *- pu _ 2+ 2 oe ©. « —_—_ » » Jan - Wold 4 a o '@ Ce a Roe 2304- - -  W-4 > » H 08, is p = . —_— - jth SY f © ws 
—— _ _— wy kl » - ” 408 th So » , _ <4 " 4 G b, , - . - © ns D - 4 * a a+ bs j v7 wa x " % —_ DET TE” " M5 : 5 FT 1 | p 1 "i Uh > - Sv ny. ed ft »F4 FA + —_ darade | 6 | Hes ago) ow - * —W - 
- | hg | w *, = - bay " . as Wu : ' _ nw WL i "2 "FE d Ln TS ' . Is. : g mo L M6 i - wy « pt har 4 0 _ P 
” . - co co : —_ - ak. Ls ' _ - = Cy nie bg . A - 4 + wr es . > C - - - F " A 2. >. a NON os "oi oo —_—_— La. © L.A j 
4 4 ——_ _ —_ pE by a On -XIP2 ES Eo reef 2-4 Ft.  __ 4 = _—_ ww _ ad = a b.4 
pu Pas) ks - — moat - — _ —_ YI __— 


Chap. XXXI, 
as Birds do in a quiet and ſafe N 


or Towns of it. d The very 
phick. Beaſts here are People, t 


eſt. t In his Kingdom, in the Cities 
ſame thing expreſt by a new Hierogly- 
he Field is the Countreys round about, 
their bringing forth theirYoung, includes their making their Dens, 
that is Mens buildings begetting Children, and breeding them under 
his Branches, under his Government and ProteQtion. e This gives ſome 
Light to the Riddle. No Nation that was great at that time in the 
World, bur either own'd the Dominion, or ſought the Alliance and 
Friendſhip of tliis King and Kingdom: 

- "['hus was he fair fin his oreatneſs g, in the length of 


his branches þ : for his root # was by great & waters. 

f Beautiful, lovely and deſirable. _ g Not exerted in Tyranny and 
Opprefiion, but exerciſed in the Royal Art of imitating the greateſt 
and beſt Being, whois King over all, for he doth good to all. þ How 
far ſoever remote, yet-the Juſtice and Goodneſs of the Government 
appeared the Beauty of thoſe Provinces as we!l as of the whole King- 
dom. 3 Whence he ſprang, which ſupparted and ſupp'ied the King- 
dom, was Right, the Laws, Puniſhments, Rewards and Encourage- 
ments, neither founded in Cruelty, nor-maintained by Violence. k Not 


AZEKIEL 


Chap : 0 ha 


| that run in the Bottoms ſois this mighty Cedar, this King and K; 
dom fallen from higheſt Power and greateſt Honour, into hanna 
; tempt and Impotence, not able to repeal his Adverſaries, or eſca £ 
out of their Hands. þ All that were tributary to him, have x 
— their —_ 0 cy wins his Dominion ; and ſuch as wers 
' kis Allies, and depended on his Patronage, have quitgheir Le 
 Deperidences, and left his Shadow. , F eg 


03. Upon his ruin # ſhall all the fowls & of the heaven 
[remain, and all the beaſts ] of the field ſhall be upon his 


branches. 

| + His broken State. & Which builr and bred there, ſhall now 
ſpiſe the Tree, and triumph over it. / The ſame in Sov arg 
as ver, 6, Bzaſts, Fowls, Peopie and Nations that were ſheltred unde: 
the Shadow of this Tree, ſhall all, asis the Cuſtom of all, of them _ 
from under it, and with the firſt inſult and trample upon the Bo? ; 
Boughs and Branches ; Fowls get on it and both pick and defile Beaſts 
ruſtle through it and brouſe on the broken Branches. TI 


I4 To the end » that none of all the trees » by the wa. 
ters 0 exalt p themſelves for their height, neither ſhoot up 


by Blood, which 1s no proper kindly Nouriſhment for ſuch Cedars, : - , 
but by Waters which are kindly and proper, and theſe great enough their top among the thick boughs, neither their trees | {tand I : 
for his own growth, and bs nouriſh others too. up 1n their height, all that drink water : 9 for * they are |0; I. G74 ) 
* Cen.zs. 3 The cedars > in the * garden of God » could not |2ll delivered unto death, to the nether parts of the carth fon f 
hide him: the fla-trees 0 were not like his boughs , and (1 the midſt of the children of men, with them that paths " 
the cheſnut-trees p were not like his branches : nor|down to the pit. "Pj; 1 
any 9 tree in the garden of God was like unto him in his 72 All this is deſignedrobe a Warning to Mortals, » 7. e. the E ; 
beauty. PR, NE Kir:gs, orrich flouriſhing States. o Planted __ 3 l | 
m Kings the greateſt and moſt magnificent. » Either in the moſt ah —— ws —Yy with Power and Wealth, 3 wn 
fruptul Gardens, or in Tudah and Iſracl ; not Davida, not Solomon, Je-|thick Boughs the! N "oy oY ROT nn ANODE BUT | TOPS above all the ; gc 
hoſhaphat or Heeckiah could top and ſhade him. o A meaner ſort of | 61 1tin Hers is ms" This Caution againſt Pride and Self. 4 cl 
Trees, emblem of leſſer Kings and Kingdoms, tneſe were notlike his' (js —_ eh —_— — that all, eſpecially great Men, and ” 
Boughs, though they grow to great height and bulk. p The ſame in; pe pombe g = EH's w_ om this Parable-is propounded, ſhould _ 
another A/lnjimm, Kings, ike Cheſnurt Trees, great when by themſelves, | are Men, : { : r : Tr ce they are Gods, yet by Nature they | A; 
yet conpared with this Aſjrian, were but as Branches of his Boughs,; ,1Q + 7 M, Y 4 b Jags of God, who cannot die, theſe Gods B Hr 
all which in 1ſ9:a#'s Words, chap. 10. 7,8.there was ſome truth, though | 1;1e Fig nemmnaies. e Jaid = _—O forgotten like other Men, = 
more pride in this Speech of the #ſjriar, which the Prophet re-! ng diftinaion B mean Men, for that Death and the Grave make = cle; 
=_ 7 All ſummed up, none like him in all the Kingdoms of the; you yy" . Be norproud, God will pull down ſuch ; be humble, U fan 
Vorld. ——_— 4 
o o 4 » as I T ; Z 
© Ihave made him fair » by the multitude s of his bran- Ss. _ —_— —_ _ q In the day when her "es 
ches : ſo that all the trees of Eden, that were in the garden'req the deep us ny, rg mT leet -< 4 ay and ma 
of God, envied him. | thereof, and the great waters y were ſtayed; how Lo k Wer 
n Allthis Greatneſs, Wealth and Glory I have given him. s The, Lebanon z to F mourn for hi d Td i Ccauk bc: # 
Numbers of his Provinces, and multitude of his, Subjedts, high and | field fainted 6 f _ im, and all the trees 4 of the = Whi 
low, _—_ and ſma])]. R o_ did when they ſaw his greatneſs, or bn or him; ; HH Lion 
would have envied if they had ſeen it; or 1f there may be 2 ſeemin r The King of 4/hria, the tall Cedar, or the K: _ = neve 
Juſtifiablenels in wondring at another's Glory, and wiſhing 1t our _ Was like a Man in a Grave,buried in its own __—_ day # Creat 
here ir might be found. a er % T put the Sea, 3.e- either neighbouring States, or Wo 
10 T Therefore thus ſaich the Lord GOD, becauſe rs —_—_ : _— ee rng Part of the World, into mour. BP. oy 
thou haſt lifted x up thy ſelf in height, and he hath ſhot up | ligences w Fg Ja” em airs, Commerce and friendly Intel. WWF «eq. 
his w© id. chick ban! 1h; ye - ligences were at a great ſtand. » The great Traffick and Wealth b Y 
nis top among the tNICK DOUgNsS, an his heart is lifted up | ©; which did flow as great Waters, were ſtaid, and living Rivers ”_ kf oy 
in his h<zght 5 ; as void of Motion as the Dead Sea, all was out of Courſe. x The 7 _ 
x Now you ſhall hear the Sin, and the Fall of this great Kingdom Field in which this Cedar grew, 7. e. the whole Kingdom of A/yri I = 
of Aſſria. 6 Bis mind could not longer bear ſo great Proſperity, he zs All the leſſer Kings, and Pmnces about him. 6 Fell into a ſwound ; 4 
lifes up himſelf, and in his Pride forgets God who lifted him up; and at the News, of this great and unparalle'd downfal of this mighty F thee | 
will caſt him down. You have a Specimen of it in that of 1/2. 10.7, 8, King and Kingdom ; which hath been here in ſacred Hyperbols ſet forth of ch 
9. with the reſt ro the 207h werſe, and Iſa: 36.9, 15, 18. this as other | ©2 warn Egypr, and convince it, none can ſtand whom God will caſt Þ beaſt: 
beſt framed Politics degenerated into Pride and Violence againſt down. Whether there were any portentous ſigns in the Sea, and great F- | 
Neighbours, Subjects, Friends as well as againſt Enemies. Though Waters, and the Rivets, and among the trees, prefages of this fa, i ini 
roo much *rwas to deſpiſe Man, yet *twas intolerably more inſolent to and pointed at here, I enquire not. : | | [ef : 
reproach 4 It is = _— lop, nay cut down this Cedar, as 1/a.| 16 IT made the nations to ſhake *£ at the ſound of hi _ Fa 
10. 33. with 1/a. 37. 36, 38. fall : P | 
. - - w ” f1 
+ Heb. '» IT I have therefore delivered p him 9 into the hand|d { _ OO RN Rel! , with cham tht led wi 
doinz be of the mig! of he: hb elcend into the pit: and all the trees x of Eden, the wh 
yi Fey the mighty one 7 of the heathen: + he fhall ſurely | choice and beſt of Lebanon , all that drink bn "_—. 
COR deal with him , I have driven # him out for his wicked-|be comforted & in tl "he - F rink water y, tal Wo 
Ys OW. 16 nether parts of the Earth, and fi 
In y prophetick Stile, as ſome think I have, becauſe I wil, for Rt _— — _ of his fall trembled at it, *twas as God of 
moſt certainly God will deliver. 9 Proud King of 4/jria, who in-|King and Ki e, an aſtoniſhment to them all. » Brought th: s Whi 
herited all the Vices of his Progenitors more than their Kingdoms, in- beg anc Kingdom, as a dead man to the grave among them, that In heig 
ous Sardanapalys. r Some ſay Cyrus, rather Arbaces, who firſt | ef m—_ oo _— and buried, All Kings, and particularly the greats or mat 
ſtrook at the Root of this Cedar, and cut him down ; and well might |e 3 riche called here the choice, and beſt. of Lehanov. / Did c Witl 
his Man, thou oh no King when he attempted this , be tiled the oy great Power, Riches,jand worldly Glory. z *Tis a Proſopopeis, r1ght : 
mighty ons of the Heathen, who could bring together four hundred thou- a e ſpeaks of the dead with alluſion to the manner of the living, qu'on a 
ſand of Medes, Perſians, Babylonians and Arabians, a power ſufficient | p w# 50" to ſee the proud brought, as low as the loweſt, thus tit a 61 
a = Aſrian King two Years in his own City and Palace. One, 3% 3s th 0 | thou 
on _—_— G w he he[d _ mms wichoye Pope of relief , tillat| 17 They aallo went down into b hell with him, unto z. ſhall bi 
l s end this VIC10us K.ng burnt imſelfwith his Palace. * With | ther that be lain with the ſword : d th h his a M 
diſgrace for his lewd ſhameleſs Courſes, asa Wite is caſt out by divorce | arm, that dwel g © 01.095 Ahhtere-aat | = water L 
for Adulttry, Lev. 21.7. So Sardanapalus was caſt out for his effe. 1 welt under his ſhadow in the mid(t of tv Ba plent 
minacy and may 5 : for *tis reported thfis gave Arbaces firſt Fncou- heathen, this Lis 
ragement to Jay a Dctign againſt him, who was driven out, as the Pro-| # Either his neighbour Kings and Pr: his map 
ys words ir, by the breach of two Mile and half widenels, made by | 9wn SubjeQs, hn and es, b nu burhangd pad d”" _— ft : 
7 __—y Floods from continual Rains, which the Walls of Nincuch him, and went to thoſe God had {lain for their pride and wickednels | thallbeſ} 
could not withſtand,ſo God rather than Man did drive this Beaſt out, | His loyal and faithful Subje&s and Friends abroad who having I think 
* Ch.2g.7, 72 And ſtrangers c, *the terrible d of the nations, have been 5 porn; by him, remembred it, and adhered ro him ts {up ſhould be 
cut him off e, and have leſt him f : upon the mountains g Port mw Fg = fell, we net and gone down to the pit, whe" Wa thy Bloo 
and in all the vallies his branches are fallen, and his boughs aſhes, and God plerkanr, hal -” - atom "RE 
are broken by all the rivers of the land, and all t PO ONE T MA 
th ar do c and, and all the people] 18 © * To whom & artthou thus like in glory and 1 i the hi 
- reg re gone down from his ſhadow, and have p_—_ among the trees of Eden ? yet ſhalt thou * i" cover «| 
© rought down e with the trees of Ed he nethe' BF: give h 
"EM . , en unto the N bY& net 
TEA > nn My ele a wr mwanys | __ ey, Berk were = of the earth: thou ſhalt lie F in the midlt 0 To Asa 
S 4 44. Fu e bd o A 4 p 
for their Strength and Valour much, bur for their Numbers and Bar- Tn 4 —— with avg: __ by lain win day's F ood and 
barity more to be dreaded. e Not ſhall, for *twas done before Exe- _— araoh and all his multicude , faith the Lo! eſcrj ' 
wb c___ Oo the time Hezekia/ was born, and about 240 Years GOD. = TR 
zefore the deſtruQtion of Fers/e/cm, and the Babyloniſh Captivir *Iht5 - . 
-: | iry. f Re-| 4 The mightieſt, richeſt and longeſt liv'd Ki re repre: IM, In \ 
_— - < -rans_5-4 z Asa Tree, that growing onthe | ſented, ſaith God, overthrown and hored : —_— jt oe Gs 
; ins, which hang over the Valleys when ir falls, breaks,and its | not pretend to equal, and if not like this, w ag King or Kingdon arl Mrs, the 
thou like, that thou ſhould'ft be invincible? e who er! thou art oe 0 


Branches are ſcattered 1 , bd ed. . 
C tered in the lower Ground, on the Banks of Rivers 


P gy 
-1 Height and Power, thou ſhalr be like them in thy Fall and Ri- 
in"? As unclean, deſpiſed and loathſom in thy Blood, like the Slain 


— Sword, not to be known without an upbraiding Inſcription 


Tits 15 Pharaoh. 


CH AP. XXXIL 


4 lament ation for the fearful fall of Eg) Pt, for their pride and Tyranny, by the 
ſword of Babylon, 1 —17. A aeſcription of their fall and ruin, with 
other proud rulers and nations, 18—J32. 


1 - ND ic come to paſs in the twelfth year a, in 


the twelfth month 5, in the firſt c day of the 
month, :hat the word of the LORD came unto me, 


: Of the Captivity of Jeconiah. b Anſwering to part of our Febru- 


ar; and part of March, and called Sabat. c And was the 15th of Febr. 
old ſtile, and the 5:4 new ſtile. ; 
2 Son of man, take dup a lamentation for Pharaoh 


eking of Egypt, and ſay unto him, Thou art like a 
& ,., young lion f of the nations g, and thou art as a {| whale 
17 in the ſeas 5: and thou cameſt forth with thy rivers k, 

and troubledſt the waters / with thy feet 2, and fouled(t 


» their rivers. 

1 See chap. 19. vir. I. let. a,b, c. and chap. 27. wer. 2. let. a, 6. 
e Enphra. f This Hicroglyphick ſee chap. 19. wer. 3. let.s. and wer. 6. 
Jet.;. g Among, orto the Nations round about thee, ſpoiling all thou 
canſt, a cruel Devourer abroad. hþ A Crocodile, a devoucing Dra- 
gon in thy Rivers ar Home, for there the Crocodiles lay and did Miſ- 
chief, though ſometimes they went down the River to the Sea. 7 That 
comes forth to ſeek prey and devour, ſo a Lion at Land, a Whale 
or C:ocodi!e rather at Sea, ravenousevery where. & Raifedſt mighty 
Armie;,and didſt lead them our againſt thy Neighbours, as in particu- 
lar, cap. 29. 3, 4+ 7 The People, Kingdoms and Kings near thee, 
m Wich thy Souldiers. » Diſturbedſt and muddieſt their pleaſant 
clearneſs, and madeſt them unfit to drink, 7. e. did{t ſpoil all the plea- 
fant and uſeful Conveniences of thy Neighbours. - | 
# Thus faith the Lord GOD, I will therefore 
ap.12.* ſpread out o my net over thee, with a company of 
and many 9 people, and-they ſhall 7 bring thee up in my 
W. netr. 
þ o A large, long and wide Net, drawn out to full extent. p With 
which both Lions and Crocodiles might be taken, and in which this 
Lion and Crocodile ſhould certainly be taken ; for God, whoſe Hand 
never erreth, will ſpread the Net. q In the Countreys where theſe 
Creatures were hunted; for they went in mighty Companies to the 


ln Game, as they accounted it. r Drag thee along to deſtroy thee, pull 
or thee up our of the Pir, in which the Net was laid to take the Lion to 
"n killhim, and draw this Crocodile up out of the Water for the ſame 


end. In brief, War by Land and Sea, by a Confederacy of many Peo- 
ple againſt Hophra, ſhall be God's Net, wherein he ſhall be taken, 
 kepta Priſoner, as he was, and at Iaſt ſtrangled, ſee chap. 29. wer. 4. 
= ltr. 

4 Then willI leave thee s upon the land, I will caſt 
* thee forth upon the open field, and will cauſe all the fowls 
' of the heaven to remain «upon thee, and I will fill the 
beaſts of the whole x earth with thee. 

s Thy beaten Army ſhall be ſlain, ſee chap. 29. 5. it was literally 
fulfilled in the Deſerts of Lybia, where the Slain of Hophra's Army were 
kft to be devoured by Fowls and Beaſts. Meraphorically *tis gather- 
ing a mixture of People, Souldiers, like ravenous Birds and Beaſts, 


bs | from all Parts to ſpoil Egyp!, u They ſhould not be removed, till fil- 
hat led with the Spoils of Egypt. x The foreign and mercenary Soul- 
the diers ſhall be enrich'd by the Slaughter and Plunder of the Egyprians. 
hal 5 And I will lay ythy fleſh z upon the mountains 4, 
' andfill b thevalleys with thy height c. | 

Gol y Throw or caſt; xz The Carcaſes of thy ſlain Men and Souldiers. 
the FF © Whither they retired forſafety. 5 Not ſo fill them as to equal them 
thit | in height with Hills, but we ſay a Man fillsa Place,who ſcatters much, 
reed or many things, though but on the Surface ; ſohere, Valleys filled. 
Bl With the Carcaſes of thy Princes, as the Chald. Paraphraſt I think hits 
my right: And fo the French ( Et remplirai les wallees dz tes Glorieux 
ns, | qgqu'on aura abbatu.') 


"8 6 I will alfo water d with thy bloodithe [| land wherein 
z thou ſwimmeſt e, even to the mountains; and the rivers 
pr. ſhall be full of thee g. 

 « Moſt plentifully pour out thy Blood, as Water is poured out to 
= water Land when Men float their Grounds. e Either becauſe of the 
& plenty thereof, wherein they ſwimm'd as we ſpeak, or elſe becauſe 
this King was a Whale or Crocodile, his dwelling muſt be the Waters, 


unto 
Ce his 
f the 


re his WG 2ndin them he ſwimmerth. f An Hyperbole,Blood ſhall be poured forth, 
- with WE 2 if ir were to riſe to the very Mountains, and cover them, or thy 
dneb, | ſhallbeſhed chrough all thy plain Country to the very Mountains,which 
aving I think are roward the South-Weſt Parts toward Ethiopia ; ſo they 
@ {up ſhould be ſlain from Miegdol or Magaala to Sy:ne, as chap. 29. i109. g Of 
whett | thy Blood, and of thy Carcaſes caſt into the Rivers by thine Enemies, 
t and or drow'd in attempting flight by Water from the drawn Sword. | 


7 And when I ſhall ||put thee + our, I will * cover 


nd i ithe heaven, and make the ſtars thereof dark : I will 
21 b'' WR” cover che ſun with a cloud, and the moon ſhall not 
xethel BN. £''e her light, : 

a(t 0 . + Asa Torch is extinguiſh'd, 1ſ-. 43.17. ſol will pntout thy Light, 
vord | mm turn thee into Darkneſs. # Either by dark Vapours thar ariſe from 
Lord Blood and putrifying Carcaſes which darken the Heavens ; or tis a 


Deſcription of great Sorrows, Fears, Troubles and Perplexities ; or 
| Elle it may intimate particularly the roral Ruine of rhe whole King- 
com, in which the beſt, greateſt and nobleſt Parts are,as Heaven, ſup- 
2012 the Government; the Sun, the King ; theModon, the Queen ; the 
| ar5,the Prince, and Nobles ; Bright Lighrs the moſt eminent of the 


EZEKEL 


Common People : All tha!l be covered with Clouds, and darkr:fs 

of Miſery firſt, and Sorrow next ; or 'tis poſſible that ſome unuſual 

_ might be ſeen in the Heavens, and on the Earth about ther 
ime. 

8 All the + bright lights of heaven will I make + dark tf 1-b 
over thee, and ſet darkneſs upon thy land, faith the Lord light of 5. 
GOD. | _ Fo 

Theſe two foregoing Verſes contain the ſame thing four times with + wo 
4 little variation, repeated to effe& the carer, and to impreſs it the 5/em #211 
more deeply on their Minds. | | Det: 
9 1 will alfo + vex &the hearts of many 7 people, when f Heb-2--- 
[ ſhall brtng thy deſtruRtion »» among the nations, into the "** Ee 
countreys which thou haſt not known 7. — 2 
& Ic ſpeaks a Paſſion mixt and made up with Grief for what is done, 

f Fear of the Conſequence of it, Anger againſt him that did ir, and an 
Aſtoniſhment at the Reporr, and it ſeizeth the Heart and Spirits ofthe 
Hearers. 1 And great Nations. m Either the fame of it, or the re- 
mainders that fled timely from thy Deſtru&ion.; or thy Captives,who 
after thou art deſtroyed, are carried away, and the News of thy Fall 
with them;or when the like Ruin and Deſtru&ion ſhall fall upon them. 
2 Such as were Stangers to Ezypt, and which Egyp! had no Commerce 
with, ſhall be troubled with apprehenſion what Miſchief may come 
upon the World from ſo mighty a Conqueror, and by the acceſſion of 
ſo great a Kingdom and Power as that of Egypt. | 

19 Yea, | will make many » people amazed p at thee, 
and their kings 9 ſhall be horribly 7 afraid for thee, when 

[ ſhall brandiſh « my ſword before them ; and * they ſhall * Chao. 
tremble 7 at every moment, every man # for his own life x, 2. 16. 
in the day of thy y fall. 

o And mighty People too. p Aſtoniſh'd and puzzÞ'd, not knowing 

what Reſolutions to take, what Advices to follow, or what to do. 

4 Who uſually are, arid in reaſon ſhould be undaunted, and diſcover 
no Signs of Fear, ſhall diſcover mighty diſorders of fear and doubr, 

both for Egypr. and themſelves. » Vid. chap. 27. wer. 35. let.e, f. 

s Or make my Sword paſs with ſuch ſpeed, as if did fly along their 
Borders, or hover near them, and fo chreaten them. # Be greatly 
afraid, left Nebuchadnezzar, who here is God's Sword, ſhould ſmicz 
them. # Every one of the Kings, whoſe Kingdoms are near to Ezypr, 
and by whoſe Borders the Babz/oniſh Army muſt paſs in their Marches. 

x They ſhould be ſolicitous, not for the outmoſt Parts of their Kings 
doms, or for their Subje&s, but for their own Life. » When they ſhall 
hear of Hophra beaten, taken, impriſoned, his Kingdom taken from him, 
and he dead by a ſhameful Death; and all his People flain, captivated, 

ſpoiled or fled. 

11: T For thus faith the Lord GOD, The ſword » of 

the king of Babylon ſhall come upon thee 4. 

, Seechap.30. 24, 25. & Both King and Kingdom of Egypt: 
12 By the ſwords of the mighty 5 will I cauſe thy mul- 

titude to fall c, * the terrible 4 of the nations all of them z * Chap. 
and they ſhall ſpoil the pomp e of Egypt, and all the mul- 28. 7. 


titude thereof ſhall be deſtroyed f. 

b The Souldiers of N:brchaanezzar help'd alſo by 4maſis, and the re. 
bellious Egyptians that joined with Amaſis and Nebuchadnezzar againſt 
their own King. c The People ofthe Land, which werenumercus before 
they were waſted by theſe Wars. a See chap. 31. wer. 12. let. d. 
e Break her Strength, rob her Treaſures, ſack her Cities, captivate 
her People, and make the Kingdom Tributary, and fo ſtain all her Glo- 
rye. F From hig to low, the great and the mean promiſtuouſly ſhall 
periſh. 


13 I will deſtory alſo all the beaſts g thereof from 
beſides the great þ waters, * neither ſhall the foot of man 
trouble them z any more, nor the hoofs & of beaſts trouble 


them. 
Z£ The Sheep and Oxen devoured by hungry Chald:axs Souldiers, or 
elſe driven away : The Horfes taken up to mount the Horſemen of the 
Chaldee Army, whoſe own Horſes were tired or ſpoiled. þ The Pa- 
{tures lying along the Rivers-ſide, and along their Canals, ſhould be 
emptied of all Cattel, with which once they were full. #7 There 
ſhould be fo few Men left in Egypt, that they ſhould nor, as formerly, 
diſturb the Waters by digging, ſwimming of rowing on them, or elſe 
no more trouble the Waters with the paſſing of mighty Armies over 
them to invade their Neighbours. & So few Horſe or Cows, that they 
ſhould not at watering times, or 1n heat of the Day, foul the Waters 
by running into them, and ſtamping or trampling in them ; but the 
Waters ſhall continue pure and undiſturb'd. | 

14 Then will I make their waters deep /, and cauſe 
their rivers to run like oil , faith the Lord GOD. 

1 The Senſe 1:terally this, the Waters undiſturbed ſhall be clear, 
the Mud ſettled at the Bottom, and the Waters above it_of good 
depth. » Smooth and ſoftly, as Oil glides along, which will be when 
neither Men nor Cattel diſturb the Rivers: but-#zuratively Waters and 
Rivers are People and Narions, and thofe near to, and once diſtur- 
bed, and put into confulion by Ezyp?r, at whoſe Fall all thoſe Troubles 
ſhall ceaſe, the People ſhall ſettle in quiet State, and Afﬀairs ſhall, like 
a quieted River, run ſmoothly, and in great Peace. 

i5 When I ſhall make the land of Egypt deſolate, 
and the countrey ſhall be -þ deſticute 0 of that p where- 4 :14,5,, 
of it was full, when I fhall ſmite q all them that gevare 
dwell therein , then ſhall they know »r that I am the from 55: 
LORD. Jabueſy 
» The former Verſe afſuresus of what it foretold,and the Aſſurance *7*< 
i5the Word and Truth of God ; this Verſe rells us when this hall be. 
o This Phraſe-is chap. 12. 19. let. y, þ Men and Women, Catre], 
Food, Wealth and Peace. 9 By the Sword, the d:ſtroying Sword of 
the Chaldeans. r Then ſhall they confeſs it to rhe Glory of Gods's 
Power and Juſtice, 


16 This s # the lamentation * wherewith 'they « 


FI ef. 


* Chap. 
29. 1?. 


Sbj:&s for Wiſdom and Underſtanding ; and then the Land the 


ſhall lament her ; che daughters x of the nations ſhall 
lament 


Chap. KSXIEL 


OSV Sz 


7 2:5 IA * 
Deli - - Sr > — a > k 
C Poe ———— at 45 wn The. - ie SL + 
» >Mq” ds ” = _ ew - wy o "_— - PITS - < by oy . 
_— mm fot 0 Wigs g x Po - - ITE _— 3 7-1 ect - S+, 
Tl, 942 £4 & . iP . D—_ . = F ©S geen” fg ; 
tg « na > , , 5 
» yp be 2" % TY Un; 4 4 a {4 
© > __ Ron 678 2 2A _ __ OT 
$1 NG POET. % Pos . / > N 4 l 


nes 
_— — 
Fart v 


Oo 
- Ci : 
- — = 
< Mrs vs MAE <P. OT 
at _ - 
oomnr any cy a7 
Ds.. 
S ; 


Mg Chip. XXXIL 


— 


Egypt 7 and for all her- multitude z, faith the Lord 


« This heavy, mournſul, and Tad account, which the Prophet hath 
given of the State of Ezypr. The Funeral-Spzech of this Kingdom ; 
tor this, as Funeral-Orations, tell us what was their antient Glory, 
and what is now their miſerable Reproachand Loſs. « Her Friends, 

WY or the Ezyprians themſelves rather. z This may be expoſitory of the 
WORK ARE. | - former, and tell us who they are that ſhall lament Czy9:. The Pro- 
| vinces, and Cities of their Neighbouring Nations ; or literally, the 
Dauglers, the tender-hearted Virgins, and Women abroad. y Ruin d 
E2yp:. 2 The common People, many of which ſuffercd for what they 
could not prevent; a ſort of People that were ſitter to be pitied and 
{pared, than to be robb'd and ſlain ; a fort of People, none but unre- 
tenting Hearts could be harſh to, or haſty with. 


17 E lt came to paſs alſo in the twelith year a, in 
the fifteenth day b of the month, 744: the word of the 


LORD came unto me, ſaying, | 

a Sce wer. 1. let. a, b. 6 About the 1974 of February New Stile, or 
the 1/7 of March Old Stile. 

18 Son of man, wail <« for the multitude of Egypt» 
and caſt them down d, eve» her, and the daugh- 
ters e of the famous nations, unto the nether parts 


fof the earth, with them that go down into the 
210 F. 
| © the Funeral-Ceremonies at the Burial of Exypr, compoſe 
a ſutabls Song or Speech, utter it with a like Sutableneſs to the ſad 
Occation. Jer. 9. 17, 18,19. and Amos 5. 16. uſe the Word, and the 
Places read will explain rhis. & Either declare that they ſhall be 
caſt down from their Height and Glory, or becauſe this was doneal- 
ready, rather lay them down as dead in the Grave, bring him to 
his Grave, as the word is uſed with addition of Seo, 1 King 2.9, 
and much like are chap; 26. 20. let. b. 4. and chav, 31, 16. let. . 
e And ce<lebrare the Funerals of other Citics and Kingdoms, that lie 
buried in their own Ruins, and other Mens Oblivion, f A well 
known Dcſcription of the State of the Dead, and the Grave. g Uſu- 
ally thisis no more than a common Deſcription of Mens going to «the 
Duſt in their Burial, but here it includes mote : The Egyptians affeted 
to be buried either in the Iſle Chemms, or in the Pyramids ; their 
Kings, and great Ones thus would be laid by themſelves : but Ezekiel 
rovides them their Grave among common People, buries them where 
they fall; for they ſhall not have what they account ſo much of in 
their Funeral. 


19 Whom fdoſt thou paſs in beauty ? go downg, 
and be thou laid þ with the uncircumciſed 7. 

The whole from this Verſe, is a moſt elegant perſonating of the 
Dead, as if ſenſible and acquainted , and diſcourling with, and re- 
joicing at the Fallof proud Tyrants, who took not warning by their 
Fall. Such a Profopopeia you have Iſa. 14. In this Chapter, the Ators 
are the Propher, the King of Egypr, and his People, and their Auxilia- 
ries. f The Propher begins with this Queſtion Dialogue wiſe, Art 
thou better than others, that thou ſhouldeſt not die, and be laid in 
Duſt, as well as all others? ſpeak Hophra, if thou haſt any Privilege 
to plead, what haſt thou to ſay, why thou ſhouldeſt nor go down to 
the Pic as a deſpiſed Mortal? g The Prophet hearing no Plea of Pri- 
vilege, adjudgeth him to the Grave, or lays him down with ſome. 
what of a Sarcaſm, Go down like others. 5 Take up thy Lodging, 
thy long, dark, and diſmal Receſs, where thy Duſt and Bones ſhall 
never be known by any Royal Figure. - Among profane and loathed 
Carcaſles, ſuch the Uncircumciſed were in the Opinion of che Circum- 
ciſed ; and Herodotus in Enuterpe, ſaith the Egyptians were circumciſed. 
However, in Scriptures a Burial with the Uncircumciſed is a Note of 
Diſhonour and Contempt. Thus for the King and Princes. 


20 They & ſhall fall in the midſt 7 of them that are 
- Or. :3-{1ain by the ſword »-: || ſhe is delivered » to the fwordo; 
Shut] * draw p her and all her multitudes 9. 


la:d. Now the Prophet determines concerning the People, which die as 
others, fallundiſtinguiſh'd, and, asſuchuadiſtinguith'd, muſt be Jaid 
in the Pit. k The Egyptians. 1 In Battel ſhall die. mn Of either 
one another in Civil War, or.of their Neighbours they invaded, or of 
Babylouians that invaded them. » The whole EgyptianKingdomis gi- 
ven up of God. o Of waſting Enemies, eſpccially of the Chaldeax, 
p Make no Ceremony more than uſually is made, when common 
Souldiers, flain in the Field where the Batte] is fought, are dragg'd 
by Scores into mighty Pits, and thrown into them promiſcuoully ; 
or,as the Interlude will bear it ſuppoſe any of them unwilling to ſtoop, 
draw them to it agaiaſt their Will. q Of Souldiers and People,Subjetts 

Allies, and Helpers of Egypr. 
21 The ſtrong r among the mighty s ſhall ſpeak to 
him * out of the midſt of hell « with them that help 
x him : they are gone down y, they lie z uncircumciſed, 

lain by the ſword. 

The Prophet ſeems in this Verſe to introduce the next Speakers in 
this Parly, and bringing them in, gives their Chara&er. » The 
PO Powerful, the Valiant, whoſe natural Strength of Body was great, and 
IWR)" | their Courage greater, thoſe that were ſtrongeſt, s For Fears they | 
I did, by which it appearedthey might, compared with others, paſs for 
261 LL Giants, migthy Warriours, Conquerors and Rulers. + The King of 
01; 906.8 Ezypt. #4 Or rather the Grave, where they lie without Strength, as 
(4 (8A: | dead Mortals ; though while they lived, they bore themſelves, as if 


=— & #—; . 
CENT 2 DEC I” "I 
”Y p—D - 2005, p _ PS 
. = - 


wee If Jer :. 

wt "'Y 22 Aſhur @ x there & and all her company «: his 
Wh, 1 graves are about him &d; all of chem ſlain e, fallen by 
the ford. 


HIZEKIELI. 


lacaent her : they hall fament for her, ever for| 


Gods, and immortal. x Either theſe great Ones ſhall ſpeak to Hophra's | 4 n : : ; 
Helpers, or elſe theſe his Friends {lain in his Quarrel, and dead before | 27 And they ſhall not lie e with the mighty, 7 bat ave 
him ſhall ſpeak to him. » To the Grave, ſee wer. 18. It. d. z Neg- fallen of the uncir cumciſed, which are gone down (9 


iefted, and forgotten, or remembred with Contempt , ſe wer. 19. | hell with 


a The famous, warhke, victorious Kings of Aria. & In the State 
of the Dead, in the Land of Darkneſs and Oblivion. c Princes, Cap- 
tains, Souldiers, Subjetts and Confederates. & Perhaps his the rea- 
ter ; yet a Grave, and they about him, who were {lain with him. 
e Some in Wars,whi)ſt the Kingdom began, grew and flouriſh'd ; others, 
when the Kingdom was deſtroyed ; theſe fell by the Sword, a while 
their Sword was longeſt, at laſt a longer Sword, that of 4rbaces the 
Mede , with his Complices, wounds 4ſbur to the Heart, and he js 
brought to the Grave. 


23 Whoſe f graves are ſet in the fides of the pit, and 
her company g is round abeut her + grave: all of them 


the land of the living &. 

f Artleaſt for Decorum here isſuppoſed a ſpacious Vault,or Pir ; in 
midſt whereof the King of 4ſþur in a ſtately Tomb lie buried, and 
roundabout the Vault Places to lay others dead with him, and in his 
Cauſe, ſome of his more famous Captains and Commanders. s The 
common Subjetts, and Souldiers ofthe 4ſjrian Empire, all buried un. 
diſtinguiſh'd about her; ſee wer. 22. let.d. h4 The Ruins of an Em- 
pire are its Grave, and fo all the Subje&s of this Empire lie buried 
with it. : Were a Terror to all they would be Enemies to ard 
proudly boaſted of, and inhumanely uſed their Power, now lie quict 
their Duſt lictle regarded, leſs feared,and leaſt of all pitied. & While 
they were in the Land of the Living, a Periphrafi; of Life. 


24 There &s Elam / and all her multitude m2 coung 
about her grave, all of them ſlain », fallen by the 
ſword, which are gone down © uncircumciſed þ into 
the nether parts q of the earth, ' which cauſed cheis 
terrour 7 in the Jand of the living, yet | have they 
born their ſhame 5s with them that go down to the 

Ik, 

1 The Perſians, and their great famous Kings, who lived in former 
days. m Ver,22.Jet.c. and wer. 23. letg, h. n Vid. we.22. o See 
wer. 20. let. y. p Vid. wer. 20. let.z. q Vid. ver. 18. let. d, + See 
ver. 23. Jet.z. s God and Man poured Contempt upon them, and 
puniih'd them for their Pride, and turned their Glory into Shame: 
whoſe Vicesand Miſcarriages are more remembred than their nobl: 
Fats and glorious Atchievements. 


25 They have ſet her a bed * in the midſt of the 
ſlain « with ail her multitude x : her graves are round 
about y him : all of them uncircumciſed, lain by the 
ſword : though their tecrour was cauſed in the land of 
the living, yet have they born their ſhame & with them 
that go down to the pit : he is put in the midlt » of rm 
that be ſlain. | 

z Some conceive the Prophet may allude to the Manner of burying 
with the Perſians; who had-their Coffins,or Sepulchral Cheſts,in which 
with Balms and Spices the Dead were kept, and theſe Cheſts placed in 
midſt of Places provided for them ; in ſuch is the King of Z!am here 
placed with his «flaughtered Captains about him : Vid. ver. 23. ler. b. 


x Ver.22.let.c. » Ver. 22, let. d. x Fer. 24. let.s. a See ver. 20, 
ler. /. 


25 There x Meſhech a, Tubal 5, and all her multi- 
tud2 : her. graves are round about. him : all of them un- 
circumciſed , ſlain by the ſword, though they cauſed 
their terrour in the land of the living. 

a See chap. 27. ver. 13.let.l. b Vide chap. 27. wer. 1 3. let. k. To 
which interpretation I {till adhere ; adding, that in the full extent of 
theſe Moſchi, and Tibareni, theſe Cappadocians and Albanians, the Scy- 
thians may be included, many of which were next Neighbours to them. 
Junius 1s of opinion, that the Schytians are here meant, and ſo aml. 
But 'twill be ſaid, they never had ſuch a ſettled Kingdom worth no- 
thing. *T5true of that barbarous People, no account that e're they 
were Lords of the World, yet they cauſed their Terror in the Land 
of the Living, were lain by the Sword-under the Command, and in 
the Expeditions of their Kings into 4s, who were accompanied with 
her Multitudes. 7eleius reports they waſted .4/7a 360 Years before 
Rome was thought of, and that's about 1082 Years before Chrift's 
Birth. Again we find them in Arms. ( no doubt in nembers much 
like what they appeared in, when Tomyris their Queen deſtroyed 
Cyrus, or when they have moved againſt their Neighbours in latter 
days) and with thoſe Arms waſted the Cimmerii, a People ſeared near 
them on the Euxine Sea, and Meotis Palws ; and about. that time they 
did under their Chiefrains waſte 4/7 ; they forced Ciaxares from the 
Stege of Ninevch, ſuch conſiderable Strength they were then of : This 
was 634 before Chriſts Birth, about 117 after Rowe was built. About 
this time, or in this Expedition. they took Sardis, the Royal Seat of 


the Help of Halyatres, King of the Lydians. Theſe things were freſh in 
memory when Ezekiz! propheſied thus againſt Ezypr ; for they fell ou! 
abour the eighth or ninth Year of Pharaoh Necho, ſome fourteen Ye3!s 
before Phararh Hephra came to the Crown ; now about the ſixth Year 
of his Reign, came this Word of the Lord to Ezekie! ; ſo that the Pro: 
phet might well mention theſe,as Inſtancesof God's Power abating ths 
Pride, and deſtroying the Kingdoms of the Mighty, and theſe are wit! 
reaſon brought in among the Perſiavs and 4ſrians, 


- their weapons d of war ; and they hair 
laid their e ſwords under their heads , but their in- 
quity fſhall be upon their bones g, though # 9 
_ the terrour of the mighty 3 in the land of 1 
iving. 


Chap. XXX1 


ſlain, fallen by ther ſword, which cauſed || terrour ; in| Or.;: 


ma J!y > 
— fs) ' 


Creſus, to which Ovid gave the Title of Great, only the Caſtle held 7 
out. Theſe Scythians in thoſe days were a Terror to the Nations.ciw 
Nay, Helvicus tells me from Herodotus, that they had the Imperial 
Power, were Lords of 4fis for 28 years; and it ſeems thar theirw 
Power was ſuch, Cigxares was glad to decline plain Dealing, and to" 
overthrow them by a Wile, as Calviſius tells us 4d Ann. M, 3344, and 33 


F ml 
pO, an 
"Word s& 


, his 
1 F4) Whom 


FE my, 
3 foarh; 
') ſhame 


living 
uncirc 
EVEen 


GOD 


£ [ti 
a Reta 
were a * 
nued V 
Cod ha 


” ments h 


© Hophrat 
” Tithe the 


U like Mi 


= as well | 


= Out with, 
urnt to 
| 15 reſt tot 
| Tunlke, 


Cod ſh-wer 


. a5 they . 


and the 


', TS 


A 
- la.c.? | 


phets, 3 


' Ac 


2 So 


| 4 man 
Man : 

2 The 
Mour 


| 7 I/ I 
[12P- C0001 U 

: The Leaders of theſe Seythions were n2t buried with a Pomp like 
wharof L{fhur, or £99, but ſurprized by the Fraud of Halyarres and 
45. 47e5, WEre Cut off with all cheir Mulrtirude, and tumbled into Pits 
"the Rabble. 4 A Ceremony obſerved in pompous Funerals of 
great Captains, £0 have their Weapons and their Armour carried be- 
tre the Hearſe. e Either when carried out to be buried, or laid un- 
4+ their Head in their Graves y or perhaps under the Statues of them 
made, and laid on the Tops of their Tombs ; theſe barbarous Scythr- 
©. were not to buried. f The exemplary Puniſhment of their Ini- 
a - Shall be ſeen upon their Bones unburied, and caſt out on 
h by the juſt Judgragnt of God. + Becauſe they were cruel; 
L e; 132. bloody, Tavenous, and miſchievouſly ryrannical, while they lived. 

* 7 (:xxavcs, and the Prrſians, that durſt not again attempt Nineveh, till 
the $cvth7 ans were fallen. G 

-3 Yea, thou & ſhalt be broken 7 in the midſt of the 
uncircumciſed, and ſhalt he #2 with thern that are flain » 


with the ſword o. | | 

þ Chief of Meſech and Tabal, though not named. 7 Shall be killed 
with the reſt of thy wicked Followers. » Without regard hurled into 
the Pit wich the common Soldiers,as thou falleſt with them. » Whoſe 
Throars were cut after they were taken. o Of Halyattesand hi+ L:-\) 
dyans, in revenge 'tis like of theSpoil doneto Sardis, and by Ciaxares, 
in revengeof the Aﬀeontthey gave him, forcing him toquir the Siege ' 
of Ninh, and by giving him Childs Fleſh to eat, pretending it was 
Veniſon tiken by them in hunting. =» 

29 There is Edom p, her kings q, and all her prin- 
bcc 7, Which with their s might are - laid by * them 
-1:toat ere Dain by the ſword : they ſhall lie « with the 
uncircumciſed, and with them that go down to the 

IT. 

p The Poſterity of Eſau, the Name of the Country too in which 
they dwelt. q Which had been many, and ſome great Warriours. 
r Or Dukes, as Gen: 36. 20, 21. 5 Shew'din the Afiiſtance they gave 
the £&/hrians, t Are lain, and Jaid aſide to be buried, as Comman- 


g 
QUITY. 
rhe Earth 


ESGESS LD 


Chap. XXXIH. 


c Propound a Parable unto them. 4 Tf at ary time. e War, or any 
fore Judgment. f Chooſe out a Man, who lives on the Borders, 
knows the Avenues and the Ways the Enemy wil! moſt likely come 
to allault chem. g Appoiat him to watch the Coaſts, that they may 
nor be furprized. 

3 It when he ſeeth the ſword bþ come 7 upon 
the land , he blow the trumpet +, and warn / the 
people; | 

h Of the Enemy, or any cther Danger, which k2 may foreſee inany 
of the Cauſes, or Fore-runners of it 7 i. e. Coming, approaching to 


the Land. + Sound the Alam; the Scund of the Truinpet 15 a 


Warning, yer to this ſome:unes 'tis neceſſary / to add a Warning by 
word of Mouth, and teli People, brought together by the Trumper, 
what he ſeerh. | 

4 Then whoſoever + heareth 2 the found of che + Heb. 5: 
trumpet, and taketh not 4 warning; if the ſword come 7-* "-97- 
and take o him away, his blood p ſhall be upon his owns #77 
head 4. | 

7 Conſiders not, and minds not what he hears, who hears and does 
not contider ; he turns a deaf Ear to the Meaning, thoug! not to th5 
Smund of the Trump:t. » Apprehends nor, nor wil! be made ap» 
pretenfive of the Danger, to provide for reſiſting, or flying the Sword. 
0 Deſtroy him. p The Gui'r and Blame of his Blood, of his Death, 
q Shall never be charged on any, but himſelf. 

5 He heard r che {ound of the erumper, and took not 
warning, his biood s (hall be upon him : but te thac ra- 
keth warning, ihaii a472r 7 bis foul v. 

7 He heard, as wells oth..rs who efcap'd, ard he might have 211. 
vercd himlic}f as they did, who took war 1ing.: s Heis iheon'y Cufe 
of his own Death. # Shall fave his Life. « Hinfelf, pretorve his 
own Perton. 

6 Bur 5f the warchman fee tle ſword com ud 
blow » not the trumpet, and the peopie b- not 


ders are uſually after their Death regarded, and their Bodies kept for 
2 Funeral. » Yeras the uncircumciſed, ſo rheſe muſt tothe Pit, though 
no mention made of their being a terror to the Nations. 

39 There be the princes of the north x all of 
them , atzd all the Zidonians, which are gone down 
with the ſlam y; with their terrour 2 they are 
aſhamed @ of their might, and they lie uncircum- 
ciſed b with them that be ſlain by the ſword c, and 
bear 4 their ſhame with them that go down to the 


It. 


which lay Northward from Judea, now ſwallowed up by the Babyloni- 
#17, y Conquer'd and ſlain. z Their Terror is buried with them. 
a When it appeared a vain Confidence, and too weak to reſiſt the Ene. 
my, and fave themſelves. 6 Scorned, and-caſt out, as profane and 
loarhſome. c Of their conquering Enemy. & They lie under a 
ſhameful Fall, from a ſeeming Glory to a Real Ignominy. 


31 Pharaoh ſhall ſee them e, and ſhall be comforted F 


”_ HE AW... 


by the {word faith the Lord GOD. 


EA 


them all ruined, as he was, ſhould f be comforted, or rejoice, others 


t- before him mer with the ſame fatal End ; and, what ever comfort 
d this might be, 'tis all he ſhall ever have, did he know all thoſe 
Things and Perſons that are here repreſented and perſonated to us. 

- " 32 Forlg have cauſed my terrour in the land of the 
ws | living : and he + ſhall be laid z in the mid(t of the 
= uncircumciſed with them that are ſlain with the ſword, 
\|. even Pharaoh and all his multitude, faith the Lord 
n0- GOD 

as g It is God that ſpeaketh, who had puniſh'd former Tyrants, and by 
= a Retaliation, that the World migh- ſe- his juſt Judgments : They 
_ were a Terror to the World by their Cruelty, Oppreſlion, and conti- 
= nued Violence; by their Covetouſneſs, Ambition and Pride : And 
| 7 God hath made them a Terror by his juſt Severiries in their Puniſh- 
wch 

po * like themby choice of their Vices, and I will take him likethem by 
por * like Miſeries and juſt Recompenſes; and theſe ſhall be to his Subje&s 
= as well asto himſelf, To Hophra, who was ſtrangled, and likely caſt 
_ = out without Buria] : To Amaſis, who was taken out of his Tomb, and 
This & burnt to Aſhes ; ſo unlike the Condition of rhe Dead, which uſually 
bout = i5reft tothe Body, was their Condition after Death ; who in life made 


— þ YT unl ke, and imagined it was above the Condition of mortal Man. 


held 8 
tions. cw 
perialas 
cher 
4 ro Au 
and 3 
efh 1 
11 our 
Years 


CHAP. XXXII. 
Gus ſh-weth the prophet his daty, and the duty of all faithful prophets, 1—-9. 


#5 they are watchmen ; as alſo the juſtice of his ways towaras the penitent 
and the revolter, 10 16. He defendeth the equity of bus proceedings, 


21----29, God's judgmen:s upmm the flatterers and mockers of the pro- 
Phets, 30---33. 


Yeat | 

s Pro: I R Gain the word of the LORD came unto me, 
oo laying, 

yy ,2 Son of man, ſpeak a to the children of thy þ peo- 
oo: Me 22d fay © unto them, + When 4 1 bring the 


n 
have j# 
ini 
þ rhej\ 
F ths 


"man : 
a Th 
; his 
+ bo 


Wiom he had not ſpoke ſince what he ſpake in the 24: Chapter 


* Of allthoſe Countries, Tyrians, Zidonians, Afriansand Syrians, &c. | 


over all tis multitude, even Pharaoh and all his army lain | 


I7-——20. Jeruſalem being taken, the deſolations of the land foretold, 


word s upon a land, if the people of the land take 
74 man of their coaſts, and ſer g him for their watch- 


e Propher, after three Years ſilence enjoined him, now hath 
Mouth opened by a new Commiſſion. & To the 7ews in general, 


7. warned : if the ſword come and take 4 y pzrfon 
from among them, he is taken away in t:; «:iiqui- 
ty z, but his blood & will I require 5 at the waichmai's 
hand. 

x Negle& his Charge, which is to give the Alarm. » But, un- 
warned, are ſurprized by the Enemy. z Puniſh'd by rhe Lord for 
his Sins and Treſpaſſes formerly done, and he is deſtroyed under the 
preſent Fault of not watching, which is a Fault in every one thar is 
1{o ſecure in time of War. a The Guilt of that Blood. + Charge up- 
on, and for it puniſh the Warchman, who finn'd in nor giving 
warning. 

7 © * So thou, O fon of man, I have ſet thee a+ chap, ; 
watchman unto the houſe of Ifrael : therefore thou ſhale r7, &c 
hear the word at my mouth, and warn them from 
me. 

8 When I fay unto the wicked, O wicked mar, 
thou ſhalt ſurely die; if thou do not ſpeak to warn 
the . wicked from his way, that wicked man ſhall die 
in his iniquity, bur his blood will I require at thins 


e Hophra ſhall go to them by a like DeſtruQtion, and as if he did ſee hand. 


9 Nevertheleſs, if thou warn the wicked of his way, 
to turn from itz if he do not turn from his way, he 
ſhall die in his iniquity, but thou haſt delivered thy 
ſoul, 


Theſe three Verſes are the ſame with the 17:5, 13h, r9th Verſes 
of the third Chapter, where ſee them explained. 

10 Therefore, O thou ſon of man, ſpeak c unto 
the houſe of Iſrael 4, Thus ye ſpeak e, faying, If our 
tranſgreſſions and our fins be upon f us, and we * pine 
away in them, how ſhould wethen live g? 

c Declare to them from me. 4 The Reſidue of the Two Tribes, 
which are brought to Babylon, or elſe to thoſe already there, and * 
hear their Brethren are on the way thitherward, ſince Feruſal: 2 was 
taken. e Thus ye diſcourſe among your ſelves, obje& againſt Ged 


| 


* Chap. 


24» 2J a 


_Oments; and fo, ſaith God, will I do with Pharaoh : b That is, Pharaoh | and his Prophet, and your own Duty ; ſome of you out of Inficmity, 
: Hophra c, ſhall ſuffer as they, ſince heſinned as they; he made himſelf” others out of Perverſneſs. f The unpardoned Guilt, and the unſup- 


portable Puniſhment of our Sins, who were warned, and took not 
warning, do thus, as in the waſting our Country, burning our City, 
aboliſhing the publick Worſhip of God, comeupon us ; we ſhall pine 
away, conſume, *tis roo late to hope 'twill be berrer with us now, 
we ſhould have heard, and followed the Counſel earlier if we would 
have delivered our own Souls : if the Prophet ſpake true at firſt, there 
is no hope, ſay the weaker ; if there be hope now atter ſo perem- 
ptory Menaces, and ſo great Execvtion, the Prophet did nor ſpeak 
Truth fay the Perverſe, and ſo concluded they would, as they were, 
run the hazard. £ How can it be better with us, if the Threats be 
true, and ſure 'twill be worſe ; if nottrue, how are his Promiſes to 
bereſted on, that 'twill be better ? 


11 Say unto them, As I live , 4 faith the Lord GOD, , 
I have # no pleaſure * in the death of the wicked, but & Bhs: 
that the wicked turn from his way and live : turn / ye, cp" ,g 
eurn ye from your evil ways : for * why will 2 ye die, 23, 32. 
O houſe of Iſrael ? * Ch. 1% 

h Vid. chap. 5. wer. 11. and ch#0. 16. wer. 48. Tet. f. rad 2h, 17. 16. 31-4 
et. g- See chap. 18. wer. 23. and wer. 32. let. q. & Here an Evipſis, 
but I have pleaſure in the ſeaſonable return the Sinner makes ſrom Sin 
'to Holineſs, and from Death co Life. / O leave Sin, ceaſe to do Evi}, 
be perſwaded to repent; it will pleaſe me to pardon your Faults, and 
to throw away the Rod, and to ſave your Pertons. m Death is your 
choice, not mine, ſo long as you go on the Way that is not good 3 
whoſo ſinneth againſt me, wrongeth his own Soul ; andlove to Sin is 
interpreratively a love and chooling of Death, 'Tis your culpable 
Will, not my ſevere Reſolution thar you die, 

72 There 


2 Sam. 


> 12 REI mae —— 
SO iy 
—_ "" J. >—— _—_ - - 
= + "= —_— = —_ _ 
OY — - =_ Ms EIS 
Etta ety 4 ; 
- 


EF 
Ex SE"; 
Jnr in gen 


- 
=== LE —_ v_ —— 
—_———— —_— —- POR” 
= = - þ-%Y oy 5 _ 


ST IE” 


— OO. RN 


of i 
+ 3717 a 


- _ = = ye _— S - -- 20 = 2 
_ PI — A 7 m— >, 0 mn <ZT0 
_ = [_ « : —_ —_——— 
"cx; Mw. Ai = bg F res Ron [a __ # 
- 
- 


Fi; 
$33 


Pe 


Fa 1 


+ Reb. 


jucgment 
ana juſtice, 
*Fxod.22. 
1,4. Lev. 


Þ Me 


Numb. 5. 


G, 7. 


”” 

I SYAII. 
12 Therefore, thou fon of man, ſay unto the chil-| 
*Ch.2.29. dren of thy people, The * righteouſncls of the righteous 
$ 18, 24. thall not deliver him in the day of his tranſgreffion : » 
3s tor the wickedneſs of the wicked, he ſhall not fall 
thereby in the day that he turneth o from his wickedneſs; 
neither ſhall the righteous be able to live ior 5:5 rig couſneſs 


Þ 


in the day that he ſinneth p. 

2 Hee chap 3. ver. 20. and chap. 11. ver. 24. tot. 
27. 21, 22. tot. þ See chap. 3, wer. 20. and c#5p, 
tame things are explained. 


2 When I ſhall fay to the righteous 9, rt he ſhall 
ſurely live 7, if he truſt to his own righteouſneſs s, an 
commit iniquity ?, all his righteouſneſs {hall not be remem- 
bred «, but for his iniquity that he hach commicted-«he ſhall 


die y for it 2, 


9 Who bath in his Life, for what is paſt, kept the Law, and for- 
born Evil, hath done what is right and good, and nor done what 1s 


evi), both which parts of this Righteouſneſs are deſcribed 1a chap. 18. 
wer. 5, 6,7,8, 9 r Makehim promiſe of doing him Good, and gi- 
Ving him Life, Peace, every B c 
f-rmer Righteouſneſs is ſufficient, and therefore turn tO waysof Sin 
pleaſing tro an evil Heart. # Give himſelf to doing Evil, as 'twere 
his Work. » No Regard ſhall be had to what he had done; he doth 
himſelf praQtically renounce it, and interpretatively recant his doing 
it. x In his Apoſtacy and backſlidden State. »y Shall be puniſhed, 
his Comforts ſhall be taken away, or die in his Hand, he ſhall live and 
Gjie miſerably. » His Iniquity any Puniſhment of it, and this is c-7- 
;Eaticalle xe eated, as chap. 18. 26. L 

g T 4. $58 when I ſay unto. the wicked, Thou ſhalt 
ſurely die ; if he turn from his Sin #, and do - that 
which is lawful 5 and right; 

a Chop, 18. ver.21. let. f. 6 Ibid. : . 

15 /f the wicked reſtore c the pledge, * give again 
that he had robbed 4, walk in the {ſtatutes of lits without 
committing e iniquity ; he ſhall ſurely live f, he ſhall not 
die. 

c Chap. 18. wer. 7. let. q. & Ibid letr. Tis not a finleſs Life 
here required or ſuppoſed, but a Life in which a Man doth not habi- 
rually, and wilfully work Iniquity. f Vid. cap. 18, wer. 9. let. z. 

16 None of his Sins that he hath committed, ſhall be 
mentioned g unto him : he hath done that which is lawful 
and right 3 he hall ſurely hve. 

g See Chap. 18. wrr. IG, rot. 

As the Threat againſt a righteous Man that proves a preſumptuous 
Apoſtate, was ſtated in the former part of the 12:5, and inthe whole 
13th Verſe; fo in theſe three Verſes rhe Caſe of a repenting and re- 
forming Sinner 15 ſtated, and determined to his Encouragement and 
Comfort, and they are the ſame with chap. 18. wer. 21, 22. and with 
ver. 27, 28. which ſee. 


17 © * Yet the children of thy people ſay, The way 


"of the ORD is not equal ; but as for them, their way 1s 


not equal z, 

; Theſe impious, obſtinate Quarrellers will accuſe, and do condemn 
the juſt and holy God, that they may acquit themſelves ; See this 
Veric explained, cap. 18. ver. 25, 29. 

13 When the righteous turneth from his righteouf- 
ne's, and committeth iniquity, he ſhall even die there- 


by 


do that which is lawful and right, he ſhall live there- 
by &. 

In theſe two Verſes the Caſes are fo clearly ftated, that 'tis as 
cl:ar as the Sun, the Ways of God are very juſt, and that none bur 
ignorant Atheiſts would think or ſurmiſe otherwiſe. 

20 Yet ye ſay, The * way of the LORD isnot equal : 
O ye houſe of 1ſrael, I will judge + you every one - after 
& his ways. 

Still blinded Prejudice quarrels, / Call you to account, plead with 
you, and paſs Sentence. 7 This 1s added, to rouzeevery one up to 
repent of all Sins, and of this particularly. k A terrible Threar, 
aad I know not how a greiter could be denounced againſt Sinners 
than this; God infinitely holy. and perfe&tly jult, will judge them 
according to their unequal, unrighreous, fintu! ways, and according 
tG his inflexible Juſtice, And if God enter thus into Judgment, who 
can ſtand in light ? 


21 Þ And it came to pals in the twelith year of * our 
captivity, inche tenth 0h, in the fifth Jay of themonth 7, 
that one that had eſcaped 7 out of Jeruſalem, came unto 
me, ſaying =, The cy o is * ſmitten p. 

[ That is, one Year and five Months after the thing was done, and 
Temple burnt, and the City fack'd. - Qnz whoſe own Care, bur 
God's wonderful Providence had much more befriended him , perhaps 
ir might be oneof thoſe that yielded tothe Babylon:ans before, but 
was reſolved to ſee the upthor of all. » Likely giving a particu- 
lar Account of the whole. o Jeruſalem, p Taken, and plundered 
the Inhabitants, or ſlain, or Captives, and the City fſack'd, razed, 
and burnt. 


22 Now the hand 4 of the LORD was upon me in 
the evening, afore he that was eſcaped came ; and had 
opened my mouth 7, untill he came to me in the morn. 
ing. and my mouth was opened, and I was no more 


dumb. 
4 The powerful I flzence of the Propherick Spirit inſpired me, 
31d prepared me for what follov ed. » Not that the Prophet was 


BEEZKSTEL 
o Vid. chap. 18. 


18. 24. where the jland of Ifrael, ſpeak «. ſaying, Abraham was one, and he 


lefling and Happineſs. If he conclude 


* 9s 3 | 
19 But if the wicked turn from his wickedneſs, and 


dumb through Impotehee ard Inability to ſpeak, for he had Pro- 
pheſted again{t many Nations bur he was forbidden to ſay any thing 


26, 27. and c52p. 29. 21, but now the Spirit moved me to ipeak 
and continued his Motion, till the Meſſenger came, and never after - 
for God did not command him Silence any more, ; 
23 Then the word of the LORD came unto me. 
ſaying, | ; 
24 Son cf man, they that inhabit thoſe waſtes t of the 


[inhericed x the land 5 but we are many, the land is given 1: 


') for inheritance &.. 

| s Who were left behind, having either hid themſclves, but now 
!come out of their Holes, or returned from Neighbour Countries 
' whither they fled, or permitted by the conqueror to ſtay and pl:re 
| Vineyards. z Places once very fruitful and abounding with People, bur 
{now by the ſpoil of the Soldiers, emptied of Inhabirants, and mage 
'as a Gelolate Wilderneſs, « Thus think and ſpeak, thus with vain 
| Reaſonings they deceive themſ:lves. x Our Father had hereditary 
Right to all this Land, when butone, and he multiplied to a greze 
Company, and fo they poſlefied the Land ; we Children of 4brahay 
tho dininiſh'd, are many, and the Divine Goodneſs willſurely appear 
then, and continue to us both Right and Pof{zſſion, and we ſhall lj 
;the Land, and recover our former State and Privileges. y Twas gi. 
ven by Promiſe to us the Seed, as well as to our Progenitors, nay 
more 'tis given us in Poſſeſſion, we dwell in it, when Abraharn had 
, Not on? footof it in his Poſicilion. z The perperual Inheritance i; 
$9 Thus with vain fal}acious Arguments they cheat one another, 


c 


Ll 


25 Wherefore « ſay unto them, Thus ſaith the Lord 7 


GOD, * 
c toward your idols, and ſhed blood 4; and 
poſſeſs the land ? | 


2 Remove them from this dangerous carnal Confidence, and ſhew De 
them what they do, by that what they are, how far from Abrahan's * 


'Seed, his genuine Seed. 5 What ever might be the reaſon why, tis 
;moſt certain this was forbidden, Ger. 9g. 4. Lev. 17. 14. and 19, 26, 
they ſinned by violating this Law. «c Honouring, praying, depend. 
ing on, and committing your ſelves to the PreteCtion and Guidancecf 
thoſe dumb Idols, Yd. c. 18. 6. let. k. d Innocent Blood ; ye are 
Murderers. e Polluted with ſuch, and many other hainous Sins, and 
what colour of hope. can you have, that you ſhall poſleſs the Land? 
The Queſtion includes a peremptory Denial. 

26 Ye ſtand f upon your ſword, ye work abominati. 
on g, and ye defile every one his neighbours wife 4, and 


thall ye poſſeſs the land z ? 

f Youtruſt to your Sword, and ſtand with it as *twere drawn ready 
to kill and ſlay, you do all with Violence and Force, not regardiag 
what 1s right and equal, and fear no Reſtraints or Puniſhments. g 1- 
dolatry, or other Wickedneſs not to be named. þ Adultery is ſo com- 
mon among you, that *tis no bold Hyperbole to fay, every one defiles 
his Neighbowr's Wife. # And can ſuch Sinners flatter themſelves, 
that they ſhall inheric the Land promiſed to a holy and good Father, 
and to the like Seed 2 Will not the Land ſpew Jewiſh Sinners our, as 
it did ſpew out Canaanitiſh Sinners ? 


27 Say thou thus unto them, Thus ſaith the Lord 
GOD, 4s I live, ſurely they that are in the waſtes & ſhall 
fall 7 by the ſword, and him that is z in the open field,, 
* will I give to the bealts to - be devoured : and they; 
that be in the forts », and in the caves, ſhall die of the 
| peſtilence. 

& The ruinous Heaps of Ciries or Towns, in which ſome ſorry 
| Habitations might poſſibly be found by them. 1 The Chaldean Sol. 
{ diers ranſacking all places, and either expeCing, or by chance find. 

ing them there, ſhall kill in Revenge of Gedaliah's Death, and I/ma- 
el, with others ſhall deſtroy ſome of them. »= Thar wanders in the 
Fields ſhall be a prey to Lions, or rather ravenous Beaſts, that will 
mulriply in that ruined Country. # Out of the reach of Men and 
Beaſts, my Hand ſhall reach, I will ſend the Peſtilence, that ſhall 
ſweep them away. F 


28 © For I will lay o the land + moſt deſolate, and the; 
* pomp p of her ſtrength ſhall ceaſe : and the mour- 
tains 9 of Ifrael ſhall be deſolate, that none » ſhall pab,” 
through. k 


0 I do purpoſe to deſtroy utterly all in this Land, and what can e- 


ſcape, when Salvage Beaſts, cruel Men, and a peſtilential Air a!l con- 
cur to ruine the Land? 6 The ſtately and pompous ſhews of her 
Strength, and her former Riches and Power. q On which were Vine- 
yards, and Oliveyards, where the joyful Sounds of the Vintage and 
Harveſts did glad the Heart, there ſhall be utrer Deſolation, » No Man 
daring to venture for fear of Wild Beaſts, or Peſtilential Air, or Fa 
mine in thoſe waſted Mountains. 

29 Then ſhall they know that I azz the LORD -, whet 
I have laid the land moſt deſolate, becauſe of all their 
abominations which they have committed. = 

sT would have had them acknowledged me to be the Lord by my 
Bleſſings which beautified the Land; by my holy Precepts which di- 
reed to Piety and Juſtice; by my Mercy and Kindneſs towardsthem ; 
but they deſpiſed my Mercy, broke my Law, abuſed my Bounty, 2" 
now by the Puniſhment of their Sins, as I threatned, and by laying 
the Land moſt waſte, they ſhall be conſtrained to own and ſubmit t9 
m?, as the Lord. 

39 © Alſo thou fon of man, the children - of thy # peo- 
ple ſtill are talking againſt thee by the walls «, and 
the doors x of the houſes, and ſpeak one to another 
every one to his brother, ſaying, Come, z, I pray yt 
and ' hear what is the word that cometh forth from t<># 
| LORD. : | 


; Captive; 


of the Jews, to threaten, warn, counſel, or command, cap. 24: UF. + 


Ye cat with the blood 5, and litt up your eyes:;, 
hall ye e265 
Io, 


& 


them 


© thallk 
E warn | 
= waito 


BT; 
' 


= 4 repro 
them 


the Le 
E ihephe! 
© the ſhe 
= &4 Th 
7 and Prin 
#1 Tribes, 
F David, 
> Prophett 
> Codthar 
hk} Sins, anc 
= threarne 
Woes th 
their our 
tie Cortſe 
they not 
Care? T} 
Ceties, an 
GS - I 
= | 
4 Wool h, 
E the flock; 
E 7 Rather 
VOur * Ou 
} ExaGted by 
had their 
. of the Peon 
and Luxury 
have not to 
ontrive 
and next t 
make merr 
fatteſ} of rf 
prote&, pr 
tealted Wit! 


4 The 
ther have 
*e bound 


,NOught, ; 


[] 


bs, 
7.20 
6. 6 
0, 
Dit 
16, 


Wet, 


peives 


| 1.4. 


} : - cometh, and || they fit 6 before thee as my <c people, 
Gr and they hear thy words, but they will not do dthem: 
bf, * with their words, e they + thew much love, but 
E ” icic heart f goeth aſter their coverouſneſs. 


IF. women flock re hear ſcme famous Preacher, or as they were wont to 
| 2 / 


” © of 52%, chap. 8. 1. Which ſee at ler. f. ſo the Diſciples of the great 
= Rabtes fat at 


. " to be my People, and hear ſeemingly very attentive. 4 They do 


| their Money with excefſive and intolerable Uſury and Increaſe. 


%. 23 And when this cometh to paſs (lo it will come ) 
& then * ſhall they know that a prophet hath been among 
” them. 

E propheſtedſt againſt the Nations, come to paſs to their Ruine, they 
> fha!l know thou waſt no Mufician, but a Prapher ſent of God, tofore- 


= warn them to fly from Wrath, not imployed by Men to pleaſe their 
& wanton Ear and Fancy. 


o CHAP. XXXIV. 
p 4 repraf to the wicked ſhepherds of God's people, 1—6. his judgment againſt 


; I ND the word- of the LORD came unto me, 
: {aying , 


# ihepherds ec of Ifrael that do feed f themſelves : ſhould not 
- the ſhepherds feed g the flocks 4? kt 
” » The Rulers of the People, both Political, as Kings, Magiſtrates; 
& and Princes, as alſo Eccleſfaſtical, Prieſts and Prophets. 6 The rwo 
| Tribes, and the few that out of the ten, did adhere to the Houſe of 
' David. c The Command is repeated, to encourage and engage the 
> Prophetto his Work. & Exzckiel ſpeaks,bur theſe Rulers muſt know 'ris 
| Cod that ſp*nks by him. e They have been principal Cauſes of many 
2 Sins, and exemplary AQtors in other Sins, for which many Woes were 
& threatned, many re already come, and the reſt will come,- in which 


E the flock, | 


5. XXXIV. EZE 


x Captives in Pafyion, 2 Thy, int my People, God doth. debaſe, 
u AS Men now do in Cities or Towns, ſo 
then they ſtood up to the Wall, when meeting in the Steets they 
: x Others go into the Porchesof Doors of their 


deorade and dilown them. 
would talk together. ke 
Houſes, this they did-ro tell each other what News of their Coyntry. 
y And aliends in this 
Prophet, rhe true Propher, and enquire what God hath revealed to him, 


04 what he may reveal untous, whether any, or when will that end, 


ot Our Sorr ows be. EE WO. 
1 And * they come unto thee - as the people 


2s Flocking to the School of ſome famous Door, or as Men and 


” the Synagogues to hear their learned Scribes. 4 So we find the Elders 
rheir Feer, ſo is Saul fajd to be broughtup at the Feet 
"of Gixaicl. e By their outward Deportments you might judg them 


"2 nity hzar what thou fayſt, but they will not do ir. e All their 
; Tere is but from Teeth outward, either to Me, my Word, or my 
P:opher, faith God. 7 Their Delire, Love and Care is about their 
Gaia. how to make thriving Bargains, how to place out and ſecure 


s +» And lo, thou art to them as a + very lovely 
ſong of one that hath a pleaſant voice, and can play 
well on an ini{trument: for they hear thy words , but 


they do thein not. | _ 

Theſe Frwr efteem and regard thee, and what thou fayeſt, as Men 
rz2ard a Skiful Muſician, who to a well-tuned Inftrument hath ſung 
the Praztes of Verrue, or of vertuous Men; it pleaſeth their Ear, bur 
ic doth nor frame their Hearts and Lifeto Vertue. They loved him 
for his eloquent Lamentation, and Reproof of their Enemies, and for 
forerelling rhar they ſhould fall, and ſaying nothing againſt them and 
their Sins for theſe three Years paſt ; but when he exhorts,or diſlwades 
thzmto Duty, or from Sinthey 1 hear, nor do. 


| When all thouhaſt propheſied againſt the Jews ſhall, as that thou 


them, 7 —10. his providence and care for his flick, 11—19g. Chriſt the 
chief ſhepherd ard prince of his chureh is promiſed, 20—24. the church's 
kaypy and ſafe condition under his government, 25—31I, 


2 Son of man, propheſie againſt the * ſhepherds a 


at laſt. z Come I pray let us go up to the 


phorical Shepherds ſhould, as the other, Rirengthen their Sheep with 
carrying then into good and quier Paſtures. p The Sheep in our Fa 

ſtures are ſubje&t ro many Sickneſles, the Sheep in Church and Stats 
fo more, and Shepherds in both ſhould be as Phyſicians to heal then: 
but here theſe did not {9. 4 Sometime violent and ravenous Bzafi; 
break their Bones, ſomerimes the ſtronger and fatter Sheep bruiſe or 
break them ; theſe ſhould the Shepherdsbind up ; violent Oppreſior s 
in the State, and ſuch in Church broke many then, but theſe Shepherds 
bound them not up. » Sheep are often driven our of the Paſture 

frighred, hunted, and purſued by Dogs, or other miſchievous Crea- 
tures ; theſe the Shepherd ſhould find our, and bring back in Churck 
and State. There were many ſuch frighted and driven by fierce Men,like 
Dogs,running upon them ; bur the ſewiſh Rulers took no care to en. 
quire for them, or to bring them back totheir own Connery. « Sheep 
wander and loſe themſelves, Shepherds ſhonid ſcek ſuch and bring 
them home ; many political Sheep among the Jews wandezz:d from 
their Country, their King, Religion and God, and'theſe carele(s Rulz:s 
never ſought them. - Witch hard Hand that held faſt all, char thou'4 
look like Royal Power and Privilege, and rigoroull; executed all chei: 
grievous Laws and Edits. » Such asthe Egyptians uſed toward the 
Jews, Exod. 1.13, 14. inſtead of ating like Shepherds, theſe Tyrants, 
£ the Jewiſh Polity, att:d like mercileſs Butchers in Church and 
cate, 


5 And they » were ſcattered y || becauſe 55.72 i5 no i} Or,» 


ſhepherd z: and they became meat : a to all the beaſts = A 
verd, fov. 


5 of the field, when they were ſcattered c. < 
x My NegleQted Sheep. - » By the Inroads and Invaſions of theic * 
Enemies, taat broke in like devouring Beaſts. z No vigilant, ai he 
ful good Shepherd that loved the Flock, and of Love ſtudied its Wel- 
fare. a Were madea Prey of, and devoured by Syrians, Ammonites, 
Moabites, Edomites, &C. al] their Neighbours migit then devour them 
b Signify Men, Troops of Robbers and Spoilers. c As Sheep ſcatrer- 
ed are eaſily devoured by every hungry Wolf or Fox. 
6 My « ſheep wandred through ali the mountains 4, 
and upon every high hill e: yea, my f flock was ſcat- 
tered upon all the face gof the earth, and none did 
h ſearch or ſeek aftcr them, EE 
c Theſe Shepherds forgot thaaFlack was not theic Propriety ; bur 
God. will .not loſe his Propriety in them, nor ſhall Shepherds find ar 
laſt they were more than God's Stewards and accountable. a When 
endangered, afrighted, purſued, they got upon the Mountains by their 
own Choice, or carricd away by Enemies ; or it may refer to their 
wandering after Idols worſhipped in High-places, or perhaps to King 
doms and States, and great Cities, compared ro Mounr 1ins, that there 
rhey might find what they conld not at home, Quiet and Safery. 
e The ſame thing in the Words. f They were (if any among the 
Jews could be called fo) my Flock, that were fo uſed, nor the Swine, 
and Goats, and uaclean Beaſts, that by whole Herds reſted undiſturb- 
ed ; 'twas Baruch and Jeremiah were fain to hide. g They were diſ- 
perſed through male adminiſtration to all Parts of the known World ; 
"tis an Hyperbole that Speaks a mighty ſcattering. 6 The Shepherds 
were contented; nay. glad they were rid of them, neicher principal 
Officers ſearch'd, nor inferiour ſought after them. - 

7 JT Therefore ye # ſhepherds, hear the word of 
the LORD; - 
# The Rulers, King of 7/-ae!, Princes, High-Prieft and Prieſts, and 
pretended Prophets, hear ye ; God ſpeaks in the Stile and Manner of 
one greatly incenſed. 


8 As I live, faith the Lord .GOD, ſurely becauſe my 


of Ifrae! b, prophefie c and ſay unto them, Thus faich 
the Lord GOD unto the ſhepherds 4; Wo be to the 


- 


Woes theſe Rujers thall have more than ordinary ſhare. f Contrive 
their own Eafe, Advantage, Honour, and ambitious Proje&s. g Let 
the Cortſciences of theſe Rulers Eccleſiaſtical and Political ſpeak; ought 
they not as ſhepherds take care of the Sheep commited to their 
Care? The Sheep, both whole Flocks and ſingle Sheep, whole So- 
citties, and particular Members of them. 


3 * Ye eat the fat; and ye clothe you with the 


® woo! k, ye kill /them that are fed: bur ye feed m2 not 


7 Rather the Milk, which inſatiably and without meaſure you de- 

our: you exhauſt their Purſes, and weaken their Eſtates by Tributes 

} exaGted by Extortions; ſo the Temporal Rulers ; and the Spiritual Rulers 

had their Methods and Arts to Milk them dry; theſe lived on the Sins 

| Of the People. & With beſt and fineſt, as beſt ſurting with your Pride 

and Luxury, on which you force the Peopleto beſtow ſo much, they 

| have not to c!othe themſelves and theirs, this was mighty oppreſſion. 

! Contrive Methods for a ſeeming legal courſe to forfeit, firſt che Life, 

and next the Eſtate of the well-fed, the rich and wealthy, and then 

make merry and feaſt ; as voluptuous unfairhful Shepherds feaſt on the 

fatteſt of the Sheep in their Maſters Fold. »» Take no care to lead, 

prote&, provide for, and watch over them, but as idle Shepherds, 
teaſted with the fatteſt, let the reſt ſtatve for any thing they cate. 


4 The diſeaſed » have ye not ſtrengthned 0, nei- 
ter have ye healed p that wich was ſick, neither have 
fe bound q up that which was broken , neither have ye 
Sought, again that which was driven away r, neither 
ave ye fought that which was loſt s; but with *,force # 
and with cruelty # have ye ruled them. 

" The weak and linguiſhing, ſuch there are in the Church and 


flock became a prey, and my flock became meat & to 
every beaſt of the field, becauſe there vas no / ſhep- 
herd , neither did my m2 ſhepherds ſearch » for my 
flock, but the ſhepherds fed themſelves o, .and fed nor 
y my flock: 
k See wer. 5. let. a,b. 1 1bid. let z. m Government and Gover. 
noursare by Gad's Appointment, and here he owns the careleſs, worſt 
of Rulers, as his Shepherds. » Yer. 6. let. h, o Yer. 2. let, f. p Yid. 
ver. 3. let. fo ; : | 

9. Therefore, O ye ſhepherds, hear the word of the 
LORD; | 


Vid. ver. 7. tot. | , 

ro Thus faith the Lord GOD, Behold, I am againſt 
q the ſhepherdsr, and I will require 5 my flock at their 
hand, and cauſe them to ceaſe * from feeding the flock, 
neither ſhall the ſhepherds feed themſelves « any more; 
for I will deliver x my flock from their » mouth, thac 


they may not be bear & for them. | 
9 They have provok'd me to Diſpleaſure to be their Enemie, and 
will appear, and act ſo; they are Enemics to my Sheep, yer pretend- 
ed to be Shepherds, I will be an open Enemy to them. To Zedeti av, 
his Princes, the Prieſts and Prophers, all rhe ruling part in Zero -z/c12, 
s I will require, both by Account firſt, and next by ſevere punithing, 
as Zedekiah his Children, &c. found. # Turn them our of my Ser- 
vice; that honourable Employment ; ſo was the King and Princes ot 
Judah turned out of all by the King of Babylon, by whom God made 
good this his Word. « Their Profit ceaſed with the cealing of their : 
Authority, and they could no more milk, fleece or flay tlie Flock, 
when 'twas taken out of their Hand. x They ſhould have delivered 
them out of the Hands of Violence, fince they did nor, I will deliver, 
fave and reſcue this Flock which is mine. y Thisſpeaks that thele 
Shepherds. had been Lions, or Bears, or Wolves, rhore than Shep- 
herds, and therefore out of their Mourhs, not Hands, God will celt- 
yer. & So the Flock ſhall no more be devoured by them. 


11 © For thus faith the Lord GOD, Behold, I, ever 
I 2 will both ſearch b my ſheep, and feek c them our. 


a The Conſtruction is emphatical in the Heb. and well expreſs'4 
here, 1 the Owner, the Lover, the Maker, the great Shepherd, ever 
I, who committed themi to your Care, never ſubmitred rhem to your 
Rapine and Cruelry, who am as angry with you for devouring them as 
I am zealous for their Welfare, 6 Will demand them of you, I know 


I” « With your Hand, Countenance and Counle]; ſo theſe Meza- 
0!, II | 


how many I delivered to your keeping,and I expe$} An Acc. ant of fo 
[Aa] marry 


Chap. XXXIV. 


many again, 

ver 5.let 5. and wer. 6. let. bh. under your Hand many at 

— my Hand nor one fſhal] be loſt. ; _ 

| Heb.e:- 12 + As a ſhepherd feeketh out his flock in the day 
cording tothat he is among the ſheep that are ſcattered 4; fo will 
rbcſecki?g-] feck out my ſheep, and will &eliver ether out of all 


dark g day. | 

a fe doth gently gather them together, counteth chem, 
them to the Fold, views what they have ſuifered, whether lame 0 
torn, and binds up and healeth ; if any are wanting, 
findeth them, and dees bring them back; ſo will I, faith the Lord : 
the Shepherd find the Wolfor Lion among tae 
either kill or drive him away, ſo will God; 


e They are wronged in all Places whero they were ſcattered,the _ 
in which they are, and ſhould not be, are part of that Danger I _ 
free them from. f When the Storm firſt began to ariſe from abroa 
or at home here in Perſecutions, there in warlike Preparations. g That 
the Land was invaded rill the Deſolation of Jer#ſalem, the times of 
male-Adminiſtration of their own Governours, and violent Irruption 
: of their Enemies. | 

* Chip. 13 And *I will bring 5them out from the people, and 

28.25- oather ithem from the countries, and will bring &them to 
their own land, and feed mthem upon the mountains 
7 of Ifrael by the rivers, and in ali the inhabited p places 


of the country. : 

h When Cjrus's Proclamation came forth that the Jew: might re- 
turn, *this Prophecy was [irerally fulfilled, God did incline the Minds 
of the Jews to retire from the People amidſt whom they had dwelr ſe- 
venty Years, vid. Ezra 1. 5,6. and 7.13. # Aſſemble them together, 
ſo they didin a Place appointed without the Country where they were, 
(as appears, Ezra 8. 15.) intheir aſſembling at 4ava or Diava, near 
where ic falls into Euphrates in the Country Adiab:ne, which was from 
the more inward Receſles ofthe Babylonian Kingdom, onwards of their 

Journey to Jeruſalem. k Lead, condutt, and asa Shepherd go before 
them, till I have put them into. Poſleſſion againof their own Land. 
| Canaan, their own by Grant from the Crown of Heaven, antiently 
polletied by their Fathers, and out of which Violence caſt them. 
» God will provide, maintain and nouriſh them. # Places proper for 
Sheep, where now they ſhall once more be kept. o Water-brooks, 
as P/al. 42. 1. which run down from the Spring-heads inthe Sides and 
Tops ot the Mountains with ſome Impetuouſneſs and Noife, or if 
oreater Rivers, they are thoſe that run by the Foot of the Mountains, 
on which theſe Sheep ſhall feed, p This may explain the former, on 
tuch Hills by Rivers che returned Captives would firſt ſertle their Habi- 
tations, and here theſe Sheep would beſafeſt ; thus literaly : ſpiritually 
it referrs to the gathering the Ele& by the Goſpel out of the World, ©. 
14 I will teed qthem in a good 7 paſture, and upon the 
high mountains of Iſrael ſhall their fold « be : there : they 
{hall lie in a good fold, and i» a fat paſture ſhall they feed 


upon the mountains of lrael. ; 

g See ver. 13. let, m. r Infat, ſweet, plentiful Paſtures. 5 Toreſt 
in there for Safety, they ſhall ſertle their Habitations upon their Re- 
eurn 3 or there my Flock, my People, my Church, ſhall dwell and 
reſt, where Idolaters once had their High Places, thus fpiritually. 
s This and what follows is a Confirmation of what before was pro- 
miled, and *tis aflured to them by the Lord, who himſelf will ſee all 
this be done. 


15 I will feed my flock, and I will cauſe them to lie 

down, faith the Lord GOD. ; ; 
* Mc.4. 16 * ] will ſzek that which was loſt s, and bring again 
6. that which was driven away, and will bind x up that wich 
vas broken, and will ſtrengthen y :9at woich was fick: but 
T will deſtroy z the fat and the {trongs, I will teed c them 


with judgment. : ; 

In the 16:5 Verſe, former part, God promiſeth to his People, that 
hz willdo allthe Offices ofa good, watchful, and render faithful Shep- 
12rd, which choſe Shepherds did neglett, v7. 4. which ſee. nu Yer. 4. 
Jet. ;. w Ib. let. q. y 1h:d.let.o, and» = Severely puniſh, which as 
threatned, ſo was fulfilled in the Ruine of the Rulers of this People. 
a3 The powerful and rich, who by oppreſling and devouring my Peo- 
ple grew far, proud, troubleſom and dangerous to the poor Sheep. 
5 By their Authority I gave, and by the Encroachments they have 
made to increaſe their Power. c 'Tis an Irony. I'll feed them bur with 
Wormwood and Gall, my ſore but juſt Judgments and Diſpleaſure, ſo 
ſome ; but others refer Judgment here to Reaſoa, Decency and Fit. 
neſs the moſt convenienc, beneficial and ſafe way, as a wiſe Shepherd 
will I fced theſe my Sheep ; and either may conſiſt with the Context. 


I7 And as for you, O my flock, thus ſaith the Lord 
* Ch, >» GOD, Behold, * I judg 4 between T cattel and cartel, 


27, 38, between the rams e and the ÞF he-goats. 

*Zech to. & Make a diff:rent Eftimate and Judgment between Men and Men, 
3. between the ſmaller and weaker, that need more Tenderneſs, and the 
Matt. 25. greater and ſtronger, whoſz Violence 1s to be reſtained - and as be- 
$2, comes me, and their diff: rent State requires, I will do. e The Hiero- 
+ Heb. glyphick of Rulers in the Authoricy, Humours and Carriage toward 
ſms#'! cat=their Subje&s, who are allo obſerved, and ſhall be dealt with accord- 
tcl of 'smbs ingly, when God makes good all this his Word. 


are bits. 18 Seemeth f it a ſmall thing unto you, to have eaten up 


_ Heb. . 
ap ";, the good paſture, but ye mult tread down with your feet 


722: The reſidue of your paſtures? and to have drunk of the 
deep g waters, but ye muſt foul 5 the reſidue with your 


feet ? 

f God a wakens them by this Interrogatory to think firſt, and then 
ſpeak what this is, when you are full fed, and others hungry and rea- 
dy to flarve, who might live on that you leave, if you did not ſpoil it, 
dayor think ſuch dealing isno Crime ? Is it not a very great. Cruelty, 

and a mo#t barbarous Inhumaniry ? You great ones, who have much 


{ will ſee in what State ind Condition they aretoo. c ide More than others, partly by the Bounty of th? Lord of the Sheep, and 


e , but under partly by your Injuſtice and Rapine,you eat the far and ſweer,and wht 
| you cannor cat you waſte and ſpoil ; and what would you fay if yay, 


proud, fat and ſpiteful Servants in your Houſes ſhould de ſe to their 
weaker, leaner, and modeſter Fellow-ſervants ? g Which are cles; 
to the Eye, and pleaſant, which are ſweet to their Palate, which 2. 


| wholeſom to the Drinker. +þ In ſpite as much as Wantonneſ; vou 


places, where they have been ſcattered in the cloudy fand| ſtamp inthe, raiſe all the Mud from the bottom, thar makes the Vy,. 


tersunfirto be drank: is this a trival thing, thus to ſtarve and Choak 


brings thoſe you ſhould feed and refccſh ? Such hath been the Carriage of y,y 
r' rich, powerful, ruling and governing Part of my People, who tj 
he looks till he been+torced cither to live on what you made unwholſom and noxio,; 
if orto ſtarve at home, or ſeek ſomewhat abroad; this hath deſtroyed 
m ornear them, he will: many,and diſperſed more,but I will not always wink at,and bear thi; 


if under-Servants have | ] 
been careleſs, they ſhall be warned or turned away. So here, &.' troden with your feet, and they drink that which " 


1 
( 
1 


19 And as for my flock, they eat that which ye hays 


have fouled with your feet. 

20 ET Therefore thus faith the Lord GOD unto them, 
Behold, I, ever I will judg &berween the fac Zcattel, arg 
between the lean » cattel. 

; See the Phraſe, wer, 11. Jet. a, & Yer. 17, let. d. I am Judge by 
Office, and I will vindicate and right the Poor by Judgment. 1 Tj, 
rich, voluptuous, and wanton ones. # The Poor and [Indigent thy; 
are deſpiſed, oppreſſed, and injured; thus the Chald. Paraphr. between 
efie rich Man and the poor Man. 


21 Becauſe ye have thruſt with ſide and with ſhoulde-, 
and puſh'd all the diſeaſed with your horns, till ye hay; 
{cattered them abroad : 

22 Therefore » will I fave o my flock,, and they ſhall no 
more be a p prey, and I will judg q between cattel and 
catte]. 

2» Inthe 21: Verſe thoſe Metaphors and Alluſions do expreſs the 
Unmercifulneſs, Injuftice, Pride, Cruelty, and wanton Tyranny ofthe 
Rulers in Church and State, againſt the meaner People, that as you 
the greater Cattelrun againſt the leſſer, andoverturning or laming, ſome 
way or other hurting them by ſhouldring againſt them ; or as horned 
Cattel wound and tear the weaker, and make them run for it; fo had 
theſe Rulers uſed their Power to the hurt and ſcattering of rhe People, 
0 Becauſe I ſee they deſtroy who ſhould defend. þ I will interpoſe; 
they will not, but I will be fo kind, juſt and faithful co my People, 
and promiſel will ſave from foreign Violence and home-Oppeſſion; 
p See ver. 5. let. 8. and ver. 10, let. y. q See ver. 17. let. d. and wer. : 
let, k. 


what intended, bur principally and plenarily, as Chriſt is intended here,” 
ſo in him 'twas accompliſhed ; for he is the great, good, chief, only," 
Shepherd that laid down his Lite for his Sheep. :- Give rhem bel}," 
moit abundant, and moſt ſeaſonable Food, he alfo ſhall govern them in 
Righteouſneſs, and with Equity. u Meſiah ( as Kimchi on the Place) 
of the Seed of David, the beloved one, who was typified by Davii 
andin other Places called by this Name, as Fer. 30.9. ch. 37. 24. and 
Iſa. 37. 35- Heſ. 3.5. « Doallthe Office ofa good and fairliful Shep. 
herd, and that for ever. »y I willtruſt them in his Hands, for he will 
keep them, that not one of them ſhall be loſt, bur ſhall go in and out 
under his Hand, and find Paſture. 


24 And I the LORD & will be their 2 God, and ny 
ſervant b David c a prince 4 among them, I the LOR) 
e have ſpoken 2. 

£ The glorious, gracions,eternal One. # I ſo puttheminto Chriſt's 
Hand, thatſti!] I am and will betheir God : yea, I will, chrough this 
my Servant David, be their God. 6 Chriſt was in this great Wok 
his Father's Servant ; Iſs. 42.1. and 52. 13. Ezek. 37. 24, 25. c A 
wer. 23. let.u. Chriſt called David there as well as here. & So Chriſt 


. 


1s Prince and Saviour to his Church, A4#s 5. 31. e God ſeals it with 
this as his Oath, unchangeable. 


25 And 1 will make fwith them a covenant g of peace, 


in the woods /. 


contain and ſhall bring Peace, in Hebr. D:ale& all good ; this, as is! 
refers to the State of thisPeople afcer thei Return, comprehend. chat 
outward Peace and Proſperity that God gave them, bur it hath ar 
higherand more excellent Import, better Mercies of this Covenant, cf 
bliſhed on better Promiſes, 7. e. beſt, becauſe ſpiritual and ererna! 
þ During the Ba5yleniſh Captivity evil Beaſts had exceedingly increaſe 
through 70 Years Deſolation in 7:4es, but on the replanting and it- 
creaſing of Men theſe were diminiſhed, anddeſtroyed at laſt ; thus li 
rally : but myſtically under the Bondage of Satan, worſe Beaſts d:- 
ſtroyed Men; theſe Chriſt, who turns back that Capriviry, will deſtcoy- 
# Withour Danger, and withour Fear; ſeech. 28. v. 26. let. ». & In 
which both wild and hurtful Beaſts, and wilder, more hurtful Rob- 
bers did haunt. There is ſomewhat of an Hyperbole here ; aftec the 
temporal Redemption from Babylon they ſhould have that Safery, the! 
fhould account very great after ſuch long and great Troubles ; in th! 
ſpiritual Redemprion they ſhould have greater Safery, when delivered 
from the Hand of Enemies, they ſerve God in Holineſs before him 3! 
their Days. ! Places where venemous and devouring Creatures uſually 
_, yet there ſhall yeventuce confidently to ſleep, and without muci 
anger. h 


26 And I will make them #2 and the places » round 
about my hill o, a+blefling p; and I will ceuſe the ſhow- 
er q to come down in his ſeaſon : there ſhall be * ſhow-' 
ers of blefling. 


mw My 


Thap. XXy 


23 And I will ſet r up one * ſhepherd - over them and-; 
he ſhall feed :them, even my ſervant David « ; he (hall, 
feed x them, and he ſhall be their ſhepherd y. (2 

r Advance, eſtablith, and make great ; thus I will appoint and 
up. 5s Formerly their many Shepherds deſtroyed, as Fer. 12. 10. noy" 
this one ſhall ſave, /iteraily ; and hiflorically Zerobabel may bs (ome k 


f Renew andconfirm tothem. g A Covenant of Promiſes, which 


" ed, 
NY , 


God 


> ple exp 
b> them, a1 
> Tiled at 
- Deculta; 
E& ſeemed 
& toaited 
E Vvcnant. 
10, ST 7; 
F MN, « 
FE 9 No 
E this Floc 
E prets'd b 
will be { 


Tie utter 
ang re 
14 re: 


2. Ic 


q,* prop! 


i", 42 Put 


w, ſtern and 


and * will cauſe the evil beaſts 4to ceaſe out of the land: WM let. ». an 
and they ſhall dwell ſafely 7 in the wilderneſs &, and ſleeps: 
(3 


8 tarts of it 
Yet fruitf 
Mo:mitaine 


£ lterity , D 


\ 3 
= 4 n 
| hold, O 
| $ Out m) 
# defolat 
| e Bya 


3 them, as 1 


; my Who x 
* [nthe p] 
lhou'd be vv 
| 5 Becq 
F- lhed t/ 
Of the {wc 
t/ RY PS. | 
E141] E)etr ; 


Vol. J 


p. AXXV. 
'FgÞ "1 2. 
AXW* 


» My rned Captives, who 
Land ba 2 All the Coun 
eu 410 s 
” doth 1Scalled an Hol 
Us, WV laawt 


C I o "i ” Why : 

E ERR EET 
Pen as cuy 

Jeruſal:m, or the Temple $:. 

6. þ Very Profperous, that 

Or a Blefſj 


9 
' retu were look'd v 


ory, 0 


:d,reproach- 
y Hill; 7%} , 


Ws 
LE rs 


+4 Oo 


{guſt or en 


i, Prixtaer to Fa 
Flatreq, 


Ut Oretater ce 


C 


an hereg 
'S, Ul now- 


, w 
45 their Fath 
5, by a form 


er did he 
2d W 
double Bleſſings to them. 

;:, 27 And * the tree 
and the earth « ſhall y 
be late # in their | 
LORD, when I hay 
and delivered them 
themſelves & of the 

r Either thoſe that 

thoſe that grow wild j 

; Tilled by Man. 

4 SCC ver, 25, let. 

ranny of Babylon. 


Z Made tl 


il times 
0099's Seed. 
©5 2Ppears Ob z7 
en all was loft, 1 
» then did Ezom cruelly 
Þ When their Iniquiry was Char 


brought them to inal Ruine, 


of the field » 


ield her increaſe 7, and the 
and, and 

e broken x tt 
Out of the 
m. 

are planted 


red, 
cepeſt Calami ty wl 


7 Which 


«. 


5 


6 Therefor 
Prepare s thee 
* ich thoy ha 
thee, 


e ox I live x, 
unto b] 


{t 


ith the 
ood, and blood 
not hated blood + 


O. 


then 


C5 


a\ 
© 


fore Vengeance for it fol 


7 Thus will ] make mounce 
cut off from it him that P 


2 See wy. 3. let. h. 
Country, or 
with which h 


a Yee wer, 
ver. 25. ler, b 
ther Beaſts, nor 
 bedcltroyed and 
WL. 29 And1 
B.- nown, and 
P27 7 in the 
t-. eathen any more. 
1, e Eltabliſh and ſettle. 


ndanger th 
them a * plane f i of re. 
10 more + conſumed with hun. 
* Neither bear the ſhame 5 of the 


em. 


4 
mountains c with his f1 


nd in all thy rive 
rd. 


4 Puraphraſt, ſoit beſt 
Fo aSweread it, *tisa Pr 
in the Maccobees time 

to be raiſed for them, 
made by Enemies, or by 1 
tnem as caſt away, 
Taunt and Proverb 
39 Thus ; {h 


\T0M 224 ar 


d ch. 32. 
g 


Y, and ther 
onge Siege, 
rejected of God, a 

*MNg the Heather, 
all the 


M 


Vengeance of God. 

"T will m 
ll not 
D, 


9 

Y & know that RD 7 their [cities ſha 
_ with them » and hat they o, ewe the houſe | the LOR 
ot Iſrael 


» 2re My people » Lord GOD 


4 delolatio 
le 7 faith the 
: By theſe many and = 
e 


ſhall k 


Ne 


» and ye 


perpetual Hatreq Puniſhmene 
ns. 


urn into 


E femed to h 
& toalted he þ 


 Venantr, 


and they £: 
em for his, 


1 3 Theſe e\ 


nd will 


F 
Y paſture, rel; 


CHAP. AXXV. 


une of munnt Ser 
ing ar their w 


Tie Uſer x 
and rej 


PredifF; 


d, for their hatred 
ery, 15, 


of Iſrael, 1 —T. 


| 


& D 
Oreover, 


the word of the LORD came unto me thy uf 


ſet thy a face 


3 


didft fini 


againſt moune 3 Seir c, and 


Mount Ser, ta: with a 
le you meet .20. v.46. 
6 The Country for the Inhabi. 
Pture ; this was a mountainous 


old Lord 


wz 
nes are taken in t 


thou ſhale k 
heard all th 


gainſt the 
They are 1ajd delolate, 
ume ». 


2 Thou didf reproach 
cen the People of lome q 
Lord who hea 


by the 
heiro 


# 
s 


I2 And 
Lord GOD, Be- tha 


# I have 
ſtretch | 


now that I 22 the 
poken 
make thee -f- moſt 


Y blaſphemies whi 
Mountains of 
they are given 


ch 
Iſrael , 


” © By 4 Proſoprpeig 
E them ; 


layin 
; z» or 
' 5 1t thou vs 


perfonating a Diſcourſe with them, ſpeak of 
aking to them, ver. 22. let. f. [1h 
* 7. let. s. and ch. 6. V. Ig. 
ak will be which God g 


ng bur Solitarine 


and thou ſh 


1.41 will ;1, 
Flare, and th 


- ”» 


0d doth w 
Who Was a 


y thy citi 
ou ſhalt kn 
hat he ij 
Ppoinred 


ſuch like jm. 
es & waſte, alt be de. ity 
S Nebuchadnesz. 

It, as Jer. 27. 3. 
es in Edom,yert all 


In like manner 


did 
ay and ſtrong Citi 


<= 33; 23; 14. Where he 


hem. 
ed 5 againit + 
ainſt 


4 
Yet Tis certain from this ? 


boaſtin z 
hemous 
ed th2m 
hey thall 
{marr 


h ye have b 


Your words ag 
# Becauſe 
Zhe 


thou haſt had 1 ll 
bl, 


04a 3, of” the child 

, word 2, in the ti 

94! Thety iniquity P bad 
Vol. IT 


PCTPetual hatred 7 and haſt 


ren of Iſrael by the + force[P 


me of their calamity o, in the time 
an end 9; 


of 


5 Though the very Word 


aſlage, that they ſpake proud!y againſt the 
what they would do, will he nil] he. 


ords or Diſcourſes Were not once or '2 
is Probable, not much unlike the Words 
| lAa 2] 


$ be not reported 
Me ſiwor 


wice, the 
' 


y multip]; 
of Senache 


116; butt 


rat other times, 


; thus the 
Ft 
V. 1 


exe 
ed 
ee 


OD 
ſhall py 
> &VCN blood ſhall Pp 


77 B 
nd | 


7 
+. 


Sw 
Wick 
- I1,12, 
nd their 
CUte hj 
anl pun 
ch, 


4 3 
rlue 


at fr 


an men, : In 


rs ſhall they 


ns, and thy, 
ef, . 
now that I :z2 ; Je "y 


Mal. 1.z, 


ſhall he 


Friendſhip 
3 now for 
Never return to 


* £14? 
[fe 


res from 
In which 


* EXECUTE þo, 
ares wh ch 


LORD, 4» 
thou haſt 


by 
7 US to F con: # Heb. g:. 


V9 :Y. 


Heb, 


Mme : J7gnif:d, 
- « $ 


am. 2z 


3 ludden 
'V Taking 
8 


2,03, 


urſue * PC 199, 


e rill 
there, 


e, and 
2, ahd him th. 


" Pfal.s;, 


I 2. 
- 8 Iſrael and B 
Arr 5. 4554 though rhe 
WAS theirs.. 
* LORD was 
e Pofleflinn © : 


.& dr 


Fi * 
: AV bs] 


ord of 
ierce. 
FY 
Cir 
$ Has 
ſhed 


> » 
\ e 


4, 


&s 


Or, 


. 
7s 


Chap. XXXVL 


EWEEITEL 


ſmart for all this, and know 'tis for this when God aQts againſt them joy b of all their heart, wich deſpiteiul c minds to caſt it oyy 
cho durft proudly ſpeak againſt him. . I have heard your Words, you for a prey. 
ſhall feel my Sword. 


« 


thou knowelt. x Isin Peace and Plenty, and enjoy both ; thou ſhalt ' 
want all, and then Envy at the Welfare of others ſhall break thy 
Heart. Envy was thy Sin, and now what isthe Obje& of Envy ſhall 
be thy Gricf, v/z. the Proſperity of others. | 


x4 Thus 
rejoiceth x, I will makethee deſolate. 
:« The Inhabitans of the Countries round about thee, the whole that ! 


15 As thou didſt rejoice y at the inheritance of the houſc 


t In the Heby. *tis in formofan Oath. « In my hot Difpleaſure 


{aith the Lord GOD, When the whole earth | x Threatned Ruin and Deſolation to them. y Againſt all the Nati 
ons that are and have been Enemies to 1/rae/. 2 The Land, in which 


the Eldomites dwelt, the Heb. 1s Edom. 
help'd to take the Land from my People, and then left it in the 
of the Chaldeans in hope it ſhould be given back to them for the: 

Poſlefſion. 6b Tranfſporred with Joy, 7aco's Children put our, thous! 
, Heathen came in to poſſeſs the Land. c With rancorous Minds fc 
ling with Hatred ; 


a Have given, or delivereg 
hang 


and from thar a&ting with utmouſt Vigour, tg fly 


OS bl 


the Inhabitans, that there might be no Pretendersco the Land, byt thar 


of Ifrael, becauſe it was deſolate, fo will I do unto thee : they might inherit it. 
thou ſhalt de deſolate, O mount Seir , and all Idu;| 
5"? _ all of it; and they Jhall know that I am the ſay d unto the mountains and to the hills, to the 5. 


3 Thou took'ſt Pleaſure in the Ruin of my People ; for this thy | 


Sin I will ruin thee,and then do to thee as thou didft, I will retaliate ' 


and rejoice in thy ruine : thou helpedſt ro make 
will make thee ſo; thou cried(t ro ruin them all, 


Ferrſul:m deſolate, I 
to deſtroy all the 


Land, all thy Land ſhall be ruin'd ; and by theſe Judgments I will be} 


known to be the Lord, 


C H A ÞP. : XXXVI. 


6 Propheſie therefore concerning the land of Iſrae!, ana 


vers and to the valleys, Thus faith the Lord GOH 
Behold, I have ſpoken in my jealouſie', and in my 
fury e, becauſe ye have born the ſhame F of > 
heathen. 

d See wer. 4. let. 5, which is the ſame with this verſe. e Sex we, 
let. uv. nodifference in the thing expreſs d, though a little difference in 
the expreſſing of it; there 'twas the Fire of my Fealouſy, here in m y Fea. 
louſy, and in my Fury, f Which wer. 5. is being a Derifton to the re. 
ſidue of the Heathen ; theſe loaded them with Reproaches, and expo. 


The people of Iſracl comforted by the d.ftrnfion on their en:mies, 17. and 


*" "Ch. 6.2 


of Iſrael, hear 4 the word e of the LORD: 


by the bleſfng of God upon Iſrael, $—=15. yet Iſracl for their ſins 
chaſliſed and p:miſhed, 16 20. They are again reſtored, not for their 
own avings, but by ſis mercy and favour with all ſaving bleſſmgsp 2 I—38. 


I Lfo a thou ſon of man, * propheſie 5 unto the 
mountains c of Iſrael, and ſay, Ye, * mountains 


a nif.b. 6 Declare from me and in my Word. c The Inhabi- 


tants waſted, or in Captivity ; ſpeak concerning the Mountains, that is 


+ Heb. Be. 
cauſe for 
þ2cari[c. 

jj Or,z- are 
wage t0 
Come pon 
the lip of 
$178 torgie. 


kt Or, b:7- 


the Land of F+4zhand Iſrael, which was a Country full of Mountains, 
which were now horrid,unplanted. 4 What farther revenge I will take 
on Edo, and on other Nations that waſted you ; this continued to the 
end ofthe 6:5 Verſe. And hear what good I willdo to you; this from 
the 7:h tothe end of the Chaptcr. e The ſevere Judgments againſt your 
Enemies, kis gracious Promiſes to you. 


2 Thus ſaith the Lord GOD, Becauſe the enemy f had 


ſid againſt you, Aha g, even the antient high places + 


are ours z in poſleſſion & : 

f Many were the Enemies of God's People, but they ſo conſpired 
in ene Deſign, with one Conſent, and were. ſo one in their Humours 
and Enmiry and Carriage, that the Prophet ſpeaks of them as one, 
and particularly of Zen. g Rejoicingly and with inſulting Pride, 
as Ammoz did chap. 25. 3. and Tyre did chap: 26. 2. which ſee. þ The 
everlaſting Hills, bur this is common with other Hills, whoſe Foun- 
dations, as theſe of i/racl, are from the beginning, and ſhall be to the 
end; that they aim at, is a deriding of 1/-acl, who by promiſe from 
God claimed theſe Mountains as a perpetual Inheritance, but were now 
caſt out of it, and they hereby tax the God of 7ſ-ael as not keeping his 
promiſe, fo they blaſpheme God, and inſult over his People. 7 Our 
Righr, as of the elder Houſe, now Conquerors, and Feudatarics to 
him that hath ſubdued them ; thus they pretend right to juſtify their 
Injuſtice. k& We are now where we ſhould have been theſe 1160 Years 
or more, where we thought we would be one time or other, 1n ſpite 
of rhem and all their Boaſts of their God; we are where we will keep, 
and nenc ſhall put us our. Such impiousBrags were their Sin, and are 
implizd in the Words. 

2 Therefore propheſie and ſay, Thus ſaith the Lord 
GOD, -+ Becauſe they / have made you defolate mz, and 
ſwallowed 2 you up on every fide o, that ye might be a 
poſſeifion unto the reſidue p of the heathen, and || ye are 


taken up inthe lips q of talkers, and are an Infamy r of the 
people; 

{ Edomites, and others with them. Firſt broken vour Strength, 
waſted your Cities, and burnt che Temple, and waylay'd you to cut 
off rh-m that were eſcaped at laſt, » Devoured you as hungry Beaſts 
devour the Prey. o From all Coaſts of the Land ; throngh the whole. 
p Thar ſuch of the Heathen, who remained here, might have what 
thy no where elſe could have, being the ſcum and worſt of Men, an 
Inhcerirance and Poiieflion ; fo unnatural was Etwm that caſt out his 
own Kindred. ro bring in the vileſt of Men, and the moſt barbarous 
Strar:gers. 4 You are the Subje& on which wild and foul Mouths dif. 
courſe, which is explain'd. » In that the People ever talk'd of them 
wich reproach, and branding them as infamous. This was foreto!d ro 
Iiracl, Je'.24-9. and they.were adviſed to prevent it. 


4 Thereiors ye mountains of Iſrael, hear the word of 
the Lord GOD, Thus faith the Lord GOD to the moun- 
tains and to the 5 hills, to the [| rivers and to the valleys, to 


ſed them to Contempr, and Jſrael could not prevent it, they were tor. 
iced to bear it. 


7 Therefore thus ſaith the Lord GOD, I havelifted gup 
mine hand, Surely the heathen that are about you þ, they 
ſhall bear their ſhame. 


g Sworn in my Wrath, but in my Truth alſo, Deut.3 2.40, and when 
Men did ſwear ſolemnly, they did heretofore uſe this Rite, Ger. 14, 22, 
h Moabites, Ammonites,and 1dumeans ſhall be repayed in their own Coin: 
I will, asfure as I am God, as ſure asI can, fo ſurely I will make them 
a Taunr, a Proverb, and a Curſe among Men. 

8 © But ye, O mountains of Iſrael, ye ſhall ſhoot 7 forth 
your branches, and yield your fruit to my people of Iſrac], 
for they are athand & to come. 

; Shall be fruitful, and ſend forth the Branches, Trees, Plants, Herbs 
and Graſs, that are proper for you ; and theſe Branches ſhall nor have 
| Leaves only, bur they ſhall bring forth their Fruic. & The time will 
come, yea isnear, when my People ſhall come out of Babyloniſh Cap. 
tivity to reſettle in their own Land. I will perform my Word, and 
uy chem aſſured Peace ; and this will not be long, e're tis begun at 
eaſt, 

9 For behold, Tm for / you, and I will turn 2 unto 
you, and ye ſhall be tilled and ſown. 


with Redemption, that your old Inhabitants may return ro you with 
ſinging. # Look towards you with regard to what hath been, andi; 
your Eſtate ; your Sufferings, which wereleſs than you derſerved, ye: 
were the greater becauſe ye aremine ; your Inhabitants gave me the 
back ; and ſinned againſt me, and I turned the back on you,and regar. 
ded you not; then all Darkneſs covered you : now my Face ſhal] b: 
towards you, and you fhall proſper, and be fruitful to the comfort 0 
thoſe that ſhall dwellia you, and plough and ſow you. 


ro And} wil! multiply men upon you, all the houſe of 
Iſrael, evez all of it, and the cities ſhall be inhabited, and 
the waſtes ſhall be builded. 

1: And I will multiply upon you man and beaſt , and 
they ſhall increaſe and bring fruit; and I will ſettle you at: 
ter your vid eftares, and will do better » wnto you than 
at your beginaings, and ye ſhall know that I am the 
LOR. 

Theſe Verſes contain much the ſame promiſe of future Good, which 
God engageth ro ds for 1ſ-ael after their return out of Babylon. He will 
multiply Men upon the Mountains of 1ſrae! ; he will encreaſe them: 
Now leſt any ſhould reply, there had been Men roo many on th: 
Mountains, even all the Heathen ; God addeth, they ſhall be all cf 
them of the Houſe of 1/-ael, Jews, and they ſhould ſettle, build the 
waſted Cities; not Jeruſalem only, bur other Cities alſo, even waſted 
Houſes ſhall be built; you ſhall have large Stocks of Catrel, that your 
Condition ſhall be as inthe days of old. »n I will give ſpiritual Bl: 
ſings inſtead of remporal; and Meſiab's Kingdom ſhall haſten to you 
inſtead of that which was aboliſhed : in whatſoever this berter conliſt- 
ed, 'tis certain God performed his Word. 

12 Yea, I will cauſe men 0 to walk upon you, even my 
p people Ifrael, and they 9 ſhall poſſeſs thee, and thou ſhale 
be their inheritance 7, and thou s ſhalt no more hencefortl 
bereave them of men, 

o For Years paſt ſince your Captivity , wild devouring Beaſts 
ranged up and down, but now Men inſtead of ſuch ſhall walk up and 


z0as , or tn2 defolate waites, and to the cities that are forſaken, down in the Mountains of 1/rel; I will rake away the Beaſts from 


FER $. 


* Chap. 
30.19. 


winch became a prey and deriſion to the reſidue of the 
heathen that are round about: 


s Now is added a Parricular of Hill, Valleys, &c. whereas before 
only the Mountains were mention'd, but by them the whole Land was! 


off you, and bring Men upon you. p A People that are mine by Co- 
venant, whom T willown my 1ſ-ae!. q Edom boaſted he would poſ{!s 

ou, O- Mountains ; but not Em, or Heathens, your own antten* 
, Dwellers thall Poſſeſs you, even Abrabem's Seed. r For Perpetuity, 3 
Inkeritances are. 5 O Land of Canaan. r Conſume, and deſtroy thins 


j 


underſtood ; and to aſſure them thereof, all Parts are here particularly ' Inhabitants. 
mention'd, all thar the Enemy waſted ſhall be repaired, all that he| I3 Thus faith the Lord GOD, Becauſe they uſsy unto 
q v 


took away ſhall be reſtor'd in kind, and thoſe he derided ſhall be vin- 
Cicated ; their Eſtatesrepair'd, Cities rebui't and filled, their Credit 
and Honour clear'd and vindicated. Their Deliverance ſhould be. 
compleat and full. 


5 Therefore thus faith the Lord GOD, * ſurely * in 


the fire # of my jealouly havelII ſpoken » againſt the re- 


ſidue 7 of che heathen, and againſt all Idumea z, which 
Have appointed 4 my land into their polleflton, with the 


you, Thou /and devoureſt » up men, and haſt bercaved } 
chy nations ; 


4 The Heathen round about ; the Enemies of 17-22! accuſethe? Land 
of deftroying its Natives, and bring an evil Report on it, x Either 
by inteſtine Wars, or foreign Invaſions, or by unhealthful Air, or by 
mulcitude of wild Beaſts, or by Barrenneſs and Famine, thou kille! 
them, art like a Womb that conceives often, but almoſt as often mM! 
carrieth, as the word implieth. » Haſt conſumed thy Nations,ſ the 


Frenc!, 


1 Favour you and am pacified towards you z or I come towards you 


Chap. XX Wap. 


Potence 


Jour ſak 


hap 


,caue 
'/ 


*s.. 


64 wb der 6 WIS - RY” a bs 53-4 
As he dn es FILE . $8 ESA RR ran ea pox FAG 
Ot Ono oe ed AA ee ee eas INE an AI 
"- ALE - YL ER Vous Fl 4 5.7 = hor OE 4 ry ED AHA 6 ED ro yOu. 
a VO bo: 4 ng "eh 2 oe To ATV NG, 39% + ROI Rr AH RAE Pg DIR AT X 
Ag Wi Be SO GA by 03s 
ROS, 


A - 
i 

JU, 3 

( 4 

is H 

' at B 

he 

To 

hz 

of 

ol 2.6 
nd 2 


3 


French ; deprived t 
as a miſcarrying 


, Ur ſake; yo 


, 


' XXXVT 


Womb deprives a Family of hoped Children. | 


14 Theretore thou ſhalt devour z men no more , nei-* 
ther || bereave thy nations any more , faith yo Lord 


D. Vet ' . 4 
o_ will ſo bleſs thee, O Land, that thou ſhalt bring forth,4nd breed | 
vp man Sons and Daughters ; 


1creaſe, and this Reproach ſhall ceaſe for ever. | 


h of the people any more , neither ſhalt thou} 
_ "Oo nations 6 to fall any more , faith the. Lord 


GOD. 


"Verſe is a Confirmation of what was promiſed in 12, 13, 14- 
wa ail which is doubled for more aſſurance, and each part al- 
ready explicated. a Ver. 6.let. f. and wer. 13. let. u. x. b Ver. 13. 


let. y. 
16 Moreover, the word of the Lord came unto me, 


ſay *- Son of man, when the houſe of Iſrael dwelt in their 


own c land , they defiled 4 it by their owne way, and by 
their doings f ; their way was before me as the unclean- 
nes g of a removed woman. 


- In Fuineſs, Eaſe and Security, as in days paſt they did. d Brought 
*1 much Sin, and great Gujlt upon the Land. z. e. on themſelves, who 
welt there, and ſinned greatly. e Leaving my Law, deſpiſing my 
Counſel, forſaking my Worſhip and Temple. f By their Carriage, 
and Pra&ices in their whole Converſation. g Or,as one excommuni- 
cate, and cut off from the Congregation, becauſe of ſome great Sin. 
Or ſince [dolatry is ſo often compar'd to Fornication and Whoredom, 
poſſibly it may be here the Filthineſs of Spiritual Whoredom ;I hated, 
and loathed the Filthineſs of their Ways, as I would the Impurity of 
a whoriſh Woman proſtituting her ſelf for Gain. The word may in- 
clude the Reward of a Whore, as it doth Ezek. 16. 33. 


18 Wherefore + I poured my fury : upon them for the 
blood that they had ſhed & upon the land, and for their 
idols 1 wherewith they had polluted it. 

hb Theſe and other Sins were the true Cauſe that the Land was 
emptied of Men ; there was no ground for the Heathen Calumny. i I 
was angry with them, and the Effe&'s of my Anger were ſuch as made 
the Land and Cities deſolate. & For Murders committed in the Land, 
and frequently charged on them, Eze. 22. 3,6,9.12,27. and _ 
23.45. 1 Idolatry was another of their Sins, which brought Deſo- 
lation on them. 

is And I 7 ſcattered them among the heathen , and 
they were diſperſed » through the countries : according 
to their way and according to their .doings 1 judged 
them » : 

'1 My Hand ſcatter'd them ; and what Hand can retain the Inhabi- 
tants that God will fling out? »» Driven away, as Chaff before the 
Wind. n As their Ways and Doings provoked me, and deſerved 
what I brought on thern, ſo I judged them, and puniſh'd them with 
Deſolation. 

20 And when they centred o unto the heathen 


whither they went, *they * profaned p mine holy 


£ZEKEEL 
fthelr Hope of encreaſing innutmbers of Men, Mercy is the Spring and Fountain ; the vindicating my N ame from z'l 
NDOT EY G Imputation of Weakneſs or Unfaichfulneſs, and the magnitying the 


thou ſhalt ſee thy Childrens Children, ,,,,.. profaned « among the heathen, which 


rofaned in the midſt of 
1c * Neither will 1 cauſe 97 to hear inthee the ſhame F, 1 nom 


; of the heathen any more , neither ſhalt thou bear the GOD, 


Glory of my Goodneſs. Wiſdom, Truth and Power, are the Reatonsg 


on which I do what I do for 1j-2:/. z Broughtunder ſuſpicion with che 
Heathen, who think that the only and almighty God ſhould do better 
for his own and only People. 


23 And I will fandifie a my great 5 name which 


ye &d have 
them, and the heathen 
that I azz the LORDe, faith the Lord 


eyes. 


2 By clearing it up, and removing the ObjeQion that the Jews 
Sufferings and Sins among the Bavy/mians had raiſed. 6b They gave 
the Heathen occaſion to think meanly and contempribly of me ; bur 
I will ſhew I amas great as good, in both inflaite, c Seewey. 20, let. p, 
and ver. 22, let, z. d. God chargeth the Jews with the Blaſphemies 
the Heathen caſt on God ; the Jews were the cauſe of them, and rhey 
are therefore juſtly imputed to the Jews. e By what I do, the Heathen 
ſhall know what I am ; and from the great and good Things I do for 
you , performing my Promiſes, and purifying you, ſhail ſee I am 
Great, Good, Faithful and Holy ; then ſhall I be ſanRified in you , 


as Thave been profaned- by you in their Eyes; and ſo *twas 
Pſal. 127. 2. 


24 For* T] will take f you from among the heathen, * 
and gather g you out of all countreys, and will bring you 
into + your own land. 


F The Heathen purpoſe, as Pharach did, to detain you Servants ; 
think it impoſſible any Power ſhould take you out of their hand , or 
break the Yoke ; but I will doir, I will by omniporent Hand reſcue 
you from their Power. g They were ſcattered to through 127 Pro- 
vinces, that the Heathen judged it impoſſible to reafſemble chem, buc 
God will dothis too. þ So many Dithculties lay in their way of ger- 
ring into their own Land, that they thought them inſuperable; ſo 
long Journey, ſo many Enemies, and ſtrong, crafty and malicious; fo 
weak, poor and unarmed People, &7. yet alltheſe ſhall not prevent 
me, I will bring them ſafe totbeir own Land, and ſettle them. When 
this is done, they ſhall confeſs, and the Heathen ſhall confeſs, thatT am 
Great, Good, Wiſe, and Faithful ro my Promiſe; a God not like 
cheirs, but worthy to be thought well of, and to be ſpoken well of, to 
be praiſed and obey'd. 


25 T Then will I ſprinkle s clean water & upon 
you , and ye ſhall be clean /- from all » your 
filthineſs, and from all your idols » will I cleanſe you. 


z; He alludes to the Sprinklings under the Law, perhaps to tha: 
Num. 19, 9. which was for purification of Sin, and 19, 20 Yer/Jes. 36 
God will purify them from their Guilt. & Some think it may refer to 
Baptiſmal Water : if ſo, *tis to the Blood of Chriſt ſignified by it ; and 
this, ſay beſt Expoſitors, is here intended, and this is the Blood of 
Sprinkling, Heb. 12. 24. ! When Sin is remitted , the Perſon is in. 
deedclean, both in account of God and Chriſt. zz Though they have 
been many of all Sorts, and among all Ranks of Men, yet multirude of 
Sins ſhall not hinder me from pardoning. » That notorious great Abo. 
mination, your multiply'd Idolatry,I will pardon that alfothat yemay 
beclean. Thus Remiſlion of Sin 1s promiſed. 


26 A new 0 heart alſo will I give p you, and a new 
q ſpirit will I put within you ; and I will take away the 


name, when they q ſaid to 7 them, Theſe s are the 
people of the LORD, and are gone forth out of his 
land. | | 


o When they were come into Babylon, and entred into familiarity 
with the Inhabitants as Neighbours. p Did profanely ſin againſt thoſe 
Precepts of my Law which Heathens did know, venerate, and obſerve 
better than the Jews ; or it may include the Miſery their Sins had 
brought them to, which Miſery refleed upon their God in the Opi- 
nion of the Heathen. q Their Heathen Neighbours. » The miſera- 
ble and profane Jew. 5 With Taunt, and cutting Reprimand': Theſe 
theſe captive Slaves, that are moſt forlorn of Men, will have ir that 
their God is the Lord, the mighty and the good God, the true and 

aithful One, that gave them the Land out of which they are driven. 

f he be good, as they boaſt, how comes it to paſs his People are in 
ſuch ill ſtate ? Or, is he not able co better their ſtate? Was he weak, 
and could not keep them in their own Land ? Or doth he falſify his 
Word? You miſerable Jews, ſay what this meaneth. Burt, by their 
impure Life, they open'd the Mouths of the Heathen more to blaſ- 
pheme, and call the Holineſs of God into queſtion ; when they ſaw his 
People ſo unholy, they concluded, as is the People, ſo is their God ; 
and this, asit was a great Offence and Scandal to the Heathen, fo ir 
was a great Diſhonour to God. 


21 < But I had pity * for mine holy name «, which 
the houſe of Iſrael had profaned among the heathen whi- 
ther they went. 


: I ſpared them, who in Captivity continued to fin greatly againſt 
me, and for which Sins I had juſt Cauſe to cut them off; but I had 
Pity. « For my own ſake, and forthe Glory of my Name : had I de- 
ſiroyed them, the Heathen would have concluded againſt my Omni- 
potence and my Truth. I preſerved, I reduced, I re-eſtabliſhed them 
tor the Honour of my Mercy, Truth and Power. | 


22 Therefore fay unto the houſe of Iſrael, Thus 
faith the Lord GOD, I do nor ths for your fakes, 

houſe of Iſrael, but for mine holy names ſake ”, 
which ye have profaned z among the heathen whither 
Je m_ : 

# Which I have done, ſparing you, and preſerving you, and givin 
50u Favour in the ſight of the ” Tor : Nor do hg. ay I _ = K 


0 for you returning you to Judea, planti 
kt , planting you, encreaſing you 
and eſtabliſhing you , and making you a Bleſſing : "I do not this for 


u deſerve no ſuch Kindneſs from me. y My infinite 0p Temporal Bletiings ; 1o Earth doth follow Heaven. 7 jballdwe!l: 


{tony 7 heart out of your s fleſh, and I will give you an 
heart of fleſhs. 


0 A renewed Frame cf Soul,a Diſpoſition,and Mind changed from fin- 
ful to holy, from evilto good, from carnal toſpiritual. See chap. 11.19 
let g. A Heartin which the Law of God is written, as Fer. 31. 33. It 
is a ſanctified Heart, in which the Almighty Grace of God is victori- 
ous, and turns it from Sin to God, p God takes it to himſelf, asindeed 
it 1s his only Work, vid. chap. 11. 19. 9g Thisis exegetical, and tells 
us whatthe new Heart is ; tis a new holy Frame in the Spirit of Man, 
which is put in him, not found in him ; given to him, not wrought by 
his own Power. r Stubborn, ſenſlefs, uncraftable Heart, that receives 
no kindly Impreſſions from Word, Providences, or the Spirit of God in 
itsordinary Operations and Influences, that hardens ic ſelf ina day of 
Provocation, that is hardned by the Deceitfulneſs of Sin: this evil 
Heart ſhall betaken away, and God will do, whoonly can do it. 5 Our 
of your Fleſh, put for the Marv, t Thar is a Heart different from the 
ſtony-hard Hearr, quite of other Temper and Frame, hearkening to 
God's Law, trembling at his Threats, by gentleſt Providences moulded 
to a Compliance with his Will ; to forbear, do, be, or ſuffer whar God 


will, receiving the Impreſs of God, as foftned Wax receiveth the Im- 
preſs of the Seal. 


27 And I will put @ my * ſpirit x within you, and cauſe 
y you to walk in my ſtatutes, and ye ſhall keep & my judg.- 
ments, and do thera ; 


» Elſe-where pour out; God will givo as freely , fo abundantly. 
x» The Holy Spirit of God, which is the immediate principal Cauſe of 
that Change ofan old Heart into new, and of hard into ſofr. By the 
efficient Cauſe we may know the Effet, and underſtand what a new 
Heart 1s, and what the new Spirit is, when we know they are wrought 
in us by the Spirit of God, which is given to, and dwelleth in the 
Saints, which makes them Saints, and then abideth with them. y Sweer. 
ly, powerfully, ſucceſsfully, yer without compulſion ; for our Spirit, 
framed by God's Spirit to a Diſpoſirion ſutable to the Spirir's Holineſs, 
readily concurreth, and co-worketh, xz Be willing and ready, able, 
and in your Degree ſufficient to keep the Judgments, and to walk in 
the Starutesof God, which is to live in Holineſs. 


28 And ye ſhall dwell - in the land that I gave b to 
your fathers; and ye ſhall be my c people , and 1 will be 
your d God. 


2 Spiritual Bleſſings promiſed in wer. 25, 26, 27. are now followed 


God 


when I ſhall be ſanCtified in” you before | their 1 


j Or, $9399 


Chap. AXXVI. 


Ch.2.4 If 


*Ch.1.19. 


: » 5 4 
4 ly, : 


9 
2 23 F 


Uo 


Ia 


LEY 
vx. uw 


w_—_— We o 
£ dy < = 8 ba * 4 of —_ 0 > _—— Aaoited'® 
F 2 4 ” wr £ at z bs "2 4 "% ; $ <1 go TT. 
— vp ,& oC __— + - _ E——_ AS . _ - mr r . Y _ o __— bi _ 
re - £4 by C X pf Tr $9. "= — CT, — - . KY - REN TILE > Sax . ' - , OS wa cu I . - y - 1 2 Is q ” FT a Ns rags : 

Lf = : ” o 5% = n . rn . _ as U p32 "Hh by :, CF 2 & be F _ & 2E- _ — : - 7 Pay p =  —_ > : L rm 

wy = - IS = " - "aed 72 ; 4 2 oe IE o, ; mm '. - S, he #3 = —_ E P 99% rs ea... LOTTEN ? —_——— — — , . by E omni pro mn KL Bet 
yoo my ks $3 pf % > Fg” fa _ 4 «A; * - TS "a9" —_ —_ p £6.4" VS. ” GR . > 45 GE ww 7 # p—— = == « - ST + 55 # wp EIS. 4 IR © 4 IM Ivy —__ *44 F.-4 w ad Fang A > as doen - 

Y x _y £2 ko 3. SERTR Ex OY KS We k TRAN 7 m_- _— ———_ : . I wm "PPT fo + rtf Ag en - Ds l =3 y , fe Fb.- ” -% ” Fa NE C 4 
bes rat a . .£ 9 > > 26561 £ = we” : « pipes: = » n RY ——_ Cr” S _ by T ow a IHE > <_ D >; e261005-\. HH ty > ? : 
S pane bot = - RR _ —_— ” Ay 4 - » q WEE 7 +» - = ea is rg Kb _- <7 y. S _- wo " * q 4 G ""—_ » 4 a the x "I _u 6 ith = ro - i 
2 3 + a" 6 : oP; - A; - - *- » Ls 4 60 Ww \ s = , - n <7 Fe FN & a - pi + * & r! wn 2 5 PAET. , * wy P ——— 
— , ol ©: p . $432 WP R Y a E221 ns RG I — : ws. Ale 1 AD he: 6 D 29> . Of Val ; C : wt c 5 © ww 2 : ' : . , 
Rn \ - - : L - SF & pt , "EI OX . 
: 4 WIE CRSPPERFEy Ss o . Seb, <a v4. ” 4 4 c -* manneg 3 , Ks RN. - iv 4 gu - 4 
Oper nnhe rigs 194 ENLAG Memnbp nrt a ge ee Se - "OT . bo ra - oft R Ta "- _ ph ne ” y ' S 
- > . < « . . a P. a - q mods. 264d, 56 qo « D 2. d p , M1 PLEIIOE _ " an : . 
b - , — — — T ju £ __ z : 4 #0: F , a 2 Y ” 4 6 As y (ol green wr Deen E& 4 
4 bw _—_—_ —_ a t—_ 2 _ winds ps - I» »* s 97 AMES . —_ 004 = a" 4 Tp or : 
= » hs > 7 - <4 - > nc. "2A Ox - 4 = V a. 0 I ooo gn yer « RIES S, OS ep 4 vo das. ———— _ 


& xe =, ahh Ls. 


' - _ A _ _ than » (Gntetry, > > _ » 
— PER == _ —_ _— - u : - Wt ammo an : = Kew, bs 0 4 a _ » 
LIFT; _ —_—_ - 2 _— PS —— - = — ES. Cn ne h SY ne = + al - $ » —_ ”» 
m E = — ” < — - _ - yo _ - ag Y - pon _ . - -— 22 p _ 2 
A TL = = - —= = —2 _ — ow _ . - ——_ _ _ - —_ <> 4 : 
—_ Sm <param = yp — > 4 * »” Wh 8 4 —- - > as _ _ ———_——— 
_— 5 - - hooks - - ie === = = ——T == _ == — = ——_ 
— —D———— ren ene - - _ _— Y " - _— - _— : I S - 
— hk ad *" - _ —__ . - . ——— ” « pr= : 5: 
—_ - - = - = — I Aw - 3 ow = 
_ — gh © «vs BR - — _ — -- — —G — _ _ — = —_ —_ is m—_ - _ he - + t Lad 
- C _ I .. X =——- Lo - — 
. k - IANS I 
» D. _ L » % _ <- 
A £ HY Oe _" F - % « ad " Pr 7 W a ,_ A adi , 
ch pr__ 4 ih —- - _— CIEES — 
= ” — , —- - _ - =_ ——z 
2 we . - - Q A — = — == = —— ws - Re, "= rw KISSED boo he —— none - — a y— _ = —_ 


—— Js 
MLS ny cw - 
————t__— — pow .4 - 


—_— + ——— 
» _ 


WD 


——y 
OS c —— 


_ 


—_—  _——— 


| Chap. XXXVI. 


God adds this to his taking, gathering, and bringing into the Lang, 
wer. 24. when they are there, they ſhall ſertle and continue Proprie- 
tors, poſleſſing their own Houſes and Lands. 6 They were greatly 
pleas'd tothink, Canaan their Land was by God given to their Fathers ; 
in this Land under this CharaGter you ſhall dwell : The Land that by 
Promiſe 'to Abraham was your Right 1346 years, or nearit. c As 
your Fathers were, who reverenced, loved, worſhipped, obey'd, and 
believed in me. 4 As I was their God to prote&, guide, comfort, and 
enrich, &c. Vid. chap. 11. 20. let. p. to perform Promiſe to their 
Faith and Patience; and ſo you ſhall inherit the Bleſſing. 


29 I will alſo fave you from all your uncleanneſſes 2; 
and I will call f for the corn, and will increaſe ir, and 


GEESE 


*lay g no famine upon you. 

Perhaps the former part of this Verſe would have been better joined 
with the former Verſe, as a glorieus Fruit of God's taking them to 
be his People, and his condeſcending to be their God. e Salvation 
from all Uncleanneſles includeth Juſtification in our Pardon, SanQift- 
cation in the renewing our Minds, ſomewhat of Adoption in Peace 
and Hope, and a conſummate Glorification in Heaven, that State ofab- 
ſolute Purity ; all this God gives, when he is our God. f Corn, all 
Neceſſaries for Aliment compriſed in one, and theſe brought to them 
at God's Call, which they will hear, Pſal. 105. 16. 40. Hoſ. 2. 21, 22, 
g This is God's Arrow, he ſhoots it, where 'tis he layeth it ; but his 
People ſhall neither have it their Miſery or their Reproach any more ; 
as in next Verſe. 


30 AndI will multiply the fruit of the tree, and the in- 
creaſe of the field , that ye ſhall receive no more reproach 
of famine among the heathen. 


The former part ofthis Verſe explain'd, ſee chap. 34. 27. and 8, 9, 
10.ver. of this chap. ThelJatter part explained in wer. 29. 


31 Then þ * ſhall yeremember i your own evil & ways, 
Chap. 16.and your doings that were not / good, and * ſhall loath 
62.63- your ſelves in your own fight », for your iniquities, and 
Lev. 26h your abominations. ” 

L When 1 have given you my Spirit, renewed your Hearts, brought 
you by miraculous Mercy out of Captivity in a ſtrange Land, unto Li- 
berty in your own. ; Call to mind, review, and examine all your paſt 
Life. k Ways oppoſite to God's ; therefore both their own by Choice, 
and alſo evil intheir very Nature, the Ways the Prophets condemned 
and threatned, as chap. 22, and Jer. 3.5. &c. 1 Itis a Meioſiſs, not 
Good, 5. e. exceeding evil, like, yea worſe than other Nations,chap. 5,6. 
than Sodom. chap. 16.46. m See chap.6. 9. Your Mind ſhall abhor 
what you loved, and deeply grieve at what you rejoiced in; when 
Swine, ye wallowed in Mire ; when made Sheep, you ſhall as much 
fear, and fly from it. » Not in ſight of others, but Repentance in the 
chief parts lieth more retired and inward, and loaths Sins that are in 
the Heart, though none ever knew them beſide God and his own Soul. 
This fruit is the firſt and moſt ſure Sign of true Repentance. 


32 Not for your fakes o do I :hs faith the 
Lord GOD, be it known- unto you: be aſham- 
ed p and confounded for your own ways, O houle of 
Ifrael. 

o To aſelf-exalting People, who have too high Thoughts of them. 
ſelves, this is anecefſary Monition : We are all like the Jews, proud 
of ſomewhat we have not, vid. ver. 22. an old Diſeaſe, and we long 
ſince warnedofir, as wellas they, Dent. 9.5,6. p Shame and Con 
fuſion, Self-abhorrence, and deepeſt Humiliation, that will become 
you; for you have walked ſtubbornly in your own Ways, though I 
would have reclaimed you, and did call you back from them by my 
Fr phets. 

33 Thus faith the Lord GOD, In the day 9 that I 
ſhall have cleanſed you from all your iniquities, I will 
alſo cauſe you to dwell in the cities, and the waſtes ſhall be 
builded. EY | 

7 Sin committed, that deſeryeth ; and Sin imputed, that doth bring 
down Judgments on the Sinner ; (ſo did the Jews Sins, and continued 
the Puniſhment in thoſe Judgments) until a Pardon take away Guilt, 
and then Judgments will be removed: So here, pardoned Captives re. 
turn to, and dwell in their own Cities ; Sin unpardoned waſted the 
Country, but Sinners repenting and pardon'd, ſhall build the Waſtes: 
Sin unpardon'd , leaves the Land untilled and barren ; but pardon'd 
ones ſha!! plough, ſow, reap, and ear. 

34 And the deſolate land Jhall be tilled, whereas it lay 
deſolate in the ſight of all that paſſed by. 

35 And they r ſhall ſay, This land that vas deſolate 

*Iſz51-3-is become like the garden of s * Eden ; and the waſte, 
and deſolate, and ruin'd cities are become fenced 7, and are 
inhabited- 

r Strangers, or Foreigners, who had heard or ſeen the ſad Waſtes ; 
and now eirher hear or ſce the replanting of it, and how it ſucceedeth- 
s See the Phraſe, chap. 28. 13. moſt fruitful, pleaſant, and deſirable : 
This is true of the Church of Chriſt without an Hyperbole ; bur here 
*tis to be accommodated by a Comparative thus; thar good State the 

Jews are now in, compared with what they were in, is as an E9:n to a 
Wilderneſs. : Not onlv built for Habitation, but fortified for Defence. 
36 Then the heathen that are left « ronnd about you, 
ſhall know that I the LORD build the ruined places, and 
* Ch: 35, Plant chat that was deſolate : I the ® LORD have ſpoken r, 
* and willdoz. - ; 
# That were not garried away and diſperſed ; whether they were 
& 37. 14. Tyrians, Zidonians on the North, or Awmon, and Moab, and the Ph:1i- 
ftines, and Edomites Eaſtward and Southward ; theſe Remnants of the 
Heathen ſhall ſee and confeſs a peculiar Providence of God toward the 
Jews, in theirflouriſhing ſo greatly upon their return. 


27 Thus faith the Lord GOD, I will yet for this be en- 


quired x of by the houſe of Iſrael, to do zt for them, I will | 
mcreaſ: them with men like a flock. 


x Tho I have repeateu ſo ofren my Promiſe to return them , tg 
rebuild, to multiply them, yet they ſhall know 'tis their Dury to in. \ 
treat it, to wait on me, and then I will givea merciful Anſwer, anq [ 
do it. Thus Danie/ pray'd when he knew the Return was ſure anq l 
near. Or elſe it may be thus ; Above all this, or yet more than a1 y 
this I will be found ofthem when they doſeek me; thus 'tis a Promiſs | 
made to their Prayer, in the other 'tis a requiring them to pray , {g t 
they ſhall increaſe as a Flock. | F O 
38 As the + holy y flock, as the flock of Jeruſalem WW 
in her ſolemn $v feaſts; ſo ſhall the waſte cities be filled 4 1 a 
with flocks of. men , and they ſhall know that I am the fit Mn 
LORD. Wy 
3 Flocksdeſigned to holy Uſes, as Sacrifices, and therefore farther OC: 
deſcribed by the Place where they are, Jer»/a/em. 2 The Occation SB bt 
and Time, ſolemn Feaſts, either the three annual great Feaſts , or - 
you may take in the daily Sacrifices. Theſe Flocks were for Quality, B 
the beſt of all, and for Numbers, very great on the folemn Fealts ; m3 
30000 at once of Lambsand Kids in Joſiah's time, and many more at _ 
the Paſſover in after-times. Thus ſhould Men multiply and fill the Fl, 
Cities of replanted Juzes. of 
CHAP, XXXVIL | 
| \ 
By the refurreFion of dry benes, the dead hope of Iſrael is revived, and thei Th 
dcliverance from Captivity foreteld, 1———=14. by the joining together of ww Oo 
two ſticks , is ſhewed the union of Iſracl and Judah, 15 I9. the : 
everlaſting kinzaom of Chriſt promiſed, 20 — 28, live 
0 
Se hand 4 of the LOR D was upon me, and at 
carried me out in the ſpirit 5 of the LORD, mig 
and ſet c me down in the midſt of the valley 4 which was _ 
tull of bones e. | zafi 
# Either the Prophetick Spirit, as chap. 1. 3. and chap. 8. 1. let. g, Qua 
moving him to propheſie by this Emblem, or elſe the Spirit of God ſpire 
carrying him wi/ioally not corporally, as in chap. 8. into ſuch a Prolpet chew 
or Landskip. 6 Either in the Power of the Spirit of God, or 1t may _ 
referto the Prophet's own Spirit, he was in his Spirit, or Mind and h 
Apprehenſion. c So it ſeemed to me in the Vitton, that I was rea 
gently down. 4 'Tis vain toenquire what Valley this thould be, which UP Uj 
wasviſional , not corporeal or real. e *Tis as vain to enquire whoſe EL 
Bones theſe were, they are vi/imal and Hieroglyphicks ot' Iſrael's preſent Soul, 
Condition. _ 
2 And cauſed f me to paſs by them round about g ; and ns" 
behold, þ there were very many 7in the open & || valley ,1q, Ss 
and lo, they were very dry /. pin and y 
F In the ſame manner I was made to go round about them, in which would 
I was carried to ſee them. g Round, round ; perhaps twice or oftner II 
to view them well. þ He reports what he: obſerved remarkable, the \ 
i For Number Firſt, they were not only many, but very maxy , as ver. bones 
ro. that they made an exceeding great Army. k The Place nexr, the our p 
Face or Surface of the Plain, expoſed to Wind, Weather, and to Vio- d Tl 
!:nce, 1 The 2uslity of them, dry, wery ary, 1n which could be no- | dilcour 
:hing that might promiſe Life. | very, a 
3 And he »» ſaid unto me, Son of man, can « thels WR up ar 1; 
bones live? and I anſwered, O Lord GOD, thou {| bur th; 
knowelſt o. | Ps | 
7» The Lord, who brought Exzekic! hither , ask'd him what he bake 4 
thought. » Either is it likely they ſhould , or is it a future thing that 
ſhall be, or poſſible that they may live > o The Propher's Anſwer open 
refers all to God, to whom all thingsare poſſible, which argue Power your g 
in doing, and who knows all he will do inttime to come. The Prophet's U bTe 
Anſwer ſeems toown the Poſlibility, and refers the Futurity co-the BF miſe an 
Will of God. & poor d 
4 Again he ſaid unto me , propheſie p || upon thele p mo y 
bones, and ſay unto them, O ye dry bones, hear 9 th* "Wi Capt 
word of the r LORD. Grave, 
2 The Prophet had ſpoken often to things that could as little hear WW 2 Hand 
as theſe Bones could, yet when they are deaf to a Prophet, they'll hear (7 that yo 
the Prophet's God. 9 Alas, what dry Boneshear ! no, not a Sylls- 02 $95 0 
ble of this Word. » But this they will hear, obſerve, and obey it; ot Youma) 
his Voice, who calls things that are not, and makes them to be, gives s 13 
Being by his Word. | have « 
5 Thus faith the Lord GOD unto theſe bones, Be- up = | 
hold, I will s cauſebreath * to enter into you , and ye hal —- 
IVC raculouſ] 
s My Prophet propheſied and ſpake, butT, ſaith the Lord,only cal & of my P, 
and I will ſurely give Life to them. : When God had formed 44» $ i 6 1 
Body, as lifeleſs as theſe Bones, he created him a living Soul, by | and ] | 
breathing into his Face the Breath of Life, by a creating Power h* | know 0 
brings Breath into theſe Bones too. » The Effe& ſhall be ſure and ir fox ( 
ſpeedy, when God brings his Power to work it. —_ 
. . . 0 
6 And I will. layy finews upon you , and will bring thankfur- 
up & fleſh upon you, and cover you with a skin , and put and in R 
b breath in you ; and ye ſhall live, and ye ſhall know chat Poſſeiſ.on! 
I am the LORD. 'Fulneſs: 
7 Sinewstie the Bones together, & 7!eſh fills up the Hollownell:s, ' 
and being full of Muſcles, helps Motion. a Skin as the upper St] | 11 $1 q 
ken Garment, covers all with a clear and bluſhing Colour. 5 Breath Jing, 
laſtly muſt be added. Allthis God declares he will do, and I ſupp%* ; 16 M 
rheſe Promiſes are what the Prophet is ro declare to theſe Bones th q ſtick, 
they may revive. children 
7 Sol propheſied cas Iwas commanded 4 : and as I p10 ther 
pheſied e there was a noiſe f, and behold, a ſhaking g, 2" ck of 
the bones came together þ bone to his bone. . COmpanz 
c Declared, or pronounced theſe Promiſes, or gracious Purpo{es 9 _ Tablet 
God concerning them. d Whether it was thus or ſome other 2) ' _— bs 
the Prophet was commanded it, and fo he did it ; he ſpake *9 chem w Wo 


which could not but be deafto him , and whictycould not —_ 


/ 


FE ey Oe 
» 
when God ſpeaks. e Eicher according to the purport of my Pro-| 
hecy, or rather, during the tine, or while.I was propheſying; or 
l ſoon as I prophelied. f Thuader ſay ſome; others more likely, the 
Noiſe was the. ratling of the Bones in their Motion ; ſuch Noiſe 
they could not bur make where multitudes of them heaped, or laid 
rogether, diſperſe and roll! themſelves from one to other, till they 
meet their fellow Bones. g There was 2 rrembling or Commortion a- 
mong theſc Bones enough to make this Noiſe, and to manifeſt a Di- 
vins P:cſence 2nd Word from God workiag among them. þ Crepr, 
or with this ſhaking Morion glided nearer and nearer, till each Bone 
m:t the Bonero which it 'rwasto be tied. 

2 And when 3 I] beheld &, lo, the ſinews and the fleſh 
came / up uponthem, and theskin covered them above ; 
but there was no breath » 11 them. 

; The Noilc he heard would certainly make any one look and Con- 
ſider what 'twas. & Looked carefully, and heedfully obſerving. 
| Came gradually RY it ſelf, as what grows wider and longer. 
» Uopcrmoſt the Skin covere them. So here were Men 1n Skin, with 
Eleth, Sinews, Bones, bur like Adam before inſpired with the Breath 
of Life. n The Spirit of Life was yet wanting. 

9 Then faid he 0 unto me p, Propheſie q unto the 
* || wind 7, propheſie, ſon of man, and fay to the wind, 
| - Thus faich the Lord GOD, Come from the four winds s, 
! O breath, and breath upon theſe ſlain z, that they may 
hve #. es : 

o The Lord God. p To Ezekiel viewing, and no doubt wondring 
at the fight. q Declare to that what my Will is. r Spirit Heb. and 
might be fo tendred, bur our Verſion hathir Wind, while the French 
hath it Spirit, 4. & the Soul, whoſe Emblem here 1s Wind, which, as 
it did gently blow upon theſe Lifeleſs Creatures, they received; each 
inſpired with its own Soul and Spirit. » Gather your ſelvesfrom all 
Quaiters of the Earth under Heaven; unite to your own Bodies; in- 
ſpire them once more. # By Sword of Enemy long ſince; ſome of 
themtheſe 70 Years. wu Revive and riſe, 

10 So | propheſied x as he commanded me, and the 
breath y came = into them, and they lived 2 and ſtood 
up upon their feet, an exceeding great c army. 

x See wer.. 7. let. c. y The Spirit Hcb. the Spirit of Life, or the 
Soul, Gin. 2. 7. # Entered, took up its abode. & Preſentiy diſco. 
vered, that they did live. 6 Roſe with Strength, able to ſupport 


EZERIEL. 


| Chap. XXXVII. 


irs Faſhion was, it muſt be but one.. « The Inſcription is not on!y 
commanded, . but the Words alſo in which 'Gs to be written. .x The 
Tribe, or poſſibly the Kingdom; if the latter, then the Companions 
mentioned will be ſuch as in proceſs of Time fe!] off from the Ten 
Tribes, and united with the Kingdom of the Houle of David; if the 
former, which is moſt likely, then y his Companions are Benjamin and 
Levi in part. 2 Who kept with the Tribe of Judah their Obedience 
to Davia's Seed. a When thou haſt written on the firſt Srick, then 
take 6 a ſecond Stick, ſuch as the firſt was. c He was Father of two 
Tribes, one of which was chief of the ten Tribes, and is therefore 
mentioned here. d Ephrain was the Son. of Joſeph, whom his Grand® 
father bleſt, and by Prophetick Spirit foretold, and promiſcd thar he 
ſhould be one of the chief ot all the Tribes; and Ephraim was moſt 
conſiderable ia the Kingdom of 1jr4e! when divided from the other 
ewo. e The other nine Tribes.  f Who did ar firſt ſide, and have 
continued ſtill with Ephrarm. Some ſay Ephraim wasthe whole King. 
dom of the ten Tribes, and that his Companions were the Gentiles 
converted to the Faith of Chriſt, which I wiſh were wellproved. 

17 And join g them one to another into one ſtick, and 
they ſhall become one in thine hand. 

Z Some would have this done miraculouſly, but I do not think God 
bade the Propher work a Miracle; were it fo, God would rather 
have ſaid, I will make them one, for he can do Miracles; 'twas e- 
nough if glew'd together, or but held in his Hand, ſo that in his 
Hand they were one, | 

18 And when h the children of thy ; people ſhall 
ſpeak unto thee, ſaying, Wilt & thou nor ſhew us what 
thou meaneſt by theſe ? 

hb So ſoon as they enquire. 5 To whom thou art Warchman by 
Office, and nearof Kinby natural Deſcent, k There was ſome reaſon 
why they might doubt whether he would, becauſe they had carried it 
ſo frowardly toward him; therefore they requeſt it by an Interro- 
gatory, Wilt thou not ? We ſhall never know the meaning unleſs chon 
unfold it, wilt thou not do it then ? 

I9 Say unto them, Thus ſaith the Lord GOD, Be. 
hold, I will take the ſtick of Joſeph / which « in the 
hand »2 of Ephraim, and the tribes of Iſrael his fellows », 
and will put them with him 0, even with the ſtick of Ju- 
dah, and make them one ſtick p, and they hall q be one 
in mine hand 7. 

: On 'which Joſeph's Name is written, and which repreſents Joſeph. 


themſelves. c A Power, ſo the Heb. or Army of ſtrong, couragious 
and well-ordered Soldiers. The Phraſe in the Hes. is very full. N 
Power or Hoſt great, very very great; thus they riſe, that the Propher , 
and we might know how fate in themſelves, and how terrible rhey j 
would be to their Enemies. | 
® 11 Then he ſaid unto me, Sonof man, theſe bones are 
© the whole d houſe of Iſrael : behold, they fay e, Our 
* bones are dried f, and our hope is loſt g; weare cut off fo! 
= Our parts, : 
ZE 4 The Hieroglyphick, or Emblem of the Houſe of 7/-ae!. e Think, 
diſcourſe and conclude. f Their State as hopeleſs, as far from Reco- 
| very, as dried Bones,ſcattered abroad firſt, and undiſtinguiſh d heaped 
| vp at laſh, are from Life. g The hope, not that falſe Prophers gave us; 
| bur that the true Prophets propoſed to us, 1s utterly loſt, and we are 
| out of all expeQtation of Recovery. 

12 Therefore propheſie 5, and ſay unto them 7, Thus 
ſich the Lord GOD, Behold &, * O my people, I will 
open your graves /, and cauſe you to come up out #2 of 
your graves, and bring you » into the land of Iſrael. 

þ Tell them their Miſtake, aud revive their Hope by i new Pro- 
© miſe and Declaration of my Purpoſes of Mercy towards then. i Theſe 
& poor deſponding, deje&ed 1/raelites. & Conſider what ny Propher 
aſſures you he hath ſeen, dry Bones miraculouſly revived. and ſtand- 
ing up in Power as a mighty Hoſt; ſo ſhall you. / Though your 
| Captivity be as Deathgyyour Priſons and Confinements cloſe as the 
# Grave, yet I will open thoſe Graves. mT will life you out, lend you 
= a Hand to bring you out with Life and Strength. » Be your Guide, 
= that you may know the way ; be your Support, that you may be able 
7 togo; and your Guard and Defence againit Dangers of che way,that 
© youmay certainly cotne into your own Land. 

* 13 And ye ſhall know that I a» the LORD, when I 
= have opened your graves O my people, and brought you 
# upout of your graves, 8 

When your Reſtitution to your own Land, and your Proſperity in 

your Land, when ybur Growth to Strength and Power ſhall be fo mi- 

raculouſly effe&ed, then yeu ſhall acknowledge and publiſh the Glory 

* of my Power, Faithfulneſs, Goodneſs and Wiſdom. 
14 And ſhall put my ſpirit e in you, and ye ſhall live p, 
| and I ſhall place q you in-your own land : then ſhall ye 
{ know that I the LORD. have ſpoken 7 ir, and performed 5 
ir, faith the LORD. 


| 0See chap, 11. 19. let. f and chap. 36. 27. let. #, 
thankful for, and 


? Joyful in, 
, contented with your Bleſſings I give. 9 Quietly 
and in Reft ſettle you in your own Habitations, and in your antient 

ofſeiſ.ons. r This hall demonſtrate the Truth of my Promiſes. 
' Fulneſs and Punctualneſs of my Performances. 


r 15 T The word of the LORD came again unto me, 
Jing, 
, 16 Moreover, thou ſon of man, * take thee one 
! ſtick, and write « upon it, For Judah x, and for the 
children of Iſrael y his companions % : then « take 

write upon it, For Joſeph «© the 


another 6 ſtick, an 


ſtick of | Ephraim 4, and for all the houſe e of Iſrael his 
COmpanions f. | 


- ' Tabler, 7 c. a writing Tablet or a Tally, ſuch as is firted to be 
"ten upon, or 2-Rod or Staff on which chou mayeſt write, the Heb. 


* Which was under the Government of Ephraim; or thus, which is 
the Tribe of Ephraim, the latter explaining the former. » Se2 wer. 16, 
ler. e, f. oe Judah and his Companions. p One Kingdom, one Peo- 
ple, whereas theſe have been dwided, and Enemiesa grear while. 
q Real, cordial in theic Union. » Under my Government, Care, and 
Bleſſing. This is the meaning, God will make the two divided 


_ one in his Hand, as I make theſe ewo ſticks one in my 
Han 


20 T And the ſticks whereon thou writeſt; ſhall be 
in thine hand before / their eyes. 


s To affe& them the more; and to aſſure them the fullier, let them 
ſee theſe two divided Sticks made one in thy Hand. 


21 And fay unto them, Thus faith the Lord GOD, Be- 
hold, I will take the children of Iſrael « fromi among 
the heathen whicther they begone «, and will gather them 
on every ſide x, and bring them into their own land. 

See this explained chap. 38. 24. rot. t Theten Tribes, as well as 
Judah and Bejamin; at leaſt many of the ten Tribes. The Expreſ. 
ſion ſeems to look to them that were gone among the Heathen by a 
yoluntary Peregrinetion, whether before the Captivity or after it, 
I will not conjeQure ; bur 'tis likely enough to me, that among the 
Jews Earried away, and ambng their Children, there wete ſome that 
were uneaſie, where they were againſt their Wills, who would ramble, 
and range over Countries, hoping to fare betrer, and perhaps theſe 
Wanderers may be the Perſons meant by this gone, where they are 
who mwalk'd thither, as the H:bh. x The Wind was to come from the 
four Coaſts of Heaven, ver. g. let. /. thereby telling us, they ſhould, 
as 1n this, be gathered on every ſide. 


22 And* I will make them one 7 nation in the land, 
z upon the mountains of Iſrael, and * one king @ ſhall ** ft: 


be king to them all : and they ſhall be no more two 6b natt- Jer. 3. 8. 
ons, neicher ſhall they he divided into cwo kingdoms any Ho. 1.17. 
more at all, * Joh. 16. 


3 They were one in Devid's time, who was Type of the Me/fah, 6 
and continued fo till the end of Solomon's time, whole Namie includes 
Peace. So wheri the Beloved, the Peace maker, the Me/72h ſhall he 
King, and on his Throne execcifing bis Kingly Power, chey ſhall be 
once more one again. z Of Canaan, called here, as elſewhere, th: 
Mountains of J1ſrae/, 2 M:/ish moſt, and beſt, if nor learnedſt In- 
rerpreters underſtand, not Zerobabel, nor Nehemiah, nor Judas Maccabers. 
b The Union under the Mefia#'s viſible and actual Exerciſe of his Re- 

al Power ſhall be perpetual. On this place ſo full and expreſs for a 
frm, laſting Union between the two Nations Ephraim and 7ud:h, and 
theit being of two Kingdoms made one in thz Land, whence they 
were ſcatter'd, ſome take occaſidn to enquire whether ic be fulfall'd ai- 
ready, or remaineth yet to beaccompliſh'd ; the Diſcuſſion whereof, 
as very alien to a litera] Paraphtaſe, ind which would be too prolix, L 
paſs over, ſaying no mote of itinthe Affirmative or Negative, 


23 Neither ſhall they defile c themſelves any mpre with 
their 4 idols, nor with their deteſtable e things, nor wich 
any of their tranſgreſſions f : but 1 will fave g chem ouc of 
all their dwelling-places; wherein they have tinned 4, and 
will cleanſe ; them : fo ſhall they be niy people &; and | 
will be their God. 


c Idolatry is a very defiling Sin, :tid the Jews in both Kingdothis ex 


| ll it Word, without deſcribing its Form and Faſhion, but whatevex 


ceedingly addiRted to it, pertinacious in it to the utter Ruine of bork 
King- 


_m—_—_— 


- > ——_ 


bs 
- OY 
. = -———— 
— -— . _ - >: - 0 _s > ” 
Ws Go LED REED --3 SA = 09's © Wo 
a, _y _— —- _ = — — 
SG -+- 7 . nds — 


a 
=> 


I 


LY 
I EIS MEET” 


= Sr 


Inn. A ben 
Dy 


> - 
LO 


Chap. SRKEYU1I. 


K4 n gdoms 4 
ro where that they fell to Idolatry. 4 It may refer tothe Heathen, 


p Ila. 4©O.1%. 


Jer. 23- 5- them ; and * they all ſhall have one o ſhepherd : they {hall 
alſo walk in my judgments, and obſerve my ltatutes, and 
Ln.1.32.do them p. 


and 30. 9. 


Hof. 3. 5 


” Yor. 235 
Tch.10.16 


"J-h.1.1.4; 
Lia. 14.11 


fe:ds, not flzeceth the Flock 


— 
EB 
but after the returh from Babyloniſh Captivity, we find 


ard thzn' *tis they ſhall not defile themſclves with the Idols the Hea- 


then did werſhip;. or to the Idolsof the Jews, their own Idols, with 


which they ſhall benomore defiled. e The ſame wirh Jo's, and ad- 


ded to'icr out the Toathſomneſs of the Sin.  f The former ob{tinate, 


bold, daring Tranſgreſlors-did that which theſe ſhall nor defile them- 
ſelves with, Vid. chap. 36. 25, 33. and chap. r1. 175 18. g Whilſt there 
I preſerved them, and now I will bring them {afe our of the places. 
þ Where out of a bad Fear, or worſe Choice, they ſinn'd, as did the 
Heathen with whomthey dwele, + Both ſanCtifie and make them ho- 
ly, and juſtific and give them Pardon, chap. 49. 29. & Vid-c9p. It. 
20. let. p. and chap. 36. 26. let. d. 

24 And * David 1 my ſervant » ſha!! be king 7 over 


Ce c/: i a4, who w his 

I See chap. 34+ 23, 24. *Tis the Son of Davin, who was alfo h1 

ord, Ro is here intended. The Mea in his Mediatory Office 1s 
God's Servant, and our Saviour. 7 Over th:ir H-acts, and rule 
there in a ſpiritual manner. o This King ſhail be a Shepherd, that 
: > but one chief Sh-prierd, others thar feed 
and rile the Flock are ſo by Commiſſion from him, p Ic is both 
declaratory of Duty, and prediCtive of the Event, and promillory of 
Ability and Afliſtance to keepthe holy Commandmenrset God;Chriſt's 
Kingdom is that which by Law and Precept commandeth Righteoul- 
neſs, and which by Grace and Power ſtrengrhens its Subjz&s ro this, 
and ſo the Event is ſure, and freeſt Grace makes holicft Lives. 

25 And they q ſhall dwell in the land that I have 
given r unto Jacob my ſervant, wherein your fathers 5 
have dwele 3 and they ſhall dwell therein, even they and 
their children, and their chi!drens chiidren for ever 7 ; 
and my ſervant David « ſball be their prince tor e- 


Ver. 


ZEKEEL 


Loſſes and Dangers of the Jews, ere they ſhould overcome them, anq 
God ſhould ſully and finally deliver them. &# See cap. 20. 46, ter... 
& 21. 2. & 25. 2. & 35.2. let. a. 6 Thiscannor be one fing'e Perſyy, 
or one only Prince, tho like enough it points out ſome one, by whom 
the 'Troubles forerold were begun, yet the Succeflors of thisone wh, 
e're he was, are included, and deſigned by this Gog ; nor. ishe tg h. 
limired to one certain Nation that he was King of, nor yet confin'g 
ro one Ape, or (it may be) to two or three. Some will fix the 
beginnings ef this Gog among the Seleucide, and take in the others 

who divided the Grz:ia Empire among themſclves,ard who did mych 
Hurt to the Jews, the Hiſtory of which zn part you meet with in the 
Books of the Afr;cabees. But if wemuſt account why theſe are calle4 
Gog, perhaps this may ſuthce : Gyges, who gave Name to the Lang 

Predeceſſor to Crc{us (for he was Grandſon to Gyges) was conquer's 
by Cyr, deprived of the Kingdom; and this made and conrinyeq 
Tributary to the Perſians, till raken from them by the Crecians, anf 
when that Kingdom was divided, it fell among the Succeflors of 
lexanter in Scleucus's Line, and fo the Seleucide may, not withuort ſons 
ground, be thought pointed at by Geog, whoſe Country fell into the 
Hand of Selcncus by the Succeſles he had againſt Antigone. And of aj} 
the Seleucide, the ſixth from Seleucus itands fairelt for ir, this wz; 
Antiochus Epiphanes, Type of Antichriſt, and a fierce Enemy of the 
Jew:s, Others judge this War, in which Gog is Prince and Leader x. 
ters to times mich later, and there are f:veral Particulars that do ng+ 
wellſure with the Times of Antiochrs Epiphanes, Fhey will therety;e 
rather refer i to ſome Scythian King or Kings, and that the time is ijj 
[ro come wherein this Prophecy 1s to be fulfilled. Andrhatic mu 
intend thoſe Enemies of God's Church who deſcended from rhe $:y. 
thians, and are now Maſlters of Cappadocia, Iberia, Armenia, or are in 
Confederacy with the 73:tars, and thoſe Northern Heathens, Nay 
the Arms and Equipage here mention'd well ſute with theſe Scyri:;up. 
and they with the Turks, as like to make up part of this Army, Br 
others think, that all the Enemies of 7/-a:! in all Quarters, all boch 
open and fecrer Enemies are here intended, and thar the Antich»;#; 
Forces and Combinations are what the Prophet foretells; and if from 
a Conjunttion of Aﬀairs now, or Jately on foot in the World, we 
might makeour guels, the Invaiionsof rhe Turks on one 1ide, and the 
Contrivance of others on this ſide Chriſtendom to extirpate the Nor. 
thern Herelie (as ſome have called our Religion) we might beex. 
cusd if we err, ſaying, The Confantinopolitan Antichrift, and the Roman 
Antichrift, with all their Aſſociates and Helpers, are this Gag. © Mags; 
1s at leaſt part of Sc3zhia, and comprehends Syriz, in which was #;.;,. 
polis taken by the Scthians, and called of them Scythopolis. Iris then 
that Countrey which is now in Sabje&ion to the Turks, and may hs 
extended through Aſia minor, the Countries of Sarmatia, &c. from 


more 6. 

x As *twas my Kindneſs to your Fathers to give them, ſo ſhall it be 
ro you, to give you my Bleſſings on the ſure and inviolable Security 
of a Covenant, »y Comprehending all B'eflings that may give a People 
Content, and render them happy, Peace with God in Heaven, Peace 
in your Conſcience with your ſelves, with your Brethren in the 
Chuich, with the Beaſts of the Field, and with your Enemies, who 
ſhall for Fear, tho not for Love, keep Peace wich you, while your 
Ways pleaſe your God. z The ſpiritual Part is abſolutely endlels, 
the external Part ſhall bs for a long time, as 'tis always to be inter. 
prered where T<emporals ſeem promiſed for ever. a Both Temple 
and Worſhip, nor ſuch as are typical of the Aefiah to come, but ſuch 
as may aflert he is come, ſuch as bring to the Knowledge, Love, and 
Obedience of him. IT will ſet up a ſpiritually glorious Temple and 
Werſhip amiiit you. 6 Never tobe alter'd or aboliſh'd on Earth, 
bur ro be conſummated in Heaven. : 

27 * My tabernacle c alſo ſhall be with them : yea, I 
will 4 be * their God, and they ſhall be my e people. 


c The Tabernacle of my Preſence, or wherein I will ſhew my 


Preſence among them. Their Fathers had a Tabernacle of Witneſs, 


ſo thall they, that was brought by 7ebuah into Canaan, But the Mcfſiah 
ſhall bring with tim a better, a ſpiritual, and heavenly. d See chap. 
11. 20 Rev. 21.1, 2,3. eBy my Grace T will make them holy, as 
the People of a holy God oughrtro be, and I will make them happy, 
as the People of the ever-bletied God expett and hope to be. 

28 And the heathen ſhall know that I the IORD do 
fanctifie Iſrael, when my ſanctuary ſhall be in the mid(t 
of them for evermore, 

When Chriſt by his Spirt in GoſpeI-Ordinances 1s among them, it 


ſhall appear they are a conſecrated and a fanCtified People. 


CHAP. XXXVII. 


The Army and march of Gog againſt Iſrael, 1—13. The LORD's mighty 


*Rev.20.8 
' Or,zixceJand of Magog c, the || chief 4 prince e of Meſhech 
9 ?9:42-2nd Tubal f, and prophebie againſt him, 


hand and judgmeat againſt him ; 14.22. God h:reby magnificth him- 
ſelf 7 the eget of many nations, 23. 


I ND the word of the LORD came unto me, 


ſaying. 


2 Son of man, ſet thy face a againſt * Gog 6, the 


Since the rwo former Chapters had aflured fo great and wonderful 
lefſ,ngs to the Jews, after the return out of Babylon and the gather- 


ing them rogether in their own Land, 1t is more than 8 go: the 


Jews wou'd expe&a full accompliſhment of all theſe t 


ings quickly 


aſter their Return; and if Troubles ſhould, as they did, intervene and | 


prove long, be diſcouraged, and quarrel with Ptovidence : 


God; 


doth in this 38:h and 39th Chapters forewatn them, by relling| 


what Enemies and Troubles would interpoſe themſelves to the great! Birhyn/axs alſo, theſe deſcended of Gomer, x Paphlagonia and CoP'** 
(: 


thoſe Parts under more than one in Succeſſion of Time, and in the 
[laſt Times under ſome one particular aCtive, undertaking, and daring 
Prince, Enerty of 1/ae!; all their Power will be ſtirr'd up again} 
Chriſt and Chriſtians. 4 Or Prince, who is ſupream in Authority, 
moſt violent in Oppoſition ro the Church of Chriſt, and molt aGire 
to attempt its Ruine. e What we render Prince, may well be the 
proper Name of 4-axes in Arabick, principal River of A-menis, and 
ſo that the firſt Countrey mention'd under the Command of Goz, or 
the Scythians of Mount Taurus, which were called Rhos. f Vid. cas. 
27. 13, let. k. l. | ; 
3 And ſay, Thus faith the Lord GOD, Behold, I «7 
y_ thee, O Gog, the chief prince of Melſhech and 
ubal. 


| 4 And * TI will turn g thee back, and put hooks 5. 
into thy chaws, and I will bring # thee forth, and al, 


pany with bucklers 0 and ſhields, all of them handlins” 
p 1words, 

g The words ſeem to imply a diverting him from ſome other En 
terpriſe, or elſe intimate to us, when that mighry Power comesout, 
they are ſtil] under Gqd's Controul, and he GI! curn them back from 
what they intended,' that they ſhall not effe@ ir. + See this Ex- 
preſſion chap. 29. 4 # So diſpoſe Aﬀairs, thou ſhalt leave thine own 


mah of the y north-quarters, and all his bands z, 
many people with thee. 


Country to invade and ſpoil, and deſtroy. k The whole Power thou 
canſt make. / Thoſ&Nations Sarmate, or Scythians, Cappadecians, &. 
or which compriſe all the Tarks and Tartars, are to this day ſtrong in 
Horſe, and their Armies conſiſt much of Horſemen. »: Their Lt 
ders both rich and gaudy, yer well armed, and their Soldiers well 
provided too, and we know how they and other Antichriſtian Soldi- 
ers march with all Warlike Proviſions. » In vaſt Armies far greater 
than any of their Neighbours can bring out againſt them. »o Buck 
lers for their Foot, and Shields for their Horſemen, as Servius ob- 
ſerves the difference between the two Latin words Scutum and Clyp:w, 
if not miſreported ; I doubt whether the Heb. words doſodiffer, how- 
ever theſe were for Defence of thoſe that bear them, and ro thisday 
the Tartar: uſe oblong Shields for Defence'on Horſeback, as the Fi- 
gures repreſent them to our Eye. p That is very ready, expert 
and Strong in uſing the Sword, this to ſlay the Enemies, as the oths: 
to ſave themſelves, 


5 Perſia 9, Ethiopia r, and || Libya { with them  all;0 


of them with ſhield and helmet 7. 
9 The Land for the People, Mahometans, and Enemies to the Name 


of Chriſt. » Nor the African, which is Habaſſs, or Nubis, or both 
the old Macrobii, but the Aſiatic, or Arabian Zchiopia, Polterity of 


Cruſh, Mahomerans too. ſ A People of Africa, either now Subje&ts of, 
or Confederates with the Turks, and who are near enough to jo1), 
when the eff-& ſhall demonſtrate this Gog who he is. £ Prepar'd to av: 
themſelves what they can, tho they {lay their Enemies. Now ſoms 
of all rheſe were in the Armies of Antiochws againſt the 7:9! 
and many more will ſerve in the laſt Army of Gog. 


6 Gomar «, and all his bands, the houſe of Tog®" 


1 Inhabitants of Galatia, called formerly Galbogreci, Phrygians,and 


ach, 


Chap. XXYV) 


thine army , horſes / and horſe-men, * all of themG 
clothed »2 with all fort of armour, even a great n com. 


7 » Av " 3; —— — Jt FP *& 
+ Tan ET IE es bon Dd oe re as hs 
= a % 1 a 8. 2 bs - oe; , . # 8 b " . 4 
x ks FA *., 5 LE - 9% EIS 3 ts SI OBEINn CROPS, vu: ROI on? Ppgte ; 
Greet EG ee EE Os os ee nr OW 


o& 
a 
n 


Pr Get 
FS 2. Toe tune, HK 
WS 
ELIT 


the i« 
14an, 
I Am 
give 7 
Cannc 
bur 1 
believ 
gan a 
they 
them 
Proſp 
God, 


9 
ſhalt 
| band: 
| mM 
here 1 
not. 
thou ſh 
multu 


| 


this G 
againſ] 
k T4 
unwal 
that d 
and h 
u Tt 
Vade w 
Defenc 
any Re 
little ev 
In the ] 
Gfely. 
Lines ; 
againſt 
ſi + 12 
| thine | 
he bired 4 
| Nation 
Ms In the 
Ve 


s c ot da mh. Ad Foy Sa. PN, Lge 00 " " X % ver . ? 
: is, "NS bt THF $2 "x CE N . Vi hat AXIS» _ 2 - _ 
+ RY To: Go Sos DIET EIS ME BESS Co & MEETS as AE ARIES 2 peta W3<0- iT 
x: bh! TH AE CEE : ARDS EO i, "* Wt; LPG i If Dr Wed : Cs ah SE 
WES; Sa es AE RI MP rot Hel, ts A BIS Wfy 0 oy I RS Re an ent 3701 
Revs. TG e855 bg Ie} LOR "73s 0 ah : - D , 


” Ke pon 
36 oy LS) 
o Md $2, 0? 


o. XXXVIIL EZE 


ighrt be ; fition, and leave 

- hap. 27. 14. » It might be read in Appoſition, 

m— rat hg, many more to afſiſt Gog ; beſides all thoſe men- 
_ ” the more Northern People, the numerous Tartar: ſhall wich 
"11 rheir Bands fight for Gog. z Grear, and mighty of Stature, and 
Screngeh and Courage, as well as many in Numbers: 

7 Be thou prepared 4, and prepare for 6 thy ſelf, thou 
and thy company that are alſembled unto thee, and be 
thou a guard unto them, 

;'Tis an Jrovy, God, the Propher, and the Church deride this 
mighty Preparation, as once the Daughter of Sion laugh'd Senacherib 
thar proud 4f' rian to ſcorn, and the Scoff is doubled. 6 Such a 
mighty Army wall need great Magazines, and Granaries, and good 
Watches, and Guards for their marching in Safery ; therefore awaken 
thy Diligence, let nothing be wanting, for, O Gog, thou wilt find I am 
againſt thee, faith che Lord. 

$ & After many days c thou ſhale be viſited d: in; 
the latter e years thou f ſhalt come into the> land g, 


EF#L Chap. XXXVIIL, 
c The Scythiars, and thoſe other Nations in this Army, werefrom 
their Original a violent, unjuſt. and thieviſh People, addiQed ro Rob. 
beries, and they now under this Geg follow the old Trade. 4 The 
ſame repeated. e Either ir ſpeaks the Eaſe with which Gog preſumeth 
| he ſhall do what he intendeth, or the ſad Deſolation which he would 
' Cauſe to return upon the Fews. f Made ſo by the Babylonians, and 
continued fo till of Jate Years paſt. g Newly repeopled, and rebuilt 
upon their return out of Babylon. h Or which are now by your Huſe 
; bandry and Diligence getting ſomewhat of Eſtate and Riches ; or, as 
'we read 1t, have gotten ; for 'twas to Antioch: Epiphanes's time from! 
their Return near 350 Years, and from the finiſhing the Walls of Je- 
ru/alem by Neh:miahto Antiochws time, 200 Years ; fo that in that time 
the 7ews might be grown rich enough to be accounted a great Prey ro 
him, if he were this Gog, however ſuch the 7ews will be thought when 
Gog attempts this Enterpriſe. 


I3 Sheba 7 and Dedan &, and the merchants of Tar- 
ſhiſh }, with all the young lions »» thereof, ſhall fay unto 
thee, Art thou come to take » a ſpoil 2 haſt thou gathered 


chat is brought back from the ſword, and is gathered! thy company to take a prey ? to carry away filver and 
out of many \people againſt þ the mountains of Iſrael, | old, : to take away Cattle and goods, to take a great 
which have been always waſte ;: but it & is brought: poll * 

forch our of the nations /, and they ſhall dwell ſafely = i Vid. chap. 27. we. 22. this Sheba was Southward, and contains 


of them: 

c Some refer this to the time of the Maccabees, about 200 Years 
afrer their Return, and finiſhing the Repairs of the City Wall; others 
ſay, after the expiring of the Tooo Years ſpoken of, Revel. 20. 7. 
Bur certainly the full accompliſh-d days are yer to come, when Gog 
and Mazog ſhall be deſtroyed, and fo theſe days are the latter days of 


che Miab's Kingdom among Men. @ Be called to account, judged | 


and puniſhed for thy Violence, and poſſibly convinced by thy Over- 
throw, it may prove a Viſitation in Mercy for Converſion. e Theſe 
muſt be contemporary with the many days already mentioned, ſo that 
where thoſe, there theſe alſo are to be fixed. f Gog with all thy Num- 
bers. 2 The Land of the Jews, who were under this CharaTter in the 
Maccabzes time, and will be under the ſame in theſe latter days, a 
People of God recovered from Slavery and Captivity, into which the 
Sword of their Enemy had brought them, but God had now gathered 
out of the Countries. þ IF it refer ro G:g, *ewas againſt che Moun- 


tains, bur if it doth, as it may, refer to the People gathered, ir ſhou'd " 
be to, not againſt the Mountains. 7 Either deſigned to Deſolation by, 


the Rage and Malice of Enemies, or elſe becauſe ſo long waſte that it 
is beyond the Memory of many living ; 'twas 4ooYears and upwards 
from this Prophecy ro Artiochus Epiphanes's Death, ut he were Gog ; | 
but if the ten Tribes gathered tothe ewo, and made one Kingdom, be 
this People, and the waſted Mountains refer to them, they may well 
be called Mountains always waſte ; for 'tis aiready 2400 Years ſince 
the ten Tribes were carried away by Sa/manezer. k The Land of Ca. 

naan, i. e. thc People of it, Land being, as often before, put for People. 
I Among whom they were ſcattered, of which Nations, tho we can! 
give account of them to whom the two Tribes were 1n Caprivity, we 

cannot ſo of them to whom the ten Tribes are to this day Servants ' 
bur if this PrediQtion do as' mach concern them as ſome confidencly 

believe, theſe dry Bones ſhall revive and come rogether. 2» This be. 
g2n at leaſt to be tulfilledwwhen for ſome 380 Years after their Return | 
they lived tolerably quiet, afterwards &nwochus vext them, and did 
them much Damage; what remains of longer and fuller Quier and 

Proſperity afrer the ſlaying of Gog, time will diſcover to the People of 
God, whoſe Lot *cwill be to ſtand up in thoſe days. 


o Thou ſhalt aſcend and » come up likea ſtorm, thou 
ſhalt be like a cloud to cover o the land, thou and all thy 


| bands p, and many q people with thee. 


»n Sometimes ſuch Phraſe declares Duty, and as 1s preceptive, bur 
here it declares the Event, and is prediCtive ; Geog will, tho he ſhould 
not. » The Hebrew might be read thus, Thou ſhalt aſcend as a Storm, 
thou ſhalt come as a Cloud, This Storm is violent with confuſed tu- 
multuous Noiſes, and with Devaſtation, as the word implieth ; and 
come as a Cloud, that is, as dark, as large, and as inevitable, and 
which continueth the violent waving Storm. o Gog and his Bands 
ſhall be a Storm that- overſpreads the whole Land. p Troops or 
Wings. 9q Many in Number, great in Courage and Strength. 


10 Thus ſaith the Lord GOD, Ic ſhall alſo come to 
paſs, zhat at the ſame » time ſhall things 5 come into thy 


. mind, and thou ſhalt || think * an evil thought. 


ry That the People are gathered rogether, ſetling in Peace before 
they have ſecured themſelves ; much like the Dragon waiting on the 
Child-bearing Woman with purpoſe to devour her Child ; Projedts 
or Deſigns for Miſchief, as appears wer. 11. 5 And theſe miſchievous 
Thoughts thou ſhalt ſo manage, as ro forecaſt how they may, and to 
ſer on the Execution till they do take EffeQ. If Antiochus Epiphanes be 
this Gog, Darrel in chap. 11, ver. 24, 25. foretels the like thing of him 
againſt Egypr, 


all of that Coaſt which aſſiſted Gog. &k 1dumeans, or the moſt Eaiterly 

' Parts of Arabia Deſerta ; by theſe are noted the Eaſtera Nations thar 
, aſſiſted, ſay ſome. 7 The Inhabitants of the Sea-Coaſt Weſtward, 
and Magog North. Robbers by Land on three tides, Pirates by Sea 
! on the fourth, in a Confederacy to ſpoil the Church of God. #2 Young 
Men thirſty of Blood, but more of Spoil, flock to Gog, reſolved to 
join if they may rob and ſpoil for themſelves. » This repeated =n- 
quiry made by theſe, I ſuppoſe is not fo much toſound the Intentions 
of Gog, as 'tis a Capitulation and Agreement to come to his Aſſiſtance ; 
and on Condition they might have, poſleſs, and carry away whac they 
ſeize, they are for him, and they mention Particulars, Silver, Gold, 
Cattel, Goods ; are thus exaQ, out of foreſight what little part they 
might have without ſuch a CompaR. 


14 J Therefore, ſon of man, propheſie and fay unto 
Gog, Thus faith the Lord GOD, In that day o when my 


peop'e of Iſrael dwelleth lafely p, ſhalt thou not know 
ta? 


o Vid. ver. $. let. c. p Vid. wer. 11. and chap. 34. ver. 25. q Thou 
wilt be informed how weak, yer how rich, how eaſy 'tis to make them 
a Prey, and thou'lt believe and try it. 


i5 And thou ſhalt » come from thy place s out of the 
north-parts t, thou « and many x people with thee, all of 
them riding y on horſes, a great z company,and a mighty 
army. 


r Vid. wer. 9. let. mn. s Out of thine own Land. # From Scyrhia, 
from the Euxine and Caſpian Seas, and Countries thereabouts. « The 
Leader, and Chiefrain. x Mighry and numerous, as ver. 6. and wer. 
g. let. q. y Ver. 4. lt. I. z Ver. g. {t.q. 

16 And thou ſhale come up againſt my people of Ifrael, 
as a cloud to cover the land, it ihail be in the latter a days, 
and I will bring 5 thee againſt my land, that the heathen 
may know c me, when [I ſhall be ſanCtified 4 in thee, O 
Gog, before their e eyes. . 

The firſt part of the Verſe, ſee wer. g, @« See wer.s. let. c. b See 
wer. 4. let. ?. c Gog gathers all from all Quarters to be with him to 
rake the Spoil; God brings them together to do that among them, 
which may make the Heathen ſee and own his Hand. They do it in 
proud Contempr of God and his People, but God doth it to glorify his 
own Name, and to vindicate his People. a Confetſed to be a great 
God over all, a gracious and faithful God to his People, and a juſt; 
tho dreadful Enemy and avenger againſt the wicked and proud Ty. 
rants. e In the ſight of all the Heathen that are with Goz in his Ex. 
pedition, and much more in the ſight of God's own wonderfully de- 
livered People. 


17 Thus faith the Lord GOD," Art thou f he of whom 
I have ſpoken g in old time + + by my ſervants the pro- 
phets # of Ifrael, which propheſied in thoſe days many years, 
chat I would bring thee againſt them ? 

F Either by way of Contempt from God upon him, and all his 
Preparations, or by way of Monition ; all theſe Enterpriſes I foreſaw, 
have ſpoken of them, and I will as well defear as I did foretel them. 
g 'Tisnot ſaid 'tis written, tho that be true alſo, but 'rwas more ſpoken 
of. h In the days of thoſe Years paſt, or of their Years in thetimes 
when thoſe Prophets lived. # Not by Prognoſticators, or Sourh-ſayers, 
but by true Prophets, my Servants, whom I ſent, Dan. 11. and Zeb. 
14. Now, tho they had not foretold this when Exetel did, yet when 
the Queſtion ſhall be ask'd by the Church, *twill be ſo many 195 


+ Heb. +5y 
the hand. 


11 And thou ſhalt « ſay, I will * go up to the land of| <2" paſt, it may well refer to theſe two Prophers ; beiide 7/s. 26. 


| unwalled villages 7, I will go to them that are at reſt z, 


| that dwell {| ſafely «, all of them dwelling without walls 5, 
and having neither bars nor gates. 


u Thou wilt reſolve in thy ſelf, and declare it to thy Council. & In- 


vade wichall thy Puiſſance. y Weak, and without any conſiderable 

efences; a ſcattered People that dwell in Villages, can make little if 
any Reſiſtance. z Who would willingly be quier. # SuſpeCting as 
little evil from-orhers, asthey incend little againſt others, and truſting 
in the Prote&ion of their God, who hath promiſed they ſhall dwell 


| Gfely, 4 Thar may reſiſt and be too ſtrong for my Forces and En- 


gines; tho they have Walls, Bars and Gates, yet Gog accounts as none 
zgainſt his mighry Armies. 


12 + To take a ſpoil c, and to take a prey 4, to turn | 


thine hand e upon the deſolate places f that are now inha- 


, dired gy and upon the people :hat are gathered out of the 


nations, which have gotten + cattel and goods, that dwell 


þ«. 1n the -þ midſt of the land, 
I Vol. I. 


20,” 21, with chap. 27. wer. 1. Jer. 3o. 23, 24. Jorl 3. 1, 15, 16. 
and Afic, 5. 5, 6. are Prophets cited as thoſe who{pake of this mighty 
Enemy, and his coming, and from which an underſtanding Reader 
may ſoon colle&, that this Foe was intended as well as others in the 
places. 

18 And it ſhall come to paſs at the ſame time, when 
Gog ſhall come againſt the land of Iſrael, faith the Lord 
GOD, that my fury ſhall come & up in my face 

k Gog cometh up in Fury againſt J/-ae!, and God's Fury, 7. e. hot, 
yet juft Diſpleaſure, comes up in his Face againſt boththe Attempr 
and the Attempters, againſt Gog, and all his Power, whothink tofiad 
a weak People, but they ſhall meet wich an angry God. 

19 For in my jealouſie /, and in the fire of my wrath 
2 have I ſpoken : ſurely » in that day there ſhall be a 
great ſhaking o in p the land of Iſrael. 

1 For my own People, rhat I may preſerve them, and for mine 
own Glory, to vindicate that, as chap. 39. 25, and Zech. 1. I4. 
| m Againft mine Enemies Gegy and of Ras "Tis in Hebr. after 

the 


— am—_—_—_ 


=. 


_ 


oil ond. AC 


I a Þ”- % m— __— ahem - g y ho. PE an 
PE” WS 8 Ni ch : S SHES I: = IG way, $59 —_— — wm» 4 af 
ea ne Cr "—o— - Shs ” 4 "wy "=.4 Su. 4 . , 
SR — _ _ cho_ - — A — = —_ —_ ——— - p - > _—_ 4 
y—— _— = — — . ” I - AY : — I : — So n ——_— _ \ 
"3 = < p Pr” 5 4 , - - __ "= _— a — —_ 
2mm nm erm" " —_—— Is þ_ wh o—_ _ — = 
_ = £ — Y % 2 -—< -; : -—— p = === ID mo -- = - x KEI” 
_ - "= nq— — - —_— - I. 5. ——— p POR , £ 
= EE —_ =2 - — WD _ _ =— = 7" BW . L CCS by mw = 
_ _ 4 On = — £ = "- Bias x = Js ? a : " 2p EI l 
= OT IT "Y oy — - - - __ op C _ bo n 
—— . _ _ - _ <D— <omy  ——_ o> — —_ -——_— —— — - —_ - S < }- F —- ney Sr 
_ _ _ FE > L SIR da - — —_— wp — ——_— -- —_— ” _ - p ery +5 uy 
" *&; * / — SIZE 4 £ wy « a a ” R © 
— 1 = : . = " & "es __ . xa Sho. MN FIRES . aA _ TW 
= A —"- E a. _o Wy” 0" we - _—_ - Q = " _ FA » 
- " - —eriha 
_ ,——_———_ - - £ — —=-222 ———— = _ mm hos —_ _ 
En Bo, - : - - Res WP _ m_ i pl — =; 4 Sd. ce : om» 
1-3" = _ a Tote — RS Bo > Res 4 n—_— , Lows . 2D S ——— ng © 6.» 
- wy —_ 
. 4 
: 
- 
” 


4 pt SY 


Chap. XEYIX. 


' Or, tow- 
#5, Or 
j/ 8775, 


*P{[31.6. 


* Ch. 36. 


and 


23. an 
4 5 


{| Or. /#r:7e 


?hee with 


E Z E 

the Form of an Oath, 45 c{.75. 36. vr. 5. o To be ſure a very Freat| 
Diturbance and Tumult, like an Earthquake, as the word ſignifies, 
for ſuch an Army, ſuch Threars, ſuch Afſaults, and Sieges, will ſhake 
"Cities, Towns, and Hearts of the ſtonteſt. p Or, againſt the Land of 
75 2, which, for ought I know, wi!l make the Senſe'more obvious, 
the miphry Preparations, and the prowd Threats of Gog againſt 7/74el, 
wil! make many Hearts to quake, as well as Foundations of Cities. 

20 So that * the tilhes of the fea» and the fowls of 
the heaven, and the beaſts of the field, and all creeping 
things that creep upon the earth, and all the men that are 
upon the face of the earth, ſhall ſhake at my preſence, 
and the mountains ſhall be thrown down, and the 
| ſteep places fall fall, and every wall ſhall fall to the 
770and; 

Here is a lofty rain indeed, giving us the Deſcription of the To- 
E215 of Cod's Preſcace againſt his Enemies; the Effe&s of his Diſplea- 
fure againſt them are fecn on all the Creatures, ſenſible that their Maker 
3s ang v, though they know not with whom, or for what : if ro be1n- 
terp!eted 4:eraly, we ſhall find ſome Parallels when our God march'd 
before 1/-ad through the Red Sea, as the Waters, fo the Fiſhes ſaw, 
trembled, and fled ; Pſ:1. 757. 16, 19. when he breaketa the Cedars, 
Pfal. 29 6. and diſcovers the Foreſts, the Birds that make their Neſts 
th-rc thake at his Preſence and Power. When Sina; trembled, Leba- 


K Fi E L. Chap. XXx 


3 And I will finite g thy bow + out of thy lef; ; 


210: and $ir:0 $kipp'd like a voung Unicorn, the creeping things in 
them no doubt thook, and the Beaſts feeding on them did no leis ; 
Pſal. 29. 6. But Men apprehenſive of God's Diſpleaſure, and ſhaken 
with their own Guilt. ſhill much more ſhake. Bur, I think, ir 1s a 
very elegant alluiive Deſcription of choſe ſtrange Troubles and Con- 
Nernation of Minds in Men art that day, and ſo metaphorically to be 
underftood. Mountains may be great ones ; or poflibly when God 
comes to juds Gog, he will by his mighty Power give the World fo 
great a Shake, thar ſhall be preface to his dreadful Judgment-dazy. 

21 And1 will call 9 for a ſword” againft him -through- 
out all my mountains 7, faith the Lord GOD : every mans 


« {word ſhall be againſt his brother. 

g Summon and awaken. » My Army, the People of 7/racl. 5 Gog 
and his Powers. zt From all parts of the Land, called here Mountains. 
becauſe*twas full of Mountains. « As 'twas in Fehoſhaphat's time ,in- 
deed theſe Swords may be meant by the Sword God will call for 
through all, for they ranged all over his Mountains. 

22 And I will x plead againſt him with peſtilence, 
and with blood, and I * will rain upon him, and upon 
his bands, and upon the many people that are with him, 
an overilowing rain, and great hailſtones, fire and brim- 
ſtone. 

x As Judg and Avenger, and in moſt dreadful manner, (whether 
you take rhe Words figuratively or Hitcrally) as I flew others, Senache- 
ribs Army by Peftilence, (probably this was the Angel's Sword) others, 
as Ammon, Moab, Mount Seir, with Blood by their own Swords, the 
Amorites with Hail-ſtones, Sodom and Gomerrah with Fire and Brim- 
ſtone, the Old World with an overflowing Flood. Each, ſingle, was 
dread JI, but all meer in the DeſtcuCtion of Gog to make it moſt rerri- 
ble. Whecher theſe things are enigmatical or literal I will not deter- 
mine; bur I am fure they tell us how great the final Ruine of the E- 
nemics of God and his Charch ſhall be. 

23 Thus y will I * magnify z my felf, and fanctifie 
a my ſelf, and 1 will be known in the eyes of many 5 na- 
tions, and they ſhall know that I a2 the LORD. 

3 In this moſt dreadful manner. z Undeniably prove, that I am 
th2 mighty, juſt, faithful, wiſe, holy and merciful God toward my 
People, and that T am the great, juſt and terrible one againſt mine and 
my Churches Enemies. a Declare I am holy and true to my Word. 
þ Many Heathen Nations ſhall ſee this in the execution of my Judg- 
ments, and own it to my Praiſe, that I am, and none elſe 1s the Lord. 


C H A P. XXALL. 


God's j1rgments upor Gog and Magog, more particularly mention:'d, 1—7. 
Iirael's viffory and triumphaover them, 8—10, Gog « burial, the man- 
ncy how, and place where, 11—16. A great ſacrifice prepared by the 
Lord himſelf for his people, 179—20. God known by his judgments a= 
rongft the heath and Ifrasl, 21, 22. Iſrael being puniſhed for their 
Ens, aud taking ſhame to themſelves, are reſtored to God's favour, and 
ſhall be plagued no more, 2329. 


I Herefore, thou ſon of man, propheſie againſt Gog, 

and fay, Thus faith the Lord GOD, Behold, I 
am againſt thee, O Gog, the chief prince of Meſhech 
and 'Tubal. 


Vid. ch. 38. v. 2, 3. where this whole Verſe is unfolded. 


2 And I will turn thee @ back, and [| leave but the 
b ſixth part of thee, and will cauſe thee to come © up 


fix plagies, from the -| north-parts 4, and will bring e thee upon the 


or draw 
thee back 
with an 
Book of fix 
teeth, as 
cf. 38. 4. 
+ Heb. 
ftes of the 


W7th. , 


mountains f of [ſrael : 

@ See ch. 38. v. 4. let. g.or elſe, when Gog or his Aſſiſtants ſhall go 
into cheir Countreys to compoſe Diſorders riſen ſince this Enterpriſe 
was ſet on foot, they ſhall return to the reſt of the Confederates. 
b Some read, as our Margin notes, 7 wil! draw thee back with a Hook 
of ſixth Teeth, alluding to the drawing Fiſh out of the Water: Others, 
will firike thee with fix Plagues;z others, I will kill five of ſix, and 
leave but the ſixth part of thee ; let me conjefture too, I wil leave 
in thy Country but one in fix, and I will bring forth thy People 
with thee in ſo great Numbers, that five of ſix ſhall march on this Ex- 
So; this runs more compliant with what follows. c By his al- 
wiſe Providence God will diſpoſe things fo, that Gog ſhall deliberately 
chooſe this Expedition, ſo God will bring him, as ch. 38. 4. d Pi, 
ch. 38. wv. 15. let. t. c See ch. 38. wv. 4. f See ch. 38. v. 8. let. k. 
and v. 21. let. 7. 


hand, and will cauſe thine arrows to fall & out of thy vs; 
right hand, mas 
7 Make thy Hand weak, not able to hold the Bow, and thy Hears = 
fainr, not daring to rake it up again. þ What is ſaid of the Boy re, # : 
dred uſeleſs, is to be underſtood of all other Weapons of War, thi; = 2c 
one kind, the Bow, being moſt in uſe with theſe Scythians, is es = oÞi 
tioned for all the reſt. + The Hand for holding the Bow, while th« UW chai 
right firs the Arrow to the String, and draws to ſhoot. & Thou ſhale 7 fail 
chrow away thine Arrows that thou mayſt the betrer fly for Eſcape. 8 
4 Thou ſhalt fall & upon the mountains of H+qe ;* 
thou / and all thy bands #», and the people » that h _"_ 
with thee : * I will give thee unto the ravenous o bird; © BF | tet 
of every - fort, and ro the beaſts p of the field + to be 1. We t © 
devoured 9. , TT WWW 
& Thy Army ſhall be overthrown and ſlain. 7 Gog himſelf the * MW wia 
Leader of this Army. »z Thine own Souldiers, the old trained Soy]. i i 9 
diers. » The ſeveral of the Nations that had joined in thisEnterpyiſg *% on 
with Gog. o Their Carcaſes unburied ſhall be torn and mangled by mn 
every ravenous Bird of the Air. p Wild Beaſts that range over the ney 
Mountains for their Prey ſhall eat them. q So many of them faall be _— CO” 
denied a Burial : ſee a likePlace, ch. 32. 4, 5. $ _ 
5 Thou ſhalt fall upon the + open » fie!d, for 1 Daves p. _ 
ſpoken #?, ſaith the Lord GOD. * WY 
r See <<. 16. wv. $. let. y. and c<. 32. v. 4. let. s. and ch. 29. 5. fl pany 
6 And I will s fend a fire : on Magog, and among * che 
them chat dwell [| carelefly « in the ifles, and they {hail' 0. 11 
know that I am the LORD, fi 1 wii 
s By an unuſual Judgment from God. *t Either civil Diſſentions, ” rael 
as Egypt was conſumed by, as cþ. 36. 16. or elſe the deſtroying Pcſti. F ſe : 
lence, which always carrieth with it a burning Diſtemper or Fever ; |, 3 
or that Fire and Brimſtone mentioned, ch. 38. 22. or whateverthis Fire £ and 
was, 1t ſhould devour and lay deſolate. » Who perhaps thought thcir by, ade 
Situation would be their Safety ; though Gog fell on the Land, the wh 208. 
Ships and Iſles might eſcape : not ſo, for the ſame Hand will fend the = -V 
Fjre on the Iles, and their Inhabitants, which ſent it on Gog, pollibly ” my. 
the Tyrians and Sidonians may be aimed at. " given 
'7 oo will I make my holy * name known in the Reaſo! 
midſt of my people Ifrael, and I will. not let 7 zher; | Relig) 
pollute my holy name any more ; and the heathen < $5 my 
{hall know that I am the LORD, the holy one in lirael. ſhall 
In wer. 6. the Judgments executed on Goz made God known inthe make 
midſt of the Heathen, here they make him known among his own brow. 
People, in both glorious. x The Deſtru&ton threatned againſt the ' from 1 
wicked for their Enmity againſt Holineſs, being executed, manifeſt Arabia 
that God is holy, and the Prote&tion of ſuck. Or, Holy Nam:, for Egypt a. 
that he does in his Oath ſwear by his Holinzſs. Se his Faithfulne; is WM Sa, to: 
here commended and illuſtrated. »y I'll give them that new Spirit, MF ward, | 
that due Senſe of my Mercy, they ſhall not, as formerly, profane /* the _ 
my — among the Heathen, Ezek. 20. g. let. c. See c<þ. 38. v.21. bv bea T) 
et. b. ; & more ; 
8 CE Behold, it 4 is come 6, and it is done, ſaith the MF but few 
Lord GOD; this # the day c whereof I have ſpoken 7. © Travel] 
# This Prophecy to be fulfilled in the Deſtructionof Goz, Reſcue of WI 92108 tl 
God's People, and magnifying the Name of God. & As ſure as if al. + Enemie: 
ready come : Or, as it already done ; nor ſhall it be too long ec in ; when d 
effegt and fully it ſhall be done. c That notable Day of Recompences p andto | 
againſt the laſt great Enemies of Chriſt and the Church, d By Ex:kit © Prince, 
now, and by ochers. See ch. 38.v. 17. let. g, h, 7. b tude. 
9 And they that dwell in the cities of Iſrael ſhall zo WW: wny 
T be = to any \ 
forth e, and {hall ſet on fire F and burn the weapons 2 % 
yy 8 65 accomp] 
both the ſhields 4 and the bucklers, the bows and the ar. WW 12 
rows, and the {| hand-ſtaves 7 and the ſpears, and they (hail rying « 
{ burn & them with fire / ſeven years : hs d M: 
e Out of their Houſes and out of the Cities, with Foy to ſee and it pointm 
admire the great Goodneſs of God towards them, and the Greatneſ/ tude, n 
of his Power againſt their Enemies. f This Expreſſion ſeems to inti-” natural 
mate, that they ſhould burn theſe things in the open Field or Moun- WW; 13 
tains, where they found them ; here is no mention made of the car- : and it 
rying any into City or Houſes to burn in their Chimneys,it may be they > oforifi 
ſhould make thoſe Fires in token of Joy, g The warlike Proviſion, MW 5 _ 
Inftruments, Engines, Carriages and Wagons, &. as well as thoſe re- MW wet hy 
counted. h Yid. ch. 38. v. 4. let. o. 7 Thateither their Leadersuſed, WW of Þ ar 
like our half-Pikes, or perhaps ſuch as they caſt like Darts at theEn-- MW |... _ 
my. & It may be wondred they burn theſe Weapons, which might W- wg R 
be of uſe to them for Defence and Safety ; but*rwas done partly becauſe 7 - 7s C 
they were Weapons of the uncircumciſed, partly becauſe they were 41 © ; © s p | 
themata, as all Jericho was, but chiefly in Teſtimony that God was WF the 
their Safety and Defence, on which they relied, and would ever, finc? WW: th. be 
he had ſo wonderfully delivered. 1 We might read the Words thus, 7 Fa of n 
they ſhall kindle with thews a fire of ſen years, and then the Senſe would L Enerni G 
be plain, that there ſhould be ſuch ſtore of Weapons and warlike Uten- | = 
fils that heap d together, they would laſt fo long, being caſt into the 14 4 
Fire ſtill by ſuch as found them ; for it's not unlike they gathered up employ 
the Weapons, as they did ſcattered Bones on their Walks, as they did palleng 
light on them. Others teH us, *tis a certain Number for an uncertsin ; tO clea! 
others, that 'tis ſomewhat proverbial Speech, they ſhall have enouglt fearch 
by the Spoil of the Enemy to make them and keep them warm ; mucii ITh þ 
as we ſomerimes ſay of one well provided, he is a warm Gentlem2!; Work 4 
and ſome others tell us, *tis an Expreſſion of the Jews, who love to uſe "rs be 
this number in extraordinary Caſes, though they intend not preciſely wie h 
the ſame, as we ſay of a thing delay'd, *ewill be ſeven Years e're!% BW __ th 
come ; or of a thing that will ſerve us a good while, 'cwill laſt ſeven | ns wou 
Years; Or elſe, ſince the Hebrew hathnort a diſtin& way of declaring Good,” n 
what might be, or the Potential Mood, as the Latin, but they expres p Unk. 
poſfible by future; and fay, that ſhall be, which we expreſs by 74! | ſeven Mc 
be ; the Meaning of theſe Futures, they ſhaZ,in this and the next Verſe, | times by 
is no more than they may or might burn for ſeurn Years, and ſo Kms for all } ; 
gloſſeth it as to countenance this laſt Gueſs. They ſhall be ſufficients | <d and T 
and.in fach a Country, where the need of Fire is muck leſs than with © fomneſe 


us ; 


Vol. 


"iW:>. 00,008 


E - teſt by thele Ggires, that the Jews will not need to go to the Foreſts 


\ che ſame word 1n both caſes. 


Z ] will give unto Gog *t a place there of | graves « in [It- 
” re), the valley x of the paſſengers on the eaſt y of che 
- fea; and it ſhall ſtop the || moſes & of the paſlengers : 
& and there ſhall they bury « Gog 5, and all his multi- 
© rude ; and they ſhall call z c, they valley of || Hamon- 


” my. t And to many of thoſe were with him, for ſome were, wer. 4. 
= given to the Birds and Beaſts to be devoured. 


BP Gog 1hall have a Grave in 1ſrae!. He came to rake Poſſeſſion, and fo 


make a Prey of. He ſhall have one Place there, a Grave, as the He. 
 trw. x This Valley hath here its Name and Situation ; the Name 


Arabia Felix into the more Northern Parts, and from theſe again into 

 Epyj: and Arabia. y By its Situation it 1s on the Eait-ſide of th? Dead 

F- Sa, todiſtinguiſh it from the Valley thar is on this ſide Fordan Weſt. 

ward, in which is Dotham. Now in this Valley did the Fews diſcomfit 
{* the immonites, Moabites, Tyrians, and Sidonians, 1 Mac. 5. c This mighr 
» bea Typeor Firſt-fruits, and Afluranceof this great Vitory, bucno 
& more ; for this was of a few againſt a few, and in this Fighr of ſome, 
” but few fell, &c. » The Stink of the putrifying Carcaſes ſhould make 
Travellers ſtop their Noſes, offended with the 11] Smells. @ Partly in 
# doing the Office of Humanity, though to dead Enemies, and ler their 
E Enemies live, who would not (for want of others) be fo civil rothem 
* when dead ; but chiefly ro remove the Nuiflance of Eye and Noſe, 
Z and to prevent Diſcaſes that riſe many times from ſuch Sme!ls 5 This 
” Prince, whoever 'tis, ſhall there fall, and be buried wich h:s Multi. 
= tude. c This ſhall give Name to the Valley, which is ro be ca!!ed the 
© Valley of Hamon Gog, which Appellation I do not know to be give, 
ro any Valley as yer, probably becauſe this Prophecy is not yet fully 
# accompliſhed. 


b: and it ſhall be to them <5 a renown 7 the day thar I ſhall be 
+: glorified &, faith the Lord GOD. | 


> withthis Army. þ The Houle of 1ſ-ae!. i A Commendarion, Marter 
£2 of Praiſe, that did, like Men, bury the dead, who otherwiſe muſt 
> have been all Dung on the Face of the Earth ; and the ſweiling Hill 
- riſing from their buried Bones ſhall be a Monument to the Praiſe of 1/- 
ras Courteſy. 
” be a Renown to Iſrael; as indeed 'tis an Honour rv be owned of God, 
 ſowhen God ſhews he owneth ſuch , he gives them Honour among al] 
[; that obſerve it. & In the Deliverance of I1ſ-ael, and in th: DeftruSi. 

& on bf Gog by my wonderful Power, in my juſt Zeal againſt miae 

| Enemies, and for my 


| ſearch ». 


EZERK 

65: nd voy meredmle, tat the warlike Utenſils of. fo 
ws; i il _ be enough to ſurniſh them with Fewel for 
7 any Years, 97 MOI. = is 

+» 5o 1 that they ſhall » take no wood out of the field, 
acither cut down azy out of tho foreſts : for they ſhall 
"Hurn the weapons with fire, and they. ſhall ſpoil p thoſe 
ar ſpoiled q them, and rob r thoſe that robbed them, 


fich the Lord GOD. Se - 

»y Heb. 4nd they ſhall not, &c. » This, as noted before, taken 
Setentially, Or ſpeaking what they might, not what they eventually 
{hculd do ; fuch ftore of Fuel from the Weapons and Utenſils of War 


to cur down Wood : Or elſe comparatively, as ſome will, what they 
(all n:ed ro ferch from the Poreſts, ſhall be nothing in compariſon to 
what they were wont tO ferch. o They may if they will, tis not pre- 
--»:ve, © make ir Duty, nor doth it neceſſarily determine that they 
muſt; bur there were and would be for all char time, who would be 
burning theſe Weapons, and ſavethe Labourand Coft of buying and 
ferchin; Wood and theſe, who ſhould do this, I woule look for 
among the poorer ſort. p Strip the Dead, rifle their Wagons and 
Tents, ſearching what they may find of Value and Uſe, in which'tis 
likely che poor among the Jews would be earlieſt and moſt diligent. 

The Army of Gog and his Followers »r "T wasnot Theft or Robbe. 
ry in the Jews to do this, though 'twas Robbery in Gog and his Com- 
pany to 1poil the Jews, but for dccorum of the Phrale the Propher uſeth 


it & And it ſhall come to paſs at that day 5, that 


02H 
: S When God ſhall have deſtroyed this Prince and his formidable Ar. 
Reaſons for burying theſe ſlaughtered Multirudes, the Humanity that 
Religion is full of would guide the Jews to it ; and God rells us, that 
he ſha!l, but not as he purpoſed and hoped, but as God intended ; Gog 
ſhall poſſeſs his Houſe of Darkneſs in that Land which he invaded ro 


from the frequent Travels of Paſlengers through it from Egypt and 


12 And ſeven months ſhall the d houſe of Iſrael be bu- 


rying of them e, that they may cleanſe the land f. 
d Many of the Houſe of 1f-ae!, ſome voluntarily, others by Ap- 


TEL Chap. XXXIX. 


the firſt ſeven Months are expired, for during the ſeven Moaths there 
would be work for all of them to bury the dead and {lain 6f Gog's 
An -.. -. 
I5 And the paſſengers s that paſs throuzh the land, 
when any ſeeth a mans bone r, then ſhall he + fer up a ſign t Heb. 
by it, till the buriers have buried it in the valley of {| Ha- ©: bs 
mon-gog. | | hr ce 
808 | multitude 
s Order fhould be taken to inform Travellers if they lighted on any ef Geg. 
Bone 'or Bones of Men, as they journicd, that they were delired ro 
ſet up ſome Mack at them, that thereby the publick Officers appointed 
to gather and bury them, might find and carry thole Bonus to the 
common Burying-place. © Many of Gog's Souldiers were torn by 
Beaſts, which if tome of the greater Beatts did, rhe lefler could not 
break and devour the Bones but with the Fleſh, theſe were dragged 
about by Beaſts, or ſcattered by the Eagles and Vultures, and fo lay 
divided from the Body 3 of thete the Prophet ſpeaks. y 6 
16 Andalfo the name of the city # ſhi be || Hamonah : | +. e. #5 
thus ſhall they cleanſe the land... Rc 


z Either which is next to this common Tomb of Goz, as moſt lil:e- 
ly, or the City Jeruſalem, whoſe People, de'ivered, fanRiked, grate- 
tul, and magnifizd in the Eyes of the Narions by the wonderſul Mercy 
of. their God, ſhall be called by way of eminence, The Peoble, or Hr 
People, Hamonah. | 


17 & And thou ſon of man, Thus ſaich the Lord 


every beaſt &.of the field, * Aſſemble your ſelves a and ſev Emp | 
pl F . Ver} 7p, 
come, gather your ſelves on every ſide to my facrifice 7 *# 


b that 1 do c ſacrifice for -you 4, , even a great || facritice 5 and 34, 
e upon the mountains f of Iſrae!, that ye may eat fleſh g, 16. 

and drink blood b. Ih | Jer. 12.9. 
x Though they underſtand not thy Word, yet ſpeak, for they wil] = EY 
underſtand my. Word; which ſhall go our with thine. y To all forts ; EE 
of carnivorous Birds, every kind of thoſe that cat Fleſh. z That are 
for the Prey, little or great, which either by Craft or Power ger their '; 
Food out of the Fleſh of others. « Come in whole Companies, Flocks 


- 


# Beſide many other þ404 Herds too ; and this repeated twice more, Come, gather your 


ſelves, they have an earneſt Invitation from all fidzs. 5 When Sacri. 
fices were offered, there uſually was a Feaſt tothe Pricſt,the Sacrificer, 
and for what Gueſts were invited ; now God is about to make ſuch, he 
invites his Gueſts, reſolved to encertain them plencifully. c The Pu. 
nifkment of theſe God calls a Sacrifice, which he doth offer, z. e. to 
his own Juſtice to fatisfie thar. & Ic was for higher Ends, yet lince 
God intends to fill them with the Fleſh and Blood ef at, he is pleaſed 
to tell them he hath flain for their Enterraiment. e Where more 
thouſands are offered at once, than ever were at any time offered ; 'ris 
a Sacrifice ſo great that none ever was, or will be like. f The Land 
of Canaan. g The Fleſh of the Sacrifice. + And the Blood of at ; 
this was Entertaiment fitting theſe invited Gueſts. 


18 Ye ſhall eat the fleſh of the mighty z, and drink. the 

blood of the Princes & of the earth, of rams /, of lambs », 

and of + goats », of bullocks o, all of them tatlings p of 4 ye. 
Baſhan 7. | great 


In theſe two, and the two following Yerſes, God takes on him the goar-- 
Perſon of one that makes a Feaſt, invites his Gueſts, and promiſcerh 
co ſatisfy them. Of the two former, the firſt is an Enigmatica! In- 
vication, or an Invitation in a Riddle, the latter is the Key co this 
Charatter. 7 Who had great Authority, great Courage and Strength ; 
the giant-like Ones, Commanders of great note in the Army. & Many 
Princes came with their Country-men and SubjeQsto aſliſt in this War, 
whoſe Blood theſe Fowls ſhould drink, and theſe compared to / Rams 
which lead the Flock. » Lambs are the more ordinary in the Army. 
n Great Goats, as the Hebrew denoteth, and theſe fagnify the more laſci. 
vious and impetuous among them. o Such as though more {low were 
of great Strength. p Well fed, 'twas no lean Sacrifice made. 


pointmenr. e A little time would not ſuffice to bury ſo great Multi-| 94 A Mountain of moſt rich and ſweet Soil, and thar fed che beſt.,f 


eude, make what haſte they could. f Nor in a legal Senſe, bur in a|ariy. 
2 natural, to clear the Land of hurtful Stinks. 


13 Yea, all g the people of the land {hall bury them, 


g Thar dwell there about, or all that came out to reſiſt and fight 


k Or elſe thus, the Day cf my being glorified ſhall 


eople. 


19 And ye ſhall eat fat » till ye be full 5, and drink 
blood, till ye be drunken, of my ſacrifice : which I have 
ſacrificed for you. | | 

r Accounted beſt, and which ſhall here be plentiful. s None ſhould 
fray them away, nor ſhould any devour fo much as to leave others 
hungry. » Yid. wer. 17. let. c,d. | 

209 Thus ye ſhall be filled at my table « with horſes x 
and chariots y, with mighty men z, and wh all men of 
war, faith the Lord GOD. . | | 

# In the Field where Gog, his Princes and Army are fl:in, compa- 
red toa Table. x Horſe put for Horſemen, nor common Foot-Soul- 
diers. y For the Men that ride in them. = P'd. wer. ler. 7. 

21 And I will ſet a my glory 5 among the heathen c, 
and all the heathen 4 ſhall ſee e my judgment 7 char 


14 And they 7 ſhall fever »z out -- men of continual|I have executed, and my hand that I have laid upon 


employment, paſſing » through the land to bury with the{them. 
| paſſengers o thoſe that remain p upon the face of the earth 
{to cleanſe q it: after the end of ſeven months ſhall they 


with Wiſdom towatd his People. c Among whom my 


b The Glory of Power, Juſtice 
and Wiſdom againſt Enemies, and of Power, Mercy and Faithfulneſs, 


z I will advance and continue. 


Name was evil 


[ſpoken of; they eclipſed, but God will clear up his Glory. . 4 That 


! The Rulers in 181. m Chooſe ont Men who ſhall make it their | are either in Gog's Army, or in the Countries to which the News ſhall 


ork. » To go up and down over the whole Land ; for many of 


come. e Not be able to deny or doubt. f The Puniſhment juſt and 


Grg's wounded, flying Soldiers died in Thickets, and by Corners into. from Heaven, called God's Hand laid upon them. 


which they crept when they could gono farther. o Whoſe aſſiſtance | 
they would deſire of Courteſy , or command by Order, and that wich} 


22 So the houſe of Iſrael ſhall know that I am the Lord 


reaſon, all this Care and Labour for burying the Dead tending to their |& their GOD from that day h and forward. 


Good, thar they might unoffended travel whicher they were going. | 


x Vid. chap. 34. ver. 31. let. I, m. þ From the Day of Gog's ſigrial 


? Unburied by the publick Labourof the Houſe of 1/-ae! during the Deſtruction forward, while time ſhall be. 


| ſeven Months; 9 Alegal cleanſing, if referred to Antioch Epiphanes's' 

_ nh. ſo with thoſe _ _— it to a ſeaſon not yer come, [{r4el f [ 
| , ©"! 1egal Ceremonies are ended ; when Gog's Army ſhall be deſtroy-' ....q & againſt me, therefore hid I my 
| yy and buried, the Land ſhall be cleanſed from the ſteneh and noi- _ _ X I 5 ; / 
F * theſe Carcaſes. » Theſe Officers' begin their Work aftet ace rom Omem, 


? 


23 & And the heathen ſhall know that the- houſe of 
went into captivity for their iniquity z : be- 


and gave them imo the hand » af 
(Bb 2] their 


GUD,. Speak x F unto every feathered, fowl y, and to i Heb. zo | 


<— 


wy = & 
_— 8 > pi of Ray none Fraps +4 
mt ten ao Ys un > = - 
VER RI SI@£#CTMD——— %;.: 
<—— - = _ 4 


EE 
> -. 
> « 


& BS of +) Pac © 


_ 


EE... ” S 
Paper mr ho yt 


z -—Sdts =: 


OO LOOT OC EEEEECORCEFT TEES IE EECCEENRT CIIITYS CC IE TITS VE SENTIT ELITES 
— 6. - —_—_— Becky ; 


: = | _ 
- - _ : - . 
— > —T - 206.7 _— = = , h SE | 45 "IJ 
- Dp - : I ——— — - IE. CEE Inn Z = = — _—— —————— og a ER_=y N an GIS = - — — Ax 
” = = > - = = : >. STE = Sq = ——_— = = _— F -" 4 & =——== ———t SS a = Ds £ . Z f : . 
aſe rt ng a re: ——— : vn it——_— <p —_y ————_—_—_ = = ; —_— - _ > A = - SD = — - 
poem - —e_———2 . . _ = I———— = — . hs Ln 2 ——— c--- n—_—_ — Wu -0 . - - OY , - « _ 
* = a - — = ; —_— = - - _s < -- - . . = —— == — = — == — — — = = = 527 _—_ —_— - - SEE 
p a = 2 e— —— . = n i mn _ — - pn == =_ EEE TEE £ 
—— = - —— ——————— —— nth P "———— =e = — Y - - - — —_ - SEIIDSS —— a: === j——e——IS h —_— ODIN 
B_ - my == - 2 pr IEY Oy Re _ — ” ——— - = — = _ _ —— =_ —_— ,natthe” 4 = 7 — . EEE = Fg - T wm yngenns = , > 6 : > _— r 
_ ; - = 5 = - DT er _ bs ITED P__ -_— _—_ xx a_—_—_— _ —_ - —== ——= == £ » ; » YL DEEEITES 
= = | 0 "+ = . = _ - — os —_ —_—_ 4 —__—— 7 - - : _ . ? a 
i "_ 


{59119, 
4 


* Chap. 
36.23» 


+ Heb. #5; 
LT, cauſing 


of | thi, 


EZEKIEL. Chap 
x | - ' . " a. | W.; - » I) 
rice Enemies; ſb fall they all by che ford = \0 Vang ee A en Oboe he ot mt 
; The fotciſh Heathen thought meanly of the God of Tract, and pog- | chan ho ts thaw good in this their latter End. 2y re} 
"med they came into Captivity, becauſe the People of ſome pet 
| CHAP. XL 


{04 had by the Power of their God, prevailed againſt — 
: - bur by this overthrow given to Gog, they ſhall lee | 

and his People ; but by - _— OY hat The time, manner and end of the Lords apyearing to the prophet in a ;c 

on, I—5. A deſcription of the ſeveral gates, chambers, ports and arches 


*rxyas not Impotence in 2/5 ae!'s God, but iniquity 1n 1/rac!'s People - | 
brought them into Captivity. & Committed Sin perver{ly,continuany, , 
and A an hi*h Hand. 1! Withdrew my Favour, would no more re-| of = ag ſs. of the eaſt gate, 074g. 2004 that looketh " 

WY 1 1 20—2J. te gate towar 77 SE x 
gard them, and then *cwas ſoon a Night of Trouble ro them. m2 In-/ mink ge Foe bs - 3 y ah” —_ oe 4 4 mm 24—31. the 
to the Power of their Enemy which could nor have hurt 7/rae!, if 1]- ri 65, J2—43- the chambers of ths ſingers, 44. ihe porch of t. 
-e! had nor firſt forſaken his God, but then God forſook them. = When | wuſe, 48. 


Lice 


God withdrew his defence as fenceleſs, they fell under the Sword of | N the five and twentieth year of our captivity , 
? 


the Enemy, for tis he that ſubduerh Enemies, and giveth Victory. 


24 According to their uncleannefs 9, and according 
to their rranſzreflions have I done p unto tnem, and hid 


my face irom them. 

o Whatever Severity I have ſeemed to uſe, 'twas but according to 
their Sins, yer 1cf than their Sins. p In puniſhing and hiding my 
Face from them. 

25 Therefore q thus ſaith the Lord GOD, Now » will 
7 bring again the captivity of Jacob s, and have mercy 
; upon the whole « houſe of Iſrael, ard will be jealous for 
my holy name x: 

Since my Name, my Power and Juſtice are vindicated, and the 
Heathen ſe 'twas 1ſ-ae!'s Tniquiry brought them into Caprivity, and 
Iſracl knows this roo. + From this time of Gog's overthrow. 5 The 
Seed of Jacob here called by their Father's Name. 7 This reducing 
C-ptive Jews is meer Mercy ; it's very true, by Sin they deſerved to 
b- made Captives ; and *tis as true, they never did, or could deſerve 
a «ci erance from Captivity : *twas not extremity of Juſtice that ſo 
punith'd, bur *'twas the Riches of Mercy thar fo pardoned and re- 
d:emed. # On the ten Tribes with the two. «x Andall this in zeal 
for my holy Name, by which I am engaged to be their God. 

26 Aﬀer y that they have born their ſhame 2, and all 
their treſpaſſes a whereby they have treſpalſed againſt me, 
when they dwelt ſafely & in their land, and none made 
them atraid c. 

y They have Jong ſuffered, and now ſhall ſuffer no longer : for it is 
enough my People know, and rhe Heathen know, that I am the Lord. 
z Rep:ozch for their Sins caſt on them by the Heathen, with great Re- 
flections on their God ; this was part of the Punzſhmeat of them all, 
and the greateſt Grief to the beſt among them, that their God was 
reproach'd. a The Puniſhment of thoſe Treſpaſſes, whereby they 
tinned againſt God, which thisProphet plainly and frequently charg- 
eth them with. þ And this done amidſt that Proſperity and Safety, 
which ſhould have obliged them to Love and Obedience ; bur when 
they were ſafe at home, they ſinned as if danger would never over- 
take them. c No Enemy to endanger and alarm them ; ſtrange In- 
gratitude ! to caſt off the Fear of God and his Law, when he had ſet 
them free from the Fear of Enemies. 

27 When I have brought 4 them again from the 
people, and gathered them out of their enemies lands e, 
and am * ſanctined Fin them in the fight of many na- 
tons ; 

a "The Phraſe cap, 28. wer. 25. Jet. 5. the Perſons here are not the 
two Tribes only, butthe ten with them, as wer 25. let. v. e Where. 
ever they were, they were among Enemies out of their own Country. 
f By their accepting Puniſhment, repenting for Sin, loathing their 
former Ways, and themſelves for them, acknowledging God to be 
holy, his Law holy, and his Worſhip holy, and engaging themſelves 
in Covenant: of perpetual Obedience ro God, and keeping 1t : by theſe 
things God will be ſan&ified among rhe 7/-aelites, and in fighr of the 
Naricns, when they ſee the Furnace hath purified them. 

28 Then {hall they know g that I a2 the Lord 4 their 
GOD 7, + which cauſed & them to be led into. caprivity 
among the heathen : but I have gathered chem 7 unto 
their own # land, and have left none z of them any more 


ther? 0 
7 On fulleſt Experiences, and cleareſt Evidences, fee, acknowled 


and publiſh ro each other. þ The mighty One, the juſt Judg, who de- | 


rermineth righteouſly between Men and Men, yea, between them and 
himſe!f 7 Who in Covenant with their Fathers, hath remembred it 
for the good of their Children, who did afſure them thar if they vio. 
Jared his Covenant he wou!d paniſh, and when they repented he would 
ſh:w mercy. k Who by his own Hand raiſed up Enemies againſt, 
and then delivered rhem into the Enemies Hand) ſo ſent them into a 
{ad and long Captivity. / Burt now done more for them than when 
I brought them out of Babylon, - whence the rwo Tribes (yer not all 
of them, for ſome ſtaid bchind) and a few of the Houſe of Jſ-ael re. 
turned, now the whole of the twelve Tribes ſhall be gathered. 
»» That Country they fo dearly loved ſomewhat for their Father's 
ſake, whoſe antient Seat it was, but more for the Goodneſs of it, 
which flow'd with Milk and Honey, » This Recovery it ſeems ſhall 
be much more univerſal than the former ia Zerobabel's Time, as com- 
ing out of Egypt, not a feeble Perſon left behind, ſo nor here, if the 
Words be ro be literally explained. o In the Land of Captivity, the 
En=mies Country. : 

29 Neither will I hide p my face q any more from them : 
for I have * poured r out my ſpirit 5 upon the houſe of If- 


rae), ſaith the Lord GOD. | 

> See wer. 23. let, 1, I will not turn from them in Difpleaſure. 
q From the whole houſe of 1ſrac! : This is no aſſurance to any Preten- 
der of great Intereſt in God, who yer lives in Sin. » In abundant Mea- 
ſures of Wiſdom and Holineſs. 5s Which is a Spirit of SanQtification 
ro make them holy, and a Spirit of Strength to confirm them in Ho- 
lineſs, and of Adoption to ſweeten Obedience to them ; they ſhall 
not, they will not depart from me, according to the Promiſes, chap. 
113. 19, 20. and 36. 25, 26, 27. and c-ap. 37. from 23, to 28. and 


[ 


in the beginning 6 of the year, in the tenth 
.c day 'of the month, in the fourteenth 4 year after 


« . O 
* the city was ſmitten e, in the feiflame f day thz., i 
hand g of the LORD was upon me, and brought 4 ms... 
thither z. b ; 
a Of thoſe that with Jeconiah, who is alſo called Jehojachin, were h 
carried away into Captivity, eleven Years before Feruſslem was (2.11 0 
and burnt. And this falls in with the 3374th Year of the World, 9: 7 
near it ; abour 574 Years before Chriſt's Incarnation. 6 Tn the Month ke 
Niſan. c The day that the Paſchal Lamb was ro be taken up in orger R 
ro the Feaſt on the roth Day, on which 1/-2c! went our of £y,,, 
d Which appears thus, the Ciry was ſmitten in the 11th Year of 5.. 
coniah's Captivity, or 11th Year of Zedetiak's Reign, to which, if you TC 
'add fourteen, they amount ro twenty five. e Taken, plundered ang bi 
(petſes by the Babylovians. f This 1s very particularly noted, a of ga 
(ſome weight. 2 The Spirit of Prophecy, wid. chap. 1. 3. let, 4. ang ad 
(3. 14. let. x. and 8, 1. ler. g. -þ Notby local Motion carrying his þ,. A 
dy, but in viſional Repreſentation, ſhewing the Prophet what he xe. for 
lates to us. # To Jeruſa!:m, the place where it did ſtand, as apycars on 
in the next verſe. anc 
2 In the viſions & of God brought 7 he me into the ”u 
land 2» of lirael, and ſet » me upon a very high moun. "we 
cain 0, [| by which was as p the trarne of a city 9 on thei | 
ſouth r. : " 
k By this it appears *twas not. 2 corporeal Tranſumption of the Pro. Fr . 
pher, 7:4. chap. 8. 3. let.g. 1 Vid. wer. i. let. 5. m The Land of ca. =o 
zaan Was in a Scheme repreſented ro him. #= Placed him in the moſt Rs 
convenient Situation for Proſpe&. 0o*'Twere vain to enquire what _ 
Mountain this was, ſince this is a Viſion, probably it was Mount 2. oth 
riah here ſignified. p The Pourtrait and Model of a Ciry, 4 a MF 
goodly fair City, or by way of Eminence The C:ty,-or of that Cjry WF 9 
which 14 Years agone was burnt. r On the South of the Mountan WF © bits, 
where the Prophet was ſet ; and this was the Situation of Fers/.:/, MW gate 
on whoſe North was Mount Sion, Pſal. 48. 2. e ] 
3 And he s brought me thither 5, and behold, hr: EN 
Was a man #7, whole appearance x w4s like the appearance G _—_ 
of braſs, with a line of flax y in his hand, and a * mes; fon 
ſuring reed ; and he ſtood in the gate z. the ot 
s The Lord by his Spirit, as wer. 1. let. h. z Yer. 1. Tet. ;, « Th" Proru 
ſame no doubr, which appeared to the Propher, chap. 1. 26. ler. 6, 22 the 
whoſe Name is the Branch, and who builds the Temple, Zech. 6. 1:, Y 10 
13. x Whoſe Faſhion and Colour was like burniſhed Braſs, ſo Rev:, three 
I. IF. much like to that chap. 1. ver. 27. let. c. and ſpeaks Glory and 
Strength. » A Plumb-line. a Maſon's Line to diſcover the ReQicud: One 
of the Building or its Defe&s. z Not the Eaſt-gate, but in the Nortt- |. one © 
gate next toward the Eaſt. by Th 
4 And the man a faid unto me 56, * Son of man, beg vt 
hold with thine eyes c, and hear with thine ears d, and. _— 
ſet thine heart e upon all f that I ſhall ſhew thee ; for to MW? ; The 
the intent g that I might ſhew them unto thee, art thou F tions. 
brought hither : declare + all that thou ſeeſt to the houſe of WF: 1: 
Ifrael. b* ; gate t 
a See Yer. 3.1et.u. b Ezekiel called here, as many other Places, MW * bits. 
the Son of Men. c Diligently view ; all accurateneſs is required her: WW: ; It 
in Jooking into theſe things preſented to the Eye. &d Like care ani i * thePo 
attention uſe alſo in hearing what-ſhall be ſpoken, theſe kind of Phraſes of a Se 
S |do' bind us to greateſt heedfulneſs. e Ponder and weigh with thy (el, WM } Lengr| 
\meditateand ſtudy on them ; though here is a ſupernacural Revelation, MW * becayſ 
yet he is required to a rhe utmoſt part of Man to know the things D agree 1 


revealed. f Nothing is ſignificant here, therefore all muſt be regard. 
ed. g This was the reaſon why thou waſt brought hither, and wiy WW 12 


I am come to meet thee. +4 Plainly tell them that they may diſcen W- One ct 
and tell all, conceal nothing. jo: lide; 

5 And behold, a wall ; on the out-ſide & of the houk MW and 4 
{ round about, and in the mans hand m2 a meaſuring-reed BF ! Th 
» of ſix cubits /ong o, by the cubit, and an hand: breadth p: WW; Cubir d; 
ſo he meaſured the breadth q of the building, one reed, WF ep. 
and the height » one reed. na 

7 This was that outmoſt Wall which did encompaſs the wiol! WW the Rail 
Ground, on which the Temple ſtoed, and the Courts thar belonged WE South, 
to the Temple ; a Wall that encompaſſed the whole Mount Sion, up- Chambez 


on whoſe Top the Temple ſtood. & This Paſlage clears which Wall 
it was, viz. the outerinoſt of three, which the Floor of the Temp!: T3 


and the Mount was encircled with. ! Houſe of God and the Tmp!!, of one 
as ch. 10. 4. and 2 Chr. 2.1, 5. m The Prophet is cailed to ſee an breadth 
hear, but the Standard is not put into his hand ; Chriſt, who 15 rhis door 
Man, hath and keeps the Reed in hisown Hand, as the only fic Per: F, 
ſon to take the meaſures of all. » Or Cane, for this meaſuring Ro of Is 
or Staff was of thoſe Canes growing in that Country, ſtreight, log s ſide - p , 
light, and which Archite&s did make uſe of: o Each Cubit co” Bu 7 ” 
ſting of 18 Inches in cur common Account ; and though there 15m of the Ch 
wrangling about the exa& Dimenſions of this Cubir, I will not inc: oy amount 
meddle with the Diſpute, it was about one Roman Foot and ha : "7 Wawa 
which comes very near toour Engliſh Foot and half,or eighteen Inca Sourh-ſiq 
or one half Yard. p Added to each ſix Cubits, not as ſome hav® $upP® each Char 


Fer. 31. 31, &c. and 32. 37, 38, 39, 49. 'T was Sin that cauſed God 


Reed 
y and 


ſed to each Cubit. 4 Therhickneſsof the Walls which were N 


{ + | 
\ 82:7 XL. 


uu 


% Eo 
: . 
Te () 


3 £3. D 


hi. ST , 
> 7 a” 


ASI 
« 


= 


12 
N- 
18 Wl 


% 
3 \ 


F< 
1 ” 


bo 
2 
<3 
£ «I 
bon 
Ay 
<0 


”, 


EL. 


B-5cp 
2+ 


C85, 4 
wall 


8+. 
7" 
: ig 
Pt): 
87 
5 
IS 
ER 
Cab ky 
-#- 
y*K 
E 9 


q 
Y 
Et 


BK 
ky 
pe 


one on that ſide -. 


EZEK 


EL 


and one FHand's breadth, cr three Yards and three Inches thick. | Doors being all opzn, you had a clear proſpect through all the Cham- 


- And the Height equal, taking the meaſure, not from the bottom of 
the Wa lin the Valley on the out-fide, which was of different height, 


ac ths \ alley was of efferent depth, but taking the meaſure from the 


Aria, or Floor Cn the in-ide of tne Wall; it was in the whole Circuit 


ofequal height, as here. 7. = 
6 & Then 5s came he ? unto the gate F which looketh 


hoſe 75:2 ward the eaſt, and went up the ſtairs xthereof, and mea- 
ww 1/7: £ 
,, and theother threſhold z of the gate, which 2was one reed 


{-:redthe thre{bold y of the gate, hich was one reed broad, 


broad. . | 
5 When the P; opher had well obſerved the outer Wall, and the 


Meaſuring thercof. # The Man with the Meaſuring-Reed, z. c. Chriſt. 
« Either of oneof the inner Walls, or of the Templeirſelf. x Till he 
was got up, he could not meaſure the Threſhold, which was laid at the 
rop ofthe Stairs; and theſe were ten, if the Meaſurer be ſuppoſed in 
the Gare cf the Houſe, or eight if in the Gare of the Court of rhe 
Prieſts, or ſeven it in the Court of 7jrae!, and each Stair halfa Cubit in 
height ; too high at loweſt for him to take the Meaſure of the Threſh- 
o!d, if he did not go up the Stairs. » Itis like he meaſured the lower 
Threſhold firſt, as nextat hand. » 7. e. The upper Threſhold, or Lin- 
tel of the Gate, which was of equal Dimenſions with rhe lower ; a 
Recd broad, or three Yards and three Inches broad, or thick. 


7 And every little chamber a as one reed long, and one 
reed broad ; and between the little chambers were five cu- 
birs +; and the threſhold ofthe gate, by the porch of the 


gate within c, 24s one reed. 

2 Aloug the Wall of the Porch were Chambers, three on one ſide, 
and three on the other, wer. 10. of equal Dimenſions, each one reed 
fquare. 5 A ſpace of two Yards and one half between each Chamber ; 
either filled with ſome near Poſts or Pillars, or 1t may be quite void, 
and nothing in them. c The inward Threſhold as well as outward, 
were of the ſame Meaſures, and curiouſly arched over-head from ſide 
to ſide, and end toend, which was from Eaſt to Weſt. 


8 Hemealured alſo the porch 4 of the gate within, one 


reed. | 

a The Poſts, which were joined together at the top by an Arch; and 
ſomade the Portico, ſay ſome : The open ſpace under the Arch be. 
tween the Poſts, or the Alley which leads from the Gate into the more 
inward parts of the Houſe, or to the inmoſt.. So the French Verſion, 
on apres il meſurs d'une canne I'alles qui menoit a la porte la plus en de- 
«d4NFS, 


9 Then meaſured he the porch e of the gate, eight cu- 
bics, and the poſts f thereoftwo cubits, and the porch of the 
gate was inward. | 

e This ſay ſome was another Porch, another Gate diſtant from that 
ver. 6, But others, morelikely, refer this Meaſuring to the ſame Gate; 
but where, as before, the Breadth, now the Length is meaſured. 
f Theſe were half Columns, that from the Floor to the Heighth of the 
Wall jerted out, asif one half of the Columns wers in the Wall, and 
the other without, which was both for Beauty and Strength ; and the 
Proruberance of this half Column was one Cubit, the other taken up 


bers to the Temple. | 
14 He made ” alfo poſts, of threeſcore cubits :, even 
unto the poſt 7 of the court round about the gate. 

7 Meaſured, and thereby ſh-wel whar kind of Pofts they ſhon'd be. 
If rhis might be interpreted by C-as's Edit for building this Fae 
brick 60 Cubits hich, it would b- a clear Confirmation of the Divine 
Miſſion of the Propher, ard the C-rrainty of a future Performance of 
the Good he promifed in God's Name; when it appears {o evident, 
that he had fo long b=iure declared ro what height che Building 
ſhould be raifed by L:icetive from Cyrus : Bur more like 'tis, that ic 
refers tothe Height of £111; Gate built up two Stories above the Arch ; 
and the Poſts in their {teight are only mentioned, but imply all che 
reſt of the Building over the Exſt-gate. # Theſe high Columns, or 
Poſts on the inner Front of this Gate, were ſo diſpoied, that the laſt 
on each ſide was very near to the firſt Poſt, or Pillar of the Court on 
either ſide of the Gate ; and fo the Poſts and Buildings laid on thoſe 
Poſts joined on each fid- of rhis Gate. | | 

15 And from the face of the gate of the entrance, 
'unto the face of the porch of the inner gate, were fity 


Ccubits. | 

This Verſe ſeems to ſum vp all the Dimenſions at length ; this 
Gare, its Porch, and Thickneſs of its Walls, and fo fum the Cabits ; 
ſix in the Thickneſs of th- outer Wall, eighreen 1n the thiee Chame 
bers, twenty in the Spaces berweznthe Chambers, and ſix Cubits in 
the Thickneſs of the inner Wall of the Porch. 


about, and likewiſe to the || arches &: and windows were, 
round / about || inward : and upon each poſt were palm. 
trees m. - | | 


-_ 


the Chambers, and the Wall was ſloped for that purpoſe, both with- 
in toward the Chamber, and without toward the Cloifter; this out- 
ward ſloping gathering the Light from without, and the inward ſlo. 
ping diddiſperſe it over all the Chamber, fo they were Windows nar. 
rowed inward tothe middle. þ The three on each $%e of the Porch. 
7 The upper Lintel of each Door, over which was a Window to ler in 
Light from that ſide. & Windows under the Arches berween Poſt 
and Poſt, to give Light ro five Cubits ſpace between Chamber and 
Chamber. ! Theſe were on both ſides of the Porch within the Gare; 
exattly alike. 2 3.0. Engraven with curious Arr for Berury, and 
whoſe upper Branches ſpreading themſelves along under the Arches, 
ſeemed to bear up the Arches. | 

I7 Then brought he me into the outward » court, and 
lo, there were chambers o, and a pavement p made for the 
court round q about: thirty » chambers were upon thepave- 
ment. ES 

2 So called in regard of the more inward Court, between that where 
he was and the Temple it ſelf; . This Court here, called the ourward 
Court, was at leaſt the ſecond about the Temple, as you go through 


the firſt and greateſt Court, or Floor encompaſſed with that Wall of 
one Reed high, and one thick rhrough the ſecond, which is the Courr 


in the Wall. 


of the People, and which probably is this in our Text. 0: Not only 


10 And the little chambers g of the gate eaſtward, were 
three on this ſide, and three on thatſide; they three were of 
one meaſure, and the poſts had one meaſure on this ſide and 


This 1s a Repetition of what the 7th Verſe hath already acquainted 
us with; I only obſ=rve, g Theſe Chambers were for the Prieſts and 
Leviresto Jodg in during their Miniſtration, according to their Courſes 
in the Temple, where they kept Watch continually Night and Day. | 
þ The whole was framed in very great Harmony, and juſt Propor- 
tions. | 

11: And he meaſured the breadth of the entry z of the 
gue ten cubits, axd the length & of the gate thirteen cu- 

It's, 

; Ttis meant of the whole Length of the Entry, or Walk through 
thePorch, which was ſo wide, and to which they aſcended by Stairs 
of a Semi-circular Form. k The Height is meant, bur tis called its 
Length, either becauſe Height is an ereGted Length; or rather, 
becauſe rhirteencubirs isthegreater Dimenſion : And this Interpreters 
agree 1n, 'tis the Height of the Gatehere meaſured, 


12 The ſpace / alſo before the little chambers »2 was 
one cubit on this fide, and the ſpace » was one Cubit 6n that 
lide; and the little chambers ere ſix cubits 0 on this ſide, 


and fix cubits on that ſide. 7 | | 

{ The Bound, Limit, or Rails, as ſome think, which were ſet up at a 
Cubir diſtance from the Front of theſe little Chambers, and gave a 
Beaury to them ; or elſe rhe ſpace of a Cubir on the our-ſide for conve- 
nientplacing of Benches for the Prieſts to ſit on, while they obſerved 
Whocame in, and went out of the Gate. m |Vid. wer. 7. » Between 
the Rails, or Baliiſters, and the Chambers on each ſide, North and 
South. o There was no difference in the Dimenſions of theſe little 
Chambers, they were all alike on each ſide. 


13 He meaſured then the gate from the roof p 
of one little chamber to the roof of another: the} 
peach as five and twenty cubits, door 9 againſt 

00r, go 

\f From the Extremity of one little Chamber on the Nortli-ſide of 
yo Gate, to the Extremity of the oppofire Chamber on the South» | 
ae ; and fo one Cubirt and half for the Back-wajl of the one Chamber, 
ws as much for the Back-wall of rhe other Chamber, with the Lengch 
of the Chambers, ſix Cubits each, and ten for the Breadth of the Gate, 
— to 25 Cubirs. 9 Either ſo placed, that the Door of the firſt 
- amber on the North-ſide, anſwered to the Door of the firſt on the 
outh-ſide; or ſome ehink, the Doors of the Chambers were two iti 


court [| without 65, .an hundred cubirs-eaſt 
ward Co 


Lodging-rooms for the Prieſts, but alſo Store-houſes for Tirhes and 
Offerings ; theſe were Treaſuries, and fo rendred by ſome. þp Avery 
beautiful Floor laid with Chequer-work, as ſome fay of Marble, or of 
Porphyry, which is much richer. q *T'was not laid as we ſee ſome 
Courts before Great Houſes with us, in a fair Walk up from the Gate 
to the Door ofthe Houſe, but the whole Floor of this Court was thus 
paved. » That is, fifteen on the South-ſide of che Gate, and fifteen 
on the North-ſide, built over the Pavement. 

18] And the pavement 5 by the ſide * of the gates, over 
againſt the length « of the gates, was the lower x pave- 
ment, 

s That mentioned wer. 17. # That part which lay on each fide of 
the Gate, and fromrthence ſpread ir ſelf towards the Chambers, le. 
Ving a ſpace of a Pavement of equal breadth with the Porch, or Gate 
in the middle. « This length was meaſured fifty Cubits, wer. t x, 
from the out-ſfide of the firſt Wall ro the our-iide of the inmoſt Wall 
of the Gate and Porch ; from which, on a Pavement ſomewhat :aifed, 
aS1n other ſtately Walks, this went on to the next Gate of the next 
Court. x The fide Pavement was laid ſomewhat lower than this mid. 
dle Pavement ; not only for ſtate, bur for the more convenient. keep. 
ing it clean ; ſo the middle Pavement roſe with a little Convex-ſurface, 
and the Edges ſunk with a little Declivity. 


I9 Then he meaſured the breadth z from the forefronc 
of the lower gate z, unto the forefront 2 of the inner 


3.Of the whole Ground between the inner Front of one Gate an4 
Porch, to the outward Front of the next-Gate more inward to the 
Temple. z Called ſo in reſpe& to the next Gate, which was on the 
higher Ground, and into which the Entrance was by Stairs or Steps : 
Sothe firſt of the Fabrick was the loweſt, the laſt was the higheſt, and 
the riddle Gates were the one higher than the other, as io all Bui!- 
dings that ſtand upon ſuch -Aſcents. a To the our-fide Front of the 
Gate of the Prieſts Court, which was next to this Gare now meaſured, 
that is from the Weſt-front of the lower to the Eait-front of che np. 
per Gate. þ This Conre from the Weſt-fronr of the Jower Gare, 
was one hundred Cubits in length to the Eaſt-front of the Cre 
of the inner Court. c And ſo was the ſpace from the Sourh- 
front of the Court to the North-front. So the Court was exattly 


ſquare. | | 


4 Now isthis Meaſurer giving an account of the North-gat2 of this 


*ch Chamber inthe Eaſt and Weſt-parts, and ſo exaQtly ſer, that the | 


outward Court ; in which 154 moſt exact Harmony with the q——_, 
Faſhion 


ward and north-!' © 
W717 1019! 


Chap. XL. 


16 And there were F narrow g windows to the little t Heb. cc: 


chambers 5h, and to their poſts ; within the gate round/: Or, aud 


eries, Or 
arches. 
jOr,w::5- 
g Theſe Lights were made through the Thickneſs of the Wall of *- 


F, fr 097 
- 


30 & And the gate d ofthe outward court + that looked + Heb. 
coward the north, he meaſured the length thereof, and the whoſe jace 


breadth thereof. 


Was. 


9: 11188 
a ; : 


Chap. XL 


EZER 


Faſhion and Ornaments of the Eaft-gate, fo that nothing needs be 
here repeated ; who would know all Particulars of this Gate, may find 
them in the Eaft-gate. 

21 Andthe little 'chambers thereof ere three on this 


fide, and three on that ſide ; and the poſts thereof, and the 


' Or, ga] arches thereof were after the meaſure cf the firſt e gate : 


” » "a 
vob oC 


* Seew. = 30 And the arches i round about were * five and twenty 
11h * Cubits long, and five cubits + broad. 
"Rey ; Here as once before, as wer. 11. let. k. Length 1s put for Height. 


the length thereof was fifty f cubits, and the breadth five 
and twenty g cubtrs. 
e Called wer. 22. Eaſt-gate. f See wer. 15. g See wer. 13. let. p. 
22 And their windows 4, and their arches z, and 


their palm-trees &, were after the meaſure of the gate n 


that looketh towards the eaſt, and they went up unto it 
by ſeven 7 ſteps, and the arches thereof ” ere before 


» them. | ” 
h See wer. 16. let. g. # See wer. 16, let k, &Tbid, let.m. 7 "Tis 
he Eaſt-gate ; but by 


not ſaid what number of Stairs they went up to the Eait-gA 

chisit appears, they were ſeven Steps in number - and 't1s ſaid by ſome, 
the Form was ſemi-circular. » Of this Portico the curious vaulted 
Roof. » Within, or more inward than the Steps or Gate. 

23 And the gate o of the inner court p as over 
againſt the gate 5 toward the north, and toward » the 
eaſt; and he meaſured from gate to gate an hundred cu- 
bits. 

os The North-gate. þ Or Court of the P:1eſts. 9 North- gate of the 
outer Court ; theſe were dire&ly over-right each other. r 'Tis con- 
ciſe, but thus to be expreſt fully : The Eaſt-gare of rhe inner Court 
was dire&ly over againſt the Eaſt-gate of the outer Court, and equally 
diſtant from each other. 

24  Afﬀer that « he brought me toward the ſouth 7z, 
and behold, a gate toward the ſouth «, and he meaſured 


the poſts thereof, and the arches x thereof according to 
theſe meaſures. | 

+ Having finiſhed the meaſuring of the Eaft-gate, and ſhewed the 
Prophet the Sameneſs of the North-gates's Buildings, Meaſures and 
Ornaments; now he is informed of the South- gate, and itsexaQt Sym- 
metry with the other two, which conſult in wer. 5, 6, 7,8, 9,10, 7. 
z Theſouth-point of Heaven. « South-part of the Houſe. & Vid. 
ver. 16. and 21, 22. Lf q 

25 And there were windows y in it, and in the ar. 
ches thereof round about, like thoſe windows z ; the 
length was fifty cubits, and the breadth five and twenty 
Cubits. . 

3 Vid. wer. 16. let. g. z Which were in the Eaſt-gate, and already 
meaſured there. . 

26 And rhere were ſeven a ſteps to go up to it b, and 
the arches thereof were before them © ; and it had palm. 
trees, one on this ſide, and another on that ſide 4 upon 
the poſts thereof. | 

# See wer. 22. b The Floor, or Square-Court. ©c Vid. wer. 22. let. 
». d On theright and on the left-hand Poſts, each Poſt had one 


Palm-tree. 

27 And there as a gate in the inner court toward the 
ſonth, and he meaſured from gate to gate toward the fouth 
an hundred cubits. 

As before the Eaſt-gate anſwered to Eaſt, and North to North ; 
ſo here one South-gate anſwers to the other in the confronting, or Pa- 
rallel-rwalls, and in all Points exa@ly uniform ; to prevent Repetition, 
I refer you tothe particular Meaſures, &c. of the Eaſt-gate. 


I 5 L. Cinp. 


' $33 Andthe fittle chambers thereof, and the poſts there. 
of, and the arches thereof were according to theſe meaſures. 
and there were windows therein, and in the arches thereof 
round about : z: was fifty cubirs long, and five and ewenty 
Cubits broad. 

Compare the 334 verſe with the 6th werſe, &c. tothe 16h, where the 
Form and Dimenſions are expreſly ſer down. 

34 And the arches thereof were toward the outward 
court, and palm-trees were upon the poſts thereof on this 
ſide, and on that ſide, and the going up to it had eight 
eps. 

Vid. ver. 31. where this Verſe is explain'd. 
35 T Andhe brought me to the north-gate o, and mes. 
ſured zt according to theſe meaſures : | 

o From the Eaſt-gate, and taking the Meaſures hereof, he paſſerh by 
Order to the North-gate; where all is exa&tly conform'd to that in the 
South and Eaſt-gates. 

35 The little chambers thereof, the poſts thereof, and 

the arches thereot, and the windows to it round about; the 

_ was hity cubits, and the breadth five and twenty cy. 
its, . 

37 Andthe poſts thereof were towards the utter court, 
and palm-trees were upon the poſts thereof on this 


[{ide, and onthat ſide ; and the going up to it had eight 


ſteps. 
38 And the chambers p, and the entries 9 thereof +: 
by the. poſts of the gates 7, where they waſhed 7 the burnt. 


offering. 

 ?Eitherthe ſix, three on one fide, and three on the other, as before 
In the Gates of the outer Court, orelſe Chambers built on purpoſe for 
the Uſes here ſpecified, as ſome conje&ure. q The Doors, as well 4; 
the Chambers , were by the Pillars probably adjoining to then, 

7 Though ſome have thought the North-gate was that alone where 
they waſh'd the Burnt-offering, yet others conceive 'twas done at the 
Eaſt-pate too, if not at the South alſo; and the Piral Number war. 
rants us to look for another Gate beſide the North, when 'tis ſaid theſs 
Chambers were by the Poſts of the Gates, Plural. s God commanded, 
that the Legs and Entrails of this Burar-offering ſhould be waſhed, 
Lev. 1. 13. now here they did that; and whether theſe Chambers 
were built for this Uſe only, or pur to this, as to other holy Uſes, is 
not greatly material to enquire. 

39 T Andin the porch t of the gate weretwo tables on, 
this ſide, and two tables on that ſide, to ſlay thereon the; 


burnt-offering, and the * ſin-offering, and the * treſpaſs: 


offering. | b 
: Though the Words ſeem ſo expreſs, yet doubt is made whether 
any Table were in the very Porch it ſelf, andthink they would cum. 
ber the Paſſage; but ſure where only the Prieſts in courſe of Miniſtra- 
tion entred, there would be no great Croud ; therefore I conceive, that 
theſe two Pairs of Tables were ſet in the very Porch ofthe Gate,which 

15 the Letter of the Text. 

40 And at the fide without «, [| as one goeth up to theil: 
entry of the north-gate , were two tables; and on the" 
other ſide, which was at the porch of the gate, were two 


tables. 

#« On the right-hand without, and probably in the open Air; orelſe 
under the Cloiſter that went Eaſtward, ſtood two, and on the left. 
hand two, in like manner, for the ſame end and uſe, to flay the Sacti- 


28 And he broughtf me to the inner court by the ſouth- 


gate, and he meaſured the ſouth-gate according to theſe 
meaſures : | 

f From the South. gate ofthe outer Court through the Porch, and 
over the hundred Cubit-p4vement, to the —_ of the inner 
Court, which is here deſcribed by its Harmony with the other Gates, 
which were before meaſured, and to them are you referred, leſt we 
needleſly repeat the ſame things. 

29 And the little chambers thereof, and the poſts there. 
of, and the arches thereof according to theſe meaſures ; 
and there were. windows in it, and in the arches thereof 


Cubits broad 4. 
g Vid. ver. 15. h Seewver. 13.let. p. 


31 And the arches thereof were toward the utter court, 
and palm-trees were upon the poſts thereof; and the going 
up to it had eight ſteps. } Bal 

In this Verſe two thingsare mentioned, wherein this Gate differed 
from the other; firſt, in the Arches or Porch which ſtood not inward, 
but outward towards the outward Court, the Reaſon whereof will ap. 
pear in what follows: The next difference lieth in this, that the A. 
ſcent was by eight Steps (more than the other, ſay ſome, and ſo make 
them fifteen). Now, if the Porch to this Gate built outward, ſtood 
upon ſuch Aſcent, *twould be neceſſary the Pillars ſhould be ſuch as 
wer. 30. expreſſeth them, five Cubits in the breadth of the Baſis, and 


25 Cubits high. 
32 T And he brought me into the inner court / toward 
the eaſt », and he meaſured the gate according to theſe 


meaſures » : | 

1 The Court of the Prieſts, which was next to the Houſe or Temple 
3tſelf. » Tothe Eaſt-gateof that Court ; ſo he is brought from the 
South to the Eaſt-gate. » As the other, ſo this, exaRtly like to the firſt 
inall Dimenſions of length and breadch. 


burnt-offering, of a cubit OE long, and __ = 
: an halfbroad, and one cubit high: whereupon alſo they 
round about : it was fifty g cubits long, andfive and twenty. jlaid the inſtruments c wherewith they ſlew ra burat-offer- 


them four, becauſe they were coupled ſo ; onefour on the one ſide, and 
the other four on the other ſide. & "Tis not likely theſe were mean 
worthleſs Stones, but either beſt Marble, or elſe ſome Stone better than 
Marble, and they are exa&ly ſquare, a cubir and half every way: 
6 Here is nothing ſaid of the thickneſ? of theſe Stone-tables; *ris pro- 
bable they were ofa good thickneſs, which, added tothe Cubit height, 
on which they were ſet, might raiſe them to convenient height for 
uſe. c When they were brought outifor preſent uſe ; at other times 
we know they were laid up in Chambers, and Cupboards prepared tor 


that end. 


ned z round about; and upvun the tables 4 was the fleſh 0 
the offering. 


theſe Tables ſtood. 
ces, perplex more than explain: Hooks, on which the ſlaughtered S1- 
crifice might be banged, while they prepared it farther, were need”, 
and the Word imports ſuch Iron Hooks. 
might be two Hooks of Iron faſtned ro, or wraught out, where che 
Plate was ſo broad, and therefore called Hooks in the Plural. 5 is 
Walls, no doubr, near theſe Tables. hþ They were careful to keep ©®* 
holy Fleſh from lying any where, that might look like com 
Ground. Ir is like that the Sacrifice was fafined to theſe Hooks, - 


fices. 
41 Four tables were on this ſide x, and four tables on 


that ſide, by the ſideofthe gate ; eight tables y, whereupon 
they ſlew thetr ſacrifices. 


x Either within the Porch ewe, and without ittwo, on either ſide; 


or elſe, as ſome will, four without the Porch and Gate, in the Cloiſters 
on the right and lefe-handofthe Gate. y How er placed, they were 
eight for number, and deſigned for ſlaying the Sacrifice on. 


42 And the four tables z were of hewn ſtone 4 for the 


g and the ſacrifice. | 
' z Each four Tables; for the Prophet ſpeaks of all eight, but names 


f-|0 


ta, 
j MN 


43 And within d were [| hooks e, an hand broad f, fa 


d Within the Houſe, Porch, or whate'er the Place be called, where 
e Learned Conje&tures here, asin many other plz- 


Flr is probable, that there 


mon 
and 
Y 


te ſides F 


Y if 


E-- ſevera 
W exact, 
= tion'd 
-y Altar 
BY from t. 
- Jower ( 


48 
b- ſide, a 
| gate 22 
lide. - 
* eFro 
& joined t 
= oneach 
© ſide Nor 
= North tc 
> Breadth' 
© Gate war 
-- the midd 
> each Le: 

= Cubits. 
= 49 ] 
 thebrea 
: Whereb' 
|: by the 
- ſide. 
S <Tho; 
> from Eaſt 
2 the Dimer 
> T1,and for 
= Was come j 
7 Side-walls, 
&: and Boaz Ty 


ff Tic meaſures 
I—6 


| x Fe 
| ſt 
tide, and 


alls in the 


1 and half br 
: bits. | 


2 Ang 


w * : | 
aW0. 1-1: | 
coſted on the! | 

1eces. SIN RT F h : : 
A \4 T And withot / the inner gate 2ere the chambers & 
tefh /in the inner court m, which as at the ſide of 
d their proſpect as toward the ſouth », 


efrhe ſingers 
'- che narth-gate : an Was 
ſide of the caſt-gate p, having the proſpect to. 


oj 
01:e 0 57 ns 


b ward the north. : 
b \ken he was got through the Gate of the inner Court, & Several 
” +. tow, { VVhere they lodged both their Inſtruments and them- 


&ives, during the time of their Attendance. m2 Next to the Temple. 
. The Bick-parts of theſe Lodgings were roward the North-wall of the 
ner Court, and their Lights and Proſpe&ts to the South ; and flood 
ah on the North-eaſt ſide, and on the North-weſt ſide. o One Row of 
Chambers. p This Row 11 Jengrh was from Eaſt ro Welt ; and how- 
ever this Row butted, "tis certain the Polition of their Lights was to 
{hz North ; ſor theſe Chambers muſt have their Back-parts on ſome 
Building that run out from the Eaſt-gate into the Body of the Courr 
Weſtward. ; h 

bw. - 15 Andheg ſaid unto me, This chamber 7 whoſe pro. 

P:" ſpect i5 coward the fouth, 7s for the prieſts 5 the * keepers: 


& ..: of the || charge ofthe houſe. | 


A o Who appeared with Meaſuring-Line and Reed, wer. 3. » This 

Wo Range of Chambers ; for this {tingle Number refers to the whole Row, 
rortoone particular Chamber. s The Sons of Aaron; yer, I think, 
not exceeding others who had Charge under the Prieſts. * While, ac- 
co:dir.s to their Courſes, they had the Charge of tae Houſe of God, and 
attended on the Service of it. 


46 And the Chamber s whoſe proſpect zs toward the 


6 
7 
p 


EZEKIEL. 


ir Stene-tables, white the Prieſts 'cut them into their| afid five-cubits on tie other fide: and he meaſired tho 


_ þ thereof forty cubics, and the breadth twenty cv- 
Its. 

e Or the Aperture, the op0!1 ſpice which let in Tight, 2s wel! a: 
Men ; properly the Door ofthe Porch. f Between Poſt and Poſt, of 
which the folding Doors did hang. &£ The ſpace from the edge of thy 
Wall by the Potts ro rhe Side-wail inward, was oa each fide five Cu 
bits, on the North-ſide fo many, and on rhe Snuth fo many, which 
make the Content between Wall and V/1'i, as the Verſe hath it, 20 
Cubitcs in breadth. - þ Of the Sanftuary, frem the Porch to the Par- 
ticzon berween the Holy of Holies, and the inward Front of che Wa!] 
of the SanQtuary was 40 Cubits, unleſs we ravuſt rake in the thickneſ; 
of the Walls of both Sanctuary and Holy of Holies, of which mor? 
may poſiibly be ſpoken. 


3- Then went he inward z, and meaſured the poſt & of 
the door / two cubits, and the door fi; m cubits, and the 
breadth of the door ſeven cubits. 

7 From the Porch through the Body of the Temple, to the Partition 
between the Body of the Temple and Holy of Holies, or the Oracle. 
& Either the thickneſs of that Particion-wall, or of the Pilaſters, which 
ſtood one on one ſide, and the other on the other ſide of the Door, / or 
Entrance out of che Temple into the Oracie. 2 This Door was 
fix Cubirs high, ſay ſome, bu* more likely *twas fix Cubirs broad, and 
an upright Bar or Poſt on which the Leaves did meer, and which w 
of one Cubits breadth, make out the 7 Cubits mention'd in the laſt 
words of this Verſe. 


4 So: he meaſured the length thereof » twenty cubits, 
and the breadth twenty o cubirs before p the temple ; and 


* ; north, z for the prielts * the keepers x of the charge of the 
* "4ltary: theſe are the ſons of * Zadok z among the ſons of 
Kins. Levi, which come near to the LORD to miniſter unto 


him. | 

u See ver. 45. let. rv. a See ver. 45. let.s.t. » To preſerve the Fire 
perpetually on the Altar, &c & The High Prieſt, who was put in by 
Sclomon's depriving of Abiathar, in whoſe Race the High Prieſthood 
continued, while God's Order was obſerved ; his Sons eſpecially 
among the Levites had this Charge,and in their Turns took care of the 
Altar ; which that they might the better do, they had thoſe Cham- 
bers, whoſe Proſpe& I do ſuppoſe was toward the Altar, _ 

47 Sohe meaſured the court 4, an hundred cubits long, 
and an hundred cubits broad, four-fquare 6, and the altar c 


that was before the houſe 4d. "0 
» The Inner Court, or Court ofthe Prieſts ; who, according to their 
ſeveral Charges, had Lodgings in it, as ver. 46. b This Court was an 


'Is exatt equilatera] Square. «© Here the place of the Altay is only men- 
& tion'd; the meaſuring of it is ch2p. '4.3. from wer. 13. to ver. 18. This 
6. 5 Altar was placed in the very Center of this Square, in a direct Line 
LW from the North, Eaſt, and South Gates, and might be ſeen from the 


* lower Courts by thoſe who ſtood there. 4 The Temple it (elf. 


48 T And hebrought e meto the porch of the houſe f, 
and meaſured each g poſt of the porch, five cubits on this 
- ſide, and five cubits on that ſide 4: and the breadth z of the 
| cate as three cubirts on this ſide, and three cubits on that 


| lide. | 


1 
ol (: 


11 _ 
B77 © joined the Temple, and was part of the Houſe. g The Poſt or Wall 


2 5A, 
Py 


= fide of the Wall, and the in-ſide of the Wall was five Cubirs on each 


he ſaid q unto me, This is the moſt holy r place. 
: Of the Oracle, or Holy of Holies. 0 It was exa& ſquare, as was 
Solomon's, 1 Kings 6. 20, p Parallel with the breadth of the Temple, 
9 .T he Prophet was commanded to hear, and now he ſhews us his Ac. 
tention. » As having the Tokens of God's more eſpecial Preſence, 
In that the Mercy-Seat and Propitiatory were there ; ſo called Nuws.7, 
89. 'twas called alfo the Oracle, and 1 Kirigs 6. 15. the inner Houle. 
r, I5, 17. 

5 Aﬀer he meaſured the wall s of the houle * five cubirs s, 
and the breadth of every ſide-chamber x four cubits round 


about » the houſe on every ſide &. 

s Having lefc the Holy of Holies' meaſured 1n the 34 Verſe, now he 
is come to take the Meaſures of the outer Wall. :- The Temple it ſel{: 
# Three Yards thick was this VVall from the Ground to the firtt 
Story of the ſide-Chambers. z Of the loweſt Floor ; for there were 
three Stories of theſe, and they differ'd in their breadih, as the Wall 
of the-Temple on which they reſted abated of irs rhickneſs; for the 
middle Chambers were broader than the loweſt by a Cubir; and the 
higheſt as much broader than the middle, » On the North, South, 
and VVeſt parts, z On each fide of every one of theſe three Gates. 
The Eaſt-Gare, and Buildings about that, were not faced with ſuch Fa- 
Cings, | 


ther, and || thirty in order 5; and they entred into the wall chamber 0« 


c Which was of the houſe for 4 the fide chambers round a- v#7 /ac- 
bout, thatthey might e-# have hold, but they had not hold 


e From the meaſuring the Butlding and Court. f That Porch which in the wall Fof the houſe. 


chamber. 


| ond thirty 
_ a Tnthree Stories high. þ How theſe thirty in a row were diſtri -*77e5, or 


* oneach ſide of the Gate. þ+ The Thickneſs, or Space betweenthe out- | buted, is not ſaid ; ſome gueſs twelve on the North-ſide, as many on foot 
the South: ſide, and fix on the Weſt ; bur as this may be, fo poſſibly + Heb. 5:- 
it may not be; but we are ſure the whole Number is thirty in a row /9{7cn. 
| on each Story, 7.e. three times 3o, or go in all. 
*” Breadth was 11 Cubits ; but the Breadth of each Leaf of this folding ; ſix Cubit Wall, which was the VVall ofthe Houſe, bur another V'Vall 
of one Cubit thickneſs, on the top whereofwas a Reſt or Ledge of one 
: . Cubic breadth, on which the Ends of the Cedar-Beams were faſtned. 
* each Leaf hang'd on Poſts two Cubits thick, which amount to 11 |/ Tis ſaid this was built for the ſide-Cambers, either from the Foun. 
| . dation the Wall was made fo thick, that at 5 Cubits from the Ground 
they might rebate or drawin thethickneſs of the aſcending VVall ene 
Cubir, or elſe this Cubit-thick V Vall was after added: but this, as 
not probable, I reje&. e That the Beams of the Chambers might have 
goed and firm. r-{ting-hold, 


c Not the five or 


7 The Ends of the Beams were not 


-: by the polts, one on this ſide, and another on that| thruſt into the main Body of the VVall of the Temple, as we ſee 


fc WW fide North and South, if we ſuppoſe the Breadth of the Porch from 
fr. WW North toSouth, and the Length from Eaft to Weſt. :- The whole 
ls 

' Gate was 3 Cubits, and they met, or ſhut on an upright Poſt, ſer in 
n MK | the middle of the Gate-ſpace, and this ene Cubit broad : And then 
_ Fl Cubits. | ME : | 
eo 49 Thelength & of the porch was twenty cubits, and 
is WM the breadth eleven cubits; and he brought me by the ſteps / 
re WW whereby they went up to it; and there were pillars 
he WW fide. 
nd WW  &# Tho Learned Men diſpute the Poſition of the Length, whether 
& BB from Eaſt to Weſt, or from Northto South, expreſs Word determines 
» > the Dimenſions of this Length and Breadth. / Eight ſay ſome, others 


> 11,and ſome ſay 10, others ſay 12, but moſt ſay 8. 2 So ſoon as he 
& was come into the Porch, he ſaw two Pillars, that ſtood off from the 
nes + Side-walls, not joined to them, as the Poſts were; much like Farhin 
n = and Boaz in Solomon's Temple. 


C H AP. XII. 


p04 


aye = 


fro I — .. | 9 


F Am a he brought me to the temple, and mea- 
| \ ſured the poſts 5, ſix cubits broad c oh the one 


ft- lide, and fix cubits broad on the other ſide , which was the 
: breadth of the tabernacle 4. | 

| . * Aﬀeer the meaſuring of the Courts,c5c. tiow the Prophet 1s brought 

Wo to ſee the Temple it ſelf meaſured. 4 The thickneſs of the Walls 

" (called Poſts here, as alſo chap.q 0. 48.) on the North-ſide, and on the 

p South.ſide of the Gate. c One whole Reed in thickneſs. d Theſe 


1ful Wallsin their thickneſs took up as much ſpace as the whole breadth of 
here Miſes his Tabernacle, Exod. 26. 22. where 8 Boards, each one Cubit 
- che _ half broad, make juſt the breadth of the Tabernacle 12 Cu- 


C-- _ [of the Houſe went ſtill upward round & about the houſe : 
4 Tic meaſures, parts, chambers of the Temple, together with its ornaments? [therefore the breadth of the houſe / was #711! upward, and-+ 1 Kings 
; |; lo ericreaſed m frors the loweſt chamber to the higheſt by 6. s. 


Beams laid into the Body ofthe V Vallsof Houſes ; butfor each Story 
a.rebatement of one Cubit in the thickneſs of che VVall, ſo that tix 
Cubits thick at the Ground up to the firſt Floor, and five Cubitrs thick 
from that to the ſecond Floor, and four Cubits thick from the ſecond 
ro the third. Floor ; ſo each Floorreſts on a Ledge of one Cubic with. 
out the VYall, and each Story grows a Cubit broader than thar is 
next lower, 


7 And -f-* there was attenlarging g and a winding about 5+ Heb. it 


{till upward to the ſide-chambers, for the winding / about w#5 194 


broader ant 
went round. 


the midit -. b-- | 

g Viz. ofthe ſide-Chambers, ſo much of breadth added to the Cham. 
ber as was taken from the thickneſs ofthe VVall ; that is, two Cubits 
in the uppermoſt, and one Cubit in the middlemoſt more than in the 
loweſt Chambers. + VVinding-Stairs which enlarged as the Rooms 
did, and theſe run up between each rwo Chambers, from the bottom 
to the top, ſothere were two Doors at the head of each pair of Stairs, 
one Door opening into one Chamber, and rhe other into the oppokite 
Chamber ;. or elſe ypu muſt make the Chambers thorow-Fares, and 
ſuppoſe Paſſages thcough all. ; Theſe Stairs, as they roſe in heighc, 
enlarged themſelves too. & z.e. On all ſides of the Houſe where 
theſe Chambers were, which, as obſerved, was on three ſides of the 
Houſe. 1 Ofeach Chamber. Grew broader by one Cubic i 
&ery upper Room or Chamber.  » From 5 in the loweſt to 6x in the 
middle, and to 7 in the higheſt Chamber; 


, 


- 


_ -; 
g To RE. 
pam | 2 And thebreadth of the || door e was ten f cubits, and 
m= | ing ſides @ of the door were five cubits on the one ide, | 


3x 


Chip. XLy. 


6 And the ſide-chambers ere three , + one over 2 ano-+ Heb./:- 


' Or, three 


_— - 
; 2,463 


{ d.. " a> «4 
than RE e ” 6s _ TS. ” 3 x fs x 
ng > -_— o * - - Jn ;m_ 4 . N _ - 
_ ' Ss Axl ERR”... i —_ ER : 
ys ls 7h ond = Bea _— : - 

. + NN Pe uy . v . 4 - a 'V i 

 w__ſ4 ”, - - nat - © oe ” - - wee - Spe _ 
c SOEETIP wy x ” eg EO —— * Wn HE icy Redo oning 
GS EY GH DRE wo = © =>, © > ; PP S228 = gs > = p _ mt 4 _ = Warns be tht 
IF : ” o on & 7 17 n a F , a P, v7, Y 
£ E 54 'S * Y _— ” ASH of ba : \ 1 S £ < "TR, 737 ? , 
- - fo 9e wet no y - %& 4 


now 


m— 
o b \* 
- "8 by Tu z 
- £4 tr 
4 \. " Y - 
- Le A n A 7 
- * b - ', * % p p L 4 AY 
my * —— - 61, he — - om SOOT EE ea. - 3.4 DIE Es x Oe _ 99s RH 
_—_ wb err 1 —_—_ br» - * hg E ” _ - - . wg ——<” IT_ Wn eds - af - 
. - hs 1 Fe "Y 44 m_y £3 wp, p__ "_ w_- Bat g.4 = -7 ay _» > nn, 4 * Q 
7 CREATES: —_ Ia £ i « mw - > A IN ” by 4. oy Ono, eo w 
ot - _ 7 5 =o yoy ; . i aath Fi by ; 5. = 26-4 * 
N b, - uy & & _ an Pry by - - ov) 
ell te OO ESTA Z Pong * £8) 3" o V IE" wg * En : 
. at? & 9%. 2 HAS C - Jo : ; 
=_ FT 4+ 264% (4% TER , 
mY wit oe £0 > —  — wt > Y.. "P) Meets ach _— 
Fe I " y 
: - g ; —_— 2-0 - _— ” - _ 
; Dy TEES Ma; xy ” = 


4 ky an 
4: + CS AR 
z buy ”y ad 


Ao ER oi CREED 
At v4 . Pads f 


Fave. re ack 


Chap. XLL. 


" "Ch.20.5- 


8 Ifaw alſo the height of the houſe o round about : the 


foundations p of the ſide-chambers were a * full reed of fix 
great cubits. 

o Ofthe Chambers, or the three Stories of therh ; 'tis not the Tem- 
ple. p The loweſt: Chamber had properly a Foundation laid on the 
Earth ; bur the Floor of the middle and higheſt Story muſt be accoun- 
ted here a Foundation ; ſo fiom the Ground to the Cieling of the firſt 
Room was G6 great Cubits, from the firſt Beams, Joices and Boards to 
the ſecond,6 great Cubits, and from the third Floor to the Roof of the 
Chamber a like number, to which add we one Cubir for thickneſs of 
each of the three Roofs or Floors, you have 21 Cubits for height, 10 
Yards and half high. 


9 The thickneſs of the wall which vas for the ſide- 
chamber without 9, as five cnhits ; and that r which was 


lek, was the place of the {ide chambers that were with- 
in Fs. 
9 The outward Wall for theſe Chambers was 5 Cubits in thickneſs, 
and was made of Stone, which adled boch Beauty and Strength to the 
other part of the Building, and ſerved as Buttereſles to the Temple. 
Wall. 7 That ſpace which was left without this Wall about 5 Cubirs 
broad, and ſerved for a Wa'k before the Chambers, or for a Paſſage 
from one -Ch:mber to another. «Th: W.'k and Wall. | 

19 And between the chambeis £ was the wideneſs of 


twenty cubits round about the houſe on every ſide. 
£ That on one ſide joined ro the Temple, and were publick Repoſi- 
to. ics for Offerings and Ti hes, &c and thoſe other Chambers, which 
were built on 'hz Wall of this inner Court, and were Lodgings for the 
Pricſts; there was a void Space or Pavement inthe open Air twenty 
Cults broad, and theſe round about on all ſides of che Court, and 
probably ſome Rails, or Balliſters, or low Wall round too before them 
encloſing this Space. | | 
11 And the doors #- of the ſide-chambers were to- 


ward the place that was left, one door x toward the 
north, and ancther door toward the ſouth, and the. 
breadth of the place that was left, was five Cubics round 


avout 
1 The Doors of the loweſt Row opened into this void paved ſpace. 


SZEAKIEL 


| : Chap. Xj 
Temple. » res, Sagas the North Point along by the Eſte; 
Front to the South Point, or Corner of the Buildings or V Vall The 
admeaſuring the Particulars I forbear ; but fince this fide runs equa] 
with the Jengrh of the whole from Eaſt ro V'Velt, we need not douy 

"tis an hundred Cubirs. : 

15 And he meaſured the length of the building » ove; 
againſt the ſeparate p place which was behind it 9, and thel'0, 
[| galleries r thereof on the one ſide, and on the other ſide, "*! * 
an hundred cubits, with the inner temples, and the porches : Wy 

hy, 


of the court. 

o Poſſibly that of the 12h and 132h Yerſes, or the Buildings of thi, 
Court next to the Temple, or elſe the Weſt-Buildings behing the 
Oracle, or the Buildings of the outer Court, of which in chap. ,2, ; 
3,7, 8. p Seewver. 12. let. a. q The Buildings that were behind oq 
the Weſt-lide of that ſuppoſed Range of Buildings, or elſe behind ths 
Temple. 7 Either Chambers or Porches, or Balconies, places ſupport. 
ed by Pilaſters, made for Beauty and Delight. s According to the 
Meaſures of the Temple, and its appendant Buildings, 

16 The door-poſts 5, and the narrow windows », and 
the galleries x round about on their three ſtories y, over+ 
againſt the door z + cieled with wood round about, || ang is 
irm the ground @ up to the windows, and the Windows 


were covered 6. | 
Whar are here recounted were all meaſured by the Ange), ang _ 
with the ſame Reed or Meaſure. t See chap. 40. 48, 49. *'Tis likely av 
he means the Door-poſts of every Gate, or Porch in every Court. 4 a 
u See chap. 40. 16. let. g, a See ver, 15. It. q. and wer. F, let. x. ”Y 
3 Vid. wer. 6, 7, Or Parts, or Buildings, Temple, ſeparate place, and 
on the Court-walls. z The ſingular for the plura! Number, the Dur; 
which were cieled with Wood, were meaſured, this Cieling was with 
choiceſt Wood. @ The height of theſe VVindows were raken tog, 
b Had Lids or Curtains to cover them, and Lettices roo, ſay ſome. 
17 To that above the door c, even unto the inner houſe 
and without, and by all the Wall round about within ang i 
Mut 


'withou, by -f meaſure. 

c Inthe 15:h Verſe the Prophet began his Catalogue, and continu. 
eth it through this Verſe, in which in the groſs he tells us all aboye 
the Doors, inevery Porch and Gate to the very inner Houſe, and all 


lar; 


x B-ſide the particular Doors to each Chamber, there were two, one 
on the North, where was a fair Stair-Caſewhich did lead up to every 
Story, and above theſe ro the top of the Temple, And fo another 
like this on the South, excepting that this Sourh Stair-Caſe led nor up 
to the top of ail, as that North Stair-Caiz Cid. 

12 Now the building y that as before z the ſeparate 
place 2, at the end b toward the weſt, as ſeventy cubits 
c broad, and the wall of the building was five cubits 
d thick round about, and the kngth thereof ninety e cu- 


bits. 
7 This isa new Building not yet mention'd, bur now meaſured by 


wirhout the Buildings about the V Valls were meaſured exaQly, tho 
we have neither the particular Account of what theſe were, either 
Things or Meaſures, 


18 And it was made d with cherubims e and palm-treesf 
ſo that a palm-tree was between g a cherub and a cherub, 


and every cherub had two faces : 

Now we are acquainted with the Ornaments,the beautiful Carving, 
which in all parts mention'd were to be ſeen. d Beautified. e Gene- 
rally taken for the Pourtrai& of Angels, and framed to the Beauty of 
young Men with Wings. Yet is the Deſcription of them very diff 
rent 1n different places, as the Curious obſerve in Ezckie!'s Viſion,chap.1, 
Iſaiah's Vition, chap. 6. Jokn's Viſion, Rev. 4. and in Solomon's Temple, 


Jrſclf. z Or over againft, # Either the 7-»ple with all he appen- 
dant Treaſury Chanibers ; or th= Orade, which was in the Welt-end 
of the Tem;yle, and ſeparate from the reſt o' the Temple : Or that 
20 Cubirs ſpace which was cut off from the Chambers, -nd the 5 
Cubirs ipac- before them by a Breaſt-Wal), as ſome think. 4+ OF 
either Temple, Oracle, or torcfaid ſpace toward the Weſt, c As 
Mea are not agreed about the Fabrick, and its Dimenſions here inten- 
ded ro be meafured ; ſo they are as little agreed how ro compure the 
Meaſures, every one however makes out his Account, whether the 


f A very beautifu], upright Tree, from a ſtreight well grown Body, 
ſpreading its Head with large Boughs and Branches, which were uſed 
on Occaſions of Joy, and were Emblems of Vittory, Joh. 12. 13. and 
Rev. 7.9. g Theſe were ſo engraven, that each Palm-tree was be- 
*ween two Cherubs, and each Cherub between two Palm-trees, and 
this ariſeth from the different Aſpe&t, or numbring them. 4 Curiouſly 
wrought on the ſame Head, ſomewhat like a Fanw's Head ; what theſe 
Faces were, the next Verſe tells us. 


I9 SO that the face of a man 7 was toward the palm-tr2 


thiag he meaſures be the 11 ght or miſtaken. Firſt, ſuppoſe the Tem- 
Dleand the Weſt part of it from North to South, thus; 20 Cubits the 
Bon each Side-wall 6 Cubits, Breadth of Chambers on each ſide 4, 
the Thickneſs of the Out-walls of theſe Chambers on both ſides 5 Cu- 
birs each, a void Space of 5 Cubits compaſling the whole, and then the 
Jow or Breaſt-wall that encloſed this Space 5 Cubits-thick on eachſide, 
making up the third 10, produce the 70 Cubirs. But they that think 
ofa diſtin&t Building on th: Weſt-end of the Temple, do alſo in their 
Method make out the Account. 4 This ſeems to countenance their 
Opinions, who conceive a diſtin Building meant. 
tionsare eaſily laid together, which will makeupthetotal, and agree 

with the Temple thus ; Temple and Oracle with their Walls 70 

Cubits, Porch 11, and Chambers and Walls 9 Cubits. And who will, 
have ſuch a new Stru&ure here meaſured (which is more than was ; 
in thefirſt Table-Fabrick) will make all correſpond to their Hypotheſis, | 
and you may more eaſily obje&t againſt another's, than demonſtrate. 
your own Gueſs. The beſt is, the Ecror is not great if a Maa do err 


here. | 


13 So he meaſured the houſe f, an hundred cubits g 
long, and the ſeparate place h, and the building 7, wich the 
walls thereof, an hundred cubits long &. 

f The whole Temple, Oracle, Sanftuary and Porch,with the Walls. 

From Eaſt to Weſt thus< Stairs of the Eaſt-Porch, or the thickneſs 
of the Walls Cubirs ; the Paſſage through the Porch 11, Wall of the 
Temple within the Porch 6 Cubirts, the Temple it ſelf 40 Cubirs, 
Partition-wall 2 Cubits,the Oracle 20 Cubirs, Weſt-wall thick 6 Cu- 
birs, the Chambers at bottom of the Weſt-wall 4 Cubitrs, and the outer 
Wallofrhe Chambers 5 Cubitrs. h See wer. 12.1et.s. i On both the North 
and South-fide of the Temple. k Which is reckoned the breadth of 
the Temple 29 Cubits, thickneſs of both Walls 12 Cubirs, the bottom 
Chamberson both ſides 8 Cubirs, the outer Wall of theſe Chambers 5 
Cubirs a-piece; the breadth ofthe placelefrt on each fide 5, on both ſides 
10 (7. c.5 each) and then the widenels between this on either fide 20 


Cubits. 

14 Alſo the breadth of the face 7 of the houſe, and of 
»» the ſeparate place toward the eaſt, an hundred cu- 
bits 7. 

1 The whole Front ef the Houſe Eaſtward, the Proſpe& of it be- 


ingto the Eaſt. »» This explains the other, ſay ſome, che Houſe 1$ 
the ſeparate «place ; or elſe, as others, that other Building on the 


on the one ſide, and the face of a young lion toward the 
palm-tree onthe other ſide : i# was k made through all the 


houſe round about. , 

2 This one Face, the other of a young Lion. Now as to the Aſpett 
"twas thus ; the Cherub between two Palm-trees looked rowards both 
Trees ; towards the;one a Man's Face, towards the other a young 
Lion's Face looked. k And thus it was through the whole Houſs 


e Theſe Propor.. | r9und abour, from bottom to top, as ver. 20. 


20 From the ground unto above the door / were che” 
rubims and palm-trees made, and oz the wall mz of ths 


temple, 

I Some think 'tis the great Eaſt-Gate: I think rather here 1s an 
Enallage, or change of Number, Door for Doors, and that every Porch 
was ſo beautified. See chap. 41. 16, 22, 26, 34 mm Theſe beautiful 
Sculptures were round about the Walls of the Temple, and Oracle 
too, tho not expreſt here. ; 


21 The + poſts» of the temple were ſquared o, and thet6 
face p of the ſanuary: the appearance of the ore as the ap- 
pearance q of the other. 

2 On each fide of the Gate or Door, both of Temple and Oracle: 
o Not round as ſome other were, and as the Poſts of the Door of the 
Tabernacle were, but of exa& ſquare. p The form of the Doors, 
or Gate of the Temple was ſquare, 7. e. not arched, as the Gates 0 
our Churches ordinarily are, but with a flat Beam, or upper Lintel 
laid on the top of the Poſts, and fo either made an equilateral $quar*, 
or an oblong Square. q As was the form of the Gate of the Temp!? 
in its Iarger, ſo was the Form of the Gate ofthe Ocacle in irs l:ſſer Dir 
menſions. 

22 The altar 7 of wood 5 was three cubits high e,and the 
length thereof two « cubits ; and the corners' x thereol, _ 
the length thereof, and the walls y thereof were of wood; 
and he ſaid unto me, This is * the table z that « before ths | 


LORD «, I 
» Of Incenſe. s Sothe inward Parts were made and covered wit 

Gold, Exod. 3o. 111. 1 Kings 6. 29, 22. and from this Covering 0 

Gold, *twascalled the Go!den Altar. t One Cubic higher than that P 


the Tabernacle of Moſes, Exod. 30. 2. « As long again as Moſer's hy 
rar of Inceaſe in the Tabernacle. x The Horns framed out ww Y 


Weſt-end of the Temple, which was of equal Dimenſions with the 


ſtories ] 


b The 
Templef, 
Lights lo 
i Which 
Building, 
Is, a Call, 
ward th 
eries wer 
Now place, 
Wo rows « 


4 Anc 
breadth 
Oward th 


- » This 1 
ten Cub 
Chambers 
lome C 
aleries pr 
ngrh fron 
UY to walk 


Vol. II 


ap. XLII. EZ E 
made of Wood, but covered with Gold. 
the Tables of Shew-bread, and ſpake of that. 


olies. 


Holy of . 


doors. 


folding Doors, or two leaved Doors. ; ; 
24 And the doors had two leaves 4 piece, two turning 


leaves ; two Jeaves for the one door, and two leaves tor 
the other door. 


the temple e, cherubims f and palm-trees, like as were 


þ the face of the porch without 2. | 

Carved &d The Doors of both Temple and Oracle. e Including 
the Holy of Holies alſo. f Vid. wer. 10. g I ſuppoſe theſe were 
Boards of more than an ordinary Thickneſs, which were faſtned to 
the great Beams, whoſe Ends came out beyond the Wall of the Porch, 
and probably were laid fo, as ro make a part of/an Arch overthe 
Entrance into the Gate, as we ſee over ſome Houſes, and as ſometimes 
under the Balconies ; and here alſo in theſe thicker Planks, 'tis like 
were ſome Ornaments. h Or above the Front of the Porch. z On 
the Court ſide of the Porch, that part that look'd outward. 

26 And there were narrow & windows and palmtrees / 
on the one 2 ſide and on the other ſide, on the ſides of 
che porch, and pon the ſide-chambers of » the houſe, 


and thick planks 0. 

þ Vid. wer. 16. let. =. 1 See wer. 18. let. f. m On the North, and 
on the South ſide, as you enter in from Eaſt toward the Weſt; thus 
the ſides of the Porch outward were garniſhed. » Which were 30 1n 
2 row, and three Stories high, vid. wer. 6. o Alike carved and 
beautified, and alike ftrengthening, and defending the places where 
they wereuſed, 0 


CHAP. XLII.. 


A deſcription of the court with the chambers, 1 12. the uſe of them for 
the prirft and the holy things, 13----18. the meaſure of the out ward conrt, 
ly, 20. 


1 "T"Hen a he brought me forth into the utter 5 court, the 

way toward the north c, and he brought me 

into the charaber 4 that was over againſt the ſeparate z 

place, and which vas before the building toward the 
north f. - 

s Aﬀer a particular view of the Temple, and all its parts, with 


the inmoſt Court, and all in ir, the Prophet is brought forth. 5 Cal. 
kd fo, in regard to that more inward, whence the Prophet now 


nd cometh ; it is likely, if not certain, this was the Prieſts Court, which 
{ly had two others more outward, but becauſe the Prophet had been in 
cle one more inward than that of the Prieſts, he giveth the Name of 

outer to this Court. c Through the North Gate by which he de. 
20 ſcended into the Court, where the Stair-caſe was by which he went 


he up into the Chambers built over the Pylaſters, and Arches, ſo that 
| | Underneath was a Cloyſter or Gallery. 4 Either the ſingular Number 


Ine * fortheplural, or Chamber for the row of Chambers, or elſe into one 
of the many that were there. e Whether you take it for the Tem- 
et | ple it ſelf, or for that Building: equal to the Temple, on the Well 
oth | partof the Temple, ſtill this row of Chambers faced the North part 
ng + of ir. f The South Front of this Range of Chambers Ilook'd to the 
ule | North Front of che Temple, and it's that fide-Buildings, or to the 
| North Front of the ſeparate place. 
ne” Wi” 2 Before the length g of an hundred cubits was the 
ts WF north-door, and the breadth was fifty cubits. | 
| g The Temple of one hundred Cubits long and fifty broad, was 
; 2 | on the South Proſpett of theſe Chambers, or poſſibly this North 
"ch | Door did give Entrance into Buildings that were one hundred Cubits 
hs | long, and fifty Cubits broad. 
racie 


| 3 Over againſt the twenty bits þ which ere for the 
Inner court, and over againſt the pavement # which was 


for the utter court, was gallery againſt gallery & in three 
ſories I, 


hb The twenty Cubits ſpace of the inner Court, or Court of the- 
Templefaced the Sourth-EFront of this row of Chambers; their Southern 
Lights lookd into this ſpace, and to the North of the Temple. 
i Which was in the Prieſts Court, and on the North-ſide of this 
Building, into which Pavement the North Windows look'd. & That 
5, a Gallery on the South part toward the inner Court, and a Gallery 
toward the Pavement Northward, and between the backsof theſe Gal- 
keries were Chambers. 7 Either in height, or elſe in three Ranks, as 
now placed, two Galleries on the ſides, and a Chamber in midſt ; or 
wo rows of Chambers, and one long Gallery in the middle, 


4 And before the chambers 2 as a walk of ten cubits 
readth inward, a way # of one” cubit, and their doors 
toward the north 9. 


m This row of Chambers had on the South-ſide or inward a Walk 
of ten Cubirs broad, which lay between the Wall on which theſe 
Chambers were built, and the twenty Cubir ſpace, poſſibly it mighr 

lome Cloiſter running along the Wall on the inſide. » Before the 

aleries probably was a Led ge of one cubit broad, running the whole 
*ngth from Eaſt to Weſt, called herea Way, thonot deſigned fo, 


23 And the temple and the ſanctuary had two 4 


25 And there were made c on them 4, on the doors of 


made upon the walls; and here ere thick planks g upon | p 


KTE L. 


5 Now the upper chambers ere ſhorter p: for the 
galleries q {| were higher than theſe, } than the lower |; Or, 1:2 
eas of tri, 

p At firſt view ir ſhould ſeem to refer to the length, but indeed ir rin 
refers to the height of the Chambers, of whichthe loweſt Charaber *** ©%- 
was higheſt pirch'd from the Floor to the Cieling, the ſecond lower 5: 
pirchd rhan the firſt, yet of greater height than the uppermoſt be- conſiſted 


lower than the middle or loweſt according to Rule of Archite&yre. 
which directs that the upper Rooms take not up ſo much in their 
height as the lower, that the Weight of the Timber be not too heavy 
for the Walls. 

6 For they were in three r ſtories, but had net pillars as 
the pillars s of the courts : therefore rhe building £ was 
raitned « more than the loweſt, and the middlemoſt 
from the ground. 

r Built high one over another. «5 So thick and ſtrong as thoſe were, 
bur of the ſlenderer and weaker make. # The highctt Room of the 
Building « was laid at nearer diſtance than the middlemoſt from the 
loweſt, or than the Roof of the loweſt from the Ground. 

7 And the wall x that 2vas without over apainſt the 
chambers y, toward the outward court & on the fore part 
of the chambers, the length thereof as fifty cubitsb. 

x Not of the Chambers, but ſome Wall at diſtance from them - 
perhaps ſome Wall that might keep up a Terra(s-Walk. ; Therefore 
was Northward from the Chambers. z The Courr of the Men, or of . 
Iſrael, which is called utter with reſpe& to this, wherein this Building | 
ſtood, as this was called utter, wer. 1, and 3. with reſpe&t to the Courr 
that was more inward. a Which evidently ſhews, that the Wall of 
fifry Cubirs ſtood North from theſe Chambers. 5 Anſwerable to the 
length of this Building from Eaſt to Weſt. 


8 For thelength of the chambers that were in the utter 

c court as fifty Cubits : and lo 4, before the temple wer: 

an hundred cubits. | 

This Verſe gives us a Reaſon why the Wall over againſt the Cham. 

bers was but fifry Cubits, it might not be more or leſs, becaul: 'twas 

ro hold exa&t ſymmetry with theſe Buildings which ir confromed. 

Poſſibly this Verſe may give ſome light ro the ſecond Verſe latter part. 

c See wer. 1. let. 6b. and wer, 7. let. z. d. Some ſay the Angel, con- 

dufting the Prophet from theſe North Chambers © the Souch, hit! 

occaſion given him to takenotice of, and ro meaſure a ſecond time this 

ſpace before the Temple; bur what if the Angel and the Prophet 

were now on the Roof of this fifry Cubirs Building, as they ſ-em to 

be wer, 5. meaſuring it, and thence the Angel might point to che 

hundred Cubirſpace before the Temple, and bid the Prophet ro mind 

it? The former moſt received, ſutes beſt with the 11:h and 2:45 Verſes. 

os And || from under theſe chambers was || the entry || Or, from 
on the ealt-ſide {| as one goeth into them from the utter t>* place. 
coure, I! DT, 122 

I ſuppoſe this Verſe deſcribes the Entrance into the South Cham. **** 

bers, that it was on the Eaſt-point, and that whoſo would go into brought _ 
them muſt go up the Stairs (which probably were windiag Stairs) at | Or, as he 
the Eaſt-end of theſe Buildings, whoſe Front was towardsthe South, ©*”** 

109 The chambers, e were in the thickneſs F of the wall 

of the court toward the ealt, over againlt the ſeparare 

place g, and over againſt the buiiding -. 

e Galleries alſo with them of this South building now meaſured. 

f Orthe breadth of that Wall of the Court which was Eaſtward, and as 

an encloſure of the Building. g Which was Weſt iron this Building, 


whoſe length lay North and South, and irs breadrh Eaſt and Weſt ; 
what this ſeparate place may be, vid. wer. I. kt. e. þ Vid. wer. 1. ler. 7, 


1: And the way # before them was like the appearance 
of the chambers which were*toward the north, as long 
as they, .and as broad as they; and all their goings / our 
were both according to thelr faſhions »», and according to 
their doors ». 

i The Walk, as wer. 4. k ExaQtly uniform with the Fabrick on tho 
North-ſide. / Every Window and Door. » Framed in the fame 
manner. » According to the number of the Doors in the one, was 
the number of the other, all in all things exactly like. 


12 And according to the doors of the chambers that 
were toward the ſouth, was. a door in the head of the. way; 
even the way directly betore the wall coward the eaſt, as 
one entreth into them. 

This Verſe is a particular Deſcription of the Door and Way, that 
from the Eaſt-end of this South Building did lead either under the 
Buildings, or through ſome part of them toward the Weſt-poinr, as 
before ; ſuch a Way from the North-Buildings did Jead to the South, 
nor do I think neceffary to ſpeak more of the words. 


12 T Then ſaid he » unto me, The north chambers an 
the 7 ta. dome which are before the ſeparatep place, 
they be holy 9 chambers, where the prieſts r hat ap- 
proach s unto the LORD ſhall eat * che moſt holy things : 
there ſhall they Jay the moſt holy things «, and the meat- 
offering x, and the ſin-offering y, and che treſpaſs-offer- 
ing z; for the place z holy. . 
o The Meaſurer, Chriſt, Man in appearance at that time. þ Vid. 


ver. I. let. e. q St apart, conſecrated ro holy Services and Ulzs, as 
Veſſels, Garments, and Days may be holy. » And Levires too, that 


my " wk on it, ſuch Ledges we ſee in many great Houſes. o Eve. 
ol, IT 


were then in waiting according tortheir courſes; for this Approach 
CE] 15 


- 


Chap, XLIT 


A he top of the Altar. y The ſides of this |ry Chamber.door opzned to the North, and ſo the Entrance into thei: 
ſour Poſts at each Angle on t | Ch 1512 
- Wax 11 fides,are here called the Walls rhereo ambers was through the Gallery which looked to the Pavement of 
Altar, for it wasmage up on 5 z Some ſay 'tis ſpoken | the outer Courr. 7 , p IO 


inted him t 
of this Altar of Incenſe, others fay, the Arg Poke fk , 


: \ or Holy of Holies ; this Incenſe-Altar was placed , yet 
ay Se ty ns. Me from the Prieſts offering Incenſe at it and than the middlemolt of the building. 
by courſes, whereas none but the High-Prieſt might cnrer into the 


eween the Floor and Cieling. q Poſſibly there might be over the up- of. 
þ Fach had one Door, ſo there were- two Doors, and they were |permoſt Chumbers a flat Roof on which as on a Gallery, they mighr er and the 
walk from one end to another, and therefore thar Floor was much 25: 


> crete AA Dn 


PG - 
to. Sade - 2 REED oe. Ad 

4 MISETE: £5% 
ge) 1 In -_ _ 


—_— ds" OE 
IE RRxCYTTIRTY I. 
WS 


_- 


ati Snort 
l _- 


a» W's; * 
nd . CE ITISS: 
—>—»— on... = 
nd OE: "oxen ware BER, 1 
CSS " Pe Lox 
—tENETCIOD TY oor HERE 
PY aut. - - = "a 
. pea" 
_ 
m Ho > « 
» % pe 


: * 
di . +2 
: 2% 


Wag oc 0 v2 L aac tw 34 ——_ 
- 4 : - » - 3 
_ wo" 4 - . Nas ous out A 
"OI %g7 by rn.) > ©: = 3 _—_—_ " SIE.al was 
a l -- a . - = _ =_ - o 4 
pon trmge > p 6 AEGNSES 4 
<FIES % 


_- 
10 = 


Y g ———N _ ge. oo a & Jar 2 Cx 
Us y.4 4 Soho Wd _ . - — g A IT = 
- 1 nn , ” ” V3 cl . ” [, OP ” - 
Pr "mu te eeepitine —_ ED. ot I 2 : _ vr p - Ac wh <A a n " _ 
_ : S 4+ + Fae LI TY , 
* TOY" AIR in rnd wor Fo ears LIE OY #4 
ide ago Wh r £ b - « 4 
+ "9D —"— 4A 7s By - ” Gl wb 
, ; 't Jo Sg 2259s = 


Zhap, XLIV. 


+ Heb. #7 jt, and they ſhall + conſecrate themſelves. 
theirhand;. 


Or, 
i bank-offce gOD. | , | 
YIgs. a When you have on every Day of theſe ſeven <f-r'd the Sacrifices, 


ee goats without blemiſh # for a ſin-offecing &, and they 
7 ſhall cleanſe the altar 1, as they did cleanſe i with the 
—_—  :].. Þ =” 

þ The next Day's Sacrifice 1s here dire&ed. « This wes a Qualifi- 
cation required in all Sacrifices, and there were Prieſts appointed co 
ſearch whether they were perfe&, in which Search they were very 
pun&ual and curious, & Vid. wer. 19. let. «. / The Prieſts in Atten- 
dance or Courſe. m See wer. 20. let. c. = With the Blood ofthe Kid 
put upon the Altar, as appointed, and as the Blood of the Bullock, 
TT. 20. Jet. z. 


23 Whenthon haſt made an end o of cleanfing , thou the common RefeQory, as appears, c/.-42. v. 13, let. s. 


ſhalt offer p ayoung bullock without blemiih, and a ram 
7 out of the flock without blemiſh, 

o Of the firſt and ſecond Days Sacrifices, and cleznfing the Atrar. 
p Onthe third Day, and ſoon, through ſeven Diys. 9 ARid,v. 22. 
naw a Ram, beth, or either, as God appoints ; There was no inherent 
Excellency in either one or other to commend them to God, bur a 
Male, and withour Blemiſh it muſt be. 


24 And thou ſhalt » offer them before « the LORD, 
and the prieſts ſhall caſt ſalt * upon them, and they 
:: ſhall offer them up for a burnt-offering unto the 


LORD. 
» Dire& them to offer. » Not only to the Lord, bat before the 


AEEKITEST, 
*: a 2 \ . C oy q 
FH, :5 | 4 E +, 


22 And on the ſecond h day thou ſhalt offer a'kid of| the way of the porch of that gate, and ſhall 29 Gut by 


— 


Chap. X11 


| 


54 


the way of the ſame. 

& For the King, ſay ſome ; if fo, then theDoor ſhut was the D 
not of cbe Temple, but of the Eaſt-Gate of the Prieſts Court wag 
High-Prieſt, and the ſecond Prieſt, ſay others, and indeed thi = 
likely. 7 The King might'lit before the Lord, others might = yo 
the Prieſts ſtood rainiſtring, as Hcby. 10. 17, Perhaps the Hj bh Þ me 
might have ſoine Privilege to fit when others might nor. m Te rs 
ſtood. of the King, *twas his eating of the Sacrifice,that pazt of it —_— 
was allowed to the Offerer ; if this Prince be the High Prieſt <_ 
Bread was the Shew-bread, which it ſeems he'mighr ſir and eat; _y 
near tae Porch of the Gate, whereas other Prieſts wers bound ro —_ 
"ap i bs " 
cts his Privilege, or he hal, that is; 'tis his Duty to enter = tho! 
and to come out at it, that the People may know which way to | | 
when they would ſee their High Prieſt enter to make Atonement; wh: 
may be myſtical, and inctude our looking to the great High Prift "= 


4 J Then 0 brought he p me the way 9 of the 
gate betore the houſe ; and I looked, and behold Re 


glory 5 of the LORD filled the houſe of the LORD, ang" 
E te!l * upon my face. "20 
9 When he had been informed of the Reaſon why the Eaſt-Gate wW 
ſhut, an4 when he perceived he muſt not go out thereby. P Thea » 
ge), or Chriſt in the Appearance of Man. 9g To the North. gate g 
the inner Cour:;, wh«©nce he had a Proſpe&t of the Temple, though ws. 


Lord, 2. e. before the Temple, fo the Altar ſtood where the Burnt- 
Offering was to be offered. #t So the Law, Lev. 2. 13. expreſfly re- | 
quired,and the Prieſts ſalted every Sacrifice made by Fire three times, 
thev ſay in the Salt-Chamber, at the bottom of che Altar,and when the 
Sacrifice was on the Altar. It may allude to the Perpetuity ofthe Co. 
venant thus made by Sacrifice, and ſalted ; as Numb. 18. 19. and 
2 Chron. 13 5. u The Prieſts. 

25 Seven days ſhalt thou prepare every day x a goat for 
a ſin-oftering: they ſhall alſo prepare a young bullock, and 
a ram out of the flock without blemiſh. 

x By this it appears, that there were ſeven Days appointed for con- 
ſeerating Altar and Prieſts, and that either theſe three Sacrifices were 
every Day of the ſeven offer:d up, and their Biood ſprinkled on che 
Aitar, or at leaftthe young Bullock every Day, and one Goat, or one 
Ram with it ; theword here is copulative, bur poſſibly the Senſe dif 
junRive; for ſo this Particle is often uſed. 

26 Sevendays ſhall they y purge » the altar and purily 

3 The Prieſts in courſe. ziThe ſame with whar isfaid ofthe Prieſts, 
they and the Altar were thus conſecrated and dedicated unto God , to 
be his 1n peculiar manner. ; ; 

27 And when theſe days are expired a, it ſhall be that 
1 pon the eighth b day and fo forward, the prieſts ſhall 
n:;ake your burnt offerings c upon the altar 4, and your 
|| peace offerings ez and I will accept f you, faith the Lord 


as appointed, and for the Ends mentioned. b Which begins anew 
Week, and 'tis probable the firſt of theſe ſeven Days for Sacrifice 
might be the Sabbath, and end on our Friday ; however, the firſt 
Week isſpent in ſolemn Conſecrationof Altar and Prieſts ; all Weeks 
after are to have, day by day, the uſual appointed Sacrifices. c Which 
were Sacrifices expiarory, and for Aronement of Sin, 4 Of Burnt- 
Offring, the grear Brazen Altar deſcribed in this Chapter, v-r.13,14, 
15, 16, 17. e Sacrificesof Praiſe and Thankſgiving unto God for kis 
Goodneſs. f Be well pleaſed with your Perſons, pardon your Sins, 
ſmell a {avour of Reſt in your Thankſgiving, 3nd own you with ſignal 
Tokens of my Favour and Kindneſs : I will ſhew my good Will, and 
delight in you. 


CHAP. XLIV. 


The uſe of thee eaſt-gate for the prince, 1 3. God commandeth the pre- 
phes to reprove the people for chuſing ido!atrous prieſts to miniſter before 
bm, 4 14. The children of Zadock ſettled and infirufted in the 
mmiſlry; and thiir maintenance aſſured, 15 —— 31. 


I Hen &@ he-brought m2 back 5 the way of the gate 
of the outward fanfuary which looketh toward 


the eaſt, and it was ſhutc. 

a When the Altar was meaſured, and Dire&ions given for conſe- 
ccating ir ar firſt, and for the perpetual Uſe of ir for tuture. 5 From 
the inner Court, where he had been viewing the Alcar to the outer 
part of the ſame Court, and to the Eaſt-Gate thereof: Others ſay, 'twas 
to the Temple Gate Eaftward, and that the Temple is called outward 
Sau7usry, in reſpett of the Holy of Holies. c When, or by Whom 
the Propher ſays fior, but he found it ſhur. ; 

2 Then 4 ſaid the LORD eunto me, This gate ſhall 
be ſhut, it ſhall not be opened f, and no man g ſhall en- 
ter in by it; becauſe the LORD the God of Ltrael hath en- 


tered in by it, therefore it ſhall be ſhut z. 

d Likely the Prophet was ſurpriſed ſomewhat, and wonder'd that 
the Door ſhould be fhut; and while he muſeth on it, e The Lord 
ſpeaks ro him outofthe Temple, and informs him, and ſarisfieth him. 
# 7.e. Shall not ordinarly ſtand open, bur be ſhur till occaſion requires 
it ſhould fomerimes be opened. g None of the common ordinary ſort 
of Peopie; or none bur the Prince, God's Vicegerent, and the mini- 
ftring Prieſts. þ What wasthe Glory of the God of Iſrael, chap. 43. 


7. 6. gaveEvidence of a more than ordinary Preſence chere. #; Either 
kept ſhut with Bars, or by a Prohibition, be as if 'twere ſhut, char 
none ſhould enter thereby. 

3 & # for the prince &: the prince, he ſhall fic 7 in 
i tocat bread w before the LORD ; he ſhall » enter by 


{rom your Pra&tices, or complying with your Superſtitious and Idols 
trous Inventions. 


things : but ye have ſet keepers o of my || charge in ny 
ſanctuary for your ſelves. L 


exa&t keeping of my Holy Things, Houſe Sacrifices and Worſhip.* 


rogates, and Curats, to look to the Gates, and theſe have let m tit 
profane and unclean. Your Pride, or Covetouſneſs, or Lazineſs, hit 
raken you off from your Duty and your Charge: or you have, as jy! 
ſaw good, conſecrated Perſons, whether fit or unfit, whether approve 
or not approved by me ; ſo you have profaned my Name, and vioiztt 
my Law, Numb. 18. 4. 


cumciſed 7 heart, nor uncircumeiſed in fleſh, ihall _ 
wr. 2. ts here the Lord God of Iſracl, thatGlory was the viſible Sign of | into my fancuar of any ſtranger that # among © 
his Preſence. His Glory is himſelf, and where thar entred, he entred, of Iſrael. Ys Y S : 


wicked and Heathens to enter his SanQuary. None, of what Quali- 
ty ſvever, what Intereſt ſoever they make, though Princes, No 
Learned, Travellers, that come to view Nations, and the Rarities? 


Door to it on that Side. r Through the Windows of the TÞ 

oor 1 7 R emple 
Uid difcern that Brightneſs and Luſtre which filled the Temple. my 
- 4 v. 28, lt. i,k, {,m, and ch. 43-V. 2. let.c, 7 Yid. ch. i. y F 
er. /. 2 


5 And the LORD faid unto me, Son of man, + markit 
well, and bchold with thine eyes, and hear with thine m__ | 
all that I ſay unto thee concerninng all the ordinance, , ; 
of the houſe of the LORD, and all the laws thereof and h 
mark well x the entring in ofthe houſe, with every goin | 
torth of the ſanctuary z. : . 

The whole of the firſt part of this Verſe is ch. 40. v. 4. where 's 4 
explained. « The preſcribed Rules for Perſons and Things in a | b 
about the Temple, Theſe Ordinances are called Laws in this Verſe, BY 

£ 


x Set thy Mind that thou mayſt comprehend them all. } Not <6 
much the Gares and Porches, through which the Entrance is to the _ 
Houſe, as the Perſons who may, and who may not enter. z Take _ 
here largely for the Holy Courts, ratherthan for the Houſe it ſelf, = 

6s And thou ſhalt fay to the rebellious 2, ever to the Þ _ + 
houſe of Iſrael, Thus faith the Lord GOD, O ye houſs oh 
of lrael, let it ſufhce b you of all your abominations, 

4 Vid. chap.2. wer. 3. let f. and wer. 6, 7, 8. afthat third Chapter 
6 Let the Time you have ſpent on your Sins, your many great Sin 
and Abominations, let them be thought enough, nay too much, az 
I Pet. 4. 3. do ſono more. | 


7 In that ye have brought c into my ſanttuary F tran! 17 
gers 4* uncircumciſed in heart e, and uncircumciſed in WW fhippe 
fleſh f, to bein my ſanctuary to polkate it, ever my houſe," Ws me, 
when ye offer my bread g, the fat < and the blood 3; and: any : 
they & have broken my covenanc /, becauſe of all yourn "ung 
abominations. the H 

c Either by abuſing your Power you have licenſed, or by conniving 5. ler. 
you have permitted tocome into my Holy Courts, 4 Foreigners and cap, 1 
Heathen, who had their Idols in the very Courts of the Temple, and 
there worſhipped their Idols, as ch. 8. v. 5, 10,14,16, e The we 13 
of them, profane and impious. f No uncircumciſed one ſhould com? the of 
into the Court of che People, but you have brought them into the ve. 'of my 
ry SanQuary at the times of publick Worſhip, and when you have 'bear r 
been offering my Bread, &c. Some think that the profane Careleſ hay 
neſs ofthe Jewiſh Rulers was ſuch, they ſuffered uncircumciſed ons Þ © EY 
fo be Prieſts among them, and to approach to God's Altar; this done Þ | * Th 
in Solomwon;*s degenerate Days, and in the Days of Ahaz, Manaſſeh, Amt g9"0P Ne 
£ Either che Meat-offering, or firſt-Fruits of Corn and Dough, and = th 
the Shew-bread. þ Which was taken off the Sacrifices and hurnt. op 
: How let out, received into Veſlels, ſprinkled and poured out; the Þ * mens 


thens have given them Courage to ask, and you have not Zeal and 
urage eriough to refuſe them, but you have ſatisfied their forbidden 
urioſity, and ſhewed them all theſe things; or, as was ſaid, havt \hereof 
advanced ſome to be Pricits in my Houſe, and ſuffered others to be Þ © ge 
Prieſts of Idols ſtanding, and worſhipp'd in my Courts. & The whok Þ | 14 
Nation of the Jews, the People of the Land. ! Turr'd Idolaters, + 1 
mix'd with Heathens, forſaken meand my Law. »» Taking Example 


Prieſtsand Rulers of my Houſe, through a ſinful Familiarity with Het Fig 


And ye have not kept » the charge of mine holy 


» You have not obſerved the Laws I gave you for the careful and 


0 You have ſubſtituted others in your rooms, made Officials, and Sur- 


+ o 
9 T Thus faith the Lord GOD, No ftranger un 


Now God renews his former Law againſt the permitting of the 


bies, 


chem : None of theſe, or ſuch like, ſhall on any celour of rw” 


rough 


W::7. XLIV. 


£ 43.-oks into my San&yary. Perhaps Solomon ſhew'd Sheba's Queen | 
"at pps Dora : ſhewed the Ambafadors too much, 


- "GR 
+4 
I 


ach, we are ſure Hezekiab 

= _ cad not that either of them ſhew'd the Santtuary. 
io And the Levites p that are gone away 
me, when Iſrael r went aſtray, which went aſtray away 


fom me after their Idols, they ſhall even bear s their ini- 
Teri intended here, and indeed the Sons, or Poſterity of them 
25 here intended ; for this Apoſtacy among them was elder than the 
eldeſt of them all, q Tdolaters go far from God, for they depart as 
an Adulterous Wife from her Flusband, their Hearts and AﬀSionsare 
far from God, they fell ro heatheniſh Iiolarry. » It may be worth our: 
while to enquire what time, or near what time this was, I doubt Baal- 
Por, Numb. 25. or from Solotzors time, when there was ſomewhat of 
this Sin among the Prieſts. But of Rehoboam's Time 'ris ſaid 2 Chron. 
12. 1. All rae! forfook the Law of the Lord. And in | Hhaz his 
Time, when the Altar at Damaſcus ſo pleas'd him, andche High-Prieſt 
 Ytriah, that preſently an Altar like that ismade and ſer up between 
© God's Houſe and Altar; and Orders, or in our Language Injunttions, 
FP” from the King to the High-Prieſt, and from him to the1aferior Prieſts 
I and Levites, who obey, 2 King. 16. 16. and Manaſſeh carried the Apo- 
ftacy higher. Now account from any of theſe, from the laſt of them 
co the firſt return out of Captivity,is 114 Years, to which we muſt add; 
the 25 Years, which each Prieſt muſt be e're they enter the Prieſts 
Office, *cwill amount to 139 Years, and to theſe add 44 e'rethis Tem- 
ple was repair'd, "twill be 183 Years, too great an Age forany of the 
Prieſts to be of ; therefore, as I ſaid, the Prieſts that are now degraded, 
are the Childrenof thoſe Apoſtare Prieſts who were (as Zech. i. 5,6. 
faid of the Fathers) dead. s Shall bear the Puniſhment of this their 
> Apoſtacy, bedebaſed ro meaneſt Services, ſubje&ed ro others, and be 
deprived tor ever miniſtring atthe Altar. So 2 King. 23. 8,9. andfo 


ars God executed his Threat againſt Z/i's Houſe, 1 Sam. 2+ 13. | 
5 u 11 Yet they ſhall be miniſters : in my ſanctuary s, 
nd i #aving charge at the gates x of the houſe , and miniltring 
n! + to the houſe : they ſhall ſlay z the burnt-offering, and 
the ſacritice a for the people, and they ſhall ſtand before 
"rs b them to miniſter unto them c ; 
and : Servants, employ'd in the loweſt and leaft honourable Work. « Not 
cle, if the Temple it ſelf, but about the Courts of it. x Shall be Porters to 
to open and ſhut, and ſweep, and ready to go on Errands. y Probably 
| the may learn the Arts of Maſon or Smith to mend and repair, to fetch 
aken Wood and Water with 7ebuſites. x Do that ſervile Work tor the ſacri- 


d ticing Prieſt, + a All the Sacrifices the People bring. Heb. expreſſion 
| of Servants attendance. c To wait and obey the Prieſts. | 


| T2 Becauſe they miniſtred 4 unto chem before their 
% . idols, and -| cauſed e the honſe of Iſrael to fall into 
lg iniquity 3 therefore have I life up mine f hand againſt 
ff: chem, faith the Lord GOD, and they ſhall bear their 
yp; iniquity g. 

{ 4 Add as Prieſts to Idols, and in the Name of idolatrous Wor- 
ſhippers ſacrificed ro the Idols. e Were firſt occaſion of Fall ro 
ſome, when their Example was follow'd; and in after-times they 
E ſeduced, perſwaded and urged them to ſerve their Idols, and ſacrifice 
” tw them, for this was the Gain of the Idol-Prieſts. f Sworn againſt 


z0uſe," 
* and? 


ours WF them that they ſhall ſuffer for this their Iniquity. This lifting up 

the Hand 1s the Form of an Oath, Exo4. 6.8. Deut. 32. 40. thap. 20. 
nivins WW 5; !Ef: 7- g The Puniſhment of this Sin, fo 'ris chap. 14. 10. and 
rs and WW £92: 18. 19, 20- and 23. 35, 49. 


le, and 13 And they ſhall not come near & unto me to do 
Al | .the office of a prieſt unto me, nor to come near zto any 
there. | of my holy things, in the moſt holy place : but they ſhall 
zu have © bear their ſhame &, and their abominations / which they 
Carele: Þ have committed. © | 

ed ons Þ * þ They ſhall never be admitted to the Office, nor employ'd in the 
his don ® {proper Workof a Prieſt, that miniſters to me. # They ſhall nor come 


21,4" F- into the Temple, much leſs into the Oracle, nor have any part in 
igh, anl Þ {the offering up of Sarrifices on the Altar, tho* they have Meat, Drink 
1d butt. ® Jand Lodging about the Temple, yet as diſcarded Servants, that are 
out; the retained, leſt they ſtarve. k They ſhall be little regarded, but 
rich He Þ {diſeſteemed and put to Shame, and this ſhall be part of their Pu- 
Zeal and aniſhment, 1 They ſhall be dealt with according to their Abominarti- 
orbidden Þ ons, 7. e. their Apoſtacy and Idolatry, and bear the puniſhment 
aid, _— thereof, 

tov” . 
he whott | 14 But I will make them keepers »2 of the charge of 
1dolater, | #he houſe for all the ſervice thereof, and for all that 
; Example W 2Jhall be done therein. 
and Idols Bp? ;, Vid. ver. 11, let. 5, #, », 2. 45 
- holy i. "5 T Burt the prieſts » the Levites os, the * ſons of 
ne Zadok p, that kept the ch f-my fanQuary, v 
« in mj(8;,240K. 7, that Kept the charge q ol my Janctuary, when 
Wee children of Ifrael went aſtray r from me, they ſhall 


arefut anlEOme near 5 to me to. miniſter unto me, and they ſhall 


| Worlbip*P'and before me to offer unto me the fat ; and the blood, 
1s, and Su- WWatth the Lord GOD. | | 

let im "So called from their Office. o By deſcent frorm Levt, Focob's 
zineſs, 13% BO. » Who was of Eliazer's Family, to whoſe Father Phineas a 
we, as 0 , wvenant of Salt enſur'd the High-Priefthood, and all the Honour, 
2r approve nilges and Advantages thereof, Numb. 25. 12, 13: 4 Were 


nd violated onſtanc, zealous and faithful in their Prieſtly Office, and their Du-{ 


1 1t. 7 This may poſſibly refer to that Tranſgreſſion in the 
Aatter of Baal-Peor, of which Num. 25. 3. and Pſal. 106. 28, 29. | 
30. Vid. wer. 10. let. r. 5s Vid, chap. 40. 46. 7 To offer expiato- 
y Sacrifices, to make Atonement, and intercede for the People, this 
Mour God put upon thein for their Integrity and Conſtancy in the 


far 9 from 


 % The High Prieſt and the cther Prieſts fhall have Right and Li- 

erty of entring. & Both to the Altar, to the Temple, and the 
High Prieſt into the Holy of Holies. y To ſet the Shew-bread on, 
and to take it off. z To offer Sacrifice at the Altar, and Incenſe in 
the Houſe ; this the Prieſts did in their Courſe, and of this Line, the 
' High Prieft 2lone once a Year in the Day.of Expiation, went in 

» miniſter to the Lord in the Holy of Holies. a See wer. 8. 
ef. 3. © 


17 T And it ſhall come to paſs, that when they en- 


jfer5 in at the gates of the inner court c, * they ſhall be t Exod. 


clothed with linen 4 garments, and no wool e ſhall come 39- *®- 
upon them, whiles they miniſter in the gates of the inner 

court f, and within g. :, 
6 They muſt put on their prieſtly Garments in the Chambers, that 
are appointed for Veſtries ro them, where they pur off the Garmenrs 
when the Service. was done, and whererhey put them on when thy 
approach'd to the Altar, chap. 42. 14. c Where the Altar of Burnt- 
offering ſtood, and where the Temple which is included ſtood. - 4 Ac- 
cording to the Law, Exod. 28. 42, 43. e The reaſon hereof is given 
in the next Verſe. f About the Altar of Burnt-offering. g la the 
Temple it {elf, in every Service of . both. . _ 


1s They ſhall have linen bonnets upon their heads, 1 Or, 2» 

and ſhall have linen breechees upon their loins : they Jreering 

ſhall not gird themſelves || + with any thing that cauſeth places. 
weat. .- | | + Heb. 24 
This Verſe recounts but two Garments of Linen | the Bonner and OT, with 

the Breeches, but Exod. 28. 39. and 1 Sem. 2. 18, 28. and 14. 3./9e 

mention a2 linen Coat or Ephod ; fo that they had three Linen Gar- 

ments, and 2 Girdle of fine twined Linen abour to gird the Coat faſt, 

yet fo as not to make them ſweat or ſmeli offenſively. # 

19 And when they ga forth into the utfer court, 

even 1nto the utter court f to the people, they ſhall put 

off their garments wherein they miniſtred, and lay them 

in the holy chambers, and they ſhall pur on other gar- . 

ments, and they ſhall * not ſanRtifie g the people with "Ch. 46 

their garments. | OM 

Vid. Chap. 42. 14. tot. where this verſe is explained, yet here are 

two things that verſe hath not, of which a Word. f This tells us in 

which Court ſtood the Chambers, wherein the Prieſts did attire rhem- 

ſelves, into which alſo they retic'd, ro unclothe themſelves of the 

Prieſtly Garments. The Chambers were in the Court next to the 

Court of the People, as Chap. 42. 14. let. f, 5. g By the Law com- 

mon things touching holy things became conſecrate, and to be no 

more for common uſe. If the Prieſts conſecrated Clothes touch'd the 

Peoples, rhey muſt part with them, this would be inconvenient ; fo 

ſome. Or leſt the People ſhould think themſelves rhe holier for ſuch 

contaQt, and grow proud of it; ſo others. The Chalice Paraphra; 

frames it to the Jaſt Clauſe of the 14th verſe of the 424 chap. they i 

holy Veſts hall nor intermixt with the People, this would be a pro- 

faning the holy Veſts. Or elſe thus, they ſhall nor come our ro bleſs 

the People in theic Prieſtly Garments, bur having finiſh'd the Sacrifice 


b 


and all belonging thereto, they ſhould change Garments, and intheir 
ordinary Garments come out tothe People, and blcſs them in thar 
Form, Num. 6. 23, 24. 


20 Neither ſhall they ſhave + their heads, nor ſuffer 


their locks to grow long z, they ſhall only poll & their 
heads.  . | 


þ Te was forbidden, Lev. 19. 27. & 21. 5. Hair is givenfor an Or- 


nament, and the Prieſts ſhould not disfigure themſelves, nor imitate 
idolatrous Heathens. # Priding themſelves in it as 4/olom, giving ill 
Example by ſuch exceſs. & When the Hair is grown ſomewhat, they 


ſhall rrim, cut the ends of their Hair, and keep it in moderate Siz: ; 
beſide, long Hair was the token of a Nazarire's Vow, and God would 
have all holy Things and Perſons kept unmix'd,and diſtinguiſh'd from 
other common things. 


21 Neither ſhall any / prieſt drink » wine, when they 
enter ” igto the inner court. 

{ Any one on any pretence. » Or any other ſtrong intoxicating 
Liquor. » When they go either tro trim the Lamps, or ſet the Shew- 
bread in order, or to offer Incenſe in the Temple; or when they goto 
the Altar to offer a Sacrifice, which ſtood in the inner Court; this 
Prohibition you have Lev. 1o. 9. which ſee, and 'twasTto prevent all 
Indecencies in the Service. 


22 * Neither ſhall they take for their Wives a widow, * x &y. x 
or her that is -+ put away : but they ſhall cake maidens of 7. 

the ſeed of the houſe of Iſrael, or a widow -f; that had at Heb. 
pr ieſt before. thruſt forth 


God allowed them to marry, only direQs it be not one of ill fame t. Heb: 
or divorc'd, Lev. 21. 13, 14. nor the Widow of any deceaſed com-/ . 
mon Perſon; yet a Prieſt mighc marry a Prieſt's Widow, but a Virgin P 
rather comrnended to their choice ; and whether Widow or Virgin, 
it muſt not be as Moſes married a Daughter of a figange People, or as 
they did in Bebylon, Exrs, 10. 18, &«. ang poſſibly this of Ezekiel was 
deſign'd as a Rule to dire& Ezra in reforming this Diſorder when 
they came from Babylon; rior were they at liberty to marry any of 
any Tribe, but it muſt be one of their own Tribe too. 


23 And * they ſhall teach o my people: difference be. * Chap: 
eween the holy p and profane, and cauſe them to diſcern 4 22. 26. 
between the unclean and the clean. _ | Mal. 2.7 


o By their place they were bound to inſtruft the People, Lv. 15 
10, 11, thiswas part of their Work to read the Law, expound it, and 
reſolve Queſtions ariling about it. They were to be as Miniſters oughc 
now to be, apt to teach, 1 7. 3. 2. p Whether legally and ceremo- 
nially fo, or morally and really fo, that they might keep the Pcoo's 
from Pollutions, 4 The ſame thing in other Words, only thiskems 
to require Prieſts patient inſtrufting, till the People have teornt 5 
difference unclean and clean. 


ing of the "_ of God. : | WE TE 
what Qui" ih © They ſhall enter « into my ſanctuary x, and they 
ces, Noble, BE Come near to my table y co miniſter £ unto me, and 
e Raritie*' WFGy thall keep my charge 

Prerence © 


broug®* 


24 And * in controverſie 7 they fiiall frand : in 11, 


| 
4 ; 
; bs (67 | 
0 233; 
_ | 4] 
- » (vo? hs 4 
4 G - ” - - . 14 1 : 
» I . . 1 *+5 q 
_ . :; o + 
. 
. . *7 7 q L 
; 3 © 
8 f 
" f7sx 
4 - 
. PF 
y : 
Pp, + 
, 654 E; 
”: oo 
& 


F 
: 
7” $297 £8 .. 


= 
nn imnn—mapen men men _ 
= 


b 243 #-+ - Pn 
re == ——— — — 
. £4 "I" J 


Chap. XLV. 


ment, and they ſhall judge # it according to my judg-| 


EZVERKTE L. 


ments « : and they x ſhall keep my laws and my ſtatiftes 


in all mine aſſemblies y, an 
baths &. 


» In doubts about lawful and unlawfu), in Pretences ef right and 


wrong in all Conteſts. s If the Controverſte be broughrto them, they? 


ſhall hezr and conſider. 7 Shall determine, end the Controverſie, and 
reconcile Parties. u Not as they favour and affe&, or diſaffe&t and 


they ſhall hallow my ſab- 


} 


[ 


hate, bur according to what God hath by his Laws in that behalf di- 


refed. x Prieſts firſt, and People with them. » Publick Congrega- 
tions for worſhipping of God. z With holy Care obſerve the Sab- 
baths as days of holy Work, to be ſpent in ſecret, Family and publick 
Worſhipof God as he requires. 

25 And * they a ſhall come 


* Lev. 21. - 
file themſelves : but c for father or for mother, or for ſon 


T1: 


or for daughter, for brother, or for ſiſter that hath had no|I am apr to chink that 
;1aS to the 500, wer. 2. 


{ Reed, that ſo the whole Content may not ſeem overgrown, for + 
I Reca-Meaſure this Portion contains at leaſt 75 Miles, and a liitlemore 
11n length , but at the Cubit-Meaſure it amounts but to 12 Miles and 


husband, they may defile 4 themſelves. ; 
@ The Prieſts who come near to miniſter before the Lord, 45 Net- 

ther touch nor come into the Room, or attend rhe Funeral of the 
Dead : For this would be a legal and ceremonial Defilement, and it 
is prohibited, Lev. 21. 1. The Jews tell us, that who comes within 
four Cubits of the Dead is defiled, and the Law, tho it determine 
not at what diſtance ſuch are defiled, it dothdetermine that they are 
unclean till evening by touch, or coming near the Carcaſe of any 
but Man; and the Defilement by coming near a dead Man laſted 
7 Days. c The Prieſt was indulged in the Death of ſo near R=laci 
ons, as Lev. 21. 2, 3. Where they are reckon'd up as 1n this Verſe. 
d Mourn for them, touch them, be at their Funerals, and ſhew 
their natural Aﬀe&ions to them. | 

* Num.6. 26 And * after he is cleanſed e, they f ſhall reckon g 

T0. & 19. unto him ſeven days. 

ak £ Aﬀeer thar for ſeven days he hath kept from thedead, by which 
the Jcws accounted a Man was cleanſed; for as Nearneſs did d-file, 
ſo Abſence did cleanſe in this Caſe. f The Prieſts who are about the 
Houſe of God. g Shall appoint ſeven Days more to this defiled Per- 
ſon for his cleanſing b fore ae is admitted into the Santtuary. 

27 And in the day that he goeth + into the ſanqu. 

ary z, unto the inner court, to miniſter k in the ſanctu- 
ary, he ſhall offer his ſin-offering /, ſaith the Lord 


GOD. 

h During the Days of his uncleanneſs he kept out of the Sanftuary ; 
when the Days of purifying are fulfiled, he then may goin. # Not 
the Temple it felt, but as the next Words haveir, the inner Courr. 
& To execute the Prieſts Office, 1*Tis not faid what this ſhould be, 
nor doth that Lev. 6. 21. refer to this. I think rather that Lev. 4. 3. 
a young Bullock wzs to be this Sin-offering in purifying as it was 1n 
conſecrating him, chap. 43. 19. 

28 And it » ſhall be unto them for an inheritance » : 
I * 277 their inheritance o : and ye ſhall give them no poſ- 


ſeffion p in Iſrael ; I am their poſleflion 9. 


*Num. 18. 
20. Deur. 
Io. 9. & 
88. 1,2 
Joſh. 13. 
I4, 33- 


caſion of repeating the proviſion made for the Prieſts, for under this 
require a defil'd Prieſt to bring his Sin-offering, in which the mi. 
niſtricg Prieſts had their ſhare, he would expeG the ſame of all 1/- 
rael, which would amount to a great Sum. » Inſtead of Lands and 
Cities. o God is the Inheritance of all his People, but eſpecially of 
bis Pricſts, and ſo what is given to God by him is afſign'd ro his 
Officers. p As the reſt of the Tribes had. 9 The peculiar Bleſſing 
of God on them, and their ſhare in his Offerings was a very rich 
Poſiefſion. : 

29 They ſhall eat the meat offering r, and the ſIn-offer. 
ing, and the treſpaſs.offering; and every || dedicate thing 
5 in Iſrael ſhall be theirs. 

7 We muſt not think that the whole of theſe were eat, God had 
his Part, and the Prieſt his Part too; ſomewhat of each came to 
the Prieſt. s As the firſt Fruits and Tithes, &c. the Prieſt had 
part of them. 


Orc; 32 And the }* firſt # of all the firſt-fruits of all :hings, 
r,cnief. 4 Fo F * 
* Exod.zz and every oblation # of all of every fort x of your ob- 
2. & 22, lations ſhall be the prieſts : ye * ſhall alſo give unto the 
29, 30. prieſt the firſt of your dough y, that he may cauſe the 
m—_— p, blefling to reſt in thine houle. 
oo ; z So ſoon as the firſt Fruits are ripe in the Field, your Vineyards 
Þ and Olive-yards, &c. nay Redemption-money for the Firſt-born of 
Man was theirs. « Whether Free-will Offering, or preſcribed, 
x Of what ſort ſoever, whether of Flock or Herd, &c. »y Tis con- 
ceived this was of every Maſs of Dough they made, andof the firſt 
of the Dough, which every Year they firſt made of the new Corn, as 
by the Cuſtom of the Jews at this Day appears; who ſincethey can- 
not give to the Prieſt, will burn a lirtle Cake of every Batch in the 
Oven. = The Prieſt may bleſs and pray for thee. 


01 Theprieſts ſhall not eat of any thing that is dead of 
it ſelf or torn, whether it be fowl or beaſt. 


This forbidden toall the Jews, much more to the Prieſts, Exod. 22. 
31. and Lev. 22, 8. 


T, ace 
VR 7 


2. 
um.I5. 
20 Neh. 


30. 37. 


CHAP. XLV. 


Certain portion of Iand ſeparated for the ſanftuary, prieſts and Levites ; for 
the city and the prince, 16. Ordinances concerning manifold offerings for 
the people and the prince, 17—25, 


Heb. Tt A ff Oreover, when ye a Þ+ ſhall divide by lot 5 
I the M the land c for inheritance, ye ſhall * offer an 
landto fall.gblation 4 unto the LORD, Þ an holy e portion of the 
— 4+land : the length ſpall be the length of five and twenty 
+ Heb. 5}. thouſand reeds .f, and the breadth {7/7 be ten thou- 


$1njs. 


} 


b at no dead perſon to de- 


ſand g : this ſhall be holy < in all the borders thereof 


round about. & 

2 Ye returned Jews reſtor'd to your own Land. 4 It was not on the 
Return divided by Lot, as 'rwas by Joſhua, but Lot and Inheritaiice 
are the ſame many times in the Scripture, and the Expreſſion alludes 
to the uſual way of aſſigning Inheritances. c Landof Canaay. 7 A; 
'ris fit God have his Portion firſt ſet out. e By its Relation to Gog 
and becauſe dedicated to his Service. f The Heb. doth not expreſ, &. 
ther Reeds or Cubits; our Tranſlators ſupply Reeds, but the Frexch reads 
it Cubits (Coudees) Rochel edit. 1616. The Gr. keeps tothe Heb. ang 
adds not Reed or Cubit : could it be demonſtrated which is here 
intended, we might proceed with greater clearneſs and certainty 
"Tis true, Reeds are firſt mention'd as the Meaſure, but Cubrts are allo 
very ofren mention'd, as a known Meaſure ig meaſuring the Temple 
and Courts, as appears to any one that will read overtheſe four Chap. 


burbs » thereof, 


ters, 40, 41, 942, 43- beſidethe ſecond werſe expreſly faith Cubits, and 
it hath relation as wel] to the 25300, wer, 1, 
I rather favour the Cubir-Meaſure than the 


a half. This eaſily, che other hardly imaginable. g Reeds is at i=aft 


{ 30 Mves and a half, but Cubits amount to five Miles in breadth, and 


this ſeems to me both likelicſt ro be intended, and eaſieſt to be un. 
derſtood ; however ſince the firſt wer. mentions not the particylz; 
Meaſure, I may as well borrow it from the ſecond wey. as others fetch 
it from the 4o chap. and I think the third expreſly limits us to the 
Meaſure by Cubit«, which ſee with Notes, let. o. 4 Set apart for holy 
Utes, the whole Circuit thereof. 


2 Of this z there ſhaii be for the ſanQuary & * fe, 


7 


ld 
z; Whole conſecrate Portion of 25000 Cubits long, or 12 Miles and 


ha'f, and 10000 broad , or five Miles and little more. & For a Platform 


\ 


hundred in Jength 7, with five hundred i» breadth, ſquare 
round about : and fifty cubits 9 round about, for the || fu." 


for the SanQtuary, both Houſe and Courts. 7 Five hundred Cubirs 
ſquare, which is about one fourth of a Mile ſquare. = Which 4a. 
mount to 29 Yards and half a Foot. This bears ſome proportion to 
the content of that Square, which is one quarter of a Mile in each 
Side, but 50 Cubirs Suburb to that Square, that ſhould be ſuppoſed to 
have Sideseach a Mile, a half, and half quarter long. » Place roung 
about this the five hundred Cubits ſquare Mountain of the Houſe, 

3 And of o this meaſure ſhalt thou meaſure the length 
of five and twenty thouſand, and the breadth of ten 
thouſand ; and in it p ſhall be the ſanQuary, end the 
moft holy place, : 
o Or by or from this Cubir-meaſure, verſe 2. ſhalt thou meaſure : 
So expreſs that indeed I wonder a diſputean ariſe ; and this juſtifies 
,the French Verſion, which from this verſe no doubt rook the Coudz, 
; which they ule in verſe 1. p In the Center or Navel of chis 25000 

and rooo0o, ſhall the whole ſanQuary, Courrs, Temple and Holy of 


» Sin-offering being mention'd immediately before, gives the oc- Holies, or the Oracle, be built. 


one, all ocher offerings are couched ; and if the Lord do fo expreſly prieſts 7 the miniſters of the ſanuary, which ſhall 
come near to miniſter unto the LORD, and it ſhall be 
a place for their houſes 5, and an holy place * for the 
{anuary. 


r Sons of Zadok who miniſter to the Lord, and others with them, 
who though degraded from the Prieſtly Honour, yet lived upon Pref 
ly Proviſion. 


4 The holy portion q of the land ſhall be for the 


7 The whole content of 12 Miles and half long, and five broad, 


sIn which twenty three of twenty four Courſes of 


Prieſts may dwell conveniently,while the 24:h.miniſter atthe Temple, 


as by order they did. 


t And how much God did reſerve to himſelf for 


his dwelling is expreſly mentioned. Thus God makes himſelf and 
what 1s his, the Inheritance and Poſſeifion of the Prieſts his Ser- 


vants, as he told them, chap. 44. 28. 


5 And the five and twenty thouſand of length, :nd 


the ten thouſand of breadth ſhall alſo the Levites the mi. 


zens of Jeruſalem, and to be the content of the City. » 
Miles and half broad, and 12 Miles and half long,meaſured by *t* 
Cubir, as wer. 3 
with the holy Portion, though bur half its breadch. . 
and capital City, to which the Tribes reſort, ic muſt be large np 
ro entertain them too; and was to be framed with ewelve Gates © 
twelve Streets, for the twelve Tribes, as chap. 48. wer. 31- 


one 4d fide and on the other e 
of the holy portion f, and of the poſſeſlion of the © 
ty, before g the oblation of the holy portion, and 
fore the poileflion of the city, from the well-lide 


niſters of the houſe have for themſelves, for a poſleflion 
tor twenty chambers. | 


As we render the Words they are a little clouded, but as they ate 


rendred in the French they are plainer; we read them as if theverſe 
ſpake of the ſame 2500e long, and 10000 broad, which the Prieſts 
have, but the French thus; 'There ſhallbe other 25000 in length, and 
10000 in breadth, which ſhall appertain to the Levices, who do the 
Service of the Houſe with — Chambers ; ſo they have abroad in 
the Country equal ſhare with t 

Courts about the Houſe twenty Chambers or Rows of them in which 
to abide for their conveniencies, when in their Courſes they attend 
the Services they were to perform, as Porters, Singers, and Atten- 
dants on the Prieſts. 


e Prieſts, and in the outer Court or 


6 T And ye ſhall appoint « the poflefiion x of th? 


city five thouſand broad y, and five and twenty thouſand 
long over againſt z the oblation of the holy portio” : v 
ſhall be for the whole a houſe of 11rael. 


*% Order and meaſure out. Land to be a Poſſeſſion to the Citi 
About two 


. directs. z This muſt run along parallel in lengt 
s As the chit 


che c prince on ths 


q] And a portion b ſhall be for , 
: ; ſ ſide of the oblation 


go 
weſt- 
waſd, 


Chap. X11: 


c E a Guar 
2 Civil F 
& Porto, 


E turn ou 
2 Princes 
tices, ( 
I” yer the! 
* Babyloni 
| that thi 
] theirs, 
? that are 
* Tribes, 
| reſtored 
= 94 
BH you, ( 
3 and e 
» Your -f 
4 GOD, 
* #& Prin 
| made th 
} conteng, 
* and who 
preſſive ( 
not you 
Sabje&s 
* Either 
Opprelle 
tence be 
* This is 
& and I 
will nor, 


IO 

phah 4 

# Prin 
they mu 
tO appoi 
and Scale 
the ſame 
Ig. J5 py 
| Prince he 


lure dry 1 


( 


2nd 


Tion 


7 are 
yerle 
rieſts 
and 
o the 
ad in 
rt or 
rhich 
trend 
tte» 


' the 
ſand 
1:0 


; Citi 

; £80 
yy the 
engl 
chit 

nough 
ces £0 


1 the 
atiof 
ne Ct 
| be 
weſl- 
waſd, 


OE SS 
tr Rs 


wo 
AV GA A os”! 3 HRrgs,< 


La 


+ Portion on cach end of the ocher three. 


. "my & princes ſhall no more oppreſs / my people; and 


4 MECH, "ig 


| made them Princes, counſclled, exhorred , and commanded. r Be 
| content, aim not at mor? ; who gave no more can make this enough, 
| and who will curſe and blaſt what you indire&ly, and by finful op. 


pl 


| Subje&sdare violate one another,nor your Officers violate any of them. 


p. &LV. 


ward, and : 
wall be over # 
rolls unto the eaſt-border 


þ Though not 
of the City, 
pream Ruler. 
of choſe three 
thereof ; ſo rl 


already ſet our. 


broad as the e 
from North ro. South, 
Welt, as in this Diagrams. 


"The Tribe of Judah's Pottion from Weſt to Eaſt. | 


MS. 
m ? 4 _ 
The Prieſts Portion © | 
7 £ © G 
@ 25000 long. o* 
a; = ; 
= [») | os 
m_ £53 uU 
Z I. 
i — bd 
mY is 
| =_ - 
S #- The Levites Portion © s | 
* < © 2 
© ! o S 
we 25000 ONg. = Q 
Lan nd _ % Oo 
© Q _ 
, O 
= ——} 
S. | | | = 
= The Ciry Portion 2 | £ 
fs - O 
H So| 
25000 long. R-g 
The Tribe of Benjamin's Portion from Weſt to Eaſt. 


h What called now over-againſt,or paralle), or by the ſide all along, is 
called before three times together: So now you have an exaC& Square 
of 25000 Cubits laid our for God,the Levites and City, which appears 


| thus in the Breadth ; 


10000 For the Prieſts. 
10000 For the Levites. 
5000 For the City. : 
And the Length of each 25000, that is ſome 12 Miles and half 
{quare. 


And the Princes Portion embracing or bounding all at each end as 
a Guard and Defence both of Church and State, of Religion and the 
Civil Righes; which may fairly be intimated by this aſſigning him his 


$ In the land # ſhall be his poſſeflion in Iſrael ; and 


the ref m of the land ſhall they » give to the houſe of 1f- 
rael oaccording ? to their tribes. 

i Either in that portion of Land ſet out for him ; or as 'tis added, 
in Iſra-1, 7, e. in the Land of 1/-ae/. & Who own my Favour in their 
Advancement, and my Law in their Government : All Princes are in 
ſome ſort God's Princes ; bur all do not regard God, as Sovereign 
Lord of them, and their People ; but God did raiſe up ſuch at the re- 
turn out of Baby/oz, who where and did recognize themſelves God's 
Princes. 1 Both Exzekie! and other Prophets, did reprove the Inju- 
ſtices, Cruelſties, and opprefſive Merhods of the Kings of 1/rael; and 
yet they rook not off the Yoke; bur it ſhall be betrer afcer the days of 
Babyloniſh Caprivity ended. »: Afeer God had his Portion, which was 
that the Prieſts and Levires had, afrer the Ciry and the Prince have 
theirs, the Remainder is to be given to the People. » The Perſons 
that are Officers appointed to divide the Land. o Two Tribes and Ten 
Tribes. p To the number of the Tribes, and their Right, it muſt be 
reſtored ro them, or they compenſated with an equal value. 

9 T Thus ſaith the Lord q GOD, Let it ſuffice r 
you, O princes of Iſrael : remove violence 5 and ſpoil 7, 
and execute judgment , « and juſtice x, take away 
pe + exdd&tions y from my & people, ſaith the Lord 

OD. 


9 Princes are here in God's Name, and by Advice from him, who 


preſſive Crafts wreſt from others. 5 Pur it far from your ſelves; do 
not you uſe ir, and ſo diſcountenance in others,that neither commion 


? Either the ſame as Violence, or effe& of ir. violent Courſes, rob the 
Oppreſſed and ſpoil them. « Judge righteouſly,and then look the Sen- 
tence be executed for terror tothe Unjuſt, and Relief of the Oppreſs'd. 
« This isadded for Emphaſis, though the ſame thing. » Heavy Tax- 
e and Impoſitions on Eſtates or Trade. z Whom I muſt, if you 
will not, right, 


10 Ye a ſhall have 5 juſt balances c , and a juſt e- 


phah 4, and a juſt bath e. 

# Princes of 1ſ-acl. b Though they were not Traders to uſe, yet 
they muſt have, 7. e. appoint, for to then as a Privilege, it appertains 
to appoint Standards for meaſure among their Subje&s. c Or Weights 
and Scales, by which to meaſure what is to be ſold by weight, one and 
the ſame to all, that none buy by a greater, and ſell by a lefſer : So Lew. 
19.35, 36. Prov. I. 1. and 16.11. Mich. 6, 10, 11. ſo muſt the 


T* <0 S | 
from the eaſt-ſids eaſtward ; and the length] of quid things, as Oil, Wine or Water ; an what each conrainzd tl 
againſt one of the portions, from the 


ſaid how much, 'tis like *twas near fourfold to that 
San&uary, or the Prieſts and Levices, c The King,or Su- 
4 One half of the Prince's Pottion lay on the Weſt-ſide 

c Theother half lay -on the Eaſt-ſide 
\ePortion of City, Levites, and Prieſts, lay in the middle 
fir. f OfPrieſts, and Levites, and SanQtuary. g Ir lay parallel, as 
es ſe three were broad, and ſorunon both ſides 1a its Breadth 
and had its Lengrth as the other from Eaſt to 


next Verſe will acquaint us. 

11 The ephah and the bath ſhail be of one mea- 
ſure f, that the bath may contain the- tenth part 
of an homer g, and the ephah the tenth part o: 
an - homer : the meaſace thereof ſhall be after tlio 
homer. 

F One ſhall contain as much as the other ; (he Epboh! ſhall contin a5 
many Gallons of dry, as the Bath doth contain of liquid things. 
g Which is commonly ſaid to be 30 Buſhels, or near it : So that 51:5 
Ephah will be ſame 3 Buſhels in dry things, and the Bat G4 Pints, or 5 
Gallons 1n liquid thiags. ; | 

12.And the * ſhekel þ ſha be twenty geralis : twenty 
ſhekels, five and twenty ſhekels, fifteen ſhekels ſhall be your 
maneh z. - | 

þ Having laid down the Standard for Weight and Meaſure in 1={, 


ation of which was part of the Prince his Prerogative : The firſt meq- 
; tioned in the Text is the Shckel, which, faith the Text, contained 
rwenty Gerahs ; row every Gerah was one Penny half” Pznny Engliſh 
value ; the Shekel then was 2 5. 64, the twenry Shekels was rwo Pounds 
ten Shillings, the 15 Shekels was one Pound 17 Shillings and 6 Pznce, 
and twenty five was 31.25.64. i Somefay 'ris one Pound, and char 
the Pound was either Jeaſt, middle or greateſt, according as there 
were more or fewer Shekels in it ; the leaſt or common Pound was buc 
I7 £.and 6 4. the nexr, which was the Royal was 50 5. and the greateſt 
or Pound ofthe Sanftuary, was 62 Shiliings and 6 Fence. 

13 This «x the ofNation that ye ſhall offer &; the 
ſixth Zpart of an ephah of an homer of wheat, and ye 
ſhall give the ſixth part of an ephah of an homer cf 
barley. 

k In the daily Service, the Morning and Evening-Sacrif-e, ther? 
muſt be Wheae and Barley-flower. ! Sixtieth part of an Homer,abou: 
one half Buſhel and one Peck, and one quarter of a Peck, a4 thre? 
Pints, or near it, ſo ſome : Others abate the odd Meaſures,and ſay the 
Ephah was abour our half Buſhel, as indeed ic cag beno more ; itthe 
Homer were zo Buſhels, the Ephah a tenth parc of the Homer, that is 
three Buſhels, the fixth part of the Ephah amounts co four Galloas, or 
half a Buſhel. 


14 Concerning the ordinance of oil #2, the batt of 
ol 7 ye ſhall offer the tenth o part of a bath our of the 


cor p, which # an homer of ten baths ; tor ten baths 2re 


an homer : | 

2 Now foraſmuch as Oil was always offered with the Meat-offer- 
ing, here is Direction what quantity ſhall be uſed ar each Offering. 
» Which contained abour 24 Gallons, or very near it. o So the qu2r- 
tity of Oil by this Account will be two Gallons, three Pints, and a l:t- 
tle more. p Which is here ſaid to be an Homer ; theſe were rwo 
Names of one and the ſame Meaſure, and deſcribed by the Baths ir 
contained. 


dred, out of the fat paſtures of Iſract.; for a meat-ot-, 


fering , and for a burnt-offering , and for 


Lord GOD. 

This Verſe preſcribes the Proportion that is to be obſerved in bring- 
ing the Lambs for daily Sacrifice ; they were bound to chooſe ont of 
rhe beſt Paſtures of 7ſ-sc! the beſt, and fatteſt Lambs; one out of rwo 
hundred ; ſo favourable was God to them in theſ: Cartel, raking to tew 
out of ſo many : And theſe Lambs were deſigned for to be off-rc 
with the Meat-offering, either in expiatory Sacrifices, or in Eucha- 
riſtical Sacrifices : Thus daily Sacrifices kepr up their Peace with 
God. 


tion {| for the prince in Iſrael. PE 
The plain and ſummary Meaning of this Verſe 1s, that this daily ' 

Sacrifice ſhould be, as for the People and the Priace, {o fhould ic be 

paovided by a common Purte of Prince and Pcoplz ; all thou!d cone 


| 


tribute to this Charge : Though ſome think the People were to give 
this, and the Prince to give a like Share ; and I know (ome think, 
that this Prince is the High-Pricft, and that 2!l the People,joining and 
contriburing to this Sacrifice, are here bound to bring ic to the High. 
Prieſt. 

17 And it ſhall be the princes pare 9 rt give burnt. 
offerings r, and meat - offerings 5, and drink-offer 
ings *, in the feaſts « and in the new moons, and in 
the ſabbaths, in all folemnities of the houſs of Iſrael : 
he ſhall prepare « the fſin-offering ; and the meac- 
offering, and the burnt - offering, and the || peace; 


Iſrael z. 

7 Beſide the Share he gives to the daily Sacrifice in the common 
Charge, wer. 16. the Princes bound alſoon Solemnirics to give Sacri- 
fices out of his own. r See Lev. 1. where the ſeare deſcribed. 5 $22 
Lev. 3. 1, &fc. t Exod. 30. 9 and Num. 15. 24. the Driak off ring 
was ever joined with the Meat-offering, Nr. 29. 1, 16. 19, 22. 
s Which he doth particularly recount, as New Moons, Oc. of all pace 
ticularly to treat would be too long. x Here lieth the main deci. 
ding Circumſtance, whether the Secular or Eccleſiaſtical Prince be 
here intended : ſome fay this preparing is aſacerdoral Att in order ro 
Offering; if fo, ir muſt be the High-Prieft; bur Ithink they miſtake. 
This Preparing is nothing more than on the Prince's Charge ; and by 
his care to ſee; thar there be ſuch Beaſts ready ar hand as are required 
at ſich Soletnniries ; and fo "cis the Secular Prince. y See wer. 15. 
z All the People. 


Prince remove oppretiive Cheating by divers Weights. 4 To rmea- 
ſare dry things, as Corn, Olives, Dates, &'c. e This Was 4 Meaſiire 


18 Thitts faith the Lord GOD ; In the firſt month C 


-a 4 


| peace-;; 


' , » oh 
aHt-07 ce 


offerings, to make reconciliation tor them , fſaich the jv; ;, © 


7? 
4 h 
4 v 
= 


-m 4 
CO 1 


3 - 
3 4. J n 
q,-x 
t'oV. 
SS. 


Or 


Gr mY 


Chap. XL\V. 


-” ay 
a - 9 


- valuable things, and that are ſold for Money, now the Standard is {-; NUR. 5 
| down for the currant Coin, which paſſed among rhem;, and the Vai. *7 


1s And one || lamb out of the flock, ont of two hun | 9", ©4 


16 All the people of the land | ſhal give this obla» - IT 
AK VE TCr. 
Or,w.7b. 


offerings , to make Reconciliation y for the houſe of th2»t »57- 


F:7 "g ( 


ABR. 4 Y 
4 ” wa 17 
ery >oetys.%. Sas 
Fas, =y; IS. "op 


_ 


R & > J05 
= 
£4 


+ 


IIs 
_ - ——_ 
at 


_ Cn e_—_—_——— 
; : BY = 5 
- my ” $ 

—_— Mo —_—_— — n 
70 F FR 
> LATENT 3-136 Pm” = 
He : 9 Ups, ar dts troy 
we jo Og: mga wn» 
+5 TT TR Fe _- 
as 0 ys he gn. hs s 
_y monty av = ” 
CL  - hs - ca 
= 2 2x 


4 £i% 
: Sx 24 
x: - 


» 
l "Y 
_ m— 


nn ne 


4 
m— 


=s: 


——>—— >a oe hs 4 
x — 


£—<x> 


——— — 


” Lev. 23; 


$. 
Num 9.3. 
& 28.16. 
Deur. 16. 


l, 


* Lev. 23 


34: 
Nu.29.12. 
D-ur. 16. 


4 > 

in the firſt Jy of the month, thou 5 ſhale take a young 
Fey. 16. bullock c withour blemilh , and * cleanſe 
10. 


= 9 £ 


Etvary. 


a Ofthe Year, every New-year's Day, or the firſt New-year's Day 
aſter the Temple is builc, a kind of Feaſt of Dedication ; the former 


better agreeth with the followgng Verſes, b Procure, either bring 


our of hiz own Flock, or buy with his Money ; this the Prince muſt 
do. c Such rhe Law required both for Kind and Quality, in what 


Sacrilice , or on what Occaſion ſoever the Sacrifice was offered. 


That by this, offered according to the Law, the Temple might 


be cleanſed. 


19 And the prieſt e ſhall take f of the blood of 


the ſin-offering g, and pur #i* upon the poſts of the 
houſe, and upon the four corners + of the ſettle of the 
altar, and upon the poſts # of the gate of the inner 
court. 


e Had the 15: and 18:h Verſes intended by Pr.nce the High Prieſt 
there would have been no need of changing the Phraſe, or of ment10- 
ning the Pric/? : it would have been enongi to have ſaid and he ſad ; 
bur ia thoſe Verles, the bringing and preparing is not Prieſtly,but al- 
Cribed to the Prince as it would be to any other, who offers a Sacr1- 
fice ro the Lord by the Land of the Prieſt. f Carry with him in ſome 
Veſlel or other,from the place where the Bullock was ſlain. g Lev.1.5. 
chap. 43. 20. let. þ Chap. 43. 20. let.z. a. i The blood of the 
Sin-cffering was to be pur upon the Poſts of the Temple Door, and on 
the Poſts of the Gate of the Inner Court, or that next to the Tem- 
p:e. 

29 And fo thou fhalt do &+ the ſeventh 7 day of the 
month for every one m2 that erreth, and fer him that 15 


fimple » : ſo ſhall ye reconcile o the houſe. 


& The Pri:ſt muſt offer the like Sacrifice for cleanſing the Errors of 
the People, and reconciling them. / About a Weczk before the Paſl- 
over. #2 For allthe Errors of all the Houſe of Iſ-ae!, in all that had 
erred through Ignorance. nu Thar isof weak IntelleEtuals, half-witred, 
or a Foo], as the word ſignifies, or for one that was ſeduced. 
o {.e Cleanſe, as ver. 18. which legally or ceremonially was defiled by 
thoſe Errors dgne in the City, or Courts of the Houſe, whither rheſe 
Perſons might come ; for *tisnot the Temple ir ſelf, I ſuppoſe, that is 
here meant. 

21-” In cthefrſt prcrth, in the fourteenth 4 day of the 
month,ye ſhall have r the paflover s, a feaſt of ſeven days 7, 
unleavened bread ſhall be eaten #. 

> Nijan,which is part of March and part of April with us. q As was 
appointed of old by Meſes, Exod. 12. at large. 2 Have and /lay, for ſo 
E::e.12. 6. s TheLamb, which was ro be eaten with Thankſgiving 
tor God's ſparing the Jewiſh Children, their Firſt-born, when he flew 
the Chief of the Strength of Egypr, and for bringing the whole Houſe 
of Iſrael out of Egyp:, # See the Inſtitution, Exod.12. « Though here 
is an Evipſis, yet che thing clearly ſpeaks it ſelf, though the whole 
Feaſt of unleavened Bread was to beeaten under great penalty,Exod.1 2. 
18,19. Theſethings no doubt concerned the returned Captives; thro 
thy have a Myſtical Meaning allo. 

22 And upon that day x ſhall the prince prepare for 
himſelf 2, and for all the people « of the land, a bullock for 
a lin oftering. 

x Uponthe fourteznth Day, on which the Paſſover was {liin. » As 
beiore, ©. 17. ler. x. and wr. 18. ler. b. z To expiate his ows Sins. 
# S=e vr. 17. where th: ſams is found. 

23 And feven days of the feaſt he ſhall prepare a 
Þ.rnr-oftering ro the LORD, ſeven bullocks, and ſeven 


rams without blemith, daily the feven days, and a kid of! 


the goats dayly for a {in-offering. 

At.er the firſt Day's Offering,wver.22. or elſe after thz 15:h Day was 
over, though firſt more likely, the Prince at his own Charge, is to 
ger ready day by day feven Bullocks, ſeven Rams perfe& without ble- 
miſh, as the Law required, and one Kid each day of the ſeven, in all 
49 Buliocks, as many Rarns, and ſeven Kids of the Goats. Theſe the 
Prieſts were to off:r ro make Atonement for the Prince and his 
Pcople. 


24 And he - ſhall prepare a meat 6b offering of an e- 
phah « for a bullock, and an. ephah for a ram, and a hin 
d ot oil for an ephah e. 


a The Prince. 6 For the Sacriſice was not entire without this,and 
the Text proportions this alſo. « For each Bullock one Ephah of fine 
Flower, three Buſhels and one half with rh ſeven Bullocks of the firſt 
Day, and to for th: Rams : Thar is, ſeven Buſhels every day for ſeven 
days together, according to the number of Ramsand Bullocks. 4 This 
was abovur one Ga!Jon and threequarters of a Pint. - g To cach Eppah 
of Meal, fo every of the {even there were 


7 Buliocks, 7 Ephah-, and 7 Hins of Oll. 
7 Rams, 7 Efh1bs and 7 Hins of Ol). 
49 of each kind of rhe Beaſts in the ſpace of the ſeven days, and g8 


a 
Ephaks, and as many Hins with them ; a great and coſtly. Service. this Numb. 6. 14. Lev. 1.3. y When 'twas more thn a Year old, the rexy 
; Jews accounted it a Ram. 

25 * In the ſeventh f moth g, in the fiſtcenth þ day 5 And the meat-offering ſhall be an ephah # for ? FA. 

| þ : 5 P of Oj! 

of the month, ſhall he z do the like & in the feaſt of theſram, and the meat- offering for the Jambs + a5 1+ conc! 
ſzven days, according / to the ſin-offet ing, according to| ſhall be able to give 2, and an hin 6 of oil to 2%; Worn, 
the burnt-offering , and according to the meat-offering, ephah c. bs I5 
and according to the oil. | z Three Buſhels of Meal foreach Ram, a Rather as he ſhall © MF offer; 
f According to their Eccleſiaſtical Account. g 7iſ-;,which anſwers! good,as much as he thinks fit in Decency or in Bounty. 6 One Gallon burne 
fo part of our Auguſt and September. þ On that Day the Feaſt of Ta- | and a Pint, for a Hin did contain 12 Logs, and each Log contain Thi 


bernacles began, and it continued ſeven days. # The Prince as before, 
ver. 24- k In every reſpe& for Sacrifices,and all that belonged to them. 
/ As was required at the Paſlover, ſo ar this Feaſt alſo ; and therefore 
you are referred 10 the Particulars of that Feaſt. 


d the fan. 


blemiſh. 


s This is different from that chap. 42. 13. as appears both from the # Se 
Kind of Sacrifice, and the Occaſion of it, or the Time of each. : Of I4 
weekly, Sabbath by Sabbath; this was three times as much as was [t- every 
quired, Nub. 28.9. u Ofthe firſt Year and Males, wer. 13. and as the ) third ; 


Hebrew implies. x Umblemiſh'd Sacrifices were ever required, and {0 


three quarters of a Pint, or thereabouts. c Which was three tim 
8 Gallons; for each Ephah contained three Buſhels; ſee chav. 45- = 
ler. g. So then one Gallon,and one Pint of Oil, was required as prop® 
tion to three Buſhels of Meal in the Mear- offering. 


<P <p 


CHAP. XLVI 


Ordinances for the prince in hu wo ſhip, 1—8. for the people 01:1 5, Wis 
rogether, 9—I5. An Order for the prince's gift to vis Jons and fervancs, 
16—18. Th, courts of. boiling and baking for the pricfls and Le its, | 
19—24. 8 


l Hus faith the Lord GOD, The gate aof the in 

ner court that looketh toward the eaſt, {hall he 
ſhut 5 the ſix working days c, but on the ſabbath 4 jr 
{hall be opened e, and in the day of of the new moon fir 
ſhall be opened. 

4 Twas the Eaſt-gate of the Court next to the Temple, or which 
did lead into the inmoſt Courc, where the Altar of burnt-offcriag 
ſtood. 5 This explains that of chap. 44. 2. ler. d.f. #. c Or every 
day thatis a working day. 4 On that holy Reſt the Proſpe& intg the 
Temple, and rothe Altar, ſhall be free. e The Prieſts ſhall Open ir. 
f This one Feſtival is named, bur all the reſt are included ; this Gate 
was to be ſhut only on working days, therefore to be open on all holy 
days, which were days of holy Service to God. 


2 And the prince ſhall enter by the way of the 
porch of tha: gate without f, and ſhall ſtand gs by the 
polt þ of the gate, and the prieſt ſhall prepare 5 his 
burnt-offering and his peace-offerings, and he {all 
worſhip & at the threſhold 1 of the gate : then he ſhal 


go forth m2, but the gate ſhall not be ſhut until the 
evening ", 

7 He muſt come in at the Gate, which is between the Court of the 
Jews, and the Court of the Prieſts, which here is called the Gate wi:;.. 
out, or the outer Gateof that Court ; and ſo go up to the Gare within, 
which leads into the inmoſt Court, and roſe by 10, or 12, or i; 
Stairs, ſay ſome. & While this ſolemn Service was acting to make 
Atonement for the Prince, or to offer Sacrifices of Peace-offerings for 
himſelf, he is dire&ed ro ſtand before the Lord, in other Caſcs he 
might ſit ; the greateſt ſhould revere that God, whoſe Mercy they 
need and ſeek. + One of the inward Poſts, where he might beſt ſee 
the Sacrifice offered up, but may not go into the Court ; none might 
$0 in but ſuch as were, by God's Appointment,to miniſter before him. 
i Ver. 22,23,24. of the 45th Chap. 'tis ſaid rhe Prince ſhall prepare, 
here the Prieſts muſt prepare ; bur theſe places ſpeak of different Pre. 
parations, the Prince prepared by buying, or bringing ofhis own the 
beſt for Sacrifice ; the Prieſt prepared by receiving, bringing the $4. 
crifice to the Altar ſlaying and diſpoſing of all things according to the 
Rule. The Hovuſholder prepares, fo doth his Cook prepare the Feaſt; 
ſo that each prepare what is proper to them : and ſo 'tis here,the Prince 
prepares bur doth not ſacrifice, the Prieſt prepares bur doth nor buy, 
or bring the Sacrifices. & He ſhall bow (as Hb.) himſelf, 'tis « pray- 
ing Poſture, Exod. 12. 27. in which Duty the Prince, as all others ar: 
to attend on God, while the expiatory Sacrifice is offering, while their 
Reconciliation is to be made, in which poſture the Prince is to be al 
the while the Prieſt is offering ; 2 Chron. 29. 29. 1! Here he took his 
Standing in the beginning of the Service; here heis, when tis finiſh 


Chap. XI] 


© partici 
than aj 


{ atthe inner Treſhold of the Gate, where his Eye might ſee enough, ne 
if his Underſtanding were enlightned with Knowledg of theſe Myſte- "A 
ries ; he need not approach nearer to God, than his Faith could nov il 
carry him while at the Threſhold. *»» Not ſtay to gaze, or talk; but | offeri1 
he came ro worſhip, ſo having worſhipp'd, he wk return. » Till all * ram 
the Sacrifices were offered, and the Offerers reconciled ; Now each L of oil. 
Offerer was to bring his Offering to this Gate, and there give it to M- Thi: 
the Prieſt, and there lay his Handson the Head of the Sacrifice, Lev. WW! the 5 wo 
I. 3,4. | 5 | 

3 Likewiſe othe people of the land ſhall worſhip a | _ ; 
the door of this gate before p the LORD, in the ſa LOR] 
baths 9, and in the new moons 7. Prins 
0 And Heb. i, e. as the Prince had done, bringing Ntanding, worſhip. M7 _—_ 
ing at the Tareſhold ofthe Gate,and departing when the Sacrificews M7 0d | 
finiſhed ; ſo muſt the People when they brought their Sacrifices, bur MW 7 then 
one Manner, one Gate, one Sacrifice, but one Saviour. p With due WF 7 ſhall {| 

Senſe of Go4's holy and glorious Preſence. q Both weekly and other ie : In th: 
holy Days, which are called $abbaths on good ground. » Which wer i 1 A | 

ſolemn Feaſts to the Jews in their Generation ; bur theſe Days pri” W2 1; h 
leged them only ro come thus near, who brought their particular O- We tuft 4 

ferings; for I ſuppoſe the People might not approach at pleafure "yp Tap 

to ſee the ſtated Morning and Evening-Oblation facrificed ; this WM Gate w 

Ina croud the Gate , but at this thme they kept in their onn Wt perfor 
qurr, 0n ord} 

4 And the burnt-offering s that the prince ſhall 2 
offer unto the LORD in the ſabbath-day #, ſhall & hel 
fix lambs « without blemiſh x, and a ram y without thou ( 


Theſe 
r 10n 0 
lets is 
13 4 Pa 


Vol, 


4 And 


#75 VT 
1\ jo XL \ I, . OY ' \ on” : 

' 4 And inthe day Of the new moan #7? ſhall $e'a young 
bullock 4 without blemilh e, and ſix latabs f,, and a ram : 
be f1a1l be without blemiſh. TL. © 
_ neſ2 Verſes nothing new occurs , but the appointing a Bullock 
wg ering for the New- Moon Sacrifice; of which alſo on 


| bs Ek Boa.” bes 7-0 1 | 

p I aiready, ver. 1.4 Vid. Chap. 45. 22: e Vid. ver. 4. 
ket x. f- SCE Ver. 4 let. #. | 3 

- And he ſhall prepare a meat-offering g, an ephah + 


& 7, a bullock, and anephah for a ram 5 and for the lambs 
2 according 25 his hand ſhall attain 7 'unto, and an hin & of 
"7 1 an ephah. . "508 , ND 

®: ”" Va. alin 46. 24. let.g. + Vid. wer. 5. let z. 7 Vid, wer. s. 
ER 1c o., & Vid. ver. 5- let. 6. : 

"> And when the prince ſhall enter I , he ſhall go in by 


Py - T WF ” 
ITY 


1 

; th: way of the porch of that gate, and he ſhall go forth 
F 'e way n thereof, ; 

q I wo = hy Gate of the Court next the Temple to offer his Sacri. 
- 7 c. » Gotothe Threſhold, the inward Threſhold, of the Eaſt-gate, 
Q wo hae opens into rhe Court of the Teniple. n Noneof the People might 
Y > 461, only the Princeand the Prieſts might go out the ſame way they 


FE came 111 


F F” 9 F But when the people » of the land ſhall come be. 


e fore p the LORD in the ſolemn feaſts Fe he that encreth 
s MW in by che way of the north-gate to wort , ſhall go out 
ll WW ty the way of the ſouth-gate 7 ; and .he that entreth by 


I! E: the way of the ſouth-gate, ſhall go forth by the way of 


EZERKNTE L, 


= gate whereby he came in , but ſhall go forth over againſt ;Ples inher Icance by oppr eltion otro chruſt them p out of cheir 

7 * | 'poſſeflion ; bur he hall give q his fons inhcricance out oi 

- WU » Allexcept the Prince when they come to worſhip, muſt obſerve his own poſleſſion ; that my people be nor ſcattered r every 
man from his poſſeffion r. 


cludad : They were :odotn the Evening-Oblaticn zs they did in 
rhe Morning. h NG | 

16 « Thus faith the Lord GOD , If the prince give 
1 gift 4 unto any of his ſors; -the inheritance e there 
ſhall E2 his ſons, it ſball be their pollefion fF by inhe- 
rm +5, : 

4 Of Houſes or Lads e The Right to thoſe Homſesor Lands ſhalf 
deſcend to Childrens Children ; the Fee-fimple ſhall be toche Poſte- 
rity of that Son'ro whom Dor, war given. f They ſhall enjoy ir, 
poileſs it, as Heirs poſſeſs an Inheritance. F 


17 Bur ithe give a gift of his inheritance g to one of his 
ſervants h, then it ſhall be his to the year of liberty 7; after 
ic ſhall rettirn to the prince &: but his / inheritance ſal bo 
his ſons for them 72. 


g Of any part, or parcelof the Crown-Land, orthePrince his Inhe- 
ritance. þ Whether ſuch Servant be ſtriftly taken, a Servant or Bond. 
man, or in more large Senſe, any of his Servants in the Court, and in 
Office about it. 5 The Year of Jubilee, as Lev. 25. 10, 13, 28, k& Qr. 
his H-irs, if the Prince be dead. 7 This may be underſtood eirher of - 
the Prince or the Servanrc: Either thus ; though the Land by Gifr JO 
back ro the Prince, or his Heirs; . from the Servant; yet what Lands 
this Servant had of his own Inheritance,ſhall deſcend ro the Heirs of 
that Servant, and be theirs: Or elſe thus; whatever Lands of thr 
Prince by Gift, are given to Servants, ſhall ar the Year of Jabilec re. 
vert to-the Sons of the Prince, who {hall re-poſleſs them ; foraſmuch as 
they are Lands of [nhericance, and of Right belong tothe Heir. zz And 
for theirs after them. 


13 Moreover, * the prince ſhall not take » of the peo-, LOPEY: 
4c 8. 


n Seize and eſcheat as forfeited, ( like as 4bab dealt with Naberh, or 
David with Mephiboſhech) to give to others , or keep for himſelf 


# —_ they might not enter At, as already IS obſeryed z and what- o Whether fraudulent Oppreſlion, or violent, whether under colour 
* (ever Reaſon might be given beſides, this Paſſage in this Verſe gives| of Juſtice, or againſt all Rules of Law. p Thar he may pur ia his own 


Crearures or Children. q Provide for his own, our of that is his own. 


* Temple, and the Entrance into it, ſtood in a ſtteighr Line from every], Thar chey may keep together in theic own Land. 


19 © Afﬀer, he brought s me through the entry, 


which was at the ſide of the gate, into the holy chain- 
bers t of the prieſts, which looked toward the north. 
and behold, there as a place on- the two # ſides welt- 


ward. 
s Weleft the Prophet, chap, 44. 4. at the North-gate, and on rhe 


inſide ofit ; now we find him going through a private Way by the 


tide of that Gate to the holy Chambers appointed for the Prieſts. 
t Chap 40. ver. 45, and 46. let. r, 5,t, u. and chap. 42. wer. 13, 14. 
# Rather, on their ſides Weſtward ; that is, on the. Weſtſide of theſe 
Chambers. which look'd toward the North ; the 72 read it thus, Behold, 
there was # Place encloſed. | a 


20 Then ſaid he unto me, This « the place where 
the prieſts ſhall boil x the treſpaſs-offering and the fſin- 


{offering , where they ſhall bake the meat-offering : that 


they y bear th2mz not out into the utter court 2, to ſanRifie 
athe people. 

x Thoſe that were brought Sacrifices for Sin, vrere in part for tho 
Sacrificing Prieſt, and he was to eat thereof ; bur 'ewas to be dreſsd 
in the Verge of holy Ground, and fo Kitchins, Boilers, Ovens, &c. 
Urenſils were prepar'd to do it, and theſe Kitchins are here deſcribed. 


12 Now when the prince ſhall prepare a voluntary jy The Prieſts, or the attending Levires. z Where the People were , 


and many times in great numbers, that this holy Fleſh muſt needs be 
very near many of them, if it were carried out. » See chap. 44. 
ver. 19. let. g. 

21: Then he brought me forth into the utter 5 court, 


and cauſed me to paſs c by the four corners of the f He - 


court; and behold, + in every corner d of the court there 3%. 75 
was A Court e. court,ond a 
b Either the Court of the People, or more likely the Court of the cre in a 
Prieſts or Levites, called here urtcr Cour: becauſe it was more outward corner of 4 
than the Court of the Temple. c To go about the whole Square of conv, 

the Court. d Where the {ide-Walls did meer in right Angles. e A 

i{maller Court made up an che ourer-fides with the Walls of the grea- 

ter Square, and on the inner-ſide made with two Walls; the one forty 

Cubits loag, the other thirty Cubits broad. 


22 In the four corners of the court there were courts PO” 
_ - . , Ur, maae 
|| joined of forty cuvirs long, and thirty broad : theſe four y;:þ chime 
-- corners were of one meaſure f. 5, ron 
They were then an Oblong Quadrangle. - f All of equal capacity + Heb.cors 
for Length and Bredth. | SEO 


23 And there was a row of building g round about 
in them 5, round about them 7 four, and # was 
made with boiling & places under the rows / round 
about. <H | 
gz A Range of Building ori the in-fide of the Walls of the leſſer 
Courts, or four Ranges anſwerable to the four ſides. þ Added leit 
any ſhould chink the Buildings were on the our-ſide of th: Walls of 
theſe Courts. # Four Courts in the four Corners. & Places of Srone 
raiſed on purpoſe, and framed for the more convenient beiling ofthar 
Part of the Sacrifice which was allowed to the P:ieſt, or to the People, 
to eat before rhe Lord, and feaſt with. / Theſe Rows of Building were 
ſo framed, that the Caldrons and Pots were placed under them ; 'tis 
likely they might be like Cloiſters, over which was a Roof to cove: 
both the Prieſt, or Levite Cooks , and the Meats they dreſs; and they 
were either open as a Cloiſter, or had Windows, out of which tha 
Smoke of the Fire, or Steam of the Mear pafled. 
24 Then ſaid he unto me , 'Fhele are the places of 


2 E the north-gate : he ſhall not return s by the way of the 
he ES 
> to vo out at rhat Door that is over-againſt the-Door at which they 
i5 = au = p Preſent themſelves and their Sacrifices. q The three 
o ”” car Annual Feaſts,the New Moons, and the Weekly Sabbaths. » The 
or 
he 
- Ws one they could not go right forward to go ontara Weſt-gate ; forthe 
to EE ) 
gh > one ofthe Eaſt-gates from tae out-moſt Court : fo thar if any ſhould 
_ $84 goſtreight forward, they would&gointo the Temple and Oracle, which 
" W- was notto be : There were but cwo Gatesthe People might enter at, 
= FS the Sourh or North. - None might turn their Back on the Temple, 
": > nor do that which look'd like a going away from God, which may 
th 7 give us ſomewhat the meaning of Jer. 2. 27 and 32, 33. Their rarning 
it. © tbe Back on God. | F : 
- WM 19 And the prince in the midſt of them , when they 
by, (4 80 in, ſhall go in ; and when they go torth, ſhall go 
ray- We. 7 forth s. | ; 
Sar? * 27 The Prince and People ſhall meet togetherat the ſame time, and 
theic © when 'tis the time for offering the Morning or Evening Sacrifice , be 
e all © ready to preſent their Prayers tothe Lord : And when they offer any 
k his © particular Oblations, on account whereof they go any whit nearer 
_ than at other time, both Prince and People ſhall do it at the ſame 
ug, time, | 
my 11 And in the feaſts, and in the folemnities, the meat:-; 
_ E offering ſhall be an ephah to a bullock , and an ephah fo! 
ill all { aram, and tothe lambs, as he is able to give , and an hin 
each WW of oilto an ephah- | 
ito WW: This Verſe is the ſame with the 57, therefore ſee that, and with 
Lev. | the 1th, which ſve. 
PA WY burntoffering or peace-offerings voluntarily unto the 
ſab- ZLORD , oze ſhall then open him the gate that looketh 
n 7 toward the eait, and he ſhall prepare his burnt-offering 
= £2 and his peace-offerings as he did on the ſabbath-day : 
- bur FW}; then he {hall go forth ; and aſter his going forth, one r 
h due WT ſhall ſhur the gate. 
other WE Jathes, 4, 5,6, 7 Verſes, Orders were given about thoſe Offerings 
1 I 2; which were requi:ed, which the Prince »1f offer ; in this, DireCti- 
pri” I; on is given about thoſe that are Free-will-offerings, which in all points 
ar Oi- # inuſt be prepared as the orher were on the Sabbath-day ; which ſee 
eaſure & in the fore-mentioned Verſes. : One of the Pricſt-Porre:s : As the 
gas [7 Gate was opened for this Scrvice only on tuch a Lay, fo the Service 
08 Wh performed ; ſome Ptieſt-Porter ſhall ſhur ir, for ic mult not ſtand open 
1 on ordinary days: 

= 13 * Thou ſhalt daily prepare « a burnt-olfering unto 
Mi the LORD, of a lamb x -f of the firſt year without bletmiſh : 
chou thou ſhalt prepareit + every morning. 
Ny" # See ver. 2. let. i. See wer. 4. let. n, . : 
; Or 14 And thou ſhalt prepare a meat-offering y for it 
vas re- (every morning, the ſixth z part of an ephah , and the 
|as the BP third @ part of an hin of ail , to temper with the fine flour ; 
br a mear-offering continually &, by a perpetual c ordinance to 
_ the LORD. 

Gr 4 9 See wer. 7. let. og. 2 Half a Buſhel of fine Meal. a Three pints 
. heed of Oil, for a Hin held nine pints. 4 Morning by Morning. © To 
as I continue til] rhe Meſſiah comes who will ſer up a more ſpiricual 
tO 4g” orſhip. 

" 15 Thus ſhall they prepare the lamb, and the meat- 
hall > BW offering, and the oil, every morning, for a continual 
Gallof urnt-offering. 
= _ This Verſe isa ratifyingof all preſcribed in the 13th and 14th Verſes. 
e oi « Theſe three Verſes dire the daily Sacrifice ; and becauſe they men- 
45- I tion only the Morning-Sacrifice, and one Lamb, ſome think rhar here 
prop Ie$$ is required rhan in that Numb. 28. 3, 4. but they forget that there | 
/ 1nd I Parity of Reaſon for the Evening-Sacrifice, and thar this in in-' 


Val. jI. 


[Dd] themn 


Chap. SNL.VL1. . 


< _—_— bs _—_ 0 
"ix 57e* ray p . — 4 CF, ; - = : _—_ - > - -. 
77 2M < "ax 6 , = oa AT re. Ws - p = oj — »N af Ih. TIO 
*=< <F&"-I In, a on IEA... \ 6" > _ & FIR -- Y; T'I ITS. 2-5. w—_—— : IKS: 
= is m——_—__ * 3A " y r 4 - 
uy © 4 open 7 q PL... v da - on 7 ol 
"eg I —oo ores > A KY ad + - a” 14.7 eral re : a6 14 . 1 Gangs on 
2 "4 Fl & "4 . ny IS. - » RO -, - ng ſa nA - "De _ TY uy "As — - 
4 RI%Rs:4- . - 28 cart * dl, » I SMESLRar*  _ ” {7 - -- TUNG owns oe £1) Y rm ILY 1% uw w==+ ad -r 
A. hn td - _ II Ae - he As 6 = © v6wlÞ It's "Xp - C7" , "A Wnav kh 
R ” LY _ x "bs ” : __ Os} eee uae wth ed 5k 
F pl % Hae + ” <1 \F*. - * P x 7 - 
"os 2 
- p 


_——— 


_ #%-\G%# 
__ + * > - .  aggnr ens & _w—__ $ 
> SO Oe — —— - wn HY oo a - = _ = 
4 Tres. ” he ” _ - [ =  $. 
© wy - me 4 > ho >: * a7: n © waa ris ly, . 
f Fo i I 
2 - 


. —_ EI 


, AS 2 "_ 7 : - 
, — WSN 4 —— , 5 LE TERS et ef es >; 4 - . 
> - 7 © "+ \ ou _ 3 1 0b Wt» - "” y =P _ 04 -. oh 3 
Sk ad raVgarts oo ot ry et ge -——— s p w— = - "= © 7 4 _ _ ore iS i! _ - YL. ."- 
Ian ELITY Moot ono Os <5 > IT ” "_— - per IE s ow on A . ; . 
netltooriiy+ 2:42 0 wy" hy : a pM ys us - ” - ear Pe. 3... * A k 
oy - enenng oy nn k * » 2” + "6rp) 4s - _ Pape * 2 D + j " "e I ay —_— aa wo a 
NN OR — - - _ \ Q _ _ - _ 
G K& . - a — Ah 6M p - - on - L — A a 4 hot ”. _ _ cho 
te ig - . "ray . = : week ». - _ Rig th, < OS —— _ gy" * - - . 
ws | 7, So, Rs, IT - D . OE I es Y we : — NY .- We = daye ? : _ _ — - _ _ Pay" 
s . Trae "of 75 44 vS. _ + Meets Bow» wy Ry _ =o hm © L == _ uy 7 , _=_ a —_ 7 Ic Ws. LES 
+ p z ary; . 1 4, = a . - — o jd a+. I FD P, 4 7 , _ yaners * + Ban wr>*e _—— a G0: _ - 
jen p4 1 " 93 —_— -- "24 eres : o vow ey ee l ont ft tera ects th % W- Fs" £ S I - <4 oy HT. Ig a TROL + oe 
- "IT? > " - * D —- £2 > Xs 2 yr - ©. 4 as + +3 1 - Sy} - 4 $4 "+7 ay Rag hf - 2 > -< b = b, To We 
n — Z R et of Hl p . mm ba Tear 6” of _ A by pp w_ « 48 A way 4; : , 4 - wo 
: As. —____ ry . - tt 5 - - 7 2 a —_ . OO oe » GOP QIAS CIS-INT fo ell SY WD ponnerrrr meth Es nb 
— $ = - ? L. LD _ _ x FL wr % -, — nf In g . " _ g —_— 
EY p AXE - in Ben PIR © Pinbes IA — ——_ : - — w_ ' es nn Ine eo + 
+ od 4 * wc - 4 4 et <; 7 i > 4 Ind '*. q Pap os , Poa 4 * "Pp 8 . ” - ET -»6 SIRREL I -,. 3. 5 23 7 ” og ou bs > = ——_ 
bom Ea ” In; w We way : ? perl 3c AI Fs Pr TEL a 
PRE _ Ah ee  COIEIETY p — ws x: A 1 x *, pay + ” = 7 Nm 
I £ — © ca ” —_—_— UC þ.- p . - D 275% 0 

+* s. _—_ 4 


Chap. XLVII 


E ZE 


them that boil »», where the miniſters » of the houſe o 


ſhall boil the ſacrifices p of the people. 

m Approved to do the Cobk's Work. n Either Levites, or elſe 
degraded Prieſts, of which chap. 44. ver. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14: which 
ſee. o The Templeof God. p which they bring, particularly their 
Peace-Offering, of which the People were to have a Portion, and to 
eat it before the Lord, which is the Reaſon ſome think theſe Courts 
and Kitchins were in the Corners of the Courts of the People ; but I 
think, as the people bringing a Sacrifice were admitted into the 
Court, that was the Court of the Prieſts, and to the very Gates of the 
Court of the Temple, where they gave rhe Sacrifice to the Prieſt , 


ſaw him prepare and offer ir for them, ſo they might be admitted to: 
Feaſt on ſo ſolemn occaſion in the Courts or Chambers , 
dinar1ily they might not come ; 4 
Kitchin-Courts to have been in the Court of the people , £s more 
like they were in the Prieſts Courts. ' 


n | 
whither or-| 


f cannot therefore derermine theſe} 


| 


CHAP, XLVII 


KIEL, Chap. &1 
ſeen b? thenhebrought me, ahd cauſed me to return ; 


to the brink ofthe river. 


a The Man with the Meaſuring Jine in hand. b Obſerved and, 
ſidered this , haſt thou well ſeen this ? c *Tis not ſaid whether he ms 
gone from the Bank; tho it be ſaid he returned to the Brink, o; Why 
haps tis, he cauſed me to return along by the Brink of the River, © * 


7 Now when I had returned 4, behold, * at the 4 


bank e of the river were very many trees f on the one ide 


and on the other g. 

d In his firſt coming he obſerved none, and no mention is made gr 
any Trees, but it ſeems he found them on his return ; tho they do nor 
really ſo ſoon grow, they might be viſionally there. e Where uſually 
for Delight and Ornament, for Profit too Men plant Trees. f The king; 
are not mentioned, tho the Excellency of them 1s commended, yer. 1, 
but the Multitude ofthem is mentioned, and rhe Growth intimared i 
the Hebrew, and perhaps the Uniformity of them, which ſeemed acof 
one Tree; for ſo 'tis the ſingular Number in the Hebrew. & On the 
North and South-ſides, for the River ran from Eaſt to Weſt. 


3 Then ſaid heh unto me, Theſe waters iſſue out t. 


The viſion of tbe holy waters flowing out of the new Jeruſalem, 1—$. the 
virtueof them, 6— 12. The borders of the land of inheritance dcſcribed, 
13—— 21. @ivided among ft Iſrael and ſtrangers, 22,23. 


I Fterward a he brought 5 me again unto the door of 


the houſe c, and behold, waters iſſued 4 out from! 


ward the eaft.countrey, and go down into the 5 || deſert 
and go into the ſea / : which being brought m2 torth into thel 
ſea, the waters»: ſhall be healed. 

h Ver. 6. let. 8. i Some read it as a proper Name, and fo render 


under the threſhold e of the houſe eaſtward : for the fore-i it ; they did run toward Galilee in the Eaſt, and the Hebrew bears i 


front of the houſe /food toward theeaſt, and the waters came 
down from under from the right-ſide f of the houſe , at the 
fouth-ſide g of the altar. 


a After that the Temple was meaſured , and the Ordinances of it 
were ſcttled, and what pertained to Prince and Pcople afſign'd, ©. 
b The Angel, or the Spirit of God, ehap. 1. 3.and 3. 22. c The Temple 
it {elf d Some doobſerve, that there were AqueduQs Jaid under 
Ground, which from ſome Fountain were convey'd to cleanſe and 
purge away the Blood of Sacrifices poured forth, and the Excrements 
of the flain Beaſts, of which ſome would remain after greateſt Care ; 
however they would need much Water about their Temple-Services, 
and this was convey'd in Pipes from the Fountain Eram, as Dr. Light- 
fot obſerves from their Rabbins, and from Ariſtew an Eye-witnels ; 
theſe gave occaſion or ground of this Viſion. e The Fountain lay 
tn the Weſt, the Conduit-pipes were laid to bring the Water to the 


Temple, and fo muft run Eaſtward, and perhaps one main Pipe might N 
be Jazd under the Eaſt-gate of the Temple. f On the South-ſide off 


the Temple; for ſo the South is to a Man whoſe Face Iooketh toward 
the Eaſt. « Towards the South-ſide of the Altar, for ſo it ſeems they 
were convey'd to run till they came to the Altar, and were convey'd 
by the right (ide ofitinto a Room they called the Wel-Room. The 
ſpiritual meaning I refer to the private Meditations of Chriſtians. 
Thus for of the Aquedu&s. 


2 Then brought he me out + of the way of the gate 


northward 7, and led me about &k the way without / 


unto the utter gate 2 by the way that looketh ealtward 
2, and behold, there o ran out waters on the right 
ſide p. | 


h Of the inmoſt Court, where he ſaw the Waters running under the 
Threſhold, and by the South-fide of the Altar. #7 The Eaſt-Gare 
being ſhur, the Prophet in this Viſion is 1:d to the North-gate, our 
of which he gocth into the next Court, and ſ@ through them all ci)l 
hecomes to th: North-Gate of the outmoſt Court. k Cauſed him to 
go about from that Gate to the Eaſt-Gate of the ſame Court. 
] Not on the inſide of the Wall, but round on the outſide of the 


- 


Wall, which will appear preſently, and the Reaſon why. »» The 


* ©utmoſkh North-Gate in the Wall that compaſled the whole Mountain 


of the Lord's Houſe. » When the Prophet was come quite out of 


all the Courts, and is on the outſide ofthe laſt Wall, he is turned 
from the North-Gate towards the Eaſt-Gate, and walks up to that 
Gate. o There he found the Water-courſe. p That is on the South. 
ſide. Vid. wer. 1. let. f. | 

3 And whenthe man q that had the liner in his hand, 
went forth 5 eaſtward, he meaſured 7 a thouſand cubits «, 
and he brought me through the waters x 5 the | waters 


+ Heb.wa- zyereto the ankles y. 


e275 of the 
axkles. 


+ Heb wa- 


ters of 
fe W1314z1T, 


9 This is he, who accompanied the Prophet as his Guide all along, 
and of whom already hath been ſpoken in ſeveral Notes. » Mentioned 
in chap. 40. vey. 3. but hithertonot uſed, for the Reed and Cubir hi- 
therto were uſed only, at leaſt only mentioned. s From the Gate 
direCtly Eaſt, with whom the Prophet goeth. # By the Line in his 
Hand. « Almoſt the third part of an Engliſh Mile, it wanted about 
8o Yards of a third part. x Went before him as his Guide, and the 
Prophet followed; all this in Viſion. y Some five or ſix Inches deep. 


4 Again he meaſured a thouſand, and brought me 
through the waters ; the waters were to the knees : again 
he meaſured a thouſand, and brought me through ; the 
waters were to the loins. 

5 Aﬀeerwards he meaſured a thouſand, and it was a 
river that I could not paſs over; for the waters were 
riſen, -# waters to ſwim in, a river that could not be 
paſſed over &. 


k "Chis was all donein Viſion , and theſe Waters thus encreaſed 
were viſiona] Waters, there was ne ſuch natural courſe of Waters in 
the place; nor is it imaginable, that in three Miles, or thereabours, 


indeed as to the ſound of the word ; but it cannot be the meaning of 
the place, for Galilce, neither the upper or lower were Eaſt , by 
North-Weſt from Jeruſalem toward Tyr: : eur Tranſlation doth there. 
fore better render ir the Eaſt Country, or Border, as the H.brew Pro. 
perly. k To Arabis, fay the LXXII in their Greek Verſion; if thi 
were the courſe of the Waters, they did run a courſe quite contrary 
to that of Galilee, which lay North and by Weſt from Feruſaltm, 
Whereas Arabia lay South and by Eaſt from Jeruſalem. *Tis then the 
Champagne, plain Country, or the Deſerc, as we read it, and may 
literally be underſtood of the Deſert of Maon, or Kadiſh, or Zidh 
' which lay on the dead Sea ; and this ſutes well enough with Enged 
and En-Eglaim, mentioned as bordering on theſe Waters , v#. 1, 
|} TheSea of Tiberias ſay ſome, others, the Sea called the cad $:4, q; 
| Lake of Sodem, which needed healing. »= When they run into thi 
Sea, or fall into it, which is our uſualPhraſe. » The Waters of the 
' Sea ſhall be healed, made wholſome. * Where the Grace of God from 
his Temple and Alrar flows as this Water, it heals the COITUPTt vicious 
ature of Man, and renders barren, horrid and terrible Delerts, 1 
Land of Waters, and Gardens ; fo repreſented here, and fo pronj. 
{ed by the Lord, 1/a. 36. 1, 2. and 43. 19, 20. and 51. 3. On; 
more to this Verſe let me add, that as the Hebrew Doors do, ſo u: 
may take 1t here, that theſe flowing Waters do divide themſelves; 
and that ſome flow toward one Sea, 7, e. the Sea of Tiberias, this to. 
ward Galilee ; other parts flow toward Arabia the Deſert, and ſoin 
their way take their courſe by Enged; the Deſerc of Ziph , and iny 
the dead Sea. 

9 Andit ſhall come topaſls , 7hat every thing that liveth 
0, which moveth p, whitherſoever the - rivers q thall come, 
ſhall live 7 - and there ſhall be a very great multitude : gf 
fiſh, becauſe theſe waters # ſhall come thither: for they 
ſhall he healed », and every thing ſhall live x whither th; 
riyer cometh. 


o As Fiſh, ſo thisuniverſal is to be limited. p In the Waters, 
Gen. 1. 20. this kind of living Creatures are deſcribed. g Tek 
Rivers { by thisit appears, the H:brew DoQors have ſome ground for 
their interpreting it the running of theſe Waters in two Channels) 
flow. r Bepreſervedalive, or nouriſhed, and thrive, whereas noFih 
can live in the dead Sea, as all Reportsaſſureus, and to which this of 
che Prophet alludeth. 5 Before none, now innumerable Filh there, 
+ Theſe Temple-Waters, which have in them a healing Virtue. « The 
poiſonous Waters of the dead Sea ſhall be made wholſome for Fiſh. 
x Thrive and multiply in the virtue of the healing Streams of this 
Temple-water. Thus Enigmartically is the fruicfulneſs of the Gract 
of God in the Church ſer forth. 


10 And it ſhall cometo paſs, hat the fiſhers y ſhall ſtand 

z upon it 4, from En-gedi beven unto En-Eglaim c ; they 

{hall be a place to ſpread forth nets e, their fiſh ſhall be ac 
cording to their kinds f as the fiſh of * the great ſea," 
t 


exceeding many h. 
y Men whoſe 'Trade is to fiſh for Livelihood and Profic. z Shall 
diſpoſe of themſelves about theſe Waters ; either on the Shore along 
the River ſide, or in Boats on the Sea, to rake the Fiſh. a The Sea, 
whoſe Waters healed become fruitful. 4 Which lay on the South- 
Weſt of the Lake of Sodom, fo near thar *ris reported that there arethe 
Trees which bring forth Fruit beaurifulro the Eye, but rouch'd with 
che Hand fall into Aſhes; yer on thoſe parts more remote from this 
Sea, Engedi affords excellent Vines, Canticles 1. 14. or Gardens ot 
Balſam-Trees. c A City on the North-Eaſt of the dead Sea , near 
which place Jordan runs into it, and they ſay *tis a Boundary Town of 
Moab ; others will have it no proper, but common Name, and ſignity- 
ing the Confluence of Waters in any place: if fo, 'twill be likelieft 
to be underſtood of that part of the Red Sea, where Jordan, and two 
more leſſer Rivers run into it, at the North and North-Eaſt end of this 
Sea. e All along on the Wcſt-ſide of this Sea to dry them, and fit 
them again. f Ofall ſorts. g For Number, Growth, and Goodnels 
for uſe. þ Or great, of exceeling great bigneſs in their ſeveral kinds. 
All this is myſtical, and fu'filled fince Chriſt hath made his Miniſters, 
as he made his Apoſtles Fiſhers of Men. : 
1x Bur the miry 5 places thereof, and the mariſhes* 


which was the moſt of the Current, the Waters ſhould fo riſe ; but ir 
is emblematical, and hath a deep myſterious meaning, and includes 
ſpiritual things, and their wonderful Growth from ſinall Beginnings, 
and theſe from the Temple alſo: Bur I refer this ſtill to private Medi- 
cations. 


6 F And he afaiquntome, Son of man, haſt thou 


thereof, || ſhall not be healed /, they ſhall be given t,, 
ſalt »-, thi 


; Unſound , rotten parts , that are neither Sea, nor yet ſound 
Ground, a proper Emblem of Hypocrites. & Low Land, fob'd wit? 
the overflowings of unhealthful! Waters, , neither fic to breed Fiſh #5 


the Sea, nor bear Tiezsas the Land, / Theiez Warers find __ and 
ca\* 


lome re, 
the Fr, 
beyond 
Country 
I7 | 
Zar-en; 
northy 
north: { 
 T 
Village 
Lat, th 
the moſt 
18 
Haurg 
Val 


1P. SLVII. 


EZEKIEL, 


ve them corrupt and noxious. » Left to their BarreancG, or uſed 6. F ] "oe I 
jeavet ncomrons, » Let ans th and from the land of Iſrael by 4 Jordan, from the border 


i2 And by » the river upon the bank thereof on 


unto the eaſt-ſea e : and rhis 3s the ealt-lide. 
4 That was the North-Eaſt Bound, where we muſt begin to mec- 


+ this ſide and on that ſide, ſhall þ- grow 0 all trees for | ſure the Eaſt-ſide; and © b this was = heb: SHO - > 
2. meat ?, * whoſe leaf ſhall not fade 9, neither ſhall the| Haurar; bur the Countrey OS. fot avgbe | kaow rene Pra es 


ob 8. f{qzic thereof be conſumed r : 


it ſhall bring forth {| new 


Damaſcus, or neat it, and ſo this more particularly dire& rhe meaſu- 


fruit according to his months 5, becauſe their * waters| $757 Þ<8in ar Damaſers, draw the Line through Auwanit'r, and fo o1 


c g. they itlued out of the ſanQtuary «, and the fruit thereof from South to North, where jvins 


Southerly to Gilead. c A famous Mountain abour fifry Miles in !eiigth 
ount Libany at the Eaſt.e11d of 2r; 


aa {hall be for meat x, and the leaf » thereof for | medI1- | and hath many particular Names ih particular places, and fectns toend 


» All along this River, which way ever it runs, it ſhall make its 
Banks ſo fruittul, that on both ſides thereof it ſhall be abundantly 
planted with beſt Trees. o Take Root, flouriſh. and be fruirful, as 
Trees that like their Soil. p They ſhall not be as Trees that are 


his Sourhern Progreſs at the Rock Aarzot. d From urſide of the 
q the ourſid L 
Land of J/rael, which lay beyord Jordan. e Thence to Ho © Pons ne 
Dead S:a, which lay on the Eaſt of Jeraſal;m. Thus a Line dravr1 
from Damaſcus throgh Auron:tis, Gilcad, the Land of Iſrael beyond Jer- 


4an to the Eaſt. Sea, made the Eaſtern Ftonticr. 


ſer only for Pleaſure, their Fruit ſhall be for Food. q Ever green i9 And the. ſouth f ſide ſouthward from Tamar, 


and flouriſhing,as Trees in the Spring,and in their Prime. » Never | ever TH ; : TT 
be ſo little as ro be conſumed and ſpent, never rot and decay, there| yer Pays _ rs of . {rife g in Kadelh, the | rj- Ot* Met:« 
ſhaltalways be Fruit, and enough. 5 Theſe Trees have, as the Tree » TO the great Ia z: 
of Life, their Fruit every Month, Rev. 22.2. #t Called their Waters, 
becauſe watered by this Stream. v And ſo carried a Bleſſing with 
them, theſe Waters carne from the Temple, and were indeed a Spel] 


; d thi i 4 C4. bah. 
|| ſouthward. an 1; the ſouth-ſide l 


againſt Barrenneſs. x See let. p. y There are many Herbs of a heal. dition of Hazezon Tamar ; and ſo ſome place the Lake of Sodom, that mn 


ing Property, none like the Leaves of theſe Trees. z Healing the 
Nations, as Rev. 22. 2. Theſe Trees moſt likely were Palmeto-Trees, 
whence the Balm that healeth, the Fruit thar feedeth, and Juice thar 


the greateſt part will be this Southern Frontier From 

. p 7 
Linedrawn to Meribah in Kadeſh, of which Numb. K.. t3. and prog by 
þ Called the Riverof Egyp:, and was on the South of Judah, lay dis 


refreſheth, and allays our Thirſt. Thus the Lerrer ; the Myſtery T do reCtly in the way to Egypr, from Jeruſalem. i Tothe South. welt parC 
nor inliſt on, 'tisno hard matter for private Chriſtians to accommo- | ®* "ie Mediterranean Sea near Gaza. This is the Southern Frontier: 


date 1t tO themſelves. 


20 The welſt-ſide alſo ſhall be the great ſea from the 


13 T Thus faith the Lord GOD, This ſhall be the bor. | border, till a m me * Ds 
der a, whereby ye ſhall inherit 5 the land according to] weſt-ſide. Oe nn + SU 


twelve c tribes of Iſrael : Joſeph 4d ſhall have two +.* This Boundary begins where the River fallsints the Mediterr ane 4 


portions. 


little South of Gaza, this the South Point of the Weſtern Boundary ; 


a The utmoſt Bounds ofthe whole Land. 5 That is, ſhall divide and the Line runs all along t he Sea-ſhore Northward ,U] you come iti 


for Inheritance to the Tribes of 1j-ac/. c As'twas at firſt divided 
into twelve Portions, ſo now again. 4d That is, the two Sons of 57o- 


a ſtreighr Line to Hamath, and this is the Nothern Point of the Weſt 
Frontier, over-right Sidon, or little differing. 


ſeph, Ephraim and Manaſſeh, and this purſuant of their Adoption by] 21 So ſhall ye divide this land # ; accordi 
Jacob, as well as in fulfilling the Will of 7ac6h, who gave Yoſeph 4 the tribes / of Gael nd & unto you, according tg 


double ſhare. 


k Now bounded. ! Into twelve Parts or Tribes, to wit, all buc 


14 And ye ſhall inhericit, one e as well as another : con | whar is allorred to Pr; i i : : 
| ; pn l EE nce, Prieſts, Levites, and the City: h 
+, Cerning che which I i * lifted up mine hand 7 to give: It holy, muſt be reſerved ; and when reſerved, a very fair - 0 ic Tefe 


7. unto your fathers 
inheritance. 


2, and this land ſhall fall 4unto you #for| ©? the twelve Tribes, if youmeaſure the holy Pottion by Cubits, and 


not by Reeds. 


e By equal Right eath Ttibe, and each Family ſhall inherit their| . 22 Y And it ſhall come to paſs ”, that ye ſhall &- 
aſſign'd Portion, by rightof Children deſcendaar from a Father,whoſe vide it by lot 2 for an inheritance unto you o, and tothe 
ewas by Letters Patents from Heaven. f Which by. Oath bound ſtrangers that ſojourn ? among you, Which ſhall beget 


= my {clf, faich God, to give to you, ſee this form of Oath, chap. 20. 
ver. 5. Tet. r. andehap. 36. wer. 7. let.g. g Firſt to Abraham, Gen. 13. 
Is. and 15.18. nextto Iſaac, Gen. 26. 3. next to Jacob, Gen. 28. 13.14 I! . 
| andall three are frequently mentioned, as thoſe to whom the Lord | 123 have inhe 
ſware in this thing, Exed. 33. 1. Deut. 1. 8. and 6. 10, & 
ſpeak of the Inherirance which is ſure and firna b 
and comes into aQtual Poſſeſſion ; beſide it may referto the dividing by 
Lor, which God will guide, char each may have their own. 5 Retur- 
ned Captives, who were carried away, and uſed as if nothing were your 


you never ſhould have any thing, but in their ſight you 


own, andasif 
ſhall inherir. 


Is And this ſhall be the border of the land toward 
the north-ſide &, from the great ſea /, the way of He 


thion »z, as men go to Zedad »: 


& In bounding the Land, the Prophet is informed what is the North. 
Border firſt. 1-This called fo, not that 'tis the greateſt, for 'cis the 
5 Meaiterrane here ſpoken of, but with reſpe& to the Jews; this to them 
= was the greateſt they knew. or traded on; from the Sea doth the mea- 
£ furing of the Land begia, from the Weſt point along to Herlon. 
# » Which is called Het2alon by Adrichomius in the Tribe of 4ſher, ar 
the foot, or near the Mount Hermon or Senir, as chap. 27. 5. calls thar 
Mount : This City was in the North-Eaſt of /4ſher's Lor, and on the 
North-Welſt of Naprhali's Lot, in- the old Diviſion of the Land. 
» Whichis Seda, a ſmall Town under the ſame Hill, and near the 


head of theRiver Eleutherns, antient]y Gebat. 


76 Hamath 0, Berothah p, Sibraim 4, which 3s be- 
tween 7 the border of Damaſcus, and the border of 
: Hamath; || Hazar-hatticon s , which is by the coaſt of 


auran ?, 


0 Very near to the Head of Elenthers, or Gebat, and to Sedada : It 
like to be that mentioned. ſa. 10. 9. ſituate about the middle ofthe 
orth-boundary of the Land, called ſometime Epiphanis, from Antio- 
'd it, and ſome ſay now called Enimas. p Be. 
derable Town or Village, lying Eaſt of Seaa- 
as, q Or Sabarim, a place of no farther note than the former, known 
thus by being a Boundary. » It lay berween theſe two, Hemath to 

ſt of it, and Damaſers to the Eaſt by North, ſomewhat nearer 
© Hamath than to Damaſizs. 5 Tho we render it as a proper Name, 
ome render it otherwiſe. The ſmall Villages between them two ( ſo 
£ Or Aran, ſome Miles 
*yond Jorden, Eaſtward from Hamath, which alſo gives Name to the 


Is 
N 
<1 Epiphanes, who repair 
rtha a ſmall and inconſj 


the We 


ne Fr.) i.e. between Hamathand Hauran. 


ountry called Auranicis. 


17 And the border « from the ſea x, ſhall be * Ha- 
*4-enan y, the border of Damaſcus, and- the north 
, and the border of Hamath ; and #hzs 35 the 


northward & 
north: ſide. 


Vi 


ic moſt Southern of Syria Damaſcens, 


1s And the eaſt-ſide ye ſhall meaſure -+ from 


Hauran a 
Vol. ] 


. 


h So we llrael, 
y indefeiſable Righr,| This dire&s what they ſhould do, as well as foretels the Evens 


1 The urmoſt Northern Bounds. x Vid. wer. 15. Jer. 1. y The 
k q By Enan, or Enon near Sebada. 2, A Line drawnfrom Weſt co 
wt, that ſhall diftinguith the moſt Nothern Boundaries of 17 ael from 


children q among you: and they ſhall be unto you as born 
in the countrey among the children r of Iſrael, they 
ritance 5 with you 7 among the tribes « of 


that ſhall be. » So *"twas divided before, ſo ic muſt again, for thus 
all Controverſies ſhall be prevented ; thus he will chooſe thelr Inheri. 
tance for them, for the Diſpoſition of the Lot is of the Lord. o Thar 
are the natural Seed of Abraham. p Foreigners never had ſuch Pri. 
vilege before, tho they mighe dwell and trade among the Jews, yet 
they were excluded all Hereditary Right, could not purchaſe, nor 
poſlefls Inheritances ; bur now the Conſtitution is altered, and by this 
Temporal External incorporating them, a Spiritual and Heavenly is 
ſignified no doubt. They are pur into Capacity of inheciting with 
Iſrael 'in both Canaans, in this below, in that above. 4 Who frony 
cheir Birth ſhould be inveſted with this Right of inheriting. - Equally 
witch the Children of 1/-ael in point of Right, and with thar very 
Tribe 1n which they ſojourn. 5 Poſleſſs and enjoy as well as you. 
£ This ſpeaks the equal Title or Privilege. « This dire&s where the 
Inherirance of theſe Stangers born among them, or thar firft cams 
with them, whea they came out of Babylon, ſhould be aſign'd them, 
viz. 1n that very Tribe where they ſojourn'd, which is fully expreſt 
in the next Verſe. 

23 And itſhall come to paſs x, rhat in what tribe y the 
ſtranger zſojourneth, there ſhall ye give « him his b inhes 
ritance, ſaith the Lord GOD c. 

x See ver. 22. let. m, y Whether by choice or chance the Stranger 
fix'd in that Tribe, No Stranger ſhall be excluded out of the Tribe's 
Inheritance among whom he hath ſojourn'd and begotten Children. 
z Every Proſelyte or Gentile that joins himſelf ro the People of God. 
a Neither the 7ew might thruſt a Scanger out into another Tribe, nor 
might the Stranger by choice go to another. #& *Tis called his, for ſo 
much as he had a Right preceding the Afſignation, c All this eons 
firmed by Divine Authority. 


CHAP. xty1n. 


The portion of the twelve tribes in the new land of inheritante, 15, Of 
the ſanftuary, city, ſuburbs, and of the prince, 8 —29. The meaſure and 
gates of the new city, 39—35« . 


I OW theſe « are the natnes of the ttibes, from 
the north + ehd to «© the coaſt of the way of 
Hethlon 4, as one goeth to Hamiath e, Hazar-enan f, the 


border g of Damaſcus northward, to the coaſt of Ha. 
math 4, ( for theſe are his # ſides eaſt & and weſt) a -þ por- 
tzon for Dan /. 


a Which follow in theirorder. 5 As the Meaſuter began to bound portion. 


the Land firſt on the North-tide, fo he will firſt p!ace the Ttibeto 
whom the moſt Northern Lot fell, or rather was aſltign'd by a- Divine 
Dire&ion. c Along through the Coaſt that leads from the Weſt or 
great Sea to Hethlon. d See chap. 47.15. let.m, e A PFrontier City 


, and from: Damaſcus b, and from Gilead c, 


of that Name ; ſee c49p. 47. 16. let. o. antiently the Royal City of 


fD4 2] Th; 


Chap: XLVII, 


F Shall begin at that Point which firſt vergeth Sourh ward fork ON 
Eaſt-Sea roward Tamar, which is near Engedi, and known here _ Moe wu 


_—_ 
oy 


TV TERTI—_— 


= a i ans 


AF 
*« 


”— 


i | 
i 
c '* 138 5 
1 
p : : 14 
; 
- : . 
4 : 
LEY 
p| cs : 
4 4 , 
i 
' b 
: (37s 
bot! 
v 
[i Fi 
, + 
. "3 18..7 
: / 
! 4 
Ts * 
8, * 
[4 - Y 
446 
- : 4 
1 > 
L 
i , i3 
J i. 4 
i |S. . 
x « 
#5 
\ 3* 
f | ll Fo 
q '* T7 
} , > | 
: ad p 
' f : 
ad » 
[1 K £7 
' wt. 8 
, ; 18: 
: ; 7 
: i] | 
: 
' THEE; } 
l g 4 [ 
4 r 
b | 
4 TIT! 
l 14 
41 h2) 
ag 
8 Ci 
"5 
75% 
ur, 
1 9 : 
? 4" FI 
L "wt. 
$ "+ 
q: ' FR1% 
4 . . be » £ 
a 4 BZ . 
. £3: 
b . 
: j OE 7 
«4 : * (F* " 
1% + Mas 
4 ES z 
bY ; 
»* Z 
: ,, : £ 
.F : S 
; {3 37 © 
» : b Ji Bt (S 
: I i 417 A 
5 [4 Ns pt 
K 6 4 
T3 Fx - 
iEF 7.3 
£5:1% 8 
: [HEE by 
8 4 o 
: bd "WE 
F and P:18.H £ 
i 4 Fn 
J EN 3. 4 
#44 WE 
Bs (2: d 
: 4 
4 af 
ki C: "er: - 
, 33 + 5 Pr 
/ C48 FIR. 
1 Z XN 
F 
=. SOTHI8 - 
by. +: +. y 
TH 3-25 4 7 
= F ” 
Fat BTL . 
Li , 
- : y 
«+ A - & 
18 et : G 
, MS : y 
a » wt 2 x 
1 ELON? 
#1 + *'v *+ 
, 
by p - ut y 
4 " 4 ol B « 
ES, II's 4 
J A FS 2 
if > «1 WF 6 
= v.25 - -4 
: » H ; 
*4.5 Het 7 
: "3 4 {* & 
bt 1 : 1 
F + 35 . 
q 08Y SENT 
"4s 41 $5 
is, vi 4* 
4 + +; .: 
A : VS 35 4 
: "I 3 
q 4 I . 
F q 
J : ' | 
= ” ia 
Ef) F : LX;3 
p * + " 
& z $38 
£ 5 8 ;F;: 
+2 - nn + 
+13 F *32.t* 
Wo % 
= : 4 
-> 4+ IS . 
4 "2.36 + , 
s | & 
+ [ Y 
's "ey Fs: 
$*/ 352 
» 4 z 4 
K Max 
'S th; 1eg%h 
B35 {5245 
25, : 
= $3Þ 
4 FA 5 Y 
+*THK&L $* 
4 ” 63.5 FF» £ 
i Pn 
* a5 e #41 '« 
is Ts OBE 3. 
8 4:4 »: tf þ#-2 
3-7; . +47 4 Fi 
F "S823 
Y v 
#5524 
3 - = wn 
PLL © "$22" 0 
4 - - AT : 
MET 7 
i x : , 5 
j 21K” \ Y! 
> . 
4 & 6 3» *3% 
Þ 1,2 "13. 
IS E 
Y : 
=. +;'-77 3 
: \ 
J wo i 
81S 
4 *7 
. : 8 £3440 
x ; $4 
' Þ 4 
- * is 
Y CY #190 
Li £3 A 5 5,198 
IIA LHR bd 
C : : 
ſ . 
\ 34 ;F'8 ? 
SE 4 7 W577! 
: 3 £3 
, [4 ,4 - V " 
j » % i485 
J 4 , 5 
- bs 
b * bs 12+ 4-8 
15 + ST 23<IL 0 
'T 4% '&F 
£ b 
13-3 "uh, $ 
7 | : { 
F$1Þþ #4 b, 
ou. Us © 3.41 i-| 
pEr 287 7 . * 
* 4% %4 : * | 
F5 ; ' F5K: 
"4%, © of *3.1 
» . pt of 
$< I #0 TH Ate 
i; = 7 PEST, 
+ F FA: 3 
, = + *E. 
. . et 1533S 
SETS 1 TH 
þ '# ; | i# -£: 
: - '$ 
t] SISAS: © 3. 
2; *-. 4 
: LIT 
17+ : : ' 
3 [3 FL, 
1 166" Ty 
4 +? 4 : 
” . : 
#” 182" : "4 
Fa 
4 | 1% _ 
! ge 
: 7 F 1: 
: o $34 . 
; $48 1.8 
14! X 
© 7 Wet tt 
31! þ 13 Pj; 
' » 
ws 4 : : 
4 f +, - ny 
{4 i+ Cy } - 
SI (- . 
{ÞS \. {5% 
1 \ = 
a &- £ 7 
on [f « 
. ; . 
+ i F $ 47 
4 4% : 1 4 be 
#23 £7 t 
" do +£ 2-1 
'+ 34 + kb 33's 5 Pi s 
' 346 
; br WEI 
"> : a .. ” 
ES 4, 
G - " 
3% J$ 
: þ " 24596 
004 +8 
15 $65 FS | 
4 a - | t 2 £1 
n p; 
. ? (1 
, 7 3 " 
o 
Che 
4 . 
, , 1 


- w—_ 
< 75w — 
-* 


+ H-b. 094 


Chap. XLVIII. 


g- 


Tor, who congratulated David in his Viftory over Hadadezar King of 
Syria Zobah, 2 Sam. 8. 2,10. f Vid. chap. 47. 17. let y. for I meet 
with no more concerningit. g And ſo on by the Border of Damaſcus, 
which Jay farther Eaftward than Enan, as Geographers deſcribe it. 
þ This is Syris, and perhaps might have been beſt ſo tranſlated ; along 
bordering on this Coaſt the reſt of the Northern Boundary did run. 
5 The Land, or. Dan mentioned immediately after. k That is from 
the Eaſt-point, where Mount Libanrs joineth to Gilead, to the Weſt. 
point, which is ſuppoſed in the Midland-Sea, near the hot Baths or 
Sidan ; ſee chap.47.20. 1 The Tribe of Dan, and the Strangers that 
ſojourn with him. 


2 And by mtheborder of Dan, from the eaſt-ſide unto 
the welt-ſide, a portion for Alher. 

» That is all along on the South-ſide of Dax, from Eaſt to mY 
in length ſhallthe ſhare of the Tribe of 4ſber lie. | 

3 'And by the border of Aſher, from the eaſt-ſide even 
unto the weſt-ſide », a portion for Naphtali. | ; 

» To the North-weſt Point where the dividing Line ends, being 
drawn from the North-Eaſt Point to the North-Weſt in the Mid/and- 


oy And by the border of Naphitali, from the eaſt-ſide 


unto the welt-ſide, a portion for Manaſlch. 

5 And by the border of Manaſſeh, from the eaſt-ſide 
unto the weſt-ſide, a portion for Ephraim. 

6 And by the border of Ephraim, from the eaſt-ſide 
even unto the weſt ſide, a portion for Reuben. 

7 And by the border of Reuben, from the eaſt-ſide 
untothe welt-ſide, a portion for Judah. : 

Hitherto you have ſevenof the twelve Tribes placed inthe Nothern 
part of Caxa#n, and reckoned as they lay in order, where nothing 0c- 
curs new fromthe 24 Verſe to the 8h. 

$ And by the border of Judah, from the eaſt-fide unto 
the welt-ſide, ſhall be the offering o which ye ſhall offer 
of five and twenty thouſand reeds p in breadth, and 7 
length as one of the otber parts, from the eaſt-{ide 
unto the weſt-ſide q3 and the ſanQuary r ſhall be in the 
mid(t of it 5. | 

+ The holy Portion, ofwhich chap. 45. 1. fet out for Priefts, Le- 
vites, and City, chap. 45. 4, 5- þ Reed is here ſupplied by the 
Tranſlators, but I rather think Cubits, for the greatneſs of the Portion 
meaſur'd by Reeds willeat ourthe Tribes, orleave very little for them, 
as appears thus. The whole length from North co South was about 
160 Miles, the breadth ſome 6o. . Now 25000 Reeds are atthe leaſt 


77 Miles, at one thouſand Paces to a Mile. Theſe 77 taken out of 


160, there will remain but 83 for the 12 Tribes, which will afford 
not quite ſeven Miles in breadth for each Tribe, whenas 77 Miles 
are allotted to the Pricſts, Levites and City, ſothat there will remain 
but 83 Milesfor the 12 Tribes, that is, to each one almoſt 7 Miles. 
Now this to me would ſeem very much diſproportion'd ; but 25000 
Cubirs reckoned do give the holy Portion and City 12 Miles and 
halfſquare, as broad as long, and give near as much 1n breadth to 
each Tribe, and five times almoſt as much in length to each Tribe ; 
which appears thus, 12 times 12 times make 144, and 12 quarters make 
3 wholes; givethen each Tribe 12 and aquarter, you divide 147 by 
12 and aquarter : now tothis add the Princes, the holy Portion, and 
the City-land, which is 12 Miles add a half, and you have 159 Miles 
and three quarters, which is the length of the whole Land ; thus the 
breadth of each Portion for each Tribe, but the length of each ex- 
ceeded the Prince by 12 and a half, and the holy Portion, as much 
as 6o exceeds 12 anda half. q That is 25000 1n length, which a- 
mounts to 12 Miles and one half. Now the reſidue of the Land from 
the Sea Eaſtward, abutting on the whole breadth of the holy Por. 
tion by equal Proportion, will be twenty three and onequarter, and as 
'much from the other ſide, meaſuring from the Eaſtern Bounds of the 
holy Portion to the utmoſt Bounds Eaſtward of the Land, which is 
60 Miles from its utmoſt Weſtern Bounds, as appears thus; Take an 
Oblong-Square, whoſe breadth is 12 and a half, itslengrh 60, ſuppoſe 
in the very middle 12 and a half Square taken up, there will remain 
at each end the halfof 47 and three quarters, which is 23 and three 
quarters: according to this we conceive the Prince hath aſlign'd him as 
much as two Tribes very near, and almoſt four times as much as the 
holy Oblation; ſo that there is good reaſon for that chap. 45.9. againſt 
Oppreſſion, and the Command he be content. » The whole Content 
of Suburbs, Courts, and Houſe. s Of the Land laid out for the holy 
Portion, for God and his Pricſts. 


9 The oblation that ye ſhall offer unto the LORD, 
ſhall be of five and ewenty thouſand in length, and often 
thouſand in breath. 

This Verſe theſame with the 34 Verſe of chap. 45. which ſee. 

10 And for them, ever for the prieſt r, ſhall be #43: 
holy oblation, towardithe north «, five and ewenty thou- 
ſand i» length,and toward the weſt ten thouſand in breadth x, 
and toward the eaſt tenthouſand in breadth y, and coward 
the ſouth = five and twenty thouſand in length ; 
and the ſantuary of the. LORD ſhall be in the midſt 
thereof. 


£ Who are more particularly deſcribed, ver, 11. which ſee. « The 
North-ſide in length from North-eaſt to North-weſt. x From South. 


* Ch. 44. weſt to North-weſt Point, between which Points lay the Welt-ſide 


5. 


» Between North-eaſt and South-eaſt Points, which made the Eaſt- 


+ Or, the border. = From South-eaſt Point by Line drawn to South-weſt, the 
ſanfified ſame Meaſure with the North. 


portion 


11 * || 7: ſhall be for the prieſts :hat are ſandtified, of 


ſhall be f57 1. ſons of Zadok, which have kept my || charge, which 


the prieſts. 


I 


went not aſtray when the children of Iſrae] went aftray, as 


ward , orthe Levites went aſtray. 


erd;nauce. See this Verle explained , cp. 44. 15, 16, 


EZEKIEL 


Chap XL /T 
12 And this oblation a of the land that is offereq ; 
ſhall be unto them c a thing moſt holy by the border 2 


of the Levites. 


s Which is as 'twere the Primitiz ofthe Land, 'twas order'd to he 
firtt ſer out for God. 6 Set apart, and dedicated ro God. «© In the 
account both of the Prieſts,and che whole People it ſhall be moſt ho] 
on no occaſion to be Servant unto any common Uſes. 7 Ir ſhalj ki 
next to the Levites, theſe lay Southward between the Prieſt, ang = 
Cities Portion. : 4 


13 And over e againſt the border of the 
Levites ſhall have five and twenty thouſand 


prieſt, the 


in length 


and ten thouſand in breadth : all the length ſpal} ;; 
= and twenty thouſand, and the breadth 
and. | 


ten thoy. 


Vid. this Verſe explain'd chap. 44. 5. tet. e The Levites Portion 
ran parallel with the Prieſts, whoſe Northern Limits were next to the 
Southern Limits of the Lewvires. 


'14 And they ſhall not ſell Fofit, neither exchange, no; 
alienate the firſt-fruits of the land : for ir s holy unto 
the LORD. 


F It is moſt koly, and therefore no Price ſhould be offered for ie, noe 
any Price ſet upon it, nor may they paſs nw any on pretence of get. 
ting greater, and more particularly ſerviceable to them, and their In. 
ployment, and ſo for Conveniences part with God's Inheritance - this 
is forbidden, this is holy, as the firſt Fruits were under the Lay 
Lev. 25. 23,24. 1 King. 21. 4. 


i5 JT And the five thouſand hat are left in the 
breadth over againſt g the five and twenty thouſand 3, 
hall be a profane # place for the city, for dwelling & ang 
tor ſuburbs 1; and the city »» ſhall be in the migf 
thereof », 

g Or running along by the fide. þ Afign'd to the Leviter, i A 
common, not conſecrated place, in which the City ſhon!d be built, ; 
place for allServices as Men ſhall need. Now as that is counted holy 
which is ſer apart only for the Service of God, ſo that common oy 
profane, that is for common Uſes. k Houſes within the Wall, 
{ Streets, and Dwellings, or Gardens without the Walls. ws Jeruſalem, 
» Of this common place, which ts called here profane; ſo that ten 
chouſand are left at each end, | 


15 And theſe ſhall be the meaſures 0 thereof; the 
north-ſide four thouſand and five hundred, and the fouth 
ſide four thouſand and five hundred, and on the eaſt-ſide 
four thouſand and five hundred, and the welſt-ſide four 
thouſand and five hundred. 

0 The extent and proportions of the Ground for the Ciry, a Square 
of 4500 ſhall be raken out of the middle of the 25000 for the 4, 
or Ground-plat - of the Ciry- So it ſhall be an equilateral Square, 
every ſide exatly the ſame North, South, Eaſt and Weſt, 4500 4 
piece ; by which Meaſuresthe whole Content is viſible 18000 Culit, 
not Reeds. | 

i7 And the ſuburbs of the city ſhall be towards the 
north two hundred and fifty, and toward the ſouth two 
hundred and fifty, and toward the eaft two hundred and 
fifry, and toward the weſt two hundred and fifty. 

Here arethe Dimenſions of the Suburbs, which added to thoſe of the 
City, thus, 250 added te the 4500 on the North-ſide, and 250 added 
tothe 4500 onthe Southſide, makes 5000; fo on the Eaſt add 250 to 
4500,and then add 250 to the 4500 on the Weſt, it makes up a 
Square equilateral 5oeo in each ſide. 


18 And the reſidue in —_— p over againſt the obls 
e 


tion of the holy portion, ſhall be q ten thouſand eaſtward, 
and ten thouſand weſtward : and it ſhall be over 
againſt » the oblation of the holy portion, and the in 
creaſe s thereof ſhall be for food *t unto them that ferves 
the city. 

> Which remains on each fide of the 5000 Cubir ſquare 4, 
7 Will be 10000 on the Eaſt, and 10000 on the Weſt. r Lie pr 
rallel, and even with the South-ſide of the Lewites Portion both on 
Exiſt and Weſt. 5s ProduR, the Revenues of his Land. '* The Main- 
tenance, both Salary and Allowances of Bread and Wine. « For tht 
City Officers, ſo they may live by the City, whoſe Life is ſpent 
for the City ; that the Labourer may, as he 1s worthy of it, receive 
his Wages. 

19 Andthey that ſerve the city, ſhall ſerve it out of al 
the tribes of Ifrael 0. 

e Either this Service1s a Burden ; if fo, ris fit all ſhould bear their 
part in it, or tis a Privilege and Advantage, and then 'tis as fit t 
Advantage ſhould be equally given to all the Tribes ; all Tribes ſhall 
be capable of the Advantage, and liable to the Burden. 

20 All the oblation ſhall be five and twenty thouſand, 
by five and twenty thouſand p: ye ſhall offer the holy 
oblation four-ſquare, with the poſleflion 9 of the city. 

p Having particularly meaſur'd out 10000 for the Prieſts, an 
10000 for the Lewites, and 5000 for the City broad-ways,theſe make in 
all 25000. Andthelength of each the ſame 25000, here is evident 
25000 by 25000, that a perfe& equilateral Square, whoſe ſides ar® 
25000 each ſide, q The Land aſſigned for the City, being added to 
that of the Prieſts and Levites, makes their twice ten thouſand to #- 
mount to twenty five thouſand broad. 

21 T And the reſidue » ſh:ll be for the prince on tit 
one fide s and on the other * of the holy oblation, 
and of the poſleflion «of the city over againſt the fi!e 
and twenty thouſand x, of the oblation toward ti? 
eaſt-border y, and weſtward over againſt the five and 


ewenty thouſand toward the weſt-border, over againlt . 
the 


P 


SS as Aa a oo _ 


wy . nn 


plain tc 
28 
outhu 
e W; 
e gre 
«Tl 


is See < 
ilus, a 


aver ( 


| NLVIII. 


-ons ſor the prince z, and it ſhall be che holy oblati. 
- Po the Ctuny & of the houſe 5 ſhall ve in the midſt 


thereof c. 7 _ Y 
Ofthe Land, which isa great Portion, for 'tis the Remainder of 
4 nd an half taken out of 6o ; ſo that the Remainder will be 47 
A half. s Suppoſe it be the Eaſt-ſide , there will be 23 and three 
y 'rers. £ On the Welt juſt as much, 23 and three quarters. 
The reſidue of that which is on each ſide, Eaſt and .Weſt of the 
: o Square Ares x Which amounts out of the Prieſts, Levites and 
Fry dara y Of the Land of Gonsan. All from the Eaſt-ſide of the 
$1 ro the utmoſt Bounds Eaſtward fhall be the Prince his Por- 
pe and.ſo likewiſe on the Welſt-ſide Weſtward to the great Sea, 
« Theſe 25000 on both ſides lay over againſt, orrun parallel] with the 
breadth of the Princes Portion, but the length of the Prince his Por. 
tion on each ſide exceeded the length of the holy Portion and the City- 
Jand, as 23 and three quarters exceed 12 and an half.. a The holy 
Mount. þ Of the Temple of God. c Of the Land aſlign'd to.the 
Prieſts, which lay as deſcribed, bounded and guarded with the Prince 
his Portion at Eaſt and Weſt-Ends. 
22 Moreover, from the poſlefiion of the Levites, 
and from the poſleflion of. the city , being in the mid(t 
that which is the princes, . between the border of 
Judah and the border of Benjamin , ſhall be for the 
prince d. _ 4 GE 
hat we may clearly underſtand this, we muſt remember that 
F.. | nh of Ts = laid from Weſt to Eaſt next to the holy 
Portion and the Portion of Benjamin is in ver. 23. laid likewiſe from 
Weſt ro Eaſt nextto the Poſſeſſion of the Cizy. So that on each ſide the 


S ortent of Judab and Benjamixrun out to 23 Miles and three quarters 


further than the holy Portion, and Poſleſſion of rhe City did ; and all 
the Land contain'd between the Borders of Judah and Benjamin were 
whe Prince his Right, both-cthe '12 Miles and an half broad, 23 and 
three quarterslong on the Wett, and the ſame proportion on the Eaſt ; 
and this is the Sum of the 224 Verſe. 


23 As for the reſt of the tribes, from the calt-ſide unto 
the weſt-ſide, Benjamin e ſhall have + a portion. 


e We left withthe Prophet the laſt aſſign'd Portion to Jadahin the 
1th Verſe on the Northtſide of the holy Portions; now the firſt on 


© the South-ſide of the Poſſeſſion of the City is Benjamin ,, whoſe Por- 


tion, as all the reſt, runs in length from Eaſtto Weſt ,and its breadth 
from North to South. 


24 And by the border of Benjamin , from the eaſt-ſide 


T untothe weſt-ſide, Simeon ſhall have @ portion. 


5 evident 
 ſjdes rf 
added £0 


and £0 4 


on tht 
jblation, 
che five 
rard O02 
ye = 
gain 4s 


25 And by the boxder of Simeon, from the eaſt-ſide 
unto the weſt-ſide, Ifſachar a portion, 

26 Andby the border of Hfſachar , from the eaſt-ſide un- 
to the welt-ſide , Zebulun a portion, 


27 And by the border of Zebulun , from the eaſt-fide 
untothe weſt-ſide, Gad a portion f. 

f Thus all the Tribes have their Inhericances afſign'd them, but 
their Lot is nox here as in Joſbuah's Diviſion; it was a new Church and 
State, that was here intended, and accordingly many Changes made 
init, which differenced it from the old, which Changes no doube are 
inſtru&ive, but the particular InſtruQions fall not within the deſign 
f a Paraphraſe or Comment, that is, tomake the Letter of the Text 
plain to ordinary Capacities. 

28 And by the border 4 of Gad, at the ſouth-ſide, 
outhward, the border b ſhall be even from Tamar c unto 

e waters of | ſtrifein Kadeſh, «nd to the river d toward 


6 great ſea. 
# The South-Border of Gad. b Of the whole Land Southward. 


s See chap. 47. 19. let. f,g,h,i. d Siber, ſay ſome ; but if Sibor be 
ilus, as Ortellius makes it, it cannot bethe Boundary; *tis indeed a 


River that ariſeth , as ſome place ir, out of the North-part of the 


EZEKIET:. 


Mountains of Paranand running a courſe Weſt foo its Riſe, patlerh 
between Gerar and Rhino Caxura, and after ſome 28 or 30 Milcs Travel 
falls mmto the great'Sea; better known in Scripture by che Name of thz 
River of Egypt. But poſlibly the, tsue: Riſe may be from Mount Carm:, 
and Gezenwhence it may be ſome forty Miles Engliſh to the great Sea. 
, 29 Thise # theland which ye ſhall divide by lot f unto 
the cribes of Iſrael for inheritance, and theſe g are their por- 
tions ſaith the Lord GOD.  _.. .. EY 

e Whoſe South-boundsare here repeated, the North-bounds, wr. 1. 
f Not caſting Lots, bur afligning the Shares. g Above deſcribed are 
the particular Shares of each Tribe.. | Cd: 

30 T And theſe are the goings out of the city on the 
north-ſide, four thouſand and five hundred meaſures h.. 

þ Now the Prophet hath a general Topography of the City, which 
lay four-ſquare. The firſt ſide mention'd is the North, for there he 
began to deſcribe the Land, or becauſe *'twas neareſt the Temple. 


"Twas as wer, 16. which ſee, 4500 Cubits, 7. e. about a Mile, and one 
third ofa Mile. F:2 


names of the tribes of Iſrael , three gates northward + 
one gate of Reuben, one gate of Judah , 
Levi. 

7 So then at equal diſtance from the Corners, and from each other 
*tis probable thele Gates were built. | $51 

32 And at the eaſt-ſide four thouſand and five hun- 
dred: and three gates; and one gate of ſoſeph, one 
gate of Benjamin, one gate of Dan. | 
- 33 And at the ſouth-ſide four thouſand and five hun- 
dred meaſures : and three gates ; one gate of Simeqn, 
one gate of Iſſachar, one gate of Zebulun. 
34 Ac the weſt-ſide four thouſand and five hundred 
with their three gates; one gate of Gad, one gate of 
Aſher, one gate of Naphtali. _ 

35 1t was round « about eighteen thouſand meaſures b: 
and the name «c of the city from that day 4 ſhall be, 
LORD ex there. 


one gate ot 


Meaſures 'twas about five Miles in Compaſs , if the Meaſures were 
Reeds it would be 3o Miles and 325 Yards in compaſs of the Walls, 
which cannot be conceived credible; whereas the other is the Propor. 
tion the City might have been built to, if the Sins of the Fews had 
nor prevented. c By which called, known, and which ſhall be the 
Honour of it, and its Glory. « From the day of the Lord's reſtoring 
this People,and rebuilding their City, and re-eſtabliſhing kis Worſhip, 
and their thankfu), holy and pure worſhipping of God there ; from the 
day that ſuch unmatched Mercy produceth a ſutable return unte God, 
from that day it ſhall be ſaid of Jeruſalem. e The Lord, who as his 
Name alone 1s Jehovah, fo 1s the only true God, faichful to promiſe, 
rich in Mercy, glorious in Majeſty, righteous in his Judgments, wiſe 
and holy in his Government ; whoſe Preſence makes us happy, whoſe 
withdrawing from us leaves us to Miſery. This God will by his Fa. 
vour and Preſence repel Enemies, and prote@ his People, bring with 
him che Confluence of all Good to Perſons, Family and Cities; this 
God will be there to dwell, | ary , defend, proſper and crown. 
The People is blefled that isin ſuch a caſe, for their God is the Lord , 
Pſal. 144 15. Such was the caſe of Typical, Earthly Jeruſalem, tho 
not long ; ſuch is, and ſhall be for ever the caſe of the Heavenly Jeru- 
ſalem, the City of God, the true Church and Temple of God. Such 
the caſe of every true ſincere Believer, who may wherever he is, in 
his way of Duty, ſtill write 7<hwvah Shammah, my God is here, and 
'tis beſt ro be where he is, till he bring me within the Gates of the 
glorious Gity, where inconceivable Light and Love from the imme. 
diate Preſence of God give every one an Ecernal Demonſtration that 


MNDawY NNN? ; to him be Glory for ever. 


3r And * the gates of the city ſhall be after the, 


CE. 20, 


2 12. &c, 


+ They Heb.” 
. ; | Tehovah- 
s Meaſuring all four Squares. 6 Or, Cubirs, at which proportion'd Shammah. 


The ARGUMENT, 
for the better underſtanding of thu Book , and the Mind of God in ;, 


N Daniel and his Prophecy obſerve theſe things , 
| 1. As to Daniel the $4 1x or Penman. 2. As to the Book ll ſelf. - 
was a Prophet, as appears by his 4s: ps the little Stone cut out of the Mountain withy 
0 


| | H 
1. As to the Author : ( 1 ) He , Chap. 2. likewiſe Chap. 7. to the end of the 


Hand. . ſt the Meſſiah and his Kingdom, what he ſhould 
 Pmarog, yrs tbe fo laf Prophetical. (2) As 70 his Lineage , be was one of the Royal 


Book, The fix firſs Chapters are Hiſtorical : 
Seed, ( 3 4 7 bs T Captive, (4) He was rarely qualified for Piety , Wiſdom, Beauty, (5) As to his Eduwatin 
(6 ) His Advancement , for bis Parts and Wiſdom. (7) He was fait ”y 


be was trained for three Years in Learning. 
43 pt tied : ) His Care and Kmaneſs for bis Companions , he 9ru 


d blamele(s in the Pl, Honour to which he was preferred, (8 
and blameleſs in the Place of 4 bL Holineſs 1; Power with God in Prayer, Ezek, 14. 14. ( 10) His Fit. 


cured their Pr emotion alſo. ( 9 ) His ſin : 
fulneſs and Conſtancy xl Worſhip of Grd , maugre the Ewvy and Perſecution of bis Enemies, (11) The firange Provide 
; of God in bis Preſervation and Deliverance, ( 12 ) His fignal Integrity , and flouriſhing State under ſeveral Kings Reigns, egy 
5 Kings 7; critical times, and great Changes, unto his old Age, and beyond the ſeventy Tears of Captivity. 
it , eſpecially the latter, we find, ( 1.) Great V; 


Reiga. As to the Book it ſelf, both the Hiſtorical and Propherical Part of 
2 Asto OOK 1t leli, Yorb the Fl _ « Meſſiah; F dreadful Wars; of fearful Deſolations to Conmries , and the Jy. 


Geiergus. -: {6 6-45 
rietyin them, ( 2.) Famous Prediftions : 
iſh Nation in particular, for putting Chriſt zo Death, great Perſecutions of tbe Church, by the Grecians and Romans eſpe. 
ly, in which Antiochus and Anti-chriſt are pointed at. Theſe things are all of ſuch weighty Conſideration , that our bleſſed $, 
viour calls oy eſpecial Underſtanding in_the reading even of one Part of it , Matth, 24. IF» His Chronology and Calc, 
z:ons may be called the Key of Time, relating to the Church's Sufferings and Deliverances. Daniel was the greateſt Fxum. 


rite we Tead of , namely of the King of Heaven , chap. 9. 23: and no, 11. and of the greateſt Kings then on Earth, bk, 
was the nobleſt Pattern of a publick Heart , for the Church of God, for whoſe Afftictwon he was deeply offlicted in the mid} 


bis Court. Honours and Employments, 


ons were made Eunuchs, in a ſtri& Senſe , which doth not appexty 
CHAP. L 7 p—_ ; bur rather to be bred up in the Court oe Offices 2nd 

SG 2. ; ; | lienate their Minds from the Religion of their Cou 
choiakim's Captivity, 1, 2. Daniel, Hananiah, Miſhael and Azariah car- hereby tO all g10T n any , 
: ried to Babylon, bs refuſing the king's portion they feed on pulſe and m_ _ ng the yo Return of rheir People : bur (oi 
water, 8,—14 They are fatter and fairer than theſe that did eat of the | 2 or IT, My pointed by this Education of them, as app Cars 11 lite 
king's portion, 15. Their wiſdim ten times better than that of the magi- | 2Y ſignal Teſtimonies of the Preſence and Power of God with then, 

, | | for the Convittion of Idolaters, that God was above all Gods. 


cians, IT — 21. | R . . | 
I N the third year of the reign of Jehoiakim king of | + Children in whom was no blemiſh , but well-faro- 
Judah, came Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon red, and skilful in all wiſdom, and cunning in know. 

unto Jeruſalem, and beſieged it 4. ledge , and underſtanding ſcience g, and ſuch as ll 

ability in them to.ſtand in the kings palace 4, and whon 


# Comparing this with 2 Kings 24. 1. and with 2 Chrox. 36. 6. the | "xp . 
Meaning is, after the Lord had ma away that good King Joſiah for chey might teach the learning and the tongue of th: 
for the Sins of Judah and Manaſſh, which were very great, by Pharaoh Chaldeans z. | 
Necks King of Egypt , the people of the Land took Jehoahax the Son of g If Princes are ſo curious in their Choice, no marvel that God wi 
Joſiah, and madehim King ; he reigned but three Months, wherein he | cautious in his, Lev. 21, 17.to wer, 21 and 22. 20. T0 ver. 25. Th 
did ſo evilin the ſighr of the Lord, that the ſaid Pharaoh Necho put bim- Reaſon why, they wane Gs delicately trained up, Pr oh tas they bein the 
4 _ - + 7 gel _ = ———_ nim tO E£2P'; you - a4 » | in the Flower oftheir Age ſhould be allured with the Delights of the with t 
7 yy w ia " IS gr & A108 iN bs HEAG, ang. Turne he ame | Court, and ſhould thereby be brought to forget their Father's Houſ, 
< _—_— = == $ + 126790: ng, -142-ag9*phr + wy tk and their Religion 3 this hath been the Artifice of the 7wk in taking 
Ws S nft 7eruſa $19 Fran —_— < | 2% Je purge 5 | Chriſtians Children, and making them Janizaries, that thereby they 
 wanIE Yo 's - q 66.- x. 2 - "a 36, 6.) £ RE the en ro ” "oy may become Renegades, who are commonly the greateſt Championsfo: 
— compte ra » . * F C LID alter Tok time Ne mg 4 - Makomet,and Enemies to'the Chriſtians. þ This notes Men fit by their 
peer ivades Pos gin bigs Joao and rake, a Je Pats > giv Ade inaduoas Mares, 2 Clom.: 6. hicten | 14, 
_ F- Aa wh or rs arry him to Babylon;'o that Men only of promiſing Abilities, and notincompetent, ſhould b* WT them t 
m, and his Death and Burial, you havea ſad Account, Jer. 22. | admitted to the Preſence of Kings. 7 For this Cauſe Moſes was learned WF 
17, 18, Ig. in all the Wiſdom of the Egyptians, As 7. 22. yer it muſt be ſuppoſd WW 7 *F 
| 2 And the LORD gave Jehojakim king of Judah |cbar neither Moſes nor Daniel learned any thing that was ungodly, but iſ } P<ared 
into his hand, with part þ of the veſſels of the houſe of _o — and that hn Sar only moral ; wherein eh WW did eat 
God, which he carried into the land of Shinar to the | tjearhens. And although their Magi or Wile 4s op oe Milin perf 
houſk of bi J - eathens. And although their Magi or Wiſemen did ar laſt degene- n perſyy 
c of his god c, and he brought the veſlels into the trea- | rate into curious and and vain Arts, yet Daniel had no farther Dclign MT of God 
ſure-houſe of his god. « {to know their Wiſdom than to chuſe the Good of it, and to ſhun and MF upon hon 
6 In this Expedition Nebuchadnezzar carried away ſome ofthe Veſſels _ _ m__ was unlawful. The Chalde an Tongue differed from Strength 
of the Temple, and ſome Captives, among whom was Daniel and his the Hebrew in DialeCt, andin Pronunciation, which they learnedinthe WWF ſvcer. 
Friends. Theſe Veſſels he carricd into the Houſe of his God, which | 1/8"* Tone and Accent, that they mighr bethe more acceprabletotte 16 I 
God was Baal 0; Bel, and N:bo, Tfa. 46.1. which Words they put in- Kiog and Court by their Conformity 1n Garb,Language and Manners; 8 and the 
to the Names of their Kings and Favourites, of which more afterward. for which they had the Space of three Years allotted them, E pulſe ; 
4 _ TT Sos he'putin the Houſe of his God for his Honour, þ- $5 And the king appointed them a daily proviſion of the io; Whic 
peels he choghe he had goren his Vifwry by he help of is Ll kings meat &, and of + the wine which he drank: fo a- five 
13 bony © Fac aibpr Free 1 77 ar þ ; nil gg "vm riſhing them three years, that at the end thereofthey migtt\ © _ 
cutioners of God's Wrath upon God's ſinful People have other Thoughts ſtand before the king. "=: by Gy 
than God hath about that , ſa. 10. 5, to wer. 16. .* Suchas he had at his own Table ; Wherein his Bounty and Hum: ſir , 
3 « And the king ſpake unto Aſhpenaz the maſter eg gr a on __ more ons. they being on 17 
of the eunuchs e, that he 7 _ CPR on tey were judged fir ro ſtand before tis Bs 
1 1e ſhould bring certain of the King, Prev.22. 29. Men of Ingenuity, Induſtry, and Proficiency» OR 


children of Iſrael, and of the kings ſeed, and of the are fic toſtand before Kings. 
| Ueams x 


among theſe were of the childr ih, Da 

: Theſe here called Ennnchs were chief among the King's Servants, | niel, H naniah, Miſhael, and Azariah /: FTI : hy m 

- my by 5 you Eunucys becauſe many of therft were ſuch ; asatchis| 1 Dotibtles moſt of them of the Royal Lineage of Fudah to which "a we 
> » of old among all the Princes ofthe Eaſt ; bur they were not | Tribe God had a ſpecial Reſpe&, wpon the account of Devi, and this S. 2 = 
—_ , "4 5 F gl wag Ms __— - ap rn = Cham- | Tribe of fFudah had the Preheminence in many things gv1a, nba 

erlain, as Hetach, Eith. 4, 5. ſuch were Bigthana and 7, ; "Wn 

2 pn neianryy® war rs ah iſh omar _ l 7 Unto whom the prince of the eunuchs gave names” +* Reſp, 
or he gave unto Daniel the name of Belteſhazzar »; and '0 WR, : Thi 


of the King's Eunuchs, who had ſer Melzar over Daniel and his Compa- H : ole 
nions, ver. 11. f Here was fulfilled what the Prophet 1/aiah had fore. anamah b of Shadrach ? and to Miſhael , of Meſhact wn; _ 
- al, and 


__ oa hs py 
DD — — 
En name Shermer nn ne 


= 


*Ch.3 29.{kall be * 4 cut in pieces, and your houſes * ſhall be 


+-Chald. 


wade pIcces 
PRE... - 
L2 F& ". O. 


a ” 


6] 'Or, ſee, 
CH. 5.17, 


8s they think ; but all this would not do, therefore they are ſtill where 


F Chaid, 
buy. 


+ Chald. 
and the 
wiſe men 
were about 
ro be ſlain, 


+ Chald. 


refrerncd- 


ji Or,ch7: 7,25 gone 


2arvjhal. 


+ Cha'd. 


chief of th: 


EXEANT: m7 


ar /ilang/> 
ECT 172, 


5 The kit; anſwered and faid to the Chaldeans, The 
thing is gvone tiom me 0 : it ye will not make known un- 
to me the dream, with the interpretation thereof p, ye 


made a dunghi! 9. 

o This was of God thzt theſe Impoſtors ſhould be made infamous 
by dereQtingrth: ir Ignorance and their Arrogance, ahd that this ſhould 
be a ſtep to D::icl's Honour for knowing the King's Dream, and inter- 
ptering of ir, neither of which the Chaldeans could do. p If they do 
not bu.th, faith the King. q This was a uſual Puniſhment in thole Parts 
of the World, thus S-uel! cut Agag in pieces, 1 Sams. 15. 33- I Chron. 
20. 3. Thus David dealt with the Ammanites, And the like was in 
making Feuſ's a dunghil, The likewe have, ch. 3. 29. and thus they 
did to the Houle of Baa!, made ic a Draught-houſe to this day, by 
4's Command, 2 Kings 10. 27. The like did Darins threaten to 
thcm thar would alter his Decree tor building the Houſe of God, Ezra 
'G. 11. This Commination argued the King's Wrath to be exceſſive 
and ſmious in Puniſhing, for not doing what was above their human 
Strength, and which the Chaldeans never ariogated to themſelves, yet 
wasthis a juſt Reward to theſe: Men that were fo preſumptuous. 

6 Buc it ye Jhew the dream, and the interpretation 
thereof, ye ſhall receive of me gifts, and || rewards and 
great honour » : therefore ſhew me the dream, and the 
interpretation thereof. ; 

r As I threatned you with Death for not doing, I promiſe you Re. 
warGs and Honour if ye perform it. 'This1s in the Power of Princes, 


they were. They anſwered the King again. 
\ 7 They anſwered again and ſaid, Let the king tell his 
ſervants the dream, and we will ſhew the interpretation of 
It 5. 

« Bur this the King could not do. They could not tell the Dream, 
nor th: King could not, ſe that both require Impoſlibilities. 

$8 The King anſwered and ſaid, I know of certainty 
that ye would -| gain the time 7, becauſe ye ſee the thing 
1s gone from me. | 

: This ye do in Policy, to eſcape Puniſhment, that being taken up 
with other Aﬀairs, I may forget to make farther Enquiry after this 
ting, butir ſhall nor ſerve your turn. 

9g Bur if ye will not make known unto me the 
dream, there x but one decree for you « : for ye have 
prepared lying and corrupt words to ſpeak before me, 
till the time be changed : therefore tell me the dream, 
and I ſhall know that ye can ſhew me the interpreta- 
tion thereof. 

That is, I will not retra& my Sentence, Ye ſhall ſurely die; you 
are upon tricks, ye have prepared corrupt and lying Words, for he 
that can interpret a Drezm can tell the Dream, both come from a di. 
vine Inſpiration, which ye pretend to, bur I ſee ye have it nor. 

10 < The Chaldeans anſwered before the king, and 
ſaid, There is not a man upon the earth that can ſhew 
the kings matter : therefore there x no king, lord, nor 
ruler, that asked ſuch things at any magician, or aſtrolo. 
ger, or 'Chaldean. | 

1: And #: # a rare thing that the king requireth, and 
there is none other that can ſhew it before the King ex. 
cept the gods, whoſe dwelling is not with fleſh x. 


EZ ERIE LF. 


thing. For, 1. Their Lives were at fake, 
thing he was ſure that God was about, wherewith he had troubled the 
King's Mind in ſuch a manner. 4 Therefore he reinforceth his $ crengr}; 
calling his Friends ro help him. As Prayer in times of Danger j, :(; 
moſt ſeaſonable and ſovereign Help, ſo in a common Danger wemnup 
call in all the Help we can to it. 


ven concerning this ſecret e; | that Daniel and hj;/n 
tellows ſhould not 
of Babylon f. | 


ſineſs, and the Honour of ir whelly to himſelf, but would have hi; 1, 
Fellows ſhare in it with him. Again, they would deſire Mercy, #:. 
the Bowels of tendcy Mercy : the choiceſt Saints deſired to be ſaved by 
Mercy, Pſal. 51. 1. f The Lord hath a diſtinguiſhing Car: n| 
Love for his Peop!e, 2 Thefſ. 1. 6. 2 Pet, 2. 9. eſpecially in common 
Calamities, Exod. 14. 19, &C. pvc. 18. 4. 


night-viſion g : then Daniel bleſſed the God of hex 
ven 4, 


Watching and Prayer, for Night-Vifion is diſtinguiſhed from Dream, 
Numb. 12.6 Whether ſleeping or waking Daniel had the ſame thing 
revealed unto him which King Nebuchaanezzar had, with this Differenc: 
the King remembred not his Dream, nor knew whar it meant; bu 
Daniel was able to tell his Dream, and give the Meaning of it all. 
þ He gave Thanks and Praiſe to the Father of Lights, from whom all 
Wiſdom comes, who heard his Prayer, and revealed this Secret to 
him. Note, this was revealed to Daniel, and not to his Companions, 
for he was Chief; and b 

the Degree of a famous p 
God of Heaven, becauſe he: made Heaven, his Throne is there, and the 
Magicians and Heathen Gods come not there, but were caſt out thence, 
being Devils of Hell, but the God of 1ſrae! is the Ged of Heaven. 


the King had Dreatned a firange Dream that ticubled him, ang 4 . 
he had forgotten it, thar he called all his Wiſe-men ro ſhew bot, th 
Dream and 'interpretation, but they could not. Thereforethe kink 
decreed the Death of all the Wiſe-men in Bablov, and Daniel with 62 
Fellows among them, withour ſaving the Life of oneof them. ny 
he, wiz, Arioch, had received Command to execute it preſently, Tha 
there was bur a Step betiveen himand Death. 

16 Then Danie] went in, and deſired of the king th; 
he would give him time 6, and that he would ſhew the 
king the interpretation. 

6 There are four things here very ſtrange and wonderful. x1, Th, 
Ariech, inſtead of executing the King's Decree ſpeedily, ſhould make 
this ſtop. 2. That he ſhouJd dare toſee the King's Face when he wx; 
ſo wroth, thitead of doing what his Commiſſion tied himto. 3. Thir 
Danie! ſti&uld have the Boldneſsto go in to the King when he wasin his 
Fury. , 4. That he ſhould deſire Time,and obrain ic of the King, w/,, 
had denied the ſame thing to the Wiſe-men, To which we anſize, 
1. The ſignal Hand of God was in all this. 2. In particular, n,;,,j 
was in great eſteem with the King, above all the Wiſe-mea, chap, 1 
19, 20. 3. He gave both Arioh and the King Hopes he would thew 
and interpret the King's Dream. 

17 Then Daniel went to his houſe c, and made t|\+ 
thing known eo Hananiah, Miſhael, and 'Azariah, lis 
companions #4. 

c According tothe good Hand of his God upon him, who had ſheyn 
him Favour thus far, and obrain'd the King's leave, he wear to tj; 
Houſe near the Palace, that he might ſeek God in ſecret for this great 
2. It was not a inal 


18 That they would deſire mercies of the God of hez.t( 
periſh with the reſt of the wiſe.men,7 


e Obſerve here Daniel's Humility, he ſought not to ingroſs this Bu. 


I9 T Then was the ſecret revealed unto Daniel in : 


g It is not improbably conjeQuured, that Dante! ſpent the Night is 


thisis ſignified by what ſteps he roſc upto 
rophet. Again, he calls the rrue God the 


x The Chaideans bring three Arguments to convince the King : 
7. There isnot a Man upon Earth can ſhew the King's Matter. 2. There 
is no King requires ſuch a thing of any Magician. 3. None but the 
Gods can do this. The Chaldeans, with other Gentiles, did believe 
moie Gods than one, and the ſupream Deity or Deities did not meddle 
wi:h the Aﬀairs of Men,burt had the Cognizance by inferiour or inter- 
mediate Demons. So Plato and many of them held : The Meaning then 
is this, Secing there are ſome things that God, who knoweth all things, 
will not communicate the Knowledge of to Men,and hath not done it 
tous, it is therefore a ſingular and unreaſonable thing the King ſhould 
1cquire it of us, and that ſo ſuddenly, and upon ſuch Penalties. 

12 For this cauſe the king was angry and very fu. 
Tious, and commanded to deſtroy all the wife men of 


Babylon y. 

> Tyrants are inexorable, and they rule according to their Will, 
and being croſs'd, they are furious, and that brings forth Death ; the 
Wrath of ſuch is the roaring of a Lion. | 


13 And the decree went forth - that the wiſe »e 
ſhould be ſlain; and they ſought Daniel and his fellows to 
be ſlain &. 

z This was unjuſt, that Daniel and his Fellows ſhould havetheir 
Share in the Puniſhment, and yer be excluded from the other part 
which was the Reward ; the Reaſon why they were not called, was, 
becauſe of their Youth, which the Chaldeans deſpiſed ; wherein we 
have theſe rhree things obſervable. 1. The Magician: confeſled rhis, 
that Knowledge and Revelation maſt come from God, and therefore 
what Danicl did was not by any humane Strength, bur divine only. 
2. That the Lord held the Governour's Hands, fo that he did nor ſlay 
Daniel preſently with the firſt. 3. That Daniel by his Prudence and 
Piety faved all the Magicians Laves. 


14 J Then Daniel! -þ anſwered with connſe] and wif 
dom to Arioch the {| -f captainof the kings guard, which 
forth to ſlay the wiſe z7e7 of Babylon. 

1. He anfwered and faid ro Arioch the kings captain, 
Why « the decree fo haſty from the king ; then Arioch 
made the thing known to Daniel. 

« $o precipitare 20 Nay the Innocenr who were never called, who | 
Enzw noch of ir. This appears plainly Hom rthek Words, they 
fniuh mate te ihicg keyws to Danic!, vez. 35. which was this, that 


r 


Wiſdom God gave him in revealing this great Secret to him, whichthe 
Wiſe-men could not attain to, becauſe rhey knew not the true God, 
nor did ſeek to him for it : this is clear in ver. 21, 22, 23. 2. Mg 
is his, that 1s, he is Almighty, above all mighty Potentates of the 
World, above Nebuchadn:zzar and all the Kings of the Earth, fori: 
ſets them up and plucks them down at pleaſure, wer. 21. ag the Jn 
terpretation of the Dream and Viſion ſhews. 


removeth kings, and ſetteth up kings : he giveth wi 
dom unto the wiſe, and knowledge to. them that kno 
underſtanding. 


ſure of Time; he made the Day and the Night, and the Seaſonsof 


Times better, and turn Night into Day. He can make the Sun g? 
backward or ſtand ſtill, as in 4haz and Joſbuah's time, Ir isrhe great 
part of God's Power and Prerogative to change times. Daniel here it 
tributes that to God which Heathens attribured ro Nature which tht 
deified,or to Chance ; ſeeing that God only thar made all by hisPos* 
er doth rule, and ſometimes over-rule all by his Providence. 


knoweth what # in the darkneſs »», and the light dv, 
leth with him. 


Mens Hearts and Counſels which are very cloſe, deep and ſecr't, Hi): 
ing in themſelves, Who can ſee us? and the deep and ſecret __ 
Grace, and the Myſteries of Chriſt's Kingdom : All this is comforts? 

to the Saints, and glorious God. : ' 
hidden things ; Dezic! points at tbe King's Dream in the Night, vi 
he only gave the King, andchen took it from him, and theo gut! 
Daxitl for him again. 


my fathers », who haſt given me wiſdom and 
and hafi mads known umo me now what We 


20 Daniel anſwered and faid, * Bleſſed be the name! 


of God for eyert and ever : for wiſdom and might ar: 
his z, | Z 


i He bleſſeth God for two things. 1. Wiſdomy he means chiefly th: 


21 And he changeth the times and the ſeaſons & : * tt, 


k God made Time ; God made the Sun, Moon and Stars, the Met 


he Year, yea the Revolutions and Change of Times; he can makebii 


22 * He revealeth the deep and ſecret things /: It 


1 Both of Nature, wherein ate infinite Depths and Secrets; andof 


» He ſees and forettes rhe 0 


23 I thank thee, and praiſe thee, O thou God 
mnghh 


Chap, 


hb inſtrue 


OWE IN ARTE. TIOAEY 
OP. 07 POEh 1 2) 100 > A RR 
oo "> 7 0, $6 ES 
LENS AS OL AS: Coed 


” 20 hh En rubs 6, 4 cs 
art SHE ES EE; ie LOR TS, 
> LS a Bn ey BG 0 LIES 


« | 
Thing 
withor 
rTogate 
It of a1 


theſe | 
x He 
the Poy 
Jiar Pre 
himſe}f 
Prophe 
the Dre 
degrees 
I. By th 


4, 30 * 
for any 
their (2 
1y. king & 
v heart, 
*r, 2 $ 
) whoſe Pr 
that the 
May'(t 1 


reſt the 
Is, and 
and rowa 


Vol 


+f thee : for thoo haft 4029 miade known'unito ts the kings] 


ww 
IB 
Re 
bY 


/ d, 
Fe: 


W; 
*< 
rods 


Imede nezzar, what ſhall be in the latter days y. Thy 


41 


a, king z, and that thou mighteſt know the thoughts of thy 


"7 ca rt, 
ttr, 2 Some will have this relate to the Jews and the 


Tnattcri 0, 


2 f See. 8 EIT ET Ly 
DANTETL 
- B 


ER Les 


z bl 


image az 


Ro” 


Pe: 
Cha, 


31 E Thou, O king, + ſaweſt, and Behold, a great+ Chal? 
this great image whoſe. brigheneſs . was ex. 2#/t ſee- 


« Here ke gives his God another diſtinguiſhing Title from all cho |cellent, ftood before thee b, and the form thereof was **: 


f the Hcarhen, he calls him'the God of his Fathers,meaning by the 
os \t made with 4braham,&c. to whom and.their S2ed God revea. + 


Covenan 


Jed his Saving-knowledg,which he didnot to the Heathen : God is the 


God of all by the Kingdom of his Power ; but the God of his Church, 


Iy according to the Kingdom of his Grace. o In which words he 
intimates a twofold Privilege ; the one, that as the Son of ſuch Fathers, 


" obtained the Grace and Favour of God 1n giving him Safety and 
wiſdom; the other, that he found him a God hearing Prayer, and thar 
.n a thing of a high Nature, he made known to him the King's Matter, 


24 « Therefore Daniel werit in_ into Atioch þ 


whom the king had. ordained to deſtroy the wiſe 
men of Babylon: he went and faid thus unto him, 
Deltroy not the wiſe m7ex q of Babylon : bring me 
before the king, and I will ſhew unto the king the incerpre- 
ta.lon, | | | | 

p Being now prepared he goes to Ariochto go in with him to the 
King. 9 
was becauſe they could not. tell the Kings Dream : Come, ith he, I 


will ſhew that, by that I take away the Ground of thy Commiſſion to. 


eſf-roy. Queſt. Did Daniel do well in deſiring to have them ſpared, 
— {es to die for their unlawful Arts, Divin-rs, Necroman- 
cers? '&. Anſw. Two things are uſually anſwered to this: 1. They 
were notall ſuch ; ſome were innocent, ſtudied Arts and Sciences taw- 
ful and laudable. ., 2. Thoſe that were otherwiſe, he pleaded not for 
chem as ſach, but for Juſtice, that they ought not todie unjuſtly ; and 
hat was their Caſe and Cauſe. | 


25 Then Arioch brought in Daniel before the king in 


k 


bis. haſte, and ſaid thus unto him, 4 1 have found a man r of. 
the + captives of Judah, that will make known unto the | 


Id. 


ti» bim by great Search, or by great Chance, and as if Danze! had been 


king the interpretation. = | | 
r How comes Ariochto boaſt of what he had fonnd ; as if he got 


ſome obſcure unknown Perſon, when Danie! had askzd time of the 


King juſt before? Ir is themanner of Conrtiers to be very officious,and | 
to commend their own {ittle Deeds, that thereby they may ſignify | 
ſomething with their Prince, and make themlelves neceffary to him ; | 
but poſſibly Arioch might not know that Daniel had been with the King, | 
and therefore comes with this ("Evenzs. ) I have found your Man, | 


here he is, behold him, he will give the King full SatisfaQtion ia all 


concerning the Dream. | 


26 The king anſwered and ſaid to Daniel, whoſe | 
name was Belteſhazzar s, Art thou able to make known 
unto me the dream which I have ſeen, and the interpreta-| 
tion thereof 72 wy | 

s By this name of Bel::ſhazzar he had given Daniel, he took Cou- 

rage as if he mighe expe& ſome great thing fiom him ; for the 
word ſignifies the Keeper of ſecret Treaſure, 7. e. to lay up and 
bring forth. * As if he had ſaid, I queſtion if thou canſt, ſeeing all 
my wiſe Men cannot doit ; canſt thou preſume to do more than all 
they ? ; 
:7 Daniel anſivered in the preſence of the king, and 
ſaid, The ſecret which the king hath demanded, cannot 
the wile men, the aſtrologers, the magicians, the ſooth. 
fayers ſhew unto the king « z = 

# He reckons up here all forts of Divination, to ſhew that Divine 
Things, and the Secrets of God, cannot be comprehended by Man 
without ſpecial Revelation ; and that thoſe who preſume to dot, ar- 
rogate too much tv themſelves, and that it is roo tyrannical to require 
it of any, and that upon pain of Death ; for faith Daniz! they cannot 
doit. 
28 But there is a God in heaven that revealeth ſe. 
crets x, and + maketh known to the king Nebuchad- 


dream, and the viſions of thy head upon thy bed, are 


theſe ; 

x Hereby the Prophet gives God entirely all the Glory, proving all 
the Powers on Earth ro come ſhort in it ; it belng orie of God's pecu- 
liar Prerogatives to reveal Secrets: Yea, in great humility he denies, 
himſelf ro have any ſhare in it; as alſo ver. 29. y Obſcrve here the; 
Prophet's Wiſdom in this Diſcovery ; he doth not fall abruptly upon | 
the Dream, bur firſt prepares this lofty King for it in general, and by ' 
degrees he labours to win him to the Knowledge of the true God ; 
I. By this his Power : And 2. By his gracious Favour to the King, in 
revealing to him the greateſt Secret in the World about the Change of | 
Kingdoms and Governments, and touching the Power of Chriſt's | 
Kingdom over all in the latter days. See wer. 44- 


29 As for thee, O king, thy thoughts 


+ came into thy | 


' -mind, upon thy bed, what ſhould come to paſs hereafter : | 


and he that revealeth ſecrets maketh khowh unto thee | 


what ſhall come to pals. ; | 

. 39 * Bur as for me, this ſecret is not revealed to me, 
for any wiſdom that I have more than any ing, buc + for 
their ſakes that ſhall make known the interpretation to the | 


Church of God," by 


He bad him ſtay his Hand, and nor deſtroy the wiſe Men of | 
B4by.0n. Arioch might plead the King's Command; Danze! tells, him thar 


terrible c, 
.. 8 Not a 
Preſent o 

God+) called here 
and ſhadow, rather than in ſubſtance, 


narchies. 


] painted ſuperficial Image, but a Maſſy One, a Statue'in 
Man's oe great, ſplendid, majeltical; (chus they were wont tore. 
old. great Emperors and Empires, and worſhipped them as 
an Image, and in a bs en all which is in ſhew 
and therefore vaniſhing : An 
that upright,of a prodigious height, noting the Grandeur of choſs Ne 
6 Some ſay the Image was fo plac'd, that the Face look'd 


towards the King, and thus it might crouble and terrify him. c Govern- 


ment is to be feared ; Fear-to whom 
alſo ſome had rather be feared than loved. 


32 This images. head 4s of. fine gold, 


Fear, and Hinour to whom Howour ; 


his: breaft 


and his arms of filver, his belly and his || thighs cf |LD:, ſieer. 


braſs, 


Clay 4. 


rowed 


it ended ar laſt, as this Image in the Text, in Dirt. | 


' 34+ Thou faweſt till that a ſtone was cut out  _ 
which ſmote the image upon, hisjOr, w4:-h 
won and clay, and brake them to was w in 


| without hands, 
feet that were of 


. pieces e, 
| 


tion of all follows. 


35 Then was the iron, the day, the braſs, the fil- 
ver and the gold broken to pieces together, and be- 


. 4 By this we ſee the World is much worſe and far declined, every 

ge degeneraring from what it was of old, as the Poets (which bor- 
their Fancy from this Image) have deſcribed the;Ages of the 
World from Merals; the firſt was golden, and ſo coming on courſcr, 


, 33 His legs of iron, his feet part of iron and part of 


hands, as 


ei.e. Allof itto pieces, all vaniſhed ; and the Stine became a great =” ON 


Mount and filed the whole Earth: this is the Dream, and the Iaterpreta«» 


came .* like the chaff of the ſummers threſhing-floors, * Hol. :3. 


was 
image became a 
earth. 

35 
pretation thereof before the king f. 


. 


| F By this werd we, appears Daniel's Piety and Modeſty ; for he de» 
| Clares by it, that he and his Companions had begged this Skill rom 
| God; and therefore he did not,nor could arrogateit,to himſelf exclu. 


ding them, without Injury, and Diſhonour to God that heard Prayer. 
Now begins the Interpretation. 


This the dream ; and we will tell the inter: 


and the winds carried them away, that no places. _ 
found for them : and the ſtone that ſmote the 
great mountain, and filled the whole 


37 Thou *, O king, art a king of kings g : for the » Firs of 
God of heaven hath given thee a + kingdom 4, power, ogy n 


and ſtrength, and glory 5. 


£ He means Nebuchadnezzar in Perſon, together with his Succeſſors, 
Evil-merodzch and Belſhazz.ar., TheProphet would not mind the Kin 
of any thing paſt, nor of any other Governments bur thoſe wi 
whom his Church were then, and to be concerned for the future, cil] 
the coming of the M:$iah ; by whoſe coming they ſhould ſupport and 
comfort themſelves againſt alltheir Sufferings by Oppreſſors ; and alſo 
God would have the Prophet mind Nebuchadnezzar of the Stone cur 


er. 27. G, 


7. p 
Ezek. 26. 


Hof. 8.10. 
+ Chald. 
the kinge 
dam, the 


out of the Mountain without Hands, growing and breaking in pieces?9%*” Eos 


all earthly Power. + It came not to thee by thy Anceſtors or by For- 
tune, or by thy Valour; but the great God of Heaven hath the beſtow. 
ing of thoſe, and giverh them to whomſvever he will. : Authoricy, 
victorious Armies, with great Proſperity. 

38 Arid whereſoever the children of men dwell, the 
beaſts of the field and the fowls of the heaven hath he 
given into thine hand, and hath made thee ruler over 
them all & : thou art this head of gold/. Sy 

k i.e. God hath given thee abſolute Dominion of a!l Creatures, 
Men and Beaſts, within the Bounds of thy vaſt Kingdom, to hunr, 
catch, or kill, for thy Uſe and Pleaſure : God as Lord Paramount, al- 
lows thee his Vaſſal arid Tenant at will allthis. This was not uni- 
verſal over all the World; but only within his large Territories,which 
yet were bounded. / 1. Why Head? Becauſe he was firſt in order, 
as the Head is beforethe other Parts; and the Viſion began ia him, and 
deſcended downwards to the other three Monarchies. 2. Why Head of 
Gold ? Becauſe of the vaſt Riches wherein ir abounded; and which the 
Chaideans moſt covered, and ſcraped from the Spoils and Tributes of 
al! Countries, 1/a. 10. 13, 14. Jer. 51. 41, 44: Alſo this is called the 
Golden Head, becauſe it ſtood longeſt, 500 Years, and was fortunate 
and flouriſhing to the laſt. | | gp 

39 And aiter thee ſhall ariſe another kingdom inferiour 
to thee », and another third kingdom of braſs », whicti 
ſhall bear rule over all the earth, : | 

» This was that of the Meds and Perſians; inferiour in Time and 
Succeſſion ; in Duration it Jaſted not half ſo long as the 4/57ian in 
Proſperity and Tranquil/ity, for the Pcrfan wasfuller of Trouble; yec 
was this wonderful rich and large for a time, Eſther 1, 1. this was the 
Breaſt and Arms of Silver. » This was the Grec:an Monarchy under 
Alexander the Great ; who conquered the former, called a He-z0r, 


chap. 8. 5. becauſe given ſo much to Luxury : Braſ;, becauſe courſct 
| than the other, and their Armour was chiefly Braſs, yaazoy47 v:5. 
1 OT GO ' o Therefore this iS alſo called an univerſal Monarchy ; for Alexander 
7 whoſe Prayer this was obtained ; bur the more plaia Senſe is this, bu# qarctied into the Indies, and conquered much of thar, by which he 


that the Interpretation may be manifeſt ro the King, and thar thou ,,. (aid to coriquer the World, and wept that he had nor another 


may'ſt know the Thoughts of thy Heart, that thou may'ſt be berter 


reſt the Mind of God in ir, and whar ir points ar, and what thy Dury 
15, and how to ſteer thy Counſel and Attions in this vaſt Monarchy; 
and w—_ the affliged Church of God.ia it. 

ol IT. 


foraſttiuch as icon __ in picees; and ſubdueth, all 


World to conquer ; yet this laſted not long, for he was ſoon overcome, 


fo infructed and fatisficd in thy Mind in this great Secret, when thou and kill'd by his Worldly Luſts. 


42 And the fourth kingdom ſhall be ſtrong as iron : 


e things 


a i (= __ - - 
EEE SEE CES 


— 
=_ 


_—_ 


_— OIENTCS. IET 


. 
SIR + DT — amy 
greets Yap _— - nel + 4 S —_ 
o LOS Sh, ee OI VS; a. " "Bo. I - , 
Anne apirxESt Tor St wait ox rx" « 
« & Ser Secs _ o_ Pp —_ — _ p 
« þ 


| 
n 142th p -. -= Y " "3, . —_— 
Food ag do y : . " Jo % _ X ; 
w , 7 = ” 6 .. whats « n 
p _—_ 7 IYER no - Fo Y » vaF —_ woms Con m - 
; <A v7 v£ IAT AH "EG: am pntngss.. - = wt Fes b . Ew 
4 4 "6 A. 4 ; o a 4 . b - $ $15 ——_— 1 we . > p! " -_— —_— - _ - 
Ws © ed CCS II ". 4 G "_ F Rs wo 
» _ , b——gs—— - << ww MATE Prot K - VF : cA « RY V2, IAG ws 9-1 
4 F- a 2-4 5 a. hs bo — —_— vi . p As or RTF £ —_ = WE > me un, 
- .- ge - 0 a - I - - 4 Y be # = STLD " — > wn Sm 4 + _— hon —<e - 
> $ - _ S ra . \ 23 ID ng2 _—_ - boa ” ud >. eſieg NN ATT Oe! wines & 6 —_— 4 44 » 
h —_ F bay > re ro SLE » pl : - __ Py _— —_ . - 
. —— f De —_—_ _— Ty en —_ - s P: prey 4, 2 A 6 _ ” m"_— gry $24 
4 a. bo dy : Ag” - 77 . - X 
al at '» KS. v Tx WS. 6. 3 $f r= CIT q - - _ ny Joc = -- - 
IJ a Þ: 62 = EB as”, - * - 
we \ x +” 194 by % "IK. ” 4 £ - - 
" = Þ — of ao 
£3 


= _-_— 


— 


Chap. I1. 


| Or, 


brictle. 


F Ch a 14. 
this with 
this, 


+ Chald. 


their days. 


3, 34-and 
6. 26. and 


7. 14,27. 
Mich. 4+ 


33- 

+ Chald. 
kingaom 
rnereof. 


than all other, becauſe it breaks them in pieces. 


DAN 


things p: and as iron that breaketh all theſe, ſhall it break 
in pieces, and bruiſe 9. 

p This is the Kingdom of the Romans ; and was to laſt not only to 
Chriſt's firſt coming, but under Antichriſt to his ſecond coming, but Nil 
going down asto Pagan Worſhip, and at Jaſt to Antichriſtian and Pa- 
pal Power : For wer. 28. Daniel tells the King, that God made known 
to him what ſhould be in the latter days ; therefore he intended a ge- 
neral Hiſtory to the end of the World, wer. 44. and chap. 7. Jatter 
end, and chap. 11. and 12. q This did break in pieces all other King- 
doms, being too ſtrong for them, and was never in ſubjettion to any, 
bur brought all in ſubjeCtion to ir, till the Stone fellupon ir, of which 
afterwards 

41 And whereas thou ſaweſt the feet and toes, part 
of potters clay, and part of iron : the kingdom _ 
divided r, but there ſhall be in it of the ſtrength of the 
iron, foraſmuch as thou ſaweſt the iron mixed with miry 
Clay. = 

y Partly ſtrong and partly weak : The Rman Kingdom was divided, 
partly becauſe Tyranny followed Ariſtocracy, and the Government was 
mads up of both ; partly by reaſon of their Civil Wars; when two 
C: mpetitors ſtrove each for Dominion, the common People againſt the 
Sznate, Syla againſt Marins, Ceſar againſt Pompey 3 alſo, partly when 
conquered Provinces and Kingdoms caſt off the Roman Yoke, and ſet 
up Kings of their own, and ſo the Empire was divided into ten King- 
Coms or Toes. The Viſion attributes two Legs to the Image, 
and to the fourth Monarchy, becauſe the Romans had ſometimes Duum- 
wirs, two Cinſuls, two Emperors, one in the Eaſt, and the other in the 

et. 

42 And as the toes of the feet ere part of iron, and 
part of clay ; /o the kingdom ſhall be partly ſtrong, and 
partly || broken £5. 

; This was plain in the Civil Wars of the Romans, the falling off of 
ſome Countries, «ſpecially in and towards the end of ir. 

43 And whereas thou ſaweſt iron mixt with miry clay, 
they ſhall mingle themſelves with the ſeed of men 7 : but 
they {hall not cleave -| one to another, even as 1ron 15 not 
mixed with clay. 

? 7, e. By Maritage; but they ſhall never ſodder well together, be- 
cavſe Ambition is ot ſtronger Force than Affinity and Conſanguinity 


1n Rulers. 5 REAR 
And in - the days of theſe kings Inall the 
God of ett ſer up a kingdom, * which ſhall 


never be deſtroyed s : and the - kingdom ſhall not 
be left to other people, but it Jſhall break in pieces, 
and conſume all theſe kingdoms, and it ſhall ſtand for 
cver. 

+ i. e. While the Iron Kingdom ſtood, for Chriſt was born in the 


Reign of Ang#ſt:zs Ceſar, Luke 2. 1. Shall the God of Heaven ſet up a King- 


a'»m. Now ſee the Difference of Chriſt”: Kingdom from allother King- 


doms in the World: 1. In the Rite of it, it was not by earthly Succeſ- 
ſion, or Arms, or Policy, 2. It is ſpiritual and heavenly in the Laws 
and Adminiftrationof it. 3. Jeſus Cariſt was not a meer Man, but 


God-Man : He that is the King, isthe Son of God. 4. Ir is ftronger 
5. It is not bound- 


ed by any Limits as worldly Empires are, but truly univerſal. 6. Ir 


{hail be for ever, and never deſtroyed and given to others, as the reſt 


* Ia.28. 
16. 

j Or, 
which was 
wot 11 
han. 

+ Chald. 


ajter this, 


7 i.e. Thegreat God hath ſhewn all this, who is above all the Kingsof 


gives a perfe(t Scheme and Propherical Hiſtory of things ro come, a. 
d] 


© Sze Acts 
10. 25. & 
i4 IT,T3. 
gS 38.6, 


Were. 
45 Foraſmuch as thou ſaweſt that * the ſtone was 


Cut out of the mountain [| without hands, and that it 
brake in pieces the iron, the braſs, the clay, the filver, 


and the gold x; the great God hath made known to 


the king what ſhall come to paſs | herealter y : and 
the dream & certain z, and the interpretation thereof 


ſure a, 


x 1. This notes the ſmall beginning of Chriſt's Kingdom viſibly. 
2 The different Riſe of Chriſt from all other : His Conception by | 
the Holy Ghoſt, like as Melchiſedeck, withour Father and Mother, re. 
ſpeQively as to histwo Natures ; Iſa. 9. 6. who ſhall declare bu Genera. 
tion ? his Nawe ſhall be called Wonderful. 3. This Stone as a heavy 
Rock, tumbling down from the Mountain, brake the Image 1n pieces, 
which could not be faid any other did ſo, 4. Chriſt is a Stone that 
grinds to Pouder thoſe it falls on : He is the precious Foundation and 
chief Corner-ſtone of his Church for ever: 5. He is a Growing-ſtone 
even to a Mountain, and therefore will fill the Earth, 1 Cor. 15. 24. 


the Earth, and only knows, and decrees, and effeQs furure things ; 
who only doth great and wondrous things. z 7.e. This Dream is no 
ordinary Dream, but an Oracleof God ; it is ſent from Heaven, and 


out the ſpecial Providence of God, in changing Governors and Go- 
vernments, with particular regard to his Church under them, and 
above all, about the Kingdom of Chriſt, and the Growth of it; mau- 
gre all the Enterprizes of Pagan and Antichriſtian Rome. a Ir is not a 
conjeftural Guefs of the Magicians, and wiſe Men of Babylon, who uſe 
to prepare lying words, becauſe they have no Knowledge of the true 
God, and therefore are wholly unacquainted with his Secrets, which 
he revealeth to his Prophets by the Spirit of Prophecy, which he hath 
now ſignally imparted ro me, which I have faithfully made known | 
unto thee O King. 

46 © Then the king Nebuchadnezzar fell upon his 
face, and * worſhipped Daniel, and commanded that” 
they ſhould offer an oblation, and ſweet odours unto: 
him 
- -b This wasſtrange, that ſo great a Monarch ſhould thus worſhip his 
Vaſfal : thus was it ſometimes done to Men, as to Elias the Prophet, 
2 Kings 1. 13. this was done in Conſternation and Admiration, becauſe 


T E L. 
he ſaw ſo much of God in the Prophet, and in the Revelation of th 
Dream ; but why did Daniel ſuffer it to be done ro him? x. Thoy h 
he could not hinder the King in his Proftration, aad in his Ward 
Command, yet doubtleſs he ſhewed his Averſeneſs with much Zeal 
and Abhorrence, as the Apoſtles did inthe like Caſe, 4; 4. 13,1 
15. becauſe it was high Sacrilege and Idolatry. 2. Ir is nor ſaid - 
offered Sacrifice to Danie!, but only the King commanded ir , whict 
doubtleſs Daniel refuſed, becauſe he was ſo careful in not defiling him. 
ſelf with the King's Dainries, chap. 1. 8. Alſo, in that he woulg not © 
mit the Worſhip of God,though with the hazard of his Life, chap. 6. "oe 
therefore the King being inſtrufted of Danie!, gives God aJlthe Glory 
in the next words. : 
47 The king anſwered unto Daniel, and ſaid, Of , 
truth ix #, that your God is a God of gods c, and a Lorg 
of kings 4, and a revealer of ſecrets e, ſeeing thou couldett 


reveal this ſecret f. | 
c A God of Gods, the greateſt and ſupream God of all the Wortg . 
above Baal, or Bel, and above all other Gods. -d The word is are o, 
maran, which in the Syriac ſignifies Lord, or high Lord, ſeeing he is the 
higheſt King of all the Earth : He makes, over-rules, and pulls down 
| whom he will, 1 7:9. 6. 15. Rev. 17. 14. and 19. 16. by this he g@. 
thers, that. God is a Revealer of Secrets, Ia. 48. 3,5, 6, 7,8. elf. 
pream God, becauſe he knowsand fore-knows, and declares all thinss 
future. f Therefore Daniel had it from God, who revealcd it to him 
which here the King confeſleth. ; . 
48 Then the king made Daniel a great man P 
and gave him many great gilks 4, and made hin 
ruler over the whole province of Babylon 7, "ang 
chief of the governors over all the wiſe wen of B;. 


bylon &. 

g Chald. Rabbi magnified him. + An Eſtate ſutable to his Hononr. 
i Gzal col Medina over the chief Province of Babylon, which was head 
becauſe of the Metropolis : The word Medina is alſo A4rabick, and 
therefore uſed in Spain at this day. k Chap. 4. 9g. Daniel was chief of 
them in Wiſdom, for he could unfold what none of the wiſe Me 
could. Again, he was chief in Place and Power ; he had the Rule 
and Inſpection of them which were Students and Profeſſors of Wit. 
dom and Learning, into their Studies and Manners, like a perpeual 
Lord-Chanceilor ; not that this holy Prophet gave any Encourage. 
ment to them in their unlawful Arts and Divinations, but rather 
diſcouraged and correQed them, teaching them the Knowledge of 
the true God: Thus dorh the true Religion rop all the World, and 
make the Grandeur thereof ſtoop to ir, for it is the Wiſdom of God, 
and the Power of God. : 

49 Then Daniel requeſted of the king, and he 
Shadrach, Meſhach, and Abed-nego over the affairs of 
the province of Babylon : but Daniel fat in the gate of the 
king /. X 

l Pd ſubſtituted them as Lieutenants for the King's Service, under 
Danic! ; which as the Curious obſerve, was chiefly about Agriculture, 
and gathering Revenues and Proviſions for the Court : but Daxicl hc 
was as Privy-Counſellor and Lord-Chamberlain, about arduous Afairs 
of the King and Kingdom ; ſitting ſometimes in Judgment, aad al 
admitting and conduCting Perſons and Cauſesrothe King as there waz 
need, to whom there was difficult acceſs, according to the Magnih. 
cence and Majeſty of the Kings of the Eaft. Thus Daxie! fate in the 
King's Gate, to be near and ready for the Kiog's chiefcſt Buſineſs. 
And ir notes Honour, alſo high Favour : but eſpecially we muſt loct 
upon Daniel's Promotion to be fer the Service and ProteQtion of his 
Brethren in their preſent State of Captivity, as Mordecai was : which 
ſhews that God doth remember his People in their low Eſtate, and 
doth nor leave himſelf without witneſs tothem, in raiſing up nurſg 
Fathers for them. 


CHAP. III 


Nebuchadnezzar ſetteth up # golden image ; comman4eth all to warſhip it 
I—7. Shadrach, Meſhach, and Abednego, refaſe to do it ; are accuſed, 
8—12. fear not the kings threatnings, 13—18. are caft into the fry 
furnace, and ſafely delivered by the power of God, 19—27. The king 


ſeeing the miracle, calleth shem forth ; bleſſeth God for his faithfulneſe au 
power, 28, and maketh a decree to ſerve the God of Shadrach, Meſbach, 
and Abed-nego only, 29. 30. 


I A the king made an image m of gold, 

whoſe height was threeſcore cubits, and the breadth 
thereof ſix cubits »: he ſet it up in the plain of Dura, in 
the province of Babylon. 

» This daring Sin of Nebuchadnezzar was aggravated. many way, 
by the Greatneſs of the Kingdom and Majeſty God had given hin, 
by the late Diſcovery made to him when Daniel interpreted his Dream, 
by his ConviRtion and Confeſſion upon it of that great God, and his 
Sovereign Power. This is the height of Ingratitude, arguing his 
Carriage before to be only a Fit of Aſtoniſhment, without the leaſt 
Change upon his Heart. x The vaſt Proportion of the Srazue or 7di!, 
was to ſhew his Greatneſs by the Height and Bulk of ir, and his Pride 
and Magnificence in the Richneſs of it, ſeeing it was of Gold, and 
to be a Monument to Poſterity of his famous Exploits. Some give 
this Reaſon, that he might ſcem hereby to avert the Fare of his Em- 
pire, foretold by Danie/, and declare himſelf ſole Monarch of che 
World, or Head of Gold, becauſe he made ir of Gold ; whether 
maſly, or plated, or gilded, matters not. Likewiſe that he might 
ſeem no ways to be inclined to the Jews, or their Religion, where- 
of che Chaldeazs might be jealous, ſeeing he had owned their God © 
be. greateſt, and had preferred Dame! and his Friends to great Ho, 
nours. Nebuchadnezzar aſſured his wiſe Men and Nobles, that he 
would ſtill maintain the old Eſtabliſh:d Religion, without Innovation 
or Mixture: So Mald, Menochins, Geierus, That they had a Spigh* 3 
gainſt the Jews is clear, wer. 8, 12. 


2 Then Nebuchadnezzar the king ſent to gather !9- 
gether the princes, « the governours, and the captall® 


the judges, the treafurers, rhe counſllors, Gs ſherth 


Chap, 


Engin 
plicity 
8 gaw 
ple, a 
Men d 
moſt b 
excels 
| Mane, 
vokin 

$- finress 


fatisfie: 


= and cr 


here, t 

Babylen 

Rev. 1 

Franki 

kneel t, 

| the 
Z lurnac 
Ss -«< Ti 
and bur 
this the 
the hell; 
that cro! 
tures Chy 
Which 5 
Jeſus ; Vv 
ure with 

as Ye ſee 

7-2 
the for 
try z Al 
UOns, a 
the gol 
kt up. 

» The 
of their fa 
Baſt, ang 

8 


Mar, ar 
'9 Th 
king, liv 
lo T 
Vol. 


a 


he rulers of the provinces o, to come to the dedi- 
þ of the image which Nebuchadnezzar the king had 


and all 
cation 


ſer up. 


1: creat Statue, whether Nebuchadn:zz.ar's own, or of Bel, or any 
Pa, * br Gods, ( ſee ver, 14. ) muſt be ſolemnly dedicated, and 
ceforeall che Peers of the Realm are called toic. But whether theſe 
Ranks of Men and Officers are truly rendred from the Chaldee words,1s 
hard to derermine, and not worth diſputing ; E:ymologiſts differ in it : 
this only is material, that the Heads of all chat vaſt Empire were ſum- 
moned, of ſeveral Nations and Languages, to teſtify rheir Conformity 
ro the Emperor's Will, and thereby give aſſurance of obliging the Peo- 
le under them to the ſame Obedience, 7 e. to the ſame idolatrous 
Worſhip. p It was the manner. of the Heathen to conſecrate their 
1dol before they worſhipped it ; and herein, as in many other, Saran 
imitated the Jews and their Temple-dedication,7ohn 10.22. They held 
a Feaſt : The Popiſh Church do the like, when they dedicate material 
Temples to particular Saints, with Solemnty and Jolliry : from whence 
come the Feaſts of Wakes and Revels to this day. 


2 Then the princes, the governours, and captains, the 
the judges, the. treaſurers, the counſellours , the 
ſheriffs , and all the rulers of the provinces were 
gathered together unto the dedication of the image 
hat Nebuchadnezzar the king had ſet up ; and they 


ſtood before the image that Nebuchadnezzar had ſet 
np 4s 

fe . In the Plains of Pwa,where great Multitudes might eaſily be 
gathered, and behold it lifted up on high, conſpicuous toall : They 
beheld ir with Admiration, ready to adore it, in obedience to the 
King's Will and Pleaſure ; for whatſoever pleaſed him, pleaſed them, 
walking willingly after the Commandment, as Jeroboam by his Calves made 
Iſrael to fin : Heatheniſh and profane Men are unſtable as Water, and 
blown any way by every wind of Dotrine, ſuitable to their Princes,and 
to their own Lults. If the King had commanded Idols ro be broken and 
burat, and the Worſhip of the true God to be ſet up, this People 
would not have been fo torward in their Conformity, becauſe Men are 


- generally more inclined to falſe Worſhip than true, 


4 Then an herald r cried - aloud , To you f it is 


* commanded, O people, nations and languages 5, 


r It is likely there were many Heralds at the Head of that great 
Concourſe, elie they could not all hear. s Proclamation was made 
therefore in ſeveral Languages, to ſome of ſeveral Nations allembled 


D ANTIE L; 


[man that ſhall hear the found of the Cornet”, flute, 
harp; ſfack-but , pfaltery and dulcimer, and all kinds 
of muſick, ſhall fall downi and worſhip the golden 
image: | | 

1: And whoſo falleth not down and worſhippeth . 
me he ſhould be caſt into the mid(t of a burning firy 
Urnace. 


12 There are certain Jews whom thou baſt ſet 
over the affairs of the province of Babylon , Sha- 
drac, Meſhach and Abed-nego : theſe men, O king, 


up &. 

2 Now the Devil's Cloven-foot appears ; now ye have the bottom 
of the Plot: one of theſe two is clear, theſe Chld:ans finding the F-ws 
made Courtiers, and preferred to Places of Truſt and Honour, they 
either put the King upon this Work, or elſe made uſe of it both to 
ſatisfy their Ambition, and wreak their Malice againit thoſe three 
Worthies; as they dealt with Danie!,chap. 6. 4, 5. they accuſed the Jews, 
which word {ignities to c 11uminate, and allo to eat vp and devour, which 
15 the deſign of Envy and Malice ; ſee how they go to work : 1. They 
ſtrike while the Iron is hot, they take the King in his Huff. 2, They 
read a Law Eſtabliſhed. 3 Then they ſay the Jews do nor obſerve the 
King's Laws, a People already obnoxious. 4. Yea, ſeveral of them 
deſpiſe the King's Laws and Authority. 5. They abuſe the King's 
great Favour and Indulgence to them. 6. They ſhould give good 
Example, being in Places of Truſt and Dignity. 7. Yet behold, they 
declare their Contumacy and Rebellion in not confotming to the 
King's Laws : This ſet the King all in a flame of Rage and Fury, and 
commana:d to bring theſe three Men before him, 


13 «| Then Nebuchadnezzar in 4's rage and fury 
commanded to bring Shadrach, Meſhach and Abed- 
nego a: then they brought cheſe men before the 
king. 

a Why not Daniel too, becauſe he was chief of all in Honour ? 4». 
Becauſe the King had a greater Favour for him; and he was popular, 
and beloved for his great Wiſdom and unblameable Carriage: they 


would not meddle with him now, left by his Knowledge, and Intereſt 
in the King, he might chanceto ſpoil their Plor. 


1+ Nebuchadnezzar -ſpake and faid unto them, 1s 3t 


*.. 


Chap. III, 


T bave not regarded thee, they ſerve not thy gods, + Chald. 
nor worſhip the golden image which thou hait fer #2ve /e +: 


reward 
101 ?3e7, 


CI 
Pr 
209.4 ow. - 6g Pn. 


— — 


. _y 
+ —_— 
Ga 


oY, OO? 


i mn 
_ 


warren ne og 
wy » 


* h 
Meh % RA 
pm 


Fi > Ze 


there, and tothe Repreſentatives of al]. l true, O Shadrach, Meſhach, and Abed.nego ? do not yell Or, F 


5 That at what time ye hear the found of the cornet, [terve my gods, nor worſhip the golden image which l have?2%%, mi 
XOU, 21, 


F flute , harp, ſack-but, pfaltery, || + dulcimer, and |ſet up b 2 


all kinds of muliek 5, ye fall down and worſhip the 
golden image that 
up 4, 

: 3. e. Wind and ſtringed Inſtruments of various Sorts and Faſhions; 
for we have here Cyrian and Greek Ones, as appears by the words 
though in Cha'dec Letters ; for this mighty Monarch was Lord over 
them all. « Mark, all that is required of them is only a Geſture of 
Worſhip, without Oral Profeſſion : The Pomp and Equipage, the fo- 


| kkmn Sound of the Muſick,and the ſ{tri& Command, were enough to in- 
| ducethem to ſtoop and fall down to it : This is one of Satan's great 


Engines, to draw the World from God's pure Worſhip, and the Sim- 
plicity that is in Chriſt,dazling Mens Eyes,and bewithching them with 
a gawdy whoriſh Dreſs of idolatrous Service, as ye ſee in this Exam- 


ple, and Rev. 17.4, 5. all which ariſerh meerly from hence, becauſe 
Mcn do not,or willnot ſee,tharGod's Worſhip is wholly Spiritual, and 
moſt beautiful and glorious as ſuch, 2 Cor. 3.6. to the end. By this it 
excels all Pagan, Jewiſh and Antichriſtian Worlhip ; all which is hu- 
mane, bedily, uncommanded of God, therefore diſpleaſing and pro- 
voking, unprofitable, enſnaring and deſtruQtive : Now idolatrous Ge- 
ſtures are ſinful, becauſe forbidden of God, Exod. 20. 5. becauſe this 
fatisfies and hardens Idolaters in their way ; alſo becauſe by this Snare 
and critical Mark their Proſelytes are known and diſtinguiſhed ; as 
here, they ſtood up, whenothers fell down ; Thus Antichriſt and New 
Babyle hath her Mark in the Forehead, and Handsof her Followers, 
Rev. 13. 15,16, 17. Primitive Chriſtians would not offer a Grain of 
Frankincenſe to a Pagan Ido), for fear or favour; nor true Proteſtants 
kneel to the Hoſt, which the Popiſh Prieſt holds up ro enſnare them. 


6 And whoſo falleth not down and worſhippeth, ſhall 
the ſame hour be caſt into the midſt of a burning fiery 
lurnace x. 

* This wasa Puniſhment uſual among the Chaldeans, to ſcorch, roſt 
and burn Offenders with Fire, Jer. 29. 22. ſee 2 Macead. 7. Z- And 
this the King of Moab imitated, 2 Kings 3.27. Amis 2. 1, This ſhews 
the helliſh Malice and Cruelty of wicked Men, eſpecially againſt thoſe 
that croſs their Pride and Superſtition, which was viſible in the Tor- 
tures Clriſt;ans were putto in the ten Perſecutions, and in the Fires 


6 Now when theſe Men were brought before the King, though in : 


Nebuchadnezzar the king hath ſet |Rage, yer hedorh not preſently throw them into the Fire, but makes 


inquiry by Interrogatories, that he might ſee firlt if they were guilty, 
by hearing them ſpeak for themſelves, and telling them he expe&ted 
Obedience and Conformity to his Laws fromthem; and it was ia vain 
to look for any Indulgence from him, he would bate them nothing, th2y 
ſhould- be burned : What, do ye make a Jeſt of my Gods, and my 
Religion, and my Commands ? fo the word z/:d4z in the Syriac doth 
ſometimes lignify to ſcof or deride ; as if he had ſaid, Is ir true in- 
deed, that ye refuſe to worſhip. my Gods ? What, do ye doit in ear- 
neſt, or in jeſt ? It ſeems by your Carriage, if it be true what I hzar of 
you, that yeſlight my Gods, and make a mock of my Authority ; bur 
ye ſhall know there is no jeſting with theſe Edge-tols. 


15 Now if ye be ready, that at what time ye 
hear the found of the cornet, flute, harp, ſackbut, 
plaltery , and dulcimer, and all kinds of muſick, ye 
tall down and worſhip the image which I have made , 
ell : but if ye worſhip not, ye ſhall be caſt the 
ſame hour into the midſt of a burning firy furnace ; 
_ my z# that God that ſhall deliver you out of my 
ands c 


c Prodigious Pride and Blaſphemy ! for he doth not only inſult 0- 
ver all Godsin general, but particularly againſt the only true God, 
whom he lately confeſſed, chap. 2.47. to be a God of Gods, and a 
Lord of Kings; fo the King of 4ſyris, 2 Kings 18.30,33. Thus all the 
Tyrants of the Eaſt, Turk, Mogul, Cham, whoſe very Titles are Blaſ- 
phemy. It's a wonder why theſe M-n worſhip any God, ſeeing they 
ſerup themſelves above all. Reaſon of State makes them ſet up ſome- 
what to keep the People in awe ; they themſelves are exempt, and care 
for none. The root of Nebuchadnezzar's Arrogance Jay chiefly here, 
he had burnt the Temple of the Jews God, and made Slaves of his 
People, and hedidnotdeliver either, and therefore thought he could 
not, and ſb preſumes the ſame now ; but God will make him quickly 
of another mind. 


16 Shadrach, Meſhach, and Ahed-nego anſwered and 


Q 
Þ has 


which Antichriſt hath kindled in all his Reign, againſt the Witneſſes of 
Jejus ; witneſs the Book of 4#s and Monuments ; Whom they cannot al- 
ure with their Gawdery, they fright with their Fires and Maſacres ; 


faid to the king, O Nebuchadnezzar, || * we are not care-1| Ord, 


ful to anſwer thee in this matter 4. not;fo Gr, 
4 Heb. We care not, we may nor, there is nonecd of any Anſwer in* Mat.19. 


as ye ſee the EffeQts of both in the Verſe following. 

7 Therefore at that time, when all ths people heard 
the found of the cornet , flute , harp , fack-but , pſal- 
try, and all kinds of muſick, all the people, the na- 
uons, and the languages , fell down and worſhipped 
n golden image | that Nebuchadnezzar the king had 

up. 

7 The ſame Methods hath New Babylon followed,in the long Slavery 
«their falſe Catholick Church ; for the whole World wondred after the 
Baſt, and none could make War with him, Rev. 13. 3, 4, 7, 8- 

3 T Wherefore at that time certain Chaldeans came 
mar, and accuſed the Jews. 

. 9 They ſpake and faid to the king Nebuchadnezzar, O 
king, live for ever. 


" Thou, O king, haſt made a decree, that every 
'0l. 11 


the King is reſolved to have his Will of us, and we are reſolved onthe 
contrary : For to obey. him in this horrid thing, will be Diſobedience 
againſt our God, to the higheſt. 


17 Ifit be /o, our God whom we ſerve, is able to deliver 
us from the burning fiery furnace, and he will e deliver ws 


out of thine hand, O king. | | 

e They were indued with a ſtrong Faith in theic God, not only as 
ro his Power, which was omnipotent and unlimited, but alfo as to his 
Will, which readily inclined him to fuccour his Servants in their Di- 
ſtreſs, for his Name, according to his Promiſe, and the Saints Experi- 
ence in the like Caſes of Extremity. | 


18 But if not f, be ic known unto thee, O king, that 
we will not ferve thy gods, nor worſhip the golden image 


which chou haſt ſet up g- k 


(Ee 2] f They 


this Caſe, for it is in vain for us to deliberate and debate rhe Matter ; 19. 


4 


Chap. IIT. 


to this Deliverance abſolutely, for God is free, and knows how to de- 
liver, and ſometimes to ſuffer his Saints to glorify him by ſuffering. 
g It was therefore all a cafe ro them which way of the two God would 
honour himſelf; they were reſolved to venture ſuffering rather than 
{inning, and leave the Cauſe to God. 


28 


the God of Shadrach, Meſha 
hath ſent his angel, and deliv 


DANIETL, 


f They add this, 6: ifns!, to ſhew they did not preſume to tie God ob World in its height, by workin 


Then Nebuchadnezzar 


g againſt and above Naty 
utmoſt ſphear of Activity is limited by God. 


ſpake, 
ch, and 


Chap. 
re, whoſe 


and ſaid, Bleſfed z, 
Abed-nego Z, Who 


ered his ſervants that truſted 


+ Chald 19 4] Then was Nebuchadnezzar # full of fury : in him, and have changed the kings word, and yielded 
Fila. and the form of his vilage was changed +4 againſt|their bodies that they might not ſerve nor worſhip any 
Shadrach, Meſhach, and Abed-nego : therefore he|g0d, except their own God 3. 
ipake and commanded, that they : ſhould heat the| = Thus our ofthe Mouths of Blaſphemers and Contemners of God; 
furnace one feven times more than it was wont to be | can the Lord ordain Praiſe ; yer all this did not draw off this Kin 
heat 5. | from his Jdolatry, for he ſaith the God of Shadrach, &c. not his Gog: 
h Which appearedin his Face, and in his Words, taking this Anſwer yoann will not work Converſion, till God work upon the Heart, 
for the higheſt Aﬀront and Provocation, which as the Caſe ſtood he hic TOE Ka. 2, a He bleſſed God for four things: 1, for ſendin 
could not bear : The Pride of his Heart made his Indignation boil over, he >. jy aq RE his Servants that truſted in him. 2 Thar they 
and therefore he made the Furnace ſeven times hucter. 5 Tyrants would Th the King's Commandment, 5. e. fruſtrated it, and made it 
burn the People of God in Hell ifthey could. .. Ph = _ = anger him T b _ Ming, 
4 : i eir ies to the Fire, and to his Fury, by 
+ Chald. 20 And he commanded the + moſt mighty men that Pallive Obedience, rather than not obey God aQvely, by worlkit;e) | 
aa of were in his army, to bind & Shadrach, Meſhach, and any falſe God; 4. But only the true, whom they choſe to be ther | 
ferongth. Abed-nego, aud to caſt them into the burning firy own God. Obſerve alſo here the Power of Faith - It quencheth ( 
furnace. the Violence of Fire, Heb. 1 7. 34. and the Preſence of God with his | 
k What, did hethinktheſe three Men would have reſiſted ? or that | People, even in the F re, andin firy Trials, 1ſs. 43.2. 1 Per. 1. 7. and t 
their God would defend them from his Power; or that if he #9;9 m_ Þ fans | b 
theKing and his mighty Men could have prevailed * None of all this 29 Therefore + T make a decree, that every peop! 
was in the caſe ; for God purpoſed to ſhew his Power, when the King . . g . P -OPIC, f y g 
did his worſt,and to Loch Bs Violence of the Fire, both of the bus! _ _ [2DBUage, which ſpe ak + oy thing amils _ a 
nace, and of the King's Fury atonce ; and in the thing wherein he | SUIT the God on ohadr ach, Mefhach, and Abed-nego op T 
dealt proudly, to be above him. ſhall be * + cut irr pieces, and their houſes ſhall be mag," Fo 
| Or,van 21 Then theſe men were bound in their {| coats,| 4 dunghi]; becauſe there is no other god that can deliver, to 
= rr. heir hofen, and their || hats, and their orher par-[after this ſort, *( 
- ant; ments 7, and were caſt into the midit of the burning tiry| #* Obſerve here, that though he doth not reſolve to worſhip the true} ( me. 
ps furnace _ nor —— others ro do it, yethe would not allow the God of ny Lunt 
_— : . tne Fews to beevil ſpoken of; this was all that he came ap to : Hewag 
! Thisis obſervable and wonderful, that the Fire ſhould not catch reſolved to hold fff to the Religion eſtabliſhed ; his own Idols.” , 
their Garments, being the moſt obnoxious toir. the great golden Idol, which had been flared a. flighted by þ "BE 
a 4 j 1 : bl ele E 
t Chatd. 22 Theretore becauſe the kings ft commandment w— three Worthies, he would not take down and relinquiſh: Thi... Dre 
et CBI, and the furnace exceeding hot, the || flame off the ver Quarter the true God could ger among them, nor to be ſpo. ei 
'—** the fire flew thoſe men » that took up Shadrach, Meſhach, ken amiſs of under great Penalty ; though he confeſſed no God elf oY 
and Abed-nego. could deliver after that ſtrange ſort. Bel could not preſerve his Men wo 
» Which made them the more haſty and precipitate in their Exe. | out of the Furnace ; God preſerves his Servants in the Furnace : All fly « 
cution, and took leſs care for themſelves, againſt the Violence of the | Was one for thar, Be/ ſhould be his God fill. "% P 
blame, » A ſignal hand of God upon ſuch as execute wicked Com- 30 Then the king + promoted Shadrach, Meſhach, and il zen 
mands, who though mighty Men, had no Might to eſcape the Flame Abed.nego in the province of Babylon c. ; - £ 
- _ Mouth of the Furnace, when the other eſcaped in the midſt £ n They that honour God, chem vill God honour: To ſuffer, ain; A 4 F 
q utter Shame and Pains for God, is to honour God, John 21. I9. 1 Pt, 
23 Andtheſe three men, Shadrach, Meſhach, owe f! 14 Ir is probable that the Chaldeons uſed to reproach the Coder _ 
bed-nego, fell down o bound into the midſt of the burning | the Jews, and more upon this account, becauſe for his Sake theſe his "_— 
po 
firy furnace. —_ _ Conformity to Babylonifh Idolatry ; and their common relj Fr 
« o * # E 
o All this is expreſt with Emphaſis, to make the Power of God | Q947el with the People of God wasupon the account oftheir Religion ; 
more glorious in or Preſervation; for that Flame that ſlew the Exe. | Tus here in this Inſtance, and thus in Dy niet's Caſe, Dan. 6. 4,5. thi Wha 
cutioners, might much more eaſily have ſuffocated the three Children | 999929n, Eſther 3.8. Allo for that very thing they make them diſloyal, 
le they Gil down and Breakers of the King's Laws : Now God would vindicate his Peo- $ < 
y : # | Ple herein, and made this greatKing to do it too, knowing it was x ( * wt 
24 Then Nebuchadnezzar the king was aſtonied, and | Grief of Heart for theſe Men, Shadrach, &c. to hear the Name of Go 
Or, ge. roſe up in haſte p, and ipake and ſaid unto his [ counſel- abuſed by Idolaters add profane Wretches ; and doubtleſs they com- wand 
vm4r:. Jours, Did not we caſt three men bound into the midſt of PR wn _ _ — them Right by _ _ Decree, my : 
"= . . Ong as 1t Jailed ; ſeeing the King moreover thought fit to promote i 
the fire They anſwered and ſaid unto the king, True, O them to Honour, 3. e. he did reſtore them to their Places, as the word > Wh 
king 9. 2 O_ | ſignifies, and made an Addition to their former Digaities. not, but 
Þ This Fear, Perturbation and Amazement, as the word ſignifies, ding of 
ſurprized the King; being ſurprized with the Strangeneſs of it, be. CHAP. IV. done thei 
holding ſomething ſupernatural in it, together with the Diſappoint- They kne 
ment of his Deſign and cruel Commands. 94 The Lord extorted this Nebuchadnezz ar declareth to all men the wonders and kingdom of God, 1=1. -#s now 
Confeſſion from them, though Engies. relateth his dream, and Daniel's interpretation of it, 4 26. he comſil peaks in 
25 He anſwered and faid i La, i ſee » four men | #he king Fo repentance, 27, The event confirmath Daniel interpretation; mo yy 
+ Charg, looſe, walking in the midſt of the fire, and + they| for which the King projſeth Gid, 28—37, | ngenes 
:here is no have no hurt; and the form ofthe fourth is like the ſon of | ; ME pleateth, 
ls is God :. | I NEbuchadnezzar the king, unto all people, nations - o0 
Zhem, r The Fire gave Light to ſee them, though it had no power of and languages that dwell in all the earth, Peac: Cauſe I 


+ Chald. 


aoor. 


Heart ro burn them. 5s A Divine, moſt Beautiful and Glorious Coun- 
tenance ; either ofa meer Angel, or rather of Jeſus Chriſt the Angel of 
the Covenant, who did ſometimes appear inthe Old Teſtament before 
his Incarnation, Gen. 12.7. and 18. 10, 13, 17, 20, &*c. Exod. $3.23. 
and 33. 2. Joſh. 5. 13,14, 15. Prov.8, 31. in all which Places it is 
Jehovah, Gen. 19. 24. Exod. 3.2. Afﬀs 7. 30, 32, 33, 38. 
26 4 Then' Nebuchadnezzar came near * to the 
pl mouth of the burning firy furnace, ad ſpake « and 
aid, Shadrach, Meſhach, and Abed-nego, ye ſervants of 
the moſt high God, come forth, and come Hirher. 
Then Shadrach, Meſhach, and Abed-nego came forth 
of the midſt of the fire x. 

* As near ashedurſt come within hearing. = With a milder Tone 
than before, God having abated the Fire of his Fury : Now he could at 
once confeſs and acknowledg the true God to be the moſt High above 
all Gods, andthe three Worthies to be his faitful Servants. x The 
went out upon the King's Call, without which they would not have 
ſtirred, ; 

27 And the princes, governors, and captains, and 
the kings counſellours being gathered together , ſaw 3 
theſe men, upon whoſe bodies the fire had no Power, 
nor was an hair of their - head ſinged , neither were 
their coats changed, nor the ſmell of fire had paſled on 
them. | 
y With great Admiration, for the Satisfa&ion of all by their Sight 
of them, and by their Smell: All the Works of God are perfe&, and 
there was nothing here wanting to make this wonderful Deliverance 
compleat ; Here was a pure A& of God's Omnipotence, to divide be. 
tween the Fireandits moſt intenſe Hear,and to maſter any Creature in 


che 


God in 
of was, that War bein 


he had fini 


be multiplied unto you 4. 

The Prophet Daniel here ſets down another 
ſhed that of the three young Men : 
forth not in his own Words, 
clamation, that it mi 


and queſtionleſs put into 
aSthe manner was. Theſe three 
mproperly annexed ro the end of 


h and Happineſs, This was al 
ation among the Eaſtern Nations, 
with uninterrupted Joy and Felicityin 

and from them it came Jerived down to 

, and notes more, even Peace with 

Jeſus Chriſt, Spiritual and Everlaſting : Now the Reaſon here | 
g the Root of all Miſery, eſpecially where al 

Government was tyrannical, and when 8nce it brake forth, it mad* 

Y | alldeſolate; therefore Peace was as 
of War, which made the 
the boſom of Peace. 


2 + I thou 


Heaven in compariſon of che Hell 
Heathens paint Platus the God of Riches 18 


ght it good e to ſhew the ſigns and] 
wonders that the high God hath wrought toward; 
me f. 


e Idid upon mature Thoughts judg it very becoming me,yea it #® 


my Pleaſure to let all the World know it. f 1. Signs and Wonders 
2. Wronght by the high God: 3. Toward me, wherein I was pe 
ſonally concerned, Thceſe were his Reaſo 
World. 


3 How great are his ſigns ! and how mighty ® 


his wonders g ! his kingdom & * an everl? 10g" 
kingdom 


ns why he made it known 


ſtrange. Story, after 
This the Prophet fets 
but in the Words of the King's own Pro- 
ght paſs with undoubted Credit, and withoutall 
Diſpute ; being ſent to all his vaſt Kingdoms, 
the King's Archives, and Court-rolls, 
firſt Verſes of this 4th Chapter, are i 
the foregoing third Chapter by ſome, ſeeing they are the Preface ofthe 
following Hiſtory. & 7.e. All Healt 
ways the Form of Greeting and Salut 
comprehending Peace, Plenty, 
all comfortable Enjoyments ; 
the Penmenof the New Teſtament 


; thee 9, 
Ons of 
thereof 

7 This 
he truly « 
with, anc 
ExpcQatiq 


T0 
Flow 
andthe | 
\ Beca 
tem Viſz 
Underſia 
It With hjs 
US that a 
ap. 31. t 
to huge ( 
Tx..3 
thereof 
end of : 

I2 
ol the 
O8TA 
\. * Thig 
1715 bette 
i3l 


[] p. IV. 


Kingdom , and his dominion # from generation to gene- 
Oo 


ion Þ. os _ 
_— f two Words ſignify in their Roots, Admiration and Aſto, 
04 = . ir ſzems theſe Works of God had that Impreflion upon this 
—__" -ear Cauie whereof was his Ignorance of the true God, to- 
King, _ his own exceſſive Pride and Epicuriſm, God by this fol- 
ger Dream, and Daziel's Inſtruftion, had told him his Fate, and 
rags Kingdom bur God's Kingdom was everlaſting, which he had 
ar” him once afore this, Dan. 2. 44- b This Confeſſion of the King 
fo on Convidtion, and it looks lomewhar like Repentance, bur the 
Sequel proves him to be no Changling, though God made prodigious 
Mutations in his Kingdom, and in the Form of his Perſon, as ye ſee, 
verſo 31, 32-7 Of this Chapter ; he was metamorphoz'd to a monſtrous 
Beaſt, and then to a Man again, and yet no Convert. : 
47 | Nebuchadnezzar was at-reſt in mine houſez, and 


| fourithing in my palace &. 


- At reſt when his Wars were over, which were great, and he vifto- 
_—_ then I fat down quiet, enjoying the Spoils of my Enemies. 
; Which was moſt Magnificent, there I lived in all Delights and 


rrandeur. : . 
my ſw a dream which made me afraid /, and the 


| thoughts upon my bed, and the viſions of my head trou- 


led me. FE: 
b ID isno Felicity in this World Iafting; a black Cloud big with 


> d T=<mpeſt ſpoils the faireſt Sun-ſhine day. They that fear 
Cod: ſhall - frighted by him. God doth juſtly make Epicures and 
T rants uneaſy in the midſt of their Fool's Paradiſe, where , if the 
Foo! Girh in bis Heart there is no God, he ſhall ſoon find in his Heart 
ro think otherwiſe. 

6 Therefore made I a Decree, to bring in all the wiſe 
en of Babylon before me m7, that they might make known 
unto me the interpretation of the dream. 

» Though he had experienced before that theſe Wiſe-men were 
fool'd, and could do nothing either 1a telling or interpreting his 
<a chap. 2. yet he will cry them once again, poflibly becauſe 
: n freſh Credit with the King ; or he would hear what 
they could do, and if they failed him, he would then make uſe of 
Daniel whom he had in reſerve. Perhaps theſe Chaldean DoQors and 
Wizards ſhunned and ſcorned Daxi«''s Company, and he was as much 
fy of theirs; theretore they came not together : but God had difpo- 
ſed of this whole Scene, and for the Honour of his Name ſuffered Da- 
nel not to bs ſent for till the laſt, 


- Then came in the magicians , the aſtrologers, the 


chaideans, and the ſooth-ſayers: and Itold the dream 
before them ; hut they did not make known unto me the 
interpretation thereof », | 

And yetthis was it they ſtood upon before, that the King ſhould 
teli the Dream, and they would interpretit , which now they could 


they might gal 


nor do ; this ſkewsthem to be meer Impoſtors, and that neither their 


vatural Skill, nor Diabolical Help could unfold God's Secrets. 


$ © But at the laſt Daniel came in before me o, 
(* whoſe name was Belteſhazzar , according to the 
name of my god, and in whom # the ſpirit || of the 
holy gods p) and before him I told the dream , /ay- 


in 

l Whether ſent for by the King, or brought in by another, appears 
not, but.he was laſt, that it might appear he had the true underſtan- 
dino of theſe Secrets : for if he had come firſt before the reſt had 
done their beſt in trying all their Skill in vain, they would have ſaid , 
They knew as well as he, and ſo God would not have hadthe Glory ; 
but now it's plain the Spirit of God in the Prophet did all, p He 
ſpeaks in the plural like an Idolater ; and becauſe he calls him Belte- 
ſhazzar according to the Name of his God, 7. e. Belor Baal, by the Spi- 
rit of Gid he means the Spirit of Divination, or Prophecy of future con- 
tingent things which God only knows, and reveals by his Spirit as he 


| pleaſeth, which none of the Magicians were indued with, 


9 O Belteſhazzar , * maſter of the magicians, be- 


cauſe I know that the ſpirit of the holy || gods # in 
3 thee 9, and no ſecret troubleth thee, - tell me the viſi- 


ons of my dream that I have ſeen , and the interpretation 
thereo 

7 This argued he was convinced of Danie!'s great Abilities, and that 
he truly deſerved the Title and Dignity the King had honoured him 
with, and that Daniel would ſhew he anſwered both the Opinion and 
ExpcRation the King had of him. 

10 Thus were the viſions of mine head r in my bed ; 
+l faw, and behold, * a trees in the midſt of the earth , 
andthe height thereof was great. 

7 Becauſe the Fancy and Imagination is in the Head ; and he calls 
them Yiſjons or Seeings, becauſe Eyes and Sight are attributed ro the 
Underſtanding, and the thing ſeemed viſible to him, as if he beheld 
it with his Eyes. 5 Thoſe that write of the Language of theZff tel] 
us that a Tree denotes ſome excellent Man. Thus the Propher Ezekzel, 
22). 31. throrgi1out, deſcribes the King of 4ſris, and Pharaoh King 
or Eg1pt in their Flouriſh, Height and grear Fall, comparing them 
to huge Cedars. . 

11 The tree grew, and was ſtrong, and the height 
hereof reached unto heaven, and the fight thereof to the 
end of all the earth. | : 

12 The leaves thereof were fair, and the fruit there- 
of much 7, and in it was meat for all: * the beaſts 

ol the field had ſhadow under it, and the fowls of the 
3 dwelt in the boughs thereof, and all fleſh was fed 
01 1t, 
| * This notes the publick Good and. Benefit of Magiſtracy : ſo that 
1:15 better living under Tyranny than Anarchy, as Ca/vin ſaith. 

12? I ſaw in the vitions of my head upon my bed, 


DANIEL, 


from heaven. 13 


# By Watcher 1s mean2 an Ange, a holy or good Angel , they are 
the Inſttuments of God and his Meſſengers to execute God's Judgments 
which they watch conſtantly to perform, Pal. 103. 20,21 


14 He cried - aloud , and faid thus x, Hew dowr the + Cha!g 


tree, and cut off his branches, thake off his leaves , 
(cater his fruit ; letthe beaſts get away from under it, 
the fowls from his branches. 


x Whereby isſhewn the Conſent of the Angels , when one ſtirs up 
another to cut down, 7. e. to caſt out and take away. 


I5 Nevertheleſs, leave the ſtump of his roots in the 
earth y , even with a band of iron and braſs, in the ten- 
der grafs of the field z, and let it be wet with the dew of 
heaven, and let his portion be with the beaſts in the grals 
of the earth. 


Y Here he mitigates and correQs the former rigour of his Sen. 
tence, that the Kingdom ſhould remain with hope of return and re-ad- 
mifſien : God cuts off many flouriſhing Kindoms to the Stumps , by 
ſpoiling their Riches, Beauty and Majeſty. z Let the Body of N:- 
buchadnezzar be preſerved, and the Kingdom remain firm, though he 
be turned out to Graſs for a while among the Beaſts. 


I6 Let his heart be changed from mans, and let a 
beaſts heart be given unto him , and let ſeven times paſs 
over him 4. 


# Let him live ſeven Years as a Beaſt in Man's ſhape atnong Beaſts 
of the Field, let him become brutiſh without humane Senſe and Un. 
derſtanding , and this appeared much alſo in his ourward Shape ; 
Nails like Claws, and Hair like Feathers. Some think that he was 
truly changed into a Beaſt, but this cannot be, for then the Chald- aus 
would never have more owned or reſtored him. Others judge thar he 
was not changed at all, butin appearance only to the beholders, andin 
their Fancies; but this is a falſe Conſtru&ion of God's Works, when 
the Scripture faid it was truly done. Ir is probable he was mute, and 
bellowed only, that he went naked and bowed, and eat Graſs among 
che Beaſts with whom his Converſe was. A dreadful Example upon 
che greateſt Man on Earth, for his brutiſh and raging Tyranny,and in- 
humane Carriage, abafing himſelf, a1d abuſing his Honours and great 
Prerogativesto Wickedneſs and ſavage Cruelty, io be thus forſaken of 
God and Men, and to be made a Prodigy and SpeQacle to the World, 
and that upon Record toall Generations. 


and 


and the || demand by the word ofthe holy ones 5: to 
che intenc that the King may know that the moſt High 
ruleth in the kingdom of men c , and giveth ic to whom- 
_—_ he will, and ſetteth up over it the baſeſt of 
men #4. 


6 The Decree was God's, and the Demand was of the Holy Angels 
if God would ena& and ratify it: the Angels as Commiſſioners had 
the Diſpenſation of it put into their Hands, and they all conſent to ic 
as 2 juſt Judgment of God to be executed by them according to the 
Will and Pleaſure of God: and they deſire of God it may be done , 
alluding to the Cuſtoms of ſome Nations, and ſpeaking after the man- 
nerof Men, for the holy Angels are zealous for God's Honour, and 
pray him to affert his own Soveraignty againſt thc bold Encroachments 
of mortal Men, eſpecially rampantand favage Tyrants, to make then 
know themſelves. c This Nebuchadnezzar and his Flatterers conceited 
he was God in Earth, independant and unaccountable to any, and 
though he had Notions of a ſupream God , yer he confined his Go 
vernment to Heaven. Jupiter in Heaven, Ceſar in Earth rules all, ſaid 
the heathen Poer. Bur the great God will make all Men know he 
rules all in Earth too, and ſets up ar his Pleaſure whom he will, and 
plucks them down again : All Power is of God, Row. 13, 1- who doth 
often make uſeof his Power in this Caſe, thereby declaring he only is 
arbitrary andabſolute : for Inſtance, He gives this Dignity ſometimes 
to the baſ-ſt of Men, as he took it from Sau! and gaveit David a poor 
Shepherd's Boy, Pſal. 78. 70,71. and made him a Name among the 
great Men of the Earth, 1 Saw. 2, 7, 8. 1 Chron. 17. 7, 8- 


18 This dream I king Nebuchadnezzar have ſeen : 
now. thou, O Belteſhazzar, declare the interpretation 
thereof, ſoraſmuch as ail the wiſe me of my kingdom 
are not able to make known unto me the interpretati- 
on: but thou art able, for the ſpiric of the holy gods 
# in thee. 

I9 4 Then Daniel ( whoſs name was Belteſhazzar 
was aſtonied for one hour , and his thoughts troubled 
him c: the king ſpake and faid, Belreſhazzar, let not 
the dream, or the interpretation thereof trouble thee #- 
Belteſhazzar anſwered and ſaid, My Lord, the dream te 
to them that hate thee, and the interpretation thereof to 
thine enemies g. | 

e Becauſe he foreſaw ſuch tragical things coming upon the King, 
for whom he had ſuch reverence for the high Favours and Honours he 
had conferred on him, and he was afraid to declare them ; theſe things 
coming upon him while he was a&ed by a Spirit of Prophecy, doub. 
led his Conſternation, and troubled his Thoughts, Dar. 10. 16 17. 
f Speak out freely, let the event be what ic will. 5 Though this King 
werea Tyrant and an Enemy of God and his People, yet che Prophet 
is grieved for him,and prayed for him chat God would avert his Judg- 
mentsfrom him and lay chem rather upon his Enemies, Fer. 29. 7. 

20 The tree that thou faweft , which grew, and was 
ſtrong, whoſe height reached unto the heaven, and the 
ſight thereof to all the earth ; 


21 Whoſe leaves were fair, and the fruit thereof 


much, and in it 2s meat for all ; under which the bealts 
of 


and behold. a watcher «, and * an holy one came down * chap. g. 


and wis/m 17128 


17 This matter & by the decree of the watchers [| Or, pc:-- 


Chap. IV. DANIEL Cha 


upon his Humiliation, 1 Kings 21. 27. and God would try TWry 
giving him ſpace of Repentance, as he did to them before the Flood 


. 
c 


"Fer.27.5 


| Or, re- 
acem, 


Prov. 16. 


6. So Gr. quillity 5. 


| Or, a7; 
h:aling 


*Line e700. the King ſome hopes of mitigation at leaſt, as it was with Nincveh and 


þ. Orc.z 207. 


* dwelling ſhall be with the beaſts of the field, and they 


of the tie!ld dwelt ; and upon whoſe branches the fowls 
of the heaven had their habitation ? 


. Gen. G . 3, and to Jezebel, Rev. 2.21, but it is moſt probable th 
22 Ie « thou, O king +, that art grown and be-[\.. 1. 7 lire aftonied ar the firſt, when he heard God's Ough he 


Decree - 


come ſtrong : tor thy greatneſs is grown and reacheth gainſt him; yethe having this reſpite, he grew hardned, and thought 


unto heaven 7, and thy dominion to the end of the: 
earth k, 


h Thou art he that is meant by it. The King is the Tree, the Bran-! 
ches are his Princes, Children and Nephews ; the Leaves are bis No- 


is the Protetion which his People had under him. See Achmeres of the 
Language of the Eaſt. Now in that he ſpeaks plainly and roundly the 
whole Truth, this Prophet is hereina Pattern toevery faithful Miniſter 
of Chriſt. Firſt to preach the Truth of God, and to apply it without 
reſp: of Perſons, and yet with that Wiſdom and Moderation, that - 
Men hay ſee they have a compaſſionate Care for their Souls. 7 Thou 
art High and Mighty in the Majeſty and Splendor which God hath gi- 
ven thee & Say ſometo the Caſpian Sea North, to the Euxine and 
Z&gem Weſt, ro the Mediterranean South, for 1t 15 not clear thar it 
1eached further, and this alone was great. 
39 


2 And whereas the king ſaw a watcher, and an 
holy one coming down from heaven, and ſaying, Hew, 


the tree down , and deſtroy it , yet leave the ſtump, 


of the roots thereof in the earth, even with a band of 
iron and braſs in the tender graſs of the field, and let; 


| 


it be wer wich the dew of heaven , and /er his portion. 


be wich the beaſts of the field , till ſeven times paſs over 
him; : : | £50 

24 This is the interpretation , O king /, and this «| 
the decree of the moſt High, which is come upon my lord 


the king : | 

1 This is the Decree of the moſt High which 15 come upon my | 
Lord the King. By ſaying theſe Words, my Lord the King, he endea- | 
vours to {weeten the bitterneſs of this Cup of God's Diſpleaſure as 
much as he can, 


25 That they ſhall * drive thee from men, and thy 


thall make” thee to eat graſs as oxen, and they ſhall wet 
thee with the dew of heaven m, and ſeven times ſhall paſs 


over thee, till thou know that the moſt High ruleth in the, 
kingdom of men, and * giveth it to whomſoever he' 
will 2. 

» Becauſe thou haſt lived a brutiſh Epicarean Life, and were lifted 
up above the common Race of Mankind in thy Heart , therefore 
thy Fate ſhall be nor to be caſt out to live among the baſeſt and meaneſt 
fort of Men, which were hard enough, nonot among Herdſmen, as if 
that were too good for him, but among the Beaſts,to herd with them. 
This was ſuch a thundering Pea], that it was wonderful the King could 
endure to hear without Wrath and Fury boiling in his Hearr, yet the 
Lord withheld him. = How hard is1t for lofty Princes to learn this 


Leilen, that God is the Giver of all they have, and will call them to 
accounc ſeverely forall they do, and make the Kings and Kingdoms of 

*the World to know they are his, and not theirs, and that their Te-| 
nure 1s but at the Will of the Lord folely, who can alter and alienate | 
rhe Property of allcheir Enjoiments, being the High Lord Paramount | 
above all? 

26 And whereas they commanded to leave the: 
ſtump of the tree-roots; thy kingdom ſhall be fure unto 
thee 0, after that thou ſhalt have known that the heavens 
do rule . 


o There ſhall be no other King choſen in thy room all the time 
thouliveſt, as a Stump ofa Tree, Job. 14. 7, $8, 9. Thou ſhalt recover 
all again, young Branches ſhall ſprout out of thee. p Yerſe 34, 35, fc. 
If Princes will not learn and know this, God will beat it into them. 
'Thisisthe end of all God's Rods upon them, if they wou'd hear the 
Voice ofthem, and him that hath appointed them, 2 Chron. 33. 12, 13. 
P/al. 119. 67, 71. Micah 6.9, Though Nebuchaanezzar never proved 
a Convert, yet God made him acknowledge this Frath upon his Reſto- 
ration. 

27 Wherefore, O king , let my counſe] be accep- 
table unto thee q, and {| break off » thy ſins by righ- 
teouſnels, and thine iniquities by ſhewing mercy to 


the poor ; it it may be || a lengthening of thy tran- 


g Theſe Words Daniel adds out of his good will to the King, if 
perhaps it might turn away this dreadful Stroke from him, and give 


others, » The Word is well tranſlated break of, for ſoit properly fig- 
nifies, and not rm, as the Papiſts would wrefft it, toeſtabliſh their 
Works of Satisfa&tion and Merit, and is no more than this, Ceaſe to 
do evil, and learn to do well, change the Courſe, inſtead of oppreſ. 
fing the Poor ſhew them Mercy. 5 Daniel was not certain of pardon 
for him, nor did he altogether deſpair of it, as Peter dealt with $:- 
71103 Magus, AF. 8.22. Jocl 2. 14. who knoweth if he will return and re- 
2-17, Tozah 3.9. Zeph.2.1,2, 3. Though Daniel gave not this Coun- 
ielto elude or null the Decree of God which was immutable, yer it 
might turn to the King's Good many ways, if he followed this Coun- 
{cl. 1. Hereby this Judgment might be ſhorter in the time , and ea- 
fier in the rigour.2. That he might acknowledge God to be gracious 
to him in this Chaſtiſement. And 3. That he might become by his 
Reformation more capable of Pardon, and prepared for it. 


28 & Allzrhis came upon the king Nebuchadnezzar. 
29 Art the end of twelve months : he walked || in the 
palace of the kingdom of Babylon. 


; Here we ſee God did forbear the Execution of his Judgment de- 
crecd the ſpace of one whole Year, which may be upon Daniz/'s 


it was over, and therefore ſpreads his Plumes and fſtrutted in his Pride 
| as high asever. 


39 The kihg ſpake and faid, Is not this great « R,- 


bylon that I have built x for the houſe of the Kingdom 
bles and Captains; the Fruits are his Riches and Revenues, the Shadow by the might of my power, and tor the honour 
majeſty y ? 


of my 


# Asto the greatneſs of this Place it might be well called Great, g,, 
moſt Hiſtorians and Geographers make it 45 Miles abour the Walls,fome 
6o ; for the height of the Walls, they affirm tliem to be 100 Cubic, 
and for their thickneſs ſuch as fix Chariots might go a-breaſt upon ths 
top of them. See Bochart in his Phaleg. x Which Words of his are 
not true as to the firſt Foundation of Babylov : For that was done 
Nimrod or Bel., which is the ſame, Gen. 10, 10. bur if ye ſpeak touc),. 
ing the repairing and enlarging of it after Nizeveh was deſtroyed, £, 
Nebuchadnezzar might be ſaid to build it, ;.e, to make ito great ang 
glorious asat laſt. » The manner of proud Tyrants is to ingroſ; xj 
Honour to themſelves : moreover he attributes nothing to the (ignyj 
Goodneſs of God to him, but takes all to himſelf. Now God tha 
reſiſts che Proud, preſently falls upon him, and down he comes whil: 
he ſtood crowing and pruning his gay Feathers. 

31 While the word was in the kings mouth , ther: 
fell a voice from heaven z, ſazing , O king Nebuchaq. 
nezzar , to thee it is ſpoken, The kingdom is departeg 
from thee a. 

2 This made the Judgment more remarkable , and argued the Sin 
more provoking, and the Anger of God more juſt againſt him. $yg. 
den Judgments are moſt dreadfu], whereof we have many Inſtance, 
as in Herod, "Elimas, Anamas and Saphira, &c. this Voice was from 
God. a This Voice was aloud and clearly perceived by rhe King and 
chem about him, which the Dream intimated more obſcurely ; nt 


the Kingdom, but the Adminiſtration of the Government was tranſ. 
ferred to others. 


32 And * they ſhall drive thee from men 6, and thy'; 


dwelling ſha!l be with the beaſts of the field : they 
ſhall make thee to eat graſs as oxen, and ſeven time 
ſhall paſs over thee , until thou know that the moſt Hiph 
ruleth in the kingdom of men , and giveth it to whenh 
ever he will. 

6 From the Society and Converſatian of Men. 


33 The ſame hour was the thing fulfilled upon Nehu 
chadnezzar; and he was driven from men 6, and di 
eat graſs as oxen , and his body was wet with the dew of 
heaven, till his hairs were grown like eagles feathers , and 


his nails like birds claws c. 


c Being berefr of his Underſtanding , asa Man diſtraCted, he fl 
and betook himſelf to the Woods, or wasthruft and driven our, cither 
by popular Tumults, or Conſpiracy of-his Nobles, or by his Son Evil 
Merodaach. Some think when he raved, he was bound with Chains, and 
after turned ofF looſe into the Woods among Beaſts. « Which migit 
eaſily grow in ſeven Years to a prodigious length and deformity. 


- 34 And at the end of the days, I Nebuchadnezar 
life up mine eyes unto heaven , and mine underſtanding r:- 
turned unto med, aud 1 bleſſed the moſt High , and] 
praiſed and honoured him that liveth for ever, whole dv 


minion zs * an everlaſting dominion, and his kingdom 5'( 


from generation to generation. | 
If 


4 God ſhined upon his Soul, and gave him underſtanding to refle | 
upon his Condition, to conſider his ſad State and the Cauſes of it. ', 
e By Prayer and Praiſe adoring the Juſtice and Mercy of God to- 
wards him, giving God the Glory of his Soveraignty and Unchange- 
ableneſs, Chap, 4+ 35. 


35 And * all the inhabitants of the earth ar: repu,, 


'ted as nothing f : and he doth according to his will z.. 


in the army of heaven, and among the inhabitants of the 
earth +: and none can ſtay his hand , or fay ugg bin, ' 
* What doſt thou ? 5 


f A due Conſideration of God's infinite Greatneſs makes the Cres 
ture appear as nothing in compariſon of God. Creatures are nothing 
to help, nothing to hurt , nothing abſolutely , nothing in duration, 
nothing ſolid and ſubſtantial, nothing without dependance, and influ- 
ence, and ſupport from God. God is 7 am, and there is none ele; /* 
rily every Man in his beſt Eſtate # altogether Vanity. Sclah. Pal. 39-5: 
yea, leſs than Vanity, and nothing, Pfal. 62. 9g. Iſa. 40. 17. g Pſal. 
115. 3. God only is Arbitrary. +þ Being the Lord of Hoſts, and tht 
only abſolute , and univerſal Monarch of the World. 7 He 1517t- 
ſiſtable and uncontroulable, Jobg. 12. 1ſaiah 45. 9. Romans 11: 35 
342 35, 36- | 

35 At the fame time my reaſon returned unto & me, 
and for the glory of my kingdom, mine honour al 
+ brightneſs returned unto me/; and my counſellours?s 
and my lords fought unto me 2, and I was eſtabliſhed 
my kingdom 7, and excellent majeſty was added unto 
me 0. 

k What isa Magiſtrate, yea, or a Manwithout Reaſon ? ABruts, 
as 2 Ship withour a Pilot , as an Army without a Commander, *3 
Flock or Herd without a Shepherd. 7 Inſtead of the Shape of 2 
ſavage Beaſt, I got the Majefty of a King in. my "Countznanct 
m They who before deſpiſed and reje&ed me, now were glad to Cie? 
to me, and to know their place and diſtance. » In my wonted Pow! 


Words, and h: did reform ſomewhat, as Ahab was ſpared a good while 


and Place, owned and obeyed withour Competitors by all ; wits 
Queſtion or Complaint, ſee chap, 5. 18, 19, o He was the molt ou 


E#pleaſed 


; Piece 9 


Band Cor 


Fannve: 
@ZBut thi: 


Mecoed, 
frank w 
proved f 
2 B 
ned to 
Father 
ble wl 
rinces 


u This 
akea n 
emple,! 
od and 
onour 
ntouch? 
rofanen 


managed | 

od: Th 
Ir hereof 
bat ſhook 
Ntigued: 
Daztzay fla 
©e it with 
bich affo! 
onviQtion 
Ttor to hj 
fr Jollic 


| 6 The 
Is thou 
INS Wer 
her 4. 

c His che 
IT hadqui 


"mn. dS 


ap. Y. | A 
guſt and Magnificent Pr 
led che Lady of Kingdoms, 
Now I Nebu 
the king of heaven P 
way's judgment 9, an 
abaſe 7. ; 
Thus can the Lord make the ſtonteft Hearts to ſtoop and do him 
M7 Shoot This Doxology proceeds from his Heart. 9q God 1s Truth 
eſſentially : He 1s che Rule and Srandard of Truth, his Words are 
Truth, his Ways are Truth; and they areJudgment : Heis wiſe, and 
hath dealt juſtly with me for my Pride, and in very faithfulneſs hath 
affliged me, and in very tenderneſs hath reſtored me : I do and ever 
ſhall adore him for ir. » As he hath declared upon me 1n ſtupendous 
Changes, which I proclaim to all the World to his Glory. He had a 
juſt Controverſie with me, and I have no ground to quarrel with him, 
but togive him Glory by this Confeſſion. 


CHAP. V. 


Belſhazzar's wicked feaſt : profaneth the weſſels of the temple, 1 ——=4, s 
troubled'at a hand-writing, which the magicians couldnt read, 5 — 9. 
Daniel by the commendation of the queen, us ſent for : refuſeth the king”; 
giftt : reproveth his pride and idolatry, 10 -24- then readeth and in- 
typreth the hand-writing, which portendeth his ruine, 25—29, Darius 
the Median in the ſ.If-ſame night taketh his kingdom, 30,31. 


Ifa. 47. 7, 8. 


d thoſe that walk in pride he Is able to 


uy Elſhazzar / the king * made a great feaſt z to a thou. 
ſand of his lords, and drank wine before the 


| thouſand. 
{ His Name is from Riches and Power. They were wont when they 


were promored to take new Names, which alſo were ſignificant, as 
thisis., Belſhazzar, Bel hath or gives Power and Riches. This they 
artribured to the honour of their [do], which belongs only to the God 
of Heaven. There is much conteſt among the Learned who this Bec/. 
| ſhatſar was ; Jet us mind the Scripture, and not truſt zo Heathen Hi- 
forians. In the ſecond werſe here he is called the Son of Nebuchaanezzar 
his Father, ſo verſe the 11:þ twice, and ver, 13, 18, 22, If he were his 
Son, then was he called alſo Merodach, or Evil-merodach. Yet he might 
© be called his Son tho' his Grandſon : under theſe three was the Capti- 
Wvity, Fer 27. 7. Nebnchadnezz ar, Evil-merodach, and B:lſbazzar. t Atter 
B#the manner of the Eaſt, who ſhewed their Magnificence this way, and 
pleaſed theEpicurean Palats of his Nobles herein, it being no ſmall 
Fpicce of Policy with ſome Princes to oblige their Grandees by Ba/; 
Sand Compotations. This I believe: Yet I conceive alſo, this Feaſt was 
anniverſary for the Honour of their Idol Bel, as Herodotus reſtifieth. 
Bur this is prodigious, that he ſhould carouſe when th: Ciry was be. 
* ieged, and ready to be taken by Dnrius the Med? for ſaith the Texr, he 
prank wine before the thouſand, Theſe Bacchanalian Feaſts have often 
proved fatal and tragical, Eftþ. 1. : 
2 Belſhazzar , whiles he taſted the wine , comman- 


J:d to bring the golden and filver veſſels «, which his 
Father. Nebuchadnezzar had + taken out of the tem. 
le which was in Jeruſalem, that the king and his 


| 


ince On Earth, therefore his Kingdom was cal- 


chadnezzar praiſe and extol and honout 
, all whoſe works are truth, and his 


I E L.. Chap. Y, 
of the Earth, that he who hath the Heartof 4 Lion ſhall utterly melc 
away. Thus can the Lord ſpoil the mad Mirth of drunken Atheiſts 


in a moment. When they are in their Cups, O how valiant are they 
as the Kings of Syria, 1 King 20. 16, 19, &c. 

7 The king cried - aloud to bring in the aſtrologers, + Cha19. 
the Chaldeans, and the foothſayers e: and the king ſpake. w:thmight- 
and faid to the wiſe men of Babylon, Whoſoever ſhall rea 


this. writing, and ſhew me the interpretation thereof, 


ſhall be clothed with || ſcarlet, and have a chain of gold 11 Or, pr: 
about his neck, and thall be the third ruler in the king: ple. 
dom. | 

e To read the Hand-wriring, with promiſe of Scarl:t Clothins, Gold 
Chains and Hwmours, This is the old Trade, and the laſt Retuge this 
poor Heathen Prince had, which yer failed him: For how can the De. 
vil help when God is againſt him? 1 Sam. 28. 16, &c. Moreover, he 
had his Father's Experience, chap. 2. 27. chap. 4. 7, Twice he tricd 
them, and they could do nothing, and yet he will go to the Devil's 
Oracle. Men naturally leave God, and go to Refuges of Lies, and: 
God pives them up to ſtrong Deluſions to believe their Lies. | 

8 Then came in all the kings wiſe men, but they could 
not read the writing f, nor make known to the king the 


interpretation thereof. 

f The Rabbies ſay, it was not the Chaldce CharaQter, though the 
Words were Chaldee, but the old Hebrew, Canaanitiſh, Phenician and 
Samaritan Letters ; or elſe becauſe only the initial Letters, M. T. P. 
were written. But God reſerved this Honour for Daniel, and to him, 
that ke might have all the Glory. Beſides this Interpretation was fi. 
gurative, about weighing in a Balance. 

9 Then was king Belſhazzar greatly troubled, and his 
+ countenance was changed, and his lords were aſto- 
med g. 

£ The ſecond time, becauſe his Hopes ia his Wiſemen made him 
aſhamed, and God would give him to much Grief as he had Pleaſure 
in his Luxury. His Lords aſtonicd, Theſe were his Afſbicates in fin- 
ning, and therefore muſt ſhare in his Conſtcrnation : fo fac were they 
from comforting of him. 

Io E Now the queen by reaſon of the words of the 
king and his lords, came into the banqueting houſe b; and 
the queen ſpake and ſaid, O king, live for ever : let not thy 
thoughts trouble thee, nor let thy - countenance be f Cha'd. 
changed. brixhmu ſi, 

þ The Women in thoſe Courts had always an Apartment by them- Gr. for, 
ſelves; and this being Queen-Mother, and aged, did not mingle her 
ſelf with the King's Wives and Concubines, but withdrew her (elf 
from thoſe Pleaſures in Banquetting, yet brakerule in coming in now 
upon.this ſolemn Occaſion and Fright. 

Ir * Thereis a man in thy kingdom, *in whom is the " Chap. 2, 
(picic of the holy gods i, and in the days of chy {| father «pl 
light and underſtanding and wiſdom like the wiſdom of the g *,"F.+ 


- my . 2 9, 18- 
gods, was found in him ; whom the king Nebuchadnezzar |Or,;-ang. 


+ Chald. 
brigohinſſ.3 


rinces, his wives and his concubines might drink chere- 


« This King having the Wine, liked it ſo well, that he reſolved to lay 


ake a merry Day of it, and inorder to it,ſent for the Veſſzls of God's 
emple, which he did in ſcorn and contempt, triumphing thereby over 
od and his People ; bur this Sport laſted not long, they had more 
onour for the Veſſels of their own Idols, which they kept ſacred and 
ntouch'd ; therefore the Propher upbraids them with this infolent 
rofaneneſs, for the Concubines alſo drank in them. 

3 Then they brought the golden veſſels that were taken 
dut of the [| cemple of the houſe of God, which was at Je- 
uſalem ; and the king and his princes, his wives and his 
oncubines drank in them. 

4 They drank wine, and praiſed the gods of gold, 
nd of ſilver, of braſs, of iron, of wood, and of 
Lone Xx. 


| 


* Ar the ſametime inſulting againſt the Great God of Heaven and 
arth, The Name of God is never more profaned than among Drun- 
ards and Epicures. 


5 TIn the ſame hour y came forth fingers of a mans 
and 2, and wrote over againſt the candleſtick upon the 
laiſter of the wall a of the kings palace ; and the king 


aw the part of the hand that wrote 5. 
7 By this irdid appear what was the cauſe of the King's Puniſhment 
nd Ruine, namely his reproaching of God, and profaning the holy 
eſſelsz. The likeneſs ofa Man's Hand, which Ra. Solomon Gaith was 
managed by the Angel Gabrzel; it is clear it was immediately from 
: This was a plainer Teſtimony than thar of his Father's _ 
Ir hereof were above 2 thouſand Witneſſes beſides his Conſcience 
bat ſhook him, a thouſand more. # By this it appears how the Feaſt 
ontigued far in the Night, in which Night Babylon was taken, and B:l. 
92Lar ſlain, ver. 30. 6 God intended it for him, and that he ſhould 
*1t with his own Eyes, and it ſhould not be brought him by report, 
ch affords ground of doubting, but here was undeniable Proof and 
anvittion : the viſible Hand of God was here, and it was alſo for 
tip _ and ſpoiled his Draughts of Wine, and was a cooler to 
er JOLtes, 


\6 Then the kings 
s thoughts troubled 


+ countenance F was changed, and 
s him c, ſo that the || + joints of his 
bus Were looſed, and his knees ſmote one againſt ano. 


.coachearfu] Countenance was turned to paleneſs. Fear and Hor- 
Cn — blaſted the Majeſty of his Face, like an Eclipſe of the 
* ©20 ſoon can the Terrors of God ſhake the lottieſt Cedars; it is 


thy || father, che king, 1 /ay, thy father made * matter fa:6 -. 


of the magicians , aſtrologers, Chaldeans and footh- |,Origrani« 


ers ; i 
#7 This Man was Danie! ; but how came the King not to think of 49 
im ? Danzel pofſibly was our of his Place, by hisown Reſignation, or 
his Enemies malicious Contrivance, and was willing to withdraw him- 
ſelf from the Court, and from the Company of the Soothſayers, and 
would not be reckoned one of them. 

12 Foralmuch as an excellent ſpirit,and knowledge, and 
underſtanding, [| interpreting of dreams, and ſhewing of, 
hard ſentences, and || diſſolving of f doubts were found in +. 

the ſame Daniel, * whom the king named Belteſhazzar : |} Or, «f 4 
now let Daniel be called, and he will ſhew the interpre- ©//* _ 
cation, hover 9g 


knots. 
13 Then was Daniel brought in before the king; * Ci. 1. 7. 
and the king ſpake and ſaid unto Daniel, Art thou that 


!i Or, of a7; 


WF iis, 


Daniel , which art of the children of the captiviry of j|Or,gran«- 


Judah , whom the king my || father brought out of #4 
Jewry ? 

Tho he was in high Eſteem for his Skill in the Days -of N.buchad- 
n:zzar, Who had him in high Honour, for the Spirit of God in h:/m, yet 
he being dead, and other Kings coming on that had never tr1cd his 
Abilities, nor known his Merits (as it was1n Joſ/p5's Caſe, E271 8 ) 
hereby he came to be negle&ed and deſpiſed, as rhuſe Words feem ro 
import, ver. 13. Art thou that Daniel of the Captivity of the Children of 
Judah ? Os : 
I4 I have even heard of thee, that the ſpirit ofthe gods 
7s in thee, and 7hat light and underſtanding, and exceilenc 
wiſdom is found in tice. 
15 And now the wiſe en, the aſtrologers have been 
brought in before me, that they ſhould read this wrt- 
ting, and make known unto me the interpretation there- 
of: but they could not ſhew the interpretation ol the 
thing. 
16 And I have heard of thee, that thou canſt + make t Chald. 
interpretations, and diffolve doubes : now if thou canſt ?70?7%» 
read the writing, and make known to me the interpreta- 
tion thereof, thou ſhalt be clothed with ſcariet , and 
have a chain of gold about thy neck, and halt be thethird 
ruler in the kingdom. 

Theſe things were ſpoke to before, ver. 7, 8. 


ke an Earthquake in the Bowels : Thus can God terrific the Tyrants 


17 < Then Daniel anſwered and faid —__ 
ings 


Chap. V. 
Or, ſe; King, Let thy gifts be to thy ſelf, þ and give thy rewards to 
es ch. 2.6, another &, yet I will read the writing unto the king, and 
meke known to him the interpretation. 
þ Did not Daniel receive Gifts and Honours from Nebuchaanezzar 
'on the Jike occaiion ? Arſw, He was then young, and the Captivity 
was to be long, arid he by his place could be helpful ro his poor Bre- 
thren ; butt now the tithe of the Captivity was near expired, and 
Baby/. in diſtreſs, by Invafion and Siege, and thar Night King, City 
and Kingdom laſt; and there the time was different, and the Caſe 
allo. Moreover, Dir! would not receive a Reward for fo ſad a 
Mreflage. 

18 O thou king, the moſt high God gave Nebuchad-! 
nezzar thy father -þ a kingdom, and majelty, and glory, 
and honour /, | 
} 7 This the Prophet repeats, to put Bc/ſhazzar 1n mind how God 

exlc with his Father ; for it is good for Kings to read over the Story 
of their Anceſtors, and take warning, and to take Example; in the 
firſt they are Sea-marks, in the ſecond Land-marks. 

19 And for the majeſty that he gave him, all people, 
nations, and languages trembled and feared before him ; 
whom he would he flew, and whom he would he kept 
alive, ahd whom he would he ſet up, and whom he wou 
he put down . 

m He ruled arbitrarily, and had power of Life and Death : He did 
what he would, his Wiil was a Law. Andthislifced up his Heart in 
Pride, and hardned it as Ph.raoh's, for which being incorrigible, he 
was depoſed from his Kingly Throne, as in the next Verſe, _ 

20 But * when his heart was lifted up, and his mind 
hardned || in pride, he was - depoſed from his kingly 
throne, and they took his glory from him ». 

+ Chald. n Which was opened before. All this Danicl minds him of to rub 
made to Up his Memory, that he might have the fuller Blow in the Applicati- 
come down. ON, wei, 22. for the Aggravation of his Crime. ; 
21 And he was * driven from the ſons of men, and [| his 

* heart was made like the beaſts, and his dwelling as 

with the wild aſles : they fed him with graſs like oxen, 
heart equal, and his body was wet with the dew of heaven, till 
&C, he knew that the moſt high God ruled in :the kingdom 
of men, and zhar he appointeth over ic whomſoever he 

will. | 

22 And thou his Son, O Belſhazzar, haſt not humbled 


thine heart, though thou kneweſt all this o : 


} Chald. 

#he King- 
aom, CC. 
lo Gr. 


* Ch.4.30. 
jOr,to acal 
proudly, 


DANIEL "_ 


Belſhazzar and his Line and Family. Secondly, that it was 9;v, 

the Chaldeans to the Perſians. Thin it was re {ber C— = _ 
and Perſians ; for Cyrus took Babyloz, who was 2 Perſean ; after tha 
gave part of it to Darius his Son-in-Jaw, and he was a Meg: = be 
they were as it were Partners. So this vaſt 'Empire, thar Was one le 4 
entire thing under Befhazzer, becomes now as it were two divide 
'ewixe the Medes and Perſians. It is curious to obſerve that this W - 
Phars, or Pharas, ſignifies with the Chaldeans not only Dividin - 
Perſian, as Pliny teſtifies. The Perſians in Scripture are calles” Y 
mites. y : 


4 


29 Then commanded Belſhazzar, and they clotheg Dz. 
his neck, 
he ſhould 


niel with ſcarlet, and put a chain of gold about 
and made a proclamation concerning him, that 
be the third ruler in the kingdom x. 

x Thoit were a fad unwelcome Meſſage to him, 
as good as his Word, and performed his Promiſe: For his Prin: 
were Witnefles to it, and the Word of thoſe Kings was counteg fo 
cred, Belides, it wasa great thing that Daniel had unfolded; all Wers 
convinced of itas well as the King. Queff. But how comes Dane! to 
accept that now, which he ſeemed to refuſe before? wer, 19. 41 
He refuſed before, leſt he ſhould ſeem to prophefie for Reward, which 
was diſhonourable ; now it is as it were forced upon him, for the Kin 
commanded it ; and there is as much Danger and Crime with Gn: 
in refuſing a Favour, as Boldneſs in begging. ; 

39 T In that night was Belſhazzar the king -- of thei 
Chaldeans lain y. i 
3 Which the Heathen Hiſtories do alſo confirm. This ſhews th,* 
Severity of God's Judgment agiinſt the higheſt Offenders, ?(z ; 
and 110. and 149. Hof. 10.7. Ir alſo confirms the Tuth of God) 
Threatnings, and of the Hand-writing as Dazie! interpreted. Son: 
are ſad Inſtances of God's Veracity. 
3x And Darius the Median took the kingdom, + beiny 

b 


| about threeſcore and two years old. 

z There were two of this Name, one called the Mede, another nh 
rius called Perſian. This in the Text was he that wich Cyras beſizge(|| 
and took Babylon : He gave himſelf the Name Darins, being before 
led Nibomedus. He waschief in the Siege, and ficſt in the Quarcelz. 
gainſt the Chaldees. 


yet he would hs 


CHAP. VI, 


Darius maketh Daniel the chief of the preſidents : they cavy him, and dr 
an idolatrovs, . to pray unto none but the king for 30 days, 1—y, 
Daniel accuſed of its breach , caſt into the lions den, 10—17. ol 
preſerved, 18—23. his adverſaries caſt in, and devoured, 24. Dmy 


o Sins againſt Knowledge, Experience, and Example, have the higheſt 
Aggravation. Thy Father was puniſh'd for his Pride moſt dreadtully, 


and thou kneweft it, and behold thou art worſe than he. God pu-| 


niſheth others for Example and Warning to us, that we may h:ar and 
fear, and dono more wickedly ; but thou, O King Bclſhazz.ar, art more 
wicked than thy Father; he was reſtored, bur thou art utterly de- 
firoyed. And now he goes on to rell for what. 


23 Buthaſtlifted up thy ſelf againſt the Lord of heaven p, 


and they have brought the veſſels of his houſe before thee, | 


and thou and thy lords, thy wives and thy concubines have 
drunk wine in them, and thou haſt praiſed the gods of fil- 
ver and gold, of braſs, iron, wood and ſtone, which ſee 
* Job 12, 297 nor hear, nor know ; andthe God in * whoſe hand 
_ ' thy breath #, and * whoſe are all thy ways, ha(t thou not 


* Prov.20, glorified. 
24. p He inſtanceth in three or four things. 1. They have brought the 
Veſſels of his Houſe before thee to drink Wine in them, to profane 
them in your Idolatrous Feaſt, and ye have all polluted them with 
your filthy blaſphemous Mouths, Concubines and all. 2. Ye have prai 
ſed the Idol-godsof Metal, Wood, and Stone, which cannot hear, nor 
ſee, nor know. 3. And haſt not glorified the true God, in whoſe 
hands thy Breath is, and all thy Ways. Yea, thou haſt highly diſho- 
noured, and affronted, and reproached him. 

24 Then was the part of the q hand ſent from him, and 


this writing was written. 
gIt is called par? of the Hazd, becauſe the Hand appeared parted 


from the reſt of the Body. 


25 T And this zs the writing that was written, MENE 


MENE, TEKEL, UPHARSIN. 
26 This #s the interpretation of the thing ; MENE r, 
God hath numbred thy kingdom, and finiſhed it. 


r MENE, MENE, he hath numbred, or it is numbred, it is numbred. 
Theſe Words are doubled for the greater Confirmation, to note that 
the number of his Sins, andof his Days, borh of Life and Reign, are 
Full. Irtrelates ro the number of the 70 Years Captivity now com- 
pleated, or to the 70 Years for the Overthrow of the Babyloniſh Empire, 
or the Tranſlation ofit to the Medes and Perſian; forerold 1/a. 13. and 
14. Fcr. 50. and inthe Dream, Dax. 2. 32. 


27 TEKEL -, thouart weighed inthe balances, and art 


found wanting 7. 

s Thou art weighed ina hanging Balance, alluding to the weighing 
of Goods exaQ!y in Scales; and God is ſaid to weigh the Mountains 
in Scales. Ir ſhews his juſt proceeding. God is not haſty in puniſh- 
ing, but will give juſt Allowance in weighing; he will hold the Scales, 
he will do it fairly before all the World. + Thou doſt not hold 
Weight, but cometh ſhort vaſtly. There is no Weight nor Worth 
in thee : Thou haſt made light of God in his Honour, People, Veſlels ; 
and the Lord makes light of thee; thou art reprobate Silver, falſe 
Coin ; thou art of no value. 


+ Chald. 28 PERES »s, thy kingdom is divided, and piven to the 


Madai and F Medes and Perſians. 
Paras. u Separated, divided, broken. Paras ſignifies two things ; broken 
of, and Per/iox ; noting that, Firſt, this Kingdom was broken — 


magnifieth God, and maketh @ decree that all worſhip the living Gl, 
25—— 28, 


= pleaſed Darius to ſet over the kingdom .an hundr 
4 and twenty princes, which ſhould be over the whol 
kingdom ; 

2 And over theſe, three preſidents (of whom Dani! 
was -|- firſt a) that the princes might give accounts un 
them, and the king ſhould have no damage. 

# This was Belſhazzar's Promiſe to Daxiel, he ſhould be the thi 
Ruler in the Kingdom, chap. 5. 7, 16, 29. The firſt was General « 
the Army,the ſecond Preſident of the Palace, the thicd of the Ll 
and Provinces, 

3 Then this Daniel was preferred above the pre 
dents and princes, becauſe an excellent ſpirit ws it 
him ; and the king thought to ſet him over che whel 
realm 6. 

6 There werethree things that made Darius greatly favour Dail 


r. Becauſe he propheſied the DeſtruQion of Beljhazzar and his Reigh 
for which cauſe the King of Babylon favoured Jeremiah the Prophtt 


chap. 39. 11, &. 2, Becauſe he ſaw ſo noble a Spirit in him, 
Spirit of the Holy God. 5. Becauſe Darius himſelf was old and unfit ft 
Government, and therefore took Daniel with him into Media, 70/.4rit 
I0.12. whereby the Lord by advancing Daxiel, made careful Proviſot 
for his Church. This was an A& of great Wiſdom in Darius, to pri 
fer Men for their Partsand Merit, and to make them thar have 
of God in them to be their chief Favourites ; A thing rarely mind 
by the Princes ofthe World, who favour them uſually moſt, that 
moſt gratifie their Luſts. 

4 T Then the preſidents and the princes ſought to fol 
occaſion againſt Daniel c concerning the kingdom 4, bt 
they could find none occaſion nor fault: foraſuch sf 
_ faithful , neither was there any error or faule fou 
1N nIifmn. | 
c Madediligent enquiry, and ſet their Wits awork about it. #* 
can fland before Envy? This Diſeaſe always reigns in Princes Cour 
Every one would be uppermoſt, and chief Favourite, and quarts ! 
them that ſtand in their light; their Eye is evil, becauſe their Prin 
Eye is good. d Andfſo to have made him guilty of Treaſon, 0r othe 
high Miſdemeanours, Unfairhfulneſs, and Falfeneſs in the King'sBu 
neſs ; but all their Wit and Malice could find none, foraſmuch 4” 
was conſcientiouſly faithful. | 

occal 


5 Then faid theſe men'e, We ſhall not find any 
ſion againſt this Daniel, except we find zt againſt him 6% 
cerning the law of his God f = 

e Theſe proud envious Courtiers. f Pliny ſaid of old, if 5 by 
Cuſtom of Courtiers to ſtudy how to make innocent Men fav? * 
d Scripture and Experience tells us, that the moſt Religious ** ef 


counted moſt dangerous to the Government, and that Debauch*)" 
Loyalry, and that Flatterers ought to be the beſt Favourites, F/! 
12,13, 14. Nehem.6.5,6, 7. Efther 3. 8. Dan. 3. 12. and this Tt 
are plain Proofs of it ; beſides. the Experience of every Ag* ©? as 


Yong, 
or is 1 
Io ( 
lened, 
Open 11 
on his] 
thanks 
} Thi: 
ich do 
Purds Te 
Gentiles, 
he King 
and the 7 
Weſt-end 
ced his N 


3 cople at 


only the 


Jan Eye ti 


hem Out 


Waithfury 
Fand Impl 


Ing and d 
comely Pc 


WF God's Tri 
& Humiliati; 


t Thus D; 
the Morni; 


ther at the 


ed, Atts 10, 
Atternoon, 
36. Afts A 
Saviour Cþ 
Now Dani, 
linder his 


(ly Man ; al 


mand, nor 
ue did nOtl 
ud not imj 
2d forbor 
Ired Man 
commands 

0: his Own « 
grieve and 

uardnin 


b v. VI. D A A 7 Fl 


| 


« MT 7. This was for the Honour of Daniei's 1negrity, and cor a Brand | 1.5 Then they came near, and ipake before the kin: 

> MT cf lnfamy upon his malicious Enemies. : : | COncerning the Kings decree, haſt thou not ſigned 

* If 6 Then theſe preſidents and princes || aſſembled to | decree, that every. man that ſhall ask a petition of any 
- Jnr oether to the King, and ſaid thus unto him, King Da- God or Man, within thirty days fave of the 43 
+} rivs, live for ever. _ be LY king, ſhall be caſt inro the den of lions #? The king 
. | +—7 All the preſidents of the kingdom, the gover- | anſwered and ſaid, The . thing # true. according, 0 


nours, and the princes, the counſe!ours and the cap- [the Jaw of the Medes and Perfians, which 'altereth 
-xins have conſulted together to eſtabliſh a royal ſta- | not 0. | 
= bs | 
= titcy and to make a firm | decree, that whoioev er ſhall a Lhey had enough now, they came wit]; open Mouth, they plead- 
d 72 35k a Petition of cither God or Man tor thirty days, lave | ec the breach o! thc King's Laws, they tell the King he had Gencd it, 
bk of thee, O king, he ſhall be caſt into the den of lions. ant! it. could not be diſanaulled, the King's Authority aad the Honour 


þ - T M - 1 |L-,> "ha * EIID | . { W- 
i LL: ee. and fign the | 9 the Nation lay at ftake. 0 The King ownes ſuch a Law, and jv 
be & $8 Now, O kings eſtabliſh the decree, S was unalterable. ; 


n ——_ 
"FF ES 4s. 
Sa ne - 


«s ME citing ; that it be not changed, according to the = ” 

+ _ of the Medes and Perſians, which + altereth | 73 Then anſwered they and aid before the King , 

— | £2 Daniel p which #s of the children of the captivity 

to ES: 10: Sg JE. O dah q, regardeth not thee, O king, nor the de- 
| Darius figned the writing and | Judah q, regar g e 

. $7 —__ —_ S S cree that thou haſt ſigned r, but maketh his Petition 

| A : SS; 


ng = . ; The ſum of all was this ; they had a Plot againft Danel, and his three times a day. ./ . . 
_ 2 Prople, to throw him out of place and favour : to effett that they tall p Here they call him, That Dantel, as ver. 5. that Damel, both by 
| upon him in the Point of Religion, which they would make to be | Way of Contempt 3 they had laid him low in their Thoughts and 
How ſo 2 Thev contrived an A& of Uniformity by an un- | Words, intending the King ſhould have the ſame Thoughts of him 


oy ST * . 
p a > __— 
Ss, E =Y ” : ” = + £ © d 
"- 6 | - as a 4.25 EN nn \ RC, £5. ERtG 
T %*_ fs « hos: I'S —_—_ "Ta - - 0 ay of " 4 FL - 
7 - _ 6 bp « 1 _—— f _ DOT > - Se 
*7 Wo» gaping 2 wwe omg þ: py _——_ «i F- + L —_ bx PT . _ cw 4 E = ; w ; =_— LOVE - 
« ny tou 4 MR 4 nIOn = v— 1 n 4 7 4 - _ ” 
—_ 2 > L s - » <2 dh -_ x PEE —_— $I, + hv - D Ae» + , EN I cnteibiin omar - 4 
VE LY lt _—_— Bats | " _ ho. > 6. ST" OI Is Hd? PA R om 4 4 - >. / PE" 
* « « _ $ « + pom ns y . »- py ge a eg a Wa 
- V 4 Gy = ” * vi - I; p - - 
"ur Z oy js % Bot, + * *yty ww - Moodbrns: wa W x © —_— ms Ct — 4 4% 
, e>\ 94 px o_ 4 "* : 
eP 4-07 * woo 
q my ” Fawn, 


Tr G Ay Mfr 
oh _ Law, to ask no Petition of any God or Man but of the King | t00; and alſo thinking hereby they ſhoald have the fairer Blow at 4 
2 for one Month, upon pain of Death. They wheedled the King into him. q A Priſoner at Mercy, and yet rebellioully flights the King il 
he it, and paſſed it into a Law. The King fees the Plot to be againſt | and his Laws, What ? becauſe he choſe to: ol;ey God rather than E 
& P:niel, and would have ſaved him, bur they held the King to it, they | Men, and ungodly Laws, as this was in the Þeiz11t, Well, that's his W. 
ks T Kore zealous for executing Laws of their own procuring ; it was a | great Crime; that he prays to his God tht. iimesa day. 7 Which 4 i 
_ W Net they had privily laid for this Holy Man, and had got him faft, | we account diſhonorable to thy Greatnels, #nd unſufferable from ſuch "Wi 
; |. We fee the horridneſs of this Decree againſt God, for it was to | a Muſhroom as heis. What | do all the Native Subjetts of the King 'S 
;n+l ungod him for a tine, that Darius might be Deified. 2. It is marvel- | keep his Laws, and muſt this Danzel pretuine to break them, and be in- | 
tous that Darius ſhould ſuffer himfelf to be periwaded to this Idolatry, | demnified ? Wilt thou tolerate this, O King ? i. _/aph 
Dh Blaſphemy and Sacrilege, but that we know it was common to the 14 Then the king, when he heard theſe words, * was * So Mark (Hef f 
gel Kings of TT Rees wo_— to be ſore diſpleaſed with himſelf s, and ſet his heart on Daniel $* 26+ I 
Che Some give three Realons w arius was periwaded to it. I. . —___. . . [4M 
14. # he Carats, and had not —_— Authority, and by this means he would to deliver him : and he laboured till the g01Ng down of Wy 


I gain it highly. 2. Becauſe by this the ſuperſtitiousChaldeans newly con- che ſan to deliver him bo 8 
Z quered would be the better kept under. 3. Hereby he would ſeem s He was not wroth with Danzel, as Nebuchadnezzar upon the Ac- 
£2 rot at all to be beholden to Cyrus for the ſhare of his Government. cuſation againft the three young Men, chap. 3+ 19. but he was angry 
2 3. The wickedneſs of this Decree appeared allo in this, that it brake with himſelf, that he ſhould be to moved by his Courtiers againſt an 
PS 21 the Bonds of Nature's Laws, between Superiors and Inferiors, for | 12nocent perion ot !o much Honour and Honeſty. te This made him 
*& one Month. 4. The Craft of this curſed Cabal is ſeen in this, that they | labour to ſave Dante! till. Sun ſer : Sometimes blaming his own Inad- 
2 mind Darius that it was his Honour, Intereft and Duty to ſee this | VETTENcy and Levity in ſo raſh and ſinful a Decree; tometimes conſi- 
a Law executed, ſezing it was the Cuſtom and Conftitution of the dering the great Reverence of ſo Holy a Man ; then the Cruelty and 
S Mcdes and Perfians, and he himſelf was a Mede. The Babylonians had Craft in laying Snares by Laws made on purpole againſt the beſt 
G, WS co ſuch Law and Cuſtom, but the others had of old, ſth, 1. 15, 19. | Feople in his Court and Kingdom. Then withal how hard it was to 
and chap. $8.3. «, The Courage, Zeal and Sincerity of Daniel in not break or elude a Law that was by Cuſtom unalterable, and how un- 
balking the courſe of his Devotion for fear of the King's Edi& z but | ſafe to rejelt his Princes when they pleaded for the King and his 
Ired a3 if he had not been concerned at all in it, being overawed by the Laws: 
hole car of God, who was ſuperior to all the Gods and Princes of the 15 Then theſe men aſſembled unto the King, and faid 
Vorld, he made the Command and Inſtitution ef God alone, the Rule unto the king. know, O king 4, that the law of the 


df his Worſhip, . ; 

'P : = Medes and Perſians, is that no decree nor ſtatute which 
=_ «] Now when Daniel knew that the writing was | the king eſtabliſheth, may be changed x. 
lzned, he went into his Houſe 3 and his Windows being | Theſe were bold Men, they were reſolv'd to follow their Blows, 
thil open in his Chamber towards Jeruſalem h, he kneeled up- | and would have their Will rather than the King ſhould have his in 
br on his Knees # three times a day k and prayed, and gave this caſe, which on the King's part was honorable, and royal to retrieve 


Fl: Ee hic | ; ; an Evil Act, and to retratt, at leaſt ro mitigate a rigid and raſh De- 
Lan thanks before his God, | as he did aforetime . cree. x Thus Zaman contrived and pleaded, yet there was a way 


Þ This was 1 Kings 8. 47, 43, 49+ according tO Solomon's Prayer, | found to prevent Execution, Eſth?r $8. Again, this Law which they 

reſi hich doubtlels all the devout Jews in this Captivity did obſerve. To- | yjead was fundamental to make all Laws and Decreees immutable, was 
2a 10 v1ds Feruſalem, not towards the Eaſt which was the manner of the | abſurd and impolitick z for Laws ſhould be effentially changeable by 
what Gentiles, nor towards the King's Palace, left that in compliance with | the Law-makers, becaule they often lee greater cauſe to change a Law 
the King's Edit, he ſhould ſeem to worſhip him, but towards the Weſt | yhen it grows obſolete and burdenſome, tho before thought neceffary, 

and the Temple in Feruſulem, where the Holy of Holies ftood in the | than to make it at firſt: whereof we have ſufficient Inſtances in all 


Doi Weſt-end, and becauſe the Temple was the place where the Lord pla- | Nations in all Ages» Will any Legiſlative Power in the World fo 
Rey) Bced his Name and Worſhip, and promiſed to appear, and aceept his | hjnd their own Hands, as to entail a Yoke upon themſelves and Na- 


= 3+ cople and their Sacr ifices, all being a Type of Chriſt, through whom tion, which they and Poſterity could not remedy ? the Intent of the 
nm, | only the Saints are accepted. Which doubtleſs Dauet by Faith had | Law-giver is the Law, the Equity of it is the Obligation of ir, which 
7 ft > a Eye to, "_ allo that God in his own time win __ alſo is the true meaſure of its Duration. 
AK WHT oem out is Captivity | in tnt . 

| out of this Captivity, and bring them back again, and that he 16 Then the King commanded, and they brought 


ovito! WWWaithfully minded theſe things in the midſt of his Honours, and Riches, | «-» 
ro pr! MW Fand Imploymenrs, 3 This Poſture was always uſed in times of mourn- | Dantel y, and caſt him into the den of Lions = : »ow the . 


e mul ing and danger, Not that we are ticd to this Geſture, but it is a | King ſpeak and faid unto Daniel, Thy God whom thou 
nindel comely Poſture before the great God, noting our Guilt at the Bar of | ſeryeſt continually, he will deliver thee a 

that 6 WY God 5 Tribuual, and begging for our Lives by humble Conteſſhon and | , 146 þ4q a £00a mind to do Daniel a Kindneſs, but he could not 

| —_— and craving Pardon, and blethng God for his METCIES. | ftem the Tide of his Flatterers, who being croſt might machinate 

o find _ David, Pſal- 55.17. Their three times were, one at nine 1 | ſome Miſchief againſt him ; having this plaubible pretence for it, they 

4. bit is o_ orning, which was their third hour of the Day, As 2.15. ano-] gggg for the Fundamental Laws of the Land, which the King endea- 

i ter at the fixth Hour, which was at Twelve a Clock ; then Peter pray- | ygured ro null by his 1 rerogative for the ſake of one Perſon, his pure 


45 £ . . : - o = . . — 
Found - Ads 10. g. Another at the ninth Hour, which was our Three in the | yagay, peing an Alien and of another Religion, which was contra- 
Ol ernoon, which was the time of the Evening-Sacrifice, 1 A?ngs 18. | ry og that which was by Law eftabliſh'd. 7 Yhus the beſt Man in the 


*8, it . ? ?, I S , q Ss «6 p . 
30 ACT 3.1, If is called the /7our of Prayer, and at that Hour Our | no qom becomes a Sacrifice to the Malice of the vileſt Men, the King 


' Savio . A . bl % OR ® 0 . - FX A - = g: - 
, Wa "10VT C69ft offered up himſelf a Sacrifice for us, Mar. 27+ 46, 5C- | contenting and commanding it againſt his Conſcience, but for Rez 


1 0 nr . ins (; - . . : : « 
Courts Wing —_ ordered his Afﬀairs ſo, tho great, that they ſhould not | g,, gf State, being inexculable, for aſſuming the Honour and \Vor- 
rel A F Mat is ſolemn Divotions to God, I By which we ſee he was a H0- | (4; of 4 God, exclutive to all other Gods and Worſhip; -and for all 
Princts "86g alſo that he did not abate his Prayers ſor the King S COM- | that be was convinced of the true God, would net worſhip him, nor 
r oth "yy , nor did he raſhly break the Law by doing it purpoiely, decaute | 5, for gthers to Go it upon pain of Death. 4 No thanks to him ; 
's Butte oy In 7 more than he was wont to do in ſerving his God. Doe why then did lc caſt tlie Servant of God to the Lions to try Experi- 
h a5 bt wn i much Jeſs fintully in this Action. L. Becaute it he ments upon him ? no, to excule himſelf, and to comfort Daniel, but 
| SD _ _ to God, he would have declared by it that he pre- | +, lirtle purpoſe either. ; 
Treat Man be = : i NJ ich * " 2 fy . 
occal ——_— 6 7 And a ſtone was bronghr, and laid upon the mouth 


cnmmands God to be worſhipped. 3. againſt the Dittates and Feace x -—_ n 
m c0l- BW © iis own Conſcience. 4. Nanak the Togle of God, whom he would of the den, and the king ſealed it with his own tigner, 


8ere and ſtumble by this forbearance. 5. Againſt his Enemies, by | and with the f{ignet of his Lords : that the purpoſe 
» is th ores. them in their evil Way, and giving tnem occaſion of [ri- might not be changed concerning Daniel b. 
faulty * pang and blaſpheming. 6 They are reſolved to make all faſt and ſure. So did the Enemies 


grl; [il Then theſe men aſſembled, and found Daniel mn three young _ Dy __ Heat = in very Frag 50 
Y1y . = . . - SI . j . g of s = ? . \» « ; f 
_ (4. MayIng, and making ſupplication before his God m. - eos an _ of i. og _ ſerve 
| his ine 1a; - | ; » Abi3 12. 4, XC. 409 ana 26 ©, A 
is Tx" too. - They ITO - A N_ —_ —_ m__ 16. 23, 24. Thus the Heathen Perſecutors, that thought by variety, 
of = hagy <A Nc Pen. - be | tel; d nniverſality of Perſecutions and Torments we tne 
* O27. 002, he prevented their breaking open Doors, and ruſhing in, or pod er nnormo nn Py meg wank Proinr ow 


Making Proof he nw . Chriſtian Rel;:zion out of the World: and rhns mickrift by Crulido:s 
i gl TOGt ; he owned all and freely offered himle!?. MaTicrs an LATINA fo ties ſoatrrg of the Dex TINS . ON wy, DW ys 


FH. 
Vol, 00 | 
Eh, * } T Los r 


— 4 
p— S 
ern © WE | 
f wa -» y 
Ee NT 


tes 


— —- Þ Gd Pre eo —_ - 
2” 282 - nana... . 


— _ 
— 


ut. VOPR any. oo + 
= 


Men ren mee 


+> IL INGIE. =5 


- 


= —JS—===* 


Chap. VL 


_ _— . 
night falting c 


 # Ch. 2:4» 


_ Cauſe, Pu. 25.11. Pardon my Sin jor it 1s great. 


*SeeDeut.to the den of lions m7, them * their children, and their wives 


D 4 N 


Power from the King of delivering D1te!, becauſe they knew he fa- 
vour'd him. By which the Power and Providence of God for his 
Preſervation and Deliverance was the more fignalized, Aits 4. 26,27, 
28. Thus the Lord gratifies the Enemies or his People o:rentimes, 
as if they had a Commitiion from him to do their worft, and they g» 
a great way in it, as far as they have Rope, F/. Ic. 6, 7: 11ke 22.53. 

18 Tocarhe King went to his palace, and patled the 
neither were || inſtruments of mulick 
brought before him, and his fleep went from him. 

c Yea, and without Inſtruments of Muſick , and Sleep,, The King 
was in Perpicxitv, he was uader great Conviction that he had done 
very dithonourably and crueily, by hearkening to the Counſc] of his 
wicked Courticrs ; he thould have reſcinded his raſh Decree, and ra- 
ted them for their Barbarity againſt Daniel, and have over-ruled them, 
and let him our; he is convinced of all this, and grieves for it, but 
to little purpoic. Many are diſplealed with themſelves for their 
Vices, Yet arc drawn away with them z and upon Point of Honour or 
other carnal Ground, never come to true Repentance, which con- 
fiſts in a change of Heart and Life. £#/crod was alike troubled for Foby 
bþapijt, bur for all that, tor his Oath ſake to a wanton Wretch, and 
for the Company's fake, he ſent and beheaded him, Mat. 14. 9. 

19 The king aroſe very eary in the morning d,and went 
in haſte unto the den of lions. 

d Watching and grieving, and being between fear and hope, long- 

ing to be ſatisfied. ; 
- 20 And when hecame tothe Den, he cried with a la- 
mentable voice unto Danicl, and the king ſpake and ſaid 
ro Daniel, O Daniel, ſervant of the living God & is thy 
God whom thou ſervelt contiuwally, able to deliver thee 
trom rhe Lions 7 ? 

e This was a Commendation both of Dani-l and his God, tho he 
ſerved both very courtly. f Is he Omnipocent ? ſurely if ever he will 
put forth his Pewer it will be in thy caule, for thou ſerveſt him con- 
tinually, thou wilt not be frizhtned trom his Service by Savage Beafts, 
by ramping and roaring Liensz now it will appear what thy God will 
do for his Servant. Ah poor King! God is a better Maſter to his 
Servants than thou ait, even to Dazzel. : 

21 Then ſaid Dagiel unto the King, * O king, live 
for ever. 7. 

£ He prays for the King's Proſperity. tho he ſuffered under his hand. 

22 My God hath ſent his angel, and hath ſhut the 
Lions mouths that they have not hurt meb: foraſmuch 
as before him Innocency was found in me 7; andalfo be- 
fore thee, O kings have I done no hurt. k. 

hþ. He had his Eye ſpecially to him whoſe Cauſe and Honour was 
ccncerned In this matter. The Lord either took the Lions Hunger 
away from them, or made Daniel appear terrible to them, or lite- 
rally ſhut their Mouths, . 7 Becauſe by Faith he trufted in the Lord, 
Heb, 11: 33. therefore the Papiſts from hence talily conclude Juſti- 
fication by Works and Merits,aſhgning fallacioully a talſe Cauſe inftead 
of a principal, tormal and meritorious Caule ;z for the word foraſmuch 
or tecauſe in Scripture doth often ſignify an Occalion rather than a 
| Daniel did not ule 
to argue thus, but the contrary, 24% 9, 7, 13. Dante] pleads the 
Innoc-rce of his Cau'c to the King in Suffering, not the Righteoul: 
nels Of hi> Perſon; and that the Lord delivered him to aſſert his Ho- 
nOUr in his unjuſt Sufferings. bk Nor have I tinned” againſt thee, O 
King ; the fear of God is tet before the honouring of Kings, 1 Pete2.17. 

23 Thenwas the king exceeding glad for him, and 
commanded that. they ſhould take Daniel up out of 
the den - fo Daniel was taken out of the den, and no 
manner of hurt was found upon him: becauſe he believed 
ia his God /, 

I H= truſted in God's Power and Faithfulneſs, not to work a Mi- 
racle, but committed him{elr to him as a righteous Judg ; who would 
deliver here, or {ave him hereatter. 

24 4 And the king commandel, and they brought 
thoſe men which had accufed Daniel, and they caſt them in- 


is 4 1,and the Liors had the maſtery of them, and brake all their 
1-14" bones in pieces Or ever they came at che bottom of the 


*Ch.2,29. 
and 4. 1. 


C'1.2.4 1» 
& 4, 3» 34 


X 7.14,27 


\L,UXeIs 23+ 


den. 

m Thus they digged a Pit for another, and fcll into it themſelves, 
which the H-ath2a ſay was a very juſt Law, the Law of Retaliation, 
which the Lord doth otten obſerve, as iu Ad9nivezec, and Avab's Ca- 
ſes, and many moie. n Darius was yet ccu?) in this Execution, becauſe 
he calt in with them to the Lions, their Wives and Children. This 1s 
not without precedent in Scripture, as in Corahb and his Company, 4- 
chan and 1m, for the greater Terror ? for the Kings Juſtice in thi: 
Fatt, we nze.t not trouhle our ſelves, it being the Cuftom of the Arbi- 
trary Tvyrants cf the Eaft, 

25 Faea kin Duwrins * wr2:2 nnto all people, nati- 
ons and langnazes, rthar dwell 1a all the Earth o, Peace be 

nulcipl:c unto you. 

0 7, e. Ofthe known Earth then, H-ing chiefly that great Empire « 
for what hid h2 to do i1all the World 52'1123? Ir is. uſual with the 
Turk, Tartzr, Chin:jc, to ariogate the lame Univerſality with the like 
Pride. 

26 I make a decree, that in every dominion of my 
kinglom, men tremble aid tear before the God of Dani- 
cl p- ror he rs the liviag God, and Redfalt for ever ; and 
his Kingdom th.z: which ſhall not be * deſtroyed, and 
his dominion /þ.4l} be even unto the end. 9. | 

p Take hed how they ſpzak evil of this great God, but own and 
honour him 25 ſach ; whereof he gives the Reaſon following. q. You 

would tai;e Darius by theſe words to be a Convert; how tar this 


F £3 Chap, 


went with him, and how long it lated, who knoweth ? Surely j; 1, 
were in earneſt, he would forſake his Idolatry, and ſer up the \y g-/ 
ſhip of rhe true God in his Kingdom, that his Subjetts mip!t turn {1,. 
dumb Idols, as inconfiftent with the living God and his Yo; 
Howbeir, it's clear that Darzzs had learnt this Doarine from 2.z;.; 
whom lie hzard and honoured, and was the more convinced of jr þ; 
this miraculous Deliverance of Danzel irom the Lions. 
27 Hedelivercth and reicueth, and he worketh js; 
and wonders in heaven and in Earth, who hath deliver; 


and in the reign of Cyrus'the Perſian. r. 
r Chap. 1. ver. ult. Who was after Parius his Death, which Was Called 
ſay ſome, Naboanedus. Daniel continued all this cime 18 great Hony; 


CHAP VIL 
Daniel ſeth a viſi;n of four beaſts, 1 ——8. of the ancient of days d:1j;,,, 
ring 4 Kingdom 19 the jon of man, 9 —— 14> The Interpretation there, 
of, which troubieth Danizl, 15-——28$. 
1. FN the firſt year s of Belſhazzar t King of Babylgy 
. «> . L 
Daniel -| had a dream ,, and viſions of his hezg 


ſum of the || matters, ja 


This Prophecy is written in Chaldee, to be a Monument and Dgcy. 'v 
ment to Beiſhazzar, of the Reverence his Father and Grandfather ſhey. 
ed towards God, who had done ſuch mighty Works for them, and. 
gainſt them, to humble their Pride, and make them know that the 
High God ruled, and they reigned at his Mercy. Howbeir Belſ1axy; 
made no ule of it, but lifted himlelt up in Profanenels and Vridetill the 
Wrath of God pluck'd him down. s Now Daniel begins to declyr 
the Vitions God ſhewed him at ſundry times, therefore he goes ha 
to the firft Year of Belſhazzar. 8 It is obſerved by the Curious, that the 
wordBelſbazzar is here changed by the Prophet, one Letter tranſpoſe 
which alters the Signification greatly, for his Name NSNU 71 ,, 
I. ſignifies Treaſures ſearched out 4nd poſſefſed ; but the word in the Tex; 
I5 this, uw Which fignifies Be/l is conjumed with the Fire if 


Enemy, as was propheſied by Feremy Ch, 50, 2. and 51. 44. See Fr, 
51. 25+ 58, The Fews uſed to change the names of Idols and 1d}, 
ters, and it turned to a Reproach to them, as Grorzus proves wellg 
of Moſes de Kotzi. u Thele Viſions of Danze} were ſent, and recor, 
ed by him in Writing for the Benefit of tae Church, to reQify ther 
Miſtake ; for they thought all things would ſuccecd proſpernoſly afer 
they returned out of their Captivity : yet they ſhould find z 
world of Troubles in many Generations following, ſeeing of th 
4 great Monarchies, which he calls Beafts, there was but o& 
paſled, and that they ſhould findthree more yet to come, Thi; I 
niel dreamed, ſaw, wrote, and told the ſum of it. } 


2 Daniel ſpake and ſaid, I ſaw in my viſion by nielt,! 
and behold, the four winds of the Heaven x ſtrove upu* 


the great ſea. z, 

x What is meant by Winds, becauſe Daniel doth not expound, Es 
poſitors think there is room left for every ones ConjeQure, where 
in that ſeems moſt likely, that by the four Winds of the great 
is ſignifted Commotions of contrary Nations and FaQions ftriving toge 
ther by Wars, and producing theſe four Beaſts ſucceſhvely. Thi 
this is often tignified by Winds is plain, as in Fer. 49. 36, and «11 
where the Deftru&ion of Babylon, the firſt Monarchy, and of Eli, 
7, e. the Perſiza Monarchy, is thus foretold. + The great Sea in Sip 
enre is the Mediterranean Sea, called now Levant, Archipelago, Strati 
&%c. It is {o called. 1. Comparartvely, for the Jews called Lakes Sex; 
15 the S2a of Galilee, Gennezzzzreth, Cinneroth, the dead Sea, or Lit 
of Sodom; but the Mediterranean was Famma rabba, the great Sea 0! 
his Lengrch aud Breadth, above all the Lakes put together thou) 
it be ic ſelt but a Lake in Compariſon of the 4rlentick and Indian Oceats, 
2. Great-Sea, bzcauſe the great Stage of Attion hath been on it, and at- 
joyned to it : and all the ,four great Monarchies have been Maſters (! 
of it. Je Alkgoricaly, for it is uſual in Scripture to compare Peoj!: 
to Waters, and Nations to Seas, Rev. 13. 1.and 17, 15. Call: 
from the the confuſed Noiſe of it, Rev. 19. 6. and from the Ut 
ſtableneſs of them, always running and rolling with every Win 
as it blows, indangering thoſe that ride upon the Backs of its ſve! 
ing Waves, EY 

3 And four great beaſts came up from the Sea, diver! 
one from another. a 

4 That is four great Monarchies, great in compariſon of particuir 
Kingdoms that were little to chem z Beaſt toc their Idolatry aad If: 
rannical Oppreihons and Depredations. | 
4. The firſt was like a lion b, and had * eagles wings (; 
and | beheld till the wings thereof - were 'pluck'd 5; 
and || it was lifred up from the Earth, and made 
ſtand upon the feet as a man, and a mans heart was give1 


anto It, | 

h Oae the King of Beaſts, the other thz King of Birds; for wiiCl 
he 15 called the Golden-Head, as Dan, 2. 32. 38» This was the Chi 
dean or Afſyrian Empire, whoſe feat was firit at Bavyion , atter x 
Nineveh, and then at 545ylon again. c They were ſwitt, overunits 
many Countries, and brought their Monarchy to a prodigious Height 
Ina (ſhort time. Thus Fereiny prophetied, be jnould come 143 4s C 40K" 
his Chariots ſhall be as a Whirlwind, his Horſes are ſwifter ten EY 
ch. 4. 13. and in the 7th Verſe he is called a 11, 4 Whic) WP 
arlt in ſtopping the Career of their Victories, and att2r inciting ChB 
JT Of their Kingdom. The Nation was not deſtroyed, out cnc 
narchy. This was truly verified in Neouchadaeradr after be wa Pr 
Bealſc turned out amoayſt Beaſts, Dan, 4. 31, 32, 33, 34+ 
iſhed upon his Son Belſhazzar for not taking warning, Dane 5+ 55 


5 And 'bzhold, anocher beat e, 4 ſecond like oo 
bear f, and || it raiſed up it ſelf 01 one fide 2, ant 
bad three ribs in the mourh of it þ between oe © 


l 


\n 


x 


# j a 
442) F 
RE 
A 


Daniel from the + power of the lions. tr 
28 So this Daniel proſpered in the reign of Darj,; 


upoa his bed. then he vrote 4 the dream, and told the 


rOOfs j 


of a n 
? Da 

q4 Some 

ſ ;Panes, i 
that riſ 
the Hor 
Therefc 
miſh 41; 
one Kin; 
muſt re 


muſt be 


F whom þh 


8 ſome int 


$ 


% 


PZ his thro 
burning 
t By Thi 
deſtroyed 
becauſe of 
Kings Vice 
Moraecai, 
ment, J/z, 
Ot his Cou 
3) 4» Mal, 
tormidable 
Kings who 
alſo God's 


[. 


- and they faid thus unto it, Ariſe, devour mich 


fleſh. 
e Vie 
Creature, 


5and Perſians, f Which is a fierce, grim, ravenous 
The cry eſpecially thoſe inhabiting the moun- 
- 113 Parts, as Of Caucaſus, Armenia and Media by the Caſpian Sea 
_—_— Tartars, and thoſe which border pon the Mgul, the Usbe- 
near nd the Sasbuts ; read Iſt. 13+ 17, 18. Fer. 51. 48. 50. Called 
ane See Ver. 11, &c. Thus God ſent in the Northern Bears up- 
Pp gow to devour Fleſh. See how God calls them againſt B1bylon, 
on Þ4") 20. 21, 22,23,27,28. he reckons Ararat, Minnti, and Aſhlemas, 
F ws po "Medes "+. Armenia, Parthia, Hyrcania, &c. the rough Nor- 
Ls and l "Sor ry Bears. £ The North Side ; for the Mede firſt aroſe 
wot _ _ ” Cyrus the Perſian to come in and aſſiſt him againſt the 
pas: ptr and made him General. b Several of the Babylonian Subjetts 
77 covolted from the Babylonian ( and all theſe made the three Ribs ) as 
* the Hyrcanians, and Goorim. | ; _ 
5 After this 1 beheld, and 1o, another like a leopard z, 
© hich had upon the back of it four wings of a fowl, the 
| © beaſt had alſo four heads k ; and dominion was given to 1t }. 
; This Leopard was the Grecian Monarchy ; 2 Leopard is leſs than a 
Lion, ſo was this Monarchy at firſt, but yet durft fight with a Lion ſo 
did Alexander encounter Darius witha Force very {mall to the other. 
A Leopard alſo for his Swiftnels 3 therefore deſcribed with four Wings 
on his Back. & Becauſe thoſe that ſucceeded him were four of his 
chief Commanders that divided that Empire into four Parts between 
them ; and theſe were the four Heads to whom Dominion was given, 
Prolomy, Seleucus , Philippus, Anngonus, or a3 others, Perdiccas and 
Meleager, Dan. 8. 21, 22+ 1 Alexander did his great Exploits by the 
mighty Fower of God : elſe how could he conquer Dertus that had 
605200 with 20000,and in ſo ſhort a time go Conquerer over 4/2, to 
the Zaſt- ndies ; 1 mean that part which now the Moenl pofſefſeth, 
where he fought with Porus and beat him? _ 
7 After this I ſaw in the night-viſions, and behold, 
a fourth beaſt, dreadful and terrible, and ſtrong ex- 


ep 


ar jt 


£ ceedingly m; and it had great iron teeth : it devoured 
hy and brake in pieces, and ſtamped the reſidue with the 
4 feet # of it ; and it was diverſe from all the beaſts that 
< were before it, and it had ten horns o. ; 

hot 1 This was the Roman Empire z for that followed the Greczan, and 
rep was monſtrous as to its Riſe and Progreſs. 7 As to the Variety and 
d a Cruelty of the Government, it made uſe not only of 7raltans but Spa- 
he BE 2iards, Gauls, Germans, Britains, which made their Armies hardy, and 
on: W2& hacd as Tron, which broke in pieces the Gold, Silver and Braſs. But 
» WS it's plain this is the laſt Kingdom of the four that was to be deftroyed 


- and this Work was to be doing till the laft Age, 
ver. 24. Kev. 17.12 called Zorns, 2. e, of Iron, 


by Chriſt's Kingdom 


[ Ve 13+ 0 7. &, Kings, 

, ; 
it as the Teeth were, 7. e. cruel and -per{ecuting ; as Beafts puſh and 
wy gore with their Horns. 


8 I conſidered p the horns, and behold, there came 
up among, them * another lirrle horn q, before whom 


DANTKEKEL 


Chap. \ 


( 


Ns. 
T3 £35 & 
F &* 4 


w I 
p: | 


their dominion taken away e: yet their lives were 
longed for a ſeaſon and time. 

e The Prophet chiefly intends the fourth Empire, and therein ti; 

proud blaſphemous Horn ; yet did not wholl7 omit to ſpeak of -1:5 © 
three firſt Empires, and what became of them. He fair, they w-re 
wholly raten away, that is, ſucceſſively, as Hiſtories t-1i us. The 
Beaſt. and the #0r7 periſh together, for the Holy Ghoſc t-!1s us, that 
the Zerz ſhall prevail againtt the Saints till the Antient of Pays come 
fo tit in Judgment ; and becauſe the Scfſion of [Judgment in Danices 
Vilion was principally to pluck up by the Roots that wicked Horn. 
ver, 26, following, Daniel's Expe@ation had failed him, if the Horn 
had not periſhed with the Beaft. Beſides, the ftate of the Beaſt 
under the Horn was to be 4 time, rimes, and the dividing of time, yer, 
25. of which more when we come to it, 
13 I faw in the nighr-viſions, and behold, oze like 
the ſon of man, came with the clouds of heaven f, and 
came To the antient of days, and they brought him near 
before him 5. 

F That is, the Meſſiah; this is the ſame with the Stone, Dan. 2. he 
came wth the Clouds of Heaven, Mat. 24. 30. 1. e. glorioulſly, (wiftly 
and terribly, Fer, 4.13. g This relates to his Aſcenfion, Aﬀs 7, 9 
10, TI. at which time, though X277g before, Mat. 2. 2. yet now and 
not before he ſeems to receive his Royal Inveftiturefor the Protettion 
of his Church, and curbing of their Enemies, which he ſays he had be- 
fore, Mar. 28. 1. 1 Cor. 15. 25. ch. 2. 44. 


14 And there was given him dominion and glory, and 
a kingdom, that all people, nations, and languages ſhould 


6. # 


h I was tranſported even to Aftoniſhment with the Viſion, it was ſo J#*##Þ» 
ſtrange, ſarprifing and terrible to me. 

16 I came near unto one of them that ſtood by 7, and 

asked him the truth of all this & : ſo hetold me, and made 

me know the interpretation of the things. 

z That is, toan Angel that miniftred, Zech. 3. 4, 7. & That 1 might 

learn of him the true and full Meaning of this Viſion, which the 

Angel readily told him. 

17 Theſe great beaſts, which are four, are four Kings, 

which ſhall ariſe out of the earth /. 

7 Men of the Earth, of earthly Principles, Idolatrous, Ambitions, 

Senſual, Tyrannical;z who, after they have acted their Parts, thall he 

driven off the Stage into the Tyring Rooms of Death and Deftrudtion 

18 Bur the faints of rhe -| molt High ſhall tate c}2 + Thald, 
Kingdom m1, and poſſeſs the Kingdom for ever, even jo. *#* 


ever and ever. _ 
m Jeſus Chriſt being their King, they ſhall reign with him, Rev. r. 


is, 


places, 


there were three of the firſt horns pluck'd up by the 
roots 7 ; and behold, in this horn were eyes like the eyes 


of a man, and a mouth ſpeaking great things s. 

> Daniel canſidere:, and this calls upon us to confider the Matter. 
a Some will have the 7u4# meant, others before him Antochus Ept- 
8 ares, others Fulius Ceſar, others Amichriſt, It's certain the Horn 
that riſeth out of the He-goat is Antiochus, Dan. 8. g. 10, 11, 12. but 
the Horn here mentioned riſeth out of the fourth Beaft,or under hin. 
Therefore he muſt be either the Turk, as ſome will have it, or the Xo- 
Not the Turk, 1. Becauſe the Horn ſignified only 


ea (0! miſh Antichriſt : : | 
houg one King, ver. 24. 2. He muſt gain all the fourth Kingdom- 3. He 


muft reign before the Kingdom of Chriſt is erected ; therefore it 
muſt be meant of Ant.c'riſt 3 r The Greeks, Lombards, and Franks, 


id al 
2 0 whom he thruſt out of /raly to make way for himſelf. s This again 
Pol: WY ſome interpret of Antiocbus, ſome of Mahomer, ſome of the C/ars, 
11:4 6 WM others of Antichriſt, all concurring in their Craft and Blaſphemies, 
1c W& but yroperly it can be meant but of one, viz. Antichrilt, 
win l 9 I beheld till the thrones were caſt down #, and 
{vc WE the antient of days did fir, whoſe garment was white 
ere RY #5 now u, and the hair of his head like the pure wool =: 
b7 his throne was like the fiery flames y, and his wheels as 
1; (W Porning fire z. - ME: 
4 Ty t By Terones caſt down, muſt be meant the Kingdoms of this World, 
deſtroyed byChriſt the King,and Judge of all,called the Antrenr of days, 
1 becauſe of his Eternal Deity 3 withour beginning and end of days, u Thus 
95 (41 Kings Vice-Rys. were clothed, Cen. 41. 42. as Foſeph in ine Silk, and 
"4 4 Mordecai, Eft. $. 16. noting his Innocence and Righteoulnels 1n Judg- 
mac ment, J/z. 42. 4. x Rev. 1, 14+ noting nis Eternity, and the Maturity 
viel of his Counſels. » This notes his Majeſty in Judgment, Ke 7/2/. 50, 
; 3,4» Mal, 4. 1- Rev. 19. 11, 12. ty Arguing the greateft and moſt 
- tormidable State of the laft Judge and Judgment: alluding to the 
' 1" WW Kings who had moveable Thrones, and they bad Wheels. It notes 
eo al God's Swiftnels in Judgment, Mal. 3. 5. 
_ 110 A fiery ſtream iſſued, and came forth from before 
racie RON 2: * thouſand thouſands miniſtred unto him, and 
c cou, WY "<1 thouſand times ten thouſand ſtood before him, b : the 
; £51 WE udement was ſer, and the books were opened c. 
nico WP 2 Tſul. 50. 3. Noting his Juftice and Wrath, in giving Sentence, 
2, 00" id executing it, 6 This is the great Afſſize. c Kev. 20. I1,12. I his 
1cit 01 WE fy ome is ſpoken agreeable to the Smedriam or Sanb:drim,and after 
> 7." ith manner of Men, and notes the Book of Life, of God's Eternal 
% an g eee, the Book of God's Omnilcience, Gc., : 
+ Mm it | beheld then, becauſe of the voice of the great 
» 10 WMV 0rds which the horn ſpake : 1 beheld ever till the beaſt 
a0! is lain, and his body deſtroyed, and given to the burn- 
; Lect ing flame d, 
9 i , ©. ifis cannot but be meant of the Ruine and Judgment of Anz7- 


"1,2 Theſſ, 2. 8 Revs 17. $. and 19. 20. 414 20. 10s 
12 As concerning, the relt of the Beaſts, they had 


and he ſhall be d 
three Kings 5S. 


divided. 


of times, even of Annctriſt's Reign. 1 will 


6. and 20. 6. and pofſe(s the Kingdom for ever, Mar. 19. 28. 1 Cor. 
I. 9. and 6. 2. 1 Pet. 2.9. Rev.4. 10. This ſhall be for ever, becauſe 
pings Kingdom is the laſt Kingdom ; never any ſha!l ſucceed after 
19 Then I wonld know the truth of the fourth beaſt, 
which was diverſe -- from all the others », exceeding + Chald, 
dreadful, whoſe teeth were of iron, and his nails of braſs, #79 al 
which devoured, brake in pieces, and ſtamped the reſidue '%% 
with his feet. 

7 1 would fain know it more perfealy and exaaly, becauſe the 

Fewiſh Nation and Church were to be icatter'd long, by and under 

the fourth Beaft. 

20 And of the ten horns that were in his head o, and 

of the other which came up, and before whom three 

fell, even of that horn that had eyes. and a mouth thar 

ſpake very great things, whoſe look was more ſtout than 

his fellows p. 

0 What they meant. þ 7, e. Who took more upon him than ever 

any King or Emperor did, and was cruel againſt the Saints, v. 21. : 
21 1 beheld, and the ſame horn * made war with the *ReY-17- 
ſaints, and prevailed againſt them 3 | ws 
22 Until the antient of days came, and þ judgment 
was given to the Saints of the - moſt High ; and the,,,,,"**:, 
time came that the Saints poſſeſſed the kingdom q. Ge, 

q This ſhews plainly the Horn is Antichrift of Rome, or the Whore + Chald, 
that rides the Beaſt ; and this is more apparent in the Interpretation hizb ores, 
of the fourth Beaſt and the ren Kings. 

23 Thus he ſaid, The fourth Beaſt ſhall be the fourth 
Kingdom upon earth, which ſhall be diverſe from- all 
Kingdoms, and ſhall devour the whole earth, and ſhall 

tread it down, and break itin preces. | 

24 And * the ten horns out of this Kingdom are ten *yer.7,3, 
Kings 7 that ſhall ariſe : and another ſhall riſe after them, 

iverſe from the firſt, and he ſhall ſubdue 


+ Chald. 
th2 jug - 


r i,e, Ten ſeveral Kingdoms, into which the Roman Empire was 
s See On ver. 9. let, r. 


2s And * he ſhall ſpeak great words againſt the moſt * Ch. 8. 


High, and ſhall wear out rhe Saints of the -+ moſt High, 24, 25. & 
and think to change times and laws : and they ſhall he ONES 
given into his hand, until a time and times and the divid- + Chald. 


ing of time #. 


high 077 fs 


t The Numbers of Daniel and For ſeem to agrees Daniel was cer- 


tainly prophetical in theſe things,2nd bis Prophecy reacheth to tkeend 


1 


r9t deny but Ar Tech 


FF! 7 IC 


Yol. 1. 


LOS) 
Witz!! 


TH. 


x: ven the: 


Mes F 


things, or 


© fs . 


11CiQ. ft 


5 
4-4 

[17 mas 
"4 Y 


ſerve him : his dominion 7 * an everlaſting dominion, *Ch.2.44- 
which ſhall not paſs away, and his kingdom that which Mic- 4. 7. 


ſhall not be deſtroyed, —_ 
i5 I Daniel was grieved in my ſpirit in the midſt of 
my | body, and the viſions of my head troubled me h. +Chald, 


Chap. VILE. 


TOOK 
might be a Type and Forcrunner of Antichriſt, and did many things | 
again the Fewiſh Church, with Craft, Cruelty and Blaiphemy : but 
he was no part of the fourth, but of the third Beaſt ; whereas Daniel 
here points mainly at the Roman Power and Periecution, eſpecially by 
the /ittle Horn, which laſted till his Ruine; atter which iz is clear the 
Lord Chriſt will reign in and over his Saints much more gloriout)y 3 
which the Fews will never be beaten from, becaule there are {o many 
fignal Places in the Prophets ſpeaking of it, yer unfultilled, and in the 
Zrocalvn/> 10 the wiſe Reader,atter the Beaſt and Whore are deſtroyed 
$37] all their Supporters. But enough of that at preſent. 

26. But the judement ſhall fir, and they ſhall take 
*C©h.5.25 away his dominion, to conſume, and to deſtroy t * un- 
to the end, 

27. And the * kingdom and dominion, and the great- 
nefs of the kingdom under the whole heaven, ſhall be 
given I the people of the ſaints of the - moſt High, 
Oro whole kingdom 75 an everlaſting kingdom, and all || do- 
{5 minions ſhall ſerve and obey |! him. 

[| That is, 28, Hitherto is the end of the matteru, As for me 
ol Sag * Daniel, * my copitations much troubled me, and my | 
m 54 countenance changed in me x : but 1 kept the matter in 
& 10. 8, My hearr. 
+ Chald, % 7, :. Of the Viſion, and the Angel's Interpretation. x 1, Becauſe 
brightneſſes it became him iv to be, a3 a holy wiſe Man ought to be in that caſe. 
Gr, form, 2. By this Impreion made upon him Goll would have It laid up in his 
Heart to be drawn out occationally, and delivered to his People, and 
that all theſe wonderful Diſcoveries from God might engage him more 
earneſtly in rayer for the Church of God, as he doth, ch. g. 


FLuk.1.22 


d. Chaid. 


high on-s, 


CHAP. VIE 


ellgrifiyd thereupon, I5 27. 

1 FN rhethird year oi the reign of king Belſhazzar y, 
a vilion appeared unto me, eve unto me Daniel, 

after that which appeared unto me ar. the firſt z. 

» This follows then in time aiter the former : Thoſe things that 
were meet for the Chaidees to know, are recorded by Danzel in that 
Tongue; but now he writes in Zebrew, which lafts to the end of the 
Book, becaule theſe things relate to the Church of Chriſt, Few and Gen- 
zilc,to the end of the World, 7 In the other Vition he ſpeaks of all 
the jour Monarchies; here only of the three firſt, this Vifion being 
both as a Part and a Comment upon the firft. 


2 And I faw in a viſion (and it came to paſs when I 
+ Heb. in ſaw, that I was at Shuſhan 7 the palace, which # + in the 
Z;2m ite province of Elam a) and I ſaw in a viſion, and I was by 
Fon. the river of Ulai b. 

4 In kis Mind and! Thoughts, not bodily ; and ſo he was alſo by the 
River Ul:i- tome think he Was loc-iiy there, being ſent thither in 
Embally by C» «us ; but Dante! was nuw at B by/on, when it was be- 
ſiexed and taken, Dan. 5. he was only there in Spirit, as the Prophet 
Exekie! faith he was in Ferufal-m, Ezel., 8,1, Now Daniel! had this 
Vion at 3uj2, becaule their Deliverance was to coine by Cyrus the 
Perfian, or Elamite, for £44m 15 Perfiz, This City was Called Suſan, 
Ze a Til, for the Pleaſantnets of It ; tuch ames they glve ailo their 
Cities in Chinz, 0 A Piver whote Waters were {0 wholeſoine that 
they were carricd t2r, and the King arank 0: no other. 

3 Then [ lifred up mine eyes, and ſaw, and behold. 
there ftvod upon the 1:ver a ram which had two horns 
c, and the two horns were hgh d: bur one was higher 
tnan Þ the other e, and the hizner came up laſt, 

c By which is meant the Kingdom of the Medes and Perſizns, as it is 
in V7. 20, Where It 15 10 interpreted, Beiore, it was called a Bear, 
and here a Am, both 21 ing the tame thing, though by different Ex- 
preſhions: A Ram, YLecaule he 15 a fighting Creature, puſhing. d 5. e, 
They were very powerful. e 7. e Ihe Medzan, though it came up laſt, 
yer was hjzheſt at firſt; bat afterward the Ferſtin was much ſuperiour 
In Magrhcence and Fame, which was verified in Cyrus ; who had an 
Incredible Heay, even 50 Millions of Talents. Sec Curtins and Strabo. 

4 I ftw the ram puſhing weſtward f\ and northward 
Z, and ſouthward þ : fo that no beaſts might ſtand be- 
tore him 7, neither was there any that could deliver out of 
EE x es LECT 

Ch.11.3. his hand, but * he did according to his will, and became 
great |, 
f i.e. Towards Bavyion, Syriz, Cippado-tr, Afiz the leſs, and Creece, 
ail weſtwarl from Medizand Perſur ; for the Perſians under Darius and 
Acrxes made War againſt Gr-ece, & 7. e, Againſt the Armenians, 1be- 
Mins, 1 ydians, Colch?, Cd/piaif, þ 7. Againlt Erbiopls, drabia, E- 
£3Þt, which Camoy/es invaded, 7 They profpered and conquered all, 
as did Cyrus, & He prevailed ag2inft all that oppoſed, and did what 
he woull without Controul,and became the greateft King of the Earth 
then. 
s And as 1 was ceniidoring, vehold, an he-gnat [ came 
from the weſt on the face of the whole carth m7, and 
{| Or,792!| touched not tne ground #7; and the goat had. a not- 


+ Hceb.the 


PBXAXNITEL 


rouced able horn between his eyes 9. 

him 27 IP | The Grecian Empire, repreſented by a He-goar, becauſe the 
oo Grechs were called X&geane, 7. e. goatiſt ; and their Sea was called 
+ Heb. the Z#gean S2a, voecaule that Country and its Ilands abounded in 
_ of Goats, as the word ftignifies, This He-goat anſwers to the Belly and 
fight Thighs of the Image,and tothe Leopard and-£liirl! Beatt, m 7.e, In that 


,InvpE + 1, o 135 TIS) l,. > if \ (" \* 
, © 4 þ& UL S. jo WIiCIC 4Je OnpAll P% YI 
-_ 


Emi3; 42 
14: ,- ki o 
yY 


£3 =] 
he Faltern 


s 1K... F3.0 al 
X2S, aANda QOVETr-ran ali 


il 'Theretcr?: Cajzed a Leopard wit L; Hig ', T0r hc conquered | {1:0 , and the franſs!: "SI 


4 


i 


Chap. Y] 


with incredible Swiftneſs in a ſhort time ; for in fix Years Space þ+ Y 


overcame the Medes and Perſtuns, Babylon, Egypt, and all the Coun- b 
tries round, far and near, as if he had bur travell'd over them ;  h+ 2 
came, ſaw, and overcame them, 0 This was Alexander the Great, the 
Yeftern Emperor, Creatures that have one Horn are therefore trons C 
as the Monoceros or Unicorn, Numb. 23. 22. Between his Eyes, notin, I. 
his Power and Policy, alio his wite Council, Captains and Cendys _ 
as Parmenio, Clitus, Philotes, &C. , £0 
6s And he came to the ram that had two horns j = 
which I had ſeen ſtanding before the river, and ran untg = 
him in the fury of his power. apy 
Þ 7.e, The King of Media and Perfia, and joined Battel preſently het 
and furiouſly, Fehu like. by CY 
7 And I ſaw him come cloſe unto the ram, and he MW ©: 
was moved with choler againſt him, and ſmote the = 
ram, and brake his two horns q, and there was ng us 
power in the ram to ſtand before him, but he caſt hin | 
down to the ground ,, and ſtamped npon himr : ang thr 
there was none that could deliver the ram out of his | + 
hand. þ & 
q viz. Artaxerxes Mnemon, who aided Cyrus againſt Alexander, an | fot! 
alſo Darius Codomannus ; theſe are the two Horns, or rather the Mee | her 
and Perſians, r He overthrew him utterly, that he could never rip = init 
again, This was at Granicum, Jſum, and Arbela. * 1Th 
8 Therefore the he-goat waxed very great 5s, an! WW tt: 
when he was ſtrong, the great horn was broken t : and : oo 
for it came up four - notable ones, * towards the four ti wm. 
winds of heaven #. o firſt 
s By conquering all the Eaſtern Empire and Power even to Jv, "RE in all 
t This was the mighty Power of the Lord of Hoſts, who is higher thaz "MIT up an 
the higheſt, and ſtronger than the ſtrongeſt, though they ſeem invinc = thers 
ble ; Verily every Man at his beſt Eſtate is altogether Vanity, Selah. When # cured 
Alexander the Great was greateſt, in his Youth, not 33 Years old; = teucid 
when he called himſelf the Son of Fupiter 5 when he was ſwoln with 2 Year 
Victories and Succeſſes ; then was he broken, and that to pieces, fr when 
he, his Mother, Son, Brother, and all his Kindred, were deftroze!, WF * 148, 
So weak are the greateſt to bear Proſperity long { for this Wond:: « WF 7 Days. 
| Men, by Pride, Luxury and Paſſhon, prepared himſelf for Ruine: h WF 7 Hoch 
that wept becauſe he had not another World to conquer, and war:i MW & Years 
breathing room in this, how ſoon was he tymbled into a Grave of it WW & *7, 45: 
Foot ? u 1. Antipater got Greece. 2. Aſia was poſſeſſed by Antigmu, BW © 14> * 
3- Prolomy got Egypt. 4+ Seleucus had Babylon and Syria. All this WWF 42" the 
were variouſly ſituated, to the Eaſt, Babylon and Syria ; to the South, ae fr 4 
Ezypt; to the North, 4fia the leſs; to the Weſt, Greece, ; RY 
9 And out of one of them + came forth a litk' Cod p 
horn x, which waxed exceeding great , toward th:"MME.... -..- 
ſouth y, and toward the eaſt z, and toward the ple Mes, + 
ſant land a. £4 
x This little Horn was Antiochus Epiphanes, he aroſe out of the 5:1 had ſe 
ci4@ of Syria; called a little Horn, 1. Becauſe he was much leſs than behold 
Alexander, called a notable Horn, v. 5. 2. Little, becauſe he was the Bn 
youngeſt of his Brethren, 3. He was held a Priſoner and Pledg at ag 
Rome, Wh21.ce he eſcaped. 4, Little, becauſe he had nothing at fil — Sp ma 
of Greatnels and Heroick Noblenels in him,alſo of low Fortune. 1. A cu : 


2ypt, where he belieged and took many Places from Philomer:r, til 
the Romans ftopped him. 7 7.e. in Syria, Babylon, Armeniz, a fi 
dea, ſo called becauſe of the Temple and People of God in it, and the 


BE 11s Chur, 


Eruitiulneſs of it, Ezzk. 20. 6. the Glory of all Lands, So vt. 1s. Pl, 16 | 
43. 2, Zo SC. Fer. 3. I'9. Dan, IT. 16,41, 4.5» ; | Wai, v 
10 And it waxed great, even || to the hoſt of het underſt 
ven b, and * it caſt down ſome of the hoft, || and of tie}; By a $ 
ſtars to the ground, and ſtamped upon them. "EWcommn 
b i.e. The Church of God militant, who worſhipp'd the Gol o:WWF604, 
Heaven, who are Citizens of Heaven, whoſe Names are written! | 17 
Heaven z and among theſe chiefly the Priefts, and Nobles, and Char! "a bame 
pions, who were as Stars ſhining above the reſt ; theſe he profans WY ; 
and flew cruelly, | og m 
11 Yea, he magnined himſelf even || * to the prin! tne _— 
of the hoſt c, and || by him the daily ſacrifice was takel, wh pars 
away d, and the place of his ſanluary was C1, bear the 
down e. Us to teac 


Ealpire to 
i Man, to x 
& 0NS, and t] 


c Not only againſt the High-Prieft Cnias, whom he put from his 
Prieſthood, and fold the High-Priefthood, 2 Mace. 4. hut againſt G00 
himſelf, which ſhewed his daring Infolence, and God's Patience @!* 


Permiſhon for the Sins of his People. 4 For he ſo perſecuted the 10 we ve Ind 
ple of God, that he forced them to omit the Worſhip of God. Þ. H: now in thy 
took away the U'e of the Temple as to the Holy Service and SACCINCE, 18 N 
commanding that it ſhould not be called the Temple of God, ooh lkep on 

Fupiter Olympus, whoſe Image he ſet up in it, and gave the Priclt3006 me, and 
to wicked Men, as Faſon and Menelavs, ; t Being: 
12 And || an hoſt was given him againſt the daily WWboth of ch 
ſacrifice by reaſon of tranſgreſſion f, and ir caft 00s An ps þ 
; Wan the It 


go REM - -OfDeT-] 
the truth to the ground, and it practiſed, and pro” lgnify we 


cd g. 


. Aelf 
| 7. e, Either the Tranſgreſhon of the Prieſts, for F497 perf wy i Natl? b An 
took away the Prieſthood from his Brother 3atas, and after 5-7/4". Ve 1 
did the like by him ; Or elle for the Sin of the People about the i « ume appc 
ſhip of God: Gr elſe 4nrochus wickedly, and in Contempt ow | X7.e, T] 
put Souldiers into the City to hinder or break up the Ps , Sant the 5 
God's People about his Worſhip, 1 Macc. 1. 47. £ Th? Truiin, 1.0 nat Indigns 


Dd? Nis Execy 


£ CG & hich 4ntiochus 0 
Law of God, called the Law of Truth, Mal. 2. 6. which #0 This þ 
L118 1 {a 


@ {iff 
Titans f 


. . - p . . - JEN, of No a> 4 bb 
in pieces, and burnt, 1 Macc, 1.59, This was his Preciuce, af 


| ceeded tor a time as he dcjired. | J WO: make h: 
. . otuer” 20 [| 

13, C Then I heard one ſaint ſpeaking, and 3n0: , : Alt 
ſaint ſaid unto || that certain ſamt which {pax "1 1 gs 


{ Or the 


Hoy long ſh] be the viſion concerning the daily /*. 
n |; of deſolation.s, i. : 


ro A7 7 . Pp q:... Fe. 
VIM. VEL. __ DF ZXmRAS  ; - Chap. Fa 


21 And the rough goat 7 the king of + Greece a, E276: 
cot ? {and the grear horn that # berween his eyes is the rt © 
: þ By the firſt 15 meant an Holy Angel by the other s ON OR king b, | - By 7 
Chriſt, Palmoni, a Numberer Or Revealer of Sect crs,a wonderful ns 4 od, Fr Of Favan, or Ton, or Fon, which Property 13 fra ths Iſt, which 

-- 6, Of him the Angel asks this Secret Concerning the Calamity ; was inhabired by Favan, Gen. 15, 2. mit ſpread over all Greecs, an 

long it would laft, for Danze!'s ſake and his People. ! al} tpake Sreeb,and the Sea was thence cx:)2d the /mrizn Sen. Tec more. 

tor the Lord Chrift is the Teacher of his People,the Wiſdom of God, | in Bochart, b #, & Alexander the Great ; catledt the rear trom his 

+4 hath all this in his Power by Office, and as he ftands wy FON _ great Power, Succcts an Polteftons : and the ſri Kirg, 7,0 in ia, 

»is Church, and for them- 7 The Lord knows his ſuffering People arc ani by his Exploits and Victories over the Perf. Monarchy ; for &fe 
much concerned about the time of their Sufferings, becauſe ther E 15 bon tnere were other Kings of Greece before him,hnt none of them in the 
appointed time for it, and the Lord doth reps eal - as REG Senſe aforeſaid. : | 

here, unto his conſidering ONES, Ver 5. and praying Saints,ch.g, They 22 Now that being broken c, whereas foor ff004 up 


5 ot in their Agonies, how long O Lord and it's an Addition to _ 4 : c oh ; 
cry ont ine NN ewerk bow Jong; PAL +46 a6 HA for ir d, four kingdoms ſhali ſtand up out of the nation, 


tinue his tyrannical Vexations againſt the People of but not in his Power e. 


both tine ſnAtuary and the hoſt to be troden under 


Jite gs 
of the Church, how 


_—_ HS * ww 


their Sorrow, © 


| con . - 1} Py 
—_ —_ pres of God! This is the reading down of the San- | © 7.e, Broken by Death, which breaks the Horn of all Pride and 


* 3.» ond the Hoſt. earthly Glory. 4 z. e, Four Kingdoms of the Nation of the Greeks, 
4 guns And he & {aid unto me, Unto two thouſand and |* That is, not in his Majeſty and Magnificence, but inferiour to him. 
T 


#- days 1; then ſhall the ſanQtuary be| , 23 And in the latter time of their kingdom f, when 
three hundred Þ Cays 7; J the tranſgreſſors - are come to the full -, a king of fierce + Heh. ac 


+ cleanſed. -mtl_es / _ 
| _— Angel unnamed ; why did he ſpeak to Denizl, and not | countenance þ, and underſtanding dark ſentences i, ſhall Go" 
: e 


to Rog that asked him ? Becauſe Dartel, and the Church to which ſtand uP. | — . 
& herelated, and was to communicate the Anſwer, was moſt concerned | f z, e, When they were come to the Height, and beginning to de- 
 jn it, andthe Angel that asked the Queſtion did it upon their Account. cline : It notes that time when the Romans began to ſeize part of the 
* ]This ſeems to many learned Men a very ditfcult Place, 7. &. where Grectan Kingdom, by Emilius Probus, who ſubdued Perjeus King of Ma- 
B to hegin, and where to end theſe Days. 1. Some explain it thus, a cedonia, and thereby brought all Greece under the Roman Juriſdiction, 
= Year contains 365 Days; then 2300 make f1x Years 2 Months and 18 | which was 166 Years betore Chrift was born, that very Year Antio- 
& Days, reckoning in 2 Days of the Leap-years gained, from the ſuper- | chus ſet up the Avomination of Deſolation. g When the Fews were grown 

numerary Hours and Minutes. Now this time begins at Antiochus his to an Excels of Wickednefs, which called tor Puniſhment, then God 
| firſt Entrance into Fud?a, when he profaned the Priefthood, and takes | ſuffered Anticchus to perizcute them. þ Such was he ; the word is tran- 
in alſo his ſecond coming in, when he interditted their Worſhip, ſet | ſlated impudent, inhumane,for the Countenance is the Diſcoverer of the 
# up an 1dol in the Temple, and interrupted the daily Sacrifice. 2. O- | Mind and Manners oftentimes. 5 Full ofall Subtilty ; another Fulian, 
 thers count the 2300 Days from the Peoples Revolt, which was pro- | to lay Snares, and fetch over the inconftant and backſliding Fews, 
cured by Mznelans,which began in the Year 141 of the Reign of the Se- | ſuch an one all Hiſtories declare this Arriochus to be, 


Ei 


\, W__ 7-ucilz, 1 Mac. 1. but Antiochus did not aft his Impieties till the next 24 And hjs power ſhall be mighty, but not by his own 

t WF |} Year atter, vir. 142, in the 6:5 Month, and the 6h Day; from | oye. 1. 11d he ſhall deſtroy wonderfully, and ſhall pro- 

- WW : whence if we reckon to the 254th Day of the gth Month of the Year Has ad Qi 4 Gt vor the ok. he qt 

' MW. © 145, there will fall out preciſely fix Years, three Months, eighteen | *P&T, ana practue, and na y 1gnty, and LBC LHeb 

”" WW © Day: 3. Others reckon alittle otherwiſe, from the Beginning of An- | | holy people 1, _— _ 
: FT riockes his Profanations to his Death : From 143 to 148, taking in both t Not by any Heroick Deeds, or truly Regal Qualities, but by _ 4 : ”s 
WW +> Years to the Number. For though Fudas Maccabeus recovered the Ci- making uſe of the Fewiſh Fations, and allo through the Livine Per- ©, - ors. 
: WW ©t;, and cleanſed the Temple in 148, yet Anriochus was not ded till | miſhon and C ommiſfion given him to puniſh a backſliding degenerate Gle7. B7o 
= 5 43, till when the Work was not finiſhed. 4. Others make it to begin | Nation ; laſtly, by the Help of Eumenes and Artalus, by whoſe Means 

wr | Zin the Year of the Seleucides 145, and to end anzo 151, two Years af- | and Help he got up to this Height, who being Kings, ſufpeRed the 

ps &ter 4ntiochus's Death,for the Abomination of Deſolation was ſet up in | Roman, Power, and raiſed him to be a kind of Check to them, 1 He 

Wl the Month Chiſleu, t Mac. 1. 17. and not till two Years after A4n1z0- | ſhall by Force, Craft and Cruelty, deſtroy many of God's People, 


rs Death was Nicanor overthrown with all his Army. Thus Facob from the higheſt to the meaneſt Ranks of them. 


tk, C:p:7and LU Empereur. 5. Others reckon not Days but Sacrifices (at 25 And through his policy alſo he ſhall cauſe craft to 
the Wir every Day) and reſtrain the time to fewer Years, out of Macca- proſper in his hand m2, and he ſhall magnity himſelf in his 
ce WE. *cr5, Foſeph. : FR WY” I Daniel heart », and by || peace ſhall deſtroy many 9: he ſhall || Or, pro- 
L547 AG 0 I Path, When. 7, any ane” | alſo ſtand up againſt the prince of princes p, but he ſhall /P*9- 
Net had ſeen the viſion, and ſought for the meaning mr, then ', | 
un WWc1014, there ſtood before me as the appearance of a | * Proken withont hand g. , | 
Fs £NO1A, TNETE m He ſhall contrive many Devices, and moft of them ſhall take; he Fig 
ſys Man 7, : : ; ſhall be a great Maſter of thoſe kind of Artifices ; all to circumvent #4 
F { :: Having obtained the Favour of knowing ſomething, he longed for | and deftroy, as Beaſts and Birds of Prey have a kind of Craft to com- BAG 
FE #2 more clear Diſcovery of thoſe things : and he had his Deſire granted. | paſs, and then devour their Prey. # He ſhall take a Pride in his "Fe 
il E7 Either the Angel C4v77e! or Michacl,who appeared often i the Shape wicked Devices and Tricks. o Under colour of Kindneſs, and pro- mus 
« Wot Men, and are the Meſſengers of God in the great things concerning miſing Peace and Amity, ſball lull Men alleep, ſo as to tear nothing + if 
I F# is Church, Heb. 1. uz, Others will have this Angel to be Chriſt, from him. p All this you find verified of him in the Maccabees and i 
2, WE 15 And I heard a mans VOICe 0 between tbe banks of Foſepbus. He fought againſt God in removing the High-Prieſt, affronts £331, 
; gg Ulai, which called and ſaid, * Gabriel, make this man to | ing God's Laws, profaning God's Worſhip, Name and Temple, and A741 
ſtand the viſion Þ ſetting up the Image and W orſhip of Fupiter there, q By a Diſeaſe 1907 
ed, under pg G . i . whereof he died, 1 Macc. 6. 8. 2 Macc. g. 5. '# 
the: 0 i.e, Of him but now before-mentioned, namely, Chriſt. p Z Ce 26 And h viſion of themmins and the morn3 44. 
", By declaring it more plainly to him : this ſhews Chriſt to be God, in : na Tne VHLON c S a p Po 4. 
. WH commending and ſending his Angel. Gabriel fignifies the Strength of which was told, is true 7; wheretore * ſhut thou up the *Ch, :2.4: & \ 
1 WW God. | viſion s, for it ſhall be for many days. l; 14 
M8 17 So he came near q where I ſtood: and when he | » i.e. Of the 2200 Days before, ver. 14. This Expoſition of it is F195 
wn Yen, 95 afraid, and fell upon my face : bur he ſaid | rv, lain and certain and therore to be believed, and ſeriouſly Fl 
an x ; : __ inded. s Lay it up i , , c E $1210 
E a—pry Underſtand, O ſon of man y - tor at the time of till it be fulfilied. He doth not mean that it ſhou'd be concealed from 2.9308 
inc be end /þall be the vilion s. _ ; the People of God that were wiſe in Hearr, for they were concerned in 81% 
ken! - q He came near that he might ſpeak more familiarly to him, yet Da- | it, and therefore it was revealed ro Daxiel. But he would not have 1 | 48 
m1] could not bear the Glory of it, Mat-17.6. ' How much tels can we | jt revealed to the Chaldeans and profane Heathens, and therefore ir = 
Cl bear the Glory of God, and how graciouſly hath the Lord dealt with | was written in #-brew and not in Chaldee. It was to be fulfilled in 't Ws. 
5 to teach us by Men and not by Angels; and how vain are they who | after-times,and therefore to be ſafely laid up,and wiſely to be thovght ING) 
| his 8 a[pire toa Converſe with Angels here on Earth ? r He calls him Son of on and improved. Therefore it. is added, for ir ſhall be for many Days, i £21 
God WS Man, to make him mind his Erailty, and not to be lifted up with Viſt- viz. 200 Years after this, in the time of the Seleucidz ; long atter D.- 7.1 
> ant $ 0n5, and thi: great Condeſcenſion and Familiarity of Heaven with him. | y;e/'s Days, and that Generation. See Rev. 22. 10. [Fi "I'f 
Pev- &* 7.0. In God's appointed time, fs in the latter hae not 27 And * [| Daniel fainted L and was fick certain * Ch. -. v1 bd. 
Gow 3 An Ws Shoe wich wha I gn > deep days t : afterwards I roſe up and did the kings buſi- - GY. 10, "oF 
| 2 £ . 4 " _ 0, Is "EF 
a lkep on my face toward the ground t - but he touched m_ . 0 | was aſconiſhed at the viſion, but none un f 4 
me, and + ſet me upright 4, ; z 1. Greatly afi&ed to conſider the fad Calamity that ſhould befa! UT 
oily; i Being terrified and aſtoniſhed with the Splendor an Grandeur the poor People of God, This he did in Sympathy and Compaſhon 4 
Alt) both of th Fl nd Meſſage, by the Sight and by the Voice. & pod P : PF: S 
fe or the Met COgET © ge, BY TOC SS ) with his People, upon whom theſe Sufferings ſhould fall. 2. Under 
Of a one Touch only. The Power of Spirits is incomparadly greater | 1. dreadful Apprehenſions of God's Wrath provoked by his Peoples 
x1- NN" fn firongeft of Men, Carnal, and Fleſh and Blood,in Scripture Sins, which made it an Act of Juſtice in God to puniſh them thus ſe- 
guty weat, 2 Cor. Lag be 4 , | verely. 2. That Daxtel ſhould not be lifted up with this Vitton and 
cully” i9 And he laid, Behold, I will make thee know what Revelation. 4. That hereby Daniel might be in a due Frame of 11n- 
o1gu5 ſhall be in the laſt end of the indignation x ; for at the | miliation and Poſture ſor Prayer. 5. To ſhew the power'ul Opera- 
Nor ume appointed the end [hall be y. tions and Impreſhons of the Mind upon the Bodies of Men by the 
God, N !, e, That God will raiſe up Antiochus to execute his Wrath «- Pathons chiefly of Fear and Grief, cauling O:ten Faintings and Con- 
$0] aſt the Fews for their Sins, and that yet there ſhall be an End of ſternation, which appears moft in thoughtful good Men, whereof are 


many Inftances in Scripture, #6, 3. 16. Kom. 9. 1, 2, 3. #4 Having, 
digefted his Grief, and recovered Strength, he minded his Place, Dury 
and Truft, and concealed che whole, thar they might not lee it by his 
Countenance ; though he had deep Thoughts of Heart abour it. 


"at lignzrion ; God will have the End of his Intenttor, and the End 
' bis Execution, in all his ſevere Providences relating to his People. 
i115 he ſaith to make ns wait patiently, He that believeth will 
00: make haſte, 

ther? 20 The ram which thou ſaweft having two horns, are 
- b, * kings of Media and Perſia =. * | 
| vt Rungom, Ch. 7+ 17s CHAT. 


| 
CHAP. IX, 


Darziel underſtinding by books the time of the captivity, mabeih corfeiſion 
of ſins, prayeth for the reſiauration of Feruſalem, 1 Ig, Gavriel 
informeth him of the 70 weeks ; ar the end whereof deliverance fooul.! 
be wrovchr by the Meſſiah, 20 27. 


DANDTELDT. 


*Ch-1-21.3 JIN the firſt year x of * Darius the ſon of Ahaſue- 
- - _ rus, of the ſced of + the Medes y, || which was made 
"arty king over the realm of the Chaldeans z ; 


17 

11 Or. in X Thatis, immediately after the Overthrow of the Kingdom of Ba- 
which he, bylon, which was allo the Year of the Fews Deliverance from their 70 
&c, Years Captivity, theretore punctually here {et down. The Lord hath 
carefully recorded the ſeveral Periods of Time that relate to his Church, 
and the fignal Providences both of Mercy or Judgment exerciſed to 
wards it : for hereby God 15 glorified in the fignal diſplaying of his 
Attributes, and the Saints Graces exerciled, eſpecially Faith and Pati- 
ence, by calling to mind what God ati doae in time paſt, Pjal, 77. 
£, 6,7. y This Darius was not Darius the Perfiay, unler whom the 
Temple was built, as Pory{yrius would have it, that thereby he might 
perſwade unlearncd Men that Dariz! lived long after the time that he 
did live in. Therefore this is called Darzus the Mede, and by the 

Greeks culled Cyaxares, 2 Ani this is confirmed by Xenophon. 
2 In the firſt yer of ks raign, 1 Daniel underſtood 
by books a the number of the years, whereot the word 
* Jer. 25-of the LORD came to * Jeremiah the prophet, thar 
12-X©29- he would accompliſh ſeventy years in the deſolations of 


ICs 

Jeruſalem b. | 
4 By ſacred Books, both of Feremy the Prophet, 5 er. 25. 11, 12: 
and 29» 1c. fo allo the Pentateuch, which he had, as 13 plain, v-r. 19, 
31, 12, *2, &c. by which we ſee this great Prophet did nit dildain to 
ſtudy the Word of God, and the . tatz of the Churci of ull, tho gh 
he had the Converſe ad Revelation of Angel, and though he was in 2 
Heathen Court, and in h gh Office. which required great Attendance. 
b Fer. 7. 34. and 22.5. and 25. 15. 
3 T And | ſet ;ny tice unto the Lord GOD, to ſecz 
by prayer and ſujpplicaticns, with taſting, and ſackcloth, 
and aſhes c. 
c Obſerve two things. 1. That d:ep revolting and deep Afﬀfiidti- 
ons call for dzep ani folema Humiliation. 2. God's Decrees and 
Promiſes do not excuſ* ns from Duty and i'rayer, but include it and re- 
quir? it, God will b; inquired 0: ior thoſe things which he hath pur- 
poſec and promiſed tv give his People, Ez-t. 36.37. And if it be ob- 
jefted by any, (as it is by Calovius) that Gud's both Threats and Pro- 
miles are ablolute and not Hypcthetical,as they will prove by Fer. 25. 
II, 12, and 29. 10+ It's anſwered, that, 1. Though it be ſpoken pe- 
remp! orily and abſolutely, yet uot without a tacit Condition and ſe 
cret Reſerve in God, For. 3.4. 2 God often ſpeaks poſitively,to put 
Sinn:rs in the more awe ot his Judgments, and to drive them to Re- 
pentance, Fer.18. 7, $,9,10- 23. It God give a Reaſon of his Threat- 
ning, viz. becauſe they have deſpiſed his Word, and abuſed his Pati- 
Ence, 2 Chron.3 6. 15,16. Luke 19. 42,43, 44+ then the Threat is ab- 
ſolute. 4. And it God add upon his Threatnings ſuch Words as theſe, 
1 will not hear yu, pray not for 1hs Pcovle, of which we have many In 
ſtances, then it's peremptory. $5. When the Threat and the Judg; 
ment threatned is the Fruit of God's Decree, then it is irreverſab/c ; 
not elſe, Mind all theſe Rules wcll in this Cafe, 


4 And I prayed unto the LORD my God, and made 

* Deut. 7-my confeſſion d, and ſaid, O * LORD, the great and 
0 1s, dreadful God, keeping the covenant e, and mercy 50 
& 5. 32, them that love him, and to them that keep his command - 
ments - 

d By this it appeareth, 1, He prayed m Faith, to the true. God, 

and his God. 2. He made Contetfion of Sin when he prayed tor Deli- 

verance becauſe hereby he juſtified God in the Captivity of his Pcople., 

3. He knew if God vouchlafed Pardon of vin, upon this Contcfhon, 

that would be a {ure Foundation of future Mercy. 4. He ſet down 


Abuſe of Ambaſſadors hath by the Law of Nations ever been high'y 


i1clented ; 2 Sam. 10. and 12. 29, 3O, ZI. 
7 O LORD , righteouſneſs || belongeth unto thee 19, 
but unto vs confuſion of faces, as at this day ; to the tet; 


men of Judah, and to the inhabitants of Jeruſyem 
and unto all Iſrael that are near, and that are far 


through all the countreys whither thou haſt driven then 
? 


C 


becauſe of their treſpaſs that they have treſpaſled zgaing: 
thee. 


8 O LORD, to us belongeth confuſion of face, to or 
kings, to our princes, and to our fathers, becauſe we haye 


ſinned againſt thee z. 

z Here the Prophet, after he had arraigned himſelt and his Pegyje 
upon their Guilt, paſſeth Judgment, for in this caſe every true Peg;. 
tent fits in Judgment, and proceeds judicially, that is, ſolemnly ang 
impartially; 1 Cor. 11. 31. for he judgeth for God, and proceed; ac. 
cording to God's Law,and Conſcience is Witnels © and this God takes 
notice of, and takes w-1l, for it prevents his judging of us, See 2 Cyr, 
7. Ii, and is a true Sign of true Repentance. 

9 To the LORD our God beloug mercies and forgive. 
neſles k, though we have rebelled againſt him 1. 

þ How did God ſhew himſelf merciful, when he puniſh-d them 
ſeverely ? Anfw. 1+ becauſe it was leſs than their Sin deſerved, for jt 
was Rebellion. 2. Becauſe ti:z-ir Puniſhm=-nt was God's Chaſtiſement 
which to his People is an Att of Love and Mercy, as ye ſee, eb, 12, 
6, 7.8,9. 3+ Becaufe God preſerved them in their Captivity, an 

delivered them from it. / They therefore that yray to God under their 
Sin and Miſrry,muſt eye God's Mercy's as well as his Juſtice, P/al;1,, 
an1 130. 4. For as the one doth caſt them down, ſo the other bears 
them up, and gives them Hope, or elſe we might be ſwallowed up of 
too much Sorrow and Deſpair, 2 Cor, 2. 7. 11. wherein Satan would 
be too hard for us, as well as in Dedolency or want of godly Sorroy, 
10, Neither have we obeyed the voice of the LORY 
our God, to walk in his laws which he ſet before us 
his ſervants the prophets m. 

m (1.) To be large in Confeſſion of Sin, eſpecially in a Day of Kr. 
miliation, is no vain Repetition, for we offend commonly in being 
ſlight and pcrfunQory in our Confeſſions ; and God will have all au, 
and make us own it. (2.) It was God's Mercy not only to give ti; 
People a Law, which he did {olemnly by Moſes, but ſet it plainly ar 

powertully before them, and ſet it bome upon them by the Expoltti 
ons and Applications of all the Prophets, tor this was their Work, 


cauſe we have finned againſt him o. 


none to and in ir. Then the Curſe comes upon a People, z.e. tiz; 


ty and Excellency of Jeſus Chriſt, who was ſent of God to bleſs us, 
in freeing, us from the Curſe of the Law by becoming a Curſe foru; 


ſpake againſt us p, and againſt our judges that judged: 
us q, by bringing upon us a great evil - for * under 
the whole heaven hath not been done as hath been don: 
upon Jerutalem 7. 

p By this it appears that God's Judgments threatned againſt Sin are 
to be teared,becauſe of the great and terrible God, ver. 4. Deut.7,q 
10. Nech-m. 1. 8. q Whoſe Place and Duty it was to govern the I& 
ple, to judge their Cauſes, and to appoint others for it, wherein! 
there be a Failure, as there ofcen was, is was a Sin, and Judgment ! 


here the Words of his Prayer, becauſe it is the Prayer of a righteous 


Man, and one of God's eminent Saints and Favourites in Scripture, ; 


on the People, and upon the Rulers and Judges themſelves allo," 
which we find many Inftances and Complaints in Scripture, 7/al-2-% 


who had great Power with God in Prayer, J60 42. 7, $,9. Eck. 14. | 9, 10- and 58. 1, 2. 7 A Place privileged many ways above all others 


I4, 20. Fam. 5.16, e He puts God in mind of his Covenant, Deur. 
7. $. Neb. x. 5. he calls him great and dreadful, as to his ſevere Juſtice 
and Wrath; now though the Covenant hath Promiſes and Mercy, 
yet it includeth Obzdience on our Part, as here 15 exprels'd. 
_— * We have ſinned and have committed iniquity, 

p +5 and have done wickedly, and have rebelled f, || even 
| Or; arg by departing from thy precepts, and trom thy judg- 
kave de- ments. 
parted, SH f As if he had ſaid, we are not only Signers, but our Sin 15 Wicked- 
Gr. neſs aggravated to the Height ; thus much the Gradation here inti 

mates, by doing wicked!, and rebeity, In our Coni.thons of Sin to 
God there mult be no mincing nor civaking of Sin, but a [full and 
naked Diſcovery, with ſelf-judginz and felf-abhorrence. Note here, 
all along atter this holy Man Danze! puts himſeif in the Number of the 
greateſt Sinners : S0 when we are Supp!iants and Penitents, we muſt 
include our ſelves in the general Petition, 

6 Neither have we hearkaed unto thy ſervants the 
prophets y, which ſpake 1n thy name to our kings, our 
princes, 2nd our fathers, and to all the people of the 
land b. 

£ For God to ſend his Prophets to his People was their high Privi- 
ledge,and the higheſt Att of Favour to chem,and of his Authority over 
tiem, for they were Guil's Ambaſladors, and came to them in the 
iord's Nam?, and theirtore their Sin and Puniſhment was the greater. 
h God's Ambaſſadors havea large Cmimiſhon, and general Initruction 
to [peak in the Name of their Lora with all Autiurity,and without Re- 
Ipect of Perſons. And this ſhews, 1. Gud's Autlority vver al], 2.God's 
Mcrcy towards all, of all forts. 3. The Agyravation of this Sin, be- 
caule it was of all lorts, as Gem, 6* 12, 13. 2 Criren, 26. 16 Now the 


' chiefly by the ſignal Preſence of God there, and his Promiſes to 
Pſal. 56. 1, 2. yet when Sin is found there, as it was in Ferwlem, 
the height, as in Sodom, it was puniſh'd to the height. Read the Bow 
of Limentat0ns, ; 
13 As * it is written in the Law of Moſes s, All th, 
evil is come upon us; yet -+ made we not our prajf!: 
before the LORD our God, that we might turn from our 


intquiries, and underſtand thy truth. * | 

s lev. 26.14, tO v.40. The Sum of all is this, As the Lord threte, 
ned an1 forewarned us long ago,ſo is it come to paſs this Day upon Þ5,' 
becauſe we took no warning, we under{tood not, but tinned and If 
turned not. The Lord is true and juſt in all that is come up ©: 
chiefly becauſe we have not made our Prayer unto God to prev-n* 0 
Milſcry beſere it came upon us, nor to remove it when 1 lay hegryol 
us. Sec it in Ezekiel, who prophcked in the Captivity, 21id how 01e! 
received him: and though they kept a formal Faſt, yet wha: did tha 
hignity ? Zech. 7. 5, 6, 7+ : 

14 Therefore hath the LORD watched ft upon - 
evil, and brought it upon vs: for the LORD vr GN 
'5 righteous in all his works which he doth - for 
obeyed not his voice. 

r This notes, 1. God's taking notice. of all their ways, © 
Men (leep in carnal Security, and dream of no Danger. 2. Gy 
watching here notes the fit ways that he always takes 10 —— 
ners. 2. It notes. his haſte in executing Judgment auly and 1ca\c —_ 
when it makes moſt for the Honour of his juſtice, 4. 1145 ue 
like a careful Watchman, not luffer any to eſcape his Hans. | oh 

And now, O LORD our God, * that hait 00% 
thy people Itorth ov: of the land of Ev 


'eN while 
2, 30 '5 


THF 
£ C 


Chap, [ 


11 Yea, all Iſracl have tranſgreſſed thy law, || eret!; 
by departing, that they might not obey thy voice »;i- 
therefore the curſe 1s poured upon us, and the oath tht; 
x written in the * law of Moſes the ſervant of God, be." 


7 Tt, When Sin is Epidemical, it's ſad and fatal to a Nation; By 
in Pſal, 14. 3. K2M. 3. 12. ſo a Deluge of Sin bronght a Deluge of, 
Judgment, Gen. 6.13,17. 2. This makes the Gap great, and leare,, 


Puniſhment of the Breach of God's Law, Fer. 42. 18. and 44 1%; 


0 This, 1. ſhews the Holinels of God's Law. 2. Tt ſhews the Sinful, 
neſs and Hainouſneſs of Sin, the Breach of it 3. Itſhews the Necel, 


12 And * he hath confirmed his words which tt; 


gy 
2 


zz Of it, 


Lord i: 
New 

5, Bec 
ATGs I« 
F/al. 8 
v7.17, 
ep; 
the K 1; 
ke, 5 
becauſe 


18 
thine 
f whit 
lent © 
les, by 

a Ob 
It was | 
£00d Ar 
Gold in « 
Cautious 


. all the $ 


I9 
ken ar 


| K [God b 
| & Name, 


b Her, 
Man pre 
lows, anc 


= God wer 
Tired; Th 


9 h1ve NM 
own fake 
Lord, ren 


20 q 
confeſſin 
preſentir 
for the h 

21 Ye 
man * ( 
Vepinnin 
abour the 


mn, Co 
ling Spirj 
lating tr) t 

= Wn oh, 
Nation of « 


Ora TICS 
Etear ENCO 


o i C } 
Y F-" 
ON! 


jap. I X. 


\ mizhty hand 2. and haft + gotten * thee renown as at 
;hee this day 3 we have ſinned, we have done wickedly. 

nc. u Daniel mentions this Deliverance now, that God would pleaſe to 
Wold. 51; forth the ſame Power in their Deliverance out of Bzbylon, accor- 
85. 4ins to his Promiſe,”?/ 1.85. $- Fer.16.14 and 23. 7. this he grounds 
his Faith upon - Fer. 22.13. read thence to the end, 1 How the Lord 
aſſar2d them they ſhould return out of Captivity, by the Prophet's 
making a Vurchaſe and ſealing Evidences, and laying then up late, 
2. How the Lord would certainly plague them notwithſtanding, for 
their Wickedneiv. 3. How he would deliver them, as once our of 
Bip s , 
16 COLORD according to all thy rightcouſnels, | 
beſcech thee, ler thine anger and thy fury be turned away 
* from thy city Jeruſalem, thy holy mountain  : becauſe 
© forour ſins, and for the iniquities of our fathers, Jeruſa- 


@'” about us y. 

$ As if he had ſaid, Lord, according to thy Righteouſneſs thou haſt 
puniſhed thy People, as they juſtly deſerved ; now alſo according to 
thy Mercies,which 15 the other part of thy Righteouſmeſs,ſave thy Veo- 
ple though they deſcrve it not. See Pſal. 14.3. 1, 2, For God hath pro- 
miſed, and rheretore he ivil] do ir , yet in Mercy, and this is Faithful- 
neſs and Righteouineſs. See 1 Fokn 1. 9. y Now though Sin is the Ke- 
prochof any People and Nation,yet much more of the People of God ; 
which ſhould be a holy People, becauſe their God is a holy God, and 
his Laws are holy Laws, by which they excel all other People, Yet 
Lord, ſaith he, if Feruſalem be a Reproach, this is a Reproach to thee,be- 
cauſe of their relation to thee therefore I pray thee take away this 
” double Reprodch x it is grievous unto us to bear it for thy Name's ſake, 
Q let it be grievous unto thee, and therefore wipe it away. 

17 Now therefore, O our God, hear the prayer of 
© thy ſervant, and his ſupplications, and cauſe thy face to 
= ſhine upon thy ſanCtuary that is deſolate, for the Lords 
= lake z. 


? 1, Here the Prophet is moft concerned for the Sanuary, and 


#4 


God,but alſo of Chriſt ; becauſe in all theſe the Lord is greatly concern- 
ed in Honour, eſpecially confidering ; 2. His Argument, tor the 
3 Lord's /ibe; for Chriſt's Sake the Meiiah : who is meant here as I 
23 prove, 1 Becauſe the concurrent Teſtimony of the beſt Interpre- 
2X fers is for this Interpretation ; and the Synod of Sardis. 2. Becauſe 
23 this Conſtruction is moſt agreeable to the Text and the Hebrew : 
the contrary is againft it; forced and figurative, when there is no need 


New Teitament, Luke 1. 43. and 2. 11+ Fob. 20. 28. Rev. 17. Iq» 
5. Becauſe the Jews had none elſe to truſt to for Salvation, Fob.14.13- 
ATS 15.11. Eph. 3. 12. 1 Tim. 2.5. Thus in the Old Teſtament, 
\Fſal. $0. 15 16, 17, for the Son's ſake, whom he calls the Son of Man, 
$27.17. for ſo the Chald, Paraphraſe,tor the King Meſſiah. So upon that 
Place, Pſul. 72. 1. Give the King thy Fudgments, and thy Kletreayt neſs 10 
the King's Son; 2, e, the King the Meſſiah. 2 Sam.7 21. for thy Word's 
ſuke, 7. e, Chriſt, Foh. 1. 1. 2 Sam. 12, 25. be called bis Name Jedidiah, 
becauſe of the Lord, of whom Solomon was a Type. | 


oy. 18 O my God, incline thine ear, and hear ; open 
1." thine eyes, and behold our deſolations,. and the city 
cl WW | which is called by thy name a: for we do not + pre- 
Gus, ſent our ſupplications before thee for our righteouſneſ- 
0: 1 ſes, but for thy great mercies. 

1 a Obſerve here, 1. How he entitles God to the City for his Name. 
Joed: It was the City of God, Pſal. 48. 1, 2, 8,9, ut. Fer. 25. 29. Itisa 
ndery good Argument in Prayer to entitle our ſelves to God z yea to intereſt 


God in our Selves, and to our Cauſe, Obſerve, 2. How careful and 


done ; 
my cautious the Prophet is to flee to Mercy,and to renounce Merit. Thus 

_ all the Saints, 

11.7% 19 O Lord hear, O Lord forgive, O Lord hear- 


eV WW ken and do;. defer not for thine own ſake, O my 


__ God b: for thy city and thy people are called by thy 
allo, 0 : | Nn a m Go : 
1.2, 2 Here, 1, We have the effeftual fervent Prayer of a righteous 
others 2 Man prevailing z he never gave over till he got it. 2. The Lord al- 
to i, {WG 1095, and loves Importunity in Prayer. 3. He and the Feople of 
em, 0 God were under a fore Trial, for the 70 Years Cap"ivity were expl- 
he Book red ; Therefore he faith, defer not now Lord ; *tis high 17m? for thee 
19 hrve Mercy upon Sion, yea the ſer time is come i, Lord hear for thine 
11 this BS 22 fake, though not for ours ; What ? haſc thou forgotten ? O 
a9 x Lord, remember. % 
"nm our! 20 EC And whiles I was ſpeaking, and praying, and 
ay <onteſſing my. fin, and rhe fin of mv people Ifrael, and 
creat MY Preſenting my ſupplication beſore Lune LORD my God, 
z201 5 for the holy monntain of my God : 
and i WF 21 Yea, whiles 1 was ſpeaking in prayer, even the 
pu man * Gabriel, whom 1 had ſeen in the vilion at the 
__ depinning, being, cauſed to fly + ſwiftly ®, touched me 
ow (6:1 BW ©Dour the time of the evening-oblation c. 
did tal C1. By this we ſee Dant?l uſed vocal Prayer, pouring out his 
| Soul, 2. That the Saints in Prayer do parly with God ; it's an hum- 
on Ul Ole and holy, and fervent unboſoming our Svul to Gol. 3. That ho- 
'r God l Men in confeffing the <ins of the Nation, confeſs their own Sins too, 
for we andthar Impartially, begging Pardon for all. 4. That when a Child 
E God ſets himſelf in earneſt to ſeek God by Prayer, the Lord hears 
ey Mk Compare ver. 20. with 23. 5. As the Angels are all mini- 
en my nz Spirits,ſo the chiefeſt Angels are ſent on the chiefeſt Meffages re- 
2 Si , ng tt the Church of God, Thus Grbr::1 hetore, chap.8. 16. Thus 
— ne: Allo to Zachary and Mary, Luke 1. 11, 19, 26, about the Incar- 
21011 3h 


com Chrifr, and our Salvation by kim. 6. God herein gives 3 
ener Encouragement to Prayer, and fulfils his Promiſes made of old 
- +» -*Ople in this behal!, Lev. 26, 40, 41, 42, Det. 30, 1, 2, 3+ 


q mil. 
" NE 14162) 


Lo 

; N11 ib 

): \ gh 
+ 


q! 
' a 


hd 


D A NET 


W:4- Jem and thy people * are become a reproach to all that are 


PZ Place of Worſhip ; a Type not only of the Church, and the Worſhip of 


Chap. I. 


| Ja. 39. 19. and eh:p. 65. 24. It ſhall come ro pals befor? they call 1 will 
anſwer, and while thy are yr ſpzaking T wil þh-ar, 7. The ord is quick 
in hearing, and helping his People. The Angel was made to fly {wit:- 
ly, even unto wearineſs as ſome trantlate it: Or to fly with flight, 
Has. 1.8. The time of the evening-Sacrifice. was a ſolemn and ſet 
time of Dzvotion. Then God heard Elij th and did Wonders, 1 Kings 
18. 39, 37, 38+ and Jeſus Chrilt the Saviour -of the World as ficr;- 
hiced for us at tho” tie, avour the ninth Hour, Matth 25. 46. Mar. 
| '$+ 34. Luke 23.44, KC. all thele three Evangeliſts mention Chriſt 
giv:ng up the Gnoir a* the ninth Hour, which was the time of the 
evenog- acritiie. At this time Gad»7el is ſent ro Daniel rg toll him 
the time of the Methah's Death, and the Conſcqucats of it. See vor, 
24, Ge. 
22 And he informed me, and talked with me, and 
ſaid, O Daniel, I am now come forth + to give thee $111 + Heb. 1 
and underſtanding d. me 


4 That is, to make thee know great and ſecret things concerning _ of 
the City and Santiuary of Ferujalem, of the rebuildicg of it, and of Peanding 


the Meſſiah, &c, 

23 At the beginning of thy ſupplications the - com- + Heb. 
mandment came forth e, and I am come to ſhew thee : for 994. 
thou art + greatly beloved f : therefore underſtand the T H*. © 


matter, and conſider the viſion. ny 
e This thing was decreed before in God's Counſel, but not divulged, Ch. 10, 12 
or ordered to be proclaimed till Daniel petitioned. f Heb. A Man of 19, 


deſires, i, e. dear to God, Luke 1. 28. 


24 Seventy weeks g are determined vpon thy peo- 
ple, and upon thy holy city h, || ro finiſh the tranſpreſ- || Or, t 
tion, and || to make an end of fins, and to make recon- iran 
ciliation for iniquity 7, and to bring in everlaſting righ- | Or, ſeed 
teouſneſs k, and to ſeal up the viſion and + propheſie / 4Heb.pro- 
and to anoint the moſt holy m7, | : pher, 

8 Theſe Weeks are Weeks of Days, and theſe Days are ſo many 
Years: though neither Days, nor Mont%s, nor Years are expreſſed 
( which makes it ſomewhat the more obſcure ) but Weeks only. Ic 
IS yet plain and obvious, that the Angel uſeth the Number Seventy to 
ſhew the Fayour of God towards them,that they mig ht have ſo much 
Liberty and Joy as their ſeventyYears Bondage and >ufferings amount= 
ed to. Yet was this but a Type of the time of Grace which was to 
follow after by the coming of Chriſt. þ Why doth he call them Da- 
niel's Feople. 1. Becauſe they were his by Nation, Blood, Laws and 
Profefſion. 2, Thine becauſe thou doſt own them, and art fo ten- 
der of them, and ſo zealous for them. # Note, the Angel diſco- 
vers firſt the Diſeaſe in three ſeveral Words, FANUN TY 12U9 + 


Peſhang, Gnavon, Chataoth, which contain all ſorts of Sin, which the 
Meſſiah ſhould free us from by his full R edemption. See Exod.34.6,7. 
Matth, 1. 21. viz. original, a&ual, of Ignorance, Preſumption, &c, 
alſo both Fault and Puniſhment, which we may prove by Scrip- 
ture. 2. The Angel ſhews us alſo the Cure of this Diſeaſe in three 
Words, le callee, Ie chatem, le capper; 1. To finiſh Tran;greſſion. 2, To 
make an end of Sin. 3. To make Reconciliation, All which Words are 
very ſignificant in the Original, and ſignify to pardon to blot out, 
mortify, expiate, k #.e. To bring in Juſtification by the free Grace 
of God in Jeſus Chrift, the Lord our Righteouſneſs, Jſa. 53.6. Fer.23. 
6. and 33. 16. 1 Cor, 1. 30, Called everlaſting, becauſe Chrift is eters 
nal,and he and his Righteouſneſs is everlaſting, Chriſt brings this in, 
I, By his Merit. 2. By his Goſpel declaring it. 3. By Faith ap- 
plying, and ſealing it by the Holy Ghoit, 1 To abrogate the former 
Diſpenſation of the Law, to fulfil ir, and the Prophecies relating to 
Chrift ; and to confirm and rati'y the New Teftament or Goſpel-Co- 
venant of Grace, The Talmud faith, all the Propheſies of the Pro- 
phets related to Chriſt; m By which he alludes to the Holy of Holies 
which was anointed, Exod. 30. 25, to verſe 31. and 4o. from ver. g, 
to ver. 16. This typified the C hurch which is called anointed, 2 Cor, 
1. 21, and Heaven into which Chriſt # entred, Heb. 8. 1, and 9.24. 
aad 10. *9, but chiefly Chriſt himſelf, who is the Holy One, As 3. 
14. He received the Spirit without meaſure, Fobn 3.34. His humane 
Nature is therefore called be Temple, Fohn 2.19. and Tabernacle, Heb, 
8.2. and 9. 11. Moreover, Chriſt is he that held the Law ( as the 
Ark did the two Tables ) by which the Will of God is revealed, he 
is the Proptriatory appeaſing God, the 7able that nouriſheth us,the Can- 
dleftick that enlightens, the Altar that ſan&ifies the Gift and Offering, 
All theſe were anointed and holy ; by this Word Anoinring, he alludes 
to his Name Meſſ14h and Chriſt, both which ſignify anointed, Chriſt 
was anointed at his firſt Conception, and Perſonal Union, Luke 1. 35. 
In his Bapriſm, Matth. 3. 17. to his three Offices by the holy Ghoft ; 
C 1.) Knp, Matth. 2. 2. ( 2. ) Propher, Tſa.61.1. ( 3. ) Prieft, ſal, 
10. 4. 


25 Know therefore and vnderſtand z, that from the | Or, 


. feven 
going forth of the commandment ro reſtore and to7,,,c. .., 


build Jeruſalem , unto the Metliah che prince, ſhall be ;ceſcore 
|| ſeven weeks 9; and threeſcore and two weeks the ſtreet aud mo 
- ſhall be built again, and the [|| wall, even Þ in-troublous w*#ts : c&e 
7 (treer, Kc, 
tIMmes Pp: | & Gr, 

n i.e. By deep Conſideration, upon a due ſearch of Reaſon, and +Hch ſhy 
comparing of thing*, and minding what the Angel ſaith. o From the ,eyry ind 
Publication of the Edi, whether of Cy7#s or Darius to reftore and þe byilr, 
to build, we ſhall ſee anon, p Noting the Enemy ſhould create them || gx 
much trouble in the building, and reparations of the Wall; City and ye2cþ gr 
Temple, which they did many ways, as we read in Nehemiah, which j;xcþ. 
the Spirit of God doth premoniſh them of, le!t they ſhould thinky feb, in 
this their chief Deliverance and Redem,tion. Thele fever Weeks are frgir of 
therefore mentioned by themſelves, and repeated no more, becaule;jnes, 
they contained the time of building the Wall, City and Temple of 
Feruſalzm, at the end of which ſeem to begin the ſixty two Weeks, 


26 And after threeſcore and two weeks q ſhall Meſ- 


i- er t] - Me 
fiah be cur off”, | bur not for hiniſelf s- and the peo- | dry 
ple of ithe prince that ſhall come #, ſhall deſtroy the ciry _— 


- »* 
= 
By ” »> ," 
- A oft< CAL 6 
As? ” > ” py « K " HS ” as 
> WA des _ C [zag on STE t4s NI 
. \____—_— - - FY ”«& _ - - od — - 
beer +6". p "emo > AX” eek 
4 , - Www", $ _ — 
wo oe > Re 
= x ' " _ % go - p 
wi £4 . «, — PR "_ pe ” - "y 


" * _ : 
= 
no Sw 


© Ring gigs... 
. ” 


> 
On. 
-  - po. w— 
. p a 5 —_—_ 
GAG : "fag: = RS 
_— [4 mo nd 
2069/9 4} - 
- vr = - 
= Fg=2 - 
>— ot je _— as. ION fs 
61 g Ertl T 
_— - 
- 


"> thi: ahh 
Pas 117 
oF f%s 


| d- £ ft 
e , ; 
__ 4. . os 
ITT, 155 
F. of BO 20 4435 
LAT. 
f 5:2 10%  ASFES | 
& EMS © +5 
+ 


Chap. 1X. 
aad the ſanctuary, aud the end thereol ſh. be 
| Or, it flood; and unto the end of the war || defolations are de- 
Jas ce Of termine te, 
off hy de- q f. e. After the fexen before, and after the ſixty two that fol- 
JOINTS, lowed them, which all make up fixty nine, called by the Angel teventy 
Weeks, though no Week more be deſcrived, becauic it makes up the 
Number a round Number, after the Fewiſn manner of Calculation, 
and there migic be fome Fragments in the particular reckoning, to 
znake up the Sum; or it might be finiſhed in the 70th Week, and 
that was enough to call it 70 Weeks, viz. 24+ 7 The Word 
7:52 tignifies cutting off, or cutting down as a Trec, //4. 44+ 
I 4. Fer. 10, 3» Secondly tis uled for cutting off by capital Pu- 
nithment, Exo./, 12. 15. and 30+ 32, 33. whether this be by the 
ſignal Hand of God, or by the Magiſtrate, for ſome hainons Ot- 
fence, Lev. 18. 29. and 20. 17. Pſal. 37. 34. This foreſhews that 
the Death of Chriſt ſhould be as of a condemned MalefaQtor ſentenced 
to Death, and that juſtly. So did the F-ws, Chriſt's Executioners, 
proclaim that he died for B7:ſphemy, anc that he was a deviliſh Impo- 
itor, Cc. Yea God himſelf charged Sin Upun him and the Cur{e, Iſa. 
53+ 4. 2 Cora. wit, Gal, 24.33 | J'S) Which being abrupt 15 va 
rioully ;endred, and read ; ſome referring it to Chrift, and ſome to 
the ivoplo,and others to both,and all with very probable Conjettures, 
Pile 22. 6, 7. Ii. 52. 2. 7. nor rokim:;, There was none to ſuccour 
him ; 6: that they wonld none of him for their Meſſiah; they ſet him 
at novghe and would not have him live, and therefore he would not 
own them for his Veople, but caft them off ; for thus dying is exprel- 
{ed in ſhort nor to be, 'Thus Enoch, Gen. 5.24. Foſeph, Gen. 42 36. 
and Kache?'s Children, Fer. 31. 15, Matth, 2. 17,13. But our Engliſh 
'Tranflation ſeems to hit the trucſt Senſe, i.e. 20t for himſelf. He was 1n- 
cent and guiltleſs ; he died for others, 'not for himſelf, but for our 
Sakes and for our Salvation. #t The Romans under the Condutt of Ti- 
tus Veſpaſianus. u God hath decreed to deſtroy that Place and People, 
by the Miſeries and Deſolations 07 War, 7, e. Sword, Famine, vick- 
nels, Scattering. All this is fignitic: by Skowzmorp: allo the protaning 
of the Temple by Idels, which are called Abomznations that make de- 
ſolate 3 this was done by the Grecks and Jews before, and the Romans 
at their Seige and after. Queſt, But fume will query, why the Angel 
who was ſent to comfort Danzel, ſhould inſert here this tragical Butt- 
nels of Deſtruction and Deſolation, being beyond the Space of ſeventy 
Weeks? Arſw. 1, That Dantel might be informed of the Judgments 
of God upon that Place and People, and the Reaſons of it, viz. their 
rejefting and killing Chriſt, 2. That the Spirtt of God's People 
ſhould not fail, wheu theſe Tragedies were acted, being foretold 3 
thereby they were prepared and fortified againſt it, and ro expett it, 
and not to be ſurprized by it when it came, 

27 And he x ſhall confirm the covenant y with 
ire week, Many & || for one week a - and in the midſt of the 
{ Or,zh Week he ſhall cauſe the ſacrifice and the oblation to 
the avoni-ceaſe b, and || for the overſpreading of * abominati- 
able ar- ons he ſhall make zt deſolate c, even until the conſun- 
77% mation, and that determined ſhall be poured upon the 


>* 
"3-24 deſolate d. 5 
514.Luk, X This| He] is not Titus making truce with the Fews, which he did 
21. 26, Bot, though he indeavoured to perfwade them that he might ſpare 
them. 1 ſay then with Graſer, Mede, and others, that this [ Ze] is 
the Meſſich, and the Covenant he confirms is the New Teſtament or 
Covenant, called ther-'ore the Covenant of the People, J/a. 42. E. 
and 49. $. and He 1s called the Angel of the Covenant, Mal. 3. 
I. and the Surety or the Covenant , Zeb. 7. 22. and the anti- 
ent Rabbins called the Meſ:45 D'VA UN a middle Man, or mid- 
dle Man between two, Queſt, How did Chrift confirm the Co- 
venant ? Anſw. 1. By Teſtimony, (1) Of Angels, Luk.2.10. Manh. 
25. 2. (2.) Fobn Baptiſt. (3.) Of the Wiſe-men. (4.) By the 
Saints then living, Luk, 1.2, (5+) Moſes and Elias, Mat. 17. 3. (6.) 
Pkarijces, as Nicodeinus, Joh. 3.2: (7+) The Devels that conteſt him. 
2. By his Preaching. 3. By Signs and Wonders. 4. By his holy 
Life. 5. By his Returrection and Aſcenſion. 6. By his Death and 
Blood ſhed, » Va He ſhall corroborate it, as if it began before his 
coming to fail and be invalid. x Noting hereby the paucity of the 
Jewiſh Church and Nation, compared with the great Increaſe and En- 
largement by believing Gentiles throughout all Nations and Ages of 
the World, Jſa. 11. 9+. aid 49. 6. and 53. Ll, 12. and 54. 2, 3. 
Mark. 16. 15. Act. 13. 45. q. d, With many Fews firſt and laſt, and 
with many more of the Nations, yea with the many- whom the Rab- 
bins and Pharijees deſpile as the Rabble, the common People, 1/2. 42. 
2. Matth, 21. 31. Foh. 7. 48, 49. 1 Cor. 1. 26, 27. @ Many were con- 
verted to the Chriſtian. Faith, b>th Jews and Gentiles, within the 
Compatls of this laſt Week. 5 Zebach and Mincha, bloody and un- 
bloody Sacritices, he ſhail cauſe to ceale, 7. e. all the Jewiſh Rites, 
and Levitical Ccremonious Worſhip, viz. by the burning of the Tem- 
ple, before the City was taken, for they were only to offer Sacrifice 
in the Temple, nor had they whecewithal in the Siege. Yet 15 there 
more in it than this, vzz. That the Lord Jelus by his Death, and by the 
Execution of his W:ath, did abrogate and pur an en to this lahori- 
ous Service, and made it to ceaſe tor ever. ©c For the Ig (as ſome 
render it) z.e, tor the maniiold and great Abominations, ſtretching,or 
as our Text hath it well, 09-2/preadzng. This Abomination was the &Ko- 
man Army with their Lagies, and with their ſuperſtitious Kites in ap- 
proaching, to beſtege, and 'ubdue any place. And this Prediction is 
cxecuted by Chriſt upoa them, Matti, 22. 7. when he 1s called a King 
tending forth his Armics, and deſtroying the Murderers, and burn: 
ns their City ; and their coming is Chriſt's coming, Mu. 3. 1, 2 
Foh, 21. 22. Fm. 5. 7. therefore its ſaid here, be fhall make it {-ſolate. 
4 Here al} tlis is made the i:ttect of God's Decree, and therefore irre- 
vocable. This Word Shomem notes that this People were bewitched, 
lottiſhly Supperſtitious, Wanderers, baniſhed, the Aſtoniſhment an 
Scorn of the World, all which did juſtly and dreadfully befal them, 
and they verify it to this Day. They that will curiouſly ſearch fur- 
ther into the ſeventy Weeks and other Numbers in Dant:1, and have 
leiſure and $kill, let them rcad Graferus, L' Empereur, Waſmuth, Meds, 
Wilt, Wichmanaus, Senftins, Runolius, Pererius, Derodon, Broughton, 
Lt-:ioh's, elvttus, CaioHas, Geiertts, 8&0, Iege Foſs Med. p. $61, &c 


|! Or, 7 


? » s 


DB ANTE L. 


with a 


and -Bail, p. 189, Vc. This Scripture ſhews the coming of the Mej. 
/izh fo clearly, his Sufferings, and the Wrath of God fo ſeverely Up- 
on the Fews for it, that it thoroughly confutes their Unbelicf, and 6,1. 
| Iy confirms our Faith in Jeſus Chriſt, 


CHAT. - 


Daniel humbling himſelf before God, ſeeth a viſion, x ——. bers af 
frizhted, us comforted by an Angel, who foretelleth whar would be{ 1 Li 
Fews, 10 14. hercat he us again troubled ; and (trengihene4 by 
the Angel, who foretelleth him, promiſing to ſhew him what 5 11,4 
in the (cripture of truth, 15 ———216 


L N the third year of Cyrus King of Perſia e, a thing 
was revealed unto Daniel f,, (whoſe name was calleg 
Belreſhazzar g) and the thing was true þ, but the ting 


had underſtanding of the viſion k. 
e This fell out in the 318 Year, which was the laſt Year of the 


| Kingdom of Perfia, but the third Year after his Seifure and Monzr. 


chy of Babylon; indeed it's ſaid Dan, 1. ult. that Dantzel continued tg 
the firſt Year of Cyrus, i, e. in his Place of Honour, but he lived much 
longer. f Revealed by an Angel from Heaven, not in a Dream, 
in any more obſcure and uncertain way, but plainly. This Chapter 
is but a general Preface to what is more particwarly declared in the 
next Chapter. g By this Name Daniel was famous among many Peg. 
ple, and they took notice of him by his honourable Place, Name an 
Prophecy. b Both in the matter, and that which was truly to come 
to paſs; not feigned, nor a bare Conjetture ; TR) it was Truh: 
7 7, e, For 300 Years ſpace, as was faid Dan. 8. 26. 0r to the end 
Antiochus his Perfecution, or of the World, Dan. 12. 2. &k And he 
underſtood the thing and the Viſion. This is doubled to beget the 
greater Credit, and aſſurance of the Truth of it+ 


weeks m. 

3 There are ſeveral Cauſes of Danie!'s Mourning, 
the Fews had Liberty to go out of Captivity, yet many of them ftzid 
ſtill.in Babylonwe 2, Becauſe when they were building the Tcmylz, 
Walls and City, they were greatly hindred and moleſted, Pz7.. y.,, 
3. Becauſe he foreſaw the many Calamities of the Fews that wu! 
befal them for their Sins, eſpecially in deſtroying the Meſſiuh, art 
rejeing his Goſpel, m He faſted and mourncd all that time, bothty 
declare his deep Senſe of thoſe Calamities enſuing, and to be in a bet 
ter Poſture to receive divine Impreſſions, which uſually God reveals 


to humble Souls, : 


till three whole weeks were fulfilled. 


7 Faſting and Feaſting are very inconſiſtent. Dentel at other tins 
lived very magnificently according to the Dignity of his Place; he 
had the beſt Bread, Fleſh, Wine, and anointing after the manner 
the Eaſt, all which he Jaid aſide, that by auſterity he might affiid ti 
Body, and quicken his Soul ſutably to the time of Facob's Trouble, anl 
to a true faſting Frame, 


4 And in the four and twentieth day of the fir 
month o, as I was by the ſide of the great River, which 
* Hiddekel p : 

'0 It was the Month Niſan, which is March, p This 77iddetel i 
Tigr#, Which was a great Branch of Euphrates ; the Prophets had mai 
of their Viſions by Rivers. | 

5 Then I lift up mine eyes and looked, and behold 4 
+a certain man y clothed in linen, whoſe loins mw!" 
girded with fine gold of Uphaz s - 


q He beheld wiſhly and with a compoſed Mind. 7 Which Ma 
ſome will have an Ange), either Gabriel, who appeared to him befor, 
or Michael chief among, the Angels, Fude g. or Archangel, who is met- 
tioned after. Or rather Chriſt, who was true Man. 1+ He appeati 
to Daniel m Royal and Prieſtly Robes, which was not proper ior a 
Angel. 2. He appeared in ſo great Brightneſs and Majeſty, whi 
made Dantel aſtonied, and laid him proſtrate. 3. Compare i 
place with Dan. 13. 6,7. and you find him the ſame as here,revealia; 
the Secrets of times, and of God's Providence towards his Chut, 
which is Chriſt.” s Sec Rev. I. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. where the Lo 
Jeſus Chriſt is. deſcribed as here in Dantel,and for the ſame end, Nv# 
he appeared thus (before his Incarnation} in the Old Teſtamei 5 
a Preludium of ir, as the beſc Expotitors grant it. By this appeati% 
the Lord Chriſt. held out clearly his three Offices of King, Prieif 2: 
Prophet. 'Fhe girding of Loins ſignifies his readineſs to obey 
Commands, and do the Work of his Father ; beſides the Ornas 
ot the curious golden Girdle. 


6 His body alſo was like the beryl t, and his fac : 


the appearance of lightning #«, and his eyes as Jams | 
fire x, and his arms and his feet like in colour to p% 
ſhed braſs y, and the * voice of his words like the 
of a multitude =. 

et Which iz of a Sea colour. Others tranſlate | 
others the Jacinth, the Word in the Text is WW N72 1ike . 

Eo X 61D" 2M and 1K 
this is a Colour like the Sea. The Bery], which is Azure, and w 
the Heavens, thew Chriſt to be immortal and glorious, FE 
from Heaven, heavenly, 1 Cor. 15. 47, See Fyel, 1. 16. and 19.6 
and 28. 12. « Noting that he comes quickly to ſuccour 15 wy” 
and terrify his Enemies, Marth, 24, 27. and 28. 3. AV. 4+ 5* -orit 
Eyes like Lamps of Fire, fignify Omniſcience, Splendor anc 1 w - 
Chriſt. » This notes his incredible Power and $wittnels to 0h 
to deſtroy invincibly. +2 By this the Lord Chriit is d.ftinghunnen. 
C:eatures, who'c mes with a Noile and a Sourd, to ſhow fe? 
nd Terroc of his Preſence. And thu tis romency 1 


itthe Chi79%9 


OT _ 
the 1) 


L-1 xy* 
ic lis 


3 I eat no + pleaſant bread, neither came fleſh no! 
wine in my mouth «, neither did I anoint my felt at all; 


appointed was + long z, and he underſtood the thing, ang +: 
g! 


2 In thoſe days I Daniel was mourning 1 three + ful 


'Y 


I. Becauſe thy * 


Chay, 


ant Pray: 
us 1h Pe 


PUICHES Pr 
Fg Gatr 
at Cre G 
5, by dou! 
OUT mea; 
UNg the 
Cs, atte 
T4 Now 
il thy 
P '9r 1.4 
FO! I} 


_— - I 8. 9.77 


> 


_z—_ 


1 t0 
het- 
eas 


nor! 
| al, Fn 


times 
- be 
er 0f 
A tis 
2, and 


firſ 


ich is 
Li 


bel 
| mat 


21d 4, 
wile 


>< Ma 
before, 
15 met 
D eared 
fOr at] 
', whic: 
re 
-yealing 
'# butt, 
1e Loc 
1, No# 
INE. # 
DEALac 
C ieil 27 
obey tix 
cnames 


face ® 
mp5 © 
[0 por 


ap . 


uherecd ih be 
4, Als 2: 2. ©, an(l 1.4 ; | 
of Moſes, Iſaiah, Feremiah and the Apoſtles.  Itneres allo ths mig] 
Power of Chritt fo tear. | __ 


. - AndI Daniel 


4 


quaking 
ſelves. 4 
a So lube 24. 16. Att, 9. 7. 


0 

m—_ he ſtrengthen them 
e ren a 5 

ys G6 > n them ; and thereby-the. Truth and Certainty 


che Viſion, by hearing iuch a Sound tho they ſaw 1t not, Aits g, 7, 


+8 Therefore I ,was left, alone , and ſaw this great 
viſion þ, and there remained. no ſtrength in me c : for my |} 


| * comelineſs was turned in.me into corruption d, agd 


q i | 
retained ng ſtrength. 12:t? Las 


Terror and Confternation. | 7. ; Atl os 
9. Yet heard-1, the voice. of. his words e ;, and when 


© heard the voice of his words; then was I in a'deep ſleep. 

" on my face, iand my- face | toward the ground f. 
; rerthet Here was Power in Weak- 
and yet this added to his Fear and Frailty. _f As one that 
one that ſlimbred, and as one that adored the 


* *e Nevertheleſs he made me to hear:.; 
£5 nels, tl -4 
ſwounded, or -as .0ne 
| Ground. 


10 | And 


hands FP LY Ef f 
.£ What a poor 
Hand of God: - 
8. 16.17. 7; 
11, And he ſaid unto 


ood trembling z.. TH4gs 226 LETT 
b Thus the Lord moulds and models us :s Clay in his Hands to re- 
eive his Impreſſions, We are not fit for any great thing till we are 
baſed, and yet when we are vileſt in our own Eyes, 'we are moſt 
pretious in God's Eyes. - - Underſtand-she words thar J ſpeak to thee, and 
ard upright. . Thus $443 when he was:ftruck down; and ſtruck blind, 
hen he received his, Call and Commiſſion to be an Apoſtle, and to 
now the Myſtery. of. Chrift ; ſee. Zab. 3. 16. # The Lord doth not 
tore at once his Servants from. their Frailties, that they, by gradual 
omforts, may. prize, every drop.of Mercy, being not quickened at 
nce when they: are, mortified, but may ;be admoniſhed by the Re- 
tains of Fears and Frailtiez, to. keep, their Hearts humble, . 
'12 Thea ſaid heunto me; Fear not, Daniel: for from 
he firſt day & that thou didft ſer thine heart to under- 
and, ant to chaſten thy ſc1f before thy God, thy. words 
ere heard, and I am come for thy words. 
k'1: The Lord is quick in hearing the fervent Prayer of an humble 
ul, tho' he doth not preſently let them know it. © God heard the 
| day, tho he ſent not his Angel to tell Daniel of it till three Weeks 
&r. 2. A Soul that would obtain greatthings from God by Prayer, 
uſt be ſolemn and fervent in ſeeking God. 3. The fervent and con- 
ant Prayers of the Sain s, make God to ſend from Heaven and ſave. 
us in Pexer”'s ce, As 12.5 6 7, to ver. 15, and here in Daniel's, 


13 But the Prince of the Kingdom of Perſia withſtood | 


one and twenty days /: but lo, Michael \| one of the 
ief Princes came to help me 2, and I remained there 
ch the Kings of Perſia. '. 1 I 
F This place hath ſome Difficulty, therefore variouſly expounded. 
me expound it of Earthly Princes,ſome of Angels, and among them 
e will have good Angels meant, who they ſay have the Patronage 
' the Kingdoms-and Provinces of the Earth ; but who can imagine 
at good Angels ſhould quarrel one with the other ? Therefore ſay 
hers, they are bad Angels that oppoſe the People of God, and their 
liverance, ſeeking rather their Ruine, as Michaet and the Devil 
ove, ev, 12. 7. now ſometimes God permits Satan to:do much 
Way. But I judge þy the Prince of Perſez is meant Cambyſes who | 
5s an Enemy tothe Fews, and hindred the building of the Temple. 
ow he coutt not” properly retift the Angel, bur figuratively he did. 
gels Power is not unlimited, but bounded by © eommiſſton and TIn- 
10ns from” God. Therefore God ſuffered the wicked Counſels of 
byſes to take place a while ; but Damel by his Prayers,and the An- 
LDy his Power: oyercame him at haft : And this very thing laid a 
undation of the Perfian Monarchy's Ruine, ver. 20. and-doubtleſs 
King wasſtirced-pp to his evil Machinations agaigft the People 
ood, by the, Prince of the Powers. of Darknels, that ruleth ja the 
dren of Diſobedience, Epheſ. 2. 2. m This we take to be Chriſt, 
115 Name itgnifies, Who u like Ged, 2. He's the firſt int Dignity 
*© all th? Angels, #eb. 1.4, 5,6, 7, &c. called Archangel, and the 
MIcres Prince, ver. 21, 3+ The chict Champion of his Charch, 
this: Gavricl, not as his Fellow, but: as his General. Thus we ſee 
"rCae God takes of his Church's Safety againſt their. potent Ene- 
by vouvling their Succours, ( when he could do is it he pleaſed 
"© Means } thereby to conliwt, his own Glory in the World by 
| -_, the Counſels, and breaking- the Powers of the mightic!t 
"15, Wer he had given them Rope todo their worlt, 
1.4 Now | am come to make thee' underſtand what ſhall 
{4 Wy people in the latter days # : far yet the viiion 


K iOr many 
FP IF 1a;72) Uays, 


D .4NEA£ 


ſore the Revelation cf great things, Exch. 1.24. and 43. 
K-v. 1.10, 15, Anil 14. 2+ and 15. 1, By the-Example 


alone ſaw the Viſion ; for the Men 
that were with me ſaw not the Viſton @ : but a great 
fell upon. them, ſo that they fied ro hide them- 


I. The Lor hereby ſhews his Power 
ver our Senſes, both outwardand inward, in a igna}- diſtinguiſhing 
2. The weakneſs of Mortals to 'ee or - hear. Heavenly Things, 
3. Their flying and quaking argued the 


þ Great in the Kppearance,aud great in the great things revealed. 
c:By the recoiling.of his Spirits jnward: | - 4 His Colour was changed | 
| ;mo Paleneſs, as-one that is faint, and pining into. a Conſumption by. 


-behold., *!/an. hand touched: me, which 
+ ſet me upon my knees, and «po the palms of my 


Worm. is Man to cruſh, or to raiſe by the mighty 
Thus dealt the Angel Gabriel with him. before, chap. 


me, O Danniel, * -þ+ a Man 
greatly beloved þ, underſtand the words thar 1 ſpeak un- |: 
Ito thee, and | ſtand vprighr - for unto thee am I now 
Went, And 'when he had ſpoken this word 'unto me, I 


Chap, X.” 


# Now at laſt with much ado, afrer the Conteſt is over, I am 
come to ative thee underitanding torching a}t-che Purpoſes and Provi- 
od relating to his Church, This made amends tor the 


44 S 


dences oft G 
d-lay ; this was the comfortable EF#ea of effectual fervent Prater, 
cth13 was God's overflowing Kindneis to his Servant Dante!, to certify 
him by fo honourable a Meſſenger as this, that God would not only 
give him the knowledge ot the preſent Times and Diſpenſations to- 
\y ares I11> Clurch and their Enemies, but for a lone time after, even 
490 Years, to the coming of the Meſſi, as he did to David, 2 Sam. 
7+ 159. , By which we'learn this ſolemn Truth; that God will never 
leave himſelf without witneſs to his People ; but in the wort of 
times bo will afford them ſufficient Diſcoveries of his Care of ther: 

as he did by this Prophecy in thoſe dark days. : 


15 And when: he had ſpoken ſuch words unto me, 


ol 
1 ſet my face towards the ground, and I- became 
dumb 0, 


ty 


— 
& = "= Bs ” "8... IE = FN 
er EIT TT ULTIES pron 


My > gn - I47KEKK 
—_  ——_ _ _ wy mY _ — -— OS 
- c— = - <2, = - —— wer 

» po Yi. OW mo Ling < = 

£ % ve on eb "4 

= Six _—_— - 

yo tend © AO) <nes 

i Ads 5 


ID 
| 0 


* I. 2923 Woes, "T4 


— 


th _— Seat ma—g 
do > OL —_———. 
eng 

tbe 


* 
_ 


+ SE 7” = 
- 7 ad > - 
I. Eat - 
» nM 02 
art x SE + 5290-6 2 ar A P bo 6 - 5:J 
h C YU Wa T —w 
p* = —— « _— a ide £3 


* 
VT 
- _— — 
T De AE OR 
ty Fate 
a ps = 


Pet 


of 
2 , 


mY = L L3IS4 


moe nb, 
; « 


+ . 
— 
$44 ” 


! . 0 He was not yet quite free .of all .his ;Fear, of which we heard 
Ver. 9. Happily this prefled him down the more, when he conſidered 
he Majeſty of the Angel, the Greatneſs of. the Viſion, and his own 94: (1 i STS 
Frailty”: -this tranfported him with Afſtoniſhment ; and above all, that i. 58. 8 
- ſaw fo much of God'in it, in his Fayour to him, and his poor *l ou; 
_ | - | 


|, 16. And behold, oxelike the ſimilitude of the Sons p of 
Men teuched my lips - then 1 opened my mouth q, and 
ſpake, and ſaid unto him that ſtood before me, O my lord, 
by the viſion my ſorrows were'turned upon ine, and I 
have retained no ſtrength r. G WS 
, Þ An Angel in the ſhape of a Man, and no other but Jeſus Chriſt 
as before; he that had humbled him,now helped and encouraged bim. 
q Which cannot be till the Lord couch our Lips ſal. 51. 15. Jſa. 6, 
$, 6, 7. Fer, 1.9. 7 Tho the Angel appeared to. him, and ſpake to 


28 a Man, yet could not Danzel bear his Preſence without ſome 


+ 17 For how can || the ſervant of this my Lord talk || Or, thi 
with this my Lord s ? for as for me, ſtraightway there re- / _ of 
mained no ſtrength in-me, neither is there breath left in 7 © 

me, AS | 
s The Condition ofthe Church under the Goſpel is a better Dif- 
peniation than the.Law:and the Prophets, when God ſpake often by 
Angels, but now by his Son, and that not in - Angelical Shape and 
Splendor, but. as a mean Man, in a meek and humble Garb, and moſt 


I 


I 


, .48,,Then there. came again and touched me oze like the 
appearance of a Man, and he ſtrengthened me t, 

© Daniel needed a ſecond Touch and another word of Encourage- 
ment before he could hear, and bear the Angel's Words as to the Vi- 
| jo and Prophecy z and-now being fortified by degrees, he hath got 
' OUrage., 


' 19 And ſaid, * O Man greatly beloved, fear not , * Ver. 11, 
peace be unto thee, be ſtrong, yea, be ſtrong x. And 

when he had ſpoken unto me, I was ſtrengthened, and ' 

ſaid, Let my Lord ſpeak ; for thou baft ſtrengthened 

me. 

u The Lord is gracious and compaſſionate towards his Saints under 
their Infirmities, 7/al. 103. 13, 14. x And this tender Carriage to- 
wards him, was a token for good to him and his People, that the 
Lord would be propi:ious to them. 


20 Then ſaid he, Knoweſt thou wherefore I come unto 
thee y? and now will I return to fight with the Prince of 
Perfiaz - and when I am gone forth, lo, the Prince of 
Grecia ſhall come. ; 
» i.e, By what I have ſaid already, and what T have further to tell 

thee upon thy Prayers which God hath accepted, and hath given me 

in charge to reveal to thee as followeth to the end. x Cyrus, or Cam« 

byſes, who by their Counſels and Captains hinder the Work of God, 

and to bring the Prince of Greece upon him, viz. Alexander the Great, 

who utterly ruined the Perfizn Monarchy ;- which is uſhered with the 

word Lo, becan(e it was a wonder that the Prince of Greece with 

30000 Men ſhould do it. T hus the Lord ſets and diſpoſeth the Fates 

of Empires, and changeth them as he liſts ; eſpecially in his Church's 

Quarrel. | | 

* 21 But I will ſhew thee that which #5 noted in the 
Scripture of truth a- and there s none that  holdeth + Heb, 
with me in theſe things but Michael your Prince b. ftrenzthen. 
'4 7.e, In the pcremptory Decree and Purpoſe of God, more au- erh himſelf 
thentick and unalterable than the Laws of the Medes and Perþans : 

How God hath appointed to deliver the Fews from the Perſians by the 

Greeks ; and from the Greeks by the Maccabees, eſpecially the Seleucids 

and Lagids z and how the Kom4ins ſhould come after, and plague the 

Pcople of God Jong, both by the perſecuting Emperors, and by A4n1- 

ctrif, and how that allo ſhould have an end, 6 Jeſys Chriſt alone is 

the Champion, and Prote&tor of his Church, and that all-lutfcient, 

when all the Princes af the Earth beſides deſerted or oppoſed it. For 

it cannot be meant of Angels in any found ſenle, as Poprſp Interpreters 

would have it, thereby to countenance their Angei-worſpip 5 for can we 

imaginz upn rational and orthodox Principles, that the Angels of 

Heaven ſhould be divided into Parties, aud but two of them mind 

che Cauſe of the Church of God, with other like Abſurdities, which 
accompany the Popiſh Senſe that Mellenare, 4 Lapide, &c, tairen upon 

£415 SLF:PLUICs 


H 


PAS; 


"A t 
Fe 
v 


CHAP. 


11.1 s 
ol. 14, 


l —_ 
: an _ " = 
d G ef - - \ n po - 
£ i —_ es. 4 . 
- —— _ a " . gy oo &- 2.4 
_ 0 Io ——_ _— vw muy s - —_ 4 ; S 
©}. "em 4 . 
*" KC ' p s 
—— — WA IP > Se oy Rn. — . 
a revis o_ wh. 3% 


pr i 3 a7 
me of. | ' wu 


SITS 
p3 


* . my 
7% IG 


Chap. 1X. DAN 


|, Or, # flood; and unto the end of the war || deſolations are de- 
ſhall 9e Ut termined 7, 
of -roi q i. e. After the ſeven before, and after the ſixty two that fol- 
JOIHOMS, Jowed them, which all make up fixty nine, called by the Angel teventy 
\Weeks, though no Week more be deſcriaed, becauic it makes up the. 
Number a round Number, after the Fewiſy manner of Calculation, 
ard there migic be ſome Fragments in the particular reckoning, to 
znake up the Sum; or it might be finiſhed in the 70th Week, and 
that was enough to call it Jo Weeks, wiz. 244 7 The Word 
7:52 fignifies cutting off, or cutting down as a IreC, //4. 44+ 
I 4. Fer. 10, 3» Sccondly tis uled for cutting off by capital Pu- 
nithmenr, Exo/. 12. 15. and 30. 32, 38. whether this be by the 
ſignal Hand of God, or by the Magiſtrate, for ſome hainons Ot- 
fence, Lev. 19. 29. and 20. 17. Pſdl. 37. 34+ This foreſhews that 
the Death of Chriſt hould beas of a cond-mned Malefattor ſentenced 
$1'] to Death, and that juſtly, So did the Fews, Chriſt's Executioners, 
| proclaim that he died for B7z/phemy, anc that he was a deviliſh Impo- 
itor, Cc. Yea God himſelf charged Sin upun him and the Cur{e, Iſa. 
53+ 4+ 2 Cor. wit, Gal, 24.32 J'S) Which being abrupt 15 va 
rioully ;endred, and read ; ſome referring it to Chrift, and ſome to 
the iconle,and others to both,and all with very probable Conjectures, 
Pile 2:. 6,7. Ia. 55. 3. tt. not tokim:; There was none to ſuccour 
him ; 6: rhat they wonld none of him for their Meſſiah; they ſet him 
at nought and would not have him live, and therefore he would not 
Ki own them for his People, but caft them off ; for thus dying is exprel- 
\bh {ed in ſhort nor to be, "Thus Enoch, Gen. 5. 24. Foſeph, Gen. 42 36. 
and Aache!s Children, Fer. 31. 15, Math, 2. 17,18. But our Engliſh 
Tranſlation ſeems to hit the trucſt Senſe, i- e. not for himſelf. He was ins 
cent and guiltleſs ; he died for others, not for himſelf, but for our 
Sakes and for our Salvation. t The Romans under the Condutt of Tj- 
tus Veſpaſianus. u God hath decreed to deſtroy that Place and People, 
by the Miſeries and Deſolations 07 War, 7. e. Sword, Famine, Sick- 
nels, Scattering. All this is figniticd by Skowa2moth: allo the protaning 
of the Temple by Idcels, which are called Abomzmations that make de- 
ſolate 3 this was done by the Grecks and Jews before, and the Komans 
at their Seige and after. Queſt, Bur ſome will query, why the Angel 
who was ſent to comfort Dantel, ſhould inſert here this tragical Butt- 
.ncls of Deſtruction and Deſolation, being beyond the Space of ſeventy 
Weeks? Arſw. 1, That Daniel might be informed of the Judgments 
of God upon that Place and People, and the Reaſons of it, viz. their 
rejecting and killing Chriſt, 2. That the Spirtt of God's People 
ſhould not fail, wheu theſe Tragedies were acted, being foretold ; 
thereby they were prepared and fortified againſt it, and ro expett it, 
and not to be ſurprized by it when it came. 
27 And he x ſhall: conirm the covenant y with 
ire week, IMAny & || for one week a : and in the midſt of the 
ll] '{ Or,ozh Week he ſhall cauſe the ſacrifice and the oblation to 
hy: the abomi-ceaſe b, and || for the overſpreading of * abominati- 
zable ar- ons he ſhall make it deſolate c, even until the conſum- 
' In7% mation, and that determined ſhall be poured upon the 


>* 
: Mat-21- Jeſolate d. 
5, Mar, My Il _ : ( Cs a ns 
214. Luk, * This [ Ze] is not Titus making truce with the Fews, which he did 
27. 20, Bot, though he indeavoured to perſwade them that he might ſpare 
them. 1 ſay then with Graſer, Mede, and others, that this [ Ze] is 
the Meſſtzh, and the Covenant he confirms is the New Teſtament or 
Covenant, called ther2'ore the Covenant of the People, J/a.- 42. E. 
and 49. $. and He 1s called the Angel of the Covenant, Ma. 3. 
I. and the Surety or the Covenant , Zeb. 7. 22. and the anti- 
ent Rabbins called the Meſ:45 D'I'A UN a middle Man, or mid- 
dle Man between two, Queſt, How did Chrift confirm the Co- 
venant ? Anſw. 1. By Teſtimony, (1) Of Angels, Luk.2.10. Marth. 
28. 2. (2.) Foba Baptiſt. (3.) Of the Wiſe-men, (4.) By the 
Saints then living, Luk, 1.2, (5+) Moſes and Elias, Mat. 17. 3. (6) 
PFarijces, as Nicodemus, Joh. 3.2: (7+) The Devels that conteſt him. 
2. By his Preaching. 3. By Signs and Wonders. 4. By his holy 
Life, 5. By his Relurrection and Aſcenſion. 6. By his Death and 
Blood ſhed, » V2 He ſhall corroborate it, as if it began before his 
coming to fail and be invalid. x Noting hereby the paucity of the 
Jewiſh Church and Nation, compared with the great Increaſe and En- 
largement by believing Gentiles throughout all Nations and Ages of 
the World, J/a. 11. 9. and 49. 6. and 53. 11, 12. and 54. 2, 3. 
Mark. 16. 15. Ad. 13. 45. q. d, With many Fews firſt and laft, and 
with many more of the Nations, yea with the many whom the Rab- 
bins and Pharijees deſpile as the Rabble, the common People, 1/2. 42. 
2. Matth, 21, 31. Foh. 7. 48, 49. 1 Cor. 1. 26, 27. 4 Many were con- 
verted to the Chriſtian Faith, b>th Jews and Gentiles, within the 
Compatls of this laſt Week. © Zebach and Mzncha, bloody and un- 
bloody Sacritices, he ſhall caaſe to ceale, 7. e, all the Jewiſh Rites, 
and Levitical Ccremonious Worſhip, v7z. -by the burning of the Tem- 
ple, before the City was Taken, for they were only to offer Sacrifice 
| in the Temple, nor had they whecewithal in the Siege. Yet 1s there 
'7'Y more in it than this, v7. That the Lord Jelus by his Death, and by the 
1418 Execution of his W:ath, did abrogate and pur an end to this lahori- 
C | ous Service, and made it to ceaſe tor ever. c For the Ing (as ſome 
q | render it) z.e, tor the maniiold and great Abominations, ſtretchizp,or 
as our Text hath it well, ov-1/preading. This Abomination was the &o- 
man Army with their tagles, and with their ſuperſtitious Kites in ap- 
proaching to beſtege, and !ubdue any place. And this Prediction is 
409 cxecuted by Chriſt upon them, Matti, 22. 7. when he 1s called a King 
141 tending forth his Armics, and deftroying the viurderers, and- burn: 
ay | ns their City ; and their coming is Chriſt's coming, Mz. 3. 1, 2 
be Fob. 21. 22. Fm. 5. 7. theretore it's ſaid here, be fhall make ir {:ſolate. 
4 Here al} this is made the i:ftect of God's Decree, and therefore irre- 
vocable. This Word Shomem notes that this People were bewitched, 
{ottiſhly Supperſtitious, Wanderers, baniſhed, the Aſtoniſhment an! 
Scorn of the World, all which di4 juſtly and dreadfully befal them, 
'W and they verify it to this Day. They that will curiouſly ſearch fur- 
L | ther into the ſeventy Weeks and other Numbers in Dani-1, and have 
F leiſure and skill, let them rcad Graſerus, L' Empereur, Waſmuth, Meds, 
Wilt, Wichmannus, Sanftins, Runolus, Pererius, Derodon, Broughton, 


Lt-c1's, Helvirtis, Ca.0s, Gierns, Ko I2&e Fo, Med. Þ- $61, Sc. 


» | 


|! Or, in 


and the ſanctuary, and the end thereof /hill be with a 


2 2 9 Chap, } 


and Bail, p. 189, &c. Thus Scripture ſhews the coming of the Me;. 


| fk lo clearly, his Sufferings, and the Wrath of God fo ſeverely uy. 
on the Fews for it, that it thoroughly contutes their Unbelief, and 11. 
ly confirms our Faith in Jeſus Chriſt, 


CHAT: A: 


Daniel humbling himſelf before God, ſeeth a wifion, x ——9. beirg x. 
frizhted, 1s comforted by an Angel, who foretelleth what would bet; b. 
Fews, LO 14. hercat he ws again troubled : and (trengihenes by 
the Angel, who foretelleth him, promiſing to ſhew kim what i vere 
in the ſcripture of truth, 15 ———216 


I N the third year of Cyrus King of Perſia e, a thing 

was revealed unto Daniel f,, (whoſe name was calleq 
Belreſhazzar g) and the thing was true þ, but the time 
appointed was Þ long z, and he underſtood the thing, ang +: 


5 29.044 


had underſtanding of the viſion k. a! 

| © This fell out in the 318 Year, which was the laſt Year of the 2 
Kingdom of Perfia, but the third Year after his Seifure and Monar. ak 
chy of Babylon; indeed it's ſaid Dan, 1. ult. that Dantel continued tg * 
the firſt Year of Cyrus, i, e. in his Place of Honour, but he lived mych T 

longer. f Revealed by an Angel from Heaven, not in a Dream, gr 

in any more obſcure and uncertain way, but plainly. This Chapter he 
is but a general Preface to what is more particularly declared in the Wor 
next Chapter. g By this Name Daniel was famous among many Peg. 8 
ple, and they took notice of him by his honourable Place, Name an{ c 
Prophecy. . b Both in the matter, and that which was truly to cone os 
to paſs; not feigned, nor a bare Conjetture , TAR) jt was Tryj: Fu 
Z 7.e, For 300 Years ſpace, as was ſaid Dan. 8. 26. 0r to the end 1 
Antiochus his Perfecution, or of the World, Dan. 12. 2, k And he 4. { 
underſtood the thing and the Viſion. This is doubled to beget the i 
greater Credit, and aſſurance of the Truth of it+ han 
2 In thoſe days I Daniel was mourning I three + ful? BY 
weeks mM. ; 8: 16 
1 There are ſeyeral Cauſes of Danie!'s Mourning. 1. Becauſe th © | 
the Fews-had Liberty to go out of Captivity, yet many of them fil : 
ſtillin Babylon. 2, Becauſe when they were building the Tcmyle SD 
Ot 


Walls and City, they were greatly hindred and moleſted, Pxr. 4, 
3. Becauſe he foreſaw the many Calamities of the Fews that woult 
befal them for their Sins, eſpecially in deſtroying the Meſſ5ah, ant 
rejeing his Goſpel, m He faſted and mourncd all that time, both ty 
declare his deep Senſe of thoſe Calamities enſuing, and to be in abt 
ter Poſture to receive divine Impreſſions, which uſually God reyes 
to humble Souls, | 

3 I eat no + pleaſant bread, neither came fleſh nxt 
wine in my mouth «, neither did I anoint my {elf at all; 
till three whole weeks were fulfilled. | 


2 Faſting and Feaſting are very inconſiſtent. D#niel at other tins 
lived very magnificently according to the Dignity of his Place; te 


Dretion: 
Land ups 
'hen h 
now th 
eftore : 
omfore 
nce wh 


had the beft Bread, Fleſh, Wine, and anointing after the manner ans. of 
the Eaſt, all which he Jaid afide, that by aufterity he might aid hi 12 ] 
Body, and quicken his Soul ſutably to the time of Facob's Trouble, al he firſ] 


to a true faſting Frame, 

4 And in the four and twentieth day of the fil 
month o, as I was by the ſide of the great River, whichs 
* Hiddekel p : 


0 It was the Month Niſun, which is March. p This 7iddetel ws day, t 
Tigr#, Which was a great Branch of Euphrates ; the Prophets had mai 2 
of their Viſions by Rivers, uſt be ſol 


5 Then I lift up mine eyes and looked, and behold h, 
a certain man y clothed in linen, whoſe loins ne! 
girded with fine gold of Uphaz s - 


q He beheld wiſhly and with a compoſed Mind. »7 Which Ma 
ſome will have an Ange), either Gabriel, who appeared to him befor, 
or Michael chief among the Angels, Fude g. or Archangel, who is met 
tioned after. Or rather Chriſt, who was true Man. 1+ He appeatd 
to Dantel m Royal and Prieftly Robes, which was not proper 107 a 
Angel. 2. He appeared in ſo great Brightneſs and Majeſty, wh 
made Daniel aſtonied, and laid him proſtrate. 3. Compare tu 
place with Dan. 12. 6,7. and you find him the ſame as here,revealls 
the Secrets of times, and of God's Providence towards his Chut, 
which is Chriſt. $s Sec Rev. 1. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. where the Lo 
Jeſus Chriſt is deſcribed as here in Daniel,and for the ſame end, N# 
he appeared thus (before his Incarnation} in the Old Teſtamei 
a Preludium of ir, as the beſc Expolitors grant it. By this appearit” 
the Lord Chriſt. held out clearly his three Offices of King, Prieit 2: 
Prophet. 'Fhe girding of Loins ſignifies his readineſs to obey 
Commands, and do the Work of his Father H beſides the Ornames 
ot the curious golden Girdle., 


ove, Re U, 
Way, B 
> an Enem 
WW he con} 
gels Powe 

l0ns fro 
byſes ko t; 
by his Pot 


6 His body alſo was like the beryl t, and his fac ® 


*g. © . © ne undati 
the appearance of lightning #«, and his eyes as Jamps * pie 


fire x, and his arms and his feet like in colour to Þ2” log, 5... 
ſhed braſs y, and the * voice of his words like the 9 Wild. n gf p 
His Name 


of a multitude =, 
rt Which is of a Sea colour. Others tranſlate ittiie Core 
others the Jacinth, the Word in the Text is WWNNN Jike 146 bw 
WE - ' Nb and like 
this is a Colour like the Sea, The Bery), Which is Azure, aad ot 
the Heavens, ſhew Chriſt to be immortal and glorious, ©- 7 


"call the 
LOrcres Pri 
Fg Gabri 
% Car e Gd 
"297 dout 


© To 
(31864 


from Heaven, heavenly, i Cor. 15. 47, CC Ezek, 1, I 6. - : ont "OUT mean 
and 28. 13, u« Noting that he comes quickly ro IUccout - Wng the 


and terrify his Enemies, Marth. 24. 27. and 23, 3, MeV 4. 5r MICS, afte 
Eyes like Lamps of Fire, fignify Omniſcience, Splendor anc Long \ or 
Chriſt. » This notes his incredible Power and Swittnels fo 607? | 


i; Now 
ul thy 


to deſtroy invincibly. + By this the Lord Chrilt is dftinguunnee. bs £, 

Creatures, who ccmes with a Noile and a Sourd, to ſhow 372, \, I maz 
x7 { p m - 8 Y | ha i 34-7 2277 ' bu \ 4 " fl} 

Jeur ani Terror of hi: Preſence. And thu ©: Urcwvnc: & F*3 oh 


DANIEL Chap. 


# Now at laſt with much ado, afrer the Conteſt iz over, I am 
come to 21ive thee underitanding rouching a}t.che Purpoſes and Provi- 
dences of: God relating to his Church, This made amends tor the 
d-lay ; this was the comfortable EfFec of effetual fervent Praier, 
ch1z was God's overflowing Kindnelis to his Servant Dante!, to certify 
him by fo honourable a Meſſenger as this, that God would not only 
give him the knowledge ot the preſent Times and Diſpenſations to- 
wards liz Cliurch and their Enemies, but for a long time after, even 
490 Year>, to the coining of the Meſſi, as he did to David, 2 Sam. 
7+ 19. , By which we-learn this ſolemn Truth, that God will never 
1guil leave himſelf without witneſs to his People ; but in the wort of 
way. 2. The weakneſs of Mortals t0 'ce or . hear. Heavenly [hings, | times he will atford them ſufficient Diſcoveries of his Care of cher, 


unleſs he ſtrengthen them. 3; — cw _— argued _ as he did by this Prophecy in thoſe dark days. | 
r of God upon them ; and thereby-the. Iruth and Certainty 0! . 

te Viſion, by hezring iuchia Sound tho they ſaw 1 not, As g. 7, 8 ſet wg May Feder > ; pune ge) fe ns 

-$ Therefore I ,was left, alone, and faw this great |, "OR Z , 

yihon 6, and there remained no ſtrength 1n me C: for my |} _ 0 He was not yet quite free .of all .his -Fear, of which we keard 
j. | * comelineſs was turned in.me into corruption d, and I = 9. Happily this prefſed him down the more, whea he conſidered 

retained no ſtrength. wet 00% | | E193: 7 he Majeſty of the Angel, the Greatneſs of. the Viſion, and his own 
$. | þ Great in the Appearance,aud great in the great things revealed. Frailty”: this tranſported him with Aſtoniſhment ; and above all, that 

«By the recviling,of his Spirits inward: {- d His Colour was changed Rn fo much of God'it it, in his- Favour to him, and his poor 

into Paleneſs, as-One! that is faint, and pining 1nto. a Conſumption by. Church, _ 2:1 | ; 

Terror and Confternation. _ | 5. þ fi .- .__ ..{, - 16. And behold, oxelike the fimilitude of the Sons:p of 
Y ». Yet heard-1, the voice-of. his words e ;, and when I |\Men reuched my lips - then 1 opened my mouth 9; and 

heard the voice of his words;ithen was I in a'deep ſleep | ſpake, and ſaid unto him that ſtood before me, O my lord, 


® 
IS C 2 
Iw = T ” ” 
=> SO Ee 4% 


3 _ © -—=M4 =. 
rs nn ng - 
Pad x EG Com modi... x 

Is. y-- 4.” 


p!X. 


; 4 : T4 WT ITPey \ oe ; / 
ro in before the Revelation cf great things, Exe. 1. 24. and 42. 
_—_ xy 2, Rv. 1.10, 15, ant 14. 2. and 19. 1s": By the-Example 
of Moſes, Iſaiah, Feremith andthe Apoſtles. - It nores allo the mighty 
wer of Chritt to tear. RS. THY Y | 
wh” And 1 Daniel alone ſaw the Viſion ; for the Men 
chat were with me ſaw not the Viſion  : but a great 
guaking fell upon. them, ſo that they fled to hide rhem- 
{elves. LE 

a So lube 24. 16. Att, 9.7. Is The Lord hereby ſhews his Power 
ver our Senſes, both outward'and inward, in a hgnal- diſtinguiſhing 


III AS 


VA - 
—— FF. 
= OED 
A - Rr 


0 


" on my face, iand my-face || toward the ground f. by the viſion my ſorrows were turned upon ime, and I 
= eNeverthateſs he made me to hear: Here was Power in Weak- <0 
© neſs, and yet this added to his Fear' and Frailty. . f As one that 

ſvounded, or as [one that fltmbred, and as one that adored the 
| Ground. . | 76, 3”; | 71h hs 
' ,10 © And behold, *i/an. hand touched me, which 
# ſet me upon my knees, and «pox the palms of my 
hands g. "ft. S122 00 ; 

£ What a poor Worm, is Man to cruſh, or to raiſe by the mighty 
| Hand of God-! - Thus dealt the Angel Gabriel with him. before, chap. 
8: 16, I7. 74.3 SE tx Þ Ms | 

11, And he ſaid-unto me, O Danniel, * + a Man 

greatly beloved þ, underſtand the words thar 1 ſpeak un- 
to thee, and + ſtand upright -' for unto thee am I now 
ent, And when he had ſpoken this word 'unto me, I 


ood trembling &, . , + j | ">ic} 

b Thus the. Lord moulds and models us 2s Clay in his Hands to re- 
eive his Impreſhons, We are not fit for any great thing till we are 
baſed, and yet when we are vileft in our own Eyes, 'we are moſt | 
retious in God's Eyes. - - Underſtand tbe words thar } ſpeak to thee, and 
Jard upright. . Thus 344} when he was;ftruck down, and firuck blind, 
/hen he received his, Call and Committon to be an Apoſtle, and to | 
now the Myftery. of. Chrift ; ſee. #ab. 3. 16. # The Lord doth not 
tore at once.his Servants from. their Frailties, that they, by gradual 
omforts, may-/prize, every. drop.of Mercy, being not quickened at 
nce when they : are, mortified, but. may .be admoniſhed by the Re- 


have retained no ſtrength r. 


as before: he that had humbled him,now helped and encouraged him. 
q Which cannot be till the Lord couch our Lips Pſal. 51. 15. Jſa. 6, 
5, 6, 7. Fer, 1.9. 7 Tho the Angel appeared to. him, and ſpake to 


him as a Man, yet could not Daniel bear his Preſence without ſome 


dread. | 


with this my Lord s ? for as for me, ſtraightway there re- 
mained no ſtrength in-me, neither is there breath left in 


tains of Fears and Frailtie;, to. keep, their Hearts humble, ;_ 
| 12 Then ſaid heunto me; Fear not, Daniel: for from 
he firſt day & that thou didft ſer thine heart to under- 
and, ant to chaſten thy ſc1f before thy God, thy. words 

cre heard, and I am come for thy words. -. 
t'1- The Lord is quick in hearing the fervent Prayer of an humble 
ul, tho' he doth” not preſently let them know it. - God heard the 
| day, tho he ſent not his Angel to tell Daniel of it till three Weeks 
&. 2, A Soul that would obtam greatthings from God by Prayer, 
uſt be ſolemn and fervent in ſeeking God. 3. The fervent and con- 
ant Prayers. of the Sain 5s, make God to ſcn4 from Heaven and ſave. 
us in Peter's Cale, As 12.5 6 7, to ver. 15, and here in Dante's, 
13 But the Prince of the [Kingdom of Perſia withſtood 
i one and twenty days / : bur lo, Michael || one of the 
lief Princes came to help me. 2, and I remained there 


th the Kings of Perſia. /: ,{ -/ FS, 
3 This place hath ſome Difficulty, therefore variouſly expounded, 
me expound it of Earthly Princes,ſome of Angels, and among them 
e will have good Angels meant, who they ſay have the Patronage 
the Kingdoms-and Provinces of the Earth ; but who can imagine 
at good Angels ſhould quarrel one with the other ? Therefore ſay 
hers, they are bad Angels that oppoſe the People of God, and their 
cliverance, ſeeking rather their Ruine, as Michaet and the Devil 
Ove, Rev, 12. 7. now ſometimes God permits Saran todo much 
Way. But I judge þy the Prince :of Perez is meant Cambyſes who 
i an Enemy tothe Fews, and hindred the building of the Temple. 
dw he contd not property reiift the Angel, but figuratively he did, 
gels Power is not unlimited, but bounded by © ommiſfion and In- 
tions from" God. Therefore God ſuffered the wicked Counſels of 
byſes to take place a while s but Damel by his Prayers,and the An- 
by his Power: oyercame him at hft : And this very thing laid a 
undation of the Perfian Monarchy's Ruine, ver. 20. and-doudbtleſs 
it King was ſtirced-up to his evil Machinations againſt the People 
vo, by the, Prince of the Powers. of Darknels, that ruleth in the 
ldren of Diſobedience , Epheſ. 2. 2. m This we take to be Chriſt, 
His Name itgnifies, Who is like Ged, 2. Heis th firſt in Dignity 
*c all th? Angels, Heb. 144, 5,6, 7, Kc, called Archangel, and the 
Murcnes Pr Ince, ver. 21, 3+ The chick Champion of his Church, 
118 Gabriel, not as his Fellow, but as his General. Thus we ſee 
[Are God takes of his Church's Safety againſt their. potent Ene- 
527 Joubling their Succours, ( when he could do.is it he pleaſed 
"OT MENS ) thereby to contillt, his own Glory in the Work by 
MMUNEZ the Counſels, and breaking- the - Powers of the mightielt 
"C3, ter he had given them Rope todo their wort, 
[4 Now | am come to-make thee' underſtand what ſhall 
4 thy people in-the Jatter days # : far yer the viiion 
IF ma; Uays. | 


11.1 o 


tC, 


*Sg 
, 


me, | "rh, | FT 
s The Condition orithe Church under the Goſpel is a better DiC 
penlation than the. Law-and the Prophets, when God ſpake often by 
Angels, but now by his Son, and that not in - Angelical Shape and 
Splendor, but. as a mean Man, in a meek and humble Garb, and moſt 
famuliar,. 1/2. 61, 1, 24.3», Foh; 13 6. As 3. 22+ | 


; 18, Then there. came again and touched me oze like the 


appearance of a Man, and he ſtrengthened me t, 
z: Daniel needed a ſecond Touch and another word of Encourage- 


ment before he could hear, and bear the Angel's Werds as to the Vi- 


$20 and Prophecy ;z and-now being fortified by degrees, he hath got 
OUrage. (037024 4 


F 
x 


peace be unto thee, be ſtrong, yea, be ſtrong x. And 


Þ An Angel in the ſhape of a Man, and no other but Jeſus Chriſt, 


- 17 For how can || the ſervant of this my Lord talk | Or, thic 


ervant 
my lord. 


' 19 And faid, * O Man greatly beloved, fear not u, * Ver. 12, 


when he had ſpoken unto me, I was ſtrengthened, and 


ſaid, Let my Lord ſpeak ; for thou hbaft ſtrengthened 
ne; -; "4 | 
4 The Lord is gracious and compaſſionate towards his Saints under 


their Infirmities, £/al. 103. 13, 14+ x And this tender Carriage to- 
wards him, was a token for good to him and his People, that the 


Lord would be propi:ious to them. 

20 Then ſaid he, Knoweſt thou wherefore I come unto 
thee y? and now will I return to fight with the Prince of 
Perfiaz - and when I am gone forth, lo, the Prince of 


Grecia ſhall come. 
Y i.e, By what I have ſaid already, and what T have further to tell 


thee upon thy Prayers which God hath accepted, and hath given me- 


in charge to reveal to thee as followeth to the end. x Cyrus, or Cam« 
byſes, who by their Counſels and Captains hinder the Work of God, 
and to bring the Prince of Greece upon him, viz. Alexander the Great, 
who-utterly ruined the Perfizn Monarchy ;- which is uſhered with the 
word Lo, becanſe it was a wonder that the Prince of Greece with 
30000 Men ſhould do it. T hus the Lord ſets and diſpoſeth the Fates 


of Empires, and changeth them as he liſcs ; eſpecially in his Church's 
Quarrel. 


* 21 But I will ſhew thee that which is noted in the 
Scripture of truth a- and there s none that + holdeth 
with me in theſe things bur Michael your Prince b. 


'41,e, In the peremptory Decree and Purpoſe of God, more au- erh himſelf 


thentick and unalterable than the Laws of the Medes and Perþans : 
How God hath appointed to deliver the Fews from the Perſians by the 
Greeks z and from the Greeks by the Maccabees, eſpecially the Seleucids 
ahd Lagids ; and how the Komins ſhould come after, and plague the 
People of God Jong, both by the perſecuting Emperors, and by Anti: 
crif, and how that allo ſhould have an end. 6 Jeſus Chriſt alone is 
the Champion, and Prote&or of his Church, and that all-luthcient, 
when all the Princes af the Earth beſides deſerted or oppoſed it. For 
it cannot be meant of Angels in any ſound (enle, as Poptſp Interpreters 
would have it, thereby to countenance their Angei-worſyip 3 for can We 
imagins up-n rational and orthodox Priaciples, that the Angels of 
Heaven ſhould be divided into Parties, aud but two of them mind 
che Cauſe of the Church of God, with other like Abſurdities, which 
accompany the Popiſh Senſe that Meldenate, 4 4 apide, GT talren PPgR 
£415 SCF:PLUrCs 


CHAP. 


+ Heb, 


ren;thene 


Chap. XI D A N 


CHAP, XL. 


A prophecy of the kings of Perſiz and Grecia, 1—— 4g. The leagues and 
conflits berween the rinces j the ſouth and the north, 5 —— 29+ The 
cruelty and wickedneſ? of one hing above all the reſt, and of other enemies 
of God's people ; the invaſion and tyranny of the Romans, 30 ——45: 


1 Lſo1, in the firſt year of * Darius the Mede c, ever 
I ſtood to confirm, and to ſtrengthen him. 

This firſt Verſe ſhould have been the laſt Verſe of the tenth Chap- 
ter, for it partains to it ; and the ſecond Verſe of this Chapter ſhould 
have been the firſt ; which Negle&, thoſe who divided the Scripture 
into Chapters have been found guilty of more than once. c Thus 
fpeaks the Angel to Daniel, becauſe Darius had the Rule of Babylon 
by tie Conſent of Cyrus ; he ſettled the Monarchy of the Medes and 
Perſians upon the Ruines of the Babylonian, for the verifying of Pro- 
pliecies, and for ProteRion and Preſervation of the Church, | 


2 And now will I ſhew thee the truth d, behold mane; 
ſhall ſtand up yet three Kings in Perſia e, and the fourth 
ſhall be far Richer than they all : and by his ſtrength 


throagh his Riches he ſhall ſtir up all againſt the Realm of 
Grecia f. EE, + 

4 This is that thing which Danzel ſaith, chap. 10, 1, was revealed unto 
him, and was true ; i. e, plain without any Obſcurity, and ſhould ſud-. 
denly and certainly come to paſs. e Which notes their flouriſhing 
and Strength z for after them that Monarchy declined. Theſe three 
are Cyrus, Smerdis, Darius Hyſtaſpis. Others put Cambyſes for Cyrus ; 
others add Xerxes, who is added as the forth in this ſame Verſe, and 
made more potent than all rhe other three, becauſe his Father Darius 
had gather'd an incredible Maſs for him, and heaiſo himſelf drove the 
ſame Trade for fix Years together before he made his Expedition a- 
gainſt Greece. There were more Kings of Perſia beſides thoſe four,but 
they had no Concern with the People of God ; but thoſe four had, 
either in hindring or helping the building of the Temple z and there- 
fare the Angel's Inftrutions from God toDanzel,was principally touch- 
ing thoſe four who are mentioned. f He had vaſt Territories from India 
to Ethiopia ; he had a Navy of 1200 Ships, and an Army of $00000, 
as Creſids writes : but #erodorus ſpeaks of a prodigious Army that 
Xerxes had, little ſhort of five Millions and near an half, 5283000,and 
all againſt the Realm of Greece, where he-made incredible Havock at 
Thermopylz and Athens, as the Greek and Latin Hiſtories mention. + 


3 And a * mighty King ſhall ſtand up,' that ſhall 


*Uh.;.2 I, 


* Ch. 8.4, 


will z. 
g Fils was Great Alexander the He-goat, who moved with Choler 


for the Perſian Invaſion, ran down the Rem and ftamped on it, and 


got a Golden Fleece from him by that ; and after many Viftories he 
did according to his Will, even what he would without Controllment 


by any. See Dan. 8. 7, 8. | 
4 And when he ſhall ſtand vp, his Kingdom þ ſhall be 


broken #, and ſhall be divided toward the four winds of 
Heaven ; and nor. to his Poſterity k, nor according to his 
Dominion 4 which he ruled : for his Kingdom ſhall be 
pluckt vp, even for others beſides thoſe m. 


þ When he is come to his higheſt, as Monarch of the World, &c. 
# After he had enjoyed that Title a little while, his Kingdom was 
broken, as the Text ſaith. $0 it was into four pieces, whereof we have 
ſpoken, Dan. 7 and 8 Chapters. & But tofour of his chief Commanders 
who ſhould reign in the four Quarters of the World, 7.e. in the 
Countries conquered by Alexnder, tha here he only mentions two of 
them, Egypt and Syria, t. e, the South and the North : Alexander had 


a Brother named Aridzus, and two Sons, Alexander and Hercules, be- 


ſides others of his Blood, but the Nobles deſtroyed them all, and ſo 


the whole Race of Alexander was rooted out to fulfil this Prophecy : 


but judicially for his great Cruelty, Pride and Luxury. 1 They did 


not reign as Kingsat firſt, but only as Captains; and as to the extent 


of their Dominion, it was far leſs than Alexander's; yea all four fell 


ſhort of his. m Some lefſer Commanders ſhared ſeveral parts of that 
Empire, as Eumexes, Philotes, with many more, at leaft ten ; as Hi- 


ſtories tell us. 


5 © And the King of the South ſhall be ſtrong, and |? 


one of his Princes #, and he ſhall be ſtrong above him, 
and haye Dominion: his Dominioa ſhall be a great Domi- 
nion 9. 


#» This King was Ptolomy the Son of T agus, the firſt King of Egypr 
after Alexander, who is brought in becauſe he took Feruſalem by Trea- 
Chery ; for the Ang=l minds only thoſe Perſons and Things which re- 
lated to the Fews, paſſing over many things that pertained not to 


them. o His Riches were great,and his Territories by Land and Sea ; 
for he added Cyprus, Phenicta, Caria, with many other Countries to 


Egypt, and left all to his Son Prolomeus Philadelpbus with an incredible 
One of bu Princes, i, e, either one 


Treaſure and an invincible Army. | 
of theſe Profomies,cr Antiochus,or Nicanor,or Seleucus Nicanor,ſo called 


for his great Viftories. who overcame Demetrius, and added Aſia to 
his Empire ; he overcame the King of Thrace, and a King of India, 


and built many Cities: And Fudea lying in the midft of them, was 
much atHidted by him, and his Antagoniſts and Allies. 


+Heb.ſhaz 6 And in the end of years they p - ſhall join themſelves 


} Soter, 


rule with great Dominion , and do according to his 


Tk E£ 


the firſt Peace was conluded hetween Ptolomy Tapus and Antioch; 


tinued not in Favour Ynd Authority. 


dences relating to his Church and their Enemies- 


7 But out of a branch of her roots ſhall ove ſtand yp jn 
his eſtate x, which ſhall come with an Army, and ſhalt 
enter into the fortreſs of the King of the North y, anq 


ſhall deal againſt them, and ſhall prevail - 


her, whoſe Treachery was hereby repaid. 


the King of the North a. 


the Benefator. 
leucus his Kingdom, had he not been recalled. 


and ſhall return into his own land b. 


or danger. 


and be ſtirred up even to his fortrels e. 


called Philopater ironically and reproachfully. 


11: And the King of the South ſhall be moved with 
choler f, and ſhall. come forth and fight with him, wn 
with the King of the North : and he ſhall ſet forth 1 
great multitude, but the multitude ſhall be given into bs 


hand, 


F Inraged by his Lofles, and the Aﬀrents put upon him, fought 
with Antiocbus, and flew 10000 of his Army, and took 4.000 Priſoner. 


' So Hiſtorians relate of it, Polybius and Strabo, 


12 And when he hath taken away the multitude, 
his heart ſhall be lifted up z, and he ſhall caſt dont 
many ten thouſands ; but he ſhall not be ſtrengthened) 


it. 


g He might. have conquer'd and recover'd all again, but he gi 
roud of his Viftory, and returned again to his Luxury, Enterit 
Fudea, he entred into the Temple of God at Feruſalem, and the hd 
Place againſt the Law z yet cho be caff down many thouſands, he was 


ſtrengibned by it. 


with much Riches. 


b Antiochus the great ſhall raiſe great forces, even from Boo as 
Metz; Philopater being dead, and Prolomeus Epiphanes his >00 
a Child, under whom gathocles a difſolute proud perion Fred 0f 4 


governed Egypt as his. Viceroy. 


they ſhall fall. 


7 i, e. Many of the Grecians , Arabians, Edomites , 


Chay. Y 


-c, and for! 
& eſt i 


add, many of the protage Apoſtate' Fews ſhall joyn with tne! 


plunder and ſpoil, whereby they fulfill what was foretold of tbe" 


Mojecs and the Prophets. 


15 So the King of the North ſhall come &, ans , 
up a mount, and take - the moſt fenced Cities, ® 


2. The other ( which is here meant ) was between Prolomy 
Philadelpbus and Antiochus Theos the Son of Soter, So Funius and Pg. 
Imus, r Bernice ſhall come from Fg ypt an1 marry with Antiochus 7heus 
who was the Son of Artiochus Soter, and Nephew to. Seleucus Nicanor, 
for her Father brought her to Peluftum with an infinite Sum of Gojq 
and Silver for her Dowry. Here was nothing fincere on Either tide, 
for each gaped after the other's Kingdom, and covered all with a 
League and a Marriage ; for Azriochus put away his lawful Wife Ly. 
dice, by whom he had two Children, that he might take her Siſter tg 
Wife. Thus ſacred Wedlock and Leagues were violated. s She con. 
t For Antiocbus now 
Bernice and took Laodice again,for ſhe made away Anttochus 
and ſet up her Son Seleucus Callinicus in his ftead, who flew Bernice; 
From hence many cruel Wars and Tragedies arole between thoſe twy 
Kings. « See here the miſerable Fates of wicked Princes and Cyy 
where their ſinful Politicks moſt commonly end in their Ruine ; 
ſo it did to theſe two Families, which thing God by his Angel inftrygs 
Danidl in, to inform and ſatisfy him about theſe wonderful Proyj. 


put away 
by Poiſon, 


its, 
for 


x #, e,- Of Bernice ſhall come Ptolomeus Euergetes, who ſhall be Kin F 
and revenge the Wrong done to his Siſter. y For he invaded Sr; 
and took many ftrong Holds, with a great part of Syria z and he ſhalt 
prevail, i, e, (hall be Conqueror, and deftroy Calinicus with his py 


8 And ſhall alſo carry Captives into Egypt their gods, 
with their Princes and with + their precious Veſſels of i 
Silver and of Gold z, and he ſhall continue moe years tha 


z Which with other Veſſels amounted to 2500, among which were 
the Images which Camby/es long before had carried out of £gyprintg 
Perſia,for which good Att the Egyptians called this Prolomeus, Euergey, 
4 He continued 46 Years, and had ſubdued all 5. 


9 So the King of the South ſhall come into his Kingdom, 


b So he did with a Booty of 40000 Talents of Sitver, without fear 


10 But his Sons || ſball be ſtirred up, and ſhall aſſemby! 
a multitude of great forces c : and one ſhall certainly cone 
and overflow, and paſs through &d : then ſhall he retur, 


c He means the Sons of the King of the North, 7. e. Antiochus,and 
Seleucus Ceraunus, ſhall be incenſed with the Deeds of Prolomeus Eur. 
geres, and his 2on Prolomeus Philopater, d He means Antiochus the 
Great, becauſe the other, viz. Seleucus Ceraunus,is taken off by Poitn 
at the beginning z he ſhall paſs through Syria, and recover what the 
King of :gyps took from his Father, e 7. e. To Raphiaat the entering 
of Egypt, which was check to any Irruptions from Arabia or /dyn:y, 
beſides many other places. The cauſe of which Succeſs was part! 
the Egyprian Kings Luxury, and the Hatred his People had agai 

him for his Cruelty in ſlaying his Father, Mother and Sifter. He wa 


13 For the King of the North ſhall return, and ſhall 
forth a mwltirude greater than the former h, and ſhall! 
tainly come + after certain years with a great Army, i 


14 And in tholſc times there ſhall many ſtand up? 
gainlt the King of the South z - alſo + the robbers of tl 


reopte ſhall exalt themſelves to eſtabliſh the Vilion, 


the arms of the South ſhall not withſtand, neither F i 


choſen People , neither ſhall there be ary 


aſſuciaxe together q ; for the Kings Daughter of the South ſhall 
-7- "__ come to the King of the North to make # an agreement r : 
-* * bur ſhe ſhall not retain the power of the arm s, neither 
ſhall he ſtand, nor his arm t ; bur ſhe ſhall be given up,and 
!| Or, they that brought her, and || he that begat her, and he 
whom ſhe that ſtrengthened her in theſe times u. 
brought p i. c. The Succeſſors of thoſe firft Kings of Egypt and Syria ſhall 
forth, join and make Leagues. q This Confederacy: was two leveral times ; 


withſtand, 


ſtreng [v 


þ Ancio: 


5 


fi 
3 


all that 
protect 
them by 
I9. 
his ow 
found. 
t Beir 
having 
Dn diſhoy 
Mans, an 
Difgrace 
ontent 
WOM; an 
Ot in (af 
Dacrilegii 
ame to | 
36-3 
dXCesS u 
Uays he 
n battl: 
4 This1 
NS Subje4 
Friends fr 
pared nor 
Tile thac T 
lory of t 
Father's R 
and Treac 
Vl Doers ; 


21 Aj 
"om th 
but he \ 


dy flatter 


& Antioch 
IS Flatterg 
Cntrary, ; 
anners : 
Jpe of 4 
Perſecutor 
but his Ne 
the Kingd Q 
the Romans 
t11y5 the Sc 
athe In t 
Was 200d. 
les with 
ko his Brot 


Voll. 


oy 


\ ap. WE - 


t Antiorhus Magnus ſhall march on irreſiſtably and vioriouſly, be- : 


.* and takins fenced Cities, and ſtrong Holds, as Siden, Sdmd- 

ie 4 _— the Power of Egypt withſcand him. | 

2.6 But he that cometh againſt him 7, ſhall do ac- 

= cording to his own will, and non? ſhall ſtand before 
© him: and he ſhall ſtand in the || + glorious land m7 
PS which by. his hand ſhal] be conſumed. | — 
© the 1; e. Antio:hus ſhall do after kis own ill, as he liſteth — 
0r- Controll. 1 7. &- Fudea, The word mav be rendred pt: ajunt, defire- 

mn. able, noble, Dan. 8. 9. Antiochus held all Fudea,the Fews not oppoling, 
and with the Provition and Produtt of it maintained his Army 3 Foſe- 

hy, And to win them to his {ide from the Eg yprlans, he gavet -_ 
Liberties as to their Religion, 1ncouraging their Sacrifices, and caling 


:- Taxes. For ſo Foſephus tranſlates n59 by THA<1sV, 10 conſummate 
_—— and Os conſume, as ſome render it ; and. thus the 

9 likewiſe. ; : 
a ry He ſhall alſo ſet his face to enter with the ſtrength 
|, of his whole kingdom #, and || upright ones with him o - 
"thus ſhall he do, and he ſhall give him the daughter of 
- women p + corrupting her : bur ſhe ſhall not ſtand 07 bts 


- ſide q, neither be for him. 
1 He ſhall uſe all the Force and Fraud he can to maſter Egypt, and 
19 ;ngroſs it to himſelf, becauſe Prolomy was then young, and not able to 
\ match him. 0 7. &. Many of the Religious Fews joined with him, 
Numb. 23. 10. called Rzghreows in oppoſition to the reft of his Army, 
which was compoſed of Idolators, and a profane Rabble of rude Hea- 
thens, þ 7.0. Antiochus ſhall give Cleopatra his Daughter which was 
| young, to young Prolony ; called the Daughter of Women for her Beau- 
mu ty and rare Parts, which ſhe afterwards diſcovered, and gave in Dowry 
(T5 with her Coeloſyria, Phenice and Fudea, dividing the Tribute and Re- 
venues between them, (as Saul gave Michal to David to be a Snare to 
her Hysband, to betray him, and deftroy him.) q But ſhe ſtuck to her 
Husband's Intereſt, and not her Father's. 


x 13 After this ſhall he turn his face unto the Ifles, and 
, ſhall take many r- but a prince + for his own behalf 
2 ſhall cauſe + the reproach offered by him to ceaſe s; 
without his own reproach he ſhall cauſe z# to turn upon 
him, 

r 7, e. The Ifles and Sea-Coaſts of that part of the Medzterranean 
at and Aigemn Sea, as Cyprus, Rhodes, &c. allo 4ſia the lels, with the 
i Grecian Coaſts, for the #ebrews call Countries bordering on the Sea, 
els Iſtes ; particularly Greece and 1:aly. The meaning is, that this Antiochus 
ne craftily deſiſted for a time from his Enterprize againſt Feypt for fear 
0, of the Romans z; and difſembling with them both, preſumed he ſhould 
outwit them all, and therefore perſwaded as many of the Greeks as he 
could, to take part with them againſtthe Romans, ſlighting and reviling 
and them. s 7. e, A brave Roman Embaſſador, and Commanders fent by the 
Were Roman Senate, viz. Atilius, and chiefly Scipio, beat Antiochus at his own 
the Weapons of Power and Policy, and turned the Reproach upon his own 
ion Head ; for they fell upon him, becauſe Prolomy required Help of them, 
the who was beſieged by Antiochus: they raiſed the Siege, and recovered 
10g all that he had gotten from them ; for the Komans were dexterous in 
'mel, protecting their Alzes,and in retorting Indignitics and Aﬀeronts offer'd 

art) them by Incroachers and Oppreflors. 


is Then he ſhall rurn his face towards the fort of 
his own land # - but he ſhall ſtumble and fall, and not be 
Nth found. 


t Being beaten in Battle by Scipio, with 30000 Romans, he himſelf 
even having 70000; and rejeRing the Counſel of Zannibal, he yielded up 


th 1 vn diſhonourable Terms to deliver his Ships and Elephants to the Ro- 
0 bis mMa1s, and all the Places he bad taken from them, which turned to his 

Diſgrace; Then he turned his Face homeward, and - was made to be 
fought ontent with the narrow Limits of the remoteft Corner of his King- 


dom ; and tho' he ſported himſelf with his Retirement, yet was he 
ot in ſafety ſo, but was ſlain, when he ſought to enrich himſelf by the 

dacrilegious Spoils of the Temple. Thus Antiochus called Magnus 
ame to nothing, 


gow 20 Then ſhall ſtand up in his eſtate - a raiſer of 


ned axes « in the glory of the kingdom ; but within few 
uays he ſhall be deſtroyed x, neither in -þ anger, nor 
he gd n battle y, 
: 4 This was Seluchus Philopator, a very covetous Griper, who peeled 
the " Nis Subje&ts ; who being told by his Friends, this would alienate his 
- w4s riends from him, anſwer*d, Money was his beft Friend, and therefore 
pared nor. to rob the Temple, for which caule he ſent #eliodorus to 
hall {ﬆ rifle that Treaſury. 2 Mac. 3.7. therefore ſaid to raiſe Taxes in the 
1all cel lory of the Kingdom. x For he lived not out the third part of his 
0 Father's Reign. y Not by open force, but by Poiſon or ſecret Wiles, 
1, and Treach-:ry of Heliodorus z as ſome write of him. The Seed of E- 
- V11 Doers are never renowned in Lite or Death. 
7 21 And in his eſtate ſhall ſtand up a vile perſon z, to 
red of nom they (aſl not give the honour of the Kingdom 4 . 
but he ſtall come in peaceably, and obtain the Kingdom 
4 up + by flatteries. 
s of ul I Antiochus called Epiphanes 7, e. illuftrious; thus he was called by 
100, bil IS Flatterers and Admirers:; but the People of God acconnted him 
Contrary, 7, e. infamous, bafe, tre:cherons, barbarous, ſuch were his 
d for Manners; and accordingly the Angel calls him here « vile Perſou, the 
an w ype of Antichriſ?, and may more properly be called Fpimanes, a mad 
he re Perſecutor. 2 i.e, Neither Peers nor People : nor was he the Heir, 


4 h , 
: them] ut his Nephew, or Brother Philopator's Son 3 but he cheated him of 


the Kingdom, and crept in by Flatlertes, 7. e. he wasa great Flatterer of 
Une Romans, as well as of his People, till he gat up and ſhut out Deme- 
7145 the Son of Seleuchus, So vile a Flatterer was he, that he would 

Ne in the ſame Bath with mean Pc ople, to make them believe he 


and cb 
ties, ay 
fil 


D # N FS © 


Chap. . 


22 Aid with ttc arms of 4 2ood ſhall they be over- 
flown from before kim &, and ſhall be broken z yea, al! 
the prince of the covenaiit o - 

b 7.e, The EgyprianForce ſhall be overcome neal Pclufium,where the y 
fell by the power ot Antiochrs, with a great Slaughter, and it was near 
theRiver Ns, to which the Holy Ghoit aljude: here by the Phrair, 
Arms of a Flood. © i.e The High Pricft with his Place and Honour, 
for he put out 07745, and et up in his ſtead Faſor his Brother, am-i- 
tious of that Honour. Thus he oppoſed the Paople and Worſhip oi 
God, with the ſame Stratagems as he did the King of Fgypr. 

23 And after the league made with him, he ſhall work 
deceirfully 4; for he ſhall come vp, and ſhall become 
ſtrong with a ſmall people. 

4 For he made te League with Egypt, and came with a few in com- 
pariſon, ( but they were choſen Men) and he took the Paſſes and {et 
Gariſons, and put all in ſubje&tion to him. 


24 He ſhall enter || peaceably even upon the fatteſt || Or, i= 


A 


. p * 1be peaced- 
places of the.province e, and he ſhall do that which his j\*-* {us 


Fathers have not done, nor his Fathers Fathers ; he ſhall 
ſcatter among them the prey and ſpoil, and riches : yea, 
and he ſhall + forecaſt his deviſes againſt the ſtrong- 
holds f, even for a time g. | | 

 e He ſhallcome in upon the Eg ytians under pretence of Peace, and 
in time of Peace, to a ſecure People in a plentitul and delicious Coun- 
trey, and among a Maſs of Treaſures, which the Kings ſucceſſively had 
heaped up, the greateſt part of which this Anriochus took and diftribu- 
ted among his chiefeft Confidents, whereby he obliged them the fafter 
to him, for he was large-hearted and liberal. He did herein ( ſaith 
the Text) what bis Fathers had not done ; theKings of Syriz efore him 
could nevee attain to this Succeſs over Ez ypr, as he did. -f 7. e. Having 
tucceeded thus far in the lefſer Places of the Country, he ſhall proceed 
to the moſt important Citties and Places of greateſt ftrength in that 
Kingdom. g That is, till God put a ſtop to his Carier, for he held 
Egypt not long. The Egyptians found means to deliver themſelves 
from his Yoke when their King grew to riper Years, yet againſt this 
did Arrzochus fore-caſt his Devices, as ſaith the Text. 


25 And he ſhall ſtir vp his Power and his Courage a- 
gainſt the King of the South with a great Army h, and 
the King of the South ſhall be ſtirred up to battle with a 
very great and mighty Army 7; but he ſhall not ſtand : 
for they ſhall forecaſt Devices againſt him &. 

h Antiochus Epiphanes being emboldned by his former Succeſſes, ſhall 
wage War ogalak Prolomy King of Egypr, with all his Might, and with 
open Force, 7 being exaſperated againſt Antiochus, þ He might have 
proſpered if he had not been betrayed by Eulaius, Leneus, and the reft 
of his Nobles being corrupted by -:zricchus. 


26 Yea, they that feed of the Portion of his meat ſhall 
deſtroy him 7, and his Army ſhall overflow - and many 
ſhall tall down ſlain. 

I His moſt familiar Friends and Confidents ſhall kc falfe and trea- 
cherous to him, for he ſhall be overthrown with a great Slaughter, as 
when Nas overflows the Country ; for there was the Battle between 
Mount Caſius and Peluſium. 


think bis 
thoughts. 


chicf, and they ſhall ſpeak lies at one table m2 ; bur it _ 


ſhall not proſper # - for yet the end /hall be at the time 
rppointed o. 

m They ſhall meet under pretence of Peace. hut with treacherous 
Intents on both fides ; they both plaid the Gipſies with each others at 
Memphu, where Prolomy igvited Antiochus to a Feaſt. Thele Inter- 
views of Nejghbour-Kings jealous one of another, have ever proved 
fatal ; tho under the ſmootheſt Promiſes. # For neither ſhall 4ntio- 
chus gain Er ypr by all his Artifice, nor Ptolomy Syria. o Viz, Br the 
Lord, whoſe Purpoſe and Counſel ſhall ftand, whatever the Devices 
of Mens Hearts are. 


28 Then ſhall he return into his land with great 
Riches p, and his Heart ſhall be againſt the holy cove- 
nant q; and he fhall do exploits, and return to his own 
land y. | | 

þ Antiochus ſhall depart with his Booty gotten in Eg ypr, irito his 
Kingdom of Syria, and be content with the Bounds of thar, leaving 
Egypr behind him. q Againſt the Law and Covenant of God, wi h 
the People that worſhipped God according to his Rule and Will, 
7 He ſhall greatly afli&t and vex the People of God, yet was it a 
Mercy they had this warning of this ſore Trial. Antocbus was a fit 
Inftrument of the Devil for this Work, being Rich and Proud, and 
thought he might take this in his way : God permitting his Horn io 
puſh and gore, for his People's Sins, and for a prepatation to his own 
Ruine, 

29 At the time appointed he ſhall return, and come 
toward the ſouth s, but it ſhall not be as the former, or 
as the latter 7. | EY 
s 4.e- Egypi to fight againſt Prolomy and his Wife Cloparra, Sifter 
to Anniochus, t This ſhall not bc ſo prolperons as the two former 
Evpeditions, but ſhall fasl of his Victory and Booty, 


30 © For the ſhips of Thittim ſhall come againſt him # : 
therefore he ſhall be grieved and return, and have indig- 
nation againſt the holy covenant ,- ſo ſhal} he do, he 
ſhall even return, and have intelllzence with them that 


forſake the Holy covenant. 

u i.e, The Romans out of Jtaly, and Parts of the Archipeligo under 
them, ſhall come with Force, and the y ſhall vex and atHiet him ; ror 
the Romans had Harbours for their Ship: and Galhies in Citicia, Mzre- 
donia, aud other parts of thole Coafts; whereby after they had ſubiued 
Greece, they pnrſued Anto:bus in Aſa, and fent into E2ypr to pre» 


el «ho Was £00d-natured, and not proud. He ſoothed and courted the No- 

engl les with much Kindneſs and Preſents, and ſaid he was but Guardian 
"4 to his Brother's Son the Heir, till he deftroy'd him, 

þ Ant Voll. Il. 


p g 8 "L = - PRE _ bs ET 9 I e -t 
v«nt his g£0'ng ito Aloxandrtl, ITT 4G. 191 avoved and f ct oc 


GE 3 


+ Heb. 


27 And both theſe kings Þ hearts /hall be to do miſ- +Hebtheir 


FIR LY 


rs rnd v 
_—— <a 


BETTY OTA ce a 
—_- Y . 4 *#s, 
. -_ na - © =. ot 4 Be 


LS 
— 


<— ads _ - 
— £ _ 4525 & - = 4 = c 
—< - i q 2 - Er * _— —_- i -- —— +6 >< "2 - . 
" 2 £ by . q bx "2" PAD _ —_— : _ Fa , n—_ 
bt Inns dg es _- 
*. - bs 1 9%e > Hm . _t - At! —_ => . —— png me Ss %,. ye OE = - 
vs $I) +, - FS pt r3& —_ = bo 4 "W304 WS % "1+ RE" nn —r —_ G - - —_ 
bi -- + » ee —- % 4 " : by Te AAR. . ” ” Sts ; 
_ _—Y - "=". Ix ag voy £ = o PET oa So M4 a. *. 
: z” - > SIT EI 1 as. 5 ICT 2 has eg ” I 
— = Ot -> = *4 _ bn 
TEAPST -+ * tx. - —_= 
SH bs, LE So 


7: Jo _  % rs 7” Po OC > REECTS a. 6A. 
ag a" Py. le < A 0 4 C 
On Eh nt, 22 TE ES - ob - ES 
—_ oro arr IS, 
= 


ARIEL XIE.” "0x. 
___ —_ —n— RS 
= - Pl P a _ - - _—_ - 


Chap. XI. D A N 


him: For when he lingred and framed Excuſes, Popilius the Roman 
Ambatſador made a Circle about him with his Rod, commanding he 
ſhould not {tir thence till he gave him a pohtive preſent Anſwer ; by 
which, tore againſt his Will, he was fain to pack away out of Egypr, 
and withdraw his Gariſons and Navy thence. This made his Heart 
boil with Rancor, which he {pit our all againſt the Fews, therefore 
it's ſaid, he ſhall, &c, x Eſpecially being ſolicited to it by Ffon firit, 
and Menelaus a:ter, who were Apoſtates, and Betrayers of their Bre- 
thren, and the true Worſhip of Gad, 2 Mac, 4. 26, 27, &c. becauie 
Cai was in Power ; this they envied, therefore went to Antiochus, 

* Ch.%., 31 Andarms ſhall ſtand on his part y, and * they ſhall 

& 12. 11-pgllute the ſanAuary * of ſtrength, and ſhall take away 


2: the Gaily ſacrifice, and they ſhall place the abomination 


24. 21s | 
[] Or,a&0- That || maketh ceſolate z. 
nitherh, y 7.e, Antiochus ſhall come with armed Power to affiſt the Deſerters, 
and force the faithful Fews by his Gariſons. # He polluted the 
SanQtuary by taking away the Holy Veſſels, and forbidding the pub- 
lick Worſhip, but be added a third Pollution, by ſetting up in the 
Temple the Abomination of Deſolation, t. e. the abominable Idol of 
Fupiter Olympius, with many more, 1 Macc. 1. 21, 22, 23, 24, 41, 10 the 
end, 2 Mace. 5. 24. 
: - 32 And ſuch as do wickedly againſt the covenant, 
| ON,*47 ſhall he || corrupt by flatteries a: but the people - that 
rf do know their God, ſha!l be ſtrong, and do explorts b, 
+ Heb. of 4 By Gifts, Perferments and Promiſes, he drew away great Multi- 
them har £9des of this wretched People of Fudea, always bent to Backſliding, 
do know, £9 his idolatrical and heatheniſh Prattices and Intereſt, b They that 
adhere to the true Worſhip of God, and are zealous for it, ſhall ſcorn 
Antiochus's Gifts, and abhor his Ways, and defy his Force, not loving 
their Lives to the Death; as you have many Inſtances, 1 Macc. 1. 62, 
63. 2 Macc, ch, 5,6, 7, $. and alſo how Fudas Maccabeus and his few 
Followers dad Exploits againſt Nzcanor and others, 

33 And they thar underſtand among the People, ſhall 

inſtru&t many c : yet they ſhall fall by the ſword, and by 
*Ch 3:26. game, by captivity, and by ſpoil many * days d 
& 10. 14, J y P ILY, y 1POlI any y : 

c Such as Eleazar, that old Scribe, 2 Macc. 6. 18. and ſome others 
tearned in the Laws of God,and holy in Heart and Life, ſhall inſtru 
many in the righteous ways of God, and retain them from Apoſtacy 
when others fall off, 4 Many of the People ſhall fall, yea of their 
pious and learned Teachers, as well as their Dilciples, x Macc.1. 52, 
66. 2 Macc, 6, 

34 Now when they ſhall fall, they ſhall be holpen 
with a little help : but many ſhall cleave to them with 


fAatteries e. 

e i, e. God in their Aﬀidtion, when it is great, wherein he never 
leaves himſelf without Witneſs,ſfhall raiſe up ſome Succour,to be Wit- 
neſſes to this Truth, to vindicate his Honour, and ſave his People from 
utter DeſtruQion, viz. by the Maccabees. Read what Martathias and 
his Sons did at Modin, (1 Macc, 2, read the Chapter) who would not 
pe flattered out of their Religion, 

35 And ſome of them of underſtanding ſhall * fall, to 
try || them f, and to purge, and to make them white, ever 
to the time of the end : becauſe zt vs yet for a time ap- 
pointed 2. 

f We ſee hereby that the beſt of Men have ſome Droþ,which makes 
AffiQtions, yea firy Trials neceſſary for them ; for the word ſignifies 
ali kind of Examination and Trials, either as Founders try Metals to 
purge them. or as Corn is winnowed to cleanſe it from Chaff, or as 
Fullers that waſh and ſcour to take out Spots, Mal. 3. 1, 2, 3- g Now 
mark, here the Spirit of God ſeems to ſlide into the Romaxy Monarchy, 
for this began in the Reign of 4ntzochus,ſo that he did begin that which 
the Romans afterward in Iroceis of time acted more highly againſt the 
Fews and Chrifians tov. For Antiochus is made by all a Type of Anti- 
ckrift, as Maldonate confeſſeth. And thus you find the Prophets, and 
our Saviour too intermixing Hiſtory and Prophecy. David brings in 
C hriſt, 7ſal, 72. 8. when the reſt is ſpoken of Solomon. So Pjal. 16. 
Iſa. 49, 54. and 60. So our Saviour ſpeaking of the Temple, ſpeaks 
with it of the end or the World : and thus the end of this Chapter is 
clearly of Antichriſt,and this Prophecy of Danzel end's with the World's 
end. Therefore Antiochus is a Type of Antichriſt, in his Pride, Cove- 
touſnels, Craft, and Cruelty againſt the People of God, and Blaſphe- 
mies and Tdolatrics, to the Reproach of Chriſt, Therefore it is here 
added, becauſe 7t is yet for the time appointed. 

36 And the king þ ſhall do according to his will z, 
and he ſhall exalt himſelf, and magnify himſelf above 
* Ch. 7.5-every god, and * ſhall ſpeak marvellous things againſt 
& 3. 25- the God of gods k, and ſhall proſper till the indignation 

be accompliſhed 1 ; for that that is- determined, ſhall be 


done Mm. 

h The King, i. e. the Roman Government, whether by the Senate, 
or by Emperors, or by the Biſhop of Rome, who ſhall drive our the 1m- 
perial Power not only from Kome, but from 7Jraly, and all the Weſterz 
Empire as far as he could, by ftriking in with the barbarous Nations 
that invaded it, who are called ter Xivgs. Read for all this Rev. 17. 

* 30,11,12,13. 25 all the ſeven or eight Governments of Rome are called 
Horns, and the Horns Xings, ver. 10,11. The Sum is this, though it 
3s granted ſome of theſe things are applicable to Antiochus, yet the An- 
zel ſpeaks of him here and henceforward but by the by, and very 
lightly : His main Scope is Anrickriſt, as will appear in the Interpre- 


* Ch. 12. 


LO. 
[] Or, by 
them, 


37 Neither ſhall he regard the God of his fathers ” 
nor the delire of Women 0, nor regard any g£0d : for a, 
(hall magnify himſelf above all. 

m He ſhall ſo far degenerate from the Rule of Chriſt, and from Pr. 
mitive Chriftianity,that he ſhall be the Head of that Apoſtary, 1, Tim 
4. 1. 2 Thefſ. 2. 3. mark'thoſe Places, the firſt whereof is fully opened 
by Mr. Fojcph Mede, in his Do&rine of Demons ; the other by Riſic, 
Jewel in bis Comment on that Place. 0 7. e. the Detire of Wivin® 
te, forbidding to marry, forbidding Priefts Marriage. 'G 

33 Burt in his eſtate ſhall he honour the Gag gF 
|| + forces p : and a god whom his fathers knew nor, ſþy 
and. -| pleaſant things. 4 

p Mauzzim, of Strengths or ſtrongs Holds. The P>@niciins wor, 


Senſes of this p=y3 yn tranſlated God of Forces, yet none comes nexre;$t); 


than Mr. Mede, who interprets it of Demons or titular Gods, which ” 
the Romans ſhould worfhip with Chriſt, ſuppoſing them to be Ange. | 
or Saints, This is not to be thought a novel Opinion, for many 6f the by 
Fathers ſay, that this Mauzzim is the Idol that Antichrift ſhould wor., 
ſhip. So the Meaning is, That in Chriſt's Seat or Place,the Temple A 
they ſhould worſhip Saints and Angels with Chriſt, as the Prepoſition y 
imports, rogether with Chriſt; Which it's notorious they do. Thar 
which made this Place obſcure, was, that Men generally took this, 
ſtrange God for an Idol ; for indeed the Fews call the Gentiles Goa. 
ſo; and ſo doth V.T. often, becauſe they are foreign to the true Go 
which was their God ; but the true God was foreign and ſtrange to the 
Romans, becauſe their Gods were Idols. Therefore the Philoſophers 
called Chriſt Eivoy Aatuortoy, a ſtrange God, This God they ſhould 
honour with Gold andSilver, and precious Stones ; The Vulgar tran. 
{lates Mauzzim Prorettor, and we know too well how the Romani; 
adorn the Churches and Shrines of theſe their Patrons and titylzr 
Saints, P/al. 27. 1. and 28. 8+ and 31. 3+ And the Fathers ſometimes 
fatally hit upon this Expreſſion at the firſt ſetting and honouring of 
Martyrs, calling them ſtrong Holds, and ſtrong Towers of Defence 
but the Council of Confantinople called the them Devil's ſtron g-Holtds, 
Thus they called their 1mages alſo. 
39 Thus ſhall he do in the + moſt ſtrong holds with ai 


ſtrange god q, whom he ſhall acknowledge and increaſe" 


with glory: and he ſhall cauſe them to rule over man, 
and ſhall divide the Land for þ gain 7. " 


q A Confirmation and Ingemination of what he ſaid before : He tat” 
uſe all Art and Authority to propagate this idolatrous Worſhip. We 
have laid by the Intepretation of theſe things of Antzochus,though 74. 
lanus, Funius, and others, apply all to him z but the Angel fpeaks 
the Romans, and it's plainly verified of Auzichrift,who did not only tak 
upon him. to diſpoſe of Kingdoms and Provinces by uſurped Power; 
his Profit, drawing incredible Maſſes of Money from them, but up 
a pretended religious Account, appointing tutelar Saints over then, 

49 And at the time of the end ſhall the King of the 
South puſh at him s, and the King of the North ſhall cone 
2gainſt him like a whirlwind with Chariots, and nith 
Hurſmen, - and with many Ships, and he ſhall enter into 
the countries, and ſhall overflow and paſs over t. 

Ss In the laſt times towards the end of the World, for it cannot x 
true of Antiochus,who died the 11th Year of kis Reign,and theſe thing 


are joined to the laſt ReſurreCtion, ch. 12. 2. Therefore ſome undet- 
ſtand the- Turk and Saracen, who is. without the Church, as Antidif 
before-mentioned ſate in the Temple ; he extending his Dominions 
into Af4 and Africa, will be a great ſtop to Antichrrfts Proceeding 
and Incroachments. # 7.e. The Turk from the North ſhall invads, 
and run down the Saracen ; Mede. | 
41 He ſhall enter alſo into the || -þ glorious land, and, 

l] 

many countreys ſhall be overthrown : but theſe ſhall elcape; 
out of his hand, even Edom, and Moab, and the chief 


the children of Ammon #«. 

u When the Turk ſhould ſubdue Fudea, thoſe People of Edom, Mr! 
ab and Ammon,ſhall be left, becauſe all along to this day theſe 4riiw 
live partly by Robberies, and partly by Turkifh Salaries, to ſecure they 
Carguans. Theſe ſhall live, and not be overthrown by Mahometans. | 


42 He ſhall + ſtretch forth his hand alſo upon the” 


countreys, and the land of Egypt ſhall not eſcape x. 

x Though Egypt (and the adjacent Countries) long ſtood out ut 
der the Mamalucks, yet was forced to ſubmit to the Ortomor EmPpit% 
Anno 1517» | 

43 But he ſhall have power over the treaſures 0 
Gold and of Silver, and over all the precious things 

Egypt - and the Libyans and the Ethiopians ſhall be at h1s 
ſteps y. 

» i.e, The Parts weſtward from Zg ypt along the Barbary-Coaſt, and 

Ethiopia, not the Abyſſmes, but Arabia. 


44. But Tidings out of the Eaſt, and out of the North 
ſhall rrouble him z : therefore he ſhall go forth with gre 
fury to deſtroy, and utterly to make away many. | 

7 The Chriſtian Princes of the North, and the diſperſed [ſrazlth 


and the Jews carried captive into the North, Fer. 16. 14, 15- a 


alſo Kings of the Eaſt, ſhall come and trouble him ; and all bis Power 


tation. # Artiochus did according to his Will: he ſhall be atbitrary in | 211 not be able to withſtand. See Rev. 1 6. 12. 


his Attions, notwithſtanding any Checks of divine and humane Laws, 
The Cauſe follows. + This is true of the Romans, who would deify 
what they pleaſe, and dety 1t or ungod it. Moft true of the Perſecu- 
tors of Chrift and Chriſtians in the time of the Zmperours,but moſt no- 
toriouſly of the Roman Antichriſt, See how this agrees with that Pre- 
phecy, 2 Theſſ. 2. 3, 4, tO Ver. LO, Rev. 17. 3» 4 Then ſhall Anti- 
chriſt continue long and prevail. Read tor this, Rev. 13. per torum, 
2 That which God hath decreed to be done by him againft the Saints 
ſhall be done, and that which God hath purpoſed to be done upon 
him, ſhall be executed allo to hie Deſtructions 


45 And he ſhall plant the Tabernacles of his Pane 
between the Seas 4 1n the || -| glorious holy Mountain ; JG. 
he ſhall come to his end, and none ſhall help him. te! 

a The Euxine, and Mediterranean, at Confantincple, and even to - 
Red Sea, in the glorious holy Mountain in the Church of Chrliteare \f 
So the Turk. Or in the Weſtern Seas, Mediterranean and Arr 
the Pope, reaching to the Weſtern Ocean ; both Antichriſts, 0c vw 
out, and the other within the 7-mple, of God, 


Yi or 


_ 


Bae: ww co 5 


Chap, 


: . - l [10 
| he honour with Gold,and Silver, and with precious ſtones J 
},J 


ſhipped Mzrs the God of Wars, which Antiocbus did worſhip : bur yel;: 
are come to the Romans z and though many have conjettured ſeyery '* 


« 


li>ficaci 
the Go 
Degree 
Lord's 
verſion 
evil Lit 
Grotius 
the We 
4 * 

ſeal &] 
TUn to 

8 By 

hings ! 
but the 
Your of 
crets,- 
ſee the 
he ſhou 
Iy in the 
forlake 
upon rÞ, 
make an 
becaule 
as thoſe 
ſee 2 Ch: 
Irquirea 
and ſhall 
£0ncerni! 
Wair UPC 
I/2. 26.8 
Ure, anc 
Mmely, ll 
re the 
! He meg 
Chriſt, a1 
Other x 
River 

Ivey 
River. 

h Two 
Commanc 
nw Viſio 


by # , : 
Fl 
DANES. 
Inquire into ti > things, {gr they do n 
norant of many things, Marth, 2.4. 55. Fp'. ;. 1 
7 And I heird the Mau clothed in | 
upon the waters of the river, when he * held vp his 
right bard and his left hand unto heaven », and ſware 
by him that liveth for ever o, that zt ſhall le tor a time, 
times, and || an half p- and when he ſhail have accom- 


Chap. Nil. 
" 


not know 2, Fea they Are 1S- 


» T1 
ik» 


. ap. XII. 


CHAP AK 


Miehael delivercth God's People from their long troubles, 1 ante 
d:forerh to know the time: the Angel injormeth kim ;, but he uudorſilands it 
A promiſe 10 him that waiteth, 12. 


Aly. : 
; 1% bt 
0 


Bt men which was 


4. Danmrel 
— YR. Gn 


ND at that time ſhall Michael ſtand vp, the 


; . | ; TN 
"WF great Prince which || ſtanderh for the Children | pliſhed ro ſcatter the power of the holy people, all SP) 
7 of thy Peopleb, and there ſhall be a time of trouble, [theſe things ſhall be finiſhed 9. 4 
0, & fch as never was fince there was a Nation, even tO that | # Here he calls Gd to witneſs the Truth of this thing ; many Reas may: 
os 2» ome time: And at that time thy People ſhall be deli- | ſons are given by ſundry Expoliters of it, why ke held up both Hands hy i 
ey - that ſhall be found written c*in the to Herwen, 1+ For the more lure and ſolemn confirmation of it, . Ya 
y & vered, every One 7: 2. To denote the Unchangeableneſs of God's Decre:s both for Good | FRY 
| My Book. ; : Cup | ts the Church, and for evil to our Enemies. o By God the Father, 14 bot 
Ind 2. bMany interpret this of the Heat of Antiochus his Perſecution, but tht liveth for- ever, to ſhew the Eternal God that decreed ir only 136-88) 
| * 3« their Arguments are not cogent z but the meaning is this; As after ihe | k:1ew, and would briog it to paſs, that he cnly is Maſter o: the Times, WH 
a0 al. Death of Antiochuthe Fews had ſome Deliverance and Reſpite, lo there | 42, 1,5, » It ſhall be for a longtime and yet a definite Time. Some ' :4TIRE 
1 k ? will be yet a more famous Deliverance to the People of God when 7- | win have all this to be and end in Antiochus's time, but we have pro- FF 
Fa S. c<ae) your Prince, #. e. Meſſiah the Prince, ſhall ſignally appear for your | ye pefore, that this is a great Miſtake, and the Text and this Chaps he 
ye, 3 Salvation. He is called the great Prince, but theſe Words in their Con- | tex gjfprove thar Conceir. 4 Which reacheth t5 the calling of the Ne 
_ v texture refer not to the Times of Anrzochus, but to Amichriſt, and tO | Jews upon the Deftruftion of Anticbrift, for till he be down the Church Wt 
\ why that Part of them which are the laftPart. Yet I think the trueſt Mean- | will ſuffer,and will not be up,which will fall out upon the pouring out | 118 
14; ing is to interpret theſe Words, at that time, of all the time of Chrift, | the ſixth Vial, and after, Rev. 16. 17, &c. and the ſeventh Vial; them LE ds, 
"Tk from his firſt coming to the laſt. Theſe all are the laſt times wherein | all js finiſhed, ver. 17. See alſo 2 Theſſ. 2. 3» The Judgment of Ih #1 
cr God ſpake to us by his Son, Heb. I. I, 2, 3. to which the Name Mt- Chriſt will not come, till the Man of Sin come and fall. is) |: 
£7 _ —_— - nary ent ans 6 ——— 38 And I heard, but I underſtood not : then faid T, "8 
| wit * 2. ©o was ne Fl 4 >  B. 2 + \? "7 
ke Prince tO comfort his People againft the Opprefſion of Herod, and the _ OREY m_ ſhall ” ug : Sanyo —_ WE 1 "= Be 2 
3 = Fomars, by bringing in a glorious Salvation, which ſhould wholly free "bs &, What 1s the Meaning of all this, of tne c Is, ya yo balf, | &" 
4 the EleR /ſr2e! of God from the Roman Yoke, both under the perſe- ks wy wu begin :nd end, and when the opp the Churches, and Wh! 
ts cnting Emperors, and under Antichriſt, c Thus this Fle#ion is called, TE IE 0g of the Church ſhall have —_——— al 
ts by a Meraphor uſual in Scripture, and drawn from the Uſage of Menin | 9 And he faid, Go thy way, Daniel : for * the words »WÞ5 
ir many caſes, namely, writing ſome ſelett Mens Names in a Book; ſhew- | are cloſed up, and ſealed till the time of the end s. mm, 
5 ing that this Salvation ſhall not be National, neither to Fews nor any | $ They ſhall not be clearly underſtood till the event make them "8 
of Gentile Nation, but only a gathering together of the Ele& of God, | 2004; ſee ver. g. of this Chapter, and Chap. 8. 26, God is choice in ot 
6, which are ſcattered abroad ; called theretore a Remnant, Rom. 9g. keeping the Keys of Time at his own Girdle, As 1. 7. ] 15h Hl 
X 2 And many of them that ſleep in the Duſt of the | 1o * Many ſhall be purified and made white and * Ch. 1. Fl | 
ly Earth ſhall awake, * ſome to everlaſting Life, and ſome [tried t - but the wicked ſhall do wickedly : and none 35: Wu. - 
ori to Shame and everlaiting Contempt c. of the wicked ſhall underſtand, but the wiſe ſhall un- Zech, 13s vl L 
E: c So enamour'd are ſome of thcir Notions, though Fong _ and | Jerſtand u . 3 
Fr ill-grounded, that they will pertinacicutly hold them, and ſleek till to * RMS NCR w ll ed 
i prove one Abſurdity from another, as Grot1us doth here, ftill ex- = ot 099 4 mT» gle dlands 3. = 11" WAR 
zl pounding all of Antiochus, and ſo makes this Reſurrettion Merapborica), |... Eggs gow ! Gat ; J P 1 Silver (of BA 
We and not the real ultimate one ; whereas the moſt learned Fews them- —_ ira ne Filth, on: 2: h ” they EDT = | 
9 X . . . { . 5 
the os Nh againft him, as the late Manaſſch Ben Jſrae!, in his Book de | ye they do, viz. they ſhall not be bettered by the Word or Rod, or 
$0 Aron ; : : any Warnings of God, but be hardned to their Ruine 3 but the Godly 
” 3 And they that be[] wiſe ſhall * ſhine as the bright- ſhall be taught of God to underſtand the ways of God's Providence, 
. hes of the” Finer d, an d th ey that turn many to foretold by _ Prophets: for this 15 1t they w_ —_— _— of, _ 
| righteouſneſs e 2s the Stars for ever and ever f. commended tor, particularly in this kind oft Wildom ; 1. becauic it 
the { Here the Faithful are called wiſe, i.e. t0 poetry © ſo theſe - — Pon _ _—_ are concerned greatly to know NF 4 
two Members include Teachers, and Diſciples that are truly taught the Y " I f ———__ rho ail . *Ch.3.12 
Me way of Salvation, 7. &. ſuch as are taught of God to learn Chriſt as the |, 17 And from the time that * the daily ſacrifice ſhall * Ch. 11. 
"th Truth is in Jeſus, Fohn 6.45. Eph.4. 21. & They that teach true Ju- | be taken away *, and - the abomination that || maketh F Heb. 79 
nt0 t>fication by the Righteouſneſs of Chriſt imputed, which is the Sum of | deſolate ſet up, there ſhall be a thouſand two hundred/; as thngo*-42 
the Go'pel, and expreſs it by righteous Walking, they ſhall have high | and ninety days. poker it 
be Degrees of Glory. f By being diligent and faichfui Inftruments of the : . 5 Ou 
eh Lord's Hand ( by the Word of God, and a holy Example) of the Con- 12 Bleſſed is he that waiteth, and cometh to the [| Or. aſtg- 
a verſion of Sonis from an evil State, from an evil Heart, and from an | *houſand three hundred and five and thirty days x- nijperhs 
dif evil Life, unto God, they ſhall ſhine, not in Fame for a long time, as |  * Theſe Days are either natural Days, and properly ſo called, and fo 
now Grotizs lamely renders it, but for ever and ever in heavenly Glory, as | the Times of Antiochus are hereby noted. Or, 2. Propherical Days, a 
ding the Words import. Day for a Year, Exek. 4. 6, and thus 12g0 Days are 42 Months, which 
if we multiply at 30 Days to the Month, make the Sum 1290. Here 


4 * But rhov, O Daniel, ſhut up the Words, and 


many learn'd Expoſitors fall in together to that Opinion of Calculating 


ſeal the Book even to the time of the end g - many ſhall 
run to and fro þ, and Knowledg ſhall be increaſed 7z. 
& By theſe Words the Angel doth not forbid all Knowledge of the 
hings here foretold,for whatſoever # written u written for our Learning: 
but the Meaning is, 1, That Danzel mult take norice of the ſpecial Fa- 
vour of God to him, to make ſo great Diſcoveries of the Divine Se- 


theſe Years by Days, beginning the 1290 Days from the profaning of 
the Temple, to the Letter of King Antiochus to the Fews, 2 Macc. 11. 27, 
and ſo make them to end exad@ly then: and concerning the Abomina- 
tion of Deſolation, whereof ſee what is faid, Dan. 7.25. and $. 14. & gs. 
25. being the Fpocha from Anttockus's comming, who was calied the 
Prince ot Abominations, or from the Worſhip of God forbidden by 47: 


- 0 
—_ - T - er oy . > . —_ _ = _ 
þ 7 . S FA hy 2" yy OS, > , = * 
pron þ 4 , RS 4 SG - : Y > * 2s » A a og . m 
Ph pos oe mortars on bg Wig < : a wY L ey rok 0 Y Saf . l 7 - -0- wc; your Þ . dar 
-\ Sl : ——— . N - W A &F Ln . io Se” a, 1s Va NG A ot ” oy 
q © 2 44 by gs or LN ——__—— 4 ——_— — F pre RE ih: Is - PH woes bo Ot <p ER . - 
42S vas —— & x —_ - - Gb p RY > ; v os V = — 3 . 
4 — » Cr TRIIY ED wn RO : ———_— —_ A prone —_ CINE 0 = 
p b: . oO -- - <= TATE: : womgy wo; Tl > : = - - e n —<_—_ a -Y 
he 4 ws * 4 "Y "T ” " £ % Fed -: ” IG - Foe T's ” 0g” $a—- 4 - # =_ 
6 4 a ho 4 ow ty Pc <4 2 g 4 p "2 . *%. « - Ls x; $ ry bs s : A 
: - ou : = Ir 1na.9 .. IS "ELL » A ASSES = - > - d CI f "he Lara. a”; 
"2 * >> £ * of 54m p- &<5 9% z , : : —— w_y vo —_— k p « h Y > 
_ po p4 Bl —_— JELE — ONS.” 224 : Xs I ; . by - c - . # P__ 
5 _—_— : L ey k l , —_— X _— 2. . , . he - PEADSR * 
- . : = "4 S r Rq__ _ s =" T > = 7 4 _ 
"a ” ng; Me, : FEE ww " TS . ” PR — x" - : Ole on -_ w_ - XL En 
_ A —= if Sod 4 _—_ 3 - 4 b , ” 7 4 2 _—” ? = = 5 RE OO La " a = 
os. We ts D , , vi; ,. » Re x RT "LIN 
: £FE: mw þ n Dy — Ate ne, 2 - "IR 
pk, One Hrs 26.4 bes Tat Fe "5M & . 


6. crets,” 2; That they were intrufted with him, that thereby he might | zjocbus, and at laſt reftor'd by Fudas Macchabeus, and confirmed by 4n- 
- the ſec the Force and Fruit of his Humiliation and fervent Prayer. 3. That | riochus ? trom thence to the Death of Antiochus are 45 Days, which ad- i 
ans, {Dc ſhould ſuppreſs and lay up theſe things for the wpport of the God- | ded to 1290 make 1335. But this is a falſe Account and contrary to 'q 
the! Iy in their future deep Afflietions. 4+ That God would never utterly | the Scope of this Place, and to Hiftory and Chronology, which the [f 
v-_ forlake his Peop'e, though their Sins juſtly provoked his heavy Hand | Learned Foſeph Mede hath proved at large, ib. oper. TI. p. 832. The þ 
upon chem. 5. That theſe things be kept from the Profane, who would | Fews make theſe Days to end at the Coming of Chriſt ; but they are un- by 
ut ut make an evil Uſe of them. 6. The Book was commanded to be ſealed, | certain when to begin their Reckoning, and ſo have been often and i 
mpitey becauſe it would be long e're the Words would be all fulfilled, where- | grofly deceived. Sound Chriſtians reter it to the ſecond coming of L 
aS thoſe that were ſhortly to be fulfilled were forbidden to be ſealed ; | Chritt; Mr. Mede makes the chief Revelation of Antichriſt to be in 1127, A 
ES of ſee 2 Chron, 21. 12 Iſa. $. 16. Rev. 22. 10. hþ They ſhall diligently | the latter Number of 1335. ends in Anno Chritti 1169. and ſo the Tipe | 
195 of rquireand ſearch theſe Prophecies concerning the Fates of the Crurch, | of Anichriſt, which is Anriochus Epipkanes, teads us by the Hand t9 the bs 
It his and (hall fee and admire both the Prelcience and Providence of God | Revelation of Antichriſt, which fell out An. 1106, to An. 1120. be- Wy Ht 
concerning things ro come; they ſhall know Signs. of the Times, and | tween which time the Papal Power was highly mounted, the Church WalY. 
wait upon God in the way of his Judgments ; ſee Pſal. 77. 5, 6, 7. | greatly perſecuted, after that great Numbers of them had ſeparated "LF: 
ſr, Iſa. 26. 8. 1 Pet: 1. 10, 11, 12. The miſerable Jews pervert this Scrip- | trom the Abominations of Xome, openly declaring it to be A4nrichriſtian 2. F. Bs 
4 tre, and forbid the People by dire Threatnings to Calculate Times; | Therefore the Angel faith, the Saints by their Trials ſhall he purified and k [ wb 
NotT namely, leaft they find thereby that Feſus Chriſt is the true Meſſab, Thus | made white, that is by thoſe cruel Perſecutions which befel them from 1 8: 
great Ire they wilfully and judiciouſly blinded, A&#s 28. 26. Ko. 11. 8: | their ignorant and inraged Enemies, who went on todo wickedly, and we 
! He means chiefly in Goſpel tires, which came by the Preaching of | did not underftand. How this is further cleared, and why the Angel 
-4linth Chriſt, and ſearching the Scriptures about it. makes ule of the £oman Supputation in this Caſe, namely, by 1nd:t- 7 
all 5 C Then I Daniel looked and behold, there ſtood | ons, and how it anſwers, and reſolves che Cale, ſee in the forecites 
. Power other two k, the one on this ſide of the - Bank of the | Author. : 11 BY 
: River, and the other on that ſide of the Bank of the | 13 But go thy way till the ena te y: i| for thou 1} Oz, ard "Of 
Pala Iver, ſhalr relt, and ſtand in thy lot at the end oi the days Z. rvpoy, &c. 2 th 
1; Jo; h Two Angels waiting and miniſtring on Chriſt to obſerve his yq. 4, T have revealed to thee ſo much of thele things as I had in M1 
; ommands, by the Banks of the Kiver Tigris or Hiddekel, where this | Commilſion, that thou and thy People ſhould be-prepared for the >ut- Ms 
n to tt! new Vition was. ferings which will come upon them, and yet NOT without Hope of a 
eaſter 6 And one ſaid to the Man clothed in * Linen], | glorious eter + n w___ _ _ _ 4 ve _ 
atiih, Which . ' . Fear or teeling of trouble, £11 3e Rent 10N of the Juſt, to the 
1e Wit "ich was {| upon the Waters of the River, How Jong Joys of another World. Which ſome make to be here, a'ter all Enz- 


a! it Leto the end of theſe Wonders m ? 

' To Michael, Ch. 10. 5, Chriſt who ſeemed to ſtand between the 

MS, 7, e, in the Air aboye the Waters, or upon them, Match. 14- 
m'] he Angels them'elves 


mies are deſtroyed, at leaſt to begin here, an ty be conſummated in 
Heaven eternally ; comparing, £115 wth A;Ve 23-20, 2, 


HOSEA. 


F - 
4 ** 


*D9R Many People, [27 [Ome, Rev. LC. 2. 


= — 
_— — — _ 
"EEE EIS = 


- 4 
bona — —————— 
n—_— nt v= crane end Co I 0s 


TR ARGUMENT. 


Ithout Diſpute ouy Prophet is one of the obſcureſt and moſt difficult to unfold clearly and fully :, though he come nat 

Ifaiah and Amos do ſometimes, nor as Ezekiel and Zechariah do frequently, with Yi/zons, yet his ſententigy 

and conciſe Stile, peculiar tb himſelf, renders it many times difficalt to find out firſt, and to declare next the genuine an ug. 
doubted Sence of bis Words. In expounding this Prophet the Expoſitor needs the Candor of his Reader, and the Reader one 
bis Expoſitor Thanks, if he do make ſome dark Paſſages fairly Intelligible, though he do not demonſtrate his Expoſition tg 
be the only Senſe of the Place. This latter is not pretended to ; the former *tis hoped the Reader will find m the moſt, i; ny 
211 every obſcure Paſſage, It was a very debauch'd Age our Prophet did live in and you will find bim very ſharp againſt the 
Fices of the ten Tribes, and very plain and open in his Threats for their Sins, whith he ſaw puniſh'd 3 for he lived to ſe 
Samaria faken, and Hoſhea made a Priſoner, and the People carried Captives, As *tis not agreed when he began, ſo wy 
7s it agreed how long he continued to Propheſy. . 
The Kings of Judah and Iſrael, 'of in whoſe time he firſt appear'd a Prophet, were of long Reigns ;, the one forty one, thy 
other fifty two : in which long ſpace of time very different Beginnings may be conjettured. All agree thot he contmued a Pro. 
phet very long, ſeventy Tears at leaſt, and ſome add more Years, and make them up ninety. The Sum of what he Propheſy 
is here given us in ſhort Heads, rather than in a continued Diſcourſe. And as *twas preach'd in Iſrael, (chough we r244 
not of the Places where Hoſea erther lived or died, or did Preach, it 15 moſt likely within the Hearing of the Court) ſo it di 
more particularly refer to Iſrael or the ten Tribes : Declaring to them what were their Sins, adviſing them to repent, proj. 
fmg them Mercy upon ſincere Repentance, threatning grievous Judgments on their Impenitence, foreteliing their Rejedtion i 


they did not amend ; and, for the Comfort of the Godly, predifing Mercy to them, mtermixing many Promiſes of the jy. 


ture Kingdom and Coming of the Meſſiah, to whom many ſhould be converted, and by him be faved, and eſpecially m.my 


the two Tribes who hear from our Prophet a more comfortable Meſſage (viz. of 
which muſt not expet# any ſuch Return, i. e. for the whole Body of the People. 


returning to their own Land ) than 1ſrae| 
And he cloſeth his whole Prophecy ether mith 


Form of Confeſſion and Supplication for the Remnant retwrn'd, or a Prediftion in what manner they would return, confe; 
ſupplicate and rely upon God alone ; to which Duty per formed, he adjoined ſweet and excellent Promiſes, containing both tem. 


poral and ſpiritual Bleſfings, Chap. 14. 


ER AP. I: 

The time when Hoſea prophecied, I. #e by marrying Gomer repreſenteth 
Irael's ſpiritual whoredom, and jheweth Gods judgment againſt it, 2, 2, 
begerteth Fexreel z the reaſun of his name, 4, 5. Lo-ruhamarh and Lo- 
ammt, the reaſon of their nam:s, 6 ——g, A promiſe of the glorious 


converſing with Men,and dwelt in a ſeparate Houſe, retain'd theRojy 
Title and Authority 5 but it is uncertain how many Years this uz, 
Some ſay Fifteen Years 3 others ſay tour Years) for we read 2 Kin 

15. 33: that he reigned ſixteen Years; and in ver. 30. we have his 
twentieth Year: now the four here mention'd ſeem to be thoſe Year 
of his Viceroyſhip or Government for Vzx/ab) yet others ſay his 6+ 
vernour's Power was of ſhorter Date, and that Vzz7ab was firuck wit 
the Plague of Leproſy in the laft Year of hisAge and Reign: This ſeens 
ſcarce confiſtent with the Report of Fotham's being over the Houſed 


reſtauration of Fudah and Iſrael, 10, 11. 


HE word a of the LORD that came c unto 
Hoſea d, the ſon of Beerie, in the days f of 
Uzziah g, Jotham h, Ahaz z7, and Hezeki- 
ah k, kings of Judah, and in the days of ſeroboam ! the 


{on of Joaſh 7 king of Iſrael x, 

« Or the Command, and the thing commanded ; or the Predition 
expreſſed in the very Words God ſuggeſted by bis Spirit to the Pro- 
phet, and thr things too v. hich are now toretold ; for holy Men of God 
fpake as they were mover, Tr. 2 Pet. 1. 21. and the things that were 
ſhortl; to come to paſs were revealed alſo (in the Words of Rev. 1. 1.) 
Hoſes ſhews the things, and ſpea':s them in words which God hath ſug- 
geſted to him. 6 The Eternal, as Gallic; Jehovah, eb. which ex- 
prefleth the Eternity and Infinite Being of our God, together with his 
Soveraignty and abſolute Authority over all. This is expreſly added, 
to give Warning to the Prophet to command Audience, Attention, Re- 
verence and Submiſhon in the Hearers, and to intimate to them the 
Certainty of Execution if they repent not, and the Certainty of Per- 
formance of Promiſe it they believe; for it is Fehovah who changeth 
not, that ſpeaketh both. c Or, was with þim ; as it came to him, ſoit 
4:d abide with him, made a deep Imprefiion upon his Mind. Prophets 
were too backward, rather than over-forward, to publiſh ſad Tidings 
to ſinning-People. Moſes was unwilling to go to Pharoah ; Feremiah 
pent up the Word till it grew like Fire in his Bowels, too hot, and he 
could hare no Eaſe till he gave it Vent. It is not unlikely the Prophet 
ea intimates by this Expreſhons ſome ſuch Effet the Word of God 
had on him, he was foll of the Prophetick Spirit, its Motions were 
ever with him, and ſtirring within him. d A Name that carrieth moff 
comtortable News in the Letter and ſignification of it, being the ſame 
with Foſhua or Feſu, and his Word or Meflage from God to the Good 
was comfortable, It was Aſſurance both of Preſervation and Salvation, 
as will appear in proceſs of his Prophecy. e Though ſome would 
have this Beer! to be the ſame with Be-rab, 2 Chorn. 5. 6. it hath no 
Probability, the Names heing different ; bzlide that Beerab was carried 
Captive by 7zglath Pileſcr, and *ris probable his Family was carried 
away with himz or if Aoſca had eſcaped his Father's Miihap, he 
would have given us at leaſt ſomeGround to believe by his Words that 
he reſented the Unhappinels of his Family in that reſp ; but we know 
the Name of the Prophet's Fatner, we know not his Tribe or Country, 
or of what Quality he was, where he lived, or when he di2d. f. 7. e. 
During the Reign, in the times it is a :.cripture-Epreſſion of times 
& Uzz1iah called i247tah, 2 Kings 14. 21. and - q145, Mat. 1. 8. the Bc- 
ginning of whoſe Reign is very varioully gueſſed at,and ater all is lefc 
uncertain; but this is clear that Fer2bo.72 was contemporary with V7- 
2/ah, who began to reign in the twenty [evinth Year of F:roboam z rec- 
koning thence to the forty firſt Year of his Rejgn, which was the laſt 
of Feroboam, there will be fourtceu Years of U2ziib's Reign, in which 
Hojra prophetied : but if there was (as for ought I find there mizht 
be) ſome Years of Viceroy(bip in which Amaz:4h reigned with his Fa- 
ther FoaſÞ, and the like between Ferovoam and his Fatier, then a lon- 
ger Synchronilm ariſeth berween Uzz/ah and Ferob5am, and a larger 
ſpace of time for of 2 to prophecy in their Days which 1 ſearch not 
int, b Who ſucceeded Uriah as Governour, and judged £þ- /cople, 
vie Uzzfeh, Being a Leper, was, 2Ccording to the Law, retired 'rom | 


the King, judging the People ; and the Leper King dwelling in a ſep 
rate Houle till the Day of his Death, 2 Xngs 15.5. and 2 Chron, 6, 
21. They miſtake, I think, who place this Stroke of Leproſy ſo lae; 
and they do as much miſtake who place it at the twenty fifth of H- 
ziah, and make him a Leper, and ſeclude him 27 Years. Forkumhath 
the Charatter of a good King, 1 Chron. 27. 2,6. but he could not nuks 
his Subjetts good, 2 Chron. 27.2. # The worſt Son of a good Fathe, 
yet the Father of one of the beft of Kings. He finned more in hisD+ 
ſtreſs, 2 Chron, 28. 22. and haſtened God's Judgments on him and his 
+ Who reformed Judah, and walked fo with God, that above any 
the Kings of Julah he was protetted and reſcued by the immediate 
Hand of Heaven. How long #oſea propheſied in this King's Reigt 
appears not, but that he did prophley a great while is moſt apparen, 
whether 50, or 65, or 70, Or 75, or 90; which different Computate 
ons have ſome to aſſert them, I determine nor. | | he great Grand 
ſon of Fehu, of whoſe Greatneſs and Sins you read, 2 A27gs 14. 24,2, 
26, he was of the Religion of Feroboam Son of Nebat, m Whole to 
ry you mee? with, 2 Xs 13.5, 10. though a great Idolater, andre: 
proved for it no doubc by Eliſha, yet he gave a Vihit to the dying I'v 
phet, and with Tears bewail'd the publick Loſs by Eliſha's Death, and 
by the Prophet had a Legacy given him, three Vidtories over the 5 
r14ns; and more they ſhould have been, had not Foaſh been {parity 
too much to his own great Loſs. I remember not any lingie Viſit {0 
nobly and magnificently repaid. » Kingdom of the ten Tribes, tr 
tra-diftinguih'd to Fudah : by this then it appears, Hoſea was ſent t0 
prophecy againſt the Sins of /ſrael, or the ten Tribes, as well as again 
the Sins of Fudab ; againſt //7ae} he prophefied during Fer059m 
Time, (and afterwards left them to their Obftinacy) but he continued 
to prophecy to Fudah untill his Death. 

2 The beginning o of the word of the LORDpt)f! 


Hoſea q: and the LORD faid r to Hoſea, * Go, key 
unto thee a wife of whoredoms t, and Children 0 
W horedoms 4 : for * the land x bath committed gi 


whoredom y, departing from the LORD =. 

o This ſay ſome, gives Hoſea the Precedence of all the Prophth, 
which perhaps may be allow'd to him among all theProphet chat have 
written diſtin Books of their Prophecies, but ſimply firft of all - 
Prophets he was not; in David's and S:lomon's times we meer vi 
Nathan and Abijah the Shilonite, Or this beginning may 'E, 43 __ 
dinary Phraſe ſo ſoon as God ſpake ; or at the very firſt of God $ Pe: y 
ing to Zoſca he commanded him to take luch a Wre, Go. Þ p! 
ver. 1. let b. q In Hoſea, denoting the Impalſe of the Spirit 0 2 
phecy, the internal Motions . nd Influence ot the Spirit in tae Prop "y 
Vid. ver. 1. let. c. r Directed and commanded him; this was Wa 1 
co him, doing which otherwiſe was unſeemly for a Propact *v 
done. 5s This was, ſay ſome, done? in Vition, 'n4 was to bet 5 
the People as other Vifhons were: It was paravolically prop: | "I 
chem, and this might be ſuiſcient co convince the Jews, ou: __ 
have conſidered it well, as Pavid coriidered "Varpa4's rac 
ſay it 'was really ated, and that the Propk-c did, as COmmeres 
marry one who had been a Strumpet, or that proved io be 10 69h © 
was married. And though this would have been unteeny 1, 


3: Y & F FE YT RR Co 


as throuy 
df which 
don is ſo 
Throne t 
'e know 
1s Reig 
pent e'r 
Count s | 
{4/4b,ar 
vas this 
ballum cc 
lo 7ebu's 
miſh theſe 
fit, 7, & 7 
xecnte 
preſſed th 
Dy Feby's 
5, 6, 7. I 
at his OW 
Tudab a1 
Houſe by 
Juir'd, ] 
the Dogs 
Cleans'd of 
l, as the 
Poſſeſſed t 
Feboaſh an 
the Idolat 
had now 7 


Wed for 
P e tahiah's 


VUury'd th 


lap p [ 
plet, had he 
dal ceaſeth, an 
with Credic Fon 
-v Duty $0 Dll, 
onenly I ofed Whore, 
I horedoms, As, 
many Whoredoms, 
7 Either, that 
neſs ; or elſe, 
maintain the C 
| jt may lead our 
who were (4 


uzh do what God had by his Command made a necefſa 


, = 


as FS married them tO himſelf, and did ſhew wonderful Kindneſs to them 
Wo & 9d theirs ; all which is lighted and forgotten by their Poſterity, by | 
{8 u, O Idolatrous /raelires ! Or it may refer more expreſly to what 
es God did for Jael when he brought them out of Egypr, and made a Co+ 
venant with them in AÞreb, which was as a ſolemn eſpoufing them to 
" God. The Lord found them tainted with, Egyprian 1dolatries ; yet,as: 
* the Prophet here, married them-to himſelf,and covenanted with the 
be fo be faithful to him, but they broke the Covenant, / x Land, ?, e. the 
ſee People of the Land, intimating the er ſpreading, of &.his Sin, all 
wor or moſt of all ſo infetted. y The Phraſe, Zeb. pling the Harlo,,; 
| hath plaid the Harlot, ſpeaks the Continuance of this Idolatry among 
chem, as well as. the Greatneſs of the Whoredom,  Frgm their Fore-, 
the fathers they had been Idolaters, while God was giving; them his Law 
Y0- (from the Nuptial Day to Hoſedb's time ). they committed ſpiritual, 
el Whoredom, and firft made, next worſhipp'd the Golden Calf. 2 So 
of they left their firſt Husband, and doted on Adulcerers, on Idols, as 


Chap. 2+ 5+. 
3 So he went and 


- W&Diblaim c, which conceived and. bare him a Son 4. 
of # z As commanded, ſo he did, whether you take it parabolically or 
fl Wiiterally, 5 If you take it literally, this Gomer will ba. ſome known 


Harlot,and perhaps ſhe was famous for her Beauty andSkill in the Cur- 
iſans Art, as her Name may import, '. It you take it as a Parable, we 


zoth in the beſt Senſe 1/rael was yerfett with-the Perfection which God 
lid put upon her, Exek.16414- he made her Gomer z and in the worſt 
Senſe ſhe had made her ſelf Gomer, one that was drawing to her end, 
who had undone and conſumed her ſelf; thus the. word, Pſal. 12. 1: 
and ſo in one word, God's Bounty and Mercy, and 7/ae/'s Ingratitude 
and Sin is ſet forth, together with her Puniſhment haſteniag upon her. 

Literally underſtood, this Diblaim muſt be either -Father or Mother 
pf this Gomer, or elſe the Name of the Place where ſhe was born. Pa- 
abolicaly underſtood, Diblaim, Bunches of dried Figs, may imply the 


by Deliciouſneſs of her Proviſion made of God, ſuch as was made for 
cath reat Feaſts, 1 Sam. 25. 18, ſo01 Chron. 12. 40+ thus "twill ſute, ch. 2. 
Op ,9. and the Places where the Fig is mentioned as Fruit with which: 
With od had bleſſed 'Jſrae]. All which abuſed to Luxury and Sin, will 
105 z0w make her a Daughter of Diblaim, of Wilderneſs,defolate, d This 
ed ems to favour the literal Acception of all this-as really, dong, and 
epi jot only as repreſented in Vifion,Parable or Hieroglyphic.,' But,while 
,%, ther way it will be well apply'6 to the Purpoſe-in hand, I ſhall leaye 
a; t to the Choice of every judicious Reader, to interpret and apply as 
Y eſt likes him, HE 

wo 4 And the LORD ſaid vnto him d, Call his e name 
ther, ezreel f; for yet a little while þ and I wiſl + avenge 7 


he blood & of Jezreel I upon the houſe of Jehu m7, aud 
vill cauſe to ceaſe the kingdom n of the houſe of Iſrael 0. 


pe d Hoſea the Prophet, who, as'in taking to Wife. an Adulterels, ſo 
date n giving Name to his Son by her,was to preſignity /ſraePs future Cala» 
gh nities. e Thy Son now born. f The word is, The Seed .of tbe Lord, 
ens r the Arm of the Lord, or the Lord will ſcatter ;, ſo it may infinuate that 
a od by his own Arm will ſcatter among the People, z. e. the Aſjriens, 
:anG hoſe who were his People or Seed. But we have a ſurer Guide to lead 


15 through this, 7. e. the Hiſtory. of what was by Febu done in Fezreel; 
ff which more preſently. g This is the Reaſon why the Prophet's 


F Son is ſo called. þ *Twas four Generations of Febu God promiſed the 
; Pro Throne to,and now the third that is now running: how near toanend 
, and re know not, but are ſore *twas within 28 Years; for Feroboam began 
e of is Reign in the fifteenth of Amazieb, and fo 13 Years of his 41 are 
ariny pent e're Vzzith comes to the Throne, 2 Kings 14. 23 this one Ac- 


count ; but 2 Kings 15.1. accounteth Feroboam's 271b to be the firſt of 
77iab,and then there are not above 14 Years to come, ſo little a while 


y conſpired againſt Zechariah and flew him,and reigned a Month ; 


"I ſo 7ebu's Seed was caſt out of the Throne. i Enquire after, and pu- 
nr niſh theſe Crimes, which were committed in Fexreel. Heb. / will vi- 
ſt, 7, e, as a juſt and impartial Judge I will require an Account, and 

by! | ae ue 
if] xecute Puniſhments. k Murders committed are in Scripture ex- 
akes' preſſed thus by B1ood ; here are particularly megat the Slaughters made 
n 0 ROY Fcbs's Hand, or by his Order, 2 Kings 9. 10, 11. and 10. I, 2,3, 4, 
"ear WS! ©: 7+ in Fexreel, where he did with a treacherous Nind, and aiming 
5 at his own Greatneſs, deſtroy Abab's Houle, and flew Abaziab King ot 


Fulah alſo. This was the juft Judgment of God upon that wicked 
I ouſe by Fehu executed, but he did it not with that Mind Gol re- 
uir'd. I The Town which Abb choſe above others to dwell in ; where 


11 the the Dogs lick*d up ' Abeb's Blood, when his Chariot was waſh'd and 

r with Cleans'd of the Blood of that ſlain King, and where Dogs did eat Fez- 

ur of bel, as the Prophet threatned, 1 Kings 21. 23. 1m Which had now 

(peas Polſeſſed the Throne (Febu uſurp'd) through the Reigns of Feboabax, 

| Vide Feboaſh and Feroboam 3 but the Uſurper and his Foccoiions adhering to 

f 0 the Idolatry of Feroboams the Son of Nebar, and adding other Sins to it, 

ophet ad now provoked God to declare a ſudden Extirpation of the Family, 

a 1a Which God will in his juft Revenge make as like to Feroboam's Family 

z 13 p as 4bab's, and they had made themſelves like them in Sin ; al} which 

01.110 ame to paſs when Shatlum conſpiring againſt Zechariah, flew him. | the 


2 Kings 15, 10, # Not immediately, but ſoon: after the Death of 
9*cbertgh the Kingdom of 1/7ael did ceaſe firſt to be free, for Mena- | 
= *N made it tributary to ſtrengthen himſelt z ſo it is like it conti- 
Ut Med for ten Years during his Life, and two Years during his Son 
*ctabiab's Reign + after him Pebab the Conſpirator and Murderer 


HOSE A. 


done it without this particular Dirction, now the Scan- 
d it is very fit God be obeyed, and the Prophet may 


and marry one known to be a lewd Whore. t An 
a notorious one, ſo the Heb, Phrale, Wife of 
2 Man of Bloods, or Man of Sorrows ; a Woman of 
and a very lively Emblem of Idolatrous J/rae!. 
born of ſuch a Mother, are, as ſhe, addifted to Lewd- 
with the Mother made his Wife, he is to receive and 
hitdren ſhe had by her Adulterers.And thus underſtood, 
"Thoughts to God's rich Mercy towards their Anceſtors, 
braham himſelf not excepted) Idolaters when they dwelt 
on the other ſide the River, Foſh. 24+ 2, 3- yet God took them, and 


took..a Gomer b the daughter of 


Wrnukt take this Name for a made Name; affurted for its Signification 3/ 


was this here ſpoken of, for in ſix Months after Feroboam's Death | 


Tiplath Pileſer ; to be ſure Hoſea was ſo, and in is ninth Year this 
Word was fulfill in the Letter of it, . the Kingdom of J/7ae! after 
one and forty Years tottering, fell to utter Ruine, and hath ſo continu- 
ed to this day. o Or the ten Tribes divided trom the Houſe of David, 


.5 And it ſhall come ro paſs p at that day 9, that I 
wi break r the bow s of Iſrael t in the valley of Jez- 
reet a. | 

p Moſt certainly this ſhaſl be effeted. q When my Vengeance hath 
overtaken the Houſe of Feb::, when his great great Grandſon ſhall be 
{lain., r Weaken, and by degrees quite break, 7. e. by the Conſpira- 
cies, Seditions and Civil Wars which will ariſe among themſelves. 
S This was a warlike Weapon they much uſed and were skilful in : this 
one' Weapon put for all their warlike Proviſion, Power and Skill ; pol- 
fibly it may allude to the Bow of Fehu who ſlew Foram with an Arrow, 
nd uſurp'd hisThrone,but now the Bow of theHoule ofFeha andof 1/rae3 
ſhall be broken. t See.ver.4..ler. 0. u Next to Semaria, Fezreel was chiet 
F-Y of the ten Tribes, a very ſtrong and fortified Town, and both fi- 
uated in the large afid pleaſant Valley that hath from Foſhua's time 
been known by this Name, Valley of Fezreel, Foſh. 17+ 16. In this 
Valley it is probable the bloodieft Battels in the Civil Wars were 
| (onght betercen Zechariah and Shallum, 2 Kings 15. 10. and between 

Shakin and Menabem, 2 Kings 15, 14. between Pekabiab and Pekab, 
2 Kings 15.25. and Pekab and Zoſhez: the Reaſon whereof probably 
might be this, becauſe whoever carried the Vidtory in this Place, 
pers. oh Maſters of Samaria and Fexreel, and conſequently cartied 
he Kingdom to0. | rig: 
| 6 E And ſhe x conceived again y, -and bare a davgh- 


rubamah b - for + I will no more' have mercy c upon 
the houſe of Ifrael d : || but I will ntterly rake them a- 
WAY.e, | —_— 

| "x Gomer, the Hieroglyphick Wife, who was to be a Sign to Jrael. 
y'Whether viſionaſly or really, it comes to one. 3. Which is to. be a 


obtained 
Mercy. 


wil] not 
4d1 any 


1 Sign too, as was her Mother, It is too nice which &:bers obſerves, 997% #0. 
i| Or, that 


the weaker Sex. This Daughter was fit to be an Emblem, and there- 7 ſ99uld al- 


that the State grew- weaker, as appear'd by bringing forth of one of 


fore *tisa:Daughter rather than a Son, though 'twill be next a Son #9gether 
and no Daughter. © But Lo-rubamab is. Feminine, and in congruity Þ4740n 
'of Speech it muſt be a Female who bears this Name. 4 As before them. 
God impoſed, ſo now. again he impoſeth a Name, ſignifying what 
.he would do with 1/Feel. Though God dirett what it ſhall be, the Pro- 
'phet.-is to give the Name. 6 Nor pitied. Jſrae's Name had been 
thronga many Ages Rubamab, i. e. pitied. God had with marvelous. 
Patience-forborn them, and with tender Bowels pitied them, and 
[ſaved them from Enemies, but now Jſr7ac} ſhould be no more pitic 
as faxmerly, God would throw them-up fo the Rage of Uſurpers, 
and to the mercileſs Hands of proſperous. Conſpirators; ſo Menahens 
mercileſs rip'd up'Wormen with Child in Tiphſab, 2 King. 15.164 And 
:God gave up this bloodyTyraat into theHand of 7iglath Pileſer, c T was 
, wont to. add Mercy unto Mercy for //7ael,I was never weary of ſhewing 
'them.Mercy, but 1 wilt do-no more lo for them ; my Pity ſaved them 
in, Feraboam's time, and raiſed them to 2 great Height and Glory, 
but now they ſhall unpitied by me, fink lower and lower z Reftraints 
of Divine Pity are ſure Forerunners of Deftrution, Fer. 13..:14. 
\4 This to me ſeems a qualifying of the former Threat ; though the 
' Hogſe of J/rael as a Body politick, as a Kingdom under this Charadter, 
ſhall no more be as it hath been pitied, yet many among them may 

' obtain Mercy in the Days of Goſpel-Grace,and many of them had Mer- 
cy ſhew'd to them by the Lord, when they join'd with Fudab in the 
\return from Babylon's Captivity ; but the whole Houſe,the Families of 
the ten Tribes, united in a Kingdom, ſhall no 'more be to God Ruha- 

; mah, but ever Lo-rabameab, thus it hath been through the long Series of 

| 2400 Years and 'more. & Taking away, / will take away, till the whole 
Kingdom is utterly overthrown, and removed out of the Land where- 
in it once had flouriſhed. ' Thus ſome were taken away by the Sword 
of Civit Wars, ſome ruined by Oppreſſion of the prevailing Fattion 
in thoſe divided times, whole Cities and all the Land of Napthali was 
taken away by Tiglarh Pilcſer, 2 King. 15. 29+ and at laſt all ſwept 
away by Shalmaneſer, 2 Kings 17. 3, 4, 56 - | 


7 But e I f will have mercy g upon the honſe of ſudah h 


nor ſave them:by bow1, nor by ſword, nor by batrtel, by ** 
porſes, nor by-horſemen. 


. e Or and. or yet, f. The Lord who threatneth 1/rael, proud, flou- 
' riſhing, ſecure and ſinful 1/rae} ; he promiſeth Mercy to poor, oppreſ- 
ſed"and impoveriſhed Fudab. g Prolonging that Kingdom 132 Years 
after 1ſ/rae} ceaſed to he a Kingdom, preſerving them from the com- 
bined Powers of the King of Syris and the King of /ſracl, who com- 
bine'to deftroy them; railing them up to Greatneſs and Glory in the 
Reign of Hezekiab, in whote Days the Houſe of Fudab was faved, by 3 
Miracle : Betide all theſe, Fudab's Captivity was for 70 Years, /ſrae''s 
forever ; Fudab xeturned to their own Land, J/rael never did. By this, 
as the Prophet would abate the Pride of 1/r22I, ſo poſſibly he would 
ſecretly ditedt the beft among JZ/rael whither to go to find Mercy. 
h Including Benjamin, and ſuch of the Levires as adhered conftant to 
God's Law and Worſhip, and as many of the other Tribes as renoun- 
ced the Calves, Baal and all idolatrous Worſhip, and worſhip'd God 
alone as he requir'd : all theſe in this Caſe are included in Fudab, and 
ſo we find many ſuch returning with Fudab, 1 Preſerve, that violence 
do not ſwallow them up, nor length of Captivity do noc wear them 
out; and this preſerved Remnant ſhall return and be planted in their 
own Land, and there kept in ſafety. This Promiſe does ſeem to 
point out ſuch remporal Salvation, but as a Type of a far better and 
more-glorious Salvation. & Either by Meſſ1ab.. who is the Lord and 
ir God, or by God himfelf, as their God whom they did not as /(-, 
r4el forfake utterly. This Patlage þids ns look to that extraordinary 
' miraculous Delivezance of #eqctiab and. Ferujaizrme Vid. Iſa, 3736+ 
and 2 King. 18. 13. and 2 Chron. 32. 8. Here God 5-maverh all 
Force and Might, whether their own os theis Alkes, all igh. 
eclipſe the Glory of Gol in this Salvation. Now this was very roffy*-- 
pertormed in #ex:hial's Tune, when Sensckerib's Army was, 1/4. 27. 


| wary'd the Throne for twenty Years, and probably was feudatary to | 


TE - 


+ Heb. 1 


«eo thee 


ter z ; and God ſaid/unto him a, Call her name || Lo- || That is, 
not having 


and will ſave them: by the LORD their God k, and * will * Zech. 9. 


6b , . 


| \ FT, 1 » 
H 0\ $. E 2. 


Chay 


Antitype ſhall d2 gathered together. by the Spirit of God, the prey. 


7:4rms's, the Captive Jews-law "rwas not by; Fower nor.by Might, but; ing or the Galpel, ad mutual Iaftruction, Exhorcation and Encour. L 
the I.prd ſaved them, (oſhou!d it be.here, as Pj4l.,44+ 5 ,0+ {/4s $3» J5) agements of each:other* 1, Zerubbabel in Type, who was appoint<q oy - 
15. Zech. - bt e330 bnbik $. 1.0 4 aidvott. Cans Ver, uk {01S Appro-ation. gt the P3.. Fs putting themſ.1r.. de 
, "IMF - under his Con:luct,. to carry tnem up to Ferupulem. But in the a; ke 
-5 4, Now when: ſhe had, weaned; Lo-ruahamah 7, kc type.Chrift appointed by the EP Head of his Chyrch, "> wha %n ane 
conceived and. bare: a d@n 7. 22 wed wit rd {af levers heartily accepting, 1nay in, a Jarge Senſe be ſaid to appoin; t, de! 
m Though ſome wreſt the Words to an allegorical Senſe, I think | themſctves. - m Literally our of Raby]on,lpiritually out of Captivit, jr Cit 
the Prophet keeps the Decorum- in the Similitude,.and thereior, 25 | Sin and. Satan.. » Good, joyous and comfortable. ' # Of the Sees the 
\Women ordinarily conceive'n2t, whileſt they give ſuck, ſo this Gomer | Pegple of God, the, Sons of God once diſperſed, but now gathered 1, oy 
weaned-her Daughter er'e ſhe conceived. the Son, Which 1s to HE an | the Goſpel. | | j ido! 
}-mblem of. the final Rejedtion of the ten_Ttines, 7 To be a third'] 1", NE | 4 p 
Sign £0 this incorrigible;acd [cl-undoing Kingdom... = 7g OR = CH-A.P. II. for 
{| That is, -:9: Then! ſaid God 0, Calbzhis-: nameip {| Lo-ammtryq_; |; Smifatti A rn Hibs | 1s , 
19t my peg for ye 7 are not my: Pe ople's, ant'1- #ill "not: ben your The faithful. 71 iſrael contend with the people for their idolatry, TRE - 
!es GT. | ENT STS, Bron, 1 1:1 fn —_ be re _ «pogo Sy nts pe 4 Frere promiſe; that 
+ js; 7 WIKEDY) LK, 2 03 M3 Kg. 0 j11=-L. $.033.99C. 1 vial fi | SLE &: 'D15  EXFFI/Ng INTO C at- CRUVSP, I fone 
NCTE EO TID oma non wnn 5 
this.new. born Son,.the.Sign,or. Typ? 05 THEM, 41% WHOM ICT TCA ve". _ ade frmabboos: At: S þ 
ers God,and would not be reclaimed... 4 Normy Peoples, cog h'} % Mie Fe b " unto 'your brethren Cc, 11 Ammi d, and none 
ves ay wore. 2 peculia; Pegplcs 62 are f 30 More.in-my Actoune, 5 | "LP "tO you Rees e, || Rythamah, = i hb 
Youae-ak off as you deſerved, 7. louſe of Ap 16.1 'In the two It Verſes of the foriner Chapter, the Prophet dig) : 
firſts ie Hauſe, of Dapd,can rejeaet] from Got 13 dba Abrwng > fo Fudeb and W726), to that Ren. tai that 
og 1 pa GEL. 5 Though circumciſed, Yethave | hafit'of the "Steal, 4brabam, Who retufned out of Captivity, ang T 
me, fi wt not, be, Your, , i. + 4 ug F v7 Mel TOR A. 5 6*the ny6tt 4 71th i 10 * +; JT” 2 Ps and ſaid i 
ER VE iy Coveyadte you nefthes gg ey mor. Cor] Como w Jet E RD Mercy; 12169) Obes one anonker 09 nie” FR bt 
© PHT FP: &.nor. keep. my. Law; z B44, The Et 2p the, Idols, poking Wedge Fe, ercy, ain to" eXcite one another 6 miitual Lore on 
of your Neighbours are your Gods, ye are their eople; Ye ate nel:," ark Eſteem. 4 Declare, own or publith; b Who of cople are mate my * 
ther mine as to the Civil Conſtitution, ypu made you Kings, atid T bole, A a, popiien ant unregarded, but: now have 6h. 8” : 
kh STE ELALR. 4; Withouriny leave -0d IR Zndfiks toChfiran- | ined Metey 5 Durhat arethe Sans of the living God; whether Jen; verity 
2 321T ' Conffitheleiiate ive mine} for. your ' whote; Viagthtp: is the;politigg} '-Gen:iles%” you Chriftrans; as the Apoſtle applics the Words, Rm, E worſhi 
£1» \"»Cporriv'ancy of Feroboumithe Sappt Neure,, Yourbaye forgourn. apy B: 34 357 ala 10.19 The Antitype no doubt they are ro be underſtonl; BN 1 Thi 
© += Maker,an bujld Temples, Hofe,5+11 4-. YE FOrar uk ng: ch10ge my. (PU in the Et T and Type,the rfon$ hete mentioned ate thoſe who © noural 
Jth yy I Ghings to You, 1 muſt cotint you gets to me” T4 among this. B=ople. were Pious, feared God,amd kept! his Law, ſome done v 
% 997 \yrotett you againſt Dangers ard Enemies, or to repleniſh youW{fy4/tct.chere.wrere among themz3:'s:'To , thoſe, of the. ten. Tribes, wig Whore 
* Blefitgs; the Fruits of-my culonted. Goodigy;ror-t0ipity you. when [j4E0, and witlihe'thefe torty Years your Brethren: ;;4,Let them knoy to ther 
\ «4®. * yordoreither/warits or.:imact,comew c0:unfisyan jw ditheuliies; Or LO - thar.yet they'are the/People:of: God, :and Repentance may remedy al, ſhe will 
0: hear your Griss, or Pardon: yaure>uls, 08:ARSEPHAN Offering abyour” they. are. Rill within the Covent; of; their Father, Abrebam ; if they vooelt; 
v9, hand:-azyorhave longand{dfgrefulcdpeand have tried allivays: Page their: (Facher,' walk with God, all ſhall-be well.” e Ina Dec. oved h 
'z*: * for:to prevent your finabflfrundoing «<Jbtnnaty;fonow Ido forever : rum: to (-whar before was made-Emblem of 1/74et ) the Prophet' Wworkhir 
? reje:t:yuu:O: Houſe of 3frad; and-will ba Gods £0: you no mare ſhane Daughter, {o-Auhamaz ſome are;here diretted £0 reaſon (as tisve, Ws ever 
to any'of the: htather:ixatives.5i This God \cxechted: when he gave, [[26) with her: 7. c. with zach whoſe Name is yet Kuhemab, and it may ayena 
them-up-into the Hands:cbf Shomanifer, whoTſentthem:where:nmme, 'be ſo till, if Ir ael-wilkretam: it by returning to God. |, : jnpude 
row -canind'themg::they are tolt xo>ien, thes mow not! where they | 2 Plead- ith your*'mother-g, -plead +: for * ſhe'l with (u 
ae'y thyy.ars loſt 10.God, he loves ndti nor c{rethfop them, '': | 11554 +:1]\75 not my Wite* 7/, neither” am” | her husband. &: let ud idol 
pena: hho Let n "Bhs hb of gue; Wea of .agha ber cherofaes yur away her. whoredoms } on d MW 
12. 1 <tr" thall-be as.the. ſand. of theſes, which capgot. be: meaſug{g1[her fight 2+, and her adulteries #n from between her forth 
! Or, in- 8OÞ.qgumt edy : 'and'it. ſhall 'come.ite-ipaisz,:thatr\|-in the: breaſts o 45" £15 105% > 3h5.cm a dy | d abuſed 
 Wrgt a"wherbit was ſaid vhto het ? RE as Hut my be f 54 ah W"Cuſt Ante hen era preg wy bw: your Mother | : _ 
that. RAB 0 2 th) CHAD RNS hank 92 the ey] then debate it/Ffully; lay open'either niy Difpleaſure, how greatit 1s | 
fer, Hed Zie DRE Lajd ; 4 Upito by AU LLY F the 6h {4 or the Effefts df 'if already upon the Houſe + Ifrael, or oy Menaces 6q 
OLLBE LVIRg 0c Fo br tao 2  Doboold #122 qu 2067 bolf[dgainſt theit forthe future; by niy Prophet Hoſea: And next real: ith th 
« 4/Ehis. may anticinate-the (carnal 7cers Objetin7 that thug God]; left the'Cartiage-of your Mother: of Jrael 3 confider her Sins, her | 
would fail.of/ tits Word'to'4 dba; orhe:woulkt boſe his Feople;1me-" ! Lewdnels, her 'Adnltteries, her-'Unthankfulneſs, how inotorious, hon 20 pat! 
thimgdb,v vet, though'tteis Fribes'be ! for /@vepreaptivated; Gotvin: || long, how iniftiplied and aggravated- / 'g The Syttigogues, the whole 7 Becar 
have:his-//rat-x'Nob 1Fudlaffet the Flebyinot'thole very Rexſons;/ | Body.of thePeropIt[rael, which- wefe/emblemiz'd in Gomer the Wite $,nothin 
Families that are carried Caſtive?Cthonghl toriought I'know;i ot Inf of Whoredoms. þ Ye that are Sons or Daughters of God amid this low the 
caturelprs:the contrary; He may bed incteaſed for: Alrubani's (ile )- | degencrate; Idelatrous. Nation, ; you that have any Reſentments i FT 
burithe:}/>.z1'of God drearcink" to the Falglv/xhe Spiritual 'Seed'off | your Fathers dehgges or at leaft. deal plainly with her which is called tixfy the 
Abratamcontifting both of Few's and Genpiids3i  Thnnmeteble,lex-: | your Mother, and' ſay how little” right ſhe hath to be called my Wits, alts, ſet 
prefſed tby:an (elegant proverbiar Specth,/athitig t6 the Immetiſneſs |; and how litrte'reafon'T have to'own miy. ſelf her Husband, 7 In point ars, and 
ofithe Sarkis; J/@; 107 22%; Rant Rem, $. [2907 The time (ified; | of Rightiſhe is riot; for by her Adulteries ſhe hath: diffolved the Mar lough th 
and*the-thing-(hall-tertwtily p64 God. will bring 46abonr in Kit ime;: | fiage-Covehant; and/fo aboliſhed the Relation, though in point df Ive little 
As we-read it, "tis plain, tht in thole-Places' 6rf Countries, Where” ' Favt ſhe'is:not.caft off utteriy ;- I-bave not ſued ut the Divorce, n0r ke to ke 
a-People, dvictt: who Kfiew ?n6r! Gd} wetehmndribis Peopte;' there | turned hetiont ot Doors, bnt yet for. all that ſhe-is no Wife, nor hat © cannot 
fhowld be u/People thad{homte both be called, and be:his:Peopls ; che: þ any right :to: Honour, Maintenance,. or Ive of a Wife. | k Idondt us Peopl, 
Heatheri ſholld be dillet"it& the” Church and every -aed-God! | account my'ſclf bound by any Covenant of Marriage, to love, Mall 5 throw 
ſhould have: his.Yeoptes? Orc He! (thus; | hfteidilof being: called the | tain, comfort” or protett her z nor will 1 long do it, if by her colt WR almaneſe 
Peopteios G:4, you {half- bevoated the Chis fo-blefed a/change, | aned Eewdnels ſhe-ftill violate her: Faith, and abuſe my Patience: wen t 
that #ho: were once: far tb ant nota Peopltyſhatiiiow be morethan- þ Tell idolatrons Jrael, that. her God will deal with her as an abuſed iteth. 7 
People! they-[hall be Chit@ren: "Phe Gems and Fwy unconvertet. | Husband will deal wich an unreclaim'd adulterous Wife.  ] When yol 'la for 
c In the State of unconverced Qhes, &fe MEAront-God, without ths; | have pleaded; then make an Offer to! her yet 'once more, counlel atchiuln 
co Mb e090e fb K 0,654 f ) ybpll conkeks_it, perlwade, 'intreat-and incourage her to do what becomes a Wife that whe fl 
- Gb el * it melt, 2 Koo Vf 0 k © *e Gre ſhall | would not be divorced ; try-it,you-can prevail with herito caſt aſide, WARE Wit 
«Q 550. _belenl r&ed/-you { Relatibiſlnck | ad Twect&r wor Thall be tþv, adt ; and toremove from her all evi BraRtices' and Indlinations, to caft of WS 7 An 
' S2rjo gry 7 have Commulaiavatith God as wicOgotriRather and this: | Fpiritual Whoredoms, which all her::idolatrous Prattices are account all-not 
{Fall be the common or equal Priviledge gh this, whole 4/r4z4 of God \;, | ed to be. ' #4 Either remove the Jdols, ' their Temples; Priefts and all not 
This is fulfilled in the Kinggom of rhe M-{Þ:ah.under the Goſp a$ þ gaudy Rites for-\ever out of her Sight; as they did; /ſt. 2; 20. 0r elle Ir | 
the Apoſtle argueth it;"F9. 2%, 28,” 7'Whb. is the” Fotite in'of ceaſe from' her whoriſh Laoks,her unchaſte and -innnodeſt —_—_ 1 .X.to 
Lifeto'al his Children; dn wlit gavet chemi ey AﬀeCtions toſerye | Face /and Geſtures, - # Idolatiies Which are ſpiritual Adylteries. 03 Wh te than | 
him; to* offer tiviny, Sacrifices'ts the livin 'God.S6 are we lied; | AN immodeſtand.laſcivious manner of framing the Breafts, and laying 0 Hedvec 
Rom, 12,1, 2. .and1 76: 4+ 5 Bb & u int nxt ha: x DR | them _ Sq yrs W omen here: alluded ta, did entice a ents of Ge 
* Ha. 1, ox *. Thin ARS or die aa O16 | terers, and: {0 were/iciolatrous /jraetites grown impudent in their 100- all attem 
$4." Ter.2. (86 LP DET, Owe þ ihe | ty pews pom roman ant}. eQurtes !obhers 10. thamelcls manner to. turn Idolaters * _ So 
13. Ezck. .*:.. 2 2 FEY 224, Dey wy Vp. 05454) hee ALD 4d PEE | : el 
24+25.and 2P ornt themſelves one head 1, ang *they ſhall»come up | 3: Leſt p:1-ſtrip her naked 4 and ſet. her as in the Won this a 
37-16,22. ur, of he land m3; for great n /B3PI7" the" day of Je-'] day that ſhEwas * born'}, and 'make- her as a wilder , lends, anc 
IR bat or os nt 1dBilw Wann 1 - nome fied S1l2 3444 b Dirote neſs s, ang, ter. tier like a. ary land &, and {lay her with a: He 
- This Veeſe-without=doubt hath in» it botlvan hiſtorical Senſe;-afd. | TRITIE x. | wb Dt 3 get pets i 
a nivfticalior-ſpiritoal Senſe; ivtvoketh Comewhat ro\therreturn outro} | | *p This little-Word-ſuggefts great Hopes ; if this treacherous Wite rok 2 G , 
the ÞabyloniſhCaptivity,and totheir ſetlingir Cangut , butits looktth | willceafe hEr-Lewdnebs, and become chafte,the may beforgiven, It res d Dilappoir 
farther to a'more glorious Deliverance fromia.more mylerable Capti- | ierves room: tixt;Repentance and-Reconciliation,wirhout theſe it threa” antick Wil, 
vity.-& In the Type and Hiſtory,whenthe Babylainſh Captivity dif | tens. q: AS was ufually done by incented- Husbands, divorcing impudent he final If 
ſolved ;-and - the Captives'are-looted.. h:'The Children of the rwo-| Adulterefless mit £346,398, 29,-and' 23» 26. So Godwillitrip Beſs Itleſs Labo 
Tribes;'who adhered to th&Honle of -Davrd, Whowrre , carried Cap» | all her Ornaments which-14 gave, ig he-did gradually by jſrazl's Ee: Id Idolater: 
tives; Har under promile ofa Redemption from it: Some of the tew| mies' the Ajyrians,till-at laſc by: Shalmanejer ſhe was ſtript 70 tle ith her ſelf 
Tribes Whs either went «Over rv, aud did motporate with the Kings; | Skin, and-led. away: Captive; God caſt. her out thus by him. 7 1» le had tried 
dom of Fudab and ſg- were Carrie Captives with chetng or-fome ot the | not'much material to fx the Feriod of this Birth, but *tis enough God Un, come 
ten 'FEbes which. the Chiklirer'ot Judah tourdin the Kingdom of 54: | threarens, as lomietumes we (0, an EXLTEAM, poor, deſolate and ca tied Iſrae 
ty1on; which having ſwallowed up the 4ſy7i:nMonareby; and now the. | forte. Conditian, by a kind of proverbial Speech, as. naked as &'® terers 
te" iribes Captives to ther. conquering >wordon thus In Fype.y:butt] borne. 5 Lbs Phraſe may. Jomewhat intimate the time of 74" Wanton W, 
it is ſprritnally and myftically ts berunderfigodiol therwlole Hra-l of | Birth, viz..between Lbeir going:out of Ex pr, and; the 2 ings is uch the Tas 
God, Few #nd Genile; redeemid by; and ' converted to:Chiift;. inthe | Eow, or thriv.entring. upon their Travels um ghe Wilder, 1% rich Appa 
Day ot his Power, & By the Power" of. Godby the Decree-of Crus, | State was poor Enough then, now..it . ſhall: be as bad 6r worle, 1%! and'; greate! 
by each ather heartning ene aroaliertorreture zato the Lypegantie | hall be as tbe Wilttcach, (barten, ap? delulare, atfoding 1196175 0 Vol. If 


[ 


LD II. Ht 0 


c. 1» Delio ht, mich Tels for Profit 5 whereas Adultereſſes ordinarily 
ae or De profic and Delights. God will punifh Adulterous 7/7 4e/ with 
—_ both to her ſhe ſhall be like the Wilderneſs, horrid and itar 
my 5 This is much the ſame with the former,ana added to confirm 
nal Nuſtrate it. #8 Al] this {hall be done to the end the may be 
Jaſtroyed* Of old God led his People through the Wildernefs, to a 
City of Habitation 3 now he will make them as the Wild-:net+, that 
I: may periſh in it. x A miſerable End ſurely, thus ro be icorch'd 
oe i parching Heat ; ſo will God's Wrath burn up thule wicked 
iJolatrous //74e11es. 

+ And I will not have mercy y upon her children z ; 
* for they be the children of whoredoms 4. 


s Vid. chp. 1, vere 6. let. c, 4, 7 By this Expreſhion particular 
Pcrſons are ſeverally, as by Mother the whole Nation was threatned, 
© chat none might flatter themſelves with hope of better ; *tis obſervable 
| they are called her Children, not |God's. 4 Born in Whoredomaand 
like the Mother addifted to Whoredom ; as if God had ſaid they are 
none of mine by Birth,nor any whit like me in Diſpoſition, but a ſpuri- 
ous and hateful Brood, and as ſuch I will uſe them. 

For 4 their mother b hath. played the harlot c ; ſhe 
that conceived ther hath done ſhamefully d - for ſhe 
aid e, I will go after f my loversg, * that give h me my 
bread and my water, my wool and my flax, mine oul and. 
my | drink. | 

1 This demonſtrates the Truth of the Charge, and juſtifieth the Se" 
verity of the Puniſhment. b Vid. ver. 2. let. g. c Doted on Idols» 
E worſhipp'd them, and brought forth, and educated Children for them, 

| 4 This Prattice, though in beſt Circumſtances it can be put, was diſho- 
# nourable as well as diſhoneſt 5 but here is an Aggravation of it, 'twas 
done with ſhameleſs Impudence, and openly avowed, Fer. 3.3. with a 
Whore's Fore-head,.: e She took it Reſotntions, declar'd them, ſtood 
to them, none could alter her. Conrfe.  f When they came not to her, 
ſhe will go tothem ; impudent Adulterels / forſaken,thou courteſt and 
ooeſt, g This ſpoken as if they loved her better than her Husband 
oved her ; this high degree of Itnpudence. Theſe are the Idols ſhe 
Kworſhipp'd,and the Idolaters ſhe affociated and: traded with. b Where- 
s every Mercy ſhe enjoy'd was Got's Gift to her, and a. Fruit of his 
ovenant, Love and Faithfulnels towards her ; yet ſhe denies (like an 
mpudent. Strumpet) all his Kindneſs, aid ina manner chargeth him 
Sith ſuch Hardneſs and. ill Uſage, that ſhe had ſtarved, if her Idols 
d idolatrous Friends had not maintained her ; and gives out, the 
ead she eat, and Water she drunk, and: the Clothes she wore, all was 
their Kindneſs,: ., This is shamefyl indeed ; and the Prophet hath fer 
forth to thelite ; and now is there nivt good reaſon; why 1 Husband 
> abuſed Should without Pity caſt'of fach a Mother, ſuch Children, 
d leave them to live on their choſen Lovers, vz'to perish under 


FE 


. 


ic Hatred of. theip, deſpiſed God ? 


ae 44004 4:4 w oL i,14 «d wu - 04 $12.04 
6 @ Therefore # behold,k, * I will heds up thy way 
ith thorns 1, and + make # wall m1, that fhe ſhall not find 
er paths. [74 Eats + to W | 
i Becauſe she: is ſo. impetuons and shamelels in her idolatrous Cour- 
s,nothing hath, and she reſolves.nothing $hall hinder her, but she will 
low them, k Take notice of itthou lewd Womanand all that ſtand 
j, } Thou wilt it no'bounds to thy. Luſts, and thy Wandrings to 
ticfy then; I will deal with thee as Men do with unruly and rambling 
aſts, ſet a Hedge of Thorns about thee ; 7. e. compals thee in with 
ars, and other Calamities, which shall wound and pierce thee, that 
tough thou love thy ſinful Courſes, 'and wilt follow them, thou shalt 
we little pteaſure in them. Another Alluſion to the Method Men 
ke to keep in wildeſt Cattle which would break through Hedges, 
t cannot. break through Walls ; God will make, the Calamities of 
is People as a ſtrong and high Wall, over which they cannot leap 
id throw which they cannot break :* <0 was the'4Hſpian Army under 
W:lmaneſer, which coopt then up in a long Siege of Samaria, and at. 
Wt took them, and carried them into'a long Captivity, which now 
ſteth. # Wherein thou didſt.go when thou wenteſt to Egpyr, or 
7ia for Help; but by my Judgments, and thine Enemies Power and 
atchfulneſs, always shall be watch'd and guarded, thou shalt not find 
dw to ſend to them for Relief: © Theſe were her Paths, whereas a 
aſte Wite would to her Husband for Relief. " Tg 


} 7 And ſhe o ſhall follow p after her lovers,q, but ſhe 
all-not overtake them r ; and ſhe ſhall ſeek s them, but 
all not find'f them - then ſhall ſhe ſay « 1 will go and re- 
rn x to-my firſt husband y for then was jt better with 

We than now z. | 


0 _ in with many and great Diſtreſſes, when under the Judg- 
ents of God, p With earneſt Travel,and with weariſome Toll, she 
1! attempt every. way to get to them, but to-no purpoſe 3 Atflicti- 
is and Sorrows ſurround J/r4e!,theſe 7ſrae] can by no means break out 
to theſe Lovers z and they like falſe Lovers haſten as faſt and as far 
om this Adulteteſs as they can. q Idols and Idolaters, her falſe 
ends, and falſer Gods, r They which haſten after. ſuch ſtrange 
odsand Helps, as this shameleſs Harlor, shall-meet with Sorrow, but 
er overtake their deſired Help.' 5 As is the manner of immodeſt 
mpets, it-ſpeaks alſo her obſtinate Reſolution in her way 3 ſo J/rael 
look a God that would have ſought him to do him Good, and by 
d Dilappointments would' be. (for a lonk time) taken off from this 
antick Wildneſs, of ſecking to Idols that could do him no Good, 
he final Iffue of all is at lalt, she is wearied in her Folly, tired with 
itleſs Labour, and fits down hopeleſs of ever finding Help from Idols 
Id Idolaters. # As the Prodigal,firſt think well on it, next reſolve 
th her ſelf. x Reſtleſs the will try one way more; happy she, if 
I had tried this ſooner 3 this would have been ſucceisful, She will 
un, come back, and ſeek to her Husband. y Z. e. God who had 
Tried 1ſ74e} to himſelf,who was her Hushand indeed, all others were 
lterers, are Deceivers and Seducers, who abuſe the Credulity 
vaton Women firſt, and next abuſe their Hu-hands Beds. + How 
h the Tune is changed ; in ver. 4. all her Gallantry, her Feaſts, 
TI Apparel,;theſe are Gifts of her Lovers; not a word of her Hul- 
* $6 Kindneſſez. But now $he {ces and confeſſeth, the leaſt 


Ih 4 
nd » 


tnele her Paramours ; and at work with her Husband, she was better 
can at beſt with Adulterers. 


gold f, || which they 2 prepared for Baal h. 

+ This ynexemplified Ignorance or Inconfideratene$ was the Cauſe 
of all this loft Labour and Unthankfulne(s to God. 4 In her Fulneſs 
and Proſperity, as were the days of Feroboam : in Which much of this 
Lewdneſs was committed, and in which the Prophet calls them to Re- 
pentance. 5 Conlidered not, but carried it toward God, as if indeed 
ſhe did not know z nor did ſhe own it,or acknowledge it by any {utable 
Obedience and Thankfulnefs to the God of her Mercies. c Without 
Deſert or Worthineſs, it was Mercy, and this free,from whence ail ſhe 
had came. d Which is the Stay and Strength of our Lite, one necci- 
ſary Comfort put for all the reft. e Theſe chear the Heart,and include 
all Proviſion for Delight-and Sweetneſs. f The Treaſures of Gold 
and Silver, and all precious things brought in by Trade, and increaft 
among them, were the effe& of mine undiſcerned, and unacknowled- 
ged Bounty and Goodneſs. g The generality or body of the Fews; 
theſe idolatrous Fews, þ Firſt made the Idol with the Gold and 
Stlver,and next dedicated it to the Service of the Idol. Sottiſh Igno- 
Trance, that with one part of the Gold and Silver make a God,with the 
other part provide for Sacrifices to be offered to it. Thus one part js 
advanced to be a Deity, the other part of the ſame Mafs conſecrated 
to the Service of its fellow-Lump. What Abſurdities will not down 
with ſuch Fools and Sots ? 

9 Therefore 5 will [ return k, and take away 1 my m7 


corn # in the time thereof o, and my wine in the ſeaſon 


cover her nakednelſs p. | 

? Becauſe I was not acknowledged,nor ſerved as the Giver. þ Much 
after the manner of Man doth God ſpeak ; be had left large Blefhngs 
behind him among this People, but their ſottiſh Ingratitude provokes 
him to Reſolutions of returning and ſeizing of ail. ! Take into my 
hands,or reſume all I give,for all given was mine till,God never gives 
away his Right, m It was hers while thankfully received, and rightly 
uſed 3 but want of theſe forfeit that Right, and the Propriety reverts 
to God, 7 See ver. 8. let. d. o Either when they ſhould gather it in,as 
being ripe, or when they need it, and ſhould uſe it ; All they enjoy is 
mine, but ſince they ſo uſe me as to ſerve Baal by it, I will either 
take all away from them,or make all uſeleſs to them. p When I take 
away my Wool and my Flax, ſhe ſhall appear ſhamefully naked, not 
having one Rag of her own. 


mine hand «, 

; expoſe-her, or elſe I ſhortly will do ſo, &re long, 
| kednelſs. of her idolatrous Worſhip, (and perhaps the corporal Lewd- 
nefſes which Idolaters ſeldom were free from, may be here intended.) 
S Among whom moft will loath her, and hoot at her, ſome ſecretly 
deſpiſe her ; if any ſhall attempt to help-at this dead lift, it ſhall be 
to no purpeſe. # They who would deliver her are tew and weak, un- 
able to reſcue her from the Infamy I adjudge her to. In short,as she 
hath like. a Strumpet, shameleſly inal ſo like a Strumpet the shall 
be shamefully, with greateſt Infamy punished ; and I, ſaith the Lord, 
will ſee it done. 

11 I will alſo cauſeall her mirth to ceaſe x, her feaſt- 
days y, her new-moons x, and her ſabbaths a, and all her 
ſoiemn feaſts b, | 
x The Jollity of Iſrael was certainly dampt, when Tiglath Pileſer 
took 1jon, and other Cities, and captivated Naphthali, 2 X ings 15. 29. 
which was ſome, yet but few Years after this Prophecy : But 1ure all 
their Joy ceaſed above ten or twelve Years after, when Samaria was 
faken, aud Zoſhea and all 1/72} made Captives z ſo the Threat was 
executed in this Senſe : But the Prophet ſpeaks (as by what follows ap- 
peareth) of their ſacred or religious Joys, which God will abolish ; 
He did not ſet them up, but he will pull them down. y Though A- 
Poſtate 1/748] was fallen to Idolatry, and renounced the true Worship 
of Gad, yet by this Text it appears they retain'd many of the Rites 
and Ceremonies that were uſed by the Fews, or elle {et up others 
like them, as their ſolemn Feaſt at ſetting up the Calves at Dan and 
Berhel, in Feroboam's time. 4 Theſe were days of greater Sacrifices, 
Numb, 28, 11. and greater Feaſting, 1. S4M. 20. 5. 4 Their weekly 
Sabbaths. 5 The three Annual Feafts of Tabernactes, Weeks, and 
Paſſover, or others with them ; all which should ceaſe when theſe Peo- 
ple were carried captive, as they were by S2/maneſer. 


that my lovers hath given me g- and * 1 will make 
them ha foreſt 5, and the beaſts k of the field ſhall eat 


them J. | 

c Go& will do it either by Blaſting,or by the Aſſyr7ans,who as other 
Invaders, Shall ſpoil all. d4 Make very deſolate,or lay wafte. e Theſe 
two were mentioned, but all other Fruit-trees are meant, f This was 
in peculiar manner the Sin for which /ſ-2e} was punish'd thus ; they 
gave the Praiſe of the Eruitfulneſs of theſe Trees, and the Abundance 
of them, to Idols, robb'd God of the'Praiſe due for them, theretore 
God will take them away. g Their falfe Gods are here made the 
Givers of all outward Bleſſings to 1ſrael z vid. ver. 5 þ 1heir Vine- 
yards and Olive-yards, and Places where they planted and tence in! 
their Fig-trees, and other fruitful Trees. # Wild and uncultivared 5 
the Hedges and Fences $halt be thrown up, and all run into the Wild- 
neſs of a Foreſt, as it cams to pals in the A{yrian Tnvalton. k Salvage 
Men, ſuch as the Afſrians were, or rather in the Letter tne Beafts of 
the Eield should break down their Branches, and devour them, and 
pull off the Fruit as Foxes pull the Grapes, or wild Boar of the Wood 
root up and eat the tender and ſappy branches and Springles. 1 1he 


Trees and their Fruits. 
M 1 1; Argd 


Chap. ti 


of her Husvand's Kindnefſes was better than the zreateft Kindneſ, of 


8 For z ſhe adid not know 6 that 1 gave # her corn d, #79." 
and - wine, and oil e, and multiplied her ſilver and | 


thereof, and will || recover my wool and my flax given to |! Or, tate 


aw?y, 


10 And now q * will diſcover her + lewdneſs r in the * EZ<*.15- 


Q 


fight of her lovers s, and none ſhall deliver her our of 37' © 7 


+ Heb: 


' 'q When I make a Seizure, and ftrip her of all that is mine, T will folly, or, 
7 Folly and Wic- villany. 


12 And I c will + deſtroy d her vines and her fig- + Heb, 
trees e, whereof ſhe hath faid, Theſe are my rewards f 7 


dfol:t8. 
* Pſa! $0- 
I2, 17. 
Tac 5. 5" 


_— 


>» 


—_— * - 
- x = ” " 
Ki Ie 4 - ++ e 
Gyre wo > "Y 4 * X * wwe" + RR 
- c ad. 4 
Iu 5Get » - £ 
. — gm 2 £2 a * "i. 4" > > arg: 
, —_—_——_— = - 
. . By -” 
"= £ | I 
6 - _ _ A . 
24 wo - ns "> : 
v4 q IARC I 
me = 


= "I 
IT > 
x — ——_ — 
VL 


*. -—- n - 
RE. Deans 
GOT IRC Ton" Mp: ; 
2 . "= ' yy A wr_ 
> 1-5 fp lens, a = ono > 6, ney 
xenbth3 ak, 54 XK none 


— 


-$, 


NEO FISEWIEY aoudl 
En 

SRL ory EL _ 
_ — OY 


Pets 
BE 4. 
Les % PR 
———_ 
> = ” 
q We x 
Wn a 
"= 


C 
- + ; - 
yo" 5 2 73 BO "3; 4, P22 IP an—_— 
720-0 ont; 
X - » 
22 4 


4 at.” . < 
PR 
- _ 
TER _ 4 _ 
22." = OP => _ 


243, 


- 


np 


III * _ 
_ T5. . _— D ans 4 
8d x" p 
- - -- Fu 
-_ _—_—_ "* 
ws 2h XD E a - =y = 
Cog Bag —— - . 
: 8 : Fol - 


T_T. SY —— WS ” 


Io © + p po 
£ £ oF vw - - ors —_ . pom : 
; . _ R_— ps —_ - > 
NR SR IT. be nk _ _— — _ — <_—_— EI 
— wy = ah. ., _ n 4 _— 2 a — ond - + "$8 % £©& NE -: D x uf ite gy < _— 
- 0 eter Heb = 0 gs EY Pt > . —_— : AT Int _" NEE SIS At 4 20-1 == 
( = "oe - 6 > extrthtdrts &a « . _ eo AV *-.. . Ava Fe 443" Sg RAI v > 
: C . 6 ——— . Eten = X <_ oo tf ng or tru Agee + he o 
"—x 4% £ . a 


: py 
2 ſo . 
gr Se "3" a> » 
= AAR, 0 Po 
At en rn... 
- Lo 20 ns + ABA - 
- = 1 OO —_— 
©. DS OS oe, 
SOIT . 


. TOSCICALARS i I Se T7 7 re mg ho > 


Chap. 11. 


13 And I will viſit m upon her » the days o of Baa- 
lim p, wherein ſhe burnt incenſe to them q, and ſhe dec- 
ked her ſelf with her ear-rings and her jewels r; and 


ſhe went after her Lovers s, and forgat me t, faith the 


LORD. 


m Puniſh, for the Prophet threatens them with this Viitation, by 
which it evidently appears to be a Viſiting in wrath. = Dhe Kingdom 
o The Sins of thoſe days paſt. p Baal was the great Ido] 
of the Ten Tribes, the Chief of their Idols, their Lord, (as the word 
{7nifieth, ) and Patron : Hers it is plural paulim, either co denote 
the Multitude of Idols which they worſhipp'd, all call'd by this one 
the Multitude of his Statutes or Ima- 
es, and of his Altars and Temples erected to Ba. in all Places of the 


Land: q Sacrificed and Worlhipped, for this one kind of religious 
r To put the greater Honour ups 


icheſt and beſt Attire, or it may be 
it would make them the more ac- 


of Iſrael. 


Name, or perhaps becaule of 


Obſervance is put for all the reft, 
on the Idol, they put on their r 
they blindly thought this rich Hab : : 
ceptable to their ſenſlels Idol, s Deckd thus, Strumpet like, ſhe 
went on by her Spiritual Adultery to prayvoke Me.; 
me, if ſhe did at all think of me, Adultereis like. - 


(ke p 14 ©þ Therefore « behold x, I will allure y her, and 
SH *., Dring z her into the wilderneſs a, and ſpeak || F comfor- 


ber heart, rably þ unto her. 


u This Particle ſeems to conne& theſe following Paſſages with 
thoſe that went before as cauſul, or giving a Reaſon why God will do 
thus, and ſo are difficulcer than if read as ['JJ? ,] might be efrher as 
a Particle that ſpeaks Order or Time of things, and 1s as much as afrer- 
wards ; ſo *twill be eaſy, 7 will viſit, &c. afrerwards 1 will allure, firſt 
puniſh, next comfort : or elſe it may be adverſarive, as much as yer, or 
but ; ſo*tis plain, thus ſhe like an Adultereſs hath finn'd, and I have 
puniſh'd. Bur, or yer, or notwithſtanding 1 will allure 3 or elſe 18 Is 4 
Particle that dotb more ſtrongly affirm ; ſo rendred, the place would be 
leſs obſcure, thus, 7 will deſtroy her Vines, &c. Surely I w7I allure, &Cc. 
is uſed Feremiah 5. 2. and Zechariah 11.7, & With Attenti- 


thus 395 


merly, where with beft Leiſure ſhe may conſider and bethink her ſelf : 
So underſtood, our Verſion is eaſily intelligible, 6. Things that are 
full of Comfort,and in ſuch manner too as is comfortable to the Hear- 
er : Here are glad Tidings, gracious Promiſes, and wonderful Mercy 
to the true jſrael after Atfitions. have brought them to God, after 
they are converted from Sin, by theſe means. | SA 

* Joh. 7. 15 And I c will give-her her vineyards d from thence 

4 e, and the * valley of Achor f for a door of hope g, and 

ſhe ſhall ſing þ there as in * the days ot her youth #, and 


ter. 2:7. 


Ezek. 16, AS in the day wien ſhe came up our of the land off 


22, 60. Egypt k. TOS 
c Reconciled to her, 4 Will hath ſettle her, and abundantly enrich 
her with Bleſſings, as the Uhraſe implieth., e Either from the Place 
of their Exile and Sufferings, or from the Time of their Hearkening 
to the Lord ſpeaking to them in their Diſtrefſes and Sorrows or if it 
refer to ver. 12. *tis a Promiſe to comfort them under that Threat 
which ſwept away the Bleſſings of Vines and Figetrees, in their own 
Land: and here is a Promiie of Vineyards to them from the time of 
their Repentance, and from the Place where they are Captives. f 
Which was a large, fruitful and pleaſant Valley near Fericho, and on 
the very Entrance into the Land of Canaan ; . where after forty Years 
Travels and Sorrows, 1/rael firlt ſet foot on a Country,ſuch as they ex- 
petted. g As that Valley was a door of Hope to /ſrael then,by that 1/- 
rael ſaw that he ſhould enjoy the promiſed Land 3 ſo would God deal: 
with repenting J/r2el in the times here pointed at. bh Praiſes to their 
God for his Mercies, and fing forth their own Joys too, and anſwer 
each other, fing in reſponds, as the word tignifieth. 7 As that Age is 
moſt jocund, and exprefſeth it by Singing ; ſo ſhall it be as renewed 
Youth to 7'rael, full of Bleſſings from God, and full of Praiſes to God. 
+ This Paſſage explains the former; their Youth is a time ſomewhat. 
ke the time of their coming out of Egypt, their Mercies now like the 
Mercies of that time, and their Joys and Songs ſhall be like too: How- 
ever, theſe things were fulfilled to the Type, whole Repentance and 
Return to God is not very eminent : They are all fully made good to 
Antitype J/rae] the Church of Chrift in ſpiritual Bleſſings, chietly here 

intended. | 


{| Thatis, 16 Andit ſhall be at that day /,” faith the LORD m, 
_ that thou » ſhalt call me || Iſhi s, and ſhalt call me no 


I{ That is, MOTe || Baali p. | 
my Lord, 1 When through deep Diftreſſes T have prepared her to return, 
and ſhe who was an Adultereſs repents, and renews her Covenant of 
Love and Obedience, and in the day of my Bleſſings on her. mw This 
confirmeth, and enſureth the thing. = My repenting J/-ael :. o Both 
by Words, Aﬀections, and Obedience ſhall own me as thy loving ten-| 
der Hushand, and delight to call me ſo. p Though the Word hath no 
11l in it (elf, yet *tis ſo near to the Name of the abominable Idols, that 
E will no more be called Baal:. | 


*Toch.22, 17 For q * I will take away the names of Baalim r out 
7.PC, 16.4, Of her mouth s, and they t ſhall no more be remembred 


Zech. 13. by their name «. 

2. q It.is my Purpoſe to aboliſh the Memory of Bazlim, r This great 
Idol for all others ; God will cut off all the Remains of Idolatry from 
his Church. s So God required of old, Exod. 23. 13.t Thele falſe 


Gods, and provoking Idols, Shall be quire forgotten. « Their Names | ſown in the Earth, which multiplieth exceedingly z fo the : ct” 
[ 


perishing with them, when G2d $hall ſo cut off all 1dolatry from his 


"WE "8 


HOSE A. 


j Church in Goſpel-days, *twill be the final and fullef Accomplishmenr 


s And {lighted 


|. tribute to the goad of ſuch as any way depend on them. Thus het, 


| command their Dew and Showers z they would be as Iron overs! 


07 this Predittion. 


our of the earth a, and will 
ſafely b. 


might either ſerve or hurt them. 


ſings shadowed out by theſe Temporal Bleſlings. 


cies 11. 


now it shall be an everlaſting Contra@ and Marriage between ny]; 
rael and their God.. þ This Promiſe is repeated to confirm it, andy 
remove Scruples and Jealoufies. # On equal terms on both fx, 
þ With mature Advice, or well in formed and ſetled Judgment wi 
Reſolution, this Covenant $hall be as a well taken Oath, finite 
with Integrity of Heart and Judgment. 7 Without deſert in herthz 
is betrothed of meer Lore, and freeft Kindneſs. .m' This, tho the fare 


Loving-kindneſs is the never-exhauſted Fountain, Mercies are the 
ver-failing. Streams, the abundant Eruits of that Love towardth: 
poor and undeſerving Objetts of it. EY 

20 I will eyen betroth thee unto me in faithfulneſs, 


and * thou ſhalt know the LORD 0. | ] 
| #7 This Verſe is a third Promiſe in the ſame words to comfort ay 
encourage the true J/7ael, only Faithfulneſs is here added: a Qualina- 
tion of this new Marriage, which $kall continue firm on a mitul 
faithful Promiſe, Love and Contra@. 0 His juſt Anger which tath 
punished, his rich Grace which hath now pardoned, and now taket 
| into Covenant again, his Faithfulneſs and tender Compaſſions, hisAl 
ſufficiency and Sovereignty, that we'may obey him, and reft ſatist 
in his Love as *tis our Reward and Happineſs, | 

21 And.it ſhall come to paſs in that day p, I will hea, 
4. ſaith the LORD 7, * I will hear the heavens 5, andthe 
ſhall hear the earth, ff 
_ þ In that day when this new _. Alliance is made, or in the day 
Goſpel-Grace., q This general Promiſe God gives us to encourages 
to cry to him, he will ſo hear as'to anſwer. 7 This is the Sealtoti 
truth and certainty of the Things promiſed. s There is a Subordts 
tion of Cauſes, all ſecond Cauſes do in their Ranks (like Wheels in! 
curious Engine) move as moved by the firft great Spring, and ſo at 


God the firſt and yniverſal Cauſe will influence the Heavens, hel 


God did not command them to diftil their Drops or the Earth vIt! 
this is dry, parch*d and barren, and it does as *twere- cry to Heat 
- for refreshing Snawers, for fruitful Rains 3 when the Seed ſown, 
Vines and Olives, planted, are-at a. ſtand, take no rooting, the 
as it were Cry -to. the Earth for its kindly Influences and Fate 
that they may ſpring up, and yeild Fruit for Fexreel ; which maydl 
and cry, and wait, but never be ſatisfied if God do not hear titl 
and | cotnmand - his Bleſſing of fruRifying Influencs, which Godle? 
doth promiſe to his people on renewing Covenant with them : Got 
Seed, this gathered. ones, his eſpouſed Church ſhall be ſerved tolt 
Comfort by all :the Creatures. When Diſobedience, Backſlidnh 
Idolatries,and ſuch. hike Sins did provoke God to puniſh them vil 
Famine and Scarcity, now their Repentence and Obedience 519 
bieft with Plenty; and: God will ſet the frame of Heaven and Ext 
due order te effett -this, there shall be an Harmony and Corte 
dence between all- ſubordinate Cauſes moved by God the firſt g's 
Caule, whence-expetted Events and Fruits shall certainly be pi0w# 
ed for their Good and Comfort. 


22. And the earth ſhall hear the corn and the # 
and the oil, and they ſhall hear Jezreel. | 


23. And * I will ſowt her unto me in theeatlls 
and I will have mercy upon her that had not obam 
mercy x, and I will ſay to them which were not my Þ® 
ple, Thou art my people y ; and they ſhall ſay, T hou 4 
my God z, / 

rt Their Sins, the Enemies Sword, and God's juſt Diſplzafure 


| VF 1o theb 
waſted and lefſened their Numbers,bnt now the Lord will ble, 
with. wonderful increaſe of People, expreft with allufon ways 


tiplied after the Babyloniſh, Captivity,but much more are 11 ur” 


Chap | 


18 And in that day « will I make a * covenant x fo, ; 
them y with the beaſts of the field, and with the fow,, 
of heaven, and with the creeping things of the ground :.;* 
and I * will break the bow and the ſword, and the bare! 2 
make them to lie doyy'tk 

Yo 1; 


u See ver. 16. let. l. x Command, or enjoin, and theſe Creature; " 
Shall as duly obſerve the Command as juſt ones keep a Coven, Jo 
» True Converts, «the 1ſrael of God. x3 With all the Creatures thi 


It is a full and gracious Promiſe of abundance of Peace, Safety, an, 
Love among all through the Creation. for the Comfort of God's Peg. 
ple. 4 But if Brute Beafts do not hurt, yet unleis more brutish Cre, 
tures, bloody Men, be tamed, there will be little ſafety to the Church, 
therefore God will put an end to Wars, and make Men peaceabte jn 
their Diſpoſition, far more peaceable than heretofore they have hee, 
b By a ſpecial Care of, Love for, and Preſence with them, Gag yij 
provide for their Safety. Now, I doubt not but all this in ſome mg, 
ſure was made good to the Fews returning out of Captivity, among 
whom were allo ſome thouſands of the Houſe of 7/7ae} who had thei 
Share in this promiſed Peace, Safety and Proſperity. But the full Ace 
complishment is tobe to the Church of Chriſt, and.in Spiritual Bec 


i9 And Ec will betroth d thee e unto me f for eye 
Z, yea I will betroth thee unto me þ in righteouſneſs; 
' and in jndgment k, and in loving kindnels 7, and in mer. 


c Thy God, who was offended, but now am reconciled. 4 Tho 
was divorcing thee, will now betroth, on new Terms enter Marriage. 
Covenant with thee. e O Jſrae}, who art my People, and learef 
thine Tdolatries and Rebellions.  f God of Mercy and Truth, gh 
| hath forgiven and changed thee, and made thee ſutable to my 
on and Wonder at the Methods of Divine Grace. » With kind | and who will be as kind and gracious as thou canſt defire or nee, 


Words, and kinder Uſage, I will incline her Mind to hear and conli- 
der what I propoſe ; I will perſwade by ſweeteft Dealings, like a kind 
Hushand that makes uſe of the Diftreſſes of his difloyal Wite, to com- 
mend his Love to her, to win her to himſelf, and to Ways that are the 
Honour and Happinels'of a Wife. + After 1445 1 have brought her into 
the Wilderneſs ; (ſo the' French) and ſome other Verſions, and ſo it 1s 
plainer than as we read it, « Deep Diſtreſs or Captivity, with all the 
Sorrrows that atten Captivity : then 'tis likely ſhe will hearken ; or, | 15: « - 
by Wilderneſs may be underſtood a retired Place and Solitary, where | with the former, is ad.tcd to enſure all to this new eſpouſed Wite;a 


ſhall be no Diverſions of. her Mind, and no ſuch Temptations. as for- 


Z The former Covenant was broken, and the Marriage null4, by 


. afflited $ 


vu 
”- 
IP!) 


ad! 
the 


loy 
; 4 
= oro 
= and 
WE ton 
EE will 
= woul 
© was f 
& him, 
a / He 
2X Love 
8 with 
8 cauſe 
=X to th 
know 
dearly 
part. 
'me fot 
Relatic 
look'd, 
Hearts 
Idolate 
Wine t 
uſual in 
gons of 


m Whic 
tainted \ 
| or rede 
quantity 
but note 
F ſome 37 
whole w; 
Proviſior 
kind of P 
4. Jy 12s 
gratitude 


3 A 
' many d 
- ſhalt n 
thee «, 
This \ 
{ Ment bet 
Expett an 
thee, r 
here, ma 
. ber waiti 
modeſt, n 
ous Lj 
Life Prai 
commit 
the Cont! 
mutually 


4 Fo 
« © witho 
a Sacrifi 
Ephod 
x Now 


Iſrael mud 
tery, bot! 


Jet in Me 
long time 
Whether 
and the g 
the two 
ther til 

the Fews 
Line ſhatjj 
ang they 
Kingdgm 


Voll. 1 


4 fince the preach 
4 Elett of God. 


, . ing of the Goljcl, and the gzthering in the 
1nNcreas > f a - 7% *E . fe 
u Either, the Land of Canavn, it you refer 


diſperſe 


r o he Zews after. the Captivity, or the whole Earth, all Places 
% | = rn” you do as you ſhould refer it to Goſpel-days, and lo 
"al ” en this Promiſe fulfilled; x See chap. 1. ver, 6. let. b, &, 


we have 


and ver. 10. tO's J So great is the Change Grace hath made, that 


' 'eople are once more taken to be a-pecu:iar People: A 

R _— —_ them is ſaved. 4 Not in word only bes with hearty 
Confent ſoy, AﬀeRion and Thankfulneſs they ſhall be my People, 
as well 25 call themſelves ſo. This People of whom the Prophet hcre 
ſpeaketh, ſhall openly confeſs the Lord is their God, Soveraign to 
command and rule, and Saviour to deliver and fave them z their God 
| hem Law and Life, to dire their Obedience, and to be 


WY +, 1 7 (4 o 4 . ». /* . . 
ng T © £" exceeding great Reward for it; their God to ſanQity, juſtify 
-0- "* and glority- 

2 
n CHAP, I. 
n EY gs 
25 By bis loving and buying an adultereſs, God ſheweth the long and deſolate 


condition of 1jrael before their reſt auration, 1——5, 


HOSE A 


God threatneth 1/r4el for the wickedneſs of the People, and Prieſts, 1----11, 


Chap. IV. 


{ of the Fews make their C icf Officers to rule the Fews, but Strangers 
ſhall be Princes and Governours over them. «a Either right, and ac- 
cording to Law ; (theſe Sacrifices they had long lince calt of } or 
Idclatrous ones which they would chooſe. ' 6 They could carry none 
ot their Images with them, and the Aſrians would not let them make 
new ones. c No Prieft as well as no Ephod., 4 Idolatrous Images 
kept in their private Houſes to worſhip and conſult with, like the Kc- 
man Lares and Penates, Houſhold-Gods; in one word, ſuch ſhould be 
the State of theſe Captives: They ſhould have nothing of their own 
either in Kingdom and Civil Afﬀairs, or in Church and :\eligicn, but 
- wholly under the Power and Arbitrary Wills of their conquering 
-NEMIES. 


5 Afterward c ſhall the children of [ſrael return d, and 

ſeek the LORD their God e, and David their king f, and 

ſhall fear the LORD g, and his goodneſs þ in the * latter # 1%. 2. 2: 

days 'y M:ih.4-- 
c After theſe long and ſore Troubles have broken their Hearts and 

opened their Eyes. d Repent ; 'tis not promiſe of return into their 

own Countrey. e To know his way, and to live under his Frote&ion 

and Bleffing, to worſhip him; and they ſhall pray to kim, depend on 

him, conſult with him, with ardency and earneſtnels of Detire, f Not 

Son of Feſs, who was long fince dead; nor Zerubbabel, but Meſſiah 

who 15 elſewhere called David, Pſal. 132. 10. Fer, 30. g. Exch. 34.24 

and 37. 24, 25. which ſee; and Amos g. 11. g With Reverence 

ſhall pray, depend and conſult their God, and worſhip his Son the 

Meſſi4h, whom the Father ſent out of his infinite Goodneſs and Kind- 

nels towards us. h God and his Goodneſs, 7. e. the good and gra- 

ctous God, ſuch to us in Chriſt, God in Chrift and with Chritt thall 

be worſhipp'd. 7 In the days of the Meſſiah, in Goſpel-times, 2:4 

perhaps the laſt of theſe latter days. 


CHAP. IV, 


eſpecially their abominable 1dolatry, 12 
it by JſraeÞ's calamity, 15— 19. 


'H 
verhe e with the inhabitants of the land F, becauſe there 15 
- _ g, nor mbrcy h, nor knowledge of God 7 in the 
an ”. : 
4 Attend, conſider, and duly weigh z it's the hearing of the Mind, 
as well as.of the Ear is here required, 6 He that ſpeaks is the 
great God ;z tho the Meſſenger be a Man, the Meſſage is not Man's, 
but it is the Word,the Meſſage of the Sovereign, Holy, Juſt and Mighty 
Fekovah, who ever ſpeaks moſt important things, things that reſpet&t 
our Duty and Safety. «c You of the ten Tribes with whoſe Anceftors 


14. warning Fudah againft 


Ear a the word of the LORD 6, ye children of 


Iſrael c-; for * the LORD &d hath a contro- — 
Jer. 25.31. 
Chap.12.2 
Mich. 5.2» 


ng ©; Hen a faid the LORD b unto me c, * Go yet d, 
Ay love a Woman e (beloved of hey friend f, yet an 
ef adultereſs g,) according to the loye of the LORD toward 
the children of Iſrael þ, who look to other gods z, and 
a | love flagons of F wine k. - f s 
F; 4 Or, And, Heb, or, furthermore. bCommanded. c Hoſea. d Again, 
Is ® or once more, ſo it -implieth he had once already been commanded 
EZ 2nd done ſome ſuch like thing.- e In the former he was commanded 
ol © to marry, in this he is commanded: to Jove ( the reaſon of which 
© will appear in the. png of the Parable ) a Womay, tho de- 
oy 2 {rib'd by her - Charatter, yet not named; and tho her - CharaQter 
rho = would ſuit well enough to Gomer, yet it was not ſhe, for this Woman 
* = was to abide, ver. 3. for him, but Gomer was preſently married to 
il him, or at leaſt, ſo repreſented; this was bought, Gomer was not. 
by f Her Husband tho ſome think it may be ſome other Perſon, or 
F Lover. & Either already tainted, or that certainly will be tainted 
k with that Vice, a divorced Woman ſeparate from her Husband be- 
"a "Þ cauſe of her falſeneſs to him. + Let this be the Emblem of my Love 
nj £9 the Children of Iſrael; by this I intend, ſaith God, to let 1ſrae! 
" know how I haye loved, and how ſhe hath loved 3 how greatly, 
tat dearly,conftantly on my part ; how ſlightly, inconftantly, falſly on her 
hs part. i When I adopted them to be a peculiar People to me, to take 
< me for their God, and requir'd' they ſhould have none other (which 
go Relation is well expreft by that of Husband and Wife ) they have 
th look'd, liked, loved other Gods; and depended on them, and their 
Hearts have been eftranged from me; they have turned downright 
' Idolaters. k Loved the . Feaſts of--their Tdols; where they drank 
F Wine to exceſs, by too great Meaſures, which without diſpute was 
uſual in the Idol-Feafts, Amos 2. 8.. 1 Cor. 10.21. or elſe theſe Fla- 
ul; gors of Wine ſpeak their looſe, drunken, and riotous living. 
- 2 So11 bought her mto me{for fifteen pieces.n of ſilver, | 
th and for an homer” o of barley, and an -| half homer of 
ket harley p. 4 2 hn ; | 
Al . TAs TI was commanded, I procured, or as we read it, bought :, 
fel m Which exactly anſwers to the State of the Fews when in Egypt, 
tainted with Egyptian Tdolatry, and poor without a Portion 3 bought 
or redeem'd. to be affanced to God, » Whatever was the exa@ 
cal quantity and value of theſe Pieces we need not here curiouſly enquire; 
Ie but note we, it was half the value of a Slave, Exod: 21. 32. and was 
t ſome 27 5. 6 4d, 0 This Meaſure might be about 14 Buſhels ; ſo the 
> whole will, for her Diet, amount to twenty and one Buſhel, no great 
” Proviſion for her Diet. p And 'tis Barley in both places, the meaneſr 
i kind of Proviſion, and ſuted to a low Condition, Fudges 7. 13. Exek. 
fo 4.9, 12. All this the fuller to ſet forth .//reel's Indigence and In- | 
" gratitude to God, and God's Bounty to //rae!. 
a 3 And I ſaid unto her, Thou ſhalt * abide q for me 
ere ' many days r, thou ſhalt not play the harlot-s, and thou | 
br ſhalt not be for another Man #t , ſo will } alſo be for 
tet thee 4, 
res This Verſe is the form of Contract, or the Articles of Agree- 
Fr: ' ment between the Prophet and this Woman. q Dwell with me, and 
rd expect and wait in an unmarried Condition, until I ſee it fit to eſpouſe 
nth thee. r 'Tis not ſaid how long ; but a Slave, as ſhe is repreſented 
al, here, may not think this ſevere. The Preterment will compenſate 
het, ' her waiting. s This is the third Condition, ſhe is to live chaſte and 
let modeſt, not to do as ſhe had done. This was to ſettle her in a ver: 
on tuous Life, and to prove whether ſhe would betake her ſelf to a 
ob Life Praiſe-worthy. #t She is bound to marry none other, nor to 
ins commit Adultery with any other. « In due time | will accompliſh 
ail the Contra, and as I wait, ſo I will be for thee : ſo the Deed is 
Mr: mutually ſeald and fign'd. 
11 BR 4 For the children of Iſrael ſhall abide many days x 
bs . * without a King y, and without a Prince z, and withour 
Nis a Sacrifice 4, and without- + an Image b, and without an 
Ephod c, and without Teraphim d. 
x1 x Now the Parable is unfolded and made plain, it ſhall be with 
Iſrael much like as with ſuch a Woman ; they and ſhe guilty of Adul- 
| tery, both puniſh'd with a Divorce, both puniſh'd long with ſuch 
hh . atfliled State, both made Slaves, kep* hardly, and valued meanly, 
joe yet in Mercy, at laſt pardon'd, reaccepted,and preter'd ;_ but this after 
pet long time of Probation. How long we cannot tell, nor liſt to diſpute 
if Whether 70 Years of Babylon's Captivity, or whether thele Seventy, 


and the one hundred and thirty Years of ten Tribes Captivity before 
the two Tribes went Captives, i. e. two hundred Years z or whe- 
ther till Meſſiah's coming, or the general and laſt Converſion of 


ef the Fews, long *twas to be no doubt. » None of their own Royal 
5d Line ſhall fit on the Throne and rule them, but Foreigners, Enemies, 
"y uni they that had conquered them ſhould be Kings over them : So the 
rhe Kingdom ceaſed, as chap. 1,4. 7 The conquering Kings will not out 


Voll. It. 


' Angels, but have not kept it, you that have turned afide trom your 


f Who dwell in the Cities and Towns of 1/rael divided from the Houſe 


inftead of Truth here is Verjury, inftead of Compathon here 18 Ex- 
ecration, and evil ſpeaking. " od: 
denying of Truths, derrauding, leftening Good and repreſenting it 


difed to fecret 'I heits, and ſome openly prattiling it. p Which was 
a Sin grown high 


over all Hed ) Jr ; xr c 
che Law, which exprefly forbids what you daily practiſe. r Slaughs- 
ters are multiplied ; by Blood the Scripture nndertanderh Shughtcr, 
(Fen 4+ 

terer, W 
or poſſibly it may reter 


T Fom's. - _ a I 
" __ <— . ” *\- ; . 
4 _ FM es ut & a —_—_ a + = ” 4 
at - : pg, "47. 
4 = b __ . Iz WY" L A 2 . os . 
"2s — —_ ; as vo "+ "| Wyyrtnry 21 1 ba = . - x = < ov LY : WIS 8 Fo = 
» ee + x _ web's * - * _ - wy \ *y _ Ws", ) G'y 0 ey ww #4 - —_— 5 - - 4 
S 4 # © Wo x Js. - > £ ANEEIPSIREA s " : = © F y = OE Ini a4. gd - : xv wh 2"; 80s 
: a "45 b y On 3. a Te erthns LN _— » 44 Br weaned} BD : Ta 1 5D Dd SS I37 7,51 IT ec?! »e = bn EF 
* . g 22 "_— Pg wn 7 AL. Ts - w x cw —_— te © _ _ = "4:4" TP, - y 8 - Ng ; 5 "= 7 
ERS. IIS... - VI £- b < ew 3 "F* _ I ” ET N x - . —mIE mor yaw _— <> E444 bx <cimze 4 «4 _ to ITE” = oe _ my boy —_— 
addr. F >4 © [om we 4 _—— Wes ups & <5 55% wo * . b I us . SF; - OST” 7 - —_ > <4 - pe g= —_— " _ " Wo, 
OS. $59 9 5 "> ee I - ns * - o_ wig =&, _ —_ - = . , _ - var 
”*X - . G > * — a+ TIP A Gs 1)» xo” y . "4 "> a - at z — 
- ” % : Uaketes £1 Lg Hs 8 tho 57 We EOEIR —_ Phe royt > - - whe, os. r= 2 7 + Pa A ao - -_ »I Poe = X 
. - " - » S : a : m_ I 4 p - a PII" TRY 
= ya tag, p _ ” Z © © abr 7 y AC 1 [4 pp 3h) te- vos - A . 4 I A] Ee of 2 2 4 ' Þy + . jo % 5. OR A an 
. q od « : op 4 < — - ” "7 a K Ca eo a "= a 5 ,- . s vey, - : 7 > " 
_— , ». ; * ax : - = a ia s ; þ - . Pb 3 Rag 9% Q , —— —— — Pe n_—_— , NM was. 4 $i r ee 4 
_- G—_ - ad a, 320 *, T-2S _ , : »$= - - _Y. > 7 ne, AS Fw * Io wig gags; =. »- k. 1 . - - Soup Pa 4 - eats nu 
3 —_— F ., —_— 22 - 6 . —- L 0 "a P's 3 + - hog I & M44 go. Py. oo ITO . Ly 
ba, 2 Sons 5 L + OY > r ” ww a . 4 P; - 4 . d "YR m * 
« = akon "7 poo E WO _ - 6% es - was | . = " $-} 5 4.57. Bo "> 
* yo - pm ———=—ny 1160 CAS <7 q 4 p 5; g , > LACS o—_—_ "7 ”» — : *X "} —_; ' . PN acts ws 4 24 p 4 
= _ _ ? .. a w—____ FS x i. 00 - — ral 4 —_ _—__ or SK - atv. 2D nr xx yp rd "0 Y F _— — — i... a4 voP 


b 
w oo pa _ 
Px” * 2.40 - : PSY 
" PEELED : - 
4 if” 0 
= OE 
= -- - . 
” . 
"a+ As - 
_— "MT" - 


-— 

_ Mo Or 
"£1 5 x __ 

: He FN bh - 
- : OY 1 * 

oo hen. + o ” g Yu; boa 


my Covenant was made, who received the Law by the Diſpoſition of 


4 


—_— 


God to Idols. 4 Who knoweth your Sins, who hateth, threatneth 
and will judge, and puniſh unleſs you repent, it is he that ſpeaketh, and 
ſummoneth you to plead with him. e Juft matter of Debate or ar- 
guing againſt you, you have wrong*d him and he will right himſelf, 
yet fo that he will be clear in his Judgment ; all ſhall ſee that the juft 
Lord doth juſtly, and that this Peoples Sins are the cauſe of all their 
Sufferings, that God doth not delight to afflift the Children of Men, 


of David, and from the Houſe of God ; ye that dwell with Idolatrous 
Neighbours; it is not a few, but the generality of the Inhabitants, 
'tis the whole Land I have an Attion againft. '£ No Faithfulneſs in 
their Minds, Words or Works; they cover Falſhood with fair Words, 
till they may fitly execute their defigned Frauds. There is neither 
plain-heartedneſs nor conſtancy in their Purpoſes and Words. þb Kind- 
neſs or gentleneſs of Mind, all are hardened, and reftrain their Bowels 
which ſhould be open*d toward the Indigent and Necefſitous. There 
is neither Compaſſion nor 'Beneficence among them, they pity not,nor 
relieve any. 7 All generally are Ignorant, know not what God hath 
done for them, or what God is in himſelf, or what Candor and Truth, 
or what Tenderneſs and Beneficerice he requires in his Word ; if they 
have a flight knowledge of thoſe things, yet they contider them not. 
They have raſed the Knowledge ot God out of their Minds, & This 
ſpeaks the univerſal Ignorance, Mercilelneſs and Unfaithfulneſs of 
that Age. 

2 By ſwearing 1, and lying mn, and killing », and ſteal- 


ing o, and commitring adultery p, they brake out q, and - + Hebs 
0i00de 


blood toucheth blood r. 


I Either fallly, or profanely, or curſing, and wiſhing evil to one ; 
1 Of all kinds; atfirming of Falſhoods, 


whar *tis not, greatning what is in others 111, and ſo flattering in lome 
caſes, and defaming in other caſes, &c. ' » Tho God hath torbidden 
all kinds and degrees of Murder, this People through Ignorance of 
God do fill the Land wich Murders with open or ſecret, by Cruelty 
withholding Relief from ſome, by Violence and Falſhood cutting off 
others: The Temper of this People was toward killing, their Deſigns 
laid for it, &c. 0 Injuring one another, either by taking away what 
was another's, or detaining what ſhould have been his, or giving lets 
to another than was his due: Every one inclin'd fo Frail |, many ad- 


_ 4 >50T %. 1+ ” 
—_—_ a bo by w 
So Gnas _ 4 F P! - - - 
Jy Fa FIY 29-3 : 
hy or £ \ Mo L; I vs » wy 
= y, - * $i ” "N” my _ wa 
[© —Y . \ ARS _— 
oy T on: ' - 
_—_ ms oh C $a 1 > 7m - 
”— — OE; EI. _—_— 5" 
—_——— — 


> 
-.. 


EE er 


among them, a Sin direttly againſt the Truth and 
Mercy which ſhould have been among them. Under this, all degrees 
of Adultery, unchaſte Thoughts, Words and Geſtures are ingluded. 
5 that (well aboye ail Banks, or as unruly Beafts that breaic 
ges, ſo you, O 1J/r4-lires, have broken down the Hedge of 


— 


4 As Waters 


10, &c, Pu. 5. 10. poſſibly the Wrong done by the Adult 
as (as Amnon's} revenged with the {laughter of the Aduiterer ; 
; ro Murders committed in the very Court of 

HB h 2 . the 


- 


w_—_— 


——_ - yy" es 


COIL ES «onion er nd Neg 4 PO IIEID——_—_— - 
- «. < 08s... _ 


= © ad —_ 
——— == - = ——— 4 - : 
CO rn — rv 
- * x -- 


Chap. IV. 


the Temple ; {> the Blood of the Murdered touch'd the Blood of Sa- 
crifices. It is too particular to refer it to rhe Blood of Zech2riah {lain 
between the Porch and the Alter, and which-(ſome ſay).ran down to 
the Altar, and touch.d the Biood of the Sacrifice. Or what if this 
ſhould refer to what will be ere long, when Ferobozm is dead, when 
Zechariah is murder'd by Shallum, 2 Kings 15. 10. Menaven {lays 
Shalium, ver. 14. and ript up Women with Child in Tipſah, Ver. 16. 
when Pekab flew Pekabiah, and Zofpea flew him. Theie Kings being 
thus lain, no doubt much Blood was fpilt 3 all which happen'd in Iels 
than fortv Years. For from Zechariah to Vekab's Uſurparion are bur 
fourteen Years, trom Pekab's entrance on the Throne tov Hojhea s Con- 
{PIracy are twenty Years. 

3 Therefore » ſhall the land s mourn ?, and- every 
one that dwelleth « therein ſhall languiſh -, with thc 
beaſts of the field y, and with the fowls of Hea- 
ven -, yea the fiſhes of the Sea alſ> ſhall be taken 


away ' | - $ | . 
r Since their Sins ate ſo many and ſo great, for, thoſe, very Sins al- 
2ady mentioned 'in the firſt and ſecond Verſes. s Which the ten 
Tribes did now inhabit. 7 Tt is a Meraphorical' Exprefhon, for pro- 
perly it cannot be ſpoken of the {enfe!els and inanimate Creatures z 
but as Men and Wornen mourn under the los of their Comtorcs anu 


Joys, as they negleft themſelves in their Habi:s, and go lels neat, (o | ſhould be Teachers, are and will be. ignorant, will not know, Teied 


when the Sins of "the People ſhall bring an Enemy upon the Land, 
when War ſhall firſt ſpoil their Cities, Lowns, Vineyards an.l Olive- 


yards,-and finally ſhall carry the People Captive, all ſhall run into [that Il deſtroy your Prieſthood ; and I will do this: with Deteftaticy 


horrid and ſaddeſt State, and be in doletul plight. The ſame Ex- | 
preſſion ſee in 1/z. 24. 4. and much like Amos 1, 2. u NO ſort of 
Men but had provoked God and finn'd,no fort but ſhould be punilh'd ; 
all that continue in the Land rill theſe threatned Judgments overta«c 
them. x Shall with Grief and Vexation pine away ; what they lee 
with their Eye ſhall make their Heart ache, and faint with greateſt 
Dejetedneſs and Ielpair, as the word imports, /ſ4.16.3.-and Foel 1.12. | 
» Theſeare elſewhere menacetl , Zeph. 1. 2+ which ſee 3 God pabiſh 


eth Man in cutting off hat was made for Man'SBenefit antl Comfort ; | - 


and *tis probable that the ramer Cattle were ftarved'for want of Grals | 
or Fodder, all being, eaten up and conſumed by the waſting Armies, } 

+ The tamer and innodnr; either kill'd) by Enemies, or offenfged ith 
ſtench and noxious Air, die of forſake the Country, or are devohred 
by Eagles-and Birds of Prey,which in thole Countries wait on Armies, 
7 Whether by drying up the Waters ot Riveygy Lakes, and Porids, or 
by corrupting them "with Blood and Carcaſes, or by what other way 
we know not ; he can do it, who faith he will ; and we are: {ureit 
ſpeaks the Greatneſs of the threatned Deſolation. | 


a Yet alet no-man b ftrive EC. nor reprove d another : 
for thy e Pcople ' are as they that ſtrive f with the; 
Prieſt g. Ne 3 


_— CO IE 


4 Tho Judgments great and waſting are ſo ſure, tho the approach- | 


ing Calamities will lay all utterly waſte. 5 None of private.Capa- 
City ; nov. [rieſt or :Prophet any more open their Mouths to .reaſon , 
and debate with thts Yeaple ; let all know they are ſo obſtinate;andy 
-hardned;”tis'to no purpoſe to warn any, mure.. «©, Contend as in Cauſes! 
pleaded before a Judge, tay, not the Law before them, who have {o; 
often retuſed to hedr it, - 4,No more chide or ſharply inveigh againſt 
their Sins and Ways. ;. Or this whole Paſſage may be thus read, Tet. 


ny 


. certainly there none that -miy or can ſirive &cs, Allare fo corrupted, ! 


that there is noheitree, who may with Canfidence argue againſt ot JETS. | 4 SCC Ver. 6. let. t. o Covetgus, Luxurions, Idolatrous- Prieſts, the 


ROS 2 2 


"IX 
Uhap, [ 
me a : ſeeing thou haſt forgotten the law of thy God þ | 
will alſo forget c thy children d. ES ; 
t The Divorce was not yet.iflued out, the ten! Tribes yet were j; 


fome ſenſe Ammi. nu Not. only in the. Prophetick Stile are, becaule- 
e re long they ſhall moſt certainly be deſtroyed, but in the courſe gf 


tne Hiſtory *tis plain in matter of Fatt, many of them” were cy: oF = » 
by P#] King of Ajſyria, 2 Kings 15, and many were deftroyed by tha by I 
bloody and cruel Tyranny of Menahem, and more were ruin'd in the: 9 
Eftatcs by Exattions and Impoſitions, the Civil Wars; tte Seditiors o 

% >< 


the Uturpations of ſome, and the depoſing of others were things the 
irophet #sſea lived to ſee, and I believe ſpeaks of here ag thingy 
char had already deftroyed many. , x Of God, his Law, his Menace; 

bl 


— ob OE BHS 
WAS, Ii PAIRS Ren 

5 

= bu -* 

Py +4 


raged ptr 


But our Veriion is better of the two. , e Thy Country-men,, Zoſea, it; Prieſts of Baat and the Calves, þ Watch to, ard earneſtly deli, 


the former words be the words of God to the Prophet :. Or. aſe if. 
they . be the words of the Prophet to the, People, then he ſpcaks to! 
them of the Temper 'of their Neighbours andl People with whom' 
they-dwelt. It is much:;one which we take, for Hoſes was now amo3g! 
them z and whether his People or no, they are ſtill the ſame Perſons! 


ſpoken'of, f There! js no 1agenuity, -Modeſty, or Fear of God or!| their doings. 


Man left among theta, they- will contend with their Teachers, Re-, 
provers, and Countellors, - They will jukify themfelves, and condemn; 
all Reproof ; they will-adhere co Sin and. reject all better Advice,juft; 
as they Ml. 1. 2, 7. and 2. 14. g This doth not ſuppoſe, much leſs 


/ 


afſerr, the Priefts of Baal and the Calves to be true Prieits; bnc were; |; + uniſhment ſhall be equal too, both. Prieſt and Peqple ſhall be led in 


they as true as they are falſe, yet tuch 1s the Temper of the People, 
they would not hear, .contider and amend, whoever conteſted "with 
them. Let them alone: tizeretore to periſh with obſtinate Sinners.* | ! 


5 Therefore þ ſhalt thou i fall k in the day 1, and the they ſhall commit whoredom t, and ſhall. nor ij 


+Heb.c Prophet z allo ball fall » with thee o in the nigh p, and 
off £2: I q will f deſtroy r thy Mother s. | ER 

: hb Becauſe thy Sins are ſo many and ſo great, and thou art incor+ 
rigible in them. 7 The Prophet curns his Speech to the People, thou 
O Jjrazl; he ſpeaks to them as to one Perlon, they were all of one 


. . » - 4 Þ] y - - > , 8s - — , ; * - . p P 
piece in Sin, and ſhould be ſo one in Puniſhment, & Stumbte, and | (ajq i, eat up the Sin of that People, 5. e. by finful Courſes tie) 


tall, and be broken. 7 Or this day, 7. e. very [uddenly,your Fall ſhall be 
preſently effeRed by your Enemies Power, Vigilance and Succeſſes; it | | 
{hall be no.longer delayed. m Who ſpake ſmooth things, who prophe+ 
fied Lies ; the talſe Frophets of Baal and the Groves, Fer. 14, 13, 14 


to this People. Or, as we read it, when the People are ruin'd and 


continually fall ; or allutively, both ſhall tall-as a Man that falls: inthe |, 
Night, Orelſe the Prophet ſhall fall in the darkeit Calamiries,he thall 
be covered with thickelt Clond,who fallly foretold-and promi ed Light 


or make to cea, or be lilent tor ever 5 Vid. cap. 1. ver. 4. ket, n, 
s Both the State , or Kingdom ; and the Synagogues, or mock+ 
- Churches : ,The Publick 1s as Mother to private Perlons, fo all hal 
be deitroyed, which allo came to pals betore the Propher Z0jea. died, 

_ helivedto-ſce his Threats tulfilled, x 
Heb. 5 «| My people t are + deſtroyed 4 for lack of 
; knowledge: : becauſe thou y halt rejected Knowledge z, 
I will aiio rejeX thee, chac thourtſhale bz no. prieit co b 


ed, nor ſatisfied with what they eat. _ See' /Zapit4. 6, 7 Tho tif 
{ "> « 24: Avant multiply Wives to'relieve them under the Cutie. of Barrenne' a 
I5, IG, and 23. Ig, 7 Be In as ſad calamitous Condition as atr\', [want of Children, -or by Fornication ſeek” ro mulciply their Of 
0 Either the Prophet that is with thee, that lived with,and prophelted ſpring, tho they do this which they ought not ro'Qo. b 
. Eves, 9 _ not hereby increaſe the number of their Children, either the Wort 
captivated, with them the falſe Prophet ſhall likewiſe be ruin'd and ſhall not bear, or the Children nor- live. - x They have a poſtatize 
captivated. p Either proverbially taken, People and Propher [hall | ac turn'd trom the true God, from'his Worſhip and Law. 


away The hearT 4. f 

to luch People. q The Lord againſt whom thou haſt finned. r Cut off | - 'y Unlawful Converſe with wanton Women, the forbidden Plet 
ſures of an Adulterous Eed. 42kxceſs of drinking, and 1c 
immoderate Pleaſures ; one kind being put for ali. 


' deprive them of the right ule of their Underſtanding anu ee” uck to the 
by theſe courſes both Pricits and People here have dilzvice Fen S 1/720) hat] 


{=]ves to diſcern aright between good. and bad, between ſais 39 
gCrouss | 


his rovidences and Government of the World: "Had they knowy |; # 
his holy Nature, his Jealouly for his own Glory, his Hatred of Ge © . 
and his Power to puniſh it ; had they known their God, they Woulg uu 
either have forborn to tin, or repented of what Sins they haq com So bs 
mitted, and ſo prevented his Wrath. . y The Prophet now turns his W -;;; 
words from the People to the Priefts among them. The Peoples I : -: Sages 
norance was much from the Tgnorance and proiane Humour gf ther hy 
Priefts, and this -the Prophetidoth \tacitly charge on the. Prieſt; to 7s 
whom he ſpeaks as to one particular Perſon ; thou who calle th a 
let, art accounted by' the People; /and 'goeft under. the Name g 2 wi 
Prieſt. x Strange Perverſeneſs!. they who ſhould dire others, who TO 
I 

Knowledge ; deteſteſt to know,ay the Chald. Par,” # With equal Diſjye ” tain 

7 will reje& thee, I will deſtroy* your Church-Conftitution, and ji F and 
and Abhorrente tob. ' '6 O 17x { and. you O Prieſts. you haye xy I al. 4 
linn'd together, flighted 'and difreſpected the-Law, broke all the Ire, wg by h 
cepts of it,” Jet up other Gods;:other Worſhip, other-Prieſts than th, MIS CEry 
Law directs; - 7 I will pay thee' in thy own Coinz 1 will, forget, ;,, WF 5&3 
flight and diſregard. 4 The People of 1/rael, the whole Kingdom o = times 
ten Tribes ; "both thoſe pretended Prieſts, and their Ghoſtly Chilqrey = Out þ 
with them. E157 m_ | eltecr 
7 As they e were increaſed 'f, ſo they finned apaing G9; 
me g : therefore * will I change þ their glory ; ing! where 
ſhame k, | oo :- lp not hi 
e Kings, Prieſts and People of that Age, that 1s, Feroboam, ſecqr could | 
great Grandſon. of Febu, who raiſed the Kingdom: to its higheſt Pit White 
and Glory,-: f Both multiplied-for Number and grew great in Riche, Ont toy 
Power andcHonour. Such Temper were they of, 1/2. 1.2. 75S Antier 
grew with their Wealth and-:Honour 3 God who. raiſed them ya;hy People 
them provoked the more, they turn'd his Bounty .1nto Sin. Toouſy 8 Pough 
a return from Sinners to God. © -þ Turn by a juſt Retaliation. i They 7” Cony 
turn'd their” Glory, all that in' which they might glory above other 8 acrific 
into Sin. . # I will turn it into Shame; that ſhall be their Diſhonoun, MIR Place &: 
which had it.been well uſed might have been their, Honour, 1 vil (as the. 

| degrade the Priefts, impoveriſh the People, captivate both. " often 
3 They & eat up / the' fin m2 of my: People », ard ; fr Sins 
they o | {it their heart.p on their iniquity 4: 0 where by 
_ k The Prieſts who miniſter .to the Idols. '7' Live upon with Ds” lies, b 
light, maintain" themſelves andtheirs. m2 Either:/by. conniving at, he Sin 
their Sins,.not:reproving as they feſerye, leſt thereby. they ſhould dil Juſc Hand 
oblige Perſons and lefſen their Bounty to them. Or leave themtfi Gm pup 
hirir, and next look for Sacrifices for thoſe Sins, like ſome that make 4 Or, Sp 
Gain by, the Sins gf People with whom they diſpenſe; Or more plan to any Fa 
ly by Si2 is. meant Sin-offering, in which the ' Prieſt had his (hare grievous 
toretold ( 

hope and expedt.. q The People will fin, and bring Offerings for Si **.} | 
which is the iniquity as well as Gain of theſe Prieſts. + - + whe 
'9 And ** there ſhall be like people, like prieſt : and! pontter) 
will puniſh them for their ways, and - reward then Jl bat = 

| | 

The ſum of theſe Words is this, that God will certainly puniſh; a q Or, * 
for the Sins both of Prieſts and People are' ſuch, that God will a0 them ſuch 
farther forbear either, and when'he comes to puhiſh he will do icac obſerve t 
cording to the Waysand Doings ef;both ; where. Sins have been equl, play 
to Captivity, and there uſed withour any differenting reſpett of on: Wal hink I wi 
or other. | f 7 5 
10 For r * they ſhall,cat, and not' have enough 5: BOC Will I 
Ill incre 
creaſe « : "becauſe they have left off to. take heed to tit ow Hu: 
LINEEF &, -. : RW, WO | xl, 
r Or And, Heb. This is another part of their Puniſhment, and ti to ſatisf Ki 
better render'd as a particular part of their Carle, than as a Calls any ed | 
of that which was ſpoken in the former Verſ ] « $, they art Sar 
hat | POxXEN IN the former Verie. SF In-ver. Sd. UNC) Vhoredom 

; L 0m , u Pertorm 
projet for their Livelihood, now comes the Curie God will puniſh ing next, 3 


his Sin with : He will withhold his Bleſſing, they fhall-not-be nourid and prevals 
All this it is 
ot God, as 
and ſcatter, 
toreign Iny 


ls a] 
not Judah 
either 

LORD li 
4 This 
32 Tranfiti 
fation, or A 


” They thall 


: | =t [, 
11 Whoredom y, and wine, and new wing 2 [4 


Iced al 
z Beſot Men, ab 


Phet ſaw Fu 
Deging i 
Mpie an 
erVerd iro 
Uwelic Stond 


£85 0G 


12 © My a People ask (counſel b at their 0 oi 


v ; 8 hg ' : atlas Rf 
nd their {ſal declireth unto them 4+ for 000, oy 


« 
” 


[ 


wok 
1 Do 


6 | 13\* They g 'facrifice vpon the tops of the moun- 
9” tains þ, and born incenſe upon the Hills z, under "Oaks þ, 


o Whoredom p, and your ſpouſes ſhall commit Adul- 
© tery q. | | | 

= &7 Both Priefts and' People,” þ Where their Altars. were, ſome- |. 
© times to God, ſometimes to Idols ; theſe were the high Places choſen 


E ctcem'd little elfe than Tdolatry, 7ſa. $7. 7. 


8 (as the Heathen did) that the Numer, Deity delighted to dwell, or 


p. IV. 
of Whoredom e hath cauſed them to err f, and they have 


one a whoring, from under their God g. poet 

1: Whom I choſe, brought out of Fg ypt, and ſettled in this Land, 
who are not yet caft off, tho they deſerve it, who call themſelvez my 
People. b Enquire about future things, and what ſhall befal them 3 
I threacen from Heaven, they believe me not, but flatter themſelves 
*will be b=tter than my Prophets lay it will, an they enquire of 
their Idolatrous Priefts concerning their Fate. c Wooten Statues or 
1dols. with which their Prieſts conſult, and make them give Anſwer 
ſating to the hope of theſe People. 4 This was another kind of 
forpidden conſulting with the Devilz an Art much in ule in thoſe 
times and places. Yeu read of this Ezek. 21.21, Theſe were parts 
of their ſattiſh Tdolatry, So they thought they believed what rheir 
falſe Prophets reported from.the Sraff or Stock 3 unparallcli'd Folly, 
nat to believe God ſpeaking from Heaven, but at the ſame time be- 
li-re a Stock or Staff that knows. not in'whoſe hand tis, or what uſe 
*js put to, e A Heart addicted .to, and enſnared with Whoredoms 
Syiritual and Corporal. f Hath blinded, miſled and deceived them, 
69 /[4, 40, 20» and 44+ 14, 18, g So: they have lett their God, re- 
fiiinz to be under his Guidance, endeavyonring to evade his Cor- 
vcions, and to- fortify themſelves, Rebel like, againſt his Armies 
raiſzd to chaſtile them; truſting herein to Idols. 


and Poplars 1, 'and Elms #2, becauſe the ſhadow there- 
of is good 2 : therefore o- your Daughters ſhall commit 


out by themſelves, and where their Sacrifices offered to God were 
i Another piece of Ido- 
 latry they praftiſed, which as it uſually was joined to their Sacrifices, 
| ſo is it here added by the Prophet. This Idolatry abounded in J/7ael, 
where without Controll it had heen in uſe ever fince their Revolt if 
not before. A. Wood ſo deep rooted, that the beſt Kings of Fuday 
could not quite extirpate it. & Some fay Pines, or the Alder. 7 The 
white Poplar. m Or, Lime-tree; or the Tree whoſe Boughs ftretch'd 
ont together, caſt a pleaſant Shadow. Under all theſe 'tis certain the 
Antient Heathen did perform their Tdolatrous Services z ſo did this 
Veople chooſe all theſe great Trees, which having. many-and great 
Boughs do afford the. darkeſt and cooleſt ' Recefſes, Eztk. 20. 25. 
2 Convenient for the Sacrificers, while. the Smoke and Smell of the 
Sacrifice went up through the Boughs, and the Coolnels of the ſhady 
place kept their Perſons from ſultry Heat z-it may be they thought 


be often in ſuch places. 0 For theſe Sins of yours (tho you account 
them no Sins) for your harmonizing with , Heatheniſh Superſtitions; 
for your leaving, my Temple, and againſt my Commands ſacrificing 
where beſt liketh you- p Shall diſhonour themſelves and their Fa- 

lies, by their Lewdneſs and unlawful Converſe with Fornicators. 


he Sin ofthe Fathers is thus puniſh'd, that they might. ſee God's | 


juſt Hand puniſhing; and the Sin puniſh'd : Here.is ſpiritual Whore- 
tom puniſh'd ; With giving up: Daughters to their wandring Luſts: 
| Or, Spouſes , of ,your Sons, as Gallic Verſon ; a great unhappineſs 
to any Family to be diſparaged and wronged by Adultereffes, and a 
grievous Puniſhment. where or whenſoever executed ; and this is here 
toretold (*twill be o) not countenanced. 


14 || I will not puniſh q your daughters when they com- 
mit whoredom- r, nor your ſponſes when they commir 
adultery -s : for themſelves are ſeparated with whores *?, 
and they ſacrifice with barlots u- therefore the people 
that doth not.underſtand y, ſhall || fall z. 

q Or, viſit upon your Daughters; God will not any -more lay on 
them ſuch Refcraints,as remarkable Puniſkments are uſually to all that 
dbſerve them. © They are threatned thus to be thrown up'to their 
own Hearts' and others Lufts. ' r You have rejefted my Law which 
lirected the Correttion' and Puniſhment of ſuch Sins, and do- you 
think I will by extraordinary Courſes reſtrain, where you caſt off the 

ordinary ? $ You ſhall have no bitter Water of Jealoulie to diſcover, 

onvidt and torment an Adulterous Wife, as Fudah had, Numb. 5. 12. 

*Or Will I by unuſual ſtrokes of my Hand (mite them. This Impunity 

ill increaſe. your Grief and Shame, and ſo you ſhall be puniſh'd. 

The Husbands .and Fathers are Examples to Wives and Daughters 3 

hole are ſeparated with the lewd Wowen, which either they took 


HO. 8 EE: 4. 


; camNcatton revived, the Paſſorer kept, £:fr, « 9. 

vided che Land, #4jþ. 14. 6, there the TaberniGe wa 

aſter they came over Fordan, and there they facrificer 

Ab4b's time a College of Prophets 4 and now. whtior 

rence to the place 0n thele accounts, or for what v!1.o! 
matters not, but cert3in "tis this Gilg! was choſen gut by ©»: fs, 
by ſucceeding Idolaters, 'Or a; Pace 0! publick Worlniy ot their Idols 
and grew famous for it. Go nut up to partase or their tdo!itry.ur to 
I2arn It, Tris a Concile Speech which forbi:ts. all the Si; Mk be CAS 
at Gupal, f Which is Betiel where F+<29.lodge.!, hae a Vion "Tre 
Angels, and a more comfortable Yition of Gol! wh) «P:car'd T0 Fact - 
who jor this gave Name wo che Place, and call ir b. the] Nate 8. 
God; but when Ferovoam made it the place for his Cal-- worſkin, : 


ip 4 


became and is called Berh-aven, Houſe of nity or Iniquity, Go vt 
thither to worſhip 3, *tis as the former, a prohibition of being, of t';a 
Religion Wiich was in ule at Ecth-avin, and had heen the _—_ Wig 
Religion for two hundred Years, or thereabouts, wiz. ever flac 4e- 
roboam's time. g This iS in it {elf a lawful Oath, and may b< utes. 
but in the Circumltances wherewith *tis here attended, it's tDrbidden, 
becauſe many who went thither yet pretended there to ſacrifice only 
to the true God, that they own'd him the only living God, reverenced 
him, ſwore by him, tho they went up to B-rh-27n or Giigal, yet they 
worthip'd God there. This is a Synecdoche, a part being war tor the 
whole Worſhip of God, which the Prophet warns them not to blend 
and mix with 1dolatries, which yet was done before Toſral/s time 
Zeph. 1.5. which ſee, with the Annotations on it. s 


16 For h Irael 7 ſlideth back, as a backſlidins heifor þ : 
now / the LORD m will teed them as a Lamb in a large 


place . i 

þ There is juſt cauſe why Fud2bþ ſhauld not imitate Iſrael, and this 
Cauſe 1s. here aſhgned.. 27 The ten Tribes, k Grown luſty, fed and 
wanton, will neither endure ths Yoke to work, nor be confined in her 
allowed Paſtures, breaks over all Bounds, caſts off all Service, ſo is 
Iſrael, as ver. 7. which fee. 1 Ere long, or ſuddenly, fo chap. 2. ver, 
19, - m Offended by their Sins, and provoked-to Diſpleature. # In 
their finning they were like an untamed Heifer, boundleſs, ſtrong,and 
ſrood upon their Defence ; but in their Puniſhments they ſhall be like 
a'Lamb, ſolitary, full/of Fears,.in a large Place or Wilderneſs, where 
no Reſt, Safety or Proviſion $ Such ſhall be the condition of the ten 
captivated Tribes. .This 1s. a Proverbial Speech, ſetting forth the 
torlora State, which 7/rael ere long ſhould fall under. 


17 Ephraim o # joined þ to Idols : let him alone 4. 

o The Children of Epkrajm were numerous and potent among the 
ten Tribes, a principal. part” of them, and out of which Tribe the 
frſt  Idolater and Uturper did ariſe, 1 Xings 11. 26. and therefore 
'th2 whole body of the ten Tribes, and the Rulers among them are 
; here: particularly pointed at.' p Aﬀociated as Friends to Friends, or 
Joined. as Lovers are joined to Lovers ; married to Idols, and will 
not be taken off. q He is indeed obſtinately bent on his old courſes,and 
as ſuch throw him up, he will nor return, let him wander,but let ic be 
alone, O Fudah be not his Companion, his Friend, £0 not with him. 


love, Give.ye#, .. - 


this is either ſowre and unpleaſant, or corrupt and hurtful, there is 
no, good Savour in it ; therefore, O F:42h, decline thou the intimate 
Faniliarity, and have nothing to do with the Idolatries of 1/7421. 
sS Both ſpiritual and corporal. t Without ceaſing from Feroboam's 
time to this day, 200: Years, one King atter another, and one [dolater 
after another ; not. one, but either was an idolatrous Worſhipper. of 
Baal, or the Calves, &:,. » Beiide all this there 15 ihameful Oppreſſi- 
on and Bribery among, them, and what good then, O Fudah, canſt 
thou look for from Society and Friendſhip with them ? 

19 The wind hath bound her up in her wings x, and 
they ſhall be aſhamed y becauſe of their Sacrifices z. 

x The Whirlwind of Wrath from God hath already ſeized this old 
Adykereſs, and carried ;lome of her Children away already, 2 Xings 
15, Ig. and ver. 29, Execution of Judgment 13 already begun, and 
therefore, O Fudah, keep dilrany form Ephraim. y Greatly contounded 
and diſappointed of their Hopes z as thou, O Fidzb, wouldft prevent 
this Shame, fly the. Szciety of theſe Idolaters. 2 What 'they made 
their Confidence ſhall be their. Shame, their own Idols cannot help 
them, but their Idolatry ſhall ſurely undo them. Their Idols which 
they worſhipp'd and depended on ſhall be their Shame and Confaihon, 
for thy God, O Fudab; hath curſed ſuch People. 'Confounded be au 


0ihem upon putting away their lawful Wi'e, which theſe Men did 
to latisfy their Luſts,or elſe ſeparated, 7. e. withdrawn from the Com- 
Pany of their fellow-Idolaters, that in privacy they might commit 

Vhoredom withthe Women they chooſe to themſelves for that end. 
# Pertorm the Rites of Sacrifices, both in offering firſt, and in feaft. 
ng next, In, which: Feaſts Wine and Women would prove great 
and prevalent Temptations to Whoredom among thoſe Men. » By 
all this it is evident;this People is a ſottiſh ignorant People, that-know 

vt God, as ver. 1. 6, Ll, 7 Be utterly ruined, broken into pieces, 
and ſattered; broken at home firft by Inteftine Wars, next by 

wergn Invaſions, and carried away at laf by conquering Enemies. 


is & Though thou Iſrael play the harlot, a, yet let 
not Judah b offend c, and come not ye d unto Gllgal e, 
telther go ye up to * Beth-aven f, * nor ſwear, The 
LORD liveth g. 


, 4 This fummeth up the Sins, the Idolatries of the ten Tribes, and 
34 Tranfirion to what next follows. b Either by way of Exhor- 
fition, or Admonition, or Prayer, and Wiſh for the two Tribes which 
uck to the Houſe of David, and to the Temple. ' c Commit like Sins 
3 174e] hath done, imitate none of their Idolatry ; poſhbly the Pro- 
Piet ſaw Fudab inclin'd to backſlide, or this might be preach'd in 
ine beginning of Ah4z his Reign. 4 You of Fudah who have the 
mple and Houſe of God with you, who have hitherto been pre- 
cave! from Jſraelitifh Tdolatry. e A place near Fordan, where the 
elie Stones were pitch'd, Foſh. 4. g. the Camp was pitched, Cir- 


they that ſerve Graven Jmages, that boa/l themſelves of: 1dols, Plal. '$7. 3 
if 1/74ael do, vet, O Fudlah, do not thou ſo. | 


CAM PV; 


God withdraweth bimſeif from the Prieſts, the Teople and Princes of 77te 
for their pride, 1--»--5, rreachery, 7. and other wickeancſſes. S--- 14. 
God will not return to them till they acknowledge their offence and repert,5 . 


[ F Ear ye this, :O Prieſts a, and hearken, ye houſe 
| of Iſrael 'b, and-give ye hear, O houſe of the 
king <.;. for judgment 75 toward yon d, becavle -ye 
have been a ſnare con Mizpah f, and a net ſpread- vpon 
Tabor #. 
z Proclamation is made, and the Criminals are citcd to appear and 
attend their Charge ; amongſt which the Prieſts are firit ſummoned; 
Not of the. Tribe of Levi, not God's Prielts, but Baz''s Prielts, Prieſts 
of the high places ; ſuch they called themtelves, 19 accounted by the 
People, and Prieſts they were as g004 as their Cunritution, by F-10- 
boam Son of Nebar, could 'make them. 5 All the People of 1/rael, 
hearken and confider duly. c All you of Mznahem's Court, and all 
vor that are/of the Royal Family. - If 15 very prodable, if not plainly 
certain,that Mrnakam was IK is At _ 'S T1 NC Q&! {1 act, and that - ofe1 
noin's him out with his Whele, Farin'. 4 For t9 721 appertain'd to 


ONITL 1 4 
wu » S 4 ot 


- 18 Their drink is -F ſower r : they have committed + Heh. 
whoredom s continually t : * her + Rulers with ſhame do On 

Mich.7-3 
Tho in their Idol-Feaſts they drink Wine and ſtrong Drinks, yet FB _ 


lien REES Ai 7. 


D IE: an mr —_ may 
Sn vi q — Pr In a. "A 
—_— —_ = S 
- - "om ws + " - _ PR 0 — - 

+ & ——_— - . wp # 

2m mr o - 2 © — _— = 

hey - - _ d; = 

IS .. 


_ - 
no — II P 
© 70AEDS. WS ALERTS” 


_ 
4 A ee ks en Er SD EGO IR 
in came ooo HG a <A Ebat,..._._. 


, 5 ” _ yy 
—_ _ 
- O—_— - a - —_ —_ > = 
., - , s. CEMENT! £ x 4 ® 4 4 —_ © > _ - 2 by . 27. m5 - Fo 
- "ny &. 7 = - ; » wer L. . mw 7's . v of = - = by = 
- wi 2 «4 q 4 5 Tow I : pn — my aſs 4 3 - w SA "x » ED Lg Wy L # > — —_ Y ® 
. a o * y = . - - [2 - = %. 2 
- we +: <a I i b4 —__ - * - be ; ; I 
dg ge AA anal 2" HT; Ie .- = vs : D _ — or TD 
Eee TR 5 : SE. ng 2 7 == + £ ——— 1% No = s 
07 tes , : - " © * Ty ; —— 
SS oo... , .V IZ3* : y a pony - a 2 9 pre + —- - ” 
, My ue i if gp re ” > Ws; % "3 By a Mee... - Gow A = - - > _- » x 4 = w——_ - 
alle. n a "Ix _ pt Z , 4 T. of 
g ms - = w* A, EV? < in » = 
- _—— T : nom Ts - ee I n: - 


+ Heh. 4 
correilion, 


+Heb.they 
will 29 
27Ves 

|, Or. thetr 


70t ſuffer 
them. 


*{ h.7.10. 


Jer. 11.11. 
Ezck. 8.18 
Mich. 3.4. 
Ihe 7 34 


_— 
Chap. V 

. e [-] 
execute Judgment, and (6 Riglit, fo ſome z but the molt read it as we | 


do, Judgment is toward, 7. e. agaiuſt you, You have tinned, and | ! 
| Confidence of eſcaping Ruine,or elſe foretels that Extremity of SUR, 
- ” ” oy K” 


God will puniſh. God's Controverly, ch. 4. v. 1. is with you all, but 
firſt with Prieſts who neglected to inſtrutt the Pevple ; next with the 
Body of the Pcople z and laſtly, with the King, Court, and his Fami- 
I", e You, O Prielts and Princes, Nobles and Judges, have enfnared 
the People by your Examples and Prattices, which have been idola- 
trous, and the People have imitated you. It may poſhhly r1eier to 
that the Jews ſay was done; Spies ſet to watch who went to Feruſulem 
to worſhip, and to inform that they might be puniſh*d : Or elſe thus 
By commending the Calves, and palliating the Idolatry committed in 
worſhipping them, by perſwading the People they might as well wor- 
ſhip there as at FeruſaJem ; you have been a Snare unto them, and 
drawn them into Idotatry. f Either taken comparatively, as Fowlers 
and Hunters have taken many Birds and Beaſts, by Gins and Snares, 
on Mizpah; ſo you liave enſnared many Souls in Idolatry : Or by Jdola- 
tries atted at Mizpah you have enſnared many ; ſo at Mrzpah there was 
an Hgh Place, and idolatrous Worſhip performed there ; whether at 
Mizpah in Fudah, which is not very likely, or Mizpah part of L1b4- 
mus, which is the more likely, I determine not. g A very famous 
Mount for its exa& Roundnels, and the Hcight thereof, and as famous 
for the Pleaſantneſs thereof, which eafily perſwades me to think this 
Hill muſt needs have ſome High Place on it, andthat where High Places 
were fo much in faſhion Tabor could-not be omicted. Here, as in Miz- 
peh, Tdolatry catch'd Men, as Birds or wild Beaſts are taken ina Net: 
or briefly thus ; The Priefts and ſecular Power did make Religion and 
the Civil Government a Snare for Men ; both ſo managed the Laws of 
each as to intrap all they could, as if Men were Fowls and. Beaſts, 
and Governours Civil and Ecclefiaſtical Hunters -and Fowlers, and 
their Laws Nets and Gins ſet to catch Men, and make a Prey of them. 
"'Fhus *twas in //r.ze/ at that Day. 


2 And the revolters þ are profound i to make ſlaugh- 


TER ;®0d, ter k || though I 1 have bcen + a rebuker m7 of them all s, 


- þ All thoſe that have caſt off the Law of God, both in Matters of 
Religion and Civil Government. 7 Dig deep fo hide their Counſels, 
or have taken deep Root fince their Apoſtacy from God, and revolt 
from the Houſe of David.  k All their Religion is but a butchering of 
Cattle, no Sacrifice to God z or which is worſe, a murdering of Men- 
L Hoſea, m A Freacher. who in the Name and Word of God have 
ſharply- inveigh'd againft their brutiſh - Religion, and their bloody 
Slaughters. = None that have been guilty have eſcaped the Reproof. 
I have declaimed againſt Idolatrous Prieſts, and bloody Uſurpers, ſuch 
as were in thoſe Tumcs, Shallym, Menahem and Pekah. 

3 I know Ephraim: o, and Iſrael is. not hid from me : 
for now, O Ephraim, thou committelt whoredom p, and 


Iſrael is defiled 9. #8 & 

0 Theſe Revolters neither are nor can be ſo deep as to conceal them- 
ſetves, their Deſigns, Contrivances and Prattices from me : I through- 
ly know Ephraim ; the Revolters are called Y7ae1 in this Verſe, who is 
not hid from me. It is an elegant Repetition of the ſame thing in 
different Words. þ All thy fair-Pretences thou canſt put upon thy de- 
viſed Religion cannot better it, ſtill 'ris-down-right Idolatry or ſpiri- 
tual Whoredom. . q J/rae! here is Efhratm, and when Jſrael is ſaid to 
be polluted, it is to be uriderftood both ofſpiritual and corporal Pollu- 


- tion, which moſtly arelinked together, and draw on each other. 


4 Þ || They. r will not frame their doings s to turn 
unto their God ft : for the ſpirit of whoredoms « is in 
the midſt of them x, and they have not known y the 


doings will LORD z. 


7 Thoſe Revolters, polluted 1/raelites, and Idolatrous  Epkraimites. 


s They are lo intent upon their Idolatries and Oppreſhons, they have 
been ſo long inured to theſe Doing, that now they are become Slaves 
to their own Doings, inſomuch that they neither have Will nor Power 
to change them, as Fer. 13. 23- #t Torepent of thoſe wicked Courſes, 
and to leave them, and lo return to their God, who was once theirs by 
Covenant,though now they. have violated the Covenant, and departed 
from God. They are in Sin hardened to a hopeleſs and remedileſs Ob- 
ftinacy and Iinpenitence. « Vid. chap.4iver. 12. Their Mind and Incli- 
nation ſtands bent, and fixed upon ſpiritual Whoredoms, and they are 
incited to it by the ſeducing Spirit, allured by Examples, and all theſe 
hurry them on. x It is an univerſal Diftemper among them, all fla 
with this Spirit, it hath ſeiz'd the Heart of them. » They never did 
rightly kncw, nor would they ever know ; they forgot, were wiltully 
ignorant of the way of Holineſs and pure Religion, contained in the 
Law of God. + Who is pure, zealous for his Glory, ſovereign in his 
Authority, rich in his Rewards, ſevere in his Puniſhments, and true to 
his Promiſes and Threats : That nothing can be more prejudicial to a 
People than to forſake, nor any thing more conducive to the Good of 
a leople, than to keep his Law. 


5 And the * pride a of Iſrael doth teſtity b to his face c : 
therefore ſhall [ſrael and Ephraim d fall in their ini- 
quity e : Judah f alſo ſhall fall with them g. 


2 It might have been rendred, the Exceliency or Glory of Iſrael, and 
ſo referr'd to God ; it would be a Prediftion, that God himſelf would 
witneſs againſt Jſ-ae]. God is ſaid to ſwear by the Excellency of F4- 
cb, Amos $. 7. 7. e. by himſelf ; thus interpreted it would very well 
accord with what follows in this 5b, 'and in the 6th. Verſe. But as it 
is here rendred, 'tis the Haughtinels,carnal Confidence of 1/74el grown 
great, under the long and proſperous Reign of Feroboam the ſecond, 
that they thought it impothble ſuch Calamities, as foretold by the 
Prophet, ſhould overtake them, vr that Ged ſhould think fo ill of that 
Worſhip they thought {o well of ; they neither confeſs their Sins, nor 


fear Goa's Judgments. 6 Is lo full and evident Witneſs againſt J/7ael, 


that no other 'leſtimony-need be produced c to convince and filence 


them, 
6 * They hb ſhall go with their flocks, and with their 


herds to ſeek the LORD / : but they ſhall not find E7: k, 
he hath withdrawn himſelf from them /. 


:H O \Y { A. Chap.| 


 b The People of Fulah ſay fome, but I rather think tis CC Ty 
111 "3: ys : %: 215 YPOECTOf 
the Ephraimites, and either implies by what they did NpPort their 


ings ſhould torce them at laſt to vffer Sacrifices to God ;' and the Fen 
iſh Dottors do tell us, that under //oſhea's Reign 1/7ael hail Liberts cx 
bringing their Offerings and ' Sacrifices to Feruſalem, Whether &; 
were [o or not, 7 *tis certain they did not ſeek him in right manner X 
was with their  Flocks and Herds, but not with their Hearts, not wi 
lound Repentance. k Whileſt he might have been found they woy!, 
not leek him ; now as a Puniſhment,and to leave them remedileſ; Goa 
will not be found of them, he will not either accept a Sacrifice, 


pardon their Sin, or return to ſave them. In Diſpleaſure hath with. : 
drawn his favourable Preſence from them, and with Reſolution wi 
leave them to the Violences of the 4ſſyrian Powers. [ 
7 They m have dealt treacherouſly #» againſt the be 
LORD : for they have begotten ſtrange children ».- p 
now p ſhall a month q devour. them with their pox. i 
tions r, | doh | w 
2 The whole Houſe of Jae), Prieſts, People and Princes, and their he 
Kings with them. #» Have falſified their Word and Promiſe of Fidelity th 
and Conſtancy,of Love and AﬀeRion when they entred Covenant with 
me, turned Idojaters, and have worſhipp'd and relied on falſe Gogz, 
0 A5 it 'twere not enough that they were Idolaters, they have train " 
up their Children in the ſame  Idolatry, partly by their InftruQicn 
and more by their Examples. p Or, therefore ; or, &re long, as c<, y th 
V. 10, let. q. q Either the New Moon, one particular Species of Ce. "_ 
remonial ſuperftitious Worſhip put for all the reft, as ſome interpret. ” 
or rather, a time not long, (as an Age ) not as to the old World. nar : + 
as to Nneveh, 40 Days, but a ſhorter time ; poſſibly it may refer tg _ Bk 
Stallum*s ſhort- time of Uſurpation, which laſted but a Month, , Fo 
Mcmh ſhall devour them + The Aſſyrians ſhall make a ſpeedy Conqueſt 2 5 
over you. 7 Not only Perſons, but their Goods and Chattels are ex. Wi; Da 
poſed to ſpeedieft ſpoilings ;. and as a Token of ſuch future ſpeedy De. . -_ 
lolation, the Prophet points out a ſhort Reign of one of the Uſurper; | 
and foretels the preciſe time of his Continuance, that when they ſha * ſaw 
ſee this come to paſs, they might believe the reſt foretold by the Pro. and 
phet ſhould alſo come to paſs. Nor is this ConjeQure without ſome 
ground, fince we know that Shallum ſlew Zechariah before the Peogle ag 
2 Kings 15. 10. implying the Peoples Concurrence herein, and thei he | 
accepting of Shallum with Expettation of Peace and Proſperity, to the 99 
Increaſe of their Portion under his Government, all which was blaſted arm 
at the Month*s End. RES, 'S , = 
| 8 Blow ye the cornet 5 in Gibeah #, and the trumpet! ER == 
in Ramah *; cry aloud at Beth-aven y : after thee z, 0 WY 2, 
Benjamin. PHE be 8 two ? 
s Ye Watchmen, or who ever have the Care and Cuftody of thel poſth 
fortificd Towns, ſound the Alacm', for the Enemy cometh. 14 | the St 
Town of Benjamin, ſituate on an” Hill, built by Afiz, 1 Kings 15. 22, for Al 
made by him a Frontier, and likely always gariſon'd againft the Inur Applic 
fion of the ten Tribes. u Add to the Sound of the Corne?, the Trn Word 
per alſo, which is proper for War, and will be beſt underftood byti did aff 
People. Left they miſtake the Meaning of the Cornet, which is, af h Amb 
ſome, a Paſtoral Inftrument, proper for Shepherds, ſound the Trun Interpy 
pet. x Of which there were three, one in Naphrhali, and Rane A 
phi, and this of Benjamin near Gibeah, and was an Inlet into Fultof Car 
great Importance, as appears, 1 Kings 15.17,21, a Town of Strength thee > 
built on a high Hill, and fit to be as a Watch-Tower. Be you up "= 
your Guard when the Invader is ſo near. y As more concerned, oi weny 
out with more Vehemency, awaken all to prepare for Defence," =: oe 
howl and lament for the things that are come upon thee, O Z:rb-a1, Kine 
The Afhrians March will alarm thy Neighbours, but. their Such Sp 
againſt thee will ruine thee utterly ; let thine Inhabitants theretoreaſ -, k ern 
and howl, Berh-aven, if that ſituate in the Wilderneſs, this Paſa + neſs 
foretels the DeftruRtion of it by the Afſrians, probably in the Begit 5 Wye 
ning of their Invaſion ; if *twere Bethel, *twas the chief Seat of Idol rs Mgt 
try, and- firſt or chief in Mileries. 2 Thee, referr'd to Berb-t9th as Nr | 
ſpeaks thus, After thy Cries, when thou haft howled, let. Benjamin ai 14 ] 
Fudah too begin theirs, for they ſhall alſo fall for their Sin. young 
9 Ephraim a ſhall be deſolate b in the day of rebuke: and go 
among the tribes of Iſrael 4 have I made known e tit bim t. 
which ſhall {vrely be f. = 7 The 
a The whole Kingdom of the ten Tribes,all Sorts and Ranks of MW MM kindled, 
among them. 6 A Deſation, 7, e, moſt deſolate, utterly cit of. {ome, a 1 
c When Shalmaneſer ſhall come up \with his Forces, befiege, {acc a and rave 
captivate all thy Cities, and Samaria with the reft ; when by thele # Others : | 
14ans I ſhall rebuke, j. e. puniſh; /'4 To the Houſe of 1/7ae! openly, 3UCh as a 


15 -g£rown 
Gameſo 
when ca 
Humour, 


that all might be informed. © & By 'my Prophets I have foretold vii 
ſhould be, and by ſome Judgments already executed, I have fart 
made known to them, they are ſufficiently watned, and ſhould hat 
conſidered in time, and prevented their own Calamities. j What 


irrevocably determined and ratified, and they ſhall never evade, Threat js 
ever Overcome. Vengean, 

10 The Princes z of Judah þ' were + like them that we ed t 
move the bound k : therefore 1 will pour oat my wrath'f mo hi 
on them 1 like water m. | parks 


d Gore! 


I . 
\- Mal Will be 


g The great Men about the King and C ourt,the Rulers an 
them, 


nours, who by the Law ofGad and Man ſhould have been t1 - 
tainers of Equity and Juftice among the People, þ Of the N"g" 


of Fudah, or the two Tribes. # Have been, and now are, 11 the D3 I5 Cj 
of Abaz ; for to this Man's time the Prophet now pointeth. þ Tres acknow 
cient Bounds which limited every one, prevented Controver'e 8. afflitio 
Opprefſions of encroaching covetous Men. 1 hie Prophet I cues u Aﬀe 
aims at reproving the Sin of theſe great ones in changing the LY b, be like a 


Us Help, he 
3. COnfeſs, 
I, es 

Y 6 reſs t 
did at t 


Religion, as well as altering the Bounds of Civil Rights, wheel 
encroaching upon Foreigners, and enlarging the Kingdom of 7%” 
entrenching on the Neighbom ing Kingdoms ; or, which 15 107, 
tain, by Injuftice and Voolence feizing what: was another | 
was Sin, and forbidden, Deur.19.1t4. 4 Yhis Prattice 1s Cv g- 
27. 17. and God now will puniſh it. m Like an overtiow!ns mM i 

11 Ephraim » is oppreſſed o, and broken 11 6 
ment p - becauſe he q willingly walked ry afrer 1&0 
mandment 5, - 7h 


p 


»" 


© <--dnels, and too great a Readineſs to comply and, obey that Law 


7 conſume and rot as Wood doth by Worms; ſo God will puniſh both 
© Jactand Fudah, theſe ſhall be Forerunners and Preparatories to the 
** final Deſolation of both z of the one by Aſſyria, and of the other by 
LY | B 4 h ylon. 


IT the State of the two Tribes at that Day, ulcerous and full of Danger, 


MW kindled, who hath threatned to extirpate them. o A Panther, ſay 


V 
_-Y 
1 The Subjefts of the Kingom of Iſrael, th2 ten Tribes, the Pro- 

net reſumeth his Threat againſt them. o Suppoling, as well we 
Cy rhat this Prophecy reſpecteth Ahaz his time : it will appear that 

haria, Shallum, Menahem, Pelabiah, and Pekab's Reigns were paſt, 
"hich were unjuſt, ſeclitious, bloody and tyrannical Times, 1n which 
Onpreſſions abounded ; and of which our Prophet now [peaketh. The 
ren Tribes are by Seditions,* 1vil Wars and bloody Conlpiracies eaten 
1p already almoſt. But to thoſe God will add his Diſplealure, and the 
Aſſyrians ſhall be the Executlioners, and ſhall oppreſls Ephraim. pie. 
Through Fear of the Partiality of the Judge,though his Caule be equal 
and juſt, yet Money or Monies- worth 1s extorted, to prevent an un- 
1}, or tO Procure a juſt Sentence z a known Courſe in ſuch Days as 
theſe the Prophet lived in, or as the Days of Martz and SyPz. q Epbra- 
im ſpoken of as if one Perſon, perhaps. to intimate the univerſal De- 
&tion. 7 It was not a Force upon them, they did willingly. Tho 
there was a, Law commanding, yet there was in the People a For- 


which made Idolatry the Eftabliſhment in the ten Tribes. s To for- 
hear going to the Temple, and to worſhip the Calves at Dan and Be- 
rhel, as Feroboam Son of Nevat required. 


12 Therefore t will ] be 4 unto Ephraim as a moth x : 
and tothe honſe of Judah y as || rottenneſs z. 

; Or, and Heb. u I am, it is conciſe in the Hebrew, and might be 
thus expreſſed ;, Bur, or, and as for me ] am, and will be to the ten 
7#bes, x Moths do leiſurely eat up and marr our Clothes, ſo God 
was chen, and had been, from Feroboam's Death to this Day, weak- 
ning the ten Tribes,their Seditions did eat them up. y The two Tribes 
who now with 4haz did as Ephraim, caft God off: + Shall ſecretly 


13 When a Ephraim b ſaw his fickneſsc, and Judah d 
- ſaw his wound e, then went f Ephraim to * the Aſſyrian g, 
and ſent þ'j| to king Jareb 7 : yet could he not heal you k, 


nor cure you / of: your wound mm. | 
4 And Heb. after thar. 6 The King and Council, and Kingdom of 
{ the ten Tribes, Menabem is ſurely meant, vid. 2 Kings 15, « Weak: 
neſs, like a Conſumption, threatning Death. Though Menahem had 
killed Shallum, and got into the Throne, yet he found himſelf unable 
to hold it againſt the oppoſite FaQion,and therefore ſent tor Aſſiſtance 
from Aſjyria, 2 Kings 15. 19. Or at leaſt purchaſed the Friendſhip of 
Pul, who was come out as an Enemy, 4d The other Kingdom of the 
two Tribes. e A deep and feſtering Wound 3 or a corrupting Im- 
poſthume, which needs be opened, cleans'd and bound up, ſuch was 


for Ahax had done very wickedly, and wounded the Kingdom.. f Made 
Application.  g Particularly to Pul,as 2 Kings 15. 19,20. Not one 
Word of their going to God, he was not in all their Thoughts : He 
did affi& leiturely that they might ſeek him, but they forgot him ſtil], 
h Ambaſſadors,and Preſents to entreat and procure his Help. # Whileft 
Interpreters agree not who this Fereb was, while ſome. will have it be 
2a proper, others an appellative Name, of a Perſon or Place, I think 
twill be a ſurer Courſe to compare times, who was = of Aſſyria 
when Ephraim was ſick, and Fudah was wounded, and both felt it ; for 
whoever this will prove to be, he it is that is meant by Fareb. Pul 
in Menahem's Time, Tiglath Pileſer in Abaz's Time z or, what if Fa- 
reb be the Sum of what Ephraim and Fadah defired of this Aſſyrian 
King ? they complain'd of Wrong received, and ſent to this foreign 
King their Complaint, and requefted that he would judge, or in our 
modern Terms he Artibrator ; ſo the Word will bear. &k Ephraim's 
Sickneſs grew worſe by it, ſrael was ſicker for it. 1 Fudah, Ahaz, and 
his wounded State, m The Aſſyrian King was either unable, or an- 
willing to heal the Wound which he knew would as much profit him 
as hurt his Patient, | 


14 For * 1 awill le unto Ephraim as a lion o, and as a 
young lion to the houſe of Judahp- I, even 1 will tear q 
and go away ; I will take away s, and none ſhall reſcue 
him t. 6 

2 The Lord, whoſe Power is infinite, whoſe Wrath they have en- 


| fome, a very ſwift Beaft, wherein he excels the Lion,and a very fierce 
and ravenous Creature, wherein he equals the Lion : or a Lionels,ſay 
Others : but to leave that, God will make the Aſfjyrian a Chirurgion, 
3UCh as a fierce ravenous Lion would be to a wounded Man. p Which 
15-grown up to hisStrength for Miſchief, and retains his Inclination to 
Gameſomneſs, or to play with his Prey; ſo ſhould Fudab find himſelf, 
when caught by this Lion, firſt made a Sport to pleaſe the tyrannous 
Humour, and after made a Feaft to feed his ravenous Hunger. q The 
Threat js doubled to aſcertain it, and make it more dreadful ; Divine 
Ms re by the Afrians ſhall be as a Lion tearing his Prey. r When 
fatisfied the Lion goes away, flieth:not for Fear. 5s Leaveth not any 
behind him, carrieth away what he did not eat, ſo ſhould Afyria devour 


HOSE A. 


: G 6 H A P. VT. : 

An exhortation to repentance, and truſt in God, with 4 promiſ» of mercy, 
I---3. A complaint of their anconſiancy in good ; and their bolancſs 
in evil, 4——11. L 


l Ome a and let vs return unto the LORD b-: for 


imitten e, and he will bind us up f. 

4 The former Chapter ended with a Declatation of God's Reſolution 

to bring his own choſen ones, true J/7aelires, by deep Diftrefles to Re- 
pentance, and to ſeek him whom they had forſaken ; this Chaprer be- 
gins with a Declaration of the Succeſs of this Projekt. The Frophet 
therefore brings them in, exhorting and calling upon one another,and 
encouraging each other ; the Phraſe you have, Iſa. 2.3. Mich. 4.2,8&c, 
b Let us be wiſer at laſt, Idols have not profited us, they have been 
our Sin and our Fall ; we forſook the Fountain of Living-water, when 
we did forſake the Lord. Let us now, with repenting Hearts, leave 
Idols, and return to the Lord ; Jet us caft them off, and betake our 
{elves to the Worſhip, Obedience, Love and Fear of the Lord, the on- 
ly true and eternal God, &c We now ſee his Hand in all we luffer,and 
as 'tis his we own it very juſt z we, like froward Rebels, ſought our 
Help from his Enemies z and he, as he threatned, hath met us, like a 
Lion, and hath torn us ; his Voice in the Judgment, like the Roaring 
of a Lion, hath awakened us; and our bleeding Wounds have told us, 
that God hath done all this againft.us, and all this becauſe we were 
departed from him. 4 For, beſide, his Mercy inclining him, we know 
*twas his Deſign, by this Courſe, to recover us to himſelf; and we are 
aſſured he hath withdrawn his Hand, left us in Perplexities but till we 
would ſeek, till we would be willing to be healed ; he will be our Phy- 
fician, and by his Lenitives will eaſe and cure us, now his ſeverer 
Courſe hath abated our Phrenly. Aſſyrian King could not,but J/rae!*s 
God and King can and will heal. e The ſame thing in a different $i- 
mily, God hath wounded. f As a skilful and tender Chirurgion binds 
up with Plaiſters and Swathes to heal. 


In this Verſe it is moſt certain we are to regard both the literal and 
hiſtorical Senſe, and diſtinguiſh it from the myſtical and accommoda- 
ted Sen{, in this latter theſe Words foretel the Death and Reſurre&i- 
on, and future Glory of Chriſt and Chriftians, as 1 Cor. 15. 4. and fo 
are generally interpreted and applied by Expoſitors. As to the Let- 
ter, or Hiftory *tis in brief thus: g After ſome ſhort timeof Sufferings 
for our Sins, or rather when our Sufferings have brought us toRepen- 
tance and Return to God,our God will ſoon arter ſhew us his Grace and 
Favour, and revi;e our dead State. It is not needful we enquire how 


long time this two Days intends, *tis a certain Time for an uncertain, 


two Days for a ſhort time. God doth not delay long when we return 
to him ; Fer. 31.18, 19, with 20, and Hoj.14.3, with 4. þ Though 
we were as dead Men, buried in our Mileries, and neither deſerved 
from God, nor could hope from any other Hand a Reſurrettion and 
Recovery to a better State ; yet our merciful God will quicken us 
again : Ezra g. $, 9. expreſſeth their Return our of Captivity in thoſe 
Words that might well paraphraſe our Prophet. 7 Mercy recovers by 
Degrees, and thefefore a third Day is added,in which this People ſhall 
be raiſed up, increaſed, eſtabliſhed, and confirmed ; poſſibly the Pro- 
phet may allude to the third Day, which is ſaid to bea critical Day to 
the Wounded, who conceive Hop?s when better on that Day ; or 
poſlibly it may refer to the third Decree by Darius made to Nehemiab 
for building Feruſalem, and the two Days may refer to the Times of 
Cyrus reviving the Fews firſt by his Decree of Liberty, and command 
to build the Temple z the ſecond Day or Time,that of Darius Hyſtaſpis 
to Zerubbabel and Foſhua, for building the Temple, in which Work his 
Bounty revived the Hopes of the Fews; however poor and unable, 
yet the Temple ſhould be built, and the Worſhip of God reſtored. 
This was a great Reviving, but their Settlement was upon the third 
Decree, which was given out by Artaxerxes Longimanus to Nehbemiab, 
chap. 2. ver. 1. k Flouriſh in Peace, Wealth and Joy ; in pure Wor- 
ſhip of God, in Righteouſneſs among our ſelves, in Safety from Ene- 
mies. 1 The Eye of our God being upon us for Good, and we filled 
with the Fruits of his Favour, inheriting his Promiles here till we fully 
poſſeſs them in the Light of Glory, | 

3 Then m2 ſhall we know », if we follow on to know 0 


the LORD : his going forth p is prepared as the morn- 


latter and former rain unto the earth 7, 

m After that God bath revived and raiſed his repenting and en- 
quiring Captives, brought them to his Temple and City, reſtor*d his 
Worſhip and his Law amongft them (all which are Figures of more 
glorious things to be expetted by the Church of Chriſt after his Re- 
{lurre&tion.) » Be better inſtructed in the Law of our God, know 
what Worſhip he requires, is beſt pleaſed with ; This Knowledge of 
God ſhall be to us a Spring of all holy, righteous, ſober, and tempe- 
rate Converſation ; ſuch Knowledge, it we obſerve the Scriptures,was 


the Land, and carry away the People. t None have C ourzge to at- 
tempt, or Power to effet a Reſcue, rhe Prey muſt hopelels periſh; fo | 


a be with Epbraim and Fudzh, when God appears as a Lion againſt 
em, 


15 © I will go and return to my place «, t * till they 
acknowledge their offence x, and ſeek my face y - in their 
; atiliftion they will ſeek me early z. 
u After the manner of Man God ſpeaks, he will do that which ſhall 
2, be like a Man's going away from ſuch as refuſe, though they need his 
9, Help, he retires 3 God will withdraw his ſaving Help. x Till they 
, confeſs, hymble themſelves for their Sins. y Me their God, my Mer- 
I, Cy, and my Law ; me their Soveraign as well as Saviour, xg In deep 
-Diſtreſs they will, at leaſt ſome will ſcek me diligently ; as indeed they 
Gil at the end of Fudab's 70 Years Captivity. 


promiſed to the Fews after their Return out of OR and theic 
ſeeking the Lord, Fer. 24. 5, 6, 7+ and 3I. 34s EJ&R; Ll. 17, 18, 19, 
20. and 36. 26. Hab, 2. 14. Zeph. 3-9.©c. 0 It ſhall be an increa- 
ſing Knowledge, which by a diligent Attendance to the Word and 
Works of God theſe thall attain, and improve by doing the Will of 
God, and by Worſhipping him they ſhall know experimentally and 
practically. how holy, how good, how faithful God is, Fobn 8. 31, 33s 
before this they knew not God, and finnd, provoked God, and un- 
did themſelves; but now they ſhall know, obey, and pleaſe their God 
and Saviour. p Before his People who know him, and endeavour 
to encreaſe that Knowledge z his gracious, faithful, holy,juft and wiſe 
Providences, and Manifetrations ot himſelf in the Conduct of them for 
his Peoples Good and Comfort. q As ſure, ſeaſonable, beautiful, 
gratetul, and as clear as the Morning, which dilpels the Darknels, and 
proclaims irs own Approach. r Which reviveth, maketh it fruitful, 
beautifieth it, and gives a new Face to all. .. So God will abundantly 
bleſs his repenting 4/7ael, his returning People ; this Bleſſing he pro- 
miled over and over to the mr ng the Captivity ; Exch. 34. 25» 
Hof. 2: 18, 19. and I4. 5, 6. Md. 3. 10. 

J] » Ig &$+ 52 . « * O 


Chap. \l. 


* he hath torn c, and he will heal us 4; he hath *Deut- 32 


2 .* After two days g will he revive os h, in the third + x Cor. 
day he will raiſe us up z, and we ſhall live & in his fight 4, 75 & 


ing q; and * he ſhall come unto us as the rain; as the : Plale 72. 


—_ a 


_ n= » Fro 
as marr. 6 
NE Oi Sh 
a 3 . 
» 4 EIS, 
x Mg 


_— 


C—_— OE ORE CSI —j.-- + : » _— - _———— 
III IRE Sx i F 
A _— - - + 


— — — 
_— —_ (VEE _ : » CSS OO II 
> en IE I - + FE LB. 


> ar 
8 A - _= 
* . 
- tt apt 4 
bays; 
+ » ak, 3:3 
m5. $5 
EE DLNTR 
wa FI 8 


_ 


dee 


pw 
Fab/tanos 


—_— ” hed - 


OS ona _ - 
DI AGB -F - - Pg” - 
a ; oy A __ TY ELD. 


__ A ——__— 
— 


S— - 


Chap. YT. 


*('t) * 1 Ls S * 
| _ 
5 ( Wo mer- 


CYOU KIA. 


? 


7g do 
C h.13-2. 


+ © * © Lyhraim, what ſhall | do unto thees? O 


7 


Judah, what ſhail 1 do unto thee ? for your \\ goodneſs t 
5s * as a morning-cloud, and as the early dew 1t goeth 
away Uu, 

« The Lord now enters a Debate with both 7jr4e! (here called Ephra» 
im) and with the two Tribes, with all that were his People antiently ; 
much atter the manner of Men, who having to do with frowarc! and 
ungovernable Children or Servants whom they pity, and would not 
calt oF after mucl! Kindneſs and Patience ſhewed to them, and abuted 
by them, at laſt ſeem at a ſtand, what mere to do, or appeal to By- 
ftanders, whether more might be done, or demand of the untrattable 
on2s what they can deſire more to be done ? $0 //z. 5. 3, 4, 5, 0 and 
Mi h. 6.3, 5. whet is it I may do becoming my holy, juſt and wiſe 
Procedu es with my reaſonable Creatures ? What ſhould I do more ro 
fave you 'rom Rnine, and ſalve my own Honour, Truth and Juftice ? 
Would you of tie ren Tribes, and you of the two 1 ribes, have me 
caſe to be God, and reſign to your Idols ? or repeal my own Laws, 
and ſubſcribe to your Idols Rites. ? Or wonld you have Satan the wick- 
ec one, (who hath ſeduced your Kings, Prophets, Prieſts and People,) 
whom you worſhip in your Idols, would you that: he ſhould ftill retain 
your Love and Service, and I maintain you in it? _ I would do, as 
appears by what 1 have done, any thing that may be done to reduce, 
reclaim, and reform vou, who are as impudent Adultereſles, that will 
-ot be lincere and faithtul to their reconciled Husband. 2 Or, your 


X#ndneis, your Love to me, my Law, Worſhip and Honour, your Pro- | 


miſes of Love and Loyalty. u Vaniſheth without Effect, it 15 deceit- 
ful, you are Hypocrites, nothing but ſhort and empty Signs of Good- 


neſs, Piety and Amendment ; their Hypocriſy ant Unconftancy ele- 


gantly expreſs'd in this double Allufion, renders them uncapable of 
tarther Gentlenets. | 


5 Therefore x have I hewed them y by the pro- | 


hets z: I have flain them a by the Words of my 


P | : 
[| Or, that qguth b \| and thy: Judgments c are as che light that 
thy judg- wn | | ; 
ments 
might be, 
C. 


goeth forth. 

x Becauſe T would do for you whatever might be done, becauſe I 
would cure you of your Obftinacy and Hypocriſy, and make you up- 
right and conſtant. y I have lererely, continually, and unweariedly. 
by the Prophets, reproved, warned and threatned, your Hearts have 
been like knotty Trees, or, hardeſt Stones : Thave made my Pro hets 
like Labourers, and my Words like Axcs, or Hammers to cut 0 the 
Knots, and to hew off the RoughneG which make unfit for Uſe, but all 
to ao purpoſe, the defired,Efett hath not been attained. x Some that 


were before 4#ofca, Jeroboam firſt was by a Prophet reproved, and | 


threatned for this Idolatry in, which 1/rael perfifted, and to which Fu- 
dab did too often fall; and through the Space of two hundred Years 
from Feroboam the fiſt to 220ſes's time, many other Prophets were 
{ent, whoſe Names, and ſome Menmwirs of them, we have, as Abjjah, 
Febu, Hanani, Elijah, and Elijþ1, Theſe and ſach like were the Pro- 
phets that did hew crooked and knotty Jrael. 4 Some fay the falſe 
Prophets are the Perſons meant here, whom God did flay for their Sin, 
ſeducing 1/721 to, and confirming them in Idolatry z indeed Flijab's 
fincere Zeal did cut off ſo many, 1 Kings £8. 22, 40. and Febu's coun- 
terfeit Zeal cut off ſo many, 2 A745 10.21, 25+ that it could never be 
torgotten among that People ; ſo the thing is true,many talle Prophets 
were lain for this Sin, yet the Perſons in our Text were not theſe falſe 
Prophets, but they were the People of 7ſrael and Fudab, the Tdolatrous 
refratory Hypocrites among them,whom God threatned with Death, 
and that by the Sword et Enemies. & As he did by his Word fore: 
tel, ſo he did effett too in due time. © 7. &. The Puniſhments threat- 
ned, the Miſerres foretold which tell upon this People did fo fully an- 
ſwer the Prediction, that every one might ſee them clear as the Light, 
and as conftantly executed as che Morning ; 0 Zeph. 3. 5. 

'6 Ford 1 delired *:mercy e, and * nat ſacrifice f; and 


* 15am-15. the knowledpe of God, more than burmt-offerings g. 
22. 

kcclel.g.1. am required, approved, and could accept ot z they were full of Sacri- 
Mat.g.12, fices, and ſpar'd them not, but either. to Idols, or elſe in Formality 
& 12. 7» and Pride. Thele Sacrificers were either abominable Idolaters, as 


* I fal.50. 


$, &c. 


Prov. 21.3 
Tas 1. 11. 


[0 
f 


Or, 


Adam, 


* Ch.S.1 


41 fo hew'd and flew them, becauſe they did not what I moſt of 


were they of Ephrainr, or proud Hypocrites, as were too many of Fu- 
dah. e-Compathon an Charity towards Men; this one principal Du- 
ty of the ſecond Table put for all Works -of godly Humanity, pleaſeth 
me, in this I delight, I had found little of this among you, nor could 
] perſwade you to it, though this was it: that I gequired, Mich. 6. 8. 
+ Rather than, or more'than Sacrifice, (for *tis not an abſolute, but a 
comparative Negative.) Mercy to Man who needed it, without a Sa- 
crifice to me, who.need jt not, was more'pleafing than a Sacrifice 
(though required) with Cruelty to Man which 1 torbad. g Hearty 
affettionate Knowledge of God, which fills the Mind with Reverence 
of his Majefty, Fear ot his Goodnels, Love of his Holineſs, Truſt in his 
Promile, and Submiſfion 'to his Will Knowledge of God's Law, the 
Rule of our Obedience, of -his Favour, the Reward of our' Obedience, 
and Knowledge of his Omniſcience, diſcerning and judging it, with 
thofe excellent Efetts, proper Fruits hereot,are more than all Sacrifices, 
although they were burnt Sacrifices, which of all other were intirely 
given to God. But Truth is, who knows God aright, and doth keep 
his Heart for God, gives God more than he that brings whole Burnte- 
Offerings ; for thele are but Ceremonies and Signs, empty and inlipid 
to God, without the Heart. In ſhort,thele People actcd all fo contra- 
ry to this temper of their God, gave him ſo much ot! that he valued 
not, and fo little of that he did moſt value, that he could not be tov 
{evere againſt them, nor is it wonder he - was fo diſplealed with their 
Sarrifices. 6 4l;s 1 2 1: 

7 But þ they like | men i * have-tranſgreſſed the co- 
venant k : there have thcy dealt treacherouſly againſt 
me m7. 3-35 4 ; "AIG | 

þ T told them by my Prophets what I requir'd of them by. Cove- 
rant, bur I could not oiftain it, they regarded not what 1 ſaid. 7 Or, 
like Adam ; ſome take ar.for a proper Name, aud ſo refer it unto the 
firft Man, and his breaking Covenant; and, tor, ought I fee, it may 
well enough reter 'to Kim; who forgot or {lighted the Threat, who 
judged of what he did by what it appear'd- as a {mall Matter: and {o 
thee rorget and flight my Threats, and” judge of the Place where, and 


= 


the Perions by whom, and the Times when SacTifices are to be offer'd, 


, 
bas - D- n 8 


H O0.SE A. 


| 


w 


23 no material Circumſtances, and therefore do' chooſe what I lacss 
they pleaſe, and appoint what Prieft iketh them heft ro offer, or e!17 
tranſgreſs the Covenant,as if it were the Covenant of a Man like them. 
ſclvas. k The Law of their God which directed and encourages 
their Obedience, and which threatned their Diobedience and curled 
it, 7 In that very Place, the good Land which by Covenant | paye 
them, they have broken my Covenant, or in the things in which they 
thought they kept Covenant in their Sacrifices, and obſerving gf 
Feaſts, in thele things they tranſgrels the Covenant. m Very froward- 
ly, and with wilful Reſolutions perverted my Law, their tranſgreſhn 
was a detign'd Perfidiouſneſs. I told them Obedience, not Sacrifice 
they reply Sacrifice, and ftop there, they give no Obedience, though 
they offer many Sacrifices. | EE 

8 Gilead ” #5 a city of them that work iniquity o ; and 
5 || polluted with blood p. 
Name, on a high Hill, whence *tis called Ramorh Gilead ; now as a Ci- 


ty of Refuge, it was a City pettaining to the Prieſts and Levites, as all 
the Cities of Refuge did, in what Tribe ſoever they were, Num. 35, 6, 


| 0 A Sacerdotal City where Priefts did, and Religion, 7. e. Knowledge of 


God, and Mercy to Man should dwell ; but Gilead js a City full of moſt 
notorious Tranigrefſors, the Inhabitants, though Levites and Priefts, 
are a Generation of Men that work all manner of Wickedneſs. p Mur. 


ders committed there have polluted it, or Murders proteted there 


againſt the Law of God, who provided theſe Cities a Relief for ſuch 
as unawares, without Malice, by chance flew his Neighbour, not for 
wilful Murderers;; yet theſe for Money or Intereſt got in and were ſe- 
cured there, and probably many kept out or delivered up to the 
Avenger of Blood contrary to the Law : thus Gilead by Name, and all 
or reſt of the Cities of Refuge intended too, were polluted with 
locd. 
9 And as troops of robbers wait for a man, fo the com- 


pany.of prieſts murder in the way, + by conſent q: for . 


they commit || lewdnels r. | 
q What is here charged upon theſe Prieſts, they turned Highway. 


out, nor could get their Livelihood within the City, but reduced to 
Straits, took this wicked Courle for a Lilelihood, rob'd and murder'd 
on the High-way, and then divided the Prey with the Prieſts, whoſe 
Conſent to the thing made them deeply guilty. r And thus in this 
manner they a& moſt lewd things,or theſe things are done and encov- 
raged by the Prieſts, becauſe they make it their Bufineſs, it is their 


| Trade how to contrive' and aft Wickedneſs, higheſt Wickedneſſes, 


or if you rather like it in brief, the Prieſts by Companies lay wait, 
and rob, and murder, like as do the Troops which roh towards 
Shechem, 

10 Is have ſeen an horrible t thing in the houſe of I- 
rael-u : there is the whoredom x of Ephraim y, Iſrael is 


defiled 7. | 

s It may be. underſtood of the Prophet ſpeaking what he had ſen, 
or of God who ſeeth now, and hath ſeen. # 4 very horrible thing, as 
ſome obſerve from the Word. #. The ten Tribes. x Idolatry, 
y Which was brought in by. an Ephraimite, by Feroboam the firſt, 200 
Years agon, and 'tis there ſtill. 4 It hath overſpread all rae), none 
free, but all defiled greatly with it. 


11 Alfo O Judah a, heb hath ſet an harveſt for thee 


when I returned c the captivity of my people d. 

This Verſe is confeſſedly very dark to Interpreters, who agree nf 
whether Fudab be Vocative or Nominative, or who it is that ſetteth, 
whether Epbraim, Fudab, or God, or what Captivity is here meant; 
whether one paſt, or to come: the conciſeneſs of our Prophet makes 
him very obſcure. Or alſo Fudab, i. e. as Iſrael is polluted,and muſt 
expett to be chaſtiz'dz or O Fudah, thou art like polluted 71 itt 
Sin, and mighteſt be every way like in Puniſhment. 5 But thy God 
hath appointed an Harveſt. for thee, thou ſhalt not as //74el be utterly 
cut off, a Seed of thee ſhall. be ſow'd, and thou ſhalt reap the Har- 
veſt with joy. © When 1 ſhall return, rather ſo it looks to what is 
to come, or elle foraſmuch as I will turn thy Captivity. 4 The Houſe 
of Fudah. | 


CH AP. VI. 


Ged complatnerh- of the groſe 5 fins, as falſbood, malice, lies, &c, pride and 
obſtinacy, &c. amongſt all degrees of men, 1-———10, Wrath again 
them, '11---15. with his complaint of their hypocriſy, 15. 


? Hen a 1 would have healed Iſrael b, then the ini 
quity c of Ephraim d was diſcovered e, and the 


ſrowls; 
Hog «4. 1 01,00 
men and Murderers, ſome underftand of their killing and ſpoiling 

thoſe that were going up to Feruſalem to worship God there ; but more V 


likely it is that in this Gilead, were many Murderers who durſt not go niy, 


Chap. YI 


1 Or, 
7 One of the fix Cities of Refuge; ſituate in the Country of that "8 jr 


ol, 


+ wickedneſs f of Samaria g:; for they commit falſehood »: +3 


and the thief cometh in 7, -and the troop of robbers 


| ſpoileth without k. 


2. 


« + - 92» 
other is a&ted as if *twere a Buſineſs they were bound to attend ! 


cret Thetts, or robbing others by ſubtle and undiicern'd mw par” 


ſte Senſe th p 
ves, 6, let, 


ſt 


7 Fl 
lar wl 
them, 
Mind3 
it ſeen 
here a1 
vent p 
ſo far t 
Deligh 
ralſe A 
Report 
diculou 


—_ 


i 


47 
pe baker 
Fed the 
| axrÞot 
F- which h 
Vice is g 
When th 
rare all | 
tinved ſy 
Adultery 
Whole M: 
the Cour 
Oren he; 


5 In 
it him ſick 
hand c y 


4 Who att, 
of that Da 
ſtowed 1 p 
and the Ki 
inſtead of 5 


# JUN into 1 
E Bottles of 1 
& elves, and 


drink and x 


L of 1ſrae) fo, 


the Forma 
4 Who der 


6 For 


| an Oven 
| 2 ſleeperh 


tlami ng fit 
| e Surely, 

*ep Cloſe 1 
'2 Paker keep 
O01 Eſtate of | 
*7. 7. again 
'He who þ 
ne day with 
"ISO, neve 
ue aWakes to 
101 and Reh, 
10US to the Pp 
lolute times, 


1 They 


ed 0 their 
5 none ame 


This Verſe 


r Senſe 


> 


cceiu1, de 


ap. VII. HT 0 $S 


1 Violence by Hands joined to Hands. to ſpoil abroad. Tn 
wort, the ſtrength and danger of thrir Di:eale appears and increat- 
| hs more and more under endeavours to heal them. 
&. 7g > And they} T conlider not in their hearts m, that 
b 1 remember all thetr wickedneſs » : now their own do- 
| - jngs o have beſet them about p, they are betore my. 
face 0. : LS 
|] They who are thus greatly wicked, notorious Sinne ri» m Do _ 
remember, nor will they once ſeriontly ponder this. Li That I ſee al 
they do, and remember all I ſee, and that with more than an idle un- 
ative looking on, or retaining in Memory ; 1 look on, and —— 
to call them on an account, and to puniſh for their Sins, They wou 
axrter themſelves into an Opinion that I take no notice of heir _ 
kedneſs, and that I Wil never requite it, 0 The Guilt and I _ 1- 
ment, the Iniquity and Miſchief of the Works they have done, therr 
onmn doings, not their Fathers, as Hypocrites and the Incorrigible are 
ready to complain. p AS Cords wrap one taken in them, or as an 
Enemy inveſts and beſtegeth a Town on every tide, ſo theſe profli- 
ate People, Courtiers, Prieſts, Prophets and Citizens are all held en- 
doſed with their own Lins, q What they have done I do ſee, and 
what they ſuffer 1 do ſee, and it is but juſt they ſhould ſuffer what 
their Sins deſerve ; they hoped for Impunity, becauſe they thought 
I did not regard, but now by a juſt Puniſhment, by full Meaſures 0: 
Sorrows heap*d upon them, they ſhall find all their ways were under 
my Eye, and that I weighed their doings. 


3 Theyr make the King glad with their wickedneſs s, 
and the Princes t with their lies 4. 


- Either the SubjeQs in general, or rather the Courtiers in particu- 
13r who were about the King. s The Kings of J/rael every one of 


þ And op 


Mind; were vitiated, deeply tainted with all kinds of Sins, and they 
it ſeems took pleaſure in Sins, both in their own and other Mens ; and 
here are a Parcel of flagitious Fellows that make it their Work to 1n- 
vent plealing Wickedneſs, to acquaint their King with it, who 15 
ſo far trom doing his Duty in dilcountenancing it, that *tis one of his 
Delights to hear or ſee it, t Great Men about the Court. # W ith 
ralſe Accuſations brought in againſt the more Innocent, or by falſe 
Reports made of their Words and Attions, repreſenting them as ri- 
diculous or fooliſh, drolling them into Intamy. 


* 4 They are all adulterers x, as an oven heated by the 
he baker y, || who ceaſeth from || raiſing after he hath knead- 


F ed the dough, until it be leavencd. 

| xrÞoth ſpiritually and carnally, and this latter Adultery 1s that 
Pp which hece is charged on the Courtiers, and People of Jr7ael. » This 
Vice is grown raging hot among them, as you ſee the Fire in an Oven, 
when the Baker having called up thoſe that make the Bread to pre- 
yare all things ready, and the whole Mals is leavened,he doth by con- 
tinued ſupply of Fuel heat the Oven to the higheft Degree: So doth 
Adultery among this People grow by degrees to raging Flames. 'The 
whole Maſs of the People are leavened with this Vice allo, as well as 
the Court, and every one enflamed with this unclean Fire, as the 
Oren heated by the Baker. 


5 In the day of our King =, the Princes a have made 
Im ſick with j| bottles of wine b, he ſtret-hed our his 
hand c with ſcorners d. | 

3 Whether this Day were any occaſional Day,that the King of 1/rae! 
took to feaſt his Nobles as Aki rus did his 5 or whether the Anni- 
rerlary of his Birth or Corcnation,buth which were uſually celebrated 
amongſt moſt Nations, the Birth-day eſpecially. So 7h.iraoh,Gen.go. 
20. and Herod, Mat. 14. 6. whether of rheſe we enquire not curiouſly, 
a Whoattended on the King to witnels their Joy inthe renembrance 
of that Day which made the Publick g/ad, ſo great a Blefling was be- 
ſowed upon them, and to wiſh many ſuch Days unto their King 
and the Kingdom. 6 In their excels of drinking Healths no doubt ; 
inſtead of a pious and thankful remembrance of God's Mercies, they 
zun into monſtrous Impieties of Luxury and Drunkeneſs, and with 

# Bottles of Wine drank off probably at one Draught enflam'd them- 
& Jclves, and their King, and drink him almoſt to Death while they 
» drinkand wiſh his Lite. «c In theſe drunken Feaſts it ſeems the King 
of 1ſrae} forgat himlf, became too familiar a Companion, and uſed 
the Formalities of chele drinking Matches, ftretch'd out his Hand. 
« Who deride Religion, and wiſh Confuſion to the Profeſſors of it. 


= 6 Fore they f have || made ready thzir heart like 
an Oven 7, whiles they lie in wait : their baker 
| * leepeth all the night, in the moruing it burneth as a 
| flaming fire &. | 


e Surely, f Thoſe luxurious and drinking Princes, ver. 5+ g Do 
keep cloſe ſome fire of Ambition, Revenge or Covetouſneſs, like as 
'2 Baker keeps a hot Fire within his Oven. b Either againft the Lite 
vr Eſtate of ſome of their Fellow- Subjects, or it mas be, as appears 
were 7, againſt the Life which they ſeem'd in their Cups to pray for. 
! He who ſhould watch and prevent Miſchicf, is [wallowed up in 
the day with Feaſting and Drunkenneſs, and fleeps in ſecurity all the 
Night, never ſuſpetting the Projedts of Conlpirators. k But when 
ie awakes too late, he ſceth all in Flames, and paſt quenching. Sedi 
01 and Rebellion is among theſe, a Sin as hateful to Gad, as dange- 


qi 
05 to the Publick, yet frequently ated by the Uſurpers of thoſe diſ- 
ldlute times, J 


| 7 Lheyl are all m hot as an oven 7, and have devour- | 
© otheir Judges p ; all their Kings q are fallen 7, * there 

5 none among them that calleth unto me 5s. 

This Verſe is a Key to the former, and helps us to underſtand the 

p 1e Senſe thereof, 1 See ver, 6. let. f. mIn a larger, and more 

"gar Senle, the moſt, or almoſt all of them, few excepted. mn See 

"7.6. let.g. 0 As Eire deſtroys, {0 have theſe Conſpirators, when 


fg laces , p 

x "<c:v'u}, deſtroy'd. p Thoſe that were Magiſtrates and Rulers, who 
wy 0s ſumewhat of Integrity, wou'd not join with them, nor pro- 
Pa 'TLOTR 4 M - 

:  O Intereſt of Uſurpers. q All that had been ſince Feroboam 


them, from firſt to laſt were addicted to vitious Prattices, and their | 


EM 
Skalum, Pel akiah, Pekah ; theſe four fell by the Conſpiracy of ſuch 
hot Princes, only Menahem died a natural Death. r By Treaſon and 
Violence, from ſuch as would drink them fick with wiſhes of Health. 
s Not one of all the!e cither tear'd, truſted or wor}:ip'd God. By 
Profeſſion all were Tdolaters, in Prattice debauche.l, and by their 
Compeny they kept thele latter Kings of J]-ae! appear under a ſuſpi- 
tion of Men contemning God, and deriding Providence ; but they 
py lorg unce fallen, where they muft lie for ever under God's 
uſtice. 


ple #; Ephraim is a cake not turned x, 

t The Kingdom of J/rael. u By Leagues and Commerce, by imita» 
tion of their Manners, and by either entertaining their Gods, and ſa- 
crificing to them, or at leaſt worſhipping Idols as the Nations about 
them did ; direttly contrary to the expreſs Law of God, De ut. 7. 2, 
3, 4+ and 12. 2, 3. this was their Sin, and the greater becaule Volun- 
tary ; the Expretiion ſeems to repreſent ir as a thing of their own 
ſeeking, they did mix themſelves with the Heathen, whereas had the 
Heathen ſought it, *rwow'd in likelihood have been ſaid that the Na- 
tions mixed themſelves with Ephraim z but this is in ct1er Words the 
ſame with chap. 2. 5,7. or this Paſſage may be ( as ſome conceive} a 
Threat that the Ephraimites ſhould be ſcatter'd among the Nations, be 
Captives to them,and diſperſed amongſt them,with whom to eaſe their 
Condition a little, they ſhould endeavour to mix by Friendi};ip and Al- 
liances ; if ſo, this is the Puniſhment of their former ſinful Confedera- 
cies. x Some interpret this of the Party-colour'd Temper of Zphraim, 
by {uch a Proverb as ours is, neither Fiſh nor Fleſh,neither J/a?lire nor 
Heathen, but a Mungril ; neither a Heathen Idolater, nor yet a Wor- 
ſhipper of God, a hotch potch of differeat Religions and Policies, 
like them, 1 Xzng. 18. 21+ and Zeph. 1. 5. neither Bread, nor yet 
Dough, but partly both, as the unturned Cake on the Coals is : But it 
better expreſſeth their Danger and ſudden Ruine, whoſe hungry Ene- 
mies will eat them up quickly as Men do, who for hafte will not ſtay 
the full baking of their Cake. 

9 Strangers y have deyoured z his ſtrength 2, and he 
knoweth 7t not b: yea, gray hairs are - here and there 
upon him c, yet he knoweth it not d. 

Y Foreigners , whoſe aid Ephraim ſought, as 2 Xing. 15. 19, 20, 
when Menahem bought the Friendſhip of Pul King of 4ſjyria for one 
thouſand Talents of Silver, and imporveriſh'd the Land thereby. x Eat 
up, lived upon, as Men live on Bread they eat. 4 The Riches and 
Goods of the Kingdom of Jſrael, the Eruit of theOlive and Vine, the 
Fruit of the Earth, Corn ; the Increaſe of their Flocks, and of their 
Herds ; the moft or 1ſt of atleaten up by Strangers, either Souldiers 
in Gariſon amongſt them, or elſe courted by Preſents and Rich 
Gitts ſent to them. 4 1+ not ſenſibleeither of the Cauſe why, or the 
Tendency of this haſty Conſumption of all ; till they are ſecure, and 
ſin as much as ever. c The manifeſt Symptoms of approaching 
Death, undeniable Tokens ot old Age, and declining Strength never 
recoverable, are upon their Kingdom,like grey Hairs that are here and 
there intermixt on the Head ofa Man ; what with Domeftick 5Sediti- 
ons and Foreign Invaſions, and the Fears,Cares and Griefs from both, 
Ephraim is turned grey-headed,his vital Vigour and Strength decayeth, 
and this is a Fore-runner of his Death. 4 So ſecure and ſtupid,that no 
notice 1s taken of this, nor any Courſe thought of for preventing the 
diſmal Effe&s of this declining Conſumptive State z none turn from 
Sin, none ſeek to God the only Fhyfician that can heal, 


10 And the pride of Iſracl teſtifieth to iis face e, and 
they do not return to the LORD f their God g, not ſeek þ 
him for all this z. : 

e Vid, chap. 5. ver, 5. let. a, b, c. Their proud contempt of God 
and his Threats, of the Prophets and their warnings, is notorious, 
f} They perſiſt in Sin without Repentance, run away from God ra- 
ther than return to him ; of this Phraſe return, ſee chap. 6. ver. 1, 
let. 6, g Who was theirs of old, who ſtill would be theirs on fair. 
Terms, of whom they talk and boaſt. bh See this Phraſe, chap. 5. 15, 
let. y, 7. they pray not, repent not, nor rely on God. 7 Though 
ſo greatly, continually, and ſeverely puniſh'd, though almoſt eaten 
UP. 

11 < Ephraim k& alfo is like a filly dove 1 without 
heart 2 ; they call 2 to Egypto, they go to Aſſyria p. 


k Vid. ver. 8, let. t. and ver. 1.let.d. 1 A deceived Dove ſeduced 
by falſe Prophets and idoiatrous Prieſts, whoſe weak Arguments are 
ſoon believed, and whoſe unſeaſonable Advice is too ſoon followed : 


_ Ephratm is now become like the Dove in Weakneſs and Fear, as well 


as in Imprudence and Liablenels to he deceived. m This explains the 
former, whether Heart here be Judgment and Diſcretion, as ſome- 
times It is, or be Reſolution and Courage as otherwhile *tis; this 
Dore, this Ephraim wants both. 7 They ſhould in their Perplexity 
call on God, who can help, but they do not; they call indeed, bur 
not to their God, or to a Friend, o This z7oſhea, did, 2 King. 17. 4» 
and I remember not any mention of other application to Egypt fince 
Fehufs time. It is probable Zoſea aims at this Embaſſy and private 
Confederacy, of which, as of a thing in hand, he ſpeaketh. They 
do call to Egypt whoſe King is called So, and judged to be Sabacor 
the Ethiopian, who had lately conquered Egypt : By this alſo may we 
gueſs at the time of this Prophecy about ſome four: Years before Sama- 
ria was taken. p So did Menahem when on the Throne, fo did Zoſhea, 
as 15 evident, 2 Xp. i5. 19, 29. with 2 King. 17. 3} Thus both 
bewrayed the greateſt Imprudence, depending for help on profetſed 
old inveterate Enemies. $0 lilly were they Vid, clap. 5. Vere 13s 
and chap. 14. ver, 3» 


12 When they ſhall go q, I will ſpread my net upon 
them 7, I will bring them down as the fowls of the hea- 
ven 5,-I will chaſtite them 7? as their congregation hath 
heard 4. : 

q Whenſoever they ſhall ſend their Embaſſadors to ſeek aid of Zgypr 
or Aſſyria. r As Fowlers ſpread the Net, watch the Bids, and caſt 
it over them to catch them, ſo will God do to Ephraim ; $0 he did 
with Jrae} when he accepted the Alliance or Shaimaneler, and turn'd 
tributary ; and again, when /{r.e; env bt by Fg 16s help to get our of 


<cona's Reign, to the delivery of this Prophecy, viz, Zechariah, 
Jon ils | 


I1 ; the 


Chap. VII. 


s Ephraim ft, he * hath mixed himſelf among the peo- *Pa. 10s, 


350 


+ Heb. 
ſprinkled, 


wm Oo, » * 
_ NW —_— _ g rOTDg: : » py L x -2 p IT - 4 om 5 " - Y 
F a + he. Be ene D : way $77 LE Tank e WA by x: h F c Re: APR. 4 Wes 1g md. « 2. Ss C . "9a v © _—_— = y <FMC-w$ w" 
_— b. - < p 4 i v - _- - - , , + « « = wk - - rw” + ny —— ” 4 + 4+. 0 a c "2" wr & 
"* _ . —_ _ — . o f , 8 4 - b. 5 
mm 0 " A _ COIN wn Ew em 4127 4 ” f . 4 OT Li the 1, Ox Oe 120g." ” p pews <*  Tvy 4 "..” —_ , - - x _ 
moan rue L ad , b. — a," o — - be” ©6420 . £ -__ « T & a - I we” WR >. - Os oy wo - __— < " £2208 
—_—— — Sa EIS 0 . ” _ — r : s <D PEIA A £ ' uns tes $', 2 NETTED ET 5 4-4 : _—_ > - > mw 
_ y—-—_,>— _—_ __ _ * , p 2 bo > > "GC FE wy oath - A , - wy 22 XS A : Hb ances S aEEELIET IS, d bom > A" —_ 
/ " ag ls " " ar V 2s 4s of oye A a wn 5 AM HC —_— _ s nin hover RR ————— = ſi —_ — oo £otoenoay bones <— x- = opts *y L - - 
4 _ þ a Y —- . 1 ; « Þ , wt x; jon "2 t > Cc Y . -_ 
Y 4 - ro ——— $ . FE 2 a _— - _ - - 
ke : 0m. ven ——_— _ © - ” _— » - ” g” - 4 ———_— -— . : " 
= ” 46-4 LR PA ——_ _ o b -_ "2 " "— » py ; a py ” ,  \.- =y 2 _—_ -_ *s 4, oh _—_ .- - _— _— —_ "Ow : . bs . 3 P -__ -- 4 
p WE. 7 gone Las . . - 4 - E _— - _ 2P > b C_ - bo; hg : - EW! ae; , - DO & N . q =. p % - 
AOL : ned EPR P—— | It ac Fo = _ a SCSI ys, gt x61 o% : Fu” # -— - - "ite DF, 2 —_ Tt wh . x ty 5. "An - ba yuh eos, % NC TIIEED gy” 
$ * ” : tb > * 3a 3X; x WS 28, - : Ir; lens ae ron Ip aA X I ” w —_ "Ws + WS) 4 = a Bte- GD no —— x = — : 
Ne" i = - I _ 99 ©h< Snare oe, \ 4 - 4 nat . ot wa 2 s _ G £ " [+ S _ 
. 4 ws - £ < A j K+, 4 : 7 BUFR 7; a" Yah. £ (She < : v 
- _ " -_—* < - £ "I by -» OY p : wes 4b VO. ” C. j G 4 C28 F * w 6 > . 4 mL Is - ſo ou - Mb. " > Sy 
Y > = by o - « Y 9 - 4 px bd < - FL. _ -  Sahenontns > S_— = _ _ —_— ” - - _ g rt >a by Mags — 2 —<IEL LEE SL TAS _—_ —_——_ *__ x1 - . he of 
—_— —— OT cf % Ad ro = - — —_ - « we "F _ y_ a9 ITC: TEE _ —— = CE IS Fga _ - E- _ : by OW wo TS oy "SOA "It 
- co p - bo F - __ LJ SEP bay "4 by +00 ww * > < mY ow” w A nn” 7 __ 
p b — Y <> of I : _ FR. - 3 - % bong LE —__ ——_ POrey p_ _2 - cu x - - 

- - : es > han 4” ng re RY : well + J bY 4 ,, » . > dj dia IO TE. 7 ann. ws " A, ' 

A bl hs pe g k Low a OY - = 4 Vp > ” G S 

» s | z* # ” q -_e IRF7; - - b - £ _ » Kg RO = + < 03% jp A 

. 3” WD iT ; o - <4 
—_ bl as - _ & AJ. > = 0 EI pg 
2 > L - p bo - . _ __ J 


—_ 


"* / © 5 GOES = REA. p—_ SE". a: 4 - 6; a ” = : o IS p C pry t 
horn. A ene”: . ” - 
= Is *, + . . ws , bl d_ = ” 
þ1 + Fe I. ad -- ———— . w_ £ by _ = cs an a a a « > 
2 As - Abt =" 4p "I, nn k : _- - Ef < $-- Wt _—— —_ _ s 
- —— "_- Gy - | Ks = 
© bn pe CET 6. - wt » M4 - L a _ may » —_ - 
4 _ 27 $a a og =—_ = . Wha” DE IR, a... Pin; L ht :, CDT <tr conit 
CY 3, - bf —  YF— — = Lg, go 2A j = _y » _ ; qu - m—_—_— wy —_ i_ 
A ans thn bt mate ————o_ oe IV22-- 0 oy PT: : ”; — * pa = — Z = f 3 » I Ln 
\ ' _ OR * 4 . _———_—— A ”— —_ - . dos. ST 19. EZ % [4 I 
. W— > \ bl en _ - - ® 4 b, __— ; > . 5 J = . * ty 3 > » w 
{- Vp oo . jo BY = YO - Og D g = (Fr e » © rand 'S <0" a a —_ o . -- - _ 
wo = LIE: nad US . - Q 1 Pug i. % 4 —_ 
£1 - —- » a, . —_— # -*. w —_ wy TA © 7 . Sar 2 IE. I" : ” p "uo .. - Ch ben HE ; yy 7 hs . KP 
AF 8 2% E——_ —— _ proof r NE =. OL. i. PF _— = " . "if _— *_ v,'# — Ry P 4 —_— 7 a - 
= C _ - _ ; a ——_— Me —— - Wo Se - =» b+ - mL ” > = - a "_ eee hone NE noe 
- 2-4 - AEILE 4 = 7 - I . —- A "= ors s P_oy ———_—— = JA $44.00 "a | "> 
- -—- + m F 8 | — g - p l —_—_—— P ” S F a w cham. " - 
< g Bhs —_ by x5 £ 7 — . 4 _ _ - T = « \ o _ > — —s A ee aur—es T, 
_ oe —_— x «2 _ _ — ya IY - —_— q tron rs Co coax 3 > Loy - Fee. 4 tk 
I : $ ore? tho 4 *Y. " Len = . . 2 hk, =» FI ODE ”_ 5 £ —_ nr 
Ss HY 77 6. as, - 5* _- - nth EY _—_—_ my" = cf-atti Mong td 1-43; 2 ogy 1 of ts es » a ” C " : a 
. - ec — ; 4 wS "i Woe , PO Bron - _ 3568-7, A Or ME cling at, Arn : 
. » Wk mate CITIES - FE. -a - . ££ T ke - * 2; IT; hn e Las 
7 : . EO <4: A : :- g Ta . - aw S A "LF £t o *PE Kc ="atdF. . ” 
pr My x ——— WT. bo Sy : Lag > 007 hg . : . 
Z 5 as _- les - . - FS Td C J 7 P pn 
ro STE, 4 a> on St EM + > as); we Ae A X P . " 
z gra gn.» A a4 x i 2c £5: — "I ' N : - — « = "_ 
* , - a, nine, OY pres on * I or , 
_ - N s - R . ——————_ . _ i - 3 ——_ - + 
P- - - ” ” 4 =. T < [6 44 ” pH ” = «4 wed], — Ch - bs» _.- % — w- 
q 0 - 2 eee erties 
v * a . -. — pl o _ o R—_ > 
I « Ws % a lt — - v ” 
bs = * . o 


- ID - 

MM bh, 

> « 
o CRT TY 


4 o 
| £17 
, : 


Py rent 


Cs er ey en - ” 
os en 4” 


_ 


-” -- -— car 


—— 


Chap. V11. 


the Snares of their Vaſſalage to Shalmaeſer,whorevenged the Conlpl- | 
racy with a total © aptivity 3 nor can there be likelihood or poſhbility | 


theſe Fugitives ſhould eſcape, when'tis God's Net, and he ſpreads It, | 
his Almighty Power, his all fearching Wiſtom,his juft Vengeance that 

” S = . . . . T i 
follows them. 5s Though they attempt to fly,yet as Fowls in the Net | 


vere gathered into $4;74774 as a Net, and there made Priſoners, and 
thence carried Captives. t Thus they ſhall be puniſh'd. # Both trom 
the Law of Moſes which they had with them, and as they had hcard 
from my Prophets which 1, have ſent unto them. 1 will, ſaith God, 
make good my Word. 

13 Wo x unto them, for they have fled from me y : 

+ drſtracion unto them z, becauſe they have tranſgreſled 
a againſt me : thovgh I have redeemed them 6, yet tney 
have ſpoken lies againit me c. 

x It is the Voice hoth of Menace and Lamentation, the Prophet 
doth at once foretel and bewait their Miſeries. y As if it were not 
enough that they did at firſt leave my Government, Temple and Wor: 
ſhip, they have gone farther from me, they have haftened herein, 
they flew from me as Birds on- the Wing: Their Sia 18 Apoltacy. 
> This explains the Wo already mentioned, ſuch Wo twill be as ends 
in Deſtruttion. a Rebelliouſly caft off my Law and Government, 
much in State, more in Church-matters 3 Oppreffors in one, Ido- 
ters in the other, and incorrigible in both. 5 Out of Zzypr, but 
that's long, fince, and the Prophet ſpeaks of deliverance nearer to the 
times ne lived in; God redeemed them partly by Foaſh, 2 XIngs 13e 
but more fully by Ferobozm the ſecond, 2 King. 15. and would have 
compleated this deliverance, but they by their Sins hinder it. © Pra- 
Qtically they belie me, {lying to Idols, worſhipping them, praying to 
them, as if I were not able or willing to help them 3 and aſcribing the 
Praiſe of the Good they <cnjoy to their Idols, chap. 2. 5,6, 7. they 
belied his Corrections as if not deſerved, or ſeverer than need ; they 
belied the Good done, as if to9 little, or not done by God, but by 
their 1dol. ; . : 

14 And they t have not cried vhto me « with their 

heart x, when they howlcd z upon their beds a : they 
aſſemble b themielves for corn and wine c, and they rebel 
againlt me 4. 
t Immerled in theſe Troubles, taken in the Net. « Either they 
cried to their Idols, not to God, vid. ver. 7. let. s. or elle their 
Tongues made Noiſe, their Hearts were ſilent, and that is in God's 
Account no Cry at all- x With Aﬀection, Hope, Humility and Sin- 
cerity, but out of ſome Trouble an more Fear, they cried out to be 
delivered out of their Pain and Fear. + 'Tis therefore elegantly and 
properly called howling; though they did thus howl, yet they pray'd 
not, they did not pour out a Supplication to their God. 4 On their 
Couches, or in their Chambers. 5 In the Houſes of their Idols. 
c That they may have plenty of theſe to ſatisfy their Appetite, to live 
luxuriouſly, and in jollity. 4 As in the ule of theſe to excels, ſo in 
this manner of ſeeking theſe, they rebel againft God, and give that 
Honour to the Idol which is due only to God. 
15 Though e I || have bound f and ſtrengthned 
. their arms g, yer do they imagine miſchief againſt 
me h, 

e but 4s {or me, or, an! 7, f Or, chaſtiſed, as the Word will bear, 
or, inſiructed; either Notion will well ſute the Place. When T had 
chaſtiſed them for their vins, as in Fehoahax his time, I ftrength- 
ned them in Fetoaſp his time, and in F-roboam's time, and made 
them ſtronger than rhe'r Fnemies, Or I taught them, gave them Wife 
dom and Skill ro han.lic their Weapons; ſo David ſpeaks, Pſal. 18. 
34. U koteacheth my has 19 war, and Pſal. 144 1- But the Senſe beft 
futes with what he took upon bim betore, if we retain it as our Ver- 
fon hath it, bound, as a Chirurgion binds up a weakned Member, or 
having ſet a broken cne, doth with Swathes end Bands bin it up 
ſo did God for Ephraim, when the Syrians and other Enemies had bro- 
ken their Arms. g As I took care to bind, fo I did what none elſe 
could, give ſtrength to them, both courage of Mind, and ftrength of 
Body, and Succeſs added to both ;z lo they ſubdued them that had 
formerly waſted and ſpoiled them: what Succeſſes Fehoaſh had, or Fe- 
r0b02m had, T gave, and they fhould have own'd it, and been thank- 
ful; bur + they contrived, latl rheir Heads together, and deiigned 
what L431 they could againſt mz, they imputed their Succefles to their 
Idols, to their way of Worſhip, and hardned them'elves againft all 
Thovghts of Repentance, and returning to me, and deviſed Milchiet 
againſt my Prophets, and let locſe the Reins to all Impicties. This 
is their Requital for all my Love ! 

16 They returu :, but not to the moſt High k: 

* Plal. 75. they arc * like a deceitful bow 1: their Princes 12 

ſhall tall by the ſword #w, for the * rage of their 

”” tongue o - this p {hall be their derifion q in the land of 
EgyPr ”. 

i 1 hcy tometimes have given ſome Signs of returning,as when Fehby 
deſtroyed 7a), or #ofhea gave liberty to 7/1421 to go up to Ferujalem, 
(it it be true which ſome afhrm of him) and if I were ſure #cſhea dil 


+ Heb. 
{poll, 


- 425 As F 4D 
CLAIRE ELITES »- oa i —og- REAC ro =" — 


[| Or, 


chaſtned, 


57s 
* Pſal. 7 
0. 


& Feba tell off to the Calves, and 2/;ſhea's Reign was wicked too too 
nuch, though the Reigns 0i other Kings were more wicked 5 what 
jew {oever of Repentance among them, yet they never throughly re- 
pented, never fully embraced the Lnw of God. I All was done (as 
the Similitude clegantly 1cts it forth) in meer Hypocriſy ; though they 
'L fzem'd bent for, and aiming, at the Mark, vet like a weak Bow they 
} carried not the Arrow home, ani like a falle- Bow they never carried 
td it ſtreight toward the Mark, m The Royal Family, principal Nobles and 
Magiſtrates, their brave Commanders an:l Leaders. 7 Be ſlain by ei- 
| ther Sword of baſe, talle and Bloody Traitors at home, or by Sword 
| ot Foreigners, as the Aſſrian. 0 Againſt God, his Prophets and Pro- 
vivence, Which to decry with Scorners was their uſual diverſion, ver. 
5. 7 Ihis ſad End. q Shall be upbraided to them. r7 Among their 
Allies and feeming Friends. 


HOSE 


they ſhall certainiy fal}. T1 will bring them down as he did when they ; 


thi-, I ſhould think the Prophet aim'd at it, in this they return. | 


A. 


CHART ve. 


God 1lreatneth Iſrael for tranſgreſſing bis Law and Covenant ; for ſettivo y, 
a Xing of their own, 1----4. Their idolatry threatned by conſuming th. 
truit of the land, and their diſperſion among the Gentiles, 5 ---12, G;, 
refuſeth their ſacrifices, and threatnzth them jor their ſins, 15, yy 

| Fudan alſo, I 4a 


c COEt the trumpet to F thy mouth 2 - he b hall come 
I * as an caglec againſt d the houſe of the LORD «, 


. 


becauſe * they have tranſgreſſed my covenant 
paſled againit my law g. 


and which from above ſeizeth his Prey, ſo ſhall the Aſſyrian Army 
come. d Or, up ro, as far as, ſo ſome ; but *tis better, as here, againſt, 
e Either ſo called becauſe the //raelites pretended their Temples were 
not Idols Houſes, but Houſes of Fehovah, and ſo the Prophet tor once 
calls them ſo, perhaps to intimate to them that their Sins would brin 
an Enemy againſt thoſe Houſes, tho they were indeed whar they 
pretend them to be, the Houſe of the Lord ; or ele by Houſe of the 
Lord is meant the Family of Jſrael, or the J/rae1itical Church, which 
till unchurch'd might be called the Houſe of the Lord: or it may be a 
Sarcaſm or Irony againſt their wilful brutiſh Ignorance, who woylq 
not underftand what was moſt plain, that his Houſe was only at 5e. 
ruſclem; or a ſofter derifion of them, one of whoſe principal Places g 
| Worſhip was Beth-el, which in Signification is near the ſame with 
this in the Text, #ouſe of God. f Taken other Gods inſtead of me, 
turned Idolaters. £ This explains and confirms the former, Coven; 
and Law are ſynonimous, and ſo are tranſgreſſiing and treſpaſſing, 
They have violated the whole Law and Covenant, and are Apoftate; 
from their God, Rebels againſt him their King. 


2 Iſrael h ſhall cry + unto me, My God k, we know 


thee 1, 

h The ten Tribes. 7 In deep Diſtreſs, when the 4frian rangeth 
over their Country, when Samara is belteged, they will cry out aloud, 
but hypocritically ; they will roar, but not pray. kt Then they'l look 
to the antient Alliance and League between their Fathers and me. 
E An only Saviour, be ours, for we are thine. Thus in Hypocrily will 
they carry it. : 

3 lirael m hath caſt off x the thing that 1s good 0: the 
enemy ſhall puriue him p. 

This ſeems to he the Anſwer God by his Prophet gives to 1/741; 
in the firſt Part of the Verſe he doth refute their Pretence of a ye 
culiar Relation and Intercft in God, in the latter he tells them what 
they muſt expe&. m The whole Houſe of 7ſrael. » With an abhor- 
rence, as an adulterous Wiſe puts away her Husband. o Moral Good 
to be done, all Vertue and Goodneſs; and the ſupream Good to he 
enjoy'd, God, true Religion and Vertue, all caft off for Idols, falſe Re- 
ligion and Debauicheries. Such a Nation cannot be my People, nor 
do they know me. p That Enemy he would be deliver'd from, the 
Aſſyrian Army ſhall overthrow, and then purſue, till he hath coopt 
him up in Samaria,and till he have brought them Captives out of their 
own Land into Chalah, Chabor and Gozan, &c. By this they ſhali know 
that I know them, their Tranſgreſhons and Hypocriſy. 


and their gold have they made them idols x,-that they 


may be cut off y. 

q Iſrael, the prevailing Faction among them in Zoſea's tigie. 7 Ski 
lum, Menahem, Pekah and #oſhea, who uſurp'd the Throne. s Not by 
my Direction, or with my Approbation ; they neither pray'd his Ble- 
ting, nor ask'd his Leave. And this may be applied to the very firſt 
founding of the Kingdom of J/7ael, divided from the Houſe of D:- 
vid, t Rulers and Magiſtrates, or Nobles. u He that will not approve 
any one Evil when his Omniſcience Gilcerns all, is pleaſed to ſay, 
knew not what he did not approve. x Heathen like they have made 
them Gods, and ſet up Idolatry, ſo have perverted all in Church and 
State ſettled by me. y As if they were reſolved to cut themſelves of 
from being a People. By this they though to eſtabliſh themlzlre5, 
but *twill be quite contrary, theſe Sins will be their Ruinge. 


5 © Thy calf a, O Samaria, hath caſt thee off b; mine 
anger is kindled againſt them c : how long will it be'erc 
they attain to innocency 4 ? 


a Feroboam at. firſt (et up two Calves at Dan and Bethel, but 'tis pro- 
| bable that in proceſs of time there were more ſet up in other Pl: 
; ces, for when J/-ael forgot his God, he built Temples, ver. 14+ he 
. Calf then here is the chief Idol ſet up in Samari, and worthipp* 
' there; the. Prophet in contempt of the Idol, and in derifion of thr 
Foily, gives it its right Name, 'tis no God, but a Calt, nor ye 9 
' much, for that it is ſenſleſs and without Life. 6 Peen the occaſion 0! 
caſting thee far off, in that by this thou haſt provoked God to agfl» 
and he hath caft thee off: Orelſe thus,if thy God,if thy Idol, thy C2! 
have done ought,'tis Miſchief; thy Calf could not keep it ſelf in $47”) 
but is either carried a captive God, or broken into Pieces, 15 cart i-+ 
Piece-meal into A4ſjy774, and ſo hath caſt thee off ; it carrieth 10%” 
what of Irony in jt, c Now it is evident, that my Anger as Fire D\'! 
eth againſt the Idols, Idol-makers and Idol-worlhippers, and ſhall '0 
burn till they are purified or conſumed, 4d The Prophet is very WT. 
ciſe, and perhaps bere muſt be ſuppoſed ſome or other (ſome one © 
the People, or the Prophet himſelt ) fighing out to God, How 10% 
(hall thine Anger burn ? and aa{wer returned by God, How log will 
it be *cre they be cleanſed ? | 
6 For e from Iſrael f was it g alſo, the workma! L 
made it 7, therefore it 5 not God k ; but the calf 0: »t 
maria ſhall be broken it pieces /, 


C k 


Chap. YI 


+ a MT 
att 
roger cf 


3 and treſ. men 
*Do. 


2 The Lord here commands the Prophet to publiſh, as by ſound of 4: |; 
Trumpet, that which God will bring upon Apoſtate 74 ; Awaken ti 
them with the Alarm of War. 6 The King of Aſjyria,Shalmaneſer,whg be: 
carried Jſrael Captive. c Swift, hungry, ſurmounting all Dithiculties, (;, 


4 They q have ſet up Kings 7, but not by mes : they 
have made Princes t, and I knew 7t not #4: * of their {ſilver 


' 10 Yeg 


hap 


* 
* 5 
FA 


Z 
YL 


ES 4 


iwallo 
riy 
Labou 
IS {wal 
Within 
let. o, 
aſperſ 
YAS y 
in baſef 
Nation: 
Confed; 
calt of, 
© -P F 
- alone 
Vers e. 


and ſubje 
ment ſha 
tO their 
PrediRic 
done, 4 
Very gre: 
deportin, 
ol. throug 


K Was a Te 


and finfy] 
vetely pur 
refer it to 
wild Ag, a 
well, 1ſrae] 
a wild Aſs 
72el, Who x 
tle wild A 
for Aids 

15 n0 Path « 
they ſhall } 
yinto moi 
Vlaces, and 
now known 
Une by bi 
Wit; (0 't 
Wildernefſe 
the Friend 
dearly boy 
Sever 1; tc 
td vith thei 


| 
on, ag 
|| Orrow 5 
} Or, yea 
ities, but j 


Ie5 11 1g + 
s UN t] 


\ Q! [1 


D's 
#1 
54 


Ur , 
' N14 


D 


be 
& 


|. * 
Ww by 


- ah 
e a 
| . 0 
bn 
by hs 


A 
gre! 
et 10 
O11 9: 
1LeT 


Cal', 


CON 
me 0: 
lots 
r will 
p 


hap. 


237 


« 
15 


| Io Yea, though f they have hired among the na- 


V[IT. HH O $ 


2 Oc, becauſe, f By their Iavention and Authority. g. Both the 
14ol and the Worſhip of it. þ 1 he Founder, dilverſmith, or Gold- 
niich, 2 £:ſhion' the Calf, þ& You are (ottiih Fools a think 'tis a 
God ; if the making it will not convince you 'tis no Gud, yet I hope 
the deſtroying it will prove whatere 'twas made for, or whatever 
chought to be, yet *twas not, nor could it ever be a God, ] But when 
'he Idol is broken into pieces, $414 ſhall lee *twas but a © alf, and 
confeſs their Folly in worſhippig it, however the deftruction of it 
will be a perpetual witneſs of Szmariah's Sin, an.l God's juft diſplea» 
ſure in its Ruine. | 

7 For m they have ſown the wind #,, and they ſhall reap 
the whirlwind 0: it hath no. || ſtalk p : the bud ſhall yield 
no meal q : if ſo be it yield, the ſtrangers r ſhall ſwallow 
IC. up. : 

6 + that, or, for ſo much as, (or) verily, ſo the Het. Particle 
is ſometime uſed, J/z. 7. 9. 7 A Proverbial ſpeech' to denote either 
loft Labour, or- which is much worſe, Labour that will undo and 
tear to pieces him that laboureth, both there are inthe Verie: Man's 
Life and Labour is a Seed that will bring forth Fruit, but when this 
Like and Labour is laid out on Sin, as here J/racl's was, 'twill bring 
forth that Fruit the Sinner is unwilling to reap. 0 A violent tearing 
and diſipating Tempeſt, w hich beareth down and deftroyeth all that 1s 
in its Way ; 2n Emblem of the Wrath of God breaking out againſt theſe 
rain and finful Men: So Ephraim reaped in his Civil Wars, and 
much more in the Afhrian War, which ended in' a Whirlwind that 
hath ſcattered them into unknown Countries, and where they have 
Jain buried in forgetfulneſs above 2400 Years. p Suppoſe this Seed 
ſhould have-its Harveſt in no Whirlwind, it will end in loſs and dil- 
appointment, as Seed that never ſprings up. into a Stalk, nor hath 
Bud or Ear ; all your Worſhip of, and dependance on Idols, and 
Foreign Aſſiſtance, will at laſt be as Seed that yields neither Stalk 
nor Bul. q Or ſuppoſe it produceth Stalk and Bud, yet *twill be no 
Profir, but all loft Labour, for the Bud ſhall be lank, ſkrivel'd, and 
blaſted, and never yield Meal; ſo was the Fruit 1/rael reaped from 
Pul to Mcnahem,and from” Egypt's aſſiſtance to Zoſhea againſt Shalma- 
neſer, » Or if yet Meal be found' in the Bud, 1/74el ſhall be never the 
better, Foreigners ſhall deyour it ; ſo did Pul and his, and Shalmane- 
ſer and his Ajjyrians eat up all. 

8 Iſrael /- is ſwallowed up t : now # ſhall they be 
among the Gentiles x, as a veſle] wherein v no plea- 
{ure y.-* 

/ 1n the former Verſe, the Prophet foretels the loſt Labour of ſuch 
Pains and Seed as Ephraim beftowed : Now he addeth ſomewhat more 
dreadful, the Harveſt is Ruin and Deftruction to the Seeds Man, he is 
i wallowed up, and this is the Effed of the Whirlwind, ver. 7, ordin2- 
rily Whirlwinds ſcatter the F:uit, but here's one ſwallows up both 
Labour and Lahourer. # Very ſoon and irreparably, as a Man that 
5s ſwallowed alive by a mighty overgrown Shark. u E're long, 
vithin three or four Years at moſt, as I noted on chap. 7. verſe 11. 
let, 0. x Carried out of their own Country by Shilmanzſer, and 
diſperſed at the Pleaſure of the Conqueror into Chalah, Habor, tc. 
) As worthleſs, and uſeleſs, caft out of Door, or if of any uſe, yet 
in baſeſt and moſt contemptible ; ſo ſhall theſe Captives be among the 
Nations whom they muſt ſerve ; or Iſrael impoveriſh'd by chargeable 
9, is now look'd upon with contempt by ' them all, and 
calt of. - | 
9 For z they are gone up a to Aſſyria b, a wild aſsc 


'alone by himſelf 4 : Ephraim * hath hired  le- 
vers e, 


? The Prophet gives now an Account why J/7ae] was ſo impo- 
reriſh'd, and why they ſhould be ſo ſeverely puniſh*d , why fo 
puniſhid of God, and why ſo lighted by Man. 4 Either gone, 
!, e, have ſent Embaſſadors with rich Preſents to purcha'(e aſſiſtance 
from Ajyria, or gone with their Tribute to procure the continnance 
ot the Afyrian Confederacy and Aids. This confidence and truſt in 
Ajyria was. accompanied with a caſting off their dependance on, 
and ſubjeftion to God ; this their Sin was very great, and their Puniſh- 
ment ſhall as their Sin be very great. Others refer this going up un- 


to their going into Captivity into Aſhria, and it ſurely may bea. 


PrediQtion of what ſhall be (if it be not a Narrative of what is) 
Cone, b It was at that time a mighty Nation, whole Kings were 
very great, and yet more proud than great, as appears in Sexacheril's 
deportment towards God and Man : This Kingdom had now grown 
ot through Pul, Tiglath Pileſ.r, Shalmaneſer and S:#2chertb's Reigns, 
was a Terror to Enemies, and the vain confidence of this foelith 
and finfy] People, for which they are particularly threatned, and ſe- 
verely puniſhed, c This is differently applied by Int=rpreters, ſome 
refer it to the King of Aſſria, who is fierce, ſwift and haughty, as the 
wild Afs, and all for himſelf, thus the French interpret it; So it ſutes 
well, rae] thou wilt be diſappointed in thy expettation from Aſhur 
a wild Aſs, who ſeeks himſelf only. Others do refer wild Aſs to 1/- 
74], who wild, untamed, and buraing in Luſt, ( as is reported of 
the wild Aſs) rangeth far and wide for Lovers, ſeeks every where 
tor Aids and Succours. 4 Solitary , or in a Wilderneſs, where 


'E*M 


1 5 
fore, &e. op Bring Jſfral together by a locrt and unfailins T 


will, faith God, affemb'e ani herd them rog4ncr, ia 


it, tis King of Aſſyria, the great King who boalted of his Princes. 


altars o, ſhall be unto him ro {in p. 
I This refers to what follows. 


the lame Idol. They had many high Places and Altars in alt of them. 


fices to be offered on them to Idols. 


{dols, and to attend their Altars and Sacrifices, or elſe by a juit and 
dreadful Judgment from God delivering them over to their wilful 
Blindneſs, and idalatrous Hears : fince they would never be reclaim'd 
nor taken off from ſinful multiplying Altars, let them follow their 
own Hearts and (et up what they will, much like that Rev. 22. rr. Or 
elite thus, Alcars ſhall be the occaſion of his greater Guilt and Puriſh- 
ment, his A/tars, 7.e, his Idolatrous Worſhip ſhall be that Sin that 
rains him, 


law, but they / were counted as a ſtrange thing tr. 
write ? bnt moſt read as wez*in the perfect or jaſt Tenſe : 1 have 


given to them as well as to the two Tribes. 7 For their lnportance, 
weighty ; for their Excellency, precious z and for multitude of Pre- 
cepts, Counſels and Direttions, ſufficient ; my Law had all this in it 


theſe things I have written. # Jſrael looks on them a3 nothing to them. 
they are a diſtin& Kingdom, and have a diſtin Eſtabliſhment ; their 


dom of our Governours other Laws eſtabliſh'd for our Worſhip ; let 
Fudah keep to theirs, we will keep to our Laws. After 200 Years :!e- 
ſuetude, would it not be madnels to introduce Fulab's Laws, and in- 


Law, as if they were nothing concern'd in them ; 2nd thus all their 


Sins at laſt become incurable Diſeaſes, which nothing but utter de- 
{tration of the Sinners can put an end unto. 


now will he remember their iniquity, and viſit their {ins : 


| Nations to ſecure them againft thr Gu 1nd fis Ti taments, the re- 

vr Train. 
they mY 
be taken and deftroy'd together. Others lay, God will gather the 
Nations together againft Jj74e!. þ For a while be'ore their final Cap- 
tivity, they ſhall complain and be grieved. 7 1he Tribure laid on 
them, þ by the King and Princes, 7. e. of 1/72el ; but berter as we read 


11 Becauſe / Ephraim hath made many alturs m to inn, 


m Nultiplied cither to many Idols, 
every one having his Altar, or multipi ed Altars in ſevera! aces £2 
n Both as ating againft the Law of God which require: but on- 
Altar, and alſo thele Altars were to lin, in that they were for Sacri- 
Theſe Perſons did not inten 
them for Sin, but their good Intention did nor, could not chan»e 
the thing, 'twas Sin however they intended. 0 Either thote he &- 
rected, or thoſe they ſhall find in Afjria when they come Captivez 
thither. p Either becauſe forced in Captivity ro worthip Ajſy7i 1: 


[2- | have written q to him the great things r of my 


q Some read it in the Future, and by way of Queſtion, Sha?! / 


written, by Moſes firſt, by other Prophets afterwards, the Law was 


for their condu&-in all Righteouſneſs towards God and Man. { All 


Laws are now become unpracticable to us, and we have by the Wiſ- 


novate all in J/rael ? thus they contemned the excellent things of Gud's 


1 3 || They facrifice « fleſh for rhe ſacrifices of mine of || Or, 7: 
terings, and cat #t ; but the LORD accepteth them not x -*;* /47 


Mee) of 


* they ſhall return to Egypt z. 


and in Oppoſition,read them, and perhaps 
connected with the former when ſo taken. 


. £ Z 
u Or. as for Sacrifices my Gifts ; ſo ſome ablogghe words Abfvlute, Fa; 


mine offoy. 
, 57 CO 7 
F } » they, 


they afe plainer and cloſer * Chap.g, 
1 have written to them, 4 & 15, -, 


and they count it a ftrange thing, and the Eacrifices and Gifts which 
they call mine, I tell you what I account them to be ; as for Sacrifices 
which now they pretend to give me, it is Fleſh they ſacrifice, an cat 
it wheg they have done, and I acceunt no more of it : they facri- 
fice that they may feaſt and fill themſelves with Wine an\l Mirth, and 
what is that to me? x Neither owneth them as his, nor taketh any 
Pleaſure at all in them. Thele Sacrilices $shall never expiate thelrc 
Sins, nor reconcile me to them, ſaith Gad : I think here is a Meiofjs 
in theſe Words, they may be a ſofter expreſſion of Hatred and De- 
teſtation 'which God bears towards ſuch. y In his juſt and hot diſs 
pleaſure he will reckon with them, and by puniching them tor all 
make them know he remembers all their Sins, Hereremembring and 
viſiting are the ſame, and include Punishment. 7 Either alluding to 
their Bondage in Egypt, (o Ajſyria shall uſe them ; or el{e-it is an up- 
braiding them for, and minding them of their perfidiouſn2ſs to Sha!- 
man ſ:r, They had been ever Covenant-Breakers with God and Man, 
this laſt part of Treachery God will punish : or elſe they shall return 
to Eg ypr, i.e. many $hall to ſave their Lives fly from the Aſſyrian 
into Egypt, and there ſcek their Safety z and if they preſerve their Life 
there, the Punishment of their Sins $hall follow them. Exile, with 
Miſery as bad as Captivity, shall be their Lot there. So Cap. g. 5. 

14 For lſrael a hath forgotten b his maker c, and 
builderh Temples d; and Judah hath multiplicd fenc:d 
Cities e: bur I will ſend a fire vpon his Cicies f, and 1t 


ſhall devour the Palaces g thereof. | 

a The ten revolted Idolatrous Tribes. 5 The ſame with ch49.2.9. 
which ice; or chap 4. 1. and 6. ver. Either remembers not at ail or 
*tis without Love, Thankfulneſs, and Contideration of what becomes 
him towards. God. c Who made, who preſerved, who advanced 


them, and gave them all thoſe Priviledges wherein they exc?! oiter 


is no Path or Tratt ; this will well ſuit them in their Captivity, when Nations, who brought them out of E:ypr, &c. d The word will 
ey ſhall be left asin a Wilderneſs, and may, as perhaps many did, | hear Palac:s, or Towers, - It is like their Idol-Temples were magri- 


yinto more reinote and deſolate Places, and ramble into uninhabited ! 
Vlaces, and there take rooting, and give Being to Nations which are | 
now known to us, though we know not whence they deſcended. Or, 
ane by himſelf, in a Poſture fit to become a Prey to the Lion of 4 
1 ; ſo tis reported the Lions make a Prey of the wild Aﬀſes in the 
 Wildernefſes, ſo will Afſyria make Jjrazt a 1 rey e Hath dearly bought 
the Friendſhip of Aſjyria in Pul and Shatmaneſer's Time and more 
dearly bought Friendſhip of Egypt in the time of So or Sabacon, or 
Seveclus; tor beſide all the Treaſuie they laid out on this, they part- 
&d vith their God for it, and ſet him againſt //r2el. 


ons, now * will I gather them g, and they ſhall 
. || forrow a little þ for the burden i of the King of Princes k. 
j Or, yea, becauſe they think this the way to prevent their Cala- 
mties, but it ſhall appear this was the ready way to bring Calami- 
ies Upon them + and for as much as they have hired the aid of the 


V0. Il, 


- 


might for need gariſon and fortify them, and truſt in their Strength 
ina day of War and Trouble. -e On like Deſigns and Morives durh 
Fudah multipiy ſtrong holds, fortifying ag 'init threatned Judgments, 
making Flesh rheir Arm, whilſt their Heart (as at-this Time of hx 


ficent, that they might boaſt of them, aud ſcrong like Towers that they 


his Reign and Apoſtacy) did depart from the Living Gol, f Bring 
an Enemy upon them that $hall befiege chem in their Cities, and burn 
them ; which was effeed by Nebuchadn-z7ar and his Armies abuut 


130. Years after. g The ſtately Palaces of their Princes and No les 
in their « ities, theſe $hall be burnt too: Tadub hath imitate 7ſrael, 


and made himſelf like to. Jjrael in Sin, and God will make ihem like 


in -ufferings; the Fire which chcir Sin hath kindle, >lall Cunſums 


both, 


Ii z CHAT 


SES 


Sor gee 5 


_ yy, 
_—_ 4 vb » &f 
Uo Tas > IE I 
Fe 


9 9 
S424 
PROD 


ws 


= 


by 
w. _-_ _ L 
ro—_—_ A ” a _—— .- ' ap _ « _— . D 2-4 
2 5 \ w_ a. = 6 ——__ _ 
” R X . k Py ” - = RIPE _— 6 0 - 
- of i ——_ 7 v- I wo eos. > - — - = a As PT” OS A SIE , " 4 " 5 CYIS ; 
| dia me - - Loa .; - - - 1 - p_ = y 2 <li by A oe 323 oe * — NR \ & pom I 
S . end £4 w PRA 2es.! TIES 5 Ab; = on > > 7 Fn hw oft Sp =: = : * Ng ——— "—_— w— ——— S _ Dttcotes 
00 Wins” be RAR... "EEK - _—_— - A > - 7 EM = © CES =" -_E IEF” WM we * _ FS > . - ae - - ; - > a —_—_——— = LE No - - 
2 Br - « ' - _— 9. La I IEEE fe - -aifeay , > - - ” > O ", nas A. v8 tm — 
TIP Ns Ho. ran" FI 7-24 mw PS IHE «<P ww q a b a EE. jo ada; Ia "_—_ £ -. h;.o4 ad 3 
WR Fi , —— wy o oo IS > + *- : _ : *1 $5 "I « % - -) Wd wed B oy C 
- : 5: £20 2 : : in - _— £4 a nk Me e das * os I. 4 wt py NN ” —_ » OI * gy, = _— us = 
TS i, => < b- NTIRT ID” -; - "_— g © n ge" . 4208 
pf or X w "a —_ wy - a \ <3 97 "= ? hr wi 4 ger nos Rgbs" tot _ 4 US TAIIES - "7 gee = A 8 mn beads & 
£377 £ [= 4 L GE AC.. - Acs. ee J 
LW LY . : Wea... hee ; Cn arena - nt h 75 Wi DD - - 
b YL F*" 4 - Mloes £2» 4s . 
_ py . > he) «4%. x ot . ce; —_— 
. . ” 5 " 3 $ "5 C R 
+ F , A 


Chap. IX. 


CHAY. Ic. 


Ged rhreatneth the Iſraelites mith ſpeedy famine, captivity, and deſtrudi- 
on: their corruption and abominations threatned with barrenne's and 
flaughrer of their children ; their diſperſion among the nations for de- 
Jpiſing God. 1 17. 

I Ejoice not a, O Iſrael b, for joy c, as other peo- 

le d : for thou haſt gone a whoring from thy 


* Jer. 44+ God e, thou haſt loved a * reward f|| upon every corn- 

7 Boor g. 

[! Or, T @ This might ſeem a moroſe Humour of a diſcontented fullen 

GC Preacher : what, forbid a People to rejoice when things proſper with 
them ? When ſhould a People rejoice if not then ? The Prophet who 
had a deeper Reach, and took a larger Proſpett of things, had good 
cauſe to adviſe, or warn or forbid as he doth; for he ſaw more 
cauſe to grieve than to rejoyce, and ro mourn than to be merry 3 
the Reaſon you will have preſentiv. 5 You of the ten Tribes. 
© For any thing that is counted juſt matter of Joy z though at preſent 
you proſper either under Feroboam 24. h:s victorious Arms, or under 
M-n them, and the Safety he hath procured by a Confederacy with 
Ajjyria, though at other times theſe might be Matter of rejoicing, 
now in thy Circumftances, O /ſr2-1, 'tis not meet thou ſhouldſt ſhew 
any Gladneſs, d With Feaftings, publick Games, and Triumphs, or 
with ſolemn Sacrifices of Thankſgiving, or with erecting Statues to 
the Memory of your great and brave Commanders, or for continuing 
the remembrance of their Atchicvements. e With thee, O Jſrael, 
*tis as unſeemly as *tis for an Adultereſs Wife to rejoice and be jovial, 
whilſt the Guilt of her Adulteries, and the ſhame of her Lewdnefles, 
and the diſpleaſure of her Husband fly in her Face, and whiſper Re- 
proofs in her Far. f Such as is given by Adulterersto lewd Women. 
£ Thou haſt loved to ſce thy Floor full, and haſt thought and ſaid 
thy Idols had ſo furniſhe(l thee, and therefore thou didft love them. 
Though Mirth might become an honeſt Woman, it doth not ſo well 
{uit with a diſhoneft Adultereis; the very Place, the Company and 
occafion do upbraid ſach an one rejoicing with her lewd Adulterers : 
befides this Adultereſs's Toys will be {hort, and end in Sorrows and 
Shame, ſo will thine O J1ſrael. 

|| Or , 2 The floor þ and the || wine-preſs ; ſhall not feed k 

wine-fat. them 1, and the new wine ſhall fail in her m. 

þ The Corn which is gathered into the Floor and that is threſhed 
there, that Plenty which theſe ſotriſh Idolaters have and think they 
have it from their Idols, the Bread rhey eat. For here is the Floor 
put for the Corn, and the Bread made of it. 7 By the ſame Figure 
put for the Wine that is preſt out in it, though there 1s great | lenty 
and the Fats overflow as well as the Preſs full, k All this Ulenty 
ſhall not nouriſh and ftrengthen them. Since they think their Tdols 
give them their Corn and Wire,let them zive alio what I will not give, 
a Bleſſing on theſe that they may ſupport and reireſh them they ſhall 
be lean and half-ftarved in their Plenty, unleſs their Idols can do 
this for them, 7. e. bleſs their Food, 7 Who ſeek to Idols for Corn 
and Wine, and praiſe their Idols as givers of it. Theſe I will blaft, 
their Proviſion ſhall-be as theirs, Hg. 1.6, m# Or, lie unto her, or 
fail her ExpeQation. Samaria and all Iirael expett a fair and full 
Vintage, but they expctt it from their Idols which are a DoGrine of 
Lies, and in this as in all other will lie. 

3 They » ſhall not dwell in the LORDs land o ; but 

* Ch.$.13, * Ephraim ſhall return t2 Egypt p, and * they ſhall eat 
-_— 4+ unclean things in Allyria 9. 
tb oF Who worſhip Idols, an-! give my Glory to them, depending on 
* ** ®* them, and aſcribing to them what I alone give them. o Though they 
bave been in Pofſſcſhon many Years, and though now they ſeem out 
of fear of loſing it, being great at Home, ani in Peace with Neigh- 
bours abroad; yet in muſt of this Proſperity and Security, let them 
note it, they ſhall not much longer dwell in the Lord's Land, which 
God gave them according to Promile, with exprels Condition that 
they ſhould obey Him. and fear Him, and Him only, Deut. 6. 2, 3. 
and with expreſs menace of Exile and Ruin it they forgat God, 
Deut. $8. 19, 20. This Land which 1s the Lord's Propriety, and 
theirs only on Condition, and this Condition broken ſhall be their 
Poſſeſhon no longer. p Many of Ephraim, for *tis not meant of all 
or the moſt part, but of the more Timorous , Wary, and who con- 
ſult their Safety before-hand ; many ſhall fly into Egypt and ſhift out 
of the Enemies reach. Sq again, ver. 6. q The reſidue who fly not 
into Exypt, ſhall be carried Captives, and in Aſjy1iz be forced to cat 
forbidden Meats, called here unclean, (uch polluted the Eater. 

4 They » ſhall not offer wine-offerings s to the LORD, 
neither ſhall they be pleaſing unto him ft : their ſacri- 
fices ſhall be unto them as the bread of mourners « : 
all that eat thereof ſhall be polluted x; for y their 
bread = for their ſoul ſhall not come &@ into the houſe of 


the LORD. 

r Captived for their Idolatry and other Sins, Ss Theſe were by 
the Law appointed to be offered with the Morning and Evening Sa- 
crilice ; the Sacrifice repreſented Chrift, and Pardon by Him ; the 
Wine-offcring repreſented the Spirit of Grace ; the Sac rifice repeated 
daily continued their Peace and Pardon. The Spirit of Grace ſup- 
ported, guided, comforted and retreſhed ; all which ſhall be with- 
held from thele Captives, the Law of God forbidding no one Account, 
the Law of their Conquerors forbidding on other Account. t Or if 
any ſhould venture to do it, and think thereby to appeale God's anger, 
they ſhall miſs thcir Aim, "twill not pleaſe God, « Their Euchari- 
{tical Sacrifices, in which they were uſed to feaſt with Joy, ſhall 
be to them as the Bread of Mourners, as if they had buried a Father 
or Mother, and to comfort or ſupport their {adned Spirits did torce 
themſelves to {ome larger Allowance and choiccr Meats ; {o great 
ſhould be their Grief in the midſt of their Joys. Or elſe thus, their 
Sacrifices ſhould as much pollute them and difpleaſe God, as if one 
mourning for the Dead, and forbidden to ſacrifice in Tears and 
Mourning, ſhould yet venture to do it, and againſt Law lacrifice 
to his God when polluted by the Dead, Num. £9. 11, 12, 13, 14. and 
Deut, 76. 14. x 0 far (hall theſes Mens Sactifices be trom expiating 


HOSP A. 


Chap, I 


and purifying, that they ſhall increaſe their Guilt and Danzer, and 


expole them to the Penalty threatned againſt rhe Iolluted, Zeur, 26. Im 
13+ and Numb. 19. 13. y Or, ſurely ; the Particle 1s not here Cauſal the 
but Aſertive, as in many other places *tis. + Their Mtncha or Breaq y A 
which they always offer'd, and were bound to offer with their $Saczi. int 
fices ; or elſe the firſt Fruits of their Corn which were to be brovygin hat 
to the Lord, and which being rightly offered, did ſanWify and enjure the 
the reſt to them with a Blefſing. This ſhould not be done, they phe! 
ſhould be at that diſtance from the Temple, and under the confinement int! 
of Captives, ſo that they ſhould not be able to do it it they were ij. then 
ling. a Be brought in to the Pricft in the Temple, Deut, 26, 2,, tred 
ce | anot 
5 What will ye do in the ſolemn day, and in the day 9 9 
of the feaſt of the LORD ? days 
Think with your ſelves what you are likely to do then on thoſe inq 
days you were wont to ceaſe from your Labours, to offer Sacrifice; 2 ] 
to God (as you thought and ſaid) to feaft with one another ? All was ple, b 
full of ſeeming Religion, and real Feafting and Jollity on thoſe days cheir 
in your own Countrey ; but will your hard Mafters that love their c The 
own Profit, that hate your Perſons, and deſpiſe your Religion, wil Work 
they loſe your Labour, indulge your Eaſe, incourage your Religion, charge 
and ſuffer you to exerciſe it ? Is this imaginable ? © Promi 
6 For lo b they are gone, becauſe of - deſtruftion c ;4 y, iſ of not 
Egypt ſhall gather them up 4, Memphis e ſhall bury/xi, WW . '* 
them f: || - the pleaſant places for their ſilver g , * net. )% faw y 
tles ſhall poſſeſs them þ : thorns 5 ſhall be in their tf 6, rſt ti 
bernacles k& : Fi. ed m1 
b Mark it well, and obſerve the Event. c Some of the Wary and g, | LIONS | 
Timorous are already withdrawn from the Deſolation that cometh 4 jj, g the 
on their Country, and more will fly from the Aſſyrian Invader ; and j4, UNexpe4 
'tis very near, and very certain, expreſs'd therefore in the Perfett #1, | which a 
Tence. 4 In Egypt they hope to be quiet, and ſurvive theſe Deſola- xy; bear to 
tions, and to return into their own Land ; but they ſhall die in Zgyzr,c,, ſeth the 
and Ex yptians ſball lay them out, and prepare them to their Graye, or Iſaac, 
So this Phraſe, Fer. $. 2. and Ezek, 29. 5+ e Which elſewhere is cal- & & As th 
ied Noph, Jſa, 19. 13+ a very greatly traded City in thoſe days, and at W the firſt 
th's day alſo known by the name which ſpeaks its Greatneſs, Gran we bear,wh 
Cairo. f Many of the Ten Tribes flying their own wafted Country, - FThis e 
did no doubt remove ſo far as Memphy, partly for Safety, that they P Facob, b 
may be out of the Aſhrians reach, but more principally for Conveni- Story of 
ency of a. Trade, that they might at leaſt get a Livelihood, if not groy - committ 
rich on their Trade ; There many of theſe Fugitives died, and per- | diſcourſe 
haps by the Peſtilence ( which is a Diſeaſe that frequently ſweeps that - Looſenel: 
City) Multitudes of them might be ſwept away into their Gravesin "7942s; of 


& Mozo whe 
E ple: this ] 
& 5 the mo, 
themſelvec 
addiſted t] 
Yacrifices. 

ſpeaks of t 
to expreſs 
dd. p Th 
fancied, or 
ed; ſo the} 


and about that Cit”. g Their beautiful and ſtrong Houſes built tor 
keeping their Wealth in. þ They ſhall be ruined, and lie long in 
Rubbiſh,till Nettles grow up in them. # Qr Br1ars, or whatever (one 
kind for all) worthlets, and hurtful Shrubs uſe to grow in perpetuz 
ted Deſolation. & In their Dwelling-places, their Houſes which here 
retain the Name of their antient Habitations when they dwelt it 
Tents. 


7 The days of viſitation are come, the days of 
recompence are come 1, Iſrael ſhall know # mn: tie 
prophet #5 a fool », the | ſpiritual man o 75 mad yp, forit 


the multitude of thine iniquity q, and the great ha- 1 It As 
tred r, - bird s ; fi 
I The Prophet doubleth the ſame thing, both to confirm the Cer- the conce 
tainty of it, and to awaken the ſtupid !ſraelires ; the days of God's juſt 7 Their 
Diſpleaſure, in which he will puniſh, and render to theſe incorrigible Iſrael, as the 
Idolaters, and abominable Debauchees, as their Wickedneſs deſer- tions m1; 
veth, are come ; they are very near, within four years at moſt. m /- of promiſe: 
rael will not believe it, though God hath often told them of it ; but * Pal. 128 tc 
when *tis come, and they feel it, they ſhall then know indeed, as Fools . unexpeRed 


know when they 1mart for their Folly. # That their falſe Prophets 
were all to a Man of them Fools and raſh, judging by preſent Great- 
nels or Alliances of Jſrael,not obſerving what were their Sins and God's 
Wrath. Now when #oſea preach'd what was contained in this ninth 


g Prov, 23. 5. 
= Verb, 7 Sh, 
= World; 


Chapter, //rael had made a League with So King of Eg ypt, caft off the W% _ : 
Ajjyrian and not ſought to God, but vainly truſted to the Ezypriar ; 12 Tl 
Succours : Now any wiſe Man might imagine that likely, which the WW: will 1 bi 
Prophet #oſea did foretel as certain,that the Aſſyrian with all his Fow- IF # Zeft 2 : y 
er would fall upon the Revolters ; none but Fools would promiſe (uci WW * them þh 

a People a time of Safety when the War was falling upon their Heads, BW », ©. ſupp 


0 That pretends to be full of the Spirit of Prophecy, and foretels Good 
to them. p Whom we thought a true Prophet, but now find by fad 
Experience that we believed a Mad-man-z one much out of his Wits, 
yet were we more to believe what he promiſed. q God was highly ci 
pleaſed with the Multitude of their Iniquities, and began his Puniſh- 
' ments in giving them over to believe the Lies of rheir taiſe Prophets, 


L: and come to 
= deprive ther 
© Vere long an 
| and diſperſiny 

and as Slaves 
| £ There ſhall 


and to expett what Peace thoſe Prophets did Promiſe. r Which God I will cut they 
had againſt your Sins and Ways : You would walk'in Ways whict Compleat the: 
God hated, yet would have Prophets to foretel Peace and Plenty ; ſuch blad to loſ c 
you have had, as deſcribed Mich, 2, 11. and you believed them ; an =e% 
God, out of his juſt Diſſike, ſuffered. this to be, left you to your 13 Ephbr 
choice. fant place e 


{0 the murc 

© Kingdom 
Try rich, well 
Ward held out 
Miz Em pire j 
nIncible, IS as 
tlther Strengt] 


8 The watchman s of Ephraim was with my God?: 
but the Prophet u 15 a ſnare of a fowler x in all his ways) jc 
and hatred || in the houſe of his God =. F 

s The old true Prophets indecd were with God; heard what he 
ſpake, and told it to the People ; they were tor God, for his Henour, 
Law, Worſhip and Temple, and lo thould Prophets now be : Ephraim 
once had ſuch Prophets ; ſuch were Elijah and Elifha, but none ſuck 
now, or Ephraim carts not for them. # The Prophet ſpeaks of 09%, h 


> - "ha Þ þ do- ne Safety to 
the true God, as his God, in oppoſition to Idols, on which EpFr4im on Utude of Chija 
ted now, whoſe pretended Oracles they believed. u The me Kt twill be b 


now a-days, who call themſelves Prophets, and are fo accounice e) 
the People, have, as the Feople, let. God, and do no more comm 
with God. x Their pretended Prediftions and Promiſes arc but 4 
Snare, ſuch as Fowlers lay to take Fowl in; and theſe Impoſtors _ 
conitious to themſelves that they are Deccivers, .at leaft they © 
but know that the tcue God never gave them anſwer at any 0” 


844-430" 7 


14 Give 
ave then; 4 - 


wap. IX. 


-, Images : Y 
” them: ſo they 


*n this Opinion and Hope» 
hate ſach DeCE1VETrs 3 
the Sight 

hets 3 W 
in their Temples 
themagainft ceturni 
tred, £6, i. & caule 
another. 


WL 
- 


iniquity, be will viſit their ſins f. 


: The People of the'Ten Tribes, Prophets, Priefts, Princes and Peo- 
> b have ftrangely.and horribly debauched one another ; befide all 
"heir Idolatry, there is more than wie 4 ye" ny ter 
hereof you have Fudg. 19. 18. od who hateth ſuch 

Apoongl J pardon their Iniquity, but 


e He will nor 


J f Ini uit . a 
PRs 3 —_ God ſaith he will not remember, 'tis a 


charge it upon them 3 when 


Promiſe of pardon ;_ when he threatens he will remember, 'tis a Threat 


of not pardoning. f He will puniſh, ſee ver. 7, let. L 


ſaw your fathers as the firſt-ripe in the fig-tree at her 
« 5: time & .- but they went to * Baal-peor 1, and ſeparat- 
ed m themſelves 1 unto that ſhame o : and their abomina- 


tions þ were according as they loved q. 

g the Lord ſpeaks of himſelf, b in the Perſon of a Traveller, who 
unexpettedly in the Wildernels findeth a Vine loaded with Grapes, 
which are moſt delightful and welcome to him ; ſach Love did God 
bear to J/4e!, 7. e, a very _—_ and hearty Love z the Simily expreſ- 
ſeth the Greatneſs,not the Cauſe of the Divine Love. i Not Abraham 
W or 1ſazc, and Facob, but your Fathers whom I brought out of Eg pt. 

| þ As the earlieft ripe Fruit, either of the Fig-tree, as qur Verſion, or 


” 1 This evinceth that the Prophet ſpeaketh not of Abraham, 1ſaac and 
> Facob, but of thoſe who were brought out of Egypt, as appeareth in the 
' Story of their Deportment in Sbirtim, Numb. 25. 1, 2, 3+ where they 
” committed Idolatry with Baal-peor,of whoſe Rites Authors do variouſly 


10 I g found Iſrael like grapes in the wilderneſs þ : I 


HOSE A 


-t they pretend he hath done it, an} that he will proſper | 
enſnare the People firft in Sin, next in Puniſhment. | Irouble for the State of a finking undone Nation ; it isan Intercefion 
3 And all they detign and endeavour by all means 15 to keep the Peopie tor them. þ As if he ſhould tay he knew not what to ask, or how to 
z SO is hated in the Sight of God, he doth | Pray tor them ; he knew God had peremptcrily d2termin'd to puniſh 
and be # hatred, 1.e, e're long will be hatred 1n 
of the People he deceived, they ſhall hate their falle Pro- 
ho from the Houſe of their God, by Anſwers from the Idols 
confirmed the Peopl= in their Rebellicn,and hardned 
rning to God, which ends in their Ruin : or elic Ha- 
of the Peoples Hatred againſt God, an:l one 


9 They a have deeply corrupted themſelves b, as * in the 
days of Gibeah  : therefore he d will remember e their 


& the firſt ripe of any ſweet and delicious Fruitetree, as the Word will | 
& bear,which are moſt valued and deſired ; ſo was 1/rae! dear and valued. : 


diſcourſe, ſome reporting them to have been prattiſed with ſhameleſs 


© Looſene(s, as the Rites of Bacchus, Venus, or Priapus among the Ko- 
- mans; others ſay, this Idol of Moab had his Name from a-Mountain in 
© Moo where he was worſhipped, and had a fiately and famous Tem- 
Þ ple: this Mountain is mentioned Numb. 22. 41. with 23. 28. and this 
+ is the more likely Opinion. m They did conſecrate, and dedicate 
themſelves. # Poſhbly ſome turn'd Priefts to the Idol ; however,they 
addited themſelves to, and worſhipp'd the Idol, and brought their 
Sacrifices.. o By way of Contempt and Deteftation the Prophet 
ſpeaks of this Idol, and gives it the name of Shame in the AbſtraRt, 
toexpre(s the greateſt degree of Neteſtation of it, and of that they 
dd. p Their Idols and Way of Worshipping them. q Either,as they 
fincied, or as the Idolatreſs Women whom they loved were multipli- 
el; ſq their Idols were, for they took the Idols with them, 


It As for Ephraim, their glory r ſhall fly away like a 
bird s ; from the birth t, and from the womb «, and from 


the conception x, 

7 Their Children or Pofterity, which was as much the Glory of 
Jſreel, as their multiplying was above the common Rate' of other Na- 
tions multiplying z it was to them a ſingular Bleſſing, and performing 
| of promiſe, and they did greatly rejoice and glory in this Bleſſing , 
 Pſal. 128. tot. Prov. 17. 6. $*Tis proverbial, and ſpeaks a ſudden and 
& unexpeRed Loſs of Children, which vaniſh, and are-gone as a Bird, 
# Prov. 23.5. where ſudden Loſs of Riches is expreſs'd in the ſame Pro- 
= verb, t Shall die ſo ſoon as born. u Prove abortive, their Mothers 
EF fball not bring the Fruit of the Womb to perfection, or alive into the 
& World. x Through Barrenneſs their Wives ſhal] not conceive. 

. 12 Though. they bring up their children y, yet 
3 will 1 bereave them &, that there ſhall not be a man 
left a : yea, wo alſo to them when I depart from 


| WW themb. 
 F Orſuppoſe neither of theſe, but that their Children'live,grow up, 
- 2 nd come td ſame maturity : 2 Yet God, provoked by their Sins, will 


# deprive them of their Children by Famine, or by Civil Wars, which 
: vere long and bloody on each other ; or by Peſtilence,or by Captivity, 
| and diſperſing them among Enemles, to whom they ſhalt be Slaves ; 
and as Slaves beget Children not to themſelves, but to their Mafters. 
£ There ſhall be a total Extirpation of them, and their Memory,or elſe 
Twill cut them off from among Men, as the Phraſe will bear. 5 To 
cmpleat their Miſery, I will leave-them, I will depart from them. It 
blad to loſe Children, it is ſadder to loſe their God. 

13 Ephraim c, as I ſaw Tyrus d, + planted in a plea- 
ſant place e: bur Ephraim ſhall bring forth his children 
{0 the murderer f. 

© Kingdom of 1/72el 4d Of which ſee Ezek. 26, 27. and 28 chap. a 
I? rich, well fortified, and pleaſant City, and ſecure too, that afrer- 
Ward held out thirteen years Siege againft all the Power of the Baby» 
a Empire in Nebuckddnezzar's time, e Is now well provided,ſeems 
nvincible, is as ſecure as Tyrus was in her Proſperity ; perhaps reckons 


þ er Strength ſhall break the Enemies, or Money buy Friends : or 
xd, © Mzgnificence and Beauty of their Palaces and Dwelling ſhall be 
10- va Safety to them ; but all this ſhall avail nothing. f Though mul- 
ot5 Me of Children to ſend forth in mighty Armies againft the Enemy, | 
yy BW: *! be but a ſending them out to the Slaughter ; God is depart- 
uit fall ho them, and will not go out with their Armies ſo they hall | 
2 7 the Sword of the Enemy, as they needs muft, whom God doth | 
E It befriend in a War. 


14 Give them, O LORD 7zZ ; what wilt thon give hz 
Sethent a+ miſcarrying womb #, and dry breaſts k, 


| _& It:is an abrupt but very pathetical Sp-ech of one that ſhews his 


them with a tota! Extermination, and in moſt dreadful manner, as des 
[Cribed ver, 11,12,13- Now give ſome Mercy. # The d1ys are COm+ 
ing when the barren Womb will be a Bleſſing ; give this, O Lord ! 'tis 
le!s Miſery to have none, than to have all our Children murdered by 
a barbarous Enemy, Luke 23.29. k Not to ftarve the Children born, 
zur tis farther Explication of the former; dry Brexfts are Sy mproms 
of a barren Womb, whether by Abortion, or Non-conception, by one 
or other: Prevent theſe woful Effets of our Enemies unjuſt Rage,and 
of thy moft righteous Diſpleaſure againſt us, O Lord. 

Is All } their wickedneſs #2 * & in Gilgal #- for 
there 1 hated them o: for the wickedneſs of their do- 


Ings p 1 will drive them out q of mine houſe y, 1 will 


rers 4. 


I The Chief, or Sum, or: Beginning, it is not to be underſtood exclit- 
five to other Places, for every City was full, there was all kind of Sin 
ellewhere. m In rejeting God and his Government ; here Saul was 
made King, and Samuel was rejeted:; Here they began to turn the 
remarkable Bleſſings God gave them in this Place, into a uperſtitious 
and hypocritical Veneration of the Place,and began their Will-worſhip 
and Jdolatcies : If all the Impiety of Ephraim may be reduced to their 
horrible Degeneracy and Corruption in State and Church, here it be- 
gan,and fo all was here. = Where 1/rael firſt pitched their Tents after 
they paſſed oyer Fordan.&c. Vid.chap.4.15.let.e. 0 As there they Began 
to {in ſo. notoriouſly, there alſo I began to ſhew that I hated them. 
Þ For the continued Wickedneſs which from their firſt beginning 
there they have propagated to other Places, and increaſed daily, and 
with Obftinacy. q As Mean thruſt out of their Honſes,one-that is alto- 
gether unworthy to dwell longer with them. r By a Synechdoche,the 
Houſe tor 'Land, or out of their Houſe 3 which though theirs for Uſe, 
Was yet God's Propriety ; and when God caftsEphraim out of his Houſe, 
he ſends him into Captivity. $I will ceaſe to expreſs any more Love 
to thee, it is a Mezofis,l will add no more to love them +7,e, I will add 
to hate them, and puniſh them z I will leave them in the Hand, and 
under the Fury of their Enemies in a firange Land. r Their Kings,Ru- 
lers, both Civil and Ecclefiaſtical. « Are and have been Idolaters 
ever fince the Diviſion in Feroboam Son of Nebat, not one of their 
Kings but were Tdolaters, and obftinate, and perverle in it alſo, 

16 Ephraim is ſmitten =, their root is dried up y, 


they ſhall bear no fruit z : yea, though they bring 


x This gives us ſome Gueſs at the time of this Prophecy,which was 
after Feroboam's Death z in whoſe Life and Reign Epbraim was as a very 
flouriſhing Tree,whoſe Roots were full of Sap and Life ; but after the 
Death of this King they were, as here 'tis expreft, a. Tree ſmirren, as 
if ſcorch'd with Lightning, or burnt up with-a vehement and conti- 
nued Heat and Drought by day : Blaſted they were,whatever was the 
Means ; or poflibly it may refer to thoſe Seditions, Civil Wars, and 
Rebellious Conſpiricies which (ſay ſome) did for tome years affict 
the Kingdom of the Ten Tribes, which unnatural Wars were as an 
AX to the Root of this Tree,and gave 7: King of Aſjyria Opportuni- 
ty and Courage to ſet upon them, of whom they were forced to buy 
their Peace at a dear rate,viz. a thouſand Talentsof Silver ; or to the 
captivating of Naprhali,and taking many fortified Towns out of Petah's 
Hand by 7igleth Pileſer, who came up to the Reſcue of Aba; 2 Kings 
15+ » This hath dried up the very Roots of this Tree ; this Blaft 
from Heaven hath nut only fcorch'd the top-Boughs, but rended the 
very Body of this J/7acliziſh Tree, and hath ſpoiled its Roots ; or Civil 
Wars firft,and Foreign Wars next,have cut upthe Roots of this Tree, 
the ſtrong and valiant young Men, who were to perpetuate the Life 
and Beauty of this People. - 4 As ſuch a dead Root cannot fpring out, 
lo thele Epbraimites never ſhall ſpring forth; they ſhall ever be barren. 
4 Suppoſe they ſhould yet bring forth, (ſuch a Suppoſition yau meet 
with ver.12,which ſee) they ſhall not grow to Maturity and Greatneſs. 
b Either by Diſeaſes which are legibly from God's hand, or by the 
Sword of one another, or of a foreign Invader ; if you do not enume- 
rate all the Ways God will take, we are ſure he will rake Ways e- 


| nough to make good his own Word, and lay their beloved Children, 


thoſe Children that were the more beloved, for that: their Parents 
had either few, or elſe: had loft ſome they had before. 

t7 My God c will caſt them away 4, becauſe they did 
not hearken unto him e : and they ſhall be wanderers f 
among, the nations g. 

_ © No more thy God, O Epbraim ? thou canſt no more have hope or 

that account ; but my Go, faith the Prophet, my God, who hath re- 
vealed his Purpoſe to me, and who will accompliſh it, who will make 
good the Word I have ſpoken againſt yous 4 Your Sins have been 2 

Wearineſs, a Loathing to my God ; and now as a vile, loathed, and 

weariſom thing is caſt off by a Man, ſo ſhall you be caft off from your 

God. e Neither did hearken to God to prevent Apoſtacy, nor would. 

' ever after hearken to God at firft to repent and turn to him z like a 

wilful Adultereſs, they would not keep faithful to their Husband, nor 

return to him when once departed from him. f Have no City of their 

own, no ſettled Dwelling-place ; as much ſuſpected, hated, ill uſed,and 

puniſhed as Vagabonds are in *well-ord:x 4 Common-wealths 5 ail 

which is fully come upon them. g Gentiles were ſuch the proud Cir- 

cumciſion did deſpiſe and hate ; but now the Sins of the Circumciſed 

ſhall bring them uader as much Contempt with the Nations ; nay 

theſe proud Apoſtates from God, when caft off, and Wanderers, ſhalk 

account it a Faveur to be admitted to incorporate with, and {0 to grow 

up Heathens among Heathens, as after long time they dids 


Chap. XI. 


*Ch.4.15. 
and 12.11. 


love them no more s; * all their princes t are revol- *Ifa..22. 


forth a, yet will 1 lay even the + beloved fruit of their # Heb, 
| womb þ, ſires. 


3 F by 


= - Foes 5 4 @, » wy 4 *. 
"7; fs Ee: HIDE * m_— Y 
4 LY NY ”y < - . 
AS - F = _ " = 7 


» ” L _— S * wy NY C ” 
« my» uy - ry -. dap warns > : © y : 2 —_—_ - my Py 
T4" x : pf . - - cs > A... Fl ad p =. 2a 7 - Us —*— SEE noone Y —_— - - yh" - s & - & = ; -_ Ys > Fr_— 
> - us br _ *. >; "— S o_ - % 9 ww COOII br — us y "4 _ po 34 mm Te. C o wo < a - : . " - —_ _ — z——_— 
yo * Cx 4 4 4 — Supj, 8 3. —_ 9 # — s Yo » 2 ay - b ve - my a - = = - L ol, AoC PA 6 LO A NN \ _ > - 
y — F bo 4 ” S 4. A - ab, « 3b "» FE ag} a 4 8 4 yy o7 P- "R F 2969 An. "Y £4 G 
LOO FAWN ag av aa — WS” -n - jt «4 On - os is he . : LE "W —— "_ Spg arr | : Py ; _ <4 OE ET. OE oY EY OO. os - 
yeah 6X. Pho PS, 'S . : WIDSTTL ; A p . . ; wg : =D = bs = Re. : a 2 Ry — _ Pa : 5 £ away > - EIN, - 
7 LISLE Wy , A 2 yy —_— " : "I ; Sp tl + ' ; "WR - > 1 by -; = ; s » I ea " 
bs Y LY 4 \o tt _ nn: - WG Yate oo» » « _— > = * - 4; 4 yolhes 4” : x # my : >. ” 4,4 : " NAT : . 9 C 7 
. c —*_ me 4 - IE ” - hs. . - -. — TS yo : — E hides 0 & x” OS —_— A - . Daft Lat Sire - 95 - _—_ 4 « p 4 x 
: = ——— ve hl y $0 F p $a "I " : ru de no 49 v0 C 3 ” 0s Hel 
- - L : = x TW 4 bo wh oY "_—_ 4. * . pH « by K d NP. > a 
TI ” l « j ated — Y - chs 2 «<A. : > — SL as a , a 
T - . C- Fe 4 > 3 my " . wi my "4 : N 
de: > ke'Þ; . Ls M, +++ "is . i _ 29 ue - <1 -- OY _, . GR 387% : q, 
8 : . + VESTN S% w_ - = 7* : £ = 4 . > a l " "ITE 4 4 meg Spy. 5A , *2* nie 2g 3s I : _ ds me = = a ” 
n, -w * - \ — 6.0” + . -_, - my C k. ” / - —_ FL. ” a S$5..45 - - F Ss a < Pye a" < _ 
« ME ub 4 PIR wa SI —_ —_— _ . -— 5  —— : : g _ = - — — MoanC Alas oo KA. PR! IE” a 6 © _—_ = : : 
_— om Þ wh d "Os . _— Mg K. al. 2% 4 2 » ESSESFLITS 20D . 2 gs PS. _ Js re b Ln < - * -- F. 
, _ D - by - o . A ———_ * . _- - a - - : - g—_— x " 4 _—_— _ n _ _ 
ma , — _ - pa ts>, ——e D 34 4 2 D - = 22-p ys ths "Ta *, Wc IE} _ ra DOD ERIE ; 
Soormntneerige —_— - — D— ——— -—— EO - » 
os ba wy v4 - py > —_— i - - 
F4 " 244 df 2. a. <5 ; D 


2 = = > _ 4 . ” * 
4 uy pr __— -. ——_ ded, \ Fe " - b » - "> £ $4, ” > 
: 4 —_ — » a thee (9.1 : p one, IG x : . , wy) EST =. > 2" F 
af” 1258 FS 9 o _—_ gy __ - Ts yang. < 4 - pn = < — SE : ms D_ ” 6% 4 —__ of by mag. He bs - 
—- —— drm oo & " > X88 (@rx.Z a : G o <<. (R$ a A az 2 - - = > X _—_— 
—_ ==Y : Co —_ _ _ __ Y hs 0 Derm <p <A ——>—— >_> >_> £ —— PI ” = . , - ye oe " I. ons an Sn . Ja —_— 
8 T Yn p : 6 CERT <7 ” 7 - on OE 3s : ” rw _ £4 Rh "y _ = 2ar% EY Bom 3 T _ = $8 bs a 2 : = —_—_— — —; = - 
. . "Ou. be 1 n . J : = - - i, 2. * TT) : j 5 g - Lens : p _ 
> ws _ y— _—_— _— du - : - bn FE —_—_ = bs Naw <4 A oe _s _ —_ how - £oenern au cw nnd - pore _—— Ne ARC LR. - — bs q 4% 4 _ as <6 - w_ — b _—_ b - Ms 
©; EPIC TOO = HR ei, i. EI". WT pI, NP IA I IT TER Tn EE ne 9 A WS A nn Se n._- = Sh : LEED > . = 
, ms "45> IP TH , . - IM —<) " > 3, WAGE 7 ; "_— D * 7 I ; LE... Wa" IT LEI ow +4 a m_ ; p £1 $44 4 , 3 —_ " >. pe-44 - * .: __ 7 Py __ _— KP—_—_ a mn - © 
OIEES you b = ._ : Ko PT. \ 7 —— 3 bs 5, oi ' EIT A , £ s 2 gy 6 - ty Le bk *F "he ot "oY an ee. 9; q _ 8 : No ae re A = 5 = : -. Xx . 
0h 2 a6 Xa "oo bs LAST. Cone gs OT = ET] : SET CO AER ny rg | NS a Cre” wo dh Aro Sit ox LITRE IS pe” Pre 5 -- vs " 
C Nr . ETA T oo Prat, < os " D YE a " AO - p -#£.. bo js p yn __— pe — FEY; Is ; 7 eg eG Ag a hpi 28 3 _ pts re $ « 
by py ve GY - $I _s! - WAL Laeds. p._4 IK +: *%., pon te a8 , n 5 2; " > - s oO IF _— a ” l ? opR, a+ _- ©. p_ 
= = "ye CR DR —————_——_— —  — — —— — —— A : DT EEE og. I eL IR” 54D SEE ga ;h<. Ch" DEAMES 5 5,4 LL EL PIO Or} Ay "IN RE 
TCV ha ud” 7 I 25 0 E 2 . 6 Se ES I iu b G- I 2" x Go == py. Iz oo ”— ”_ SY - - - 26 V 4 _ l - ark , - We Xa Ns a, , — * , 
-—- » of4 £2 au D g me - -——6 Ay” ON by - l 5 5 - OS _ — - - 8 "hy —_— A X -——- 
ons "x = » . . 5 - ” . 
2 =_ 
oh 9 A% . 


——_— 
oh 
mm 


C 7 
n 19. p< 
- k. 
| -. = 
"= 2569 ATDIRE? a 
RO: IS 00 
——— . 


*, 


banned 

> '. << = 
I = 
_ 


Wed. 
fp” P 
 TREACy __ 


F I.E 


$004 y 


S \ m 
” b among 07 wag * * 
R mor Þ. 1g 4g er Ss Inge; > - _- 
Ort. wood none ood ITE Ie oe wore vo on etl 1 , - 
- a Fy Cs 0 - 
G ne: * a4 "_—_ A : pr - 
- -_— - of a 
Cay , _/ & 
"mm — ” y 


EN INS "A *E: 
mb <ocey 


LT 


oc a& 
79 CREOLE AA. 
% ben 


ho 


AG 
4 To WO 


Chap. X. 


CHAT. X 


God complaineth, and r:provetb ljricls manifoid fins of untharkfulne/s and 
idolairy, &c. thream-th their rutne aud the carryiiig away of thelr 
calves, ro their (fame. 1---6. 2415 juſt judgments, Ly their enemies, Int 
fliited on them and therr Ling, J---15. 


Y ED 'Srael az is * | an empty vin? 2, he bringeth forth frvic 
Rs, unto himſelf þ: according to the multitude of his 


en1177g Nuit c, * he hath increaſed the altars 4 : according to 
the frunt the goodnels of his land e, he hath made goodly f 


a . 
comer T + ERP 0 Rp Yrophet doth ordinarily uſe 
* Ch.$ 4.1 Jjrael and. Eptraimn are Terms our Prophet dot - OF INATLLY UiC, 

-2- 5» and they ſignify the ſame People, the Ten Tribes revolted from the 
11. and 1x uit of David, and from the true Worſhip of God. 4 A Vine 
12. 11 waſted and ſpoiled, that hath loſt its Strength to bring forth any 
F Keb. Fruit, or that is robb'd and. peel'd of the Fruit it doth bring forth ; this 
0 T partly-for want of the Divine Protection and Benediftion, which they 
#1MM'S - were wont to have, and partly from an inherent Barrenneſs and 
195% Weakneſs in this Vine. 6 What-ever Fruit was brought forth by its 


remaining Strength, was not brought torth to God, for his Service 

- and Honour ; but for themſelves, tor their own Uſe, for Service of a 

''State-Intereft, to make Preſents, and to pay Tribute z or which 15 yet 

worſe, to maintain.the Worſhip of Idols. c When the Land yielded 

+more plentiful Increaſe, this Plenty was impioutly employed on mul- 

tiplied [dols, or on multiplied Altars, built to the ſame Idols. d Of 

their Idols, either by adding to the Number of Altars, or elſe adding 

to the Numbers of Sacrifices offered to the Tdols on their Altars. e I- 

* dolaters ſottiſhly. imagined that the ' Govudnels of their Land was a 

Bleſſing on them from their Idols ; Thus facrilegioufly they robb'd 

- God, and on this miftake they proceed to farther Impiety. 'f More 

ſtately, more curiouſly wrought, more richly adorned ; and it is moft 

likely more for number too, accounting It. a great Devotion to have 

- many, and rich Statues of thuir Idols. 

| Or, bs 2.]| Their heart is Givided 7 * now ſhall they be found 

kzrh ai» faulty þ ; bei, ſhall + brezk down &k their altars : he ſhall 

_ heir ſpoil their images 1. | 

op PG g From God and his Worſhip, or between God and Baadl, ſuch as 

EE leb. be- Zeph. 1.5. ſpeaks of, or tle divided one;trom ano: her by Parties and 

ext. Fattions, and CivilWazs, which tended to their Ruin. b. As this was 

- their Sin, ſo the feds hereof {houid manifeſtly prove them faulty. 

i Either God, or the Kifig of 4ſ};ri2 firr'd up by God to invade and 

deftroy Fpbraim, © k Ucterly pull down thofe Altars which they had 

multiplied to their 1dols ; the 4//;rians ſhall, as other conquering 

Heathen Idolaters, rage againft the Guds of the People they conquer, 

as well as againſt the People ; ſuch was the iride and Atheiſm of theſe 

Men. 1 Waſte, or deſtroy thzm 3; how goodly foever they had ſeem- 

ed to be, yet they ſhould bz broken to pieces: if they were made of 

rich Materials, as <ilver and Gold ; or it adorned with it, the Enemy 

ſhould the ſooner ſpoil them, and then *rwill appear how ſottiſh this 

People were to truſt in.-them, or aſcribe any Praiſe to them, when 
Baal cannot defend his own Images or People. 

2-4+ 3 For m2 now n they ſhall ſay o, * We have no King p, 

becauſe we feared q not the LORD; what then ſhould. a 

King do to us r ? | 7 

m Surely. » Frelonz. 0 See, and feel, and be convinced too of 

this Trurh. þ Either no ing at all, as.in an Inrerregnum,. or no ſuch 

King as we expected; and hoped: our Dependence was .much upon 

the wiſe, valian*, and {ucce{sful Condutt of our King z but he iseither 

Jefs wiſe, and rvaliant,or ets ſucce(stul in.his Enterprilez, qWorſhippd \ 

not, kept not his Liwg depended not on; God, therefore we have no. 

K ng, or one next to'none, not able to helpus. 7 And now it we had 

our King, were he as/pdwertul, wile, and. ſteceſstul as Feroboam the 

ſecond; yet *twou'd'be too late, the, Aſſyrian; Power bath.ſo far pre- 

vailed, and Gud..is: ſo far departed -from us: Kings are not able to 

ſave without the God of Kings. 18-5 CL, « 

+ S% _ © 4 They s have ſpoken words t, ſwearing falſly's in 

Deur. 29. making a covenant.x.: thus judgment y ſpringeth up * as, 


A 
oy 


os Wt; 


$4 hemlock in the farraws of the. eld z. Fo os 
To 5-23+ 5 The Nobles, and Great Men in /ſr az/ 3 the Heads of the' Parties, 


+ 12+ or the Counſellors of the: Kingdom, * t'Have- in long and repeated 
Conſultations and Debates, contrived and laid:*forth the Dengns moſt 
I:ke to help us; but all in vain, all iz but words; Or thus, they have 
deceived cre ancther, and ruin'd all z and this latter ſeems exattly to 
jure with what follows, #« by Perjury, deceiving thoſe they: treate1 
with, x Either among themſelves, accepting an Uſurper, promiling, 
and ſwearing Fealty to him 3 or with their Ailez, as with the Aſſyrian 
King, whoſe orenant'they perjurioutly broke, and contrary-to Oath 
{ent To, and confederatedt with Sur, or S9,-King of Ft ypt. y Fug 

menr, 7, e, Divine Revenies do lo 2bound every. where,” or''eleune- | 
quaj and finful Projeas, Counte!ls, and Reſolutions of their Rulers are 
inftead of juſt whotetom and ſaving, turird into bitter, poiſonous'and 
pernicious as Hemlock. A proverbial Speech. exprefling the Great- 
nels of this pernicious Evil; So this will be explained by Amos 6. 12. 


FDI E 2. 


Chap, 


afraid for, yet they truſtei in theſe for Aid againſt Fnemies; and roy 
tear they have not power enough to detend. themivIves: what Brute; 
are Iolaters! Of this Berh aver, principal Seat of the Calf-God, (:, 
chap. 4. 15+ let. f. c They who dwelt at Beth aven, who had Gain 
and Profit by the Idcl, to which many re{orted ; or elle they that were 
additted to this Ido}, worshipp'd it, and truſted nit. 4 Howl ang 
cry over the endanger'd God, {o tt all their Scrrows be multiplieg 
that haficn after any ftrange God. e That were to atzend and git; 
Sacrifices to theſe Calves; the Prieſts were like to loſe their Living; 
with their Idol. s f Theſe Prieſts formerly were cd, clothed, enrich. 
ed, and got into credit by thele their Idols,this made them right g12q, 
2 Allic's Credit and Veneration, þ Is vanish'd ; 'twas once taken {;; 
a God, but now the caſe is altered, *tis turned into a Captive, an, 
with loſs of Liberty hath loft its Deity alſo ; the Aſjyrians have Either 
broken it, or carried it in Derifion into A714. 


6 It þ ſhall be alſo carried + unto Afſyria ji | 
preſent # to King Jareb 1 : Ephraim ſhall receiyg 
ihame,. and. Iſrael ſhall be aſhamed » of his ogy 


countel n, _ | 

b The Golden Calf made by Fcroboam the Firſt, 1 Xings 12, 29, 
7 Though it hath Feet, it cannot go, it muſt be born ; as 7/aiah deride; 
the Idols of Babylon, Iſa.,46. 2, 7. and Fer. IC. 5+ and It is catried jn 
Triumph.  # According to the Cuſtom of conquering Generals, th: 
rich and rare things of the conquered People were relerved tor Gits 
to their Kings : and here is a Rarity indeed, a captive God, and 'ti 
rich, for 'tis wade of Gold. 4 Vid. chap. 5+,13+ let. 7. 1 The grex 
Con{ulicn of this People is here foretold, and the Certainty of ith 
the Ingemination of the Phraſe, the 4ſſy77ans $1 Nupbraid them with 
their brutish Folly,. to think that a God which could not keep it |; 
from becoming a Prey to inſolent Souldiers : and when thus taunted 
]ſrae] $hall have nothing to anſwer, but muſt be filent with Shame, x 
Which is expreſly metioned, 1 Kngs 12. 8. it was againſt the Coy. 
{cl of God;and as they began,lo they perſiſted in it by the ſame Coung, 


7 4s'for Samaria 0, her King p is cut off q as the foney 


upon -| the water y. | 

o After three Years Siege she $hall be cut off. p For all the ref 
the Kingdom was loft, and now he 1s pent up there alſo ; hethat yz 
once the Confidence of the Ten Tribes, and King of a mighty Peg 
ple, is now ſpoiled of all but one only City, where he is rather a It; 
foner than a iing, kept cloſe till made a Captive. ' q Shortly will > 
cut off; *tis not unlike this Prophecy $should be delivered when Sur; 
r14 was beſieged. r As a contemptible, weak, and light thing ; 2 
er, and foretels how contemptibly the Afſyrians should v: 
them. 


3 The high placess alſo of Avent, the fin of [ſri 
ſhall be deſtroyed * : the * thorn and- the thiſt}/ 
ſhall come up on their altars y ; and *: they ſhall [;y, 
to the. mountains, Cover us, and to the hills, Fall oj; 


US Z., Jþ 
s The Temples and Altars of Baal, and other Idols. t For 5:tþ-! 
aven, (ay ſome Interpreters: what if Aven, Vanity, Folly, be here puti 
for all 1dol-worship, and Rites ? # Which was notoriouſly the Sin of 
Iſrael, x Utterly overthrown. y And lie ſo long waſte and dev 
late, that' Thorns and Thiftles $hall ſpring up out of the Places where 
their Altars once ſtood within their ſtately Temples; #4 When thi 
hall be brought to paſs, the Idolatrous Jſraelites $hall be in ſuch Per 
plexity, that they shall wish Mountains and Hills might fall on then, 
and bury them alive, that they might eſcape the Troubles that they 
did foreſee were coming upon them z or it may be an uphraiding them 
for Praying to lifeleſs Stocks or Statues, and telling them in their Di 
ſtrels 3. and when their Gods are gone, and cannot help, they shouid 
cry to deaf Mountains to cover.them. | 
9 O Iſrael a, thou haſt ſinned from b the * days" 
Gibeah c : there they ſtood 4 ; the battel in Gibeat 
againſt rhe children of iniquity did _ not _ overtak 
chem ec, | A Sr 

a You. of the ten Tribes with ſuch- Conſent have -finn'd, that yu 
ſeem to do- it as one Man, 6 Ever fince the days, 16. we ; but asf 
ver obſerves, it will bear.a Compative thus, thou haſt ſinned avove 
more thay, The ten Tribes were greater Sinners than thoſe Gibet 
thites, {0 the;Prophet compareth the Sins of the preſent, Age and tl 


| 


4 


4 
*; 
Ng 


* 


L 
% 


paſt. «13d. Figes 19. where the Story is ſet down ar Targe. See: Wie 
ſo Zof..5. 8. tet. t. the place deſcribed. 4 In that Day and Vi We 


I 
_ (54 


4 


ſome ſtood, who were a Sced for raiſing up the Tribe; ſo I refer th 
Paflage to the ix bundred-Men which fied to the Rock X&immon, e Toi 
fatal Battel did not reach-them, , but now 1/7421 $hall be more ſevere!! 
punisþ'd ; for who eſcape the word, hall be carried Captives, i: 
they Shai] be no more a ! cople, of Kingdom : or elſe thus, J/rae] batt 
ſfinn*d more than the Givezrizzes,” and I will therefore punish thel 
more than the Gibeatkires; They ſtood once or tivice, but 1/74e1 no# 
$hall be ever beaten and put to flight. In that War Jet had Heal 
to rally; and aſter-two-Deteats were Vidtors in the third Encount®T; 
but it'$hall not be fo now, a: Wat $hall overtake them now, not {ici 
to J/rae] as was that aga nft the Gibeathites. for in that they had af 
laſt the better, bur in this they +11all be totally ruinfd, 


Oppreſion, Injuitice, and all Sins ſpread-C(as Hemlock quickly over- WE 4, i I : 
runs 2 Field) wel 1 the Kingdom p : ; 10 -Jt.75 1m. my delue that ] ſhould chaltiſe = ple ha 
+4472 6 #4 wy 4 _ , F - ; ; : 1 {| 
4 : pf 1 inc ot 5 and '** the people” ſhall he gathered - again" : 
 Or,cfe- 5 The inhabitants of Samaria ſhall fear a, b:cauſe of the JF pM | Py | 908 _ et Daves oh Ek rio Man» | 
7 calves.of Beth-aven b: tor the people thereof. c ſhali LY Ry OT s A 0: the * 
3} 54M . fF- * | p . 4, . INT 4 | , "d 
% ; O I F £ f 4 - A r 
4.21, 22. mourn ; dv Sy 4, and the || Prieſts tic 9 y #hat rejDycea Our Verſion leaves this Verſe; amewhat obſcure, but our readins > 4 
On It F, for the glory thereof g, becauſe it 1s departed | in the Margin doth much <lear the words,. and maketh them mu" In = ſu 
from it þ, . | | more cafily intelligible. f Lam reſolved to pugigh them as I ſee go S = ear 8, 
4 The Citizens who dwelt yet ſafe in Szmaria, but knew that the| they have delerved the utmoft Fhat I $hall lay upon them, and t x wants, TA 
Ajjriaa invaded the Kingdom, beat 1/r2e!'s Army, and took his City : | fore I will punish;as I ſee meet. ,g The Forces of the A014 EP k tain No 
theſe idolatrous Citizens were in bodily fear for their Gods, left the | Shall be gathered in Arms agaiuſt them, I will-dxing Sralmaneſer W Kin Nog 4 
#ſſrians ſhould rudeiy ſpoil their Gotithips. 6 Some give the reaſon | on this unful Idolatrous Nation. þ J/+.;e} or . Eptrait. 7 ox: all 6 — 
of their Fear, becaule they had tinned by theſe Calves, and provoked | ball bind them, or, when they foli ve.beund for their two ITErL Jar thoſs ; T2 
God, therctore ſhould this Fear feize them ; but *tiz more likely this | ſo the Marginal Reading : an then *cis plain, ii once'it appet» my Art —"—_ 
doth ſpeak The Oh:ett of the Sima trans Fears, their Cow-calves ( as| were their ewo Tran'grei' 018, either cornoral and ſpiritual ASOT; *& and Dil 


"et . - Þ- ; FI Bec 0 } o "> 
by way of Cenempt in the 27egr.) wore the geodiy £ eities they were 


\ ad + , 1, of vg . a@ 
Y 3 and WALAT I: Cw Core 


. . , FA + Ti 
tieir Revolt from Davin Hs ran 


8% 
{ 
. 
TT 
* 


; 


a P: 


ai 


cance 
EXPE 
he gt 
it ſo, 
her, | 
and m 
deal n 
broug 
Rider, 
kim, 7, 
dah, tl 
ged 'T. 
Ephran 
their v 
dah plc 
ſuffer, 
to Bab; 
buſed a 
ft, ſhall 
urn no 
121 
= COYS: 
= ſeek th 
© upon) 
= 7 The 
© them ye 
& the Prop 
E fore the; 
8 by bis Pri 
formerly, 
niverſal R 
ty; and hi 
in theſe 
amountet] 
and ſv is 
place here 
are, as Gr 
broken up, 
torth Fruit 
God, u T 
may ſeek 
hearken, a! 
| te found, 
he will, co: 
God will cc 
and love t] 
to them, 
$ Mercy whi 
Ous thing t] 
cies of Got 
Obey his Ct 


13*Y 
iniquity c 
| -Cidſt try 


FY 


PE -*, 
bye. 
Mo. 
B_ 
v2] 
val 


4 ty men 


4 You, C 
b Inftead of 
in Wickedn 
Impieties, t 
Goodneſs. 
pened into 
this your Ly 
firſt ſeems m 
Hopes, e 
torlaking thi 
doth in the 
Idols, wors! 
idolatry co 
lived was thi 
Nobles, Ca 
} them, the 


ap. A 
antient Rebellion and Tdolatry, or Revolt from God 3 Fuicie were the 
ewo main Spring heads ot their other particular Sins, and tot : Hei] 
they ſhall be bound as Pritoners and Captives, and carried away to 

Afrite 4 . . . WE 

A 11 And Ephraim 7s as an heifer & that is Tavgrt 2, aid 

©... loveth to tread OUT the cora m, but | patied over vu pon 

: nn t. her fair neck 4 : I will make Ephraim to ride 0: Jugdal 

&. ſhall plow þ, and Jacob ſhall break his clods 9. | - 

B þ A young and wanton Heifer unaccuftomed to the Yoke, not uied 

to hard Labour. I Uſed to, and 1o $kill'd in or acquainted With. 
mn What we do by threſhing, the Fews did by theſe Heiters or ps 
tread out the the Corn, and in doing this the Law provided that the 
Ox ſhould not be muzled, but ſhould eat what it would : So 1t was 

E with Ephraim, he loved that Work that was ſo pleaſan:, uy 

| «, well fed him : And God doth let Ephraim know that he ha 

E y-en very much indulged herein, God had given them all abun- 

F Qance and Proſperity, and with little Labour or Care ; and he 

= expedted Thankfulneſs for it, but no ſuch thing was done by Ephraim, 

je grew more infolent, untraftable and gerfidious. # When I found 
” itſo, I did paſs'over upon her fair Neck, laid ſome lighter Yoke upon 

EZ her, brought ſome gentler Afict 10ns upon that People to tame them 

and make them ſerviceable, but this hath not prevailed. 0 I will now 

deal more rigorouſly, I will try another courſe ; and as Horſes are 
brought to work by one that can bring them to bear and carry the 

Rider, ſo 7 will deal with Ephraim, I will ride on Ephraim, and tame 

kim, 7. e. by the 4ſ7icns who ſhould ſubdue and enflaye them. p u- 

dah, tho leſs ſinful, hath been uſed to harder Labour, and more rug- 

oed Treats ; hath plow*'d when Ephraim hath reap'd,yet I have ſpared 

Ephraim more. - q The ſame in another Proverbial Speech, repeated, 

their work at preſent harder, but there isan Harveſt follows ; tho Fu- 

{zþ plow, and Facob break his Clods, labour hard, and for their Sins 

ſuffer, yet they ſow in Tears when harafſed by Ephraim, or going un- 

to Babylon, and ſhall reap in Joy at the return. But Ephraim who a- 

buſed all my Bounty and Kindneſs, who work'd only for his own Pro-: 

ft, ſhall be more ſeverely puniſh'd, and when he gocth forth ſhall re- 
turn no More, 
12 Sow to your ſelves in righteouſneſs r, reap in mer- 

E cy s; * break up your fallow ground t : for zt & time to 

&: ſeek the LORD , till he come x and rain righteouſneſs y 

Upon you 2. 

7 The Prophet continueth his care of their Welfare, by exhorting 

” them yet at laſt to repent, which, as learned Interpreters obſerve, 

> the Prophet doth here in the ſame elliptick Speech which 1s uſed be- 

© fore thele Imperatives, and is to be made up thus, The Lord hath ſaid 
> by bis Prophets, Sow, &c. this ſame Duty hath been preſſed on them 

formerly, and is again commended to them z ſo in Righreouſneſs, in u- 

niverſal Righteouſneſs, towards God in Piety, toward Man in Equi- 

ty; and herein ſee that ye ſow plentifully, that is, exerciſe your ſelves 
in theſe Works, s This is referr'd both to the Divine Mercy, and ſo 
amounteth to a Promiſe, and to the Mercy we ſhould ſhew to Man, 
and ſv is Dire&ion for another part of Duty. both may well have 
place here. # Yonr Hearts, O ye Ephramites ! have heen, and ftill 
are, as Ground over-run with Weeds, which needs be plowed and 
broken up, that good Seed may be ſfowed in them, that you may bring 
torth Fruit in a holy Lite, trom a holy Heart, and obtain Mercy of 

God, u Tt is full time it yon conſider it aright, or it is yet time, you 

may ſeek and find he is not quite gone, ftill he calls you, therefore 

hearken, and follow ſeaſonable Advice ; ſeek ye the Lord whilſt he may 
be found. x Seck with Patience and Faith until he doth, as certainly 
| | he will, come ; for this Paſſage 1s a vertual or implicit Promiſe, that 

God will come to them if they ſeek him, 7. e. he will bleſs, favour 

and love them, in theſe he wiil appear to them, which is his coming 

to them, » Plentifu'ly pour out the Fruits of his own Goodneſs and 
tercy which he hath promiſed, and having promiſed, *cis a righte- 
ous thing they ſhould be given according to Promiſe z thus the Mer- 


7; 


H OS & M 


> 5 => ” } An onct o _ 4 ve Ga 4-4 C 4? % F ap F Y- 
the Fnemy that dares beiiege them ; theſe every one of them a5 77e%, 
_ 4 


Conſtruction bears it) shall be wafted. m1 It is moſt provably fpolen 
of Shati ineſer, tho abbreviated, which is uſual in all Writings of Hi- 
ttory, lo 47.xt42r or Pomp:;, without the addition of Great, and fo 
here Shalmay without eſer, or firnamed Prince. # Polhbly 4-521 here 
may be the Name of a Man whoſe Houſe and Family 5khzlmen dcftrey- 
eu, and fo this Paſſage might be read, the H9uf;: of Arbel, . but the 
inore lively reading 18 as we 1cat it, lo 'tis thc Name of ſome Coun- 
try, or City, or both. We meet witi a City cf this Name famous 
ior tne (verthrow which Alexander gave to Darius ; ani] probable it 
is, thar this might be that bel or Berk-arbe! here ſpoken of, rebuilt: 
and grown great again ſince the ſack of it by Sha/man, which was at 
leaft 490 Years before the Overthrow of Darius : It was a City of 
Ajſyria, and gave Name Arv-lis to a Country or Region, part of A{jy- 
712, and lay ſomewhat below Arpad. o Of this \Var we no-where 
ele read, it i5 likely *twas not long b<fore the War with Samzriz and 
the ten Tribes, that the Memory of that Severity was fresh, and the 
Particulars then well known. p All were put to the Sword, and the 
City utterly deſtroyed. 


I5 SO q ſhall Beth-el » do s unto you t, becauſe of 


of Iſrae] y utterly be cut off z. 

q Mercilelly and univerſally ruine. » One place put for every one, 
anc the Place put for the Idolatry committed there. s Procure, bring 
upon you, do all this Evil againſt you. r 0 Samaritans, and th- teſt 
of the ten Tribes. « This Idolatry, and the concomitant Sis are 
here ſummed up in their total Sum, great Wickednels, exceeding great 
x Suddenly, or ſo ſoon as *tis day, poſſibly the 4fſyrians might alfault, 
the City towards Morning, and maſter it. y 2oſhea. 2 His Pow- 
er broken, ſor his Life was ſpared, aud he made a Priſoner, 2. Kings 
I7. 4+ 


CHAT. xt. 


God's love and kindneſs ſhewn to Iſrael ſince their being in Egypt : their 
contrary abuſe of mercy, diſobedience and ingratitude, 1=--4, His judg- 
ment upon them, their captivity in Aſſyria, 5---7. A promiſe of mercy, 
and their converſion to him : the deceitfulneſs of Epkraim and Jirael, 


bus the faithfulneſs of Fudah, $---1 26 | 


I We Iſrael was a child a, then I loved him b, and 

called * my ſon c out of Egypt d. 
4 In the Ir.fancy of 1ſrael, which is here dated equal with his being 
in Egypt, 6b Mjanifeſted that tender and paternal AﬀeCtion which I 
did hear to him, increafing him in Numbers, Wealth and Honour. 
c Adopted him toe my Son, and as my Son provided for him, and 
brought him out «<t Servitude ; I fo loved him as togive Eg ypt for his 
Ranſom, 1/4. 43. 3- 4 Where they had ſojourned 215 Years, and in 
them ſuffered many Outrages from the Fg yptians, who were their E- 
nemies, and aim*d at extirpating rae : now amidſt ſuch Enemies 
God own*d them to be his Sons, his eldeft Son, and redeemed him out 
of Bondage, a Fruit of wonderful Love never to be forgotten, This 
in the Letter and Hiſtory is exceeding plain, but there is difficulty in 
the Application of this unto Chriſt, and his Call out of #2ypr, of whick 
many Interpreters treat at large, which may not now be ſo much as 
ſummarily toucht; it is too little to ſay that the Evangeliſt doth Mat. 
2. 15. allude to this place, and I think ftis too much to ſay this place 
is cited by Matthew, as in the Hiſtory of the thing referring only to 
Chriſt, being called out of Egypt : but if you will make J/rae! the firft 
adopted Son, Type of Chrift the firft-born, and the Hiſtory of 1/a- 
cl's coming out tohe a Type of Chriſt's tuture coming out, you then 
give to both their proper ſhare in theſe words, and the Letter and 
Hiftory is verified in both, and the principal Import of the words 
will refer to Chrift as principally intended in them, yet not exclud- 
ing the Type. 


2 As they e called f them g, ſo theyh went from / them 


i cies of God to us are his Righteouſneſs to us. + Who repent and 
| WE ©Þcy his Counſel by his Prophets. 
; Wis. 13*Ye 4 have plowed wickedneſs b, ye have reaped 


&. iniquity c, ye have caten 4 the fruit of lies e : becanſe thou 
# didft truſt in thy way F, in the multitude of thy migh- 
+ ty men p. 

a You, O Jſaelites, Subjefts of the Kingdom of the ten Tribes, 
b Inſtead of Repentance, and a Life of Righteouſneſs, yeu have lived 
in Wickedneſs, and propagated it, you have increaſed all manner of 
Impieties, thus' you have abuſed and perverted the Fruits of God's 
= . Goodneſs, c The Wickedne(s vou have ſown hath ſprung up and ri- 
# pened into Iniquity, or you have met with a Recompence worthy of 
this your Labour, God hath puniſh'd yon for your Wickednels ; the 


TT TO 
NY" 


1 | firftſeems moſt agreeable to the Text. 4 Fed your ſelves with vain 
þ Hopes. e Maintained your ſelves upon a carnal ſinful Confidence, : 
1 torſaking the Fountain of living Watersz and theſe Lies the Prophet 
x doth in the following words reduces to two Heads, f Dependance on 
« WW {{ols, worshipping them, and ſreking to them their way, was their 
: Kolatry committed with the Calves. g The next Lie on which they 
h lived was the Wiſdom and Valour of their great Men, their King, 
a Nobles, Captains and Counſellors z in Confidence of ſufficient help 


by them, they held on in a way of Sin and Wickedneſs, 
14 Therefore þ ſhall a tumult 7 ariſe among thy peo- 


mn" . 
+ Ek, and all thy fortreſſes ſhall be ſpoiled /, as Shal- 
o WF 0an+”7 ſpoiled * Beth-arbel = in the day of battel 
\W-.** tbe * mother was daſhed in. pieces upon ber chil- 
ng , dren p. , 
< b Since ſuch are their Sins, and ſuch will be their Diſappointments, 
od lace their Refuges will be {o vain, and their Enemies ſo many and 
6 rong, 7 A Diſcontent, Murmur and Outcry as of Men affrighted, 
rt not knowing what courſe to take when the Alarm 1s given, and cer- 
pr fn News cometh that Shalmaneſer comes with his Army againft the 
7 | Kingdom of Jſrael. k The Jjraclires amongall ſorts of People, among 
's, all the Tribes of the Kingdom. 1 Every one of thy ftrong Holds, 
Fit tote impregnable Fortifications on which thou haſt laid out all that 


e 41t and Diligence could, to make them able to break the Power of 


& : they ſacrificed unto Baalim 1, and burnt incenſe to gra- 


Ven LMASCS 772. 

e Moyes and 42ron, and other Prophets, and holy zealous Judges 
and Pricfts, as Samuel, &c. f Adviſed, perſwaded, intreated and ur- 
ged by Exhortations. £ The whole Houſe of J/72el, and among theſe 
the ten Tribes, or Ephraim, þ Jſraelites called and intreated, eſpecial- 
| ly they of that Age when the Diviſion was made, and ever fince, 7 

Frowardly, and moſt difingenuouſly apoſtatized more and more, as the 
Prophet, 1/a. 1. 5. horrible Ingratitude ſo to requite God ! k From 
the Prophet*®s Counſel and Commands, delivered as they came from 
God. 1 In the Deſert they began this Apoftacy, join*d themſelre; to 
Bal Peor, Numb, 25. 3. and worſhippd the Calf, Exod. 32. 4,5, 6. 
and he!d on with Obſtinacy in it. #2 Images of their Gods, before 
which they performed another part of Religious Worſhip, burning Ins 
cenle beiore them. 

3 I taught, Ephraim alſo to go z, taking them by their 
arms o : but they knew not that I healed them g. 

2 As a Mother or Nurſe doth help the Child, and with tendereft 

Care doth guide and form its Steps, and by long continued Patiance 


waits on it; ſuch like was the Tenderneſs of God toward /ſrae! in his 
| Childhood. o Sapporting and bearing them up, as XNurles bear up 
! the Child in their Hands, taking them up by their Arms, giving 
Strength forMotion,ti}l theChild ſhould grow to Strength. qUnthani:- 
ful, ſottiſh and heedlet> ones, neither would ſee nor acknowledge me kn 
it, but Exod. 4. within few Months time alcrib? their Deliverance 
to a Golden thus foolithly they requite the Love of their God, 


4 I drew r them with cords of a man 5, with bands of 


* 


' on their Jaws #, and } laid meat unto them x. 

7 1 found them backward and unapt to lead, I therefore mn my Pity 
taid my Hand on them, and as a Father or Friend, drew them gently 
to me. 5 ie. With fuchobliging Kindneſ: as b-ft fits and moſt pre- 
vails with a Man, with Reaſon, 1 1heſe Arguments of Love, which; 
might as ftrong Bands hold them faſt to my Law ard Worship for 
| heir good, 1 athd all manier of Kindaefs towards them to fiv 


ee 
»* - x 


£4; = 
Ci22P. <4 L» 


' y : : Heb. ths 
|- your great wickedneſs : ina morning x ſhall the King php 


Jour evis, 


* Exod 4» 
21. 23s 


love t, and | wasto them as they that | take off the yoke + He, 
litz Ih, 


w—_ 


— 


_: - 
24 54 ol 
endo er ern LD Bu 


o D 
« i _ 
——> Go tn 
C oenanrndides Fo 
y _ 


a» 


Wu Ws 65 P@3 i= - . hſ "IP _ © < p 
—_ 4 % PRYS . ; x Fe S mags "- . I I PRSER TT '4 —_ - 
RI SN "Ip. 9 EE TAE 4 ——— -- - Ar. hes ws ® +4 " k. T. #= = 7. _ 2 tbedns. adapt _ 
> , - - - + 2 mn oy ” _ <a. þ n—_ - —_ _ 
—_ aw. F 6 — . - " a a= _—_ 
” _ —_ ——_ 4 pave ate. $_—_— - Po =. RF, b4 - — n_ 

*7,'T - _ ys EIAED 2-5 San of — w= —Mh + TIED . - . mh "wh mad ITE Ic Sd 

». "5 % tl, 2 ng ” - . —_— ” Che a On > <4 — ry n u % _ _ . - - Ta 

g WEEN LAH OE LES ? 1-8 —— oy FCS NT amt - ' A e- yy Wo _- 
- r 26,0 3; «ww be KY oat Dk a”, - - « T3 $M py , —_ p _- 
A os aoodes : ge <nees = -- _ -—» > . - © - — D : —X __ > 44. - p ” 
8 ke. G 2. —indits ' J A pe 


4 "OR 
Mas << ron 


X —_— yy 
——X-* 22 tat 


— 


= 
- 


Chap. XI. * 


* C2p 


* Ch. 10. cauſe of 7 their own counſels 7. 


exalied 
70t. 


+ Ch. 6:4- 


Deut. 29. 


them in goo. 


in their Wants, as tie careful Husbandinan 


iucrcale to the days of their final Ruine. 


«| * He y ſhall nor retura into the land of Egypt = 
chap. $. 3- byt the Aſſy iaus ſhall be his King a, Eecaule they refuſed 


Oo returu b. 

3 Eptraim thus provided for by me, thus indu 
Punitthed. 2 Either nee 
&j1red that Afhftance z I wou 
fic.2ntiy provided tor them F iO, 
t2reatned or puniſh d ; bur it E} HET@ THEE 
ha. it foretold, that tho Ephraim Hatters numlelt w 
a Recuge in Egypt, it ſhould nut bc. 
tazm, ould make himleit their King, and 
C:velty. b The realon of all 18, 
their Lm;enitence, refuling, to return 00. Goa ; 
lages are alſo explicable as t 
turned anto me, Aj/yr7.z (hou : 

6 And the ſword c ſhall abide d on his Cities e, and 
ſhall conſume f his branches g, and Geyour them h, be- 


|] not have been their King. 


c Either Inteſtine or Forcign Wars, or both. 4 Shall be long, not 
be as a ſudden Incurſion, which doch much Milchiet to ſurprited and 
unfortified Places, but it ſhall be a laſting War ; three Years Samaria 
was beſieged, lo the Sword lid abide, e All the Cittes of Epbraim, 
the Enemy ſhould have Courage and Leiure to attend the SIege of 
every one of them. f Shall prevail to tae, lack, burn and ruin the 
Branches. £ Lefler Towns and Villages. þ Which he ſhall ſwallow 
up with ſpeed and eaſe, without remeay. 2 Which they firſt took, 
1 Xtrg. 12+ 2S. and ever fince irreclaimably have tollowed in oppu- 


HDSE AM 


u As a carefy' Hu-banJiman doth in due ſeaſon take 
che Yoke tron bt> labeuring Oxen, and rakes oft the Muzzle with 
which they were kept trom eating when at work, gives them time of 
rett and teeding ; >6 did God with jjracl. x brought rhem Proviton 

bri1gs Fidider and Pro- 
vendcr for his wearied labouring Ox ; by which plain Stmile God doth 
inform //rael in 4:5jcd's time, what antient, tender, cenftant and vi- 
gilant Love he had ſheaed ro Iſra:1, tO their Predecetlors, and to 
them allo, and hereby diſcovers their unheard of Ingraticude and 
\\ ickednels, which began in their Fathers, ans hath continued with 


unchangeable Goodiiefs, he remembers ail his Promiſes to every one 
and now teeth who among /{7.2el believe, and hope for his Grace _ 
Mercy ; theſe he muff (pare as he is juſt Judge of the whote Earts 
A and tor their ſukes he will ſpare meny others. » A holy God, ang S 
Covenz2ut, tho not with all, yet with many among you ; ang tho'. 
that are in Covenant with Gcd are holy ones too : I will not mat.. 
them as 4.{mah or Zeboim, tor the caſe is different, in the Cities gf the 
Vain there were no righteous ones, but here are ſome, tho ngt rg 
and io &7vct renders the words, there is a holy One in the mt of 30, 
where the ſingular is uſed for plural, as in that Paſſage, there js none 
righteous. 7 I will not come amonfſt you, as I came into Solom, ay 
Here is Comtort for God's Remnant. ; 


'&>, or elſe Ephraim 
ded not have courted Exypr's Friendhip, or 
Id have kept them {ate enoug”, and ſut- 
if You I2:cr this to Eprr &m, not 
»braim be here threatned, then you 
ith falle hopes of 
4 Conquering and captivating 


tremble 4 trom the welt c. 


4 Whom. infinite Mercy ſpareth, the choice Remnant. 6 Shall hear 
and obey, worſhip and depend on the Lord, on the Meſſ5ah, of wg 
thele and the words of the next Verſe do certainly ſpeak. They re. 
fer alſo to the return out of Captivity, in both Hiſtory and Type of 
our Deliverance out of ſpiritual and eternal Captivity. c Chriſt the 
Lion of the Tribe of Fad, ſhall ſend out his Goſpel, this meant by 


10 They a ſhall walk after the LORD b : * he ſhall ro 
like a lion c: when he ſhall roar, then the children ſhaj 1: 
Y 


rule them with Rigor and 
their Gbftinacy in Idolatry, ar.d 
which two latter Pal- 
\c tormer : thus, if they would have re- 


the Licn roaring, Foel 2. 16. of whom *tis obſerv'd, that he doth by 
roaring gather his Whelps and others of his kind to the Prey; by the 
mighty Voice of the Lord in the Goſpel, the Eie& ſhall be gathered 
to partake of Eternal Life. 4 The Spirit by its Power awakeniup 
them to the fight of Sin, fhall make them fear and tremble. e To the 
Ends of the Earth. This is the myſtical Senſe, yet the literal I thin: 
refers to the rzturn of the Fews out of Captivity, when many out gf 
Ajſyria and E: ypt returned, and ſome report 100000 from Ethiopiz cy. 
Xa, and the Parts toward Arabia z and poſhbly this hath particular 
reſpe& to Darius his Decree, on the behalf of thoſe that follow'd Hy 
gat and Zchariah's Counſel, finiſh'd the Temple, reftored the Wor. 
[hip of God, reformed ſtrange and unlawful Marriages, paid their 
Tithes, &c. in theſe they followed the Lord; and Darius madea De- 
cree for them, terrible to the Children of the Welt as the roaring of 2 
Lion. Ter this Work go forward, Exra 6. 7, ©c. who dares to hinder? 
let Timber be taken out of his Houle, and a Gallows made thereof, 
an ſuch be hanged thereon, ver. 11, 12+ All this filled the Inhahi. 
tants of thoſe Parts with great Fear, when God thus gatheret his 


fition to all the good Counte 


time, ro all which they have turned a deat Ear 3 they have lued for 


Egypt andl Aſbur's Favour, and lighted mine. 
7 And my k people are bent to backf'ding from me 7.: 


+ Heb. :0- tho they m2 called them to the moſt High #, | none at all 


gether they g would exalt him p. 
þ Yet God owneth them for his, he had not caſt them quite off; 


or fince they call themſelves his, he is willing to encourage them by 
owning all in them that loyks toward him. ; Or, continue ſuſ- 
pence, doubtful and unreſolved what to do, or rather inclined moſt to 
an Averlion from me z tho the Lord's Prophets have perſwaded them 
earneſtly to return by Repentance, yet they continue unrelolved 
what is heft to be done, whether to adhere to their Idol-Gods, to 
make ſure of Feyptian Aids, or tv turn to God, and caft off the other z 
this they moſt diſlike, and continue as *twere tack'd and faftned to 
their Rebellion, as the {cc Verſion, 2 The Prophets. » Invit- 
ed, exhorted and encourage. the: with many fair Promiles to give 
Glory to God by returning, « Not one of many, icarce any one 1n 
thoſe great Numbers in //- a! would hearken and obey. p God in 
his Holineſs, Juftice, Grocinels and I ruth, all which a repenting Peo- 
ple do magnify, but thele wii! not. They recam their Idols, cepend 
on Fxypr, and put all on thar caft, and will neither believe nor try 
God's Goouanels. 


8 * How ſhall ? five thee up q, Epliraim ? how ſhall I 


deliver thee, Iſrael ? how ſhall 1 make thee as * Ad- 
« Gen-14- mah ? how ſhall 1 ſer thee as Zeboim ? mine heart is 
turned within me yr, my repentings ure kindled toge- 


272, ther s. 


4. 
Amos 4, 
'PE 


After ſuch unparallell'd ahule of infinite Mercy and Patience what 


could be expetted, but unreicutirg Wrath and fierceft Indignation / 
but here isa Wonder above all the reft ; Bowels troubled anf1l firug- 
ling with Anger, and conteſting on behalr 07 moſt inexculavle Sin- 
ners. q O Fphraim, thou haft deſerve to be deftroyed for ever, 


{ braids them with this their Sin. 


thy <ins call for this, al my Jultice Threatens it 3 I may do it, but 


my Mercy interpoſeth, and 1 would rather {pare in Merc; than de- 


firoy in Juſtice : there is ſtill a debate between theſe two 3 how fhall 
] give up to Juſtice ? ſaith Mercy ; and how thall I not give up (ſaith 
Juſtice into the Hands of Enemies ? Juſtice muſt be executed, that I 
muſt do, ſaith God, and Mercy ſhall be wagnified, that I will do; 
but how ſhall this be done, it I deliver thee, © Jracl, to thine Kne- 
mies ? they will utterly deftrey, and where then 1s Mercy ? It I de 
liver thee not, thy Sins will not be chaftiſed, and where then 1s Ju- 


ftice ? If I puniſh thee, as I puniſh'd Admah and Zeboim, with Fire 
from Heaven, I do what is juſt, but then I ſhew no Mercy ; tor theie 


are two of the four Cities which ſuffer the Vengeance of cternal Fire, 
of theſe Gen. 19. 24. 7 Atter the manner of Nan God lpeaks, we 
know what tis to have a Heart turn'd from Wrath into Kindneſs and 
Compaſhons, to God ſpeaks of himſelt here, and J/4. 53. 15. Fer. 31s 
20, 5 Still like a compaſhonate Man, he could wiſh his Threats in 
again, his Bowels are now as in a Flame for them, 


9 I will not exccute the fiercencſs of mine anger tf, I 


vill not return to deltroy « Ephraim ; for& am God, 
and not man x, the holy One in the midſt Efthee y, and 


[ will aot enter into the City =. 

r Here Mercy rejoiceth againft Tulgment, and God declareth his 
Purpotc to ſpare, he promiſeth thac he wiil not execute a:cording to 
utmoſt Severity. u This promiſe he confirmeth by doubling ir, tho 
in ſomewhat different words, I will not do as Men who having beat 
down au Enemy and wounded him, do return again to lee whether he 


Is the Prophets gave them from time to | diſperſed ones ; but what I conjeAure at I do ſubmit to better Judg 


ments, 


11 They ſhall tremble as a v:rd out of Egypt, and *3; 
in their houſes þ, ſaith the LORD. 


The <ummary of thc firſt part of this Verſe ſeems to be, Tha: 
ſome ſhould haſten, yet with Solicitude, out of Egypr, whither they 
fed for ſhelter, like as a Bir that hath bcen caſt out of her Net haſ:- 
ethtoitz others like Doves shall haſten out of 4ſh7i4 unto July, 
but with Fear and Colicitude, which cannot but attend them in 
Land, tho their own, yet now deſolate and horrid under 180 Years 
Devaſtation, ſince Shalmaneſer tranſported them, 7. e. 110 Years he- 
fore, and 70 Years concurrent with the Fews Captivity in Babyloy, f 
They*11 find none but I will place them in Houles, and they hall be 
theirs too. Tt is a very ſeaſonable and comfortable Promiſe, and (uit- 
ed to the State and Wants of thoſe returning Exiles, and in the letter 
of it refers to them ; and they as Types of what is more myſteriouſly 
and more darkly contain'd in them, wiz, the gathering of Believers 
from all Quarters to Chrilt, with the Alacrity and Speed which Birds 
make in flying to their Neſts, and God's providing Manſions of Relt 
tor them, well reſembled here in theſe Simifies, 

12 Ephraim g compaſleth me about with lies þ, and the 


God, and is faithful with the || ſaints #7. 

This Verle might better begin the next Chapter, and by moſt In- 
t-rpreters I have ſeen iz is the firſt Verſe of the next Chapter; but 
fiace we fin(l it here, we will here conſider it, g Many, or the molt 
ct Ephraim. þ Vlay the Hypocrites with me till, yet give me good 
Words, call themſelves my People, and ſay I am their God, and that 
they wcrihip me and ſeek me ; but they flatter me with their Mouths, 
and lie unto me with their Tongues, as Pſal, 78. 36. So God up- 
7 The fame thing in an ingeminat- 
ed Phraſe, to affet and alcertain the more. þ The People of the 
two Tribes, under the Government of the Honle of David. 1 While 
Llolaters are Vatlals and Slaves to the Devil and to their own ſuperlti- 
ous Fears, the true Worshippers of God like Princes rule with God: 
Or rather keeping to the Houſe of Davil retain'd the Government 
in State-Afﬀai:s, which was Theopolitia, a Government ſet up of God, 
when Ephraim made Kings and Princes, but God did not know it, 7. 
did not adviſe nor approve it. m Retains alſo Purity, at leaſt Truth 
of Worship, and in the holy things of God keepeth to his Word, and 
comparatively is faithful z whereas Epkraim is hypocritical and falie, 
Judah adheres to God's holy Prophets, Prieitsand other Saints of Gove 


his ſuppcr:ing himſelf with Hopes as unfic to ſuſtain him as the Wird 
15 to teed the Body ani nourith it ; in his religious Pretenfions he 
Hypocrite like, compals God with Lies, and now in his Civil Concer? 


he compaſſeth himſelf with Lies. 6 In thoſe Countries the £2: 


CHAP. XI. 


Goa reproveth Epkraim and Fadah for their fins, and co venanting with ite 
Aſſyrians. 1,2. exhorteth them by bu former mercies ro repentance, 
3---6. The unjuſt dealings and i4olatry of Ephraim provoketh Gos 
wrath, 7--- 14. 


[ Phraim feedeth on wind a, and followeth after tie 
eaſt-wind b: he daily increaſeth lies c andd eſolati- 

ond, and they do make a covenant with the Afſyrians* ; 
ai ol is carried into Egypt f. —, 
4 It is a proverbial Speech, denoting the Self-lattery of Eper aim, 
did, 


1i7- 


. . \ 1 2 - — 5 hs - by . O, #0- 
breaths, and to make an end of him, or Conquerours that plunder | Winds were moſt vehement, dangerous and blaſting, Tſal. 43. A 
the conquered City, carry away the Wealth of it, and atter ſome time * 745 4. 8. a very apt Emblem to repreſent the ſelt-dc frroyingg bw 


return iv burn it; Gold will net do fo. x His infinite Compattons, his : which Ephraim took z3 which though yet he w3il not bejigh's, 


{ © 
4 


a dove out of the land of Aſſyria : and I will place then " 


rouſe of Iſrael with deceit z : but Judah þ yet ruleth/ with | 
10 
kl, 


Chap bf 


ou 


can juf 
dard 0 
upon et 
and whi 
legant ; 
aſſure it 


30 
womb j 
God x, 


» 3. Fac, 
delign of 
which Go 
racle fore 

% Birth-rj gl 
God they 
Primogen 
and Equit 
and Kingl 
0n or Shar 
forfeited b 
pent, and | 
Ure, and | 
Facob ſtroy 
It in full A 
Fruit of thi 

l Teceived of 

7 Obtain'd thi 

” Way: The 

ut you are 


S Your fa 
aSa Prince y 
conquere, 
z ver, 3. ( 


| Created Ang, 
| God by Naty 


faking, x ( 
| Not by (ach | 
n becauſe | 
&, 3 Nott] 
eb, 7 By th 
fo, with Senſe 
& he defired, 
Wreſtled, Bu 
the beſt part © 
not of God 
10 meer Creg 
Creator of / 
Om every 
Wearineſs, q 
0. when Pra 
'» When on hj 
PPeared to hi 
Lig, but by 7 
f Renewed hi 
[nt of the wo 
7 him; bur «4 


| 
| 


ap 


. XII. 


long ſcorch, 
do the weak 


blaſt, rend and tear him as the tempeſtuous Eaft-win:!s 
er and unfenced Plants. c By making new Leagues, and 
fortifying himſelf with them againſt the Menaces of God by his Pro- 

hets, he increaleth Eriendſhips, but all of them will prove Lies to 
Nm at laſt like the Wind he feeds on : The like you have chap. 10. 13. 
and 1/4. 57+ 9, 13, 4 This is worſe than meerly to be diſappointed by 
a Lie; as betore the Eaft-wind was hurtful and did him Miſchief, lo 
here his purchaſed Friendſhips ſhall haſten and increaſe his Deſolation. 
The League made with Su, or So, King of Egypt, was accounted A 
Conſpiracy in Hoſhea ;, and this brought Shalmaneſer upon Iſrael,which 
War ended iu 1/rae!'s Ruin and final Deſolation. e With' urpole to 
defeat the Threats of God, and to ſecure themſelves in their Courſes. 


HOSEMA 
| 


they finfully confederate as before, chap. $+13.and 7. Il, and 
Ts er ect nds Covenant and truft not him, but make a Co- 
verant with Enemiesand truſt them, f Not common Oil for Trade, 
but rich and precious Oils z Preſents and Price to procure Friendſhip 


there too, tho forbidden, 1/2, 30. 2, 6.and 31. 1» 
> The LORD hath alſo a controverſie g with Ju- 


dah þ, and will - puniſh 7 Jacob k according to his 


ways l, according to his doings will he recompenſe 


him mm. _ | 

7 Though Fudah compared with Ephraim be faithful, yet when con- 
ſidered in ais Ways and Doings he is found faulty in many things, and 
God hath juſt matter of complaint againſt Fudab in point of Manners ; 
in publick Worſhip Fudab was faithful, kept to God, and the Temple, 
though not without ſome Defetts ; but in their Lives there were ma- 
ny more and greater Faults, about which God will contend that Fu- 
4th may be reformed. b The two Tribes, # Or viſit with chaſtifing 
to amend, elſe to deftroy z. there is hope of Fudah that he will be re- 
claimed, therefore I will try by gentler Viſitations, by Fatherly Cor- 
re&ions,yet I will not leave him as hopeleſs, nor as faultleſs. k Not 
the Patriarch; but thoſe whoare of him ; his Children, but that have 
degenerated from his ways of Love, Fear, Truſt and Obedience. 
Both Ephraim and Fudab are of Facob, hut both have corrupted them- 
ſelves, and therefore will I proceed againft both : and if Fudah, the 
Ie faulty, eſcape not, Ephraim can have no hope to eſcape ; if Fudab 
be whip'd with Rods becauſe a diſobedient Son, Ephraim may fear a 
Sword becauſe he hath been and till is an obſtinate Rebel. 7 Neither 
can juſtly complain then, fince their different ways are made the Stan- 
dard of the different Proceedings of God againſt them, he will not lay 
upon either more than is equal ; who ſuffers moſt hath deſerved more, 
and who ſuffers leaſt needed ſo much to amend him. m This is an e- 
legant and very uſual Ingemination of the ſame thing, which doth 
aſure it will be done, and ſhould affed us the more. 


ds 3 | * He n gook his brother o by the heel in the 


"womb p, and by hjs ſtrength q he -Þ * had power with 
God 7, | 


| or Truft from you. 


Li{olatry, Gen. 35. 4- which he did. But you Children of this Facov 
by natural Deſcent are of another, and far different Humour z tho 
you have been called and exhorted to leave your Idols, yet this 200 
Years you have kept them, and will, I ſee, keep them ; this is your 
Sin, and in it you are obſtinate, and I will puniſh ſuch a Facob as you. 


| 5 Eveng the Lord þ GOD of hoſts z, the LORD k vu 


his memorial /. 

& Or, And he that appear'd and ipake, who promiſed the Bleſſing, 
and commanded the Reformation ar Berkel, was h Fehovab the eternal 
and unchangeable God, who till promiſeth with like Commands. Z 
Who can both perform his Promiſe and execute his Threat, who is a 
moſt terrible Enemy and moſt deſirable Friend, all being to us as he 
is. k Fehovab repeated for Confirmation. #4 By this he will be known 
by this Name, by ſuch Methods of his Soveraignty and Grace, Exod. 


3+ 15, 


Chap. X13 


6 Therefore 92 turn * thou to thy God = : keep * Ch. 14. 


mercy o and judgment p, and walt q on thy God conti- !- 


nually r. 

m No more yainly boaſt of F«cob ; but, as he, do you approve your 
ſelves to God. 7 Repent, leave Idols, and all Sins. He worſhipp'd 
God alone, do you ſo ; he caft Idols out of his Family, do you fo too ; 
be Facob's Children herein. o Shew Kindneſs to all who need it, caft 
off Cruelty and Inkumanity, and be merciful to the afflifted ; this 
contains all the Duties we owe to any that are in ftraits. p Wron 
none ; but with Juſtice in Dealings, in Judicatures, and publick Off: 
ces, render to every one their Due. Acquit the Innocent, and con- 
demn the Guilty,and let none have juft Cauſe to complain of Injuries. 
q In publickWorſhip and PrivateDutiesof Prayer and ſecking God, him 
only ſerve and truſt; let not Idols have either Sacrifice, Prayer, Praiſe 
| 7 And let your Hope and Worſhip be perpetuat- 
ed, for ever continued towards God, till he ſave and reſcue z truſt, 
pray, and reſign your ſelves to him who will be yours as he was Fa- 
cob*s God, on theſe Terms, and no other. This ſhort Phraſe, wars on 
thy God, includes all Duties of the firſt Table of the Law, all religi- 
ous Worſhip of the true God ; do this, and the Lord will be to you, as 
to Facob, Defence againſt Danger and Fulneſs in your Wants. 


7 «| Heis \| a merchant 5s, the balances of deceit t are in || Or, Ca 


his hand : he loveth to || oppreſs «. 

s Ephraim, of whom here, is ſo far from being Facob, or as F4co 
that you may cal} and account him a Canaanzire, a ſubtle Merchant. t 
What he cannot gain by fair Trading he will by down-right Cheating, 
he is covetous, and very unjuſt. u Where Violence, Calumnies, and 
falſe Accuſations, are needful to compaſs his covetous and cozening 
Deſigns, he will not. ſtick at them 3 this way of Sain he loveth, his 
Heart is upon it : though God hate the falſe Balance, and falſe Wit- 
nels, and the violent Man, yet Ephraim loves them all for his Gain. 


naan. 
b { Or, de 
? cel Vee 


YN 


8 And Ephraim ſaid w; * Yet 1 am become rich x, I «2. ;. 


RG 
SO 


at _—_ ——_— 


— T — 
 —— > 

- _— 
a CY 1 
7 _—_ . - yo 


2m 5 
; 
1 Ang... 
wm vy 


——_ 


Lids 
CRETE 


120 Green - 
- . ' 
Þ. I 
+ "6% 


- 7 " ”» J _ - Fo _ A A 2 
- _ _ bs A ”* » - - : py. cg mp" . - , 
dre: L-2 - = E / os = A > + ro 
wy. — . - fue! K a 
—_— yt A»: H _ . gas > ern > —_ ffs - Ry __ _ - _ _ 
My . p Ll b Y - ar—_nF - #24 i - _— o < - - =_ cones ” 
- «6 oO - ARE : op _ — {+ xn . b $ = = =. <a Rego ih. 
WW, - IG. -0 _ , 0 / - o- - Y 'Y ff _ —_— IS Us p - | ut | - 
— - ” - ——_—— - bd _ a 4 __ - oO = 2 _— S MS 2 in Po bo > 5 <q - 4 LEN O _ - 
1 m——_— : IE . A —— —IY — —__— E —_ . my —_— : _ _ 
w2 > , EE We IE ABILITY CO - —_— SIRI IN Ts S077 » "Forde = IE nmr” Ix ' ery ” ©» —_ = =—_— ER = Ila 
PI. o IX... ra 4-5 PEI , * (as, + p - En IS. , ol (2 PE: Z aw . 7 ; IO... V Z EE C % Huge Yar ada 
be 1Þ-—vochen __— _ —— o—— nod Ck kn -. . . : "* Dy w F350 JG re ; - = os —wa ad, ot - . : 4 a i 5-4 
: _ his In *. "ui - d "ow wg ; = — : . 4 _ _ £40 - & #: "CER. E ; t gn mm _— aw nnd — HE c Ay ——_— —_ - y 
.* . . Q Pr: 4, Saas _" on DD g*©D74 Pra yy <e>= Gs in, -s -{ Se 0 © ? 
2 —_— = - 2 - = : w_ -:] ACRES... — _ et = - - . + jon == ——_— ri ey SIRE, 
4 r _ -—_ _ Y _ aj » Sf ow ——_ __ ſth q by 3 as Se - 7 
_, #5 "- 2 - Py \j , - 2 Cat . % » D p_ . 9 od ol 
— —_ . U _—_ jo " —_ ___ 6 - "of « . 3 - o po n—— —_— —_ —Y 
F<: "=": ng. EX 1 - — - _ - wy po - _—_— 44 3's - w . _ _ 
. 4 _ - EF > wn : 2 - ren wx ey - > 
<= — — —— .: F "9 Fo a YI —o_ T hs > 
- =,  FI"I2H , -. my ——" - - 
- » wr 7 R P Li OE : 


OE 5 

ks 
4 _ 
_ Li 


have found me our ſubſtance y : || #2 all my labours they «. 
ſhall find none iniquity in me, | that were fin z, [| Or, all 
w This covetous oppreſſive Merchant reckon'd with himſelf, or 7 1abours 
diſcourſed with himſelf upon the whole of his Trading. x Whate're /#//ice me 
is aid by ſome, or thought by others, yet I get what I aim at : either #9 : he 
*tis good and lawful, and proſpered to me by the Bleſſing of God on it, Shall have 
becauſe *tis juſt and righteous ; or *tis not ſo bad as moroſe Prophets P*niſhmens 
and Preachers make it, or at worſt (which I will venture, ſaith Ephra- of imyfuiy 
im) it leſſens my Innocency, but improves my ſtock ; and this is more 77 whom is 
to ſuch Merchants than all the poor Innocence in the World, y The #n 
ſame thing with a vain Boaſt of what is not in his Wealth and Sub- Þ Heb. 
ſtance. If in his Gain be aſſumed his own only to himſelf, it were Phich. 


» nFacob, © Eſau. þ The matter of Fatt you have; Gen. 25. 26. the 
deſign of mentioning it in this place is to mind them of that Goodneſs 
which God ſhew'd to them. in their Father Facab, who was by a Mi- 
race foretold to be ſuperiour to Eſau, that he and hisſhould have the 

% Birth-right, this ſhould never be forgotten. The'true Worſhip of 
God they ſhould have preſerved, ſince in the Priefthood part of the 
PFrimogeniture, it was included both as Priviiege and/Duty, Juſtice 
and Equity they ſhould have maintained as a Flower of the Crown 
and Kingly Authority included in the Birth-right, and a double Porti- 
on or Share in God's Bleffings was theirs too. But all theſe Bleſhings 
forfeited by their Apoſtacy, for which at once they ſhould bluſh, re- 


v 
- ay > PO NY 5 
Og : ® y 4 8 "bs. X 
4r # * _— ———" "—_ 
"$4.25 mts = OTC ».* 2X — 
CT PIE re ID - - _ - 
_ —— —— — 
_ y'® "ts PRr_— —=_ w..-4 £1 
yo Em L WW 
. 2 08 - te bo oe XN 
os +> 
\ = 4 - - 
Se = _ * p —_ 
Pe”. 6 
= 223 = 27> _— bY 
= x _— . - 
_— "po 3 - A 7 r 0. Mr” 
- - *0h X . x5 a 
S 2 Ip" 1 p29 " 
4 4 - a: he: i 0.4” y * 
=” et »*F" "YL x _ 
Se S ... 18 "a 
0 * "4 my, - —_ 4 +7 
po ; "FD 3 
” gov 50th ey » 
& x hot 
þ- w « "Y = PX 4 


pent, and humble themſelves, and at laſt remember their Primogeni- 
re, and labour to recover to a Temper worthy this their Original. 
Facob ſtrove for the Bleſſing in the Womb, but you profanely neglett 
it in full Age. q This Strength was not of Nature but of Grace, a 


* Fruit of the Divine Love and Elefion,Strength from God. 7 Strength 


received of God was well imployed betimes, in it he wreſtled for and 


obtain'd the Bleſſing ; but you let it ſlip out of your "Hands and fin it 
away: There was ſomewhat of Heroick, a Conqueror from his Birth, 
| butyou are Revolters from the Womb. 


4 Yea, he 5 had power t over - the Angel «, and pre- 


£ vailed * ; he y wept and made ſupplication untq him a ; 
4+ hebtound him c zx Beth-el d, and there he e ſpeak || with 


Z asa Prince with God, Gen. 32. 28. + With the Angel was willing to. 


us f. ; 


5 Your famous Progenitor of whom you boaft. t Behaved himſelf 


be conquered, or Facob could not have gotten the Viftory. - u Cal- 


J led, ver. 3. God, and ver. 5. is Fehovab Lord of Hoſts. ' He was no 
| created Angel, but the uncreated Angel, Chriſt the Meſſiah, Eternal 


| Godby Nature and Eſſence, Angel by Office. and voluntary under- 
| taking, x Got the Vitory, went out of the Field a Conquerour, but 


| not by ſuch Arms and Methods as you uſe. You are conquer'd by ' 


Man becauſe of your Sins, he conquer'd with God by Faith and Pray- 
et. J Not the Angel, as ſome through Miſtake, but your Father F4- 
cb, 2 By this we know he pray'd with Tears, tho the Story ſays not 


ſo, with Senſe of his own Unworthineſs, with Earneſtneſs for the Mer- | 


© he defired, and apprehenſive of the Majeſty of him with whom he 
wreſtled, But you quite contrary, proud as if worthy, regardleſs of 
the beſt part of the Bleſſing, and earneſt only for the meaner part, ſeek 
itnot of God but Idols. 4 It is Chriſt who is here intended, it was 
0 meer Creature, Facob might not have pray'd to ſuch, but *twas the 
. i of Angels and the Redeemer of Man, the bleſſed Jeſus, to 
X Mm every Knee ought to bow; Phil. 2. 9g. b God, © Facos full of 

. carineſs, Fears and Svlicitude on his Journey to Laban, Gen.28. 12, 
N, When Prayers obtain'd a Bleſſing ; but with this, arid more dirett- 

Ss When on his return after this wreſtling about, Gen. 35+ 1, Ic. God 
rms to him, ver, 7,8, to 15. and bleſſed him. d Formeriy called. 
| b but by Fagob new named and called Berh-el, Gen. 28. 19. e Gud 

u ro his Promiſe and confirm*d the Bleffing. f By the cur- 
- ogy words in their Grammatical Order it ſhould be, He ſpake 
Perc. bur *tis not without good reaſon changed to the plural firſt 
a _— his Poſterity were in F4cob*s Loins, and blefſed with him ; 
Y any where God appeared to Facob, he co:nmanded him to build 
Vo _ to GoJ, to reſtore Religion and reform his Family from 


praiſe-worthy z that is, if he took to himſelf with Shame the finful 
manner of acquiring it, but he takes the Fraiſe ro himſelf and forgets 
God; boaſts of his Wit, though he cannot of his Honeſty. 7 Finally 
he hugs himſelf in the Apprehenfion of cloſe and crafty Carriage of all 
his Aﬀairs, that no great Fault, no Crime can be found in it to deſerve 
a Reproach or Puniſhment, that he hath more Reaſon to believe all is 
well ſince it doth proſper, than to ſuſpett any great Miſcarriage which 
ſhould deſerve Puniſhment. So this People do at once flatter them- 
ſelyes into Security fearleſs of Puniſhment, and into hardned Obfti- 
nacy in Sin uncapable of Amendment. 


9Andal*® that am the LORD thy God from the land « Ch. t-3. 


of Egypt 6, will'c yet make thee to dwell in tabernacles, 


aS in the days of the ſolema feaſt. 

4 Or but, I the Lord thy God, who ſorbad thy Frauds and gave 
thee Wealth, and am forgotten in both, thou feareſt not mine Anger 
and finneft 3 thou forgetteſt that T give thee Power to get Wealth, 
and takeft Glory to thy ſelf ; but wouldft thou, as thou shovidft, re- 
member, thou woyldft know 5 that all thy Bleſſings from thy coming 
out of. Eg ypt to this day are from me, I give more than thou getteſt ; 
thou boafteſt of what is not thine, and if thou wilt glory, remember 
it should be in my Good:1eſs and Bounty. c Hitherto have made, ©c. 
thy Peace, Safety, Plenty and Joy (here expreſs'd proverbially, in al- * 
luſion to the Joy and Security which they enjoyed in the Days of the 
Feaft of Tabernacles) was all through my Goodneſs, Preſence and 
Faithfulnefs. And dareft thou, O Ephraim /! *hus facrilegiouſly rob 
me of the Praiſe and Glory ? darelt thou be thus unthankfnl ? Oc 
elſe thus, I would ſtill make thee to dwell, &c. I take what Courlz is 
fitteſt to prevent thy Dangers, Sorrows and Ruine, but all will not do, 
thou wilt undo thy ſelf. Iam Fehovah, I change not, I am thy God 
ſcill, and have been ſo ever fince thou cameſt our of Egypt ; I gave thee 
Flenty, Peace, Safety, Joy, and would willingly continue it all, as will 
appear by what I have done to prevent thy Sin, and continue thy O- 
bedience. Some tell us 'tis a Threat that God will bring them into 
theCondition of Wanderers again; others make it a Promiſe of iuture 
Mercy, and in various Conjettures we have vencured on what will 
ſute the Contexture of the Words, at lealt tolerably well ; it it be not 
the belt, it beſt pleaſeth at prelent. p 

10 I have alſo c ſpoken by the Prophets, and | have 


multiplied viſions 4, and uſed linuilitudes e, by the  mi- + Heb 
niſtry of the Prophets. 


c And Heb.i.e. Since I would haye continued Ephraim's peacefal 
State, I have ſpoken to them by my | rophetz, who have warn'd then 
of their Danger, reproved them for their Sins, intreate., them to rey 

K k Pe:1t,, 


hand. 


NEE EO 


| 
*f 
u# 
þ 
Fy. 
b 
4 
2 
19 
i ' 
M 


—— 


Vo 


= 
SULEEzRSA _ pry n= 
hn ite err es =D —= Eur _—"_ w_ 
Z _— 28. - — 
,_ - — —— Ae.» - I— - 
2 —>—— vn I I ere ns ng =? 
—_ > — == - = _ 
— = FI E = 


*; 9; - 4 
” * - 4490s ty 


wont . Py 
=D 
EARL he _— 


- — SR —_—_ — 2 <a £2 our na y 
To OP IG APR cou: — A RO > gs ————_ 


Chap. XIII. 


pent, and do their Duty, 
phts ſpake plainly to them. 
of my Mind, the Duty of the People, what would be ſafe, what dan- 
gerous, by lively Emblems ſet before the Prophets, and by them told 
to 1ſraz], T have adviſed and warned that I might yet ſettie them. 1 
would have had them dwell ſtill in the Peace, Safety, and Joy of Feſti- 
vals, therefore I have ſent ſuch as Hoſea, 1/aiah, Foel, &c. e Para- 
bles, Examples, Aftions ;* /aiab goes barefoot, names his Son Maher- 
ſhalal-baſh-baſh, to warn Jſrael. Berth-arbe's Deſolation is mentioned 


—-— 


co prevent $amaria's. Heſea takes an Adultereſs to Wife, to bring Iſ- | 


7ael to Sight and Senſe of their Sin. All this and much more by my 
Prophets, becauſe T had Compaſſion, and would have made them 
dwell in Peace and Safety under my Government. And yet uncoun- 
ſclable and unthankful 1/rae} will not underſtand and comply, will not 
own their Sins and repent. 

11 7s there * iniquity in Gilead f ? ſurely they g are va- 
nity, they {acrifice bullocks in * Gitgal ; yea, their altars 


are as heaps in the furrows of the fields 4. 
f In this conciſe Interrogatory the Prophet warns the refratory 
4. & 5. 5, ungodly Jfraelites by an Example of God's Wrath on them. About 
An, M. 3264. at Ahaz's Requeſt and Charges, Tizlath Pileſer, 2 Kings 
15. 29. came up againſt J/rael, and took Gilead among other Towns, 
leading the Inhabitants Captives : now ſome 16 or 17 Years after doth 
our Prephet mind the ſinful and ſecure Fpbramites what they muſt ex- 
pe, and doth it in this pungent Queſtion, Is there Iniquity 1n Gze- 
2d ? i.e. is there only ? oris there more ? much like that of Chriſt's, 
Luke 13. 2. Suppoſe ye them greater Sinners ? Be it, captive Gilead was 
all Imquity, and Grlgal is no better. g That come up to Gzlzal to ſa- 
crifice are Igolaters, they fin againſt God in offering to them, and a- 
gainft their own Welfare in truſting to them, both ways they appear 
to be Vanity ; whileſt they multiply theſe Altars and Sacrifices, they 
multiply their Sins, God's Diſpleaſure is increaſed, and the Danger 
more near and dreadful. + Idolatrous /frael, thou aboundeft in Al- 
tars, but if they are for Number like Heaps of Stones gathered out of 
plowed Land, and laid in Furrows, they are as common t00, 7. e. as far 
trom ſacred, as far from commenting any Offering to God, or atoning 
his Diſpleaſure. And canſt thou, Ephraim, hope toeſcape, whoſe Sins 
excced the Sins of captive Gzead ? wilt thou never be wiſe, never 

warn'd, never repent r « 

12 And Jacob i fled into the country of Syria k, and 


* Gen,29. Trael 1 * ſerved mm fora wifen, and fora wie he kept 
20, 29, ſheep 0. | | 
2 The Patriarch. kþ For fear of Eſav, 1 Though honoured with 
that great Name. m Stoop'd to the Condition which is next door 
to-flave. #» A Wife was his Wages. o Of Laban. All which in the 
Hiſtory is related, Gen. 29. at large. ; theo] 
13 And * by a prophet p the LORD brovght 1ſ- 


* Ch. 6.8. 
* Ch. 4. 
15.& 9. 
15. 

Amos 4, 


* Exod, 
ys rect q out of Ezypt r, and by a prophet was he pre-| 
& 13. 2. ſerved s. | | 


p By Moſes. q Your Forefathers, + Where they had been Bond- 


men 215 Years, or near upon it, old Slaves, cr Vaſfals for me De- | 
icents. 5 In the Wilderneſs, Exod. ch. 2, 3, ©c. Now the Dritt of | 


the Prophet herein ro m2 appears to be this, to prevent their vain 
Pride and boaſting of their Anceſtors, their vainer ſheltring them- 
ſelves under Anceftors Merits againſt God's juft Diſpleaſure on them 
for their Sins, and the ſottiſh Plea of what their Fathers did at Bethel 
and Gilgal. There are many things which ariſe on contideration of 
-what' their Fathers were, ſuffered, enjoyed and. did, to aggravate 
their Sins and enſure them of Puniſhment, but nothing to ſecure them 
againſt Judgment to come, or to leflen Judgments when they come. 
+ Heb. 14 Ephraim provoked him to anger - molt bitterly t : 
with bize- therefore u ſhall he leave his + blood upon him  : and his 


zernzſſes. reproach y fhall his Lord z return unto him. | 

+ Heb. t Afterall the Means uſed from time to time to reclaim idolatrous 

bloods, finning Jfrael, yet ſtill they provoked God to Indignation by their Tdo- 
latries, Perjuries, Oppreſſions, Murders, and all manner of Sins which 
uſe to be rite among Idolaters, thele things were Bitterneſs unto God. 
z Seeing he will incorrigibly perſiſt as he hath begun, and end 'in Sin 
and Milery. x He ſhall bear the Guilt and Puniſhment of all his: 
Blood, his Murders of the Innocent, of thoſe that teſtified againſt him, i 
and, as one who hath murdered himſelf, fhall bear his own Guilt too, | 
4 Which Ephraim hath caft upon the Prophets and pious Workhippers | 
of God ; all the Reproach Ephraim hath caſt on God, preferring Idols. 
before him. + Either God who is Lord of all, or the 4fſyrzan King! 
and his Princes, lording it over captive Ephraim:z God ſhall by theſe! 
return the Shame on Ephraim which he caſt on God, his Worſhip, 
Temple and Prophets. | wig | 


[1 


C H A of XIII. | 4 
Ephraim”s glory and excellency, by reaſon of idolatry, wanifheth, 1---4. 
God's anger ſtirred up by their unthankfulneſs, 5---8. yet his gracious | 
promiſes of mercy and ſalvation to th:m, g--- 14. The deſtruttion of all 
Samaria threamed for their rebellion, 15, 16. | 


1 (A) Hen þ Ephraim 2 ſpake b, trembling c, he exal- 
/'Y ted himſelf in [ſrael & ; butwhen e he. offend- 
ed in Baal f, hedied g. 

+ So ſoon as, or according as, Zeb. phraſe bears it, and implieth, 
there was a time when, according to the Word of Ephraim, ' there 'was 
deep Impreſhon on the Hearers. 4 Feroboam >on of Nebar an Epbrat- 
mit? ſay ſome, but this is wide of Truth, nor ſutes the Text which -re- 
ters to their worſhipping of Baal, and this 'came into Uſe in J/rael in 
£hab's tirae, 1 Kings 16. 21. his Wife Fezabel, Daaghter to Erhbaal 
King of the Ziaonzans, prevailed with him to take her Country Idol 
and add to Feroboam's Calves. Epbraim here is either the Tribe of 
Epkraim, which wasof all the ten Tribes moſt powerful, and when an- 
gry and diſcontented made the other Trives afraid; or rather the 
whole iv ingdom of J/rael called frequently in Hoſca, Ephratme 6 When 
he conſulted, commanded, threatned, or ſent out his Proclamation ; 
"tis a {peaking like a King, or Kingdoms ſpeaking, which .s back'd, 
with Power ſufficient to a& as they ſpeak. «c The Tribes, and the 
neighbouring Kingdoms apprehended Danger, were put into a fear or 


HOSE A 


fo I would have eftabliſhed them, my Pro- | once was the Authority, Power and Glory of Ephraim. d Was mas. * 
4 By many Vifions and Repreſentations; 


and foundeſt nothing for thy Suſtenance but. what, my-miraculo 


tore * have they forgotren me k, - 


f When they were come into Cangin, that Land of Springs, Bro: we them a | 
and Rivers, . that Land of Wheat, Barly,; Vines, Olives and F'&% 2 _ of Afyr 
Deut. $. 7, $, 9. When they had abundance of things for Delight, ® aw; take aw: 
well as for necefſary Suſtenance 3 when T-had, like a good, careru! #" "76, and ſend 
wiſe Shepherd, brought them into this rich Paſture, g-they like 100 "ind you 


gorged themſelves with ſweet Wines and Deliciaus: Fare. 
this is a Reduplication of the 


ſhurun waxed fat, Deut. 32. 13, 14, 15+ i Grew proud, 


the cr nſeguence tov, all Men felt a Cummution within them. Such 


nified, advanced, and made glorious, the Kingdom flouriſhed in My;. 
titudes of People, in abundance of Wealth, in the Succeiles of their 
Counſels, and in their Credit abroad. In this flouriſhing State þ. 
phraim, a principal Tribe, and which firſt ſet up for the Royal Dijgr:. 
ty, and carried it, had prnceges ſhare,. and is ſaid to exalt him in gr 
with Jſrael. e So ſoon as he ſinned. . f By taking Bal to be their God 


added this Idolatry to their former Sins. g Undid himſelf, lok 1;;; 
Power, Glory and Bravery, as a dead Man. _.. ; 
2 And now b they ſin more and more, and * hare... I 
made them molten images of their filver k, az idols ac- jj,” ; 
cording to their own underſtanding /, all of it the work of *c;.; R 
the craftmen m2 : they » ſay of them o, Let the men that &8., Y 
facrifice p, * kiſs q the calves, - TIER oh 
hb Though they are admonifhed, threatned, and in part puniſh, Ne ar 
yet now that Baal is takes in for a God and worſhipped. 7 They gg I ki, th 
on to fin, and add new Idolatries to the old, they increaſe the Num. a 
ber of their Sins; in ſome Reſpe@ their new Sins are greater than m/ 
thoſe committed formerly, but the Prophet here ſpeaks not of Great. —_ 
neſs of Sins, but the Number. + Theſe were the Figures and Re. f rhe wo 
preſentation of the Gods they worſhipp'd, and were multiplied as Fa. = 
'(milies, able to go to the Coft, did multiply, every one got their : 
Hou(hold-Geds, Heathen-like, and moſt of theſe Puppets were made the! 
of Silver. Or the Phraſe may imply, that at their own Charge theſe mac 
People made them Gods ;z ſo though *twas a ftrait Aſh or Wood that 5 Fl 
would not ſoon putrify, which wasformed into the Idol, yet becauſe ble t 
bought with their Silver, it may by a Metonymy be called their Silver, that 
Every oneas he fancied, as he thought moſt comely and proper to re. then 
preſent a Deity, perhaps theſe Idolaters vied with each other who on hi 
ſhould have the handſomeſt God z as Abay would vie Altars, and Your 
therefore made new gnes» Perhaps ſome of theſe Tdolaters melted his G 
down their old leſs handſom Gods to run them into more pleaſing that 1 
Features, m Whatever is of the Image is of the Workman, who gave ] IEF 
it ſhape, but could not give it breath, fill *tis a lifeleſs Lump or Im- IO 
age. 7 Either the Kings of Jſrael, or the Priefts of theſe Idols, or the oy _ 
Leople. o Of the ' Tdols. þ Let every one that ſacrificeth, all that taken 
bring their Offerings to theſe Idols. q Reverence, worſhip or adore, oy as 
and thew they do ſo by kifſing the Calves. + They'll make them gire > p þ 
tull Worſhip to their Idols, . ; ; wt 
3 Thereforer they s ſhall be t * as the morning cloud, *C: eo 
. the al 
and as the early dew thatpaſſeth away, * as the chaff tht, p 
is driven with the'whirlwind out of the floor,. and as the” WWF + 751 
ſmoke out of the chimney. WY Afi 
7 For theſe fins in multiplied Tdolatries and trufting to Idols, s 6 thy ſelf 
Ephraim his King, his Captains, his Fortrefſes and Aids. # In the | though | 
Day of the Aſſyrian Invaſion, ſuddenly, eaſily, totally, and finally di. | Caule at 
 perſed, expreſſed here by four Similies, every one very apt and full dy and a 
clear and eaſy to be underſtood. ; | = *y $ins, 
4 Yetul * am the LORD * thy God from the land of vere Lie 
Egypt y, and thou ſhalt know no God bur me z: for wi 0 
*-there 35 no ſaviour beſide me s. > t frojed tt 
..u Though thou bg ſo revolted, . and choſen other Gods, it is not 11, Help, ani 
occaſioned; by any Change in me, I am what I was. x The Lord, the 101 \ 
mighty God, the everlaſting God, Fehovah. y Thy God” who alone fe th 
brought thee. out. of Egypr, and who hath maintain'd thy Lot; the Fe oe 
Calvesand;Baat were not known amongft you then. And fince I a+ ſr d, 
lone brought. thee out of Eg ypt and faved thee with wonderful (alva- 41 woul 
tions many times ſince, why doft thou ſeck Gods thou needeſt not, retuledſt n 
Gods that cannot help? 7 I forbad thee to know any other God but be my Ri 
me, in;Gratitude thou ſhouldſt know no other ; if rhere were any & vill bea K 
ther, in point of, Intereſt thou ſhouldfſt have known, 7. e. worſhipp', Where is t 
truſted, and obeyed none but me. And finally, by woful Experience thou haft r, 
thqu ſhalt know, that Calves and Bgal are no Gods, they cannot fare  VICh the ne 
thee:nor themſelves, thou shalt know IT am Gqd alone who can de- 0" peg C 
roy:thaſe;jwho would not obey me. 4 When thy Idols cannot fare "_ 0: my F 
thee out of the;Hands of thoſe" I deliver thee up to z then thou shall ey? Thy 
ice what now thou wilt not, that there is no Saviour but me, none vith thee, 
who can dcliver from all Evil, and who can enrich with all Bleling; | 6D ortune 
who can pardon Sin, and faye the Sinner. | ww i ok n ſedi 
5 © 1did know b thee c inthe wilderneſs d, * in the ine bes 


boam the 

between wh 
an Imterregiy 
lent People, ; 


land of - gteat drought e. ELYE " 
b Owned, took care of, guided and fupplied.'\.c O Jſrael, in thy Fay; 
thers. d Through which for forty Years together thou waſt movi% 


Goodneſs and Power gave thee, throvgh thoſe many Deſerts thou” 


| ver did{t want. - e In the parched Sands where no refreshing 510 11 I gay 
ers, 90-Rivers or Springs of Water to ſuffice ſo many Cattel and Me Way p | 
where thou wentelt as 'twere through Flames, and on Sands ſcorching f A po 
$ 


as Embers of a Fire, a Place fit for none but firy Serpents or Salama 
ders (if, any ſuch). | ; 6 ; 
6 According, to their paſture f, ſo were they filled; 


they were filled þ, and their heart was exalted 5 : there- 


10Þ. & The 
h God was an 
better pleaſed 
oven, and *t 
+ / 0! read the | 


6 "he 
gry Beaſts eat to Exceſs, run into Luxury and Riot 3 Epicure 1, 
Charge to confirm .it, I ſay, the 
thus luxurioully lived, or elſe *tis elliptical, and to be-made our FA 
Anil .ſo ſoon as they were filled ; and'thus*twill be parallel to _ Fa 
entertallee 
high Thoughts of their Progenitors Worth, their 'Noblenels by 5 
ſcent, their Worthineſs and Righteouſmeſs above other ha” 
thought of God as of Man, that he proportioned his Bleſhngs ww 
Excellency was found in thoſe he did Good to. So they have i0rs $ 
ten me, who found them in Slavery, Poverty, Reproach and — 
Egypt, cut of which I ſaved them ; and they have moic Ie ol 
made them Gods, worſhipped them,and with ſacrilegiovs Ut |, 
ne given.the Praiſe ot all I did for them ro dumb 1dut, 2h, 
warn'd them of it beforc-hand, Dez1.6.1 1,12.and $.13:14« 


ap. XLIL 


- Therefore 1 * I will be cnto them 1 as a lion n, as a 


lcopard o by the way will I obſerve p them, 


] Since t 


Drunka "ones pr Pome ng ; . 
Vid. ch. 5+ Ve 13. let. 0, that 1s, 1n his fuileſt Strength, 0' a middle 


Aze, ſwift in puriuing, and that can continue the Chaſle till he over- 
$5—9 
take 


-hallenged any one to attempt Its Reſcue. 0 A very fierce, {wift, flv 


that 1 may be ſure to take them. ; 
0 ] will meet them q as a bear that is bereaved of her 


| mhelps r, and will rent the caul of their heart s, and there 
b. will | devour them t like a lion #: the - wild beat ſhall 


"rear them X. : | | 
ql know their Haunts, their Walks, I will not fail to meet them 


there. 7 Robbed of her Whelps newly taken away, which makes her 
mad with Rage, ſo great Rage is proverbially expreſſed, Prov. 17. 12. 
«Firſt kill, next tear in pieces, pull out the very Heart ; it is proba- 
hle this fierce Creature may by Inftin& haſten to tear up the Prey, 
that it may drink the Blood before it run to waſte. r Where I find 
them, and ſeize them, like the hungry and fearlels Lion which feafts 
on his Prey where he catch'd it, draws it not into his Den, but de- 
voureth it immediately. # An old Lion that hath his great Teeth, 
his Grinders, and hath ftill Whelps, fierce, Gen 49. 9. and terrible, 
that will either call in his Whelps to divide the Prey, or drag the 
Prey to his Den for them; and what hope of any thing to be ſpared 
when vou fall into ſuch Hands ? xt is ſaid of the Lion, that he calls 
by his Roaring the wild Beaſts together to' the Prey, when he hath 
taken it, ſo you ſhall be devoured by the whole Troop of wild Beaſts. 
Or it may be a general Threat added to thoſe particular ones before, 
every wild Beaſt ſhall prey upon them, All this God executed on 
them by the Aſſyr7ans, who in their Fiercene(s, Cruelty, Greedineſs 
and Courage, anſwered the Charatter here given to them z the par- 
ticular Reſemblances I leave to any who may eallly ſute them, 


9 © Q Iſrael, thou haſt deſtroyed thy ſelf y, bur in me 
* + thy help z. 
kw » Afﬀeer thele Menaces it might ſeem I had deſtroyed thee, but thou 
thy ſelf haſt done it by thy Sins, it is the Rebel that deftroys himſelf 
| though he fall by the Sword of his provoked Soveraign z thou art 
Cauſe and Author of thine own Ruine. #4 Or, for, I was always rea- 
dy and able to help thee, and would certainly have ſaved thee, but 
thy Sins, thy Wickedneſs, carried thee toward other Helps which 
were Lies, and have diſappointed thee, and now thou doft periſh un- 
der thine own Choice, whereas hadſt thou choſen me I would have 
help'd and ſaved thee. Or elſe thus the whole Verſe : This hath de- 
ſtroyed thee, O J/racl, for thou haſt rebelled againſt me, againſt thy 
Help, and ſo Sol. Farchy. 

io 1 will be thy King a: * where zs any other that may 
are thee in all thy cities b ? and thy judges c of whom thou 


laidſt d, Give me a King e and Princes f ? 

41 would have bcen thy King to govern and fave thee, but thou 
refuledſt me im both, yet I will be thy King to puniſh thee, I will not 
loſe my Right and Honour by thy rebellious Carriages againſt me, I 
vill bea King; and ſubdue ſuch ; or elſe *tis a taunting Queſtion, 
Where is thy King, on whoſe Counſel, Wiſdom, Power and Conduct 
thou haſt relied ? let him now ſave thee if he can; ſo it runs ſmooth 
|. with the next Words, b Or who is there, what wiſe, valiant and 
lucceſsful Commander in any of thy Cities, that can deliver thee firſt 
out of my Hand, and next out of the Aſſyrians Hand ? c Where are 
they? Thy Magiſtrates have ſinned with thee, and ſhall be deſtroyed 
with thee, thy Rulers or inferiour Governors. 4 Whom thou didft 
importune and ſolicite, in a manner forcedſt to meet, conſult and re- 
oive in ſeditious times who ſhould be King next, when Treaſons had 
taken away him that was. e Some refer this to their firſt asking a 
King, but 'tis better referred to the Times either after Fero- 
boam the firſt, or to the Times after Feroboam the ſecond, 


LL) 


AOSE-4. 
ſhould not ſtay + long in the lace of the breaking forth T 11", 4 
ot - children q. $2ilhe s 

; hey have-ſo abuſed my Gifts by Luxury, Pride and atheifti- 
% cal Forgetiulnels of me, of what I had done for them, what I delerv-! ph 
| ed and expedted from them, I will uſe them as is meet, an take my , with very great Anguith, and with as great certainty, Ati+, 5.5. 0 
Revenge upon them. m Unthankful Apoſtatzs, Idolaters, ſottith i As ſuddenly, inevitably, and with as much Danger too; ir hc be nur 
rds, Belly-gods, who live to eat an drink, and forget me. 7 the wiſer, and return to his God. p i.e. Ephraim. jp A very touliſh 


Strength and Succeſs, that will dreadtully roar over his Prey, as it he 


ind watchful Creature, Fer. 5. 6. and 2ab, 1, $. p Watch for them, | 


, 


n By this Simily, weil known in Ecrinture, the Proptct aſſure; F- 
piraim that the Puniſhment of his Sins will overtake him {addenl 


#7 "IT; 
oleCall) 3 


i? 
v4 


SON, an incon{iderate Child who eadangers himſelf ani his Muther. 
'q Aa Child thar ſricks in the Birth, fo Xpkraim juſt ar the Birth hci 


his Prey 3 and which is ftrong, couragious and proud of his tateth, one while will, another while will not return to God, thus di- 


cth under the Delay. 


CC I——_— 


Z ; repentance ſhall be hid from mine eyes a. 


in the Subjunttive, and conditionally, I would have ranſomed, I would 
have redeemed, ©. if 1ſrael had been wiſe : ſo *twill well cohere wich 
the 13th and 15th Verſes. And if the Words be conſidered as ſpoken 
of the whole Body of 1/7 acl, they will be maſt intelligible as they in- 
clude a Condition, and are ſubjun&ive. But the Apoſtles doth, and 
molt Chriftian Interpreters with the Apoſtle, interpret them as an ab- 
ſolute Promiſe made for the Comfort of the Pious and Ele among 
theſe J/7aelites, and labour not to conneR them with the foregoing or 
tollowing Words, but ſuppole them to be in a Parentheſis between 
them : And ſo we take them. r Fehovab or Meſj5ah, the Father pro- 
miſeth the Meſſiah, s By Power and Purchaſe, by the Price of the 
Blood of the Lamb of God, and by the Power of his Godhead. x 
That repent and believe, and wait for Redemption through Chrilc 
the Meſſih. u He conquered the Grave, and roſe out of it as our 
Captain and Head, and he will at the Great Day of the Reſurrettion 
by his Almighty Power open thoſe Priſon-Doors, and bring them out 
in Glory, Immortality and Incorruption, whom he redeemed by an 
ineſtimable and invaluable Price. x From the Curſe of the firſt 
Death. henceforth they that dig in the Lord $hall be blefſed, and 
from the ſecond Death which ſhall have no Power over them ; I will 
take away the Sting of Death which is Sin, 2. e. in the Dominion and 
Guilt of it; now Chriſt redeems from the one by ſanfifying Grace, 
and from the other by juſtifying Grace, y Thus I will deſtroy Death, 
and defeat him that had the Power of Death ; it isa Metaphor, as the 
next, + Iwill recover the Prey outof the Mouth of the Grave, Tl 
pull down thoſe Priſon-Walls, and bring out all that are confined 
there, of which the Bad I will remove into other kind of Priſons, the 
Good I will reftore to glorious Liberty. The Wicked ſhall have a ' 
worſe I'riton, the Godly ſhall for ever be freed from Priſon, and (o E 
will raze this Priſon the Grave to the very Foundation. 4 This Grace 
toward the Gedly, toward Believers among J/74el, and in the Charch, 
"through all Ages, is unchangeablez I will never, as Man that repent» 
eth, change my Word and Purpoſe, faith the Lord. In either Senſe 
they ſpeak the Grace of God toward us, he is ready to pardon and 
fave all that will repent, and he will moſt certainly and eternally ſave 
from Death, Grave, Sin and Hell, all that do repent and obey the 
Meſſiah; an abundant Comfort to pious ones who ſhould yet die Cap- 
tives in Aſ]yria, but riſe by the Power of the Meſſiah to eternal Glory 
in the Day of the General Reſurrettion, 
15 © Though he a be fruitful b among his brethren c, 


come dry h, and his fountain ſhall be dried up : : he k ſhall 


2 Ephraim. b At preſent as a flouriſhing Tree ſeems to be fruitful, 
things in State ſeem to be well ſettled ; Peace at home, under #ojhea ; d:fire 
and Peace aboard with 4ſſyria and Egypr. c And all his Brethren ſur- I 
-round him, either the reſt of the Tribes, or the Nations who by 
League are become as his Brethren, 4 An Enemy, as pernicious to 
his Eſtate as the Eaft-wind is to Fruits, ſhall certainly come. e A 
mighty ahd violent Enemy, called here the Wind of the Lord, the u- 
ſual euperlative among the #ebrew, f Which lay South-Eaft from 
Canaan, and ſo it ſpeaks a more pernicious Quality in theſe Enemies, as 
the South-Eaft Winds in that Country were of all moſt hot and blaſt- 
ing, coming over thoſe hot, dry, ſandy Deſerts. g Springs of Water 
which were moſt needful, and highly valued. þ Shall fail and be cut 
off, dry up that there shall be no Waters in them. #7 The ſame thing 
in. different Words, confirming the certainty hereof. This the, Re- 


(emblance of the Aſſyrian andthe miſchief he shall doto //7ael, he Shall 
lay Ephraim deſolate, and dry up all his Fountains, which were the 
Comfort of that Land, k The Aſſyrian Army, Shalmaneſer | $hall rob 
their Treaſuries, m and carry away all defirable Veſſels and F.rnicur: 
out of all their Houſes and Wardrobes ; thus all the Glory of Eplri 
Shall wither whilſt *tis ſeemingly flourishing, and well rooted too. 

16 Samarla # ſhall beccme deſolate o, for ſhe hath re- 


belled againſt her God þ -: they q ſhall fall by the ſword r : 


men with child ſhall be ripp'd up t. 


4 10 between whoſe Neath and Hoſhea's Time, ſome ſay, there was 
Bi an /nterregnum of twenty or near twenty Years, during Which a turbu- 
u 4 {ent People, as the 1ſr2e/rres were, would be frequent and earneft in all 
nes likelihood in moving for a King, f Neceſſary to affift the King. 
4 11] gave thee * a King in mine anger f, and took him 
w way g In my wrath h, T 
at © | Such as Shallum, Menahem, Pekah, &c. but in Diſpleaſure againſt | 
Ju, g The Hebrew ſays not what, 1 think, their Kings mentioned. 
- God was angry when. he gave ſuch Kings to //rael, and he was no 
6 better pleaſed when he took them away ; they were Funiſhments when 
oy v'\en, and Twas Puniſhment to Jjrae! when they were taken away. If 
200 readl the eleventh Verſe in the future Tenſe, as you may, I will 
oks, 1 give them a King in my Anger, it may refer to God's giving the 
6 ng of Afria the Rule over them, making them his Vallals : and 
, a 1%1ll take away, 7.e, you, O Jſraeiites { in my Wrath, I will deftroy 
and ome, and ſend others into Captivity, take all away out of your Land, | 
hut and ſend you in Wrath to the Grave, or Captive into Aſjyr ids 
lik 12* The inicuity z of Ephraim k is bound up : his fin 
cher E hid 97, 
- = theſingular inftead of the plural, all the Iniquities and Sins. & 
" G - Ingdom of the ten Tribes. I As Inditments drawn up and Ll-- 
ned "bs againſt the Day of Trial, or as Bills and Bonds tied up 
« fe pe may ve ready againſt the Day of Account when all muſt be 
we king gs Sins unpardoned ; for to looſe Sins is to forgive, and to 
"hal "Fog 15 to Charge them upon the Sinner, Marth, 16. 19. O-E- 
rg , --", Ut ne unpardoned Sins lie in Account againlt thee, thou ſhalt 
s, 11 —_ 
hol ops gy Day of Recompence, a3 Fob 21. 19. lo Rem. 2+ 5. and 
nv "a Yes : . 
upbl £0 * The forrows of a traveiling woman # ſhall 
ly "& upon him @, he p #5 an unwiſe ſon pp, for he 


ol, 1l, 


taken, plundered and ſack'd, probably *twas razed to the Foundation 14. 


by the A{;yriar, provoked by the Treachery firſt, and by the Obſtinacy Nah. 2.15, 


next, of 2oſtea maintaining the Sicge againſt Shalmarneſer three Years, 
2 Aings 17.5. þ Caſtoff both his Worship, and ſet up Tdolatry, and 
alſo shak*d off rhe Yoke bf David's Houſe, and ſet up new Kings, aud 
maintained both long ayzainſt God. q ihe Inhabitants of Szmaria, 
and allo the Subjects of the Kingdom of J/racl, 7 Be cut off in War 
by the prevailing Arms of the King of Aſj172. 's A muſt barbarous 
piece of Cruelty, yer uvally prattiſed in thoſe Countrics when they 
were enraged againit a People, 1 Another kin of like or greater in- 


humanity. Thus Stalman raged againlt Arg27 in th= Day of Barrel, 
L. 


hu 4 © 6 > a © op. (4 
<< 0f them and ſmart for them. m Not from God, but laid up with| aad this confirms what the Prophet ſaith, cþ, 10. v. 14. An this was 
nv doubt executed upon Syumariz when it was taken; fo their Springs, 


Women and Children, which are a> Fountains, were a!l tt: io up, 


Chap. X11. 


' 14+ * Ir will ranſom s them t from - the power of. the *14.25.9. 

grave 4: I will redeem them from death x : * O dearh, { + Heb. 1 

will be thy plagues y, O grave, I will be thy deſtruction og; 
* 1% 


Some Interpreters render this Text not in the Future abſolute, hut "203495 30 


* an eaſt-wind ſhall come 4, the wind of the LORD e ſhall * Fzex., 
come up from the wilderneſs f, and his ſpring g ſhall be- 79: 12. 


ſpoil the treaſure 1 of all + pleaſant veſſels m. + Heb. 
veſſels of 


* their infants ſhall be daſhed in pieces s, and their WO- « , gc: 44s 


S.. 12. 
2 The chicf or royal City of the Kingdom of Jſ-a?!. o Beſeged, Ch. 1-, 


a V "1 £2: a "\ . - . » 
LO hs > os eo -- bo no Sa Ag ES 
bo Es Ce” LK 2s 0 i . 
CIS ME; ates =: AS: . b TS." 
DE EN REID ono comm , - 
. AY. -- wh REvv wa 40 * PR 4 
244 Re veur 7 > geen ; . : 


x; * ao. AY 
"TY. STE LG; 
42 AS 


be Lc eg. 
x 


- r _ C—_— 
. a_ > po ,- T s A : _ 5 na 
- . _ _ - - = Oo ki .: : a : = " F --, -" 5 Dt" a - -< 
7 a? p. 2 ©” a n 5% 7 SN © Os p, < -- ES es, T9 , Nv. _—_ — 
4 - 5 Ws = T Ea 7 7 bes 8 ”_ FF ——- by e L Sefeo BY - : > #3 Ty þ > 
D 4 ,4 p 4 * : % Sn, URGE hee n F. 4 A , 6 f on *»4,. wy D-; VO > th 7 ie by : < . 4 2 «eq da halts 200 - wh +024 pow das « * acts 
. : : : by . VS *£ SN = Wage . . x” : 2 = ” - uns FO g - ; , 
COT TIIng - ADS _—_— . = < Sled IA LE " - S eds Se x > f- 2 - PET ' * . & CT ho * 92 ag 4 wn 
* 4 p bas Jt a, F S p - oC , : ag : £ _—_ ” *@ ASL -v _ SN IIET —_ i _—_ Ln ao _ TATE <i*: Ser Ie boa Tv *. 4. - l i 
( pn - F 2 : of Tf + Df +-- Fu: 
” oy a bod * 9 yr X y_ m = Mo IS of " OY , : » -_ wor Wo _ ” 
"4 u . ” _ "oF" 4 - s ve A ren % a —_ c ” k 
* pe Ae: rr Dn ” < $4 N . > T © AE P 6x » "PC. "2, : "Jo 7 = ns. fo = > 
Po , p_ . "i = > .  n_o—r_y 2 4 © xabnid 3 tinge 23 4 _—— OO arcugepercs a, NE. CAE Fw - th I Ay 37: "©! - "” . C 
Sd. 7 Ps - : * Z ——> oh *_ ” . (5 Hg _ _ Sn _ Ss — 29% - 
is & Ws 4 *_. P"INY % os 2”; + UE We" 3. : - ” Tas ot . ” "—V oY tv" 4 " yy , 4 : Hg -- z _ PIR $4 mr PR 
 ——— ples Spain © 5s = OR non- <habdi>e—> ror nomns gne.; 3 4 w_ wad * X Me a [2 - IM < = . - ” ys 2 y - oh bo - : > - - "4 4 . __ 2% _ * 
Is 3 A XL ——LX. 22 . ” p__—_ 5 - : P has 3 "4 _ > "© "— M25 Sens - Morn,” X ol js =” ® —_— -' id AE £7 . F* Oh dd of po £4 © x 
"4.99 7: G - 2 g ” __ 4 a _ F - LT - > ——— _ - __ - 
 __ — = - © : - "on 4 - . s — ; - 
+ pore ag . o - yn 7 % al V % w a EIT 2 > 1 ps os "+ - p Þy > _ * S , 
+ - py OI Fa? x Lytey - v >< 6 "u*- ws Sa Frm < © - 05g yt Jing p "WO 9s. << a —— —— rx = 4 : Lo 30 Al , - bo = as; ne” 
date w 5 p Rk 4 4, IE IX. _ mage e——y -& g Ono , « My +4 ny ; a "3 KL EZ = 2. an ” I od * 


J <> n_——— + ef « - 
I a nn men gin nn ee A - : 
= . - = == = - 


Chap. XIV. 


®Ch.12.C. 


| Or;give ſay unto him k, Take away a 


£004, 


*P(.3317. 
Ua. 31s 1, 


| Or þ0/- 
tan, 


+ Heb. 
f: YH C's 


CHAT. XIV. 


Ijrazl exhorted 10 repentance, and raught rhe prafice of it, 1---3, Ap romiſe 
ro heal their back ſlilings, and beſtow on them great bleſſings, 4---9. 


'Q 
quity /. 

4 You that are the true /jrael of God, you that are the Remnant 
amidſt lo great a Body ot incurable Rebels. &þ Repent ye throughly, 
not hypocritically z turn ve from all your Sins in which with others 
you have been defiled, and turn to the Lord, c The everlaſting living 
Gol, who is worthy to be worſhipp*d and obeyed ; your Idols were 
never worth your Love, but the Lord, the Fountain of Being and Life, 
is worthy of it. 4 Tura to him as thy God in Covenant with thee, to 
get Pardon for paſt Sins, according to Covenant-Promiſe, to renew 
Covenant for time to come, and to ingage thy (elf ſincerely and hear- 
tily to be his People. e Thy Sins againit the Lord thy God have en- 
kindled his Wrath againſt thee, have involved thee in endleſs Trou- 
bles, have turn'd thy Proſperity into extream adverſity ; Sin hath caſt 
thee trom the Height of Glory to the Depth of Reproach and Con- 
tempt: thus thou art fallen. f It is fingular Number, either bes 
cauſe all theic Sins were ſo link'd together, they were as one huge 
Maſs of Sin ; or it refers particularly to their Idolatry, which is by 
way of Eminency, and above any one other vin, a falling from God, 
and here puniſh'd with a Fall into Calamities. 


2 Take with you g wordsNgnd turn þ to the LORD 7, 
iniquity /, and || recelve 
der the calves of our 


Iſrael a, * return b unto the LORD c thy 
God d : for thou haſt fallen e by thine ini- 


us m graciouſly x : fo will we 
lips o. ; ; 

g Bethink your ſelves what Words will beſt {ct out your Sins, God s 
Patience towards you, and your preſent Sorrow and Repentance for 
Sin 3 prepare your ſelves to make Confeſſions, Petitions, Vows and 
Praiſes to God. h With Words join Decds, let your Hearts be in 
your Words, turn, do not as the incorrigible Hypocrite. 2 SEe Ver. 
I. let. c. k Prav, prefent your Petitions to him who heareth Pra; er z 
here is no mention of Sheep or Oxen, or any legal Sacrifices : true 
Repentance is required, which is much better, Faith and Hope 
through the great Sacrifice, in virtue of which theſe Converts expett 
the Grace they need and ſeek. { This Petition for Pardon of vin in- 
cludes Confeihon of it, Sorrow for it, Hope that God will of mere 
Grace forgive it, and take away the Guilt, prevent the Puniſhment, 
and aboliſh the Power of Sin, not of ſome, but of all ; fincere Converts 
ſeek full Juſtification, and full Sanctification. m2 Into thy Proteftion, 
Guidance and Benedittion. # And this of thy mere Grace and Good 
neſs, having; taken away Sin, take allo graciouſly our Perſons as re- 
conciled, and well-pleating to thee. o This will qualify and encou- 
rage us to give the Sacrifices which are to Gol much more pleaſing 
than an Ox that hath Horns and Hoofs ; 7/al. 69. 31. with theſe 
Calves of our Lips we will give onr Hearts allo, for thoſe Praiſes of 
the Lips are Fruits of what Praiſe the Heart of the Convert firft 
gives; and thele here are Signs of their Heart given to God, that ſo 
they may be Spiritual 'Sacrifices, ſuch as Pſal. 55. 13. or Heb. 13. 15. 

3 Aſher ſhall not fave us p, * we will not ride upon 
horſes q, neither will we ſay any more to the work of 
our hands, Te are our Gods r : for in thee s the fatherleſs 
t findeth mercy x. 

p It had been one great Sin of 7/razI that they cid truſt to an Arm 
of Fleſh 3 Afrer is particularly rame:!, for thar tie was the laft with 
whom they made a Co\ienant fairly, or above-board ; but any other 
foreign Aids and Friendſhips may be here underſtood, God promil- 
ed his peculiar Protettion, and wouid have continued it it they had 
not caſt him off, and truſted to Man. q Another Fault of theirs was, 
they multiplied Horſes, and truſted to their Strength, which God for- 
bal ; this includes their home Strength anda Provition of all ſorts. r 
They had muft brutiſhly chought their Idols: would be Gods to help 
them : this the particular Conteſhon of their great comprehentive 
Sins, which brought on many others with them ; Now they renounce 
as well as confeſs them, and ſuch renouncing is neceſſary, and ground- 
ed on Hope of finding Metcy, as appears by s the Reaton they give 
of their renouncing thete Sins and vain Confidences in God, to whom 
they return, in him only there is Help to be had. rt All that are de- 
ſtitute of Strength in themlelves, and deſtirute of Help from others ; 
all that being ſenſible of their own helpleſs Condition look for it from 
God who hath lower, Mercy and Wildom to help and relieve. u Ob- 
taineth as often as he dovs rightly lue for. x Both Fountain and 
Streams of Goo:Incſ too, free Grace, and rich Bounty. 

4 I will heal y their backſlidings z, I will love | 
them freely a: for mine anger is turned away from 
him b. 

» It is a uſual Metaphor in Scripture, Sin is our Diſeaſe, God is the 
Phytician who healeth us, Pſul. 103. 3. and Fer, 3. 22. and he doth it 
through Chriſt, in whom this Promile is made to returning Backſlid- 
ers. 1 his Promiſe God maketh by his Prophet to encourage them to 
hearken to his Advice of repenting. 2 Averhons, voluntary and wil- 
tul turning away trom God, wcll expre[s'a here, and called Rebellions 
by ſome other Interpreters: theſe voluntary, continued, and obftinate 
Avertions or Packſlidings are Inftances of greateſt Sins and Sinners ; 
vet God promileth to heal theſe old purrifying Sores, that we might 
be ailur'd rhat he will heal all other I-ffer Wounds: He will tully heal 
by pardoning and purifying. + Lhough before he hated, could take 
no Pleaiure in them, now he will ſhew that his Mind and Heart are 
rowarus them to accept them, and do th?em Good, a Without their 
Deſert, and without Younds of Time or Meaſure, or Kind, All kinds 
of Mercies, Fruit of his Love, infinicc Mercy in Grace an Glory, e- 
ternal Mcicies his Love will afford to them. This is liberal Love in- 
deed, this promiſed here. 6 I am reconciled to them, my Diſpleature 
IS turned away, 

5 I © will be as the dew d unto lirael c : he ſhall 
|| £row as the lilly Ff, fend + caſt forth bis roots as Le- 
banon g. 


4 


HOSE A 


— 


e The Lord, who have pardoned, am appea(el. * Reireſh and wa- 
ter, that they may grow, and that they may be fruitful, and flouriſh, 
as the Dew in thoſe Countries, where *twas more abundant than wit! 
us, and for ſome Months together ſupplied the want of Rain ; Gog 
will refreſh and comfort, and make fruitful in good Works, through 
his Grace, ſuch as return to him, e Thoſe that do unfeign2dly, noe 
hypocritically confeſs, pray and repent. f Which grows apace, i; fra. 
grant, beautiful, and delights in Valleys, often grows among Thorn ; 
lo the Jjrael of God among Troubles in low State, yet comely and fr;- 
grant to the Lord, and grows up in him ſpeedily. g Put tor the Trees 
of Lebanon : as thole Trees ſpread forth their Roots, grow up to 
Strength, are moſt beautiful, odoriferous and durable, Cedars in Lebg- 
20n are theſe Trees, ſo ſhall the true 1ſrael, converted Backſliders he 
—_ of God ; ſo flouriſhing and happy ſhall the Church be under 
Chriſt, 


6 His branches þ ſhall - ſpread z, and * his beauty ſhal]} hy 


us 
Cir 
ant, 


be as the olive-tree k, and his ſmell as Lebanon J. 

h His tendereft Branches, which are new ſprung out, ſhall gather 
Strength, not be broken off, but by theſe shall they multiply in Num. ns 
ber of Boughs. 7 Grow great and beautiful, and excellent for Shade, 

t Which retains his Verdure all the Winter, and is rich in Fruit ; 6 
the true J/rael of God $hall flourish not in fruitleſs Beauty and Stateli. 
neſs, but in defirable and lovely Fruit, even in Winters of Afflition 
and Troubles. 1 The Mountain famous for Cedars, where alſo were 
the Trees that afford the Frankincenſe, which ſweat out that excel. 
lent Aromatick, and where many more ſweeteſt Flowers grow, and 
perfume the Air ; ſuch hall the ſpiritual Fragrance of the Church he 
to God and Man. : 

7 They that dwell under his ſhadow #2 ſhall re- 


urn #, they ſhall revive as the corn o, and || grow #0 


the vine p : the || ſcent thereof /hall be as the wine of Le- 
banon q. 


, 
m As many as unite to the Church, are Members of it, shall dwell” 


under theſe ſpreading Trees: The Churches planted and ſpreading 
Shall be to new Converts as ſuch Trees to fainting Travellers, almof 
ſpent with Toil and Heat ; they shall find Reft in this Shadow, which 
may refer to Chrift and the Church. #z Revive and recover ney 
Strength and Life ; ſo do Souls weary and heavy laden with Sin and 
Fears, find Comfort and Life coming to Chriſt, converſing with (uch 
as have been eaſed and comforted by Chrift in like manner formerly, 
o Which dieth e're it liveth to bring forth Fruit, ſo Converts die in- 
deed to Sin that they may live to God, die to all legal Righteouſneſs 
that they may liveon rich Grace; orelſe it may refer to the Increaſe 
of the Church, which shall be as many Stalks from one Ear of Wheat, 
p Which in Winter ſeems dcad, is prun'd, and promiſeth little to the 
Eye, but yet Life, Sap, and a frudifying Virtue is in it, and it will 
ſpring and bring forth Fruit : ſothe Church of Chriſt is ulcd, thatit 
may bring forth Fruit more abundantly, Fokn 15.2, 3, q The % 
vour of it to God and good Men 5hall be pleaſing as the Scent of the 
delicious Wines of Lebanon, which are mentioned by profane Authors 
with a great Praiſe for their Sweetneſs and Deliciouſneſs. 


8 Ephraim r ſhall ſay, What have I to do any more 
with idols s ? I have heard hjm, and obſerved him t : I 


am like a green fir-tree«, from me #5 thy fruit found =. 
7 Not the whole Body of Ephraim, but converted Ephraim, thoſe 
who, ver. 1, 2. were ſenfible of Sin, confeſſed it, and ſued for Pardon, 
s 7, e. T haveno more todo with them, nor ever will ; they have been, 
firſt my Sin, and next my Sorrows z and my Sorrows have been mul- 
tiplied by haſting after other Sods, I will no more do fo ; and with 
Deteſtation againſt Tdols doth Ephraim ſpeak, as the Queſtion impli 
eth. tr Some refer theſe Words to Fpkraim, owning what he ha 
found and obſerved in God what Grace and Mercy in Pardon, Deli- 
verance from Miſeries, and comfortable Revival of his State : Others 
refer it to God, and make it a gracious Promiſe.from God of hearing 
Prayers, and taking eſpecial Care of converted Ephraim ; either way 
{utes the Words and Matter, and I leave it to your Choice. u Thef 
Words alſo as the former are either J/aeP's giving Praiſe to God, whv 
had on JſraePs Return changed his dead withered State into a flouris- 
ing, lovely and beautiful State ; others ſay *cis God's Promile to be to 
Ephraim as ſuch a Tree is to a weary Traveller, who may with De 
light and Safety fit under the Shadow of it. A Tree, ſay ſome, that 
grows with very thick Boughs, that Rain or Heat pierceth not, and 
whoſe Smell drives away wild Beafts ſo there is Safety and Refresl- 
ment under the Protection of the Lord, under his Shadow. x Th 


alſo is differently interpreted, 1/74! confefſeth that the Fruit of Gods 
Grace is ſeen from what /ſrael now is, and doth ; others ſay, God pre 
mileth the Fruits of Comfort Jj/ra:1 enjoys, and ſtill shall enjoy from 
God, and his Grace toward Ijracl, 1 determine neither, but ſure [ 
am, (uch is the Corce:nondence of God's Grace to the converted, that 
they cannot more readily acknowledg what God hath done for the, 
nor more readily engage to do what God adviſeth and requireth, thi! 
God is ready ro encourage them by gracious, ard rich, and ſutadi 
Fromiles, ; 
9 * Who # wiſe, and he ſhall underſtand theſe thy” 
y ? prudent, ana he ſhall know them z ? for the ways; 
the LORD are right a, and the juſt ſhall walk in them#:; 
but the tranſgreſſors c ſhall fall therein 4d. 'Þ 
y Though not many wiſe, yet ſome methinks now of thoſe few, 
who is there that will confider what Sins God complains of, and threr 
tens to punish in his People, what Sins God forbad them (0 much 
once to commit, and peremptorily commanded them to turn. io 
when once committed ; what Duties he required, what Promil® , 
propoſed, what Patience he uſed toward them while any Hop* c 
their Amendment,what Severity upon their incorrigible Sins. V __ 
with any tolerable Degree of Wiſdom will-view theſe things, 479” 
riouſly conlider of them, they will underſtand, and know that che Iv 
phet bath given beſt Advice, and thar'tis ſafeſt Courle to follow If { 
The ſame thing doubled with Elegancy, and to confirm the Word, : 
is uſval in Scripture. 4 The Ways which he would have 5 wry 
towards him, his Law, his Ordinances of Worship, his whole Dottie 
which diretteth our Walk, are all righceous and equal. A%** 
Ways wherein God walketh toward us in Corr-&icns for $1956- 
mitted, in {uſpending his Fromiles of Grace en conditivss 0 Dn 


Chap. X11 


on, 
0 


CSR 


and | 
typic: 
£100 | 
the u1 
chap. 
Mart 
were 
s tbod f 
” wander 
Time, 
= the ſul 
| aunive) 
2 neral ' 
 zhe wh 
8 Myſtic 
© been ain 
t Aunota 


Fel by C 
exhorre1 
Accomm 


il Jr 

a dince 
Zjea,chap 
Poſterity « 
Mel's Son 
ldever, we 
{0 Cited by 
| 2nd tis po 
| Caliſe he I* 
| Phet's Fath 
Z With gre 
& Second's R 


2 Hea 


: habitants 
[: Or even j 


d Heis ; 


: | to conſider 
{ among you 
2 vere young 
© May poſſbl) 
& Can, 
# both. þ Di 


Vis. 


| fer tell yo 
ever ſuch a 
Peak of it ? 

3 Tel] 
tell their 4 
On. 

t Declare 
that your C 
Petuated « fc 
0 to mind 
ght them 

4 | Th 
locuſt eate 
Canker-wo 
bath left, 

Four ſorts 

erbs, are 
ured all t 
Pte a ori . 
preters, t 
iToof hereof 
ner ; the 
eech in its 
Ut (I do be 


F @ E-& Chap. I, 


tually it proves ſo ; they ſtumble and are offended ſomewhat at 

his Precepts and Commands, but more at his ſevere Judgments ; 

they caſt off the one, and vainly hope to ſhift off the other, till 

- _ they fall under the weight of their own Sins and God's 
raln. 


JP: [. | EE 
-a:no or comforting, are all righteous and very equal. 6 Will ap- 
__ = all, ;uftifying the Righteoulneſs ef God*s Diſpleaſure, 
=nd confeſſing he remembreth Mercy in the midft of Judgment : And 
-oſtifying the Righteouſnels of his Precepts by endeavouring to ob- 
forve them. £c Wilful, obſtinate, and inconfiderate Sinners. d Even: | 


"ut 


The ARGUMENT. 


9 Ince ſo many #ndeterminable Points of leſs moment occur in our Prophet, as of what Tribe he was, whether his Fathes 

q g were @ Prophet, whether he propheſied in Jeroboam's or Hezekiah's time, whether contemporary with Hoſea, Amos, 

and Iſaiah 5 whether he preach'd to the Ten Tribes, or to the Two Tribes, or to both; whether the Locuſts are literal only or 
typical, and ſignificative of Enemies, or how many Years they continued ; what Nations they did prefigure, when the Execu- 

| tion began, when it ended ; or when be began, or how long be continued to propheſy : We may well reſt our ſelves contented in 

the undiſputable things of greater moment, ſuch as are, The Divine Authority with which he came, atteſted by himſelf, 

0; chap. 1, ver. 1. and confirmed to us by the Apoſtle, AQts 2.17. and Rom. 10. 13. and by Chriſt himſelf, Matth. 24. 29. 
; Mark 13. 24. and Luke 21. 25. All be ſpake is the Word of God. The pernicious Conſequences of National Sins, ſuch as 
were viſible on God's own People at this very time in parching Droughts, devouring Locuſts, and Famine. The only Me- 

| thod for removing theſe Judgments, Faſting, Prayer, and Amendment of our Life, The ſucceſſive Sufferings of the Church 
 ander the ſeveral Monatchies till the commg of the Meſſiah, with the wonderful Preſervation of the Good during thoſe 
Times, The juſt and final Deciſions God will make for his againſt their Oppreſſors in thoſe Kingdoms, doing it by raiſing 
” the m__ Empire to puniſh and overthrow the Precedent. The Converſion of the ews, the Calling of the Gentiles. 
The Adv ent of the Kingdom of the Meſſiah, and Communication of Gifts and Graces to his Church, The final and 


| univerſal Deciſion of all things that concern God and his Church on the one ſide, and their Enemies on the other. The ge- 
 cral Judgment of Quick and Dead, are the great SubjetFs he doth in plainer or darker Terms ſet before us, In unfalding of 
© Zhe whole, whoſo excludes the Letter and Hiſtorical Reference, will fail on one band ; and whoſo excludes the Typical and 
© Myſtical Reference, will err as much on the other hand. In a due and juſt Application of both lieth the true mean, which hath 
© been aimed at in this Enterprize ; and how far attained, is ſubmitted to the Fudgment of thoſe that read the enſuing 


- ns 


| Annotations, 


CHAP. L 


Fuel by God's command, ſenteth before them ſudry fearful Fudgments z 
exhorterh 20 obſerve them, 1 » to mourn and lament, $ 13. 
Acommanid to faſt and pray, by "OY of their calamity, 14, —— 20» 


1FFHE word of the LORD that came to a Joel b the 


fon of Pethvelc. 

a Since this Preface is word for word the ſame with that of 
Zoſea,chap. 1. ver. 1. ſee it there explained. b Suppoſed to be of the 
Poſterity of Reuben, therefore could not be (as the Jews ſuppoſe) S4- 
mue!'s Son, nor will his Time fit to 1 Chron. 5. 4,8. but of what Tribe 
lvever, we know he came from God, and with his Authority, and is 

| fo cited by the Apoſtle, A#5s-2., 16. c More of this Man I know not, 
& and*tis poſſible he might be, as the Jews ſuppoſe, very eminent, be- 
# Cauſe he is named : however, *tis an Honour to be reported a Pro- 
{ phet's Father. The time of his Propheſying,though not demonſtrable, 
Z 1S with greateſt Probability laid about the latter end of Feroboam the 
# Second's Reign over 1/rael, and in the days of Uzziab over Fudah. 
Z 2 Hearthis d, ye old mean e, and give ear, all ye 1n- 
© habitants f of the land g : hath this been in your days hb 
{: or even in the days of your fathers z ? 
'; dHeis ahout to report a very wonderful Occurrence,and defires all 
7 to conſider it, mark it well, and tell me what you know. e The oldeſt 
' among you, who can remember things done in your days, when you 
2 were young, ſome ſcores of Years paſt, f Tt is an Appeal to all that 
= may poſhibly know more than others, and remember better than others 
© Can. g Viz. of Fudea ; whether of the two Tribes, or ten Tribes, or 
| beth. þ Did you perſonally ever know the like ? 7 Did your Fathers 
ever tell you of ſuch a thing happening in their days ? Was there 
ever ſuch a thing known among them ? Have you ever heard them 
peak of it ? : 

3 Tell ye & your children of ir, and Jet your children 
el} their children, and their children another generati- 
On. x 

t Declare it very particularly, or record it; write it as 1n a Book, 
that your Children may know it, and the Memory of it may be per- 
petuated * for as it was a very wonderful and unuſual thing, ſo it was 
or to mind us of the Caule of it, and what is taught, or ſhould have 
irught them and us. 

4 + That which the palmer-worm hath left, hath the 


Context, that there ſhould really have been ſuch Caterpillars, and 
other Vermin, and that they did devour all that was greer : and 
tho this is no where elſe mentioned, as I remember, in the {acres 
Hiſtory, yet it is likely *twas done, as here told, and as ſo done was 2 
figure of ſome greater Devaftation made by foreign Powers, as by 
Tiglath Pileſer, Shalmaneſer, Senacherib and Nebuchadnezqar. 


5s Awake I ye drunkards mm, and weep, and howl » all 
ye drinkers of wine o, becauſe of the new wine þ, for it is 
cut off from your mouth q. 


I Great Drinkers of intoxicating Liquors are apt to ſleep, and be 
ſecure ; the Prophet doth therefore here call to them, as to Sleepers, 
and by one apt word exprefſeth a double Duty, Vigilance of Mind, 
as well as of the Body. ſo may this be parallePd with Rom. 13. 11. 
1 Theſſ. 5. 6. 1 Pet. 5. 8. or Eph. 5. 14, m Riotous Livers, ſuch as 
Prov. 23+ 30,31, 32. and Jſa. 5. 11, 12. whoſe Life is nothing but a 
continued teafting with choiceſt Wines, and in Exceſs, ſuch as Amos 
6. 4, 5, 6. deſcribeth. » Lament your Condition with ſober Tears, 
for the Sorrows coming upon you are juſt Matter of weeping, nor 
will an ordinary degree of weeping ſuffice : Cry out, and how! like 
Men ſurprized with unſupportable Miſeries, J/2. 13. 6. and 15. 2. 
0 Who offend by an inordinate Uſe of Wine; for it is not to be 
underſtood of every one that drinks Wine, but of ſuch as before are 
called Drunkards, who are in love with Wine, p Which is ſweet 
and pleaſing to the Taſte, and no doubt drank without ſtint or mea- 
ſure by Men of that Age, againſt which Feel prophefieth. q Sudden- 
ily cut off, even when you are ready to drink it ; and totally, all cut 
off by theſe devouring Vermin : which as *twas a Narrative of what 
was already done, reters to that Waſte and Famine by the Locuſts 
as *tis allegorical and predittive, 'twill be more dreadfully fulfilled 
when the Enemies of Fudab ſhall deſtroy all. 


6 For a Nation 7 is come vp s upon my Land t, 
ſtrong «, and without number x , whoſe teeth are the 
teeth of a Lion y, and he hath the cheek-teeth - of a great 


Lion z. 

This Verſe countenanceth their Conje&ure who take the Locuſts 
and Vermin to be emblematical in part as well as literal ; for it 
ſeems not very ſutable, to call their Teeth, Teeth of a Lion. r An 
innumerable multitude of Locuſts and Caterpillars, called a Nation 
here, as Solomon calls the Conies and the Ant, Prov. 30. 25, 26. A 
Prognoſtick of a very numerous and mighty Nation, that e're long: 
will invade Fudah, $s Or ſuddenly will come rs upon Canaan whichs 


on F- ecult eaten ; and that which the locuſt hath leff, hath the _ calls bs Land, =— PRONE tive boos IDeS, Fudth 
1c i canker-worm eaten; and that which the cankerworm | FIF1y, rakene | # Mighty in Tourer, anc undaunted in Courage, - 
hath Bros you refer 1t to the Afſyriin Or BaUy:ontans 3 1 tot ole Vermin, they 
e 0 ih left, hath the caterpillar caten. are, though each weak by it ſelf, yet in thoſe Multitudes whick 
Four ſorts of Inſe&s pernicious to all ſorts of Trees, Corn and | come, {trong enough, and irrefiſtable, and ſhall do God's Work 3 


erbs, are here mentioned, which did ſucceed each ather, and de- 
*Oured all that might be a future Support ro the Jews 3 wherice 
"led a grievous Famine for four Years together, ſay the Jewiſh Jn- 
yrerers, tho there is nv cogent Reaſon in what they mention for 
roof hereof. Theſe Inſefts might in the ſame Year ſucceed each 
nngh, the one, as is uſual, might come ſooner, the reſt ſuccefively, 
*2CN 1N It's 


2 (I do believe) really ; and tho thele might be Emblems of ſome 
We Devaſtation, yet it ſeems m2ſt arable to Reaſon, and the 


Seaſon, and ſo ſpoil the ſpringing of all things, which they | 


| 


that is, waſte the Land, and devour all before them. x Not fimply 
numberleſs,. vut in ſuch Multitudes none of you ſhall be able to re- 
count them. » A ſtrong Lion, of the middle Age, that hath Whelps, 
and hunts the Prey for them. #4 Which is old, and the more Ferce 
and terrible in his Looks, no way lefjcned in his Strength, and thar 


preys for his young ones ; now what Waſte fuch Lions make, ſuch n 


theſe Locuſts will make, ſuch 4jly-t2n5 will make. 


” I 


208 


| . ws laid my fc 
7 He a hath laid my vige waſte 6, and + barked c my ,;.. y *£ 


FC u 


h2-tree :4..! ;- 
- . w 


Chap. I. 


| Or,af#a- corn is waſted t: the nzw wine is |} dried up 4, the oil x 


med, 


Rg-tree : he hath made it clean bare d, and caſt zt away e, 
the branches f thereof are made white. 

a That Nation of Locufts, ver. 6. both literally and myſtically un- 
derſtood. & Made it a Deſolation, 7. e. moſt deſolate, which is more 
particulariy declared in what followeth. ©c PeePd off the Bark, which 
15 certain Deſtruction to the Tree, 4 Eat off all the Rin, and green 
Bars, and Jett the Budy of both Vine and Fig-tree bare and ftript. 
e As Vermin-caſt out of their Mouth the Chewing of what they ſpoil ; 
lo here. j All the Branchcs of both Vine and Fig-tree are by thele 
devouring Vermin made uv Þite, all their green being eaten oft ; ſo 
miterably defolate will the Enemy fignified by theſe Locuſts make 
Fudah God's Vine. _ "© ; 

8 & Lament f like a Virgin g girded with ſackcloth þ 
for the husband of her youth z. 

The Vicious and Wicked among the Jews were alarmed and 
threatned in the !tormer part of the Chapter; Now the Prophet 
beſpeaks the Good and Gcdly among them, to prepare tor mourntul 


Times. f Thus is minatory, and threatens calamitous Times ſhall | 


come, as well as direit:iv?, what to do V hen they are come ;z when 
God calls for weeping, we muſt not rejoice. & This tells us to whom 
the Prophet diretts this part of his Sermon z tis to thoſe who amidft 
the Jews were like chaſte and modeſt Virgins, whole Heart was fixed 
on one, her own, her cholen beloved Husband. þ In deep Mourn- 
ings the People of thoſe Countries did ule Sackcloth in their Mourn- 
izg-Habit,and wore it girded clole to their kin, 7 Either married to 
her in youth, or eſpouled to her, but lnatchd away from her by an 
untimely Death, which ſhe doth moſt birterly lament. 


9 The mcat-offering k, and the drink-offering ! js cut 
off 1 from the houſe of the LORD x ; the prieſts o the 


LORDS miniſters p mourn 7. { 

& Which b; Divine Appointment was tO be cf tne Flower, Oil and 
Erankincenſe, as ev. 2, I, &c. ant 6. 14, So This Meat-offering 
was neceſſary 10 every Sacrifice ottered under the Law ; ſo that with- 
out the Mincha, or Meat-offering, the Sacrifice was maimed and ille- 
gal, 1 Required daily, as appears £594. 29. 40, 41, and Numb,2s.s, 
a fourth part of a Hin of Wine, tor one Lamb, Numb, 28.7, m By 
the Deftrucion of the Vines, by the Locults fore-mentioned, all that 
Wine (out of which they ought to offer the Drink-offering, ) did fail. 
z It was to be poured out it Wine, and part ot the Meat-offering was 
ro be burnt on the Altar ; lo both wee .lipotedaccording to the Law, 
in the Houle of the Lord. 0 Sons of A:ron, with the Lev r's, p Who 
did fervethe Lord in the Services of the Temple, q Grieve :nwardly, 
and expreſs it by outward Signs ; theſe had more cauſe than others to 
mourn : for as they had equal caule with others in reſpect to God, 
whoſe Service hereby failed, lo the Prieſts, in reſpect to their private 


f0 EL. 


Growth, and that doth rile under the Weight which would depret 
it, Pſul. 92. 12. With thele Fz-kiel's Temple was adorned, chap, Ne 
18, 25, 26. with the Branches of thele triumphant Shews were I 
made, but theſe are wither'd and dry. g The Fruit wheregf __ 
very uſeful, and did -ordinarily well recompenſe the Care of the 
Planter ; but now as other Trees fail them. h None ſo hardy and 
able to bear unkind Scalons, but are now deftroyed by the Tua 

ments of God in Drought and Locufts, 4 Not as in Antumn, yy, 
the Leaf falleth, but becauſe the Root fails, is either dead or BR 


Ee IIS 


| k Or, therefore, or, ſurely; for the Particle here uled is oftentimes. 
| aſſertive, not cautal, 1 All Mirth and Liveline(s of Men is blaſte? 
with this diſmal Blaſt upon their Labours and Hopes, they canoe 
rejoice who foreſee they ſhall be, nay are alreaty pinci'd with war. 
and Famine. " 
[0 Gird 1 your ſelves, and lament m1, ye Prieſts y 

howl +, ye Miniſters of the altar o : come, lie all night þ 
in ſackcloth, ye Miniſters of my God q : for the Mea. 
| offering, and the Drink-oftering is withholden trom the 
| houſe of your God x. 


I Bind ' your mourning Sackcloth cloſe to you with a Girdle, that j- 
| may be more troubleſome to the Fleſh ; for though in #6. *tis only 
' Zird, the Phraſe is well known 1n the Scripture on theſe Occafiqr; 
| to include Sackcloth, as what 1s girded on the Mourner ; and ver, 6, 
| Sackcloth is expreſly mentioned, and in many other Places, 1ſz. Ig. 3, 
For. 4» $8. Lam.2. 10. Exek.7.18. and 27. 31. m Weep bitterly as they 
dy who mourn for the Dead, lament over your dead Joys, let it he 
a hearty Grief, as that of Abraham for Sarah, Gen. 23. 2. of Facy/; 
Children and Friends ſorrowing for his Death, Gen. $0. 10- or of 
/jrael lamenting their brave Judge, 1 Sam. 28, 2, # That you may 
be Example to others, and becauſe they had, as obſerved ver, g, 2 
double Cauſe to mourn, one more than the reſt of the People. + Se 
Ver. 6, 1et., 0 Ver.g. let. p. They were the Lord's Minifters. noy 
Miniſters of the Altar, they ſerve the Lord in the things of the Altar, 
p The Caſe needs a continued Faſting, Weeping and Supplicationin 
the moſt humble Poſture, and with all the Tokens of an atfifted $yi. 
rit. The Prieſts ſhould above others mourn ; if they mourn in th 
Day, the Prieſts ſhould mourn Night and Day. q Whg, haviusg ſent 
me to ſpeak to you in his Name, doth call you to thiFhat he may 
pardon and bleſs you when you repent. Vid. ver, g. let. k,1, w, 1, 


14 © * Sanctifie ye 5 a faſt t, call * a || ſolemn aſſem.' 


bly 4, gather the elders x, and all the inhabitants of the i 


land y #40 the houſe z of the LORD your God a, and cy 
unto the LORD b, | i; 

s You Prieſts, Minilters of my God, ſet apart a Day, or more Dajs, 
appoint a time, forbid ail Servile Work, and Senſual Pleaſure,do what 
you may to prepare for {uch a neceſſary Work. r Wherein to afi 


Gain and Mainrenance, had more caule to mourn, their Proviſion was 
by this means ſhortened. 
10 The held is waſted y, the land mourneth s; for the 


languiſheth y. | 

r The Soil that was wont to be fat and fruitful, and did ſhout with 
Fruits, now lieth waſte ; horrid to look upon, and ſuch as promiſes no 
Eruitz the Famine in their Houſes, and the ceaung of the Sacrifices in 
the Houſe of God, is like to be perpetuated, $s The Inhabirants of the 
Land by an uſual Figure, hore catjed re Land. 8 The Wheat and 
Barlzy,their, Bread corn 15 earn up in 11s Greennels by theſe d2vouring 
Locuſts, whether in the Letter by Vermine, or in the Figure by the 
Sabylonims. u The word may as well berendred 13 aſam-d, or con- 
founded ; *tis then a figurative Expreſſion, which this 2roph-t uſeth, 
wer, 12, 17. in the laſt of which "tis readred withered z if you retain,as 
well rou may, our Veriton, it plainly tells us, the Heats and Drought 
with them was {o great, that the Vines were withered, and all their 
Hopes of new Wine by thts means Cur off. x The Oliire-Trees,as the 
Vines, fade too, and promite very lite Ou, »y Neither able to ſend 
Sap from the ROUOUt to Maintain Its Verdure, nor to put forth Berries, 
or to bring them ro maturity : Now as theſe words declire what Bar- 
rennels was now npon the Land ; ſo *tis a plain Account of the Rea- 
fon why the I'riefts are cail-d to mourn, and why the Meat. offering 


which made them up, Corn, Wine and Ou. 
11 Be ye aſhamed, O ye husbandmen z : how], O ye|t 
vine-dreſſers a, for the wheat and for the barley ; becauſe 
the harveſt of the held is periſhed 0. 
7 Some read it afſertively, the Husbandmen are aſhamed ; and as 


tive Moot, or by way of Exhortation, it better will fute the Context : 
They are now called upon to bluſh, repent and tearci into the Caule 
of this Barrennels, and 10's of their Labour in plowing, ſowing and 
manuring their Tillage; the Prophet aims at this principally, to 
bring them as well as the Priefts to Repentance. 4 A lort of Men [6 
well known with that People, as Gardiners are with us; Men whole | 7 
Work was to plant, water, prune and manage Vineyards, and whoſe | 
Labuvur { unlels for Sin blaſted ) did uſually ircceed to a great In- | q 
creaſe, b'Your Sins have brought upon you this woful Scarcity ; 
your Harveft, in which ycu expected your Labours and Cares fthoul{ 
be recompented, is periſted, quice deſtroyed, as the word imports ; 
T his is juſt cauſe why you, O Huzbeanimen,fhould lament, and tarther | , 
enquire why Ged 1s to diſpleaſed with you. 

12 The Vine is dried up c, and the Fig-tree d Jangui- 
ſheth, the Pomegranate-tree e, the Palm-rree f alfo, and 
the Apple-rree g, even all the trees of the field » are wi- 
thered 7; becauls & joy is withered away from the ſons of 
men 4. 

c See <7, 1O-let. tw 4 A Tree well known, and the Fruit of it | ,, 
was uſually a great Advantage, and Benefit to the People of thoſe 
Countries, e A pleaſant Tree, as appears Carr, 4. 13. and 7.12, and 
its Fruit lovely, therefore fit for Ornaments about the Pillars of the 
Temple, Thee in the common. Drought , and by Locuſts have 
Io their Beauty, ard do fail the Hopes of him that $lantc 
tem, f Of great Beauty in the Height and Uniturmity 07 its | et 


& 


w 


grievous Calamities, and ſhould now be Examples to others in repen- 
ting. » Make this Faſt as publick and univerſal as you can, command 
all the People of the Land, all that dwell with you ; perhaps the Pro- 
phet intends Proſelytes of the Law, and thoſe of Commerce as well 
as the Fews, x Courts of the Temple, (for Prieſ:s cnly might go into 
the Temple it ſelf ;) the Court of /7ae!, where the People were wont 
to pray. 4 Remember the Covenant by which you are his People, 
and he 1s your God, that you mav plead his Promiſes as well as wait 
for his Merciess 6 With Tears of Repentance, with Prayer of Faiit, 
cry more with the broken Heart than loud Voice. 


zs at hand F, and as a deſtruQtion g from the Almighty 6 
ſhall it come 72. 


cular Declaration of th? Grounds of this Faſt, or as a Direction how 
"FI ; ER” to manage the Faſt,a ſuggeſting to the People what they ſhould (prezd 
: Fering ut off: the's muſt ceaſe when that ceaſert = pw o A To | 
ind Drink offering are cut off ; thi hat cealcth, before the Lord, or <lic as the Words of the Prieſts, bewailing the 
calamitous State of the Land, c It js a very pathetical bemoaning 


Day of Trouble, <orrow and great Diſtreſs, e Thi explains the for: 
mer ; it is a Day of greater Troubles than yet they tel, Trouble; 
which God will heap upon them, a Day in whici Gd will be Judg*, 
= : ang! puniſh by the / ccuſis, by the Drought, and by Babylonians, Unis 
ro matter of tact, *tis true, they were aſhamed ; bur in the Impera- you repent. f Great Calamitics were now upon them, and great! 
were appr- aching tv them. It the Prophet Foel aims at the Captivit), 
of the two Tribes, it was 180 Years off ; if of the ten Tribes, !* 
was about 60 Years off; for he prophefieth about the latter End 0: 
Ferobgam the Second ; it is likely therefore he aimeth at ſome othe! 
Calamities. g A total Overthroy of the Kingdom,the Worſhip of G0 


nothing can retard or divert it, unlets Faſting. Prayers and Tear 
and Amendment do it. 


garners q are laid deſolate y, the bir s are broken gov! 
tor the corn 1s withered «. 


your ſelves; confeſs your Sins; repent of them, and ſue out your 
Pardon,return to God, that he may remove your preſent Calamities 
and prevent the future. « Proclaim and publiſh it, that every one 
may know they are rzeſtrain'd from common daily Work, and that 
they are commanded to come together, moſt ſolemnly to ſeek the 
Lord. x Both for Age and for Authority,Magiſtrates and Rulers,who 
poſſibly bad been by their Sins, more than others, cauſe of theſe 


i 
MH, 


15 * Alasc for the day d: for * the day of the LORDe; 


This Verſe and the three next way be look'd upon either as a pattr 


hemlſelves, which ſpeaks their ſenſe of the Evil thy ſuffer'd, 4 Tis 


n4 all your Labours in your Land, þ Whoſe Diipleafure as 2 con'tr 
ting Fire, can and will burn up all before it, his Power and Hand ill 
0 it, and then riothing can retiſt it, #7 Moſt certainly and ſpeecli!y 


6 Is not the meat 2 cit off & before our eyes 7, 4, * 
joy and gladneſs trom the houſe of our God m7 ? 
i The Queſtion does moſt vehemently affirm ; Our Food, what ve 


ſhould eat, z, e. all Proviſion we ſhould live vpan. & DevourceÞf 
Locujts, or withered with Drought, 'tis pcriih'd. 1 We ice % 
not fo far off as what is foretold, *tis under our Eye. h 
fail much, and t'rieſts have ſcarce enough to live upon, white 


»1 Sacritices 


be v2. 
fi n_ 


4 . . +- gm 0 . me 1 '$ 
i1l-Offerings, firſt Fruits and Tithes, amount to very litt!c, 09: _ 


fcient to feaſt the Sacrificers and Offerers, whu on ſuck occaton & 


c tO rejoice in the Houſe of God, ; 
17 The feed 7 15 rotten o under rlicir clods 7, + 


2 Called fo from the Seqgs-man's ſexrt-r rg it abroad when 
h it, and 1n this Place only fo uſe! for ou the 1] tan pun 


a, this 


whit 
zmuſ 
p Al 
hut 
Store 
7 Ell 
nels 
LL Chis 
E: the fi 
> deſol: 
tiles, 
E lodge 
> a The 
© therc! 
8 10 
- are P 
” flocks 
o . 

& XS 
= 11 the 

& der anc 
- )Ihes 
& laces, 
& likely b 
& and the 
= ther as 
© preſent 
þ- heart at 
© and reli, 
19 ( 
þ devour 
© fame f 
” 4 Mak 
© 'tis the 

& Driefts, 

&= Flaſhes 0 
Þ trequent 
F ful and p 
uſe to fe 
tice, Ce 
Sfcom Cit 
ithere we. 
laces of 
the Cloud 
hunder, 
heir gree 
extreain I 
wSealleſs ar 
(aoſe Cre, 


20 Tl 
jor the r 


leroured 
kh Vit, we 
Miles ſeeki: 
0d, and cx 
Fclves, yet. 
their ſad Tt 
to God, þ 
brutiſh amc 
od, many 
a0ugh tho! 
EDrought w! 
irink for tþ 
God ſend a 
ver, 19. let. 


> 709 1 »” IT NY 1H * 
> A aL DO 5 Ws IG 


( 


-Þ 


b The Prophet 

 horteth to 
I2-—_; 
EF Zionatt| 


F 1 DLoy 
% ala! 
ants of the 
Z 4 The Pro 
| WN0 were by 
$and to call t 
* VOUld he has 
Weep, and Pr 
though fri 
his Royal Pa 
*Unſt the 
Canger atten, 
Feruſalem, in 
0 God's Ma 
Heart, all yo 
2* Ac 
1 
Pon the 
there hat 
More xz aft 


; $ Metapho 
-Uamities, : 
*MPerity b 


To IT. o | 7 O 


+his uſe of it 
which is ſown. 
muſty and fruitleſs, 


fr the Seed againſt next Spring. 0 Is putrified, grown 
nor is this Word any where elſe _ ne way 
om under which the Seed covered ſhould ſpring up, 
_  _ rotten and fruitleſs Seed, is loſt under it. q Or, 
= houſes, Treaſuries of Corn, in which 'twas kept for future Uſe. 
" Either run to ruin, becauſe the Owners diſcouraged with the barren- 
my fthe Seaſons, would not repair them ; this will intimate that 
ey rudement laſted ſome Years, and 1is better ground for it, than 
"+ four forts of Vermin repeated one after another, in ver, 4. or elle 
Jefolate, being pull'd down and the Materials employed for other 
” ns, till they may have Corn to keep in them. s In wh'ch they 
E lodged their unthreſhed Corn. * Negletted, and without repair. 
W There was no uſe of them, no Corn to be laid up, all withered, and 
therefore the Barns were not regarded. | 
> 18 How do the beaſts groan * ? the herds of cattle y 
> are perplexed, becauſe they have no paſtures z yea, th 
© gocks of ſh2ep 7 are made deſolate. E 
| x $0 great was the Penury and want of Suſtenance, that the Beaſts 
© -1 the Field pinch'd with hunger, groaned, made diſmal noiſe for Fod- 
E er and Water; the firſt Word Beaſts is general, and contains all ſorts. 
# , The greater Cattle which go wandring about, and range over all 
& laces, yet can find no Paſturage. 7 Which led by Shepherds, might 
© likely be ſuppoſed better ſecured, yer their Shepherds find noPaſture, 
© -nd the Sheep pine away and ſtarve. Theſe things are mentioned, el- 
© her 25 convincing Men of their ftupidity, who were leſs ſenſible of 
© preſent Miſeries than brute Beafts were, or to provoke them to lay to 
” heart and preſſing Calamities, or as Arguments that he would pity 
& :nd relieve innocent Brutes, though he puniſh'd ſinful Brutes. 
* 19 OLORDa, to thee will I cry b- for the fire c hath 
k devoured the || paſtures d of the wilderneſs e, and the 


© fame f hath burnt all the trees g of the field, 
” 47 Maker and Preſerver of theſe poor famiſh'd Cattel. 6 Either 
© tis the Prophet's Prayer he maketh, or a Form preſcribed for the 


here is juſtified by all the following Words ; the Grain | 


EZ © Chap. 


which certainly 43 intended here, and the ſynonymous Term: are here 
multiplied, to imicate the extremity and length of theſe Troubles 
And this Paſſage may well allude to the Day of Judgment, and the 
Calamities which ſhall precede that day. þ Thick Darkneſs does un- 
doubredly imply, as the gradual Approach, ſo the diſmal Efe&Rs of 
God's Judgments and the Fews Miſeries. See this Word nſed 2 Sam. 
22. 10. with 12,13, 14, 15, 16. and Pſa). 18.9, 11. It was ſuch 
Terror with which God gave the Law, and in ſuch he will puniſh the 
Tranſgrefſors of his Law. # As the Morning ſpreads it. ſelf ſuddenly 
over all the Hemiſphere, and as it firft ſpreads it {lf upon the high 
Mounrans, (o ſhould the approaching Calamities overtake this People. 
& This ſeems more dire&ly to intend the Babylonians rather than Lo- 
cuſts, yet both are numerous, as the Word imports, Hebr. ſee chap. 
I. Ver. 6, let. 7, u,x. 1 Bold to attempt, and mighty in ſtrength to 
execute, both true of Aſſyrians, or Babylonizns, or the Locuits, m Lo- 
cuſts, Emblem of the warlike Nations ; and the ſpoil done by both are 
here deſcribed the greateſt that ever yet were known, and of the 
Aſſyrian or Babylonian Spoil made in Fudea, the Hiſtory doth aſcer- 
_ this. z If ever the like be, it ſhall not be in many Ages to 
me. 


3 A fireodevoureth p before them q, and behind them 


and nothing ſhall eſcape « them. | 

0 Either the heat of the Sun, vehementer than uſual ; or the Lo- 
cuſts, or Chaldeans and Babylonians reſembled by Locufts, as Fire ſhall 
devour. -pUtterly conſume and eat up. q That People, ver. 2. let. &, 7. 
r What is left behind them is as burnt with a Flame, all that the Lo- 
cufts leave behind them is as that which the Flame hath ſcorch'd, dried 
and turned into Char-coal z or all the Chaldeans and Babylonians leave 
behind them, is ( as is cuſtomary with the barbarous Invaders ) ſet on 
Fire ; and what they cannot eat or carry away, they deftroy with 
Fire. s *Tis every where a moſt fruitful and pleaſant Land where 
they have not yet come. This is expreft in that proverbial Speech, 
as the Garden of Eden, ſee Iſa. 51. 3. Exek. 36. 35. t But where-ever 


a flame burneth 7 : the Jand #s as the * garden of Eden be- *Gen-2.3; 
fore them s, and behind them a deſolate wilderneſs t, yea, ——_ 


_—_— 


& Prieſts, c The immoderate Heat, or elſe the ſcorching and blafting 
”> Elaſhes of Fire in the Air, which in thoſe hot Countries are more 
E. frequent and more pernicious than in colder Climates, 4 The fruit- 
ful and pleaſant Places where Shepherds pitch'd their Tents, and WEre 
F ae to feed their Sheep, all are parch'd and dried as if burnt with 
F4Fire, e Either becauſe the Shepherds chooſe to pitch their Tents far 
8 -fcom Cities and Towns, or elſe becauſe in thoſe vaſt Wilderneſfſes 
fl {there were ſome fruitful Paſtures ſcattered up and down, ſome lower 
EP laces of Springs and Water-courſes, f The Flaſhes of Fire from 
7 Ithe Clouds, or in the Air, without Thunder, or elſe Lightnings with 


theſe Locufts, or the Armies they ſignify, come, all is turn'd into moſt 
deſolate Wilderneſs. # Nothing that was for Beauty and Pleaſure, 
nor any thing tor neceſſity and ſupport of Life. 


4 The * appearance of them 7s as the appearance of *Rev.9. 7: 


horſes .x, and as horſemen, ſo ſhall they run y. 

x Their Carriage for Fierceneſs, Agility and Irreſiftivlenefs, is like 
that or Horſes trained up to the Wars, of which ob 39. 20. y This 
glves light to the former Expreſhon, and by it we ſee theſe Locuſts 
are not reſembled to the Horſe for Shape, but for their nimbleneſs 


xx ax > < - EN 
7 4. —"T c S ——_—_ + ID. , " 
Jp = . > WOE. #2 
_ hm Ln Ree => _— 
_ = ————— . © ———_— l =s 
+ . - W " s hs 4 ” 
— NT. — I mo p= 222-- » =—2; Pots 


*4 


- x, £4 4 
p ' L = _ pogo - Logs 
Nee OY : 2, —_ BD Þ.4 -- —_ _——_ * - - p " < - bt 2 _— - = 
ET ds Pr I IE x a? p 4r . HY 7: ———— go ms ” MO YE * ho y —— 
Ho wes — hy - - - =_ . —- ot F AY =2 « _—_ - ” = < _ 4 4 
” PO on = . Ai gmt - 2 oy p _ 8 KY = "CPS . ro "wt? ' w_— ” 
$-'v- h \ _ ” p A — x S » Tz 
. £2 een MO _ [err OS. «A. oy - : _ CJ 
. Ahn - us 4 I « ” —_— . = = LOS : . — — c % - —_-— " ._ < > Sa oy A þ. 4s 
OG Ix > =E _ _ —___  - * >. nn HC [ng & 24 pl. _ 2'Y FR ere On — we ® were woo — 
TH # 1 AY Fo — « je _—_ : OE. ae os +4 - # wag een _ . q 5 —— - <- eu 
eh, - © =_ wed —_— hy. 5% aha —_ % : —_ F _ yo " ©5.5..3 mA KH, - EW». 
_ a... . Sx " = W 7 I wv 4 - DOE cy” ——_ * hoy now 7 WA = _——_— 
_— IIS > Y Y 2 - day + NO = 7 os {XZ..4 Ct — - — —_— = ——_— - $ - _ - "tw T7 : —_— * 
. "— p . | ey s bs - ett 4 —_ — x 2 >" ” _ "4 - - . Bs , wm _ _ x ee c $a JR "4 WO <4 we —___ & 7 - oy 4 > = - ” CI — 
are Bs, h - 5 pee”. 7 y At Ps, oe a Gy 1 BYS 4-- ” wig Mes 7 a wy X hate 7 SY * b 
by wy ' I 4 _ ey b be Jenn - a L Y ”y as | M -» + - Sad : py 5 =, - 
b. ; " 7 WR do _ —_— _ _ 
1 : 0 3 3 aud ——_— : 
y 0: - A d 


- 


w—_ Fn 
L on Y . 
3 LR _— ID. 
A _——— 
Ku ITE L 
—_—_ mnt — R 
IE. 


2 


_—_—_— 
-— 
> 2 ===> 
OO RN - 
- <= [Is 


hunder. g That they neither afford their Fruit, their Shade, or 
heir greed Boughs for Brouſe, for the relief of Man or Beaft, This 
xtream Deſolation ſhould affett them all, it doth ſhame the finfully 
Senſlelſs among them, and it is a good Argument to uſe with God, 
£1.20ſe Creatures they are as well as Man, | 


20 The beaſts þ of the field * cry # alſo unto thee &: 
jor the rivers of waters are dried up 1, and the fire hath 


leroured the paſtures of the wilderdneſs m7: 

bid, ver. 18. let. x © The wilder Sort, that rove about many 
diles ſeeking their Livelihood, find no Suftenance, they look up to 
0d, and cry to him z theſe Creatures that can better ſhift tor them- 
ſelves, yet can make no good ſhift ; they utter their Complaints in 
their ſad Tones, they have a Voice to cry, as well as an Eye to look 
to God, k Who only canft open thy Hand and fill them, learn ye 
brutiſh among Men, look and cry to God: And again, have pity O 
God, many of thy linleſs Creatures periſh without Relief, hear them, 
hough thou ſhouldſt not hear Men. 7 Mott extream and tedious 
EDrought which hath dried up the Rivers themſelves, there is no 
rink for the Cattke, they muſt periſh without help, unleſs thou O 
God ſend a plentiful and fruitful Rain. m Vid. this explain'd above 
ver, 1g. let. c, d, ee 


$ CHAP. I 
© The Prophet ſheweth Zion the terribleneſs of God's judgments, I=--11. ex- 
* borteth 10 bumiliation and repentance, by enjoining faſting and prayer, 
12——17. jromiſeth a bleſſing thereon, 18---27. The bleſſed ſtate of 
Zion at the coming of the Meſſiah, and the fearful trouble of the world 
| atulaſt appearance, 28 32s 


x | 6 Jens yea the|| trumpet in Zion b, and found an 
* alarm c in my holy mountain d : let all the inhabit- 
ants of the land tremble e- for the * day of the LORD 
- cometh, for it is nigh at hand f; | 
4 The Prophet continueth his Advice or Exhortation to the Prieſts, 
| Vho were by Office appointed to ſummon the ſolemn Aſſemblies, 
£4nd to call them together by ſound of Trumpet or Cornet, and ſo 
; vould he have the Priefts to gather the People together to faſt, and 
veep, and pray, 6 Which taken largely is the ſame with Feruſalem, 
though ftritly taken it is the Hill on which the City of David, or 
tis Royal Palace did' ſtag, c Give notice that all may be prepared 
uſt the Enemy, let it" bz known that the Enemy is coming, what 
danger attends his coming, and what proviſion ſhould be made. dn 
Frriſalem, in Moriah, on which the Temple did ftand, e Stand in awe 
0 God's Majefty, fear his Diſpleaſure, and do this with a penitent 
Heart, all you that dwell inthe Land of Canaan, the parch'd and burnt 
Land, f See chap. 1, ver. 15. tet. e, f,f, Þ 
2 * Aday of darkneſs and of gloomineſsg, a day of 
COuds and of thick darkneſs h, as the morning ſpread 
Pon the mountains #:' a * great people k and a ſtrong 7, 
there hath not been ever the like, neither ſhall be any 
more 72 after it, even to the years of -| many generatl- 
Ons x, 
| 5 Metaphorically taken for a time of exceeding great Troubles and 
-Uamities, according to the Stile of the Scriptures, which exprels 


Proſperity by the Metaphor of Tight, and Adveriity by Darkneſs, 
| 


in Motion. And as were theſe Types, ſo ſhould the Armies which 
were typified be alſo. 


tains ſhall they leap z, like the noiſe of a flame of fire that 
devoureth the ſtubble a, as a ſtrong people b ſet in battel 
aray c. 

? Such warlike Chariots on reſounding Mountains, do with their 
rapid Motions, and ſhaking their Irons about them, make a great and 
dreadfnl Noiſe, ſo ſhould theſe Loculis in their flight. By which they 
ſhall terrify the People before they come to them, for the noiſe of 
them may be heard ſay ſome at fix Miles diſtance. . 4 Which does 
with continued crackling burn what is under the Flame, and threaten 
ſpeedy and inevitable Ruine to what is before it ;, all ſhall be endanger- 
ed by it, as if ſurrounded with flaming Fire. 6 So ver. 2. let. 1. c Pre- 
pared to aſſault and deſtroy, in purſuance of this Metaphor, ſee ver. 
7» 8, 9, 10, IIs 

6 Before their face d the people e ſhall be much pain- 
ed f: all faces ſhall gather blackneſs . 

4 At the fight of theſe Locuſts, both literally and figuratively con- 
ſidered. e Of the Land, f As a Woman in travail is in pain, their Fears 
ſhall be very great, leſt theſe devouring Creatures ſhould ſeize and de- 
ſtroy whatever was for ſupport of their Life, and Life of their Fami- 
lies. g Such as is the Colour of dead Men, or as is the dark paleneſs 
of Men frighted into Fits and Swoons. | 


7 They þ ſhall run # like mighty men &, they ſhall 
climb the wall } like men of war m2, and they ſhall march 
every one on his ways, and they ſhall not break their 


ranks n; 

hb Locuſts, and they who by the Locuſts are ſignified, viz. Chaldeans, 
Aſſyrians or Babylonians, i With ſpeed,fierceneſs and irrefiſtable Power 
againſt their Enemies. & Valiant and ſtrong Men or Giants, } No 
Walls of any fortified Towns ſhall be high enough to keep them out, 
ſtrange Locuſts that aſſault Cities, but arm'd and commiſfion'd of God, 
they ſhall vigorouſly att their part, and do what he appointeth and 
commandeth them to do. * m Who fear no Power that from with- 
in the Cities might oppoſe them, they thall valiantly and skilfully 
manage the Aﬀault. = Naturaliſts teſtify the Truth of this in the 
Stories of theſe Inſefts, and their marſhalling of themſelves, of which 
alſo ſee Prov. 30. 27. and Nahum 3.17, This Skill in ordering, and 
ſteadineſs in keeping order, like exa&ly trained Souldiers, foretels the 
Terror and Strength both of the Armies ſignified by theſe Lo- 
caſts, and of the Locuſts themſelves. As theſe then did, ſo the 
Alſyrians, Chaldeans or Babylonians ſhould proceed in Arins againſt this 


People. 

$ Neither ſhall one thruſt o another, they ſhall walk p 
every one in his path q: and when they fall upon the 
|] {word r, they ſhall not be wounded. 


0 The Prophet in purſuance of the Allegory, both tell us how this 
Army of Locuſts do move without diſorder,ſo ſhall they who are hereby 
typified; it is much the ſame with the laſt Clauſe of the tormer Verle. 
p Before *twas run, i. e. for ſpeed, now *tis walk, for ſred'aſt and even 
motion. q The Tra&he firſt takes to, follows his Leader exattly,and 
obſerve Rank and File. r The Sword ſhall not be a Weapon to de» 
ſtroy them, they ſhall run among Swords, yet not be wounded ; 1: 
terally verified in the Locults,and verified in the (frange m" 


- - 6 
+ wow ay 
=: eye I 
vo. Ex: 
4aIF- I Y 
oo So wy 
IS. beet 
_s £4 - 
"—? CEE ww w_ td 
DT * . 7 
. 25 - — : pt - * 4 4 P: . 
jo Is — L << _ *7 =_ w ” + ” G ” —_ 
L % > * a —— "x," . _- Ove '» ws <a 44 - 4 > —_ ” + A o wa 
* <9 "IA ——- 2 - - Ragizve P "—_- IRE > > M —* , 9-2 3. SE <% 27% "a We _—_ n x 
ry, "the 5 , 2322 ey, —— St; <-*# Sh 4 c * + ne » v2 OS I 6 —— 3 . 's - b5 NETS. |< » 4 ts l "I 
I wy wy Py. __w wt #4 ——X 2 E » T ' SZ yo -_ < Y — ge 3.74 . o vari 
” Aa tote _- 4 "x: " . "% AL ' g&' S 4 aw — +4 _— os m_ - ad. ey WT _— =) A _ * _ 
. 5 ” re e-- . — - . © na 3 - _ : 4 2255 po _ 2 = - _ — —_—— 4 
In . : - ; . : >>” ALI; . — k - 
- 4 - | T9. *% 3  AN-A. " 7p* SEAS nc it k *% £5 Gan » *= 4 FY = 
—_ —_— CY _m "Ge nes -- EC > enters - _— - it. "OI B CL © 6# CO II: oe. 
"amr xp . - —_ % « LO” IS... 14,6 Rene , / pomp —_ 4 _ _ ——— <——_ ho 


= : Sx 

2 - pe ome ©, 

ent" 3 Ion AF,” * Th pm_—_ 
Se” _ .: Eat» ng. Fs — 


5 * Like the noiſe of chariots on the tops of moun- *Rev-9-9- 


Chap. II. 


and Eſcapes from Dangers in midſt of the moſt deſperate Adventures | 
made by Aſſjrians or Baby/ontans, 

o They ſhall run to and fro s in the city 2 : they ſhall 
run upon the wall « , they ſhall climb up upon the 
houſes x : they ſhall enter in at the windows y like a 


thief =. 

In this Verie we muſt diſcern what 13 any whit proper to the Lo- 
cafts,and what is applicable more fitly to the Souidiers figured by them. 
» This leems not proper to theie Inſects -which move forward, and 
alter not their Courſe in luch limited and ftiaitned Bounds as a Ci- 
iy ; but this well ſutes with Souldiers that conquer a City, and ſearch 
all Places for Plunder and Prey. t In every City that they take. u To 
clear the Wall of all the Befieged who did defend it, to help up others 
that were (caling the Wall, and to leize Towers which were built up: 
on the Wall ; this is better fitted to Souldiers that take a City than to 
Locufts. x Either forſaken and ſhut faſt up by the Inhabitants before 
they left them, or Houſes defended by ſuch as are in them, as is uſu- 
al in Cities taken by aflault. » Where they can find the firſt Entrance, 
there they will through, and nothing ſhall keep them out. & Sud- 
denly, unexpe&ly to ſpoil at leaft, it not to kill and deſtroy, Loculſts 
and Souldiers will do this, 

10 The earth a ſhall quake before them b, the 
* Ta. 13. heavens c ſhall tremble, the * ſun d and the moon e 


a ren ſhall be dark f, and the ſtars ſhall withdraw their ſhin- 
3 7+ . » 


ing g. E | 
2p : _ * a Literally taken, *tis an elegant deſcription of moſt unparallel'd 


Armies of Locuſts, ſent of God to waſte this finful People, in the de- 
ſcription whereoi the Prophet ſhews his lofty Stile, and in a divine 
Hyperbole warns the People : but therc is another Senſe of the Words 
we mult look to : tneſe Locuſts in this Prophecy are Hireoglyphicks 
and Emblems, and fo are the Earth, £:*2icn, Sun, Moon and Stars. 
By E:rth thus confidered the Vulgar mean Multitudes are many times 
ſet forth, here the common Peopl- among the Fews. b Locults firſt, 
and Armies of Foreign Enemies afterwards, and that ere long, 
ce Grandees, Rulers and Counſellors, or the whole tame of the King- 
dom and Government, ſhall ſhake and trem'le, their Hearts ſhall 
fink within them, who ſhould he a Support to others. d Their King. 
L e Their Queeg,who may as particniarly be here pointed at as the Queen 
of Nineve in Nah. 2.7. f Overwhelmed with amazement from the 
greatnels of their Troubles. g The Courtiers, and Men of eminency 
that were as Stars for Glory and Brightneſs, ſhall be covered with 
Clouds, and theſe thick and black : all this miſerable Confuſion 
threatned againſt them for their Sins, and ia this Emblem of vaſt Mul- 
titudes of Locuſts preſented to theic Thoughts. 


11 And the LORD b ſhall vtter his voice # before his 
army k: for his camp is very great l: for he ts ſtrong m 
* Jer. 30-7 that executeth his word #, for the * day os of the 


A LORD ts great p and very terrible q, and who can abide 
: "Itr? 
Is. I5e 


b Fehowah the Eternal and Almighty God, Lord of Hoſts, 7Sum- 
mon them in, and encourage them as a General doth encourage his 
Souldiers ingaging in Fight ; God commands their Attendance, and 
countenanceth their Attempts, & Of Locuſt and InſeRs, and of Aſh- 
rians, Chaldears or Babylonidns Nngnified by Locuſts, F Very numerous 
and ſtrong, and therefore deſc ried by the Prophet in a manner almoſt 
above Belict; it is the Hoſt which Ged gathers tog<ther, and by which 
he will do great things. m He giveth ſtrength to his Army, and 
among them the itrong oae, he doth by them execute his own Pur- 
pole and { hreats, and 10 ſhews his ſtrength. 7 What he tath declared 
and threatned to do. o See ch:p. 1. ver, 15. let. d,e, f, ga p Where- 
in great Sinners are puniſ'd, great Judgments are executed, by great 
Power 1n the Inſtruments, and by greater Power in the Han. that 
uſeth them. q Full of Terror, and ſuch as will make the ironteſt 
Heart quail. 7 Neither King, Nobles or Warciours, but all Faces 
gather Blackneſs, as *tis ver, 6, 7, 9, 10. 


12 Therefores alfo now. ſaith the LORD, * turn ye 
even to me t with all your heart «, and with faſting x, and 
with weeping y, and with mouruaing <. 

s Since fo great Diſpleaſure is conceived againſt you for your Sins, 
and ſo terrible Fxecution is ſhortly to be made upon you, and there 
15 no way ot reiiſcance or eſcape left. # Repent of your Sins where- 
by yop have departeq trom me; all this preparation made againſ. 
you is made not to deſtroy you utterly, but to awaken you to Re- 
pentance ; whilſt you may hud Mercy upon Repentance be adviſed 
to it, and prevent your final Deſolation. « Not hypocriticaliy, wich 
divided heart, but fincerely and with full purpoſe of amendment ; 
let your Heart, your whole Heart firit be turned to me your Go4 
and Soveraign. x Publick Faſting as well as private, ſuch Faſting 
as chap. 1. ver, 14. is required, y Make it appear that you are 
ſenſible of, and deeply affetted with your former Sins in the Jollity 
of your ſenſual Life, now weep for it, Tears do well become a 
Faſt but they muſt not be Tears only. # But a mournful Frame of 
_ within, a Fountain of theſe Tears is expected and iniiced re- 
quired. 


* Plal.zz. 13 And * rent your heart 2 and not your garments b, 
at 4 A and turn unto the LORD your God c : for * he is gracious d 
Gap "a * and merciful z, ſlow to anger f, and of great kindneſs g, 
LMai.$6.c, and repenteth him of the evil þ, | 
15. Jon.4, 7 Tay them open as Chirurgeons lay open putrifying "ores that they 
2, may be throughly cteanicd, remove Iniquity from your Heart, as the 
Chaldze Paraphralt, 6 As Hypocrites do, who in ſudden or great 
Troubles eafily ſtoop to tear a loole Garment, but hardly are brought 
to rent their tiearts 3 what God expetteth molt they cannot be per- 
lwaded to, but what he careth leaſt tor they are ready to do. Be not 
luch Hypocrites before God who cannot be mecked, nor ſpare them 
who Gate do it ; let your Garments ſcape it you pleaſe, but your 
Hearts break them, circumciſe them, D-ut. 19. 16. c In repenting 
keep Hope alive, look to God as your God, wbo by Covenant hath 
promiled to ſhew you Mercy on your repenting and turning to him, 
LEUr, 12-17» 2%! chap, 20, tr. $,9. Ie. 55.7. Fee 21. 15, 20, and 


of 


SD EL 


Chay 


32. 38,39, 40. d Gentle, eaſy to be intreated, and ready to forgive 
the guilty, e Compaſhonate and ready to ſhew Pity and reliere 11, 
Indigent ; you are beth guilty and afflicted, return to your Gog, y;, 
is gracious to pardon your Gnilt,and merciful to relieve your Miterie, 
f Who hath ſpared, doth cill ſpare, and waits purpolely that YOu 
might have time to repent, and turn and live. g Your Provocatigy, 
are many and great, yet return, for his Mercy is great, his Kindnefs 
are many. b Not as Man, but as becometh his own holy, juſt 204 
immutable Nature, he turneth from executing the fiercene!z of bis 
Wrath, Fer. 18. 7, 8, 9, 10. be wiſe and obedient, and follow yy 
Counſel, repent, and make your Peace with God. ; 
14 Who knoweth s if he will return k and te. 
pent /, and leave a bleſſing behind him m1, even a mez:. 
offering n, and * a drink-offering o unto the LORD your t 
God ? Tr 
i None nced be diſcouraged as if *twere too late to ſeek and hope "v 
for Mercy, God will pardon the truly penitent and deliver them from | 
eternal Miſeries, and it is poſſible he may deliver from preſent Te.” i 
poral Calamities alſo. If you obtain not all you would, you ſhay 
obtain enough to ſhew that it was worth your while to ſeek Gy, * 
t God doth not local'y move from one place to another, but when 
he withholds his Bleſſings, the Fruits of his Favour, he is faid to with. 
draw himſelf, ſo when he gives out his Bleflings he is ſaid to retyy, 
I Vid. ver. 13. let. h. m Cauſe the Locuſts to depart before they 
have eaten up all that is in the Land, 7 Vid. chap. 1. ver, g.let,h, 
0 Ibid. Jet, 1. 


15 © * Blow the trumpet in Zion p, ſanQify a faſt qi; 
call a ſolemn aſflembly yr. It 
þ 5, 27. 1* let.-4, b, q Vide chap. 1, ver. 14. lets S, te 7 Jbid, 


716 Cc: the people s, ſanfQtify the congregation; 
aſſemi>'. the 14ers t ; gather the children «, and thoſethy 
ſuck tj1& breaſts x: * let the bridegroom go forth of hi, 


chamber y, and the bride cut of her cloſet z. þ 
s 1bid. let. y. t bid. let. x. u Tho they underſtand little what i; 
done, yet their Cries under the Afiiftion of a Faſt aſcend, God hear 
and with Pity looks on their Tears. x Let your Faſt be moſt uni. 
verſal, ipare not ſucking Children, bring them with you, their Tear 
and Cries may perhaps move the Congregation to greater Mourning 
and earneſt Supplication to God for Mercy ; or will be a fit Obſits 
preſent unto the God of Mercy to move him to ſhew Mercy. Sott: 
Ninevites, Fon. 3. 7, $. » Let the new-married Man leave the Mitth 
of the Nuptials, and lay afide his Bravery a while, and afflift himſl 
with the reſt, 3 Or Chamber, in which with the Virgins ſhe adornel 
her ſelf or carefſed them. That theſe may more earneſtly ſeek the 
Lord, let them at this ſeaſon forbear lawful Delights. 


17 Let the Prieſts, the Miniſters of the LORD a, wee 
* between the Porch band the Altar c, and let them ſay 6, 
Sparee thy People f, © LORD, -and give not f thin, 
heritage g to reproach þ ; that the heathen ſhould || rut, 
over them : * wherefore ſhould they ſay among the pev-|( 
ple, Where rs their God 1 ? F 

£ Vid. chap. 1. ver, 13. lets 1, m,n. . b That ſtately Porch built 563 
Solomon, 1 Kings 6. 2. and Ezet.40. 48, 49. c Not of Incenſe, ft 
that was in the holy Place, but the great brazen Altar, or Altar on 
Burnt-offering, which ſtood at ſome diftance from this Porch ; ant 
here are the Prieſts commanded to ſtand, faſting and pray ing, wheace 
they might be heard and ſeen by the People in the next Court, 
which the People were wont to pray. d With loud Voice, and wif 
louder Heart and Aﬀettion ; after this manner let them pray andur 
tercede with God. e This includes Confeſſion of Sin, acknowledging 
God's Juſtice, layIng themlelves at the foot of God for Mercy, al 
imploring of Mercy ; q. 4. tho we have ſinned and deſerve ſevere 
Wrath, yet ſpare, deal not with us as we deſerve, f This includesal 
they can plead from the Covenant of God with them, his Gra, 
Promiſe, Faithfulneſs, &c, we are thy peculiar People, thou art oi 
Go!, therefore ſpare, &c. ff Thou only canft expoſe us to Famite 
and Servitude, and both will come upon us if thou firſt give us up 
theſe predooming Locuſts, (which will conſume al!) and if thou attf! 
give us up to thoſe Nations which as Locuſts are innumerable and1t 
reliſtable : O give us not up to them! g Choſen, redeemed, poſſeſſed 
through many Ages by thee, O Lord ; even fince we came out © 
Eg »pt thou haſt owned us for thine Heritage : tho whilft we were 
penitent, and finn'd high againft thee, we deſerved to be caſt off, 10 
we return, repent and pray, be gracious to us, and continue to 0 
and bleſs thine Heritage ; ſince thou canft make it fruitful and beat 
ful, command it to excel in both, cultivate, fence, and watch over! 
*tis thine Heritage. + It is a Reproach to any Land that it ftarves 
eats up the Inhabitants thereof, Fzeb. 36. 30. and Numb. 13. 32: © 
Famine, tho by Locufts, will be a Reproach to this thine Heriage, " 
will be greater Reproach to be Slaves to the Narions ſignified by the 
Locuſts, therefore of Mercy deliver us from both one and the other. 
i Whether Aſſyrians, or Chaldeans, or Babylonians. k Conquer firſt and 
then enſlave thy People, or, as the word Will. bear, rake them up for 
Taunt and Proverb, when they thall know that they leave their ow 
Land as too barren a place to maintain them,' or ſeek their Breadz 
a Gear rate in Heathen Lands. 1 Nay, theſe barbarous People v 
not ſo much conſider our Sins, or juſtify our God, but they wil® 
proach God, our God, the great. God as if unable to maintain Us 3 


thee our God. E: 

18 © Then #2 will the LORD be jealous # for hls 
land o, and pity his people p, _ | 

1 When you follow my Advice, ſaith Foel, and heartily rept fol 
of your Sins, and turn to God, fr, » Will ſhew his Love and _ 
for the Credit of his Land. o The Land «f Canaar, p Cone! 
their Prayers, their Arguments and Tears, and upon the wi:ole a1 
deal ſo with them that they ſhall know I co own them for my Fe 
and that I will do them good. 


WW»: 


[% 1 wd: 


«9 AE Es _ » 
rd T y 
LY Here ESI Es 


{pare for thine own Glory lake, never let them, as Pſul.115- 2- (6: 


hap. 


{cribe 
called 
4s, Ol 
of thi 
here « 
tru 
came 
dow'd 
Deatt 
of Fu 
vading 
Rench 
Earth, 
fer this 
my of 
ill great 
my, an 
rellous, 
Not all 
thi3 Ped 


21 i 


LORE 

7 Verſ 
ing Arn 
mended 
ſhould r 
not, was 
Who is 
gracious 
plains tl 
God's V 
Wili recs 


w A | 


Os þ & 


cha 


ry 
S 
254 
E 


; ethher 


was com 
the tame 
the Mou 
£Ereen, at 
Trees, tt 
dead, no 
not, as ch 
but with | 
do might 
they are q 
23 Be 

the LO] 
(+ | former 
t1 down fo! 
- ter rain 
x In th 

)* known Ele 
F nat ; now | 
Work as w 
habitants © 
how your 
ty Which g 


V ul, Il, 


hap. II. 


LORD will anſwer yr and fay s un- 
to his people f, Behold «, I will ſend x you corn, and 
wine, and Oll, and ye ſhall be ſatisfied therewith y ; 
and | will no more make you a reproach among tine 


eathen Z. — = 
, q Or 114 Heb. r Before *twas he would pity, ver. 13. not a3 Men 


: nes PILY, and profels to have Compaſſion for tie mitoraple 
OM Ra yet 4 nothing 3 but God will pity TNcir Cale and 
hexr their Requeſt, nay grant their Requeſt aud relieve them. 5 
Speak ro and work for his People. r His Covenant, Praying, repent- 
ing, and reforming People. #« What he doth for tuch a People ſhall 

ho viſible, remarkable, and ſuch as they may obſerve. x Fruittul Sea- 
ins ſhall come when God ſends them, his Command ro the Heavens 
to pour down their ſweet and fruitful Influences ſhall certainly be 0- 
beyed, theſe muſt hear God, and then the Earth ſhall bear the Corn, 
and Wine, and Oil, as Hof. 2. 20,21. y You ſhall have abundance to 
£11 ant ſatisfy you, that you may rejoice 1n Four Habitations and know 
no Want. & Your Heathen Neighoours ſhall no more inſult over you 
my People, nor Over me your Gotl. Obey my Prophet, turn from 
YOUr Sis, and I will do you all this £004 I promile, or you need and 
a5ks 

20 But a I * will remove far off from you the 
northern army b, and will drive him c into a land bar- 
ren and deſolate, with his face 4 towards the eaſt-ſea 
e, and his hinder part f towards the utmoſt ſea ; and his 
| Fink ſhall come up, and his ill favour ſhall come up g, 
5 hecauſe he h hath - done great things. 
ifs z And Heb. 6 That part of.theſe numerous Locuſts which are to- 
wards the North ſhall be removed far from you, no more to annoy 
vou on that quarter z ſome ſay this refers to the Diſſipation of Sena- 
chris Army, which came up from the parts which lay ſomewhat 
Northerly from Feruſulem and Fudez, © Some other part of this Lo- 
cuſt Army ſhall be driven away into the Southern Delerts, here de- 
{ribed by a barren and deſolate Land. 4d The Van of this Army here 
called the Face, ſhall be driven into the Eaſt-Sea. e The Sea of Tiberi- 
as, or the Salt Sea, or the Dead Sea, Eaft of Feruſalem. f The Rear 
of this Army of Inſetts ſhall be driven into the great, the Weſt Sea, 
here called the utmoſt Sea in the Letter and Hiſtory, The total De- 
firu&ion of this Army of Inſetts is here foretold, which no doubt 
came to paſs ; if Senacherib's Army and its Diſhpation were here ſha- 
dow'd out, it is fairly accommodable to this place, when upon his 
Death and the rout of his Army from Heaven, his Forces retir'd out 
of Fudea on all quarters with loſs of Men, -as is ever the fate of an in- 
vading Army beaten in the Heart of the invaded Country. g The 
Rench of theſe Locufts deſtroy'd and lying putrified on the face of the 
Earth, or the Corps of the 4ſhrians- lain and unburied, þ Some re- 
fer this to the Locuſts, and thoſe whom they fignified, he, 7. e. this Ar- 
my of Locufts, or Afyrians ; others refer it to God, thus, for he will 
do great things, as indeed the utter deſtroying of this devouring Ar- 
my, and remoyal of this dreadful Famine was a great Work and mar- 
rellous, and *twas an Anſwer to their Faſting and Praying tio 'twas 
not all done, which is contained in this conditional Promiſe, for that 
1:is People never performed the Condition. 


21 © Fear not, O land z, be glad and rejoice &- for the 
LORD I will do great things m. 

? Verſe 10. the Land is aid to quake at the approach of this devour- 
ing Army, now at the approach of Mercy 'tis encouraged, and com- 
mended not to tear ; by the ſame Figure and in the iame Senſe, it 
fhould not fear now as before it did quake. & This tells us that fear 
rot, was a Meofis, ſhout for Joy, expreſs the greateſt Confidence. 1 
Who is your God, whom you ſeek, who by me afſureth you *ris his 
gracious Purpoſe to do great things for your good. m Either this ex- 
plains that laft Clauſe, ver. 20. or is Antitheton to it ; the Locuſts, 
God's Meſſengers and Servants, did great things again{t, but now God 
K1li recal thele and do great things fer J/rael. 


3, 22 Be not afraid, ye beaſts of the field » : for * the 
22. paſtures of the wilderneſs o do ſpring p, for the tree bear- 
: ethher fruit q, the fig-treer and the vine s do yield their 

Rrength te, | 


&e£x0- 
A 


EI > aa PN Meh PEE at a6 fs, 
, DINS Lanka Cette WOE I Ran SO a SHRRE E 


et MH 2 Chap, 1. 18, 19, 20+ The poor Beaſts were repreſented, as in 
- | greateſt Perplexity, for-want of Pafture they were like to periſh, but 
= 7 now theyare ( as if capable of Fears or Joy, from foreſight of what 
| %2 


was coming toward them) encouraged, they ſhould find Paſture, both 


Wy the tamer which are under Man's hand, and the wilder which range 
the Mountains. o Vid. chap. 1. ver. 19. let. 4,e. p Begin to look 
0 


£rcen, and the Graſs freſh promiſeth Food for you. q All ſorts of 
Trees, tho chap. 1, ver. 12. they were withered, and ſeemed to be 
dead, now they recover their Strength and bring forth Fruit. r Does 
not, as chap, x. 12. languiſh. s The Vine is not as before dried up, 
but with change of Seaſon hath changed its Hue. r Both theſe Trees 


oe) : do mightily bear, are full of Fruit, and bring forth as much as ever 
Ao they are able to ſtand under. 

| an) 23 Be glad then ye children of Zion *, and rejoice in 
for a + the LORD y your God z : for he hath given-you the 
082 WE: | former rain -- moderately a, and he will cauſe to come 
_w » down for you the * rain a, the former rain b, and the lat- 


- ter rain c in the firſt month d. 


. O01 hn In the former Verſe the Prophet by a uſual Figure, anq with 
1c:i4 WIN. known Elegancy called on Land and Beafts, tho they underſtood him 
"dt; now he addrefſeth himſelf to them that can underſtand their 


- his Workas well as their Advantage, and the Children of Zzoz, all the In- 

habitants of Feruſalem and Fudea, who were called to faſt and weep. y 
"+ yo1 how Four ſelves ſenſible of your Mercies, thankful to that tree Boun- 
1 224 © Wich gave your Mercies ; rejoice, but not only in your Barns, Gar- 
p or irs and Bellies full, but in the Eternal God hath been found of you. 
nA ne og ſuch you were adviſed to ſeek him, as ſuch.own kim, rejoice in 
£9522 mM, ard aſcribe Glory to him who keepeth Covenant to thouſand Ge- 


ier2tions, and hath remembred his Covenant for you in this your low 


Vul, I 


7 @ .E is 


| 


according 10, R2roſnofs, - Eicher fome emicent Pronhr. 
phers, /jatzh, or {#1 himielf, bur as Fere-rumners and I'yp. 

great rophet, fo the wortls will be a Pr omile ot the M.tfzh, 

thele Children or Zic to the Meſſiah, as Fountains of all th: 

they receive of Gol in *: etnporais a5 well as Spiricuals; it 

Scripture thus to pals from Temporal to Spiritual, and ro: 

ro Temporal Fromites and Bletiings, ff, ri, 9. 4, Trew't 

bat tince our beſt Interpreters re-ain 4s ovrs tis Verſic: 

ruIciy, Or IM AVC MeAUUre, We adbet - tO ad 3 Gull 

gentle, yet lutncient Showers tv make the Earth ui. 236k $4 
Showers have made Paſtures ani Trees to ſpring, fuurit an bs 
fruitful. 4 As he hath already given iome, fo he will give more, 415 
the Earth and Trees ſhall need. 5 The Autum Kain which is nzed- 
tul to mellow the Earth, and fit it to receive the Corg aud Fruits,and 
to plant and low them about September, c Needful to brig forward 
and ripen the Fruits planted or ſown, accounted the latter Rain be- 
cauie thele Husbandmen and Vine-dreffers reckoned from Seed-time 
unto Spring and Harveſt, d That.is our March, both theie Rains as 
promiled, Deur. 11. 14. and Lev. 26. 4. ſhall be given trom Heaven. 


24 And the floors e ſhall be full of whear f, and the fats 
2 ſhall overflow h with wine and oil z. 

e Where they threſhed their Corn. f The b<R and moſt uſefu] 
Grain, the Bread-Corn for Man's Life and Support. g The Veſſels 
into which the Liquor ran out of the Preſs. h There ſhall be of the 
Grape and Olive enough to fill the Veſſels, nay to make them run 0- 
ver, tho the care of good Husbands will ſave it. . 7 For wlat was ver. 
22. ſaid, is here fulfilled, the Vine doth yiell its Strengrh. 


locuſt hath eaten, the canker-worm, and the cater-pillar, 
and the palmer-worm m, my great ariy # which I ſent 0 
among, you. 

k Make up to you or compenſate : the lean Years of Egypr did eat 
up the fat, but with you now the fat Years ſhall feed, and enrich the 
lean ones. 1 By this it appears that this dreadful Famine by theſe In- 
ſets was longer than of one Year's continuance, and perhaps counte- 
nanceth the Jewiſh Conjefture of four, becauſe four ſorts of Inſes are 
mentioned. Theſe in the late Years devoured the Fruit of the Earth, 
but now God wiil reſtore the Fruits. m All recounted, chap. 1, 4. 
with little variation of the Order wherein named. 7 Vid. ver. 3, 4, 
5, 6, 7, $,9, 10, 11. 0 There was ſomewhat extraordinary in thele 
Armies of Inſe&s, by which the People then living and afflited by 
them, might ſee they were ſent immediately from Heaven, tho Hi- 
ſtory do not report it to us. 


26 And ye ſhall eat p in plenty q, and be ſatisfied r, and 
praiſe the Name s of the LORD t your God «, that hath 
dealt wondroully x with you : and my people y ſhall ne- 
ver be aſhamed =. 


p Enjoy and live upon. q Not with Scarcity, as when Water is 
meaſured to them, and Bread is given by weight, F7-#. 4. 16. r The 
Bread they eat ſhall refreſh them, maintain their Strength, not be as 
that, Zaggai 1. 6, $ Aſcribe the Glory to the Mercy and Fairhful- 
neſs, to the Power and Wiſdom of your God, ye ſhall ſpeak of it to 
his Praiſe, ſtop the Mouths of inſulting Heathens. # See ver. 13. let. 
l, u See ver. 13. let. c. x In one Year giving as much as the Locuſts 
waſted in the Years foregoing, whether three or four or more. y 
You that are my People demeaning your ſelves as becometh my Peo- 
ple. + Neither diſappointed of your Hopes, or refuſed when you 
pray, or neceſſitated to ſeek Relief among the Heathen who will re- 
proach you and me. 


27 * And ye a ſhall know b that 1 am in the midſt * Ch. z. 
of Iſrael -, and that I am the LORD 4d your God e, 17. 
and none elle f : and my people ſhall never be 
aſhamed þ. | | 

4 Who repent, pray, are bleſſed with ſuch Anfwer to your Prayers, 
b By Experience $hall ſee and acknowledg. c My true J/rael, ohedi- 
ent Jſrael, T am with them to bleſs them, defend them, guide them, 
and provide for them. d The Almighty and everlafting God. e@ As - 
I was the God of your Father Abraham, yours in peculiar manner by 


Covenant, and to redeem you. from Evil. f That there is not a God 


heſide me, that the Idols you formerly doted upon were no Gods, that 
the Idols the Heathen boaſt of are a Doctrine of Lies, and deceive 
them that truſt on them, g See ver. 26. let, y, h 1bid. let. x. 


28 © And it ſhall come to paſs a afterward b that * [ 
will pour c out my ſpirit upon all fleſh d, and your 
ſons and your daughters ſhall Propheſie e, your old x, - 
men ſhall dream dreams f, your young men ſhall fe :g. 
viſions g. 


return out of Babyloniſh Captivity, after the various Troubles and Sal- 19: 
vations by which they may know that I am the Lord their God in 
the midſt of them, when thoſe wondrous Works shall be ſeconded by 
the moſt wonderful of all, the ſending the Meſſiah in his day, and un- 
der his Kingdom. «c In large abundant meaſures will I give my holy 
Spirit, which the Meſſ1ah exalted $hall ſend, Foh. 16. 7. in extraordi- 
niry Power and Gifts in the Apoſtles and firſt Freachers of the Goſ- 
pel, and in ordinary Meaſure and Graces to all Believers; Epke}. 4. 8, 
9, 10, 11. d Before theſe Gifts were confin'd to a few People, to one 
paiticular Nation, to a very ſmall People, but now they $hall be en- 
larged to all Nations, As 2. 33. and 10. 45. to all that believe, all 
that are regenerate. e This was in part fulfilled according to the 
Letter in the firſt days of the Goſpel z but this Promiſe is rather of a 
comparative meaning : thus by pouring out of the holy Spirit on 
your Sons and your Daughters, they $hall have as clear and full 
knowledg of the deep Myſteries of God's Law, as Prophets before 
time had. The Law and Prophets were till Fob, and during this 


time the Gifts of the Spirit were given in lefſer meaſures, and of all 


Men the Prophets had greateſt meaſures of the Spirit, but in thele 
days the lealt in the Kingdom of God is greater than Fokn. f No 
difference of Age, to old Men who had heen long blind in the things 


« {+ - f 4 
"ae, 42 The Heb. will bear it, 4 Teacher of, or unt0, Or ac- 


of God, the Myſteries of cron be revealed, and theie $h:il 
| know 


25 And Iwillreſtore & to you the years / that * the * Che 1:4! 


4 
vo 
ha A} 
: [2 
boy 
b, 
+19 
LT 6 
44" 
, 44 
bs 224 
© 
bs | 
. 
; 4, 
$3 
bo 
4 
" * 
0 
8. - 
© 
: ” 
s It; 
r « » 
; R j »F, 
+3 + 
a 4 7 8 2 ' 
3 r 1 I 
ky? u+ e fe 4 4 
: : _ BG 
at +3 '. Op 1 
oy = » 
> $4 1386: Fa 
#; 4 i 4142 
: + A 
q y ; «- - bs : 
3 Wt. 5: he 
: | ”} *s : 
( © 
4 Vt 4 EG 
- *& F \ . ay : Y - "2 : 
” (+ T7 44 w FP”: -& we 
4 x . =q 4 
'43r7 6s im: F T4 > þ, x 
* F , T7 4 > 
d : Hh + *1 
3.4 _-” TIS - bp Ws 
» +: T 0 41 - 
i 1: 1s + 
+ - $ 
, o T1706.) Ex V9}; 
: Bs bf F 6 45 * 
> :, 2X . o 
RF We £0-bi* 
© T |! 2 ". oF + 
: £4, 7 64 1} By: AS Ll 
b 0 She MS, 3: 
t I 5 255.44 
47 30+ oo” : 7 ! 
va <7 Os 4- a + 
PUB 1 24> 
4 fr i2muyt is as 
om b ; [- \ : 
%% : © FRY 7 * "3 
b p * 4 i 4X 
ie o | i 4 'S] WIk 
g : : G F : 1 by 
if *k1.7 15 Fo i & 
wn 5 WA © CO. oF? 
: d * Hart's jt N iT 
ts : 0 'F oF) 1 3 +. 
i - L | [1 f x F 
W3%z7 I $5 , i” Ri. 
F ur 13> 
"4 þ fl ys F -a3H 
4% x : 7: "; L ke7 
is T1: bas Ft VE, x . 4 
= © 0 AF i } } 7% 
$, * . ; BY # 1" "304% [1 
WH > $0 1RSETY "4 7 $7 
394; 4 "th $5.4) 
+ +4 b Fi} 28 | 
16); P 1b: RLARSS: 
f I4 "MFI 34 F 
0 


29» 


Atts 2.17. 
4 Moſt certainly this shall be done. 5 On the latter days, afcer the ZE» 12- 


mY 
——_ > 
n__ 

x mare. 
ares 

ag tg 

Y bag 


ONES 


em = — 


Sor 


_ 
" ge Vs - N 
V 
ms ds b . 
” I - -- a _ "FIR , 
"<0 F, %* - Dr $$: a. bn = 
” -_ —_— - —— iy wh! : pn _ 4 by 
Ge . 4 ———_— = _—_ - ; % of 
. fe _"T % bh wa 4 % _— Foo &. 43> OI L "e Z - 
of . 4 S.-- 4 Lu " - - «# - _ "=" 
4, » $ l ET 4 b # 
: - - PS.” . ” m__ ; 
bg. a p A "GER T 5* Us f bs # * $95h,) 0696 
EPI ow re a Les oder; PR” - . - $25.20 
£ RES ”_— roman” CA ne ES — O_ ——o—e——z Ge —e— 
————— ra CL bo — ta - - + , 
2. 0 2-3 abt. yy "T5 ER £ - PP934. A - 
- # 4 NN I UELI IM 5 266: _—_ pu SE —- = 
© wes "- my —_ 2-1 * <= LITTER 36 — by 
=___— or of »-* F _— ——_— \*. *%_ S » 4. Þ, 
- 4 ERERIED vg 4 : 6 LC T7” a k 
Sq > * —_—— » 
p bet an Fre 2 << we 
w . oo . = - R 


_ 


+ ws y 
m9 WR _—_ 


lf Chap. UI. 


know 25 ceriainly and clearly as if G34 had extraordinarily revealed 
himiclt to them 5; Dreams ioat of Ved upon them. g Many young 
Men [hall be az eminent ja knowieds, as if the things known were 
coinmuaicated by Viton In a_ word, all Knowledy of God and his 
Wil (hail abound among all Ranks, Sexes and Ages in the Mefſs.a9's 
davs, and not only equal, bat lurpal: all chat formerly was by Pcophe- 
cv, Dreams or Viitviss 

25 And alſo upon the ſervants, and upon the hand- 
Maids 7 in thoſe days, will I pour our my ſpirit x. 

h With equa! ireeneſs, 7 Upon the meaneſt Bzlievers, lee Ga/, 3. 
<3. C45,3, 11. k Of Santhificativa azd Adoption, 

39 And i will ſhew wonders | in the Heavens, and in 
the Earth 3z, Blood # and fire o, and Pillars ot 
ſmoke p. | 

I As he promileth {uch Grace to Believers, ſo he warneth them that 
they ſhould not be ſurpriſed with thole alarming Prodigies which in 
thof> days God would thew, which would uſher in the hard times that 
ihouk be Chaſtifement io the beſt, and Deftruttion to the worſt ; 
whotb will read ant obſerve what Hiſtorians andl Naturaliſt report of 
thole Times, will ſee this fulfiiled ia the very Letter, Mr. 24. 7, 29» 
and 317 13. 24. Like 21. 11, 25. 74 Above Men, and under their 
Feet, all which Sigas are particularly named, ani ficitthe Signs on the 
Earth. 2 Pcſhbly Eruption or Bloo:!, as foine Fountains have heen 
reported to have run with Bloo.l, and theſe prefiguring the great Ef- 
fution of Blco:l by the Sword and Wars following, or by Antichriftian 
Per.ecutions. 0 Either breaking out ot the Earth, or elſe unuſual 
Lightning, and unparallclld Flath2s of Lightning3 in the lower Re- 
£362 0f the Air, {erting many things ox re. p From thoſe burning 
thin;ss fixed by Lizhtnings, or by extraordinary Flaſhes a Smoke ſhall 
20 Up iike a lillar, Particular Inſtances of thet2 may not here be ga- 
thered rogether, but Zzorringer that learned and paintul Hiſtorian hath 
gathered many together of the tirit Age,and ib of the followingAges of 
theChurch in his Eccleiialtical Hiftory which whodefireth may conſult, 

* Yerze, 31 * The Sun q ſhall be corned into darkneſs r, and 
C:..:.15.the Moon into Blocd 5s, before the great and the terrible 
day of the LORD come #. 

5 Laving mentioned the Predigies which wet to be wrought on 
Eaith, now the Prophet Ypecifieth what ſhall be done in Heaven,where 
the great Luminaries ſhall be wonderfully affected, rhe Sun ſhall be 
greaily obicur'd, r Shall ſeem to be turned trom a Body of Light to 
meer Darknels, s Either by Ecliple, or by the intervention of Va- 
pours drawn up from the places where was great Slaughter and Effu- 

ten of Bloed 3 however as to manner, *tis moſt certain as to the E- 
vent, th Moon ſhall leem to bz Blood, t Great to all, terrible to the 
Rejecters and Periecutors of Clift, This day was the day of Ferufa- 
{11's Dcſtruttion and burning of the Temple, and Slaughter of the 
Fews fer their Violence againſt, and Murder of the Meſſhub, for their 
Sins againft the Golpel : "Chis was fulfilled partly in- the Vevaſtation 
of Feruſulem, but Shall fully and finally be fulfilled in theday of Judg- 
ment, and at the Con|ummation of the World. 


* Roms 32 And it ſhall come to paſs 4 that * whoſoever ſhall 

10.13. call on the Name of the LORD x, ſhall be delivered 7»: 

bid. for * in Mount Zion zand in Jeruſalem a ſhall be deliver- 
ance b, as the LORD hath ſaid c, and in the remnant d 
whom the LORD ſhall call e. 


u Yet when Nature ſeems out of courſe, and (ſuch terrible Convul- 
fions overthrow all States and Kingdoms, and nothing but Ruine and 
Þcftruftion appears on every lide, yet then moft certainly it Shall 
come to pals, x Who hearetit the Goipcl, repenteth of Sin, believ- 
eth in Chriſt, and prayeth for Grace, Peace and Glory, whoſo wor- 
Shippeth the Father through the Son in Truth and Faith. » Either 
delivered trom thoſe lad outward Atfiictions, or elle, which is infinite- 
iy berter, from eternal Miſeries,which will ſwallow up the unbelieving 
and impenitent World z when the Fews who rejetted Chrilt were de- 
ſrroyed by the Romans ; all (as Eufibius reports) the Fews that believ. 
el in Chii'h, and ſubmitted to the Goſpel, eſcaped. 7 In the true 
Church typitied by Zicn, the City of David, a Not local Feruſalem, 
there was tie chict place of Slaughter, Blood, fire and Death ; but 
myſtical Ferufulem, the Church and City of the Meſſiah, 5 Salvation 
whether Temporal or Eternal, or both. c According as God hath 
promiſed, and this promiſed Deliverance gives the Believer SatisfaQi- 
on and Reft, whether in Lite, or by Death. d Not of the Fews only, 
but of the Gemzles allo; e Calted of Gud to be his peculiar People, 
called to the Knowledyg of Chrift, to profels his Name, to believe in 
Chriſt, and by him tv wait for Eternal Life and Glory, Foh. 10. 16 
AXES 1.5. 46 ROM. Ls 4 5, 7o ; 


7. 


CHAP. 


God's judgments againſt the enemies of his church, 1 —— 8. Fe caleth to 

the Gentiles 10 prepare for war; ſheweth kis awful appearance in Zion, 
— 1, promiſeth everlaſting happineſt to his church, and threatnerh 
the deſolation of the enemies, 1$-——2 1. 


ll, 


I OR a behold b, in thoſe days and in that time 
when I ſhall bring again the Captivity c of Ju- 
dah d and Jeruſalem ec, 


2 Tho our dividing this Chapter from the former ſeems to ſome a 
beginning of ſome new matter, yet indeed the Lrophet prolecutes his 
old Subje&, and proceeds to declare how that great thing mention'd 
in the laſt Verle of the ſecond Chapter should be effected, and in this 
Verlie you have a Tranſition to that thing. 6 It is a Note of great 
Attention, and heeding what is to be here ſpoken. c When I $hall by 
Cyrus the Type bring Fudab's People out of Babyloniſh Captivity, 
the Emblem of a greater and worle Captivity. 4d After the Hlesh as 
the Type, but according to the myſtery of it, Fudah fignifieth the 
w hole Remnant, or Reſidue of thoſe Gcd will ſave. e Both literally 
ani typically underſtood ; ſo that beſide what refers to the Hiſtory of 
the two Tribes or Kingdom of the Houſe of David reſtored out of 
Cap:ivity by C3775, here is the bringing back the Captivity of the 


j0 


& L Chap. Il 


whole 7jr2el of God by Chriſt the Meſſiah to be confidere?, and all a. 
long through this Chapter, 

2 | will alſo gather all Nations f, and will bring them 
down 7 into the valley of Jehoſhaphar b, and will plead 
with them # there & for my People ], and for my heritage 
lſrael 9 whom they have fcattered among the Nations #, 


af 


and parted my land o, D 7 
f Inthe Type it is not ſimply all Nations, but all thoſe Nations Y 
that have with hoftile Minds oppreſſed and ſcattered Fudzh ; inthe = 2 
Antitype, *tis all Nations that have been Enemies to Chrift and the HR" 
Church. g This is ſpoken with reſpett to the low Situation of the Z (] 
Place, being a Valley, and we deſcend into low Parts ; ſo here they are E FE 
cauſed to go down. h Much Difhculty Interpreters find in explaining ca 
this ; we muſt took to it as a Type to ſomewhat ſignified by it, and f6 0: 
apply, The Valley of Bleſſing, where Fehoſhzphar, 2 Chron. 20. 22, th 
&c. diſcomfited mighty and numerous Enemies, and then triumpt'a Sit 
in God with Praiſes to him : So the whole Church may be this Valley 
of Bleſſing, and in this God will judg the Enemies of his People, and th 
give them Occaſions of praiſing God for his righteous Judgments,and 
Feruſalem his Church s$hall ſee this; as the Inhabitants of Feruſalen th 
might ſee what is done in the Valley of Fehoſhaphar, if they would be hai 
at a little Pains to go out of the City. 7 After the manner of a juft q 
and impartial Judg I will declare my People's Cauſe, and dothem hay 
right. & In the midſt of my Church henified by the Valley of Feho. wit 
ſhaphar, the Valley of the Judgment of God, 1 Fudab two Tribes, but ſer 
as in their Hiftory bearing a Type of the Church of Chriſt, n cha 
Purchaſed and poſſeſſed by me ever fince they were brought out of Z. char 
gypt ; tho many times invaded and injured by their unjuſt Neighbours, Trac 
who were ſo much their Enemies, becauſe they were my peculiar Peo- any | 
ple, and kept to my Worship. = Either by Force driving them out of this | 
their Habitations, or elſe carrying them into Captivity, and diſperſed he d 
them after their inſolent Humour, of which Diiperſioa more folloys, Few, 
ver. 3,6, 8% 0 Divided among themſelves the Land I gave to my fell t] 
People to hold immediately of me, ſo *twas my Land that they divid- the 
ed, their Robbery and Spoil was Sacrilege : Such is the Injuftice and NY 
Opprefſon of Perſecutors of the Church now, and ſo God will judg Zidon 
them in due time. or by 
3 And they have caſt lots for my People p, and have = 
. . . rabi, 
given a boy for an harlot q, and ſold a girl r for wine, uy 
that they might drink s. Sea C 
It was cuſtomary with Conquerors to divide the Captives by Lot, E verth 
and ſo did theſe Enemiesof the Fews, Obad. ver. 11. and fodid the © which 
Chaldeans on the captive Ninevites, Nah. 3. 10. though this was grie- # Cas the 
vous, yet *twas the common Lot of Captives. q Either procured a Sabeas, 
Boy to beſtow on ſome Harlot or other which they kept, or gave aBoy Sabeans 
inſtead of Money, the Price of an Harlot, to be enjoyed by lewd Soul- be an e 
diers. r A young Girl, which being captive, fell to their Lot, they them, ( 
have valued at a baſe, low Price, and (old her for Wine. 5 So much off from 
as at one Sitting one cf them could drink z or perhaps for one Draught ple and | 
of Wine when the barbarous Souldier was dry,or minded to be drunk,  orby w] 
4 Yea, and what have yeto do with met, O Tyres 90 
and Zidon x, and all the coaſts of Paleſtine y ? will ye ren» pare w;: 
der me a recompence 7 ? and if ye recompenſe me, ſwift- war dr; 
ly and ſpeedily 4a will I return your recompence upon x Publ 
your own head b, a, 
t What juſt Cauſe of Quarrel have you againſt me ? Have I done "fobatle 
you any Wrong which now you avenge upon my People ? Or do you noſed to 
begin to violate the Laws of Neighbourhood and Friendship, and which ma 
think to eſcape ? Do ye think you have to do with my poor oppreſs4 The fi 
People, and I nothing concerned at it ? u A great Mart Town which wrt 
was Neighbour to the Fews, and ought to be Friends, either joined by theſe b 
Forces with the Enemy againſt them, or retaining Friendſhip with the The valia 
Enemy, bought the Fcws for Slaves, and ſold them again to Strangers, | Strength t 
to Grecians ; this in his Man-Trade Tyre was accuſtomed to, Ezek. 27. . Wn perienced 
13- x Zidona famous antient Empory, whoſe Merchants alſo bought marſhall'q, 
up captive Fews at cheap rates of theſe barbarous Souldiers. y Which the War 
lay along the midland Sea, among which were Towns of Trade, nd of Viſion, | 
Merchants that bought and ſold theſe Captives. x Do ye this by way 0 * 
of Repriſal? Havel or my People ſo dealt with you or yours? 41 [orual 
will, tince you dealt ſo with my People, and with me, certainly and || Pruning 
ſpeedily avenge my ſelf and my People on you. 6 As you have uled Wi 4 [tron 
them they ſhall uſe you. It is probable this may refer to the Aſris BR. CHere js 
Invaſion, when Senacherib took all the fenced Cities of Fudah, and ome Inter; 


Swords are 
hooks ; it W, 
& ry in ploy 
& and Planters 
| Either of By 

of Mind, 

SIter than 


might ſell the Captives ; or to Shalmaneſer's time, when he captivated 
the ten Tribes ; or it may be a Fredifion of what Tyre and Ztdon, an 
theſe Cities of Paleſtine would do in the Babylonifh Syccefſes ; and # 
Threat what God would do againſt them for it : but to whatever par- 
ticular Hiſtory it refer, who lees not this in it, that God will plead the 
Caule of his oppreſſed Church, and avenge it as his own Caule ? 

5 Becauſe ye have taken c my tilver and my gold d, and 


have carried into your Temples e my goodly - pleaſant; 11 Ae 
things f. #908 *"d pathe 
c You Trizns, Zidonians, and Philiſtines, have received at the Fands ther } | C 
of thoſe you confederated with, you have taken them either as part 0 LORD ” 
the Spoil, or as part of your Pay. 4 Silver and Gold Veſſels dedicated b The w 
to my Service in the Temple, and about the Altar. e And 1n col. ſten to th , 
tempt of me with proud Inſulting have preſented them in your Tem nd hat : 
ples to your Idols, as if they were mightier and more glorious than 1 moſt Ls n 
ſo did the Philiſtines carry the Ark into Dagon's Temple, but it ©O Fudeg oY 
Dagon his Head, 1 Sam. 5. 4. and Nebuchadnezzar carried away the {a 4 ang "_ 
cred Veſſels when he ſpoiled the Temple. f God ſpeaks of thele ate lead —_ 
the manner of Man, and ſo accounteth of thele things. 09 the, n 
6 The children aJſfo of Judah g, and the children of Je- 8a hered aph 


ruſalem þ have yez ſold unto the +Grecians k,that ye might 41 
remove them far from their border 1. . f 
g The Fews who dwelt in the Land. bh The Citizens of Feruſlem, 
or perhaps the young ones, Boys and Girls, as ver. 3. both of City a 
Country. 7 Tyrians, Zidonians, and Philiſtines, though Neighbour 

and oftentimes befriended by the Fews, yet you have done this- 


"42% Puniſh 
© Lfere of 


Or >ons of Grecians, who either employed them as Slaves in G7 = wh If and G 
or elſe {61d them to other Nations for Slaves. ! That there migit Todl'sCon 
no Hope to theſe poor Captives ever to 1teturn to their Counts”; ſa '2 let 


Vol, IT, 


ip. IIL FM 


jury by t ] 
on hiliflizes, and God's Diſpleaſure at it. 


ther ye have ſold them o, and will return your recom- 


110n your own head f. ET, 

— well, for as *twill. be ſtrange when done, lo it (hall 
EF Certainly, to your Joy, be done, O my People, and to the Aﬀtonjlh- 
Z ment of your Enemies, # Awaken and raiſe them, though they lay 
E ſleeping, Or as dad Men ; I will ſtir up ſome ſhall befriend them. o 
Eulfilled when Alexander Magnus and his Succefſors, as Foſephus, lth, 12. 
cap. 5. reports 3 diſmiſſed all Fews that were Slaves in Greece, and 
oave them leave to return to their own Country. p And more than 
this, I will pay you in your own Coin, you ſhall read ard know your 
Sin in Four Puniſhment. ; 

3 And] will fell q your Sons and your Daughters into 
the hand of th& children of Judah r, and they ſhall fell 
& them to the Sabeans 5s, toa people far off z;. for the LORD 
” hath ſpoken ts. ( 
F q Give them up into the Hands of the Fews, who thereby ſhall 
have Opportunities of diſpoting of them as they ſee good ; ſo you did 
with my People, ſo 1 will recompence you. 7 To the Fews, the Po- 
ſerity and Kindred of thoſe you ſold, Þ Either as Fattors for Nebu- 
chadnezzar Or Alexander the Great and his Succefſors ; or elſe as Mer- 
chants trading on their own Account, ſhall make this one part of their 
Trade to ſell Grecians, Tyrians, &c. Now though we ſhould not have 
any particular Hiftory that relates the TranſaCtions of theſe People in 
this kind z ret we may reRt aſſur'd *twas done, fince God taid it ſhould 
he done: nor can we expett, or is it neceſſary It ſhould be, that the 
Fews ſhould by a Conqueſt of theſe People bring them Captives, and 
iell them: The Zidontans, Tyrians and Philiſiines did not ſo againft 
the Jews, but they bought particular Perſons out of the Hands of Sy- 
7ians and Aſſyrians, who took the Jews Captives ; ſo when Tyre and 
Zidon, and the Philiſ:ines ſhall be captivated by the Bahyloniſh Power, 
or by the Grecian, theſe ihall [el] their Captives either into the Hands, 
or by the Hands of the Jews. s Sz5e.ns were a People in the Parts of 
Arabia moſt remote from Tyre and Zidon, they were accounted the 
Ends of the Earth ; Mat. 12. 42. and ſpread themſelves along by the 
Sea Coaſt on both Sides of the 4rabian Bay or Red Sea, and pals'd 0- 
ver that Sea, and planted in Africa, and were part of that Country 
which now doth, or lately did belong to the Emperor of Abaſſua, who 
(as the King of Spain in both dies) glorieth in being King of doth 
Sabeas, and Succeſſor to the Queen of 3h2b4z to one or both of theſe 
Sabeans did the Jewiſh Men-lellers diſpoſe of thoſe Slaves. # Ihis may 
be an elliptick Speech thus to be filled up, and the Sateans ſhall {ell 
them, (7. e. whom they bought of the Jews) unto another Nation far 
off from the Sabeans'z or elſe tisan additional Deſcription of this Peo- 
ple and their Country. # Then *rwas done, whether we know when, 
or by whom, or how many were fold or no, ; 

9 © Proclaim x ye this y among the Gentiles z ; F pre- 
pare war a, wake up the mighty men þ, ler all the men of 


war draw near c, let them come up d. 

x Publiſh, or make known, as by Sound of Trumpet ; ſome ſay *tis 
an Irony, I rather think *tis a Declaration of what is to come to paſs 
through ſome Ages before the Coming of the Meſſiah, as will appear 
probable from' what followeth. y Or theſe things which IT am pur- 
poſed to do in retaliating to the Enemies of my People, proclaim Wars 
which may make Capt.vy2s for Sale under the Hand of my People. + 
'The A{rians, 'Chaldeans, Babyloniins, and Grecians, ſucceſhvely. 4 
Make ready for Wars againſt the Enemies of my People, who ſhall 
by theſe be correted, but their Enemies at laſt ſhall be deftroyed, 6 
The valiant Men who dare atrempt any thing, and are of great 

| Strength to execute what they attempt. ©c All the Captains and ex- 
$ Perienced Souldiers, let them appear at the Rendezvouz. d When 
& marſhall'd, let them march up on their Defign, toward the Seat of 
the War, which will now, for many Ages, be in or about the Valley 
of Viſion, the Church, the Valley of Judgment from the Lord. 

& 10 * Beat your plow-ſhares into ſwords e, and your 


& | pruning-hooks into ſpears f 3 * let the weak g ſay, | 


2 [ 
a 4 


þ The ſeveral Nations in their appointed time, and perhaps the 4 


7 Behold mn, | will raiſe » them out of the place whi- | 5,445 are fic to awake and Ri under Shatmaneſer, next under Sena- 


cherib, both which came up againft this Valley of Jehoſhipiart. q By the 
Sins and Divitions of God's: own People, by their own ravenous anc 
turbulent Diſpotition, and by a ſecret Hand of Providence. r In ko- 
{tiie manner, cither againſt the Church and People of Go1, intended 
here ty this Valley, fo Seracherib-did in #:2ebiab's time. 5s In the 
midft of my People and Church. + To plcad with, condemn and 
puniſh by the Sword. u Not all the World, but all the Heathen round 
about Judea, which was opprefled by thoſe Heathens ; their God judg- 
ed Senackerib by his own Hand ; their God -puniſhed the Ep yptians by 
Nebuchainezzar, who defeated Necho. And within Sight of the Jews 
were all the Puniſhments God inflifted on the Aſſyrian, Batyl-niſh, Per- 
firn and Grecian Monarchies, executed ; and God all this while in midſt 
of his People preſerved them as a Buſh all in Flame, yet not conſum- 
ed, ſo did the Lord lead his mighbty ones, and limited their Power. 


flow c, for their wickedneſs is great d. 

x Ye mighty ones, ye Men of War, Executioners of Divine Ven- 
geance, » Begin to reap, cut down Sinners ripe for Judgment, let 
Tiglath Pileſer and his Souldiers cut down Syria and its King Rezir, 
2 Kings 15. for their Violence againſt my People. Let Cyaxares and 
his Armies begin to cut down 4jj1i4 with Nineveh and its King, for 
their Sins are ripe to Judgment. Let Nebuchadnezzar put in the Sic- 
kle and cut down Moab, Ammon, Mount Setr, Egypr, Tyre, Zidon and 
the Philiſtines ; after this let Cyrus reap down the ripened Babylonians, 
and Alexander with his mighty ones reap down Medes and Perſkans,and? 
let divided Grecian Captains cut down one another, till the Romans cut: 
them down. And when this is done, God will have mighty ones {till 
to cut down his Enemies Perſecutors of his Church, when the Harveſt 
is fully ripe, and till the final and univerſal Judgment wherein alt 
Gods Enemies ſhall for ever be defiroyed. # The Sins of thoſe ſeve- 
ral Nations are fully ripe. 4 In another Metaphor the Prophet de- 
clares the cutting off the Churches Enemies. b As the Grape-gather- 
er cuts off the Buncizes, and hrings them into the Preſs till it be full, 
and then they are trod ; {o here the Enemies of God's People ripe in 
Sin, and brought together to be puniſh'd, are to be troden in the 
Wine-Preſs of God's Diſpleaſure. c A mighty Execution is made, and 
the Blood of flaughter'd Men runs as Wine preſs'd out in greater a- 
bundance than the Fats can hold from the Preſs; verified in the Slaugh- 
ter made at the Overthrow of the Kingdoms here intended. d The Vi- 
olence, and all manner of Sins of theſe Kingdoms is grown exceeding 
great, 


f: for the day of the LORD g & near þ in the valley of a jon; or 


deciſion, 8, 

e Whether Predifion or Exclamation with Wonder; *tis doubled ta 
intimate the mighty numerous Armies contending one againſt ano- 
ther, and threſhing each other, overthrowing numberleſs Men be- 
tween the Conquered and Conqueror ; ſo each Kingdom was over- 
thrown ſucceſſively. The Afyrian overthrown by Arbaces and Pul-belg. 
chus, conſpiring againſt Sardanapalus, where the Multitudes were ſo 
great, that the Blood of the Slain is by Diodorus Siculus reported to 
have colour*'d the Water of a River, and the Number of the Conſpi- 
rators Army before Nizeveh is faid to be four hundred thoufand. Af- 
ter this we meet Sexacheri5*s mighty Hoſts againſt E; ypt and the Phi- 
liſtines, to neither of which could he march but either through part of 
Fudea, or very near to it; and after this he hath 185 Thouſand flain in 
one Night before Jeruſalem, betide Nechs's Army marching toward 
Carchemiſh, and Nebuchadnezzar's Army in purſuit of the routed Egypri- 
an ; and the Armies of Alexarder 'M. and atter theſe the Armies of the 
Seleuct4 and the Lagi/z. f Where God having by wiſe Providence 
gather*d them, did by juft Determination of the Viftory decide their 
Quarrels, and by the Conqueror puniſh*d the Conquered for their Sins 
againſt God and his People. g The Day of Vengeance and righteous 
Recompences upon Enemies. + If it begin in the Puniſhment of Nine- 
veb and the 4fjyrian Kingdom, by the cutting off Senacherib's Army, 


+ amſtrong h, 

ke. © Here is a Prediftion of War, and ſuch as ſhould continue, with 
ſome Intermiſſions, through many Years, as on the contrary when 
words are to be beaten ir.to Plow-ſhares, and Spears into Pruning- 
7 hooks; it was a Prediction of Peace, J/a. 2. 4. lay aſide your Husban- 
- dry in ploughing and ſowing: f And let Gardiners, Vine-drefſers, 
| and Planters, think of getting Spears inftead of Pruning-hooks. g 
| Either of Body, through Sickneſs or Natural Weaknels, or elſe weak 
of Mind, fearful and cowardly. þ Put on Strength and Valour, 


4 


| SCAT than he hath, let none be abſent from this War. | 

[ !1 Aſſemble your ſelves h, and come all z ye heathen, 
and gather your ſelves together round k about : thi- 

ther 1 || cauſe thy mighty ones to come down #2, O 

! ORD 7. 


, b The War proclaimed, ver. 9g. Proviſion made, ver. 10. now ha- 
to the general Rendezvouz, embody your ſelves as you march, 


moſt Latitude, but all that are here concerned. & All round about 
**and Jeruſalem, the Church and Heritage of God. m Direct and 


"lp there; let all thy mighty ones, whether Enemies of thy Church 


W 


n, 6 
id Meges puniſhed Sabylon, Alexander punithed the Perfians, and the di- 
[5 «cd Captains Succefſors plagued one another wichWars within ighr, 


a "umlelf and God's People,intimating that all theſe mighty ones are un- 
be ToolsConduttand he is in the midſt of them to fave his ownPeople. 
07 7 

7 '2 1ct the heathen p be wakened 9, and come upr to 


Vol. IT, 


Julea, the Natioas near about this Valley of Vition. / Toward Fu- his People t, and the ſtrengrh u of the children of Ifrael . * Hag, 2. 


lead them by thy Provi ey may pitch their Teats, or en- | midft of his Church. 
Stn nye > oonactgget Gere Mi ; ( Mer of War, and commands them fo march out agaiait his and his Shoe 
| aihered againſt it, or Friends of thy Church, and gathered for its | Church-s Enemies, he will ftrike the Enemy with Aﬀoniſhment and. as 
cence, let them all here encamp z or all thoſe mighty Warriours | Fear, as the roaring of the Lion doth aſtoniſh the weaker Beaſts of , /* » 

ich thou wilt make uſe of ſucceſively to puniſh the proud Oppret- | the Forreſt, Fear ſhail ſurpriſe them whenGod ſhall tpeak againtt them. 
NS of thy Church ; ſo the Cha/deans puniſld Aſſyria, Perſians and | # The Place where Godc' oolcth to dwell, Emblem of his Church, and 
M c " of the Kingdom of Chiift. m In Wrath and Tndignation againft rhoie 
he will aettroy, becauſe they have deſtroyed his Church. 7 Typical, ſo 
(%>"Twere of Feruſalem and Judab). n With wiich the Prophet comtorts | Gol roar'd and uttered his Voice againtt Sera:herih 2 Myſtical, ſo he 
of hath often already, and till will tartaer difcover his Diſpleaſtre a- 
gain his Enemies; and he will, as one who dwells in a | lace for the 
Defcnce of it, rebuke and cl eck thoſe who afult ir ; fo Gcd dwells in 


*twas in Foel's time not above ſixty four Years, ſuppoſing Foel prophe- 
fied in Feroboam the ſecond's time, and probably not quite twenty 
Years to this Day of the Lord, if Foe! propheſied this in X#ezetiab's 
time, or after the captivating of the ten Tribes by Shalmaneſer, which 
was An. M. 3283. and Senacherib's Overthrow was 3294, eleven Years 
after the Deportation. As the DD. Archbiſhop Uſher in his Annals. 

15 The Sun and the Moon ſhall be darkned, and ths 


Stars ſhall withdraw their ſhining. 

Vid chap. 2. ver. 10, let. d,e,f, g. When God doth in the Valley of 
Decition puniſh any of the Kingdoms which perſecuted and oppre(s*4 
his Church, the Punishment shall be ſo great as to darken the Glory 
of ſuch Kingdoms,it shall be to the utter Overthrow of thoſeKingdoms 
and Governments, and ſo it was effefted on Babyl”m by the Mede and 
Perſian ; {0 on this by the Grecians,and on them by their inteſtineWars, 
and by the Romans at laſt on theſe, and on the Murderers of Meljizh. 


16 The LORD z alſo ſhall * roar k out of Zion 1,and utter + fer, 22, 


his voice mm from Jeruſalem n, and the * heavens o and the 3c. 


and ord | 7 ; ' 
nd haſten what you can, as the Word imports. 7 Not ſimply and in earth þ ſhall ſhake q; but the LORD r will be the: hope 5 of Amos 1: 


7 Who, chap. 2. ver. 27. is the Lord in the midft of 1/742), or in the , 
k& When he brings forth his mighty ones the ry He) 


karbgur, 


his 5 ernſalem, as 'tis, V27., 175, 0 Metaphor ically the States and Kings 
1. } a Come, 


Chap. IIL 


e Tyrians and Zidonians of being cal'd to Account for the [the valley of Jehoſhaphat : for there s will I ſit to judg f 
hem *twas done unto. Amos 1. 6, 9. mentions this Sin of | 21] the heathen round about 4. : 


13 * Put ye *« in the ſickle y, for the harveſt is ripe z 3* key, x; 
come, get you down a, for the Preſs is full b, the fats over- 15, 19. 


14 Multitudes, mnltitudes e in the valley of || deciſion || 0,09 


threſhings 


: 4 
#& 1-1 


_ = OY 
WEL tr ns 
& 2 WI ” 


Finn Ten 


we 
4fAY 
£2, © 
pA 


 RHES® 


Chap. II. 


doms, the great ones in thoſe States. p The common ſort of People, 
the inferiour Ranks of Men, the Foundations of thoſe Kingdoms $hall 
be shaken and overthrown. q And fly as affrighted, fo the word fig- 
nifieth, 7 But at that time, and in the midſt ef all thoſe Commortions, 
the Eternal and Almighty God, who fills the Enemy wirh Fears and 
Aſtonishment, s «hall be the Objett of his Peoples ExpeQartion, they 
Shall look 'or Good trom him by all theſe Troubles 5 and fo Gol was 
ro his atter their Return out of Captivity, through the Mzd9-Perſean 
Reign, through the Grectan Rule under Al-xandzr, and under che 
times of Alexinder's Succetlfucs. 8 Of them that believe his Word and 
obey his Law. = Strong Dcteace and Fortceis ro hi; x Here called 
tbe Children of 1ſ-ael, thoſe that are Jſraelires indeed. 

*Ch.2.27. 17 SO y * ſhall ye z know athart | am the LORD your 


+ Heb.b9- God b dwelling in Zion c, my holy mountain & : thea e 


at : ſhall Jeruſalem f be holy z, and * there-ſhall be no ſtran- 
"x "M Foers h pals through her any more #, 

Rev. 1, 2 By the tfletts of my Preſence with my People, by my Anger a- 
27, gain{t their Enemies, by punishing them by each other, overthrowing 


Oppreſſors, by fulfilling what is foretold. x Ye that ſuffer for my 
ſake, but hope in my Word, and ſupport your (elves on my Strength. 
£ By molt comfortable and unqueſtionable Experience. 6 That I 
have remembred my Covenant for you, and acted according to the 
Power and Mercy of an Almighty and all gracious God. & Very gra- 
cioully preſent with you, and ever watching over you, and delighting 
to ſave you, as a Man would do his Dwelling-houſe. 4 Which is cho- 
fen and ſeparated from all others to be the Place of his Habitation, as 
Pſal, 2. 6. which he loves above all Places. e After thele things are 
finished, when Enemies are dettroyed, and the Remnant 1s ſaved, and 
the Meſhah is come { for to him and his Days do theſe things finally 
and ultimately refer) and the Goſpel is preach'd. f The Church of 
Chriſt, the ſpiritual Zeru/a/em, g Be much more holy and pure than 
now, being made io by the Word and Spirit, and Atfictions too, þ 
No profane and unclean Verions shall pals through it as formerly, and 
bring their ſtrange Fashions, Rites, Worship or DoCtrine. # Though 
they have done it formerly, as in S9.omon's Days, and Ahaz and Manaſ- 
Jeh's time, they shall do fo no more for ever. | 

18 I And it ſhall conie to paſs in that day k, that the 
* Am. g. mountains / ſhall * drop down # new wine », and the 


Ls hills ſhall low with milk o, and all the rivers of Judah ſhall 


omg + flow with waters p, and * a fountain q.ſhall come forth 
47.1. Of the houſe of the LORDy, and ſhall water s the valiey 
* Zech. Of Shittim t. 

14.8. & When AfBiQions, amidſt which they were preſerved, from which 


Rev. 22.1, delivered, and by which they were purified. 1 The Vines planted 
upon the Mountains which were, ch. 1. 12. dried up, ſhall now be full 
of Juice and Fruit. m Shall come down as the Showers or Dew 
Cxectly and plentifully. 2 Sweet and Delicious. o So fruitful shall 
the Hills be, and keep ſo many Cows, Sheep and Goats, that Milk 
Shall abound every where, as tt were a Current that ever runs down. 
p In the great Drought Rivers dried up, now the Rivers shall be full 
of Water and ever flow. q The Prophet alludes to thoſe Waters 
which were conveyed from ſome Spring through Conduit Pipes to- 
wards the Altar, of which Ezek. 47. 1, 2, 3+ for the Uſe of the Tem- 
ple, in which Water the Prieſts washed what was to be washed. This 
no doubt is a Shadow of the purifying Blood of Chriſt, and his ſanQi- 
fying Spirit and Word. r And in that it is ſaid to come from tbe Houſe 
of the Lord, it intimateth that theſe glad Tidings, this ſaving Grace 
<hall be firſt Preached from Feru/al:zm ; and by the Church, which is 
the Houle of God, $hall be published to others. 5s Refresh, purgeand 
make fruitful in all holy Works, #t It was a Place in the 'lains of 
Moab, on the Borders of Jjrc/ towards the South-Eaſt, Numb, 33. 49. 


JOEL 


| 
| 
} 


and Foſh. 4. 1. not far from the Dead Sea. Theſe ſpiritual Waters 
Shall flow down to the dry and thirſty, the barren and fruitleg Gen- 
tiles, and make them fruitful, 


19 * Egypr « ſhall be adeſolation x, and * Edom y ſhall «3; 
be a deſolate wilderneſs z, for the violence againſt the * 
innocent 29, 


children of Judah 4, becauſe they have ſhed 


blood in their land b. 

It was in Egypt that the People of God were long kept in Bon- 
dage, which defiled //rael too with its Idolatries, contrived the Ryine 
of 1jrael by a barbarous and unparallell'd Cruelty, murdering all the 
new-born Males, and with utmoit Obſtinacy reliſted the Deliverer 
who came to fetch J/-ael out of Bondage. By Egypt underſtand we 


then all the Enemies of the Church of Chriſt, who carry it toward 


the Church as Egypt carried it toward Jſracl. x Moſt deſolate, when 
God hall judge and punish ;z fo Shall Spiritual Egypr, Rev. 11.8, 
The Poſterity of E/au, of near Kin to 1/rael, according to the Flesh, 
whoſe fſirlt Father envied J«cob the Bleſſing, and vow*d his Death 
and made him fly from his Father's Houſe, and become a Servant ina 
ſtrange Land, and was the firſt who denied J/7ael a friendly Paſſage, 
and the common Civility of Neceſfaries for their Money, and came 
out in hoſtile manner to fight them, Numb. 20. 18, &c. It was Edom, 
of whom you read in 0badiab, tor. a moſt bloody implacable Enemy 
to Judah in his greateſt Diſtreſs. And all who come under Eons 
Charatter, are here intended, and threatned under this Name, 
Moſr deſolate, and which Art cannot repair ; deſolate Houſes or Vine. 
yards may, but Wildernefſes cannot by Art be repaired. & The Þeo- 
ple of God, his Churches 6 Where diſtreſſed Jews $hould haxe 
tound Safety, they met their Death ; in Egypt and dumea, 


20 But c Judah 7 ſhall || dwell e for ever, and Jeruſalem [6 


f from generation to generation g. 

c And, or, yet. d The choſen, peculiar, redeemed of the Lord, his 
Church. e No more be captivated and driven from home, but in 
their own Land and Houſes abide ſafely and perpetually : This typifi- 
eth the eternal Peace and Reft to which God's People are redeemed, 
City of God. g Through many Generations on Earth, through Eter. 
nity in Heaven, Some Shadow of this poſſibly we may find in the 
Days of Maccabees, but the Fulneſs of this we expe& when that Day, 
great, dreadful, and finally decifive Day, which Interpreters refer 
this Chapter to, ſhall deſtroy all the Wicked, and put the Godly into 
Poſſeſſion of Eternal Manſions of Glory. 


21 For h1 will cleanſe ; their blood & that I have not; 


cleanſed 1, || for mz the * LORD dwelleth in Zion. + 1k 

h And Heb. i Purge away both by the Spirit of SanQification and ti 
by free Pardon in the Blood of the Redeemer, by their Sufferings al. kl 
ſo, by the Waters of Afition, as well as by the waſhing of Regene- a, 
ration, and renewirig of the Holy Ghoſt. & Their moral Pollutions*] 
and Sinfulneſs compar'd here unto Blood, as alſo Ezek. 16. 6, g. and; 


fo Men in a finful State are called Fleſh and Blood, Marth, 16. 17, and 
Gal. 1. 16. God will pardon and purity Believers z and when they are 
pardoned and purified, nothing attempted againſt them $þall ſucceed, 
I Which before I had not taken away ; what was wanting in their Sar- 
Qification or Juſtification, and Reconciliation, I will make up in them 
and to them. m And I am Febovab dwelling in Zion, whence the Lay 
of Grace was publiſhed, where the Wonders of pardoning and ſandtify- 
ing Grace are wrought, that J/7ael might be a People with whom the 
Holy God might dwell. Now whereas this can be done but in part 
here on Earth, there is a S702 above, whither Fehovah, who dwells 
there, will take every Saint after the Day of Judgment, having firſt 
vindicated, acquitted, and pronounced them holy and meet for Enjoy. 
ment of the Holy One. 


| 


o— ——— 


AMO $S 


The ARGUMENT. 


F, we might be allowd to make a Conjefure at the Ouality of our Prophet's Sermons by the Signification of this Name, 
* muſt conclude that they contain heavy Tidings and grievous Fudgments coming upon them to whom he 1s ſent to real 
Amos 7 the Hebrew coming from a Word which ſignifies to burden, to lay a Weight or Load on one. ; 
er Kule to judge the Contents of brs Prophecy by : He is by ſome antient Writers, erring in this point, ſaid to be the Father 0, 
Iſaiah ; but beſides that Iſaieh was contemporary with Amos, which fairly argues it unlike that Iſaiah ſhould be Amos bi 
Son - Amor the Father o;" iſaiah is quite another Name different from Amos, both in Letters wherewith each 1s ſpelt, 4 


. 


in Signification alſo, 


Aud if Iſaiah were of the Royal Line, ( as ſome ſay he was ) Nephew to either Amaziah or Uzzial 


ne 
b; 
But we have a ſut- 


by a Brother, it cannot be conceived how Amos a plain Herdſman of Tekoa ſhould be his Father, It 1s certain he mas & 
ther by Birth or Education, or Employment, or in all theſe Reſpeds, of the Tribe of Judah ; and as certain that by an mm 


aiate Call from God he was taken off the Herdſman's Work, and made a Prophet, Ch. 7. 14,15. He did 1m Deed, a5 
profeſſed in Word, cone from the Lord, and in bis Name deliveres his Meſſage to all thoſe whom God ſent him unto. 


M 


purſuant hereto he Preacheth firſt againſt thoſe Nations who were Borderers, and had been bitter, oppreſſ|uve, and old Agua 
farics to Iſrael and Judah, cþ. 1. 3, to theend, and Ch. 2. 1, 2, 3. By this expreſs Courſe, declaring future ju = 
tions upon Syria, Paleſtine, Tyre, Edom, Ammon, aud Moab, the Prophet doth much prevent the Prejuidices W%* 


Iſrael and Judah might have had againſt his Perſon and Dottrine. | 
and threaten the Sins of God's own People, ſince he hath ſo plainly reproved and threatned their Encmuics ; 
they who eaſily bulieved him a Prophet in his Prediftions agamſt Foreigners, muſt in Reaſon as eaſtly b: 
Prophet in his Reprooſs and Pred:Gions agataſt themſelves. 40M 
cn [Iſrael or the Kingdom of the ten Tribes, to whom he was principally ſent ; yet be doth Prophecy again/ji 
and to both he ts very ſharpeinfhis Reproofs, imparti.z! in bis Cenſures, carneft in his Per/waſtons to rec ?, 


5 . S 7 Ie 
Now he way more freely and piamly "_ 


eHeve him 4 

4 [rout (t) 
He doth beſtow the far greater part of _ Dy 
16an 5; 


- 0 , 
+ 068 I 1 LA 4 
F4 &: Y fill 1% [6 þ 


Chip, T 


preached t 
Intru&tior 
Preacher. 

token are 
Jatah eith 
Words, or 
diebrew,in 
1,e, M.and 
| Of each ; fc 
Burden or 

nearer, or 
| the words j1 
ve ſhall no 
If add to hi 
belonged t; 
this laſt be 
| building Fo! 


W Vaslituate c 


Wit. © Rece; 


5 Words of 
; Houle of 7, 


fon. & Cal 


; fruding into 


Tibe of Bey 
of David, th 
but Grand(o; 
cording to th 
rom a declir 
which, only t 
and where v1 
the Fews tha 
Driefts Work 
fon of Diving 
ther than this 
anddifmal Ea 
and Summer 
Years before 
Prefixed by t 
2 And 
and utter h 
01s of the 


Mel x ſhall 


R mos, / 
have forſ how 
aludin 

hepher ds,the 
&Y, doth ex 
le of it, th 
[S them in 
Oppoſition to 


kt 


ion and Sj 


| ap I. 


couragements 


contemporary. with him, though it :appear not how long. 


ay | | 
ies bart Eloquence, and fortified with that. Loftineſs 


moſt un 
0.7 . the Prieſts of Bethel, ch, 7. 10, QC. 


AMOS. 


to this Duty, and demonſiratively evident in his charging Sin upon them. He had 1iaiah, Joel ana Hoſea 


He is in many Places ſententious and conciſe, which makes the Paſſages the more obſcure 3, though be do bring with him many 
om his Country-Imploymeut in his Reproofs, Alluſaons and Arguments, yet fitted with admirable Skill, and beautified 


of Stile, that proclaims it ſelf to be from him who gave Man 


toth Judgment, Fancy and Tongue, which 1s an intrin/ick CharaGer of Divinity in our Prophet's VV riting. He was a Perſon 
daunted Reſolution, of a prudent Condutt, and of ſpotleſs Integrity, as appears by the Conteſt he bad with Amarzia, 


He lived when Judah's Affairs were rolerably well and proſperous, but when Iſrael's were in the higheſt Meridian, when 


they thought themſelves ſecure againſt all the Dangers he foretold, Uzziah had pretty well recover'd; Judah, and ſettled it, 
Jeroboam had highly advanced Iſrael's Fame, Riches and Power, . With their Growth in theſe, Sin grew as faſt and as 
»xorbitant, and called for Tudgments, which our Prophet foretels wery: plainly 1m expreſs Words, ch. 7. 11, 17, and in 


ons m 


ery ſionificant Hieroglyphicks ch. 7,8, 9. He foretels the Earthquake, ch. 1.1. an Emblem of thoſe Civil Diſſenſ3- 
he /s Hook their Foundations, and bal f ruin'd them before the Aſſyrian: conquered and captivated them, FF hich Mi- 


ſeries laſted through an Interregnum of eleven Tears, ( ſay ſome) to be ſure. through: the Reign of Zechariah, Shallum, 
Menahem, Pekahiah, Pekah and Hoſhea, in whoſe time all theſe Miſeries were ſwallowed up mm a greater, their perpetual 
Captivity, which came upon them about 54 or 65 Tears after the Death of Jeroboam .the Second ; near to whoſe Court, and 
within their Hearing, Amos preach'd many, perhaps moſt of bis Sermons, and therefore you may obſerve his Reproofs, Threats 
| nd Predidtions ſeem to be calculated for that Court, which was highly guilty of the Sins he reproved, and were called to repent 
of them ;, which becauſe they did not, they did deeply ſuffer both in the Civil VV ars, under thoſe four Uſurpers and Conſpirators, 


Shallum, Menahem, Pekah and Hoſhea, and moſt deep in the Aſſyrian Captivity. 
is ſome Reference to thoſe times, with ſomewhat more particular Application of the Prophetick Text : to the Circumſtances of 
Times he aimed at, than bath been by any learned Pen I have happened to peruſe: And would the Brevity to which theſe 
Anotations are bound bave born a larger Account of thoſe times, and a fuller Accommodation. of them to the Prophetick 
Diſcourſes, 1 do not doubt but the Truth of the Prophet's Charge, xeproof, Threats and Predi@ions againſt Iſrael would appear 
to every Reader. Laſtly, our Prophet, as others, cloſeth the ſad Tragedy of this fleſhly [inning Iſrael, with Promiſe of 4 


th, 
friritual State under the Meſſiah, full of Grace and Peace. 


CHAP. L 


= The condition of Amos, and the time of bis propheſying, 1. He declarerh 
| God's judgments upon Syria, 2—— 5. upon the Philiſtines, 6 $. 
upon Tyrus, Edom and Ammon, 9 ——15« 


HE words 4 of Amos b, * who was among 
the herdmen c of "Tekoa d, which he ſaw e 
concerning [ſrael f, * the days of Uzziah g 

King of Judah þ, and in the days of Jeroboam * the Son 

of Joaſh k King of 1ſrael /, two years before the * earth- 

Quake #7, 
£ The Holy Ghoſt doth in this Expreſſion comprehenſively take in 

al the Sermons, Viſions and Prediions which Amos preached and 

publiſhed 3 all the Exhortations to Duty, the Menaces againft Sins,the 

Warnings of Dangers coming,and the Promiſes of Mercy to them that 

hear and obey his Words Vid. Hag. 1. 12. and ſo what Feremiah 

preached to his Auditors are the Words of Feremzab, ch. r. 1. and the 

Inftruftions and Counſel of Solomon are Eccleſ. 1. 1: the Words of the 

Preacher. Both the things ſpoken, and the Words wherein they are 

tpoken are included. - 6 Whoſo think this was Father to the Prophet 

Jjatah exther diſcern not the Difference that is in the two ZHebrew 

Words, or pronounce haſtily without conſidering what each is in the 

fHebrew,in which Tongue theſe Words have but two Letters the (ame, 

ie, M,and 0. the other are quite different ; as alſo is the Signification 

| of each ; for the one imports Strength and Might, the other imports a 

Burden or heavy Weight. c Or Shepherds, but whether one of the 

meaner, or one of the chiefer, whether a Maſter-herdman or a Servant, 

| the words imports the former ; yet becauſe the Scripture doth not ſay, 
we ſhall not enquire, ſince it conduceth little to our profiting,nor will 

It add to his Authority, fince *tis God who ſent him. 4 Whether it 

belonged to Rebulon, Aſher, or Fudah, is not much material, though 

this laſt-be moſt likely, for 2 Cbron, 11. 54, 6. we read of Keboboam's 
building Fortreſſes in Fudah, among which Tekoa is mentioned. It 

& wasfituate on a Hill on the North of Fudah,as a learned Pen deſcribeth 

Y it. e Received by Revelation ; this tells us that the rhings as well as 

2 ords were to be underftood, when *'tis ſaid, that theſe were the 

== Words of Amos, f The Kingdom of the ten Tribes revolted from the 

F Houſe of David,and now under the Government of Febu's great Grand- 

F lon, | & Called alſo 4zarizh, who was ſmitten with a Leproſy for in- 
& fruding into the Prieſts Office, 2 Chron. 26. 16, 19. b Including the 
ribe of Benjamin, and ſuch of the Levites as did adhere tothe Houſe 

of David, the Kingdom of the Houſe of David. # Not Son of Nebar, 

but Grandſon of Fehu. k Who had ſome Succeſſes againſt Syria, ac- 
cording to the Prophecy of Ziſha, by which Succeſſes {rel was raiſed 
from a declining to a thriving proſperous State. 1 See let.f. m Of 
which, only this Text, and Zech. 14. 5. do make particular mention, 
and where ſomewhat is ſpoken of it z which ſee. It is the Tradition of 
the Fews that this Earthquake happened when Vzz74b uſurped the 

x 0 WY Fic Work,and offered Incenſe in the Temple, againſt which Viola- 

« lis tion of Divine Rites God teſtified thus from Heaven, ſay they. Far- 

W ther than this we need not enquire in this Matter. It was a great 
ai and diſmal Earthquake, and perhaps by this God did ſmite the Winter 
ial and Summer-houles, as ch, 3. 15. however, as 'twas foretold two 

15 0 R * cars before it came, fo we are ſure it did come according to the time 

mic BY Pnixed by the Lord. ; 

ai: WF 2 And he # ſaid, The LORD o will roar p from Zion q, 
nl and utter his - voice r from Jeruſalem s : and the habitari- 

12-2» of the ſhepherds ? ſhall mourn «, and the top of Car- 


-cu- «1 x ſhall wither y. 
| hid h a mos. o The Almighty and Eternal,whom you of the ten Tribes 
= we forſaken,and thereby have provoked to Diſpleaſure. p "The Pro- 
7 he Phet alluding to what was dreadful, dangerous, and moſt routing to 
ar hepherds,the roaring of an hungry Lion that comes out of his Den for 
him 6 &, doth expreſs the Danger of /ſrae!, and would awaken them to a 
ile of it, that they might prevent it by Repentance before the Lord 
- - ears them in Pieces as a Lion tears his Prey. q Either the Temple,in 
, "20 Ppoſition to Feroboam's idolatrous Chappels, or intimating their De- 
| Won and Sin in leaving Sion for Dan and Bethel. r This explains 


I 


14 


In the Annotations you will find there 


| and confirms the former metaphorical Expreſſion of God's Wrath. 
s The City God had choſen, where he dwelt, the Seat of God's infti» 
tuted Worſhip in the Matters of Religion, and the Royal Seat of the 
Kingdom as God had ſettled it, from which in both Reſpetts the ter 
Tribes had revolted. This whole Paragraph you have, Foel 3. 16. 
which ſee ; and Fer. 25. 32, #3 Where the Shepherds found conveni- 
ent Paſturage they pitched their Tents, or built them Cottages, and 
dwelt therein, that they might attend the Care of their Flocks for 
which they alſo made Folds; and this was the Delight and Wealth. 
of theſe Men ; now by Alluſion to theſe Amos expreſſeth all the Wealth, 
Greatneſs and Delightfulneſs of the Kingdom of 1ſrael. Princes are 
in the Greek Diale& Shepherds of the People, People are the Flock 3 
Tow"s ard Cities are the Habitations of both, and ſo the Scripture, 
Fer. 2.3. and 3. 15. Exek. 34. 2, 7, $, 9. Kah. 3. 18. uſeth the Ex- 
preffion ; which ſee. u Be made delvlate, and reduced to a lad, 
mournfu! and lamentable State, in which Men ſhall fee nothing bus 
Matter of Sadneſs and Tears. x There were two Places of this Name, 
and though diſtant from each other, yet both very fruitful,and much 
uſed by Shepherds, the one was in the Northern Parts of Canaan, 
whether Elijah reſorted ; the . other in Fudah, the Southern Parts of 
Canaan: now this was nearer Tekoa, better known to Amos, and there- 
fore ſome think this to be here intended ; but the other was in J/rae!, 
which is here threatned, and therefore fitter to be the Emblem of the 
ten Tribes, and meant here, ſay others ; which ever you choole *tis no 
hard thing to accommodate it to the Prophet's Purpoſe of Carmel, Vid. 
Nah.1.4. } Either blaſted, or elſe dried up with Drougat,and turned 
into Barrenneſs. So the whole Kingdoms of the People threatned, 
and of che ten Tribes,though as fruitful and pleaſant as Carmel,ſhould 
be made horrid and deſvlate as a dry and barren Wilderneſs. Vi. 
Joel 1. 12. and 17. 


3 Thus faith the LORD z, For three 2 Tranſgreſli- 


Ps. 


—<— 


cond, though ſoon atter Joſt again, and was in Abax's time the Sea 

Royal of Kezin, whom Tiglath Pileſer ſlew, 2 Kings 16, 9g. White 1: 
was in its Power and Greatneſs,it mightily oppreſs'd {rael ; it is here 
by a Synechdoche put for the whole Kingdom of Syria, £ Some refer 
this to the ſuffering Damaſcus to be quiet; God threatens that the ihall 
not have Reſt ; others lay 'tis a Threat that God would nat convert it, 
but leave the yrians to their impenitent Heart; but our Verſion is full 
and plain,it is a Threat of Puniſhment which they ſhould certaialy fall 
under. - God would no longer continue to be patient and gracious to- 
wards ſuch Sinners, nor divert the menaced iuniſhment foretold by 
the Prophet, deſerved by the People, and which {hull be executed by 
an impartial Hand, d The Syrians comprized in the word Damajcas, 
by a Synechdeche. e Frift gathered (as Husbandmen gather Sheats 
into a Floor) next trod them under foot, beat them imall, z. e. with 
utmoſt Cruelty deſtroyed the Perſons, Towns an.l Cities» f Of this 
Name there was a great Mountain 5o Miles in Length, faith my 
Author, there was alſo a Country of this Name, and a City poſſeſſed 
by the Renbenites, Gadites and Munaſſnes ; now the G1-44 in this Text 
i3 by a very uſual Figure put for the Inhabiragts of this Cuuntry ani 
City, whom 4#ax4el King of Syria, as was foretold by E/jo 1, 2 kings 
8. 12, di&moſt barbarouſly murder, as appears by tre Words of this 
Text. # Rakes or Flails, or Harrows, or Saws, or heavy Wheel: £ 
iron, whichloever of theſe were the Inſtruments intended, 'tis myit 
Certain it was a very barbarous and crae} manner of uſing thu, 


| which ſhall devour 1 the Palaces 9 of Benkavad 53, 27s 


f Th * 


Chap. I. 


ons of * Damaſcus b, || and for four I will not || turn * 1%. 8.4: 
away c the puniſhment thereof ; becauſe they d have & 27- 1+ 


* threſhed e Gilead f with threſhing Inſtruments of ; pgs 
Iron g. || Or, yez 


2 Amos ſpeaks not by Conje&ure, or of his own Hea:!, but as he for four. 
comes in the Name of the Lerd, ſo he aſſures us of it by this moſt {o- || Or, con+ 
lemn Atteſtation. 4 This certain Number is put for an uncertain, vers it or, 
Three, i, e. many , eſpecially when as here *tis joined with Four ; lex a be 
| their Tranſgrefhions are ſo multiplied, grown to ſuch Height and Num- quiet ; {v 
ber. 6 It was the chict City of the Kingdom of $74, and very anti- v. 6, &c. 
ent, Abrahim's Steward was of this City ; North Eaft from Car:n ; * 2 Kings 
gems pen by David, loft by Solomon, recovered by Feroboam the Se> x7. 7+ 

, 


Bur * I þ will ſend a fire? ito the houle & of tHazae), * fer, 9, 


- gtn<5 43d & * y - _— "__ 4% . P + _ 
: OS OG ers p - 26x" J — OT 
—_ - wm ww eo ” TI " IE \ 
>, = —_ - > _ _ _s . 
arP OP 9, Ft I8T=. <——@_ 
__ = - 
£ d 0 n 
Y.z 4&4 Ws wow oo 
» E way = w . 96S, 
y _ by - .* ”. 4 ® —_— 4; 
x =; — PO: 3. _ WR -» <if@mgn , 
_ Ee -- © Oo ES <- 
PS wn ” - . $$. ay y 
wh + ae .. % _s * as: an » 


_- 


_—y 


a2 ena. 
—— 
__ A ry 4 
- _ > 


a _ —  — — 


——— 
— - 


_ Chap. 1. A M 


O S. 


þ The Lord, Avenger of mine oppreſſed 1/rael, Fekhovah, as ver. 3. ton ) had ſome Accompliſhmenit in Nabopol«Jat and Nebuchadneo>,p, 
let. 5- 7 Either literally underſtood, or figuratively Famine, Peſtil- time, and in Alexander the Great, to whom this City, as wel] a; G24 
ence, Wars foreign or inteſtine, Effetts of God's great, but juſt Diſ- |and Aſ>dod, became ſubjeft. o Having deſtroyed theſe, faith th. 


pleaſure, which deſtroys all like fire. & The Family, or the material 
Houſe in which he dwelt, or both ; #azae!'s ſtately Dwelling-p'ace 
ſhould be conilumed by Eire, and his whole Family be cut off, / Eat 
up, ſo as to leave nothing remaining ot either. m Ihe Royal Palaces, 
or thoſe that deſcended trom #azael, and dwelt in them. # Whether 
this were ſome one of the Syrzan Kings before Hazel. or the Ben: 
ka1:d flain by Hazael, or Son and Succeiior to /7azazl, 15 uncerrain 
ncr can we know particularly who this was by this name Benhadad, 
which to the Syrian Kings was a common Name, as Pharaoh to 
the antient Egyptian Kings, Ceſar to the Roman Emperors, and C747 
to the Muſcovires at this day: Three Benkhadads are mentioned in 
the Books of the Kings, as 1 Kings 15. 19, and 2 X7ngs 8. 7. and 
I 3. 3s 
| 5 I o will break p alſo the bar q of Demaſcus r, and cut 
; 9 Bi- off ry the inhabitant s from || the plain of Aven ft, and him 
Es” that holdeth the Scepter # from || the houſe of Eden w : 
29, and the People of Syria x ſhall go 1nto captivity unto 


Beth-edert, #* ] 
Kir y, ſaith the LORD =. : 

0 The mighty God, as ver. 4. let. hb. p Weaken and ſhake into pie- 
ces» q Literally the Bar with which the City-Gates were ſhut, and 
both faftened and ftrengthned, Fudg. 16.3. Nek. 7.3. and P/al.107.16. 
Metaphorically it contains all the Munitions, Fortreſſes and Strength 
of 2, Place or People, ſo here. 7 Vid. ver. 3. let. 6. It is put here, as 
before, for the whole Kingdom, of which *twas the Metropolis. rr 3y 
the Judgments of War, Leſtilence, Famine, or Diſeaſes, all commil- 
fioned to do this. s For Jnb4bitants, the Singular uſed for the Vlu- 
ral, and may poſſibly denote the univerſal Exciſion and Deftruttion 
of the Syrians, who ſhall periſh as one Man, ſee the like uſe of the Sin- 
gle Number, Exod. $. 6. Fer. $: 7. t It is poſſible this may reter to 
tome peculiar Manner which the Sy77ans obſerved in their chooſing 


the Valley or Campaign for the Place of Worſhip to their Jdols: 


Iſrael choſe high Flaces, the Sy: is choſe Vallies *tis likely,and there- 
fore though beaten in the Hills where they thought the Gods which 
Jjra*l worthipped were ftrongeſt, vet are confident that in the Vallies 
where Syrians worſhipp'd their Gods, the Syrians would find their Gods 
the ſtronger, 1 Xinss 20. 23. for this Realon the Valley or Plain hath 
its Name the 7liin of Aven, of Iniquity and Vanity, becauſe in it they 
worſhipped vain Gods, and their Religion was higheft Idolatry ; or it 
may be Bikath- Avex was the Name of ſome City of $yrtz well known 
then, but whoſe Memery is periſt'd with it a great while ago. # A 
Diſcription of the King of Syriz, whoſe Royal Dignity ſhall be no Se- 
curity to him. w Some Royal Seat, where the Kings of $yri4 d1d 
think good to build them a Houſe or Palace for Pleaſure and Delight, 
and therefore gave it this name Beth-Eden, or the Houſe of Plealure ; 
all their pleaſant Seats, the King's £ummer-houſes ſhall be laid waſte. 
x The main body of the Subjetts and People of Syria z this explains 
Damaſcus, ver, 3. let.b. andin this Verſe* » Cyrene of Egy/1,ſay tome, 
but without any probability in this place : There was allo Ar ot Moab, 
Iſa.15. 1. but not this Xir in the Text; this was Kr of MeJ14,1/4,22.6. 
now under the Aſſyrian Yoke, and thither did 7iglath Prlejer carry the 
conquered Syrians, 2 Kin;s 16.9 and placed them Captives in that 
barren mountainous Country, about fifty Years after it was foretold 
by Amos, + This gives us an Afurance that all here threatned 
ſhould at laſt be executed. 
* 6 © Thus ſaith the LORD, For three tranſgreſſions 3 
_ <a of * Gaza b, and for four 1 will not turn away the ju- 
SED aiſhment thereof c ; becauſe they || carried away cap- 
tive 4 the whole captivity, to deliver them up to 


Edom e. : 
a Vide ver. 2.let. a. b The principal City of the 7hiliſtines, all the 
rcſt are to be underitood, and here the City is named, but the Inha- 


2. .4o 
il Or, 
carried 
them away 
with 47 


entire Cap- bitants are meant alſo with the City, antient and ſtrong, the Seat of 


Hel). the Anakims, conquered by Judah, yet loſt foon after to the old Inha- 
bitants, © Vid. ver. 3. let.c. d This refers to the Inroad by the 7hi- 
liſtinzs and 4rabtans, made upon 1144+ in the days of J-horam the Son 
of Jekohaphat ; the Violence and Cruelty of which,is ſet forth 2 Chron, 
21. 16, 17. about the 3116th Year of the World, and this 15 that 
which is here threatncd, as a Sin that ſhould be puniſh'd. e The 
Poſterity of Efau, who were inveterate Enemies to the Poſterity of 
Jacob ; and as ill Neighbours are, {o were theſe, the worſt Enemies the 
Jacobites had, as appears Zzek. 25. 12. and Obad. v. 10, 11, 12,13, 14+ 
ang Pjal. 137. 7. 1heſe Edomires were ever ready to opprels, enflave, 
and tyrannize over tke Jews, if by any means they couldby Force or 
Fraud get them into their hands. 


7 But I will ſend a firef on the wall g of Gaza h, which 
ſhall devour + the Palaces thereof 7. 


f Vide ver, 4-let. h, i. deſolating Judgments expreſs'd here by Fire. 
£ Which was ſtrong, and a mighty Detence to the City ; this only 
mentioned, but all the Power and Strength of Gaza, and cf whole Pa- 
leſtina is here included, and the Judgment denounced is here intended 
againſt all the Munitions of that People. þ Vid, ver. 6. lect. b. + Vid. 
ver.g. let.l, 7 Vid. ver.g. let, wm, What i5 here foretold was fulfilled 
partly by UVzz:4h, 2 Chron. 26. 6,7,8. and partly by Hezekiah, 2 Kings 
x18. $. ant partly by S-nacherib, Jſa. 20. 1. 

8 And I will cut off the Inhabitants k from Aſhdod 1, 
and him that holdeth the Scepter 2 from Aſhkelon », 
and I will turn mine hand againſt o Ekron p, and the 


remnant of the Philiſtines q ſhall periſh r, ſaith the Lord 
GOD <s. 

þ Vid. ver. 5. let. q,r. IVid. Zeph. 2. 4. and Zech. g. & This was 
ene of the five Cities of the-Ph/lijtines, and had its Roitelet. It was at- 
terwards called 4zorzs, Atts 8. 42. In this City was Daggn's Temple 
and Statue, 1 Sam. 5.1, 2, 3. the like Threat againſt wm d1:1 Fere- 
mz Aenounce, chap. 25. 16. WIth ver. 20. i Vid. Vere 5. JEtete = Ano- 
ther City ot the Palejiine Pantarchy,ans a very ſtrong onc,ot which ſee 
Zephe. 2. 7. and Zech. g. 5,6. which (hall periſh with the bang and In- 
habitancs thereof, which( beſides what Shulmanejer, Senachertb or S& - 


gon, Kings v! Ajjyria did, ard beſides what 2czechiab did againit Afi ke- read not in any particular Story when and wheie ; a'l could aut o bt 


Lord, I will proceed on to Ekron : p Another of the five Cities of the 
Philiſtines ; ſtrong, but as the reſt,crnel to /rael,and very finfylly jq, 
latrous, worſhipping Bad/-Zebub, for which this flall be deftroyeq ain. 
ſce Zeph. 2, 4. and Zech. 9.5. q What remaineth either cf. Citic, 
Towns or People, not already expreſly mentioned and rhreatneq' 
r Be cut off, and waſted utterly. s When all this ſhall be done, thy 
perhaps ye may not know z yet know ye this, that afſuredly ir ſhalt hs 
done in its time, for the Lord hath ſaid it. : 
9 4 Thus ſaith the LORD, For three Tranſgreſſions 
of * Tyrus, and for four I will not turn away the pun. ; 
ment thereof t ; becauſe they delivered up the whole cap. }: 


tivity to Edom «, and remembred not the t brotherjy 


covenant x 
The Prophet having foretold the DeſtruRion of the Syrians and py;. jt 

liſtines, for their Inhumanity and barbarons Cruelty againſt the Zens " 
he doth now in the ſame Manner and Words foretel the Deftru&ign 
of the Tyrians. t Vid. ver. 2. let. 3,4, u Vid. ver.6. let. d,e, where 
theſe Paſſages are already explained. x Which was between Hirgy 
on the one part, and David and Solomon on the other part on ac. 
count whereof theſe Tyrians ought to have befriended the Fews, ang 
not betrayed them, ſo ſome : Others thus, The Nearneſs ef Bloog 
between /ſracl and Edom ſhouſd have been remembred by the Tyriays 
and they ſhould therefore have perſwaded Edom to carry it as became 
a Brother, and by their Mediation the Tyrians ſhould have madePexce 
between J/7ae! and Edom z but they did not ſo, they took advantage of 
times, and made Merchandize of Jſrael, ſold ſuch as either fled fo 
Refuge from other Enemies, or ſuch as fell into the hands of the 
Tyrians, joining with #azael and Benbadad in their Wars againft [74 
What other Sins Tyrus added to this between this time and Nebuckyy. 
n2z7.17s befieging and ſubduing Tyr, were then puniſh'd, when after 
13 Years viegc it was taken, of which ſee Ezek. 26, 27, and 28 Chy, 
where at large Tyrus is ſpoken of. 

10 But ! will ſend a fire on the wall y of Tyrus, which 
ſhall deyour the Palaces z thereof. 

3 See ver, 4. let. þ,i, and ver. 9.1let.g. x Vid. ver. 4. let.l, n, 

11 < Thus faith the LORD, For three 'Tranſereſl- 
ons a of * Edom b, and for four I will not turn ant 
the puniſhment thereof c ; becauſe he did purſue 4 hi 


brother e with the Sword f, and -| did caſt off all pity 
and his anger h did tear z perpetually k, and kept his, 


wrath for ever }, W 

4 See ver, 2. let. 4 b Vid. ver. 6. let. e. ©c See ver. 2. let 4() 
4 Watch for, and laid hold on every occafion to oppreſs Iſrael. e Jung 
cb and his Poſterity here are meant,as is Eſau and his Poſterity : Ewan 
perſonally confidered,was an Enemy to the Perſon of Jacob, and vowed, 
his Ruin, forced him to fly into Paden- Aram, and on his return thence 
frighted Jacob too by coming out with four hundred Men armed; the 
Poſterity of Eſau behaved themſelves no whit more friendly, f E 
ther joining with the Enemies, as P/2l. $3,6,7,8. and 137. 7. 0r wy 
a \Var on foot 'on their own account, as 2 Chron. 28, 17. again 
them. g Common Humanity: was by Edom caſt off, when Jac 
Poſterity needed 1t, as appears by their denial of Paſſage, and ſelling 
t them Neceflaries for their Relief in travelling by their Countr, 
Numo. 20. 14, fO 21. nay, they arm'd againſt Jſrael, ver, 20. Con 
mon Pity would have forborn- Strangers travelling by our Coafts 
how much more Brethren ? The Inhumanity of the Edomires appear: 
ed yet tarther.in this, that they were Chapmen to buy all the captire 
{/: a2/7tes, and io (ell them to the Heathen for Slaves, which is cer- 
tainly the height of Inhumanity.- þ Which is expreſsd by Fierce- 
nels, and with Vehemency. 7 As a ravenous, hungry and fierce Lion 
tears the Prey; fo the word, k& Tho ſometimes this Anger did 
intermic for want of Opportunity, yet on every occafion it revired, 
and ſhewed it (elf again, / Left the fire of his Wrath ſhould extinguiſh, 
Edom did record, treaſure up, and reſerved the Seeds of his Dilple: 
lure, as Men rake up Fire in Aſhes to blow it up into a Flame, fuc 
was Edom's Wrath; a Wrath that exceeded all bounds, as the word 
imports, and never ceas'd. | 

12 Bot * I will ſend a firem.upon Teman », which ſal 
devour the Palaces o of Bozrah p. , 

m Vid. ver. 4. let. h, i, and ver. 7. let. f. » Metropolis of dun, 
called from Eſau's Grandſon of that Name ; of which ſee Ezek. 25. 13 
and Hb. 3. 3, And this here taken Synecdocally, implieth the It: 
habitants of this City, and of the whole Country, which ſhall peril 
when the Judgment here threatned ſhall be executed. 0 Vid. 01-4 
let.m, p A City bordering on Moab and 1dumea, and which ſome 
time belonged to the one, ſometime tothe other, as Events of Wat 
determined : It may be there might be two Cities of this name, tht 
one in Mozb, the other in Edom or 1dumea: However, this waSa yer} 
firong City, and one of the chiefeſt in the whole Kingdom ; ſo that 
in the Menace againſt Bozrab and Teman, the Strength and Glory0 
Edom is threatned with an utter Overthrow, as of that which is burn? 
up by Fire. 

13 © Thus ſaith the LORD, For three Trarf, 
greſlions o of the * children of Ammon and 107 
four I will not turn away the puniſhment theredf ; 
becauſe they . have || ript up the Women with! 
Child q of Gilead r , that they might enlarge 08, 
border s. | 

o Vid. ver. 4. let. 2,4,c. þ This is the fourth Kingdom threatnes: 
A People deſcended trom Lot, by his younger Daughter, of near #i (0 
iſrael, and much like Neighbours, as the Edomites, bitter Enemics 
the Jews ; vid. Ezeb. 25. 2. q A moſt inhumane Practice, yet v 
in thole Times and Places, of which mention is made 2 X75 6, 14 
and 15. 16, and c2ofea 13. 16, which ſee: When, or in what part” 
Ir Place Chis was uwne,is not reported in the Hiſtory of the Bibi 
Probably 'twas when .. 3421 barafſed {rael, 2 Kings $.12. with v-" 
the Ammoenttes perhaps pined ; but the thing was done, cno9gh” 


1 


{cd 


Chap 


If 


ten wl 
19, Ne 
cellznt 
(Rac BE: 
i 

E and IL 
the da 
wind 2 
: Vid, 
eme wh 
Kingdon 
| Exzkiel, 
þ ingdon 
gure COT 
and Glor 
mixt and 
lings of f 
Conquere 
neſs, as f. 
is A 
his Prin: 
4 Or M 
as well as 
well as the 
Querors, 1 
hreaf, v 
211C Minifl 
{ Minift 
Overthrov 
ld, 4 T 
ar God ha 


ol's julgn 
| Oppreſſion 
& With thei! 


H 


niſhmen; 
ing of E 
4 In this 
ere he dot 
on, and al: 
al, and tt 
curſe then 
le part, a 
at ſo he m 
inſt innoce! 
bo for thei! 
4, who of 
er hoſtile. « 
telty to #4 

K implied, 
re, nor elſe 
this to 2-4 
0 aied {uc; 
ſh and Ner 
Ile it ſo lor 
his fomew 
ta Aung, w 
ether "i 
 mentionec 

Bones dis 
cun'd the } 
Ncrs conjett 
alls and Roc 
npt of the K 


2 But 1 
dur the Pa 
mult m, \ 


umpet o, 
f Vid. chay, 
lar ground, t 

tter rea( 
tonymy the 
ughter, þ 
is Country ; 
Waiſt all the 
* deſtroyed, 
aults make, i 
M, and laying 
Very uſual, 

Enemy, d 
» to expla 


, IL 


ich, was d ect 
- _ 91th of City and Country about it, and yery rich in CX- 
_ 1d Balms. $ By deſtroying all that dwelt in it, and 
--frer might claim or pretend a Title to if, 
char nerealter mg , RR” . 
Bur | will kindle a fire in the wall 7 of Rabbah u, 


042 in thoſe Agew »r Vid. {79;. 6. 3, and Zech, 10. } 


cellznt SNICCS a 


| and it ſhall devour the Palaces the: e>fx, with ſhonting in 


| che day of battel y, with a rem elit in tne day of the whirl- 
4 _— 4. let. h, 7. where the Phraſe 1s explained. As fo the 
me when ch15 Prophecy was fulfilled, 'rwas partly when the Ajprian 
Kingdom fouriſh'd, and partly by Nebuchadnezgar, as was foretold by 
| Frekel, chap. 25» I, 2, 33 Gc. which ice, u The Chief Ciry .of the 
kingdom of Ainmon, 2 S4M. 1Ts I» and 12. 26. which by an uſual Fi- 
gure comprizeth all the Ammontes, and all their Strength, Wealth 
and Glory, all which ſhall be devoured. x Vid* ver. 4. let.l., yA 
mixt and horrid Noiſe of Trumpets, and Alarms of War, with How- 
lings of the Diſtreſſed, Groans of the Dying, and Acclamations of the 
Conquerors. & 7. & With irrefiftable Force, and ſurprizing Switt- 
neſs, as the Similitude imports. 


is And their King 4 ſhall go into Captivity, he b and 


is Princes c together, ſaith the LORD 4. 

1 Or Milchom, or Moloch, the Tdol of the Ammonites z ſo it fignifieth, 
a; well as King 3: I ſuppoſe the Prophet may intend both, their God as 
vell as their King ſhall be carried Captive ,as was cuſtomary with Con- 
ayerors, 1 5.17 5+ 2. and Jſz, 46. 2 6 This repeats and confirms the 

hreat, whether it refer to the Idol or the King. «c Either Nobles 
nd Miniſters of State, who attend and ſerve the King, or the Prieſts 

1 Miniſters of the Idol : Here both may be included, and the utter 
Nrerthrow of their Afairs in Religion and State be ſignified and fore- 
old. 4 This, as elſewhere, doth ratify and enſure all ; it ſhall ſo be, 


xr God hath ſpoken it. 


GH-AF. IL 


e's julgment upon Moab, Fudah, and Iſrael for their abominable ſins of 
| Oppreſſion, Uncleamneſs, Idolarry, and  Vnthankfulneſs 3 &Co I-*==12, 
s with their ſore and unavoidable deſtruttion, 13 IG. 


| Hus faith the LORD, For three Tranſgreſſions of 
* Moab, and for four I will not turn away the 
niſhment thereof a; becauſe he b burnt the bones c of the 


ing of Edom d into lime e. 
2 In this Form the Prophet began, chap. 1. ver. 4. which ſee: 
ere he doth threaten a Nation of ſome kin to J/rael, &c. as was Am- 
"n, and almoſt as much an Enemy ; they appeared early Enemies to 
zl, and took moſt wicked Ways to ruin /ſael, firſt hired Balaam 
curſe them, Numb. 22. 23. when this did not ſucceed, he next atts 
ile part, and by lewd Harlots draws 1/rael to fin, Numb. 25.1,2, &©c, 
at ſo he might do againſt finful J1/rael what could not be done a- 
inſt innocent 1ſrael ; Mob alſo was the ſecond Opprefſor of !ſrael, 
bo for their Sins were delivered into the hands of Fglon King of 
145, who opprefs'd them eighteen years, Fudg. 3. 14. for which, and 
er hoſtile Carriages, they are here threatned ; yet their inhumane 
elty to Zdom's King is only expreſs'd, the other Hoftilities to /ſrae! 
Ke implied. 5 The King of Moab, who particularly this was, -is not 
re, nor elſewhere mentioned, though ſome ſay *twas Mefha, and re- 
this to 2 A/ngs 3+ 4+ Yet "tis not very likely that this was the King 
bo aied ſuch Cruelty, © It had been barbarous to have burnt the 
hand Nerves of an Enemy. ; but to make the Fire ſo hat, aud con- 
Ive it ſo long as to burn Bones into Aſhes, is much more barbarous. 
his ſomewhat aggravates the Cruelty, he was no common Man, 
ta King, who was ſo uſed ; his Name, the Time when 'twas done, 
(ther *rwere ſome King alive or dead, and his Bones digg'd up, 1s 
It mentioned, but every way *twas barbarous, though *twere done 
Bones digg'd gut of the Grave, as ſome conje&ure. e Or Aſhes ; 
Icin'd the Bones, reduced them by Fire into fine Duft, and ( as 
hers conjetture ) uſed "theſe Aſhes inftead of Lime to plaiſter the 
als and Roofs of his Palace, and this was done in Hatred and Con- 
mpt of the King of Zdom, 
2 But I will ſend a fire f upon Moab g, and it ſhall de- 
dur the Palaces þ of Kirioth 7, and Moab & ſhall die 1 with 
mult 24, with ſhouting, n, aud with the ſound of the 
umpet o. 
f Vid. chap, 1. ver, 4.let. h, i, g Some think, but I know not on 
nar ground, that there was a City of this Name,and meant here but 
better reaſon we conclude it to be the: whole Country, or by a 
(0nymy the People, who were the Poſterity of Lot by his elder 


Wghter. þ Vid. ver. 4-let, 1,m. i A ftrong and principal City of | 


is Country ; or,the Cities, ſo the word will bear,and then the Threat 
gainſt all their Cities. k The Moabires all Sorts and Ranks of them. 
e deftroyed, and periſh utterly. m7 Such as Souldiers in Fight or 
ults make, when they carry all by Force, bearing down all Oppoſt- 
n, and ſhying all Oppoſers, with that Rigour which in ſuch Caſes 
"ry uſual. # As Conquerors ſhout to the end they may diſhearten 

Enemy, and animate their fetlow-Sonldiers. o This adaed 


3» to explain, and partly to confirm what the Prophet had fore- 


3 And I will cot off p * the Jedge q from the midſt 
NICOI r, and will lay all the Princes 5 thereo# with him «, 
th the LORD | 


. hy the Sword of the Enemy. q The Governour, 7. e. every one 
+, the Singular being put tor the Plural, to intimate the De- 
lon of all of them. r- Either of Kirioth the Metropolis, or of 
ty City In which were Judges appointed to govern, and miniſter 
"Se the People ; and thele ſhould be cut off in thete Cities, and 

© midft of their Government. .s Either by Birth, or by Othce, 
/ excellent Endowments, the chief among the Moabitiſh People. 
= _ ſupream Governour before threatned, let. p. x Noting 
* : X Certainty of the thing, the irrevocable Sentence paſt upon 
w_ King, Princes and Judges, who being cut off, the People 
"Weds periſh, and come to nothing. 


AMOS. 


4 T Thus faith the LORD, For thrce Tranſgreſſions 
ot Judah, and for four 1 will nt turn away the puniſhment 
thereof y; becauſe they have diſpiſed z the Law of the 
LORD a, and have nor kept his Commandments b, and 
their lies c cauſed them to err d, after the which erhcir 
Fathers f have walked g. 

Y God hath in ti» former Verſes threatne the Enemies of his P- o- 
ple, for their Outrages againft his People : Now he oes threate:1 
his People: for their Obftinacy in reiterated Sins: vid. chap. 4. ver..; 
let. x,4,c. Þ Firſt lighted it as it no Excellency were in it, an 
next rejected it as if *'twere not worthy of their Obſervance ; i hus 
they refuſed with an Abhorreace and Deteftation, 4 the whole Law, 
partly by their Immoralities and Tranſgreſſions againſt the juſt Com- 
mands of it, and partly by their falle Worſhip and Idolatry: That 
Law which was given with ſo much Majeſty and Terror on Mount. 
S141 ; from which they ſhould not have departed either to the 
Right-hand, or to the Left ; that Law which was perfe&;, holy and 
uſetul, with which no Fault could be juſtly found s So much the 
greater were their Sins, becauſe committed againſt ſo clear, full, and 
pure a Law. 6 4. e. They have. greatly violated , as the #ebr. 
Phraſe importeth, Neh. 9. 34. Dan. 9,5, 10,11. «c Idols which are 
a Lie, whether commended to them by their falſe Prophets, or choſen 
according to their own Humour and Fancy ; all their falſe ſuper- 
ſtitious and Idolatrous Worſhip, 4 Their Idolatry was firſt their 
Error, and this blinded them, made them more {ottiſh and brutiſh ; 
which was partly from the natural Tendency of this Sin, and partiy 
from the juſt Judgment of God, Rom. 1. 24. and 2 Theſfſ. 2. 15, 
II, 12. e Tdols or Lies. f Firſt in Uz of the Chaldees, hefors 
Abraham was called, afterwards in Egypt, the Wilderneſs, and in the 
Land of Canaan it ſelf. g Succeſſively, one Generation after another, 
Idolatry and Superſtition, and Will-worſhip have been old hereditary 
>1ns, and now ſhall be puniſh'd. 

$s Burl will ſenda fire þ upon Judah z, and it ſhall de- 


vour the Palaces & of Jeruſalem 1. 

h Vid, chap.1. ver.q. let.b,i. i In the Kingdom of the Two Tribes, 
Benjamin is to be included with Fudah, as elſewhere hath been already 
often obſerved. & Vid. chap. 1. ver. 4. let. 1, m. 1 The chief City of 
Fudab's Kingdom, the City of God, where was the Temple of God,ancl 
where were the Seats of Judicature ; the Holy City, but now to be 
deſtroyed for its Sins, as well as other incorrigible Nations: Now 
this was fulfilled by Nebuchadnezzat, about 200 Years after this 
Prophecy of Amos. 

6 4] Thus ſaith the LORD, For three Tranfſgreſſi- 
ons 2 of Iſrael », and for four I will not turn away rhe 
puniſhment © thereof ; becauſe * they p fold the 
Righteous q for fſilyerr, and the poor s for a pair of 
ſhoes f. 

m Vid. chap, 1. ver, 3. let. 3,4 # The Kingdom of the Ten Tribes 
under the Government of Feroboam the Second at this time, againſt 
which the Prophet was chiefly ſent, though he began with Syria and v- 
thers, by the Threats againſt which Nations he prepared both 5:42h 
and {ſrael to hearken and conſider, 0 Vid. chap. 1. ver.3. let. co p Thoſe 


who by the Appointment of the Law had Power to hear, and decide 


Cauſes between Man and Man z Judges, and Witneſſes like the corrupt 
Judges. + For Bribes were their Aim, and they would at any time 
ſell Juſtice to the higheſt Bidder. q The Innocent, or thoſe who had. 
a = and righteous Cauſe, for the Prophet here ſpeaks of the Juſtneſs 
of the Cauſe, not of the exatt Juſtice, or abſolute Righteouſnels of th= 
Ferſon. 7 Money was the moſt current and prevailing Commodity 
with theſe Judges, but Monies-worth would do the Feat too, if Mo- 
ney were out of the way. 5s When poor Men went to Law with poor 
Men before theſe Judges, and the thing they contended for was of 
ſmall value, the Contenders too had light Purſes, and could not give 
a conſiderable Bribe. t A very poor Bribe expreſs'd here prover- 
bially, would ſway with theſe Judges, who gaped ſtill after ſome- 
what of Gain from all. 

7 Thar pant after the duſt of the earth on the head of 
the poor 4, and turn aſide the way of the meek x : and a 
man and his father will 


profane my holy name z. 

u Or, ſwallow up, as the word is moſt frequently turned by our In- 
terpreters, and ſo perhaps more plainly 1s their Cruelty and Violence 
{et torth, in that they make a Prey of the Poor, who walk with Duſt 
on their Heads by reaſon of Diſtreſſes that are upon them ; and with- 
out any Compaſhon towards them, greedily, and as at once (waJlow 
up;anq devour the Poor, whom by the Law of God, and the Office 
they bear (as Judges) they ſhould deliver out of the hand of the Op- 
preſſor. x Perverſly,and maliciouſly miſinterpret the Ations, Words, 
and Deſigns of the Humble and Meek ; of the Compaſſionate and 
Merciful, who pity the Poor in theſe Straits and Dangers. y Theſe 
corrupt Judges, and violent Oppreflors, are alſo ſhameleſs Adulterers 
and Fornicators ; they commit that Lewdneſs which the better-tutor'd 
Heathens abhor and forbear ; a kind of inceſtuous Pollution, the Fa- 
ther and Son keep the ſame Harlot, and go in unto her. x Thus 
they profanely diſhonour me by caſting off my Law, and doing that 
which is ſo ſhametully undecent, and unlawful z and giving Heathen: 
occafion to blaſpheme my Name, and either think, or ſay, lize Pev- 
ple, like God. | 

8 And. they lay themſelves down a urn Clothes 


laid * to Pledg b, by every Altar c, and they drink * Fx. 22. 


the Wine of j| the condemned 7 the Houſe of tneir cp 
God 4d. od 

2 1 he Jews of old did not, as we, fit upright at their Feafrs and 
Meals, but in a Polture of greater Falz, did lean, or liz on one fide, 
ſo here they lay themſelves down 4. e. put themielves in a teaſting .. 
Poltrre. 6 Of which the Law had expre!17 aid, none ſhould detain 
them all night, Deur. 24.12,13. c Impudznt Sinners, who dare thus, 
before the Altar where they ſuppole thar Go:l is prefear, ring tacir 
crying inexcuſable Oppreſhons, and feait 1a tacred aces, on tacred 
Viands with bloody Minds and opprefive PraQtice:, an feels Me oy 
from God when they ſhew- £9 Mecy to tae Vo0r, 4 To compicrs 


Si 44 


Cap. II. 


= 


Ap FII"4 4 of - hy was 
—» M533. _—_— = _— L p Rs - 8 ? - Sf 5X 4 6 
- Ts —X * - _—_— 4 2 a. . A F.- ou ['s - _ 
| ens re nt "7 hy 4 or 347 ou "7? = . —_— - _ - rf 0-44 well - = =: 
Ix ARS - gu 2 - mew - wg or 2? Rs oo Aa ww TE TE » TY $ _ 
te Nee LF \ [2M TIN _-_ 7-4 op, OT | is .” ome L we Ne. wot A 
E 7 x" 4d . os went os Nd {he 28E In : hy ua - > A 8 Gy 
7 ON ne OE he bn __—_ 4 <yS50<S 6 mn , ” 5 —_ Fre > - 
Fe a: - pe 4 7 ” 
ex "F P "ps - hn YL * =p . 
- Mo . - jo. 3 ory" —_—— - 4 $07 Ws » FYy _ ow 
ns w* 4 T5 jt 
» 


-_ 


— _ 4 o 
IF CEE En DA. > I TT Dn © 4 R _ a — . 
VS, = » Wd Iv Wed ps nm { —_— - ns © oh n —_— 
, » by _— " —_— ; x A I. fl - UQ - X =  —— 
IETF ; z G ——_ > 2 » » ma nA Cu; Y wo. S A x 6, . 
. a ot m_ - - LA - 
" - — 


-—qB BA 3 OE 


wo Ee» 


0 in unto the ſame || maid y, to |[Oryour, 
S __ _ vs. - 


2 8 
© 4 . 
_ Ae 4 


SIS 


Su 


Fn Fn o "4% » op» £-0e HD 0 
= RaF's bh -_- J - —— X74 4. - X K 
6 Z ” . _—_ 7 =, = pA © » : "RO® - 
_ > + Ds ng D-IL, Log wy b- — - ——_ _ Ea eas " F ” 
F, = s {- > wn ot Lb ” ww "I, ——_ - 4 iP © 7” F = % _ % _ 5 = _— 0" Y —_ _ 
*. % : _* «pe S - _- Y G. ny A 
. X es 48 — i _ ds As . 
.: _ "e , "A, = ” 
Fe, we ..0 _ "Y) P33 R _—_— .. + COAL R ” c hd ape hag , 
We o _ SIE EF. - — yo EE = 0 EX - + Ce nh er TN - ho - Wen, a Ka) I: 6 os cy * I. Coon a a - - -—- g_ -_ ————s . 
-; a "Ws —_. » 5 Y " Ms =< E —* . hs ” nates > Im 067 a « oO TS 5 = . 8:3 > : x Y 
MST np 4 - y bo a oy ” 2 . i _ I - ap = - "__ 4 © go : - .- _ - _ os hs p - - —_ : q 
. » 4 £**& He's 4 3” 6s ” a Ps "I" ; aoPs - ” oy « PC . . — % Pu ths. WS -- -— ” _— 
< -— pag 4 ——_ —_ wv wo 0.2. _ -w _ PR” Dr S nc ” NV. x . _ _ FR. ,4 A W TY ©. at o 7 7 =D 2 —_—C_— » ee” — L "_ F"—_ —_— ag, ens om, ores 4 - E -— 4 = S SRL, os 6 _ 
: 4 I ID - - . 0 — © _— 1 ng a * bes he ot ns > —_ 5 = - T . 3 rE : [.og'6 
C2 7 "- . »s?! g—_—_ - y - ad -_ -- 4 - . ” - - ” _— - n_ + 4 - - as 4 p: p e - _ = 
. = —_— [ne *% "I q, AM wm was - —_— xe . _—_ Spa 4 p& 4 - ” pn * np q ” > oa « : w A a> = 2 Hf» . - PEC > 4- "a a 
Dp - nas 8 4 tes, 54 FRET 4 2, 9437's; £% ey "= ———_ > .- a SEE . = _ ” »1#4-..8. wp : > >y f WH 4 — . : ” —_— RD web. Wu . _—_ —_—— Re . —_ * = —- > ions og —_ - 2-25-44 £ = - D . -_ - - 
s - a6] x , is 4 " OI > +. +4" = — — we © 5M þ4 "TV KY _ p : ON <a fn kh > . - Wax 2 ” BOL Ez . by h > ” Y * — $5 = S993 WE wy A Ro d "IFC "> - v =" - ” A Dons: -—% y 1 So « ar; _ _ 
1 ky y 4 4 : PI ha : wm / 4 o- : - + -- . - -- 4 Ca——_ x, pg op » 3.4 D- - roo We - Ps I rn . b _ pL 3} . w_ % —" 5 » , / - Su - wx WAS 
1 4 a Cr Se - 4 . : er : . . 29g 2 - - - ” " = ” p © _ Y _—_ - . : Po, . - . N " -- F _ "RI 0 
< 1 ja- Fa 54. bg a. — IRC WAR <p pA © EY : * , - —_ "ITT, ; 3 © PREY . dig a, * "_ .- rr ——_ . = - _ — — _ ; þ wy EIS a: v 8H eo Aw IE c: 4; 9.8 7 : , " " > ne RE T Ws Oe WEN Lea a 
oy — gy Ione re — _——— ——— Oy © oo Et p—_——_ RS — - o \ 22d IR. "—_ we in A Cy yy Is tres 4 —— a v Lao "24 MTS op NT nn ER WE. 7, If + a . 0 GX b OO th me _ 
- Pre”. <0 . . + ps? — cede CES BE 2c a _—_ PT ITED ” —D,- ; XX wr _—_- es 4 - e- - -. - . wy : —_ - "Ap". TIE TORS. + - - 4 : aL _ 
I » a8 Jos 12 * £5 bp _— D 6 5” 2g _— Md 2 lr K £53 "i £$-2-II — " bh $355 4 ,”F "8" ti a » CIO IEEE « -.-- Ts > bo 75 44:0 EA W—__ On. -- — 9 
a; Sv kaz7 TI Ine bY - I mA "XI==- I—_ þ o_ A =—= : > tC "i p - p; _ _—_ A , Lon —_ * -_— £4, 
* 6 _ ey " = *4 -» 6} : : - : Arte - - 4 - wm & _ Rd Yon "ONES VV _ Li. - —_ "aghr & _ -e : > _ f - x - m_ - Jus ” = : —» =, y= a 
= b _ > F- \ n . - — _ =£ L : jg " -_ 2 ſ - m_ £ - __ ws þ rm hg _ Jeon p_ ” _ - " - I 
” eating wh # Y © C *", Ae b oS.. 29.) 45 " y " «1 4.40 1. = ww Ly 2 W +. 494 _— —_—_— __ MC ood 4 = Ps $oe G eg : £ $IX., eh > -3 \ oo: ”- E CVS S 
FI - \ 9 or Fei J * q _ - Wo 2» 1 " : o =. -P - « þ. - N * - "= k- ' S = ho. 
- a W5-x -". ay of IT IG "4 4 dt E - 5 > vw T T A , : q wad L p "I ia » 2 4p C ER 4 - b- i . __ * 9 4 "wer wy <xbths TH" * "a Dy iy ) -*Y oy _ 
- ba __ CURE X% Le - = $4neÞ* 1, : : OF 1 2 <4 : wy - _ X : — ot — 0 —_ - 4 _o_—_ —_ {act q FEY ee: m i n } 5 L, T ta —_—o_ 
4 . 3 3 _ h_ - o _— $ ag : "7,007 a. os. py es " p ,, - 6 : = « = : 
2 , , x 4 + - = Þ= 7 ot RS. wg XK x. £0 ©W4 Cacad & FILTS PE? *2.. © "Th ”" Wang Þ 
S - = . WY 2.6 4 wwe? . 7 . : 4 I ” . 
p- 44 @ ” - —_ » 5 


as have 
fined, or 
mulcted. 


Chap. II. 


tir Wickedneſs, they offer their Drink-offerings in Wine which 
taey bought with the Fines and pecuniary Mulets laid on the Inno- 
cnt and Guilile; and thus rejoice ia their Vielence, wailft God 
Lates Rubbery for a Eunrnt-offtering. ; 
*Num.2 9 © Yer * deſtroyed | e the Amorite f before 
A them g, whoſe * height þ was like the height ot The 
SIE Cedars 7, and he was ſtrong as the Oaks k, yer 1 ae- 
-HT*og {troyed 1 his fruit from above mm, and his roots fron be- 
4432423. NEaLN nm. 

e Whom they hare ungratefully forgotten and forſaken, and ſet up 
Idol; in competition with me z nay, caft off my Law aac Worihip, 
and embracd Tdolatry, worihippd Idols that never could do rhem 
Good, nor deftroy their Enemies z this they did atter 1 had de- 
ſtroycd cheic Enemies. f The mighticft Nation of all the Canzanines, 
and therefore exprefly mentioned as inſtance of God's great MErcy, 
and J/raz7s great Ingratitude ; By this Nation mentioned, all the rett 
of Candanitiſp Nations are t be underſtood : '1hele Amorries dwelt 
beyond F0r.{an,between that and Moab,and their Land fell by Lot unto 
keuber, Ga4; and halt Tribe of Manaſſeh. g The Children of 1jrael 
under the Condutt of Moſes, Deut. 2. 24, ©. and 3. I. £0 Ver. 14+ Al 
the very light of whom theſe mighty Men fled, for God had ſtruck 
them with a Terror that they migit not ſtand before raed. þ The 
Amorites were Men of largeſt Size, they were of the Race of the 
Giants, Numb. 13. 32, 33» 7 Ihis 5a proverbial Speech, and ſets out 
the Amorites, excee-iing ordinary Men in Stature, as much as the Cedar 
exce:ds ordinary Trees in Height, # Another proverbial Speech, 
acnuting their great Strengrh above the Strength of other Men. 1 Ut- 
terlv rooted them out. m Trees propagated by Fruit are cimi- 
niſh'd, by defiroying the Fruit which is the Seed of them z io God 
cut off the Children of the Amerizes, and thereby prevented all Succeſ- 
tion. # This refers to the deſtroving the old. Standards, that pre- 
ſear Generation; this laſt Claule reters co the Command God gave, 
LIEU. 7. 2. 

10 Alſo I * brought you up os from the land of 
Egypt py and led you q forty years 5 through the 
\Wilderncſs s to polls ft rhe land of the Amo- 
Tite 7, 

0 You did not reſcue your ſelves out of the hands of your Enemies 3 
] dil in meer Mercy, with a mighty Arm, fave and reſcue yon, and 
brought you out, p Where you were opprefled Servants, and expo- 
ſed ro ruin. q As a Shepherd leads his Flock, nay, miraculouſly con- 
duting by the Villar of a Cloud, and Fire, ani feeding with Manna 
from Heaven. 7» Reckoning from their coming out of Egypt. $s They 
paſſed through many Wildernzfles named in Scripture according as 
they were then called ; bur all theſe lay ſo contiguous each to other, 
that they all made up one great Wildernels, as the many Names 
given to parts of the Sea make us know what = page Part is ſpoken 
of, but all make one Sea, r As an Heir potſefleth that he hath an 
hereditary Right to. u Including all the reſt of the accurſed, and 
diſpotleſicd Nations. 

11 And I raiſed up x of your Sons for Prophets y, 
and of your young men z for Nazarites a. Is it not 
even thus b, O ye children of Iſrael c ? faith the 
LORD d. 


x Gave Prophetick Endowments, ſtirred up their Minds, commiſ- 
ſioned them to Propheſy, at carried them throughby an undaunted 
Courage given tothem that they ſhoul:l not fear to ſer upon, or faint 
in aticading to their Office. y Did not employ Strangers, whoſe 
Aﬀcttion you might with ſume colour of reaſon ſuſpe& ; but your 
own Sons, whoſe Aﬀettions to you and to their own Country are 
unqucftionable, were ſent Prophets to tell you of your Sins, to foretel 
your Dangers, and to impurtune you to repent of your Sins, and to 
prevent your Dangers. #3 Though that Age be generally inclined to 
pleaſe their own Fancies, to walk after the light of their Eyes, Eccleſ. 
11.9. yet did God change the Mind of tome of them in their Youth, 
and inclined them to eminency in Religion, to he Examples to others. 
a Who were Religious Perions, under Vow bound to a very ſober, 
abſtemious, afd holy Life ; either for ſome certain limited time, 

. or tor thcir whole Life ; ſee Numb. 6. 1, 2, ©, Theſe were not 
to drink any ftrong or intoxicating Liquors, 6 Gad appeals to them 
i1 this Matter, whether he bad not done this for them,given Prophets 
to teach them, aud Nazarites to be Examples to them ; in both which 
God fiewed his Love and Care of chem, c Apoſtatizcd J/rael, you of 
the Ten Tribes. d This added to excite them to ſerious pondering 
wl.a: 15ſaid to them. 

12 But ye d gave the Nezarites Wine e to drink, 
and commanded f the Prophets g, ſaying , Propheſie 
uot h. | 

d For whoſe Benefit both Nazarites and Prophets were raiſed, you 
who ſhould have heard their Word, and imitated their Example. 
e Importuned, urged, or it may be (as is the Cuſtom of exceſhve 
Drinkers )) forced them to drink Wine, to violate their Vow, and con- 
temn God's Law too, Numb. 6. 3, 4. f By this Paſſage it appears that 
they vere Men in Auth: rity who did this; It is not probable that mean 
Perſvns who had no Authority would enjoin Silence on the Prophets, 
Jf4. 30. 10. chap. 7.13, Mich. 2.6. It is evident Amaziah was chief 
Vriett in Bethel, and by virtue of his Jurifdittion there filenceth the 
Prophet. g. The true, faithtul, and plain dealing Prophets, who re- 
buked their Sins, requircd them to repent, and threatned Judgments 
if they did not repent. þ Vid. 4. 30. 10. Mich, 2. 6, 11. and chap. 


K'X.J2.<1, 


jOr,mwil” 72, 1d ; | 

NG = RE: Behold 7, || 1k am preſſed! under you, as a carr is 

tht = ; Prelied that is tull of ſheaves m. ; 

# art fil of i Hitherto the Lord by the Prophet had declared the Sins of the 

ſheaves Kingdom of the Ten Tribes ; now he is about to pronounce Judg- 

preſſerk, Ment ag2inſt them : hg calls tor their Attention, and diligent weigh- 
ing what he is about to ſpeak. & The Lord who have fo multiplied 
Mercies to this People. / Some rcad this Paſſage actively, and make 
this the Senſe; I will load you with theſe Judgments as a Cart is 
loaded, and you ſhall cry and groan under theſe Judgments, as a Cart 
heavy-loaded makes a noiſe in its Motion uniler fuch IPceflures, 


HMOS. 


| 


m Pcrhaps Sheaves, the T.oading of a Harveſr-ſcaſen, are + pt 
intimate the Ripeneſs of their Sins, and God's reapir- forth +1, 
cutting them down by his Judgments, and carrying them ; vice 7 
be threlhed by tarcher Judgments. x ; fea 
14 Theretore » the flight ſhall periſh from the {\, at 
and the ſtrong p ſhall not ſtreagth2a his torce qo SA 
oj - Is | PH ED, oo roy he | 
{hail the mighry r deliver -| himlelf. | F 
: A = ; inn 
n Becauſe chey firſt loaded God with their Sins, now he loads +1, ; and 
wich Punithments; no way of eſcape ſhall be leit. o Not by &,.;." Pre 
neſs of toct flifing trom the Judgments, for their Enemies (x1 1. on; 
{witter than they, 1/2. 30. 16. p Natural Strength ot Buy "* Iy fl 
not deliver. q Such, though they might do more than weaker yj... whic 
yet ſhall not ſave themſelves; for they. ſhall not know hoy tg then 
their Strength, they ſhall want Courage to do it. 7 The Valian; ,., 
Man of greateſt Courage, ſhall not be able to deliver him! j;, , 5 
Courage ſhall fail. "Y a 
I5 Neither ſhall he ſtand s that handleth the boy ; and 
and be that is ſwift of foot ſhall not deliver himjeF, = 
neither ſhall he that rideth the horſe deliver hin. — 
ſelf. then | 
s Though at diſtance from the Enemies, yet ſhall not dare to kee God 1 
his Place. t Much uſed in the Wars of thoſe Times, and uſe keepl 
ſtrong and valiant Men, but now both Strength aid Valour ſho ſelves 
fail 1/r4e/'s Bow-men. u« This is the ſame, and explains that inths fate ar 
14th, verſe, let. o. x Here the Prophet foretels that the Swiftne; take 1 
the Horſe, which ſome will make uſe of, ſhall as little avail, nor bi it: ſo 
Strength of his Horſe ſhall carry him through, nor his Swiftneſs @ry his Ne 
him away from the hand of the Purſurer. 6 © 
16 And he that ts - couragious among the migh. 'WF- plc n 
ty y, ſhall fice away naked = in that day a, faith chr” and 
LORD b. . qV 
This Verſe is not a bare Repetition of what he had aid he. 7) appro? 
fore to confirm it , but he doth foretel an inevitable Ruin t * ticular 
thoſe who were the moft likely to eſcape , and a moſt ſhame and Ti 
Manner of Flight. y A Deſcription of the moſt famous Warrigy 33+ 7+ 
amongſt 1/742}, ſuch as were known for Valour among the mighty near *t 
and valiant Ones, like David's Worthies, ſuch as had the Heart q ſuch 11 
a Lion. 7x Either without his Clothes and Furniture, or with ordinal 
nis Weapons and Arms which were caft away'to expedite his Flight, founde 
4 When God will by the Aſrians, under the Condutt of Txluj ther | 
Pileſer firſt, and: finally under the Condu& of Shalmaneſer, firaitzy Afi 
theſe Sinners , and befiege them in their Cities. 6 All confirm Elle. 
under the Seal of Heaven, and on 
the han 
CHAP. III. es 
; 6 7 W 
God puniſheth 1ſrael above all others becauſe of bu great hindneſs t) thn, reveals 
\ and their ingratitude to him, 1=——$, A publication of Gol's rh phets 4 
reous judgments, and their cauſes, 9,——15. P* YSinc, 
: thing fox 
I Ear a this word b that the LORD hath ſpoken: OY for 
againſt you d, O children of Iſrael e, againſt tie ment to. 
whole family f which I brought up from the land d ———_— 
Egypt g, ſaying, i His Pu 
a With Ear and Mind, conſider it well, for this is to hear indecd, ben 
b Which is ſpoken, and the thing decreed too of God. « The Lot Will in 
who did ſhew you greateſt Kindneſs, and whom you have repaid vil whom thy 
greateſt Ingratitude, the Everlaſting God, who changeth not, hitt and by C 
determined and declared his determinate Purpoſe. &d Or, to, or, «a through | 
erning ; for if Menaces are Words againſt them, yet Advice, Extot | 
tations, and Promiles are to, and concerning thole to whom they 8 TI 
[poken. e Subjetts of Feroboam the Second, now King of the Ta the Lot 
Tribes. f And let the: Two Tribes confider too how far they at eh? 
concerned in the Prephet's reproving for Sin, calling to repeit 0 e God 
Sin, and threatning if they do not repent. g Vid. chap. 2. vr.1% fo God h 
let. 0, þ. | =) a and prox 
2 Ycu only have I known h of all the Families i of ti World; 
Earth : * therefore & I will -þ puniſh / you for all you Wl when the 
Inicuities m7. | TR 
h Choſen, made near to my {1f, adopted to be my peculiar Ons; or th wk 
to beSons andDaughters to me ; to you only have I revealed my vbvt uh ar 11; 
Will, and given you my Law for your Rule and Direttion, and", | 3g 
Promiſes for your Encouragement, and required you have no 0tie, Bro i M 
Gods before you. # This poſſibly may intimate God's choofing til rg, 
when they were but a ſmall Family as in Abraham's day, and when Bn © = 
ther Families were as con(iderable as that of Abrabam was the Grow ** 9-0 
of which into a mighty Nation, was from the Favour and Bleſling 9CP 
God, performing his Promiſes to their Fore-fathers ; and £59 laces in 
aggravate their Apoſtacy from God , which in the next worG i ſelves } 1 
threatens to puniſh, & Here is an elliptick Speech ; for God doth no wth 
puniſh his peculiar People, becauſe they are ſo near and dear to © gre 
but for that being ſo, they had forgotten their Duty and Obligat® preſſed þ 
to God, and had abuſed all theſe his Mercies. 1 My Hand ſhall pu b You P 
certainly, whoever are the Means, and whatever is the Manner; ple 1/rael, 1 
which you ſhall hear more, but I will certainly viſit for it. taveto do 
your Idolatries, and Sins againſt the Precepts of the firſt Table, ® liſtines, cþ4 
all your Injuſtices and Sins againſt the ſecond Table, all your Dc - Court at ./ 
ings of the Law of Piety and Juſtice z none of their Works ſhall” Land, let t 
be forgotten, Amos $. 7. : bour Land 
3 Can two walk together, except they be agre@d* * hulk 
Here the Prophet threatens this People, that God would beg" _ toget, 
Vitications and their Puniſhments, in his forſaking them ; and cr Doing 


by this Interrogatory endeavour to convince them, that h£) - them, nt 
not with any Keaſon expett better from him : It could not be f 
{hould loag have God's Preſence with them, or that he ſhould * 
among them, and bleſs them, while they walk'd to contrary it _ 
They could not in Reaſon hope that there should be any tries 
Commerce , where was fo little Agreemenc and Friends 


Retaliation they muſt expect from the Lord, he will terfalke W oo on thi 
who have forlaken him. W wg 6 
4 Will a Lion rore in the Foreſt whcn bc 14 "Bu #9 Y. 


P14 


ip. III, 


+, prey ? will a young Lion + cry out of his der}, if he have 
tib taken nothing ? We | 68 

010% Tn this Verſe, by a double Similitude, Amos certifieth the Jews of 

near and inevitable Puniſhment: Firſt by Similitude of a Lion roaring 

at fight of his Prey, which ſeldom eſcapes when the Lion roareth a- 

ainſt it ; The Lion uſually 2s ſo nigh to his Prey when he roareth,that 

he leapeth on It preſently, and teareth it. So here God would have 

finning 1/rael know that their Sins ' had provoked him to Wrath, 

and that his Judgments were near at hand : Nay nearet yet, like a 

Frey dragged by the old Lion into theBen for the youngLions to feed 

on ; ſo was their Cale, their Enemies, the 4ſrzans, ſhould” as certain- 

ly devour them as the young Lions 1n the Den do devour the Prey 

which is brought to them. If the Departure of God from them affedt 

them not, perhaps the Fiercenieſs of Lion-like Enemies may affect them. 

Can a bird # fall in a ſnare o upon the Earth where no 

in is for him 2 ſhall ozetake up a ſnare from the Earth, 


and have taken nothing at allp? _ | 
1 A Sparrow' properly, one kind put for all ſorts. o Theſe are ta- 
ken by Nets ſpread on the Earth for that End; and theſe Nets are 
watched by the Fowler, attending till the Birds are within the Shrape, 
then he draws the Net over them ; So here, for your Sins, O J/rael ! 
God will ſpread his Net z he will, as a watchful Fowler, attend and 
keep his Eye upon you, and caft the Net over you. þ Flatter not your 
Glves as if you ſhould finally eſcape, becauſe you have ſo long been 
fafe and proſperous z though the Fowler doth long wait, he will not 
take up the Snare before all the Prey, or ſome of it at keaft, be taken in 
it: ſo the Lord, againſt whom you have ſinned, and who hath ſpread 
his Net for you, will certainly let it lie till you are taken in it, 
743 6 Shall a trumpet be blown q in the City 7, and the Peo- 
+ ple not || be afraid s? * ſhall there be evil # in a City #, || 


Tand the LORD * hath not done y, zt ? | | 

q When an Alarm is ſounded, by which notice is given of Danger 
5 7 approaching, of an Enemy invading the Land. r Any City, but par- 
- ticularly in a Frontier City, in which were Watchmen on the Wal!i: 
and Towers to give notice of an Enemy, 1/a. 52. 8. Exek. 3. 17. and 
33-7. 5, Aﬀetted with the Danger, to weigh how great 'tis, how 
near *tis, whether it be beft to prepare to relift it, or to fly from it ; 
ſuch like Aﬀe&ions doth the Alarm of War work in the Min: of +en 
ordinarily, and there is £ood Reaſon for it : But though God hath 
founded the Alarm, yet brutiſh, ſtupid, ahd ſinful Jae! fear aor, nei- 
ther conſult what is the beſt Courſe to prevent the danger. rt Of 
Afiiftion and Sorrow, ſuch as Plague, Famine, &c. u Or any where 
elle. x The eternal, holy, and righteous Governor ot all in Heaven 
and on Earth. y Either immediately by his own hand, or mediately by 
the hands of thoſe he employs ; the Evil of Puniſhment he will exe- 
cute and bring upon 1ſraet by the hands of the Afſyrians, in due time. 


6. 7 Surely y the Lord GOD will do nothing z, but * he 
revealeth a- his ſecret b unto his ſervants c the Pro- 


| phets d. | | 

' YSince that, or for as much as, +4 Uſually the Lord doth no great 
thing for or againſt his People, neither brings great Judgments upon 
them for Sin, rior beſtows great good upon them for their Encourage- 


EZ 5. ons Go |= 


__ - co ww 


$2 


Ne ment to daty. & But he foretelleth the one and the other. by his Pro- 
a phets to his. People, that they may by Repentance prevent the Evil 
threatned, and by conſtancy in Obedience attain.the Good promiſed. 
bHis Purpoſe and determinate Counſel, which would never be known 
aforehand if he did not reveal it. c Who fear the Lord, and do his 
th Will in the midſt of worſt of times, they are holy Men of God to 
itd whom the Lord revealeth his Will. 4 By Office called of God to this, 
a2 and by Gifts fitted for this, and by extraordinary Aſhffance carried 
o through this Work. 
ar 8 The Lion hath Roared e, who will not fear f ? 
ſe the Lord GOD hath ſpoken 2, who can but Prophe- 
an fieh? | 


e God hath threatned, and as a Lion roareth when near his Prey ; 
ſo God hath terribly threatned—what is near to be done ; Amos lived 
and prophefied in Feroboarm's time about the 3150th Year, of the 


tit World; and theſe threatned Judgments began to come upon J/rael, 
Our when the Conſpiracies and Uſurpations of Shallum, Menabem, &c. fil- 
led all with Blood and Confuſion about the 3177th Year of the World. 
ws, f What wiſe Man, who that is ſolicitous for his own Good and Safety, 
hot or that hath any Aﬀe&tions for the Good of others, will do leſs than 
inf Teverence and fear, and prevent by a ſpeedy Repentance ? g This is 
tet plainly what was before figuratively ſet forth, God had ſpoken to his 
" Prophets, but dreadful things againft Iſrael. b They dare not con- 
-n0 WY <2! them 3 Amos cannot but ſpeak what he had heard, Fer. 1. 17. Ats 
oink 4+ Ig, and 5. 25, 
% 9 T Publiſh þ in the Palaces at Aſhdod 7, and in the Pa- 
$ laces in the Land of Egypt k, and ſay, Aſſemble your 
4s It {; [ : 9 9 
roy elves ] upon the Mountains of Samaria m : and behold 
bo WF "the great tumults 0 in the midſt thereof, and the || op- 
at preſſed p in the midſt thereof 9. 
pu b You Prophets whom I have ſent to threaten the Sins of my Peo- 
T3 ple /74el, now invite Strangers to come and obſerve what juſt Cauſe I 
x f haveto do what I threaten. #7 One of the principal Cities of the Phi- 
Jon liftines, chap. 1, ver. $. lets 1, and Zeph. 2. 4+ Let thoſe that are in the 
out Court at Aſþdod, and have a mind to travel a while out of their own 
Ie! Land, let them know what ſtrange Sights they may ſee in their Neigh- 
ur Land, *k Let the young Noblemen of Egypt come too, let as 
! many as will come. 1 By an Appointment ( if it may be ) let them 
g meet together, and make their Obſervations, and then judg between 
{ doll their Doings and their Sufferings z my Judgments, ani the Czuſes of 


coull | them, mEither the whole Kingdom of Samaria, or the Ten Tribes ; 
x (1 7 Elle it may denote the Great Men and Cities of Samaria : let Eg yp- 
| wal _ and Philiſtines in their Travels up and down over the Kingdom 
on n ſra!], affociate them{elves with the Great Men, and converſe in 
OS: 2 Take an exa@ View of all done by them and in them. 

© {editions Counſels and Revellious Conſpiracies, begun amongft 


the on the Death of Feroboam 2. and continued one atter another 


AMOS: 


doing of all ; beſides all former Violences of Barſhi, Zimri, Omri an! 
Febu, who took the Kingdom out of the hands of their Matters 
T boſe of Shatum, Menabem, Pehab and # ſp2z, atted in the Times .4- 
mos pountell at, p Multitudes of oppreſſed Ones in thoſe Times, when 
the Uſurpers took it to he their Intereft to cruſh all they teared or !ut- 
petted. q Samaria the chief City of the Kindom, and in other Cities ; 
yea, rather through the whole Kingdom of Samzriz. 

10 For they know not 7 to do right s, ſaith the 


their Palaces y. 

7 Who oppreſs others, do it as unlearned Lawyers and Judges do ; 
they are ſhamefully ignorant of the Law of God. s What js equal 
between Man and Man they will not confider, nor do they care whe- 
ther it be done or not. # As Men lay up Wealth in their Treaſures, 
they fill their Houſes. u Perverting Judgment, firſt condemning the 
Innocent, next ſeizing all as forfeited by Law ; ſo they did no doubt 
in thoſe Times of Rebellion and Uſurpations; Sequeſtrations and De- 
cimations, &c. were then too, x The true Name of all their Pro- 
ceedings, however palliated, » This intimates to us that the greateſt 
among them were chief Attors herein, vid. Zeph. 1. 9g. but as they 
ſtored up Violence, they alſo treaſured up Miſery and Deſolation too, 
as the Heb, elegantiy imports. | | 

IT Theretore z thus ſaith the Lord GOD, An adver- 
ary a there ſhall be even round about the Land b ; and he 
ſhall bring down thy ſtrength from thee c, and thy Pala- 
ces ſhall be ſpoiled 4. 

2 Becauſe of all the Violence and Rapine, with other crying Sins 
multiplied againſt God in the midſt of them. a The Afhrian with u- 
nited Forces, 6 on all ſides ſhall beſet thee, the whole Land ſhall be 
but as one befieged City, out of which none, or ſo few as next to 


none, ſhall eſcape. c Lay low all thy Fortreſſes, break all thy Power, 
kill thy valiant Men, deftroy thy Armies, and by force take thy ſtrong 
Holds.. 4 Where thou laidſt up thy Spoils gotten by Violence and 
Oppreſfſion ; there thy Enemy ſhall find them, and take them away as 
lawtul Plunder ; and when thy Riches are carried out, they ſhall burn 
che Palaces themſelves tao. 


an ear þ, ſo ſball the Children of Iſrael i be taken out that 


th2 beds 


maſcvs 92in a Couch n. we 


In brief, this Verſe foretels how few, and with what Difficulty they : 

ſhall eſcape, who are not ſwallowed up of the approaching Judgments, 
and 1t is elegantly expreſſed in the following Similitude. e As the 
Shepherd doth hardly reſcue a ſmall part of a Sheep or Lamb, when 
the Lion hath feized and torn it. f 'The fierceſt, ftrongeſt, and hold- 
eſt Creature ; not a Bear or Woolf. g Which are Parts the ravening 
Lion leſs regardeth, and laft eateth. 6b Leſs conſiderable than the 
Legs. 7 Some of the Children of J/74e), or ſome of the Ten Tribes ; 
but the poorer, meaner, and more worthleſs of them, & ſhall eſcape 
when Samaria is taken. 7 Lying in ſome dark Corner, and ona piece 
of a Bed, as the Poor do in moſt places. m The chiefeſt City of Syriz 
taken by Tiglath Pileſer, much about the time when he wafted 1ſrae! in 
aid of Abaz againſt Refin and Pekah, » Some few of the Poorer among 
thera alſo ſhall eſcape, pitied by the Enemy when he findeth them 
weakly and fick upon their Couch, | 


13 Hear yeo, and teſtify p in the houſe of Jacob q, faith 
the Lord GOD y, the God of hoſts s, 


o Prophets. p Publickly declare, and witneſs, make what Proof you 
can of this thing q To the Ten Tribes as firſt, and moſt nearly con- 
cerned herein z and to the Two Tribes alſo, who as guilty of many 
and great Sins, ſo are in danger of many and great Judgments, and 
theſe haftning on them. 7 Aſſure them the Meſſage comes from the 
Lord God. s Who is Lord of all, and hath all Power in his hand : 
when he commands, all the Hoſts of Creatures attend to execute his 
Commands ; ſo that what he threatneth, he will ſurely execute. 


Beth-el y, and the horns of the Altar x ſhall be cut off a, for. 


and fall to the ground b. 

t In the appointed Time, and within compaſs of a little time too z 
God will in his ſet Time make quick work with them. « The many 
and great Tranſgreſſions of the Ten Tribes z theſe God will, as he 
hath foretold by his Prophets, ſeverely puniſh ; and in particular, their 
Idolatry x ere&ed unto the Calves, and on which they offered Sacri- 
fices to thoſe Idols by Fereboam's Appointment at firſt, and by the 
continued Commands of their Idolatrous Governors : It is poſſible 
there might be Altars to other Idols too; ſee 2. Chron. 34. 4. and Zc/. 
$. 11. and 10. 1. which ſee. y Antiently called Zaz, but after Fac 
on his comfortable Viſion did change its Name into Bethel, *twas in the 
Tribe of Benjamin, and one of the two Places Feroboam firſt ſet up his 
Idolatry in. 4 Whether more ſacred Part in their Account, 1 know 
notz but who fled to the Altar, and laid hold on the Horns of it, 
found them a Sanftuary, 1 Kings 2. 28. but theſe now ſhould not be 
Safety to themſelves. 4 The Altars ſhall be pulled down, 5Be caft 
out as common, and trodden under foot with Contempt. 


riſh g, and the great houſes h ſhall have an end 7, faith the oo 36. 


LORD k. ' 

c By the Greatneſs of the Deſolation it ſhall appear that God did 
ſmite though by the Aſſyrian or perhaps it may refer to the Earth- 
quake foretold two Years betere it came, chap. 1. ver. 1. let.'m. +4 
Which probably was in the chief City, where the rich and great Men 
retired in the Winter tirwe as more for their Delight than the Country 
horrid and cold, and ftrip'd of its Glory. e The Houles of Pleature, 
where theNobles and rich Men of J/74e/ ſpent the Summer-time. f Not 
built with, but beautified-with Ivory, or the Elephant's Tooth ; called 
here andelſewhere by way of Eminency the Tooth. g By the Violence 


22. 39. 


ar ol or ns like Mad-men, bent on ruining one another to the un- 


M m . of 


Chap. II1 


LORD ; who ſtore # up violence 4 and || robbery x in j|Oc,ſp677: 


12 Thus faith the LORD, As the ſhepherd -| taketh + Heb. 
out of the mouth e of the Lion F two leps g, or a piece of /ivereth, 


dwell in Samaria k, in the corner of a bed 1, and || in Da- || Or, or 


14 That in the day #' that I ſhall || viſit the tranſgreſ- [| o;,9un. 
ſions of Iſrael upon him #, I will alſo viſit the Altars x of {þ 1-483 


15- And I will ſmite c the * wintex-houſe d with the * Judg, 3. 
Summer-houſe e, and * the houſes of [vory # ſhall pe- 20. 


* i Kings 


P = + 
CS Wo om _ 
- = EN enoue Herr ener oo erred = ts 


Chap. IV. A M 


of the Enemies, thele ſtately Houſes thali be ranfack'd firft, and pulFd 
down next, and left in rubbiſh. & Or many, for the Word tacludes 
both. The Magnificent Palaces of Princes and the Nobles of ſrae!. 2 
Shall ceaſe for ever, either be utterly walted, or ceaſe to be theirs 
whoſe once they were, & All this ſhall intallibly come to pals, and be 
tultiiled in due time. 


2 6 5 AB\'A 


God ſmeareth that all Samaria ſhall be carried Captives for their oppreſſion, 
ilclury and incorribleneſs, notwithſianding their many judgments, 
1-—11. yet by His Majefly and Power intrerh them 10 Tepemance, 
12, IJ. 


1 JF FEar « this word b, ye kine of Baſhan c, that are in 
the movntain of Samaria d, which opprelſs the 
poor e, which cruſh the needy f, which ſay to their Ma- 


{ters g, Bring b, and ler us drink 7. LE 
Tit Verſe ea Introduttion to all that follows in this Chapter. 
« Attentively, and conſider the Coniequences Or It 3 weigh both hae 
and whoſe it is that is ſpoken. 6 Prophecy or Sermon of reproof an 
threatning, Vid, chap. 3. ver, 1+ let. 4, 9, C d. c So Amos bred RG 
Cattel, compares the Mighty, Proud, Wanton, and +5 rg fires = 
of {/rael to thoſe full-fed, ftrong and wanton Beafts which in the _ ls 
did puſhat, hurt and diſturb the weaker Cattet. Some will by this 
anderftand the Com: t-Ladies of 1jrae? in thoſe times 3 but this perhaps 
is too nice, though as in 4b2b's time Fezabe! was at Court, and a Pro: 
moter of Oppreſſicn and Violence, io there might be 1n + ar 
leme like her, and perhaps theſe maybe intended ſecondarily, {> 
ſurely Amos intends the great Men and Governours, whom - ca . 
Kine of Bajiar, a fruitful Country, of which lee £zeb. 39. T . _ 
Nah. 1. 4. 4 Ina Decorum to his firſt alluſion he calls their Places of 
Power, Authority and, Office in the Kingdom of Jrael, Mountains: 
for as thoſe Beaſts grazing on DMountairs grew fat, fo thele _ 
their Fees, Perquitites and Bribes grew intolent and 1nd eg id, 
chap. 3. ver. G. let. m. e The meaner fort of rhe People, the _ 
monalty under their Juriſdidtion, by colour of Law. f By Force an 
open Violence break in pieces the Afficied, who have neither Power 
nor Friend to relieve them. g #usbands lay ſome, lo the Hebr. will 
bear, or it may refer to lome of rhe greateft Othcers in J/rael, who 
had inferiour Officers under them, or the Mafters of the Poor. h 
Get us Commithon, or bring them into our Ccurt and Office, 7 We 
will get by them to feaft on, and revel in drink. ; 
2 The Lord GOD hath ſworn by his holineſs k, that 
* Jer. 16. 10, the days | ſhall come upon you m, that he 7% Will _ 
I 6. you 0 away with * hooks p, and your poſterity q with fiih- 


Had. 1.15» hooks r. ; 

& I have often told you that God had ſpoken, now I aſſure you _ 
the Mighty and Eternal God hath /wor7 the thing, and you mul 
therefore needs conclude it ſure and certain. He hath ſworz by bis 
Holineſs, by himſelf, as he is the Holy God and cannot lie, ſee 7/a/. 
89. 25, 1 Of Darknels, Slaughter, Famine, Deſolation and Captis e 
ty threatned againſt you. m Opprefſors that cruſh the Poor. = Goc 
by the £4ſjrian Army under Shalmaneſer, nay before that time you 


ſhall be taken as Fiſh are taken with the Hook, during the inteſtine | when your gardens k. and your Vineyards [A and your 2, 
hg-rrees m1, and your oliye-trees # increaſed o, * the pal. , 
mer-worm j devoured q them ;, yet have ye not returned|! 
unto me, f:ith the LORD x, 


Wars that are coming upon you. 0 Who now live and hear the 
Word of mos and Hejea, but notwithfianding do continue to att the 
ſame Violence ſtill. p Or, Thorns, as the #cbr, with which they did 
pierce the greater Fiſh Lcfore they had the Skill of making Iron 
Darts, 'as ſome obſerve. q The Children of theſe Oppreſlors. 7 
Shall be taken as filly Fiſh, and as ealily carried away ; the Enemy 
ſhall with delight cninare and dettroy them. 
3 And ye s ſhall go out t at the breaches u, every cow a* 
|| Or, ye that which is before her x, and || ye {hall caſt them into the 
ſeal caſt a- Palace y, ſaith the LORD. ; 
way the 5 Kine of Baſhay, Oppreſſors diſtreſſed by the juſt Hand of God, |r 
tinge of and by the violent Hand of your Enemy. rt Endeavour to make your |f 
zhe Palace. eſcape by Flight. u Which the belieging Enemy made in your Walls 
when Samaria is befieged.' x It shall be an univerial Flight, and with 
great Conſternation, they not able to torecaft where the ſateft, but 
taking which way is readicſt. »y Either caſt away all the Riches and 
Ornaments of your Palaces, or the Prey and Bribes you had laid up 
tt.erez or yes$hall abandon the Palaces ye dwelt in. , 


4 T Come to Beth-el a and tranſgreſs b, at Gil- 
gal multiply tranſgreſſion c ; and bring your ſacri- 


S 


Yr 


+ Heb. fices every morning a, and your tithes after + three 

threeyears years © 

495 4 The known Place of the Mojckolatriz, Calf-Worship. - See chap. 3. 
ver, 14. let. y. 6b This clears it to be an Irony, cither throwing them 
up to their obftinate way of ſinning, giving them over as hopeleſs and 
incorrigible Sinners, or deriding their trutt and dependance on Idols, 
to which they ſacrificed at Berth-el z ſee what will be the ifſue hereof, 
how you hall {ucceed herein. © Giigal was a Place allo where much 
Tdolatry was atted, vid. of. 4. 15. and 9. 15. and 12. 11. Since you 
will not be warn'd, go on, try whether Go4 likes your Sacrifices there 
as well as you like them, and whether they will be a means to pre- 
ſerve from Judgments, or Sins haſtning Judgments on you. 4 In 
the ſame Irony God doth by Amos exprels his own Diſpleaſure, re- 
prove their Sin, and threaten it, though they imitate the inſtituted 
Worship at Ferufalem, Exod. 29. 38, 39. Numb. 28. 3, 4+ © God had 
Dent. 14. 28. commanded cvery third Year that all the Tithe of that 
Year $hould be brought and laid up in a publick Store-houſe, to this 
Law with the ſame Irony doth the rropher allude here. 

+ Heb.of- $-And - * offer a ſacrifice of thankſgiving with lea- q 

= y ven f, and proclaim and publiſh the free-offerings g ; for 

I 7. + this liketh you þ, O ye children of lirael 7, faith the 

I. Lord GOD k. Ws hPa : 

+ Heb. ſo f Allthe reſt of your Will-wors hip, ſ this alſo againſt the expreſ: 

geleve, Law, Tev. 2. 11. but yet you will perfift in it, and. do fo at your Pe- 


ril, try whether it end in_good to you, £ Publickly, frequently and 


CCS 0 


Hand hath been heavy upon you, 1 have ſmitren, 
Heat and Drought have turned your Corn into black and parchel 


ſons were extreamly unkind, and all ſpoiled with it. & About yours 
Houſes for Convenience and Pleaſure. Planted for your ſupport and, 
to enrich you, to chear your Heart. 


neceifary Uſe. o When they were ſeemingly moR fruitful. p il 
Foel 1.3, 1O, 11, 12, 


manner of Egypt #4; your young men have I ſlain x with! 


have made the ſtink of your camps to come up unto your; 
Noſtrils 4 : yet have ye not returned unto me, faith tit! 
LORD b. 


it, and it ſwept you away in ſuch manner, that any obſervant EF 
might have ſeen the Han of God againſt you in it, and might hat? 
read the Commiſkon, ' 
waſteth at noun day. u In which there was ſomewhat extraordina!ſs 
it ſwept away both Men and Beaſts, ſay ſome ; probably *twas - 
Diſeaſe which by the Stroke of the Angel ſeiſed the Firſt-born 1n 
&ypr. Others interpret this with particular reſpe& to the Death & 
chem in going down to ſeek aid of Zgypr, or in their return from E 
£ypt, as'it the Prophet minded them of many that died on the way : 
or from Egypt 3 but the Phraſe in the way is better rendred by ” 
Tranſlators, after the manner. x God was their Enemy, and flew 
young Men the choice of their Srrength and Hope. » In War = fs 
their Neighbouring Enemies in Fehoahaz his time, and $jr14n* 
that too, 2 X7ngs 13. 3+ and 15. 16, and 19. compared. 
Murrain, but by what was worſe to you, by the Hand of thoie *” 
did ride them ; and theſe being ſlain, the Horſes were taken Þ) pe 
Enemy, and added to their Strength and your Danger. #4 50 8 


O FS. 


think to pleaſe me z but you offer them all to Idols, this your Religion 


13 Impiety. b As you invented it, fo it pleaſeth You, and you will nc+ 
be reclaimed. # Ye Hdolatrous Apoſtate 1j7aelires, 
Shall be punish'd by the Lord your God, 


k For theſ? you 


6 © And 11 alſo have given you cleanneſs of teeth », 
in all your Cities 2, and want of bread in all your pla- 
z yet have ye not returned unto me p, faith the 
LORD. 


7 The Lord who gave many Bleſſings to win you to Repentance, 


hath alſo tried what might be done by Judgments. m 1 his is a Des 
(cription of Famine, by one effe of it ; 
are not fouled, as where it is eaten. 
probably *twas that 2 Xings8. 1. long Famine. 
Bread, yet 'twas very ſcarce every where, this Paſſage explains the 
former. p Yet this ſtarving People, repented not of their Idolatries 
nor caft off their Idols; left not their Idols ; left not their Sins of O,. 
prefſon and Cruelty, &c. Vid. Foel 2.12, 13. what you did like re. 
turning was partial and hypocritical, and not laſting. 


where Meat fails, rhe Teeth 
7 It was a general Famine, ang 
0 If there were ſome 


7 And alſo I have with-holden the rain from you q, 


when there were yet three months r to the harveſt, and | 
cauſed it to rain upon one City s, and cauſed it notto 
rain upon another City t : one piece « was rained up- 
- x, and the piece whereupon it rained not y, wither- 
ed z. 


q Your Vanities could not, and becauſe ye did fo greatly fin againſt 


me 1 would not give you Rain, I forbad the Clouds from above, ang 
they thus prohibited dil with-hold their Rain, as I threatned, Dey, 
28. 23, 24. 7 At a Seaſon when your Countrey moſt uſually had, ang 
as then it ever did moſt need Rain, vid. Foel 2. 23. Three Months 
Drought then, as 'twas unuſual in the Courſe of Nature, ſo twasay 
extraordinary Curſe and Punishment on them. s That you might ſee 
my Hand in it and be inſtrudted, I gave Rain to one City; t And with. 
held Rain from the next Neighbour City. u Nay one part of a Field, 
the ſame Field, x Watered and flourish'd ; y Another part dry and 
withered, All this to convince and turn you. 


3 So two or three @ Cities b wandred c unto ore 


City. d to drink water, but they were not ſatisf- 
ed & ; yet have ye not returned unto me, faith the 
LORD f. 


4 Acertain for an uncertain Number. 6 The Places for the Inhab; 


tants by an uſual Metonymy. « It ſeems. to imply that they trare. 
led at ſome uncertainty, as they do who wander and rove about, 41: 
is not unlikely but that in the Prophets times the Story might he 
well known and freſh in Memory, though here no mention is made of 
theſe Cities. e Either that City they went to had not enough for 
them, or durſt not part with it ; or tho they quench'd their thirk, 
yer becauſe they muſt return back to their own dry and waterlek Ci 
ties, Or becaule God withdrew his Bleſſing, they were never the bet 
ter, or elſe not much or long the better. f Vid, vers 6. let. ps 


9 * 1 have ſmitten g you with blaſting h and mildew 


& Toother Judgments inflited on you I have added this alſo, my | 
þ The exceſive 


moot or Aſhes. 7 A Bane to-Corn through roo much wet, the $ex-| 
mM Which were excellent, of ve 
y great uſe and profit in thoſe Countries. # A principal Com:odi- 


y aroſe from their Olive-yards, all that was for Delight, Profit and 


q Eat up all as is the manner of that Worm 
V1d. ver. 6. let. ps 
10 I have ſent s among you the peſtilence t, !| after the, 


he ſword y, and Þ have taken away your horſes z, and!, 


s You have died of Plague, but I commiſkoned the Diſeaſe, I {«: 


t Arrow of God that walketh in the dark, ti 


nc? 
Not dj 
h 


ofe wh0 
h 


. 4 : Ti 
aughter hath been made in your Camp that there were pct ſufÞiciens 


to bury the ſlain before they ftunk and offended you, 6 id. verſe 6 
let. þ. | 


* PT 
11 I have overthrown c ſome of you d as God 9" 


threw * Sodom and Gomorrah e, and ye were "07 
are-brand pluckt out of the burning f ; yet Fac? 


09: 


Chap. I 


earneſtly perſwade your People to voluntary Sacrifices, in Which you 


neſer, f 
Veſſel 5 Or 
Cri1-d C: 


_ 


like th 
' by Goc 
theref 
determ 
infinite 
he can ; 
puniſh | 
Can as 
can turr 


cloudy d 
pent, 
Places o 
altel al 
in this Ic 
Mighty ( 
fures obe 


Alament, 
the try, 
macy: x 
pocritte, 


I 


Iſrael. 
4 This 
b zC, d, an 
that the Þ 
Lord who 
mournfu] 
Ten Trib 


2 The 
Tiſee : i 
raiſe her 


© This 
e was a 
Riches, G 
Portion, 
Perly ma 
Jer, 46. 1 
Put as do 
ay falling | 
naj Ruin 
be about t 
Elſe it ma 
will appea 
they mig 
Ing their ( 
ventually 


Vol, 


ip: V. 


ÞP” createth q the || wind ry, and declareth unto man what 
$.is his thonght 5s, * that maketh the morning dark- 
. neſs t, and * treadeth upon « the high places x of 
*& the Earth, the LORD, y the .God of Hoſts 4s his 


| by God, who can ſoon with one Word lay them all aſleep; return 


. Can as eaſily turn outward Proſperity into extream Advertity, as he 


A 1 


returned unto m2 2, ſuith tne LO RD. 

c Utterly conſumed and deſtroyed your Houſes and Goods, 4 Tho 
ir was a total Conſumption to thoſe it fell on, yer was but on ſome 
who might be warnings to others, and by which others might fee how 
eaſy it was {or God to deſtroy them all. e We no where elle read of 
ich Fire from Heaven, yet *ris pGſhble ſome ſuch Judy ment might fall 
on ſome of their Cities , and not be recorded ; but 1 do rather under- 
{rand it proverblally ſpoken, denoting molt grievous and detolating 
Fires, or Judgments. J Such of you as eſcaped were yet in Very great 
Danger, and as Fire-brands in midlit ai the Fire, where vou WCre with 
others burning till infinire Mercy ſaved a Remnant and pluck'd you 
out. 2 Vid. chap. 4s Ver. 6s let. þe | 

12 Therefore h thus will I do unto thee 7, O Iſrael & - 
1d becauſe I will do this unto thee /, prepare 2 to meet 


thy n God, O Iſrael. | F 

þ Becauſe none of my former Methods have ſucceeded as in reaſon 
might have been expetted. 7 In ſome more terrible mannner will 1 
now proceed againſt thee, k You of the ten Tribes. } And theretore 
my laſt advice to you is to conſider it well ; if you think well of it, pol- 
fb'y you may ſee and prevent the threatned Evil, m It you humble 
rour ſelves, and ſo return, 'twill be Mercy to you ; but if you proudly 
1nd finfully refuſe to return, know ye that you muſt perish, for you 
can nev-r make good your Cauſe againſt God ; and yet you muſt meet 
him, for he will,e're he hath done with you,end the Controverſy, 7 
Who once was thy God, and whom thou till owneſt for thy God, and 
who would yet be thine if thou repent. 


not 


13 For o lo, he that formeth the mountains p, and 


Name z. | 

0 To move them to a& for their ſafety, the Prophet tells them 
how great and-dreadful God is, the moſt dreadful and rerrible Ene- 
my, but th2 moſt detirable Friend. p When there was not a Moun- 
tain or Hill, or the leaft Duſt of either, thy God O 1ſ7ae} formed 
them; and it is Wiſdom to return to him, for he can remove Dithcul- 
ties and Preſſures were they as heavy as Mountains, and ſo he can 
mend a!l with you quickly ; and if your Confidences in ſinful Ways 
were as ſtrong as Mountains, he can overthrow them, return there- 
fore and repent. q Giveth being by an Almighty Will, » Which 
ſor its Inſtability ſeems, of contrary Nature to Mountains, which doth 
ſhake then and overturn Foundations, that Wind which we feel and 
hear though we ſee it not, that makes hideous Noiſes, and works 
dreadful Effets, The Storms you are threatned with, O Jſrael, are 
like the Wind, dreadful, irrefiftable, but as the Wind raiſed and ruled 


therefore to him. $ Think not by any Counſels to prevent what God 
determines againft an impenitent and ſinful Nation 3 as his Power is 
infinite in creating, his Wiſdom is infinite too and unſearchable, and 
he can and will take Sinners in their incorrigible Wickedinefſes and 
puniſh them, be wiſe therefore and return to him by Repentance. # 


can turn a glorious Morning into a dark, diſmal and overclouded 
Day, -2n41 ſo will do againſt you if you repent not, and can turn a 
cloudy Morning into Brightneſs, and Miſery into Happineſs if you re- 
pent. #« Can tread under foot the Idols that are worſhip'd on high 
Places of the Earth, and trample on high and mighty Potentates, ex- 
altel above ordinary Men as higheft Hills are above loweſt Valleys. x 
in this lower World. y Who alone am the Lord, the Eternal and 
Mighty God. #4 Whoſe Soveraign Power and Command all Crea- 
tures obey, and act for or againft us as he willeth. 


GHRHAF. V. 


Alamentation for Iſrael's fali and decreaſe, 1 ——. Exhortation to ſeek 
the true God, and forſake idolatry, 4, 13 to repent for their obſti- 
nacy : the terrible day of judgments, 14 —30. A rejetion of all by- 
pocritical worſhip and ſervice, 21 27. 


1 Ear ye this word which I take up againſt 
inK you a, even a lamentation b, O Houſe of 
rael, | 


4 This Preface you have in the ſame Words, chap. 3. ver. 1. let. a, 
b,c,d. and in part alſo chap. 4. ver. 1. let. a, b. to which I now add 
that the Perſon here ſpeaking may refer to the Prophet and to the 
Lord who ſent him, both ſpeak this Word. 5 Which is very fad and 
mournful to all concerned in it, woful News to the Kingdom of the 
Ten Tribes, 


_ 2 The Virgin c of Iſrael is fallen 4, ſhe ſhall no more 
rike: ſhe is forſaken upon her Land f, there is none to 
raiſe her up g. 


c This Name is given to her not for her Purity and Integrity, for 

e was an Adultere$, but either ironically, or becauſe her preſent 
Riches, Glory and Beauty ſeemed to be that of a Virgin that had her 
Portion, Strength and Honour untouch'd, or elſe by a Figure as pro- 
perly may it be applied to Iſrael as to Babylon, Iſa. 47. 1. or to Epypr, 
Jer. 46. 11. to S7don, Iſz. 23. 12. d Or, ſhalle're long fall, the thing 
Put as done already becauſe of the certainty of it. Or rather is alrea- 
ay falling by Civil Wars and Con piracies, which prepared way for the 
final Ruine of Iſrael; it is poſſible this Sermon of the Prophet might 
be about the time that Shallum or Menabem uſurpd the Throne. Or 
elſe it may refer to the times of Fehoabaz, when that of the third Verſe 
will appear to have been fulfilled ; this ſeems mott probable. e Tho 
they might by Repentance have riſen again, yet the Prophet conſider. 
ing their Obftinacy, ſpeaks of it as a thing that ſhould never be, as e- 
ventually it proved allo, for Iſrael never recovered the fall by Shalmg- 
neſer. f Broken to pieces upon her own Land, and ſoleft. as a broken 
Veſſel; or ſhe ſhall be by home Diviſions firft broken, and afterwards 


Q &. 


tink. 

3 For thus faith the Lord GOD hb, The Ciry that wen! 
out by a thouſand 7, ſhall Jeave an }undred & ; and nh: 
which went forth by an hundred, ſha!! leave ten to 1 
Hovuie ! of Iſrael. 

þ This ſolemnly attefteth the certainty of the thing, 7 7 
out one thouſand Souldiers as the Quota thev nereaticiel at to h-111 
againſt an Invader, & Shall loſe nine parts of-ten, ſo great thall the 
Slaughter be which the prevailing Enemy ihall make upon 174! ; ant 
here the Prophet uicth a certain Number to expreſs an uncertain, or 
proverbially ſcarce a tenth Man fhall eſcape. 1 The Kin:dom of th- 
ten Tribes, and thiz perhaps may reter backward tov F-bownup Ins 
time, 2 Azngs 13. tobe lure it's fulfilled in the Wars of 3b.:hnzm;j; r 
and the taking $4mariz. | 

- 4 Þ For # thus ſaith the LORD be Houſe of 

4 T For # thus ſaith the 4 unto the Houſe of If- 


rael 0; Seek p ye me, and ye ſhall live q. 

m Or, yer, truly, n Amidſt all thoſe Threats there is ſtill a Re- 
ſerve, a conditional Proviſo, and the Lord here does by his Prophet 
declare.it. -o Though Apoſtate both in Sacred and Civils, though 
polluted and defiled greatly, and this through many ſcores of Years, 
yet after all Repentance would help them. p Enquire for my Law, 
and repent of your deſpiſing it, obey it in all things for future ; en- 
quire diligently what Promiſes T have made, and wait for them ; be- 
lieve, obey and repent, for this is to ſeek the Lord, when a Peopic 
have turned from the Lord, as you have done, O Houle of /jrael. 4 
It ſhall be well with-yon,-your Perſons, Families, and the whole King- 
dom ſhall proſper, as 42c5. Phraſe importeth. 

5 But ſeek not * Beth-el xr, nor enter into Gilgal s, 
and paſs not to Beer-ſheba t: for Gilgal « ſhall tare- 
ly go into Captivity x, and Beth-el y ſhall come to 
nought z, Ws | 

r Conſult not, worſhip not, depend not on the Idol-Calf at Berþz1 ; 
or ſeek not God at Bethel but at Feruſul:m, where he will be found ; 
caft off Idolatry, return to the true God and to his inſtituted Wor- 
ſhip, ſo ſhall ye live, s A City of great TIdolatry, a Place where God 
will not be ſought nor found by you, Vid. Zof. 4. 15. and g. 15. ant 
12. 11, Where 1t is more fully explained. t Though God of old did, 
Gen, 26. 24. appear there to /ſaac, though Abraham dwelt there, Ger. 
21. 31, 32, 33. and Facob ſacrificed there with acceptance, Ger. 45. 1, 
2, 3. yet now God appointeth Feruſalem and the Temple the only 
Places of his ſolemn Worſhip, and of your ſeeking him. #« The In» 
habitants of Gilgal, for the Place could not go-into Captivity, it is 
a Metonymy, the Place put for the People. x Shalmareſer and his 
Aſſyrians ſhall certainly carry them away Captives. » Both City and 
People. x Shall be Vanity and Diſappointment to all that truſt to the 
Idols of it. 

6 Seek the LORD and ye ſhall live a, leſt þ he break 
out like fire c in the Houſe of Joſeph d, and devour 2t ec, 


and there be none to quench zt in Beth-el f. 

a The Prophet repeateth his Exhortation to Repentance with the 
repeated Promiſe of a good Iffue hereon, vid. ver, 4. let. p,.q. 6 
This is a new Argument to perſwade with them to do their Duty, 
for unleſs they do it God's Judgments will break out upon them. c 
Suddenly, with ſtrength and prevalence, as the #eb, Word here ren- 
dred, brezk forth, importeth. 4 The Kingdom of the ten Tribes, 
the chief whereof was Ephraim, who was the younger Son of Foſ-pb ; 
aad the firſt Ere&tor of this Kingdom was an Epbramite, 1 King. 11. 
26, e Utterly conſume it as Fire uleth to do where it gets head and 
prevaileth. f If once this Fire break out from God, all your Idols in 
Bethel ſhall not be able to quench it, no Tears from your Eyes there 


. 
hy (nys 
kokisw iti 


| ſhed, no Blood of Sacrifice there offered ſhall quench it. 


7 Ye g who * turn judgment þ to wormwocd z, and 


leave off k righteouſneſs in the Earth /, x 

£ Rulers and Judges. þ The righteous Sentence of the Law, the 
Equity'of it, which is ſweet and pleaſing to juit Men, and lafe for all. 
7 Proverbially underftood Bitterneſs, Grief, Injuftice and Oppreſſion, 
k Make to ceaſe in your Courts of Judicature, and tread it under foot. 
I Or among Men in the Land, the latter part of this Verie explains 
the former. ; 


ing.p, and maketh the day dark with night q ; that 
* calleth for the waters of the Sea y, and poureth them 
out upon the face of the Earths; the LORD &* his 


Name &. | | 

m Tho this be not in the Hebrew, *tis well ſupplied Dy our Tnter- 
preters. # A famous Conſtellation, and whoſe rifing about Seprember 
was uſually accompanied with Rains and [weet Showers, which as cbap. 
4. ver. 7. had been with-holden, whence want of Water and Bread : 
now the Prophet adviſeth to ſeek the Lord who can give them Raia 
and Corn, by the kindly Influences of that watry Conftcllation, which 
as he made, 10 he guides and manageth. This I take to be the mot 
natural meaning of the Place. 0 Which ariling about Novemb:r, 
brings uſually Cold, Rains and Frofts intermixt with much uncertain- 
ty, but very ſeaſonable for the Earth, to make it fruirtul x this ment!» 
oned to perſwade theſe People to repent, who were atflicted with f:ct 
Parrenneſs and Untruitfulnels as bi ought famine with it. p Prover- 
bially, that curneth greateſt Adverſity ( which is here calle the fha- 
dow of Death) into as great i roſperity, h-re calle! the Morning, P//, 
23. 4. q Metaphorically thisexprefſeth a change of Proſperity into 4d» 


State adviſed to (eek him, who can turn your Morning 1at0 Night, or 
your Night into Morning ; who can on a ſud.len cemon's ail Evil {om 
you, and bring all Good upon you; ſeek him theretore, and feck not 
Idols. 7 Either to' raiſe them to terrible Swellings ard Rage, or ra- 
ther calls np Waters out of the Sea, by commanding ti:e Vapour to af- 
cend, which he turneth into Rain. $s And thei poureth out from the 
Clouds to make the Earth fruitiul. 5 He oaly is Gou enil the Lord, 
who doth, G&c, 


mw - > abs & None at home among all her Princes, Counſel- 


21 m 2 9 


verſity ; ye Houſe of J1ſragl think well of it, you are in a dangerors 


Chap. V. 


lors and Rulers, nor any Friend among her Allic:, all l-ave her t9 


F Ch, £., 


I2, 


L . 
aL F 


8 Seek m him that maketh the * ſeven ſtars a and Ori- * Job 9.9. 
on 0, and turneth the ſhadow of Death into the morn- © 33: 3t- 


1. 9c s 


_ -— 2 
—_ *%4 
A  — p ” 
= MACE = "ESE: __—__ * - gps 2 
— 7; od _ Wm. 4.6, -- I - 9-7 he = w_ wn - 

= b- GA i —_— > WW — prom w_— x — tt = "ERIE" 

Eo ae ne ge oe OE een - - A DTSIIDD 

BG. _ —— ” £ Cz . 

_ = = - pay — > > = 7S = —_ x. A _ ” _ —> 4 — . - — — = = —— — — _ = = 


A M ©O S:. 


o That ſtrengthneth the f- {ſpoiled {4 azainſt the | bound to be with you, and own you ; 
1e | Tepent, ceale frou Idols and Violence. 


frong x, fo that the ſpoiled y ſhall come againlt tl 
fortreis <. 

# You have been exceedingly weakned ard ſpoiled by your Ene- 
mies; yet return, repent, ſeek God, for he can renew your Strength, 
that you ſhall ſpoil your Spoilers who are ſtrong. x The Mighty, 
Victorious and Inſolent. y Thoſe that had lot their Strength, and 
were as conquered, 7 Shall rally, re-embody and form a Siege againſt 
their Betiegers ; ſo God whom you ſhould ſerve will ſoon tura all 
from Dark and Diſmal into Light, and pleating unto you and yours ; 
in your Apoſtacy all will be Milery and Darknels, but in your recurn 
all Shall he well and proſperous with you. 

10 They a hath him that rebuketh b in the gate c, and 
they abhor him that ſpeaketh uprightly 4. 

2 Either this is the Prophet's Complaint of chem without farther 
expeRing their compliance with his Advice, or he foretels what they 
will do, Judges and People. b They both hate them that rebuke, 
Judges hate the Yrophets, who-rebuke corrupt Judges, and the Peo- 
ple hate impartial Judges, if any ſuch be among them, « Where 
Judges fate, and where the Prophets did many times deliver their 
Metiage. 4 They cannot brook any one that deals plainly and honeſtly 
with them, whether Judge, Prophet or private Perſon. | 

- 11 Foraſmuch therefore as your treading e 5 upon the 
ISN poor f. and ye take from him g burdens of wheat hb; * ye 
£2 © have built houſes 7 of hewn ſtone k, bur ye ſhall not dwell 


+ Heb, in them! ; ye have planted + pleaſant vineyards mn, but 


vine-yards ye ſhall not drink wine of them n. 
of d:fire, 
expreſt here by treading. 1c was very heavy on the Poor, an Effect 
of Eraud, and executed with tyrannical Inſolence, as the Word and 
its Faraphrale imports. f Who have not Power to withſtand your 
Violence, nor Money to buy your Friendship. g Receive when offe- 
red,and ye force them to offer, you extort from the Poor. þ Great 
Quantities of bet Whear, on which the Pocr <huuld live, either ma- 
king Bread of it to feed th-n{clves,or elſe making Moncy of it to ierve 
other Occations. It is nor ſ1id what Burden,but probably as much as 
the poor Man was able to carry. # Perhaps theſecorrupt Judges had 
builc for their Children; ſo one greedy and ravenous Judge might 
build as many Houtes as he had Sons, or theſe Judges being many had 
built many Houſes. & Intimating the Greatneſs, Beauty and Strength 
of them ; and they flatter themſclves,that they and their Poſterity shall 
long dwell at eaſe, and multiply in theſe goodly Houſes, 1 You by op- 
preſſion build, but God will by his juſt Hand, and by the Afyrians Vio- 
lence, turn you out of thoſe Houſes, and make you Captivesin a Land 
where your Enemies pleaſe to carry you z you $hall find that Deut. 28. 
30. fulfilled on you. m Moſt detirable for ſituation, for fruitfulnels, 
tor ſweetneſs and goodneſs of the Grape, every way delighttul, 7 Ei- 
ther they shall not bear, or the Enemy $hall devour, or you $hall 
be carried away into Captivity. The Threat Deut. 28. 3g. Shall be 

EXEcuted, 
12 Foro Ip know q your manifold tranſgreſſions r, and 


your mighty s fins - they 2fflict # the jult «, they take a 
{| Or,zan- || bribe x, and they turn aſide the poor in the gate y from 
<a their right 2. 

0 Wonder not at th- threatned Severity, as if *twere too rigo- 
rous ; it is but proportioned to your Sins, p The Lord whom you 
provcke, who hare threatned you. q Clearly, fully, and in all the 
CircumB&ances of them, what moves you to do ſo, what Pretences #f 
Law you make, all your Evalions are vain and focligh, r The increa- 
ted Number of your <ins, and the greatnels of them too, as the 
Word importeth. s Which mightily wrong and break the poor and 
necdy. r Befiege, or with hoſtile Minds watch againft, and gladly 
take any occaſion to wrong and grieve the juſt, # Not abſ0Jutely 
and finlefly juſt, but ſuch as are comparartively juſt, or thoſe whoſe 
Cauſe is juſt, or thoſe that live with regard to all the Commands of 
God, and follow Righteouſnels; It was the mighty Sin of the corrupt 
Rulers in Samaria and Jſrae! at that day, that they were Enemies to all 
Righteouſneſs, x In Civil Caules Brides carried it, vil. chap.2, ver.6. 
let. p, 9, 7, 5. 7. here Bribes ſet Criminal: irce, a Raniom, (as the W ord 
#ebr.) buys off the Puni-hment appointed by the Law againſt Murde- 
rers, Adulterers, ©; y The Poor, who appear ia their Courts for 
Juſtice, they turn them away, or delay to hear, or hear and judge un- 
juſtly, and ſo ſend them away wrong'd and crying. x Theſe Words 
fully expreſs the Prophet's meaning, and are therefore well ſupplied 
in our Verſion. 


13 Therefore 4 the * prudent b ſhall keep ſilence c in 


that time, for it 75 an evil time d. | 

# Becauſe that Men are ſo univerſally impatient of hearing Re- 
proof, and yet their Sins ſo much abound, and fo much deſerve Re- 
proof ; ſince they will ſooner turn againſt the Speaker,than turn from 
the Sin ſpoken againſt. - 6 The wiſe Men, Prophets ſay ſome, but I 
rather think other private Men are here meant , whole private 
Capacity ailoweth them to keep filence, when others mult ſpeak. 
c Be forced to it (ſay ſome) they $hall be filenced; this true, but 
rather here is a voluntary, choſen Silence toward vile Corrupters of 


Law and Juſtice, who will nothing mend though reproved, or a | 


Silence before God, owning his Juſtice in. punishing ſuch Sinners, 
4 Both for the ſinfalneſs of it, which progoketh God to Wrath, and tor 
the Sorrows, Troubles, Wars and Captivity of this People by the 
Hjſyrians. 

14 Seek good e and nt evil f, that ye may liveg: and 
ſo the LORD the God of hoſts ſhall be with you , as ye 


have ſpoken z. 

e Turn to the Law of God, ſtudy it that ye may do the good it 
requireth, in Works of Piety, Juſtice and Charity, f You have devi- 
ſed Evil, and done it in Works of Impiety, Injaſtice and Cruelty. 
Or this may be the ſame with ver. 4,5, 6. Wlch lee, g Vid. ver. 4. 
Iet- q. 6 The Eternal Glorious God, who is Lord of all, and can help 
you, having all the Hoſts of Heaven and Earth ar his diſpoſal; he will 
be with you to bleſs and lave you yet, notwithitanding all your for- 

2c Sins, # You have boaltcd his being with you, you think he 1s 


e Their Oppreſſon was more than ordinarily proud and tyrannous, - 


| 


! 
! 


| 


Cha 
2 will inet "7 


15 * Hate k the evil 1, and love the good M, ar! e-xy. 


| ſtabiiſh judgment in the gate" : it * may be thar the Lorg & g-" 


GOD of hoſts will be gracious 0 unto the remnant Þ of *ti; 


Joſeph q. 

kt Slizht Diſlikes will do little in this caſe ; you Rulers and Judges ** 
muſt heartily hate, and ſhew that you hate, 1 both Ways, Doings " 
Contrivers and Abettors of the, Evil among the People, and _ 
elves. m Commend, encourage, defend and reward all Good in 0- 
thers, and do it your ſelves ; let your Heart be toward good Things 
and good Men. 7 By this it's evident the Prophet ſpeaks to Goyer. 
nors and Judges among them ; what the Import of the Phraſe is, 
ver, 10. let. b, c. and ver. 12. lct. y. Set up honeſt and upright Judges 
in every Gate, where Judges did fit in thoſe days. o Poflibly he Will 
forgive, or abate, or reſpite the evil days z poſhbly he may give yg, 
his gracious Preſence, and yet ſave. p What the Invafions of Enemie; 
or the Civil Wars have ſpared, and left q in Samaria and Jſ7ael, the 
Ten Tribes ; Vid. chap. 5. ver. 6. let. d. 

16 Therefore y the LORD the God of hoſts , the 


Lord ſaith thuss, Wailing # /hall be in all ſtreets x 
and they ſhall fay in all the high-ways x, Alas, 
las ! and they ſhall call the Husbandman to mourq. 


ing y, and ſuch as are skiltul of lamentation z to wail. 
ing, | | 

7 The Prophet foreſeeing their Obſtinacy in their Sins, and their 
refaling to obey his Counſel from the Lord, doth proceed to de. 
nounce Jndgment againſt them. $s That there might be no douly: 
made of the Truth of the Prophet's Words, he doth in moft ſolemn 
Manner atteſt it to be from the Lord ; and that he might awake 
them to Repentance and Humiliation, he proclaims the Majeſty and 
Power of God who calls them to it. # Lamentations uttercd in 
Words and Geſtures , Eccleſ. 12. 5. Fer. 4. 8. Zech. 12. 10. ſhalt 
every where . be ſeen and heard in the broad Streets of your Citi: 
as when the Afſrians prevailed and cut off the Forces of Jjrael, he. 
fieged and took their Strong-holds. '# Of great Towns or Cities, 
x Abroad in the Country, and on the Road all ſhall cry out as undone, 
diſpirited and hopeleſs Men, Alas, alas! » This ſort of Men are 
little uſed to ſuch Ceremonies of Mourning ; but now ſuch ſhall their 
State be, that they ſhall be called upon : Leave your Toil, betake 
your ſelves to publick Mourning, +4 And to make all ſound doletul, 
cail in thoſe whoſe Art lieth in aQing the part of Meurners, and can 
move hardeft Hearts to lament and bewail : See theſe Fer. g. 17, 18, 
and Mar. y. 23. 

17 And in all vineyards a hall be wailing ; for * I wil 
paſs throvgh thee b, ſaith the LORD. 

4 1n theſe Places was uſually the greateſt Jollity, and they gathe- 
red their Vintage with Joy, but now *tis quite contrary ; either 


Vines are blaſted, or eaten up, or deftroyed of the Enemy. 6 4 
an incenſed God puniſhing all, every where, who have ſinned again 
him, and therefore every place now ſhall be full of Sorrow, becauſe 
every place hath been full of Sin. - | | 

18 * Wo unto you that deſire c the day of the LORD4;*l 


ro what end e 25 it for you ? the day of the LORD t- dark- s 
neſs F. and not light g. | 


c Scoffingly, or not believing any ſuch Day would come ; the Pro 
phets had long threatned ſuch a Day,but theſe Scoffers thought no ſuch 
thing could ever overtake them; and if it did they would know the 
work of it,alter their Courſe they will not, whatever comes on it ; ard 
they are confident the Prophets tright them with Bug-bears, but Woe 
to ſuch Scoffers. &@ Vid. Fo?1 1. 15. and 2.2. and Zeph.1.15, e What 
do you think to get by it ? What Good can you expett when darkeft 
Calamities overwhelm you ? f All Adverſity moſt black and doleful, 
therefore called in the Abftratt Darkneſs. g No Joy, Hope or Com- 
tort in It. 

'19 * As ifa man did flee from a Lion, and a Bear mct' 
himh; or went into the houſe z, and leaned his hand on 


the wall k, and a Serpent, bit him I. 

þ Here proverbially is cxprels'd the Continuance and Succeſſion of 
Evils one atter another ; it will be a long Calamity when your Cirll 
Diſlenſions waſte you firft, next God's Armies of Locuſts and Palmer: 
worms, and the Ajjyrians too, until all ends in final Captivity : you 
may eſcape one, but ſhall fall into another Calamity, and worſe than 
that you eſcaped ; abroad your Mileries ſhall be like a Lion or Bear. 
! At Home you may hope for cafety from ſuch open Dangers, but 
there other kind of Miſchief ſhall meet you. þ Weary and Faint 
ſhall think ro eaſe and ſupport himſelf, 1 Whoſe biting iafuſeth 2 
deadly Poiſon, which ſuddenly corrupts the whole Maſs of Blood, 
and kills the Man, If Conſpirators at home be Lions, the {[yrians 
will be as Bears to you, = 

20 Shall not the day of the LORD be darkneſs, 
and not light? even very dark, and no brightneſs 1 
it mm? | 

a All theſe things conſidered, ye ſecure, profane and atheiftial 
Scoffers, ſpeak your ſelyes, will not that Day be as dark as I have, de- 
{cribed, and as little to your Comtort ? 


21 © 1I* hate », 1 deſpiſe o your feaſt-days p,and I wil 


not \| ſmell q in your ſolemn aſſemblies r. qu 
7 Impure and unholy they are, whatever they ſeem to be, and, 
therefore the Lord hateth them, they are Abomination fo MM, 
Prov. 15.8. and Jja, 1. 12,14. 0 Worthleſs and contemptible they 
are, and as ſuch God rejeterh them, /ſa. 1. 10, 1,12. 1 here 15 no 
Goodneſs that I ſhould value in them, there is a!l that V jleneſs 1 
them which attends deep Hypocriſy, for which I do hate them. 
p The Apoſtate J/7aelites imitated the Fews in many things, among 
which they retained their Feſtivals, in which they mulriplied ther 
Ceremonial Sacrifices, and ye: God owns them not as his, but brands 
them with this, they are yours, therefore unwarraitable, \V i11-worſbip, 
and diſpleaſing to God. q A <Savour of Reſt or Lelight, 1 wit __ 
cept and be pleaſed with, Gez, $8 21, 7 Appoin:<4, a5 yu &-: _—_— 


i 


j 


, 


Ys þ 


crifices 
$ worſt! 
taken a 
ed Sen! 
pieating 
Inftrum 
| andl Inj; 
them, 
24- ] 
x Righre 
8 / 4d 
£ threatne 
B# flice to | 
& between 
Z common 
tle want 
down all 
Ti2ht, do 
25 * 
Otering 
Iirael y 2 
| Their | 
Ie People 
F0u not fro 
pued for th 
tet Ditficy 
5d! and 
Wo: [acrificc 
Din ard Idc 
Niif iS We! 
dare mac 
Operly le 
Put Patticul 
Tankincen; 
I! YCars in « 
vmmon in { 
ICcOunt run 
lies, 
+26 Put 
loloch x, 
od a wh 
ST The 1do! 


aopy in 1 

+TTS Conjet 
IS the Nam 
IPPoſed Dei 
pter was 0 

"em, Who W; 
ation, thoug 

and the who] 
IC Err; The 
arried al 

U ith him t 
derly, as the 
Elun to be $4 
em their Iny 
da nor enqu 
and prob 


M you wor 


Withed to yo 


lll be d 
112,and j1 

| Orners 0 
5 that lay at 


Pitry, than c 
'"XCTried j 


y Caprivir 
JN, took 1 


ap. V. A M 


very weighty Reaſons, 


0urs, not Mine. 
: 22 Though 
\car-oferings U , | 
will [ regard the || peace-offerings y of your far 
beaſts Z. +, 
« That have departed from my Temple, Law and Inftitutions, you 
of the Ten Tribes. r Which was wholly burnt on the Altar 5 no 
part due £0 any but God : of tnis theſe Hypocrites had a high Eſteem, 
Miz4þ 6. 6. becauſe they accounted it an entire Gift to God. « To 
our Burnt-offering add the other, yonr Meat-offering alſo, as Lev.2. 
{. 2. Numb. 617. vid. Foel 1. 13. and 2.14. x It may be a Meiolis, 
1 vill, 25 V2r. 21. hate them. y Your Thank-offerings too, of which 
1ev.6.12, & 7-15+ Jonr Praiſes for your Proſperity is no better pleaſing 
neither. 7 In theſe Peace offerings, though you bring the beſt, the 
(atteſt, yet you bring nothing but a Beaft, for you leave your Hearts 
wich your Sins, and you have no warrant from God to do this, nay, 
you are prohibited, for you are to offer only as #2ruſulem, and at the 
Temple. | : 
23 Take thou away from me the noiſe a of thy 


Songs b ; for 1 will not hear c the melody 4 of thy 


| Viols e. 
y 1 By way of Contempt.and Loathing, God calls their Song3 noe ; 
how harmenious, delightful and raviſhing ſoever they might be to 
their Ears, they were not pleaſing unto God, 5 Uſed in their Sa- 
crifices , aad their ſolemn Feaſts z herein they imitated Temple- 
worſtip, bur all was unpleaſing to the Lord, c This is not to be 

| taken abſolutely, for God heard the Noiſe ; but *cis taken in a qualif- 

ed Sen{e, he did not hear with Delight and Acceptance, _ 4 The 
pleaſing Harmony, the ſweet Concents, e This one kind of Muſical 

Inftrument put for all the reft; in a word, your Hypocriſy, Idolatry 

| 2nd Injuftice ſpoils all your Services,and makes God weary of you and 

them. 

24 But f let Judgment g, run down as Waters b, and 
| Righreouineis 7 as a mighty ſtream k. 
| # 4d, Hebr, g Some interpret this of Penal Judgment, by God 
© threatned againft theſe Hypocrites z but *ris better underftood of Ju- 
© fiice to be adminiftred by Rulers, whoſe Othce *twas to determine 
© berwecn Party and Party. þ Freely, conftantly, ſpeedily, and for 
# common Benefit of all, as Waters run. 7 Equity, relieving Juftice, 
Ethe want of which hath been notorious among you. kt Which bears 
down all that oppoſeth it ; be hindred by none from doing every one 
right, do this and you may yet be accepted. 

25 * Have ye offered m unto me # Sacrifices o, and 
Ofterings p in the Wilderneſs forty years q, O houſe of 
Iirael r 2 | 

I Their Fathers and they, though at ſo great diftance of time, are 
Ne People 3 and ſo the Prophet conſiders them in this place. m Did 
you not frequently omit to offer, and yet were not reproved or pla- 
ud for the Omiſhon, when your frequent Removes, and many 0- 
:< Ditficulties, made. it unpratticable z ſo little is Sacrifice with your 
&«!' and yet when you did offer, 2 Was it to me only, or did you 
W': [acrifice to Idols and falfe Gods, and provoked me ? Will-wor- 
bard Idolatry have been hereditary Diſeaſes in your Generations z 
0715 well kaown too, that theſe Idolaters fell in the Wilderneſs, 
ware made Admonitions to you. o Of Bzafts ſlain, as the word 
p-opzrly ſpeaks. p Minchah in general, is any Gift or Preſent made z 
ju particularly here, it is a Gift or Preſent of fine Flour, Oil and 
rankincenſe, unto God with the Sacrifice» q It was a broken number 
jf Years in exatt account ; that is, 38 Arn. and 11 Months ; but as 1s 
ommon in ſuch Caſes, the full and round number 1s taken, and ſo the 
_ runs here, and in As 7. 42. forty Years. 7 You of the Ten 
[1)eS, 

.26 But ye 5 have bornt || the Tabernacle 4 sf your 

loloch x, and Chivn y, your Images z, the ſtar of your 


od a_ which ye made to your ſelves b. 

5 The Idolatrous Children of Idolatrous Fathers. t Carried along 
Fith you in the Wildernefs, « Or little Chappel, - or Shrine, or 
anopy in which the Image of their Idol was placed : Though 
chers conjeRture this to be the proper Name of an Idol, I conjefture 
is the Name of the portable Temple, or Chappel in which the 


I will not accept them x; neither 


— 


ws WPpolſed Deity was placed. x The great Idol of the Ammonites, as 
m priter was of the Greeks and Romans ; Some antient King among 
ww em, who was a famous Founder, or Raiſer and Benefattor to their 
int ation, though we know not who this was. / Perhaps it we under- 
12 and the whole Apparatus, or Store-houſe of their Images, we ſhall 
= IL err: Their grand Idol was Moloch, whoſe Image they kept, 
yo d carried about in a Sacellum, or conſecrated portable © happel, 

1 with him the reft of their petit Deities, in their Images placed 
T derly, as they fancied, abour their great Deity z others will have 
S, "unto be Sarurm, 73 Whate're theſe were, 'tis plain God accounts 
IN Km their Inventions, and their Gods 4 What Star this was we 

ed not enquirez the 1dolaters appropriated the Stars to their 
ical ds, and probably did in the Roof o* their Gods Tabzraacles, frame 
de- © Sar over the Image ef their God z or the Star your God, or 

lich you worſhip. 5 All which Deities you have found out, and 
vill J Wlithed to your ſelves. 


27 Therefore c will I cauſe you to go into captivity d 


and Yond Damaſcus e, faith the LORD, whoſe name 7 rhe 
vim, "AO of hoſts, 

chef F For All your Idolatry,and othet Sins,in which you have obſtinate- 
| 2 @Ninued. 4 you ſhall certainly be ſubdued and captivaredy and 


> Mall be done, ſo that my hand ſhall appear evidently in it. c In- 


jel. 1y712,and into parts beyond Damaſcus z but 'Tis not certain into 
ngft a Corners of the World they were ſent, but probably to thoſe 
their $ that lay about the Caſpian Sea 3 more remote from their own 
ands try, than ever to hope they may get back again ; Or thts, you 
ſhi, LI Carried into a C aptivity more grievous, by Sha/mane/ er, than 


the Captivity of thoſe whom Tiglath Pileſer 1ed captive when he 
Rn, took Damaſcus, and waſked 1/razl in the days of Pekab, when 


ye s offer me burat-offerings ?, and your 


_ pa . E . FR Fo 4 , ! 0 PF ; 4 S. oy 
with rich Sacrifices, in mighty Crowds, and in excellent Order all is : 8rievous Captivity. 


named * || chief of the NationsFf;, to whom the 
Iſrael cameg. 


are ſecure, that think to Morrow ſhall he as this Day, and neither 
fear nor believe the threatned Judgments of God. 'c By a Syncc- 
doche put for the Kingdom of the Two Tribes, and principally the In- 
habitants of Feruſulem and Zion z the Ten Tribes were hitherto threat- 
ned, now the Prophet warns the Two Tribes. d Wo to them alſo who 
rely upon the Strength,Wealth, and Policy of the King, Princes,Cities., 
and Kingdom of Samaria and Iſrael, e Which two Cities, Zion ant 
Samaria, f Accounted chief Cities among the known Cities of that 
part of the World : Others refer this Paſſage to the Nobles,Wiſemen, 
and great Men of each Place z Men that we:e Heads among their own 
People. & To which Places all 1/r4e! had recourſe, ſo the Two Tribes 
went up to Zzon, the Ten Tribes went to S1mzriz ; or to whom, ?. e. 
to which Nobles and Rulers the People of each Kingdom did go on 
all Occations for Judgment, Counſel or Refuge. 


thence go ye to Hamath & the great: then go down 
to Gath 1 of the Philiſtines : be they better than theſe 
Kingdoms ? or their border greater than your bor- 
der mm ? 


$ Run over the Hiſtory of that Great and Antient City, as go to 
Shiio, Fer. 7.12. h Built by Nimrod, Gen, 10. 10. and after a long 
growth to Power, Wealth and Security, through near 1300 Years,was 
at laſt ruin'd,as is probable in the Civil Wars,which ended in the utter 
Ruin of Sardanapalus by Arbaces, and Phul-Beloobus, Grand-father to 
Shalmaneſer who captivated Jſrael ; the Story of which,freſh in the days 
of Amos, is thus reterr'd unto for warning to Jſrael, #i Conſider well 
' what befel that City built on Eupbrares, rich,delightful,and, as you,full 
; of 5in, & Head of the Syrian Kingdom, lately overthrown by 7iglath 
| Pileſer, a very freſh Inftance of God's juft Indignation againſt ſecure 
Sinners, and a very fit Warning to Jſrae], 1 The chief City of 
the Phzliſtines, a few Years before waſted by the Arms and Cruelty ot 

Jarael, 2 Kings 12. 17- by thele Examples learn to amend your Ways, 
or expett to periſh in them. m2 The reading this Paſſage interroga- 
fively, renders it darker than if *twere read affertively z yet they were 
. berrer, 1,e, greater than thele Kingdoms of 1/r-2el and Fudah; and rheir 
Borders, i. e, the Bounds of thoſe Kinzdums, greater than theſe of 
Iſrael and Fudah ; But if you retain our Verfion,ic will amount to this 
Are they, 7. e. J/rael and Fudzh, better, more juſt, thankful and merci- 
ful than theſe Kingdoms, that they ſhould iwvpe to eſcape ? or is the 
Border of theſe two Kingdoms greater, that they ſhould hope to ſtand 
by Power ? 


Miſery foretold, is tar off, as Ez-k. 12. 27. which ſee: Theſe were 
great Ones too, that the Prophet here threatneth, who thus poſt- 
pon'd the Day of Jſrael and Fudab's Calamities. o Not as if it ſhould 
be a ſhort Calamity, as a Day; but it ſpeaks the determinate fixed 
Time, and the Hafte wherewith the Execution ſhall be made, p The 
Throne , or Judgment-Seat which ſhould relieve the Oppreſſed, 
condemn the Wicked, and acquit the Innocent ; this is made a Seat 
of Violence where unjuft Judges condemn the Juſt, and take 3Bribes. 
4 Thus you draw the Judgments of God on your fe}ves;- by ating 
Violence againft the Poor, and contemning the Threats of the 
Prophets. | : 


the flock x, and the Calves y out of the mid! of the”; 

ſtall z : | 
7 The Wo is to be added to them, that either Out of Lazineſs or Lu- 

Xury, and to pleaſe the Fleſh, lay themſelves to reſt s on beautiful 

rich Beds, bought with the Gain of Bribes and Opprefhon, 2. his 

ſomewhat explains the former; They did extreamly. indulge their 

Pride and Luxury, and on Beds or Couches laid themſelres to feat, 

when God called them to mourn and weep. « With Excels, as Mar, 

24. 37, 38. and Luke 12. 19, 20, x The very beſt iq all their Flock, 

and probably they choſe them out firſt, before they ſet out Lambs 

for Sacrifices z or ciſe theſe gluttonous Judges and Rulers eat the beſt 

Lambs, not of their own, but out of poor oppreſſed Mens Flocks. 

» Thoſe that were tatteſt too. 4 Kepr on purpole to make them moſt 

delicious and nouriihing Meat. | 

5 * That ||| chant a to the 

invent to themſelves Inſtruments of Muſick c , 


David d : <2 | 
a Wo to them that ina time of deepeſt Mourning, do enfertain 
themſelves with Songs, and with greateſt Skill ting to th-ir Mutical 
Inftruments as it they had no greater thing to mind. 5 Ver Lute, or 
Guitern,one kind put for every one uſed in their Feaftings at this time 
of Amos. c Not ccntent with know, old-faſhion'd Muiick ; they nn 
out new Infiruments, New Spngs and Tunes. 4 In kmiation of Da- 
vid, as they profanely pretend ; or «t{e.emuating his Skill, and pre- 
ferring their own Feaſt-Songs and -Mulick, , before his Temple-Muſick 
and Songs: We may imagine what Song; [ach ungodly, cruel, volup- 
tuous Men would ling, and what Tunes they wouid tet £00, on {cls 


TH 


Occalions, viz. looic, grofane and igpure 3nowgye | 
$ That 


truſt in the Mountain of Samaria d, which e are ay 
houſe of {owes 

*ESX.,19.0+ 
2 This comprizeth many and great Sorrows, all that God intends as | Gr, * -/ 
gainſt thele Sinners. b6 Who live in abundance, eat drink, ſleep, and {, 


% 
» aw 


T&r 


4 That lie r upon beds of Ivorys, and || ſtretch them- j| Or, 4 


ſelves upon their Conches t, and eat u the Lambs ovt of [9s with 
pu er rus 


ſound of the viol 6, and * Tf <. 124 
like [| Or, q7- he 


Fa 7 F 
U $ Chan. V1 
141nSChn#/e ah 2 
| | i 
o . M - FE PS i { % 8+ 0 SORTS ns A - . " . ' 
and by ſufficient Authoriry, and celebrated ſome J/raelires were carried Captiv2s; but this ſtall be a more 
CHAT VI. 
Wo and capitvity u threamed uton Zion and Semaria for their eaſe and 
ſecurity, g- 6. God ſmeareth that ke will d:{troy *em by plagues, 
and other judgments, 9 —— 11, Their perverſeneſs an obſtinacy the & 
eauſe of all this, 12 I 4 
I O a * tothem that, || arc at eaſe b in Zion c, and * Luk. C. 


;< 


2 * Paſs g ye unto Calneh bh, aad ſei; and from *Nah.3.3 


3 Ye that put far away the * evil day o, and cauſe *©h.5-12. 


the || ſeat p of violence to come near q : | FOuy 
2 Wo to you that flatter your (elves that the Day of Darkneſs and IL.g 4. ”_ 


POOR He a 6 


WA. 


tool 


" p VS fps £< 1 " 
- q F W- 
ba boy's \ « Tec. > = amy % "9 "a . . 
p<. - Po x00 wore Mere”. - 
wn o = 4 * "pan * 
y ha B . R—_—_— 64s 
Neat Io" Q Ws , m__ 
, * 4 y > San AI 4 . - = 
- "ns pe. Y — S bY ww b LI; 0 J : — - 
. . G 5 = y vo. . » 
<4 _ > £ : WA = 
=o» py — " -- ” 4 _— - J _ 
G = » —_— *7 Xx Es, ' 
F —_ 427 ' 40 "Iz z - WET "77 __—_— A —_—_— - 
__—— - \ —_—_ 
= uy p og. d >. $-% af _— wo Ns AO BY 9 - o wo ——_ ” 
- wn OR LL - : J 
Way . _—_ - 21:16 Pats OE Ca _ . 
« _—- Cm Ln —— 4 ——__ wn 
bao neF rg ” =? 4 - " 
i. : » 
: ES "4 "0 i II» "TIC a mag”, ws PEE 
222 wide? Re I 
£ ſw - ; A a : Boks an 3 
at: Wir, * OD. - - \ —Ir%s - _ _ = a - 


RG : ” Ys _ _ — _ 2 : « - ng 
x pe « ww — = - Me , EL » < - Wie ® - nee * LES nd ”- 
g £ : * "IE = by & ny — * + 6 dl » 
<3 = Soy pn pL Ow rope. : F _ » - _—_ 
vo A j- nic - : 3 ONS 4 
i wa ; —_ aa 5 < - I : > «Fry 
- CESS - 9x4 go "—_ AW 4 = Wy . : 
_ vhs - - © = A ths tis . . - - ” 
I = ke won. X — _ _ — —_ vr as $255 dM "x" 
WM , ? Pad *t7.4 ad tC Abc 4 m - FEES wo. " - -- - 
— 4 x a : 4 Oy ow 
- pm 1 pa —— , Pn 
- —— «< = —_— o = * . ”-  — - _ - "4.1 . = - - 
- CO EEzet *r A——— A * — Tg" " ”; "T- $ mo - P _ = : .* S 
a Da” wen 4 a gt ; bogey hn - 7 rt: , . "As i > P « = 
Wy _—_ by I rx EV 4 '® «* A _- + _ 1 — . _- - - 
* —_— -4 . > 1 ——_ ” - þ - ſh 


Chap. VI. 


[| Or, iz: 
bowls of 
wine, 
+ Heb, 
breach, 


X* Jer. s Is 
I 4+ 
Heb.6.13, 


7. 
+ Heb. the 


fulneſs 
thereof. 


*Ch, g .] 3 . 
S Bs Jo 

{] Or, they 
will n0t,0r 
have 10. 


1; Or, 
aroppings, 


6 That edrink || wine in bowls, and anoint themſelves , 
with the chief ointments g : but they are not grieved for 
the -F aflition of Joſeph bh. 

e The Prophet continues the Wo till to theſe riotous Feaſters ; 
the jovial, banqueting, dancing, and finging Judges. f Not in little 
Veſſels, not in moderate Glaflſes or Cups, as beſeemed tober Men, 
but in great Veſſels, called Bowls; and it is likely they drans thele 
filled as full as they could hold too, and in detign to drink each 
other down. g In thoſe hot Countries this anointing was necdtul 
to refreſh and ſtrengthen the Limbs, and *cwas much uſed : But 
here the effeminate Uſe of it, at ſuch a Time, and by ſuch Men, at 
Feafts, is condemned as a great Exceſs, and provoking Sin which 
God will puniſh. hþ Nothing afetted with, or tronbled for the 
0 ay Calamities of their Country, though they were ſore Ones 

rought on them by the Syrians, and by their own Diviſions and 
Civil Wars; both Kingdoms of Fudab and J/rael were in a very low 
afflited State : but theſe Rulers and Grandees live, feaſt, fing and 
dance, as it no ſad Occalion called for other Carriage. : 

7 © Therefore # now ſhall they go captive k with the 
firſt that go captive /, and the banquet m2 of them that 


ſtretched themſelves # ſhall be removed 0. : 

7 For this Sin of unſeaſonable Feaſting added to all former Sins z 
much like that, Jſz. 22-14. kt Who ruled others, and whoſe Cha- 
rater you have, ver. 1, 2, 3, Gc. who put far from them the Evil- 
day, &c, theſe ſhall certainly be carried Captive. / And as they de- 
ſerve by their Sins, ſoſhall they be carried away the firſt ot any, God's 
Hand in puniſhing them ſhall be as eminent as their Hand was in f1n- 
ning. m The Feaftings of voluptuous Ones ſhall ceaſe. 7 Vid. ver. 4. 
let. ?. o God will ſend the Aſyriuns to take away the Banquet, and to 
bring in a Bill, a Reckoning, for theſe ſecure Sinners, who ſhall be re- 
moved too as well as their Banquet is 3 they ſhall go into Captivity, 
and there in Sorrows dearly pay for all their Luxury, Inhumanity and 
SECUritY. 

$8 * The Lord GOD hath ſworn by himſelf p, 
ſaith the LORD, the God of hoſts q, I abhor 7 the 
excellency of Jacob s, and hate his palaces ? : there- 
fore will I deliver up the city «, with + all that 1s there- 
IN X, 


þ The Secure, Incredulous and Atheiftical among the Judges of 
Iſrael, are here ſpoken to eſpecially z and' the Prophet affures them 
that God had ſworn by himſelf that they ſhould be puniſhed, and 
in the Manner he had forctold. q God affureth his Prophet, that 
the Prophet might atteft it: to his Hearers. r I look with Deteſta- 
tion, and remember with Loathing. s All that the Seed of Facob 
accounts a Glory and Excellency to them, and in which they do put 
their Truft, all their external Priviledges and ceremonious Wor- 
ſhip. t In which Violence is ftored up, in which Luxury a- 
bounds. u Feruſalem, Samaria, and all the other Cities. x Both 
Perſons and Things, Aſh77z firſt ſhall ſweep away all out of J/r4e! 
and Samaria, and Babylonian next ſlall carry away Fudab, Ferujalem, 
andall in it. 

9 Andit ſhall come to paſs y, if there remain z ten men 
in one houſe a, that theyſhall dieb. 

7 The thing is decreed, and ſhall take effe&, x Or eſcape the 
Enemies Sw"rd, or the Famins of Samaria betieged three Years. 
8 Many Men, for *tis a certain number expreſs'd, though an uncertain 
be underſtood. b Either of Veſiilence, or by ſome other Stroke of 
God's hand; though they eſcape a while, they ſhall not finally eſcape, 
2 ASS 17. 5. : 

10 And a mans uncle c ſhall take him up 4, and he 
that burneth him e, to bring out the bones out of the 
houſe f, and ſhall ſay g unto him that 4 by the ſides of 
the houſe h, Is there yet any with theez ? and he ſhall 
ſay k, No : then ſhall he ſay / * Hold thy rongue m ; 
for || we may not make mention of the name of the 


LORD »s. 

c Or ſome near Kinſman. d Inſtead of thoſe Mercenaries who 
were wont to do this, and were paid for it; but now none of 
theſe to be had, the next to the Dead muſt as well as he is able 
take him up on his Shoulders, and earry him, 7. e. the laſt of the 
Ten, the other Nine being dead. e Though the Fews moſtly 
buried, yet in ſome Caſes they burned the dead Bodies, as in this of 
waiting Peſtilence, when they could not carry them out, either 
for fear of infe&ing others, or for want of help. f All that re- 
mained : The Fleſh of the Dead being conſumed to Aſhes ; the 
Bones are reſerved to be buried, and laid up in ſome Sepulchre 
of their Anceſtors. g He that doth this Office for the laſt of his 
dead Friends, ſhall enquire h of one he ſeeth either dwelling near, 
and by the ſides of the Houſe out of which the Bones are carried, 
or elſe of ſome that lay undiſcerned in the Corner of the Houſe 
where ſo many -died. #Is any one living in this your Flouſe, hath 
any one eſcaped? k The Man of whom the Uncle, or whoever 
carried out the Bones, enquireth., 7 Then ſhall the Enquirer fay ; 
m Either murmur not againſt God, or mourn not ; for ſo ſad is the 
time that the Dead are happier than the Living, or ſay nothing leſt 
all be rifled from thee : For ſach Inhumanity was among them, 
that there were thoſe who would dare to rifle infeted Houſes: Or 
elſe, which ſutes the next words, be filent under God's juſt Diſplea- 
ſure.. 2 Now *tis too late to ſeek God, who is executing his immuta- 
ble Decree and $entence which we were adviſed to prevent, but did 
not in ſeaſon. | 

11 For behold o, the LORD commandeth p, and he will 
ſmite the great houſe q with || breaches r, and the little. 


houſe s with clefts te. 

0 Conſider this well ; it ſeems to be the. continued Speech of him 
who took care of the Dead, ver. 10. p God provoked by our Sins, 
hath ſent out thy Enemies ; War, Famine and Peſtilence, all come 
commiſhoned of God z and when the Arrow is ſhot, *twill hit and kill. 

The Palaces of great Men, and their Families. 7 Shall have great 


| Boar made in them, by which they ſhall be ruined. $s The Cot- 


ages, and lefler Dwellings of poor Mea with their Families, # Shall 


AM O S. 


| of eating the graſs of the land hb, then 1 faid i, 0 


by leſſer Stroaks be ruined, their Clefts ſhall be enough to ag thi 
Ail ſhall be overthrown, and we mult ſubmit to it. : 

12 © Shall Horſes run apon the Rock 4 ? will one plow 
there with Oxenx? for * ye y have turned judgmen 


2 Hy 


into gall a, and the fruit of righteouſneſs b into hemlock ; Cz, 


u Would it not be dangerous to Horſe and Rider ? if Prophets and 
pious en exhort, threaten or adviſe, they endanger themſelye;, i: 
does no more Good than if you would run your Horſe on the ſlipper 
Precipices of Rocks : Or all is loft Labour on theſe hardned Sinner: 
x Your Hearts are hard as the Rocks; my Prophet's Freachins on 
lefſer Judgments warning you,all gentler Means uſed are but a; 2 Hy" 
bandman's plowing the Rocks. Theſe ſhall therefore be torn up " 
the Roots, your State and Kingdom ſhall be utterly overthrown, » You 
Judges and Governours in the ten Tribes, and in F#4dab too, > Fig, 
ch, 5. v. 7.1et.g,b, i, a Or, Poiſon, by thoſe Laws they took "_ 
Life, and forfeited Eſtate, which, had the Laws been rightly executed 
had ſaved both. 6 All that Fruit which Equity and Juſtice would 
have produced by due Application of the Law, hath been Worm- 
wood, Grief and Complaints, by your wreſting and perverting the 
Law. © A deadly and pernicious'Weed, ſo the Courſe of your Cours 
have been. ; ; 

13 Ye which rejoiced in a thing of novght e, which 
lay f, Have we not taken to us horns by our oy 
ſirengthg ? k 

4 Glorying with a Joy and Satisfa&ion, with Hope and Confidence 
e In your Vietories, Alliances, Fortifications and Idols, all which 
draw you away from God, end from ſeeking .him as he will be fqund 
f Tell the Prophets that reprove you, and foretel your Downfa|: '0n 
ſay to them, notwithſtanding all that God threatens, yet x you hare 
raiſed your ſelves to Dominion and Greatneſs by your Wiſdom, (ov. 
rage and Succeſs, and by the ſame you will maintain it, and ſo jc 
put off the Day of Evil. 

14 But þ behold z, I will raiſe & up againſt you, 
nation , O houſe of firael 9, faith the LORD, the 


God of hoſts » ; and they o ſhall affli p you from th; 


neſs 7. 


ſerve and weigh well what is ſaid. k Awaken, call together, ftrery 
then, ſucceed and proſper in the Attempt againft you. 1 2ul ha, 
and Tiglath Pilefer hath or now doth afflit and break you, but Shun. 
zeſer ſhall utterly deftroy you ; if his Strength were not enough i 
ſelf, mine Arm ſhould firengthen him to bring all yonr Hope t; 
novght. # Kingdom of the ten Tribes. » Who doth what he fait, 
who does command and *tis done, whom none can refift. . o The 4j- 
rians and their Confederates. p Diftreſs you and preſs you hard nl 
ſides, it ſhall be a great and an univerſal Oppreſſion of you. q ACiy 
of Syria, bordering on the Land of 1ſrael, North-Eaft, and was an Ir. 
let into Syr7a, from the North of Canaan, r Which is Sichor inthe 
moſt South-weſt Parts of Canaan towards Egpyt. So all your Cour 
try, Fudab and all, ſhall be oppreſſed by that Nation which I will ;ait 
and ftrengthen againſt you, 


CH AP. VII 


The vifion of the Graſhoppers, and conſuming fire, judgments upon 11, 
are turned away by the interceſſion of Amos, 1 6. The vin 
the plumb-line, ſhewing the utter rejeftion aud ruine of Iſrael, 7-4 
Amaziah the Prieſt accuſeth Amos of conſpiracy, x0——12, Ei 
defence, and Amaziab's judgment and ruine, 14 ——= 17. , 


I Hus 4 hath the LORD God ſhewed b unto ne 

and behold c, he formed 4 || Graſhoppers e i! 
the beginning of the ſhooting up of the latter groutt,? 
and lo, it was the latter growthf after the Kings Mon 
ings g. 

a Sometime this refers to what went before, here it refers to whit 
the Prophet ſaw and is about to declare. 6 This is the firſt offi: 
Viſions or Prophetick Repreſentations of what was coming upon th 
People tor their Sins. The Lord gave Amos a clear Sight of tit 
future Calamity by this Viſfien, «c I could not but obſerve, and | 
is worthy your Obſervance too. d It is not ſaid he called for thi, 
but he formed -or created them, probably intimating ſomewhat & 
traordinary in them, either in their Bigneſs or Number, 0: ratie! 
ſudden appearing of them. So the Plague fignified by them ſhoul 
ſuddenly come upon them. e In our Country Graſhoppers are 
hurttul, but theſe in our Text were Locufts, and fo rendred, /# 3} | 
4+ and Nah. 3.17. and the word uſed by Amos here i paraphraſe 
by the Zebr, Criticks, by a Word that properly notes Locuſt, flirt 
ſhooting up of the firſt Growth being too luxuriant, they did either 
mow oft the Tops, or eat it down with Cattel, and this was «0 
for preſerving the Corn and Increaſe of the Harveft ; but if tie 
ſecond Growth were cut- off or eat up, it marred the whole Hati® 
and theſe devouring Locuſts were formed in ſuch time as todo this 
and ſo to bring a Famine upon the Land. g It is ſuppoſed that 
firſt mowing, of the luxuriant Corn in the Blade was for the Kit) 
Uſe, and after this the ſecond Springing grew up to the Hare 
It may polfibly intimate, that though the Kings of //r4e! did 35 tae 
mow the luxuriant Riches, yet they grew again ; but when Ajn# 
Locuſts come, all is.aevour'd. j 

'2 And itcame to pals, that when the had made wn 


GOD, torgive. I beſeech thet k, {| by whom. ſhall Jacdl 
ariſe }? for. he 5 ſmall m. 


b Either vifionally, the whole Scheme repreſented 


both Loch 


Grafs, Herbs and Cern,and it repreſeated the Grais asalmoft all af? 
up,and the Loczſts are ready to rall upon the Corn,and all that remain” 
Or elle really it was atted, and the Grals was devoured. 
the former ſeems moſt likely, 1 ave it to every one's [ulgmene 


f 
'þ And heſie 
Proceeding" 
h.:ir C0 
$1;105 


mos interceded by Prayer for this People in this caie. ' 
for Mercy, intreats for Pardon, hereby juſtifying Go: s Pr: 
and to02gh this People for whom he pravs is inentivie 075 


| 


entring in of Hamath q, unto the || River of the Wilder.;! 
; is 
b Notwithſtanding all your Boaſts and carnal Confidences. i 0, | 


el, and of 
FLO Procce 
fully buil 
Meaſures 
"twas vari 
meaſuring 
cown, tho 
lented to t 

8 An 
thod e ? 


LORD, 


my peop] 

any more 
| i Who < 

This God 

he wonld by 

Fhat follou 

tame Wall 

hem whet! 

, I will EXa 

en Kingdo! 

Tight, or hc 

Ill pull do! 
dns, and this 

9 And 

and the S; 

* will ri 
word p. 

7 The Tet 
Nip of God, 
dut his Chi] 
ome do, tt 

iZh Mount 
and fall with 

t This expl: 

imes the Pr 
and Bethel, o; 
be will ſtir y 
dt Zechariah ( 

onſpirator . 

Io 7] 
mtu to ? 
2th conſp 

df Iſrael a 
Nords c, 

( After thai 
f Idolatry anc 
aily he was 
able he migh 


Þ! the Tribe 0 


be chief Prie 
I Uoyernour 
« u rants 
me of Feby? 
M the Throne 


ndconſpirin 
IkIF or hath « 


ganſt their . 
ome to paſs, 
© People a 


Freviions, th 


Y ; 


o. VII. AM 


r:ion, yet the Prophet is deeply affetted with 1t, and deprecates the 
Miſyleaſure of God, and implores his Mercy ; to God belongs For- 
a0" to them nothing but Shame. 1 How ſhall any of Facob 
A rag "or if thou, O God of Facob, doſt caſt him down, who will 9r 
elcap - him up ? he mult needs periſh if thou be ſtill angry, and ſhew 


F | 
= Is, m Weak in Strength, few in Number, not able to reſiſt 
his Enemies the Aſſyrians, Te, | 

3- 3 * The LORD repented zz fer this : It ſhall not be o, 


* rich the LORD. 


" This ſpoke after the manner of Man, is to be underſtood as 
:-come3 the Immutability and Omniſcience of God z what a Man 
«hcn he repenteth doth, deſiſting from the thing, ſo God defiſting 
or ſuſpending his own A@, doth te!l us he repenteth. o This 
explains the former, That ſore Famine like to be cauſed by theſe 
Locuſts came not, Amos prevailed by Prayer, and the Judgment was 


iverted. 
ww Tkus hath the Lord GOD ſhewed p unto me - and 


behold q, the Lord GOD called 7 to contend by fire s, 


and it devoured t the great deep #, and did eat up a part x. 
| In Viſion or Hieroglyphic ;' vid. ver. 1. let. b. q Vid. ver. 1. let. 
| 6  r Declared he would judge as by Fire. s Literally, ſay ſome, God 

would from Heaven by Fire puniſh. Others ſay metaphorically, by 

Drought which ſhould ſcorch up all Fruits of the Earth, and dry up 

Fouatgins and Rivers. Or elſe by very ſore, waſting, and irrefiſtable 

udgrfients, that like Fire ſhould conſume all,, hereby denoting the 

Aſyrian Rage. 7 Eat up, 7. e. viſionally, or in the Emblem. « Not 

literally, but as the other, ver. 2. in Hieroglyphic. So it appeared to 

4nos, x Of the Land too, it ſeemed to ſeize on the Earth ; now 


0 $ 


all, high and low, and a well-ordered Government may not bear ſuch 
a Prophet, Thus far the general Accuſation. 


It For thus Amos laith d, Jeroboam ſhall diz by the 


their own land p. - "= TE | 

4 S0 Amaziah fallely reports the Prophet. e He no where ſaid ſo; 
ou «lid he infinuate ſo much, but ſpake of his Houſe diſtinguiſh'd 
rom his Perſon, as ver. 9. f This indeed he forcto!d, but did no 
more contribute to it, or contrive it, than the Phytician doth who 
toretels the Death of an uncounſelable Patient,fick of a mortal Diſeaſe. 
Z This is added to lignify the Greatne's of the Captivity. 

12 Alſo Amaziah faid unto Amos h, O thou Seer #, go, 
tlee thee away into the land of Judah k, and there ear 


bread, and Propheſie there m.. BO 

6 It is probable enovgh that this Arch-Prieſt of Zechel did ſend this 
Advice,or gave it to the Prophet ſo ſoon as he had 2ccuſed the Prophet: 
to Feroboam, and perhaps he thus intended to intinuate a great good 
Will towards the Prophet, preſuming the Prophet knew nothing that. 
Amaytab had accuſed him. # Whether- this be ſpoken in Scorn, or 
81ving him the Reſpe& due toa Prophet; I determine not. k Be ad- 
viſed, ſtay not here, but with all Speed fice out of the Kingdom, get: 
thee into Fudah whence thou cameſt, there thou mayft be fate. 1 Thou 
wilt never get thy Bread here by this kind of Preaching, in Fudah *tis 
likely thou mayſt get thy Livelihood by thy Prophetick Art ; thithec 
$0- m There thou mayſt freely declaim againſt our Vices, and pre- 
dict our Fall, which we do as lirtte as thou doſt much believe. 


13 But *Propheſie not again any more at Beth-el 7 : 


them. c What he faith will come, if ic doth come will certainly ruine 


Sword c, and Iſrael ſhall ſurely be led away captive f our of 


* Ch.2.1+. 


_ m——_iions 
p ; > 
— 24 SEZ 
» 
DEL 


v 3d (v 
Ro IE — 
Sets on x RR OY 
=—_”— Pry -” T: Gi 
_ \ 2 _ » es 
Y _— —_ ms. 
I nes . - i : S 
ESnEY et Hr  E- 


x —_—— 
I” —ar_— 
« ns gy 
= : 


this in Viſion awakens the Prophet as before to pray earneſtly. 


for it 5 the Kings || Chappel o, and it #5 the + Kings Court p. || Or, /«.- 
5 Then faid [, O ne GOD, _ | beſeech thee 5 by 2 As a Friend B51! ny do not, and as having A frow Fuary. 

whom ſhall Jacob ariſe ? for he 75 1mall, the King, I do declare thou ſhalt not prophefie in Bethel. o Where 1 F Heb. 
6 The LORD rcpented for this : This alſo ſhall not be, | am by the King's Authority empowred to give Licence, or impoſe Si- ©9#c 0; 7: 

lence, and to ſee that none but fic Perſons. Preach before the King,who KINgaum. 


faith the Lord Ged. 
Theſe two Verſes are almoſt Word for Word the ſame with ver. 2, 


and 3. which ſee. 

7 Thus he ſhewed me,and behold y, the Lord z ſtood z 
upon.a wall made by a plumb-line 6, with a plumb-line 
in his hand c. 

7 Vid. ver. 1. let. b,c. 4 The Great God, who had long tried J/-4- 
el, and often ſpared. &« Poffibly it. may denote his fixed, Purpoſe now 


doth there pay his Devotions. p Where all his Nobles attend him, 
and where no ordinary, obſcure; and uncourtly. Dotor may appear 5 
velide ſuch Preaching ſo near to the King's Court, will be ſpeedily pu- 
niſh'd; therefore as thou loveſt thy ſelf, Amos, follow my Advice; 
and let the King's Court and this Country hear no more of thee, 
14 « Thenganſwered Amos, and faid r to Amaziah 5; 


[ro procced todemoliſh this State, 6 Strongly, regularly and beauti- 
fully built, as Art could build it. c Ready as an Artift to take the 
Meaſures of this Wall, to diſcover all the Defets of it, and how much 
*twas varied from what it was at firſt built. This ſhall be the laſt 
meaſuring it, and on this Meaſuring whatever is faulty ſhall be pulled 
down, though to the very Foundation, This was viſtonally repre- 
lented to the Prophet. ; | 
8 And the LORDd ſaid unto me, Amos, what ſeeſt 
thong e? and 1 faid, A plumb-line F. Then ſaid the 
LORD, Behold, I * will ſet a plumb-line in the midſt of 
my people Iſrael g, I * will not again paſs by them hb 
a0y more. | £ 
| | Who did before ſhew Aniot the Emblem in Landskip or Vifion. 
This God asketh not as if he were ignorant what Amos ſaw, or as if 


he wonld be informed whether he ſaw aright, but it is introduQory to 
phat follows. f Or perpendicular to which Maſons firſt build, and 
ame Walls of Houſes, and by which they do ar any time meaſure 
hem whether they ftand upright, or any way belly out, and decline. 
FI will exactly meaſure my People Jſrae!, the who'e Fabrick of the 
en Kingdoms, I will take a particular View of all, and how far *tis 


fruit y. > 

9 So ſoon as this falſe Accuſer had under tlie Vizzard of Friendſhip 
given Advice,and withal intimated his Reſolution to uſe his Authority 
to make Amcs deſiſt if he did not do it voluntarily z Amos gives him. 
Anfwer. 7 Readily, boldly, and yet ſmoothly, and out-ſhoots the 
Court Pontif in his own Bow. $s Not fearing his Perſon or his Pow- 
er. # Not originally, or by Succeſſion, or by Study, or by any hu- 
mane Defjgnation and Preparation, as many have been. u My Father 
was no Prophet, nor was I bred up in the School of the Prophets, ſuck 
as 2 Kings 2.3,5, 7, 15. and 4.38. and 6. 1, Though you call me 
Seer, whether ironically or ſeriouſly I matter not, but afſure you I amt 
not ſuch by Art or Trade, or for a Livelihood. x By Breeding, 
Choice, and Occupation, I was and ftill am an Herd-man, and have 
my Concerns in that Myſtery in or near Tekoab in Fudah, on which L 
can live ; though I propheſie without Stipend or Salary, I needed not 


to run into the Prophets Work for my Bread. y The Tree and Fruit 
is known by one Name, Paleſtize abounded with both, and the Fruit 
was ſweet, not large, yet good for Feod for Man or Cattel, as ſome 
Fruits are with us; on theſe I could ill, as I formerly did, live, and 
be content, 


I was no Prophet f, neither was I * a Prophets Son #4; * x Ki- 
but I was an * Herdman x, and a gatherer, of || Sycomore IT 
Jo I . y © 


70S 


ight, or how far *tis out of Order. þ I will no more forbear; but I 15 And the LORD z took me 2 Þ as I followed the + Heb, | 
il] pull down all that is faulty, though I pall up the very Foundati- | Aock b, and the LORD ſaid unto me c, God, propheſie efron Les 
ind, 


ico 


dns, and this is confirmed in what followeth. 


9 And the high places z of Iſaac k ſhall be deſolate }, 
and the Sanctuaries of Iſrael ſhall be laid waſte; and 
* will riſe # agaiaſt the houſe of Jeroboam o with the 


word p. | 
? The Temples on high Mountains built to Tdols, or' for the Wor: 
Dip of God, though he forbad them. & The Father is here named, 
but his Children are intend2d, all tlze Seed of J/eac ; I cannor, though 
ome do, think the Prophe: alludes to 1ſaac's being offered upon a 
igh Mountain. 3 Shall be raſed to the Foundation, or left to moulder 
and fall with Length of Time, and Afſaults of Storms and Weather, 
" This explains the former, and ſpeaking after the Cuſtom of thoſe 
imes the Prophet calls the Idol-Temples Santtuaries, whether in Dan 
and Bethel, or elſewhere. » God will, but not immediately, riſe up : 
He will ſtir up ſomeor other to do what he threatens. 0 In the Davs 
dt Zechariah ( Son of Feroboam ) murdered by Shallam. p Firſt of a 
onſpirator Shallum, next of Civil War. 


10 | Then 9 Amaziah r * the Prieſt s bf Beth-el ? 
nt4 to * Jeroboam * King of Iſrael y, ſaying, Amos 
2th conſpired againſt thee z in the midſt of the houſe 
df Ifrael a: the Land b is not able to bear all his 
Nords c, 

{ After that Amos had expreſly and peremptorily foretold the Ruine 


1 Idolatry and Kingdom of 1ſrael for their Sins. 7 It appears not what | 


amily he was of, nor is it much material we ſhould know, *tis pro- 
adle he might be of ſome mean Family, or poſſibly an Apoſtate Prieſt 
P! the Tribe of evi. s By way of Eminency, no common Prieft, but 
be Chief Prieſt. r To the Calf at Bethel, and 'tis like he was Prefect 
Ir Governour for the King in the Civil Aﬀairs of that City and Coun- 
* 4 Gaye Information by Meſſengers ſent. x The ſecond of that 
ae of Febu's Race, the third from Fehu. »y At that time living,an«: 
© the Throne of Jf7ael. 7 He accuſed the Prophet of High Treaſon, 
mionſpiring to raiſe War againſt his Soveraign. « Openly and pub- 
Kly,or hath endeavoured to raiſe all Iſrael into Sedition or Rebe'lton 
ant their own King. 6 Either thus, if what he threatneth ſhould 
"me to paſs, *twill be Ruine and utter Deſolation to all : Or thus : 
vc People are incenſed ſo much againſt this Prophet tor his hart 
Faiions, that he muſt be made an Example to quiet ar:d conte::! 


unto my people Iſrael f. | 

7 The great and jealous God whom you oppoſe by Idols ; 4 By an 
extraordinary Power of his Spirit took me off from my old, mean and 
private Employment and Receſs, and I could not withſtand him. 
'b A Deſctiption of a Shepherd's Employment. c Commanded whe- 
ther by Voice from Heaven, or extraordinary Irradiation of his Mind, 
or Impulſe of the Divine Prophetick Spirit, comes all to one, his Au» 
thority is Divine. 4 Out of Fudah. e As a Prophet,inftrutt,threatenz 
promile, invite, and foretel. f The ten Tribes, which with like Ci- 
Vility are called by Amos God's People, as he called Seer. | 

16 © Nowg therefore hear thon þ the word of the 
LORD #: thou ſayeſt k; Prophefie not againſt } Iſrael, and 


drop m not thy word againſt the houſe of Iſaacn. . 

| & When forbidden, Amos undaunted Propheſteth to him that for- 
bad him; b Amazzab, who haft accuſed, yet pretendeft to wiſh and 
adviſe my Safety. 7 Who ſent me, whom thou contraditeft, from 
him I have ſomewhat to ſay to thee, and of much Concern alfo to 
thee, kt Uſeft thy Power to' filence me, 7 Preach not Sedition, or 
whart tends to it under Pretence that God ſpeaks it againſt J/7ae! : if thou 
canſt ſpeak Good of us; and to us, this may be good for thee ; but if 
thou wilt ſpeak ſad News againft us, it will nor be believed, it may 
hurt thee, it will do no Good to others. m2 Diſtil not, Vid. Ezek. 21- 
' 1, 7- and Mic, 2.6. 1 The Poſterity of Jſaac, this explains the 
former, and is an Hendiadis or elegant Ingemination. 


divided by line t: and thou ſhalt die « in a polluted land x, 
and Iſrael y ſhall ſurely go into captivity forth of his 
land z. . | 


0 Becauſe thou haſt ſv direMy and ſcrenuouſly oppoſed the Lord: 
p Whichroa Man of Senſe is a graat Atflition.. q A common Whore. 
7 A notorious one that plays not the Adultereſ> in ſecret at homey 
'Jut ſo that all take notice of it, - and brand her for it. s Which in all 
Likelihood doth intimate their Slaughter by Shallum when he flew Ze- 
'c:artzab Feroboim's Son, with whom nv doubt but his Friends fell, 
' 4mong which this Family was 3 or ele by the Sword of Mcnab:m; v ho 


A, » 
_ 


, 


17 * Therefore o thus ſaith the LORD, Thy Wife þ « 5:- Fa 
ſhall be a harlor q in the Ciryr, and thy Sons and thy 28. 1: 
Daughters ſhall fall by the Sword s, and thy land ſhall be 29-25,” 


oor $4 , E _— ms p © 4 I 
T « 5 rl Fe 
- —_ m_—_—y £ bo _ 
—— "-—_ ING ge - - ” oo» 
——; _ D> - - <p -— £ __ —_ - h_ pre" "98 26 <> 
_ - > EE v7 R_E-y 2 —_ 0 
—_—— "0 : =_— I= . = 
p——— — w . 
eres went Roo ee eres —— _ 


Chap. VIII. 


flew Shalluim. t Thy Eſtate, which no doubt was large.ſhall be ſhared | 


among the Sonldiers and Courtiers of Menabem. u Thy Diſhonour by 
2 lewd Wife, thy chilale(s Solitarinels, and thy Poverty ſhall come 
on thee &'re thou die, its probable he fled to ſave his Life. x Among 
the Heathen, where thou mayſt be ſure my Word was true. y Ten 
Tribes. # See ver. 11, let. f. 8. 


GC HIA P. VI. 


By the baset of ſummer-fruit i ſpewed the nearneſs of 1ſraePs end for 
their oppreſſion, 1——6. God ſweareth urte»ly ro ruine and deſtroy 
Iirael; th-ir miſerable condition for want of the word, 7 I 4+ 


I Hus hath the Lord God ſhewed unto me, and be- 
hold 2 8 basketb of ſummer-fruit c. 

@ Vid. ch. 7.%. 1. let. b, c. and ver. 4. and ver. 7. 5 A Hook, ſay 
ſome, with which the Gatherer might either pull down the Bough,or 
pull off the ripe Fruit ; or a Basket into which the ripe Fruit gathered 
was put to be carried away. c Not the early ripe Fruit, but that 
which as ic needed, ſo had the whole Summer's Heat to ripen it, and 
was gathered in at the End of the Summer. : 

2 And he ſaid, Amos, what ſeeſt thou 4 ? and I ſaid, 
A basker of ſummer-fruit'e. Then ſaid the LORD unto 
me f, The end g is come upon my h people Lirael, I 


will not again paſs by them any more z, | 

d The like Qneftion you have, ch. 7. v. $- which ſee in let. 4, e. 
e Vid. v. 1. let. b,c. f Hero! 
very plain in it ſelf, the Lord doth here explain it in the following 
Words. g Of God's Patience towards 1/74e1,”of their Peace, Growth 
and Glory, the End of their ripening, they are now as Fruit fully 
ripe, in the end of the Year fit to be gathered, bh So they were once, 
ſo they boaſt themſelves, ſo the Nations about them account /ſraes to 
be the People of God, # Vid. ch. 7. v.7. let. h. God had with ad- 
mirable Patience ſpared and tried, but now he will wich juſt Severity 
puniſh, neither pardon nor ſpare. 

3 And the ſongs i of the temple & ſhall + be howlings } 
in that day m2, ſaith the Lord GODn : there ſhall be many 
dead bodies o in every place p, they q ſhall caſt them torth 
7 Heb. be -- with ſilence 7. 
fivent, 7 Which are compoſed by choiceſt Wits , and ſet to ſweeteſt 

Tunes, and chanted out by moſt skilful Singers to the beſt muſical In- 
ftruments. & Either to take in Judah, and foretel the Deſolation of 
their Temple, or elſe by an Irony, the Idol-Temples, or elſe of the 
Palace, as the word in the Zebr. All Court-Mirth and Jollity, Balls 
and Muſick Entertainments, 1 ſhal! kowl, Heb. be turned into the hi- 
deous Outcries of undone and deſpairing Men. m When God ſhall 
execute his Judgments threatned as he did begin, on the Death of Fe- 
roboam, and continued that Day of Vengeance till Shalmaneſer finiſhed 
the Work in the Ruine of Samaria and its Captivity. a This added to 
aſſure Iſrael, that what Amos did foretel ſhould be accompliſhed, for 
God ſpake it. 0 So there were when Shallum flew Zachary, ſo there 
were when Menahem flew Shallum, when he came with his Army againſt 
Samaria, when he ripp'd up the Women with Child in Tiphſah,2 King. 
15. 16. and when other Uſurpers pre(sd through Blood and Treaſon 
to the Crown; beſide the Howlings when Pul, Tiglath Pileſer, and 
Shalmaneſer cruelly waſted all. p In Cities, Towns and Country, in 
Palaces and Temples too, ir all which the bloody Effects of Enemies 
Swords, the Waſtes of Famine and Peftilence ſhoutd be ſeen. q Who 
howl, who ſee this. 7 Either ſhall ſecretly bury them, ſo ſome z or. 
to rid themſelves of that Trouble,ſhall caft them out where-ever they 
can, with Silence, that none may obſerve them : ſo great calamitous 
Mortality, that the Living ſuffice not to bury the Dead, or ſo great 
Cruelty by the Enemy uled againft them, that they dare not bury 
them, or it they do, it muſt be undiſcerned ; ſee ch. 6, v. 10, 
» 4 < Hear this s, O ye that ſwallow up t the needy 4, 
even to mak® the poor of the land to fail x. 
s Thovgh the Prophet had ſeveral times told them what were the 
Sins for which God would thus puniſh j72e], yet on a repeated Threat 
he repeateth the Rehearſal of the Sins which draw down theſe Judg- 
ments on their Heads ; fo here, attend and contider it. #* Greedily 
and cruelly devour, that do like the greater Fiſh ſwallow up the leſſer 
Ery : In this one Word the Prophet includeth all the Methods of their 
cruel Opprefſion, waſting the Poor. # Such as were Objetts of your 
Mercy, had you been juſt and honeſt, as well as rich and great. x Ei- 
ther to root them out, or to enſlave them while their Neceſhties 
force them to (ell themſelves for Bread. 
5 Saying, When will the new-moon be gone y, that 
we may fell z corn ? and the Sabbath, that we may 
+ Heb. -f- ſet forth wheat a, * making the ephah ſmall b, 2nd 
* Mich.6, © m_— great c, and -þ falſifying the balances by de- 
wy ceit d ? 
+Heb.per- 5 V that could wiſh there were nothing to interrupt your Market- 
wverting the ing,your irreligious Impatience,and your Eagernels atter the World 
balances of look on ſolemn times of Divine Worſhip as very burdenſome,ſfuch was 
deceit, the firft Day of every Month, and the weekly Sabbath. #4 No ſervile 
Hoſe4 2.7. Work might be done on new Moons,no Markets kept,or Corn brought 
forth publickly to be fold. a They were allo bound very religiouſly 
to obſerve the Sabbath, and on that Day they might not buy or ſell, 
now they are weary of the Sabbath, as of the new Moon, and on the 
ſame Account wiſh it over ; here was irreligious gaping atter Gain. 
þ The Epbah was a Mealure for dry things, and contained about half 
Buſbel and one Pottle Engliſh Meaſure. Now thele covetous Corn- 
Merchants meaſured the Corn they ſold by an Ephah that was too lit- 
tle, the poor Buyer had not his due, c They weighed the Money 
which they received, and theſe rich Men had no more Pity and Juſtice 
than to make their Shekel-Weighr greater than the Standard ; ſo the 


+ Heb. 
how], 


f The Meaning of this Hieroglyphick, as not ' 


Poor were twice opprelled in the fame way, had leſs than was their 


Riglt, and paid more than they ought to pay ; and thus they undid 
the Poor, and cat him up. d Deceittully pervert the Ballances that 
the Money or Shekel weighed, though of full Weight, yet appeared 
too light on the Ballance, and they who paid it} were forced to add 
more d11ver to It. 


A M O- 9. -hap, Vi 


6 That we * may buy the poor e for filver / 914 14. 
needy for a pair of ſhoes g; yea, and fell the rcfyſe; of 
the wheat ? 

e Either it ſpeaks the Aim of theſe Men in opprefling the 
thus, that they might at laft buy their Perſons for” Servants 
Drudges,or elſe it ſpeaks the Reaſon why they would bave New 
and Sabbaths over, that they might to Market to buy the Poop 


Poor 

and 
'-Mloong 
lb. fie 


A little Silver, at Undervalue, as Amos 2.6. £ This explains the for. ©? 


mer, and ſhews us that theſe cruel Oppreflors lay in wait for the 
to buy them for a very Triflez when theſe Poor owed but for 
little and cheap Commodity, as ſuppoſe a pair of Shoes, theſe 
leſs Men would take the Advantage againft them, and make them Rl 
themſelves to pay the Debt. All which Practices are moft diregi; 
againſt the Law of God. h That which is fitter for Hogs to mouzj« 
or for Horſes to eat, the Poor muſt at dear rate either buy or ſtarve. 
and this-another kind of Oppreſhon, corrupted Wares at exceſſye 
rates, ſold to thoſe. that were neceſſitous. : 


needy 
a Very 
Merc. 


7 The LORD 7 hath ſworn k by * the excellency fit 


Jacob /, Surely m I will never forget 2 any o of their 
works. | | 

7 Who changeth not, whoſe Words and Purpoſes are immytz 
true and ftedfaſt, hath often told you, that unleſs you repent, he wii 
puniſh for your Sins, k Now he hath ſworn it, and ſends you wars 
Dy me, that he hath in moſt ſolemn and irrevocable manner qere:. 
mined, publiſhed, and expreſly declared, that he will viſit all your Sin; 
upon you. 1 By himſelf, for God cannot ſwear by any greater,and he; 
called the .Excelleney of Facob, Pſal. 47. 4. 1 If, Hebr. If Iam a Gs 
I will remember and puniſh. '» Or let paſs unpuniſh'd, I will neys: 
remit the Puniſhment by an A& of Pardon, nor ever omit to pynjh 
by an A@ of Forgetfulneſs. o Not one of all theſe their aboming!s 
Injuftices and Irreligion, not one of theſe Cruelties. 


8 Shall nor the land þ tremble for this q, and * ereryy 


one mourn r that dwelleth therein s ? and it * ſhall rif 
up wholly as a flood, and it « ſhall be caſt out and droyy. 
ed x, as by the flood of Egypt. 

p Either literally, are not ſuch Sins and Judgments enough to ſhake 
the very Foundations of the Earth ? Or, metonymically the Land fo 
the People of it, as after in the Verſe they that dwell therein. qThi 
that you have done, O Houſe of Jſrae), in ſinning, and this that Gi 
w1t] do in puniſhing, enough to melt the Earth, as Pſal. 46. 6. r Sint: 
every one hath ſinned too much, and every one ſhall ſuffer in this ap. 
proaching Calamity, every one at the News may well mourn and |z 
ment. s Inthe Land of J/7ae]. 2 Orby an Interrogation, ſþal i ny? 
7, e, ſhall not the Judgment, the invading Troops of Aſſyria, the Dil. 
pleaſure of God, riie and grow as a mighty waſting Flood ? Or el: 
thus, the whole Land ſhall riſe up, ſobb'd in theſe Judgments, it ſal 
ſeem to ſwell and grow greater ready like an Hydropick to burk aſwn 
der ;- or elſe 'tis an Hypallage, the Land ſhall riſe up, 7. e. The Flu 
ſhall riſe over the Land, or which I rather incline to, the whole Jul: 
ment ſhall riſe as a Flood, u The Land, the State, People, and hat 
they have ſhall be as in a Shipwrack,or mighty Flood which breaksal 
down before it, be toſſed in the Surges and Waves. x And atlaſtby 
the Continuance of this Tempeſt drowned all, as the overfloxing d 
NiJus doth drown all the Plains of Eg ypt. 


9 And it ſhail vme to pals y in that day z, faith tis 
Lord GOD, that * a will cauſe the Sun b te go don 


at Noon c, and I will darken 4 the earth e in the clear 
day f. 
_ 3 Moſt certainly *twill be. z When God begins to execute theſe hi 
juſt and ſevere Judgments on the ten Tribes. 4 The great, juſt, ho 
and terrible God who is provoked by theſe Sins, and hath denounc! 
theſe Jndgments, my hand ſhall be evident in it. 6 Literally, 
ſome, but erroneouſly ; by Sun I underſtand rather the ſettled State 
of their Proſperity under their preſent Government in the Houed 
Febu, or it may reter particularly to their King and Court, which # 
roboam at his Death left, like the Sun at Noon, in the Height of thel 
Glory, as all know, who know the Hiftory of thoſe times. -« S0 Ih 
e's Sun did, as at Noon, ſet under the dark Cloud of home-bred Cor 
ſpiracies and Civil Wars by Shallum, Menabem, Pekah, and Hof? til 
the Midnight-Darkneſs drew on by Pul, Tiglath Pileſer, and Shalmai 
ſer. 4 Bring a thick Cloud of Troubles and Aflitions. e The con 
mon People, the whole Body of the Nation ; ſo the Su ſpeaks tif 
Royalty, Nobility, and great ones of this Kingdom by an Alluſion wel 
known in Scripture, and the Earth ſpeaks the common ſort of People 
ana ali are here threatned. f When they did think (as in Feroboans 
time) all was fate, ſure, and well ſettled, far from the Night of Soriv# 
and Trouble, then will God bring all this he threatneth upon thel- 
10 And 1 will turn your feaſts z into mourning #, and 


all your ſongs into lamentation z, and 1 * will bring! 


ſackcloth k upon ll loins 1,and baldneſs upon every head: 
and I will make it as the mourning of an only ſos #, and 
the end o thereof as a bitter day p. | 
£ Religious, though Idolatrous in your Temples; V1. ver- 3. let. 
t, /, and your ordinary civil Feaſts in your Valaces, hee 93 
let. J. 7 This Ingemination doth affure the thing, and foreboue the 
Sadneſs of their State. & As all inwardly shall be Sadneſs, lo all that 
appears outwardly shall ſpeak their Sorrow and Sadnels. 7 All-ſorts 
Perions should put on this Mourning, and gird it cloſe to their Louth 
that it might atHie them the more, a Cuſtom very general in £0 
i 1mes and Places. m Partly pulling off the Hair of the Read chrovp 
Anguish, or Shaving the Head and Beard in fign of greateit Sadnens 
as the Eaſtern People did, Vid. Mic. 1.16, = This 1s accounted tif 
greateſt Mourning, and ſeems proverbially to exprels ſuch Mournilh 
Fer. 6. 26. and Zech.,12.10. which lee ; ſo God will affiet this Peopl 
with greateſt Sorrows, and fill them with greateſt Mourninge | 00 
may hope theſe Troubles will over, and come to an end, but that i 
be little to yuur Comfort. p A bitter Day, which you Shall wh 50 
had never ſeen, $hall ſucceed your dark-Night, as indeed 1 doih'0 
this Day. . 
11 © Behold q, the days come, faith the 17 
GOD y, that I will ſend a famine-in the 1284 5, wy 
EH 


$( 


Plgrim 
Never 1 


Another 
fulne) 
miſed 
bappi; 


l 6 
| 
 Polts | 
of. ther 
ſword 
1; and 
vered | 
4 Ab 
a fifth \ 
fible To 
ready to 
EXecute 
Offering 
Altar an 
and here 
poſhbly j 
Exetel, c 
Or, the 


nemies H; 
2 Thc 
take the, 
Will | by 
When . 
L 8, 9, IC 
I as 
hide then 
e is with 
Heart and 
Vol. 1] 


C fay e, Thy God, O Dan, liveth f, anc the manner yg of 


1p. 1X 


$s # of the LORD. | 
"2 _— now I ſhall. declare to you, and conſider it. r 
cnrely F peedily, and according tothe Threats of God. s By a ignal 
Hand of Divine Diſpleaſure it ſhall appear to be from God, that luch 
Famine cometh -upon them of 1ſrael.. 8 A ſpiritual Famine join d 
- h a corporal Famine, their Bodies were pin'd with Famine, dcſti- 
_ © Breac and Water ; and this God ſent too, but the Famine of 
the Soul is worſe and mote grievous. ' # Either the written Word 
which Iſrael had among them till their Captivity, but afterwards 
ſhould ever want both it, and thoſe who ſhould interpret it to them, 
orelſe the Word of Prophecy ; now they deſpiſe it, though they have 
:+ but then they ſhall deire it, and have it not : They ſhall hunt af- 
7 Prophets, to-tell them when their Troubles ſhall end, though now 
they hate Prophets who warn them, that their T ruubles migit not 
begin: Now Jſrae1 deſpiſeth a Propher's. Counlel, then they hall 
hunt for it,but not have a Prophet to give them Counſel as P/al.74.9. 
12 And they ſhall wander from fea to ſea x, and from 


he North even to the Eaſt y, they ſhall run to and 
fro z to ſeek the. word of the LORD 3, - and ſhall 


not find it b. : STE 
x Search all Places for a Prophet or a Preacher, from the Syrian or 
Midland Sea to that of Tibertas, to the Dead Sea, and to the Red Sea. 
3 That Mountamous Tratt, whether perſecuted Elijah fied, and per- 
haps other Prophets, in like Circumftances retired.z proverbially they 
ſhall ſearch all Corners for a Prophet. 4 Shall diligently and fpeedily, 
on every Report that a Prophet is, on hear-ſays, in fuch or ſuch a 
Place, haſten thither, as Ahab in his Search for Elijah, 1 Kings 18. 10, 
4 Hoping to hear ſome good News of 'an End of their Miſeries from 
God by x Frophet. 5 They perſecuted and flew ſuch as foretold the 
Peginning of this Miſery, and now 'tis come, they ſhall neither hear 
the News, nor ſee the Hopes of an End. -.God did tell them it would 
he utter Ruine, and no Prophet of God can tell them any better News. 
13 In that day ſhall the fair Virgins and young men 
faint for thirſt c. 
c1t is probable theſe in their Strength-and Vigour. would ſeek ear- 
nefily to know what End they might expett, whether they ſhould out- 
live thi3 Famine of the Word, and the Famine of Bread and Water, 
bur both ſhouid faint with Thirſt and Hunger z neither finding the 
Wor: of the Lord for their Comfort, they ſhould faint with Deſpair, 
nor findirg Bread and 'Water, ſhould faint and die with Weakneſs; fo 
1-22) ſhoukl be extinguiſh'd. = 
14 They that * ſwear c by the * ſind of Samaria, and 


- Beerſheba liveth,. even they ſhall fall b, and never riſe up 

again 7, | PERO | | 

n Who now do, as formerly. they have done, truſt in, ſacrifice to, 
and ſwear by;; who areobſtinate Idolaters,-and truſt to thoſe Lies, 4 
That which was the Sin, the Occaſjon of the Sin of Samariz, the 
Calves at Dan and Bethel, e Think, profels,. and ſwear too, that f 
The Idol at Dan is the true and living God, . g The 1dols at zeerſkcba, 
to which the zealous, mad and bigotted Idolaters in 77:1 made their 
Filgrimages. þ Be conſumed by Famine, - Sword and Captivitr. 
Never return out of Captivity, nor recover of this Conſumption, 


GH AF IX 
Another viſon ſhewing unavoidably the ruine of Tſrael for their unthank- 
falneſs and great ſecurity, 1 10. The Kinglom of Chriſt pro- 
miſed ; a remnant ſaved, 11 12+ The deliverance and everlaſting 
happineſs of Iſrael in the latter days, 14, 15. 


| 1 JT Saw a the LORD bſtanding c npon the altar d, and 
he ſaid e, Smite the || lintel of the door f, that the 
-Polts may ſhakeg : and || cut þ them # inthe head & ally 
of. them : and 1 will ſlay the laſt m of them _with the 
ſword ; * he that fleeth of them, ſhall not flee away 
1; and he that efcapeth o of them, ſhall aot be deli- 
vered p. 
4 As before, chap. 7. 1, 4, 7+ and ch, 8. 1. ſo here the Prophet hath 
a fifth Viſion, 6 The great, glorions, ju and Holy God in ſome vi- 
fible Tokens of His Majefty. «© Either ready to execute Sentence, or 
ready to depart, Ezek. 9. 3. and 10. 1, 4. indeed here he will do both, 
Execute his own Sentence, and depart from - this People. 4 Of Burnt 
Offering before the Temple at Feruſalem; here the Scene is laid, this 


AM O S. 


read, nor a thirſt for water t, but of * hear- 


may lay the Suppoſition, were it poſſible to be done to hille in the 
Center of the Earth, or the Depth of Hei). # For Hell is naked to 
God, and the Grave did not hide ſome'of theſe Sinners, when dead 
and buried, the Rage of Famine, or of the Enemy, might dig ſome 
out of their Graves. $s Could they fly up to Heaven, they wonld be 
out of the reach of Men: = But thete they would meet an offended 
God, and he would caſt them down. | 

3. And though they hide themſelves in the top of Car- 
mel 4, I will ſearch and rake them our thence x, and 
though they be hid from my ſight y io the battom of the 
ſea, thence will I command the ſerpent z, and he ſhall 
bite a them. 

u One high woody Mountain, Shelter and Hiding-Place for. wild 
Beafts, by a Figure put for all the reſt ; if they think to be ſafe where 
wild Beafts find a Refuge, they are deceived. x I will, faith} God, 
hunt them out, and take them. » This an Jr0ry, like brutiſh Atheiſts” 
they think to hide themſelves in the bottom of the Sea. # Crocodile 
or Shark, ſome Sea-monſter. 4 Devour them: Miſerable /ſrazl, to 
whom, nor Sea, nor Mountains, nor Heayen, nor Hell, will afford an 
Hiding-place. 

4. And though ttey a go into captivity b before their 


f, and not for good g. 


that yet the Enemy may ſpare. 6 Captives are the Slaves, the Poſ- 
ſeſſion of their conquering Enemies, thefe make Profit of them by ſel. 
ling them to others, or imploying them in Labour and Service. ' c This 
ſeems to intimate ſome Voluntarinels in theſe People going before the 
Conqueror, whom they hope hereby to mollify and ſweeten, that he 
may uſe them well ; yet this Hope ſhall fail them too. d The Enemy 
Should either out of cruel Humour and Hatred againſt them, or on 
any flight Occation and Diſguft, ſlay them, as if they had Commiſſion 
trom me ſo todo; neither Propriety in them, nor Service by them, 
nor Profit in the Sale of theſe poor and miſerable Captives, should 
be Safety to them, they should be accounted as Sheep for the Slaugh- 
ter, - eI will perpetually watch over them, and then be ſure no Op- 
portunity will be let flip. f To afflit and punish them g for their Be- 
nefit. Thus was the Courſe of God's Providence 2gainft them from the 
Days Amos aimeth ar unto this veryDayzand God hitherto hath,and till 
doth make good his threat againſt this idolatrous, cruel, oppreſſing 

People. | 

5 And the Lord h GOD : of hoſts & is he that toucheth 
] the Land mm, and it ſhall melt n, and all that dwell therein 
ſhall mourn, and ir ſhall riſe up wholly like a flood, and 
ſhall be drowned, as by the flood of Egypt. 

The Prophet having foretold ſuch {ad univerſal Deſolations, Miſe- 

ries, beyond what this ſecure People could think pothble, and ſuch as 
the Atheifts among them c-nſured, and derided as Impoſhbilities, as 
Ver. 10. ROW in this and the following Verſes to the 10th, the Pro- 

ph<t confirms his Word, and the Certainty of theſe future Judg- 
ments. b Aionat the Soveraign Lord. # Fehbovah who ſpeaks and 


; | doth, and need no more than Will to work and accomplish ;- ſo he 


made, ſuftaineth and diſpoſeth of all. k All the Creatures are his 
Army, and do what he commands them to do againſt his Enemies. Z 
A light I ouch of his Hand, h2 needs not as Man to take great Pains 
to break and diſſolve hard Metals, a Touch of his Finger will do this. 
m. Either the Inhavitants, or rather the Land it (clf in which they 
dwelt, the Land of Canaan, or more likely the whole Earth, how 
firm Tnd hard ſoever it fecm to be. » As Snow before the Sun in its 
hotteft Influences, or as Wax before a mighty Fire, who can do this, 
can do all that I have denounced againft you, O Jſrael, The reft of 
tne Verſe, vid. Ch. 8. v.$. ler. r,s,7,u, x. 


calleth s for the waters of the ſeat, agd poureth them out 


Name -x. 

o He that threatens and will execute his juſt Severities on you, is 
that mighty, glorious King, p Whoſe Palace inconceivably ſurpaſſeth 
all the Royal Palaces of the mightieft Monarchs on Earth ; his Cham- 
bers, as P/al. 304. 3. are in the Heavens; he by a Word of his Mouth 
prepared and garnilh'd thoſe Rooms of State, where is Glory that ra. 
viſheth the mighty Angels : how eaſily can he demoliſh and rujne 
your Cells, and with the Breath of his Noftrils by one Command, 


Altar and Temple frael had forſaken, and ſet up others againſt it ; 
and here God in his Jealouſy appears prepared to take Vengeance z | 
polhbly it may intimate his future Departure from Fu42b too, There | 
Ezelzel, ch. g.4,2, ſaw the Slaughter-men ſtand. . e Commanded. 
Or, the Chapirer, Knop, Ornament, that was upon the Lintel of the | 
Door, which is ſuppoſed to be of the Gate of the Temple z or poſſibly 
Door of the Gate that led into the Priefts Courts ; and though the | 
Party that ſmites be not named, *tis likely *twas an Angel, or poſlibly 
the Prophet ſeemed to do it, for this is to do in Vition, g Which 
vere the Strength and Beauty of the Gate. bh Wound deep. # The | 
People which were vitionally repreſented as ſtanding in the Court of 
the Temple. &+ That it may more fully ſignify the deſtroying of the 
Chief of the Heads of this ſinful People... I Spare not one of theſe. m 
God will flay by the Enemies Sword the meaneſt of them, or the laſt, 
6, the Poſterity of them. n Or get out of Danger. 0 For pre- 
ſent, out of Battel or beſieged City ; p Shall yet at laſt fall into the E- 
nemies Hand, or by tfis Sword. | 

2 Though they dig into Hell q, thence ſhall mine hand 
take them y3 * though they climbap to heaven s, thence 
Wl I bring them down : 

When David would deſcribe the Omnipreſence of God, 7/al. 129. 
t; » 94 10, I1, 12, hedoth it moft elegantly in almoſt the ſame man- 
ka 3 Our inſpired Herdman here doth ; where-cver theſe ſeek to 

We themſelves from the purſuing Vengeance, they ſhall be found ; 

- 5 With them, from whom they hide. © q The deepeft Receſſes, the 


war Center of the Earth or the Grave, or literally, for ſo we 


blow away and ſcatter your little Duſt-heaps, which you call Cities, 
Fortrefſes, and impregnable Munitions ? q He laid the Foundations of 
this lower World, and can as eaſily ſhake or overturn as at firft he laid 


f them. r All that is below the Royal Pavilionsof God, are but asa lit- 


tle Bundle, which he can foon uanty and ſcatter about z nor are the 
things tied up of ſuch Worth and Value that be ſhould loſe by doing 
it 3 how much more ealy is it for him to deftroy (as he hath ſpoken ) 
your Land and Cities, which are a very ſmall thing compared with the 
whole World, and this as a Point, compared with the unmeaſurable 
Greatneſs of the Heavens. You ſet a Value on: your ſelves, and are 
proud, and think that God will not loſe fuch Jewels, as if a King in 
his Royalty ſhould fear to loſe a Pin's Head, or one Atom of Duft 
that heth on his Foot-ſtool. s The eafieft way a Man can take to get 
any thing done ; nothing ſo ealy for Man to do, as 'tis eaſy tor God to 
drown a ſinful Nation or World. Poſfibly God by this may mind them 
what ſeeming Impoſſibly he did when he called tor the Waters of the 
Sea to drown the old World, and would hereby make them fee that he 


can now. do the like. #r Either by Wholeſale in Judgment to drown, 
or by Retail by Vapours in Mercy to give Rain. 
olence, or in gentler Showers to punith or refreſh. 
lar Nation, or the whole World. x Eternal, Unchangcable, Almigh- 
ty and Juſt, 


tt In Storms and Vi- 
4 Either particu- 


Vid. Ch.g.v.$. leter,s, t. - 
7 Are ye y not as children of the Ethiopians z unto me 
a, O children of Iſrael ? ſaith the LORID. Have nor } 


brought up Iſrael out of the Land of Egypt b ? and the * * Jer. 47- 
Philiſtines from Caphtor c, and the Afiyrians d from 5 


Kir e? N a 3 Who 


t+ upon. the face of the Earth u; the LORD # his 
! 


Chap. I'S. 


enemies c, * thence will I command the ſword, and jt ſhall * Deut, 
{lay them d: and 1 * will ſet mine eyes upon them e for evil rg 


. & I”. 
4 Thoſe excluded from Safety every where elſe, may perhaps hope Jer.44.t, 


5 1t i5 he o that builderh his || -- ſtories p in the hea- [| Or, 
ven, and hath founded q his|| troop r in the Earth, he thar /?** ieb.aſ: 
cenſions. 
Or,bure 


T ] 


LEY OI _— - 
— DD EET CERES eee I _—__—_ 
4 [ "OI 
——_— oy 
Sas 
— ® _ x 
— - 2-235 W-x—., Vn” 3 21 wy 
"—_ ro 
—_ # RIP" w— 
—— 
4 - - — wy _- 
- -4 . 
- - 64 - "<< NA 


Chap.IX. 


AM 


3 Who glory in-yaur Deſcent from Abraham, and are in Truth the | 
natural Dz=icendants of 4/rael, and think very highly of- your ſelyes; on», 
this Account, lighting all other Nations, and preſuming that God: 
neither will, nor can, becauſe of his Covenant, deltroy you, whatever 
Prophets lay. 7 Not that-remote Nation beyond Eg ypt, but thele ot 
/rivia Perrea, a wild, thieviſh, and (ervile Nation, tuch as now, inhabit 
thoic Parts, baſe, bloody, and thieviſh 4lrbes, hated and delpiled of 
ail their Neighbours, and fo by the J/raelites their Neighbours ac- 
counted at that day. 41 did make them, as you, they are my Crea- 
enre a3yon ; wherein ſoever you excel them, you owe It tO me, who 
madz. you both as Creatures, 'and have diftinguiſh'd you by my tree 
Mercy and rich Grace, giving moſt LO YUu, of which you boaſt, and 
giving Jeſs to them tor which you delpite thems b and whereas you 
boaſt of my. Kindacſs to.you, bringing you out of Zgypr, and there- 


 upon;conelude, God canngt leave you whom be bath ſo redeemed ; 


+ Heb. 


cauſe 10 


you-arguegamils, 40r theſe things aggravate your Sin, and FT you 
ies: 6apable of hoping or; ootaining METCy, ſince you abule, ſuch 
Gxacd:; remgpaer efn0s 3.2. You think I cannot, muſt not now root. 
you'pur of yaur Land, hecauje Ibrought you Out of Eg Ve as It .you 
were the only People that ever were brought out of Bondage, c But 
Moſes tells you, the Philiſtines were captivated Þ the Cyphrorzms, who 
dwelc in their Land, yet the Philiſtines were Ie ored, and you. tound 
them in the Land When you came to poile!s it ; their” Expuliion you 
read, Deur. 2. 23. though 1 remember no particular mention of their 
Deliverance in any Hiſtory, yet this Hint 35 enough to afſure us of the 
Matter of Fatt: 4 AnantientPeople, inhabiting a large Countxy, and 
known by ſeveral diſtin&t Names. e Conquered by tome potens;Ene- 
mies,- probably the antzent A{/yr1475, and ſent away to Azria City.or 
Country. of Melia,. yet delivered at laſt ; Should thele Nations, as 
you do, argue themſelves'to be out of , Danger ot;-Divine Juſtice and 
levere Puniſhments, becauſe I had done this for them ; eertainly. you 
wouid not allow ſuch Arguments-in them, nor will I allow it in-you. 

'$ Behold p, the eyes of the Lord GOD: þ are upon the 
finful Kingdom 7, and I will deftroy ir-from off the tace 
of the Earth k ; faving that 1 I will. nor utrerty deſtroy 
the Houſe of Jacob m1, ſaith the- LORD 2. | 


- £ Conſider things better, and argue more like Men of Reaſon. b | 


God of infinite, Purity and Knowledg, whole, Nature hateth all Sin, 
and whoſe Office *tis to puniſh Sinners, his Eyes behold all the Chii- 
dren of Men, they run'tq and fro, as 2 Chrw. 16. 9, 4 Every fintul 
Kingdom, and on the Kingdom of the ten Tribes, as notoriouſly che 
{inning Kingdom, as Zeb. k And I will ruine any ſuch Kingdom for! 
their:Sins, that: it ſhall ceaſe to be a Kingdorz, on- Earth. -1 And lov 
would Ido with the. Kingdom of J/rae?, ,but that 1 have by Covenant 
with their Fathers engaped to be their God for ever, which Promiſe I 
will keep to a Remfiant of their Seed for, ever. '- m The Seed of Facob 
which God will not utterly extirpate, thongh- he do extirpate other 
Nations, Fer. 3011: ;# This 1s added to confirm the gracious Word 
concerning the Remnant which ſhall be ſpared.. | | 
-.v For loo, | will command p, and I will + ſift the 
houſe of Iſrael 'among all Nations 9, like as Corn1s ſifred 
ina five r; yet ſhall not the leaſt + grain s fall vpon the 
Earth.t. BY 149 | | | 

- 0 As this confirms what the $rh Verſe premiſeth, ſo it requireth a 
very diligent and full Attention of us. Þ Or give a Charge to all Na- 
tions whither theſe <exiJed Perions ſhajl come, and they thall obſerve 
the Charge, it ſhall as-jurely be dane az tis ſpokes q Though Ajjyri- 
aps and other Nations be the Means and Initruments, yet God's Hand 
is principal ; whileſt they would tols and _Iicatter Jjrars with Viadlence, 
yet God will hold the Sive,and guide their Hands, and let Bqunds to 
their Violence; - 7 By a skiltul and careful Hushandman who deiigns 
to ſeparate the Chatf ſrom . the Corr; to prefcrve this, to tread the 0- 
ther under Foot. « T hough covered under much Chaft, though tum- 
bled and tofſed with the-greatcit Violence, and withoutany regard to 


- it, yet the ſmalleſt and leaft regarded good Grain ſhall not-be jolt or 


* Ch. 6.5 


4 


+ Heb. 
bedg,or 
wall, 


deftroyed with that Fire which conſutmerth the Chaft, 7 7.6, Periſh 
or be 'loſr, fo the Phraſe, x Sam. 26./20- and 2 Sam. 14. 11, and 
1 Kings 1,52. here is a' Promiſe of Preſervation as great and wonder- 
tui, and as hardly comprehended as was the threatned Puniſhment, 
10 All the ſinners # oft my people ſhall die-by the 
.fword x, *which ſay, | The evil y ſhall not over-take || 
nor prevent Z us.” peY 4 
u The great, notorivns Sinners, Tdolaters,” Opprefſors, Perverters 
of Law and Equity, cruel and inhumane Judges and others: x Either 
at home in the Wars, or ':broad by barbarous Men that captivate 
thems as er, 4-let.d, + In their Hearts thinking or hoping, or in 
their Words diſcprrting 'the Impoſſibiliry of what Amos did toretel, 
3» The fad, miſerable, and deſolating End; '}| As a purſning Enemy, 
we will flee from it, vid. ver. 1. Jet. #. 7 1t is far off, we ſhall die firſt, 
and be-ſafe in the Grave; a Kingdom in its Proſperity, and well ſet- 
tled as this Kingdom waS'in Feroboanrs time, cannot ſoon he brought 
to'ſuch Confutlion; we ghatl never ſee it. This ſavoured Rank of their 
Atheiſm, and theſe shall certainly fall and perish, and nerer riſe. .. 
© 11 E In that day a will 1 raiſe up b the Tabernacle of 
David &c that is fallen 4, and + cloſe up the breaches e 
thereof, and | will raiſe up his runes 7, and I wilt buyld 
if $ in the days of old gp: - Ig AS 


-* This Promiſe I nothing doubt hath a double Afpea, both to the. 
5 | 


Return out of Captivity, and to the Meſhah his Xingdom, and each 
Part 15 to be contidered by us; it we would dnly explain this and the 


following Verſe, let us look firſt to the Letter and Hiſtorical Refe- | 


rence, and next to the myſtical and ſpiritual'Senſe of the Words. 4 
A very uſual Phraſe in <cripture, whereby a time fix'd and certain,yet 
unknown to us, 18 intended in the {et time which God hath prefix'd. 
b Lay the Founilation, and build up, reduce out ot Captivity, and re- 
eſtablish in their own Land. c The Houle 'of David, ana thoſe that 
O14 adhere to Pavid's Family, which are here called a Tabernacle, part- 
ly tor that it never did after the Captivity riſe to a free and indepen- 
Gent Kingdom, and partly becanſe he would diſtinguish the Jews trom 
the Apoltate J/rac1tes, who did wholly foriake David's Houle, d By 
a Revolt of ten Tribes in twelve, whereby -their State is low, and as 
faliton to the Ground, e Which are in it by that long Divifen, ſince 


4 4 '? 


Fee o6c473 the aiit's time, which Breaches $hall upon the Return out” of 


0 S. Chap þ 


Captivity te made up by the voluntary Unicn of the Remnant of the 
ten Tribes, which sþall return with the two Tribes out of the Babylc. 
niſh-Captivity. f Diſpoſing the Minds of the Kings of Perſia ty ad. 
vance David's Line to the Government of the reſtored Captiyes, and 
continuing it ' x the ſupreme Power till Meſſuah's Coming, and by re. 
building Ferufalem and the Temple;and (ettling true Religion among{ 
them. g MuCh what 'twas before the Sack of the City and Tempſe, 
and the carrying the People captive. All which, as far as they are 
temporal Concerns, do ſuppoſe and did require: a-ſound turning, tg 
God ; as did the like Promiſes made by other Prophets, And how fax E 
| ſoever they fell short of theſe:Promiſes, 'twas through Unbelicf, ang _ 
other Sins; as Haxgai, Zechdriab and  Malachz - complain in their pry. = 
phecies. Now as it refers to -Mefhah's Kingdom, "tis a Prophecy of 
the Converſion of the Gentiles, as appears Atts 15. 16, 17. of Which 
no more here, becauſe thatiour Work 3s to give the literal Senſe of 
the Text: Who would ſee more may conſult larger Commentators 0n 
this Place, and on As 15. 16, 17. . 7; 


12 * That they h may 'poſleſs ; the remnant &k of + mat 
Edom }, and of all the heathen m1, which are called by* 6: ſom, 
my Nante 2, ſaith the LORD! o that doerh this'p. 1h, men 

| þ Literally and Hiſtorically the Jews, or they of the two Tribes, * ſelyt 
and with them ſuch as of the ten;Tribes. did unite to; them, and re. an 
turned to Jeruſalem. 4 Both the Lands of Edom, and: ſome of the-pg.t : 5% 
ſterity of Edom/; theſe as Servants,-the other as their Propriety, Dn w Is 
Left by Nebuchadnexar, :or that fled out of. his Reach, and lived pri," that 
| vately, where they conlt'find-a Ending: Places, till J/74e?'s Return, 1 phat 
| The Poſterity of- Eſau waſted by Nevdcbadneggar, aud ruined fo, that tain | 
they never did recover. to. be;a;Kmgdem, but who remained of th the ] 
did ſhelter themſclves.as Retamers 10; other Nations, and among theſe 
ſome did betake themſelyes-to the Jews, and lived under them. Thy Fempl 
formerly theyihad been deſperate'Enemies to the Jews, Elomites, whg 4.21 
cried, Raſe, raſe, Pſ21, 137-7. ſhall now aifiſt - as Servants in laying which 


the Foundations, and building Jeruſalem. m1 7. e. Round about, 
Moadites, Ammonites, ©c.-by an uſual Phraſe called: All the. Zeathey, ; 
' Theſe Words either muſt refer to Heathen, and Zdomites proſclyted, 


; or they are by a Traje&tion laid here, but in Conftruftion are tohe ſpotl'd 
; | join?d with the foregoing Words thus, Thar they which are called ty ny ſtant 
N.cme may poſſeſs, &c. o This 'immutably confirms the Promiſe, 5 ans, 1 
, Who iaith and doth, who willethand effeQeth,' whoſe Command them 
Almighty. That thjs is a'Prophecy'of ſetting 'up the Kingdom of the ſhec if 
Meſſiab,- and bringing in the Gentzles is very certain, but that apyet. ou 
tains to the nyc Senſe, not to the'literal, which is our Work, their | 
13 Behold 9, * the days come »r, ſaith the LORD, thati Moat) 
the Plowman s ſhall overtake the reaper t.,and the treaders Mis, 
of grapes him that +. ſoweth ſeed 4 ; and” rheMountaiiy ', ſhould 
x ſhall Urop|}| ſweet wine y; and all-the Hitts thall melt Lim 
Here is another Promiſe made literally for Aſſurance of abundar The deſtr 
Plenty to the returned Captives,- and myftically of abundant Gnzly gainſt 
poured' forth .in -Gofpel-days.. But of t e Letter and Hiſtory.” 4 and vi 


Mark weft, ye poor captiv'd ' Jews. »r The time will certainly come, 
nay it hafteth, and hiſs lives to return ſhall ſee this Word perforn- 
ed. , s Who breaks up the Ground, and prepares it for ſowing, tShal 
be ready to tread on fhe Heels of the Reaper, *whe ſhall have a Hz: 
veſt ſo large, that before he can gather it all in, it ſhall be timeto 
plow the Gronnd, and prepare it for the Seed fornext Year's Crop, 


11namba 


So God will take away the Reproach of Famine ( in Ezekie?'s Phraſe) and let 1 
from the Mountains of J/-ael. u Sv great ſhall their Vintage be, that * 4 Whic 
e're the Treaders of Grapes car- have finiſhed their Work, the Seeds: phets are 
man ſhall be ſowing his Seed, againſt next Harveſt Seaſon, x The (y is Viſion 
Jews did plant the Mountains and Hills of Canaan with Vines, 1.5, any Certaj 
I. there were their Vineyards. y The Vineyards ſhall be ſo fruittul, hid and fe: 
and new Wine ſo plentiful, as if it did like trickling Streams run don that the Py 
from the Monntains. q Or as if whole Hills were melted into ſuch Ly Wem in thi 
quors. Vid, Joel 3. 18. It isa lofty Strain, and . very elegantly et thirty or | 
prefieth the abundance of ontward Bleffings promiſed to this People 3025, and 
here ſpoken of. If any will obje&, it appears not that ever it was 0; his Name | 
I anſwer, 1t 1s certain the Sins of the returned Captives did in very cludes his / 
great Degrees preyent thele Bleſſings which are here promiſed unde againſt Edo 
a tacit Condition, which they never did fulfil. | Fenitor or ] 

14 AndI will bring again a the captivity of my people called /dum; 
of Iſrael b,.and they * ſhall build the waſte Cities c, and in frabia Petr 
habit them d ;, and they ſball plant Vineyards, and drink" rg, k 
the wine-thereof e; they ſhall alſo make Gardens, andeat cog by his 


the Fruit of them-F. - | 
What js contained in this Verſe is an expreſs Promiſe of a Retun 
fo captive Jjrael, and it is af implicit ftating of the time when tho[ 


F2ather Ford 
mext by Net 
God ftirr'q 


former Promiſes, ver. 11, 12, 13. ſhould be fulfilled. a Cyrus was Which was ( 
Perſon who proclaimed Liberty of Return tv captive J/rae!, but God JD 27. 3, 
ſtirred up his Spirit to do this, and it was God's eminent Work 3 it WWubjett to x; 
was ſeen in it, as Pſal. 126. 3, 4. -b Of thoſe Shalmaneſer carried ap Thisis a Sur 
tive, and thoſe Nebuchadnezzar carried captive, both falling under tif their Propor 
Diſpoſal of Cyrus by his Conqueſt over Babylon ; by which means Ve Filling to an 
el, the Remnant of the ten Tribes, as well as the rwo Tribes, bs 2 Beholt 
leave to return. c Of Fudahb and of J/rael too, as well as Ferujaiein, then o + th 
many of: which we meet with in the latter Hiſtories of the FT ab m Ye Sn 
their Wars. d So they dit from the time of their Return ill the A midſt ſuch 1 
man Captivity, and were not by the Space of 600 Years pull*d ot C and mount 
their Habitation. e Be bleſs'd in the Increaſe of them and enjoy it," 3 of it, fit 
from thatCurſe, Deut.2 $.39. f Theſe planted forDelight ſhould ve ber makes Peg Je 
ſ-d too, both Vineyards and Gardens ſhould be fruitful, and theyti! rs, or hon 
planted them ſhould dwellin their houſesſafely,and eat the fruit often, Bp. . promiſe 
15 And I will plant g them upon their land þ, and 1 BiNitions, , | 
ſhall no more be pulled up i out of their land which 1835 i — 
©} employed 


given & them, ſaith the LORD thy 1 Ged. be 
£ Or plant, ſettle them as Trees that are well rooted. þ By ant: 
Gift, and by.late Retiicufion to it by the Lord. - 7 By the Violend 0 
their Efiemies, which Promiſe is an implicit Condition that they ſecs 
and not forſake the Lord, and was on God's Part with admirable 
ftancy and Patience to that finfulNatiop performed through 6ooVealh 
perhaps the longeſt time of Freedom from Captivity they ever pes * 
Ot free Gift without their Merit. 1 God,thy God and thyLord WIllE 


Pied, and &*re 
be leaſt of ; 
es, Houſes 
3 T The 
thar dwel] - 
0! is bigh, l 
Own to rhe 


it tot bis Coyerant-ſake, therefore ſurely and ſally will he 90 Ts, + 


V9). IT. 


BAL 


I A H: 


= _— ak. FP a 


_— — 


The ARGUMENT: 


MCs, 


ſhoulaſt thou, Reader, 


The deſtrution of _Edom for their Pride, 1, 2. violence and cruelty a- 
gainſt Facob, 59 ——16. Gracious promiſes of great deliverance, 17, 
aud vittory, 18 ——21, 


JHE viſion 4 of Obadiah 5, Thus faith the 
Lord GOD c* concerning Edom d, * Wee 
have heard a rumour f from the LORD, and 
arambalilador g is ſent þ among the heathen z, Ariſe ye k, 
and let vs riſe up againſt her in battel /, . 
| £ Which the Prophet received immediately from the Lord : ſo Pro- 
phets are called Seers, 1 Sam. g. 9. and Amos 7. 12. and their Prophe- 
(y iS Viſion, 1/2. 1. 1, and Foel 2. 28, 6 Who this was appears not on 
any Certainty, on when he propheſied. That *twas not 0badiah who 
hid and fed the Prophets of the Lord in Aba#'s time, is evident, for 
that the Prophet doth threaten Zdom for their Cruelty againſt Feru- 
/alem in the day 'twas taken and fack'd, which was three hundred and 
hirty or forty Years after Abab's timez he began to Reign about 
3025, and Feruſalem was ſack'd about the 336534 Year of the World ; 
his Name ſpeaks, a Servant or 4 Worſhipper of the Lord. c This ins 
cludes his Autherity, the Certainty of the things he ſpeaks of, d Or 
azainft Z£dom, both People and Country are ſo called from their Pro- 
genitor or Founder, Eſau called Zdom, Gen. 25. 30. This Country is 


le called /dumea, Iſa. 34. 5, 6- Ezek. 25. 14. Which ſee 3 *'twas a part of 
f- Irabia Perrea, e Other Prophets, as I, have heard this News to tell 
oy to Edom, or to ſend to them, I/a. Ir. 14. Fer. 27. 3. Joel 3. 19. and 


$Am0s 1.12. f Notan uncertain and vain Report, but it comes from 

God by his Prophets. 7 An Herald, or Muſter-mafter, who ſhould 
W&ather Forces together for this Expedition. b By the Lord firſt, and 
mext by Nebuchadnezzar, who executed on Edom what is here foretold, 
God ftirr'd up the Spirit of Nebuckainezzar, to make War on Edom, 
which was (as well as other Nations ) given up to Nebuchadnezzar, 


30d er. 27. 3. 7 Or, Nations, both thoſe that were Confederate with, or 
tit Jubjett to Nebuchadnegzar, whom all Nations ſerved, Jer. 27. 5, 6. k 
ap Thisis a Summons to them from Nebuchadnezzar, that they ſend in 
tl their Proportions of Souldiers. 7 This ſeems the Voice of Souldiers 
I willing to and deſirous of the Wer. 

hat 2 Behold 97, I have made thee ſmall + among the hea- 


then o : thou art greatly deſpiſed p. 


7 m Ye Edomites lay it to Heart, and conſider it well ; be not ſecure 
by = ſuch Dangers. # Thou art a ſmall People for Nuiaber, thy 
eel Land mountainous, rocky and barren, and *tis little that which 
bleſ 3 of it, ſituate very incommodiouſly for any Trade, which 
whit Makes Pcople great and famous z a Country fitted for Moſs. Troop- 
w_ i5, Or Bandirez ; and of ſuch Out-laws and Robbers thou art proud, 
mh and promiſeſt great things to thy ſelf, 0 In compariſon with other 
0c) BF "*tions. p By thoſe that do hear of thee, who know thy Situation, 
146 »"fernment, manner of Life, and what thy Forces are, and how uſu- 

=y employed. Whatever theſe Edomites had been, now they are de: 
tient ys and E're long ſhould be more deſpicable, when, as Jer. 49. 20. 
of i leaſt of Nebuchadnezzar's Army ſhould pull them out of their 


cock Wes, Houſes and Strong; holds. 


Coir 3 T Thepride of thy heart q hath deceived thee r - thou 
cat BP that dvelleſt in the clefts of the Rock t, whoſe habitati- 


His ſhort Prophecy will not need any long Prefatory Argument ,, He concealeth his Nation, Family, and Place of his 
Birth and Abode, which he'would not have done, had it much concernd us to know, or would it have added any thing 
material to the Authority and Efficacy of bis Word, Tet perhaps we (hould be thought too ſlight, if we did not tell you, That 
ſome thought bim to be a proſelyted Edomite, fill'd with the Prophetick Spirit, that he might be ſent to declare God's Fudg- 
ments agamſt Edom - but this Suggeſtion will no more prove him an Idumean, than 'twill prove Jonah or Nahum to be pro- 
ſelyted Aſſyrians 3 or Iſaiah, Amas, Jeremiah and Ezekiel to be of ſo many different Countries, becauſe they propheſied a= 
zainſt ſo many different Nations. = Some others will have bim the ſame that was great with Ahab, but greater with God, hid- 
Mg and feeding his Prophets by fifty in a Cave. But this is too early for this Prophet, as 15 noted in the Annotations. Or 
that he was Captain of the Band of Fifty, whom, on his Requeſt, Elijah ſpared ; or that be was one of thoſe ſent by Jehoſha- 
phat, 2 Chron. 17. 7. £0 inſtrud the Jews, as 1s ſaid by ſome, bath more againſt than can be ſaid for it. But it 1s cer- 
tain he was a Prophet ſent of God, and that his Diligence and Faithfulneſs anſwered his Name Obadiah, 3. e. the Servant of 
the Lord, whoſe Meſſage he delivered, though we are not certain when, in what King's Reign, or what Prophets he was con- 
| temporary with, Some gueſs be was contemporary with Jeremiah, and they think the 37th and 39th Chapters, be/ades Lam. 
4. 21, afford Arguments to prove it ;, but if they did not live in the ſame time, they preach'd the ſame things againſt Edom, 
which were in due time fulfilled, though we cannot preciſely define the time. 1t is indiſputable, that Edom's Cruelty, Perfidi- 
ouſneſs, Pride and Rapine againſt Jacob were the principal Cauſes of this Divine Anger againſt Edom ; and yet it admits 
ſome Diſpute when "twas Edom did ſo barbarouſly lay wait for, cut off, or deliver up the flying Jews, whether when Shiſhak 
ſpoil d Jeraſalemg or when Nebuchadnezzar ſacked it, and led the Citizens Captives. 7 rather think it had been a con- 
ſtant Courſe obſerved by Edom to run in with all that invaded Judea, whether Philiſtines, Syrians, Aſſyrians or Chalde- 
ans, who were cruel enough, but yet. Edom was more cruel ; for this Cauſe our Prophet both threatens Puniſhments upon 
them, and warns them of their approaching Ruine, © Some think the Prophet warns Edom that they ſhould not do what is here 
ſpecified, 1 think be threatens becauſe they had done it, 1n brief, the accommodating the Particulars of this, Prophecy to 
their particular Times and Per ſons concerned, as it requires ſome good Diligence and Skill, ſo it will ever leave room for 
Modeſty towards thoſe that it's likely will differ from us in accommodating them, Edom, Type of all the Churches Ene- 
ſhall be deſtroyed, and Chriſt's Kingdom ſhall be ſet up; 4s Obadiah foretels., the Church believeth, and fo 


and daring People z neceſſicated ſometimes to extraordinary Adven- 
tures, and many times ſucceeded in Attempts which others would 
not venture upon 3 hence they did ſwell in Pride and Confidence, 
and their Hearts were bigger than their Atchievements, and they 
roud above meaſure. r Magnifying thy Strength above what real- 
y it is. s People of Edom. tr Houſes, Fortreſſes, Towns and Cities, 
built upon inacceſſible Rocks, which neither could be undermined 
nor ſcaled. Or dwelleft in dark, deep and unſearchable Caves a- 
midft the Rocks. « Who think with themſelves, and are upon 
Report of an Invaſion ready to ſay, x Tt is not poſlible for Armies 
to approach to us, nor bring their Engines to ſhake or batter 
our Walls. Who ſhall ? 7. e. none can. 


© q The Zdomires were, as moſt Mountainers are, a rough, hardy 


thou ſet thy neſt among the ſtars z, thence will I bring 


thee down, faith the LORD 4. 

y Edom boaſted of his Strength from the Height of the Rocks he 
dwelt on, v. 3. but here he is anſwered, If he could build his Neſt as 
the Eagles, which build and fly much higher than any other Bird, nei- 
ther the Height of the Neſt ſhould ſave the young ones, nor the 
Height of his Flight ſave the old one. + Nay yet in a more lofty 
ſtrain, ſuppoſe you could lodg your Brood among the Stars for Safety, 
and there fly above the Reach of Man, yet ſhould you not be out of 
the Reach of Danger. « God who is in the Heavens would throw thee 
down ; when Men could not marſhal Armies againft thee, Stars ſhould 
fight in their Courſes againft thee. Nothing can ftand which God 
will caft down, vid. Jer. 49. 16, 17+ 


* would they not leave \| ſome grapes e 2 
mix*d of Wonder and Doubt, expreſs the ftrange Havock and Deſola- || Or, 


what Poſture waſt thon found, O Edom ! that ſuch ſtrange Deſolation 
is found in thee ? 4 If Thieves by Day had fpoiled thee, they would 
not have thus ftripp'd thee. b If Robbers which prattiſe their Vio- 
lences in the Night, had b:en with thee, they would have left ſome- 
what behind them, «c Here is either a TrajeRion ; this placed here 
which muſt be read firſt in the Verſe, or an Exclamation of one as in 
hafte to know whence ſuch unexpetted Events, or an inſulting Deriſi- 
on of that Pride which boafted ſo much, and performed ſo little in 
Self-defence. d Thieves and Robbers take till they have what is ſuf- 
ficient f::r them at preſent, and leave thereft, but here is nothing left. 
e It Edom be a Vine, 2nd gathered, ſome Gleanings would be left 
by Grape-gatherers ; but alas here have been thoſe that have cur up - 
the Vine! and is all thy. Confidence and Boaſting come to this ? 

6 How are the things of Eſan f ſearched out ? how are 
his hid rhings ſought upp ? 

f The Father of this People, and here put for his Poſterity. g All 
that the Edomites had laid up in the moſt ſecret Places, in unfearcha- 
ble Caves, and deep Abyfſes of hollow Rocks, how are all his Trea- 
ſures found our, ſeiſed and brought forth a Prey to greedy Souldiers f 
how durſt they adventure here / 

7 All the men of thy confederacy þ have brovght. 


" 00gh, that faith in his heart , Who ſhall bring me | 
"wn to the ground x? | 
B& Yal, IT. 


"hee even to the border 7 : 
| Nn3 


4 * Though thou exalt thy ſelf y as the Eagle, and tho « Am. 


the men 7 that wer? at 4 ph, 
PEACE 7hy peace. 


JeZe 


5 * If thieves a came to thee, if robbers by night þ, * J:-49- 
( how art thou cut off c ! ) would they not have ſtolen till 7 ney; 


they had enough d ? if the grape-gatherers came to thee, 24. 23. 
Iſa. 17. 6, 


In the fifth Verſe the Prophet doth in an abrupt manner of Speech, & 24+ 13s 


tion made in Edom; as if he had ſaid, Who have been here ? or in £{*4777g% 


of 


- ——__— 4ſt ty r>—e—_ q LES X 1 ES 
g= , -— — SED = yy ——_ yr __ a—_—— . -——_ - - ont - 
———I—__— vt _— — = =_ —_— — - — 
—_ — < b. - YI 1 4 . nt a= =_ 
- —_— , MPSS. 262 Ba; $2 - = ny "OR R 4 . 
- = - : " —_ . - ” >. p-. 
—— - - > =D = = " * OE 


GT II 
© Oh nn cho ies een os, ie nu RE rin, 
- — 


peace with thee 5: have deceived thee &, and prevailed 
+ Hcb.rhe againſt thee 1 : {| they that eat thy bread mn have laid a 


"6: 7 wound under thee # : there is none underſtanding || in 


com ev'd home the-Embaffadonrewho-made it, Or elſe have coun: | 
ſclled thee to meet the War before it entret't thy Country, and have 
marched as Confederates with thee until thon wert come ro the Bor- 
ders of thy Country, as if they would there fight for thee agaiaft the 
Enemy. 22 This is Ingemination, or repeating of the ſame thing 
b-forementioned ; unleſs; Men of thy Peace, be Men that did make. 
Peace, and accept the Terms thou didſt propoſe for thy Advantage. | 
& Proyed treacherous, nay. defigned to betray thee. / Either thus 
their. Plot took, or elſe they turned to the Enemy, and under his Co- 
lours deftroy'd thee, m Thy Friends, thoſe thon haft maintain'd, the 
Sou!diers thou keepedſt in pay. z Have lain'a Snare armed wittſome 
ſharp and piercing Inftrtiment, that wounds ſo ſoon as thou falieft on 


the Snare * & Eicher naprudence to foreſee and prevent this, or to 


manage and leſſen its _:. - 


* Iſa. 29. - 8 X Shall I not p in*that day 9, ſaith the LORD, even 
14+. Jer. deſtroy 'y the wiſe mens out of Edom, and underſtanding 


#5 7* ountof the Nount of Eſau t. : 

Þ This Introgation is a firong Aﬀertion, I certainly will. q Of War 
and Deſolation of Edom, when Nebuchadnezzar with his Armies ſhall 
invade 1dumea- 7 Either by War or Sickneſfes take the Wiſemen out 
of Edo, they ſhall die, 'or deprive them of Places of Truft where 
they might help to ſaie Edom. Or elſe turn their Wiſdom into. 
Fooliſhnels, as chi ops!'s was. 5s Men of found Counſel and good 
Condu@ in the Aﬀairs of Peace and War. 't An elegant Ingemina- 
tion for illuſtrating- and confirming the Predifion. All Edom 

ſhall miſerably periſh, not a wiſe Man left to foreſee and prevent 
It, | 

o And thy mighty men 4, O Teman x, ſhall be diſmay- 
ed y, to the end that every one of the Mount of Eſau 
may be cut off by flaughter z. | 

:: Valiant Commanders and Soulliers who were never blemiſh'd 
with Cowardice, who formerly durſt adventure en greateſt Dangers, 
and encounter moſt formidable Enemies, and were never daunted with 
a ſlow approaching Enemy how much ſoever over number to them, 
nor with any ſadden ſurprizing Accidents. Men of invincible Cou- 
rage, and moſt ready Minds, x A principal City and Munition of 
Kimea. Vid. Ezet. 25. 13. and #ab. 3, 3. and Amos 1. 12. y Aﬀo- 
niſh'd and ſurpriſed with ſuch fear as diſableth from Aion and Coun- 
{el, ſhall neither dare to reſift, or hope to eſcape, but tamely give up 
all to the Enemy. 2 Thus all ſhall be expos's to ſlaughter when they 
dare not fight, who ſhould have ſaved themſelves and defended 0- 
thers. - Deplorable is their Condition, whe ſurrounded every way 
with Enemies, have neither Strength nor Counſel to relift their Pow- 
er or defeat their Malice. 


* Gen.27. 10 * For thy violence 2 againſt thy brother b Jacob | 
41. Pla. c ſhame ſhall cover thee d, and * thou ſhalt be cut off for 


$37-7*  evere. 

*  @ Though /dumears were gui'ty of many other and great Sins, they 

are here charged with this as the great crying Sin, inhumane Cruelty 

and Perfidiouſnes, they did mcrcilcfly ſpoil and: ifely betray the, 

« Fews, which will be particularly mention'd in following Verſes. 5 E- 
domites the Poſterity of Eſau, and the Fews Pofterity of Facob, are 
here called Brothers, for that the Fathers of both People were Bro- 
thers, Twins z and this nearneſs of Blood ſhould have been remem- 
bred, and kindneſs ſhould have ſtill run through the Blood and Kin- 
dred. It is a great Sin to be cruel and falſe to any, but greateſt Sin 
to be ſo toa Brother. «c Pur for his Children. 4 Contempt and Re- 
proaches ſhall by all Men be caſt upon thee, and cover thee as a Gar- 
ment, or ſwallow thee up. God and Man ſhall pour Shame upon 
thee, thy Memory ſhall be retain'd with Condemnation to ſhame, and 
thy End ſhall be in ſhame too. e Never more be a Nation or King- 
dom, which was in a very great Degree fulfilled. in the cutting them 
off by. the Sword of Nebuchadnezzar. Vid. Jj4. 34.5, 10s Exek. 35, 
9. threatens the like Deſolation. 


1c In theday f that thou ſtoodeſt on the other ſide g, 

{] Or, his in the day that the ſtrangers h carricd away || captive 
fubſtance. 5 his forces k, and foreigners entied into his gates /l, and 
caſt lots /I npon Jerpſalem 7, even thou # waſt as one of 


them o. 

f# During the War which the Baby!o1izns made upon Fudea, or in 
the Day of Battel when Fews tought with Cbaldeans. g Tookſt up thy 
ſtand over-right them, obſerving with delight how they were worlt- 
ed, {laughter'd and routed ; or didir ſet thy ſelf in Battel Array a- 
gainſt thy Brother Facob. h The Babylonians and the mixed Nations 
which joined with them. # Firſt maſter'd the Fews, and then made 
them Captives, and ſent. them away out of their own Land, a 1ght 
which ſhould have moved Compaſhons in thee. & His Strength, his 
Troops, or Multitndes that ſurvived and were taken, and their 
Wealth and Riches tov, 7 That invaded, ſlew the Inhabitants, and 
forced the beſieged Places to open their Gates, Or took the Fortreſſes 
by Afault. So Robbers divided their Prey and Conquerors, Prov. 
I+ 14. Foel 34 3. which fee. #2 Upon the Citizens and their Goods, 
which were found in Feru/ulem when *twas taken by the Chaldeans. # 
A Neighbour who waſt not moleſted by J/-2e} when they marched 
through other Nations from Egypt to Canaan, who waſt a Brother by 
deſcent, ve. 10, let. b, 0 AS mercilels and inſvlent as any of thole 
barbarous Foreigners. 

jj Or, 44 12 But || thou ſhovldeſt not haye looked þ on the day 
zo behold. q of thy brother, in the day that he became a ſtranger 
7; neither ſhouldeſt thou have rTejoiced s over the Chil- 


p dren of Judah * in the day cf their cetruction # ; nei- 


OB ADIA HH. 


of diſtreſs y. ; " Mg be 
Þ With ſecret Joy and Satisfa&ion to thy Eyes and Mind ; if thy * =; 
wouldſt have looked, it ſhould have been with Tears and Grief not 
with Joy and Gladneſz at the Sight ; ſo the Word, Pſal. 37. 24. ana 
54+ 7. and Prov. 29, 16. q On the Affiiftion and ſad Miſery which fejj 
upon thy Brother Facob ; ſo Dayin Scripture, thus abſolutely put, dotk 
otten fhgnity, Pu. 37. 13. Micah. 7, 4. r Having by the Miſery of 
War been made a Captive, and loſt his former Right and Liberty in 
his own Country, was now look*'d mpon as a Stranger, 7. e. one who 
had no more right to any thing in the Land. s This explains the for. 
mer. # This expounds Brother. « This tells us what Day meant. , 
Vaunting over the Fews, infolently upbraiding and reproaching them 
with virulent Words, and exulcerated Malice, y When Feruſalen was 
taken. Ks MN | 
13 Thou ſhouldeſt notthave entred Z into the pate y i 


ther ſhouldeſt thou have -| ſpoken proudly x in the dy +; 


of my people b in the day of their. calamity. c ; yea, thoy 0 
ſhouldeſt not. have looked on their afflition d.in the day $ 
of their \calamity; nor-have-laid hands on their || ſyb- Tn 3 n 
ſtance e& in the day of their calamity. en, ar 
' 2 Asan Ehemy, a Conqueror. . #'By a Synecdoche, City is meanthy | F 
Gate ; the Zdomzres warring among the Babyloniaxs,.dia with them 
| Enter the-Gates of conquered Feruſalem, appear'd a proud inſulting de 
Enemy over Fidah. b Thou ſbouldeft have remembred that the Jen; Ins 
| thy Brethren were my People, my peculiar People. -c When their Ci. it 
ty was broken up, their King impriſoned, and captive with his Noble ] 
and other Subjetts. 4 As before'ver. 12. let. . .e Or, Strength, the aga! 
Word notes both-; Edom ſeized thePerſons of the Fews, and made {thc 
them Priſoners, . and they plundred the City, ſeized the Good; Sake 
-o the Citizens ; this they did with delight, but God will puniſh Cap 
an OI \ $ ſhall 
14 Neither ſhouldeſt thou have ſtoed in the croſs-way 25.1 
f, to cut off g thoſe of his that did eſcape b ; neitk:: twel 
ſhouldeſt thou have || delivered up # thoſe of his & tht|t rao 
did remain in the day of diſtreſs m. 0 of 
 f Or, in the Breaches, viz. of the Walls, by which when the City Jong. 
was taken, ſome might have made their eſcape from the Enemy; $tor 
thou didſt, though thou shouldef: not, ſpitefully and crueliy watch a Maces 
ſuch Breaches, and preventedft their flight z or elſe thou didf pot ſtical 
thy ſelf at the head of theWays,where thou mighteft ſeize flying Jens Enem! 
& Either kill if they would not yield,:or cut off their Hopes of eſcap: Elame 
by making them Priſoners, h Out of the City, anxl were flying far- them 
ther for ſafety. # Reſerved them Priſoners, and brought them back cumciſ 
into the Hands of the Chaldeans, k Of thy Brother Facob's Poſterity, done, ii 
7 Survived the taking of the City, and were fairly like to eſcape, but of the t 
[thou foundft them, and betrayedſt them. m When -they couldro 
longer defend their City, not had any hope but in a Flight throughal ef 
ſecret ways they knew ; but thou didſt watch theſe ways, and did{tca of Ef 
off many who ſought to fly through them. ; and th 
15 For the day of the LORD o i near upon al the fie] 
the heathen p : as thou haſt done q, it ſhall be doner Gilead 
unto thee, thy reward s ſhall return # upon thine on 7 The 
head #. SOD ry 
_ 0 Of juſt revenge from the Lord upon this cruelty of Eon ; tle the phae?? 
time which the Lord hath appointed for the puniſhing of this and od, nag 
ther Nations. p Which God had given to Nebuchadnezzar, and ubid ny, oh 
by this Man's Arms God would puniſh, as Fer. 27. 2, 3 4, 5, 6,7- by the Fe: 
that Day may juſtly be accounted near, which ſhall come withintit Foſephus 
compals of one Man's Life, and that well advanced in Years, as X% Tere co bl 
chadnezzar now was. q Perfidiouſly, cruelly and ravenouſly againf | 
cob, with an hoftile revengeful Mind. 7 It ſhall be done by thine En 
mies tothee,as ver.7. and this came to paſs on Edom, within five Yes 
after Jerufalem was ſack'd and ruined, within which ſpace of time0% "MN; 


diah prophelied, reproving Edom and threatning him for what he hal 
done againft Jeruſalem, and its Inhabitants. s The Puniſhment orke 
tribution of Evil, for the Evil thou haſt done to Jacob. 1 By Gots 
ju Hand, and by thy Enemies cruel Hand ſhall be poured out up 
thee.  u Thy chief Men, chief in the Cruelty, ſhall be chief inſufer 
ing ; for the Meaſure thou haſt meaſured shall be meaſured to tht 
as PJal. 137. 8. Extk. 35+ 15. Joel 3. 7, 8 

16 For * as ye y have drunk z upon my holy mountal 
a, ſo ſhall all the heathen drink continually b, yea, they 
drink, and they ſhall || ſwallow down, and they c ſhall 


as though they had not been d. | 
x This with ſome, is a Confirmation of what is threatned again 
Edom, yet others make this Verſe the beginning of the Conſolatl' 
Sermon to Judah, and either ſutes well with the Context. y O- 
mites, or ye O Jews. x If you interpret this drinking as feaſting, 
velling and caroufing, 'tis to be applied to the Edomztcs and othe 
who triumph'd firſt by their Arms, next in their Cups over & 
querd Judah, a Either the whole Land, or [eruſalem, or the Tel 
ple, for all theſe are called by this Name, and here theſe proud ani 
ſolent Conquerors did drink Confuſion to the Jews. b The Ni 
ons, Enemies to Edom, Shall on Mount Eſau conquer firlt, and then® 
umph in their revelling Feaſts, and drink continually, til they bai 
ſwallow up Edom. c Edomites z d Shall by this means perizh ute! 
and their Memory ceaſe with them, ſo it ſutes with Ezet. 35+ 14" 
which ſee, Others refer the Words to the Jews thus, Ye nave crab 


ns ——  — 


UR 

tho 

called to [£0 
Carry in it 
of the Pey 
My Truth 
and God te 
cant Name 


the Cup of Aſtonishment in your Land, and in Feroſeem W! * J, and w 
Mountain ; ſo now 'ere long the Nations which atfified you by Elijah M 
drink of the C up of Aſtonishment, loag, yea drink the Dreg5% 5 Monſtrated 
that they Shall perish, and be no more, when your Day © dark Net) be _ 
fiction sball end in a Day of Light and Salvation; and when - Proſper 
Nations do this, Edo: shall much more, becauſe moſt deep!) 5* þ ous 
Wether be , 


above others, vid. Fer. 49. 17, 18, 21, 22. 
' » | "rr il 
17 © But e vpon mount Zion f * ſhaY) be || delivet® 


g£, and || there ſhall be holineſs b, and the 'houtz of Jacob 
{hall poſlels their poſleſions &, 


ure we ma 
by this alſc 
narchs * It 
tftory; i 
| #4 retire, 


b. f Hiſtorically, and in the Letter this refers to the 
- Or and His to the re ow of Ferujalem, and thoſe who 
_—_— 1 God in the Temple. In the Myſtical Sente or Typical, ir 
Wa O ff Goſpel-Church,and the ſetting up the Kingdom of Chriſt, 
— 64 calvation and Redemption of God's 1/rael. g A Remnant that 
Hall eſcape the Enemies Sword, and ,which after 70 Years Captivity 
ſhall be delivered and reſtored by Cy1%s : An Hieroglyphick of 1/72e7s 
Redemption by Chriſt. þ Or, zr ſoall be Holy; the Temple, the City 
rehuilt,the People returned trom Captivity ſhall be Holy to the Lord; 
they ſhall obey his Law, attend his Temple-Service, and offer a pure 
Offring to the Lord, &c. All this typical and accompliſh'd in the 
Chriſtian Church, though not fully and pertettly till the Church is 
olorified in the Heavenly Sor, 7 Literally the Survivers of the two 
Fribes in the Babyloniſh Kingdom, and ſome others of the Ten Tribes, 
but including the Ele of God, the Houſe of Facob in the extent of 
ir as taken in J/2. 59. 20. and Kom. It. 26. k Either the Poſſeſſi- 
ons of the Heathen, their Enemies, or rather their own antient Poſ- 
rafhons, out of which the violence of their Enemies did caft them 
when they were led Captive, and difj poſſefled of all. 

22 18 And] the houſe of Jacob #2 * ſhall be a fire, 
and the houſe of Joſeph's .4 flame, and the houſe ot; 
E{au for ſtubble o,. and they: ſhall kindle in them p, and 
devour them q , and there ſhall not be any 7 remain- 
ing of the houſe of Eſau ; for the LORD hath ſpoken 

'T&- | 

1 Beſides. what Nebuchadnezzar- ſhall do upon his particular Quazrel 

againſt Eqtom,bringing them to a very deſolate Condition,there ſhall be 

{though it be not owned) intermixed the Quarrel of God for JſraePs 

Sake, which the C baldeans ſhall avenge ; or elle after the return out of 

Captivity, and ſome ſettled State in their own Land, Iſrael himſelf 

ſhall deſtroy the Remnant of Zdom, Foe] 3. 16. with 19. and Ezek, 

25. 14. mMEither the Kingdom of the two Tribes, or elſe the whole 

twelve Tribes, the reſidue of the ten Tribes joined with the two in 

their return from Babylon. n= The ten Tribes particularly here men- 
tioned to comfort them, and affire them that they ſhould not be caft 

of, though they were more notoriouſly guilty” of Idolatry, and a 

Jong Apoftacy. 0 As unable to reſiſt or ſecure themſelves, as ftubble 

3storelift the Flame. þp This was fulfilled in part by Zrcannus and the 

Maccabees, x Mac. 5. 3. but more fully to be accompliſh'd in the my- 

ſtical Senſe, when the Lord ſhall make his Church as a Fire to all its 

Enemies, and Feruſalew a burdenſome Stone to all Nations. q As 

EHlame eats up the Stubble. 7 No conſiderable Number or Body of 

them, or none ſhall continue Edomzres, but turn Fews, and be cir- 

cumciſed, be added to the Church. $s However, or whenever this is 
done, it ſhall be done becauſe the Lord hath ſpoken it ; this aſſures ys 
of the thing, TEE 


19 And they t of the ſouth * ſhall poſſeſs the mount 
of Eſan ; and they of the plain «, the Philiſtines  ; 
and they ſhall poſſeſs the fields of Ephraim y, and 
the fields of Samaria z, and. Benjamin @ ſhall poſſefs 
Gilead b. 

: The Fews who lived in the South Parts of Cayaan,which was next 
to /dumea, ſhall after their return and Vittories over Edom poſſeſs his 
Country, called here ths Mount of Eſau. u The Fews who dwelt in | 
the plain Country, which was next to Paleſtina, Foſh, 15. 33. x Shall 
enlarge their Borders, and poſſe(ls the Philiftines Country, together 
with their antient Inheritance. ( Now of the Poſſeſſion of Mourt Eſau) 
by the Fews, Saith Grorius, it was moſt fully accompliſh'd by Zircanu, 


7.0 XN: 


it this were the tint2 of falfilling the one, *twas the time of fulfilling 


che other allo, 


Y And all the Land which the tzn Tribes once 


did poileſs, ſhall again be poſſeſſed by the Fews. z Tie Fields al;o 
about S4maria, how greatly ſvever waſted, ſhall be replanted, and that 


by the Fews too. 4 Either apart, or jointly with Judah, 


b A Couns 


try beyond Fordzn, aſſigned to the Tribes of Reuben, Gad and half Mi- 
najſ:h, waſted by #23 el and Trgl2th Pilzſer, ſome time before Sumariz 
was taken, but ſhould-be inhabited by the Benjamites ; and - probably 


Gad, Manaſjeh and Reuben did enlarge upon the Moabites and Ainmonites. 


Here is promiled a larger Poſſeſſion than ever they had before the Ca pe 
nvity, and it doth no doubt point out the Entargement of the Church 


of Chriſt in the times of the Goſpel, and particularly when Antichriſt, 
typified in this Prophecy by E4om, shall be deſtroyed s but we are to 
give the literal meaning, and think we do not miſs of it- 


20 And the captivity of this hoſt of the children of 


lrael c ſhall poſſeſs that of the Canaanites 4, even un- 
to Zarephath e ; 


South z. 

.'£:Thoſe of the ten Tribes that were carried away Captive by Shal- 
manejer, one hundred and thirty Years before that Feruſutem was taken 
by Nebuchadnezz4r, 4 All the Country they antiently poſſeſſed, with 
this Addition alſo, that what the Candanires held by force,-and the 1/- 
raelites could not take from them, shall now be poſſeſſed by theſe re- 
turned Captives, e Called Sareptab, Luk. 4. 26. near Sidozr. f The 
two Tribes carried Captive when Feruſalem was taken by Nebuchadnez- 
$47. $ The Modern Fews call Spain Sepharad, but without any good 
Ground ; nor was it ſo called antiently, nor doth the Chaldee Paraphr. 
ſo interpret it 3 nor do I meet with any thing better than a tacite Con- 
feſſion, that moſt believe *tis a City of Chaltea or Aſſjria, and toward 
the Northern and fartheſt Bounds of it z but where *twas exaQtly they 
know not. þ All the Cities which were once their own. 7 In Jude, 
which lay Southward from this Sepharad, where the Captives dwelt, 
and whence they return. 

- 21 And & *Javiours | ſhall come #2 upon mount Zion 
to judge o the mount of Eſau p, and the * Kingdom q ſhall 
be the LORDS y. <9? 

k Or for, ſo the Gallick Verſion, Printed at Rochel, 1616. - 1 Deli- 
verers, literally the Governours or Leaders of thoſe Captive Troops, 
who shall come up from Babylon to their own Country,luch as Zerubba- 
bel, Exra, Nehemiah, of whom twas ſaid he came to ſeek the Good of 
the Fews. Neb, 2. 10, and ſucceſſively after theſe many others to the 
times of Zircanus and the Maccabees z myſtically Chriſt and his Apoſtles 
and other Preachers of the Goſpel, m Literally with Leave and Com- 
miſhon from the ings of Perſia, ſuch as Cyrus, and Darius Hyſtaſpie, 
to manage the Aﬀa'irs of the returned Captives. # In Fudea, at Feru- 
ſalem and the Temple, and whatever might concern them with their 
Neigkbours round about. 0 To avenge J/ael upon Zdom, to fight, 
ſubdue, and give Laws to them, as #ircanus did when the Edomztes 
were glad to be circumciſed to keep their Country. p The whole 
Country ſo. called from the Father of that Nation, who choſe thoſe 
Mountainous Countries for his Habitation, as moſt ſutable to his wild 
rambling Humour, which delighted in hunting. q The Government, 
called here the Xzngdom, ſhall manifeſtly appear to be ſet up, main- 
tained and proſpered by a Power, Wiſdom and Goodnels greater than 
humane. » The God of J{rae], who is Fehovah, shall be honour'd, 
obey'd and worship'd by them, and they $shall not as formerly rely 
on Idols or Foreign Aids. All which moſt fully is accomplish'd by 
Chriſt the Saviour, and now known in the Chriſtian Church, who do 


Foſephus, Lib, 13, chap. 17. reports the Matter thus, that the 7dumeans 
were commanded either to depart the Country, or be circumciſed, 


—5 * = * & a © 7 oo» 


believe he will, and pray that he would fave his S70n, and deſtroy 
Edom, t. e, Antichriſt and his Kingdom, 


though it appear not whether he was born in Gath- 
called to go Envoy to the great City Nineveh ; for of the 
carry in it the CharaFer of ſome Grace or Vertue which was 
of the Perſon. Amittai in the Hebr. 
My Truth : though Jonah a Dove by Name, 
ard God tells us by Jonah's Pen, He 1s the Son of 


by Elijah to anoint Jehu, Eliſha and Hazael, 
monſtrated, would be of no great moment or uſe 
yet) he was imploy'd a Prophet in Iſrael before be was 
Proſperous Succeſſes of Jeroboam the Second, enlarging 
whether he appeared a Prophet before Jeroboam's 
ſure we may date his time, and range him among the firſt 
by this alſo we may gueſs who was the King of Allyria, 
Parchs : Jt admits a diſpute, whetber it was Sardanapa 


| 4 retiredneſs of Sardanapalus reported in Hiſtory, ſeems 


time, of in the beginning of bis Retgn. 
of the Prophets who have left their intire Volumes behind them, 
who gave ſuch a rare Example of Repentance to ail ſucceeding o- 
lus or Beleſus, otherwiſe Phul Belocus, aud Phul mm Scripture 


Hiſtory ., if the time do not beſt ſute to the latter (as 1 think it may) rather than to the former, yer 1 am ſure the unparal- 


The ARGUMENT, 


UR Prophet himſelf by both his Father's Name, and by his Country : of this latter no great doubt 15 raiſed, 
' —_—_——— hs or whether *twas the Place of bus abode, when he was 


former ſome do enquire whether it be an aſſumed Name, and 


eminently in the Man, or whether it were the proper Name 


denotes Truth, Veracity or Faith; with the Pronoun Poſztive of the firſt Perſon, 
denounce dreadful things againſt Nineveh, yet be doth it as God's Prophet 3 
his Truth, Whether Obadiah were bis _— = _— = == 
cant Name Amittai given him for bis owning the Truth of God, and his true Prophets, in the times of Ahabd's Apoſta- 
Oy; and Cs * fother be that Witew, whoſe = Elijah did raiſe from the dead ; whether he were the Perſon ſent 
as the Jewiſh Y//riters affirm, is of no certain demonſtrability, and if de- 
to us : It is clear that (though this be the only Book left under his Name, 
ſent into Alſyria ;, for 2 King. 14. 26. be propheſied the future 
and eſtabliſhing the Borders of Iſrael ; yet 1s it 10! certam to us, 


Not far from this time we are 


to me a reaſon why it muſs be ſome IMonarch, that more like 
a 


CATCPNath and the captivity of Jeruſalem f 
|| which 75 in Sepharad g, ſhall poſſe the Cities h of the | Or,sha! 


poſſeſs rhax 
mwhichis im 
Sepharai, 


*1Tim.4> 
16, Jam» 
5. 20, 

* Luke Is 


33s 


IE + 


Chap. I. 


70 N 


A Hl. 


a gallant Man, lived more free, open, and of eaſy Acceſs, that the News might, as 'tis ſuggeſted it did, come ty his 


phet : Upon this be declines the Embaſ[ly ; 
him on his Work, and ſucceeds it, he grows paſſionate, and 


racle bath ſet 
Y b yet falls to Sin, and falls under the Ruine foretola by 


Nineveh, (mwhzc 


* Matt.12. 
39. Fonas, 


*Ezra 9.6 


| Rev. 18.5. 


X* Toſh.19. 
6 


4&6. 
2Chron 2. 
I6, 


+ Hcb.caf? 
forth. 

+ Heh. 
thouckt to 
be broken, 


bearing in the firſt Day ;, ſuch Temper, 
the Succeſs be did find ;, be thought ſo 
elſe if they believed him, then they would 


i is like, Phul Belochus was of: YYhoever was the King, Jonah little expege4 
great a King and City would not mind him, or elſe would geride or puniſh bim ;, of 
repent, God would ſpare them, ang Jonah would be cried out on as a falſe Prg. 
and till God taught him his Duty in little eaſe, he will not doit. VFhen a 7yj. 


will die : God ſpares and pardons him” as well 
Nahum) and ſo leaves him a Type of Chriſfs Buri, 


and RefurreF1on, and an Inſtance how far a good Man may ſometime be from his Duty, and that great Paſſions may be in ; 


Prophet, 


CHAP. LI. 

Fonah, ſent by Gol to preach at Nineveh, flieth to Tharſis, 1--3. and #. 
purſued by God with a great tempeſt ; Fe is diſcovered by a lot 10 have 
cauſed it,q---12. Tbe mariners pray and ſacrifice ; and on Fonahs advice, 
caſt him into the ſea,and the ſtorm ceaſeth, 12--15. God appoints a great 
fiſh to ſwallow him up 3 in whoſe belly he abides three days and three 
nights, 17s 


To OW. a the word of the LORD b came c unto 
* Junah d the ſon of Amittai e, ſaying, 
a And Hebr. b Which is a uſual Deſcription of Prophecy ; what 


God had to ſpeak againſt Nineveh, he here does reveal to Fonah with 


Command that he publiſh it to thoſe concerned in it, c Or, was with, 
d Called Fonas, Ink, 11. 30. which ſignifieth « Dove: he was of Garth 
Hepher, a Town of Zebulon, 2 Kings 14+ 25. but no more 15 added ; 
by which I conje&ure it was ſome obſcure Place, to which Fonah gave 
more Light than it could to him. e Of what Rank he was, appears 
2 Ariſe f, gog to Nineveh h that great city z, and cry 
againſt it k; for * their wickedneſs is come up betore 


me 0. 

f Forthwith prepare thy ſelf,and get all in readineſs, and with hear- 
ty Reſolution {et upon the Work. g So ſoon as thou art ready, ſet 
forward on thy Journey, make not any delay. h The Chief City, or 
Metrop2lis of the £ſſyrian Kingdom, built by Aſhur, Gen, 10. 11, if 
this Verſe he not better tranſlatea thus, Ze (i.e. Nimrod) went out into 
Aſſyria, and builded Niveveh; fo Nimrod, the Founder, and firſt Builder. 
# It may be eaſily conjeAured a great City, which was ſituate on ſuch 
a Rirer as Tigris is, had contintted fo many hundred Years, from 1719 
of the World, in which *twas' built, unto 3124 ; about which time 
Fonab was ſent to preach againſt it « during which long growth it may 
be conceived as great as *tis ordinarily deſcribed, 150 Furlongs in 
Length;that is eighteen Miles,and three quarters of a Mile of our Eng- 
liſh Meaſure, and eleven Miles and one quarter of the ſame Meaſure 
in Breadth, & Earneftly, and publickly, preach againſt the Sins, and 
denounce the ſudden Ruine of that City unleſs they repent : So cry 
that all may hear, or at leaft all may come to the Knowledge of what 
is threatned. 7 Their many and great <ins, as *tis ſaid of Cain's Sin 
when he had ſain Abel Gen. 4. 19. and Sodom's Sins, Ger, 18. 20, 21, 
and the Sins of Oppreſſors, Fames 5. 4. cry aloud, the Cry enters 
Heaven; and Juſtice muſt no lenger defer z yet I will give them 
Warning : Fc:th, go thou, and tell rhem plainly,their great Sins ſhall 
be greatly puniſhed. 

3 But m1: Jonah roſe vpn to flee o unto Tarſhiſh p from 


the preſence of the LORD q, and went down to * Jop- 
par; and he found a ſhip going s to Tarſhiſhr - ſo he 
paid the fare « thereof, and went down into it x to go 
with them y unto Tarſhiſh, from the preſence of the 
LORD =. 


m A; d Heh. n He was commanded to ariſe, ver. 2. fo here Fonah 
did, but *twas to run from his Buſineis, not to do it z *twas a rifing a- 
gainft God, o Whatever was the Cauſe which moved Jonah to do this, 
It is ſtrange that he ſhould fall into a fixed Opinion,that he ntght,and 
a fixed Reſolution that he would, thus fly from his God, and from his 
Duty. p To Sea, as ſome, but this ſeemeth too rambling a Humour ; 
to C#7cia ſay others, and particularly to Tar/us,no mean City of C717cia, 
Hs 21. 39. others ſay *twas Tunis or Carthage in Africa, to which Jo- 
nah minded to fly ; either of theſe carry ſuch Probavility with them, 
that we will not determine for our Reader. q I cannot ſuppoſe Jo- 
ah dreamt of flying from the Omnipreſence of God ; he knew how 
David deſcribed this, Pſal. 139. 7,89, 10, 11. and natural Reaſon told 
him he could never fly from this : But this Preſence of God is to be in- 
terpreted of the Place where God ulually had ſhewed himſelf preſent 
by revealing his Word and Will to his Prophets, who are Servants to 
the Lord, and as ſuch did ftand before the Lord ready to receive his 
Command: Now this Command to Jonah being diſpleating to him, 
and yet whilſt he was in his own Country, the Vally of Viton, he is 
fill put upon the Work ; now he reſolves to ſhitt off the Work by 
ſhifting Place : perhaps he might think God would not put him gpon 
ir, when he was gotten into a ſtrange and remote Couutry, where 
were no Prophets, nor prophetick Impulles. » A well known Haven 
on the Medzterrane, now called Jaffa, antiently Japho, Jof. 19. 46. 
s Bound for, and ready to ſet fail for the Placehe deligned, # Car- 
thape or Tunis, or Tarſus in Cilicia, u Forthwith agreed with the Ma- 
ſter of the Ship, and tho unuſual, paid preſently, ſtaid not till he come 
to the Port deligned. x Immediately went a Ship-beard, and in a 
melancholy diſcompoled Humour, gets into a Cabin, or under Deck, 

»y Waiting the time when they ſhould go, that he might be ſure to go 
with them. 2 Vd. Jet. q. : 

4 © But the LORD a + ſent out ba great wind c into 
the ſea d, and there was a mighty tempeſt in the ſea c, fo 


that the ſhip -| was like to be broken f. 

2 The Almighty and Eternal God, from whoſe Work Jonah flieth. 
6 God keepeth the Winds as in Store-houſes, or Treaſuries, and now 
brings one forth to fetch back a Fugitive, and obſtinate Reiuſer of his 
Command. c The Greatnels of it, with the Suddenneſs of its riling, 
and Manner of its working, undeniably ſhew'd that *twas ſupernatural, 


and from God, diſpleaſed with all, or with ſome one or ocher my 


them. 4 The Winds did not blow aloft over the Sea and Ship, hy+ 
as if they had intermixt with the very Waters of the Sea z and like 
an unheard of Hurricane, ſhaked the very Keel ot the Ship, . e Tha: 
part of the Sea where Fonab's Ship was ; this Meſſenger ſoon finds out 
Fonah, and ſpeaks in moſt dreadful Manner to all in the Ship, who aj 
ſaw and ownedit to be from Heaven, the Finger of God. f The M1. 


ter, and Mariners thought they, Ship, and Goods, and all ſhould he 
loſt : The Z#ebr.exprefleth it as if the Ship had ſenſe of God's Anger 


as if the Ship could think, and did think of its own Weakneſs, and 
God's mighty Hand. 

. 5 Theng the mariners þ were afraid ?, and cried k eyery 
man 1 unto his god mm, and * caſt forth the wares that were +1, 
in the ſhip #, into the ſea, to lighten it of them 9. but 2. 
Jonah p was gone down into the {ides of the ſhip q, and he 


lay, and was faſt aſleep r. w | 
£ When this preternatural Tempeſt felt with all its Violence into the 
Sea. bh Paſſengers are not here named, who accuſtomed to Sea,might 
be too apprehenſive of Danger 3 but the Men that were acquainted 
with the ea, and had ſeen many a Tempeſt, and weathered many x 
Storm. 7 Heartily afraid, full of Apprehenſions that they ſhould be 
wrack'd. k With loud Voice and earneſt Petitions, as the Manner of 
ſuch Men is, when Danger awakens them to the Duty they negle& 
whilſt afe. 2 Not a Man of them but feared, nor a Man of them but 
cried out z by which it is evident, it was a moſt dreadful Storm, m By 
this it appears, that the Ship's Crew was a Mixture of Men who wor. 
ſhipp'd ſeveral Gods, and every one doth now cry to the God whom 
he worshipped : whatever God it might be, *twas not he that did 
raiſe, nor could allay the Tempeft. » When Prayer to their fal 
Gods doth no Good, but their Danger continued and threatned them 
with foundring in the Sea ; to prevent this, they lighten the Ship, as 
is uſual in ſuch Caſes, and caft the Wars out z not as Sacrifice to the 
God of the Sea, or as repenting of Piracy, by which the Goods were 
gotten, tho ſome conjetture ſo, but the Text tells us 'twas to lighten 
the Ship. o That it may bear up its Head, and work with the $a 
better than when heavy-laden, p The greateſt Weight, and only 
Danger to Ship and Sea-men. q Was under the Hold, or in ſome 
Cabin or other in the Side of the Ship, whither he went before the 
Storm aroſe. 7-In a very deep Sleep, as the word imports, 
6 Sothe ſhip-maſter s came to him ?, and ſaid unto him, 
What meaneſt thou, O ſleeper ? ariſe x, call upon thy 
God y, if ſo be that God z will think upon us 4, that we 


periſh not b. 

s Who had the Condutt of the Veſſel, and from whoſe Mouth ſuch 
a Reproof was ſeaſonable. rt Miſſing him, when all the reft were 
toil'd with Labour, and had been crying mightily to their falle Gods, 
but Foxah appeared not. u A very decent, yet sharp Reproof to him, 
What Metal art thou made of ? Or, What God doft thou fear ? Or, 
Art thou deaf to all the Menaces of Heaven ? x Awake, get up, 


| Fray to that God thou worshippeſt, as we have already each done; 


for poſhbly thy God may be mightier than our Gods, and may lay the 
Tempeſt that lieth ſo heavily upon us. 7 They had loft their Labour, 
ſeeking to other Gods z yet think it adviſable, that Fonah should try 
his God too, if ſo be, ©c. vid. Foel 2.14. and ſo Amos 5, 24, 4 With 
Pity, Care, and Favour, and do for us in this our ftrange Diftreb. 
b That Ship, Gocds, and Men too, may not be loſt. 

7 And they iaid every one to his fellow þ , Comec 
and let us caſt lots, d, that we may know for whoſe cauſe 
this evile 7s upon us. 50 they calt lots Ff, and the lot fell 
upon Jonah g. 

. b After they had prayed, which was neceſſary in ſuch Caſes, as be 
ing a Religious Means, and caft out the Goods which loaded the Ship, 
which was a proper natural Means of Safety, but none appeared, fiil 
the Tempeſt,ard their Danger with it continued ; a ſhrewd Symptom 
that there was one or other amongft them whole Sins had provoked 
God to do this, and that *twere fit to be known who this was; and 
whoe're firſt moved for making the Search, all agree in the Exped: 
ent, c 'Tis like that it was upon the Thoughts of many of them, 
and ſo expreſy'd here. @ It is extraordinary Danger we are in; all 
ordinary Means fail, let -us try that which hath ſomewhat extraord- 
nary in it, though many Means uſed ; let the' Lot decide among Us 
who is tne Caule of all this: Lots are an Appeal to Heaven 
doubtful Caſes, and therefore not to he uſed on trifling, or ut 
neceſſary Cafes, but where the Matter is great, difficult, or unde- 
terminable in any other way, as Scripture-Inftances of Lots 40 
inform us : Lev. 16. 8, 9. Num. 26..55, Foſh. 14, 2. & 21 4 9 
Gc. 1 Sam. 19. 12, &©c, Neh. 10. 34. & Lt. i. Saul Choſen by L0% 
and Aﬀs 1, 26, e Very great, unuſual, and pr2ternatural Tempei;, 
not one among them but had deſerved more , yet they furmi 
ſome notorious Offender amongſt them, or this had not been. f 11 
att according to what was propoſed. g God determines and ſingles 
out Fonabh, : : 

8 Then faid they unto himh, Tell us we pray thee”, for 
whoſe cauſe this evil is upon us k : what is thine occupal!; 
on 1? and whence comeſt thou 92 ? what is thy countrey” * 
and of what people art thon o ? mY” 

þ When the Lot pointed out 502ab, theſe Mariners all are ſatisfcd 
that he was the Man ; that Heaven had determined thar grand £09” 
ry, and accordingly they treat with him. # They do try What ©" 
Means wili do with him, and de fire to have the Account {70 1500, 


ile .- 


Chap 


WPrch into th 


Jap: 


rule the 
Heaxens 
now# thr 
| God hg] 
cap, and 
the Eaft] 


"When, 
Matihets ( 
puniſh'd; 
he diA® Pur 
very thing 
Hf S:4pÞEd; 
atiShed,cha 
Meſnge, yu 
mnanded 
hich no Re 
Rd GONE. 5 ;A 
ng Quef 
or 10: dozhg 
umſelf whil 
vis Prank 0 
vo no don 
tas ho. Na: 

rot thei P 
den he firſt 
ater this fug 
hat great $ 

Ss Sin, hum 

ormeth then 
In theſe wo! 

as the thing 

f this by th 

ſit&the C 
ey't60k his 


ve.do' unt 
Is 2 (- for 
Das 72, ©) > 
*When- the 
Sigh it <a, 
FOpnet-fittef 
"arty fo hight 
Is Wil, and'y 
0 Wis Will, ant 
1 rettirn' to» 
[04h hf "Fed 
mſef, and fat 
3, mofe” tem Pt 
Mey were ſent 
1*'*Ther Fe 
MY-a5k his: Cc 
12 And h 


T1 know o 1 


W'o1 7, 


"2 Prophet q 
Woling to die. 


ward into the ; 


this way Tr 
4A Commant 
Viobelience and 


*914l ceale, 


Jap. [L 


nd with usfor thy ſake 2 ſure: thou canft not! but know what *tis, and 


”_— Rt doſt thou hiv profeſs to follow, that we may guels by 
Boone Hhoit art- one/of flagitious, or of honeſt Life-? yi E're 
he aire apſwer't6'this, probably-anothee asketh whence he cometh, 
het Company he had kept; 91 try they conj<(ture af the Man. 7 A- 
hother-farts:4 third Enquiry, What Country or: Nation he is of ;' to 
thoſe Ports Perſons of different [Nations flockt : poſhbly they hoped 
{Ome oriathetrin: the Ship:mighC be his Country-men, ahd ſo fitteſt to 
-xamine him-, .0 This ſeems tobe the ſame Queſtion repeated, or elle 
*n Enquify where he dyglth iTheſe, the Heads of the Queſtions askt 


a him 4 LN hers vac. 16% 
'* 9 And he ſaid. untp NG p, I, ant att Hebrew 9, and'1 
Kart rhe: LORD's the;God, of heaven z,” which hath made 

"he ſeag,andthe dry lend. 102” 01h ; aq 
p Jotab:trealyand readily; gives'account of himſelf, q One that 
2n--gefcended> from ' Heber! whole: Of ſpring: by: /4brabam are well 
knos8,andpibbably:totheſt:Matiners : He faith-not k'Fer,becanſe he 
2; not. id Strriinel3 of Speech ';/ for he was of the Tribe: of Zebutun, 
nor-ha {/aclitediftin gailhe fromthe Few, deft he ſhontd feem to own 
him(elf.ob thab idolatrous'Fatbioq 32 I warſhip and ſervethe'true:God 
obly; orpoſibly it may implythdthus Employmentwas in the imme- 
dare Seryioe'off God, as-.a'teligious::Perſon, [that had abdicated ths 
World, and:dedicated himſelfito God... s The.Eternal; and Almigh-i 
ty God;] yours/are: upſtare.Gutls, and have no'Powet or: Might, or 
can-theydo_any. thing; xWho-firft made, now. ruleth, and ever will 
rule 'the Hedvens,/which hone: bf'your Gods.can pretend to z thofe. 
Heartens froto whehce you feethis' Storm falleth, ... w That Sea which 
now threatens you for my Sake, and threatens me for my Sin: my” || 
| God hgth raiſed the Sea mihisiQuertel to contend thns furioully,and he || 


1; -- So Fafhne dealt with Aghun, Foſh. 7; ſatisfied in the Perſon, the Ship, endangered you all. 
_ 530 ao Th commendable Juſtice and Calmneſs efquire into the b. 4 Dis 
thing; What baſt thou-done,'for which God is To-ahgry- with thee, | be my fault if you be drowned. 


now frankdy-tell 05. -7 What Tbdtfe of Life haft thow lived, or what {| God will puaiſh by that Juſtice which is, in this Place. 


I ha 0 Tam aflure:l of this, and though 
ave been your Danger, and this was. my Fault, yet it ſhall nor 
Hh p For my Sin which God will Pu= 
A, but not by my. own Att, I muſt got leap 9ver-board, 'tis a'Crime 
And will be 
till you have executed God's Sentence = ab 7. TE TID 

- Mit. tO, -NCe ON Me, which I willingly ſub- 


1.£9-the land, but they could 6 noc ; for the ſea-wrought, 5** 
| and, was tempeſtuous againſt them #. ky. ; 
| 7-424 Heb,: but:rightly to the proper Senſe of the Phraſe rendred 
| here neverrhelefs, notwithſtanding the 5Lot fell on Fonah, he confeſſed 
|-Bis Fault, dixetts them'to caft him ovet+board, and in all this avoweth 
| Dimfelf to.be a Prophet -of Gad,. and afluresthem of a - calm Sea, if 
they do this ;;;yet. very willing to:faye him; $ They contrived all 
ways,andare' willing: to be at:any Labour tb ſave him they ply their 
\Oars, and ftrain their Strength with. Ueep Stroaksto force the Ship 
| toShore.: : t All was loft Labour, God had: given other Ordev to his 
| Servants, the Wind and . Sea both obey ſhjm,' and both keep Fonah a 
Priſoner, ſelf-condemned, and deſirous of what the Mariners were ye- 
Ty: nowilling t0«'::4 Vid, ver.'11: let. 2. the Sea toſs'd it ſelf more vio- 
tantly; and by unfteady Motions,like ſome Hurricane, every Momenc 
endangered them. *::. TE 2 Us 158 B42 
"1 4' Wherefore = they cried.y unto the Lord z, and aid, 


We 4 beſcecti þ thee c, O LORD, we beſeech thee 4, let 
95'not periſh for this mans life e, and lay not vpon us inno- 
> rows #: for thou, O LORD, haſt done-2 as it-pleaſed 
Il e F : X - P __ 4 . - T 


13 Nevertheleſs 7 the men + rowed hard 5 to bring tf FHeb.dfg- | 


can, and nome but. he; cad, Sagan to be ſtill, x-A Deſcription. of: [| ning of the Tempeſt every Man to his God, but better inftruted Jouw 
thithe eV 2 


the Eafth, you would get r, but all your Gods c 


znfot bring you. || theyall' do cry to Fo#zb's God, to Fehovah the true God, *  T | 
thither, or give you to [et one Fopg upon it if my God [ay no: This is {coir in Brayer _ 10.7 - They alt 
the Sur of what Fonah che by which he intimaterh' his Tnnocen- |] 


cy he rs Cries they might imagine him guiltv, and | £6:Saints or intermediate Demons, d Tis repeated to note their Vehe= 


Preſence of Lord. 


ho 
—_— 
as : 
We, 
3-4 
1 
+ 
Ll. 
2 
ig 
<A 


"mighty God. 2TH 


: 


\ » 
# & 


C3 omsnr yoo” Ga= ou 


+. # 


iHe readily gives them;Advice for their Safety. 7 This he ſpake' 
52 Prophet directed of God, and not as ſome Few7ſh Rabbi thinks, 
w ing to die rather than to go to Nineveh. . m Throw me Over- 
Ward ito the Sea, no:.other way muſt you deal with me than this ; 
this way T-not:only dixett.as expedient,but from God I give you 
\- + Command, and:you muſt do it ; thus my God will puniſh my 
obedience and Comtempt, "As a Prophet I affure you the Tem- 
Uhall ceale, ant you.be ſafe, and by that you way know I being 'i/ 


wo Wert Fearwas doubſet, 
or:t& then; therr own Danger, Nite: 


| fiſh « to. ſwallow x up 
in the - belly of the fiſh y three days , and three 
| nights z. IN | 


? his Sin which, he had before told rhem | mency in Prayer: e Though he-is pointed ont b ri 
efftood. it: not, 'br-thotffht light of it 3' he fled from the y y S my ut by Lot, hath adviſed 


| 

! 

[phit by it, neing hin by his" 
{and confirmmg Gaara Y— —- by the Continugnce of the 
Ti 


thee ic ſhould be jo. 


4+ 


"'15: So # they"t6ok up Jonah &, and caſt him forth into 


'7 And He. As he adviſed, with Reget to themſelves, though /{994« 
with fall Confent'of-Forah, at laſt they" yield. 1 Vid. ver.-11. let. m. 
'm'As Fonahb had: affared them, ſo they find' the Sea all on a. ſudden 
calm and friendly, which we muft underſtand includes the Wind ſent 
-into the Sea, though it be not mentioned here. - - | 
' 16 Then the menos feared the FORD p exceedingly g, 


—_— 


; VOWS;S. -  - | 

2 When they ſaw'God approved the thing, and confirmed Fonah's 
'Word, as of a true; Prophet, and: had ſpared them. ' o The Sea-men, 
and all others, if;any-others were in the Ship. p With a deep Reve- 


-| rence of his Power, Wiſdom and Juſtice againſt Forzb, and of his 
-| Mercy towards them. What was the final Effet of this, and-whether 
| they were by: it throughly turned to God, I.enquire not now ; it may 
-|'belt become our Charity, that as Fonah's caſting over-board was 2 
| Type of Chriſt's Death, ſo the. Effett it had upon the, Mariners might. 
[be a Type' of the Converſion of; the Heathen from Idols to God. 
] q4 Their Fear before was exceeding great, but that was a Fear of the 
.| Danger, and for themſelves a natural Fear z but now they do fear the 


Lord and' his Majeſty ang. Mercy, it is a Religious Fear. ' 7 What they 
had in the Ship to offer to God, or how they could offer there, ap- 


| pears not to us, but the Scripture affirms they, did Sacrifice, not to 
'| Idols, but to the true God : Some ſuppoſe the Words are to be inter- 
| preted, that they would ſacrifice at Feruſulem, where they now know 


thatthe God of Jonah was worſhipped. *'s Vows are a Part of Naturat 


|'Religion, and here theſe Perſons bind themſelves. by Vows to recogniſe 


God's Goodneſs ji their Deliverance. It is not improbable that here 


| is a Trajeftion, as many tines Þ Fcripture, that placed. laſt whick 
-'in ConſtruRion is. to be firſt. _ 


hey vowed Vows and Sarrifices, 2. e. 
vowed they would .do it, would be Profelytes, and ever worſhip him 


.| whom Job preagh'd to them. Creator of Heaven ant Earth, 


i7. q, Now-s. the LORD had prepared te a great 


20. 
+ Hed. 

s And Heb: t Created at firſt ſay ſome, but what need that when ;gwezs, 

a mighty overgrown Eith of a double ' Age may do this by Got's Will 

and Appointment attending the Ship, and following it in the Storm, 

expetting a Prey, and ready to receive the Priſoner ?. A Whale, 

as we read, Mat. 12. 49. others ſay 'twas a Shark, a Fiſh common in 

thoſe Seas. x Not to chew upon him, but to take him down whole. 


3 In (ate Cuſtody. _ 2 That he might rightly rypify Chril.*s Burial in 


| 


the Graves 


CHAT. 


|the'fea Land theſea - ceaſed from her raging m7. + Heb, 


.and | offered a ſacrifice r unto the LORD, and'+ made + Heb. /+- 


crificed. 
+ Heb. 
vowed. 


onah :_ and * Jonah was * Nat-:5. 
- ] 4. Luk.u, 


— ENNIS Yeti RA. ie. 


- a ,- - age"; 
Og OT "AY 
FIRE us x 


CE Oe COLL = 


Chap. 11. f0N 


CHAP. Il, 


FonaPs prayer and vow, 1-— 9g, The fiſh at God's command ſpues him 
our 07 the ſhore, 10. - 


l Hen a Jonah prayed bunto the LOED c his God d 
| | out of rhe fiſhes belly e. 


2 1d Hebr. at that time when he lay by the Heels.a cloſe Priſoner 
31 a Priſon, whence none before or ſince ever came out alive. 6 Sent 
his Petition in all humble and ſubmiffive manner unto God 3 Fon ah 
wonderfully preſerved alive,and in full Exercite of his Judgment and 
Memory, now betakes himfelf to Prayer, and.in this' exerciſeth-his 
Graces; 'hjs Soul follows hard after God, when he was ſhut up in this 
Dungeon. - c That was angry, and now was puniſhing of Foz4h, the. 
Lord who had committed: him. to this Priſon ;' the. Almighty God, 
whocan «lo for Fonab all that he. can need or deſire. 4d Though Fomdh' 
in his froward Eit flies from his God, yet now by the Rod taught bet- 
ter, he flies to God ; nay,.as his God, and remembers his particular 
Intreſt.in God. !- If Fonah prays by Faith grounded on God's Almigh- 
tineſs,now he prays with Affurance and Hope of Faith,looking to God 
as his God if the Power of the Lord and his Mercy keep Fonah alive 
in the Eiſh's Belly, the ſame Power and Mercy can deliver him out of 
this Danger, and-the Prophet believes he is kept there for an Enlarge- 
ment, as miraculous as his Confinement was. e Where he was'a 
Priſoner under many Miracles, and all concur to awaken him to Prayer 
and Faith 3 he calls it the Belly of Hell, or, the Gr.rve, ver. 2, imploy- 
OIEY ed his time well there. $5 | 

120't- 2 And ſaid f, * I cried g || by reaſon of mine af 


5 ang fiction þ unto the LORD #, and he heard me; out of 


of mine ' 
pro the belly of || hell cried 17, and thou heardeſt my 
!{ Or, the yoice m. ki 
87200 'The former Verſe was a general Account that he pray'd ; this 
ord in the Front of this Verſe isa Tranſition to a more full Account 
of his Prayer. what for Subſtance, and ſomewhat of the Words alſo. 
g Not with a lond. Voice of the Tongue,as *twa> not ordinarily feiſable 
in ſo cloſe- a Priſon, ſo nor was it, necelſary-.he ſhould, where none 
were to hear but his God, who heareth the ftrong=ſt Defires, and ac- 
counts them the ftrongeſt Cries ; {o Fonah cried, with his whole Heart. 
þ Diſtreſs or . Straits with which he was, encompaſſed, and. cloſe be- 
fieged 3] nor was there ever cloſer Siege laid to any one, his Body and 


Mind both ſhut up, the one by the monſtrous Dungeon of the Fiſh's | 


Belly,and the other by the Terrors of the Almighty. -7.It was in ma- 
ny ReſpeRs fit Fonzb ſhould petition God, for he was committed by his 
ſpecial Warrant, and none either had Power or Authority to deliyer 
him but God. &k Though Fonab ſay not how God, did, hear, in what: 
Particular, yet he knew both how and in what the Support of his Per- 
ſon, thc. Exerciſe of his Reaſon, the Workings. of his Heart toward, 
God, and a Hope or Aſſarance. that-he ſhould be delivered, were paxt. 


of the \ercy God gave, and. he prayed for. 1 Grave, ſo Sbeol, ſo it. | 
was as dark to Fora, and had been as deſtruttive too; if Mercy had |. 


not prevented. This is doubled to intimate both the. Priſoner's Ear- 
neſtneſs, and-the Greatneſs of the Mercy given to one:that was as ſhut, 
up in the Grave, m Of his.Soul, whileſt he way in that diſmal Dun-. 
geon, aslet. g. : . VELET of: 
3: For.» thowo hadſt taſt p me iato .the deepq, in 

' the + midſt of the ſeas r, and the floods s compalled, 
\me about. all thy billows and thy waves paſſed over met. 
2 This introduceth the Account of his Diſtreſs mentioned ver. 2+ 

o The Almighty offended by my Fruwardne(s and Obftinacy. p Tho 
the Mariners Hands heared me over-board,'twas thy Hand that did it, 
and preſs'd me ſore. q The Bottom of the Sea ; by what follows it is, 
probable Foxab was caſt into the Sea far trom Shore. r Or Heart of 
the Seas, but more literally and ftriatly in the midſt of the Seas, than 


+ Heb. 
heart. 


that Feb. 27.4. 5 Either the mighty Rivers which run into that Sea, |! 


or the Floods, the mighty Currents, which the rolling Sea and Winds 
with Tide-made. tr The Surges of the Sea, which explains what be- 
fore he called the Floods. Here is an elegant Deſcription of the Vio- 
lence and Horror of the Seas into which Fonab was caſt, which toſſed 
his Body, and fHgnified the Terrors wherewith his Soul was diftreſs*d 
rom God*s immediate Hand, as T7ſal. 42. 7. Thy Waves; Fonah, 
ſeeth God's Hand and Sovereignty in all this, intimating that he pray- 
ed for what he knew his God could do for him. 

4 Then « I faid x, 1 am caſt ovr of thy ſight y ; yet I 
will look = again toward thy holy temple. 

z Though this Ward with us ordinarily denoteth Time, yet here 
it denoteth Order and Connettion, the Hebrew is and.. 'x With my 
(elf, I thought in the midſt of my Fears and Sufferings. y Cut off 
from all Hope of Life among Men, rejetted, forlaken, and as *twere 
forgotten of my God, and left by this Death to pals to a worſer 
Death. Thus he was. wrack'd with Senſe of preſent Danger from 
God*s Diſpleaſure, and is almoſt carried away with a Diſpair of ever 
ſeeing the Face of God again with Comfort, much as P/al. 31. 22. 
and Zam. 3. 18. 2 His Faith begins to recover it ſel?, he will not as 

_ deſpairing ones any more look towards loſt Hopes, but with reviving 

Hope be will hope againſt Hope, and never yield to ſuch Delpairs. 
a Where the Ark of the Covenant, where the Mercy-ſeat, where 
Propitiatory'Sacrifices are offered, where is God's High-Prieft, Types 
of the Great Redeemer, Mediator and Saviour, by whom Sin 1s ex- 
piated, Sinners pardoned, Grace and Favour communicated, where 
God commands tne Bleffing; Life for evermore ; he will look and hope 
to appear in;.the material typical Temple, and to find there Grace 
dilpottive for , as well as tignificative of Glory in the heavenly 
Temple, he hopes tor botlt. 

5s The * waters a compaſſed me about even to the ſoul b - 
the depth cloſed me round avout c, the weeds were wrapt 
avout my head &. 

The former Part of the 5th Verſe ſeems to be an ingeminating of 
What was {aid,ver. 3. and bears the lelt-ſame Meaning and Interpreta- 
tion. « Literally the Waters of the Sea, metaphorically Afflictions, 
myſtically Temptations ; theſe laſt ariſing from his own Guilt, and 


, Pſ.69.1. 


4 H Oy 


trom the Tokens of God's Dilpleaſure againſt him in ſo unuſual a man- 


net. b To the endangering his Life, and were Forerunners ( 25 ha | ap 
apprehended ) of worle Miſcries, the Foretaftes of an eterna} Damna, 

tion ; *ewasa Miracle of Providence to preſerve my Life, *twas ng Ie t 
Wonder of Free Grace to ſaye my Soul, c He was carried to the hs ] 
tom of the Sea, lay as in the deepeſt Hole of the Sea. -«4-Not imm . ſ 
diately, as ſome conje(ture, by the Fiſh pulling them from the "aug 7 
tom of the Sea, and ſwallowing them down, where they wrapp'd Jo F je 
nab's Head, but mediately when the Fiſh ſwam amidſt theſe, .o; i = 1 
ther it is a comparative Speech, I was no more likely to eſcape droyy, t] 
ing, than a Men in the Depth of the: Sea wrapp'd up in, and he1q fa { 
down by the Weeds in the bottom of the Sea. . 01 

6 1 went down e to the | bottoms of the mountains f:4 1 
the earth with her bars was about me for everZ : yet ht a 
haſt thou brought up my life k from || corruption I Oc . 
LORU m my God ". pi xi 

e The Fiſh carried him down. f As deep in the Sea as are the Pa 
Bottoms of the Mountains, or into thofe Depths out of which might ed 
be ſuppoſed that Mountains were thence drawn out by the Roots, 1p C01 
elegant Deſcription 'of fathomlteſs Depths, Whirl-pools of the $e;; by 
z I ſeemed to be-impriſoned where the Bars that ſecured me were z Co 
great and durable as. the Rocks, which'they. were made of, þ Ny. t01 
withſtanding all theſe inſuperable Difficulties, and my own Fears, ib Riz 
what was fk my Danger thou haſt wonderfully ſecured me ; what! of t 
thonght ſhould have been my Grave, was made a Safety to me: 
the Fiſh Fonab is in due time fairly and; ſafely ſet on Shore, | jj, 

Life of Nature, his Life of Comfort and Peace, and Joy too. 1 0; F 
the Pit, a Diſcription - of the State. of the dead, whole Bodies tray Fo 
| PutrefaRtion and Steick. m O Almighty and Eternal Being; Lorday | - 
 Soveraign over all. - = Mine, ſaith Jonab, by particular Choice, Fi 
and Hope, whom I had ſerved, and ſhould not have diſobeyed, 9 
' whom | prayed, who hath pardoned; whom I will adore, obey and or: 
for ever, | 3'6 , , 

7 When o my ſoul fainted p within me, I remembrey 4 
the LORD, and my prayer ry came in unto thee s, jnty M... 
thine holy temple t. _ ch. 1, 

0 £0 ſoon as, and ſo often as. p Heart perplexed with Variety mand 
Fears, Sorrows, Temptations and Difficulties z whenever I did fore give | 
caſt and deviſe what way I might likely eſcape out of this forlorn Ca on to 
dition, I was diſpirited, Heart fuhk within me, P/al. 22. 14 andy, b 
4- and TI had fainted if I had not remembred the mighty, faithjy, Pp 
wiſe and gracious God, who could fave me, and on whofe Merg] _ 
relied, who had promiſed the beſt of two Deliverances, the etery| 4 
' whatever he did with me as to the temporal Deliverance. ' q Wit & Vid. 
Faith and Prayer, for *tis not a bare recalling of God to his Mind, it onray 
iarecalling his Mercy and Proryiſe to his Mind. r Made in thefifi , _ 
| Belly, in his Priſon more diſmal than ever.was.that of Manaſſeh. «Dil , "_ 
' enter the Ears.of the Lord, he heard and readily anſwered. t Ty eB 
ally the Temple at Jeruſalem ro which Jozob looked, but princily 4 ant 
| Heaven the Temple of his Glory,whence God gives the Comma rs "Pp 
; his Delivery, orders the Goaler to ſet him ſafe on ſhore, Either : 

. 8 They thar *obſerve lying vanities «, forſakes thi WM --+ :n. 
. own mercy y, _.. $ 3 SC 
©. Whoever they are that.do, as the Heathen Mariners feek to, cordin 
; penid upon and wait for Help from Idols,falſe Godsz whoſoever chuſ h 6 
' them. for their Afiftance, and worſhip them, do depend upon ni of ell We 
 falfe Grounds, wait for moſt lying and deceiving Objedts 7 and thisdf Journey 
the. Prophet is true of,-and applicable to. all. our Creature Dep I And, 
dencies, to all-Truft'repoſed in any but God himſelf; theſe dig reſolved : 
; themſelves Ciſterns, broken Ciſterns that can hold no Waters, ]#.1 along Jo! 
.13. x Turn away from, and do really and prattically forſake 6, more eli 
,as he leaves the Eaſt who goeth on to the Welt, truſt” in God; al complying 
Idols are as oppoſite, as is the Eaſt to the Weſt. » The Lord, wv preack w} 
is to all that ſeek him, and depend on him, the Fountain of Lirng with Af; 
Waters, who is an eternal Fountain of Mercy, and flows forth ire ever he w 
to all that wait for him. ENS, Y, It w 

9 But z I will ſacrifice a unto thee b with the voiced _ 

thankſgiving c, I will pay d that that I have vowed e: it Walks F: 
. . nh 
vation f 15 of the LORD g. meet, and 

7; Fonah here doth intimate. his. Adherence to God, his Afſurat ON its Wa, 
that he ſhould find God to be a Fountain of Mercy to him. that 6 Lion and fo 
would hear his Prayer. 4 In moſt ſolemn manner recognize the Me ears to| 
cy I receive, I ſhall have juſt ground to do ir, and I will certainly): Difference 
juſt to the Mercy of my God, and do it ; who wait on God's thatar we account 
not deliver, ſhall never have Cauſe to ſacrifice to them ; if they dot i amoun 
thing, they do facrilegiouſly rob God. b Excluding all others who fle to he tþ 
have as little Share in the Praiſe as they had in the thing for wh ount his le 
Praiſe is offered. c Including the Heart alſo ; for ſuch is the Sactift neceſſarily ; 
with which God is beſt pleaſed, P/jal. 51. 17. and 116. 14, ) RiAWſich fans, 
Hoſ. 14- 2. Heb. 17, 15. 4 Vows are, when , made, Debts we oF KOuld be as 
to God, and muſt, as juſt Debts, be paid. e It is not ſaid what't® ourſing wit 
he: had vowed, probably *twas a more obedient Heart and Depo rough the 
ment, likely he reſolveth to go to Nineveb,and preach what God 0" BlWtuwas eight, 
'manded him, he will perform his Promiſe to the Lord in all things MWnore than (4 
did engage to do. f Power to ſave, and attual Deliverance from 2 Mile's B 
Dangers, inall Diſtreſſes ; when none of the Gods the Mariners 117 een Niles x 
ked, neither any one apart,nor yet all together, could quiet the Te ers account 
peſt, and fave from the Danger of the Sea, Fonat*s God could do wenty Mile: 
he could by his own ſingle Power deliver Fonab out of the Bell Preach, diſp 
Hell. g He only can ſave,none elſe can as he can,P/al.3-8- and 68.20 vunt ſeems x 

10 Þ Andbthe LORD # ſpake &k unto the fiſh }, and 4 And g 
vomited out 2 Jonah upon the dry land #n. " KIUAT 

b Or, as the Particle is ſometimes rendred, ther, 7. e. after Fol Wi\ineyeh 1 
had prayed, and aRed his Faith, though in the Whale's Belly. / W q The for; 
made Heaven and Earth, and commanded both, who is God of 51" BW... * Now 
tion, k Command , ſignified it to be his Pleaſure ; as fe - O preach the 
Word prepared the Fiſh, and brought it to give Attendance i0 =—_ amed 9 
the Pritoner ; ſo now it doth diſcharge the Keeper, and requires ell all what c; 
to ſer his Priſoner at Liberty- 3 Though Fiſhes are deſtitute U With what 
ſon, and underſtand not as Man, yet they have Ears to hear UW Ort time, { 
Creator, and readily obey. | m It preſently obeys the Word, if " an God Bs 
no longer keep Fon4h a Priſoner. » The Command required this ("© to 5od9n; 
could it be a Deliverance without this ; had he been caſt ny und in Ni 

| Whale's Beily any where elſe in the Sca, he bad been Jrawnes; boelh | a cams = 
Dre! 


anc per 
Vol, mn 


ria JONAH Chap. II). 


h was his Danger ſhalf be his Safety, a Ship now to land | ſerve with God on condition of Repentance; which operated in due 


t whic f - oy, , ; 
- h before was like to-be his Grave. The Scripture doth not | time, and manifeſtly proved that God intended Mercy to repenting, 


him, whic 


" -— > - F 
LN Be - — ; 
g Do ST 
« 0g eb as =—; oe = "op 
WT. 27 4 = 
=> wb * . 
LE as  - 
= 
4a , x7 $2.5 DA wee 
of - << IR 
—_ 


ſay where he was thus ſet on Shore, but conſidering he was to go to 
Nineveh and preach Repentance to them, it tis a very obvious Con- 
jetture that any Man might make, that the Whale ſet Fonah on Shore 
*1 ſome Place of the Syrian Shore neareſt to Nineveh z and on view of 
the Charts any indifferent Geographer would conjetture that *twas 


Nineveb, though he threatned an Overthrow tv impenitent Nineueh. 
How it ſhould be overthrown is not expreſſed, ſome conjecture by 
foreign Enemy, which carrieth Unlikelihood with it ; others gueſs by 
Fire from Heaven : but fince *twas not deftroyed, we need not en- 
quire how it ſhould have been z and had they not repented, the Event 


CES 

-— -- ch by 

: : > _— p 
- o : o_ * 
NO Oe antos-. -. ns” atanhoed 
we Dc 44 I 
£1; PT "4 » 

. *, 0; a. 

ye ; 


ſomewhere on the Bay or Gulph of Lajazzo, antiently the Sinus Jſicus, | would have informed us fully. 
or ſomewhat near to Alexandrerte, as the French, or Scanderoon, as the 5  Sot *® the People # of Nineveh believed God x, * Mat. 12, 
Turkscall itz whence, though a long, yet by the Maps appears to be | ang proclaimed a faſt y, and pur on ſackcloth from the 41- 
the traiteft Journey to Nineveb. As for ſome who conjetture *twas reateſt of the . cha ted of rh Luk.i.2; 
on the Euxine Sea, they conſider not the {trait Paſſage of the Propon- S m Even ro " —o CEMMz : 
*: nor the Length of 1600 Miles from Fopps to that part of the Eu- c p And Heb. u The Inhabitants who heard, they firſt believed who 
xine which is next to Nineveb, nor the Length and Difficulty of the | I heard, and ſucceſſively others, as ſoon as they heard, x Speaking 
Paſſage thence by Land to Nineveb 3 but he that ſaid Jonab was Land- | OY his Prophet, they knew their own Sins, Though Forah were a 
<4 0 Nineveb's Shore was much wider out in his gueſs, and never cranger to them, yet becauſe coming in God's Name, he did very 
confidered that Nineveb was built on Tigris, ſome hundreds of Miles ms fully, and to the Lite, enumerate, decipher, and lay open 
by Land from Foppa, and if the Fiſh brought him thither, it was by a - eir Sins, with what they deſerved, what might be expetted; what 
Compaſs of many thouſand _ _ N require ſome Months _— Re: pi ; _ w ne * opt a9 os 
. | 7 7 - 
to run over: beſides that the Filh woul too great to ſwim up the Whether the Fame of jJon.2l*s Deliverance came to Niveves 


; ir Conjefture biddeth faireft who confine it to ſome Places | P*Pt+ \ og oy 
= Por Sea. and wor from Scanderoon. ns before him, appears not, ner is it likely it ſhould come o far and ſo 


faft, though *twere known on the Syrian Coaft, and about Tyre and Z7- 
CHAP. II don ; poſhbly Fonah might publiſh it in Nineveh, » Every one called 
: : WK ; upon other to faft, or cried out, *twas high time to faſt, repent, and 
Fonab ſent agan, 1, 2. and Preacheth to the Ninevites ; their ſubverſion, | ſupplicate God ; ſo ſome think : but this Paſſage is an Anticipation, 
3+ 4. They believe: King and People bumble themſelves before the | tells us what was done, and will tell us afterwards on what Grounds, 
10RD; and amend their ways; 5 —— 8. They hope thereby to find mer- | Authority and Example *twas done. 2 A Ceremony very uſual in 
iy, 9. God repenterh, and ſpareth them, 10. Mournings, private or puhlick in thoſe Countreys, and a Token of 
*| their true Mourning ; this all did, great and ſmall, rich and poor. 
I ND a the word of the LORD b came c unto | 6 For a word came unto the King b of Nineveh, and he 
Jonah the ſecond time d, ſaying, aroſe from his Throne c, and he laid his Robe from him 
a After that Fonab had been well diſciplined for his Contumacy, and | 4 and covered him with ſackcloth e, and far in afhes f; 
was ſet at Liberty. 5 The Command or the Prophetick Spirit, vid. | *, This now accounteth for the Peoples proclaiming a Faſt, ver. 5, 
ch, 1,v, 1. let, b,c, d The firſt time Jonah rebels againft the Com- they did it becauſe *twas commanded, and they had the King's Exam- 
mand, now better prepared and humbled he is tried agam ; God doth ple herein. 5 Whether Fonah did particularly ſpeak to his Hearers 
give him the Gift of Yrophecy, and by that fignifies his/Reconciliati- | to ſend Word to the King, or whether the Strangenels of the thing 
on to him, and admits him into his old Station. ; might move ſome or other to report it to the Courtiers, and they to 
2 Ariſe e, go f unto Nineveh that ﬀ great City #, and | the King, is not ſpecified ; certain *tis that the King had Word 
Preach b unto it 7 the Preaching that I bid thee k. brought him, and it was conſidered by him : nor isit ſaid whothis King 
e Vid, chi 1. v, 2. let. fo f Vid. Ch. 1. ve 2olet. g. ff 1bid. let. h. | was, Sardanapalus ſeems too early, Phul Belochus is with more Probaliry 
Vid. ch. 1. v. 2. let. 7. great in Extent of Ground, in Strength of its | thought to be this King. © Came down from his Royal Seat. d Put off 
| Fortifications, Height and Breadth of their Walls, and Multitude of | Þis rich, gorgeous and luxurious Apparel, e Put on the rough and une 
their Towers, great in the Multitude of its Numbers and Riches of | <aſy Garments of a Mourner. f As Fob 2.8. and 42 6. E/., 4.13, 
its Citizens, and every whit as great in the Multitude of its Sins; but 7 And he g cauſed #t to be proclaimed h, and - pub- + Heb. 
let nothing retard or diſcourage thee z ariſe and go. b Publickly, | liſhed 7 through Nineveh ( by the decree of the King ſaid, 
plainly, boldly cry, cþ. 1. v. 2: let, k. 7 7.c. Againſt it publiſh the | 3 v5. nobles &) ſaying, Let neither man 1 nor bealt Eh: 


near approaching Ruine of it, preach to them the Neceſſity of their . . ' 

Repentance, and awaken them to it by the Terrors of the Lord. & | 7 herd nor flock taſte any thing # ; let them' not feed, great ment: 
Either which I did bid thee at firſt; as ch. 1. v. 3. or what I ſhall ſug- | Nor drink water. : ; 

geſt and communicate to thee when thou art come thither. g The King. h Took a particular Care to have > emmy, a Faſt or- 


3 So I Jonah aroſe and went nnto Nineveh #7, ac- | dered and notified to the People by thole publick Officers, who were 
Z wont to proclaim the Decrees and Edits of the King and his Coun- 


'S.. 
* 


y : I 4 > C = 
"2 . 
” 
. oa "x dupe 
oo _ SR p er 
138.0) Ces In ay 
<8 - F = Oo 
- **- — RETT < - 
_ _—_ ay SI—_ —— 


« 
- 2 ants} 
o _ 


o - my - $3 
Coe one” . » ” 9--g : 
. > _ hath _ _ 
_— * - Ws - 27 
P _ « >> 4 2 _ _ — 
. - wang po nA > x 2 —_ 
ON, PIR * 2 HERES E ; . 
—_ A >” Fd Ears 


ct. A 
w = LO 


ps -- 


— to tlie word of the LORD # ; ( now Nine- cil. 7 This Ingemination confirms the ting, and adds ſomewhat for 
We was an | exceeding great City o of three days ſhewing the deep Senſe the King had both of his own and his Peoples 


—_— Chagas ho 
$44 —— mop 
-__ : 
a, tt 4 


Journey p. ) Sins, Danger and Duty in this Exigent. & It was an A&t of the King 
I And, Heb. as God commands and dire&s ; ſo Fonah with ready, | and Council, and that which paſſed them with good liking, they re- 
reſolved and obedient Mind ſets about the Work. m Though it was | liſhed the thing, as the Hebrew Phraſe importeth. 7 Men have finned 
along Journey, yet three Weeks or three Months Travel by Land is | and provok*d God to this high Diſpleaſure, it. does moſt principally 
more eligible than three Days in the Belly of Hell. Every way | concern them to repent, faft and mourn for their Sins, that God may 
complying with the Command of God, ſpeeding thither, reſolved to | pardon and ſpare them. m Theſe compriſed in the Threat, and like 
preach whatſoever Sermon God ſhould put into his Head, encouraged | to be involved in the common Danger, are put under a Faft; this the 
with Aſſurance that God who did ſend would be with him whitherſo- | general, which is afterwards expreſs'd more particularly Zer4{ and 
ever he was ſent. 0 The greateft City of the known World at that | Flock; let none of theſe; whether at home in the Stall, or abroad in 
diy, it was then in its flouriſhing Stare greater than Babylon, whoſe | the Fold and Herd. # This referred by ſome to the Striftneſs with 
Compaſs was three hundred ſixty five, or three hundred eighty five | which Men were bound to keep this Faft, but this may be a general 
| Furlongs ; but Nineveb was in Compaſs four-hundred and eighty, her | Prohibition explained by what follows, Let all, Man and Beaft, forbear 
Walls an hun:red Foot in Height, broad enough for three Coaches to | to eat or drink, that the Faſt might be moft ſolemn, that the Cry of 
meet, and ſafely paſs by each other z it had fifteen hundred Towers | Man, ſeconded. with the Cry of hungry Cattel, might enter the Ears 
0 its Walls, and theſe Towers two hundred Foot high, and one Mil- | of God, who preſerveth Man and Beaft, 
_ and _ _— thouſand _ wr ge for eight] $ But let man o and beaſt p be covered with ſackcloth, 
ears to build it, if our Author be not miftaken. p There is ſome - he , _ 
Difference in accounting how this City was three Days Journey ; if and cry wy 1 —_ God r: , let —_— s —_ 390g *Ia.$9.4 
we account the Length of it at one hundred and fiſty Furlongs, this | 7Y ONE # ITOM N1S EvVIl Way #, an rom * tne VIOtenCe Xx 
i amount to eighteen Miles and three Quarters : this ſeems too lit- chat 45 in their hands Y. : 
tle to be three Days Journey, unleſs it be ſuppoſed the Prophet ac- 0 Every Man from greateſt, the King on the Tlirone, to the leaft, 
ount his leiſurely Progreſs, and takes in the many Stops that would | the Beggar on the Dunghil, put off his uſual and otter Habit, and af- 
neceſſarily and unavoidably retard him in his walking and preaching | flidt themſelves in coarleſt Garments. p Their Horſes in which they 
Iuch ftrange News 3- if we conſider this, *tis not unlike fix Miles | gloried much, their Camels alſo, both which they adorned with rich 
KOuld be as far as he could goina Day, preaching to afl, and diſ- | and coftly Clothing in their Stables, and with as rich Furniture tor 
ourſing with many. Others will account it three Days Journey togo | Saddles, Bridles and Trappings, when they were uſed abroad * now 
rough the Streets and Lanes of this City ; but on the Suppoſition | all in Teftimony of an hearty Repentance muſt clothe with Sackcloth, 
tas eighteen Miles in Length, and eleven Miles in Breadth, *twill be | the Clothing of Beafts muſt witneſs for Men. q Beaſts in Diftreſs and 
nore than three Days Journey, or a Week's Journey ; for ſuppoſing | Starving cry to God as the young Ravens and hungry Lions, anc fo 
2 Mile's Breadth but eight Streets from end to end through eigh- | here Beaſts of the Herd and Flock cry. But tis to be referred to 
en Miles Length, *twill amount to four hundred fixty four Miles. O- | Men lamenting their Sins, deprecating Judginents, imploring Mcrcy 
hers account by the Compaſs of the Walls fixty Miles, and allow | with all Earneftneſs and Vehemency of Detire, called here a cry:ng 
wenty Miles to each Day's Journey, too far for any one to walk, | mightily ro God, as cb. 1.5+ 7 Who only could prevent the Judgmenc 
Preach, diſpute er reaſon, and account for himſelf : The firſt Ac- | threatned from being executed, v.9,10. s The Inhabitants of Nimeveh, 
vunt eems moſt probable: whetherTraders, or who live at their Eaſe andPleaſure there,let them 


4 And q Jonah began to enter into the City a Days reform and amend their Doings. t The Edit tor cealing trom V1o- 
lence is as full and particular as the Edid tor Faſting, all are com- 


Our 1 p a 
= = 4 ur he cried and faid £ Yet forty days and manded to be juſt and righteous. u Not ceaſe from fingle Acts only, 
en 1nall be overthrown s. but change the Courſe and habicual manner of Lite, called here their 
q The former Verſe gives us Intelligence of Fonah's Arrival at N1- Way: every one was vicious, atid each 0:e aimoit had lome particyv- 
veb; now, ſo ſoon as come, he preacheth. r To walk through, and | 14; Method of Sin, which was his way of finaing ; this muſt they tarn 
\ Preach the dreadful Threats of God againſt Nineveh, and he pro- | frgm. x Opprefſion and Rapine, as a cluet Sin is here particularly 
"a openly and plainly what God commanded he teared not to | qentiened; compare this with Nah, 3. 1. » Which attcd by them 18 
, —_— concerned all, he did It with Earneftneſs as deeply aftett- | gjy in their Hands both in the Guiit ot it, the Effetts of it, and as 
ort raya okra oi boos. 6, Po. - - Ws publickly known as what is ſeen in a Man's Hands, Fid. Plal. 7. 3. 
pl ILY 3 2; __ . X ry 
Man God was bound to give, 'or than they ea eutve, or than God 9 Whocan rell z if God will turn and as. my * and 
pave to Sodom and Gomorrah, the Sins of which Cities were, no doubt, ! CUrn away from his fterce anger b, that We Peril notc * 
und in Nimeveb now Fonah preached, and grew ripe by that time Na-| z,Here is the ground of the Ninevites fafting and praying, there 1s 
"ane to foretel their Ruine, vid. Nahum tor. The Threat is ex- | a Foſhbility that they may eſcape, there is airly argued a 1Tobabilt- 


i r . . . - : WE x HATJ ? : hoe T; TIES >>,» £3 14A wo» IT a 4-51 J TE 
-> and peremptory in its Form and Words, though there be a Re-| t: 3 for why fLovid the Evine b2yore- bang be eareotaog, but to give 
Vol, 11, | Q @ Warzng 


«A E > 


Chap 


* Pl.36.5. 


.IV. 


Warning ſo many Days e're it come, unleſs it be to try us 
we willraſt, pray, repent and amend ? and though Fonah had 


FONAH. 


po | | | 
whether } nab forgets himſelf and his God. » Tn a peeviſh Humour #5246; 
no Com- 


miſhon to promiſe them a Deliverance, yet *tis very like he acquain- 
them with the merciful and gracious Nature of his God, This Speech 
of theirs, vid. Joel 2. 14. and 2 Sam, 12. 22. it includes both Faith. 
and Doubr, yet. Faith prevailing to Uſe of Means. 4a If we return-by 
Kepentance, to which God would now call us by this minatory Admo- 
nition, he may perhaps return to us in Mercy, and by the Event ſhew 
*rwas Not an irrevocable Sentence pals'd againſt us. b Forbear to exe- 
cute that terrible Menace of overthrowing us in his juſt and hot Dil- 
picaſure againſt our Sins ; this explains that which he had called Re- 


penting be'ore ; 


which being here, as elſewhere *ftis, attributed to 


God atter the manner of Man's ſpeaking, mult be interpreted as be- 
cometh his Immutability and Majcſty. c Suddenly, exemplarily, tem- 
porally and eternally, all which impenitent Sinners deſerve, Nnevites 
were in Danger of, and the provoked Juſtice of God would have 


brought upon them if they had not repented. 


10 4 And God ſaw d their works e, that they turned 
from their evil way f, and God repented of g the evil 
that he had ſaid i that he would do unto them k, and he 


did rt not 1. 


4 Not only with naked and fingle Intuition, but he ſaw and appro- 
ved, was fingularly well pleaſed with that he ſaw. e Works, not 
Words, are ſure Signs of what Men are, humbling themſelves to the 
Duſc, extraordinary Faſting, and crying unto God ;, theſe were ſome 
of their Works, but God ſaw more than theſe 'external profeſſing 


Works, 


f Vid: ver. $, let. u. they did heartily, preſently and univer- 


fally turn from the Ways of Impiety againft God, of Injuſtice q- 
gainſt Man, from the Ways of Luxury and Pride, from all their Vio- 
lence againſt Man ; wit:out thisall the reſt had been not worth the 
obſcrving, nor would God have regarded it. -g This is ſpoken as be- | 
fore, ver. 9. let. &. (and as his Seeing is attributed to him) after the 
manner ot Man, and muſt be applied unto our unchangeable God, fo 
as may not reflett any Blemiſh upoa his Truth, Conftancy or Immu- 
tability. Thovgh he is ſaid to repent, *tis not as Man doth, who may 
through Frailty of his Naturelie ; but our God js not a Man, or as 


the Son of Man, that he ſhould change or lie. þ Of Luniihment, 


z 


Threatned by Fonab's Mouth. & To finning_ Nzmevites, who did. 
rightly conjecture that 'twas poſſivie this dreadful hieflage might be a 
minatory Warning, aad might be big of a merci:ul Condition of Far- 
don if they repented, and there was no other way to make the Diſ-: 


Ccovery of this but that they took. 


] For he will not deal with peni- 
tent Sinners as with impenitert; though his Juſtice would nat have 


ſpared unrepenting Citizens, his Mercy is ſo great he will not deſtroy 


* 


repenting Sinners. 


CHAP. IV. 


Jonah diſpleaſed at God's ſparing the Ninevires, complaineth of it to him, 
Li 3» God reproves bim for it, and by 4 gourd inſirufterh and con-: 


vinceth him, 4. IIs 


I BY! a it b difpleaſed c Jonah exceedingly d, and he 


was very angry e. 


4 And Heb. b The Divine Forbearance ſparing the great and ſinful 
Nineveh. © Was very unagreeable to Fonal”s haſty and fierce Tem- 
per, to his Love of his own <redir, and it afflicted him to ſee Nime- 


veb ſurvive the forty Days limitcd for their Continuance. 


4 *Twasa 


great Afictjon to him, fo highly diſtemper'd is F5a4þ at Goa's Good- 


nels toa repenting City, 


e This kindled a Fire in his Breaſt, which 
3 


was made up of tnvy. Indiznation and Grief, for that it was not 


done, and dctire that yct ir may be done. 


Fa4h would yet have Nz. 


meveh a Sacrifice to God's Juſtice, and an cternal Monument of his 


Truth, who foretold its Ruine. 


2 And he prayed f unto the LORD, and ſaid pg, I pray 
thee, O LORD þb, was not this my ſaying z?, when | was 
yet in my own Country k ? Therefore I fied 1 before unto 


Tarſhiſh m2 : 


for | knew 7 that thou art a * gractcus o 


Joel 2.12, God 2nd merciful p, flow to anger q, and of great kinaneſs 


* 1 Kings 


I 90 4 
7 , 
* Yer. $. 


7, and repentelſt thee of the evil 5. 


f In ftrarge diſtempere:!! Humour ſets about this Work, and ac- 
cordingly manageth ir; when he deſigns to pray, his turbulent Af- 
fections hurry him into unſeemly Conteſts and Quarrcls with God, 
yet ſince he fell on his Knees with purpoſe to pray to God, the Scrip- 
tures report it a& his Prayer to the Lord. g Either ſpake 1: out in 
Words, or elſe thus reaſoned within himſelf, and now leaves ic record- 


ed what were hi: Words or his Thoughts. 
plaint or Quarrel againſt the Lord, 


þ This begin3 his Com- 
7 Did I not think of this? was I 


not apprehentfive that it would be [o? I ſhould preach avenging Ju- | 
ſtice, and thou wonldſt exerciſe pardoning Mercy ; thy Pardon would | 
contradidt my Preaching. & Either in Canaan, or Galilee, or in Gath- | 


Hepber, where had I died, and never ten a Prophet to Ninzv.h, Thad 


ever had the Reputation of a true Prophet, but now at Nizevea 1 


ſhall be reportei a faiſ> Dreamer. 
[ 


I There was Reaſon tor what I did. 


when I declined the Meſſage, and fled away from thy Preſence ; he 
ſeems to juſtify that Flight which God condemn=d in him by a mira- | 


culous Puniſhment inflicted on him. # 74, ch. 1. v. 3.let. p. 


2 He 


might know-1t by God's Dealings with ſo exorbitantly paſhonate a | 


Man as Fora% himielt was, but he knew it trom God's Account of | 


himſelt, Exod. 34.6, 7. and many other Places of the Scripture. 


Who hath Bowels of Compeſhon, a Heart that is a Fountain of-tender | 
Mercy. p Readily expreffing his Compatiion toward Sinners that need 
and ſue for Mercy. q Who doſt weit long tor the Sinner's Return, 
and doft not haften thy Executions. 'r And when provoked thou art 
yet of an infinite Gooinels, Lenity and Kindneſs, and forgiveft the 


Sinner that repenteth. $s Vid. ch. 3. v. 9g. let. 4. and V. 10. let. ge 


3 * Thereforz t now «, © LORD s, take, I beſeech 
:t 5 better & for me todie 


thee, my life from me y ; for * 
than to live a. 


t And Heb, « Now preſently, let no time flip. x Who art, as cn- 
Ir Author, ſo tle great Arbiter of Life. The mighty and eternal God ; 
lis S0\crcienty was enongh to command 7onah's Reverence,: byt Jo- 


0| 


.made zt to come vp o over Jonah, that it might bea ſz 


3 WEAs 


ry of his Life, and prays for Death, yet in. this Requeſt ſcme Mixture 


there is of Grace with Paſſion, ſomewhat of Mercy from God to ge 


zah, in that he doth not give him up to his own Paſſion. And $0144 
as weary as he is, yet will live till God will take away his Life, Þ'Th 
more deſirable to me todie and be buried, for then my Propheſiing 
that never came to pals will he ſoon forgotten, however I ſhall n =. 
more bluſh at the Rebukes the World will caft upon me. 4 Diſpracey 
and upbraided by Atheiſts, and hardned Sinners, who will reflec th. 
Lie upon me or on my God. EN noainny 


4, Then a 
angry d ? | 


Chap.] 


faid b the LORD: c, || Doeft thop well toly iq 


iS; Ts ; th 
4 <0 ſoon as Fonabf's. Haſte had ſinned againſt his God and his ome 


Life, 6 Either by Voice audible to Foxah, or rather 


Beggs | by his Spirit 
that Spirit which gave Fonah Order to go and preach, 


now takes Or. 


der to debate the Caſe, _ c Who is now, as Jonab needed he ſhould he 


Gracious, flow to Anger, and of great Kingneſs toward Fonh, elſe j. 
had not lived a Moment longer to;repent him of his laft Sins in thi 
Matter. 4 1s thy yehement Anger warrantable ? or will this Anger 
of thine do good to thy ſelf or others? Think. well of .it, whether 
thou doſt att like a. Prophet, like-one that feareth God, or like 1 
Man, in this thine Anger ? * 7h; EEP mY 

5 Soe Jonah went out of the City f, and fat g on the 
eaſt-ſide of the City.h, and: there made him a booth j, ang 
fat under it. in the ſhadow k,.till he might ſee what wouy 
become of the City I. Lt ING 

e When the Lord had taken notice and reproved the Paſſions of 54. 
nah, and made ſome Impre{kon on his Mind for the preſent. . f Dir. 
contented in himſelf, and doubtful of the Iſſue, whether God would 
be more tender of {t!;2 Life of Multitudes, -or of Fonab's Credit, the 
Prophet withdrew Limſelf, and, waits, how long»we have not ary 
ground of Conjedure. g Put himſelf into a Poſture of waiting, ar 
thereſore to repole himſelf, rather fat than frtood. b Which in likel; 
hood was ſome higher Ground, the City ſtanding on the Faft-banks 
Tygrts ; the farther he went Eaſt the higher the Ground was, andthe 
ſatec from the uncertain manner of the City's Overthrow. i Some 
imall and mean Shed for Shade and Shelter, uſually made of prey 
Boughs, & Theſe Boughs thus. pitched and made into a Booth, afford. 
ed ſome Shadow in which Fonzh repoſed himſelf. 7 By this Paſhye 
it ſhould ſeem the forty Days were. not fully expired, nor yet wantet 
much of expiring ;z and Fonah ſeems reſolved there to expett the t- 


| vent of the City. 


6 And the Lord GOD prepared ma || gourd », ani! 
dow over his head p, to deliver him from his grief 4. $ n 
Jonah - was exceeding glad r of. the gourd s.' ty 
m Commanded, that in'the Place where Foxab's Booth ſtood, this ji 
Herb, or ſpreading Plant, ſhould ſpring up to be a Shade whenthe| 
gathered Boughs are withered. n Tis not certain what this was, tome 


| 1ay Ivy, others fay *twas Palma Chriſtz, or five-leaved, whoſe Leares 


are lo ſet as to reſemble a Man's Hand, or a wild Vine or Colon; 
nor 1s it very material we ſhould ſearch farther into the Nature of thi 
[FP in the Text, *twas ſome wild Plant with long and broad 
Leaves, Which ſaddenly grew, ſpread it ſelf, and made a good Shade, 
0 God gave it aſpeedy Growth, and direQed the Growth that it 
ſhould cover the top of the Booth. pþ And be a Shade to Jinth+ 
gainſt the Vehemence of the Sun, which did ſhine very parchingy 
hot in thoſe Countries. q To give ſome Faſe to his Mind, refreſh hi 
natural Spirits, much diſcompoled by the Violence of his Paſſions, and 
by the violent Heat of the Sun. *©Tis probable this Grief was ſont 
extreme Fit of continued Head-ach. r As vehement in his Joy, now, 
in his Grief beiore ; he was a Man of great Aﬀettions, whatever m6 
ved them. s His Eaſe by the Gourd made him glad of it, and 10- 
ſerve that here is no mention made of Fonab's ſeeing Godin it. | 

7 But God prepared t a worm « when the morning 
roſe the next day x, and it ſmote y the gourd that it wr 
thered z. 

r By the ſame Power which cauſed the Gourd ſuddenly, and to F# 
nabf's great Joy, to ſpring, grow and ſpread it ſelf, as a Canopy, pre 
pared alſo, # What, is not ſaid, ſome contemptible Grub thatw 
not ſeen by Fenah, x Which early next Morning, 7. e. by break 
Day. » Bit the Root, 7 © that the whole Gourd ſuddenly withered, 

8 Andit came to paſs a when the ſun did ariſe 6, that 


God prepared c a || vehement eaſt-wind 4; and the in 


beat upon the head e of Jonah, that he fainted f, and; 
wiſhed in himſelf to die g, and ſaid, * 7t is better fort 
to die than to live h. | | 
a Aﬀter all theſe Paſſages both in chaſtiſing and refreſhing 79% 
and after all Fonaþ*s Deportment under them, but more immediate) 
afrer the withering ot the Gourd, and the Loſs of the Shadow : 
With the riting of the Sun, ſo carly in th2 Morning as the Sun aroſe, * 
By a particular Command from God. 4 A dry, ſcorching, b!allns 
Wind where-ever it blows, but more than ordinarily ſo, in th0l on 
mates, and moſt ſo when tent out on ſuch an Errand by the Lore vo 
lent, ſaith the Hebrew, Rutfling Winds uſually cool tne Air? but 1 
ſilent, which blow with even Tenour, rather increaſe the Heat of te 
Air. However this Wind was lent todo fo, and certainly did I * 
Did perpetually and vehemently ſhine, or point its burning Beams 
on the undefended Head of Fonah. No Wind to cool, no Shade 0 
ver ſcorched Fonah. f Overcome by the Heat, he was n0 longer® 
ble to ſtand, but as a fainting Man fell down ready to 0c: p 
Strength of Body, and his Courage of Mind alſo failed him. 5 wy 
Weakneſs and Pain, in this Perplexity of Body ard Mind, be 0, | 
orice more 0 a down-right Impatzence and Wearineſs of Lite. *c., 
here he will juſtify his Paſlion, *is beſt of the two z but For«b oy 
wiſer and humbler, and more merciful too efre he die. Before o 
hath done with bim, he will teach him to value his own Lc me 
and to be more tender of the Lite of ochers. _ 
9 And God ſaid to Jonah, || Doelt thou well ge 
gry i forthe gourd k ? And he I ſaid 1, || 1 dg well 


(0 
: Fd 
angry even unto death # Y 
TI 0 o 6 


left h 


S 4M 
E I will? 


7 — 
4 


' 5 

1 444, 
what No 
but not 17 
Countena 
me Aut, 
hat Tim 
hut had hi 
ally corry 
od and 1 
Which Mic 
phets, ang 
ye to dife 
as 11 Or dev 
capable | 
mMcntariesc 
mes > AY, 


: 0 the Tew 
ory of If 


nd their 1 
h's Reign 
ere Feprom 
Wine, Peſtil 
bout ten re 
ve Jews ca; 
er fhirite, 


Wicral Senſe 


Wt thay the 
al Referey 


les, and ot} 
Jeareys, 


64h; Countre 
4arnſt Facob 
He exborterh 


f 


1 


dah 
Giles 4 7 


Vol, It, 


p - : - - , bl 
l M IF C 4 
P- * | 2 | - x. © 
; vid. vr 4. + God adds this to the ſame Queſtion before propoſe fy my doing it 2 b God of infinite Compaions,: and Goodnefr. co, 


" Xx f F ! _ "A ; . 4 k x ph pe. F- 
ed, that Jonh mig ht be his own Judg, and ar once condemn his own | mighty City: Jonah, thou haft Pity on a forry Shrab, and fhali © 


Paſſions, 


Iy anſwers for himſelf: whereas ver. 4. he was filent, now he is out of | was the Labour of almoſt one Million and half of Labor <, throuz! 
4 6 , -4*2>1lC w PL 4 ; R » : a -* s -Y ” X "” + WY CHLAUUA.L 
11] Patience, and quarrels highly againſt Go, who had ſpared ANire- j eight Years, the great Wonder of that World. Ihy Gour1, Jona:., 


l My ”_ 
Er, WALE a Rey” : 1 ( 
the old World ; but he feels in himſelt a Heat almoſt as devouring as | be ruined to pleaſe thee, and thy Gourd muſt not, left ic diſpleatic thec. 
te wiſhed to the Ninevites: thus unexpecteclly Ccrofled he flies OUT a- Is this equal ? wouldſt thon have me leſs merciful to {fuck a Zooliy 
| God himſelf. » If in the Violence of this Paſſion T ſhould die, | City, than thou art toa Weed ? e It was a ſingle Gourd ſonch 


. . % 
Tait 77 
47 dee olnp 


gain 
"As : . , . 
chargerh God with hardly ufing Jonah, and breaking his Heart, tho |Men and Women, which I have pitied and ſpared ; Here are morc 


he hal come a long Journey to deliver a Meſſage he would fain have | than fix{core thouſand Innocents who are Infants, who are my Crea- 
heen excuſed from. So exorbitant and unreaſonable is Fonah's Anger. tures made for Eternity, who grow ſlowly under my Care and 

io Then o ſaid the LORD p, Thou q haſt || had pity r | Charge z whom I value as my own : And peeviſh Fonak, wilt thou 
on the gourd s, for the which thou haſt not laboured t, not afow me ( who can) to ſhew Pity to mine own invaluable Creg- 


| | . FM ans tures, when thou pitieſt what is neither thine nor valuable ? Had it 
neither niadelſt 1t hr; which - came up x in a night, | ye thine, this might have required thy Aﬀettion ; had it been of 
aad periſhed y In a night z. 


; worth, this might have excuſed thy Earneſtneſs for it i this ag- 
© 0 When Jonah had ſhewed his Aﬀettion of Love and Pity to the | gravates thy "a and cruel Paſſion againſt Nineveh. efte 268 
Gourd. p Shewea Jonah the little reaſon he had to concern himlelt Women and Children, who are in Nineveh, there are many others of 
for the Gourd, and the great reaſon God had on his fide in pitying and | my Creatures that are not ſinful, and my tender Mercies are and ſhall 
ſnaring Nineveb, g Thou a Man of narrow and uneven Compaſſions. | be over all my Works : If thou wouldſt be their Butcher. ye. 3 will be 
/ Haſt both had and ſhewed. s A common and worthleſs Weed. tz | their God, I know what becomes me, God of Prophets : ani though 
*Twas not the Work of thy Hand to ſet it, x Nor didft thou water, | once I hearkned to Zijah to ſend Fire from Heaven on contempruous 
and give Growth to it ; *twas not thine, x Asa Muſhroom, was the | Sinners, yet it is not meet to ſend Fire. from Heaven upon repenting 
Zirth of one Night. Died, and was only fit for the Fire when wi- | Nineveh : I know how to impreſs their Minds with a continued ?.cliet 
thered. + With equal Suddenneſs withered, | that Jonab came from God to preach Repentance, and that it was their 
11 And ſhould a not 1 b ſpare Nineveh c that great Ci-| Repentance prevented their Overthrow z I can falve thy Credit Fo- 
ty d, wherein are more than ſixſcore thonſand perſons, ab, and yet not humour thy Cruelty : Go Jonah, reſt thy ſelf COn- 
tht cannot diſcern between their right hand and their ns = be COON: That Goodnels, Mercy and Kindneſs, which 
bs hand ©. and oth mock Cantet f ? pared Ninevep, hath ſpared thee in this thy inexcuſa2le Frowaridneſs. 
e 5 I wall be to repenting Mzeveh what I am to thee, God gracious and 
| 4 May notT by virtue of my Sovereignty, pity, ſpare, or pardon if merciful, ſlow to Anger and of great Kindneſs ; and I will turn from 
E 7 will? or is there not zood reaſon to incline me to do it, and to juſti>1 the Evil thou and they deſerve. 


us 


The ARGUMENT. 


» 

s | 

F JT #5 by Cuſtom become neceſſary in writing the .irouments on the ſeveral Prophets, to tell of what Country the Prophet was ; 
8 | 44d, where the Hvly Ghoſt obſerves it, we may not ſlight it. Our Prophet was no doubt, of the Tribe of Judah ; but of 
: what Note his Family was for Riches, Authority, or Credit, appears not to us ; theſe might be eminent for any thing T know, 


tut not mentioned, becauſe his Call to, his Ability for, and his Diſcharge of the Prophetick Office needed no Credentials or 
Countenance from any ſuch Fxternal Advantages. It is unqueſtionable he came from God ,, and bis whole Prophecy 1s of Di- 
ine Authority - Jeremiah gave Teſtimony to it, and Cites ſome conſiderable Authority from the Opinion of certain Elders of 
hat Time, who bcid bim to be a Prophet ſent of God, Jer. 26. 18, 19. He was not, as ſome were, confin'd to one Kingdom, 
but had his Commiſſion enlarged to preach to the Kingdom of Iſrael and Judah, which were now grown old in Sin, and univer= 
ally corrupred with 1dolatry and Impiety, with Inhumanity and Cruel Oppreſſion, with Falſchood and Deceits, Ingratitude to 
od and Forgetfulneſs of bim ;, vain Confidences in the Iying Promiſes of Falſe Prophets, and in their Ceremonial Services : all 
which Micah doth (as faithful in his Office) openly, ſeverely, and impartially diſcover, reprove, and threaten in Princes, Pro- 
phets, and all the People of beth Kingdoms ;, which are ſo cloſely join'd by the Propbet, that it requires a very ſteady and quick 
ye to diſcern which of the two is moſt dire@ly concerned in the Prophet*s Diſcourſe, or whether both are equally intended, yet ſo 
ns in order of time Iſrael firſt, and Judah next. His Phraſe and Connexions and Tranſitions, are many times obſcure and fair- 
capable of different Accounts, as every one will ſee who can and will read the Hebrew Text, and the Payaphraſes or Com- 
rentaries of Men learned in that kind of Learning. The Prophet's Stile is wery lofty, as is his Contemporary Iſatah, many 
imes ; and 1 little doubt they were acquainted and conver ſed each with other. His Diſcourſes have a very particular Reſpect 


3 
ko W$o the Temper of thoſe Times he lived in, and will be cleareſt underſtood by thoſe that do diſtinly read over and digeſt the Hi- 
d. Wor y of Iſrael and Judah, as they'are reported in the 1ſt of Kings, and 2 Kings, from the firſk Apoſtacy of Iſrael from God, 
that nd their Revolt from the Houſe of David. But more eſpecially the Stories of Judah through Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezeki- 
ml Wh Reign; and of Iirael through Zechariah, Shallum, Menahem, Pekah and Hoſhea's times ; in which moſt of the Sins 
and ere reproved and threatned did reign, and which were (whilſt Micah lived) puniſhed according to hs Word with Sword, Fa- 
07 nine, Peſtilence and Captivity. He lived to ſee Iſrael made a Deſolation and an Hiſſmg, and ſurvived this dead Kingdom 


bout ten Tears : Judah's Calamity followed ſurely and not ſlowly ; for within 130 or 133 Tears Jeruſalem was ruined, and 
ve Jews carricd Captives to Babylon. Many Paſſages of our Prophet have both their literal and hiſtorical Reference, and 
bir ſpiritllal and myſtical : In this latter I have been ſparing, becauſe the Deſign of the preſent Work was to give the plain 


of, tera! Senſe ; yet 1 have ſeldom ( if ever ) omitted to point out the Myſtery. If any one ſee more into this, and be larger 
aſi 1t than the Author ; let fuch one know, the Author had his Reaſons why he ſaid ſo little, though be ſaw more of the My- 
: ;, F'<# Feference of the Words t the Meſhrah, bis Birth, bis Kingdom, the Redemption of the Ele@, the Calling of the Gen- 


«i! "5, 4nd other Evangelical Truths contained in our Prophet, who- did certainly preach the Goſpel, as well as the Law, to his 
of the UCATEYS, 


Ito * 
mS 07 
0 - . o 2 
19ers 4 Thus Hoſea begins his Prophecy, cap. 1. 1. and Foe! 1.1, and Jo» 
o'r = © % 48" | 1ah 1. 1. and Zeph. 1. 1+ which ro b Ling oo nx 5p 
In thi Wcah's Countrey and time of Propheſying, 1, He ſheweth the wrath of God and Dorotheus, are ſaid tO report this Mica » ro Ve the ame wit the 
con againſt Facob {or their ow e/ying " oodart guy Feruſalem, les Son of Imlah, 1 Kings 22. 8. yet R, Sol. Jarcht s Reaſon why this cou! 
4; 1.0 BN = exborteth ro deep bumiliation and mourning, 10 16, not be, is ſatisfattory, for one Generation and almoſt half interven'd 
nul ; between Ahab and Jotham : Apab died about 3046 Year of ” World, 
We IB ; *Mj_ | #orham began to reign about 3190 3 by which 1t appears there were 
_ 25 woes of the LORD that-came 4 £0 f _ One hundred forty and four Years between Micaiah the Son of Imlah, 
7 cah þ the Moraſthite in the days 4 0 Jo- and Micah our Prophet, c Whether Mareſbab, rebuilt by Rehoboam, 


tham, Aharz. A and Hezekiah f, Kings of 2 Chron. 11, $. ( called alſo Berh-gebarim in after time) of which ver, 


heal” . - = . P I: ra 
6” be = 8, which he ſaw þ CONCerning Samaria 2 and Je-| 14. of this Chapter: Or whether —_— ( __ -_ T5. ) gaye 
WW alem k him this Sirname z and _— "_ e Micok was Dory there, or 
T6s EY | o HB 


Vol, It, 


juſtity Gen $a ya «ry OT, wha Oe with God be by thee confined tliat he ſhould not have Piry on 2 vatt aud 
6 tisfaction In that God had ſpared Nimeveh., I Fonzh, 1m Paſhonate- ! mighty City ? 4 A ſtately Strufture z Which coft immente Creatures, 


h Fonah thought ſhould have been conſumed as So.lom, or as | may not be named m the Day with this : on!y in a Paſſion this mult 


we know ſome have ) yet were I not to blame : "Thus he tacitly j and is angry that it was ſmitten 3 here are many hundred thouſands of 


Be ne . 
Sw . 
Rare ve 
* " 
"A 
- hy 


Sirens, 
= IIA 


#.'* Eu Lab 7. 
< TT YE TR Wo x ITT TR EIT 
WT; "Fi 6 . 
nn 7 I 
RO 


PIP — "00 = 
BE. I FACSBTS. 
* > a Oe 
poo __ ls 4 2 


Songs © 


moo oY 


mk, 


- —_ — 
i b _ ad . » 
, > - - - _ - » * _— _ - af a 
47 ” - © 
bo rx. ro : x . " . A 27 < , » 
* 2 . > . g ue : » =— x” —_—_— = 
. - L 79 , oh Wt © Ins - = 4 A "RI T > me = ſts FRO wad 
0409 -.; 4 _ l %; <0 . " % v wr; : f : fy we £ w - -. ” 
- SLIT, —_— . o I - , 5 nt - : : »q 4 bn. WW 6 _ _— DR * - Mu 9 wy " 02+ <dyidy0 r— , _ "0 . 
an 4 —_ —_— = a h os ISL M —_ oat" ns, - un 6 £74. Ia - m S_& +v 24 RENT 4 Te ay - I _ ? En « . PR "2 
a - my b. s - a > * 26, 0 : fM > —_ — _ RES , =_—_ = ——_ - 5 =7x Su - - . d MCs 
: ”». 4 " _— ©nq—F4 » H.-F LL p WE T.4% ” 8 p———_— ——— £4, n —__ —_————” i __— EA RICA x > - 8 - 
So een +. k A RS FD. k 7” - lib, LID 2 $55 »<. ©. == —y barren po T = Bo 4 OI WR” 7 C7F% wh ne h - T - _ Ve oo > PIR _ < id s. = 
p « . bt " cnn cd $M EI. ” I" is —_ - * md A 4 - - 
- : 5 Fagſunns + —_— —_— A _ pn =_ « cu - —_—— tte... 6a = hy ABS Io vn ! CE OI 42 ' RET Y . . ” jo 1 o Lon _— — <. 
| 4 X "——_ \ cry Aj be © — " _ : Mo 4-3 : nd - * —_ "Ros FE An A > <= er, a. "po on ns ri . : > _ we-'T7 —— - Bo. a EY . TT ma” cy cam. -ge cy — wr a x x = ——_— ” a; 
ot p ” IONS gr a LESS p be. + 4 ED" ws - bed as: — RE. —_——COP.. 4508 . wa, es nn 26s >. x «8 "= As £ 3 eres . , * * Bay... Cars; ny ne _ Eg : _ 5 GT 7 . "ds SE. rn TO = Azgy 
o - PETE IVING EX IS = TIN ; - H at. ar Ys : Tm . q on oe - 4 " aye 2 þ » J ” ")\t; —_— Y pu , * of == wy S. A hn Poa 
- *e fo! - neo NCI — RI ” b e PIO EY ood , ry — CE - ri - : % * Os ry nes BSI; F, 4 rr > $3” 698 1 #"nvig ” 0g - V " MD Wards. > y ns.; "7 $06" H p07 Lenka > nmr a4 ap i "Sa : 
9 FR 4 4 x 4 wot EY =x es . _ is” > p p34 hy bs 4 A —_— > ad _ : -- . won I - Ts b - ” C 4 * \ 4 J, we P q . "Bs 
£ LET IN pt n y , . Ss. - ” Beth WR. - or © og res " phe - k _ "_ Cong _ y = Po" ea; T 3 Ke —; ” 4 - = og : AY - 9 —— - - ESL -- bo A - - -_ NN In RED RS Sd... A 
y by bs PEN a  — : "FS —_— nn 9 +: : #tY ns _ _ _ » EL % ade - —_—C——— 6 >.>. RT ESNTD | Fs 
hs. - tas "ah y 2 . Pa 4 - Pp x _—_——- 4 p 4 © ne cbS , : = - gh Ne » 2 "a :: i d > 4 _ N 
P. _—. —* *- - PEE > - rol = " 1D a» . q St o 2p - - T2 - ' x « 4 Vt a a 2D 48A” mu onanen © oe ren a -- + 
- OI E5 —_— ” = b _ CI” 4 be - : >. yo 1,4 - : a IE Y + F PR - - E of 4 , : ] Te reid AA be * = ; 6d, ; .” Ss po ” bh 4 
"8 7 A br be. 9 » bot - _ z 3 -_ at Ob = > > - A SS oe $26.4 Þ © LAZY nes , "FRY 4 t es i os. > . OE ; A... Phd . "=> 3% 
«] x - : 4 "I Pye” 7 a CEE " Fe x In h. By + _— FY X.<pe 4 == _ pt My % 0 x CY A a. ren . Ts — -=e1 I i 4 Hous 7 % « k 4 4 ” 
» & =—_ = «69. on _— Ir - x " kT." _—— p - ray < hh : > nip > « 4 c . IT vw — ol w— ” - a 
- * : d - ———_— —- = - ; - _ 9 = - 4 . - s - -. . : _ 5 
by oy Dea - ” 5 : OS - MAS. AJEA . . A i IS - "3" TERy _ -_ Ws ,_ PE _ = . I Kt _ a , ” =o. 
- m—_ y _y y) = "wa q a 1 ” - - ” — nh . » "ne _ we, - - 0 5 P 4 _— ©. Yb 2 RE RY” ” mg _ *(f, . þ - 
? 3 _ x D - I -4 pore _ _ g bs moth _ -——— 7 + PrIY - - —_— __ wn ES * 
"4 4,905 _ " ko - - - ” " ws WF... - | " g es OS RY ts 4 — a - . 
. P.. As " a . _ A « - p X ; 
- A . As CY GT———_ ” — _ wA Gap, ==> my 4 - - > W_—_ 


* fog 5 po_—_ 
" _— 4 
EN. 


Chap. I. M I C 


elſe did well there, is not eafily reſolved, nor material if *twere re- 
reſolved. d Ir is not ſaid what Year of Forb.m this Prophet begun 3 
it is probable *twas abour the beginning of Forkom's Reign, An. M. 
3199, of which we have this Charatter, 2 Angs 15. 34, 35+ he aid 
r:Shr, Sa, yet the high Places were not removed : Religion was not 
wholly corrupted as in //7ael, »yer was it exceedingly abaſed with their 
own Mixtures. e The very worſt of all Fu.{a5's Kings, all things con- 
ſidered z he brought the Bualirical Idolatry into Fulab. f The beſt 
Son of ths worſt Father, who reformed Fudah:; How long Micah pro- 
pheſied during his Reign, we can but conjetture ; poſhbly till the 
fourteenth Year of /ezciiah; So this Prophet may betuppoled to 
hare prophefied ſixteen Years in Forkam's time, as many under Abaz, 
and fourteen under Hezet#ab, in all forty tix Years, and ſurvived the 
Captivity of Jjrael ten Years 3 which he lamented as well as foretolcl. 
£ Judah only named, but Benjamin is included. þ Vid. Amos 1. 1. let. C. 
i The Metropolis of the Kingdom of the Ten Tribes, and by a well 
known Figure put for the whole Kingdom; as k Feruſalem chief City 


A Fl. 


tranſgreſſion of Jacob 7 > # it not Samaria » 2nd 
what 2 arc the high places of Judah ? are they not Jeruſ; 
lemo ? : 


g The ſingular for the Plural, the many Tranſgreſſions COMmittes 
amongſt them, but eſpecially that Flood of Iniquity, which {prin ® 
up in Samariz, did overflow the whole Kingdom, Idolatry, Pride LY 
ury, Cruelty and Oppreſhon. þ The Sons of Faceb, the Ten Trida 
molt likely are here meant by Facob. i All thele, many ang Treat 
inevitable and irretiftable Judgments of God foretold, and Which nil 
overtake, and utterly ruine theſe Sinners. & The People of the Kin ; 
dom of Fudah, called here by the name of 1ſrae! : Or elle this and the 
former Phraſe may comprehend the Twelve Tribes which were Allen 
trom God's Law and Worſhip, and be an elegant Ingemination 

confirm the thing ſpoken. 1 Or, who is, i. e. the Spring and Cayſ- of 
chat overflowing Tranſgrefſion, who brought in the abominable 14, 
latry? m Here is meant the Kingdom of the Ten Tribes, the head of 


of Tudab is, by the ſame Figure, pur for the whole Kingdom. 7 As 
both had linked together in Sinning, God doth link them together in 
Suffering, and commands Mich to do lo. 


+ Heb. 2 + Hear 1, all ye people m, hearken, O earth », 

Hear ye and Þ all that therein o is, and let the Lord GOD p 

4 = be witneſs againſt you 9, the Lord from his holy tem- 
> Fo 


Heb. ? 
> fulneſs I The Prophet here by Proclamation requires earneſt Attention to 
thereof, his Word : So Moſes, Dent. 4. 26. and 30. 19. and 32. I. So the Plal- 
miſt, 7ſal. 50. 1, 4+ and lo 7/a. 1, 2. and 34. 1- 1 Either all the Peo- 
ple of both Kingdoms, all Jſrael and Fudab ; or elſe univerſally all Peo- 
ple of all Kingdoms whatever, both of that preſent Age and all of fu- 
ture Ages. # It may be taken for the meaner ſort of People, the 
Commonalty ; but I rather incline ro interpret-it as both a tacit Re- 
proof of the Deafnels of this finful and hardned People, with whom 
Micah now contends, and an Appeal to the ſenſleſs Creatures, Or a 
Summons to bring them in Evidences for God againſt thoſe King- 
doms. o Animate or inanimate Creatures, a!l that are on the Earth ; 
If we interpret Earth for the meaner ſort of People, then this Fulneſs 
of the Earth will be the whole Multitude of the People : It 1s a lofty 
Strain, {uch as thoſe of Moſes, Dent. 32. 1. David, Pſal. $0. 1+ Iſatah, 
chap. 1. 1, 2. and Feremiah, chap. 6, 19. p The mighty, holy, gract- 
ous, and faithtul God, Lord of Heaven and Earth z who knows all 
your Ways, who is a juſt Judg, and a ſevere Avenger of obdurate Sin- 
ners. q By his Word, the Voice of his Law ; by his Prophets whom 
he hatk ſent, by the Judgments he doth execute according: to his Me. 
naces : as by his Sovereignty he is ſupream Judg, ſo by bis Omnilci- 
ence and Truth he is an authentick Witneſs againtt you, O Houſe of 
Facob. r Either from his Temple at Feruſalem, or elſe from Heaven, 
* 1.26.21, 45 7/4. 11. 4. and Heb. 2. 20. . 
* PC,n5-3- 3 For behold s, * the LORD cometh forth t out of his 
* Deut. * place #, and will come down x, and tread upon y the 


oy i2and x high places of the Earth z. 
POO s There is great Reaſon for Earneftneſs with all People, and there- 


fore once more I adviſe you to conſider it well : Behold, attend to 
what is ſaid. & Who is Tudg himſelf, Pſal. 50. 1, 4. whoſe holy Ma- 
jeſty you hare provoked to Diſpleaſurez who is a Jealous God, and 
hath an Almighty Power to daſh his Enemies into pieces: He comerh 


forth as a Judg prepared to hear, determine and puniſh: Now when 
'God, who is in all Places at all Times, is ſaid ro come forth, *tis not to 
be meant of his leaving a Place where he was, to come to a Place 
where before he was not ; but 'tis to be underſtood of his Diſcovering 
his Preſence by ſome Effes of it, which before in that Place were not 
diſcovered. # Heaven, the Place of his glorious Throne. x Shew by 
the Effefts of his Power, Juſtice and Wiſdom, that he is more emi- 
nently preſent there. y Trample under foot, ſtain, abaſe and break, 
2 All that is high, excellent, and matter of your glorying z whether 
flouriſhing State of your Kingdoms, or Power of your Kings, or 
Strength of your Fortreſſes and Temples, Altars, or Cities and Par- 
laces : In that Day the' Zaughrineſs of Man ſhall be laid low, and the 
Pride of Man ſhall be brought down, Tſa. 2. 17. your Sins will procure 
this to you, O Samariz and Feruſalem ; of which God is my Witneſs, 


—_— I have plainly told you. 
_—_ '4 And * the mountains a ſhall be molten under 


Amosg.5. him b, and the valleys c ſhall be eh d : as wax e before 


+ Heb.de- the fire, and as the waters that are,poured down a Þ| ſteep 
ſcent, place F | 

a If literally underſtood, we know it hath been ſo: When God will 
kindle that Fire which ſhall burn up the Earth, and the Works of it, 
as he will when hecoineth finally to judg the World, it ſhall be done 
again : But figuratively, Mountains are mighty States and Kingdoms, 
flouriſhing with Proſperity, and which do think the Foundation of 
this ſure as Mountains: 'So chap. 6. 1, 2. #ab. 3. 6. 1ſa. 2. 14+ Or poſ- 
fibly theſe Mountains may be by a Synecdoche put for thoſe who dwell 
on them, Mountainers who were uſually more fierce, ſecure, hardy, 
and of difficult Acceſs, and therefore leſs regardiul of Threats and 
Puniſhments. 5 Which way ſoever you take Mountains, yet the Ef- 
feft of God's powerful Anger and Juſtice ſhall be this ; they ſhall be 
no more able to bear his Indignation, or withſtand it, than that which 
like Wax melts before a ftrong Fire. «c Which either are Emblems of 
the lower ſort of Men, er the Men that dwell in the Valleys with 
their Cities built there 5 which might hope to eſcape the Storm, lying 
more under Corert : But ſuch ſhall be the ſweeping, ſearching, and 
rapid Storm of God's Judgments, that no Wyaces, no Perſons $hall ei- 
ther withftand or divert them. 4 Or, renr in junder, broken up, as the 
word Gen. 7. 11. and flid away. e Which doth eafily and ſpeedily 
diffolve, and run before the Fire. f Which immediately ſpreads it 
ſelf, and runs down the Precipice, not able to keep together in one 
body ; but ſcattered one part from other, loſeth it {elf without reme- 
ay ; ſo shall-the Glory and Strength of Sam:r44 melt away betore the 
Fire of God's Diſpleafure, executed by Shal/maneſer, and by Senacherib 
and Nebuchadnezzar on Fudah 5 

5 For the trangreſſion g of Jacob þ i all this 7, and 


fcr the ſins of the Houſe of Iſrael k, What 1 & the 


which was Samaria, where the Kings of that Kingdom had their Rox. 
al Refidence;z where they worshipped Idols, whence they iFfued 0, 
their Edits, and which became Example to the reft of the Iſraeli 
Kingdom. » Or, who is, #.e. Cauſe of the high Places, and the Ido- 
fry there prattiſed ? o Which was the chief City of that Kingdy 

and Place where their Kings dwelt, had the ſame Influence on ti, 
Kingdom as Samar! had on the Ten Tribes z there was the Examyle 
they imitated, thence the Laws they obeyed contrary to God's Lay 


the held 7, and as plantings of a Vineyard s , and [ yij 
pour down the ſtones thereof into the valley t, and 1 wil 


diſcover the foundations thereof . 

p For theſe Sins of Samaria, and the Kingdom of J/rael. q Nath 
an immediate hand from Heaven ; but by the Aſyrians, under th 
Condutt of Shalmaneſer, they ſhall do it as my Servants, aithts 
Lord. 7 Much like 1/a. 25. 2. That beautiful City ſhall be made, ay 
ſo left asa ruinous Heap in the Field. s In planting Vineyards, they 
did dig up the Earth, and caft it up in Hillocks, caſt out all the Stors 
ſo ſhall they make this City. 8 The City was built on a high Hil 
and a deep Valley heneath it ; now when *twasſackt by the Aſjrias, 
they pull'd down the Buildings, and caft the Stones thereof into thy 
Valley 3 ſo God did by them throw down the Stones of Samurjy, | 
Raſethe Walls, Fortreſſes, and publick Buildings of this City tothe 


| very Foundations of it, nor leave one Stone upon another, as Me, 


24. 2+ and Luke 19. 44. In a word, here is feretold an utter Deſolzi 
on upon Szmaria for her Sin ; ſuch a Deſolation as ſhall not learett 
leaſt Footſteps of Samaria in the Place where once it ſtood: 


7 And all the graven images = thereof ſhall be bu 
ten tO pieces y, and all the hires z thereof ſhall be burn 
with the fire a, and all the idols thereof will I lay d& 
lateb: for ſhe c gathered it d of the hire of an harl, 
and they f ſhall return to the hire of an harlot g. 


x Eretted in honour to the Idols they we wr, rv which uſialy 
were the Images or Similitudes reſembling their Idols, their God 
Silver, Gold, or Stone, or Braſs, or Wood. y Pulled out of thei 
Chappels, Shrines, or Repoſitories, by the conquering Aſſyrian, who 
would, as was cuftomary with ſuch Nations, deal with the Gods 
with Enemies conquered, trample upon them, and uſe them moftcax 
temptibly z and when they break into pieces Idols of rich Materia, 
"twas to Carry it away with them as their Booty ; others were broket 
in contempt of them. 4 Or Rewards, or Gifts which 1dolaten 
thought their Idols gave them, as Zof. 2. 5. or the rich Gitts givet 
for the Honour and Service of the Idols by deceived Idolaters ; oral 
the Wealth of Jrael got by Leagues with Idolaters. 4 When thei 
Cities or Temples are burnt, as no doubt many were burnt by the 4 
ſyrian before he could reduce them to Obedience ; in which Conf 
grations many rich Donatives belonging to Idols, were conſumed ta 
Aſhes, or melted down. 6 Thus ſhall the Idols of Samaria be madeds 
ſolate 7. e. their Temples burnt, their Images either beaten in pit 
ces in contempt, or be carried away, (if the Materials they weremade 
of were worth the Carriage; ) however, they ſhall neither remain, 
nor be worſhip'd any more in J/rael or Semaria, but be carried anij 
Captives with their captive Worſhippers. c The Kingdom of itt 
Ten Tribes, or Samaria, d Their Wealth, or the rich Preſentsmat 
to their Idols, or both, e As Harlots get rich Gifts of their Loves; 
ſo did this deceived People think, and ſay, that their Idols gave tht 
che Wealth they had: or elſe as impudent Adyltereſſes, that hit 
lewd Men to come into them z ſo this Hire was that theſe blind Jo 
laters (like ſhameleſs Adulterefſes) gave to their Idols. f Theſeri 
Preſents 2 ſhall be either turned by the Aſſprians to the Serviceall 
Honour of their Idols, preſented as Gifts in Acknowledgment ef ti 
Greatneſs and Profperity, as the Bleflings their Idols have givel 
them, as Zof. 10. 6. or elſe thus; As what is got by Harlots, bp 
Shame and a Curſe with it, and never continues long, but is as bale 
waſted as *twas gotten ; ſo ſhall it be with all the ill gotten Goods 
theſe Samaritan idolaters, and all their Wealth. 


8 Therefore g * I will wail þ and howlz, I wil 
{tript and naked & : 1 will make a wailing * like che Dn 
gons 1, and mourning as the f owls m. h 

& Becauſe of thoſe dreadful Sjaughters and Devaſtations mal in F, 


- 


ra:l and Samaria, hþ Solemnly, as when they who are skiltul in L| 
mentation do at Funerals bewail in moſt affeive Manner to fiir 
the like Sorrow in others ; vid» Amos 5. 16. let.t. # The ſame ind 
word of like Senſe to aſcertain the thing, and to intimate the double 
Sorrow, the multiplied Miſeries of this People. k As one ſpoiled of 
Clothes by force, or as one that in Bitterneſs of Paſhon hath a 0h 


his upper Garment, or as if diſcompoſed in Mind through the Kar 


| nels of his Vexations z now this the Prophet either [peaks 45 wee 
; ſufferer with them, or as intimating what they ſhould be reduced 


at laſt: So ſz, 20.2,3. whether of theſe, or whether boch, 1 determit 
not. / Vid, Mal. 1.3. rather Fackals which haunt deſolate Pagnrny 
make great and hideous Noiſe by Night ; and by their Walls, 
doleful Cries,in which tis ſaid they anſwer one another,and hl _—_ 

with the Sound,and [rarellers with Fear ; theſe Creature are 97 rag 


Chy 


6 Therefore p I * will make 4 Samaria as an heap of 


Gate | 
dicatu 
over t 
chadne 


Philifti 
ſuch Pt 
make 1 
your Er 


*WGriefs | 


Or Toy 
2. In 
as the 
ere (or 

does dir 

Weep it p! 
ommon 

Duft roll 

paſſion to 

onform - 
ets it isr 

&; it fc 

Nould do 
he Duſt ; 
Duſt now. 


11 P2 
laving t 
ame not 

all rece 
Y The Ir 
ere forete 
detore the ] 
Meaſant Ha 
S were m 
baps are he; 
ar Town © 
lountains. 
beropolis, 
nave 7) mu 
hou be thu 
f Nakedr 
ers take j 
udah, It 1 
Dn full of P, 
IeVe their þ 
Wn Guard, 
er Neight 
he People c; 
a,who mea 
Vvading En 
an, ft Who 
he Enemy 


polled, and c 
Make them Ivy 
Fainſk his Fo 


XPences of 


Wat refer thi 
L bat they 
"ould do a 
neir Neighbq 


12 For f 


ji for 89 


ORDo v 
f Yet,or, ce 


pa for all, » 
do Ing the Le 
POITS, the ric 


ame of (06m! 


Y. t For Pe 
* Of Trouble 


ized in 


this 


; 


q ” followed very (udd 


bring 
 balelſ 
pods 


ll 
; Dia 


ein, 
in Lag 
ſtir v 
ne In 9 
oubles 
1 of 8 
af of 
Great 


LP l. 


«11% QI 


Fo an\ ably their Noiſe may be as mixt of the Barking of the Fox 
ons Pry ag of the Wolf: It is poſſivie the Propter by this xind 0 


and Howli 
Wailing 3 
hungering anc 
a liccle hetore the 


Creature, a 
haunts deloiate 
deolate State :; V 
:: the Deſerts 3 either will fit the place. 


Places, and fo fitly is an Emblem of J/e!'s doletu 


> 35 
ndah o: 
” to Jeruſalem 7, 


1 The Wounds of Samaria and the Ten Tribes, her own Sins $ God's 
and the Enemies Rage, have deeply wounded her : 


uſt Diſpleaſure 
_ * ſonflſs, impenitent, and furious againft her Phyſician ; and ſhe 


(hall at laſt die by Sword, Famine, Peftilence and Captivity. o The 
Contagion of her Sins, and the Indignation of God againft it, and the 
Enemies Succeſſes, viz. Senachertb's or Nebuchadnezzar s, like a Flood, 
have reached to Judah allo; and this is the Reaſon why the Prophet 
foretels ſuch Mourning, and is willing to perſonate it to awaken both 
Kingdoms to repent, and turn to God. p The inſulting, conquering, 
and cruel Enemy 3 or in the Neuter Geader,#e ; 7. e, the Evil is come, 
| 7, e. in the Prophetick Stile will certainly and ſuddenly come. q E1- 
ther ſignifying the Aries beſieging Jeruſalem, as Senacherts Son of 
Shalmaneſer did ſome few Years after the Sack of Samaris ; or elſe by 
Gate of my People is meant the City where the Sovereign Court of Ju- 
dicatur2 to the whole Kingdom is,denoting the Vidtories of the Aſſyrian 
over the ret of the Kingdom of Judah, or elſe the ViRories of Nebus+ 


chadnezzar. 7 This ſeems added to explain the former Phraſe. 
10 © Declare ye it not at Gath s, weep ye not at all 7 : 
in the houſe of |} Aphrah « * roll thy ſelf x in the duſt, 


5 Do what you can to keep your Griefs to your ſelves, let them not 
he publick, that the Philiſtines your bitter Enemies ſhould know how 
ſad'tis with you, and rejoice at it : Gath was a principal City of the 
Philiftines ; and though this only is mentioned, the reft are underſtood ; 
ſuch Phraſe yon have, 2 S4M.1.20. t You that are of J/r2c} or Judah, 
make no publick Weeping, that your Cries and Tears ſhould inform 
your Enemies in Paleſtine how deplora"le your State 1s 5 let not your 
Griefs be their Joys. u We render it as a proper Name of ſome City 
or Town, though of no great Note; yet we meet with one, 1 S4M.13. 

2. in the Tribe-of Benjamin z a ſecond we find in Manaſſeb's Lot,and 
was the Place where Gideon's Father dwelt, Fudg. 6. 11. theſe Towns 
were ſomewhat remote from the Philiſiines, and there the Prophet 
loes dire them to weep with the greateſt Expreſſions of it, and to 

Wcepit private from the Philiſtines : Others account the word to be a 
ommon name denoting Duſt, and ſo give the Senſe, in the Houſe of 
Dyft roll thy ſelf in Duff, x Or, I have rolled my ſelf, viz, in Com-. 
paflion to the miſerable J/raclites, or as a Pattern to which they ſhall 
onform 3 fo the word as written : But as by Dire&ion of the Maſo- 
21s it is read, and as here *tis rendred vol thy ſelf, it direts and fore- 
ds; it foretels what they ſhall do at laft, and direts what they 
bould do at preſent : They ſhall be brought to ſit, nay to wallow in 
he 4, and in foreſight of this, it would become them fit in the 
ut NOW « 


11 Paſs ye away y, ||thou | Inhabitant of Saphir z, 
aving thy * ſhame naked a; the Inhabitant of || Zaanan b 
ame not forth c in the mourning of || Beth-ezel d, he e 

all receive of you his ſtanding f. 

The Imperative is here put for the Future, and the Prophet does 
ere foretel and threaten what ſhall hefal this People, they ſhall gov 
efore the Enemy into Captivity. x Denotes either the 5eauriful and 
leaſant Habitation, and ſo may be applied to any pleafant Seat ; ſuch 
$ were many in Fudea, ſuch was Samaria and Ferujalem, which per- 
japs are here intended ; Or elſe 'tis the proper Name of ſome particu- 
ar Town or City : who read Euſebius will meet ſuch a Village in the 
lountains between Aſphelon and Hebron, or (as later 'tis called) Eleu- 
keropolis, a Stript by thy conquering Enemy, ſo that thou ſhalt not 
ave ſo much left as ſhall cover thy Nakedneſs ; with Shame ſhalt 
hou be thus led into Captivity, andchange all thy Beauty into ſhame- 

f Nakedneſs. 6b A Place rich in Paſtures and Sheep ſay ſome, 0- 

ers take it for the proper Name of a particular Place in the Tribe of 

udah; it is likely at tais time it might be ſome conſiderable Gari- 

n full of People and Souldiers. c Neither ſent out Succours to re- 
eve their Neighbouring beſieged Town Beth-ezel, but ſtood on their 
dwn Guard, nor yet durit ſend out any to condole the Captive State of 

cir Neighbours. d A ſtrong Town taken and waſted by the Aſſyr/ans, 


be People carried Captive under the Eye of the Inhabitants of Zaa- | 


2n,who mean time dare not ſtir, or make any Signs of Sorrow. e The 
nvading Enemy, ſay ſome ; others ſay 'tis the Inhabitant of Zaa- 
an, f Who refer this to the Enemy, make this the Senſe z viz. That 
he Enemy ſhould make his Stay among them till he had conquered, 
polled, and captivated tham : Or, that he ſhould by tevere Dealing 
nake them pay dear for their O'ftinacy in defending their Town a- 
zanſt his Forces z that he ſhould ſtrip them of all to recompenſe his 
xpences of Treaſure, Time and Blood, in taking them. But they 
mat refer this to Zaman and its Inhabitants, make this the Senſe ; 
L hat they ſhould take their Meaſures, and judge what the Enemy 
'ould do againft them, by that which he had done againſt Bezh-exel 
neir Neighbour, 


12 For f the Inhabitant g of Maroth þ || waited careful- 
} i for good k ;, but * evil m came down #: from the 
RDo unto the gate of Jeruſalem p. 


1 Yet,or, certainly,as the Heb. Particle is often to be rendred. g One 
dnt for all, becauſe all ſhould fare alike. b Some ſay *tis by tran(- 
ling the Letters put for Kamoth; others ſay 'tis, as the word im- 
Ports, the gricving embittered Cities z others take. it for the proper 

ame of [ome lefſer Place in Fudab, i Long, earneftly, and patient- 

t For Peace, Proſperity, and what might make them happy. 

"A * Trouble, Sword, Famine, and Peftilence ; all ſorts of Evil com- 

FINCL In this one. 7 Tn mighty Tewp -ts, or as a ſweeping Rain. 


would intimate the near Approach of the Aſſy-ian Lion 
| thirfting, and purſuing the Prey: As the Jackall runs 
Lion, ſo this Wailing of the Prophet ſhould be 
enly with the Roaring of the Lion. m melancholy 
and loves Night, and makes a moſt unpleaſant Noiſe ; 


Others render it Ofirick, which makes a doleful Cry 


o For || her wound ts incurable », for it is come unto 
c tep is come unto the gate q of my people, ever 


M IC A&M 


- © od - bh) <> My, "#8 4 . © a 
\ Wolf for Bigneſs, and ſeem ſomewhat like each in Qualities 


7 


r 


[ 


[ 


of Mareſhah þ : || he ſhall come unto Adullam z the glory 
of Iſrael k. 


Wars, to the The 4 and poſſeſſing of the Cities of J/r4e} and the 


Chap. It. 


0 By his ſpecial Command anf Charge, and as 2 Puniſhment inflicted 


on them trom*Heaven* p The Flood of Affiction by the A{[;riun 


lwallowed up other Towns and Cities, and ſwelled high to the head 


Cat 


Citizens captive to Babylon, 


were found 1n thee y. 


ther Sins allo, 
ſhip the ſame Idols that Samaria did. 


14 Therefore y ſhalt thou z give preſents a || to Mo- 
reſheth-gath b: the houſes of || Ach-zib c ſhall be a lie d to 
the Kings of Iſrael e. 

Y For ſo much as thou haſt imitated 1/74el in Sin, and been at leaſt 
an occaſion to Feruſalem, and the Kingdom of Fudah to commit the 
lame Sins. x Zachiſh, n Though I do not remember the ſacred Cto- 
ry reporting this in matter of Fatt, we read not what Preſents were 
given, or by whom ſent, or when : yet as 'twas foretold by the Pro- 
phet, ſo no doubt it was fulfilled, and the Inhabitants of Lachiſh court- 
ed the Aſſiſtance of the Philiſtines againft the Aſſrian, and poſſibly 
againft the Babylonian. b A known City or Town of the Philiſtines 
called here Moreſbeth-Gath, to diſtinguiſh it from a Town of the ſame 
Name of the Tribe of Fudh and in the Valley of Zephatha, where Aſa 
ſmote Zerah the Ethiopian King who invaded Aſz with a Million of 
Men. « This was alſo a Ciiy of the Phbiliſtines not far from Mareſha, 
Aſtkelon and Gaza, it was a Maritime Town and ftrong. There was 
another City of that Name towards 7rw alſo,but of this the Prophet 
doth not ſpeak in this Place. d A lying Refuge, or a Prop that ſhould 


break under them that leant upon it, as Egypt proved a broken Reed 


to Fudab when truſicd to ; in the #eb. there 1s an elegant Allufion, 
which the Tranſlation cannot expreſs. e Some ſay 'tis meant of the 
Kings of Fudab, but we find not that Hezekiah made any ule of the 


Houſes of Achzib when Senacherib invaded him. It is more probable 
the Kings of the ten Tribes are meant, and that #oſhez did rely on 
Gath, Achzib, &c. and on the Friendſhip of the reft of the Philiſtines 
to join with the Egyptians, or to give them a quiet Paſſage through 
their Country to help Jſracl againft the 4ſſyrian, 


15 Yet will I bring F an heir g unto thee, O inhabitant 


f The Lord God will cauſe the Aſſyrian to riſe up and proſper in his 


Philiſtines g The Aſſyrian, who in the right of Conqueſt ſhall poſſeſs, 
and account himſelf Heir of what he poſſeſſeth.- 6 Moſt think the 
Prophet ſpeaks of Mareſhah in his own Country, but T think the Aſſy- 
jo did not inherit that, though he might inherit that of the Phili- 

ines. 
ter known for the Cave where David lay hid, 1 Sam. 22.1. "Twas 
made a Town of defence by Rehoboam, 2 Chron. 11. 7. *twas once a 
Royal City, and had ſeveral Villages belonging to it, Foſh.12.15. k1- | 
ronically (ſay ſome) calied thus, minatorily threatning that the Glory 
of Iſrael ſhould be brought as low, into as mean Condition as Adullam ; 
others think it ſhould be read, and to rhe Glory of 1/rael, that is, Feru- 
ſalem, ſo there ſhould be an Elliptis of (11) the Particle Conjun- 
Rive. Others think 'tis the Propher's deep Sigh at the Thoughts 
how the Glory of J/rael is laid in the duſt. Others think it was con- 
fiderable enough at that time to be called the Glory of 1ſrael, though 
we know not how. 


16 Make thee * bald !, and poll thee mz for thy delicate * 11. 22. 
children s, enlarge thy baldneſs o as the eagle p, for they q '* 
are gone into captivity from thee y. 


i Famous for its Strength ſay ſome, but I rather think it bet- 


I © Judez and Iſrael initoken of Sorrow for theſe wafting Judgments 


tear off thy Hair with thine own Hands. m Shave off with the Ra- 
zor, and by others Hand what thou canft not tear off. 7 For the loſs 
of them, ſome being lain, others ſtarved or ſwept away with Peſti- 
lence, and the reſidue carried Captive, exprels thy deep Sorrow for 
theſe Miſeries, conformably to the Cuſtom of bitter mourning, Jo» 
1. 20. 1j2. 3. 24. and 15. 2, Jer. 7-29. 0 Make thy baldneſs great- 
er than ufual, for the occaſion does require and will juſtify it. p Which 
loſeth at once her Strength, Courage and Beauty, and languiſheth in 
her baldneſs. q Thy delicate Children, 7 Never to return more, 
or not till a long Captivity expire. 


CHAP, II. 


'I'0 and bondage threamed againſt oppreſſion and violence, 1---3. A la- 


mentation and reproof for injuſtice, for deſpifſing prophetical reproofs, 
and delight in faiſe prophets, 4 -—11. A promiſe of gathering and 


reforing Jacob under Chriſt, 12, 12. 


e The 


Ciry Feruſalem, as partiy by Senackerts's Invration, but more fully by 
Nebuchadnezzar's befieging and taking Feruſuem,- and carrVing the 


q A very ftrong Fortreſs on the Confines of Fud:h towards the 
Kingdom of the ten Tribes, and which as it did to the laſt ftand out 
againſt Senzcherib,ſo *tis very probable they did beaſt of their Strength 
and Valour. » Either to fly from the Sword of the Enemy, and to 
leck ſafety in another Countrey forſaking their own : Orelie by way 
of derifion, you will be befieged and coop'd up by the Aſhrian, and 
then you may harneſs your Horſes or Mules to carry you in Chariots 
about your own Streets z or elſe the Prophet foretels Senacherib'scom- 
manding Poft.Chariots to catry his Meſſengers to ſummon Feru/2lem 
to yield up all to him. s Zachiſh. x From thence Idolatry ſpread it 
ſelf into Fudab and Feruſalem. Lachiſh neareft to Idolatrous Jſrac! 
took the InfeCtion of them, and conveyed it to Fudab or Feruſalem, 
here called the Daughter of Zion. » Not only the Idolatry but o- 
x Of the ten Tribes. » Thou didſt receive and wor- 


O ato them * that deviſe iniquity b, and * work *Hof. 7.s. 

evil c upon their beds 4 : when the morning is *Pa.36.4. 
light e, they praGtile it f, becaule IT is in the power of their 
hand g. 


13 O thou Inhabitant of Lachiſhq, bind the chariot to 
the ſwiit beaſt” - ſhe s is the beginning of the fin ro the 
daughter of Zion t: for the tranſgreſſions « of Iſrael « 


|| Or, for. 
[| That is; 
a lie, 


[| Or, the 


glory of Iſ- 
rael 
come, &C., 


all 


x. 417 


jt fe id edt wo. - . 
| IE _ 


Chap. 1. 


a The Pr. phet now Jenounceth Judgment againft Oppreſſors in 
pat ticular, of which {rt of Men J:{45 had too many, and Jjrac! had 
Many more at thic Day. 6 Cent:ie and frame Milchiets to others 
tow they may be ruined, as appears ver. 2. and all the gain can be 
made of their fall may be-brought into the Hand of the Contrivers, 
which was the Sin of the great Ones in Jſ7ae!, who, for near torty 
Years together were plotting to undo one another, © Here is a Diflo- 
cation of the Words, ynlef the Prophet would intimate to us, that in 
God's Account reſolving to d& Evil is doing it, 4 When they ſhoutd 
reit from making trouble to others, as well az they reft from their 
Labour and Troubles of the Day z when they ſhould praiſe God for 
their own Eaſe, Safery and Reft then their Inkumanity and Cruelty 1s 
tv: ecaſting how to grieve, vex and fxallow up others. e So ſoon as 
they riſe, and that is early, when ſuch Prattices are in deſign, thele 
cannot flcep till they make them fall on whom they fix their Delign>. 
# Finiſh or execute their milchieveus Purpoſes. g And care not Wwhe- 
therthere be either Juitice or Reaſon for what they do; it they have 
Power enough to do, they will take confidence to do it, and never 
vlu'h, Ws 
2 And they þ * covet fields 7, and take them by vio- 
2 lence &; and houſes 1, and take them away m - fo they 
hes , de- | oppreſs a may and his houie 7, even a man and his heri- 

* - Tagao. | 

þ Who deviſed Miſchief, ver. t, 7 Eirſt ſet their Minds upon their 
meaner Neighbours Eſtate, think how convenient It lieth to theirs, 
as Ahab thought Naborh's did for him. FE By Power wreſt the Eltates 
out of their Hands at their own rate ; or if they will not ſo part with 
them, thele miſchievous Oppreſtfors will act a Fezavel's vart with Na- 
both, which was no hard matter to do in Iſrael, Quring the times that 
ran parallel with Forkan, haz and Hegzekiah's times, 1 In which 
their poorer and innocenter Neighbours dwelt, but p-rhaps theſe 
Houſes ſpoil'd a iroſpett, or ftraitned the great one, who right or 
wrong will have them, that. they may enlarge their own Houſes, 
Orchards or Gardens. m They tear, devour and ſwaliow up the 
poor Han, # His Family which by this means 1s lezt to Poverty and 
Beggary., 0 This explains the former, and addeth ſomewhat to the 
greatnels of their Sin, that this > done againſt antient Right and 
Poſſeſhon which the oppretied plead, nay, in a Caſe where God hath 
forbidden them to (e1] their Heritage, Lev. 25. 23. Numb, 36. 7. 
and 1 A7lig. 21s 3» 

3 Therefore þ thus ſaith the LORD, Behold 9, againſt 
this family do 1 deviſe an evil y, from which ye ſhail not 
remove your necks 5, neither ſhall ye go haughtily : : for 


this time 75 evil 4. | 
p For this great, inhumane, cruel Oppreſſion. q The Lord by his 
Prophet declareth what he will do, and adviſeth them to- conſider 
it, for *tis a moſt manifek Retaliation or piniſhing the Offenders,.ſo 
that every one may ſee God deals with them as they dealt with their 
oppreſſed Neighbours. r They deviſed , now God will deviſe; 


_ lis 6. Is 


theirs was Evil againſt others, God will deviſe Evil againſt them $4 


theirs was Evil of Sin, God's is an Evil of juit Puniſhment againſt their 
Family ; as they deviſed Evil againſt the Family of their poor Neigh- 
hours, God will bring the Aſſyrian Power upon them. s They laid 
Snares where open Force would not 1 utfce, ſo that the Poor could not 
get Out of their Hands, but were empoveri{h'd and enſlaved ; ſo-God 
will deal with them by the -{[yr7a7, trom whoſe Power they {hall not 
eſcape. t You have made others hang the Head, ſo ſhall you now. 
u You great ones have made it an evil time, Evil for Sin agaialt me 
and the Innocent, and for Cries and Griefs to the Poor ; I will make it 
an evil time, full of penal « alamiries and Muſeries on the whole Fa- 
mily or Polterity of Facov. 

4 @ [In that Gay * ſhall one take up y a parable z a- 
+ Heb. 7 gainſt you, and Jament with a | doleful lamentation a, 
1:19 and ſay, We be viterty ſpoiledb: * hec hath changed 
7 . *% the portion d of my e people : thow hath he removed 
* Ch. 1.16. it from mef ? || turning away g be hath divided our 
{{ Or. zz;- helds. | 
: + When God ſhall retaliate, as ver.3. when he ſhall by the Aſſyr7- 
an Captivity fulfil what here 1s threatncd by the Prophet. » There 
ſhall be taken up, or b- in cemmon ordinary Uſe among thoſe that 
know what is befalien vou. + Or taunting ſ{corning Proverb, this tells 
them how their ſrt. Conquerors ſhould reflett Reproach and 
Shame upon Captive Jſ72!, much like that Pjal. 137+ 3s which the 
Babylonians uſed toward Captive Judith, a Your Friends ror you, and 
you for your ſelves, ſhall mourn moſt bjtterly,as the import of the 
Hebraiſm is, Lament with a Lamentation of Lamentations. S0 though 
all are not alike afte&ed, yet every one thall carry it towards milera- 
ble J/r2c1, according as they are affected, condoling their ſad State, or 
inſulting over them. 6 This is the ſum of their mournful Lamenta- 
tion over their own "tate, our Land waſted, vur Friends ſlain, our 
Cities taken, piunder's «nd {ackd, our Houſe: and Gouds either taken 
away from us, or burnt, and our Perions 10 more our own, but Cap- 
tives under the Tower and Will of our Enemy ; thus ſpoiled, nothing 
is any longer ours. c The Aſſyrian ſay ſome, God ſay others z indeed 
God did it by the Ajjjrians. d The Eſtate, \Wealth, Plenty, Freedom, 
Safety, Joy and Honour, into Poverty, Famine, Servitude, Danger, 
Grief and Diſhonour. The Land of Cazaun was the Inheritance, and 
!l the Conveniences it afforded were part of the Portion of Jjraet: 
but doleful Ehange ! thele all taken away from // ael, and given to 
others. e It is either ghe Prophet who calls them his People, or 
rather every one of jj7ael that uleth this Lamentation, who ſaith my 
Te:plr, f How dreadfuliy hath .God dealt, with rae} ? removing 
their Perſons into Captivity , and transferring their Right and 
Pofſefion to Enemies. . £ Eirher thus, ring away from us in Dil- 
pleature, God hath divided cur Fields among others, given them to 
the Enemy, air he hath divided them to whom he plealeth, to his 
own People and Souldicrs: Or clic this Word turning away, may be 
rendred retinnirg, and be ſpoken Ot the Enemy, when he returned he 
did divide our Fields or, as the Margin of our Bible, inſtead of reſtor- 
ing our Fields, which we hoped, and our miſtaken Leaders promiſed, 
God hath given the Enemy Succels and Power to divide our ÞF.elds, 

2nd £o allot them to Others. 


” 4 
ſic »| ! "if 3 £. 
. , 


(torts 


s Therefore þ theu z ſhalt have none that 1:3! * < _ 
cord by Jot & in the congregation of the LORD 2. g 
þ Becauſe your Sins ſo great, univerſal and incorrigible, have Pro 
voked God to frame and delign this Dz{vlation azainſt You, 2nd _ 
cauſe he will puniſh you according to your Ways. #7 Either Opnrer 
ſor, {poken thus as to one, that 1t might comprehend every op of 
them, who are deſcribed, wer. 2, or elle this Thou is the whoie Fam. 

ly, ſpoken of ver. 3. perhaps both theſe may beft be mean: here 
{ None that ſhall ever return to this Land, to claim an Inheriragcs 
there, or to ſee it allotted by Line, and given to them to poiſ:; it « 
the Prophet here alludes to the magner of dividing Fields, anq In. 
heritance of old in uſe among them, as in Foſvug's time + ſo both the 
whole Family in general, and the great ones, Oppreffors anq Ex. 
tortioners, are more particularly menaced with an utter and perpe. 
tuated Excluſion out of tne Land in which they ſinned, and whence 
they are carried Captivesz whoever do, neither they nor their Pg. 
Rerity ſhall poſſeſs Inheritances in it. } They ſhould. no more be the 
Congrezation of the Lord, nor ſhow their Children be ſo, or Rang 
in the Congregation of the Lord at any time hereafter, to clain 
their Portion among God's People. Thus they are rejeed and dic. 
inherited, and this to this Day is verified on the main Body of this 
People. 

6 || | * Propheſie ye not m, ſay they, to them that pro. | q 
phefien: they o ſhall not propheſie to them p, that they oh 


{hall not rake ſhame 9. a! th 

m It js manifeſt that our Verſion here intends this as an Interdid, or / 
Prohibition laid upon the true Prophets, whoſe Hearers were { far } 
from amending and turning unto God in compliance with his Coun, ®;i 
and obedience to his Commands given out by his Prophets,that Rulers Fl 
and People agree to ſilence the Prophets, and exprefly forbid them tg !% 
difti] or drop their ſevere PrediCtions againft the Kingdom. 7Faith. 71% 
tully, as 1/aidh, Hoſea, Foel and Micah now did. 0 My true Trophet;, 
ſaith God, p Shall ceaſe from farther troubling, and terrifying theſs 
People, who fear not my Judgments, and will not by Repentance pre. 
vent their miſerable Captivity and Shame. So God doth in his Dic 
pleaſure grant their Delire, and gratity the Interdixt in Judgment 
againft them. q That they may, as they ſeem reſolved to put of al} 
Pivihing and Shame, go on without Checks or Rebuke, till they 
be ntterly ruined: they are impatient of that Shame they ſhould 
take to themſelyes for their Sins, and therefore would not here the 
Truth; ſo it ſhall be, and they ſhall not be ſhamed to Repentance, 
but they ſhall be ſhamed in their Ruine- This ſeems the meaning of 
the Words in our Verſion, and I will not add any other, though there 
are ſeveral Verſions which ſomewhat vary from ours. 


7 © O thou that art named r the houſe of Jacob s, is the 
ſpirit of the LORD || ſtraitned t ? are theſe x his doings?||0, 
do not my words do good y to him that walketh + Op-b 
rightly 2? Ty 
' r You are in Name, not in Truth, you call your ſelves, and wou'd "ps 
be called by others the Seed and Pofterity of Facob, s You glo- 
ry in Facob whom God bleſſed, guided and preſerved, and you think 
he ſhould ſo bleſs you z but you gothing think how Facod feared, o- 
beyed and worfhipped God, you are nor honeſt, plain-hearted and 
upright with God as he. # The Power, Goodneſs, Wiſdom and 
Kindneſs of God is not leſs now than formerly, he is as merciful to 
deſign Good as gracious to promiſe, as great and good fo perform 
his Word ; but the reaſon -he doth not promiſe Good to you, but 
threatens Puniſhment upon you by his Prophets, is all from yourſelves, 
*tis for your Sins, you dc the things that muft be diſcountenanced ; 
and if you would hear better things by the Prophets, you muſt do het- 
ter, you muſt do what God requires by them. x Are theſe ſererer 
Proceedings againſt you,the Doings your God delighteth in ? Doth he 
chooſe to take this way 2 Doth not Mercy better pleaſe him ? He 
would be more pleaſed to ſpeak comfortably to you, do you as Faco 
did, and God will deal with you as he did with him. y My Words 
promiſe all Good, and my Prophets declare Good to thoſe that are 
indeed the Houſe of Facob. All the ways of God are in aneven Te- 
nor, Mercy and Truth to ſuch as keep his Covenant. and Teftimanies 
to do them, as 7/a. 25. 10. 4 That with honeſt Hearts walk in the 
ways of God, but froward Sinners and difſembling Hypocrites cat 


not with reaſon expe the ſame uſage from God, who will give Peace, 
and ſhew Mercy to Iſrael, whileft the Workers of Iniquity are led out 
to Puniſhment z this whole Verſe is excellently cleared by the !r0- 
phet, ſa. 59. 1, 2, 3, ©. | 

3 Even | of late a my people 1s riſen up b as an en?M): 4x 
ye pull off the robe + with the garment c, from then! _ 


paſs by ſecurely d, as men averſe frem war e. : 
This Verſe to me ſeems to be deſigned as a Proof of the Perrer 3, 
neſs and Iniquity of this People, and conſequently a juſtifying God, 
and his Prophet threatning Severity againſt them ; they Aattereds 
themſelves, and were angry with the Prophet,but God in theſe W ords 
convinces them that they could not with reaſon expett better tidings 
For 4 from a long -time ſince they have revolted from me, and 0 
later days they have revolted with addition of new Violence to their 
old. b All of them have riſen up, and ated Hoſtilities among then- 
[clves: Jſrae! againſt Fudab, and Fudzh againſt J/7ael, and of late the 
ten Tribes have conſpired againſt one another, Subjetts againſt _ 
Kings, and great ones againf the meaner ſort ; all Places are #® 
of the Sins and woful Effects of Civil <editions, and the "reaſonable 
Pratices of violent Men. «c You ftrip thole to their Skin, Lake ar. 
their Clothes, and leave them naked. 4 That in Peace and 'eatins 
no Evil, go about their private affairs. e Diſliking tucn apt ne: 
bloody and oppreſſive Courſes, and wiſhing every one might enjoy M® 
Right without Plundrings, Sequeſtrations, Confiſcations and One 
tions for not being of their Party. All which we may calily beliere 
attended the fa&tious and rehellious Times which ſucceed. atrer 7 
boam*s Death, briefly mentioned 2 King 15. 8, Tc. which read zſ. 
this Verſe, and diligently contider how it paints cut thoſe £0: 
/ſraeF's tinning. 

9 The \| women f of my people g have ye calt © 
their pleuant houſes i, from their children Pave 


away k my glory 1} tor ever 7. 


ut þ fromyj 
fe Lk: 


# The 


4 


Strange! 
to be tC: 
and turn 
which tl 
jn this V 
'Family, ( 
to thele: 
to them, 
bands an 
their belc 
by your \ 
Children 
'God from 
confiſcated 
them, in 
ance of w 
continual 
ſtand for « 
10 Al 
cauſe it 1: 
deſtruQi 
n You I 
ſelyes, and 
nill ye, ſo * 
be applied 
and to adv1 
this People| 
tinued Obe 
{hall never | 
until the C 
preſſed; th 
ble, nor gru 
and old Sins 
that bears t] 
| r Such as m 
Deſolation, 


11 lfa 
lie 4, ſayin 
ſtrong dri 
ple z, 

5 This Pec 
but they wer 
promiſed the 
ment on this 
that pretend | 
t And on tha 
1" God's Nam: 
Gol, u Aga 
Contented Bre 
Arian Capti 
jou ſhall hay 
merry, ſuch ti 
ful Judgment 
ct the People 
3,10, 4 Doc 
and pulling it 
Blindneſs, 


2Gla 
| will ſurely 
together f a 
midſt of the 
reaſon of th, 
There are t] 
| hard to lay, w] 
T will propos ; 
Eirſt, Some wi 
Phet's preachir 
Miſe made to t 
62h, he foretole 
tel the affemHy1 
and bringing b; 
by Tiglath Pile 
Brzh, and thai 
their Muititnde 
Ves in the 12: 
miſe of the Re! 
with Chriſtian 
Poral Reſtitutic 
tual, partly fulf 
utably to this E 
an the 13th Ve 
Put Upon them, 
10 inquire int 
the Volume by 1 
Wrel ere we Ca 
P.UM in expou; 
Threat againſt 
With them, þ 
Clls to the Hou 
Pe of (what 
Land ang Cities 
[0 affure us the 
[07 lome were b 
uy be gathere 
VIth the Alſyriaz 
Une of the Shee 
PE de encloſed : 
Breffos ang lok 


4 I II. 

The poor diſconſylate Widows, whoſe. Husbands you hae firſt 
L | *vith the Sword of War, Or unjuſtly condemnrell to. Death, or 
% he Wives of Husbands whom you had opprefſed, and'by per- 
me | Judgment had-condemned-to- forfeit their Eftatess -:&.T his ag- 
verve . « rhe Sin that this was done againſt Jſae17:iſh Women, not 
| centage againſt thoſe that were by peculiar Provition-o0: Ga's Law 
— and mercifully dealt with, Ex9d. 22, 22. bh Diſſeize, 
Rn out, as if unworthy to dwell longer in their old Habitations, 
gr they pretend forfeited, as Paradiſe by 44am, who was therefure 
1 this very Word caſt our, Gene 3-24»; Or as {Zagar out of Aoraham's 
in nily, Gets 21s 10+. 7 Either, pleaſant for.Situation, ſach Seats were 
ar _ dangeroys as Naboth's V neyard was to him z or elle pleaſant 
10 them, becauſe they were their own, where they ep joyed their Huſ- 
Yands and Chi'dren, and wiſh'd no more, Preterment, content with 
their beloved Habitation and Domeffick Coaveniencies. 'k You have 
br tour Violence and Oppreſfion ruined their Poſterity, turred their 
Children out of Houſes and Eſtates, which were ſecured by the Law of 
'God from any legal Alienation and Sale beyond the Jubilee, you have 
confiſcated them for ever. -7 Which was the Glory of my Bounty to 
them, in uſe of 'which they did: give Glory to me, and by continu- 
ince of which they might have lived above Contempt. - mm Either 
continually you have done this, or what'yqu have done. you intend to 

tand for &VEF»1-, 114 © LP TLE SEO | bt 
| 10 Ariſe ye and depart #, for this':s not your-xeſt 0: be- 
cauſe it is polluted p, it ſhall deſtroy q ys# even with a ſore 


deftrutionr. : 
' n You Inhabitants of 1/4e!, eſpecially you Oppreſfors, beſtir your 
ſelves, and prepare for your Departure qut of this Land; tor, will ye, 
nill ye, ſo *tis, you ſhall be carried away. The Words aiſo may fairly 
be applied to the Oppreſſed, to leſſen the Troubles they were under, 
and to adviſe them to. retire. out of this Land, .o Though 'twas given 
this People for a Reft under God's Wing, yet, 'twas. on condition of con- 
tinued Obedience z bur ſince they do not obſerve the Conditipn, they 
ſhall never find the expetted Reft 5 one Trouble ſhall ſucceed another, 
until the Captivity ſweep them all-away, both Oppreffors and Op- 
reſſed; theſe therefore ſhould grieve the leſs at their preſent Trou- 
ble, nor grudg to tranſplant themielyes. p With many, and great, 
and old Sins. q Spue them out as a Burden intolerable to the Earth 
that bears them.as Lev. 1$.25. this polluted Land ſhall be deftroyed, 
r Such as may well require a Lamenxation, ſuch as ver. 4. a grievous 
Deſolation, ſuch as never ſhall be repaired. : 
11 If a man || walking in tbe ſpirit s and falſhood #, do 


lie 4, ſaying, I will Propheſie unto thee of wine, and of 
ſtrong drink x, he ſhall even be the Prophet y of this peo- 


ple z, | 
5 This People were weary of true Prophets, and ſilenced them,v.6. 


but they were fondly taken with the falſe Prophets, and what theſe 


promiſed them z and theſe, as here deſcribed, are by a dreadful Judg- | 
ment on this People-permitted, or left to deceive them': Prophets | 


that pretend to,walke in the Spirjty 5.8; to have the Spirit of Prophecy. 
t And on that: Pretenge takes the Baldneſs to promiſe pleaſing things 
in God's Name, whereas he never received ſuch Promiſes of Good from 
Gol. # Againſt God, and to the People. x Micah,.,and his male- 
contented Brethren, foretel Scarcity, War, diſmal Calamities, and an 
/yim Captivity of all for ever ; 1 tell you theſe are idle Dreams, 
jou ſhall have Plenty, and good Days, and may eat, drink, and be 
merry, ſuch times of Evil you thall never ſee. » By a juſt and dread- 
ful Judgment from God, as well as by an unhappy and fatal Choice 
cf the People 3 1 Kings 22+ 6, 10, 11, 12. With Ter. 34. Fzek. 13. 
2,10. + Doomed to unparallel'd Miiery by God for their Sins, 
and pulling it upon themſelves by their obſtinate Impenitence and 
Blindneſs, 

12 C1 2 will ſurely aſſemble b, O Jacob c, all of thee q; 
| will furely gather the remnant of Iſrael e, I will put them 
together f as the ſheep of Bozrah g, as the flock 1n the 
midſt of their fold þ: they ſhall make great noiſe / by 


reaſon of the multitude of me k, : 
There are three different Interpretations of this Verſe, of which *tis 
| hard to fay, which i3 moſt agreeable to the Inteat of this Scripture z 
I vill propoſe ail three, and leave each Reader to chooſe tor himlelt. 
Firſt, Some will that theſ2 Words be a Continuation of the falle Pro- 
phet's preaching Profperity and good Days. So the Words are a Pro- 
miſe made to them, contradi&ory to the Menaces of the Lord by Mz- 
eh, he foretold all would end in Deftruftion ; the falle Prophet fore- 
tels the affembling of all the See& of Facob into their Land and Cities, 
and bringing back the Remnant of the captive J/raelites carried away 
by 7iglath Pileſer, and their Safety in their own Fold as the Flock of 
Brab,and that they ſhould make great Noiſe of Joy and rejoicing in 
their Maltitndes. All which ſpoken by the falſe Propher, Micah re- 
furein the 12th Verſe. Secondly, Others make it an Evangelical Pro- 
miſe of the Reſtitution of 1/r2:! by the Meſſiab, and many jews agree 
wth Chriſtian Expoſitors herein : though the Jews refer it ro a tem- 
oral Reſtitution, not yet fulfilled, the Chriftians refer it to a ſpiri- 
tual, partly fulfilled, yet more fully to be accompliſhed hereatrer z and 
(utably to this Hypotheſis they interpret ali the Patliages of this Text, 
al the 13th Verſe, both which will very fairly bear the'Senſe by theſe 
Put upon them, and may be the myftical Senſe of the Words: but we 
v0 inquire into the literal Meaning, think it adviſeable not to ſwell 
the Volume by long Digrefſions. A third Opinion ought to be con(1- 
are! ere we can crooſe which we ſhall adhere to : Now the third O- 
PM in expounding the Text, makes it a Commination or dreadful 
areat againſt this People, and thus ſutes it. & 7. e. God ottended 
viththem, 6 By his Providence will cauſe to come together. .c He 
Qlls to the Houſe of Jſrag! to coniider ir. 4 Who were flying upon 
Fe of (what their falſe Prophets promiſe) a Return to their own 
an and Cities. e The ſame thing in lictle different Words repeated 
aſſure us the Truth of the thing, f All that remain of the tea Tribes, 
ſtor ome were before carried away by Tig/ath Prieſer) (hall moſt affu- 
uly be gathered together,rhat they may all be in one Covey covered 
With the Aſſrian Net. g In Mulcitudes, like thoſe Fiocks. þ Whenc2 
"7 ofthe Sheep can get and make their Eſcape, ſo inuuld this Peo- 
Pe de encloſed and taken. i Of Cries and Lamentation for their Ni- 
Wes and loft Condition, & Such great Multitudes coop'd up, fall 


M I CAM 


| 
; 
t 


hideoufly ſament their own Condition, like Multitudes that ſuffer Shin: 
wrack together ; all chis God will bring, pon them by the diiltitygde 
of the Afſyrian Souldiets which come up againſt them. = ud 
,. 13; The breaket 1 13..come up 2 before them s:: they 
havg. broken up .and have :palied; through the pate p. 
and. are. g2ne out i byi itq, and" their' King # ſhalt ' pg 
before 4 them #t ,” and "the LORD# 'on the fead of 
them x. / RR. 98 7 
11 the Opinion of thoſe, who account the '1 225 Verſe to be part 

- # ide 0 oy \ ov, AL arti o 
the flattering Diſcourſe of 'falſe Prophets, this Ver is the, | nero 
ra: 5 Reply to thoſe talle,T eachers : to, tax.5 it. from Truth that God 
will reſtore the Remnant, and eſtabliſh them, that.he afſures them. the 


contrary will ſurely and' ſuddenly befal them ; and- theſe 49 jh ſore 


manner expound the Words as they of the third Opinion tone 
ver. 12, thus, I The 'Aſj114n with his mighty Hoſt, Les poo bramny ens 
his Arty. m The Preſent (put after the Stile of, the Prophets) for 
the Future, becauſe the thing was near, and yery certain. -' » The Peo- 
ple of J/rae! might ſee them, would the open. their Byes 3: the: Pres 
parations for this Expedition are viſible to all, that will obſerve: whac 
5 doing abroad': The mighty Army of the; Aſhrigs King ſhalle're.loag 
approach, the Contines, enter the Land, inveſt the, Cities, yea-the_Me-. 
tropolis of 7ſrae. o NofFrontiers $hall he ftrong enough 'to keep the 
out of the Land. p No Cities ſo ftrong with Walls and Gates,whic 
the Aſſyrian shall not take and poſſeſs, and enter iry through the Gates, 
as of his own Cities. q And ſecurely go out, too, » Shalmineſer.c s in 
triumphant manner. t His own Army,and the Captive Facob. u Offer 
ded with the Fews. x Leading,and ( ucceeding the 4ſſriens in this.War, 


God's, judgments upon the princes for their tyranny, 1=——=4. 'upon/ the 
prophets for their faljbaod, 5 ——7. and upon both' for their vitkeda 
neſs, and corrupting the people, $—=12, - oowaxh © gg 


I ND I ſaid 4, Hear, I pray youc, O heads of J acob, 
{ \ and ye Princes of the houſe of Iſrael d ; Js it not 

for you e to know f judgement? . ' + 1 I 
4 In farther Diſcharge of his Prophetick Office, and his DireQiotz 
from the Lord, the Prophet proceeds to preach. 6b Attend: diligent- 
ly, and give good ear.” ir Being to addreſs to Governors, he intreats 
their Attention, as'we have'the Zebrew Particle here rendted; which 
might have been rendred now; and fo the Gallic Verſion dotlr render 
it, and the Particle fignifieth both. 4 You that are by birth'Heads of 
the Families,and-by 'Office Princes and Rulers in'J/rae! and Facyb + i.e. 
in the King4om-both of: the ten Tribes, and 'more particnlarly the 
two .Tribes, 25 appears from the laſt Verſe of this. Chapter. © e Are 
you not bounil >y Qffice? Do not Men expe ? Doth not God re- 
quire ? Doth nor ihe Publick Weal engage you to be well $killed in the 
Laws of God ? fitnderftand, approve, conform to, and rule by E- 
quity, and the juft Laws of your Got. -. You Princes, Magiſtrates 


 aad ruling Officers ought to know and do Judgment and Jukict, you 
Of al] Men ſhould know.,and do right. | __ W_ 


2 Who hatethe good g, and. Jave the evil þ, who pluck 
off their skin from off them z, and their fleſh from off their 


bones k : | 

g In PraQtice and AﬀeRion, theſe Rulers were direaly contrary to 
what they ſhould have been and done; they hated not only to do 
Good, but they hated the Good which was to be done, and thoſe that 
did it: 'and whar kind of Men may we judge they were who hated 
good Men, and what was Good, and by coni2quence hated alſo God 
himſelf'? 6 Chooſe, embrace, encourage, delight in, and prefer both 
evil Works and evil-Workers,and take pleaſure to do Evil. your ſelves 2 
The worſt Charatter that can be given of any ſort of Men. 7 You by 
Office are Shepherds, and ſhould feed, guide, heal, protett, and love 
the Flock ; but you uſe them as cruelly as the Shepherd, who inſtead 
of ſhearing of the Fleece, would pluck off the Skin, and flay them. 
k Another proverbial Speech of the ſame Import, and chargeth higheſt 


| Injuſtice, and Inhumanity upon theſe Princes and Rulers; Vid. Ezek. 


22, 27. Zepb. 3. 3+ 


3 Who alſo * eat I the fleſh ; of my people n, and flay * PL 14-4: 


their skin from oiF them o, and they break their bones p, 


and chop them in pieces as for the pot, and as * fleſh with- *E2+11+7+ 


in the caldron g. 

I Maintain themſelves and their Followers, nay, live in Luxury and 
Exceſs, revelling in Banquets and Feafts, as the word is many times u- 
ſed, Amos 6. 4. m The Eftates, Goods, and Livelihood of their Suly+ 
jets, Neighbours, and Brethren. #» Whom I have choſen,maintained, 
and allotted an Inheritance unto, of whom TI once faid, 1/ho ronucherb 
them, roucheth th? Apple of mine Eye, Deut. 32. 10. Zech. 2. 9, o With 
barhbarous Cruelty, and unheard of Injuſtice, ftrip off ( as Butchers 
ſtrip the Sheep they kill ) the very Skin 3 or as Hunters, which ha- 
ving taken the Yrey,wearied, and worried tirft by their Dogs, do ftrip 
off the Skin to (ell, and eat the Fleſh in Feaſts and riotous Banquetings, 
p An Allufion to Wolyves, Bears, or Lions, which devour the kleſh,tear 
the Skin, and break the Bones of the innocent, weak, and defenceleſs 
Lambs or Sheep: Thus our Prophet tells theſe Rulers plainly what 
they were, dil, and how barhbaroutly cruel and wicked, q Thete bloo- 
dy Murderers, Princes, and Chieftains, are here compared to Cooks; 
and the <ubjetts, weak Neighbours, are compared to the bare Sores 
which the Cook doth by his Art prepare for the Pot; and to the 
Fleſb cut ſmall for the Caldron, that all might be boiled and extracted 
out to make Pottage, and delicious Brothsor Jellies : Thus the great 
Ones uſed the meaner Sort, who lived under their Juriſdiction ; poſti- 
bly the Prophet may aim at the bloody, cruel, and devouring Times 
under Shalium, &c: or to that reported of Menahem, 2 Aings 15. vr, 
15. when probably much of this was done according to the very 
Letter. | 


4 Then” ſhall * they s cry nnto the LORD t, but he will #P:$.25, 
not hear them, z : he will even hide bis fac2 from them x E+ 5. 18. 


"7, 
£EC ls Tel3 


at that time y, as they have behaved Wenteaves i in their 


| doings 2. 


# When 


wg 


a 4. = 
ys} 4 
> ws Tx Are orgs A” PYy . _—— —— 9th -, & 
— — - m_ 
oy Cl © 4 p, Co . . - 4 4 - 
SES bis To £ : . Ing $5 F eo Re = «8 dg. - — - S - > vey os — 
. oe *. 142i WT _— = : . - hats cow _ we cas. 
* - "_— - _—_— ARR; bo pl _— . OE or gaps - div 
7 . re @ 7 Via. + = b ns uy 
” Y. "x * S_ 


TY. : 
- C I=IL,. "4 -— == - 
” A EIS - > - =» « Dp - — ones oy ooo h_ X 
we ET ys 4A 4 re. s 4? . £ 
F [5 my, Ven” ave on _ ” wt 4 
—— === 4 wi . . ” = 
24d vat rqS L £5 ads "#6 
bo A... Ix I; : n # 
. I- I Liber aa - Sam, "4 4 
. : pn "xp ” 
_ OPT .-—_ - Le 


bo. So, 
Po -: 


— 
m__ 


. A” * 
on > == 
_ = In O 
2 ©. a 4. = 
Op  im—_—— ” A oh —— - eee” oh hs 
— . —— ob 4 - Tee: i. 
V hn * << af — rs 


Chap. III. 


MICA He. 


> When that TimE, and thoſe Miſeries which Micah foretels, ſhall ing a Prophet of God. 4 Not from himſeif, but from thi Spirit of 


come upon them, chap. 1. 6, 7, 8. and 2. 3- when God ſhall retaliate, 
and pay theſe great Ones in their own Coin, $ The cruel (a | 
ſors, theſe tyrannical Judges that pitied none,devoured all, and feared | 
not the Divine Vengeance. t As if they were his, and as if he were 
bound to deliver ; they then ſhall own he can, and none elſe can deli- 
ver them, and they will expett a ſaving hand after all their Rebelli- 
ons againſt, and Contempts of God, « As they heard the Cry of the 


Opnreſſed, but would not hear z ſo God will hear the Cry of their 


Diſtreſſes, but not hear the Requeſts they make : he will do no more 
for them, than as if he did not hear them ; he will be as a Stranger to 
their Caſe, x They turned away their Face from beholding and pi- 
tying the Poor; now God will turn away his Eye from them, and as 
if unconcerned, leave them to their own Diſtreſſes, and their Ene- 
mies Rage and Cruelty. y This added to affure them they ſhould 
have leaſt Reſpe& from God, when they need it moſt z ſo they ſhall 
receive what they gave, Fulgment without Mercy, as "Tis Fam. 2. 13» 
2 This ſpeaks both the Reaſon why, and the Manner how God will 
thus leave them to the Oppreſlor 3 the Greatneſs of their Sin deſervec 
this ; and ſuch was the Quality of their Sins, that nothing fitter than a 
Retaliation to puniſh the Sin, convince the Sinner, teach the World 
Righteouſneſs, and to vindicate God. 
| 5s © Thus faith the LORD a * concerning the Pro- 
F-.2.26, Phets that make my people err b, that * bite with their 
* Ch.2.11. teeth c, and cry, Peace d : and * he that putterh nor 
*Ezek.13-into their mouths e, they even prepare war againſt 
13, 19+ him f. 

1 'Now Micah in the Name of the Lord, foretels what ſhall become 
of falſe Prophets 3 he had frankly dealt with the Seculars,now he deals 
as plainly with the Ecelefiaſticks, b Though he gave them the Titl- 
they aflume to themſelves, yet he doth very fully deſcribe them, aud 
ſhews they are falſe Prophets; they err, and make others to err with 
them : Jſ72el is too apt to miſtake his God, and his Ways ; theſe fall: 
Prophets make them err more, both concerning their former Wa\'s 
6f Religion and Civil Policy, and concerning their preſent Danger ad 
Duty, and concerning future Judgments and Puniſhments. c Wien 
they are furniſhed with Gitts, and well fed- d They promiſe great 
Proſperity ; they pretend to give Aſſurance from God,that all ſhall go 
well with J/72el, and none of the diſmal Woes threatned by Micab,and 
ſuch like Prophets, ſhould ever be verified on them. e But thoſe who 
will not feed theſe falſe Prophets, that bid them not welcome to their 
Tables, nor make good Chear for them. f They do threaten with 
War, and all Calamities that attend it 3 or elſe as Enemies prepar::d, 
they work them all the Miſchief they can, and ſhew what God they 

4 ſerve, even the God of this World, and their own Bellies. 

Ezcko & * "Therefore g night þ /hall be unto you 3, | that 
734.2: 4 Je ſhall not h ifion &, and it ſhall be dark! 
Zecki13.4. JE Mall not have a viſion &, and 1t Iha ark } unto 
+ Heb. you, | that ye ſball not divine mm, and the ſun ſhall go 
from £ downover the prophets #, and the day ſhall be dark o over 
viton. them.: | 
# —_— 2 Becauſe of their irreligious and atheiftical Pretences to Divine Re- 

om 4t-  velations,and to come from Heaven with Promiſes direWly contrary to 
vmmge God's Purpoſe and Word, even when their Conſciences told them they 
did lie therein. b Of Ignorance, and loſs of Gifts ; but fince they had 
none ſuch as they pretended to, I ſee not how they could loſe them. 
rather take this Night to be a Night of Diftreſſes;a Time of great Ca- 
lamities upon thele Prophets more than ordinary, and upon all the 
People they ſeduced. i Deceivers, and falſe Prophets. & You ſhall 
no more pretend to have a Viſion,you ſhall not dare any more to fore- 
tel any thing to this People. 1 Very calamitous time to all, but moſt 
to you wholived ipon lying Viſions, and now ſhall ſtarve tor want of 
them. m Have neither Skill, nor Will any more to ſet up for your 
ſelves in that Trade, being found great Impoſtors, and ſuch as have 
ſeduced this People into Sin firſt,and Miſery next ; they will be inraged 
againſt you,and you ſhall not ſafely appear among them. 7 A prover- 
bial Speech,and contains much the ſame that Night and Dark do con- 
tain; Perhaps this intimates the viſible Hand of God extraordinarily 
againft them, and making their Sorrows the more dreadful, as Dark- 
nels by the Sun going down at Noon,would ſpeak it ſelf an extraordi- 
nary Judgment, and moſt terrify the World. o The beſt Circumſtan- 
ces any ot them ſhall be in, shall be ſo ſad and woful, that they hall 
not know which way to take for themſelves, or dirett for others. 


+ Iſa. & 6% 


7 Then ſhall the ſeers q be aſhamed r, and the diviners 


confounded s : yea, they ſhall all cover their - lips ?, for 
there 5 no anſwer of God «. 


p In the days of this Calamity, which shall confate all the flattering 
Promiſes of theſe Prophets. q Who called themſelves, were accounted 


by others, and were adviſed with as Men that had Viſions from God,' 


were Prophets in Name and Repute with the undeceived People. 
r Their Impoftures being deretted, they hall be covered with Shame z 
the People $hall talk what they are,and tell them to their Faces where- 
ever they meet them, that they are falſegnd lying Varlets, not wor- 
thy to live ; and the very Conſciences of theſe Men $hall then fly in 
their Faces, and upbraid them. $s Divers here are Seers, and being 
confounded, the ſame with aſhamed ; this Ingemination adds to the 
thing ſpoken, at leaſt a fuller Verification of it. s So Lepers did, 
£ev.12 45. and Men ashamed ; and Mourners did thus, Ezeb.24.17,22. 
So theſe $hall mourn and pine in their Shame. # God doth not auſwer 
them, rather becauſe the Anſwer they had formerly given and preten- 
ded to be from God, now appears not to have been from lam ; they 
Should therefore by the Sentence of the Law be ſtoned, Deur. 13. 10. 
and Zech. 13. 3. ſo Elijah dealt with Baal's Prophets ; and *'tis like 
=_ my Prophets deredted, might fear the like from thoſe they had 
deceived, 


8 © But truly x I am full of power y by tke ſpirit of 

L the LORD z, and of judgment a, and of might b, to 

*H258.1« 4 _—_— unto Jacob his tranſgreſſion c, and to Iſrael his 
in d. 


x Notwithſtanding this Sha ne, and Silence covering theſe fa!ſe 
Prophets, yet aith M.c&þ. » Courage, Viracity, and Ability becom- 


God given to him, and duly qualifying him to the faithful D; 
of the Prophetick Office ; and without Fear, Flattery, BY-reſpefts 
Self-ſeeking, I have already, and ftill do, and will declare the Lig 
Duties and Dangers of this People, that they may repent and jy 
ſaved, or my God may be juſtified when he judgeth, and this Pegr1. 
may know the Difference between a falſe and true Prophet, {x 
Spirit of Judgment to diſcern a-right Times and Seaſons, to aig 9 
Ri: from Wrong, Truth from Lies, and pure Worship of God 
froin Tdolatry ; and what are the Conſequents of all the "as 
People who decline from the Way of Truth and Purity, or A. 
to it. b Reſolution, undaunted in ſpeaking God's Word tg * 
greateſt of Men; as I have dared, I fill do dare to tell the Heaqsp 
F4cob, and Princes of J/rael, what they do againft God, ang ws 
God will do againſt them. c With impartial Reproofs, with "ow: 
Menaces from God, to preach againft Facob's Tranſgreſſions, p 
_ _ repeated : All the Twelve Tribes have finned, and Gy 
will viſit, | 


9 Hear this, I pray you, ye heads of the houſe of Jacob 
and princes of the houſe of lſrael, that abhor judgmen;, 
? 


and pervert all equity f. 

This Verſe is word for word the ſame in the former part of it, yi 
the former part of the firſt Verſe of this Chapter z we refer thither for 
Explication of it : 'The Prophet having afſerted his Divine Cal and 
avowed his Faithfulneſs in the Prophetick Office, ver. 8, he here zine 
us one mor* !roof of it, dealing roundly with the Magiſtrates in both 
Kingdor 1, Iſrael and Fudab, e Whereas Judgment $hould be the; 
great. Velight, as it is of every good Magiſtrate, theſe had Hear 
thac deteſted it, were weary of the Dire&ions of God's Law jr their 
Polity, and hated to be controlled by it. f, Where you can, you yre& 
the Law to countenance your unequal Proceedings, and wrong thy. 
you Should right, and acquit thoſe you Should condemn : And there i; 
many a Wo denounced againſt ſuch. ; 


Jeraſalem with iniquity #. 

q Heads, Princes, Judges,and great Ones among them. 7 Enlag} 
or beautify, ana fortify. | 
meant the Temple and its Buildings, and the Royal Palace of the King 
of Fudah, t With Wealth and Gifts,which theſe Builders made they. 
ſelves 7-laſters of by Violence, taking away the Life of the #wners, 
elſe fining and amercing them : By this Courſe they wreſted part f 
their ſtates from them, by the other they ſeized all ; they allot 
Gain ſometimes acquitted the Guilty,and freed them in capital Ci; 
and ſo ſold the Blood of the Innocent. a By ſuch Injuſtice Feruſd:n 
was brought to Ruine at laſt, though ſome particular Perſons ar 
Families did raiſe themſelyes, their Houſes and Palaces to a preſent 
Largeneſs and Statelineſs. 


11 * The heads thereof judge for reward x, andthe" 
prieſts thereof teach for hire, and the prophets thereof? 
divine for money z - yet will they lean upon the LORD aj 
Þ and ſay b, 7s not the LORD among us c ? noel aj 
come upon vs 4d. 

x Whereas the Judges were God's Deputies, to hear and determine 
Caules, as the Merit of the Cauſes were found, without reſpett of Per- 
ſons ; they ſhould have been careful to give ſuch Judgment as Gol 
would give, (for the Judgment is the Lord's, and he fits in the milf 
of the Judges.) Theſe corrupt Judges attended little to the Cauſejut 
much to Rewards, and with them the greateft Bribe made the juſt 
Cauſe; and he was moſt guilty who was poor and could not, or h0- 


neft and would not, give the expe&rd Reward : This was moſtd- 
rely againft the Law of God, Exod. 23. 8. Deut. 16.19. and exprelj 
curſed ; yet *twas the common Courſe and Praffliee with them. » Thek 
Men ſhould have impartially declared the Law of God to all  tol 
them what was clean or unclean, what was prohibited, what permit 
ted, what commanded ; what was ſafe to them, being pleaſing toGod; 
and what dangerous to them, being offenſive to their God : but thel 
tor Hire would dire& them how to pleaſe themſelves ; and thoug! 
they broke the Law, not be guilty ; to extort, yet not be guilty 
Ulury 3 to kill an Enemy, yet not be guilty of Murder, nor break the 
ſixth Commandment ; to be unnatural to Parents, yet not fin : Who 
paid them well, ſhould find them moft excellently skill'd in the G 
ſuiſtical Divinity the Feſuttes at this day are Mafters of. 4 Whit 
being extraordinary Perſons raiſed of God, and ſent by him to dcliver 
his Meſſage Impartially to all his People, to all Ranks of Men amy 
them, without ear, Flattery, Prejudice, or any : By: reſpetts ; there 
were in this People at this day a ſort of Men called Prophets, but weil 
indeed meer Fortune-tellers, as we call a vagabond ſort of Peri0:5% 
mong us, and theſe made a Trade of Divining z and as if 'twereit 
their Power to frame future things to the Mind and Humour of Me! 
for a good round Sum of Money they would ſell Proſperity to them: 
tor they never told great Good to come to any but ſuch as gave a gt 
Reward, and little Money with them never purchas'd the News 
great Advantage ; and whoſo had firſt the Miſery to be poor, [1 
they could: not buy, or elſe were wiſer than to believe theie 1mPy 
ſtors,theſe were ſure to be told a (ad Story of Troubles and Afiliftions: 
Many Diſciples of Balaam, 2 Pet. 2. 15. they loved the 11 ages of Ute 
righreoujneſs, a Whilſt Magiſtrates, Prieſts and Prophets, arc © 
abominably corrupt, yet they will preſumptuouſly lean up6n ih? 19% 
and flacter themſelves that he is preſent with them, that he owe" 
them as his peculiar People. b Yea, they boaft ſo. c AS Oli as 
our Shield z whereas he was among them, but provoked to be tie 
Enemy, though they will not believe it. 4 So they do fallly concluce 
againft all the Word of God,and againſt all his true Prophets Admo% 
tions : No Evil of Aftition, ſuch as War, Famine and Captivity, cal 
come upon them. Thus far theſe corrupt Fews, 


ed a5a field gy and Jeruſalem þ ſhall become heaps 2, and 
che mountain of the houſe k, as the kigh places 0 
foreſts, ; 


| | : : gf 


Ty 


Tharge | 


10 They q build upr Zion s, * with + blood t, ani; 
2, 


s The Houſes in Zion, or perha s mayhe!! 


12 Therefore ſhall Zion e for your ſake / be * [1B 


time, al 
time; .| 
Micah lp 
likeliho0 
ther thin 
might a\ 
format10 
Sins of- 
Should Þ: 
(ures the! 
ftruttion 
would ha 
Safety tO 
ſake, NO! 
Heaven V 
againſt I 
1njuſtice, 
DangeT., 
jtto be D 
Body of t 
ties of th 
of the gr 
he demoli 
on which | 
heautified 
over with 


4 promiſe; 
Church 1 
vittory ( 


1 u 
f 
ſhall be « 
ſhall be « 
unto it þ, 
a This 1 
us look to 
that was ? 
of a happ 
rance out 
out of 1gn 
This latter 
der them, 
Years Capt 
Days of th 
Days, c T 
on which th 
roglyphick 
and in the 
Jews returt 
complished, 
of the Goſ 
Hell should 
the Mounta 
noured abo' 
and Reproai 
ont for Gc 
worShip Id 
God ſhall ez 
thoſe who c: 
Maids, Exra 
to the Few? 
tiles to be cc 
are ſur? of ; 
fude, we lod 
four Miftior 
Benjamin, li 
in Multitud 
Out of Baby 
red the Jey 
II, Caf, 4, ( 
Reafos to b 
thatit mig] 
this Type 
tudes we re: 
the Apoſt 


2 And 1 
let us £0 y 
Houſe of 
Ways n. 
ſhall go fl 
from Jeru 
7 This wa 
and cCircumc; 
Kingdom, le 
ers, and mt 
them to Jery 

eliverance 
Mordecai in t 
no Requeſt 
VInces, Eft, C 
nels, And I 
159 Years 
ble good Cor 
ao this Pro 
Montes and | 

'S Comman 
Unciſeq , 2s 
the Words, | 
Vel, Il, 


ap. IV. M 4 


ef e473, that this Sermon was preack*d to Judah and its 

_ _ na and Prophets, who _—_ thus wicked in Ahaz Ns 
= —_ robably continued ſo in the Beginning of Hexzekiah his 
_ Teremiab does put this out of all doubt, ch. 26. 18. ſaying, that 
prone rake theſe Words to all Judah, As for the time, it was in all 
Sn before the thirteenth Year of Hez kiab, ſay ſome ; I ra- 
_ oaths them of that Age to comply with Zezeti2h in the Re- 
ns of. Magiſtrates, Priefts and Prophets : they thought that Zz07 
<hould be their Safety, however they tinned ; God by his Prophet aſ- 
ſires them the quite contrary, thelr Sins Should be the Danger and De- 
@rudtion of Zion. f Becauſe your Sins are ſo great and many z God 
would have ſpare! Sodom for the fake of righteous Men, theſe may DC 
$afety toaCityz but God will not ſpare the Wicked for any Place's 
ke, nor Shall a Temple be more Security to a wicked People, than 
: ven was to finning Angels. Tho theſe flagitious Men cried out 
2 inſt Micah, and ſynch like Men as a publick Danger, Truth iz, the 
7njuſtice, Idolatry and Inhumanity of publick Perſons were the great 
Danger: g Either by the Enemy and Conqueror, thereby forbidding 
jtto be plowed without his Leave, or by ſuch as remained after the 
Body of the People were carried captive. b One of the goodlieft Ci- 
ties of the World, proud in its lofty and beautiful Buildings, the City 
of the great King. 2 Shall all lie in Rubbish, its ſtately Buildings $hall 
he demolished, and Jie buried in their own Ruines, & Holy Mountain, 
on which the Temple, one of the Wonders of the World, did ftand, 
heautified with rareft Buildings. 7 Shall lie ſo long wafte, as to be run 
orer with Wood as a Foreſt, and bea Lodg of wild Beafts, 


CHAP. IV. 


4 promiſe;of the future glory, enlargement and peaceful condition of the 
Church under the Meſſsab, 1 7. Their final deliverance from, and 
vidtory over all their Enemies, 8 — 13, 


1 NUT  * in the laſt days b it ſhall come to paſs, 

that the Mountain of the Houſe of the LORD c 
ſhall be eſtabliſhed in the top of the Monntains d, and it 
ſhall be exalted above the Hills f, and people g ſhall flow 


untoit þ. 
a This Particle which ushers in the following Promiſe, doth alſo bid 
us look to ſemewhat before ſpoken, of a very different Complexion 3 
that was News of a total and a long continued Deſolation, but this is 
of a happy Reſtitution, which doth reter both to a temporal Delive- 
rance out of Babylon's Captivity, and to a ſpiritual Deliverance 
out of Ignorance, Superftition, and all other Ways of falſe Worship. 
This latter is the principal, the former is typical, and ſo shall we confi- 
der them, 6 Or, the latter Pays, at the expiring of the ſeventy 
Years Captivity, (near 200 Years from Mzicab's time) as Type of the 
Days of the Meſſiab's Kingdom, which are moft uſually called thelaft 
Days, c The City Jeruſalem ; or, more particularly, the Mountain 
on which the Temple did ftantl, called the Houſe of the Lord, the Hie- 
roglyphick of the Church gf Chriſt in Goſpel-times. 4 Literally, 
and in the Type fulfille4 when the fecond Temple was built by the 
Jens returned out of Captivity. Spiritually, and in the Antitype ac- 
compliched, when Chrift did eftablish his Church by the Preaching 
of the Goſpel, and laid the Foundations of it, ſo that the Gates of 
Hell hould never prevail againft it, and made it this Promiſe. f As 
the Mountain or Hill on which the Temple ſtood, was by this ho- 
noured above. other Mountains and Hills, ſo shall it, after Deſolation 
and Reproach of 70 Years, be honoured with the Temple rebuilt up- 
onit for God's true Worship, whereas on. other Hills the Heathens 
worſhip Idols. So the Goipel-Church and the way of Worship to 
God ſhall excel all Modes of Religion. g The Gentiles as Antitype, 
thoſe who came up with 1ſrael out of Babylon ſaid to be Servants and 
Maids, Ezra, 2. 65. above 7337, many, if not all of them proſelyted 
to the Fewiſh Religion, and a Type as well as Firft-fruit of the Gen- 
tiles to be converted in the times of the Meſſiah. This Number we 
are ſure of; as for, that Foſephus reports of 4074 of a mixed Multi- 
tude, we look on with no more Credit given, than to his Report of 
four Millions fix hundred and twenty eight thouſand of Fudab and 
Benjamin, lib. 11. cap. 4+ of Anriq. h Come in freely, continually, and 
in Multitudes, which in the Type was fulfilled, partly at the Return 
out of Babylon, and partly in after-Days when Darius Hyſtaſpu favou- 
red the Jews, and encouraged them, as Foſephus reports, Anti, lib, 
11. cap. 4. conſonant with Exra. 6. from ver. 3, t012, and we have 
Reaſon to believe that God ſo diſpoſed Darius's Mind to favour them, 
that it might occation ſome to embrace the Fewiſh Religion. But all 
this Type was eminently fulfilled in. the Converſion of thoſe Multi- 
tudes we read of brought in to Chriſt by the Preaching of the Goſpel 
the Apoſtolical Times. 


2 And many Nations# ſhall come and ſay, Come k, and 
let us go up to the Mountain of the LORD I, and to the 
Houſe of the God of Jacob m, and he will teach vs of his 
Ways n, and we will walk in his paths 0: for the Law 
ſhall go forth of Zion p, and the word of the LORD 
from Jeruſalem 9. 


7 This was in part, and as Type fulfilled when ſo many proſelyted 
and Circumciſed Servants of ſeveral Nations amaſſed in the Babyloniſh 
Kingdom, left their native Country, and in love to their Fewiſh Ma- 

ers, and more to the God of the Jews and his Law, came up with 
them to Jeruſalem and the Temple z afterwards, when the wonderfu] 
eliverance of the Jews, and the advancement of their Countryman 
Mordecai in the Perſian Court, brought the People and their Religion 
to Requeſt and Credit, many turned Jews, through the 127 Pro- 
Vinces, Eft, $. 17. were circumciſed, became Proſelytes of Righteouſ- 


nels, And in the times ſucceeding through the Reigns of five Kings, 


T 30 Years, the Jewiſh Aﬀairs and Religion continued in a tolera- 
G good Condition. | In Alexander's time, and under the Maccabees, 
Alo this Prophecy was partly fulfilled when /ſhmaelites, Moabites, Am- 
monites and 1dumeans ſubmitted to the Maccabees z and by Hyrcanus 
's Command, and with their own Conſent, the /dumeans were cir- 
Unciſed ; as Foſephus, 1ib, 13. cap. 17, Antiq, This, notwithſtanding 
the Words, had a fuller Accompliſhment, and ftil} shall have onder 
Vel, It, 


the GoÞel-days in tlieſe times of the Mr{fiuh ; to which, as to the An 
, titype and principal Mark, they are levell-d no doubt. & So th: Cap- 
| tive Jews by Cyrus and Da-ius's Decree releaſed from Captivity, dik 
certainly call, perſwade and encourage each other to leave the ſtrange 
| Lands in which they had been Captives, and to go up to Feruſulem, 
. and to huild that and the Temple, and to reftore the Worſhip of God. 


*rwas in the very Beginning of Heglaab, and that this ; And zealous Profelytes Gil, as the Eunuch, Lord Treaſurer to Queen 


' Candace, come up to Jeruſalem to worſhip. So that-we meet many. 
Preſclytes at Feruſalem, As 2.5, 10, 11- whither they were-wont to 
come before the Goſpel was publiſhed. Now as this was a fulfilling of 
this Prophecy in part, ſo the Converſion of the HMultitude of the Gen- 
tzes to Chriſt is much more eminently a fulfil'ing of it. 1 To the 
Temple at Feruſalem, Type of Chriſt and the Golpel-Church. m 
This explains the former Paſſage, and doth, as that, reſpettively look 
to the Worſhip of God at Feruſalem, and in Goſpel-Days. » Out of 
his Law, both in Points of Worſhip and Judicature, by ſuch as Fr, 
Nekemiah, by ſuch as Zechariah and Haggat, and by Scribes acquainted. 
with the Law of God, this to laſt till Elzas, Fore-runner to Chriſt, 
ſhould prepare his way, and the Meſſiab ſhould come to teach his Peo- 
ple, and publish the Goſpel of the Kingdom by Apoſtles and ſucceed- 
ing Preachers. o As was the Duty of returning Captives, and as, 
indeed, many of them did, after their Return, walk more exatly in 
the ways of God, and eſpecially kept themſelves from Kolatryz yet 
this was a fulfilling of this Prophecy in Type, preſignifying what hath 
heen done this 1600 Years and more, under the Preaching of the 
Goſpel: before Facob only, now all Nations ſee the Salvation of God. 
p In Feruſalem and Zion is declared the only way of worshipping God 
before Meſſiah comes, and from thence the only Law of right worship- 
ping God 5hall go ferth, when Meſſiah is come. q An elegant Inge- 
mination of the ſame thing in ſomewhat different Words; which, as 
they do reſpe& both Type and Antitype, ſo muft be applied to each 
reſpeCtively. . | 

3 © And he 7 ſhall judg 5 among many People t, and 


Nation y, neither ſhall they Learn War any more z. 

7 God by thoſe Governours, High-Priefts and Prophets (taking his 
Word for their Rule) ſet up of Sod, Types and Servants of the Meſ- 
fiah, who in due time, and in a fuller Accomplishment of this Pro« 
phecy, shall, by himſelf, during the Days of his dwelling in Flesh, and 


of the Word. s Judg, rule Perſons, determine Controverſies, ap- 
point Ordinances, enlighten Minds, convince Sinners, and convert 
them, as Pſal. 2. 8. t As the Knowledg of God, and the Worship of 
God, after the Reſtitution of the Captivity was ſomewhat more ex- 
tended by the coming in of many Proſelytes, as is noted, ver, 1, 2, 
and this as Type prefiguring the Largeneſs of the Kingdom of the 
Meſſiah or the Goſpel-Church ; ſo when Chrift ſet up his viſible King- 
dom, and Commiſſoned his Apoſtles, it was, Mar. 28. 18, 19. to teach 
all Nations. u By the Captive Jews he did convince ſome of thoſe 
mighty Nations among whom the Jews did live 70 Years; and tho 
they were far off from God, his Law, his Temple, and true Worſhip, 
he brought them over, they were made Proſelytes to the true God : 
ſo now much more is this fulfilled in the turning the mighty Nations, 
the Roman Empire, and many other Nations, from dumb 14ols, ro 
ſerve the living and true God, 4nd v0 wait for his Son from Heaven 
2 Theſſ; 1. 9, 10. x All that do heartily embrace the Goſpel ſhall be of 
a peaceable Diſpotition, both in their private and publick Capacities, 
and ſhall, as much as in them is, follow Peace with all Men, They ſhall 
gladly ſee Wars ceaſe, and turn their Weapons of War and Slaughter, 
into Inftruments of Husbandry ; Iſa. 2. 4. y Which receive and 0- 
bey the Goſpel ſhall not, unleſs neceſſitated to it, enter into a Courſe 
of War and Bloodſhed. x To make it the Employment of their Life 
for their Maintenance, or the choſen way to Riches and Honour. 


4 But they a ſhall fit every man under his Vine, and un- 
der his Fig-tree b, and none ſhall make them afraid c : for 


| the mouth of the LORD of Hoſts hath ſpoken #t 4. 

a The redeemed of the Lord, redeemed from Babyloniſh Captivity, 
and brought back into their own Land, the Type of a greater Re- 
demption by Jeſus Chriſt, 5 The planting Vines and Fig-trees was 
one part of that Husbandry which the Jews made great Profit by, ts 
this Husbandry they were much addifted in times of Peace, 
1 Kings 4.25. and when Peace, Security, and Riches or Plenty are 
promiſed, among other ways of expreſſing it, this is one ; ſo Zech. 3. 
Io. So inthe Type, the Jews returned ( whileft they walked in the 
ways of the God of Facob) did enjoy Safety and Plenty, as £zeb. 34 
25, 26, 27, 2$. and 36. 8, y, ©c. This was made good in the Goſpels 
days more univerſally and fully, both in outward and inward Peace un- 
der the Meſhah. c Thoſe that were once Enemies ſhall be Friends, 
the Wolf ſhall dwell with the Lamb, and the Leopard fhall lie down with 
tbe Kid, Iſa, 11. 6,7, $, 9. Theſe proverbial Allufions do affure us, 
that they who are redeemed out of Babylon, and the Servitude of Sin, 
ſhould enjoy their own with great Safety and Security ; which literally, 
was performed to the returned reſettled Captives, and ſpiritually or 
myftically is made good among thoſe that are redeemed by Chrift, and 
who do embrace the Goſpel. 4 This gives us the greateit Confirma- 
tion and Aſſurance of the future Accompliſhinent of the Predidtion 
and Promile z the merciful, wiſe, faithful and Almighty God hath 
ſpoken it, he hath promiſed it, whoſe Word ſpoken, commanding it 
ſhould be, can make their State what he ſaith it ſhall be. iy 

5 For call People will walk every one in theName of his 
God, f and we will walk in the Name of the LORD our 


God-g, for ever and ever h. | | 

e This is either a Reaſon why they ſhould be ſo ſafe, or elſe a De- 
claration of their Reſolution to take this Courſe, that it may be fo 
with them, and (o the Hebrew Particle may be rendred certainly, f It 
is a received Rule, that they ought, and 'tis a conſtant Prattice with 
the Nations they will pray to, depend on, and ſerve their Gods, ane 
think by this Courſe to receive their expetted Bleſſings ; they are con» 
{tant to their Gods, Fer. 2. 11. g Seek the Lord, embrace his Law and 
Worſhip,wait on him as the Fountain and Giver of all Good,as he is the 
Lord who can give 15 Vines and Fig-trees, and can giveus Srfety under 
them ; as he is 07 Go.l,and engaged by pramile to do all this for us, 1-7 
his Name we? w?ll alt, ail ty figlh we be fs and <njoy all Card 
, Fy cy fronts 


by his Spirit and Word, and Officers he hath appointed, unto the end 


Cha P. [. 


rebuke ſtrong Nations afar off « 3 and * they ſhall beat * Joel; 
their Swords into Plow-ſhares, and their ſpears into || 10. 
pruning-hooks x : Nation ſhall nor lift up a ſword againſt |) 


Or, 
ſithes. 


Chap. IV. M IT C 


a6 


from im * Te 0 2 

though we have done io, {/1,. 2.5, Or 7, This was in Letter and 
in part tultlled, when upon their Return ont of Captivity they did 
abandon all taife Go.ls, and worthipp'd Gal alone. And *tis fulfilled 
more eminently in all the 1Fael of God, who turn from dumb 


1dols to ſerve the living and true Go:l. þ Unchangeadly, through 
the Succeſhon of Ages among the reitored Jews, and the redeemed 
Gentiles. "20 | : 

6 In that day i.faith the LORD, * will I aſſemble & her 
that halteth!, and I will cather ker that 15 driven out 72, 
and her that 1 have aillicted #. | 

; Called wer. 1. laſt, or latter Days, let. b. vid. In the Day wherein 
1 ſhall reftore my captived People,and in the Day I ſhall redeem mine 
Ele&t. & Firſt, and in part by the Editts of Cyrus, Darius, and Ar- 
tix2rx2s, for the Releale of the Captives, their Return to Feruſalem, 
and for the rebuilding the Temple, and for reſtoring the Worthip of 
Go; but more fully by the preaching of the Golpe], publiſhing Sal- 
vation by Chriſt to whom the gathering of the Gentiles was tO be, 
Gen. 49.10. I Vid, Zeph. 3. 19+ weakned with the hard Ulages of 
oppreihng Conquerors, who were as lame ones, unable to walk; ſuch 
were the mmpoveriſh'd Jews 1n the Babyloniſh Captivity, utterly unpro- 
vided for io long a Journey ; and it's likely they were unrelolved to0, 
whether to go or not £0, halted between a Debire of going, and a Fear 
of the Difficulties that would unavoidably attend their Poverty. Now 
the Bounty and Favour which God moved 1n the P:rfuun Kings toward 
the Jews, was ſuch,-that thele Poor weie encouraged to ſet torward 
on the Journey. This Word 15 tO this day tulnlled,in that Chriſt doth 
by the Power of his Word and Spirit make his People 4 wiling Peo- 
ple, determines their Reſolution, and enables them to perform it, and 
to give up themſelves to God, m In this Phraſe, 1 will gather, Qoes 
God by Eb, 28, 24. promiſe the Recovery of his People trom Captt- 
vity, and ſv does Fer. 31. $. almoſt in the ſame manner promiſe the 
reſtoring of captive Fudah. Here they are ſzid to ve driven 0ur, i. 0. of 
their own Land, into a ixange Land, where they are Captives, Fer. 
8. 2. and 16+ 15. and 23.3. and 24. $,9. and 29. 14. and Ezek. 4s 
13. The Lord will by his Power ai:d Goodneſs gather thole whom 
Nebuchadnezzar. atrered through his xingdom, and Chrift will much 
more gather to his Fold thoſe who were Captives to Satan. = This in 
the Letter refers to waſted and inmpoveriſhed jj 42], on. whom God laid 
an Afiction 0i ſeventy Years. 

2 7 And 1 will make her that halted o, a remnant p, and 

| Da. 7+ her that was cat far off q, a ſtrong nation ry; and * the 

,, LORD ſhall reign over them in mount Zion s, from hence- 
©" forth even for ever f. Es 

o See this Phraſe opened, Zephe 3. 19. and in this Chapter, ver. 6. 

let. 1, þ Which as they were preſerved for a Seed, ſo they ſhonld as 

fruitful Seed take Root and increaſe,and continue to the Coming of the 

Mcfſiah. q That was caft off by. God, and by the Hands of Babylonians 

were carried away Captives into remotelt Parts of the Babyloniſy King- 

dom. 7 So the Jews did grow up in Multitudes and Strength, as ap- 
pears by the Jewiſh Wars, which were by them waged in the Days of 
the Maccabees, s The true God, Lord of Heaven and Earth, ſhall be 
their God alone, him they ſhall obey in his Worſhip, Law, and Tem- 
ple in Feryſulem. t i.e. Jo the End or Period fixed for the Moſaic 
and Legal Infſtitutions,for a very long time, not ſimply for ever. This 
was partly fulfilled to this People in their Return, and Re-eſtabliſh- 
ment in their own Land, and in J-rufalem ; but the final,full and eter- 
nal Accompliſhment hereof is nuw fulfilling, and ſhall continue fo, un- 
der the Aeſjah, till fulfilled in the gathering ail the Elett to Chriſt in 

Grace on Earth, and in Glory in Heaven, 4 

8 © And thou, O tower os the flock 4, the ſtrong hold 
of x the daughter of Z:on y, unto thee ſhall ir come, even 
the firſt dominion =, the Kingdom ſhall come to the 
davghtcr of Jeruſalem. 

u Some refer this to that Tower Eder, in the Neighbourhood of 

Bethlehem, built there for the Shepherds convenienter watching, over 

their Hlocks. 'The Prophet may poſſibly allude to this. In the Church, 

Chriſt's Flock, there is a Tower built tor Defence of his Hock, but "tis 

that Name which is a ſtrong Tower, to which the Righteous run, and 

are ſafe. But there was a Tower of this Denominarion in Feruſalem, 
through which Tower the Flocks of Sheep were driven into the Sheep- 

Market, this one Tower by Synechdoche put tor the whole City Feru- 

ſalem. x Ophel, as*tis Hebrew, and perhaps were better rendred a pro- 
per Name of that impregnable Fort, 2 Chron. 27. 3. another conlide- 
rable Part put for the whole. y Or, 0 Daughter of Zion, ſo "twill be 
an Explication of what the Prophet before meant by the Tower Eder 
and Cphel, 7. e. O Zion, O Feruſuem, both in the typical and in the 
myſtical Senſe. # The former Dominion, not in outward Splendor, 
but becauſe the Government and ſupreme Dignity among the People 
was reſtored (after ſeventy Years Captivity) to the former Royal Fa- 
mily, and continued in it till Shzloh came. This in the T ype was ful- 
filled upon the Settlement under Zerubbabel and his Succeflors ; but 
the whole Antitype concerns the Meſhah's Kingdom, and the Goſpel 
Feruſalem, and is fulfilled in the fpiritual Glory of it. Chriſt's King- 
dom is the antient, ſupreme. and moſt glorious Kingdom, and by his 
redeeming us from Bondage of. Hell is ſet up, and ſhall be continued 
firm and unmoveable, more than Eder, Ophel, Zion or Feruſalem, ty- 
pical, as Zak? 1, 32, 32. and more large than ever David's or Solomon's 
Kingdom, Dan. 7. 14+ and therefore greater.in Glory, tor Chrilt is 
King of Kings, Rev. 17.14, and 19.16. This ſpiritual Kingdom came 
firſt to the Fews, Als 13. 46, '/t was neceſſary that the IVord of God 
Jhould firſt have been ſpoken 16 you. The Goſpel -was to be preached 
firſr to the Daughter of Feruſalem, There the Preachers of Pepentance 
and Remiſhon of Sins was to begin, and thence they were to publiſh it 


* NEZCK- 24» 


I. 


a>0 
nike l, 


ther Lovers, nor £0 after them , 


A HH. 


Chay, =P V 


a Now that I have from the T.o:d promif-1 ſach great 9gga we. Senacher 
to you,afrer the ſeventy Years Captivity, an in the Davs 6 ttc», ances | 
ah. 6b As if this caſe were deſperate, or 25 if it would > e: 22 N; b_ ed to Se 
with thee, or . as if thy Hopes would not outwejzh thy Fears OE” in one | 
future Joy would not cepnter-bullance thy preient Griefs, ; i. fomewh 
haft loft thy King Zedeliah, and now art become tributary « ts ,. Church, 
God, thy King is with thee, and will be with thee to prelerys ron chriſtian 
eſtabliſh, enlarge, enrich, and to beautify thee with Salvation 4, though : 
reign over thee in Mount Zten for ever, Ver.7. Thy Loſs at neon, ? they ma 
great, but thy tuture Advantage may well top thele Qutcrics, 117, ed into © 
thou none among thy wiſe Coanſellors left in thee ? Hath 7." 997 Wii 16, 17) 1 
z4r cruelly flain all he took of them, and are the reft fled; y.. ..* 13 F 
wonderful Counſellor is with thee, doth contult and reſolve thar 14, will Mz 
ſhalt not be undone and periſh for ever. Meſſiah, the Wiſdom .c. 

aj . : : _ on ef his braſs k 
Farher, hath the Condu@ of thy Sufferings, Deliverance and Reef ; 
bliihment, in which thou mayeſt at laſt glory. e This great Di&. ph and. 
of Spirit appears by thy Outcries, like thoſe of a Woman in ; ey {and thi 
of which no great Reaſon can be given,all things conſidered; ng i earth 7. 
than a Woman at her full time, and bringing forth the Fruit gf i” | g Thi 
Womb, to the preſent Increaſe and future Honour of the Eamjjr expreſs I 
whoſe Pains end in Joy, Fobn 16. 21. ', Daughter 

19 Be in pain, and labour to bring forth f Church, 
daughter of Zion y , like a woman in travail þ,", State, and 
now 7 ſhalt thou go forth out of the City k, and thoy og 
ſhalt dwell in the field }, and thou ſhalt go evey tg Ba. Church e1 
bylon mz, there ſhalt thou be delivered » : there the than her 0 
LORD o ſhall redeem p thee from the hand of thire _ _ 
-nemies 3 


enemies g.. 
f Tt may be read, Thou ſhalt be in pain, and thou ſhalt labour, gc, c, 
It will be a Prediction of t:- Troubles, Sorrow: 114 Dangers that the 


pieces, anc 
that is thre 


ſhall meet with in the Wars againſt the Babylonians, and in their Cap. ps 
tivity under them. g All the Houſe of Judzh, particularly you thx = take | 
dwell in Jeruſalem, and near Mount Zion. h Whoſe Sorrows are very which the 
ſharp, but ſomewhat mitigated by ExpeCtation of a good Delivery doexpreſs 
and the Birth of a living Child, Iet your Hopes ſo mitigate your Sr. down her 1 
rows too, 7 E're long, within a few Years you will ſee or hear thr Zion expre 
Iſrael is carried captive, (which Micah lived to ſee) this may he 44. er of Enem 
monition, it is certainly a Token that you ſhall be Captives too, an! js thresh'd 
this came upon them one hundred and thirty Years after, when in 22. the rebuilc 
dekiah's time the Daughter of Zzon was deplorably waſted, Conquered their Wars 
and captivated by Necbuchadnezzar. k Forced thereto by the prevailing nemies in Þ 
Power of the Babylonians, who took Zedekiah and thoſe that accomp. Words, as 
nied him when they ſtole out of the City, theſe did go out when they hard Heart 
could keep in it no longer, 1 As conquered, made Priſoners, ar! ſelf. And 
held ſo in the Fields under a ſtrong Guard,until all theConquered yere port his ov 
brought together, that they might in one Body be led away. Intheir down and t 
Journey to Babylon they were forced to lodge in the Fields, alſoer- he hath ſom 
poſed to all the Inconveniencies of Heat-in the Day, and of Coldin ances he he 
the Night, weary, hungry, thirſty and faint, near to Death. n0 Church-Hiſt 
Daughter of Zo, thou ſhalt certainly be carried Captive to Babylm, of the Inſcr 
where thy Dwelling ſhall be little bettered, thou ſhalt dwell by the Ri ſhalt conquer, 
ver, without the City. #* By Cyrus firſk, and by Darius #yſtaſpinext, wards the Je 
and by Artaxerxes in Nehemiah's time, alþthis as Type of a greater De both many a 


liverance. 0 The everlaſting God, thy God, whoſe Servants the 7 
fan Kings that favoured the Fews were,and by whoſe Motion they did 
incline to releaſe them. p The Hebrew Word points out a Redemp- 
tion by the next Kinſman, and fo fairly minds us of the Meſſub, the 
great Redeemer of the Church. And to him and the Redemption of 
che Church by him do theſe Deliverances ultimately and principally 


with, and ſu 
eb forth cong 
te made bis 

and ſo it may) 
Slould by the 
it to the Lori 


to all Nations, Luke 24. 47. This Text, and ſuch like, the blinded 
Few doth take in a literal Senſe only,as if it promiſed a temporal Do- 
minion over all Nations, and a worldly Kingdom to the Meſhah, in 
which they expe a large ſhare z but whar is literal, and concerned 
the Fews alone, was limited to them that came out of Zabyloniſh Capti- 
Vity, and hath been fulfilled to them. ; 

9 Now @ why doſt thou cry out aloud b ? 7 there no 
Kingc in thee ? is thy counſellor periſhed 4? for pangs 


nave taken thee as a woman in travail e, 


and bring his Enemies and his Churches Enemies together, 0195 592 


| point, q Who would have detained the People of God longer inSl- will, and the: 
very, Or who would have hindred the rebuilding of the Temple, and it, 0 The $ 
the Re-cſrabliſhment of the Worſhip of God: proportionably to this their Hand, 
Type doth the Antitype anſwer, Luke 1. 74, 75. and the Ten 
11 © Now y alſo many nations s are gathered apainſ Spoils of Ene 
thee, that ſay «, Let her be defiled x, and let our eye look tour 
upon y Zion z. | Thoughts of 
7 7.e, Ee long, the time is near at hand. s Many for Number, Lord of all 
and great for Name, mighty in Power, all that were at that time con- : 
tederate with, or fendatary to Senacherib King of A{]yria,or elle tothe 
King of Babylon. tr The preſent Tenſe for the future, in the prophe- 
tick >tile, to exprels the Certainty and the Nearneſs of the Judgment, The Birth of C 
they will all of them atſemble, and come up againſt Fudah and Feru/t of the Gu 
leni, as Senacherib did when he belieged Feruſalem,or as Nebuchadner;s 4—7, 7] 
did when he took it. # Propole it as their Deſign, hope for it as their France , ts 
end, and boaſt of it as ealy. x Let us uſe her contemptuouſly, tread 64, 
her under foot as a common and polluted thing, let us deftroy her with J OV 
fuch Spite and Scorn as a dcfiled thing deſerveth. So the Phrake, 
2 Kings 23. 8. let her be polluted with Blood, and without Reſpect to te! 
her former Holineſs let us enter, ſack and deftroy her Temple and Pa e: they f f} 
laces. y With delighting our ſelves in the Ruine, let us feed ouret- Won the cheek 
vious revengeful Eye. 4 Upon Ferujalem the Royal Palace, and the a This Verſe 
cred Temple buried in their own Rubbiſh. Others will ha 
12 But they a know nor b the thoughts of the LORD, tion how far t] 
neither underftand they his counſel 4: for he ſhall gather on Fudah anc 
them ec as the ſheaves into the floor f. : nckatge 
4 The gathered confederate Nations, £10n's Enemies. þ Neither _ ba ieak 3 
diſcern nor conſider. c The Deſign of the holy, juft, gracious, and Otder 8 -_ be 
faithful God, who is God of his People, of ./ſracl ; who will humble, BR 4 cit Af 
but not extirpate ; who will purify by, but not conſume in, the Fur- On 
nace 3 God's Thoughts to /ſrael is to give him an expefed or: and : _ 
a The ſame thing in ſomewhat different Phraſe, this Elegancy ever Þ Vheſies, 3 uy % 
added to confirm the thing foretold. e By his ſecret, juſt and effettu- , ” V. ( 
al Providence diſpoſing all things to facilitate their gathering cogether the vio] ming. 
that they ſhall do, and yet God alſo ſhall do it ; he as the firſt Cauics the CE of 
they as the ſecond z he moves according to his own Pleaſure,they more Daphte a mw 
as they are ſecond and dependent Agents, they ſhall as a Fire puſg* 00 wprks G ! 
out the Droſs, or a Wind blow away the Chaff and lighteſt Coſ% a E An 
which is that God intendeth ; bur they conſult only to extinguii tn ninety fink wn 
People; to cut them off that they be no more a*Nation, f A pony vary B o_ 
very intelligible Simily. The Husbandman gathers the Sheaves 10-0 muſt be this ;_ 
Floor to threſh them ; ſo God gathers, 7. e. in due time he ;1t E- Vol II 608 


may be bruiſed, broken and deftroyed utter!y, This lecns v.19 7 


- 
{144% 


ap. V. 5 
P gathering his Power azainft Fernjalem, and the Circum 
tances well 


ed to Senachert 
in one hundre 


" ” - j - 4 | 
# 4 * "- i- ET, 
M TI E! A d Ft. p : ; ; 


* | Arian which had taken all but Feruſatem, and did inveſt Feruſuemn 
n- |f003 Or Babylonian, which afterward behheged and took Ferujzlem, 
b, but perhaps to the Slaughter made on the Enemies fack'd tlie City, burnt the Temple, and captivated the People. e Hath 
1 in prophetick Stile, cettainly will lay Siege againſt the Inhabitants of 
that is farther off, indeed running through all Ages of the | Feruſalem, the only People of God at that Time 5 both King, Judges 
ſhall be finally accompliſh'd in the Ruin of the Anti- | arid Citizens were all encloſed in the Siege. f The proud, ſucceſsful 
m ; then ſhall that of Zech, 12, 3. be tulfilled, when | and oppreſſive Enemy. g& The King, ſupream Judg. þh Not the ten 


herib's ; . . . q 
Senach enough lute this ; yet is not this to be confined or reſtrain- 


d twenty ſeven Pcovinces in Ef/her's time, looking to 


- LR 


though all Nations gather themſelves againſt Feruſul2m, ver 'tis thar | Tribes, though they are uſually called by this Name, bur the two 


ſomewhat 

Church, and 

chriſtian Kingdo 

they may be cut in pieces, when the Vine of the Earth ſh21l he gather: 
ed into the 


16, 17» 18, 19, 20, 21» 


i3 Ariſe g and threſh þ, O Daughter of Zion : for 1 


Tribes that adhered to David's Family. i This is a proverbial Speech 


Winepreſs of God's Wrath, Rev. 14. 19, 20. aud 1, 45g | expreſſing a very contemptuous Uſage of the Perſon ſpoken of, and 


"twas fulfilled partly when Senacherib's General Rabſhekab did fo vilify 
good Hezekzab, and not content herewith vilified the God of Iſrael 4 


will make thine horn Iron 7, and ! will make thy hoofs | {0 as 2 King. 18. 19, &c. and J/z. 37. 23. It was more fully and: lite- 


braſs k, and thou ſhalt beat in pieces / many people m: 


rally accompliſh'd, when Zedekiah, his Children, his Counſellors, and 
his Officers of State were moſt barbarouſly uſed by the inſulting Bby- 


and 1 will conſecrate » their gain o unto the LORD p, | tonians, > King. 25. 6, 7. 2 Chron. 36. 13, 17, 18, &ce and Fer. 52.6, 


4. 
- 


'earth 7. 


- 
AY 


expreſs Pr 


Daug 


. £ 
_ and this shall be by the reviving Power of her God. 


Decorum to the Metaphor, ver. 12. uſed to expreſs the gathering o 


the Enemy into: the Floor to be broken, the future Strength of the 


&c, Since all this muft be done againft us, make hafte, © thou proud 


Chap. V, 


ind their ſubſtance q to * the Lord of the whole 


This Imperative may be read in the Future Tenſe, and ſo be an 
omiſe ; it is however an implicite Promiſe made to the 
hter of Zion, the Jewiſh Church, Type of the Goſpel Catholick 
hat she hall be raiſed out of a captive, low and D__—_ 

Soina 


Enemy, and do it, for *twiff end in our deliverance and thy ruine. 


in Iſraels : whoſe goings forth have been from of old, 
f| from + everlaſting t. 


Church employed ſucceſsfully, ( more by the Arm of her Redeemer | the Tribe of Fudab, ſtiled therefore Berh-lehem of Fudah, Mar. 2. 5, 6, 


than her own) in the ſubduing and breaking her Enemies is here fore- 


m 50 called, ſay ſome, from Caleb's Wife; but that's not probable, for 


told and promiſed, as tis allo 7/2. 41. 15. Chriſt will thus punish his | it had the Name long before Caleb's Wife was thought of, as appears, 


Fnemies3 ſo Babylon Typical, as threatned Fer. 51. 33. was beat to 


Gen. 35.19. It is more likely to be called Ephratah from the richneſs 


pieces, and ſo shall Antitypical Babylon in due time be broken as Straw | and fruitfulneſs of the Land where it was fituate 3 the Zeb, Word 
that is thresh*d into ſmalleft pieces like Chaff. 7'Some taking this for | whence this is derived importing fruitfulneſs, whence alſo *twas called 
the horny part of the Hoof of the Ox which did tread out the Corn, | Beth-lebem, the Houſe of Bread. n Some read this asan Interrogati- 


make it to be in Senſe the ſame with the Hoofs made Braſs z but they 


on, Art thou little ? which ought to be reſolved by a Negative, thou 


that take it as our Verſion doth for the Horn properly taken, with | art not little, and ſo reconcile Marth. 2. 6. to this of the Prophet. 
which the horned Beafts do push and thruft down, break or wound, | Somedo read it in the Neuter Gender, Jt is 4 little thing for thee to be 


doexpre the Power and Strength of the Church firm as Iron to beat 
down her Enemies. & By this figurative Speech is the Strength of 
Zion expreſſed, by which $he treads under foot, and breaks the Pow- 
er of Enemies into pieces that it shall never be repaired, as Straw that 


3s thresh'd in the Floor and broken like Chaff, In the times after 


the rebuilding of Feruſalem the Jews grew to ſuch Strength that in 
their Wars they did, eſpecially in the-Maccabees times, break their E- 
nemies in pieces. But here is a myſtical and ſpiritual Senſe of theſe 
Words, as they refer to the Meſſia's Kingdom, in which he will break 
hard Hearts by the Power of his Word, and convert Sinners to him- 
ſelf, And by the Power of his Almighty Arm will defend and ſup- 
port his own Subjeas, whilft he doth by invincible Strength throw 
down and trample into Duft his and their Enemies; and this Power 
he hath ſometimes evidently exerciſed already in the various Deliver- 
ances he hath wrought for his People, which ſtand recorded in the 
Church-Hiſtoriesz of this Strength you may truly ſay what is-reported 
of the Inſcription in the Crols appearing to Conſtantine, In thus thou 
ſhalt conquer, 1 Such as were Enemies in Diſpofition and Carriage to- 
nards the Jews, though Neighbours in their Situation ; theſe were 
both many and mighty Enemies, ſuch Chriſt's Church hath to conteſt 
with, and ſuch Chriſt will conquer for his Church, for he 'tis who go- 
2 forth conquering and to conquer, Rev. 6. 2. And all his Enemies fyall 
be made bis Footſtool, Pal. 110.1. n Some refer this to the Church, 
addſoit may well enough be applied. The Redeemed of the Lord 
ould by their own A& and Deed become the Lord's. Others refer 
it tothe Lord, he will conſecrare, it*s beſt put both together the Lord 
vill, and therefore the Church will, God requires it, they conſent to 
it, 0 The Spoils of their conquered Enemies, what they get out of 
their Hand, So the Tabernacle was enrich*d with the Spoils of Egypt, 
and the Temple built with that which David did dedicate of the 
Spoils of Enemies 3 and Perfan Bounty built the ſecond Temple. þp 
Tothe true God for his Honour and in his Service. q Their Power, 
Glory and Wealth, all they have and are. r With Humility and low 
_—_ of all they do, as done to him that doth not need it, being 
ord of all, 


EH AF. V. 


The Birth of Chriſt promiſed to be at Bethiem-Ephratah, and rhe converſion 
of the Gentiles, 1 3» his feeding and governing bis Church, 
4—7. Their growth and vidtory over all their enemies; God's ven- 
&zance againſt the diſobedient, $ I%o 


I OW a gather thy ſelf in Troops b, O Daugh- 
ter of Troops c; he d hath laid ſiege againſt us 
e: they f ſhall ſite the judg g of lirael & with a rod up- 
01 the cheek 7. | 
a This Verſe is, ſay ſome, a harp ſarcaſm againſt 1/raePs Enemies, 
Others will have them to be a Repetition of the Evils, and a Deſcrip- 
tion how far thoſe Evils should prevail, that were efre long to come 
Upon Fudah and Feruſalem, by either Senacherib and his 4jjyrians, or 
by Neouchadnezzar and his Babylonians, to whom God's Leople ſeem 
thus to ſpeak ; we have heard what we muſt ſuffer for a time, and 
low we shall be delivered and triuraph at laſt; and fince that is the 
Order, firſt Aflitions, afterwards Salvation, delay not, O thou E- 
nemy, but now, 6 Summon in thy Forces, appoint thy Rendezyous, 
bring thy ſpoiling waſting Troops, thy mercile(s and bloody Troops, 
and torm thy Army; O Aſhrian ; of whom much like this jſaiab pro- 


eiolence of both which they were to ſuffer, and from both which 


r00Þs that ſpoiled, cut off and deftroyed, and had been more than 


unety fire Years together in the ſucceſſive Reigns of rheſe four Mo- 
archs. Babylon allo in her time was as troubleſome to Fudah, and 


among the thouſands, to have a Captain or Ruler of a Thouſand in Fu- 
dab, it is much greater Honour which ſhall be put upon thee, out of 
thee ſhall come he that is to be chief Ruler and Head of all the Peo- 
ple of God, the Meſſiah; much like Phraſe is that 2 King. 20. 10, 
and 1/4. 49. 6+ there is an Expoſition of the Word 7ſair in the Text, 
as denoting the contrary to our uſual Notion of it ; ſo Fer. 43. 4. the 
Chald. Paraphr.explains it by Sultans or Princes : but I queſtion whe- 
ther one Initance from the Scriptures can be given in which T/air ſig. 
nifies Great, Notable or Chief 3 our Tranſlators have better rendred 
it with ſupplying the Adverſative Though, and make the Senſe plain 
and eafie, As for Beth-lebem-Ephratah, ſhe is ſo little that ſhe is ſcarce 
to be ranged among the Cities of Fudah which go out by a thouſand, 
or are led out by one that is Head, Prefett or Captain of a thouſand. 
0 This was the Royal Tribe from which the Meſſiah was to riſe, this (as 
other Tribes) was divided into thouſands, and a Head appointed to 
each thouſand, and of theſe the thouſand, or in oux Language, the 
Regiment of Berb-lehem was one of the leaft tothe Eye. p Out of the 
Tribe of Fudah, and out of the City Beth-lehem ſhall he come, 72. e. 
be born. q For to do that great Work God hath deſigned to do by 
the Meſſiah. 7 King and Soveraign. $s Amidft the Jae) of God, the 
whole Jſrael as well that after the Faith, as that after the Fleſh. 
Chriſt the Lord in the midft of them, ch-4. 7. # Whoſe Generati- 
on, as he is the Son of God Equal with his Father, is eternal, This 
afſerts the eternity of his Divine Nature. | 

3 Therefore « will he x give them up y, until the 
time z that ſhe that travaileth a hath brought forth b : 
then the remnant of his brethren c ſhall return unto the 


Children of Iſrael d. 

u Or, nevertheleſs, as the Particle will bear. x God the God of J/- 
rael, y To the Chaldeans, to be waſted by them, and to be led into 
Captivity, and to be afflicted there for their Sins committed in their 
own Land againft God. x Until 70 Years be expired ; this the time 
appointed for the puniſhing the Jews. 4 The Daughter of Zzo7 com- 
pared here to a Woman in Travail. & Be delivered out of Captiyi- 


4 ty, compared here to a Woman's bringing forth, as chap. 4. 9, 10. c 


Z. e- The Brethren of the Meſſiah, thoſe of Fudah and Benjamin, who 
were carried Captive, 4 Being ſet free by Cyrus, ſhall return to their 
own Land and be there eftabliſhed 3 and they shall return with 1/744} 
rather than 0: all this referring in the Letter to their Redemption 
out of Babylon, (which was the Effet of the Mefſſhah's Power and Mer- 
cy towards them, as chap. 4.wv. 10. and chap. 5, v. 2.) hath a farther 
Reference toa more glorious Redemption, and to intervening Af- 
flitions which ſhould fall upon the Fews from after their Reſtitution, 
and reſetling in Canaan, unto the coming of Meſſah in the Fleſh,when 
born of the Virgin ; and that of Jſaiab 7. 14. $hall be fulfilled 
when Meſſiah, Ben David $hall ſet up his Kingdom, and deliver 
the whole 17/rgel of God from their Captivity under Ignorance, 
Sin and Hell, and $hall bring in the Gentiles, that Remnant of 
his Brethren, and unite them to the true Jaz}, and make them 
one Church to God, 


of the LORD g, in the Majeſty h of the Namez of the 
LORD his God k, and they ſhall abide: for mz now # ſhall 


he o be great unto the ends of the earth p. 
e The Ruler born in Bethlehem, the Meſſiah ſhall and ; ſometimes 


this Poſture denoteth the Miniſtry of a Servant, but here it ſpeaks 
the readineh, chearfulnels, firmneis and ftability of both the Ruler, his 
Plelies, 1/2. 8. 6, 7, 8,9, 10, 11- And this Paſſage of Micah may alſo | Government. and Kingdom. f As a Shepherd that does diligently 


&r refer to the Babylonian Army under Nebuchadnezzar, under-| watch over, guide, preſerve and feed his Sheep, or as Rulers are ca]- 
led Shepherds, Chriſt is that good Shepherd, Fokn 10. 14. and he is 


the Jews $hould have a glorious Deliverance e're long. c O Nineveh, | the righteous and holy Goyernour, and his Government sball have no 


Daughter of Troops. From her firſt Founder she was a City full of | end, J/a. 9. 7. g In the Afiſtance which God hall give him, for 
Chrift-Man was carried through this great Work, redeeming, ſetting 


Ordinarily ſo under Pul-Tiglath, Pileſer, Shalmaneſer and Senacherib for | up, eftablishing his Church by the Power of the Father, who was 


with him, and upheld. him, as was promiſed 7/2. 61. 1,2, 3+ All 


Power in Heaven and Earth was given to Chriſt eur Mediator, who 


© ©o2 Strength 


Vol, 1 


muſt o_ Daughter of Troops alſo. 4 That is the Enemy, either | being Eternal God, of equal Power with his Fat2cr, doth in his own 


2 Bur k thov, * Beth-lehem 1 Ephratah 2», though thou * Joh, 7, 
be little » among the thouſands of Judah 0, yet out of 42 
thee ſhall he come forth p unto me q, that #5 to be ruler y 


kt And Heb. 1 Not in the Tribe of Zebulwn, Foſh. 19. 15. but in 49s of 6+ 


4 < And he ſhall ſtand e and || feed f inthe ſtrength [! Or;74/2. 


Bae 6 O25 7 2 ere 


—trr hm men —m—_ po_— 
_ — 4 - 


—_- 


Chap. V. 


4. Heb, 
Princes 0 


Mews 


+ Heb. 


ear tip. 


| Or,witþ the ſivord b, and the Land of Nimrod c in || the entran- 


ker own 
mailed 
ſword, 


called many, when 'tis ſaid of Nebuchadnezqur, . that God gave him | 


M IT C 


A H. 


Strength overcome all Enemies, remoreth all Difficulties, gathereth all Nations and Kingdoms, Fer. 27. 6, 7, 8. (or elſe amid}? the Nati. 


and governeth his Church, and will do ſo to the end of the World. | ons) their Neighbours after their return and re eſtabliſhment jn 
þ Such vilible, convincing Tokens of a Divine Power and Glory work- | own Land ; this Remnant wherever they are. k Either ſubfitin 
ing in him, and with thoſe he ſengeth to preach the Goſpel, I mean | multiplying as the Dew ; or elſe as the Dew refreſheth the G: 2'; 
Apoſtles, and all managed to the Glory of God. 7 By Commiſhan js beneficial to it, fo where this Remnant is, it ſhould be a Bleff; 
from the Lord, in whoſe Name Chrift came, preach'd, wrought NMi- | thoſe about them that uſe them friendly, ſo Hoſe 14.5. I 


racles, and inftituted his Goſpel-Church. & ze. God the Father, I 
His Sheep, his Subjects, his redeemed Iſrael, his Church made up of 
converted Fzws and Gernrilzs, ſhall continue, the Gates of Hell ſhall 
not prevail againſt them. # The Church is ſo redeemed and efta- 
bliſh'd, that Chriſt the Meſſiah might be glorified, God will give him 
a glorious Name, therefore theſe things are diſpoſed in this manner. 
2 Either e're long, or in due time, at the ſet time. o Meſhah. p 
Whole redeeming Grace ſhall be publiſh'd to che Ends of the Earth, 
and his Dominion, his ſpiritual Kingdom {hall be enlarged wide as the 
World it (elf. All here ipoken in this Verſe 1s too great any ways to 
he applied to Zerubbavel, as ſome F-ws themlelves contels. 

5 And this q man r ſhall be the peace 5, when the Al- 
ſyrian ſhall come into our Land *t: and when he ſhall: 
tread in our Palaces «, then ſhall we x raiſe agalnſt him 
ſeven ſhepherds y, and cight + priactpal nien z. 

This Verſe, as the former, is abftrnſe, and tne Particulars are not 
caſily accommodated to times and things. 9 50 the Hebrew, and it 
may be read as the Neuter Gender, an be reterr d to time, or thing, 
or both, following in the Text thus z At that time this thing ſhall Þ>c 
our Peace, viz. when th2 4ſyrizn thall invade us, we ſhall raile by 
our Pravers ſufficient Strength againſt him, here expreſt by ſeven 
Shepherds, Ge. our Verſion ſupplies the defett of the Subſtantive 
with Man, x 4i,e. The Meſhah the Ruler, who ſtands and feed> in 
the Strength of the Lord. s Which is promiſed to, and expected by 
the People of God. All their preiervation and deliverances are not 
only for the Sake, hurt effefted by the Power of the Meſhah. 7 As 
Senacherib did within a few Years after this Prophecy was delivered, 
and then by the Power and Authority of Mcſhah was Senacherio and 
his Army defeated, and Fudea's Peace was ſecured. u Which the Aſ- 
ſyrian did in all the Cities of Fudah, except Feruſalem, againſt which | 
he could do nothing, becauſe God-Man the Meſſiah was with Zezekiah 
and Feruſalem, as toretold, ja. 8. 8, 9, 10. and chap. 37+ 32, 33» 34» 
25. x Zezekiah, and with him the Prophets and People by Prayer to 
God, ſhall prevail with God to ſend Deliverance and Salvation to 
them. »y The Number is certain, but put for an uncertain, and the 
quality of thoſe raiſ?d is expreſt by Shepherds in a Decorum to the} 
Repreſentation of the People of God by the Metaphor of Sheep or 
Hock, of which Shepherds do particularly take Care. 2 Here again 
a determinate Number is put for an Indeterminate, and for a ſuthci- 
ent Number, that the Effe& may be ſure. - God will raiſe a ſufficient 
Number of Deliverers for his People z this the Import of this Phraſe, 
25 elſewhere ſix Troubles and ſeven, Job. 5. 19, Thus in the Letter 
and Hiſtorical Reference, I ſuppoſe the Words do loux to the won- 
derful Deliverance of #ezeliah and Jeruſalem from the Aſſyrian, but I 
doubt not they have a myltical and ſpiritual Reterence, and contain a 
Predifion of that Peace Chriſt did make, and doth maintain for his 
Churches againſt all Enemies typified by the Aſſyrian. Beſide this 
Expoſition given, I mult not pals over that note, viz, The Word 
rendred Peace, fignifieth alſo Recompence, and ſo might be rendred, 
This. ſhall be the Recompence of the Aſſyrian by the ſeven Shepherds, ren- 
ared. for bis invading and ſpoiling Judea, and for attempting” againſt 
Jeruſalem. ; : 


6 And they a ſhall + waſte the Land of Aſſyria with 


ces d thereof : thus ſhall he dd deliver us e from the Aſſy- 
Tian f when he cometh into our Land, and when he 
treadeth within our borders g. | 


a The ſeven Shepherds and eight principal Men, 7.e. thoſe great, 
wiſe, and ſuccelsful Inſtruments of GoJ's Revenge, and of his Church- 
es deliverance. b This Paſſage ſeems to point to the Babylonizns, who 
did invade, waſte and ſubdue the A{jyrizn Kingdom under the Con- 
du of Meredach Baladan King of 846;1on, called allo Berodach, 2 King. 
20. 12. he ſent the Congratulatory Embatly to Zezekiah newly by Mi- 
racle cured of his mortal Diſeaſe, and delivered from the Aſſyrian, 
1ſa. 39. 1, 2. This Merodach taking the opportunity of the weakneſs 
of the 4ſhrian Kingdom, partly by the great Slaughter of Senacherib's 
Army and the Murder of that mighty daring Monarch, and partly by 
the Civil Wars which enſued between the Regrcrdes and 5jarhaddon, 
took Arms, and ſucceeded in the Attempt ſubduing the A4j[y72an King. 
dom with torce and bloodſhed enough. c The ſame lay ſome with the 
Land of 4fſyriz, but others perhaps with better reaſon refer this to 
Babylon, and the Kingdom thereof, which by Nebuchaine33ar's Hand | 
deſtroyed the Jews, Jeruſalem and Temple, and was afterwards de- | 


ſcroyed by the Medes and Perfizns, whom God raiſed to puniſh Babyloz + 
and releaſe the Jews. | 


4 As we read it denoteth both the fortified | 
Frontiers, the Garriſons which keep all the Entrances of the King- | 
dom ; it denoteth alſo their Cities, through the Gates of which was 
great entrance, or their Courts of Judicature which were kept in the 
Gates; both their military Power ſhould be reduced, and their civil 
Power alſo by the prevailing Conquerour, 44 In this manner ſhall 
He, 2. e. the Meſſiah, e deliver the Jews his People. f Both as Type | 
of all other Enemies, and he an Enemy to the People of Go1, g See 
this explained, ver. 5. let. . I add that what is rendred when, might 
be rendred becauſe, and note out the reaſon why the Lord Meſſiah 
doth iv deal with 4{lyria firſt, and Babylon next. 


7 And the remnant of Jacob h ſhall be in the midſt of 
many people, as a dew k from the LORD Z, as the ſhow- 
ers upon the graſs m, that tarrieth not for man, nar wait- | 
eth for the ſons of men 7, 

þ Both the Remnant which ſurviveth the ſacking and burning of 
their City and Temple, and carried Captive, live in a ſcattered © on- 
dition ; and the whole Remnant, according to the EleQtion of Grace, 


whether of Facob after the Fleſh, or aiter the Spirit. 7 Either among 
the ſeveral People under the Babyloni} Domjnion, which may well be 


their 
5 and 
and 
ngto 


Ft ſhall be 


the peculiar Work of God, as Dew hath no other Father or Fountain « 
ſo the Bleſhngs onFzccb,and the Blefſing by him on others ſhall h« 
the Lord ; ſo God vlefſeth thoſe that bleſs Abraham's Seed, Gen, 
SO Cy7us received his Bleſſings, and his Perſians with him, Iſa, 4 


from 
2.3% 


. . . , [ 
3, 4+ m The ſame thing in a different. but very apt expreſſor, Toy 


tions kind to Facov ſhould for this ſpring and flouriſh, as the Gras 
doth by the Dew and Showers, 


7 Tt ſhall be the only Work of Ggs 
he ſhall by his 1mmediate Hand bleſs ſuch as he alone, without the 
help of Man, giveth Dew and Showers. As this was fulfilled in the 
Type defore the Goſpel of the Kingdom was preached to all Ni. 
ons, ſo it hath been, now is, and ever ſhall be fulfilled in Apes 1, 
come. God's Remnant 1hall be a Bleſfing to the Places they live in 
and the Perſons they live with, as Facob was to Laban, ' my 
Reg and Foſeph was to Poriphar, and to the Keeper of the 
riſon. 


S T7 And the remnant of Jacob ſhall be among the 
Gentiles in the midit of many People », as a Lion + 
mong the Beaſts of the Foreſt, as a young Lion aro 
the flocks of || ſheep p - who if he go throvgh, both ig 
treadeth down q, and teareth in pieces r, and none cz 
deliver «c. | 

n Vid, ver. 7. let. 7. Who are Enemies that do injure them, » For 
Strengrh and Courage, which the Beafts of the Foreſt dare not 
pole, and cannot refift ; ſo ſhould this Remnant, much like that 7, 
2C. 8. Þ A ſecond Alluſion of the ſame import, but yet with ſme 
greater Emphaſis; in the former Compariſon, the greater Cattle. 
led Behemoth ; in this Sheep, much lefſer and weaker Cattel are. 
pared with the Lion and young Lion. q Overbeareth, and throys 
down by Strength, and treads under foot with as much eaſe asa Nan 
would tread on Worms, or tread down Straw for the Dunghil. r Tg 
devour, fatisfy his Hunger, and repair his Strength for a new afſult 
on his Prey. s That dares attempt a reſcue, but the Prey is le ur. 
der the Lion's Paw, to ſatisfy the hungry Beaſt ; ſo ſhall /ſrael be afer | 
their return out of Captivity, and while they keep the ways of the 
Lord 3 ſo they were in Eſther's time againft ſuch as would haye de. 
ſtroyed them; ſo in the Maccabees time, when they ſubdued the Nxi. 
ons about them. But the conquering Power of the Word, the Rv 
of Chrift's Strength, doth greater wonders than the Sword of tie 
Maccavees ever did. It is the mighty conquering Power of the Gd: 
pel that is here ſhadowed forth to us. | 


9 Thine * hand # ſhall be lift up upon thine adverſz 


ries x, and all thine enemies y ſhall be cut off z. 

t Meſhah, or a People of God, nay both, for as much as whaterer 
theſe can do, they do it, not in their own Power, but in Chrift's Pow 
Er. u Thy Strength and Power, for ſo does the Scripture uſualyer 
preſs Strength or Might, x Shall be greatly exalted, and ſhall be 
wonderfully ſucceſsful againſt Enemies, who in great Multitudes did 
ſet upon the People of God z ſuch were thoſe who fought the Me 
bees, and were defeated by them. y Who do obftirately holdonin 
the Enmity of their Natures, Ways and Doings. 2 Finally, certainly, 
eternally and dreadfully periſh. This hath a partial fulfilling now, 
but its full Completion will be when Chriſt will appear the Julget 


quick and dead, when all his Enemies ſhall be made his Footftool, P/al 
I IO. Is 


10* And it ſhall come to paſs in that day a, faith tle; 
LORD 5, that I will cut off thy Horſes out of the midſt; 


of thee, and I will deſtroy thy Chariots d - 

4 When the threats againſt the Enemies, and the Promiles to the 
People of God ſhall be made good. 6 This is added for affuring ti: 
PFertormance of the things foretold, c Not in Judgment, but in Mer 
cy, tor there ſhall be no ſtich need of them, nor ſhall the Church 
God any more rely on them; ſo #oſ.14.3. We will not ride upmHoſe; 
though we have put confidence in them, we will do ſo no mote. 4 
Warlike Chariots prepared for War z as God alone is, {© they vil 
make him their only truſt. 


11 And Te will cut off the Cities f of thy Land, and 
throw down g all thy ſtrong holds : ; 
e The Lord thy God, and thy Saviour. f Cut off the occaſion 
thy fortifying thy Cities ; as heretofore thou haſt done, thou (hal 
dwell in nnwalled Towns, and need no other defence than what 140 
to thee. g Demoliſh all thy Forts, and Watch-Towers, and Frontier 
Guards : Theſe here mentioved are Means of defence againk Ene 
mies Affaults, in which J/rael had too much truſted ; the others 6 
fore-mentioned, ver. 10. are offenſive Preparations for annoying the 
Enemy; but in the Day of that Peace here ſpoken of, there ſhould 
no Enemy to invade the People of God to put them on thell De- 
fence, nor ſhould they have any need to attempt upon their Ee 
mics; and though theſe Means are lawful to be uſed, yet ſhall Ice 
the Happineſs of God's People not to need them, for their God, fe! 
Lord is the Saviour in midſt of them, and he will cut off Enxm? 
round about them, ſo that vircually this is a Promiſe to 1/42), that 
Adverfaries ſhould be deſtroyed, and fo his Fears diſappear 


12 And I will cut off Witchcrafts þ out. of thine hath 
and thou ſhalt have no more Soothſayers 2. _ 
h 1n this Verſe the Lord foretels the Downfal of all unlawiil AS 
which had been in uſe, though forbidden by the Law of God, 4" 
20. 27. though Jſrael ſhouid have conſulced with God alone, yet the) 
did conſult with Sorcerers. So did Marzaſſeh, and before him, 2 A 
17.17. 7 The very Art ſhall be out of ule, and none ſhall openly p 
formerly conſult with them, or-they make profeſſion 0! foreteliNs 
Events, or what a Iucky Day or Hour to ſet upon al _ 
priſe, or to curſe (as 3alaam would have done) an Enemy £9. 
way for Viftory: no more of theſe, .the Oracles ceaſed when Cry 
was born 5 much to this purpole, Zech, 13, 3. and bh 35+ 74 


Chay 


* 2 *Here 
F-and ye ſtron 


| Cans to hear « 


Bar th, infer i0 


_ 


will 1 
occat 
1 
Rt th y | 
2nd 
hand 
k V 
ſmoot! 
thoug| 
ſon f01 
Name 
the TY 
co th15 
Captiv: 
all Rel! 
to worl 
deem | 
they 
fide hin 
4 . 
"ee of thee 
0 The 
Worſhip 
the othe 
from Ba: 
the appe, 
of Idolat 
hgnifieth 
are thoſe 
{t;oyed ; 
firm ther 
Cities, Or 
hatrys th 
when the 


I5 4 
and fur; 
heard 4, 
q God | 
Word tign 
ethz and ' 
cute it, he 
Wrongs b1 
' frans and 1 
partly ful 
now fulfill 
ked. s Thi 
of God's juſ 
what we do 
the moſt ter 
and Terror : 
t Literally t] 
Nations uni 
Words, all 1 
and to his pe 
With unpa, 
to others. 


Gol's controv! 
rejeteth th! 
proveth and 
patice of 0 


I Ear 


CO 
the hills he 
a Vid, chap 
debate with y 
your ſelves w! 
Lord's Meſlag 
God's Comm: 
Ver, 2. Which 
at eaſe, and n; 
and perhaps t] 
to retire and 
ſelf; ePlead A 
thy God Plain 
mently, let th 
's vide, an 
and Hills on w 
I have blefſed 
vould teſtify t 
and clothed the 
and beautified 
reſt 3 this I 
and there the 
to Devils, and 
Micah, ſpeak a 
ly tor me, Dey 


lath a conty 
With Iſrael } 
$11 the fir 
ills tor Witn 


and Witneſſes, 
Underftand Pr 


I 

ap. V1. 
will in Mercy t0 this People take away theſe tambling-blocks, theſe 
<cations of Sin. : 

- 13 Thy graven Images k alſo will I cut off, and 
3 thy || ſtanding Images } out of the midſt of thee zn ; 
[3 y & . : \ - "us 

and thou {halt no more Worſhip the work of thine 


151 
1and's 1. b 
| t Which were for the Matter of them made of Wood or Stone, 


ſmoothed and faſhioned to the Images, which the blind Id9ojrter 
thought di! Well repreſent his God. / Statues erected in Places cho- 
Name from their Poſture, the Matter tilt the ſame. m O Jſael in 
the Type, and O 1/rael Antitype, this verified among the Fews, who 
0 this Day hate Images for Divine Uſes, and learu'd this in their 
Cantivity 3 and 'tis verified in the Church of Chrift, which condemns 
all Religious UC of Images. 7 *Twas once the great Sin of the Fews, 
ro worſhipand rely on Idols ; but when God 'hall by the Methiah re- 
deem both his J/raels, they ſhall no more tin thus, Zoj. 14. 3. for 
they ſhall know he is the only true God, and there is no Saviour be: 
fide hims - b . 

14 And I will pluck up thy groveso ont of the midſt 
w of chee: ſo will I deſtroy thy || Ciries p. 

0 The Groves were ſome of them abuſed in downright idolatrous 
Worſhip, others of them uſed ſuperſtitiouſly, thus beſide the Word ; 
the other way quite contrary to the Word... but. after the return 
from Babylon, there was a great Reformation in this Point, and after 
the appearing of the Meſhah there had been a greater Eradication 
of Idolatry. p Or, thine Enemtes ; for the Word here uſed,indifferently 
fignifieth both, and they will either agree to this Place, If Cities, they 
17e thoſe devoted to Idolatry, which Deut. 13. 15. were to be de- 
{tioyed ; if you interpret it Enzmz?s, *tis either an Argument to con- 
firm them that they ſhall not need Horſes and Chariots, or defenced 
Cities, or a farther Bleſſing promiſed upon the reforming from 1do- 
latry 3 this an Effect or Eruit of it, God will deitroy their Enemies 
when they have deſtroyed theſe Idols which are his Enemies, 


i5 And I will executeq Vengeance y in anger 
and fury s upon the heathen ft, ſuch as they have not 


heard 4, 
q God ſpeaks to our Capacity, he will proceed, or att, as the ev. 
Word fignifieth 3 he is ſupream Judge : r To whom Vengeance belong: | 
ethz and when he hath paſſed the Sentence, and his Inſtruments exe- | 
cute it, he takes it to himſelf 3 ſo when the Babylonians revenged the 
Wrongs by the Aſjyriaz done to the Fews,and when Cyrus with his Per- | 
fans and Medes avenged the Injuries of Babylon, this Prophecy was | 
partly fulfilled, and in ſucceeding times it was farther fulfilled, and is 
now fulfilling, and ſo will he, until the final Deſtru&ion of the Wic- 
ked. s This ſpoken after the manner of Man ; it includes the greatneſs 
of God's juſt Diſpleaſure, and the EffeQs of it,which are reſembled to 
what we do. when furiouſly angry, at with utmoſt Strength, and in 
the moſt terrible Manner we can ; ſo God will with .as great Severity 
and Terror as Fleſh and Blood can bear proceed againſt theſe Heathens. 
Literally the Nations under the Afſjriaz Monarchy firſt, next the 
Nations under the Babyloniſh Kingdom 3 in the full import of the 
Words, all the Nations that are Enemies to the Lord, to his Chriſt, 
and to his peculiar People, who know not God, nor obey the Goſpel. 
20 unparalleFd Terror, and ſo they ſhall be made Warning-pieces 
t0 0kNers. 


CHAP. VL 


Cof's controverſy with bis people for their unthankfulneſs, 1 ——5. He 
rejeteth their ſervices, and ſheweth them their duty, 6—— 9g. re- 
proveth and threatneth their injuſtice and oppreſſion, and the idolatrous 
praltice of Omri and Achab with deſolation, 10 16, 


l Ear a ye now b what the LORD faith c, Arile 4, 
contend thou e || before the Mountains, and ler 


the hills hear thy voice f. h 
a Vid, chap, 1. ver. 2+ let. 1, m, vn. 6 Whilſt the Lord is willing to 
debate with you before it be too late for you. Though *tis a Man like 
| your ſelves who ſpeaketh, yet he comes from the Lord, and with the 
LorUts Meſſage, and *tis the Lord who ſpeaketh by Micah. This 1s 
| God's Command to Micah, who is bidden to ariſe z ſo Fonab chap. 1, 
ver, 2. Which ſee, Prophets as other Men could he content to tit 
; at eaſe, and neither be troubled by others, or troubleſome to others ; 
| and perhaps the liitle Succeſs of Mzcab's Preaching had occaſioned him 
toretire and fit down; now God rouſeth him, Get up, prepare thy 
ſelf; ePlead Micah the preſent Cauſe, argue the Caſe that is between 
, thy God Plaintiff,and thy People Delinquents. f Plead openly, vehe- 
, mently, let there be Witneſſes to hear the Caſe which is ſoclear on 
e 
e 


God's Side, and ſo full againft thy People, that the very Mountains 

and Hills on which they have ſinned againft me notoriouſly, on which 
. I have bleſſed them abundantly, had they Eyes and Ears, and Voice, 
. vould teſtify that I have planted them with Vines, Olives, Fig-trees, 
, and clothed them with Graſs and Flocks,and ſtored them with Springs, 
, and beautified them with Cedars, Oaks and all pleaſant Trees of the 
4 foreſt; this I have done upon the Mountains and Hills for my People. | 
b and there they have made their Groves, ſer up their Idols, ſacrificed 

to Devils, and committed other Lewdnefſes not to be named. O 
Micah, ſpeak as if thou wouldeft make Mountains hear thee to teſti- 
J fy tor me, Deut. 32. Is 1ſd. 1s 2, 


- 2 *Hereye, O mountains g; the LORDS controverſy h, 
-and ye ſtrong foundations of the earth i: for * the LORD 
WT {th a controverſy with his people k, and he will plead 
1 WY. ith 1irael 1, 

n $11 the firſt Verſe God direQs Micth to take the Mountains and 
; BY Fills for Witneſſes 3 now in this Verſe he doth call upon thoſe Moun- 
WH ns to hear ; It is a Proſopopeia, an elegant perſorating of Hearers 
"HY 74 Witneſſes, as Deur. 32. 1. 1/4. 1. 2. and 2. 2. Some by Mountains 
; underſtand Princes and Nobles, and by ſtrong Foundations of the 
0 Eirth, inferiouc Magiftrates, as #/al. 75+ 3+ but it may as well or bet- | 


MICAH 


ſon tor the purpole, fixed that they move not, had this ditferent | 


*, 


; ter hean Appeal totheſe Creatures in ſo jut a Cat for their Cre: 
; tor. 6 Whole Soveraign Majeſty may well command what he pleatcths 
and expctt to be obeyed, and whoſe unyaralletd Gootnes to Jjr.e! 
ought ro have been uncontroverted Motive: to o55v him in all things © 
yet the Soreraige Goonun-G is flighted and diſobeved, on which he 
now impleads his People, brings his Aﬀtion ag2inft them. 4 Call'd 


before /7ills : Tr is an ex2lanation uf the tormer, outings, 7 it may 
he an Appeal to thoſe deep Foundations which are hid trom any Lye. 
anil which ſeem moſt remote from what is dene on Farth + but the ill 
| Carriage, the Diſobedience and Sin of J\* a21 is {o notorious, that the 


whole Creation may be Subpena'd Witneffes againſt them. &t © ove- 
nant, redeemed and only People, as Amos 3.2. I No longer put off 
the Cauſe, nor forbear to puniſh them, and right himſelf, he will 
bring the Cauſe to Hearing, Judgment and Execution too. 

3 O my people m, what have I don? vnto thee #, 
and wherein have I wearied o thee ? teſtify againſt 
me þ 

m You whole Houſe of 1-421, my People choſen in Abrakem, 1ſzac 
and F4co5, multiplied in Fg ypt, and by many Miracles owned, redcem- 
ed and carried through the Wilderneſs, and ſettled in the promiſed 
Land, 7 It I have done only Good, why art thou weary of me ; if 
thou know any Evil I have done, declare it, ſay what Iniquity haft 
| thou found in me, as Fe". 2.5,31. 0 What grievous or burden- 
| ſome Impotlitions that thou mighteſt juſtly groan under. p Speak, de- 
mepr ſpare nor, thou who canft not recount all the Good I have done 
Z0r thee, and who canft nor find out one Evil I ever did to thee, de- 
Clare what *cis hath cauſed thee to be weary of me. 


4 For * I q brovght thee up out of the land of * Fx: 12, 


Egypt 7, and redeemed s thee out of the houſe of ſer- 


vants ft, and I ſent before thee Moſes «, Aaron x, and * 
Vuriam y, 

q Look as far back as thy coming out of Fg ypr, near ſeven hundre1 
and forty Years agone, with an outftretched Arm. »r Where by Ser- 
vants thou wert oppreſt, where thy Oppreſſors did plot thy utter ex- 
tirpation, where thou ſervedft in the Iron Furnace. 5 Delivered thee 
by mighty Power, and gave E-ypt tor thy Ranſom, I made them pay 
dear. for their detaining thee, and ill uting of thee, t Being Off- 
ſpring of Canaan, they were in their Fathers Eurle doomed to be Ser- 
vants, and were ( as ſervile Minds are) moft barbaroufly cruel to J/- 
7.201, As appears by the bloody Edi againſt the Male-Children,and by 
requiring Brick withour Straw z their Bondage was a cruel Bondage un- 
der which they groaned. u A Man excellently qualified to be a Condu&t 
to them, a very learned, Martial and experienced Man ; he improved 
his firſt :orty Years by the Advantages of a Royal Education firft, and 
next by the great Employments which ſuch Perſons are called to : for 
his Wiſdam and Learning, his Might and Valour, you have witneſs, 
Acs 7, 22. the #ebr, Tradition is, that he fought and got many Bat- 
tels, in which he commanded as Generaliſimo ior Pharaoh, Moſes 
was beſide this admitted to extraordinary Conſults with God, by 
this means their Model of Polity was made very exatt. x A Fer- 
ſon called to the Exerciſe of the higheſt Office in the Prieſthood, 
to offer Sacrifice, and make Atonement for the Sins of the People, 
and to be a Type of the great Interceſſor. »y A Propheteſls to be Aſh- 
ſtant to her Brothers laſt mentioned, to be Example and Counſellor 
* the Women ; God furniſh'd them with Magiftrate, Prieft and Pro- 
pnet. 


5 O my People, remember z now what * Balak * Rev. 2, 


King of Moab conſulted a, and what Balaam b the Son 14: 
of Beor anſwered c him from * Shittim 4 unto Gil- 
gal e, that ye may know the Righteouſneſs of the 
LORD F 

7 O J1/rael think well of it, what I did then was worthy of a grate- 
tul Remembrance to this Day. 4 This Man, though a great and war- 
like Prince, yet would not adventure by plain force to ſet upon 1ſ-ael ; 
he wiſh'd their Ruine, he contrived it, and had he ſucceeded in his 
firft Attempt to bring 1/7ae] under a Curſe, he was reſolved next ta 
attack them by Force. 6 A Man accounted to be a Prophet, and a 
holy Man able to blaft any by his Curſe, and able to advance any Af- 
fairs by his Bleſffing, but really he was a Soothſayer, and a Man of per- 
nicious Counlels, ©c Forced againft his Intereſt and Inclination to bleſs 
Iſrael, Deut. 23. 4, $. and Foſh. 24+ 10» and to confeſs he could not 
prevail with God to curſe J/rae1, So alſo remember how Ba/aam coun- 
felled Balak to draw your Fathers to Sin, how this Snare took, and 
how it coft twenty fcur thouſand Lives. The Story at large you 
have, Numb. 22, 23, 24, and 25, chap. d This the Place where Ea- 
lak began by fair but lewd Women of Midian to debauch 1/ra21 as 
Balaam had counſelled, and fo continued to Gz/gal all along the Bor- 
ders of his Dominion : or elſe thus, remember O my People, how L 
ſpared thee in the matter of Baal-Peor, for which thou delervedſt to 
be deftroyed at Shitrim, remember alſo the Mercies I gave under the 
C ondutt of Foſhua after Myjzs, his Death, which fell out while you 
abode at Shitrim, Foſh. 3. 1. e Where 1/7221 firſt took Poſſeſſion of the 
promiſed Land, and ſaw viſibly the Faithfalneſs of their God, f The 
Mercy, Juſtice, Uprightnels Veracity, as it ſignifies, but here it ra- 
ther denotes the Right on God's Side in this Controverily with h1s 
People. 

6 4 Wherewith z ſhall I þ come before the LORD 7, 
and bow my ſelf before k the high God 1? ſhall I come be- 


fore him with burnt »: offerings, with calves | of a year ny 
0 a4 Yars 


old 1 ? Me ns 
In the foregoing part of the Chapter you have God's Relolution 
to have a hearing, ver. 1, 2, and his Plea for bim'clt agamic ant un- 
rateful People, ver. 3,4, 5 Now in this Verie you have the reſi! t, 
which is either an unfeigned Submiſſion and Jaitincation of God's juic 
Proceedings made by tome of the belt of this Peop:e, or elc an En- 
quiry made by Men among them, who did yet retain 16m? Vpinion 
of their own Integrity 3 much like thoie, 1/4. 55. Vere 3» REY Were 
ready to fay, WE have offered SACrifices as F. quired, Ce WHAT WOu, 
God have us do more ? Or elle "tis an Enquiry whar tne Prophe: 
would farther direc them to do in this Ca'cy Its an 101mLEGOR Lat 


wey 


Chap. VI 


<VZN G0 


* Toſh.5. 9 


14.4" 


V; v wy * — a ” 
Ld -_ nds ml a X 
aadreo- btn EG SPE conahor nem y CEC I _ 
: T *_ 
- y 


CR 


I<x-- 


— A 
a=" 


FAS, 
ec 


Chap. VI. 


they were ready to offer any Sactifices God ſhould require of them ; 
or elſe this Veri2 is the Prophet's Suppoſition that ſome among them 
would be ready to enquire how they ſhould in this caſe behave them- 
{clves. and ſo this Proſopopeia fairly makes way for farther direQion to 
this People: £ 1! irb what, Heb, what Preparation ſhall I make for a due 
and right adreſs unto God ? þ In the Perſon of all the People, or elſc 
in the Perſon of the moſt thinking among ; this 7 is the People of 
the Fems, iItis a Temple-Phraſe,and contains the ſolemn attendance 
on God in his Worſhip, well paraphraſed in the Chald. Par, With 
whar ſhall 1 ſerve before the Lord? &k This is exegctical to the for: 
mer Phraſe, When I come to bow my ſelf and worlhip the Lord,with 
what ſhall T appear ? 7 Such was the God of 1ſrae}, Heaven his Throne, 
the Earth his Footfto-1, Tdols are Dunghil Gods, our God alone 1s the 
God who dwells on high. m Shall theſe ſuffice for Teſtimony that 
1 owe my all to God, or appeaſe his Diſpleaſure, which juftly might 
devour me as the Fire the Sacrifice ? 7 It is probable this repeats 
{as is uſual in Scripture to confirm and affett us the more) the thing 


before mentioned. 


© my % -* Willthe LORD be pleaſed with thouſands of rams, 
Rs, * or with ten thouſands of rivers of oll p ? ſhall I give my 


Ile 


firſt-born q for my tranſgreſſion r, the fruit of my + body 


+Heb.&el- for the fin of my ſoul s ? 


ly. 


5g ag what doth the LORD require of thee y, but * to do juſt- 
Emblethy 1y &, and to love mercy a, and to | walk humbly with thy 
ſelfrswalh God b ? 


ems yy 9 The LORDS voice a crieth þ unto the city cy and || the 
' ſee thy man of wiſdom d ſhall ſee thy namee : hear f yeg the 


which MH. 


ſider. d4 Man is ſupplied to make the Senſe intire, but without that 
ſupply the Senſe might have run plain, And IViſdom will bear, which 
mutt have been reſolved ſome wav like to our Tranſlation, and I know 
none that better fits than that our Learned Tranſlators have ſupplied. 
I know not but that the Abſtratt uſed here tor the Concrete, may ex- 
preſs a Superlative Degree, Wiſdom, i, e. the wiſeſt will hear, Tc, 
e Rightly apprehend and duly reverence the Holinels, Juſtice and Ne- 
cefſarinel(s of God's Proceedings, with his Power and Majeſty in execut- 
ing his juſt Diſpleaſure on brutiſh hardned Sinners, f Conſider well 
and diſcern. g Citizens both of Feruſalem and Samaria,and every other 
City in the Twelve Tribes. 
ing, by which he will plead his Cauſe. Theſe are called rhe Kod, ei- 
ther becauſe they are from God, who once was, and ftill would be a 
Father to them, or kecauſe *tis a comprehenſive Word which takes in 
the various Puniſkments inflited. 


o The Law did dire& the Offering of Rams , ſingle Beaſts for 
ſingle Sacritices ; if this be too little, they ſhall be multiplied, we will 
give many, very many ; for the Phraſe is an Hyperbole. p Cz was 
required too in their Sacrifices in the Meat-Offerings of them, but in no 
great Quantities,a Log or Hin, 7. e. half a Pin or three Quarts: but we 
know ſuch Gifts are infinitely ſhort of the Divine Goodneſs beſtowed 
on us,he who is our God is worthy of Rivers of Oil,multiplied to thou- 
ſands; had we ſuch ſtore, it ſhould be all his. Such like Hyperbole you 
meet in Jſz. 40. 15, 16, 17- q This is propoſed not as a thing 

.praQticable by any Rule of Reaſon or Religion, but as a Proof of 
their readinels (as Abraham) to offer up their Firft-born, as he did 
offer up his //aac to God, It is. much to part with any of our Chil- 
dren, but *tis more to part with the Strength and Glory, and hope of 
our Families z yet right Hypocrites, or like unnatural Heathen, this 
they would do, rather than what would pleaſe the Lord, 7s To ap- 
peale the Anger of the Lord for my Sins, would theſe be Expiatories ? 
The Queſtion is repeated to affett us the more z the Words would 
bear this reading, Shall I give my Einſt-born 2 Thus would be my Sin ; 
The Fruit of my Body ? This would be the Sin of my Soul. 


$ Het hath ſhewed thee 4, O man, what good * : and 


: The Prophet anſwers the Enquiry made, ver, 7. otherwiſe than 
theſe Enquirers did expett ; you who mak? this Enquiry might have 
ſpared this Pains; God himlelt hath already plain enough told you this. 
u O Fews, every one of you might from the Law of God know what 
would pleaſe your- God, and with what you ought to come before 
him, you might have read, 1 Sam. 15. 22. that he delighteth in your 
obeying his Word ; and more early, Deut- 10. 12, 13, 22. the ſame 
practical Rule was laid down. x In it ſelf for you, and well pleaſing 
to your God: from his own Mouth your holy and righteous Fathers 
did know, and fo might you, what is that Good, with which you 
ſhould appear before Gud. » What ſo much ? Or what without ; of 
doth he require any thing without ? It is a Queftion that muſt be re- 
ſolved in a Negative, Comparative or Abſolute z the Lord doth not 
require Sacrifice without Moral Duties,nor doth he require Sacrifice fo 
much as ſuch Duties after-mentioned. 7 To render to every one what: 
is their due, Superiors, Equals, Inferiors, to be equal to all, and 
oppreſs none, in Body, Goods or Name in all your Dealings with 
Men carry a Chancery in your own Breaſts, and do according to Equi- 
ty. 4 Be kind, merciful and compaſhonate towards all that need your 
Kindneſs, do not uſe Severity towards any ; though the Laws of Man 
did not require you to remit of your Pretences, and if you exadted all 
your Right you did not break the Laws of Men, yet you ſhould have 
reſpe& to the Law of Love, and fhew Mercy with delight in ſhewing 
it, Rom. 12.8. and 2 C97, 9. 7. Heb, 13.16. b In all Duties which 
immetiately refer to the Precepts of the firſt Table, in all religious 
Exerciſe and Deportment toward God, keep the Heart fincerely 
kumble toward God, think highly of him, his Laws and Determi- 
nations z murmur not againſt the final Determinations God by his 
Providence makes, complain not of any of his Precepts, know and 
own it, thou art an unprofitable Servant if thou haſt done all, Luke 


17. 10. 


rod h, and who hath appointed z it. 

2 Either by his Judgments, each of which is the Lord's Voice, he 
ſpeaks by them z or rather by his Prophet, and whether People hear 
it or forbear, the Lord himſelf is concerned in it. 65 As to deaf, or 
to ſleepy and ſecureMen ; who will not hear the milder and ſoiter Calls, 
the Prophet muſt cry to them in the loudeſt manner he can ſpeak. 
c To every City in Jſrae! and Fudah, but principally to Feruſalem and 
Samaria, Places of greateſt Concourſe, and where the Men of greateft 
Senſe may reaſonably be ſuppoſed to dwell, who ſhould hear and con- 


hþ The Puniſhments God is now ſend- 


WEAC 4 I 


bians, &c, brought upon 1ſr4el and Fudeh, which were the begiunings 


plain Heartedneſs, Integrity and Honeſtſy among them. $o Dau 
complains of his Times, P/al. 12. 2, 5. 

. 13 Therefore e alſo will 1 make thee ſick f in fmi- 
ting vo , In making thee deſolate g becauſe of thy 
tins 2. 

e For theſe many Sins of Violence, Frauds and Lies, f Some read, 
I have begun to ſmite thee, ſo it ſutes well with the Hiftory of the 
Wars, Rapine, Captivity or Deſolation by the Syrians, Aſſyrians, 44 


of their Sorrows, and God's juft Puniſhments ; but as we read it fit 
in ſmiting, it will as well ſute with the Grammatical Conftruftion of 
the Words, with the Hiſtory too, and thus *twill give the greater En- 
phaſis to the Words; God will *ere long ſo ſmite, that the Strokes of 
his Rod ſhould reach the very Heart and make 1ſrae} Heart-fick of his 
Wounds inflifted on him by the Lord. g This was fully accom 
pliſh'd, when the Kingdom of the ten Tribes was overthrown by 
Shalmaneſer, and the Kingdom of the two Tribes captivated by Nebw 
chadnezzar, h Multiplied, aggravated, obſtinately retain'd, and not 
repented of, = 
14 * Thou ſhalt eat #, but not be atisfied &, and 
thy caſting down 1 ſhall te in the midſt of thee ”, 
and thou ſhalt take hold», bur ſhalt not deliver 0: 
and that which thou delivereſt oo will I give upp to tt 
ſword 9. 
7 Both literally and figuratively taken for uſing what they have. Q 
God threatens, Zev. 26.26. So God did puniſh the Fews, Hg. 1,66 
which ſee. k Not be filled with ſweetneſs or ſtrength in the cating 
ufing of what thou haft, thy Sins ſhall bring either bitterneſs 07 
ſuiciency upon all thou haft, by both all ſhall be made ufelc6 f0 
thee. 1 Thy DeftruQtion, partly by thy Diffenſions , Deſolation 
Violences and Conſpiracies within thy ſelf, and partly by the Enem'e 
breaking in upon thee, and bringing the War into thine owl Bowels, 
m Thou ſhalt be weakned at home by thine own Hands, and be wane 
utterly by thine Enemy, belieging thee in thy Cities and taking theme 
= Though there is ſome variety of readings here, yet the plaine! an 
moſt obvious Senſe is as we render it, whether you do refer £15 tae 
ing. bold to Perſons, as Wife, Children or Friends, whom ( though 
they endeavour to ſave out of the Enemies Hand, yet ) they" 
not. be able to ſave z or if referr'd ro Things, Goods, their moſt ralus- 
ble and moſt portable Goods and Wealth; as Men in Diſtreſs, and fi 


i Hath comifſſioned it, handleth 


ing out or the reach: of Enemies, pack up their beſt Morcablcs,J85 


the Rod, hath choſen it out, ard ftrikes with it, whether it hs 7,, ; 
an, Or Babylonian, or both at leverat times. This is the plain =_ on 
Senſe : others there are which are omitted, becauſe they ſaute — ftre 
Detign of this Work. 66 As 
10 © || Are there yet k the treaſures of wickedneſs} j1 | = 
the houſe of the wicked m7, and the - ſcant meaſure x thay the. - 1 
s abominable o? from 
kt After 10 many expreſs Laws, peremptorily forbidding, ſo mar nao unth 
Examples of Puniſhments on ſuch, after ſo many Reproofs, Menace; fey fltal 
and Exhortations ty ſo many Prophets, dare. you ſtill do fo unjuſtly 2 Pick to fl 
/ Gotten by injurious oppre ſive Courſes, ill gotten Wealth, here a+ He, Han. 
led Treaſures of Wickedneſs ; the Wickedneſs wherewith they rake, "ou or Þ) 
their Wealth together is laid up with their Wealth,as the like is ſaja lea, rians, 
Fam. 5.3. m None have thought of reſtoring their ill gotten Googs Miſt? 1: 
the wicked Fathers, who heap'd them together, laid. them up ay * thong 
their Hcuſes, and the Children retain them z the #ouſe, i, e, Fami1 Fl, 
of theſe do as their Fathers, ſtore up Violence, and fo do direg} 13. thee 
contrary to the firſt Rule, ver. 7. do juſtly. » Which is leſs than 3-5, WINK 
Standard, vid, Am. $. 5+ by which theſe unrighteous Ones did both to 
offend againſt God, and cozen their Chapmen* 0 God abhors ſuch her 
Injuſtice, Prov. 11. 1» and 20, 10,23. and Deut. 25+ 12, 14, 15, 15 t Lay © 
It is moſt hateful in his Sight. ” the Fru 
11 ||Shall I p count them pure q with * the wic.(|0:4 ſhall ro! 
; . . couſe of 
ked balances r , and with the bag s of deceitfy}!*; F 
ghts t ! Str mich af 
Þ It may have ſome reference to the Prophet,as ſpeaking of himſelf i be diſap} 
appointed of God to he a Reprover, an impartial Cenſurer of the Sing ” be chear 
of this People ; when I am ſo to judge of them by their Doings, ſhall 7 lee thine 
flatter them,and ay they are better than they are ? But it better refers other G1 
to God himſelf. q Approve, juſtify or acquit them, as if they were ie 16 0 
righteous, and not worthy to be puniſh'd ? Shall I let them eſcape who 1] th 
are ſuch unjuſt Perſons ? This Queſtion implieth a ſtrong Negation, me 
7 This kind is put for all the reſt, wherewith things bought and fold 0 thei 
were apportion'd, and by which Buyers and Sellers were aſcertain'q - ſolation 
how much they bought. s In which they both kept their Weights ſing h: 
at home, and carried them about with them. # eb. Stones of de. - nle ; 
cett ; they did ( as in many Places with us Men do ) uſe Stones for , on | 
Weights, and this unjuft People did cheat both at home and abroad, t | - 
both the Balance and its Weights were deceitful and condemned, Ley, The. 1 y 
I9. 35, 36. Deut. 25, I3, 14, 15, IG, Worſhin W 
12 For 4 the rich Men x thereof y are full of yio- Serelucy 
lence z, and the inhabitants a thereof b have ſpo- very much 
ken lies c , and * their tongue - is deceitful in theirt MM £ins the i: 
mouth d. deat 
# This is given as an Evidence of the Truth of the Charge, ani 0 =—_ - 
of the juftnels of the Reſolution God had declared to puniſh then, c of = . 
x Who of all Men had leaſt Temptation to deal unjuftly, they weref whi pups 
well provided for, that without a Trade they might live, and in Tr- nn they T 
ding they ſhould haye been content with "ons Gain 3 they ſhould Houſe ry 
have been Examples of Charity and Bounty, but theſe are the Men feral 'f Pr 
deepeſt in this Guilt. » Of Feruſulem, Samaria, and of every trade 2nd ; po 0 
City in the Land, + Full of Principles, Praftices and. Fruits of Vie 2 Kings wt 
lence and Rapine, their Minds inclined to Cheatings and Diſhonefty, ola $4 
their Prattices managed with Fraud and Falſhood, and their Riches fead 6 bo = 
heap d up through Violence. @ The Diſeaſe is univerſal, not ome Him, co on 
few rich Men, but they that dwell in the City are wholly Opprefion; the -y ny 
or perhaps thus, who come to dwell among them ſoon caich the Dil ter did = ; 
eaſe, and learn theſe Ways. b Of all the Cities of the Land of C b end ps s, 
n441n. c Have accuſtomed themſelves to ſpeak Falſhood, there isno Of th 'F, : 
Truth in their Affirmations or Negations. 4 There's not a Man & eut, wry 2 k 
” 


In the Law, if 1 
eproach'd as 


Ire Church: com! 
ſmall: exhorre 
mes: God co; 
pardoning her 
comrg of Chr 


Ois 
ed 
k the Vintagi 


U og firſt-r 
4 All are r 
: deſigned © c 
0, did Juſtice, 
2 thetica] Com 
| here tis La 
Mriety of the 


C11 the P 
ay be e Perſon 


>a 


Fo 
Ni 


c 
F* pe Fruit gathered, none left, or none but evil Fruit ; ſach as the La- 
_ _ thought not worth gathering up : So is the Harveſt of J/rae] 
:1- Judah too; though I and other Prophets have ſown good Seed a- 
: to ndantly,yet Goodnels comes up very thin and ſcarce ; ſo I#z. 24413,16. 
_ lame Complaint in a like elegant Metaphor, drawn from the 
nic: I -b©8atherer, who leaves but few ſcattering ſingle Grapes : So J- 
vals, and Fulah, which -in bringing forth good Men, ſhould have been 
ſte A fruitful Vine full of Clufters ; but barren they have been, and 
Wil and good Men, 4. e. juſt, compatſionate and humble Men, are as 
| and »4Y after the Vintage is gathered. d Suck good Mens Converlc 
s hay v9 23 much delight, refreſh, and encourage me, as a fair Cluſter 
ouoh 7pMes doth a thirſty and hungry Perſon ; but there is not one ſuch 
«.1 ar e It ſpeaks 4 vehement Defire. f It is an Ellipfis or Apoſiopetis, 
ala” 0 be ſupplied thus 3 bur there was, or 1 found none. 

id by 2 The * || pood man g is periſhed þ out of .the 
AY ali, and there is none upright k among men : they 


hap- V II. 


t 25» 


and carry fem away 


on their Children, 2 | L nt {ome reraoter Place, or 
ſtrong Hold ; ſv 't15 likely chi» People did WHCN invaded, yo 25+ 11, 
) Where thou !lo1geit thy Children, a:zd layeit up thy WW ealth, thi- 
ther the Enemy (hall purlue thee, there behteze thee and thine ; or it 
thou fly into Of 


her Countries, it ſhall not be a fate Refuge to thee. 
00 Thou doft for a little while, tor a few Weeks or Months, preterve 
from the Enemy, that thou thinkelt 1s late p By UNCXpecied and 
unthought of Accidents to you, yet guided by the unerring and unre- 
{ſtable Hand of Divine Wiſdom and Power, ſhall be given up, tail in- 
to the Hands 


Hand in fs a 
or by the invatling, Conquering, 
rLAN'S, 

i« Thou ſhalt * Sow r, but thou ſhalt not Reap s : 
thou ſhalt, tread the Olives f, but thou ſhalt not anoint 


and waſting Troops of the 2z- 


-. thee with Oil «; and ſweet Wine x, but ſhalr not drink | 
1.5, WING Y. - 


7 Be at great Pains and Coft in Tilling and Sowing. &£ It ſhal! el- 
ther not thrive to a Harveſt, or if it does, an Enemy ſhall reap it. 
: Lay out thy Labour, and weary thy elf in it ; plant the Tree,gather 
the Eruit and tread it; and when thus prepared to ule it, an Enemy 
{all rob thee of it» u Which in thoſe Countries was much in uſe, be- 
couſe of the great Refreſtment it gave to the whole Body. x Here is 
2n Ellipſis, and muſt be thus ſupplied, thou ſhalt tread the Grapes 
which afford ſweet Wine, In this, as In the other two, thou ſhalt 
be diſappointed 3 thou ſhalr not enjoy thy Labour, nor ſhall thy Heart 
be cheared with new Wine z nay, thou ſhalt be fick with vexing, to 
{thine Enemies Hearts glad with the Wine thou hadft prepared for 
other Gueſts. = 

ke 16 © For || the ſtatutes of Omri z are kept a, and 


#1] the works of the houſe of Ahab b, and yec walk 
in their counſels d, that I ſhould e make thee a de- 
;- folation f , and the Inhabitants thereof g an hiſ- 
ſing þ: therefore ye ſhall bear the reproach of my peo- 


le z, 

c ; Of which you read, 1 Kings 16. 25, 26, 27,28. He built Samaria 
to bea Royal City, and Seat of Religion, brought in by Feroboam : 
Thus he both ſtrengthned, and put more Credit upon the Idolatrous 
Worſhip which was ſet up by Omri; in a Royal City ; whereas by 
Feroboam *twas ſet up in Places of meaner account. « Diligently, 
very much, b Sum'd up, in eftabliſhing Feroboam's Idolatry, introdu- 
cing, the idolatrous Worſhip of Baal, 1 K?ngs 16. 31, 32, 33- cutting 
off the Prophets of the Lord, 1 Kings 18. 4. and 19. 10, 14. anda- 
boliſhing the true Worſhip of God z beſides the barbarous contriving 
the Death of the Innocent, and ſeizing the Eftate, 1 X7ngs 21.8,9, &C. 
| c Of the Houſe of J/rael, though under the Government of Families, 
which had no great Reaſon to value the Houle of Abab; yet you have 
done their Works of Idolatry and Oppreſſion; and you allo of the 
Houſe of Fudzh have degenerated, and done like their Works. d Li- 

tetally fulfilled in Fehoraw's Reign, Atts and Counſels, 2 K7ngs 817,18, 
and in AbaziaÞ*s,who was Son of Fehoram,and Grandſon of Fehoſhaphat, 
2Kings $. 27. and ſo did Feb, and his Succeſſors, all perſift in the 
wlatry of the Calf-worſhip,and in Oppreſſion of the Poor : Thus in- 
fead of walking humbly with God, they did openly depart from 

lim, contrary to what God required of them. e Eventually this was 

the end, or in neceſſary Tendency it could not end otherwile, tho' 

hey did not intend this, nor did God will them to do ſo,that it might 

end, f An utter Waſte, ſuch as ſhould aſtoniſh thoſe that ſaw it. 

£ Of the City or Land. h In token of Abhorrence and Derition, 

Deut, 28. 37. Fer. 25.9, 18, and 29, 18. 7 The Reproach threatned' 
In the Law, if my-People forſaize me z or Feruſalem ſhall be as much 

eproach'd as Samaria, Or as Exh. 36. 20. 


CHAP. VII. 


Ihe Church' complaineth of her ſmall number, the corruption of great and 
ſmall;, exhorteth ro truſt in God, not in man : triumpheth over her ene- 
mies; God comforteth her with mercies, as the confuſion of her enemies, 
pardoning ker ſins ; all which ſhe admires ; and waiteth by faith for the 
coming of Chriſt, 1-— 20. 


Oisne a,for I bb am as-| when they have gather- 

ed the ſummer-fruits b, as the grape-gleanings 
f the Vintage c : there 5s no cluſter to eat d + my ſoul deſir- 
( © the firſt-ripe fruit f. 


4 All are agreed in the Scope and Meaning of theſe words, that they 
C deſigned a Complaint for the great Scarcity of Men that feared 
09, (id Juſtice, and loved Mercy ; aud ſo the Prophet begins with a 
athetical Complaint, 1/0 is me ! Ordinarily this Phraſe is Minatory, 
t here 'tis Lamentation z as every Eye may ſee, who diſcerns the 
[0priety of the Zeb. bb Either the Prophet in his own Perſon, or 
& in the Perſon of the good Man, or by a uſual Figure, the Land 
ay be brought in, complaining, that whereas *twas once well fto- 
d, now it hath few right good in it. 5 All the fair, goodly, and 


of Enemies, ſo that any conituerate Eye may ſee God 5 ! 
q To be cut off by either Domeſtick and Civil Wars, | 


, li! 


IT | 


' 
1% oe $YOIP 
C:] WH alllt Ts 


all He in watt t: 
't 


i 
i 
[ 


n P 
LiCY NUNE 7 C3 ei EEG 1) ls3 
* -4 v0 1 


F 
w 4 Io vv; 


£ Who loves, and i- kind to Men in need, at 
of God's Gocadneſ:, and in a defigned Tmiration 
Frame of his Heart, and Courte of Life tow x1, 
toy Men tor God*s <; þ Is dead aud gone, and I-it no Heir of his 
godltke Vertnes. 4 Out of Jfrael and Tudrn too, tho? #/cyvkiat 
| CrObapt: , now their King. + An honett, plzin t- | Mat 
 Dninketa tg Deceir, bur ipeaketh the Truth ; titat is, witho! 
ea ant pe rverte Detigns; fuch an one may poſſibly, hur not 


C i FOE "Fo l \C aa 5 " FF, my 
ZOUN ANON the leopie of the Ten, and of tlie 1 wo trite, 


"y «2 
arits Cy 
1 
yY- 2 
11%. © 


ni ahead ©, 
ti Tel 


1 1 
l ct 


ir Van imagineth not Evil againſt any, $ bur 


b_ 
=g 
r_ 
a— 
C5 
Q 
NN 
=y 
2 
oj 
> 
A 
_ 
= 
CO 
”_ 
Aa? 
— + 
MN 
ws * 
mm 
n—_ 
JQ 
my 
CR 
_— 
@)) 
wm. + 
wy 
» —_ 
'TF) 
—_—_— 
a 
£3 
oy 
An 
N 
ws 
U 
V5 
[Wo 
W 
= —— 
wm + 
- of 
_— 
= 
_- 
4 
i 
\ 
—_ 
Uy 
Wo 
to 
>) 
® 
yg 


T 


4 "i ?s 
unt 


, 
- 
£2 w% 
\M 


- ann 1 
th Fu 


I” PR 
GLIR 3 a5 


OVET * 


C 


3 © That they ray do evil with both hands ear: 


eth for a Reward s; and the great man t he utte- 
reth 4 -| his miſchievous defire x : ſo they y wrap 
up > oÞ , . 

p As we render the Words, their plain Senſe will be, that all their 
Diligence that with both hands they can ule, is to ſet forward Evil 
and Miſchief : Poſſibly the firft Clauſe might bear this Reading, Bork 
re towards Evil ; and then the following Clauſe thus, 7o 47 Good 
nce asketh. q The Chict Ruler who commiiſoneth the Judge, 
ould awe him from perverſe Juuging, who Should charge the 
Judges a# J-hoſhaphar did, 2 Ciron. 19. 5, 5. but conrtrarily hore the 
Prince ſet a Price upon his own Att in Evil. » The inferiour Magi- 
ſtrate commiſſioned to be Julze, $s ShameleS$ Injuftice ! to (ell the 
Innocent, and condemn their Caule and Perſons ; and to acquit the 
Guilty, and pronounce them juft : for a Bribe, to make God's Autho- 
rity which is in them, to att ſo direttly againft it (elf, is abominavty 
wicked ; for God's Authority to them is giveh,that they. might relieve 
the poor Opprefſed, and acquit Innocency ; but here Innocency muſt 
buy its Satery, or elle is fold to Danger. t Either the Advocates in 
their Courts of Judicature, or the great Men of Intereft at Court, 
who can do what they will there. u Is bold to ſpeak plainly what 
Bribe he will have, he makes his own Demand ; whereas they did 
(whilft a little modeſt) treat by others; and a Servant or Under- 
Officer muſt make the Bargain. x His unjuſt, oppreffive Deſign and 
Purpoſe ; knowing that his Greatneſs and Intereſt will bear him out in 
whatever Violence he attempts again{t poor, weak, and unbetriend- 
ed Innocence, he dare for Gain ſet any thing forward. »y All 
three , Prince , Judge and Great Man. #4 Or , twiſt zt together ; 
conſent each to other, and jointly promote Violence and bloody 
Cruelty. 


4 The beſt a of them b 7s * as a briarc : the moſt up- 
right d is ſharper than a thorn-hedg e - the day of. thy 
watchmen f, and thy vilitation g cometh þ ; now z ſhall be 
their perplexity k. 

2 Among all naught, who is leſt naught paſſeth for beſc, and ſo 
muſt it be here, not one zood ; but the jeit evil Man is by the Pro- 
phet called the belt. b Of People, ! rophets, Judges, Great Men and 
Princes. c Miſchievous and hurttul to all that meddle with them ; 
and perhaps the Prophet alludes to Briars infolded in each other. that 
Shall ſo be devoured at laſt, 4d In the lame Senſe upright, as they are 
faid to be beſt. e The ſame in different words; 7. e. hurtful and 
milchievous to all. f Literally taken for ſuch as on the Watch- 
towers obſerve whether Enemies approach ; the day in which they 
Shall give the affrighting Intelligence, and ſound the Alarm : Or elle 
figuratively Watchmen ; i. e. Governors, Prophets and Teachers, ei- 
ther good and faithful, or evil and unfaithful. The Day which the 
true Prophets foretold would come 3 which faithful Teachers con- 
tirm'd, good Governors believed, fear'd, and, as Hezekizh, endea- 
vour'd to prevent, will certainly-overtake you, that day of evil which 
your Sins have provok'd God to appoint: Or elſe that day of Good, 
which your falte Prophets have promis'd, your corrupt Princes, Jud- 
ges, Great Men, do expect and hope for ; £ Shall be a day of gric- 
vous Puniſkment, by which the Falfhood of flattering Prophets tha!l 
be diſcovered, and the 'i'ruth of Micah and Jfaiah, &c. true Prophets, 
be confirmed. h ;,e, Surely, ſpeedily, and unavoidably on impeni- 
tent Ones, how many or how great ſoever. 7 When the Day is come 
as to Samarizin its Captivity, by the 4j}yr7an Tyrant,and to Fery; 2c, 
in the Babyloniſh Captivity, by Nebuchadnez3.r 5 and in many other 
Nows infervening between the time of Micab's Minatory Predictions, 
and the full Accompliſhment of them. k The aftoniſhing over- 
whelming Sorrows, Fear, and Confutions which ſhall wrack theſe 
great, notorious, and impudent Opprefſors, Hunters end Sellers ot 
Juſtice : They ſhall be perplexed, becauſe the fore Evils roretoid by 


the true Prophets of God ſhall overwhe!m them z and becau:e the 
Peace and Proſperity, promis'd by the falſe Prophets, is unexpectedly 
turned into "Troubles, Deſolation, and utter Ruine to their State, Ct- 
ties and Familics, 


neſtly p, * the Prince q asketh, and the * Judger ask- *Hoſ. 4.13 


. Io 23s 


*Ch. 3.11; 


It + Heb. 1&2 


. zoi# i . i* "a 
oc age 7 
his joul. 


+Ezelk.2.6 


5 « * Traſt ye not in a friend 1, put ye not coaldence * Jer,g.4. 


in a guide m: keep the doors of thy mouth x from her that 
lie in thy boſom 0. - 

I Moſt prodigiouſly treacherous were the People of that Age 5 and 
ſince none upright, all lay in wait for Blood, and were turn'd Hun- 
ters of Brethren, it is but neceſſary caution that they truſt no Friend. 


ach 


ſhip. m Either Governor, who ought to guide ; of Equal, who h2- 
ing of intimate Familiaricy, afoa'iy fo guine x ora Hubiind, as the 
ord 


Chap. VIL 


word imports. - Watch thy Words, let not 'thy Tongue diſcover | 
any Secret, or utter any Words which may be danger to thy felt, 
'or give an Advantage to thine Enemy. 0 A Periphratis of a Wife 
in honeſt Times : but whether in debauched Times, as theſe are of 
which the Vrophet d1d ſpeak, it may not import ſumewhat like that 
Prov.5.20, I will not lay; a Wite one may rationally ſuppoſe will 
never diſcloſe a Hu>band's Secrets to ruin him, yet luch were the T rea- 
cheries of that corrupt Age that it-would be Imprudence to truſt a 
Wite. 

4 y 6 For þ the * ſon q diſhonoureth y the father 5s, the 

4M = davghrer t riſeth up againſt her mother «, the daughter in 
law againſt her mother in law x ; a mans enemies y are the 


men of his own houle z, 

p The Prophet here gives us a Reaſon of his Advice to be wary 
how, and whom they tcuft.  q Who received his Being, Maintenance, 
Education, and inherits the Honour as well as Eftate of his Father ; 
the Son obliged by moſt inviolable Laws to pleaſe, preſerve, and ho- 
nour his Father. r Seeks to accule , vilify , endanger and ruine. 
s Whole Diſhonour and Loſs or Kuine, is alſo the Son's Diſhonour 
and Ruine; yet unnatural Treachery will be ſo rife in thoſe Times, 
that the Father had need keep his guard upon his very Son. t Whoſe 
Love and AﬀeRtion uſually more tender than the Sons towards Parents, 
yet will forget their Duty. #« That bare them, that nurſt them, that 
more than Fathers, tend, indulge, and bear with them : Sov mon- 
ftrous hall the Perfidiouſneſs of that Age be. x In Conſanguinity 
there was not any Faithfulnefs, in Afﬀinity much leſs may you expect 
it. y The worſt and moſt perillous Enemies, who will be moſt ready 
and moſt able to miſchief them. 4 Among Relations and Rerainers ; 
who by Law of God and Nature, Should have been faithfu'teſt Friends : 
So it fell out through the Civil Wars of the Jews, in their ſeditious, 
and in their calamitous days ; Much like to this is that of Chriſt, 
Mat. 10. 21, 35, 36+ 


7 Therefore a I will look b unto the LORD c - I wil 
wair d for the God of my ſalvation e : my God will hear 


me f. 

a Since Times are fo calamirous, and all ſorts of Men are [& 
fdious: fince no ſure Comfort or Relief from thoſe that are neare 
Relations, and should be deareft Friends. 6 As one ſet in a Watch- 
Tower looks round about, and diligently obſerves all that ſtirreth ; So 
will the Prophet, ſpeaking in the Perſon of the Faithful, the rae! of 
God; ſo did they who in Iſrae} and Fudab feared the Lord, and walke 
ed with him. c The God- of Mercy, Power, Truth and Wiſdom, 
who can and will hely. ,4 Though he do not preſently appear for me, 
( faith the Church ) I will with Patience expett. e Who only can, 
and who graciouſly hath promisd to ſave his Church. f He doth 
hear my Cry, and will deliver me. 


*Lam.4 8 © * Rejoice g not againſt me h, O mine enemy ? : | were continued in that Servitude by the Babylonians till the Medes and 
2. when 1 fall &, I ſhall ariſe]; when I "7 fit in darkneſs 7, the | Perfians overthrew the Babylonians, and proclaimed a Releaſe to al 


LORD /hall be a light o unto me. 


MICAH 


ok in 
Price, 


h with 


of the true God, or preferr'd. their Idols above him 3 and as if þ« 
had becn a conquer'd and captiv'd God, as well as his People i 
bh F hare 
ſpeaketh afſured of the. Truth of God's avenging Sox twor 

7 With Delight or Well-pleaſedneſs the People of Coy 
ſhall ſee their Enemies laid as low for their Cruelty againft the 
as ever God ſuffer'd the Enemy to lay his People low for their Go 
againſt him, and his Mercies: So the like Expreſſion, Pſzl, - 
IO. chap. 4.11, let. x k Either ſhortly ſhe ſhall, or elſe when El 
time of full Deliverance is come, the Church ſhall in that Day » 
joice in her God, and ſay Now. | Be accounted and uſed az moſ 
contemptible and uſeleſs, the conquering Enemy ſhall thea tre? 
the Babylonians in the Dirt, and ule them deſpitefully, and without 
more regard than that we have for the Dirt under our foot : and 
_ _ accompliſh'd by the Medes and Perfians in their Conqueſt of 
pabylen, 


Theſe Words are variouſly expounded ; but the plaineft, ang moſt 
ſuting with the Letter and Hiſtory to me, ſeems to be this, n © 
Feruſalem, the days ſhall certainly come, that thy Walls Overthrown 
and raſed by the Babylonians, ſhall be rebuilt, #» Which was firk in 
part fulfilled under Cyrxs, but more fully under Darius Zyſtaſpis, ang 
Darius Longimanus, who commiſſion'd Nehemiah to repair the Walls of 
Feruſalem, 0 Either the Decree of Artaxerxes, who is allo called Can. 
byſes, and who forbad the building of the Temple z or elſe the Decre: 
of Darius Hyſtaſpis, reviving Cyrus his Decree for the return of all the 
Fews that would return, p For ever ceaſe, if referred to Camby; 

ecree z this ſhall no more hinder ; or elſe ſhall be diſperſed far and 
wide among all the Provinces, if you mean Cyrus's Decree that all may 
return. 

12 [1 that day q alſo he r ſhall come even to thees from 
Aſſyriat, and || from the fortified Cities «, and from the! 
fortreſs x, even to the river y, and from ſea to ſea z, ani" 
from mountain to mountain a. | 

q After the Jews return out of Captivity, and Jeruſalem rebuilt, 
r He who is of Jewiſh Race, and proſelyted Gentile, s O Feruſdln, 
Seat of God's Solemn Worſhip, Type of the Goſpel-Church, reſto 
red to thy promiſed Glory. # In which many {ſraelites were found 
Captives when the Babylonian Kingdom ſwallow'd up the Aſhrior, and 


captive Fcws ; then from Aſſyria did captive /ſrae!, 7, e. ſome of then, 


The Prophet in this Verſe perſonates the Church, and brings her 
in beſpeaking the Enemy in this manner. Jy it be no Pleaſure or 
Matter of glorying to thee, that the Day of Calamity hath overtaken 
me. h jJſrael of God, the Remnant, the Faithful, which are the 
Church of God, 7: O Aſjrim, Edon, or Babylon. k Into a low 
Condition , into deepeft Diftreiſes. 1 I Shall not always lie in 
them ; God will raiſe me out of them. #2 The Prophet intends 
the Good, the few Righteous Ones among thoſe degenerate Mul- 
titudes. # When Affittion, War, Famine and Captivity, as a dif 
mal C loud $hall cover us, and benight the Daughter of Light, 
when fallen as low as a Captive. 0 Shall ſupport, comfort, and de- 
liver me 3 his Preſence and Favour 5hall, as the Sun rifing, diſpel the 
Darkneſs of the Night. This is ſpoken more eſpecially concerning 
Fudah., | 

9 I will bear o the indignation of the LORD p, be- 
cauſe I have ſinned againſt himq, until he plead my 
cauſe r, and execute judgment for me 5s: het will bring 
me forth to tke light «, and I ſhall tehold his righteon(- 


neſs x. 

0 Patiently and ſubmiſively, p The juft and chaſtifing Anger of 
the Lord in the Effects of it upon me. q Greatly, continually, bo:h 
againſt his Law and Precepts thereof, and againft his Love and the 
Effedts thereof: Fudak was guilty of idolatry, Ingratitude againft 
God. and of Injuſtice, Unftaithtulne's, and Unmercifulnels againſt on2 
another; and theſe Sins deſerved ſorer Punishments than they ſuffer- 
ed, theretore the Righteous Ones here juftity God, and humble them- 
felves. 7 Againft mine Enemy ; for that he will e're long do, as well 
as now he doth plead his own C aule againſt me : He will be as well a 
juft Judge againſt mine Enemies,to avenge me on them, as he is a juſt 
God, by my Sins provoked to chaſtiſe me. s When that Day comes, 
he will certainly an4 evidently declare his Judgment to be againſt mins 
inſulting Adverſaries, my cruel Enemies, and that he doth ſo punish 
them for my ſake ; as 7/al. 137. 7. Iſa. 10. 5,12. Fer, 30. 8, Zech.1. 
12, 15. t The great and glorious, the holy and juſt God, who now 
chaſtiſerh me. u As a Priſoner brought out of a dark Priſon br Dun- 
geon into the Light, is ſet at liberty, advanced and beautified, ſo shall 
the Church be delivered and made to proſper. x The Truth and 
Riches of his promiſed Salvation : This made good, partly in. the Re- 


£0 up to Feryſalem. u In which *tis probable many Fews were kept 
or ſervile Works ; Shalmaneſer did place the Captivity of the Tea 
Tribes in the Cities of the Medes, which for ought I know maybe 
the Cities here ſpoken of, x One mention'd for all the reſt; and 
ſuppole theſe Fortrefſes might be frontier Gariſons made for defence 
of the Country, where the Fews were in policy placed by the Aria; 
from theſe places, and through all the Country. » To Euphrates of 
Chebar, where alſo were of the captive Fews. 7 From the Caſpim to 
the Perfian, and to the Midland Sea. a On which many of the dil 

rſed Fews did in all likelihood ſettle themſelves in proceſs of tine 
or Security and Retirement, as the yerſecuted 1aldenſes and Ali: 
genſes ſettled in the mountainous Parts bordering on France, Savy, 
and J/taly; Or from Mount Taurus to Mount Libanus or Carmel, In 
brief, from all parts of their Captivity they ſhall return to their own 
Countrey ; a ſingular Type of the Redemption of the Church by 
Chriſt, the bringing in the Gentiles, and enlarging the Mefſubs 
Kingdom, 


13 || Notwithſtanding a the land þ ſhall be deſolate, 
becauſe of them d that dwell therein e, * for the fruit off 
their doings f. 

2 Heb. And, but well rendred here Notwithſtanding, viz. theſe Iv} 
miſes of Reſtitution, and gathering in the diſperſed Fews, &c. whicl 
took not place till more than 200 Years after they were firit made 
by the Lord to his People, accounting thus, 133 Years from ti: 
Captivating of Samara to the captivating of Feruſalem, 70 Years the 
Babyloniſb Captivity laſted y to which add the Years to Darius 5 
ſtaſpis e're the Temple was built, and the Years to Darius Longm 
us ere the City was built and the Wall repair'd, *twill amount 9 
conſiderable Sum of Years. b Of Canazmm, c Laid fo by Shani 
ſer, Senacberib, and Nebuchadnezzar, in the Ruins of this laft 70 Yeats 
4 The finful Fews ; which now in Micah's time did, or hereai 
hall dwell in it. e In Canaan. f As Puniſhment for their &| 
Doings. | 
14 || Feed g thy people þ with thy rod 7, the fock0! 
thine heritage k, which dwelleth ſolitarily zx# the wool) 
in the midſt of Carmel m : let them feed i Baſhan ' 41 
Gilead o, as in the days of old p, 


ſtitution of the Captivity, rebuilding of Feruſulem by order of Cyrus 
[| Or, 94,74 Darius, and partly before this in Hezekiah's Reſcue from Sena- 
thou wilt 4.,,;6's Pride and Rage. 


ee her that & : 
je mine e- 10 || Then y ſhe that 1s mine enemy z ſhall ſee a zt, and 


nemy , and ſhame b ſhall cover her c which ſaid unto me f, * Where 
cover ker js the LORD thy God g ? mine eyes þ ſhall behold her :: 
with ſame ow þ + ſhall ſhe be troden down as the mire of the 


* P[.42. 
10.&79.12 ſtreets I. by 


+ Heb. ſhe » In the time of this hoped Deliverance ; when God. ſhall, as T ex” 
ſhall be for pet he will, plead my Cauſe, 3 What Nation or People ſoever 3 
2 treading whether Aſ}y114, Edom, or Babylon, or whcever. a As they did when 
down, Hezehiab was miraculouſly faved,. and Feryſulem with him, ouc of the 


Z That this Verſe contains good Tidings to the People 0 Goh 
both to his antient People, Type of his Church in Goſpel-day5, fo 
to the Church of the converted Gentales, is agreed on all hands; nt 
they are either a Dire&ion and Command to thoſe God doth 42s 
by Office to be Shepherds over his Flock, or a Prayer to God th! 
would pleaſe to take the care of them, which doth include 10Me%®; 
more than the bare Petition for the Bleſſing: Or it 15 a Predit Cop 
what ſhall be done for them after their Keturn out of Babylori bs 
tivity ; or a Promiſe made to affure and comforc them durih - 
Captivity. Feed; ſo Chriſt dire&s his Office1s, or God apo ” 
Chrift to do this: or ſo the Prophet for the People, or the VFe0P*. 
themſelves, pray to God that he would be their Shepherd, — 
them.: Or the Prophet doth in the-Imperative, inftead ct rhe * che 
tell them what ſhall be z whichzis a Prowiſe expreG enorghtt 


Chap V 


hand of the Aſſyrian, and as in the-return cut of Palylon, whe: te 


11 In the day that thy * walls 2 are to be builty, jt 
that day ſhall the decree o be far removed p. _ 


F a | 


hos hay et —_— A oa mw ha 


- hw 


10.4, zed a1 
107.42, delive 
the fi; 
viouſ] 
7 AsÞ 
as feld 
thougl 
't, yet 
out of 
remnal 
inthe 1 
Compl 
1548.7 thal 
[17 
bings, earth 
2, ANC 
a Th 
molt ſu! 
ſerve an 
ſion whi 
ters, P/, 
when thi 
Courtier 
ded the 
the 5th 
petually 
of !laver 
ſhould by 
ſirong-hi 
fivity.arc 
ſelves ou 
when An 
ſcattered 
_ hold 
chap. 4s, 
the al 
i the co 
Arm, and 
did powe 
Captivity 
el) for hi 
Cyrus, and 
preatneſs 


ap. VI. 


id Comfort. þ Literally Iſraz!, after tne Fleſh return'd out 
"Ciptivity : Myſtically the whole I/ra'/ of God red eem'd our of a 
” go NS : bath a people peculiar to God thro' Grace by Cove- 
wor” 1 chro” Chriſt. 7 In alluſion te the uſage of Shepherds, who 
rr ae Sheep by a poſtoral ſtaff; the peculiar and gracious pro- 
guided enNCli p vyaP , ; Rt . 
” 4-nce of God over ht ſheep 15 hereby cxpreſs d, 2nd defird or pro- 
mis'd. & They are as ſheep wealr, not 2»/e ro defend or provide for 
chemſclves, 4 Hock of innocent ones compared with their enemies 5 

1 however they have been ſcattered, they are thine heritage ſtill, 
hich thou, O Lord, haſt purchaſed of old ; ler them be ſo ſtill, and do 
__ bot't poſſeſs, rule, feed and preſerve, Dent. 4. 20. and ch.32+9- 
7s 100. 3. 1 Feed, graciouſly protett, and guide thoſe that in their 
preſent captive ſtate are ſolitary, compalſſed wich dangers from wild 
B-afts; ſo thy Peopſlc are 1 danger by cruel Enemies, worſe than wild 
Beaſts. m A fruitful Place, and well inh2bited, whether you take it 
fi c Carmel with Elan frequented, or where Nabal dwelr, and where 
was rich paſtures and ſafe Feeding. n A place of note for fruitfulneſs 
1 Canaan. 9 Equal with any of the other for plenty and ſafety. 
,, Refore the fins of the People cauled their Captivity ; own them for 
*hineand proſper them, O Lord, in their own Land; a much-hke 
5:omife or prediftion you have, Fer.50.18,19. and Ezeh.34.25, 
is According to the days 9 or thy coming out of the 
Lind of Egypt will I ſhew unto him s marvellous 
things 7. 

Theſe words are by all look'd on as the anſwer made tothe prayer 
made inthe 14th Verſe. q You 7ews do often refle& on the wonders 
vour Fathers ſaiv in Ezypt ſome hundred of years ſince ; and ſome of 
cou think that ſuch wonders would both eftabliſh your hope, and 
engage your obedience for ever to God : You pray that you may be 
fed as in days of old ; it ſnall be ſo, according to what I have done 
{ will again do. 7 There I ſlew the firſt-born e're they would let thee 
-1 free; that ſtroke of the Angel I will parallel with the deftruttion 
©\ Senacherib's Hoſt in one night, and fo I will preſerve my People 
and City : Pharaoh and his Hoft were drowned in the Red-Sex; and 
the Babyloniſh Kingdom ſrall be ſwallowed up by Medes and Perſians 
to make way for my ranſomed ones. s The perſon changed, as is 
uſualin Scripture. # As indeed the reſcuing Feruſalem from the Aſſp- 
7ian power was marvellous, and the bringing Iſrael out of Babylon was 
1 marvellous work of God,ſtirring up the Spirit of Cyrus and Darius, 
and others, torelcaſe and ſet free, nay, to furniſh this captive people 
with necefſarics for their Journey, and for the Work they were to 
do : So Pſal.126.2, 'twas a work all wondred at, by thoſe paſſages, 
Jer,16-14,15, and 23. 7,8 it ſeems more wonderful ; but the great 
Redemption by the Mcſſtah here typified, is a moſt wonderful tulfil- 
ling of this. 

16 T The nations z ſhall ſee and be confounded at 
all their might x . they ſhall lay their hand upon 7zherr 
1.3. 5, mouth : * their ears ſhall be deaf 5. 

\ -1.e, 4 The Heathen, Enemies to the Fews,as Pſal. 126. 1, 2,3, x Ama- 
>4, zed at what they ſee and know done amongſt theſe Nations for che 
1:7.42, deliverance of his people : The enemy ſhall neither be able to bear 
the ſizhr, nor deny the certainty of the thing z it will make them en- 
viouſly look on rhe proſperity of the good and godly among the Jews. 
z As Mea ſeldom tail to hear the firſt report of what they defire,and 
as ſcldom open their ears to that they like not 3 ſo ſhall it be here: 
though they will nor ſpeak of it, nor defire others ſhould ſpeak of 
1t, yet they ſnould totheir great grief, ſee their poor captives raiſed 
out of depth of ſhame to the height of honour, trom a contemprible 
remnant to 4 mighty Nation. As this had its typical Complement 
in the redu&ion of Iſrael out of Babylon, fo it had its anti-typical 
Completion in our Redemption by Chrift,as1 Cor. 2. 9. 

| 17 They @ ſhall lick the dult 6 like a ſerpentc, they 
17.4.% ſhall move out of their holes d like || worms of the 
1carth e: they ſhail be afraid f of the LORD our God 
" 8, and ſhall fear becauſe of thee þ. 

a The proud and cruel Enemies of Iſrael,the Babylonians. b In the 
molt ſubmiſſive, ſervile manner teſtifie their ſubze&ion, promiſe to 
ſerve and honour the Fews releaſed out of Captivity 31it is an Expreſ- 
fion which alludes tothe ſeryile manner of thoſe eaſtern Complimen- 
ters, P.72-9.Iſa.49.23. and was fulfilled in the days after the return 
when the Kings of Perſia favoured the Fews ; and (as manner of 
Courtiers is) in compliance with their Kings the Grandees, forwar- 
ded the proſperity of the Fews, as may eaſily be conjeQured from 
the 6th and 7th Ch. of Exra. c Condemned to eat the duſt,and per- 
petually to crawl on the duſt ;, it ſeems to intimate rne perpetuity 
of ſlavery and ſubjeRtion that rhe enemy ſhould fall under,and that it 
ſhould be on them as a curſe like that on the Serpent. d So the 
ſirong-holds and faſtnefles of the Babylonians, who kept Iſrael in cap- 
tivity,are called. e Which do with trembling and haſte,wrigele them- 
ſelves out of their holes, when the earth is ſhaken about them ; or as 
when Ants tumultuouſly in their fright run about from the Ant-hill 
ſcattered with the foot, ſo ſhould theſe Enemies of Iſrael fly out of 
their holds,and leave them to conquering Perſtans, as Iſaiah foretold 
chap. 45. 1, 2,3, 4+ f A panick fear, expreſſed by the looſning of 
the Loins of Kings, 1/a-45.1. ſo did the conquering Cyrus proceed 
in the courſe of his Vi&ories, as Iſa. 41. 2, 3. God ſtrengthned his 
Arm, and left the heart of Babylonians ſinking within them, g Who 
did powerfully work for Cyrus 1n order to the deliyering us out of 
captivity : It was our God (faith the Prophet in the perſon of 1ſra- 
el) for his promiſe-ſake made to us, who did thoſe great things by 
Cys, and for us. þ Sothat the Name of Fews, their power, and 
greatneſs, ſhall be terrible to their Enemies, 


Support 2 


Vol. II. 


nz 


MIC 4 


— 


S 4: 
s -. 


"C_* 6 


H.: Chap. 

18 Who 7s a God like unto thee z, that pardoneth ini- 
quity &, and paſleth by / the tranſgreſion #2 of the rem- 
nant oz his heritage z ? he retaineth not his anger tor 
ever o, becauſe he delighteth 77 mercy p. 

Leſt what hath been ſpoken of this wonderful change in the affairs 
of the Jews, ſhould on one hand be thought tobe made for the righ- 
teouſneſs or worthineſs of this people : Or elſe on the ather hand, 
ſhould ſcem too great to be done for a ſinful people; and fo 4ny 
ſhould doubr wherher it ſhould be done at all, the Prophet in this 
and the two following verſes propoſeth the ground of 2] this laid on 
the unparalſel'd grace of God toward his people, who pardoneth 
their unrighteouſneſs, and then of free mercy delivers them from 
their affli&ions and diſtrefſes, changing their darkneſs into light. 
z Some obſerve, thar El here uſed, fiznifieth the mighty God, and fo 
render it thus 3 the Ffench Je Dzea fort,none but the ſovereign migh- 
ty God can, or doth forgive iniquity; it is a flower of the Crown of 
Heayen, Exod.34.6,7.andNNumb.14.18.and Mark 2.7.This Interro atory 
and Admiration isa ſtrong Negation. & Taketh away: the Guilt,and 
Puniſhment too by his pardon. / A form of ſpeech uſed amongſt us 
when we promiſe not to purſue an offence, or not to cxa the pu- 
niſhment of it ; or,as if we either ſai it not, or voluntarily winked 
at 1t,being refolved that we would not make it a cauſe of quarrel or 
breach. mIrt will not ſute our brevity to enquire the difference be- 
twixt inquity & tranſgreſſion;or whether they are here ſynonymous 
and explicatory of each other : God paflerth by the forfeirs we make, 
and ſtrips us not of our Mercies. n This intimateth the Reaſon why 
God doth, as well as the perſons to whom hedoth, pardon fin ; that 
Grace which made them his heritage, and reſerved them to himſelf 
in the common deſtruttion,the ſame grace doeh as freely pardon and 
paſs by,that it may do them good : No worthineſs in them to whom 
'ris done, and yet greateſt certainty it fhall be dcne, as Rom. 4. 16, 
0 Tho' in hisjuſt difpleaſure God did fend them into captivity, yet 
becauſe he doth not retain his anger for ever, their captivity ſhall 
not be for cyer; he will chaſtiſe his remnant , but not conſume 
them, Zech. 1.3. þ All from the exceeding riches of his mercy,it 
15 hisdelight to ſhew Mercy : and we need enquire no farther, our 
God is ſo wonderfully merciful, that 'tis his pleaſure to ſhew Mercy; 
and it a Man ſometime may give this as a reaſon why he doth a thing, 
ſurely our God may well expe& that we ſhould acquieſce in this ac» 
count of his doing ſo : hedelighteth todo it, P/a.103.2,9-1a.43.25. 
and 57. 16, Fer. 3.5, 12. 


19 He will turn again 9, he will have compaſſion up- 
on us 7: hew1ll ſubdue s our iniquities, and thou z wilt 
caſt all their fins z into the depth of the ſea x. 

q Spoken after the manner of Man, who in his anger went away 
reſolved to right himſelf, but on ſecond thoughts laying afide his 
anger, turns again to be reconciled and forgive : ſo the next words 
explain theſe. r With tender bowels he will ſhew himſelf gracious 
tous, Fonah 3.9. $ Asour Enemies and his,God will break the pow- 
er, aboliſh the dominion of fin z which whilſt it reigned, provoked 
God and undid us, it pollutedand ruined us : but God will pardon 
the guilt, and abrogate the law of fin, and ſo reſtore his people 3 
ſuitable co that Exeb.35.29, to 34. # Here is anenallage of the Per- 
ſon from the third to the ſecond perſon, yet without any leffening 
the ſenſe in ſtrength or clearneſs. x An uſual expreffion in Scripture 
to ſet forth the full and eternal pardon of fin ; here 'tis empharical, 
all thetr fins. x Whence ordinarily weaccount things can never rite 
or be found more. 


20. Thou y wilt perform 2 the truth a to Jacob b,,nd 
the mercy c to Abraham 4, which thou haſt tworn e unto 
our tathers/ from the daysof old g. 

y O God of mercy, wiſdym, power and taithfulneſs, who ever are 
honoured with being thine inſtruments and ſervants in doing tome- 
what herein, the work 15 thine, thou wilt raiſe up a deliverer, Cyrus 
ſhall be thine anointed to do this great work. 2 Give, Heb. actually 
beſtow what thou haft in mercy promiſed. a Nothing certain as the 
Word of God ; it is the Truth, by way of eminency, his promiſe 1s 
Yea and Amen. 5 The Poſterity of Facob 3 he was that plain-hear- 
red Man who gives now Name to all the upright and honeſt among 
his ſeed which God will never finally caſt off 3 though now carried 
captive, they ſhall be reſtored, rebuilt, and re-eſtabliſhed, ſhall 
Houriſh,as v.10,11,12. and this as they area type of a more glorioully 
redeemed People. c It was meer grace ia God to promiſe Abraham 
and his Seed ſuch excellent priviledges which Abraham's natural ſeed 
did inherit ; but both this ſeed, and this mercy, look'd beyond the 
natural Deſcendents of Abraham, and beyond their return to the Land 
of Canaan, whence they were carried : The Mercy to Abraham was 
that in his ſeed all Nations ſhould be bleſſed, Luk. 1.54,55- and 58.and 
holphen. &d Not only as Father to 1ſrael after the fleth, bur to him 
as father of the faithful. e Not that there was on God's part acy 
need of ſuch confirmation, but that on our part all doubt might 
be removed, and we by the immutable things of God might have 
ſtrong conſolation, as Heb. 6. 18. f Becauſe this Mercy was fre- 
quently repeated in the promiſes to the Fathers after Abraham's 
time 3 by which promiſes a mercy to be perpetuated in Abrahams 
ſeed, till the Redemption of the Iſrae! of God by the Meſſiah (of 
which all temporal deliverances of Trae! were figures) ſhould be 
effeted. g Everfince Abraham's days, and God's gracious adopting 
his ſeed to be the peculiar people of God; into this we do, as {raet 


| did, reſolye our afſurance of final deliverance. Amen. 


[Q q] NAHUM 


Vii. | 


Ro—_ po, 


a ww " $44 
: EI ade agrees - L 5 - 
- _ jZ - - —_ ” _ _ = 
_- __ - T2. IC. "ok... : _— i X 
=o %. od be _— - _ _ oy 
h þ4 porn "— 
. ge $5 hes wy = , # pz NS K. £ SE ->-» 5. 
bs . - > B76 a8Þ4 19mg _— : NOW IR, - ” 
F pls wn g 2V . : y 3d? 
—_— 6d - < —_— y WS o = A i 
_ © ———<SIIESEGe—Epe— GI G——_— T _— _ —_— 5 — = 
. CF 2. — 4 pon _- EE - — 
m=_y _ _ "_ » _ 
" » 
_— s: V —_ a ie) <= _—— - * _ 


_—_ 


—— — 
> #4 T5 


& <1 
'F Ge A 
Wo, 


» 
IV Ws 


C ” - "_— Þ 
Ls. ” A o Xs 9 % oh 
—— 7” BY ye IL 4 hy args z G 
Þ* I Fw. ad Nets hs " = 8 - a 4 , 
> a9 = 9" Ho ho. . - my - AL Ta , * an ir: 1.707 
- - ——- - _ * * 20,04 ” » 
w 0 4 - . » Xo & SJ * 24x o wh . Ad. a3 = 3 bs (5% 4 4 Y 
D - © *. N dy Re * » =_y - p 4 ” of pe L 
. . / - "&- RI. thy. Cat to os OLA " 6. a.) —_ 
% Lie” : » -B Pl 9-5 FY < 2 - - oy ET <0 - So > 
z = = Y Ay 2H, #\,-4 . & F- D, <Tw wt _ p 
_e : — Ss PA s . 
$ = T - <4 by - —— Y 
A *' #4 ” % - 


+ N 
{ORD is 4 > 


The ARGUMENT. 


HE prophet Nahum is one of thoſe prophets whoſe family and countrey ts concealed, and it would be more loboys 


than profit 10 


/ Pe nd time on t he Enquiry aft cr T1 he one or ot her. He 7s ſt ted t be Elkofhite,and pefhubly born and 


bred in Elkofh 0 107 of Galilee, an obſcure Place, of which perhaps we bad heard no more, had it not been writes; 
that this Man was born there, to allude 10 that of the P/a/miſt, Pſ. 87. 5. The time of Dis appearing in publick tg 
7s frophetick Office 1s much more material,being a key to the whole prophecy. Noz it ts certain tbat Nahum 


diſcharge |. 


as. a Prop 


wntire firengih, whilſt it 


het in Office, whilſt the kingdom of Aſſyria was not only ſtanding, but whilſt it was ſtanding in its glory and 
was dangerous and terrible 10 its Neighbours. It 1s to me evident, that Nahum prophe/ied be. 


{re tbe deſtruction of Senacherib's Army, for be foretelleth the deathof Senacherib, chap. 1. 14. i 7s certain alſy 


p; 


he appear'd after Hothea, and the ten Tribes were carried captive by Shalmaneſer. 


- Hezekiah, 2 Kings 18.10. and ſome few years before the death of Shalmaneſer, whoje ſon Senacherib /zcceeded 
and invaded Egypt and Judah in the 141Þ year of Hezekiah.,cight years afier Samatia was taken and the ten 1ribes 
Were aft rot cd;ithin which time.and probably toward the fifth of thoſe eight.Nahum 7s ſent a prophet to guiet, ſap 


port aid 
ro dejtroy 


LY 
Go 


 excourage Herekiah and his Subjetts,againſt all the threats and power of the Aflyrian Tyrant.oho threatned 
21h Jeruſalem, {rom accompliſhing whereof the tyrant ſhall be ſo far.that God will turnit to his rune, 
andere aa very tit ſeaſon the prophet declareth the final and utter rume of the Aflyrian Empire and its capital 


Gy Ninevel.oe @ ft revenge for all their oppreſſions of their Neighbours but eſpecially in revenge of their renerg. 


red oi0lence ag0inft Trael and Judah on account of tohich good T11dir;zs the prophet bath his name Nachum, which in 


- 


i 


the Hebrew 7s from a word fgnitying to comtort, ad alſo 10 repent : Indeed repentance is preparatory to comfort nd 


though bis preaching againſt Nineveh ve 19e comfort of Jerutalem, no deat be called Jeruſalem to repent, which js 
7: obably colletied from Ch. 1. v. 15. Keep thy ſolemn feaſts, O Judah, p<:torm thy \ OWS. L£ his whole prophecy ex- 
cept the 151Þ verſe of this Chapter, is directed againſt Nineveh, head ciiy of i 'C Aſſyrian Kingdom, and again} the 
whole Kingdom hich with all forts of Men and Women 1 H1.QFc threatued with very ſore and Peavy Judgment s,eit) 
final deſolitien Or captivity for their fins , all which tas fuljitled by the Lord.afing the Babylonian and Median power 
10 coertbrow this power of Allyria, and particularly by ihe joint forces of Nabopollaſer and Aftyages, as 7s by the 
2 /f learned A.B. Liher objerved,in Anno Mundi 3370. Tet others tell us the final LUC of the Allyrian Kingdom 


did ex PIre. 


o k g 
Tin Mo. 


forctold by Nahum came much ſooner, and that in the death of Etfarhaddon or Aifiradinus tbe Aſſyrian Monarcts 


But tho” I determine not the number of years, during which this tbreatned Monarchy did ſtand, yet te 
they fewer cr mere, Nahum's prophecy was fulfilled in the deſtruthon of Nineveh, axd the ſubverſion of the Aﬀly- 
andihe Jews were no more infeſtedby the Allyrian, th they were by the Babyloniſh kingdom, 'Ibe 


rely > 
things then fpoRen of by N 


ahum., doin the letier and hiforical part of them concern the times between the 12th 


ard 14ih of Hezekiah, and the ends of the Aflyrian Monarchy. And a silful obſerver of the Hiſtories of thoſe timcs 


TAL SH 

, ORE 1 

TO MCN 010. 
7 

Fd 

TEE 


” 
« 


Le a2-2513* 0 
46 ( x 7 


world be beſt able to interpre 


7 this Prophet , nor ſhall any ao 1t tolerably well without recourſe to thoſe Hiſterics, 
b 1o.1:þ 107 ated bere at large (wich brief Annotations admitnor ) ye? have not been quite neg !etted ;, and 
#12 applying the Hiſtories and Computation of Iimes are bere committed, all will candidly excuſe 1 


knew the chjeurity and ancertainty of thoſe 1imcs. 


= MINK. 7" 
A doforintinn of the mai? 


EH 2x. 


[, 


ſo vengeance 15 the Lords's, and he will repay. 1 'Tis repeated for 
confirming the Truth, and to affe& the wicked with terroy, aid to 
awaken them to a timely Repentancez to affe& God's own people 
with joy and hope, that they may wait on him till they ſee the ver- 


? 3 nf (on . D . / , 7 » - - : : x 


7s people, 4 == 7. The prophet threatneth the Ninevites| ,p 14:þ, js Lord or Maſter of Fury, not like furious Men, who ca 


I-FiHu uItts 


- VUILLTLC 


+ a 


A $3, 
+ 2 $445 | + 


41% % F743 7 


H.. 1G. 1. © Ratylon, Ia. 13. 


tite Cam! 


the Morher City of the Af]1tan Kingdom, 


and {t, erebs comfort ety the zodty 3 's —_— I I» 


NN pongeny | 7 [- \ETITENTD 
Wo Fr 11 
! 


a * of Nineveh 6. 
the vition d of Nahum e the Elkothirte }, | 
; When the Prophets were ſent to denounce future Judgments Ind wifdem toexecute his diſpleaſure in fitteſt time. n When it 1 
2 Naitionor City, the Word was uſually call'd the Burden 01]! CICA.ONTD! | 

un or Cify ; as the Burden of 23foab, Ifa. 15. 1. of Fgopt.| <*p:iunsttic former phraſe, Lord of Fury 3 God reſirains and keeps 
1. Gf Damaſcrs, Iſa, 17. 1. So her | # Ms own anger, which grows greater by the ſufferings of his peo- 
ics forrtold are calld the Burden of Nrnevth. o It wa. ple, and fins of his enemies. 

2nd io by a Synechdochke 


nor command or govern their Anger, but grow ſuddenly furicus,aud 
* , | 45 ſuddenly pour it forth, whether fcafonably or unſcaſonably they 
The book © 0i (cgard nur; but God who here threatens enemies, and comforts is 
irtends, is as much Lord of his anger, as he is Lord of pour 


moſt ſeaſontble he ſhould do it, he moſtcertainly will do ir. 0 This 


3 The LORD zs flow p to anger g, and grear in pow: 


is kereto be interpreted,ac inciuding the who's Kingdom which 1:| ex r, and will s not ar all acquit t the wicked u : the 


threatncd with deſtruRion, in the deftruftion of Nineveh,a City very 


Ce.b 


Ancie:t, built by Aſſur, ſon of Nimrod, repaired and cnlarged by 


1505, OT 1508+ 


elſe becauſe written and lett to be read by poſterity. 


d Or pro-} þ Not flack as ſome count ſlackneſs, 2 Pet. 3. 9. either in perfor- 


rlicſy, for Prophets were of old call'd Seers, 1 Sam. ge 9+ and thei, M138 promiſe,or executing threats, bur very wiſely patient and long- 
prophecies were called Viſrns 3 or it may include the manner in which | luffering,which is ever tempered with great mercy, and both are join- 
Nabum was mntormed what was coming upon Nimevel , Goo reycaled,| ed together in his Providence and in his Word, ſee Exod. 34. 6. 


and the Prophet toreſaw the thinzs. 


e His name ſpeaks a comforter, Numb, 14. 18. Neh.g. 17. Pſal. 103. 8. and 145.8. Foel 2. 13. Jo: 


but *:5s to God's people, to whom he gives notice of the deftruttion} 4. 2. g Juſt diſpleaſure conceived and expreſſed ; the Lord doth 
oi thier oppreflore: his family, place of birth, and tire of pro-| not pretently entertain reſentments of diſpleaſure, nor make ſinners 
phecying, arc ſorewhar uncertain 3 perhaps he might propheſy inÞ reel them. He doth now, as he long hath forborn, you, O finful Ni- 
Lic tine Of Hezehiah, when the ten Tribes WCTe carried captive by neuttes, QO cri! Aſſyrians ; but conſider it, his flow anger will be the 
f Whether this ſpeaks Nahum's Family, or Town where heavier when it fails on you. r Moſt mighty in power. which reſtrains 


, Po 

4 / ; 
, 1ty*0;2;*" 
G17; NNitcVT!o 


, 2 - "8 
bra, or h:s Conntry 


H-.c- ? 1 _ 
v:/ice Elcofþ 10 
_ CE 


L . Eilks 5 


% 
4% 


X ef 
44 z 


i” # YO 

- 3 w #3 . 

| LIVLE £2 
" «_? 


4 % 


1 p ' 
C + - <7 
-» _e Y I y 8 i 1 3 1 
PF, >C. [bfS Soil LS dWwHThil 4 


a 


Galilee, by which he 1s here called. 


in gererel, 15 not certain, but probably tis the} the rage of cxcmies, defends and ſupports his opprefſed ones, and in 


a moment can deſtroy thoſe that have deſery'd,yet tear not hisanger3 


? JEULOUS >, and the LORD 7 revengeth} that the Af -izns are not yet deſtroyed tis the effeRt of patience, nor 
"FY reverzerh . and 7s F furious M., thy} 2tunpotence in the God of Trae. s Thisis ſpoken to awaken the 
vo. LOKD wil take z vengeaiice on his advertaries, and 
| 4277 tor Bis Encimics. 


'ecurc Kingdomin which many "tis like were as the ſcoffers, 2Pet.3+4- 
ready t3 fay all things do continue as they were, there will be nv 
chanpe, no judgment againft the wicked. But our prophet aflures 


f 4 i ne nngnty frog, t the Fr, <rlton,and the Heb, N INM- luch, that as there 1: reac power with God, he can 3 ſo there 15 EX- 


II: 


hk ih 4. 


$3:11250 

. +64 4 " : 
” 

- , PX © 


» £4 


A 58+ 
PY TFi EF 


#3: 5+ ' vt; oat. y b- , R - 

«$622; BUECTNIT. P13% LOVE 15 CI VEL 
- 

na their R.e nn 


4} 57 &$4 


: 


” ** FF 2, 44 
' 64 'o YE # % 
| "wy 
S021 


* a, $$*-a + \3Q, 


2 fy rneur, Win OY Hoe I'S, 43d acconit: aipath; or elfe his Way, ntimating the unerring {leddineis Ol 


eq 


bp tg. . Ln tt 
-4aY -2'g dw ig © + 


- =» 


ri: 6wn glory he will appc:r and att fo, 


$1 

t Top ins people, his diſpleaſure hot againſt | aR juſtice and ſtedfailt reſolution, he will judge. t Neither pronounce 
role id Hatrics he will not Jong bear againſt | them innocent by ſeatence of judgment, nor let them eſcape 45! 
terand rage againft his people 3 but as jealous | innocent by a perpetuated forbearance in the Courſe of his Provi- 


dence ; but ſooner or late*, in due ſeaſon the wickednets or rigiate” 


if. ande. 2. 7 Fehwahj ouſneſs of Men fhail be up2n them. u The incorrigitlc hardned ail: 


+, S__ PL 
iQ Ls j” liadibk 


te fame always towards hi: Þ perſiſting ſinner. x Either the Methods of his providence, his vu 


 Þro- 

» . » 0 217? 4 - 
the opp:ctlor :| vulence,the ſtreight and knowa path : howeycr to us it may 16i3;%! * 
CCL!) 


This was either in Anno Mundi 
2229. as Helvicus.or 3283. as Archbiſhop Uſher, and Dr. Lighttoor, in 1he ninth year of Hothea, which was the fix4h) 


* LORD bath his way x in the whirlwind y, and in «pp, 
Ning, giving rame to the City he repaired Ntneveh, Anno Mund! che ItOri Z, and rhe clouds are the duſt - of his 7, fwd 
c Either becauſe written and ſent to Nineveh, 03 teet Þ. £11; 


ſieddineſ; 
and irre 
Foundatid 
42ainſt rh 


1 8: 
Uly of t 
1 him 


'>85 gent! 
*In his ju 
mg dger 
Much an 
*dierato 
But here 
Pri 7 
SVaras | 
-3-T, and 


Qu O = pes — 


Rt A 


natura! 
ind tre 
5. 4. 7, 
diſplea 
Prrapht 
"tis a co 
2545 fire 
k 4. s,' 
"Are, ye 
vileis tg 
11 earth 
Heh, 1m} 
far off, 
whnſe a 
Overwhe 


6 
Can F 9 
tury L., 
Wrown 

a Sir 
t12 Nine 
refiſt or | 
long reby 
endure, 
uo * 

1:5 mic} 
the torme 
can teary 
worthy, 
fit and v 
by God h 


7 Tl 


> Tho! 


T > 
vo] 


Chap. [. 


certainly God knows and keeps the right way, y Which riſeth ſud- 
denly, and with violence beareth before 1t all things that ſtand 1n its 
* which n217e can prevent, which no Man can claim,which 1s at- 
tended with terror and amazement, Fob 27. 29» Iſa 17. 13. and 
20. 6, Aims 1. 14. fo will deſtration from the mighty and juſt 
diſplcaſure of God come upon his Adverſaries, and on you Xinevites 
and Aſſrians when you ſhall fall before chis whirlwind and tempeſt ; 
(> al) 1npenitent finners periſh, Prov. 1.27. x Heb. Speaks a dreadful 


e:mpeſt which makes Men full of horror 3 'tis an elegant Ingemina- 
tion of the ſame thing toaffe& hearers the more. 


a Thouzh he be 
ſarcounded with Darkneſs, 


way, 


yet asan Army afar off is diſcovered by 
*he duſt that their feet raiſe, ſo will God at laſt appear as any enemy 
with great power marching againſt his enemies. 65 And trom aboye, 
25 well as from the darkneſs of clouds deſtroy rhem ; this 1s ſpoken 
after the manner of men, and muſt beapplicd as beſeems God. 

1 He rebuketh « the ſea b, and maketh ir dry c, 
1nd drieth up all the rivers 4: Baſhan & languifheth /. 
and Carmel g, and the flower of Lebanon 2 languitht- 
em #. | 

- He once did rebuke, as Exod. 14. 22, he ſtill can, as a Lord re- 
Muketh his Servant, or a General rebukes his Soldiers, by Word or 
Look, Iſa. 59. 2. b Literally underſtood or figuratively, it 1nports 
{;i!l that he can deliver his Peopie and deſtroy his Adverfaries as of 
old he did. c His Word or Will doth as ſpeedily do this thing,as it 
doth proceed from Gad ; he commands, and 'tiz done. d S9 Jordan 
C19; or heard rhe rebuke of our God and tled, or was driven back 3 
Frſh. 3-154 16, and Pſz. 114. 3- And what he once d:d upon Far- 
1.m, that he cando on al! other Rivers, and ſo are we to underſtand 
the Words. e It lay Eaſtward of Jordan, was the Kingdom of 0g, 
+ was famous for Oaks, Exel, 27. 6. for Cattle alſo,as Bulls, Pſ.c.22-12. 
and Rams, Dent. 32+ 14. and was given to the half tribe of Manaſſ*h. 
£© Grows barren, as if under aconſumptive languiſhing, is not longer 
{ulicient to feed the Cattle that were wont to feed and grow fat upon 
it, g Avery fruitful mountain, either in the Contines of Zebulon and 
4(bzr Northward, Joſh. 12. 22. whereElhab by fire from Heaven con- 
cended with, and convidted the Baalites ; or elſe this Carmel might 
be that where Nabal dwelt, 1 Sam. 25. 2. famous for its rich Paſtures; 
his was more Southward than the other, and not far from Hebron, 
þ Whatever flouriſhed, and was beautiful, Trees, their Blofſoms, and 
the flowers which were wont tobe the glory of 1t. 2 A mountain 
thirruns from the Coaſt of the Phenician Sea Weſtward, for 125 
Miles more or leſs Eaſtward, and vergins toward Arab:a, it 1s the 
North Boundary of Judea, and divides it from Syria, famous for 
its fruittulneſs, as for its height. &þ Loſeth its ſtrength and virtue 
both the produ@, and the very Sc-.1 that produceth too, foon fall 
into a Conſumption. 


5 The * mountains / quake 2 at him, and the hills 
o melt p, and the earth 9 1s burnt 7 at his preſence, yea, 
the world s, and ail that dwell therein 7. 

] The more known mountairs of that Country were mentioned, 
v2r. 44 now the propher doth extend his Speech to all mountains, 
how great ſoever, and how faſt ſoever their Foundations are laid, 
7 Tremble at his rebuke, not only are ſhaken by Earthquakes from 
natural cauſes, diſpoſed by God's power and wiſdom, but are ſhaken 
ind tremble under the Effe&s of his extraordinary preſence, FudZz. 
s. 4. Job 9. 8. Pſal. 29.5. Fer. 10,10. n By his power, orat his 
diſpleaſure, orindeed at his preſence, P/al. 68.8.and ſo the Chald. 
Paraphraſt. 0 The leſſer hills diſtinguiſhed from inountains, or elſe 
'tis a confirming Ingeminativn of what he had ſaid- p God's rebuke | 
545 fire, mountains and hills ike wax melt down before ir, P/al. 
114. 5,7, 8. q Whichſ-:ms ro be ſecure againft the fury of the 
fire, yet proves combuſtible under the fice of God's Wrath. r Or 


6, 8 


, f p] 


NAH VU 54. 


the word and promiſe of God. 
nis word of promiſe in Hezebiah's time. 


18. ro, and is their ſtrengch alſo in that Fortreſs. g At all times of 


Aﬀfii&ion and Danger, when outward Prefſures fill us with anguiſh 
and Fears. 
pezr that he doth preſerve, that he may deliver his peculiar Ones. 
He knows the wicked, and will refirain, rebuke and deſtroy them 3 
he knows the good, and will protect, reſcue and fave them. i Whe- 
ther you conſider them in a body and community, or by themſelves 
a part or finply, 


þ Difcerneth, approvetiiz, owneth, and will make it ap- 


þ Believe, depend and wait on God, they that de- 
pend by Faith and wait with Hope. { On God, or on Chriſt, or on 
So God was to thoſe that truſted in 
Ss But mz with an over-running flood 7 ne o will make 
an uttzr end p of the place thereof x, and darknets £ 
{hall purſue 7 his enemies z. 

m Or And, or therefore, ſince God 1s fo good to ſjrael oppreft by 
Ajhriz, and ſo terrible, juſt and mighty ro puniſh oppreitors. n ts 
judgments like a mighty Flood that overiloweth all Banks,and ſcorus 
all that might check ir, ſhall ſwallow up Afjzr7ia and Ninzveh j which 
was in part effefted by Phraortes about the 2312 An. of the World, 
aad in part by his fon Cyzxares, who broke the Af;rian Kingdom ant 
rook Nineveh. o The Lord by the Medes, p will deſtroy, 15 that it 
ſhall never recover, or be rebuilt. r Of Nineveh, that 1s, Vin-weh in 
fcIf, Son Scripture ſometime the Place is ſaid to perith when the 
Thing it ſelf doth, as D.in.2.35. Rev.12.2, & 20. 11. s Troublcs,de- 
ſolating afflitions, extream evils,in Scripture ſtile are call'd darkneſs, 
Fob 15. 22. & 17. 12. Pla. 35.6. Eccl. 5. 17. Iſz. 42. 7. & 55 9, Wc: 

zel 2. 2. t Not a fiogle Calamity which is ſoon at an En, hut 
indeed a fucceſiion of Calamities, a continued Courſe of them ſhall 
purſue; ſo Phraortes began, Cyaxares continued, Scythians heip'd vn, 
and ASﬀyazes finally with four hundred chouſand Mcn f::j%Hed the 
purſuit in the Sackand ruiaof XNineveh afrer two years ſiege. 4 The 
Nineuites and 4f]yrians, 


þ, 


9 What do ve imagine x againſt the LORD y ? he 
will make an utter end = : alliction fhall not rife up rhe 
{ſecond time 7. 

x Having declared the dreadiulneſs of God's power and anger 1- 
gainſt the wicked, his goodneis towards his peopte, and d-noun- 
ced future deſtruction azainſt the Ninevites and 47 rims he< doth 

now expoſtulate with them, would know what *tis they think <£ 
God, what 'tis they defign againſthim, and cn what ground they 
Hatter themſelves into ſuch an attempt. y The God of T{-ge!; for 
however you, O Ninevites and 4j]yrians, will look orly upon a pact 
afflied people (weakened by many wars) and defign to firallovy 
them up, yet theyare the People of the Lord, and you defizn a- 
gainſt him what you deſign againſt them. 7x He will make your ut- 
ter deſolarion to be the iſſue of your projetts, and the puniſhment of 
your ſins,vid. v. 8.let.p. a When that ſtorm which ſhall overthrow 
you is paſt, nd other ſhall ariſe, becauſe you ſhall be no more 3 as if 
the prophet had ſaid, God will at once, and for ever deſtroy your 
Empire and City. 


10 For þ while they be folden together c as thorns, 
and while they are drunken d 2x drunkaads, they ſhall 


be devoured as ſtubble fully dry ec. 


b Tins giyes us account how this delolation ſha'l be cfe&ect 


Chap. 1 
ap. I 
Hold, as the H:5. Af/ox imports, 37d is fornctunes rendred. Tho? 
Trae! feems fo be expoſec. to the violence of enemies, and to he 
without any Munition or Fortreſs, yet verily the Lord their God is 
tor a Detence and Fortreſs to them, Pſal. 31. 3. and 61. 3» Prov. 


elieis taken away, withdraws it ſelf, lifts up 1t ſelf, as ſomerimes 
1 earthquakes, or as the Gallick Verſion, mounterh up in fire ; the 
H:5.importsall theſe. s The habitable World. # Whether they be 
far off, or near to 1ſrael, both Men, and all the reſt of the Creatures, 
whoſe abode is on Earth, are wonderfully ſhaken, affrighted and 
overwhel:ned at the Tokens of God's rebuke. 


c They ſhould be like thorns eafily burnt, and like thorn: folden to- 


gether which burn togerher, and help to deſtroy excl: c 
altogether caſt into the fire, 


M - Io ! bj 107 
1 A £3 b& ©; - « - 1 - £ ! 
da AS WL! UI Unicen ani UNAGN;e tO PLIEL 


tiemſelves arecaſily dettroyed, fo ſhill the Jirians be; or drank 


with pleaſures and pride, they thall be ſurprize 


4nd ruined and 
all TUnced, an 


eaſily overthrown. e This tully exprefferh the ſpeedy, ircefitivie 


6 Who can ſtand beiore his indignation z? and who 
can | abide x in the fierceneſs y of his anger ? his 
fury = is poured @ out like fire v, and the rocks c are 
irown down by him. 


? 
+ 


LH), 


tie Ninevites ? what Kingdom or Monarchy 15 mighty caough to 


at reſiſt ar defeat the counſel and power of this God, who will e're | 
nt long rebuke and pour out his indignation upon them? x Ee able to | 
$8 


Tis rmich the ſame with ſtanding before-mentioned. y This exp!ains 


canbearit, 2 Fury in Man ſpeaks ſome.+har culpable and vlamne- 
worthy, but jn God it cannot be fo, 1t 15 the intenfene(s of his 
fait and wiſe diſpleaſure. a With moſt righteous and wiſe direQion 
vy God himſcif,who is as ver. 2. let. m. which ſee. b Not inthe un- 
ſteddineſs and unrulineſs, but in the vehemency, ſpreading nature 
and irreſiſtible Force of it, as in Sodom's overthrow. c Though 
Foundations do ſupportother things, yet eannot ſupport tkemſelves 
4zainft rheir God when once angry. 


; _7 TheLORD disgodde, a || ſtrong hold f in the 


+ 
Vin 


In hiin /, 


3.1 and 119, 68, f it might haye been rendred, good tobea ftrong 


Vol, I1. 


« Since God can do all this,who among the Aſſyrians? who among | 


endure, or continue in flouriſhing, peaceful, ſate or joyful fate: ! 


the former, the heat of his anger is his indignation, and no creature j Ard he tmagined evil againſt the people of the Lord, 2 Chr. 


1, 6, day of troubleg, and he * knoweih þ them 7 that rruſt & 


> Though ſo terrible tohis Enemies, to obſtinate Sinners, yet he 
1545 gentic, kind and good to his people, to Tſrael; ſo the Chald.Para. 
*1n hisjuſt ſeveriry he continuerh to be good,none of that conſum- 
mz anger comes from any want of goodneſs in God : Yea, 'tis as 
mach an effett of his goodneſs, as juſt Puniſnments on incorrigible 
Nuetattors are the effefts of goodneſs in a Judge or Mupiſtrate. 
But here the prophet intends rather the kindneſs and grace of God 
towards his people, to whom he doth good, 'and will do more, Pſa. 


and rotal deſtruQion that the anger of God will bring upon them 7 
as the fire burnsup all the dried ſtubble, fo ſhall the Wrath of God 


deſtroy the enemies of T/razl, and of Tſracl's God, 


11 Thereis orz f come g out of thee þ that imaci- 
neth 7 evil againtt the LORD & : + a wicked counſel- + Heb. 4 
lour /. | ; 
f This 15a very uſeful Diale&to exprets an uncercain number ; ſe- Bellats 
veral are contained in ſuch an One, though if you will decermine it to 


| one ſingle Perſon, it is very like it may be Senachert5 or Rabſheka. 


2 From Nineveh he {ct ftort!t on that Expedition againſt Fudea inthe 
Days ot Hgelgah. h Nineveh, F Conſulteth, hath formed and re- 
ſolved upon it, & So 11s evident by his blaſphemies againſt the 
Lord, Ija. 35. 7, 18, 20, & 37. I9, 24, 2 9s 2 Chron. 32. I 


43t Sy17319» 
| ' "+ ay 
{ One whote Counſels.and Projefts are without any regard to rzhr 
and equity, who by iniuſtice and oppreflons, who by frauds and 
deceits, by blood and {laughter deftgas his own greatneſs, and the 
ruinc of his Neighbours. 


be quiet p, and Likewiſe many 9, yet thus » ſhall would 
they be F cut down s when he 7 ſhall paſs through : have been 


> > hguld 
more 5. they have 
Sea of Heaven. n Or it they would have been quiet and peaceavle ,,.+ (6 


many, Cc. but I think 'tis nearer to the intent of the place to retain 
our Verſion, Though s Citizens of Nineveh, and the People of 4(j- 
ria. p Be ſecure and fearno danger, becauſe of their ſtrength and 
victories. q As appears by the mighty Army with which they be- 
fieged Jeruſalem, in which 125000 were cut off in one Night. + Ir- 
refiſtibly, ſuddenly and univerſally, as is foretold v. 10. s The 


have been 


prophet varieth his phraſe, for v. 19. he ſpeaksof it as done by fire, 
| here he ſpeaks of cutting down, intimating that 'twas the Sword, 


[Qq2] 


whych: 


canker of 


12 Thus faith the LORD m7, || Though 7 they 7 [Or.if chey 
6. 3 


though zI have allied thee x, I will atfict y thee no © P*4ce, 1? 
1 


m This addeth weightto his prediQion, ic comes under the great y,en many, 


towards my people Iſrael, they, 7. e. the 4ſſrians, thould have been ſhould they 


ſho, and he 
ſhould have 
paſſed away 
feb. {fon 


—_ 
My es ee 
- mt ” 


_ « 
--£L 
TT 
4 


1 Rs ae > 0677 >, 
» - - , get 


nt . 
£990 ayer as. - 


Ie © 4 _—_; 
en ng <_ 
——_ RL ws; 


- 


% 
= Tp 


- : 
#2, . had? % 
CoD RT oy CORDS Hg, - 


- Op — 


wa_® 4 np i _— = 
Toner SO It = Rt LR - 


- as _—_ 


—- — 


fans Lim s 
III Et 


$6745 ndF 
£ om 
—_——_— 


_ ” Lane = 
= $==2x. 


—_ ma 
ww + - © 2 . 6 EN 
. » - Ter [IT - w ba P _ F 
—R_ Ex oo 85 a 

> 09 3% ? 
"h G ps ng ; £  l; 
T.> r *7 - 
” n po Aint o 1; BE 


v 


- 
og 
+... oy O- 
PIC 4 of : 
” 
-- 


TD 
. * LAS 
Lo. 
» T —_ 8 
= "—_ + 
- 7 1B # 
> wn te way 
_—_— OS : - 
—_ = > - 2 
ow +. 3 
_ « - _— 
_ —_ Pr SO 
4 > Ca Log 
"4 \ af > - BYY 
- - + ws 
- v9 y — Oye ©-pÞ; 


*z ,< 
T4 4©:* © 


CO CCI EIS 


ES 


> —— 
= n- ——_ 5 CEE de 
EPR TS THE GR "G1 "rv eps was _— —_ 
_ - 


o 


Ez. $2.5, 
Ro.10 is. 
+ Heb feal?, 
T hed. 
Bel:al. 


!! Or,the 
a"jperſer,or 
ka nmer. 


Chap. IT. 


which ſhavle cut thiem off. t Either Gol. the mighty and terrible 
Oae, paſſing over as a Flood, as 'tis ver. 8, or clfe the Ange! of the 
Lord, as 2 Kin. 19, 233. « The lord who am good to my peop'e. 
x O Iſreel. y Chaſtifed by the 4jrian, the rod of mine Anger-haft 
thou been to my people ; but I will no more uſe that rod. x For tliey 
ſhould ſoon ceaſe to be a Nation that ruleth, and be conquered and 
oppreſt by others, 


12 For a now b will I break c his yoke d from oft 


thee e, and will burſt thy bonds f in ſunder. 

a The Lord confirms the prediQion, by drclaring how it thould 
be done. b E'rc lonz, and in few years after this was done, tho! we 
cannot preciſely determine how ſoon it was. c As that whici: is bro- 
ken intopieces. d Senacherib's, or rather the tyranny and oppreffin 
of the. Aſſrian Kinzdom. e O Iſrael and Feruſalem. f Thoſe unjuſt 
Impofitions and Edits,which as ſtrong bonds faſtyed his heavy voke 
upon thy neck. They are the bonds of A4ſhriz as laid upon 1/rae!, 
they are Iſrael's bonds as born by Iſrael. 

14 And the LORD & hath given a commandment h 
concerning thee 7, zhat no more of thy name be fown # : 
out of the houſe / of thy gods m7 will I cut oit 22 tne 
graven image o, and the molten image p - I will make 
thy grave g, for thou art vile 7. be; 

2 God of Iſrael, againſt whom thou imagineſt Evil. h Determin'd 

with himſelf, and given charge to the Aedes, which in due Seaſon 
they willobſerve, and with affiſtance of the Chaleans will tully ex- 
ccute. 7 Or agiintt thee Senacherib, thy royal Family, and the 
whole Kingdom of A(ſjziz. þ Tho? Eſarhaddon ſon to this Senachertb 
did ſucceed his Father, yet may it be rather ſaid he was never ſown, 
he never took root, but like ſecd that falling on the ſurface of the 
Earth, there withers and dics : or elſe none ſhall bear rhy Name 
ard Title ; but hercafter thy kingdom ſhall be ſwallowed up by the 
pawer,and filenced in the name of Babylonian or Chaldean Monar- 
chy./ Temples built for their Heatlieniſh Worſhip. mIdols incimating 
the number of them, and the chiefeſt of them. n Deſtroy and aboliſh, 
ſo idolatrous conquerors were God's Servants to cut off 1dolatrous 
Worſhip, and idols of the conquered Nations 3 ſo did this Senache- 
rib, 2 Kings 18. 33, 34+ Iz. 37. 15. deftroy the Idols of the Conque- 
red, ſo ſhould they do againit the 4ſſrian Idols who were appointed 
of God to waſte Nineveh, o Either it reſpe@&cth- the univerſal deſtru- 
dion of the Idols all cut off, notone left : or rather ſome one more 
noted, dependedon, worſhipp'd, call'd Iſa. 37. 33. Niſroch, by ſome 
thought to be the Sun, but nothing in particular 1s elſewhere recor- 
ded of this Ido! or its worfhip. p Added either to intimate that all 
idols ſhould fall in the future ruine of the Kingdom, or to ler us 
know that the worth of the Metal of which the Image was made, 
and the curiofity of the Work, nor yct the pretext ot Sacred as a 
Gcd, ſhuuld be any Safeguard to it. q L hou ſhalt nor have a royal 
magnificent Tomb made by thy Succeifor,or ſuch as honor thee; but 
thou ſhalt be cither buried in obſcurity, or el'c thy tomb ſhall relate 
thy vileneſs, as 'tis reported it did by this Inſcription under Senache- 
ribs ſtatue in an Ezyptian Temple , "Fig 44s Tis ogy *evTeGns £50, 
learn to fearGed who lookelt on me.rDeſpiſed ſince thy defeat before 
Zeruſalem, orrather haſt been a vile prophane deſpiſer of God, whom 
thou kafſt blaſphemed avd reproached, and an oppreflor of Men, 
whom thou haft lain or enſlaved, unworthy of Lite, and unworthy of 
2 Grave when dead. 


15 * Behold s upon the mountains 7 the feet of him 
tzar brinzern good ridings #, that publiſheth x peace y - 
Q Tudah, t keep thy 1olemn feaits 5, perform thy 
vows a : fort the wicked b ſhall no more pals through 


c tlice, he is utterly cut off . 


s As this ſpeaks ſome unexpeRed thing, ſo it calls for our heed- 
ing and minding of it, Over whichhe muſt needs come that either 
came from the Aſſ»+7an Camp where the miraculous {laughter was 
madce,cr from Xineveh, where the fugitive defeated tyrant was ſlain 


mary mountains invironing Feruſalem, and lying diſperſed in Fudea, | 


over which the meſſengers came, who brought news of Senachertb's. 
Ecirh, or downfal cf the Aſſyrian Kingdom. # Good news indeed to an 
oppreiſed and weakned people, at which they might well rejoyce 1- 
deed, 1f it be coufidered what this tyrant intended,vid. T/a. io. from 
v. 5-to the end of the chap. Now he is dead who defigned the Miſ- 
chieit. x Proclaimeth and tells to every one he meets. y Not by 
Ieague or triendſhip with the Aſſyrian, but as the conſequent of 
his death, and overthrow of his Kingdom. x Be carctul to ſerve 
God, and worſhiphim ye that are his people. a Made in thy deep 
diftrcſs whenall ſeemed loft and folorn, 


c Neither as a conqueror who beareth all down betorc him, nor as a 
triumpherglorying in his Acquiſts, which in progreſs he takes view 
ot. 
Yes arifing on the {ſlaughter of his Army,and an Anarchy, or Interreg- 
num, whilft the rwo brethren parricides warr'd with the third for 
tie Crown, and ell three were in that jundure as in an opportune 
ſeaſon. invaded, ſubdued and deſtroyed by Merodach Balandan King of 
Babylin, vid. If4. ic. tot. 


C.HIJA P. II. 


Toe fearful and vidtorious armies of God agninſt the Ninevites, becauſe of 
their tyranny againſt the people of God, 1 = 13. 


1 || E a that datheth in picccs þ is come up be- 

tore thy face c : keep the munition C, watch 

the way &, make rh loins ftrong /, tortifie zby power g 
mightily. 

a Some by miſtilc refer this to Senxchertb ; *tis more rightly re- 

ferred to the Medes or Srythiarns. or to the Chaldeans, all which did 


N A H U M. 


b That wicked Counſellor, | 


wer. 11. the violent oppreifor, proud Senacherib, who ſhall fall by | -_ Light of flaming Torchescarried in them, the Chariots an 
che ſword,orrather is fallen by it, in his own land, when this Meſſen- ; like ſo many great Flambeaus,very dangerous and terrible. hBoth to 


ger of glad ridings camc, Iſz. 37. 7. with 37th and 38th verſes. | 


a Murdered by his ſons, his kingdom ſhaken by inteſtine rrou- | 


lomewhat againſt che Aﬀyrians. b Thar as a heavy and trons Ham. 
mer breaks into pieces, and thea with his Arm ſcattcreth the bra- 
ken pieces, ſo ſnall the deftrover of Nineveh do, as a Maul) fo the 


Word Pro.25.18.) or azthe wind ſcatters ſmoak, ſo the word Þ/;. 
68. 2. c Azainſt thee. and 1s within fight; from thy Watch-Tow- 
crs on thy Frontiers thou mayeſt deſcry his Avant Guards.d The Pro- 
phet derides Nin-veb, and foretels ail will be to no purpoſe: ſhe ſhat{ 
never be able to withſtand, ſo as to conquer, re-enferce thy Gari- 
ſons, yet they ſhall fall. e Know which way he comes, that thoy 
mavett barocado the way, or ſet Ambuſhes. f Encourage thy So]- 
dicrs, and make them valiant as thou canft, chooſe out che ableſt and 
moſt undaunted. g Gather up all thou canft for the war.cncreafe thy 
Armies,fill up thy Companies, engage Afﬀiſtarce from abroad,nothing 
ſhall avail thee. 


lency z of Jacob #, 
the * empticrs #7 have emptied them out z, and mar- 
red 0 their vine-branches p. 

Z This confirms the Prophet's Threat, either declaring that now, 
ſince God had iufficiently puniſhed Facob and Iſrael, he would next 
puniſh the proud Afyrian, as Ifa. 10. 12. or elſe 'tis a Confirmation 
by Argument from the greater to the leſs; Iſrael and Facob were 
more to God, yet he did puniſh them,much more will he puniſh Ni- 
neveh. h Laid low or captivated, as no doubt Senacher!5 did whenhe 
took ſo many fenced Cities, he did not flay all, hefſent many into 
Captivity, and threatned Feruſulem, her Citizens with the like, 7a, 
36. 17. 7 The Wealth.the valiant Men, the wiſe Men, all th#t Zacob 
could (with any colour of reaſon) and had (with fin more than e- 
nough) gloried in. h The two Tribes. / The ten Tribes ſpoiled, 
conquered and captivated by Shalmaneſer. m Aﬀyrians who invaded, 
plundred ati:d ro»b'd them, both Tſrae/ and Facob. n Quite exhauſt- 
ed them. o Either corrupted them in Religion and Manners,as 2 Kin. 
17. 244Xc. or deſtroyed and cut up the Race of Iſrael to deſtroy them 
utterly, p It may literally be meant, that the Aflyrians did cut up 
the Vines to impoveriſh the Vine-dreffers, or elſe figuratively tor the 
Nation which is often compared toa Vine, fo the Branches are Men 
' and Women. 


his preparation 2, and the fir-trees ſhall be terribly 
ſhaken @. 

q One part or the whole of the Armour and Furniture, or Har- 
neſs. » Medes or Chaldeans. s Souldicrs, more particularly the brave 
and ſtour ones, who were the choice Men of the Army. # Either 
coloured red by the Dyer, or clſe dyed red with the blood of the 
ſlain. This explains the former, they uſed this Colour much, ci- 
ther to terrifie the Enemy or to conceal their own wounds when the 
blood onother colour would. have diſcloſed them. x Much uſed in 
the wars of thoſe Countries, and the great Men uſually fought in 
them in thoſe Days. »y Either becauſe they did force fire out of the 
ſtones by their ſwifr Motion oyer them, or rather becauſe there 
were torches always carried in thern to light them that rode in them 
by Night,and to be in readineſs to fire the Houſes of Cities or Tents 
in the camp they did break into. 7 When he ſhall muſter his Ar- 
mies, and bring together his Magazines, and prepare his Engines. 
a By Axes c.tting them down for ſeveral uſes in the War,for Torches, 
for Lances, for building Forts, and many other Uſes. This parallel 
with 1/2. 14. 8. whole Forefts ſometimes deſtroyed by great Armies, 
which cut them down for their ſervice. 


4 The chariots 6 ſhall ragec in the ftreets d, they 
ſhall juſtle e one againſt another in the broad ways 7, 
T they ſhall ſcem like torches g, they ſhall run like the 
lightnings/. 

b Of the Chaidcan Army, or the Riders in the Chariots, by their 
fierceneſs and carriage, by their cries and calls heartning one ano- 


/ 


ther, and threatning the Afſyrians. c Shall ſeem to be more [ike mad 


Men than well ordered Souldiers, and a& as if they were pofleſſcd 
; with Furics, do more than Man can do. d Either of the Towns 
| they paſs throf,or rather of Ninev2h when taken. eBy reaſon of their 
; multitude, haſte and fury, they ſhall hir one againſt another. 
Ff Where is moſt room, ſhall be moſt of theſe Chariots, and yer 
; ſcarce room for them to move in, g What with ſparkling fire cau- 
ſed by their Horſes and Chariots ſhod with Iron, and what with thc 
glittering of the poliſhed Irons about the Chariots, and what with 


ſpeed, irreſiſtibleneſs and terror,againſt which no defence,from whicit 
no tlight or hiding. 


5 He 7 ſhall recount & his || worthies / : they gry be 
to the / 


ſtumble 2 in their walk : they ſhall make haſte 


wall 7 thereof, and the defence o ſhall b2 prepared. 
' 7 This verſe may indifferently refer either to Nin?veh and its k10g 
, making their defence, or to the Chaldeans and their King main- 
| taining the ſiege, both a& with Vigor and Diligence. k Muſter 
and give Orders. / Approved Officers and Commanders. m Shew 
| ſuch forwardneſs, make ſuch haſte, that they ſhall not ſtand ro pi: 
| their way; and there ſhall be ſo many, that they ſhall ſtumble for 
| want of room. n The Aflyrians to defend, the Chaldeans to afſawlt 
the Walls of Nineveh. o What mightdetend the beficged,and what 
; might defend the beſiegers ; all ſhall be ready on both fidcs, and 
what Men can do both will do. 


6 The gates p of the rivers 9 ſhall bz opened 7, and 

| the palace-s ſhall be || dif{olved 7. 
| þ Of theCity toward the River. q For River, or hecauſe of rhe 
greatneſs of Tigris upon which Nineveh ſtood. r Tt 15 reported by 
' Dudorus Siculas,Bibliath; 1, 3.c. 7. thar when the Chaldeans befiegcd 
Nineveh, a mighty deluge of Warers overthreiy the Walls or Nemete 


= 
4 


Chap, 1] 


2 Forg rhe LORD hath turned þ away the || excel- *Ifar..;, 
as the || excclency of Ifrael / : for # Or; pic 


3 The ſhield 7 of his » mighty men s 1s made 
red 7, the valiant men are in || ſcarlet # : the chari-| Or, 4 


ots x ſhall be with || flaming torches y in the day ar 
| ſy My 


F Heb. tn 
þ 


JW. 


VIE 


haj 


or, t1at 
hich was 1 
| Lbliſhed ; c 
r, there x 
as a fland 
pede. 

l 1: 
Or, 


of LR. # 
Wcowe! Cle 


dr, from 

day ye 

pt ſhe 4 
: C/ 

k heen, / 

Jr, cauſe ] 


of this 
gather 
theret 
telling 
whatt| 
great 
both tc 
in the 
Theirr 
robes, 1 
and ric 
15, IO 
|. , heart | 
). 6. 6, 
[2, 5, much 
all gat 
0 Nin 
Souldier 
many H; 
ther flip! 
fo. Het 
timate t 
hathhrol 
Teady to 
Pains an 
Fripghts, 
which ta 
Uriefe, 
It Were {1 
rowſul a 
Symprom 
11 \ 
izeding 
even th 
none m 
a It 1s 
b Nineve 
T1ors, as: 
the Chilc 
his Pride 
Which n: 
T2 


wielps 


NOIes 2; 


N. 4 1 af 


-— 
— —— 


Entrarc? ; 
An. M.. 325” 

rally under{to00 5 1 
ſhall be ruin d. FS Either th 
narch, or the Mm | . 
ſome mighty Bulwark raiſed there for Defence. # As it melted, 1t 


hall drop to piecetz and they that were in, whether Servants of 
*he Court, or Votaries to the Idol, or Souldiers for detence of the 
Fort, ſhall in haſte wirh fear of the danger fly away. 


- And | Huzzab z ſhall be ||led away captive , ſhe 
r, toak Fay Avy h A! d he Thads v {hl 1 14 _ h 4 
4iþ was ſhall be brought up, and her IMalgs y NULL ISAA Z CY 
Lrbited; o< with the voice of doves a, tabring upon their 
r, t2re breaſts h. 
as a flan: 4 This is varioufly taken, bur the moit probable pueſs is, that it 
pede, 15 mcait of the Queen who kept cloſe in tie Palace Or Temple, 25 
oO, , where ſhe might be moſt ſafe in the flrenpth and fuppoted tacred- 
Yererede eſs of the Place. x Without due reſpect to her Royal Dignity ſhall 
be hurried into a ſtrange Land with other Captives, and (as they) be 
expoſed to Danger and Infolence. y Ladies that waited on her ia her 
Royal State, now ſhall be her Companions in Captivity, » Support 
their ſorrowful, weary and fainting Queen, ſpent with ſuch travel as 
ſhe had not been uſed unto. a Srghing out the Complaints they 
durſt not ſpeak out. b Theſe Maids of Honour ſhould now in Cip- 
tivity ſtrike on their Breaſts, but with ſuch Caution and fear of be 
ins diſcovered in their lamenting thcir ſtate, as ſhould be but lik- 
the Noiſe of a Taber lightly ſtrucken ; or elſe inſtead of muſical In 
fruments on which they were uſed to play, and to which they were 
uſed to fing, now they ſtrike their own Breaſts, and figh out their 
Sorrows. 
fon $ But Nineveh 7s || of old c like a pool of water d: 
das yet they e ſhall flee away. Stand, ſtand f ſhall they g 
at fe 753; but none ſhall }| look back Þ. 
h vet. ©. A very ancient City, of great renown and ſtrength. d Very po- 
dr, cave tous, like a Pool of Water which hath been long breeding of Fiſh, 
m9 :1d is full of them. e Yet theſe Multitudes ſhall not be a Safety o1 
F ProteRion to Nineveh, they ſhall flee away diſcomfited and terrified. 
f As Officers call ro flying Souldiers, and tis doubled to ſhew the car- 
neſtneſs of the Commanders defiring the Souldier to ſtand and fight. 
gThe Chieſtains and moſt valiant among the Ninevites. þ A pannick 
Fear ſhall ſo poſſeſs them, that none of them ſhall dare to turn again, 
nor to look back upon the Enemy. 


9 Take 7 ye & the {ſpoil of filver, take the ſpoil of 


,and gold : \\ for / there is none end of the ſtore m, and glory 7: 


ir nf ut of all the Þ pleaſant furniture. 
fore; 7 God ſpeaks by his Propher, commanding that ir be done, and 
foretelling that it certainly ſhall be done 3 and Scythians, Medes and 
b, weſ Chaldeans, or whoever elfe did affociate in the War, and ſacking of 
1%" Nineveh, may be ſuppoſed to encourage one another in the plundring 
of the Ciry. k Conquering Soldiers, you that come together in hope 
of this Booty. { Here's enough for you all, Nineveh hath been long 
gathering and hath gathered much Treaſure, it is unaccountable 
therefore take all you can lay hands on : pofſibly it may he the fore- 
telling of the chiet Commander, his giving his Souldiers leave to take 
what they could, for ſo much as after all they would leave enough, a 
great Treaſure for him. m Or all forts, both for Uſe and Luxury, 
both tor Necefficy and Supertluity. n Splendid and rich Furnicure 
in their Temples, Palaces, puvblick Edifices and private Houſes. 
Their rich Veflels.coſtly Hangings and gaudy Apparel, in their Ward- 
robes, in thefr Cloſets, and in their Shops, all delightful ro the Eye, 
and rich in the real Value- 
1, 1o Sheo is empty p., and void 9, and waſte, and * the 
-, , heart melreth s, and rhe * knees 1{mite 7 rogerher, and 
17. much pain z 7s in all loins x, ard the * faces y of them 
all gather blackneſs 5. 

* Nineveh taken, and under the proud Inſultings of the barbarous 
Souldjers» p Tho' once tull of all ſtore, yer now ſhe 15 empty enough, 
many Hands have been employed to ſpoil her. 9 Citizens are ci- 
ther ſlipt away, or carried Captives, » Deſolate, and ſhall continue 
fo, Here isa threefold Exprefſion to aſcertain the thing, and to in- 
timate the greatneſs of Nimeveh's Deſolation. s This Devaſtation 
hathbroken the Hearts of the Ninevites. # Not able to go ſteadily, 
ready to fall through weakneſs and faintneſs of Spirits. #- Acute 
Pains and Griefs cauſed by their Troubles, Lofles, Dangers and 
Frights, x Which in thoſe that are well are their ſtrength, and 
which to diſeaſed and broken Bodies are the feat of Pains and 
Griefs, y Which were wont to be haughty and ſcornful, and as 
It were ſparkle with briskneſs of Spirtt. x Now are clouded, for- 
rowſul and dejetted, cvery one may fee their deſperate State in this 
Symptom. | 

11 Where 2 zs the dwelling þ of the lions c, and the 
tzeding-place d of the young lions e © where the lion, 
even the old lion f walked g, and the lions whelp, and 
none made z7hem atraid. | 

a It is the inſulting or deriding Speech of all thar fee and note it. 
b Nineveh compared to a Lion's Den, c Tyrants and bloody War- 
riors, as Pul, Tizlath, Pileſer, and Shalmaneſer. d Nineveh. e Princes 
the Children of thoſe tyrannical Kings. f The King of Aff rive g In 
his Pride, in Safety, and his Princes with his Rapines about him, 
which none durſt diſturb, k 

12 The lion þ did tear 7 in pieces enough tor his 
whelps 4+, and ftrangled for his lioneffes /, and filed his 

wes x2 with prey. and his dens z wirh ravine 9, 

h The Prophet continues the Metaphor, this Lion is the King of 
Efhriz. 7 Formerly id fall upon his nei;hbour Nations, broke their 
Strenpth, andro bd their Treaturics and Store-Houſes, and Lroke 
them in pieces. þ The young Brood of the 4ſſrian Royal Family, 
E Queer: « Concubines or Ladies in the Aſſyrian Court. 7: Ris Tred- 


o iz 


11d Koval Scars, called Deas in aDeccrum to the 


. 


Lurie. Magazii ( 


Speech he hal ufef, «n Tnoeminatine what way before: ſpolren, 
9 Spoils which his rav-ac2s Mind and Hand could Iay hold on; a!l 
vas Prey thar he could take. 

13 Benold p, 1 4 am againſt thee », faith the 
LORD of hotts s and I will turn her 7 chariot; 
in the ſmoke z, and the ſword x ſhall devour thy 
young lions y, and 1 will cur off thy prev = from the 
earth, and the voice of thy meſſengers « fhall no more 
be heard 6. 

þ This calls for cur Attention. q The God of j;r.ze whom thou 
hait deſpiſed and Laſphemed. r Afſirian Kingdom and Nineveh, 
s Whoie Cummand a!l muſt obey. # Ninevth. a In wrath or ſud- 
devly; or what if when the City firſt plundred, then burnt, theſe 
Chariots were burnt in that ſmoke? x» of the conquering Enemy. 
Y Young Princes that either arc found in Arms, or eife arc cur off in 
tne places of their Retirements for ſafety, + Cauſe thce to ceafc 
from maiung a Prey any more, of Ceftroy all thou haft portca by 
thy Prev. a Either Einbaſſadors ſent forth, or Tribute: gatherer:, 
or Muſter-maſters to liſt Souldicrs, or Heralds to proclaim Edie-., 
4 None fall concern themſelves with one or oft: of them 3 now 
ovey or fear thee, 


Cty Us AiCd 
4 


CHAS UL 


The miſerable yuine of Nineveh and Aſſyria like that of N1, and d(Iry 4 
for the ſame ſin, 1 - 8. The:r jtrength and great power thall avail 
mthinz. 9 —— 19. 


not 2, 

a f comprevenſive rthrcat of many and great Calamities coming. 
b Nineveh, the chief City ot the Aſſyrian Ringdom, Vid. chap. 1. vor. 
r.ler. b, c Every part, Oificers and Rulers; Traders, both Buycrs 
and Sellers z Shops, Houſes, Judicarories, all fill'd with Falſhood* and 
yes. de Cheating in their Trades, and falſe Witneſſes before rhe 
Judges. e Their Gain, though rhey count Honeſt, is no better in 
God's Account than Robbery or Rapine, as 1s that the Lion taketh, 
reareth and devourcth, as the word Heb. unplies. f Urjuſt acquiſts 
by Fraud and Force, Extortions and violent taking away what was 
not tncirs. g As they did fo long itnce, they continue fill fo ro do, 
no change from Tvjuſtice to Juſtice. | 

2 The noiſe of 4 whip Þ, and the noiſe of the rat- 
ling of rhe wheels z, and of the pranking horics &, and 
of rhe jumping / chariots. 

The French »eads this Verſe with a Negative Diftributive, and fo 
links this and the next Verſe with the former Negative, ver. 1. thas, 
the Prey departeth not, nor the Noiſe of the hip, cor, 7Fc. inti- 
mating the I-ng continuance of rhe Chaldeans infulting over the Ni- 
nevites. h With which the Charioteer rouzed and animated the 
Horſes which drew the warlike Chariots, 7 By the fwift motion of 


the Horſes. bþ In the Chariots proudly and ſtately trampling. 
! Made to jump by the ſwitneſs aud ſtrength of the Horſes which 
drew them, 


* 


their corpſes . ! 

m The Chaldean and Meds, or their Confederates in the War. 
n Hath his Sword noc only drawn, but in a Poſture ever ready to 
{mife, wound or kiil. o Thefe Warriors kept cheir Weapors :n tuch 
manner, thar they wcre fic both to cut and kill, and alſo to dazle the 
Eye, and affrighe. p Ila Nineveh and the Streets of 't. q By the 
>word of the prevailing Befjegers. ry The {lain lay in the Streets 
unburied, Fs None knew the Numbers of the flain., t Both Inva- 
ders and invaded, all within the Ciry. # Are ready to fall at them, 
nor ale to avoid them. 

FIR OC ok oy ; A PDF I » 

4 Becauſe x of the multitude of the whoredoms y of 

the well-tavoured £ harlot, the miſtreſs of witchcratrs ., 

that Jelleth þ nations c through her whoredoms &, and 
woe I T4 Sal erm boa 
tamilics.e through her WitCucratts. 

x God 1s juſt, Nineveh hath deferved all this. y Her Crafts 2nd her 
Policies. z In which the reſembled thofe lewd Women,as they by their 
Wiles abute and deceive Men, fo did Nineveh or the Aſſyrian Kingdom 
deccrive,1mpoveriſh and entlave Nations by State policies, fo Ja. 23c 
17. and Rev. 17. 2. or elſe by Whoredoms here may be meant Ido- 
latries, which were multiplied by the many People-that ſerved the 
Aj{y;1an Idols, or by their multiplying of Idols, which probably they 


did by taking inro the Muſter-roil ot their Gods thoſe Idols whict 
the conquered Nations worſhipp'd 3 or Whoredoms liceraily under» 
ſtood, for this Sin undoubtedly did abound where Wealth. Luxury, 
Fate, and long continuance of theſe were to be tound. 2 The glory 
of their State aud Government, or the ſplendor of their idols, Tem- 
ples and Sacrifices, or the Comelineſs and Beauty of the lewd and 
whoriſh Women among them, a Bewitchins Pclicies, and enchant- 
ing Counſc!s, Confederacies and promiſed Favours z or it may be j:* 
tcraily raken for Witckcraits or Necromancies, which Sin aboanded 
no doubt among the Aſ]j,7ans. .b Diſpoſeth of them as impericuſty 
and abfolutcly, as Men do Slaves which thev buy ; or eife drawing 
thein into the Wars tor pay,expoſed them to laughter uy the Ere- 
mics Sword, as if they i:ad tought there Ferfvis to felt rievw Lives, 
rhat thereby their own Coutry-men and Citizens mgnt be ſpared 
and cſcape. Or f<llerh, 7. 2. occaftoncti them to-avound 1n f19, tor 
which God in his juft Judgment telleth them into the Enemies Hard, 
c Whole Ringdons. & See let. y, e Either tis anelegant liuftra- 
tion of the turmer Paſſage, or perhaps ir may intimate tne feduciug 


of ſme particular and eminent Families co engage theauleives in 211 


F.cre- 


[ 


tude of ſlain 9, and a great number ot carcaſes 7; and /?” 


- 


V\ Fi) a to the * + bloody city b, it zs all c full *Ez-5. 2: 
of lyes Fl and robbery E; theo prey f deparieth 9. tai, 


3 The horſcmen 2 lifteth up z both the + bright + teh. 
{word o, and the glittering ſpear, and zhere f 7s a multi= fame f - 
= an 
. R F 2 - [1.2 1. b% 
there 1s no end of ther corpſes s - rhey 2 ſtumble upon ,;,..: 


T4 


«8, FTE 
4 Mg ang Beng 2. 


=" 7" 
Gerd ori th ng P _——_y 
x ———" 
2 + ALEIYP 0.” 
_ pr rn 


£4 


* ſ? WW 
' . ro” od - 
= —_ Lan - b_\ 
__—— c_—_— 
SR —_ g % a 
< F - ; 


where ares at po 


I 


>” Roe ea 


— 


2A parc > 
— : 
bs alorenothamane > 
_- _ ” 


_—_ 


activa 
_ _- —_— RE : *s- 4 >= 
"me wma na_r_p_n I oy . _— — 


©. Bees 


Chap. III. 


*Ifa 47-2, 


3, 8. 
I3 22,25. 


Tf mo £. - c 
t Or 


*® 
, 


Jer. 


« y * 
nM FWDING. 
= 


7 
Ln 


'S 
; LiCyU. 


N)- 401, 


*X T > 1 -< 
$+< T. *+-— © 
c 
Fa 


& 


hereditary and perpetual Service to the Ajyrian Idols, or to Witch- 
crafts, in which the Devil jmitated God's Inſtitution, 10 taking a Fa- 
mily to his Service, ſo the chict Families had the Authority of ruling, 
and the Burden of an Idolatrous Prieſthood, Gr. Tholoſan. de Rep. 
lib. 4. SeF. g. and lib. 8.c. 2. Sc&. 6, and 8» : 


5 Bchold f, I am againſt thee, faith the LOR D ot 
hoſts, and * I will diſcover g thy Skirts upon thy face. 
and 1 will ſhew the nations þ thy nakednels z, and the 
kingdoms thy thame. : 

f See chap. 2. ver. 13. let. , q, 7,5 g Nineveh as an Harlot lad 
been proud, and appeared beautiful and gay in the Gifts of her Lo- 
vcrs3 but now God will deal with her according to her ways, ( and 
as Men provoked uſe to do with Harlots) ſtrip her naked, and eX- 
poſe her to the greateſt Infamity; or deal with thee as ;inhumane Sol- 
diers do deal with Captive Women: Vid. Annot. 10 Ezek. 16. 37- 
þ Which once did reverence thy Greatneſs, ſhall now abhor thy. Na- 
kednefs which they behold. 7 Thy Vileneſs and thy Shame, as 1n 
the next words. 


6 And I will caſt + abominable filth / upon thee, 
3nd make thee vile 7, and will ſet thee 7 as a gazing: 
{tock 0. : 4 ; 

- By the Chaldran and Mediſh Army which God will ſtir up againſt 
the Arian Monarchy, | As is done to lewd Women. m Nineveh had 
made her fclf morally evil and vile by fianing ; now ſhe ſhall be 
made penally vile. n O Nincveh. 0 At which rhey ſhall wonder and 
be attoniſhed, ſome ſhall take warning too 3 ſo Sennachertb's Tomb 
was a ftanding Monument to put Men in mind that God 1s to be 
tearcd, and that Men looking on it may rcfle& on their Inſolence 
and decline it. So Senmackeriy's Tomb-1tone with his Statue : Of 
which chap. 1. 27, 14. 

7 And it ſhall come to paſs p, zhat all they that look 
upon 4 thee, {hall flee » from thee, and fay s, Nineveh 
is laid waſte 7, who will bemoan z her ? whence-x ſhall 
i ſeek comforters for thee ? 

p It will moſt certainly be. 4 So ſoon as ever thou art ſeen and 
ditcovered, O Nineveh, in thy Vileneſs. 7 With hatred, loathing 
and abhorrence for her former Pride and Wickedneſs, and for her 
preſent Miſerics. s With Wonder, Scorn, Rejoycing and ſpreading 
the News. # Taken, ſack'd, emptied of Inhabitants, yea utrer:y ſub- 
verted, that ir may be no more a Rival with Babylon ; tis certain 


N A H U M. 


that 'tis not nov where it once ſtood. # Whoſe Bowels will be 
moved for her that had no Bowels for any one, who will move Font 
or Hand roward her Relici ? x From what Place ? She hath wronged 
all her Neighbours, and ruin'd ſome of them; from amidft theſe 
ſurely not one mav be ferch'd to ſpeak comfortably to her; theſe 
do with reaſon upbraid her former Cruelty and- Pride, and rejoyce 
in her preſent Calamirv and Ruine, and Strangers will not be con- 
ccrn'd for her. , 
$ * Art thou y better £ than || + * populous No, that 
was firuate among the rivers a, that had the waters 
round þ about ir, whoſe rampart c was the ſea d, and 
her val! ws trom the fea c £ 
y O Nirneveh. 2 Tis generally ſuppoſed, that this was what we now 
call Alexandria, a City full of People, and as full of Luxury and Un- 
clearneſs, the Sins whereof had brought it to Ruine, though the Hi- 
Rory of it do nor ſpecifie Time, Perfon or Means, Wc. Art thou 
greater, fironger and wiſer, more able to rcfiſt an Enemy and pre- 
ferycthy ſclt? Yet all her Power was broken, her Riches ſpoiled, 
and her Glory buried in Ruines. This known in thoſe Days, was a fit 
Example to be ſer before the Ninevites 3 and though ſome conjefture 
the Prophet forete!s what ſhould befal populous No, to awaken the N7- 
pevites.,yerit ſeems incredible that the Prophet ſhould take an Inſtance 
2 terrific ſecure Ninevites trom ſomewhat to come to pals 1n after 
Ages. @ Ina Flace where the ſeven Streams of Nilus very fairly 
might be acccunted ſo many Rivers, and near to one of theſe Streams 
roward the Sea was this mighty and rich City ſeated. b Though at 
tome diſtance, vet at noegreat diſtance. c Or defence of its Walls on 
one fide. d That part of the Midland-Sza which was Mare Egyptia- 
c:-51, and was Nerthward from the City. e. A mighty ſtrong Wall 
baile trom the Sea on the parts Landward, where need was. 
9 Ethiopia f and Egypt g were her 1ttrength Þ, and 
77 ras infinite 7; Put & and Lubim / were F thy hel- 


- Pers. 


f Tis not very probatle that this Frbiopra fhould be that remote 
Country thaz lay South of Ezypr, though in Truth 'tis poſſible, and 
while Ez1pt was in Friendſhip with No-Amon or Alexandria, the Aids 
might in length of time come from Ethioptz or Habaſſia : But there 
was 4 Cut, an Ethinpia in Arabia, near to E-ypt and Alexandyia,whoſe 
Feople were likeſt to undertake the affiſtance of Alexandria their 
Neighbour. See 2 Chron. 14+ 9. Ezek. 30.4, 5. Hab. 3.7. g This 
Noor Alexandria, was either a City ſubject to, and was part of Eeypr, 
or 1f ( as ſome conjeRure ) 'rwas a tree City, 'twas in League with 
Ezypt. h Furniſhing Souldiers and warlike Afiſtance on all Occafions 
to Alexandria, which relied on theſe Confederates. 7 They never 
made an end of their Confederacics and warlike Proviſions, It js re- 
ported that when Amaſis reigned, Egypt reckoned twenty thouſand 
Cities; and «hen ZerahKing of Ethopia came againſt Aſa,it was with 
an Army of ten hundred thouſand Men, and three hundred (thou- 
ſavd ) Chariots; theſe were the Aﬀociates of Alexandria. bh Or Phu- 
teans or the Modrs, who liealong weſtward of Alexandria. 1 The 
People that inhabited the Parts of Africa, and rhought to be that 
which is now ca'led Cyrene. Vid. Ezzh 32 m O Alexandria. 

10 Yet ſhe was carried away 7, ſhe weng into capti- 
vity 0: her young children p allo were daſhed in pieces g 
at the top of all the ftreers: and they caſt lots » for 
her honourable men s; and all her great men 7 were 
bound in chains z. | 

n Its probable this might be about thirty Years before; for about 
3207, as CalT:/i75,, or 3277, as Arch-Eiſhop Uſher, Sabactn Ring of 


and flouriſheth. o This ingemination confirms rhe certainty of the 
thing, and intends to affe& the Ninevites the more. p Their innocent 
Age was no fateguard to them. q Firſt barbaroufly murdered, ans 
then trod under foot in the Streets, as was uſual with thoſe cew-! 
bloody Souldiers, 2 Kings 8. 12.Pſal. 137. 9. Iſa. 13, 16. r Either 
to put a Scorn upon them, or eiſe to prevent any Conteſt alays 
them, being taken among many others together, and none could fu; 
this is my Priſoner. s Citizens of note, or ſome Officers 'or G4. 
vernours. # Great in Place, Strength, Valour, Wiſdom, and fo ijke- 
ly to do the Conquerour a Difplcature, ſhould they not be ſecured. 
u Of Iron or manacled, uſed as worſt Slaves. 


11 Thou x alſo * ſhalt be drunken y : thou ſhalt be "Pai-;; 
hid Z ; thou alſo a ſhalt ſeek b ſtrengrh becauſe c of the 145.7, 


enemy. 7 

x ONineveh, y Not only taſte, but drink deep, yea be drunk with 
the bitter Cup of God's diſpleaſure and thine Enemies rage, I/a. 29., 
Obad. 16. x Either hide thy ſelf, or be ſo weakned and diminiſh'd 
that thou ſhalt no more appear, or elſc be as contemprible, laid by in 
ſome obſcure Place, Fear and Shame ſhall coyer thee. a O Nineve) 2s 
well as Alexandria. b Shalt ſue for and intreat Aſfiſtance. c Or from 
the Enemy, 7. e.cither thus in thy diſtreſs thou ſhalt ſeek tor ſtrength 
from ſuch as are really thine Enemies, though they make a League 
with thee; or thus, thou ſhalt beg Prote&ion from thy Enemy tha: 
hath captiyated thce, and rely on the Mercy of him againſt the Rage 
of others, 


12 All thy ſtrong holds d /ha// be [ike * fig-trees 2 *p,, c. 


with the firſt-ripe tgs f : if they be ſhaken g, they thall 
even tall into the mouth þ of rhe eater. 

d Caſtles and fortified Places, nor one or two, but all of ther, 
e Eaſily ſhaken. f Whoſe weight and ripeneſs will bring them 
quickly to the Ground, g If bur yery lightly tcuch'd. þ Into the 
Hand of devouring and hungry Ones, 


13 Behold z, * thy people &# in the midit of thee /* |. ,, 


* 


are WOmen 7: 
wide o open unto thine enemies p; the fire ſhall de- 
vour 9 thy bars 7. 

7 This may ſeem ſtrange, but attend diligently, thou ſhalt ſec low 
this will be. & Thoſe thou hireſt and are thine for pay; thoſe thar 
are born thine, all thy Warriors. } Where very Cowards uſe to bc 
valiant, or where Neceffity makes Cowards valiant, where they ſhould 
ſhew moſt valour. mm Weak, afraid, flee away and hide themſelves, 
Fer. 48. 41- & $1. 30. God would fill them with Terror, and 
they ſhall not dare tokeep their Gates ſhur againſt the Enemy. n The 
Cities, but eſpecially the ſtrong fortified Frontiers which ſhould keep 
out the Enemy. o Shall either through Fear or Treachery be opened, 
wide opencd to admitthe Enemy. þ Ghaldeans and their Confede- 
rates. q When the Enemy 1s thus admitted, he ſhall burn cither 
the City or the Gates and Bars, he will never truſt nor ſpare thee, 
r With which the Gates were both ſhut and ſtrengthened, 1 $a". 
23. 7. Pſal. 147. 13, 


14 Drayy thee waters for the fiege 7, fortify « thy 
ſtrong holds : go into clay, and tread the monter x. 
make ſtrong the brick-kill y. 

s Fill all thy Ciſterns, and make more that thou want not tc 
drink, yea draw the Waters into the Ditches or Graff about cv<r; 
Fort. # Which thine Enermies will lay againſt thee, # Repair al! 
decays, and ſtrengthen all that js weak. x Set thy Brick-makers on 
work to prepare ſtore of ſtrongeſt Bricks. y That the Materials for 
thy Fortifications may be firm and good. All this is ſpoken with an 
Irony, or derifion of their truitleſs Labour. 


15 There = ſhall the fire a devour thee : the fivord 5 
{hall cut thee off: it ſhall ear c thee up like the ca 
ker-worm d; make thy ſelf many e as the canker-woim., 
make thy ſelf many f as the locuſts. 

{ In the very Fortrefles. a Either literally or figuratively, ti: 
Wrath of the Enemy hot as Fire, or the Peſtilence, or all toge- 
ther. 6b Of the Chaldeans, their Wars, (after all that the $cythi.ns 
have done againſt thee ) theſe ſhall utterly deſtroy thee. c This 
tells us the manner how the Ninevites ſhall be deſtroyed, they ſhall 
beeaten up. d Either the Enemy ſhall as eafily eat thee up, as the 
Canker-worm eats the green Herb or thou ſhalt as ſoon be devoured 
as Canker-worms are deſtroyed by Storms, Rain, Fire or change of 
Weather. e They are innumerable, be thou ſo if thou canſt be, all 
will be to no purpoſe. f The ſame Trony repeated, when the Nine- 


vites have doneall they can, they ſhall as fully and ſuddenly be de- 
ſtroyed as theſe Vermin are. 


16 Thou haſt multiplied g thy merchants þ above the 


fleeth-77 away. 


g For Number; and as the ord may import, thou haſt great- 
ned them, thou relieſt on their Purſe and Intereſt. - þ Either lite- 
rally or figuratively, thy great Men, Princes and Rulers, which ſold 
and bought,c.3.v 4.0r thy Confederates, who by viruue of ſuch Leagues 
have free Commerce with thee, and tkis moſt like to be the mean- 
ing. 2 Proverbially taken for a very great Number. þ This ſeems 
an abrupt Speech, and may be thus made up, Whatever thou thinkeſt 
of theſe, which thou both mulriplieſt and magnifieſt 3 I tell thee, 0 
Nineveh, they are like the Canker-worm and Locuſt. 1 Which ſpoil 
whercever they come, and do the greater Miſchief where they are 
greater in Number, for they come for ſpoil; while they get by thee 
they continue with thee. m When no more is to he gotten, they 
take wing and flee away, leaving waſte and fench behind them ; {C 
will theſe ſerye thee. O Ninevch, 


ry... 
i7 Ii; 


Chap, 


Ethiopia invaded Egypt, took Borcorgs and burat him, which was ror 
likely to be done without ilaughter of Men, and ſacking of Towns ; 
about which time No might be ruined. Now as Calviſius and Hel vic 
Account about 3238, or 2s Uſher 3307 Ann. Mund. Nahum appear; 


the gates 7 of thy land ſhall be {er57. 


ſtars 7 of heaven : the canker-worm # || ſpoileth / and ir 


Chap 


J Or, 4- 1+ 
f tant one5- FF 


T 


70 'CE 
the | 
Pal! 


7a: 
71ghi 
abou, 
dah ; 
jrof 
mand 
God ; 
and a 
Perfia 
dom 0 
IWorla 
by the 
dreſjet 
it bot] 
iN, an 
tation, 
Drfficn 
IWe ca; 
kith o 
what 1 
the pr 
think: ; 


The prop 
ſhewe 


Jet pra 


Th 
if 
a Vid 
Per to th 
grievous 
_ feel ; 
Cuntry 
Name 5 
embracer 
fo his Pe 
ond emh 
Cacy of / 
nat is 
and ſent 
Out did q 
It atfkcRec 


- {Or. 4 A- 
Wnt ones 


Chap. I. 


17 Thy crowned # ave as the locuſts, and thy cap- 
tains 0 as the great graſhoppers, which campp 1n the 
hedges 1N the cold day 9, bt when the ſun arileth 7 they 


fce away 5, and their place is not known 7 where they azo. 

n Thy rich and wealthy Citizens, or thy Confederate Kings and 
Yinces, or thy Tributary Princes. 0 Hired or homeborn, rather the 
former, Commanders and Officers for number and briskneſs, are like 
Locuſts and great Graſhoppers, but 'tis all for ſhew, nothing for help 
to thee. þ As if they would guard the Grounds about which they 
ſettle. q This laſts while the Scaſon ſutes them. r When Trouble, 
war and Danger, like the parching Sun ſcalds them. s They ſhift 
f;om the Hedge they eat up. # Thou ſhalt never know where to find 
them when thou needeſt, and they ſhould help thee. 


1$ Thy ſhepherds z flumber x, O king of Allyria y : 
thy || nobles = ſhall dwell 7 7Þe duſt a : thy people b 
is ſcattered c upon the mountains 4, and no man ga- 


thereth e tem. 
4 Subordinate Magiſtrates, Rulers and Counſellors, or Officers ſer 


over the Kingdom. x Are remiſs, or miſtake, or are heartleſs or 
dead; they cannot;or will not mind the publick Concerns. y H1s Name 
] mcet not with, Aſaradinus,or as the Scripture calls him Eſarhaddon, 
may poſſibly be the Name and Manintended, 2 The brave, valiant 
and famous Men. @ Either be duricd as dead, or lie on the Duſt as 
f:int and weary, or be trampled on as worthleſs and uſeleſs. b Thy 
Citizens and SubjeRs in their great Numbers. c Partly through Fear, 
Shame and Aſtoniſhment ; partly by Violence of the invading Enemy 


H 4 B-4 KU KI 


| 


a4 Where 1s neither Safety nor Frovitiot acninit Danger 2nd Want, 
e No one that will concern himfelt to preſerve thy diipericd Onws, 


fo rhou and they are lett hopeleſs and ruined, for the Stepherds ©: 


ſome dcad, and cannor, the reit ſlumber and will not lay to tia: s 
their Condition, 
19 There is no Þ healing f of thy bruiſe g- thy woun * 


IS grievous Þ :- all that hear the bruit of thee 7 111all clap 
the hands # over thee; for upon whom / hath aut thy 
wickedneſs mz paſſed 7 continually o 2 

f In a word, thou Nineveh muſt die, thy Bruiſe he will not heal 
who gave it, and others cannot. God iy the Cha/deanshath wounded 
thee, and thy Friends cannot bind up the Wound. 2g Shiver'd and 
broken State. þ Hath brought a Weaknets on thee, thou art tick 
with thy Wound and fainteft, not able to bear a Cure. 7 Of thy 
former Carriage and preſent Calamities. þ Inſulting and rcjoycing 
over thee. 1 No Kingdom, State, Ciry or Family almoſt rouzd 
about rlice, not one can be named. m Thy Sins, thy Idolatry, Lux- 
ury, Orc. thy Tyranny, Pride, Oppretfion and Cruclty ; thy illegal, 
unprecedented Violence. n Without any Bounds, aid 1n molt ve- 
hement and fierce manner, o Either always treading down, and 
trampling upon thoſe whom thou hadſt ſu>dued, or ciſe having con- 
quered and ſpoiled one State, didft forthwith tail upon fone other; 
Thus all ſuffered by rhee,and all rejuyce at thy utter Downral z and as 
none have cauſe to befriend thee, ſo none will tind Hearts to pity 
thee, or Hands to help thee, but every one 1s ready to with, that all 
who are as thou wert, Enemy to blankind and Juſtice, may as thou, 
periſh without Help or Pity. 


HABAKKUK. 


K— 


The ARGUMENT. 


TT: Prophecy of Habakkuk ſeems to be an exatl ſtating of that perplexed Caſe touching the ſeeming 


UN E7 41 " 7t '{s 


of the Proceedings of God in the Government of the World, in which the Good ſuffer Evil, and the Evil re- 


Tazce in Proſperity ; the more Righteous are afflified, and the more Unrighteous proſper ; nay, the worſt domineer 


CUEF 


the beſt among Men. This Caſe baffled the wiſe among Philo/ophers, and it much troubled David and Jeremiai, 
Plalm 73. 2, 3, &c. Jer. 12. 1, 2. azd hath ever been matter of jome wonder 10 the beſt and wiſeſt of Men, as here 
was to Habakkuk, who lived in the times of great Impicties againſt God, and of great Injuſtice amongſt Men. *1is 
moſt probable he Irved and propheſied in the Days of Manaſſeh, when the wicked devoured the Man that was more 
righteous than himſelf; and this is the Subjett of his Complaint, ch. 1. 11,2, 3,4. Thoſe grievous Sins which then 
abounded, he declareth ſhall be puniſhed by the Chaldeans, at which he again wondreth , it gricvertt him to ſee in Ju- 
dah the beſt affliffed by the worſt ;, and it 1s as much Grief to bim to fereſce the wicked Nation of the Childcans 
proſper in the Ruins of a more rightcous Nation, from the 51h tothe 111h ver. of the firſt Chapter, which God conr- 
mandeth him to forctel. On this he propoſeth the Caſe expreſly, from ver. 12. tothe end of the Chia pter, azd wich 


God reſolveth for him in the ſecond Chapter, where the Sins of Judah and the S:ns of the Chaldeans ore enumerate; 


f. 


/ 
5 


and at once both are threatned with Pumſhment, when the Chaldeans have puniſhed Judah's Sins, the M95 ard 


Perfians ſha/l puniſh the ſame Sins in the Chaldeans, In all which the unſpotied Righteonſneſs.and the admirable if. 
dom of God is ſeen, in the Government of bis Church chaſtifed for ber Sims againſt God, and in bis Governmen 


_ , 
"AS. 


Fa Y 2 
LES-4 p 


World {inning bighly againſt God, and with greater Wickedneſs atting the ſame, or worſe things than thoſe, ſor which 


» 
_ 
p 


by their means God bad before puniſhed his Church. In fine, the Prophet with ſteddy Faith and fervent Prayer ad. 


dreſſeth 10 God, and in moſt elegant manner recounting God's Mercy and Fiithiulnejs to bis People, chap. 3; 
=> C w 1 


it both a Foundation to our Hope, and Pattern for our Pract 


He oY Ce # 


tice. He doth revive, as we (ould, to wait for, rejyce 


mn, and ſubmit to the Lord, in greateſt Diſtrcſjes and Darkneſs of Providence. An excellent Subjed for our Mcdi- 


tations at this Day, as well as in the Days of our Prophet , whoſe Name feems 


to wiply bis Wreſtlings with theſe 


Difficulties, or his laying bold and embracing of God our ſafeſt Corſe mn [ac Creamptances being to adhere 10God, 
IWe can but gueſs at the time of his Propheſying, and that we think is rather 1n the tne of Manatlth 1hip of Heze- 


kiah or Jofhiah, though poſſibly be might live and be a Prophet 
what Family he was of we pretend not to teil you, ſince we C: 
the pretended Meſſenger that carried a Meſs of Broih 0. 
think it a wonder, any thinking Man ſhould now bclieve 1t, 


CHAP. L 


The prophet complaineth of the great wickedneſs of the Fews, 1 —— q 
ſheweth the fearful vengeance of the Chaldeans againſt them, 5 — 11. 
yet prayeth for them, and againſt their enemies, 12 — 17. 


HE burden « which Habakkuk 5 the prophet c did 
lee d. 


4 Vid. Nahum 1. ver. x. let. a. to which we may here add, as pro- 


per to this Time and Place, that the Prophet ſeems to ſpeak of the | 


grievous things here intended, as a Burden to himſelf, a Trouble he 
did feel and groan under. b Here we might as others gueſs ar his 
Country, Parentageand Tribe; but no certainty appears in theſe, his 
Name may perhaps intimace ſomewhat, either Actively one that 
embraceth, or Paſſively one embraced, and ſo may refer to God, or 
fo his People, and iotimate good to a People, whom God will ere 
lond embrace z or it may ſpeak one that is puzzled with che intri- 
Cacy of Aﬀairs, and therefore expoſtulateth, as v. 2, 3- c Not he 
that is mentioned in the Apocriphal Book, but a Prophet called, 
and lent of God. d Not only in the fur uce certainty of it on others, 
»ut did alſo feel in the preſent Trouble.and Perplexicy wherewith 


!t affected him, 


7n the firſt part of Joliah's Reign. What Tribe or 
not pretend 10 Riow s, but we are ſure be teas not 

ir of Jadea into Babylon for Daniel's Dinner: az wo 
4 


; / The 5 Ut 
as 1t would at that Day have been if really done. 


2 0 LORDe, how longs f ſhall Terr -. 2nd thou 
wilt not hear þ? ever cry 7 out unto thee > cf vio- 
lence /, and thou wilt not ſave 2 2 

© Unto God alone he makes his Application. as only able to re- 
dreſs all grievances. f It may be ſome Years he i244 preack'd. and in 
Preaching had complain'd-and cry'd out againft Wickedneſ. 2 Un- 
t> Men in thy Name, and unto thee in Praver ind *upnlicarion, 
h Give anſwer by correng or pumfhing the Bad, aud ;, reſcuing 
and delivering the Good ; by appearins a juſt &4rhitrator and ſudo 
of both. 7 With ſubmiſſion, not murmuring, nt impaticu*, not C1 
ſtruſting the Juſtice or Mercy of God. þ Who art more dilpleaſed 
than T or any ore elſe can be diſquieted,with thar I complaiuof, who 
art by Office and Word bound to refiriin Violence, 7c. [ The 
acguft and wicked Oppreffions which 1 ſce others tee, and a!l pood 
People are eadanzered by. m By changivg the Bad or refirain- 
ing them, or by overthrowing them, and ſetting up juſt and up- 
right Men in their room, both in 7erajalem and in Fudea, and eve- 
ry where clſe. 


3 Why doſt thou ſhew » me iniquity o, and cavſe 
me to behold p grievance qe tor tpoiling r and vio- 
lence 


Chap. 1. 


Wi MIN: ige 


ferns = Me, utes he” Ii 
4 pg — : = <* -y on 
- _ 
—_— oy woo, ee ER; OEMS . 
_ OY. 4 o " _ 4 p 
va > x = 


: \ * Wks. Sov 549 ” 7 pt 
\ Fas ff 
—_ nt 20g” © 6 We oy" <4 
of ww . a 
WJ LT 
w— - -% a” 
nec; poo. om 
wg # ade es ret es 
wo _ - 
dx — 4 bo 
- i ® och 
IOID- inns, 
= 


a _ ew £4 . 
= = = - __ 
/ - VO ae I. en 
bh , ———_— 
amgtocnerdt unalince cows = » . Lc 


Chap. I. 


HAB A 


lence s are before z me, and there are that raiſe up 7 


{trite and contention x. 

» Tt is a moſt unpleaſing Sighr,and thar which troubles me,and eve- 
ry 200d Man, to ſce unjuſt and injurious Men without controul and 
unpuniſh'd, to a their Iniquity; and yet O God, thou nor only per- 
mitteſt it co be done, bur to be done in Sight, and to the Grief of 
thy Servants : thus God ſheweth it, and 'tis not withour juſt Cauſe, 
though the Cauſe he hidden. o Men of Iniquity and Vanity 3 un- 
righteous toward Men, and vain in their Thoughts and Prattices of 
Religion toward God. p This explains the former, let. m. q So 
"tis 1n regard of the effett it hath upon Beholders, and ſuch as ſuffer 
by this Iniquity; 'tis Grief and Sorrow to them, tis a Grievance 
they groan under. r Such as waſteth and undoeth them that fall un- 
cer it, Fs Perverting Judgment, and turning it into Wormwood 3 or 
elf: "tis a Hedraiſm, Spoiling and Violence, that 1s moſt violent rob- 
bing and ſpoiling each other. # Every where I ſee it, to the break- 
ins of mine Heart. » Or, and there is Strife, that is lirtle elſe but 
Strife among Men, occaſioned by theſe oppreſſive Prattices. x So 
twill be a Hebraiſm. expreſſing endleſs Contention. It would bear, 
and Fudgment is taken away, which ſutes the next Verſe. 


4 Therefore y the law = is flacked «, and judgment 6 


21.7. doth never c go forth : for * the wicked d doth com- 


T Heb. 
breadtis. 


[Or from 
them ſhall 


proceed the ©. #; 
jn7gment of ſelves. 


theſe, and 


- paſs about e the righteous; therefore || wrong Judg- 


ment f proceedeth, 

F Becauſe the wicked go on with Impunity, and the Puniſhment 
they deſerve is deferr'd. x Of God, given to this People by the 
Hand of Moſes, the whole Law Moral, Ceremonial and Judicial. 
a Is lighted, weakned and little ſtudied, and leſs obeyed by all ſorts. 
b Not ouly private Men negle@ the Law, but Magiſtrates, Judges and 
publick Officers pervert, or divert, or obſtru it alſo. c Heb. To 
the End, or unto Vidtory, with prevalence to reſtrain the Unjuſt, and 
to prote@ the Innocent, which is the End of Magiſtracy, Rom. 13. 3. 
d The unjuſt and violent Man. e As 'twere beſiegeth, ſurroundeth, 
with deſign to oppreſs and ruine by falſe Witneſs , Intereſt or 
Bribery. f Perverſe Judgment, wherein Innocence is condemned, 
and the Nocent are acquitted ; ſo the Judges are Swords in the 
Bowels, when they ſhould be Shields over the Bodies of theRigh- 
tcous, 


5 © * behold g, ye among the heathen h, and re- 


'gard 7, and wonder marvelloully &- for I / will work 7 


a work in your days 7, which ye will not believe o though 
it be told you p. 

2 Here God begins toanſwer the Prophet,and calls for a very par- 
ticular and exa& Confideration of the thing ; ſee and ponder, 
þ what Judgments, what Puniſhments have been executed upon the 
Heathen for like Sins. 7 Weigh it well in all its Tendency and Conſe- 
quence, for it is a warning to you,it afſures your Judgment will over- 
take you alſo. k As aſtoniſhed at Judgments, too great to be expreſt 
in words, and ſo ſtrange that 'twill ſeem too much to be believed. 
I The grear and glorious God, the juſt and ſupreme Judge. m Begin, 
continue and finiſh a Work; a Work IT am working, a Work of 
equal Scyerity and Juſtice. It ſhall no more be deferr'd, Ezek. 7. 
s, (5c. o Ycu wicked violent Oppreflors will not believe tho' the 
Lord by his Prophets foretel it. þ Deſcribed how, and by whom, 
and when, 

6 For lo 9, I raiſe up 7 the Chaldeans s, 2hat bitter 7 
and haſty # nation, which ſhall march x through the 
+ breadth * of the land., to poſleſs y the dwelling- 
places 5 zhat are not theirs. 

q Now the Prophet declares particularly whar 'tis that the Lord 
will work. r Awaken to Aion, animate them in it, and ſtreng- 
then them to accompliſh their Defign. s Who had ſubdued other 
Naticns, and had already ruined the 4ſſrian Monarchy. # Cruel and 
without Mercy, 7er. 6. 23. & 21-7. u Speedy and quick in exe- 
cuting their mercileſs Purpoſes, as 1/a.s. 26, 27. - x Heb. walk with- 
out fear, and in order, as a Conqueror doth jn his Conquefſts. 
* Through all Parts of the Land, no Corner ſhall eſcape his Search 
or Cruelty. y Not to ſpoil and be gone, but to take and keep Poſ- 
ſeſſi:n, as Lord and Proprietor in the Right of Conqueſt. z Houſes, 
Towns, Cities, Jeruſalem it ſelf, which they had no right to, 'till 
Fewiſh Sins gave occaſion for the diſpoſſeffing of the Fews, and the 
intfoducing of the Chaldeans. 


7 They are terrible and dreadful @ : || their Judg- 
ment þ and their dignity c ſhall proceed of them- 


a To afﬀe the inzredulous Jews with greater fear, 'tis doubled, 


the captivi- they are of all Nations moſt terrible, in the Fierceneſs wherewith 


ty of theſe, 


FT Heb. 


harp. 


they aſſault, and Cruelty with which they uſe their Captives. b The 
Law they obſerve is their own Will, and what they pleaſe you muſt 
ſubmit unto, nor complain of Wrong done, foraſmuch as they do 
3t. c Their Authority and Superiority, for which you muſt reve- 
rence them, the Lordlineſs of their Deportment roward you, or the 
Right they aſſume to ſend you Captives, all is from themſelves, with- 
out reſpe@ to any other Law or Rule whatever. How miſerable are 
vou like to be, when enflayed to ſuch a barbarous Cruelty, and un- 
bovaded Pride ? 

8 Their horſes alſo are ſiwifter d than the leopards e, 
and are more Þ herce f than the evening-wolves g : and 
their horſemen þ ſhall ſpread 7 themſelves, and their 


* Jer-4-13- horſemen ſhall come from far &, * they ſhall fly / as 


the eagle zhart haſteth 22 to ear. 

d They will be ſooner upon you than you think, and when once 
among you, they will be ſwifter than you can tly from, J/a. 3o. 16. 
and Lam. 4. 19. & A fierce Creature, ravenous as the Lion, and 
much ſwifter, a watchful and ſly Beaſt, from which 'tis very hard 
to ſhift. f More cager after, and more cruel to the Prey, g Which 
with long Faſting in the Day. do come out in the Evening, more 
fierce on every thing that may be a Prey for them ; ſee Fer. 5. 6. 
Exel. 22. 27. Zeph. 3. 3+ hExcelicat Riders, that can manage the 


K K U K. 


Speed and Fierceneſs of theſe Horſes. 7 All over the Land, fo ma. 
ny ſhall they be, and ſo ative, and ail ſtrongand hale, as ſome think 
the word implieth. &þ As far from liking your Cuſtoms, pitying your 
Perſons, or underſtanding your Language, as they are far remote 
from your Country; Menthat will make you pay the Charge of their 
long and tedious Journey. / Leſt you ſhould dream ot eſcape þy 
Flight, your Enemies ( O miſerable Fews ) ſhall be ſo ſwift, you'l} 
think they flew on Wings, on Eagles Wings, the ſwitreſt of Flight 
and quickeſt in eſpying her Prey. m Hunger makes her Flight the 
quicker, and her ſeizure of the Prey more bold and daring, Fob 9.25, 
Ezeb.17. 3. ſo ſhall your Enemies be to you, 


ther the caprivity q as the ſand 7. 


/ 


will carry Eaſtward : Or, thus, when you are devoured they ſhall 


Captives gathered. 


70 And they 5 ſhall ſcoff 7 at the kings z, and the 
princes x ſhall be a ſcorn unto them y : they ſhall de. 
_ every ſtrong hold, for they ſhall heap duſt and 
take it 5. 


s Both the King of Babylon and his Souldiers. # Deride and con- 
temn. # Which either confederated with the Fews, or elſe oppoſed 
the Deſigns of the Chaldeans, as the Kings of Egypt, of Tyre, &c. 
or the Kings of the Fews, as Fehoiachin and Zedehiah. x Gover- 
nours, Counſellors, valiant Commanders and Officers. y To the whole 
Army of the Chaldeans. xz By mighty Mounts caſt up, 6r by 
ng up the Trenches about your Cities and Fortreſſes, ſhall maſte; 
them. 


11 Then Z ihall his mind a change, and he ſhall paſs 
over b, and offend c, mmputing this his power d unto his 
god C. 

7 It notes both the Time and Cauſe of what happened; extraor- 
| dinary Succeſſes, and a continued Series of them, attending the De- 

ſigns and Attempts of the Chaldean Kings, at laft made them fo 
haughty and proud, as to trample on Kings, ver. 10. and when their 
Pride was at this height, it ſtops not here. a The Spirit or Wind, 
as Heb. and ſo ſome think the Prophet does foretel the Change of his 
proſperous Gales, his downfal ; but "tis more natural to underſtand it 
of the change of Mind in the proſperous Chaldean, he will think 
other Thoughts of himſelf, his Aﬀairs, and of other Men. 6 Break 
over the Bounds of all ſober and modeſt Sentiments,exceed in his V4- 
lue of himſelf, and of his Atchievements, as Sennacherib firſt did, 
2 Chron, 32. 17, 18, 19+ and next Nebuchadnezzar , ſurnamed the 
Great, Dan. 4. 29,30. c This Pride wasa great 110, and highly pro- 
voked God, for the inſolent Tyrant idolized himſelf. d The ſtrength 
by which he had done all his great Exploits, or the Might and Power 
to which he had advanced himſelf. e This at firſt ſeems a little to- 
lerable, it ſeems to favour ſomewhat of Religion, yet 'tis a grear 


to reckon his Strength to be his God, as the words will expreſs it 
in the Heb, Vid, Dan. 4. 29, 30. 


12 E Art thou not from everlaſting f, O LORDz 
my God h, mine holy one ? we & ſhall nor die /: 0 
LORD 2, thou haſt ordained x them o for judgment | 


for correction £. 


forth, thou waſt God : thou haſt permitted, born with, reſtrain'd, 
overthrown and puniſh'd ſuch proud, bloody and ſacrilegious Wret- 
ches. In thy Works of old,before this proud Chaldean Monarch was 
thought of, thou wert as now Wonderful, Juſt and Good, and thy 
Saints found ſupport in the Remembrance thereof, Pſal. 74. 12. and 
77-6,12.& 143+ 5. Iſa. 45. 21. InCovenant with thine 1ſrael,which 
Covenant 15 not of late Years, it 1s an ancient Covenant, and as it 
hath,ir ſtill ſhall be kept for our good. g The Sovereign Lord and Ru- 
ler of the World,who only art Fehovah. h Judge and Vindex by Office; 
as Judge, engaged to defend, reſcue and avenge the Oppreſled, and 
my God or Judge. Whether the Prophet ſpeaks only in his own, or 
in his Peoples Name, he hath reſpe& to that peculiar Relation he or 
they had to God, much like that 1/a. 63. 19: He refers to the anct- 
ent Covenant-Relation which God had taken them into, and implics 
his Hope and ExpeRation of Help from God, their Judge and Vindex- 
; Holy in thy Nature, Law and Government, in thy Mercies, and it 
thy Judgments, who doſt intend to make thy Holineſs appear in duc 
time by ſaving us; though thou ſeem to forger, or ar leaſt to delay 
the Work, yer thou art the Holy One in the midſt of us, ſa. 12. 6 
and we wait for thee. þ Who are thine, and oppreſt, threatned 
and expoſed ro the Avarice and Cruelty of the Chaldean. 1 Be ut- 
terly cur off and deftroyed, for the Death of a Nation is the Deſtru- 
ion or Deſolation of it ; thou who haſt made us thine by an ever- 
laſting Covenant of Mercy, wilt ſhew us ſuch Mercy that we ſhall 
outlive the Rage of our Enemies. m With humble Veneration he 
doth look towards God,and diſcerneth what quieteth his Spirir, 04 
confirms his Faith and Patience. m Ser up, maintained and defign- 
ed. o The Chaldean Kingdom, as ver. 6. p To execute this Judg: 
ment, which is ever attempered with Mercy, which ever betfcrs, 
never deſtroys thy People, Vid. Iſa. 10. 5, &c. Babylon as Aſſ111* 
was the Rod of God's Indignation, &c. q This he repeats for Col- 
firmation and 1!luftration, and intimateth God tobe his Peopies 
Rock and Reſuge. r Strengthened and fortified. s To chaſtilc 


and diſcipline, nor to deſtroy, 
13 * Thou 


Chap. 


9 They 7 ſhall come all o for violence: || + their fa. 9s, ; 
ces p ſhall ſup up as the eaſt-wind, and they ſhall ga F 
J #071. 


Ces. Vow 

n Chaldeans, and in particular theſe fierce and ſwift Horſemen, Fed, 

o With one Purpoſe, on the ſame Deſign, to enrich themſelves hy ſeal [nh 
making a Prey of all. p Either thus, their very Countenances ſhall to,,, .; 
be as blaſting, peſtiferous and dangerous, as is the Eaſt-wind jy «1 * 
thoſe Countries ; or thus, all they can ſup up, or lay hold on, they +46, ., 


ſet their Faces Eaſtward to devour others in thoſe Coaſts. q Priſo- 71:5; /,.. 


ners or Captives, called here the Captivity, to expreſs the Extremity 79y,;4;, 
thereof. r Both for eaſineſs of gathering, and the Multitudes of ef, 


Offence thus to aſcribe his Grandeur to a dumb Idol, but 'ris worſe 


and O + mighty God 9g, thou haſt + eſtabliſhed 7 chem ſr 


. 2. 4 
_ F In Being, thou art that God who art not like the Gods of the Na- ; a 
tions, Upſtart and Novel y but before the Mountains were brought £1 


Cha] 


#* Pſal. 5.55 
& | Or, 


4 ; 
grts VANCE. 


PS m—. ws by = "= wu a * Fe IF CEOs 


SO Dn 


Mniy eg 
themſe] 
17 

Hit {} - 
nm Th 
licceſs | 
all; iv 
fv]l Net 
Wore, 
«: endlet 
«erſons, 
Juſt and 
bher by t 
iuffer it ; 
p:EiTors 
V 


KK KU K 


CHAP. I.. 
The Prophet waiting by faith for an anſwer, ſheweth the de/irudtion of the 
Chaldeans for their unſatiableneſs, 1 — 8. cruelty, intemperance, and 
idolatry, 9 — 20. : 


Chap. oa 


H ABA 


' 13 * Thout art of purer z eyes x than to behold y 
eyil z , and canſt not look a on || iniquity : where- 
fore lookeſt b thou upon them that deal treache- 
rouſly c, azd holdeſt thy tongue d when e the wicked F 
deyoureth g the man þ that 1s more righteous z than 

p] 

_ © Lord, who haſt raiſed and increaſed-the Chaldean Kingdom. 

4 Of infimte Purity and. Holinets. x Afſcribed unto God to expreſs 

his Knowledge ſo his Eyes run to and fro, and his Eye 1s upon the 

Rizhteous. y His Omniſciefice beholds all things ; and fo David ex- 


prefſeth ir, Thou beh»ldeft miſchief and ſpite to requite it, Pſal. 10. 14. 
But he doth not, will nor, cannot ſee with delight, with approbart- 


rn 
ann by 6 2 


* : Go. Ren Ret og 
z . tat y 
DO RETIREE 
COPS nas xp. or Can 
: z = eng nope. 


Or, 
pb . 
grievance. 


(ts he 
I” "= 


Will *ſtand 2 upon my watch 6, and ſet c me upon *1fr.21. 
the + tower d, and will watch #2 to ſee what he f will rp fon 


lay g || unto me h, and what I ſhall anſwer 7: + when I ;,; places. 
am || reproved #. f Or, 7n me 


4 The firſt Chapter ended with that difficult and perp!ex'd Que- f Heb. 
ſtion, why God ſuffers the Wirked ſo long to proſper in their Op- upon my re- 


—_ 


i Ib 


IT PT : 5 : A © 
= Y K 4 ANTHATT Ty wt » wr. od N < 
wt > we She <<, xr Fur i Lab. a "7 Bee. Tos * ner _— 
. As x o_ "I, hy = —— \—_—_ —_ 


eb. fat, 


on, z Of Sin and Violence. a The ſame thing repeated ro confirm 
us. All this the Prophet doth lay down 2s moſt undoubtedly true, 
and on which he. ſtays himſelf, (chough the be amazed with the 
darkbeſs of Providences- ) and by this he will repreſs all undue Mur- 
murings, when he debates with God about his Providences, moſt 
Joſt and Holy * But why thus or thus? 5' Seeſt all the Violence 
done, and bearc{t with them that do it 3 why doft not thy Hand re- 
move, and avenge what thine Eye is offended at, and-thy Heart” ab- 
horreth ? c The Chafdeans, who were a perfidious Nation, and rus 
in'd many by their Treacheries, Fraud and Force, were both alike 
to them. And 'tis_ likely they dealc- very fafly with the Zews. 
4 Scemeſt unconcerned in ſuch a Degree as to. be filent and ſay no- 
thing.  e Or whileſt it might ſeem a fir ſeaſon co ſpeak, when the 
Violent are about their Violence, when the Prey 1s between the Teeth 
-nd not ſwallowed. f The Chaldean, an Oppreffor, bloody and trea- 
cherous againſt Men, an Atheiſt, or Idolater againſt God. g Swal- 
loweth down whole, as the word imports, Numb. 15. 3o. and Pſal. 
124-3. h The Few, or almoſt every one of us, as the Phraſe, im- 


rts. i Tho' the Fews were a very cortupt-Nation, yet compa- | 


red with the Chaldeans, rhey were the better, of the two the Few 
was the leſs evil. 'Now this Riddle he defired might be unfolded ; 


Why is the Juſter oppreſt by che Unjuſter ? 


14 And makeſt & men / as the fiſhes »: of the ſea 7; 
as the || creeping things o zhar have no ruler p over 


them ? | 
þ Not infuſing cruel, ravenous and unſatiable Appetires, but per- 
mitting them to a& according to ſuch Appetite which was already 
intkem. / Who ſhould be juſt to all, and wrong none z who were 
once framed for mutual Help in Civil Societies,and whoſe Life ſhould 
be Beneficence. mOF'which the greater/live on the lefler, and do 
orecdily and all the day long feed on the ſmaller Fry. n Where the 
Devourers are more for Number, of greater Bulk, and ſwallow grea- 
ter Numbers of- the ; lefſler. o Which in the Waters are Food 
for the leſſer Fry 3 ſo the World like. the Sea,. 1s;wholly Oppreſſion. 
> None to defend the- Weak, to reſtrain the Mighty, and to give 
Law to all. F00-IF1 : Ka : 
15 They q * take” up all s of them with the an: 
ole t: they catch them in their net z, and gather. x 
them in their || drag y; therefore they = rejoyce a and 


are giad b. | 

q Eirher more generally Oppreſſors every-where, or elſe particu: ; 
larly the Chaldeans, r Draw them out ſlily and craftily when they ' 
are taken by his Bait. s Without diſtin&1on, all alike Good or Bad. | 
# It way refer to the Delight theſe Oppreſſors took in theſe Courſes, 
or to the more private way of deſtroying. - # Another Method of 
the Chaldean Rapine like catching of Fiſh, not ſingly and one by one, 
but deſtroying many together. . x As if they could neyer have 
enough; theſe Chaldeans do, Fiſher-like, drive Men into their Nets 
and Snares. y This is a third way of deſtroying Fiſh. The Chal- 
deans would uſe all ways to devour the Fews. x The greedy and 
cruel Chaldeans. a Both in their own Gain, and in the Fews Ru- 
ine. b 'Tis doubled to ſheiv the certainty of the thing, and pro- 
bably to intimate the double Joy they took in their proſperous Op- 
preſſion. ES | ; 

16 Therefore c + they ſacrifice d unto their net e, 


and burn incenſe f unto their drag g - becauſe by 
them their portion h zs tat z, and their meat & || + plen- 


£ 


teous /. | 
c Becauſe they proſper and thrive, in which they ſhould ſee and 
acknowledge thy wiſe and mighty Providence. d Idolize and pay 


preffions of the Righteous ? This Chapter repreſents the Prophet proof, or 
waiting and muſing, ſtudying with himſelf what account l:e might argutrg, 
give to himſelf, and waiting what 'account God would give him of ir. {| Oc, a: 22 
He will ſtand in a Poſture of Meditating, obſerving and waiting, 2d with. 


b Poſſibly the Prophet may have reſped to the manner of che Fews, 
who in their ſolemn Frayers and waiting on God had their Stations 
and Watches (as DD. Buxtorf obſerverh'in verboQy) in their Syna- 
gogues or at Feryſalem. | Bur T rather think the Prophet refolyeth 
ra be like one that is to be a Watchman, asProphets arc, Ezehb. 3. 17. 
for the Ptople of God. ' Or paſſively, in my Watch; 7. e. where 
my Adyerſaries like beſieging Enemies obſerve and watch me. tt 
contains his <igent and perſevering ExpeRation and:Obſerving, 
c Fixedly and with reſolution not to-leave my Sration.'as the Hb. 
implieth ; tis the ſame thing more empharically expreſt than in the 
word ſtand. d Either Watch-Tower, or, befieged Tower, or with- 
in a Circle, og of which I will oot..ſtic till I receive au Anſwer. 
e Moſt attentively obſerve. f The Lord, chap. 1. 12. g Oc ſigni- 
fie unto me. h Waiting for mine own SatisfaQion, and for the In- 
formation of others. i There are many that are perplexed at the 
Intricacy of Providence, and ſome enquire to be inſtrufted ; ſome 
propoſc Doubrs and Fears; and others do quarrel, and perverſly 
wrangle with God and his Prophets : And how I may anſwer rheſe 
from the word of God, is that I wait for, ſaith our Propher. þ When 
called to give an Account of the Myſteriouſneſs of Providence; 
when either to ſatisfic Doubters, or to ſilence Quarcellers. 


2 And the LORD /anſwered »7 me, and faid, Write 7 
the viton o, and make z plain p upon tables 9, that he 
may run 7 that readeth it. 

! On whom he waited, and who ruleth all Aﬀairs. #: Did hear my 
defire, and gave Dire&ion what 1 ſhould do. n What is only ſpoken 
is foon forgor, but what is written is more laſting z therefore write 
thou the: Viſion. ſhew'd to thee. o The things thou ſeeſt, or which 
chou ſhalc ſee. p. Make the /Writing.yery plain, engrave it, as was 
their manner. q What was of publick concern, and therefore to be 
publiſhed, was anciently written- or engraven upon Tablcs, ſmooth 
Stones or Wood, ,and then hang'd up in a publick Place to be read. 
r That noge may need to. make a. ſtop, but hold on his Courſe, in 
the greateſt haſte of Buſineſs, eyery one may plainly and clearly diſ- 
cern what is written, ' | 


3 Fors the viſion 7 zs yet” for an appointed time , 
bur at the end -x it ſhall ſpeak y and not lie 2 : though 


will not tarry d. 

S The reaſon why it muft be writren 1s, becauſe it ſhould not be 
forgotten, whileſt the appointed time is ſomewhat far off; write it 
that it may be preſerved in memory. t The accompliſhment of the 


things ſhew'd unto thee 3 what thou ſecſt is coming, and what thou - 


foretelleſt to them, will take effett. u Derermin'd and fixed wich 
God, though unkr-2wn to Men, x When the Period appointed of 
God ſhall come, then, and not till then, 'twill be accompliſhed. y Be 
accompliſhed, and fully made good. x Not diſappoint your Ex- 
peRacion. @ From the time of the Prophets ſeeing it, which was about 
Manaſſeh's time,or from about the time of captivating the ten Tribes, 
until Cyrus his time. b Expett it, then 'twill ſpeak out that every 
one who hath an Ear may hear it. c When the ruine of Babylon, ne- 
ver to be more built, ſhall proclaim the Juſtice of God againſt his, 
and his Church her Enemies, and what difference there is between 
Correttions on his People, and Deſtruftion upon Enemies. d Not 
beyond the appointed time, which reckon'd from the Captivity of 
the Ten Tribes, was 150 Years, or trom Manaſſeh's Captivity, was 


divine Honours; aſcribe the praiſe of his Viories and acquired 
Glory, e To his own contrivances, diligence and power, as if the Fi- 
ſher-man ſhould make his Net his God, and offer Sacrifice for a good 


funnges 120 Years, more or leis, to the Deſtiuftion of Babylon by Cy- 
rus, when the Riddle was tully uatolded. 


4 Behold e, his - foul f which is lifted g up, is not 


it rarry 2;wait 6 for ir, becauſe it will * ſurely come c,it * Heb. 19- 
} 


p22 RS SE a nn erd— pogprrrooagt 
III TIER >. 
og. thr p 


- Tw 


®; 
5 


* - Þu ” 
_— -— gt So - 
£2 dh ante ee WY . DTS 
I «x 4 , _ > 
iy Won 4 wu tg. WS 
— SR | 0 >> oe ad > 
A "$6" ” FRO, .v 
- 72 . * R = - - owes = 
* Ll * 
TD - ef Sy” =» Xx >: 


oy 

ON CO OISEIE 
II 
= a Ts o 


- 
mM s = » 
_ © * TR ras WOT 
_ anne boo ICE ABT 
_— How Lo neng 


PROS = "0 
a» om a7 


LW 
——_—— 
Mo 


4 4 ”. - 
,- > os \ £ 6 : >. ug” 
-. h+ 6 - - 
= *e: ” - ' es a mw YL PR ” w—_ os , — * 
” _ > - 4 w_ 4 - ” % 
—— — br + - =D Mrs "= ps "Wt 144 REREE 3 _= © = p By J 7 A BD 2 C20 .; =c 
x ol nad 5 1x k 5 bs 4 A 4 - - 4 : _ - nd fl 77 y I» THEE 3. < £38" "5 ew p CG ; = - _ 
- SIRE — o ; » : 84 2& . _ 4 - "7 _ &; —__ A — *- Iz Þ 
"_ < SEAS Ns - net Lv $6 . i” ..; op, Saver —- Þ 4 nt LI we Bt " 5 - 2 23K© Oy of, 2 gf. ab $ = OE ood > ng 4 s wo = A 
02 0% entre Hot - di ——_— - > = +2 —_— > _ _— wote.om.i7 : v E - S a, 292 my RR 2p 2% hnnmeny 20 = tart . 4 
2 S d Vo - _ 40 pow a— - I ——_— % —__—_ > 4 - . wal « Q 
Fa $ 2 y- , 8 4 ala bays nf voi "*X IF «4 " ooo - ” # \ = - ſap _—__— I — by -> —y 
po. — LS = _ m—_—_y A >, - © 2.948 CO <o ai wy Wy nA 0D ae ; — _ So mg__ * ” 
- wm : m-— b V W. 
_ -—— ——— as"; os _ CIS — tl 


Ot 6 
.” 


ibaa 
rad _ 
0. IIS San 


m_— C—_—_ 2 
= S 


——— 


 Y : . : - *Joh. 3.35. 
upright / in him : but * the juſt z ſhall live & by his _ 4 
faith /. Gal. 3-11. 

e Note it, there are two ſorts of perſons who concern themſelves Heb.10.33, 


draught of Fiſhes taken to the Net that took them. f Another part 
of Divine Honour, and moſtly uſed in giving Thanks and Praiſes, 
£ To their Policy and Power, their own Courſe}, Conduft and Arms, 


expreſt in the Metaphcr of a Fiſherman's Drag. h State, Condi- 
tion or Intereſt. 7 The great and flouriſhing. & The Revenues of 
the Kingdom in general, and the Revenues of particular Subjedts, 
eſpecially of the. Commatiders and Military. Officers z thoſe who 
help to ſpread, draw and empty the Net. Abundant, that it might 
ſeem a ſufficient Proviſion, as well as a pleaſant Meſs, ſufficient for 
quantity,as ſweet in quality. It is like theſe ſelf-admirers did not 
only eat the tat of the Land they waſted, bur laid up in tore for 
themſeives. DD E 
17: Shall they therefore 7 empty their net o, and 
ict ſpare p continually to flay 9 the nations 7. 
_ m The Chaldeans, Nebuchadnegzarand his:Armies. n Shall former 
lacceſs be pledge of future-? they have proſper d, and they think they 
ſhall; wilt thou confirm this ro them ? o As; Fiſhermen empty the 
full Net to fijl it again, and caſt out what they had taken to take 1n 
Tore, ſhall theſe proud and cruel Chaldeans do ſo ſtill? p Shall they, 
a: endlefly as mercilefly waſte. q Murderer like, kill, = Not fingle 
Perſons, but whole Kingdoms and People at once: wilt :hou, O moſt 
Juſt and mighty God and Judge, ſuffer theſe things always? The. Pro- 
phert by the Queſtion intimates to us that God moſt certainly will not 
iufer it always. The Lord will in fit time ariſe and break the Op- 


in this puzzling Queſtion of the Divine Providence ; ſome objeR 
and quarrel, conteſt wich God, proudly, diſcontentedly and impa- 
tiently, Others enquire humbly, ſubmitring themſelves to God, and 
waiting for him. 'f The Heart and Mind of every ſuch one. & That 
proudly conteſts with the Juſtice and Wiſdom of the Divine Provi- 
dence, that ſlights Promiſes of Deliverance ar fo great a diſtance, and 
provides for his own ſafery by his own Wit. + Is very corrupt and 
wicked, full of (not only Diſtruſts, bur ) poſitive Concluftons againſt 
God's fature puniſhing the wicked ; ſuch a one is ſo wicked that he 
thinks God will not puniſh the violent and bloody, the ſuperſtitious 
and idolatrous Babylonian. ti The humble, upright, and comparative- 
ly righteous One, who adores. the depth of Divine Providence, and 
is perſwaded of the Truth of Divine Promiſes, and doth approve the 
Seaſon God chuſeth. & Supports himſelf, and quiets his own 
Heart, whileſt he foreſecth the approaching Deliverance of Sion. 
| His well -grounded Dependance on a perſwafion of the Truth of 
God's Promiſes touching the Relief of the faithful Servants of God, 
whoſe D<liverance he believes to be certain, and fo waits for the 
performance of Promiſes made to him and them, 


OL hs 4 fave the opprefſed Church and People of God. 
\ OL. IT. 


| KEY home g, 


5 T || Yea alſo , becauſe he 7 tranſgreſſeth by | or, zz» 


wine 0, be is a proud p man, neither keepeth at much mo.e. 
| 'y 


Chap. I, 


horae G, who enlargeth his deſire as hell 7, and is as 

death r, and cannot be farisfied 7, but gathereth z un- 

tro him x all nations y, and heapeth £ unto him all peo- 
le. 

m Or moreover, furthermore. n The King of B.zbylon, or every one of 
them. o Which Vice deſtroys Kings and Kingdoms; and in the Ex- 
ceſſes of Luxury the Baby{0n7an King Belſhazzar,his City and Kingdom 
of Babylon fell a Prey to Darixs and Cyrus. p Infolent in his Beha- 
viour towards all, both Retainers; Subjze&s, Strangers and«conquerd 
Enemies, ſuch Pride ſhall have a fall. q ls ever abroad warring upon 
ſome or other, which though it_ enlarge his Countries, 1t weakneth 
his Kingdom, and givcs advantage to Malecontents and Conſpirators, 
beſide that ir expoſeth him to imminent and continual Dangers. r Is 
moſtinſatiably greedy to devour all, as far from ſaying 'tis enough, as 
the Grave is, s As pernicious and ravenous. # All is too little 
for him, and there is no poſſibility to ſatiate his Appetite. #« Ad- 
deth one after ancther.. ».To his Kingdom. y That are round 
about him, all he knowsAare deſign'd upon, and he purpoſcth to en- 
groſs them. x, Another Expreſſion: of the ſame jmport.. Now all 
this, foretoldof the. future Temper of the Babyloniſh Kings and King- 
doms, are ſure Preſages of their no. Jong continuance in Grandeur, 
but that ſhortly Divine Vengeance-yill overtake them. This might 
be anſwer to Diſputers. NY 


6 Shall not 9 all theſe b take up a parable c againſt 
him d, and a taunting e-proverb againſt him, and fay, 
{{ Or, Hehe. || Wo f ro him: that increaferh g that which 1s nor b his: 
how "long i 2 and to hiny that ladeth & himſelf with 
thick clay /. hs © 425-577 BY jw 
a The PrediQtion is moulded thus ina Queſtion to give it Emphaſis, 
and make it. more affetive. b Who have been oppreft, contume- 
liouſly uſed, and perfidiouſly deceived; .ail rhe People. who have 
fear'd the Power and Policy of Babylon. c Turn him and his State 
into a By-word and Scorn.. d The King of Babylon,a while ſince the 
Terror, now the Scorn of Nations. e Short, but ſmarc woundmg 
Scoffs; and whereas Men uſually &ewail and condole the Miſhaps of 
great, brave, and juſt Kings or Kingdoms, all People ſhall exulr and 
triumph in the Miſeries of this oppreflive, luxurious and baſe Ring- 
dom. f Either *tis a Threat of like Vengeance on all ſuch. Tranſ- 
greſſors, or it may be a publiſhing the Miteries come upon Babylon. 
2 By Rapine, Frauds and injurious Dealings multipherh his Trea- 
ſures, as the King of Babylon did. h Twas not his, though he had 
it ; 'twas not his Right, though 'twas in his Poſſeſſion. Or elſe thus, 
one Miſery of the Babylonians ſhall 'be, they increaſe Wealth, but 
not for themſelyes, but for the AMedes and Perſians.'' This ſeems 
to be the Sigh of the Opprefſed, who/ think it long ere the Oppreſ- 
ſor fall. k& Wo to him that is a burden to others, white he burdens 
himſelf with amaſſed Treaſures gather'd by Extortion and grievous 
unjuſt Taxes. . / Gold and Silver, :ſo called to lower the Ovyeryalue 
of them, and perhaps to mind the Tyrant of a Clay bed. 


7 Shall they not »» riſe up 7 ſuddenly othat ſhall 
bite p thee, and awake 9 that ſhall vex7 thee, and thou 
ſhalt be for booties s unto them 7 ?. - 


m This Queſtion doth more fully aſcertain the thing. = Either 
grow up, or elſe as Men who reſolve to do athing throughly get upon 
their Feet and ſtand to it. The Medes and Perſrans weregrowing to 
Power, and would ere long riſe up to ruine Babylon. ''o- Andſurprize 
it in ſecurity; ſo they were down ere they did perceive themſelyes 
falling, and ſuch ſudden Ruin is moſt dreadful. p Devour and eat thee 
up. 9 Thou,O Belſhatzar (and Batylon with thee) wilt in drunken ſlum- 
bers ( unable to reſiſt ) tall isto the Hands of the awakned Medes 
and Perſians. r As thou haſt been, O Babylon / Vexation to others by 
thy proud and inſolent Behaviour, by Scoffs and Cruelties ; ſo others 
ſha!] now be a vexation unto thee. s Not only your Lands, Houſes 
aud Goods, but your Perſons, and thoſe of your Relations, ſhall be 
Booties taken, and ſold for Slaves to the Profit of & Medes and 
Perſtans. | 


_ 


$ * Becauſe z thou haſt ſpoiled x many yy nati- 


* ia. 33. Io 
ons, all y the remnant of the people ſhall ſpoil thee z - 


* Ver. 17. * becauſe of mens Þ blood v, and for the violence b 


T Heb. of the land c, of the city 4, and all that dwell e 


HABAKKU K 


Chap. 11 


which he would enrich, and greaten by raifing it on the ruines of 
opprefled Innocents. þ A proverbial Speech in alluſon to Birds 
of Prey which build their Neſts in the greateſt heights, 0badiah 4. 
Greatneſs and an advanced Eſtate gotten by Rapine and Prey, may 
ſeem, but never can be a lecurity to any Monarch. / Higher than 
God, ad Juſtice ſet him. m Kepr ſecure, and out of danger from 
all below him. n Heb. from the Palm of the Hand of Evil ; thar | 
no Evil may faſten on; though it may attempr againſt them. | | 


Chat 


10 Thou o haſt conſulted ſhame p to thy houſe 4 
by cutting 7 off many people, and haſt ſinned 5 againſt j ] 
thy ſoul z. 


0 Nebuchadnezzar Ring of Babylon, p Haſt miſtaken thy meaſures, 


= herein... 

u The Prophet proceeds to give account of the Reaſons on which 
the Divine Nemeſis moves in this Afﬀair, and theſe may convince and 
confirmus in it. x Slain their People, ſack'd their Cities, robb'd 
their Treaſuries, led captive the SubjeRs,and depoſed Kings,and done 
this to many Nations whoſe Cry 1s come up to Heaven. yy Fer. 25. 98 
and 27. 3. recounts ſame fix or ſeven Nations. Ir 1s like all the Na- 
tions that lay round about this Kingdom were ſpoil'd by it. y Now 
ſha!t thou be paid in thine own Coin. The Remnant of the Nations 
unſpoiled by thee,ſhall combine againſt thee, and execute the Lord's 
juſt Sentence, and ſpoil the Spoiler. x O Babylon.. a Either ſhed 
by private Murders which cried to Heaven for Vengeance, or ſhed by 
il Application of the Sword of Juſtice, or continual needleſs Wars 
upon her Neighbours. b Injuſtice and Oppreſfſions. c Of the whole 
Land of Chaldea, if you underſtand it aivcly; or elſe, if paſſively 
taken, 'tis the Violence done by Babylon to the Land of Judea, eſpe- 
cially. & Either , Babylon which oppreſt Jeruſalem, or Feruſalem 
oppreſt by Babylon, e This alſo as underſtcod attively or paſſive- 
ly 15 applicable co either Babylon's or Feruſalem's Citizens and Inha- 

ltants. {oe 4 | 
*Ter.22.13 9 Wo f'to him g that * coveteth an evil cove- 
[| Or, that tyuſnels Þ to hits houſe z, that he:may fer his neft 4 on 
ea1meth an high /, that he may be delivercd m2 from the power of 
9 ©, = | | 

» patm 4 ; f , | 
of the hand. f Itis a general and comprehenſive Threat azainft all Tyrants and 
Oppreffors. g Every one that is puilty of the fin.. þ Or driveth a 
trade 0: Oppreiſion, to: gain by what means ſoever, right or wrong, 
This is evil of 5:1, azd will end 1n.cyil of Trouble. 7 His Family 


thoughtſt to advance thy Glory, and to illuſtrate thy Name ; but 'ris q 
in very deed the ſhame of thy Reign that it bath been bloody. q Or d 
Family, thy Royal Family. r Deſtroying and impoveriſhing multi- wy 
tudes of Men and Cities. s It was thy fin whatever thou didſt think N 
of it. # Or Life of thy Perſon and Poſterity 3 this Blood and Cry. C. 
elty will ſurely ruine thy Houſe. - 
| th 
11 For the ſtone # ſhall cry jout.. x of the wall, wy 
and the || beam y out of the timber ſhall || anſiver  |'0rji: 
it. | MJafin k 
# The ſtrength of thy Houſe accuſeth thee. x As if it had i Voice [Org ia 
it crierh to God for Vengeance. y On which thy Chambers arclaid, 4am ir ſat 
z Confirms the Charge againſt thee, and that Fabrick cannot be long all 
a ſafe or beautiful Habitation, whoſe Stones and Beams are ſhaken all 
with the ſtrong Cries of innocent Blood, and Families ruin'd by the 
Oppteffion of che Builder. | the 
12 & ? Wo to him that buildeth o a town þ* je. Y wa 
with F blood c, and eſtabliſh da city e by inj- !3-E:, -4þ"%y of 
quity.F. 24.5.Ny, liner of 54.1 
a Whoſoever he be that lays Foundations in Blood, is here threat- 3 " faſhion. EO 
ned, and none ſo great as to keep off the Wo, deſerved and menaced. 7 Be 
b Heb. City. c In the Guilt and with the Cruelty of murdering the binds boal 
Innocent ; it is the worſt Cement, which is tempered with Blood of prof 
murder'd Men, Women and Children, d Goeth about, or thinketh on 
to ſtabliſh the Foundations of a City. e Babylon in particular, f By _ 
Force and Fraud, by Riches extcrted from the juſt Poſſeſfor. pw: 
13 Behold g, 7s 7t not of the' LORD of hoſts þ, _ 
*. that the people 7 fhall labour. in the very fire 4, * «5. hblec 
and the people / ſhall weary » themſelves || tor very x Gang Gold 
vanity? | | Y Metal 
2 The Prophet calls for attention, and that we obſerve who 'ris wherh 
will execute Vengeance on bloody Cities 'atid Kingdoms. Babylon is a Lyes, - 
mighty City, and the Kingdom 1s an over-match to ahy Ringdom, and on 
and perhaaps it may be thought none can give Babylon Blood to help, \ 
drink, or kindle a Fire in her that ſhall conſume her. h Thongh Men knows, 
cannot; the Lord of Hoſts can; and is nor this Vengeance his? will wane 
not he repay? 7 Either Babylonians and their Confederates, labour the Idc 
for that the Fire ſhall confurme. Or the Adyetfaries of Babylon ſhall knows 
be able t6 endure a Service for God againſt" Beby/on, hot as if they _— 
laboured in the Fire. & Either literally taken, or figuratively, will wg 
well conſiſt with the Text, / Either #tedes and Perſims againſt Ba- meT, 
bylon, or the Chaldeans for Babylon. m Spend their Strength and { Whic 
Life. - #, The one to. preſerve what ſhall never profit them, which Sſrait; 
they laid up in vain, the ther to deſtroy all (though they loſe their Threat 
Booty by deſtroving it) jn the Fire, yet all this trom:- the Lord of 19 
Hoſts juſtly puniſhing Babylon for all her Cruelties, Awake 
14 For * the earth oſhall be filled þ || with the know: *Iſaatg, _ : 
ledge 9 of the glory » of the LORD: s, as the waters co- hh a 
ver 7 the lea. my — 
o The Land of Chaldea, of the MeJes and Perſians and their Confe- LORD, Unprofit 
derates, the Lands oppreſſed by the Chaldeang, bur Fudea more par- | laters, 7 
ticularly. p Every Eye ſhall ſee, of Ear hear, or Tongue ſpeak what and they 
they know. 9q Sight and Senſe of the r Juſt and glorious Proceedinzs vive it , a 
of God againſt Babylon; for when God ſhall appear to execute his fill Woc 
juft Judgments upon his own and his Churches Enemies, he will ap- ſeth the 1 
peat Gloriovs indeed. Fs The God of Iſrael , their Holy one, as Gad ? Ne 
chap. 1.12. #Itis a proverbial Speech expreſſing the general No- ee. o A 
tice, and deep Senſe all ſhould have of God's Juſtice, Truth, Power - and ſtill a 
and Zeal againſt mighty Oppreſſors, ſuch as Babylon was full of. carved, *t 
15 © Wo unto him that giveth his neighbour Idol; and 
drink z : that putteſt thy bottle x to him, and makeſt it muſt ah 
him drunken y alſo, that thou mayeſt look on their na- _ Ide 
kedneſs 2. | | he 
u Another publick and crying Sin of this Chaldean Kingdom was the Facing 
exceſſive drinking, and making one another drunk, and for this God can that bk 
will feverely puniſh, x Forcing them by imporrunity or Threats, were more 
to drink by greater meaſures than they can bear, y Never giveſt theſe to py 
over til] thou haſt made him vile and loathſom, as well as ſenteleſs 19 them, 
in his drink. x Deſigning to put the preiteſt abuſe on them, expo- : 
frag them to view, fcorn and derifion, or to beaſtly, cr not to be 1a- 20 Bu 


med Utcteanneſs, which Vice the 4 pic un; 


rodotus and Cteſias. | 
76 Thou @ art filled b || with ſhame for glory c:1% 
* drink d thou allo, and let thy foreskin be uncovered e 7; 


the cup f of the LORD's right hand g-ſhall be turn: ys. 


Babylonians are charged with by Ht- 
| Lim o, 

& What | 

Mm, Poicnt and 

I 7. He is Zehor 

13, People, he 


a.l 


- -—_ thee, and ſhameful ſpewing i /ha/l be upon thy = h ice of = 
"ON | o- 4 all tim 

a O King of Babylon. b Shortly ſhalt be, and *tis as ſure as if al- 5"? oth Yang # 
ready done. c As muchfiiled with ſhame by the Contempt they ſhall rclieve and | 
caſt upon thee whom thou didſt once vilifieand contemn; thy ſhame lie Oppreſſ, 
fhall be greater than ever was thy Glory, as the Heb. ſeems to im- [Et] theſe | 
port. d Thy fin was that thou didſi drink, and madeſt others drink im ; ler hj 
to ſhameleſs exceſs too ; now thy puniſhment ſhall be to Erink of che lis Diſples 
Cup of God's wrath, which will fill thee with Aſtoniſhmenr and Cala- Walt for him 
mities. e Let thy thame be laid open before all; this retaliation 15 C) 


Juſt and neceſſary. f A Scripture Phraſe, expreffing the juſt Judg- 
ments 


Hand here, and in his Hand, Pſal. 7-8. 


£5, and make thei drink deep of it, they ſhall not eſcape. 7 The! 
Mate thou be as much loath'das a ſhameful Drunkard 1n his Vomit. 


17 For the violence of Lebanon # ſhall cover thee /: 
the {ſpoil of beaſts m which made them: 72 afraid be- 
 o.0f mens blood, and for the violence of the 


and 


Jand, of the city, and ot all that dwell therein. 


{- This is added to all the reſt, thar God's People might know this 
was the times of Recompences tor Son, that the Violence by Batylon 
done to Judea and its Inhabitants, ſhould be avenged and no longer 
deferr'd, but now ſhould overwhelm Babyt9n, in which ſhould be made 


p Here the Prophet removes the Confidences of Babylon, ſhe would 
boaſt of her Gods, and depend cn them, but this will be vain and un- 
profitable 3 it is not imaginable that theſe Idols ſhould help rheſe per- 
ſons. q Carved in Wood or Stone; for of ſuch Materials did theſe 
Idol-makers ſometimes make their Gods, r It 1s brutiſh Folly in any 
one to value or defire to be help'd by ſuch lifeleſs Idols; but 'tis 
erateſt Folly for him that niakes the Image, that remembers how 1t 
was hcwed, plained, tumbled abour, ant all this without the leaſt 
degree of ſenſe or feeling of what it ſuffered ; and can that be ſen- 
ſible of my Sorrows which feels not any thing it ſelf? s Idols made of 
Gold or Silver, or any other fuſile Metal, were framed out of the 
Metal firſt melted, and are therefore called molten Images. # But 
whether graven or molten, yer all ſuch Images are but Teachers of 
Lyes, Fer. 10. 8, 14- They withdraw the Mind from God our true 
and only Helper, and bewitch Men to truſt to Idols in which is no 
help, which ever proved Lycs to all that truſted on them. « Who 
knows, for he ſaw that there was no Life, Strength or Wiſdom in 

one or other; it is ſhameleſs in any, but moſt ia him that made 
the Idol, to worſhip his own Work, and rely upon that which he 
knows hath no Eyes, or Hands, or Ears, but what his Tool framed for 
it. x His own Work, and yer his God ! The Product of his Art, 
and yet the Hope of his Soul ! O brutiſh Folly, Self-contradi&i. 
on ! » Reſteth confident of defence and reſcue from Evil by it. 
2 Which neither can anſwer a Queſtion, nor give a Direction in a 
Straitz can neither promiſe Guod to a Friend, nor denounce a 
Threat againſt an Enemy. 

19 Wo 2 unto him that faith to the wood 6, 


Awake c; to the dumb ftone d, Ariſe e, it ſhall f 


K KU K 


| tifattorizy folve the Doubts, aud untold the Rideles of his owu Pro: 
| VIdCIICEs 


CHAS WU. 


. | The Propriet prayeth God to remember his People in captivity : the fear- 
ful appearance of Gol in bringing Iſraz! out 5f Exypr « be ricmbleth at 
the deſtruction of Feruſalem, 1 15. Ter comporzeth hlnſe:f in the 
firergth and ſalvation of God, 17 19. 


— 


Prayer 2 of Habakkuk b the propher c || upon Si 197-.acc9 d- 
Elonoth d. wry rel 

a Tine Propher required the Earth ſhould he filent &-tore God, nd Bags gl 0 
now pives them Example; he waits on and prays to God in his Holy a 
Tempic; ſome ſay 'tis a Prayer of Interceſh »n, and chat the word Hebro 4 
carricthir ſo. b Vid. chap. 1. ver. I. cVid. chap. 1. ver. 1. Ict. c. GhFoin + 
d A muſical Note, fay ſome, and ſuch Norte as the Fews have ng * 700 
certain knowledge of. Othes ſay Sigtonoth is Ignorances, which the 
Prophet doth conteſs, and ſueth tor the pardon of; both he and 
the People had erred, were offended at the Darkneſs of Divine Pro- 
vidences, and needed Pardon as well as Inftrution ; or it may be a 
Prayer on occaſion of the many and great Changes Providence 
wrought in the Aﬀairs of the woe and the Church, 

2 O LORD, I have heard e rhy Þ ſpeech f, 27d was 
afraid g : O LORD, || revive þ thy work 7 in the midft 
of the years 4, in the midſt of the years make known /; 
1 wrath 12 remember 22 Mercy. 

e Received anſwer to the iniquiry made, chap. 1, ver. 13, 14, 15, 
15 and 17. whether by Voice trom Heaven, or by inward umina- 
tion or Irradiation of the Mind, or any other way of Imprefii>n 
from tic prophetick Spirit, needs not be encuired. f The Repore or 
Declaration God made to him concerning the future Correttions of 
his own People, and the Devaſtations Bby/5n would make among 
them ; and next the Deſtruſtion which thuuld tall upon the Balylo- 
nans by the Medesand Perſians, which is ſuminarily ſet down, cap. 2, 
g Trembled at the Apprehenfion of rhefe ſad things, which b>th 
we and they were to ſuffer 3 he faw them as certain and grievous. 
h Not only keep alive, but ſomewhat refreſh, renew, give ſome 
new ſircngth ro thy Church and People, who wait for thee. 7 Thy 
Church, called Jſa. 45. 1. as here, God's work in an eminent man- 
ner above other People; fo the Apoſtle, we are his work n:nſhip, 
Epheſ. 2. 10. or elſe by Work may be meant the returning of the Cay- 
tivity, and reſtoring them to their own Land, which was the great 
thing God did promiſe to do for them; and the Prophet prays for 
ſome Kindneſs trom the Lord,that may be a reviv.1l of the hope, at- 
ſurance and joy of it. þ 'Tis not needful we reporr the different Ac- 
count of theſe Years, and the preciſe midſtof them aſſigned by ſome, 
perhaps it may point to that time when Evil Merodach exalted Jehia- 
chin out of Priſon, which 2 Kings 25. 27. was in the 37th Year of 
their Captivity 3 but I rather think 'tis m-re vulgarly to be taksn 
for any time within the Term of the ſad agd troubicſome Days which 
would laſt ſeventy Years. / It is an affeRionate Requeſt, and (as 
ſuch often are ) ſomewhat abrupt, make known cither thy Truth, 
or Wiſdom, or Power, or Compaſſion, or all; make it known that 
thou art our God, and we thy Yeople, that thou ſtill haſta care of 
us, or ( what next follows makes the Senſe full) m Whileſt thy juſt 
Diſpleaſurc burns againſt vs for our Sins, = Make it appear thou haſt 
not forgotten to he pracious, let thy People ſee rhou rememirett 
Mercy toward them, | 


T Ho. f os] 
teport.cg 
hearin ” 

i De pe 

i; Of, pre- 


So 
Ji Ve di;Uho 


{ 


teach : behold g , ir zs laid over þ with gold and 
hlver, and zhere is no breath at all 7 in the midſt 
of it. 

a In the former Yerſe the Prophet declared the Uſeleſsneſs, and 
Unprofitableneſs of the Idols of Babylon, now he. threatens the Ido- 
laters. They fſinn'd greatly by placing their Confidence in them, 
and they ſhould ſuffer the more for it, b Whatever ſhape Art may 
pive it, or whatever Veneration blind Idolaters may bear to it, 'tis 
till Wood, no better; a Log, a worthleſs Block. c This exprefſ- 
ſeth the Tdolatcr's Prayer to his Idol, Awake, what? Is he a ſleepy 
Gol? No, not ſo much, 'tis a lifeleſs Log, and its Eyes never did 
ice, d Another ſort of their uſeleſs Idols, ſenſeleſs as the Stones, 
and ſtill as unable to riſe or help as before they were graven and 
carved, 'tis a Stone, no God. e Another Form of praying to this 
Idol; and when the Idol can riſe Babylm ſhall be help'd, till then 
it muſt abide its Sorrows. f Sottiſh Men! in Miſery to hope that 
lifeleſs Idols ſhall counſel and dire ; what, dumb and without 
Senle, and yet teach ? g Look ye Self deceiving Idolaters, con- 
lvit your own Senſes, fee what Matter they are made of. h See 
tne Facings or Plates are different from that which is under, and 
can that be a God that is made up of ſuch different Materials ? It 
vere more hike Men to pull off the Gold and Silver, and with 
_ to purchaſe your Safery, 7 Not ſo much as the Soul of a Brute 
10 knem, 


., 20 But 4 * the LORD / 7s in his holy tem- 
if em; + ler all the earth 7 keep filence before 
a7 Lim 0. 7 
/b + What Idols are, he had already ſhew'd, a Dofarine of Lics, im- 
bln, Poicnt and lifeleſs Statues. But the God of Iſrael 1s not like them, 
17,7 he Is Zehovah, Fountain of Being, Life, Power and Salvation to his 
13, People, he can do all he will, for or againſt a People. m Or Pa- 
ce of his Holineſs, he is in his Temple and in Heaven, every where 
at all times ; though his People he in Babylon, yet He 1s where he 
3th hear, ſee and diſcern their ſtate, and whence he promiſed to 
Tcieve and help them. n Both Chaldea the Oppreſſive. and Fudea 
lic Oppreſſed, and Medes and Per/ians and all their Confederates, 
let al] theſe Nazions, o Fear, ſubmit, pray, wait tor and depend on 


4 
i 


>—— 


him ; let his Þnemies be filert, tear, make their Peace, and prevent 

iis Diſpleaſtire : Let his People be filenr, reverence, hope, pray and 

Wilt for him, who will ariſe and have Mercy on them, and deſtroy 

their ns ho will maxe it to be well with the Righteous, | 
"oh Ih 


3 God o * came p from || Teman 7g, and the holy *Tuig. « 4 
one 7 from mount Paran s. Selah 7. His glory z co- Plal. 62.7. 
vered x the heavens y; and the earth 5 was tull of his Fas - 
Praile 9. a 

o The God cf our Fathers, cur God; Appeared , diſcovered 

himſelf, for that is his coming, who ſince he fills all places at all 
times, cannot be ſaid to come by any change of place. p Either 
appellatively the South, or elſe as a proper Name of 4 Mcuntain or | 
Country, ſo called from Teman Son of Eliphax, and Grand-ſon of Z- 
ſan. Its alſo called Seir, or is one particular Hiil among thoſe mz- 
oy, which make up Mount Seir. It was not far from Mount Sina? 
where the Law was given, and the Prophet hath reſpe& to rhat Dov. 
33- 2. where God appcared in a manner equally Glorious and Ter- 
ible. r Of Iſrael. s Which was a Name to Wilderneſs, Plains and a 
Mounrain, of which the Prophet here ſpeaketh, and in Deut. 33. 2. 
tis ſaid God fſhined thence. This the Prophet mentions as a Sup- 
port of his Faith, as an Encourazement to others, as a Motive why 
God ſhould renew his work among them, fince he ſo gloricuſly ap- 
peared among their Fathers, and made a Covenant with them. t To 
the Argument he addeth this to awaken us to attention. » Lizht- 
nings and Thunders, and Fire and Smoke, Tokens of the Power, My- 
zefty and Greatneſs of God, at the ſight whercot M/s himſelf trem- 
bled. x Overſipread, ivtercepred and obſcured. y That part of the 
viſible Heavens, under which /{-ae/ then encamped. #7 That part of 
the Earth where this was done. a Ot works which deſerved then, 
and ſtill dodeſerve to be had ia remembrance, with Praiſe ro God 
who did them, 

4 and bis brightneſs a was as the lizht &, he had 
| horns c coa7779 our of his hand &, and there e was: the || Or, bright 
hiding / of his power g. Eo 

a That Luftre in whic!: God appeared. that ynparallctl'd Spien- of bts ſides 
dour which ſhined from him. þ Pure, clear as t..c Sun, but imnuch 
more dazling and overcoming. c Some read it Bcams cr Rays of 
Light, and fo the Heb. will bear, and thus 'tis plain. d Our G2d 15. all 
Glory and Light, Moſes's Face ſhined ; the Face, yea Hands of our 
God ſhine with glorious Light ; he dwelleth in Light. e Either in 
that p'ace where he thus appeared, or in that Lizht wherewit!; he ap- 
peared. f One would think his Brightneſs ſrould aye diſcovered, 
not hid his Power; it did both, it difcovered much of. it, but hid 
much morez it was Light inacceſſible, and therefore a hiding Light. 
£ Strength or Might, by what was there done ir did evidently ap- 

[| Rr SY p<2r. 


y 
i. h 


C2 


Chap. Iil 


nts and CorreQions of Sinters. g Tis ſaid to be in his right Lund again. will make it il] with the Wicked, who will fully aid C+- 
mw h They turced the Cup 
of pleaſure about 3 God will carry the Cup of Indignation about al- 


—_— 


2 : ; $4 T 1 _ l _ FM 
. 4 ” ws A ws #2 was... 37.5 \ - A . L 
. - ws Ay - - - * ” * _ . . _ = ms - - -— = 1 : ** ws 
- - Act Wn ws. "- EE GED - = J==zq pas —— , wo ps _ —_ T* : : _— 
mn F "+ : Un . - ——_ "I vo—_ A ag _ . by > -Y n f : _ 6 
a "e . -» <- _ —_ 4 oF 24 PEPE IA £ % . - i A. " —_ 5 Ix n — * . J == ” Eh kc \ j _— - - _ 
Re " i Rt _— Mo wav ” —_— _ h p Ov 6.4084 Y £ » CET : 30 . TE L wa l FL —— C Ge a — — To Sx A \ Wo vo "T 45 _ F —_——— g : - - 
4 : — > y ;Þ. I I - EE Oi —" I Sx. <9 Ava Gy wp : b act £ On I. pP => = F KELLS —_—_— ”z foe 7 _— We. l - ar Y _ _— — I ———r— ho - A - h 
e e == ——_ > Pe" - 8 by. = KO ot, e "> hp -— + = Hh . OS 2 w- . . - . => — n » _o_ a” R * + +7. y h PL = < mes x "4s T bs ps} _ 
5 "*F 3.5 ( + 2g ws BY LO _ 4 ow "4 ped " <q Y by va 5 - _ -»k;"@." a0 * 4 ER -— IT < 23 "0 —— SL I od —_—_—_ S.. 7 F > "4+. Bt 1207 0 " a t 73 "=Y - a Big oÞ ” wy 
as . v4&% , . S - q . hn y 4 - I BY ES : — KW — a8 - — Þy - p 5 « d b { * PX: - Y bp 4 q : = ww WF 4 - wv pe 7. n Y OS, ns \ * - *- » 4 - - at pA 2 a 44 - 
© Y ws « * 0 # _—_ f . - , 2, 4M bs. m4 F RN 4. +c4-wa EL - © PER 5" ,_ wo. 4 a _—_ EP s a F > IS... _ wo >= a : ki wa r <" > 4 $ 4 ny IT IT » was »0y os - M1 »- At by " 
_ o dr . V B * — IO Fi y, ( Y 4 e 5% \o>ole -W # — 4 A IS . - 7 - M = ee + $M. .- -n, T 3, q cy "29S _ . Iv _.” _— & - g - | 4 mo & 
; , 2 — OOO v3%AY J - >< 2. N ———- x ve - a . . = : __— FP 17 SIT 5 9D 54 5 . "Xx _ _—Y £ : _ > ar ow - ” 2 ; on p Mo "Y þ : "Gs . 
_ : o yt -—- wah, Bees : [ ou! - a . \ Þ 4 ho g - A | & —— S - ; ER = & % : , _ FP l $4" 4b ho Saad —_— I» . Ars, 
MO oa Fo. OS ee DEORES Hogs 7 : « ” - dis Pape eas ho Fes, TE TI one. on : : x;  "—_—— _—"— = _— an . > ent — ORF 18 FL j nh. LERETY tae 8 IR 
$9 SOIL IN xk "Rh _ - 4 _—_— : b 4 þ- "- page -” S bis . - " =. b- 'y £44." <a "RM $4 58 g—_ : y"S bo I . & n_ Pw nay = 2 nan ” ” 
S"ICT? , ; G " gt rs Tome 6, Fae = nn 3 —_— . " -, es) - _— «<4 %3 ; we ; 
It CK ano. - __ p _ —_— Wes . - n—___e gs . —_— HW RTE” « — : "wo g ny . ER" —_—_ > > _ - * k IX . 
a ts \ JOEIGT. : A —_— , , - To. &. Fs. - Ss = Fear © 0.13” "UE 5 FE £ 4 —_ w_ . , ho « ” x at Ns =hrag. b LS, +0 pd re ny 47 -. b b { 
4———- ” ” - - Se Ava "WR Fi 24 way wy 2 4 $ * $00 9 4 2 - + - 2s "A ——_ - Ks 4 po - - Tr” bz Rt m— - ny - ” te yr «s q _ hd tn. a A.” =, Ewe - 
"I Tv ar « > —— e ** = Cc - ' - _ p . : —— b —— © odd Sat, A eenets . 
<p TS = "2 "I —- _ PAD © _— 9 ww > Ereeyey - LS” COD — IE > - = *9 = - _ W A 0 p wats = u _ I —— : = = ay _ 2 —_ 7 —_— 
-—— 4- - _ . "Os 5 Y : '< _ "- 4 TIE S— ——_— an & ig E > co Rn ANCIENT OY nd " = RY 4 : CS LEI —_ . .. 
—_— _ " by © & —_ 4 "_—_ ——_— Co _ _ . . = _ — w 
= : v oy - - _ ” "$4 XJ =w Eng - . - » _ - - Woe ; p —_— _— bu A. 4 < | +a. J : aa < i 7% OY the Y nf 
= .. 2 *- . - —y = z - : ; oe - %S— þ. IIS 4 > fe nant ; "W pe rg he is *; 2a : Ts q & * P "OY 1 oY . NW. LF : us 
= a < -. "Ix — - - 4 p - wt » = w_ " — - y 40 - - 
_ - 2 o . « PR 


r 


- — , ” ' Is 
Bethel," = x OOENT. = — —_ 
- pris wh +» > ' 064-3 Wichgs 
— PDA. Sd x- « —"__— Sn _ 
p = TA: $I 
- (et 4 
CL , 4 - _—_ _ 


WO of cheearth having his Bow in his Hand. o The Caſe taken off, that when 'twas 


lf, 'F chat he would drive out the Canaantes ; and this Oath is here called 


4: JOLA;P 
' 1 : - 
13-8 
f Chap. 11. 
| pear, God who was there could do much more, but it could not ap- 
1; 16-18 pcar how much He could do. | 7 
WA: *Nah.s 3. 5 * Before him þ went the peitilence z, and burning 
We 11Or,6urning |] coals & went forth / at his teer 22. 

| i aiſeaſes. h When God was leading the Iſraelites out of Egypt into Candan, 
"09 he made the Peſtilence ro go before him, ſo preparing room for his 
People. 3 Which waſted the Inhabitants of Canaan, ſwept them 
out. b Burning Fevers and other Diſtempers of firy and deſiru- 
Rive Nature, which deſtroyed the accurſed Nations. U As ſent and 
obſerving the way he dire&ted. mKept even pace, or waited on 
him, were his immediate forerunners : All this mentioned as Argu- 
ments to prevail for ſomewhat like theſe for Iſrael, and againſt Iſra- 
el's Enemies. O God, revive ſome ſuch Work amidfſt us. 


6 He ſtood x, and meaſured o the earth p : he be- 
held g, and drove aſunder 7 the nations s, and the ever- 
laſting mountains were ſcattered 7, the perpetual hills 


did bow # : his ways are everlaſting . 

n Gave his Preſence with Foſhua and others, as one that ſtood by 
while the Work was done. 0 He divided to them their Inheritance, 
and did this without Toil or Difficulty; his very Preſence with his 
People was enough to make it known what he allotted to them. 
Þ The promiſed Land, q Look with a frowning Countenance, with 
anger itt his Eye. 7 Caſt them out, or cauſed them to fly, as many 
did out of that Country ; his Eye did this, for he look'd on them, 
and did this, s The curſed Nations. # Either literally underſtood, 
as Nahum 1. $. and may relate to that the Pſalmiſt minds, Pſal, 114. 
4, 6. when the whole Mount, all the Mountainous parts of Sina? 
tremble Exod. 19. 18, (9c. or figuratively, the State of theſe Na- 
rions, ſeeming as immoveable as Mountains, yet ſoon ſhook and diſ- 
ſolved before the rebuke of the Lord. x An elegant Immuration of 
the Phraſe, to illuſtrate and confirm the ſame thing. x The Wiſdom, 
Goodneſs, Juſtice, Holineſs, Faithfalneſs and Power of God, which 
he ſheweth in the Methods of his governing his Church and People, 
are everlaſting, they are the ſame; and where the ſame Circum- 
ſtances concur, the ſame Effets of his Power may be hoped for; 
So the Prophet purſueth the Argument; they are everlaſtinF Loving- 
kindneffes with which he embraceth his Church. _ = | 

[| Or, 7 I faw y the rents = of || Cufhan @ || in affliction 6, 
Ethiopia, and the curtains c of the land d of Midiane did trem- 
j| Or, under ble ft. 


affliction,or »y Not with the Eye, but with his Mind and Underſtanding, in rea- 
Vanity. ding the Hiſtory of 1ſrae!'s Travels, x For the People that dwelt in 
them. a Some ſay of Cuſhan Riſhathaim, in Othmel's time,and under 

his ViRories over them; but I-rather think 'tis meant of the Erhio- 

Fans, on the Confines of Arabia, that Land of Cuſh,near whoſe Bor- 

ders Iſrael's marcht through,and Encampings in the Wilderneſs, had 

| very often lain. 6 In Fear and Pain, leſt that mighty People under 
1 the Condu of their Geveral, (famed for Miracles) ſhould as a vio- 

q lent Storm fall on them and deſpoil them. c For thoſe that dwelt 
within them; theſe People dwelt in Tents, and theſe made up on the 
ſides with Curtains. d People of the Land. e A People ſprung 
from one of Abraham's Sons, by Keturah, who gave his Name Midtan 
to the Land, as well as to the People. f Were ſore afraid of the 
Arms of 1ſrael, which at laſt by God's expreſs DireQion were em- 
ployed againſt Midian, and cur off five Kings, and deſtroyed the Coun- 
try. Theſe terrible things our God, whoſe ways are everlaſting, 
hath done to carry our Fathers from Egypt to Canaan ; let him who | 
"me 15 our God ſtill revive his work, (9c. 


$ Was the LORD diſpleaſed g againſt the rivers þ?| 
was thine anger againſt the rivers? way thy wrath 
againſt the ſea z, that thou didſt ride &# upon thine 


horſes /, azd || thy chariots #2 of ſalvation ? 

g The Prophet recals to memory the miraculous dividing of the 
Red Sea and Jordan, when God divided them to make a Paſſage for 
his People, when by a Miracle he made the devouring Element to be 
a Safeguard to his People z when'twas not diſpleaſure againſt rhe Sea 
or the River, but favour to Iſrael, that moved him to do this. The 
Prophet repeats the Quſtion to impreſs the Mind of the Captive 
Zews with deeper Apprehenfſions of the Mercy of their God. h Sce 
Nahum 1. ver. 4.lct. d. 7 The Red Sea, hþ As a General in the head 
of his Army, leading them forward on ſome great Exploit. 1 Al- 
luding to the manner of Men, with whom Horſes are of greateſt, 
ſtrongeſt and ſtatelieft Preparations againſt an Enemy, but theſe 
were not deſigned againſt the Sea as againſt an Enemy. m But with 
theſe Horſcs are joined ( for the Decorum of the Figure ) Chariots, 
that are Chariots of Salvation for his People chear up then, the | 
Lord hath the ſame Love and Power ſtill. | 


' ; 
"F: 
u o 
*1 

I 

' % 


| Or, thy 
charits 
were ſal- 
Valli. 


9 Thy bow 7 was made quite naked o, according to 
the oaths of the tribes p, even thy word gq. Selah 7. 


[| Or. Thou || Thou didit cleave the earth with rivers s. 
aidſt cleave n One part of Armour put for the whole, or elſe the Lord here 
the rivers is repreſented as armed, in readineſs to ſmite through all Enemies, 


to be uſed, there might be nodelay. þ In purſuance of his Oath, 
made to our Fathers he promiſed and confirmed the Promiſe by Oath, 


v1.44 Oarhs, becauſe repeated and renewed art ſeveral times ; and 'tis Oaths 
(114 of, 7.e. to the Tribes, to raiſe their Hope in their preſent low Con- 
OOARA | dition: not Abraham here mentioned, leſt they ſhould be upbraided 
*1!'" "T7Y with degenerating, and lofing the Right to rhe Promiſes 3 but 'tis 
{84 Tribes, the Right is in them. g Of Promiſe. r Note it well. s When 
they were to march through a dry and thirſty Land, where no water 
was, how ſhould they ſubfift? What Good to be defended from 
periſhing by the Sword of an Enemy, and be left to periſh for want 
of refreſhing waters? This then 1s added ro 'compleat the Mercy ; 
our God made Rivers in the Deſert for them, and ſatisfied them 
7 PR with Streams out of the flinty Rock. 


HABAKKUK 


Chap. 11 


the deep 4 uttered his voice b, and lift up his hands c on 
high d. 

t Litterally taken 'tis an elegant Hyperbole, expreffing to us the 
glorious Effets of God's Power and Preſence: and thus Sinati,and the 
contiguous Hills, the whole Mount, Exod, 19. 18. are intended ; o 
if you take it figuratively, theſe are Kings and States, whoſe Hiero- 
glyphicks in Scripture are Mountains. « Were ſenſible of, ſhewed 
they were affe&ed with his approach and preſence. x Were prie- 
ved; ſo 'twill well ſure to Mountains Metaphorically taken, it was 
grief to the Kings and Stares to ſee God own, condu@ and proſper 
Iſrael, Numb. 22. 3. Joſh. 2. 9, 10, 11. or trembled, z. e. were ſhaken 
as with an Earthquake, Exod. 19. 18. and Pſal. 68.8. and 114. 4,6, 
ſo it ſutes the Letter of the Text. y The Inundation which at thar 
Seaſon was wont to be very great, the mighty Floods on Fordan, 
z Paſſed away, 7. e. at the Word of God the waters below flowed, 
and ran away from thoſe above, which ftood on a heap to make x 
Path for Iſrael. a Either the deep Channel in which Fordan flowed, 


| the very bottom of the River appeared, or the deep, 7. e. the Red 


Sea; b With dreadful roaring like a mighty Voice, parted its wa- 
ters; divided, but withgreat and terrible Noiſe, in this unuſual Com- 
motion. c Teſtifitd its Obedience to the Command of Gad, as by 
lifting up the Hand, one doth at diſtance ſignifie his ready Compli- 
ance with the Command, or DireRion, or Hands, 2. e. Sides : fo when 
the upper waters ſtood on a heap both in Fordan and the Red Sea, 
they appearcd as with Sides or Flankers unto the 1ſraelites. d Like 
a Mountain, viſible and conſpicuous to all. 


11 Thy ſun and moon ſtood e {till in their habitati- 
on f: || at the lighr of thine arrows they went g, andat "Ot: 
the ſhining of thy glittering ſpear. | matt] 

e Though he rejoyce as a Giant to run his Race, and had conſtantly ;1, by 
come out of his Chamber to run it about 2500 Years paſt, yet now &o " 
ſtops his Courſe, and with his ſtay puts ſtop to the Motion of Moon 
and Stars at the Command of God's Miniſter, and 1ſrael's Captain, 
Foſh. 10. 12, 13. f So the Pſalmiſt, Pſalm 19. 4. ſpeaks of a Pa- 
villion or Tabernacle pitch'd for the Sun, where now at Foſhua's 
word, ſeconded with the word of Fofhua's and Iſrael's God, he makes 
a Halt as 'twere, ſtands at the Door of his Tabernacle to behold and 
forward the ſtrange work, the miraculous Overthrow of the fivc 
conſpiring Kings. g As we read the words they ſeem ſomewhat ob- 
ſcure and perplex'd, yet. very intelligible in this Paraphraſe at the 
Lizht, according to the Light which thine Arrows gave by their glit- 
tering Heads, poliſh'd Shafts and bright Feathers 3 in their Flighr 
thine Arrows, O God, for theſe were the Arrows of I/-acl, and thine 
Arrows too, as the Sword of Gideon was the Sword of the Lord. 
They, 7. e- Sun and Mooft, went, dire&ed their Courſe, and took their 
way compliant with the Flights of theſe Arrows, not haſtening to 
the Place of their going down whileſt 1ſrae! had Arrows to ſhoot, or 
Enemies that Day to diſcomfit, whileſt they were to lift up a Spear 
againſt any Enemy that day. The marginal reading of theſe words 
is much plainer 3 Thine Arrows walked in the Light, ( which was 
miraculouſly continued ) and thy Spears walked in the Brightneſs of 
the Lightning, (as I venture for once to read the words from the 
Hebrew _) ſo dreadful was that Day to the Enemy, fo joyful to Tſrael; 

O let ſome ſuch day ariſe on Captive Jews, revive thy works of old, 
ſo the Prophet prays. 6 


12 Thou þ diſt march 7 through the land & in in- 
dignation 7, thou didſt threſh mz the heathen 2 in ar- 


—« of ; 
h Our God. # As the viRorious Conquerour leading fiill thine Ar- 
mies, the Tribes of Iſrael. k Of Canaan, to ſubdue the remain- 
ders of thine Enemies and theirs, and to give thine Iſrael poſleffion 
of the promiſed Land. 4 Againſt them for their Sins, 7m Break to 
pieces. n The Nations devoted to Deſtruftion, theſe were cut in 
pieces by the Sword of Iſrael. 


13 Thou wenteſt forth o for the ſalvation p of thy 
people 9, even for ſalvation 7 with thine anointed s; 
thou woundedit the head 7 out of the houſe z of the 
wicked x, by f diſcovering the foundation y unto the fi 
neck. Selah >. king! 


o Purſuant of his Metaphor the Prophet ſpeaks of God as march- 
ing on before his People; or it may refer to che Ark, a Token of 
God's Preſence before the People. p To compleat the Salvation be- 
gun 1n bringing them out of Egypt, and carrying them through the . 
Wilderneſs, and to be finiſh'd in ſetling them in Canaan. ' q Thy cho- « 
ſen People, the Tribes of thine Inheritance. r 'Tis repeated tor 
Confirmation, and to affe@t us with the Greatneſs of the Mercy. 5 Or 
for thine anointed, 7. e. all Ijrae/, or under the Condud of thine 
anointed Joſhua, Type of the Meſſiah, by whoſe Hand all theſe great 
things were done. # Gaveſt a deadly wound to the Princes and 
Kings of Canaan, Enemies to Iſrael, who were cut off, and their Fa- 
milies utterly deſtroyed. « Royal Palaces or ancient Dwellings, avd 
ſetled Habitations, of which ſlaughter of Canaanitith Kings, Pal. 135 
17, 18,19. x The Courts of theſe Kings were Houſes of greateſt 
wickednefſes, for which they were deftroyed. y Raifing the found 
tions of their Power, and deſtroying all from toot to head. 7x All 
which 1s to be heeded and well minded. 


14 Thou a didft ſtrike through with his ſtaves 5 the 
head of his villages c : they d + came out as a whit! fie 
wind e to ſeatter f me : their rejoycing g was as to de? 
vour þ the poor 2 ſecretly k. 

a OGod. bEither meant of the Staves or Arms of the Canaariti/h 
Kings which they lifted up againſt I/rael, thereby provoking Iſrael to 
fight, in which being overcome, they periſh'd by their own Arms 
taken from them or it may be meant of the Weapons of 71/14 
and Iſrael, called Staves, for that they were Arrows and Spears which 
are armed Staves; or it might he tranſlated Tribes; ſo withthe Tribes 
of Iſrael, the Tribes of God's anointed, or by them were theſe £«- 


«p11. 10 * The mountains 7 ſaw z thee, and they trem- 
Mic. 1. 4. bled x : the overflowing y of the water paſſed by = :\ 
\ 


naarites deſtroyed. c All the Cities, and all the unwalled Tow"s 7 
for ſo Iſrael deſtroyed the Daughters with the Mothers, 7. e. the V 


29CS 
> 


kiah, in 
Judah, 


Ch: 


| [Or, mud, 


'r, 
it them 


pleces, 


'F* 

18, 1, 
tineſs 
Royal | 
for the 
God $1 
Chap. 1 
ments, 
Ex amp, 
they ret 
Chap. 2 
Encour, 
of the G 
low the 
me clo 
midſt of 


Und forete 
for. thej 


ſheweth 
ver 'em 


ap. I. 
Ch p es with the Cities, 


arly the five Kings, ver. 
7h, 10, which ſce. 


I1. let. f of whoſe Conſpiracy you read 


ly as irregularly. 


of Enemies, and 'come to feaſt, not fighr. þ They dreamt of no- 
thing elſe but eating up God's People as they would eat Bread. 7 Help» 
leſs and friendleſs as they ſeemed to be, poor Iſrael. k Ether by 
ſecret Conſpiracy, or by ſecrer execution of the Plot they laid 
againſt T/raet- 
15 Thou 
ſes, through the \| heap 0 ef great waters p. 

O God, or thou O Iſrael, notwithftanding all Plots and Oppo- 
Gtion. m Heldeſt on thy way, and walkedſt from thy entring on rhe 
Eaſt of the Land, to the Weſt thereof; from Bethel, Fordan and Fe- 
Yico on the Eaſt where they entred the Land that lay within Fordan. 
n Rather to ( as F. Tr. and Gret.) the moſt weſtern Parts of all the 
Land God gave, they rook poſſeſſion from Eaſt ro Weſt, to the great 
Sea. o The weſtern Sea, the mightieſt Sea the Fews of that rime 
knew, called here by way of Eminency the heap of great Waters. 
p Called Exzek. 47. 10, 15, 19, 20. the great Sea, as Fojb. G. I. fo was 
fulfilled what was promiſed, and they took poſſeſſion ot rat was cita- 
ted on them, Foſh. 1. 3,4- I rather refer this 15th Verſe in this 
manner, than with moſt Interpreters to the Red Sea, which 15 to me 
a Repctition unſeemly tor ſo ſhort and elegant an Enumeration of 
God's cronderful Deliverances and Bleffings to Iſrae!, from their lea- 
ving Egypt, to their ſctling in Canaan. 

16 When I heard 9g, my belly 7 trembled s : my 
lips quivered at the voice 7 : rottennels entred into my 
bones z, and I trembled in my ſelf x, that I might 
reſt in the day of trouble y : when he cometh up 2 
unto the people a, he will || invade 6b them with his 


kro00Ps C. 
q har dreadful Deſolations God threatned againſt Iſrael, chap. 1. 
wer. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. for thoſe he now ſpeaketh of, and me- 
ditateth on, having finiſh'd his elegant Deſcription of God's whn- 
derful works of mercy toward Tſrael of old, and left them as a foun- 
dation of Comfort and Hope. r Or Heart, -or Bowels, or inward 
Parts, Prov. 20.27%. $ Another Effe& and Sign of ſurpriſing Fears 
and Aſtoniſhment. # At the meer report. # A conſumption and de- 
cay of all my Strength, a languiſhing oft my Spirits, and a declining 
of my Vigour, a very uſual Effe& of great Fears. x I was all ſha- 
ken, as withan Earthquake, no part was free or unſhaken. »y Theſe 
Fears awakned my remembrance of that God, and thoſe wonders 
which I have recounted ; theſe Fears have occaſioned my ſearch into 
this Myſtery of Providence, that underſtanding it, I might, as I do, 
betake my {elf to God, and his covenanted Mercies, that I may reſt 
in him who will make it go well with the Righteous, even with thoſe 
Righteous who ſhail live to ſee and feel the troubles of thoſe days. 
z The King of Babylon, with all his bitter and cruel Nations bent on 
Violence and Rapine. a Againſt the F-ws my People, ſaith the 


, [Or, mud. "_ 


Or, 
it them 


, EPHANTAMC 
d The Inhabitants of Canaan, but particu- 


e With violence invading every ſide z a Tem--/ 

de uy of contrary Winds and Exhalations, moving as violent- 
mo— f To dfſperſe and drive away from the Earth. 
g The joy hey took was ſuch as is the joy Men who take the Spo1] 


/didſt walk zz through 7 the ſea with thine 


| Prophet. 6b With mighty force,a2d eur in pieces, make moſt bloo- 

dy work among them. c With numerous Armies and ſpoil ia Troops, 
where what one leaves, another will take; where none eſc1pe tic 
_ of ſome or other in the Troops ſee this accompliſh'd, 2 Kin:s 
ClNaÞPes 25s 


17 < Although & the fig-tree e ſhall not bloſſom 
neither /þa// fruit be in the vines g, the labour þ of the 
olive ſhall + fail 7, and the fields & ſhall yield no mear /. 
the flock 2» ſhall be cut oft z from the fold o, and here 


/hall be no herd p in the ſtall : 


d To War foreſeen the Prophet ſuppoſeth Famine, and deſcri- 
»eth the moſt grievous, as indeed it fell out. -e Which was in that 
Country a very conſiderable part of their Proviſion to live upon. 
f Nor give the leaſt fign of bringing forth Fruit. g Which were alto 
the Riches and Proviſton of choſe Countries. h Either 1a:cur beſt w- 
cd upon the Olive, or the Fruit which the Olive brings forth, called 
acre Lavyour, by an Aſlufion to our Labour. 7 Diſappoint th- ex- 
peRation of both Dreſſer and Eater. k Ploughed and ſown. / Cara 
'or Bread, m Of Sheep kept out in the Field; n Either by Wolt 
Murrain, or by the waſting Babylonians. 0 Where they were wont to 
"e ſafe, now are in greateſt danger, and that becauſe they may be 
ſwept away allat once. p Greater Cattel kept in the Stall for labour, 
Ir for feeding. 


+ Heb. le; 


18 Yet I q will rejoyce7 in the LOR D<-,I will joy 
in the God 7 of my falvation z, 

g As for my part, I will, ſaith the Prophet, r Look for Joy CK- 
pett matrer of rejoycing in the Lord z 5s Who will preſerve 4 Rem- 
nant and redeem them, who will rebuke Babylon, and will very 
ſtrangely deſtroy it. # The Prophet renews his own Faith, and con- 
firms ours. u All ſhall end in Salyation to him and Believers, 


19 The Lord GOD 7s my ſtrength +, and he will 

make my feet like * hinds feet y, and he will make me *2 Sam: 
to walk upon mine high places z. To the chief linger 7 *7 3% 
on my Þ ſtringed inſtruments. | + Heb. 
x The Prophet had in his own, and in the Name of all the godly, Ne-in;/ 
made a full profeſſion of his Faith, and reſolution to behave himſelf © 

with Joy in midſt of Troubles, ver. 17, 18, now he gives us account 

on what ground he ſpeaks ſo, *tis not in his own ſtrength he can do 

lis but it is becauſe the Lord God is liis ſtrength. »y That I may 

eſcape to God my Refuge, to that ſafe Mountain of Salvation, that I 

' may at laſt fly from Babylon to Fudea, ro Feruſalem. 2 To my native 

Country, to my beloved City, and thy more beloved Temple which 

were built like high Places to that Munition of Rocks, gc. Deur. 32. 

13+ Iſa. 33. 16. My God will return my Captivity, and when [ 

am ſet at liberty, as I ſhall be by Cyr, my God will be my ſtrength, 

that as a Hind let looſe, I may haſten to the Mountains of Ifrael, 

a Let this be kept on Record for publick Uſe, this be Pattern for 

others, as well as tis Declaration of my Faith, Hope, Defire and 

Prayer, | 


for their Sins , of which in particular, Idolatry, Apoſtacy, 
God; and the ſinful Faſhions of great Ones in their Habits, 
chap. 1. 5, 6. 8, 9. which Sins, and many others which then 


The ARGUMENT. 


His Prophet by ſomewhat larger Account of his Pedigree, groes us ground to gueſs of what Family be might be 

the laſt named may poſſibly be the good King Hezekiah ; the Names are the ſame in chap. 1. ver. 1. and 2 Kings 

18. 1. By his freedom with Princes and the King's Children, reproving them, ver. 8. and threatning them with the lof. 
tineſs of his Style, may fairly be admitteda Conjetture at ſomewhat more than ordinary in his Deſcent , but whether of 
Royal Blood or no, he came with a Droine Warrant, and with a prophetick Spirit, ſharply reproving all Ranks of Men 


and negled to enquire for the irue Religion, and the true 
and the violent Oppre/ſion of the great Ones, are named, 
abounded among ft them, are threatned with ſevere Puniſh: 


ments, and with utter Deſolation, which had already befallen ſome of the neighbouring Natiens named, and propoſed as 
Examples tothe Jews to move them to conſuder, repent, amend, and prevent the threatned Fudgments, which unleſs 
they repent, will come ſuddenly. The Prophet therefore affetionately exhorteth and preſjeth them to Repentance, 
chap. 2. by Examples of thoſe he mentioneth, whoſe Impenitence added to their Sins ruin'd them. By Promiſes and 
Encouragements to expett Mercy upon their hearkning to his Counſel, foretels the coming of the Meihah, the calling 
of the Gentiles, the preſerving of a Remnant of them amidſt all the "Troubles and waſting Fudgments that ſhould fol- 
low them, and a Return out of Captroity, with the E_ them as the Church and People of God, which Pro- 


mije cloſeth his Prophecy, and for which he calls on them 


CRAT. L 


Gd forezelleth the deſolation of Feruſalem and Judah by the Batylonians 
r. their idolatry and many other ſins : exhorteth them to repentance : 
ſheweth the nearneſs of their captivity : nothing ſhall be able 19 deli- 
ver 'em from deſtruftion, 1 — 18. 
HE word a of the LORD 6 which came c to 
Zephaniah d the fon of Cuſhi e, the ſon of 
- Gedaliak, the fon of Amariah, the fon of Hiz- 
Tad in the days of Joſiah f, the ſon of Amon g king * 
udah, 


to be thankful to, and rejoyce in their God, who in the 


midſt of their Sins, and his Wrath for thoſe Sins, yet remembred his own Mercies and Covenant for them. 


a The Declaration of the Purpoſe of God, citker ſpoxen audiblys 
or clearly manifeſted by Signs, b God of Jſraz!: here is the Divine 
Authority of this Prophecy with whick theProphet's word is ſecond» 
ed. c The preciſe manner how it came, we need not enquire into 
Zephaniah did not hammer out of his own Brain any ſuch News, he 
received from God what he communicated to them. 4 By deri- 
vation of the Name, it is one hidden of the Lord, whom God doth 
hide, or God's Secretary, or elſe one that is God's Watch-may, 
whom God hath ſet over the Houſe of Zudar, as Exeh.3. is faid to 
be. e His Pedigree here gives us no certainty what his Progenitors 
were, whether Princes (as ſome think him the great Grand-ſon of 
Herzekiah, 


_ Chap. I. 


Chap 


T Heh. By 
Taking a- 
wiiy I will 
714he an 
end. 

+ Heb. 


the fice of 


the land. 


* Hol 4.3. 
[ Ir, idols. 


* . R; 
2 Rivgs 
$3.22. 


Fer.15.13, 


[ Or. ts 
the Lit, 


a1 p 
Fr121.2.29, 


1. 


Fezebiah, the Name heir; ihe faine, or whether Prophets, or only 
eminent known Meo. 7 Eciore the Captivity he was then contempo 
rary wich Jeremiah and Fze\icl, propheſicd before the Caprivity, and 
foretels much like what 7eremiah, or Frekrel did. g Whoſe Reign was 
very full of Impicty and 1dolatry, and haſtued the Captivity upon 
Fudah. This 4m ſacrificed to all the carved Images which Mana/- 
jeh had made, 2 Chron. 33- 22, 

2 + 1 will uticrly conſume þ all :bizgs from oft t the 
land z, {aith the LORD K. i 

h Heb. Gathering up, I will gather up, or take up, mtmarting 
particularly the manner how all ſhould he conſumed, 72.,0. ſwept away 
as a Prey to the Babylonians. i Of Judah, the two Tribes. & This 
1s added to confirm and afſure the Truth hereot. 

3 * I will conſume man and beaſt /- I will con- 
ſume the fowls 2 of the heaven, and the fiſhes z of the 
ſea, and the || ftumbling-blocks o with the wicked p. 
and I will cut of man 9 from oft rhe land -, faith the 
LORD. is 

The former Verſe denounced the furure Deſolation 1n general 
Terms. This Verſe ſpecifieth what D-iolation 1n particular God 


would bring upon the Land. Man ſhall be conſumed for þis own 
Sin, and the Beaſts conſumed for Man's ſake ; Men by the Peſtilence 


and Famine, the Beaſts by Murrain, and devoured by multitudes oft 


hungry Souldiers that ſhall make greater havock than any Murrain 
ordinarily doth, m Either by ſome unknown Diſeaſe among them, 
or elſe by a diſtaſte ar the ſtench of purifying Carcaſes they fled away, 
fo that none, or very few appeared, infomuch that it Jook'd as 1t 
they were all conſumed. n By Sea ſome underſtand Ponds, Lakes or 
ſmaller Scas, ſuch as that of Genezareth and Tibertas, the Waters 
whereof might be made noiſom to the Fiſh by the Streams of Blood, 
and Carcaſes which might poſſibly be caſt into them; or God mighr 
deſtroy the Fiſhes by ſome conſuming Diſeaſe toov- He hath ways 
to do it, who hath once ſaid he will do it. o The Idols. þ The 
idolatrous Prieſts and others who worſhipp'd them. q Al! ſhall diſ- 
appear. yr Of Fudah.. | 

+ T will alio s ſtretch out mine hand 7 upon Ju: 
dah z, 2nd upon all the inhabitants x of Jerulalem y. 
and * { will cur off the remnant of Baal 2 trom this 
place 7, and the names bþ of the chemarims c with the 
priefts & , | 

s Av4 1 will, or, And I have, Hebr. ſo Prophets ſpeak of what ſa\, 
molt certainly be, asif already done. t This ſeems to intimare ſore 
immediate ſtroke from God, He ſpeaks fo in Jer. 51. 25. Exek. 6. 
14. and i4. 13. and 25. 13, # Benjamin is included, though f4zan 
only is named. x It will be univerſal Deſtruion ot them, eiche1 
by Sword, Fainine, Peſtilence or Captivity ; both Citizens and So- 
J-urners, all ſhall periſh, or ſuffer by ſome or other of theſc ways. 


» Though 'twas the Holy Gity beautified with the Temple of God, 


yet all ſhould not ſecure it, Jer. 7. 4. and Ezeks 9.6. x Whatſoevyer 
remains cf the Idolatry of Baal, both the Idols, their Temples, Sa- 
crifices, Prieſts, Ornaments and Worſhippers. Whether this refer to 
times after the Reformation by Feſ14h, or to times before 1t, needs 
not ſcrupulouſly be enquired into. 4 This Idolatry had filled Zeryſa- 
tein it feclf. b Both the Perſons avd the Memory of them allo, tor 
Names includeth both. c Either calld ſo from their black Gar- 
mc.ts they went in, or from their [warthy Colour occaſioned by the 
black 1moke of Incenſe, which they were almoſt continually in ; 
or Door-kcepers, Sextons cf Baal; or voluntary Scrvants3 cr ſuch 
as the Popiſh Monks, ſome Miniſters of Baa/diſtint from the Priefts. 
d Kicher the Pricſts of Baal, or the Apoſtatcs of Aaron's Houſe, 
who (though Frieſts by Birth and Office ) ſhould have been ſtedfaft 
to, but had fallea from the true God and his Worſhip, to Baal and 
his Worſhip. 


5 And them * that worſhip e the hoſt f of heaven 
upon the houſe tops g, and them that worſhip, ard 
that wear || by the LORD Þ, and thar fear by Mal- 
cnam 2z 5 

e Thoſe among rhe People that adhered to this Idolatry. f The 
San, Moon and Stars, frequently in rhe Scripture called the Hoſt of 
Heaven. g Openly, as the manner of toc Idolarers was, either be- 
cauſe they thovght thoſe Deities they imagined to dwell in the Body 
&f thoſe Stars better ſaw them, cr were better pleaſed thus ; or be- 
cauſe thele places were nearer Heaven. On the flat Roofs cf their 
Houles they were uſed to have their Altars and Worſhip. h Or, to 
the Lord, (as the Heb bears) pertons that mix Idol-worſhip, and the 
worſhip of the rrue God 3 that devore themſelves tro God, and Baal, 
or Mulcham. 7 Called Milcom, and Molech, and Moloch, Amys 8. 26, 
probably twas their chief Idol, fanfied to be King of Gods and Men. 


6 And * them that are turned back # from rhe LORD, 
and zho/e that have nor ſought / the LORD, nor en- 
quired 2 tor him. 

k &poſtares who have forſaken the Lord and his Worſhip, or that 


are irri.cd Arheits, or that in Matters of Religion have taken up not 
wat 1s purcſt and trucſt, but what is neareſt and molt in faſhion, 


7 Slugziſhiy neglctted to examine pretended Religions, according to 


the Law, which they mizhtand ought to have done, and who have 


embraced a taile Religion initead of the true. m Thouph che Pro- 
phets have preacit d 8zatnit this Apoftacy, and called the Prieſts and 
Pcop!e to forlike the Idol:,and enquire after God, yet they would 
not enquire, thcf{c alto are here doomed to deſtruRtion. 


7 * Hold thy peace 7 at the preſence of the Lord 


Zeci.2.13. GOD 0: for the day of the LORD p zs at hand: * for 


1 1234 6. the LORD h 
4 ©. euells 7. 
EZC 3017. ©" 

T Heb. ſlin- : qo 
eifg, or Is &g4in it Goa, his Worſhip and his Government, that thinkeſt of 
; him Cu 1:0 tetrir than of Baal or Malcharn, ceaſe all thy Quarrels 


þrepaied. 


n Then that murmureſt in diſcontent, or diſputeſt out of froward- 


and -Diiputcs, fiand in awe. o Who is Almighty, Omniſcieat, who! flatter themſclyes into Thovghts, 


ERPHANIAH 


2th prepared a facrince 9, he hath Þ+ bid his 


ruleth and will averge. þ A day of Vengeance from the Loxq. 
q The wicked among the 7ews, whom we will ſacrifice by the Chat. 
deans Sword. 7 Summoned in Beaits of the Field, and Fowls of the 
Air to eat the Fleſh, and drink the Blood of flain Jews, whom the 
Bibzl:nians flew. | 

5 And it ſhall come to pals s in the day of the LORD's 


ſacrifice 7, thar I « will F puniſh the * princes x, aud + pe, 
the kings children y, and all /uch az are clothed with wii "— 
with y 


ſtrange 2 apparel. 

s It ſhall moſt certainly be fulfilled, what I threaten I will moft 
ſurely execute. # Ot ſlaughter to be made by the Babylontans, called 
here a Day of Sacrifice, that we might ſee clearly the juſt and exem- 
plary proceedings of God; theſe People finned in ſacrificing to 
ſtrange Gods, and God will puniſh them, making them a ſtrange $4. 
crifice to his Anger, » The puniſhment ſhall appear to be from my 
hard, as he threateus often by Ezekrel. x Nobles about the Court, 
the great Ones who dreamt of ſhitting better than others, but tell 
with the firſt, 2 Kings 2. 19, 20, 21» y Sons and Grand-chiidren 
too of good Foſtah ; Fehoahax died a Captive in Egype, 2 Kings 23.32. 
Fehoiabtm died on the way, or in Babylon, buried with the Burial of 
an Aſs, Fer. 22. 18, Fecomah carried to Babylon ſped ſomewhar, 
yet but little better 3 there he died a Captive : As for Zedebtah and 
his Children, theſe were ſlain before his Face, then his Eyes put out, 
and he led into miſerable Captivity. x Some ſay the ttrange Appa- 
rel of idolatrous Frieſts; others ſay, and more likely, the Garb of 
Foreigners, imirated by the wanton Fews. 

9 In the ſame day «2 alſo will I punifh all thoſe char 
leap on the threſhold Þ, which fill their maſters c houſes 
with violence d and deceit e. 

a Not to be taken for a ſingle Day, but more largely for that time 
wherein God would yifit and punith. 6 Infolently and with Rage 
break open the Doors of ſuch whoſe Goods they ſeize, upon pre- 
tence of Forfeitures or Fines, a Sin that Exekzel- both taxed and 
threatned, chap. 8. 17. and 12. 19. and 45. 9. ©c Either the op- 
preſſing Kings, whoſe Officers theſe ere; or publick Officers and 
Judges, whoſe Servants thus did (to enrich their Maſters ) ſpoil 
the Pocr aid the Oppreſſed. d Goods taken away by force, and 
kept as much againſt Right, as at firſt taken away without Right. 
e By falſe Accufations, and by ſuborned Eyidence tor proof, and by 
Pcrjaries. 

10 And it ſhall come to pals in that day f, ſaith the 
LORD g, zhat there ſhall be the noiſe þ of a cry from 
:he fiſh-gate 7, and an howling #& trom the ſecond /, and 
4 great craſhing m from rhe hills 7. 

f See ver, g.let.a. g To afſure us of the certainty of the thing, 
h The Voice H%. or a Cry; 2. e. a very great Outcry and Lamen- 
tation, i} Whirh vas on the Weſt-fide of Jeruſalem, through which 
Gate they !r0:._ht in Fiſh from 7oppa, and other Sea-Towns on the 
'Veſt-Sea, ©: great Sea, now the Mediterranean; at which Gate the 
Bailyloniar are faid firſt fo enter into the City when they took it; 
thus it vw {be 4 Prediction at what Gate the Enemy ſhould enter. 
b The great, horrid, and confus'd Lamentations of deſperate and 
undone Mu'ti:udcs crying out, and birterly bemoanirng themſelves, 
I Gate, which was in the ſecond Wall of Feruſalem, which on that 
fide was fortified with three Walls, or ſecond Part of the City, 
or the middle City, for 'rwas divided into three parts. Others read 
Second as a proper Mamc, ard make it the School, College or Uni- 
verſity, and ſo render the howitng of the Univertity, 7. e. of Stu- 
dents either ſlaushter'd, or captivated by Chaldrans, m Breaking 1n 
pieces, or the-Naiſe of what is broken 1nto ſhivers; poſſtoly the 
Noiſe of Doors, Windows, Cloſets, and Cheſts broken up, cr burn- 
ing. 1 In the Houſes of Nobles, likned here to Hills, or more lite- 
rally in Gazeb and Goath, on which the flying Jews purſued by the 
Chaldees, loft what they carried with thern, and their Life too; fo 
all places were ſu!l cf miſerable Slaughter and Out-cries, 

11 Howl o ye inhabitants of Makteſh p, for all the 
merchant people 9 are cut down ; all they that bear 
lilver 7 are s Cut ott. 

o Cry aloud and bitterly. p Some read it appellatively : The Mor- 
tar in which of old, before the Corn-Mill was known and uſed, they 
did pound and beat their Corn forBread : They alſo pounded Spices. 


Others ſay *tis the lower Town or Valley of Cedron in Feruſalem, 4 
deep Valley that ſurrounded the Mountain of the Temple, which fan- 


| fied like a deep Mortar, they gave the Name Makteſh to it. g Who 


were wont either to lodge in this place when they came to Trade, or 
if Jewiſh Merchants dwelt there, which was much to the Advan- 
tage of the place; bur now by the Invaſion of che Land, and by the 
*iege, all Trade is cut off, a:d many Merchants either flain, or made 
Slaves. #7 That brought jt with them to pay for what they- bought 
up, and fo enrich'd rhe Inhabitants of this Mahteſh; all that traded 
and payed ready Money, are cut off, as Jer q, Others ſay the Mo- 
ney-changers or Bankers are here meaut by them that bear Silver, 
Perſons that fur:iih'd all ſorts of People with Silver for Goods laid 
to pledge, or baitered. s 7.e. Shall be as ſurely as if 'twere airea* 
dy done. ; 

12 And it ſhall come to paſs at that time 7, 7% 1 
will ſearch z Jeruſalem. with candles x, and punifh the 


men 7Þat are + ſetled on their lees y; that fay in thei! + e 
curaed,) 


thick! 


heart =, The LOR D will not do good, neither will be 
do evil 2. | 

ft That Day, ver. 9. which ſee let. 4. u God ſpeaks after the 
manner of Man, who ſearcheth dark places with Candles in hand 
God's Omniſcience ſeeth all things, and needs no help for diſcovery; 
but by this Expreſſion foretels how fully he would both diſcover and 
puniſh. x It 1s like enough this was literally fulfilled when the Chal- 
42ans did ſearch the Vaults, Cellars and Sewers of Jeruſalem for Men, 
or Goods hidden in them, » In alluſion to Liquors, which not being 
poured out from Veſſel to Veſſel ro refine them, grow thick 4? 
ſctled ; ſo Men thar have known none or little Changes ſettle in SECu- 


rity, and fear no Menaces. 7 Entertain an Opinion, or begi" f? 


a No Proyidence to connte- 
pance 


Chap] 


but Met 


16 


fenced 

y Go! 
alſo gat} 
ning. 5 
hed wit! 
Heb. cal 
which (a 
ſo they 


17 / 
they ſh 
finned 2 
poured 


a Caſt | 
lamities, 
among th 
ty Men, : 
what to d 
4 All thi: 
have been 
be as mu 
contempt! 
on the Fa 
beof nom 

Dung, and 


18 * 
| beable t 


38 Wrath R, 


the fire \ 
4 Theedy 
land, 
; h Sg,met; 
ne Hand of 
ut now irf 
Cife the en 
With Prefer 
ouldiers dq 
Man, Wom 
they were 
lan only, G 
a mghteous 
Carried away 
ok (whit 


Nap. [. 


nance the good, Or 


hath forſaken the Earth. 
he fin we 
© itcous, and ill with the wicked. 
'S) 
and thel 
houles, 


vineyards, but not drink the wine thereof. 


c Stores int 
hers and Wargrobes. « 
diers, invading, prevailing, wa 


to that Deut. 28. 30, 39+ 


bitterly 77. 


h Appointed, foretold, and 


'> preat things by thoſe Armies. to! 
_— - ; Very near, it is dow 


ow aftually brought on them by the Lord. 


Enemies eagerneſs for the Prey, your Sins and Security» ard the 
Lord's juſtly provoked Anger haſten this day. / 'Tis within hear- 
ing, the ſound of it 1s 1a mine Ears, methinks you might bear it al- 
ſo. m The valiant and ſtout-hearted among the Jews; they who 
ſhould ſupport others, ſhall be ready to fink themſelves, and as much 
need aCordial themſelves. n Their Courage broken, they ſhall cry 
out moſt yehemently, or like hopeleſs Women» 


J 15 * That day 0 is a day of wrath p, a day of trou- 
8:3": Ye and diſtreſs 9, a day of waſtneſs and deſolation 7, a 


> day of darkneſs and gloomineſs s, a day of clouds and 
86 thickdarknels 7, | 

; 0 Great Day, ver. 14. þ From the Chaldeans, and from the Lord 
aQtively, upon the Jews paſlively. q Here the Prophet heapeth up 
words of much the ſame Senſe, to expreſs the grievouſneſs of the 
Troubles of thoſe times which ſhall agency Wes upon them ; moſt 
diſtreſfing Trouble, none knowing how to bear it, or where to hide 
from it. r Noſt deſolate waſtneſs in City, Villages and Fieldsz every 
where the ſpoiling Souldier ſhall lay waſte, carrying all he can, and 
deſtroying what he cannot carry away. s Poſſibly it might be ſo as 
to the remper of the Air,dark and gloomy, but figuratively I am ſure 
it was ſo. # Either literally from the Heavens clouded over them, 
or (if it refer, as it may, to the day of ſacking Feruſatem, and effets 
of it) Darkneſs, Gloomineſs, Clouds and thick Darkneſs arifing from 
the Smoak and Fire of the City every where fired by the Enemy); 
but Metaphorically theſe ſpeak the moſt unparallell'd Calamities. 


16 A day of the trumpet « and alarm x againſt the 
fenced cities y, and againſt the high towers 2. 

y God's Trumpet calling the Chaldeans, the Chaldeans Trumpet 
alſo gathering together their Troops. x Threatning and affright- 
ning. y Of Faudah. 7 Stately Palaces, and ſtrong Munitions, forti- 
fied with high Towers, built at the Angles of Walls, and therefore 
Heb. calls them high Corners; it may mean alſo the grear Men, 
which (as Corners well built) are the ſtrength and beauty of a Wall, 
ſo they of a State, Fudz. 20. 2, Zech. 10. 4 


17 And TI will bring diſtreſs 4 upon men 6, that 
they ſhall walk like blind men c, becauſe they have 
linned againſt 4 the LORD: and their blood ſhall be 


CZ EPHANTA HM 


to puniſh the bad : No God, or none that re- 


is done on Earth, or as they, Exeh. 8. 12. think God 
rdeth wt Theſe Atheiſts God will puniſh ſeverely, 
11 deſerveth; they ſhall ſee, it ſhall be well with the 


> Therefore b their goods c ſhall become a booty 0, 
ir houſes a deſolation e : * they ſhall alſo build 
but not inhabit zhem 7; and they ſhall plant 


- 2 yuniſhmenrt for other Sins, ſo for this ſecure Atheiſtical 

1-1 of Providence, though they have denied, they ſhall feel and 
confeſs, that the Evil they ſuffer is both juſt, and from my hand too. 
heir Shops and Ware-Houſes, Fruniture in their Cham- 
d APrey divided among the Babyloniſh Soul- 
ing Villages and Cities. : hy. 
emember the Curſe threatned in the Law,executed on them, 

] cknoniodes that who gave the Law, rules by ir. f According 


14 The great g day of the LORD þ zs near, 2t 25 
near i, and haſteth greatly &, ever the voice / of the 
day of the LORD: the mighty man 2 ſhall cry there 


Not the Day of general Judgment, bur the Day in which the 
grcat God will bring his great Armies againſt Zudah and Feruſ::lem, 


bled to ſhew the nearneſs of it, and to aſſure us it is ſo. & Your 


Chu 


ver. 1, m To which their firs provoked the Lord, which their fins 
inkind!ed, and now it burns that none can quench it : Vid.Deat.z8. 
from wer. 15. to the end of the Chapter ; all which God will now 
make good againſt them. n Though he had with wonderſul Pari- 
ence waited and forborn, now he would wait no longer, -but wit! 
ſpeedy Executions fulfil his Threats aud accompliſh his Wrath 
which he did within leſs than rwenty Years attcr this Prophecy, as 
is moſt like, on the accurateſt Computation we can make of the 
_ of Zephaniah's propheſying and Nebuchadnezzar's taking rhe 
ity. 


CER 


The Prophet exhorteth Tjrael to Repentance, before Fidgments fall upon 
em, 1 — 3. The Philiſtines, Moabites, Ammonites, Ethiopia and 
Aſſria, threatned with Judgments, 4 — 15. 


| (8 your ſelves together 9, yea, gather together b, 
O nation c not || defired d : 


all have notice given to meer on this work, and being gather'd roge- 
ther; ſearch your ſelves, hearts and ways, and repen'. 6 Repeated 
to affe&t them the more, and to haften them to ir, and make them 
ſerious in it. c Of the Fews, yet a People, yet my Pcople, though 
next door almoſt to being no People, d Neither defirous to returns 
nor defirable in your return, fooliſhly unwilling to return, and ut- 
terly unworthy to be received on your return ; yet gather together, 
ſearch your ways, and try what you may do for your ſafety, 


2 Betore the decree e bring forth f, before the day g 
paſs as the chatt h, betore the herce z anger of the LORD 
come upon # you, before the day of the LOR D's an- 


ger Come upon you, 
e The word of the Prophet which declares the Purpoſe of God 
againſt chis ſinful People. f The Decree is pregnant, nay hath gone 
a great whiie, but is now htke a Woman near her full time ready to 
bring forth 3 be you ſpecdy in your Repentance, leſt your Miſeries 
Rue forth of the Womb of Divine Vengeance and deſtroy you. 
2 The Day of ycur Calamities, Babylon's Rage, and God's juſt Diſplea- 
ſure. h Carry you away as the Wind carrieth Chaff away for the 
Fire, while thc 700d Grain 15 gathered and preſerved. 7 The heat of 
Anger. It was Jealoufic like Fire, chap. x. 18: and here 'tis the Heat 
of thatFirc, tnrimating the greatneſs of the Anger. bþ &As 4 Storm 
from on high with Violence irreſiſtible and deſtruftive,and the warn- 
ing is doubled to make them take it. 


3 Seck / ye the LORD, all ye meek ? of the earth 7, 
which have wrought his judgment o, ſeck rightzoul- 


in the day of the LOKD's anger. 


engage in new Obedience, inquire in the Law what is your Duty,and 
do it; fear, worſhip, depend on the Lord alone. m Ye humble ones 
who have not hardned your ſelves with the ſtubborn, proud, idola- 
trous Hypocrites, but have trembled at the word of the Lord. n Of 
Fudea, which is here ſpoken of, as chap. 1. 2. .0 Obey'd his Pre- 
cepts ; ſo doth the Scripture expreſs Obedience to the Law of God 
by doing Judgment, Dexe. 4 5. Pſalm 119.121. p Enquire and 
know the Righteouſneſs which God commandeth, which you ought 
to perſiſt in, and continuc ye in it. q Carry it humbly towards God, 
and patiently under his CorreRions, ſo wait on the juſt and merci- 
ful God. r This is ſufficient to raiſe hope; if it be not ſure, if it 
be hard, yet 'tis nor impoſſile. s Under the Wing of divine pro- 
tefting Providence kept ſafe from, or in theſe Troubles z they thall 
be either averted or avated. 


4 q For 7 * Gaza x ſhall be forſaken x, and Aſh- * Amos 
kelon y a deſolation z - they a ſhall drive b out Afſh- 7 5 
_ at the noon-day 4, and Ekron e 1hall be rooted 
up F. 


# It 1s time to ſeek ſome refuge, high time to ſeek it in God, for 


poured our as duſt z, and their fleſh as the dung f. ow Neighbours as well as you ſhall he deſtroy'd, there ſhall be no 


aCaſt them into, and ſurround or beſiege them with Diſtreſs, Ca- 
lamities, which ſhall greatly trouble and perplex. b The chiefeſt 
among them,the richett, and who think themſelves ſafeſt ; rhe migh- 
ty Men, as wer- 1o, let, m. c Like blind Men, ſhall neither know 
what to do, or where to fly, neither be fit for Counſel or Aion, 


Refuge for you among your Neighbours. #« A chief City of the Phj- 
liſtines, very ſtrong by its ſituation, and by Art fortified, a Frontier 
toward Egyp:, and not full three Miles from the Sca. x When the 
conquering Army of the Chaldeans ſhall come againſt it, ſhall be for- 
ſaken either by the Flight or Captivity of the Inhabitants. y Ano- 


d4 All this for their great fins againſt the Lord z theſe Men of Note 
have been as much greater in Sin as in Stateabove. others, and ſhall 
be as much Deeper in Diſtreſs. e As fteely, abundantly, and as 
contemptibly as Duſt in the High-way. F Shall be ſpread as Dung 
on the Face of the Earth to fatten and improve it 3 their Life ſhal! 
beof no more value than Duſt, their Honour no more regarded than 
Dung, and. they ſhall be ſo uſed after Death. 


13 * Neither their filver nor their- gold þ ſhall 
| be able to deliver ; them in the day of the LORD's 
15, Wth #, but the whole land hail * be devoured / by 
the fire of his jealoufi: 22 - for he ſhall make ever 
ipeedy tiddance = of all them that dwell in rhe 
and. 
| hSometirnes theſe have purchas'd Friends, and redeem'd a Life'at 
tne Hand of greedy Soldicrs who have ſpared on promiſe of Money, 
but now irſhall notbe fo, neither Silver or Gold ſhall help. 7 To pa- 
cife the enraged Sulran of Babylon who had been formerly appeaſed 
with Prefents and Tribute-Money, but will no more. Nor ſhall his 
ouldicrs dare to ſpare or ſave any when they are charged to ſlay 
Man, Woman and Child, as in the taking of Jeruſalem *tis probable 
they were charged, Pſal. 137. 7, 8,9. k Were it the Wrath of 
lan only, Gifts might appeaſe it, but 'tis the Wrath of God who is 
a righteous Judge,and receives not Gifts, [Utterly ruined;its Wealth 
Seed away, its Proviſions cat up, its Stores exhauſted, and its | 
took (which ſtould continue their Proviſion ) utterly deftroy'd, as { 


ther of the ſtrong Cities of the Philiines which fell to the Tribe of 
Dan, and was a Maritine Town. #2 Utterly waſted, ſo the Abſtra&t 
doth imply. @ Babylonjans. Vid. Ezeb. 25. 15, 16,17. blnto Cap- 
tivity, caſt them out of their own, and force them into a ſtrange 
Land. c A ſtrong fortified City of Paleflina, called in afrer-times 
Azotus. d It ſhall be taken by force at Noon, or the Citizens led 
away Captive in the heat of the Day, and under parching Heats. 
e Famous for its infamous Idolatry where Baalzebub was worthipp'd, 
the chief Scat of Devil-worſhip. f Utterly extirpated, no more to 
ſpring up : Vid. Fer. 47. 45. it ſhall be as a Tree pull'd up by the 
Roots or maimed, as Horſes that are houghed, as 7o/h. 11. 9. 


5 Wo unto the inhabitants f of the ſea-coalts g, the 
nation of the Chererhires þ : the word 2 of the LOR D 
7s againſt you : O Caraan &, the land of the Philiſtines, 
[ will / even deſtroy thee, thar there ſhail be no -inha- 
birant 2. = 

f Now all the Philiflines are threatned, whereas hefore he named 
only thoſe four Cities. g The Coaſts of the great or weſtern Sea, 
now the Mediterranean, on which the Philiſtines of o:d did dwell; 
h Or Deſtroyers. Men that were ſtout butfierce, and perhaps terrible 
to Neighbours and Foreigners that had the hard hap to be forced on 
their Coaſts by Violence of Sea- They were great Souldters, and 
lived Switzer like, Guards to David, it may be to other Kings alſo, 
7 His Purpoſe, his Threats too by his Propnet. & That pact that 
the Philiftines did by force keep irom the Fews. | Though the Chal- 
deans be the Men ſhall deftrcy, yet the Lord will doit a'fo; they his 
Servants, 


| Or, 1% 
4 Call a ſolemn Aſſembly, as Foel i. 14. proclaim a Faſt. Let 49's 


3 


neſs p, ſeek mecknels q : * it may be 7 ye ſhall be hid s "Io 2.14. 


109.9.15 


] Turn to him with ſound and true Repentance, pray for Pardon, Jonzh13. 5. 


_ 
_ 


_ 
Lo . 
—_— 
: 
———_—— 
© 


= 


” yo 
= by - > 
a” SGI 
—X- * mm >. re. 


" me * 


=> - : Sie EEELE 1 
FBS Ix __ £ 
— £9954 Tg Pt. —— 
_ —_— = ” - 
rv > rg - 
= — 
w . ſy ag ————_ 


2. 


Chap. 1I. 


AEPH 


ANIAH 
Chap 11 


Chaj 


Servants, he. chief in doi 
vel! _—_ chief in doing ir. m No .þ 
24741 A R more Citics nor Citizens to | 4 
F, the {ea- '\N The P 
for ſhep! coalt ſhall be dwell F rophet doth 
2pherds 72, « on. a wellin Zypt, but of | not ſpeak of ; 
S This confirms  qg Gr flocks. gs and cottages Country was _ mg Ethiopians bao ws Ethioptans Sout! 
2 "4. ki 1 l 
thepherd: Cicies full of rich Citiz us what ſhall be in thoſ, | Neb 3-7. let. a. 7 Puniſh'd the Addition Ethiyis Cf aol =_ 
s watching over the! zens, there ſhall be C *, 7 1h uchadnezgar and his C by War, and pla Cuſza, Sc [fa 
WM hb coat eir Flocks, ottages for employ'd and proſpered th haldeans called here Aer S eople cut " Mich.3. 9) 
12 yp ragy4 ; . em, S - 0, Ito 
houſe of Judah 9 0 ſhall be for the remnant f 13 And he /will it OI £4 
houſes of Aſhkels 1ey ſhall feed p of the north 7, and * retch out hi 
ifs) : ot Afhkclon | r thereupon, 1 ? , and * deſtroy Afyri 1s hand 22 agai 
' Or. when, Ing : || tor the ORT) ſhall they z lie down A 2 in the _ p a deſolation 9 4 wp ts o, and will 1 in. ang the 
hk ' f / C. —_ ' 1e even- an ir. 4 4 J 
__ turn away their ca , Sr) God x ſhall viſit y = Th rg God of Iſrael, or pd ms wilderneſs a Nine- oy 
ca coaſt, th bi '& )In i. 6. Asfo neage all hi 0p APO _ 
ped, as ſome did, or ; grnnedbey Fd hilitines. p Eith EN Ava, which Pn SE Tk God's Ser. 3,6 
= _ both: included vived the Captivity. 9 —— eſca- | and ——_— Sg lon, if 1 Ciſtake A 7 reg utmoſt. i. 
es of Aſbbelon fi . 7 Their Flock vo Tribes, | þ Chief Ci ingdom of Aſſyri not. 0 Overth » but more * 
too. 4 The 4 on formerly ſtod s. £ In places wh : ief City of that Ki ria, of whichm rthroiv that e | 
laſti / ſt.od. # Both Sheph ere | Nah. 2. at Kingdom. V7 ore at large i great | 
nant, » InM 90-408 Wie Fehwah. * F iepherds and flocks | thi 3-10, 11, 12.. 7 Wi <3 hon. ge in Nahuy, 
ſend to recei ercy remembring his Cov rom their Fathers by Cove- thirſty and barren Land _ wes thoſe well- = 7 Moſt defot _ * Jer, 23» 
ve their P enant w as a tred Places i ate ye. 'P 
cir | ith th wW1ld Pl ) 
vity, and by he Con riſoners, or Caprives 9 pl em. z Or ſhall , A ernelſs. a4ces into dry 11, 32. 
10to their own Cour: umand of Cyrs give —_ return their Capti- 4 And flocks ſhall Ii 1 Hoſ. 9. 7 
IT 4H Liberty of recurning all the beaſts 7 of es lie down in the midi} *Fck t 
IS VB 1ave heard an . e nations : il © 22, 26, 
: revilings of ny 2 the reproach of Moab and the bittern ſhall ] wes both rhe || * c t hers, f 
Jer.45.1. have dh 7 children of Ammon c 0 b. mY the 1 —_— voice thall G ge IN the || upper "———__ : Or, 0 
ed m 7 ere a | ng in the w1 tels .Peilcan, "| 
ſelves agai y people d, and * y they e 1n the th e windo x of * 
4inſt thei , and 7 ma reſholds 2: || fi * Tre arte 
Ie Eicher che = I . order f. vrais inn CO S 2: |[fors he rr [Ora , 
8 ww more likely in «4 pehead — or for the People the OE ſhall be ſo razed th Ver the cgi q 
*ormd _—_ reſented ſ op” , _ the Gets nts —e Beaſts me - # before of Beat of Cattel ſhall lie d [03h MN 
WT 6 Reogle bf near kin fo ighly diſpl . ad | of nch are tound in th Ines, ver. 6 own in cog, E 
rer, ſeated Fatt pico near kin to the P eaſed with that he watching She t oſe Count 1 - «6, tf All a 11 
« Eaitw pherds . ries,the t ſorts of ere, 4 
erful Peopic ward of Canaan u Fews, born of Lot's D about thoſe Pl , and wild ones ,the rame under th 0 
| 2OP!c ad 2s : pon the dead Se augh- p] 4 ' FIACES. UH Bird S ceking thei e guard 
againſt the 7 proud . whole Pride b a and Fordan, a pow- aces, 1N ready Ke s that are ſolicar _ Prey will at "I 
48. 27, 2 Fews, as appears fon roke out on all O v- | on as unlucky Bi ens, where they C Y, and delight , rend Deut 
7, 29. brand th ,m firſt to laſt : ccaſions y Birds. x$S hey ſeek their F In deſola 3% o ; 
Fewiſh Bl-od them as very proud aſt : Iſa. 1. 6. and and chuſe their L x Shall either m: ood, and te +: 
A Kt - d . & d ſr make thei b are look' f Heb p 
fers and Je . and as bitter againt' _ A People as near as Mo _ upon the Pillars odging there; they ſhall ir Neſts there q bo hi 
who the T Eicher ig te War, 6 Neh. 4. 2,3. bit od Ft mke wane Turrets,or Pidgeles,- —— "> wornge denn miming Oy 
. cen the ca : ene War. or at th 4 of 1 ter Scof- h . a4 more dolef [ A acles. y Theſ, the Night am : Ju 
vity, Ezeh. 2 ptive Fews were led b the taking of Fern: | heard 1n their defſol ul Noiſe, thar ſhall e doleful Cre *[ 
they a s. 3. puts theſe al y their Borders 1 a- | from to olate Windows all be all the M atures &6.6.15, 
lves rogether. Ej into Capti- | beaut! p to bottom .7 The loweſt uſick to be x 8, 12 ſo, 
they will ac were, or what tl e Either boaſti eautiful Lad nothing but W part of thei j 
o againſt I ey would h ng what | now ics looking Waſtes and Ruine cir Houſes, the 
ER 7 + 14 Nay Sing wow: Inga 7 omg Hr enrs Soo a gan = ——_— —— +00 ho9-warkh - 
ence. g their Frontiers pretended Rizht | Roof: »ylontan hath b nd their dolef| rs and fins; pe! 
9 Theref; , and ſpoiling them with mm 4nd Coveritins _ Frag Houſes, or _ _ 2 Or os Ay 
z \er{ore 24 | live o. ſa; oulcs, 08 cedar, the Beauty own the curi = the 
* Iſa. 15. the God or Litas! 7 eg. ſaith the LORD y and the Defence f het. wo 
\ 2 nd * th el Kd oab ſhall 5 This ; me! 
F-ck. 25. © i the chiidren of | ſhall be as So-| © is te T mw 47 . 
I ven the breeding of 4 of Ammbalas G 5 So- | lefly 6, that faid i ejoycing city a * th wit 
"wo pgheen perpetual TOLLS O nettles "A and {ſalt pits omorrah belide d4 me ; ko in = hearr "1 I am a c o_ _ Miu of | 
- 1.13+ ſpoil p n z, the ref: [ 7. and a | for b : how 1s ſhe b , and there 7 | 
them ) refidue o of m ? 2 | for beaſts to 11 ecome a delſolati 7s None 
ſeis the , and the remn y people ſhall | Þ ie down f in! elolation e 0r, 
em 9 ant of my peopl all | her, ſhall hit: in ! ever , A place ws. 0 
þ > ſhall iſs and w : y one that p: ure, Cell 
£ The moſt ple ſhall poſ. |, © We m wag his hand t paſſeth þ 
Vid. E olemn Oath ſtandi ay ſuppoſe the Pr IQ &. of paſ! 
_— eb. 14.16. h Who Bs fit for none but God hi Jol ding ſtill and wond ie Propher, or the Few X IS 
Iſr ael's God wy ear proud Revilen, pt no you and can noon and Security i _ an Gi fs Nineveh, all rar : 
proached þ Thi ſrael is my People, in a o by Covena from her G , a5 if it had been i riet. bn ſogreat C urth and ans a 
, & x. ſe R nt am s NCT lory. c ÞP npoſſible ſhe ſh great Confide 
rreat DeſtruRti $ 15 4 proverbial Speech i oe eproaches I am coming any b erſwaded her ſelf j ould eyer h nce cally 
© Se a5 5 ion, as T{a. 1.9, A in Scripture Phraſ Te- | that wil y bur God himſelf if intaan Ono ave fallen Toy 
; s Sodom and » Moab and Amm eto ſpeak will be ſo hard . d None th pinion very il! b ſhec 
tion of theſe Gomorrah; b on were not d Nt : me: ſom ; y asfo attem , at can cont y - Iiſhec 
. 1 Not Fran 37 Out the next word eſtroy'd 3 ſomewhat like T) pt againſt m end with 
twere only to b cultivated, but r ords are an Expli was like her 1 yrus, Exe e,none abl ne, e Or 
| plica- er in Gl » Exek., 28. 12, & e to overth 
to dig Salt out reed them. m AC; un over with Nettl I- | her indeed J10TY, Power and ,&c. e She th row not C 
of it. alt, dry, ba es, as if ceed, but it is f cr and Wealth : Sne thought n | 
OT riot for a Io n Never more t 5 rren Earth fit 0 the Speech f 1S ITOF Miſery a d - Now there i one - Or {lai 
>= hogs ng, a very long ti o be manured and , fir only | ;Qyc of one that lame nd Deſolations, I $ none like Capti 
_ 1e Remn g time. 0 Either th inhabired. | + y eth at it. f nts and wond _ t may be ej 
the Injuries of ant that return'd r the few left with ».| for Beaſt Where Pal ers at it, O either 
win ; "0b; pg hee $3 wh alaces for Pri » Or of one th 7 
ſpoil thei of Meab and A out of Babylon. p P ride thei ereNobles d rinces flood at re- : 
that ar fi - 9 Sertle upon lic” ſhall take Arms, Sine a reps yet —_ Arrogancy,and ——_ now do ignoble Cat! ROW re Face! TTCE! 
+ arc fit for Habitation eir Lands, and dwell in 49 goo vith ſome Pity toward —_— ungodly _ _ g De- Cut © 
, y e Parts eſolate City and Secur! 
* IC. 14.6 10 Thi 'ty, rity, carl 
*» (0, 1 4 : y 
Jer. 48.29. they bn da na ox have * for their pride s, b C A. 
SIO; - acne 4 10C S *f 17 Y, wh 
” cha e people of req SR — conplatnerh of 5a - : A by fn 
T1E | { ho hreatneth . oppreſſion , ſtiffu y fin 
ſulted nad er; Rune like Sodom” Ke ots x. em with God" » ftiffnecked 
Tir as odom's, this j oo for the x ; s Tudgm edneſs of Teruſ, th 
x bet : Tſra21 ſhall tread on on” Retaliation z they in her IS cleanſing por rus xk, wy AAP ro qo — 
againſt rhe ver. 8 let. e. t Defam' m. s Haughty Mi . 5,8 20, protedting the church. + 4 Hara 
ME Caviak ny lefſening them - = ſpoke Lies = -=_ _ rch, and deftiajing Ae 
* y 1C C em. U : 124 Scan 26 ie ad t 
+ NY ein. Br Þ in gta rar V O 2 to || + her that 3 —_ 
EN of $i Getafe the OE  Sooedrs & |< Th the oppreſſing d dn filthy 5 and polluted c, to10 i 
, 11 The ve thet 17:0ait a : Ci Or. the1 
t Hb. he - he LORD 1/7 be pr God. POT doleful$ — ſhew'd us Ninev 4 bn ws : ed of by 
whole x3 wm Loan: ; all A terrible y unto them upon ertfaon, he brings us to hrs in ruins for her ſins; from thi + i —_— 
wn uy » why > S gods þ of the earth c = for | full of Sin. pts ere Jong wi 05 of what men cr 
the 1tic ; , Every one ft . nd mes | nably afted oathſom i ull of W c 
O £5 f.ot the Els | trom his place Sj wha of ly ated, A City that I her ſins, ſo foul the OT ua 
y Or the 1 Le yg EVEN all r impud ike a y are, and INV) 
will make 1 ord who is to be f ; Glurt pudence in fin. Or wo n infamous Woman i fo abomt- OR 
and e 1t appcar that he 1 cared is againſt or ab w ony of Feruſalem lit to the great Craw - branded bor lor m) 
” | 5 pat and their Goda __ in his  Anagy them, and yjomng 4 rey tothe —— — and their 0 RE ont the : ny 
cough now their Alt; | . of whom they 2s. 2 Moabites r the City fool es. c Greatl the Poor, who | : 
ran over, as if th ars are filled wi ey gloried. a S bear, but ol:ſh and ſedu y polluted by. thi n 1,18, Mine 
+ Barat ev dcfi.s with Sac ; Starve, | /; , 0UT our Verſion i ced. as a y. this means. brig 
"oy th tier bas hae y" to make their --y and their Bowls jeem's « CHy chat dot atder® anc rd; Faq Dove ; ſo Heb. wil all the 
4+ oi ceaſe, ard their a tm ings3 ory" 1 by <4 ſhall app oth nothing but ms, Fo 6 hat paſs, feri- Jalouf 
CE nn them ail s grow lean, The 4 few or ; Fer. 6.6, and Exh: s $i 
"+ oy Chennſh, Moteck Gen 1m Lis yr be a Conſump- | ,. She obeyed ware, 
Earth, 20% among tl , &c. that are God . £c Of thoſe Land rection f yed not the voice e- ſh attend 
the Earth, vi ng the Decerved; s no where ell by - ſhe truſted . : ſhe received nd m1 
, vile ſpuri 3 or. Gods of e but on | NOt ed not ved not ||cot- aD 
> or a!l Men —a > ws d Of that Co I Earth, as Sons of near to her God þ in the LOR Dg : ſhe drew [ to tak wn 
e "he u _p__® _ * Ou c 
> he = he dwelleth, Ln own and char wx þ por Gods are _ or the Law, her Proph TW inf and ] wi 
the Now? be f Either literady, one or 1n otra Kip mens crit _ on were ) yo _— Prieſts, (which you, a 
for his Law. erpret Iſles to be T we now fee it fulfi » But | Tnſtruft! ng loud, warning, 1 nor of God by hi om_ 9u, Sat 
Heb . as fore : ranſmarin alfilled, or truftion, did ing, 1nvitin y his Mercy and Judg- una] 
of the Wor 15 toretold, Iſttab e Places. as | fis , Cid not learn g, perſwading tc G terah 
| Gof "a M7 This is emine nu 4. 2 Of all <1 they wait | x 24s the words, ſhe hated would nor be ſtrut «+ return. f Or Monarch: 
_ f tly fulfi S1 7. and Inſt ed; th de | 
Iſa. 18.1 CT. Y y fulfilied by the Soda all Ons and Aſh Prov. 5. 12. and — 4 as that wicked NO on eans; th 
&- 9 p lj e E . ; ing 0 the k ur,1n an » IS, P one, Plal. 59+ a The © 
WY A HEINE th Y p y carnal g Put he . The of 
my / ſvord. iopians þ alſo, ye ſhall be ſlain z co 9 Counſeliours I rather than emerge in E2)P* wl punj 
{lain z b olted did not » Warriors and C er God, in her kings eainſt 
Y | draw near with rats. when in pages rn dc. h When Ne d CR 
| yer, &c, s did not ſeek him, did not \ealous fo 
{ewiſh Pc 
L2toricut] 
Vo 


42CKk-3G$. 


2 * Hei 


* Fzek- 
92. 27 


Chap. 


> * fer princes 7 within her are roaring lions & her 
judges / re evening wolves m7, they gnaw not the bones 


Mich.3- 9» Till the MOITOW 77 


JO, II, 


by Jer. 230 
11, 32» 
Hol. 9. 7+ 


| *Ezck- 


A 
92, 26, 


*Deut. 


+ Heb, 


* ſer. 
8, 12, 


11.18, 


; Perſons of principal Place and Authority about the Ring, chiet 
officers in Civil Matters 3 and which is worſe, her own Princes born 
and bred among them, who ſhould have been moſt render and juſt, 

which hunt for Prey, are ever tearing or threatning, atirighting 
or devouring. Such che Aſſyrian Princes were, Nah. 2. 11, 12. Such 
and no better are the Princes in Fudah and Jeruſalem. | Elders 
of Cities, Magiſtrates of lower Rank : Or it may be the Sanhedrim. 
;-» Moſt hungry, inſatiable and cruel, like Wolves of che Evening 
whetred with hunger and faſting, Hab. 1,8. n They leave nothing 

' tobe eat on the Morrow, they devour all preſently. 


4 Her * prophets 7 are light » and treacherous Per: 
ſons p - * her prielts g have pollute the ſanctuary 7, 
they have done violence s to the law, | 

n By Education, Profeffion and unwarranted Pra&ice called ſo, 
falſe Prophersz ſuch Zedekiah, and probably Chenaanah, &C, Were. 
) Unſtableand inconſtant,ready to comply with humours which they 
ſhould have reproved, 1 Kings 23. 13. p Men of Treacherics, what- 
ever pleaſing Temper they ſeem to be of, yet ſtill they deſign Ire 
cheryz the Heb. ſeems to run it higher, Treacheries in the Abftratt. 
q Of the Houſe of Levi, of the Stock of Aaron. r Bound by Office 
to keep holy the Sanftuary, have defiled it, and all that is holy. 
5 Wreſting it by perverſe Interpretations to what Senſc beft teryetn 


a corrupt Mind. ; 


s * The juſt LORD 7 in the midſt thereot7 - he 
will not do iniquity z - t every morning doth he biing 
his judgmenr to light x, he faileth not y, bur the * ui- 


urning by juſt - knoweth no ſhame. 


t Though unjuſt Princes, Judges,Prophets and Priefts do not think 


15'Þ, yer the Lord who is moſt juſt is in the midſt of them, poſſibly 


the Sanhedrim; he obſerveth all, condemneth their Violence and In- 
juſtice, he is Sovereign as Lord, and juſt as Judge. x To him it ap- 


ZEPHARNE4AM 


pertaineth to judge all, therefore the Unjuſt ſhall be puniſhed as well 


asthe Juſt approved. x Daily he diſcovereth his diſpleaſure againſt | 


the wicked, and puniſheth them. y Lets not one fit ſeaſon flip to 
wonvince and awaken ſecure Sinners, by publick and vifible Puniſh- 
ments or Judgments. x But the wicked Jews proceed impudently, 
without ſhame and without fear or amendment; there is no hope 
of better, where is no ſhame for wortt of doings, Fer. 3. 3. 


6 I have cut off the nations a : their || towers b are 
deſolate c, I have made their ſtreets waſte d, that none 
paſſeth by e : their cities f are deſtroyed g, 10 that there 
is no man þ, that there is none inhabitant. 

a Of old the Canaanites, lately the ten Tribes, later yet, the Aſhri- 
ans and others, have been cut off for their Sins. 6 Either meraphori- 
cally Magiſtrates and great Men, as chap. 1. 16. Or literally ſtrong 
Towers built on the Angles of Walls or Palaces. c Razed and demo- 
liſhed. 4d I overthrew their Houſes, that there were no Strcets. 
e Or none that walk'd through them. f Small or great, Capital or 
not Capital. g Taken, plundered, burnt and ruined. þ All fled, 
or ſlain, or ſtarved, or ſwept away with Peſtilence, or carricd into 
Captivity, notan Inhabitant left 1n the Places. 

7 I ſaid 7, Surely thou & wilt tear me /: thou wilt 
receive inſtruction m2, fo their dwelling 7 !hould not be 
cut off o, howſoever I puniſhr them p : but they. roſe 
early 9, and corrupted all their doings 7. 

7 I thought ( ſpeaking as Man would) I concluded what was like- 
ly, what I mighrexpe&. k O Zeruſalem, O Fudan. I For the many 
and great Judgments executed upon others in thy ſight, thou wilt fear 
by ſinning ſtill, to provoke me. m Wilt learn thy Duty to do it, 
thy danger to prevent it, thy ſins to repent of them, thy ways to 
amend them. = Houſes, Villages, Zeruſatem. o Sack'd and burnt, 
þ Whatever I had done againſt them, however I had chaſtiſed them, 
had they been bettered, humbled and amended, I would have ſpared, 
not deſtroyed utterly. q But they grew worſe, more eager in the 
purſuit of their vile Courſes; as if the day would be too ſhort for 
their ſins, they riſe early, and begin berimes. r Defignedly and cut 
of ſet purpoſe did worſe and worſe, when ſmitten they reyolted 
more and more, Iſa. i. 5+ 


$ © . Therefore s wait ye 7 upon me, ſaith the 
LORD, -until the day thar I rife up to the prey z - 
tor my determination x zs to gather the nations y, that 
| may afſemble the kingdoms 5, to pour upon them 
mine a indignation, ever all my tierce anger b : * tor 
all the earth c ſhall be devoured d with the tire of my 


jealouſie e. 

s Since you will not be amended by all, fince you grow worſe and 
worſe, & Ye retraRory and incorrigible Fews, Rulers and People, 
attend my ReſoJution, for I am reſolved what I will do, and have ſer 
a Day for it, « Untill, as an Enemy riſe vp to deſtroy firſt, and-next 
totake the Spoil z you by your Sins continue to be mine Enemies, 
and I will by my Judgments. by the Chaldeans, who ſha!l riſe up 
againſt you and deſtroy and ſpoil you, ſhew my ſelf in Arms againſt 
You, asan Enemy ro you. x My fixed purpole, that which I have 
unalterably reſolved upon- y All that are SubjeRs to the Chaldean 
Monarchy. 7 Which are Confederate with,or Tributary to the Chal- 
deans; theſe thus gathered, liſted and marſhalled in a mighty Army, 
« The obſtinate, incorrigible and impious Jews fi:ſt,(afrerwards { 
wh puniſh Babyſon.) b Which by their $19s they have kindled a- 
zanſt themſelves. c The whoſe Land of Faaea and her Cities, 
a Conſumed as if burnt up. e That ſcalouſie wherewith God is 
1calous for his own Glory, tor his Ordinances and Statutes, which 
{ewiſh People, Princes. and their Prophets and their Prieſts had 
L2toricutly violated, 


Vol. *TE, 


9 For then g will I tuvin to the peopic a pur: 


T language 4, that they may all call upon rhe name 7 feb 
T comn- 7; <9: 


of the LORD 2, to ſerve him 4 with one 
ſent /. 

2 Or then, afrerwards; i.e. when my Jedements have been exc- 
cuted, and have cut off the wicked. þ 1 will give them 4 pure wiy 
of worſhipping me in Prayer, Praiſes, and the Iffue of a pur:net 
Heart, Ezeh. 11.17, 18, 19, 20:.and 35. ver. 26. i Perform ail re- 
ligious Service,all Religion being expreit thus by calling on the Name 
of the Lord, bh The Lord their God, noc Idols, 1 With one Heart, 
and according to his own Law and Will, with one $h1/4er fnall they 
bear the Yoke of the Law, alluding to Forters that join Shoulder £9 
Shoulder 1a carr3ing great Burdens, 


10 From m * beyond the rivers of Erhionia 7, my * Ifz.12.t, 


luppliants, o, ever the daughter » of my difperted 9 {all 
bring mine offering 7: 

m The Coaſts which lie beyond the Rivers of Tn./ia, ſaith the 
Chald. Paraphraſt, but Idoubr whether the Captive Fews were car- 
ried ſo far. n In Arabia bordering on EZzypt, whither 'tis eafie to 
conceive many Fews might betake theinſelves; who are here cailed 
diſperſed , or Diſperſion , ſomewhat diftinguiſh'd from Captives. 
2 Praying to me, ſaith one Verſion. p This explains who the Sup- 
pltant is. qg The praying Remnanc ot the ſcattered Fews, wit had 
gotten into thoſe parts of Arabia that were coſting alons the Rivers, 
which divided Ethinpia Cuſea from the reſt of Arabic. r Shall return 
co their Land,and bring themſclves an Ofcring unto the Lord, which 
was done when Cyrys, in league with thefe Ethiapians, procured their 
Favour tor the diſperied Jews, that they might return to Feraſaler, 
meet their Captive Brethren, and cſfer a Gitt to God. 

11 In that day s ſhalt thou not he aſhamed z for 
all thy doings %, wherein thou halt tran{Srefied :1- 
gainft me : for then I will rake away out of the midi? 
of thee them that rejoyce in thy pride x. and thou 


ſhalt no more be haughty y + becauſe of my holy + Heb: 
y s in il} 4 


mMOounr 2. 

s When pardoned Captives and difperſed Ones, ſhall return and 
ſerve the Lord with one Conient, mourning for their Sins, and fecic- 
ing the Lord, # With a Shame of Reproach and Confuſion ; when 
Sin is pardoned, and finful Hearts were purified, reproach'u! Shame 
may well ceaſe, Iſa. 54-4,5. #« Which are exponnded in the follow- 
irg words, the Prophet ſpeaks of the Sins they formeriy committee 4 
againſt the Lord. x Hypocrites, proud Formaliſts that placcd wil Re- 
l1g1on 1n the gaudy Out-fide; theſe removed, and thoſe that worſhip 
the Lordd,oing it in ſincerity, gathered tozether,the Lord will accevt 
and beautifie them. y Thou O Nation of the Fews, forme;1y tull 
of haughty Thoughts of your ſelves, your Sacrifices, and vour #'ri4i- 
leges, but-you ſhall no more boaſt, or glory, or vaunt your ſelves hcrc- 
in. 2 Either the City, orrather the Temple on which proud Hi po- 
crites did bear themſelves high formerly, when they lived in noturi- 
ous Sins, and yet cried the Temple of the Lore, +. Jer. 7. 4. 
with 9, tc. 


12 | will alſo leave 2 in the midſt of thee 5 an af. 
ficted c and poor d people, and they thall watt in the 
name of the LORD ec. 

a The Chaldeans had ſpared none if the Lord had not preſerved 3 
Remnant ; 'tis he rather than they , which did leave 2 Remnant, 
6 To return and dwell in Judea and Fervſalem. c Or a People of a 
broken Spirit, a meek humble ſpirited People, inſtead of that proud 
Heart was once among them. d Not ſo much in <utward rejpetts 
as poor 1n Spirir, ſuch a People as the Lord can delight in. e Not 
in City or Temple, but in the Lord and in his Mercy, Fairiifulneſs 


—— 


and Power. 
13 The remnant of Iſrael 7 ſhall not do iniquity *, 


nor ſpeak lies þ : neither thall a Jeceirtul-rongue : ho 
tound 1n their mouth : for they 104ll_tecd 4 and lis 
down, and none ſhall make ear atraid /. 

f Prelerved in Captivity and Diſp:7fion, purified in the Furngce 
ot Afﬀition, and now recurned to the'r un Laude g Shall ror come 
mit theS.ns they formerly con.m t!e1, nor provoke God with their 
Abominarions as beiore; it is not a Predidion of a tintets, hut of a re- 
tormed State, they ſhail be righteous, aud taughr of God, nv more 
[dolaters. h They ſhali love Truth, aid ſpeak Truth, or in larper 
Senſe ſhall be honeſt and upright amongſt Men, 7 A tale © ccufer or 
Wirneſs, like Deg, or Fexabel's Evidences agaioft Na5oth, according 
to that Pſal. 15. 2. and 24.4+ hþ Or they Gail teed aiſo, Fc.” fo 
twill be a Bleſſing added 45a Crown of their Fiety aid Truth : or if 
you read it, for they ſhall feed, &c. it gives you a Reaſon why they 
ſhall cot by Frauds and Lies, as formerly, tin agzinſt one ancther 
they ſhall have a ſufficiency by hovett ways, ai:d trom God's bictiing, 
and ſhall not be under any great Temptation to Diſhonetly and 
Lying. | Frizhts made David, Abrah :;n and others to forget Truth, 
here none ſhould tright them, and they ſhould nor fear to 1peak 
the Truth; their Lips pure, ver. 9. they truit in the Lord, wer. 12, 
therefore ſhall not Lye. Here's a Cluſter of ſp+rituai Promiſes with 
the Temporal. 


rulalem, 
For all theſe Mercies the Church is cnjuined to be thankfui and 


to rejoyce 3 aid 1t 1s trebled, fing, ſh:uc ard rcjoyce, O Daughter 
of S7on, Iſrael, and Daughter of Ferujaler 3 the ſame Perſons, the 
ſame Duty, but differently expreiſed, but the whoie Heart required 
in all. 

15 The LORD » hath taken away 7 thy jvigments, 
he hath caſt o our thine enemy p : the King of lirael, 
even the LORD zs in the midſt 05 thee 7 : tion thalt 
| not ſee evil any more 7. 


" A... 


Y Sf | | 72 Who 


14 ? ding, O davghter of Zion, ſhout. O Iſrael, be * ifs. 
glad and rejoyce wirh all the heart, U daughter of Je- & 41 


4, 
: 
ETR2 4 
#; 4 
a 113 * ; 
NI TS l : 
k +; CF 
y * 'S - 
= 
4-0'io 33; [ 
3 ; ; 
7's 7 : : : 
£ 4 o 
SET Kg i ' 
| 19058 4 L : 
4% , 
2.4 : . { 
i * ' #4 
$ +#, i} & * Ti 
Ras 4 T. 1 
L 
 L.88. « fy F+44-4 . 
” ns #05 6 tis ERC BE 
"i Þ F 19 008 6 
« 
v ; %-, | \ 3 
*4 | 74 n 4 : 3; . 4 
is - (1 
Q 8.7 : 5X 
i oy L Fe 4 bi q 
; #7 l , : SCENES 
b 3 2” FAY 5 i 
s 2 *Y 4 : 
» wo” BY 12 go (4:4$ 
 , ” #; Nl $1.4 
7 3 Iz t+: ; $34 Þ+ } 
7 4-2 "265 49-;- Gy . 
7% of 4 25; : : Y fi 
t —« 3%. 
o og p «1 
24,20 4 « o 
is 4% TRY ne {3 
» , a $3003 ; 
4 FE 3 |. "7 / ; 7 
"1+ Ces © R 1 
| , - 3 £8 
. T i | * 4 5 > : : 
' £% P £5 Ot 
- KF > hs ( 3 1 
: it: : in 4 
L | * : F , 
$ 3 ® = | 
v4 ' t ? 4: i; 
” 4 ! #3 5 L ; 
"40) TY 4 4% p# 
3 4s * c 4 
4 £1 $858 5 3+ Ss & ; I 
% #2 , 52S 
| n 1.6. $7 +1 
Y $3 [ 2 | — 
> I 44h +: : 4 i 
' * & wy 
x 1 pt ? 
” hs | 
7 SAIL 4-04 : + 
F k; 
8 8 
TH >. - 
+ x - 
« j 4 hs 
$2. I8% F- , 
1 © » £ ; 
: $547 4 HEE; 
- » Jt : 284 - 
WW: ; ; 
Ke. i 
C ! Mo + } 
4 FT 
F. : 4 > 
4 : 4: 36 
; $M i + 
j. 44% * ES. 
j Pe 4 4 
4:+&5 x 
*.. 12s | 4&5 
i4® 4 
of - 
rn © 
: 
. #% 4 | 
+ "RI%Y 
3.7 f . 4 
- 4 : 
, gt be 
> . 7 
bi 4; 
" 249 © Fo. 
$7 : AY bs 
EET. 14 7 
vir AS 7 X.} 
. : py þ- T*: 
al 411 +» 7 
; 'T b 
* + 4 : 45.1 
: * 
* A 34 
e : $38 
q +. 2 
$3 R 
pd { Jl " a 43 
. (, 44 
4 + «2 , 
| + $2657 - 3. ha 
+ $7. 
f \ b4 . 
* : Py » 1 
: x hg ; 
4 6 - 
$ *.; x" $8. 2 
1 | L 7 
: "4 
{42 ns "I 
S..1 $= Bis 
$) ifs $7 
: ' £44 
65012 Hp HESTY 
*, MK} ! "1 
PE UROT: | rt 
LV 4 
PEA? F L207 
7 \ * 
$$, £ VB 
az {* 
hs. MM». _ 
I . 2 
*;© MM 4 
"3; 45- U 
- Y : : x 
.” . TIE 
. [2K . 
SW L7E5 
* {ad \ +. 
at 4» 3 -'f bo 
"KN +..54%* $: 
net 3 2 0 00 
. « 
} a 335" 6 e114 -- 
$10 5 IM3 
Ls + HS! t 
_ T7 : 
a 'F- w_ : 
$911 2 3008 DJ 
X88; "JF 
[PAN 
iT 
: 2004-f 
427 PR 
” 1.+ 7 
$1» (bt 
. L 
thy 160 
l 
. 


| Or, faint, 


+ Heb. 
be {ilent. 


+ Hch. the 
burden upon 
7t was rC- 


proach. 


*F7zra 7. 
24-&.5.1. 
Zech. 1. t. 
T Heb. +' 


Hap gat. 
* 1 Chron 
3-17, 19. 


Chap. I. 


the hand of 


m Who kills and makes alive, acquits or condemns, and none can 
reverſe the Judgment. » Aboliſhcd and put an end to thy Suffer- 
ings, the Judgments thySins brought upon thee; he hath pardoned 
thy Sins and ended thy Sorrows. o Caſt the Babylonian out of the 
Throne, and placed the Perſian in it. p The Baby{5r1an who held thee 
Captive, and placed in his room Cyrs mine anointed, and thy 
Friend, who ſhall let thee go free, Ezra 1. 1. q Thus it 15 evident 
that the Lord who is thy King, O Iſrael, is with thee that he raketh 
thy part, is returned to redeem and govern thee. x No more fuch 
great Evil as thou haſt ſeen ; whilſt thy Carriage is as becometh thy 
Mercy received, and my Preſence with thee, thou ſhalt neither fear, 
nor feel like Evils. 

16 In that day s it ſhall be faid 7 to Jeruſalem z, 
Fear x thou ngt : and to Zion, Let not thine hands be 
| Hack y. »_. 

s The day or time of Reſtitution, when the Captivity returned 
ſhall be ſertled in their Land. # By Prophets, or by Friends congra- 
tulating them, or by cach to other, # Ilahabitants of Feruſalem, the 
Place being pur for the People. x Diſquiet not your ſeives with 
Fears, though you may apprehend ſome Dangers from Sanballat 
and Tobiah, &c. though trouvlous times, as Neh. 4. I, 2, and Dan: 9. 


25. y lathe work of the Lord, building the City and Temple, and | 


reſtoring the Worſhip of God, take Heart, O ye returned Caprtives, 
for God your King is with you. 

17 The LORD a thy God b in the midſt of thee 7 
mighry c - he will fave 4, he will rejoyce over thee with 


Joye : he will + reſt f in his love g, he will joy over 


thee with ſinging Þ. 

a The everlaſting One, who changeth not. 6b Thine 1n Covenant 
never to be forgotten or repealed. -c Can do all he will, can reſtrain 
and deſtroy Enemies , can ſupport and defend his own People. 
d From thy Fears, and thine Enemies Rage. e Will greatly rejoyce 
in thee. f Will take content and ſatisfa&ion in this his Love. g The 
Love he ſheweth to thee ſhall be Reſt to him ; not thy Lovelineſs, 
but his own Love ſhall ſatisfie him. h Shall ſhew greateſt Love and 
Joy in moſt affe&ionate manner, all Expreſſions borrowed from the 
entireſt Loye of Man toward deareſt Relations, Pſalm 103. 11, 13+ 
and Iſa. 62. 5. | 

18 I will gather 7 zhem that are ſorrowful & for the 


ſolemn aſſembly /, who are of thee m, to whom the Þ re 
proach 7 of it zoas a burden o. 


HAGGAT 


i This Promiſe removes at Obje&ion which might be made by 
diſperſed ones, How can we return ? 1 will gather you, ſaith God. 
þ Mourn in their diſtance from the ſolemn Worſhip of God, as Da- 
via, Pſal. 42. that are for want of God's Ordinances troubled more 
chaa tor any thing. ] Which three times eyery Year in great Solem- 
nity they celebrated , but now for 70 Years had wanted them. 
m Theſe longing Mourners are thy Children indeed, Jraclites in whom 
is no Guile. n The Taunts of Enemies, and Triumphs over God and 
Religion, ſuch as Pſxl. 42. 3, 10. o Heavieft Burden, or a Sword in 
their Bowels. 


19 Behold p, at that time I will undo q all that af * Ex. 
Hick » thee, and * I will fave her that halteth s, and '5 Nie; 
gather her that was driven out z, and I will + get them ths i 


praiſe and fame z in every land x, F where they have 
been pur to ſhame y. | 


lonians who afflited the Fews,and who were undone by Gyrus and his 
Perfians. s Who is in great Trouble and ready to fall, as Pſal. 38. 
16, 17. who is wnder greateſt diſtreſs, and hath leaſt ſtrength to bear 
or get out. # By force of the Enemy carried away Captives, and 
ſcattered into far remote Countries. # Vindicate them as a People 
that are not rejeRed of their God,as the People of the great God of 
Heavenand Earthas Pſal. 121.2. x Amongall People with whom 
they dwelt as Strangers. y Were ſcorned and reproached as Slaves 
and Abje&ts, whoſe God could not, or would not help them,or had 
caſt them off, and none other would take care of them ; but now 
2athered ropether by the Lord, ſhall appear to be ſtill his peculiar 
People and his Delight. 

20 At that time will I bring you agam, even in 
the time thar I gather you : for I will make you 2 
name and a praiſe among all people of the earth, when 
[ turn back your captivity betore your eyes, faith the 
LORD. 

This Verſe isa Repetition of the Promiſe for the greater affurance 
of it, and ſeems to add but little to what was before promiſed, un- 
leſs it be the ſpeedineſs of what God doth for them, and the Com- 
prehenfiveneſs of it, he will turn back their Captivities, Zeb: plur, 
whether under Manaſſeh, or Fehojakim, or Fecomah, or Zedekiah; all 
which is confirmed with the.Broad Seal of Heayen, Thus ſaith the 
LORD. Bclieye then and rejoyce 1n it, 


—— 


HA/GG A L 


The ARGUMENT. 
AGGAI is the firft Prophet that {56 in the Name of ihe Lord of Hoſts, to awakengreprove,dire.gxhort and 


encourage both the Governour, Hig 


Prieſt and People, returned out of Captrotty,zo the reſtoring and ſetling the 


Worſhip of God, to the re-building the 1; whoſe Fond ut ons, together with the Altar of Burnt-Offering, had been 
) 


laid ſeventeen or eighteen Tears agon, but 1 


e finiſhing of the Temple probivned by Cambyſes all the time of his beins 


Vice-Roy to his Enher Cyrus, and during his own Reign , and negleted near two Nears in Darius Hyſtaſpis his time, 
through the Covetouſneſs of many, the Coldneſs of ſome, and the Cowardice of others among the Jews,who were all bent 
on their own private Concerns, and pleaded "twas not time to ſet avout the building of God's Temple, and who in all 
probability would bave deferred it much longer had they been let alone : now therefore the Lord doth in Zeal for his 


. a . . . « : R h | 
own Glory, ard in Mercy to his People, ſend his Servant Haggal 10 awaken them to their Duty, which was this, The 


bilding the '[emple, and reſtoring the pure Worſhip of God ;, reproves them for neglefling this, tells them this Sin 
was the Cauſe 6 he Penury and Scarcity which affiied them theſe fifteen or ſixteen Tears paſt, aſſures them that ſo 
ſoon as ever they begin the Work, their Ground, their Cattel, their Vines and Olroes ſhould wonderfully increaſe their 
Store ; promiſeth Gods Preſence with them, and with it a Supply of Gold and Sitver which are his ,, and he will, as 
be did by the Bounty of Darius, and the Contributions of others, bring in 10 them. And though the external Glory of 
this Temple were leſs than that of the firſt Temple, yet this 2d 1emple ſhould exceed the firſt in Glory, for ſo much as 
their expetted, longed for, and the blejjed Meſſiah ſhould appear in it. All which, as they were weighty Arguments 
in themſelves conſidered, fo through the —_ of the Spirit cf God, they prevailed with his Hearers, who ſet 


about the Work , and when oppeſed by their 


:nemies, who ſent to Dailus 10 ſolicit him to renew the Prohibition, he 


on the contrary confirms and enlargeth their Charter granted by Graiid Cyrus, and annexeth ſevere Penalties on 
all that dare binder this Work. All which particularly, and at large are ſct dnwn in the 6th and 7th Chapters of Ezra : 
end ſo in four Tears time the Temple is finiſÞd, the Feaſt of Dedication 35 celebrated, and the final Iſſue anſwers to 
the Name of the Prophet, who, ſent of God, ſet it forwards, Haggai, whs hath his Name from the Word that ſigni- 
feet a Feaſt, as if we ſhould call him Feſtivus. He cioſeth all with a cloſe Predittion of many and long Wars, and 
Sed:tions to come among the Gentiles to the Overihrow of the Enemies of the Jews, 


CHAP. 1 


The Prophet reproveth the people for negle&ing to build the houſe of the 
Lord, 1 —6. and declareth that becauſe of their negled, judgments 
came on them. 6. He exhorteth them to re-aſſume the building, and 
perfect it, 7—— It, Zerubbabel being encouraged by God's promiſe, 
entereth on the wirh, 12——15. 


N * the ſecond year of Darius 2 the king b, in the 
naxth month 55, in the firit day of the month, 
came the word c of rhe LOKD + by Haggai « 

the prophet ce unto © Zerubbabel f ſon of Shealusl z 


| 


|| governour þ of Judah z, and to Joſhua & the fon of Jo-[ G 
caphi®* 


ledech / the high prieſt m7, ſaying, 

a Of this Name there were ſeveral, Darius Medus, Hyſtaſpis, N0- 
thus, Codomannus, one before Cyrus, wiz. that Darius which is diſtin- 
guiſh'd from the other by (Medus_) the Mede ; the next Darius was 
Son of Hyſtaſpis, and third King of Perſia (if we leave out Smerdis 
the Cheat, who on Cambyſes death counterfeited the true Smerdis, 
{lain by Cambyſes his order, got into the Thrane, but was diſcovercd 
and ſlain at ſeven Months end) of whom the Text ſpeaketh unleſs 
you can think Joſhua High Prieſt through 144 Years, and ſome con” 
fiderable numberof Fews to have lived 196 Years, and the returned 
Captives tov want a Temple for 112 Years at leaſt, which incre6t- 
ble things attend them who will haye this Darizs to be Nothus, - AS 

| eg 


Chap. | 


Pratj', 
p Mark well. q I will deal with them, do their work for them, as T ich, of 
ve ſay, I will break their Power and diffolve their Kingdom. Baby- their ſha, 


but. 29, 


Ch: 


ſo lire] 
tions y 


--* ] 
T Con 

þ 0! 
ſet you 
therefoz 
ceſs of : 
Care, an 
Labour 
and ho! 


of. 4, 6 Y 
Mich, eat Þ 9 
is, Ot fill, 


bour, Car 
You are { 
have beer 
15 evident 
du} of t 
doth not 
kineſs and 
Not your 
Your Spir 
ould no 
Wooll an 
You from 
tO gain an 
PUt inte a 
This fruit 
Ways, and 


70 
Ways , 
4 Deha 
"hat will 
Evil Whic] 
of Tod, h 
Vo! 


» Sam. 


P' 3) 


h, 
| y0.r 
Wt "n 


, 
je 


Chap. 1. 


but. 29, 
of. 4, 
Is, 


d. prer- 
binvgh, 


; reateſt of that time, and by way of Eminency above 
_ ”s ul anſwering to part of our Auguſt and September. c The 


man 
os had omitred to do. 


HAGG Al. 


d or Dire@tion what they ſhould do, and Reproof for what 
d We read nothing of his Parentage or 


Country in the Scripturezke doted that thought him an Angel. e Inſpi- 


red, ſent, appr 
ſpeaks either 
45 ſome conje 


oe adoptive Son to Shealtiel, being of the Royai Line, pro- 


his Birth in Babylon, or his Intereſt and Power there, 
ure ; probably his Birth in Baty/on might be ground 


ovedand affiſted of God in his Office. f Whoſe Name 


him with the Government of Judah, to which he had 


bably he was the chief Branch thereof ( Uncle to him ) but by Na- 


rure, or by Generation, Son of Pedajah; or elle there were two Ze- 
vubbabel's,Sons of two Brothers, Pedajahand Shealtiel. b Appointed 
to this by the Perſian King, under whoſe Power the Fews were now 
fallen, and at whoſe Pleaſure Governours were placed or diſplaced. 
; Over the Remnaitrerurned out of Babylon, and once at laſt ſerled in 
the Land of Judah. k A Type of the great Deliverer; one Joſhua 
leads them 1nto Canaan,another reſtores the Temple. { Whoſe name 
did portend Good to this People, and beſpoke God's Righteouſneſs; 
his Father Serajah was High Prieſt and flain by Nebuchadnezzar. m By 
lineal Deſcent according to the Law, chief of Power in Church-mat- 
ters, as Zerubbabel was chief in civil Things; to theſe the Prophet is 
ſent to ſtir themup to the Building of the Temple. 


2 Thus ſpeaketh # the LORD of hoſts, ſaying, This 
people x ſay y, The time is not come 2, the time that 
the LOR D's houſe ſhould be built. 


« By way of Reproof, and toawaken the drowſie Jews; he who 
knew their Heart tells them what they both thought and ſpoke. 
.» Whom Mercy preſerved in, redeemed out of Babylon, and brought 
;nro their Land on purpoſe to build the Temple. This People whom 
C745 by Proclamation ſent to do this, who ſeemed to long tor a 
Temple when they were in Babylon. y Diſcourſe thus among them- 
ſelves, and diſcourage all thar were forward. x The proper Seaſon 
of re-building the Houſe of God ſeems to be not come; for fince 
the prohibition by Cambyſes in the Days of Cyrus, and through all the 
time of Cambyſes, and in the firſt Year, and part of the ſecond of 
Darius, we have no Commiſſion to do it, but are required not to 
do any thing in this Aﬀair withour farther order, Ezra 4. 21, 

3 Then @ came the word of the LOR D 6 by Hag- 
g41 the prophet c, ſaying, 

a When the People were thus ſluggiſh, made Excuſes and delayed 
doing their Duty, then at that time. 6b Chap. 1. 1. let. a. c Vid. 
chap. 1. ver. 1. let. d. 


4 * Is it time d for you e, Q ye, to dwell f in your 


p.Plal ceiled g houſes Þ, and this houſe /ze waſte 7 — 
* 4 You think it full time to build your own Houſes, you judge it 


ſeaſonable enough to lay out much coſt on adorning them ; whar 
pretence can you make that 'ris not ſeaſonable to build my Houſe ? 
e Jews who were by a Kibg (that knew not your God) ſent to build 
my Houſe, you unthankful and forgetful Ones. f To ſettle your 
ſelves ſecurely and for continuance with ftatelineſs. g Arched and 
with Cedar Wainſcot, curivuſly caryed and covered, and as richly 
adorned, as if you were full of Treaſures. þ It ſeems to intimate 
ſome of them had more than one Houſe, a City and a Country: houſe ; 
and whilft God's Houſe lay waſte, they thus laviſh out their Wealth 
on private worldly Conveniences, but grudge the Charge on God's 
Hcuſe. Can you thus live without a Temple, an Altar, a Sacrifice, 
and yet cannot live without ſtately Houſes ? Do you owe ſo much 
to your ſelves and ſo little to your God ? So much to your Bodies, 
ſo little to your Souls? 7 In its Rubbiſh, or in bare, naked Founda- 
tions without any Superſtrufure. 


5 Now therefore & thus ſaith the LORD of hoſts /, 


t Confider your ways 7, 
h Or And now, or but now, Heb. it is time for you to confider, to 
ſet your Heart to that I propoſe. / The great God ſpeaks, hearken 


= 


was. therefore. m Ponder well the Courſe you have taken and the ſuc- 


ceſs of it, what you have deſigned, how you have ſucceeded, what 
Care, and what Diſappointment, what Labour, and how fruitleſs your 
Labour hath been : Conſider how you have carried it toward God, 
and how God hath carried it towards you. 


6 Ye have * ſown much 7, and bring in little 0: ye 
f, but ye have not enough q : ye drink, bur ye are 
not filled with drink 7: ye clothe you, but there is none 
warm s : and he that earneth wages, earneth wages 70 


pat it into a bag F with holes 7. 

n The Prophet doth help them, or direfts them what in particu- 
ar they ought to conſider, and fo debareth it with them z your La- 
bour, Care and Charge hath been great in ploughing and ſowing, that 
you are ſenſible of: But whar Harveſt have you had ? o Your Barns 
have been far from full, you have reaped and brought in little, this 
15 evident to all, p You feed on the Fruit of your Labour and pro- 
duft of the Earth. q But what you eat doth not nomiſh you, it 
doth not ſuffice 3 you are hungry and meagre ſtill. r The like emp- 
tneſs and unprofitableneſs in your Drink, your Water quencheth 
Not your Thirit, your Wine does not refreſh your Heart, or revive 
your Spirit, or you dare not eat or drink ſufficiently for fear you 
ſhould not have enough, leſt your Store ſhould fail you. s Your 
Wooll and Flax is not what was uſed to be, ſufficient ro defend 
Jou from the Cold, *twill not warm-you. # Who labours or trades 
i gain and lay up, loſeth all his Labour, it runs from him as Money 
Pet into a Purſe or Pocket that hath no bottom, that cannot hold it. 
Ttys. fruitleſs Labour you will ſoon diſcern, if you conſider your 
Waz*, and what think you may be the Cauſe of this ? 


7 < Thus faith the LOR D of hoſts, Corfider your 
ways A, Vid. V. 4, 

4 Debate it with your ſelves, both as to what is already paſt, and 
«hat will >x for time to come 3 it hath not been a Chance, or an 
Evi] which none can te{l whence it proceeds, 'tis from your neglect 


——— 


v God, his Temple and Worſhip. 
Vol. 1 


41.4» 


Ss Go x up to the mountain y,and bring wood 2, and 
build 2 the houſe 6 ; and I will take pleaſure © in ir, 
and | will be glorified d, faith the LORD. 

x Delay no longer, ſpeed ye up. y Moriah, or Sion, better L25.1- 
non, where beſt and greateſt itre of Cedars were to be had, whence 
came the goodly Cedars which built $92mon's Temple, 1 Kings 5. 
14, 15. and where they had ( before che Building was forbidden } 
furniſh'd themſelves, Ezra 3.7. 7 Provide all forts of Timber for 
this future Edifice. a Go on with the Work, the Foundation where- 
of hath been laid ſome Years, but the Superſiruture omitted. 5 Of 
God, the Holy Temple. c This a very gracious Promiſe revived, 
and Afſurance that God will dwell in it,and afford his Preſence there: 
I will meer you there, and there I will bleſs you, there I will ac- 
cept your Offerings, hear your Prayers, forgive your Sins, and ſatisfie 
you with the Fatneſs of my Houſe ; much che ſame Promiſe with 
that, 1 Kings 8. 25. and 9.3. d Shew my Myeſty, and a:count my 
ſelf glorified by you alſo. 

9 Ye e looked f tor much, and log zt came to little 5; 
and when ye brought 77 home, I did || blow 7 upon it : 
why ? ſaith the LORD of hoſts : Becauſe of mine houſe 
that zs waſte &, and ye run / every man to his own 
houſe m. | 

e O Fews, you toiled, and were at great coſt, as ver. 6. f Ex- 
peRted, hoped, promiſed your ſelves a great increaſe, a plentiful Har- 
veſt. g Burt you ſaw, diſcerned, and were ſenſible that it anſwered 
not expettation. þ All dwindled into a very little, you were Loſers 
by all, went backward ſtill. } Had your little been as the righteous 
Man's little, you might have lived on it, and rejoyced in it,but it had 
nor ſuch a Bleffing upon it; it was blaſted, and ſo was weak, and 
empty, and heartleſs, it profited little. þ All this Curſe on your 
Eſtate and Labour was for your ungodly neglett of my Houſe, leayi ng 
it waſte, / Did with eagerneſs carry on your own particular Build- 
ings, ſpared not Care or Coſt for them, you ſtir not a foot about my 
Houſe, you run with greateſt earneſineſs about your own m Dome- 
ſtick Afﬀairs and Concerns, in w...co nut one or two, or ſome fey, 
but every one 1s culpable, ſcarce any free from this Fault. 


_—_ x 
10 Therefore 7 * the heaven o over you is ſtay- , © 


- p from dew, and the earth is ſtayed from her 
Tult. 

n For your great intolerable negle& of God, his Houſe and Wor- 
ſhip. « Ab. Heavens. p Shut up, ſealed, prohibited ; God, whoſe 
they are, hath forbidden them, they drop not one Pearl of Dew, and 
the Earth muſt be barren, when dry, without the frutifying Influ- 
ences of Heaven, 

11 And *[ g called 7 for a drought upon the land s. 
and upon the mountains z, and upon the corn, and 
upon the .new wine, and upon the oil; and upon zhat 
which the ground bringeth forth , and upon men , 


hands y. 


This Verſe is a particular Narrative of what was more generally 
expreſſed in the former Verſe, and all things mentioned herein arc 
very plain. q Your God whom you negle&ed. r Commanded or 
willed, which 1s Call powerful enough ro bring together any of his 
armed Souldiers,to puniſh rebellious and contumacious Sinners, s Ej- 
ther the whole Land, or in diſtin&ion ro Mountains, the lower 


and rich in Vines and Olives, and Corn; all which for want of Rain, 
dried up, and withered, languiſhed and came to nothing ; ſo the 
Condition of theſe People was very deſolate; a juſt Puniſhment for 
a Temple deſolate by their Negligence* x The very Blood, Hu- 
mours and Conſtitutions of Men were ſtrangely changed hereby, and 
many Diſcaſes afflifted them. x Murrain, Leanneſs, and Death, 
among the brute Beaſts, y Whatever Man's Induſtry planted, as 
Trees and Plants, were under this Curſe, and languiſh'd, died and 
were hurnt up. 


12 & Then « Zerubbatel the ſon of Shealtiel þ, 
and Joſhua the ſon of Joſedech c the high prieſt d 
with all e the remnant of the people f, obeyed the 
voice of the LORD # their God þ, and the words 7 
of Haggai the propher, (as the LORD their God 


had ſent & him ) and the people did fear before the 
LORD 7. 


a So ſoon 75s they heard this convincing and 'awakening Sermon. 
6b Whois called Selathiel, 1 Chron. 3. 17. Matth. i: 12. cVid.ch. 1. 
v. 1.let. k,l. d The twenty fourth from Aaron, as ſome reckon, 4/- 
fled, Chbron/ but the firſt aftcr th= Captivity, e Either none were dear 
to the Lord's Reproof and Counfe], or elſe none durſt appear fo, whert 
the chief Rulers in State and Church were ſo forward in obying the 
Prophet. f The common People, the meaner ſort, g Acknowledged 
that 'twas the Sovereign Lord who ſpake, who ought ro be obeyed, 
becauſe he is tneLord. þ And therefore they ought to do his Will, 
that they might receive the Blcflings, which he, as their God, had 
promiſed torhemz as God made this an Argument to Obedience, ſo 
do theſe now ; We are thy People, thou art our God. i This inter- 
prets the former, the Voice of the Lord was the words of Hzggat, 
he added.nothing of his own to them. þ According to ail for which 


| the Lord had ſent and commiſſioned him, or particularly ia all char 


concerned the ſpeedy building of the Temple. / This ſpeaks the 
right religious Frame of Keart in this People at this time, « 

:3 Then a»: ſpake Haggai the LORD's meſlenger zz 
the LORD's meflage o unto the people p, ſaying. | 4 
with you g, faith rhe LORD -7. 

m When the People ſhewed their Obedience,and the willingneſs of 
their Minds, then God encourageth them by his Prophet. = Legatc 
or Envoy, the Hebreiv word fignifieth alſo an Angel; but this is nor 
ſufficient to prove their Opinion, who dream that Hz7gai was not a 
Man, but an Angel inthe form of a Man, the word here uſed (arifirg 
from a word that fignifieth to ſend, and paraphraſed by a word tha: 
primarily fſignifieth to ſens . OT are ſent) doth ſpeak 4a An- 

IS SY ge! 


Chap. I. 


k Or, £2 


it awaje 


I9. 
Deut. 23, 


23. 


* 2 kings 


and upon cattel x, ar * upon all the labour of the * ©i-2. 17: 


Grounds and Valleys. # Which in Canaan were fruitful in Paſturage, 


woe = 3 ho 

Boe a nga) a 

Out. aps. LO SIISE - 
FATS 

bAEFES - 


NS 


> 
$2 


ln » - 

Z we 

bots» — =o 
6 a % 

ned $20IS 


*; - 
CS > Je 
- ao ** IS: ER bn-=T - "I. 
a CER : 3 _ v 4 
oats Be: > 5 es. - = Wh 
- nomad ho > 24 "ge ITY x” 


_—_— _ 5 
yg 4 -v a 2 
_ wc oy Seger tag 
Eo 0G. . 


Wroneres > tos ene 


j Bon; NOI 


=” TY 

Pele 
SETS 
* : 


i ”. 
1 Out... 08 


ens 
ay 


——— 


Chap. I. 


H A 6G 


gel, from his Office and Work as he miniſtreth before the Lord, and 
it ſpeaketh not the Nature or Eflence 


runneth ſwiftly on his Errand 3 1 : 
of Angels, as they are Spirits. The French Verſion ( which I ule, 
printed at Rochel, 1516.) reads it, like ours, Ambaſſador. So Haggat ' 


was God's Meſſenger or Ambaſſador to his People, no Angel. 9 As 
becommerh an Amyaſſador in the words of his Maſter, fo Haggaz de- 
livered the Lord's Meſſage.. p Not. excluding the Governors, bur 
the People are only mentioned, for that the Prophet ſpake to the 
whole Afﬀembly, or becauſe the Lord would encourage them moſt, 
who moſt needed Encouragement. 9 A great Promiſe, and which 
contains all rhey can need or defire, it enſureth God's Preſence al- 
wavs with them, and his Affiſtance always to them, and his Bleſſiag al- 
ways upon them. He will be always for, as well as always with 
them, and then Tatnai, Shethar, Boſnai, Sanba!lat, and all other Con- 
ſpirators with them, ſhall not prevail to hinder the Work; ſuch a 
Promiſe as this, vid. Exod. 3. 12, and 4. 1, 12, 13. Matth. 28. 20. 
Rom. ®. 31. 2 Cor-12. 9, # This ſolemn Acteſtarion addeth weight 
to the Promiſe. 


14 And the LORD's ſtirred vp the ſpirit z of Ze- 
rubbabel the ſon of Shealtiel # governour x of Judah, 
and the ſpirit of Joſhua the ſon of Joſedech »y the high 
prieſt, and the ſpirit of all the remnant 3 of the peo- 
ple, and they came @ and did work 6 in the houſe c of 
the LORD of hoſts 4 their God e : | 

s This is the firſt notable Effet of God's Preſence with them, a 
ſenſible performance of his Promiſe. God inclined their Minds, fix'd 


their Reſolutions, and inſpired them with Courage for this Work; 
whereas the ſtouteſt of them before had no mind to ſet on this Work, 


& 4: L 


ſaw and took notice of at ſixteen,-or could make that Judgment of 
the Diſproportion between the two Temples? ch. 2.4. Or can it 
be ſuppoſed that Zechariah, ch. 1. 12. would have accounted but {«- 
venty Years Deſolation, when he might have more than doubled the 
Years, and have reckon'd 169 Years? would not the Argument this 
have been more moving ? 


CHAR» 


The Prophet exhorteth Zerubbabel, Foſhua, and the people, to 89 forward 
with the works promiſing greater glory to the new than the old temple 
1 —9. reproveth their bypocriſie in the type of holy and unholy things, 
which hindred the forwardneſs of the work, 1o — 19, God's promiſe 
#0 Zerubbabel, 20 — 23. | 


N the ſeventh a month, in the one and twentieth b dy 


the propher Haggai c, laying, 

a Which the Hebrews called Tiſri, and Ethanim, and it anſwers to 
part of our Septemberand to part of OFober. b Some ſeven weeks af. 
ter the firſt, mentioa'd 1n the firſt Chapter, and about one Month af. 
ter they began to build, or at leaſt prepar'd for building the Temple. 
E Vid. ch. 3-w. ie bc, & & | | 


2 Speak now d to Zerubbabel e the fon of Shealriel f 
governour g of Judah, and to Joſhua the ſon of Joſe. 


| dech the high prieſt þ, and to the reſidue 7 of the people, 


laying, | 

_ d Once again acquaint them with what I now impart for their 
Encourapement. e Vid. ch. 1.1.tet.f. f Ibid. let.g. & Ibid. let, þ, 
h Vid. ch. 1.1. let. þ,l,m. See alſo ch. 1. 12, where thefe Perſons 


now the weakeſt are forward to it, and bold init, #7 The Heart, 

Mind or Inclination. # See ver. 12.let.b. x Seever. I.let.h. y See 

wer. 1. let. Land ver. 12. let. m. x See wv". 12,let. ec, f- a Immedi- 

ately, without delay, and unanimouſly without any viſible Diſſent, 

b Every one ſer their Hands to it in ſuch manner as was fit for 

them, Govcrnours did overſee, dire& and cncourage the Workmen ; 

 Artificers framed and prepared, and the People all lahoured. 
c Which was now to be built upon the old Foundations, laid ſome | 
ſeventcen Years before, when Cyrus gave the. Fews leave to return | 
and build their City and Temple. 4 By which Name he delights ro 

be known among the returned Captives;z and it was a Name beſt 

ſuted to their preſent State, compaſſed on all Hands with Enemies, 

and in perpetual danger by them. e Vid. ver. 12. let. h. 
15 In the tour and-twentieth f day ' of the ſixth 


month. in the ſecond year of Darivs g the king. 

F It appeareth then that Zerubbabel and Foſhua, with the People, 
did reſolve on the Matter quickly ; for in three Weeks and three 
Days, they are at the Work, as is evident, ch. 1.1. on the firſt Day 
Hageai preach'd, on the twenty fourth Day of the Month the People 
are at work, ver. 15. g Vid. ver. 1. let.a. Now this Darius was not 
Darins Nothus, bur Darius Hyſtaſpis, as will appear by conſidering 
well the following Scheme of Years, from the Captivity to the par- 


are mentioned, # See ch. 1-12. let. e, f. | 
3 Who zs letr among. you # that ſaw / this houſe x 
in her firſt 2 glory ? and how do you ſee it now ov ? 


thing q © | 

þ There are ſurely ſome that are of rhat Ape as to have ſeen the 
Temple which our Father's Sins, God's juſt Diſpleaſure,and the Cha/- 
dean Malice burnt, who are they ? and where may they be found ? 
this Queſtion implieth there were ſuch, and by Zxra 3. x2, 13. ap- 
pears there were many, for the Cries and Sobs of them equall'd the 
Shours of the younger, who rejoyced to ſee the Foundations of the 
ſecond Houſe laid. / Took notice of it then, and remember it now, 
that were of ſuch Age and Knowledge as to remember what was 
ſtanding in its Glory, (one hundred and fifty Years ago, if ſome con- 
Je&ure aright, but what 1s nearer to Truth ) who remember ſome 
fourſcore Years paſt , who are about one hundred Years of Ape. 
m The Houſe of God, the Temple built by Solomon. 7 In the ſtately 
Stru&ure of it, in the rich Adornings of it, in the unparallel'd Skill 
and Curiofity of irs Workmanſhip , when 'twas the Glory of the 
World. o Doyou ſee the ſame glorious Struſture going forward ? 
Have you Expeation of one equal to the former Temple? þ You 
cannot but recal the former to mind,and make your Judgment of this 


ticular Years of cach of theſe two Darznus's. Suppoſe we therefore 
the Computation of theſe Years according toeither of theſe Schemes, 
it will appear-that there is no likelihood this Darius in the Text 
ſhould be Darius Nothus. 


SC 3359) =C 3350 YL 3420 & © Noth. 3529. Helv. 
'J S by T 

D S 7) E 

2 =) QC / E 

EC 3398 35 C3416 0C 3458 96 CH 3485. Uſb. 


by that. q Do you not judg this ſecond nothing comparable with the 
firſt ? you are ready to fay (in proverbial Speech) it is nothing toit. 

4 Yet now » * be ſtrong 's, O Zerubbabel, ſaith the 
L ORD, ard be ſtrong, O Joſhua, ſon of Joſedech the 


| high prieſt ; and be ſtrong, all ye people of the land, 


faith the LORD, and work z : tor I az with you #, faith 
the LORD of hoſts; _ 

y In this Junure, though old Men weep for the Diſproportion of 
the two Temples yet now, s be of good Courage your ſelves, O Ze- 
rubbabel, and thou O Zaſhua, and encourage others by your Example, 


This latter Account begins the Captivity at the fourth Year of Zehoia- 
bim, the former begins it at thefirſt of Feconzah's Reign, as Ezehiel al- 
ſo doth, ch. 1. 2.& 40 1+ Hence. that difference which is in the Ac- 
count of the Years between the beginning of the Captivity,and the 
burning of the Temple; the former Account makes it eleven Years, 
the latter makes it eighteen, for it begins ſeven Years ſooner. In 
what follows, we ſhall find both agreeing well enough to clear the 
uplikelmhood of Darius Nothus being the King intended here. 

Both Accounts make the Captivity to end in the ſeventieth Year 
according to the Scripture, But now the former Account makes it 
one hundred and nine Years between Cyrus his Decree, and Darius 
his Decree ; all which time the Temple by this Account lay deſolate, 
without a Prophet to ſtir them up to their Duty of building the Tem- 
ple. Now is this probable ? Can it be reaſonably ſuppos'd that the 
Temple ſhould ſo long lie waſte afrer they were ſent our of Babylon 
purpoſely to build it ? Or rhat they ſhould be ſo long in that Con- 
dition without a Prophet ? But now the latter Account reckons ſe- 
venteen Years between Cyrys and Darias his Decrce for bur{ding the 
Temple, a ſpace of Time cafily conceived likely to paſs while the 
Fews did not build 3 nay, were forbidden by Cambyſes (in Scripture 
called Artaxerxes) Vice-Roy to his Father Cyrus (engaged in Foreign 
Wars) all the time Cyrus lived after he gave out the Decree, which 
ſome make more, ſome leſs ; bur who make the likelieft Gueſs, for 
ought I know, make it five Years : whether Cyrus taken up with 
theſe Wars, did know of this Prohibition, or thought not good to 
take it off till he return'd Conqueror, I know not ; but he died and 
letr this Ear on the Work, which continued all Cammbyſes his Reign, 
and unto the ſecond Year of his Succeſſor Darius Hyſtsſpis. Now if 
this were ſeventeen, the moſt, ſome ſay but fifreen, others but 
twelve Years, it i5 very Probable, whereas one hundred and nine 
Years is utterly improbable. - Beſides this, ler us view what Age 
thoſe niany or few were of, by theſe different Accounts, who lived 
to ſee the Temple re-cedified. It in Darius Nothus's Time, they could 
be no !efs than 18s, allowing them to be fixteen at the burning of 
the Temple thus, fixtcen when the Temple was burnt, thence fixty 
to Cyrus's Decree, 2nd thence 105 to Darius Nothus his Decree. But 


animate each other, that all the People of the Land may take heart 
with you. t Forthwith ſerabour the building of the Temple. « Both 
to-defend you from Enemies, to ſuppiy you with Neceflaries, to bleſs 
and accept you, vid. ch. I. 13. 

5 According 10 the word x that I covenanted y with 
you when ye came out of Egypt 2, ſo my ſpirit 2 re- 
maineth bþ among you : fear ye not c. 

x Eithcr the word of Promiſe to give them his Preſence, and to 
carry them through all Oppoſition 3 or, the word, the Son of God 
promiſed to them and us, ſo it refers to Chriſt, in whom all the Pro- 
miſes are Yea and Amen. y In ſolemneſt manner reduced to the 
Form and Model of a Covenant,that it might be ſure and firm to you, 
as to your Fathers in whoſe time made this Covenant, and with you 
in them. xz When I brought you ought of Egyp?, the Houſe of Bon- 
dage. a Ot Strength and Courage, of Wiſdom and Underſtanding, 
of Zeal and: Fervency to carry you through this Work. 6 Still doth 
dwell in you, ſhall be continued to you, and give DireQion and Suc- 
ceſs. c Let no diſcouraging Surmiſes ſettle in your Mind, or weaken 
your Hands. There were as many Improbabilities lay in bar to your 
getting out of Egyp?r, yet my Word, Covenant and Spirit overcame 
= 4 fear not therefore, I am the ſame, and with you, as with your 

athers. 


and the earth h, and the lea z, and the dry land #. 

d After many Repetitions and Confirmations of the New Covenant, 
one more Repetition, and but one morereſtsto be made. e Compa- 
ratively 'twas little, though 517 Years from the ſecond of Dartus Hy- 
ſtaſpis to the Incarnation of Chriſt, a long time ro us who are ſhort 
liv'd,and ſhort ſighted, bur a little time compared with that between 
the firſt Promiſe ro Adam, and Chriſt's coming; or take any other 
ſhorter Period, as between Abraham or David,and Chrift, this laſt Pe- 
riod is ſhort, a little while. f Whether it be metaphorical or litera], 
it was verified at the time of Chriſt's Coming into the World. After 
the Return of the Captivity, what with the Commotioos among the 


by the latter Account their Age ameunts but to nincty five Years,,| Grecians, Perſians and Romans, which began ſoon after this time the 


which appears thus; ſixteen at the time the Temple was burnt, 
thence ttxty to Cyrus his Decree, thence ſeventcen to Darius Hyſta- 
{vis his Decree 5, in all aincry five, which though a great Ape,yert not 
improtable at that time, though the othcr (185) be improbable. Be- 
fucs,how iew through 15g Years can diftinaly remember what they 


Prophec points at, this was metaphorically fulfilled, all States were 
ſhaken either with Invaſions from abroad, or- inteſtine Diſſenſ19n5 
among themſelves : Literally it was fulfilled by Prodigies and Earth 
quakes, 7c. a5 ſome have obſerved and recounted at the Birth, Death 


| and ReſuireQtion of Chrilt, g Either States and ————_ = 
orld, 


Chap. 11 


of the month, came the word of the LORD + by tHe. 


* 7s 17 not in your eyes Þ in compariſon of it, as no. * 


= 
"> 


6 For thus faith the LORD of hoſts, * Yet once &, +1: 
it zs 4 little e while, and I will ſhake f the heavens g, fe" 


ha 


this ſec 
were 
ſomery' 
higher 
ficence 
Gc.sa 
to come 
was def 
was pre: 
70 Yea 
Houſe, ] 
Interna] 
which d 
Peace 0 
aives it 
the Lord 
Io ( 
7nth | 
of the 
This ti 
or Sermi 
d:ficult 
and tivo 1 
and Dece, 
4. and ve; 


« [0, IT 1 
the pri 
73, prie 


e The 1 

Of his ow! 
with, def 
bound the 
their Lips 
In the Caf, 
I2 [It 
g4rment. 
Or wine, 
iN! priet 
i Any C 
* Part of ti 
holy by the 
1s ſuppoſed 
Lapof his « 
Cloth touc! 
thing by fuc 
theſe Prie | 
ſome amon 
PlOpofe the 
live ; for nd 
could make 


Chap. 1]. 


Church-Afﬀairs, which in Scripture are called the Heayens, 
ings oh Heavens, and the Firmament. h Which either figu- 
o rively or literally taken, will agree well with the Text, and the Hi- 
19 of Times. # Sea, one 'patt of, that is called Earth, this lower 
Globe. þ The other part of this inferiour World, and both may 
2s former words be literally or figuratively taken, and which better, 
7 do not undertake to determine. 


- And I will ſhake all nations /, and the defire of all 
os {hall come m2, and I will fill- this houle z with 


glory 0, {aith the LORD of hoſts p. 

/ Which was literally fulfilled in the Overthrow of the Perſian Mo- 
narchy by the Grecians, in the Civil Wars, and ſucceeding Troubles 
among Alexander his Succeſſors, the Growth of the Roman Power by 
their ſubduing their Neighbours, and their Difſenfionsand homebred 
wars, all huſh'd by Auguſtus a lirtle before Chriſt's Birth. Theſe Con- 
yulſions began a little atter this Prophecy, and continued long, 11 
which the Fews under the Maccabees had their ſhare, m Chriſt the 
moſt deſirable, becauſe the moſt helpful to all Nations, which ſome 
Proſelites in all Ages did cgme to the knowwledg of, and did earneſtly 
defire, and who was deſired by all that knew their own Miſery, and 
his Sufficiency to ſave them, who was to be the Light of the Gent1les 
as well as the Glory of his People Iſrael. The Meſtah's Coming ( the 
Fews do own) is foretold in this Texr,yet will they not ſee how this 
Jet a little while 1s long fince paſt, and the true Meſſiah long fince 
come. 2 Which you now build, this ſecond Temple. The firſt had 
a falneſs of Glory in its magnificent Strufture, rich Ornaments, and 
cofily Sacrifices, but this was a worldly Glory,that which 1s here pro- 
miſed is a heavenly Glory from the Preſence of Chriſt init. He that 
was the Brightneſs of the Father's Glory, who 1s the Glory of the 
Church, appeareth in this ſecond Temple. o Of my Preſence, preach- 
jog, healing and comforting, faith the eſſtah,the Ring of Giory,who 
entred theſe everlaſting Doors, Pſal. 24. 7, 8. This was before the 
Deſolation of this Temple by the Romans, a Demonſtration thar the 
Meſſiah ſhould come whilſt this ſecond Temple ſtood, Bur noiv the 
hardned Few ſecks to eyade this Text. p This isa ſolemn Sealing 
the Certainty of the thing in this Prophet, and Zechartah, and Mala- 
chi, who ſtile him Lord of Hoſts near an hundred rimes. 


$ the filver 7s mine. and the gold zs mine 9, faith the 


LORD of holts. 

q The Right as indiſputable,the Treaſures of both as full and Jarge; 
doubt not therefore but I will give enough to build this Houſe, and I 
could beautifie it with theſe as much as the firſt Temple : but I 1n- 
tend a greater Glory, I am the Proprietor, others but Truſtees, I 
have the tull diſpoſal of all. | 

9 The glory 7 of this latter houſe s ſhall be greater? 


than of the former z, faith the LORD of hoſts: and 
in this place x will I give peace y, faith the LORD of 
hoſts 2. 


r Which God intends to put upon this Temple. Solomon, and a rich 
People with incredible Spoils taken from conquered Nations, gave 4 
Glory to the firſt Houſe, but God himſe]t will give the Glory of this 
Houſe. s Which poor Captives, and feudatary Governours do build : 
this ſecond Temple,the prophet ſpeaks of as if 'twere already a Houſe, 
wiereas 'twasnow to be built. What God accounts a Glory, muſt be 
ſomewhat better than Silver and Gold. # More truly Glory, and in 
higher Degres, the leaſt of Chriſt is greater Glory than all the Magni- 
ficence of Solomon. u There were no more bur two Houſes built by 
Gc..'s appointment,into the latter of which the Meſſiah was perſonally 
to come, as Mal. 3. 1. therefore he came before that latter Temple 
was deſtroyed, that is 1684 Years ago, when at two Months old he 
was preſented in the Temple, embraced and confeſſed by Simeon,ſome 
70 Years before the Temple was burnt by the Romans. x In my 
Houſe, Type of Chriſt, and who is the Glory of it. y A Spiritual, 
Internal and heavenly Peace in pardoning Guilt, and deſtroying Sin, 
which diſpleaſeth God, and diſquieteth Man himſelf. Chriſt made 
Peace on his Croſs, preached, or publiſhed it to the World, and 
zives it to them by the Power of his Spirit. x Solemnly avowed by 
the Lord of Hoſts, who cannot deceive, or be deceived. _ 

10 © In the four and twentieth a day of the ninth 
»exth b, in the ſecond year of Darius c, came the word | 
of the LORD by Hagegai C the propher, ſaying, 

This tenth Verſe is an Introdu@ion to the fourth ſolemn Diſcourſe 
or Sermon the Prophet makes to this People, and there 1s nothing 
Citficult in it but what hath been opened already. a Two Months 
and two Days after the third Sermon, ver. 2. b Part of our November 
and December, Kiſſeu, Heb. c Which Darius this was, ſee ch. 1. 1. let, 
a.41.d ver. 15. ler. f. d See ch.1L. 3, let.b, c. 

11 Thus ſaith the LORD of hoſts e, * Askf now 
the prieſts g concernmg the law. þ, ſaying, 

e The Prophet comes with his double Parable, or Problem, but nor 
of his own Head, but in the Name of the Lord of Hoſts. f Conſult 
with, defire the Solution of the following Caſe. g Whoſe Office 
bound them to ſtudy the Law, and to anſwer all Caſes of Conſcience, 
their Lips ſhould retain Knowledge, Mal. 2.7. h What the Law faith 
In the Caſe ; not what the Church, but what the Scripture ſaith. 

12 It one 7 bear # holy. fleſh / in the skirt 7 of his 
garment, and wirh his skirt 72 do touch bread, or pottage, 
or wine, or oil, or any meat, ſhall it be holy o 9 And 
the prieſt anſwered p.and ſaid, No. 

! Any one. hþ Carry away from the Altar, or the Prieſts Hands. 
? Part of the S:crifice, legally and ceremonially ſanRified, or-made 
holy by the Altar on which the whole was ſanRified, of which a part 
13 ſuppoſed to be carried away in the Skirt of a Garment. m In the 
Lapof his Garment, or in any other Cloth or Napkin. n And this 
Cloth touch any common thing, as Bread, gc. ſhall o that common 
thing by ſuch Contra become legally or ceremovially holy? p Who 
theſe Prieſts were, is not mentioned, but 'ris likely that there were 


H-4 6 G&E 


| 13 Then faid 9 Haggai, It one that is unciean » by & 
dead body s, touch any of theſe 7, ſhall ir be un- 


clean z? And the prieſts anſwered and ſaid, I: ſhall be 
unclean x. 

q Now the ſecond Caſe is propoſed for Reſolution, 75. r Cere- 
monially, or legally pollured, and unclean. s For ſuch torch, tho? 
at unawares did pollute, Namb. 19. 13. t Bread or Potcage, Wine, 
or Oil, or Meat. 4 Shall that which the Unclean (by rouch of the 
Dead) doth touch, become unclean, or no? Though a mediate touch 
of what is holy will not make holy, yet will not a mediate touch of 
what is pollured defile whatſoever ic toucheth ? x It is reſfclyed 
affirmatively, it ſhalt be polluted. | 

14 Then aniwered Haggai, and faid y, So > 7s this 
people 2, and 1o zs this nation 6 hetore me c, ſaith the 
LORD ; and 1o zs every work of their hands 4, and 
that which they ofter there e zs unclean f. 

y Now is the Caſe applied. x As common things touch'd by holy 
'things are not ſanRified, and as polluted Perſons, t-uching whac is 
clean, pollute it; as holy things did not by touch and bodily Appli- 
cation make him legally holy, who was common but a polluted Per- 
ſon made all he touch'd and handled unclean: fo unſan@ified and pol- 
luted Fews polluted God's Ordinances, while the outward performing 
of legal and ceremonial Duties, ſuch as bringing, offering, earing, 
dragging abour their legal Sacrifices, left them as unholy in them- 
ſelves, and as unacceptable tn God as they were before; ſomewhat 
more then is to be done, The Soul is ficſt to be purified, rhat they 
and we may offer up a pure Offering. 4 The Body of the Fews, or 
the moſt part of them. 6 This ingeminateth rhe ſame thing, to 
intimate to us how God reſenteth it, and how we ſhould be affeRed 
with it. c In God's Account, or in his Sightz who ſeeth indeed 
what Men are, and what their A@ions are. 4 Whatever they do 
in Sacred or Civil Matters, they make a ſhift to pollute all by pol- 
lured Hands, by leprous touches. e What they do bring to the Al- 
tar with impure Hearts and Hands, is more polluted by them than 
ſanftified by the Altar. f Rea!ly impure, though it ſeem externally 
clean and holy, 'tis unſutable to the Purity of a holy God. In fan- 
ified Aﬀtions all is ſpoiled by unſan&ified Hearts. Thence 'tis that 
Uncleanneſs is derived on their beſt Works, and conſecrated Rites 
do nor, cannot ſanifie prophane Spirits, 

15 And now g; 1 pray þ you, conſider from this day z 
and upward #, trom betore a 1tone / was laid upon a 
ſtone 2 in the temple x of the LORD »o. 

2 Furthermore confider. þ He affe&ionately intreats them to ob- 
ſerve. 7i This twenty fourth Day of the ninth Month, er. 10. 
þ Through paſt Years, trace Year after Year, and your Succeſſes and 
Diſappointments in them. / Obſerve all Years paſt before you would 
ſer upon the re-building of the Temple after you had intermitted ir, 
ſome Years paſt, 1o, or 15, or 20, or 40 ( or more ſay ſome ) be- 
tween your ſurceaſing from the Work, and beginning to re-build. 
m The Prophet meaneth either before they began to lay one Stone 
upon another in the Foundation laid in Cyrus his time,ar before they 
began to lay the Foundation of the Walls of the Courts and outward 
Edifices. n Either ſtritly taken for the Houſe of God, or more 
largely for the reſt of the Buildings about the Houſe; this tacitly 
reproves their Sloth; 'twas the Temple they negle&ed, which they 
did long for in Babylon. o So much the greater their Sin, for that 
*rwas the Lord's Temple was ſlighted, 


heap r of twenty meaſures, there were but ten s : when 
one came to the preſs-fat for to draw out fifty veſſels 
out of the preſs, there were but twenty. 

p All that while the. Temple lay negle&ed, and you were conten- 
ted with maimed, and half Worſhip. q Men were diſappointed half 
in half. r Which, he expe&ed would prove twenty Meaſures, E- 
phahs, or Buſhels, or what other Meaſure you pleaſe. s It proved 
bur halt your Hopes: Thus your Corn failed, but your Oil much 
more failed, and you found but two where you expeRecd five : this 
Barrenneſs you cannot be ignorant of. 


dew y, and with hail 2,in*all the labours « of your 


t My Hand was viſible in your Loſſes, Scarcity and Diſppoint- 
ments, m The Perſons put for cheir Labours, their Corn, Vines and 
Olives. x Burning and ſcorching Winds that blaſted all. y Which 
with too much clammy Moiſture, that like Glew cleaves to Fruits, 
and turns toa corrupting of them. x Which in theſe colder Countries 
many times by .ts violence deſtroys Corn, Fruits and Trees, but in 
thoſe Countries doth it oftner. Now here was in theſe ſomewhat 


vous, fo more viſible, a In your plowing and ſowing tor Harveſt, 
in planting of Olives and Vines for a Vintage. b You did not fee 
my. Hand, tho' you felt it, you did not repent of your ſinful negle& 
of me, my Worſhip and Temple, nor thought of building my Houſe, 
c This atteſted with God's own Hand for witneſs hereto. 

18 Confider now from this day, and upward d from 
the four and twentieth day of the ninth 2wonrh, ever 
from the day that the foundation of the LORD's tem- 


ple was laid e, conſider zt f. 

d Secver. 15.let. 7. b. e See ver. 15. let. m. Make your Obſerya- 
tion from the Day when you began to build on the old Foundation 
laid many Years agon in the time of Cyras. f Let that be the preciſe 
Day from which you begin your reckoning 3 by this the Pro het ex- 
cites them to believe, and wait, ſince he doth in the Name of the 
Lord ſo cxprefly promiſe a Bleffing, and tells them when it ſhall 
begin to come unto chem, and would have then obſerve how truly 
he ſpeaks. . 

19 Is the ſeed yet in the baing* yea, as yet the 


fome among the People. who did by the Propher's perſwaſion go and 
Propoſe the Caſe, and they recerved the Anſwer as here in the Nega- | 
uve, tor neither mediate, nor yet unmediate Touch of holy Thinge, | 
could make common things, or uaholy Perſons holy, 


vine,and the fig-tree, and the pomegranate, ad the olive 
tree hath not brought þ forth : iroma this day 7; will ! 


| bleſs your f, 


Chap. II, 


16 Since thoſe days p were, * when one came q to an . 


17 | * | imotez you z with blaſting x, and with tnil- * Deut. 32. 


hands, yer ye 7#rned bnot to me, ſaith the LORD c, !King8- 


more of the Hand of God, and ſo the Puniſhment was as more grie- 


I... _—_ 


—— 
a > "INE 28 
_ REES 
=o 
JF 


Dt 


—_ > I; BURY 

_ > 

_ nm nn 
I 


-- 


A nes or 
- IFr2e "4444 as. 7 th 


 % 
SY Ne 


WEHSECAL Chap. 1 


LD Zoo 2s ſown, | 5 This ſeems an explaining of the forther, and a confirming it too, 

” Your Seed for the next |! _— = OPT «6p | Tho' the Gentiles of many Kingdoms, united inall their Strength, ſer 

- 0 0nc can make wart, a 604d r it ſhall be blaſted and little : | to hinder this Work, this ſhall tucceed fo contrary to their expeRa- 

:* 2/1 e great, ard bleſs d; or on ia but in the Name of the | tion, that not you, but they ſhall find DeftruRtion asthe end thereof; 
ens feb Zee, _ © it ſhall be a plentiful Harveſt to | which was verified in the ſucceſſive ruine of the Perſian, Grecian, and 
..i4 toretel and promiſe you, nat 1 ——_ ch no Sign yet ap | $517an Kingdoms, all which opprels'd the Church, and were deftroy'd 
hate you! oy Ny ore of "Wine, Oil, Figs, | forit. + This Paſſage foreſhews that God _ ering Civil 
pears v hat Vintage app a ay choice and rich Fruits; bur in | Wars to ariſe among theſe Nations, ruine them F themſelves, as in 
26 Yomegranates, which are you lefs'd in them all, and have | cruth they did. Now whilſt thoſe Commotions and Overthrows per. 
ic word of God I tell you, you ſhall be blefs'd in the , plex and hurt the Jews, yer they were an Occaſion ſometimes 0 


1 '$ b. and ver. : ' 
2 1izge produce, a joyful Vintage. 7 See ver. 10. let. a, | CES Co nuns of 
is et. 7. & In al] Tad Labour; as before you were blaſted in all, | ſome Relpire to them. The! gag De 


cauſe you negicRed, ſo now you ſhall be bleſs'd in all, becauſe you figns, and could not mind Miſchief to the Fews. . 
:lgently build the Temple of the Lurd. 23 In that day w, ſxith the LORD of hoſts, will I 


20 © And again the word of the LORD came un-ſ take thee x, O ——— OS the fon of 
! (on Y b M4 1 an ce ds 4 
CO" Me of the month /, | Shealtiel 2, faith the ) , : 
-0 Haggat in the four and twentieth day © > [Gamer þ ; for I have choſen c thee, ſaith the LORD of 
:aying, . hoſts 
{ See ver. Io. let. a, b. and ver. 15.lef. 7. OD. 4 DeſtruR; ; 
During thoſe Days of Troubles, WS and De 10n, and par- 
1 Speak m2 to Zerubbabel governour of Judah 7, © larly a them. x Advance, honour, defend and 
141: 1 will ſhake o the heavens p and the earth g, own. y Perſonally underſtood, it reſpeRteth the beginning of thoſe 
+ al 7 ie, faith the Lord. * n Sce ch. 1, ver. I. underſtood, it refers to all thoſe Times in which 
” /, Word, and in my Name, Days y l 
 £: b,. and chap. 1. v. 12+ let. b. 6 Vid. wer. 6. let, f. p Ibid. God promiteth he would, and indeed did preſerve, guide and honour 
7s q 'Thid. let. h. ſuch Governors of his People, who were as arr" Wasz na 
And I will overthrow the throne of kingdoms 7> | of which promiſe and performance you may obſerye in the Times 


b ; ding unto, and through the Machabees Times. Typically this 
' will deſtroy the itrength - of the kingdoms of ths | fucceedng unto, and through the Mechaters Rimes, Ppteal vi 


204 11} fe The Stile changed ſeems 1 
-then, and I will overthrow the chariots, and tho by the Government of Zerubbabel. 2 g . 
-2t ride in them, and the horſes and their riders ſhall or to him who was God's moſt un enr-2rg Be $2. &. ood 
ome down EVETY ONC by the ſword of his brother 7z. $2, 13" & Who was one of the —_— +a ey Yu er i - 
- Now B brlinicns are ſubjeted to the Perſian Power, and this | 1. 12. Luke 3.27, 6 Which ” Wat un, "4 and "= Jeng D 4 5 4 4 
ſt; + - s The Strength of many Kingdoms, and ſeems to be one | and uſed to confirm and ratifie Gi ,- Meſſiah, be a Pe od "4 
Thr N <ocaldy b all the Power of the known World, and can hardly | So ſhall the Antitypical — Gs. 6-0ha his Chaneh, : For 
be hoe to be hay; wh better than = oy; = _—_ —_ _ —_— EE o_ _ Doria a Ow well ples. 
1 ing of the Worſhip of God; for comfort 1 : ) I | 
— - nnpep morph drntteiaing them, in caſe they oppoſe. | ſed, as the Chald. Paraphraſt. and Materh, 3. 17 


The ARGUMENT. 


Echariah 7s the ſecond Prophet who cometh from God 10 7 _ w_ _ _ s L_- p pn : hs on ge 
- , eveal more fully, than be doth, all ihe futu 6 2 
both to ſecond Haggai's Exbortations, and 10 revea , d the Rejedion of the Fews 
| Lats d the ſecond Temple by the Romans, and the Rejection 0 We 
Events to the final Deſolation of Jeruſalem, an aud Bw Mah cofo, re. 
>. | | Hg God, and for their rejedting and murdering of the » WO, 
for their Sins againſt all the Mercies of their * Church "= FRY Zecha- 
. ; them : which 1s revealed unto 7Z&cha 
: th in the Gentiles, and cftabliſheth his Church amongſt them ; ; 
getted of the Fes, take 7 Y "HSE h R of the Perfran Kingdom by the 
. ; with a Declaration of the future Ruime 
riah, and communicated 10 the Fews by him 3 WW! 7 & the s: durins the Se: 
V, J d Lagidz, and ther Overtþrow by the Romans : ir 
Grecians, and alſo of the Wars of the Seleucide, and Lag - | E 1; Inq cl 
. ts Lge erous, wealthy and powerful ;, and jo long as 1 ey KEEP 
ries of which times the Fews ſhall be grown numerous, Foe be cither wonderfully ſecured amid 
iT ; rinently owned of God, and be enber wonderfully ſe 
nant with Ged, ſhall do wonderful things, and be en d indeed what Zechariah foretold 
Pole Tr * MOVE WW ully vifforious over thoſe that irouble them. And indeed what 'Z&c A , 
theſe Troubles, or more wonderfully vitto | _ ually fulfilled , if the Pro- 
b Fa 118 in its ti od amongſt ihem, his Preditfions were puntlually fulfilled , 
er fromiſed 10 them, was 1n its t1me made good among » IS. a BS ney be abſerocd 
©, BSRM T—_ ! Tews by their Sins cut themfelves off from the Promiſes, which may 
Hes were not, it Tas becauſe the 7ews by n h k | . 7 M ſhah Now the firſt Inter- 
oo Trrtere 1/ me : opbeſying, and the coming ef the Meſſiah. | 
in thoſe Imtervuis of Times between Zechariah's Prop 8, | Axrgfermapr mn che com- 
| DC Ted 1: Yeath of Alexander Magnus, during which time the Ferws enjoy 
val was abcoe two hunared Tears to the Death of . hs We" 08 
os Poors with tbe Subjetts of the Perfian Empire, and the particular Favour of Alexander Fe wage, Od 2 = = 
his Life. Theſe Tears were lears of Growth to the Fews : The next Interval through the _ ars o | m—_— f 
divided Captains, and between the Seleucidx and age, = - Int _ Y _ gl o' - Ne ty = 
. |; 's that of the Maccabees, during Wt. 
eater Preſervation to the Jews. The next Interval ts that c) > | = 
ra A do almoſt exceed our Belief , but whilſt thus Times were changed, the Jews continued _—_ 4 ” 1 
unthankful to God, cold in Rel1g1on, and added to their Sins duily, till at laft God delivered them into the Han _ 
gl nt - ; depoſed Hyrcanus from the Throne, and reſtored the High Priefthoo 
Romans, whoſe General, Pompeius Magnus, depoſed Hyrca Go s accompliſh/d, the City e 
bim ;, from henceforth the Fews Sins and Miſerics grow tegetber ml that Zech. 14. 2. _ - 'p Y ddr 
ruſalem zaken, the Houſes rifled, &c. Thus by various Imermixture of Providences, G9 rt 64 2 ef wy 1h 'y 
they would, as became bis People, repent of former Sins, amend their future Doings, —_— is PÞ7 _ a es 
s Precepts, that he might bleſs them ſo ſhould all the Good (foretold by this Prophet ) Jave crown'd them. 
bis Precepts, that he mig 5 . 14 : did take them. and 
they fai'd, ( as they did ) in thoſe Points of Duty, then all the Evil threatned ſhould (as it d1 - Ver fr th 
as Zechariah foretold, continue on them as it doth ro this Doy. This Prophecy thee contains the Revo _ Liſe 
-| arg Y 7 4 G and the Romans ; in whoſe tames the Fews, by killing the Lord of Lije, 
Filed up their Meaſure, and by whoſe Hands God punſtd them, deſtroying their Policy, raſing = 7 7 4 28 
their 1emfple, and captivating the Pevple, which lafteth to this Day. The better to repreſent all theſe a 
your UICW., take ths following SOLeme. | 


] 
L 
"L286 


C 
do f | 
a Ca 

our OC 
courage 
third P, 
let. f. at 
commur 
Name by 
rememb 
the Deſc 
Great G 
Baruch a 
oned 2 C 
Zecharia, 
moſt Jike 
Temple a 
tioned M 
the Evan 
this 15 to 
Wolphius 1 
and this 1 
dv, I deter 


with 2 Th 
W' your tat 
f The | 
the Worlc 
led within 
conſumed 
nitors, Fo! 
into Cana; 
many hunc 
notorigus £ 
3 The 
$5: LORD of 
| bo of hoſts « 
7. Of hoſts g 
! And, H 
are returned 
ty 1 have 1 
nRepent ye 
to obey it, « 
It. 0 Who 
Return, anc 
Bleſſings, W 
Wo with you 
ſhall he E- ww 
may be afſur 
Periorm as 


2 Be y 

. Mer s pr 
[ LORD of 
and from 

2 hearke 

7 You w! 
rorderfully 

and Sraff, 7 
cd crneftly, 


hap. 1. 


ZECHARIAH 


Exhoyt to preſent Repentance and Reformation, chap. 1. 2. and chap. 7.8. 


Promiſe 
and that 


Zechariah 4 Joſhua, chap. 3. 


0Al E e 
doth either a 


Threatens the 


Foretel the 


| In the Maccabees times. 4 


Zerubbabel, chap. 4. 


Preſent Bleſſings, chap. 1. 2. and chap. 8. v. 9, to 15. 


Euture Mercy, under Perſian Government, c. 8. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. 
Alexander and ihe Grecians, chap. 9. 8. 


chap. 9. 12, 13, 14, 
15. Chap. 12, 6, 


chap. 1. 21. chap. 2. 9. 


Enemies of the Jews. chap. 9. from 1. to $. 


chap. 12. 1, 2, 3,4, and 9. 


Sinful and impenitent Jews, Ch. 4. Ch. 11. 1. Ch. 14. 1, 2. 
Meſhah's coming $* 


Jews rejefing him, chap. 11. 10, 11, 12, &c. 
Avenging this Sin on the Jews, chap. 14. 1, 2, 


AP. 3. S, 9, 10. ch. 6. ch. 8. 19, 20, 21. and 
chap. 9. 9, 10. chap. 13. 7. 


Calling in the Gentiles, ch. 8. 20, 21, 22, 23. ch. 12. 10. 


God's 


and Ch. 3. 8, 9. and ch. 6. 12, 13, &Cc. 


Continued Protettion of the Church of Chriſt among the 
Gentiles, chap. 14. from ver. 3. to the end. 


All which either in dark, yet ſignificant Types or Emblems, is repreſented to us by this Prophet, or elſe in plain 


and eaſily intelligible Words. 


CHAT. 


The Prophet exhorteth Iſrael to repentance, that they might eſcape the 
judgments their fathers underwent, 1——6. The viſion of the horſes 
and their meaning, 7 — 11. At the angel's prayer, a gracious anſwer 
and comfortable promiſes are to Jeruſalem, 12 — 17, The viſion If 

« the four horns and four carpenters, and their meaning, 18 ——21. 


N the eighth months, * in the ſecond year of Dari- 
us þ, came the word of the LORD c unto-* Le- 


chariah d the ſon dd of Barachiah e, the ſon or 1d- 
do f the propher g, ſaying, 

- Cote Aturaloſer and Byl, by Heb. and anſwers to part of 
our Ofober and November, ewo Months after Haggat began to en- 
courage the Fews to build the Temple. 5 Son of Hyftaſpis, and the 
third Perſian Monarch, vid. Hag. I. I. let. 4. and again chap. I. 15. 
let. f. at large. c Here is his Warrant and Divine Call, the Lord 
communicated to him what he was to communicate to others. d His 
Name befpeaks him a remembrancer of God, or ir may ſpeak God 
remembring him and the reſt of this People. dd The Fews call'd 
the Deſcendents in right Line Sons, tho' they were Grand-ſons, or, 
Great Grand-ſons ; in this Senſe ſome ſay Zechariah is the Son of 
Baruch and the Son of Iddo. This Zechariah is not he that 1s menti- 
oned 2 Chron. 24. 20. this is too early by many Years; nor is this 
Zechariah the Facher of Fohn Baptiſt, this 1s as much too late 3 but 
moſt likely, *tis that Zechariah whom the Fews ſlew between the 
Temple and the Altar, Matth. 23. 35. & This Name is expreſly men- 
tioned Matth. 23. and his time exaRly ſutes the rime pointed at by 
the Evangeliſt. f One of this Name you have 2 Chron. 9 .29. but 
this is too old to be this in the Text, for there will be found ( as 
Wolphius in Exram notes) 450 Years diſtance berween 14d the Seer, 
and this 14d» mentioned in the Text. g Whether Zechariah, or 1d- 


do, I determine not. 


i 2 The LORD f hath been t fore diſpleaſed g with 


ne. your tathers h. _ . 

| f The Holy, the Mighty One, your God, the juſt Governour of 
the World. 2 So long provoked, that his diſpleaſure at laſt enkind- 
led within. his Breaſt, and broke out into that Flame which hath 
conſumed your Land, City, and Temple. h All that were Proge- 
nitors, Fore-fathers to the rerurn'd Captives, from their entrance 
into Canaan, bur ſpecially ſince the Apoſtacy in Feroboam's time, for 
many hundred Years your Predeceffors have provoked God by their 
notorious Sins, even to the Days of their Caprivity. 

3 Therefore i ſay & thou unto them /, Thus ſaith the 

5s: LORD of hoſts m, * Turn ye unto me 7. faith the LORD 
"of hoſts o, and I will turn unto you p, faith the LORD 
' of hoſts 9. 

7 And, Heb. þ Command and require. 1 Of the Captivity, who 
arereturned totheir own Land. m1 In my Name, by the Authori- 
ty 1 have over them as Lord of Hoſts, require they hear avd obey. 
1Repent ye of all your Sins, leave them, ſet your hearrs on my Law 
to obey it, on my Worſhip to give me it, on my Temple to re-edifie 
It. 0 Who can puniſh your Refuſal, who can prote& you 1n your 
Return, and reward-your Obedience. p With Blefſings, with all 
Bleſſings, which my Preſence brings to a repenting People, It was 
wo with you and your Fathers when I departed from them, but it 
ſnall be as well with them when I return unto them. q That you 
may be affured hereof, I promiſe it to you, and will be engaged co 
pertorm as Lord of Hoſts, as having all things at my diſpoſal. 


{ 2 be yer notas your fathers, to whom rhe for- 
. Mer s prophets have cried z, ſaying, Thus ſairh the 
' LORD of hoſts, * Turn ye now from your evil ways z, 
and from your evil doings x : but they did not hear y, 
29 hearken unto me 2, taith the LORD. 

7 You who have ſcen the Sorrows of along Captivity, who are 
rorderfully brought back , who are under the teachings of Rod 
and Saf, 's All the former Prophets, 2 Chron. 36. 15,15. # Preach- 
cd crneftly, frequently aud compaſſionately, u Now to Day, yet 


\ 


a Is 


\ 


before 'tis too late : O! turn from vitious, finful Courſes and Ways ; 
from your Atheiſm, Idolatry, Murders, Oppreſſions and Adulteries. 
x Ir 15repeated thar it might be more impreſſive upon them. The 
Prophets importunately intreated them to ceaſe from Evil, Iſz. t. 
16. and 31.6. Jer. 3. 12. Ezek. 18.30. and Hoſ. 14-1. y They did 
not, becauſe they would not, chey regarded not whar I ſaid by my 
Prophets, neither could they be perſwaded to it. 4 This obſtinate 
Diſobedience is twice togerher charged on them, to make their Sin 
appear in its greatneſs, 

5 Your tathers, where are they a? and the pro- 


phets 6, do they live for ever ? 
a But where are your diſobedient Fathers? Are they not buried 
in a ſtrange Land? Did they not die of thoſe Diſeaſes ? Were 
they not conſumed with Famine, and the Sword, as was menaced 
againſt them? b Some apply this to the falſe Prophets who pro- 
mifed Peace, hut where are they now ? But 'tis better underſtood of 
the true Prophets, who died as others; they do not,nor muſt live 
always to warn you. | 

' 6 But my words f, and my ſtatutes g which I com- 


manded þ my ſervants the prophets, did they not [| Or, 


|| take hold 7 of your fathers ? and they returned and 9rtale- 
{aid &, * Like as the LoRD of hoſts thought to do unto Spa " 
us according to our ways, and according to our doings, ' 


{o hath he dealt with us /. 

f The dreadful Menaces which I ſpake by my Prophets. ; The de- 
creed Judgments which my provoked Juſtice reſolved to execute on 
them. h Which by my Prophets, as my Heralds, I proclaimed and 
publiſhed. 7 Overtake as a purſuing Enemy overtakes and ſeizech on 
his Enemy and ſpoileth him; have not my Judgments thus raken 
hold both on your Fathers and on you ? & By this it ſhould ſeem 
thar Zechariah gave them time to conſider what anſwer to give. / It 
15 true, as God ſaid he would do, ſo he hath done againſt us, our Fa- 
thers, our Families, our Citics and Temples. God's Words have not 
failed, they died not, though our Fathers did : This may be an Ab- 
ſtra& of their Repentance. 


7 < Upon the four and twentieth day of the ele- 
venth month, which zs the month Sebar m7, in the ſe- 
cond year of Darius 7, came the word of the LORD » 
unto Zechariah, the ion of Barachiah, the ſon of Iddo 
the prophet p, faying, 

m Which anſwers to part of our January. n Vid. Haz. 1. 1. let. 
a, b. and ver, 15. let. f. o See wer. 1. let. c. p Vid. ver. t. let. d, 
e,f, &. The firſt Sermon Zechariah preach'd, was three Months be- 
fore this, and that Sermoa was Reproof, which probably had good 
effeR, as ver. 6, ler. þ, /l. 


s I ſaw g by night 7, and behold.s, a * man 7 * oh. 5. 
riding z upon a red horſe x, and he ſtood among the 13- 
myrtle-trees y that were in the bottom 2, and be- 
hind him @ were there * red horſes 6, || ſpeckled c and * Chaps, 
white d. ny - 

q In a Viſion God communicates his Word, Mind or Will to the — 
Prophet. r Either literaily, it was by Night that Zechariah had this 
Viſion,or with this it may note the obſcurity and myfteriouſneſs of the 
Viſion, for it may be emblematical, as the Myrtles and the Bottom 
are. s Mark well what 1 ſaw, as now I relate it to you. # One ina hu- 
mane ſhape, Chriſt Jeſus in form of a Man, fo he appeared to Ezeb. 

1. 26, & 4- 3-and to Daniel, ch.7. 13. «In a poſture of readineſs, 
ſpecd and reſolution to help his people,8& to appear for them in ſome 
rokens of Greatneſs and Majeity,Pſal. 45« 4. x Both the Beaft is no- 
ted, Horſe, bold, ſtrong, ſpeedy and gallant ; and the Colour is no- 
ted alſo, in the ſame Colour he appeared to Jſatah, chap. 63. ver. 1,2, 
3.and Revel.6.4. This Colour isn Symbol of his coming to avenye 
his own juſt Quarrel, and the unjuſt Dealings of his and his Peoples 
Enemies. y He poſteth himſelf in a very convenient Place to o5- 
ſerve and be ready ( as needful ) among humble, verdant, fragranr, 
pleaſant, and much valued Trees; Emblem of the tiauriſking, truir- 
ful and excellent Sainrs and Servants of God. x This Bottom or low 
Vailey in which the Myrtles grew, (probably oa ſawuc Rivers Bank) 
z Fr 


- - 
- Fw, - 
et] 
FM 


” 
: ws none tia 4 a » 
= hw =. 2 4 b . ET IS. . - - 
- - 5 Sap a < by KM : ap . " " "OI s "IM" 
kao es v 47 CS - VN - So y £3, 4s - ” _ 
- - bp» 72 wo » - - 2 o o x5 &. *: ” . 
— __ a” \ : 6 4 a ra. | —_ - 
w———< v4 x A BS __ + p Js mat LOB yoni yu - or. - FELICITY nn ” s Do . wares _ my bo i 2 > V3=% Id <3. a = LU 
4 > ab Os FAC. RS -- : MPA. et 3 - wrt _ I o ”—_ | w— a m_ b 4 . . 6 + = 
. Ts we rar - ”. 0 - Y Fd, ny s 2 ks —_— ” : Q = _—_— - an _— , . _ wo = —_ * > PIT — - - - p—m——_—_gy Wa - X 
. - do” \ 4. STAY Y TT” "IC; as . by SLE _—_ A, aq ln 4 Y Es 6.55 - oF - 3s $97 CEE . þ Y 9 > "—_—_ Ramey P : hes a i . — —_ D - —_—— ” ”_ C_— - — ” - — - uu» was . vw _ _ —_—_ - D . a. 
: Es 0.3% . , * * — SE ill bags” gh 2 6's W's, | : K-——S DO i nf { : ADAIR, ome ct en Jo —_——_— . - ha pm pa - = pe wh _ l mr ; =. wh i ae... _ = Las EVO nn” IRC AINION , 
3 . Why > > 7 - y pr y ! »< . y . ou +<—_ . , OE e3 ” ax — £4 ov Ns 1 IS Oo 6-0 . ago) wg - A - id. d- £ Cn "II" - + wa ——_ —— PRO - Xs : I w_ W 3 "2 —_—_ - ; ET wr 
, : MS. "A "oY 4 4 Y Bw ” - + Sm, - = " Ov 5 ” - a ER v- - WH «4p -- A's I 1 -- 4 _ a : 4 "_—_ £ ——_ > - — —— hy 
rare ELSE --- 4 2 on p PL IT Hey bangs ed [2s - . y - X 542; : - 4 > DS” » S d * L . \ by JOE — WK=Er 26 " _— TB roar an aw DS 4 ch rtends - _ iz W EE2> Ir—_— 2 > 
—— —_ $ qt - _ - - » 4 - * ed > 1 " - D %*. 4-5; et Ys %, 4 1242 +4 = = an = C | ea " l Ee {> <_ 4 ” GRE ds py o 2 I hd pe A bs == > # PIE Be ah - = © 7 Ws Q h h - . a - = 
- - — —_— _—_ —— Re _ " Oc od —=%.-+, pe » id ” * op non - cut; p "ad © by, 4 — ” " : "x: bs Fr at - hs *; D'S \ hn s -- v5. _, - ra on " - 
- 4 o gta ae. - Ta MF . % " pr® Gs, "de 4 cane ds by — =  _ - CES -- . $ WIT + I - $7 $a : ; . - , was +» 2 «© . us _— —_ « A RACES Yr LT + ” Ws 1d v; ” ” 9s S =” =" 
j - ” FP > 6, 6 — F-= — "IF p ek : : ; D = or - i —— y . _ : ER TESTS WINE ay” L oq — ; #4 a 7” Aa - © TEL — » . 2” was. of . Dl ” % Y on = Pl or 7 £ he "gg + ons I 2 
CLE” X Wa fr —— _ - : ? : bw 2d 04 ” _— 2 po ro 5 — - : T—_ oo a os ne ene el Os » ed _— ko. age "a _ Bs On + oiry oy w $$ , vs SR X'# - IAB capers. d 4 es i... "Coas« Abs, Lo Fon 4 . p IIS 4 ts. EO 
- *7 0 * Wn ng n y Y ap = - * _ ? _ 9. Ic —_ —_ ——_— N w — Vs 4 a 4 ot o_- _ .. b 41 1s + wag IT — ” Ce ee os nn —_ —_—_— _—_— _ whey od : nr ac - at « £ » ch $f I 4 PEER & 3: - - p 4. "wt ki . J « - a _ wc. os AS 
> a M -ol » AI n Þ. . FI _ IT 7 =. _.. > hn : , . k x; pn it . _— ot oy a _— - _ . 1] _ —_— ————_ pw - If I” "C6 —_—— _- <, = _ : : Ae: 94. age) . CIA > 42 : < >" Ek 
- ; : _ 2 = , q Me > ."W : EET p - Pe Z 04 «\ I = -_ - . D 2 : Ry o - —_ © —— 1 i : ie — 3 WVSO — way 3 _ 4 Lb, _ - ; l wo JL Wound go —_—_ Ia on Sdn. 3s —_—_ 
®. - s v2 = y { —_ Co 4 4 *.> —_ , by - w x - - 1 » b. -- _ % _ . - ad —_ by <—_> » bt — my ©” "20% _ . _ 
Ro yon > "a Ss of oj 14s. * LE Ly f , 4A | 9 —_ - w_—— 4 > J \ v Pt - rv bu TE EIW nw, « aWXY Ts = wn - at  — > _—— _- $- oy - Fi 3 7 f ” - © IST. "a TS" C . 
- 4 Z E' 7-"PE _ ys p. - g it - + py ” Foes m_ : "BE & 2» 2 T 5 —_— 5 _ - 4 - py _ ry. ww _— _ ar rn 2% v BT _ 2 —_ - 1 Me a [; a; * ou: 
X : Fares a - - . 4% 2 7 x ', = : 00 S . . Sealy ” _ on wy 4 - = - ” 454 4 X P__ % Y =_ —_ - _- " ſo 2 - x > A 
__— _ EBIT! 4 "TI g a _—_ 4 4 5-- w— - 1c A+ « I <4  —3>* 2x 2 CT ID Em. I > an OOIIN" 4 " 7 Se —_ = LS A = _ Bc - —_— - a>. > +a PS 
Þ; - wt - A <0 f . — Y I es - . C = Ab - f \ » 4 I. \ 3 » 3 4% - E . - a ot. =. - _ __ - —_ . > 
- - <4 . " "8 T. 4 NE a FF... af a, 2 . LL . I - - yn . <1 - 77 ot, "CP & < n—— <7 —s = v6 y % 
_ - 5 y— _-_—_ . - _ —_— [ TACT a 4 - *- d t© 3 bod 6 l _* - $ © 
= : fo Cong k -, " . - 1 c - 4 
» " a Y ”—O— —_— _ a - - % _ wh : 0 
= D wo * Bo pu INES R f ky od Y OI 
. w "I - , 3 +. : . monk 
q b "©, 


a x 
y rr OI 
I - -—_ Pye 
= = s 

© we 


Chap 
; ap. I. 
ZECHA 
RIAH 


Chap. 


J5 an Em! 
—_— 
A verda e Church | 
neg 4 - =_ Rn : low, mourni 
of the ED or bs Wi as ce ark ops | eſa aMiRted S 
vreſt ; b LOT n ants, arc . a Captai , Or as Spice tate; then | 
ded, and _—O $yae: t without Ine ——_ In the = 'roiedina 14 S 
t, Red I are A chdoche, tl yo es 6 ON bir ; the reſt, unto o 7 the ; 
Sb enotin ngels,v he orſes 5,thougl im. b ) me. C 1nzel 
>a by Wars g probably —_ nw = w + ha they are _ hoſts r 4 Cry th ou o that c 
when 4 hers iy bes, on FP eithe ition of 5 ieſe Horſes is ni.e great jeal ous s fo ; Thus fai with m 
juceeſirely by Ars weuigy —_— her when Go po Horſes it | tie ps uſa 4 cr" rag] wa Log 
Loa. 1 y Wal nlan, P ar On A is Chu uniſherh [72 Roping en too athoe h 7,and D | ha 
Gon and black P- 14. Cc ods Wo ctan, Or R the Tim s Ene- | P2 thou "os e Lord Cl 1enfion the S 10n-; « 
plexi , as fo A mi rk, hi man 1Es ſt Dor, capt areſt ; Zhrift ,and on and 4, Ot, 
n on, me xt C is ſt Em paſt, | ptive, 1 3 pre: .pÞV om a "2 
_ all light pot all pr Luck; C olour, rhe: wh <mrr yy Jid ill do pris import by Co id. v. 1 uſt be  ſweres ; "7 
ceks, f tow pry the all uyproſ Aﬀai of white, but now , promi abliſh wha Ms od =o ca 
dos com the s did th Proph nprol irs of di ite, | very hi am j uſed t what G God IMC, a uhli h 
> af rs tat e = def ſperous 3 iffe ry h jealo o do at Go \ my Go nd 2liſh ut 
9 The , + 0 6g m, tothe Meſ : axpunyy"fons 4 nor gas Ap 6-0 legs 8 ts, and God, 
Avd i hen e ſai TE py are the Chu 1 þ an Pr atk --908 all —_ Vette - Oporeſſ tor my P © 15 cen Jealous Matter the 
dc TNE A f. with it ich tho ming. 4 ow 6 e D\ le ſtood ; ors. eople eigh agai 7 
ew that y lord in,ſoR nfinitel 1em, 1 of 7 e Gate ity c of Indic to ; t 
e th tal _ eV. y 1 , 15 gre acob. sof Zi alle Phy n 
Chrift the Lot he —_ —_ by = aa theſe þ 2! n5 And 1 and piricth a wonder has T_T ahich1! my Name by 
oor Lord cena = &, 1a1d u > þ 2 [cath Ns Hs People. ag ned gry oved mor ro d 
Ave Viſions of Hoſts, 3 pg nto me, I tle FIR pat / am very i he Zeal $0 gs :nfo 
that _— that on 7 Chriſt t hart 1s LETT , fic; l pleaſed 4 at caſe ore difpl a God "= quir 
. m_ 4 Hs _ ; boat of —_ a", This wa , _ e. j, and th 2 : for pleaſed 5 10 ſhou 
=_ þ -= the ——_— _—_ che SI ſhe he Lordof Hoſl ey c helped - Ms _ PX Miſe 
© ANLVVETeC an t e al tt t r : at s, G u , x 
ind arh 1ent 7 a1d, Theſe _—_— - wa ae | min emſelves __ gc” feelit; 7 Exceedi the af: 44 blem 
FS. Vid. ver. 8 to walk to 91 14 : the - gs rtle the oath O cople : bw _ my dſpealure angry fri 
. orlem 4 . let an tr 6 w om Wy a A er 5 FA J 0 Iſrael i elr ſtr re 15 and ' < 
niſters of en. n A ,h,n,- r0 thro the | wi ttempted was litt! n compari * Tee ength, ſi grown will ſhall 
> God i f the Div) Periphratis I Gave ugh o th Mol to { to deſtr e, Pſal. 1 riſen withihe & 4 ED caſt « 
CD <f ine Providence f angels anſiver to. wh s fd Koundrs kl, ay Sn aha B h che Anger 1 $ ; ke _ 
need th of the W 1e man the G 0 are SE at T ask did ' could d ill, &c ed to bl bur c cathe cara - od* 
Pp The th God wi orld : M ner of Me cvernmen rvants and ed. er 3 eget=ng" provok It is an ood; 1 COT, 6" Babolat, ver, 1 
Theſe mpires v will emp! en muſt en to ſpe = of the W Mi- MiRion "at I permi eme n Anthropo ' O30. plies, 
were vhich hi ploy An Empl ak of hi orld of Iſr rmitted t! 1Ore aga! pathet to bi k 
tery of e partly b 11s Chu gels, th oy othe is managi . 16 Th ael: 1v tor 4 gainſt th 4, elt ind vu 2 
beer an ham on _— is becauſe They ned bur | th A rt was more'thay 
orld vants ; ide of ere eith e need e the ] g to Jerul: ej th prune, bur tey di hole 6 th Th 
- pony that ti and Miniſt thele Ecoperl ator a, builr i erul; = itch thi RAN cir own fin eVi 
arth : m p'd or in) m no itn 1 lem wi aith ey ſtruc nd ad own fi in C 
well Sm —_ ime in mat ers, and perors r injur'd t | ſh ir +. ſai wit] the L ack at ded x Ins an « 
wn amo the Scr) ters of G partly 5, partly by th oF all be {tret aith th 1 IMETCIE ORD the Root, the ned 
ſto nd th though etime y tho Orance AfMiRi auſe th tor D of yh mr 
od 1 ey 7 1 there be 1 s uſeth ught to of 1Fcion e En th u of h oulſe . etur- 
ked monyg tl n{wered e.lome | Phraſes be the was de to the Ao, hath pon Jer oſts / z ſhall 
7 to: 6 Wm ed the mpropri 5, uſed Pe parted afflicted. *ti fo b afolem.. * and» 4; he 
Geart and f yrtle-trees angel priety in te) hes ages tage eo pytgmonny . a line 
earth {; ro throu &S HL. 21 of the LO them. ence ſh ndled; b withdr ime to ſl: y and 3 F 
r The litrerh {til gh the os nd ſaid. W RDs nemlion all reſtcai ut now [ awn my P ave and ma 
s Or ra miniſteria! : l y and i earth z. : , We hav that | inde » abundan in the Vi will retu reſence relieve ly adde; 
eucand recon brhlangel , Genificd reſt 1 ag behold; wal-|ve Fry The Jen promiſed er — thus cruelly Ks hen : 
tions vat Acc ount wh ,he unc 1e Hor 2 iſed mpedi God es now Innoc mz m } pard t 
urns = many = corre air cn fs. A. tall be Excellency ſhall be c þ Wit Beauty 
elf Lo chiefly th alk'd y part; $ ry who ſeyr en. | © now t] his confi 9.0 wi gages of omf 
elt Lord y th the rt; ſo i" ES þ th e ſtre Big ents vill ved; Zacob orted 2 | 
TOTC \ of all th rovgh t! ength a we ha en wh em | ſes] tched © mport | s the P rota on 3, what » k Sh U 
++ hoop beſecch e Earth :1C Baby/ & nd bre ve lea _ would . In Fer ut,to n 1ercof romiſe n this Glor all ey nto 1 
wy th - xD) ontſh E adth of rch'd al with 2ruſalen rk out V mTl ,and Houſ y Iha h 
Diffe s enced nee, O Lord Tis w mpi of the [| Na- Skill 1,that ut Wal ve Thad eſtabliſh > of ant re the br 
to tak es,and ſh oil, or w hats iS "Sa hs oy of Iþ rt; and may be b ates, Pal 212108 420 aye] Fai Flti 
the hope; Eaſl eathed th  weather'd th and c < ſeen, and the it| 17 Cr __ Pn Ap Aces, St yaY Line ſh before 
rt of * Either 1 \ 1-1 mee |= 166g My cit y yet 77 We the — to be © 
xpreſs theſe $ ither tl ids ar orm, C this = CIt1CS , Tayi | 1ore tl eauty , and Ho a e 0! 
Quiet i aro ie fame thir full of P compoſe y As abroad 0 thi ying, Th ie Gl and Strengh terogl 
; : The Þ ard Qu! » or to CO thing Peac ed thei + q,a ough : us ſai ory of ength Qu! » 
py of rar the Tate avi i hee ome pecoety KU r tally = Sogn ple t 
an Gd en a t] mpir one's s ch thei , or to [ given . s Co ES a 21 et CO Et b lS 1creaft 
AJ . Te 4 o whi Mind ID out P e of tohi mmiſſ 4 em. omfo (57 {f : c 
* not h: VU L an ich a ſatis ward | - God m,to rai ion is e tt 7 pread 
Dan © NaVE OR gel of t thar ti isfied ; ord kc raif is eith 10 FRG. 
. $6.2. d; 1Ve Me D ot the ea this | | , and Feruſl, e the Hope er en! ns.and. 3A 
10. 27 > ETCY 'E n of h LO » e ruied is | {arge as m1 alem OPEC nidr 2 nd 
TT Pe on | olts 4 RD all. | ſend wack il 7, and th wh iv. ana went 
three gainſt whi erulale , ho ba . | ſend fo . pTh build e Cities abliſht more | [at : j 
COTC A 11ch thc 2905508 f w lon nſwered incr rth Col rough : , beautifi CS of 7 he Wa: all Inf [ him 
avben 6 nd te 10ulhaſt hz and 0 g wil creaſe of onies, 3 ncreate of e,cnr! udah ith of th ry- C4 
perity of ! urveyi She ind] Cit! 10u |r oloni thand ant ne: ainilies ; rtifie ine,faith kad c 
the Ch, of the Hea eying An s 12nati ES of The! CS, , Catt 101 T es a::d , defe oat the ſo 1 
atlon Ju-]* r God q >wa el, be a! owns Perſl, nd.a tle- 
Frl Ch urch, 4d ny b EP had m * 4 *+ th Type VERY s Zi rm as B able to and 'S oT Ons l bl nd en- trees 
"Hg riit ſpeaks cad of th he Angel ade their R ele ſhall be - the 05 Z1on his Ch: ees, and build Mp Fo OY ſmall perhaps 1 
"= whit his atflicte his Father Church. the Lord eport of | 14-4 leſt in i _— — fend 0 pa. pon. 
S 7 > ed Ch 1er, ſpe: SPY . rd Chri the . '$. all my ſelf. at 25 he 2 wit C ut thei s, andſt bec l 
the "LA 1 Soul; urch, peaks as rays a iſt, Medi Pro- 18 this an 7, and be re joined omfort Ir you ock A ame h 
> me os Feb #e Fit is the Exod #009: 99 woe b q 1 NH DES ng ones, ngels, 
—— ls ne þ . oft the E:: 10 Ex ch aft tercedi ehold ; hen : my ch gtoo Zion; ra C| 
rain ns under the nging f aqui xpoſtulati eted wi ing tO u lif uſing 1 thers, mac the Ki rch, 4 Ar 
——_— alt: or M iry of adi ation with TA , tour h tlu X git,and ,much li Kingd m 
ct wh "Ih of rhe Pro ar, Rev. 6 ercy: $9 a diſc chat the fter I OIns 5 Pm dwelli lik g4om "an. 14 
> rebuildi ' » Os Daw onte well and r . had ſe a. ine e elling 1 e that Ho © p] a 
or. at *h; rebuildin miles to be IO. f7 avid. P ded Mi be- | z eceived een th yes ginit de with 
ENDED Te g, Peace re-edifi eruſalen ſal. 1 ind.but (li He w: Commi zoſe thi x, and : out 
NC. Ga » Jer. and ified em, t ay ut | lif as ſo miſfio; ings id 1a therej 
ir way juſt and They He ena 2 and | che En Soy Mon copublh al tle goo w 3, an oO 
;ath f , and 1s ſo ſt ive felt ha u hait s Citi n- | fo mes - yCl , that h the comf, 9s Ah” 
fix'd f nocaked 1 (o ftill b elt thin aptcrs dy) OLo 1CS ro00 r thei of the early ec look” g00d N ] ortabl "un ſ 
d for the C 2ainft , but it 1 © Anper and E rd, , r Numb Jews 5 certain] d on ews [ le words to that | 
EI mpey: reds Pt perl wk yo Sy 3 , ſpoken | 1x1.” hay a ed aps nope had heard. mba 
ſeif bs oe Capt iwity is t cep of o be pe hot Dj » and W And I : all trengtl diftin& 4 elſe ; eard. do. 0 
Bs wity ; ully c chy P rpetu iſple 37 ha {aid parts of 1, Fie ly ; nowh and fi 
) ! "0 be; h noe ;|ho theſc to t] orld eſs and Pri Jlems of lain 1 
Fecont mple was or tne ſet ew Merc the ſeventi The T Ange Ins c 1C1C b? 1C an . d Prid " ] In R1 
Dntas WI vurnt time 1 y, bui] enticth erm r | ru: which ? And gel th e; and late and 
and fo; ith man , and 7, is COM 11d $20 Year pre- alem hay he anl1i at t It ſh 
Spore y of th Gefatom fack: 4 bo wa oftheir | v1. e ſeatt n{were alked wi Hall be 
From wich tore by Fee wer car) erg a CR RR TT cred Judah et ok _ 
S. ond of any we ried canti 80 Ye: "4&7 rang 1e beſt s forl » Ur are th Pr n 
13 A Dari Vere Carri aptive i ears f1 e ,which Teacl nformati acl e - elenc 
nd 15 Arc arried wi e 1Nt9 INCC rs, Stat I ſee 1CF. matio 2 and fo ©, 
- fy - a dgutripd ce Exch Jt indrofled my ce and know tobe af the Ange n 's Fo 
rds 2. wi ) anſ vitae os a Po « « : his » 6G has , from Chri 19, W ol 
h G . 9 ith 0 wered ;ght 0 ans: Cc prob: Þ e,fore ich hav $,and fo mean! hriſt 9, I all 
EE or: good / words wh a; | week + tos orcly bruſed re from al pln RG of te in LE 
and mer —_— 7 Cheri ] an : . 12 n _ g »ft7 e Moabi t an puſh' o oOW- 
the i = p Yael, po 6 th IE _ — Abe na thys ; on ow a rage Sia Arie we *% broken wr 
47 iries Zech, ing the Mi o had firſt ared An 91 | Or theR of Fud þ e Fews eſt the 0m /-ogy k rians.and zf eſe fo m y 
WOrGs Min! ari , | ah. . _ . and Babylon uch 
2Dport niniſter'd Py das þ and m talked Ogeſs Lord © elicks of If e The a The Uiſtines : the Sou ylont- great a 
ed Delivera omfort ok EE oodte of i by Sgns and Vs , 20 And Jrael, be hog es = Arars Ede- nk, 
—_ anFy is ES 0 Fon ers Þ. the LOR hg engrtag OI —— te ſealed; 
ptiyes;z Th ne. ti; wh ew of Davi neſer 2 uld 
53 the wo « Eyes " great G o before 1 ed g mc _ : LW: 6.1 
rds|c s to ſee od. is the A ne four San Al 
arpe ,and 0d ' 4 Both noel 2 Carpe Cou In 
nters or $ Icern 1 propof, » 3 fe Chri It- th ntries : 
Smiths t bK ed the thi \riſt; he i emſelyes 
| :, as the nown b thing ; heis thee! 7M ves 
Hebr y their ( ro be eterral | yPr 
rew cir G: ſeen eſe 
wp bears it ard Soy Arg gave * 6U} 
k gols fo he and of 
VOU 2hr [ 
(O) 
21 Then the LOR 
4 Si 
22d Bl 
Bleffin 


Vc 


x'Y, II. 
| hap Then ; faid I #, What come theſe to do / ? And 
*” ſake, ſaying, Theſe 7 are the horns which have 

he #7 Fm Judah, ſo that no man did lift up his head o : 
Saas ſe p are come to fray them 9, to caſt out the 
_ - of the Gentiles s, which lift up zherr horn 7 over 


” Tudah to ſcatter 1t x. 

the land wn J uld propoſe the Queſtion, immediately upon ſight 

7 So - enters. k Zechariah. I He ſaw they were Men,enquires 
of the _ were, but what was their Buſineſs and Deſign ; per- 
not _— for us to reſt alſo in the knowledge of what they are 
haps 'tis 4 enquire no farther who they were. The Lord Chriſt 
co doy ry he Prophet. n Chriſt doth, in order to ſarisfie the En- 
Sfores: pi int to the four Horns, of which ver. 18, 19. as if he 
quify. all" Look you, there are four Horns which have done 


s Heathen round about Fudea. # Have employ'd 
Strength againſt. # The whole Kingdom of Fudah, 
x To drive them out of God's Inheritance. See 


caſt out eaſily. 
their Arms and 
God's People. 


| 
Yer I 9. let, as 


CHAF. IL 


"n of meaſuring Feriſalem, ſheweth God's care of it, 1 —5. Zion 
yen is nine fe to repair home : her enemies deſtrufion threat- 


ned, 6—9. Apromiſe of God's preſence in the midſt of her, 1r0—13. 


2 lift up mine eyes again b. and looked c, and behold 
J 2 man d with a meaturing-line in his hand e, 

a Zechariah, b This is t!e chird Emblem, or Viſion he had ſeen. 
c Very diligently, and integtly. d Ore in form of a Man ; ſome 
ſay *rwas Chriſt, others ſay a Type of Nehemiah z it was an Emblem 
of ſome Maſter-builder to be ſure, and *'tis probable the Prophet 
took him for no more than a Man. e He appear'd ready and pre- 
pard to lay out the Plarform of Feruſalem for Extent, Form and 


Beauty. | 

2 Then ſaid T, Whither goeſt thou f * And he faid 
\ unto me, To * meaſure g Jeruſalem þ, to ice what 7zs 
*” the breadth thereof, and what zs the length thereof. 


It is evident, the Prophet did not in ſo bold a manner enquire 
Wb which may poſſibly be for that he apprehended this Man 


Z ECHARIAH, 


Men that need be awakned. b Set upon your Journey for your 
own Country and City, come out from your captive Priſons. c Make 
all the haſte you poffibly can, and flee as Men do who are purſued 
wich danger z as Men thar are earneſtly bent to get out of harms way, 
as the Man-ſlayer to the City of Refuge : Heb. hath only And flee, but 
our Tranſlators have by that gueſſed at what might ll up the Ex- 
preſſion, and read Come forth, &c, d Babylon, which lay North to 
Canaan. e As I executed my Threats in ſcattering you, ſo ] will 
perform my Promiſe,ard gather you from all Quarters ofthe World 4 
ariſe, come away therefore. Ma | 

7 Deliver f thy ſelf, O Zion g, that dwelleth þ with 
the daughter of Babylon z. 

f The Proclamarion for free rerurn is publiſhed, up then and be 
gone.. g O ye People who ſhould dwell in Sion, ye Daughters cf 
Ston. þ Keepeſt in Babylon when thou mighteſt go to feruſalem. 


& Some refer this to what went before, as a Reaſon why the Jews 
ſhould return, for God hath commanded it : I think 'tis an Encon- 
ragement to the Fews to return, becauſe God had promiſed to make 
them a Glory, and now aſſures them that he will take a very parti- 
cular Care of them ; therefore ſends his Son as a Judge, or Vindex, 
againft the Nations that had ſpoiled the Jews, or God ſends his Son 
to them to inform them thar 'tis their tntereſt to unite with the 
Fews, and become the People of God, and be Partakers of the Glory 
and Satety of God's 1/rael, However, to let them underſtand thar 
"twill be dangerous to do Violence to [ael, as it would be dangerons 
ro any one to violate what is moſt dear to him thar can deſtroy the 
Offender ; to tell them Iſrael is the Apple of God's Eye. 


9 For behold, I will ſhake /mine hand »- upon them x7, 
and they o ſhall be a ſpoil p to their ſervants 9 - and 


me 2. 

/ Or lift up. m My Power and Strength. = Apainſt the Nation 
*and Kingdom that doth Violence to the People, who are my Glory, 
and I am theirs, ſaith the Lord. o Thoſe People who comply not with 
him whom God ſendeth. p Shall be overthrown and ſpoiled, and be- 
come a Prey. 4 The Fews who were firſt.ſpoiled by, and then made 
Servants to the Nations who conquered, captivated, and kard ly uſed 
the Fews z and indecd this fulfilled in Efther's days, and in the 24.c:- 
cabees times. r Either Jews, or Heathen, or both. s Be convinced and 
own it. # The great and faithful God, # hath commiffioned Chriſt 


* ye 7 ſhall know s that the LORD of hoſts z hath ſent * 


Chap. 11. 


ſhoul ſo und c had either Strength | 7 Perhaps this intimates that which kept many Jews in Babjlan, wi L 

Ou - o Kept them ſo under, none had e1 reng Pp y Jews 1n Babylon, Wives 

—_—_ m- up he head 3 and thus theſe Horns proudly and | Or pag] om $ | f 

or CS coy'd my Pcople- _Þ Theſe Carpenters or Smirhsare Em- For &# thus faith the LORD of hoſts, After the (Ot 

blems of thoſe Inſtruments wo will ___ - — "OM _ glory hath he ſent me unto the nations which ſpoiled . q 
. four Carpenters to brea » q 10 . at * ; 7 Ly -"Deut.22, 

froyers : brit; rheſe Kingdoms fignified by Horns, rg. wh he that * toucketh you, toucheth the apple of 16. PR. 

_— their Courage. 7 Then their Authority and Power ſhall be JC. 17, 2, 


 LI-0613% 4 


n | to inform them who are to make their choice what to do herein. , TER 
Hieroglyphick 3 but underſtanding wit 1t t , - - de es agg & 54-1. | 
_ _ where the Platform was to be laid. g To take the ex- for lo, 1 come =_'Y and I * will dwell 2 in the midft of Z-ph.3.14« 


at Dimenſions of it, that it may anſwer God's Promiſe, and be ca- thee, ſaith the LOR D. ; *L ev.26.12 
pable to receive its Inhabitants. + The City which was to be builc | x Now Chriſt calls them to reJoyce in the Goodneſs ſhewed to them, EZ- 37-27» 
kereafter, but firſt the Temple is to be built, and to ſing forth the Praiſes of him who ſhewed it. y The whole Joh. 1.14. 


yt: Nation of the Jews, the peculiar, redeemed, and reſtored People of 2Cor.$.16; p 
3 And behold, the angel that talked z with me, 


'went forth 4, and another angel / went out to meer 


him 7. | | : 

; The great and glorious Angel, 7. e. Chriſt Jeſus himſelf, which 
had ſo long talked with Zechariah. k From the midft of the Myr- 
tle-trees, where he was firſt ſeen z whither he is going 1s not ſaid 


God : They that had been in-great and long Captivity. x To exe- 
cute Judgments on thine Adverfaries, ro compleat thy Deliverance 
and Salvation : I cone as foretold and promiſed, in the Diſpenſari- 


| ons of Providence among the Nations, in the Performance 07 Y7o- 


miſes to you my People. a Pitch my Tabernacle, nay build my Ha- 
bitation and Houſe, and reſide in it; give you my Ordioaaces, my 


perhaps to ſtand by, dire, and encourage the Perſon that was going 
tomeaſure Fernſalem. 1 A created Angel, or a Miniſterial Angel, as 
became his Office; offers his Service to Chriſt. 1m Who is Lord of 


IS, . 
_ And ſaid 7: unto him. Run o, ſpeak to this young 


man, ſaying, Jeruſalem p ſhall be inhabited g a# towns 7 
without walls, for the multitude of men and cattel s 


therein. HE: 

nOr, And he ſaid : Or as the French, ( lequel 1ui dit ) which ſaid un- 
to bim; ſo'tis plain, that the Angel which noiv was going forth,ſpake 
to that Angel which came to meet him, or gave him Orders what 
todo. o Since you come ſo ſeaſonably, haſten with all Diligence, 
and from me tell that young Man Zechariah. p Which hath ſo long 
hin in Rubbiſh, which 1 once delighted in, which now ſeems deſo- 
lte and hopeleſs. q Filled with Inhabitants. r The Suburbs of 
it ſhall be as Towns unwalled for greatneſs of Extent, and for Safe- 
ty, and Freedom from Enemies and Danger 3 their own Multitudes 
of Men ſhall be ſome Safeguard to them: And they ſhall have my 
Preſence, a better Safeguard.  s Brought thither tor ſacred Utes, 
for Sacrifices, 


5 For z I, faith the LORD x, will be unto her a 
19. wall of fire x round about y, and * will be the glory 2 
In the midſt of her. 


| t What was promiſed or foretold in the former Verſe, is ratified 
in this by an account how it ſhould be performed. # That a thing 
ſo much above the hope of a preſent dejeted People, ſo much too 
Ereat for ſo weak, and ſo few a People, might be believed and ex- 
pefted, God engageth he will perform the Word. x Which cannot 
be ſcaled ; it wou!d conſume them that attempt irz nor undermined, 
none could come ſo near it : Such a Wall as once was Eliſha's Guard, 
2 King. 6.16, 17 Verſes; to which this place may poſſibly refer: Or 
tisan Allufion to the Manner of Shepherds and Travellers 1n thoſe 
Countries full of wild Beaſts, to make Fires in the Night to ſecure 
themſelves. y No part ſhall be unguarded, or open to the Enemy. 
{ My Preſence and Favour ſhall make her glorious, Iſa. 4- 5, 6» 

zo, 6 © Ho, ho a, come forth b, and * flee c from the 
q lard of the north 2, faith the LORD: for I have ſpread 
i. YOu abroad as the four winds of the heavens e, faith 
;, ihe LORD. 


Bicffing, and my Preſence : This was fulfilled in part preſertly, and 


ſpel-Church. 
11 And many b nations ſhall be joined to the LORD c 
in that day d, and ſhall be my people e : and I will 
dwell in the mitt of thee f, and thou ſhalt know g that 
the LORD of hoſts þ hath ſent me 7 unto thee 4: 

| b Andzreat, Heb. implieth both Multitudes, and Greatacf; of 15 
tions ; or Heathen, and Gentiles, as rhe Word beareth. c Bucumes 
Profelytes, enquire for, adhere to, and worſhip the God of 1-3-1, 
d When God ſhall lift up his Hand for his People againſt their inc- 
m'es, as Ether 8.17. wher: Chriſt ſhall he come 1a the Fleſh, and ſha!l 
take down the Partition-Wall. e Covenant- People, to love, tear, wor- 
ſhip, and obey Chriſt. f See v. Io. let. a. g See v. 9.let.s, h The 
Sovereign Law-giver, and Almighty Ruler of Heaven an Earth. 7 The 
Meſſiah, and Zechariah his Servant. k Jew and Gentile. 

12. And the LORD / ſhall inherit 22 Judah 7 his por- 


again 79. 

[ Jew the God of Abraham, and of his Seed, who had caſt cf 
Zudah, and ſeem'd to quit his Claim in his ancient Inheritance, by a 
Difſeiſm of 70 Years. m Claim, recover, poſſeſs and delight, as a 
Man doth in his paternal Inheritance. n All his Iſrael; this Tribe 
mentioned, but all the reſt included. o His Treaſure and peculiar 
Pcople 3 his Lot and Part. p Upon, Heb. holy, not by any inherent 
Holineſs, but holy and ſele&ed,and fer apart for a holy People conte- 
crated to God. q The Lord will as of old chufe Feryſalem for his 
Seat. 


for he is raiſed up z out of F his holy habitation ; 


theſe Promiſes are too gond, too great : But 1nfilence reverence and 7 
adore God in all his Excellencies and Ways; wait,and expet the ac- 
compliſhment of all, by him who never utters more than he can ar. 4 
will do for his People. s Both Jew and Gentile; you are weak,fhorr- 
ſighted, and worthleſs ; you are Fleſh, be ſilent and wait. t The wiſe, 
mighty, gracious, and faithful One 3 who never ſuffered a werd of 
his to fall unfulfilled, nor will let any of theſe Promiſes tofail. uy He 
ſpeaks to our Capacity z God is ſaid to be raiſed in ailafl 2Dn to Men 
who get up, or riſe up, and ſet about what they will do; fo hece 
God is on this Work already. x Either Heaven, or his Temp's. 


a Since Jeruſalem ſhall be ſafe, rich, and glorious by the Preſence | 
and Bleffings of her God, the Prophet calls to the fleepy Jews, 2s 
Vol. 11, 


Fe] CHAP. 


ſo through near 500 Years, till Chriſt cane, and ever fiance t9 his Go- 


linejs:; 


tion o.in the holy land p, and ſhall * chooſe Jeruſalem *ch, 3.15: 


13 *Befilent 7, Oall fleſh s, before the LORD 7 - *Zeoh. 1.7; 
+ Heh. the 


gs - 1 habitation 
- r Murmur not, you that love not Zion; diſpute not, you that think 'f his ba: 


- . Fa, "FI 
ard - TOS 
-, As S. X - - SA 
f * as er es NR wy - —t& 2 * Ip 
Frng oh "Uh — . YE "+ Ib 
We ns - $0 "owe. M wa = f 2 
, 4 Y AY LOTS na w_F-.s no "3x y by - 
noms 4 2-5 P__ . SIS aa : . — - 0 
- . - C : —- 
_— - - 
- - - m" 


—_ 
_ 
” " 


A 44 
uf _ 106 
= A 
2 - 
Xx _ 


ed 


_- 


- — 4” 
SCC - 
», ” 


Chap. I. ZECHARIANHN Chap, 
Fl 35 an Emblem of the Church in a low, mourning, aflifted State; then | 14 90 7 the angel o that communed with me Þ, aid 


*tis moſt verdant and fragrant, as theſe Trees, or as Spices bruiſed ina | ynto me. Cry thou 9, ſaying, Thus ſaith the LOR D of 


as be ;aptain, 1 ; the reſt . : | \ 1 
Mortar. @ Chriſt was, as beſeems a Captain, 1n the head; t > [hoſts 7. * 1 am fealous « for Jeruſalem z:and for 75... * 
as his Souldicrs or Servants, are behind attending on him. b Horſes 7 ) l 7 or Z.jon { Od, 


_ . ith : 1t | IC x. 
of the ſame Colour,not without their Riders,though they are not ex- with a great jealouti 


: inten- j, ©. he Father had keard the Son and anſw ; 
: 'tis a Synechdoche, Horſes and Horſemen are both inten-} 7 7. When t1 | ered him - bu 
== eſs es Abects.ver. zo] now the Colour of theſe Horſes is, | £1515 ſpoken to our Ap Rn ſo muſt be underſtood. 0 Of ho 
1. Red, denoting probably the bloody Condition of States and King: the Covenant, the Lord Chriſt. þ Kr _—_ k: 9 Now publiſh he 
doms by Wars one againit another, eithcr when God puniſherh his what thou heareſt; preach oy _— wn Irom me, and afſure my; t , 
Church, or when he avengeth himlelf and his Church on his Ene- | PT, captive, impoverlih's —_ a pans 6; Fee and her God, 
mies and hers, which will appear on a ſurvey of the Times paſt, | will do good for her. r —_ what God, 4 ot Hoſts, and Father of t 
when Aſſyrian, Babylonian, Perſian, Grecian, or Roman Empires, did of his People, promiſed to do or them. s I have been jealous againſt, 
ſucceſſively by Wars do God's Work, his ſtrange Work, 0c. I/a. | Þut "high d one Sons | oa —koby rp, rv an _ 
69: poply hes. th. A mixt Colour, made up parrly of white, very high degree of Compathon tor my Pic, and OT Indignation 
mg Ro Vlack A bot an Emblem of Afﬀairs of different a her 1 ome _ Cppreiioe 5 ONO gone W my Name, 

- - 1 e ſtood ;, tho on, which I | 

| Il proſperous, nor all unproſperous ; not all dark, | # vnere my temp! 3 5 oved more | 

ER - my ga ny laghet Ea q he Day nor | than all the Dwellings of Facob. x That Zeal 1 bear, and now will ſhou 
Night : Such Times did the Fews know, during the 70 Prophetick ſhew for them, is great to a wonder 3 1t 15 the Zeal of a Gd who Miſc 
Weeks, from the beginning of them, to the Meſſtah's coming. d An infinitely loves and piticth his People. putt 
Emblem of the beſt Days and Stare the Church thould be in,ſfo Rev. 15 And I y am very ſore diſpleaſed Z with the crue 
19. Il, I4. and the Empire to with it. heathen #hat are at eale a : for I was bur Pl lit- "Inv troy 


9 Then e faid I f, O my lord g, what are thele Þ&[ 1. 4:-11fked b, and they c helped forward 4 ſtrike 
Avd the angcl i that talked with ine, ſaid unto me, I | p:g: i by Jy P the af: | 


will ſhew thee what theſe be. . ; y TheLordof Hofts, God of Iſrael. x Exceedingly algry,and will | w_ 
e So ſoon as he had ſeen and obſerved. f Zechariah. g This was | ſthew it that they may ſee and feel itz my diſpleaſure is grown up to 
Chriſt the Lord of Hoſts. þ Whar is the meaning ot theſe Appea- | the higheſt againſt them. @ Securein their ſtrength, ſing a Requiem 
rances or Viſions ? 7 Chriſt, the Angel of the Covenant; fol take | ,, themſelves, and trouble to Iſrael : See v, 11, let. y, z b Wit wer, 1 
this Angel that promiſeth to inform the Prophet to be, the ſame | qjne own People 3 7. e. in compariſon with the Anger I dear againſt 
that appears as 2 Man on the red Horſe among the Myrtles. the Heather, 'twas little, Pſal. 137. tot. c The Heathen, Babyloniang 
Io And the man that ſtood among the myrtle- d Attempted to deſtroy whom I would bur corre, Iz. to. & I4. I 
trees + an{wered / and {a1d. Theſe 2 are they whom the | whiprt to ſmart, you wounded to blood ; I did wound to bind up, you 


. | "i did wound to kill, gc. It is an Anthropopatheia. eIt was more t} 
LORD hath ſent » to walk to and fro through 0 the they could do to provoke me niore againſt chem than their own = m 
earth . did; but what I permitted tor a while, they did, and added x0 the 


þ Vid. ver. 8. let. ft, u, x,y. I Gave anſwer to what I asked. | af:Rion of Iſrael : 1 would prune, but they ſtruck at the Root, 
1 Horſemen. n A Periphrafis of Angels, who are Servants and Mi- 16 Therefore f thus ſaith the LOR D: I am retyr- 


iſters of the Divine Providence in the Gevernment of the World. . y" . : 
EGod is pleas'd after the manner of Men to ſpeak of his managing ned g to Jeruſalem with mercies Þ : my houſe 7 ſhall hs 


the Aﬀairs of the World : Men muſt employ others, becauſe they built in 1t &, faith the LORD of hoſts /. and a line 8 
need them; God will employ Angels, though he needs them nor. ſhall be ftrerched forth upon Jeruſalem. 
p The Empires which his Churches were either help'd or injurd by: | Ff Becauſe the Enemy hath fo barbarouſly and inhumanly adde4 
Theſe were partly by the Pride of their Emperors, partly by the Flat-] afiition to the atflited, *tis time to ſave and relieve. g When [ 
rery of their Servants and Miniſters, and partly by the Ignorance of | was departed,and had withdrawn my Preſence, thus cruelly were m: 
the World at that time in matters of Geography thought to be the People handled; but now I will return, I will be with them; my Pre- 
whole Earth 3 and the Scripture ſometimes uſeth Phraſes, uſed and | fence ſhall reſtrain the Violent, and prote& the Innocent. h With 
well known among Men,though there be.tome Impropriety 1n them. _—_ abundant,and promiſed Mercies now they ſhall be comforted 
L : indeed. 7 The Temple of God, the Excellency of Facob. 
11 And they 7 I the $9=f + 4 ary a7 be finiſhed, the rape ſhall be ad ng plow 

ſtood among the myrtie-trees 5, and 141d, VE nave wal-l viſed by Haggat, ch. 2.9. I will put upon this Houſe of minein 
ked 7 to and iro through the earth ., and behold Xx. all Feruſalem, I This confirms the Promiſe, and eſtabliſheth our Faith 
the earth {itrerh {till Y, and is art reſt >. if we know the import hercof. m The Builders meaſuring Line ſhall Hierog: 

r The miniſterial Angels, fignified by the Horſes and Horſe-men. be ſtretched out,to mark out Walls, Gates, Palaces, Strects, and Hou- JANES 
s Or rather the Angel,the Lord, the uncreated Angel ; who ſent them ſesin Feruſalem,that they may be builr again in Beauty and Strength aft Dim 
out,and receives account what they had done. # As Men who would with Skill and Art; and ſhall be once more the Glory of the Earth pable tc 
give an exadt Account,ſuryey every part; ſo we have ſearch'd all Na- | 4nd Joy of 1ſrael. : ; kereafte 
tions and Kingdoms, walk'd the length and breadth of them. « The 17 Cry yet 7, ſaying, Thus ſaith the LORD of hoſts, A 
World,but chiefly through the Babyloniſh Empire, which accounts it [My cities o through + proſperity Þ thall yer be ſpread +84 LI 


ſelf Lord of all the Earth. x 'Tis wonderful to be ſeen, and there- ok” 
fore we beſeech thee, O Lord, to behold, and conſider this. - y As abroad 9, and the LORD 7 thall yer comfort Zion s ,and 


having enced their Toil, or weather'd the Storm, compoſed their * ſhall yet choote d Jeruſalem. "lin 
Differences,and ſheathed their Swords z are full of Peace, and fir ſtill | _ 7 The Prophet's Commiſſion 1s either entarged,or more ſull Inſtru- © had fo I 
to take their Eaſe. 2 Either the ſame thing repeated, to heighten QHions given tahim,to raiſe the Hope and ſtabliſh the Faith of the Peo- tle-trees, 
the Quiet of theſe States, or to confirm the truth of che Thing, or to ple of God. o Feruſalem, and the Cities of 7udah are mine,ſaith the perhaps 1 
expreſs the inward Quiet of Mind the People had wich their outward Lord, and as mine I Il build, beautifie,enrich, forcifie, defend ,and en- to meaſu 
Quiet: The Fuvlick peaceablc, and every one's Mind ſatisfied z this large them. p Through increate of Faintlies aud Perſons, they ſhall became h 
is the State of the Earch, the Empire which at thar time ruled all. | ſend — gr te nawns Towns and Ciries z and through Angels, 
12 © Then « the angel of the LORD 56 anſwered wire a ag - pat doorggprkry hav A o 4 At 
and 12d c, O L ORD of holts d, how long wilt thou [r Their God. s Zn his Church, with Comforts fit for a Church. man, ia 
not have mercy e on Jeruſalem f, and on the cities of Ju- |*, Type of the Ciyil State as here joined with Zjon;z the Kingdom without 


>. IEEE oli ns. Bo . * ſhall be bleſt in it ſelf, and be a Bleffing to others, much like rhat Hol, therein. 
Dan. 5.2. dah, 2gain{t which thou haſt had indignation g theſe] 4- 4, $- all this an cfleot my chufing it, and dwelling init. n 


———_——_ze a 
———— LY = "Fs D 


hs — £ rw ————— 
i SY ——— —— _ _—_ 
I + = IS = EIS = 


+ — 


00S Sogn 


—— www —— i. wa 


> Sz 


—— —<—_we C—eco<caywy 


threeſcore and ten years þ © . : nOr, 4 
a When the ſurveying Angels had made their Report of the Pro- 19 Then @ lift 1 up mine eyes x, and ſaw Y, and to bim; f 
ſperity of the Heathen. b The Angel, the Lord Chriſt, Mediator of behold, tour horns 5. to that A 


the Church, and Head of the Church. c Prays as one interceding. | # After I had ſeen thoſe things,and heard thoſe comfortable words, _ bs 
d Chriit ſpeaks to his Father, ſpeaks as one much affefed with the | and received Commiſſion to publiſh all the good News I had heard. b ——_—_— 
ſtate of his afflied Church. e It is the Expoſtulation that well be- | xz He was ſo intent before, that he look'd on nothing elſe; now he _ in Ri 
fits a praying Soul 3 1t 1s not the Ei:quiry of a diſcontended Mind, but | lifts up his Eyes. y Clearly, certainly, and diſtintly, 2 Emblems of whig | 
the Requeſt of one [pnging for Mercy: $9 David, Pſal. 13.1, 2, and | the Enemies of the Fews, for Strength, Fierceneſs and Pride; and ws all be 
the Sculs under the 8lJtar, Rev. 6. —M] Jeruſalem, thy choſen Moun- | for their Number, from all parts of the World. «rs 
tain, Heir of the Promiles to bere-edified z and on Fadah's Cities roo, 19 And I faid unto the angel that talked with me 2, Preſence, 
cf whoſe rebuilding, Peace and Proſperity thou halt, O Lord, ſpoken : f 

or.at things, Jer. 30. 31, 31, and 33 Chapters, and Ezek. 36, and 37, What be theſe b ? And he antwered me, Theſe are the or Sacrifi 


&c. Chapters. g They have felt thine Anger and hot Diſpleaſure ; | horns c which have ſcattered Judah d, rae] &, and [e- 5 Fo! 
it was juſt, and 1s ſo ſtil}, but 1t 1s not to be perpetual; thine Anger | ruſalem. 9, wall of 


tath ſroaked againft the Sheep of chy Paſture. h The Term pre- : in the 
fx'd for the Captivity is tully come, 'tis the ſeventicth Year of their | wh js the Deſt, Terror, bhi ra be Ee re gf aſe Whit 
miſerable Captivity 3 now thew Mercy, build $70n, and glorifie thy Horns, which I ſee and know to be Horns,and four in number ? c Pow- In this by 
ſelf in doing 1t, tor rne ſet time 15 come : It 15 now 70 Years fince | ers, States and Kingdoms, which have from all fides puſh'd ar, broken ſo much a 
thy Temple was burnt, and 7 eraſalem ſack'd , and full 20 Years fince | 1nq roffed my People, ſorely bruſed ſome,and deſtroy'd others; theſe Ereat for { 
Feconias with many of thy People were carried captive into Babylon, | ory; are probably on the North, the Syrians, Aſſrians,and Babylont- petted, Go 
and ſomewhar mure 3 fince many were Carr iced with 7 ehotachim, ans; on the Eaſt, the Moabites and Ammonites z on the South, Edv- be ſcaled ; 
from which to the ſecond of Darizs are much about eighty cight or mites and Ezyptians ; on the Weſt the Philiſtines : All which had mi- none could 
nine Years. : ny a time 1poiled the Fews. d The two Tribes, which were the 2 King. 6.1 
13 And the LORD Þ an{wered the angel 7 that tal-|Kingdom of Judah. e The ten Tribes carried away by Shalmaneſ?!, tisan Ally 
ked + with me, with good / words, and comfortable 2 | or the Relicks of 1/ael, which adhered to the Houſe of David. Countries : 


Words. 20 And the LORD f thewed g me four carper:- CN 
h God rhe Father. 7 Chriſt, the uncreated Angel, Lord of Angels | ters h. T | 

and Redeemer of Iſrael. þ Who had firſt talked by Signs and Vitions, f Jehovah, who before is the Angel, 7. e. Chriſt; he is the eterval | 1 24 

and nextby exylaining the Mind and meaning of them, & anſwering | One, tic great God. 7g Both propoſed the thing to be ſeen, and gave ard of t 

the Enquiries Zechariah made. Þ Satable and teaſforable. m The Eyes to ſee, and diſcernit. þ Known by their Garb and Tools to be 

words minifter'd Comfort to 7eraſalem and the Captivesz the words Carpenters or Smiths, as the Hebrew bears it. 

upported Deliverauce and Bickiings, | 


21 Then ad Bleffin 
| Vc 


; I. | 
hap Then i ſaid I #&, What come theſe to do /? And 
21 ſake, ſaying, Theſe 7 are the horns which have 
oY adah, ſo that no man did lift up his head 9 : 
hut theſe 7 are, OMe tO fray rhem 2, to caſt out the 
—_ 7 of the Gentiles s, which lift up her horn 7 over 


* Tudah to ſcatter it x. 

the land 2 _ —_ propoſe the Queſtion, immediately upon fight 

[ _ enters. k Zechariah. I He ſaw they were Men,enquires 
of the _ were, but what was their Buſineſs and Deſign ; per- 
not —— for us to reſt alſo in the knowledge of what they are 
haps 'tis 4 enquire no farther who they were. m The Lord Chriſt 
an "Prophet. n Chriſt doth, in order to farisfie the En- 

.» firſt point to the four Horns, of which ver. 18, 19. as if he 
quiry, Hr Po 1. Lock you, there are four Horns which have done 
ſhould have yo - none had either Strength 
Miſchief to 7 - lift up the head 3 and thus theſe Horns proudly and 
or _ ov'd my People. p Theſe Carpenters or Smithsare Em- 
cruelly deitroy God will employ in breaking theſe De- 


Inſtruments 
— — are four Carpenters to break the four Horns. q To 


. hem firſt; theſe Kingdoms ſignified by Horns, 
_ s # Then their Authority and Power ſhall be 
=- _ eaſily. s Heathen round about Fudea. # Have employ'd 

heir Arms and Strength againſt, # The whole Kingdom of Fudah, 
oi a's People. x To drive them out of God's Inheritance, See 


ver. 19. lets de 


" 
ſcattered l 


HAT Ii 


The Viſion of meaſuring Feruſalem, ſheweth God's care of it, 1 —5. Zion 
in captivity, is exhorted to repair home : her enemies deſtruion threat- 


ned, 6—9+. Apromiſe of God's preſence in the midſt of her, 10—13. 


2 lift up mine eyes.again 6, and looked c, and behold 
J 2 man d with a meaturing-line in his hand i; 

1 Zechariah, b This is the chirs Emblem, or Viſion he had ſeen. 
c Very diligently, and inregily. 4 Ore in form ofa Man; ſome 
ſay *rwas Chriſt, others ſay a Type of Nehemiah ; 1t was an Emblem 
of ſome Maſter-builder to be ſure, and *tis probable the Propher 
took him for no more than a Man. e He appear'd ready and pre- 
pard to lay out the Plarform of Fer»ſalem for Extent, Form and 


Beauty» : 
2 Then ſaid I, Whither goeſt thou f * And he faid 
unto me, To * meaſure g Jeruſalem h, to ſee what 7s 


' the breadth thereof, and what zs the length thereof. 

F It is evident, the Prophet did not in fo bold a manner enquire 
before, which may poſſibly be for that he apprehended this Man 
to be one lefſer than an Angel; nor doth he ask the meamiog of this 
Hieroglyphick z but underſtanding what 1t meant, the Prophet en- 
quires only where the Platform was to be laid. g To take the ex- 
at Dimenſions of it, that it may anſwer God's Promiſe, and be ca- 
pable to receive its Inhabitants. h The City which was to be builr 
kereafter, but firſt the Temple is to be built, 


3 And behold , the apgel that talked z with me, 
'went forth k, and another angel / went out to meet 
him 22. ; | | | 

; The great and glorious Angel, 7. e. Chriſt Jeſus himſelf, which 
had ſo long talked with Zechariah. &þ From the midit of the Myr- 


2 ECHARKT EK 


Men that need be awakned. b Set upon your Journey for your 
own Country and City, come out from your captive Priſons. c Make 
all the haſte you poſſibly can, and flee as Men do who are purſued 
with danger ; as Men thar are earneſtly bent to get out of harms way, 
as the Man-ſlayer to the City of Refuge : Heb. hath only And flee, but 
our Tranſlators have by that guciſed at what might El! up the Ex- 
preſſion, and read Come forth, &c, d Babylon, which lay North to 
Canaan. e As I executed my Threats in ſcattering you, ſo JT will 
perform my Promiſe,and gather you from all Quarters of the World 
ariſe, come away therefore. hs 

7 Deliver f thy ſelf, O Zion g, that dwelleth þ with 
the daughter of Babylon z. 

f The Proclamation for free return is publiſhed, up then and be 
gone. g O ye People who ſhould dwell in Sion, ye Daughters cf 
Ston. h Keepeſt in Babylon when thou mighteſt go to feruſalem. 
7 Perhaps this 1ntimates that which kept many Jews in Balylon, Wives 
or Miſtreſſes. 

s For # thus faith the LORD of hoſts, After the 


glory hath he ſent me unto the nations. which ſpoiled 


you ; for he that * toucketh you, toucheth the apple of 


his eye. 

k Some refer this tro what went before, as a Reaſon why the Zews 
ſhould return, for God hath commanded it : I think 'tis an Encon- 
ragement to the Fews to return, becauſe God had promiſed to make 
them a Glory, and now afſures them that he will take a very parti- 
cular Care of them ; therefore ſends his Son as a Judge, or Vindex, 
againſt the Nations that had ſpoiled the Jews, or God ſends his Son 
to them to inform them thar 'tis their Intereſt to unite with the 
Fews, and become the People of God, and be Partakers of the Glory 
and Satety of God's Iſrael, However, to let them underſtand thae 
"twill be dangerous to do Violence to Jſ-ael, as it would be dangerons 
co any one to violate what is moit dear ro him that can deſtroy the 
Oftender ; to tell them Jae! is the Apple of God's Eye. 


9 For behold, I will ſhake /mine hand »- upon them #; 


Ne 2z. 


/ Or lift up. m My Power and Strength. = Againſt the Nation 
and Kingdom that doth Violence to the People, who zre my Glory, 
and I ai theirs, ſaith the Lord. o Thoſe People who comply not with 
him whom God ſendeth. þ Shall be overthrown and ſpoiled, and be- 
come a Prey. 4 The Fews who were firſt.ſpoiled by, and then made 
Servants to the Nations who conquered, captivated, and kard ly uſed 
the Fews ; and indeed this fulfilled in Efther's days, and in the 2£:c- 
cabees times. r Either Jews, or Heathen, or both. s Beconvinced and 
own it. # The great and faithful God, « hath commiſſioned Chriſt 
fo inform them who are to make their choice what to do herein. 


God : They that had been in great and long Captivity. x To exe- 
cute Judgments on thine Adverfaries, ro compleat thy Deliverance 
and Salvation : I coine as foretold and promiſed, in the Diſpenſari- 
ons of Providence among the Nations, in the Performance or” Yro- 
miſes to you my People. a Pitch my Tabernacle, nay build my #a- 
biration and Houſe, and reſide in it; give you my Ordinances, my 


tle-trees, where he was firſt ſeen z whither he is going 1s not ſaid; 
perhaps to ſtand by, dire, and encourage the Perſon that was going 
to meaſure Feruſalem. 1 A created Angel, or a Miniſterial Angel, as 
became his Office, offers his Service to Chriſt. m2 Who 1s Lord of 


Angels, 
= And ſaid 7 unto him. Run o, ſpeak to this young 


man, ſaying, Jeruſalem p ſhall be inhabited g as towns 7 
without walls, for the multitude of men and cattel s 


therein. - 

n Or, And he ſaid : Or as the French, ( lequel lui dit 9 which ſaid un- 
to bim ; ſo'tis plain, that the Angel which noiv was going forth, ſpake 
to that Angel which came to meet him, or gave him Orders what 
todo, o Since you come ſo ſeaſonably, haſten with all Diligence, 
and from me tell that young Man Zechariah. p Which hath ſo long 
hin in Rubbiſh, which 1 once delighted in, which now ſeems deſo- 
late and hopeleſs. q Filled with Inhabitants. r The Suburbs of 
it ſhall be as Towns unwalled for greatneſs of Extent, and for Safe- 
ty, and Freedom from Enemies and Danger 3 their own Multitudes 
of Men ſhall be ſome Safeguard to them: And they ſhall have my 
Preſence, a better Safeguard. s Brought thither for ſacred Utes, 
for $acrifices, 


5 For z I, faith the LORD », will be unto hera 
19. wall of fire x round about y, and * will be the glory = 
in the midſt of her. | 


- tWhat was promiſed or foretold in the former Verſe, is ratified 
in this by af account how it ſhould be performed. # That a thing 
ſo much above the hope of a preſent dejeted People, ſo much too 
great for ſo weak, and ſo few a People, might be believed and ex- 
peited, God engageth he will perform the Word. x Which cannot 
be ſcaled; it wou!d conſume them that attempt itz nor undermined, 
none could come ſc near it: Such a Wall as once was Eliſha's Guard, 
2 King. 6.16, 17 Verſes; to which this place may poſſibly refer: Or 
tisan Allufion ro the Manner of Shepherds and Travellers in thoſe 
Countries full of wild Beaſts, to make Fires in the Night to ſecure 
themſelves. y No part ſhall be unguarded, or open to the Enemy. 
{ My Preſence and Favour ſhall make her glorious, Iſa. 4- 5, 9. 

6 U Ho, ho a, come forth b, and * flee c from the 
lard of the north 2, faith the LORD: for I have ſpread 
i. Ou abroad as the four winds of the heavens e, {aith 
; ihe LORD. 


Bicffing, and my Preſence : This was fulfilled in part preſer:tly, and 


ſpel-Church. 
11 And many 6 nations ſhall be joined to the LORD c 
in that day d, and ſhall be my people e - and I will 
dwell in the mitt of thee f, and thou ſhalt know g that 
the LORD of hoſts þ hath ſent me 7 unto thee 4+. 

| b And zreat, Heb. implieth both Multitudes, and Greatacd; of !24 
tions 3 or Heathen, and Gentiles, as the Word beareth. c Bucums 
Proſelytes, enquire for, adhere to, and worſhip the God of 1ſ-4-1, 
d When God ſhall lift up his Hand for his People azainft their inc- 
mies, as Ejther 8.17. whe: Chriſt ſhall he come 1a the Fleſh, and ſha!l 
take down the Partition-Wall. e Covenant- People, to love, tear, wor- 
ſhip, and obey Chriſt, f Sze v. 1o. let. a. g See v. 9.let.s. h The 
Sovereign Law-giver, and Almighty Ruler of Heavenan Earth. 7 The 
Meſſiuh, and Zechariah his Servant. þ Jew and Gentile. 


12 And the LORD / ſhall inherit zz Judah z his por- 


again 7. 
[ Tetavah, the God of Abraham, and of his Seed, who had caſt off 
Fudah, and ſeem'd to quit his Claim in his ancient Inheritance, by a 
Diffeiſm of 70 Years. m Claim, recover, poſſeſs and delight, as a 
Man doth in his paternal Inheritance. n All his Iſrael; this Tribe 
mentioned, but all the reſt included. o His Treaſure and peculiar 
People 3 his Lot and Part. p Upon, Heb. holy, not by any inherent 
Holineſs, but holy and ſele&ed,and fer apart for a holy People conte- 
crated tro God. q The Lord will as of old chuſe Feruſalem for his 
Seat. 
13 *Befilent 7, Oall fleſh s, before the LORD: : 


for he is raiſed up z out of + his holy habitation 

. r Murmur not, you that love not Zion; diſpute not, you that think 
theſe Promiſes are too gond, too great : But in filence reverence and 
adore God in all his Excellencies and Ways; wait,and expett the ac- 
compliſhment of all, by him who never utters more than he can ard 
will do for his People. s Both Jew and Gentile; you are weak,ſhort- 
ſighted, and worthleſs ; you are Fleſh, be ſilent and wait. ? The wiſe, 
mighty, gracious, and faithful One z who never ſuftered a word of 
his to fall unfulfilled, nor will let any of theſe Promiſes tofail. u He 
ſpeaks to our Capacity z God is faid to be raiſed in ailufizn to Men 
who get up, or riſe up, and ſer avout what they will do; fo hece 
God is on this Work already. x Either Heaven, or his Temp!s. 


a Since Jeruſalem ſhall be ſafe, rich, and glorious by the Preſence 
ind Bleffings of ber God, the Prophet calls to the ſleepy Jews, as 
Vol. IT, 


+> 


T2 | CHAP. 


and they o thall be a ſpoil p to their ſervants 9 - and. 
* ye 7 ſhall know s that the LORD of hoſts z hath ſent © 


ſo through near 500 Years, till Chriſt caine, and ever fiace to his Go- 


*Deut. 22; 


Chap. 11. 


To. Pal. 


I7, & 


* [{41.72.6« 


16 < * Sing and rejoyce x, O daughter of Zion y : g, 


for lo, I come 2, and 1 * will dwell # in the midft of 2:02 a; 
thee, ſaith the L ORD. *Lev.25.12 


x Now Chriſt calls them to rcjoyce in the Goodneſs ſhewed to them, EZ- 3727+ 
and to fing forth the Praiſes of him who ſhewed it. y The whole Joh. 1.14. 
Nation of the Jews, the peculiar, redeemed, and reſtored People of 2Cor.%.15; 


tion 9.in the holy land p, and ſhall * chooſe Jeruſalem * ch, i.t5: 


*Zeoh; 17; 
+ Heh. the 
habitation 
of his hos 
lineſs: 


* 
_ ——_ re er en : 
Eo foes —_—_ PB, = ; % 4 
Fe 0. 1 p © 60: at . 
_—_ þ : ——— _—_ . 2 . 
ab PROT. 7 EE bed A 
OO EI p — _—_— 
be —==cx" 3 _ —_ —_—_— 
_—— - _ —__ —_— 


BE" 
p bolt 
, 1 
7 


* : 
Any 


— , , —_— — 
——_ 
A I 
AY 4. ASS... ; _ 
by "_ -- 
” ba, : 4 
$—_ = 
- "a pom 2 
T CY 
A. 
2, gr * 


4 7 A 


£ 4 A 
80 7. 
* 44 ' 1g i} 


Chap. Ill. 


 *Ch6.10. 


C H AP. IL. 


Uader the type of Joſhua is repreſented God's love to his church, his care 
and the proviſion he hath made for her, 17. Chriſt the branch #s 
promiſed, 8 — Lo. 


ND he @ ſhewed me 6b * Joſhua the high prieſt c, 
ſtanding d before the angel e of the LORD, 
and || Satan f ſtanding at his right hand g to T refiſt 
Rim P. | 
a The Lord of Hoſts, whoſe Servant Zechariah was, and in whoſe 
Name he ſpake. b In Viſion repreſented to me Zechariah. c For 
that Office was by hereditary Right deſcended on him; and how 
mean ſoever his State was, yet ſtill he was that great Officer of the 
Church. &d Either as accuſed, and ro make his Detence z or rather 
miniſtring in his Office, according to his Duty. e This Angel was 
Chriſt, whoſe Miniſter, or Servant, the high Prieſt was, as well as 
Type of him. f That Adverſary, as we might render the word, el- 
ther Satan the Devil, or ſome Inſtrument of his ſtirr'd up by him, 
$.anhallat, or, (yc. g Either becauſe the Accuſation was true, or to 
hold his working hand from its work. b Foſhua. 

2 And the LORD / ſaid unto Satan, * The LORD #2 
rebuke o thee, O Satan, even the LORD that hath cho- 
ſen Jeruſalem, rebuke thee : zs not this p a brand pluckt 
out of the fire q © | 

1 3.e. Chriſt the great Redeemer, Reſtorer, Lord and Mediator of 
the Church. m The great God, Father of our Lord Jeſus Chriſt; who 
2s Mediator rather chuſeth to rebuke him in his Father's Name, than 
in his own ; though this he could have done. o He who was accuſed, 
was God's High Prieſt; and to minifter in the Temple at Feruſalem, 
the City which God had choſen; in which reſpe&, it was ſure that 
God would take Cognizance of the Matter and judge aright: He 
would prohibit Satan's Attempts. p This Man, this Zoſhua. q Like 
2 Brand half burnt, or all ſmucty with long lying in the Fire of Af- 
flition. Rcjet him not for this. 

3 Now » Joſhua s was clothed with filthy 7 garments, 


and {tood x before the angel x. | 

7 Arthe time Zechariah ſaw this Viſion, he ſaw alſo in what a 
mean, dirty,ane totter'd Garb he was, who repreſented the High 
Prieſt. s It was the Hieroglyphick of Joſhua, not Foſhua himſelf. 
# Emblem of a poor or ſinful State, or both. #« Vid. ver. 1, let. d. 
x The LordChrift, called the Angel. 

4 And he y anſwered 2 and ſpake @ unto thoſe that 


ſtood before him b, ſaying, Take away the filthy gar- 
ments c from him 4. And unto him he dd ſaid, Behold, 
I have cauſed thine iniquity to paſs from thee e, and I 


will clothe f thee g with change of raiment þ. 

y The Lord Chriſt, who purifieth his Church, who purgeth away 
her Sin, and clothes her with rich and cleaa Garments. x So the 
Heb. and fo this Prophet ſpeaks,though no Queſtion went before: It 
is an Idiom of that Language. @ Commanded. 6b Some of the At- 
tendants ; thoſe Miniſterial Angels, who were Chriſt's Seryants, and 
as ſuch are repreſented ſtanding before him, c Remove, or cauſe 
them to be removed from him, as aitogether unbeſeeming his Per- 
ſon, Office and Employment : Theſe filthy Garments thoſe Angels 
took away, but another hand takes away what is ſignified by this 
Emblem. d From this High Prieft Foſhua, da Chrift the Lamb 
of God. e What Angels could not take raway, Chriſt did; he 
removed the filth of Sin, the guilt and ſtain of it. f Adorn and 
beautifie. g O Foſhua. h Clean and rich, Emblems of Graces, and 
ſpiritual Excellencies given to him. . ; 

5s And I faid z, Let them # ſet a fair * mitre / upon 
his head : 1o 22 they ſet a fair mitre on his head, and 
clothed him with garments 7, and the angel » of the 


LORD ſtood b by. 

7 Zechariah takes the boldneſs to defirethar for Foſhua,which might 
addto his Veneration and Authority; and he asks the thing of Chriſt, 
of rather Chriſt commandeth thts be done. þ Who miniſter before 
Chriſt. / Arich and beautiful Ornament for the Head of the High 
Pricſt ; not a Crown, which 1s for Royal Heads, but a Tire, a Pontifi- 
cal Enfign. m As they were commanded by Chriſt at the requeſt of 
the Prophet. n All the Garments which did appertain to the High 
Prieſt, of which you read Exod. 28. 4. which probably were put on, 
though they are not expreſly mentioned here. o The Angel who is 


* Hag, I. To 
!' That 18,4n 
adverſary. 

+ Hch. he us 


- . 

+ Jacav lm 

(LEVEL IIET Fe 
c 


* Jude 9. 


SSCHARIAH 


4c As Aﬀeſſors or Coadjutors in a Council, or Aﬀembly; the High 
1 Prieſt as Prefident, the other as Members of the Council 


ſate with 
him, co let them know what theſe Types mean. & The worldly 


prophane, unbclieving and ignorant fort of Jews wonder at they 
and their Hopes at their Labour and Expences in attempting tg 
build ſuch a Houſe, with fo little Helps to raiſe ſuch a Structure ay 
of Rubbiſh. e God the Father. f Will bring forth a muck ow 
wonderful Work. g Chriſt Meffiah, the Branch, 1/a. 4. 2, and x; ' 
Fer. 33+ 15, ” 
9 For þ behold, the ſtone that I have laid before To- 
ſhua : upon * one 7 ſtone ſhall be * ſeven eyes, beholg. 1 "tin, 
will engrave # the graving thereof, faith the LORD of (6.2, 
hoſts, and 1 will remove / rhe iniquity of thar lang jy g.#% 
me 2 Nep, 4.6 
one day. & 
h Here is an Ellipfis, and to make 1t up we muſt repeat that «© t 
8th verſe, Hear now,&c. For behold, (pointing to a particular Stone) 
that Stone which [ have laid, ſaith God, in the fight of Joby, c; 
which he ſaw laid in the building of the Temple. 7 On that one Stone 
are ſeven Eyes, and Joſhua and his Fellows are commanded to 9g). 
ſerve it; the meaning of which the Angel will ſuggeſt to them Pre- - 
ſently. It is not improbable this one Stone might be a corner Stone 
and a principal cqrner Stone, and the Eyes engraver on it,ſo placed. 
that they might look many ways 3 ſo 'twill be a more exact Emblem 
of Chriſt the chief corner Stone, and of his perfe&t Knowledge and 
Wiſdom,fitting him to govern his Church, and provide for it. b The 
Engraving engraved, 7. e. moſt artificially, lively, and with EXcellenr 
Contrivance. / Or, and I have removed, I have pardoned the 1ni. 
quity of this Land at ence: Thus the Emblem or Type, which 1 ſhall 
once more'ſet before you in plainer words, than thoſe of our Verſion: 
Hear now, O Foſhua, thou and thy Fellows; for behold there is one - 
Stone, and on thar Stone ſeven Eyes moſt curiouſly engraved, ang 
this laid in thy fight, and in the fight of thy Fellows: This learn by 
it, that the Temple, founded on ſuch a corner Stone, builr by the 
Wiſdom of the chief Builder, guarded and watch'd over by all-ſeein 
Providence, is the Bleſſing and Honour of that People, whoſe Sins 
are all forgiven, The farther ſpiritual meaning diſcovers the Mef. 
fiah, the chief corner Stone, the Goſpei-Church founded thereon 
guided by perfe& Wiſdom, and preſerved by never erring Proyi. 
dence, and blefi with the Pardon of all her Sins, taken away in one 
day by the meritorious Death of her Redeemer. 
10 In that day », faith the LORD of hoſts, ſhall ye 
call z every man his neighbour * under the vine o, and i, 
under the hg-tree. 
m Of building my Temple, when 'tis finiſh'd, and in the Day of re. 
moving the Sins of my People; literally referring to the returned 
captive Jews, myſtically to the whole Church in Goſpel-days, when 
Chriſt the chief corner Stone ſhall have purged away Sin, and eſt. 
bliſh'd his Church. 7» Invite with Love and Peace, ſuch as become; 
Neighbours, who are Partakers of the ſame Grace of God, and Blef. 
ſings of a Redeemer. 0 To feaft or refreſh themſelves under the 
pleaſing Shadow, and with the ſweet delicious Fruit of the Vine and 
Fig-tree of both which there were ever greateſt ſtore, and of choj- 
ceſt raſte, when the People of God, the Jews, did obey, worſhip,and 
fear the Lord, and long for the Meffiah, and loyed each other. 


CHAP. IV. 


The golden candleſtick and two olive-trees, ſheweth the ſucceſs of Zerit 
babel in building the temple : he prayeth for farther explication of this 
viſion, and obtaineth it, 1—14. > 


» 


Nd the angel that talked with me 2, came again # 
and waked c me, as a man that is wakened out cf 
his ſleep, 

a Chriſt, who for ſome time had lefr Zechariah, and beſtowed ſome 
time on new dreffing and cleanſing, and adorning Foſhua the High 
Prieſt. b This 1s the fourth time of Chriſt's revealing his Mind to 
this Prophet by Viſion. c Either rouzed him out of a drowfie Fit, 
and bodily Sleep, or out of an Exſtacy, or Wonder, that ſurprizing 
[ftir, he was as if aſleep, -or ſhaked him out of a ſluggiſh Negligence 
to an obſervance of theſe things. 


2 And faid unto me, What ſeeſt thou 4? And I faid, | 
] have looked e, and behold, a candleſtick f all of golds, | 
with + a bowl Þþ upon the top of it z, and his feventi 
lamps thereon, and || ſeven pipes / to the ſeven lamps," 


the Lord Chrift himſelf. p Withdrew not till all this was done. 
6 And the angel of the LORD 7 proteſted + unto 
- Joſhua, ſaying, 

g The Lord Chriſt. 
him ro know, 

7 Thus faith the LORD of hoſts s, If thou z7 wilt 

[| Or, walk in my ways z, and if thou wilt keep my ||charege x, 
ordinance- then thou ſhalt alſo judge y my houſe, and ſhalt alſo 
+ Heb. Keep 5 my courts, and I will give thee Þ places to walk 
walks. among theſe that ſtand by. 

s The Father, whoſe WillZhrift reveals to us" # oſhua. u Obey 
the Preceprs and holy. Commands of rhe Law. x The ſpecial Charge 
and Office of the High Prieſt, » Be Chief, and Ruler in the Tem- 
ple, aad in the rhings that pertain to the Worſhip of God there. 
7 Not as a Door-keeper or Servant, but as the Chief,on whom others 
may wait, and give Attendance, and at laſt ſhalt have place among 

* Pl. 71. 7. glorious Angels, Heb. 12, 22, 

If1.2.i% + Hear now «, O Joſhua the high prieſt, thou-and 
1429 thy teliows b rhar fit c before thee : for they are * men 
* {f1. 22.4, © Wondred at d: for behold, I ewill bring forth f * my 
* 52.123. ſervant the * BRANCH p... | 

| a Hitherto thou haſt been entertained with Emblems and Hiero- 
2.6. 12, glyphicks; but now, O Joſhua, kear what theſe mean. b The other 
uke 1, 72, Vriefts, thy Aflociates 1m the Prieſtly Office, tho' inferiour to thee. 


r Solemnly declared, and averred it, gaye 


ol 
which are upon the top 7 thereot : w 
d Whar doſt thou diſcern of that thou didfſt before half aſlcep,;,x 
half awake ſee, but didſt not obſerve? e Since awakened and rou-,, 
zed, I haye very diligently viewed and obſerved, and i ſec. f By x, 
God's appointment there was a Candleſtick to be made, as an Uten- 
fil and Ornament of the Temple, Exod. 25.31. g So was the Candle- 
ſtick to be for the Temple, all of pure Gold, Exod. 37.17. # Or 
Baſon, or round, and large 'Oil Cruet, capable of ſo much Oil # 
would ſuffice to feed all the Lamps in the Candleſtick, #j On tit 
higheſt part of the Candleſtick, on the top of the Candleſtick, on 
the top of the Shaft, or-on the head of the Candleſtick. k Either {0 
many, becauſe the Temple Candleſtick had juſt ſo many, or becauſe 
of ſome Perfe&ion ſuppoſed to be in this Septenary Number. / Onc 
Pipe ro each Lamp, the Mouth of which Pipe joined to the Bow! 
or Baſon, and received Oil from it; the other end of the Pipe faſt- 
ned to the Lamp, conveyed Oil into the Lamp. m So each of tht 
ſeven Lamps had a Pipe reaching from it to the Bowl or Baſol- 
n Theſe Lamps were ſo ſet as to ſtand ſomewhat higher than the 
body of the Candleſtick. ; 

3 And two olive-trees o by it, one p upon the right 
fide of the bowl , and the other upon the left /« 
rhereof g. ; | 

o Some ſay Branches; better Trees, which well rooted, will cot 
rinue & perpetually ſupply the Bowls,and that will ſupply the Lap: 

p Not more or fewer than two. q So placed that the Candleſtick _ 
between them, and each Tree ſtood at diftance trom the Candleftic : 


Chap, Ir 


. Jr 


hap 


” _Y 


Dro my. {ay 
{pi 
c 


this 
him 

as G 
by C 
Chu 
Care 
be d 
the \ 
fend 
abou 
h Co 
need 
ſame 
i Wh 
moye 
tiful : 
may vu 
buildi 
May 1 
enoug 
of the 
Dori 
neſs f; 
nued 


y 
rubba 
55. forth 
CI'V171K 
þ T! 
ple, ei 
Prophe 
rates, « 
par'd w 
will fin 
and th 
he canr 
" 45 a PI; 
Travell 
Servant 
faiſhin 
ticn-ſto 
mations 
Þ Prayi 
to the 1 
and Fay 
dwell in 


r. Perl 
Own Han 
Condug. 
lkelier f; 
Thus the 
ance of Z 
th Work to. 
*n that doft 
f the be fully a 
D /:4]] Our God 
manded n 
d Builders © 


rap IV. _ ZECHARIAH 


on the right and left hand thereof, that they might diſtil their Oil 
the Baſon or Bowl. All which is an. Emblem of the Church, 
what it is made of, pure Gold ; what made for, to be Light in 
d; tro ſhine as Lamps thar continually burn, mainrain'd 
with pure Oil, diſtilled from the Olive-Trees,not preſſed out by Man, 
bur continually, freely and abundantly dropping or flowing from 


Oliye-Trees. 
_ So 71 anſwered s, and ſpake to the angel that talk- 


ed with me 7, ſaying, What are # theſe, my lord ? 
» After that I had ſeen and diſcerned, s See chap. 3. ver. 4+ let.z. 
+ See chap. 1. ver. 19- let. a, and chap. 2. ver. Ze let. 7. # Sce chap. 


L, ver. 9. lets h. ; 
Then x the angel that talked with me y, anſwered, 


3nd faid unto me, Knowett thou not 2 whart theſe be ? 
And I faid oa, No, my lord b. 


x When the Prophet had enquired into the meaning of theſe Em- 
blems. y See chap. 1+19+ let. a. 7 'Tis not a Queſtion either to up- 
braid the Prophet a5 an Ignoramus; Chriſt doth not reproach his for 
not knowing deep and dark Myſteries at firſt ſight of them: Nor is 
it the Queſtion of one that was uncertain about the thing enquired 
*nto,Chriſt knew the Prophet's Ignorance though he ask the Queſtion, 
but *is to excite him to attend and learn. 4 Zechariah freely con- 
feſſeth he knew not, he pretends not to know what indeed he did not 


know. 6 He owns the Greatneſs and Sovereignty of Chriſt. 


s Then c he {anſwered and ſpake unto me, ſaying, 


This is the word e of the L O R D unto Zerubbabel 7. 
ſaying, Not by || might g, nor by power Þ, but by my 
ſpirit z, ſairh the LOKD of hoſts. 

c So ſoon as Zechariah had owned his Neſcience. d Chriſt. e Or 
this word of the Lord is to Zerubbabel, 'tis particularly deſigned to 
him, and in an Emblem prefigurecth what a Church, hoy precious 
4s Gold, hovw full of Light, how framed, how maintained it ſhould be 
by God hitafeif, This Hieroglyphick 1s a repreſeatation of what the 
Church ſhould be. f The Governour, on whoſe hand much of the 
Care and Trouble of Building the Temple did te ; yet let him not 
be diſcouraged, for this Work lieth on God. g Or by an Army, as 4 
the word bears, Heb. you may think you ſhail need an Army to de- 
fend you in carrying on this Building, which the ill will of Neighbours 
about you hindereth; bur I tell you there 15 no need of an Army, 
h Courage and Valour, all which make Armies confiderable, n9 
need of this neither. Or might and Power here may be of the 
ſame Import,and added only for Elegaacy and Aſſurance of rhe thing, 
; Which garniſheth the Heavens,and can beaurifie the Church; which 
moved upon the Darkneſs in the Creation, and brought forth a beau- 
tiful and mighty Struure, and can do as much now. By Spirit we 
may underſtand either the Third Perſon of the Trinicy engaged in 
building the Church with the Father and the Son; or by Spirit you 
may underſtand the Power of God. Either is Encouragement 
enough, and ſecureth the future Effe&,and promiſeth a future Scate 
of the Church, pure and precious as Gold, full of Knowledge in the 


into 
both 
the Worl 


Doftrines of God as this Candleſticx with ſeven Lamps,fuil of Holi- 
neſs from abundant Meaſures of Grace, perſevering in ir by conti- 
nued ſupplies from the Spirit of Grace in Ordinances, (Fc. 


7 Who art thou, O great. mountain &? before Ze- 
rubbabel zhou ſhalt. become a plain /, and he // ſhall bring 


. forth the head-{tone m thereot 7 * with ſhoutings o, 
crying, Grace, grace Þ be unto 1t. 


þ The Angel having reſolved the Queſtion about building the Tem- ) 


ple, either himſelf doth deride all the Power of Oppoſers, or the 
Prophet doth triumph over it, Who art chou? Sanballat and Confede- 
rates, or Satan,or Babylon, or all put together, what are you all, com- 
par'd with the Power of God the Lord of Hoſts, who by his Spirit 
will finiſh this Work ? 1 Thou ftandeſt in the way of my Servant, 
and thinkeſt his Weakneſs and Foverty cannot remove thee; but if 
he cannot ſurmount thy height, I will bring 1t down and make thee 
' a5 a Plain, and my Servant ſhall as cafily go on with my Work as a 

Traveller goeth over a Way plain'd betore him. U/ Zerubbabel.,as the 
Servant of Chriſt, m Shall, as is uſual, affiſt ar the laying of the laſt 
faiſhing Stone, as well as he ſaw and affifted when the firſt Founda- 
ticn-ſtone was laid, n Of the ſecond Temple. 0 Wirh loud Accla- 
mations, the Signs of great Joy, and farisiation 1n the thing done. 
Þ Praying and wiſhing all Proſperity, and A long continuance of it 
to the Temple and thoſe that are to worſhip God in it; as the Grace 
and Favour of God began and finiſh'd, ſo may the ſame Grace ever 
dwell in it and repleniſh it. ; 

$ Moreover q, the word of the LORD came unto me, 
laying, 

7 Either at another time, or elſe at the ſame time was added what 
now Zechariah declares. 


9 The hands »r of Zerubbabel * have laid the foun- 


are the eyes of the LORD, which run to 2nd fro 
through the whole earth. 

. # And now for thoſethar deſpiſed ſmall Beginnings, who they are 
1s well known, and to them I ſay, and premiſe what they expettcd 
nor 6 Ot which Haggai 2.3. c Or but; notwirhftanding they, fo 
much undervalued the meanneſs of the ſecond Temple, yer when 
hniſh'd they ſhall with many others rejovce init. 4 The Perpendicu- 
lar with which Zerubbabel ſhall try the finiſhed Work, or the Work 
near finiſhing. e In ſubordination ro, and co-working with the Di- 
vine Providence, expreſt eniblematically by the ſeven Eyes which 
were on that Stone, of which chap. 3. g. Though Zerubbabel were 
prudent in managing all the Affairs of Jews, Feruſalem, and the Ten 
ple, yet not his Prudence, but infinite Wiſdom of God gave ſucceſs x 
and when the ſucceſs appears in the finiſhing of che Temple, then 
thall ic be acknowledged an admirable Work of the Divine Wiſdom 

and-the Jews ſhall confeſs thar the Eyes of the Lord which run to and 
fro through the whole Earth, have been upon them in this work for 
good, and that God hath ſhew'd himſelf on their behalf. 

11 © Then anſwered I, and ſaid unto him, What 
are theſe two olive-trees upon the right /de of the can- 
dleſtick, and upon the left /ide thereot ? 

In the eleventh Verſe, the Propher propoſerh a Queſtion to x7 hich 
no Anſwer is given,but he doth immediately procced toask one more 
Queſtion,though ſomewhat, yet not much ditfcrent from the former 5 
and in the anſwer to this latter Queſtion the Frophet acquicſceth. 
The Explication of the 11th Verſe you have ver. 3. of this Chapter. 

12 And I anſwered f again g, and faid unto him Þ, 
What be theſe rwo olive-branches 7, which + through 
the two golden pipes & || empry /+ ihe golden #2 0i/ our 
ot themſelves 7: £ 

f 1 went on to diſcourſe; which is the fignificacion of the Hes. 
Phraſe here uſed. g Heb. a ſecond time. h The Angel that talked 
with the Prophet. 7 Two principal Branches, one in each Tree, ful- 
ler of Berries,liigher than the reſt,and hanzing over the golden Pipes, 
hk Theſe were faftned to the golden Bowl, oa each fide one, with a 
hole through the ſides of the Bowl, to ler the Oil thar diſtili'd into 
them trom thoſe Olive-branches, run into the Bowl; and ot of thar 
Bowl it was through ſo many golden Pipes conveyed into the ſeven 
Lamps. / Freely, without any Violence offered, drop the Oil out of 
themſelves,yct ſo that ſtill chey are full of Oil for perperual ſupply to 
the Lamps. m Becauſe of its Preciouſneſs, or from irs Colour. 7 A 
ſupernatural Work and Emblem of ſupernatural Grace; theſe Bran- 
ches filled from the true Olive-Tree, ever einpty themſelyes, and 


are ever full; ſoare the Goſpel-Ordinances filled by Chriſt, always 


filling his Members, true Chriſtians, and ever full for all Believers, 

I3 And he anſivered me and 1aid, Knowelt thou not 
vhar theſe be ? And I faid, No, my lord. 

Vid, ver. 5. let. Zy 4y Þ. 

14 Then faid he, * Theſe are the two Þf anoin- 
ted ones o, * that ſtand by the LORD of the whole 
earth. | 

0 Not Enoch and Elias, nor the two Witnefles, nor Peter and Paul, 
nor the two Churches of Jew and Gentilez nor principally Zerubba- 
bel and Foſhua, though perhaps the Expoſition may glance upon 
them, and the two Orders inagiſtracy and Miniſtry inthem as theſe 
are Types of Chriſt in his two Offices, King and Pricſt ; or Chriſt and 
the Comforter : In this I determine nothing. 


CHAS v. 


By the flying ro!l the Prophet ſheweth the curſe and puniſhment of thieves 
and ſwearers, 1—4. By the woman preſſed in an Epha, the everlaſting 
deſtruction of the churches enemies is repreſented, 5— 11. 


TY a | turned 6, and lift up mine eyes c, and look- 
ed d, and behold, a flying roll e. 


a Or And. Heby, 1. e. after 1 had ſeen thoſe comfortable Viſions, 
and been inſtrutted in the true meaning of them. 5 Changed his 
Poſture, tho' the Occafion of it be not mentioned, nor the Poſture 
into which he put himſelf. c Look'd up into the Air where the Vi- 
fron appeared. &d Very diligently, and diſcerned clearly. & A Yo- 
lume, or Book, which in thoſe Days were nor written as now our 
Books are printed and bound, bur were written as Deeds are now on 
large or long Parchments, and rolied up upon a neat round Stick, or 
elſe rolled up on themſelves ; ſuch the Roll here ſeen, much as our 
large Geographical Maps are rolled upon Rollers, ard lodged in a 
convenient Cavity, fo were their Books of old: Burt probably here 
now the Roll was ſpread our at large, flying in the Air ſwiftly, per- 
haps with ſome Noiſe, that might make the Prophet look about 
him. 

2 And he f ſaid unto me, What ſeeſt thoug? And I 
anſwered, I ſee a flying roll, the length thereof 7s twen- 


dation s of this houſe, his hands * ſhall alſo finiſh it ; | ry cubits b, and the breadth thereof ren cubits. 


* and * thou z ſhalt know # that the LORD of hoſts 


«ry 
6.15. hath ſent me y unto you 2. Ws 
7 Perhaps ( as is cuſtomary ) he did lay the firſt Stone with Hs 
own Hands, or rather his Dire&ion and Command, and under his 
Conduct. 5 In the ſecond Year of Cyrus, perhaps forty Years agon, 
likelier fevenreen ; but be thoſe Years more or leſs he ſhall finiſh It. 
Thus the Prophet expreſly promiſeth from the Lord, both continu- 
ace of Zerubbabel's Life, Care and Power, as alſo his ſucceſs in this 
i;h Work to encourage both him and the Jews. # Whoever thou art 
# that doſt hear me, both Zerubbabel and all among the Jews ; # Shalt 
f the be fully affured and certainly know. x God of Truth and Mercy ; 
fag Our God from our Fathers who remembers his Covenant, y Com- 
marded me to preach theſe things. x Returned Captives, and poor 
d. Builders of this ftarely and magnificent Houſe. 


Fi. 10 For who 9 hath deſpiſed the day of ſmall thingsb ? 
70 | for c they ſhat] reJoyce, and ſhall fee the Tt plummet q 
153, 1 the hand of Y.erubbabel wth thoſe ſeven e, * they 

Vol, M, | 


| 


f The Angel, chap. 4. ver. 1, 5. g O Zechariah. h That is ten 
Yards long by this it appears the Roil was ſpread out, for had it 
been rolled up, he could not have ſeen the length, tho' he did the 
breadth five Yards, 

3 Then faid he 7 unto me, This zs the curſe # that 
goeth forth / over the face of rhe whole earth 2 : for 
|| every one that ſtealerh 7, ſhall be cur off o as on this 
fide, according to it p - and every one that 1weareth g, 
ſhall be cut off a on thar fide, according to It. 

7 The Angel which inſtruRted the Prophet. & This Roll or Book 
containeth-the Curſe, the menaced Puniſhment due to Sinners, of 
which too many were ſtill among the Fews. 1 That goeth ſpeedily, 
for it flieth. m Either the whole Land of Fzdea, or over all the 
World, where-ever theſe Sinsare found 3 this Curſe will come upon 
the Sinners, unleſs they repent. n Theft is here firſt mentioned, a 
Sin thar had abounded among them, and from which they were nat 
free then;- they robb'd one another, and they robb'd God, they were 

i _ 


t 2-] facry 


F : $ 
X Y : 
WA 4 & J 
n+ 4 # 
. ">: : 
h xg - | 
Y th ; 
: 3: <4 þ ! 
Þ 4 *y LA ( . , 
Fi } = $. þ FF] 4 4 
; £47 b 0 ? 
[ : M634 4 : 
r ; . s F 
$ j- 2 ' 
a Q s - TITER 
't5 \ - - I 
Ye) 157% + hb 14% 
[1 , »l 
Thats © TRE $1 If 
z FF: 1 06.286 þ ] 
. my ki is JF , j 
y : pi & - . 


T Heb. 
hy the hand. 
' Or, empty 
out of them- 
ſelves oll 
13to the 
gold. 

Heb. 
the gold. 


*Rev.11.4; 
eb, 

ſons of oil. 

*. Ch.6. 5: 


[| Or, every 
one of this 


people that 
# 


b ealeth, 
holdeth 
himſelf 


guiltleſs, as 


it doth, 


Chap. V. 


* Ch. 8.17. 


* Gee Lev. 
E4: 45. 


> Shall be puniſhed with an extermination of his Houſe, 
| p According to the juſt Threats 
Perſon ſhall be cur 


ſacrilegious- {het 
as well as with cutting otf his Lite. ling 
of the Law. g Profanely, or falſly, the perjur'd 
off too. | 

4 I will bring it forth s, ſaith the LORD of hoſts, 
and ir ſhall enter 7 into the houſe z of the thict x, and 
into the houſe of * him rhar fiveareth falily by my 
Name y : and ir ſhall remain & in the midit @ of his 
houſe, and * ſhall conſume b it with the timber thereot, 


and the ſtones thereof c. | 

s So exemplarily will I execute this Judgment,that it ſhall appear 
I do itz my Hand, ſaith God, ſhall be ſeen in it. # None ſhall be 
able to keep it out, this Curſe ſhal! come with Commiſſion from me. 
x Where hc laid up that he got by Theft, and thought to rejoyce 1n 
it; or by Houſe underſtand all his Eſtate and Goods,with his Family 
and Poſterity. x The Robbers of God, and of their Neighbours, 
and every other notorious Tranſgrefſor of the Precepts of the ſecond 
Table. y This doth explain that of the third Verſe, and *tis plain 
that the perjur'd Perſon is here threatned, every one that dares call 
God to witneſs to a Falſchood,2nd imprecate themſelyes:f they ſpeak 
notTruth. 7 This Curſe ſhall be a long Curie, it ſhall ſtick cloſe to 
them and theirs like Gehazi'sLeprofie. a As in the Heart and Center 
of their Houſe, like a Sword in the midſt of the Bowels, or likea Diſ- 
eaſe that ſeizech the Heart. b Though it do not deftroy tuddenly,it 
ſhall deſtroy ſurely. c The ftrevgth of it, nothing ſhall remain, as 
when both Timber and Stones of a Houſe are conſumed and waſted. 
Such Execution ſhall be done on thoſe whoſe Name and Place ſhall 
be blotred out. : 

5 | Then the angel that ralked with me, went 
forth &, and {aid unto me, Litr up now thine cycs c, and 
ice whar zs this that goeth forth. 

d Or went on, proceeded; or,as we read it, went forth from ſome 
more retired Place, though he do not tell us what 1t was, or where he 
was with the Prophet when the laſt Viſion appeared. e Now the Pro- 


- phet was come forth with the Angel, he is commanded to look upand 


obſerve whar he ſeeth going forth from Jeruſalem, or the Temple. 
6 And | f ſaid, Whar zs it? And he g ſaid, This zs 
an ephah Þ that goeth forth z. He ſaid, moreover #, 


This zs their reſemblance / through all the earth. 

F Zechariah k:ew not what this was he ſaw, ſo far was he from 
knowing whar it meant. g The Angel. h The greareſt, ſay ſome, 
of Mcatures with the Hebrews, but their Corus was much greater; 1* 
was a great Meaſure, and many times taken for any Meaſure; when 
ftritly raken, it held ſome three Buſhels. 7 Out of the Temple of 
Feruſalem. k, Having told the Propher whar the thing as, the Ange] 
addeth once and aboye. 1 This, how dark ſoeyer it may ſeem to be, 
1s a clear Emblem of this People every where. Thus there 1s a li- 
mited Time and Meaſure tor them, whiMt they fin, and are filliig up 
the Ephah with their Sins, they will fiad thar the Ephah of Wrath 
1s filled up alio to be poured out upon them 3 or, as the Hebr. This 
tncir Eye; as the Galiich Verſion, This the Eye I have upon them,7xc. 
7. e. God's Eye obſerves how they fill their Ephah with Sin, that he 
may ſutably punith, that his Ephah of Wrath may fill alſo. 

7 And behold 7, there was lift up 7 a || talent ot 
lead o : and this zs a woman p thar fitterh q in the 

Vdit of the ephah. 

1m Here is another part of this Viſion. n Either lifted up from out 
of the Eph:h, or brought thither to cover it. o A large piece of 
Lead of a Talent weight, large as the Mouth of the Ephah. p A 
Woman, the third in the Vifion or Emblem. q Secure, ſhameleſs, 
and reſolved of her way in increafing in Sin. 

S And he faid 7, This s 7s wickedneſs z ; and he caſt 
it z into the midit of the ephah., and he caſt the weight 
of lead upon the mouth x thereof. 

7 The angel unfolds the Riddle, s This Woman that fits in the 
Ephah repreſents the figtul Nation of the Jews, is Emblem of their 
Wickednels. # In the Abſtrat to expreſs the Greatneſs of the Jews 
Wickednefs, they will grow up to be moſt wicked, « The Angel 
caſt down this Woman's Wickedneſs trom the Sear ſhe ſat on, ver. 7. 
x And now ſhe 15 down, the weight of Lead, which ſhe can never: 
lift up, or remove, 15 laid upon the Mouth of the Ephah; ſhe is ſhut 
up, as in 4 Priſon, to ſuffer the Puniſhment of all her Sins. This 1s 
their Reſerablance, 

5s Then lift ] up mine eyes y, and looked 2, and be- 
hold, there came our @ two women b, and the wind 
was In their wings c, ( tor they had wings like the wings 
of a itork) and they lift up the ephah between the 
earth and the heaven d, 

y Vid. ver, 1, let.c. x Ibid. let. d. a From the ſame Place whence 
the Ephah came. 6b The finful Nation was reſembled to a Woman ; 
and now, to keep a Pecorum in the Viſion, they who are to be God's 
Exccutioners, to punith that wicked Woman, are called Women ; *tis 
like enough to be meant of the Romans, a warlike and ftout Nation. 
c They are ſet forth as having Wings, like the Wings of Storks, 
large and ſtrong, ard as flying before the Wind with great ſwiftneſs; 
f> !h-uld Divine Vengeance ſwiftly tollow,and certainly overtake the 
Jew:th Nation, when atter their Return our of Captivity they ſhall 
corrupt thenifelves, and fill up the Meaſure of their Sins. d The 
Judgments came thus flying, and fo bear away with them rhofe chat 
2rc to be punithed : It 15 a ſecrer intunation of a future deportation, 
or carrying tae ſews into Caprivity again for ſin. 

_ Ie Then e faid I co the angel thar talked with me, 
Whither g do theſe bear þ the ephah ? 

e Vhen | faw rhe Ephah, Woman impriſoned, and led too on the 
Wings of thoſe rwo Women in motion. f Zechariah. g To whar 
Place, and 5 far. þ Not as a Nurſe carrieth che Child, but as Cri- 
12!S arc Carried to puniſhinent. 

11 Ard he ſaid unto me, To * build it an houſe z in 
the land or Shinar A, and it ſhall be eſtabliſhed, and 
ter there / upon het own baſe ww. 


#BCHARIAH. 
| 


The Angel gives him an Anſwer fuller than his Queſtion, and fir 
tells che Propher what was to be done with it, 7 Not in Mercy, bye 
= as intending the next deportation ſhould not be as the 
firſt for ſeventy Years, bur for ever; they ſhould never return. } Of 
Babylon, whither many of the Jews fled, and ſo by voluntary Exile 
fulfiiled this Prophecy, whither others of them were forced by th. 
Romans. 4 There they ſhall be confined without hope of Re!. 

m Not on the Foundation of God's Promiſe and Covenant, i;;;- 
Baſe of their Sins, 


CHAT. * 


The viſion of four chariots ſheweth that God will execute his judgmen;, 
upon his enemies, 1——8. By the crown of Joſhua is ſhewed the temple 
and kingdom of Chriſt, 9 — 14. Gracious promiſes to the chuych on 
their obedience, 1 5. 


Nd I turned «, and lift up mine eyes 6, and lookeg 

and behold, there came tour chariots c out from 

berween d rwo mountains, and the mountains were moun. 
tains of braſs e: 

a See ch. 5. ver. 1. let-b. b Ibid. let.c, d, c The Appearance or 
Emblem is plain enough, we can eafily conceive that; but the thin $ 
ſignified hereby are moſt ditticultly found out, and perhaps nor found 
when we think they are: here then,if any where,all are are bound to 
write mode-{tly, aud 2:1 are bound to read carefully,and to judge can- 
didly. Wh: t5y thele Chariots are meant, 1.The various Changes 
made by W 4: 1n the Nations; the Chartots, as ſome ſay, were Cha- 
ricts for Wa: and drawn by ſeveral coloured Horſes; and thus Wars 
and Murations thereby might ve ſignified : 2. Or, the four Monar: 
chies of different Temper and Carriage toward the Jews and others 
whom they ruled 3 as very many learncd Expofitors think : Or. 
3. The four Goſpels, with the Apoſtles and Preachers of the Goſpel 
ſent by Chriſt,as others: Or, 4+ Angels who are ſometimes ſtiled Cha. 
riots of God, and who are by the Prophets, Daniel, Ezebiel. Zecha- 
riah,and by the Apocaly;ſe, introduced as great Miniſtets and Servants 
of Chriſt in the Aﬀairs of his Church ; I determine nor: tnough per- 
haps all theſe mighr fairly be woven into one Web, in which Angels 
as employed in the Aﬀairs of Church and Empire, a& their Parr in 
che Revolution and Changes of things, be theſe of what Temper ſoe- 
ever they willia both, till the Goſpel be preached by the Meſſiah and 
'1is Apoſtles. d Out of a deep, ſhady, and dark Valley, which here 
is laid between two Mountains; ſo God's Judgments area great Deep 
hiſt his Righreouineſs is as the great Mountains, Pſal.36.6.. e Theſe 
Mounrai:!5 appear to the Prophet very wondertul, for they were of 
Braf:, t» denote the immoveable Decrees of God, his ſteddy Exccuti- 
ans of his Counſels, the inſuperable Reſtraints upon all Empires and 
counſels, whi:h God keeps within the Barriers of ſuch Imprezaable 
Moun! a-ns, * herice not one can ftart till he open the way and poſ- 
fioly 1t may i:mport the Preflures, Difficulties and Diſtrefles of the 
Times tjgnified hereby. . 

2 In the nrit chariot were red f horſes, and in the ſe- 
cond chariot black g horles, ; 

There 15 no diſtii@jon made between Chariot and Chari6t, nor any 
men: madert the Drivers of theſe Chariots, though theſe are in- 
ciutc: 1: ihe Chartots: Nw oy the different Colours of the Horſe: 
doth th- ®ropnet diſtinzuiih the Chariots ; and poffibly that is all 
wcended by the various Colours, though generally Interprerers do 
gueſs by the C::our of the Horſes what ſhould be the uality and 
Temper of the Tire: poinied at; of which a little. f May fignifie 
blody Times, a fiery execution of Wrath, Rev. 6. 4. & A time of 
Mortality and waſting Diſeaſes, Rev. 6, 5. 

3 And inthe third Chariot white h horſes, and in the 
fourth chariot griiled 7 and || bay horſes. 

h Joyful and proſperous Aﬀairs, ſee ch, 1. wer. 8. let. d. # State 
of Aﬀairs mix'd of good and bad, ch. 1.8. let, c. 

4 Then I aniwered and 1aid unto the angel that talke 
ed with me, Whar are theſe, my lord ? 

Vide ch. 5. ver. 5. and ch. I. Vers I 9. 

5 And the angel anſwered and faid unto me, Theſe 
are k the tour || ſpirits / of the heavens 2», 
forth from * ſtanding 2 before the Lord 


earth o. 


"i Ct.4! 
k Signifie, or are the Emblems of I Winds, Heb. to which the 1yyu 


Empires are ©o:zpzred, Dan. 7. 2.. and for the buſtlings of them may 
be well compared io; 2nd toraſmuch as they are raiſed by the Lord, 
and are under his Con:5nd, may properly enough be called Winds 
of Heaven, which blow a: God orders. Or, Spirits of, z. e. Angels 
of Heaven, who have, as Miniſters of Divine Providence a great 
ſhare in che Manage of Aﬀairs both of Church and State. "Or, the 
Impulſes cf God's Spirit moving as he pleaſeth in the Kingdoms of 
Mea, and in Þ15 Church. Indeed this is the great Spring which moves 
Angels, and ſets them on work about what is to be done by them, ei- 
ther for or agaialt States and kingdoms.eſpecially in reference tothe 
Church of Gd. im Which as they refide.in Heaven, till employed, 
ſo go thence when employed, and obſerve the Will of their God in 
Heaven, a..9 having done their Work return thither again. n They 
ſtand as Servauts attending the Will and Command of their Lord. 
o Their God is Lord of all, and their Buſineſs to do his Will in all 
the - 0 not 11 one only part, bat every where, whitherſoeyer thcy 
are ſent. 

6 The black horſes p which are therein 9, go forth 
into the north-country 7, and the white s go torth at- 
rer them; and the grifled 7 go forth toward the ſouth: 
COUNtry 2. 

þ The Angel fignified by the black Horſes, the Executioners ©f 
God's juſt ditpleaſure againſt Sinners, 9g In the ſecond Chariot, for 
nothing is ſaid more of the firſt, ) the red Horſes) ſay ſome, becauic 
that bloody and cruel State was expired,but the ſad things portended 
by the black Horſe are to come next on the Scene. »r Babylon, the 
whole Kingdom of Babylon, which lay ſo much North from Fudes, 2rd 
becauſe the Mctropelis lay North, the whole Kingdom is called the 


North Country, which muſt feel the EffeRts of theſe black _— wo. 
WIAILC! 


which go|0 
T ls 
oft all the |, 


Chap. v1 Mcha 


tor the 
IO 
of To 
bylon, 
houſe | 
m Gc 
to n:ake 
who yet 
: Go fe 
ompan 
day 9s 
ſmith ; « 
Perſons 
Temple, x 
BY; = 
and ſer 
Toledec] 
q This 
ormer C 
Ss Put botl 
Circumſta 
his People 
extraordin 


anch NUme zs 
n- Of his pl 


' LORD, 


u 7oſhua 

x Confider 
mony, y Th 
liznified by 
expect, and 
the Branch, 
Wonderful P 
Proxy, Or in 
Branch it ; 
Root dry or 
Meſſiah King 
The and K 


Hi 

+69; 
i 
bs 


| -6& 
% 
PH 5 
5 


o 


b 
£458 
Phi 6s 

Fs 
AF. 4 I 
; y 
: 


fy 
> 
- 


\ 


# 
o 


£ 
$ 
' 


ZECHARIAH. Chap. V11 |þ 


unſeen, that ſtands by you, that built the material Temple ; Neither 
Zerubbabel nor Foſhua, nor all the Jews, could do any thing without 
Chriſt in the preſent Building, which is yet far inferiowur to the Spi- 
ritual Temple, which Chriſt will build, beautifie 2nd nreter ve, and 
dwell in for ever. : 

13 Even he ſhall build 7 the temple of the LORD #. 
and he ſhall bear the glory f, and he (hall firs and rule þ _ x 
upon his throne 7, and * he 1hall be a prieſt 4 upon his 317% 4 


VI. 


hich was executed by the Hands of the Medes and Perſians,aſſiſted 
a that Squadron of Angels which appeared in the ſecond Place. 
by iniſters of Goodneſs, Mercy and Kindneſs, went after the bjack 3 
: 4 their Buſineſs was,fay ſome, to diſpoſe Aﬀairs for the Benefit and 
Tc of God's People in Babylon, whither theſe were ſent to preſerve 
hem ro condu them, and bring them back ; and here was greir 
4's in this, for many ſtaid behind till Ezra and Nehemtah's time. 
The Angels ſignified by theſe, and whoſe Buſineſs, as ſome gueſs, 
- he Roman Power, which was a mixture of many dit- 


Chap 


Heb. 2: 1. 


av in managing t . : , 
”_ People, and which were ſometimes favourable, ſometimes 


fierce and ſevere tO thoſe they had to do with. u Egypt and Arabia, 
which lay South of Judea, and which the Romans did, though late, 
ſabdue z it may perhaps point at their invading Africa too, whoſe 
Puniſhmenrs were mixed ſomewhat with Kindneſs and Mercy more 
than the Puniſhments of Babylon were. 

7 And the bay went forth y, and ſought > to go, 


that they might walk to and tro through the earth « : 
and he faid b, Get ye hence c, walk to and fro through 


the earth. - So they walked d to and fro through the 


arth. | 
Y y From the place where the Propher ſaw them at firſt ſtanding,as at 


the ſtarting place. x Either asked, Commiſſion, or waited for it. 
4 They hada larger Commiſſion, ſay ſome, the whole Earth, or a 
particular Commiſſion to keep their Rounds 1n the Land of Fudea,and 
to take care of their Afﬀairs for the Comfort of that People. 6 Chriſt 
who hath all Power in Heaven and on Earth. c Stay no longer here, 
haſten to your Charge 3 as you have defired, ſo do. d They obey 
immediately and do his Commands. Theſe bay. Horſes are here re- 

reſented as attempting or making Effay, which at firſt ſeems to take 
little effe&, though at laſt by a full Commiſſion empowered, they do 
ſucceed in-the Attempt. This might give ground to ſuppoſe here is 
ſome Kingdom aimed at, which made ſome Attempts to enlarge it 
ſelf through all the Earth,but failed in 1ts Attempt, which no won- 
der fince the Angels which were to affift were not commulionated to 
walk through the whole Earth, and they keeping to their Commiſ- 
fion gave no farther help, for want of which the Deſign failed. How 


fir this may concern Goths and Vandals, or any more late Empires | 


and Kingdoms, I have neither Skill nor Will farther to enquire, Nor 
yet to enquire whether theſe Bay Horſes were not Emblems of An- 
gels employed by the Lord, in the Government of the reſt of the 
Kingdoms of the World remote from Fudea, but not remote from 
God's Wiſe and Sovereign Providence governing allthe Earth. The 
known Empires here are ſuppoſed to have been managed by particu- 
lar Angels, repreſented according to the Analogy between the Co- 
lours of the Horſes and the Comple=x1on of the Kingdoms. And it 
may ſeem likely that the reſt of the World was not left without ſome 
to haye Care of them. 
$ Then e cried he fupon me, and ſpake unto me, ſay- 
ing, Behold, theſe that go g toward the north-country þ 
have quieted my ſpirit 2 in the north-country. 
e When the Propher had been informed about the former Viſion. 
f The Angel that talked with the Prophet, 7.e. the Lord Chriſt ſpake 
aloud, and called to him. g Or are gone, tor he ſpeaks of what was 
already paſt, *tis likely he meanerh the red Horſes. þ Into Babylon. 
; Either by doing what I appointed them againſt the cruel Chaldeans, 
in Revenge of my Peoples Injuries, or bringing my People back out 


of Babylon into Canaan. 
9 < And # the word / of the LORD came unto me, 


ſaying, 

þ It appears not that this next thing hath any neceſſary Connexi- 
on to that which the Prophet laſt ſaw. / The DireC&tion or Command 
for the Prophet to do ſomething*ut of hand. 

10 Take m of them of the captivity, ever of Heldai, 


of Tobijah, and. of Jedaiah, which are come from Ba- 
bylon, and come thou 7 the fame day 0, and go into the 
houſe of Jofiah p the ſon of Zephaniah : 


m Gold and Silver, of thoſe that are come out of Babylon, lately, 
to n:ake their Oblation to the Lord or to bring the Oblation of them, 
who yet were in Babylon, but remembred Jeruſalem and the Temple. 
n Go fetch them if they lodge elſewhere, and bring them 1n thy 
Company. o The ſame day in which they come, orelſe in the ſame 
day that I ſpeak unto thee, delay not. p Some ſay he was a Gold- 
ſmith 3 others, that he was Treaſurer for the Temple, and that theſe 
Perſons before-named had brought a rich Preſent to him tor the 
Temple, and the Service of the Lord. 

11 Then take filver and gold g,and make *-crowns 7, 


” and ſer them s upon the head of Joſhua 7, the fon of 


throne, and the counſel of peace ſhall be berween them 
both /. 

4 The Promiſe is repeated to ſettle the Fews in the afſured Exp 
Ration of the thing. e Your material Temple as Type, and the S$pi- 
ritual Temple as Antitype. f Of both kingly Officeand prieſtly, the 
Glory of both thoſe Crowns ſhall abide on him, the only Perſon WOr- 
thy of it. g Which ſpeaks both his Royal Magnificence, and the per- 
petuity of it. þ Though he ſhall have many Actendants and Officers, 
yet he ſhall Rule, give Laws, diftribute Rewards, and puniſh Offen- 
ders. 7 His by Birth, by Donation, by Purchaſe, and by Conqueſt, 
his moſt undoubtedly by beſt Right. & The great High Prieſt, to 
offer the.great Sacrifice roGod, to make Reconciliation, to intercede 
for his People ; rhis is that meant by the Crowns ſet on thy Head, O 
Foſhua. 1 The Peace made for God's People ſhall reſt upon theſe two 
the kingly and prieſtly Office of Chriſt z by his prieſtly Office he 
ſhall make their Peace with God,by his kingly Office he ſhall deliver 
them from ſpiritual Enemies; by priettly Operation he ſhall expi- 
ate our Sin, by the Power of his kingly Office he ſhall extirpate Sin ; 
as Prieft he makes, as King maintains Peace 3 purchaſe as a Prieſt, 
protect as a King. ; 

14 And the crowns #2 fhall be to Helem 7, and to 
Tobijjah, and ro Jedaiah, and ro Hen the fon of Zepha- 
niah, tor a memorial o in the temple of the L OK D. 

m Thoſe two Crowns before-mentioned, made of the Gold and Sil- 
ver brought from Babylon, ver. 11, n Theſe Perſons we know no 
more of with any certainty, but their Names. 9 Of their Increduli- 
ty ſay ſome, of their Liberality ſay others; but theſe Crowns were 
certainly to be Memorials of the Meſffiah's certain and ſpeedy Com- 
ing,and to be reſerved in the Temple, as a Memorial of this ſolemn 
Typical Inauguration of Foſhua, or Meffiah in him. 

15 And they 7har are tar oft p thall come 9 and build 
in the temple of the L OK D, and * ye ſhall know that ; 
the LORD of hoſts hath ſent me unto you r. And 2/5 WY 
ſhall come to pals s, if ye will diligently obey the voice 
of the LOR D your God. 

This Verſe hath certainly a double Reference, one to the Jews, and 
che building of the marerial Temple, which is the liceral and hiſtori- 
cal 5enſe,the other myſtical,and refers to the bringing in of the Gen- 
tiles. p Such Jews as do now abide in Babylon and Perſia, or other 
remote Parts. 'Tis alſo the Charatter of the Gentiles, A#s 2.42. 
Eph. 2. 13, 14. q The Jews did fo with their Gifts, came to 7eruſa- 
lem and builc with theic Brethren ; the Gentiles are come jn and 
build the ſpiritual Temple. r The Accompliſhment of this ſhall prove 
my words tc be God's Word, and that I am ſent of him. £s The li- 
teral Part ſhall come to paſs in your day, it you will obey the Voice 
of the Lord your God ſpeaking by me : The myſtical Part ſhall come 


a pals alſo ; and, if you will believe and obey, the Gentiles thail 


come in and be your Erethren, make up one Church with you, 
and help to build the Temple, the ſpiritual Temple. Bur if you 
obey nor you ſhall be caſt out, and the Gentiles be taken in t9 be 
God's People, and to build his Femple. 


CHAT 


The captive Jews enquire about obſerving the fat *heir forefathers a3 7, 
I — 3. Zechartah reproveth it, 4 —— 7. 'n exhnrtation to [hw 
mercy, 9, 10. Their refuſing to hear G14's w id, the cauſe why the 
Lord will not hear their prayer, but ſcatter them, 11 — 14, 


ND in came to pals 2, in the fourth year b of king 

Darius c, that the word of the LOR D came un- 

to Zechariah in the fourth day of the ninth month, ever 
in Chifleu 4 $ : 

a A moſt uſual Form of Speech introdu@ary to what ſhall after- 
wards be ſpoken. þ When the Jews had now been two Years in 
building the Temple, and probably 'twas in good forwardneſs. c Son 
of Hyſtaſpis, about Anno Mundi 3487, as Archbiſhop Uſher in his 4n- 
nals, d Part of our N»vember and December, when half the time of 
building the Temple was ſpent. 

2 When they e had ſent unto the houſe of God F, 


Joitedech the high prieſt 

q This reiterating the Command, both confirms and explains the 
former Command. y Two, the one of Silver, the other of Gold. 
s Put both of them, 7. e. one after the other. # Who now in this 
Circumſtance ſtands a Type of Chriſt, King and Prieſt for ever for 


Sherezer and Regem-melechg, and their men þ to + pray + Heb, in: 
before the LO R D p. treat the 


e Either the Captives which ſtill continued in Babylon,or the Jews face of the 
returned out of Captivity, but dwelt in the Country at diſtance trom LORD. 


his People, and this extraordinary AR was to repreſent ſomething 
extraordinary in the Meſſiah. 


12 And ſpeak unto him z, ſaying, Thus ſpeaketh rhe 

{ LORD of hoſts, ſaying, Behold x the man y whoſe 
ah Name zs the BRANCH 2, and he ſhall || grow 4 up gut 

T an- of _ ”=_ b, and he ſhall build the temple ©c of the 


u Foſhua, but in hearing of others, and in the Name of the Lord. 
x Confider throughly the imporc and meaning of this unuſual Cere- 
mony. y Thou Joſhua art the Type or Figure, bur he that is the Man 
Iiznified by thee, is that great Perſon God hath promiſed, and you do 
expett, and who ſhallcome. x Whom you know by the Name of 
the Branch, who was called ſo long ſince, Meffiah Ben David; this 
wonderful Perſon is the Man that is crowned, as King and Prieſt by 
Proxy, or in Effigy : Thou, O Foſhua, art the Pourtrait, he is the 
Branch it ſelf, ch. 3.8. a Though you may perhaps ſuſpe& the 
Reot dry or dead, yet afſuredly 'tis not, the Branch will ſpring up, 
diefſiah King and Prieſt ſhall be born in due time» 6 Of the ſame 

2 and Family, and inthe ſame Place foretold. c He it is,though 


Feruſalem. f Temple,which now half built began co be frequented by 
Prieſts and People, and where Haggat and Zechariah might be found 
true Prophets. g Irappears not who theſe were, but no doubt they 
were eminent in Dignity and Piety. h Train either of Friends that 
accompanied them; or, of Servarits that waited on them. 7 In moſt 
ſolemn manner, and with Sacrifices no doubr, for the Altar was ſer 
up long ago, Now theſe come to intreat the Face of the Lord by 
Prayer, in the Houſe of Prayer, for Pardon of what was pait, and 
Acceptance of them ar preſent, aud for Anſwer to their Inquiry, 


3 And to ſpeak & unto the prieſts / which were in »2 
the houſe of the LORD of hots, and ro the prophets z, 
ſaying, Should I weep o in tkz fifth month p, ſeparating 
my ſelf 9, as I have done 7 thee ſo many years sf 

þ To conſult with. / They were to be the ordinary Caſuiits, and 
ought to be able and ready to anſwer ail Caſes of Conſcience, as 
Mal. 2. 79. m Had their reſidence in, or about the Temple. n Theſe 
were extraordinary Caſuiſts, who might be ſuppoſed able to fatisfte 
the Enquiry, if the Prieſts could not, Thefe Prophets were Hagga? 

po 


Chap 


* Iſa. 58. g. 
* Ch.1.12. 
*See Rom. 
I4. 6s 


{ Or, be nct 
ze they 
that, &c. 


[| Or, are 
not theſe 
the words. 
+ Heb. 

by the hand 
of, &C.. 


* Mic. 6.C. 
Mat.23.23 
tTHev. judge 
Jud ment 
of trth, 


* Jer.5.28. 
* Ch.8.17. 


T Heb. they 


give da 
back (liding 
ſhoulaer, 
+ Heb. 


made heavy c 


VII. 


and Zechariah. 0 + e. Faſt, of which Weeping was a part, 1 Sam. 
I. 7.and Mat. 9.15. þ In ſad Remembrance ot the burning of the 
Temple on the ioth Day of that Month. q From worldly Cares and 
Deſigns, and affiiting my ſelf. r This intimateth their former 
Practice, and ſeems to include in it ſome little boaſting of it. s It 
had been eafie for them to have reckoned up the exat Number of 
Years, but they chooſe rather to expreſs it thus, to greaten their per- 
formance. 

4 © Then 7 came the word z of the LORD of hoſts 
unto me, ſaying, 

£ When theſe Men had propoſed their Caſe, and expetted the 
Prieſts Anſwer. # An Anſwer from God, which folloivs in the 7th 
and 8th Chapters of this Book at large. 

5 Speak unto all the people x of the land y, and to 
the prieſts -, ſaying, When ye * faſted and mourned 2 in 
the fifth b and ſeventh c months, even thoſe * ſeventy 
years d, did ye at all faſt * unto me e, cven to me / * 

x 7.e. Either by their Mefſengers who came in their Name, or to 
all the Jews that were at Jeruſalem. y By which it ſeems to be not the 
Loiterers in Babylon, but the returned in Fudea, that ſent. g Some of 
thele perhaps doubted ; and others might overvalue, and dote on 
theſe voluntary Services, and needed as well as deſerved a'Reproof. 
a Who preſcribed this your Faſt? and fince you needs would, (as it 
was at Liberty you might faſt and mourn) who was better for it? 
or did you do it to pleaſe me, when you diſpleaſed me by other your 
finful Courſes? 6 Sce ver. 3. let.p. c For the Murder of Gedaliah, 
ſlain by Iſhmael, Jer. 41.1. d So many they were ſince Gedaliah's 
death to this time of Erquiry, which 1s made now as many Years at. 
ter the return as Gedaliah was ſlain after the beginnin:g of the Captt- 
vity. e Whatever ws in it, there was very little 1a it from me, 
no Command, no Hoaour, as you ordered it, you pleaſed your ſelves 
in it, not me; you wept more for the Inconvenicnces of the thing, 
than the Sinfulneſs of it. Had you taſted to me, you would have 
abſtained more from Sin, which I forbad, than from Meats which 1 
did not forbid. f As if God had ſaid, I put it o0.ice more to you, 
did you indeed faſt to me ? . : 

6 And when ye did eat, and when ye did drink, 
| did ye not eat for your jelves, and diink for your 

elves & 

I was as little minded by you in your Faſts, as in your Feaſts, and 
I was as litt'e pleaied with your Faſts, as Feaſts ; fe)f was all in both, 
you look'd no higher. Such Faſting commends none to God, you 
had not bcen the worſe if you had torborn ſuch Faſts, nor arc you | 
the berter for ſuch illinanaged Abſtiner.ce. | 

7 || Should ye not hear the words g which the LORD 
hath cried þ + by the former prophets z, when Jeruſa- 
lem was inhabited, and in proſperity #, and the cities 
thereof round about her, when mez inhabited the 1lourh 


and the plain ? 

2 You needed not have thus enquired, had yecu heeded the word 
written, ſhould you not remember ? Or have you not read what 1/a. 
58. 3, 4» 5, 6, 7. determines in this very Caſe ? bh Openly and loudly 
ſpoken. 7 Who have given you the true Value of Obedience to the 
great and niomentous Precepts of the Laiy,who have called for Repen- 
tance, and fincere Love to God and Man, and have on juſt Ballance 
ſhewed how light and under Weight tormal Services have been, 
þ Did ſuch Obſervances preſerve Feruſalem in its Froſperity ? Did they 
prevent the Deſolation of the Cities round about her? Were they 
ſufficient ro ſave the Men, the Multitudes that inhabited the South 
of the Plain ? Did thev, or could they do no good when things 
were all fate and well? And do you tondly imagine they can profit 
you now a!l is in Ruines? Can fy reſtore a fallen State that could 
not ſupport it falling ? 

s & And the word of the LORD came unto Lecha- 
114h, faying. 

V:d. wer. 4. fot. | 

9 Thus ipeaketh / the LORD of hoſts, ſaying, 
* + Execute true judgment , and ſhew mercy z and 
compeilions o every man p 70 his brother g. 

[ Or did ſyeak, 7. e. to your Fathers, and thus he doth ſpeak to 
you Gow. 22 God required former Judges, and he requireth preſent 
Judges, without Hatred, Prejudice, Paitiality, or Eribery, to give 
true Sentence. 7 Be kind and berefice»t to ſuch as need. Wrong 
none, if you could ; do good to all you can. o With tendereft and 
moſt abundant Fity, with a Heart that fcels their Miſeries. p As 
this is every Man's Duty, let it be every ones Pratice. q 7.e. to 
every one that needs you. : 

10 And * oppreſs 7 not the widow £, nor the father- 
leſs, the {tranger, nor the poor, and * let none of you 
imagine evil againſt his brother 1n your heart z, 

y Do not firſt miſreport their Perſons, their ARions, and their 
Caſes, and on that Pretence do them wrong, and oppreſs them : 'tis 
doublc Oppreffion, to oppreſs by falſe Information, and then con- 
demn z the firſt is an Oppreffion ot Righteouſneſs, the next is Op- 
preffi »n of the Righteous. s A Cataiogue of helpleſs ones who are 
under the peculiar Tutelage of God, Exod. 22. 21, 22. Deut. Io. 18. 
and 14.25. and 24. 17, 19. I/a. 1.17, 23, &c. & Neither think 1] 
of, or wiſh il] to, nor plot evil againſt one another. 


11 But they refuſed to hearken z, and+ pulled away 
the ſhoulder x, and + ſtopped their ears y, that they 
thould not hear 2. 

u They wilfully were 1gnorant,would not conſider nor underſtand. 
x Next they ſhift from doing their Dury, withdraw their Shoulder 
rom the Yoke of the Law, Neh. 9. 29. Hiſ. 4-16. y And to make 
it higheſt Contempt, they a& che deat Man, ſtop their Ears, and ſo 
rurn their Backs on God. 7 All this out of an obſtinate Reſolution 
to be unacquainted with God's Will, aud their own Duty. 

12 Yea, they mude @ their hearts a4 an adamant þ 
ſtone, leſt they ſhowd hear c the law &, and the words e 


ZECEHARIUN 


aedeoo Chap. VI 

which the LORD of hoſts 7 hath ſent in his ſpirit - 

+} by the former prophets þ : therefore : came 4 great +1. 

wrath # trom the LORD of hoſts /. ther? 
a Though the Heart of it ſelf is far from taking Impreſſions, ang of os 

recelving kindly the Law of God, yet theſe deſperate Sinners think 

tis too pliable, they ſtudy how to harden it, and this was the Fault 

of many of them. 6 The hardeſt of Stones. c Which was peremy- 

rorily required of them, and they as peremptorily reſolyed againſt f 

4 Of God by Moſes, of whom they boaſted, whilſt they deſpiſed his 

Law. e Counſelsaad Commands. f Which the Lord of Hoſts their 

God ſpake, nay though they knew he ſpake they would not hea; 

g By his Holy Spirit in clear Evidences, piercing-Convidions, —_— 

erful Opcration, and dreadful Threatnings 3 yet they Oppoſed and r«. 

fiſted, and finned againſt his Spirit. þ All of them acted by the 

ſame Spirit,and preffing them to the ſame Duties, and toretelling the 

ſame Miſeries, and promiſing the ſame Bleſſings, but all would not 

prevail. 7 For this great Obſtinacy. k which conſumed the whole 

Land, and burat againſt them 70 Years together in Babylon. } In all 

which the Hand of the Lord was moſt evidently ſeen, dealing to them 

according to their ways. Such were your Fathers, ſuch their Ways 

ſuch their Sufferings, all which is well known ro you who ſtart ſuch 

Queries, and mean while run away from the great Commands of the 

Law. 


13 Therefore m: it is come to pals, that as he 7 cri. 


Ch: 


| £Sre 194N 


| 2.30. 
Lim-2.20 
&c. & 5. 
11, 14+ 


= + Heb» 
| multitude 


of days, 


ed, and they would not hear ; fo * they cried o, and [*p;, 
would not hear, faith the LORD of hoſts. 1a. 
n. This is the very Cauſe, and *tis juſt too- n My Spirit by the 11.1.1, 
Prophets called, warned, intreated, and urged them to repent, obey, |tt-1141, q 
and live 3 but they would not. 0 By faſting and howling in their & 14.12 
deep,but choſen Diſtreſs, in the Miſeries they fell under after Gedali- Mich,3., 4 
ah's death, yet I would not hear ſaith the Lord of Hoſts; is it not | fi 
moſt juſt I ſhould diſregard their Tears for Gedaliah, when after his It 
death they pretended ro enquire that they might obey my Word gi 
Fer. 42. 2,3, with 5,5? yet then they gave my Prophet the Lye, h 
and contempruouſly reſolved to do contrary to my Word by him. Or, hard 
Fer. 43. 4- Thus you know my Reſentments of your Fafts held on ir dificult. | 
with your Sins, faith the Lord. Gen 18, _ 
14 Bur I ſcattered them p with a whirlwind q amoyg ws 
11l the nations + whom they knew not s : thus the k. 137, EY 
land 7 was deſolate after them z, that no man paſſed a 
through, nor returned x for they y laid the + pleaſant ita the 
land delolate. of i, ly x 
þ When they had ſo provoked me, I caſt them our of their Habira- Day 
tions, purſued them with the Tempeſt of Wrath that ſcattered them eT 


as I threatned, 9 Irrefiſtibly, ſuddenly, and tearing all into Pieces, 
as Whirlwinds do. r All the Heathen char hatred them, and their 
ways» £ Where they could haye no Pity, nor any Relief, nor com- 
mon Commerce but as barbarous Uſage as fierce and unintelligible 
Enemies can give them. # Once flowing with Milk and Honey once 
full of Cities, Men and Cattel, now waſte as a Wilderneſs. u Either 


4 


it Su Pron 


4 
Jeb. cOunc fav 
f the the 


a1wn F | 


the Jews caſt out, or the Chaldeans who caſt them out. xz *Twas nor Tate, 
fit to make a Road through a Land ſo void of all Neceffaries, ſo full bangs 
of wild and ravenous Beaſts, ſo unwholſom as to the Air, g9c. y Sin- brou; 
ful Jews by their Sins, fierce Chaldeans by their Sword ; and God, by the ] 
his juſt Diſpleaſure, laid the pleaſant Land moſt deſolate and wafte, WEFE 
CHAP. VII. _ 
The Prophet comforteth the Fews with the rejlauration of Feruſalem, 1 —. capti\ 
They are ative and encouraged to build the temple by God's favour ti ſhoulc 
them, 9——15, He exhorteth them to godlineſs, 16, 17, Their faſt from t 
ing ſhall be turned into joy, 18, 19. Gracious promiſes of enlargement Jews. 
made unto them, 20 —23. World 
Gain 2 the word of the LORD of hoſts b came» and 
me, laying, _ 
a Or And, Heb. as the word of Reproof in the former Chapter, in th 
ſo the word of Conſolation in this Chapter was from God. b Here- ple 77 
by God affureth the Jews that he promiſeth he can perform, and ouſne 
therefore in this Chapter, where ſo many things, ſo geeat, are pro- I Tt 
miſed, this Name 1s very many times repeated, in this ch. ver. 18. from re 
2 Thus ſaith the LORD of hoſts, I was c jealous ſupply 
tor Zion d with great jealouſie e, and I was jealous for up the 
her f with great tury g. | tonAe | 
c I have been in time paſt, in days of old, before the Captivity, contain; 
and I have been ſo fince the Captivity for ſome Years paſt. &d Pro- UI. 20, 
perly 'tis the Paſſion of a Lover or Husband, mix'd of Love, Care and Þ Both 
Anger in their higheſt Degrees for the Beloved, and againſt all that theirs in 
1s hurtful to if; ſo God had greatly loved Zion, had been careful of 9 
her Honour and Welfare, and diſpleaſed with her Sins, ( which firſt hands 
hurt her ) and then with the Chaldeans, which violated her. e With word 
great Eare that ſhe ſhould not, as formerly,ſfin againſt my Love,and ods 
her own Welfare, and with a great Loye to do her Good now, and In the 
to reſcue her from her Enemies. f On her behalf, and nor as for- LOR] 
merly againſ®her, 1 am jealous in favour to her (as the Hebrew built pp 
Phraſe 1mporteth.) g Witch Heat of Anger againſt her Enemics, 45 9 Beg 
ch. I. 14z 15. Which ſee. tion of G 
3 Thus faith the LOR D, TI am returned þ unto Li- Captives, 
on 7, and will dwell in the midſt of Jeruſalem #, and = by hi 
Jeruſalem * ſhall be called / a city of truth #7; and'l® time 1 po 
the mountain of the LORD of hoſts 7, the holy moun-* ing, but, 
taln 0; *10ns and « 
hþ I did in anger depart from finful and incorcigible, and unhum- Or Cyrus, 
bled Iſrael, and ſent them into a long Captivity, and a far diftance Cambyſes i 
from my Houſe; but now I am pacified, they puniſhed, and 1 wil be Crown of 
no longer abſent from them ; I am returned, not by change of place, the ſecond 
but by change of my dealings with them. 7 Literally to my place 0! Will make 
ancient Reſidence, where the Temple and City of David ſtood; ip!- But to lay | 
ritually to the Church whereſoever it was humbled in Diſtreſſes: of Darias x 
k Once more, as of old, I will fix my Reſidence, and afford my Fre: "12 Years t 
ſence there, as 1 King. 6. 13. and Pſal. 68. 16. according to Promile Plaint, for 
repeated to my People Jeruſalem ſhall be my Dwelling-place. / I! People wit 
ſhall be, for I will make ita m City of Truth, her Citizeos ihall go : and your D 


| the Truth and ſpeak it, ſhall worſhip me in truth of Heart, as well as 
in the true manner preſcribed to them, and they ſhall inherir the 
truth of my Promiſes too': much to this 15 that of Ezeh. 37. 23, 24, 
tothe end of the Chapter. - n Either Feruſalem ſhall be called, The 
Mountain of the Lord of Hoſts, or Mount Moriah,on which the Temple 
was built. 0 Shall be called, and be the holy Mountain, for thar the 
Temple isretMilt there, and the holy worſhip of God reſtored there 
impure Idols which were worſhipp'd there by your impure Fathers, 
and thereby was the Mountain defiled, ſhall now be caſt out, and 

none but the Holy God worſhipp'd in his holy Temple. 
4 Thus ſaith the LORD of hoſts, * There ſhall 
et old men p and old women 9 dwell in the {treets of 

| Lam-2+ 295 


b Jeruſalem, and every man 7 with his ſtaff in his hand 
&c,&X 5 


” tor + every age 5 
+ Heb. p Very old Men, and very old Women; formerly War, or Fa- 


Ur 16 or Peſtilence» and waſting Diſeaſes, or wild Beaſts, did cut off 
| _ mg Women before they grew to old Age; bur now it ſhall be 
£695 otherwiſe, 1 will bleſs with Health, and long Life, in a peacefu] 
State, q Though naturally the weaker, though by Child-bearing far- 
ther weakned; yet there ſhall be many of theſe very old ; or poſſi- 
bly it may intimate a very long Life with their beloyed Mates, and 
ſo old Men will be ancient Husbands, old Women their ancient 
Wives, | However, this old Age ſhall be a Crown of Honour to this 
City. 7 Every one, as Heb. will bear ir. s Through multitude of 
Days, it ſhall not be from Weakneſs and Diſeaſes, that they lean 
upon their Staff, but very Age ſhall bring them to ir, 

5 And the ſtreets 7 of the city ſhall. be full z of boys 


and girls x playing y in the ſtreets thereof. 

t Every Street. # Haye many young ones healthful, ſtrong, brisk, 
and lively, the preſent Joy, the future Hope of all. x So will I ful- 
fil the Promiſe of multiplying your Children. y Feruſalem ſhall be 
in that Peace; Health and Plenty, that Parents ſhall neither fear Dan- 
ger to their Children abroad, nor need their Labour at home. $o 
ſhall char, Pſal. 128. be fulfilled to them, , 

0r, hard, 6 Thus faith the L ORD of hoſts, If it be \| marvel- 


jr difficult. Jous Z in the eyes a of the remnant of this people þb 


| £9p7 1 SAM» 
| 2.3l- 


RIAH 


peace c to him that went out, or came in, becauſe of 


the attliction d : for I e ſer f all men, every one againſt 
his neighbour. 
a For eighteen Years together. b Reward or Recompe 

profit by the Labour of Man or Beaſt, ſowing or planting, Bid. tag, 
1.6, 7,8,9, 10, 11, and Hag. 2. 15, 16, 17, and Mal. 3. 10, 11. Or 
elſe though the poor Jew laboured and received Wages, it profited 
him not, God blaſted it. c No ſafety or content, and reſt at home 
or abroad; nothing proſper'd as might be hoped, in Field or Houſe 5 
it they went out 'twas trouble to ſee all unproſperous there; if they 
came home 'twas not one whit better : perhaps it may intimate trou- 
bles by War 3 but I inclixe to interpret IHYy I'R 45 1 have done 


with reſpe, partly ro the Hebrew, partly to the twelfth Verſe, 
4 Diſtreſs, or Straitneſs and Want, through ſuch great Barreaneſs as 
attended all their Labour. e God juſt and holy. f Let our, or took 
oft the Reſtraincs which kept Men in ſome order ; & when they were 
thus let out, they did diſcompoſe all, fell into Seditions, and taking 
of Parties, and breaking their own and others Peace, 

11 But now g I w2/! not be unto the refidue of this 
people Þ, as in the former days z, ſaith the LOR D of 
hoſts #. 

g Since this People go about building the Temple, and reſtoring 
my Worſhip with ſome Cheerfulneſs. h God changeth not; his not 
being what he was to this People is a change of his Providence and 
his Dealings wich them. Our Afﬀairs will be to us as God is to uss 
7 See ver. Ic. let.a. kh See ver. 7. let. f. 

12 For the ſeed / {hall be F proſperous, the vine + Heb, 
ſhall give her fruit 7, and the ground ſhall give her of peace. 
increaſe 7, and the heavens ſhall give their dew o, and 
[ will cauſe p the remnant of this people to pollets 7 all 
theſe rh:ngs. 

E Which before brought nothing, or very little forth, ſhall n»w 
proſper into a plentiful Harveſt, ſuch as Mal. 3. 10. m This was very 


thing, &c, 


Gen-18+ 59 theſe days c, * ſhould it alſo be marvellous din mine 


eyes? faith the LORD of hoſts e. 


7 Theſe things promiſed may perhaps ſeem very ſtrange and 
dithculr, if nor impoſſible. @ In the Judgment and Opinion, or ra- 
ther, to the Unbelief of this People. b Few in number, exceeding- 
ly poor, and perpetually ſurrounded with dangers, c Which are 
Days of ſmall things. d Impoffible, or ſo much as difficult to me. 
e The Almighty God will do this. 


7 Thus ſaith the L OR D of hoſts, Behold z, I will 
Fe). coun- Tave Þ my people from the eaſt-country 7, and from 


f the the F weſt-country K. 
(own F Here again God engageth his Almighty Power to make.good his 
Su Promiſe. g Conſider well what Power is to do this. h Bring them 
Tate. 7 Perſia and Media, which lay Eaſt from Feruſalem, and being 
now Maſters of Babylon, and the captive Jews, they are ſaid to be 
brought our of the Kaft, though otherwhiles they are brought out of 
the North; both very confiftenr. & No doubt ſome of the Jews 
were carricd weſtward, the Trade of ſelling Men was known in thoſe 
Days, and Tyrws 15 noted and threatned for it, by Ezeh. 27. 13. beſide 
other Sea-Towns Weſt of Canaan, which would be ready to buy 
captive Jews, and convey them weſtward, Bur if this Promiſe 
ſhould look to the Roman Empire, and ſecure the Jews a return 
from that Captivity, it is plain how their Empire lay Weſt from the 
Jews. Or perhaps 'tis a Synechdoche, theſe two Parts of the 
World mention'd, bur all Parts intended, as Pſalm 50. 1. 8& 113. 3. 
and Mal. 1. 11, 

$ And I will bring / them, and they ſhall dwell 
in the midſt of Jeruſalem, and they ſhall be my peo- 
ple z, and I will be their God o in truth and in righte- 
oulnels p. 

| Though many things interpoſe to hinder, none ſhall keep them 
from returning ;z I will lead the way, I will guard them in ir, I will 
{upply their Neceffities, I will give ſtrength to the weak, and cheer 
up the dejeRed, I will gather and carry too. m Settle their Habita- 
tionin Feruſalem. n A peculiar People to obey and honour me, it 
contains very much, Fer. 30. 22. and 31. 33. and 32. 37, 39. Egch. 
11. 20. 0 I will own them, perform all my. Promiſes to them. 
þ Both on God's part, and on their part; on God's in Truth, on 
theirs in Righteouſneſs, in obedience to God's righreous Law, 


9 T Thus faith the LORD of hoſts, * Let your 
hands be ſtrong 9, ye 7 that hear s in theſe days 7 theſe 
words z by the mouth of the prophets x, which were 
In the day that the foundation of the houſe of the 
ORD of hoſts was laid y that the temple might be 

uilt 2, 


. 9 Be of good Courage, and hearten on cach other to the expeta- 
tion of Gods Promiſe, and the doing your Duty. r You returned 
Captives. s This is an argument to revive their Courage, they hear 
God by his word very fairly propofing great things. # In theſe days 
of Darius Hyſtaſpis, ſome 12 or 15, or perhaps 18 Years fince the 
time I poinrat. In theſe days of hope from Darius favourably help- 
1g, but moſt from God aſſiſting and bleſſing. # Promiſes, Exhorta- 
0ns and Counſels. x Haggai and Zechariah. . y In the ſecond Year 
of Cyrus, which ( if reckoned from his ſucceeding of is Father 
Cambyſes in the Perſian Crown, and his Father-in-law Cyaxares in the 
: _— of Media, which happened near about Anno M. 3457, unto 
wy econ of Darius Hyſtaſpis, Anno M. 348 5. that is 18 Years agon ) 
YU! make it likely that Haggai and Zechariah are intended here: 
CY it ſo that this re-edifying of the Temple be in the ſecond 
_ —_ Nothus, is ro make theſe two Prophets either to be filent 

We ears together, or to preach with litrle Succeſs, and leſs Com- 
Plaine, for I do not remember that either of them chargeth this 


p.2.4, 


gates mm, 


you do it. Belide building the Temple, aud reſtoring publick Wor- 
ſhip in Sacrifices, theſe things ye muſt do. þ Be true of your word, 
and lie not one to another, as becomes ſuch a People, Pſilm 24. 4. 
Prov. 12. 19. Ho. 4+ I. 
Fathers, they have lied, deceived and cheated, not Strangers but Bro- 
thers and Neighbours, but do not ye ſo; every one you deal with is 
your Neighbour, do you ſpeak Truth to every ſuch one. 'k Vid. ch.7. 
ver.9. let. m. 1 That may reſtore, ſettle and promote Feace among 
you, as righteous Judgments will do. m Either referring to the places 
of Judicature where the Judges fat z or more generally and compre- 
henſively through the whole Land, Exod. 20. 19. 


much the Wealth and Support of that Yeople, this had been blaſted, 


jas Hag. 1.9, Io. now it ſhall be bleſs'd, and bring torch her expeRed 


Fruit. n Summarily, the Ground you plant ſhall abundantly bring 
forth her Fruit to your ſatisfation. o Which before were as Bras, 
and made your Earth as Iron, hard, barren, ſhall now drop down 
cheir Rain, and make the Earth fruitful. Much hke that P/27. 72. 2, 
Hof. 2.18, þ By my ſpecial, ſingular Providence, and Bletfing oi 
them. q To enjoy, have the things and rhe Comfort of them z 
whereas before,tho? they ear,they were not ſatisficd, had not enouzh, 
Hats. 1.6. 
13 And it ſhall come to pals, zhat as ye were a curſe 
among the heathen s, O houſe of Judah 7z, and houſe of 
[{rael z; fo will I fave you x, and * ye {hall be a blet- * Rurh 4; 
fing y : fear not, b»t let your hands be ltrong 2. Lt, 12. 
r As threatned, Deut. 28. 37. and Fer. 24+ 9. & 29. 18. all which 
came upon them in this ſeventy Years Captivity,and the Miferies that 
receded. s Nations who knew the Miſery which they heap'd on the 
Town, Nations among whom they were ſcattered. # Two Tribes. 
# Ten Tribes, or rather ſome of them which eſcaped Shalmaneſer's 
hand, and adhered to Fudah ; or ſome thar from the Divitton of the 
Tribes did keep cloſe ro the Houſe of David, and the Temple-Wor- 
ſhip. x In ſuch manner will I ſave you, ſo wondertully, fo graci- 
ouſly. » A Form or Model of Bleſſing, as Zepb. 3. 19, 209. 2 Be 
not diſcouraged, neither flack your Hands in the building of the 
Temple, and reſtoring the Worſhip of God, for God will be wich 
you, and finiſh all by and for you. 
14 For thus faith the LORD of hoſts, As I thought z 
to puniſh you 6, when your fathers provoked £ me to 
wrath, ſaith the LORD of hoſts, and 1 repented nor 4; 
a Determin'd firſt, then declared my Reſolution, in my Threats 
and many Warnings given. b Jews, the Body of that Nation; vcu, 
one with your Fathers. c Highly, obſtinately, and till there was co 
Remedy, my Wrath being kindled and continually increaſed by it- 
creaſe of your Fathers fins and yeurs. d I did not fail to do as I faid 
[ would ;- I neither changed my Mind, for 1 am not a Man, nor 
changed the Courſe of my Providence, but executed my Threats, 
15 90e avain have I thought in thele days to do 
well unto Jeruſalem, and to the houſe of Judah : tcar 
ye not f. 
e So with like ſteddineſs of Mind, with an equal unchangeable- 
neſs, I haye purpoled and promiſed todo well to you, O Inhabitants 
of Feruſalem and Houſe of Fudah. f For if in puniſhing, which I 
love not, I was conftanc; in blefling, which pleaſcth me, I cannor 
but be conſtant. 
16 Theſe are the things that ye g ſhall do, 
* Speak ye every man. the truth þ to his neighbour z, * Eph, 4; 


K ; e4Ce / 1n your 25- 
f execute the judgment of truth & and pza at +Heb.judze 


truth, and 
the judg- 
ment of 
peace: 


z You to whom I amreturn'd, whom I have promis'd to bleſs, you 
have ſomething to do that the Bleffing may come upon you,and look 


7 Toall Men; it hath been the fin of your 


17 And ler none of: you imagine evil in your heart 


againſt his neighbour zz, and love no falſe oath o - tor 


PeOÞIe with this particular Fault. x According to God's Command 
and your Duty. ; 


all theſe are things that I hate p, faith the LORD. 


n Viz, 


VE 22 A. 
> LE TIED oo __—_ , — © 
"= a To >, - 
. Ee Os toon ee pens Sms + 
: - - ay > o» 
* cg? (0 rp 
- - 't= Deg CETEY 6 M8 OD 
© * C P <> 7 - IG. 
_ -_ >, ye de, % _—_ 
XY Kx 


e 
noo TR 


£ "In by _ i 
> 2 Ln wh 
PT%AYV 


_— GC 
"©="M 
9 - = 4 1 
TY Be ed 
, by % . ” "4 
% . Wd” a * 1 +6£% *L " . 
* s £ "R - " "4 I On I TIENES _ 
* fd ” by IEEE _ 
_— A. $4 an "71 ee Md þ- PE * RINGS : - = 
= pe ” - b ER . __ - 
pl - < b,* rm A 6 tae” © 7 17% w g . © SODA. ££7'q A Y 
—_—- - >. ” AS... - ain - -- 6. 
ha, Ho a be h - 
- age Tt -  —_ > —_ br 200g ww rw b, 
Fit 4 y 7 


< oy 
- of —CC 
- —_—— 
X A - 
w _” —— 
To «I 


er" 
< "_—_— y . » 
% 


< ” 
EI; 4 
þ} : 


a” 


OS W—_ COS, > _ -  —— ho _———— —— 
XV _—_ RR ws a IS? 
_— -v_ 2 5 me 


BL 
Tan 


Wh Chap. VIII 


ZECH 


*4, chay. 9, 10. let. f. 0 Vid- chap. $. ver. 4. let, y. you that 
TOS ? muſt not ſwear to a Lie before God, Pſalm 


' 4. Exeb. 17.18, 19 þ So that I cannot be reconciled to them, 
Fo + [ So not, will not let them go unpuniſh d; if youll be 
bleſt, as I promiſe, look you do asI preſcribe. This is reaſon enougn 
why you ſhould not do them. 


13 And the word of the LORD of hoſts came 


unto me, ſaying, 
19 Thus faith the LORD of hoſts, The faſt of the 


fourth month 9, and the faſt of the fifth 7, and the 
faſt of the ſeventh s, and the faſt of the tenth 7 ſhall 


be to the houſe of Judah Joy and gladnelis z, and 
chearful + feaſts x ; therefore love y the truth and 


Peace. | 

This nineteenth Verſe is a final Deciſion of the propoſed Caſe, 
| and the whole of this Verſe ſtands on a Proviſo or Condition, That 
they do thoſe things required, ver. 16, 17- then ſhall their faſting 
ceaſe, and turn into Joy and Feaſts. g Wherein the City was taken 
by the Babylonians, who'on the ninth Day of this Month broke into 
the City, Jer. 52.12, 13. r Of which on the tenth Day the Tem- 
ple was burat. s Wherein Gedaliah was killed, Fer. 41.1. # On 
the tenth Dav whereof the King of Babylon's Army fat down before 
theCity and beſieged it # Good Days, in which they ſhall rejoyce 
fr all the Goodneſs that God hath ſhewed them in their private; 
they ſhall rejoyce, x for publick ; theſe Days of taſting ſhall be 
turned into ſolemn and publick Feſtivals, Days of Thankſgiving to 
the Lord, for turning back their Captivity, and reſtoring Church 
and State. y Letyour hearty AﬀeRion be ſet on Truth, in all con- 
cerns of Religion, and on Peace in all Converſe with your Neigh- 


bours. 


20 Thus ſaith the LoRD of hoſts /, Ir /ha/l yet come 
zo paſs m, that there ſhall come people 7, and inhabi- 
rants of many o cities. 

I This ſolemn Atteſtation, that 'tis the Lord of Hoſts who will do 
that great thing next promis'd, cal's both for our heeding and belie- 
ving of it. m How low ſoever the ſtate of my Church doth ap- 
pear, and really is, yet a time ſhall come when it ſhall be more con- 
fiderable. n People, that is, Multitudes of People,, for they ſhall be 
o Inhabitanrs of many and great Cities, which is added to explain 
what was more obſcure in that one word, People; the Gentiles ſhall 
be added to the Church, and increaſe her greatly. 


21 And the inhabitants of one c:zy ſhall go to ano- 
ther p, ſaying, Let us go || ſpeedily q } to pray betore 
the LORD, and to ſeek the LORD of hoſts 7 : I will 
go allo s. 


p Great was 


muſt nor lie tro a Man, 


the Zeal and Forwardneſs of primitive Converts, to 


+ Hcb- in- bring others into the Church, and ro acquaint them with the Do- 


Arine of Chriſt ; and this is here forctold under the Zeal and For- 


the wardneſs of the Fews to gather one another , and to aſcend thus 


to the Temple. q In going let us go, ſet forth preſently, hold on 
conſtantly and chearfully, Iſa. 2. 3+ Mic. 4.2. r To call upon his 
Name, entreat his Favour, or Face, as 'tis Heb. one part of religious 
Worſhip put for all, and explain'd by ſeeking the Lord for Counſel 
and Supply, for Grace, Comfort and Glory. s This foretels a rea- 
dineſs in the inviced, they ſhall with as much Zeal embrace the 
Motion, as ethers made it, | 


22 Yea, many people and ſtrong nations ſhall come 
to izek the LORD of hoſts in Jeruſalem s, and to pray 7 
before the LORD. 

This Verſe is both Confirmation and Illuſtration to the former, 
chere *rwas People, here 'tis many People, and mighty, or great, not 
the porr, and conreniptible, and few, but People of a greater Figure 
in the World. The Goſpel firſt ſpread it ſelf chrough the Roman 
Empire, and triumphed in Rome the Lady of the World. Strong 
Mrions ſubmitted to the Goſpel. s Literally underftood you have 
{0 ll Fruits of them mentioned in Aﬀs 2. Io, I1, I2, Myſtically, 
7eru:1em is the Church of Chriſt, or the State of it in the times of 
the Goſpel, Pſalm 110. 2. 1ſa. 2.3. t To perform all Goſpel-Wor- 
ſip to the Lord. 


22 Thus ſaith the LORD of hoſts z, In thoſe days 
it ſhell come 10 paſs x, that ten men y ſhall take hold 2 
out of all languages « of the nations, even ſhall take 
hold of the $kirt of him that is a Jew 6, ſaying, We 
will go with you c: for we have heard d * 7hat God e 
7s with you f. 

The Lord ſeems delighted with the reporting what ſhould be done 
17 thoſe Days of the building up his Feruſalem, and therefore he bids 
his Prophet report it again, as he dothin this laſt verſe of the chap. 
u Once more the Lord avows this as his Defign, ſo his Work; as his 
Purpoſe, ſo he would effe& ir. x In the Days which ſhall be the 
Shadow of better , that ſhall be brought to paſs which ſhall be 
proportioned to them; thus in the deliverance of the Church 
trom H.man's Conſpiracy, many in the Provinces of that mighty 
Kinzdom became Jews but in the Goſpel-days it fhall be more full. 
y That is, many Men. 2 As Children lay hold on the Nurſe, or Mo- 
ther's Skirt to go with them. a No Nation any longer excluded. 
b To whom the Goſpel was firſt preached, nay, who were the firſt 
Preachers of it, as the Apoſtles and the ſeventy Diſciples. c We 
will go, that we may learn your Religion, and beof it. d And now 
ſee, believe and are affured. e The true God, the only true God, 
whom to kno 15 Life Erernal, is with you, our Gods are Vanity, a 
BDotrine ct Lies, and a pernicious Cheatz we will caſt them off, and 
no m2re truft to Lies. f God is with you only,and we muſt he with 
you, a1d of you, that God the Saviour may be with us too ; having 
hold on you, we will not let you go without us, we feek your God 
aud our Gcd. 


# R I 4 it 


CHAT. 1K 


God deftroyeth his enemies, but defendeth his church, x——8. Exhortery 
Zion to rejoyce at the coming, and her deliverance by Chrift, 9 — 11, 
promiſeth vifory over her enemies, and all manner of bleſſings, 121 7 


HE burden 2 of the word 6 of the LORD; in d 

the land of Hadrach e, and * Damaſcus f hall he 

the reſt thereof'g : when h the eyes 7 of man, as of all 
the tribes of Iſrael /ha/! be towards the LORD. 


a i.e. The heavy, ſad and grievous, the menacing PrediQion. 0< 
future Evils coming upon a People ſo Burden in Prophetick Stile 
Iſa. 13. 1. and Is. I. Nah. 1.1. Hab. 1: 1. fignifieth. 6 In which 
trom God's own Mouth Zechariah threatneth. This might be read in 


the Lord threatneth ſad Aﬀi@ions, they will come as a heavy Burden 

they cannot decline without Repentance, nor ſhake off by their own 
ſtrength. c Of Hoſts, the God of Iſrael, who determines what he 
will do againſt Iſrae!'s Enemies, and none can alter his Purpoſe, 
d Or on, againſt, Heb. e Not Meſſiah's Land, as ſome; nor the Land 
of an 1d, called Hadrach, 7. e. the Sun, as others ; nor yet the Land 
or Countries that lie round about 7udea, as others; nor yet is Arg- 
bia, here meant as others, but 'tis the Name both of a City in Gels- 
ſyria, and here ſignifieth the Country alſo. This Town was not far 
from Damaſcus, and about 25 Miles diſtant from Boſtra, a Sea-Town of 
Phenicia, which is not far trom Byblos, now called Giblee, or Gibel- 
letto,fays my Author ; no farther mention is made of it in Scripture, 
It was likely an Enemy to the Fews, and had finn'd therein, and now 
muſt account for it, and be puniſhed. f Chief City of thar part of 
Syria; and whether Abel was ſlain there or no, or whether thar Mur- 
der gave it the Name, or whether the Etymology be rightly given 
CDam._) Blood, (Sach._) a Bag, I ſay nor. But 'twas no Friend to 
God's People, Iſa. 7. and here 'tis threatned among other their Ene- 
mies, the Country is intended here as well as the City. g This Bur- 
den ſhall lie long as well as heavy on Damaſcus. h Rather for, Heb, 
: Eye, Heb. as we read it, it is of ſome difficult Interpretation, bur 
more eaſe if read, as it may be, thus, For unto the Lord is the Eye of 
Man, and of the Tribes of Iſrael; i. e. unto the Lord it belongeth to 
look to, and by his Providence to diſpoſe of all Men as well as of 
Iſrael, and all Mens Appeals in Caſes of wrong are to Heaven ; ſo 
they who fave been wrong'd by Syrian Injuſtice, look to Heayen for 
Right, and to be avenged, and God will do it. ; 


2 And Hamath # alſo ſhall border / thereby ; Ty- 


rus 7 and * Zidon 7, though it be very. wiſe o. 
þ A principal noted Town of Syria, once called Epiphania ; it 
| was near Neighbour to the Fews, tor 'twas a Boundary of the Land 
of Promiſe. 4 Shall be ſo near to this Storm which cometh, rhat 
they ſhall be the worſe for 1t. The Country called by this Name, in 
which Riblah was, and where the barbarous Murder of many Nobles 
of the Fews, the Murder of Zedek7ah's Children, and his Eyes were 
put out; all which Cruelty, and ſuch like, ZHamah muſt ſuffer for, 
now God rides his Circuit and judgeth. m A famous Mart as ever 
the World had, on which Ezekie! beftows his 26, 27 and 28 cha), 
which ſee. n Another Mart, and on the ſame Sea, more ancient than 
Thras, and as much an Enemy to the Fews, threatned as here, ſo by 
Ezek. chap. 28. Tyrus, ver. 3. Zidon, ver. 21. which 1cc, o Each 
of them, 7. e. the People, the Goyernours, and Counſellors of both 
theſe Cities are ſubtile, and think by Craft to ſave themſelyes; bur 
this ſhall not be, God derides their Wiſdom, Ezeh. 28. 3. 


3 And Tyrus p did build her ſelf a ſtrong hold g, 


and * heaped 7. up filver as the duſt s, and fine. gold as« 
I5, 


the mire s of the ſtreets. 

pÞ Which was naturally a ſtrong Hold, fituate on a great Rock in 
the Sea. q Fortified her ſelf mightily, and chen thought her ſelf 
impregnable. 7 Gather'd Treaſure, and laid jt up, ſo that there was 
no end of it. s 'Tis a proverbial Speech, and ſpeaks the very rich 
Stores of their Gold and Silver, by which they might buy their 
Peace or maintain their War : So that here is Wiſdom, Strength 
and Treaſure, the Maſter-finews of War, yet all theſe cannot profit 
them in the Day of their Calamities approaching. 


Chap, ] 


« An, LI 


Appoſition thus; The Burden, the Word ; for when the Word of - 


Jo # 


4 Behold z, * the LORD will caſt her out z, and he*Iky 


will ſmite her power in the ſea x, and ſhe y ſhall bede-&% 


voured with fire 5. 

# Obſerve it, for I tell you truth, though ſtrange, 'twill be ſo. 
# The Lord will do this, he will eje& and caſt her out of her Inhe- 
ritance, as the Word in the Heb. and he will inherit her, as the 
Word alſo bears. God will do both, he will ſeize into his Hand by 
ſome or other, and ſo put them our of all.. Her Fortifications ſhall 
not be able to ſecure her Poſſeffion. x The Lord declares how 
he will do what he threatens againſt Tjrus; where their ſtrength lt- 
eth, he will break them, take away their Shipping, and then .both- 
Treaſures will waſte, Trade will fail, and Auxiliaries will not be got- 
ten. y Tjrus, probably Zidon with her. 4 That is, by the Enemy 
in the Siege, or at the taking of her. All which was done about 
An. M. 3672. one hundred eighty five Years after this Prophecy, 
when Alexander Magnus maſter'd Tyrusat Sea with a Fleet of 190, 9T 
200 Ships, took the City, ſlew many Thouſands of them, and as Cur: 
tis reports, burnt the City» 


5 Aſhkelon « ſhall ſee it b, and fear c; Gaza dalio 
ſhall ſee it , and be very ſorrowful e , and Ekron f: 
for her expeQation g ſhall be aſhamed h, and the king 
ſhall periſh : from Gaza, and Aſhkelon ſhall not be un 
habited &. | 

a Threatned by Zephaniah, chap. 2. ver. 4. which Threat was &Xe" 
cuted by the Babylonians ſoon after the Fews Captivity, when Nebu- 
chadnezzar waſted the Sea-coaſt, & beſieged and took Tyrus; but this 


Threat of Zechariah was fully exccuted by Alexander Mag. 45 : he 


x, Cha] 


he {1 
Jebu! 
0 T 


planato 
ninabl, 
10 Deut 
Hof. 9. 
ſtroying 
them fo; 
ſo read, 
and are | 
him; ſu; 
few Few 
bloody 1 
and Hon 
Governo! 
People, ar 
litines ſh; 


Ss 8 An 
of the : 
cauſ2 of 
paſs thr 
With mj 

s Pitch 
Army 3 G 
Guardians 
the Churec] 
either thre 
froubleſom 
God, his C 
Cured by an 
thoſe that f 
an and Syri, 
(cmpr to ſte 
l's Life ; b 
TC moving, 
is Succefſo 
Mewhat, 

iormerly, W 

51f Lords © 

Bow T manif, 

ow vilely t} 
as Pſalm IO, 


= 9 all X* 

3 (hour e, 0 

"s COmeth un! 
07 &, low] 
the foal of 


ne Church. e 
1 Before it was 

oth the Chu 
r1umph at thi 
David, the c 
'9 Thee, tO rec 
0 thee. i The 
Ag tO be our R 


Vol 


ChaP- IX. 


LE GCH 


an 
rhe 
= and ſee the Siege and tell it, c As Men that have no Power 


ro defend themſelves, nor means left. of flying from the Enemy. 
4 Another ſtrong Town, a Principality of the Philiſtines, Enemy to 
Iſrael, which in Nebuchadnezzar's time ſuffered with Tyrus, Zeph. 2. 4. 
ler, x, and ſhall again fo ſuffer in Alexander's time, as here foretold. 
# At the news of Tyrus's fall ſhall rake a fright, and tall into forrows 


of a travelling Woman, as the word imports. f A City famous tor 


idolatry, ſee Zeph. 2. 4. let. d. Shall as much tear and grieve as Aſþ- 
telsn or Gaza. 8g Her hope thar Tyrus would break Alexander's Power, 
or hold out againſt it, and be a refuge ro her Citizens, who cou!d 


not hope to withſtand the Conquerour. þ Turned into Shame and 


Confuſion. 


Months Siege, and two flight Wounds received; and finding Betts the 
King, or Roytelet, adyanced to that Dignity by Darizs, thought good 
ro put him to-a cruel death, as Curtzus, 1.4. þ 7. e. For ſome Years 


it ſhall be as waſte, or as 'twas laid by the Babylonian, according to. 


Zeph. 2. 4+ 


6 And a baſtard / ſhall dwell in Aſhdod m, and I will 


cut off the pride of the Philiſtines 7. 

1 Some ſay Alexander Mag. was by Olympias's Confeſſion declared 
to be a Baſtard, and that he is here pointed at 3 bur I think rather 
Strangers, who have no Right of Inherirance, yer did dwell here, are 
meant, cali'd Baſtards, becauſe not the righttul Heirs, but Intruders. 
m Azotus now a ſtrong Town, a City of the Philiftines, but ſtill of the 
ſame Temper with the reſt againſt the Fews, and now as hefore, 
Zeph. 2. 4. muſt ſuffer with them. In theſe ſtrong Ciries did the 
Philiſlines glory, and boaſt theniſelves, as having been too hard for 
the Jews, even at their firſt coming to Canaan, who could nor take 
their Cities from them 3 but now the fataj change is foretold, God 
will cut off this Pride of theirs, as he did in the times of the Greci- 
ans, the Seleucide, and the Maccabees. 

7 And I will take away his t blood out of his mouth o, 
4nd his abominarions from between his teerh p - but 
he that remaineth 9, even he {þa// be tor our God, and 
he ſhall be as a governour 7 in Judah, and Ekron as a 
Jebutre 5. 

o Though proud and warlike ' Nations have delighred to ſhed 


Blocd, nay ( if ſome judge aright)) to eat the Blood of their ſlain 
Enemics, vet now God will reſtrain, nay overthrow their Power, 


| OED Pit 1n which no Water was, wherein the Fews muſt have pcriſhed '% 
and take the Prey out of their Mouth they ſhall neither breathe out,| pq wo Mercy from Chriſt viſited them. = is no Lets F ei S 
Slaughter, nor a& it with their Hands. p This may poſſibly be ex- though ſome ſay ſo among the Popiſh Commentators. : it; 


planatory of the former, but I think it rather is meant of their abo- 
minable Sacrifices which they offered and feaſted on, ſo the word 
in Deut. 7. 27. with 26. 1 Kings 11. 5, 7. 2 Kings 23. 13. aud by 
Hoſ. 9. 10. God wiil puniſh for theſe Sins, Idolatries, and by his de- 
ſtroying the People and Cities of thoſe Abominations will remove 
them for ever. q The Remnant, even thar (ſo it might be read; ) it 
ſo read,it points out that ſmall ſele& Number who eſcape the Sword, 
and are reſerved to be for God, to worfhip, obey, honour and love 
him; ſuch a Remnant as Iſa. 4. 3. or as Tja. 17.5. or Tſa. 24. 6, Thoſe 
few Fews whom God preſerved from the Rageand Cruelty of theſe 
bloody Idolaters, ſhall be the Lords peculiar ones. r For Reſpe& 
and Honour which ſhall be given to them, 'tis not ſaid they ſhall be 
Governours, but they ſhall be as like Governours. s The City for the 
People, and this one City and Peopte for all the other : All the Phi- 
lifines ſhall be as Febuſites, Servants to the People of God, or ſlain. 


$ And * I wil encamp £ about mine houſe 7 becauſe 
of the army x, becauſe of him that paſlezh by, and be- 
cauſz of him that returneth x; and no oppreflor ſhall 


paſs through y them any more : for now have I ſeen 
With mine eyes 2. 

s Pitch'd, not the Tents of Travellers and Shepherds, but of an 
Army ; God in the midſt of his own Hofts, and Angels among them, 
Guardians too. tf This material Temple; bur as 'tis an Emblem of 
the Church, # Of the Perſian and Grecian Army, whoſe march lay 
cither through or nearto Z-dea and Jeruſalem. x Armies are very 
troubleſom, coſtly and dangerous in all their Marches, the People of 
God, his City and Temple,ſhall be as gariſon'd and fortified, as if fe- 
cured by an Hoſt; God will have Angels pitch their Tents round about 
thoſe that fear the Lord. Fudea was a Thorough-fare ro the Egypri. 


his Succefſors, in midſt of whoſe Wars, though rhe Jews ſuffered 
lomewhat, yet they were mightily defended by their God. y As 
tormerly, when they had Tngreſs, Egreſs, Regreſs ar their pleaſure, 
asf Lords of the Soil, and of the People too. x I ever ſaw it, but 
Bow T manifeſt that I take notice of it purpoſely to redreſs it: I ſee 
how vilely they uſe my People, they ſhall do ſo no more. I behold, 
is Pſalm 10, 14. miſchief and ſpite to requite it. 


an and Syrian Armies, to the Grecian and Perſian, an unadviſed At- , Z h. 
tempt to ſtop Pharaoh Necho in his Paſſage through once, coſt Foſrah I4 And the LORD » ſhall be ſeen over them Pp, and. Y "y of 
l"sLife ; but God will be a Guard to his People, whilſt their Enemies | his arrow 4 ſhall go forth as the lightning 7 : and the ; fi 
are moving. All this was accompliſhed in the times of 4/exander and Lord GOD & ſhall blow the trumpet 7, and {hall g0 Ut bi 


; The Government he overthrown, and perhaps this ; 
literally was fulfilled when Alexander Mag. took Gaza after tio : 


ARTA RM 


; and meek or lowly of Mind. m A Beaſt of no State cr 
Emblem of his outward State. 


Price, 


Luke 19. 35. 


i 


ſhall be cur off; and he hall ſpeak peace unto the 


' hearhen 7, and his dominion s /bal/ be * from 2 coy * 


to ſea 7, and from the river # ever to the ends cf rhe 
; Earth Xx. 
0 When the Meſſiah comes and ſets up his Kingdom) he will ne&d nc 
' exceraal Force, he will do that by the Power of his Spicit z Charicc5 
, ©: Warare for other kind of Kings and Kingdoms, but in promoting 
; ef 11s own Kingdom, he will make no uſe of ſuch Force. » Eicker 
literal or typical. 9g Another Inſtrument of War, hut not uſeful t 
| the Prince of Peace, neither Bow nor Sword broupiit Salvation +; 
him, nor ſhall they be mentioned in the Day of his Conquett, 
r Make Peace for them, and then publiſh ir to them ; that on the 
Croſs, this in the Goſpel; the Gentiles ſhall through him be recon- 
ciled unto God and one another, Epheſ. 2.17. s How mean fxcyop 
on the Aſs, yet hath a large Dominion, is King of the Univrerſ., 
t From the Red Sea, and irom the Arabian Guli, to the Syrlun Soca. 
u Euphrates utmoſt Bound Eaſt. x To the utmoſt End of Can.ray, 
toward the Mediterranean Sea 3 a Type of all the World to be the 
Inheritance of Chriſt, Theſe things promiſed here are of ſpiricual 
Nature, and be Bleffings of a ſpiritual Kingdom. 


11 As for thee y alſo, || by the blood = of ty 


MO UPI 
CU) bh 


nan a, I have lent torth thy * priſoners 5 our of the pit, © 


wherein 25 10 Water c. 

y O Zion and Jeruſalem, thou Jewiſh Church; thefe words are 
Chritt's words to her, not the Prophet's words to Chritt, though 
Papiſts would have it fo, to countenance a Linbys Patrum. > Py 
my Bload, faith Chriſt. a In which thy Covenant is confirmed ; 
'tis God's Covenant as made by him, 'ris Zion's Covenant as inade 
for her, *tis Chriſt's alfo as made in him. 5 I have deliverce and 
releaſed. Cyrus indeed by his Edi ſent the Fews home, but in this 
he was Chriſt's Servant, and Chrift was mindtul of the Covenaar, 
and to perform this, brought them up. c Babylon, compared to 2 


12 © Tur yec to the ſtrong hold d, ye priſoners of 
hope; even to day fdo I declare ha: I will render dou- 
ble g unto thee : 

c The Prophet exhorts the -Fews, both thoſe in B1by/on ſill, and 
thoſe already in Canaun, to haſten up. d To Feruſulem, ſay ſome, 
which had been a ſtrong Hold, and which was now to be bui't again, 
as the high Places of the Earth; or to Chriſt, who is the Salvation 
and high Tower of his Church. e Captives in Babylon, yer under- a 
Promilte trom God, and under an Edi& from Cyrus that you ſhall re- 
turn ; this gives you Hope,this maketh you Priſoners of ExpeRation. 


F In this Day of loweſt Diſtreſs, I declare, 9c. g Either mere than 


thy Fathers ever received, or double, that is, twice as much Good 
enjoyed, as ever was thy Evil ſuffered, as Iſa. 40. 2. 

13 When I have bent Judah tor me, filled the bow 
with Ephraim z, and raiſed up thy ſons, O Zion +. 
againſt thy ſons, O Greece /, and made thee mr 35 the 
{word of a mighty man 7. 

h In the days when Fadab ſhall have recovered Strength and Cou- 


Chap 
þ As Cities ſee the fall of neighbouring Citics, they ſhall, Eye that he can ſave, 'tis in his Power : He can fave us as he did ſave 
News of it, and know jr, perhaps ſome 4/hkelonites may be ! himſelf, by raiſing himſelf from the dead. / Low and mean cf Stare, 
at 
; n In this ſome Footfieps of Sove. 
reigaty appeared in the Colt's taking and bearing him auictiv, 


| 70 And I * will cat off the chariot from Ephraim », *#a 
'and the horſe from Jeruſalem p, and the battel-how 4 


rage, and be in my hand as a ſtrong Bow, ready bent. i Ephraim the 


Remainder of the ten Tribes ( which return'd with Fudah) ſhall 
be for ſupply of Warriours; as the Quiver filled, is ſupply of Ar- 
rows to the Bow-man &k Explicatory to the former. / Avainit 
the Grectans or Tonians, the Sons of Favan, who had formerly op- 
preſſed the Fews, and bought them for Slaves, and did again opprefs 
them in the Retgns of the Seleucide and rhe Lagide,againlt whem the 
Fews took Arms and Courage under the Condutt of the Maccaboes, 
to whom Chriſt made good much of this Promiſe. m O Zimor Fe- 
ruſalem, you O Fews ! n A ſharp Sword of a mighty. Man, or Giazt, 
who cuts down all that ſtands in his way, as the Maccabees did, 


with the whirlwinds x of the ſouth y. 

0 The Almighty God, the God of I/ae!,Lord of Hoſts; p'Shall mz- 
niteſtly appear for them by his Works of Power againſt their Enc- 
mies. q Alluding to Warriours that then uſed the Bow ; God's Judg- 
ments which ſlew his Churches Encmies, were {wift, irrctiſtible and 
ſudden in ſtriking and killing them. r Which breaks forth with Vio- 
lence, and runs from Eaſt to Weft in a moment, which 1s very ter- 
rible many times. s Their God, the God of 1/rael. t Give the Alarm 


7” 
» £dks 


1 9 T * Rejoyce greatly c, O daughter of Zion d; 
«. ſhout e, O daughter of Jeruſalem f : behold, thy King g 
iz cometh unto thee þ : he 7s Juſt z, and || having falvati- 
0n &, lowly 7, and riding upon an aſs 2, and upon a colt 


the foal of an aſs. 

c The Prophet calls for ſuch a Joy as expreſſeth it ſelf in outward 
Gelture, as indeed the Daughters of Zion did in their Hrſannahs, 
when this had its Accompliſhment. 4 Feruſalem's Inhabitants, or 
ime Church. e Proclaim aloud your Joy at the News I now tell you, 
} Before it was Daughter of Zion, now it is Daughter of Feruſalem, 
both the Church and State among the Fews had great Cauſe to 
" mph at this. g The Redeemer, expetted promiſed Meſſiah, Son 
0! David, the only Reſtorer of your lapſed State, h Chriſt cometh 
1 thee, to redeem and fave thee 3 he comerh for thee, as well as 


ther,and the March alſo for their moving, and ſound the Charge too z 
God will infuſe new Courage, and give Dire&ions. #» In the Head of 
them as Captain-General. x With Fury and Strength like that of 
Whirlwinds. y In which the mightieſt Whirlwinds areraiſed, or 
Whirlwinds of Temanz ſome think the Prophet alludes to the Tem- 
peſt about Sinai, at the delivery of the Law, when all Ire! aud M9- ſi 
ſes too quaked for fear, Deut. 5. 23, 24, 25- yea quaxcd excecding- 113 x (09 4 


ly, and deſired to ſee no more ſuch ſ1ght, 


15 The LORD of hoſts ſhall deterd them 5, and 1 Or, the 
. . _ j 3 

they ſhall devour 4, and ſubdue | with fling-ttones b, ſtnesof the Wh 
and they ſhall drink c, and make 2 noile d as through ſine. . {ol 
ie 3 | ine e. and they ſhall be filled like bowis 7. »d as the Or.fill bot Tie 0 

" tice. ? The righreous One, who cometh to fulfil all Righteouſneſs, WING &, =_ m_ - the bowls. 
ud to be = "Ts þ Drfigns to ſave, and hath that in his{ COTNETS OT The Altar. 

'ol. Il, þ L 


to them to provide for the War, ſound the Call to bring them toge- | i he | 
| 


> h1 SIT * 
Yy | » In  O_ge + NT 
La } - 4x4 ; 


Chap. X. AECHARIAH Chap 


z In the moſt dangerous Attempts 3 the Jews under their Captains 
in the Wars againſt the Grecians, were preſerved to a Miracle ac- 
cording to this Promiſe. a A few of them deſtroy many of their E- 
nemies. þ As we read this Paſſage, it ſeems to refer to the ſlaughter 
of Goliah with a Sling, by David a Stripling 3 ſo weak means in the 
Hand, and under the Bleſſing of the great God, ſhall do mighty 
things : Others read the words, They ſhall ſubdue the Sling-ſtones, 
that 15, conquer the Grecians, who in their Wars uſed the Sling, aud 
that with great Dexterity and Succeſs. c In their Feſtivals, when 
they offered Sacrifices of Thankſgiving for their Viftories. d Shout 
with ſh-urs of Triumph. e Make a great Noiſe, as Men do whoſe 
Rearts are glad with Succeſs, and chear'd with Wine. f Rather 
they ſhall fill, 7. e. with the Blood of the Sacrifices they offer, 
both the Bowls and Corners of the Altars; all ſhall be full of the 
Blood of Euchariſtical Sacrifices. 


16 And the LORD their God þ ſhall fave them z in 
that day # as the flock of his people /, tor hey hal! be 
2+ the itones of a crown m2, lifted up as an enſign upon 


his land 7. 

h As in Covenant with them, not only as Lord of Hoſts by his 
Power, hut a: their God in Mercy and Faithfulneſs. 7 Fully deliver 
them, #.e. the * Sons of Zion. & In the Day of their Conteſt and 
Wars with the Sons of Javan. 1 As a Shepherd faves his Flock, a 
David faved his. m O:, tccing that they are precious, and ot value 
with me as tlie Stones of a Royal Crown, or as the Stones of Trophy 
ſer up in Memorv of ſome noble Atchievement. n Which are as 
an Enfign lifred up, to which whoſo repair, may give Thanks, and 
rejoyce in their Deliverance, a Form ot which, tor ought 1 know. 
may tollow. | 

17 For how great zs his goodnels 0, and how great 7: 
{| Or, gx, his beauty p / corn ſhall make the young men || cheer- 
orſpetk, tul g, and new wine the maids 7. 

o Infinite Goodneſs is the Fountain of all that Good done fer this 
People, the Prophet admires it, and ſuggeſts what is fit to be done by 
thoſe that come and view thoſ= Stones ſet up for Trophies. p How 
wonderful the Beauty of Divine Providence, in all the great effects ot 
it in Iſrae['s Deliverance and Salvation. q Plentitul Harveſts ſhall makc 
the young Men cheerful in ſowing, reaping, labouring in Harveſt 
work, as well as in eating the Fruits thereof. r Such plenty of 
Wine, that. all, young and old, ſhall be cheared with it. 

And now theſe arc the ſweet Fruits of temporal Salvation, hut the 
Fruits of Spiritual ſhadowed out by theſe, are much more glorious, 


hath viſited x his Rock the houſe of Judah, and hath 


made them as his goodly horſe y in the battel 2. 

s Though 'twas juſily kindled againſt all, yet 'rwas more hor ang 
fierce againſt the chief ſinners among them. # Officers in Church a 
State, who negle&ted to keep the Flock from ſiraying, who were 
Ring-leaders in Idolatry and South-ſaying. # The wanton, lufif, 
and petulant Officers among them, which like He-Goats puſh anq 
wound, and trample under foot the feeble Cattel, as Ezeb. 34-16, 17 
theſe were more grievouſly puniſhed, Fer. 29. 22. & 39.5. x 1, 
Favour and Mercy. y With change of ſtare hath changed their 
ſheepiſh Weakneſs and Cowardiſe into Strengrth,Courape and Gal. 
try,like that of a goodly Horſe this appeared 1n the Maccabees Wars, 
z When all his Courage is ſtirr'd up, and he appears as Fob brings 
him forth with: Neck clothed with Thunder, Fob. 39, 19, —26, 

4 Out @ of him b came forth the corner c, out of him 
the nail 4, out of him the battel-bow #, out of him eye. 


ry oppreſlour f together. | 

a Or out from him. b From Fudah,rather from the God of Fudyh, 
c Which in Buildings is Strength and Beauty, here 'tis the Prince or 
Ruler, which is in a Polity as a Corner-ſtone in Buildings. d From 
God the Nail which faſtens the Tents of War, or taſtens the Timber 
rogether in a Houſe. e All warlike Proviſions both of Men and Arms, 
ſynechdochically expreſs'd by Bow. f Or Officer, ExaQor, ColleQor 
of Tribute. It was from God that Nebuchadnezzar mightily prevailed, 
and in the courſe of his ViRories oppreſs'd 1/rael; and it is from God 
alſo that Judah is at laſt made free, grows up te ſuch Power, as to 
be able to cope with his Adverſaries, to beat them, and to inipoſe 
Tribute on them. He ers up, and pulls down as he pleaſeth, Pſi}, 
60. fot. 


5 «| And they g ſhall be as mighty men þ, which 
the battel z - and they ſhall fighr #, becauſe rhe LORD 


conquer'd as Fire in the Streets. k Thus valiantly and ſucceſsfully, 
| Fighteth for them, and againſt cheir Enemies. m This is the Cha- 
raer ot the Jews Enemies,they came with armed Men,and a mighty 
Cavalry, as Antzochus, and orhers did, 1n which they trufted ; bur 
this availed httle, theſe Horſemen were contounded, beaten, or fled 


refreſhing, and worth our Praiſe avd Wonder. hawey trom a beating: when God was with Fudah's Enemies, ſo they 


CHAP. A. 


The Prophet exhorteth the Jews to ſeek. to God, and not to idols for refuge 
in their diſtreſſes, 1——4- and promiſerh ſpiritual bleſſings and mercies, 
that God would give his church, 5 —11. 


* Jer. 14. SK aye b * of the LORD rain in the time of 


22, the latter rain c, ſo the LORD ſhall make cc 
Or, /ight-\| bright clouds d, and give them e ſhowers of rain f, to 
nine. every one £ grals in the held. 

a It was a time of great ſcarcity with the Fews while the Temple 
and City lay waſte, ard the Prophets from God aſſure them *tis for 
negl:&ing to rebuild the Temple z to which work the Lord does ear- 
neit;y, ca'l by Haggat and Zechariah, with Promiſes of great Bleſſings, 
which forthwith God would give to them, 1f they ſet to this work 
2nd ſeck the Lord by Prayer; to which Duty he doth dire& them 
in this Chapter, to the building of City and Temple they muſt add 
Prayer, ivr the Blcfſing is prepared, and ſhall be given when asked. 
b Jews retuined from Babylon, ſettled in your City, and returned to 
the worſhip of God, and ro whom many excellent Promiſesare made, 
you muſt pray. c Which uſually came about Spring to fill the eared 
Corn, and to vring torth the Grafs, to make the Trees and Plants, 
with their Fruit, to be full and large; this latter Rain made plenty 
of a)l Proviſions, and is proverbially uſed to fignifie a great Bleſſing, 
Hoſe. 5.3. cc By making the Vapours afcend from the Earth, he will 
cover the Heavens with Clouds; ſee how Fob, ch. 38. 28. doth ele- 
2antly deſcribe this work of God. &d Clouds which bring Rain, and 
p-ur it out abundantly, when they are opened with Thunders and 
Lightnings, which do as it were broach the Clouds, they unſtop theſe 
Batties, and they are bright Clouds through the Lightnings which 
break from them, 7ob 28. 26. & 38. 25, 26. e The Jews his Peo- 
pic. f Plentiful ſhowers of Rain that ſhall farten the Earth, and 
make it fruitful. g None ſhall miſs it, nor the effe& of it on Corn 
or Graſs; Corn for Man, and Graſs for the Beaſt. Wes 

* Jer.10.8, 2 For the.* + idols þ have ſpoken vanity z, and the 
Hab. 2:18. diviners# have ſeen a lye and have told falle dreams » ; 
+ tieb. they comfort in vain 7: : therefore they o went their 


"pt 2" way þ as a flock, they || were troubled 9, becauſe here 

unſwered. W445 NO ſhepherd F's 

that, &C- h Images, which before the Captivity they venerated,and at them 
conſulted their Idols about Plenty or Barrenneſs, and concerning fu- 
ture Events, Zudg. 10. 14. I/a. 19.3. i Their Prediftions were vain, 
nothing of certainty in them. k Southſayers and Conſulters with fa- 
miliar Spirits. / Forctoid Good, when all iſſued in Evil, no Good 
came. m' They pretended a Revclation from Heaven, but "twas a 
Dream of their own Head, or a Cheat put on them by the Father of 
Lyes. n Their Lyecs for the preſent comtort the deceived, but the Va- 
niry of theſe Comforts ſoon appears in the diſappointment which 
followeth. 2» Either they that conſulted, or thoſe who ſent them ; 
indeed almoſt all the Jews were thus fooliſh in conſulting, and be- 
lieving the Lyars, and ſo confounded at laſt, fell into all the Miſe- 
ry they thought to eſcape, . þ They went into Captivity into Baby- 
lon. q Miterably oppreſfiid and affiifted. r Without Guide or Pro- 
teRion, without Eccictiaſtical or Civil Governours, that would faith- 
tully do their Duty ; and this was one Reaſon that they were ſo affl- 
fed avd ciptivated, 


3 Mine anger was kindled s againſt the ſhepherds 7, 


behaves themſelyes, and trod down Fudah; now he is reconciled 
to Fudab, and fighteth for Fudah, Fudah ſhall behave himſelf, and 
ſucceed againſt his Enemies, as before they did againſt him. 

6 Aid 1 will 1trengthen the houſe of Judah 7, and 
I will fave the houle of Joſeph o, and I will bring them 
again p to place themg; tor 1 have mercy upon them: 
and they ſhall be as though I had not caſt them off 5: 
for I am the LORD their God 7z, and will hear them y, 


n God will give boch Courage and Strength, Courage to attempt, 
and alſo Strength to go through and finiſh the Artempt ; in thisthey 
of the Houſe of Fudah were tamous in the Wars of the Jews againſt 
the Seleucide, in which Wars they had wonderful Difficulties, and as 
wonderful Courage and Succeſs. o The Remnant of the Kingdom of 
Iſrael, the Reſidue of the ten Tribes, called the Houſe of Foſeph,for 
that Ephraim and Manaſſeh, part of that Kingdom, were the Sons of 
Foſeph. p Both Fudah and Foſeph out of Babyloniſh Captivity. q To 
ſettle them in their own Land, and in their own Cries z how far this 


doth warrant the expeRation of an univerſal Gathering of this Pco- 


ple, I do not undertake to determine. r I pity them in what they 
have already ſuffered, and my Mercy is not clean gone from them, [ 
have yer rich Mercy for them, and will ſhew it when they have 
builr City and Temple, and reſtored Religion. £ In every reſpect 
they ſhall ſo multiply, thrive and proſper, that though they remem: 
ber it. with grief and ſhame, yet the Generations to come ſhall dil- 
cern no ſad Marks of a rejeRted People. # Ina perpetual Covenant, 
which I neyer can, nor will break ; I amand will be their God ; they 
ſhould, yea, ſhall be my People, as ch. 8. 8. «4 They will pray, and 
Lwill hear, for they are mine, they will ſeek me as their God, and 
L will fave them as my People. 

7 And zhey of Ephraim x ſhall belike a mighty many, 
and their heart ſhall rejoyce as through wine = : yea, 
their children ſhall ſee zr, and be glad a, their heart 


ſhall rejoyce in the LOR D 5. 


x Vid. ver. 6. let. o, y See ver. s. let. h. x Which warmeth the 
Blood, cheareth the Spirits, and adds Life greatly, where a good and 
joyful ſucceſs concurreth as here it doth. a Either thus, in the days 
of your Children this ſhall be, or rather when the Time comes for 
theſe things, they ſhall continue through your Generations to Chil 
dren that ſhall be born. b The Goodneſs, Power, Wiſdom and Faith: 
fulneſs of God ſhall be the cauſe of this Joy, and many of thelc 
People ſhall indeed rejoyce in the Lord, and in the Meſſiah. 


 $ I will hifs for them c, and gather them d, for 1 
have redeemed them e : and they ſhall increaſe as they 
have increaſed f. | 
c Though they are now ſcattered far eff, I will cauſe them to !e 
turn 3 1 will whiſtle, as a Shepherd; and they, as ſcattered Sheep, 
ſhall run with ſpeed back to the Flock : I called their Enemies 10 
once, and they came, 1fa. 5. 26. & 7.18, 19. and my People will come 
when thus I call to them. & This ſhall be enough to bring them to 
gether, or it ſhall be done as ſoon as ſpoke, ſo ſoon as I whiſtle they 
ſhall return. e I have been at the care and charge of redeemi0s) 
raiſed Cyrus to do it, I beſtow'd all Nationsand Kingdoms on him, 
and afterwards on Darius Hyſtaſpis, todo this, to reſtore my Exiles) 
to re-plant Fudah, tore-build the City and Temple ; and 1 will do 
this alſo which is much leſs, I will, as a Shepherd with h1s paſtoral 
Whiſtle, call them in. f A Promiſe made by Feremiah, ch. 33: ** 


t Heb. v3- Y + manifhe ted EF OP a : 
Fn ation and I 7 punithed the gears x - tor the LORD of hoſts 


| and Ezek; 36. 1o, 11, 37, 39. which ſee. | 
; 9 And 


* tread down zherr enemes in the mire of the ſtreets in? 2, 


is with them /: and || the riders of horſes ſhall be con: [0:4 


founded mm. ſoul 
£ The Jews under the Conduof their Captains, ſuch as the Mac i 
cabees. h Shall be valiant, mighty Warriors. # Shall take Cities, and ”,” 
beat down thuſe that oppoſe them, and as uſual in ſuch caſes tread the * at 


'Fþ [I 


mite, a 
render 
who an 
ny Peo 
miſerh, 
peſt by 
Obfiacle 
of Enen 
ſothe w 
mous Di 
bringing 
dan, an 
elyrian 
F3- i 
ana * t 
{aith th 
s Vid. 
true enoU 
are the 
alt their ; 
Authority 
9:20) iro 
thus Ar 
were to h 
City t9 th 
Times, if 
People pr 
them, 


The deftrys 
great un 
for, other 
broken, I 


Pen 


de 
This Cha 
the Temple 
7ews under 
Wpter m 
a Either t 
Omple 1s « 
ea, whoſe 
WW? Tull ſu; 
©*Vanon a ht 
*S<B00476 
beating Sp : 
Ot the Mou 
YOuld be fi1 
terg Parte, 
t be cally : 
would haye | 
PUrativeſy rh; 
ly Fire, tv E 
Vol. 1 


hap. 


ZRCH 


Xl. 


9 


ſhall live with their children /, and turn again m2. 


g It might 
tisfie us herem 
be like © 


27. and Hoſ. 2+ 23 that Land ſhall ſoon be full of Men and Cattel, 


when God ſows both. The Heathen; here ditperſed, there they 
ſhould multiply. # There they ſhall think of me, and long for me, 
and deſire to return to Feruſalem, and to my Temple. &, Whither- 
ſoever they were driven in the fartheſt Parts of the Perſian Empire. 
/ Though Captives and Poor, yet they nar their Children ſhall ſtarve, 
nay.their Children born to them ſhall live, and grow up with them, 
this young Fry ſhall fill the Farth. m To me, my Temple, their Ci- 
ty and Country» 1 o reter 0 ' 

on ef the Jews to the Goſpel, and (© their ſpreading the Goſpel unto 
others for-multipiying of rhe Sced of Tjrael accordiag to the Faich, as 
T doubt not, ſo neither ſhallT particularly erquire, fince the Letter 
ſures with Hiſtory and Matter of FaR, as is evident from the 


ſo fairly 1 , 
Muſtitudes that wer2 gathered to the Paſſover when Titus Veſpaſian 


coop'd them up 1n a cloſe Siege. _ ; ry 

10 *] will bring them again alſo out of the land of 
FEgvpt 7, and gather them out of Ailyria o, and I will 
bring them into the land of Gilead p and Lebanon g, 
and place ſhall nor be found tor them 7. 

1 Into-which doubleſs ſome haſted by an early flight from the Ba- 
bylmians before they waſted Canaan, and others led though forvid- 
den, Fer. 43. where alfo in atrer-days ſome Jews ſought a Repoſe, 


and where they wonderfully increaſed if Zoſephas's Seory be true of 


120 thouſand Jews fer at Liberty by Prolomens Philadelphus, when he 
procured the 72 Elders to tranſlate the Hebrew Bible into Greek. 
Theſe Egyptian Jews ſhall be brought back- o In which many yer 
did linger, loth to depart, but when God hifſeth for them rhey ſhall 
come. þ Which was the Eafiern Frontier. of the Land ofCanaan. 
q This was the North Fronticr of the Land, and both fruitful and 
plerſaar, chev are here mentioned as Part ior the whole, as before, 
ch. 3. ver-7, 1 The Land ſhould be too narrow for them; ſo 1a. 
«9. 20.& 54 2, 3- which was in part fulfilled according to the hiſto- 
rical a::0 literal Part, but fully in the ſpiritual Part, 

11 And he 1halli paſs through the ſea with aficti- 
on. and * ſhall ſmite the waves 1n the fea, and all the 
dzeps of the river ſhall dry up : and the pride of Aﬀy- 
ria fhall be brought down, and the 1cepter of Egypt 
inall depart away. 

The former Part of this Verſe might be read in the preterperfet 


Tenſe, reporting what God hath done, and perhaps more agrecably | 


v:ith the Context and Defign,which is no doubt ro confirm the Pro: 
miſe, and make it credible, though ſo many and great Difficulties 
render it unlikely to Reaſon I will, ſaith God, ver. 10. I promiſe, 
who am he that hath paſs'd through the Sea,the Red Sea, and brought 
my People through 3 who hath done this, can do what he now pro- 
miſerh, I am he that dried up the Deeps of Fordan, (when ar dee- 
peſt by the floods, which were then upon the River ) I can remoye 
Obftacles, were they as great as theſe, and as eafily lay low the Pride 
of Enemies, or remove their Scepters, as I did to Afria and Egypt ; 
ſothe whole Verſe isan Allufion to what God had done in the two fa- 
mous Deliverances of his People under the Hand of Moſes and Foſhua, 
bringing them out of Egypt through the Red Sea, and through 7or- 
dan, and dcftroying the Egyptians, and delivering them out of 
e.Tyrian Bondage, and in order thereto deftroying that Kingdom. 

12 And I will ſtrengthen them s in the LORD 7, 
2nd * they ſhall walk up and down in his name x, 
” fiich the LORD. . 

s Vid. wer. 6. let. n. t Their God, in Chriſt ſay ſome; and *tis 
trus enough, whether theſe words ſo mean or no; God and Chriſt 
ace the ſtrength of the Church, and of all Believers. # Shall manage 
ali their Affarrs, Civil and Milicary, Secular and Eccleiiaſtical. x By 
Authority derived from, by Power received of him, by Wiſdom 
:»02 from above, to the Glory of our God, and our Redeemer. 
ihus far the grezr things promiſed to the Jewiſh Church, and which 
were to be tulfilled in-the time from the re-building the Templeand 
City to the Coming of Chriſt, through ſome 490 Years; in which 
Times, if ought fell ſhort of Promiſe, it was becauſe the fins of the 
People provoked God to alter the Courſe of his Providence toward 


them, 
CHF. AL 
The deſtruion of Jeruſalem and the Jewiſh nation foretold, 1, 2. for their 
great unthank fulneſs to and contempt of Chriſt ; but God's own cared 
fir, others threatned, 3—»-- 9. The ftaves of Beauty and of Band's 
broken, to. The curſe of a foolith ſhepherd, 1 5. 


Pen thy doors, O Lebanon #, that the fire b may 


devour thy cedars c. 

This Chapter is minatory, and foretels the Ruine of Jeryſalem and 
the Temple, this ſecond Tewple by the Romans, and the Captivity of 

ews under them for their reje&ing of Chriſt ; ſo the Times of this 
Chapter muſt be laid about the Death of Chriſt and downwards. 
« Either the Temple, becauſe built with Cedars of Lebanon, ſo the 
Temple is called, Ezek. 17. 3. and Hab. 2.17. Or feruſalem, or Fu- 
a, whoſe Boundary northward this Mountain was. It all theſe do 
WO rolls ſure with the Text and Context, perhaps this added may 
<%banon a nigh and great Mountain, boundary between Judea and its 
2 EMIOuTS or the North, 1s here ſpoken to open its Gates, its Fortt- 
ans riiled ſecure the Paſſages, which through the hollownefles 
of the Mountain, the deep and diſmal Straits lead into Fadea, and 
40ud be firtt artempted by the Enemy that firſt invades the Nor- 
8 vrts of Fudea. Theſe Gariſons or Fortreſſes are foretold like 
© ve calily taken, as if they opened of themſelyes, and the Romzius 
would haye czfie Entrance by this racaris into Fudea. b Either fi- 
euratively the Rape of the Enemy, or the Wrath of God 3 or literal- 


And I. will ſow them g atnong the people þ - and 
{hall remember me 7 in far countreys #, and they 


ht ſeem impoſſible the Jews ſhould ſo increaſe, but to ſa- 
God promiſcth to ſow them, ſo their Increaſe ſhould 
he Increaſe of rich Soil that hath much Seed caſt on it, Fer.31. 


That this may alſo refer ſomewhat to the Converft- 


ARTA H 
4 
anc in Ce5anm ir ſelf, c Palaces built with Cedars, or elſe fours. 
tively Nobles, Priaces, and eminent Men. 5 
2 Howl ti-tree d, for the cedar is fallen 2 ; becauſe 
the || mighry | 
tor the forelt of the vintage h is come down 7. 

4 Either mean Men, or Houſes, and Towns built with Firs. e The 
Ereatcr and vetter cſcape nor, much leſs ſhall the meaner and worſ:. 
F Howl, becauſe the mighty Men, Cities, Fortrefſes and Munitions, 
are taxen, fſack'd and ruined ; or elfe held by Enemies, which is 
worſe, and of Defences,and Safery to us, are become our greateſt An- 
noyances aud Dangers. g Oaks, either literally, as they were ufed 
12 that Country, for building Palaces, Cities, Towns and Fortrefſes : 
or elſe figuratively, the great Men of that Country, a. Land yery 
fruitful and pleaſant, of which Nahurn. r. 4. h Either all ſtrons Pizces 
which were for guarding anddefending the Vineyards; or Foruſatem: 
it ſeif comparcd to a Foreſt in regard of the many and tall Houſes in 
it, this beſt pleaſcth moſt Interpreters. In ſhort, all are called t» 
weep and cry,and howl for rhe Miſeries that will come upon all fort: 
Ingh and low, on them and theirs. 7 15 laid deſolate, | 

3 T There zs k a voice of the howling / of the ſhep- 
nerds 2; tor their glory is iboiled z- a voice of the 
roaring o of yourg lions p ; tor the pride of Jordan is 
ſpoiled g. 

k Tis as certain as if preſent,as ſure all theſe ſhall how!, as if the 
things for which they do howl were already ated. 7! A moſt hitter, 
loud, paſſionate aud diſmal Howling, m Literally thus, the Encmy 
having broken inghath driven away,orearen up their Flocks of Sheep, 
theirHerds and they undone, howl moſt bitterly on the Mounts, 
where the Eccho more doubles the Horror than the Noſe. Or fioura- 
tively, Shepherds are Governours, Magiſtrates, at:4 Civ.] Officers, 
together with Priefts and Prophets, who are ovcr the FCOPIC 4s SCN» 
herds over the Flocks. n What was their Honur, their S2ioty 


on . . P . 07 x 7 
their Joy, is ſpoiled, taken from them and given to othe:s. o The 


vour, and which lurk'd in Feraſal-m,a:d in the Cities of Fudea where- 
ſoever they could lie in wait to fear the Poor and Weak. q The 
great Forefts on the Banks ef lors called here the Pride of Jordan, 
either becauſe of the ſtately*Situarion of them, or becauſe the Pro- 
phet would keep the Decorum of his Allegory, he calls theſe t!:c 
Pride of Fordan ; for that the young Lions were wont to walk proud- 
ly, to range over 1t without fear. So did theſe Men-lions fecurely 
prey in Feruſalem and its Fellow-Cities, bur theſe are cut down, aud 
now they muſt n> more range through to ſeek a Prey ;, foa!l trom 
the North to the Eaſt of che Land of Canaan, is repreſented as made 
a Spoil. 

14 Thus faith the LORD my God 7, Feel s the Rock 
of the {laughter 7z. 

r God the Father. s O Zechariah, feed, comtort, rule 5 but ra- 

ther the Father ſpeaks to Chriſt the Son,and appoints h:1z who 1s the 
eternal Shepherd to feed his Sheep. #t Appointed tothe ſlaughter by 
different Hands, and for different Cauſes. it ipeaks of the People of 
the Jews who were killed by many Hauds, during 450 Years they 
were a Flock of ſlaughter to the Epyptians, Chaldeans, Fc. afrer- 
ward to the Romans, who ruined their Commonwealth, ilew their 
Citizens, and burnt their Ciry, | 
5 Whoſe policflors {lay them 7, and hold rhemſclves 
not guilty x : and they that {cl them y, ſay, Biefled be 
the LORD, for lam rich = : and rheir own thepherds 
pity them not . 
4 Either their own Governours, or the Romans, who in right of 
Conquerors are their Pofleffors; which way ever they got thein into 
their Hands, they ruined them, deftroyed them both in Body and 
Eſtate. x Think they do not fin in doing thisz fo low Thoughts 
they had of this Pecple,tuch extravaganr Thoughts they had of their 
own Power and Authority. y Betray their Ferſons or Liberty, or 
Eſtate, for Profit, or ſel] them tor Slaycs to Foretgners. 2 With 
profane ungodly Hearts do give God Thanks that they thrive by the 
moſt barbarous Methods of Cruelty and Oppreſfion, by bloody Mur- 
ders, as if theſe were ways of his appointing to gain Wealth, as if 
he bleſs'd them. 2 Who by Birth, Call and Office, were their pro- 
per Shepherds; the Governours of this poor Pcople, the Princes, 
the Priefts, had no pity on them in their Slavery or Blood I:ok'd on 
as unconcerned, it may be glad, that either they got a Booty,or were 
rid of a difaffe&ed Subject. | 


6 For b | will no more pity the inhabitants c of the 


land, faith the L OR D: but lo, I will T deliver the +1e, 11.4% 
men every one into his neighbours hand &, and into the #» be found. 


hand of his king ec, and they thall ſmite the lard f, and 
out of their hand 1 will not deliver hem g. 

b Their great fins have turned aivay God's Compaſſions from them, 
and Men ſhew no Mercy where God withdraws his. c The Genera- 
lity of the Nation, the Body of this finful People. d Leave to a turbu- 
lent, cruel, ſeditious and fraudulent Temper one againft another, to 
make Parties each azain{t other ; to*rob, impriſon, bath or Kill 
each other, as in the latter Times of their State 'tis kzown tney did, 
2 The Roman Ceſc, called here the Jew his Kinz, for thar they had 
choſen him to he ſoz orelſe the Head of the Faltion. f Their King 
and his Armics ſhall deſtroy the Land, it may polut to Veſpaſian and 
Titus, who ſack'd Jeruſalem, burnt the Temple, captivated 57000 
;erſons, and ſlew 60cooo at leaſt, though Jeſephus recrons 1100 
thouſand. g They ſhall never more be by my Hand de:tvered, or Þ 
will caſt them off forever, and ſo their Captivity under the Romans 


continueth to this day. _ ep = | | 

7 Ard þ I will feed the flock of tavghter 7, || cvcz ii Or, 4277 
you, O poor of the flock þ - and I tock unto me two #54197 
ſtaves /; the one I called Beauty 27, 


and the other 1 cal-, 
led || Bands 7, and I fed the Bocik 9. 


þ Or but, as the Hebrew Particle is ſometime read 3 as tor the grea- 


n 


ly "re, by the Enemy kindicd in rhe Houſes and Buildings in Fudeaz 


T1 
V Ol. Ike 


teſt part they are fo corrupt and obſiinately difobedient, 1 wilt caſt 
L V EA } Com 


are Ipoiled f: how], O ye oaks of Baihan g, | &'. 


| Or, 


tr 


— + 


I _ ww _ went - 
—_— »" > _ -— 
—_—— £- W.4 ba L _— _— - _ - 
n 9%." " 2p A Wis 1s a oe OD - I 
_ LI ERAS on — — <a>. 1 E he —_ 
- 7 ——— © ez — 2 ” LO ne 
- RED" 4 > 
» . pOaEs -n age = 7 


—- 


a 5 
£22 
> = : 
wo Aa... oo a _— 
Io ant tt SOA nal C2 CGG Or APE A A IR aa FI. at —__—__ yn. 
—B - << p_ - t 
- : y Y —_ 


Chap. XI. 


T Hb. 

ws ſtrait- 
wed for 
FNCHe 


fie - 
JETT $o2e 


+ Heb. bis 
f £59, Cr 
rierghLours 


Ir, the 
20s of the 
#ock, &c. 
certdinly 
hnew. 


{; 
F 


_ 
"l is 
/ o # * OS HO. Pas | f-/ »* # 0 A. h v -7 * 1 T o ” 3 
TONE) Sl oa 4 TIL IV PIICE CLLITEY {ic CES of ſilver. 


fed, &c. the French Verſion ſeems this way inclined : Fe me ſuts done 


 Countcl 2nd expreſs word; theſe under{tood what among others this 


them of; But, 1 will feed, &c. Or therefore, ſo then, becauſe ir ts 
tlio Wil of God that the Flock of Slaughter ſhould be fed, I will 


mis a paiſtre les brebis expoſees a tuerie, 1 am ſent then to feed the 
Sheep that are expoſed to ſlaughter. 7 Either by the Violence of 
their Enemics, of by the monſtrous Negligence of their Shepherds. 
+ This is explicarory of the former, and by the Ingemination of it 
ſhows vs that God doth in his Charge to the Prophet typically,and 1n 
his Charge 10 Chriſt the Antitype,diſtinguiſh clearly between People 
and Peopleamong the Jews, between thoſe that were poor and for- 
l-ra, and thoſe that were tyrannical, proud, cruel, and made a Prey 
of them ; theſe are left out of the paſtoral Charge, the other are taken 
carc of, { Thus he enters on the aRual exerciſc of his Oitice, and 
takes two Staves to himſelf; ar the meaning whereof we can but gueſs. 
Two, ſay ſome, to ſignifie the twofold way of Chriſt's governing his 
People by Lenity and Severity. Or, ſay others, ro note his fiogular 
care and dilizence in his Officez when other Shepherds content them- 
ſelves with ove, Chriſt takes two. Or what if hereby Chrift would 
be provited with one to guide the Flock, with another to repel ſuch 
2s would flavghter them, to prote& againſt Violence, and to direft 
ſuch as are meek ? Chriſt hath his golden Sceyter for his loyal and | 
obcdicnt Subje&s, and his iron Rod for refraFory Rebels, and viole::t 
Enemies, m Or Pleaſantneſs, Sweernels aud Lovelineſs; this Jay in 
the Holineſs of his Precepts,the Excciiency of his Comforts, the Gl 
ry of his Reward. This is the firit, and anfwers to the Character ot 
the ways of Wiſdom, Prov. 3. 17. They are Pleaſantneſs, the Vr- 
dinances of God, and the Enjoyment of them are the Beauty of the 
Lord, and our beholding ir, as David, Pal. 27. 44 n Either lucius 
to the Lines wherewith the Portion of the Holy Land was meted out 
to every one 2ccording to their Loty or referring to the Obligations 
Chriſt ſays on Men, to hold together in Peace and Unity. The Bcau- 
ty of Grace and Glcry, the Bands of Love and Peace. o With thetc 
is hand the Shepherd undertakes to feed and rule this Flock. 

S Thure p ſhepherds qg alfo I cur off 7 in one month 5, 
and my foul + Ioathed them 2, and their foul ailo av- 
horred me 7. 

p Put for many, a defivite for an indefinite Number. q Negligent 
or greatly faulty. r Put out of Office, or by diſcovering their Fai.lts 
made them lie hid, and conceal themſelves. 5s In a little rime. 
t Hated tlicir Treachery and Idlenels. u Ditgraced and turned out, 
they hated him; in which theſe Shepherds had too manyot the Jews 
that fided with them, and that bore a hatred to rne true Shepherd, 
and to his ifſapartiai executing Severity on the wicked Shepherds. 

9 Then x 1aid 1, 1 will not teed you y - * thar that' 
dierh, let it die 5 - and that that is to be cut off, let 
it be cugoff a; and let the reſt car, every one the fleſh 
of F another b. 

x After that time of his patient and vigilant feeding the Flock,and 
after his cuttiog off the three unfaithful Shepherds, and after the 11] 
Retentment he met with for itz when he deſeryed Love and Thanks 
for it, he is repaid with Diſdain and Hatred by the People, as well as 
by the Shepherdsz when he ſaw. all this, then, G'c. Thus they re-| 
jected Chriſt, the true Shepherd. y Next he reje&eth them, he will 
no more take care of them, or provide for them. x Thar which 15 
ready to die.and will not be cured, but hath rez<Qed the Shepherc's 
Love and Skill, Iet ir die 3 *tis like that, if ye believe not, ye ſhall die 
in yur ins. a Either the ſame repeated to confirm and afte&t them 
m.re, orelſc it intends to leave them naked and unguarded to their 
Enemy; to cut them off by the Sword or Famine,gc. 6 Either live 
to be befieped tl Hunger and Famine make the living eat the dead, 
&r cruclly kill that they may cat, as threatned, Det. 28. 52 58, | 
or clſe by Seditions and bloody inteſtine Quarrels deſtroy each other; 
all which happened to them in the Sicge of Feruſalem by the Romans. 

10 f And I took my itatt, cover Beauty c, and cut 
ir atunder, that I might break d my covenant e which 
{ had made with all the people /. 

c Which I gave that Name to, which was the Beauty and Glory of 
them, the Covenant of God, with a'l the Bleffiags of it, his Preſence 
with them, his Loye to them, and his Prote&ion of them, and his 
Blefing on them. d Signifie and declare that they had reje&ted God 
and his Favour, and refuſed his Covenant, and that now God would 
hold it for null'd, and nor obligatory to him. ie This ſomewhat 111u- 
fira*cs the Staff Beauty, which while unbroken, the Covenant be- 
tucen God 2nd the Jews was whole and unbroken; and 'tis to be 
notcd, Chriſt cal's it his Covenant, for he was the Mediator of it, to 
bring us to God in duty and holy walking, and to reconcile God to 
us in Mercy and Grace, which 1s the moſt beautiful and fweeteſt 
O:z<& we can ſee. f Kere again all the People, that is, the generali- 
ty, in diſtinticn to the Poor and Meck, the Iittle Remnant with 
wiom the Covenant ſtood firm, thoagh the Body of the Nation 
were rejected and caſt off, for God nor Cliriſt have neither of them 
ever call away his People, Rom. 11.1, 2. whom he foreknew. 

11 Aiid it was broken g in that day Þ : and || ſo the 
poor of the flock that waited upon me 7, knew # that 
It 7:4 the word of the LORD 7. | 

g Tie Covenant was abrogated by the Jews obſtinate refuſal of it, 
42d the M-diator of 1t. +4 It is not to be wondred *twas done in one 
Daz at lait, for the unthankſul unbelieving Jew had been tkrough 
Inauy Generations breaking it, now a day doth it, when it came to 
that, Not this Man but Barabbas, and we have no King but Czſar, and 
crucijue, crecifie him. 7 Who knew the Meſſiah, believed in him, and 
obered him, chſerved his Donne, Miracles and Life. þ Saw, and 
040d God 11 all this. That he had juſtly caſt off che Nation of the 

Jews 107 tneir Sins, their bloody Murder of the Lord of Lite, and 
(etvtiag hs Goveramenats they faw God would by the Roman Power 
puniſh rhe Jews, and lay waſte their Land, City and Temple, for this 
and their other Sins. 1 All whici was both according to his wiſe 


.- 


opact tad tor 409 Years before written of theſe things, 
\ S_ Lo 3 | = W 7 . = "kg 4 PIR, 2d 
T2 ANC 11G WO them 27, © In ye think g00d N., 
Bic #e My price o; and. 14 not, forhear: fo they p 


<4 


ZBCHARIAH 


Chap. Xy 


m Upon parting, Chriſt ſeems after the manner of Men to Wind 
them of his Pains and Care for them, and would haye them reckon 
with him. » He puts it to them, whether they thought he deſeryed 
ought at their Hands, and what it was, o Though 1. need not your 
Money or Pay, I deſerve more than you will giye, and therefore q 
in this as liketh you. p The Rulers of the Jews, the High Priefk. 
Chief Prieſts and Phariſees. q Which was the manner of Paying 
Money 1n thoſe days. r Which amounts to thirty ſeven Shillings Gy 


Cha 


{ Of, 
ſlumber,of 


priſon. 


Pence, the value of the Life of a Slave, Exod. 21. 32. this was fu. fOr, ond 
filled when they paid Judas Iſcariot ſo much to betray Chriſt, Math al againſt 
4 


13 And the LORD «& faid unto me z, Caſt it unto 
the potter # - a goodly price that I was prized at of 


them xx. And I y took the thirty preces of filver, ang cainſt Je- 
calt them to the potter in the houſe of the LORD > pſalem, 
s God the Father, with deteſtation of ſo vile an Aﬀront ang a | 
dervalue of his Son, ſaid, t To Zechariah in this Theatre, perſonacin, . 
Chriſt ſometimes. u As being.ſo little 'twould hardly purchaſe 4n ' 
thing but what was cheapeſt among them, a little earthern Ware 
x In an Irony God upbraids the Shepherds of his People, who prizeg , 
tg great Shepherd no higher. y Zechariah, who in this Part now : 
emblematically doth what Zudas will with Horror do when he hath M 
old innocent Blood, and berrayed it. 4 Or rather caſt them into the 
Houic of the Lord for the Potrer,all which the Jewiſh Rulers aR oyer w 
12 their proſecuting Chriſt unto death. " 
14 Then a I b cut afſunder mine other ſtaff, evey q 
Bands c, that I might break 4 the brotherhood e he. | 0: l: 
veen Jndah f and lfrael g. binder, , 
a So ſoon as I ſaw what value they put upon me, or preſently af. Pe 
cer thecaiting them off from the Covenant, and unchurching them; 
© Cirift 63d 1t reaily, the Propher did it in the Tppe. c Took no Pa 
lurtiier Care to keep them in civil Peace among themſelves, but lefr _ 
them to their ſeditious Humours, and inhumane Animoſities. Relj. A 
gion which 1s tree, is the beſt Bond of Peace, Friendſhip and Love; = 
when te Jews caſt off Religion, and murdered their Lord, next they w_ 
fall ro murdering one another. dA Decjare it broken, leave them to - 
ſhew "twas broken. e That Friendſhip wkich had been among them, hs 
f The two Tribes. g The Remnant of the ten Tribes which fell in: alt 
to moſt unnatural Seditions after the death of Chriſt, cill the taking __ 
of Feruſalem by the Romans. by f 
15 | And the LORD faid unto me, Take unto 4 
thee þ yet the inſtruments 7 of a fooliſh ſhepherd #. ry | 
h O Zechariah. i Put on the Garb,and perſonate once more a Shep- mac 
herd quite different from him thou haſt repreſented. þ This fooliſh of 
People have rejzeRted the wiſeſt and beſt Shepherd; let them ſee what with 
one they will chuſe, in ſeeing what Part thou now aQeſt. 
16 For lo, I will raile / up a ſhepherd in the land, _ 
-bichſhall not viſit thoſe thar þ if mm, nei 10; by 
wh1ch ſhall not vitit zhoſe that be || cut off an, neither ſhall"! zAd 
lzck the young one 7, nor heal zhat that zs broken o, nor in the 
|| teed that thar ſtandeth till p : but he ſhall eat thel%% mags 
fleſh of the fat g, and rear their claws in pieces 7. Mens 
I As a juſt Puniſhment of their Sin, refuſing Chriſt the wiſe and Into k 
good Shepherd ; his Government they would not accept to their $al- ept © 
vation, that they chuſe ſhall be ro their Ruine. m Or that are hid- I will c 
den; 1t is a tooliſh Shepherd who ſeeks not out thoſe that are loſt to and I wv 
bring them home. n Which are apreſt to periſh through weakneſs, confou 
0 Burt leayes it to die of its Wounds. p Either not able to go for- open u 
ward, or hungry ſtops to eat, but the Shepherd will not wait while them 
this is done. q Will feaſt on the fatrteſt of the Flock. r And with jefting 
Cruelty extort all from them, tear off their Skin to the very Nails: in tle For, 


brief, a ſluggiſh negligent, covetous, riotous, oppreſſive and cruel 
Government, ihadow'd out by a fooliſh Shepherd, is the Puniſhment 
ot the Sins of the Jews. 


17 Wo to the idol] ſhepherd s that leaveth 7 the 


5 
= heart « 
ng [trengr 


flock : the ſword z ſhall be upon his arm x, and upon Ine © The 
his right eye y - his arm ſhall be clean dried up, and his &, omg 
right eye {halt be utterly darkned 2. wy ke 
s To every one of them that are but the Images of Shepherds, ready _ 
worthleſs and uſeleſs. # Catis off the Care of the Flock, Fer. 23-1. of Men 
Exek. 34.2. u Ofthe Enemy. x To break his Strength: y Blind Strenoth 
and befool his Counſels, xz rower and Policy ſhall fail him, ſuch their row 
ſhall be their Governours. of all, wi 
he will g4 
CHAP. XI. 5 
Feruſalem a cup of trembling to her people,and a burdenſome ſtone to her ad- dah like 
verſaries, 1—g, Fudal's viftory and reftauration, 6—=9g. A ſpirit 0 a torch 
grace and ſupplicaiion promiſed; views of our pierced Redeemer followed th Cn « 
with mourning, 10. Al! families ſhall mourn apart, 11—14. [ef PEO 
Li an 
HE burden of the word of the LORD # for If " own plat 
4A rael Þ, faith the LORD c, * which ftretchet t Seve 
forth the heavens 4, and layeth the foundation of Ks. kindled. 
the earth e, and * formeth f the ſpirit ig of man within || 1 ” the 
nM. : : Fc It the Hear 
a Vid. this whole Paſſage, ch. 9. 1. let. a, b, c. b Or touching,cor- Sheaf on + 
cerning, as Gall. Verſion upon, againft. Heb. bears itz and ſome rake With their þ 
it in one, ſome in the other Senſe, though I think the main of the nemies. w1 
Chapter perſwades it is to be rendred, for, in the behalf of Jjrael, ſo till Chrif 
ze. the Church of Chriſt among the Jews until their Reje10n, 40 the Prophe: 
among the Gentiles ever ſince their Vocation, both have their Col Nineveh, Thr: 
cern in the things here foretold. c Who giveth out Promiſes 0 of that Nsm 
great things, to a People ina very loi ſtate, aud therefore to Faile thalj re-edifi, 
their Hope, tells tliem by his Prophet what he hath done- d AS , In Feruſaler 
Curtain, faith Iſatah, ch. 40. 22. who did more cafily ſpread abroa Which You ox 
the Heavens, than any Creature can ſpread fortha Curtain about your Cal Feryſalem 
B:d, or a Canopy over your Head z by an Almighty Power going uilt, yer 67 
along with the AR of his Will,ſaying, Let it be, all that immenſc wh Jeruſalem, 
dy of the material, viſible Heavens, immediately ſpread forth it ici": 7 The] 


e Upon his own Almighty Word, on that the chief Corner-ſon65 


flt # thy 


thereof dolie, Fob. 38. 4, 5,6. Iſa. 51. 13: fin admirable __— 


Chap- x1l. ZECH 


ARIAH Chap. 


and with mote eſpecial Artifice framed, ſo Heb. imports, as I/a. 43-7+] the glory of the inhabitants of Jeruſalem, do not mag-. 


8 46. 11. & The immortal Soul, that ſpiritual Being which ani- 

mateth us; he who hath done all this, can do all that is here promiſed 

for Iſrael, and threatned againſt 1/rael's Enemies, 
> Behold, I will make Jeruſalem h a cup of || trem- 
Nr Be bling 7 unto all the people round about &, || when they 
piſm- , ſhall be in the fiege / both againſt Judah 2 and againtt 
$069, Jeruſalem 7. - Ws : | 
gl/14g4P/® 1, Thar weak, unwalled, poor, and thinly inhabited City, Type of 
7 ub the Church, and much more the Church which is Antitype to Feruſa- 
Jhal w lem, 1 They ſhall drink their own Bane, whoſe Swords be driking 
the Blood of the Inhabitants of this Feruſalem; there is Poiſon mix'd 
in the Cup of the Wrath of God, which he will put into the Hands of 
ſuch wicked ones, aud they muſt drink it off, þ To the Heathen 
round about, to all of them,all have more or leſs at one cine or other 
moleſted Feruſalem, and God remembers it, and hath provided 


her, thinking then to finiſh all cheir Attempts again't 7craſalem. 
7 Strange Siege laid againſt a whole Country, and mizhcy Powers 
will be little enough to do this, it requires a moſt exriaordiagary Pro- 
viſion ; now when all this is in readineſs . and n0 vitio:e means of 
Eſcape, then will God make them drink the Wine of Attonithment, 
and caſt theminto a dead Sleep. m The Land of Fudav. n Typical 
and myſtical, the Church of Chriſt. | _ | 

« 3 And in that day o will I make Jeruſilem a bur- 
dentome ſtone p for all people 9: ail thar burden them- 
ſelves with 77, ſhall be cur in pieces 7, thovgh all the 

cople of the earth s be gathered together againlt It. 

oIn the times of the Heatheas affliting the Ciurch, from the re- 
pair of Feruſalem,till Chrift's coming 1n the Fleth, and in ſucceeding 
times fincez but the Day of the Zull accompliſhment of this Prophecy 
is a Day known to the Lord. p Too heavy tor them, though many 
join together to remove it. ' q Though all People of this known 
World ſhould burden themſelves with her. r They would be cruſh- 
ed to picces, as a Man that falls under a weighty aud 1:4fty Stone, 
s Many Nations have been confederate z now it you would ſuppoſe 
all through the whole World in league agair.ſt Zeruſalem, yer they 
could not ſtand under the weight of his diſpleaſure,who 1s provoked 
by ſuch Attempts, he would grind them to Powder. 


4 In thar day z, faith the LORD, I will ſmnite eve- 
ry horſe 4 with altoniſhment x, and his rider with 
madneſs y, and I will open mine eyes upon the houtc 
of Judah Zz, and I will 1mite every horſe of the people 


with blindnels 9. 8 

z Vid. ver. 3-let.o. u Horſes are of very great uſe in Wars, they 
were the main ſtrength of Antiochus Epiphanes, his beſt Preparations, 
x A dull ſottiſh Fearand Perplexity. y An.impotency of Mind both 
in the Underſtanding, which is Folly and Imprudence, and in the W1l 
and Reſolurion, which is either Cowardice or Unconftancy, like mad 
Men that neither know how to reſolve ora@. God will turn ail their 
Counſel into Fooliſhneſs, their Strength into Weakneſs,their Courage 
into Fear,and fo overturn them all. x A while I ſeem'd as one that 
ſlept or wink'd at the Proceedings of my Church's Enemies, yet row 
I will open mine Eyes, and ſee all that is going forward againſt them, 
and I will watch over my People tor good, againſt their Enemies, to 
confound and deſtroy them, and their Enterprizes ; this Eye of God 
open upon his Feople, is his wiſe, powerful, gracious Providence for 
them, Fſal. 31. 22, Jer. 24. 6, a All their Warriours, in their Pro- 
jeting and Conſults, ſhall be as full of Improvidence, and have as lir- 
tle Foreſight, as a ſtark blind Man hath of Sight ro ſee by. 


5 And the governours of Judah b ſhall fay in their 
tere heart c, || The inhabitants, of Jeruſalem d ſhall be my 
ſtrength in the LORD of hoſts e their God 


- b The Counſellors and Rulers at home, and the Leaders and Cap- 
&, fains abroad, the Maccabeesand others,every one for himſelf, c Shall 
© © think, believe, and reckon upon it, and be hearty init. d Though 
but few, and poor, yet they ſhall by my ſtrength; and theſe ſhall be 
ready and forward to go forth againſt their Enemies, with an handful 
of Men to encounter mighty and numerous Armies, becauſe their 
Strength and Help lieth in the Name of the Lord of Hoſts. e Not in 
their own Power, but in the Power of the Almighty Sovereign Lord 


he will give them ViRory. 


6 T In that day will I maxe the governours g of Ju- 
dah like a hearth of fire þ among the wood z, and like 
4 torch of fire in a ſheaf &; and they / ſhall deyour all 
the people round about, on the right hand and on the 
l&ft : and Jeruſalem ſhall be inhabited 2» again in her 
own place 7, even in Jeruſalem o. 

8 Scever.s. let. b, h A Hearth throughly hot, on which Fire is 
kindled, 7 The more is laid on, the more is conſumed and burnt 
up; fo the Enemies of Fudah and Jeruſalem ſhall be,their Multitudes 
inall no inore ſave themſelves than much Wood caſt on a great Fire 
It the hearth can preſerve it ſelf. þ& Which immediately ſers the whole 
Sheaf on fire, and it is conſumed. I The Governours of Judah 
withtheir handful of Men ſhall thus ſurely and ſpeedily conſume their 
Enemies which ſet upon them. m As indeed it was, and continued 
till Chriſt's Death, and forty Years after; for of theſe tines doth 
the Prophet! ſpeak. and not of Times ſtil] to come. n Not built at 
Nineveh, Ty us, Babylon or Rome, in ſome Place near to the old Cities 
ot that Name z but iv the very ſame Place where old Feruſalem did, 
Mall re-edified Feruſalem again ſtand. o So you ſhall find. Feruſalem 
n Jeruſalem ; or thus, ſpirituzl Feruſalem ſhall be that Feruſalem in 
wnich you ought to look ior, and' where you ſhall find the old Typi- 
cal Jeruſalem, which though it lie waſte, and I fear muſt never be 
ra 15 112 more ample mariner built up in the Church, ſpiritual 
Teruſalem. 


- 7 TheLORD allo ſhall ſave p the tents 9 of Judah 
alt 7, that the glory of the houſe of David s, aud 


of all, who can ſave by few as by many. f And becauſe their God | 


o . 
nifie zhemſelves t againſt Judah. | 
þ Reſcue from the Power and Rape of the Antiochin's ; nay, ſub- 
due their Armies, and put them to flight before the ſews, q The 
unfeticed Places, rhe open Country, the Shepherd-like Cottages, or 
| Tents of Fadah. r Before he ſaveth Jeruſalem, beſore he pur Feru- 
ſalem into Arms, or bring her Inhabitants into the Field, to ſight, and 
| help the Country, and 1ts Inhabitants firſt the weaker are ſaved, 
' next the ſtronger. $ That the illuſtrious Houſe of David, and ſo the 
glorious Citizens of Jeruſalem, t Boaſt of their Power, Policy, Cou- 
rage, and Forwardneſs, and how much 7adah owed to theſe for their 
Deliverance : This would exaiperate 7udah, and provoke God, who 
would do all this; ſo that all might magnific rheir God, none think 

greatly of themſelves, 


' $ ln thatday z thall the LORD defend the inhahji- 
| tor fantsoft Jeruſalem x, and he that is || + feeble y among !!or, abje#, 
them a Cup of Aſtoniſhment, againſt the Day in which they ucticze them. at that day ſhall be as David 2; and the houſe of f Heb. 


XI! 


David  /ha/l be a5 God 6b, as the angel c of the LO RD f*n 


before them &d. 


u See ver. 3 let.o. x As he had defended and ſaved Fadah, and 
the Tents thereof; ſo will he alſo defend Feruſalem and its Inhabi- 
rants againſt all cheir Enemies, during the Perſian, Grecian, and Be- 
ginnings of the Roman Empire, during which Days many Wars were 
raiſed againſt the Jews, but molt viſible was this, when the Macca- 
bees ſucceeded fo far, as to reſtore Religion, and cleanſe the Temple. 
» Reeleth through weakneſs. xz A mighty Man of Valour was Da- 
vid, ſo theſe through Faith of weak became ſtrong, as Heb. 11. 34. 
a Thoſe of the Royal Line ſhall be for Prudence and Proweſs in the 
Cordudtof the Armies of Iſrael moſt excellent, expreſs'd here in an 
Hyperbole. b Or as Angels, ſo Elohim 1s tranſlated, Pſal. 8. 3. and 
ſol find the French reads it (Comme des Anges.) c Nay, like the 

' Angel of the Lord, which is Head of Principalities, like Chriſt who 
' is Captain of our Salvation. In theſe Exploits, and in chis Delive- 
rance of the Church they were Types, and ſo muſt have fomewhar in 
them which may be ſufficient to reſemble them tohim. 4 Theſe ex- 
cellent ones of the Royal Line were to be Leaders and Commanders 
n theſe Wars, and in their Conduf they ſhould ſhew Prudence 
and Valouryike that of an Angel,rather than thir of anoidinary Man, 

9 And it ſhall come to pals e in that day, zhat 
I f will ſeek g to deſtroy þ all narions 7 that come 
againſt & Jeruſalem /. 

e This alſo ſhall cercainly come to paſs. f God the Defenderand 
Saviour of Iſrael. g This ſpeaks nor any Difficulty to God in the 
Work, as with Men, who ſometimes do lzek to do what they cannot 
do, bur this implieth God would rhroughty do it, his right Haad 
ſhould find out theſe his Enemies, he will hunt them our. þ Not to 
reſtrain, bur to overthrow and deſtroy. 1 Withour Fartiality,every 
Nation that ſets it ſelf to oppreſs and deſtroy Feruſalem, Ged will pay 
them in their own Join : they ſaid, blor out her Name, but God iw:ll 
blot out theirs; let us, ſay they, cur them off from being a Nation, 
bur this God will turn upon their own Heads. þ Combine, aid at- 
rempt to deſtroy her, and this was evidently ſeen upon thoſe that 
ſought to deſtroy Feruſalem, and the ſecond Temple before Chrift's 
Incarnation : for by the Romans God deſtroyed the Arntiochian Power 
which had often miſchieted the Jews, and deftroy'd the ocher King- 
doms which had been Enemies to the Jews, who were never in dat- 
ger of being cut off from being a Nation. till their horrid murderi:g 
of the Lord of Life. 1 Literally and hiſtorically the City which che 
Captives returned from Babylon did build, but wyftically the Carho- 
lick Church which God will never ſuffer to be deftroyed ; ie will ra- 
ther deſtroy all Nations, than ſuffer them to deſtroy his Caurch, 

Io And * I / will pour m upon the houſe or Da- 
vid zz, and upon the inhabitants of Jeruſalem oo, the 
ſpirit of grace o and of ſupplications p ; ard * they g 
ſhall look upon me 7» whom they have pierced s, and 
1* they ſhall mourn for him 7, as one mourneth tor Þ; 
only ſor z, and ſhall be in bitterneſs tor him x, as ons 
that is in bitterneſs for þzs firſt-born y. 

} God the Father, ſo As 2. 17, 18. and Iſ4.44. 3. m In plenti- 
ful Meaſures, as a plentiful Rain is poured forth on a thirfty Ground 
| this was fulfilled on Chriſt's Exaltation, when he received Gitts for 
; Men; and being glorified, gaye the Spirit, ſent the Comforter to his 
D:ſciples and Believers: this is daily performed co the Children of 
God, and will be continually performed till we all are made peric8, 
and are brought ro be with Chriſt for ever. n On ſome of that 
Royal Family z or typically conſidered, 'tis the whole- Family of 
Chriſt, his Houſe, who was the Seed of David, and who is called 
David their King, Exekh. 37. 24. Hoſ. 3- 5. 00 Literally under- 
ſtood it was fulfilled extraordinarily, As 2. 4, 5. and no doubt in 
the ordinary manner, to many of whom no mention is made z my- 
ſtically the Inhabitants of Feruſalemare all the Members of Chriſt, all 
Believers of all Ages. o Which is the Fountain of all Graces in us, 
and which makes us lovely in the Eye of our God ; Grace to purifte 
us, and to beautifie us, that God may delight in us. p Or Prayer, 
which 1s an early,inſeparable Fruit of the Spirit of Grace by the Spi- 
rit we cry, Abba Father, Rom. 8. 26. and are help'd to perform 
this Duty. q All thoſe who have received this Spirit. x With an 
Eye of Faith, and turn to Chrift, love, obey and wait for him, 
! 5 Every one of us by our fins pierced him, but many of the Jews 
nailed him to the Croſs,and atually murdered the Lord of Life. This, 
as foretold, ſo was very punRually ſuifill'd and recorded 1n the Ac- 
count of his Death given by Fobn ch. 19. 34, 35+ & 37+ this hath 
then a particular reſpe& to the Jews, though not corfin'd to them, 
t Grieve, and heartily, lament the crucijying the Lord Jeſus Chriſt, 
| not only as the ſinful cruel a& of their Variess, but as that in which 
| their fins had a great ſhare. « With a very great and deep, with a 
' long and continued Sorrow, with 2:1 unfeigned and real Sorrow, ſuch 
! as 15 the Sorrow of a Father in the Death of an only Son ; they ſhall 
! retain it inwardly, and expreſs it outwardly, as in the Funeral-Mour- 

rings on ſuch Occafions. x This ſpeaks the inwardeſft Atfc&ion of 


| 


the Mourner, there may be Tears in ſome Caſes without Griet or Bit- 


terneſs in the Spirit 3 but here both are jom'd, true Repentar.ce will 
bitterly 


” 


* joe! 23 


12. 


* RCv-I-7. 


Am. 3, LO, 


ds 


_ 7. 
4 pa NT - - 
| - SR - = ; =. _ —_— 
- : T \ "be & 
p & < = nl f 3 : v4 © 
tents Se 6 FE — . a—_ - - C hy " 
,- wb ts ago 
” 9 —_ . ——_ + ww — wt - we TS 
wan OP", - ho. AE \. 2. ea n 
oben % . - 
A =Y _ 
” 5 «AE = = "7-5 -- ppt ce aro > c "WI 4 
# "Ix 2.4.54 = ry 2 « > _ - fs 
I» __ ek. opt Y os — R 
m_— _— ry 5 


"— 
»® 2g 


Chap. XU. 


bitterly Iamcnt the fins which brought ſorrows and ſhame upon our 
Lord. © y This birterneſs compared to the grief of one who loſeth 
his firſt—born, to confirm and illuſtrate whar he had juſt before ſpo- 
ken of Chriſtians mourning for Chrift, 

11 In that day = ſhall there be a * great « mourning 
in Jeruftlem,* as the mourning of Hadadrimmon in the 
valley of Megiddon. : 

When the Jews ſhall know, own and mourn for their ſins,and 
for that great fin in crucifying the Lord of Glory. a A very great 
Morning, which is cxpreft by the greateſt the Jews ever were ac: 
quain:ed with, and which for irs greatneſs grew up 11to 4 Proverb, 
The Mourning of Hadadrimmon, or the Mourning for 7oſ12h flain at 
Hatadrimmon, a Town in the Valley of Hegiddon. Of this Mourn- 
inz, fce 2 Chron. 35, 24, 25- 


+:Teb,jai- 12 And the land b ſhall mourn , T every family 
ties fari- apart c, the family of the houſe of David apart, and 
HESs their wives d apart : the family of the houie of Nathan 
apart, and their wives apart ec : | 
b Land put for the Inhabitants of it, and Land 1n general for the 
Land of Zudea,or that where the Fews dwelt who ſhould cvery where 
bear a ſhare is this Mourning 3 thes ſome of the Fes from every 
Country where they dwelt, being met at Zeruſalemy were prick d at 
Heart, and did mourn over the crugthed Meſſiah, Acts 2, 5, with 37- 
and 41. c Or Family by Family, expreit in #ebr. Families Fami- 
lies. d The Royal Family in bo:h Branches of it, Sofsemon's and Na- 
than's; this Family a> having greatett vortion in Chriſt, ſhould have 
been moſt tender of kim, who tad neen Heir on the Throne, 1f 11s 
Kingdom had been of this World, aid by deſcent irom David ; but 
fince they forgot him, negleed to do their Duty to him alive, they 
remember him, and do their Duty towards hin dead; rhey mourn 
really and truly. e The manner Of che Jews ia mourning was by 
ſhutting up themſelves, retiring irom Tompany aua glcaturc 3 here 
Families retire; nav,i the Family, Wives zetire to bewail their fin, 
2nd their Fatkers ff. in rcje& ins Chritt, Scrac ther2 were of this 
Family who believed in Cult, ard mourned when the Geofpel was 
rſt publilird tothe 7ews, before 'twas carried ro the Gentiles, 


TAQs 2.27. 


* > Chir, 
- Af 
35+ a j-@ 


n 
_- 
i, 


EHCHARTAE. 


13 Tre famiiy of the houſe of Levi apart, ard their | 
wives apart : the family of Shimet apart,and their wives | 
apart : 

The ſacerdotal Tribe was the moſt bitter and fierce Perſecutors of 
Chrift, they hired the Traitor, ney ſought witneſs; the High Prieft 
( Head of that Family ) condemned him to die, for all which they 
ſhall one Day reckon with God, and therefore above other Tribes 
they are particularly named as chiet Mourners for their Injuſtice aid 
Cruelty to Chriſt. Here is one particular Branch of Levi's Family 
mentioned, tne Family of Shinez, of whom 1 Chron. 6.17. Theſe two 
Families had been a-eply gwlty, now they do as eminently concern 
themſelves to mourn tor tim, folament the fin, deprecate the fierce 
Wrath of God, and fubinit ro ms Kingdom, which their Fathers 
did not, would not do. In this Family where moſt were bitter, bloo- 
dy Enemies to Chriſt, ſome had other Thoughts of him, and mourned 
ior him. 

14 All the tamilies that remain, every family aparr, 
and rheir wives apart. 

It would be ſomewhat tedious to repeat every Family and their 
Wives once, therctore a geueral compreheative Account may ſerve z 
fvme of every Family 0; the whuijc Remnant of Iſrael mourn, 
bclieve, Loox to, and obey Chrift rhe Mefſrah. So the Mourning 
for Chriſt bears ſome Proportion to their violent dealing againſt 
Chrijt, aud they through Faith live by the Blood they did ſpill, 
and petto Glory by ijai whom they loaded with Reproaches ; what 
will not Grace do when 1t conyerteth, acceptcth, comforteth, glori- 
ficth ſuch Offendcrs ? 


GHAYF. MAIL 


Tie ſuuntain opened to cleanſe Feruſalem from idolatry and falſe prophecy, 
1——5. Of the ſuſſering and death of Chrift, of the deftrudtion of the 
wicked, and ſalvation of the ele&, after their trial, 7 —9. 

Þ that day a there ſhall be a fountain þ opened c to, 

the houſe ot David d, and to the inhabitants of Je- 

+ 9c). ſe- rufalem c, tor fin, and for + uncicanneſs f. 

paratin ff Y 4a When the Lambof God ſhall be offercd vp a Sacrifice for Man- 
uncleannc)s kind, and rhe Goſpel ſhall be preached, in which the glad Tidings 
ot our Redemption are publiſh'd. þ By Water and Ceremonial W aſh- 

15s was legal Pollution 1n many Caſes purged away, and much of ri;c 

legal Service ſtood in divers Waſhings, but all theſe were Shadows 

aud Typcs; here 1s that they typificd, the matchleſs healing and 

purging Fountain, 2. e. the Blood of Chriſt; hereis the true Siloam 

which never fa1Þd to heal any that rightly uſed it, *tis Chriſt. c The 

Spoute i5 to Chrift a Fountain ſealed, but Chrift is to Sinners a Foun- 

cain opeacd : under the Law he was as the Waters of the Teraple,for 

the 7ews ; but now ne is opened to us Gentiles, free to all, and of 

eatie accefs, and of Sovereign Virtue to heal. d He was every where 
ncareſt to them; and though his own Kinered did ſome of them. 
flight him, and not hclieve in him, yet ſome others did ; and it may 
intimate to us the firtt render of Grace madeto his own, to whom 
he came, tough they received him not; or the Roval Family ſome 
of tcm Will te Bencitct by 1t, and allof them necd it. No out- 
ward wTviege 023 Journ 25 agutnlt thePoiſon of Sin; Grace alone, 
this Fountain Pur if away 10 great and nobie,or mean and 


A+ SoT +5 
arial CC 


bale. e to alt the Jews before the Gentiles, To you firft, ſaith the 

Apgiite, God ath junt bis So, Unc in that tis opencd, 'tis to us Gen- 

FLLOS NID. 11 d> maz;6 5: the whole Church, takes in the 

Gertiies, fo i tails CE Jernſalem are all to whom the Goſyel is 

ro ied, 2: ELITERLS, f Or prong away of all manner of Sins 
«a Utcoicannciics of which Mag gone: 


:, and from which they de- 
Tohn 1. 9, 


AF vi - 
TICOCCOCAINES fo nor 2; W; nA- M * 
Coo PEN. ["8, [cat £I0%: 29g, Ye 8& 


fell from Heaven like Lightning, as Chriſt tel!s us, when the Goſpel waz 1. : 


Chap, Xt 


2 © And it ſhall come to paſs in that day e, faith the *Ewy, 
LORD of hofts, zhat I will * cut off the names of the 23, 
idols out of the land f, and they ſhall no more he re. ?fa. 
membred g : and alſo I will cauſe the prophets b, and j* 
the unclean ſpirit ; to paſs * out of the land. oy 

e Vid. ver. 1. let. a. f Utterly deſtroy Idols and Idolatry 3 Satan 42, 


Cha 


v 


51, 


al.1,, 
Mar, 
preach'd by thoſe he ſent, and 'tis known the Birrh of Chriſt filen. , 
ced the Devil, that he could no more give anſwer to thoſe that enqui- 
red at his Oraclesz the Light of the Goſpel is ſuch, that none of the 
Idols can bear it, TheDevil put it into the Heads of the Romans to 
keep Chriſt from being received by publick allowance for a God, he. 
cauſe he would turn out all the reft of them. g With Veneration 
Sacrifices, Gifts, .ereQing of: Temples, depending on, or conſulting 
with them; they fhall be remembred and abhorred, whereas before 
they were remembred and ador'd. þ Either thoſe that being Prieſts 
to Idols, did conſult with them,and pretend to forerel future Events; 
or more likely the falſe Prophets among the Fews, who are Prophets 
as Idols are Gods. 7 72. e. The Devil which ſets the falſe Prophets on 


| 


work 3; Chriſt caſt many out of Perſons poſlefſed, and by his DoQrine n 
{till doch caft out Satan. 

3 And ir ſhall come to paſs, z7hat when any ſhall , 
yet propheſie &, then his tarher and his mother that he. : 
gat him /, ſhall ſay unto him //, Thou ſhalr nor live  , f: 
tor thou ſpeakeſt lies in the Name of the LORD » : D 
and his tather and his mother thar begat him, ſhall - 
thruſt him through o when he prophefieth. s 

þ Whoſoeyer he be that ſhall pretend hereafrer to propheſie thrg | 
the inſtigarion of that unclean Spirit ; for it can be from no othe 1 Pet. 1, Al 
when the Lord ſhall have fully revealed his Mind to us. / His deareſt Th tr! 
Friends, they who arc by Nature neareſt to him, who begat him, Pl.go.15- p 9 
11 Shall diſcourſe him, and inform him what rhe Law of Moſes di- Pf, 144- pe 
reRcth in this Caſe, m WhichlT take to be not the Sentence con- ' : 
demnatory, for being private Perſons,they could not condemn him ; 2 þ 
but it is a repetition of the Law, which faith, ſuch ſhall nor live; Sily 
and then it amonnts to this, a falſe Prophet ought not to live, Dey ſels 
13.6, 3. what then doſt thou do to break this Laiv, and endanger ſive) 
thy Life ? Thou oughteſt to die tor this by the Law z the Father and 

| Mother thus ſhould admoniſh and ſhew the matter of Law arid Dan- 

wer, but not judicially paſs Sentence, and determine what fiall be 
| done. #n Thou Callefk under that Law, Deut. 13.6. o Or, wound, The 
chaſtiſe with Stripes that may leave their marks behind them, n: rx- C01 
ther ſha!l ſharply reprove him, and with cutting Words terrifie him Th 
from the lie Praftice : You read of words that are pierciag words, na) 

Prov. 12.18. words that run through as a Sword; and the Chaldee 
Paraphra!t on this of our Prophet allows the Father and Mother 

rt deai ſharply with their Son, they thall rebuke cuttingly : be- | 

des, if *twere to be underſtood of killing, the Law direRs to ſtone aH 
ſuch a one, Deaf. 13. Io, not to run him through with Lance or Ous N; 
Sword. upon t 
R : for pu 

4 And it ſhall come to paſs p in that day, 2zhat ths Zeph. 1 
prophecs ſhall be aſhamed 9 every one of his viſion, ſoon © 
when he hath prophefied ; neither ſhall they wear a _ 
* + rough garment 7 Þ to deceive s : hory | OY 
' þ By this means it will come to ,paſs, ſuch ſharp Reproofs, ſuch"? they ſ} 
impartia] Threats,ſuch convincing Arguments will have a good effett, very pl 
9 Thele Prophets will ſee their Error and be ainamed, and pive over | |.” and wh 
what they bluſh at, and is their ſhame. » Such Garments the true” < 
Prophets were wont to wear.aud theſe Cheats had uled them for a 2 Þ 
Cover to their jugling Hypccrifte 3 but when throughly conviticed, 13.16, lem to 
none ſhall need pull, they will themſelyes caſt off thoie Garments. houſes 
s By firſt ſeeming to be more holy and ftri& than they are, aud next the cir 
on ſuch i}l grounded Opinion of the Holineſs of their=Perſons, draw E ati; 
rhem into their Opinions, Religion, and Pra&ice. *Tis an excellent Y the | 
Work of the Grace of God to recoyer Deceivers, and to make e This 
chem turn off the Deceiyer, and deal plainly and faithfully with 0- this chin 
thers and themſelves. £ qt | 

5 Bur he ſhall ſay, I 2m no prophet, T am an Huſ. bis Coun 
bandman ; for man taught me to keep cattel from my the Powe 
youth. \ = Know 

This Verſe is this reclaimed Man's Recantation, or Yemncii To mak 
of his former Courſe, and his ſolemn Promiſe to rake up his own Arg 
Calling, and become a plain honeſt Man, and live upon his Labour, t alt an 
to which he was trained up from his Youth, and is ſorry he cycr we te 
left it. f 0g juſt 

luſed the 

6 And one ſhall fay unto him , What are theſe ng W 
wounds 7 in thine hands ? Then he ſhall anſiwer #, era - 
1hoje with which I was wounded 77 the houſe of my a fixth Par 
friends x. as ch, 13, 

# This Verſe continueth the Account of the reclaimed Prophet, ws #1 
and ſuppoſeth whar is uſual, that ſome will enquire what che meaaing Who were 
of the Marks or Impreffions on his hands, whether they were not ſuch I or about 
as appropriated him to an Idol, or declared him a profeſt Diviner- tor ceaſed | 
4 Plainly and tuily nofuch as you imagine. x But the Scars of the rulnd the C 
Wounds my ſtu»borneſs deſeryed, and che Love of my Friends gave 3 The 
me under a ſcyere Diſcipline, to recoyer me from ruining my felt gainſt thc 
and others by Impoſtures and Lyes, |  batte] [nc 

7 < Awake y, O ſword 2,againſt my ſhepherd z, and , jb T = s, 
againſt the man 6 * zhat 3s my tellow c,ſaith the LORV ,;.8 : Bo bf 
ot hoſts : * {mite the ſhepherd d, and the ſheep fhall jo," Men ) as a v 
be ſcattered e- and TI will turn mine hand f upon the = lem, and © 
little ones g. 1 God fought 

Many words are ſpent by Interpreters to ſhew what they think to : 4.7 4TA 
ve the Connex10n of the words; it is eafier to ſay what are the Col- Mount of 
tents and Defign of them. Ir is poſſible they are ſubjoined to the eaſt ;, 
tormer to vindicate Chriſt from the ſuſpicion of an Impoſtor,thoug" the z, and 
he was wounded, for this his Father did foretel by Zechariah 499 Ireof x 


OY 
Years inore or leſs beforchand; ſg that theſe wounds are not marks 0 terre hat 


an 


Chap. XIV. 


an Impoſtor, but Teſtimonies of his Truth, and that he is the Mefſi- 
ah. y "Tis God's Commiſſion, or rather Predi&ion, the Imperative 
at for the Future x 7i-e. Affiliations, Perſecutions, and the Croſs. 
z Who is my fairhful Shepherd, and will lay down his Life for my 
Sheep. | þ6 Who became Man, that he might be my Servant and die. 
c Or my equal, who was eyer with me, and my Delights, Prov. 8. 
30. Man my Fellow ſpeaks Chriſt Man with us, and God with his Fa- 
ther,God-man 1n one Perſon. d This great and good Shepherd ſhall 
be ſmitten, 7. &. die for my Sheep, and before he dieth ſhall ſuffer 
much for them. e As affrighted, deſtitute of one to look after them, 
and which muſt be partakers in ſufferings with their Shepherd. f God 
will, ſay ſome, turn his Hand againſt the little ones, ſmite them too; 
but others ſay, this turning the Hand 15 in Favour, and for ProteQi- 
on, 'tis Hand turned over them, as if he would keep the Blow off 
them, while others fitrer to bear it do ſuffer. g New, and therefore 
A weak Converts and Diſciples. : . 
E $ And it ſhall come to paſs, 7hat in all the land þ, 
| ſaith the LORD, two parts 7 therein ſhall be cut oft, 
and die k, but the third / ſhall be left therein 2. 

This Verſe may be a Predifion of the great ſlaughter Titus made 
among the Jews, and alſo an Emblem of the Mulritudes of them that 
periſh,and Paucity of them that are ſayed. h Of! Zudea, or the whole 
World. # Not preciſely two, but more largely the greater part by 
far. þ A Temporal Death, by the Sword of Titus, or an eternal 
Death under Unbelicf, and reje&ing Chriſt. / 7. e. A Remnant, 
the lefſer part, yet as many as are choſen. m Shall eſcape, or be pre- 
ſerved and ſaved. 


3 9 And I will bring the third part through the fire 2, 
& ret, 1, and will * refine them as filver is refined 2, and will 
, try them as gold is tried : * they ſhall call on my 


Pl.50-15- name o, and I will hear p them : I will fay, * It zs my 
144 reople ;' and they ſhall fay, The LORD 7s my God. 

; m That part that is preſerved ſhall be brought into Aflitions hot 
as Fire. n Theſe Afﬀflicions ſhall purifie them, and ſo betrer them as 
Silyer and Gold are bettered by the Furnace, made fitter to be Veſ- 
ſels of Honour. 0 Pray to me and own me for their God. pI will an- 
ſwer them, and own them for my People, my purified People, 75c. 


CHAP. XIV. 


The calamities of Jeruſalem, 1, 2. yet their enemies deſtroyed, 3. The 
coming of Chriſt, and the graces of his kingdom promiſed, 4 — 11. 
The plagues and puniſhments of Feruſalems enemes, 12—15, Arem- 
nant turn to the LORD. _ Their univerſal holineſs, 16—21. 


BTS a, the day of the LORD 56 cometh, and thy 
ſpoil c ſhall be divided in the midſt of thee 

a Here are things of very great Importance, and of very myſteri- 
ous Nature, propoſed by the Lord to us, and therefore we are called 
upon to attend to them. b The Day which the Lord hath appointed 
for puniſhing the Sins of his ancient People, Day of his Sacrifice, 


ZECHARIAH 


[mountain ihall remove toward the north, and half of it 
toward the ſouth 5z. 


t Ver. 3. The Lord is ſaid to come forth to fight for his Peg ple ; 
This 4th Verſe tells us where he will take his Poſt, or make a Stand, 
viz, on. Mount Oliver, which for its ſituation, in irs height, . and 
nearneſs to Feruſalem, and the Temple, might appear a convenicat 
Poſt for Succours to poſt themſelyes on; God ( ſpeaking after the 
manner of Men) promiſeth Succour to his Church, and affureth her 
of his nearneſs to her, and of the proſpet he hath over all thar is 
about her, or in her; that ſhe mighr be encouraged to wait on God, 
who is ſo near to her. u A Geographical Deſcription of the Situa- 
tion of this Mountain with reſpe& to Feruſalem. x As if it were ſen- 
fible of the Majeſty of God, who ſtands upon it; this cleaves, Sin 
melted, at the Preſence of the God of the whole Earth. y The con- 
ſequent of this dividing of the Mountain, a mighty Valley appears 
running ſtrait from Eaſt ro Weſt; ſo there ſhould be plain and eatic 
acceſs from the place of the Feet of the Lord unto Feruſulem, + &s 
if 1t knew how to comply with the Deſign of God, and withdray on 
each Hand far enough our of the way, and be no hindrance to the in- 
tended Relief of the Church. So 1 judge (it theſe things were not by 
Viſion repreſented to the Prophet, which I will not avow though I 
may think ſo) the Prophet doth parabolically ſer forth the furure Pre- 
ſervation and Deliverance of the Church of Chriſt : and ſuppoſe we 
then what wonderful Effe&s the Preſence of God wrought of old 
when ever he appear'd to reſcue his People ; how Mountains fled,or 
melted, or ſunk into Plains, or, as here is ſaid, divided, and made 4 
deep and large Valley,i.e. how every Obſtacle removed, that the Re- 
lief might be ſure and eafie; ſo ſhall ir be with the Church of Chriſt, 
the Goſpel- Feryſalem, in ail times of its Troubles; and though Jewiſh 
Feruſalem, that ancient City, be ruin'd, never to be built, yer a more 
| excellent City, the Chriſtian Jeruſalem, ſhall be built, guarded, re- 
ſcued,and never ruin'd ; for the Feet of the Lord ſhall ſtand ſo near 
to her, as Olivet to Jeruſalem, and the Way plain and eafie before 
him, on purpoſe to ſave her. In this manner I underſtand ſome- 
what of the Text, but I cannot ſute it with particular Accommoda- 
tion of the Events here mention'd, if I look on it as a Predi&ion of 
what ſhall be done,according tothe Letter, or be Matter of Hiſtory, 
Nor do I meet with any that do tell me any ſuch thing hath been 
done between the time of Zechariah's propheſying, and Titus waſting 
and ſacking Feruſalem ; nor ſhall any ſuch thing ever be, if material 
Feruſalem never be built. 
5 And ye a ſhall flee b to the valley of || the moun- 
tains; || for c the valley of the mountains thall reach || Or, my 
unto Azal : yea, ye ſhall flee like as ye fled trom before muntiins, 
the earthquake d in the days of Uzziah king of Judah : LE 
and the LORD my God ſhall e come, ard all the faints ;,jch the 
with thee, 
a You that are Members of the Church, and whom God doth in mountains 
wonderful Power and Majeſty come to ſave. 6b Filld with Appre- to the place 
henfions of ſuch ſtrange things, and troubled at the Convulfions and he ſepara- 
Struglings of Nations againſt God and you, ſhall, as in a great Fear, ted. 


Zeph. 1. 8. let. t. of Vengeance, Foel 2. 1, 2. cometh, haſteth, or will 
ſoon overtake you, O fintul, unthanktul, bloody Jews, who firſt de- 
ſpiſed, and next murder'd the Meſfiah. c All chou haſt, O Feruſa- 
lem, ſhall become a Prey to thine Enemy. d Thy conquering Ene- 
mies ſhall be ſuch abſojute Mafters of thee, that in greateſt ſecurity 
they ſhall divide among themſelves what they take from thee, in the 
very place where they take it z Jeruſalem is their on, and all in it, 
and where they find their own they will take it, ſo they reckon, 


2 For e I will gather all nations g againſt Jeruſa- 


1346, lem to battel þ, and the ciry ſhall be taken z, and * the 
houſes rifled #, and the women raviſhed /, and half of 


the city 2 ſhall go forth into captivity, and the reſidue | 


of the people z ſhall wot be cut oft from the city o. 

e This gives not the Reaſon why,but introduceth an Account how 
this ching ſhall be done. f God will ſummon and bring together his 
Army ; they do it themſelves by their own Counſels, for their own 
Works and Ends 3 God alſo hath his Work for them to do, and by 
his Counſel, and at his Call they ſhall come. g The Romans, with 
the Power of their Empire, which at thar time had the Rule oyer all 
the known World,or over all the Nations of that part of the World. 
hTo make War with the Jews which laſted ſome Years, and coſt ma- 
ny thouſand Lives, and ended at laſt as our Prophet foretold. 7 By 
Aſſault and Force, whereby all lay at the Mercy of the Souldiers, who 
ſhew'd little to thoſe who firſt refuſed the Mercy of their God; and 
being juſtly given up by God to their own blind obſtinare Wills, re- 
fuſed the Mercy of their Enemy alſo. kh All Houſes pillaged, and all 
inthem worth taking was taken away. { Wives, Widows, and Vir- 
gins, barbarouſly violated. m A certain Part for uncertain, or in 
common Speech, many 3 were it one half preciſely, it would be but 
a ſixth Part of what were before the Wars, two thirds being cut off, 
as ch, 13, 8. and one third remaining, of which one half is for Capti- 
vity. n That ſmall Number of the Jews, which fled to Pella, and 
who were ſpared by Titus. 0 Literally were not forbidden to dwell | 
In or about the City, myſtically were not cut off from the Church, | 
tor ceaſed to be a Church this is the more likely, for Titus utterly 
ruin'd the City. 


gainſt thoſe nations 7; 
 battel s. 

Þ After thar he hath ſufficiently puniſhed Feruſalem and the reſt of 
the Jews. q Out of his holy Place ( ſpoken after the manner of 
Men ) as a Warrjour prepared for Battel. r Which had ſack'd Feruſa- 
lem, and oppreſs'd his People. s As in any of thoſe Days paſt, when 
God fought for his People, and gave them great ViRories. 


4 T And his feer ſhall ſtand in that day upon the 
mount of Olives 7, which zs before Jeruſalem on the 
eaſt zz, and the mount of Olives ſhall cleave in the midſt 


ag when he fought in the day of 


3 Then p ſhall the LORD £o forth 9, and fight a- 


fly to ſome place of ſafery and repoſe z you will fly the Valley it ſelf 
which God maketh. By terrible things in Righteouſneſs doth God an- 
ſwer, and his People tremble before him when he cometh to fave 
them; ſo hereare repreſented tous a People wonderfully ſaved, and 
aſtoniſhed at the Methods of it. God makes Vallcys in the midft of 
Mountains, and they (for whoſe Good they are made) fly thoſe Val- 
leys. So the words were better read, our Marginal Readings, and 
the Gallick Verſion, do ſo read it. c Or although, or nit withſtand- 
ing, this Valley reach to Axal, which ſpeaks, ſay ſome, a ſeparate 
Place, 7.e. provided of God for their ſatety, a. Zoar for Lot, or 
Pella tor the Citizens of Feruſalem. They ſhall, as is uſual in great 
Frights and Conſternation of Mind, not fee how ſafe they are, or 
whither to go, but ſome will run for a while from or beyond their 
Refuge. d This was ſome dreadful Earthquake, and put the People 
into a mighty Fear,. and made them fly in all haſte, 'tis mentioned 
Amos 1. I. and the Prophet tells us, that when God ſhakes the King- 
doms of his Enemies, to make a plain and leyel Way for his ranſom'd 
ones, it ſhalt make rhem fly for Fear too. e As thus rendred it gives 
Reaſon of this Commotion of Mind, and this hafty Flight. But it 
would be plainer if it were as it may be ( I think ) read. And, or, 


yet O Lord my God come, and bring all the Saints with thee. As if 'twere 


ſaid, Though "twill, O Lord, put us into ſuch Fears; yet without 
ſuch wonderful Works, we ſhall not haye our Hopes, nor ſee thy Sal- 
vation; therefore, O- Lord my God, come, and bring thy Saints, 
holy Ones, Angels with thee; and ſo will this be like that of St. John, 
Rev. 22.20. ſhutcing up the Viſions of the New Heaven, and the 
New Earth,and the Appendages of them with, Come Lord Feſus. 
s And it ſhall come to paſs in that day f, zbat the 
+ 


light 2 ſhall nor be # clear þ, nor F dark 7. Heb. 
f Whilſt God is fighting with the Enemies of his Church, the Na- P7*c2#s- 


tions that fought againſt Feruſalem. g Good Eſtate, Peace and Wel- h; mw 
fare. h Unmix'd Good,all Light, 'twillnot be ſo well with the Church, thickneſs, 
{ Not ſo ſad as all Darkneſs, there ſhall be a Temper ct both, ſome 
Peace with ſome Trouble ; ſome Proſperity with ſome Adverſity ; 
ſome Mercy in the midft of Judgment to allay the bitterncls of 
Judgment, and ſome Judgment with our Mercy to allay its {veerneſs, 

[ Or, tho 


7 But|| it ſhall be * one day & which ſhall be known 
unto the LORD /, not day, nor night : bur ir ſhall come ,,,, 

to paſs that at * evening-time 2 it ſhall be light 7. *Rev.22. 5, 
þ One continued Day,no ſetting of the Sun to make it quite Night ; *ifa 60.19. 
God will always a& in order to the full Salvation of his ſpiritual Rev.21.23- 
Feruſalem. | The Lord knows when it ſhall begin, how long laſt and 
how,and when it ſhall (not as other Days end in a Night, but) ead 1n 
glorious Light) till then *ris enough for us that our God knows tins 
Day that is mix'd of Trouble and of Peace. m When other Days 
end. n This ſhall be all Light and Glory, 1/z. 58.8. Fſal. $7. it. : 
$ And it ſhall be in that day o, that living * waters p Ws] oel 3.18, 
ſhall go out 9 from Jeruſalem 7 : half of them toward ***" *** ** 
the || | iden {ea s, and half of them toward the hinder {Or, e.:iern 


day ſtall be 


tereof x toward the eaſt, and toward the weſt, and 
iere ſhall be a very great valley y; and half of the | 


ſea t : in ſummer and in winter ſhall it be z. 


- — A[[H.420N«aqunt Io oo er too 


—_— 


When 


Chap. XIV, | 


valley of the 


w_— OT”. 
- -Y 
- _ 
> > 45) at EO ee” 5" . 
A "_ ow -, ” Ko = = ' . — jo 


w— —_ — 
WI oo ee 
bo; wats i 1 


4 
We» IC £7 - A 


& 
m— 


L _ - wwe : Y . _ ” Fa = 
- | Hou $a 2m wo . a _- . + I 
- - - n- ” os —_— - . oy =—— -— ah 
— OCW 5 = ad + * - >. ; — 
PR Þ ” = - _ a 4 \Q = Wo \ 
—_—— $8 0 ern ot ae nth eons wg oe pg ERR, 
Xs . e wy - , = - _ 
_— , -- wet” ” " 3 g_— - ti = wy . 
C5 wt 


> 
* 
_ Lp >= J 
IIs En Ste. 
4 1 Worn 
n , & "<4 


w4 Moe” - - 
ae . - ' 
So, 4 Pee EC o + 
Wow - $63". any ft - = — ">. 
IR”: £7S -- 7, LAS _— 
a —_ + Aa - _ 
Þ "Y * "IA 2+ ck 
= —_ o _—_ "—= — = _ 
; + ID; - C9 I = 
- X : «2 f 
oe... 44 2 
X h__ ke. 17 = 
- 


335.4 


”e. 


I. 
a 
: #" > >:44 44 
% my 
—_Dc. Aa 


ee 
- 's 
La 54 5 ha oy 4 
4 IT >. * 
\- - - V+ ER _ V PIRIE 
WE $a re as -- Y 4 


- 
Y - - Ts v4 , x be "OP. a. I - 
BA b þ 2 £ mt : —y bay rd » 6 ; «bt » Ba 2 b k L 
my . oF 6 os =, BP Br _— -_ "- A Wn 7 + b w- SaETIEE 4 > oe — >. ea. wa 
4 . __ * 1." A - <a ts 2 4 a "+ Ss __ F - _ - Pa 2 a - F 
; . ; 0 PERL! BEG BEE ee a3 DT Ins - Ty noe Is : - Faro - , MR ow _ — 0 - S 
OS LY Nos: nn es ROTTE 37 EC ans 8 : Tz on "i = — 4 a CET ad. ol . 
: = , : b X £ d . _ : - : : : « W . ry 
LSE, n Crete - . pots 60% oy . 6 . ue "TRL "7 & & '> h .. np: WW M . _ T* > 4 
_ 7 _ 4 4s ” & —» *®. __ —a--. "_ » OI IO + _— -__ - ——_—_— CPS rn ere . a -- by: rhe % w " : P x "Wh TELY i X C £ 
- F n ; 3 . 5 L <A s 4 1 OE wo by 
—_— —— _— _ m . % by _ P = b "OPIN the . : — - - IE fo IJ nf - e _ z; " 2.x 
: Gy =p _— Woe . 7 6s "61 yes ” re - >. ite? b —_—y Rf 7 . L. __ 352 7 A _ ——_—_ pe ” - ; s © oy V2” Now 
4 = + _ ans wi — 1 w _—_— - 4 . PP. = "__ > , | - : SL IIE< F - @ S- - 4 _—_—_ _—_" - 4 gh ens x OE, Fe adrards 2 
— - " *_ tht. 7 ha , 4 4 $><r.<."e CAP - TI I a pe by _ - : : " <—_- -—_ ,- i v j oy e- - = — 
pr nee ren 26. <0. W8-. — ht - —_—_— y þ LIFT F 4 2 : Cn > 1: 99 : . : > : ot JC 1. 4 — - _ - _ . 
— z . d T PF "> "= ads I -; *—— I : ____ ©7-% . ; TIS oe, OS wm Regan >< wo Doo - ES 7 L _—_— 
<fiws dth et «'f:  EWs IN in og TIRE, n ' - 7 i S G a, Exe WS _ 8-5 2 xt = - : * Tree 
© 92 4 7 \ is > " <li 4 : —__ 3 - a a - _——— -. a. - _— > —__ -« 44S TT F my —_— I "ey — 6 ba A £ = = A 
HS RE Age a oe ® S ; 0 < "Fain be pe "Withas s . G ED .7. nero entnt” xt - 5. .- CET 52 = <2 3 £ e's . —_—_ L -< - ' = CE ALIEEES - 
wn n £ - 8 2 n ; * 0 
. : - S wa - _ - ; —_ LOR vacer wi _ _ was p _ y 3a ans - a -— + X% = 
. O _—_S 


_ _ EY = 
, a 


=_ f. EY 
4 = Pe 3280." 4 - 
= oe 
4 ps wth ab bg - - wm 
—  ———— 4 
——_—_ i < 
- 5 « a. os 2 
« ——— zz 
_ - *; —X 
: _ 
_ _ A W” A 
a Lo 
< _ ks —pm—— 4 ; 
by - — my = - 4 _ 
. Hes > 
" _ > 0 %* A C 
IE 2 > 


5 *r 
PETER NY - 


— 
» 


— x - 


9-7 


= - - - 
= > ——— x E . —_ hn 
—_— -——= EI Sz _ 5. —Y = 
- —— _—_ EEE — —__— 
————..  . EE A a ee I II A = 
- : Er " 
—— — 
- 09> One DIRE" > nal At. - _ 
—_——___ - _ _—_ 


LT 


404" 4 k 


I 


” / mated $24 = ——— - 
-——- An ha - - 4 44 — — —— R—_ = - _— -_ —_ - - = 
2 —= : — x —_ = . — -= — = - -  — _— _— - _ = ur _ —_ _— _ — mn _ = 
- = I _ == OS 3 GE - - = 
= =. > _ _—_ _ - - — = _— ——_ _ ——— _ 
— P_4 ——— ———_ I —_ - © - _ — _— FR ” - 4 = = m ,-_ rams. * _—_— _ —_ ow e.ome 
_ r f —— ADE — P_ _ - hg y =_ - , - = > — — = OT I = mmm Dn 
= HSC —_ = i _ 4 MP. WC. Ain I _—_ « - - _— - 4 I % " \ 4 l 
CN CICW_CCNEER Oe OOO IT hs eg EE om AW" oa ith «WG 7 ——_ -— CI - 4 _ I I A A » TH "IX "1 _ = . nw 
-- —_— ” - . on = Ei Br _ IL £ _ - Rn ws. 9 2 =. - Wa. 2 -- —_ th on _ _ a """=EE as _ Z # - 
E _—_——_ = 4 v2 = - < ” ” CLE - == 
: ————_ Sy — _ — - - —> Rau F wy - _— I - —_— - —— 
—_ m__ a Pt : — See £4 _ A 5 £ by = 
w—__—— { uns >>, _ ” we - " WS ne —— — — a apo - _—_—— ——_—_ - = - —_— — » 
- ago ———— - OO — © == INES 7 =& 7 , : : : 


% 17. nl 1+_ 


—_—C—— 


Chap. 


f: Or, 


| Or, 


feall abide. from Benjamins gate 


7 Or, atide. no more utter deſtruRion /, bur Jeruſalem 72 ſhall || be 


* 1 Sante 


- afford, living Waters in oppoſition to ſtanding, muddy and dead Wa- 


compaſſed. Geba c ro Rimmon 4d, ſouth of Jeruſalem e and it 


XIV. 


e When the Goſpel ſhall be preached, and the Days of dark Ceres | 
monies among the Jews, and darker Ignorance and Idolatry among 
the Keathen, ſhall end. p Not only ſuch as Springs and Fountains 


6, 7. giveLite ; the quickning, . ſaving 
Truths of the Goſpel, with all its Ordinances in Purity. q Spread 
themſelves, or flow down as Currents from good Springs. r The 
Church of Chriſt, the true Jeruſulem. s Or Eaftern Sea, ſo far Eaſt- 
ward. as the Sea will give leave» t Or Weſtern Sea. Synechdochi- 


ters; but ſuch as Ezek. 47+ 1, 


cally *tis both Eaſt, Weſt, North and South ; ſo from Feruſalem, 1. c. 
the Church, the Dodrine of the 


doven as doth living Water. « 
interruption,theſe Waters ſhould never dry away, 


LORD x ſhall be King y over all the 
ſhall there be one LORD. and 


Goſpel is preached abroad, and runs 
Perpetually without intermiſſion or 
nor ever loſe their 


healing Virtue. 

9 And the 
earth - : in that day 4 
his name one. 

x God, Father, Son and Spirit. y Acknowledged to be; Men 
ſhall confeſs, that as he only is, ſo he ought to be owned only truc 
God, and King of his Church- xz Over the Heathen, the Gentiles or 
Roman Empire, as well as once over the Jewiſh State. a Of - 
poſing Idols, and advancing the true God 3 all his Churches ſhall cat 
off Idolatry,andagree in worſhippiog one God, in one way of ſpiri- 


tual Worſhip and hearty Obedience. : 
10 All the land ſhall be || turned as a plain 6 from 


and || inhabited in her place g : 
h unto the place of the firtt gate, 
unto the” corner-gate, and from the rower of Hananiel 
unto the kings wine Pretles. 

a The a Lang of Fades here, is Type of the whole Earth, 
Seat of the Catholick Church, fiited with rhe knowledge of God, and 
abounding in multitudes 0: Converts. 6 All high, uneven places, all 
high Thoughts and Imag;vations , all rocky and barren Ground, 
changed into fruirful Vineyards. Sothe {hurch of Chriſt ſhall be 
fruitful, humble and lovels, as Vaſtures rich ia Sheep, and rich for 
Sheep. c North Boundary of the Land. d The South Boundary of 
Fudea. e Which taken here nut I:teraliy out my {tically, 1s the Church 
of Chriſt in Goſpel-daysz and bs ihe repatr of all parts of this Feruſa- 
tem, as here «ieſcr1bed, is ſhadoived out the full and compleat Building 
of the © hu: ch on-all fices, Nerth, South, Weſt and Eaft, f Raiſed 
out Dt thc Duſt and Rubviſh, ro which Enemies had brought her, 
through God's permiſſion, bur never ſhould be able to keep her in 
that low ſtate, fince G«d was reſolved to raiſe her. g Still 'tts Em- 
blematical of the Chriſtian Church. þ Benjamin's Gate North-Eaſt, 
Corner-Gate North-Weft. Hanantel's qv = wy Wine-Preſles 
North; chat is, in brief, compleatly round the City. 

11 And men i ſhall dwell init &, and there ſhall be 


ſhall be lifted up /, 


ſately 2 inhabited. 

7 1.e. Many for number, or eminent for worth. kh As twas Type, 
this was verificd, ſay ſome, when in League with Bacchides and ſuc- 
ceeding Kings. Bur in the Antitype, to which Zechariah looks, t1s 
now, as it hath ben, fulfilled, and more fully ſhall be, when rhe ful- 
neſs of the Gentiles cometh in. There may be affliftions and trou- 
bles, but no utter waſting of Feruſalem 3 the Gates of Hell ſhall not 
prevail. m The Antitype, the Goſpe|-Church. n Not ſecure from 
Troubles, but ſecure enough from total Deſtrution. 

12 © And this {hall be the plague wherewith the 
LORD will {mite all the people, rhat have tought 9 
againſt Jerulalem: their fleſh p ſhall contume away 
while they ſtand upon their feet 9, and their eyes ſhall 


ESCTHARIAH. | 


q 


conſume away in their holes 7, and their tongue ſhall 


conſume away in their mouth. 

o Malicioufly to deſtroy and waſte, and extirpate Jeruſalem; the 
Ringleaders, eſpecially ſuch as Antiochus, Herod, 8&c. p When they 
are fat, fleſhy aad ſtrong. their Fleſh or Strength ſhall utterly pe- 
riſk. 9g Eicher in Arms ready to fight, or ſo ſaddenly they ſhall 
not have time to fit down, a very ſudden death is threatned to them. 
r A dreadful and exemplary Blindneſs thall ſeize them. s In which 
Member, by ſtrange Judgments on them, ſome Perſecutors alſo have 
tcit God's Hand. ; 

13 And it ſhall come to paſs in that day 7, zhat a 


* great tumult xz from the LORD =» ſhall be among 


r4.155 20 them y, and they ſhall lay hold every one on the hand 


{ Or, thou 


of his neighbour, and his hand ſhall riſe up againſt = 


the hand of his neighbour. 

# When God puniſheth thoſe that invaded and waſted Feruſalem 
his Church. # Confuſion, Vexation and Inclination to turn all up- 
fide down. x From the juſt diſpleaſure of God, and in revenge on 
them for troubling his People. y The bloody, cruel and inſatiable 
Encmics of 7eruſalem. x From Murmurs and Grudings one againſt 
other, they ſhall at laſt run into Civil Wars, and fight one with ano- 
ther, and ſo deſtroy themſelves, and revenge Feruſalem; as did, (9c. 
Fuag. 7.22. & 9. 23. 

14 And || Judah @ alſo ſhall fght 6 || at Jeruſalem c - 


«lſs, 0 Fu- and the wealth of all the heathen d round about ſhall be 
dah, ſhalt. gathered together, gold, and filver, and apparel in great 


LS 


agal 


nſt, 


abundance. | 

a The Jews, and particularly thoſe of the Tribe of Judah, and 
puiſibly Fudas Maccabeus might be intended too, as thoſe who in that 
day were valiant Warriours.and ſucceſsful againſt the Churches Ene- 
mies. And many ſuch have been among the Chriſtians roo, ſince 
thoſe Days. b With Courage, good Condut and Succeſs. b Both 
in the Land of Fudea, and alſo at Jeruſalem. d Nations round about 


them, who having by foreign War peel'd and robb'd many Nations, 


had broughc it home, and now God zave it to the Jews, and in like 
manner have many vhriſtians ſpoilcd rhoſe that ſpoiled them. 


15 And 1o {hall be the plague of the horſe, of the 


Chap. Xiy 


mule, of the camel, and of the aſs, and of all the 
beaſts thar ſhall cbe in theſe tents, as this plague. 

Thoſe Creatures which the Enemy in the Wars made uſe of againſt 

the Church,ſhall by the Hand of God be ſuddenly and ſtrangely either 
deſtroyed or made uſeleſs, neither fir to annoy the Churck, nor to 
benefir their Owners. As God deſtroyed much of the Catte! of the 
Ezyptians by Hail and Murrain, &yc. So now ſhall it be with the Ct. 

tel of theſe Perſecutors, they ſhall periſh with their Maſters; the 
Horſes, as the Horſemen, were drown'd in the Red Sea. 

16 < And it ſhall come to pals, zhat every one hg: 

is left e of all the nations which came againſt Jeryſ. 
lem, ſhall even * go up trom year to year to worſhip f *Its 
the King the LORD of-hoſts, and to keep the * {eaj} 53: 
of tabernacles g. | Ley, 
e Such as eſcape the ſtroke, and are by Mercy reſerved very ma- oh y 
ny of them, among all the Nations, ſhall confider God's Hand, re- Jul I2.9, 
penr, and ſubmit rhemſelves to his Law ; they fhall ( as many gig) * *'"* 
on ſight of God's Hand for the Church, and againſt the Churche: 
Enemies, convert, become Proſelytes and Chriſtiags. f By a cere- 
monial Phraſe and Uſage, which ſhadow'd out a better Worlhip, the 
Prophet toretels the conſtant Zeal and Care the converted Gentiles 
ſhould have to worſhip the Lord. g One ſolemn Feſtiyal, by a Fi- 
gure, put for all the Days conſecrated to God for holy Worſhip, aad 
this perhaps wich an Eye to Chriſt's tabernacling with us, and may 
point to the Chriſtian Sabbath. 

17 And it {hall be, zhat whoſo will not come up þ 
of a!/ the tamilies of the earth unto Jeruſalem, to wor: 
ſhip the King the LORD of hoſts, even upon them ſhall 
be no rain 7z. 

h If there be any more remiſs than they ought herein, and neg. 
left to worſhip the Lord. 7 They ſhall be puniſhed with want of 
Rain, and with want of the Bleſſfiags which plentiful and ſeaſonayle 
Rain produceth, their Land ſhall be barren. 

1s And it the tamily of Egypt go not up, and come 
nor, T * that have no 747 | : there ſhall be the plague 
wherewith the LORD will ſite the heathen thar come," 
not up to keep the teaſt of tabernacles. font, 

k Ezypt ſhould think, though they had no Rain, they ſhould not * De, 
be much Loſers by that, having Nils to water their Ground, and 11,1, 
make it jruitful. God by his Prophet anſwers them, They ſhall tall 
under Penury and Famine, the yery ſelf-ſame Puniſkment which ſhall 
tall on other Nations, 1t they neglefted his worſhip; the Lord hath 
more ways than one to with-hold the Fruits of the Earth, and ſend 
Famine among Pcople, 

19 This ihali be the || puniſhment of Egypt 7, and |0:\ 
che puniſhment of all nations that come not up to keep 
the tcalt of rabernacles. 

{ And what he faith of Egypt, he faith of all Contemners of his 
Laiv and Worlhip, their f1n is che ſame, their puniſhment ſhall bethe 
ſame, for with God is no reſpe& of Perſons. 

the || bells » | 0; 


33 
<4 


4 


f Fel, Wh 


20 © :n that day » ſhall there be upon 
of the horſes o, HOLINESS UNTO THE LOKDÞ : fit 


: | | ) 
and the pots p in the LOR D's houſe ſhall be like the 
bowls q betore the altar. 

m When the Nations are converted to God, as *tis, wer. 16; 
n Written as twere vn eyery common thing 3 ſuch as the Bells, Bri- 
dies or Collars, or Stables of Horſes; in theſe very things, 7. e. the 
Uſe of them, they ſhould make it appear they were for God, aud for 
his Worſhip, whereſoever theſe things may ſerve, or proimore it, 
0 This waz the Inſcriptionon the rich Mitre of the Jewiſh High Prieſt, 
denoting the great Holineſs of his Office, and how he was dedicated 
co God, and that he ought to keep himſelf holy in all things, eſpeci- 
ally in things of Divine Worſhip. Now in theſe Days of the Goſpel, 
when Gentiles are converted to Chriſt, made Prieſts unto God. arc 
made holy Nations, a Royal Prieſthood, the Grace of God ſhall ſo 
abound and prevail, that common ordinary things in the Hands of 
Chriſtians, much more their Perſons, ſhall bear the dedicating In- 
ſcription of Holineſs to the Lord, and by their ſtudy of Holineſs they 
ſhall make good their Motto. p Which were uſed in the Kitchen: of 
che Temple, for the uſe of the Prieſts, and were not accounted to fa- 
cred as the Urenfils nearer to the Sacrifices and Altar. g Which re- 
ceived the Blood of the Sacrifices, and retain'd It, until the mini- 
ſtring Prieſt had finiſh'd his Service, and ſprinkled it ascommanded : 
now theſe, as appropriated to be uſed nearer to the Altar, were 
more eſteemed as more holy z ſo ſhould Holineſs in theſe Days ſpo- 
ken of, exceed the Holineſs of thoſe former Days. 


21 Yea, every potg in Jeruſalem and in Judah 7 ſhall 
be Holineſs unto the LURD of hoſts s: and all they 
that facritice 7, ſhall come and take of them , and 
ſeethe therein-x: and in that day there ſhall be no more 


the * Canaanite y in the houſe of the LORD of hoſts 2. 

q The Utenſils of private Houſes ſhall be ſo dedicated to God's Ser- 
vice,that without ſcruple they ſhall on occaſion be uſed, or might bc 
uſed in the worſhip ot God. r The Types, but the Goſpel-Church 
is the Antitypez in the times hereof every Family ſhall be a Temple 
10 which God ſhall be worſhipped, and their Houſe-pots in the wor- 
ſhip of God ſhall be in extraordinary Caſes uſed without ſcruples- 
s See ver. 20. let. # In allufion to Sacrifices the Prophet ex- 
preſleth all religious Aﬀettions, Pratice and Worſhip, which ſhall 
be as pleaſing to God, as were the Sacrifices of his People offercd up 
with Divine Warrant and Appfobation. « Freely, without ſcruple- 
x Scethe that part of the Sacrifice which pertaineth to the ?rieſts, 
and to the Offerer to feaſt on, in their Houſe Pots. y Any of the ac- 
curſed Nation, or one who makes Merchandife of Religion. In 4 
word, by allufion uſed here, we underſtand, that time will come, 
when ſcrupulous adhering to Ceremonies ſhall not be as formerly 
*rwas dcemed, ſo neceſſary, ſo material in the Worſhip. x But all 
ſhall know that the Lord hath greateſt Pleaſure in upright, hearty 
and figcere Loye and Holineſs. 


*[[a4 
Jotls/ 
Rey.2l 


| 


MAL 


hax 


good G 
ture gi\ 
Divine 


Pute per\ 
and relat 
Ingratitu 
owned, a 
£ Or, Ang 
to me, ar 
gratitude, 
Abraham's 
Pride! h\ 
It all our « 
Poſed thu 
Was not Z 
father ? W 
Father beg 
gether in « 
Tſaac in E 
outward P 
ever that 

Perſon his 
8 Brothe 
him to the 
© dreamt \ 


9 3 and 


and his he 
' deg neſs. 
m I loved 


wn 
berity ; thi 


ic fame Ki 
Other had nc 
lining his Py 
©84N toward 
Vol. I 


| hap. L 


MALACH I 


The ARGUMENT. 


Oncerning this Prophet ſome have thought (but rortDour good and ſufficient Ground) that be was an Angel inthe 
C Form of a Man others think him to be Ezra : but as *tis the plainer, ſo the ſurer Opinion, that be was a Prophet 
of that Name, an d a Man diſtin from Ezra, and ſent the laſt of all the Prophets. His time of appearing among the 
Fews cannot be determined preciſely, but 'tis beſt gueſſed to have been about the times of Nehemiah's reforming the 
ftrange Marriages, Neh. 13. 23, 28. with Mal. 2. 11. and when be reformed the ſacrilegious Detainure of Tithes, 
Neh. 13. 10, 11. with Mal. 3.8. as Dr. Lightioot obſerveth, Now this Reformation of Nehemiah tas about Anno M. 
3519.44 Dr, Lightfoot, or 3545, 4s Helvicusz or 3589, as Archbiſhop Uſher's Annals. Whatever was his time 
of appearing, *tis certain he [rved in a very VICIOus ABC, 1 which both Prieſts, as well as People, were leaven'd with 
either perverſe Thoughts of the Divine Providence, or brutiſh Atheiſm, denying the Deity and Providence ; contenf'- 
10s Thoughts of the Worſhip of God; Sacrilegious Pratlices, robbing God of Tithes and Offerings ;, ſhameleſs juſtify- 
ing theſe their Praftices;, boundleſs or monſtrous Unfaithfulneſs to their Wives, caſting off Jewiſh to marry Gentile 
IWroes, or elſe ſuperinducing the Gentile Women,and enſlaving the Fewiſh to them caſting off the Law of God, or 
zobich 1s equally bad, (if not worſe ) wreſting 1t 10 their own Jinful Sentiments. All w ich he doth ſeverely reprove, 
and requires them to reform, and foretels the Day of the Meſſiah's Coming to ſit as a Refiner and Purifier , whoſe ap- 
pearing, ſuch Sinners and Sins would not be able to bear, and tells them of his Forerunner, who in the Spirit and 
Power of Elias ſhould come and prepare a People for the Mefttah : 1 then, (as their Duty was) he commands them 
in the Name, and by Authority from God, that they remember the Law of Moſes, which God commanded in Horeb; 
bereby intimating, ſome great Change in the Law at the Comimg of the Meſſiah ; and intimating alſo, that they 


ſhould expett no more Prophet till the Great Prophet himſelf ſhould come unto them. 


CHAP. L | Mountains given to Eſay, Deut. 2. 5. Joſh. 24. 4. for Inheritance as 
; 69 I : F hei here 'tis ſaid, and which he and his Poſterity did epjoy about 1200 
Grd putting the Iſraelites in mind of his love, complaineth of their n= yrs. Þ By Nebuchadnezzar's Arms five Years after the ſacking of 
thankfulneſs, 15. Of the irreligion of Prieſts and People, exhorting | 72, 7.1211 2s forctold by Ezekiel, ch. 35. The People were lain or 
them to repentance : alſo of their prophaneneſs and wearineſs in his ſer- captivated, or forced to fly trom the Sword of the Enemy, their Ci- 
vice, 6——13+ The corrupters of God's worſhip accurſed, 14- ties taken, ne and burnt. It is poſſible that chey might meer 
7 with worſe Uſage than the Jews met with herein, however their 
He burden a of the word of the LORD 5 to If ſtate ſeems os. and ont, no Token of unequal Hatred, bur 
b.h rael + by Malachi c. Le what follows doth manifeſtly diſcover it, for whereas Jacob's Capti- 
ng f a See Zech. g. 1, let. a, b,c. and Nah. 1. 1. let. a. uſually it imports | vity returned, and their Cities were rebuilt, -Eſau's never were. 
hi, ſad Threats againſt thoſe concerned inir, though ſometimes it may be | q Or Fackals, or Owls, for the word is ſo uſcd and explain'd by 
' Nnomorethan the Meſſage of God. b The Authority was Divine on | ſome ; or all theſe with Dragons, doleful Creatures, which delight 
which this Prophet ſpake. c My Meſſenger (faith the Lord) ſo Heb. | in deſolate Places,by which the utter deſolation and the perpetuity of 
ſounds. My Angel, as ſome, though they err, who take him to bean | the deſolation of Eſau is hgnified. : 
Angel converſing with Jews in the Form of a Man ; but Angel,taken 4 Whereas Edom faith, We are impoveriſhed -, but 
in the grammarical Senfe, 7. e. Meſſenger he was, and God's Meſſen- |... .. :11 return s and build the deſolate places z - thus 


ger, the laſt of Prophets ſent to Iſrael before the great Prophet Meſſiah | .. . | ; rs 
came. That he was Mordecat or Exra, as ſome conjeure, without faith the LORD of hoſts, They ſhall build, but I will 


good Ground, or who he was, of what Tribe or Family, the Scrip- throw down ; and they {ſhall call them, The border 
ture gives us noaccount, and we make no gueſs. His PFophecy is of | of wickedneſs x , and the people againſt whom the 
Divine Authority, and ſo cited by three of the four Evangeliſts, | | ORD) hath indignation for ever y. 


May, 11. Io. Mar. 1. 2. Lake oO r6. and by St. Paul, NOM He IJ» 7 Here the Prophet introduceth Edom retle&ing on its preſent low 
2 T have loved d you e, faith the LOR DF : yet ye] Condition, and taking up Reſolutions of bettering their Condition 3 
ſay g, Wherein haſt thou loved us þ 2 was not Eſau z | where now, as the Jews were five Years before, exceedingly ſpoiled 


2» : X _ | by Nebuchadnezzar, who hath rifled our Houſes, burnt our Cities, and 
l 9, _— & brother ? ſaith the LORD : yo 1 loved Ja captivated our Citizens. s This ſpeaks tneir Inſolence, or ſha!l, this 
cob /. 


: : : ſpeaks their hopes of ſuch a return as Facob's Poſteriry had atter 70 
d God aſſerts his ancient Love, that which he had in many Genera- | Years, + Repair their Cities, as Feruſalem was repaired by the re- 
tions paſt ſhew'd; I have, time out of mind, yea, from before the | turned Captivity. u They may do ſo for a while, but ſaith God, 1 
Birth of your Father Facob,and in truth before Abraham was, deſigned | will throw it down, as he did in the times of the Maccabees. x They 
more Kindneſs to you than to others, and from the time of Facob I | will he by their flagitious Lives,after they a little recover themſelyes, 
have undeniably ſhewed it. And this deſerved what I have not found | a moſt wicked People, and ſo notorious, that all their Neighbours 
from you, a Love correſponding ſomewhat to mine 3 but inſtead of | ſhall brand them for it, and preſage a Curſe will follow them. y They 
ſuch Love, ſome are ready to ſay they ſaw no ſuch thing, or to dil- | will {9 highly provoke God, that his Indignation will be kindle# 
pute perverſly in what it appeared. : Both Jornny — againſt chem, and will burn for ever. 

and relatively, as you were in your Fathers and Progeni1tors. ctr : : 
Ingratitude —_—_ this foes Proteſtation, they ſhould readily hayec 5 And your eyes ſhall ſee 2, and ye ſhall ſay a, The 

owned, and not put God to: avow the Love he had ſhewn them, LOKD will be magnified b | t from the border of 

£ Or, And; you do querulouſly, and with Ignorance enough obje&| [ſrae] c. FHleb. fa 
tome, and put me on it to vindicate my Love, and expoſe your In- z You Jews whoare now returned from Captivity, and are blefſed #p91. 
gratitude, Wherein, or for what ? is there not ſome Cauſe? Did not | ith a rebuilt Temple and City, who are ſettled in civil and ſacred 

Abraham's Love deſerve a Love for us his Poſterity ? oſt perverſe | Concerns, your Eyes ſhall ſee; ſome of you muſt needs, more will, 

Pride! þ Who have been Captives, and groan'd under the Miſeries ot | 1nq all might obſerve what I have ſai d,that my Love is toward you 

It all our days till of late, 15 this Love to us? 7 Since they are ſup- | whom I plant, build up, and proſper, while 1 root up, pull d0::79 

poſed thus toobjeR, by cutting queſtions God will give them anſwer; | ing deſtroy your neighbouring kindred Edom. @ Ye ſhould in point 

Was not Eſan Facob's Brother ? had they not one and the ſame Grand- | gf Duty, and ſome of you will take notice of it, and confeſs it. 

father ? was not Abraham as near to one as to the other? did not one | z Or jet the Lord be magnified, let his Name be great, and his Praiſe 

Father heget them, and one Mother bear them ? did they not lie to-| area, for his free Love to Iſrael, for his great Diſpleaſure againſt the 

gether in the ſame Womb? was there not as much of Abraham and | Border of Wickednefs, for his Truth in both. c Let Tſrae! from all 

Tſaac . Eſau os in Facob ? or what of a CN 200 his Borders give God this Praiſe. 

outward Privilege was there 1n one more than in the other ? what- _ es 
ever that was, ſay might claim, for he was the eldeſt. In Eſau's 6 A ſon honoureth hs father, and a ſervant his 

Perſon his Progeny is included, as appears next Verſe. &þ The youn- maſter d : * if then IT be a father e, where zs mine ho- *Luke 5, 
87 Brother, and your Father, O unthankful Jews? 2 I preferr'd | nour f? and if | be a maſter, where 7s my fear g © faith 46. 


him to the Birthrighr, and this of free Love, before any Merit could , was deli 
edreamt of; I did love his Perſon, and have loved his: Poſterity, the L O R D of hoſts unto you,O prieſts Þ, that deſpite / 


with an unparallel'd Love, and ſhew'd it to all. my name # : and ye lay, Wherein / have we deſpifed 


5. 3 AndI * hated m Eſau 7, and laid his mountains| thy name ? 


and hj ; i]-] dThis isa prattical Principle engraven on the Hearts of Mankind 
5 —_ DETTIAgE 5 watte P, for the dragons Y of the wil a Law which all own, a Truth written with a Sun-beam, and which is 


: ! violated by none, but unnatural brutiſh Men. e This 7f, no way 
Wo, oh I loved not Eſau or his Poſterity, as I loved Facob and his Po | Joubts; but 'tis mad a Suppoſirion, a conſe 5; anciemn 
It}; this not loving, comparatively is a hating; God ſhew'd nor| 1q peculiar Adoption and Redemption, by virtue whercof the Sced 

"c ame Kindneſs fo the Twin-brothers, the one was more enrich'd of Facob had God to their Father and Maſter ; and this undiſputed 
vith the Fruits of God's Love, aud had cauſe to be thankful, the Relation) if I be, 75c. doth more piercirgly affe& the Mind wir 
_ had no eauſe to compiain, for God did him no wrong. n Con- | *5i5 demanded, Where is your Performance of Duty, where the (c- 
Uning his Poſterity with him; for chough the hatred or lefler Love | agur vou £ive me? fThe internal ia high Apprehenfions and Eficem 
bing: towards Eſau's Perſon, yer the Effedts of ir appear'd more ma-| yith anſwerable Aﬀettions, the exrernal in dutiful Behaviour and 
cltly J Fi $ Poſterity. o Mount Seir, with the neighbouring Carriage, were the ready, — dehghtful Obedience. Yre, 

Lakes RX x < 


rn , 


= ooo ds Gs v* 
- <4 . I — IT" Fu 4 
op Ld - . % +. 3 4 ——— 
x # ib | 7.1.9 Lo age, 
- ad" % - WLLS >> 
4 , 0 IS -D 
tn , 2 2 _— 
< 4 A rs” & n=" - 
—— mo p——_ meds oo, = {11 — 


— 


eo <a ———cc__—_— 
- DOES &. > 
- $-  _ 
_ A K2.<qnCT. * 
w Ig - - - - py 
7 . $4 teredl 
_ —_ wp 


mo hoot ow 
NZ t 


- 


ten: 


© GER - ” pray omnns bm Con, 
= - 4 = * _ = 2 - - : ſe 
wile. oe & 3 o 4 IE _ "= þ Wo 9 —_— = 5 >. on [a de 
RR”, <3 LIE 4 9 - & a . © _—_ - at 7; < < ; Sn F K «© 2 owl Cd Vitor aornk nk 
mom 1 ACE 4 = =y BY ew = 3 odongtes Bane oe oÞ - - _ IIs . % nar” 7! 5, Fx 2 ” = . ure Sy be *s © 4s- x 
Rs hs on 1 8 . gk 2 © =_ —_ . < Pq 27 * Wl 4 VA - P —_ — by C - - a=. - von. mo - > _— > —_— S=Y n - EW. me. .-—- CEN 
* we __ « - Y . hr X 2. va © 7  & ” i - ” = : - - > g _ Sz: ; LIM - Cs ' JT G > ry = "= ; JED TLLd "= - 4 <a hay LL - 
« Cos li Es OPY — "—t_ 6c? 21 . 4 WS 2» oe” EA cot - yy Is ; __ we : —_— I oo = IRE Meek 7 3-240" = FEE . 
+” by a $ ETAS. TK 5 Lod's —_ pe IS m_ £ + Argon =  - - _ s : . 4 2 "4 - —_ 4> we") x A - 5 ER oo Rd _ > red , -o_ [. LOR wy <-—w S 1 =  ——_— 7 ——, 4 4 << wel a>. = g—_ 5 4 ant _— 
—_ ———_ — = m _ 6 - ——— — - — —to—_ > po—_ 9 - — 3 =— x” + __ . —_ 4 Ao L Ev We. - " % bw Ul ——_ —_— > [24 wy +; — > Re - Ce bak 8 
= . - _ - ps W_ - MT 72 = ul "ware i. _—_ y _ IA - —_ _—_ —_— Yo 1 o ———— - - Nw _ > "_ _ LE p 5 : Kan ot : - " = - s , DR T.5 £ b.4 > 
D . vn Ws G - pat ha PIT Or orgs ">. - DICE ET; - * q 0 ——_ =" 0" 1 "YN: 4. 5 —_——X - "YT oor Se ESS- £2 I- -—— by : p : OT a _ thu PR OO - PEG l cm— o_ 
. you 7 _—_— » 7 - ” _ IT - fs ** & "IVC > - PRO + or er pl * ” . " To —_—_ i v 5 908 2 4 e x 4 - bi wn -— ihe - jo _— - —p- {a | — _ » k o -_ Gag 4g pm RR . —_—— _ -—_——— _ py . 2 _—__ ay - 
uk, rg 2aONSE: - - ESE” Br RD BLEED 8 = OI bs y 0 po < LY 7 EN ALOE II Rot gene AG. "7 : / = Ee gt > Ae ——_— pe” A NY b oe Sock = : 7 5 2 
PMI - =x - ws —_—_ . naman Lond þ ra" te wr rg * x py Cs eg we & _ CE PIERS 7 - _— __ D — OED vs _—_—— rant weep. 3, ooo * ITN" . *< wt (Pp . w, __ = : Tr k Ln, SY; SE. wn. pep - 
- - . LY : be 3 F ” a - ae .. ” - = os £ pr 4 hy : K ” Sy d wt © ar ivy if AQ an _ "by " % es 2 bY po 4 { 4 I". wo 4 "I — 4% pa i " y o 4 F - . ol 
, Es”, - "6 wes + ut . <4 v =_ If Cx IRE ER = * " * ” —_— "Y HE O : +, 1 "GEES - Sx £ : + — 0 IIS us as : = LI” y * ” . wany Oe. IS PI Js Caf os KOgnaghfs «= RR OO wig We Ad "2 pa IIS Ys LO - 
as « oe p - 1 £ &o 4 £ ” - *Yy —_ > o %, Ay 4 4 % A. 3 2 _ —— * : * Py - ” PRS EY 2 > 6 Das . - - Jorwn: tn Os, —T je x bd "oe 5 X T3. by Ts © _ _ . <4 Tun os; gr 4 _—_ 
. . " va os a ; ; 2s Q > ROSS — -4-: = : $ PEPE 2 ard Eh x SIE o , other: —avan F/ = = Þ n= - ” <-e kjs KT, W $Id SI ne IIa _ = : = ws AE og FIN : ; - / we = A - _— « 
e < = *% A. 4 hs Lad Dan ————— 0 mag re, . - _- "-- p_.. \ <5 A "A Po, 1 — ne,” at __ » 8 $"o II= —— —— 3m x A Wo w 6 - 4 A 5 . 
þ " £3 wr. oo > - _ n- Lew = JN _ FR _ _— oe v ?P Pars 4 - SE : EE RD s _—_—_—_ y : a - - 4 m__ n , . - = Fo 5 — Y ” : 
- hs _ '* - - - = - I — ns zz © > - rm bin = £ 2 - ” Vs : nas Per 2 6 2 Ike F.3 - PN FBC ; BEG pgs - " - 
Yb *% _ . 6 . q - * <4- - 1 . a : 7 þ" - _ MW 1 -_ < — hb - Ap $5 ect, - 4 4 , 7 x 4 _ ne x ” w_ " w—__— - * wa . " - 
ng 7 $ Sa 4 f DPI —_—_— / l . oa -- hate wrong = - o% s . - _ = * _ 0 g = - = "8 : o_ 
* KLE Beg : , : - «& , by : = * - jo b way. 5 pt os £44945 L - LESS a . - ; «- FR La S* . £5 _ 
_ _ = = * = — X fm "2 - ——— 4 ae M R _ x 8", > - ” c £ - I —_—_ 4M . * ts Lot es - es to 2 - » nkgy># __ - 9 - s "4 - - 
- RO — * —_ _- OS > ; S OB _” '% _— A. < CAT WE Cn Q $ 24 - 4 PR ART +. La2r2.+..7 - " + 
- . "__ fr. Ko - <-——_—_—— d * BB % _ a - s PRC tine 4 ry - _— == I _ * yy + - SA” - ths oy * * -* x" w_ 
ws - —— = - +. 4 m_ $ f bp 4 = - - - - ——— Sy - aa page Wi 0] na WY Pe . - . - - " mu —_ "EI — —_ - 
* ” k " p > ol "A — ———— - a " __ £4 3 oy ” = mn -_ tag . I _ > io w IX : S, -_ y A — y A -_ = a: Lo wn Dy - E = ny 
_  . -, - - (% / , lb 4 P 6 4 & _—— > -- - = = =» <a" : b =_ _ > n IE _— a - <a Wy} \ VA - RY GAR ———_ op - * - ce . 
ab, be KH £ 4 8.Ba _—_— w OS] HAS” nr x> Bn FH _ oe, Ro A 3, <0 SS———. A. q ——— . —— , « > * oo R. ., : - s ws u þ%," > h - —- _— 
< - by gr 49 % = bros m—__ n __— . — . CS _—_—_— \ f ” FIC P "4 * - *e. 4 > gry mn , — VX— py ag rm penn . —_— __ . - BI= -- w 
x _ - "0 - - U . K. FF _ - " . pane => ” vow Pao opng——— pen - - —_ mk l _ LEN DI — 5  22.158.x%" « \ . p - Z - —- _— - Ke ". ay — 20%; FTE. 1+ 4 Ct - = RAY 1 z © . 
- pt > - = . by INES : Sas " - > + & S- 3 2Þ-m—yem; ng bo x 2X. I : memos et ch 4 — = —_—_ : * ROS 2 1X. , +, bo x WP Eds ISIS - 60> "SY : = - » o þ . wh Words, 5 Lt x As 4 * RF - a a F< 
ce a ts cath - . > L. od — G..= q 0 _ b Fob by. ts w >. - 
-- Fa ws "= > : bo - 5 a> mocats ——_ A . - - p _ > eo -- ny II : > 4 EI  — _ Pp 5 SR w , . — S Deeaar ol —— 
* D 2-2-4 _. 7 - > k oy a vo ” —_ 2 » py ix, 4 ann + o_ ” \ La - % - Sek : - Pe > gl = C . Py $4 y_ wm... _ . = «79 . - — > 
- > a ' 0 ” - = £ Pp > BA  _ . = | = > - * RS p - % « 
. _— I —_ % -: Are £ ——_ "_ "I - £1 ®; _ $ ICY. _ p = - —_ pe e_ l . : : 
k& KS » I - & F< - wk $25 OE " > 2+ 3 - — - - 7 — = . _ = PLIES Jn "= . _— Fe = $a . 
4 e , . - - Tar ns , -— : -N —_> = 26> - 22243 


nn ng” "w 
FU. 0: 


l 14 YC a4 
& © -3 


-__— - - 
ke > Ch ——_ © =_ = DET 
FY - 
bo > + - = _ — - - _— ant S -—_ 
_ _ - >—— <4 — _—_ —_ 
” _ ”— - 2 4 4 * » 7 —— - 
A —_ ——_— _ _ — I 
<. a C2 - = — h ME 2. Wat & hd — y - 
=_ w_ = - - = JAUIIS: ws Cs _ — w 
= o v m_——_ —_ TIT 1 - _" "LIFRTY A - # his __ F —_ 
oy - ” —_— += * i541 ur. A Z - => _ — 
x > - —— _ - LOT: - ” 
- 4 . OE —_ _ — — =- 
” Es. _ a=, -_—— — =— = TI IK, "> 
” ” = - - . \ _ 


= - 
- ng inane oat ent ed Arr 
= aw * -”—— zY I 
4 : 


<- 


mc, and then to ſerve your turn to feed you and yours. 


Z. will be gracious unto us c : 


P. © 


7 means re : 


z Servants &o fear their ?Zaſters; and this Fear, t 
” uc fo a Maſter, it i5 a Quality ſeriag the Relation, and now where 
is either of them ? þ Had Undutifulneſs and Irreverence been found 
2m ns the ignorant People wio Keen not the Law, nor were 10 Ca- 
jr, of knowing me as you, it might have been a little excuſable, 

; vreat fin 2 Bur you, O Prieſts, nearcſt of. any to me, whoſe Bu 

{1 £ 3330 knw me, who live unon my Sacrifices, have me in a moſt 
- onlar manner your Portion, you have, like E/i's Sons, deſpiſed me 
v4 tives and made others do ſo too. i Thought and tpoke con- 
wtibly of what is moſt vencrable. þ God, his Sacrifices and Ob- 
us, 1s Law and Worſhip. - 1 Proud and hardned, they diſpute 


it Gd and his Prophets. : 
7 \e | offer polluted n bread o upon mine al- 
Tr; and ye ſay q, Wherein have we polluted thee * 
1 that ye {av 7, The table s of the LORD 7s contemp- 
tibie | 

m You through Covertouſneſs take any the People bring, whether 
fuck as the Law requires or no. If it anſwer not the Perteation ot 
the Lis, yet you fiſt make irſerve me, throug't your Contempt Of 
: n Either by 
ill managing it, and miſordering what is good and allowavie, 07 AC- 
cepting what is diſallowed a.d t bidden, becauſe of 1ts Blemithes- 
0 Either the Shew-bread, of which Exod. 25. 30. of Mcat-Otfcrings, 
Ex9.29. $1. Lev. 2. Numb. 28. 5: or 1n a morce-large Senie, all that 
was to he offered uato God, Sacrifices and Oblations. p By this 1t 
appears Bread is fo be expounded here of Sacrifices, ard not to te 
C2 fired tn the narrow Bounds of this one kind. q They ſtand upon 
their own Juſtification, avd proudls contend with Goo, cither 1m- 
plying they did net offcr Tuch polluted things, or it chey wcre de- 
ic&ive, and in Law-Scnſe polluted, yer that this d1d redound to 
God, or affect him no more than the Perfe&ion of chem could add 
to him F Perhans in Words, however by your Deeds you ſpeak 
Your Though:s and Judgment ; you think ſo, and then at ſo, «s Be- 
not os Altar, now it is Tale. not to be oppoted each to other, 
but commrebeiGing bork, and a{l that was offered unto God on both. 

3s if they meaſur'd Sacrifice ard Oblation by the Splendor, and 
cs of the Teinple and Altar, the firſt were more pompous than 


3397 7 *;C 
#4. Fa 


# 
Fr 


\ 


though ſervile, an 


1c Qualities of the Offerings, as this Temple abated 1a 1ts Splendor 3 
hey conteraned this, and then contemn thoſe Offerings. 


n 
F. | | 

te ſ-c536, ard theſe Prieſts probably thought they might abate 10 
t! 

it _ 

S And * jr ye offer rhe blind w f tor lacrifice, 7s 77 


nor evil x? aud it ye otier the lame aud hck, zs 77 not 
vii? offer it now unto thy governour y, will he be 
pleaſed with thee, or accept thy perfon £ ? laith the 
LOKD of holts. 

4 This if, implies they had done ſo, it chargeth them with ſome- 
what in watter of Yra&ice amotig them, the lame and fick alſo they 
had offered. x Is it. not againſt the expreſs Command of God, 
Lev. 22. 22. 23, 24. and Dyvt. 15. 21. the living God ſhould have 
living Sacr:fices, and God who is pericf, ſhould have perfect Sacr1- 
fices. Bur the People bringing ſuch, the Prieſts accepting ſuch, do 
in cf tcll the World, hey thought ſuch Sacrifices good etough for 
that God they were offered to; fo great FProfaneneſs runs through 
this whole Carriage. y Not their King, for they had none 3 but Go- 
veriours they had, and theſe the Jews reverenced, and would not 
dire do that to them which they do boldly with God daily. 
7 Your Governour would not thank you, he would be angry with 
you, ard account it an Aﬀront; and ſhall not the Lord of Hoſts much 
more account it an Indignity offered unto him ? People in bring- 
in, Pricfts in accepting theſe blemiſhed Oblations, which were not 
£574 enouzh ior a Man, did fin greatly, and ſpake their Apprehen- 
11.95 of God to be contemptible and flight. 

o And now I 2 pray you 6, belſeech f God that he 
this 4 hath been + by your 
vwill he regard your perſons ? Jaith the LORD 
0: hoits. 

a Malachi, b O Pricſts, 
Poople, among which (with the Modeſty that 1s uſual among Gad's 
Suyrs) he rangeth himfelf, intreat they may find Grace with God, 
ad be pardoned. 4 Deteſtable Contempt of God, his Altar and 
Werſh'p. e You, O Priefts, have heen great Occaſions of this, *tis 
tare your Sin, though too much theirs; beg then, that it may be 
$0r21v48, reventand pray, or you will not be regarded : Some think 
the whole Verſe to be an Irony againſt thoſe Priefts and their Sacri- 
ficet. 

10 \Who zs zhere even among you that would ſhut 
the doors jor nozeht 2 neither do ye kindle fire on mine 
a'tar for nought. I have no pleaſure in you F, ſaith 


- ihe LORD of hoſts, neither will I accept * an oitering 


at your haiid g. 

Some make this Verſe to be a kind of wiſh, that there were ſome 
among them tiat would ſhutup the Doors of the Temple, and keep 
out ſuch Sacrifices and Sacrificers; it would be leſs diſplcaſing to 
©0d, 'tivere better not done at all, than ſo 1ll done; and ſo long as it 
1s 10 i}! done, God can have no Pleaſure in it or them. Others make 
jr a Reproof of the Priefts upbraided for their profane Contempt of 
God, and for ther tnexcuſavle Negligence, while they are ſo well 
paid tor a!1 their Service, he it everſolittle andinconfiderable, as rhe 
tonttvg a Fire on the Alcar, or ſhutting the Doors of the Temple; 
1.cazcutable diſhovefty to receive large Wages, and negict your 
Work f 1 cannoite picaſcd with ſuch Servants and Services ; or 
"tis a Ferrſss, I am very greatly difpicated with you. g Whiltt you 
are thus proare and contemprucus, 1 will ever accept your Giirs, 
but rcjeR you aid them. 

11 FOr From the Tifing of the fun even to the going 
Gown or the lame, my Name /hel/ be great among the 
(+1/ties, and * in every place incenle Þ hall be ottered 
KG My Pume, and a pure oftering 7: tor my Name 
JÞ4 be great among the 
! 


1TH 
4243 vdihlule 


c Tntercede with God for this ſinful | 


heathen, luith rhe LORD of 


| 


| 


ple with them added th:s alſo, that they openly complained ot God's 


CHI 


Ti:\s Verſe is a very full and plain Prediction orPromiſe made cn 
bchalf of tre Gentiles, that they fhowld be a veople to.the Lord, ang 
{ould exalt his Name, and worſhip him in a pvre way, and well. 
plcating to the Lord. That wien he caſtcth off Ceremonial Services 
ad Carnal Ordinances, he w:ll fet up Spiritual and Heavenly; and all 
Nations, from Eaft to Weſt, thall ſubmit to them, and ſanRifie rh+ 
Holy and Reverend Name of God in them. hþ A Law-term for a Go. 
ſpel-Duty, and under this Type is contained the Prayers and Praiſes: 
nay the whole Goſpel-worſhip 1s that Incenſe which thall be offered 
unto God, which is in this Verſe cailed a purc Offering. 7 Both fn. 
cere in oppoficion to Hypocrifte, and holy in oppoſition to Impurity 
and purged trom Superſtition and Idolatry. The ſum of this Vers 
1s contained in that Fob 4. 21, 22,23 24. 

2 & But ye # have profjaned / it, 1n that ye ſay 7A 
The table of the LORD zs polluted z, and the tryir 
thereof, even his meat o 1s contemptible p. 

k O. Prieſts, principally and firft, the People next by their Exam. 
ples. /-Uſed it as a commen thing,and valued it at a ttrange Under. 
value, as it neither excellent or uſetul. m By your Deporrment yoy 
ſay ſo perhaps, you do not ſay ſo in Words, this were too impudent 
indeed, n Nota ſacred thing, or to he reverd. 0 Either the Meat 
which fell to the Pricſts ſhare, and was for them ro live upon ; this 
rhey deſpiſed : or elite the Vortion which d1d belong to God himſelf, 
and was laid upon the Altarz they were neither pleaſed with that the 
Lord did reſerve to himſelf, nor with that he gave to them, bur the 
found fault with both. p A poor fordid Allowance, ſcarce fit for 
ineaner Perſons, and lets Service. 

13 Ye laid allo p, Behold, what a wearinels 9 7s it 2 
| and ye have fſnuited 7 ar it, fairh the LUKD of hots, g; w., 
and ye brought s zhar which was || torn, and the lame, s ju 
and the fick: thus ye brought an ottering 7 : 1thoujd | ls: 
accept this of your hands ? faith the LOxXD z. _ 

Þ To thoſe fins before-mentioned, the Prieſt chietly, and the Peo- 10r'p bn 


Service. q What a toil and drudgery 1s it to ubſerve eycry Point of 
the Law about ordering our ſelves, and tie Sacrifices? r In token of 
Diſcontent, and that you thought it was all needleſs Labuur, would 
not examine your Sacrifices as you ſhould, s For want of Value for 
the Ordinance, and Patience in examining whether the Sacrifice were 
perfe& and according to Law, you riefts accepted and offered the 
torn and blind, gc. which are expreſl+ fort1dden to be made Sacri- 
hices, vid. ver. 8. let. v. t With ſuch Minds ſ:uffing at my Set- 
vices, and with ſuch Sacrifices, urfic tor mine Altar, have they wea- 
ried themſelves ſomewhat, but their God more; ſhould he receiye 
this at their Hands? « 2.e- 'Tis not at all fit to be accepted, nor 
will our God receive it. 

4 Bur curtcd x be the * deceiver y, || which hath in* 
his tiock a male 5, and voweth 2 and ſacriticeth þ ung! i 


the LOR D a corrupt thinge : tor * [ a a greatking C3" 
luith the LOKD of hots, and my Name zs dreadtul +p;y 
among the heathen e, 

x Now comes a Thunder-clap from Heaven agaiſt Sinners who 

were before reproved, curſed be, &c. y The Hypocrite that doth 
deceive Man, and would deceive God 3 the falſe Heart thar intends 
one tning, and pretends another, would ſeem to offer a Sacritice of 
the Left, bur puts God off with rhe worſt. + A Perte& Male, ſuch; 
God requireth and accepteth. a In Vows God requireth very pertett 
and unblemiſh'd Offering, Lev. 22. 18, 19. but here are Juzlers tht 
vow corrupt things, when they hayc what is perfett, and ihvuld voy 
that. b Solemnly facrificcth the worſt, wholly uofit for acceptance, 
c Any thinz, but the <ſt we have, is this crrupt thing ;/ for the beſt 
we have 1s juſtly commanded, and that only is acceptable to the Lord, 
d Very full of Majeſty, and therefore will by no nieans be lighted. 
e Heathens reverence this Name, and will do ſo when converted, and 
you Jews ought not to undervalue it, 


CHAT; 


God reproveth the priefls for -negleting and corrupting the covenant, 
I 10, and the people for profaning God's holineſs by their idila- 
try, adultery, and charging bim with .a delight in that which is ei, 
I _—_— I7. 


\ ND now, O ye prieſts, this commandment a 7s fot 


| you þ. | 
a Either this which he had already minded them of, about the &- 
crifices, what ought to be offered, and what refuſed, if the People 
brought defettive Sheep or Oxen, they who were Priefts, ought not 
to have admitted ; they ought not to have offered them upon God's 
Altar : or this Commandment he now brii:gs from God to them, and 
which is contained in this Chapter. 6 By eſpecial DireRion tis 
ſent to you, and look ro it that you obey it. T7 
2 * It c ye will not hear, and if ye will not lay it IN 
heart d, to give glory unto n:y Name e, ſaith the LORD pe. 
of hoſts, I will even ſend a curſe f upon you g, and [15 
will curſe your bleflings þ ; vea, I have curſed them al- 
ready 7, becauſe ye do nor lay 77 to heart #. 

c This zf, to the Prophet was dubious, but to God who ſent the 
Prophet, 'twas not doubtful, but *cwas tor Monition to the Pricfts 
and Jews, and- implied a Condition of Mercy if they would yet hear, 
but an inevitable Curfe if they did nor hear. d If you do not confider 
what you hedr, to do the Good, to forbear the Evil, e By a due 
and holy manner of ſacrificing and offering Incenſe: in negle& 9! 
which you have greatly ſinned and diſhonoured me, and polluted my 
Name and Altar. f It is a comprehenfive Threat, many Miſeries i 
one Word ; it is a Blaſt on their Good hoped for, and 'tis Poifon 10 
the Good poilefſed ; and when 'tis, as here,ſent of God, 'twill ſurely 
do both, 'twill be a Blaſt on Hopes, twill be Poiſon in what is polſefſed 
and ſhould be enjoyed. g 811, both Prieits and People, but <Ipc: 
cially on the Prieſts, h All the good, ſweet, necefſary Supports 0 
Life, and Comtortsof your ſelves and yours. # You have ſo ics 


polluted my Name, and would not refurm, that I have already ie 


4590 


Chap, 1 Ch: 


E jOr, 
| reproves 
| Heb, 
| ſcatter. 
' $or, it 
ſhall take 
* 04 away 
t0 its 


M25. s 


dual, or. 
lification 
c Behave 
1s the ſa 
may mpſ 
which is. 
Name of 


6 Th 
qQuity W: 
ill Peace 
Iniquity , 

4 The I 
according t 
ple, he reſ 
4 ve muſt 
VITeS in wh; 
Were humb 
now the L; 
the other by 


we” - 3 
out the Curſe, and 'tis in part upon you, though you are not ſenſible 
of it, nor will feel itz and this is forerunnex of greater Curſes yet 
coming unleſs you repent. k The Sin was great in that you po 
luted my Name, but 1t becomes much greater when you add Impe- 
nirence to it, and harden your ſelyes, and will not lay it to Heart; 
therefore the Curſe js gone out with Commiſſion from God to ſeize 


wm Behold 7, I will || corrupt your ſeed 2x, and + ſpread 


——» dung upon your faces 7, even the dung of your ſolemn 
+Heb, Feaſts o, and || one ſhall take you away with it p. 

ſcatter. / Note it well and conſider. m Take away the prolifick Virtue 
jor, it and Strength of it, that it ſhall bring forth none or little Fruir; your 
ſhall rake Seed you make plentiful, but you cannot make your Harveſt ſo, nor 
zou away gigt 1, till you give me the Glory contend tor, and will have c're 
#0 tt | have done; Iwillrebuke or check your Seed, which will ſurceaſe 


to grow thereupon 3 tho' your Vices check'd, thrive ſtill, your Seed 
for Harveſt cannot grow up under my Checks. n 'Tis an Expreſſion 
of greateſt contempt caft upon a Perſon 3 it 15a Token of urmoſt un- 


dervalue and ſcorn; ſo I will expoſe you, as you have expoſed my 


Name to contempt. o Your moſt ſolemn Days and Feaſts, which are 
by vou accounted moſt holy, and in which you think you offer the 
moſt holy and acceprable Sacrifices, ſhall be as loathſom to me as 
Dung, and ſhall make you, who offer them illegally, as polluted, un- 
clean and loathſome as if I had thrown the Dung of thoſe Sacrifices 
into your Faces. p You ſhall be taken away with it, removed as 
unclean as the Dung it ſelf, as unfit as that tobe in the Temple, as fit 
to becaſt out to the Dunghilz ſo contemptible ſhall you be, if you 
lay it not to Heart, 


4 And ye 9 ſhall know 7 that T have ſent this com-| 


mandment s unto you, that my covenant might be with 
Levi z, faith the LORD of hoſts z. 


4 OPrieſts ! r By ſenſe and feeling, by woful experience; or know 
ye, -7. e. what I ſpeak now, and will do among you. s Admo» 
nition, Reproof and Exhortation, ro look more carefully for the 
future, that you do not diſhonour me, and make mine Alcar and Sa- 
crifices contemptiblez but repent of what is paſt, and for time to 
come amend all, this I call for at your hands. 7 That you do not null 
the Covenant «t Prieſthood made with Levi, and which I would have 
continued in his Poſterity, in you and yours after you, which 1 would 
not have your Sins and high -Provocations ſhould abrogate; but if 
you will not thus confirm, ſettle, and keep Levi's Covenant among 
you, I will make it firm as to what is on my part to be done herein, 
to puniſh the Violators of it. #« God Almighty, Lord of Hoſts, hath 
ſpoken this, and will do it. 


wh 25s 
2 
If, 33s 


5 * My covenant x was with him y of life and 
peace 2, and I gave them « to him, * for the fear 6 
wherewith he feared me, and was afraid betore my 
Name c. 

x Here is one Covenant that is more particalar than any; a Co- 
venant of Prieſthood between God, and a particular Tribe. y Levi 
!s named ver. 4. and I will reft there, though I know ſome would 
have it be Aaron or Phineas. x Of long life and proſperous, by Co- 
venant under the Proviſoes therein contained, afſured to the Lewites 
in their due Miniſtrations before God. 4a Both Lifes, the Word is 
dual, or Lite and Proſperiry. bReligious Fear, or that gracious Qua- 
lification which appeared 1n the Ads of it; for he feared before God. 
c Behaved himſelf with Reverence and Trembling before God. It 
is the ſame repeated for Confirmation of the former, or perhaps it 
may imply the habitual Frame of Reverence from a contrite Heart, 
which is here pointed av, and commended in this Perſon under the 
Name of Levi. 


6 The law of truth « was in his mouth e, and ini- 


in peace þ and equiry z, and did 'turn many away from 
Iniquity &, 

4 The Law of God which is the Truth, the DofArine of the Law 
according to the true meaning thereof, e He did teachar to the Peo- 
ple, he reſolved all caſes by this Law 3 Aaron, Eliazor, Phineas, or 
as we muſt underſtand it, every one of thoſe Godly Prieſts or Le- 
vites in what Age ſoeyer they lived, who as ver- 5. feared God, and 
were humble. They taught the People (as was their Duty) firſt to 
know the Law of God, and then to obey it; this by their Example, 
the other by their Inſtru&ion. The Law of Truth was in his Mouch, 

e pronounced according to the Law truly,pronouncing that unclean 
Which the Law determin'd unclean, and that clean which was clean. 
j He judged not with reſpe& to Perſons, nor for Bribes perverted 
Judgment, nor judged that lawful which was unlawful,or that unlaw- 
Iul which was lawful. g His whole Life was a continual walking 
with God, as Enoch's was, and Noah's was, and as God required Abra- 
ham's fhould be, in holy Fear of his Majeſty, in true Love of his Pre- 
Cepts, and reyerend Obſerving his Ordinances 3 he lived with Ged 
and to him. hþ With God and with Men, it was his Aim to live 
pcaceably towards others, that God might make them peaceable to- 
ward him, and God gave him much of that he defired. 5 In reQi- 
ule of Mind, or in Sincerity and Uprightneſs, free from Hypocrifie, 
T elſe inall Righteouſneſs among Men. k By his Inſtru&ions, and 

Js excellent Example he converted many from ways of Sin. 
| 


7 For 1* the prieſts lips ſhould keep knowledge m, 
_ they 2 ſhould ſeek the law at his mouth o - tor he 
# the meſſenger p of the LORD of hoſts. | 
| ! Thoſe foremenrioned excellent Prieſts did ſo teach, and ſo live, 
Oraſmuch as they did well conſider 'twas their Duty to be well ac- 
Wanted with,and to have a great isfight into the Law of God. mit is 
"it their Office binds them x03 it is Duty of all Gcd's People to know 
- Law, but the Prieſts Duty to knniv It more than others, Lev. 10. 
aps they were to teach Iſrael, Deut. 33. 10. m The People of Iſrael. 

i difficulr Caſes, in Controverſies, 0c. the People were to conſult 


ACHI. 


| Caſe. p Interpreter, Ambaſſador or Legate of the Lord of Hoſts 
with the People, Leiger among them, and who therefore ouzht to be 
adviſed with about his Lord's Mind. ERS 
. $ But ye 9 are departed » out of the way s ; ye 
have cauſed many to || ſtumble ar the law 7 : ye have 
— a the covenant # of Levi, ſaith the LORD of * ** 
OItsS, ; 


q Prieſts that now are in Office, now live, when I Malachi am ſent 

| to preach. r Have ſhamefully degenerated and turned away from your 
Duty, are Apoſtates. s Of God's Law, and of thoſe holy Prieſts your © 

Predeceſſors, out of the way of Truth, Holineſs, Peace and Equity. 
f Your Expoſitions of che Law, your manner of Worſhipping God, 
and your manner of Living; all rogether were great Scandals co yery 
many 3 and too many of theſe that were offended by theſe things, 
theſe Faults of yours, fell to finning with you. 4 The Covenant of 
Prieſthood, Neh. 13. 29. chargeth them with this Sin, and therefore 
they have no reaſon to expe& the Bleſſings of this Coyenant, viz. 
Life and Peace, fince their making the Covenant void on their part 
had cut off all Claim and Right to the Bleffings promiſed in that Co- 
venant, and had expoſed them to the Curſes God threatned- them 


with. 

9 Therefore x * have I alſo made you contempti- * 7 Sam- 
ble and baſe y before all the people 2, according as ye f 5 
have nor kept my ways «, but || + have been partial 6 in j, 


the law. azainſt, 


diſhonoured me, and made my Sacrifices contemptible. y I have cepted 
lefr you under the contempt of the Peop'e, who think as you de- facesa 
ſerve baſely of you z you have diſhonoured me, and I have made 

and will make good my Werd, you ſhall be lightly eſteemed. 2 
There are none but account you an unworthy, unathankful, profane 

and unjuſt Generation, neither fit to ſerve God or guide Man. 

4 Your Puniſhment is as your Sinz you forſook the Law'of God, and 

made his Table and his Bread contemptible, now I make you con- 
temptible;z you were weary of my Service, and the People are we2- 

ry of ſuch Prieſts. b You have perverted the Law for to picaſe 
great Men, or to favour your ſelves; or to ſpeak all in few Words, 

you haye declined the true Judgment of God's Law to ſerve ſome uti 
worthy Defign or other ; ſo that none could be ſure of a right in- 
terpretation, or ofa juſt Judgment, or of a ſafe and ſure Direction 
trom you. 


Io T Have we b not all one father c ? hath not one 
God created usd? why do we e deal treacheroti:y f 
every man 2 againſt his brother þ,by protaning 7 the co- 
venant of our tathers ? 


b We Jews. c Either Abraham or Faceh, (not Adam here intend- 
ed) with whom God nide the Covenaat by which the Poſterity was 
wade a peculiar People ſeparated from other Nations, and on very 
weighty Reaſonsforbid to join and intermix 'with ftrange Nations, 
4 The Prophet ipeaks of that great and gracious Work ot God, crea- 
ting them co be a choſen Peopie, a Nation formed to ſhe torth his 
Praiſe, Deut. 32. 6, 18. Jſa. 43. 1, 7- and fo we Chriſtians are crea- 
-ted in Chriſt Jetus, Eph. 2. 10. and are in him new Creatures, 2 Cor. 
5+ 17, e& The Prophet was nor guilty of the Fault, yetfſpeaks as one 
of the Commuriry,partly to take off the Envy of the Jews, and to cyt 
off all occaſion of quarrelling againſt his VYord, ard partly to infj- 
nuate the Senſe he had of this thing,and theAﬀeRion he had for them, 
though he reproved them f Deſpite, ſo ſome, hreak our Faith in 
the Marriage-Contra@ engaged, ſocarry it difloyally, azainſt the Dy- 
ty we owe to;God's Law,which equally binds us,as our VViyes to muy» 

tual Love, Honour and Faithfulneſs ; and why then do we take Hea- 
| then VVives,('tis bad ifa Jew unmarried do it, bur here now the Cafe 


1s worſe) Jewiſh Wives being diſliked, rejedtcd, and fo grcar! 


Iy Gelpti- 


quity was not found in his lips f : he walked with meg | ſed? why do we this againſt the Bond of Contanzuiniry ? and do 


we Sens of Abraham abuſe thus the Daughters of Abraham 2 Why do 
we ſo little regard the Bond of Religion ? we ate Feople, Sons ind 
Daughters of one God, who hath called us, ſeparated us from t'146 Hez- 
then to keep Religion pure and unmixed, why then do we franſgreſs 
thus? g The Fault was very common, among the People and Prieſts 
too, and ſince their return out of Baby/m. h This wrong was done 
immediately againſt the Wite, but the Father, Brothers or Kinſmen 
of the wronged Wite are immediately, and by conſequerce wrong- 
ed; the whole Family of che Wife thus uſed is pertidicuſly abuſed, 
but Brothers as principal of the Family are named, 7 Violating the 
Covenant of God, the Law, which approyes no Polygamy, aud for- 
bids marrying of Idolaters. : | 


11 © Judah & hath dealt treacherouſly 7, and an 
abomination z# is committed in Iſrael zz, and in Jeru- 
falem o : for Judah hath profaned the holineſs p of the 


LORD which he || loved g, and * hath married the oy 
daughter of a ſtrange God 7. * Neh12, 


þ Though 7u4ah only is named, yer the reſt of the returned Cap- 23- 
tives are included. / Vid. ver. 10. let. f. m Such Treachery is a very 
abomivable thing, God and all good Men abhor it, and yer here'tis 
committed. n Who are God's peculfar People,and above others ſhould 
have been holy. s Under the Eye of the Governcurs, the High 
Prieft and Sanhedrim, nay under the Eye of God who divelt at Fe- 
raſalem; this could, not bur greatly provoke God, p Profanely via- 
lated the necefſafy cautionary Law of Marriage, confining Iſrael to 
marry within thewſelves,and not to endanger themſclves agd Religi- 
on by joining in Affinity with Idolaters, who would draiv them and 
their Children from the holy Law, Worſhip and Temple of God, 
which are the Holineſs that he loved. 4 Which he, 7.e. Zudah,once lo- 
ved,ſo 'twas Apoſtacy in Fudah. Or which he,t.e.the Lord, loved above 
all, ſo 'tis a regle@ of a main Duty, 'tis lighring what God ſo greatly 
loved. r Exra 9. 1. and 10. 2. mentions what Nations they 
were whoſe Daughters were by theſe Jews taken for Wives; they 
were idolatrous Nations, and the VVomen were [dolatrefſes when 
Wiyes 


a vile with the Prieſts, and enquire what the Law aid in the 


01, IT % 


che Jgs did marry them, This wasbad, but rhefe Jews had 


(Xx2T] before, 


Os 'E. jj. ; 
Or, lifts \\i; "1 
the face *; 


| x Becauſe you have corrupted the Covenant of Levi, and have Þ Heb, ac; 


* Epi. 4.6 


j Or, fa & 1 MWG 


: 


__ a 

— h SY Mu, + jr 

rm en - - 
s I ; 
wm - . 

y = 

">a De Hu 
— F, ww DT 


y . <A by 4 "1 ; 4 z 
” 7 7 "I" $2 FEA _ ” 


> Catndi en ——— 


__— 
OF ET fe oe 
- —_—_ 
nd » — 3 
2 PLE: 
» - bo _—- _—_ * 
4, +: -=© 
_ "ow 0.2. oF SY 
NS 52 > 54t . 
< c N , »<e & w a 
er EY z * 


3 &% 


. 5 
493 © 33 
| 


_ 

ns * : 4 _ 

POT” alt G Ss 
2 IE o bt 4 yt » 
u 


* 


= Cane 


ern—_ cc 
> _ ) 
I. - ” 
+ 


TS EA > one 
—_ _ _ - 
þ4 - a=» £ by < 


| nap. II. 
{ before, and they caſt them off, or elſe took in theſe Strangers and 
deſpiſed their former Wives; this is the Treachery and Abominatr- 
on that is here committed. | ; 

12 The LORD will cut off the man that doth thiss ; 
q 9r, bm || the maſter and the ſcholar 7 out of the tabernacles 
$04 =, of Facob 2, and him that offereth an offering x unto the 
MW; 1. LOKD of hoſts. 

s The Family of thoſe who do this ſhall be deſtroyed utterly by 
the Hand of God, he will puniſh this Crime. #t Him that calleth, and 
him that anfwereth. There ſhall be left neither any to teach,or any 
fo learn, none to call, nor any to anſwer, all the Living cut off. 
z This points to the People or Laity who dwelt in the Ciries of Za- 
cob, they ſhall be rooted out of the Land. x The Prieſts that are 
guilty of this Faulc ſhall be put out of the Office of Pricſt, and mini- 
ſter no more before the Lord. 

13 And this have ye done again y, covering the altar 


of the LOKD with tears 2, with weeping a, and with 
crying our þ, infomuch that he c regardeth not the ot- 
tering any more &, or receiveth zz with good will at 


your hand e. | | 
y Beſide that firſt fault, you kave committed another, you ſlight, 


miſuſe, and affli& your Jewiſh Wives whom alone you ſhould have 
loved and cheriſhed, but you make them Drudges and Slaves ro Ido- 
latrefſes, your new and illegal Wives: x Your deſpiſed and miſuſed 
Wives fly to the Temple, weep, and cry out unto God for redreſs of 
their Injuries. a This 1s added ro fhew the abundance of their Tears. 
b With Vchemercy crying to God againſt ſuch Husbands. c The 
Lord who ſeeth their Tears and heareth their Cries. d Valueth not 
ſuch Offeriags made to him by ſuch People and ſuch Prieſts. e Is 
not at all pleaſed with ſuch Offerings, whether expiatory or Peace- 
Offerings, none of them trom ſuch Peopte ſhall ever ayail them. 
14 © Yet ye ſay, Wheretore e? Becauſe the LORD 
hath been witneſs f between thee and the wife of thy 
y youth g, againſt whom thou haſt . dealr rreacheroully þ : 
WH * Proy. 2. yet 25 the thy companion z, and the wife of * thy co- 
17s venant &. 
e Though the Fault was ſo great in the Nature of ir, and fo noto- 

rious in the Evidence of it, theſe impudenr Sinners will not fee, but 

diſpute, what juſt cauſe God hath to reje& their Offerings. f The 

Prophet ai:fwers them, God was Witneſs both of the Matrimoni«! 

Conatra&, when you promiſcd_ other Deportiment and Aﬀections ; 

and he is Witneſs alſo of your violating this Contra, and hath ſeen 

how falſe and perfidious you have been, what Inhumanity you ave 

ſhewed againſt your Wives. g Whom in thy Youth thou marriedſt, 

and haſt had the beſt of her Time and Strength, and 1n Ape ſhouldft 

love and deal kindly with. þ See ver.10- ler. f. 7 Yet ſhe 1s, what 

ſhe was by the facred Inſtitution of God, made thy Companion, 

not thy Drudge or Slave 3 thou art moſt unjuſt to her,thus to change 

thy AﬀeRion and Deportmept when there is no change in her State 


| 


F i PIY'Y, 0 
: WHOSE 


MALACHT. 


words z : yer ye ſay, Wherein have we wearied him ? 24- 
X 
in the fight of the LORD d, and he delighteth in theny FA 
or, Where zs the God of judgment f 2 -.-. 

faithful in your Covenant with. your Wives. y After the manner of 
Man this is ſpoken of God. x Your perverſe Reaſonings, or impious 
Quarrellings againſt God, among which, one moſt ungodly ane athe. 


iſtical, does come to be remark'd on. 
Reaſoning is managed to the Overthrow (if 'twere poffible) of af) 


theiſts. c That is a wicked Man, and doth wickedneſs, ( as you Pro- 


and what they do is goed ; thus they call Evil Good 


Chap. 1Il, 


17 * Ye x have wearied y the LORD with your * tf. ,z, 


When ye ſay a, Every one 6 that doth evil js good c*Ch.z.14 


x Ye Prieſts and People, ſlight in your Religion toward God, un- 


a When vour Diſcourſe and 


Morality and Goodneſs. b Not one excepted by theſe illogical 4- 


phets preach to us) is miſrepreſented by you, 1uch are good Men, 
3 Wo then to 
chem! &dIn the Account and Judgment of God. e As appears ( fay 
theſe Atheiſts) by his proſpering of them, did he not delight in them 
would he ſo enrich and proſper them? f Or if they be evil, and 


and Relation. þ Covenants ought to be very exaRtly kept.and tkole 
eſpecially which are of our own freeſt and moſt voluntary making, 
our Covenants; ſuch was this between the unnatural Husband and his 
deſpiſed Wife; all which,as they ſhould have been Arguments to his 
Duty, ſo they are Aggravations of lus negle of Duty aud Provccati- 
ons fo God and now judge ye diſpncing, quarrelling Hypocrites, 
whether Gcd har" +.ot juſtcſt Cauſe to 1eje& your Offerings. 
15 And Gid nor he / make one 2 ? yet had he the 
"cs, I Tehidue of the tpirir 7 + and wherefore one o & thar 
+ Heb, he might leck a + godly ſeed & therefore take heed 
ſeed of God. to your 1hirit g, and ler none deal \ treacheroully 7 a- 
m Bur one Man, and one Woman, 7» Yet 


| Or, iw- gainft the wite of his youth. 

faith jay. I God our Creator. 
he could havc made more Men and Women. and if it had been good 
2rd well-pleafing to him, he could have made many Womea for one 
Man; but though by his Power he could, yet in his Wiſdom, Good- 
neſs and Holineſs, he would not make more; from the beginning Mar- 
riage was ordained to be between ene Nanand one Woman alone at 
once. So Chriſt argued, Aat. 19. 4, 5, 6- o One Couple, and no 
morc. þp Or a Seed of God, either an excellent Seed, as Hebr, ex- 
preſſes the Excellency of a thing by the Addition of the Name God 
to it; or rather a holy Secd born to God in chaſte Wedlock, and 
brought up under the InſtruQtions and vertuous Examples of Parents 
living in the Fearof God, and Love of each other, which in Polygamy 
cannor be expetted. q Keep your Heart from wandring after ftrange 
Wives, as you tcnder your Life and Souls. r Though many have 


!! Or, 


—"_ Arguments laid here cloſe rogether from the Odiouſneſs of the thing, 
+ itely, to (he exhorts them to forbear ) it is odious to the Lord who changeth 
paz away, mor, reſents this evil Pratice as much as ever. God, Judge of wrongs, 

and the wronged, hates ſuch wrong. God of Jſrael by Covenant, 


a"d he now declares his Hatred of theſe things # Divorce, ſuch 
putting away of Wives as theſe petulant Jews uſed; fo make way for 
Zome acw Wives. u Rather, And covering Violence, (9c. which God 


pg 


thy God; and what can 


kateth, ut to b wa {t thou expe from ſuch Courſes that Ged 
Kitetn, gut to becut of ? 


dorero, let none now do it any more. 

* Dour 16 For s* the LORD rhe God of Iſrael faith, || that _— of Chriſt, but it very wo ſureth - the Time between - and again 
"Dez To ; = : aptiſt's appearing to prepare the Way, and Chriſt's appearing 10 IS g. 
— hy 32 be hateth F 38 ga. away 7 : FOT. 010 % Covereth VIO- | the Way was prepared. g That Temple, which _— ths ſecon Wa HW p 
8 oy 37+ lence with his garment, faith the LORD of hoſts : | Templeat Feruſatem,Jately built by Zerubbabel and Foſhua,into whic! af P ,t 
7 ig if he theretore take heed to your ſpirit x, that ye deal not | the Meſſiah was to come, and ſo he didz there old Simeon wet ki, Ide the 
tate her, teacherouſly +. | there ene ns m_ the Doors, thither he weat to —_— ich the 

EOS, GaGd . " Woh ers and Sellers, and this according to what of him, 14 7 Ei 
put her a s The Prophet enforceth his former Exhortation, ver. 1. with the 2. 7-aud all the religions Jews, Ao —_ = _ hs Deſo- ther _—_ 


and 1n peculiar Relation, and ſo much mere engaged to puniſh ir ; 


| 
their Ways, Deſigns and Doings be eyil, and puniſhable; where is 
that God of Judgment? or why doth he delay execution of his Dif- / 
pleaſure againſt ſuch Men and ways ? I am apt to rhink that the irre. q 
Iigious Sentiments of the Prieſts, their ſuperficial managing of the L 
ſolemn Worſhip of God, their adulteries, and multiplying of Wives, a 
hitherco unpuniſh'd, had brought them either to think there was no © 
ſuch thing as Moral Goodneſs, or Moral 'Viciouſneſs in Mens ARions - 
or that it there were, fince no Puniſhment was laid on the Vicious. ſu 
nor any Encouragement or preſent Reward: beſtowed on the Verty. " 
ous 3 that God did not, norever would concern himſelf to Judge it ; to 
and ſo by an undue way of arguing, had concluded themſelves ints ſpe 
Atheiſm, the very heightof Wickedneſs. Thar this is likely enough, - 
our Ape confirms, in which unpuniſh'd Enormities, are Atheiſts ar- _— 
guments againſt God and his Providence. And unleſs he damg _— 
them, they'l not believe the Being of a Ged : Bur ſuch muſt remem- of 
ber, they fhall knowand belicve itar laſt, if not roo late. 1:25, Fo : 
IV 
CHAP. 1IL pur 
Ghrift the meſſenger of the covenant promiſed : the terribleneſs of his cam- untc 
in; to purifie his people, 1 ——6. God complaineth of their fin and fR 
rebellion, 7. Their ſacrileze : God's pardon, if they repent and ye- this \ 
form, 8 I2, Their unbelief and ſlight of God's ſervice the reaſm till ti 
of it, 13 —— I5. A promiſe of God's bove and mercy to them that to me 
fear him, 16 —i8, rifie t] 
ws : Scouri 
_—_— a, * I will {ml 6 my meſſenger c, and hettwy throug 
ſhall prepare the way before me 4: and the Power 
Lord dd whom ye ſeek e, ſhall ſuddenly come f to his ws = 
cmple g ; even rhe mellenger of rhe covenant þ whom God ” 
ye delight z in, .behold &#, he thall come /, ſaith the or ſuch 
LORD of hoſts mr. of the 
The tormer Chapter, as we have it caſt, ended with an Enquiry « That 
made by vicious and ungodly Prieſts and People, who cither doubted v_—_ 
or denied the preſent Government, or future Judgment of God onr not be n 
the World. This being reproved in the laft Verſe of the ſecond —— 
Chapter, now God condeicends to give a very full and particular An- in, 4D 
ſwer to this Queſtion, for the Inſtruftion and Conſolation of the Good, lem fb 
whatever uſe the Evil will makeof it. « This Note in this Place, and #7 01d. anc 
on this occafion, requires our beſt Attention ; conſider it well there d Wh 
fore all ye thar enquire with Doubt, and all ye that enquire with Be- Meſſiah 7 
lief, that he w']| come, who is God of Judgmeut. b Or I am ſending, Church 
I will ſhority ſead; it is Chriſt who here ſpeaketh;and who ſendeth; performec 
c fobn Baptiſt, rh: Forerunner of Chriſt, as evidently appears from ſuch CO 
Matth. 11.10. Mark 1. 2. and Lake 7. 27,28. Heis this Meſſenger Mem ney 
| whom ſome by Miſtake have taken to bean Angel ; but though the tne word, 
; word ſo ſignifieth,ir deth allo figuify a Meſſenger, and ſo tis very fit Sacrifice te 


, 
1 
' 


ly rendred in tvs Place, vid. chap r. ver. x let. « d By preaching 


Repentance, becauſe the Kingdom of Heaven was ar hand, by baps- whole Chri 


| | 
lighttul as 4 


Zing, by calling them to believe on the Meffiah, who ſhould now et as comely © 
long be revealed, Ge. ſo Fobn Baptiſt made ready the People to en- Acceptan, 
rertain Chriſt, and to believe in him ;z this was he who came in the gaveto a - 

Spirit and Power of Zl:as, and ſuch an one the Jews expettcd. mine hes 

dd Meſſiah, who is Lord and Chriſt, A#s 2, 36. Lord of Lords tain God 9, 

Rev. 17. 14. and 19.16. e You ungodly Diſputers, ſeek, but nt ple when tt 
| aright, for you ſeck, 7. e. enquire whether there be ſuch a God «f ous Acce ta; 

Judgment ? Beſide theſe, there are others alſo, who did ſeck, 7. * fices which h 
; humbly , longing and praying that he would come, and waititg, fot his com 

afſured that he will come 3; 'tis theſe chiefly intended. f After the 5 An 1 


coming of his Forerunner z this ſuddenly in the Text, is not vet) 
fitly interpreted of a time,ſo I0ng as between this Prophecy and the 


and I wil 


lation of this ſecond Temple, did believe, and did confeſs, that tit 4 if you tho 


Meffiah would come, whilſt that Houſe did ftand. He is thencom% Near to you, a 
for that Temple hath been ruined long fince by the Romans- The 7 God of Juds 
Angel of the Covenant, not £lias, but Chriſt the Meſſiah, in who ſerable who + 


Blood the Covenant of Grace was confirmed, for whoſe ſake 'tis pf 
formed to us. # You Jews, among whom few there are, who do 
nor pleaſe themſelves to think of his Coming, for the expeCtationd! 
the beſt among the Jews, was fix'd on Salvation, as that they h9P* 


Þ::c; as much as divorcing oi INS : : i 

Violence by a fe we wa al wg d ol y ſuper —_— - for by Chriſt. Others expeRed great but worldly Advantage,8) urnace; to 

Wife, called lxrea Garment God haterh, "In film; nokether path Coming, and ſetting up his Kingdom among them. & Behold #97 Gold : He 

vOrces, ivr your Folyrainy, may with Safcty be praftiſed bor God atth the Prophet, conſider throughly what is foretold. ! oy - \pmible to 
Y ae , + 2 - 

hateth both. & And therefore be adviſcd, take heed as you love your _—_ = —_ in the Manner forcſhewed, m All confirme af aſſured 

Life, your Souls, your Peace, and Welfare. y Neither on Diſlike, © Word of the Great Bog. : L I In tim I YO 

Ivor 5 _ yet with unbridled Luſt, rake other Wife in to the for- 2 But 2 whoo may abide p the day of his com1ng {-! 2s. Jy by Y ECnou 

wer z 2002 are peridzous Treachery againſt her, thy Covenant, and | and who ſhall ſtand + when he appeareth ? for * 06” lerve bps p 

k Wi; 


| 


like a refiners fire & and like fullers ſope #, 


a Ai 


* filver x : and ſhe ſhall purifie y the ſons of' Levi 2, and 


I! 


- theRighteous will fcarcely be ſaved, what then will become of the 


;, 0 Among the Jews were two ſorts of Enquirers | 
, = Hae the Mcſſiahy's uf wn ſome enquired with doubt of 
—_— of the Promiſes, that he ſhould come to ſet all right, like 
- h, 2. 17. where is the God of Fudgment ? Others enquired, ho- 
— Preferment in the Kingdom of the Meſſiah ; of theſe, who 
Fai be able to endure ? to abide this Day ? When the unparallel'd 
a MiRions of that time ſhall cut off ſomany Jews, when the Sword ot 
the God of Judgment ſhall deſtroy the ungodly Scoffers,when ſo ma- 
muſt, in Zech. 13. 8, 9. be cut off, and ſo many muſt paſs through 
0 Fire This will be a terrible Day to theſe ungodly ones. Nor wall 
: ye much better with thoſe, whe, diſappointed of the expetted 
worldly Grandeurof the Meffiah, ſhall ſtumble and fall, and be ſnared 
ev broken, who will reje&thar Mefſiah, who appears in a Chara&er 
ſo extremely different from-that they had preconceived : and when 
God ſhall puniſh for the reje&ing the Meffiah, it will be a dreadful 
Day, as 't15 deſcribed, Mat. 24. 6, 7,8, &c. Mark 13. 2, 8, 12, 13, 14. 


7 > +» Think of, as Vulzs Lat. the forethought of thoſe Cala- 
gene wn bea burden z who ſhall beable to ſtand under the heavy 
weight of thoſe Croſſes which in that Day will fall on all ſorts of 
Men? 9 This Day was trom his Preaching, rill the utter Deſtru&ion 
of the Gity Jeruſalem, abouc ſeventy Years after the Birth of Chriſt ; 
Days they were, had not been ſhortened, would haye worn out 
all ; but for the Ele& ſake they were ſhortened, Mar. 24. 22, rAn 
elegant Ingemination to confirm the thing, and to affett us with it, 
5 Same are like Metals, which nothing but a fierce Fire can purge, 
ſuch Fire ſhalbthe Troubles of theſe Days he. t Another Allufion 
though this may expreſs the Trouble of thoſe times ſomewhat more 
tolerable, yer troubleſome enough. The boiling Waters, into which 
ſpotted Clothes are thrown, where they lie ſoaking e're they are ta- 
ken out ; the rubbing of them with the Soap, by which the Clothes 
are whitened and cleanſed indeed, but withal fretred, weakned, and 
in time worn out ; ſo thar Day of the Lord will prove to all a Day 
of great Trial, to purge and refine. 


3 And * he # ſhall fir« a a refiner and purifier of 


purge them as gold and {ilver a, that rhey may ofter þ 
unto the LORD an ottering in righteouſneſs c. 
tKing Meſſiah, Chriſt Jeſus our Lord. u As reſolved to attend 


MAL ACHE: 


his dereſtation of the Sin, and ſuch as praiſe it, Dent, 13. 10, ir; 
I2, 13, 14. the People of God who may conſult with their God, his 
Word and Prophers, do very abominably if they conſult with the De- 
vilz a fin their Fathers learnt among the Egyptians, a ſin they had 
learnt among the Chaldeans during the Captivity,and praiſed under 
the ſecond Temple. p Who tranſgreſſed the Law of Nature, and of 
God, Exod. 20. 14, Deut. 5.18. and 22,22, and were by the Law 
to die for it. q Perjury, againſt which Zech. 5. 3, 4. and God hateth 
this fin, Zech. 8. 17. r Either deraining ic, or leſſening it, Fer. 22, 
I3: 7am. $5.4. s Who ſhould be relieved, Dent. 24. 19, 20, 2c. 
not oppreſſed, 7/a.1.17. t Such are not only thoſe who have loft their 
Fathers by death, bur all friendleſs ones; God requires us to afit 
and helf ſach, not oppreſs them, Pſal. 82.1, 2, 3,4. # Pervert Judg- 
ment, or wreſt the Law, or admit falſe Witneſs againſt a Stranger. 
Not doing Right is ill, though to an Enemy, bur'tisa crying ſin to 
do Wrong to a ſtranger, and God will puniſh it when it crieth, as he 
did upon your Fathers, Ezek. 22. 7. with 13, 14,15, 16. x Neither 
reyerence my Precepts to keep them, nor tremble at my Threats to 
prevent the execution of them by declining the fins I threaten. Irre- 
Iigion is Root of all theſe Oppreſfions, and Gcd will puniſh them. 

6 For yT am the LORD, I * change not > : * there. 


tore ve Tons of Jacob 2 are not conſumed b. 
y This introducerh the final and full Confirmation of what hath 
been foretold in the Verſes before, the God of Judgment wiil come, 
c. 2 As heloved Righteoufneſs, and harh purpoſed to defend and 


he now loveth Righteouſneſs, and purpoſeth to deal well with them 
that love and praftiſe it ; theſe may rejoyce, I change not. And fo on 
the other hand I do asI ever hayg hated Wickedneſs, and will, as I 
have threatned, puniſh it ; I change not, my Mind toward the thinss 
or Perſons, that are wicked, is the ſame. a Either taken for all the 
natural Branches of Zacob, or taken for ſuch as are the Sons of Facob 
according to the Faith, who did indeed tear God. 6b Since the ſame 
hatred of fin,and reſolution to puniſh, is accompanicd with the ſme 
Long-ſuffering and Patience, that you Sons of Facob by Natur« ( but: 
not by {mitation) who have provoked me, and delſerve to be 1e- 
ſtroyed, might yer have time to repentand amend , ſince my Long- 
ſuffering changerh not, you are not yet conſumed in your fias, So 
| for the Good, though they are oppreſs'd, and ſuffer, yet not con-= 
ſumed, for God changeth not, he now doth love as he ever hath 


this Work, he will ſer to it vigorouſly,and continue in it conftantly, 
till 'tis finiſhed. x Overlookiog the Furnace, that ir be hot enough 
to melt down the Silver and Gold, and to conſuine the Drofs, and pu- 
rife the beſt part of the Gold. y The Effc of this fiery Trial, of this 
Scouring, ſhall be the thorow cleanſ1ag of the Perſons that are to paſs 
through it : Theſe Sufferings, tozether with his Word, ſhall by the 
Power of the Spirit accompanying them, throughly purge the Good, 
and they ſhall be a Fire hot enough to burnup the Wicked. 7x Ei- 
ther the Jewiſh Levirtes, or all Chriſtians, who are made Priefts unto 
God, to offer Sacrifices to him, even Prayers, Praiſes and Alms, gc. 
or ſuch as ſhould miniſter more immediately to God, in the Services 
of the Spiritual Temple, as the Levites did ia the Material Temple. 
« That they may be Veſſels of Honour, purified for holy-Employ- 
ments. b By the Law-Phraſe is ſet torth Goſpel-Worſhip, for it can- 
not be meant of Legal Offerings, which the Meffiah did aboliſh at his 
coming. c In right manner, purely and uprightly. 


4 Then 4 * ſhall. the offerings e of Judah and Jeruſa- 
lem f be pleaſant g unto the LORD, as in the days of 


1; 01d, and as in || former years h. 


4 When the Lord, Meſſenger or Angel of the Coyenant, the Ring 
Mefſfiah ſhall be come, and ſet up his Kingdom, framed his Goſpel- 
Church. e The Services and Duties required of the Church, and 
performed by it, expreſs'd here, in an allufton to the Law-Services 
ſuch are now fervent Prayers, Pſal. 141. 2. lively Praiſes, thankful 
Memorials of the Death of Chriſt in the Sacraments,attentive hearing 
the Word, and giving up our ſelyes, Scul and Body, a holy, living 
Sacrifice to God, Rom. 12. 1. and Alms, Heb. 13.15, 16. f The 
whole Chriſtian Churchzexpreſs'd by.the Names of 1ts Type. g De- 
lighttul as ſweet Odours to the Smell, as ſayoury Meats to the Taſte, 
as comely Objets to the Eye, every way acceptable to God, þ This 
Acceptance God will give, ſhall be as great and gracious as ever he 
gaveto any of the Services of his Saints of old z we need not deter. 
mine the preciſe Times to which theſe Expreſſions refer. It is cer- 
rain, God did greatly delight in the Sacrificesand Offerings of his Peo- 
ple, when they offered them in right manner, He will give as graci- 
ous Acceptance ſtill; which implieth a continuance of theſe Sacri- 
fices which he will accept, and inferreth that this coming of Chriſt is 
not his coming to judge the World, his laſt coming. . 

5 And T z will come near & to you / to Judgment 27, 
and I will be a ſwift witneſs z againſt the ſorcerers o ; 
and againft the adulterers p, and againſt talſe ſwear- 
ers 9, and againſt thoſe that || oppreſs the hireling ia hs 
wages 7,, the widow s,and the farherleſs 7, and that turn 
alide the ſtranger z {rom his wght, and tear not me , 


faith the LORD of hoſts. . 

{ Either God the Father, or Chriſt the Meſſiah, to whom the Fa- 
ther hath committed all Judgment, Fobn 5. 22. & You have ſpoken 
as if you thought I was far off, but by what I do you ſhall ſee, Iam 
rear to you, and you ſhall feel my Hand, that you may believe I am 
2 God of Judgment, and they happy who wait for me, and they mi- 
ſerable who fall under my Judgments. / O Jews, not thoſe very 
Perſons Malachi preach'd to, but thoſe who ſhould be then living, 
when the Meſſiah cometh, which was more than 400 Years after Ma- 
lachi's Preaching,by which time his Hearers were all dead. m Againſt 
the Wicked, to whom he would be what Fire is to the Drols in the 
Furnace ;, to the Righteous, what the Fire is to purer Parts of the 
Gold : He will conſume the Wicked, he will refine the Good, he will 
be terrible to both in doi ng this. 2» In thathe will he a Witneſs, they 
may be affured, that they ſhould not be quitted in Judgment for want 
of Evidence; and in that a ſwitc W itneſs, they may be ſure he will come 
'n timely cnough againſt cher. And farther yer, he that comes near 
3%. Judge, to call them t2 an Acccunt, was always near them, to ob- 
ſerve all they dwl, all they 1pake or thought, and he will be near, as 
Witnels agnanſi them, 5 Soreery was forbidden, and God teſtifies 


loved them, and preſervecth them. In brief, God is the ſame in his 
Wiſdom to order the Rewards of Goed and Bad in fitteſt Seaſon, 
and therefore neither the one or other are conſumed, bur both pre- 
ſerved to theSeaſon appointed of God,the juſt Judge; and then each 
ſhall be dealt with according to what they are. 


7 « Even from the days of your fathers c ye are 
gone away d trom mine ordinances e, and have not kept 
them f : * return unto me g, and I will return unto you. 
faith the LO RD of hoſts: but ye ſaid, Wherein thall. 


we return 2 ® 

c Weneed not fix a particular Time or Age wherein this Apoftacy 
began ; it is an old Apoſtacy that is here charged on them, and they 
were notoriouſly guilty of ic. &4 Are turned away by the Examples, 
and by the corrupt Dodrines of your Fathers, and talſe Teachers ; 
yea, you have voluntarily and of Choice gone away. e Which either 
dire&ed my Worſhip, or your Dealings ove with another, ſo that you 
have finned greatly by polluting my Temple with your own Additiuns 
or Diminutions, with Idolarry or corrupt manner of performing my 
Service; and you have finned againſt one another by Injuſtice, Un- 
faithfulneſs, and Cruelty, fince you have gone away from wy Laws, 
which dire@& the way of Righteouſneſs and Equiry. f It is 2 farther 
Affeveration, confirming the Truth of the Charge,and added to make 
them more ſenſible of their fin, Some tell us that this chargeth on 
them their fins againſt negative Preceprs, as the other charged them 
with fins againft poſitive Precepts; fo the whole Law was vow, and 
had long been broken bv their Fathers and themſelves. 2 Ir is rhe 
only Courſe you can take, repent e're 'tis too late, return whilſt there 
is hope. h I will yet pardon, accept you, efta»liſh, and »lets you ; 
| amend your Ways and Doings, and I will ſoon amend the State of 
your Aﬀairs. 7 As to other, ſo now to this Advice, they return 2 
proud, ſhameleſs and ſelf-juſtifying Queſtion, Wherein, or wha: i; 
the Evil from which we ſhould return to thee? What is our tic ? 

8 © Will a man rob God 7 ? yer ye have robuzd 
me # : but ye lay, Wherein have we robbed thee x 2 
* In tithes y and ofterings 2. 

# Among the many Diviations from God's Law ( which they do 
not, becauſe they will not, ſee) the Propher chargeth them with this 
kind of ſacrilegious Theft, they had detained his Tithes, ſhortned 
him 1n that Portion which he had reſerved to himſelf, & for his Ser- 
vices which is,as our Verſion expreffeth it, a robbing of God. And 
as the Words lie in the Original, they do by arguing trom the lels to 
the greater aggravate thisfin ; as they may be read, will a Man r0b 2 
great Man ? or, a Fudze? for the word uſed will bear theſe Notions. 
Or, will a Man rob the Gods? 1.e. do not Heathens abhor the toulneſs 
of ſuch a Fault, and fexr the Puniſhment of Sacrilege, and therefore 
would not rob their Idols? As another Prophet ask'd once the Queſt i- 
on, Have any of the Nations changed their Gods, which yet are no God's 2? 
Fey, 2+ 11. ſo now, have the Nations robb'd their Gods ? « But 
bluſh, ye ſhamelcts Prieſts and Fews.” you have robb'd not a great 
Man, bur the great God ; not Judges, but the Judge of Judges; not 
an Idol, but the living God. How great is your Crime: x 4 Que- 
ſtjon juſt like thoſe, ch. 1. 7- & 2. 17, & 3. 7. which fee, y The 
People robb'd God, nor paying the full Tenth, which Gud appointed 
ſhould be paid tohim. The Prieſts robb'd God in Tities while they 
rook too much,or it may be all tor their own particular and Family- 
Uſe,and did not diftribute them to all that by God's Law had a Right 
toa *roportion of them. x Either firſt Fruits, or other Oblations 


the Service of God ; inall which the People and Prieſts had given 
him leſs than his due. : 

9 Ye a are curſed with a curſe b : for ye have rob- 
bed me c, ever-this whole nation d. 

4 O Prieſts, your Sin, your Sacrilege, of which you are guilty, 


hath yroyoked me. b Are greatly curſed, and are likely ftil] ro be 
curſed, 


Chap. II, 


reward it, yea hath promiſed, it ſhall be well with the Righteous, ſo © 


* 


* Nuri. 231 
I, Rcra, ; 


22s 


*Zech.1.3. 


10, 


avd Gifts, which were appointed to be brought to ttie Temple for | 


va og - — _ 
w __— SP ; 
A hs 7 : _ 
vw» =D . Im x. OW PIIIW 4 w_- 
IE — R JS vp 
7 


wa * 
ow 
atom N - } WW; 
Fw — PT: P 
_ = J : __ - ua! 
» rn_ —_—— —_w - a_ 1 iv _ 
== 3.207 Te 4 wy _ 


_— 


» © * =p 


. S=— Ic 
—_—_—_— oo —— 


ates nts ont acne one. A <tr canes 


canner mens 


+ 


Ply es ad 
: _— ” - when . 2 -— __ . d re or” mg rn i - ” . > m— 
a S wn : - - _ " - H— — I ——_ ge ch _ = <a o - - RS 0 ” - Do - - —_— —_———— _ - —— -- 
= 4 "R—= 0 a m—_ = - th z <= < 44©: - ay noms co _ w- - 
_ tn - ? ol x - p —— a 2 - z fy 22 = DENY _ - = = —_ —————___—_ A - 
o . .w _ nt —— Mud OI 9 = < — _ £ 1" 2a. ——_ - - o — —_ 
""_— ”— " = A - 8 - a — ” . > = - == -. - - — = - 4 : _ - _ ——= - = = R—_— == . 
-—_ = SG - ET 3 b —— _w_ > - : D _ —= — - 5 _ - > _ —— _ __ — — - — = —  — þ —z _ = _ - 
J : — 2-40, yes EE = _ y—_ - - —m : Mey >» = ==x 
: I I _—_—— As = < —_ : . : — - - —_— — — ——— 
- ———_ _ ks = « _— we » « = a = — __—— — - —_ ” - k . PII - _ _ _ _ by _ wu _ - — - - 
= - en _ _ —_ —_— - 
wo — . — = a 
” - 
— g - - _— = ———_ - — — nee _ = - - = = 
c__— —C————_ - y_ 8 p _ ; ; . > = . 7 - . op 
co Y ar my 4 _ - þ- . - - m m4 x ab _— p - - 
on : b- : = OY 2-2. aw. 4 $— K wagon _ - If a5 = = y 4 AER ST: > = 
dt OA IP Iron HOY 1, 4 VOOR A ber nets 7 me eh nd rs. ad Os & 2 £220: AT 06A w- F MOEN # 0 ha Ay 4 Af aces - IAA w7 a A - f 2 $4.4 OL cw. Pl b PRONE 32 = - CTR Hr" 4: Iz 4 at tne = = A - 
m—_—_ > a _—_— ct - ® PW PU 2 — - K-22 - ou _ _ - _d © 2 s " - 4 k 
——m—_—— 3 <> : — —_ — _ __— ya X , 
7 & = dg tier _ == Þ ES q OD _ ———_—_ a — nk —_— , ” £ - > _ acl ET —_ m—_ Hoes » = *S p nf ſtrung > o _ wo 
a van | —— -- > +> by "<— LSEOEY = COLES . « = ww Bagh IJ 4 = om” - C34 23 > _ 4 » = Sa - T4 
__ . ” " bs dal _ - 
—————_— —_ 
* 


Chap. MI. M 4 L 


* (Fot1,7-11 


2 R1n.7- 2. 


+ Heb. 


empty Mes 


* 2 Chron. 


ZI. 1®, 


F Heb. 
corrupte 


Y Job 21. 
I4, I5. 


F Hel. 


o 


cf ruatin. WAaur Prone zs 27, that we have kept his f ordinances g, | 


curſed; the Curſe ſhall continue whilſt you continue in this your 
ſi>tul courſe. c This brought, increas'd, and multiplied your Curie : 
Or as ſoine, yet ye do rob me ! Strange that you dare ſin, whilſt I am 
puniſhing for this very fin! Or by way of queſtion, and do ye rob me ? 
Viilyou go on thus to fin when youare under the Curſe for it ? Will 
you as Ahaz, fin when in diſtreſs ? er Pharaoh-like, harden under the 
Judgment? &d Like Prieſt like People ; the Prieſts and Levites did 
»:culy employ the Tithes and Offerings, and the People did unduly 
Pay 3 *tis like the People obſerved how much of the Tithes were laid 
oat otherwiſe than the Law direfed, and they were ready to think 
they might do well enough ro keep that tor a uſe better (as they did 
think ) than the uſe the Prieſts and Levites put it ro: They thought 
*ewas ill ſpent by the Prieſts, and well ſaved by them : But this how- 
ever it ſeemingly excuſe them to themſelves, it leaves them gullty 
beto-e God 5 the whole Nation is facrilegious, and che whole Nation 


curs'd for it. ; 

10 Bring ye e all the tithes into the ſtore-houſe f, 
that there may be meat in mine houſe g, and prove 
me þ now berewith z, ſaith the LORD of hotts, if I will | 
not open you the * windows of heaven #, and + * pour | 
you out a bleſſing, that there /ha/l not be room enough 7 


to YECETVE 1h, 

e If theſe Perſons ſpokes of, be the Prieſts, then they are required 
not to detain the Tithes in thefr own hands; bur, as was their Duty, 
to bring them into the publick Store-houſe, If the People are the 
Perſons,e, People, it requires them to make a punfcal and full Pay- 
ment of all Tithes ef Corn, Wine, Oil, ec. about this did Nehemtah 
contend with the Rulers, and wade chem honeſter, and all Fudab 
obeyed and did the like, Neh.13+ 10,T1,12,13- f Which was one or 
more large Rooms built-on purpoſe for this uſe,to lay up the Tithes, 
arid to keep them for holy Uſes. : It was ſome large and flately 
Chamber, tor we find that Eljaſhib had befriended Tobiah, [erring 
him have it for an Apartment ro dwel! in, N?h. 13. 5,6,7, &c. g For 
the Prieſts and Levites to live upen, that they fly not, as many had 
doae, from the Service of God in the Temple, to take care of their 
Country &ffairs, and by their Induſtry provide Maintenance for 
themſelves and theirs, Neh. 13.10, þ Make the Experiment; the 
Prophet doth in the Name ot God offer to put it to a ſhort Trial. 
3 By doing your Duty crv whether I will vor make good my Pro- 
miſe, and give you a Bleffing, inſtead of a Curſe. k This Form of 
Speech is uſed Gen. 7. I1. when thoſe mighty Rains that help'd to. 
drown the World were poured forth, and now here plentiful and 
fruitful Rains are promiſed in the fame Phraſe, in a kind of proyer- 
bial Speech, to expreſs great abundance ot the thing intended, 
1 Firſt of Rain to water the Earth, and ro make it fruitful ; next a 
Bleſſing of Corn, Wine and O11, and all other Produtts of the Earth, 
for the uſe of Man and Beaſt. m Your Barns and Store-Houſes, 
ſhallnot be large enough to receive it all : Your Fats ſhall overflow, 
Foel 2. 23, 24. Or as 'tis Arms 9. 13. you ihall haye Harveſt Work, 


and Vintage Work, and Sowing Work, as much, or more, than your, 


Labourers can well finiſh in their Seaſons. 


11 And I will rebuke 2 rhe devourer 7, for your 
fakes o, and he thall nor F deſtroy p the fruits of your 
ground 9 ; neither ſhall your vine caſt her fruit 7 betore 
the time s£ in the field z, ſaith the LORD of hots. 


m Lay aRcftraint upon, or prohibit, and the Frohibirion ſhall be 
cffeRualz if Gcd ſo check, no Creature 1s or dares be deaf to it; Tuch 
a Check not only quiets the unruly Sea, but can dry it np. # All 
kind of Devourers,the Locuſt,the Canker-worm,Gaterpiller,yc.peſts 
of thoſe Countries very often; though they are in mighty Armies 
and incredihle Multirudes, yet a Reiuke from God willcheck them all 
at once as if they were but one. 0 Not ſor Merit in you,but for Good 
toyou. p Conſume and eat up, as theſe Vermin alwaysdid where- 
ever they came. q Corn ſown by your Hand, and Graſs ſpringing up 
of its own Nature; both whick theſe Locuſts devour whereſoeycr they 
£ome, and leave Penury or Famine behind them. r No blaſting or 
burning VVinds ſhall make them drop,no Froſts or Hails ſhalldeftroy 
your Vines: This was once the Plague of Egypt, Fſal. 105: 33, 34) 
25. 36+ s Your Vines fhall carry their Fruit cill they are fully ripe. 
& VVhere they had large Vinevards and Olive-yards planted,and God 
will make them proſper if this People will return to him. | 


12 And all nations z ſhall call you blefſed x - for ye 
ſhall be a delighrſom land y, faith the LORD of 
holts 5. 


All that are about you, that know you, and ſee God's Dealings | 
with you. x Praiſe the State and Condition you are in, and pro- 
nounce you to bea very happy People, whoſe God 1s the Lord, and 
whofe Mercies come thus trom God, y Of Delights, . or defireable 
for its Fleaſantnefs; a Land ſo good Man would defire it, and when 
purged, *rwil! be a Land the Lord will delight in, and give it the 
name Hoprhfibah. x Added as an Afſurance-that it ſhall be according 
to this Fromiſe; for ſo much as he who is Lord of Hoſts hath engaged 
his VVord todo it, and his VVord will do it, can make all Creatures 
co-operate for that Purpoſe. 


13 © * Your words 2 have been ſtout b againſt me, 
ſaith the LOkD: yer ye ſay c, What have we ſpoken 
ſo much againſt thee ? - 

a Your Diſcourſes . concerning my Providences over you and o- 
thers, your Reafonings, Cenſures, and Verdids, pafled on your own 
Ways, anon the Ways of your God. b Proudly juftifying your 
ſelves as deſerving better Uſage irom God, or inſolently arrazgniny 
Gcd for his Kigdneſs toathers, who in your Judgment are worſe 
than your fclves, by ſuch words as thoſe cbap. 2. 17. c You think you 
have ſpoken netiung ſo proudly and ftoutly, and challenge me to 
tell you wherein, or with whac words you have ſhewed ſuch Inſo- 


lence. 


14 Ye d have {aid e, It zs vain to ſerve God f : and 


CHILI Chap. 11 


and that we have walked + mournfilly Þ before the? Heh, 


LORD of hofts ? in luz hi 
d Ye that are the Children of Forefathers, who had this ;.. | NC 
Land given to them, and ever made fruitful while they feared m=w_ £2 
beyed their God, you thar have been well rewarded for 6 on ſh; 
dence, or you Prieſts who have Tithes, Sacrifices;. Offerin : be Scc 
Firſt-fruirs given you for your Services. e Have thought go and | Re: 
next have diſcourſed itz unthanktul toyour God,you have Athe: F an Col 
maintain'd it in Diſputes. F That all is Ioft Labour, no pr Ulke ] yer 
God, nor any to your ſelves; therefore berter fit ſtill. an q "i to | Gr 
thing, than to no purpoſe. g While what they have before their _ Rig 
15 the Fruit of God's Goodneſs, and what they waar is Puniſhm ” _w_ 
their not doing it better; whilſt a very unſutable obſervin "_s of 
dinances of God, hath ſo much Profit for you, dare you 6 rg we 
no Profit? Sottiſh Atheiſts! who will not try what a more - - The 
able Service would do? h Sothe Hypocrites and Ungodl! "greece | 4 
againſt God, Iſa. 58, 3. Yet theirs, a5 4hab's, difſembled gs 71 
had their Reward, and inflaitely better than they deſeryed, "nngs P 
15 And now 7 * we call the proud happy &: yea, *C 
they that work wickedneſs are + ſet up /: Yea, the, teu FÞ 
h, | "ot " 4 : en d F 3 - Dey i _w 
tat * tempt God are even delivered 2. Pry; MAWb:d. 18. tha 
7 Or now therefore, on theſe falſe Reaſoninss of EIN 
Ones, they proceed to farther Impicty, and nt _ 
k we (ſay they) ſee before our Eyes,and muſt pronounce  —_ : 4 
that the proud Contemners of God and his Law, are the Aourifhir? brat 
Ones; they are at preſent happieſt, and there appears no Si "Eg a) 
atiy change of Aﬀairs tothem: They do boldly and defpirefull;, a oe 
poſe God and yer proſper: And could this be, ſay they, if mans bd _ 
a God of Judgment to ca!l Men to account, and to deal with then ſhoul 
according to their ways? } Who contrive, and then work x ney teſt C 
neſs ; who chuſe it, findy it, and glory in it, as the whole of mak and | 
Lite 3 are built up, are advanced to Honours, and filled with Ri 4 _ 
and have fair Probability rhat all this will laſt to them and _ ty ſhoul 
And could this be, ſay theſe Priefts and Zews, under the Eye of a - forc-1 
and Sovereign Judge ? where is the God of Judgment when f £ ho 
Diſorders ate every where ſeer?? m They that dare him to his os ey 
Face, that do the higheſt Afﬀronts to God, purpoſely to prove = you (| 
ther he would or could puniſh the Sinners amongſt Men : Thoſ. x 4 
eſcape Puniſhmenrthough the Law and Prophets threaten them and Ry { 
would you hayc us ( fay theſe.Men) believe there is ſuch a God of repret 
Judgment, when all 15ſo diſorderly earried in the World ? Thus fx more-c 
| the proud Behaviour of theſe againſt God, For 
| arched 
| 16 © Then 7 they that feared the LORD o, ſpaks and it 
often one to another p, and the LORD hearkned 9, and Its Ter 
heard zz 7, and a book of remetnbrance was written he. EMT, { 
tore him s for them 7 that feared the LORD x. ad Py 
that thought upon his name x... ; £ This 
n When Atheiſm and bold contempt of God w joh.21 tory of 
was ſo plainly and ſmartly popewplt boy the =p = oy will be 
were truly rehgious, that knew God's Judgments were a great "—_ as foon 
and that his Ways were as high above our Ways as Heaven aoveth & Tot a 
Earth. p Diſcourſed arighr of God's Mercy, Juſtice, Patience, 6 certain! 
lineſs and Wiſdom, 1n his Government and Manage of the Sons of can do 
Men; eſtabliſh'd one another againft the Afſaulrs of ſuch proud cor- of Tree: 
terapruous Diſputersz encouraged each other to wait for God in the the Ro 
way of his Judgments: Thouy} *tis not ſaid what they ſpake, we remains 
have reaſon to believe it was a> god of God and his Proceedings as —_— 
the diſcourſe of the Wicked was-evil: The Godly ſpake things that City aud 
did as much become the ways of God, as what the. Wicked ſpake 2 
did diſparage the ways 0t au omniſeient, holy, patient, and juſt God, w* 6 
qg After the maaner of Man, che Lord is repreſented as if he did liſten $ 1un 
to hear more diftinly, and as if he did incline his Ear. y Clearly | CC WINgS « 
perte&tly, and fully underſtood and obſerved, and what the Godly Ef the 
ſpake of him and for him. s A Regiſtry was made of the Perſons n So 
and their Diſcourſes : This is after che manner of Men ſpoken of Book of 
God, whoſe Omniſcience ſeeth, knoweth, and remembrech all; but who belii 
this Book 1s written before the Lord; he will have every good Man, promiſec 
cyery good Word of ſach, and every good Thought ſuch have for they mi; 
him, catred under his Kye, that they may be aſſured of a comforts humbly | 
ble Reward forit. 7 On their behalf, Sec let. o. x With Lore, irom on 
| Eſtecm, and holy Admiration, = os 
| 1s Churc 
17 And * they ſhall be mine y, faith the LORD of of Merc 
hoſts, in that day when = I make up my || * jewels 2;76 ws a hi 
and I will Ipare them b as a man pareth his own fon(% Wrath ; 
that ſerveth him «c, en on and R 
y Though now they ſeem to lie nnregarded, as if they were not rent ſhal 


Day of 


worth the owning, they ſhall appear to be mine. 2 The Day where- 


in God will ſever between Men and Men, and between ARions and God, to 
Ations; which Day, though ye know it not, is well known to the g His Be 
Lord: and befide the great Day of final Diſcrimination, God kath and Joy 
ſeveral other Days of Viſitation, which are Times wherein he will from the 
own his, as the good Figs, &c. Fer. 24. the Day that God hath ap- went for 
pointed, and will and did bring upon this People in che Deftruftion 9. 20, 2 
of Jeruſalem by Titus Veſpaſianus. a Or peculiar Treafare, that whici firmities 
I highly value and Keep moſt ſafely : now they are pack'd up among ruſalem, 
things of no great value; but when the Casket is opened, thelc hence to 
Jewels ſhall be laid up among the richeſt Treaſures, as when they Vigour, 
were all ſent to Pelia, not one Chriſtian left in Feruſalem; and which you on 
cryed ( 


ſhall be fully made good in the laſt great Day of final Judgment, and 
in Heaven toeternal Ages, bIn the mean time they ſhall be ſparcd, 


piried, preſerved and loved ; Now their Weakneſſes covered and BY, { 
pardoned,their Good-will approved and accepted, then their Worth oy 
own'd, publiſhed, and rewarded. c As a tender Father doth witl il the 
15 Son, his own Son, that ſerveth him ſo will God ſpare ſuch, a hofts, 
in an. Atheiſtical World do ſpeak for God, de fear God, and highly u Vi 
value both his Law and Goyernment, and fo obey him. Deſpile 
| : = th 
1s Then @d ſhall ye e return F, and diſcern g bc | _ 


tween the righteous and the wicked ; ber! 
; h1i8 


410. IV. > M4 LACHI Chap. IV. 


. that ſeryveth God , and him that ſerveth him} ſhall be fulfilled in the Overthrow of the Bad, and in the Triumphs 
him | 6 = of the Good : But more particularly this Treaving ſeems to be 11- 
| terided of thoſe, who after the ſacking and burning of Feraſaler, 
ſhould return either to view the Ruins, or ro, dwell there, aud fo 
ſhould in going up and down, tread upon the Wicked, either buried 
in the Ruins, or conſumed ro Aſhes. y By this it appears, that theſe 
preſerved Ones did not barbaroufly tread upon the entire Bodies of 
the Wicked, but upon the Aſhes of thoſe Bodies by the Fire con- 
ſumed and turned into Aſhes, and mixed with the Afhes of their 
Houſes and Goods. x Burn Feruſalem and the Temple, with the 
th wo rms Citizens and Prieſts, whoſe Carcaſes were ſlain by the Sword ; or 
were wicked, and periih now in your Wickednels, their Perſons ſurprized with the Flames, ſhall be burnt up: And 

ſo both this, and much of the firſt Verſe, may be licerally under- 
7 Þ E 8: 4 ſtood, and was ſo fulfilled by Tits and his Souldiers, Anno Chri- 


The burning of the proud and wicked foretold, x. The ſun cf righteouſ- fi, 73. 


neſs promiſed to them _ fear ge hr 253, An — 4 a] Remember a Ve the * law b of Moſes : my * Fx. 20.4 
qe ry" _— % __ ſervanr d, which I commanded unto him * in Horeb 7 *Dcu.4.19, 
rophet foretota, 5, 0s CIV ) -N L £ 4190s 
? p x Pp hed PR 9” fan all Ifrael f, wth rhe {tatures and judgments g. 
OR # behold 5, the ay c cometn « that all burn a Now take leave of all Prophecy, for you ſhall have no more till 


as an oven e, and all the proud /, yea , and all the great Prophet, till $hilob come , and attend ve diligently to the 
ad. 13. that do wickedly £g {hall be * ſtubble Þ, and the Uay | Law of Moſes, keep its Precepts and DrireQions. þ 1g the tull Ex- 
that cometh 7 ſhall burn them up #, faith the LORD _ _ _ Row or mal ions T0 for all ; 
5 1Vo rhe neces Wore \-- | The Ceremonial Preceptsz Rules of your Worſhip, to long as your 
of hoſts /, that it hall leave them neither roor not Temple ſhall ſtand a Type ot Chriſt $6000, The Judicial Precepts; 
zanch 7. : : ; whilit you have any Government,or Power of Judicatures: By 2 due 
aThe words immediately foregoing, (which as we tmve the Chap keeping this, you may eſcape future Judgments, and ovtain future 
ters divided, did end the third Chapter ) toretold 4 Day to come | Bleffings, Lev. 26. Dext. 23. beſide,by this attending to the Law,they 
then, though *tis now long fince paſt, in which ſuch Judgments | mjght be enabled ro ſee the Meſſiah, and own him of whom 31ſ*s 
ſhould be executed upon the Zewiſh Nation a5 ſhould make the {tou- | wr5te in the Law : Now though the Law only be expreſt, the Pro- 
teſt Contemners of God ro ſee and acknowledg his different Reſpets phetsare included, who alſo wrote of Chrift, Deur. 13. 15. Fab. 5. 
and Providences towards the Good and towards the Evil: Now in 45, 47. Aﬀs 13. 27, This was excellent Advice to this People, who 
this Verſe ( which conrinueth the Diſcourſc) he accounteth how it | (had they take it) had eſcaped the Sins they ran into, and the Mi- 
ſhould be. b Mark well what now the Lord doth foretel. c Be-| ſerics they tell under : They had not crucified the Lord of Glory, 
fore-mentioned , the Day of Viſitation and Diſcerning of Men. | nor reje&ed their own Mercy, nor pull'd firy Judgments on their 
dThough it be at ſome 400 Years diſtance from you, yet 'tis coming | own heads, to their utrer Ruin. c Whoſe Memory you venerate, 
and will overtake you,and overwhelm youu too abou! that time 3 nay, | jn whom you glory, whoſe Law therefore ye ought to obey, 4 Who 
you ſhall have ſome taſtes of birtcr Cupsbefore, ſome lefs and ſhor- | was my Servant, and delivered my Commands to you : £ do there- 
ter Troubles, the Preſage and Afurance of that dreadful Day I now | fore expe that my Authority, and Mejes his Efteem among you, 
ſpeak of, ſaith our Prophet. e The Refiners Fire, ch. 3-2. is now | preyail with you to ſtudy moſt carefully this Law. e With moſt 
repreſented to us as a fire burning more ereadfully, which really was | Majeſtick Circumſtances to awe you to the Obſervance of all its i're- 
more-dreadful m the fulfilling than here it is in the Predi&ion; when cepts, and which was an E:oblem of that Terror and Majefty where- 
Feruſalem and the Temple were on fire, and none_could quench it ; | jn the Lawgiver would appear to judg, to give Rewards or adjudg to 
when the fire raged every where, but burnt moſt fiercely, where the \ puniſhments. fS0 long as they ſhould be a People ad Church. £ Be 
arched Roofs did make it as in Ovens or Furnaces to double it ſelf, | not partial 3 Stacutes and Judgments, 2. e. the whole aw mult you at- 
and infold flames with flames, and with dreadful roarings increas | tend ro, and remember it as God requices, not turn aſide irom any 
its Terrors ; This Day may well be an Emblem of the Day of Judg- | of irs Preſcripts. 
ment, and this Place may be accommodated thereto; but it princi- 


pally ſpeaks of the Times of Vengeance on Feruſalem 1n its final De- 5 © Behold, I will ſend þ you * Elijah 7 the pro- *115,, 4.x, 


ſolation. f Such as chap. 1.13. and-3. 13, 14, 15. are deſcribed. , | | . | 
£ This 15 another part of the Charafter of theſe Perſons, and explica- pher #, betore rhe coming / of the great 7 and arcad- 


m when that Day of the Lord puniſhing the Jews by the Romans 
ſhall com?, and he ſhall do thus for this Jewels. e The blaſphemous 
Scoffers, proud Contemners of God and Religion. f Return to your 
Reaſon, enforced by the convincing Power of God's Judgments to 
come to your ſelves, or to change your Opinion of God and his Go- 

rnment. £ Clearly fee with Envy towards them, with Horror and 
Grief in your ſelves, the unexpetted Eſcape and Happineſs of the 
Righteous who ſerved God, and your Miſery that ſerved him not,but 


-. __— __—— -_ 
80,2 
"_ -- we * " 
—> SI". y L Ti « 
—_— — — ——— : : a * —- 
weep - _ 
T7 ". te Pra x a” - = A — 
"—_ _ = ho Let [- 
-_ = - 
—IJ=T, F -.. = 
* 4 
> Oat < ws ui WS. AT... og ” 4 
_ + T% "a" 3g 5 n © «To. - 6 ad 


tory of the former Paſſage 3 proud Men,ſuch as (the Text mentions) tul z day of the LORD 0. 


will be wicked Workers. þ Dried arid caſt into the Oven, conſumed | þ Though the Spirit of Propheey ceaſe for 400 Years, yet at the 
as ſoon as caſt in. 7 Of which aiready, ch. 3. 15. and this ver. let.c. expiring of thofe Years, you ſhall have one ſent, as great as Eltjah 
& Totally and ſpeedily conſume them. 1 Added to confirm the} and thereforehe is now called Elijah, that ſhall prepare Meſſia's Wav. 


certainty of the thing 3 the Lord of Hoſts bach ſaid it ſhall be, and he 
can do what he faith he will. m la alluſion to the utter extirpation 
of Trees tor the fire, whoſe Branches lopt off, the Body clett, and 
the Roots ft>ck'd up, ard all caſt into the fire; ſo that nothing 


7 Nt the fame in Perſon, who reproved idolatrous Iſrael, who de- 
ſtroved Baal, though both Jews and many Chriſtians would gladly 
have it ſo, in favour of ſome Errors they have adopred and would 
maintain : Buf this Perſon here called Elijah, was John Baptiſt, as 1s 


remains but the Aſhes, into which al: 15 turned ; and this was fully | cjear from Mat. 17. 9, to 13. Elias is come, and they have done to him, 
accompliſhed upon rhe irreligious Zews when the Romans burnt their | wharſhever they lifted: Ver. 12. Then underſtood the Diſciples that h2 ſpate 
City aud Temple, and deftroyed the People. of John the Baptiſt. And he was that Elias if they would receive hum, 


+ Mat. 11.10, 11, 12, 13. Elias was to come wheii Malachi lived 
2 q Bur unto you that fear _F Name 7 ſhall the Elias was come, and the Jews had ill treated him, a::d #04 had 


14 fun o of righteouſneſs p ,arite with healing in his] beheaded him, when Chirft here lived: This Elfas then was Fon 
19 wings 9 ; and ye 1hall go forth 7, and grow up s as calves | the Baptiſt,who came in the Spirit and Power of Elijah, Lukc 1; 17. 
$2. Cf the fall 7. and therefore bears his name in this Prophecy. k& Who foretold 
| n So ch. 3- 16. are they deſcribed to us who were written in the Chrift rhe true Meſſiah's ſudden Manifeſtarion ; who indeed was al- 


Book of Remembrance, who loved the Law of their God,and kept. it; | 1<24y among them, bur had nor yet diſcovered himſelf; on whom 
who believed his Promiſes, and rejoyced in expeRation of the Good he perſwades the Fews to believe, and receive his Pcrion and his 
promiſed 5 who believed his Threats, aud trembled at them, that | Law, Luke 1. 15, 16, 17. and Mark I. 7, 8. who was nga chan a 
they might reſt in the Day of Trouble, as Hab. 3. 16. who walked | Prophet, Mar. 11.9. nor doth ohn's denying himfelt ro be a | rophct, 
humbly with their God. o Chriſt,whois, Zuke 1. 78. the Day-ſpring Fobn 1,21. in their ſeile contradiet this. / That 1s immediately 
from on high : Or, as moſt elegantly deſcribed Iz. 60. 1, 2,3. who is | 2<forez ſo he was born fix Months betore Chriſt, and began his 
very fitly compared to the Sun, Foutitain of Light, and vital Hear to | Preaching but 2 while betore Chrilt began to exerciſe his publick 
his Church 3 heenlightens and enlivens everyone, 7oh.1.4,5. p And | Office. m This Day was grear indeed, yet tis not the Day of the 
of Mercy and Benignity; for the Heb.word imports both, and neither | ft and great Judgment,though the Fews perverſly affirm ir to eyade 
may be here exguded : His Juſtice is ſeen in executions of Judgment | *"© acknowledgmentot Meſſab's being already come: But this Day of 
on the Proud and Wicked, who are conſumed in the Fire of his Meſſiah was great tor the Alrerations he was to make in Worſhip,and 
Wrath, and his Righteouſneſs and Mercy are ſeen in the Preſeryati- Church-Afﬀairs, taking down the Moſatc Ceremonies, and enlarging 
onand Remuneration of thoſe thar fear the Lord ; ſo greatly diffe- | *Þ< Church 3 great for the Miracles he wrought, and empowered 
rent ſhall this time be, to the Wicked and the Godly : To theſe a | ®*Þ<r5 t9 doz great for the Reconciliation between God aud Man, for 
Day of benign Light and kindly Influences through the Mercy of the conguering of Sztan, and caſting him out ot his Throne : It was 
God, to the Wicked a Day of DeſtruRtion and utter Extirpatior. | $"<" 99 againſt the Fews his obſtinate Enemies. n It was a time of 
9 His Beams ard Rays ſhall bring Health and Strength, with Delight Vengeance, exccuted upon a People whole Sins were full ripe; and 
and Joy, Safety and Security : It may be ( as ſome have obſerved ſuch Sufferings fell on the Fews ar that time, as may very well be an 
from the word) an ivtimation of the healing Virtue that from Chriſt | £9blem of the Day of Judgment, and which may be remotely meanr 
went forth to ſuch as in Faith touch'd the Hem of his Garment, Mat. | M<r<Þy * But the firft, literal and plain meaning of the words refer 
5.20, 21, and is as effeRual for the healing of Soul-Maladies and 1u- | *9 he times of Vengeance upon the Fews from cither the Birth, or 
rmities, as of Bodily Diſeaſes. r Go out of harms way, out of Fe- firft Preaching, or Death of Chriſt to the final defolation of the Ciry 
Tuſalem, before the fatai Siege, obeying the Call from Heaven, Go and Temple, aud irrecoverdble Overthrow of their Government, of 
hence to Pella, and that of Curiſt, Hat. 24. 15, 16. s In Strength, | Wc! Chriſt ſpeaks at Jarge, Mat. 24. I. & Mark 13. to 32 ver. QC. 
Vigour, and Spiritual Starure. # Where they are ſafe guarded,and which Places point our firſt the ſad and diſmal Milerics ot the fews, 
well ordered : So will the Lord keep fate, and luok well to his pre- | 294 next by accommodation, the End of the World and lait Judge 
ſerved Ones when the Wicked are deftroved: ment: Such a Deſcription of rhis Day, 792! 2. 3r. by St. Peter inter- 
) : _ [vretedand applicd to this Day of Chriſt, 4s 2. 20. more tully elears 

3 And ye 2 thall rread down the wicked x ; for | this. o Jeſus Chriſt preaching ro the Fews, calling them to Repens 
ay 4 {hall be aſhes under the 1toles of VCUT teet y. | cance, Ly a. their _ I their ines ors ER. 
In t * a £4 © TOP '| ning their Impenitence, and labouring to gatier the Chilgren of 7e- 
ns day that 1 ſhall do this S, laith the LORD ol ruſalem together under his Wings, but they would not, Mat. 23. 34, 
Vid. wer 2 tus in Now the ungodly; proud; enbeteatins bo =" deſtroying by the Romans theſe obſtinate 
OT INS hn « 5 : as 7 } iCIsS, 
Deſpiſers of God, Providence, and futuie [udgments, do tread dow: : v | 
thoſe that fear God and are godly, bur it ſhall not be fo always; t' a 6 And he Pp ſhall turn the heart q of the fathers to 


«6 


ord, P/al, $8, 1o, 11, and that 7/z. 65.-24. and that Rev. 18. 26 | the children 7, and the heart of the children to their 
fathers 
"—_ 


$a, 2 
NCT. 
© my o * 


en 


x 
7 * 


><... 
= rs 
A EY 
F & 


- —O— 
us * a. 4p Y - 
_ 

PRIAT.. W> 54 I<* 
IPyp-em 

G Sn 4, dr 

4 ” . : + 
G 


s 


Chap. IV. 


fithers s, leſt T # come and ſmite the earth z with a 


Carſe x. | = 8 
ft, who comes 1n the Spirit and Power © 

it Fr —_— and Work to turn, as tis the Office of mo 

frm : The ſucceſs is of God,who -_ _ it : by > acct - - 
. ag ey 4 . > the 6 

did give ito Fobn's Miniftryz and ſo the words inclu > 

; ing; whi as here 'tis foretold he ſhould, cony 
Fobn's Preaching z which did, as - ped 
t this time many great and unnatural Div! 
Eh the Fews, in which Fathers ſtudied Miſchief to 


in Civils and on account of Religion; and theſe turned hearts 
_ Neareſt Relations: Some by Fathers and Children 067008 won 
Zers and Gentiles; whoſe Souls being converted to Chrift,r = —_ 
were turned one to another. s Urdutiful Children yas we 
fame means, and on the ſame accounts from their Fat yy Io — 
by obeying the Call ro Repentance, embracing ey” = cam 
Meſſiah, immediately to be reyealed, and baptized into it, 


their own Children they were divided and ſpitefully bent againſt 


MALACH I. 


rels ceaſe, and both Parents and Childrens Hearts unite to Chrifi 
SY ol then to each other, and all to God, # God, or Chriſt, 
who indeed firſt renders the Bleffings of Grace and: Peace,anq givey 
them to ſuch as accept, but this the Fews would nor ; the Rulers, 
the Prieſts, the Body of the People reti.ted them : next thingChrig 
( Lord and King, rejefted and diſowned ) will do, is to curſe and de- 
ſtroy. # The Land of Fudea, and che Inhabitants of it. x Which 
brings with it, and ends in utter DeſtruRtion ; as at this day we reaq 
in the Story of the Romans invading, ſubduing, captivating the Jews, 
and rafing their City and Temple : That the time is paſt now 15 
Years fince a Stone was not lefr upon a Stone, as was foretold b 
Chriſt, Matth. 24. 2. ſince thoſe unparallel'd Hardſhips and Miſeries 
befel the Jews, which no Heart almoſt can read, and not bleeq 1+ 
reading, ( though at this diſtance of time ) and the Sufferers ſo de. 
ſervedly endured ſuch a Curſe as leaveth Feruſalem a deſolate Hez 1 
and a perpetual Monument of God's Diſpieaſure againſt a People that 
finally ſin againſt his Soveraignty and his Mercy. 


The End of the Prophets, 


Chap, I 


T he Genea f 


F P- ] 


_—_— 
p— 


ther 17, 
God ur 
Adam, 
Will a; 


Ipels, 71 
= 7-1 
Tiding: 
of Chri 
are not 
4 0NEC 4; 
writing 
_ t! 
e ard. 
25.) N 
ons: I 
the Inſp 
indeed t 
hath Not 
relates \ 
Memory 
Evangel 
courle, / 
taken 17; 
called al) 
fart of 
Cuſtom 
10.3. & 
Teannot 
I Pree or 
une. to 
Gy 
i an! al 
( n0t to 
Tum. 
viour : 
MYre fu 


the Eaſt 


by the }, 
of her /7 
Chrifz, 


_—_v_ i 


—_— ry Ol 


— 


- 
— 


"ANNOTATIO 


On the GosPEL according to 


*MAITHY 


The ARGUMENT. 


| HE whole Revelation of the Will of God to the Children of Men, is uſually called The Bible, that 7s, The 
| T Book ( for the word Bible derives from the Greek BicaG- Or Bicary) with a note 0 if Eminency,being indeed 
| the Book of Books, ſo as Luther ſaid well rhat he ſhould wiſh all his Books burn'd if be could know, that Men by 
them would be kept from reading the Scriptures. And to diſtinguiſh this from other Books, we have ( in the 
ordinary Titles of our Bibles) added Holy, with reſpett tothe Authority, the Matter and End of it. This ſacred 
Book with 145 Chriſtians, is uſually divided into the Old and New Teſtament ; indeed the term Teſtament, doth 
.not ſo properly belong to the Laws and the Prophets, as to the Books of the Evangeliſts, the Afts and Epiſtles, &c. 
The Title of New Teſtament z7 Greek 7s, THE KAINHE AIA©HKHS ATIANTA. That 75, the whole of the 
New Diſpoſition or New Law, or New Covenant, or New Teftament. The word, Originally, and Primarily /iz- 
nificth a Diſpoſition of things - In regard, that amongſt Men, Things are ordered, or diſpoſed, by a Law, or by 
Contra&t, or Covenant, or by Will azd Teſtament, the word hath been uſed to fignifie any of theſe. But in regard, 
that until a Teſtator be dead, a Teſtament zs of no force, Chriſt having not come nor died, be fore all the Law 
and the Prophets were Finiſhed ( Imean the Writings containing the Law, and what other Holy Men wrote by 
Inſpiration un God, which the Jews call the Prophets, or the Holy Writings ) 1t 7s not ſo proper ( but that uſe 
hath now obtained ) to call thoſe Writings by the name of a Teſtament. Eſpecially conſidering, that one part of 
them (which contarned the Ceremonial Law ) was aboliſhed by the Teftator's Death, and another great part of 
them, fulfilled, in his Coming and Dying. The name therefore of Teſtament, doth moſt properly belong to the 
Books of the Evangeliſts, the AQts and Epiſtles, which do not only contain the New Law, ( ſo far as it 7s new, ei- 
ther in reſpett of the full Interpretation of zhe Moral Law, or 7n reſped of the Law concerning the Worſhip of 
God under the Goſpel, ard the Government of the Church ) bzt a!/o the New Covenant, which, tho' made with 
Adam, firſt revealed to him, Gen, 3.15. yet 7s more fully Revealed in thoſe Books, and they are indeed the laſt 
Will and Teſtament of or bleſſed Lord and Saviour. Theſe Books do obvioufly divide themſelves, into the Go- 
ſpels, -he Acts of the Apoltles, the Epiſtles of zhe Apoſtles, and the Revelations. The Evangeliſts, or Goſpels are 
| : Matthew, Mark, Luke, John, whoſe Books are called the Goſpels, that 7s, Books containing The good 
Tidings ( for ſo the word Wayyixtey ſignifies) which was brought to all People, by-the Coming, Life ard Death 
of Chrift, the Hiſtory of which, az alſo hs ReſurreCtion, and Aſcenſion into Heaven, zhey relate. So as they 
are not called Evangeliſts, as the term ſigni fieth ſuch an extraordinary Officer as is mentioned, Eph. 4. 11. ſuch 
a one as Philip waz, Acts 21. 8. and Timothy, 2 Tim. 4.5. But as they were Evangelical Hiſtoriographets, 
writing the Hiſtory, as well as publiſhing the Myſtery of the Goſpel ; of the/e, Matthew and John were Apo- 
les, the other two only Diſciples to the Apoſtles. In tbe Account they give ws of Chriſt, what be did, and what 
he ſaid, we are not to expett either a full account of all he did or ſpake (we are aſſured of the contrary, John 21. 
25.) Nor yet an exatt account of every Speech in any one Sermon,, or all the Circumſtances of any of his Atti- 
ons : We muſt conceive of them not as exatt Notaries, but ſuch who wrote from their Memories ( not without 
the Inſpiration of the Holy Spirit ) Hence it is manifeſt, that altho they do not Contraditt one another ( that 
indeed were inconſiſtent with the Spirit of Truth, therr common Guide ) yet ene Evangeliſt hath whot another 
hath not,and in the ſame prece of his Hiſtory,one hath more Circumſtances than another : 4nd hardly any of then 
relates all things in the ſame Order of time, in which they were Spoke or Done, but ſet them down, as their 
Memory did ſerve them, m_— to the Subſtance, and berng /eſs careful as to Circumſtances : So as where more 
Evangelifts relate the ſame Hiſtory, or Sermon, what all ſay muſt be taken in to Compleat the Hiſtory, or Dil- 
courle, ſo far as the Holy Spirit thought fit Chriſtians ſhould be acquainted with it , which zs the Method I have 
taken in my Notes upon the Goſpel according to St. Matthew. Matthew wa# the Son of Alpheus, Mar. 2. 114. 
called alſo Levi ; by hzs Imployment he was a Publican, that zs, one who gathered Cuſtom for the Romans (which 
fort of People were generally hated, and perhaps none of the honeſteſt Ben ) Chriſt colled bim from the receit of 
Cuſtom 70 be his Diſciple, Matth. 9. 9,10. Mar. 2. 14,15. He was ſent out as one of the Twelve Apoſtles, Matth. 
TO. 3. So as be wat both an Eye and Ear-witneſS of what be wrote. What became of him after Criſs Aſcenſion, 
Teannot tell, not knowtng what Credit is to be given towhat Eccleſiaſtical Hiſtorians ſay in the Caſe, who wrote 
three or four hundred years after. The time of his writing this Goſpel 7s as incertain, ſome joy eight, ſome 
mine, ſome fifteen Tears after Chriſ?s Aſcenſion. It hath been a Queſtion alſo, whether be wrote 1n Hebrew or 
Greek: It is moſt probable that he ( as the other Evangeliſts ) twrote it in Greek, ths it hath been once or twice 
tranſlated into Hebrew. Thoſe who as to that Queſtion have a Curioſity to know what 1s written on both ſides, 
( not to mention other Books ) may read enough in Mr. Pool's Prolegomena to this Goſpel in his Synoplis Critico- 
Tum. The Matter of his Goſpel 7s principally the Hiſtory of the Birth, Life, Dzarh, and Reſurrection of or Sa- 
viour : The paſſages after his ReſurreCtion, ard before his Aſcenſion, are moſt fully related by St. John; Luke 
more fully relates the Hiſtory of bis Birth, and what went before it. The Hiſtory of the Wiſe Men commg from 
the Faſt to inquire for Chriſt 7s related by Matthew alone, jo are ſome Parables, as that of the Virgins,Ch. 25.&c. 


CHAF. I 


The Genealogy of Chriſt from Abraham to Toſeph, 1—17. His conception 


by the Holy Ghoft, and birth of the Virgin Mary, 18. Foſeph's doubt's 
o her ſatisfied by an Angel, 19, 20. Who interpreteth the names of 
If, 21—25, 

HE Book of * the Generation of Jeſus 
Chriſt, the Son of David, the Son of Abra- 

ham. 
The Book of the Generation, fignifieth no more than the Writing 
containing the Genealogy or Pedegree ; for OY called all Wri- 
ungs, Boks, Thus, er. 32. 10, 11. The Evidence of a purchaſe is 


called the Book. So Iſaiah, 50. 1. and Hark 10. 4. the Writings 


called a Bill of Divorce are both in the Hebrew and the Greek called, | 


Vol. IL, 


a Book of Divarce. Thus in Ecclefiaſtical Courts ſtill, the term Libel 
( which ſignifierh a little B51þ ) 1s uſed ; fo as theſe words, are nor 
ro be lookt upon as the Title ro rhe whole Gofpel according to 
St. Matthew, but only co the following Pedegre? of our Saxuour's 
Anceſtors. [ of Feſus Chriſt ] Of char Perton ro whom the name ot 
Feſus was given by the Angel, as we ſhall hear further, v. 20. 21. 


Becauſe he ſhould ſave his People from their ſins, ( tor Zeſus, as allo 


Foſhuah, ſignifies a Saviour or Deliverer) and who allo was che Chriſt, 
or the Meſſiah, propheied of by Daniel, Dan. yg. 2<, 26. expetted by 
the Fews, as doth appear from ob. 1. 41, for Meſſh and Chriſt de- 
nored che ſame Perton, 7oh.4. 25. only Meſſiah was an Hebrew word, 
and Chrift of Grezþ excraQtion, both fignitying Anointed, and to do 
note God's defignarion of a Perſon ro the Otfice of a Prieſt, a Prophet, 
or a King, The Chrift fignifieth . deſignation to all three. | The Son 


Y | of 


"x 
— 


— , E” , 
- - AIG. : = : = = 
I » 


Chap: I; 


* 2 Sam.!7> 
I 2. 


of David, the Sn of Abraham.) Not the immediate Son of either, 
but by a long TraduQion, lineally deſcended from both. Abra- 
ham was long betore David; but 1s here put after him; either be- 
cauſe he was a King , or becauſe the Fews expetted Meſſtih, was to 
be the Son of David : Or becauſe the Evangeliſts Detign was to 
begin rhe Pedegree from Abraham , whom he therefore laſt men- 
tionerh. Both are named, becauſe both were concerned in the 
Promiſe of Chriſt. It was made to Abraham, Gen. 12. 3. and 22. 18. 
and to David renewed, and enlarged, Pſal. 89. 35, 37. Hence 
it appeareth, that the Fews looke that Chriſt ſhould be the Son of 
David, Matth. 24. 42. Mar. 12.35. Hence the Evangeliſt puts 
David in the Front. From Abraham the Fews derived themſelves : 
they uſtally Gioried, they had Abraham to their Fzther. The Evan- 
geliſt, by ptoving Chriſt ro have deſcended from Abraham by 
Tfaac, proveth him an Hebrew of the Hebrews, and to be deſcended 
from the Sced ro whom the Promiſe was made; and by proving him 
the Sn of David, he proves him David's righteous Branch, or Branch 
of rightenſmeſs, mentioned Fer. 23. 5, 5. & 33+ 15+ and 10 to have 
deſcended trom the Royal Family. 

2 Abraham begat Iſaac, and Ifaac begat Jacob, and 
Tacob begat Judas and his Brethren. 

The Evangeliſt reckoneth the Genealogy of our Saviour, by three 
Periods; reckoning thrice fourteen Deſcents. The firſt Period be- 
gan in Abraham, and ended in David. The ſecond began 1n $0- 
lorton, and ended in Fehojachim. The third began with Fehyjachim, 
and ended in Chriſt, Luke (as we ſhall fee in irs place ) tercherh 
our Saviour's line, from Adam. From Abraham to David, there 1s 
no difference berwixt Matthew and Luke : They bcth reckoned up 
the ſame fourteen Perſons, Luk. 3. 32,33.34+ Bur Luke repeating 
our Saviour's Pcdegree by his Mother's fide , and Matthew by his 
ſuppoſed Father's fide , Foſeph, after David they muſt differ, Mary 
deicending from D.wvid's Family by his Son Nathan, Foſeph de- 
ſcending from him by Solomon. "All Interpreters agree that there 
are great Difficulties about the Genealogy of Chriſt, (eſpecially 1n 
reconciling Matthew and Luke. And the Enemies of Chriſtianity 
have in all times made their advantage of them, to weaken cur 
Faith as to the Goſpel; bur Chriſtians-ought ro conſider, 1. That 
the Fews had without doubt perfedt Genealogies ;, and were more eſpe- 
cially cxa@ in keeping them as to the Royal Tribe of David, which 
was 7ud.h, and the Prieſtly Tribe of Levi, that they might have a 
right King , and High Prieſt ; and it cannot be expected thar aiter 
ſeventeen hundred years almoſt , we ſhould make our Genealogres, 
as they could. 2. That they were very apt to make Strifes, about 
Words, and endleſs Genealogies. As appears by the Apoſtles caution- 
ing both Timothy and Tits againſt it, Tim. 1. 4. QF 6. 4. Tits 3. 9. 

. That it had been a ſufficient exception againſt Chriſt, if they could 

pave proved he had not lineally deſcended from David. 4. That tho 
they cavilled at Chriſt for many things, yer, they never made any ſuch 
Cavil. $. That we are forbidden Strife, and endleſs Labour about Ge- 
nealogy. And therefore ir is the moſt unreaſonable thing imagina- 
ble for us to make ſuch little Diffatisfations, Grounds fur us to 
queſtion, or disbelieve the Goſpel, becauſe we cannor unty ever 
knot vie meet with in a Pedegree; bur in this firſt Period, no ſuc 
DiFculties occurr. Both the Evangeliſts are agreed, and the Old 
Teftament 22rees both: That Abraham begat Iſaac ({ when he was 
an hundred years o!d ) we are afſured by Moſes, Gen. 21. 2,5. That 
Tſaac begat Facob, he alſo te!leth us, Gene 25. 26. So alſo that Facb 
begat Zudas and his Brethren, Gen. 29435+ Fudah was Facob's fourth 
Son by Leah, and that Son of whom dying Zacob propheſfied, That 
him ſhnuld his Brethren praiſe, and to him ; wy wh his Father's Children 
bow down. That the Scepter ſhould not depart ffom Fudah , nor the 
Law.giver from between his Feet , until Shiloh came ; and unto him 
ſhould the gathering of the People be, Gen. 49. 8,9, 10. Tho' Saul, 
who was the firſt King of 7/rael (given them in wrath) was of the 
Tribe of Benjamin, 1 Sam. 9g. 21. yet David was of the Tribe 
Fudah, in whoſe Line the Kingdom held unto the Captivity. (And 
his Brethren) the Brethren of Judah,are here mentioned, being the 
Heads of the 7ewiſh Nation : Chriſt deſcended from 7udah. 

And Judas begat Phares and Zarah of Tamar, and 

Phares begat Eſrom, and Eſrom begat Aram. 

That Judas bezat Pharez and Zarah ( they were Twins begor 
of Thamar his Daughter-in-law, the Reli& of his Son Er, whom 
God ſlew, Gen. 38.7.) appcareth from Gen. 38. 27,28,29,30. Thar 
Pharez bezat Exrom, appeareth from Ruth 4. 18. and 1 Chron. 2. 5. 
and from the ſame Texts appears alſo that Ezrm begar Aram. Ruth 
4-19. 1 Chron. 2.9. where he is called Ram. Some may poſfibly be 
offended, that amongſt all the Anceſtors of Cl:rift, rhere are bur 
four Wamen named, and three of them ſuch as had a great ftain and 
blot upon their Reputatim. This Thamar, the Mother of Pharez 
and Zarah was blotted wirh Inceſt, and Pharcz was one of the Chil- 
dren begor in that Inceſt. Rahab alſo 1s mentioned, v. 5. whom 
rhe Scripture calleth an Harlot, Foſh. 2.1. and Bathſheba was ſtained 
with Adultery. But we ought to conſider, 1. That (abaring Ori- 
ginal Corruption , which we indecd all derive trom our Parents) 
no man deriveth any intrinfick badneſs from the Vice of his Pa- 
rents, tho' he may derive a bloc apon his Hon and Repuration, 
from it. 2. Thar this was one degree of our Saviour's Humiliation, 
3- Fhar it was no way incongruous, that he who came 1nto the 
World to die for great Sinners, ſhould be born of ſome that were 
fucn, 


4 And Aram begat Aminadab,and Aminadab begat 
Naaſſon, 2nd Naafſon b2gat Salmon. 


This exa&y agreeth with tne Old Teſtament, Ruth 4. 19, 20. 
1 Chron, 2. 10, 11. only it is there faid, that Naaſſm, was Prince of 
the Children of Judah , Numb. 1.7. (5 2. 3- and Salmon 15 there 
called Salma. 

s And Salmon begat Booz of Rachab, and Booz 
begat Obed of Ruth, and Obed begat Jefle. 

6 And * Jeſſe begnt David the King ----—- 

This agrecth with Ruth 2.4.2.and 1 Sam.16.2, 2.15 Here now 
ariſerh the firſt DiFiculty we meer with in this Genealogy , and it 
is rather an appcarance of a Ditficulty, than a real one. Salmon be- 


% 


SS MATTHEW. 


Ahab, 2 Chron. 21. 2,6. He reigned bur eight years, lived, and died 


ariſech another Dithculty from what is faid, Forom begat Oxi It 
1s certain that he did nor beger him immediately, for Uzziah wat 
the fourth from Foram. Febwam or Joram begat Abaziah, lie wa: 
his youngeſt Son, he lived bur one year as King, 2 Chron. 21. 1,7 
Then Athaliah uſurped the Kingdem fer 1:x years, {not counting 
her Uſurpation.) Foafh, the Son of Abazian, reigned forty years 
2 Chron. 24.1. He dies, 2 £Xiig. 12. 21. and Amaziah his Son 
reigned in his ſtead , 2 Chron, 26. 1. He was the Father of Utxiih, 
called Azariah, 2 King. 14.21. $9 that when ir is ſaid, That 7* 
ram begat Oziah, we muſt only underſtand, that Uzziah lincally 
deſcended from Foram, thus, v. 1. Chriſt is called the Sm 
David, the Son of Abraham. Thus the Fews ſaid, We have Abrchait 
to our Father, and #lizabeth 1s ſaid to be of the Daughters of 4iiM, 
Luk. 1.5. Bur ir 15a greater Queſtion, why the Evangeliſt leaves 
out Ahaziah, 7oaſh, and Amaziah, who were all three Jawful Prin- 
ces, and rightly deſcended from the Family of David. To pak I) 
various Conjettures, rhe beſt Account I find given of ic 15 ith 
I. Ir 1s manifeſt the Evanz/ift had a defign to divide all the Gene- 
rations from Abraham to Chriſt into three Periods. The firſt of 
which ſhould contain the. Growing State of the Jewiſh Commit- 
wealth, till it came at the heighth which was in David's time. Tie 
ſecond ſhould contain irs Flouriſhing State ; which was from D:* 
vid's time rill the firſt carrying into Captivity. The third ſhou! 
contain 1t Declining State, from the firſt carrying them into Cap- 
tivicy to the coming of Chriſt, 2. He defigned to reduce all tte 
Generations in each Period to fourteen ; this appeareth from 7. 17: 
Now altho' cite firſt Period contained exattly fourteen Deſcents © 
Generations, yet in the ſecond there was manifeſtly ſeventeen, {9 
as the Evangeliſt was obliged to leave our three to bring chem © 
the number of fourteen: Now tho? it be a little roo Curious [0 
inquire why the Evangeliſt choſe co leave ouc theſe three, 422" 
Foaſh, and Amaziah, rather than any other three, yer there 15: 


- 


Chy 
| Wap 
ing the Son of Aminadab, who was the Prince of the Children 
Fudah in Moſes time, Salmon cannot be imagined to have lived = 
rer than in the times of Zoſhua, Boox ſeemed-to have in oo 
rime, which ( if Chronologers count right) was three hundreq «.... 
atrerz here are bur four Men named to take up theſe years "wan 
Booz,, Obed, Jeſſe. Anſw. The World , according to Chin, 
wanted bur five of two thouſand five hundred years old, When + 
Tjraelites (under the ConduG of 7oſpua_) entred into Cana . W 
will fuppoſe Sal to have then beena young man. El; is by *h : 
faid co have lived ahout the 2810th, So that the diſtance jc _ 
hundred and fitteen years. David 1s faid to have been born in the 
2860th. So as from Salmon to David are three hundreq ſixty fre 
vears. Admit Salmon, B2z, Obed and Feſſe to have each of the : 
lived an hundred years, or upward, and this is no Dithculty ; = 
can be any abſurdity in admitring this , 1f we conſider the A . 
and Vigor of Perſons in that Age of the World. Moſes (the? 
Man ſpent with T;avels and Battels hvyed an hundred and vency 
years, Deut. 34. 7. Caleb at eighty five years was ſtrong, and x: & 
for War, as ever, 7of. 14.11, 12. If we allow theſe four Men Ie 
Lite of M7es,they might live tour hundred and eighty years Which 
might allow to cach of them fitteen or fixteen years apiece for the 
Concurrency of their Lives with their Parents, yet three hundred 
{1xry five years might be well allowed for all their time : Nor IS it 
unreaſonable for us to ſuppoſe that God might allow thoſe who 
he intended thus to digniftie a ſomerhing longer Life, than the oc. 
dinary ſort of Men lived in that Age of the World. So a; the 
thing being neicher naturally impoſſible, (for in our Ape we ſee 
particular Perſons live upward of an hundred years) nor ms 
improbable, and direGly athrmed in rhree or four Texts, they muſt | 
have a great mind to quarrel with a Divine Revelation, who Quarrel 
the Truth of ir upon ſuch a prerence : Eſpecially confidering that 
the Lives of Men in our declining, and debzucli'd Age of the 
World, are no meaſures by which we can gueſs at the Lives of 
extraordinary Perſons who lived near three thouſand years y6 
[ David the King. ) Poſſibly that term is added co diſtinguiſh the 
David here intended, from others of the ſame Name: Or becauſe 
he was the firſt King of the Tribe of Judah to whom the Scepter 
Iſracl was promiſed , Gen. 49. 10. Or the firſt King not given ta th 
Jjraelites in wrath , as Saul was upon their murmuring again 
Samuel; or to ſhew that Chriſt deſcended from that Family, to whom 
the Promiſe of the Mecſſias was made, Fer. 2. 5. and a Kingdon eftz 
bliſhed tor ever, Pſal. 89. 36, 37. Thus our: Evangeliſt hath given 
us the Names in his firſt Period, or fourteen Generations ; Atyahm 
aac, Jacob, Fudas, Pharez, Exrom, Aram, Aminadab, Naaſſo, Sal 
mon, Bo9z, Obed, eſſe, David. 

6 And David the King begat Solomon of her ut 


had been the wife of Uriah. 
| Solomon was not the eldeſt Child of David by Bathſheba, tha 
died, 2 Sam. 12.22, 23. He was born after David had taken Bt. 
ſheba (who had been the Wife of Uriah) for his Wife, », 2; 
compared with 2 Sam, 11. 27. 
7 And * Solomon begat Roboam, and Roboam he-+6 
Abia, and Abia begat Aſa. pl 
This exa&tly agrees with the Hiſtory of the Old Teſtamer, 
I King. 11. 43. ( where he is called Rehoboam) he reigned but fe 
venteen years and died, 1 King. 14. 21. and v. 3x. Abijam his Son 
reigned 1n his ſtead ; he is here called 4bia. But we ſhall obſerve 
trequent alteration of Names, both as to the final Terminations, ard 
where the quieſcent Letters in Zeb. fall into the Name. 4%ja«r 
Avijam reigned but three years, and was fucceeded by 4/a his Son, 
I King. 15.2,8. ſa reigned forty one years, 2 Chron. 16, 13, % 
as theſe three Princes reigned ſixty years. 
8 And Afa begar Joſaphat, and Joſaphat begat [o 
ram, and Joram begat Ozias. 
Jehyſaphat here called Zoſuphat, in the Greek (they having no 


Letter ro eXpreſs the Hebrew 7 by) was the Son of 4ſa, a good 
Son of a good Father, 2 Chron. 17, 1, 2. He reigned twenty five 
years, 1 King, 22. 42, Fehoram (here called Foram ) ſucceeded him 
in his Kingdom; he flew kis Brethren, he walked in the ws if 


wickedly, and was buried intamouſly, 2 Chron. 21. 20. But here 


probable good Accounc of it given by Learned Mev, who w— 
WAGE 


= 


mal 
he 

Tre 
19 


c 
Act 
T 
VCar' 
ceed 
year: 
here 
caulc 
vears 
years 
pe2rc 
Years 
queſt 
velati 
It cha 
impot 
R evel 
Caſe. 
to bey 
chan 
largel1 
Authc 
learne 


* third Z 
Ir 1s pl: 
char am 
Names : 
2King.1 
plain ch 
15 called 
up by « 
againſt. 
down, a 
as he 15 « 
5, The 
lis Son 
He Reig 
lon fetch 
Mattani 
% HH, 7 
tive intc 
Chroicle 
it ſhould 
was ſet 1 
"he Scry 
Conquer 
Þurth, 
but only 
114) men 
up the 1; 
that it vv 
Feconiah 
this I fine 
there an 
well as 7 
Names a- 
Queſtion 
the time 
peareth h 
when he þ 
Was the fi 
ven years 

Prtation 
Reading 
and Fab 
the true 
Pofias beg 
four Sons 
time of t 
Fecomiah 
and his 
intg Baby 
terminar 
In& tj 
Years old 


jap-l. St MATTHEW. Chap. I. 


. ſe Speculations. Ahaziah was the Son of 7Jehoram | nine years of Ape, 1 Chron. 24. v. 2. Feh1thaz ( or Fohanan ) his 
wade 4 _ Aon of Ahab, re iby 21. 6. 7oaſh ne eldeſt Son Polls... him art —_ ni y pn, = to he ar be 
b &- _— th her Great Grand-child, Now God had curſed the | born when 7oſizh was fixreen years of Age. 7ehnachim began ro 
_ {> of Avab, and rhreatned to root our al] his Houſe, 1 King. 21; | Reign ar twenty five years of Age. Zedekiah at one ard twenty, 
Hou hk (@'is ſuppoſed ) made the Evangelijt, who was neceſ- | as appeareth trom 2 Chron. 36. 1,5, 11. So that Zedebi:h muſt be 
_ 4 ro leave out three to bring the Generaticns ro fourteen, ra- | but about nine years old when his Father died, which was noc 
m— chuſe ro leave our theſe Princes, who were of Ahab's half | ewelve years betore Zehoj.:chim was carried into B.cbyln, as appear- 
= 1. than any cthers. It any ſay, why then did he nor leave our | eth by che Hiſtory, 2 Chron. 36. Thus, the Perſons in this Perid, 
Þ130Gs Beſides; thar he was nor obliged any other way (chan as | ( which was the iouriſhing time of the Kingdom ct Fudah are 
me wal keep to his number to leave our theſe ) he knew God's | fourteen, Solomon, Rehoboarn, Abia, Aſs, Felſaphat, Joram, Uzziah, 
hrs zs of Children, tor che fins of Parents, uſually terminate | Fotham, Ahax, Hezekiah, Manaſſes, Amon, Joſiah, Fehj..ch;m ; only 
_ chird and fourth Generation, . here 15 no mention made of 7en24haz his Reign, who was Foſiah 


| Pg  f, Ye 
o And Ozias begar Joarham, and Joatham begat either, beoarſe. Febrjerdin (ore called Fanacd es 
AchaZz. and IT TReneans. NO RP on - the ſame Farther ; w_ regard of his ſhore Reign, ( icr it was 
Mar Fratham ſucceeded his Father 07148, and Reigned H1xree ur three Months and odd Days, ) cr it may be, becaute in all pro- 
FD ——_ wich 2 Chron. 26. 23. And that Ahax his Son ſuc- babilicy he was Tumulcuocutly ter up by . Pcopie, and nct reid 
"ceded? him, agreeth with 2 Chron. 28, 1. He alfo Reigned fixteen | jn his Throne, before he was turned our by the Conguerer Pha- 
©irs, Herebi:th his Son Reigned in his ſtead, 2 Chron, 23. 27. Some | 45h Nechy; nor do we read of any Sons ke left : To be ture he letr 
here have cavilled at che Truth of the Hiſtory of Holy writ, be- | none who could ſucceed him 1n the Throne, f:r Jeh;zrchim was 
caule it appearerh from 2 King. 16, 2. thar Aba died ar thirty tix | ſer up, and his Sn Febyj.chin ſucceeded fhim, as the tiſtcry rel 
vears of Aze, and that Hezckiah began to Reign ar rwenty five | lerh us, 
years Of age, GY car from 2 Chron, 29. 1- Whenceitap- | 12 Andafter they were bronght to Babylon, * Jeco- * 2 king, 
YWeth chat” Zeze/s 3 | : Let 7 avebinke . 6, 
Ly Aze, which they think improbable : Bur thoſe who will me begat Saearnes, ane IUUIE bega p 3 Lorobabe L the 3-20 
"eeſtion the Truth of whar we have ſo gocd a Proot of, as the Re- Py his 70S Cn iy _ ro be fehojakin the wo of 7e- 
yolation of H»ly writ is, are obliged nor only to tell us of things in —_ Po pu - Gy - Feconiah, 1 Chron. 3. me as well as Jeb9).ikin, 
ir chat are improbable to their apprehenſions, bur eirher in Narure | © horas — ye C fer. Fo = = - ot ee rhe _ ot 
impoſſible, cr at leaſt inconfiſtenc wich ſome other piece of Divine Jena *_h , gu C w_ _ P _—_— ww hop ONE SOR mh whey 
Revelation. Of che latrer ſcrt, we hear of nothing objeRed in this 3 gaffe - wk 5 Pe Cen ES this Jecmah, 
Caſe, Now tho' wich us it be ncr ordinary for Perfons ar that Age Þ - Freu wo > / tes = b THY OR 7 = gs childlejs ; How 
to beer Children, yer that ic is nor impotlible in Nature, nor more _ OT m_ —_ 1; Col mes "—_ pr cd , tor o-_ 
than hach happened in the World tfametimes, Spanhemius harh b=x % Im whe” I bon _— -— A. ST Jon pen agey 6 _ 
larzely proved in his Dubiz Evangelica, Dub. 5. and thar by no leſs | 77 s a Man that ſha —_ W w Y 2 xy ; / ” ho fan of his ſee 
athoricies than thoſe of Hierme amongſt the Ancients, and the | 4 wig » fill _ y 4 - Ir Wes of ) _ 3 "ft | 7 hee Br 4 kan 
learned Scalizer amongſt the more Modern Writers, it is what may Fs af ; SO as nar TEXT 15 platuly ©O DE UNderiood witione @ Chile 
; bh : n 1. | That ſhall aQually ſicceed 1n the Crown ; tor the Text ic felt ſuppo- 
be. The Scripture telleth us ic was ſo, that is enough for us, tho Cools Chae hes MN v7 os td ark - 
ee nota thg very ordinary ſh chr he hol re fn, tee NS 0 
al 2 1anat{i- . ; p —_— 3 
10 And * Ezekias begat Manaſles, and Manaſfes 2 Chron, 3s. juſtifierh ; tor che King of Bzby/on ſer up Zedebiah his 
begat Amon, and Amon beegat Joftah. Uncle in his ſtead, who was the laſt King in Zudab; in the eleventh 
All this exaQly agreeth with the Scriptures of the Old Teſta- | year of whoſe Reign the Zews were all carried Captive. This 7e- 
ment, theſe three Princes in a lineal Deſcent immediately ſuccecd- | coniah had eight Sons, as we read 2 Chron. 3. 17, 18. Salathiel is 
ed each other, Manaſſeth Reigning fifcy five, Amon two, and 7oſtah | there reckoned as ais ſecond Son, ( poſſibly Aſſir died young, or ar 
thirty one years, all rogecher eighty erght years, | leaſt Childleſs, ) 10 as the Righr of the Crown was in Salathiel, who 


* : - is the Perſon alone here named. Burt how Salathiel is here ſaid ro 
1:3. 11 And * Jofias || begar Jeconias and his Brethren, 


A . have begot Zorobabel, 1s yer a greater Difficulty ; for, 1 Chron. 3. 19. 
+1- about the time they were carried away to Babylon. it 15 ſaid, the Sons of Pedajah ( not of Salathiel ) were Zorobabet 


m_ "P 

8" wh; 

+, creo ana 
OR —— ———— a - 


he Fea i 
fl 15» — . 
$—>- 06> "3 
. 
. 
- 4A — wo 
" F. -o 4 
+  __ 
=> ” : __—_ {hw 
- 


-— 


4 , 
A - > ARS. 8 w 
”- —_— — — * A . © ottnd = raſgic- « » ——_—_— + 
_ ger - > $0ong ade s - - Pe Or av | l — K . jy CESS PET: < Q Fon. + B6h © FeIY - pe 
: & : & Set>= 1 , 7 a "1 "Ie —_ by b , — TO. 
_ 4 _ a went th Y ——_ : a... Og "4 Fo &, - ; 2 : f 
$24- & - Add a 24: Dh res. Was; ve 4 227 = EY 4 ; "uz wo i, 2 -- : F E Fg RaGde i be T nd > 
ws 23 ae q G aq 4 _— wd = ” £805 - DRY 4 D _—_ > nr ch 
* 2 8 = _—_— 5 : $32. $ Ls : x ES I g * l das 3-38 . 
: re I inns + ; Liab ir> + oy. Heer 2. + oO ns, —_—— 7! Y "5&% I 
"aw - —_—_— 4 -_ OO *; 0 Vans. od bong 43> Glee lng org 72 PRE > po - þ < AOEC G 
Loa : per - - od. VEDRE.... © NED... - 2a : 2.5 + "07. +4 bo bo > CnY nNOS (of > 7d 41h 4 
" a . Y 2 ” 4 2 " 6.-—_ » - b— 1a g ph 2 a 8 =_ . a want; y » "ny, nes 7 £ 
_ ale mn, 1 "3 A + »--- © - ha - . . : ; Y wo oe - $i ates 
- = - ; ; - L x - CES - 
X g —— —_ -— : —_ q _ _ <<< -- SE * , = IM ” . _ om = 
"> a - ib A=IT = - Oh a -" þ "ie Tom Pine MOU I rr ER eo ee I Ke - 
Ne EY Ie OE NT IS = - % or S 
_ —— y : - — we 9k WR - —+ - _ —_ vm EI>—S,.. Is 4 p4 a wh 4 IR" oe.» ” - _ 
” T » 7 > = E As. y- - m_ WY? 17 >= - i . : b 0 - 4% rs . - x 
bo wang : > 5 bs : ey + 3 Y- . Y 4 r i £ A q ed Lat, x i La j- w# ee —oa_ 
& _——— RY _ _ - ENS omg mn earn tm us we Pen —_ - : — SI —_ _ o mmm — 
— + Px 6 2G i as oa 4 - od] "ELL has n ma : > I : : © _— EXIF S - 
5 Y A my 5 * > EP wy = X "+>" 2 , - Sos 4 Ps —_ w -] 9 N 
Dy Is . oy A = F & —_ A "vs = TS 2 - —_— _— , _—eT "x" go IT, . 
= I - : 4 7 oe - = = > --L 1 oh - - 04 . WK. I 
> - —— - 2 m cons ” - - 
£1 _ e "—_ - — o | ant Reg þ_ po , C 
- £ 4 -— agg 
is — Nag 
(3 a 


3%% Tn this Feconiah ( whoever he was ) determined the Evangeliſt's | and Shimei z it Zorobabel were the Son of Ped4j4h, how could he 
Mt fecond Perind of fourteen Generations, But there is much Ditpute, | be the Son of Salathiel ? Several Anſivers are given ro this : Some 
”  borh abour the Feconiah who is here mentioned, and the Sons of | think that Zorobabel, becauſe he deſcended lineally from Salathiel, 
" Feſiah as they are reckoned up, 1 Chron. 3. 15. where it is ſaid, The | is called his Son z which were a ſuificient Anſiver, it the Suppoſition 


* Sos of Fofiah were the firſt born Fohanan, The ſecmd Jehojakim, The | were true, that Zo7obabel were lineally deſcended from Salathiel : 
0. Fe . by . 
third Zedekiah, The fourth Shallum, 2 King. 23. 31. 2 Chron. 36. 1. 


4- 


Bur thar it is nor, for according to 1 Chron. 3. 18. Pedajah was not 
Ir is plain that Fehoghaz ſucceeded Foftah his Father : Ir is cerrain | the Son, but the Brother of Salzthiel, Others think that Salathiel 
thar amongſt che 7ews it was very ordinary for Perſons to have two | is here faid to have begort Zorobabel, becauſe Zorobabel ſucceeded him 
Names; thus King UVUzziah in he Book of Kings called Azariah, | in the Kingdom ; but as that is a ſtrange Interpretation of the word 
2King.14.21. Moſt, if not all, of Foſ;ah's Sons had rwo Names, it is | begat, ſo neither was Salathiel a King, tho” potfibly the Title of the 
plain chat Fehoahax his eldeſt Son 1s the fame who in x1 Chron. 3.15. | Crown was in. him, as the Greac Grand-child of 7oſzah ; nor did 
is called Fohanan, but he Reigned but three Months, probably ſer | ever Zorobabel aſſume the Crown that we read of, Whereas others 
up by the People, and put down by Pharaoh Necho, in a Battel | fay, that there were two Zorobabels ; and thar this Son was the adop- 
againſt whom oſiah was flain;z he purſuing his Victory, put him | ted Son -of Salathiel, both theſe rhings are ſuggeſted witchour 
down, and fer up Eliakim his next Brother, calling him Fehojachim, | Proof. The moſt probable Opinion, which I perceive the beſt In- 
as he is called 2 Chron. 3. 15. He Reigned eleven years, 2 Chron. 3, | terpreters acquieſce in, is, Thar Salathiel dying wichour ifſue, Pe- 
s. The King of Babylon purs him down, and ſetteth up Jehojachin | dajah his Brother married his Wite, according to the Law of God, 
his S5n, who is alſo called Feconiah, and Coniah, 2 Chron. 36. g. | Deut. 25. 5.. and begat Zorobabel of her char had been the Wife of 
He Reigned but three Months, and ten Days, and the King of Baby- | Salathiel ; and thence it is ſaid Salathiel begat him. Pedajah fo 
lon tercheth him away, and ſets up his Uncle Zedekiah ( called alſo | raiſing up ſeed to his Brother, according to the Law aforeſaid. To 
Mattaniah) he Reigned eleven years, as appeareth by 2 Chron. 36. | this ir is objeQed by ſome, Thac the Law was, Thzt the Child ſhould 
v.11, Then the whole Body of the Zews were carried away Cap- | ſucceed in the name of the Brother that was dead. So that if this were 
tive into Baby/on. We do not read either 1n the Book of Kings, or | the Senſe, ir ſhould not have been, Salathie! begat Zorobabel, bur 
Chronicles, that Shallum C Foftah's fourth Son ) ever Reigned, yer | Salathie! begat Salathiel. The Anſwer to this, is nor difficult : For 
it ſhould ſeem thar he did, by Jer. 22. v. 11. Some think rhar he | to ſucceed in the name of the Brother that # dead, dcth not ſignifie 
was ſet up in ſtead of Fehzahaz, when he wascarried away. Bur | to be called by the very name with which he was called, bur to 
:ne Scriprure ſaith nothing of 1r, nor 1s it very probable that the | be denominated his Son, as it begotten by him. Ard this 1s evi- 
Conqueror ſhould skip over the Second and Third Son, and ſer up the | dent from Ruth 4. 19. where Boaz hath thefe words : Ruth the 
Purth, But ir is not my preſent Concern, to inquire after Shallum, | Moabiteſs, the Wife of Mahlon, have T purchaſed to be my W.fe, to raiſe 
bur only after Feconiah menrion'd in this Verſe, and the other Feco- | up the Name of the Dead upm his Inheritance, that the Name of the 
114) mentioned ver.1 2. as the Head of thoſe Generations which make | Dead be not cut off from among his Brethren. Yet v. 21. Boaz has 
up the Jaſt Period, As to this Feconiah, the moſt probable Opinion is, | ving a Son by Ruth, did ror call his name Mahlon, by the name of 
that it was Pehojakhim, who was alſo called Feconiah ; and thar the | his Father, but Obed. 

Fecmiah mentioned ver. 12. was Fehojakin rhe Son of Fehojakim. In 12 And Zorobabel begat Abiud, and Abiud begat 
this I find ſome of the beſt Interpreters acquieſcing ; nor indeed is Elia 4 Fliakim beard 

there any great »Difficulry, in allowing Jehojachim the Father, as 1aKIM, an 1KIM DEAT 21Z0T. | ; 
well as Feh9jachin the Son to be called Feconiah ( fo near are the 14 And Azor begat Sadoc, and Sadoc begat Achim, 
Names a-kin, and the fignification of both the ſame : ) Bur then the | and Achim begat Eltud. 

Queſtion is, How Foſ7ah could be ſaid to beger Fehojachim, about 1s AndEliud begat Elegzar.and Eleazar begat Mart- 
the time of the carrying into the Captivity of Babylon ? For it ap- Y 4 Matthan b b 

peareth by 2 Chron, 36. 5. that Jehojachim was twenty five years 01d than, an atthan begat Jaco = 

when he began to Reign, and he Reigned eleven years ; and in his time Here are divers Obje&ions made to this laſt part of the Genea- 
was the firſt carrying into Babylon, ſo that there muſt be thirry ſe- | logy, and in a great meaſure cauſed from the difference berween 
ven years betwixr the begetting of Fehojakim and the firſt Tranſ- | Matthew and Luke; bur I ſhall nor artempr any Reconciliation of 
Prtation into. Babylon, The Margent of our Bibles tell us of another | thoſe Differences, till I come to Luke, c<.3. There is no Abiud 
Reading; 7oſeas begat Fakim Zakim and Fehyjakimare the fame) | reckoned amongſt the Sons of Zoobabel, 1 Chron. 3. 19, 20. And 
and Fakim begar Fechoniah ( that is, Fehojachim._) Beza thinks this | tor the others named, we have no certain Account of them, in any 
the trueſt reading taken our of an old Copy of R. Stephens, mag- | part of the Holy wrir. From the time of 7ehyjachim were above 
ned by Stapulenſis and Bucer, Bur he thinks ir ſhould be thus : | five hundred years, to the Birth of Chriſt ; of which ſeventy were 
Toſias begat Fakim, and his Brethren ( for we know that Fofiah had | ſpent in the Captivity of Babylon : Zorobabel was alive ar the end of 
four Sons) and Fakim begat Feconiah ( that is, Fehojakin  atout the | the Captivity, Exra 5. 2. And, as it appears, the Ruley of the Fews, - 
time of the cgrrying into the Captivity of Babylon. For Fehojachin or | tho' not under the title and ſtyle of King: For Eliakim, Azor, Sadocy 

ecomah was not nine years old when himſelf was carried away, | Achim, Eliud, Eleazar, Matthan and Facob, tho' we have no mention 
and his Father was carried away before. Law the carrying away | of them in any Canonical Boobs of Holy writ, but only this; yer 
nt) Babylon ] The Greek Prepofition 7} doth not ſignifie any de- | Matthew's Credit in the Church of God, oughr to. outweigh any 
terminare certain time, bur doth include ſomerimes many.and di- | other Writings, pretending any ching contrary to whar he faith : 
int rimes, as ic muſt do here; for Foſiah began to Reign ar eighr | We are therefore obliged to believe they all lineally deſcended froni 
years hay +; DR chirry one years, ſo that he died at thirty | David ; but living in a private Ky and Condition, and _ 
'0l, IL Y A wr 


REED En —_—— 
+ mm ty. — 


= — — = 
V ———..._._-.- __—_ tn OD 0 
_ : 4 p) 

- = = LL 

Cy"; Ix A. : : £.4 
_ not. X.—- - == — = - 
—_— Y a —_—_—_ 
- . Cu _ » 


- 5 £- © 4 OED ———_——_— - T 
ERIN 
SS — a= => - 
=Y X —— — —_— —_ — _ - 
$ —_ = ny 5 NS 
, PAIR corny X w 


Chap. I St. MAT 


wrir not extending irs Hiſtory beyond Zorobabel's time, (rhe time 
when the Jews came our of Babylon,) it is no wonder that we have 
no better means than we have from Holy-writ to know their 1i- 
neal Deſcent from the Royal Family. That Matthew, in what he 
wrote, vas guided by the unerring Spirit, and that he had Rolls 
of Pedezro:s, which we want, we have reaſon to believe. This 1s 
enough tor us Chriſtians, who own the Books of the New as well as 
the 01d Te/t:ment, to be wrote by Perfons divinely inſpired; fo 
char as ro them, we have nothing to do, bur to reconcile Matthew 
and Luke both, whom we own to have had the ſame infallible In- 
ſpiration and Diretion. It Fews or Pagans argue from any other 
Tpich than this, 1 is enough totell chem, Thar the Fews kept exaft 
Genealogics, and more eſpecially as ro the Defcents in the Tribes of 
Fudeh and Levi, thar they might never be ar lots as to rae Meſ- 
fſiah, whom they expedted, as the Sm of David ;, nor yet as to the 
true Hizh-Prieſt. Tho' theſe Records, and Rolls of Genealogy, be 
now loſt, yet we have no reaſon to believe they were ſo 1n Mat- 
thew's time ; of which Genealogies, (as to rhis part) doubtleſs what 
Matthew ſaith was but a Copy, diretted by thar Holy Spirit, by 
which he was inſpired. 

16 And Jacob begat Joſeph, the Husband of Mary , 
of whom was born Jeſus, who is called Chriſt. 


How Luke comerh to make Foſeph the Son of Hcli, we ſhall 1n- 
quire (if God pleaſe) when we come to his third Chapter : Bur 
from this Verſe ariſeth a very weighty Queſtion; viz. Hw, or where- 
fore, the Evangeliſt in deriving the Pedegree of Chriſt , bringeth 
the Line down to Joſeph, from whom our Saviour did mt deſcend, being 
no fleſh of bis flaſh; Chriſt being che promiſed Meſſ.15, the Prophecy, 
1/a. 7. 14. muſt be, and was fulfillzd in him. A Virgin ſhall con- 
cerve and bear a Son, and th ſhalt ca!l his name Emanuel. Now 
it 79/-ph were nat the true, but only the /egal or ſupp;jed Father of 
Chriſt, What had the Evangeliſt ro do with his G-n2a/ozy? Many 
Anſwers are given to this ; tome think thar the Evangeliſt accom- 
modateth himſelf ro the Valgar Opinim; they rook him generally 
for cae rrue and natural Son of Zyep! : They faid, 1s nt this the 
Carpenter's Son? Bur then the Roly Spirix muſt have attempted 
to have proved a Concluſion true; trom a Mca7um that was falſe, 
which muſt by no nieans be allowed : Beſides, neither could this 
be Mrtthew's deſign, who afterwards relaterh the Myſtery of our 
Saviour's Inczrr.ation plain enough ; and rells us, v. 18. That Mary 
was fund with Child before Joſeph and ſhe came together. Orhers 
thereHre ſay, thar amongſt tne Jews the Genealogies of Women uſe 
n2t to be reckoned. How univerſally true that is, I cannor tel] : 
Generally it is very probable, as being uſual almoſt with all Na- 
nions to reckon Deſcents from the Males. In the preſent Caſe it is 

ranted by moſt that Lube deriveth the Deſcent of ary. Inthe pre- 
ne Caſe ir ſeemeth of high Concern, that the Genealogy both of Foſeph 
and ary ſhould be counted : Tho' our Saviour's bets che Meſſtas, 
could not have been proved from his being the Son of Zoſeph, for 
then he could nor have been the Son of a Virgin, (yer admitring the 
Jewiſh Error in that Caſe, nor knowing the Myſtery of Chriſt's 
Incarnation) Chriſt, by cheir own Confeſſion, was confirmed to be 
the Som of David, becauſe Foſeph was 10. On the other fide, Luke 
deriving Mary's Genealgy from David, and affirming Chriſt to be 
born of a Virgin eſpouſed, confirmed him to all the World to be 
both the Son of David, deſcending from Mary a Virgin, that was a 
Daughter ro one who was the Son of David; and alſo the true 
Meſſiah, in whom the Prophecy was fulfilled, of a Virgin's concei- 
wing and bearing a Sm: So that by the reckoning of che Generati- 
on of two Pertons, both of which were lineally deſcended from 
David, he was proved to be the Sonof David, borh co the Zzener- 
licy of the Jews, who could nor deny but Foſeph was ſo, and ro all 
Believers, both Fews and Gentiles, to whom God ſhould xive io be- 
lieve the Myſtery of the Incarnation by the Conception of the Aly 
Ghoſt, This ro me ſeems a ſufficient reaſon for the reckoning up 
our Saviour's Deſcent from David both by Father and Mcther. 
Which is advantaged, by + oro} Hey of ay was nor oaly rhe 
reputed Father, bur the legal Father of Criſt, and alcho* his being 
nor the natural, but the legal Father of Chrijt, will aoc prove hint 
che Son of David, further than to the Fews, who would have him to 
be che Natural Son of Foſeth;, yer the Genealogy, reckoned from 
Abraham & Foſeph, will prove Foſepb the Son of David, (whom 
they jud;ed Chriſt's narural Father,) fo as they had nothing ro 
ſay aviuſt rhar; and the other parts of this Goſpel, and this 
Chapter infced, wich the Geneal22y of Mary, will prove that he 
was both the 32 of David, and the crue Mets, as a Son born of a 
Virgin, Whereas ſome ſay, that Mary was of the Tribe of Levi, 
end think to prove ir by her being Couſen ro Elizabeth, who 1s ex- 
preſly called a Daughter of Aaron, Luk, 1. 1. Beſides, that Luke, 
ch. 3. plainly proverh her of the Tribe of Zudah, and of the Family 
of Dxvid; the Proof is by no ineans ſufficient : For alcho' the Law, 
Num. 36. 8,9. for the avoiding of a Confufion of Inherirances, 
commanded them to Marry within their Tribes, yet this Law con- 
cerned nor the Daughters of the Tribe of Levi, for thar Tribe had 
no Inheritance as the reſt, So as that Kindred might eaſily he, 
tho' A/ary was not of the Tribe of Levi, bur of Fudah, as indeed ſhe 
was. Bur leaving this Queſtion, ler us comme to_the Words of the 
Verſe: And 7acob begat Joſeph, the Husband of Mary; thar is, the 
eſpouſed Husband of Mary, Eſpouſals make a Marriage before God : 
The Angel afterward ſaith to Foſeph, ( bur yer eſpouſed ) Fear not 
to tahe unto thee Mary thy Wife: And he was ſoon after the Legal, 
Afual Husband of Mary ; of whom was born Feſus, who was called 
Chrift ; that Perſon, who was called Feſus by the DireGtton of the 
Angel, as we ſhall by and by fee, who wasalfo called Chri/t, which, 
as we ſaid, ſignifierh Aninted, and the ſame with Aeftiah. Ir 
is obſerved by ſome, that the Name Chriſt was given to Kings of 
Fudah (becauſe of their Anointing) before the Caprivity, bur ro 
none after, till he came who was the Chriſt ; God by that Provi- 
dence (if the Fews would have underſtood it) pointing our to 
them, that the Perſon was now come who was promiſed them un- 
der the Notion of the Meſſiah. Dan. 9. 25, 26. and whom they ex- 
petted, as appeareth from oh. 1. 41. G5 4+ 25. and no longer 


_ 


" 
T HEW. Ch, 
| 17 So all the generations from Abraham to Dayiq 
are fourteen generations: and from David to the car- 
rying away into Babylon, are fourteen generations . 


and trom the carrying away into Babylon unto Chrift 


are fourteen generations. 

The Evangelift, for Reaſons which we cannor fathom red 
ceth our S4viour's Progenicors to fourteen in each Perigd 'of wa x 
Jewiſh Stare, and in the firſt Period determining with Davig the » 
were no more. In the ſecond, he leaverh out three Kings defoen. 
ded trom the Daughrer of 4hab. In the third, which wa; ya 
the Captivity to Chriſt, there were doubtleſs more ; Lube reckonett 
up twenty tour (taking in-Chriſt for one) and agreerh in very few 
with Matthew, who was forced to leave our ſome ro keep to his 
number of fourteen: Nor doth Matthew ſpeak any thing falſe, or 
contradittious ro Luke, in ſaying there were fourteen, tho' there 
were more. Beſides, there might be many more Progenitors of 
Mary pn eg whofe Pedegree Matthew deriveth. 


Io L£ 
wiſe: when as his Mother Mary was eſpouſed tg 


Joſeph, before they came together, ſhe was foung 
with child of the Holy Ghoſt. 


The Evangeliſt prefacerh this extraordinary Birth of our Sayioy; 
in this manner. Now, the Birth of Feſus Chriſt was on this Wiſe, 
not in the ordinary Courſe and Manner in which Children ae 
conceived and brought forch into the World, bur in this wog. 
ful manner | when his Mother Mary was eſpouſed to Toſeph.) [3 
trothing, or Eſpouſing, was nothing elſe bur a folemn Promife of 
Marriage made by two Perſons each to other, at fucha diſtance of 
time as they agreed up2n. Ir was a decent uſage approved of (if 
not ordained) by God, as appears by Deut. 20. 7. That we are. 
liged ſtill co uſe ir, I dare nor fay, it might be a prudential Order 
and Conſtirurion of rhar State: There was nothing in it 7jpicg: 
nothing to bring 1t under the Notion of a Carnal Ordinance, (a 
the Apoſtle calls ſome of their Ordinances relaring to the Worſhip 
of. God.) It ſeemeth equitable, thar the Partics ro be Married might 
have ſome convenient time to think ſeriouſly of rhe great Change 
chey are ſoon to make in their Lives, and more ſolemnly ſeek uy- 
ro God for his Bleſſing upon them; as alſo char they might more 
treely diſcourſe together abour their Houſhold Afﬀeairs, and the 
Settlemenr of their Families, than che Modeſty of the Virgins of 
char Age would otherwiſe have allowed them :; Ir niade them Man 
and Wife before God, tho' they came nor together for ſome time 
after: The diſtance of time ſeemetrh ro have been letfc to the Agree. 
menr of Parties, and Parents. In this Cafe we cannot certzinly 
aſſert the diſtance, bur ir appearerh ro have been ſuch, as that ſhe 
was found with Child, before they came together. ary knew what 
che Evangeliſt here atierceth, thar ir was by the Holy Ghoſt : For 4 
ſhe muſt know, that ſhe had nt known Man, as ſhe told the Aye, 
Luke 1.34. ſo the Angel had fatisfied her, ſaying, v. 35. The Hb 
Ghoſt ſhall come upon thee, and the Power of the moſt High ſhall our- 
ſhadow thee : Therefore alſo that Holy thing which ſhall be born of the, 
ſhall be cailed the Son of God. It cannor be doubred bur that ſhe revel. 
ed this ro ſome of her Friends; bur how x came ro be found, or who 
found ir, we are not told. Foſeph, as yet, had no ſuch Revelatim, 
God would have his Son to be born ofa Virgin: 1, For the ful 
filling of the Promiſe, 1a. 7.14. 2. Of the Holy Ghoſt ; tha the 
Womb of the Virgin being ſanQified by the Spirit of Holineſs, 
chere might be no Tradu&ion of Original Sin. 3. Of a Betroathed 
Virzin. 1. That he might nor be under the Reproach of Illegitimacy, 
2, Nor his Mother ſubjefted ro the Puniſhmenr of the Judicial 
LaW. 3. That Mary's Stock might be reckoned by her betrothed 
Husband. 4. Thar Chriſt might have a Guardian in his Infancy, 
19 Then Joſeph her Husband being a juſt man, and 
not willing * to make her a publick example, was g, 


minded to put her away privily. 
ic was found ſhe was with Child ; poifibly her ſelf, or ſome of 

her Friands ro!d it to Foſeph her eſpouſed Husband. Is is plain 
from this Text, he came to the knowledge of ir; for upon ir, the 
Evangeliſt faich, he was minded to put her away privily « Had Foſehb 
ar this time heard and believed, that the Holy Ghoſt had come upm 
her, and the Power of the mo High overſhadowed her ; xing a good 
Man, he would nor have entertained Thoughts of putting her & 
way: Butcho' ſhe had before received this Revelation, and might 
potNibly have communicated ir ro ſome of her Friends, yet it't 
maniteft char her Husband 7ofeph had nor heard ir, or ar leaſt was 
nor eafie to believe a thing of 1o unuſual and extraordinary a Na- 
rure. Thar ſhe was with Child, was evident ; how ſhe came tobe 
ſo, was as yet hidden from him, in Nature, and' ſo incredible 
thing, as it had argued roo much of Eafineſs of belief for him to 
have believed, had not Foſeph had (as afterward .he had) a Divine 
Revelatim for it: He therefore receiving ſuch a Reporc, and fird- 
ing ir to be true, reſolves tro put her away in the privateſt manner 
he could, rather than ro expoſe her to a publick Shame, or tobe 
made a publick Example. Their being betrothed was a rhing pu 
lickly raken notice of ; and he could nor pur her away 1 privately, 
bur there muſt be Wirnefles of ir; the meaning therefore muſt be 
as privately as the Nature of the thing would bear. 7oſeph in thi 
Caſe had the choice of rhree Things: 1. He might, notwithſtand- 
ing this, have tahen her to his Houſe, as his Wife ; for the Law 0 
Divorce, or putting away, was but a Law, giving a Liberty 1n cale 
of a diſcerned Uncleanneſs to pur away the Wife ; ir d1d nota 
any under an Obligation ſo todo. 2. He might give her a Bill 9 
Divorce, and leave her with her Friends. Now thoſe killed in the 
65-4. Writings tell us this might be done; either, more privat®) 
xefore two or three Witneſſes putring a Writing of thar ImpoTf 
into her Boſom, or more openly and publickly befqye che Mag!- 
ſtrare. 3- He might, according to the Law, Deut, 22. 23, 24: Os 
have brought her forth to be examined, whether ſhe had only ſuffered 
Rape, or had her ſelf Conſented. If it was done with her Conlenh 
ſhe was by the Law to be ſtoned. Of theſe, {0 eph in his - 
Thoughts upon the Matter, and before he rightly did underſtan 


to be expedted, 


the thing, chuſerh the Second, and the milder parr, and I —_ 


p.[ 


ow the birth of Jeſus Chriſt was * on this *u;, 


p.l 
put 

chat 
was 

poſi 
then 
have 
heen 
was | 
betol 
marr. 
ways 
cerne 
che 1 
;ng 1: 
Reve! 
velati 
give 1 
could 
by tak 
will n« 


25 
Ange 
Ing, ] 
thee þ 
Ref, 

wha 
only 10: 
Tempet 
caken u 
was nov 
have hi 
Gabriel, 
that the 
Angel, 1 
while he 
way by 1 
One of t 
phets, N 
ces lomet 
of the I 
Dreams a! 

. to diſting 
chis place, 
when God 
a5 a perfec 
Dreams an 
times fo 
en to Joſe 
SIGs, 
re ſleep, 
quifition 11 
cur Lives. 
By which C 

wed and 1 
ws, by the 

nit to take t 

and fo thy 

me ro Witn 
in a due tin 
pened, whi 
l:it thou ſhi 
thee to be « 

F {elf, if thou 

any of theſe 

 nct as thou 

Whici) is conce 

(3 Luke ſpe 

reared in he 

mighty creat 

help of the C 


2I * An 
call his nat 
their fins, 


When the 
Wth F/4 Son, 4 
Natural Son, 
broughe forth 
Jeſus by thee, 
81ve him char 
was the Cuſto 
t their Child 

ewed them 
their Childre 
cxpr clſing the 
For , be ſhall ſa 
comes from a 
1s Name frg 
VIOUT to ſave 
Wanites their } 
ould believe 
Sts, Hereh 
the Meſſuas ſh 
M their En 
IM their Bo 
ullt of them 
8cr of them 
Yher Name ung 
M in any oth 


22 Now 


| Wh ich Was 


23 Beh Q 


DF) St. MATTHEW. Chap. 1. 


\t her away, bur in Th moſt privare manner the Law would in j brig forth a Son, and || they ſhall call his name Ema- || Or, 63s 


RE 4 F" 
Ie oe - 
athies 9*.c- - 
05 ated netthes 
#4 —- 


Cate allow him ; He did this (faith the Evangeliſt) becauſe he 
char Y it Man ; where the cerm Sixa:©- fignifterh Equitable, in op- 
_ ro Severity and Rigour 3, nor ought any to fay Foſeph in this 


Fave 4 himſelf an unjuſt Man, becauſe, by rhe Law, ſhe oughr to 


ned to Death; for thar is a Mittake; ſuppoſing ſhe had 
have _ — by Man, yer if ſhe had been Gd rhe Man only 
ny die, Deut. 22+ 28, 29. Or the might have been with Child 
was [0 her berrorhing 3 in which Caſe ſhe was only obliged ro 
_ him char had fo abuſed her; A kind and equitable Man al- 
_— coſumerh the beſt, eſpecially in a Caſe where Life is con- 
_ # "beſides, that no doubr Mary had by this time told Foſeph 
cer k, and what the Angel had faid to her; to which (ic be- 
; < *ncredible a thing, as not to be believed, bur upon a Divine 
ruelatio) tho' Joſeph was nor obliged, having as yer no ſuch Re- 
""/2rion, ro give a preſenr eafie Faichz yer he might reaſonably 
ive ſo much Cred1t, 45 10 reſolve upon the mildeſt Courſe he 
old rake, *tho' he was willing alfo to avoid the blorupon himſelf 
by raking her to him for his Wife, according to his Contraſt, God 
ill not Teave ſo good a Man long unreſolved what ro do. 


20 But while he thought on theſe things, behold, the 
Angel of the Lord appeared unto him ina dream, fay- 
ing, Joſeph, thou ſon of David, fear nor to take unto 
thee Mary thy Wite : for that which is conceived in 
ker, is of the Holy Ghoſt. 


what we have in this Verſe, afſureth us, That 7oſeph was not 
only inclined, by the Kindneſs and Benigniry of his own nacural 
Temper; and by his Charity to that moderate Reſolution he had 
caken up, -but alſo more immediately influenced by God, who 
was now ſending a Meſſenger to him, to rel! him what he would 
have him to do in this Caſe. Wherher this Angel was the Angel 
Gabriel, who, Luke tells us, ch, 1. 26. was ſent ro Mary, to tell her 
that the Power of the moſt High ſhould overſhadow her, or ſome other 
Angel, none can aflerr, an Angel ic was, He appeareth to 7oſeph 
while he was aſleep, and in and by a Dream. By Dreams was one 
way by which God revealed his Mind ro People formerly, Zeb. 1.1. 
One of thoſe ways by which God made himſelf known to Pro- 
phers, Numb. 12. 6. And nor to Prophets only, but ro Pagan Prin- 
ces ſometimes, as appeareth by the Inſtances we have in Scripture 
of the Dreams which Pharaoh and Nebuchadnezzar both had. 
Dreams are either Natural, or Supernatural, or Preternatural., How 
ro diſtinguiſh che former from the rwo latter, is not my work in 
chis place, and poſſibly a difficulc Task, eſpecially in our times, 
when God having ſpoken to us by his Son, and given us his Word 
as a perfe(t Rule, hath lefr off ordinary ſpeaking to his Prophets by 
Dreams and Viſions, tho' nor limited himſelf, bur that he may ſome- 
times ſo ſpeak. We are aſſured of the Truth of a Divine Revelati- 
en ro Joſeph, by this way of Dreams, while his Head was full of 
Thoughts what he was to do in this Caſe. God thinks of us when 
we ſleep, and one way or other will not be wanting ro our In- 
quiſition in Sincerity ro know his Will, in the difficalc Caſes of 
our Lives. The Angel faith unto Foſeph, Foſeph, thou Son of David : 
By which Compellation he lers him know, he was to be the Sup- 
p!ed and Legal, rho' not rhe Natural Father of the Meſſias, who 
ms, by the Confeffion of all Men, to he the Son of David. Fear 
nit to take to thee Mary thy Wife : She that is thy betrothed Wife, 
and ſo thy Wife in my fight; thou haſt eſpouſed her, and called 
me ro Witneſs, that chou wilt Conſummate this Marriage with her 
in adue time, and take her to thine Houſe. I ſee what hath hap- 
pened, which troubleth thy Thoughts ; poſſibly thou art afraid, 
:t thou ſhould'ſt offend me, marrying one who appeareth unto 
thee to be defiled ; or thou arrt afraid of bringing a blor upon thy 
| {:1f, if thou ſhould'ſt Conſummare this Marriage : Bur do nor fear 
any of theſe rhings, bur go on, and Conſurmmate thy Marriage ; ſhe 
is ner as thou ſuppoſeſt, or may'ſt fear, defiled by Man; for that 
which is conceived in her, is of the Holy Ghoſt, That Holy thing, 
(a3 Luke ſpeaks) that humane Body which is in her Womb, is 
creared in her, and is of the Holy Ghoſt. The Holy Ghoſt by his Al- 
mighty creating Power, hath ſupplied whar is wanting from the 
help of the Creature, as to ordinary Produdtons of this Nature. 


21 * And the {hall bring forth a Son, and thou ſhalt 


call his name Jeſus : for he ſhall fave his People from 
their fins. 


When the uſual time of Women is accompliſhed, ſhe ſhall bring 
firth a Som, and thou ſhalt call his name Feſus : He ſhall nor be thy 
Natural Son, but he ſhall be her Son; nor begot by thee, bur 
broughr forth by her; ſo, Fleſh of her Fleſh; His name ſhall be called 
7ſus by thee, or by his Mother : Ic.is the Will of God chou ſhould'ſt 
give him chat Name. For he ſhall ſave his People from their Sins. Ic 
2 the Cuſtom of the Fews (God's ancient People) to gives Names 
t2their Children, either expreffive of the Mercy which God had 
ſhewed them in giving them their Children, or of the Duty which 
tieir Children did owe unto God. This Name was given by God, 
expreſſing rhe Mercy of God to his' People, in giving them this Child. 
For, he ſhall ſave his People from their Sins, (faith the Angel) Feſus 
comes from an Hebrew Word, which ſignifies Salvation. Foſhua had 
his Name from the ſame Word, becauſe he was to be a Temporal 
Yviour to lave the Jews, the whole Body of the Fews from the Ca- 
"ay their Enemies. This eſis was to ſave his People, all that 
mon believe in his Name, whether Fews or Gentiles from their 
-"q Hereby the Angel hints the miſtabe of the Fews, in thinking 
me Meſtas ſhould be a Temporal Saviour, who ſhould ſave the Jews 

"Mm their Enemies ; minding them, that he was to ſave them nor 
— their Bodily, but Spiritual Enemies. From their Sins : The 

ult of them, and the Power of chem, and from the Eternal Dan- 
kc of them; and he alone ſhould do ir, 4s 4+ 12. There #s no 


ws Name under Heaven given amongſt Men, neither is there Salvati- 
" nary other. 


S., Now all this was done, that it might be fulfilled, 
| ach was ſpoken of the Lord by the Prophet, ſaying, 


23 Behold a Virgin ſhall be with child, and ſhall 


nuel, which being interprered. is God with us. name ſhall 


By theſe great Adts of Divine Providence, that which was ſpo- 
ken and propheſied of by Jſaiah, ch. 7. 14. ſpeaking by [nfpiration 
trom Gcd, was fulfilled : Tho' things are ſ2id in the Evanzeliſts, 
ro be fulfilled when che Types have had their Accompliſhmenc in 
the Antitype, and when ſomerhing cometh co pats much like, or 
bearing tome proportion to ſcmerhing which before happened in 
che World (as I ſhall ſhew hereatrer) yer I rake the Ser.te of 62- 
ing fulfilled, here to be, literally fulfilled ; believing fo much cf thar 
Prophecy, as is here quoted, d14 licerally concern Chriit, and none 
bur him. Bur we muſt cake heed of interpreting the Particle That, 
as ſignifying the End of God's Aim in this great Work of Provi- 
dence; for the End for which God ſent his Son into the World, 
was before expreſled; to ſave his Pe'ple from their Sins, not to tul- 
fil a Prophecy. That here only ſtznifics che Conſequence cf thasr 
ARof Divine Providence ; and che Senſe is but only chis : By :21{ this 
which was done, was fulfilled that which was jpohen «f the Lord by the 
Prophet, &c. But the Jews 1o much clamouring a-ainſt rhe Aps 
plication of char Texr, Paiah 7. 14. to Chriſt; and teme learned 
Interpreters thinking the fulfilling menticned ro be no mere thin 
the fulfilling of a Type in the Antitype, jc will be neceilary that we 
make ir appear that ir was literally fulfilled. To which I know 
of but rwo Prejudices: 1. That it could be no relief to Ahaz, nur to 
the Jews againſt their Senſe and Fear of their preſent D.mger, to tell 
chem that Chriſt ſhould be born of a Virgia eight hundred - years «fter. 
2, That whereas, v. 16. 1t 1s added, Before the Child ſh.:l know to 
refuſe the Evil, and chuſe the Go9d, the Land that thy alhorreſt ſhall 
be forſaken of both her Kings. Suppoſing rhoſe two Kings to be Pe- 
hah King of Iſrael, and Rezin King of Syria, who were ar that time 
Joined in a Siege againſt 7eruſalem, or ar leaſt preparins fer ir; and 
che Child mentioned, v.16. robe the Sinof a Virgin promiſed. v.14 
It could be no relief ro Ahaz, nor any great News for the Prophet 
to have told 4haz thar they ſhould borh leave the Country betore 
eight hundred years were Elapſed. Let us therefore firſt contider 
the Hiſtory ro which thar Prophecy related, Iaizh 7. 1. We are 
rold thar in the time of Ahaz, Rezin the King of Syria, and Pebab 
the Son of Remaliah the King of Iſrael went up towards Feruſalem to 
War againſt it, v. 2. And when it was told the Hiufe of David, (that is, 
Ahaz) ſaying, Syria is Confederate with Ephraim; and his Heart was 
moved, and the Heart of his People, as the Trees of the Wood are m9- 
ved with theWind, The Expedient which Ahaz thought upon in 
this diſtreſs, was ro get Tizlath Peleſer, the King of Aſſjria,to join with, 
and help him (which he afcerward did) hiring him wich the S1/- 
ver and Gold found in the Houſe of the Lord, and in the Treaſures of 
the King's Houſe, as we find 2 Kings 1.6, 7. This Conjun@ion wittt 
Iavlaters, was what the Lord had forbxdden, and had often declared 
his Abhorrence of. Toprevent it, v. 3. he ſends his Prophet 1/ai- 


| ah to him, Ja. 7. 3. Go forth now to meet Ahaz, thou, and Shear-ja- 


ſhub thy Son at the end of the upter Pool in the High-way of the Fuller's 
Field; And ſay unto him, Fear not, neither be f-tint-hearted, &c. In 
ſhorc, he afſurech him ia the Name of the Lord, That the Counſel 
of theſe two Rings ſhould not ſtand, nor come to paſs, v. 7. That 
within threeſcore and five years 1/rae! ſhnuld not be a People, &c. 
Ahaz knew not how to believe this. J21ah voffererh him trom God 
ro ask a Sizn for the Confirmation of his word, cirher in the heighth, 
or in the depth. Ahaz retuſeth ir under pretence that he would nor 
Tempt the Lord, as if it had becn a cempring Gcd to have acked a 
Sign at his Command : Ar this the Lord was artzry, as appearerh 
by the Propher's reply, v. 13. And he faid, Hear you now you Houſe 
of David, Is it a ſmall thing for you to weary Men, but will you weary 
my God alſo ? Then he goerh on, Therefore the Lira himſelf ſhall give 
you a Sien. Behold aVirgin, &c. There was nothing more ordi- 
nary inthe Prophets, than to comferr the People of God amongſt 
the 7ews in their Diſtrefies, with the Promiſe of the Meſſias : This 
we find they often did with reference to rhe Captivity of Babylon, 
and in other Cauſes of Diſtreſs and Trouble. And certainly that 
is the defign of the Propher here, in theſe words: Behold r Virgin 
ſhall conceive, and bear a Son, and ſhall call his name Emanuel. Ahaz 
had refuſed to believe the Promiſe God gave him, to detear the Coun- 
ſel cf theſe two Kingsz he had retufed to aska Sign for rhe Confirma- 
tion of God's Word. Well, ſaith the Prophet) Gcd ihall give you 
that fear him a Sign, he ſhall in his own time ſend you rhe eſtas, 
whoſe name ſhall be called Emanuel, and he ſhall te b»rn of a Virgin, 
Nor yer doth he leave 4haz and his People comferclets, as ro 
their preſent Diſtreſs: For, faith he, v. 16. Befye the Child fall 
know to refuſe the Evil, and to chuſe the Good, the Land that thou ab- 
horreft ſhall be forſaken of both her Kings. The Hebrew -5s "117 
Hamnagnar, which I think were berter cranſlated, This Child, chan the 
Child; tor 5q ſeems not to be a Relative (reterring to the Child 


mentioned in v. 14.) but a Demonſtrative, referrinz to the Son of 
Iſaiah Shear-jaſhub, whom God, v4 3. commanded tine Propher, go- 
ing to meet 4hax to carry with him, who (probably) vas a very 
oung Child. Sairh the Prophet, Here 1s a liccle Chtid whom God 
th Commanded me to brinz wich me: Before rhis Child be much 
older, this Land which chouart ſo much afraid of, ſhall be quicted 
of both thoſe Kings, who have now ſome Pofleſfion of it : For at 
this time, 2 Kings 16. 6. Kezin had taken Elath, a Ciry of Fudah 
and doubtleſs he and Pekah had taken divers places, for they were 
come up to 7eruſalem ir felf. And indeed if this be nor the Senſe, 
it is very hard to conceive to what purpoſe God commanded 1/41 
ro rake Shear-jaſhub with him, 1/a. 7. 3. when he went upon this 
Errand. $0 that, v. 14. remains as a Prophecy reſpeQing the Mej- 
fiah only, and given not tor any relict of unbelieving Abat as to his 
preſent Diſtreſs, bur for ſome relief ro God's People among the 
Fews, with reference to their Poſteriry. This will appear a much 
more probable Senſe rhan theirs, who think that Maber-ſhatel-haſh- 
baz is the Son mentioned, v. 14. whom we read of, 7a. 8. 3. who 
was born to 1/ajah of the Propheteſs, who, ſome think, was ar this 
time a Virgin, and was a Type of Chriſt ; for the Scripture doth 
nor tell us whether that Propheteſs was a Virgin, or a Widw: net- 
ther was it any great wonder, thata Virgin, being married, fhou! 
conceive, and bear a Son: Nor had this been any reliet ro Abax, as 
co his preſenc Diſtreſs; for this Virgin (if ſhe were ſuch) was yer 
to be matried, to conceive and beara Son; fo that according ” 
tha 


= 
LR =_— _ ' 
_ - -—- > Wow gn eng” Fo» © . 
F e # 
ks + 
__ RRC 2” <li 
Ren DI 
- > ws #194 07 / & + 
by D bh 4a an 61 -4 
> - oe " 1 6 


4 OY 

DD — - 

A 
nw 


Jr _ —_— A : 
a Ry - - > 
—_ 


nt Bn "F250" ” , a + 


4 


Chap. . 


thar Notion, we muſt allow three or four years, before Ahaz could 
have expeed rehef. This is turther advancaged by thar paflage, 
T\z. 8.18. Beh2!d T and the Children which the Loyd hath given me are 
for Signs : Nor the Child, bur the Children. Shear-jaſhub was tor a 
Sin of God's deliverance of the Fews trom thoſe two Kings; a- 
her-(bal.:l-haſþ>az was for a Sign of the DeſtruRtion cf che Iſraelites, 
within free years, and alſo of Syria, which tell out atterward. Thus, 
V.1.: remains a lireral Prophecy of Chriſt; for the Jewith Interpre- 
tacivn of ic concerning Hczekiah (born fifreen years atter) 1t 15 £00 
ridiculous ro be mencicned. 

24 Then Joſeph being raiſed from ſleep, did as the 
Angel of the Lord had bidden him, and took unto him 
his wite. ; | 

25 And knew her not, until ſhe had brought forth 
her firſt born Son; and he called his name Jeſus. 


The Will of God (as we heard) was revealed to 7iſeph 1n 4a 
Dream. It is God that giveth a Power to fleep, and a Power to 
awabe : Therefore it is 1aid, being raiſed from ſ{zep : He ſhewed both 
his Ezith and Obedience; his Faith in the Divine Revelation; a Cer- 
tainty of which he had, doubrlcſs, by ſome extraordinary Divine 
Impretſion ; and his Obedience to the divine Precepr, 11 thar, He 
roob unto him his Wife ;, that is, he tock her unto his tloute (tor be- 
trothed Virzins uſed to abide ar their own Friends Houles, ill the 
Conſummarion of the Marriage) and owning her as his Wie, yet 
not fully uſing her as ſuch; for the Text faith he hnew her not (a 
m::deſt Phraſe uſed from the bexinning of the Werid, as appears 
from Gen.g.1. ro expreſs the Conjugal AQ) tiil ſhe had brought forth 
her fir/t-born Son. Some make a greac ſtir 1n derermining, whether he 
knew her afterwards, Jea or na; Some of the Ancients Were ſtiff in 
their Opini::n, thar he did not; ſfoarethe Popiſh Writers, and many 
Froteftunt Interpreters. Mr. Calvin, Ithink, derermines beſt; That 
none will move fuch a Queſtion, bur ſuch as are unvarrant ably cur 
ri2us 3 nor contend for either part, bur ſuch as are unre./) onably quas- 
rel/ame. For ason the one fide, none can conclude char ſhe had 
more Children from the word Until, further than they can con- 
clude from ſl. 110. 1. that Chriſt ſhall mt fir ever fit at Þis Fa- 
ther's rizht hand ;, (che word Until being a Paracle only excluſive 
of a preceding time, not affirming the thing 1n turure time.) Nor 
doth che term, Firſt-born conclude any born afterwerd : So, on the 
other fide, there are no cogent Arguments to prove, that 3fary had 
no more Children by 7Fijſ2ph, We read of che Brother of our Lord, 
Galath. 1. 15. and of his Mother, and his Brethren, Matth. 12. 47. 
And tho' it Lc true, Brethren may fiznifie Xirſmer, according tO the 
Hebrow Diale&; vet thar it doth [> in theſe Texts,cannct be prov'd. 
The Holy Ghoſt had made uſe of rhe //irzin tor the Produ@tion of 
the Meſa ; why atter this her Womb ſhould be ſhur up, and 7o- 
ſeph rake her home to be his Wite, and nor uſe her as ſuch, I cat- 
not tell; nor yer, what reproach it could be to Mary, Cr to Our Sa- 
viour, Marriage being Ged's Ordinance, and the undefiled Bed h1- 
murable; and thofe who think our Saviour would have been di- 


honoured in any others lying in the lame Bed afrer him, ſeem to 
forger how much he humbled himfeif in Tying in that Bed firſt, 
and then in a Stable, and a Manger : We know he knew her not 
till Chriſt was born; whether he did aft-rward or no, we are wil- 
lingly ignorant, becauſe God hath nor rold us. And he called his 


name Jeſus : This is added to declare his Obedience to the Com- 
mand reccived by the Angel. We ſhall meer with more Circum- 
ſtances relaring to the Birtn of Cliriſt, when we come to the rwo 


firſt Chapters of Luke. 


CHAP.IE 


Wiſe Men of the Eaſt, direfted by a Star, come 13 Fernſalem, to know 
where Chriſt ſhould be barn. Herod being troubled, 1—3, He corſult- 
eth the Prieſts about the Place of his Birth, and ſendeth them to Beth- 
lehem; and to bring him word, 4—10. The wiſe men finding the 
Child and his Mother, worſhip, and offer him gifts : Warned of God, 
return nt to Herod, but to their Country another way, 11—12, Gd 
appearing to J-ſeph, biddeth him t9 flee into Egypt with Teſus and 
his Mother. The time of his abode there, 13—15. Herod, in his rage, 
billeth all the Children of Bethleherr, 16—18. After his Death, F + 
ſeph, by God's Command, returneth again with the young Child and his 
Abther into Galilee, and dwelt at Nazareth, 19—23. 


+ Luk, 2. I. O W when * Jeſus was born in Bethlehem of 


6, 7s 


Tudea. inthedays of Herod the King, behold 
there came wiſe men from rhe Eaft ro Jeruſalem, 


Thar 7oſeph, rhe legal Father of Jeſus, was of Nazareth in Galilee, 
appears irom Lxh.2.4. where we are told thar he went from thence 
unto the City of David, which is called Bethlehem, becauſe he was of 
the Fhuje cnd Lineage of David, to te taxed with M.ry his eſpoſed 

fo: For, it ſeems, ſo was the Emperor< decree, v. 1. And Cy- 
enizs, the Governour of Syria, .had crdercd tl:ar every one ſhould 
go to be taxed in his own Tribe and City, Thoſe words bofaryed. 
were added to diſtinguiſh the place from anvriter Bethlehem, which 
was in the Territories of Zebulon, Joſh. 19.15. The Verſe turcher 
rells us, that chis was in the days of Herod th? King; theſe words 
[the King] are added to diſtinguiſh him trom 772-24 the Tetrarch, 
AMatth, 14: 1. or other Hzrods. This was that Hood the Great, com- 
monly called the 4;c.1lomite, the Son of Antipater. There arethree 
Opinions of learned Men concerning him ; ſome think that he was 
by Birch an 7d«mean, and that his Mother was an 4-.:b14n ; and ſay, 
he was the firſt Foreigner that ever Reigned in Fadez, and that in 
him the Prophecy was fulfilled, Gen. 49. 10. Tat the Scepter ſhnld 
nt depart from Judah till Shiloh came. Others contend thar he was 
a Native 7ew. A third fort ſay, he was Originally an 1dumean, but 
thar his Predeceſſors had for ſme Ages been Protelyred ro the Jew- 
ib Religion ; Which laſt Opinion is judged the molt probable, 
FTuder was at that time ſubje&t ro the Romans, whote Senate made 
him King over it. Chrift being born ar this rime, it 1s ſaid, There 
came wiſe Men from the Eaſt i» Feruſalem. How long it was after 
that he was Born thar they came, the Scriprures rell us nor: Some 
think they came preſently ; ſome think wachin chirceen days; ſome 


SS MATTHEW. 


* 
Chip, 
think it was two years after. It is certain they were a; 

find Chriſt ar Helis v.8, 9. There he _ Born cg ” 
ciſed the eighth day : There his Mother accompliſhed the "ns 
her Purification, according to the Law ; Which days were ;:; 
three, as may be feen Levit. 12, 2, 3, &c. Lube tells us 4 37 
Thar atcer the accompliſhment of thoſe days, they brought hin 
Feruſalem, to pretent him (as their firſt-born) to the L537 E, : 
13. 2. and to offer a Sacrifice; and he tells us there, of his me _ 
with Simeon and Anna, and of their Prophefies, tw. 25 Go = 
39+ it is ſaid, When they had performed all things according bs the rn " 
the Lord, they returned into Galilee to their own City Nazareth a, 
not probable that theſe Wiſe Men came before our Lord was ©. 
ried to Feryſalem; (which was about fix Weeks after he wa; been) 
tor beſides, that they had a long Journey to come, after ſuch x nei 
made by the Wiſe Mens coming, it is no way probable tha; _ 
and 47ary would have carried him to Feruſalem, where the * 4 , 
was firſt made; eſpecially confidering Herod's Treuble abcur "Hay 
his ſending Meflengers prefently to flay all the Children in s, mM 
hem, and in all the Coaſts thereof, v. 16. Ir is therefore 1. 
probable that it was near two Years after the Birth of Chyjf _ 
they c. me; fer tho” no fuch thing can be concluded from Poaes 
Decree, which was for the ſlaying thoſe that were two zears 3 hb 
under ; yer one weuld think the following words ſignifie ſome Fn 
thing, according to the time which he had diligently inquired « - 
Wije Fen. He lad then made Inguiry about what time this Chit 
ſhould be born; pcſibly they could not tell him the exact time: 
bur 1t they ſaid, a year, or a year and half before, Herod (to = : 
ſure) might make his Decree for all to be ſlain trom #9 heyy 
ard under; but had they ſaid a month or fix weeks, it is not probe. 
ble Hcrod would have been fo barbarous as to have flain all In 
years old; ſo as if we wiſely conſider the Hiſtory of Scripture X 
is no way probable thar they came before Mary's Purificatim is 
ovcr, and their offering him to the Lord, &c. mentioned Lybs 2 Bi 
then how ſhould chey find him at Bethlehem ? Fer he went to i; 
Tareth, Like 2. 39. Anſ. Ged might order ſome motion of Th 
to Betolehem, (ot which the Scripture is filet.) Ic was a City $6 
1 the Tribe ro which he related, where probably he had Kindred: 
SO as, tho' Ir were a year or mcre after the Birth of Chriſt before 
theſe Wiſe Men came, yet it is poſſible they might find him a 
Bcethletiem, his Parents being as Gueſts there, cho' Inhabirants ac x;. 
zareth, This 1s enough to have ſpoken of the time when theſe 
Wiſe Men came, viz. Ar what diſtance from the Birth of M41 
conſidering that nothing can be in the Caſe certainly determined: 
It is yet a greater Queſtion, Who theſe Wiſe Men were? andiion 
what part of the World (here called the Eaſt) they came? The 
1ncertainties of Mens Concluſions in the Points of Curicjry 
rather than Profit, ler us know, how vainly Men ſearch fer Sui. 
tation, when God hath hidden a thing from them. They cay- 
not agree 1n the number of theſe Men;  fome will have” then 
rwelve ; ſome bur three, and they undertake to tell us their Nane 
tho' neither can they agree in ir: Some will havethem to be &n:; 
and the Papiſts make us believe they have their Sepulchers vic 
them to this day at Cologne; and by the number of the Tcmisthe 
know their number, and that Church hath a Feſtival for then 
(which is our Twelfth-day.) Theſe and an hundred more Fuhis 
there are about them. The Scripture faich no more than Wiſe Men 
and te'lerh us nothing of their number. Whether they were meer 
Aſtrologers, or ſuch as were $killed in Magical Arts, or more gene 
rally 7hiloſophers, is 7iviy diſputed, only we have their Obſer- 
tion of this extraordinary Star, together with what the Scripure 
tells us of the uſe thoſe Eaſtern Nations made of Aſtroligers, 
guide us to think they were ſuch as were Famous in their Cour 
try tor Aſt;ology : Tho? others think them Perſons skilled in Dir 
an Zumane Laws: The Scripture only calls them Wiſe Men; whe 
ther they came from che Eaſtern Parcs of the World, or thatpar 
of the World which lay Eafiward to the City of Feruſalem, is ao 
ther unproficable Queſtion : Pagans they were without doubr, vte 
ther Perſiuns or Arabians, or of ſome other Councry, is of nogret 
Concern for us to know, and almoſt impoſſible to determite, 
Theſe were the firſt Fruits of the Gentiles owning Chriſt as Kirg i 
the Fews, Whilſt he came amoneſt his own, and they received him 
not: Nordo I know any thing more worthy of our Obſervaim 
concerning them. Thoſe thar think ir worth the while to red 
what more is {aid concerning them, may read enough in Sparken, 
his Dub, Evang. Heinſius his Exercitat. Sac. and Poli Critica, which 
I rather chufe ro name than rhe Popiſo Writers, becauſe in ſomedt 
thefe he will find che Antidote, together with the Poiſin of thoſe Fi 
bulous Diſcourſes, and be taught a Pious Warinefs of obtrudingoll 
Wives Fables into Canmical Kiſtory, and lightly impoſing upontie 
Faith of ignorant People. 


2 Saying, Where is he that is born King of tie , 
Jews? for we have ſeen * his Star in the Eaſt, at, 


are come to worſhip him. 

Jeruſalem was the Metropolis of Fudea; thither they come, 25! 
the moſt likely place, where to receive SatisfaRtion : Of whom rhe 
inquired, the Scripture faith nor; bur ir is obſervable that the) 
rook notice that there was a Perſon born, who was to bean / wſh1- 
95 King of the Jewiſh Nation ; they ſpeak nor at all doubrtully 3 
ro thar. This Information they doubtleſs had from a Divine Re- 
velation; for alrho' there was an extraordinary Str appear, 
which might let them know that Ged had preduced, cr pi 
ducing ſo extraordinary a Work of Providence in the World, J* 
without a ſupernatural Interprerer they could not have made 10 
true and particular Interpretation of it, as upon the fight of it f0 
have come with ſuch a Confidence. ro Feruſulem ; affirming, U® 
there was a King of the Fews born, and thar this was his Sta; * 
Light which God had pur forch to dire& thar part of the werid, t0 
the true Meſſizh. All guefles ar the Nature of this Star, and 
Means haw the Wiſe Men came to know that the King if the 7" 
was born upon rhe ſigh of ir, and irs motion, are great incercal 
ties, God undoubtedly revealed thething unto them, and cauie 
th's excraordinary Star, as ac firſt, to appear, to confirm what ** 
rold them, fo art laſt ro appear, dire&ing them to the very Hole 1 


as of 


3 
ns 


which the young Child with his Mother were | and are come 7? iy 


ap: ] I £ 
(hip htm 
which | 
that Re 
Js variol 
ind wr 
fre; ented 
be upol 
iccordi 
nothin 
2 | 
troublkk 
Hzrad 
lem by | 
was 4 ne 
acquaint 
piectes 
112 that 
pur be1n; 
{15 ſhoul 
troubled 
Tews, of 
nary ME. 


in their 1 
the Govel 
werc alſo 
4 An 
Scribe 

\V here 
In this 
which wa: 
{tion whi 
Chrift ſhou 
vention 0! 
bett skille 
orderly M 
tem was 
he Profhe 
tie Queſti: 
Chriſt ſho 
the Wile ; 
ved, that | 
Propheciec 
of them th 
and Senſe 
expetted ( 
5 Ant 
for thus 
6 Ant 


, the leaſt 
1, thee ſha 


people I 
Ic was ( 
of Micah $ 
ticn, tellin: 
tliey cons 
confirming 
IHeftih tro! 
Micah Yom 
But thu B 
of Judah, » 
Ruler of hra 
We muſt 
Quora:1ons 
U them as. 
10 Which tÞ 
Sente. 2, 
fo the wor 
Anirer to 
Anſwer. 
Place 14s 1 
They Anſr 
ne Teftimc 
't Bethlehon 
5 1n Senſe 
o Fudh, 
trmerly ir 
Town with; 
Wite, whoſ 
It were not 1 
ter 2th} 
Whether jr 
tom Cale!” 
t te Tribe 
(21:13 mea 
POitbly in 
One, there 
Litth It was 
:- 22 Contr 
WTI ( if it 
ipetts ir v1 
ne Fugpoy 
te Birch - 
tie lea t:o 
call it ne / 
Wiich were 
Criſt. whr 
FeIpect ro 


i. II, St MATTHEW. 


ſhip kim] whether Worſhipping him here ſignifieth only a Civil Honour, 
which hole Eaſtern Nations ordinarily gave unto great Princes, Of 
that Religious Homage and Adoration, which was due unto the Meſſias, 
© yarioully opined by Interpreters. Ir is ſaid, v. 11, they fell down 
" 7 worſhipped him ; and when they had opened their Treaſures, they 
". ented unto him Gifts, Gold, Frankincenſe, and Myrrh. This might 
ben On a Civit, or upIn a Religious Account ; and doubtleſs was 
ccording tO £NE Revelation wiuch they had z concerning which, 
nothing can VE certainly derermined. 
> When Herod the King heard zhe/e things, hewas 
roubled, and all Jeruſalem with him. 
rd was hardly warm in his Kingdom, and had taken 7eruſa- 
1m by Force, and was therefore much concerned to hear that there 
was 4 new King born, and ſuppoſing him to have been all his Life 
acquainted with the Jewiſh Writings and Records, where were Pro- 
vecies of rhe Meſſtzs, under the Notion of a King, and not know- 
1 that the Kingdom of the Meſſtas was not to be of this World ;, 


but being patieiſed cf the ordinary Notion of the Jews, that the 3leſ- 
{x ſhould reſtore a Temporal Kingdom to Tſrael, he could nor bur be 
"roubled at the News of one born who was to be the King of the 
Jews, cſpecially having a Confirmation of it by ſuch an exrraordi- 
iry m£ans, 4s Perfons coming trom a far Country, and being di- 
-ot+cd to their Journey by ſome extraordinary impulſe upon the 
(ioke of a new Star, which pointed ro uae, as the place to which 
ir related. Aer:d upon this might juſtly chink that his newly ac- 
cuired Kingdom would nor latt long: Aud tho' moſt People zre 
ouickiy weary of Conguerors, yer their former miſeries being freſh 
in rhcir minds, and the renewing of them likely upon a Change in 
the Government, it 1s no: wonder 1t the generality of the People 
were alſo troubled. 

+ And when he had gathered all the chief Prieſts and 
Scribes of the people together, he demanded of them, 
\V here Chriſt ſhould be born, 

In this Perplexity, the King Herod callech a Synod or Convocation, 
which was made up of the Chief Prieſts and Scribes. The fingle Que- 
{tion which he propounderh to them, was to reſolve him, Where 
Chriſt ſhould be born 2 It1s moſt likely this was an extraordinary Con- 
vention of ſuch of cheſe Perſons as the King rhought fir, who were 
beſt skilled 1n che Law, and other Revelations of Holy writ, not any 
orderly Meeting of che ,Sunhedrim, for the Queſtion propcunded ro 
tem was of meer Eccleſiaſtical Concern ;, and to be reſolved trom 


the Prophecies and Writings of the Old Teſtament. The ſtating of 


tie Queſtion ro them, nor Where the King of the Fews, but where 
Chriſt ſhou[d be born, makes ir manifeſt, chart alcho* ( rhar we read of ) 
the Wiſe Men ſaid nothing of Chriſt, yer Herod preſently concei- 
ved, that this King of _— that was born, muſt be che Meſſt.zh 
Prophecied of Pſal. 2. and in Dan. 9g, He therefore defired ro know 
of them the place in which, according to their received Tradition, 
and Senſe ot che Prophecies of Holy writ, the Meſſtuh whom they 
expetted ( that is, Chriſt _) ſhould be born. 

5 And they {aid unto him. In Bethlehem of Judea ; 
for thus it 1s written by the Prophet, 

6 And thou Bethlehem 77 the land of Judah, art not 
. theleaſt * amongſt the Princes of Judah : for our of 
. thee ſhall come a Governour, that ihall || rule my 
people Tirael. 

Ic was ( as it ſeems )) ſo received a Tradition, and Interpretation 
of Micah 5. 2. that they gave him an Anſwer wichour any Heſita- 
ticn, telling him, He was to be born in Bethlehein of Judea : This 
tiey coniwm by the Prophecy of the Prophet Mica, ch. 5. v. 2. SO 
confirminzz the Son of the Virgin Mary ( at unawares) to be the 
Seth trom the Teſtimony of the Propher Micah. The words 1n 
jiicah fomerhing vary from thoſe here mentioned ; they are thus, 
But thi Bethlebem-Ephrata, thy thou be little amongſt the 77291 -nds 
of Tudah, yet out of thee ſhall come forth unto te one, that us, to ve 
Ruler of hrael , whe goings forth have been of Old, from Everlaſting. 
We muſt know that the Writers of the New Teſtament in their 
Quora:ions our of the Old Teftcment, ordinarily quote only fo much 
% them as makes to their purpoſe, and nctalways in the very terin: 
19 Which they are found in che Old Teſtament, bur keepiug to rhe 
Senie, 2, Thar it is more rhan probable that the Evangeliſt keeps 
to the words in which the Prieſts and Scribes delivered 1n cheir 
Anirrer to the Ring ; fer in this Relation he 1s bur recirin;; their 
Anſwer. The ſole Queſtion propunded ro them was, What the 
place was where the Meſſiah, according, to their Records, was to be born 2 
tacy Anſwer, in Bethlehem-Fud:i they prove their Anſwer trom 
me Teſtimony of the Propher. It any obje& that the Prophet calls 
it bethleh2m-Ephrat2, not Bethlehem-Fudah : The Anſwer 18, thar it 
k in Senfe the ſame, for Bethlehem-Ephrata was within the Tribe 
& Jadzh. Te ſhould feem by Gen. 35. 19. avd 48. 7. that it was 
tormerly in Z:c53's time called Ephrah. Some think char it was a 
Town within Caleb's portion, and c:!;ed Ephratah from his ſecond 
Wite, whoſe name was Erbr.ib, or Ephratah, 1 Chron. 2. 19, 50. if 
I were not rhe ſame place only fortified anew. We read of ano- 
ter Bthiohom in Tud:h, builded by Rehoboam, 2 Chron. 11. 6. 
Whether it had this Addition from irs old Name, in Facob's rime, or 
lom Cates Wite, Or t9 diſtinguiſh it trom Bethlehem belonzing 
0 Ie Tribe of Zabuln, is hard to fay. Ir is plain, that that B#h- 
{27:15 meant, both by Micah and Mzither, which was in Judah , 
PLibly in Tract of time rhe Addirion Frbratah was loſt, Bur ſay 
one, there ts a Comradiion herwixr Mrcah and Matthew z Meah 
liith It was the leaſt ; 3M:tchew ſaith it was nt the lealt. Anſ. Here 
29 Conrradi&tion ; contider Bethlehem ic ſelf, ic was bur a ſmall 
City; (1tit were in CaleZ's Lor, it is nor named, ) bur in other re- 
'pette it was nor the leaſt, Ir was of old, famous for Tbzan, one of 
me fudges, for Elimelech, Braz, eſſe, David, and now laft of all for 
tie Lirth of Chriſt, with reſpe#t ro which the Evangeliſt calls ir not 
wn, = ne rectter rac Scrives and Prieſts words, they might 
_— ne le1ft upon the account of Boaz, Jeſſe and David, all 
ry were born or dwelt there ; and particularly with reſpett to 
OR who was born there : The Prophet calls it the leaft with 
**PLtt 10. 155 Stare in his time, the Evangeliſt not the leaſt wich 


reſpedt to irs Srate then, its Scate being magnified by the Birth of 
Chriſt, Micah ſaith, amongſt the Thouſands, Matthew amongſt the 
Princes. It 1s the ſame thing for Nun. 1. 16. their Princes were 
Heads of Thouſands in Iſrael. The Jews would by no means have 
this Text interpreted of Chriſt, bur either of Zorobabel or David: 
bur as ro Zorobabel, he was born in Babylon, nor in Bethlehem : and 
David was dead long betore this Prophecy ; neither could the fol- 
lowing words | whoſe goings forth have been old even from Everlaſt- 
ing ] agree to Zorobabel, or David : Zorobabels name tells us where 
he was born ; and we never read that Bethlehem was thus celebra- 
red with reterence to David, tho he was born there, 1 Sam. 15. x. 
and 17. 58. upon which account ir is called the Cicy of David, 
Luke 2. 4. The Prophecy certainly related ro Chriſt, and him only, 
and ſo is interpreted by the Chaldee Paraphraſt, who ſome think 
was one of this Councel called by Herod in this Cauſe. 


7 Then Herod when he had privily called the wiſe 
men enquired of them diligently what time the far 
appeared. 

Herod having heard the Anſwer of the Prieſts and Scribes, did not 
think fic ro make any noiſe of it amongſt the People z he knew the 
Jews were apt enough to rebel, and being ſo Jare a Conqueror had 
no reaſon to preſume much of their Gocd-Will cowards him ; he 
therefore calls che-Wiſe Men privily, and takes no notice of any King 
they talker of, bur only 1nquireth the rime, When this new Star firſt 
appeared, To what end he made this enquiry, may be learned from 
v. 15, only rhar he might be able ro Govern himſelf in his bloody 
Decree, thac he might neither deſtroy more Children than would 
ſerve his preſent Defign, nor yer leave this Child behind, 


8 And he ſent them to Bethlehem. and ſaid, Go. and 
ſearch diligently for the young child z and when you 
have found h:m2, bring me word again, that I may come 
and worſhip him alſo. 

He tells the Wiſe Men, that Bethlehem was the place, wherein his 
Wite Men had informed him, thac the King of the Fews was to be 
bin, and ſends them chither wich theſe Inſtructions : That they 
thould go, and ſearch diligently there for the young Child, whom he 
doth nor call King, thereby dilſembling his bloody Mind, and ma- 
king as it he had no jealouſie of him ; yer wichal he ſuggeſts to 
chem, rhat he was like to be a Greaz Prince, or elfe he would never 
have prerended that he had a Deſign, when once he knew cercain- 
ly where he was, to g9 and pay an Hmage to him, This Text lets 
us ſee the malignity of Herod's Heart, and indeed of all wicked 
men's Hearts, Herod knew that the Meſtah was born. The Extra- 
ordinary Star, and the coming of the Wiſe Men, the Prieſts and 
Scribes Anſwer to him could nor bur confirm him that he was born, 
who was long fince Promiſed as a King and Governor to Iſrael , yer 
could he nor obtain of his wrerched Heart, to comply with the 
Counſels of God, bur contrary to his own Conviftions, ſhews the 
folly of his Hearr, in thinking ic was in his Power to fruſtrate the 
Divine Counſels, and be roo hard for God himſelf ; nor is his folly 
leſs remarkable, not ſending any of his own Courtiers wich chem, 
whom he might better have ruſted than meer Strangers, ro have 
come back, and brought him an account : Bur whether it was, that 
he durſt not cruſt any of the Jews, or that he was over-credulous 
in cruſting to the innocent Simplicity of theſe Wiſe Men, being 
nor made acquainted wich his Intentions, he ſuffereth rhem to go 
alone upcn this Errand, whom he mighr poſſibly think, wouid be 
leaſt ſulpe&ed of 7oſeph and Mary ; fo as ar their rerura he ſhould 
have a m re full account of all Circumſtances concerning him, than 
he culd have expetted from one who had been raken notice cf, as 
one that belonged to his Courr. 


9 And when they had heard the King. they depar- 
ted ; and lo, the Star which they ſaw in the Eaſt.,went 
betore them, till 1t came, and ſtood. over where the 
young child was. 

They departed toward Bethlehem-Fudah, how long their Jour- 
ney was, we cannot tell. Some wonder, thar none of the Zews did 
attend them in their Journey, coming cur of their own Country up- 
on ſuch a Diſcvery, and impure it eirher to the 7-ws Fear of the 
i*rant under winch chey were, or to the blindneſs and hardnets of 
thcir Hearts, fcr Sr. 7ohn tells us he came among his own, ond they re- 
ceived him not ; bur 1t 1s poſſible that the Wiſe Mens immediare Ap- 
plications were to the Court, as thinking that the moſt probable 
place to hear of ore that ſhould be born King of the Jews ; and ir 
may be queſti-»ned wherher Herod, tho* he called the Scribes, and the 
Prieſts cogerher rold rhem, that his Summoning ot chem was o-cafion- 
ed by the coming, of rhe iſe Men, for che only Queſtion he propoun- 
ded io them, was, Where Ch:ijt was to be born £ Which they mi.zhr un- 
derſtand without any Relation ro che Wile Mens Queſtion. Nor 
is it probable that Herod ſhould be more open than needed in pub- 
liſhing the coming of theſe Wiſe 3/en, or their Errand, Yer, the 
Texr ſaying, that not only Herod, but all Feruſalem was trouble, 
ſuggeſts ro us that both their Coming, and che Occaſion of ir, was 
noiſed abroad, more than prebably A-rod could have withed, but 
ic is like their Diſmifſion was fo private, thar ifany cfthe Jews had 
had an Heart and Courage enougi to have gone with them, yet 
they mizhr not have had Opportunity. Ir 15 more admirable, that 
Herod ſent none that he could ſecurely truſt with chem : Bur the 
Hand of God was in this thing. They ſhall be hid, whwm he will hides 
The Lord had prepared them a berrer Guide, The Sr, which 
probably had diſappeared for a zocd cime, while they were upon 
their Journey to Feru/alem ( for they needed no Star to guide them 
to ſo Famous a place) as ſoon as they were our © 7eru/alem ap- 
peared again | and went before them, till it c:me, and ji514 over where 
the young Child was ] probably, the Star appeared in che lower Re- 
gion, and tho! it could nor point ſo direttly char rhey ſhould know 
the very Houſe, yer ir mighr poiat ſo near, as by mmquiry chey might 
eafily find ir, eſpecially by the influence oft God up2n their Spirits, 
which doubtleſs they did nor wanr, Whether thefe Wiſe Men 
were of the Poſterity of Balan, who Prophetied, Num. 24.17, 19, 
of a Scepter that fhmld ariſe out of Tract, that ſhould ſmite the Corners 
of Moab, one that ſp:1d have Doininion, 6c, Or this Stay had any 

Relation 


Chap. 11. 


2 - 
— 
> wo 
_ 
4 * 


” ys Ek cab Pe Ge ap 


oL. . 
j/ _ pets + 


So St bt. 


-. 


-— 


Chan. II. St: M AT 


Relation to the Star mentioned there, v. 17. is very incertain : Tt 
is more probable rhar theſe Wiſe Men came a far —_ PP; 
1nd chart the S:ar there mentioned, was not to be underſtood in a 
1::eral Senſe, bur berrer expounded by Simeon, Luk. 2.32. A Light 
79 liehten the Gentiles, and to be the Glory of his People Iſrael. 

10 And when they ſaw the Star, they rejoyced with 
exceeding great joy. 

Joy is bur tlie natural Conſequent of Defire ſatisfied. They had 
in their own Country ſeen an extraordinary Star, which, accord- 
inz to the Rules of rheir own Art, they might gueſs to be an Indi- 
cation of a great Prince born; or by a Divine Revelation chey might 
know ro be ſo. This kindled in them a ſtrong Deſire ro go and 
pay an Homage to him. Upon this they rake a long Journey to Je- 
ru/alem : When they come there, they were more tully confirmed 
from che Anſiver of the Prieſts and Scribes, that there was a Chriſt 
to be born in Bethlehem-Fudah ; thither they go in their Journey; 
the ſame Star they had before ſeen, appears t0 rhem again, Con- 
firming both rheir former Apprehenſions, and by 1ts ſtanding over 
Bethlehem, and a particular Houſe in it (to their Apprehenſions ) 
they were fully confirmed, thac they had right Inſtrutions from 
Herd, aud rejoyced in the ſatisfaction of their Deſires naturally , 
and poſſibly rejoyced Spiritually in this matter of Foy to all People, 
if they had (as is probable) a Spiricual Illumination , and believed 
thar rhis Chriſt was alſo 7eſ#, one come to fave both 7Zews and Gen- 
tiles from their ſins. : 

11 Whenthey were come into the houſe, they ſaw 


the young child with Mary his Mother, and fell down 
and worſhipped him : and when they had opened their 


| Oroffered Treaſures, they || preſented unto him Gifts, Gold, and 


Frankincenſe and Myrrh. 

How long the Virgin Mary and her Holy Child had been there, 
is not expreſſed ;z thole that think that theſe Wiſe Men came within 
fix Weeks or two Months, judge that oſeph and Mary came thi- 
ther from 7eruſalemafter that he had been there offered ro the Lord; 
of which you read Luke 2, Bur they are forced to uphold this, ro 
interpret; Luke 2. 39. which faith, That after they had performed all 
things according to the Law of the Lord, they returned into Galilee to 
their own City Nazareth, of a conſiderable time after they had 
performed theſe things; which ſeemeth ſomething hard and needles; 
eſpecially conſidering Nazareth was Foſeph's own City, 1. e. The City 
where his fixed Habitation was: It is moſt probable, that they, 
atter ſo long abſence, went right home; and if the Wiſe men (which 
is ſaid ) found thent in Bethlehem, they were gone thither again ro 
viſir ſome Relations. They ſaw the young Child with Mary his Mo- 
ther ; under whart other Circumſtances, the Scripture ſairch not; bur 
queſtionleſs they were very poor and mean, which 15 a very ſtrong 
inducement to us to believe, that they had a Spiritual Divine Reve- 
latimm, That this was a King, whoſe Kingdom was not of this World, 
the true Meſſtah, and Saviour of the World ;, they would hardly elſe 
have treated a poor Infant in an ordinary Houſe, and no more at- 
rended, ar the rate they did; for the Text faith | they fell down and 
worſhipped him ] an uſual Homage indeed which the Eaſtern Nations 
paid to Princes : Bur they uſed then ro have better Evidences of 
their Royal State and Dignity, than theſe Wiſe Men ſeemed to have 
had, if they had not beſides the Star, a Divine Revelation what 
manner of King this was to be, We may therefore rather judge 
that their Revelation extended not only to the Birth of a King, bur 
of ſuch a King as indeed he was the Erernal Son of God cloathed 
wich humane Fleſh ; and that their falling down and wor ſpipping 
him, is to be underſtood of a Divine Worſhip they paid to him, as 
the Saviour of the World : And ſothey were the Firſt-truitsof rhe. 
Gentiles, owning and believing in the Lord _ Chriſt ; and that 
their following Offerings ro him were upon rhar account; for open- 
ing their Treafures, they preſented to him Gold, Frankincenſe and 
Myrrh, The Gueſſes of thoſe who think that they offered him 
Gold, as ro a King, Frankincenſe as an High-Prieſt, and Myrrh to 
ſeeten the place where he was, I take to be bur the Produdt of 
Luxuriant Fancies. Ir is moſt certain, rhat thoſe Eaſtern People 
ſeldom came to their Princes without ſome Preſents, and that 
cheir Preſents were uſually of the moſt choice things their Coun- 
ery afforded, this is plain from Gen. 43. v. 11. And if what Natu- 
raliſts tell us be true, that Myrrh was only to be found in Arabia, 
and Franbincenſe in Sabea, (a part of Arabia ) and thar Country alſo 
had Gold, ( which it is plain that ir had, from 2 Chron. g. 14.) it 
makes a very probable Argument, that theſe Wiſe Men came from 
Arabia, which was full of Men that were Aſtrologers. The Provi- 
dence of God was wonderfully ſeen in thefe Pretents, by them pro- 
viding for the Suſtenance of Foſeph and Mary, and Feſs, in thar Exile 
which they were ſoon after ro endure z for other Allegorical and 
MyRical Siznifications of theſe Preſents, they are but Conjeftures, 


and the Exuberancies of Mens Fancies. 
12 And being warned of God in a dream, that they 
ſhould not return to Herod, they departed into their 


own Country another way. 

Now the wiſe God beginneth to defeat the crafty Counſels of 
Herod, whoſe bloody Hand he had ſtayed, till he ſhould from the Wiſe 
Men have had a perfet intelligence concerning this new-born King. 
Gcd in a Dream appeareth ro the Wiſe Men, and warneth them to 
£0 no more to Herod, The Wiſe Men came with no intention to 
ſerve Herod's bloody Deſigns, but came in the Simplicity of their 
Hearts, This Simplicity of theirs, Herod would have abuſed, ro have 
made them Acceſfaries to his Guilr, God will not ſuffer it: He who 
walbeth uprightly, walks ſafely. Thus the Integrity of Abimelech in 
raking Surah, protetted him from Guilt with reference to her, Gen. 
20. 6. The word which we here tranſlate warned of God, 1s uſed 
of Perſons whom God is pleaſed to Honour fo far as ro Diſcourſe 
with, either by himſelf or an Angel, Luke 2. 26. Aﬀs 10. 22. Heb. 8. 5, 
and 11. 7. Thus hath God honoured theſe Wiſe Men, whoſe Hearts 
were inclined towards him and his Chriſt. 1. By giving them a Star 
to guide them. 2. Confirming their Hearts by his Word, from the 
Mouths of the Chiet Priefts and Scribes, that they were not mi- 
ſtaken concerning the Star and its Indication. 3. By ſpeaking him- 


THEW Chi 


ſelf to them, to keep them from any Guilr, or bein 
Acceſlaries any way to that bloody Tragedy, which, - Fug bog as 
parture, he knew would be atted : They rake another way to on 


cheir own Country, ſo we hear of them no more. 0 

13 And when they were departed, Behold. th ar 
of the Lord appeared to Joſeph in a dream, Paying 3 an 
riſe, and take the young child and his mother, and flee unl 


into Egypt, and be thou there until I bring th | En 
tor Herod will ſeek the young child ro + ng oo: | 


How long it was before this Apparition ro Joſeph, the Sep; foi 
ſaith nor; bur admicting what 1s atfirmed by tome Geographers = _ 
Bethlehem-Zudah was but two days Journey from Feru/alem "i at not 


nor be preſumed long, for Herod had ( doubtleſs) quick Intelligence ; Aﬀti 


of the Wiſe Mens motions. Here was a ſecond Temptation y back 
Zeſeph, who was of no great Quality, (a Carpenter) and might j1 N mon 
anxious Thoughts how he in Egypt ſhould maintain himſelf, bi _ 


Wite and Child ; bur oſeph knew, That the Earth was the 7., ? 
and the fulneſs thereof. " Tho' Egypt therefore was a hon wy _ q - B. 
ters, and he had no viſible way of Subſiſtence there, yer we thay | ar, | 


hear thar none of thele things made him heſitate. Zgyp; was n os 
to Paleſtina, and the Dominions of another Prince, within which D 4 wm 
rod had nothing to do ; Feroboam fled thicher, 1 King. 11, go, | p =_ 
ſtaid there till che death of Solomon. God's Precepr here di m wo 
only indicate his Care and ſpecial Providence for, and over this = very 
Child, bur included a Promiſe of Syſtenance and Support tor ir ms take T 
its Parents : And the Lord further atlured 7oſeph, That he thoul = 
not dye in that Exile, for he would likewiſe cell him the time «he wr 
he ſhould come back. Chriſt's time ro dye was nor yer come = hee 
therefore he would have him our of the way ; for he who ſearcheh hays 
the Heart, and trieth rhe Reins, and knowerh the Thoughts 0 Man , * : ; 
afar off, did know that Herod would ſeek, the young Child to dj, I 
him. He ſhould bur ſeek ir, for God had reſolved to preſerye . th h 

buthe would ſhew the Malice of his Hearr in ſeeking of it; there. wag 
tore God commands him to go away, and dire&eth him Whither tg wm . 
g0. The certainty of an iſſue from rhe Divine Counſels, or a Divine - F b 
Revelation, ought not to encourage us in the neglett ot any rap, Fan = 
nal and juſt means for the obraining of ir. Tho' God will proyide ext we 
tor his Church and People ; yer it 1s his Will they ſhould uſe x1 " W 
juſt and lawful means for their own Preſervation. p Oy - 
14 When he aroſe, he took the young child and tj berwixr 
mother by night, and departed into Egypt, | __ 
15 And was there until the death of Herod, that i ng Fs 
might be fulfilled which was ſpoken of the Lor1,by the judgmen 


Propher, ſaying, Out of Egypr have I called my Sn, S 17) 


True Faith, or Afent to a Divine Revelation, always produceth 2 Jeremy 
Obedience to the Precept of ir. Thus it did in che Wile Men; thu b 18 ] 
in Foſeph ; thus every where in Holy writ : By w::ich we my , 
learn, Thar they indeed believe nor the Scriptures to be the Word | Hm Lon 
of God, who take no Care to live up to the Rule of Life preti = WecPin; 
bed in them. Foſeph nor only obeyed, bur readily and preſently che: for ted, 
ed : When he aroſe, he took rhe young Child, and Mary his Miu, E The T 
The Poverty of our Sayiour's Parents 1s not obſcurely varhcrel fulflled x 
from this haſty motion of 7oſeph. His motion was nor delayed fir 1 oreat M 
che packing up of Gocds, garhering in of Debrs, Fc. It he luſt ay Children | 
thing by his haſte, yer he carried wich kim che Promile, and ipeci! * fulfilled, tl 
Care of God for him, and lus; yet he moverth /rudentiall, ad Rama { 
rheretore he beginnerh his Journey by Vight, when leaſt notice cout Place tro 
be taken of his motion. We are not to put God upor iwerkins There wer 
Miracles for our Preſervation, tho* we have never 1o may fit: merty call 
Promiſes, when it may be obtained in the uie of means : Tlie) :r: of Benjami 
God's Security given to Creatures, whom he hath endued wi. :Ret Coalts ther 


ſon, and expeQs that we ſhould uſe ir, while we yer cruſt in tis 
Word, Weare norrold into whar part of Ezypt Jef, wet, ni Rache! was 
how long he ſtaid there : Some lay f1x or leven Years; others, but rous of Chi 
three or four Months : The Text laich, He was there us.til the Det! = uſed, to « 
of Herod, Some fay that was betore the Pajchal Solemnity that Yell & their Child 
Bur theſe thinys are great incertainties : Ir 1s certain tie ſaid ther cauſed * 
till Zerod died ; but when that certainly was, we k:9w not ; nt Benjamin at 
15 it material for us to be curious in enquiring. [| That it mg.” © mentioned 
fulfilled which was ſp:hen of the Lord by the Prophet, ſrying, Cit j 2h , 
Ezypt have I called my Son. | That it might be fulfilled, is a Phrale * E 19 By 
often meer with in the New Teſtament, to declare the Harmony 2 of the Lo 


both Ben 11a 


Scripture, and the Faichfulneſs of God in fulfilling the Propheſrzs,ct | 20 Sa 
Promiſes of the Old Teſtament. Spanhemiws tells us, che Scrixuit WE his morh 
is ſaid ro be fulfilled Properly or Improperly : Properiy, two Was, pr Ire de- 
either Literally, or Myſtically, Improperly, Secondariiy, when oat * : ead 
ſuch like thing hap'neth as was before torerold, or ſpoken c:, That js, 
an Example is brought Parallel to ſome former Example. Liter) they fay, n 
che Scripture is {aid to be fulfilled, 1. When a thing befere Iv ” believe Hi 
pheſicd of, or Promiſed, cometh to paſs. Thus, ch. 1. 22. the it% \; pe ” Divin 
''4 E Out! 


phecy, 1/47. 14. was Literally fulfilled ; ſo Micah 5. 2. was Literal 


fulfilled, ch; 2. 6. by Chriſt's being born in Bethlehem : fo Zec". 5.5 A _ had pr 
was Literally fulfilled, chap. 21. 5. Or eiſe, 2. When the Tize #1" WF : EE ) ler 7, 
filled in the Antitype. Thus we read of many Scriptures of che 0i | Pw pangs 

FODelarus wi 


Teſtament fulfilled in Chriſt ; ſeveral things abour the Puſh 
Lamb, the Brazen Serpent, Solomon, David, Jonas, &c. Improperly tie 
Scripture is ſaid ro be fulfilled, when any thing is reported as dot 
which bear a proportion to ſomething before recorded in Hel 
writ, as /pohen or done ; thus Chriſt applieth the ſame thing t0 rhe 
Hypocrites which lived in his time, which 7/aiah ſpake of choſe who 
lived in his time, I/a. 29.13. chap. 15. 7, 8 fo 13. 14. 14 6, 9 
This Divines call a Fulfilling, per Accommodationem, aut Tranſm 


ro Rome, a 
 iﬀferhe was 
= © return 5 


Yart-,, a 
SLATY «NICE, 


ow £ 


21 And 
Mther_ 1 


nem. The Queſtion is, Whether this Scripture which is, Hoſea 11-6 WW 22 By 
was fulfilled in Chri/t's being carried into Egypt, Properly or 17” Be 11 Tyuges 
perly ; There is a great Variety of Opinions ; thoſe poſſibly jus, Wee a6; 4 to 
beſt, who think that the I/raelires going into, and coming out © Be od 1 


Egypt, was a Type of Chriſt's going into Egypt, being preſerve” By Cat: 
there, and coming out again. Matthew faith the Scripture 9% 1” ue Hllee, 


filled, wherher Properly or Improperly, is not much material for = ; BD The ee 

know. I have only added thus much ro ſhorten my Dilcov® hee uu 

hereafter where we ſhall meet with this Phraſe, E? Governoure 
16 The) WF © ivigh, 


} 


—_— Nd » = ent li mes. d 


- 
*% 
In 
Non 
& 
ET 
2% 
3 
5 
Y 
''S 
M0 
7 
= 
Ry 
-{® 
428 
"4 
4 
© 
xz 
Rr 
Woe: 
8 
Fg 
_ 
a 
4 
+ va 
45 
2H 
In 
BP 
0 a, 
S 
IL 
b 
Dey: 
IP. 2, 
a 
$77 
Eel 
F 
9 
- 
BR, 
T 
Pe 
-— 2 
2 
0 
7 
4c 
D 
i 
a 
4 
_ 
” 
9 
3» 
* 
.7 
p- 33 
WE". 
"Ip 
E 
"2 
12 
<5 
Ke 
& 
H 
o 
Y 
bs 
ow 
43 
WV) 
wha 
bo 


p. II. 


St M AT 


14 Then Herod, when he ſaw that he was mocked 
of the wiſe men, was exceeding wroth,and ſent forth, 
and {ſew all th? children which were iti Bethlehem, 
1nd in all che coalts thereof, from rwo years old and 
nder.according to the time which he had diligently 
enquired of the wile men. 


Herod now expounds what he meant by his Coming and Wor- 
binning ChriSt alſ?, which he talked of v. 8. When he ſaw that he 
4 ncked, &c. really mocked by their coming no more to him z 
"or that chey uſed any mocking Language, or deſigned by their 
ations to deceive him bur probably inrended ro have gone 
Mick according to his Defire, bur thar they were otherwiſe ad- 
monithed by God in a Dream.[| He was exceeding wroth ; | as great 
Perſons uſe to be when they ſee any grear Deſ1zn they have, fru- 
ſtrared by their Inferiors, Cont ſent forth and ſl-w all the Children 
in Bethlehem, and in th? coaſts therenf, from two years old and un- 
1:r. 1] he ſent forth Soldiers or Executioners, and ſſzw ail the Chil- 
%en, There is a Tradicion, that amongſt chem he flew his own 
S$1n; and chat Auguſt: Ceſar hearing ir, ſhould fay, It was bet- 
or 1 be Herod's Hog , than his Child; becauſe the Fews will eat 
no Swines fleſh. Others ſay this is but a Fable, tor his Son died 
very few days before humſelt. [From two years old and under. | If we 
take rhefe words as they ſeem ro found, they would incline us to 
think chat Chriit was near two years old before the Wiſe Men 
came : but ſome very learned Men think they came within a 
vcar, or lictle more ; and that che cerm we tranſlate ro ye.zrs old, 
{onifierh Perſons thar had never fo little entred upon the fecond 
vear of their Age: So as if a Child were bur a year and a week 
old, he was properly enough called He:755, one of two years 
old; thar is, who had began his ſecond year. Hence they think 
thar the Star appeared fome !ittte matter above a year before they 
came to Bethlehem ; and confidering at how great diſtance ſome 
parts in Arabia were from Fervſalem, they think that a year might 
well be ran out in their Deliberations avout, and Prepirations 
for, and Diſpatch cf their Journey. Thus they interprer rhe 
next words, | according to the time he had diligently enquired of the 
i;/e Men, ] that they had rold him, that it was ſomething above 
a year ſince the Star appeared firſt, This is now a middle way, 
berwixt choſe who (very improbably) rhink that they came with- 
inthirreen days; too ſhort a time, dcubrleſs, for ſuch a Journey; 
and thoſe thar think they came nor till near cio years, which 
wo fome ſeemeth as much too long: I leave it ro the Reader's 
judgment. 

17 Then was fulfilled that which was ſpoken by 
Jeremy the Prophet, ſaying , 

18 In Rama was there a voice heard , lamenta- 
tion and weeping, and great mourning , Rachel 
weeping for her children , and would nor be com- 
forted, becauſe they are not. 


The Text quoted, is Fer. 31. 15. This Prophecy was literally 


fulklled when Fudah was carried into Captivity : There was then 
a great Mourning in the Tribes of Benjamin and Fudah for their 
Children rhar were ſlain and carried nto Captivity : Ir was now 
fulfilled, that is, verified a ſecond time. There ts no need thar 
Rama here ſhould be taken Apellatively, as it ſignifteth an Hig 
Place, trom whence a noiſe is moſt loudiy,and doletully heard. 
There were ſeveral Places 1o named , one near Bethlehem , ( for- 
merly called Ephrah) Gen. 35.16,19. Jud.4. 5. 4 City in the Lor 
of Benjamin, 7oſ. 18. 22. The ſlaughter was in Bethlehem and the 
Coaſts thereot; the noiſe reached ro Rama, which was clole by : 
both Benjamin and Zudah made up the one Kingdom of 7udah. 
Rache! was the Mother of Benjamin, a Woman paſſionately defi- 
rous of Chijdren, therefore the fitreſt Perſon ro have her Name 
uſed , to expreſs the Sorrow of all choſe Mothers who had loſt 
their Children in this ſlaughter. The ſlaughter of cheſe Children 
cauſed a Jamentable Mourning by tender Morhers throughour 
Benjamin and Fudah , ſuch as the tormer Captivity cauſed ro be 
mentioned, 7er. 31. 15. | 


19 But when Herod was dead, behold, an Angel 
of the Lord appeared in a dream to Joſeph in Egypt, 
' 20 Saying, Ariſe, and take the young child, and 
his mother, and go into the land of Lirael ; for they 
are dead who ſought the young child's Life. 


That is, as ſome ſay, within three or four Months, ( for Herod 
they ſay, no longer cur-lived chis blood Act) and it we may 


+ believe Hiſtorians, he was in his Death made a dreadful Exam- 


ple of Divine Vengeance ; bur we cannot aſſert the juſt time how 
long he out-lived this bloedy A&. When he was dead , God, 
ho had promiſed 7oſeph, v. 13. to cel! him by an Angel (as be- 
tore ) ler Joſeph know he might ſafely rerurn. Tc is probable this 


: Apparition was nor immediately upon the Death ot Herod, for 


Arcizlaus was reigning, ( who muit be allowed ſome time to go 
t Rome, and t: have this Dignity conterred on him,,) bur ſoon 
after he was acai, this Appurition was, with a Command to him, 


2 return jnco th2 Land of Jyrael; ro which he ſoon yieldeth 


Yar! >> 
IE lice, 


21 And he aroſe, and took the young child and his 
mother. and came into the land of Iſrael. 

22 Bur when he heard rhar Archelavs did reign 
mM Judea in the room of his father Herod, he was 
airaid to 20 thither: Notwithſtanding being warned 


' Uod ina dream, he turned afide into the parts of 


ate 
ill ee, 


Po” true King of the Jews being born, the fingular Provi- 
"Wis fer 5 COR ir, that chere Were no more conſtirured 
mages urs0 Fudea, under the Tile of Kings, tho' they are faid 

"OO the Tetrarchs in their Provinces exerciſed a 


T HE WV. 
Regal Power ; For tho' Archelaus was by his Father's Will decla- 
red his Succellor in the Kingdom, yer the Emperor and Senate of 
Rome was to confirm him, who made 4rchelaus Terrarch of Fudea 

as appears by this Chapter. . Antipas, another cf his Sons called 
alſo by his Father's Name, Tetrarch of Galilee. Philip, another of 
his Sons, Terrarch of 1turea ;, and Lyſanias, Terrarch of Abylene ; 
and fer a Governour over Fudea, which was Pontius Pilate, as 2p 
peareth by Luk. 3.1. Of all the Sons of Herod, Archolars is ſaid to 
be of the moſt fierce and bloody Diſpofirion, which made Frſeph 
afraid to go thirher. His Brother Herod Antipas is reported of a 
much milder Diſpoſition, and more unaRtive Temper ; to F.{*ph, 
not withour the Dire&ion of God, goeth into his own Province. 

which was Galilee. 


23 And he came and dwelt in a City called Na- 
Zareth, that ir mighr be tulfilled which was ſpoken 
by the Prophets, He ſhall be called a Nazarene. 


Ic appearech by Luk, 2. 4. that Joſeph dwelr in Nazareth be- 
fore our Saviour was born; and Luk. 2. 39. atter Mcry's Purifie 
cation, 1t is ſaid, They returned into Galilee to their own City Nas 
Kreth, and Luk. 4.16. he was chere brought up. Hence, oh, 
1.45. he 1s called by Philip, Feſus of Nazareth, Bur the - ftollow- 
ing Words of this Verſe atford as great Dirhiculcies as any other in 
Holy Writ. 1, How Chit could be called a Nazarene, who ap- 
parently was born at Bethlehem. 2, How the EvangeliS ſaith, That 
was fulfilled which was ſpoken by the Prophet, he ſhall be called a 
Nazarene, whenas there there 1s no ſuch Saying in all the Prophets. 
There is a ſtrange variery of Opinions as to theſe Queſtions, 
Spanhemings acquieſceth in that which ſeemeth leaſt liable ro Ex- 
ceprion; viz. Thar Chriſt was ro put a Pericd to thar Order 
of Nazarites amongſt the Jews, whoſe Rules we have, Numb. 6. 
2, 3- Of which Order Samſon was, as appears by 7ud. 13. 7. and 
Fojeph was called T7) Ne-zir,Gen.q9.26.the very ſame word which 
1s uſed 7ud.13.7. Both Joſeph and S'1mſon were eminent Types of 
Chriſt, And 1t was ſpoken of Chriſt by the Prephers, (the Holy 
Men of God who wrote the Scriptures)that Chriſt ſhould be called 


VT7 Nexir, as it is in the Hebrew ; in that it was ſpoken of choſe 
that were his Types, who are both expreſly fo called. The word 


f1gnifiech an holy Perſon ; one ſeparated to God, and from ordi- 


nary converſe with Men. Chriſt was co be ſuch a Nazarite, ſes 
parated to God forthe Accomplithmenr of our Redemption; and, 


like Joſeph , ſeparated from his Brethren, Ia. 53. 3- He was 


rejected of Men : — We hid as it were our faces from him ,- and we 
eſteemed him not. God by his fingular Providence ſo ordered it, 
chat he who was the Antitype to all the Nazarites, and the true 
Nezir, or Perſon ſeparated , ſhould be Educated at Nazareth, a 
poor contemptible Town. Fo. 1.46. Nathaniel ſaid, Can there any 
Good come out of Nazareth * That while his Education there gave 
the Fews an occafion to reproach him as a Nazarene, becaufe born 
at Nazareth; believers amongſt the Fews might underſtand him 
ro be the true Nazarite, underſtuod in Foſeph and Samſon called 
by this Name, as Types and Figures of him who was to come 
ſeparated by God to a more excellent End, and fm Men in a more 
eminent manner. So that what the Prophets ſpake of this Nacure 
concerning Chriſt, chey ſpake of thoſe who were the true Types 
of Chriſt. Thoſe who will read Spanhemius and Poli Critica, will 
find large Diſcourſes about the Difficulties of chis Text ; bur this 
ſeemeth ro be Spanhemins his Opinion, improving rhe Notion of 
Mr. Calvin. 


CHAP. I 


John in theWilderneſs Preacheth Repentance + Hus Life and Baptiſm, 
i—6. Fe reproveth the Phariſees for placing Salvation, in veing 
Abraham's Children, 7—10. Sheweth the Dignity of the Perſon, 
Baptiſm and Do@rine of Chrift, 11—12. and Baptizeth him in 
Fordan, 13—17. 


1 FN thoſe days came* John the Baprift, preach- 
in the Wilderneſs of Judea. 


Thar is, in the 15th year of Tiberius C&/ar (as Luke expounds 
it, Luk. 3.1.) when 7o-n the Bapri8?, and Christ all”, were about 
thirty years of Age, Luke 3.23. For chere was no great difference 
berwixt che Age or Christ and John, as may be learned from Luk, 
1.31, 41,57. In thye days, while Fojeph and Mary, and our 
bletied Lord dwelt in Nazareth. See Exod. 2.11. This Phraſe, 
in thoſe Days, 1s the lame with in thyſe Tears. Ir 15 an ordinary 
thing in the Hebrew, to contound che words figmitvying a Day, and 
a 7ear; and the Greeks did the ſame, as appears by the Seventy 
Interpreters , 1 Sam. 1.3, 7. The Evangel:iſts paſs over with a 
great deal of Silence our Saviour's Minority, only mentioping 
Luk. 2, 42. his Diſpuring with the Dodors in the Temple , | came 
Fohn che BuptiﬆR.) John, the Son of Zacharias, Luk. 3. 2. called the 
Bapti$; eicher, becauſe he baptized Chrift ; or becauſe by him 
God inſticured rhe Ordinance of Baptiſm , which betore that time 
the Fews uſed in the Admiſſion of their Proſelytes, [ Preaching ] ac- 
cording to his Commiſſion, Luk.3.2. where it 1s faid, The Word of 
the Lord came t9 him, ( in the Wilderneſs of Fudea, | ſome parts of 
Zudea,where Houſes and Inhabirants were very tew. None muſt 
think char che Hiſtory of the ſecond Chapter 1s conrinued in this; 
there was a diſtar.ce of rwenty-eight or twenty-nine years. The 
Evangeliſts deſigning nor to farisfie Men's Curiotity, tur only to 
give us thar part of Chriſt's Story, which might be proficavle ro us 

to know. 


2 And ſaying, Repent ye: for the kingdom of 
heaven is at hand. 


The Evangeliſt only gives us the Sum and Sccpe of the Bap- 
tis Dodrine; the other Evangeliſts give es a more full Account 
of his preſſing alſo Faith in Chrift, 7oh. 1.29. &f 3-23, 35. 1 
Aﬀ-s 19. 4 « Repentance. Faith and new Obedience ought to be the 
Subſtance and Scope of all our Sermons. Repentance f1gnifierh 
the Change of the Heart, and Reformation of the Life : A turning 
from Sin unto God, [ Fr the Kingdom of Heaven #s at hand. | That 


blefled Stare of the Church (forerold by the Prophets) under the 
Z 2 Meſſiss, 


Chap. IIT, 


*Mar. 1.4» 
Luk. 3. 2» 


% \ 


hn ee ent a ett 
— mw 
T —_— —— 
- _ — > —_ -—- 
—— —_ —— 
o -—_ 
"= a ; = Y to TD 
—————_ - -—.——— ob 
& - 4 
. i Pe 


—— 


_— ———=M— PI. - 


CCDEEREA.A, 
E -- 


—— 


. IL. 


Meſs, whercin Gcd will exhibir his Son, as the King in Zion, 
and excrt his Power and Kingdom; both Extenſively ſubduing 
all Nations to the Obedience of his Goſpel, and Intenſrvely 1n all 
the Adminiſtrations of his Government : For the Kingdom of Hea- 
won, is not to be underſtood here of the Kingdom of Glory, but of 
the Kingdom of Grace, in all the Adminiſtrations of ir. This Paſ- 
ſage conrainerh the Argument upon which the Bapti$? in his Ser- 
mons preited Repentance and Faith, and Obedience ro the Will of 
God revealed. | 

2 For this is he that was ſpoken of by the Prophet 
Efaias, ſaying, The voice of one crying in the Wil- 
derneſs, Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make his 
paths {traight. 

Ic is nor much material, whether we underſtand thefe words, 
as the words of the Evangelif concerning John, as it ſhould ſeem 
by ar. 1.3. and Luk. 3. 4 or the words of Zobn himſelt; tor 
he thus ſpake, Fob. x. 23: As the words of the Propret, they are 
found, I1/z. 40. 3- the words are judged Literally, bur Typically 
to concern Cyrizs and Darirs; and either theſe Princes, who were 
inſtrumencal in the reſtoring of the Jews to their Liberty, from 
che Caprivicy of B.zbylon; or choſe Prophets who encouraged them 
to rheir retvern-; or up9a their return , to build che Temple and 
City. Bur they are confirmed by all the Four Evangeliſts, Mar. 
1.3. Lik. 3.4. 7oh. 1.23. to have a ſpecial Relation alfo ro Fohn 
the B.rpri7,, who was to come more immediately before Chriſt, 
and wich the Fervency, 'and in the Spirit of Elias, Luk.1.17. cry- 
ing , Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make his paths ſtraight. As 
the Harbingers of great Princes are ſent before them, to call ro 
Perſons , to remove things out of the way which may hinder 
cheir tree paſſage; ſo John was ſent before this great King n 
Zion, now coming forch to ſhew himſelf, and ro ſer up is King- 
dom in the World, to cry fervently to all People by a true and 
timely Repenrance, to caft off choſe Sintul Courſes, and to reject 
thoſe Falſe Opinions,of which they were poſleſſed ; rhe holding 
of and ro which, might hinder the Progreſs of this Spiritual 
Kingdom. $ 

4 And the * ſame John had his raiment of Camel's 
hair, and a leathern girdle about his loins, and his 


meat was locuſts and wild honey. | 

There are great and infignificant Diſputes , about rhe Habit 
and the Diet of John the Baptit, The Evangeliſts doubrleſs de- 
ſighed no more , than to ler us know, that Fohn BaptiSt's Habit 
was nor of ſoft Raiment, like thoſe who are in Princes Houſes, but 
a plain Country Habit, ſuired to the Place 1n which he lived 
and his Diet plain, ſuch as the Country afforded, In vain there- 
fore do ſome contend that John wore watered Stuff , fine and 
ſplendid, as Art in our days hath improved Came!'s Hair and 
others as vainly contend, thar he went in a Camel's Skin, raw 
and undreſfs'd : Bur he was habited ina plain Sute of Came!'s Hair, 
ſuch as ordinary Perſons of that Country uſed; or elſe ſuch a 
rouzh Garment as is mentioned Zach.13. 4. uſed by the Prophets. 
Elijah had much ſuch an Habit, 2 King. 1.8. There is likewiſe 
a variety of Opinions abour theſe Locuſts, which John did cat; 
the moſt probable is, that they were true Locuſts; for Locſts 
mizht be earen, Levit. 11.22. Nor is it to be thought that Fobn 
did eat nothing elſe; all that is intended is, to ler us know that 
Fohn was a Man not at all curious as to his Meat or Cloaths, bur 
was habited plainly, and fared ordinarily , as che Men of thac 
Country fared ; if there were any Difference in his Habir, 1t was 
ro Proportion himſelf to Elijah , and the Habit of Prophets. In 
this the Evangeliſt teacheth us whar the Miniſters of the Goſpel 
ſhould be, and do; they ſhould be Men contemning the Gaw- 
dry and Delicacies of the Worid, and by their Habit and Diet, as 
well as other things, ſer an Example of Severity and Gravity to 
others. 

5 * Then went out to him Jeruſalem, and all Ju- 
dea, and all the region round about Jordan. 


The Preacher being deſcribed , the Evangeli$t proceedeth to 
tell us what Auditors he had. The term A// here twice repeated, 
is enough to ler us know, that ir is often in Scriprure ſignifica- 
tive, no further than Many ; for it cannot be imagined , that 
every individual Perſon in Feruſalem, and the Region abouc For- 
dan, went to hear ohn the Bapti$}, bur a grear many did. It 15 
not to be admired, rhat there wenr out ſuch a Concourſe of Peo- 
ple ro hear Fohn the Bapti, 1. If it be true, that from Ezra's 
rime till now, no Propher had appeared : Our Saviour ſpeaking 
of John, What went you out for to ſee? A Prophet ? Seems to hinr, 
rhart a Prophet was a great Rarity amongſt them. 2. If we con- 
ſider the Severity of his Life, Our Saviour faith, He came neither 
eating or drinking; that is, as other Men. 3. If we conſider 
the New DoGrine he brought, and his Fervency in the preſſing 
ir, he came to Preachthe eſtas , whom the Fews had long ex- 
pected; to tell them his Kingdom was at hand. 4. Eſpecially 
if we conſider the new Rite of Baptizing , which he brought 10. 
For admict their Waſhing of Proſelytes in uſe before, yer he Bap- 
tized Jews. He was ſent to Baptize with Water, Joh. 1.33. So as 
from his time the Inſtitution of the Sacrament of Baptiſm muſt be 
dared, and he did Baptize many. 

6 And were baptized of him in Jordan, confe{ling 
their fins. 

A great part of thoſe who went out to hear Jhn were Bapti- 
zed, that 1s, Dipped 1a Fordan; bur from hence it will nor fol- 
low, that Dipring is Eflential ro Baptiſm : The Waſhing of the 
Soul with the Blood of Chriſt ( rhe thing tignified by Baptiſm) 
being exprefied by ſprizbling or pouring Water, as well as by Dip- 
pinz , or being buried in Water, Ia. 44. 3. Ezek. 35. 25. Colofl. 
2.12, Whether they confeſſed their Sins Man by Man, by word of 
Mouth, or by ſubmitting to the Doftrine of the Goſpel decla- 
red, their Renupciation of the Righreouſneſs of the Law, and 
their Engagement to an Holy Life, is not exprefſed. Bur it is 
. Mmnoft certain, that a Profeſſion of Faich and Repentance, was or- 


St MATTHEW. 


dinatily required beforg the Baptiſm of adult Perſons. It may be ; 


admired thar this new PraQice of John (if it were w m 
made no more ſtir amongſt the pon Fo (as "ns = rc 
Baptiſm was in uſe betore that time, as an Appendix to 0 C/ 
| ciſion, (tho' Circumciſion only be mentioned ) or they Arp w 
Notion that Christ, Elias, and that Prophet, when "the fon w 
ſhould Baptize : For, oh. 1.25. they asked Fohn, Why Ba = | ac 
thou then , if thou be not that ChriS, nor Elias, nor they yg hag yo 
That which ſeemerh ro me moſt probable, is, Thar befor: th - 
time there was a Baptiſm in ordinary uſe among them after ON a 
cumciſing the Child, beſide the Baptizing of Proſelytes. Ang © n 
the other Sacrament, Chriſt left our the Typical Part, ang Bl, ON wy 
the Bread uſed in that Adminiſtration, and made uſ> fed = 
tor the Inſtirurion of- the Sacrament of the Supper - 5, mat - 
che Ordinance of Circumciſion, he in the Inſtitution of ws pgs 
Goſpel-Ordinance, left our Circumciſion (which was Typical alf, n ” 
and retained only the Waſhing of the Perſon with Water . ms. 
inſtitured the other Sacrament of the New Teſtament, 'Bur 4 FJoll. 15+ tre, 
there was ſo much new 1n the Baptisf's Pradice, (for he dig - OC 
baprize Proſelytes only, bur Fews ; nor did he uſe it as an wy b 
pendix ro Circumciſion preceding,bur baptized adult Fews, ) A 
if the State of the Jewiſh Church had nor been decſinins 2 q wit 
their Power of Diſcipline very lictle, (if any) chey would on Nati: 
than have ſent co John, to know by whoſe Authority he Bapti - be I 
Bur they were under the Roman Power,and their Eceleſraſtical WIC 
cers were more pragmatical than miſchievous : God in the 1w;c pnto ?, 
dom of his Providence having ſo ordered ir, thar the Chan . 341110; 
Worſhip ſhould be ar ſuch a time brought in, when ir ſhouts 1 © be 
leaſt porently oppoſed. : m_ 
7 But when he ſaw many of the Phariſees arg the 7 
Sadduces come to his Baptiſm, he ſaid unto they, buble, 
* O Generation of Vipers, who hath warned YOu th #1, chap. 7 
Hee from * the wrath to come? th pla 
: a; ot 7oh 
we ſhall often meet with the mention of theſe Phariſees ang ! 5 Golp-1 
Sadduces : We will therefore enquire here a litcle more larzey from 4 
concerning them. There were Three more eminent Reign : | 
Sefts amongſt the Fews. The Eſſenes, of whom we read nothin Wis. 1! 
in Holy Wric; their main DoGtrine was Fate, they aſcribed 1j __ = 
things ro it. The two others are here mentioned, and often, in 8.4 than 
other parrs of the New Teſtament, we read of the Phariſees and | baptiz 
Sadduces : The latter were moſt acceprable to the great Men 
amongſt the Fews ; rhe former were more popular, and acceptz [am 
ble ro the People. The Sadduces were direly oppoſite to the 1 am by 
Eſſenes ; they aſcribed nothing ro Fare, but maintained the Liher tim, co 
and Power of Man's Will in the moſt extravagant height ; the of their 
denied the Immortality of the Soul, the Reſurreion, Angels, &, al me, who 
which the Phariſees owned : This we may learn trom 4; 23, 8 Not wor 
where Paul wrought his own Eſcape, by ſerring theſe to bz. fall Gap, 
ions on quarrelling abour theſe Points. In ſhort, theſe were ng  #Hily Ghol 
better than Atheiſts; ( for what muſt they be leſs that der bp fcir Sir 
Spirits, and the Reſurre&ion ?_) The Phariſees, as to their Dodrine Got w 
were much more ſober; they owned Spirits, and the Reſurrein; an Coop 
and tho' they held much of the Freedom of , and a Poner in Senſe of 
Man's Will, yer they alfo aſcribed much to che Providerce and 4 
Grace of God. They were the Interpreters of the Law, and, 5 ona gens 
Mr. Calvin thinks, had their Name from thence, nor trom their _= wml 
dividing and ſeparating themſelves trom cchers, (as ſome think) ofa 
they ſpent much of their time in Faſting and Prayer : Br of rhole « 
I. They held a Righteouſneſs by the Works of the Law ; to be _— conſy 
Righteouſneſs; for which we are accepted of God. 2, Thiey made a Ia Fire: 
very jejune Interpretation of the Law, as may appear trom ur $i 12W 
our's correing it, chap. 5. 3. They held m.1ny unwritten Ti 1diting purge hi 
of equal Force with the Law of God. 4g. They were very Hypiite but a 
mn their Prattice, nezle&ing the weighry Things of the Law, mz WL 
king long Prayers for a pretence tor their Wickednefs, aud do- t Jndea i 
ing all they did , bur to be ſeen of Men. Some of rhe $17 N R bar th; 
ces and Phariſ:es came to John's Baptiſm ;, and no wender ; i, wy he is 
Mar. 6. 20. Herod obſerved h*m, heard him, did many things, ard wo on - 
heard him gladly ; but, Luk. 7. 30. it is faid the Phaviſee, "er Far 
nor Baptized of him : It is like they came our of Curioſity, { #: been } as 
ſaid unto them, O generation of Vipers.) The very Languaze aki in : rag 
Chriſt uſed ro them, chap. 12.34. & 23. 33. The Viper to whith _ F ..- 
he compareth them, is the worſt and work danzerous of Serperts Ne hang. - 
We need give no Account of the BaptiF's treating them 1o rou;}- 2 ſtri& %. 
ly, becauſe our Saviour juſtifieth the term by applying ir ro them, true Bel; U 
Corrupt Teachers are the worſt of Men, and of all Orders of Sit- quench = 
ners, feweſt of them Repent and have their Hearts changed, Ts 
Who hath warned you to flee from the\Wrath to come 2) What comes =_ 
in your mind, who think there is no ReſurreFjon, no Hell? Or who . 12 * 
think you are ſo Righteous, that you need fear none, to do af} unto Joh 
thing that might reſtifie you are atraid of Wrath co come. Chriſt, 1 
. _ c0 
8 Bring forth therefore fruits meet {| for 1c; rag 20 
pentance. 0 And again 
You come here and thruſt your ſelves into a Crowd of Peti- © = ny of Ap 
rents: Bur chis is not enuugh ; true Repenrance is nor a barren ” R, , Vherd 
thing , neicher are your Leaves of exrernal Protefſion a ſufficient _ of 
indication of ic; you muſt bring forth the Fruics of Holineh, $10 made t 
Fruits that may anſwer the Nature of truc Repencance. Thi = no Sin 
proper Produtts of Habits, are called their Fruirs ; Thus we read n_ 
: Wal 


ot the Fruit of Sin, and the Fruit of Rightewſneſs. Fruits meet fi 
Repentance, are Works that are the proper Product of Repentance, 
or juſtly anſwering an external Profeſſion of Repentance. 45 


Iſlitutimn ; 
Mony, Whic 


Faith, 10 Repentance without Works, is dead. _ - 
Y " e Minſe 

9 And think not to ſay within your ſelves, * We": tle Believin 

In Teſtimon 


have Abr aham toour Father : For I ſay unto you,thit © 
God is able of theſe ſtones to raiſe up children unto 
Abraham. 


All Hypocrites bear up themſelves upon ſomething, up 
which they promiſe Good to themſelves , and a Freedom frm 
rhe Judgments of God. The Jews reſted much upon their Vc 
ſcent from 4braham, as appeareth alto trom oh, 8.39. By vi 


Ws without 


I, Buy 
be baprizs 


4 


1ey intituled themſelves tro the Covenant, Gen. 17. CX= 

ded t0 his Seed, as well as to himlelt ; as allo ro the Name of rhe 
mw 4 Abraham's Poſtericy by Iſa. being a!l the viſible Church 
— had upon the Earth ar that time : Ir 1s the great 
= of Miniſters, to drive Hypocrites trom their vain Conti- 
vue This John dorh.here ; as it he ſhould ſay, I know what 
—— ro; you think with your ſelves, char, becauſe you are 
9 " Church of God upon che Earth , Judgment ſhall nor 
= m_—_ you; God would then have no Seed of Abraham to 
as cy ro : and to keep his Covenant with : But miſtake 
nc God, of Stones, it he pleate, can raiſe up Abraham a Seed ro 
gn Covenant with. Papiſts and Frmaliſts have much the fame 
Prelumprion, tho' wich this difference, The Fews were the true, 
the only Church of God; theſe do bur arrogare rhe Name to 


themlclves. : : 
10 And now alſo the Ax is laid to the root of the 

trees: * theretore every tree which bringerth nor forth 

good fruit, is hewen down, and caſt into-the hre. 


A PrediRion, as ſome think, of char dreadful DeſIru&ion which 
within a few years came by the Romans upon rae whole Fewiſh 
N:tiom, The Senſe is, The Vengeance of God is very near 
be revealed; - Men muſt Repent now or never , for every Tree 
woich bringeth not forth good Fruit , ſhall be bewen dawn, and caSt 
inz2 the Fire, Judgment now 1s as nigh unto Men, as che Tree 15 c9 
falling , to the Roor of which the AX 15 already applied, wherher 
ir be ro be underſtood of the Judgment commen to all Unbe- 
lievers; all that know mt God, and obey not the Goſpel of Christ, as 
2 Theſſ. x. 8, 9. or the particular Deſtruttion of this Nation of 
the Jews, I ſhall nor dercrmine, tho'I rather judge the Jarrer pro- 
bable. The latter part of the Text is made uſe of by our Saviour, 
chap. 7. 19. in rhe latter parc of his Sermon upon the Mountain. 
It lerrerh us know, that ir is not improper, nor diſior.ant tothe Style 
of John Bapti, and Chrift , and others, the mo?t eminent firſt 
Golp:l-Preachers , to preſs Repentance, Faith, and Hlineſs of Life, 
from Arguments of Terror. 

11 1 indeed baptize you with water * unto re- 
Fs pentance : but he that cometh after me, is mighrier 
4 than I, whoſe {ſhoes I am not worthy to bear, he ſhall 


baptize you with the Holy Ghoſt, and with fire. 


{ am nor the Chriſt, Mar. 1. 8. Luk. 3.15, 15. F 1.15, 26. 
Iam bur the Meſſenger and Fore-runner of Chriſt ſent betore 
him, ro baptize Men with the Baptiſm of Warer in Teſtimony 
of their Repentance;z bur there is one immediately coming atter 
me, who is infinitely to be preferred before me; ſo much,thar I am 
not worthy to carry his Shoes, or unlooſe his Shoe-Jatcher : He 
ſhall baptize Men with another kind of Baptiſm, the Baptiſm ot the 
Hily Ghoſ and Fire, With the Holy Ghot, inwardly waſhing away 
their Sins with his Blood, and ſan@itying their Hearts ; the Holy 
Ghoſt working in their Hearts like Fire, purging out their Luſts 
and Corruptions; warming and inflaming their Hearts wich the 
Senſe of his Love, and kindling in them all Spiricual Habits: Or, 
with the Hily Gh$ ;, as in the days of Penteco8t, there appearing to 
them cloven Tongues , like as of Fire; as Ads 2. 3. Thus the term 
Fire is made Exegerical of the term | the Holy Ghit :) Or, with 
the Holy Ghof, and with Fire; changing and renewing the Hearts 
of thole char belicve in him, by rhe Operation of the Holy Ghoſt; 
and conſuming and deſtroying others , that will nor believe, as 
wich Fire. 

12 Whoſe fan 7s in his hand, and he will throughly 
purge his floor, and garher his wheat into his garner : 


but will burn up the chait with unquenchable fre. 
7udea is at preſent God's Floor, the only Church he hath upon 
the Barth; bur there is Chaff upon this Floor, as well as Whear. 
Now he is come, who will make a Separation betwixt the Chaff 
and the Wheat ; who by his Preaching the Goſpel will diſtinguiſh 
berwixc Trae! , and choſe that are of Hrael, Rom. g. 6. Berwixr 
thoſe who living in the true ExpeRtarion of the eſſa, ſhall re- 
ceive him now he is come ; and thoſe that by their not own- 
ing and receiving him , ſhall declare thar rhey never had any 
true ExpeQation of him, ſhall ſeparate them into diſtin Hevps, 
raiſing up a Goſpel-Church ; and ſhall ar the Laſt Day make yer 
a ſtri& Diſcriminarion, and throughly purge his Floor, caking 
true Believers into Heaven, and burning Unbelievers with un- 
quenchable Fire z caſting them 1nco Torments like unquenchable 
Fire, 
» 12 * Then cometh Jeſus from Galilee to Jordan 


{ Unto John, to be baprized of him. 

Chriſt, who now was about Thirty Years of Age , Luk. 3. 23. 
cometh trom Nazareth , a City in Galilee , where Foſeph lived, 
> Cik.2, 4. and whither he went with 7oſepb and Mary, Luk. 2. 39. 
& And again, after he had Diſputed with the Do&ors at Twelve 
= TYearsof Ape, Lyk. 2, 46. cometh rom thence ro Fordan, the grear 
 Kiver where John was baprtizing Diſciples, offering himſelf ro be 
Baprized of him. He ſhewed his Humility by going to him ; and 
alſo made the Aion publick. If any ask ro whar end Chriſt, who 
ud no Sin, was Baptized ? himſelf gives us an account, v. 15. 
I fulfil all Righteouſneſs, ( of which more in irs place.) He thus 
owned 7obn's Miniſtry and Miſſion to Baprize, and confirmed the 
Inlitution of Baptiſm by Water, and offered himſelf ro thar Teſti- 
mony, which he knew his Father would give of him. He thus 
| mated himſclf in the Ckriſtian Church, as by Circumciſimn he had 

B made himſelf of the Fewiſh Church ; and fo was both the Head of 
"= Believing Fews and Gentiles : He was nor (as others) Baptized 
0" Teſtimony of his Repentance , or for the Remiſſion of Sims ; for he 
Was without Sin, 


Yap. IL. 


means tO 


<& 
Y 


- 
it 
bs 


14 But John forbad him, ſaying . I have need to 
: | be baprized of thee, and comeſt thou ro mz ? 
n | _ © did not abſolutely repel him, but modeſtly excuſed him- 


St MATTHE W. 


a more excellent Baptiſm chan he could Adminiſter wo him; fr 
God gave him the Spirit not by Meaſure, Joh. 3. 34. 


15 And Jeſus anſwering. ſaid unto him, Suffer it 
zo be ſo now : tor thus it becometh us to tulfil all 
righreouſnels. Then he ſuftered him. 


Zeſus faith unto him , Suffer it now to be ſv. The Queſtion is 
nor , Whether rhou cr 1 be more Excellent ? Ir is thy Dury to 
Baptize , for my Father hath ſent thee to Baptize: Ir is my Plea- 
{ure and Duty co be Obedicnt co my Father, whoſe Will 1 know, 
tho ir be hidden trom thee. Bupriſm is a new Law of the 
Golpel-Church ; of which, tho'I be the Head, yer I muſt be con- 
tormed to the Members of ir; concerning which , my Father's 
Will 1s, Thar they thould be Byptized with Water, as well as with 
the Holy Ghost : Beſides thar, I am co pur an end to the Jewith 
Typical Circumciſion, and to pur a new Face upon the Church, 
by Inſtiruting another Sacrament ot Initiation. Ic is rheretore 
borh ju$ and equal char T ſhould be Baptized, ( tho? nor for thoſe 
Ends tor which ochers, thac are my Members, are Eapcized ; nor 
for Remifſion of Sins, bur ) for the fulfuling of all Righteoujneſe, 
in obeying my Father's Will. { $9 he ſuffered him.] Ke that errech 
rhrough Ignorance,will corrett his Error upon becter Information. 
We may learn from this Example of Chriſt, That being B.prized 
with the Holy Gho# , will excuſe nene for cmten:pt or neelect of 
Baptiſm by Water, becauſe it is the revealed Will of God, that all 
the Members of his Church ſhould c:me under char Ordinance ; 
fo as there is -a fulfilling of Righteouſneſs in yur Cate » as well as 
in Chriſt's, tho* in a difterent meaſure. ; 


16 And Jeſus, when he was baptized, went up 
ſtraight-way out of the water : and lothe heavens were 
opened unto him, and he ſaw * the Spirit of God de- , 
ſcending like a Dove, and lighting upon him. 

17 Andlo, a voice from Heaven, ſaying, * This is 33- 
my beloved Son, in whom I am well plealcd. 


This Story is alfo related by Mar. x. 10, 11. and by Luk, 3. 21. 
Luke faich, that Jeſus praying, the heavens were opened : Mark laith, & 


great Lizhening, when che Air ſeemeth to divide , to make the 
fuller and clearer way for the Light, [unto him \ that is, unto 
Join, | And he ſaw the Spirit of God deſcending lhe a Dove, and 
lizhting upon him. | The Spiric of God is an invitible Subſtance, 
and cannor be ſeen by Humane Eyes; but the Shape aflumed by 
any Perſon of the Trinity may be ſeen , whether ic was 2 
Dove, or only the appearance of a Dove, is lirtle material for us 
co know. Ir was certainly one or the other ; nor could any 
Repreſentation at this time be more fir, cicher to let the World 
know the Dove-like Nature of Chriſt , I/z. 42.2. or what ſhould 
be the Temper of all thoſe who receive the ſame Spiric, 
tho' by Meaſure, and are by it taught ro be innocent as Does ,, 
not thar Chriſt had nor received the Spiric before , bur that his 
receiving of it might be notified to others. This Dove, or ap- 
pearance ot a Dote, lighred upon Chriſt ; thereby ſhewins tor 
whoſe lake this Apparition was. Chriſt was nor confirmed only 
ro be the Son of God by this Appearance of che ly Spirit, in 
the form of a Dove, and lighting upon him; bur alto by a Voice 
trom the Excellent Glory, faich Peter, 2 Pet. 1.17, God forming 
a Voice 1n the Air, which tpake , ſaying, This 3s my beloved Son, 
in whom T am well pleaſed. The word fignifieth, a dearly beloved 
Son, The ſame Voice was repeated ar Chriſt's Transj12uration, 
Matth. 17. 5. Peter from ir concludes the Ccreainty of the Faith 
of the Goſpel, in the afore-mentioned Text, { In whom I am well 
pleaſed. ] The word ſignifierh a ſpecial and fingular Complacency 
and Sarisfattion : I am pleaſed in his Perfon, according to thar, 


_ Prov. 8. 30. I am well pleaſed in his Undertaking, in all char he 


ſhall do and ſuffer in the Accompliſhmenc of the Redemption of 
Man : We are made nccepted in the Beloved, Eph. 1. 6. This Text, 
(as is generally obferved ) is a clear Proof of the Trinity of Per- 
/ons, or Subſiſtences in the one Divine Being”: Kere was the K+ 
ther Speaking trom Heaven ; the $1 Baptized, and come out of 
the Water; the Aly Gh: Deſcending in the form or ſhape of 
a Dove, 


CHAP 


Chrit Faſting in the Wilderneſs Forty Days, is Tempted thrice by $a- 
tan, I—1o. The Devil leaveth him , and the 4ngels miniſter to 
him, x1. He dwelleth at Capernaum , and beginneth to Preaco, 
12—17. Calleth Peter and Andrew , 18—20. James and John, 
21,22. Preacheth the Goſpel, and Healeth all Diſeaſes in Gali- 
lee, 2325, 


I Hen was Jeſus led up of the Spirit into the 
Wilderneſs, to he tempted of the Devil. 


This is mentioned by two of che other Evangeliſts, 2ar. 1. 12. 
and Luk. 4. 1. Luke laith, that being full of the Holy Ghost , he 
returned from Jordan, and was led by the Spirit, &c. Mark faith, 
immediately the Spirit drove him : Great Maniteſtations of Divine 
Love, are commonly tollowed with great Temptations. Others 
obſerve, That Temptations uſually follow Baptiſm, the Be;innings 
of Spiricual Lite , and Covenants made with God. [ He was led 
up; ] ſome think he was raken up; Mark uſerh the word 2, /aa- 
ace , the Spirir thruif him out 5 we muſt not underitand an AR 
of Compulſiom ; doubtleſs he went voluntarily. [| Of the Spt- 
rit : ] The Mbly Spirit, tha lighted upon him, as a Dove into the 
Wilderneſs. Mark's ſaying , Mar. 1. 13. that he was there with 
wild Beaſts, lets us know thar it was not fuch a Wildernefs as 
Fohn began to Preach in, chap. 3. 1. but an howling Wildernejs, 
full of wild Beaſts, TheEnd is expreſſed in the laſt words, 
[ To be tempted of the Devil.) Thus his Temprarions are diſtin- 


; Sr. 1 : 
14 Y Os 4, 
4, 


-& . fir a time; knowing that Chriſt was already Baptized with | 


Suiſhed from Divine Temptations, luch as Abraham had, Gen. 22. 1. 
&S 2 And 


Chap. IV. 


Ifa. 11.2, 
Joh. 1.32, 


* Pal. 2.7, 
Iſa. 41. 2. 
Ch. 12.18, 


cloven aſunder, Ir 1s moſt probable, that the opening of the Hea- -37-i 
vens mentioned (tho' poſſibly far more Glorious) bear a propor- Col. 1.13. 
tion to that opening of the Heavens, which we often ſee in a time of © © 


". 53 S — > 
— ETY 
_— p< 


v Wo. 
hy TE Z - _— 2 
2-9 _ z4nan wy E : > EPS 
Is ho d Wn - D—a_e - 
—_—_ SS y 
; + I > — Li 
ao” I. >. 
> yy SL 4 : S 
_ _——— DIETS _ $: T 
= oe then 8 . + 2 
= Rs — a1 
"Dr = q 3% —_— 
. >> $ $I - 
out, I Y 


i 
_ SHES 
p ar 


EST 
en Genin: 
Y iS a) 


=. op. 


w_—_— 
he <7 


as, 4 a5 S os 
” na 
_7 ance. ROO” IL 


be. noe a 
rn 09 a 
BL AA 
u*, 


_—_— bs 
DIS on nn 
"Fe ied. ney 

p, wh 


s % 
© te Po 
» —_ 4 , - by w_ 
4 - 
"J 
> x 


my 


win Wl”, te EBT £ 
na Ae ens 
”—_ ” es, 
4 mY SY 
I,” & vs oro”. 


_—m— 


_ PET” 
> ——pt—_— 


— 4 ii... 


> pe aa p 
F”; IT: "=> =» 


—— 


ee 


7 here, is meant ſolicited, or moved to ſm; in which 
The general Notion of 
Tempting , is maling 4 Trial. God makes a Trial oft his People 
for the Pf and .niſe/tation of their Gractous Habit: Satan, 
by moving to Sin, makes a Trial of Corruption which was the 
reaſon , char alcho? Chriſt was Tempred, That he might be able to 
ircey thiſe that ce Tempted , Heb. 2. 18, and that he might taſte 
all choſe Evils ro which we are expoſed, and might overcome? the 
Devil; yer when the Prince of this World came, he could eficet no- 
ing avainſt him, becauſe he found nothing in tm to comply 
With his Motions. 

> And when he had faſted forty days, and forty 
nights, he was afterwards an hungred. 

He was in the Wilderneſs, a place of Solituce , and fo fitter 
for Satan's purpoſe; and he was an bungie, which was another 
advantage Saran had. Bur he was not an hunered till He had 
fiſted forty days, and forty rights. Here was the Divine Power 
miraculoaſly ſeen, in upholding the Humane Nature of Chritt, 
without any thing to ear; this was a Miracle: Ine hike did 
AMbſes before the Law, Elijah under the Law ; Chriſt doth the ſame 
in the beginning of the Goſpel. Nor did he faſt as rhe Fews were 
wont; of whom we ſometimes read, thar they Kept Faſts ſeveral 
days; they only faſted in the Day-time, but are their Food at 
Nizhr ; or ſometimes only forbare pleaſant Bread, as Daniel did, 
Dan. 10. 2, 2. for three full Wecks; bur Chriſt taſted trom all 
Food, and that not only forty Days, bur forry Nights allo ; trom 
whence may cafily be gathered, how 1dly, 1t not impioully, the 
Papiſts found their Faſting forty Days in Lent, Here all Chriſt's 
Atﬀts ( moſt certainly his Miraculous Works) are nor recorded 
for our Imitation : Some of them are only for our Adoration ; 
all his miraculous As are ſo. There can be nothing more fot- 
tiſh, chan for us to think , thar becauſe Chriſt (ſupported by the 
Divine Nature) faſted forry Days, therefore we are oblized ro 
do it ; and becauſe we cannot faſt forty Days, and forty Nights 
without eating ſomething , theretore we may cat Filh, tho' no 
Fleſh, (when all know thar to ſome Palars, there 15 no mcre deli- 
cate Food than Fiſh) or ie. are obliged to faſt in che Day-rime, 
tho* not at Night. And becauſe Chriſt once in his Lite-rime 
faſted forty Days , and forty Nights , therefore we muſt do 10 
every Year ; or that the Church hath any Vower to injoin any 
fuch thing. If Papi/ts think , Chriſt's Faſt of forty Days, and 
forry Nizhrs , obligeth chem ro Imiration , ler chem keep rhem 
as he did (wich ſuch a Faſting I mean } and try whether they be 
able ro do it; or whether four Days or Nights, inftead of forty, 
will not convince them of their Folly. Chriſt taſted forty 
Days, and forty Nights, and thereby ſhewed he was God-Man : 
the Divine Nature ſapporrcd the Humane. Afrerward he was 
Hungry, to ſhe that he was truly Mn, touched with the feeling of 
our Inpirmities, in all Points Tempted as we are, yet without ſin, 


Heb. 4. 15+ : 
2 And when the Tempter came unto him he ſaid, 
Tf thou be the Son of God, command that theſe 


ſtones be made Bread. 

[And when the Tempter. | Satan, the Devil, as he 1 called, { came 
unto him,] probably in ſome viſible ſhape; he forming an audi- 
ble Voice ot the Air, ſaid, [ If thou be the Son of God, | not that 
he doubred ir, which ſhewed his horrible Impudence. | Com- 
mand that theſe ſtones, | this ſtone, faich Luk. ch. 4.3. [ be made Bread. 
The Temptation plainly was, to the uſe of means which God did 
not alliyw him, to relieve him in his Diſtreſs of Hunger , to diſtruſt 
the Providence of God in ſupporting of him. A Tempration com- 
mon to thoſe who are the Memhers of Chriſt; and enough co in- 
ſiru& us, Thar we ought to look upon all Thoughts, and Mortons, 
to the uſe of means not allowed by God , in order to a Lawful 
end, as are Temptatims; wel a Carne, vel Hiſte, eicher from our 
own Fleih, ( for Fam. 1. 14. every man # Tempted, when he % 
drawn away by his own Lu$, and enticed_) or from our Grand Adwver- 
ſary rhe Devil. Ir is not much material tor us ro know from which, 
they being both whar we ought ro refiſt; rho thoſe from Saran 
are uſually more violent and imperucue. 

4 But he anſwered, and ſaid, Tr is written, Man 
ſhall not live by bread alone , but by ever word that 
proceedeth our of the mouth of God. 

So alſo Lyh. 4. 4. there 15 no better anſivering the Tempter, 
than by oppoiing the Precepts of Holy wrir, ro his Mations #9 ſn. 
The Word is called , The Sword of the Spirit, Eph:{. 5.17. The 
P2pifts therefore denying People the uſe of tlie Word, diſarm 
them asto the Spiritual Combate. Tt # writter, Deuter. 8.3. Tho' 
Man ordinarily livech by common Bread, ſuch Food as bien uſually 
eat, yer God's Power 1s not reſtrained; he can uphold the Life 
of Man when that is wanting ; as he ſupported the Tſraclites by 
Manna : (to which that Text relates ) nor 15 God obliged ro 
create any extraordinary mean ; tor his Power winch ts ſeen in 
creating ſuch means, can produce the fame Effet wichour ſuch a 
mean, if it pleaſerh him : His Power muſt be fecn in creating the 
mcan,and in upinlding the proper Pewer and Faculcy of the mean, 
in order to irs End; why cannot he by the fame Power produce 
rhe Effet withour any ſuch mean ? 

5 Then the Devil taketh him up into the holy City, 
and ſetteth him on a Pinacle of the Temple, 

By the 72! City, is meant eru/alem, once an Holy City, Dan. 
9. 24. now, tho' a moſt impure and filrhy City upIn many Ac- 
counts, yer up2n other Accounts {till an #oly City, being the only 
Ciry in the World, which had then 1n ic the true Worſhip of 
rhe true Gut; and in which God, doubtleſs, ( who in 4hab's time 
had ſeven :2ufand in JF:el) had many Holy People. How the 


and by Tempte: 
Sente God teimpteth no Man, Zum. I. 13s 


Pevil rook Chriſt into the Holy City, 1s variouſly argued and 
judzed ; the ward uſed in the Greek, is ſuch as would incline us to 
think, tharhe was not carried by force, bur tolloived the Tempter 
ly ; bur ic being ſaid, He was (et upon a Finacle, 7. e. a place 


& 
'S) 


> hk 
Wl 


St M ATTH E.V. 


| his Power, or his Goodneſs, Thus the word is uſed, Num. 


Cliap, [] 


on the top of the Temple, higher than the other parts of ir « 
ro-imply the concrary. The End of his being fer there, th => 
Verle tells u:, © IO 

6 And faith unto him , IF thou be the Sg «; 
God, calt thy felt down :. for it is written, He thay 
give his Angels charge concerning thee, and in their 
hands they 1hall bear thee up, leſt at any time they 
dath thy foot againit a ſtone. 

Betore the Devil had Tempred cur Lord ro Diffdence «+ 
Diſtruſt in God's Providence, and the uſe of Means not allowed by 
God to ſupply himfelt : Here he Tempts him to an wary ans, 
ble Preſumption , and Confidence of , and concerning the Divine Pie. 
tedion. In rhe tormer Temprat!on, the Devil uled no Scripture: 
bur having been repelled in chat Ailaulr, by the Sword of the $i. 
rit, which is the Word of God , Eph.6.17. he here takes up — 
{ame Weapon : The thing to which the Tempter ſoliciceth _s 
Saviour, was the throwing himſelf down from a Precipice 5 a Tenn; .. 
tion 1n Effect, ro deſtroy himſelt, ( which is one of thoſe Fiery 
Darts, which he commcnly throwerh at the People of God. i 
their hours of Melancholy, or undergreat Pretfures of Aﬀidtion, 
but the uſual Argument which he uteth to them, is, Deliver ”_ 
from their Terrors, the preventing of Wanr, or avoiding Shame, 
The Argument he uſeth to our Lord is quite of another Natur 
the ſpecial Prote&ion of God, promiſed ro God's People, Pal. 51 
V. 11, 12, Herein he transtormerh himſelf into an 4rgel of Lich 
according to 2 Cor. 11.14, and lets us know, Thar Truch may be 
abuſed to the Patronage of Lies; and thar there is no Hock mgro 
dangerous ro the Members of Chriſt, chan rhat which is baited 
with Scripture miſ-intcrpreted, and mil-apphed : Which Holy yrir 
always 1s, when it is fo interpreted, or 1o applicd as ro be made 
an Argument to fin. This Porcion of Holy writ 1s both; 1, x17, 
cited, and, 2. As ill applied. In che Quoration, the Tcmpter lea 
our thoſe Words, | in oll thy Ways. ] This was none of cur 
Saviour's Ways; he had no Ca#, no Warrant from God to decline 
tne Stirs by which he might have gone dovn , and to thruy 
himfelt down. God j1ad never promiſed , nor cver eiven ary; 
the Protetion cf Angels, in ſinful and forbidden Ways, 2, He 
mij-applieth this Text , uſing it not to inftru&, bur ro deceive; 
dividing berwixt Man's Duty , and God's Providence ; making 
this Word a Promite ro be tulfilled upon Chriſt's neglc& cf }: 
Duty ; extending the Promiſe of /pecial Providence, as to Danzer 
inco which men voluntarily throw themſelves : Putting Go 
upon working Miracles ro declare Chriſt ro be his Son, where 
there was no need, and of which there was no ufe : Mocking 
our Saviour's true uſe of Scnpture, with Scripture abuſed, and 
many other ways; but he had ro do with one nor ignorant of 
his devices. | | 


7 Jeſus ſaid unto him, It is written again, Thou 
ſhalt not tempt rhe Lord thy God. 


This 1s written , Deut. 6. 16, To make an undye, and ws: 
rantable Trial of God, is to Tempt God;, whether the Trial reſpedh 
Pſal. 78.18. Iſa. 7.12. chap. 16.1. By this Anſiver Chril is 
the Devil know that he abuſed Scripture in his Quotation of t 
Such a caſting of himſelt down, when he had a plain way to ba 
down by the Stairs, would not have been an AG of Fiith, hr 
Preſumpriom ;, not a Truſting God upon his Word, bur a Temitir: of 
God, expreſly contrary to his Command, Der. 6. 16. Wo 


8 Again, the Devil taketh him up into an exceed: 
ing high Mountain, and {hewerh him all che Kin: 
doms of the World, and the Glory ot them. : 
9 And ſaith unto him, All theſe things wiill giv 
thee, if thou wilt tall down and worſhip me. 


This in the third Temptation , by which the Tempter ſolu 
our $.rviour to fin, and ct all other the moſt Impudenr. For what 
can be more Impudenr, than for che Creature to expet an #0 
maze © him, trom him who was his Creator. Wl:at 361: 
this was, and how our Szviour was ren vp into if, are hin 
not revealed, and »f very little concern for us to know. Tie 
Texr reils us It was exceeding high, yer not high enough , tron 
whence one Kingdom could be feen , in the extent of it, It ! 
taeretore moſt probable, that Dr. Lizhtfot judseth moſt rruis, 
That the Devil, being the Prince of the Power of rhe Air, firmed 
Airy FErizon before the Eyes of Chris, Cirrying ſich Poingous ard 
Glorious appearance of Kingdoms , St.ites, and Foyalties in the Eco 
it, as if he had feen thoſe very Kingdoms and States indeed, Sic 
things the Devil can do, and doth do, by condeniating tic 
Air firſt,chen ſhaping, and figuring, and laſtly fo colouring it, 1." 
ic may repreſent what he intendeth. Al! Theſe things be jr 
fed to give our Saviour , if he would Fall down cond Wor \hio /Mi's 
The fame eminent Perſon well obſerves, that what Tuk? cs 
1Worſhirping before the Devil , Matthew cails Wer ſhipping the Pri 
and concludes ſolidly , That if to Wirſhip before the Devil, (21 
Wirfhip tne Devil, Worſhipping before an Tmage ( as the Papi, 6) 
miuSt be Worſhipping the Image. "ro hi 


The Devil here arrogates ro Im 
ſelf, whar was God's alone to give; and ſuch ordinarily are it 
Devil's Promiſes, of things, as to which he hath go Power to 147 
fil what he Promiſeth, 

10 Then faith Jeſus unto him, Get thee hence. , 
Satan: for it is written, * Thou ſhalt worſhip ths 
Lord thy God, and him only ſhalt thou ſerve. 

As this was of all the three the moſt impudent Temprario!, 
fo cur Lord receivech ir with the higheſt Dereſtarion , 113't5 
Get thee hence, Satan / By which words, he doth nct cn!y ſhe" 
t11s Dereſtation of this Temptation , but ajfo chides him cf 75m E 
any furcher Tempring him. The Senſe is, Satan, I know 0 8” 


—_ 


; 2408 
Re 


viz, That 4 Relizious Adoration, is not ts 5: 51 


ES 


ter things. vel 


hap IV. 


IN 


iro any; bur unco Gcd alone ; rhou art a Creature, no Werſhip 
di | C1 - P- "Pe . . . 
A ! To Worſhip before thee, (lo Lute Phraſerh it, 


i Que wit nee 2 es 
Pr EPS, ) 15 Worſhip thee, This 1s exprefly contrary ro the 
Lie 2 If 


3 of GOC Je; / p P..4 is 1| Coxpuy > 
Command of God, Dex. 6. 13. and 10. 20. It 1> allo obſervable, 
© cur SavICUr CPPoIetn Os tg the Devil's words, cy meorv 
nr "ws wt, If thou falling down wilt Worjhip me ; aud 
TTFOTE : 


FE - \ « " NA WD. ; 19H 

car Clint anÞ vers, T:y Srv 0s @e3TKurnrels & dvim wara 

.l-i4;, Which thews rhe 1dlenefs ct rhe Papilty diftinttiun of 
J. & LIP 


wy = and Latreias : The firft of which they ſay may be given to 
="M Croarure - the fecond obiy unto Ged J by winch they jultifie 
© wir © per ation Of 1M4ages : Lhe ufing a pyrwe of AdTwation, betore 
+: Creature 10 an AQ ot Worthup, Cliritt here interprererh a 

+ (hippin; he Crearure, I cc Creacure cher exatts it 07 us, 
- ourpziely tet 15 betcre ns, or chute 1t as an objet CXcIting 
- racvins us co: tuch an Att of Adoration, winch the Papijts 
" Nt thar all Profrccion netore the Creature 15 an Act of 


"Py , 


PTA 
4 


— 


one Adircaitn 5 there t> a @ toil, as well as a Divine Worfhip ; 
\i in Divice Wertlip, tac Puitcion of the Creature before us, 
ny Me ineerly for Convemency, or Accidental : Bur all Pro 
im in an AR of Divine Worthip, 1s a Pojture of Adoration 3 
4 where 2 Creature is choſen, and ler before vs in that Act or 
| TH excites Or moye us, Ic partakerh of che Homage. There 

ame little difference berivixe the Words, Deut. 6. 13. and 19.20. 
an] choſe of Sc. Jorivew 5, LN thar 15 {aid co be written, which 15 
wHIICN 38 TO the Subſtance and Sente, tho' not IN mole Terms, 
es ti {haſt Fer 5, as Matthew QUOTCS 1C, IT 15, 104 ſhalt 
1.7%, The Term Fear, applied unto Ged, figmifterh any Act 
ef PUlizion, Wwhecher Extein.s Or Internal ; and tho' the laſt 
words in Dencerommy | Thou ſh. It fear by bis Name ] be nor men- 
roncd in Avtthew, yer enough are quored for our Savicur's 
Fling down and 1Jkipping, beiongeth cnly to God, 
2T ©o tice ; ler me theretcre hear of thee 


} fLUFc. 
l 


6p 
Girl cur SaViour ) 3 
Ro IN-iICs 

;1 Then the Devilleaverh him, and bzhold Angels 
c:xmeand minifired unto him. 


rf the Devil, faich James, ch. 4. 7. and he ſhall flee from 
\, Tius he did from che Head ; thus he ſhall do trem the 
Mcmbers : bur as he,did not flee trom Chriſt, till Commanded 
awav, 1 neither oi Commanded off by God doth he leave the 
Pcople of God ; bur upon our refiitance, God will Command 
him off, that we may not be Tempred above our ſtrength. The 
ul nel leaving ham, the Good Angels came and minifired unto 
ms wacther by brinzing him Food, or bringing him off rhe 
Moutr, or otherivife Executing his Commands, 1s not exprefied, 
1nd ir is roo much Curioſity to inquire. God by this teacherh us, 
[!4r our Lives are to have heir Vicithrudes of Temprarions, and 
Con{vlations ; and that our Temprartions ſhall have an happy Itlue ; 
and char when ordinary means tail, we may expeft extraordinary 
lacfuences, and Atfiſtances. Luke faith, he departed from him for 
2 Seaſn ; To ler us know, that rho' here was an end of his more 
Eminent Temprations, yer he was not afterward withour Saran's 
Atavlits. 


12 * Now when Teſus had heard that John was 


F | caſt into Priſon, he departed into Galilee : 


7-bn was ſome time after this caſt into Priſon, for his free re- 


., proving /zrzd Antipas, the T?trarch of Galilee, for taking Herodias 
: its Brother Philip's Wite, and other Evils, Chap. 14. 3, 4. Mar. 6. 


17. Ink, 3. 19, 20. Feſws heard of this Accident, and departed 
inn Galifce, There were many things happened berwixt Chriſt's 
Tvnptutions, and this his Motion into Galilee, which are omitted by 
wi che Evangeliſts, except 7b, and by him recorded in his four 
tt Chuprers, Neither by Galilee, we muſt underftand the Nether 
ilvg, which was within the Furiſdidtion of Herod ;, but the Upper 
ir1/1;eo, called Galilee of the Gentiles, v. 15. 1n the Borders of Ze- 
i472 and Nepthali, which was in che Furiſdidiom of Philip, a Man 
ot a lcts Bloody Difpofition. Ochers make ic under Herod's 7uriſ- 
7;;n; bur where the Phariſees had leſs ro do than in Fudez. Our 
$,viour doth not cur of Cowardice avoid Danger ; bur he knew 
is time was not ver come. Bur fome Judiciovs Interpreters think 
that our Saviour firſt went into the Lower Galilce, and from thence 
1591 atrer into rhe Upper Galilee : Thar which makes chis more 
probable, is the nexr words 3 And leaving Nazareth, he came and 
Swolt in Capernanms ſoas ic ſhould ſeem, he firſt went ro Nzzareth, 


which was 1n the Lower Galilee. 


2 And leaving Nazareth.he came and dwelr in Ca- 


4 
[LET 


p:rnium, which is upon the Sea-coafſt, in the Borders 
oi /ebulon 3nd Nepthalim, | 

By this ( as was faid betore ) ir ſhould ſeem thar our Lord firſt 
went 1ne9 the Nether Galiles, where Nazareth was, which atrer a 
me, he lett and went to Copern um, Wwhanch Capernaum was a City 
near the Sea, in the Borders of Zebzl-n and Nepthali, whoſe Lots 
12 Land of Canazn, were contiguous, and by the Sea-fide, as 
«ppeareti by 7oſhits 19, 

14. That it might be fulfilled, which was ſpoken by 
te Pronher Eſaias. ſaying, 

A E *Nl- 

. [5 The land of Zebvlon, and the land of Neptha- 
Mm, by the way of the Sca, bzyond Jordan, Galilee of 
tle (zentiles. P 

. 16 The People which fate in darkneſs, ſaw great 
att, and to them which fare in the Region, and tha- 
$9W or death, light 15 ſprung up. 

16 Ter; 


T1 


tin Haigh 15, C24Þ. 9, 1,2, where the Words are, N-wer- 
Re, v Dimnjs thall 157 be fuch as was in her Vexatim, when at 
"jt he lightly -offlifed the Land of Zebulon, and the Land of 
No that; : and oft376 i+d did mnre grievouſly offict her by the way 
122 121 bryond Fra en, in Galilee of the Nations. The People tha 

"ex 47 !).r\nejs, {ave ſeen a great Light : they that dwell in the 


' id of wh: batow of Death, upon them hath a Light ſhined. The 


St. MATT HEM 


Jews make a great many Objections againſt the Application of this 


Texc unto Chriſt, ( as indeed they do againſt the Application of 


all Texts cired our of the Old Teſtament by the Evanzclitts, 
Chriſtians believing thar the Evangeliſts beins Holy Men, vcho 
wrote not Ircm a private Spiric, private Interpretations, have 
not any reaton to regard} whas their [nrereſt leaderh them to ob- 
jeft : Bur even Chriſtian, Incerpreters are divided in their Senti- 
ments, whether thete words are ſaid to be fulfilled, in this Ma- 
tion of Chriſt unto Galilee, in a Literal or Typic.l, cr 4 more 5/u- 
proper and Ana/;giczl Senſe; nor 1s 1t any great manter with whict!: 


Vis 


ot chem we azree; for my own parr, I tce no reaton why n. : 


1941 


ſhould not be Literally underſtoud ct, and applicd unto Chrit?, 
nere 1s nothing more ordinary in the Propte,,, than ater 4 
chreatiing of Judgment and C:ptvity unco the Perplie, wo com 
tort fuch as tcared Gud amonytt them with Promifes ot the 372 
/14, and the ſpiritual Salvation wich was to be Erouche in ; Thc 
Land of Zebaulon and Napntili tuftered muck by R2nbid 1d, 1 Kine. 
I5-20. and mure by Tizlath-Filezer, 2 King. 15. 25. hitore the 
Gencral Ciptivity of che ten Tribes, 2 King. 17. 5. The Lord by 
rhe Propiicr, c.:p. 8, had been chrearning this genvre Captivity + 
potholy che Prophet mi;zhe fay che Affliction of rhefe parts ſhouid 
nor be fo creat as the ſecond mentioned, 2 Kins. 15. 20. Becauſe 
by che ſtory ic teems they were generally carried into Captivity, be- 
tcre rhe more gener: D2!tru&im of the other Tribes : There, faith 
hethisDarvres thall be abundantiy hereafter compenſatcd by the Co- 
ming of che MHefran, and Preaching amongſt this Pecple ; who hvins 
at a great diſtance. trum 7ery/ lem, never had ſuch a Lizhr as ſome 
ocher Parts ot Fudet; and irit drank of the Cup-ot God's Wrath 
in ther Capijvity, Ir was called Galilee of the Gentilos, becauſe 
i was ncar to the Men of Tjre, who were Genti/es, and had 
doubriefs in it a greater mixrure of Genti/es, chan any other parr 
of Canam, ever tince $4/omm gave Hiram twenty Cities in chis 


: Galilce, i King. Gs I I, 


17 From that time 


to ſay, * Repent: for the Kingdom of Heaven is at 
hand. 

From tie tune of Chriſt's Baptiſm ; or from the time that he 
heard that John was committed to Priton ; he, who betore had 
preached and raughr privately, and more rarely, began to Preaci 
more ordinarily and publickly ; and the tum of his Do&rine was 
the lame with thar oft John che Buptiſt, confirming his Dodrine ; 
Repent, fir the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand, See the Senſe of 
chole words, ch. 3. v. 7. Mark hath the fame, May. 1. I4., 

18 And Jeius walking by the Sea of Galilee. ſaw 
two brethren, Simon * called Peter, and Andrew his 
Brother, caiting a Net into the Sea ( for they were 
Fiſhers ) | 

Whether by the Sea, he here meant the Lake of Gennz/aret or 
che Oce.n, 1s not wortk the arguing ; fer the Jews called all great 
Collections of Waters the Se.rs, according ro Gen. 1. 10. i He jaw 
two Brethren, Simon called Peter, and Andrew his Brother 5\ Whe- 
ther natural Brethren, or called ſo, becauſe of their joint Im- 
ployment, | Caſting a Net into the Sea; | cither for the catching of 
Fiſh, or tor the wathing of their Nets ; fee Luk. 5. 2. | For they 
were Fiſkers | Sea-men ( as the word teems to fiznifie ) uſed ro fiſh 
in-the Sea: ,$Simom had a Ship of his own, L1b.5. 3, The Evan- 
gelilts diflering Relation of the Call of Simm and Andrew; hat!: 
made a great deal of work tor Iuterpreters. The greateſt ditice 
rence ſcemerh ro be berwixe 3autthew in this Text, and br, 
chap. 1. 35, 35, 37,39. But certainly 7ohn ſpeaketh of wne Call 
in thoſe Vertes, the other Evingeltts of another. According ro 
Tohn, they were call2d to the Knowledze of, and firſt Acouain- 
rance with Chrift : This was while John was in the publick Exer- 
cife of his Miniftry, tor they were his Ditciples, 79%. 1. 35, 35. 
and v. 39. They are Jaid ar rhar crime, #2 have abate. with him 
that day ; Probably they again returned to their old Imploy- 
ment ; and when John was impritened, Chriſt walking by the 
Sca, faw them, and chen called them to the Apoſtleſhip. There 
are 2ther differences in their Call obſerved, berwixe Matthew, 
Mirk, and Luke, bur fuch as may be cafily anſwered by thoſe 
who obſerve, char there is noching mere crdinary, than for the 
Evangeliſts, 1n reporting tne fame Hiſt-rv, one of them ro ſup- 
ply more largely wiat the other had recorded more fumma- 
rily. 

19 And he ſaith unto them, Follow me,and I will 
make you Fithers of men. 

Here was their Call ro the OFce of A27/Hes. Tr 15 obſervable, 
thar God's Calis of Men ro Places of Dignity and Honour, and 
his Appearances of Favour to them, have ordinarily been when 
they have been” buticd in the honeſt Imployments of their Cal- 
lings. Saul was ſeeking his Farher's Afies, D:vid keeping his 
Father's Sheep, when che Lord called tt.cm to the Kinzdom : 
The Shepherds were teedins thicir Flocks, when they had the Re- 
velation of Chriſt : He calleth four Apoſtles from their Fitherv ;, 
Amos from amongſt the Herd-men of Tekoan ; 21rthew from the 
Receir of Cuſtom 3 Miſes when keeping Fethroe's Flock, Ext, 3. 2. 
Gidzm trom rhe Thrething-thor, 7a. 5. 11. God never encou- 
ragerh Idlencfs, bur deſpiſern not Perſons in meaneft Impl-y- 
ments. | fillow me; ] Thar 1s, co return no more © your Im- 
plovmenr. { I will make you Fiſhers of Zen, ] Rere is the work of 
Mfniſters ſer our ro gain Souls to God ; they are nor to Fiſh 
meerly for a Livelihood, much lefs for Hoitcur 2nd Applauſe © 
themſelves, bur to win Souls to God, and are to bafr their Hacks, 
and order thcir Nets to this end ; which they will Never {erve, it 
cicher by general Diſcourtes they make the Marks 19 wide, that 
all will darc chrough them ; or it by their Wir and Lezrning they 
make their Diſcourſes 15 fine and curious, that ter or none of 
their Hearers can underſtand them. Nor will all ovr Are make 
us Fifhers of Men : Twill mabe 3u ( faich Chriſt, ) Paul may plant, 
and Apollos may water 5 God muſt give the increaſe « But yer we 
muſt order our Nets rationally and probably 10 order to cur 


y q - 2 I? £> wy . WL. 3 T1 
End ; and wichour thar, cannot expect God's Bleffings, Nor 
wee 


TJefus began to preach, and 


» 


Y- 


*Mar.1:15, 
Joh. 1. 42: 


C) 


—— 


h10- 


Chap. IV. 


4 


% F [4 hy q 1 fs | ; ; : | 
't 14 4218-4 BD PE 
© Re es BED i Bob PESO | 

he psf! $58: 26i HL 
F848 B68 19% -THE 51A 

"f * | FER ", 4! $; m 

Þ 760 3 Fe > ” *# "et. F 

$ bk 1301] 197 ;, 

: \ « 4 $54 Wh l , 
TRAY %, fi bp at (Th +. 
ESE Gn FERN 2 408 

FOR THER: Wh 
L 3k {FIR 'H 1 + t 
: ' * } LOWRY INTY 1. 
[ ; 1 "a7: 4 s. ©. y E 
#-: $' 4 « k 
' | (hb4 (+ wy K's! 
1 BI RINF : Figs 
4X8 PIC:41 
Ll ' +8 5 ' 
| Woh 19% 'S; $ 
: : WY 3 F2 Hey 
ROY (R$ POP Fi 
4 : m x Lit 
191 a. 2% F *'/; 
£ ; FP : ht he ot 1 
1kF kf g þ q 
4 4! f Wo i + 2 
#2: 00% [28 wa, 
, : # Fg: 
bs mth 3 10 : 
6.4 
7 
1 
4 1 x 1 
/ go : F 
5 bo $ RAMs 
* ©R'Þ 1 . \f F 4 
$rFi43 4 $ f 
| ( ©4Y ' r I 7 
; p i- 8 
- & Ss PF 
6 ' (83? 
: ” 0... . 
: þ 1 1'n 
+ +7 Z 
W.;* eo}, 


. 
> : D 'y P o 
_— S A 
- —_ - KA . 
» od ans ws _ ” = 
2 - Fa" bY 4s (4 
tou} wie ;; 
: Te ey ? s — 
-.oÞ % a bs, 
= = . X E _— 7p 2 
. ” I * 


- 
vow, 


— 


Bn 2 I ei 


= 
. -—_ - 
7 A — -w_ 
_ « 
- a 
- Ta" 2 + 
Aw. . —weo 3 "4 
— — Mop pou uIm—_ 


At 
_ 
— 


$4 VE 4, 269-23) 


a 


4 « 
ng 
HOW AJ 


__ 
£2 
{8 
Eon. » 
_— — 
20 mats 


PY £ " | ; T 

& 124 [dP IV , Of. M A 
were the Apoſtics preſently to enter upon the Work of the Mini- 
nittry, buc fir{t co follow Dim. And indeed, ſuch ſhould all Go- 
ſpel-Miniſters be, in the choice of Matthias : Peter limited rhe 
People in their Elettion, to 2hye that had accompanied with them 
ell the time, the Lord Jejus went in and out among$t them, Acts 1. 21. 
Ocker Miniſters commonly prove Fiſhers for ſomerhing elle, nor 
tor the Svuls ot Men. 

20 And they iraightway left zhezr Nets, and fol- 
lowed him. 

When Chriſt calls, Men ſhall obey : when he calls, he draw- 

eth. Ir is not of inditpenſible Necefficy, that Men who Exer- 
ciſe the Miniſtry ſhould have nothing elſe ro do; Paul's hands 
miniftred to his Neceſſities : But nothing bur a providing for our 
ſelves and Houſholds can excuſe Miniſters, in intanghng them- 
ſelves with the Things of this Liſe. Churches thar are able, oughr 
bertcr to provide for their Miniſters ; and Miniſtcrs fo provi- 
ded for, fin, it they do not wholly give up themſelves to their work, 
1 Tin. 4. 15. 
41 And going on from thence, he ſaw other two 
Brethren, James he Son of Zebedee, and John his Bro- 
ther, in a ſhip with Zebedee their Father, mending 
their Nets : and he called them. 

22 And they immediately left the ſhip, and their 
Father. and followed him. 

There was another Zames, Matth. 10. 3. the Son of Alphzus, cal- 
ted 7ames the Leſs, Brother of Foſes and Salome, Mar. 15. 40. This 
was Fames the Son of Zebedee, [ and John ] who is thought to be 
the Evangeliſt, Chriſt calleth chem, net with his Voice only, bur by 
his Spirit, affeting their Hearts, So as they immediately letr their 
Ship, and their Father : Elſewhere the Diſciples fay, Maſter, we 
have left all, and followed thee ; probably their Imploymenc with 
their Ship was their A//. They left their Father alſo, but ir was 
upon Chriſt's Call ; in which Caſe ir is every Man's Duty { and fol- 
l»wed him | to learn of him before they went our to Preach him, 
and ro be Witnefles of his Miracles, &c. 

23 And Jeſus went about all Galilee, teaching in 
their Synagogues, and preaching the Goſpel of the 
Kingdom; and healing all manner of fickneſs, ard all 
manner of diſeaſe among the People. 

Feſug Chrift having now.. called four Diſciples, did not judge ir 
ſufficient ro ſend them about, bur himſelt went abour all the 
places of that dark Country of Galilee | reaching. in their Syna- 


£02ues, | the word fignifiech both the Congregation convened, and |. 


the Place. Here it fignifieth both : Synagogues were of old rime, 
Aﬀs 15. 21. how ancient we know not : Some think thar they 
were no older than the return out of the Captivity of Babylon : 
Bur I am poſed then in derermining where the Body of the Jews 
ordinarily worſhipped God on the Sabbath-days ; for ir is certain 
they did nor all go up to the Temple at Feruſalem. In the Old 
Teſtament we read of them only, P/al. 74. 8. as at that time burnt 
up. As to the Order of them, we only read, that they had ſome 
Rulers, As 13. 15. who direfted thoſe who were to ſpeak words 
of Exhortation, The Scriptures were read in them, A&s 15. 21. 
the Law and the Prophets, Ads 13. 15. They prayed 1n them, 
Hatth. 6. 5. They expounded Scriprure in them, Luk. 4. 16, 17, 
18, 19. Chriſt | Preached in the Synagogues ] nor only there ; we 
ſhall find him Yreaching on the Mount in the next Chapter, and 
in private Houſes ; but he did nor decline rhe Synagogues, either as 
to Preaching or Hearing, not wholly ſeparating from a Church 
corrupt enough through Traditions, bur not Idolatrous. But what 
did he Preach ? | The Gojpel of the Kingdom, }) the glad Tidings fer 
loſt Sinners, that was come into the World by the Revelation of 
him, who was the true Meſſtas, and the true and only way by 
which Men might come to the Kingdom of God, and be eter- 
nally ſaved. This is whar all his Miniſters ſhould publifh, nor 
their own Conceirs, or Dictates of Men, or things impercinenrt 
to rhe Salvation of Souls, but the Gopel of the Kingdom. | And 
healing all maimer of Sickneſſes, and all manner of Diſeaſes amongſt 
the People. ] The Greek is all Dijeaſes and Sickneſſes ; yer ſurely 
ſome died" in Galiice in that rime. This is another Text, to 
prove that the germ 4/! in Scripture doth nor always fignifie 
every Individual, but ſome Individuals of every Species. Chriſt 
confirmed his Dodtrine, and Divine Miffion, by theſe miraculous 
Opcrarions. 


24 And his fame went throughout all Syria, and 
they brought unto him all ſick people, rhat were taken 
with divers diſeaſes, and torments, and thoſe which 
were poſſeſſed with devils, and thoſe which were lu- 
Natick, and thoſe which had the palſie, and he heal- 
ed them. 


Syria is ſaid ro be bounded on the North by Cilicia, by Egypt 
on the South, on the Weſt with the Sea, and on the Eafi with Eu- 
phrates, and ro comprehend within it all Fudea, Bethany, Galilee, 
Decapolis, Samaria, Idumea, Paleſlina, Syrophenicia, Syria of Damaſcus, 
and Syria of Antioch. Chriſt's Fame ſpread very tar doubtleſs, 
becauſe of rhe Good he did, and the Miracles he wrought. | And 
they brought out to him all ſuch People that were taken with divers 
Diſeaſes.,} All here again can ſignifie no more rhan very many 
rhat were indiſpoſed, and 11 affeftted as ro their bodily Health ; 
thoſe that were fick of, or detained in their Beds or Houſes by 
divers Diſeaſes : Tho' Chriſt ſhewed his Power in curing ſome 
Diſeaſes, which Phyſicians judge incurable ; yer he ſhewed his 
Kindneſs alſo in relieving others nor to fatally fick. [ And Tor- 
ments ] Such as were troubled with great Pains, as if chey were 
upon Racks, or in the hands of Tormentors, that ſer themſelves 
ro Torture them. | And thoſe which were p3ſſeſſed with Devils. | Of 
theſe 1orrs of Perſons, we thall read ofcen in the Goſpel : This is 
the firſt c'me we meet With the term. Ir 15 obſerved thar in the Old 


THE W, Chap, 


Teſtament we read lictle of any ſuch Perſons; ( we read © 


| 1p \ 


Saul's being vexed with an evil Spirit, ) we read much of 9 ms "= 
in the New Teſtament, and in Eccleſiaſtical Hiſtory, for = ts 
years after Chriſt, chey called them Energument, Some , ks 
Gcd in thoſe firſt Times of the Goſpel permitted the Devils « "" 
this degree, that the Power of our Saviour might be the aches oY: rhe 
ſeen in caſting them cur, and in giving Aurherity ro his Diſc 
ples to caſt them cur, which was a great Demonſtration «+ li M 
Divinity : Others think, thar God did it for a Demonſtration _ 
the Error of the Sadduces, who held there was no Spirie,, _ 3 An E 
Goſpel ſeemerh ro hint rwo forts of theſe Perſons : Some y - : neal 
whom the Devil had Power, no farther than ro Wrack ang Ef OI 
ture them, Mar. 5. 3, 4, 5» Luk. 9. 39. Others, in whom he ditel. : ” 
led Bodily, and Divined, and Prophecied in them, 4&5 15, |; = k 
{ And thyſe which were Lunatick, ] Aﬀe&ted with ſuch Diſeaſes, ix _ 
uſed to increaſe, in ſome times of che Moon, or at ſuch times yn 
ſeize Perſons: Of this Nature we know divers, more Particy. - "y 
larly the F:lling-ſickneſs and Dropſie, { and thoſe which had the Pal. _ % 
fie ) a Diſeaſe cauſed by the Reſolution of the Nertes, Thoſe _ = 
Diſeaſes are mentioned, which Men account hardeſt to be cyreg wy 
it capable of Cure by Men. Chriſt, ro ſhew his Divine Poxer LY A 
healed them. Chriſt did nor cnly cure theſe Bodily Diſtempers ar 
bur he alſo Preached the Goſpel of the Kingdom to heal their S oy 
Soul Diſtempers. We read of many came to him for Bogjly of ; 
Cure ; bur of none thar faid ro him, What ſhall we do to be ſag? © hs 
How ſenſible are Men and Women of their Bodily Pains and Dj. on re 
ſeaſes, more than of their Souls wants ? oy : 
25 And there followed him great multitudes God w 
people from Galilee, and from Decapolis, and {1 ke 
Jeruſalem, and from Judea, and from beyond Jorday, SL 
They followed for rhe Loaves, for the benefit of che Bcdily Kare 
Cures, or our of Curioſity, cho' ſome ( probably ) followed hin You 
our of Love, and to learn of him. Decapolzs hath irs Name from Jenlual « 
Ten Cities, comprehended in ir. Here was a mixture both of Joy; happy M 
and Gentiles following Chriſt, who came ro be a Saviour of then Jariehd. 
borh, and to pull down che Partition-wall berwixr both, to make excellent 
them both one Goſpel-Church, Eph. 2. 14. = fg 
3 
d 17. and 
CHAP. V. Men, wh 
Chriſt's Sermon on the Mount : Sheweth, who they are that are bleſſed, thereof 3 
I—12, And who are the Salt of the Earth : The Light of th | 1,2, Luh 
World : A City on a Hill, 13, 14. The Candle, 15. He cmith | of an Hu 
to fulfil the Law, 179—%0. Sheweth what-it 4 to Kill, to connit Men, whi 
Adultery, and to Swear, 21—37. Exhorteth to ſuffer Win ; 1 ſed and 
| love Enemies, and labour after the higheſt Perfe&ion, 37—48, — 37. 
11S 1eXxr, 
I A N D ſeeing the multitudes, he went up into 1 7 Ble 
mountain : and when he was ſet, his Diſcipls mercy. 
came unto him. : GW 
2 And he opened his mouth, and taught then, i. toy oh 
ſaying, | vho are to! 
The laſt Chapter concluded with telling us, that a great Mul | Miſeries of 
tirude followed Chriſt ; which he obſerving, that he mighe with | Tendernef: 
more Conveniency to himſelf, and Advantage to them, ſpeak b God, and a 
what he had to ſay, he went up into a Mountain ; and fiting | and _ 
pare them, 


down, (after the manner of the 7ewiſh Dotors, ro ſhew their au- 
thoricy, which our Saviour allo at other times obſerved, Matt, 
26. 55. Luk. 4. 20, Joh. 8. 2, ) | his Diſciples came 19 hin, ] bat 


= tthem, ſu 
Mercy ; and 


thoſe ſtriftly 1o called, and others alio, viz. the Mujricuce, men: - and Diſtreſs 
tioned 1n the laſt Chapter, or ſome or them ; and he bez aa tv ſpeak 5. He doch 
to them with Freedom, ſo as the Multicude might hear. Chriſt & ty ſhall b 
choughr it as Jawtul to Preach in the Mountain, as in the Synagyies; "1 $ Blef] 
nor did his Diſciples doubt the Lawfulneſs of hearing him, where & God 
ever he thought fit to ſpeak. k ; 

The Men 


 tMen, and 
but painted | 


3 * Blefled are the poor in ſpirit, for theirs is the» 
kingdom of heaven. 


Happy are they, who tho' they be not Rich in this World 
Goods, yet have a Spirit ſuited to their Srate and Condition, 10: 
looking for their Conſolation here, but having a poor and {ov 
Opinton of the World, and all thar is therein ; looking aiter more 
excellent Riches; and in order co 1t, are ot broken and cntri: 
Spirits, tor their manitold Sins, and cannor enterr4in any proud 
Opinion of their own Righteouſneſs, bur fly unto the Free 
Grace of God, and the Righreouſneſs of the Lord Jeſus Chriſt 
Not the Great, and Rich, and Proud Men of the World are 
happy ; but thetfe are the Bleſſed Men ; for true Happineſs |xe! 


clean Birds ; 
their filrhine 
tio they be 
Pure, as that 
after Holineſ: 
neſs of Mind 


- Oomortal E 


theſe Men ſh 
tho'in a Glaf 


and he js, 


nor 1n Worldly Pofleffions, but in the Favour of God, and 1 5 BleM: 
Right co the Kingdom of Heaven, and that theſe Men have, ?/: led "ho 
34. 18. and $1. 17. Iſa. 65. 2. called the « 

The World 


4 * Bleſſed are they that mourn, for they ſhall be aha 
comforted. [ t Conquer 
The World 1s miſtaken in accounting the jocund and merry} /tlin, Bur 1 


Companions, the only happy Men; their Mirth is Madneſs, ard leckins Peace 
their Joy will be like crackling of Thorns under a Por ; Ou! S2eds of Ditc 
thoſe are rather the happy Men who mourn; yea, ſuch are m0! ” Et) mike Pe 
certainly happy who mourn out of Duty in che Senfe of ml BW Wd his Nejo 
own Sins, or ot the Sins of others; or who mourn out of C0ic%, *t a Principle 
racher to ſuffer Afﬀidtions and Perſecurions wich the People 0 Nall approve 
God, than to enjoy the Pleaſure of Sin for a Seaſon. Tho' uct 13 they ſhall 
Sufterings do excire in them natural Paſſions, yet it 1s a Blellcd * line; 6 whg 
Mourning, for -thoſe are the Bleſſed Tears which God will wp tom, g, 7,8, 
at laſt trom Peoples Eyes; and ſuch are theſe. [ They ſhall be £07 tpret] h 


forted } either 1n this Lite, with the Conſolations of the Sp! WWF Þ Me:preted, 


or wich their Maſter's Foy in the Life that is ro come, [/a. 91-5. + 33, 

7oh. 16. 20. Fames 1. 12, So as this Promiſe and Declaration ® m_— 
Blefſedneſs, is not to be extended ro all Mourners, bur only © wenſs PIC 
ſuch as God harh made ſo, or who in Dury have made the -Onineſs la 
ſelves ſo, obeying ſome Command of God ; for Sympati1!% © Men © 
wich God's Glory, or with his aftliited People, Rome. 12. 15: he Mleratle, wh 
Teſtifying their Repenrance for their Sins; tor chere 153 _ a W{1re, a 


% 


F 97,11, 


| 1p V. 


-., which is 2 mecr natural effett of Paſſion, and a Worldly Sor- 
_ which worketh unto death, as well as a Godly Sorrow working Re- 
Pont ance to Salvation, 2 Cor. 7, 10. 


5 Bleſſed * re the meek, for they ſhall inherir 


che Earth. | 

Men count the Hefors of the World Happy, whom none 

\ -rovoke, bur they muſt expett as good as they bring 3 
P_ F for an Eye, and a Tooth for a Tooth. Burt 1 tell you theſe 
= = truly Happy, they are Tortured with their own. Paſſi- 
wot . their Hand 1s againſt every one, ſo every Man's Hand 
ic 2cainſt rhem 3 beſides, thar there is a God, who will revenge 
-- Wrongs they do. Bur the Meek., who can be angry, bur re- 
yas cheir Wrath in Obedience to the Will of God, and will 
Roc be angry, unleſs they can be angry and nor fin : Nor will 
eaiily be provoked by others, bur rather uſe ſoft word's to pacifie 
1/+.4;þ, and give place to the Paſſions of others ; theſe are the 
Bloſſed Men : For tho' ochers may by their Sword, and their Bow, 
CONOUET a £reat deal of Earth to rheir will and Power, yer they 
will never quietly and comfortably inherit or pofleſs it ; they 
are Poſſoſſors mals fidei, forcible Poſlelſors, and they will enjoy 
whar chey have, as rapacious Birds enjoy theirs unquietly ; every 
one hach his Gun ready Charged and Cocke againſt chem : Bur 
thoſe who are of meek and quier Spirits, tho' they may not take 
{6 deep Root in the Earch, as others more boiſterous, yet rhere 
will be no Worm at rhe Roor of what chey have, and they ſhal! 
:y what God giveth them with more quier and certainty, and 


nn will provide for them : Verily they ſhall be fed, Pſal. 37. 


ONS 3 A 


*" prelihd wn they which do hunger and thirſt after 


Ki-hreouſneſs, for they ſhall be filled. _ 

You ſee many Men and Women Hungring and Thirſting after 
ſenſual Satista&tions, Or after ſenſible Enjyyments : Theſe are un- 
happy miſerable Men 3 they otren Hunger and Thirſt, and are nor 
jasfed. Bur I will ſhew you a more excellent Way, a more 
excellent Obje& of your Hunger and Thirſ?,. that is, Righteouſneſs, 
both a Righreouſneſs wherein you may ſtand before God, which 
53s in me, Fer. 23. 6. and is revealed from Faith to Faith, Rom, 1. 
17. and the Righteouſneſs of an Holy Lite. Thoſe are Bleſſed 
Men, who firſt ſeek the Kingdom of Heaven, and the Righteouſneſs 
thereof 3 God will theſe Men with what they deſire, 1/a. 55. 
1,2. Luk. 1. 53. There are fome who. underſtand this Text, 
of an Hungring after the clearing of their Innocency towards 
Men, which is natural to jaſt and innocent Perſons talſly accu- 
ſed and traduced, and they have a Promiſe of being filled, 
Pſal. 37. 6. Bur I ſee no reaſon to conclude this rhe Sente of 
this Text, 


7 Bleſſed are the merciful, for they ſhall obtain 


mercy. 
The Men of the World bleſs themſelves, if they can take 


© Care of themſelves, let others do what they -will, and as well as 
» they can: But I tell you, that thoſe alone are the Bleſſed Men, 
© who are touched with a true ſence and feeling of che Wants and 
> NMiſeries of others ; and rhat not our of a meer Gocdneſs and 
* Tendernefs of Nature, but our of a true Obedience to the Will of 
God, and a Senſe of his Love to them, and Faith in his Promiſes; 
Z and moved trom theſe Principles, do nor only pity and compaſſio- 
” pate chem, and wiſh them well, bur extend their helping Hand 
” tothem, ſuirably co their Miſeries : For theſe Men ſþall obtain 


ttercy ; and that nor only from Men, it they come into Strairs 


; and Diſtreſs, bur from the Hand of God, P/ſal. 37. 26. Pſal. 112. 


5. He doth nor ſay they thall merit Mercy at God's Hand, bur 
they ſhall be Mercified, they ſhall obtain Mercy. 


$ Bleſſed are the * pure in heart, for they ſhall ſee 


' (od. 


The Men of the World bleſs thoſe who appear Pure and Holy 


I tMen, and pur on a Vizard and Mack of Purity, tho* they be 
* bur painted Sepulchres, and their Hearts be as Cages of all un- 


clean Birds ; Bur choſe alone are Bleſied, who being. waſhed from 
their filchineſs by my Blood, are of a ſincere and upright Heart, 
tho' they be not legally pure, and free from all Sin; yer are fo 
pure, as thar God will accept them, the benr of cheir Hearrs being 
ater Holineſs ; who have not an Heart, and an Heart, no double- 
nels of Mind, who are Perſons in whom 1s no Guile. For tho” 


E no mortal Eye can ſee and comprehend the Eflence of God, yer 


theſe Men ſhall by an Eye of Faith ſee and enjsy God in this Lite, 
tho'in a Glaſs more darkly, and in the Life to come, Face to Face, 


and 4 he is, 1 Cor. 13. 12. Heb. 12.14. I Joh, 3. 2. 


9 Bleſſed are the peace-makers, tor they {hall be 
called the children of God. 
The World bleiſerh che boifterous unquiert Parry of ir, that 


© Can never be ſtill, bur are continually -%:inking of more Worlds 
= Tt Conquer, and blowing up the ©:41s of War, Diviſun and Se- 


dition, Bur they are Blefled indeed, who ſtudy ro be quier, 
leeking Peace, and purſuirz it ; and are ſo far frum ſowing che 
S20ds of Difcord, or blowing thoſe Coals, chat their grear ſtudy 


' $29 make Peace berween God and Man, and berwizt a Man 


Ws his Neighbour ; doing this in Obedience ro God, and cur 


of a Principle of Love 'te God and Men : For thoſe that do fo, 
hall approve themſelves like rmto God, ro be Iis Children ; and 
19 they ſhall be called. ( To be called, and to be, is much the 


| lime; ſo whar Z/ſes ſaid, Gen. 21. 12. is interprered by Paul, 


#M.9.7,%, So whar is faid by Matthew, Matth. 21. 12. is in- 
rrpret-1 by Luk. 19. 45. What was f:id by Sc. Fbn, chap. 1. 13. 


3 p ime-preted, 1 702. 3.1.) for Gcd is the God of Peace, 1 Cor. 
S--/ + 33, 


w—_ = 


= - 


10 Bleſſed are they who are perſecuted for righ- 
tonſneſs fake, tor theirs is the kingdom of Heaven. 
... Men of the World judge thoſe Men very unhappy and 
"<0, Whom their Rulers make the Objects of their Wrath 

140, and purſue violently co rhe loſs of their E/kates, Li- 


St. M ATTHE WW. 


berties, or Lives, never conſidering the Cauſe for which they are 
fo purſued : But they are quite miſtaken ; for that Man who 1s 
purſued by ſuch Violence, and hunted upon this Account ; be 
cauſe to pleaſe Men, he durſt nor fin againſt God, but Labours 
ro keep a Conſcience wid of offence, both toward God, and toward 
Men, Adts 24. 16. is a Bleſſed Man , and if he be hunted our of the 
Kingdoms of the Earth, yer he ſhall be hunted bur ro Heaven : 
tor ro ſuch Men belongeth the Kingdom of God in Glory, Fames 
I.12, 1 Pet. 3.14. and 4.13. 


11 Blefled are ye when men ſhall revile you, and 
perſecure yor, and {hall fay all manner of evil againſt 
you fallly for my ſake. | 


Reviling, and ſpeaking Evil of Perſons falſly, becauſe of their 
Proteffion of Chriſt, and becauſe chey dare nor fin againſt God, 
15 a Species of Perſecution, Gen. 21. 9. Gal. 4. 29. tho? the lows- 
eſt Degree of ir. It hath been the conſtant Lot of God's Ser- 
vants ; David ſaid, Pſal. 35.11. that falſe Witneſſes did riſe up, 
and /aid to his Charge things that he knew not. Thus John and 
Chriſt were ſerved, Matth. 11. 19. Luk. 7. 34. Nor is it to be won- 
dred, thar thoſe whoſe Conſciences are ſo ſeared, that they can- 
nor feel the Guile of Perſecuring others for Righteouſneſs ſake, 
ſhould nor feel the Guilc of Lying and falſe Swearing : Bur, faich 
our Saviour, you are Bleſſed when cheſe chings happen unto you, 
I Pet. 4. 13, 


12 Rejoyce, and be exceeding glad ; for great zs 
your reward in heaven : for ſo perſecuted they the 
Prophets which were before you. 


Be ſo far from being troubled, as to count ir all 7oy, when 
you fall into theſe Tryals, = I. 2, let it be Muſick in your 
Ears, to hear that the Drunkards make you their Song : Rejoyce 
in your Hearcs, expreſs ic in your Lips and Behaviour ; [ For 
great s your Reward, ) nor of Debt, bur of Grace ; for our light 
and momentary 4jflietions are nor worthy to be compared with an 
eternal and cxceeding weight of Glery ; Where there is no Propor- 
tion, chere can be no Merir, eſpecially when it 5s given to us on 
the behalf of Chriſt to ſuffer, Phil. 1. 29. Peter upon this Argu- 
ment ſaith, 1 Pet. 4. 14. The Spirit of God and of Glory reſteth upon 
us. Our Saviour adds : | For ſo they perſecuted the Prophets before 
You. ] The Magiſtrates, and the Rulers of the Fews, perſecured 
Elijah, Micaiah, Jeremiah, Amos, and the reſt of the Prophers 
whom you ſucceed z nor in Time only, but in the fame Office 
of revealing the Mind of God to the People. 


13 Ye are the ſalt of the Earth : but if the falr 
hath loſt irs favour, wherewith ſhall it be falred ? It 
is thenceforth good for nothing but to be caſt our, 
and to be rroden under foot of men. 


In our Chriſtian Courſe we arc not to trouble our ſelves with 
what Men ſay of us, and do unto us, bur only to attend co our 
Duty of Holineſs, and an Exemplary Life ; which is whar our 
Saviour preſſeth plainly, v. 16. And leads his Hearers to ic by 
four Compariſons, which he inſticurerh berwixte chem and four 
other things : The firſt we have in this Verſe, [ 7e are the ſalt of 
the Earth. © The Doctrine which you profeſs 1s lo; a thing as 
oppolite as can be to the Putrefatticn of the World, both in 
reſpe&t to corrupt Dottrine, and corrupt Manners, ( therefore 
by che way, it will be no wonder it they refiſt ic by Reviling 
and Perſecuting you, ) you are the Salt of the Ezrth, through the 
Grace +1 G.d befſtc::ed upon you, /*i4r. 9. 50. Col. 4. 6. If it 
were not t'c che number ot Sound and Painful Miniſters, and 
Holy and Gracious Perſons, che Earch would be bur a ſtinking 
Dunghi} or Drunkards, unclean Perſons, Thieves, Murderers, 
unrighreous Perſons, that would be a ſtench in the Noſtrils of a 
Pure and Holy G::d. Look as it 1s in the World, if the Salt 
hath loſt ics 1avour, 1s Acrimony by which ir oppoſeth Putre- 
faction in Fith and Fleth ; not the Fiſh or Fleſh only will be 
good tor nochinz, but the Salt it 1elf fo infatuated ( as it is in 
the Greek _) vill be gocd for nothing, bur ro be caft upon a Dung- 
hil, and troden unaer foot. So 1t is with Miniſters of the Goſpel, 
fo with che Prc#etlors of it ;, if they have loſt their Soundneſs in 
the Faith, and Holineſs of Lite,they are of no value, nay, they 
are worte than other Men. Money, if it be clipt in pieces, and 
hatch loft irs uſetulnets as Coin, yer 1s of uſe tor a Gold-ſmith : 
Meat corrupted, if *© will not ferve for Men, yer will feed Dogs : 
Salt is good tor nothing. No more are pretended Miniſters or 
Chriſtians ; rheir Excellency lies in their favour; if char be loſt, 
iwherewith ſhall they be ſaired ? Of whar uſe are they, unleſs ro 
cauſe the Name of God and Religion to be blaſphemed ? Such 
another Similicude the Prophet uſerth, Ezek. 15. 2, 3. 


14 Ye arethe light of the World : A City that is 
ſet on an hill cannot be hid. 


You that areto be my Apoſtles, are fo Eminen?ly ; bur all you 
thar are my Di{ciples are ſo alſo. Chriſt is the Light of the World, 
7Foh. 1. 5, 9. Bur tho” the Sun be the Light of the Worid, yer ic 
doth nor tollow, thac the Moon and the Star alfo are nor fo; he 
is the Original Light, the great Light who hath Light from and in 
himſelf. The Miniſters of the Goſpel are the L1ghts of the 
World alſo, rhe Angels of Churches are Stars, Rev. 1. 20. and 
Holy Perſons are Children of the Light, 1 Toefſ. 5. 5. | A City that 
is ſet upon an Hill cannot be hid. \ The Church is otren called zhe 
City of God : Chriſt compares his People here ner to a Ci?y, bur 
ro a City upon 4 Hill; fo thar all which our Saviour mentions 4 
City here for, is the Confpicuicy ofa City fo buile. Ir 15 as much 
as if our Saviour ſhould have faid, You had need be Holy, tor 
your Converſation cannor be hid, any more chan a City can thac 
1s builded upon an Hill, which is obvious co every Eye. All Mens 
Eyes will be upon you. 


15 Neither do men light a candle, and put it un- 


Chap. V. 


Or, lying 
OY my 
name's ſale 


IMar.4.21. 


der a || buſhel, but upon a candleſtick, and ir giveth Luk.s. 15. 


light unto all that are in the houſe. 
You 


& 11. 33- 


> ©» od - 
fe . = + 4 *% 
L ONT - hag X el 
. >. --þ L T os me 
Vas a * ” was. = PR _ 
- 
; COTS "Y AN Mk w- F y4 
'K* - pw _ — 


fx 
=Z 
—_ 


GH 
_—_— 
"0 -apt- 


CY 'S ne 
— = 
VS UELG 


gg © 4 ny £ 
ULSY < Fo -- 
— - 
=: ikgs-= +hic 
by — — 
, _ 


- _ Be 
oe” ny, , 
e -- Jeneulite 
S SK” 
ra he 
——_—— 
2 — 


Chap. V. 


Tf Pet. 2 
12. 


4 Luk. 16. 
6 7. 


You ought alſo to confider the End why I have Communica- 
ted of my Light unto you 3 it is in part the fame with that of 
Men, when they light up a Candle in a Room, which is to ſhew 
Lighr to all choſe thar are in the Room 3they do nor uſe ro light 
ir up ro hide it under a Veflel, or a Buſhel : So I have not Com- 
municared my Truths, or my Grace unto you, meerly for your 
wn uſe, bur for ochers uſe. Ir is ſaid of John ( by our Saviour ) 
he was a burning and ſhining Light : So is every true Miniſter 
of rhe Goſpel, yea, and every true Chriſtian 3 not only a burning 
Light, burning with Love ro God, and Zeal tor God, and Love 
r2, and Zeal for the Souls of others, but alſo a ſhining Light, 
Communigating his Light to orhers, both by In/tru&on, and an 
Holy Converſation. Ochers pretended Candles were never of God's 
hghcing. 

16 Let your light ſo ſhine before men, that they 
may * ſee your good works, and glorihe your Father 


which 1s 1n heaven. 

Our Saviour now plainly tells us, what he intended by the 
Compariſons before mentioned. Ler che Light of that Docirine 
which you received from me, and the Light of your Holy Con- 
verſation ( the latter by the following words ſeemeth to be here 
Principally. intended ) | So ſhine before Men, ] be fo evident and 
apparent. unto men. | that they may ſee your good works : ) All ſorts 
of Good works, whatſoever I have Commanded, or ſhall Com- 
mand you, and as I Command you, and in Ovedience to ſuch 
Commands, otherwiſe they are no Good works. | And glorifie your 
Father which is in Heaven. ] You are not in your good Actions 
to aim art your ſelves, ro be ſeen of Men, as 37atth. 6. 1. nor 
meerly at doing good to others; the Good works, Tit. 3. 14+ are t0 
be maintained for neceſſury uſzs, ) but having a Primary and Prin- 
cipal reſpec to the Glorifying of your Father for, Fohn. 15. 8. Here- 
in is my Bather glorified, if you bear much fruit : Not that we can 
add any thing to God's Efſential Glory, but we may predicare 
and manifeſt his Glory. Which how we can do by Good works, 
if they proceed from meer Power, and Liberty of our own Wills ; 
nor from his ſpecial Efficacious Grace, is hard to underſtand. Our 
Father is ſaid to be in the Heavens; becauſe rtho* his Effencial 
Preſence filleth all places, yer he is pleaſed there more than. any 
where to manifeſt his Glory and Majeſty. 


17 Think not that I am come to deſtroy the Law 
or the Prophets,: I am not come to deftroy, but to 
fulfil. 


There are ſo many Adverſaries, Jews, Papiſts, Socinians, Ana” 
baptiſts, Antinomians, &c. that make their Advantages of this Text, 
for che 'Eſtabliſhing their ſeveral Errors, that ic would require 
a Volume to vindicare it from their ſeveral Exceptions thoſe who 
defire SatisfaQtion may read Spanhemins Dub. Evang. 12.3. Dub.10s, 
C3c. The plain Senſe of rheText is this : It would have been a great 
Cavil with the Fews eſpecially, ( who had a great Reverence tor 
the Law ) if either our Saviour's Enemies amongſt them could 
have perſivaded People, that Chriſt came to deſtroy the Law and 
the Prophers ; or his own Hearers had entertained from his Dif- 
courſe any ſuch Apprehenfions. Our Saviour defigning im his 
tcllowing Diſcourſe, ro give a more full and ftrift Interprera- 
tion of the Law, than had been given by the Phariſees and other 
Jewiſh Doors, prefacerh thar Diſcourſe, with a Proteſtation 
againſt his coming to deſtroy the Law, and averring that he came 
to fulfil ir. It is maniteſt by his following Diſcourſe, that he 
Principally ſpake of che Moral Law, tho! he alſo fulfilled the Ce- 
remonial Law, he being the Antitype in whom all the Types of thar 
had their Complement, and real Fulfilling and Accomplithment, 
Saith he, I am not come to Deſtroy, and put an end to the Moral 
Law ; Iam come to fulfil ic, not co fill it up, as Papiſts and S$0- 
cinians contend, adding any new Preceprt to it, but by yielding 
my ſelf a Perſonal Obedience to ir, by giving a fuller and ſtrifter 
Interpretation of it, than you have formerly had, and by taking 
the Curſe of ir ( ſo far as concerneth my Diſciples ) upon my 
ſelf, and giving a juſt Sarisfation ro Divine Juſtice for ir. The 
greareft Obje&tion urged againſt Chriſt deſtroying parc of the 
Law, and adding new Precepts to the Moral Law, is that abour 
che Change of the Sabbath ;, bur rhis is none, if we conſider char 
the Moral Law required no more than one Day of ſeven to be kept 
as a Day of Holy Reſt ; not this or that particular Day, tor the 
particular Day, the Jews learned ir from the Ceremonial Law, as 
Chriſtians learn theirs from Chriſt's, and che Apoſtles Prafice : 
Nor is it any Obje&ion againſt this, chat rhe Seventh Day from 
the Creation 1s mentioned in the Law, to thoſe who know how 
ro diſtinguiſh berwixr the Precept and the Argument ; the Se- 
venth from the Creation is not in the Precept, but in the Argu- 
ment. Fw in Six Days, &c. Now there is nothing more ordina- 
ry than to have Arguments of a particular Temporary Concern- 
ment uſed to inforce Precepts of an Eternal Obligarion, where 
the Preceprs were firſt given to that particular People, as ro 
whom thoſe Arguments were of force ; an inſtance of which 
is in the firſt Commandment, as well as in this. As on the 
other fide, Arguments of univerſal Force are oftannexed ro Pre- 
ceprs, which had bur a particular Obligation upon a particular 
People for a time. Thus in the Ceremonial Law, we otren find 
It as an Argument to inforce many Ceremonial Precepts : For 7 
am the Lord thy God. 


18 For verily I ſay unto you. Till Heaven and Farth 
paſs, * one jor, or one tirtle ſhall in no wiſe paſs from 
the Law, till all be fulfilled. 


Amen I ſay unto you ;, fo it is in the Greeh; a Phraſe, as ſome 
obſerve, never uſed, but by God and Chriſt himſelf, who 1s the 


Amen, the Faithful and True Witneſs, Rev. 3. 14. Tho' the Servants 


of God have ſometimes uſed ir, as an Adverb of wiſhing. Ir is by 
moſt concluded a form of an Oath, God by it Swearing by his 
Truth and Faitl:tulneſs, { till Heaven and Earth, &c. | That 1s, 
the Law is the certain and unchangeable Will of God concern- 
ing reaſonable Creatures, and ir ſhall never be altered in the leaſt 


S MATTHEW. 


Chap, | 
title; nor e7er be aboliſhed 3 you may therefore b 
[ come into the World upon no ſuch Rs, — thar 

19 * Whoſoever therefore ſhall break one of thep; ' 
leaſt Commandments, and ſhall reach men fo, he ſha i; gee 
be called the leaft in the Kingdom of Heaven: hy E 


whoſoever ſhall do, and teach zbe, ſhall be calle OE 
great in the Kingdom of Heaven. Ns 
Whoſoever ſhall in his Prattice violate bur one of the © wrcd 
mandments of God, which the Phariſees judge of the leaj3 nap Puniff 
which poffibly are ſo compared with others, and ſhall reach V being | 
that chey may do as he doth ; making ſuch talſe Interpretar.. rels 0! 
of the Law, as may warrant ſuch a pradtice ; he ſhall be ac os cher) 
red of the leaſt Value and Eſteem in the Church of ——_ of 
ſhall never come into the Kingdom of Glory : Bur he who = o 
ſtriftly and uniformly obey all the Commandments, ang ; 5 22 
others to do the like by his Dofrine and Example, that Man _ Lt 
have a great Renown and Repurarion in the Church, which jc u and g 
Kingdom of Heaven upon Earth, and ſhall have a great _ - gtinlr 
in the Kingdom of Glory hereatrer, = 24 
20 For I ſay unto you, That except your Righte- tv W 
ouſneſs * ſhall exceed the r:ghteouſne/s of the Scribe, cbs 
and Phariſees, ye ſhall in no caſe enter into the Kins. . ihe 
dom of Heaven. d 3 Gitcs we 
I am fo far from giving a Liberty to the Violation ; PE 
ther's Law, ( as the Scribes and Phariſees may poſſibly fung.? y Kar tlc 
that I aſſure you, that unleſs your Obedience t9 it exceed iy mr 
Obedience which the Scribes and Phariſees teach you, and "a — 
ſelves praQtiſe, you ſhall never come in Heaven. What the Rizh _ 
reouſhels of the Scribes and Phariſees was, we cannor better |ex;, Judgmer 
chan from St. Paul, who was himſelf a Phariſee, and breq rs w r 
che Feet of Gamaliel, a great Door amongft them, 45; : n amPrem, 
and 26. 5, Phil. 3. 5. That it was a Righteouſneſs of ""FxA4 avg ng 
peareth from Phil. 3. and the whole Epiftles to the Romans a Ts —_ 
Galathians, and their not owning Chriſt as the Meſjah, nor j, - ares 
lieving on him, Joh. 7. 48. made ir impoſſible thar ir ſhoulg " agate 
any other : That they lookt upon their meer Obedience tg th eg; 
Ceremonial Law as their Righteouſneſs, cannot be proved. - mg : 
the contrary 1s enough evident, by their Obedience to the H1, 8-4 
Law, according to the Interpretation they pur upon ir, Fi rea 


their interpretarion of the Moral Law was fo ſhore and jejure 
, 


0 > with refer 
that it is manifeſt char their Righteouſneſs was nor only a Riche. al 


cqualiy Ec: 


ouſneſs rot of Faith, but of Works ; but Works that were very ; 

Y it J.1itts I. 2 
perfe#, and ſhort of whar the true Senſe of the Law require em 
our Saviour afterward proveth : Thar is ro ſay, it was m9 Right: 4 
ouſneſs ; tor he that keepeth the whole Law, if he be guilty in i; 23 At 
Point, is guilty of all, Jam: 2. 10, & thou art 

| 21 Ye have heard that it was ſaid by them of (1 p. "crlary d 
time, Thou * ſhalt not kill : and whoſoever ſhall kil, "8 '! thee 
{hall be in danger of the Judgment. 2 26 Ve 

22 ButlI fay unto you, That whoſoever is arzy ME Ent 
with his Brother without a cauſe, ſhall be in dangs | {uthing, 
of the Judgment : and whoſoever ſhall fay unto hi | foralmu 
Brother, Raca, ſhall be in danger of the Courk!: 3 args: 
£ © val $ 

but whoſoever ſhall ſay, Thou fool, ſhall be in dar F hve provo 
ger of Hell-frre. E are with 


Advertaries 
E Men hefore 
& t::h foun 

© be C4rrIC 
ſuc Ottenct 
tie Pa'':2ns, 
mak. Men « 
then 1s mac 


od SEE , E 
Ht Wk (: [TIP 


The Phariſees in their LeQtures upon the Law uſually th 
pretaced, It was ſaid to them of old time : This, ſaith Chriit, you 
have heard, [ Thou ſhalt not kill : ) This was ſpoken by God in 
Mount Sinai, 1t was the ſixth of the ren words then ſpcke. { Ard 
whoſoever ſhall kill, ſhall be in danger of the Judgment k, This nos 
was the Phariſees Addition, for we read of no ſuch Addirion t) 
the Law as deliver'd, Exod. 20. 13. Thus they mixed their Ti: 
ditions wich the Word of God, which poflible mis|r be te 
reaſon of their ſaying rather, It was ſaid to them of old tirre, chan 
it was jaid by Moſes : Or, It was ſaid in the Law of God ; tor ut 
der that Phraſe, It was ſaid to the Ancients, they both compre 
hended the Law given by Moſes to the Ancient People of Gd, 
and alfo their own Traditions and .alfe Glofſes ; which thy not 
to Ancient as the Law, yer had obrained for ſome contiderable 


left dying in 
Jure and Wz 
vered, chap, 


rime, in the corrupt State of the Zews :[ Shall be Guilty of, or 0- 7 27 Ye 
noxious unto the Fudgment, | not to the Wrarh and Vengeancedt W time * T 
God ; of that they ſaid nothing, bur ro thyſe Courts of Juds: hangs: 

. 20 Dut 


ment which ſate amongſt chem, co adminiſter Juſtice in Crim , 
nal Cauſes. As if this Law of God had been only intended t0 E 1791 2 We 
uphold Peace, and to preſerve Hamane Scciety and Civil 0: WW - diiltery wy 
der. | Thou ſhalt not wh char is, (as chey interpreted ) thou ſhalt F EZ w7T 
nor, without a Warrant from God, or 'trom the Law, aual 
rake away the Lire of another, Ir appears by what followeth, 
that they extended not this Law to unjuſtifiable Paſſions in he 
Heart ; ſuch as raſh Anger, Malice, revengeful Thoghts ; ncr t0 
any opprobrious or revengeful Words. ( But T ſay unto you } 1 (hal 
give you another Senſe of this Law. The killing here forbidden 


Lo | C3 " 
: Tic J, Pe L 
l Tic Veries 
Interpreracio! 
T*; i ” 
R:1! (oY) Inteyy | 
{5 « ; 5 / "9 _ 

fo » I as 


Invrprecation 


is as well raſh and cauſleſs Anger, and opprobrious Threats Ut dfv, WW] 
Speeches, as bloody Attions. { Whoſcever #s Angry with his Brother "nh * thew 
without a cauſe, ſhall be in danger of the Judgment, &c. ] Our laty ia} Detj 
viour ( as moſt Interpreters judge ) fred; this with Alluſion 09 ey to fuch 

the three Courts amongſt rhe Fews : The one was the Court 7] t as ot the 7 
three Men, which only judged of ſmaller and lighrer Cauſes, 1% 1s Law (Vin 
in Capiral Cauſes. Another was their Court of Twenty-three MM oa Currally 

which much anſivered our Courts at Weſtminſer. The third VB T £15 great 
their Sanhedrim, confiſting of ſeventy Men, which anſwer2d T 4: Heart d 
Parliament. Some think that by the Fudgment, is meant thefir _s its, and 
or ſecond of the Courts : By the Counſel, the Syperiour Courts * I Bin t 
moneſt the Jews : Bur the Judgment of our Keverend Dr. £5” Ae, f 4uty 
fort ſeemeth much more probable, that by the Fuagment 15 meant = I 
the 7udgment of God : By the Counſel and He!l-fire, not only tne Ga Eves's 


Fudgment and Vengeance of God, but rhe Judgments and Puniſh a... 

ments that are inflicted in the Courts of Men thar are Magiftrats | SW; | 

and bear not the Sword in vain. So as the Senſe is this ; ? J 
| p 


ul: 


| That {fa Man dath bur in his Heart nouriſh Wrath 
[1ſt another, withour a j45 Cauſe, and lets it grow 
alice, and Thoughts, and Deſires of private Revenge, tho' 


ai 0 

—_— iy wo pit : But if Men ſuffer cheir Paſſions to break 
on: inco Reviling Terms and Language, ſuch as Raca, (fignitying 
ui Peri) of Hom Fool, ({peaking this from Anger or Malice) 
a 0% nar only liable to the Eternal Vengeance of God, com- 
riey are the Fife of Gehenna, bur ought ro be ſubjefted to the 
Nnſhmen ot ne Civil Haziftrate. Every Gov CO 
«in; by £ir2 Law of God, in order to the Preveytion oft Quar- 
"is or Blood-thed, (which often tollowerh Revilings each of 0- 
er) clived £0 punith ſuch Ottenccs, as being the Beginnings 
w ” War fer, Provnc.rtions 00 it, and Indications of Murderous Hearts ;, 
K-:rts full of rhat, which in che Eye of God 15 Iurdey, 


2» Therefore if thou bring thy Gift to the Altar, 
and there remembreſt that thy Brother hath ought a- 
&1121r thee : | 
” 3+ Leave there thy Gift before the Altar, and go 
1 way: firſt be reconciled to thy Brother,. and 
then come and ofrer thy Gitt. 


The Ze;vs were to offer Gifts and Sri jfices, Heb. 5. 1» Their 
wore their Free-Will Offerings, they were the m: it frequent 
amonglit rhe Jews, as may appear from 1.eviticus, and 
har the Prieſts prefled with the greareſt Tmportunity, as may ap- 
pear from 347. 7. Ie Therefore our Saviour inſtancerh 1n cheſe, 
racher chan in ocher Parts of cheir Worlhip: Bring unto God 
he beſt and moſt acceptable Sacrifnces (in your or the Teacher's 
Judsment) that you can, it there be found Malice or raſh Anger 
*1 your Hearts, God will not accept them. Theretore, how 
near ſoever you be come to a Religious Attion, it you there re- 
member, thar your Brother hath a juſt reaſon to be offended with 
vou, for any 21 :!ice or raſh Anger ſhewed or expreſicd by you; 
d9 not think this wilt diſcharge you of your Obligation ro pay 
your Homaze to God, but furbear awhile, leave your Gift before 
jb» Altar, and do whar in you lies to be reconciled to your Ero- 
ter, to have a placable Spirir to him, ro purge your Heart of 
1-114 and Melice, and any Defire of Revenge, and then come 
and offer your Gifts; pay that Homage which you owe, and 1t 
ras in your Heart to pay to God, Ir is a Text uſually applied 
with reference to Commun» with God inthe Lord's Supper, but 
cqunlly Extenſive £2 4ny other part of Worſhip, hearing the Word, 
F.v, 1.21, and Prazcr, 1 Tim. 2,8. God accepteth no Service, 
0 Homage from an implacable, malicious Hearr. 

2; Agree with thine Adverſary quickly, whileſt 
thou artin the way with him)leſt at any rime the Ad- 
 rerfary deliver thee * to the Judge. and the Judgede- 
liver thee to the Officer, and thou be caſt into Priſon, 
| 26 Verily 1 fy unto thee, Thou thalt by no means 
{ come out thence, until rhou haſt paid the uttermoſt 
| {1rthing. 
 Foraſmuch as the Overt-A&s, and Expreſſions of unjuſt Wrath 
E and Malice, are Iniquities, puniſhable by che Judge, ler irbe the 
E Care of chote thac will be my Diſciples, if by their Paſſions they 
E he provoked any, and made him their Adverſary, quickly to 
E are with them ; for you knoly che ordinary Courte of enraged 
- Aivcrſarics amongſt Men, 1s to bring their Attions, and to bring 
” Men hefore the Civil Judge; and when the Judge upon enquiry 
” h:h found chem Guilty, he uſfech to deliver them tothe Goaler 
:0 be carried co Priſon, until chey have tully paid rheir Fines for 
ſuch Oilences : And foraſmuch, as not only che Overt-AQs, bur 
the Pa' 75ns, which cauſe fuch As, are culpable before God, and 
mak Meu obnoxious to his Righteous Judgment, and God by 
then 15 mage an Adverfary to the Soul, as having violated his 
ercar C- 1 inand : Thou ſhalt do na Murther ; Let all my Daſciples, 
who !1avc been, or may be overcaken with ſuch Faults, by Repen- 
tance and Faith in me, make their Peace wich God-in this Life, 
left dying in Impenitency, they be pur under the Eternal] Diſplea- 
{ure and Wrath of God, from whence they ſhall never be deli- 
vered, chap. 5, 15. & 18. 35s 

27 Ye have heard, that it was ſaid by them of old 
time, * Thou ſhalt nor commit Adultery. 

28 Bur | ſy unto you,- That whoſoever looketh 
199n 4 woman to luſt after her, hath committed A- 
E, dultery with her already in his Heart. 

— The Scope of our S2viour in thete Verſes, is the very ſame as 
mn Gt Verles immediarely preceding, viz. to Corrett the Jejune 
Interpretation which the Phariſees had pur upon che Divine Law 


214 09 New thar he, inſtead of coming to deſtroy rhe Law, came 
0 36/fl 3 


Lit 
Ol 2tions 


+ +» 


Y b 
(] 


—_—_ which difturh Humane Society, and break Civil Or- 
I; |} ] 


| "FC "ll a 4 is 4 7 Sl 
victs Of the Fews, | Tru ſhalt not commit Adultery, | Exod. 20, 14. 


912.15, and caſts his Eyes upon a Woman, in order to fuch 
76012, 1510 the Sight ot God an Adulterer, Hence we read of 


. pes ful 7 Adultery; to avoid which, 7ob made a Covenant with 
: WW ++ / 31.1. and would not, v. 7. uffer his Heart to walk 
- jp [1s Exes'7 We muſt fo inrerprer the Commandments of 
y rc to exrend them only to forbid or command thoſe 
: + 0.10 are Piuinly mentioned in them, bur the inward Plea- | 


: Fw 
y . Y Vis * 


St MATTHEW 


ſing of our Hearts with ſuch things as are forbidden, the Defires 
ot our Hearts after them, or whatſoever is a probable Means to 
Ive us that ſinful Pleature of our Thoughts, or furcher inflame 
luch unlawtul Defires in our Souls, 


29 * And if thy righr eye|| offend thee, pluck it 


that one of thy members ihould periſh, and not 
thy whole body ſhould be caſt into Hell. 
20 And if thy right hand offend thee, cut it off, 9% 


- 


and caſt z7 from thee : for it is profitable tor thee 
that one of thy members {hould periſh, aud not thar 
thy whole body ſhould be caſt into Hell. 


The ſum of theſe ewo Verſes is, Thar the Salvation of our 
Immorral Souls, is to be preferred betore all rhinzs, be they ne- 
ver fo dear and precious to us ; and it thac Men crdinary Dit. 
cretion teacherh rhem tor the Preſervation of their Bodics, ro cur 
oft a particular Member, which would neceflarily endanzer the 
whole Body; it much more reacherh them ro parc with any 
thing, which will prejudice the Salvation of their Soul. Nox 
that any Perſon is by this Text oblized to cut off any bodily Mem- 
ber (as ſome have done) becauſe tizere can be no ſuch Necefliry . 
but only to mortifie their Members, Col. 3. 5. the Deeds of the B;.Jv, 
Rom. 8. 13. their inward Lufts; which beins mvrtified, there will 
be no need of Mutilating our ſelves; tor the Members of the Body 
are bur commanded and animarcd to their Motions, from the in- 
ward Lults of the Heart « Bur if there could happen ſuch a Cafe, 


| as that a Man muſt vluntarily part wich the moſt utcful Member 


of his Body, or tin againſt God, to the Damnation of his Soul, he 
ought rather to chuſe che tormer than rhe latter. How much 
more ten oughr Chriſtians ro I;7tifie rheir Inward Luſts and 
Unlawtul Defires, which can be of no Profit nor Advanraze 5 
them, but will certainly make them co offend , God, and to run 
them upon the Danger of Hell-Fire? 

31 It hath been ſaid, Whoſcever * ſhall put away 
his Wife, let him give her a writing of divorcement. 

32 ButI fay untoyou, That * whoſoever ſhall put 
away his Wite, ſaving for the cauſe of fornication, 
cauſeth her to commir adultery: and whoſoever ſhall 
marry her that is divorced, committeth adultery. 


The Law to which our Saviour referreth here, or rather che 
Indulgence and Toleration, (for none was obliged ro pur away their 
Wives 1n caſe of uncleanneſs) is that Deut. 24. 1. where we have it 
in theſe Words: When a Mar hath taken a Wife and married her, 
and it cometh to paſs, that ſhe findeth no Favour in his Eyes, becauſe 
he hath found ſome Uncleanneſs in her, then let im wrire her a Bill 
of Divorcement and give it her in her hand, and {end her out of his 
Houſe, The Phariſees had extended this Tilzration which Gcd 
gave Husbands among{t the ews to orher Cafes, hetides chat of 
Uncleanneſs or Adultery; fo as they pur away their Wives upon 
every ſlizhr Occafion, interpreting thoſe Words, | If fhe find n9 
Favour in his Eyes, ) ſeparately from the tollowing Words, Becaje 
he hath found ſome Uncleanneſs in her, and gave a Liberty tor Men, 
upon any Diflike of their Wives, 79 put them away, provided that 
they firſt gave them a Bill of Divycement ; and that in theſe Ca- 
fes it was lawful for the Parries thus feparared each trom orher, 
ro Marry to whom either of them pleaſed : And rhis 1s exprefled 
in terms in their Form of thofe Writings of Divorcement in 7 
ſephus and other Writers. This” indeed is a Caſe properly rela- 
ring to the Fudicial Law ;, bur all the Judicial Laws are either 
Appendices ro the Moral, or to the Ceremomial Law. This particu- 
lar Indulgence was an Appendix to the 2fral Law, in the Se- 
venth Commandment ; to which our Saviour is now ſpeaking, 
and giving the true Senſe of ir. He here oppoleth the Phariſees 
in ewo Points. I. Afſerting, that all Divorces are untueful, except 
in caſe of Adultery. 2. Afſerting, that whoſoever Mairied her that 
was put away, committeth Adultery, It hach been a great Quelſti- 
on, not ſo much amongſt Divines as amongſt Lawyers, Whether 
it be not lawful in any Caſe to put away a Wife, unleſs for Adultery ? 
The Canoni$ts have found our many Cafes, 1n which chey aificm ic 
lawful. And the Council of Trent (from whom we may learn rhe 
Senſe of the Popiſh Divines) Anathematize thoſe who deny the 
Church a Power of determining other Cauſes of Divorce, But 
rheir Blaſphemos Curſe callerch upon him, who is above them, 
God over all, Bleſſed for ever, who in this Text hath derermined 
that Point: Nor indeed did 2ſes give a Toleration in any orher 
Cafes: There may indecd be a parting berwixt Mam and Wife 
upon gvher Accounts; eicher wholly or in part. In Cafe one of 
chein will part from the other, which the Apoſtle derterminerh, 
1 Cor. 7, 11, 15 In which Caſe, the Perſon departing is only 
Guilty, if he or ſhe Marry again; In Caſe of an Error, chrough 
Tanoance or Tnadvertency upon the Marriage, that ir appearerh, 
that the Perſons married were ſuch, as by the Law of Nazrure, and 
of God, ought not to have married, gc, Bur it we take Div9rce 
for the voluntary AZ of the Husband, putting away of his Wife, it 15 
unlawful in any Caſe, bur char of Adultery, which dillolves che 
Marriaze-knor and Covenant. 2, A ſecond Queſtion is alfo here 
determined by our Saviour, vt. That it is unlawful fir her, that 
is unjuſtly put away, to Marry to any other, or for any other to Harry 
her wittingly. 

23 Again, ye have heard that it hath been ſaid by 


o 
Us 


TTs 


ſelf, * but ſhalr perform unto the Lord thy Oaths, 
This was ſaid, Exod. 20. 7. and more plainly, Zevit, 19. 12. 23, 
The Subſtance was there faid, tho' che Words be not Verbatim 
recited, 
24 But ſay unto you, Swear not at all, neither 
by Heaven, for it is * God's throne. 


35 Nor by the Earth, for it is his Footſtool : nei- 
| Aaa ther 


Chap. V. 


*Mar.18.8. 
' F > PS 6 HE 8 
out, and caſt zt from thee : tor it is profitable tor rhe —_ 9. 43 
& /» » 
that lj Or, Th, 


CAH; Q £4 


"Deu-24. * 
Mart. 16. 2: 
Mar. 1©: # 
* Luk. 13> 


1 Cor. 7: 
LO,f1-} 


them of old time, * Thou ſhalt not forſivear thy * Deut. 5; 


* DE at. 23s 


T It1.55, T. 


Chap. V. 


Pal 4?.2. ther by Jerufulem, for it is * the City of the great 
King. | | 
26 Neither thalt thou ſwear by thine head, becauſe 
thou can't not make one hair white or black. 

Doh cur Saviour here oppoſe himſelf to the Law of God, 


* Prov. 24. 
29. Luk, 
G. 29. 

1 Cor. 6.7. 
x Thel. 5. 


I5. 
Z- 9» 


x Per. 


Which faith, Devr. S. 12. 10. 20, Thos ſhalt fear the Lord thy 
Goa, and ſweur by bis Name ? Doth he condemn Abraham, who 
tware his Servant by the Lord God of Heaven and Earth? Gen. 24. 3: 
Fth he deſtruy luch an v/efil mean for the end of Scrite ? Heb. 
5. 15. None of all theſe : We muſt conſider that our Saviour 15 
here oppoſing himfelt co the Corruprions of that Age broughrin 
by the Phariſees, who had taught People, thar /zyearing Was NO- 
thing, it chey did not foirſwear themſelves, Or At leaſt ſwearing by 
the Haven, by the Earth, by Jeruſalem, by their Head, Orin fuch 
like F1ms was no Sin, it they torbear the Name of God « Thar rey 
were only oblized ro ſivear by the Name cf God 10 Publick Courts 
ef 7uſtice, bur they were nor tied up to 1t at orher tIMmes. To 
cHetc and fack+like Corruptions our Saviour oppoſerh theteWords, 
£ {ry unto you, Swear not at all; not at all v9/untarily, but where 
ic is necefary tor the end of Strife ; not ar all in your Common Diſ- 
courſe, Fam. 5. 12. and fo it is expounded in the next Verſe : 
The Law doch not on!y forbid {ſe [wearing, but common and ord1- 
nary ſwearing, needlets pyearing, which ſpeaks a grear Want of Re- 
verence in the Hearr of rhe Name of God : And ler not your 
Teachers cheat you, in tellinz you, God, or the Name of God, 15 
not concerned in your ſivearing by Heaven. Is not Heaven the 
Throne of G:d ? Or by Eaith, is not that the Forftoo! of God ? 
Or by Feri/ggerr, is nor that the City of God 2 Or by your Head, 1s 
{nor God rhar hath given you your Lite and bodily Members ? 
Is ic in your Power to make an Hair of your Head white or black ? 
S9 as the zrear thing here forbidden, is common and ordinary 
Swearins, where God callerh not us unto it, for the Derermina- 
tion of Sirife. Donor only think that falſe Swearing, bur be al- 
ſured, thar ordinu7y, common, needleſs Swearing is forbidden by 
God. 

27 But let your communication be Yea,yea; Nay, 
127: for whatſoever zs more than theſe, cometh of 
evil. 

Sr, Fames ſairh much the ſame, Fam. 5. 12. Let your ordina- 
ry Diſcourſe in the World be mecr Affirmarions, or Denials of 
things in Terms, or Phraſes of the fame Import, with Tea aud 
Nay, tho' you do not always uſe thoſe Terms : Ler Firms of 
Swearing be preſerved for ſpecial times, when the Providence of 
Gad calls ro you tor riem to determine Strite, and make fome 
weighty Matters, which you afferr credible unto others, who 
will nct cake your bare &Afertions; have ſuch a Reverence for 
the Name of God, as not to uſe it for every trifle, and ler nor 
my Ordinance for the end of Strife be made of no uſe by your 
common ute of the Name of God; for in ordinary Diſcourſe, 
and common Talk, whatſoever is more than bare 2firmations 
and Denials, cometh cf an evil Hearr, or from the Devil, or 
trom the Corruption Of orher Men's Hearts, Some would make 
the Communication mentioned here, to be underſtood as if ir were 
Converſation ;, q. d. Let your ways of dealing with Men be plain 
withour Fraud and Guile; and fo think our Saviour here ſtrikes 
at the Root and Cauſe of fo much idle and vin Swearing, VIZ, 
the common Falſhood, Frauds and Colenages of Men in their 
Dealings: Bur ir ſeemerh hard ſo to interprer aGyG+ 1n this 
place ; our Saviour eſpecially being ſpeaking concerning Words 
and Forms of Speech. 


- 28 Ye have heard that it hath been ſaid, An eye 
for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth. 


This was the Commandment of God ro the Magiftrate, in 
Caſe a Woman with Child were ſtruck, and any Miſchief came of it, 
Exod. 21. 24. and Lev. 24. 20. In Caſe of Damage done to a Neigh- 
bour,and in the Caſe of Fuiſe-wizneſs, Deur.10. 21. Burin the mean 
time God had faid to private Perſons, Lev.19.18. Thou ſhalt not 
avenge: And it is laid, Prove24. 29. Say not, Twill do to him, as 
he hath dime t2 me. The Pharijees had interpreted this Law of 
God, into a Liberty tor every private Perſon, who had been 
wronzed by another, to exaft a SaristaQton upon him, provided 
that he did not exceed this Proportion of taking an Eye for an 
Eye, and a Tooth for a T63:h,, Going no more Wrong to another, 
than that other had done to him, 


29 But I ſay unto you, * That ye reſift not evil : 
but whoſoever ſhall ſmire thee on the right cheek, 
turn to him the other alſo. 

4D And if any man ſue thee at the law, and take 
awav thy coar, let him have thy cloak allo. 

41 And whoſoever {hall compel thee to go a mile 
go with him twain. | 


The Apoſtle Pl giverh the beſt Expoſition upon this Text, 
R012. £2.17, 18, 19, 21. Recompence to no man Evil for Evil—If it 
be pajjtble, as much as in you lies, live Peaceably with all Men. Dear- 
ty beloved, avenge not your ſelves, but rather give place unto Wrath : 
Fr it #s written, Vengeance #s mine, Iwill repay, ſaith the Lord, v.21, 
B2 rt overcome with Evil, but overcome Evil with Good, The ge- 
neral Scope of our Saviour 15 that which they muſt obſerve who 
weuld underſtand the Senſe of theſe Words; they muſt nor think 
that che particular things mentioned, are their Dury ; but 1. That 
it 1s the Will of cheir Lord, thar they thould nor take any private 
Revenge, bur leave the avenging of their Injuries unto God, and 
tro the publick Magiſtrate, who 1s God's Vicegerent, before whom 
(norwithſtanding any thing here ſaid) they may teek a juft Satiſ- 
j-#i5m. 2, That in lighter Caſes, we ſhould rather remit the 
Wrong done to us for Peace-ſake, than ſtand upon a Rigor of 
Juſtice; racher overcome Evil with Good, than ſufter our telves 
ro be overcome by the Evil of others: Rather ſuffer a blow on 
the other Check, than with our own Hands revenge the blow 


& MATTHEW, 


Chay, lj 


which 15 given thus on our Cheek: rather of 
than contend tor our Coar taken away in EEG = — = 
we be in thar Judgment oppreſſed. No Injury can >", * = 
private Revenge - Ligtit Injuries are not of tn; Nature ne S: the 
ſhould conrend tor a publick Revenge of them; MET 97 OM ub 
—_ Sie! UC 
4.2 * Live to h.'2 thar asketh thee, and from him »,, ces, 
that would borrow of thee. turn thou nor away n kg Con 
In theſe Words our Saviour prefſeth another piece of Py .. wn 
VIZ. Liberality co thoſe who are Por; who are of tg Ree _ 
Some, luch as are never able to repay us; to rhuſe ke "Ie "ores: - 
eth Chriſtians to give, | To him that acheth + | Who hath HO ron 
ask, and 1n char Order coo which God hath directed _ rg 6 
Commanded us to provide for our own Houſhold, and to Page "at Gans 
all, but eſpecially to the Houphold of F.ith. The cther "ay : and « 
as may have only a Temporary Want. To thele he "gs cced! 
us to /end, and nor to turn. away from them, when they defi = find ; 
borrow of us, and we can ſpare ic. This was an Ancient Pre and tl 
cept of God, Deut. 15. 7, 8,9. confirmed by Chriit, as a $ in his 
ot his Will under the Golfpcl, ; IV Thoſe 
4.3 You have heard that it hath been ſQiq Tho ter th; 
{nalr love thy nelghbour. and hate thine enemy, 48 
Ti2u ſhalt love thy neighbour as thy ſelf was the old Law of God whicl 
Levit. 19. 18. The other part, And hate thy Enemy was the Ph Perf 
riſees Addicion, or rather their Colle&ion ; becauſe the Law oats Texts « 
Commanded them to Love their Neighbour PT; ignifies fon as 7b 2 
times a Friend, ſomerimes more largely any*other Perſon. they om, 0 
took It 11 tne ſtri& Senſe, yer they could not be fo blind as fedtion, 
to exrend it to all thoſe of their own Nation; for, v. I7, they 1s ſignif 
are two Words uted ; one ſignifying thy Brother, the other my ample. 
Countryman, whom they are Cemmanded in that Verie nor i co, 
hate in their Hearts. Eur ic appeareth by Luk. 10. 29. thatthe 15 2 thin 
did not very wel know their /eightour ; The Lawyer asked wh bour tor 
my Neighbour * Chriſt inſtruQs him by the Parable of him Fe things w 
was f.ullen amongſt Thieves, that they ought not to look upon thoſs the high 
of cher own Country only as Neighbours ; for a Samaritan mi che Lip. 3. 13 
deſerve the Name better than a Prieſt or Levite. Bur they th him 
generally lookr upon all the Uncircumciſed as nor their Neigh 
_ bur their Enemies, whom the Precept did not Oblize ho 
ans The Conti, 
44. But Iſay unto you, * Love your enemics, ble; I—4- 
them that curſe you, do good to them thar hate you, * zo be la 
and * pray for them which deſpitefully uſe you, and F —_— 
perſecute you. td Birds, 
Thar this 1s no Counſel of Perfe#ion, (as the Papiſts way! © He exhy 
have 1t) nor any new Precept added to the Law of God (as the ** citous fo 
Socimans would have it) is plain from Prov. 25. 21. where we 7 
find it Commanded under the Old Teſtament. Neither js ir. / J Al 
adviſe you, but T ſay unto you ;, which arzueth a Command, 1,1: tc 
here doth nor ſignifie che Complacency of the Heart in an Otjet ward || 
which 1s Love in the ſtridt Senſe, but be Charitable unto, ond ; < 
to your Enemies; nor are we equally obliged ro do good to our  Alms ar, 
Enemtes, as to our Friends; bur it 1s Expzunded by the followins tet of _ 
Words, and to be underſtood, 1. Of not ſecking unlawful vn done, from 
vate Revenge. Bleſs them that Curſe you : Do not return Revi 6 Mr ge 
ling tor Reviling; while chey Curſe, do you Bleſs. 2, Ding fiving of t] 
them common Offices of Kindneſs, Rom. 12. 20. If thine Eveny Wirks, Att 
Hunge:', feed him: if he Thir$, give him Drinh. This is dcirg : us of norh 
good to them th:t hate us, relieving them in their preſſing Ne iy _ of H 
ceſſiries. 3. Doing them all rhe good we can for their Suk: " wn To 
Pray for them who deſpitefully uſe you, and perſecute you. So did - Pg take 
our Saviour, Luk, 23.43. and Stephen, As 7. 60, fo did Dail, 4" 0 ther 
Pſal. 35. 13, 14, 15. Inthe mein time we may hate thoſe who they ſhe Id 
are Gcd's Enemies, as ſuch, Pſal. 139. 21, 22. And for ſuch, ne mA e uld 
may 1ſeck a due Revenge of God's Honour upon them; and fir "REN 
our Enemies,this Precept prohibits not the ſeeking of a juſt Satif: 2 Ther 
con tor Wrongs done unto us in a way of Publick Juſtice, je found a T 
not withour a Mixture of Charity. in the $ | 
45 That ye may be the Children of your Father | have wo 
which is in Heaven: for he maketh the Sun to 1k have we 
on the evil and on the good, and ſendeth Rain on thi 2 Bur x 
Juſt, and on the unjuſt, hand knoy 
As your Heavenly Father hath a common Love, which he & 4 That 


tendeth to all Mankind, in ſupplying their Neceflitics wichtle 
Light and Warmth of the Sun, and with the Rain, as well 254 
ſpecial Love and Favour, which he exerciſerh only roward thole 
ctharare Good, and Members of Chriſt, ſo ought you to have; 
cho' you are not obliged to take your Enemies into your Bolon, 
yer you ought to love them in their Order ; and as your Heaven!) 
Father, (tho' he will one Day have a Satisfaction trom Sinner, 
tor the Wrong done to his Majeſty, unlets they Repent; yer) 0 
heap Coals of Fire on their Heads, gives them good Things 0 
Common Providence, that he mighr nor leave them without Wit 
neſs; yea, and affords chem the ouzward Means of Grace fir their 
Souls : So, altho? you are bound to feek ſome Saristattton 0! 
God's Honour and Glory,- from Hagitions Sinners; and tho yo 
nay in an orderly Courte ſeek a moderate Satisfaction for rlic 
Wrong done to your ſelves, yer you ought ro love them with 4 
Love conſiſtent with theſe rhings ; chat to you may imitate Jour 
Heavenly Farher, and approve your ſelves to be his Children. 


* 46 For if you love them that love you, what!e 
ward have you ? donoteven the Publicans the ſame? 

47 And if you ſalute your brethren only, what 0 We 
you more than others £ do not even the Publica Be 
ſo ? 

Reaſon obligeth you, 
what you do, to do ſomething more than thoſe who = 
fuch Reward z or at leaft live in no ExpeRtation of any _ 
thing; and you who Condemn orhers as great Sinners, an |. 
nor worthy of your Converſe, ought to do ſomething Dy my 


ther whict 
hce openh 


There are 1 
ome PraQice 
under a Preten 
'Kmpet to be : 
| Cloſe that are. 
hever find in tt 
Speech 5 rathe 
f Charity, and 
nvited Jn ad th 
Y thy Alms may þ 
f oy Money © 
E diag. ws End 
ke Ins nder [ 

= ..> Ur own 


C.\ T 
$4 I'S) " 
FF — TIES; Ep. 3. 
7. 337 => RE og 
RC a PO 


who expe a Reward from Gcd | 
know ot 00 in ſecr, 


Vol. ] 


| ay outdo thoſe whom you ſo Condemn, both in Offices 
_ wards God, and Charity towards Men; Bur if you only 
of FI; edneſs to Your Relations, and to your Countrymen, you 
_ more than thoſe whom you look upon as Heathens, and 
- _—_ of Men, who a& only from the Light and Law of Na- 
_w_—_ nd know of no Reward God hath to give, nor live in an 
ras Ex eRation of ir. By loving here, is meant doing good Of 
_ —_ for the Souls or Bodtes of others. By faluting 1s meant 
___ on Offices of Kindneſs; ſuch as enquiring of our Neigh- 
—_— Healch, wiſhing them well, &c. The Publicans were Ct- 
2” Officer appointed by the Romans, to gather up Publick Taxes 
__ Revenues; the chief Commiſſioners were Knights and Gen- 
y' 1 of Rome, who either ler out theſe Revenues to others, or 
gens ed others under them in the Colle@ing of them: Theſe 
ws craployed were ſome Fews, (ſuch were Matthew and Zacheus) 
ok Romans. Theſe (as1s ordinary) made cheir own Markets, 
1nd exa&ted of the People, upon which Accounts they were ex- 
ceding odious : And therefore ordinarily in Scripture we ſhall 
Gnd Publicans and Sinners put rogether, chap. 9. 11. and 11. 19. 
ind they are joyned with Harlots, chap. 21. 32. and the Phariſee 
in his aſtificarion gloried he was nor as that Publican, Luk. 18.11. 
Thoſe who Condemn others, ought to take care that they be ber- 


ter than others. 
48 Beye therefore perfect, even as your Father 
which is in Heaven Is perfect. 


Perfef here is nor taken in that Senſe, as ir is taken in other 
Texts of Scripture, where it {ignifieth Sincerity and Uprightneſs, 
25h 2. 3. cr where ir ſignifieth a Comparative Perfe&ion, as Paul 
faith, he ſpare to thoſe that were perfet ; bur for an Abſolute Per- 
feion, ſuch as is in our Father which is in Heaven; and ſo much 
is ſiznified by the propoſing of our Heavenly Father as our Ex- 
ample. Nor will it therefore tollow, either thar this is 2 meet 
Counſel, not a Precept z or that an Abſolute Perſe&jon in 7ilineſs, 
is a thing in this Life attainable. Bur that ir is our Duty to la- 
bour for it, forgetting what #s behind, and reaching forth unto thoſe 
things which are before, preſſing towards the Mark, for the Prize of 
the high Calling of God in Feſus Chrift, (as the Apoſtle ſpeaks) Phi- 
lip. 3. 13, 14+ Pro perfedto eſt, qui perfe#o Proximus, God account- 
eth him Perfe&t, who is neareſt to Perfection. 


CHAP. VL 


The Continuation of Chriſt's Sermon 9n the Mount, How to give Alms, 
1—4. To pray, 5—I5. To faſt, 16—18. Where our Treaſure 3s 
to be laid up, 19—23. He ſheweth no Man can ſerve God and 
Mammon ; and dehorteth from being ſollicitous about worldly things ; 
as, what to eat, drink, or put on : Sheweth God's Providence over 
Birds, and Lillies of the Field, much more over them, 24—32. 
He exhorteth to ſeek: fir| the Kingdom of God ;, and not to be ſolli- 
citous for the morrow, 33, 34» 


7 T4 heed that you do not your Alms before men 
to be ſeen of them : otherwiſe ye have no re- 
; ward || of your Father which is in Heaven. 

Alms are any Ads of Kindneſs freely done by us, for the Re- 
lief of any thar are in Diſtreſs and Miſery; which when they are 
done, from a Principle of Love to God, Obedience to his Pre- 
ceprs, commanding them, in Faith ro his Promifes made to the 
ziving of them, and that he may be Giorified, are truly good 
Wks, Ads of Religion, and Acceprable to God, tho' Meritori- 
ous of nothing from him, As 10. 31. Orherwiſe they are meer- 
ly Atts of Humanity and Morality, ro the Reward of which, God 
5 by no Promiſe obliged. Therefore Chriſt's Diſciples are ob- 
liged ro take heed, thar in the doing of their Alms, tho* the 
may do them before Men, that God may be Glorified, Phil. 2.15. 
8 1Pet, 2, 12, Yet they do them not before Men, on purpoſe that 
they ſhould rake notice of them, and Applaud them for them; 
for God rewardeth no Aion, of which he is not the End. 


| 2 Therefore when thou doeſt zh:7e Alms, donot 
ſound a Trumpet before thee, asthe Hypocrites * do, 
. in the Synagogues, and in the Streets, that they may 
| have glory of Men. Verily. I ſay unto you, They 
$ have their reward. 
3 But when thou doeft Alms, let not thy left 
hand know what thy right hand doth. 
| 4 That thy * Alms may be in ſecret: and thy Fa- 
ther which ſeeth in ſecret, himſelf ſhall reward 
thee openly. 


There are ſome who think that our Saviour here refle&s upon 
tome Praftice of the Phariſees then in uſe, for Oftentation ; who 
under a Pretence of a Mean to call People together, cauſed a 
Trumpet to be ſounded when they diſtribured their Alms: Bur 
{ thoſe char are Jearned in their Writings, aflure us, they could 

never find in them any Foundation for ſuch an Opinion. The 
Speceh is rather Metaphorical, Prohibiring all Oftentation in As 
| 0 Charity, and inviting others to take notice of them, as Jehu 

Invited Tonadab to come and ſee his Zeal, 2 Kings 10. 16, Asthe 
| third Verſe js bur a Proverbial Expreſſion expounded, v. 4. That 
iy Alms may be in Secret. Nor that it is nor lawful to give a poor 
2 oy Money or Bread, gc. in the fight of others; bur only to do 
k or that End, that we might be ſeen of- others. The thing for- 
Fo odden under rhe Metaphorical Expreſſion is Gtentation, and ſeek- 
& our own Fnour and Applauſe. The thing commanded is 
$ rs, with reſpe& to our End : The Apoſtle calls it a giving 
8 =; Pon ous ſingly aiming ar the Glorifying of God by an 
# the; ent Performance of our Dury : He rells us, thoſe who give 
i ir Alms to be honoured of Men, have their reward z that is, 
b © "ich they are like to have; Men applaud and cry rhe up, 


Cloſet; and when thou haſt ſhur thy door, pray to 
thy Father which is in ſecret, and thy Father which 


T HETW. Chap. 


good Deeds, and he will reward them openly before Men and 
Angels at the laſt Day, chap. 25. 34, 36, 37. and ordinarily in this 
Lite, and 1134.9, 11. Pſal. 37. 25, Pſal. 41. 1. 


5 And when thou prayeſt, thou ſhalt not be as 


the Hypocrites are :- for they love to pray ſtanding, 
in the Synagogues, and in the corners of the Streets, 
that they may be ſeen of Men. Verily I fay unto 
you, they have their reward. 


Our Saviour here cautionerh thent againſt che ſame thing in 


Prayer, as he had done before in giving Alms, viz. Hypocriſie and 
Oſtentation ;, doing this Duty upon thar Deſign, meerly to be ta- 
ken notice of, and applauded by Men; it was Lawful to pray 
ſtanding in the Synagogues, but not to do it meerly to be taken no- 
tice of by Men for devour Perſons; nor yet to confine them- 
ſelves to Praying in the Synagrgues, 1t they choſe to pray /tard- 
ing, that rhey might be more Conſpicuous, and in the Synazogues ; 
becauſe thoſe places were more Holy (as they might Dream) or, 
(which ſeems rather to be here meant) becaute there moit Peo- 
ple would ſee them, for which purpoſe only rhey choſe Corners 
of Streets, as was the old Popiſh Cuſtom, (upon which Accounc 
they ſet up Croſſes at three Way-leers, g9c.) theſe things were 
ſinful; bur to pray ſtanding was uſual, Mar. 11, 25. And to pray 
in the Synagogues, and in the Temple ſtanding was uſual, Luke 18. 13. 
By choſe who do it meerly for Vain-glory, have their Reward, and 
muſt expe& none from God. 


6 Butthou, when thou prayeſt, * enter into thy 


ſeeth in ſecret, ſhall reward th-e openly. 

By this, publick Prayer 1s not Condemned, bur ſecret Prayer is 
Eſtabliſhed, and made every Chriſtian's Dury ; and Chriſtiansare 
warned nor to think, thar their Duty of Prayer is difch<rged by 
their going ro Places of Publick Worſhip and Praying there: Bur 
that which our Saviour here cautioneth us againſt, is Oſtent ation, 
by which Men may as much offend in cheir Cloſers as elſewhere ; 
where-ever we pray, we muſt take heed that our Ends be right, 
thar the Glory of God he our Principal End, and yielding Obe- 
dience to his Command; and there is no better Means in order 
ro this, than the right ſerting of God before our Eyes, as he that 


ſeeth in ſecret, and knoweth the moſt ſecret Defigns, Scopes and 


Intentions of our Hearts, and who, it we chus perform our Duty, 
will reward us of his Free Grace and Mercy; not as Perſons, who 
by our Prayers have merited any thing at his hand, (for whar 
Merit can there be in our Prayers?) but as having ſhewed our 
Obedience to his Will, and in the fulfilling of thoſe many Pro- 
miſes which he hath made to thoſe thar ſeek his Face, for the 
hearing of their Prayers. 


7 But when ye pray, uſe not vain repetitions, as 
the Heathens do : for they think they ſhall be heard 
for their much ſpeaking. 

3 Be not ye therefore like unto them : for your 
Father knoweth what things ye have need of; before 


ye ask him. 

Ir appeareth from hence, and from what followerh alſo, thac 

the Praying here ſpoken of, is //3cal Prayer, not the meer Homage 

which the Heart payeth ro God, by a Recognition of him as the 

Fountain of all Good, and our ſecrer Deſires that God would 

ſupply our Wants, bur rhe Expreſſion of thoſe Deſires by the Words 

of our Mouths, which is that Dary which the Scripture generally 

calleth Prayer, and is moſt certainly a Duty incumbent on every 

Perſori, Nor are Repetitions of the ſame Requeſts in Prayer, or 

much ſpeaking, (chat is, Praying to ſome length of time) here abſo- 
lutely forbidden : Our Saviour betore his Patſion prayed thrice 

for the ſame thing within a ſhorc Compaſs of time, (tho' he did 
not uſt the ſame Words) and Lyke 5, 1 2. He —_—_— all Night in 
Prayer to God, Bur that which is here forbidden, is an Opinion 
of being heard for our long Prayers, and uſing vain Repetitions, as 
the Prieſts of Baal; continued from Morning to Night, crying, 
O Baal, hear us! O Baal, hear 1s! ( as if their God had been 
aſleep, or gone a Journey, as the Prophet mockerh them, 1 Kin. 
18.27,28.) Repetitions are then vain, when they are affeFed, and 
flow from ſome irreverent Thoughts we have of God : Nor 
when they are, as it were, forced from the Heat and Intenſion of 
our Aﬀe&ions. The like is to be ſaid of much ſpeabing in Prayer. 
Long Prayers are not to be Condemned, but the Afe#ation of 
them 1s; and /ong Prayers upon Pretences and Defigns are : 
Bur when the Mind 1s attent, and the AﬀeFioms fervent, length 
of Prayer is no faulr, eſpecially upon folemn Occafions, when 
we come not to ask a particular Mercy at the Hand of God, nc? 
for a particular Perſon or Family : Bur Repetitions, after the 
manner of Heathens, are Condemned as proceeding from Irre- 
verent Thoughts of God, as if he did nor know what things we 
have need of, or were like a Man to be prevail'd upon by a mal- 
ticude of Words. 


9 After this manner therefore pray ye; * Our Fa- 


ther which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy Name. 
Nor always in theſe Words, bur always to this Senſe, and in chis 
Manner. None ever thought Chriſtians obliged ro uſe no other 
Words than theſe in Prayer, tho' none miuſt deny the Lawful- 
neſs of ufing thoſe Words which Chriſt hath fanttified. [ 4frer 
this manner] Firſt ſeeking the Kingdom of God, and begging 
thoſe chings which more immediately concern God's Glory, and 
then thoſe rhings which more immediately concern your felves. 
Or, After this manner, praying only in particular for ſuch things 
25 are more generally couched in the following Petitions. | Our 
Father which art in Heaven.) A Compellation ſpeaking our Faith, 
oth in the Power, and in the Goodneſs of God z; our eying him as 
in Heaven, ſpeaketh. his Power, P/al. 115. 3- Our confidering 


b ny their Reward : Others ſhall have their Reward from God, 
'? Jeeth - _ and ſo needeth nor ſuch a Publication of our 
Ol. IL, 


him as our Father, ſpeaks our Faith in his Goodneſs, Mart. 7. 11. 
[ Hallowed be thy Name.) God's Nante is whatſoever he hath made 
| Aaa2 : himſelt 


VL 


* 2 Bin. 4- 


330 


* Luk. Its 


I 


Chap. VI. 


kimfelf known by. Let the Lord be Glorified in every thing, 
whereby he harh made himſelf known. 


10 Thy Kingdom come: Thy Will be done in 


Earth, aszt zs in Heaven. 

Let the Lord rule over all the Nations of the Earth, and = 
them be treely ſubje& ro his Laws, and ro his Son Jeſus _ . 
Let the Goſpel of the Kingdom be publiſhed, and proſper, by net 
ing all Thoughts into a Captivity to it. And ler the mY _ 
of God come more within the Hearts of all Men, and ha ent - 
Revelations of the Kingdom of Glory, Ler the Will of tne _ 
be every-where done, and thar on Earth, with as much F oy = 
and Cheerfulneſs, and with as little Reluftancy as 17 15 gone y 
the Angels and Saints in Heaven. Theſe three firſt + 
of great Cognation one to another; God 15 then glor! _ _ 
his Kingdom is advanced; and his Kingdom is then IY al, 
when there is moſt free and cheertul Obedience y1e:ded T9 
Will. The ſum is, Let God be glorified. 


11 Give us this day, our daily bread. 


And foraſmuch as in thee we live, and. move, and have our 
Lite, fo the means for the upholding, and the preſerving of _ 
Lives, and the Bleſſing upon them, muſt be irom _— on IG- 
ſeech thee to give us Food convenient for us, thar whic - Io 
haſt ordained tor our Nouriſhment and Prefervarion ; and r124i 
thou wouldſt preſerve it to us, that we may have 1!t from day *- 
day, whilſt we live in the World, with thy Bleſſing upon ir, mus 
we may nor be rempred ro rake Bread which is nor Ours, nor be 
over-ſolicirous and careful for ro morrow, bur by cally __ 
may obtain daily ſupplies from thee, ſo far as ſhall be neceilary 


or convenient for us, 
12 And forgive us our debts, as 72 forgive our 


debters. | | 
Our Saviour here doth not teach us the Order in which we 


ſhould pray for good things for our {elves ; only in theſe _ 


tions comprehendeth whatſoever we ſhould ask of God. 
bondaleſe, be are obliged, according to Mat. 6. 32. firſt ro ſeek 
the Kinzaom of God, and the Kighteouſneſs thereof. Thar by our 
Debts, are here meant our Sins, is plain from Luke 11. 4 AS alſo 
from Verſe 14. of this Chapter, where they are called Treſpaſſes. 
The Senſe is then, Diſcharge us from rhat Obligation ro Death, 
which our Sins have laid us under: G1ve us a Pardon for our 
Sins paſt, and preſent, (for who liveth, and finnerh nor againſt 
thee? ) [ As we forgive our Debters 3 ] nor as Perfedly, but in like 
manner, as we, according to the imperte& Stare of our Natures, 
forgive thoſe who have done us Injury ; nor ſeekingany Revenge 
upon them, nor bearing them any Malice: So as indeed thoſe who 
retaining their Malice in their Hearts, pur up this Prayer unto God, 
do in effe& pray down Divine Vengeance upon their Souls : 


Well therefore doth the Apoſtle command, 1 Tim. 2. 8. that we 
ſhould !ift up pure Hands unto God without wrath, or doubting. SO 
that not only Faith, but Charity alſo is neceſſary to our praying 


acceprtably. - ; : 
12 And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us 
from evil: * For thine is the kingdom, and the 


power. and the Glory, for ever, Amen. 

The term Temptation in the general fignifierh a Tryal, and Is 
ſometimes uſed to expreſs God's Tiyals of his People Ss Faith and 
Obedience, bur moſt ordinarily ro expreſs Satan's Tryals of us, by 
Motions to fin, which may be from our own Luſts, Zam. 1. Or, 
from the Devil, who is therefore called the Tempter, or trom che 
World. Theſe are the Temptations which we are Commanded 
eo pray againſt : Not that God leads any Perſons into ſuch 
Temprarions, unleſs by the Permiſſion of his Providence. | But deli- 
wer 1s from Evil.} From the Evil one, as ſome read it, becauſe 
of the Article prefixed; bur others think ir-nor material whether 


*1Chr. 29. 
Il, 


we underſtand the Devil, who is the Evil one, or the Evil of. 


Temptations, which harm us nor, if we be nor overcome by them. 
For thine is the Kingdom, the Power, and the Glory, for ever, _—_ 
te Words are omitred by Luke, Ch. 11. 4. But many thin 
thar Lube ſpeaks of another time, when he DiQtated this Prayer : 
The Words both fhew. us, that the Honour and Glory of God ought 
to be the End and Scope of all our Prayers; and that we can ex- 
pet no Audience, but upon the Account of God's Grace and 
Mercy ; and they likewiſe confirm our Faith, that God 1s able 
to grant what we ask of him. { Amen. | This, in the cloſe of a 
Senrence, is a Particle of Wiſhing, and f1gnifierh our Deſire to be 
heard ; and as its a term thar ſ1znifies Truth and Certainty, it 
likewiſe ſignifierh our Faith in God that we ſhall be heard. 


14 For * if ye forgive men their treſpaſles, your 


25. . ., heavenly Father will alfo forgive you. 
*Ch.18.35, 15 But * if ye forgive not men their treſpaſſes, 


Jam. 2.43. neither will your Father forgive you your treſpaſſes. 


Not that our meer forgiving our Brethren the Injuries done 
unto us, is all that God requirerh of us, in order to the Forgive- 
neſs we expet trom him; (the contrary 1s plain from ſeveral 
other Texts, John 3. 18, 36. As 2. 38.and 15, 31, 9c.) But that 
without chis Forgiveneſs of our Brerhren, God will not forgive us, 
Matth. 18. 35. It is one piece of rhar Obedience which we owe 
ro God, and alſo of our Gratitude, without the Performance of 
which ir is vain for us to hope tor Forgiveneſs from God. 


* Mar. 11. 
25. 


16 Moreover, when ye faft, be not as the Hypo- 


crites, of a {ad countenance : for they disfigure their 
faces, that rhey may appear unto men to faſt.  Ve- 
rily I ſay untoyou, they have their reward. 

17 But thou, when thou faſteſt, anoint thine head, 


and waſh thy face : 


St MATTHEW 


Cha 
to thy Father which is in ſecret and thy Father 


which ſeeth in ſecret, ſhall reward thee openly. 


Our Saviour in theſe Words returns to his former Work 
caution his Diſciples againſt Aypocriſe, Vain-Glory, and Ofts ” 
tion 1n their Religious Duties; the doing them to he = 
Men. What he before ſaid, as to giving Alms and Prayer het wy 
again applierh, as to private Faſting z which is by this Diſcos 
of our Saviour confirmed, tho* not as a ated, yer as ano: -y 
onal Duty of Chriſtians in Order to, and as an Indication G 
their humbling of cheir Souls for their Sins, or under the mi a 
Hand of God ; but he requireth that it ſhould be jn Sincerity 

in Hypocrifie ;, for the Glory of God, nor for Oftentation and Ay a 
ance unto Men, Our Saviour probably in this Diſcourke } 1 
a reſpect to ſome Hypccritical Uſages of the Phariſees, uſin " 
disfigure their Countenances, and look demurely, or fowr| ag 
on their Faſting Days. Not that he prohibiteth here Hibiie | 
Geſtures ſuired ro the Duty ; himſelf ſomerimes commangeg Fa 
Jews to put off their Ornaments; nor was any thing more ording. 
ry tor good Men than to cover themſelves with Sackcloth; ang "- 
£ſhes on their Heads, All that our Lord prohibiterh, is the - 
Fo of theſe things, ro cover the Xpocrifie of their Hearts, Nor 
muſt we think, that it is the Will of God, that we on ſuch Days 
inould indecd anoint our Heads, and waſh our Faces; or (which; 
rhe ſame thing wich us) Adorn, Paint, or Perfume our ſelves, o 
uſe any Hzbits or Geſtures unſuitable ro Mourning, and nor Indics 
tive of afflited Souls; bur that we ſhould rather do this than the 
other; viz. put on a Mask and Vizard of Sorrow for Sin when 
indeed we had no Senſe of it; for ſtill we myſt appear to on 
Heavenly Father to faſt; which we cannot very well GO, if our 
outward Habir and Demeanour be nor ſomething Proportioneg 
ro the inward Sorrow and Afﬀidtion of our Souls ; for the Putting 
on of fine Dreſſes and Ornaments, muſt be an imperate as of 
the Soul, and nor like ro be commanded by a Soul in Aﬀition 
Ir being natural ro ſuch a Soul to negle& rhe Culture of the By. 
dy, being wholly ſwallowed up with bitter Thoughts, relating 
ro its own Spiritual and Eternal State. Our Saviour addeth the 
ſame Argument to preſs ſmcere Fzſting, which he had before uſg 
concerning the Dury of giving Alms, and ſecret Prayer, where | 
have before ſpoken to thoſe Words. 


Thieves break thorough and ſeal. 

20 * Bur lay up for your ſelves treaſures in He; 
ven, where neither morh nor ruſt doth corrupt, an 
where Thieves do not break thorough nor Real. 

21 For where your treaſure is, there will you 


heart be alſo. 

A Treaſure ( according to the Notation of the Word ) ſignifet 
ſomething laid up tor ro morrow, for future time 3 more large 
ly it fignifierhany Riches, or whar we judge a valuable Portion; 
q. d. make not the Things of the Earth your Riches or Portion, 
wich reference to future time; for all the Riches of the Earh 
are periſhing contemptible Things: Silver and Gold is wha 
Ruſt will corrupt; Clothes are what Moths will ſpoil ; any other 
thin2s are ſubje to Caſualties; and, amongſt others, to the Vis 
lence of unreaſonable Men; who, tho' they have no Right v 
chem, will ordinarily take them from you. But ler your Kits, 
your Treaſure be that which is Heavenly, thoſe Habits of Grac 
which will bring you co Heaven, the things which accongay 
Saruation, Heb. 6. 9. which make you meet 85 be Partakers if tl 
Inheritance of the Saints in Light, Col. 1.12. Be rich in good Wits 
1 Tim. 6.18. Laying up in ſtore for your ſelves a good Foundatim « 
gainſt the time to come, that you may lay hold on Eternal Life, v.ty, 
chap. 19. 21, and 25. 34. Luk. 18. 22, Thoſe Treaſures will n« 
be liable ro ſuch Accidents as all Earthly Treaſures are: Where: 
ever you fix your Treaſure, your Heart will be there allo, think 
ing upon it, delighting in it, gc. 


light, 

23 But if thine eye be evil, thy whole body ſhall 
be full of darkneſs. IF therefore the light that isin 
thee be darkneſs, how great zs that darkneſs? 


You had need look to your Hearts, your Underſtanding, Jud; 
ment and Afﬀe&ions; for look what proportion there is bervix! 
your Bodily Eye, and the reſt of the Bodily Members, with rt 
gard to their Guidance and Condu@t; the ſame proportion there 
is berwixe your Heart and whole Converſation, with reference to 
the Guidance of ir, with relation ro God. The Eye is the Wit: 
dow,' by which the Soul looks out ro guide the Body, if char be 
nor impaired by the Detluxion of Humours, 7c. wieks ſingle, It 
dires all che Motions of the Body right; bur if that be df 
eve, or any way impaired, the whole Body is at a loſs how i 
move ſafely, and with Advantage to ir. So if your Hearts be {t 
rizht, if you have a right and ſound Judgment, a true and fan- 
Aified AﬀeRion, they will influence and guide all your Attions, 
your whole Converſation will be Regular and Holy ; Bur jf chat 
inward Eye be Evil, through Covetouſmeſs, roo much Adherence 
ro the Earth, or through Envy, (both which are called Evil £ 
in Scripture,) or through the Prevalence of any other Luſts © 
Paſſims, your Darkneſs will be exceeding great: You will not be 
able to ſer one ſtep right ; for out of the Abundance of tit 
Heart rhe Mourh ſpeaketh 3 and according to the Didtates and 
Aﬀedtions of the Heart, the Hand and the whole Man adteth. 


24 * Noman can ſerve two maſters : for eitherh? 
w1ll hate the one, and love the other : or elſe hewil! 
hold to the one, and deſpiſe the other. Ye cannct 
ſerve God and Mammon. 


18 That thou appear not unto men to faft, but un- 


No Man can ſerve two Maſters; that is, two Maſters tat of 


þ 


J 


19 Lay * notup for your ſelves treaſures on Earth, 
where moth and ruſt doth corrupt, and whe = 


22 * The light of the body is the eye: if therefores 
thine eye be fingle, thy whole body ſhall be full oy 


ln 


hap. \ 


man 
of G 
Alan 
hial . 
he wl, 
ho wi 
Adio 
one ( 
G ed 6 
Cents 
had a 
ney; 
So as! 
Bacchs 
OT an | 
can /e1 
{::5 Stu 
So tha 
fe!vcs ( 
11ne1s C 


5.8, item 

$/* The' 
choſe m 
mand u: 
vide for 
Ciritt h 
the Wai 
therefor, 
with rhe 
no Anx1t 
a5 ſhould 
us, God 
Care for 
and mod 
them? |; 
eve us t 


eas ® 
0.9. not, ne1 
2 your He 

much b 


God tal 
the F'wls, 
the Fowls 
not provid 
which the 
aty ſuch c 
(who is yo 
more real 
kindred by 
than brute 
than that © 
Father. Y 
dering that 

27 W 
cubir to | 


How vair 
Thoughts : 
will nor ad 
ſence deriy 
eth upon hi 
proprcion ww] 
nor paſs, I 
that no The 
Divine BleyJt 
dS YOU Cann 
lue? 

28 And 
lider the | 
toil not, n 

29 An 
all his glo 

30 Wh 
held, whic 

Oven, ſha 
little fairh 
From Senſs, 
all Order of C 
lave alſo Lifo 
Vilting nor « 
lance in theſ, 
and anxious a 
I; 15 of no ot} 
Clothing as v 
me turn; Sud 
moſtly for Sup 
'* Wl alſo 
"Mm, Look 1 
Pilips, or oth 
-utries had 


| SUINZ) God de 


0 Meaneſt Ord 


| Pnlad jn alt 
” 2 contend w 
© *00 more tha 


ſn $He 
uke 


8, 


2 


{ 


twp. VI. 


N 
" #4 
oÞ 


0.9s 


things to each other; for har is the preſent Caſe 
Rd ns Or, no Man with che like Diligence, and 
goon and Faithfulneſs, can ſerve two Maſters. Ir 154 prover- 
al $ cech, and in reafon to be underſtood of contrary _— 
\. will either pate the one, or the firſt, and love the ſecond), __ ſe 
h» will cleave 0 the firſt, and contemn the other ; that 1s, 1o 1h 11s 
ations behave himſelt, that he will appear a true Servant bur to 
one of them, and deſpiſe, or ſlight the other 5 Tou cannot ſerve 
God and MUmmmns Ic 1s not improbable, thar ſome of the _ 
cients have thought, that amongſt fome 'of the Heathen, they 
n:d an Idol calied 3ſammon, which rhey made the God of Mo- 
ney; thence Mammn by a Figure ſignifierh Riches, as Luke 16. 9: 
& as itisof an Equivalent Senſe ro, No Man can ſerve God _ 
Bacchus, or God and Venrs : Thar 15, none can be a Drunkar Y 
or an unclean Perſon, and a true Servant of God. So no Man 
cn ſerve God, and yer make the getring of Riches, right or wrong, 
t:;5 Srudy ; hencerhe Apoſtle calls Covetouſneſs, Idolatry, Col. 3+ 5+ 
So that by ſerving here, muſt be underſtood a giving up of our 
{'ves chierly,or wholly either to the Service of God, orto the Bu- 
incts of gerring the World ; (or, ſerving the larter,) in what it 
Tempterh or Commanderh us to, Contrary to the Will of God. 


2; Therefore I ſay, * Take no thought for your 
if, whatye ſhall ear, or what ye {hall drink; nor 
yer for your body, what ye ſhall put on: Is not the 


{2 lite-more than meat, or the body than rayment : 
67s 


The Text muſt not be interpreted in a Senſe contradictory to 
thoſe many other Texts, which forbid an 1dle Lite and Com- 
mand us, 2n the Swear of our Face to eat our Bread, or tO pro- 
vide for our Families, 2 Theſſ. 3. 10, 11. 1 Tim. 5. 8. Nor did 
Cirilt himſelf live fuch a Life; he went about doing good, finiſhing 
the Work which his Father had given him ro do: Ir mult be 
therefore underſtood, 1. Of no fuch Thoughts, as are incontiſtenc 
with the Service of God, mentioned in the laſt Words. 2. Of 
no Anxious and Diſtrating Thoughts. 3. Of no ſuch Thoughts 
3s ſhould ſhew any Diſtruſt and Dithdence in God's providing for 
us. God harh given us our Lives and our Bodies, withour our 
Care for the Exiſtence of them. Why ſhould we in a Jawtul, 
and moderate uſe of Means, diſtruſt God for a Subſiſtence tor 
them? He hath given us the greater, will he nor (think you) 
give us the leſs? 


26 * Behold the fowls of the Air : for they .fow 
not, neither do they reap, nor gather into barns, yet 
your Heavenly Father feedeth them. Are ye not 
much berter rhan they ? 


God takes a care of all his Creatnres. For Example; conſider 
the F-wls, and thoſe, not che Tame Fowls about your Houſes, bur 
the Fowls of the Air, for whom the Houſewife's Hand doth 
not provide, neicher hath God fitted them for any Labour, by 
which they can procure their Livelihood; nor doth he require 
any ſuch thing of them, nor do they Labour; yer their Creator 
(who is your #*avenly Futher) feedeth them. You have much 
more reaſon to rruſt in God, if you could nor Labour, being 
kindred by his Providence ; for you are more excellent Beings 
than brute Creatures, and you have a furcher Relation to God, 
than that of Creatures to the Creator z for God is your Heaven] 
Father, You are inthe Order of Nature; and eſpecialiy, conft- 
dering that God is your Father, much better than chey. 


27 Which of you by taking thought, can add one 
cubir to his ſtature ? 


How vain a thing 15 it to diſtrat your ſelves with Anxious 
Thoughts abour your . Bady, and your Life * All your Thinking 
will not add a Cubit to your Stature: As your Being and Exi- 
ſence deriverth from God, ſo the Increaſe of your Stature depend- 
eth upon him ; likewiſe he makerh che Child to grow to rhe jus? 
priprrim which he hath intended him, and beyond thar he can« 
nor paſs, If God's Bleſſing be necefſary to this, and fo neceſſary, 
that no Thoughts, no Means will add any rhing without the 
Divine BlejJing, what reaſon have you to take any ſuch Thoughts, 
as you cannot expe he ſhould bleſs ro their deſired Effe& and 
Itue ? 

28 And why take ye thought for rayment ? Con- 
lider the Lillies of the field how they grow; they 
toil not, neither do they ſpin. 

29 And ver I fay unto you, that even Solomon in 
all his glory was not arrayed like one of theſe. 

30 Wherefore if God ſo cloath the graſs of the 
held, which to day is, and to morrow is caft into the 
Oven, /ha/l he not much more cloath you, O ye of 
little fairh 2 

From S21/;tive Creatures, our Lord proceedeth to Vegetables ; 
at Order of Creatures which have more than meer Being; they 
have alſo Life, tho* no Senſe 3 but yet two Degrees beneath Man ; 
wanring nor only Reaſon, bur Senſe. He ſhews us from an in- 
ſtance in theſe, that we have no more reafon to be troubled, 
and anxious about Cloathing, than about Meat or Drink. Cloath- 
'; 15 of no other uſe, than for Warmth or Ornament ; for ſuch 
Cioathing as will ſerve us for Warmth, a little Care will ſerve 
ue turn; Sudames ad Supervacanea, our Sweating Thoughts are 
moſtly for Supertluiries in Cloathing ; if God ſee them fir for us, 
he wil alſo give us them, without ſo many Thoughts abour 
mem, Look upon the Lillies .(wherher he means what we call 
Tulips, or other Flowers called Lilies, which probably thoſe 
-ountries had in greatcr Variety and Beauty, is not worth the ar- 
84s) God defizninz to glorifie himſelf in choſe Creacures, tho' 
of meaneſt Orders, hath given chem a greater Beauty, than Solo- 
mm tad in alt his rich Array ; to ler us know that Art muſt 
not contend with Nature, and that Beauty and Glory in Apparel 
» 00 more than is to be found in Creatures much inferiour to 


&. MATTHEW 


Chap. VII. 


our Order, which made Solon (cho? an Heathen) prefer the Sight 
of a Peacock, to thar of Crzſus ; and therefore this is a thing not 
worthy of any Anxious Thoughts; for if God ſeeth ſuch things 
good tor us, hethar ſo Cloatheth the Graſs of the Field, which is 
bur of a few Days Continuance, will much more Cloath us ; and 
and it we diſtruſt him for ſuch Proviſion, we ſhe our ſelves 
Perſons of little Faith. 


31 Therefore take nothought, ſaying, Whatſhall 
weeat? or what ſhall wedrink? or wherewithal 
{hall we be cloathed ? 

32 (For aſter all theſe things do the Gentiles ſcek) 
for your heavenly Father knoweth that ye have need 
of all theſe things. 


Our Lord repeateth the Precepr before given, v. 23. Where- 
in he forbids nor all moderate and provident Thoughts for things 
neceſſary, bur only ſuch Thoughcs as ſhall argue our di/try$ in 
God, or perplex and diſtract our Minds, or be inconſiſtent wich 
our Duty, and Imploymenr of our Thoughts abour higher and 
better things, This he here pretieth by two Arguments: 1. Be- 
cauſe theſe are the things which People ſpend all their Thoughts upon 
who are not aware that they have Souls to tabe care for, or do not un 
derſtand the Providence of God, or have no ſuch Relation to God 
as Chriſtians have, who call God Father.” 2. You have (faich he) 
an heavenly Father ; who being the God of Heaven, knoweth 


_ you need ; and being your Father, will ſupply alſo your 
ceds. 


33 But * cek ye firſt the Kingdom of God, and * Luk. 13. 
his Righteouſneſs, and all theſe things ſhall be added 3*:. 5* 
unto you. 1 RIng. 3. 


, | 12. Pl. 37. 
The Kingdom of God, and his Righteonſneſs, in this Verſe, are PI 

Terms Comprehenſive of whatſoever appertaineth to the Honour 

and Glory of God, either as Means, or as the End. Let your 

principal Care and Srudy be, how ro get to Heaven, and how 

ro promoye rhe Kingdom of God in the World, to bring your 

Hearrs 1n Subjettion to the Will of God, thar the Kingdom of 

God may be within you ; and how to bring others to the Obedi- 

ence of Faith, and of the Will of God. And for the Things of 

this Life, ic ſhall fare with you as ir did with Solomon, 1 Kings 3. 

12, who asked nor Riches and Honour, bur had them. You 

ſhall have for your Necefficics, Pſal. 37. 4, Mar. 10. 30. 1 Tim.4.s, 


34 Take therefore no thought for the morrow, 
for themorrow ſhall rake thought for the things of it 
{elf ; ſufficient untothe day 7s the evil thereof. 


No ſuch Thoughts as before-mentioned, for God will provide 
for you ro Morrow, when to Morrow cometh. Befides, every 
new Day will bring forth ſome new Cares ; you know nor whar 
ro Morrow will bring forth, nor whar to Morrow you will have 
need of; and it you did, why ſhould you torment your ſelves 
before the time? Ir will be time enough when you feel the 
Evils of a ſucceeding time; you need nor torment your ſelves 
with Prophecying againſt your ſelves; what ic may be, ſhall ne- 
ver be; or it it be, you had not need weaken your ſelves for rhe 
encountring ſuch Evils by a preyious Diſturbance of your 
Thoughts about chem. 


GHAP. VIE 


Chris forbids raſh Fudgment agair# a Brother, 1—5s. Mot to caſt 
Pearls before Swine, 6. Preſſeth to earneſt and inſtant Prayer,7—12. 
To enter in at the ftrait gate, 13, 14. To beware of falſe Prophets. 
in diſguiſe : Who are known by their fruits, 1$—20, Not to be 
Hearers only, but Doers of God's Word, 21—23. By a Houſe built 
on a Rock, he ſheweth the benefit of thoſe that hear and d; and 
by a Houſe on the Sand, the Miſery of thoſe that hear, and do mt, 
24—29, 


1* FUdge not, that ye be not judged. *Luk.6.34, 

J 2 For with whatjudgment ye judge, yeſhall Rom.2.21, 
bejudged; * and with what meaſure ye metre, it 7 <*-4:3- 
{hall be meaſured to you again. 9 


Our Saviour muſt nor. be underſtood here prohibiting any *Mar.4-24- 
Judgment, which 1s elſewhere in Holy-Wric allowed, for che Luk. 6. 38. 
Holy Spiric doth nor Command and Prohibic tne ſame thing , 
whence it 1s evidenr, that ir is not to be underſtood of Polirical 
or Eccleſiaſtical Judgments; nor was our Saviour here ſpeaking 
ro any ſuch Perſons. Ir is therefore to be underſtood of Private 
Fudgments; nor of them abſolutely, for 1t 1s lawtul for us ro Fudge 
our ſelves ; yea, 1t 15 our Duty, 1 Cor. 11. 3I. Nor is that ſudg- 
mentof our Nejghbour's Opinions or Ations here forbidden, which 
rerminateth in our ſelves, in our SarisfaRtion, as to the Truth or 
Falſhocd of the former, or the Goodne!s or Badneſs of the latter; 
we ought ſo ro prove all things, in order to our holding fat that 
which #s good. Nor is all Judgment of our Neighbour's Aions, 
with reference to him, forbidden ; how can we reprove him for 
his Errors, or reſtore him that is fallen, wichour a previous Fudg- 
ment of his ARions? Bur that which 1s here forbidden, is et- 
ther, 1. A raſh Tudgment of his State, or a judging him for ding his 
Duty ; ſuch was Simon's Judging the Woman, Lube 7. 39. or che 
Diſciples Zudgment of char Woman, Matth. 35. 6,7, Or, 2. A 
Fudeing of others, tor things which they judge to be indifferent, 
forbidden, Rom. 14. 1,2, 3- Or, 3. A Fudging them for ſecret 
things, ſuch as inward Habits of Grace, when no apparent Fruits 
ro the contrary are ſeen. Or, 4. Condemning orhers tor tingle 
ARs, or a publick Cenſuring and Condemning others for private 
Failings; or finally, any open and publick Cenſuring the Attions 
of others, when and where ir cannor conduce either ro God's 
Glory, or our Brother's Good. { That ye be not judged. | This is 
Expounded in the next Verſe, telling us eicher the ordinary 


Femper of Men, or the juſt Judgmenc of God, repaying ſuch 
| uncharitable 


Jam. 4.11, 


, wn 


- wi - 
-» p__ SO 0 _ 
= _ ———— - 94 
A —_— o was : 
——— >.< - _ - 
= EG GEES AS) 


— 
-—_ - - 


=: £5 | — es 


= ww Y "X Py = 
, as Ch 
fr Orem” 
- 4 


Chap. VI [. 


 uncharirable ARions, per Leger Taliomis, with ſuffering others to 
do the like to us, Luke 6. 37. 


2 * And why beholdeſt thou the mote that 1s in 
thy brother's eye, but conſidereſt not the beam that | 
js in thine own eye? 

4 Or how wilt thou fay to thy brother, Let me 
pull out the mote out of thine eye, and behold a 
beam 7zs in thine own epe ? 

- Thou hypocrite, firſt caſt out the beam out of 
thine own eye : and then thou {halt ſee clearly to caſt 
out the mote out of thy brother's eye. 


Whether the Wcrd Tranſlated a Ate, ſignifieth a 3te or A 
Splinter, is of no great Concern to know. Our Saviour Expound- 
&d this Text, when he ſaid to the Phariſees, bringing him a Wo- 
man taken in Adultery, Let him that #s guiltleſs throw the firſt 
Stone; So forth the Apoſtle Paul, Rom. 2, 1, The Text teach- 
cth us theſe Leſſons. 1.That thoſe who are moſt Cenſorious of others, 
are uſually more Notorious and Culpable themſelves, if mot for the 
ſame Sins, yet for others of equal, if not greater Magnitude. 2. That 
it is mtorious Hypocriſie to {py ſmaller Faults in others, and not to ſee 
greater in our ſelves. 3 That it 1 notorious Impudence to pretend to 
Cenſure and Fudge others for Sins, Mm which we live our ſelves. 
4. That there is no ſuch way to teach us Charity, in not haſtily, 
raſhly, or too ſeverely judging others, as to look firſt into our own Hearts 
and Ways, and ſeeing if -ve have nst the ſame or greater Fallings. 
Our Charity in this kind ſhould begin at home. | 


6 * Give not that which is holy unto the dogs, 
©. neither caſt ye your pearls before ſwine : leſt they 
trample them under their feet, and turn again and 


Tent YOu. 

By Swine and Dogs, our Saviour doubtleſs underſtandeth wicked 
Men of ſeveral forts, either ſuch as are more tame Sinners, tram- 
pling upon Holy Things, and with Swinz, wallowing in the ire 
of Luis and Corruptions, P70v. 26. 11. 2 Pet. 2. 21: By Dogs, 
more malicious, revengeful, boiſterous Sinners may be meanr, 
whoſe Conſciences will ſerve them to bark and grin at the Word 
of God, ro mock at Holy Things, to perſecute thoſe rhar bring 
them the Goſpel, and are their open Enemies, becauſe they tell 
them the Truth. The Goſpel is to be Preached to every Crea- 
rure, Mar. 16.15. Bur when the Jews were hardned, and ſpake 
Evil of that way before the Mulritude, gc. Acts 19. 9. the Apo- 
ſtles lett Preaching to them. The Precept doubtleſs 1s General, 
direQing the Miniſters of Chriſt ro Adminiſter the Holy Things 


*Luk.5.41. 


with which they are entruſted, only to ſuch as have a Right to 


them, and under prudent Circumſtances, ſo as the Holy Name of 
God may not be protaned, nor they run into needleſs Danger, 


*Ch. 21. © * Ask, and itſhall be given you: ſeek, and ye 
22. Mar. ſhall find : knock, and it ſhall be opened unto you. 


mo hp 3 For * every one that asketh, receiveth : and he 
uk. 11.9. . : 
fo. 14.12. that ſeeketh, findeth : and to him that knocketh, it 
& 15.7.& ſhall be opened. 
15.23, 24 Herc is a Precept expreſſed by three Wo?*s, Ak, Sech, Knock ; 
Jam-1-5,5- 11d 2 Promiſe annexed in three diſtin Terms: 7 ſhall be given 
J Joh. 3* you: Tou ſhall find : It ſhall be opened unto y»vw. The thing Com- 
22-N5-15- Tanded is Prajer; the thing Promiſed is an Audience of Prayer, 
Pro.8.17- or an Anſiver to Prayer. The Multiplying of the Terms in which 
Jer.29.12- ye Precept is exprefled, 1s nor Idle and Supertluous ; it lers us 
know our Averleneſs to the Duty ; and that God in it requireth 
of us Faith, Diligence, Conſtancy, and Importunity, Chrift had be- 
fore told us of whom we ſhould ask, our Father; it 1s not ſaid 
what we ſhould ask; both in regard we have a Liberty to ask 
any thing we have need of; and he had, chap. 6. particularly 
dire&ted the matter of our Prayers. The Promiſe that we ſhall 
have, ſignifies an Anſwer, either in Kind or in Value. The 
Promiſe of Giving lers us know, that our Prayers are not Meritori- 
ous: For every one that a«&eth rhe' things he needeth, and in 
Faith, according to the Will of God, and for a right end, recei- 


veth, toc. Fam. 4+ 3+ 
5 Or what man is there of you, whom if his Son 
ask bread, will he give him a ſtone ? 
I© Or if he ask a fiſh, will he give him a ſerpent ? 
11 If ye then * being evil, know how to give 
*Gen. 5.5. good gifts unto your children, how much more {hall 
& 8.21 yourFather which is in Heaven, give good things to 
them that ask him. 


Asbing is but a Verbal Exprefſion of an inward Defire ; no 
Man delireth that which is Evil, but that which he at leaſt ap- 
prehenderh to be Good ; (thar is, ſuitable unto his Wants.) As 
Earthly Parents, knowing that their Children, tho' through 
Weakneſs of Underſtanding they may ask that which is really 
Evil for them, yer will nor give them any ſuch things, and 
gratifie their Ignorance ; ſo neither will your Heavenly Father, 
(knowing whar you truly need, and what is truly good for you) 
give you any thing which he knoweth 1s not ſuitable for you, 
bur noxious to you : Bur if you ask any thing which 1s either 
abſolurely Good tor you, and cannot be Evil, or which your 
Heavenly Father knowerh to be Good for you, under your pre=- 
fent Circumſtances; you may be aflured, conſidering he 1s your 
E:ther, and hath as great a Kindneſs for you as an Earthly Father 
for his Child, and that he is your Heavenly E:rther, and theretore 
hath a Sufticiency to give, will give good things ro you, ask- 
ing them of him; and this you may be afſur'd of from rhar 
G2cd-will and Inclination, which you, tho' you come infinitely 
ſhore cf che Perfegion and good Inclinations of your Heaven!y 
F:the-, find in your ſelves towards your Children; for you de- 
rive from him, as his Children, all rhat Goodneſs and Benigniry 


St MATTHEW. 


Cha 


which you havs. If therefore we in Prayer ask an 
God, which may be Good or Evil under different Circumſtan 
ces, and receive it not; We may conclude, that tho' we __ 
what we asked, Bread, yet indeed it was a Stone ; rho' we thoes % 
it a Fiſh, yer God ſaw it was a Scorpion; and account tha: Gg 
anſwered our General Deſires, which were for ſome Goog by 4 
nying our Specifical Requeſt. x0 

12 Therefore * all things whatſoever you woy! 
that men ſhould do unto you, do ye even to to the, 
for * this is the law and the prophets. — 


Moſt Interpreters think the term Therefore here redundane b. 
ſome ſuch little Particles often are in Holy Writ; for ir js 1; a I34; 
ro make out this to be a proper Inference from the — "a 
This Precept conraineth in it the Subſtance of all rhar is i» % 
found in the Books of the Law and the Prophets, which COnce © 

eth us, in reference to others, the Sum of the Second T.4þ1+ which 
requireth only Zuſtice and Charity. Chriſt dorh nor ſay "Thi. 
all the Law and the Prophets, bur this is the Law and the p;;4,..> 
There is no Man but would have others deal juſtly with A. 
giving him what 1s his own, whether Honour or Tribute, ox . 
ſtate, gc. neicher taking, nor withholding his own from "Ing 
Nor is there any, but if he ſtood in need of it, would deſire the 
Charitable Help of another, or a Charitable Remiſſon from him © 
what he might in exat Juſtice require. Do ye (faith our $4, 
our) the ſame unto them? And indeed this is bur a Confirmation 
of the Light and Law of Nature; no more bur what Men woul 
do, it they wou!d hearken to the Light within them : And with. 
out this, 1n vain do Men pretend to Religion, as our Savicur 
reacheth, Mar. 7. 9, 10, 11, 12,13. Which makes ſomethink thy 
our Saviour by this retle&s upon rhe Phariſees, who laid all thei 
Religion upon Ceremonies, and ſome Ritual Performances, in objer. 
vance of their Traditions, and omitted the weightier things of the 
Law, Fudgment, Mercy, and Faith, Matth, 23. 23. 


13 *Enter ye in at the ſtrait gate, for wide 7s the ; 

gate; and broad zs the way that leadeth to defiruti. . 

on, and many there be which go in thereat : 

I 4 || Becauſe ftrait zs the gate, and narrow 5 ths. 

om which leadeth unto life, and few there be thy 
nd It. 


 OurSaviour having in this Sermon delivered many hard $. 
ings'to Fleſh and Blood, here obviates a rwofold Tempraticn 
they might have to the negleG of them. 1. From their Liffeuly, 
2. From the Paucity of them who live according to theſe Rules, te 
here compareth Heaven to an Houſe, a ſtately Houle, into which 
a ſtrait Gate leaderh; to a City, the way to which is a nay 
way. There 1s nothing more ordinary in Holy Writ, than 
call a common Courſe of Men's Aions a Way : It is alfo con. 
pared to a Gate. The Sum of what our Saviour here faith, i; 
this: There are but two ultimate Ends of all Men, Eten! De 
ftruFion, and Fternal Life, The Courſe that leadeth to Deſtr8i. 
on 1 like a broad way that is obvious to all, and many walk in thi, 
That Courſe of Life and Adtions, which will bring a Man to Hex 
ven, is ſtrait, unpleafing to Fleſh and Blocd, nor ar all gratifyin 
Men's Senfitive Appetites, and narrow ; the Greek, is affid:;, 1 
way wherein Men wil] meet with many Crofſes and Temptatin, 
and there are but a few will find if, You muſt not therefre 
wonder if my Precepts be hard to your Carnal Apprehenſions; 
no; be ſcandalized, tho' you ſee but few going in the right Road 
to the Kingdom of Heaven. 


15 * Bewareof falſe prophets, * which comets, 
you in ſheeps cloathing, but inwardly they are 1-1 
vening wolves. (y 


The term Prophets in Holy Writ, is of larger Extent than w 
ſignifie only ſuch as foretold things to come; others alſo who raughy 
the People, pretending Authority from God ſo to do, were called 
Prophets. Thus Ber- Feſus, Afts 13. 6. is called a falſe Projtes '! 
A falſe Prophet 1s of the ſame Significancy with a falſe Teas, © 
Againſt thoſe our Saviour cautionerh his Hearers, as being the i 
moft fatal and dangerous Enemies to Faith and Holineſs, Sem 
of them indeed come in Sheeps cloathing, under very fair pretences 
and a fair ſhew of Religion and Strineſs ; bur they are R:ten 
ing Wolves ;, as dangerous to yourJSouls, as Ravenous Wolves are 
ro a Flock of Sheep. 


16 * Ye ſhall know them by their fruits. Do men , 
gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thiſtles : 

17 Even 10 *every good trec bringeth forth good ,, 
fruir, but a corrupt tree bringeth forth evil fruit. 

18 A good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit, n- 
ther car a corrupt tree bring torth good fruit. 

19 * Every tree which bringeth not forth good 
fruit, is hewen down, and caſt into the fire. h 

20 Wherefore by their fruits ye ſhall know them.” 


A proper Effet diſcovereth the Cauſe: Leſt his Diſcipls 
ſhould ask, How ſhall we diſtinguiſh true, trom falſe Teachers ? 
Our Saviour tells them, By their fruits ye ſhall know them. Out 
Saviour ſends not his Diſciples to enquire into the Truth of chei 
Miſſion , whether thac more Internal from God, of which they 
could not judge; or more External from Men, who may ett and 
tend out thote whom God never ſent ; bur you ſhall know them 
(faith our Saviour) by their faichful or unfairhful Diſcharge © 
rheir Duty : If they be true Teachers by their diſcharging the 
Miniſtry in 2 faithtul Revelation of the Mind and Will of Gd, 
or by their Holy Lite, living as Enſamples to the Flock, by the 
Fruirs of true Do#rine, and a Holy Life, by the Diſcharge ot rheir 
Miniſtry in good Conſcience; tor ic is with Men, as it is vitl 
the Trees; good Trees bring forth good Fruit, corrupt Trees 
bring forth evil Fruit. If Men have the Roor of the Matte, 


y thing of 


Ca 


1, 
a *[,1., 


li 


\ 
4 


(] 


the Sced of God abiding in chem, they will in every Relatie" 
br:1S 


ily 
- 


«MS 4 
n: 


Bt 
Fa 


3k 


\V 
bring 
7:30) 
may 1 
[cdzC 
from 
witct. 
acceor 
uPOil 
&r5: { 
their 1 


of, 8,2. 21 
6.4% ſhall 


2 -5* doin 


[6-13 $21 
þ 1-22 the tr 
by an 
tho? I 
cunity, 
Dilcip! 
whole 
&. J4 


, C 
WiOl C 


22 


7 


n.24- have 1 


h.11- Name 
*——ooe 
1G many 


os, 


iy 5 & 


«13 


"4 SR 
», VernT 


k, 25+ That 
general! 
Name; 

Name, p 
dine Ma 
Operatic 
phecyin 
(under 1 
So as nc 
nary Gi 
al Favor 
declare 

you, Or t 


quiry, M 


| A 


of mine 
man, V 
-- 263 
and th« 
it tell n 


Our Sa 
ſiructing 
ea(ic incl 
he here c 
upon the 
fieth with 
Chriſt's $. 
15 compre 
thein, he 
With a Pr. 
intended, 
the Rock © 
Every wit 
of Ecerna 
15 one wh 
ſo kears a 
Opcrarive 
Will of $ 
doth to, t 
Doubrs, Ti 
builded or 
faii, becar 
lation of t 


26 A 
mine, 2 
fooliſh r 
27 A 
and the 1 
| Hl, and 


There at 
an Houſe 11 
dation, an 
cr tiemſe 
made with 
and Found 
harh Warra 
Irnnite Me 
Works ; he 
Duties of R 
te Will of 
as to ſuch | 
When a Dp 

emntation 
Periſh in a 
399 8, 13:1 
be the Ki 
by how mu 
Ment of rhe 


28 An 


-y'T. 
hap. VII 
brins forth che Fruits of 7inth and Holineſs : Tf they have nor, 
- ij} bring torch Error and Wickedneſs, From whence we 
"_ Ns Thar our Lord expeQeth from his People tich a Know- 
_ che Scriptures, as rhey may be able to diſcern Truth 
Icage rathood; and fuch a Diligence as to tearch the Scriptures, 
from r hoſe things Which their Teachers deliver to them, be 
© ring © chem Or BY, As 17, 11, Not taking Divine Truths 
WEL Trait, nor believing any thing, becauſe dittarcd by Teach- 
a their Teachers not as Dictators, but only as helpers of 


Witt. 


er: : __ 
their FUN. ; ; 

20 Notevery one that faith unto me, Lord, Lord, 
, 4s. ſhall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven : but he thar 
:5- doth the will of my Father which is in Heaven. 

15.13 &me that ſay unto Chriſt, Loy, Lord, ſhall be faved, being 
1422+ che true Diſciples of Chriſt; bur every one char owneth Chriſt 
by an External Proteftion, as his Lord; every one thar prayerh, 
ho! he dorh ic ofren, and with ſome appearing Zeal and Impor- 
runity, ſhall nct be ſaved; nor «oth by it approve himielt a rrue 
Dilciple of Chrift, but he alone who doth endeavour to tulfil the 
Whole Will of God, borh by F:ith ard Hlineſs, Rom. 2.13. 1 Theff. 
© im. 1. 22, 23, True Religion lies m Obedicnce to the 
wiolc Wil of G. d. 
22 Many will ſay unto me in that day.Lord, Lord: 
124. have we not * prophected in thy Name: and in thy 
1.1 Name have Calt out devils? and in rhy Name done 
iGo 277 wonderful works ? 
A 22 * And then I will profeſs unto them, * I ne- 
” * yerknew you: depart from me ye that work iniquity, 

Thar by that DFty is to be underſtood the Day of Fudgment, 15 
generally agreed by Interpreters. | We have Prophefred in thy 
Name; | That is, revealed thy Will unto People, and 7n 77 
X.me; that is, by thy Authority and Power calt out Devils, and 
ding many wonderful Works ; that is, wrought many miraculous 
Operations. In the Old Teftz:nent we find Bulaamand Saul Pro- 
phecying, who were borch wicked Men: 7udas was fent our 
( under the New Te!tament) both to preach and to work Miracles, 
So as ncne from Gifts, no, nor the moſt eminent and extraordi- 
nary Gitts, can conclude the Goodnets ot his State, or any ſpeci- 
al Favour with God, {| T will profeſs; ] that 1s, I will openly 
declare ro them. | T never knew you ;] char is, loasto approve 
vou, or take Pleature in you: Depart from me you Workers of Ini- 

quiry, Matt. 25. 4Is 
4 24 Therefore * whoſcever heareth thele ſayings 

of mine. and doth them, 1 will Iiken him unto a wiſe 
man, which built his houſe upon a rock. 

25 And the raindeſcended, and the floods came, 

and the winds blew, and beat upon thar houſe, and 


it fell not, for it was founded upon a rock. 


A [0 
\ + 0 
0 / 


ſirutting People by Similitudes and Parables, which by their 
eafic incurring 1nto the Senſes, give Advantage to the Memory 3 
he here chuſetit a Similirude ro conclude this excellent Sermon 
upon the Mount, The Builder intended, (who our Saviour digni- 
fieth with the Name ofa Wiſe Man ) is, He that dves not only hear 
ChriſP's Sayings, but avth them : Under the Notion of Kearing 
is comprchended Underſtanding and Believing them; by doing 
thein, he underitandeth a ſincere Deſire and Endeuour to d» them, 
with a Practice fo far as Humane Frailty will permit. The uſe 
intended, ſeems to be an Hope for Eternal Life and Salvation; by 
the Rack is meant Chriſt, 1 Cor, 10. 4. Ephs 2. 25. I Pet. 2. 4. 
Every wiſe Chriſtian, betoure he buildech up to himtelf an Hope 
of Ecernal Life and Salvation through Ctriſt, ruſt find that he 
15 one who doth ncr only read and hear the Words of God, bur 
ſo kears as to underſtand and believe them, and that with an 
Opcrarive Faith, working upon his Soul to the Obedience of the 
Will of Sod, or at leaft a ſincere Endeavour toir. And he who 
doth to, tho' his Zpe may be ſometimes ailaulred wich Fears, 
Doubrs, Temptations, ( Which are like the Afſaults of an Houſe 
builded on a Rock, by Winds, Flr1ds, and Storms) yer it ſhall nor 
fail, becauſe ir is truly founded on Chriſt, according to the Reve- 
lation of his Will, Prov. 10. 28. 1 John 3. 3. 


26 And every one that heareth theſe ſayings of 
mine, and doth them not, {hall be likened unto a 
tooliſh man, which built his houſe upon the ſand : 

'27 And the raindeſcended, and the floods came, 
and the winds blew, and beat upon that kouſe, and it 

| KIl, and great was the fall of it. 


There are, and will be others, thar, as fooliſh Builders, run up 
an tloufe 11 haſte, wichout looking ro the Goodneſs of the Foun- 
dation, and happen to build it upon loofe Ground : So rhey tlat- 
ir riemfelves with che Apes of the Houſe in the Heavens, not 
made with Hands, 2 Cor. 5. 1, without looking to the Bottom 
and Foundation of theſe Hopes, wherher they be ſuah as Chriſt 
hath warranced or no; bur eicher build their Hopes upon God's 
Irfnite Mercy, or the Sufficiency of Chriſt's Merits, or their own 
ns, hearing the Werd of God, and performing ſome other 
NT OR Ln _— to HVE-t0 the OHhedierice of 

1 of God, e Event will be to theſe Men, 
45 to ſuch foolith Builders; their Buiiding may ſtand awhile, bur 
Wien a Day of Vitiration, or Deach, or ſharp Afﬀi&ions, or 

-<MPation comes, taen their Houſe, rheir Hopes, all fail and 
periſh m a moment; becauſe they had no good Foundation, 
"a 13: 14; Gy I. UF 27. 8. Prov. 11. 7. And great will 
ran cf It. Tacir Mifery and Calamity ſhall be the greater, 

/ 97 muci their Zpes hath been the ſtronger, the Diſappoint- 


ment of their ExpeRation adding to their Miſery. 


23 And it came to paſs, when Jeſus had ended 


YA 
<4 


SS: MATTHEW 


Our Saviour makerh frequent uſe of thar Ancient Way of in- 


;term uſed by Sarah to 4Araham, and atterwards t9 Elijah. 


Cha P. 


[theſe ſayings, * the people were altoniſhed ar hi- 


doctrine : 
29 For he taught them as 63 
and not as the Scribes. 


The fame Words alfo are repeated, Mah rt. 25. Tnls 4, 3 

They declare the Effett of this, and other o: om Saviour's Scr- 
mons, upon the Hearrs of thule that heard kim, and the reat>n 
of 1r. They were aſtoniſhed, attettcd with an 47 rirurinn ar what 
they heard him in this and other Sermons Qeliver; che Divine 
Verities revealed in his Dijcourſes, che Purity of his Doctrine, the 
Convincing Power that attended ir, his Bold and Free Speech 
withour retpet of Perſons, the Simplicity 07 his Pi;raje, rhe Gra- 
vity or his Matter; the Majeſty he fhewed in his Diſcourſes atfett- 
ed the People, and made him appear to them, one fenr of God, 
and cloathed with his Authority. He did nor reach as the $cribes, 
the ordinary Teachersamongſt 116 Jews, from whom they had rhe 
Diſcourſes about Traditions, ..c Hires, and Ceremmies, c:1d and 
dull Di/courſes, of little or no Tendency to rhicir Ercynal Salvition- 


- 


CH AP. wb 


Chriſt, after his Sermon on the 3-.»:c, cleanſeth tho bclizuing Leper, 
I—4. Being at Capern.tim, admire the Centurim's Kuth, and 
healeth his Servant ſich of the Palfi:, $—123 Cureth Peter's Mn 
ther-in-law of a Feaver, and 1.1 5ther Pifetes, 14—17, A 
Scribe reſoluveth tn folbw him: His 4oſmer both to him and to or 
of his Diſciples, 18-22, Hs Ditcivies foar the Tempeſt ; He re- 
buketh their Unelief, 23—27., Ar Gergvſones he dijp>ſſ-fferh two 
Men of unclean Spirits : and juffereth them t» 22 into Swine, 
23—32, The Inhabitants of the City being ac;uainted with it, 
defire him to depart, 33—34 


ie baving 2uthiority, 


2, 


I 7 Hen he was come down firem the mountain. 
great multitudes followed him. 

2 * And bchold there came a leper and worſhip 
ped him, ſaying, Lord, if thou wilt, thou canſt 
make me clean. 

We heard 6f Chriſt's going up into the Imtin, Math, 5. 1. 
and of great Multitudes that followed him trom Decapolis, and 
from 7uder,, and irom 7eruſalem, and from berond 7ordan - 
Wherher the ſame Mulrtitude, or others followed him upon his 


uy 
coming down, is not ſaid: Bur b-h1ld (faith the Evanzceliſt) there 
came a Leper ; both Mark and LZuhe have the fame Story, or one 
very like to it, Mar. 1. 40. Lik. 5,12, Orche Plazue or Leproſic, 
we read much in the Boks of Aries, Ir was a white Scab in the 
Fleſh, which Gradually contumed the Body, and was Contagious : 
The Leper, and he wiio touched him, or any rhing he came near, 
was Legally unclean; twice weread of it inflifted as a feverc Pu- 
niſhment upon Gehazi tor Lying, and taking Bribes ; and upon 
Kings Ozziah for offering Sacrifice » It was a Diſeaſe of very diffi- 
cult Cure, This Leper comes and | worſhippeth Christ, | Mart laich, 
that he bneeleth down to him : Whether he only bnee/ed dn, or 
proftrated himſelf, is nor much material, for either of chem mighr 
be done according to rhe Faſhion of thoſe Countries, in-roken 
either of a cjvi/ eſpe? paid to him as a great and eminent Pro- 
phet, or a piece Gf Re/121ons Thmage, (if he had fo carly a Reve- 
lation, that he was the Son ot God, which ſome doubr,) ſayins, 
[ Lord, if thou wilt, thou £217 make meclean, | The term Lord will 
not conclude his Recognizing Cirrilt as the Son of God, being a 
The 
words import it's deſire, tho' they be not a Firm of Prayer, but 
an Acknowledgment ot the Power of Chrift, The Leper acknow- 
ledzing Chriſt's Power, ſubmics himftelt co his Will, and ſo with 


the ſame Breath declareth his &vith and Modeſty, He indeed de- 


clarerh no Faith in the ill of God ; nor can any Perſon exerciſe 
any ſuch Faich as to any Temporal Mercy, any furcher, than as GoG 
ſhall judge ir for our Good. 


3 And Jeſus pur forth h/s hand, and toucked him, 
ſaying, I will, be thou clean. And immediately his 
Leproftie was cleanſed. 

By che Law of God, Lev. 5. 3. he that touched another, who 
was unclean, (as the Lopzr was, Lev. c<. 13. <. 14.) was unclear, 
how then doth Chriſt (who was ſubje(t co che Law) touch che Le- 
per ? Some ſay he did nor rouch the unclean Leper, bur him thac 
was a Leper, and by his Touch made clean. Bur it is a berter 
Anſwer, thar what Chrift did as he was God, (fuch were his 
miraculous Operaritons,) he could not contra& any ritual Vnclean- 
neſs by ; and pofſibly under the Law, the Prieſt was exempred 
from that Uncleannefs, tor he came very near the Leper, in his 
Oihce abour him expretled, Lev. ch. 13. ch. 14. Nor do weread 
of any Uncleanneſs conrtrafted by A4.zron, in his Pertormance of 
his Office to Miriam under her Leproſze; nor by the Prieſts, 
2 Chron. 26. 20. tho' it be ſaid, They thruſt out Uzziah, Chrilt, 
by putting forth his Hand, ſhewed his kindneſs ro this miferavie 
Creature, by healing him with a touch; he ſhewed his Divine Poiw- 
er, ſaying, T will, be thou clean. He anſwereth him in his own 
term, I will; and then Commands the thing. How acceptable 15 
Faith to God? Ani immediately his Leprofie was cleanjed; tat 1s, 
removed; the Word immediately confirms the Miracle ; it was 
nor only a thing done withour ordinary Means, but withour te 
ordinary Time requiſite for ſuch a Cure, 


4 And Jeſus ſaith unto him, See thou tell noman, 
but go thy way ; ſhew thy ſelf to the Prieſt, and of- 
fer the gift that * Moſes commanded for a teltimo- 
ny unto them. | 


Some think thar our Saviour only Commanded him Silence 1n:- 
til he had ſhewed himſelf unto the Prieſt ; and he, according to 
rhe Law, Lev. 13. ſhould have pronounced him c!c.:n, leſt cheir 
Envy upon hearing of ir, ſhould have cauſed chem to have <b- 
{cured the Miracle, by delaying zo proncunce him clean : Bur ic 


3s 


a 


CE en a as == 


- 
= AX 


of 


+a 


a 


—_ 
—— 
C. 


'Y 
AF 
[6i1if 

; 


3 DX. « BY 
iIVisſ. i: 


— 


s 
Lu; 3» I 2. 


« Abh0-0n i he any 
2 RO 


F Lev. I 44 
3. 4. 10 


St, M AT 


manded hte upon whom he had wrought Miracles to fay no- 
thinz of ity fee Chyp. 3. 39. & 12, I6, Of 17. 9. 
thar chis Precept was not to be underſtood with 
but rhar Chriſt did ir, either char he might not 
be chouzgite ro feck his own Glory ; or rather, becaule Chriſt 
judged it nor ver time by his Miracles to be publickly made 
known : Bur he icnds him to the Prieſt, both to reach him Obe- 
drence 19 the Law, and that the Truth of the Miracle might by a 
publick Record be confirmed ; he alto Commands him to offer 
the Gitr appoinred by the Law, Lev. 14- Thereby both ac- 
knowledying his Cure to be from God, and reſtifying his Thank- 
juinets. | That Afiſes commanded.) To ſhew that he came not to 
oppole 12s. | For a Teſtimony unto them] Thar hereatrer 1 may 
be a Teſtimony unto them thar I am more than rhe Son of 
Man, 7:in 5. 36. 

5 * And when Jeſus was entred into Capernaum, 
there came unro him: Centurion, beſceching him, 

6 And ſaying, Lord, my Servant lieth at home 
fick of the Pallic, grievoutly tormented. 

7 And Jeſus fairch unto him, | will come and 


heal him. 
*Luk. 15. $8 The Centurion anſwered, and ſaid, Lord, * 1 
19, 21- ara nct worthy that thou ſhouldeſt come under my 
*DCQL, 1c, Root: but * ſpeak the Word only, and my Servant 


20, thall be healed. : 

o For i am a Man under Authority. having Sol- 
dicrs under me - and I fay to this man, Go, and 
he goeth : and to another, Come, and he cometh : 
1nd to my Servant, Do this, and hedoth it. : 

i Whcon Teſus heard 77, he marvelled, and faid 
to them thar tollowed, Verily I fay unto you, I have 
not found {© great Faith,, no, not in Iſrael. 

Many think thar this Scery was 1n order before the other, Ir 
{ related by Lub. 7. 1. With ſome larger Circumſtances there 15 
only chis Difference berwixr the two Evangeliſts; Matthew feems 
ro ſpeak, as if rhe Centurion At firſt came in Perſon to him; Luke 
ſiirh, char he firſt ſent che Elders of che Jews to him, then ſome 
F jends, Bur we are accounted our ſelves to do that which we 
ſ-r others on Work to do. {There came unto him 4 Centurion. 
There came ſome Elders of the Fews firſt, rhen ſome parricular 
Eriends of one that was a Roman Captain, to him, tO tell him, that 
rhe Captain had a Servant ar his Houſe, thart lay grievoully fick 
of, and tormented with the Palfie. Thar which we uſually call 
th Dead Palſie, in which a Fir of the Apoplexy uſually iſſuerh, 
when ic doch nor preſently kill, Our Lord promiſerh to come 
and heal him; therein ſhewing borh his Kindneſs, and how ac- 
ceptable ro 1:3im the Humanity of this Centurion to his Servant 
was. The Centurion, by his Friends, as Luke tells us, ſends to 
him, detiring him not to trouble himſelf ro that degree; telling 
him, 1. That it was a Favour of which he was not worthy : The 
beſt Men have always the meaneſt Thoughts of themſelves. 
>. That ir was needleſs; for it he would only ſpeak the Hord, 
commanding out the Diſtemper, that was enough to effe& the 
Care, For he tells him, that he believed Dijexſes were as much 
ar Chrill's Comm, as his Servants were at his Command, That 
they came at Ged's Command, wrought according to their Com- 
mithon from God, and went off when God commanded them 
off; 1o rhar if he, cho'ar a diſtance, would Command off his 
Servant's Diſeaſc, ir would be as effe&ualas his Prefence. Whe- 
ther chis Captain were aQtually Profelyred to the Fewiſh Religion, 
cr no, is uncertain; ir ſhould ſeem by our Saviour's next Word, 
that he was nor an 1/7zelite; bur it is moſt certain, that he had 
a rizhit Notion of the Power of the true God, and it looks very 
probable, chat he had a Revelation of Chriſt, as the true Meſſiah 
and Son of God, | marF np heard this, he marvelled.] Admira- 
tion agreed nor t Chriſt as God, bur as Man ir did. {[ And ſaid 
25 thoſe tha; foibwed him. ierily I uy unto you, T have not found 
7 great Faith in Trael :] Thatis, in the Generality of the I/rae- 
lizes;, forif we ipeak of particular Perſons, borh 7ojeph and Mary 
had ſhewes a greater Faith, This Expreſſion 1s enough to ler us 
kiow, thar che Centurion was no narive J7elite, and make It 
probable he was not of the Jewiſh Church, which might be, tho' 
he was fo kind to the Fewiſh Nation, as to build them a Syna- 
g0gue z up2n which Account, Like 7. 3, 3c. the Elders of the 
Fes pleaded wirh Chriſt for him. This made our Saviour go 
on, Prophecying of a furcher Converhion of the Gentiles, 


17 AndI ſay unto you.that* many ſhall come from 
the Faſt and Weſt, and {hall fit down with Abraham, 
and Ifnac, and Jacob, in the Kingdom of Heaven : 
*Ch.21.43 12 But* the Children of the Kingdom * ſhall be 
*Ch.13-42, Caſt out into outer Darkneſs : there thall be weep- 
5% X22. ing and gnaſhing of teeth. 


more probible, 
that £/1p.t.ulms, 


« Is 


T\"a! 1.10. 


4-4 - - Thar is, in ſhorr, many of thoſe who are now Heathens ſhall 
20, ©?* beſaved; and many of rhe Jews ſhall be damned: Many, nor all, 
by 


ſha!l come from the Exjt and Weſt, from all Parts, trom the re- 
maoreſt Pircs in the World : Luke fairk, Eaſt, We/t, North, and 
Suuth, Like 13. 29. 0 1/1, 11. 12. & 93: 5, 6: [And ſit doon with 
A%ahaia, and Tauc, and Facoh, in the Kingdom of God : | In Hea- 
ven, where Abrchim, Tjaac, and Facrb, the Heads of che Jewiſh 
XN:tin are, to whomthe Promiſes were made: Or, 1n the Church 
of God; tor rhe Church-Triumphant and Miſcane are both bur 
one Church. They thall fit down with them, as Men fit down 
ar a Barquet; an Expreſſion ott uſed ro fignifie the Reft and 
P.caſure rhe Saints ſhall have 1n Heaven, 7/z. 25. 6,7, 8. Luk. 22. 
29. 20. { But the Children of the Kingdom : | The Jews, who boaſt 
mc rh they are the Children of Abr.h7m, and think cthem- 


TH£cEM 


Chap. VI 


are indeed the only Church of God, as yet. | Shall be caft cyt i. 
to outer Darkneſs : | Either the Darkneſs of Errors, lgnorance and 
d] 


wap. V 


Superſticion ; the Goſpel-Lighr ſhall nor ſhine upon them, the, anſivel 
{hall be no more the Church of God: Or the Darkneſs rn pur 1590 
where ſhall be nothing bur Pain and Mifery, and Lenraron? their £ 
for che Golpcl, and the Grace thereof firſt offered to cm Rn tho'he 
unthankfully reje&ed by them; by which they jud-e "ny Foes on Met 
unworthy of ch- Grace cf God, and of Erern:!] Lice, 4%; __ their 4 
£2 Anu ious faid unto the C2nturion, Go thy way cake 
and as rhou haſt believed, iv be it done unto thee he che 
And his ſervant was healed in the ſelf fame hor © cog 
. wW 6 
Luke faith, And they that were ſent returnirg to the Hhulp fur] g 
the Servans whole that had been fick, Luk. 7. 10. So, os ir {cer K. 
eth, that what Chriſt ſaid unto the Centurion, muſt be interprere him, 
ro thoſe whom the Centurion ſent in his Name. Go your _ other 
your Buſineſs 1s done, the Centurion's Faith hath obtain. ir ſhall We 
be done to him as he hath believed; where Believing muſt ſigni. Caperna 
ſ1e, A certain Perſwaſim of the Power of Chriſt, with a relying wh to pals « 
Mercy and Goodneſs, The Proximate Obje& of Faith is tome 141; rius, Jo 
of God, How far this Centurion was acquainred with the Orz. I 
cles of the Old Teſtament, (tho' he lived amongſt the Jews, ang / # 
as appears by his building a Synagogue for them, Lub. 7. hag 4 Mate 
Kindneſs for their Religion) I cannot tell. Ir is mot probable 20 4 
char he had ſome.1mmedate Revelation of God concerning Chriſt holes 
which he is here faid to have believed, and to have had a fu! yon of 
Perſwafion of, and truſted in. All Revelations of God are th« we h 
Object of Faith, rho! the Scriptures being now writren, are to y; h : 
that have them, the Teſts and Touchſtones ro try ſuch Impreſſj- ig , 
ons by. | As thu believeſt, ] not becauſe thou believeſt. Our Fairy fic ag 
15 nor meritorious of the leaſt Mercies, but & is an Exerciſc of | - Sts 
Grace, which gives Glory to God, and receiveth the Reward, nc: _ ie C 
of Debt, bur of Grace. The Miracle appeared in that the D:';.; i is, 1 
was of an incurable Nature, and the Cure was wrought wirhoy; = p* Be 
Application of Means; and in ſuch a Moment of time, as Mezj: we with 
tho* uſed, could not have wrought it. : and befo1 
14 And when Jeſus was come into Peter's Hovſz — 
he ſaw his Wife's Mother laid, and fick of 2 © 5:7, _— 
15 And he touched her Hand, au? Gtie Fever ch ſome live 
her: and ſhe aroſe and miniſtred unto them. him know 
This Story is related wich ſome furcher Circumſtances, ;' his 
I. 29. Luk. 4. 33, 39. Mark tells us it was the Houſe ot Sinn than that 
and Andrew, with Zames and Fohn, (ir ſeems they lived there Beaſts of #1 
together, ) thar they told him of her Sickneſs, after he had been fixed Habi 
there ſome time, That he took her by the Hand, and lift hor 1p, Texts call: 
Luke faith, ir was a great Fever that they beſought him for her, Thi of, given c 
he ftood over her, and rebuked the Fever. Here is no Contradith- mane Natu 
on, only ſome Amplifications of the Story, Iris plain from thi that he w 
Texr, that Peter was a Married Man, and continued fo, tho Perſon Pro 
called to be an Apoſtle z and that he had a Family.. Fevers are tioned, wt 
ordinary Diſtempers, and often cured by ordinary Means; but I Cor. 1 = 
this was a great Fever. The Miracle here was not in the Curect | 
an incurable Diſeaſe, but in the way of the Cure, by a touch > is 21 At 
Hand, or a lifting her up, and the Suddenneſs of the Cure, it im: E- Lord, ſt 
diately left her, and her ſudden Recovery of Strength, that ſhe could | 22 Bl 
preſently ariſe and miniſter ro them. Thar ſhe could do ic, argued the dead 
her Cure miraculous; that ſhe did do ir, argues her Senſe c: Lube r 
Chriſt's Goodneſs and Thankfulneſs, and teacherh us the uſe ie Chriſt __ 
ſhould make of all God's Gracious Providences to us, ro make u; fits = 
fitter for the Service of God, and ro employ our ſelves in i; E who mo yy 
ſo taking the Cup of Salvation, and praifing the Name of the L1:, him in Bur 
Pfal. 116. 13, and that th 
16 When the Even was come, they brought unto gt al 
him many that were poſleſſed with Devils, and hz by is 12, 
caſt out the Spirits with hzs word, and healed all that nuF be prefe 
were fick. Obedience, 
I7 That it might be fulfilled which was ©oken _ = ” 


by Efaias the Prophet, ſaying, * Himſelf tcok our 4: 


- 


Infirmities, and bare our Sickneſſes. | 


Mark hath much the ſame, chap. 1. 32. and Lube, chap. 4.42, 
Luke adds, he laid his Hands upon them, and healed them, Webe: 
tore, chap. 4. v. 24. ſhewed who were meant by Perſ.ns pj! 


Nazarites, v 
their Separa 
- eoftheG 
 fromwhar n 
” bury their de 


by Devils. Ir 1s only obſervable, that it is faid, he caſt out the 3 re ag Sprr 
Devils by his Word, by the fame Power by which he made the 2 > i 
World, and all things therein, Gen. 1. His Authoritative Word. W hind 6, La 
{. He healed all that were ſick; ] That is, all that were brought 0 % cr greac 
him ; laying on of his Hands, was bur an External Symbs1, or Rite = 23 And 
uſed in Bleſſing, in Miraculous Operations, and in Ordinatiin 01 IJ diſciples { 
Miniſters. The great Queſtion 1s, How that which the Prophe: 2 4 *A 


T/aiah ſaid, chap. 53. 4. was tulfilled by theſe Miraculous Oper 
tions? The Words are, Surely he hath born our Griefs, and caii? 
ea our Sorrows : And v. 5. By his Stripes we are healed : And 


q | the lea, in 
Waves : - bt 


che Apoſtle Peter referring to that Texr, fſaich, 1 Pet. 2. 24. #" 25 And 
bare our Sins in his Body on the Tree, The Words neither {cell him, ſavi; 
truly quoted, nor doth the Senſe appear the ſame ; the Evarze ) 24y T0 
135 applyng what the Propher ſeems to ſpeak of our Sins, £0 ou þ 26 And 
Bodily Infirmities, and his bearing them to his curing them ; where "07. Oye of litt 
as Peter ſeemerh to apply ir ro his bearing our Sins ; thar is, tit Winds, and 
Puniſhment of our Sins, in his Stripes, and by his Sufferings 0! 2 B 
the Croſs. What I obſerved betore is here to be conſidered, ,</ Out 


thar che Evangelis in their Quotarions our of the Old Teſt 
ment took themſelves only concerned to keep to rhe Senfe, 1 
exattly to the Words, (which is a Liberty we ordinarily rake 11 
Quorarions.) 2. Asto the Senſe, Grief, and Sorrows, are 1017 
capable of an Interpretation, to fignifie wharſoever comes ups? 
as the Fruit and Demerit of our Sins; fo as the Prophet © 
ſigned to exprets ChrjiFs Suffering all the Puniſhment due © 
us tor Sin, of which Nature are all the Aflitions of this Lite, and 
Death ir ſelf, as well as the Pains of Hell. The only Qui” 


* Of man ist 
him > 


Itis a 
Motions _ 
Whether there 
Sea, of whict 
Material for us 
Te was in t] 
Pole for our 


ſelves the on'y Church, aid the only Heirs ot Glory, and who 


on is, How Matthew's ſaying, he healed the People's Diſcalcs, 


Ee c 
anſieres ugh for us 


Vol. 


; ropher's Expreſſion, He here our Griefs, and carried 
anf Caming ya. rae. was twice fulfilled in Chrift. As to 
wy go dily Griefs and Sorrows, that 15 mentioned by Matthew ; 
_— bare them not al{ in his own Body, yer he had compaſſion 
_ 1 with reference tothem, and ſhewed himſelf Afﬀided in 
on "x Aitions, by his putting forth his Divine Power to heal 
cher _ 4 he bare the Guilt thar was the Cauſe of theſe and 
chem "Griefs and Sorrows upon the Tree, as 1s ſaid by Peter 3 and 
ons edhs healed chem, thar he might demonſtrate himſelf ro 
= true Meſſias Propheſied of by Iſaiah, who was to come, 
who was #0 bear our Griefs, and to carry our Sorrows. 


138 Now when Jeſus ſaw great multitudes about 
him, he gave commandment to depart unto the 


ide. . . 
_— Jeſus did theſe things before mentioned , he was in 


Ni er. 5. But the Mulritudes preſſing him,he gave order 
9 over the Sea of Galilee, otherwiſe called the Se of Tibe- 
rius, Joh. 6. 1+ : 

19 And a certain Scribe came, and faid unto him, 
Maſter, I will follow thee whitherſoever thou goeft. 

20 And Jeſus faith unto him, The Toxes have 
holes, and the birds of the air have neſts: but the 
Son of Man hath not where to lay his head. _ 

We have the ſame Story, Luke 9. 57. only Like faith it was 
& they went in the way z and faith, 4 certain Man thus ſaid unco 
him. Matthew more particularly deſcribeth the Man frem his 
0fice, or ordinary Imployment : Both agree in whar he 1aid cv 
our Saviour, { Maſter ,] ( ſo they uſually called their Teachers, t9 


St MATTHEW 


| 


whole Condu&t they gave up themlcives, ) [ 1 will follvo thee * 7 


viar is, 1 am reſolved, or Iam ready to tollow thee, | whitherſo- 
ever thou grief.) Thus Men ofren take up ſudden kefciur; 20s to 
walk with God, and co be his Servants, upon Sintiter Accounts ; 


and before they have well contidered what they are like to meer ; 


” wichal, who own themſelves the Diſciples of Chriſt, Our Sav!- 
” our knowing his Heart, and that this ReſoJucion was either 
borromed in his Curiofity, ro ſee his Miracles, or in an hepe of 
ſome livelihood from him, firs him with an Anfiver, Izrring 
him know what Difficukies thoſe that followed him muſt lock 
to meet with, [The Foxes have holes, &c.] Alas! thou foft nor 
know what it is to follow me, my External Condirion *> worle 
than that of the Birds of the Air ; they have fixed Neſts, or the 
Beaſts of the Earth, the worſt of them have Holes; bur I have no 
fixed Habiration on Earch. He borh here, aid in many other 
Texts, calls himſelf The Son of Man; (a Name never, that we read 
of, given to him, bur by himſelf) fo declare the Truth of his Hu- 
mane Nature, and that he had a Natural Compaſſion tor Men; 
that he was a Child born 3 a Son given to us, 1/a. 9. 6. The 
Perſon Propheſied of as the Meſſias, Dan. 7.13. the Perſon meu- 
tioned, who was to have all things put under his Feet, Pſal. 8. 6. 
I Cor, 15. 27. Heb. 2, 8. | 


| 21 And another of his diſciples ſaid unto him, 
> Lord, ſutter me firſt to go and bury my Father. 
22 Bur Jeſus ſaid unto him, Follow me, and let 


the dead bury their dead. 

Luke repeating the ſame Hiſtory, chap. 9. 59, 60. ſaith, that 
Chriſt ſaid ro this Man, Follow me, he replieth, Lord, ſuffer me 
 frfto go, and bury my Father ; to live ar home with my Father, 
who is an old Man, till I have performed my laſt Filial Ofhce ro 
tim in Burying him. Others chink that he was already dead ; 
and that rhis Diſciple would not have begged leave tor ſo un- 
certain a time, Chriſt ſaich unto him, Fw me; nor thar our 
Lord diſapproved the decent Manner of Burying the Dead, bur 
by this let him know , That no Office of Love and Duty to Men, 
m3 be preferred before our Duty to God , to whom we owe our firſt 
Obedience, It appeareth by Lub. 9. 60. that this Diſciple was 
called ro Preach the Goſpel ; a Work not to be omitred or neg- 
letted for any Offices ro Men. OF old, the Hizh-Prieſts, and the 
Nazarites, were nort-to rouch dead Bodies, Numdb. 6. 6. becauſe of 
their Separation to the more immediate Service of God: Preach- 
ers of the Goſpel ought to keep themſelves as free as they can 
irom whar may diſtra& rhem. Saith our Saviour, [ Ler the dead 
* buy their dead.) There are enough to Bury the Dead , Perſons 
> thatare Spiritually Dead, not alive to God ; ler them take care of 
- thoſe meaner Oihces, I have higher Imployment f*r thee than 
that 1s, Lawful and decent Offices become ſinful , wken they 
hinder greater Duties. 


23 And when he was entred into a ſhip, his 
E diſciples followed him. 
7. 24 * And bebold there aroſe a great rempeft in 
3. the ſea, infomuch that the {hip was covered with the 
* Waves: but he was aflec>. 
'25 And his diſciples came to him, and awoke 
him, fayinz, Lord favens: we perith. 
26 And he faith unto them, Why are ye fearful, 
wor. O ye of lirtle faith? * Then he arolſe.and rebuked the 
Winds, and the ſea, and there was a great calm. 
.27 But the men marvelled, ſaying. What manner 
; vip IS this, that even the winds and the ſea obey 


Ry 15 apparent, that the Evangeliſts did not ſer down all the 
— ana Actions of our Saviour in order, as done by him; 
_ - —_ chis was the ſame Motion, and over the ſame 
ee. ich mention was made before, is uncertain, nor much 
_ - or us to know, Nor yer whether the Storm which here 
ng as 1n the ordinary courte of Providence, ar raiſed on pur- 

© 10F Our Saviour to ſhew his Power in quieting it. Ir is 


enough ” " ” know, that a great Scorm did ariſe. Ir is ex- 
(#] Ls . 


- — - — 


preſly ſaid that our Saviour was aſteep ; hereby he ſhewed him- 
ſelf ro be truly Fr, ſubje&t ro like Infirmities with us, (Sin on+ 
ly <xcepted, Heb. 4. 15.) . That the | Diſciples came to him , and 
awoke him, ſaying , Lord ſave us : we periſh) argued both their 
Faith in his Power, and their Kailty in nor confiderins who 
was with them in the Ship ; cne , who tho' his Humanity was 
aſleep, yer was he who watcheth over Iſrael, who never ſlumbereth 
nor ſlzepeth, Our Saviour faith unco them, | 1;hy are ye fearful, 
O ye of little faith ?] The Prevalence of Fears in us upon immi- 
nent Dangers, will not argue no Faitn , bur- will argue a weak 
Faith ; whichyethe that will nor break a bruiſed Reed,nor quench 
a ſmoaking Flax , will nor diſcourage. He will therefore give 
chem a Proof of his Divinity, { He aroſe, and rebuked the Winds, 
and the Seas; \ Ler them know he was their Lord , and com- 
mandcecd them co ceaſe ; | And there was a great calm.) Tt is he 
that rebuketh the Waves of che Sea when they roar, and ſtillech 
the Ragings of the People, {The Men, Either the Sea-men, or 
the Paſſengers, or both, Marveied, /ayin;, What manner of Man 
ws this, that even the Wirds and the Sea obey bim © Surely this is 
more than a Man, that can command Winds and Seas. 


28 And when he was come to the other ſide, unto 
the country of the Gereeſenes. there mer him two 
pollefſed of devils,coming our of the Tombs,exceed- 


ing fierce. ſo that no man might paſs by that way. 

This Hiſtory is related by 3fark, chap. 5.1, 2, 3, 4 (5c. and by 
Luke, chap. 8. 26, 27, more largely than by Matthew, The orhes 
ewo Evangelifts report it to be done in the Country of the Gad.t- 
renes, Mather» 3n the Country of the Geygejenes ; rhey were the 
ſame Pecple , ſ-merimes denominated from one great Ciry in 
tacir Territories, ijomerimes trom another; who ſo readeth the 
Story in ali three FLargeliſts, will eafily conclude ir the ſame, 
tho' relared with c'fterent Circumſtances, Muthew ſaith, there 
was tw» of thete ;emonizchs + MarÞ and Luke mention bur one: 
Luke faith, Thc Am had Devils a long time ; that he wore no 
Cloarhs, neither abode in ary Howje, but in the Tombs. Mark faith, 
There ret him out of the To:cos a Man with an uaclean Spirit, who 
had ins Dwctting emongst the Tombs, ard n9 man could bind him, no 
nr with Chains : Becauſe h2 had een often bound with Fetters and 
Chains , and the Chains hud been pluckt aſunder by him, and the 
Fetters broken in pieces , neither could any man tame him ; and al- 
ways Night and Day he was in the Meuntains , and in the Tombs 
crying , and cutting himſelf with Stores, Matthew faith, he came 
out of the Tombs , was exceeding fierce, ſo as none ceuld paſs that 
way, Divines agree, that the Power or the Evil Angels was not 
abated by their #4/, rhey were only depraved in their Will. That 
the Power of an Angel 15 much more than is here mentioned, is 
out of queſtion. Thar the Evil Angels do nor exert this Power 
upon us, is frum the reftraining Power of God, We live in the 
Air in which the Devil hath a Principality, Eph. 2. 2, Why God 
at thar rime ſuffered the Devil more to exerciſe his Power over 
che Bodies of Men, we probably ſhewed beture upon Matrh.4.24- 
The World was grown very Ignorant, and Wicked, and ſorrithly 
Superſticious. Beſides, he was now come, who was to deſtroy 
the Works of the Devil, and was co ſhew his Divine Power in 
caſting him our. The Jews Buried their Dead our of their Cities; 
the richer of them had Tombs hewed out of Rocks, &c. and choſe 
very large , as may be learned from Ta. 65.4. Fo. 20. $. The 
Devil choſe rheſe places partly ro affrighr Perſons through the 
che horror of rhe places, and rorment the Poflefled wich noifom- 
neſs of them; partly to chear Men wich an Opinion they were 
che Souls of rhe Perſons deceaſed thar were there buried. 


29 And behold they crizd out, ſaying, What have 
we to do with thee, Jeſus rhou Son of God ? art thou 


come hither to torment us before the time? 

Mark faith , chap. 5. 8. That Jeſus (firſt) ſaid to him, come 
out of the Man : and, v.6,7. When he ſaw Feſus afar off, he ran and 
worſhipped him, and cried out with a loud voice, What have I to do 
with thee , Feſus thou Son of the High God ? T adjure thee that thou 
torment us not. Luke's Relation , chap. 8. v. 28, 29. is much the 
ſame with Mzi&'s. The Devil's poſlefſing theſe poor Creatures, 
hearing Chriſt, ro whoſe P>wer they knew they were ſut;je& ro 
command them our of this Man, or theſe two Men, aid, [What 
have we to d» with thee , emis thou Som of God ?] The Devils 
kneiv Chriſt ro be the Sm-1 of God , tho' the Jews would nor be- 
lieve ir. They ſay unto him, Wozr have we i do with thee ? An 
uſual Phraſe made ute ct, where Men had nc defire to He rrou- 
bl-1:with che Company,Converſe or imporcunity of orhers, 7.22. 
24. 2 5am.16.20. 2 King.g.18.2 Chro.35.21. 71! 3.4. 79h.2.4. When 
they came to him with tome ungrateiul Motions, gc. { Art thou 
come hither to torment 8 before the time 2) Either tizey !ook upon 
cheir Diſpofirion as a T-rment; for the Devil is not at quier, 
bur when he is doinz Evil; and as this 1s the Temper of the 
old Serpeur, ſo we ſhall obſerve rhar he communicateth ir to 
his Seed, Prov. 4. 16, Or « ©: 5» Devil was atraid left Chriſt 
ſhould have commanded him to ais Chains betore the Day of 
Judgment. 

30 And there was a good way off from them an 
herd of many ſivine feeding. 

21 So the devils beſought him, ſaying , If thou 
caſteſt us out, ſuffer us to go away into the herd of 
{wine. 

Both Mark and Luke interpoſe here ſomething more, Mar. 5.9. 
And he ashed him , What is thy Name ? and he anſwered, ſaying, 
My Name is Legion, for we are many. Luke taitn, And Feſus ushed 
him:, ſaying , What js thy Name ? becauſe many Devils were entred 
into him. A Roman Legion conſiſted of tyelve thouſand five hun- 
dared Souldiers ; not that there were preciſely ſo many Evil Spi- 
rirs which had a power over this poor Man , bur many had. A 
certain Number 1s named for one uncertain. Chriſt knew his 
Caſe well enough, bur probably acked him the Queſtion tor the 
furcher Glorifying of his Divine Power, 1n caſting chem our, 

Bbb Lbs 


Chap. V Lf 


I wore 
een wv» 


bh. 2 


< _ 
be « Fr WO 
4-< = « <- 
pg emp 
2 EL 
> 
. 4 - 


- vs 
Pe 
- y 


_ 
- 
_— 1 p——_—_ 


Chap. VL 


Lyhe adds , v. 31. And they beſought him that he would not com- 
mand rhem t2 20 out into the deep. 1 cannor think that the mean- 
inz of that is into the Sea , for ſurely the Devil did nor tear 
Drowning, the word is 4&vavop, into the Abyſs; that 15, into Hell, 
inco the bottomleſs Pit, where he could do no more Miſchief: 
Mark favs, ch.tp. $. 10. The Devil befpught him that he would not 
fend them out of the Country, Still, upon the ſame Grounds, the 
Devil hath an intatiable Thirſt ro do Miſchief, and would gladly 
be where he may do it. In the mean time, he knowerh it 
i in the Power cf Chriſt ro ſend him whither he pleaferh. - Now 
comes in the 3o and 31 Verſes of Matthew, 7 hey ſaw an herd of 
many Swine feeding z Mark faith , chap. 5+ 11+ nigh unto the Moun- 
tins; Lube faith, on the Mountain. They beſeech Chriſt ro give 
them leave to enter into the Swin? ; and the Text faith , He ſuf- 
fred them. The Devil cannor fo much as trouble a Swine with- 
vur leave from GOD. The next Verſe tells us the Conſequent 
of 1t. 

>2 And he ſaid unto them, Go: And when they 
were come out , they went into the herd of ſwine : 
and behold , the whole herd of 1wine ran violently 
down a Zecp place in the Sea, and periſhed in the 


WAattTrs. : ; IO 
Þ gives us much the ſame Account, chap. 5-13. Only aud- 
_ jd. wore abour two thouſand : Luke differerh, nor only m_ 
Matthew calls a Sea, Luke calls a Lake 3 bur the 7ews call'd a 
great Gatherings rogerher of Waters , Seas. The Devil is natu- 
rally ſo tond of doing Miſchief, that he will racher Play at 
a ſmall Game, than ſtand our. This way of execvring his Ma- 
lice upon the Beaſts, we have often experience of in the praftice 
of Witchcraft. And it may teach Husbandmen, and thote that 
trade much in Catrel, ro whom they are beholden for the Preſer- 
vation of their Cartel ; and how rightly God 15 ſtyled, He that 
preſerveth b-th Man and Bea#t 1, and whar need they haveto keep 
up Daily Prayer in their Families; and to hve ſo as they may not 
make God their Enemy, who hath Legions of Devils, as well as 
many L2gims of leſs hurttul Creatures , to revenge his Quar- 


rCls. 

22 And they that kept them fled, and went their 
ways into the city, and told every thing, and what 
was bzfallen to the poſſeſſed of the devils. 


114 and Lube in this differ not from Matthew , only they 
add, a>. they oF ir in the City and Country. Thoſe thar moſt 
ſerve the Devil, are afraid of him, when he cometh roſhew him- 
ſelf in his true Colours. Theſe Men go, and publiſh abroad 
the Miracle, what had happened co the Man that was ſo famous 
an Obje& of the Devil's Malice, and whas had happened to the 


Swine, 

24 Ard behold the whole city came out to meet 
Teſus and when they ſaw him, * they beſought 
him thar he would depart out of their coaſts. 

Both Mr and Luke here add much : Mark faith, chap. 5. 14, 
15,15, 17,18, 19, And they went out to ſee what it was that was 
done. And they came to Jeſus, and ſaw him that was poſſeſſed with 
a Devil, and had the Legion , ſitting and cloathed , and in bis right 
mind : and they were afraid. And they that ſaw it, told them how 
it befel to him that was poſſeſſed with the Devil , and alſo concern- 
ing the Swine : And they began to pray him to d:part out of their 
Cofts. And when he was come into the Ship, he that had been poſ- 
ſeſſed by the Devil, prayed him that he might be with him. How- 
beit, Feſus ſuffered him not, but ſaid unto him, Go home to thy Friend's, 
and tell them how great things the Lord hath dome for thee, and hath 
had Compaſſim on thee. And he departed, and began to publiſh in 
Decapolis , hw great things Jeſus had done for him; and all men 
aid marvel. Luke ſaith, chap. 8. 26, 28, 29. Then the whole mul- 
titude »f the country of the Gadavens round about beſought him to de- 
part from them, for they were taken with great fear; and he went 
ap into the ſhip, and departed back again. Now the Man out of 
whom the Devils were departed, beſought him that he might be with 
him ; but Jeſus ſent him away, ſaving, Return to thine own houſe, 
and ſhew hyy great things God hath done unto thee. And he went 
away, ard publiſhed throughout the whole city , how great things 
Felns had dime unto him. By the whzle City, or the whole Country, 
we muſt underſtand a very great parr of them , came out to meet 
Feſus + Mch expounderht it, to ſee that which was done, and to 
beſzech him to depart out of their Coask. They /aw him, and not 
him onlv, bur him tht had been poſſeſſed of the Devils, ſitting at 
his Feet cloathed, in his right mind, A great Miracle wrought: 
They did not only ſee ir, bur they heard their Servants , the 
Swine-berds, atteſting it; they had all the External Means of Faith 
imazinable. How are they affeted ? The Text faith, they were 
afraid; an Awe of this Great Perſon ſeized them; and poſſibly 
they were afraid, Ic{t he ſhould have done them fome further 
Evil. What + the Effect of this Fear ? Surely they will fall 
down ar his Feer, beg his Graceand Favour; and thar he would 
continue with them , and be the Author of more Good amoneſt 
chem. Tho' they had loſt rwo thouſand Swine, yer they were 
delivercd trom the Fe. of him that was poſlefled with the Devil; 
and that pwr Creature was delivered from as great an Afi&ion 
as we can imagine. Nothing of all this. They came and prayed, 
and b-/nught him to go out of their Coaſts, Certaznly our Saviour's 
knowledge of the Nature of this Pevple, and what was 1n their 
Hearrs , provoked him to give the Devils ſuch a Liberty as he 
did, ro deſtroy rheir Swine : We are ordinarily puniſhed in 
the thing whercin we offend ; we need no more than our ordi- 
nary Wiſhes and Prayers to ruin us. Who ſhall hereafter cell us 
of 2a Prwer in Man's Will, to do that which is Spiritually Good, upon 
a +21 Suafion 2 What higher ral Suofion could theſe Gadarens 
have had , chan the ſight of Chris 2 And what he had done, 
afforded , (yer for ought appears) they were unanimous in this 
Deſire, That ChriS ſhould be gone. They do not do what was in 
cheir Power to do, defiring him to Stay. But Oh | how dan- 


St MATTHERK. 


Chap, [ 


erous a thing it is for Men to reje& Chri$t , he imme); They 
anc and we do not read thac he came here any on " Tejth 
he, our of whom the Devils were caſt, abideth with him - ut 01 al 
his Feer,defires he may go along with him. How erear a digs w at Ince 
there is berwixt ſering and hearing of Chri$t , and 7afi hy vign 
Good he is. The poor Demoniack would have left his "ag E bings 
and gone with him; but Chri# ſuffered him nor ; rrobably 3 ; Pope 
ſaw it would be more for the Glory of God for him to it; ny, * was f 
therefore commands him to return to his Houſe, and ſhew __ Fay Bla 
had done for him , and how he had Compaſſim on him, we ca ad fo _ 
more ſhew our Thanktulneſs ro God, than by declarin wi be cll 
Wonderful Works, and what 1n particular he hath done Fg " 4 
This poor Man doth accordingly, and publiſherh che Name = fore 
Chri# in Decapolis;, which Name comprehenderh a ſpace of tn. - 
Country, within which were ten Cities, (as the Word do L _ ? 
ſignifie,) whereof Gadara (faith Pliny ) was one, from which Ge vent 
theſe People had their Denomination of Gadarens ; thr 's O 
Citizens of Gadara; or , Inhabitants of the Country adjacen; . POWe 
char City. Ek is 
to thi 
CHAP. IX. is 
Chris coming to his own City, cureth one of the Palſie : The $4. Like, c 
charge him with Blaſphemy : He © tr g dB "jy; riloes A 
Calleth Matthew from the receit of Cuſtom, 9. Eateth with Putlz te krie 
canes and Sinners, and defendeth his ſo doing, 9—13, Fulbifith b; A thir! 
Diſciples for not Faſting, 14—17. Cureth a Woman” ſich two) mecr þ 
years of the bloody Iſſue, and raiſeth Jairus's Daughter from fy ct it. | 
Dead, 18—26. Giveth Sight to two believing Blind Men, 27—; me? | 
Healeth a Dumb Man, Poſſeſſed by a Devil : The Multitude m,; Loy who am 
the Phariſees Blaſpheme, 32—35. He taketh Compaſſion on the 141] jg Fo 01 
titude; and exorteth to Pray for Faithful Labourers, 36—38, up*n th 
and you 


had beet 


I A ND he entred into a ſhip, and paſſcd oye "_ 
and came into his own city. | 69K ys 
Whether the ſame Ship he came in or no, it is not material, ke Iu 7 : 


patled over the Lake of Genneſaret, and came into hisown (i; nor Gcd by. 
Bethlehem, in which he was Born ; bur either Nazareth, where he © riſe Der 
was Brought up, or ( which moſt judge) Capernaum, whither riots . rc 
leaving Nazareth, he weur tormerly to dwell, Mat. 4.13. whither 50 tho 
he 15 1aid to have entred, Mar. 2.1. This was upon the Sea-co;f Sins firſd 
of Zabulon and Nephthali, chap. 4. 13. ww 
J 
2 And behold they brought to him a man ſick the Son of 


and thar 
their Fairl 
becauſe ct 


the pallie, lying on a bed: and Jeſus ſeeing their 
faith, faid unto the fick of the palfie, Son, be of gol 


cheer, thy fins be forgiven thee. Confrmat! 
The Hiſtory of this Miracle is reported by Mark, ch, , A 
from the ſecond to the thirteenth Verſe. B T 
rom the ſecond to the thirteenth Verſe. By Luke, chap. 5. trem 3 B 
ver, 18.to 26, By both, with more Circumſtances than Matttey © Du 
doth report ir. Mark ſaith, He entred into Capernaum after (im: led, and 
days , and it was noiſed that he was in the houſe , and ſtraightwy unro me 
many were gathered together , injomuch as there was not in Mark fa 


receive them, no not ſo much as about the door , and he Preis! 
the Word unto them ;, and they came unto him , bringing one ſi f 
the Palſie, which was born of four , and when they could ni ons 
nigh unto him for the Preſs, they uncovered the Roof where he ws; 
and when they had broken it up, they let down the Bed wheiz th 
fick of the Palſie lay ; and when Jeſus ſaw their Faith , he (iid 1 
the ſick of the Palſie , Son, thy fins be forgiven thee, Mar. 2. 1,:, 
3, 4, 5- Luke mentioneth nor the Place, nor our $vioys beins 
Preaching ; bur ſaith, And behold Men brought in a Bed, a in 
which was taken with a Pulſie, and they ſought means to bring tim 
in, and lay him before them : And when they could not find ( 
what way they might bring him in, they went upon the Huſe ty, 
and let him down through the Tiling , with his Couch, into the nid 
before Feſus. And when he ſaw their Faith, he ſaid unto him, Ma! 
thy Sins are forgiven thee. All Interpreters agree it to be the 
lame Hiſtory, Mark in his Preface to the Report of the Miri 
cle, tells us where Chriſt was, viz. in Capernaum , whar he ws 
doing, Preaching the Word; the occaſion of the People breaking 
up the Roof of the Houfe, viz. rhe Preſs of the People, 1 


B:f, and 
amgzed, an 
Like {aith, 
them, and t, 
g -:iiving G 
and ere fall 
They all ag 
ere Went « 
mated hin 
hi; cd, or | 
f2me in the 
nz the Curt 
Miruelled, 1, 
ſaich Lute, 
Chriſt as the 
Was Yrought 
V2! ; ſeeing th 
In them an 4 
fn, :nd pur « 


they could not come nigh to Chrisf., All chree Evanzel:!ts agree 
che ſick Man's Diſeaſe to be the Palſie; which being the Re 
tion of the Nerves , beſides the Pain that attends ir, debiliuats 
che Perſon, and confineth him to his Bed, cr Couck ; which v4 
the reaſon of his being brought in his Bed , and by tour Ven. 
All the Evangelifts mention Jeſs ſeeing their F:irh, their its ;rd 
Perſuaſion of his Divine Power , and their Confidence 1 fi 
Goodneſs ; both che Faith of the ſick Perſon, and of thotc v9 
brought him. He ſaw it in their Hearts , for the inward Princt 


Texc fairh, 7 
nor for fendi 
giving luch a 

than a Man, 
BK) 77. Can [a 
3. Iruly ro be 
fe Operation 
Perlivation in 


2 And 4 


ples and Habits are not viſible to us; yer they are ſeen and knoil 
ro him, who ſearcherh the Heart, and knowerh whar is in the 
Heart of Man: He ſaw it in the Fruits , their endeavouring 9 
lay him before Chriſt : { He ſaid to the fich of the Palſie, $11, 
god cheer, thy Sins be forgiven thee. Bur what was ch1s to 5 
Palftie? Our Sauvur by this Jets im, and thoſe who brouzit 
him, know, thar Sin 1s the Roor from which our Evils fprits- 
2. That being forgiven , bodily Diſtempers (how Faral ſever) 
can do a Man no hurt. 3. That his Primary end of com!s 
into the World, was to fave his People from their Sins, 4. Tit 
1m the Hour wherein Remiſfion of Sins is granted to 4 Soul, !f Ciriſt called hi; 
becomes God's Son, dear to Chris. $5. That Remiſfion of Is *fCuſtom. Th: 
followeth the Exerciſe of Faith in Chris. 6. Poſſibly he be! BW 1. 4. ang the 

wich this to give the Scribes and Phariſees occafion of ſome Ur 401Cured to h: 


courle. and Taddeus, ( 


3 And behold, certain of the Scribes ſaid with) WF 7 He was 


- "er th W. 
themſelves, This man blaſphemetrh. ; Jews; egy 

Mark ſaith, There were certain of the Scribes ſitting there, oy um, is nor al 
reaſoning in their Hearts, Why doth this Mun thus ſpeak Blp's E 10.2. Heſvith y 
mies? Who can forgive Sins, but God only 2 chap. 2. 6, 7: oY tis Wcrg carried 
ſaich, The Scribes and the Phariſees began to reaſon, ſ.1yng » wo ed by leaving his 
this which ſpealteth Blaſphemies ? Who can forgive Sins, -o ry Vol. I 
alone ? It thould ſeem they did not ſpeak it our; 4% fs 


nimed Mar 
he 
ae {ith un 
4 - WW : 
followed Ni 
: Hob ich | 
271, and tells 
"071110, and ca 
Ii, [Pt þe 
FS Irtthew n 
Kee him the 


hip. DX. 


rhey ne aſmed in their Hearts. Matthew in the next Verſe faith, 


Je bnawing their Thoughts. It ſeemeth thar ir was then agreed 
- 1} hands, Tt forgiving of Sins was the Prerogative of God a- 
mY \nd chat cr 1-\an ro arrogare to himſfelr tuch a Power as 
ne 4 fa" to God alone, was no lefs than Bla/phemy,. as all afcri- 
nt Divine Perfetions © Creatures muſt be, Ir ſtands the 
4 and Pricits in hand to clear themielves from this Guilt, Ir 

$0 Io azrced by the Scr7ves and P2.iſces, that Chriſt ſpake 
pg op 5 Prone Uncing 5 the /ick of the Pale, thar his ſins were 
2 The reaſon was, becauſe they did nor believe him co 
wh vn if God, but lookr on hun as meer Man. 

+ And Jeſus knowing their thoughts, 1aid, Where- 
@re think ye evil in your hearts? | 

- For wherhcr is eakier ro fay, Thy fins be forgi- 
vn thee: or to fay, Ariſe and walk ? 

4 Butrhat ye may know that the Son of Man hath 
PoWer ON Farth to jorgive lins, ( then faith he to the 
ik of the Pallic, ) Arife, take up thy bed, and go un- 
to thine houle. | 

Mark repeats almcft rhe fame words, 4ſzr, 2, 9, 9,10, So doth 
Lube, c<.1Þ, 5. 22, 23, 24+ Chriſt here giverh che Scribes and Ph.t- 
i522, a Demonſtrarion ot his Deity, by lerring them knovw, that 
1 krevw rheir Thoughts, {| Felus knowing their Thoughts, ſaid £1 
A thivs act comperible ro Angels, much icts ro ONE who 13 
meer Man ; yer theſe blind Scribes and Fh.riſees taxe no NCrice 
of it. [Whe' efere think you Evil in your Hearts ? } Evil concerning 
122 1 did this, faich he, on purpole to let you KNOW, chat 1, 
who am indeed the Son of Man, and whom you miſtaxe in think- 
ing to be no more than zhe Son of Man, hath Power, while he 15 
up-n che Earth, and fo converiing amongſt you to forgize Sins, 
and you may make ſuicable Applications to him tor rhat end. Ir 
had been as cafie for me every whit to have ſaid ro rhis fick Man, 
4rit> and walk : And thar I will Demonſtrate ro you. { Then fait? 
he to the ficb of the Palſre, Ariſe, take up ity Bed, and go to thire 
[ie 1 The lame Power is required to the one, as to the other ; 
Gcd by your Confetficon can forgive Sins, and God alone can 
riſe Men from the Grave. The end of my miraculous Opera- 
tions is ro convince you, thar I am he who hath a Power to for- 
give Men tlicir Sins. 1 therefore choſe ro pronounce this Man's 
Sins firſt torgiven, that I might have the advantage ro confirm 
to you, by a ſubſequent Miracle, this grear Truth, thar I am 
the Yon of God,Ctho? you think me no more than the Son of Man;) 
and thar i have a Power to forgive Sins upon Men's Exerciſe ot 
their Faith, and coming unto me. Now therefore believe, nor 
becauſe cf my Word only, bur becauſe of the Sign I ſhew you 
Confirmative of 1t, 


7 And he aroſe, and departed to his houſe, 
3 But when the mulrirude ſaw z7, they marvel- 
ſed, and glorified God, which had given ſuch power 


Uno MEn. 

Mark faith, ver, 12, And he immediately aroſe, and too up his 
Ped, and went forth before them all 3 inſormuch that they were all 
amazed, and glorified God, ſaying, We never ſaw it on this faſhion. 
Lite faith, chap. 5. v. 25, 25. And immediately he roſe up before 
them, and took up that whereon he lay, and departed to his own houſe, 
gifving God, And they wer? all amazed, and they glorified God, 
ud wore filled with fear, ſaying, We have ſeen flrange things ts day. 
They ail agree 1a Senſe, rho' nor in Words, With Chri's Word 
there went out a power, inabling tim to do what he had com- 
miz4cd him. He 1mmediarely ſtands upon his Feer, takes up 
hi; Bzd, or Couch, that whereon he lay, (faich Luke )) and went 
t2me in the fizhr of them all, fo as none could doubr concern- 
ins the Cure. Waar effett hath this upon the People ? They 
myrveliea, ſaith Matthew; they were amazed and filled with fear, 
ſaich Lxbe, Here 1s not a word of their believing and owning 
Chriſt as the Son of God, which was the great thing the Miracle 
was wrought to bring them to, bur blindneſs was happened ro 7 
r42/; {eeing they ſaw, and could nor perceive. The Miracle wrought 
in them an Awe and Reverence of him as an Extraordinary Per- 
15n,:nd pur rheny inco a kind of Ext/re and Admiration : And the 
Texc ſaith, They glorified God, bur not aright ; they praifed God, 
not tor ſending his Son into the World to ſave Sinners, but for 
giving ſuch a prwer unto men 5 they would ſtil] own Chriſt no more 
tun a Man, tho' a Man ro whom God had £iven great power. 
b) rn can ſay Jeſus is the Lord, but by the Fly Gno't, 1 Cor. 12. 
3. Truly ro believe, own, and receive Chriſt as our Lord, requirech 
fe Operation of the Spirir of Grace, working ſuch a Faich, and 
rerlivation 11 us. 

9 And as Jeſus paſled from thence, he ſaw 2 man 
named Matthew {irring at the receit of cuſtom: and 
ac faith unto him, Follow me. And he aroſe, and 
followed him. 

1k ach the ſame- Scory, ar. 2. 14. only he calleth him 
£14, and rells us he was the Son of Alpheus. Luke alfo mentio- 
*&2) 1, and calls him Levi, adding that he was a Publican, and 
-AILt1, ſt be left all, raſe up, and followed him, Lube 5. 27, 28. 
{its Jftthew might have alſo the Name of Levi; all Interpreters 
&rce him the fame Man. All three Evangeliſts ſay, that when 
Criſt called him, he was fitting in the Cuſtom-Houſe, at the receir 
t Cuſtom. This Matthew was one of the Twelve Apoſtles, Ch. 
12.3. and the Pen-man of this Goſpel; his Father Alphzies was 
:101cured to have four of his Sons Apoſtles, Fames the Leſs, 
and T.1ddeus, (called Lebbeus ) Simon the Canaanite, and Mat- 
''2w, He was a Publican, an Officer under che Romans, to ga- 
* tne Publick Revenue 3 ir was an odious Name amongſt the 
/ews, but Matthew, to magnifie the Grace of Chriſt in calling 
«Mm, 15 Not aſhamed chus to deſcribe himſelf both here, and Ch. 
©0+2- | Heſaith unto him, follow me, and he aroſe; and followed him.) 
His Wecrd carried a ſecret Power with tr, which Matthew obey- 
& by Icay ing __ imployment, and going ater Chriſt. 

ol. IL 


St MATTHEW 


10 And it came to paſs, as Jeſits ſit at meat in 
the houſe, behold, many publicanes and finners came 
and far down with him and hisdiſciples. 

Luke faich, chap. 5. 29. That Levi made him a great Faſt in his 
own Fuſe, and there was 4 great Company of Public.mes, with others 
that ſat down with them. Mark, chap. 2.15. ſaith, They were many : 
ard they followed him. Matthew, touched with the Senſe of the 
tree and infinite Love of Chriſt ro him, makerh Chriſt 2 Feaſt : 
This fpeaketh him a Man of fome Eſtate ;, he invites many ro 
dine with him, ſome of them Publicares, ſome nored Sinners, He 
deſigns Good undoubtedly to ſuch as had been his former Con?- 
panions, that they might alſo ſee the Lord, and he brought ro 
tollow him. Grace teacherh a Man to ſtudy rhe Conyertion of 
others, and never dwelleth ina narrow Soul,nor ſtudicth ics Con- 
cealnient from others. 

11 And when the Phariſees ſaw it, they ſ2id unto 
his diſciples, Why eateth your maſter with publi- 
canes and finners ? 

Mark hath the fame, chap. 2.15, fo hath Lube, chap. 5. 39 
only he ſaich, they murmured, The Phariſees having a pertect Ma- 
lice ro Chriſt, did nct only ſeck all means to carp ar him, bur co 
bring him under a Popular Odium : this ſeemed a fair Opportu- 
nity. The Pulic.mes being an Order of Perſons, who borh for 
their Empl-vment, and perhaps alſo their i!l Managery of it, 
were abonr'nared by che Jew-, and reckoned amonyſt the more 
notorious Sorts of Sinners: They therefore come co his Diſciples 
c:amouring againſt cheir Maſter, Thar he kep: Communion with 
Publicanes and Sinners. 


12 But when Jeſus heard haz, he ſaith untothem, 
They that be whole need not a phytician, but they 
thar are fick. 

12 Butgoye, and learn what that meanzth, *1 
will have mercy, and not ſactifice: Fort am not come 
to call the righteous, bur * ſinners to repentance. 


M-rk ard Luke in the places betore-mentioned have the ſame 
Antiver, only leaving our thefe words, Go ye, and learn what 
thit meaneth;, I will have Mercy, and not Sacrifice; quoted from 
Hiſea 6.6, Our Saviour's Reply to the Phariſees, ro him that 
duly confiders ir, will appear very ſmart. 1. They were a Ge- 
neracion thar laid all Religion upon Rituals, Sacrifices and Tr.idi- 
tions, 2. That juſtified chemfeives, Luk. 16.15. and rhoughc 
chey needed no Repentance, Saith our Saviour, I am the Spirt- 
tual Phyſician. With whom would they have the Phyſician ro 
converſe, bur with ſuch as are Sick ? Thoſe that are whole (as 
the Pharijees account themſelves ) think they have no need of 
my coming amongſt them. By their Peeviſhnets ar the As of 
Mercy, which I dv, (and thoſe of the higheſt Mercy too, healing 
Souls) they ſhew that chey do not underſtand what Zſez, (a Pro- 
phet acknowledged by themſelves) long fince taught chem, Thar 
rhe Ld defired Mercy before Sacrifice, ( fer that appeareth to be 
the Senſe of not Sacrifice in that Text, both by che next words) 
and the Knowledge of God mire than Burnt-Offerings; and by the 
many Precepts by which God declared, char he did defire Sacri- 
fices. | For I came not t9 call the Righteous : | That 1s, thole who 
are ſivelled in an Opinion of their own Righteouſneſs; but ſenfible 
[ Sinners to Repert.ance. ]Firſt ro Repenrance, then ro the receiving 
Remiſſion of Sins through me, and Ecernal L::e, 


14 -Then came to him the diſciples of John, ſay- 
ing, VVhy do we and the Phariices faſt often, and 
thy diſciples faſt not ? 

15 And Jeſus ſaid unto them, Can rhe children 
of the Bride-chamber mourn, as long as the Bride- 
groom is with them ? But the days will come when 
the Bride-groom ſhall be taken from them, and then 
{hall they faſt. 

16 No man putteth a piece of || new cloth into an 
old garment: for that which is put in to fill it up, 
taketh from the garment, and the rent is made worle. 

17 Neither do men put new wine into old bor- 
tles: elfe the bottles break, and the wine runneth our, 
and the bottles periſh : but they pur new wine into 
new bottles, and both are preſerved. | 


berwixt the Fllowzrs of Fohn, and the Flowers of ChrisF, and fect 
on Fohn's Diſciples ro go and ask-an Account of rhis. Hypocrites 
are always hotreſt for Ritual Tings, as things molt fic co raiſe 2 
Diviſion abour. There was no Precepr of God tor ary FS bur 
once in a Year, tho' indeed God letr People a Liberty co f.1t ofts 
ner, as their Circumſtances more ficred, and calted tor che Duty. 
The Phariſees had fer up rhemſelves a Merhod, and would fain 
have impoſed ie on Chriſt's Diſciplesz elpecially conſidering 


7Fobn's Diſciples complied with ay _ of trequens Faſts 
Bob 43 £736 


Cha p 


. I 


* MIC. 6. 6, 

7,8. Chaps 
2. To 

F [1 Tim. IT: 

I 55 


| Cr,faz,0 
unwroughh 
Clachs 


s 
FIFTH 
THis 
(2) 2.506 [ 
» 4 
6 141+ ” 
4: ) 
S0. : 
| ; : 
, , 4 
$1 ' 
viet : 
kc C 
v3 
M's! 
©4.7 i 191 
" {] i 
; ET) '* 
0 


- mm 


— - * 9 


Ps AS or 45 reg taps pol... = jet 


Chap. IX. 


*Luk.8.41. 


"Lak e.43- 


and ſcemed to ſuggeſt, as if Chriſt ſer up a new, and more jovial 
Relivion. (As if Religion lay only or principally in Rituals, as 
to which God had ſer no Rule.) The Papiſts are ar this day the 
Ph.iriiees true Succeilors in theſe Arts. Chriſt anfiererh chem 
in cwo Particulars. 1. He tells them that his Diſciples were not 
as yet under ſuch a Diſpenſ.ation, as called for Faſting. 2+ That his 
Di;ciples were new Converts, and ro be brought on by degrees to the 
(orer Prafices of External Diſcipline and GodlineſS. This is the 
Sum of vr. 15, 16,17, 18. This he delivers in Meraphorical 
Expretſions : Can the Children of the Bride-chamber mourn as long 
u; th Bride-groum is with them 2 But the days will come when the 
Bridt2-groum fhail bz taken from them , then they ſhail ft. Your 
Maſt:r Fobn hath compared me to a Bride-groom , Foh. 3. 29. 
Thete my Diſciples, are the Children of the Bride-chamber. It 1s 
as yer 2 Feſtival-rime with them. #zſting is a Duty fitted to a 
Dav of Mourning and Aﬀition. Ir is noryet a time of Mourn- 
in; for my, Diſciples : Yer do not envy them; there will ſhort- 
I; come 4 time when, as to my bodily Preſence, I ſhall be ta- 
E-1 trom chem; then they ſhall Mourn,and Faſt. The Second Thing 
he faith . he Illuſtrarech by mo Similirudes. Firſt, (faith he) 
&moneſt Men, no dilcreer Perfon will put in an old Garment a 
reiv piece of Cloth, for they will not agree rogerher, che ſtrengrh 
of the new Cloth will bear no proportion ro the ſtrengrh of rhe 
old, which by wearing is made weak ſo as it che Garment comes 
rt» a ſirefs, the rent will be the greater. So as ro Wine, Men 
d tor uſe to pur new Wine into old Bottles, that through much 
uſe ate weakned.for fear of breaking the Borrles, and ſpilling che 
Wine: bur they uſe ro put new Wine into ney Boctles, to pro- 
parcion the thing containing to the rhing contained. My Diſ- 
ciples are newly converted. Should I impoſe upon them rhe ſe- 
verer Exerciſes of Religion, ir might diſcourage them, and be a 
Tempcation to them to go back. For, as Luke addeth , No Mam 
h.cvinz drab Old Wine, deſireth New ; for he ſaith the Old us better. 
Cuſtom is a grear Tyrant, and Men are nor on the ſudden broughr 
of from their former PraQtices, bur by degrees. This 1s a Por- 
tion of Scriprure which much commendech Prudence to Miniſters, 
both Teaching their People as they are able to bear, and alto 
putting them upon Duties, with reſpett to cheir Stature and Pro- 
ficiency in the Ways of God ; eſpecially in ſuch rhungs as are 
but our Kee-will Offerings to God, 

13 * While he ſpake theſe things unto them, be- 
hold , there came a certain ruler, and worſhipped 
him, ſaying, My daughter is even now dead : but 
come.and lay thine hand upon her,and ſhe ſhall live. 


19 And Jeſus aroſe, and followed him, and /o dzd 
his diſciples. 

Mark hath this Hiſtory , Chap. 5. 22. And behold there cometh 
one of the Rulers of the Synagogue, Jairus by name and when he ſaw 
him, he fell at his Feet, and beſought him greatly, faying , My little 
D.wehter lieth at the point of Death, I pray thee come, and lay thine 
Hunds upin her that ſhe may be healed , and ſhe ſhall live , v. 24. 
And Feſus went with him, and much Pezple followed him, and thronged 
him. Lube hath ir, chap. 8. v. 42. adding only, That ſhe was 
his only Daughter, twelve years of age : Two Evangeliſts ſay ſhe 
was at the point of Death, or dying: Matthew 1aich, that he ſaid 


ſhe was dead, ( that might be accordin3.ro his Apprehenfion) ſhe 


was ſo near Death, thar he concluded, thar by char time he was 
vor to Chriſt, ſhe was dead. Others obſerve our of Greek Au- 
rhors, thac the Parcicle 4${, here uſed, doth nor always fignifie 
a time pa, bur ſometimes , 4 time near at hand. Burt the beſt 
Anſiver is, Thar Matthew relates che Srory compendioufly. Ir 
appears from Luk. 8. 43. thar the Maid did dye; and Matthew 
reports that firſt, which che Meſſenger brouzht chem the news of 
atrerwards, 25 we ſhall ſee ver. 23. of this Chapter. By the Ruler, 
here both Marh and Lube tell us, is to be underſtood Fairus, nor 
a Civil Magiſtrate, but one who was the Ruler of the Synagogue 
in thac place ; for in their Synag2gues. they had an Order, there 
was one Chief who ordered the Aﬀairs of ic, and they fay the 
Interpreracion of the Law belonged to him. [ And worſhipped him, 
with a Civil IWo;ſhip, or Reſp-#, { ſaying, My Daughter is but now 

dead} or dying. One would judge the latter ſhould be the Evan- 
geliſt5 meaning of rhe Parcicle, becaute of what the other Evan- 
zclifts ſay, Come and lay thine Hand upon her , and ſhe ſhall live. 

His Faith riſerh not up to the Centurion's Faith , who declared 
his Faith, Thar if Chriſt would bur ſpeak the word, his Servanr 
ſhould live. Fairs defires him 70 come and lay his Hand upon her. 

[ And Feſus aroſe and followed him, and hy Diſciples.) The Jews 
thruſt Chriſt's Followers out of their Synagogues; he 1s more kind 

to the Ruler of their Synagogue z he preſently goerh, | and þis Di/- 
ciples followed him.) They were to be Witneſſes of his Miracles, 

Mk adds, Mach People folbwed, and thronged him; which gave 
eccafion to another Miracle which Chriſt did 1n his way to Fairs 
kis Houſe; the Relation of which Matthew giverh us, before he 
perfetterh the Hittory of this Miracle. 

20 * And behold , a woman which was diſeaſed 
wich an iflue of blood twelve years, came behind 
1z, and touched the hem of his garment. 

21 For {he ſaid within her ſelf, If 1 may but 
touch his garmznt, I {hall be whole. 

Mark addeth, chap. $. 25. that ſhe had ſuffered many things of 
m.ny Phyſicians, and had ſpent all that ſhe had , and was nothing 
betrered; but rather grew worſe ; when ſhe had heard of Jeſus, ſhe 
e-zne in the Preſs behind, and touched his Garment, &c. Luke ach, 
the border of bus Garment. In the Crowd there cometh a Woinan 
that had a bloody Flux twelve years: Inveterate Diſeaſes are 
I;a1d ro be cured; nor had means been negletted ; ſhe had tried 
many Phyticians, ard had ſpenc all her Eſtate upon chem. She 
caize behind him out of Modeſty , and perhaps Shame , defiring 
nor to be taken notice of, That which induced her to come, 
was the Fame the had heard of Jeſs, and a Perfuaſion wrought 

in hec Heart, (doubrlcls by the Spirir of God,) thar it ſhe could 


St MATTHEW. 


bur cone to touch the Hem or Border of his Garment, ſhe ſhoulq 


| according to that Power, 3. Ir 1s hardly poffible thar any ſh-ull 


| there came ſome from the Ruler's Houſe, which ſaid, Ti'y Daughtc 


Chap, | ( hap. I 


be cured. In this ſhe judged rightly, that Chri ; _ 
and that his Vercue was not ceflanined to his nyo - &- rhe, the - 
her. She believed thar the Oil poured on his Head _ - q 
that poured on the Head of Aaron, which ran down akon Sn 
of his Garment : Bur it ſhe thought that ſhe could thus ii -s { 
Cure, and that Chriſt's Cures flowed not from his Grace and G ” " 
will, bur a kind of Neceffiry; herein ſhe wondertully Erreq = " 
Chriſt atterward ler her know ir, tho” he pardoneq = —_ 
Miſtake. * = / 
22 Bur Jeſus turned him about, and when he ſay _ 
her, he ſaid, Daughter, be of good comfort, * thy ,, _ 
tairh hath made thee whole. And the woman ws x .* 4. 
made whole from that hour. Ki And a 
Matthew relates this Story ſhortly, as he doth 3 dead, 
being only intent upon covaling os Miracle. We maſt prom ſhe was 
ſupply ſomeching our of Mark and Luke; Mark faith, c<; oe —_ 
w/. 29, And ſtraightway the Fountain of her Blood was dried ud, 7 _ 
ſhe felt in her Body that ſhe was healed of that Plague, 4nd Jr pad 
immediately knowing in himſelf , that Vertue had gone out of fo aſleep : 
turned him about in the Preſs, and ſaid, Who touched my Cluth.? celires: 
And his Diſciples ſaid unto him, Thou ſec the Multitude = awk _—_ ” 
thee; and ſayeS thou, Who touched me © And he looked round BD 9 we 
to ſee her that had done this thing. But the Woman fearin aw rs 
trembling, knwwing what was done in her, came and fell 4, 6 _y Fa 
him, and told him all the truth. And he ſaid unto her, "Py ac T v 
thy Faith hath made thee whole; go in peace, and be whe ; IF ng ew 
Plague. Luke reports the fame Circumſtances with little varz. ogy 
tion, chap. 8. 45,45, 47, 43, Chriſt was nor ignorant of this ink | 
Woman's coming, and touching his Garmencr 3 he doubtleſ; in. = = 
fluenced her to the Motion ; his Inquiry was therefore, only thar bat ] ; 
the Miracle might be taken notice of ; he knew that Vertye ws f ks * 
gone our of him, and had healed che Woman; for he had con. Soſe ws 
manded ir ſo to go out, or ſhe had nor been healed; bur he 4. the Reſu 
fired that the People might take notice that ſhe was healed } 294in : p 
his Grace, not by any Magical Vertue in his Cloaths. The Weman T ee: 
1s brought openly ro come, and conteſs it, that ſhe had touched inco ch t 
his Cloaths, and that ſhe was healed. She feared and trrembled, || her Soul 
ſhe ſhould have offended : Chriſt comforts her, by afſuring her earance | 
the Cure; and telling her, That her Faith in him, as an Inſiry. 4 —_— 
mental Cauſe, had effefted ir, We have met with Chriſt often udged j 
betore, as well as in this Text, and ſhall again often meer ih es: 
him, aſcribing much co the Exerciſe of Faith : And the Fithy 25 Bl 
which he aſcribeth ſo much, ſeemerh nor to be Juſtifyirs Fxth in, and t 
or that Exerciſe of Grace,whereby a Soul in the Senſe cf its |; WH A 
Eſtate, by reaſon of Sin, accepteth of him as its Saviour, and te. Ly 26 | 
lierh upon his Merits alone for Salvation; for we read nothin; tha Ianc 
of che Perſon's Repentance tor Sin, nor Reliance upon Chriſt for Mark, 
the Salvation of their Souls, or any profeſſion of any ſuch thins, hand, and 
Is ic then ſo valuable an A of Faith, to believe that Chriſt isthe | 7d) Dany 
Son of God? T anſwer, 1. Tho' Faith in Chriſt be che cn | (fr ſhewas 
Saving Faith, yer a Faith in God, being perſuaded of his Poer | agreas Aſto, 
and truſting in him, is an Exerciſe of Grace, which God s F ſpuld know 
appeareth in Scriprure ) much rewarded with Bleffinzs of thi eat, Lu 
2, But ie her by the #4 


Lite; 1t giverh God the Honour of his Power , gc. L. 

condly, the great Truth, That Chris was the Eternal Son of G4 F Came again , 
was that which God more eſpecially aimed ar to gain the Wor; | her meat 
Aſſt unto, and Perſuaſion of at this time, and indeed Prelim: that they ſho 
nary and Neceſlary to People's receiving of him as their Saviour; Verrue that 
tor, Curſe is he that truſteth in Man. Tr was alſo the grear Truth, b: he perform 
which the Phariſees and the reſt of the Jews did oppoſe. Hence: & «mes he uſe 
our Saviour takes all cccafions borh ro confirm and co encouraze — mes he fouc 
this Faith, which was bur a Perſuafion, thac he was Cloathed with | he takes the 
a Divine Power, anc. did that which no Man could do, and that = td, Ariſe; 


he had in him Divine Goodnefs, ready to r::':eve Man's Infirmite E _ ” 0 
- cis lets us kr 


- dentto theB, 
+ Tious Queſtio 
& the Soul of 1 
- redto Life, w 
-  Tated from th 


truly and ſeriouſly believe that Chriſt, being apparently Man, 
and the Son of Man, ſhould alſo Exerciſe a Power, which none 
bur God could do; and that they ſhould nor beljeve in him s 
the Saviour of the World, and be quickned ro the uſe of chit? 
Means, which he ſhould reveal for cheir Salvation. For thc 


- . | U 
Reaſons, amongſt others, we may conceive that Chriſt Predicare 6: rg know w 
this Faith ſo much in thoſe in whom he found ir, This Vir# & atotheir] 
eternal Manſun 


cle being wrought by our Lord in his way ro Fzirzs his Rouſe, 
after rhe firſt notice he had of the dangerous Sickneſs of his 
Daughter, the Evangelii now goeth on to give us an Account df 
his perfe&ing chac Good Work. 


23 And when Jeſus came into the rulers houſe, and 
{aw the minſtrels, and the people making a noite, 


Neither Mark nor Luke ſpeak 2ny thing of the Minſtrels, vut 
enly of the People's wailing, Amongſt tic Jews, we read not it 
any part of the Old Teſtu:nene of Muſical Inſtruments uſcd 3 
Funerals; buramongſt che Pagrns ir was uſual, as we read in the! 
Writers. Amongſt che 7ews thy had ſume Songs tang, ws fome 
gather from Fer. 9. 17. G 22. 18. &. 34. 5. Amo; 5.16. 15 
very like thac age cy having long lived amongſt the /2.:t/ 
had learned this uſage from them. Before this, Mb addett, 7:3 


E dre under the 
- Soul was carri 
= beoppoled, if 
-- trfons were u 
- Dodies, wairi 
E Until the Lord 
MM Bodies? [ He C0; 
E Oe Miracle, | 
2 Nt publiſh wh 
the L2per C 
©  Villing his Ene 
E Matthew faith, - 
5 Galilee ar ſo} 
et of his Ene 
ay publick nor; 


dead, why troubleSt thou the Maſter any further * But Jeſus, 27 And xz 
as he had heard the word that was ſpaken, ſaid to the Ruler f tle men followec 
Synagogue, Be not afraid, only believe. And he ſuffered no 11a" 7 avid, hay 

follow him, ſave Peter, and Fames, and Fohn, the Brother of Fr": Wi 22 Ana L 


and he cometh to the Houſe of the Ruler of the Synagogue, and /2 
the tumult , and them that wept, and wailed greatly. And when © 
was come in, he ſuith unto them, Why make you this ado, and wi)* 
The Damſel us not dead, but ſleepeth. And they Iaughed him tool 


| blind menca 


but when he had put them all out , he taketh th! F'ther and x 29 The 
Mother of the Damſel, and them that were with him, and entreth In bs cn t 
where the Damſel was lying. Matthew faith nothing of what Ma > tO your fa 


59 And th 


pened in the way ; neither the Meſſengers coming and reins 
' Marged thew 


Fairus that his Daughter was dead, nor our Saviour's comfort; 
Ne 


of him; bur Lube mentioneth all, chap.8, v. 49,59» DMatthw 8 : 
Vi 


hap- IX. 
wich an Account of whar Chriſt did in the Houſe , ſeeing 
the Minſtrels, and che Tumulc cauſed by the Mourners there. 


He 1aid unto them, Give place: for the Maid 


is not dead, but {leepeth. And they laughed him to 
; _—_ faich , chap. 5. 39s When he was come in, he ; ſaith unto 
them, Why make you this ado, and weep * The Damſel i nt dead, 
but ſleopeth. Ana they laughed him to ſcorn : but when he had put 
them all out, he taketh the Father and Mother , and them that were 
with him, and entreth where the Damſel was lying. Luke faith, 
chap, 8. Vs 519 52+ When he came into the Fuſe, he ſuffered no Man 
to g9 in, | that is, 1nco che Chamber where the dead Body lay] ſave 
1 Peter, James, and John, and the Father and Mother of the Maiden, 
And all wept, and bewailed her : but he ſaid, Weep not, ſhe is not 
dead, but ſleepeth. And they laughed him to ſcorn, knowing that 
ſhe was dead. The Hiſtory 15 plain, when Chriſt came inco the 
Houſe, there was 4 mixed noiſe of Fidlers, or Pipers, and Mourn- 
25, Chriſt coming in with Peter, Fames and Fohn, askerh them 
whar they made ſuch ado for ? The Zuid was nt dead , but 
aſleep : They apprehending that ſhe was dead, mocked him. He 
deſires to go into the Chamber where the Corps lay : Bur would 
ſuffer none bur Peter, Fames and Fohn, and the Fither and Mother 
of the Maid, to g9 1 wich him ; the Reaſon appearcth atter- 
ward, becauſe he did nor defire that chis Miracle ſhould be pre- 
ſenrly publiſhed. The only queſtion is, in what Senſe our Sa- 
viour faich ſhe 3s not dead, but jleepeth ? When as they knew ſhe 
was dead. 1. Some think our Saviour ſpeaketh 4mbiguouſly, for 
D-ath is in Scriprure otten called a Sleep, 1 King.14+-20. Foh.I1.11. 
As 7. 60. 1 Cor. 15. 6, With reſpedt to the Refurrettion, Ochers 
rhink chat our Saviour ſpeaks Ironically, knowing thac ſome of 
them would {ſo diminiſh the Miracle , coo calumiuiare him, or 
abate his Reputarion. Bur ir is a berrer Anſwer, co fay thar he 
ſpeaks with Reference to their Opinion , ſhe is not dead, in that 
Sente you judge her dead, ſo as ſhe ſhall nor come to lite betore 
the ReſurreQion ; ſhe is not ſo dead, bur ſhe ſhali come to lie 
a2ain ; as he ſaid ro Mary concerning Lazarus, 7h. 21.13. Or, 
To me ſhe is not dead. Or ſhall we ſay, as ſoon as Chriſt was come 
inco the Houſe, who is the Reſurreion and the Life, Foh. 11. 24. 
her Saul again recurned into her Body, which rho? ro cheir ap- 
pearance ic was ſeparated from her Body, was nor yer fixed in 
ics erernal Manſion? In what Senſe ſoever he fſpake it , they 
judged ir ridiculous, and laughed hirz to ſcorn. 


25 But when the people were put forth, he went 
in, and took her by the hand, and the Maid aroſe. 
26 And the || fame hereof went abroad into all 


that land. 

Mark,, chap. $. 41, 42, 43+ faith, And he took the Damſel by the 
hand, and ſaid unto her, Talicha Cumi , which #s, (being interpre- 
z:d) Damſel ariſe : And ftraightway the Damſel aroſe, and walked, 

* (fir ſhewasof the Age of twelve years) and they were aſtoniſhed with 
* agreat Aſtoniſhment : And he charged them ſtraitly, that no Man 
F fruld know it; and commanded, that ſomething ſhould be given her 
” neat. Luke faith, chap. 8. 54. And he put them all out, and took 
her by the Hand, and called, ſaying, Maid, Ariſe : And her Spirit 
” came again, and ſhe aroſe jiraightway, and he commanded to give 
-” her meat And her Parents were aſtoniſhed, and he charged them, 
that they ſhould tell no Man what was done. It was the Power and 
Vertue that went our of Chriſt, which wrought the Miracles ; 
he performerh them under a Variety of Circumſtances ; ſome- 
- times he uſed only his Word, (as in the Caſe of Lazarus,_) fome- 
times he touched che Perſons, laying his Hand upon them: Here 
E he takes the Maid by the Hand and alſo faich, Daughter, or 
- Maid, Ariſe: They were Words of Power and Authority ; ſhe 
preſently aroſe. Luke ſaith, Her Spirit returned again. Luke by 
= chis lets us know, that the Soul is not che Craſis, or fome Acct- 
E dentto the Body, but a diſtin Subſiſtance of it ſelf. For the cu- 
* rious Queſtion of ſome where the Soul of chis Maiden was, as alſo 
- the Soul of Lazarus, of whom we read 7h. 11. and others reſto- 
- redto Life, when Dead, were in the time whilſt chey were fepa- 
rated from their Bodies , it is a Matter of no great Concern ro 
EF us to know where : This we know, that Gud deſigned their re- 
+ turntotheir Bodies again; they were not therefore fixed i1 their 
& eternal Manſions, Our Saviour hath taught us, thar Souls deparred 
E re under the Condu& of Angels, to their Scations. Laxariss's 
- Soul was carried by Angels into Abraham's Boſom : Whar can 
© beoppoled, if we ſay thar ic is probable, thar the Souls of theſe 
& Perfons were under the Guard of Angels, abour, or near the dead 
- Bodies, waiting che Pleaſure of God with reference to them, 
| until the Lord again Commanded the reſtoring of chem ro their 
= Bodies? { He commanded to give her Meat.) To confirm the trurh of 
+ te Miracle. Concerning our Lord's Command, thar they thuld 
- Nt publiſh what he had done, we ſpake 'betore in the Caſe of 
- the Leper > Our Lord's rime was nor. yet come, and he was not 
Willing his Enemies ſhould rake too publick 2 notice of him. Bur 
E Matthew faith, The Fame thereof went abroad into all that Land. Thar 
- © 5 Galilee ar ſome diſtance from Feruſalem , which was the grear 
| Sear of his Enemies, where probably our Saviour did leaſt deſire 
F  4y publick notice ſhould as yer be taken of him. 

27 And when Jeſus departed thence, two blind 
men tollowed him, crying , and ſaying, Thou Son of 

avid, have mercy on us. 

228 And when he was comes into the houſe, the 
blind men cain:: to him; and Jeſus ſaith unto them, 

clieve ye rha: I am able to do' this > They ſaid 
unto him, Yea, Lord. 

. 29 Then touched he their eyes, ſaying, Accord- 
ng to your faith be it unto you. 

Mt 32 And their eyes were opened. and Jeſus ſtraitly 
p . Clarged them, ſaying, * See that no man know 277. 


St MATTHEW 


_— —  — 


Chap. IX. W208 +041 

31 * But they, when they were departed, ſpread Td SOOT +: 9 GRTT: 
abroad his fame in all that Country. ae - FAR 4. BAGIHE! 

This Miracle is reported only by Sr. Matthew, tho' the other 4 Its AS 0% Wk 
Evangeliſts tell us of ſome others of the ſame kind. They followed if fl: ih v {Kali 
him in the way, { crying , and ſaying , Thou Som of David, have by Hh, of Map MPR 
Mercy on us. ] Thiele are the firſt we read of in this Goſpel, rhat ty 13 3 OR NUR. 
made their Applications ro Chriſt under the Notion of the Me/- WE IIRSED | WUD. 
J1ah, ( for ſo much that Compellation , Thou Son of David, im- WB ORFs | RD) | 
porcerh.) He was to open tte blind Eyes, Iſa. 35. 5. 7 42. 7. \L.I8 is "Mt 
and was to be the Son of Dvid, according to the Prophecies of bb HEH MOL. F 
him ; nor can any reaſon be given, why they called him the Son qt Fired 46:8 
of David, bur this their belief, char he was the true Meſſias. [ Have # wee 


Mercy on #5. |. Their Perition 1s general, tho? withour doubr they 
had a particular reſpe& co their want of Sight ; and fo our Sa- 
viour underſtood chem. Others, that came to Chriſt tor Cure be- 
tore, lookt upon Chriſt as a Man to whom Ged had given great 
Power, and plorificd God upon rhart account z as ver. 8. Their 
Courage and Bo/dnefs in the Faith alfo appeared, in thar they fear- 
ed nor the Pharjſ2es Decree, made, as appeareth from Foh. 9. 22. 
For the Chris, and the Sm of David amongſt the Fews, at this | 
time 11gnified the fame Perſon, as appears by chap. 22. 42. Chriſt TH 
liſtnech nor unto them rill he came into the Houſe; there he | 
ſaith, { Believe you that I am able to do this 8] Chriſt forgerrech 
nor the Prayer of Faith, tho' he doth nor give a prefent Anſwer 
according to our Expettation, thar he may continue us in our 
Duty, and quicken us yer to further imporcunicy. Our Lord 
purs the common Teſt upon them , Believe you that T am able to 
d) this? There 1s no abſolute particular Promitle for good things 
of a Temporal Concern: Ir is enough for us in thote Caſes, to 
believe thar God is able ro do rhe thing, and that he will do ir, 
it he ſerh ir be for our good ; he only therefore queſtioneth 
their Faith as to his Power, in their former owning him as the 
Meth, the Son cf David; they had declared that they believed 
his kindneſs to the Sons of Men, | They ſuid unto him, Tea, Lord, } 
we believe thou art able; and we believe thee the Meſſiah come 
to do good; and we have a Truſt 11 thee thou wilt do itz for 
this caufe we are come, we cry unto thee. | Then touched he 
their Eyes, and ſaid, According to your Faith be it unto yww. | See | 
che mighry Power cf che Prayer of Faith. Their Eyes were opened; | 
char is , their Viſive Faculty was reſtored, or given to them. 
And Feſus ftraitly charged them , ſaying, See that no Man know it, 
It was known they were blind, and Men muft know that they 
now ſaw : Bur he chargeth them nor ro publiſh ic as done by 
him. The word uſed fignifieth ro Command with Authoricy, and 
with a Threatning annexed ; we have mer with ſeveral ſuch 
Commands to Perſons cured , and none of them obſerved ; nor 
rhe Perſons blamed by Chriſt for nor obſerving them. We muſt 
fay the Parries ſinned in publiſhing the things , unleſs the Com- 
mand was with ſome Limirations, not mentioned by che Evan- 
geliſts, Bur we are nor able either to give a juſt Account why 
or how Chriſt commanded chem : Nor how they publiſhed che 
chings, or were excuſable in doing of it. 
32 * As they went out, behold they brought to *See Chap: 
him a dumb man poſlefled with a devil. 12, 22: 
33 And when the devil was caſt out, the dumb 4 
ſpake, and the multitudes marvelled, ſaying, It was $6. Ne 
never ſo ſeen in Iſrael. [7 | 
Some think this the fame mentioned, L:þ. 11. 14. as ſhortly 
as it is here: The word in the G--2& fizaincs De.zf as well as 
Dumb; for all Perfons who are De:f trom thei: Birth , are alfo 
Dumb. Bur it 1s probable this Man was only accidencally Dumb, 
from the Power of the Devil, that had pofleſied him, and ſuppreſ- 
ſed his Speech. Ir is obſerved that Chriſt cured, x. Some chat 
came on their own accord ro him, has the Woman wich her Bloody- 
Hlux. 2. Others that could not come, bur were brought to him, as 
che Paralytich before menrioned in this Chapter, who was wil- 
[ingly brought, 3. Orhers, who neither came, nor were willingly 
brought, bur he occaſionally mier, Luk, 7. 12. Fob. 545. 7 9. I. | 
Ochers , thar were brought without their conſent , as the Demoniack Fi 
before mentioned, and rhis, in this Verſe ; his Deſign was, by 
theſe Operarions, to ſhe himfelf the Son of God ; and theretore 
did not always ſtay for People's voluntarily offering him Occa- 
fins, bur ſomcrimes rock chem, when they were nor voluntarily 
offered, ro ſhew the freeneſs of his Grace. 


34 Burt che Pha:ſees ſaid , He cafſteth out the 


devils through the prince of the devils. 
This was ot the only time they ſaid fo. See chap. 12, 24+ 

Mav. 3.22. L::h. 11.15. I fha!l in ny Notes on chap. 1 2. 24« 

ſpeak more fully ro this Texr, where we ſhall alfo meer wich our 

Saviour's Vindication of himſelf from this Impuration. Art pre- 

ſenc I ſhall only obſerve the miſerable Eftects of Blindneſs and 

Malice. The common People marvelled, and faid , There was 

never ſeen ſuch thinss in Tſracl, The Jewiſh Do&ers ate mad, and 

charze our S1viour to have made a Contrat wich the Devii, and 

ro have derived this Power from him. Bur how did this ap- 

pear tochem ? Nothing appeared as to any thing which our | 

Saviour had done that could condutt their Reafon to fvch 4 Wall 

Judgment : Nothing bur whar led their more charitable Netgh- 

bours ro a quire contrary Judgrncur. Bur ſomething they muſt '* 

ſay ro defame our Saviour's Reputation amongſt rhe People,having Wie.” 

nothing elſe bur what the People would have judged taife, rhey 

thus charge him; nor are tne Children of rhe Devi! £2 learn 

his Arcs, who when they cannot Charge Gocd and Holy Men 

with Protaneneſs, Charge them with Hypocrifie z of which ic 15 

impoſſible chey ſhould be competent Judges. 


25 And Jeſus * went about all the cities an 
villages, teaching in their ſynagogues, and preach- 
ing the goſpel of the kingdom, and healing every 
fickneſs, and every diſeaſe amongſt the people. 


We met with theſe words, 44ap. 4. 22, Only there it was aft | 
Galiler, \ 


— Cloth 


- - Oran nemo marremnnre ne: ira ener 


—_ -4.4 Ru a 
—_ «3 £5: 
PP —_— _ 
__—_ 
- « 


q * Mar. 6.6. 1919 Wit es 
Lux.13.22e hs 


- GE es, Hi ce ee ED _——_—_ Cs de 


Chap. X. Ot. 


Gatiles , by which probably this Text ought to be expounded: 
ſee the Notes there. 
26 Bur when he ſaw the multitudes, he was moved 
t Were ti- with compaſſion on them, becauſe they fainted : ||and 
red, and 1-9 were ſeartered abroad.as * ſheep having no {hepherd. 
ring _ Mark hach ſomething of this, chap. 6. 34. It piried him, who 
L he 'y came down trom Heaven to Earth to ſeck and to fave loſt Souls, 
?7. Ec. to fee what a Company of People tollowed him, willing to be 
cr inſtructed , becauſe they were &Aa:avutcr, Or as ſome read 1t, 
£74v+44: v0, tired and wearied with running atter hum ro hear 
the Goſpel , and epprumwiyir, ſcattered abroad as ſheep having no 
Shepherd, Had then the Fews ar this time no Miniſtry ? They 
had the Temple at Feruſalem, Scribes, and Pharhees, and Prieſts, 
Synagngues 1n other places, where the Law was read and inter- 
prered. Chriſt accounts thoſe People to have no Miniſters, who 
have no Good ones; bur eirher Dumb Dogs, that cannor Bark, or 
Lazy ones, that will not. Such was the Generality of the Jewiſh 
Miniſtry at this time. This moved the Bowe!s of Chriſt, (fo the 
word fignifies.) It is a great Miſery when the Congregation ot 
rhe Lord are as Sheep which h.rve no Shepherd, Numb. 27. 17. And 
fo they are when they have no true Prophets ot the Lord to 1n- 
ſtru& them, 1 King. 22. 17. | 
27 Then ſaith he unto his diſciples, * The harveſt 
truly 7s plenteous, but the labourers are tew. 
28 Pray ye therefore the Lord of the harveſt that 


he will ſend forth labourers into his harvelt. 

The plain Senſe of theſe rwo Verſes is this; John the Baptis?, 
and Ch;:4, had now been Preaching for ſome time ; God 1ncli- 
ned the Hearts of great Mulcitudes to follow both the one and 
the other: There was a great People prepared for the Lord, 
Mat. 11.12. From the days 0 = the Baptiſt, the Kingdom of Hea- 
wen had ſuffered Violence, and the Violent took it by Force : Men were 
excecding fond of hearing the Goſpel. The Fields were white to 
the Hurve$t, (as our Saviour expreflcrh it) Foh. 4. 35. Bur chere 
were few that would faichtully deliver the Mind of God ; there 
were abundance of idle Phariſees, and Scribes, and Prieſts, that 
ſpent cheir rimes in teaching People their Rites, and Ceremonies, 
and Traditions; but the Eabourers were few : Such muſt be God's 
Gift to che People, and they muſt be thruſt our. No Argu- 
ments will be ſufficient to perſwade Men to che weighty Work 
of the Miniſtry, with an intention to fulfil ir, but the Power of 
God inclining their, Hearts ro ir: You had need therefore pray 
unto God, that he would ſend,nay, that he would exCaan, thrus? 
out Labourers into his Harve8. 1. The Inclination and Deſire 
of Mulritudes to hear Divine Truth, 1s God's Harvesf, 2. Mi. 
niſters Work is a Labour, Gal. 4. 11. Phil. 4.3. 1 Tim. $. 17. It 
righcly diſcharged, ic muſt be with Labour, 3. God 1s the Lord 
of the Harveſt, Miniſters oughr to look upon him as fo. 4. None 
ought to thruſt chemſelyes into the Work of the Miniftry, cill 
God thruſt them our, Heb. 5.4. 5. There always were but a few 
Labourers in God's HarveF. Hence Chryſoſtome choughr that bur a 
few Miniſters would be ſaved. Our Saviour in this Chapter pre- 
faceth his Work; of which we ſhall Diſcourſe in the next 
Chapter, viz. His Sending forch his Twelve Apoſtles, 


CHAP. X. 


Chrift giveth his Diſciples power to work Miracles : Their Names and 
Number, 1—5s. His Charge and Inftruion of them for their Four- 
ney, 6—15. Comforteth them again Perſecutions, and what 
they might do in ſuch times, 16—31. Heſheweth the Bleſſeaneſs 
of thoſe that confeſs him before Men, with the Mijcry of thoje that 
deny him, 32, 33- The End of his Coming to the World , to ſend 
War, and not Peace, 34—39. The Reward of thoſe that receive 
and refreſh his Diſciples, 49—42+ 


*Mar. 6.7. 1 A ND * when he had called unto him his 

Luk. 5. 13. twelve diſciples,he gave them power || ag47/? 

{| Or, ov. ynclean ſpirits to caſt them our, and to heal all man- 
ner of ſickneſs, and all manner of diſcaſcs. 


Mark , chap. 3. 14. ſaith, And he ordained twelve, that they 
ſhould be with vim, and that he might ſend them forth to Preach, 
V. Is. And to have Power to heal Sickneſſes, and to caſt out Devils. 
Lube repeats almoſt the ſame words, Lub., 9. 2. only he faith, he 
gave them Power and Authority over Devils, — and to Preach the 
Kingdom of God. This was the firſt Miffion which the Apoſtles 
had, much different from that given them after his Reſurrefion : 
They were now ſent only #o the los? .Sheep of the Houſe of 1ſrael, 
then they were ſent fo all Nations : They were nor called Diſci- 
ples, as thar term ſignified, only che common Hearers of Chrift, 
but in a more Emphatical Senſe. He chuſerth our twelve, that 
as the twelve Patriarchs begat the Jewiſh Church, ſo theſe twelve 
Men mighr be the Fathers to all the Goſpel-Church, The num- 
ber of Twelve ſeems a Sacred Number. The New Feruſalcm, Rev. 
21. 12, deſcribed,as having twelve Gates, and at the Gates twelve 
Angels,and to have wricten on the Gares the Names of the twelve 
Tribes; and, v. 14. The Wall of the City 1s ſaid to have had 
twelve Fundations, and in them the Names of the twelve Apo- 
les, the Dimenſion of it twelve Thouſand Furlongs. The Power 
he gave to the Apoſtles was, 1. To Preach the Kingdom, that 1s, 
the Goſpel; which as it ſhewerh the way to the Kingdom of Glo- 
ry, ſo it was the means to gather the Chriſtian Church, which 1s 
the Kingdom of Grace , and to tubdue Men's Hearts to the Obe- 
dience of Chriſt. 2. To c2ſt out Devils, and heal all manner of 
Sickneſſes. By which they gained repure among{t People, con- 
firming People that they were ſent of God, doing ( tho'nor as 
Chriſt did them) things which none bur God could do, by a de- 
rivation of Power from him: Chriſt did the ſame things, bur 
by a Power inherent in himſelf. Theſe twelve were ordinarily 
to be wich Chriſt, and ro go forth (as occaſion ſerved) cloathed 
with his Power to Preach, and ro work Miracles, 


*Luk.10.2, 


MATTHE W. Ch: 


> 10 
2 Now the names of the twelve Apoſtles are T X 
theſe : The firſt, Simon, who zs called Perer, and | ritanes 


Andrew his Brother, James the Soz of Zebedee and partly 
John his Brother : ha jja ſet 
2 Philip, and Bartholomew. Thomas, and Mz. hu . 
thew the Publican; James zbe Sor of Alpheys, 1nd pertedt 
Lebbeus, whoſe ſurname was Thaddeus : SE may Þ 
4 Simon the Canaanite, and Judas Lcarior, yh, - Pre”? 
alſo betrayed him. FT mm 
Mark reckoneth up the fame Pcrſcns, chap. 3. 16, 15, 18 1. © hidd 
with fome Additions , which we ſhall contider as we _ one "Y 
the Perfons whom they concern, Apytles tignifies Perſons 7. - s tow 
- the term applied to Chriſt's Dilciples, 112nines the Pertons that | _ ct 
were firſt ſent by him to Preach the Goipel. It was reaſonal1e | But 9 
for che Evangeliſts to ſer down their Names, becauſe the what. | = - 
Chriſtian Church was to be builded upcn their Do&rine Eh v4 | = the 
20. | The firſt, Simon, who us called Peter, | Matth, 16, 12. '& , loſt che 
cauſe the term ſignifies a Rock, and the Contetlion of Faith —_ : Senſe £11; 
he made, our Saviour declares to be a Rock on which he Would ; their She 
build his Church, He is nor here called the fir , becauje 1 | herefigr 
was firſt called, or fi$ believed; the contrary is plain from Th EE  7ows, at 
I. 41. Bur when many are named, one mult be firſt vamed, | 35 1.9 Sh 
He was the Son of Fonas : Chriſt gave him the Name of C3} * | erlos of 
which is, by Interpretation, a Stone. He was called Simm Pj bur fer 1 
co diſtinguiſh him from Simon the Canaanite, afterward mentig. Shepherd 

ned. So thar it ſeems the Papiſts are pur hard to it tor Arzu- Fold, 

ments to prove Peter's Primacy, and Superiority over the Ape ? 

and Headlhip over the Church, when they are inforced to mike bo 7 P 
uſe of this, becauſe he is here called the fi; if. Yet fuch anothe; 3 of Heay 
was, brought art the Diſpuration of Berne 1528, when Mo 4 $ He 
Grad, the Nun's Confefſor, would prove Peter's Headſhip, becauſe: | 
he 1s called Cephas ; and he had read in ſome Didtionary, that ou 5 _ 
1C 


Knzes anciently ſignified an Head. As if the Evangeli$ had nt To confi 
2, 10 CMN 


interprered it, oh. 1. 42. Peter, or a Stone. By the fame Arpy. 
ment they can itrom hence prove Peter tne firit, Gal. 2. 15. will 


Overations. 


prove him the ſecond, for ſo he is there reckoned. 7.mes, Cephy Devils, H 
and Folm. | Andrew hu Brother, | Simon Peter's Brother , by Jin tomerhing 
diretted ro Chriſt, 7ch.1.40. called by Chriſt, rogether with iris Erc- lf up thy 
cher Peter, Mzr.1.16.| James the Son of Zebeace, ] ſo c:lie&,co cittir- be the Sam 
guiſh him trom another of the Apoſtles of the fame Name, who wa The lame 
the Son of Alphers.This 1s be of whoſe Death weread, 49; 2.1:, Carift pre 
He was ſlain by Hered,{[ and Fohn his Brother, ] viz.the Son of Alphay: to Preach, 
This is he wh» was called the Beloved Diſciple, who alfo wrote the bur thar al 
Goſpel of Fohn, 7oh. 1.20. { Philip, and Bartholomew, ond Ti To declare 
mas. | Philip was of Bethſaida, the City of Andrew and Peter, J;, = Prone 
I. 44. found and called by Chriſt, v. 43. Of the Call cf B.;t% Ss id, 
r 


lomew we do not read, ſome think him the ſame with Nabi, 


mentioned oh. 1. 45, 46, &c. It is ſome inducement to be. - 


lieve 1t, that he 1s here named with Philip, who was the Initru- 


a charge, th 
tor them z & 


might nor 1 


ment to bring him to Chriſt, 76h. 1.45. But there is nothing 


this certain. Thomas, the ſame who was called Didymy , who Dottrine. 


was ſo unbelieving as to Chriſt's Reſurreftion , Foh. 20. 24, :*, 9 Prov 
And Matthew the Publicane ,] He that wrote this Hiſtory ct the 1 your purſ, 
Goſpel ; we heard before of his Call from the Reccit cf Cuſtom; 4 No 
he was alſo called Levi. | Fames the Son of Alphens, and Leitew, 2 ae" 
whoſe ſurname was Thaddeus. | This Fames is call'd Fames the lin, 3 neither {hi 
Mar. 15.40. and ſo diſtinguiſhed from Fames the Son of Zeteae: 15 worthy 
The Brother of our Lord, Gal. 1.19. (Thar is, as ſome think, ti | Our Savin 


= freely; they 
 toprovide wwe 
> vide neither | 
Temporary F 
= ſhore Journey 
hath a Purſe | 
Vere to finiſh 
would have | 


Kinſman, ) judging him not the Son of A4!phews, who was the 
Farher of Matthew, but another A/phers, the Husband of 34.n,th 
Wife of Cleopas, Joh. 19.25. Bur this appeareth nor from Scrip 
rure. Inſtead of Lebbews, whoſe Surname was Thaddeus, Luke fait, 
chap. 6. 16. Fudas the Brother of Fames, ( he that wrote the Ep: 
ſtle of Fude, as appeareth by Jude, ) Mark, chap. 3. 17. met: 
tions not Lebbexs at all; which makes ſome think that the Word 
are Tranſpoſed , and ſhould be Thaddeus, the Son of Lt 


beus ; for Thaddai inthe Syriack 1s the fame with Zudas. [ Sin Saviour defigr 
the Canaanite, ] Luke calls him Simon Zelotes, Luk.5.15. and 4% 1, - of God, and 
13. We muſt not underſtand by Canaanite a Pazan, ( tor Chrilt That the Laboy 


that his Minit 
* Altar which t 
not to be Co 
provide for t 
{ paſs over wt 
Words, that h 
E That he comm, 
F.. Journey, ſave ; 
© Purſe, but be ; 
whence is plail 
St.zves for defe 
Staves. The; 
3 foon to difpatc 
-- and Syſtenance 
neceſſary, 


od, 11% And 
3 enter, enqui 
till Ye £0 th 

I2 And y 
13 And | 
F Me upon it 
- Teturn to you 
* , 14 And * 
dag, <4 your we 
"ll, * clty, F {h: 


{ent our none but Fews,_) bur one of Cana, which, by Ircerpre 
tation, 1s Zelus ; from whence it 15 that Lube calleth him Zeli. 

And Judas Iſcariot, who alſo betrayed him.) There are many gue: 
ſes, how Judas had the Name of Icarist; whether from Kerit!, 
ſuppoſed to be his Town, or on ſome other acccunt, the gue! 
ſes of the beft are bur uncercainties, nor is ir material for ust0 
know. Ir here diſtinguiſheth him from the other Jud, Oi 
his Betraying his Maſter , we ſhall hear afterward. Chriſt a: 
rered the Names of Simm, whom he called Peter, ar. 3+ 1% 
He added to the Names of James and 7ohn, calling chem B:. 
ges, that is, the Sons of Thunder, v. 17. Thaddeus is called 71 
and by Matthew alſo Lebbeus. Theſe were the twelve firſt Ap 
ſtles, tro which were added (after Chriſt's Aſcenſion ) Matri!, 
(inſtead of Fudas Tcariot.) Paul and Barnabas; but theſe conver 
ſed with Chriſt, and were the firſt ſent our by him. We ſhal 
now hear the InſtruRion he gives them. 


5 Theſe twelve Jeſus ſent forth, and commanded 
them, ſaying, Go not into the way of the Gentil<, 
and into ary City of the Samaritanes, enter ye 10: | 

6 * But go rather to the Loſt ſheep of the houſe 
of Iſrael. 

Here Chriſt limiteth their Miniftry to the Zews. The Ape 
ſtle tel] us, Rom. 15. 8.Chrift was the Miniſter of the Circumeſn 
for the Truth of God, to confirm the Promiſes made to the Kh"; 
and the Apoſtle tells the Jews, A&s 13. 46. That it was neci)[) 
that the Word of God ſhould be fo Ges to them. Therefore ! 
this his firſt Miffion, he reſtrains his Apoſtles from going t2 the 


Gentiles, tro whom they had afterwards a Commiſſion to go, 91% 7 F > Verily 
28. 19. and did go, bur nor betore the 7ews had judged Them able for the 
ſelves unworthy of everlaſting Life, A#s 13. 46. by rejediing * day of judgm 


blafpheming the Goſpel , and perſecuting the Miniſters ct Ou 
They are alſo commanded no to go into any City of che 517% By them thets —_ 
19" WH tr their Journey 


bs X 


rit nes 


The Samaritanes were partly Fews Apoſtatized, and 
athens, deſcended from thoſe whom the King of A/ſj- 
"Cnr thicher, when the Ten Tribes were carried into Capti- 
og King. 17.6. and from ſome 7ews left in the Land. You 
__ d of heir Religion there, v.31. to the end. They were 
f Ah hared by the Jews, and as perfe& Haters of them, as 
-— / arhered from Luk.g. 52,53. Joh. 4.9.. Our Lord, part- 
- they alſo were no better than Gentiles , and ſo 
were of the Fews , would nor ſuffer rheſfe his firſt 
«ers to 20 and Preach amongſt rhem : Not that they were - 
agrey en (if fome particular Perſons, wherher Gentiles or Sama- 
for - came to them,) to Preach to them, bur only nor ro make 
_ Work to £0 into their Country, or Cities; the time was 
: = come for this great Lighr to ſhine upon the Gentiles. 
at, 20 rather to the 1: ſheep of the houſe of Iſrael. | By Ijrael, he 
Fcre meanerh che TWO ribes that clave to the Houſe of David; 
= he Ten Tribes ever ſince their Caprivity, 2 King. 17.6. had 
on 'cheir Share in that Name. He calls them /o$? Sheep , 1n the 
-_" that Fercmy ſpeaks, chap.50.6. My Pevple have been lo8 Sheep 
their Shepherds have cauſed them to go aſtray. So that /o8t Sheep 
here tgnifies wandring Sheep , for want of proper Guides. The 
9:7, at chis rime, had miſerable Teachers, fo as they wandred 
mY & Shes; and this comporreth with what we had 1n the laſt 
/or/2s of the former Chapter. There was a great Harveſt , and 
Mut fer: Labourers 3 he 15 therefore providing them Lahourers, 
Shepherds rhat ſhould 24ther thoſe ſcattered Sheep into one 


Fold. 
7 * And as ye go, preach, ſaying, * The Kingdom 


2 of Heaven is at hand. : 
$ Heal the ſick, cleanſe the lepers, raiſe the dead, 
c1{ out devils: * freely ye have received, treely give. 
In theſe words he gives them Power, I. T9 Preach the Goſpel. 
2, To confirm the Dodtrine they preached to be of God, by Miraculous 
052rations, Healing rhe Sick , cleanſing Lepers, caſting Out 
Devils, He hids them go Preach, Ky;gu<r2[2 .. (ry like Heralds, 
t>merhing like [aiah's Commiſion. Ha.$8.T. Cr; aloud, ſpare no: , 
lift up thy Voice like a Trumpet. He teacheth them whar ſhould 
be the Sum of their Sermons. {[ The Kingdom of God is at hand.) 4 
The ſame thing which John Bapti#t preached, chap. 3. 2. which 
Cariſt preache1, Mar. 1.15. and which he diredted the Seventy 
to Preach, Lub,15.9. Not that they were to uſe no other Words, 
bur that all the Words they uſed, were to have this Tendency. 
To declare that the Time was now come, when God had fulfilled 
his Promiſe of the Meſfiah , who was ſetting up his Kingdom 1m 
the World, and to whoſe Laws they were to be obedient. This 
Dodrine they were to confirm by Miracles ; which he gives them 
a charge, they ſhould work freely, withour receiving any Reward 
for them ; thar the Miracles being nor uſed to their private Profit, 
might not loſe their End, which was the Confirmation of their 
Doctrine. 
. 9 Provide * neither gold, nor filver, nor braſs in 
your purlcs. ; | 
* 10 Nor ſcrip for your Journey, neither two coats 
© neither ſhoes, nor yet faves: (* For the workman 
is worthy of his meat.) : 
Our Saviour having in the laſt Verſe commanded them to give 
E freely ; they mighr reaſonable be thinking , thar they had need 
” toprovide well for their Journey. No, faith our Saviour , Pro- 
- vide neither Gold, nor Silver, nor Braſs, &c. That this was but a 
© Temporary Precept, the Will of God concerning them for this 
> ſhorr Journey, appeareth from Luk. 22. 35, 36. But now he that 
hath a Purſe let him take it, and likewiſe" hs Scrip, &c. They 
” wereto finiſh chis Journey in a ſhort time , and much Provifion 
would have been an hindrance to their Motion, Befides, our 
Saviour deſigned to give them an Experience of the Providence 
of God, and to reach them to truſt in it; as alfo to teach People, 
That the Labourer is worthy of his Hire ;, and that God expetteth, 
* that his Miniſters ſhould nor live of their own , bur upon rhe 
* Altar which they ſerved; ſo as ar once he taughr his Apoſtles 
| | not to be Covetous, nor over much Solicitous; and People to 
provide for thoſe who Miniſtred co them in things Spiricual, 
[ paſs over whar others have critically obſerved concerning the 
Words, that being not my proper Work. Mark ſaith, chap. 6. 8. 
That he commanded them that they ſhould take nothing for their 
 , 7ourney, ſave a Staff only; no Scrip, no Bread , nor Money in their 
. Purſe, but be ſhod with Sandals, and not put on two Coats. From 
& whence is plain, that the Staves forbidden in Matthew,were either 
Staves for defence , or to bear Burdens upon, not meerly Travellers 
Staves. The Sum is, in this their firſt Journey, which they were 
 foonto difpatch, he would have them truſt God for Prote&ion 
-- and Syſtenance, and load themſelves wich nothing more than 
© neceſſary, 


at, 11 * And into whatſoever city or town ye ſhall 
+ Enter, enquire who in it is worthy : and there abide 
till ye 50 thence. 

12 And when ye come into an houſe, ſalute it. 
* 13 And if the houſe be worthy, let your peace 
' OMe upon it : but if it be not worthy, let your peace 
= Teturn to YOu. 
95 14 And * whoſoever ſhall not receive you , nor 
ig ar your words : when ye depart out of that houſe 
ar, 27 City, * ſhake off the duſt of your feet. 

15 Verily I fay unto you, Ir ſhall be more tole- 
ble for the land of Sodom and Gomorrah, in the 
day of judgment, than for thar city. 


Our Lord had before ſer chem their Limirs, and appointed 
tem their Work, and direQed them as to their Accourrements 


partly 


St. MATTHEW 


and Happineſs to it, it they tound themſelves welcome to Preach 
to 1t the Goſpel of Peace. Bur if they found themſelves unwe!. 
come,and difcerned rhat the People of the City, or of that Houſe, 
did nor care for their Company, and reiuſed ro hear them, they | 
ſhould nor make themſelves, or the Goſpel, a Burden to them; | 
but ſhew their Contempr of thoſe who contemned the Golpei, | 
and the Miniſtry of it, by ſhaking the duS off their Feet as a Te- 
ſtimony again them, Then he concludes, telling them , Thar 
che Lord would fo grievouſly at laſt revenge ſuch Concempr, 
char the Condition of the Men of Sodom and Gomorrah, who were 
deſtroyed by Fire and Brimſtone, Gen. 19. 24. would ar the laſt 
day be more tolerable than theirs, This is the Sum by which 
our Saviour doth obviate the folicirous Thoughts, might from 
his former Words ariſe in their Minds. How ſhall we live, 20s 
ing among Strangers, if we carry nothing with us? Saich our 
Saviour , when you firſt come into a Town or Ciry, do not en- 
quire tor the Inns that entertain Strangers; bur who is Worthy, 
worthy of ſuch Gueſts; ſo Heb. 11. 38. a Son of Peace, Luk. 0.5. 
who are accounted as the moſt Pjous and Religious Perſons in 
that Town or City, or beſt aftetted ro the Goſpel. { He hereby 
hints, that Zohn che Baptit and his Miniſtry had had ſuch ſuc- 
ceſs , that in moſt places there were fome ſuch Perſons. ) Wor- 
thy doth not in our ordinary Diſcourſe fignitie always a Merito- 
riows Perſon , but a Perſon Excelling , either in Religion, or Know- 
ledg.:, or Moral Vertue. Such Perſons our Lord preſumes would 
entertain thoſe who came upon ſo kind an Errand to their Hou- 
ſes; hecommands them to go; and when they came toan Houſe, 
co {alure it; ro ſay,[ Peace be to this Houſe, ] (which was the Jews 
ordinary Salutation, ) under the Notion of Peace, they compre- 
hended all Good, Bur, | Let your Peace be upon it, ( I conceive) 
comprehendeth more 5 viz. Preach the Goſpel of Peace unto it : 
Or, My Peace ſhall be upon ic, T will Blefs chat Houſe. Bur if 
you find youare mi{-informed, or miſtaken,[ Tour Peace ſhall return 
unto you; ) you have done your Work, and you fhall have your 
Reward. | If they will not Receive you, nor hear your Words, If 
rhey declare any Contempt of you,and will not hear the Glad-Ti- 
dings of the Goſpel ; | When you depart out of that Houſe or City, 
ſhake off the dust of your Feet.) This was more than a ſign of Con- 
rempr of them. We read of Nehemiah, chap.5.13. that he ſhook his 
Lap, and ſaid, So God ſhake out every Man from his Houle, and from his 
Labour, that performeth not this Promiſe, We have but one In- 
ſtance of this Praftice of the Apoſtles, 4#s 13. 51. Lube adds, 
for a Teſtimony again$# them; a Teſtimony of God's deſpiſing 
chem, who deſpiſed his Grace; and of the Vengeance of God, 
char ſhould come upon them tor that Contempt. For he adds, [It 
ſhall be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of Fudg- 
ment , the laſt Jud;menr , than for that City.) Their Condemna- 
rion wil be more dreadful , as having ſinned againſt greater 
Light, and fairer Offers of greater Grace than ever they had. 


16 * Behold, I ſend you forth as ſheep in the *Luk. 10.33 
midſt of wolves *: Be ye therefore wiſe as ſerpents, * Rom. 16. 


and || harmleſs as doves. 19. 
Our Lord having hithzrro Inſtrufted his Twelve Apoſtles, as to || Orfimple. 

the Places whither they were to go, the Work they had to do, 
and the Merhods he would have them obferve ; now comes ro 
arm chem againſt cheir Difficulties , and the Temptations they 
were like to meet with. [ 1 ſend you forth, ( faich he) as Sheep 
among Wolves.) Ir is moſt probable, that our Saviour ſpeaks this 
with reference co what they were like ro miect with, when he 
ſhould be taken from them ; for we do not read of any great 
Oppoſition which they at preſent met with. 7 ſen! you, faich he, 
as Sheep, which are teeble Creatures in themſelves, and wichour 
any Natural Armour to detend themfelves; amms#t Wolves, which 
are rapacious Creatares, and have a particular Enmity to Sheep, 
Amongſt Enemies, who will h:ve as great an inclinari-n from 
rheir Malice, to devour you. as Wolves have from their Nacure, 
ro devour Sheep. | Be ye therefore Wiſe as Son Ir 1s faid of 
rhe Serpent, Gen. 3. 1. that He was more ſubtil than any Be:S of 
the Field. Naturaliſts obſerve ver a grear Natural Sagacity inthe 
Serpent, which they note in ſeveral particulars. Ir 1s hard to ſay, 
char Chriſt aimed ar this, or that parcicular thing , wherein the 
Sagacity of Serpents appeareth; he only propoſerth rhe Serpenc 
as a Pattern of Subrilty, and commendcth Prudence to them, 1o 
far as it conſiſterh with Innocency ; for it followeth , | Innocent as 
Doves.) Amongſt the Beaſts of the Field, there is none more 
innocent than a Sheep ; amongſt che Birds of the Air, none more 
innocent than a Dove; to both theſe, our Lord compareth his 
Diſciples. This Text teacherh us, 1. Thar Wiſdom may dwell 
with Prudence, 2, Thar all true Prudence muſt be arrended with 
Innocency. 

17 But beware of men, * for they will deliver *ch, 24.5. a. et 
you up to the councils, and they will {courge you 1n dar. s 3: 9s ji 
their ſynagogues, ———— 

18 And * ye ſhall be brought before governours xgg.s, gow CRORNETT IE NT 16 
and kings for my ſake, for a teſtimony againſt them & 12. 1. 10h 3 IT RIS, 
and the Gentiles. OX 254 23> W010 1-100 #4 


The laſt word Gentiles maketh it plain, thar our Blefſed Lord 
is nor here arming his Diſciples fo much againſt any Oppoſicion 


9 WAR 
+ Fas £4 4 FRUrP! | 842% 
bs - F! |, 0 "34. 
— WE $ Pt: 3% ns f 
Chap. X. WIR 
F8 Fig Wahi. 
hath much of the ſame Inſtruions, chap. 10. v. 4, s, 6. bur ap- THEE | Ai 1 
plied ro the Seventy, not to the Twelve. Mark hath ſomething : LAVA ts, bf ji HU 
of them applied to the Twelve , Mar. 6. 10, 11. Aud he ſaid unto 4: ROO Ba 28 VEN 
them, In what place ſcever you enter into an Houſe, there abide until 4 ih , 4 Talk 
you depart from that place : And whoſoever ſhall not receive you, nov SRI 02 bag) WAH 
hear you , when you depart thence, ſhake off the du$ under your Feet . Ty % 4 at 
for a Teſtimony again them. Verily T ſay unto you, It ſhall be more Wi HR0 | Wt 
tolerable for Sidom and Gomorrah in the day of Fudgment , than for wit [/ TP4-Y | 0-H 
that City, The Method Chriſt ſer chem was, when they came HAINd P758 , 0636 
into any of the Cities of Tſrae!, to enquire if there were any As 1 : 19 
worthy Perſons in it, and thither co go, and there to abide (it they 1008! i Uh 
did not find they were miſtakes) until they lett that place; and i122: a8 FF 
when they came inro an Houſe, to ſalute it, wiſhing all Peacz - | 10644 &; 
WH! 


"ey 
—_— -- 
&s 


"v7 rneir Journey z here he direRerh them their Mechods. Lube 


they were like ro meet wich upon this their firſt going our, ( WO 
: | ol ey (2's TONE 4-08 3 


—Y py \ a 
wm ara ret + - " 


_—_ 
=q 


% 5 — = > 
"ND = 


Chap. X. 


* Luk, 21. 


14. 


# NC. 7.5, 


* Ch. 24. 
I3. 


* Ch. 2.13, 


GC 4+ 12s 


Att. &Q. 1. 
& 9. 25, 
& 14. 6. 


Zews, 


when for t 


fering 


ſaved.} 


they were not to go to 
with ſome years atter 
they ſhould meet with from rhe 
delivering up to the Councils, and ſcourging in the Synagogues, 
ſeemerh co have a particular *eference to the Fews. This Scripcure 
was moſt eminently tultilled,as ro the Apoſtles, As 4. 1,243, tc. 
And as to being brought before Gover?curs 


5. 27. and 6.12. Go 
mote in Eccle- 


and Kings, 
faxſtical Stories. Neit 
any rcterence to t 
he only defigned to ler rhe 
heir Owning him, av 
ſhould be brought before all ſorts of Magiſtrates, 
of Courts. Thar Phraſe | And they will ſcourge you in 
eozues ] hach mightily perplexed fome , 
dreamed Religions Synagogues roo Holy Places 
bur there is no need that we ſhould take the term Synagogues 
here for the Places of their Worſhi 
their Conventions ; and there are fo 
adjoining to their Synagogres, 
fenders, upon che A 
11. 24. that Paul W 
to their Law, Deut. 25. 3. [ Fr 
Gentiles.) A Tefti 
For my Names ſake, 
a Teſtimony againſt 
hence our terms O 
Witneſs, che other a Teſtimony. 


19 *But when they deliveryou 
how or what ye ſhall ſpeak: for it 


in that fame hour what ye ſhall ſpeak. 
20 For it is not ye that ſpeak, but the ſpirit of 


your Father which ſpeaketh in you. 

the ſame, chap. 13.11. ſo hath Luke, chap.12. 
ſtles being Men bur of an ordinary Education 
he might reaſonably ſuppoſe, thar | 
they would not appear before Councils, and Kings, and Governours, 
withour Eme Abathment, having not been accuſtomed to ſuch 
He therefore arms them in theſe words; wherein he 
Man hath 


Mark hatch much 
11, 12. The Apo 
before Chriſt called them 3 


Prelences : 


doth u3r prohibit ordinary Thoughts , which every 
before he ſpeakerh, but anxious 
he, it ſhall be given you in tha 
Lord ſeemeth to ſpeak here, 
complaining he was of a ſſow $ 
hath made Man's mouth ? It ſh 
God. | For it # not you that ſpeak, 
which ſpeaketh in you «| 
The Holy Spirit ſhal 
and ſuggeſt that to you ; 


giving you 


Ads 6. 10. 
Martyrs. 

the Spirit 15 not 
alſo an Influence 


ſtance ; bur th 
in-orher Operat 


lifteth. 


21 * And the brother {hall deliver up the brother 
to death, and the father the child : and the children 
{hall riſe up againſt zherr parents, and cauſe them 


to be put ro death. 
22 And yeſha 


ſaved. 


Luke ſpeaketh much the ſame, rho? as ſpoken upon another 
occafion, Luk. 21. 16,17. Our Saviour here rells them, that the 
Perſecutions would reach even ro-Death ir ſelf ; and thar the 
Malice of the World againſt him and his Goſpel ſhould proceed 
ſo far, as to exringwſh all Nacural Aﬀe&ton betwixt Brethren, 
and Parents, and Children ; and that they would meer with a 
Multicude of Enemies, ( for that 1s here meant by AZ, not every 
individual Man , as in a multitude of -other Scriptures.) The 
Root of all Perſecution is Hatred. 
Preaching or Profeſſing of my Goſpel, and living up to rhe Rule 
of ir, As 4.18. and 5. 41. This is that which Peter calleth ſuf- 
as a Chriſtian, 1 Pet. 4.16. And by this Phraſe, he dorh 
not only admoniſh them of their Duty, ro ſee that they ſuffered 
bur alſo encourage them from rhe Honourable 
ir was for his Names ſake. 
addeth anorher Argument, [ But he that endureth to the end, ſhall be 
There ſhall be an End of theſe Sufferings; if they end 
Life-rime, they will end with your Lives; and if 
ou ſhall be ſaved : 


for his Names ſake, 
Cauſe of their Suffering ; 


not in your 
you continue to the end, 
Patience,nor will it be profitable, if it holdeth not out to rhe end, 


Mar. 13-13. 1 Cor. 9g. 24. Heb. 3. 6. 


23 * But whenthey perſecute you in this city, flee 
ye into another : For verily I ſay unto you, Ye ſhall 
& 12. 75- not have || gone over the cities of Iſrael, unti] the 
Son of Man be come. 


Whether this Text at all warranteth Miniſters flight in a time 
| Finiſhed, of Perſecution , I doubr; ic ſeemeth ro be a ſpecial Command 
given to the Apoftles , thar they mighc have a time betore the 
coming of Chriſt here ſpoken of , to Preach the Goſpel all over 
the Ciries of 1/rael. Bur that in ſome Caſes it is lawfulto fly, I do 
nor at all doubr,(tho' I do queſtion whether it bero be warranted 
from this Text,) whar thoſe Caſes are, is largely diſcourſed, par- 
ticularly by Mr. Torſhelf, Generally it is faid, Where-ever the 


there are Inſtances enough inthe Ads, 
her do I think our Saviour hack in theſe words 
he diſtin&ion of their Camcils amongſt the 
m know, the time would come, 
d Preaching his Goſpel , they 
and in all kinds 


a Place in which they pu 
Certain ir is, 2 Corinth. 
ws according 
them, and tbe 


ccount of Religion. 
as five times ſcourged by the 
a Teſtimony again 
har is expreſſed in thoſe words, 


mony for me, t 
s or Gentiles, 


and againſt them, wherher Jew 
them in the Day of Judgment, eis pagſvercy * 
f Martyr and Martyrdom; the one ſignifies a 


Thoughts afore hand UB faich 
t hour what ye ſhall ſpeak.) The 
as he did to Moſes, Exod. 4. 12. 
peech, and of a ſlow Tongue, v.11. Who 
all, faith Chriſt, be given you from 
but the Spirit of your Father 
from your ſelves only : 
| influence your Thoughts as to the Matter, 

and it ſhall influence your Tongues, 
Speech. This was verified in Stephen, 
and hath been eminently verified in a Multitude of 
Wwe may obſerve from hence, 
to be confined tothe Will and Aﬀedtions. 
upon our Words in the Service of God z not 
that we can conclude, that whatſoever Chriſtians, ſo ſpeak ether 
in their Confeſſions or other Dutzes, 
ere is ſuch an Influence, 


That 15, not you, 


the Gentiles ) as thoſe they ſhould meet 
his Aſcenſion ; yer not excluding what 
Jews; for what is faid about 


their Syna- 


eſpectally ſuch as have 
for ſuch Othces ; 


p, ir doth as well fignifie, In 
me thar think, that they had 
niſhed Ot- 


up.take no thought 
all be given you 


Thar the Influence of 
Ir hath 


is from ſuch immediate Afﬀi- 
cho” the Spirit in this, as 
ions, like the Wind, bloweth where and when it 


ll be hated of alkmen for my Names 
fake : but * he that endureth to the end , ſhall be 


[ For my Names ſake :| For 


Ir-15s neirher true 


' 1t of the 


He alſo 


| in our Seals, 


St M ATTH EW. Chap 


Glory of God, of, the Good of others, calls to v 

$ for \ 
Bur what may be judged in ſuch Caſes, is a rhweng rti 
Queſtion. Auguſtine to Honoratus ſpeaketh well in the Cate —_ 
ſters ought nor to fly raſhly, nor our of Cowardice, nor that . 


a flight, 


| might live elſewhere lazily; nor when their flight will betra 


the Church of God ; not where the Perſecution j 

where the Per{ecution is Particular, againſt ng qo; _ 
there will be enough lett for the Care of the Church in and 
abſence, and with the Conſent of the Church they may = 
this 15 00 large a Caſe ro be ſpoken to here : Eſpecially ly 
dering ( as I ſaid ) that I do not think that any lizhc, Cons 
juſtified trom this Texr, the Precept being particular {ur # wh 
Reaſons. | Uniil the Sm of Man come, ] There is a woos. = 
Variety of Interpreters Senſes of this Text, founded y rg 
various Comings of Chriſt, mentioned in Holy Wrir : = my 
already come in the Fleſh ; fo as ic ſpeaking of a time to G vn 
could nor be, meant of thar. Nor can ir be underſtood *73- 
Second Coming to Fudgment, for they have gone through the Citi 


of Iſrael long ago. Chriſt is therefore ſaid in Scripture to c:15 


; when he appeareth in ſome great Work of Providence , whether »f 


Fudgment or Mercy, This makes fome interpret ir of the De. 


. Strudtion of Feruſalem; in which Senſe ſome think the Coming if 


Chris is mentioned, Mat. 24. Some of the Reſurre&ion of Ch:i8 from 


; whence, m_ ſay, Chriſt's Epxha commenced. Others uriderſizng 
Efu 


fron of the Spirit in the day of Penteco# + This tc 
ground on oh. 14. 17, 18. where they think Chriſt's Com? 
promiſed, ver. 18. 1s the Coming of the Spirit promiſed. wer, %, 
Undoubtedly in the General , our Saviour means, till the T Ine , 
accompliſhed, when you mu$ leave Preaching to the Jews, 10 ; - 
the Gentiles ;, and my Kingdom ſhall be further extended than ir . 
at preſent: Which Diſpenſarion of God may, for ought | ;;.; ay 
be called the Coming of Chri8 ; being an eminent A& of Gee: 
Providence, by which Chrift was more ſhewed to the Worla ol 
his Kingdom further extended. ; 


24 The diſciple is not above his maſter, nor the 


ſervant * above his lord. 


25 It is enough for the diſcipl? that he be as his C: 
, maſter, and the ſervant as his Lord : If* they hare * 
called the maſter of the houſe || Beelzebub, hoy i. 
much more /hal/ they call thoſe of his houſhold > {6 


As much as if he had ſaid, Think nor much if you meet with * 


Perfecutions : I am your Lord and Maſter, you are my Sery 

and Houſhold; you have no reaſon to lock for hs wn 
from the World, than I your Lord meer with. It is Hy 
enough tor you, to be uſed as well as I am ; you know they have 
perſecuted me; they call me Beelzebub , ſaying, Thar I ca# w 
aevils by Beelzebub, the Prince of Devils. Why ſhould you expe 
berter ? Our Saviour uſed rhe ſame Argument, Lub. 6. 40. Brl- 
zebub was the Td of Ekron, 2 King. 1. 2. The word fi2niiie the 
the Lord of Flies : Either, becauſe they invocarecd his help azainſt 
the Flies, or (as others ſay ) the Name was in Derifion tothar 
Idol, given by the Fews to the Prince of the Devils, becauſe the 
places wherein they Sacrificed ro it were infeſted with Flies, which 
they ſay God's Temple at Feruſalem never was, notwithſtanding the 
Mulritude of Sacrifices which were there killed. Certain it i: 
they underſtood by it the Prince of Devils. ; 


26 Fear them not therefore : for there is nothing 
covered that ſhall not be revealed , and. hid, that 
{hall not be known. 


This is a Proverbial Speech uſed by our *aviour, upon more 
occaſions than this, Mar. 4. 22, Luk.8.17. aud 12. 2. As to hv 
preſent uſe of it; the Senſe is, Tho' my Goſpel be now covered 
and hid, yer it ſhall be revealed and made known : Or, Tho 
your Innocency be hid and covered, yet G-'d ſhall bring 
forth your Judgment as the Light , and your Righteouſnel 
as the Noon-day : Or, Tho' your Enemies Rage and Mi 
lice be hid, and their Vengeance ſeemeth ro ſleep, yer it ſhall 
be revealed. The firſt ſeemerh moſt probable, from what to 
loweth in the next Verſe , which he ſeemeth to ſpeak as a mians 
tO Its 


=p What I tell you in darkneſs, rhar ſpeak je 
in light : and what ye hear in the ear, zhat preact 


ye upon the houſe-tops. 

The Candle of the Goſpel, which God hath by 7n the 
Baptiﬆ and me, lighted up, is not to be hid : Tho” cheretore you 
have ir from me in private, yet do you publiſh ir ; I doas it were 
whiſper ic in your Ear by private Diſcourſes, and in a private 
Converſe; bur it ſhall be made as publick, as if ic were public 
to the greateſt advantage ; and do you contr:bure what you cal 
unto ir; do you publiſh my Goſpel , as ic were, upou che Howe: 
LOPS. 

28 And fear not them which kill the body, an 
are not able to kill rhe ſoul : bur rather fear hm 


which is able to deſtroy borh ſoul and body in hel. 
As I told you before, you will in the Publication of my 0 
ſp! meer with Oppoſition from Men. Now that it is Preact 
as it were in Darkneſs, and whiſpered in Men's Ears, there 15 1? 
great noiſe made in the World; but the Caſe will be orherwile, 
when it cometh to be publickly revealed and publiſhed up 
the Houfe-rops; but conſider, the Enemies can only kill the 
Bodies of my Diſciples : You have Souls as well as Bo: 
dies ; they have no Power over your Souls ; but 1- char hath 
ſent you to Preach, and called you to the Owning and Prife 
from of the Goſpel , hath a Power over your Souls , 4s well 3 
over your Bodies, and to Puniſh both in Hell. We have che 
ſame, Luk.12.4,5. There is nothing ſo effeual to drive Our ot 
our Hearts a ſlaviſh Fear of Man in the doing of our Dui) _ 
right Apprebenſian of the Power of God , begetting 4 Fea of him 


+a 


A Ara 
29 4 


# A # 
F 4* 
o 


þ- 'C ip 
£ : 7 Shs 


E100 oper bf 
Will ! 


a / B, Ft + R 
DDE 
Diſciple , 


y > 
him all 
ICaven. 

As this 
4 time (11 
lickly own 
Senrence, 
Miu Goa] 1 
tie fame c 
Oily there 
[2 Wi Oe fl, ! 
onty.d Boll 
Oniy, bug a 
and 1s Go! 
IO, LO. a 

For, (IO WW 

Cirilt, and 

ceny chem 

for were þ 

Txt mult } 

tor Peter d 


25 Fo: 


# his father. 


E 2 daugh 


Luke hath 


| 5 the Fews 
E 4 1t he were 
8 /rwe/; and ; 
& Pcriors ink 
8 ith Pe 
& I ould be, 
8 ceived, Ir is 
SE led, herrer firt, 
E great End of 
= Itlsputſo; 
&. Coming, Act 
"Th KE v. 
EU! Conſeque: 
Up) comins 
bs J = 
(4 Lhe phra 
Spyd, Taro 
- and Lyſts, and 
- ne 11 Rehi5 
= OT Chriſt's cop 
F Pr. 0s 2c1ed ot 
= Iven-e the 
- , - FOSIN M wii C 
; C of | WT OT M- 
h » Trl 'F,*1D 6 
be 21ers and. 
E: Men have to 7 
BE CMracins rhe 
3 Lord {cfus Cir 


b- 4" r ) Fi 24 
$ID we Lol Vs Ponem \t 
BY i.e. 


= F 4 fa i 

$94 «J Ang a4 

bovihold. 

PAL : 

Nt 0; tlie FH 
! ha: bur News 
| Ct ay reccrve L116 
-!t Feuds 
þ nd roger} 
; + Wit, Tits d 


Te Hethere y 
it, 


37 Herha 


IS M9 worth 


0315) 
al = 


Ia " 
ater mor 


M . 
«2 cemerh | 
a" Þete n 
n and 
GUT £91 


\/ ! I 5 
1 6] 
ws 8 | 


Jap. Xl. 


F 


4 


7 
| 1 
} 
= 
4 
" 
1: 
4 


TY. 
PL 


4>3 


b 
1 
's] 
bn 
, 
2 
4 


| 


E i rhwich Peace and Onion. 
® ic 3.ould be , if rhe Goſpel were Cordially and Univerſaily re- 
& ceived, Ir is impoſſible that a Syſtzm of Laws ſhould be compi- 
BZ lcd, he-rrer firred ro Humane Socicty, or conduceable to Peace, the 
> zrear End of it, than the Laws of the Goſpel are ; but Eventually 
© itispur ſoz nor was ſuch a Civi! Peace the End of Chri8's 
& Coming. Accidentally, through che Corruption of Men's Hearts, 


EIT "7 I 43 Sz 5 4 aaa wy 
ont on ee ES ERS ae - We. 
he. lars 5 : . WIS D n 
Py 4 : A; 


) 
= honihold 


»o Are not two ſparrows fold || for a farthing? 
And one of them thall nor fall on the ground with- 


7 ther. 
our your Fat | 
# * Bur the very hairs of your head are all 


'n 11.501 numbred. 


21 Fear y? not therefore, ye are of more value 


chip than many {Parrows. - * 


Boti2cs confifier : There 1s a Gcd that governeth the World, 


bot ind by his Providence 111tuencech and wartcheth over the moſt 
| 11 cut and unvaiuable Beings in it, and preferveth and uphold- 


+ 
A 40 


= chem ; it extender} to the very Mrs of your Head, and to 
1 $5.q4722, (ro of which are ſold ordinarily ror an Afſzrion, che 
2171 part Of 4 R0Nn Peny,) tacle jittle Birds fall not when they 
arc thor, withour tae NOrIce Of him who 1s your Heavenly Fa- 
tz; and he wil much mare regard even your Bodies, tor you 
ar or more value than many Sp4rrovs. Our Lord rhere, I. 4j- 
- 1%» Providence of Gad t9 extend to the m8t minute things ; and 
n+: £3 be reſtrained co chings 1a Heaven , or fome greater and 
n-.r2 noble Creatures. 2. He teacheth his Diſciples to take Courage 
- » th: Confiteratioa of it; as being aſſured, rhar their greateſt 
"71-125 ould nor be able to ſteal, or wreſt chem our of God's 
Wis, bur i chey thould die in their Teſtimony, 1c ſhould be 
by Gd © orderilige 


{ qo 
38 


22 Whoſoever therefore ſhall confeſs me before 
men. him will I contels allo betore my Father which 
i5 110 heaven. 

22 * But whoſoever {hall deny me before men, 
him alſo will I deny betore my Father which is in 
ACaVeln. | x 

As this isa time for you publickly ro own me, fo chere will be 
time (in the Day of Judgment) for me to confels, and pub- 
icily 090 you before the Angels of Goa, (which Luke adderh ro this 
wnrence, Lub. 12.18.) As Men'deal wich me in this Life, fo 1 
(hilt d-2l with rhem 1n thac Day. Our Saviour ſpeaketh much 
tie me thing, as repeated by Hzrk, chap. 8.33. and Luk. g. 26. 
oaiy there, inſtead of Whrſoever ſhall deny me ;, 1t 18, Whoſoever 
(r..l be ajh med of me, and my Words. Chriit requirerh of us nor 
on; a Believing on him, bur an External Profeſſim : Nor that 
only, bu a Confofſim of him, which f13nineth a Protefſion of him 
and his Goſpel, in the Fice of Oppoſition and Enemies; ſee Rom. 
19. 10. 2 Tim. 2, 12. It is dangerous etcher through Shame or 
Fi, © withhold our publick O:vning and Acknowledgment of 
Ciriſt, and his Truths, when we are called to ir, much more to 
deny chem : But che Guile is greater, when it 1s through Shame; 
fir where Fear is the Cute, the Temptation is more high. This 
Txt muſt b8 underſtood of, tho!e who perfiſt in ſuch Denial ; 
tor Peter denied his Maſter, yer was graciouſly , upon his Re- 
jt arcs, received by him. 

24 Think not that I am come to ſend peace on the 
earth : I came not to ſend peace, but a ſword. 

; ForT am come to ſer a man at variance againſt 


vr > 


OF 
e 


\ 
4 
1 
% 


E his tather, and the daughter againſt ter mother, and 
# the daughter-in-law againſt ker mother-in-law. 


Like hath much the ſame with the 34 Verſe, Chap. 12. ver, 49. 


| As the Fews were much miſtaken 1n their Notion of rhe Meſſt:h, 
| a5 if he were to be a Temporal Prince, to reſtore the Kingdom to 


[:2l; and as the Kingdom, fo a Peaceful Kingdom : S9 many 
Perfors « iink ſtill, char where true Religion comes, there muſt be 
And indeed ſo ir ſhould be ; and fo 


te Conſequent of Chriſt's coming into the World, and of his 
Gp2) comiag into, and prevatling in any parc of the World, 1s 
(43 Lhe paraferh it) rather Diviſim , which 1s here called a 
Swyd, Tarouch Men's Fondneſs of their Ilatry, Superſtition 
and Lyſis, and Madneſs on rhem, their Imparience of being our- 
cine it Reli»ion, and Righreouſneſs of Converſation, the Event 
or Chnr:ft's coming was Divifion, Wars, Variances, like the Times 
Prophecied of by Micahchap.7. 6. God either ſtirring up Wars to 


= Tevenze tie Contempt of the Goſpel , (as it happened to the 


DN, 


: /-5,) or Men riking up Arms, to compel all others to their 


EB 1')! rigs and Superſtitions. And that Natural Antipachy which 


> Men have to linefs, ſetting them at Variance with choſe who 


E enricinz the Goſpel, love a Life as becometh the Goſpel of rhe 


Lord Fefus Chriſt, worketh fo far, as Men will have no reſpe& 


== 1207 ncureſt Relations, 
4 


"Io. 


And a * man's foes hal! be they of his own 


S. % 
i\te 


Nato the Hhyhold of Faith, which ſhewerh, thar it is not the 


E ©192/, bur 3/21's Corruptions, Which cauſerh Diviſion. Thoſe who 


Truly reccive tne Goſpel, agree well enough, ar leaſt break nor out 

[aro Open Feuds; buc rhe Tye of no Natural or Moral Relations, 
Wil hojd tozerher the Seed of the Woman, and the Seed of the 

| Serpent, Tn;s dorh not always happen , bur very ordinarily; and 
« (re rechere was need that Chritt ſhould forewarg his Diſciples 
L It, 

37 Hethatloveth father or mother more than me. 
0 not worthy of me : * and he that loveth ſon or 
©472er more than me, 1s not worthy of me. 

L:2 7emeth ro ſpeak higher, chap. 14. 26. If any Man come 


* = unit nite wt his Either and Mother, and Wife and Children, 
D g ac hon nd Sifters, yea, and his own Life alſo, he cannot be my 
; 4epre bur ne Senſe 18 the fame; for by Hatred there, is only 


\/ 
SF 
V ws ils 


S MATTHE ir, 


meanr Diſplicercy, and a i©:4n ; them in his Eſteem below Chriſt, 
and his Commands, Chr'tt : <5 nor command cr encouraze wane 
of Natural Aﬀect.on, bur » 11 by Ents Szying, He rcducerh ir to 
Order, and jh-weri. taur our firſt Love and Homace 1s due oo 
God; and where we cannot ſhew what Live and Aﬀetims our 
Father, or Mother, or Son, or Daughter call tor, without FNLINg 117 
that Duty which we owe unto God, or Vivlacing fome Divine Pre- 
cepr, we muſt acknowled ze our Heavenly Farther, even by difohov- 
ing our Earthly Parents, Inftcad ot, Is mt wirthy of wo, Lids 
ſaich, Cannot be my Diſciple, which expounderh this Term : He is 
not worthy of my Favour, ot the Name of my Diſcip!c, or the 
Reward I intend my Diſciples. 


38 *And he that raketh not his croſs, and fol- 
loweth after me, is nor worthy of me. 


We have much the fame, Matth. 16. 24. Mar8.34. L1b,g.22. 
Ir 15 nor he that makerh nor,bur he thir rabeth not hy Crols;, thac 
5, he that doth nor willingly, and chearfully, and pariently bear, 
and undergo choſe Trials and Affictions, and Pertecutions, 
which God in the way of his Providence ſhall lay upon him, and 
bring him into for my ſake, and my Go/pe!, is nor worthy of rhe 
Name crReward of my Diſciples. Our Saviour calls all ſuch Tri.!s, 
T2 Crs; either :vich reterence co rhe Roman laſt Puniſhment, by 
Crucifying, or Signifying whar Death he thould die, and with re- 
tcrence to his own Croſs, 

39 * Hz rhar findeth his 1ife;ſhall loſe it: and he 
thar loſeth his life tor my ſake, ſhall tind ir. 

fon, chap. 10.25, giveth us a Commentary upon theſe Words, 
thus : He that loveth his Life, ſhall loſe it ;, and he that hateth 41s 
Life in this Wirld, ſhall keep it unto Life Eternal. Ke, in this Text, 
is ſaid to find his Life , who thinks that he hath tound ; tha t», 
ſaved ic; who is fo much in love wich his Life, thar racker chan 
he will loſe ir, he will loſe Gcd's favour; deny the Lord cha: 
boushr him; deny the moſt Fundamental Truths of the Grjpe!. 
The Man thar doth thus ( faith Chriſt) ſhall loſe ir : Poſſibly he 
ſhall nor obtain rhe End he aimeth ar here; bur if he doth, he 
ſhall loſe Erernal Life. When, on the contrary, he that is Va- 
lianc for the Truth, ſhall ſometimes be preferved, norwichſtand- 
nz his Enemies rage ; bur it chis happens nor, yer he ſhall have 
Life Eternal, his Mhrtality ſhail be ſwail»wed up in Life. 

40 * Hethat receiveth you, receiveth me: and he 
that receiveth me, receiveth him that ſent me. 

41 * He that receiveth a propher in the name of 
a prophet , thall receive a prophet's reward : and 
he that receiveth a righteous man in the -name of a 
righteous man,{hall receive a righteous man's reward. 


42 * And wholoever ſhall give to drink to one of *Ch. 25.40 


theſe little ones, a cup of cold water only, in thz 
name ot a diſciple, verily 1 fay unto you, he ſhall in 
no wile loſ2 his reward. 


He that receiveth you, recerveth me, &, We have the ſame, 
Luk. 10.16, only there it is, He that heareth you, hearerh me : 
and there is added , And he that deſpijeth you, deſpiſeth me; and 
he that deſpiſeth me, deſpiſeth him th.:t jent me : In Joh. 13. 20. 1c 
is, Verily, verily T ſay unto you, He that recerveth whomever T ſend, 
receiveth me; and he that receiveth me, receiveth him that ſent me. 
As great Princes account what Favour is ſhewn to their Embal- 
ſadors , who repreſent their Perſons, ſhewn unto chemtelves; 
and wharſoever-Indignities or Affronrts are done unto them, as 
done to themſelves, ſo dorh Chrift. Receiving is a general Term, 
and capable of a large Interpretation. That Hearing 1s one Branch 
of 1t, Luke tells us. The Scope of the Context, and tic Words 
chat follow, do maniteſt that a givin Entertainment to them in 
their Houſes, 15 another thing here meant. There 13anorher more 
inward receiving of their Do&rire by F:iith and Love, to which 
undoubtedly there will be a great Reward ; bur wherlier it be 
here intended , I doubr. Our Saviour was ſending the Twelve 
our; hc had commanded them to take with them nov G91, Silver, 
nor Braſs, no Scrip, &c. Bur when they came 1nto any City, 
ro enquire who there were 1n that City, who were worthy Men, 
Favourers to the Goſpel , and ready to entertain Strangers, and 
to go to their Houſe or Hovſes , faluting them, and to abide 
there till hey left the place; he turnifherh chem here as it were 
with a Ticket, or Bill of Exchange. He gives them an aflurance, 
Thar whatſoever kindneſs ſhould be done to chem, he would 
account ir as done to himſelf. - And further hach atlured both 
chem, and all the World, Thar if any ſhould come to chem ro 
reveal the Will of God, ( for that che Term Prophet tigninerh,) 
it chey give him an Entertainment upon chat accounc,they ſhould 
be rewarded. Whar is here meant by the Term , a Prophet's 
Reward, 1s variouſly gueſſed : Wherner it be, 1, The Reward 
which God hath appointed for ſuch as entertain his Prophets, 
2. Or ſuch a Reward as tuch a Prophet fhall himſelf receive : 
Or, 3. The Reward which the Prophet will give him or them, 


viz. Prayers and In/tru&im. That which appears ro me moſt pro- 


bable, is, that no more is meant than a Liberal Reward : For luch 
ſhall be the Reward of choſe who curn many to Ajghteouſneſs, 
Dan. 12. 3. Thoſe words | In the Name of a Prophet | are both 
excluſive of thoſe from che Benefit of this Promiſe, wi recerve 
and entertain the Miniſters of the Grſp2! upon any orher account 
than this, Thar they are the Lord's Prophets; and allo encoura- 
ging to thoſe who may diſcern they have been miſtaken in their 
ARts of Charity of this Nature ; it they have been fincere 1n 
their Deſzzns and Adions, they ſhall nct loſe their Reward, tho” 
the pretended Prophet, fo entercained, prove but an DImpoftor. | And 
whſnever ſhall give to one of theſe little ones a Cup of cold Water 
only, in the Name of a Diſciple, he ſhall not loſe his Reward, | Chriſt 
will not only reward thoſe who ſhew love co his Prophets, bur 
thoſe who ſhew kindneſs to his Members, whom the World counts 
Concemprible, and calleth /irtle mes + Ner fhall thoſe only be 
rewarded , who give them great Entertainments, and make them 

Ccc great 


Chap. XI. 


Lu, 14.27 


Lu, 17. 22+ 


* Ch.18: 5- 


*71 Kin.27. 
10.X 18.4: 
2K1n8.4-8. 


Marg. 41- 


E3z 


_ _ ” N 
. —_— _- * 
Y Cor ET INES — 
T ="X7 E. x 
FS af? 


t- ; 
q b. . 
t 
\» oy . 
«1 ' 2; 
UT 
4 Fl um : 
+ v1 , 
1H q 
i 43 
| FRatlk-b 
? þ | B14 
Fl, : 4 
"a 
. . 0 . 
$- 3-4 n . 
6. of i |'f ' 
* i 4 
2. | | ? . ' XN 
1 'p. q 4 $43 4 " 
* > AF; x 
h ' * J o , 4b ? 4 | 
«. ' : - 
8TH f 
«0 1 
8 : 3 
Fl Ph 
; 
3 4h £4 41: 
Kit 7 
vs 


do o - 
_— 
= 
” 


bh. th, x - - 
per a $5. Ve 
7 gn - : os $0 
oo l = © — 2 n 
r q ae... _ . - 
i= ="ACAE FAINT 2 ſe YE op: >” LL ce” - MC 
- ut _ ; » x ”_ '$ 
2+ 3 LIES Fas St Þ © 'Þ *o — us 
=_ O $4 T _ 
bo. < a> + - 


© : bi 
s o 
TY: + 
Lo D 
: 
WC «LB > ES We” 
E Zn EEE.” 
: mm -—- . _ 
4 3 4 - = »*. 
__ woe AY 24-4 ors 


GWE 
— — - us 


4 

- 

ves 
"IF 
£ 
o 

. 

#5 


256-58 


- 
+ 


Chap. XP. 


ay» 
- 


orear Preſents; but (if it be proportionable to what they are able 
todo) cho” it be a kindnefs of the moſt minute Confiderarion,bur 
a Cup of cold Water, they ſhall be rewarded. God rewards the 
Love we ſhew to him, and rhe good Aﬀions that flow from 1t. 
Here are three Pertons mentioned ; for whoſe Entertainment and 
Rec2dtim , God hath provided in this Promiſe , A Prophet ;, 4 
Rico Han; a Litile One » And a threefold Reward pro- 
mittd ; The Reware of. a Prophet; The Reward of a Righteous Man, 
and by Reward. How to diſtinguiſh che Righteous Man, and the 
Little One, 1 cannot tell; unleſs we underſtand by the Righteous 
An, one more perfet, more eminent in Holineſs; and by the 
Little One, one thar is ſincere, tho? we cannot judge him ſo grown 
in Grace, and the Knowledge of Chriſt. I ſhould underſtand no 
more by the threefold Rewards , than God's more particular 
Value for his Miniſters, and for ſuch as are more perfett in 
Holineſs, While, in the mean time, he will not break the bruiſed 
Keed, nor quench the ſimaking Flax; and that every one ſhall be 
rewarded according to his Works ; which ſhall not be meaſured 


by rhe quantiry of the Gitt, bur by the Obedience, and Afettion, | 


and Ability of the Giver Zuk. 21. 2, 3. Heb. 6. IC» 


CHAP. 


Zbn in Priſon ſendeth two Diſciples to Chris « HK Anſwer to them, 

" proving himſelf the Meſſi.th, 1—6. His glorious Teſtimony of Fohn, 
7—15. #: uphraideth the Jews of Unbelief : ToreatnetÞ Chira- 
zin, Bethſcaid.: aud Capernaum with intolerable Fudgments for their 
Unfruitf:Ineſt, 16—24. Praiſeth his Father, that it was his 
gvd pleaſure t» reveal hidden things to Babes, 25—27- He in- 
witeth wearied and heavy-laden Sinners to him, for eaſe and refreſh- 
ment, 28—30. 


J A N D it came to paſs, when Jeſus had made 
an end of commanding histwelve diſciples,he 


departed thence to teachand to preach in ther cities. 

We never find our Saviour idle , bur continually going up 
and down doing good ; and we find him moſt intent upon 
Preaching and Teaching ; which doubtleſs is the great Work of 
the Miniſters of the Goſpel - Of whar Quality ſoever they be, 
rhey can prerend to no higher chan Chriſt's : Nor did our Sa- 
viour think ir enough to ſend others in his ſtead, as his Curates, he 
went himſelf, Lube norerh, chap. 10. 1. that he ſent the Seventy, 
po by two into every City, whither himſelf was to follow; ſo, as 


it ſeems , hedid nor judge ir enough thar one Proclamarion of 


the Goſpel ſhould be made to them. For thoſe that think chere 
is a Dittin&tion to be made berwixt Preaching and Teaching , xn- 
py arecy and Jsouey, they may learn from this Text, that they 
are both the Works of Chriſt's Miniſters, if chey be bound to 
rake Example trom their Maſter, and nor think rhe Servant 1s 
above his Lord. Tkoſe thac undervalue Preaching, as the leaſt part 
of the Miniſterial Work, do both forger this Text, and what Paul 
ſaid, Thar Chriſt ſent him not to Baptize, but to Preach the Goſpel ; 
rhar is, not ſo much to Baptize, as to Preach. If an think that 
People are now fo inſtrutted , thar there 1s no uch need of 
Preaching, they ſhould do well to queſtion their People a little, 
and rhey may diſcover their own great Miſtakes. Beſides , that 
Expzricnce reacheth us, that choſe who are beſt inſtrufted, are 
moſt defirous of that which deſerverh the Name of Preaching : 
Which lets us know, that there is yer ſomething further to be 
known ; or thar we had need have our Remembrance ſtirred 
up, cr at leaft our Afﬀettions quickned. 


2 Now when John had heard in the priſon the 


works of Chrift, he ſent two of his diſciples, 
2 And faid unto him , Art thou he that ſhould 


come? or do we look for another ? 


The inſtance -of this Text alone, is enough ro convince the 
obſerving Reader of Holy Writ, that the Evangelifts do not fer 
dovn all things in that Order as they were done. We have 
heard nothing before of Fohn's being caſt into Priſon in this 
G1jp:1; nor do we hear any thing here of rhe Story of it, till 
Matth. 14.6. when our Evangeliſt occaftonally relaterh it ſome- 
thiaz largely. He here tells us of ſomething done during his 
Impriſonment, viz. his ſending two of his Diſciples to Chri$, to 
be {arisfied, whether he was the promiſed Meſſias, or they muſt look 
for another. Zuke reports the ſame thing, chap. 7. ver. 19, Could 
he that was ſent bekore Chriſt to prepare his way, and that had 
Bartized him, and ſeen the Spirit deſcending on him, and heard the 
Voice from Keaven, ſaying , This is my beloved Son, in whom 
7 am wel pleaſed , and who had ſhewed Chriſt to his Diſciples, 


Foh. 1.29, 30, ZI. Cc. doubt whether he was the Meſſtah 2 Un- } 


doubredly no; bur John ſaw, how ſome of his Diſciples, either 
etvying for his fake, as Joh. 3. 26. or elſe inclinable to the Come 
mon Errcr of the Jews about the Meſſiah, were fomerhing ſhaken 
with the Clamours of the Scribes and Phariſees; ( who were far 
more favourable to John, than ro Chris.) Thar rhey mighr be 
ſarisfkcd from their own ſight of the Works of Chriſt, he a little 
beivre his Death ſenderh chem to Chriſt on this Errand , | Art 
Zhou he who (h:uld come 2] (in the Greek, who is coming, ) Which 
lets us knaw rhe fall ExpeRtation the Jews generally had art that 
time of a Meſſizs coming. The defire only to be ſatisfied whether 
Criſt was he. 

4 Jeſus anſwered, and ſaid unto them, Go, and 
ihew John again thoſe things which ye do hear, and 

CTs 

- * The blind receive their ſight, and the lame 
walk, the lepers are cleanſed, and the deaf hear, the 
dead are raiſed up, and the poor have the goſpel 
preached unto ther. 

6 And bleſſed is he whoſoever ſhall not be of- 
f-ndcd in me. 


St M ATTHE W. 


We muſt imagine theſe Diſciples of 7ohn 
Chriſt ſome time , and to have ſeen him work ſome of the, 
Miracles, and to have heard him Preach, and ſeen the —_ 6 
ceſs of his Miniſtry, and chen to have left him with this we wag 


Chap Nj hap 


fo have Ttaid with [ 


Luke therefore addetli , chap. 7. 21. And in that ſame þ 
cured many of their Infirmities, and Plagues, and of Evil "Ou < 
unto) many that were Blind , he gave ſizht. Then he repeaterh wg : 
Anſwer which we have here, in which our Saviour refer 2 | 1 
unto his Works, as ſufficiently reſtifying of him, F2þ.5, 35 _ 
Io. 25, 37,38. We read not that theſe Diſciples fi OS 
Perſon raiſed whilſt they were with Chriſt; bur ir —_— 
from Lub. 7. 18, gyc. that tae Report of ſuch a Miracle Was » 
occafion of their coming to Chriſt, The Quelition is, Huy = 
fighr of theſe things done by our Saviour, could be 4 lucie x 
Argument to confirm to them that he was the Meſſias 2 ; I 
cially conſidering that his Apoſtles did the fame things. 4j __ 
x. It was Prophefied by T/aiah , chap. 35. 4, $, 6. that vn. 
God. ſhould come to ſave them, the Eyes of the Blind ſhould be a 
and the Ears of the Deaf unſtopped; then ſhall the Lame PRs : 
as an Hart, and the Tongue of the Dumb fing : And, Ja. 61, 1 Fu 
the Meſſiah ſhould Preach Good Tidings ta the Meek ,, thar _ yg 
Poor, Luk. 4.18. which Chriſt, v.21, applied to himſelf. $9 t 1 
the fulfilling of theſe Promites argued, thar che effi was __ 
and no other was to be looked tor, whether theie chinss wr) 
done by him, or by his Diſciples. 2. The Diſcifles as ye $4 
done no ſuch things, 1o as his doing of them plainly Evider. 
ced his Divine Power ; the others did them bur as 1: Ditciples 
by his Power and Authority. 3. Ir is more than probable, 7;.; 
when the Diſciples did them , they uſed ſome ſuch Firm . & Per : 
uſed, Ads 3. 6. In the Name of Feſus Chrif of N.:zaveth, pe ae 
walk: We find Peter, v, 12, very wary, that the People thug , 
not miſtake in rhinking , they did it by rheir own Power or 14g);. i _- 


parc, 
this 1 
Cur 42; 
Prep. 


ſicrs 


7.2, Al 
none g 
H2UUEN, 
tar by 
Preacty 

Fat 1s, 
come : 
Sins, 4r 


neſs. | And the Poor have the Goſpel Preached to them.) Gr. 5.) / 
. 7 . : T2 FOIL and dec! 
$vayaltoy]a, Which may be Tranflared, The Pow Pre < 
Goſpel in an Attive Senſe; as the word is uſed, Lyb, 2.10, «©» ti I2 
Poor are Goſpelized, taking the word in a Paſſive Senſe, a: /23,,,, sf. DOW, th 
I Pet. 1. 25. and 4. 6. In the Paſſive Senie jr may be under(t%0) © the what 
eicher of a 'more External Reception of the Goſpel upon Preach. "** A . ; 
ing; or of a more Internal Reception of the Goſpel by Faith, [4 _ p £ op 
all Senſes ir was crue; of the times of the Meſſiah, the p:;; ©... ils 'S 
- Veg e 


preached the Goſpel : Nor was this a mean Evidence that the 3/4, 
was come, to fee a few poor Fiſher-men, at his Call leaving th.ir 
Nets and their Friends, and following one, calling them to Prezcy 
a new Dodrine to the World. 2. The Poor had the Goſp:! prowh- 
ed ft) them: Nor was this a leſs Evidence of Chriſt ct be tie 
Meſrah, conſidering the Prophecy, 1/z. 61.1. and the conremyc of 


Ardor an 
lie G "{pel 
a.m of C/ 
Glory, Th 
2 Detire af 
renly thing 


A 
& 4 


the Poor amongſt the Fews, Foh. 7.49. But citat the P2or, who ad dat 

commonly are the more ignorant and rude ſort of Peopjie, thould war Fn 

vouchſafe to hear the Goſpel, and be turned into the /iþ:r:3 f paar — 
the Goſpel upon Chriſt's Preaching ro them, rhis was yet an Licher and FL ang 
Evidence. Many by Poor, underſtand the Poor in Spirir. The Di Fa 
binding up of broken Hearts, and bringing Glad Tidings to Saul cold Al ts 
ſadded on- Spiritual Accounts , is a great Effet of rhe Divine TO 
Power. Ir followeth, [ And bleſſed is he wha ſhall mt be fent1 3 12 For 
in me. | Ir is not improbable that our Saviour kere retl-2 & Unti] ſohr 
the Diſciples of Fohn, who our of a great Honour for their iz SF Irisnow 


Souls of Pe 
underſtocd | 
the Prophets, 
Ume ban ri 
Pocrs DEL; & 
wich his 10g 
under I'ypes ; 
Men came to 
tile dalvation 
4th Revelatir 
14 And 
Was tor to « 
| God had ro! 
Eli. the Prop 
the Lord. And. 
and the Hearts 
and mite the 
Ue Bapti$F, as 
5 Connrmed b' 
WilCh laſt Texj 
that F!; x5 ſhoul 
Ut they looke 
Meant no more 
one m the Spirit 
Who ſhould non 
aty,than Elias 
"MN Was that F 
. 14 *Heth 
$1, Itis an Epiphy 
= (92% by St, bn 
# Tull Attention 
| Cing he had reve, 
= Vat he had ſaid; 
only of ſuch, who 
Pen t9 receiye 
Z Iecerye 
&rea Conecrnme 
ld 5pene 
7.16, PR | 
16 But whe 
l l like unto 
| Cling to their 


Fer , took many occaſions to be offended at Chriſt : One til: 
becauſe he and bis Diſciples, did not Fa$8# fo often , as ihey and ite 
Phariſees; as chap. 9. 14. Another while: becauſe fo mar, Fl 
lowed him, oh. 3.26. Burt the Words ſpoken. have a furher 
reference than tro Fo-n's Diſciples. The Lord Jeſus and his Dv- 
arine are to many a Stone of Stumbling, and a Rock of Offence 
acccording to the Prophecy, 1/a. 8. 14. and 28.16. Zuk.2,24, fon, 
9.33. I Cor.1.23. I Pet.2.6. The Fews ſtumbled 'at the mean- 
neſs of his Perſon and Parentage , and the mcarneſs of his Fol- 
lowers. The Gentiles nor at theſe things only, bur his Iznom: 
nious Death. Ar this day many ſtumble at the ſublimer:/? and 
rinefs of his Do&rine,&&. Chriſt ſpeaks here with refere:ce to 
all, and pronounceth that Man a Bl:ſſed Man,what age ſo tabe (f- 
fence at nothing ; whether reſpe&ing his Perfon, his Life, cr | 
Death, his DoEtine, or his Followers ; as to deter, or iſco: 
him from embracing him, and believing in him as the Saviour 
loſt Sinners, thar ſhall by Faith receive him. 


7 And as they departed,Jeſus began to ſay untoth: 
multitudes concerning John, What went ye our int 
the wilderneſs to ſee? A reed ſhaken with the wind! 

8 But what went ye out for to ſee? A ml 
cloathed in ſoft raiment 2 Behold, they that wel! 
ſott cloathing, are in kings houſes. 

9 But what went ye our for to ſee? A prophet: 
Yea, I fay unto you , and more than a prophet. 

Luke repeating the ſame Story, chap.7.24,25. inſtead of 7 boy ta 
are clathed in ſoft raiment; ſaith, They that are gorgeouſl apparel 
and live delicately, are in hings houſes. Our Savicur here GO 
racirly imply, Thar che Miniſters cf the Goſpel ſhould neither x 
uncertain, and unconſtant Men ; nor yer delicare Men, affecirs 
ſplendid Apparel, or delicate Diet, but minding cheir great 
viz. The Revelation of the Will of God. Bur the Scope of Bf PF 
ſent Speech here was to confirm the Mulritude 10 — 
Opinion of Fohn,and to keep them from being ſcandalzer, 
altering their Opinion of him, becauſe he was now 10 Pr] * 
chap.1 4.5. and 21.26, All Men held John as a Prophet. You _ 
(faich our Saviour)into the Wilderneſs co hear 0%" ane ; c 
did not go our to ſee ſome idle Light-man, fuch as 4 Recd _ 
wich the Wind : Nor yer to ſee a Man cloathied Gorgeoully,\" 
Wilderneſs is no place for ſach Perſons, they are to be i0une | 


mil 


- r One 
the Courts and Palaces of Princes,) you went out 7 hear Of 5 es 
revealing the Will of God to you: Nor did you M! — ; has nd ſay 
was a Prophet; not that Propher of which 2://es ſpake, _ wi v7 OE dance 
bur a Prophet; yea, and more than a _— cone eu Je have nor [ 

ghr y 4 hers ever could reac yr » , 
taught you, what none of che Prophet Jar I ſhould co: Vol. IL, 


1, the Meſſas am come ; they could only tell you, t! 10 £5 


hap- XL. 


\o For this is he of whom 1t is written, Behold 
; {nd my meſſenger before thy-tace, which ſhall 


{ 
prepare thy Way betore thee. | 
11 Verily I fay unto you , Among them that are 
tr of women , there hath not ariſen a greater than 
fokn che Baptiſt: notwirhftanding he rhar is leaſt in 
112 kingdom of heaven, is greater rhan he, = 
* Sr. Like hath the fame, ch»p, 7. 27, 28. only he faith , There 
Þ.rh mt ariſen 4 greater Prophet t.an Form the Baptidt, Ic was 
wricgen , th. 3- 1» Behold IT will jend my Mejenger before my face, 
ma te (pail prepare Fe way veJore me < And the Lord, whom you 
fe. frall ſradenly come to his Temple , even the Meſſenger of the 
Tenant, whom you delight in. Behold he ſhatl come, jaith the Lord 
f Hits, The latter part Was a Prophecy of Christ , che former 
p arc, a Prophecy of 7-hn ene Baprist 5 and applied co hum not 1n 
this Text only, but, Iz I. 2. Lub, 1.75, and 7.27, Chriſt 1s fer 
our 5 2 Zrear Prince, who ſends his Harbingers before him ro 
prepare us Wey 3 and by Z9bn's Preaching we may learn the Mini- 
Pers Duty, who are 0 piepare Chris's Way ro Peoples Souls; 
2. To Preach Repent.mce and Faith in Christ, | Verily T jay unto 
46, Among 185/C that are barn of Women , there hath not ariſen a 
1£i6r4] thar is, ( as Like expounds it) 4 greater Prophet : 
/.2. Amongſt all the Prophets of the O!d Tell.yment, God raiſed up 
nune grearer than Fohn. | But he tht 1s least in the Kined 1m of 
#.ven, is greater than he. | Mr. Caſvin, and many ochers chunk, 
"zr by this Phrate js ro be underftocd,thc Jeatt of thote who thall 
Preach the Goſpel atrer my Reſurrection, will be greater than he; 
raar is, as to their Do@rine, ohh could only declare me to be 
came: They ſhall Preach me, as having died tor my People's 
| Sins, and rifen again tor their Juſtiacarion , Rom, 4. 25. The 
; be:rh, and the Reſurredion of Chriit, were indeed great Points of 
the G:/p:1, which Fobn could only Prophetic of, not Preach 0j, 
4nd declare us things in his time accompliſhed. 
| i2 And from the days of John the Baptiſt until 
5 :;- 00W, the kingdom of heaven || ſuftererh violence, an 
bc the violent take it by force *. 
#:: As 7-hn Bapti$f wasa great Man, fo the Lord hath owned him 
HH: a: ſuch , giving ſuch a Succeſs ro his Miniſtry, chart ever tince he 
#7: hezan the Courſe of it, Men have been carried on with a grear 
Ki. Aardor and Heat, in hearing and receiving the Goſpel, which 15 
rie Goſpel of rhe Kingdim, and bringerh Men into the King- 
im of Chi amongſt Men, and ar laſt to the Kingdom of 
Glory, The Hears of Men and Women have been inflamed with 
2 Defire after the knowledzaand obtaining of Heaven, and Hea- 
venly things: They are zrear Perſons whom God chus cwneth 
and chofſz whom che Lord thus owneth, are ordinarily fuch as 
have ſome Meaſures of che Spirit of this firit Goſpel- Miniſtry ; 
making che Great Things of God the matrer of their Difcourte, 
and doins their Work with a Serioutnets, Zea!, and Fervor ficted 
” wit, [The violent take it by force :] They are nor lazy Withes, or | 
cold Endeavours, that will bring Men co Heaven. 

12 For all the prophets, and the law prophecied 
util John. 

ic 15 no wonder, that there was ſuch an Heat kindled in the 
Sauls of People, upon 7ohn the Baptifs coming; tor they 
underſtocd c ar Chriſt rypified in the Law, and only foreroid by 
the Prophets, was now come. So as the Ceremmmial Law from his 
vme bL2zan ro die, and ul che Prophecies of Chriſt in the Pro- 
}::rs 26.4% Then to have tneir Complement, Fon ſhewed them 
wich his einger, him who betcre had been only darkly revealed 
© under Types and Figures, and in the Prophecies of the Prophets : 
& Men came to ſee that they had nor hoped, or waited in vain for 
= the Salvation of Tjrael. { Propheſied, ). in this Verſe, ſignifies, made 
E 4gah Revelations of Chris, and the Kingdom of Heaven. 

14 And if ye will receive z7, this is Elias which 
was tor to come. 

God had told the Jews, Mal. 4, 5, 5. that He would ſend them 
Einih the Prophet, before the coming of the great and dreadful day of 
the Ligd. And he ſhall turn the Hearts of the Fathers to the Children, 
and the Hearts of the Children to the Fathers ; leSt (ſaith he) I come 
and {mite the Earth with a Curſe. This Prophecy related ro John 
me Baptist, as our Saviour here teacherh us; 1o, Luk. I. 17. it 
is conarmed by the Angel co Zachariah, and Mar. 9.11. From 
wich laſt Texr ir appeareti:, that the Scribes had a Tradition, 
that E/;z5 ſhould come before rhe Meſſiah. Their miſtake was, 
Ur thcy looked for an Elias to come in Perſon , when as God 
meant no more ( as the Angel expoundeth ir, Luk. 1. 17.) than 
one in the Spirit and Power of Elias, as bold and free a Preacher, 
Who ſhould no more fear the Face of Men, in the diſcharge of his 
Dury,than £745 did : (Saith our Saviour) if you will believe it, this 
 J::nwas that Elias Prophefied of by Malachy. 
as. 14 * He that hath ears to hear, let him hear. 

13, It is an Epiphinema cr Concluſion ofcen uſed by our Saviour» 

& (ud by Sr. 75bn inthe Revelation ) quickening up the Hearers to 

» Juſt Atrencion to, and, belief of, what in the Doctrine prece- 

| Cing he had revealed ro them : Intimaring that he knew, that 

= Vaat he had faid-would not be entertained, or believed of all, bur 
only of ſuch, whote Ears and Hearcs God had opened, or ſhould 
open t9 receive Spiritual Myſteries, Bur ic was a matter of 
+rcat Concernment ; he therefore calls upon choſe, whoſe Ears 

> &d hid opened to attend ir: So chap. 13. 9,43» Mar.4.9. and 
7.16. Lub.s, 8. 


16 But whereunto ſhall I liken this generation ? 
I is like unto children ſitting in the markets, and 
| Cling to their fellows. 
17 And ſaying, We have piped unto you, and ye 
ae not danced ; we have mourned unto you, and 
ye tave not lamented. 
Vol, Il, 


OUS ROT III OS OOO ORE 7 LORIE 


» 


4 


ee; « 


dt MM ATTHEIW 
| 


Lube telling to us the ſame Hiſtory, chap, 7. v. 31, 32, 32, 34, 
35- Prefacerh ir thus; v.29,30. And all the Perle thar beard Din, 
and the Publicanes juſtified God, being Baptized with the Baptiſm 6 f 
Fohn : But the Phariſees and the Lawy:rs rejzted the Cruntel of 
God again$ themſelves, being not Baptized of hin. Which lerreth 
us know , thar our 'Saviour by the tern; { this Generctinn | here 
doth nor mean all the People of that Generation + Bur this Pha- 
11/2es and the Lawyers, whom nothing could a'jure or per{ivade 
to the recetving ot Jeſus Chriſt, neither the M; witry and Exam- 
ple of F-bn, nor yer his own "reaching and Ex:mple : Kor the 
Vecple and the Pudblicans, juſtified the Words of Cirift, which he 
had ſpoken in Commendation of 7-hn, and ere B:piized of 
him, bur the Phariſces 4nd Lawyers did nor believe, nor would 
be Baptized of him. Theſe cur Saviour likens ro a Company ot. 
lullen Children, whom cheir Fellows could nor perſwade any way 
ro a Compliance with them : It they Piped, rhey would noc 
Dance; it they Sang ro them ſome mourn! ul Sonzs, neither would 
they be Aﬀected with them, ſo as no Tune would pleaſe them. i: 
5 thought, thar our Saviour doth here allude to ſome Sport uſed 
then amongſt Children, which we are nor fo well acquainted 
with, wherein Children were wont to Sing , fometimes more * 
merry and pleaſant, ſomerimes more fad and mourntul Sonss one 
ro anotiicr ; and that he here likenerh the Phariſees and Lawver ; 
OA fullen ſerr of Children, rhar ler their Companions ting waas 
rey would, they would nt anfiver them, Our Saviour's PUUnng 
s expoundcd plainly enuugh by the next words, 

1s For John came ncither cating nor drinking, 
and they ſay, He hath a devil. 

19 The Son of man came eating and drinking, 
and they Hay, Behold , a man gluttonous , and 3 
wine bibber, a friend of publicanes and ſinners: bur 
wiſdom is juſtified of her children. 

Luke nath the ſame words, chap. 7. er. 33,34, 35. The Senſ? 
of the Words is this ; God hatk by his Providence uted all means 
© WI this People to the Goſpel. The DoGirine of 7:5n the B.up- 
tis, and Ci, was the fame, bur their Temper and Converſe 
was very difierent: 7ohn was an auſtere and morote Man ; Chris 
was Or a more iree and familiar Converſation : Bur thele Men 
would neither give the one, nor the other, a good word : They 
reviled both of tiiem, and rejefFed them both , and the Do&rine 
which they brought. { ohn came neither Eating nor Drinking :] 
Tat 1s, nor as other Men ordinarily doy he was a Man that 
lived moſt in che Wilderneſs, and ted upon very ordinary Diec, 
not Eating with Publicanes and Sinners, nor coming at any 
Feaſts, gc. and they ſaid of him, He hath a Devil, he is a Me- 
lancholick,Hypochondriack Fellow, a kind of a Mad-man.{ 7he Sort 
of Man came Eating and Drinking ,| he was of a more attable, plea- 
1:nr Temper, of a more free, and lefs referyed Converſe; Eating 
and Drinkinz as other Men, ( tho' keeping to the Law of 7em- 
perarce,) ſuch things as the Country afforded; nor retuſing to be 
prefenc ar Feaſts, tho' Publicanes and Sinners were there. They 
faid to him, | Behold » Man gluttonous, a Wine-bibber, a Friend of 
Publicanes and Sinners :) He dilpleaſed them wich che coo grear 
Freedom of his Converſation; ( from hence by che way chey 
may be better inſtruted, who place foine Yer f2&on, or Merit, 1n 
living like Monks and Hermits ; by thar Rule 7ohn the Baptist was 
to be preferred before Chris? : ) Bur Chrift could pleaſe rhe Phari- 
ſees and Lawyers, and their Followers, no more than 7ohn did. 
They couid not fay he was Melancholick cr Moroſe 3 bur 
they Blaſphemed him ro a higher degree, calling him a Glutton, 
and Drunkard, and a Friend of Publicanes and Sinners. A Godly 
Man, ler his Temper and Converfe be whar it will, pleaſerh 
none ; who hareth rhe Truth of the Gofpel , and the Power of 
Godlineſs, If he be Reſerved , then he 1s a Moroſe, Melancho- 
lick Man : It he be of a more tree and open Converſe, chen he 
is a Drunkard, or a Glutton; ſomething or other they muſt have 
to ſay againſt a Man, that will not run wich them to the ſame 
Exceſs of Kiot ;, tho” they lay to their Charge, things chat they 
know not. The Buſinels is, they hare che Power of Godlineſs 
in them. This Inſtance of theſe Men's thus treating 7chn the 
Byptist, and Chrit, 1s of mighty uſe to ſtrengthen choſe who 
meet with the very ſame things. | But Wiſdom » juſtified of her 
Children, ] There is a great Variety amongſt Interpreters, in 
21ving the Senſe of theſe Words. Some thiak them ſpoken T[;4- 
nically,for the Phariſees went tor the Children of Wiſdom. Some 
think them ſpoken plainly, and think ic ſhould be Wijd-m is 
judged, or condemned of her Children : Bur tho' the word accord- 
ing ſiznitying to Faſtice, or do Zuſtice ro another, which ;uftify- 
inz, to che Merit or Demerit of the Perſon nay be, by 4140450 
114t Or condemning ; upon which account ic was true here , that 
tiſdom was condemned of thoſe who pretended to be her Chil- 
dren, and the word is to uſed in other Authors; yer we have no 
ſuch uſage of it in Scripture. Not to reckon the various Senſes 
others put upon the Words, the plain Senſe or them ſeems co 
be this. Ir 1s a Proverbial Speech, fomerhing like thar, Ars nn 
habet inimicum preter ignorantem; Learning hath no Enemies, 
bur che Ignorant. I, who am the Wiſdom of God , am juſtified by 
y94 , who truly believe on me: You know I am no Glutron, no 
Wine-bibber, no Friend of Publicanes and Sinners. 2. Or, Grac? 
is juſtified of all that are partakers of it. Godly Men, that are 
Wiſe, will own the Grace of God in all Men, whether they be 
of 7ohn's Temper, or of mine, whether of more auſtere, or 
more pleaſanr Tempers. Or, 3. The wiſe Counſel of Got, 
making uſe of ſveral Inſtruments of ſeveral Tempers , t9 win theſs 
People unto his Goſpel, will be juſtified; thar is, acquirtcd, defended, 
praifed,adored of thoſe who belong unto Gol, and are acquainted v.irh 
his Wiſdom and Counſels. Luke ſaich, The People nultifixd God, 
chap. 7. 29, Some, by the Children of Wiſtm, underitand rhe 
Scribes and Phariſees themſelves, ( who choughr themſelves rhe 
Children of Wiſdom,) or the Generalicy of the Fes, who were 
condemned tn their own Conſciences, and could nor bur in Hearr 
juſtifie ChriF, cho' in their Speeches they condemned him. *Buc 
Chris never called them the Children of Wiſdom. Tis Interpre- 

Ce A ation 


Chap. X1. 


thee 
SF: 


a 


= 


z. 


_ 


-——_—_—_——_— "95 TE in 


DE . . 


74 ” 
- 7 
3 
- ” P A 
- ; 
2.41% 

*« 
by | 
: i Fk ; 

_—_ 

'F- F i + : 1 . 
_ "i ws. ; 
& _! pe ! 
Fe: & 6 * i - 
1's F . 

'F | c . 
: s 8 
< on 

wm 


—_——— — W. 


DV. 


6 ot A 
P v 5 wr wv 
GOV P45 


Hz 


. 
- 
Hrs noe we” "4 IF+"0+4=8 
; 190 
= 
—— 


= 
. > 
—_ 
_— 
= 


- yan *% 
ECL 


- 
_ — = 


* 
—=« 


-- <= A 
=& Sx" -- —= - 
— 


bm ot 


2 LS ; 
- "I I > : 2 n >  - "= : 
CEE nd | <=%; - "7 A _ "= ” « : 
- EES : n.oF Page 2 = - = _—WS—= == S_—— = - . 
_ = — — _—— Fe ag -— Bead —_ - _ ————— Is "_- *M > " ” -_ = -_ a —_ _ = * m 
—_  — =24 _— _— - = 
- me _ rt - —_—__—_ " args = - = = - _ - 
I _ — - _ 
4 gt a 5 4 2 W - 
— Sek ANT” - 2 = © vb -4 xc 4 Op . EI. —_ » = | __ we = . 
9 & = ek + — vo - "=: - : FP. £ + = ——_ oo - 
A. 2% - , -* E 4 CI. . "(+ 5 ae — __ £2» GE : —_ — LE ITED" 2 bated” =D 1 
þ Th - las TS x p-=7. Sy 9» oo = ES EY " RE" >: PRs - = 4 8 
- - r] 5 LESS « CSS 2 III - = = "TEE - We, Wy £22 tf IX; — %. #  - ' 


» +  F 
———_ Pr netaeng gn wo 


Chap. » 4 


* Tak. 10: 
13. 


St M AT 


tation tiercfore feemeth ſomerhing ſtrained, That which ſeems 
eth the moſt natural, is whar I betore hinred. Tho' thoſe that 
ptetend to be the Children of Wiſdom, thus ſpeak of Fobn , and of 
me ; yet thoſe who are truiy Wiſe will juſtifie me, and alſo the 
Counſels and Wiſdom of my Father in the Ule of all Means, tO 
brin them to receive the Glad-Tidings of Salvatio, brought to 
them borh by my more auſtere and reſerved Fore-runner and by 
my Self, who have choſen, tho' an holy and unblameable, yet a 
more free and ple.zſant Way of Converſe with them. 

20 * Then began he to upbraid the cities, where- 
in moſt of his mighty works were done , becauſe 


they repented not. 4 

Our and had hitherto ſpent moſt of his rime in Galilee, and 
the Ciries belonzing ro thar Province ; there both John the Bab- 
t:5f, and himfſel?, had preached the Goſpel, rhere he had wi _ 
many Afiracles , by both aiming at their Repentance 3 bur there 
were Multicudes that did not receive him, nor would be brought 
ro any fighr of their Sins, Or any acknowledgment of = as = 
#oſſiis. He now begins to reprove them ſmartly ; _ _ they 
did nor applaud, and commend him, bur becauſe they al _ 
Repent. This was Chriſt's End in all his Preaching, and 1n all hs 
M;raculous Operations, co bring Men to Repent.mce, and to _ 
him as the Meſſivs ; and this ſhould be the great End purſued by 


all his Minifters. 

21 Wo unto thee, Chorazin, wo unto thee, Beth- 
fida: for if the mighty works which were done 
in you, had been done in Tyre and Sidon, they would 
have repented long ago in ſackcloth and aſhes. 

22 But I ſay unto you, it ſhall be more tolerable 


for Tyre and Sidon at the day of judgment , than 


for you. : 

Lube hath the ſame, chap. 10. Ver. 13, I4e Chorazin and Beth- 
{tidz were two Ciries of Galilee, not far trom one another, on- 
ly the Lake of Genneſaret was berwixr them; Capernaum ( by and 
by ſpoken of ) was berwixt them borh, on the lame fide of rhe 
Eike as Bethſaida , which was the City of Philip, Andrew, and 
Peter, Job. 1.44. In theſe Towns Chriſt had ofcen Preached, fo 
probably had che Apoſtles; and Chriſt had done many great 
Works in them. {Tyre and Sidon ] were Habirations of Heathens, 
their Country joined to Galilee : They were Places of grear 
Traffick , inhabired with Canaanitiſh Idolaters , and exceedingly 
wicked, threatned by the Prophet [aiah, chap. 23. and by the 
Prophet Ezekiel, chap. 26. and 27, and 28. and by Amos, chap.1.9. 
A: Peyple odious to the Jews , upon many Accounts, To theſe 
our Lord here comparerh the Galileans; telling rhem, Thar rhey 
were worſe than that Pagan People, who were ſo Contemprible 
in their Eyes, and thar their Plagues in the Day of Judgment 
would be greater : { Fr (faith he) if the mighty Works which were 
dome in you , had been done in Tyre and Sidon, they would have re- 
pented ſong ago in ſackcloth and aſhes.) Some think this a ſtrong 
Provf, Thar where the Goſpel 18 Preached , God gives us a fuffi- 
ciency of Grace - So as 1f Men will bur uſe that Power which 
they have in their own Wills, they may with the Aſſiſtance only 
of rhat Grace truly repent, and be ſaved. 1 ſhall nor meddle with 
that Diſpure ; bur cannor ſee how that Notion can derive any 
Prorf from this Text : 2. Becauſe the Text only mentionerh 
ChritPs Miracles, not his Preaching, 2. The Text doth nor ſay, 
they would long ago have repented unto Life , but they would 
have repented in Sackcloth and Aſhes 5 they would have been more 
affefed than theſe Galileans were, who fhewed no Senſe ar all 
ot their Sins. The King of Niniveh and his People repented, 
Fonah 3. wr. 7, &. fo did Ahab, 3 King. 21.27. yet none will 
Jay, they repented unto Life « None ever denied a Power in Man's 
Wiil ( his Under/tanding being by the Goſpel inlighened to his 
Duty) to pertorm Ads of Moral Diſcipline. 3. Our Saviour might 
here ſpeak after che manner of Men, according to Rational Con- 
jedures and Probabilities. Tae Scope of our Saviour in theſe words 

' 75 to he atrended ; which was only to ſhew, that the Men of 
Chazin and Beti/.zida, ſhewing no Signs of Remor/e for Sin, or 
Convi&im, of the Meſſiss, up2n the fight of his Miracles, con- 
firming his Dorine to be trom Heaven, had ſhewed a greater 
ſtubboraneſs and hardnefs of Hearr, than theſe Heathens ; who 
tho' they were had enough, yer had nor had ſuch Means to re- 
form, and to convince them. Theretore he tells thent their place 
in Hei, would be more dreadful than the place of the Men of 
Tyre and Sidon. And fo we are by this Text taught, Fhat as the 
Sins of Men, who have the Light of the Goſpel, are much greater 
than the Sins of the worſt of Men, who have ir not : So their 
Condemnation in the Day of Judgment will be much heavier, 


791. 3. 19. | 

23 And thou Capernaum, which art exalted unto 
heaven , {halr be brought down to hell , tor if the 
mighty works which have been done in thee, had 


been done in Sodom , it would have remained unto 
this day. | ; 

24 But I ſay unto you, thatir ſhall be more tolera- 
ble for the land of Sodom, in the day of judgment, 
than for thee. . 

This Speech of our Saviour is much of the fame impor with 
the cther , the Scope and Sente of it the ſame; to ler the 
Caperndites know, that the hardneſs of their Hearc was greater 
in contempe ot viic Goſpel, confirmed by 10 many miraculous Opera- 
rations; and their guilt greater than the gurlt of Sodom, long 
fince deflxoyed by Fire and Brimſtone, Gen. 18, For tho' they were 
guilty of prodigious Simninz , yet they had not ſuch Means to con- 
vince, reclaim,and reform them : God had nor fent his Son amongſt 
them , nor given chem ſuch Teſtimonies of that Ae of Grace, 
as ize had given theſe, by vouchlating ro confirm rhe DoFrine of 
lis Sen by Miracles z and theretore they mult expe, char God, 


THEW. 


in the Day of Judgment, ſhould deal more ſeverely with them 
than with the filchy and 1mpure Sodomites. Our Saviour here 
ſpeakerh not as an All-hnowing God, bur as the S:n of Man to 
the Sons of Men; who ſpeak upon Probabilities and Ratimal 
ConjeFures, It we ſhould ſay that Chritt ſpake this as an al 
knowing God, all that can be 1nicrred, is ris, Thar an Extern / 
Reformation may be a lengthning out of Perſons Tranquility: in the 
mean time, God was juſt co both,in not giving them ſuch Means 
they Sinning notoriouſly againſt the Light of Nature : which 
they had; and the Light of L's Holy Example » Whoſe 
Righteous Soul they vexed with their filthy Converſation, ang 
unrighteaus Deeds , 2 Pet. 2. 7,8. and he was alſo juſt in deſtrs : 
ing of them. Capernaum 15 here ſaid to have been exalted ty Hen 
ven, either with refpe& to their Trading and outward Proſperity 
or with reſpe& to the Means of Grace they enjoyed, in hearir, 
Chriſt's Sermoms,, and ſeeing his Miracles, The Caſting down t; 
Hell , mentioned ver. 21. ſeems to be meant of a Temporal De. 
Strudtion ;* the word & ys not ſignifying the Place of the 
Damned, bur the State of the Dead ; bur ver. 22. muſt be un- 
derftood of Eternal Condemnation , which ſhall be in the Day of 
Judgment. 


25 Ar that time Jeſus anſwered, and ſaid, I thank 
thee, O Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth, becauſ: 


denr, and haſt revealed them unto babes. 
26 Even fo, Father ; for {5 it ſeemed good in thy 
fight. 
Luke, chap. 10. v. 21. hath the farae thing; only he thus pre- 
faceth: In that hour Feſus reyiced in Sfivit, ard ſuid, I thank the: 
O Father, Lord of Heaven ond E-+th, Cv, Ve rejoiccd in Spirir, © 
his Heart was inwardly aticctcd with this Grace of God his Fa: 
ther, Then | He anſwered, and ſaid.) Anſwering in Scripture 
doth nor always fignifie Replying ro the Words of others , hur 4 
Speaking upon fome fir Occatton cffered; a Beginning ofa Speech, 
[1 thank thee, O Father ! Lnyd of Heaven and Earth.) In the Greeb 
rhe ſame word 1s uſed, which f;nifieth to Confeſs. In all Thank(. 
giving and Praifing, there is a Confeſſion of the Power, Wiſdom, oz 
Goodneſs of God; 1o as all Praifing 1s a Confeſſing, tho' all C- 
feſſi?n be not Praifing. By calling his Father Lord of Heaven mnd 
Earth, he acknowledgeth his abſolute Power to have done ther. 
wiſe, even as it pleaſed him. | Becauſe thou ha$ hid theſe things 
from the Wiſe and Prudent. | By the Wiſe and Prudent, he here 
plainly means the Scribes and Phariſees. The Learned Doors of 
that Age, who ſhould have been Wiſe and Prudent, and were fo, 
both in their own, and in their Followers Opinion. By the/s 
things, he means the Myſteries of the Goſpel ; as Matth. 13, 11, 
The Myſteries of the Kingdom of Heaven : God 1s ſaid to have hid 
them, becauſe he had not revealed them to them ; nor can it be 
underſtood of a meer External Revelation , by the Preaching 0 
the Goſpel z bur of an Internal Revelation by his Spirit, ſo as they 
embraced and believed them, 1 Cor. 2. 10, In which Senſe Pay! 
ſaith, 2 Cor. 4. 3» If our Goſpel be hid, it 3s hid to them that peiiſſ, 
{ And ha$t revealed them unto Babes, ] vymers * It fignifierh Ferſons 
that are young in Years, | Infants ] and weak in Underſtanding, He 
principally means his Apoſtles, rogerher with thoſe ordinary Per- 
ſons that believed in him; for, oh. 7. 48,49. the Phariſees laid, 
Have any of the Rulers, or the Phariſees, believed on him ? But this 
People who knoweth not the Law, are curſed. O Father (faith our 
Saviour) thou haſt all Power in thine Hand; thou art the Ly 
of Heaven ard Earth; thou couldeſt by thy Spirit have cauſed 
theſe Learned Men to have received and embraced thy Grſpe!, 
and followed me, as well as theſe poor Fiſher-men, and other 
Fews of none of the higheſt Quality ; in thar chou haft nor done 
ir, thou haſt decJared thy Zuſtice, for their reje&ing of thy Com 
ſel tor their Salvation. Bur in that thou haſt revealed theſe things 
ro any, eſpecially to theſe Perſons, not under: the ſame Wild) 
Advantages, for Reputation, Wiſdom, and Wit , herein thou 
haſt ſhewed thy ſpecial, and abounding Grace, as well as the 
Greatneſs of thy Power. Lord! I rejoice in thy Diſperſatins, 
and I give thee Thanks, thatour of the Mouths of Babes and 
Sucklings, thou ha$F perfefed thy Praiſe. There can be no other 
Reaſon given of this,bur thy good Pleaſure : [Even ſo, O Father, fi 
ſo it pleaſed thee.) We may from hence Obſerve, x. That tl 
further Revelations of ChriS to ſome Souls,more than others enjoying the 
ſame outward Means, are nor to be aſcribed to the Power or 519- 
neſs of the Will of Man, bur ſolely ro the Goed Pleaſure of God. 
2. That from the Beginning of the Goſpel , the Special and Effe&uut 
Revelations of the Myſteries of the Kingdom of Heaven, have from 
the Good Pleaſure of God, been made generally, nor to the 
moſt Learned and Wife in Men's account, but moſtly to Perfons 
of a meaner Rank. Surgunt indo&i, fy Celum rapiunt ; 105 CU: 
Doerina noftra in Gehennam trudimur ; 1 Cor. 1. 26,27,28. Jam.2-5- 
3. That whereſoever God by his Spirit reveals the Myſteries of the 
Kingdom of God, it is matter of great Foy and Thanksgiv's 
eſpecially where God reveals thefe Myſteries ro Perſons, mo: 
unlikely ro have received chem. 


27 * All things are delivered unto me of my Fi- 
ther: and no man knoweth the Son, but the Father: /* 
* neither knowerh any man the Father, fave the 501, 1. 
and he to whomſoever the Son will reveal Þ27. 


Fobn faith, chap. 3.35. The Father loveth the Son, and hath &' 
ven all things into his hand, Matth. 28. 18. All Power % gh 
unto me « and , John. 17. 2. Thou ha# given Power over all Fn, 
that he ſhould give Erernal Life to as many as thou ha# given Pim: 
God 1s the Fountain of Power, Pſal. 62. 11. He hath commiite 
alſo Power to Chriſt as Mediator, P/al. 2.7, 8,9, More paruct” 
larly the Power of Life and Eternal Salvation ; as Joh. 17. 2: F* 
harch the Keys of Hell and Death, Revelat. 1.18. and all che —_— 
that lead ro Eternal Life, are in his Power and Diſp!/!. (. 4 
no man knoweth the Son, but the Father. ] No Man knowerh Jus V' 
vine Eſſence, his Eternal Generation * And therefore Men #* 


not x0 liſten ro whar the Scribes and Phariſees ſay of hum, —_— 
atte 


thou haſt * hid theſe things from the wiſe and pru- #19; 1 


Chap. X[|L 1p: 


hand Way, 2mm, wn 1-0 


[a 


” 7 
Al—. me 


=. 


” 3 WD on wa? 


bers 9 
they 2 
Fre2di; 
Serftti 
nat 7 15 
In te 
neſs r: 
aid 41 
any du 
Chriſt” 
Plbe ur 
tor the 
ju, C 
NO fre 
true Fa 
Show m 
the Te: 
jointly 
vicur h 
St-.it by 
den li th 
Corrupt 
Nature, 
3. Tho 
accom 
#2! in It 
Ezep, Z* 
Mir t! I 
us, and 
by tn2 [ 
R1Zor o 
hizhly « 
to cur P 
Service /1 
Jjeticn | 
come ; 1 
to the 
from the 
thoſe ih 
Eternal n 
leemed t 


Chris vj; 
C27 the 
t) be I 
The Pt 
Ot al 
aun 
him, 
Gh-g 
T) the 
ond 9" 
South, 
a Sim 


3 


jap- Xl. 
1 to, and to believe what the Father hath revealed from 

rg ho beſt knoweth him Neither 
Heaven CONCErmINg him who be . [ eith 
\ woth any man the Father,ſave the S"n, } No Man knoweth che 
—_ of the Father, or the Councils of the Father, as to the 
Fenſarions of the Goypel, | Save the Son, and he to whomſoever the 
om will revelt him.) Tye Prophets inquired, and ſearched diligently 
" nin» this Saluatim; ſearching what, or what manner of time 
yy -vif of Chris which was in them, did ſienifie , when it teſti- 
the Spirit * , ; | ps 
fed beforeh.md the Sufferings of Chi ist, and the Gloj 7 that ſhould 
ily, 1 Pete 1+ TO, Th, 12. Mr. Calvin ſaith, the Son is faid 
© know che Farher, as he is his lively Image, rhe expreſs Image 
of his Perton, and the Brightneſs ot his Glory 3 And he to whom 
the Son will reveal him , Joh. 6. 45. and 14. 9. He that hath ſeen 
an h.::h ſen the Father, All our Saving Knowledge of God, 15 
I, and through Chriſt. 

»3 Come unto me all ye that labour, and are 

Treavy laden. and I will give you ref. 

29 Take my yoke upon you,and learn of me. for 
per. 7+ Tam meek, and * lowly ot heart, and ye ſhall find 
þ-*" x5oft unto your fouls. 

Js 20 * For my yoke 3s cafie, and my burden is 
p liont. 
'Our Lord having before ſhewed ; 1. That all Power was given 
+ him. 2. That none could know the Father, but by and in him; 
Voſertt his Difcourfe with an Invitation of Perfons to him. By the 
weary and heavy laden, in the Texr, ſome underſtand thoſe thar 
are [adn with the Senſe of their Sins, and rhe tecling the Guilt of 
them, Orhers underſtand with the Burden of the Law, which the 
Aroſtlzs called a Toke , Ads 15. 10, (Mr. Calvin thinks this roo 
ſtrair an Interpretarion :) Orhers underſtand , Heavy laden with 
Trials and Aftidtioms. Chriſt will give Ref ct ail choſe of his 
Perple , thar are any ways weary and heavy laden; bur in an 
Order, Firſt, To Souls wearied, and heavy laden with the Bur- 
den of their Sins, and their want of a Righteouſneſs, wherein to ſtand 
before God, Then to ſuch ro whom he hath given this ReF, he 
promiferh alſo Ref from their Troubles and Perſecutions in the 
World, 7»h. 16.33. Ir is very like he uſed this rerm Come, with 
reſpz& ro thar of Iſaiah, chap. 55. I, 2. That by Coming, 15 to be 
underſtood Believing, is plain from Foh. 6. 44,45,45. Heb. 11. 6. 
The &2f promiſed, chictly reſpefterh the $9/, as appears from 
w7, 29, The Promiſe may be underſtood borh of chat Res? which 
Believers have in this Life, Rom.5.2, and 15.13. and alfo of that 
Ref, which after this Life remaineth for the People of God, Heb.4.9. 
Wh:arever the KeFf be, ir muſt be of Chriſt's giving, v. 29. and 
our /--bing, 1.30. Nor is it to be obtained, withour Labour and 
$:Foring; for ic followerh, | Ticke my yoke vpon you. ] The Mem- 
bers of Chriſt are not wichour a 7obe, a Law and Rule by which 
they are oblized to walk; and rho' the Service of God be a perfedt 
Freedom, wer to Fleſh and Blood it is a 7oke, grating upon our 
Serſitive Atpetite, and reſtraining our Natural Motions and Inclis 
rattins, | For Tam Lowly and Meek. | Humility and Mecknefſs are 
in chemſel72s 7bes, as they are contrary to our Pride, and apt- 
refs ro ſell in an high Opinion of our ſelves, and to our Wrath 
aid 4nzer, which ſometimes boilerh to a great heighth, withour 
any due Fewel : And as in themſelves they are a great part of 
Chriſt's 2obe , fo they fir and diſpoſe us to rake Chriſt's further 
7he upon us; and may be here confidered, as Means diretted 
for the berter Performance of the Precept, Tabe my The upon 
3249, Our Lord alſo by this Precept lets us know , there can be 
no true Frith, without Obedience ro the Commands of Chriſt, Tho' 
true Faich and Obedience be two things, yer they are infeparable; 
Shww me thy Exith ( faith James) by thy Works. And the Re# of 
the Texr is not promiſed to either of chem ſeverally, bur to both 
pindy : [For my Tobe #s eaſie, and my Burden 3s light.) Our Sa- 
vicur had before, chap. 7. told us, that rhe Way to Heaven 15 a 
#-:it Way ; how doth he now tell us his Toke is eaſie, and his Bur- 
den light 2 Anſw. Nothing, makes it hard or buraenſom, but our 
Corruption , which flowerh from the Depravation of Humane 
Nature, 2. It is much eafier than the Toke and Burden of the Law, 
3. Tho! it be hard to Beginners, yer it 1s eafie when we have once 
accrtomed our Flves to it. 4. It 15 eaſte, conſidering that we do it | 
72! in 2ur own {irength, but by Aſſiſtance fr»m God, Ferem. 31. 33. 
Er%.35. 25, 26. Joh,15. 3a Wearedelivered even from the 
M.:! Law, confider'd as a Covenant,and as meerly commanding 
us, and affording no help and affiſtance. Ir 1s alſo eaſze, as weare 
by /"> Love of God conſtrained to our Duty, fo we are freed from the 
Rizor of the Law. Ir is eaſte and light, as it is a Courſe of Life 
hizhly conſonant ro our Reaſon, once delivered from a Bondage 
to cur Paſſims, Finally, it is much more eaſ/2 and /ight rhan rhe 
Service of our Luſts is, There is no greater Slavery, than a ſub- 
jection to our Luſts 3 that 1f a Drunhard faich Come , we muſt 
come ; if an #:rlot fairh Go, we muſt go. Or than our Service 
to the World, Xc, To fay nothing of che exceeding Eaſineſs of it 
trom the Proſpe# of the great Reward propoſed,and promiſed ro 
thofe who keep the Commandments of Chriſt, the Exceeding and 
Eternal weight of Glory ;, as Jacob's hard Service of fourteen years, 


- 


ſeemed to him but a few days, 2 Cor. 4. 17. 


lis ++ 


CHAP. AL 


Clr' vindicateth his Diſciples for plucking and eating Ears of Corn 
2 the Sabbath, by Scripture and Reaſin, 1—7. Proveth himfelf 
{1 be Lord of the Sabbath, by reflorins a withered Hand, 8—13, 
T1e PÞiriſees conſpire again8t him : He eſcapeth, 14 —21. Caſteth 
out a Devil out of a blind and a dumb Man : Vindicatetn himſelf 
eur, and confuteth the Blaſphemous Opinion of the Phariſees of 
bim, 22-—30, And ſheweth that Blaſphemies again$t the Holy 
Gh$ ſhall never be forgiven : Idle Wards to be counted for, 31—37, 
T) tho Phariſees ſeching a Sien, he ztveth only the Sign of [cnas: 
ond oppyſeth the F:ith of the Ninivites, and of the Queen of the 
South, to their Unbelief and Obſtinacy : And ſheweth their End by 
4 onmilitude of an unclean Spirit cat out, and returning again to 


d 


St. MATTHEW 


| ing corn, thou mayest pluch the ears with thy 


Chap. XII. 


hi old Habitatio , 38—45. Who are his Brother, Siſter, and 
Mother, declared by him, 45—50. 


I A T that time Jeſus went on the ſabbath day 
through the corn, and his diſciples were an 


hungred, and began to pluck the ears ot corn, and 
to eat. 


Mark relating this Story , chap. 2. 23. varieth little. Lub? 
relating it, chap. 6. 1. faith it was on the lecond Sabbarh aſter the 
firſt, and his Ditciples did ear, rubbing them. God in his Law, 
Deut. 23. 25. had laid, When thou come$t into thy neighbour's ftand- 
hand ; but thou ſhalt 
not move a ſickle to thy neighbour's ſtanding corn, To take for our 
need fo much of our Neighbour's Goods , as we may rezfonably 
think, that if he were preſent, and knew our Circumſtances, he 
would zive us, is no Theft, The Phariſees therctore do nor 
accuſe them of Theft, bur of Violation of the Sabbath. Lube frirh, 
This happened upon the ſecond Sabbath after the fi, Whether 
that was the Sabbath next following the FeaZt of Unlezvened Broad, 
(which was abour the time of our Eafter ) the firſt and laſt Days of 
which were Sabbaths, in the Jewiſh Sente ; or the Fea$t of T:fer- 
nacles, or any other, is nor much material for us ro know. Bu: 
on a Sabbath-aay it was, thar our Saviour went through the Corn, 
and his diſciples were an hungry : This may tcach us their Io 
Eſtate and Condition in the world. He could quickly kave ſup- 
plied their Hunzer, bur he chote to leave them to rclieve them- 
iclves with ”luching, Rubbing, and Eating of the Corn, that he mighe. 
have an 9ppIrtunity to inſtru& them and the 7huriſces in the irue 
Dodtrine of the Sabbath. 


j 

2 But when the Phariſees ſaw zz, they ſaid vato | 8 
him, Behold, thy diſciples do that which is not WL} 68 

f +: "IF ' 

lawtul to do on the ſabbarh-day. $ PLA 

So faith Mirh, chap. 2. 24. only he puts ir into the Form of TRUnnR? Mat Tak 14 
a Queſtion. Luke adds nothing, chav. 6. 2. bur faith, Certain 5; Pon 43 9h 8 
the Phariſees, They granted the thing lawful to be done another WS: T0000 
Day,bur nor on the S2bbath-day. How blind is Syp2rſtition,thar rhe y | ; Tel WY | 


could think, that ic was contrary to the Will of God, that his $8178 
People ſhould fir chemſelves for the Service of the Sabb::th by a p14 i 
moderate Refreſhment * Some of the Phariſces ordinarily ar- | 
rended Chriſt's 3vtions , not to be Inftruted by him, bur (as if 
1s atrerward faid ) that they might bave ſomething wherenf to occuſe 
him, Whar a little thing do they Carp ar? Wherein was the 
Sin ? The plucking of a few Ears cf Corn, and rubbing them, could 


hardly be called Servile Labour ; eſpecially nor in the Senfe of che | 

Commandinent, which reſtrained nor neceſſary Labour, bur ſuch Rk Ig F 
Labcur as rook chem off from the Duries of the Sabbarh ; bur (5h + 114M Wk ek te 0 
their Tradition had made this unlawful,as if it was a little Reaping ; LA: \ "UNH | 


and a hind of Threſhing. Hypccrites and Formaliſts are always 


moſt Zealous for little things in the Law, or for their own Addi- f. 
raments to it, ed," { HAN 

3 But he ſaid unto them, Have ye not read what } BH's i 
David did, when he was an hungred, and they that KERBOLE (its BT; 
were with him: PAWN. | owe 


4 How he entred into the houſe of God, and did 
eat the * ſhew-bread, which ir was not Jawtul tor 
him to eat,neither for them which were with him, but 
only tor the Prieſts ? 

Mark and Luke add little, only Mark ſpecificth the time, Ta the 
days of Abiathar the High Prieft ; and faith , When he had need, 
and was an hungred. We have the Hiſtory, 1 Sam. 21. 6. Da- 
vid was upon his Flight from Saul , upon the norice of his 
Danger given him by Jonathan , chap. 20. and being hungry, he 
asks of the High Price fre loaves of Brexd ; the High Priest tells 
him he had none bur H:iled Bread, which the High Pri:# gave 
him, v. 6. What this Shew-bre.1d was, may be read Lev.24. 5,5, 
7,8, 9. it is expreſly ſaid, 4A Stranger ſhall not eat thereof. Now 
(faith our Saviour) norwirhſtanding chis, David and his Pll,wers 
being an hunered did cat there , tho' ſtritly, according to the 
Letrer of the Law, none bur the Priefts ms;hr Ear ir. Bur ſome fl. 
may obje&t, What was this to the puepoſe £ It was not upon the 
Sabbath-day, Anſw. Ir was cither upon the S43b2th-day , or 
immediately after; tor ir was to be fer on every $:554t9-d:1y, and 
tobe Exten in the Fly Plice, Levit. 24.-8,9. And the Hign-Prictt 
told David, 1 Sam. 21.6. tit it was taken away, to ſet hot Bread 
in the rooin of it, 2, Bur ſecondly, that which our Saviour pro- 
duceth this for, was ro prove a more Gener:4 Propoſition, which 
being proved , the Lawfulnefs of his Diſciples 4 would eafily 
be inferred from jr. That was this : T7. the Letter of a Ritual 
Law is not to be inſiſted upon, where ſome eminent neceſt'y »rgeth the 
contrary, in the performance of ſome Natural or Aral Daty, The 
Law of Mature commandeth every Man to teed himfelt, when he 
is hunzry. The Moral Law confirms this, as 1t 1s 4 means to the 
Obſervation of the Sixth Commindment ; and eſpecially on the 
Sabbath-d:y , ſo far as may fir us for the beft Sandincation of 
it. The L-w concerning the Shew-bread, was but a Rite! Law.and 
that part of ir which reſtrained the uſe of ir,when taken off trcom 
the Holy T:zble, was of lighteſt concern; as it commanded 1: 
ſhould be Eaten by the Prieſts only, and by them in che 7y 


*Exod: 255 f it 1} 
7. 1 my 31 + 


21s 
- 


- $3 _ 
: : - 
£ ay 
- _ wh 
4 L % pede 
 ”> OT 
IA TIP Uno oe A ERS... 
$19 5m Date Rr 5 wut ePeoy mw 
Slrrors 2 as 'Þ y -- -— 
= 
of ne ed fe. -2L a. PI , (7 
IE - 22 ne 
* - > <4 . of 


Place; where the Lite, or nece{lary Reliet of Men was con- 15Þ R 
cerned, the Obligation of the Ritual Law ceaſed ; 2nd rh.it was as. 
Lawful both for David and the High Priest, which in ordinary « it 

Caſes kad not been Lawtul.Works neceflary encher tor tie uptold- + bro 


inz of our Lives, or ficting us tor Sabbath-ſervices, are laviiul upon 
the Sabbath-day.Tho' the Law concerning the $25.7%2 be a Moral 
Law, yer it is Fus P:ſitivum, not a Law Natur algur Poſurive and 
mult be ſo interpreted, as nor to deſtroy the [mw Nov 2, which 
commands Men to feed themſelves; nor yer ro deftroy 1t lelt. 
The Scope and End of it is to be conſidered, which 1s che keep- 
ing of a Day, as a Day of Holy and Religins Ret, What Labor 
is neceſſary to ſuch keeping of it, 1s allo Lawful. The Tim? cf 
the Sabbath is not mare Hy than the Shew-bread; and 23 


Pf 
Dal is 


Chap. X.II. 


* Toh. 7 1 2, 


v. 2 Cl:con. 


> 


G6, 18. 


* Luk. 6.5. 


David ina caſe of neceffiry might make a common uſe of thar 
thy Cr117, to the Diſciples m a caſe of like necefficy, might make 
ule of a little of that Holy Time, in ſuch neceflary ſervile Work, 
as mizhe fir rhem for their Sabbath-ſervice, Thus it was Lawtul 
by te £2 of Grd; and if the Phariſees had not been 1gnorant, 
or had underſtood what they had read, they would never have 
diipured this; the Inftance of Holy D.rvid might have ſatisfied. 
9 chat wliis lircle kind of Labour could only be a Breach ot one 
0!” their By-Laws, by which they pretended ro Expound the 
Law of G4 , in which he ſhewerh they had given a falſc Inter= 
PIetdtion. 

5 Or have ye not read in the law, how that on 
the ſabbath days * the prieſts in the temple prophane 
the ſabbarh. and are blametcſs. 3 

Neither Maik nor Luke have this Argument of our .$.zv7017 5. 
The meaning is, All Acts of Servile Labour are not unlawful on 
the Sabbarth-day. The Prieſts, according to the Law , Num, 
23.9. Offer Sacrifices, and do many other As ; ſuch as Crrcum- 
eifing, and many other things, which in your Senſe would be a 
Prophanatim of the Sabbath; yer you do not blame them, neither 
arc they ro be blamed, becauſe God permitted and diretted rhem. 
Ir any tay, Bur how doth this agree to what our 5.21947 18 ſpeak- 
ing to?  Anſw. The Diſciples or Chrift were imployed with, and 
by him, in Going abour and Preaching the Goſpel; and what they 
now did, was but in order to fit them tor his Work, when they 
had not had tuch leifure as others beforehand ro provide : Ard 
this eſtablifheth a ſccond Rule, That Works of Piety, and tending to 
fit us for Adts of Piety, that c.annat conveniently be done before , are 
Lovful on the Sabbath-day. 

6 Bur 1 fiy unto you , that in this place 1s 
* 0770 grcater than the remple. = : 

Tue Jews had very Superſtirious Conceirs concerning the Tem 
ple; and might object , Bur the Prieſts Works are done 1n the 
Temple. The Jews had a Saying, That in the Temple there was no 
$.bbath. They looked upon the Temple as Sanfitying all Adtions 
done there. To obviarte this, (faith our Saviour) in this place 35 
oe, (thar 15) Iam greater than the Temple. The Temple was bur 
2 Type of me : If the Temple can fan&ifie fo much Labour, will 
nor ny Authority and Permſſion, think you, excuſe this little Lu- 
bour ot my Diſciples ? 

- But if ye had known what this meaneth , I 
will have mercy, and not ſacrifice, ye would not 


have condemned the guiltlels. 

Neither Mark nor Luke have this Argument. Our Lyrd yer 
goerh on , taxing theſe great DoQors of Ignorance, The Text 
he quotcrh is, Ho/ea 6. 6, we mer With it betore quored by our 
Saviour, ap. 9.13. The meaning is, That God preferreth Mercy 
bfore Sacrifice ; where two Laws in reipett of ſome Circumſtances 
ſcem ro clath one with another, fo as we cannot obey both , our 
Obedierice 1s due to thar which is the more Excellent Law, Now, 
{ſaith our S:viour, che Law of Mercy 1s the more Excellent Law : 
God preterreth ut before Sacrifice; which had you well conſidered, 
you would never have accuſed my Diſciples who in this point are 
£zilt leſs. 

3 For the Son of man is Lord, even of the 
{ibbath day. 

This Argument Luhe hath, chap. 6. 5. Mark hath it thus, chap, 

2.27, 28, And he ſaid unto them, The Sabbath was made for Man, 
and nt Man for the Sabbath; therefore the Son of Man is Lord alſo 
of the S.bbath, Some Interpreters make theſe Two Arguments: 
it. The Sm of Man ws Lord of the Sabbath: Therefore it is in my 
Power to ditpence with this 4&ion of my Diſciples , tho? it had 
been contrary to the Letter of the Law : Or rather, Therefore it 
is in my Power to interpret the Law which I my felf made, 
2. The Sabbath is made for Man, not Man for the Sabbath. A Law 
made for the Good of another, bindeth not in ſuch Caſes where 
the Obſervation of it would be evidently for his Harm and Ruin. 
The Law o: the Sabbarh was made for rhe Good of Man, that he 
mizht have a Solemn Time in which he ſhould be under an 
Obligation to pay his Homage unto God ; this muſt not be fo in- 
rerpreted, as would rend to the Deſtruction of a Man. TI find 
Interpreters divided about that term, the Son of Man. Some think 
rar 1c is nor to be interpreted , as uſually in the Goſpel con- 
cerning Chris, but of ordinary Men; and that Man's Lordſhip 
over the Sabbarh, is proved by the Subſerviency of it ro his Good; 
to which End alfo it was crdained. Bur certainly that is both a 
d.mgzrntgs and unſcriptural Interpretation; dangerous to give Man 
a Lordſhip over a Moral Law ; 10r 1t 15 very improper to call any 
id of 4-thing becauſe he hath the uſe of ir, and it is for his 
advantaze: I cannot fee but we may as well make Man Lord of 
the whole Ten Commandments, as of one of them : Un{criptural ; 
for rho” our Saviour uſeth this Term more than Threefcore times 
in the Grſp2! , yer he always uſerh 1c with Relation to himſelf, 
never with Reference to any meer Man : Neither is there any 
neceffiry to underſtand ir otherwiſe here. Chri8t athrming him- 
felf Ld of the Sabbath, ſpake properly enough to the Phariſees 
Quarrel: For ir muſt needs then tollow, thar he had Power to 
diſpence with the Ot/ervation of 1t at particular times ; and much 
more to give a true and right Interpretation of the Law con- 
Cerning 1t. 

9 And when he was departed thence, * he went 
into their ſynagogue. 

Mark faith, chap. 3.1. He went again into their Synagogues on 
the Sabbath-day. This our Saviour wasotren wont to do, co own 
there what was done according to his F.zther's Inſtitution, and him- 
{e!t, ro do what Grad he could : Nor doth he now decline 1t be- 
caule he had had fo late a Contest with them. Ir 1s therefore 
1:id, that he went into their Synzgogues, as being neither aſhamed 
of what he had dclivered, nor afraid to own it in the Face of his 
Adverlaries 


St MATTHE E VV. 


10 And behold, rhere was a man which had /:;; 


might accuſe him. 

Mark repeating the ſame Hiſtory, faith , chap. 3. 1,2. 7, 
was 4 man which had a Withered hand, and they watched him whe ok 
he would heal him on the Sabbath-day, that they might accuſe tins 
So ſaith Luke, chap, 6. v. 6,7. only he addeth, rhar it was his +;,;; 
Hand, wtch made his Aﬀiction greater : They asked hin; ow 
that chey mighc righely inform themſelyes, bur that they mij bt 
accuſe him to their Magiſtrates, that had Power in thoſe Calc. 
tor ze Violation of the Sabbath was, amongſt the Jews, a Capi: 
ral Crime. ; 


11 And he faid unto them, What man ſhall 
there be amongft you, that ſhall have one ſheep 


Im, 


not lay hold on it, and lift zz out? 

12 How much then is a man better than a ſheep? 
Wheretore it is lawful to do well on the ſabbath. 
days. 

Mark faith, chap. 3. 3, 4, $5» And he ſaid unto the man that h,4 
the withered hand, Stand forth. And he ſaith unto them, Is it law- 
ful to da good on the Sabbath-days, or to do evil ;, to ſave life, yr t5 
kill * But they held their peace. Luke reports it thus, chap, 5,8, 
But he knew their thoughts, and ſaid to the man which had the wi. 
thered hand, Riſe up, and jtand forth in the mid$ﬆ; and he aroſe, cn 
89d forth. Then ſaid Feſus unto them, IT will ask you one thing, 1, 
it lawful on the Sabbath-days t2 do good, or to do evil ;, to ſave lije, 
to deſtroy it ? . Chriſt knew their Thoughts: He necded nc: 
that any Map . ſhould tell him what was in the Heart of Men , 
he knew their Deſign in coming, and propounding this Queſtion, 
He calls this Man with the withered Hand to fiand torth, char alt 
Men might ſee, and take notice of hjm.Then he argueth the Ca 
with the Phariſees, telling chem, that they themtelves wou!d 
grant, that it a Man had a Sheep tallen into a Pit on the Sabbath. 
day, chey might labour ſo far as ro take it our, (10 it feemerh thar 
in Chriſt's time they did expound the Law.) They alfo knew tha 
the Lite, or Good of a Man, was to be preterred betore the Lf: 
of a Beat ; 1n their reproving him theretore they condemned 
themſelves in a thing which they allowed. Then he propounds 
a Queſtion to them , which Matthew hath nor ; bur ic is men- 
rroned both by Mark and Lube. He asketh them, Whether it wa 
Iiwful on the Sabbatheday to do Good ,, or to do Evil © To ſave Life, 
or to deſtroy it 2 The Argument is this : Whatſoever is £ood to 
fave the Life of Man, may be done on the Sabbath-day ; bur this 
15 4 good Ation. If I ſhould nor lend him my Help, when it 
in my Power, I ſhould, in the Senſe of God's Lav, kill him. 


13 Then faith he to the man, Stretch torth thine 
hand : and he ſtretched zr forth, and zz was reſtored 


whole, like as the other. 

Mark ſaith, They held their peace ; they made him no Anfier 
to his Queſtion ; upon which , Ae looking round about him wi: 
Anger, being grieved for the hardneſs of their Hearts, he ſpake un 
the Man, — Stretch forth thine Hand. Luke faith , Looking atcut 
them all, he ſaid , &c. Our Saviour looked about him, to fee # 
any of cthem'would adventure to anſwer him , bur he faw their 
Mouths were ſhut. He was angry, that theſe grear Doors of the 
Law ſhould underſtand the Law of God no better, and ſhould yr 
be to hardy as to take upon them to inſtru him. Ae wa 3/5 
grieved ( faith Mark_) at the Hardneſs of their Hearts : That 
which we call Hardneſs, 1s a quality m a thing which refifterh 
the Truth, a non-imprefliveneſs, when a thing will receive ns 
impreſſion from things apt to make impreſſions. The Hardnet: of 
the Phariſees Hearts lay in this, That whereas Chriſt's Words and 
Works might reaſonably, and ought to have made an impreſſion 
upon them of Faith, chat they ſhould have owned and received 
him as the Meſtah , yer they had no ſuch Effe&, nor made any 
ſuch Impreſſions upon them. He faid tothe Man, | Stretch firth 
thine Hand,and he ſtretched it forth, &c. | Chriſt fomerimes uſed 
the Ceremony of Taying on his Hand ; here he doth nor, to ler us 
know, that that was but a Sign of what was done by his Poe”, 
What little things malicious Men will Carp at ? What was here 
of ſervile Labour on the Sabbath-day * They did far more them- 
ſelves, as often as they lifred a Beaſt our of a Pit. Our Savi9ur 
compounds, or prepareth no Medicaments ; he only ſpeaks :lt 
Word, and he 1s Healed, But Matthew tells that, 


lame Man was miraculouſly healed. They certainly were Mad to 
ſee themſelves confured, who would nor acknowledge him to &x 
che Meſſiah, or to hear themſelves Non-plu$, or to find themic]vc5 
Contradifed, (a thing proud Men cannor bear.) They take Coun 
cel with the Herodians, ( of whom we ſhall have occaſion to 14) 


Phariſees, to have been ſteady Enemies one to anorher ; br 
Herod and Pilate can agree when Chriſt is to be Crucifed. 

15 But when Jeſus knew zz, * he withdrew hin: * 
ſelt from thence : and preat multitudes followed 
him, and he healed them all, 

16 And * charged them, that they ſhould oo! 
make him known. 


Hcre 1s nothing in theſe two Verſes, but whar we have betore 
met with : The Mulritudes have followed Chriſt in all his 


tions, from his firſt beginning to Preach, avd co Werk his m:racu- 


s Jous 


Chap. X] 


hand withered ; and they asked him, ſaying , * 1; _ 
it lawful to heal on the ſabbath-days ? that they br 


and * it it fall into a pit on the ſabbath-day, will be *;.s. 


14 Then * the Phariſees went out, and || held 2 */ 
councel againft him, how they might deſtroy him. 
Luke faith, They were filled with madneſs, and communed one with 7. 
another, what they might do to Jeſus. Mark ſaith, They ſtraight 
took councel with the Herodians again him, how they might defi”) © (,. 
him. Whart cauſe of their Madneſs was here offered? A pot .... 


more when we come to Chap. 22.) All agree them, and ite | 


(_ 


= 
C > 


with | 
that ti 
The v 
called 
a Ser 
[Who 
in I/a 
Matth 
taken 
Whom 
<nle t] 
of the 
Peter 1 
a chief 
In I/at; 
The we 
and 7u 
Interp1 
probab 
Judgm 
firth ; 
judgerh 
Govern 
the Go) 
end Go 
61. I. 
3+ 34+ 
Glaaneſs 
to Chrif 


19 

man h 

Thel: 
deſty of 
his Wor 
with an 
took Cot 
withdre! 
ther; tie 
Craving 
Wounde 
his Veict 
neſs ; nor 
FAY) his Mi 
take nor; 
not to p; 


; 0 ; 
Ing flax 
fort!1 1 
He tha! 
upen a by 
deſpiſe th 
Bur the h 
Souls, 
Weak- in 
of which 
tapho: "0 
or ſuch a 
Chriſt is} 


& "3, | '£ 
liznifiesel 
ſhall neve 
Quench a 
ment her 
rhe 5 WI 
Mefhth, 1 
tl he th 


( | Jup- Xl [. 


= 
o . 
. - 


He healed them ail, muſt be underitood of 
Sick. The Charge he gives 15 the ſame, which 
- have ofren mer With ; of which no fatisfaRory Account can 
= iven furcher, than thar knowing his time was not yer come, 
= h 4 ſo much work to do before his Death, he uſed all pru- 
IG — to preſerve his Life, reſerving himſelf for the further 
0 bgch his Father left him ro do. The publiſhing af his 
awed would have made a great noife, and poſſibly have more 
cr che haviſces againſt him 3 neither did he ſeek his own 
— >ur che Glory of him that ſent him. 
!0ry, " ; 
17 That it might ” fulfilled which was ſpoken 
© Eſ1725 the prophet, ſaying, 
OY krſ id this: chat is, he joe nimſelf when he heard 
whar Councels the Phariſces and Herodians had taken, He charged 
thoſe whom he had cured, thar they ſhould nor publiſh ir abroad ; 
to did choſe good Adts before ſpoken of, That it might be ful- 
witnd which was ſpiken by the Prophet ; Thar he mighr ſhew 
himſelt ro be the very Perſon whom the Propher [/ziah long fince 
did forercl , 1/4. 42- 1,2,3, 4 The Words in the Prophet are 
thus: Bold my Servant whom I uphold, mine Elect in whom my 
$5.1 celichterth : T have put my Spirit upon him, he ſhall bring forth 
7,1:ment to the Gentiles. He ſhall not cry, nor lift up, nor cauſe his 
ico to be heard in the flrect. A bruiſed Reed ſhall he not break, 
«nd the (moaking Flax ſhall he not quench « or ſh.:ll bring forth Fudg- 
ment unro Truth. He ſhall not fil, nor be diſcouraged, till he hath 
2: Fudsment in the Earth; and the Iſles ſhall wait for hs Law. Tous 
{:r char Propher. Let us now confder his Words, or Prophecy, 
3s repeat2d by the Evangehlit, 
18 * Behold, my ſervant whom I have choſen, my 


fous Operations: 
thoſe rhar Were 


- þ:loved * in whom my ſoul is well pleaſed : I will 


pur my ſpirit upon him , and he thall {hew judg- 
2m to the gentiles. 

The Alteration is very little, and we muſt nor expett tro meer 
with Quotations our of the Old Teſtament Verbatim; it is enough 
thartze Senſe is the ſame. {Behold my Servant whom Thave chyſen. 
The word indifferently ſignifiech a Childor a Servant : Chrilt 1s 
calicd the Lord s Servant, becauſe he rook upon him the Form of 
a Servant, and became obedient even. to Death, Phil. 2. 7,8. 
[Whom T have chiſen, my Beloved in whom my Soul 3s well pleaſed. 
In 1/24 ic is, Whom T uphold, mine Ele in whom my Soul delighteth. 
Matthew ſeems to have lefr our Whom T uphold, and to have 
taken the next words, Mine Ele; and to have tranſlated them, 
hom I have choſen; which was all faid. by the Propher. God 
</e the Lord Jeſus Chriſt ro be our Redeemer, and the Head 
of the Ele; hence we are faid to be choſen in him, Eph. 1. 4. 
Peter faith, he was fore-ordained, 1 Pet.1.20. and 2.6. he is called 
a chief Corner-ſtone, Ele. | My Beloved in whom I am well pleaſed. | 
In J/aiah it is, In whom my Soul delighteth. The Senſe 1s the ſame: 
[172 ſhall bring forth Judgment to the Gentiles ,] or, to the Nations. 
The words, YDWA, Miſhphat in the Hebrew, ves in the Greek, 
and Judgment in the Engliſh, are all ſo varioutly uſed, as gives 
Interpreters a great Latitude to abound in their Senſes. The moſt 
probable co me is this, Fudgment ſignifies a thing adjudged ; all 
Judzment is either of Approbation or Condemnation. He ſhall bring 
firth; or , he ſhall ſhewv the things which God approverh and 
judzerh right , both in Matters of Do&rine, Worſhip, and the 
Groernment of the Church of God, and in Matters which concern 
the Government of Men's Lives and Converfarions; and to this 
end God promiſerh to pur his Spirit upon him; fo 1/2. 11. 2. and 
61.1. And John tells us, it was not given him by meaſure, Cap. 
3.24, Which 1s the ſame with being anvinted with the Oil of 
Gladneſs above his Fellows, Pfal. 4.5. 7. which the Apoſtle applicth 
to Chriſt, Heb. I. 9. 

i9 He ſhall not ftrive, nor cry, veither {hall any 


man hear his voice in the ſtreets. 

Theſe words declare the Meckneſs, and Gentlenefs, and Mo- 
deſty of our Bleſſed Saviour : His Meehneſs, that he ſhould nor do 
his Work in any Paſſion, or Roughneſs, nor carry on his Kingdom 
with any Strite or Violence : Therefore when the Phariſees 
rook Councel againſt him, he made no oppoſition, bur peaceably 
withdrew, until the rime came when he was to be delivered ; and 
ther; hie as meekly yielded up himſelf , rebuking Peter for bur 
errvwing 2 ord for him, and healing his Ear which he had 
wouaded. Bis nor Crying , nor lifting up his Voice , or ſuffering 
his Veice to be heard in the Streets, might eirher ſignifie his Meeb- 
neſs; nor crying our to ſtir up 2157 ©-iviongor notſerting a Trumpet 
to bs Moth, waen F< {.:4 wreughta Miracle, chat People might 
take notice of *'-;, inſtead © it, he cliarged che Perſons healed 
not to pi”: it 18, 

10 A brn1#::4 reed he ſhall not break, and ſmoak- 
Ing flax {hall he not Quench, until he- kath brought 
tort judmtourt unto vittory. 

He ſhail carry on his Work with fo lirtle noiſe, that if he crod 
upen a by!3/2d Reed, he ſhould nor break it. Or, he ſhall not 
deſpiſe the Aﬀi'Gied, that are as bruiſc! ReeJr, and ſmoaking Flax. 
But the beſt Expoſitocs interpret it of Chriſt's Lindne/s to Peyples 
Souls, He will no: diſcourage thoſe that arc weak in Faith, or 
weak- in pe. $S:0ching Flax, fignifieri Flax, in the kindling 
of which the Fire hath not prevailed," ar4 £ is a very pt Me- 
taphe* to expreſs ſach as believe, bur are full of Doults and Fears, 
or ſuch as have a Truth of Grac2, but yer much Corruption : 
Cirift is Prophecicd of, as 61e that will incourage, not Gifcou- 
rage tuch Souls. | Until he hath brought forth Fudzment unto Vi- 
&"3,) (Hſaiah faich) untoTiuth. Some think that Until here only 
zMtesthe Event of the thing, nor a term of time; tor there 

ull never be a time when Chriſt ſh2!! break a b11i/ed Rezd, or 
quench a ſ1nnaking Flax, in the Senſe before mentioned. By 7:dg- 
ment here, may be meant as be:ore, whar his Farther hath judged 
right ; until he hath cauſed the DuQrine of the Geſpe), and rhe 
Wiſtzh, to be believed and imbraced of all the World. Or, un- 


S, MATTHEW 


tl! he ſhall have brought forth the Judzmenc of choſe broken 


Reeds, and that ſmoaking Flax into Vitory; until ſuch Souls be 
made perfet in Faith and Holinefs, and ſhall have got a Vickery 
over all irs Unbelief and other Corruprions. Or, uncil he hath 
brought forth Condemnation unto Victory ; (fer ſo the word 
ſ1gnifcrh) rill he hach Conquered De1th and Hell; fo as there 
ſhall be no Condemnation to any Soul rhat is 10 Chriſt Jeſus, R277; 
8.1. Or, Until the la Judgment comes 3 Which ſhall derermine 
in 2 pertect Abtolution, and Acquiral of all his People, and in a 
perfect ViRtory over all his Encmics. ; 


21 And in his name ſhall the gentiles truſt. 

' This makes ſome think , that the bringing of Judgment into 
Vieto;y, referreth to the fioal Deſtruction of the Jews by the Rc- 
mans ; after which the Gentiles came more univertaliy to reccive 
che Goſpel. Tho? Chriſt be mech and gentle. with Men 2 lons 
rime, while there is any Hope of chcir Reformation: yer he will 
nor be ſo meek and patient always : Neither was he fo with the 

ews : Bur the falling of them proved the riſing of the Gentiles. 
Chriſt is beholden to no People for bearinz the Name cf his 
Church ; it che Fews fail in their Duty. they ſhall he caſt off. and 
in his Name ſhall the Gentiles tru, cd is able ot Sconces to raiſe 
up Children unto Abraham. 1/xiah ſaith, The Iles ſhall wait for 
Þis Law; his Law both of Faithand Holineſs thall be acceptable ro 
the Gentiles, The term Law; here ſeemerh to expound thar Phraſe, 
V. 18, He ſhall ſhew Judgment to the Gentiles ; that is, rishr 
things ; he ſhall give them his Law. 


22*Then was brought unto him one poſieſſed with 
a devil, blind and dumb: and he healed him, info- 
much thar the blind and dumb both ſpake and ſaw. 

Some think this Perſon was the ſame mentioned, Zh. 11. 14. 
[ preſume, becauſe the following Diſcourſe rhere is much the 
ſame with what followeth kere ; bur others are of another mind . 
and ir 15certain Luke ſpeaketh of no Blindneſs in him. We heard 
betore a Diſcourſe of 1uch as were poſſeſſed by Devils, 1o as this 
Verſe affords nothing new. 

23 And all the people were amazed, and ſaid, 
Is not this the ſon of David 2 

This is the firſt Conviction we mec with from the Miracles 
wrought by our Saviour, that he was the Meſſiah; unleſs that 
of the two blind Men, mentioned Inrtth. 9.27, And their Faith 
In ir appears bur weak, for they do nor plainly atfirm ir, only 
ask the Queſtion , like the Faith of thoſe mentioned 7oh. 7. 31. 
_ Chris cometh , will he do more Miracles than this Man hath 

one : 


24. But when the Phariſees heard 2 , they ſaid, 
This fe//ow doth not eaft out devils, but by Beelze- 


bub the prince of the devils. 

We mer with the ſame Blaſphemous Calumny from the ſame 
Perſons, chap. 9. 34. The Phariſees not acknowledging rhe Deiry 
of Chriſt, nor that he was the Meſſtah, were for their Intereſt 
concerned, not to acknowledge, and as much as in them Jay, ro 
keep others trom believing, that he did that trom his own Power, 
which God alone could do. Bur yer they might have. allowed 
him to have, by a Power derived trom God,done thele miraculous 
Things, as Elijah and Eliſha of old did. Bur they Blaſpheme at 
rhe higheſt Rate imaginable, afſcribing that to the Devil, which 
was proper to God alone. Chriſt's 2{iracles were exceeding many, 
and it was a time when the Meſſtth was expeted. The Sceptor 
was departed from Fudah; and as it appears trom 7oh. 7. 31, 
(whatever the Jews now ſay impudently,) they heard chat when 
the Mefſtah did come , he ſhould work many Miracles, Theſe 
things puts them into a Rage. This remarkable Piece of Hiſtory 
1s recorded by three Evangeliſts. By Matthew in this place, by 
Mark, chap. 3. 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 47, 28, 29,30. and by Lute, 
chap. 11. 17,18, 19, 20. 

25 And Jeſus knew their thoughts, and ſaid rnto 
them. Every kingdom divided againſt it ſelf, is 
brought to deſolation ; and every city or houſe di- 
vided againſt it ſelf, ſhall not ſtand. 

26 And if Satan caſt out Satan , he is divided 
againſt himſelf, how {hall then his kingdom ſtand ? 


This 15 our £5r4's firſt Argument, Mark relates ir, chap. 3. 23; 
24, 25, 26. With little Alteration in the Phraſe; fo doth Lube, 
chad.11. 17, 18. The Sum of the Argument is, The Devil is /o 
wiſe that he will Ihok to the ny .liing of iis "own Kingdom 
in the World, This will require as Azreement ct the Devils 
amongſt themſelves; tor it they be divided, they cannor uphold 
their Kingdom, nor ſtand, any more than an Houſe, Ciry, or 
Kingdom 1n the World fo divided can ſtand ; rheretcre the Prince 
of Devils will nor forcibly caſt our the 1reriour Devils. There 
15 bur one imaginable Objection to this, Ds we nur tee the con- 
trary to this in People's going ro Cunnng-Hen, for help avainſt 
thoſe that are Gewitched, to zer help tor rnem; and 1s there no 
Truth in thoſe many Stories we have of Perſons char have tound 
help againſt the Devil, from ſome thar fave Traded with the 
Devil? I Anſwer; Ir 1s one thing for the Devils ro Play one 
wich another, another thing for chem to Caſt our one another, 
One Devil may yield, and give place to another, for co gain 
a greater Advantage for the whole Society ; bur one never quar- 
rclleth with another. The firſt may be for che inlarging of 
Satan's Rinzdom ; this muſt be ro deſtroy ir. When a poor 
wretched- Creature goech to one wao dealeth wich the Devil 
tor help for one who is vexed with ſome effe& of the Devil ; 
one Devil here doth but yield, and give place to another by 
Compa@, voluntarily , and for the Devil's greater Advanrage ; 
for it is more Advantaze to the Devil ( who ſceks nething ſo 
much as a Divine Homage )) t© zain the Faich of one Soul, than 
to Exerciſe a Power to Afi many Bodies. In tfuch Cafes as 
theſe, the Devil, for the Abaremenr of a lictle Bodily Pain, gains 
2 Power over the Soul of him cr her who cometh to implore h's 


Help, and exerciſerha Faith in him, This 15 ar Eſtabiſhing, Prc- 
MOYINg, 


Chap. X11. 


"Soo Cl Wb: 
Go 32 


——_ 
_—_ G _— —_ I ' 5 I 5A W - 
Z ”* > 5] 4 , - - - __ ” 
ps. 4 S - <> *, = - 
- RY 0 4 P 
ns a © 4 p 
A PR - $.v# h_ C =—TY 
- > 4 Fo Fo h - IT 0 - P 
4 mo _ OE —” - - X — 
I: Lenees CO. 4 Warts ; _— . ——— avg - 
_ 6 . * um, - - — wt : " as 4 . - - - 
* - A— 4 ge oy u_ ”—o_— _ . -" 
T . ”- «x > __ w—aby > = an—_ 5 : ne wo —_— 4 
= - MP ” A : - 
FY CR Fu = : -T 4 " } 
AL. x BY 2 : - . > ; " 
ROB Yout. -obx87 95-2 , - _—_ < - 3 / 
Y Gs w_ : a o = —_— ay "4 i __ 
Fo: 4+" R _ bo So oy -- 


nr" 
- - ; 
6, 2K 
by ue , 
IEY 
+ - 
Y_ V 26 
Eee. 
. 
£1 Wage +. 
- _ —_ ” 
A — 
Fs —_ < 
» > , 
p yy 


LL . Pn TIER 
OW; 
5 "Vo. —_ ". : 
SIA. 
- = A. 
© & 3 


” 
be = - < - 
= w_ - — a EIT 
ven . = w _ omg" 
4 —_— - = > ——— - = Ix . A ue” 
_ — = ——— _ —_ or 1 HIT RIS. 7. —- 
a by = - = Ss Iz "= 
= _ = =# - 4 
_ = — — V Pre n __. I - —_ _ :D - - — 
y ; p C 2 FS Ln < . 
> ſs X = — nt —_—_—_— - n - = 4 6 
= : _—_— ” oe . " y hw nr PRIFES - mg PER A 4 
Sg oh; 4x +4 'S *. A a dc] 5 _ d — ' : , —  —_ _ 
C + = " ' . e . - 4 | " : ot 
doe; 's <= En” 2, \ W1/ ed A E 8 "Ons - wy Y 4 _ - 
_ : 7 at : ; - - gS-.- 4 P, f ” p 4 - _ —— —_ # % » 
— =__4 yo : WW _ Dea _ . "_= = = IS 


tf pa pt PRE > 


—_—_ 


=_ 


Boe 


Fx + 4 
5 T <td , 
ig >. 22 FEE. - 


- 


Chan. X 1I. 


moving and Inlarging his Kingdom. Bur Chriſt forced the 
Deviis our of Perlonsz they did nor yield Voluntarily tor 4 
crearer Advantage, but Forcibly for no Advantage. He did not 
vray the Devils to Come our, nor make ule of any of che Devil's 
S.craments ; upon the uſe of which by ſome Original Comp.zet, he 
was 0!;\izcd to come our, upon a Soul's ſurrender of ir felt by 
Faith to him 34 bur rhey came our unwillingly upon the Aurhort- 
tative Words of C'rilt, wichout the uſe of any Magical Rites 
and C:rommies, reftitying the leaſt Zymage done to hm. 

| 27 And if I by f Beelzebub caſt out devils, by 
Rub, whom do vour children caſt zhem our? Theretore 
they thall be your judges. 

Our Saviour's Argument is. this , Where the Caje 35 ? he ſame, 
the Judgment ought to be the ſame; and the contrary Judgment 
ſpeakerh Malice and Hatred ot the Perſon. Do I caft our De- 
vils? So do your Children. You fay they do it by the rower 
ot God, why do you fay that I do ir by a Prince ot Devils: 
Whar appeareth in cheir caſting ot rhem our more than 1 me, 
wiiich c:n argue that they do 1t by the Power 0: G t, and | by 
the Powerof whe Prince of Deviis* The only Quejtion ts, Wno 
our Saviour here meanerh by tncir Children 2 Some tlunk chat 
he meaneth his own Ap?/Hes, who were all of them Jews, and 
to whom they mizhr be more tavourable chan to him , becauic 
of their Relation ro them. Ochers think char he means lome 
Ex:iciits amongft the 7ews ; tluch rlicy had, Acts 19. 13. Bur 
Concerning theſe, there is a double Opinion 5 ome chink char 
they were fuch as themſelves , Ated by Compatt of tlic Devil. 
Others think thar they Invocating the God of Abran.um, 7ſ-ac, 
and 7b, God might Honour them 1o far , as upon thar Javo- 
cation to command the Devil our of Perſons. Origen and fuſtin 
1:rtir hou tell us, that there were ſome that uted that form 
with ſuch ſuccett. Bur ſo they might do, and yer not obtain 
their FF trom a Divine Influence, nor 1o much c.18 as flatter out 
Devils, upon an /{194;e firſt paid to the Devil. 1 find ſoine 
Pificulry to perfvade my felt, that 1n thoſe crimes, eſpecially 
when God, by this Miraculous Effet, was Demonſtrating the Me/- 
{i s, God ſhould to far concur with any but him, and thoſe that 
Gd it by his expreſs N.ame and Authority : And I obſerve; that 
when the ſeven Sans of Sceva attempred ſuch a thing, A&s 19.13, 
to crfed over them which had Evil Spirits , in the Name of the 
Ind Jens, und ſaid, We adjure you by Teſs whom Paul preacheth , 
{which they being the Sons of the chief of the Prieſts, would 
not have done, it the more gratetul Form of, The God of Abra- 
ham, Izac and Jacob, would have done it;) yet could they not 
prevail, (as you read there , ver. 14,15, 16.) Our Saviour's 
meaning theretore muſt certainly be, either , 1. You do not 
ſay fo of your Children, my Apoſtles, who do , and proteſs ro do 
what they do by a Power derived from me : Why do you ſay 
this of mc, not of them? 2. Or, There are ſome of you who 
ſeem to caſt out Devils,  whenas the Devil only plays with them, 
and vields to their Magical Arts for his own Advantage, and abartes 
ſome more Extern.cl Effe&s on Peoples Bodies, upon the Surren- 
der of their Souls to him , by believing he is able to Cure chem, 
and imploring his Help; yer you think chefe Men endowed with 
the Power of Grd ; Whyare you ſo unequal to me ? I obſerve, 
tho' we read of Fxci/ts amongſt the Jews, Aﬀs 19.13. yer they 
are called ooueytuerce, Vagrants ; They were an idle vag.chond 
ſort of Pertons, ( tuch probably as we call Gypſies) with whom, 
or by whom , ic is not probable God would work flich Effeds, 
eſpecially at ſuch a time; tho' chey uſed the Names of Abraham, 
1/:.c,and 72h, Nay, it is plain trom the Story of the As, thar 
tho! they uſed the Name F295, God would nor work by them, 
wv. 15. The Demmiach leapt upon them , overcame them, prevailed 
24118 them , ſo that they fled out of the Houſe naked and wounded. 


28 Bur if I caſt ont devils by the Spirit of God, 
then the kingdom of God 1s come unto you. 


Luke hath the ſame, chap. 11. 20. only for the Spirit of God, 
he haci the Fmger of Gd. By the Kingdom of God, he here mean- 
et the Coming of the Meſſizh, which is fo called, Dan.2.44. The 
time is come When the Lord begins his Kingd»m ef Grace ; ſet- 
ring up his King upm his Holy Hill of Zion, Plal. 2.6. Whence we 
may obferve, that Chriſt giverh in his caſting out of Devils by a 
Divine Power, as an Argument to prove himſelf the Meſſiah : For, 
ſaich he , by this you may know, ie Kingdom of God 3s come 
ammeg$t vous that there 1s one come among you who by the 
Finger , Power , or Spirit of God , caits our Devils. But where 
had the force of this Argument been, it the Jews had had Ex- 
o:cilts, whom God had fo honoured, tho' /agabond's, as co caſt out 
Devils, upon their calling upon the God ot Abrahum, Iſaac, and 
7.coh, while in the mean time they derided and contemned 
Chriſt ? 

29 Or elſe, how can one enter into a ſtronz man's 
houſe, and fpoil his goods, except he firſt bind the 
ſtrong man, and rhen he will ſpoil his houſe. 


2.5% hath the ſame Words, with litcle variation, ar. 3. 27. 
Tie, cp. 11. 21, 22, ſaith, When a ftrong Man armed beeperh his 
Oal.ce, bs Goods are in peace: But when a ſtronger than he cometh 
um him, and overcyreth him, he taketh from him all his Armour 
woorein ho trufed, and divideth his (pail. The Senſe is che fame, 
tio? che Words be multiplied. Our Saviour ſhewech how his 
c:\tinz our of Devils by che Spirit and Power ot God, argued 
thur che Wet was come. and the time come when God would 
ſer up Ins Kingdm amonglit Men. The Devil (faith he) who 1s 
rhe Uid of the World , and the Prince of th? Power of the Air, 
13 very ſtrong ; there 1s none, fave God only , who 1s ſtronger 
than he ; If I were nor God I could never caſt our this Strong 
3}/:m, who Reigns in the Irld as in his Hyſe. As you fee 
am2agſt Men, rhe Strong Man 1s not overcome but by one 
ſt-03:er. He by this alfo Iecs them know, that he was fo tar from 
ay Comnant or Comp.it with Beelze5uhthar he came into rhe Iorld 
a protcſied Enemy to him, to diſpolicts him of that Tyrani. a! 


S. MATTHEW. 


Chap, X] 


Power be Exerciſed amongſt Men , by his keeping them in D;- 
neſs, blinding them with Error- and Superſtirion , and (2 os af 
chem to ſinful Practices , till God , for their prodizious qhing 
ail» given him a Power over their Bodies, variouſly tc 4 
Afi, and Torment. them. Chriſt rook from this iron; 15, 
his Armour : By ſcattering the Darkneſs which was in the ah wo all 
the full revel.ition of Goſpel-Tizth : By expelling Erryy ang 5,» 
Stition; reaching People the Tiaths of Gd ; and the rib ”, 
his Worſhip ; By taking away the Guilt, and deſtroying the P;, 
ot Sin and Death, Ignorance, Error, Profanencſs. The Sc, ©. . 
Guilt ot Sin, and the Power of Lujts within us, beins the bes: 'S 
Armour, by which he kepr up his Power, and doth yer Toa py 
what Dominion he hath 1n the World. <P Up 
20 He that is not with me is againſt me. and 


4 
Y 


he rhat gathereth uot with me, {catter<th abroy, 
Lube hari rhe ſame, chap. 11. ver. 23. Some wnderſting 7c. 


concerning the Devil, whom he was 1o far from tavouring, ar 
his Work was quite oppoſite. Some underſtand ir c a : 
ſome Neaters, thar wouid neither ſheiv themilelves tor Chriſt, nx 
againſt him. Our $.vi2r rells them, char this Cauſe woylg b ir 
no Neutrality, they muſt be either tor him or apainſt hin, "a 
p-tbly it is beſt underſtocd concerning the $ bes and Phy. 
whom he lets know, Thar he was one that ſhewed Men the 5... 


>) 
% 


way oft Life and Salvatiom, and thoſe that complicd nor +;-1 
lim were his Enemies 3 and inſtead of gathering, jcattere.t 4. 
Shccp ot God, | | 

21 Wherefore I ſay unto you, All manner of {1 
and blaſphemy ſhall be forgiven unto men: but th. 
blaſphemy againſt rhe þo/y Ghoſt thall not be tors: 
Ven unto men. : 

22 And whoſoever ſpeaketh a word againſt tho 
Son of Man, it {hall he forgiven him : * but whe. +... 
ſoever ſpeaketh againſt the holy Ghoſt, it thull nc 1;, 
be torgiven him, neither in this world, neither in th- 
world ro come. 


 Miih repeaterh the ſame , chap. 3. v. 28, 2g. with no Alters. 
tion 2s to the Senſe; and inſtead ot neither in this World, my (6 
World to come; he faich, But is in danger of Eternal Damn.ati-+ 

Luhe hath ſomething of it, chap. 12. 10, And whoever (12, 
ſpeak a word agair$t the Son of Man, it ſhail be forgiven him : © 8; 
unto him that Bl.iſphemeth agcir$t the Holy Ghc$, it ſhall nt le 14 
given, Ir 18a Text hath very much cxercifed great Divines, und 
much more perplexed pocr Chriſtians in their Firs of 2elinct; 

and under Temptations, There 1s in it ſomething aflerted  tliat :: 
That all manner of Sin and Blaſphemy ſhall be forgiven, v. 22, |{|:- 
ſoever ſhall ſpeal; a word again8t the Son of Min, it ſhall be firgive:. 
(rhat 15, upon the rerms other Sins are torgiven , Repent.ance and 
Fiirh \n Feſs Chrif..) By the Sm of Man here, ſome would un- 
deiſtand any ordinary Man : Eut, 1. Chriſt never ſpake © an 
under that Noricn, but himſelf. 2. It had been no ercat Nos. 


11N{k 
KITS 


forgiven. A Text yieldinz exceeding egreat Relief to Saul 
labouring under the Burden of cheir Sits, and retl-Qing upon 
their Aggravation, Bur che Diificulty lieth jn che latrer par: & 
che Texr , which denteth Forgiveneſs to any who B/.;iphome the 
Hly G8, Upon this ariſe ſeveral Queſtions, 1, Queſt, i{% 
the Sin again8t the Holy Ghod here ſpecified was  Anjw. It is not 
hard to gacher this trom the Context, and what 3b 2ddet!, 
ch.tþ. 3. v. 30. Becauſe they ſaid he had an unclean Spirit. Crit 


did by the Power of the Devil. This out of doubr was their $i 


ot their own Confciences. Hence ariſeth a ſecord 2c: 
Whether any ſuch Sin can be now committed ? Anſw, 1 ticrc wers 
no other Text of Scripture to prove that there may, but it 
only , I ſhould conclude that there is no ſuch Sin now to 9 
commited; for we cannot have ſuch means of Convidtion 2+ tt 
Phariſees had, Chriſt nor being on the Earch, now working M74: 
cles; bur it is plain from other Scriptures, that there is 1uc!: 2 >: 
char Men and Women may yer incur theGuilr of ; See He5.5.4 54% 
and chap. 10. 26,27, and 1 7oh. 5. 16. where he ſpeaks ct a 3"! 


unto Deat?;, tor the Forgiveneſs of which he would not hV: 


Chriſtians to pray : Bur now what that Sin is, hath exerciſcd i 
Judgment of the greateſt Divines ro deſcribe, I ſhall nor repc*! 
the various Opinions about ir, many of whic! are eafily cot 
tured ; bur ſhall determine from the Guidance cf the 5:1 
char mention it,fo tar as they will dire& in the finding of 't « 
I. It cannot be any Sin that is committed ignoranily. Pat 2: 
a Blaſphemer, bur forgiven, becauſ? he did it ignorantly. 2. 7:7 
be a Sin kmwingly committed again the Operations of 19 
238t; to was this Sin of the Phariſezs: 3. 4po/iacy mult bY &t 
ingredient 1n it: If they fall away, faich the 4y5He, Fob. 5. 5 
is 4 ſinning wilfully after the receivins the Knwledge? of te Tru: 
He3. 10.26, It ſhould ſeem by this Text Per /ecriirn 15 2 
dient in it: The Phariſces did nor only tay chis, our th 
ic our of Malice, defigning to deſtroy Chritt, 5. Mit 
ic is, that tho* Impenitercy cannot be called rthar Sin, vct ' 
be an ingredient in it; for whar Sins we truly repent © , ##-- 
be forgiven, 1 79h. 1.9, And therefore the 4p/He faith of I 


- 
_ 


TT 
V »- 
wh bn ©: 7 


Sinners, Ir 1s impoſible they ſhould be renewed by Repert ice. op 


ſpoke! 
Scribe, 
things 
the bt 
2 corr 
You ft 
torch ; 
and Vi 
Or, 3. 
jade r 
be £00 
thar I « 
a cOrrup 


23 
heart, | 
out of 

The F 
What 1s | 
them, an 
5 of all © 
calling th 
Were pen 
(Hs Cn 
tpend my 
You Favd 
therefore 
abund,mco 
and dell 
of their } 
their Hear 
commonly 
Envy, Prid 
things, 

26 B 
that me 
of in the 


S>me un 


Ce word &: 
b 4 . . ) 
uCre Ur-uin 


3 = 
vt EN thet 
» w, KHIAL 


hap. XIL. 


te whole then : If any Perſon harh been inſtrufted in the things 
+ Gd, and hath made a Profeſſion of Religion and Gadlinets, 
or vrerwards falleth off from his Profeſſion, and becomes a bir- 
wing to it; ſaying, Thar thoſe things are the Effetts of the 
mak: 9 Men , which his Heart telleth, him are the Operations 
—_—_ Holy Spirit, and be fo hardy as to perſecute and feek ro 
_ \ ſuch Perſons for ſuch Profeſſion : The Interpretation be 
ps old that hate us, and to the Enemies of our God. It they 
k. n not commuirred this unpardonable Sin, they have done what 
—_— like it; and I know no = they have, bur by a timely 
and hearty RePenrance to ſatisfie rhe World, or their own Con- 
{iences, char they are not under this dreadful Guilt, And thar 
which confirms me in this Opinion 1s, thar we rarely hear of tuch 
ved by Repentance, ( if any Inſtances of that Na- 
cure atall can be produced.) I do know rhar ſome have thought 
that this Sin might be committed ty Words , without other Overt- 
44s; and indeed Bl.iſpheming ( ene raken) can biggie n0- 
ching elſe bur Evil or Reproachful Speaking 3, bur thete Words 
muſt proceed from 4a malicious Heart, tull of Rancour and Re- 
venge ; for it is not every Word, noreevery Blaſphemy, char 15 
here neant : It is (as Auguſtine ſaith, ). Quoddam dietum, quedam 
Haphemia , A certain Word, certain Blatphomy. Nor Words 
ſpoken jgnorantly, or haſtily, .or according to our re-! Fuagmert and 
09m; but Words ſpoken maliciouſly, 11 order to deſtroy God, 
or Chriſt, if it were poſſible, afcer tufiicienr Means of Light and 
Conviction, that the things which we ſpeak Evi! of, are not from 
16 Evil, ( but probably ar leaſt ) trom tte Holy Spirit oft Gcd; 
ind yer we will impure them to the Devi], in crder ro the De- 
{iminz, or Deſtruttion of thoſe Servarrs of God who do them, 
or in ixhom they are found, We can define nothing certain in 
the Cafe, bur this cometh neareſt to rhe Sin here menrioned, that 
fall never be forgiven in this World, Wh the World to come © Thar IS, 
1 arh expounds it, the Perſons guilty ſhall be in danger of Eter- 
11 Damnation 3 by which he hath ſpoiled tlic Papijts Argument 
trom this Text, for their Purgatory. 


22 Either make the tree good , and * his fruit 
good : or clſe make the tree corrupt, and his fruit 


corrupt : for the tree is known by his fruit. 

We met with much the ſame, chap. 7. 16. As the Words here 
ſpoken may be urderſtood to have reference to the Devil, ro rhe 
Scribes and Phariſees, or to Chrif himſelf : You fay I do theſe 
thingsby the Devil ; you cannor bur ſay, the things | do are good, 
the Fruit tollowerh the Nature of the Tree : The Devil 1s Evil, 
1 corrupt Tree ; how can he produce good Fruit? Or thus, 
You ſhew your ſelves ro be corrupt Trees by the Fruit you bring 
forth ; you indeed are nor Leud and Profane, bur pur on a Mask 
and Vizard of Godlineſs ; bur your Fruit ſhewerh what you are. 
Or, 3. If che Fruir which I produce be good, why ſhould you not 
jadze me good ? Speak things that are conſiſtent, It the Fruit 
be good, the Tree muſt be gocd. Convince me ot any Evil things 
thar I do, from whence you can rationally conclude, that I am 
a corrupt Trees 

24 O generation of vipers, how can ye, being 
evil, ſpeak good things ? for out of the abundance 
> the heart, the mouth ſpeaketh. 

25 A good man, out of the good treaſure of the 
heart, bringeth forth good things : and an evil man, 
cut of the evil treaſure, bringeth forth evil things. 

The Evangeliſt Luke, chap. 5, 45. hath much the ſfam« with 
what is here, wer. 35. O generation of Vipers. Fohn had fo called 
chem, and Chriſt again fo callech them, ſatth. 23. 33. ' A I iper 
is of all other rhe moſt wvonmmous and dangers Serpent, Chriſt, in 
alling them a generation of I ipers, intimareth, thar rhe Phariſees 
were penerally a moſt mitchievous Fattion for the Souls of Men. 
(Hp can yo, being evil, ſpeak god things ?) Why do I (faith he) 
ipend my Time a::4 Breath in Reproving , or Admoniſhing you ? 
You kave cankered Hearts, full cf Pride, Malice, and Envy, and 
therefore cannor ordinarily ſpeak good things, For out of the 
abundance of the Heart, the Mouth ſpeabeth.- Whar Men ordinarily 
and deliberately do ſpeak , is irom the Aﬀe&ions and Thoughts 
of their Hearts, Hence Good Men, our of rhe good Treaſure of 
tieir Hearts, ſpeak Good rhi2s; thar is, moſt ordinarily and 
commonly ; and Evil Men, out of the ſtock of Malice, Revenge, 
any, Pride, and other Luſts which are in their Hearts, ſpeak Evil 
things, 

26 But I ſay unto you, That every idle word 
that men ſhall ſpeak, they ſhall give account there- 
t in the day of judgment. 

37 Forby thy words thou ſhalt bz juſtified, and 
by tay words thou ſhalt be condemned. 

>\me underſtand by idle Words here, [{3in2 and eceitful Words; 
aiters cmtumeling, and reproachful VW:7:4s. Bur tne beſt Interpre- 
*7% ere Extend the Senſe further ; not only trom the Senle of 
Cc word egy2y, here uſed, bur becauſe they judge our Saviour is 
«Cearzung , trom the leſs to the greater, cohvincinz the Pha- 
225 Witt a Areadful Account they had to give for cheir Blaſphc- 
ms and Reproachful Words, when all muſt give an Account 
cen tor thoſe Words which they ſperk ro no good purpoſe, bur 
ramly 3 Y1chour reſpec either ro the Glory of God, cr the good 
5 Nners , or their own neceſſary and lawtul Occaſions. Hence 
«x Apoitle doth nor only forbid Filthing/s, frolrſp Tulking, and 
DOS EPP. 5. 4. and corrupt Communication, Eph. 4. 29. but 
"© ame: /'0;/e commanderh, char Chriſtians Speech ſhould be 
nr 'j Edifying, that it may miniſter Grace t1 tre Hearers : and 
EY Cl ſans, chap. 4. 6. Let your Speech be always with Grace, 
© 24 With Salt. Nor will this ſeem too ſtrict ro thoſe who 
© mer, thar any thing is abuſed, when ir is nor uſed to the 
= end and uſe, God hath not given unto Man his Faculty 
. *P*(C1, to fil the World with idle Tartle and impertinent 
kno cg by ir, 1. We might bleſs God by Prayers 


Perfons rene\ 


P 


St MATT HER 


Ch; P- AIL 


and Praiſes, Talking of his Words and wondrous Werke. 2. T. ar 
we might Communicate our Minds to Men ,. 1n their cr cur own 
Concerns, and ſo be murualiy helptul cne to another, | Fir ty 
thy Words thu ſhalt te 7iftified, &c.} What Zuſtified } ere 114,nifics, 
appears by the word Condemed , (to whict ir is cxpoſed.) Gcd 
will pronounce Sentence ter cr againſt Men in the laſt day, nct 
only according to their other Aﬀtions, tur acccreinyly 25 they 
have uſed their Tongues. It there were ne ot)-or Toxt in the 
Bible ro prove that we have need uf ancther Righreoutnets, than 
any of our own , wherein to ſtand betere Ged, this Texc aione 
would be enough; tor, Zmes 3. 2. If 2 Man effend mt in; 1i; 
the ſame is a perfect Man. : 

- 38 * Then certain of the Scribes and of the Pha- * Var. 9. 
rifecs anſwered, faying, Maſter, we would fee a fipn 2" 
from thee. | : UN gk __ 

We read the like to this, chap. 15, 1.and Luke feemeth to re- aps 

lare the ſame Hiſtory, chap. 11. 29. Muſter was the utuzl Title 
which they gave ro any , whom they owned as a Teacher, By 
4.51gn, they mean ſomething that might contirm unto chem, that 
he was ſent of God ; they expedtcd that an extraordinary Mit. 
fion ſhould be ſo confirmed. So Joh. 6.30. What Sign ſhew-ci thou 
then, that we might ſee and believe thee © what at thay wor l- ? 
Mjes ſhewed them Signs (as they there go on) he brouche down 
tor them Bred fom Heaven. Had not Chriſt thewed them Sins 
enough , whar were all the Miracles he had wrought in their 
light? They either ſpeak this out a turcher Idle Curiclity ; 
( cheir Eye nor being farisfied with feeing,) or ee they tpcak 
t 11 dirett oppoſition to the whole Scope and Tendency ot our 
Saviour's tormer Diſcourſe, which was trem his Miracles, to prove 
himſelt truly God , and fent of Grd : If the latter , which 
ſcemerh trom our Saviour's ſharp Anſiver,moſt prebable, the Sum 
of whar they ſay is thys : Maſter, we have lecn thee do wonder- 
tul Works, bur no ocher than what Impoſtors may do by che 
atfiſtance of the Devil ; we would tee tomerhing done by thee 
which Magicians cannot do; ſuch as 3hles did, Exnd. 8.40. when 
the Magicimms contetied they were ourdone, and cried, Th 5s 7: 
Finger of God. 

29 But heanſivered, and ſaid unto them, An evil 
and adulterous generation ſceketh after a fign , and 
there ſhall no ſign be given to ir, but the ſign of the 
prophet Jonas. 

40 *Foras Jonas was three days 2nd three nights *Jon. 1.15: 
in the whales belly : ſo ſthall the Son of Man be - 
three nights and three nights in the heart of the earth, 
| An Evil and Adulterous Generation.) Either called 4dultcro:u; 
for thar Specifical Sin which reigned amongſt them, (and indeed 
their Polygamy was hardly better ) orelfe, becauſe ot their De- 
generacy trom ALraham whom they ſo much gloried in as their 
Father, Fob, 8. 39, 44. | Seeketh after a Sign | nor ſatisfcd with 
| My Miracles which I do on Earth, they would have a Sign from 
' Heaven, God was nor difhcult. of confirming and encouraing 

People's Faith by Signs. He gave Gideon 4 Stn upon Ins askins ; 
he gave Hezehich,and proterred Ahuz a Sin without askitnyz;, Eur 
he had already piven the Phuriſces Signs cnuuh , and furtcient 
ro convince them ; but they would not believe, but cut ot cu- 
rio'iry would have a Stgn ot ancther kind ; a Styn trom Heaven, 
as M.rh expounderh it, cp. 8, 11. Such a Sizn, as the Deri/ 
could not Counterteit, | There ſhait no Sign be given to it, | no 
Sizn of that Nature; for we ſhall find , char alter this Chriſt 
Wrought many Miracles : Burt they ſhall have a Sizn when I ſhall 
be riſen again trom the Dead to rheir Contution and Condemna- 
tion, when I fha!l Anfiver rhe Prophet Jonas |.1s Type of me. 

He was caſt into the Sza , and was three days ard three nights 
in the Belly of the Whale , mn the Heart of the Sea, Jonas 1. 17. 

And then the Whale womited him out upon the diy I.ind , chap. 2, 

So I ſhall be by them violently pur to Death, and ſhall be in the 
Grave part of three Days and three Nights, and then I (hall rife 
again from the Dead. Bur here ariſcri1 a Difficulty ; Chriſt in- 
deed dying the Day betore the Fewiſh Sabbath, and riſing the 
Morning afrer, might be faid ro be in the Grave three Days, he- 
cauſe he was there part of three Days ; bur how can ke be f:id ro 
have been there three Nights & For he was only 12 the Gr2ve the 
Night ot rhe Jewiſh Sabbarh,{(tor their Sabbath began ar cl. Even- 
ing betore) and the Night following, which were bur ewo Niukes, 
either in whole, or in part, Anſw, What we call Day and Ni-bt, 
made up the Jewiſh vv;93ues. It appears by Gen. 1. 5. that 
the Evening and the Morning made up a D.ry, Three Davs and three 
Nights is with us bur the fame thing wich chree Natural Days, 
and fo it muſt be underſtood here. Chrift was in the Grave three 
Natural Days ; Gat 1s, part of three Natural Days, every one 
of which Days contained a Day and a Night, viz. Twenry-tour 
Hours. 

41 The men of Nineveh ſhall riſe in judgment 

with this generation, and {hall condemn it, becaulſc 
they repented at the prexching ot Jonas: and behold 
4 greater than Jonas 1s here. 

The Story of the Men of Ninzveh we have in Fomah, ch1Þ. 2. 5. 
Lube repearerh the ſame Patſage, Luk. 11.32. | Toe Men of Nine» 
veh ſhall riſe in judgment , | that 18, ſhall ar che General Refur- 
region riſe , and ſtzind up in Judgment as Witneſſes azainſt 
the Scribes and Phariſees, and the other Unhelicving Zews of this 
Aze, and ſhall be Inſtruments, as to thar Condemnarion, whic!! 
God ſhall thar Day pronounce againſt chem. Why ? | Becw's 
thoy repented at the preaching of Jonas : and beheld a greater than 
Fonus is here.) Jonas was a Stranger to them z he wrought no 
Miracles amongſt them to confirm that he was {nt of God, he 
only came, and cried , Tet forty d-ys , and Nineveh ſhall ve a2- 
#;1zed; yer they repented, if not 7r4ly and ſircerely, yet in a»- 
pearance ; they ſhewed rthemlelves to be atffeted with what 7:7 gh 


n 
ia, 


faid 3 his Words made ſuch Inipreffions upon them, 2s chat the Kng 
Dd d PIO 


v.24 
oy VO RY 


= 


T 

| * 
' : "0 
p [ 
mt $i A 
" | 
ut; 

® 4 


TEAK 6 nm 


_ . * N . 0 In - - my a p—_ - Po, 
> & « ty. p y L wm +4 > p Pr > Ges w_or @ 7 SES » Vary 
= 4 Aw. 4 he o_ 
” d «<*XEL _ - x * 4 4 by 4 "—_ mo A : = 
a —_ __ : £ 1s. IR *6s- _ ” « # A. = « a4 on : 
nE "ws. wy - D , os «a 4 
_ Ws : ” P 4 » _ _ : & NI IR a ” LD pe 
= p - mens - —_ pe WES - : 
- W7"z _— > et 4 ; Ca - - 4 4£ ” k ” - 
_ : . 4 L - - 2 — 
i 4 _ 0 © » xy s wo i... 0 -3 
| : z : - 7 
as 2g 45 . WC Ms - < ; " 
- - _ _—_ 2 — £ w—_ - mo . = © > Fn . — 
4 " *, » * _ b-4 
4 b " off INS —_— G a - ” So 
ws _ = _ - w < — w 4. . 
hy — 
+ --— - = — _ _ 4 _ V- ” ” my w- pur" . 
- <A 2 , "_ 6 ——_ : - . 2 - os i ; 
La. #.74 ry _Y F lt, on . n - od — Vat _— 
p ue 3 _— O . © wt PE: 5 - Lis a 
& - _ — - Y. : ” bd, 4 
* = ſg a9 wag Zong -< _—... 6 - q I — 8 Serene RR GS... "og w A 
Oe) "ret, EMT a 5 dn * » G * Dy th + —_ : =>, _ — VA. 
wy SC : We x Do & Ce > , aL. a : 5 . _ 2 
= . 9g 
a : : (- P g 8 = i ht att ae = 
, - _ To - , r tf 
C at " Sebel au . 7 — 4 . oo a * "Ia 
£** — ts "—_ h - At G - . - 


[Ee —— 
-, r ” 
DF p 


es. ann. , 
Cs E ny ; 
ws I” GT Bac 1 
—_— 24 
== ons 
- - we_ 4 q 
hy 0s <a” 
=——— — 
FR 
Ro ont 


T.. » ” 
_ es on 
_ 4 . . 4x ax 
— ISR y, CLTurcy 


1 


—— 
4 4. Are 
; hee SD Rn 


* 
LY 
4 


I = 


- -— 
” W427 : - 
—— .. aw 4 
, ——_ —_ -49 "—_—_ EET 


Da 


y- £ 

_ % —_- 

= 8 >= xt> == 4 I” II _ 

2 = mn 5 = nathan | ; : = —_ 
. E DR nee - _ — - _—_— Ruſty < ——— = — 
——_— ASI = — : = 
_ A Lo _— —_ 
-— jo 
"IEA _— - ; FEI ' 
* 4 D - "= gt OW oe — x Ry _ > vx _ 
__— gx: % A = ' 
, _ HE oof” a . - 
_— 7 a -4 "*» y o 6. <F « - ..; — 
$ ">. 
: —_— 


Chap. XI). It. 


"Þ. ” 
LAM: II 


I 
i $8 
2.4. 

= = 
fob 


* Hei). 6. 4» 
& 10. 26, 


* F-e Joh, 
15. 14. 
Gal. £. 5. 
& 6.15, 
Col. 3. 11, 


aroſe from his Throne, lid his Robe from him , covered —_ with 
Sichkehth, and ſate in Aſhes, called a Fat z as Jonah 3. 5,6, 7, 8. 
Bur, faich our Saviour, 1 am greater than Jonah : 1 was long ſince 
Propheficd of,and Forerold co chis People, ro Come : I am Come, 
| have Preached amongſt them; and not only Preached , bur 
wrought many wondertul Works amongſt them; yer they are 
nor ſo much afﬀfe&ted as to thew rhe leaſt Signs of Repentance. 


12 * The Queen of the South ſhall riſe up in the 


<a 


judgment with rhis generation , and ſhall condemn 
ir: tor the came from the uttermoſt parts of rhe 
earth to hear rhe wiſdom of Solomon, and behold, 


4 greater than Solomon zs here. | ; 

We have the Hiſtory ro which this relaterh, 1 Kmgs 10. I, Kc. 
Che 1s here called the Queen of the South; 1n the Book of Kings, 
and 2 Chron. 9.1. the Queen of Sheba; whether this Sheba, or Saba, 
was in 4rabia or Ethiopiz, is not much marerial z Certain It 15, 
ir was Southward of 7udez, and a place at 4 grear diſtarice. Yer, 
fiir our Saviour, Tho'She was a great Queen z tho” She lived ar [0 
ercat a diſtance from Jeruſalem; tho' She had only heard of che 
Eame and Wiſdom of Sef7m , yer She came in Perſon to hear 
his wiſe Diſcourſes , either about things Natural or Supernatural. 
Theſe wretched Jews are not pur to it to take 4 Journey. Iam 
come amongſt them. 1 who am greater than Solomon, who am 
the Eternal Wiſchm , and come to Diſcourſe of Heaveny Wit- 
dom to them ; I am come to their Doors ; theirs, tO whom the 
Notion of a /ſiah is no new thing ; they have heard of me ; 
they are no Heathens, but bred up to the Knowledge of God. I 
have done many Miracles before them, yet they will not hear, nor 
believe me. The Queen of Sheba, in the Day of Judgment, ſhall 
riſe upas a Witneſs azainſt them, when God ſhall condemn them 
for their Unbelicet, The more Light, and Means, and Obligations 
Men have upon them to Faith and Holineſs, the greater will their 
Judgment and Ccndemnarion be. 


42 * When the unclean ſpirit is gone out of 4 


- man, * he walketh through dry places, ſeeking reſt, 


and findeth none. 

44 Then he faith, I will return unto my houſe 
f&om whence I came out, and when he is come, «he 
finderh 77 empty, ſwept, and garniſhed. ; 

45 Then goeth he, and traketh with himſelt 
{oven other ſpirits, more wicked than himfelt, and 
they enter in and dwell there : * and the laſt ſtate 
of that man is worſe than the firſt : Even fo {hall it 

2 alſo unto this wicked generation. 


This Speech appeareth Parabolical, The Perſons concerned in 
it are expreſſed in the laſt Words , The Men of that wicked Gene- 
ration. The Text is thought to he well expounded by Peter, 
1 Per. 2. 29. If after they have eſcaped the Pollution of the World, 
through the bnowledge of the Lord and Saviour Feſus Chrit, they are 
entangled therein, and overcome ;, the latter end is worſe with them 
than the beginning. Our Lord here compareth the Jews ro a Man 
out of whom the unclean Spirit was gone. The Devil 1s called 
che Unclean Spirit, both in regard of his own impure Nature, and 
becauſe his Work is to tempt Men to Sin, ( which 15 Spiricual 

Filchineſs.) The Jews were a People Holy to the Eord; a People 

diſtinzuiſhed from Pagans by a vitible Profeſſion ;, {o as the Devil 
in a great meaſure had lefc them. Now, faich he, the Devil 
is an unquiet Spirir, and findeth no reſt, if he cannor be doing 
MilChieft to Men. For the Phraſe, { He walketh through dry 
places, Doking for re. \We muſt knovw, chart in Parabolical Speeches, 
we mult nor Scrue, or make a ſevere Scrutiny upon every Phraſe, 
Dry pl.rces are for the moſt part places leaſt inhabited, for want of 
the Conveniencies of Water. The Devil cannor be at reſt where 
ke harh no Miſchiet to do ro Men. Then he faith, f 7 wil 
return unto my Houſe from whence I came out.) The Devil ſo leaverh 
none, bur he will be arrempring to come into them again, and 
he ordinarily ſucceedeth where Chriſt hath nor prepoſleſt rhe 
Soul, All other Reformation proves but a Sweeping and a Gaye 
niſhing , while the Soul is empry of Chriſt. It may be ſwept from 
che Filch of Flagiticus Sins, and garnithed with che Paint of Reli- 
210n, or ſome Habits of Moral Virtue , bur none of theſe will 
keep out the Devil. { He greth and takerh with himſelf ſeven Spi- 
rits more wicked than himſelf, and enters in, and dwelleth there.] 
Seven; that is, many. The meaning 1s, he makes that Man much 
worſe than betore. So (ſaith he) 1t ſhall be ro theſe ny God 
gave them his Laws, and to delivered them from ſuch a Domi- 
nion as the Devil doth excerciſe over Pagans. In Force of this 
Law, the Scribes and Phariſees amended many things, ſo as they 
were like an Houſe ſwept and garniſhed. God ſent his Son to dwell 
amonezſt them , bur him they rejected ; fo rhe Houſe was empty, 
tho' ſivept and garniſhed. The Devil will come again, and they 
will be ten times worſe. 


46 While he yet talked to the people, behold, his 
mother and his brethren ſtood without, defiring ro 
ſpeak with him. 

-47 Then aid one unto him, Behold, thy mother 
and thy brethren ſtand without , defiring to ſpeak 
with thee. 

48 Bur he anſwered, and ſaid unto him that told 
him,VV ho 1s my mother? and who are my brethren ? 

a9 And he ſtretched forth his hand towards his dif 
ciples,and 1/1. Bzhold,my mother and my brethren. 

50 For * whoſoever ſhall do the will of my Fa- 
ther whichis in heaven, the ſame is my brother, and 
fiſter, and morher. 

Mark repeateth we lame Pailage, 2/ar. 3. 31,32, 32, 34, 35. 


M ATTHE W. 


Lube repeaterh ir more ſhortly, Luk. 8. 20, 21. Both 27; Þ ; 

Luke faich, more than one fpake to our Saviour: brit one, _ 
others. {| Thy Mother and thy Brethren, ] Moſt Interpreters th: 
Brethren here fignifieth no more than ſome of his Kirdro7 W—_ 
che Hebrews uſually called Brethren, Ey the following Worg, > 
our Saviour, v. 48, 49, 50. we muſt not underſtand that a 
Saviour flighred his Mother or Brethren, We are elſewhere wg 
what Honour he gave to his Parents, Luk. 2.51. Yet he "ty 
ro ſpeak ſomething angerly, becauſe he was interrupred in i... 
Work; fo, Luk. 2. 49. Fob. 2. 3, 4 We may ſhe a juſt Ref et 
ro our Parents, and Reſpe& to our Relations , tho' we oy . 
negle& our Duty ro God out of Reſpe& ro them. The ow, 
thing to be turcher Jearned trom this Paragraph is, Hoy ES 
Believers and Holy Perſons are to Chi, He counts them 2: gk 
as Mother, Brethren, or Siſters, and thereby reacherh us t!:e Efieen 
we ought to have for ſuch. Lube ſaith, He that hexroth mn = 
and doth it. Matthew ſaith , he that doth it : It is che Win , > 
God, that we ſhould believe on him -whem he hath ſent; — 
oh. 6. qo. and 1.12. and 8.47, This Texr derogares norhin: 
trom the Honour truly due ro the Blefſed Virgin as the Mother 


- +l 


CHAT. AL 


Feſits in a Ship teacheth the Multitude by Parables, I—2, The? 
rable of the Sower and his Seed, 4—9. Hu Diiciples asb him why 
he ſpake in Parables : His Anſwer ſhewing their Happineſs, in byzy- 
ing of Myſteries above others : Unbelief and Stupidity a judement, 
I0—17. Chri8t expoundeth the foregoing Parable, 18—23, He 
Putteth forth the Parable of good Seed and Tares, 24—30, (5 
Muſtard-ſeed, 31, 32. Of the Leaven, 33. The reaſon of his Teac 
ing by Parables, 34, 35. At the deſire of his Diſciples he expyny- 
eth the Parable of the good Seed and the Tares, 35—423. Th P;. 
rable of Treaſure hid in a Field, 44. The Jerchant ſeeking if g::9. 
ly Pearls, 45, 46. The Parable of a Net ca$ into the Sea, withi;; 
Expoſition, 47—50, Jeſus aheth his Diſciples whether they ur. 
derſlood all theſe things : Their Anſwer, 51. He proveth it thei 
duty to communicate what they had learnt , 52. Chriﬆ teachins 
in the Synagogue, is contemned and wilified of his Countryren, 
$3, 56» He ſheweth that Prophets have n» Honour in their oy 
Country : Their Unbelief hindreth his doing mighty Works, 57,58, 


I 6 Þ HE fame day went Jeſus out of the houſe 
and fate by the ſea-ſide. 
2 And great multitudes were gathered together 
unto him, ſo that he * went intoa ſhip, and ſate, and *1; 
the whole multitude ſtood on the ſhore. | 


Mark, chap. 4. 1. faith , He began again to teach by the Sex(;,ts 
and there was gathered unto, him a great multitude ; ſo that 6» e- 
tred into a Ship, and ſate in the Sea, and the whole multitud: wi 
by the Sea, upon the Land. Luke, chap. 8. 4. faith no more char, 
When much People were gathered together, and came to him © « 
every City, he ſpake by a Parable. Two Evangeliſts agree, tha 
this Sermon of our Saviour's was Preached our of a Ship to Mul- 
ticudes that ſtood on the Shore: The occaſion of his goinz into 
a Ship, was the Throng of People, both for his own and their 
Convenience. Ir 1s here fad, [That he ſate ;] This we obſerved 
betore was the uſual Geſture of the Teacher amongſt the 7%; . 
This Sermon 1s ſaid to have been made the ſame Day , which 
ſome obſerve in Hiſtorical Narrarions, is to be taken ſtriftly, and 
lers us know the Affiduity of Chrift in his Work. And he tpike 
many things to them in Parables, The term Parable often in 
Scripture ſignifies Dark Sayings, or Proverbial Speeches, Ezek.17.2 
and 20. 45. Bur in the Goſpel it generally hath another Sente, 
and ſignifies Similitudes or Compariſons of things, This being tie 
firſt time we have met with the term, and the firſt formed and 
perte&t Parable we have met with. Becauſe we ſhall meer vith 
the term often hereafter with many formed Parables, I ſhall here 
give tome Notes, which may be not only of uſe to underſtand 
the tollowing Parables we ſhall meer wich in this Chaprcr, bu: 
in the following part of the Goſpel. 1. A Parable ( in tle 
Goſpel-ſenſe of the term) ſignifieth a Similitude 2 hen from tit 
ordinary Aﬀtions of Men, and made uſe of to inform us in one of Wi? 
Points of Spiritual DoFrines. 2, That ir 1s not neceflary to 2 
Parable , That the matter contained in it ſhould be true in matte! © 
Fa# : For it 1s nor brought to inform us in a matter of Fatt, but 
in ſome Spiricual Truth, ro which it bears ſome proporcion. 1:5 
we ſee in Fotham's Parable of the Tiees going to chuſe thenilel7es 
a King , &c. 3- Thar it is nor neceſſary, That all the 4in: 7 
Men mentioned in a Parable, ſhould be Morally ju$ and hone. 1: 
Actions of the unjuſt Steward, Luk. 16. 1, 2, 3, 9c. were not 
4. Thar for the righe underſtanding of a Parable : Our g#t.# £47 
mu$t be, to confider the main Scope of it ; whither the Sicry rends, 
and what our Saviour defigned principally by rhe Parable, 9 i 
ſtru& and teach the People by that Difcourſe. $. Thar ihe mill 
Scope of the Parable is to be learned either from our S4vicul 
general, or more particular Explication of it z eicher from {2 7'7 
parabola, or Preface ro%it; or from -the Epiparabola, or ite Cit 
claſion of it. 6. It is mt to be expeffed, that all paiiicies? 
Actions repreſented in a Parable ſhould be anfwered by fometh! 's » 
the Explication of it. 7. Laſtly, Tho the Scope of the pore 
the main thing we are to attend unto, and in which it £00 
ſtru& us, yer it may Collaterally inform us in ſeveral tings gt” 
that Point which is in it chiefly intended, Te is faid , 07 = 
Saviour [ſpake many things to the Multitude in Parables, ) OV77 
Truths under Similirudes , ferchr from ſuch ordinary ES 
Men did, or might do. This was a very ancient Way ” ©, 
ion by Fables or Parables, as we may learn by Zorpams Fes 
71d. 9.7,8, (56. It is now much our of uſe wich us, bur arm's. 
the Zews very ordinary, So as our Saviour ſpake fo tem i ©, 


Chap. X11 


FD 41 
twlh ahunds 


bi 


itt | 


us, 
Ex. 
fel 
p1Ve 
tiruc 
whic 
whe 
all n 
a bla 
the | 
lexwil 


miznt | 
were a 
leem, t 
that w 
did no 
viderf 
ngs ar 
them. 
conteſs 
him ch; 
which | 
the T we 
pirted, 
1nſirutte 
Formalit 
mizhr be 
| fhneymig 
13 ] 
| 1Sfive: 
-'* Com of 
C. 2 X] 
x5, he ſhall 
4 not, fr (0)} 


Mal | 
ries of the 
theſe thing, 
Yu it us git 
them in Pg 
fre how yo 
Wh/never | 
he; becg 
cording 
Perſons to 
thin to cr 
Which con 
Um, they 
ae neceſſa 
Vred plain 
Oer thin: 
known in 
t) know, 
Ph, is thi 
5s; yer 
Ceilary to $ 
nw, Thi 
leg, 93 and 
More Aﬀe 
hath given | 
Ire clear] 
ic Ringdo 
te Saviour 
Particular ki; 
ore he hat! 
Er whyoer 


Y. 


| Wap XIE 


5 ——_ CW. OT.” 


—z 


_ a — F 5 go i gs > 
on ou © CO Sy, > WW 


LS H—_ 
— 
> TS . 


il 3 


Cd 
"T Sd 
> 


mM, [1 


St. M A T 


n Diale#. Te had a double advantage upon rhe Hearers : 
= upon their Memory, We being very apt to remember ,Storjes. 
_ Jo their Minds, to put them upon ſtudying the meaning of 
6 heard ſo delivered ; and alfo upon their Aﬀed&ions, Si- 
, -irudes contributing much to excite Aﬀe&ion, Bur withal it 
bad his diſadvantage, that te who ſo taught, was nor underſtood 
of a great part of his Auditory, 

2 And he ſpake many things unto them in para- 
Mcs. ſaving, Behold, a fower went forth to ſow. 
"And when he fowed , ſome /zeds tell by the 
vs fide,and the towls came and devoured them up. 


- Some fell upon ſtony places, where they had 
or much earth : and forthwith they ſprung up, 


h-cauſe they had no deepneſs of earth. 
4 And when the ſun was up.they were ſcorched : 
and becauſe they had not root, they withered away, 
- And ſome fell amongſt rhorns, and rhe thorns 
ſnrung uPz and choaked them. 
© Put other fell into good ground, and brought 


Q 


fr fruit, ſome an hundred-fold, ſome fixty told, 


{me thirty- told. ; 
* Who hath ears to hear, let him hear. 

There [5 ſome difference in the terms uſed by 374k and Luke 
[1 their Retations of this Parable, Afar. 4. 1,2,3,4,5. and Luk. 8. 
k, $, 5. but none that are material, nor much to be conſidered by 
us, being they are in the Parable.l ſhall when I come co 1c,more 
exaQly conſider what Ditferences there are berwixt the Evan- 
£:liſts in rhe rerms they uſe in the Explication which cur Saviour 
*verh us of the Parable ; which he did nor give before the Mul- 
tirade, bur when he was alone, ( faith Mnk, chap, 4. 10.) Thar 
which our Saviour ſpoke to the whole Multicude, was this: Now 
whether there were indeed any ſuch Sower yea or no, 1s not at 
all material. Our Saviour's Deſign was not to 1nform chem 1n 
a Matter of Fact, bur of che different Succeſs of the Preaching of 
the Word; and For this purpoſe he brought this Similitude, 
leaving the Generality of the Hearers to ſtudy our his meaning ; 
concluding, [ He that hath Ears to hear, let him hear; | which is ar 
Foiphonema, or Concluſion of a Speech we met with betore, and 
ſpake ſomerhing to. 7 

10 And the diſciples came, and ſaid unto him, 
Why ſpeakeſt thou-unto them in parables ? 

Lube faith, chzp. 8. 9. His Diſciples asked him, ſaying, What 
mizhr this Parable be? Mark faith, When he was alone, thoſe that 
were about him with the twelve, asbed of him the Parable. It thould 
ſeem, thar his rwelve Apoſtles underſtood his meaning, bur others 
that with chem were about him when the Multitude were gone, 
did nor : They therefore defire of him, 1. Thar they might 
underſtand rhe reaſon why he ſpake to the Multicude 1n dark Say- 
ings and Similirudes, without plainly opening his meaning to 
them. 2. They own yheir own dulneſs ot Underſtanding , and 
conteſs that they themſelves were ignorant, and therefore defired 
him chat he would tell chem the meaning of chis Parable, with 
which he had entertained the Multirude, Their ſtaying wich 
the Twelve , when the Generality of the Multitudes, were de- 
parted , argued thar they came with a defire co learn, and to be 
inſiruted, not our of a meer Curtiot'ty to ſee Chriſt, or in a meer 
Formality : They ſhew borh rneir Charicy, in defiring others 
mizhr be intelligibly inſtructed; and their Piery, in defiring char 
they might be more fully themſelves inſtrufted. 


Wa 


11 He anſwered. and ſaid unto them, Becauſe * it 


ye 


is given to you to know the myſteries of the king- 


b! om of heaven, but to them it is not given. 


12*For whoſoever hath,to him ſhall be given,and 


| - he ſhall have more abundance : but whoſoever hath 


not, from him ſhall be taken away, even that he hath. 


Mark ſaith, chap. 4.11. Unto you it is given to know the Myſte- 
ries cf the Kingdom of God : But unto them that are without, all 
theſe things are done in Parabies, Luke ſaith no more than, Unto 
yu it #s given to bnow the Myſteries of the Kingdom of God : But to 
them in Parables. Only chap. 8. 18. he ſaith, Take heed theie- 
fre how you hear : For whoſoever hath, to him ſhall be given ;, and 
why/oever hath not, from him ſhall be taken, that which he ſzemetly to 
hve; becauſe it is given to yu , Kc. , Given by my Father. God, 
according the good Pleaſure of his Will, hath given ro ſome 
Perſons to know the Myſteries of the Kingdom of God, more 
than to cthers. Some here diſtinguiſh concerning the things 
Which concern the Kingdom of God : The Laws of his Ring- 
dm, they ſay, are delivered plainly ; viz. Thoſe things which 
are neceſſary to be known in order to our Salvation , are delt- 
vered plainly, fo as we may underſtand rem. Bur there are 
cer things that belong ro his Kingdom , nor ſoneceifary to be 
known in order to Salvation; theſe God giveth to ſome_only 
t know, I cannot apree to this Notion : God manifeſted in the 
Hh, is the Great Myſtery of the Goſpel , the Myſtery hid from 
Ages; yet I am ſure the Knowledge of Chriſt as 1uch, is ne- 
ceilary ro Salvation. | therefore think the Empheſis lyerh upon 
knw, There is a more General and confuſed Knowledge of a 
wing; and there is a more diſtin, clear, particular Know- 
icdag, 2. There is a meer Notional Knowledge; and there is a 
more Aﬀettive', Experimental Knowledge. To you my Father 
hath given Ecernal Life, and as means in order to it, ro know 
more clearly, particularly and diſtinatly the things that concern 
the Kigdom of God; ro know, and to believe in me, who am 
te Saviour of the World : My Father hath no ſuch ſpecial and 
Particular kindneſs for the Generaliry of this People, and there- 
tore he hath nor given to them the ſame Aids and Aſſiſtances, 

Fr whyſoever hath, to him it ſhall be given , and he ſhall have in 
"ure eundance.) By Him that hath, ſome underſtand , He that | 


Vol. IE 


T HE VWs. 


flon of the Parable abour the 7alents, But tho' che preceding 
Parable plainly leadeth to ſuch a Senſe there, yer the preceding 
Words ſeem as direfaly to lead to another Senſe here, and whac 
1s the more natural and proper Stynification of rhe word Huh 
which moſt naturally fignihes to have a thing in our Poſleſtion. 
He that hath therefore in all reaſon, fignines, He that hath thar 
which, wv. 11. is faid to be given. He that hath the javirg Kniw- 
ledge of the Myſteries of the Kingdom of Gcd. To him t:,ar doct, 
nor fo much come to hear me our of Curioticy, and cumprehenc- 
cth by his Underſtanding, ſomething of my W:ll; bur hath an 
Hearr that imbraceth and receiverh me, ſo as he belieyerh in Mc. 
To him that hath the Seed of God, in him as in g924 Grzund, { Shaf 
be given ,\ that is expounded by clic next words, Ard ſpall have 
m more abundance; he ſhall have more Grace, a more tv!l , and 
clear, and <1{tin& Knowledge of me, and the thin>s which con- 
cern my Kingdom. [ But from him that hath not Y Thar hart; nor 
the Seed of God, a true Root of Grace, in whom the Sed of 
my Word hath nor fallen as in g12d Ground , but only as 19 ce 
High-way, or in Thorny or Stony Ground , | ſhall te rahen away 
even that which he hath,) how can thar be ? ſw. It muſt vor 
be underſtocd of things in the ſame Nature and Kind; Luke ex- 
pounds 1t, chap. 8. 18. by, 6 Hx6 5yey, that which either to him- 
telf, or co orhers, he ſeemeth ro have. He that harh nor a Truck 
ot Grace, may think he hath: 2s Scope, and Opinion of himſelf, 
ſhall fil. Others may, from his Gifts and Parts, think hs hath; 
God ſhall unmask him, taking away his common Gifes, or- ſut- 
tering him to fall into, and be overcome by toul Temprations. His 
Gitts and Parts ſhall decay ; his Mofal Riglteoutneſs will abate by 
_—_ juſt Dercliction of him , and wichkolding his reſtraining 
race. 


12 Therefore ſpeak I to them in parables : be- 

cauſe they ſeeing, ſee not : and hearing , they hear 
not, neither do they underſtand. 
_ Neither 37h nor Luke hath chis , but ic direQMly followetk 
trom whar they have, which alfo tollowerh here; only here ic is 
plainly afierted concerning theſe Hearers, and given as 2 Reaſog 
why our Lord fpake to them in Parables. We hall in the Explj. 
cation of the following Words, inquire in what Senſe ir is ſaid 1 
This People ſeeing, ſaw int; and hearing, heard not. : 


14 And in them is fulfilled the prophecy of 
Eſaias, which ſaith , By hearing , ye {hall hear, and 
{hall not underſtand : and ſeeing, ye ſhall ſee, and 
[ball not perceive. 

15 For this peoples heart is waxed groſs, and 
their ears are dull of hearing , and their eyes they 
have cloſed ; leſt at any time they ſhould ſee with 
their eyes.and hear with zhezr ears,and ſhould under- 
{fand with 7heir heart, and ſhould be converted, and 
I ſhould heal them. 


Theſe Words of the Prophet are not lefs than five times found 
in the New Teſtament ( betides by Matthew in theſe Verſes) ap- 
plied to the Fews - They are taken our of Iſaiah, chap. s. g, 10. 
where they are found thus : And he ſaid, Go and tell this People ;, 
Hear you indeed, but underſtand not 5 and fee you, but perceive rot. 
Make the Heart of this People fat, ard their Ears heauy, and (hut 
their Eyes, 4e$ they ſee with their Eyes, and hear with their Ears, 
and underſtand with their Hearts , and convert , and be healed. Ir 
is quoted, Mar. 4. 12. Luk. 8.10. wherethe Sente of the Words 
only is quoted more ſhortly, 70h. 12. 40. Aﬀs 28.26. Rom.11.8. 
more largely, yer with ſome more difference of Phra.e trom thar 
of rhe Prophet. By all of them ir appeareth , either char God 
ſpake thoſe Words ro the Propher, as well wich reference to thoſe 
Fews that were to live in the time of Chriſt,as ro thoſe Zews,who 
were living, when T/aizh prophefied : Orar leaſt, that the Words 
were as true of theſe F2ws, as they were of choſe; fo the Pro- 
pheſie of Iſaiah was fulfilled in chem. But the Words are fo dif- 
ferently related, that the Prophet, and St. Fohn, chap.12. qo. ſeem 
ro make God the Cauſe of the Fatneſ$ of this Peoples Hearts, the 
Heavinels of rheir Ears, and the Blindneſs of tiicir Eyes : There- 
fore they could not believe , becauſe Iſaias faith again , He hath 
blinded their Eyes, and hardened thetr Hearts , thut they ſhould not 
ſee with their Eyes, nor underſtand with their Hearts , and be con- 
verted, and I ſhould heal them. So alſo Paul ſpeaketh, Rom. 11.8, 
God hath given them the Spirit of Slumzer ;, Eyes that they ſhould 
nt ſee, and Ears that they ſhould not hear. Matthew faith, This 
Peoples Heart is waxed groſs, Matthew leemeth ro ſpeak of the 
more proximate Cauſe; Iſaiah, Luke, John, and Pail of the higher, 
but remoter Cauſe ; Matthew of their fintul At preceding, Fohn, 
Luke, and Paul, and Iſaiah, of the Judicial 4c of God, conſe 
quenc to their finful AR. God firſt ſenc chem, ſes and the 
Prophets, by whom they might have ſeen, and known his Will 
they would nor ſee, nor hear, nor underſtand, nor convert, nor 
t\> healed. God ac laſt did leave them to the Reprobacy of their 
own Mind : He willed indeed the Prophet to go and Preach ; 
bur, faich he, this ſhall be all che Fruic of chy Miniſtry ; ic thall 
bur make the Heart of this People tar, and their Ears heavy ; they 
ſhall more and more ſhut cir Eyes ; their time of Converſion 
and Healing is paſt : Ir is now roo Jatez I will nor Conyerr, I 
will not Heal them. Now ( faich our Saviour) what was ap- 
plicable ro the Jews in the time of Jaiah, is in like manner ap- 
plicable ro you; and the Prophet Tſaiah did foretel what I 
ſhould meer wich. The Generality of the People, are a People 
chat have ſo deſpiſed the Grace of God, that their Day of Grace 
is over. God is reſolved z he will not Converc nor Heal them : 
They have had Light; they have ſeen me and my Works; they 
have heard my Sermons and Fohn Baptis?'s; in ſeeing, they would 
nor ſee; in hearing , they would nor hear, nor underſtand; fo 
they are fallen under a Fudicial Hardre/s, and Blindneff. They 
ſhall not now have the Lighr fry have had : My Spiric ſhall 

2 AG: 


Chap. XI. 
hath, and maketh uſe of what he hath: And that is plainly ci:e 
Senſe of ir, Chap. 25. 29. where it is the Epiparabela, or Conclu- 


» 
< 
. 


&- R 
»2 4 | | 
Fa T | h : my 
3-3 pb8 L. 
Dy 1145 Ct 
34 411 1+ i 
$391 TW? Id 
8.4 | F r: x 
/ "EY T6 2” 
Wb 
' Nj {2 Hi ' 
{EN ITS 
£98 Þ FR 
8-4 is $6241 
Ke! 
-, L&tt 
' lag WAY 
>» 2 $, 041 
oF 
T0 
{*?Þ 
Te 4 
Fa#t, 


Chap. XIIL 


*Chap. 16. 
I }. 


* PeL.1.10. 


+ Lu.8.11, 


St M AT 


no longer ſtrive with them ; neither ſhall they have an Heart to 
make 2 due Ute of the Means they have. Thus is doubtleſs the 
meaning of theſe words : And fo they give a juſt Reaton why 
he tpake to them in Parables. And thus undoubredly God doth 
to this Day ; when a People have a long time fare under 2 g20d 
and 7roficable Miniſtry, wherein their Souls have been dealt 
withal plainly and faithfully , and they remain ftill ignorant, de: 
hauch'd, and unbelieving : God, in a righreous Judgment gives 
them over ro the Blindn={s of Mind, and Hardnets ot Hearr 
under the Miniſtry ; that tho' it continue never fo go91 amongſt 
them, yet they are nor Aﬀe@ed with the Word , bu! ſl-ep and 
han under ir: Somerimes he by his Providence ſutters tuch a 
Miniſter co come amongſt them as ſpeaketh nothing bur P.rab.es, 
things which they underſtand not ; or /7299tÞ things, fit to Imourh 
tem up in their Sintul Courſes, and harden chem 1n cheir Prc- 
judices againſt Chriſt and Holinets. A moſt rremend-us Judg- 
ment of God ; when God Antecedently ro tis Contempi, by is 
Providence ſends ſuch a Miniſtry as may declare his Wiil:ngnels 
they ſhould be ſaved, and come to the knowledge of his Truci ; 
and Conſequently ro this Contempt, and deſpifing of his Grace, 10 
dealeth with them by his Providence, cither ſuffering their frft 
ſeeming Afﬀedtioms, and-edze to abate, (as the Fews are ſa1d tor 
a while to have rejoyced in the Light 7ohbn brought, ) or 
ſufferins ſuch a Miniſtry tr come amongſt them as one ivould 
think God ſent, leſt Men ſhould convert, and be hezled. In rhe 
mean time Chriſt in this Text excellently ſers out God's Mernod 
in his dealing wich Souls. 1. He bringeth chem to 5.7 and fee, 
2. Then he makes them to undzrſtand and believe. 3. Tnen he 
comets them, renewerh and changerh their Hearts, 4. Taen 
he he:!:th them, pardoneth rheir Sins, and accepts cheir Perſons, 
nor becauſe they are converted, bur ar che ſame time when he works 
Fiith in them, and giveth them an Heart co Repent, 


16 Bur * bleſſed ore your eyes,for they Ice; and 
your cars, for they hear. 

17 For verily I ſay unto you, that * many prophets 
and righteous men have defired to {ce thoſe things 
which you ſee. and have not ſeen them; and to hear 
thoſe things which ye hear, and have nor heard 7hem:. 


Lube repeaterh this Paſſage, but not as annexed to this Parable, 
hp. 10. 23. | Bleſſed are your _ The Eyes of your Bodies, 
and of your Minds, With the Eyes of your Bodies, you have 1cen 
the Promiſed Meſſi..s come in the Fleſh; and you have ſeen tie 
Works which I have done, confirming me to be the Mfr : And 
with the Eves of your Minds you have underſtood and believed: 
For [ many Prophets, many Righteous Men ( Luke adds,mary Kings 
have defired to ſee the things which you have ſeen, &c.] From tic 
very firſt giving our of the Promiſe of Chriſt ro Adam upon the 
Fall, Gen. 3. 15. there was in Believers an Expettation of rhe 
Meſſiah, who being ſo great a Good, ſo infinite a Eleffing ro Matr- 
kind, they could not bur have a defire ( it God had fo pleaſed ) 
to have ſeen him. Bur we are told that Abraham ſaw Chrift's Day, 
and rejyced. And Simem and Anna's ExpeQation of him, men- 
tioned Lub. 2. lers us know that other Pious Souls had fuch de- 
ſires, Our Saviour bleſſerh his Diſciples , thar- they. had ſeen 
with the Eyes of their Bodies, what others had only ſeen afar off 
by the Eyes of their Minds, FHe9. 11. 13: 


18 * Hear ye the parable of the ſower. 


Mzrb addeth a little Check he gave them, Mar. 4. 13. Know ye 
zt this Parable ? Hw then will you know all Parables ? Luke faith, 
The Parable is this, (that is) my meaning in and by the Parable was 
chis : Tu ſecing that you cannot fatisfie your ſelves, as the 
moit thac heard me, hearing a Sound of Words, without under- 
ſtzndins what rhey meant ; and ſeeing, that to you it 1s given to 
know che Myſteries of the Kingdom of God; and ſeeing that you 
you ſez, God hath opened your Eyes and Ears to Spiricual,Myſte- 
ries. { #:-7 the Parable of the Sower.) My true Senſe and Mean- 
ing in this Parable; my Scope in it was to ſhew you the dif- 
ferene Efo4s, waich the Word of God Preached hath upon 

len's Hearts, and the Reaſons of that difference. 


19 Whenany one heareth rhe word of the kingdom, 
and underſtandeth ir not,then cometh the wicked one, 
and catcheth away that which was ſown in his heart : 
this is he which received ſeed by the way-lide. 


M:ab hath this thnas, chap. 4. v. 14,15. The Sower ſoweth the 
Wird. And theſe are they by the way-ſide , where the Word is ſown : 
but when they have heard, Satan cometh immediately, and taketh 
away the Word, which was ſown in their Hearts. Luke hath it thus, 
chap. B.11, 12. Tyre Seed is the Word : Thyſe by the way-ſide, are 
they that hear : Then cometh the Devil, and taheth away the Word 
eut of their Hearts, le$} they ſhould believe, and be ſaved. From 
Lite vec learn , that the Seed 1s the Word. From Mark, that 
te Sower 15 the Preacher ; Chriſt in the firſt place; then all who 
derive trom him as his Miniſters, and are exerciſed in Preaching 
the Gofpel, which Matthew callerh the Word of the Kingdom : 
becauſe it 15 the Inſtrument by which God raiſed up Chriſt's King- 
dom on Eurch, both in the Church, and in particular Souls, and 
by which he prepareth Men for the Kingdom of Glory, This 
is a mighry Commendation of the Mord. The Sil is the Heart, 
rhe Soul of Man, Now there are ſome Hearers ro whom the 
trad Preached Is like Seed that a Sower throweth upon ſome 
Foor-path, or High-way ; the Phw never turneth the Earth up- 
on i'r, or the Xzrrow never goeth over ir, ſo it liech bare, and 
15 trodden down by the Feer of Paſſenzers, and the Fowls of the 
Air. come and pick it up : So, faich our Saviour, there are ſome 
char hear the Word, bur never medirate up2n ir, never lay ir 
to their Hearrs,never cover it with ſecond Thoughts : [ The Wicked 
on2s:]) the Devils, who are afraid of the Power of the Hord 
G'eftd, (like the Fwls of the Air,_) by ſuggeſting other Trowehts, 
o- by preſenting other ObjeFs to them , Catch away the Word 
tht wi: fown in their Hearts, Theſe are they whom I compa- } 


THEW. 


red to the Highway-Ground receiving the Seed. Eur ſome m 

fay, How was it ſown in their Hearts , if the Devil could © 

carch it away? Anſw, By the Heart here, is meant the $ > 
wiiich hath ſeveral Powers and Faculties, Every thing we bs 
g5erh into our #2.rt, 1n ſome ſenſe, as the Heart may ſ1 we S. 
the Im.-gin.ztive P:wer of our Soul, or that P41 hy which We take 
che Notion of a thing. The Word doth enter 1... inners "oy 
ſo far as they ſpend ſome Thoughts upon it, ard ; au. we Know. 
ledge and Notion of 1t, yea they may entertain it wit tone tug. 
den and temporary Afﬀedim and Paſſim ; indeed ic js never {5 
in their Hearrs as that rey truly believe ir, or that their Wi: 26 
conquered inco the Obedience of ir. 4-00g 


20 Bur he rhar received the ſeed into ſtony plac 
the ſame is he which heareth the word, and * q; 
with joy receiverh 1t. 

21 Yet he hath no root in himſelf. 
a whild : for when tribulation or perſccution arifith 
becauſe of rhe vrord, by and by he is oft=r:474. 

Both Mark and Luke have this wich no d'iference, ſave co\y jp 
words, Mar. 4. 16, 17, Luk. 8.13. Wit H:t19257 Cale; C:cay 
Grounds Luxe Calis the Rock, By the Sun but vp, ann (ooh, 
:!nz the Seed in the Parable, cur S:viour mcaric ©, '..,p 7 
Perſecutim, which Luke callech a time ct Tempr..tion, chap. 6, j +, 
Stony piaces, are places where may be a little Exrch , but we 
much : He ts here likened to ſuch Ground , wio heareth the 
Mord, and anon (the Gr. is e/5us, which fignifiech proertl; ) 
with jy receiveth it , as Herod 1s \aid to have heard 7obn the Ba 
tis} gladly. The Word of God (as fome other ObjeRs) doth often 
on the ſudden affe& ſome Perſons, in whum it doth nor take any 
deep Root ;, a ſudden Paſſion ſurprizeth them , which is bu like 
the overtlowing of a Brook, which is quickly down. . | Ter hath }; 
n) Root in himſelf, &c. ] Our Saviour hefe affignerh two Caul;; 
of ſuch Hearers falling away, the one Internz), the other Extern, 
the former is the great Cauſe of the Jatrer. By Root in bim!:! 
ſome underſtand Conſtancy, or a ſerious Reſolution and Purpcje 
Heart ; hurt this is doubtleſs but the Prcdud of this K914 which 
is the ſame thing which the Apoſtle calls The Seed of God, 7: 
calls the Root of the Matter; a Principle of Grace in an Hear truiy 
rouched with the Love of God, and of his Truth. | He dureth 1; 
for a while; ] No longer than he thinks that ke can by his 7;:. 
feſſi-n attain the End he aimed at, and propuunded to himſe(, 
be it Riches, or Honour, and Reputation > Bur when | rift. 
2 Perſecution ariſeth for the nhrgytoeneh or becauſe of the (i: 


GS, 
ON 
Wi. 


a 


[2 


= 


LA 


when he ſeerh that he cannot own his Profeſſion without 
danzer of his Eſtate, Life, Liberty, Places, and Prefermerts. 
He is by and by cffended; made to ſtumble and tall; ke 2! 
tram ail his former Profeſſion of the Goſpel. . 


22 Healfo that received ſeed among the thrrrs, 


7 * tho 
R 
KN 4s 
WHO 


is he tha* heareth the word, * and the care ©! its *t: 


world, ind the deceitfulneſs of riches choks. the * 
LY 


word, and he becometh untruittyl. 


Lil 
Mark adds, chap. 4. 19. And the Luſts of other things enterirg in, (Tn 


choak rhe Word, Luke 1aith , chap. 8. 14. And that which fel 
among Thyyns, are they , which when they have heard go forth , ar 
are ch1..ked with Cares, and Riches, and Pleaſures of this Life, ard 
bring no Fruit to perfeftion. Under theſe Terms , Tye Cares if th 
World, the Deceitfulneſs of Riches, and the Pleaſures of this Life, 0t 
the Zuſts of other things ; our Saviour comprehendeth all tl: 
which St. Fohn calls The LuS of the Eye , the Lu of the Fleſh, and 
the Pride of Life. The immoderare Deſires of our Hearcs atcer 
lawfu! things, or their Deſires after things prohibiced, and unlas- 
tul: Thefe he compareth to Thorns, as Thorns in a Ground cloak 
che Seed, ſhadowing the-Blade when it comes up, and keeping of 
the warmth of the Sun, and drawing the fatneſs of the Ground 
trom ir; ſo theſe divert Men's Thoughts , and draw Men's at 
fetions off from the Word of God; fſoas ic bringeth forth no 
Fruic; cr if there be ſome little appearance of Fruit, ic dwindls 
away, and comcth to no perfe&tion. None of theſe were Pro- 
tane Gcdleſs Perſons, who make no Conſcience of neglefting t9 
hear the Word Preached. They are all Hearers. O how ſtrait 13 
the Way? How natrow is the Gate thar leadeth ro Everlaſting 
Lite? How few there be thar find ir ? 


23 But he that received ſeed into the good grovnd, 
15S he that heareth the word . and underſtandeth !, 
which alſo beareth fruit, and bringeth forth ſome an 


hundred-fold, ſome ſixty. ſome thirty. 

Mark ſaith, chap. 4.20, much the ſame. Lube ſaith, chat. 8. 15: 
But that on the g1vd Ground, are they, which in an hoe$t and gud 
Heart, having heard the Word, keep it , and bring forth Fruit wit 
Patience. To make a good Chriſtian, all rheſe rhings muſt col- 
cur. 1. An Hearing of the Word : 2. An Underſtanding 9 5” 
lieving it: 3. A Keeping of it : 4. A Bringing forth of Fruit: 
5. A Bringing forth Fruit with Patience. He thar receiverh the Sec 
into good Ground, is he, (faith Lube) Who in an hone#t and zu 
Heart, having heard the Word, keep it. The good Ground 11 
Parable, is the good and hone Heart ; that is, an Heart renewed and 
ſan&ified by the Spirit of Gcd. [ He heareth the Word : | He (faith 
the Apoſtle ) who is born of God, heareth us : Faich comet? © 
Hearing, { And underſtandeth it,) Mark ſaith , Receiveth it chat 
is, not in the meer Notion, bur by Faith, and a Mind willing ©? 
learn, and be inſtruſted. Luke adds, and heepeth it ; retatt 7 
Savour and Impreſſion of ir upon his Soul. {| Which alſo bearet 
Fruit ; ) The Fruit of Holineſs, 1n his Life, in an Obedience £9 che 
Will of God; for all Seed bringeth forth Fruir according © Þ 
kind. Luke adds, with Patience; by which is ro be underſto0 ; 
Certainty, Conftancy, and Perſeverance, and that norwirhſtandins 
all Tryals and Oppoficions he meers with from che World, 
Fleſh, and che Devil, { Some an hundred-fold , ſome J:3'), "0 
thirty ;] not all alike. A Soul may be an honeſt and gocd a0” 
and that (as we ſee here) in Chriſt's Opinion and Judgmen, 


bat dureth {x 


> 
i 


Chap. X11ck: 


6 
Tus, 13, 


ki 
LLi: 


DC? we 


Chr: 
and alft 
and 5P1 
time n« 
a Other 
tore, ar 
more dil 
2*rer th 
Evampeli 
Was alt 

or Aſp! 
Plalmist 
OPS, Al 


Chriſt : t 


{ IAjp ak 


JeeIC ſince 
Mouch in 
Wim he 


Myſteries 
& Px ſp: 


36 F 
Into the 
1} 1ng, 
the held 
The 27, 
Ing to ui 
0:7 Our $.7, 
they follo, 


ie geher ty 
Ind It Mm21y 
dreadty] ©, 


Cup 


F 
4 pA 3* 
" tude 


XIII. 


ho" ir doth not bring forch Fruit in the ſame proportion wich 
others 


> Another parable put he torrh unto them, ſay- 
ins, The kingdom 01 heaven 15 likened unto 4 man 
which fowed good ſeed in his held : 

2 Bur while men flepr, his enemy came and 
Cod rares among the wheat, and went his way. 

" 26 Bur when the blade was ſprung up , and 
brought forth iruit, rhen appearcd rhe tares alſo. 

27 Sorthe ſervants of the houtholder came, and 
id unro him, Sir, didft not thou ſow good feed 
in thy field ? trom whence then hath ir tares? 

2s He faid unto them, An enemy hath done 
his. The ſervants Jaid unto him, Vilt thou then 
that wego and gather them up? _ 

20 Bur he faid , Nay : left while ye gather up 
the rares, Ye root up alſo the wheat with them. 

20 Let both grow together until the harveſt : and 
inthe time of harvelt I will fay to the reapers, Gather 
ye together frit the tares, and bind them in bundles 


- ro burn them: bur * gather the wheat into my barn. 


21 Another parable put he forth unto them, ſay- 
:2 , * The kingdom of heaven is like unto a grain 


tf: 42:d-ſeed,, which a man took and fowed in 


©. hich indeed is the leaſt of all ſteds : but 

«i it 15 grown, it is the greateſt among herbs, and 
_ -qaeth a tree : 16 thar the birds of rhe air come 
iid [doe ia the branches thereof. 

22 * Another parable ſpake he unto them, The 
kinzdyum of heaven is like unto leaven, which a 
womin took and hid in || three meaſures of meal, till 
the whole was Ieavened. 

Here are three P..bls by the Evangeli$} pur rogerher before 


#5 ke cometh to the Explication, which cur Saviour giverh of the 


firſt; al! of them concerning tae Grfpel-Church , and rhe Diſpen- 
{xtimn of the Goſpel : In che one he inftrudts us whar we are to 
expe as to the mixture of Perſons in ir, while ic 1s in chis 
World; inthe orher ewo, concerning the Increaſe and Propagation 
of ic. The firſt himſelt expoundeth, ver. 37, 38, 39, 49,41, 42, 
43, This Par.zble 1s only found in Matthew, the other wo are 
t,und, ſhorcly boch of chem in Lube, one 1n Marks neicher of 
chem are Expounded, I will therefore without any Explication 
of theſe Y-ries ar preſent , go on to the Verſes foilowing them ; 
all which will lead me to our Saviours's own Incerprecation of the 
firſt et clicle Purables z atrer which I will alſo coniider thoſe two 
Par:bles that follow here, bur are neicher Expounded here, nor 
in te ocher Evangolijts. 

* A!l rh2ſe things ſpake Jeſus unto the multi- 
in parables, and without a parable ſpake he 
not unro then. L_ 

2: That is might he fulfilled which was ſpoken 
by r2c propnet, ſaying, I will open my mouth in 
parables, 1 will utter things which have been kept 
fecret from the foundation of the world. 

Chriſt ſpake all the afore-mentioned chings to the Multitude, 
2nd alfo to his Diſciples in Parables, dark Sayings, covering Divine 
and Spiricuai Trurhs with fir and proper Similitudes z and ar this 
tne he 4elivered himſelt wholly in this manner to them, tho 
at orher times he ſpake more plainly. He gave us the reafon be- 
fore, and by this way of ſpeaking ; alſo he made his own Diſciples 
more dilizent to arrend to whar chey heard, and more inquifitive 
2er the rrue {enfe and meaning of ic. - And thus, faich the 
EvangeliS , that which was ſpoken by the Prophet , Plal. 78. 2. 
was alf9 fulfilled in Chriſt, vor char rhe F//i$f, wherher David 
or Aſap), 41d there Profefie concerning Chriſt, tor plainly che 
Plalmift inicnded to relate the Hiſtory of God's Dealing with the 
Fews, and their Behaviour coward him: Nor was it fulfilled, 
as tne Tpr in the Antitype, bur as a things of the fame Nature was 
done; the Prophet dchivered himſelf in dark Syings , ſo did 
Chriſt; bur inſtead of 7 «i utter dark Sayings of old , the Evan- 
glit hath, Which hve been kept jecret from the Foundation of the 
Wyld; he means the great and my ſterious Things of the Goſpel, 
bid from Agos and Generations, Rom. 16. 25. I Cor. 2. 7. Col.1.26, 
wiere it 13 called, the Revelation of the Myſtery which was kept 
jeeret fince the World bezan, Eph. 3. 9g. AS the Pſalmi$t opened his 
Mouth in grave Diſcourſes tending to the good of the People to 
wiom he ſpake : $5 Chriſt caughr tie People, by revealing the 
Myſteries of.che Goſpel, hid in Gas! from the beginning of the World, 
& P21 ſpeaks ro the Epn2ſe.mns. 


- 36 Then Jeſus ſent rhe multitude away, and went 
into the houſe , and his diſciples came unto him, 
aying, Declare unto us the parable of rhe tares of 
tne field. 


The Multitude wont away, { as moſt People do from Sermons) 
never the wiſer, underſtanding nothing of whar they heard, nor 
cant underſtand ir. Bur there was a more Conſcientious parr 
07 Our S.rj9's 4uditory, who could nor thus farisfie themſelves; 
They follow Chri# inro the Houſe , and intreat him to open to 
wem the Parable of the Tares of the Field ; they ſay nothing of 
the ger ewo Parables, becaute probably they underſtood them) 
77a 1t may be this Paruble did more atfedt them, in regard of the 
Teadtul Concluſion of it, 


—+> 


4 


St, M AT THEM 


a 


(Cha P. 


27 Hz anſwered, and ſaid unto them , Ho that 
ſoweth the good ſeed, is the Son of min: 

23 The field is the world: the go0d fed arc the 
children of the kingdom : bur the tares are * the 
children of the wicked one : 

29 The enemy that {owed them is the deyil : 
* the harveſt is the end of the world : and the 
reap2rs are the angels. 


The Deſran that Chriſt had in his Parable, was to ſhev them, 
That tho? he laid a good Fruindation of a Church in the World, 
calling fome home to himſelf, and making them parrakers' ot his 
citetual Grace, laying the Foundatio of his Gripel-Church in 
tuch as rook his Toke upon them; yer in proceſs ot time, whilcs 
choſe that ſhould ſucceed him in his Miniſtry flepr, ( nor being 
lo diligenr and watchful as they oughr to be, ) the Devil (who 
is full of Envy and Malice to Men's Souls , and is continually 
going abour, ſeeking whom he might devour ) would fow Er 
neous Opinions, and find a Party , even in the Byom of kis 
Church, who would hearken to him , and through their L:/!, 
comply with his Temptations, both to Errors in Do&rine, and 5; 
rrs in Pragice ; and it was his Will that there ſhould be in 
the Viſible Church a mixture of good and bad ; ſuch bad one: 
eſpecially as Men could nor purge our without a danger ot put- 
ting our fuch as were true and ſincere; but there would Lu a 
time, in the End of the World, when he would come with his 
Fan, and chrouzhly purge his F/57, and take to Heaven all 5c 
and ſncere Souls, bur rurn all Hypocrites inro Heil. This ap- 
pears, by our Saviour's Expyſitim ro have been our S2viour's 
plain meaning in this Parable. Hence he tells us, Thar by t:c 
Sower here, he meant himſelt the Son of Man. By the Fici! he 
meant the World, By the good Seed, he meant the Children 5f the 
Kingdom , ſuch as had a true Change wrought in their Hearts, 
were truly Regenerated and Converted. By the Tires, he meant 
the Children of the Wicked me; that is, of the Devil; ſuch as did 
the Works of the Devil, 70h. 8. 44. Thar the Enemy that ſ:wed 
theſe Tares, was the Devil, who, by his Suggeſtions , preſenting 
Objetts, gc. makes himſelf the Erther of all wicked Men. Ou: 
Saviour here faith nothing to thar part of the P.r.uble, where the 
Tzres are faid to be ſown, (while Men ſlept : ) Thac was plain 
and intelhgible enough. The Devil hath a Power to Seduce, Per - 
[wade, and Allure ; none to Force. Tf particular Pertons kepr their 
Warch as they might, the Devil could not by his Ten:pr.ction 
Firce them. If Magiſtrates and Miniſters kept their Watches ac- 
cording to God's Preſcription, there could not be fo much 97+ 
Wickeane/$ in the World, as there is. Neither doth our Savious 
give us any particular Explication of that «part of the Parable, 
viuch 1s v. 28,29. where the Servants fay to their Maſter, [4/; 
thou then that we go, and gather them up * And he ſaid unto thei, 
Nay ; le$F while you gather up the Tares, you root up alſo the iN he.:; 
with them. ] Our Saviour by this teacherh us, thar every p.;ſaze 
in a Parable 1s not tobe firred by ſomething in che Explic.ut in - 
It was not the Point that he deſigned in this Par.tble ro inftruct 
them in, how far Chyrch-Officers might or ought to at in pur.;insz 
the Church, bur only, char in the Viſeble Church they mutt 
expe a Mixture till the Day of Judgment. 2. That in that Day 
he would make a perfect Separation. So as thoſe that would from 
this pafſage in the Parable conclude, That all Erronens, and 
Loſe Perſons ought to be Tolerated in the Churcli till the day 
of Judgment, torget the Common Rule in Divinity, That Par ;- 
bolical Divinity is mt Argumentative, We can argue from no- 
thing in a Parale ' but from the main Scope and Tendency of 
it. However, it is bold Arguing trom a Paſſage in a Parable Ex- 
pounded by our Saviour himſelf, when he hath omitred the Exp/;- 
cation of that Paſlage : Nor can any thing be concluded , bur 


Wheat trom the outward Appearance, that rhey cannor be rooce. 
out without an Hazard of a Miſtake, and a rooting up of the 
Wheat with them ; but our Saviour reſerves the Point of the 
Miniſterial Duty in purging the Church, to another more proper 
time; he here faich nothing of chac, bur of his own Detign co 
purge it at the Harve$t; which he interprers the End of the WiiiT; 
thac is, the Day of Fudgment. By the Rezpers, he tells us that ke 
meaneth the Angels. 

40 As therefore the tares are gathered and burnt 
in the fire : ſo ſhall it be in the end of this world. 

41 The Son of man {hall ſend forth his angels, 
and they ſhall gather out of his kingdom all || chings 
that oftend, and them which do iniquity : 

42 And ſhall caſt them into a furnace of fire : 
* there ſhall be wailing and gnaſhing of teeth. 

4.3 * Then ſhall the righteous ſhine forth as the 
ſun, in the kingdom of their Father. 
ears to hear, ler him hear, 

As in the common pradtice of Men, when they have a mind 
to pick their Corn, and have «it clean when it 15 Reaped , to fer 
Men to clean the Wheat, and to pick out the Tires; and having 
tied chem up in Bundles to burn chem, ſo (faith he) will 1 do. 


I will ſend my Angels at the Day of Judgment, and they ihall our 
of my Church rake all impenicenr Sinners all thoſe who, in ctis 


1 W1d, have been Scandats, and Offences, and Mijchievsus to my 


People, and who have made it their Butinets ro work Iniquity. 
{ And they fhail ca# tnem into a Furnace of Fire, where ſhall be wail- 
ing and gnaſhing of teeth : | Thar 1s, into Hell; which in regard 
of the ſevere Torments which the Da-med ſhall teel there, 1s ot- 
ren in Scripture compared to Fire; as chap. 25. 41. and in orher 
Texts ; by which is only fer our co us, rhe Dreadtulnets of rhe 
Puniſhment of the Damned ;, that is, proportioned to, if not tur 
exceeding thar of rhe Burning /iving Bodies in Fire, Having thus 


expreſied the Puniſhment ot Wicked Afen , he Expoundeth what 
he 


char ſuch muſt nor be rooted our as have ſuch a Reſemblance of 


* Who hath 7 


AM, 


* Ge,g.15. 1 
Att,13.19, 
1 Joh.z. 3. 
*Joet 3.12. 
Rev.14.,15, 


fl Scaidals, 
Stumblings 
blacks. 


2 f Ci1.8. 12s. 


Y; Cor.15+ 


a7 
SV q - 
perf. g 


kt k | 
*\ WENTE 


Chap. XII. 


* Phil. 3. 
7, 8. 


he means by gathering the Wheat into his Barn ; viz. The taking 
ot Righteous Men to Heaven. Then, faith he, ſhall the Righteous 3 
thote whom I have Cloathed wich my Righteouſneſs, and who 
have lived in Obedietice ro my Will, to that degree, that tho' 
they be nor perteftly Righteous, yer are ſincere and uprighr, ſo as 
I have accepted them, Shine as the Sun in the Kinga)m of their 
Futhzr : An Expreſſion much like that of Dan.12. 2, 3- Signht- 
ficative of that Glorious State of the Saints in Heaven, which no 
Eve having ſeen, nor Ear having heard , no Tongue 1s able co 
expreſs. He concluderh in the fame manner, as he concluderh 
the Parable of the Sower, exciting his Hearers to a diligent Conf1- 
deration, and Belief of whar he had ſaid. Our Saviour adding 
no particular Explication of the two Parables delivered, V. ZI, 32, 
33. the Diſciples not acking him to explain chem, and the Evan- 
2-1; having pur the Explication of rhe firſt Parable atrer them, 
7. [t is reaſonable, that tho' I omitted the Explication of them in 
their proper place, yer I ſhould add ſomething here tor the be- 
nefic of thoſe who' poſſibly will ncr be able fo readily to con- 
ceive our Saviour's meaning in them withour an Interpreter, as the 
Diſciples did ; which is thought to he the reaſon why they asked 
n9 Explication of them. The one is the Parable of the Gram of 
Alutard-ſeed, v. 31,32. the other, the Parable of the Zeaven hid 
in three 12::ſcres of Meal, v. 33, the Scope of both 1s the ſame, 
Our Saviour intended them borh ro let his Diſciples know rhe 
Succeſs that his Gofpel ſhould have over all the World, that they 
might not be diſcouraged ar the little Succeſs of ir ar preient. To 
this purpoſe he compareth it, 1. To a Grain of Muſtard-ſezd, 
which, he ſaith, 3s the lea$t of all Seeds; that is, one of the leaſt 
of Seeds, or the leaſt Seed that produceth fo grear a Plant, bur 

b:comes a Tree Þ high, that the Birds of the Air come and loage in 
the branches of it. ] Tho* that ſmall Seed with us runs up to a 
great heighth, and produceth a Plant which hath Branches con- 
fiderable enough to lodge Birds which fit low, yer we muſt nor 
judze of what grew in thoſe Countries,by what growerh 1n ours; 
there are ſtrange, and almoſt incredible Stories told of that Plant 
by Nacuraliſts, as to its growth in ſome, hot and fertile Coun- 
tries. Criſt by this foretold his Diſciples, what following Ages 
guickly verified , That the Heathen ſhould entertain the Gr/p-!, 
and the Smd of it ſhould go to the Ends of the Earth , norwith- 
ftardinz its prefenc ſmall appearance. Upon the ſame ſcore he 
combareth it to a little | Leaven, which a Woman hid in three Mea- 
ſures of Ite.11, till the while Maſs of Meal was leavened.] By theſe 
two Expreſſims, our Saviour alto lers us know the quick and power- 
ful Nature of the Word; That Chriſt's Words are (as he faid ) 
Spirit of Life, and have an hidden and extraordinary Virtue in 
them. I do not think ic worth the while to inquire inco the con- 
tent of theſe oz, or Meaſures of Meal, and why he men- 
tioneth bur three; they are Curioſities, the knowledge of which 


'turneth to no account. Our Saviour certainly, by the Expreſ- 


fan deſizned only to hint the ſmall number of the Fews that Be- 
lieved in him, bur foretold a far greater Harveif : The Law 
fhodd g1 forth out of Sion, and the Word of the Lord from Jeruſalem, 
as 1/aiah Propheſied , chap. 2.3. But many People (after them ) 
ſhould ſay, Come you , let us g2 up to the Mountain 0 

r ho Lord. 

44 Again, the kingdom of heaven is like unto 
treaſure hid in a field : the which when a man hath 
found, he hideth, and for joy thereof, goeth and 
* ſelleth all thar he hath, and buyeth that field. 


Wharſoever belongeth ro the Kingdom of God, whether the 
Word , which is called the Word of the Kingdom , or the Grace and 
Fxwour of God, which he by me diſpenſerh our under the Admi- 
niſtr.ation of the Goſpel, # like; thar is ; ſhould be adjudged, 
eſteemed, and uſed like as Treaſure hidden in a Field. Men ſhould 
do by ir, as they would do upon the diſcovery of a great Sum 
of 3/ſmey buried up in the Earth in ſome Field , not yer their 
own. Suppoſe a Man had made ſome ſuch difcovery , what 
would he do ? He would rejoyce at it, he would hide it, he 
would ſell all he had, and buy that Field; ſo ſhould Men do to 
whom there is a Revel.ztion of rhe Goſpel, and the Grace there- 
of. They ſhould inwardly rejovce in the Revelation, and bleſs 
God tor ut ; and whatever it coſt them, labour rhar they might 
be made partakers of that Grace. Earthly Voſſeſſimms cannor be 
had wirhour purchaſing ; and thoſe who have not Ready-money 
ro Purchaſe wich, muſt raiſe ic from the Sale of ſomething which 
they have; therefore our Labour for the Kingdom of Heaven , is 
ſer out under the Notion of Byying. Bur the Propher , Iſa. 55: 
1. 2. lets us know that it 15 a Buying without Money , and without 
Price : However, there 1s ſome Refemblance, for as in Buying 
and Selling there 1s a parting with ſomerhing thar is ours, in ex- 
chanze for ſomething which 1s anothers; fo in order to the 
obtaining of the Grace of the Goſpel , and the Kingdom of Glory, to 
which the Remiſſin of Sins leadeth, we muſt part wich ſomething 
in order co the obtaining of ir. We have no Ready-money ; no- 
rhing by us that is a Quid pro qu2, a Valuable Price for Divine 
Grace ; we muſt therefore part with ſomething that we have, 
and ir 15 no matter what it be which God requireth. Where this 
Piicrvery is made, the Soul will part with all it hath; nor only irs 
of Heart, its unlawful Deſires and Luſts; bur irs Riches, Honours, 
Pleaſares, it he can by no other means obtain the Kingdom of 
Heaven; that it may obrain it, they are all of no value to it: 
Nor 1s it atall neceſſary in order to Byying,that the thing parred 
with be of a proportionable Value. Amongſt Men, Wedges of 
Gold have been purchaſed for Knives and Rartles, &4c. Nor doth 
aay thing we can part with that we may obtain the Kingdom of 
Heaven, bear any better Proportion ; yer it 1s a Buying, becauſe 
it is what God is pleaſed to accept; and upon the parting with, 
gives us this Heavenly Kingdom. | 


45 Again, the kingdom of heaven is like unto a 
merchant man, ſeeking goodly pearls : 

45 Who when he had found one pearl of great 
price, he went und ſold all that he had, and bought it. 


St MATITHE WV. 


the Houſe of ! 


The State of the Goſpel-Diſpenſation is ſuch , that Men ;n : 
having a Diſcovery of more excellent things , than before tf 5 
were aware of, Life and Immortality being brought to Light ers: 
the Goſpel, 2 Tim. 1, 10. Grace? and Truth coming by Feſus __ 
Foh, 1. 17. Men and Women are fer upon ſeeking for 4, 
Spiricual things,as Merchants do tor goodly Pearls; and when o 1 
makes a diſcovery of Chri8?, and his Grace to the Soul, it ; : 
ro them as a Pearl of great Price, of more Value than all they =” 


in the World ; and they are ready to part with all , to ob+4; 5,42, 
Chriſt and his Grace. Both theſe Paratles haye the CR - 
and Tendency, viz. to inform us, 1. That Chriſt and his Grace OY 
are of a great and tranfcendent Value, 2, That under "ng J 
Goſpel, there 1s a clear Diſcovery of theſe things to the World 
3. Thar where this Diſcovery 1s effettually and particularly mage th 
co any Soul, that Soul will part wich all it hath, or is werth, rather | 
chan it will miſs of Chrift and his Grace and Glory. ; C 
47 Again, the kingdom of heaven is like unto a w 
net that was caſt into the ſea, and gathered of every | T 
kind : : | 4's 
48 Which when it was full, they drew to ſhore, | wi 
and fat down, and gathered the good into velitls 2 he 
but caſt the bad away. -.. 
49 Solhall it beat the end of the world: the angels _ 
{hall come forth,and * ſever the wicked fromthe juſt, *c, . or 
50 And ſhall caſt them into the furnace of hire: 3 © Pre 
* there ſhall be wailing and gnaſhing of teeth. £ vr Nis 
The Scope of this Parable is much the ſame with that of the "I <q . 
d 


T.res; to reach us, that whilſt the Church 1s in this World, there 


w1ll be 1n it a mixture of good and bad ; a pertet Separation of mo 
which, one from another is nor to be expetted until the Day of " 
Judgment. { Again, the Kingdom of Heaven.) This term fizni- 1 
fieth che whole Diipenſation, and Adminiſtration of the Gofpe: fig 
borh the Grace diſpenſed in it, and the means of that Grace which 6 
15 adminiſtred under it. 1 ſhould here interpret ir of rhe Pregc!. JaVs 
ing of the Goſpel, which 1s called the Word of rhe Kingdom, being 5 
the means by which Men are gathered in, both tothe Church vii. DeCz 
ble,and inviſible : This our Lord herecompareth to a At, thrown If 
into the Se.z of the World, and garhering in of every kind, bring- INE: 
ing 1n many to an outward Proteſſion ; all of which ſhall not come Fogg 
ro the Kingdom of Glory; nor are indeed true Members of Ivirb 
Chriſt, not Members of the Church inviſible, tho? they be Menz- Ag, 
bers ot the Church viſible. When the End of the World ſhall key” 
come, and Chriſt ſhall have accompliſhed his Defign in the Pe 
World, then a Day of Judgment ſhall come, and there ſhall be x 4 Vic 
perfet&t Separation betwixt ſuch as received the Goſpel in Truth, and them 
1n the Love of it,and others; the former ſhall be caken to Heayen, he ap 
and the larter thrown into Hell; which he expreſleth by the like with a 
Phraſes which he had before uſed in the Parable of the Tyre; yrs 
which need no further Explication, : a 
51 Jeſus faith unto them, Have ye underſtood all Pere. 
theſe things ? they ſay unto him, Yea, Lord. G's 
A Conſcientious Teacher will have a reſpe& to the Profit of his os Ju 
Hearers. Chriſt here ſerteth us an Example; asking his Difti- wage 
ples it they had underſtood all theſe things ; as well thoſe Para- + of 
bles of which he had given them no particular Explication, as gs 
thoſe he had explained. They ſay unto him, Tea, Lord , we have Suk 
underſtood them. Commer) 
52 Then ſaid he unto them, Therefore every ſcribe, 
which is inſtructed unto the kingdom of heaven, is 
like unto a man that is an houſholder, which bring: Bends 
eth forth out of his treaſure things new and old. ard þ 
Seeing you underſtand theſe things, communicate your know- Perle 
ledge of them unto others; do not know for your ſelves alone, Sick, 
[ Every Scribe that is inſtrufted to the Kingdom of Heaven.) The with f 
Scribes, amongſt the Jews , were nor only Clerks that were im- Ship-b 
ployed in Wriring, but Teachers of the Law; ſuch a one was Ezra, Fed, 
chap. 7. 6. Our Saviour here, by Every Scribe inſtruded to the bun, a 
Kingdom of God , underitanderh every good Miniſter of the Goſpe!, ies 
firred ro promove the Kingdom of God , to be imployed in the nia bo 
Church of God, ſhould be like a good Houſholder, that hath not Son of 
his Provifion to feck when his Gueſts come; but hath a full: the to 
fraughr Score-houſe, and hath nothing ro do, but our of his Stack 
and Store-houſe, to bring our all ſort of Proviſion , according to 7 
rhe various Palates of his Gueſts, Miniſters of che Goſpel ſhouts A 
nor be Novices, 1 Timoth. 3. 6. raw and ignorant Men , bur Mc 
mighty in the Scriptures, well acquainted with the Writings of 2 Ar 
the Old and New Teſtament, and the Senſe of them; Men that Baptiſt 
have a ſtock of Spiritual Knowledge, able readily ro ſpeik 4 9.7 might 
Word to the weary, and to ſpeak to Men and Womens particular Fy 2, / 
Caſes and hg rs 
53 And it came to paſs, that when Teſus had he Fg : 
finiſhed theſe parables, he departed thence. {Wea 
54 And when he was come into his X own coun- 11, 2 Kingdom 


Wo were 


] 
F!3 5 iS... 
v33% To AKC 


try, he taught them in their ſynagogue , infomuci 
that they were aſtoniſhed, and faid , Whence hath 


. - l s 2 death ; 
this man this wiſdom, and theſe mighty works? bear by an 

Mark relaterh this Paſſage, chap.6. 1, 2, 3, 44 Our Lord vent Ps of al 
up and down Preaching the Goſpel; he having Preached unto 192 Fon th 


che People in the former Parables, now he deparceth from «e 
Sea-ſide, where he Preached as before,into his own Country : MO 


Interpreters judge Nazareth; he was born in Bethlehem , bur *© = 2 /4ch th 
read little or noching of any time he ſpent there afterward. > re King F 
zareth was the place where he was brought up, and therefore 1 = laid, Th 
was called 7eſus of Nazareth, There he Preached in the SyN2- Je Mighty” 
gogue, or in the Synagogues of Galilee, Mark addeth, on ti? Hd | ons Elias: , 
bath-day. { Infomuch that they were aſtoniſhed.) It is nor ſaid, ©:e) ks * Bu 
repented, or believed, bur chey admired at kim, and were i | ; caded, he 
nathed; [And ſaid, Whence hath this Man this Wiſdom , and = | KG Various 


miget 


Cn YVIV. 
\ haP- 
2 That 1s, a Power to do theſe mighty Works. 


mizhiy Works * ME mn -£ = 
Wy þ fairh , Whence hath this 3an theſe things ? And, What Wiſ- 
tm is #245, that # gruen unt? him, that even ſuch mighty Works are 
ought by ©35 Hands * Aſtoniſhment and Admiration flow trom 
nh rance , and are no Indications of any ſpiricual ſaving Work 
_ Men's Hearrsz We thall fee that thele Zews , norwichſtand- 
{ns their Ajloniſh1ment, arc by and by ſcandalized and offended 
ar Curilt- : 
k1-t..4% 55 Is not this the carpenter's ſon? * Is not his 
WC:n.13- mother called Mary, * and his brethren, James, and 
= Toſs, and SIMON, and Judas ? ; 
| -6 And his fifters, are they not all with us? 
whence then hath this man all rheſe things? 
Marb faich rhe ſame, ch.2Þ. 6. 3, only he faith , 1s not this the 
Carpenter 2 6 Tix[@y * Which leaderh ſome ro think, t har Chriſt, 
while he was thirry years of Age, wrought with Zoſep> upon his 
Trade. L1be 2. 51. It 15 faid, that He came to Nazareth, and was 
(abjadt ro bis Parents. Foſeph Was an Artificer, that was certain 
15 7:x1@y ſiznifies; bur whether a Carpenter, or a Smith, the word 
will not inform us. For the Brethren of Christ, and his Siſters 
here mentioned, rhe moſt by them underſtand his near Relations, 
Tne Jews were oftcnded ar rhe meannefs of our Saviour S Parents 
and Relations. [ They were offended in him » | thar is, theſe things 
made chem ſtumble ar him, and not receive him as the Meſſtas, 
or 4 Prophet ſent from God, How unreaſcnable is Malice and 
Prejudice? One would have thought thar their knowledge of 
kis Friends and Education ſhouid have rarher led rhem to have 
concluded , that he mult be ſenr from God, and more than a 
Man ; fecing that he did not come by this Wifdom by any 
ordinary Means , nor work theſe great Works by any Humane 


Power. | 
4.21, 57 * And they were offended in him. But Jeſus 


{id unto them, * A prophet 1s not without honour, 
ſavz in his own country, and in his own houle. 


58 And he did not many mighty works there, 


becauſe of their unbelict. 

Mzyb ſaich, chap. 6. 3, 4, $, 5» But Feſus ſaid unto them, A 
Prichet is mt without Homour, but in his own Country, and amongst 
his own King and in his own Hoſe : And he could there do no mighty 
Wwrb, ſave that he laid his Hands up a few ſick folk, and healed 
And he marvelled, becauſe of their Unbelief; and he went 
rnd abut the Villages teaching. Our Lord here gives anorher 
more External Reaton of their being ſcandalized ar him :; That 
is, his being ſo familiar with them, and converſing ſo long with 
them, Familiarity ordinarily breeding Contempt; to this purpoſe 
he applierh ro them a Proverbial Speech ; That { 4 Prophet ts not 
withiur Hur, but in bis own Country.) Men are ready to under- 
value, flizhr, and diſeſteem thoſe rhey have been brought up, and 
ordinarily converſcd with, and amongſt : | He did not many Works 
there.) Marb tellerh us he did ſome, but not many. { Becauſe of 
their unbelief.] He ſaw them a People, whoſe Hearrs chrough the 
juſt Judgment of God were lockr, and ſhur up under unbelief;, and 
therefore ic was to no purpoſe to 'do more Miracles betore rhem 
upon whom rhey could have no Effet; nor did this conſiſt with 
what he knew of the Counſels of God, with reference unto them, 
$9 as he left them, and wenr Preaching about the Villages, or 
Country»=Towns 1n Galilee. 


CRAP, AHv. 


Hei1d'; Opinion of Chrif, 1, 2. The reaſm why Fohn was impriſoned 
ard beheaded, 3—12. for departeth into a deſart place : Tie 
Peyle flow him He hath Compaſſin of them, and healeth their 
Sich, 13, 14. Feedeth five thouſand, beſide Women and Children, 
with five Loaves and two Fiſhes, 15 —21. Sendeth his Diſcipies 4 
Ship-board, and goeth up into a Mountain to Pray, 23. The Ship 
toſſed, and Chri walketh on the Sea, 24, 25. The Diſciples ſee 
him, and are troubled, 26. Chris comforts them, 27. Peter walk- 
eth on the Sea : beginning to ſink, crieth out, 28,29,30. Chri$t ſaveth 
him, and rebuketh his unbelief, 31. They all owned him to be the 
Sm of G14, 33. Chri$ healeth all the diſeaſed of Genneſaret, by 
the touch of his Garment, 34—36» 


' 
+$:*,1y . 
$'4-! o 


I T that time Herod the tetrarch heard of the 


fame of Jeſus, 
2 And ſaid unto his ſervants, This is John the 
Baptiſt, he is riſen from the dead; and therefore 
mighty works do || ſhew forth themſelves in him. 


| Tis, and the following Hiſtory, is related by Mark more large- 
ly, 4þ, 6, from wer. 14. t v. 39. by Luke more ſhortly, chap. 
5 7,8, 9, We heard before, that the Romans, under whom the 
/-2s now were, had alcered the Government of the Fews from 
a Kinzd7n to a Tetrarchy, or Government of Four. Luke telleth us 
rho were the Tetrarchs, chap. 3-1. Herod (as we read there) was 
me T2774 of Galilee ; He had before this cime pur Fohn Baptis 
' dearth; upon what occaſion, and in what manner, we ſhall 
"cr oy and by. He heareth of che Fame of Feſis : Lube ſaich, he 
»2ard of all that was done by him, and was perplexed. Tit ſome 
14d Fn the BaptiSÞ was riſen from the dead ; Others, That Elias 
bad 4rpe.red + Others, Th.At one of the Old Prophets was riſen again. 
wut Herod tand. Fobn have I ben2uded + but why is this of whom I 
wear ja) things £ Ant he d-fived t1 fee him, Mark ſaith, chap. 6.14. 
492 Kinz Herod heard if him. for his Name was ſpread abroad, And 
. '- ſaid, That Fon the Bay # ww riſen from the dead, and there- 
Je mgnty Worbs do ſhew f i119 themſelves in him. Others ſaid, It 
Win Elias: And others ſaid, It us a Prophet, or as one of the Pro- 
is; But when Her:4 heard there'f, he ſid, It #s John whom TI 
beheaded, he is riſen ffom the dead. $9, as ir ſeems, tho' others 
WM various Opinions, yet Herod was fixed in this , Thar this Man 


St, M ATT HRER 


[ 
was 79 the B.tptis riſen again from the dead; the* Lybe rep res 


| Chap. ATV. 


nim as ſpeaking more doubrtully, (as he mighr do to the Pec ple) 
yer Huttnew and Mark ſpeak him, affirming of it more ccniident- 
ly, ( probably co his Courciers and Cn52ecnrs. ) © There was an 
Opinion amongſt the Heathens,thar the Souls ct Men and Women, 
when they died, went into other Budies. S2me think thar Herod 
was Infected with that; and thar this is che mcaning of "I ſuſpi- 
c1o0n, Thar F551. was rien trom the dead : Thar his$ ul, which 
he had forced from his Body, was gone 1nto ancrher Body F = 
c might be revenged on him : Or elle he thought thar John dens 
indeed raifed from the dead, (which vert by Gareth mizkt andebbis 
have been known, ) and therefore mihry Works fhewed them. 
ſelves in him. : 22CIM 

3 For Herod had *laid hold on John, and bound: * Luk. 4. 
him, and pur him in priſon for Herodias ſake, his 19, 4% 
brother Philip's wife. 

Mark faich, c>.1p. 6. 17. Fr he had married her. Whether thi 
Philip was Herod's Brother, both by E:ther and ther, is arczucd 
by ſome; as alſo whether he Married her during the Lite of kis | 
Brother : The Scripture ſatisfieth us nor in cheſe things, bur ir 5s MIE'®: wi 
moſt probable that Philip was his own Brother, and thar he ar leaſt BET: | 


lived in Adultery with her, during rhe Life of her Husband, con- " 
trary to the expreſs Law of God, Levit. 18. 15, as! 

4 For John ſaid unto him, * Ir is not lawful for *Lev. 18! al 
thee to have her. 16. nb 


Mark telleth us,chap.6.20. that H:y54 feared, that is,revercnced * #2: 2k 
and reſpeted John, knowing that he was a int Man, and an Hy 
= — = and ou he heard him, ks did many things, and 
veard Pim gladly, Porn was very popu): 14 all Men counte 
him as a Proghes: h; char ond Ne 5, him —_ 
Courr, and heard him there, 7ohn ſeeing Hood live in Adiltory 
and Ince$8f, was not able to ſuffer ſucit a Sin upon him; bur tells UE 'Y 
him he did that which was nor lawful for him ro do, for God's iT HR 
Law had forbidden ſuch Marriages. Mark adderh, that Hzrizs 1.44. + 
alſo had a quarrel againt him , and would have billed him , but ſhe | EF fl 
could nt, becauſe of the refpe&t which Herod had for kim , but | at's | ] 
this wore off; for Matthew tells us : £129 1 That, 


5 And when he would have put him to death, he | 
feared the multitude, * becauſe they counted him *Chan,23; ſr 
as 4 prophet. | 


- » 
2s. | } 
Ar firft he had ſome Reverence for 7ohn, becauſe he was a 900d Luk 40. 5: 
Man; bur either Fohn by the trequenc Checks he gave ro his f 
Luſt, or Herodias her continual Importuniries to Herod, ro revenge 
her of her great Enemy, prevailed,and made #21! willing enough ; x 
ro put him to Deach ; Bur now he was atraid of fome popular Wi þ F 
i; d j 
j 
| 


Tumulr or Inſurre&ion, becauſe of the great Eſteem which the 

Fews generally had of John, thinking him a Fro+het, one ſenc of Fl 

God to reveal his Will unto Men. 4 bY \ 
6 But when Herod's birth-day was kept , the TORE -TRA0 | 

" 2 } f ' 

daughter of Herodias danced || betore ther , and | G7. in tg 2 {i "BT 

pleaſed Herod. mich. 
7 Whereupon he promiſed with an oath to give 

her whatſoever the would ask. 


Mark relaterh this more fully, bur the Senſe is the fame, ch 49.5, 
V.' 21, 22, 23. And when a convenient day was come, that Herod on 
hs Birth-day made a Supper to his Lords, high Captains , and chief 
Eſtates of Galilee : And when the Daughter of the ſaid Herodias 
came in, and danced, and pleaſed Herod, and them that ſate with 
him, the King ſaid unto the Damſe!, Ask of mewhatſozver thou wilt, 
and I will give it thee. And he ſware unto her, Whatſoever thou ſhalt 
ak of me, I will give it thee, unto the half of my Kingdom, Thoſe 
who have got over the point of Lawfulneſs in an Acton, have 
nothing to conſulc bur Conveniency : Therefore, faich Mark, 
when a convenient day was come, when probably Herod ſhould be 
over merry with Wine , or ſhould be bufie wich his Company, 
and nor ſo much ar leiſure ro conſider what he did ; ic ſo kap- 
pened, thar the Daughter of this Herodias danced before H-ro4 
upon his Birth-day, The keeping of Birth-duys was utual 
amongſt rhe Eaftern Kings; Ph.r.40h Kept his Birth-day, Gen. qo. 20. 
Some by it underſtand the day of the Princes Coronation, or Entrance 
upon his Government , which ſome think is meant, Hf. 7.5, by 
the day of the King, when the Princes made him ficb with Bottles 
of Wine, The Fews reckoned them bath, amongſt rhe Pagan 
Feſtivals; but they had both derived this and many other Uſfages 
from them. Dancing was much uſed amongſt them ar cheir Feſti- 
vals, Ir feemeth this Daughter of Herodias pleated Herod more 
than ordinary : He ſweareth that he wou!d give her what ſhe 
would ask, to the half of his Kingdo9m. Thar Phraſe, by Eſther 5. 2. 
feemeth ro have been ordinary wich Princes when they made 
liberal Promiſes. 


8 And ſhe, being before inſtructed of her mother, tots + [5 
ſaid, Give me here John Bapriſt's head in a charger. [Rad (Ns lf 


Cn ES, 


gy a 
CO Eon 9 : - 


Mark, chap. 6. 24, 25. reports it more largely. And ſhe went Vinl 
forth, and ſaid unto her Mother, What ſhall T ach ? And ſhe ſaid, 1! 
Toe Head of Fohn the Baptift. And ſhe came in ſtraightway with haſte be 7] 
unto the King , and asbed, ſaying, T will that thou give me by and WES! 
by in a Charger the H:ad of Fohn the Baptit, The meaning 1s »y £ 


plain, fo as the Words need no Interprerer : They ler us lee, 
1. The Power of the Luſt of Malice, and Deſire of Revenze : 
Surely Herodias might have prompred her to have asked fome- 29H Wit -M 
thing which might have done her more gocd than the Blood ot ied ARE | ak 4} 
an Holy and Innocent Man. The guilty Soul is never ar reff. £5. M8... 06 
7bn Bapti$t was a Priſoner; ſhe ſhould not need have teared the 4, SR Rod 
intluence of 7ohn's word co have cauſed a Divorce, bur ſhe cannor 
be ar reſt while John is alive. 2. The great Evi! of wicked Pa- 
rents; and the contrary Bleffing of Parents tearing God ; the for- 
mer by Commanding, or Perſwading their Clildren to Sin, are 
great inſtruments rawards their Childrens Damnarion : The other MOTT. HE 2 
by cheir Admonitions, Precepts, aud I: ſtcacions ; great Intiru- 60k ROBY wt \ 

; " ments So s 1 $4 | : 1 PF de 


—_ * _ PR 
en A b 


tins —— 
ooo we; 


wo a—_— " - 


EE EY . 


WOES 2 oy Mp. a 


— D—_—_ 


OE 
CO 


AY 


, iy, 
- Ib 
- 5 , 


"= we —- - = = 
—— A: .  ——_— — = - —_——_ - - = 
NM MEOgRD Du III - DEED © 
—_ m—_— ——— ————_— —— ——— ——  C. -_ — —— —_ 
= ? = . - X __ 
> be 4 - ren 
- "I, <S —— - S - =_— == : _ - EY == = 


—_ OW, ror 


Cirup. » < iy. 


non of thr Salvation , and Erernal Happineſs. 3. We may | 


St. 


ebſerve the Genius of Harrering Courtiers, nor one of chem inter- 
voſeth £9 fave the B.yprisf's Lite. 

o And the King was ſorry : nevertheleſs for the 
oarhs ſake, and them which fat with him art meat; 
he commanded 77 to be given ber. 


10 And he ſent and beheaded John in the priſon. | 


11 And his head was brought in a charger, and 
givento the damſl.and ſhe brought 77 ro her motner. 
Mark relateth it more largely, chap. 6. 26, 27, 28. And the King 
w.# exceeding ſoriy « Tet for his Oaths ſake, and for the ſue of thyſe 
th.it [.zt with him, he would not rejeet her. And -immediately the 
King ſent an Execationer, and commanded his Head to be brought ; 


- a9 4c _ ney + be. IIS - > E . < ” 4 y "TWER 
= —_ = bo EX "Dp meters IS Fr. rr RS —y an - 
ho _——— LF =P = TEE —_— — . 
= —_ __ —_— . - : - oo. A "RI 
— _— = —— - RC © — - > id NF —- raged 1 WA . - K. _ IE 2 
_ = — —  __— — Fo <= £47 ove —— ET et, 
_ _ - : - A . - . —_ -* 4 
_ - - 5 — - . _— : T = __ 
. mw” =. 2 S4 — —_— 2 - . 
= - - = : 
= _ Z a} n— — . 2 : - 
" * a 6 A _ _ —_ « _ 4 _ = o- - — _ 
ee ES _ FL ——— Þ> 
, -: ” £ ——— as A : EY FeE 
» 2 Hop <6 Ws. *. 4 Bars 4 
— = _ : —_ EL : Eo * % 4 L 
P - — _— _ fy — — putmcoeaſings: —_ = wo g << . - Rc ——_————————n 
- —_— 


- . ,—_ Iz -——— 
CONEY CESEST I th —_ - _ - —_ —_— 
— i G on "IR Kage. _ __ mt. - WIT = 
> -_ —_ re ere er en, - _ > - —— —— - > Ao —— a pm, rem woe — _ ,_ = SD —- — 
> + SIS 2 4:2 "==; s C wp. - he _ - nem _ , 
23 _ "»— + - G EE are Gere - _ ——_ _ — === 
— -; — —— —- gen -z _ -— - ——_ - — —- - - = —_— o —_ 
—_— p _ 2 — — w_ ' 
DW. © —_— : 2 > L ye - J 7 "ui, -4 V 7 _” wk * _— OW, EEE Fo a 
8 - - = 0 ” I ; - - y _— T _ 2d 
©, oo re — - > = ad C of v 
ns IE TIE d pn Y - be -—_ pw + , _———_ F _—_ ; 2: ne LS + "2 OA , 
: -— 5h ee ARXET Xt . —> '% = SR 2 : _ >> ug $9 A 5 2d -- a 
a : TO Fg IMs : = ” ' WEI 6 op: we Py _ _ _ _- 
= >." as no, —__ — - — _ - Wo n w , ” LAM — » VE oY 
” 


252. H - Rk 
wy, $5 284” AE - Mu 
_ 3 --{--.. 4 "REN". 2 
- = 
— 


E Clp.12, 
3, 
Luk. Y. { Co 


and he went, and beheaded them in the Priſon, and brought his Head 
in d Ch.rzer , and gave it to the Damſel , and the Damſel gave it 
t> her Mother. {The King' was exceeding ſorry :] He could have 
with:d the had” askt fomerhing elſe; he was troubled ; f9r we 
hcard berore , that alrho' he feared nor God, yer he feared the 
People. { Yet tor his Oaths ſhe, ) nor our of any Religion of = 
O:th. 7uramentum nn potest efſe vinculum Iniquitatis. They mu 
be tortitlity ignorant, rhar think their calling God to witne!s chat 
they wili do a thins which God hath forbidden them -to do, 
ſhould oblige them in any manner to the doing ot the thing, 
Buc for his Oaths (:2, in point of Honour, becauſe his ord 
was 2one our, that he mizhe not appear guilry of any Temerity, 
or Levity; and for the lake of choſe char were with him, that 
he mizht not ſeem before them ro vary from his Word; or 1t 
may be, as well to gratifie them, as ro gratihe the Damſel and her 
Mocher, he ſends an Executioner, who took; off John the Baptist S 
Head, and gave ic ro the Damſel in a Charger, who carried 1t tO 
hcr Mcther: What could be more Unjuſt, and Inhumane, and 
Bioody ? 7obn was nor tried, nor condemned : Ir was a great 
Feſtival, and ſhould not have been profaned or deiiled with Blood. 
Tixcte rings were nothing , when an unſariable Majtce was to be 
gratiiied. Herrdias will have her Husband and his Gueſts ſce, that 
7oin Bids Read in a Charger, was to her as pleaſing a Diſh as 
Tny was at /7724s great Feaſt, Thus died this Great Man , to 
{1m ic the Malice and Luſt of a leud and 1mperious Woman : 
And to reach vs, What we muſt expe, if we will be faithful ro 
the Truſt which God repoſerh in us. 


i 2 And his diſciples came, and took up the body, 


3nd bnried ir, and went and told Jeſus. 
The Diſciples of Foþn, in Teſtimony of their reſpe to their 


MATTHEW. 


| 


17 And they ſay unto him, We have here hy; 
five loaves and two filhes. 

18 He ſaid, Þring them hither to me. 

19 And he commanded the multitude to fit down 
on the graſs, and took the five loaves, and the two. 


diſciples to the multitude. 

20 And they did all eat, and were filled, and th 
tvok up of the fragments that remained tive! 
baskets full. 

21 And they that had eaten were about five thoy- 


{and men, beſides women and children. 

In the Relation of chis Stcry by the other Evangeliſts, there js 
no difference in whar is Material ; the others relate fome Cir. 
cumſtances more; as, that they ſat down on the Graſs, and ly 
Fifties ; one faith by Hundreds, and by Fifties, &c. But they alj 
agree 1n the quanriry of the Provition, five Loaves,and two Fiſhes - 
the Number of the Perſons fed five Thouſand, (only one addeth. 
beſides Women and Children, ) and in the Number. of the Backers 
tull of Fragments; and in our Saviour's lifting up his Eyes t9 
He.ven, and bleſſing them. Theſe are the main things obſeryable 
in this Hiſtory, In the Hiſtory of the Miracle; as there is no 
difference berween the Evangelits to be reconciled,fo there is no 
dithculry to be explained, Ir is a plain Relation of a matter of 
Fatt, by which our Lord evidently ſhewed himſelf to be the Son 
of God , God bleſſed fer ever; ror he muſt in this necetlarily 
cxert a'Creating Power, Kere muſt be a ProduQtion of a /ub/tarcs 
or being, our of a not being; or it had not been poſſible thar five 
Thouſand Men (beſide Women and Children) thould have heen 
ted with five Loaves, and rwo Fiſhes; and therefore tome think, 
that it 1s faid , that Chriſt bleſſed the Loaves, as he bleſſed rhe 
living Creatures, Gen, 1. 22, But we have not here the follow. 
ing words, Increaſe and Multiply ; which incline me rather to chink, 
thar the Bleſſing mentioned here,upon his lifting up of his Eyes to 
Heaven, was a Bezging God's Bleſſing upon their Food ; himfelf 
thereby paying che Homage of his Humane Nature to his Fz- 
ther; and reaching us, according to that, x Timoth. 4. 4, 5. to 
receive the good Creatures which God's Providence aftordecl u; 
tor our Nouriſhment , with Thankſgiving , SanRityins them hy 
Prayer, By this Miracle, and others of the like Nature, our $1- 
viour took from the Unbelieving Fews all manner of Cavil, and 
Exception to his Works. Tho” Devils might by Compat jive 


ey 
Ve 


Matter, and of their owning of his Doftrine, and gratefut Re- 
membrance cf kim, hearing whar Herod had done, came and took 
up 7-br's Body, ind buried it in a Tomb; and they ſoon aiter 
went and acquainted our Saviour wich what had happened, 
which was the cauſe of our Saviour's withdrawing to a place 
wher? he might be lets caken notice of, as we ſhall hear. 

12 *When Jefts heard of z7, he departed thence, 
by {hip into a defart place apart : and when the 
p2ople had heard zbercof, they tollowed him on foot 
out of the cities. : 

1.1 And Jeſus went forth, and ſaw a great mult!- 
tude ard was moved with compathon toward them, 


and he healed their lick. 

Mark hath the ſame, chap. 6. 32. Our Lord knew that the 
rime for his ſuffering was not yet come; and poflibly conſulred 
alto rhe fatery of his Diſciples: the People follow him on Foot ; 
bur our Saviour going by Sea, how could che People follow him 
on F: :? Ir 1s anſwered, That it was but a Creek of the Sea 
whict our Saviour pailed over; and the People, by going three 


or for.c Miles abour, might tollow him on Foor. He ſeeing a great | 


Mulricude, had Compaſſion on them, and healed the Sick Perſons 
that were amon-tt them. 

15 And when it was evening, his diſciples came 
ro him.Jaying, This is a defart place, and the time 15 
now paſt, tend rhe multirude away, that they may 
go into the villages, and buy themſelves victuals. 

_ The fullowing Miracle being an evident Confirmation of the 
Godhead oj Chritt, 4s recorded by all the Evangelifts. By Mat- 
thew here; by 21%, chap. 5.35. by Lube, chap.g. 10,11,12, (Fc. 
by Jon, chyp. 6. 1,2,2, We Theſe Words lead us to it, and 
inew us the eccation of 1t. Our Saviour was withdrawn to a more 
priv2te Place ; which, becautle little inhabired, is called 4 deſart 
plice. Lib: ane ut was near Bethſaida, Luk, 9. 10, The Peo- 
ple, as it ſ-emicth, had been rozether ſometime. It was now After- 
noon, and the rime Oo: Dining was paſt, Ir was Evening in the 
Jewiih Senſe, (who called it all Evening, afrer the Sun was turned ; 
and racrecore had ewo Evenings, as thoſe killed in their Writings 
rei] us! eovixe which the Paſſer was to be killed.) The Diſciples 
rheretre pirying the Mulricrudes, who, they preſumed, might be 
{unzry, come to our Saviour, and move him to diſmiſs them, 
that they mizhe ger ſomething co ear in the Villages of the adja- 
Ccnt Country. 

15 But Jcius ſaid unto them, They need not 
depart ; give ye them to ear. 

7% r:laterh the Story thus : When 7eſus lifted up his Eyes, 
ond faw 1 great Company come unto him, he ſaith unto Philip, Whence 
ft: 1 we buy Bread, t2.1t theſe may eat * And this he ſaid to prove 
him, for he himſelf knew what he wald dv. Philip anſwered him, 
Two hundred penyworth of Bred 4s not ſufficient for them, that every 
ene of them may tahe a Iittlz, One of his Diſciples, Andrew, Simon 
Pote,”s brother, ſuth unto hit, There is a Lad here which hath frue 
Burley-lnwues , and tw? final Fiſhes; but what are they among$ ſo 
r.imy ? And Jeſus ſaid, Male the Men fit djywn. Now there 
4s mach Grjs in the place; fo the Men ſat down in number about 
fros ihoulund. 


place one to anorher , and ſome Exorciſts of their own mizh: 
ſeem ro caft them cur, yer none ever prerended ro multiply 
Bread and Fiſh to tuch a Proporticn as this ; that ſuch a Quantir; 
of either ſhould feed fuch a Number, and leave ſuch a Remain- 
der. This Hiſtory likewife turcher inftruerh us, horh con- 
cerning the low Condition of Chrift, and his Diſciples; their 
Faith in the Word of Chriſt ; and our Duty and Satery in &- 
pending upon his Providence , while we are doing of cur Dur, 
and minding the things of rhe Kingdom of God, and obeying the 
Will of God. St. 7ohn obſerveth the Fruit of, rhis Miracle, 
Foh. 6. 14. Thyſe Men when they had ſeen the Miracle which Jo/us 
_ yu This is of a truth, that Prophet which ſhould come ints th: 
or : | 


22 And ftraightway Jeſus conſtrained his diſci- 
ples to get into a ſhip, and to go before him unto 
the other ſide, while he ſent the multitudes away. 


Mark ſaith , chap. 6. 45. Before, unto, or over-againft Bct'- 
ſaida, Chriſt is ſaid to have conſtrained them, to denote to us, that 
rhey were not very Willing to go. They were in a deſarr place; 
ir was rowards Night; the Day was far ſpent &cr he wrought tte 
Miracle before-mentioned. Probably they were loth to leave 
Chriſt al5ne in ſuch a place, and ar ſuch a time : Bur his Com- 
mand was obeyed. Probably he Commanded , 1, Thar h2 mig! 
berter ſcatter the Mulritude, Mar. 6. 45, That he miznt pre- 
vent 4 Tumulr ; for St. Fohn tells us, That the People hid a < 
ſign to take him by force, and make him a King, F:h. 6.15. 3. To 
make a way for another Miracl?, ro which their going by S2 
gave occaſion, as we ſhall hear by and by. 4. To gain himfelt 
a private opportunity for Prayer ; for, ar. 6. 45. When he h:4 
fent them away, ne departed into a Mountain to pray, So alſo fait 
our Evangeliſt. 


he went up into a mountain apart to pray : and 
* when the evening was come, he was there alone. 

Fobn ſatch no more, than that he departed himſelf into a Mout:- 
rain alone; Matthew and Mark ſay it was to Pray. From wience, 
(as from other places of Holy Writ) the Duty of Secret Projer 1s 
commended to us by the great Example of our Saviour ; he 
chuſerh che Mountain for it, as a place of greateſt Privacy anc 
Solitude. | And when the Evening was come.) This confirmerh ti? 
former Nction , that the Fews had two Evenings. They callc 
that parr of the Day atrer the Sun had began to decline , The 
Evening, which was the Even before ſpoken of, inrerpreted hy the 
other Evangeliſts, When the Day was well ſpent ;, and the Twillght, 
which is here called che Evening, and which is the time wii) 
moſt uſually call by that Name. 


24 But the ſhip was now in the midft of ths 
ſea, toſſed with waves, for the wind was contrary: 

25 And in the fourth watch of the night, Je1us 
went unto them , walking on the ſea. 

26 And when the diſciples ſaw him walking * 
the ſea, they were troubled , ſaying, It is a {Þ!tt 
And they cried out fer fear. 


23 * And when he had ſent the multitudes away, %t: 


% Jabs 
"| mr 


fiſhes, and looking up to heaven, he * bleſſed, ang +, 
brake, and gave the loaves to hzs diſciples, and the 6 : 


, 
* 
” 


Chap, XIV 


'- 
»t & * 
4 


fa p. 


conſt 
hid 
Pup, 
or P 
his. 
peri! 
upan 


if it 


our Eye 
mediatel 
from his 
laverh 1 
wherefor ( 
yet it W 
Faith, 


I 
Wind « 
33 
and wi 


the So; 


They; 
walked 1 
pany ma] 
Manichee, 
tne Sea, rl 
ney mut 
not alloy 
C own war 
of all Hu 
Ship, bur 
Who brin 
Were in th 
Homage 1 
0 great a 
of God, © 
World to 

depr ces ; 
and a Fait 
T2 be ackn 
Iracle of 
Fhat Proph 
time We m 
his being th 
ut by the 
Wanted, 


jap. XIV. Df. 


27 But ftraightway Jeſus ſpake unto them, {ay- 
ing, Be of go9d CACer : Nt is [, be not airaid. 

Whilſt our Saviour was Praying on the Mcunt , the Ship 
which carried his Ditciples was upon the Sea, that 1s, thac Creek 
of che Sea, which they were at that time patſing over. A Storm 
ariizrh nor withour the Countel of God, that Chriſt mighr ſhew, 

mac boch the Winds and che Waves were under his Command, 
i And in the fourth Watch of the Night; | Thar is, abour three 
ours betore the riting'ot the Sun ; For tho rhe 7ews anciently 
divided cie Night 10to three parts, each conſiſting of tour Hours ; 
ver being at this rime under the Komans, they kept to their Divi- 
tion of ic inro four parts , which they called Watches, trom their 
Military Guards, which they reheved every three Hours, L Feſurs 
wont alſo unto them, walking upon the Sea ,) as It it had been firm 
Ground. { 4nd when te Diſciples ſaw him walking on the Sea, they 
were troubled , ſaying , 1t # a Spirtt : and they cried t for fear.) 
py rhis ic ſeemerh, char the Dodtrine of Spirits was nor !trange to 
char Age, tho' they had a Sect of Sadduces which denied ic: Thar 
the Devil , by God's Permiffion hath a Power to trouble and 
1:irace che Air, aud alfo to atlume a viſible Shape, and 1n it co 
;Frisht Pertons by Sea, or by Land, 1s unqueſtionable, When 
the Diſciples ar a diſtance ſaw Chriſt walking on rhe Sea, rhey 
concluded ir was ſome ſuch Apparition. This made them cry out 
through fear. [| But ſtraightway Feſus ſaith unto them, Be of g19d 
chow; it s 1, be mot affaid. | Mark, chap. 6. $2. addeth, They 
cmnfidared nt the Miracle of the Lowes , for their Hearts were 
þ:dened, Having had fo lare an Experience . borli of the 
Purcr and G2odnefs of their Maſter, in cir Jace ftraic for want 
or Bread, rhey ought nw fo 1 oon co have ihewed a difſtrutt in 
his Providence, as 15 tie would ave fuffercd them to have 
periſhed in the Sea z that Miracle did nor make a due Impreſſin 
upan them. 


28 And Peter anſwer:d him, and faid , Lord, 
if it be thou. bid me come unto thee on the water. 

29 And he faid , Come. And when Perer was 
come down out of the thip, he walked on the water 


to go to Jeſus. | : 

20 But when he ſaw the wind || boiſterous, he 
was afraid : and beginning to fink, he cried, ſaying. 
Lord, ſave me. | 

21 And immediately Jeſus ſtretched forth hzs 
hand, and caught him, and faid unto him, O thou 
of little faith , wherefore didſt thou doubt? 


Peter, by ſaying, 1f it be thou, ſhewed thar his Faith was not fo 
ſirong, as it ſhould have been, after he had heard his Maſter's 
Voice, by ſaying to him, [| Bid me come unto thee on the Water ; | 
he ſhewerh a ſomething ſtronger Faith, and a Reſolution to obey 
his Command ; bur his Fear afterward , when the Wind began 
to rite higher, and he began ro fink , argued again the infirmity 
of his Faich. Thus Peter is a Pattern of the beſt Believers; who 
tho* chey may ſometimes think thar they could truſt God in any 
Stare or Condition , yet ofren, miſtake their own Hearts, and 
begin ro ſhrink in an Hour of great Extremity ; which lers us 
ſee what need we have ro Pray, That God would nor lead us 
by his Providence into great Temprarions ; much more co take 
heed char wg do not throw our ſelves into them, No Man knows 
how he ſhall find his Heart under a great Tempration , uncil 
he hath rried ir. Ir therefore gives us a Caurion, as againft Con- 
demning others, ſo againſt Boaſting and roo much Confidence 
25 to our ſelves ; and lers us fee how much need we have to keep 
our Eye upon Chriſt, and his Strength in ſuch an hour. | 4nd im- 
mediately Feſus ſtretched out his Hand. ) God is never far off 
from his People when extream Troubles are hard at Hand. Chriſt 
faverh Peter, bur not wirhout a Check. | O thou of little Faith, 
wherefore did$ thou doubt £] Doubting is diretily contrary to Faith, 
yer it will not conclude a Soul to have no Faich , only a /ittle 
Faith, 


32 And when they were come into the ſhip, the 
wind ceaſed. * 

33 Then they that were in the ſhip, came 
and worſhipped him, ſaying, Of a truth thou art 
the Son of God. 


They; thar is, C5ri$ and Peter, whom we muſt ſuppoſe to have 
walked ſome way with Chriſt upon rhe Sea, Chriſt by his Com- 
pany making: his mighty Power more Conſpicuous; fo as the 
Marichees had no reaſon to conclude, from Chriſt's walking on 
tne Sea, thar he had no true Human? Bidy ; for ſure Peter had,and 
iney muſt aſcribe licrle ro our Saviour's Divine Nature that will 
not allow him to have had a Power to ſuſpend the Natural Motion 
Cnward which we ſee in all Gravity, which is an Aﬀection 
of all Humane Bodies. No ſooner was Chriſt come into the 
Ship, bur the Wind ceaſed, in teſtimony of irs Homage to him 
who bringeth the Wind our of his Treaſuries. [ Thoſe that 
were mn the Ship, came and worſhipped him , ) paying a Religious 
Homage unto him, as he who had preſerved their Lives from 
© great a danger; and they further owned him to be the Son 
if God. This was that great Point which God was bringing the 
World to the acknowledgmenr of ; and we ſee ir was done by 
degrees 3 his Miracles ar firſt only procured a Veneration of him, 
and a Faith tha he had his Power trom God : Then he comes 
7 be acknowledged the Son of David by the Blind Man : The 

Iracle of the five Loaves , broughr many to. acknowledge him 
hat Prophet, that ſhould come int» the World, This is the firſt 
a we meet with fo plain and open an Acknowledsment of 
= being the Son of God. This was done nor only by his Diſciples, 
| = wig aka the Paſſengers in che Ship 3 bur ic was 
— a Iteady Faith, as to tizar point, which the Ditciples yer 

Vol. II. 


MATTHEW 


34 And * when they wete gone over, they came 
into the land of Genneſarer. 

25 And when the men of that place had knowledge 
of him , they ſent out into all rhar country round 
about, and brought unto him all that were diſeaſed. 

36 And beſoughr him that they might only touch 
the hem of his garment ; * and as many as touched, 
were made perfectly whole. 


Mark relaterh the ſame, chap. 6. 53, 54, 55, $5. with no dif- 
ference conſiderable. Chriſt had been 1n this Country betore, 
chap. 8. and inic wrought ſeveral Miracles; fo as they hd a tor- 
mer knowledge of him. As foon as they had Knowledze of his 
being again come, they expreſs their Faith in him, and their Cha- 
rity towards eheir Neightcurs, in telling ir abroad, and bringing 
tick Perſons ro him. I know not why any ſh-uld fancy any 
Superſticion in their defire ro touch the Hem of his G.arm-nt, con- 
tdering tow Mark exprefferh it zav, which we tranſlate, If if 
were but the Hem of 115 Garment. It rather f>undech in my Ears, 
4s an high Expreſſion of their Faith ; they believed there was 
ſuch a Fulneſs of Vertye in Chriſt, chat ic from kim Hlowed ro 
every part of his Garmenr. Ir was their Faith in Chriſt, not cheir 
Touch of his Garmenr that healed chem. 1 am ture cur Lord 
ſo far encouraged t}:cir Faith, hat he kealed all thoſc who reuch- 
ed his Garment wich that Faith and Expettation. The Evange!ist 
{aith, they were made perfetly whole. Tl.cir Faith here plains 
ly 1mp:1ed nor only an 4jſent ro his Power, bur a Confidence in his 
Goodneſs, 


CHAP. 


The Phariſees charge Chris Diſciples with the Breach of the El:e:'s 
Tradition, by Eating with Unwaſhen Hands, 1, 3% CuriSt ins 
cateth them , and reproveth the Pharijees for Ti nz cyjing God's 
Commandment by their own Traditions , .3-—g. Sneweth to the 
Multitude, that what greth into, doth not but wh.1t cometh out of 
the Mouth, defileth the Man, 19—20. He goeth into the Coaſts 
of Tyre and Sidon, 21. A Woinun of Canaan earnetly prays him 
to diſp1ſſes her Daughter : He #s fitent : The Dizciples intercede 
for her : Her freſh Suit to him : He calleth her Dog : She owneth 
it ; but continucth her Suit : Chri$ commendeth her great Faith, 
and healeth her Daughter, 22—28. He healeth many diſeaſed by 
the Sea of Galilee, 29—3 . Feedeth four thouſand, beſide 4 omen 
and Children, with ſeven Loaves, and few Fiſhes , and dep.crteth into 
the Coaſts of Magdala, 3239. 


I Hen came to Jeſus Scribes and Pharſees, which 
were of Jeruſalem, ſaying , 
2 Why do thy diſciples tranſgrefs the tradition 
of the elders? For they waſh not their hands when 
they eat bread. 


Mark relaterh this piece of Hiſtory more largely, ch.1p.7. I, 2, 
3,4, 5» Then came together unto him the Phariſces, and certain of 
the Scribes which came from Jeruſalem. And when they ſaw ſame of 
his Diſciples eat Bread with defiled (that #s to ſoy, with unwaſhen_) 
Hands, they found fault : For the Phariſees, and all the Fews, except 
they waſh their Hands oft, eat not, holding the Traditions of the El- 
ders. And when they come from the Market, except they wajh, they 
eat mot, And many other things there be, which they have received 
to hold , 4s the Waſhing of Cups and Pots, Braſen Veſſels, and of Tables. 
Then the Phariſees and Scribes ashed him, Why walk not thy Diſciples 
according to the Tradition of the Elders, but eat Bread with unwaſken 
Hands * This Portion of Scripture cannor he well underſtood, 
wichout underſtanding fomething of che Fewiſh Government, as 
ro Matters Eccleſraſtical, in which che High-Prief was the Chief. 
Numb. 11.25. God addeth ſeventy Men more co Mes and 
Aaron, to bear a ſhare in the Gcvernment ; theſe were cailed rhe 
Sanhedrim: And this was the Supreme Courc of Fudicature 
amoneſt the Jews, as to all things which re{pe&ted the Laws of 
God, wherher Moral, Fudicial, or Ceremmial ; and every one was 
bound ro abide by their Derermination. ' Thete fare in 7-;1/lem, 
bur had their intertour Courts in otker places, trom wiich they 
appealed to the Sanhedrim, who finally derermined, Deur.17. 8, g, 
Io, II, 12, 13. Ir was the great Buſineſs of this Cozr:, ro take 
care thar there ſhould be no Corruption in Religion. Theſe were 
chey therefore that ſent Mefſengers' ro Fohn , when he Legan ro 
Preach to inquire what he was, and by whar Authcrity he 3:ptized, 
Foh. 1.19. The Phariſees (as we before heard) had char.;ed our 
Saviour's Diſciples with Violation of the Sabbath , by plucking :n1 
rubbing Ears of Corn; and himſelf alto wich che fame Crim for 
healing the Sick.lt is very like theſe Accuſations were got to Feruſ.t- 
lem; and that theſe were Emiffaries ſent trom the Sanhedrim ro 


. warch our Saviour, or poſſibly they came our of their own Curio- 


firy. They could find in our Saviour no Guilt as ro any Violaticn 
of che Law of God ; bur they pick a quarre! wich him for ſome 
Rites and Ceremonies of their Church, which he, and liis Diici- 
ples, were nor fo ſtritt in the Obſervacion of. They fay, | Why 
drthy Diſciples tranſgreſs the Traditions of the Elders ©) The word 
Traditims fignifies only things delivered, and is as well applica- 
ble ro che Law of God as any thing elſe. Thus the whole Law 
of God was but a Tradition, a Dodrine of Lite, delivered to the 
Fews by Moſes from God : Thus the Apoſtle bids che Theſſaloniens, 
2 Theſſ. 2. 15, #bld the Traditions which you have been taught, whe- 
ther by Word , or our Epiſile. Bur the Term of the Elders, is that 
which reſtraineth ir; for as the Papiſ/ts in our time hold, thar be- 
files whar we have in the New Teſt 1menz, the Apcſtle delivered 
many things co the Primitive Church only by Word of Mouth, 
which have fince that time been imparted to ſucceeding Churches ; 
ro the Obſervation of which Chriſtians arc as much cblized as 
ro the written Word, ſn the 7ews did formerly, For rhe, for 
ſome Tract of Time, they kept ro rhe Divine Law, yer in pro- 
ceſs of time they abuſed that Texr, Deut. 4.14. to found a new 

Ee c invenuon 


Chan 


XV. 


*Mar 5,0 ,- 


F Che.9.20. 
Mar. 2. to: 
_ 
Luk. 6.1; 
AttL9.12: 


Cha D, RV. 


*nvencion upon it, That while 3f2/es was in the Mounc of God 
forty Days, and torcy Nizhrs, God in che Day-time revealed to 
him ce Lav written in the Five Books of J/es,and in the Night 
he revealed ro him fevera! other thin?s; as to which , his Will 
was, they thould got be written, tor fear the Heathens ſhould 
Tranſcribe fem ; bur he delivered only by Word ot Mouth, £2 
"> 5medrim, and be to them as much a Rule of Judgment, as 
any part Of the Laiv, which was written. By which means chey 
cred themielves a liberty of making the Law of God what they 
pleaied, for their Traditions were ot tevera! forts, lome were 
D-rerminaci-ns of what in the Law ſeemed doubttal : Ochers 
were Determinations of whar che Law lete ar Liberty 3 Ocners 
they called Sepimenr. Legs , Rules rhcy gave under Pretence Of 
a Guard co rhe Divine Law, for the more Caurion , ehar they 
mi-hc nor rranfereſs it, Theſe things at firſt were not impoſed 
as Laws, bur commended by way of Advice and Counſel ; atrer- 
ward they. came to be lookr upon 25 Laws, and grew almoſt in- 
fin'ts. Thev tell us thar £71. was he who gathered thoſe Tra- 
ditions rozether, and made the Cabal in Seventy-rwo Books, 
which was kept by Gaznlie! , and otters till che Deſtruttion of 
Feruſtlem. An hundred and ewenty Years after they tell us, Rabbi 
Zudas, the Son of Simmm, compoſed a Book of tnem called Mijn, 
Three hundred Years atter this , they tell us R. 79.m.n found 
more, and he and others his Collexgues, colletted them 1NtO A 
larger Book, called the Fernſulzm T.umud, And an hundred Years 
after this , another R455i made a Collettion ot rhe Tradictons 
amonzſt the Fews, that remained in B hy/91, which he called the 
Bibylih Talmud, by which ewo the Jews are governed in Ec- 
S-{zſtical Marcers all the World over at this day. Their whole 
Tilmud is divided incofix Pares, The f:xth 1s about P#riNc.ftions ; 
ir containeth tivelye Books , and every Book hath twenty Or 
thirty Chaprerz.all treating about the Purifying of Houſes, Cloaths, 
Veſſels. Humane Bodies, and their ſeveral parts. The Zews, atcer 
the Deſtruftion of 7eruſulem were in ſuch an Aﬀited Stare, 
that tho” cheir T.z/7:d was not perfetted of Five hundred Years 
and more after Chriſt, yer ir is probable they added not much 
to what chev had in ule in Chriſt's times. The Phariſees were 
very ſevere 4s t2 theſe Traditions, The Sadduces kept more to 
the written Law. Bur the Phariſees were in far greater Credit 
with the 7ews ; therefore Paul called them the ſtriete$t Segt of the 
Fewiſh Religim, AG.25.5., The Fews have ſeveral ordinary lay- 
ins, that ſhew in what Eſteem they had chefe Traditions z, as, If 
t%> Scribes (ry our Right-hand is our Left , and our Lefr-hand our 
Rizht , we are to believe them. And, There js more in the Word's 
of the Scribes, than the Words of the Law, &c. Theſe Scribes and 
Phriſee; accuſe our Saviour's Diſciples for the Violation of one 
of theſe Tratitions, Alzrh faith, That the Phariſees and all the 
Fews, (thar is, the majar part of theſe char followed the Phariſees 
FaQtion,) except they waſh their Hands oft, eat not. They thought 
ir ſinful to Ear, unleſs they often waſhed their Hands. The Foun- 
dation of this Tradition was doubtleſs in the Levitical Law. God 
by char Law h2d declared him Unclean thar ſhould toucn the Car- 
caſs of ary unclean thing , Lev. 5. 2,3. Upon this (as ſome think) 
they had ſuperſtruted a Tradition of Waſhing their Hands, Pots, 
Cups, Y:ſſets, when they had been ar the Market; or almoſt any- 
where, for fear, they, or their Pors, Cups, gc. ſhould have 
rouched any unclean Perſon or Thing. In this they were guilry 
of ſeveral Errors: 1. Extending the Law to the Touching of 
Things and Perſons, of whom the Law had faid nothing, 2, In 
Caſes where ſuch Touches happened Accidentally, and were nor 
made on purpoſe. 3. In thinking har the ſtain of Sin could be 
wathed away by a Ricual Action, which God never Commanded. 
We muſt not think that they charge the Diſciples here with 
a Nez!e& of a Civil! Waſhing for Clzanlineſs, but of a Religious, 
Superſtiriovs Waſhing. 1.4% ſaith, zowals yeeor, that is, with com- 
mm Hinds; we tran(lare ic Polluted ;, fo Acts 10.14. and 11, 8. 
Hands nor firſt ſeparated ro God by the Religious Rite of Waſhings. 

3 But he anſivered. and faid unto them, Why do 
you alſo tranſgreſs the commandment of God by 
your traditions? 

Mark hath the ſame, ch.zp. 7. g. tho' a little our of the Order 
in which Matthew hath it. Full well you reject the Commandment 
of God, that you may beep your own Traditions, Our Saviour could 
have anſivered them, had he pleaſed, more ſtrifly co their Que- 
8t,)ns; but he muſt then eicher have incurred Danger, or 
Oium; he tlierefore chuſeth tro anſwer them by another Que- 
ſtion, which ſtruck ac che Root of the Matter. Admir,faich he, my 
Diſciples culpable in not obſerving Traditioms, which indeed you 
call the Traditions of the Elders, but are your own, deviſed by 
you, or ſome like you, mcerly to uphold your Power and Autho- 
ricy, and co keep People in a needleſs SubjeRion to you : I am 
ſure you are tar more guilty in making Tradirians contrary to the 
Law of God, cr rejeing God's Law to keep your Traditions : 
And indecd this is the common Guilt of thoſe , who are great 
Fealvts tor Traditions and Rites not commanded 1n the Word of 
God. The 7ewih Rabbi Poſe faith, He ſumeth as much, who eateth 
with unwafhen ms, as he that lieth with an Harlot, The Papiſts 
make 1t a greater Sin tor a Priest ro Marry, than to keep a Concu- 
bins, and commit Fynic.itions They make 1c a leffer Tranſpreffion, 
than to Eat Ment on a Friday. 

4. For God commanded, ſaying, Honour thy fa- 
ther and mother: and he thar curſeth father or 
mother. let him die the death. 

5 But ye ſay, Whoſcever ſhall ſay to þzs father, 
or Þ/s mother, It zs a gitt by whatſoever thou 
mighteſt be profited by me, 

6 And honour not his tather or mother, he /ha// 
be free. Thus have ye male the commandment of 
God ot none eftect by your tradition. 

Mark hath much che ſame, chap. 7. v. 10, 11,12, 13, Mark 
faich 34/es (aid, which is the ſame W:01, G:d commanded, God 


St. M ATTH E V-. 


commanded by 32/es. Mark faith, It 3s Corban, (that is, & Gie- 1 
Mark addeth, v. 12. And you ſuffer him no more to d; light fi 's, 
Eather or AOth2r ; which more tully ſhewerh their Crime A 
expourderh whar .}{ztthew had faid more ſhortly, Mark add: 
And m-ny ſuch-like things d> you. This is an Inſtance by which 
our Saviour juſtifierh his Charge upon them, thar they had made 
void the Law of God by their Traditions. The Laiy he inſtancerh 
in, is the fitcth Commandment, Exod. 20.12, Devt. 5, 16, Which 
che Apoſtle calleth the FirSf Commandment with Promiſe, Eph.s., 
which God had fortified wich a udicial-Law;, wi.erein ke hag 
commanded , That he who Curſed his Father and Mother, ſoul |, 
put to death , Excd, 21. 17. Levit. 20, 9, He had alto further 
threarned the Violaters of this Law, Prov. 20. 20. By the wa; 
our S4v1our here alſo lers us know, that the fifth Commangme;: 
obligerh Children to relieve their Parents in their necefficy; yng 
this is the Senſe of che term XHonwr in other Texts of Scripture 
A Law of God, which hath approved ir ſelf ro the Wiſdom 
almoſt of all Nations ; Liberi Parentes alant, aut vinciantuy , Lec 
Cluldren relieve their Parents, or be put into Priſon, was an 1g 
Roman Law. Nor did the Phariſees deny this in terms, bur they 
had made an Exception from ir, which in Effe& made ic of no viz 
ar leaſt ſuch as wicked Children eaſily mighr, and commonly gig 
eludeirby : They had taught the People ro ſay to their Parent: 
[ Corban : It is a Gift, by whatſnever thou mightes be profited by me .\ 
And in that Caſe, tho' they did not give their poor Parents any 
thing wherewith they might relieve cheir Neceſſities, yer they 
ſhould be Guilclefs as ro the fifrh- Commandment. There is 1 
ſtrange Variety of Interpreters as ro this Texr, ſome making the 
Senſe this : That which I ſhould relizve you with, T have dedicated 
unto God; and therefore T cannot relieve you. Others thus : Ihate degj. 
cated my Eſtate to God, and that will be as much good and benefit t; 
" YOu, as if T had given it unto you, Others think that C:rban was tl 
form of an Oath, trom whence they torm orher Senſes, Bur the 
moſt free and unconſtrained Senſe leemeth ro be this, The Ph. 
riſees were a very covetous Generation, and had a ſhare in the 
Gifts that were hrought unro God for che uſe of the Temple cr 
otherwiſe ; thence they were very zealous and diligent in per. 
ſwading People ro make ſuch Oblations. When any pretended 
the Need that their Parents ſtood in of their help, they told them, 
Thar if they rald their Parents if was a Gift, thar they had vowed 
ſuch a Portion of their Eſtate ro a Sacred uſe, that would before 
God excuſe them for not relieving their Parents ; fo as the Pre. 
cept of Hmouring their Parents,and relieving them 1n their Neceſſi 
ties, obliged them nor, it they had firſt given co God the thin: 
by which their Parents might, or ought to have been relieved, 
Thus he tells them, that by their Traditioms, under prerence of 
a more Religious expounding rhe Divine Law, they had indeed 
deſtroyed ir, and made it of no Effc& ar all. 


you , ſaying, 


their heart is far from me. " 


for dotrines the commandments of men. 


The Greek is N25 x0y]es NS27xaxias, teaching DoErines , tl: 
Commandments of Men. | Te Hypocrites , | who pur on an cut- 
ward Vizard, or Appearance of Holineſs, but have nothing in 
your Hearts of true and ſincere Piery , [ Well did 1/# propheſi 
of Jo] Ifaiah tpake to the Fews that were then in being but 
what he then ſaid of your Foretathers char lived in his Age, k 
true of you who are their Children, { Saying, This People, &c.] 
The Evangeliſt doth nor quote the Words of the Propher exatt!y, 
bur his Senſe; and teacheth us this Lefſon , That whatſoever 
ourward Shew and Profeſſion of Religion be in, and upon Men, 
if their Hearts be not right with God ; and whar they outwardly 
do proceed nor from an inward Principle of E:ith, Love and 0: 
dience in and to God, they are but Hypocrites. [In vain a th) 
Worſhip me, &c.] Thar is, idly and unprofitably , anc. to n9 
purpoſe : TI will nor accept what they do. [ Teaching [1#-ir?3, 
the Commandments of Men : | He means, in the Worſhip of God: 
tor other Commandments of Men, are not the Preacher's Tr; 
nor doth he here mean by Commandments of Men, ſuch as back 
the Commandments of God, and only ferved ro enforce them: 
bur ſuch as he had been ſpeaking of ; Humane Traditions , 0! 
which God had faid nothing , as Waſhing of Hands; or tuch 7: 
ditions, as enervated the Commandments of God ; ſuch vere ic 
laft mentioned. 


10 And he calleth the multitude, and ſaid unto 
them, Hear and underſtand. 


fileth a man; but that which cometh out of the 1; 
mouth, this defileth a man. Raſt 


Diſcourſe from the Pharijees and Scribes, who he ſaw were indo- 
cible ro rhe Mulcicude, in whom he diſcerned a more teachablc 
Temper : He uſeth the Preface , Hear and underſtand , as Well 
knowing how they had been taught, and whar an advantage £ir% 
in Poſleſſion hath. That which he tells them, and thar betcre 
the Scribes and Phariſees (as will appear by the tollowing 
Verſes) was. That that which gveth into a Man doth nit defile hin 
but that which cometh out of him. He ſpeaketh nor of a Levitics 
Pollution; tor ſo he that did ear of an unclean thing, might Vy 
ir be defiled ; bur even in ſuch an Eating, it was not the Heh of 
the unclean Bird , or Beaſt rhar defiled rhe Man ; bur his fintu 
_ afcer it, and Eating ir in Diſotedience ro the Command 
of God. 


_ 12 Then came his diſciples, and ſaid unto him 
Knoweſt thou that the Phariſces were ottended, attc! 


they heard this faying ? 


7 Ye hypocrites, well did * Efaias prophecy &,,. 


8 * This people draweth nigh unto me with... 
their mouth, and honoureth me with their lips: but x,” 


9 But in vain do they worſhip me , * reaching «(. 


18, 2 


11 * Not that which goeth into the mouth de- , 1 


. 176 
Mark hath the ſame, chap. 7.15. Our Saviour turns off lis ./. 


Cha P. X hap- 


3f.7 
provi 
of £16 
KI 
inſtra: 
dar S. 
P::r2bl 
fuid, a 
the diff 
than 
tietr F, 
Compa 
portion 


* witneſ 


of Fe 


20 
0 eat \ 


Mark 

18, 1g, 
Maithew 
this, Th 
Hearr of 
ticklings 
and Detir 
Yet deflle 
Of the He 
or Mark 
B! a (prem ) 
now thef 
they def 
our Lips 1 
Ov? t= 4; j 
a ting n 
had no f 


0 COMN.q 
flon lies 1 
of Men, 


*:F 
the coafl 
Mark, C\ 
Pave tn: Ma 
1 Queſtion 
Wirch Tyre 
Coaſts of P 
wo Phenic 
Y into tho x 
non, that c] 
entitles, I! 
S1g2n z and 
the Gent iles 
Aterwards ; 
himſe}f pub 
bnzy of it # | 
£d ſome of 
fe Woman 
Ve 


St: MATTHEW. Chap. XV, 


h 15-20 


Fence was wichour queſtion at his making fo 


The Phariſees One | 
the a Marcer 45 Oct Walhings; not char chey underſtood our 
$;vigur 45 ſpeaking againſt che diſtinction of Mears which was 
Et4blithed by che Cere:nonial Law, nor as yet Avrogated. There's 
nothing doch More offend Hypocrites than pretſing Spiricual Wor- 
bip and Hmage tO God , and che flighring of all External Rices 
3nd Actions, At acrended with a fſuicable inward Zomaze and 


Devotion Of Healts ; 
12 But he anſwered, and faid, Every plant which 
my heavenly * Father hath not planted, ſhall be 


red up. 
_ wes a p them alone : * they be blind leaders of 


, hs blind. And if the blind lead the blind 0 both 


«437 hall tall into the ditch. | | 

Every Plant,) may be underſtood of Dodrines, Praftices, or 
Periins, Thele Scribes and Phariſees are a wretched Generation, 
har are g0r into the Sheep-fold not at the Dor ; my Father never 
ſi-nc chem; they are crept in at the Windows, - chey are Plants 
got into my Garden, which my Father never planted there, and 
they muſt be roored up. | Let them alone, ) they are incorri;ble, 
and blinded by their own Intereſt againſt any Convi&ion , or 
Iaſtrttion 3 as 22. 4+ 17. Ephraim #s jin'd to Taols, let him alone, 
{, chz{e Men are joined ro their Superſtirious Traditions :; I will 
nac concern my ſelf wich chem : They are prerended Leaders of 
th Blind, Rom. 2. 19, but themielves are Bind, I pity the poor 
Pcoplez for whilſt che Blind lead cine Biind, raey both tall 1aro 
1 Dirch. An ignorant and unfaithful Miniſtry 15 the greateſt 
Pla.ue God can ſend amongſt a People. 

15 * Then anſwered Peter, and ſaid unto him, 
D:clare unto us this parable. 

:4 ns Teſus ſaid, * Are ye alſo yet without 
un.i2rſtandting ? 

3{--b fairs, Hs Diſciples asked him concerning the Parable; Peter 
probably began, rhe reſt followed ; Or, Petzr ſpeaks in the Name 
of c1e reſt; tor our Saviour in his Anſiver doth nor ſay, Art 
th:1; bur, Are ye, They did well, in that they deſired to be 
inſt:atted what the meaning was of the Parable; that 1s, the 
dari Saying which he uted;(tor the Hebrews called all dark Sayings, 
P:rables;,) poſſibly rhey might alſo ſtumble ar what our Saviour 
ſid, as tendins to rhe deſtruftion of the Ceremonial Law, about 
the difference of Meats. Bur thar they were no berter inſtrufted 
than not to underſtand a thing fo plain and obvious, this was 
tieir Faulr, and argued their ſmall Improvement of our Saviour's 
Company. God expedts a Proficiency in Knowledge from us pro- 
portionate unto the Means he giveth us. 


17 Do not ye yet underſtand , that whatſoever 
entreth in at the mouth, goeth into the belly, 
and iscaſt out into the draught ? 
p34 18 But *thoſe things which proceed out of the 
© mouth, come forth from the heart, and they defile 
the man. 
as 19 *Forout of the heart proceed evil thoughts, 
-* murders, adulteries, tornications, thefts, falſe- 
4 witneſs, blaſphemies. 

20 Theſe are the things which defile a man : but 
toeat with unwaſhen hands, defileth not a man. 


Mark hath this wich very ſmall difference in words, chap. 7. 
18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, only he ſpecifierh ſome more Sins than 
Maithew enumerateth. The Sum of what cur Saviour faich, 15 
this, That all Sin proceedeth from Luſt ; ſome Defires in rhe 
Hearr of Man after things forbidden in the Law of God. All the 
ticklings of our Hearrs with ſuch Thoughts; all the Willinzs 
and Defires of ſuch things, tho' they never iflue in Overt-Adts, 
yer defile and pollute a Man ; and from theſe inward lotions 
of the Hearr, proceed thoſe Overr=Aﬀts (mentioned by Matthew 
or Mark ) of Murders, Adulteries, Frnication, Theft, Falſe-witneſs, 
Blalphemy, Deceit, Laſciviouſneſs , an Evil Eye, Pride, Foliſhneſs; 
now theſe things take them in their Neſt, which is the Heart, 
th-y defiz,and polluce char : Take them in their pailage chrough 
cur Lips 1275 the World, they pollute char : Take them in their 
Ov i-4.7, rey pollute che Man. Bur ro Ear with unwaſhen Hands, 
a thing n5 where Forbidden by God, only by che Phariſees, who 
had no ſuch Authoricy 2iven thein from God to command any 
Iuc1 tainzs, this doth not pollure a Man. Ir is poſſible that 
Met: ay fin in nor obeying che Commandments of Men , bur 
tut be then in _rthinzs, in which God hath Auchorized them 
© comn.aud, land to eerermine our Praftice 1n; tor the Pollu- 
_ lies in a Difobedience to the Commandment of God , not 
or Men, 


21 Then Jeius went thence, and departed into 
the coaſts of Ty1e and Sidor. 

Mark, ca. 7. 24. addeth, 4d entred into an Zhuſ:, and would 
Pave n: Man knw of it, but k2 c:uld not be hid : Some liere make 
a Queſtion, Whether our Savicur did go into Phericia ,. (ot 
Warch Tyre and S:don were the prizicipz] Oiries,) of ly tur. ce 
Coafts of Palejting next to ic? Thoſe har ehiak he did nv go 
no Phenicia, are guided by his Prohibvicion .£ hi. Diicipies, T5 
6) nzo the way of the Gentiles, Marth. 10. 5. and the Confidera- 
10n, that the time was n2c yer come for his Munifcſtarion co the 
Gentiles, T rather inciin2 © think, that he wenc tao 7r2 and 
9149; and that tais was a kind ofa Preſudiiun to the C. ling of 
the Gentiles, and a Prediction of what ſhould be d ne more fully 
afterwards : Ir is manifeſt he did nor go with a Defign c9 uk 
himſelf publick there; for Mub faith , he wou!d hav? n3 2un 
kn of it « Bur tor privacy withdrew himſelf thirhcr, and (hew- 
- lome of his miraculous Operations there ; and, ver. 22. taich 
the Wy _ _ came to him was a Canaunite ; Mark faich, ſhe 

ol. II, 


Was a Greek, a Syrophenician by Nation. Nor is here any Concra- 
diction; for ever fince the Grecian JDnarchy prevailed over lo 
great 4 pare of the World, the Name or 6G; ezhs had ubraincd 10 
as they called all Greebs who were nor fews, Rom. 1.14,15. and 
Io. 12. A Syrophenician, faith Mark, by N.ztizn « That 1s, one tl:a5 
was a Narive of that part of Phenicia which joincd to Tire att 
Siam, Matthew calls her a Canaanite , or a Weman cf C.mun; 
by which, tho' ſome would underſtand one ot Can, yer as tc 
Orthography will nor agree; fo Mak calling her a Giceh, and 
a Syraphenician, inclines us rather to judge her ot the Stock of the 
Old Canaanites, 


22 And * behold a woman of Canaan came our 
of the ſame coaſts, and cried unto him, ſaving, Have 
mercy on me. O Lord, thou fon of David : my 
daughter is grievoully vexed with a devil. 

- 23 But he anſwered her nor a word. . And his 
diſciples came and beſoughr him, ſaying , Ecnd her 
away, tor {he cricth atter us. 

Mark faith , A certain Woman, whoſe young Dauzhrer had an n- 
clean Spirit, heard of him, and came ana fell at bus keet. The Wom.4r; 
ww a Greeb, a Syrophenician by Nation, and ſhe berought him, thas 
he would c..ﬆt forth the Devil out of 41 Dan;hter. But Fejus jak 
unt9 her, Ler rhe Chilaren f1ﬆ be filed, fr it s not mect 19 tals 
the Children's Bread, and to c:8 it to Dogs, Mar. 7. 25, 25, 27. 
Tio che Wi,man appears to wave been a P:22.m, yer living ſo 
near Gazliler, the had doubtlets he rd of Ct-rift, both wit he had 
done in caſting Out Devils, 4!.4 aito thac he was | 'CKT upon as 
tze Sm of David, and ulualty called by that Name, by tiulc who 
went to him tor any Cures; the t/:cret re <ives him tha Title: 
Others think her to have been more fpecially inli-h:ncd, :nd ro 
have called him the Sm of D.vid, noc as at uſuii Crmnpeliacion 
g'ven him, Eur as believiag him co Fave been th: true ee 
promiſcd to tlie es; nor is that impittible ; i2r two the G pet 
«. this time had nor thined cut up:n any contiderable Number 
ot rhe Heathen , yer Gd in all times had [iis Number amongſt 
them; and this Weman living ſo near to the Jews, and fo ncar 
to Galilee, where our Saviour hirkercs had miſt Converſed, and 
Preached it is nor improbable char tHe might have received tie 
Grace, as well as the $2:n.!, of the Gyp-1, 1» Gad might hve 
kindled in her Heart a true Faith in tne 37cyſt.4s. Our Saviour's 
Commendation of her Fairh in t.e totJowing Diſcouric , maketh 
ts very probable. ZMaxtthew ſaith, that he anlvered ner not .t 
Word : Zink ſaith , thar he ſaid to her, Let the Chil.tron firſt be 
filled, &c. To the obſerving Reader this will appear no Con- 
tradiction. For by 3h ic ſhould appear, thac ſhe firſt came cv 
our Saviour into the Houſe , inco which he went that he mighe 
be private, and there fell at his Feet. Here Chriſt, anſwered hey 
not a Wert, rook no notice of her art all. Bur it appeareth by 
Math:w, that Chriſt ſoon left the Houſe, and ſhe foljuwed ater 
him up5n che way. The Diſciples ſaid, | Send her war, for Le 
crieth after ws, | Then ir was that our Saviour ſaid ro her, Let 
the Children be Tir$ filled, His Diſciples firſt interpoting, faving, 
Send her away, for ſhe crieth after 5s. How any of the Papiſts 
think that this Text Pacronizech their Ivcttion of Saints dp. ted, 
I cannot cell; for chete Diſciples were alive, and we d- not read 
thar ſhe ſpake to any of them co incercede tor her : Ic iscercain 
they did move Chriſt on her behalr. 

24 But he anſwered and ſaid, * I am nor ſent, 
bur unto the loſt ſheep of the houſe of [trael. 

Our Lord by theſe Words dorh nor deny, bur thar he was fenr 
as a Redeemer to more, but not as a Minilicr, Cr as an Apijile, as 
he is called, Heb. 3.1. Tie Apoſtle, Rom. 15.8. latin, Tot 
Fejus Chridt was a Miniſter of the Circumciſion, fir the T;uth of God, 
to confirm the Promiſes made to the Fathers, Oar Lord's Miniſtry 
was contined to the Jews; fo was the Apoſtles, Matrh.1io.s., Till 
ſome time atrer our Saviours Alceinii.n, the Goype! was not 
Preached £enerally t. the Gentiles, tho” foine particular Perfons 
mizhr, and did borh in Chriſt's time, and 1 che time of the 4p;- 
Ses, betore they did go to the Gentiles, hear, receive, and imbrace 
the Goel, as we ſhall hear chis Woman did. 

25 Then came ſhe and worſhipped him, {:ying, 
Lord , help me. 

She here acknowledgeth his Divine Power, and 1mploreth his 
Help. Thus ſhewing chart ſhe believed him co be the Son of God, 
and a Rewarder ot rhoſe char fought him, and continues her Re- 
queſt atcer tivo Repulles, 

26 But he anſwered and ſaid, Ir 1s not meet to 
take the children's bread, ard to caft !r ro dogs. 

Mark ſaith , chap. 7. 27. Jeſus ſaid unto her, Let the Chilgxen 
fir be filled , - for it 3s not meet, 8. By the Chilaren here, he 
means the Fews ; by che Dogs, he meaneth the [ithen. The Jews 


are called the Children of the Kingdom, 77acl 1s called God's Son, | 


his Fir-born, Ex-d. 4. 22, The Apoſtle, A. 9.4. latth, to mem 
belonz'd the Adoption. By Bre.:d cre, our S191 -ur means the /0- 
lication of the Goſpel , and che Miracles by wich tne Truth of tae 
Doftrine of ir was confarmed ; by Dogs, he means the Heaxcien, 
whom the Jews did couar as Do's; no Members of the Houle- 
hold of God, it was a term of C-nteinpr, 2 $.11m.3.9. 2nd 15. 9. 
2 Kings 8. 13. When our Saviour laich, ir 4 nf zmect, 12 means, 10 
is nor juſt, nor equal, 05. How came 1t then, that tie Gotpel 
ras ever carried to the Gentiles ? Mcxrk expounds our Saviour's 
meaninZ, or rather gives us an account of our Savi-ur's Words 
more pertedtly, [Let the Children be frSt filled, Ir zs 107 meet, Xc. ] 
The Fews are God's Children, a Pe>ple whom he ci15te cur of 
24 the Nations of the Earth, to whom he gave many Priviiedges, 
Ic is his Will che Goſpel ſhould be firſt Preached to them, and 
then to che Gentiles, Gentiles are as Dogs, of wiom Ged harh 
no* caken ſuch a care, bur they ſhall have their time. Only 1: 
is not Conſonant to my Father's Will, char che Goſpel, and the 
Miracles by which it 1s confirmed , ſhould be Exhibited unto 

Eee 2 you 


—_— 
he es 


So _— —— 
” OO OBTTTAS —na a Re 
ena, ——_— 


aan OT ou magmas " 
I-77 -_ = Lian - 
Wa FITS = bo eV %. TY ! 
=> - . DIET a % ſs - 
- -— _— LESS _ 4 VEST 
2 Yd 
- - A 


—— 
vob 


Þ nap. XV. 


* fla. 55s 
7 5. 
Luk.7. 22. 


vou Gentiles, till ic hath been fully Preached to the ews, and 
they be firlt filled with the Sound, and with the Confirma- 


tiO1NsS Of Its 
27 And ſhe ſaid, Trurh, Lord : yet the dogs eat 
of the crumbs which fall from their maſters table. 


Mk teports ro the ſame ſenſe, chap. 7. 28. She goeth on, 
after a third Repulſe , the laſt of which was not wichout 2 
Reproach; for our Lord had implicitly called her a Dog. Theſe 
words are as much as if fhe had ſaid, Lord , I confeſs the Fews 
arc Chilzren; Iam a Dog, a poor Heathen , no proper Member 
of the Houthold of God ; and it is truch, that ir teemerh un- 
reaſonable thar I being a Dog , ſhould be ſerved betore all the 
Children are filled. Lord , I do nor beg ſuch a full Maniteſta- 
tion of thy Power and Goodneſs for che Gentiles; I beg but a 
Crumb ot Mercy for my ſelf, and poor Child; and , Lord, rho 
we do not uſe to give our Loaves prepared for our Children to 
the Dogs that feed under our Table, (Crumbs of our Children's 
Bread, as Mark expreſſcth it, ) = we ſuffer our Dogs to gather 
them up. Lord, I know thou haſt a plenty of Grace and Bleſling ; 
the Children may be filled, and yer I may have ſome _—_ 
Three things are remarkable in her Anſiver, beſides her Faith 10 
eminently expreſſed : 1. Her Humility; ſhe owneth her ſclf a 
D2. 2. Her: Modeſty; ſhe beggeth no more than a Crumb. 
2. Her Fervency, and Impoytunity after three Repulles. | By this we 
tearn our Ducy in Prayer, to go to God humbly, ro implore him 
modeſtly, and to be inſtinc in Prayer; going on 1n our Dury, 
though we have nor preſently ſuch an Anſiver as we deſire. Thele 
things conjoined with Faith, make an acceptable Prayer. 


- 28 Then Jeſus ſaid unto her, O woman! great zs 
thy taith ; be it unto thee, even as thou wilt. And 
her daughter was made whole from that very hour. 


Mark faich, Chap. 7. 29. And he ſaid unto her, for this ſyying, 
Go thy way, the Devil is gone out of thy Daughter. And when ſhe 
w.#* cime to ber Houſe , (he fund the Devil ge out, and her Daugh- 
ter Laid upm the Bed | O Woman ! for this ſaying, ] ſhewing the 
oreatnefſs of thy Faith, [ Be it unto thee as thou wilt : Go thy way, 
the Devil is gone out of thy Daughter. And her Daughter was mace 
whole that very Hur, as fhe underſtood when ſhe came home to 
her Houſe ; for [ She found the Devil was gone out of her Daughter,and 
hor Daughter was Laid upin the Bed.) Thus the Words of borh the 
Evangeliſts compounded , make bur one entire and perte&t 
Senſe. The £rearneſs of her Faith appeared in two things : 
1. In that the had ſo little Means, fo {mall a Revelation , being 
a Pagan ; ſhe ordinarily had nor heard the Goſpel, nor ſeen fo 
many of Chriſt's mighty Works , confirming the Truth of the 
D-Arine of it. Hence it is obſerved, That Chriſt admired the Faith 
of none but Pagans, Matth. 8. 10. 2, In that ſhe would not 
pive over, though he gave her three Repulſes z 1o as ſhe ſaid, 
tike F:cob, T will not let thee go, until thou bleſs me. And as he 
like a Prince, ſo ſhe like a Princeſs, prevailed with God, and 
obtained the thing which ſhe defired. Bur will ſome fay, 
hers was her Faith ? What Promiſe? What Word of God 
had ſhe ro afſent to? God doth nor only ſpeak to us ourward- 
Iv, but inwardly; as undoubtedly he had this Woman , giving 
her tome inward affurance, that he was the Son of God, and both 
able and willing ro grant her the thing ſhe aked. Now, a firm 
and fixed Aiſent to any Divine Revelation, is Faith ; wherher che 


Revelation be Internal or External. We from hence learn the | 


mighty Power of True Faith, and Fervent Prayer. 


29 And Jeſus departed from thence, and came 
nigh unto the ſea of Galilee, and went up into a 
mountain. and ſare down there. 

20 And great multitudes 'came unto him, having 
with them thoſe that were *lame, blind , dumb, 
maimed , and many others, and caft them our at 
Teſus feet, and he healed them : 

21 Inſomuch that the multitude wondred, when 
they ſaw the dumb to ſpeak, the maimed ro be 
whole, the lame to walk, and the hlind to fee : 
and they glorihed the God of Ifrael. 


Mark gives usan Account of this Motion of our Saviour's, chap. 
7. v. 32, and mentionerh a particular Miracle which our Lord 
wrought, either in the way, or when he came to the place where 
he reſted ; which nor being mentioned by our Evangeliſt, 1 
ſaall conſider, when I come ro that Chapter in Marh. Matthew 
only tells us in general, that he healed many; tome Lame, ſome 
thar were Blind, ſome that were Dumb, ggc. ſuch a general Ac- 
count of the Miracles wrought by our Saviour, we had, chap. 4. 
24. and 8.16. and 11.5. the Evangeliſt nor largely ſetting 
down every particular Miracle wrought by our Saviour. | And they 
glorified the Lird God of Tſrag.] The Phariſees aſcribed theſe Ope- 
rar19ns to the Devil's Power; but the poor People owned them as 
the Works of God, and gave Praiſe unto Gcd. 


22 Then Jeſus call'd his diſciples unto him, and 
f1id, I have compaſhon on the multitude, becauſe 
they continue with me now three days, and have 
nothing to eat, and I will not ſend them away faſt- 
ing, leit they faint in the way. 

22 And his diſciples ſay unto him, Whence ſhould 
we have 10 much bread in the wildernefs, as to fill 
{9 great a multitude ? 

24 And Jeſus faith unto them, How many loaves 
have ye ? And they ſaid, Seven, and a few little ſhes. 

25 And he commanded the multitude to fit down 
on the ground. 


St. M ATTHE VV. 


26 And he took the ſeven loaves, and rhe fiſh 
and gave thanks, and brake zhez, and gave to hi; 
diſciples, and the diſciples to the multitude. 

37 And they did all eat, and were filled ; arg 
they took up of the broken meat that was left. ſeven 
baskers full. 

38 And they that did eat, were four thouſana 
men, beſides women and children. 

39 And he ſent away the multitude, and toc; 
{hip, and came into the coaſts of Magdala. 


Mark gives us an Account of this Miracle, chav.8, or, 1, o,, 
4, 5, 5c. There is very little difference in their Relations, on'y 
Mark taich , our Saviour went into the Coaſts of Dalmnt;. 
Matthew ſaith, in che Coaſts of Magdala. Moſt think that j: 
was the ſame Place which had two Names ; ſome think one 1; 
the Name of the Country ,. the other of the City or Toy, 
Ochers, that they were two Towns near. together. There cre n» 
Difficulcies in this Hiſtory, Some queſtion how rhey could Fi: 
three Days ; bur the Text dorh not fay fo, onl; rhar ar rhar tim: 
they had nothing to eat, having ſpent whar rhey brought wich 
chem, probably, in their Baskers ; which anſwers anotlcr Que 
St79n allo, How they could ger Baxkets ia the Wildernets ? Te 
Miracle was of the fame nature with that which we met wit! 
chap. 14- only there were five rhouſand Men fed with $;z 
Loaves , and two Fiſhes; here fcur thouſand were fed wir) 
ſeven Loaves, and a few Fiſhes ; there rhey took up tel: 
here hut ſeven Baskers full, Our Lord_worketh ſometimes x;i;t. 
out Means, fomecimes by Means; and rhoie he diif-cencly pro. 
porrionerh to his End, as it pleaſerh him. The miracal-y; 
Operations of our Saviour are amon it his Miranda + Adiry:t; 
not his [nitanda; theſ: Ations of his, which we arc in reading 


' coadmire, and adore , bur are not concerned to imirarc ; ye; 


ſomerhing we miy obſerve from them , both for our [n/t;:j;n 
and Imitation. For our Int;-!t;5n, we may from this Ziji:y 
obſerve the extent of Chriſt's Compaſſin to his Diſciples ; which 
though it is moſt eminently ſeen in what he dorh for their 5:/; 
yer reacherh alſo to their B:4jes, and more exrernal Wants, [: 
alſo reacheth us to truſt God in the doing of cur Duty. Thcſ 
that are in a Wilderne6 hearing Chriſt, ſhall nor fainr by the wiy 
hefore they get home. His courſe of giving Thanks betuic he 
brake and made uſe of the Bread ( which we obſerved hcfore 
in the other Miracle ) commenderh to us the Religious Cuſtcm 
of begging a Blefſing before our Meat, and giving Thanks t 
w_ for good things of that nature , when we have receiycd 
them. 


CHAP. XVL 


The Phariſees , tempting Chrif, require a Sign. He reproveth thr 
zgnorance of things neceſſary, X — 4 He warneth his Diſcipls 
again$} the Leaven of the Phariſees : They reaſon about what t'.t 
meaneth, 5—12, The People's Opinim of Chrif, 13,14. Peter 
confeſſeth him to be the Son of the Living God, Chri appricath 
his Anſwer, and declareth him Bleſſed for it : promiſeth him ti: 
Keys of the Kingdom, 15—20, He foretelleth his Sufferings al 
Death at Jeruſalem , reproveth Peter for dehorting him fn 
it, 2123, and ex\wteth thoſe that will folhw him, to tak in 
their Croſs. The Reward of ſuch as will do ſo, 24—28, 


I H E * Phariſees alfo with the Sadduces came, 
and tempting, defired him that he woull 


{hew them a fign from heaven. 

What theſe Phariſees ard Sadduces were, we have had an ccct- 
ſton ro ſhew before, in our Annotations on clap. Ze Ver. 7. There 
was a great Oppoficion betwisxt them , as we may learn from 
Acts 23. 7, 8. The Phariſees and Scribes were great Zealots for 
their Traditions. The Sadduces valued chem not. The Phaiſ's 
held, the ReſurreFiom, Angels and Spirits. The Sadduces denicd 
all, Bur they were both Enemies to Criſt, and comt:ine in 
their Deſigns againſt him. They came to him rempting ; that is 
defirous ro make a Trial of him. They defire that he cud 
ſhew them a Sign from Heven ;, ſuch a one as Moſes ſheved 
them, Fh,6. 3o, 31. bringing down Bread from Heaven. Thcy 
had ſeen our Saviour ſhewing many Sizns , bur they hed r2ugii 
the” People that rheſe things might be dune by the Power 
of the Devil, or by the Art of Man; therefore they c|al- 
lenge our Saviour to ſhew them another kind of Sign, a S15n 
trom Heaven, that they might know he was ſent, of God. Sce 
Mar. 8. 11, 


2 He anſivered and ſaid unto them , When it 13 
eventing, ye ſay, 1: wil! be fair weather ; for the 5} 
iS red. 

3 And in the morning It wi/! be ſoul vicather to 
day; for the sky is red and lourins. O ye hyps 
crites , ye can diſcern the face of the sky, bur ca! 
ye not d:/cern the ſigns of the times ? | 

You can, ſaith our Saviour, make Obſervations upon ttc 
Works of God in Nature, and common Providence, and im 
ſuch Obſervations you can make Concluſions : - It you fee te 
Sky red in the Evening , you can conclude from thence , £14t 
the Morrow will be fair; becauſe you think- that the Ren./s C 
the Sky art Night., ſpeaks the Clouds thin, and the Air pure: 
and on the other fide, the Redneſs of it in the Morning, 1peaks 
the Clouds thick , 16 as the Sun cannor diſperſe chem ; CT oh 
cauſe you obſerve that generally ic ſo proverh, rhough nothing 
be more murtable than the Air ; LINE you cannot diſcern the Signs 
of the Times.) You are only dull at making Obſervations vp-T 
the Scriprures, and the Will of God revealed in them concert 
ing me; You might @bſerye, that all che Signs of che me wn F 

(0. 


Chap. Xyj 


part! 
ef the 
4s & 
C hem 
Sea b 
was d 
prom! 
laid d 
by be 
his De 
been 1 
Ckriſt 
Amevi, 
of Rep 
after d 
Chriſt? 
and T1; 
Sign, \ 
and de: 
entering 
which | 
the Coa 


Mark 
e£1tten to 1 
one Loaf, 
the Leave 
reaſing \ 
The Dilci 
Proviſion 
came on | 
time to gf 
and Sadd 
(tough 2 
under ſio0 
reference 


Our of his ] 
8 IWhz 
O ye of ] 
{{lves. be 
$4 100) 
uy, * the five 
ackets Ve 
10 +\N 


; @ land, ang 


[S | Hoy 
Iake it nc 
Ware of 
adduces, 
I2 The 
not bewgr 
Tine of t{ 
[Mark givin 
victh lome ha 


mh — Www * 


Ba. Th +» 


| 1p. XVI 


St. M AT 


] was Born of a Virgin, as was prophefted by | 
7: h, chap. 7+ 14+ IN Bethiehem-Judah , as was propheſied by 
en 3; chap. 5+2- ara time when the Scepter was departed from 
my ind the Lawgiver from his feet, as was propheſied by Zacob, 
FO 10. That ohn the Baptiit is come inthe Power and Spirit 
pro to prepare my way before me, as was propheſied by Mala- 
of E pay” Thar there is one come, who openeth the Eyes of 
GY, Blind, and unſtoppeth the Ears of the Deaf, and maketh the Lame 
i" / s an Hart, and the Tongue of the Dumb to ſing, according to 
ID cy, Iſa. 35+ 5,6. All theſe are the Signs of the Time 


fulfilled 10 ME © 


$6 


the prophe | 
when the Meſſith was to come ; bur theſe rhings you -cannot 


ur like a company of Hypocrites , who pretend one 
nother ; you come and ask a Sign, thar you 
when you have ſo many, and yer” will nor 


diſcerO , 
thing and do 4 
might believe 1n Me, 
believes - 
A wicked and adulterous generation ſeeketh 
after a fign, and there ſhall be no fign given unto it, 


but the fign of the prophet Jonas. And he left them, 


d departed. : 
We —_ witch the ſame Anfſiver given to the Phariſees, chap. 


2, You pretend your ſelves ro be the Children of Abra- 
ham | bur you are Baſtards , rather than his Children: He ſaw 
my day afar off , and rejyced ; you will not believe, rhough you 
e me amongſt you, and ar your Doors : He telieved without 
any Siznz you will nor believe though I have ſhewed you many 
<in:; You ſhall have no tuch Sign as you would have; the 
Sin of the Prophet Fonah is enough. Bur in our Lord's former 
retereace of them to the Prophet Fonah, he inſtanced in one 
particular, VIR- his being three Days and three Nights in the Belly 
of the Whale. Here he ſeemeth more generally co reter to Fonah 
is @ Type of him in more reſfpetts, which indeed he was. 
Chanmitizs reckons them up thus: 1. Jonas was chrown into the 
Sea by rhe Mariners, tO whom he had betruſtcd himſelf: Chriſt 
was del:vered to Death by the Jews, to whom he was ſpecial 
promiled, 2. Fonas was willingly chrown into rhe Sea: Chri 
[2id down his Gife , and Man took it not from him. 3. Zones, 
by being caſt into the Sea, ſaved thoſe in the Ship : Chriſt, by 
his Death, ſaved the Children of Men. 4. Jonas, after he had 
been in the Whale's Belly three Days, was caſt upon dry Land: 
Criſt , after tkree Days, roſe ayain from the Dead. 5. The 
Ninevite;, though upon the Preaching of Fonah, they made a ſhew 
of Repenrance; yet returning to their tormer Sins, were ſoon 
after deſtroyed ; ſo were the Jews, within Forty Years after 
Chriſt's Aſcenfion. So as Jonas was many ways an eminent Sign 
and Tjpe of Chrif ; our Lord having referred them to ſtudy this 
Sign, would entertain no more Diſcourſe with them, but leaves 
and deparreth from them. Mark faith, chap. 8. ver. 13. that he 
entering into the Ship again , departed to the other fide, ( the Ship 
which brought him to Dalmarutha, or Magdala) and went 1nto 
the Coaſts of Galilee again, 


s And when his diſciples were come to the other 
fide, they had forgotten to take bread. 

6 Then Jeſus ſaid unto them , Take heed , and 
beware of the leaven of the Phariſees, and of the 


Qadduces. 
- And they reaſoned amongſt themſelves, ſaying, 
I 7s becauſe we have taken no bread. 


Mark faith, chap. 8. ver. 14, 15, 16. Now the Diſciples had for- 
gntten to take Bread, neither had they in the Ship with them more than 
one Lozf, And he charged them, ſaying , Take heed, and beware of 
the Leaven of the Phariſees, and of the Leaven of Herod. And they 
reaſning among} themſelves, ſaid, It is becauſe we have no Bread. 
The Ditciples went into the Ship withour raking a due care for 
Provifion tor their Bodies, which they were ſenfible of when they 
came on ſhore on the other fide. Chriſt happened, in the mean 
time to give them a Caution againſt the Do&rine of the Phariſees 
and Sadduces, and Herodians, which he properly expreſſeth 
(though Metaphorically ) under the Notion of Leaven : This they 
underſtood nor, bur fancied thac he had ſpoken this ro them, with 
reference to their want of Bread; as if he had only given them 
warning , that for che making of Bread co ſupply their Neceffity 
they ſhould not go to the Phariſees, or Sadduces, or Herodians, fer 
Leaven or, thar they ſhould not go to buy any Bread of the 
Phariſees,or of the Sadduces.So dull are we to underſtand Spiritual 
Things, and ſo ſoon had they forgor the Dofrine which our 
Saviour had ſo lately caught them , cap. 15. 17, 18. thar choſe 
things which are foreign to a Man , and come not our of his 
Hearr, do nor defile a Man, bur thoſe things only which proceed 
out of his Heart, 


8 IWhich when Jeſus perceived, he ſaid unto them, 
O ye of little faith, why reaſon ye amongſt your 
{lves. becauſe ye have brought no bread ? 

9 Do ye not yer underſtand , neither remember, 


I2, 


 *the five loaves of the five thouſand.and how many 


baskets ye took up ? 
10 | Neither the ſeven loaves of the four thou- 


" ſind, and how many baskers ye rook up ? 


11 How is it, that ye do not underttand , that I 
ipake i not to you concerning bread, thar yeſhould 
b:ware of the leaven of the Phariſees, and of the 
Ndduces, 

12 Then underſtood they, how that he bad them 
not beware of the leaven of bread bur ot the do- 
Cine of the Phariſces, and of the Sadduces. 

[Hark giving us an Account of this Paſſage, chap. 8. 17, 18, 19. 


ctn ſome harſher Expreſſions : And when Feſus knew it, he ſaid | 


T HE WW. 


unto them ," Why reaſm ye becauſe ye have no Bread ? Perceive yt 
not yet , neither underſtand , have ye your Hearts yet hardened 2 
Having Eyes, ſee you not ; and having Ears, hear you not ? And 
ao you not yet remember » when I brake the jive 1.97ves amonest the 
five thouſand, hww many Baskets full took you up * Toney fay unto 
him, Twelve. And when the ſeven among8t four thouſand, hw m.ny 
Baskets full of Fragments took you up ? and they ſaid, Seven, And 
he ſaid unto them, hw it that you do mt underſtand ® Our 
Saviour here chargerh them with three things, Jenw.nce, Unbe- 


lief, Forgetfulneſl, Tznorance, in thar they did not underſtand - 


thar his uſual way was to diſcourſe Spirirual Thinos tc 

under Earchly Similitudes, and fo by mad he ca rv 
ſtand ſomeching elſe rhan Leaven wich which Men ufe to leaven 
their Bread. Unbelief , Thar they having ſeen the Power and 
Goodneſs of their Lord and Maſter, to feed four th »ſand with 
ſeven Loaves, and five thouſand with five Loaves, leavins a grea: 
remainder: and that he did chis for a mixed Multicude, our of 
4 mcer Compaſſion ro the Wants and Cravings of Humane Na- 
rure, ſhould nor judge that he was able to provide for them 
alchouzh they had brcught no Bread : or, doubt whether he 
would do ir or no for them, who were much dearer to him. 
3. Firgetfulneſs, which is often in Scripture made the Mother 
of Unbelief and Diſobedience » Deuter. 4.9, 23. and 25. vs. 
Pſal. 78.11. There is norhing of difficulty ja che Terms, only 
from this Hiſtory we may learn theſe things. 1. Thar God 
expettech that we ſhould nor only hear and fee, bur underſtand. 
2. Tat he looks we ſhould ner only hear fer the preſent time, 
bur for the time ro come : C!.riſt expetted har his Diſciples 
ſhould have learned from his Doctrine abour Waſhing of Hands, 
that he could not mean the Leaven cf Bread, bur t>merhing elſe 
which might defile them. 3. That he is much diſpleaſed with 
his own People when he diſcerns Blindneſs and Jonorarce in 
them , afrer their more than ordinary Means of Enowledge. 
4. That former Experiences of God's P.;wver and Goodneſs ma- 
niteſted for us, or to us, oughe to ſtrengthen our Faith in him 
when we come under rhe like Circumſtances; and a diſputing, 
or doubting after ſuch Experiences, arguerh bur a lictle arid very 
weak Faich, and an hardneſs cf Heart, that the Mercies of God 
have not. made a juſt Impreſſion on our Souls: [Then underſtood 
they that he had them mot beware of the Leaven of Bread, but of the 
Doctrine of the Phariſees, and of the Sadduces.] Mark, inſtead of, 
and of the Sadauces , hath , and of the Leaven of H:yod : which 
hath made fome think that Herod was a Sadduce. The Doftrine 
of the Phariſees is reducible to two Heads, Juſtificatim by the 
Works of the Law, and thoſe Works too accrding to that imperfect 
Senſe of the Law they gave. 2. The Oblizatim of the Tradition 
of the Elders : Whole Traditions were alſo (as we have F.card) 
fome of thera of thar nature that they made the Law of God 
of no effeft. The Dodtrine of the Sadduces we are in pur: told, 
Act, 23. 8. They ſaid, there was no Reſurre&ion, nor Ange), my Spirir 
Thefe were Principles excellently ſuired ro Men ot Acheiſtical 
Hearts and Lives; and it is more than probable, that #7:y24 and 
his Courtiers, and ſome of his Lords, and gre:t Captiiins, had 
ſuck'd in ſome of theſe Principles, 'and theſe were the Her-dians 
mention'd in Matth. 22. 16. and Mar. 3.5. Theſe Dodrines are 
by our Saviour compar'd to Zeauen, not only becauſe of che 
ſower nature of ir, bur alſo, becauſe Herericks Words ( as the 
Apoſtle faith) eat as doth a Canker, and arc of a Contagious na- 
curez as Leaven doth diffuſe its Quality into the whole Mafs of 
Mear : Our Saviour, ch. 13. 33. had, upon this account, compa- 
red the Goſpel to Leaven, becauſe, by his Bleſſing upon it, ic ſhould 
influence che World, as we have heard, ch. 13. 


12 When Jeſus came into the coaſts of Ceſfarea 
Philippi , he asked his diſciples, ſaying , Whom 
do men fay. that I, the Son of man. am ? 

14 And they faid, * Some ſay that thou art John 
the Baptiſt, ſomeElias, and others, Jeremias, or one 
of the prophets. 


This, and the following part of this Diſcourſe, is relared both 
by Mark and Luke : Mark hath it, chap. 8. 279. And Feſis went 
out , and his Diſciples into the Town of Ceſarea Philippi, and by the 
way he asked his Diſciples , ſaying unto them, Whoamn d» Men ſay 
that T am? And they anſwered, John the Bapti$F, but jome ſay 
Elias , and others, one of the Prophets. Luke faith, :'p. 9. 18, 19 
And it came to paſs, as he was alane praying , his Di.ciples were 
with him, and he ashed them, ſaying , Whom ſay the Pero thes 
Iam? They anſwering him , ſaid, John the Baptiﬆ, bur (::0e (ay 
Elias, and others ſay, that one of the Old Prophers s 1/1 again, 
Matthew and Mark name the Place whither our Saviour was go- 
ing, viz. Ceſarea Philippi : Ir is ſo called, partly to diſti:guiſh 
ir from another Ceſarea; and partly, becauſe it was built ro the 
Honour of Tiberius Ceſar, by Philip the Tetrorch. It was a City 
at the bottom of Lebanon, and npon the River of Fordan. Mark 
ſcirh, cms Diſcourſe was in the Way. Lhe fairh, As he was alone 
Praying : Burt As muſt there ſignine fie ; t- r we cannor chink 
that our Saviour would interrupt himfe!- uy Prayer, by this 
Diſcourſe; nor could he be alone Prayin: , if hu Diſc'ples were 
with him; boch which Luke ſaith; ſo char &y md © 0 a7 ;y 
TE9TEUNuEvY xalanwores, were Cefrainly trawl. cd ' .cter, After 
he had been Praying alone, { his Ditciples were wich :m :] So that 
this Diſcourſe might be (as Mark faith ) in the Wy, betore they 


came to Ceſarea Philippi, whither he was going. He acked his , 


Diſciples , ſaying , hom do Men (or, the People, as Luls hath it) 
ſay that T am 2 Nor that our Saviour, who kneiwv ce Hearts 
of all, did nor know, bur to draw our Peter's following Conteſ- 
fion. [And they ſaid unto him , Some ſay thu art Frbn the Baptis, | 
we heard before rhar H-rod ſaid fo, [ others Elias. | This reſpeRted 
the Prophecy, Mal. 4.4,5. The Fews had a Tradition z Thar 
before the coming of rhe 4/2ſſt.rs, Elias ſhould come, 79h. 1.21. 
[Some ſay Feremias, ) this is only in. 3utthew, | or one of the Pro- 
phets.) The Fews ſeeing Chriſt do ſuch wonderful Works, could 
not reſolve themſelves who he! was. Herod, and his Courrt- 

party, 


; -P "A | | " W 
Chap. XVI. | Mi 


* Chei4e 4! 


_—__ 
7 LES : uy; 


—_ 


: - b _ _ - 
*% _ wt 542.2 - wt 
TRE en vs F FF 
wps.00 opts - , = > 
- - - nn es 


- - =_ _ = o—_—_— - 
_—_ 
Ly «4 * by - 
_ : 


O_o 


0 = 
5 ES 
* 4 * ” w—_ 
TEST -<-<.4 
" SS Y » we ww * y_ 
a — as Ta . 
—— CHRIST 


Chap. XRVI. 


Act. 8. 27. 


& 0. 20s 


tj>h.4-15. 


OC Ju Zo 


"a 
party ſaid, That he was John the Baptist riſen from the Dead. They 
had ic 1cems an Opinion of ſome extraordinary Virtues , or 
Powers, in ſuch as were rifen from che Dead. Many Interpreters 
azrce, that tne Fews had at: Opimon, Thar Good Mens Souls, 
when they died, went into other Bodies. This made them guels, 
£1145 Our Saviour was one of the Old Prophets. 


15 He ſaith unto them, but whom ſay ye that 
I am? ; 

15 And Simon Petzr anſwered and ſaid, * Thou 
art Chriit the Son of the living God. | 

Mark faith , chap. 8. 29, Tho art the Chris. Luke faith, 
ch.1p.g. 20. Peter anſwered and ſaid, The ChriSt of God; that 15, rhe 
Meiji; Yourhatare myDilciples and Apoſtles, what 15 your Opi- 
nion of me? Our Lord expetts nor only Faith 1n our Hearts, bu: 
the Confeſſin of our Lips, Rom. 10. 10. { And Simm mo 
ſwered, \ ner becauſe he had any Priority amongſt che Apolties, 
bur he was of a more quick and fervid Temper than the — 
and ſo ſpeaketh firſt ; they ſilently agreed ro what he 1aid, 
Whar he faith, is bur lictle, but of that nature, thar 1c 
is the very Foundation of the Goſpel : | [ Thou art Chrif, \ che 
Anointed; the Perſon of Old promifed ro the World under the 
Name of the Meſh, Dan. 9. 24, 25. | The Son, ) nor by Adoption, 
but by Nature; for they believed Fohn the Bapti$, Elias, and the 
O!d Prophets, the Sons of God by Grace. Ir 15 plain , Peter 
means more than thar. [Of the Living God :] Our Lord had asked, 
Whom a Men ſay that I, the Son of Man,am 2And in the ſame ſenile, 
he ſpeaks to the Diſciples, Whom do ye ſay, thar Ihe Son of 
Man, am? Lord, faich Peter, we believe, that thou , the Son 
of Man, art the Chri$t, the Son of the Living God, God 1s often, 1n 
Scripture, call'd the Living God, in oppoſition to 1dols, which had 
Eyes and fav not, Ears and heard nor, nor had any Life in them, 
Ger. 15. 14. Heb. 3. 12. and 9. 14, (oc. So as here we have 
2 full and in Confeſſion of that Dofrine, which 1s the Foun- 
dation of tize Toipel. 

17 And Jeſus anfirered and ſaid unto him. Bicf- 
fed art thou , Simon Bar-Jona : for fleth and blood 
hath nor revealed 7t unto thee, * but my Father 
which is in heaven. | 

Our Lerd aprearech here to be mightily pleaſed wich this 
Corfejjim of Peter, and the reſt of his Ditciples, ( tor we ſhall 
obterve in rhe G3jpe!, har Peter was uſually the firſt in ſpeaking, 
2, 5. 63.) He pronourceth him " f" , and giveth the 
Reaivn cf ic alterwaid. | Simon Bar-jma : | that is, Simon Son of 
T-1ia; or, as lome would have it, Son of John, ( they think 7ona 
i* ; c:nrraftion of 75hamma.) Our Lord gives him the tame 
Name, 755. 21. 15. (Er Figh and Blood hath nit revealed it unto 
thee, but iy Either which 4s in Heaven, ] By Fleſh and Blood, our Sa- 
viour meaacch Han, and the Reſon and Wiſdom of Man, Thus 1t 1s 
otten ufed in Scripture, 1/z. 40. 5. Gal. 1.16. Eph.6.12. Some 
note, it always fignifieth fo, when it 1s in Scripture oppoſed to 
God. Thou haſt nor learned this by Tradition, or any Di&ates 
from Man, nor yer by any Humane Rativcination , bur from my 
Father which is in Heaven. This confirmeth what we have, Eph.2.8. 
that Fzith 3s th: Gift of God : Joh.6.44. No Man cometh to the Son, 
but he whom the Father draweth. Men may aſſent ro things from 
the Reports of Men, or, from the Evidence of Reaſon ; but ne1- 
ther of theſe is Faith, Faith muſt be an Afﬀent to a Propoſition 
upon the Authority of God revealing ir. Nor doth any Man 
truly and favingly believe, that Jeſus Chriſt is the Eternal Son of 
God, and rhe Saviour of the World, but he in whom God hath 
wrought ſuch a Perſwafion : yer is not the Miniſtry of the Word 
needleſs in the caſe : becauſe, as the Apoſtle fairh, Faith comes by 
Hearing ;, and Miniſters are God's Inſtruments by whom Men be- 
lieve. No Faich makes a Soul bleſſed, bur that which is of the 
Operation of God. 


18 And I fay alſo unto thee, That thou art Peter, 
and upon this rock I will build my Church : and the 
gates of hell ſhall not prevail againſt it. 


[ And I ſay alſo unto thee, That thou art Peter.) Chriſt gave 
him this Name, 7». 1. 42. when his Brother Andrew firſt 
brougiit him co Chriſt ; I did nor give thee the Name of Cephas, 
or 7crer, tor nothing, ( tor whar Cephas ſignifierh 1n che Syriack, 
Peter ſ1sniacth in che Greck,) I called thee Cephas, and thou arc 
Peter, a Rick. Thou ſhale be a Rock. This our Lord made 
good afterward; when he told him, That Satan had deſired 
to winnow him like Wheat ; but he had prayed that his Faith 
might not fail, Luk. 22, 32. Thou haſt made a Confeſſion of 
Faich, which 1s a Rock, even ſuch a Rock as was mention'd in 
chp.7. 25. and thou thy ſelf art a Rock, a ſteady, firm Believer. 
[ And upon this Rock T will build my Church.) Here is a Queſtion 
amonuft Interpreters, What, or whom our Saviour here meaneth 
by ths Rick ? Some think rhart he meaneth himſelf, as he ſaich, 

3%. 2. 19, Deſtroy thu Temple, (meaning his own Body.) God 
1s often calied a Rick : Dent. 32.18. Pſal. 18. 2. and 31.3. and 
11 certain, Caritt js che Foundation of the Church, Iſa. 28.16. 
1 Cor. 3.11. 1 Fet. 2.6, But this Senſe ſeemeth a little hard, 
char our Saviovr ſpeaking to Peter , and telling him he was a 
Sione, or a Rock, ſhould with the ſame Breath paſs ro himſelf, 
and not iay, Upon my Self, bur, Vpor; this Rock T will build my 
Ce). 2. Tae generality of Proteſtant Writers, not without 
the Suffrage of divers of c1e Ancients, fay, Peter's Confeſſimn which 
ie had made, 1s the Rack here ſpoken cf. And indeed, the Do- 
trine conrained 11 his Confeifion, 1s the Foundation of the 
G-{jp2! : The whole Chriſtian Church is built upon ir. 3. Ochers 
rhiok, 17 regard tar our Saviour direfterh his Speech not to all 
che Apoſtles, bur to Peter; and doth nor ſay, Bleſſed are you, 
bur, Blejſed art th , Simon Bar-jma, that here is ſomerhing 
promiſed 9 Peter in. ſpecial; bur they do nor think this is any 
Priority, much leis any 7uriſur&ion more than the reſt had 


>: chat Chriſt would make a more eminent and ſpecial uſe of | 


S MATTHE VV. 


him in the building of his Church, than of the reſt : And they 
obſerve , | Thar God did make a more eminent uſe of Peter in 
raiſing his Goſpe/-Church, both amongſt the Fews, A&#s 2. and 
the Gentiles, As 15. Bur yer this foundeth Aa little harſhiy, tg 
interpret Upon this Rock, By this Rich. I do therefore rather Ping 
cline to interpret 1c in the fecond ſenſe; Upon this Rock, i. e. upon 
this ſolid and unmoyeable Foundation of Truth, which thou hiſt 
firſt publickly made, [ T will build my Church.) Ir is true, Chritt 
is the Foundation of the Church , and cther Foundation can ng 
Man lay. Bur though Chriſt be the Fondation in one tenſe 
the Apoſtles are ſo called in another ſenſe, Fph.2.20. Rev.21.1, 
Not the Apoſtles Perſons, bur che Do@rine which they Preacheg : 
They, by their Do&rine which they preached, ( the Sum, or 
great Point of which, was, what Peter here profeliled.) They laid 
the Foundation of the Chriſtian Church, as they were the firſt 
Preachers of it ro the Gentiles, In which ſenſe foever ir be 
raken, it makes nothing for the Papis Superiority or JuriC. 
diction of Sr. Peter, or his Succeffors. Ir follows, [I wil 
build my Church. | By Church, is here plainly meant, the whole 
Body of Believers who all agree in this one Faith. Ir is c, 
ſervable, that Chriſt calls ir hs Church , nor Peter's; and ſaith 
T will build , not , Thou ſhalt build. Tne working of Faith 5: 
Souls, 1s God's Work. Men are but Miniſters by whom cthers 
believe. They have bur a Miniſtry towards , n-t a Loraſh: 
over, the Church of God, {| And the Gates of Hell ſhall nt pj. 
vail again8 jt : | That is, the-Power of the Devil, and all hi; 
Inſtruments, ſhall never prevail againſt ir, utterly ro extinzuith 
ir; neither co extinzuiſh True Faich in the Hearr of any parti- 
cular Believer, ner c:> root the Goſpel our of the Werld. The 
Gates 1s here put tor the Perſons that fit in the Gares, It was 
their Cuſtom to have the Rulers ro fic in the Garcs, Ay;h ,, 
I, II, 2 5.2.19, 8. Neither doth Hell fignifie here the Plice 
of the Damncd , a Hyg no where (2xcepr 1n one place, and as tg 
that it is Queſtionable , Luk. 15. 23.) fignifies 1o ; bur either 
Derth, or the Graves, or the State of the Dead : yer the Devi! 5; 
449 underſtood here, as he that hath the Power © Dex, 
Heb. 2. 14. ' The plain ſenſe is, that our Lord would build 
r-2 Chriſt'an Church up»n chis Propoſition of Truth , 7hat 4: 

"« Chri8, th! Son of God. That Peter fhould be an eminenc 
{:i\ſtrument in convertins Men to this Faiti ; and where this 
Faith obtained in the World , he would fo tur proteft +, thar 
though the Devil and his Inftrumenrs ſhould bv all means ima- 
2inable artempr the extinguiſhing of it, by the roral exrirpzticn 
-2F the Profeffors of ir, ard might, as to particular places preva:!; 
yer they ſhould never ſo prevail , bur to che end of the Werld 
he would have a Church ; a Number of People called our by his 
Apoſtles , and thoſe who ſhov!d ſucceed in their Miniſtry, who 
ſhould uphold this grear Truch. So as rhis is a plain Promiſe 
| for the Continuance of the Goſpel-Church ra the end of the 
world. 


19 *And I will give unto thee the keys of the 
kingdom of heaven : and whatſoever thou {halt bind 
on earth, ſhall be bound in heaven: and whatſoever 
thou {halt looſe on earth, fhall be loofed in heaven. 


| 

[ And I will give unto thee:] Not , unto thee, exclufivel; 
that Ss, ro thee, and no cthers: For as we no where read 
any ſuch Power ufed by Peter, fo our Saviour's firſt Queſtion, 
Whom think ye that T am 2 letteth us know, thar his Speech, though 
dire&ed to Peter only ( who, in the Name of the reſt, firſt an- 
ſwered ) concerned the reſt of the Apoſtles, as well as Peter, 
Beſides, as we know thar as the orher Apoſtles had, as well as he, 
the Key of Knowledge and Dorine, and by their Preaching, 
opened the Kingdom of Heaven to Men ; fo the Key of Dijc:vlin! 
alſo was committed to the reſt, as well as unto him : 7-1, 20, 
22, 23. Whoſe Sins ſoever ye remit, they are remitted unt3 them; 
and whoſe ſnever Sins ye retain, they are retained. {| The Keys if 
the Kingdom of Heaven; ] The whole Adminiſtraticn cf the 
Goſpel, borh with reterence to the Publication of the Defirine 
of 1t, and the diſpenſing cut the Ordinances of ir. We read 0t 
the Key of Knowledge, which the Scribes and Phariſees rock away, 
Luk. 11. 52. and the Key of Government ; The Key of the Hſe 9 
David will T lay upon his ſholder, Tſa. 22.22. and wer. 21. I will 
commit thy Government into his Hand, which is applied to Chrill, 
Rev. 3.7. Theſenſe is, Peter / I will berruſt chee and the reſt 
ot my Apoſtles , with the whole Admrmiſiratrm of my G1fe! ; 
You ſhall Jay the Foundation of the Chriſtian Church ,- and ad- 
miniſter all the Aﬀairs of ir, opening the Trurhs cf my Golpc! 
ro the World, and governing thoſe who ſhall receive the Faitn 
of rhe Goſpel. { And whatſoever thou ſhalt bind on Furth, ſhalt 
be bound in Heaven; and whatſoever thu ſhalt Io5fe on E.nth, jhal 
be Ineſed in Heaven.) Some very learned Interpreters ti:ink that 
our Saviour here ſpeaketh according to the Langvaze ten in ule 
amongſt che Jews; who, by Binding, underſtood the der2rininis 
and declaring a thing Unlawful ; and by Loſing , declaring 0) 
DoFrine, or determining by Judgment a thing Unlawful , tat 
ſuch as no Mens Conſciences were bound to do, or t9 av9id. 
So as by this Text, an Authoriry was iven to theſe fir{t Pianters 
of the Goſpel, ro derermine (by virtue of their infallible Sp'T1s 
breathed upon them, 70h. 20. 21.) concerning ti:ings co be 92e, 
and to be avoided. Thus, A&#.15. 28, 29. they w/e. the vow 
tiles from the Obſervation of the Ceremmial Law. Some O10, 


| that by this Phraſe, our Saviour gave to his Apoſtles, and nr 


ro them only, bur to the ſucceeding Church to the end of 1c 
World , a Power of Excomm:nication and A5jolution , t9 admit 
in, and ro caſt our of the Church, and promiſerh co ratine Va 
they do of this nature in Heaven ; and that this Text 15-©** 
pounded by oh. 20. 23. Whoſe Sins ſ2ever ye remit, they are remut- 
ted ;, and whoſe Sins ſoever ye retain, they are retained. And tit 
the Power of the Church, and of Miniſters in che Churc?, # 
ro this, is more than Declarative. That the Church hath 4 
Power, in a due Order, and for juſt Caufes, to caſt Perfons our 
of irs Communion, is plain enough from other Texts : Bur enat 


the Church hath a Power to remit Sins commitred againſt Got 


Chap. Xviſ ha 


P- 


necclt 
not at 
hk. Wi 
Obl1,za 
publii] 
publit] 
wherh 
t9 pul 
yet Col 
It publ 
over D 
their þ 
ble, ve 
Or, 4. 
Odip;:; 
publith 
Miracle 


*Clani 
1. 


bs <1 
| unto | 
3 lalem 
b” chict | 
Wl, , 
kn 1ifed 
Our L 
hear 2 
et'1 them 
t9 4 firm 
the Chris 
theirs ſh; 
ſtruct the 
pals, tle) 
irom the 


22 1 
Pr him, 
% \hall ne 
Peter tc 
would ſpe 
began to ; 
| their fami 
' * thing bene 
Inz, Be j 
Words in 
Whether vw 
thy felr; C 
Words EXP 
Mercitul us 
Tele Wo, 
Intencion . 
1.They ſpe: 
by the Duat 
Will of th 
Weakneſs j; 
Movied ed 
ond AﬀeGis 
martly : 


23 But 

$i, behind m 
lor thou 
but thoſe | 
Peter! the 


\ 


ffuaderh me 
«Cir ng m5Ire 


War, 2. 


ly / 
| EIT 
/ 


' 


4 


| hap- XVI. 


{ h.1” 


4 ifed again the third day. 


iy him, ſaying, Þ Be it far from thee Lord: this 
FP ſhall not be unto thee. 


Qt. 


ire chan Dect.cr.4tively ; that 1s, declaring that upon Mens Re- 
P2NLAnCe, and Faich, God harh remitred, I cannor fee tounded 
in this Text» CErraln It 15, that Chriſt doth not here bind him- 
felt ro confirm the Erronenss Aetimms of Men , either in Excom- 
wt. ic.22is 4 OT Abſolutions , nor to Authorize all ſuch Aetiins 
of this nature as they do. I do theretore rather encline ro think 
ear our Saviour, by this Promite, declared his Will, That his 
Apoſties thould ſercle the Aﬀairs of the Gofpel-Church, derter- 
minins WHAT ſhould be Lawtul and Unlawtul, and lercing Rules 
according ro Which all Jucceding Miniſters and Officers in his 
Ciiurch thould AR, which Our Lord would Confirm in Heaven : 
Ard char che ordinary Power of Ci:urches in Cenlures, 1s rather 
cs be derived irom other Texts of Scripture than this, though 
j will not deny, bur thar in the general it may be here 1n- 
cluded : Bur 1 cannor think rhar the Senfe of Binding aud 
L9fing here , 15 Excommunic.uting and Abſtuing ; bur a Doetrinal 
or Judicial Derermination ot Things Lawf;il and Unlawful 
grnced ro the Apcſtles : The nor obcying, or living up to whoſe 
Determinations and Deciſims, may be indeed a juft Cauſe of caſting 
Perſons our of the Communion of che Churci: ; As the contrary, 
Obedience and Conformity to them, a gocd ground of recelving 
them in again : Bur whether 10 ris Texr be not granted ro re 
Apoſtles 4 turcher Power than aprecs to any Mimlters {ince 
their Ave, I much doubr, and am very prone to believe that 
there 15. 

20 * Then charegcd he his diſciples that they 
3” ſhould tell no man that he was Jeſus the Chriſt. 

We met with ſeme Chargcs of this nature before, given to 
tote whom he had miraculouſly Cured, that they ſhould tell no 
Manof ic, Hutth. 8, 4. and 9.39. bur this feemerh to ditter from 
them. There he only forbad rhe Public:tiomm of his Miracles: Here 
he torbids chem preaching, That 7eſivs was the Chrizt : A Dofrine 
neccſiary to be believed, 1n order to Peoples Salvarion, We are 
not able co give an Account of all our Saviour's particular Actions. 
i. We are ſure this was a Precept bur of a Temporary Force and 
Oblization ; for we know that atterward they did ſuthciently 
publith. chis abroad, only for a rim? he would nor have 1t 
publith'd by his Diſciples. We cannor certainly derermine 
wherher he forbid them : 1. Becauſe they were nor as yer fit 
t9 publiſh 1o great a Truth : Or, 2. Becauſe the rime was nor 
yet come for the Publication of ir: Or, 3. He would nor have 
1c publiſhed till he rofe again from the Dead, having triumphed 
over Death; leſt People hearing of ir betore, ſhould have had 
their Faich ſhaken by his Dearh : Which teemern very proba- 
ble, becauſe, in rhe next words, he begins to ſpeak of his Death. 
Or, 4. Thar he 1nighr hereby (as much as mizhr be) avoid che 
Oliv; and Envy of the Phariſees, Or, 5. That Himſelf might 
publith firſt chis greac Truth of the Goſpel, and confirm 1t by his 
Miracles, 


21. From that time forth began Jeſus * to ſhew 
unto his diſciples, how that he mult: go unto Jeru- 
I falem, and ſuttzr many things of the elders , and 
chict prieſts, and ſcribes , and be killed , and be 


M. 


's 
4 10 
/ 


Ar 
Pun 


Jl 


Our Lord taught his Hearers by degrees, as they were able to 
hear , and to bear his Inſtruction : He rheretore firſt inſtruft- 
&1 them 1n the Truth of his Divine Nature , and bringerh chem 
194 firm and ſteady Afent to this Propoſition, That he was 
th? Chri$t, the Son of God, Leſt they ſhould have this Faith of 
theirs ſhaken by his Sufferings, and Dearn , he beginneth to 1n- 
firu them, as to choſe things, that when they faw it come ro 
pi, they might not be offended, bur wait for his ReſurreCtion 
trom the Dead, 


22 Then Peter took him , and began to rebuke 


Peter rook our Lord aſide, as we do our Friend to whom we 
would ſpeak ſomerhing which we would nor have all ro hear, and 
began to rebube him; &mmud.v, t repre him, as Men often do 
their familiar Friends, when they judge they have ſpoken fome- 
thing beneath them, or that might turn ro their Prejudice. | Say- 
ins, Be it far from thee Lord « this ſhall not be unto thee.) The 
Words in the Greeb want the Verb, fo leave us in doubr, 
whether we ſhould cranſlate them , B2 Merciful to thy ſelf, ſpare 
thy ſel; or let God, or, God ſhall be merciful unto thee. The laſt 
Words expound chem, This ſhall not be unto thee; God ſhall be 
mercitul unto thee, and help chee ; chis ſhall nor beride thee. 
Theſe Words were undoubtedly ſpoken by Peter out of a good 
Intention, and with a fingular Aﬀection ro his Mafter : Bur, 
1.They ſpeak him as yer 1znorant of the Redemprion ot Mankind 
by the Death of Chriſt, of che Doctrine of rhe Croſs, and of the 
Will of the Father concerning Clirift. 2. They ſpake great 
Weakneſs in him, ro contradi& Kim whom he had bur now ac- 
knowled zed to be the Chriﬆ, the Son of Gad, Gond Intentions, and 
_ Aﬀe&ions, will nor juſtifie Evi! 4&ioms, Chriſt rakes him up 
martiy : 


23 Dut he turned, and faid unto Peter, Get thee 

&, behind me, * Satan, thou art an offence unto me : 

lor thou ſavoureſt not the things rhat be of God, 
but thoſe that be of men. 


Peter! hou rhinkeſt chat by this Diſcourſe , thou ſheweſt 
ome tindnets unto me , like a Friend ; bur thou art 1n this an 
* as, ro me ( tor ſo the word Satan doth tignific , and is 
ney ce narity appiy'd ro the Devil, who is the grand Ad- 
a I Mankind ) {Get thee behind me.) I abominate ſuch 
ſe] wy x ets [ you Su fer LS was the dererminare Coun- 
Gifluaderh 12. 2 205 CO 2 il : He ls mine Enemy, thar 

a trec and cheartul Obedience coir; I will 


MATTHE W. 


of God, but thoſe that be of Mm.) The Werd is, 2£51 Gs, and. it 
may be, were better cranflaced,, To thinkes rn; of, or, Tr: 
unaeri andest not , the thirgs that be of Grd; that is, rhe Counteis 
or G2d 1n this Marrer, as to the Redemniion of Mankind: Thou 
coniicurcit me only as thy Maſter, and ctliy Friend, and would it 
have no harm come to me; then doft nor mind, nor chink of me 
as the Saviour of the Warld, or the Ryfoemer of Murbing  wiiet 
cannor be redeemed otherwiſe than by my Beach, Thou by ty 
:ncemperate Aﬀettion ro me , wouldeſt hinder the R-d2;pti-5, 
of Mankind ;, this is nor, in this thing, to mind , e:ink on. «7 
favour che things of God , bur to titer thy felt to be teduccd 
by thy Carnal Aﬀettion. Ir is a miſtaken Rindne:s ro our 
Friends, to dilſuade rhem, for our Perfonal Advantage, to do winar 
_ a do in conſiſtency with their Obedience to che Wii! 
of God. 


 % 
4>7y 


man will come after me, let him deny him{lt, and 3” 
take up his croſs and follow me. 

Mark hath the fame, chap. 8: 34. and Lk. g. 23. only 1b 
{aich, When he had called the People to him, with bis Dijcibles. Luke 
taich, He ſaid to them all ; Be tpake it to his Di'ciples, but ng: 
}rivately, bur before all the reſt cf rhe People, who at that time 
Wcre preſent. [If any Man will c:mme after me, that is, If any 
Man will be my Diſciple, fo ic is expounded by Luke, wp. 14. 
25, 27, Which 15 a Text muci of the ſims urp.rc with this, 
only what Matthew here calleth a denying of himjerf, Lube callerh 
hating. The Diſciples of others, are call'd the #:rycrs if em. 
| Let him deny himſelf. | To deny our ſelves, is to per © ver 
Natural Aﬀettions rowards the good Thin:s of this Lite, 
let chem_b2 Pleaſures, Profit, Ponours, Relations, Life, a 


faith, He pl: ij: 


Ce 
T feeb nt ey 91 0 3 Uiit e 


Will of him that ſent me, Joh. 4.34. { An 


"TY 


ot the Crofs, with reſpett to Chriſt's C1, ca wiiich he tuffered, 
[ Ind follw mel in his taking up the C18, Be ſhall bur do as I 
hall do, tollowing my Example, Or elle tis may be Iook'd 
up2n as a third Term «t Chriſt's Diſcipicſhip, wiz. Yielding an 
Univerſal Obedience to ri:z Commandme:.cs of Chriſt, or living 
up, as near as wecan, to the Eximple of Chriſt, 1 Pet. 1. 15. 
This Dodrine cur Saviour preacheth ro them, upon occation of 
Peter's moving him to tpare lumfclf, by which he did bur in- 
dulge his own Carnal Aﬀettion , withcur reſpe& ro the Will 
of God, as to what Chriſt was to ſuffer tcr the Redemprion of 
Mankind. 


it: and whoſoever will loſe kis life for my fake. 
ſhall find it? 


We met wich theſe Words , CÞ2p. 10. 39+ See the Notes 


' Sm of Man ;, him whem you now ſee in the ſhape of a Mar, 


there. 


26 For what is a man profred , it he {hall gain 
the whole world, and loſe his own ſoul? or * 
{hall a man give in exchange 1or his ſoul ? 

Our Interpreters , by tranflaring che fame Word $91, in the 
Verſe, which they had tranflared Life , ver. 25. let us know, 
thar they underſtood it here, of that £fſential Part of Man. which 
we call rhe Soul : In which fente ic could not be underſtood in 
rhar Verſe ; for it 18 1mpoſfible, in tiiar ſenſe, ro [fe or Soul for 
Chri's ſake. Some think that it hach the ſame ſenſe here as in 
chat Verſe 3 and that our Saviour arguerh here, from tic leſs ro 
the greater; thus, Men will loſe any thing, rather than their 
Lives: Skin for Skin , and all that a Man hath , for his Li; 
And this 1s but reaſonable ; tor 1t a Man lofe his Lite, to ger 
che World , what will the World gotren do him good? Wir 
can be a proportional Exchange, or Compenſation to him for 
char? Now, it you value your Temporal Life ar thar rare, 
how much morc ought you co value your Eternal Ecing and 
Exiſtence ? Tr comech much to the fame; only che ſenſe is 
Plainer if we take ic as our Tranflarors have taken ir; fer orher- 
wife, part of che Argument 15 not expreſſed, bur [ett ro be un- 
derſtood, or ſupplied from the nexr Verſe ; ſo as the ſenſe is 
this ; beſides Bodies , which may be killed by Perlecurors , you 
carry abour with you Immorcal Souls of infinice more value; 
and befides a Temporal Life, of which you are in potleifion, 
there is an Eternal State which awaircech you : You are Creatures 
ordained ro an Eternal Exiſtence , eicher in Mitery or in Happi- 
nefs. Admir you conld, by pleafing your ſclves,denying Me, thitc- 
ing the Croſs, declining a Lite according eo my Precepts and 
Example, prolong your Temporal Lite ; yer what will you ger 
by ir , confidering char by it you muſt ſuffer loſs as ro your 
Ecernal Happy Exiſtence ; for I ſha!l then deny you betore 
my Father, and his Ange!s. Can any thing you can zer or 
fave in this World, be a proportionable Exchange for Ecerna! 
Happineſs. 


of his Father, * with his angels; and then he thall 54. 
reward every man * according to his works. 

The Verſe makes ir plain, car cur Saviour, by Yu3y in th 
former Verſe, underſtood the Soul of Mn, or Eternzl Life , that 
blefled Srate which- 1s prepared for the Saints of God : For he 
here minderh them, char cliere ſhall be a /3F Fudgment, and 
gives them a little Deſcription of it: (1.) As to the Fudge, the 


and whom Men vitifie and contemn under char Notion ; He 
is to be the Judge of the Quick, and of the Dezd, AQ. 10. 4 *, 


a 12 mIre ſuch Diſcourſe : [ Fr thou ſavorret ut the things 


2 Tim. 4. 1, (2:) As to the Splerndour of ut; He Thatl come 72 


$9 


Chap. XVI. 


24 * Then ſaid Jeſus unto his diſciples, If any * Chap.ic. 


25 For * whoſoever will fave his life, {hall lofe * Luk. 17 
23s 
Jonh12.25: 


WAL x Plal. 49- 
7, & 


27 For the * Son of man ſhall come in the glory +*chap.5. 


Mar. 2.39. 
- *Tec.I 4.5» 


_— OO. 


20S. 


=Y 


FT 
"AT" 
ou - A: 

- 


- SEA 
wor woe 4 


NT —2——— 
CS be” a> 3 OY 

Fey 2 I DOT - 2 % IS... ? 0 

__——  — TS RF 


ph _ 

_—_ES». — — z 

© way EE * GD > T y> - Fs 
. 


SiTy 3, X V j [. It. 


cived it, Bcarcr with the Divine Nature trom his Father, and 
i W215 CONM32 t him with itis Farher: Or, becauſe his Com- 


6 Fither 2 It is alfo bis GIry, Joh. 17.5. He calls it 
'..+ v5 2s Fxther, becaute by his Eternal Generation he re- 


mit 9 for judgment was trom his Father, Foh. 5. 22. Fir the 


<. 10. Nat according to his Krh, but ores; tor Faich with- 
Gur Works is dead; bur theſe Works muſt ſpring out of a Roct of 
Fnch , without which ic is unpotiible ro pleate God, He thall 


{h 1! be rewarded, bur nor as witiz a Peny 1Cr A Peny-worth , but 
Ot Gr.:CC. 

2$ Verily I ſay unto you , There be ſome ſtand- 
ing here. which (hall nor taſte of death, till rhey 
ſve the Son man coming in his kingdom. 

{rb ſaith , cl.1p. 9.1. 71H they have ſeen the Kingdom of God 
come with Ppwor. Lube, chap.9. 27. ſaich, No more than till they 
h.zte ſeen the Kingdom of God. | There be ſome ſtanding here,that ſhall 
nt taſte of Deich ,] char is , Tr thall not die, Heb. 2. g. It 1s 
the ſame, with nor ſezing De ith, Foh. 8.51, 52. Heb. 1. 5. The 
great 27e Fin is , War 1s here mMcant by the Son of Man coming 
in his Kind? It cannot be meint of his ſecond Coming to 
Jud:ment , ſp ken of immediately before z for all who ſto2d 
there have 1 ng fince taſted of Death, yet is not rhar Day come: 
S»me underſtand ir of that fight of Chriſt's Glory which Peter, 
and 7.umes and Fon had ar Chriſt's 75.1nsfiguration, of which we 
{hill read in the next Chaprer ; and T ſhould be very inclinable ro 
this Senfe,, ( for chere was a Glumple of the Glory of che Father 
ne 2 ver. 27.) were it not for thoſe Words added by Mark, 
Tiil boy b.c2 ſen the Kingdom of God come with Pywwer. Thus 1n- 
clinecy or:ur: to think, that ir is to be underſtood of Chris s 
flewing f.rib bis Prxer in the Dezſtrudion of Feruſalem. Bur the moſt 
generally received Opinion, and which ſeemerh to be beſt, 1s, 
Thar the Caring of the $1 of Man here meant, 1s, his Reſurrection 
fem the Dz.cg, his Ajcenſi-n into He.rven, and Sending the Holy Spi- 
ri: ; alter which , the Kin;dom of Grace came wich a mighty 
Power, fubduns a!l Nations to the Lord Jeſus Chriſt, Rom, 1. 4. 
He was declied, or determined, to be the Son of God with Power, 
according t9 the Spirit of Holineſs, by the Reſurreion from the Dead. 
And when aſter his Reſaurreftion from the Dead, they asked him, 
Altsr, 5. Whether he would at that time reftore the Kingdom to 
Tir), he puts them off, and rells them for an Anſwer, v. 8. But 
yu ſhatl receive Power after the Holy Gho$t is come upon you, and you 
ſhail be Wiinejſes unto me , bath in Feruſalem, and in all Jude, and 
in Samaria,* and unto the uttermo8t parts of the Earth, And then, 
v. 9. he in their fight aſcended up into Heaven. Then did the 
Kinadom of the Son of Man come with Power, Aﬀts 2. 33,34,35,35. 
Thcy knowins atfuredly, that the Son of Han, whom the Fews had 
Crucificd, was made bath Lord and Chris, as v. 35. and as v.34435. 
{er at God's right hand (according to the Prophecy of David, P/al. 
11G, 1.) until his Enemes ſhould be made his Footſtovl. 


GHA FP. XVIL 


Fejins on the Mount 3s transfigured : Moſes and Elias appear and talk 
with him: God the Father's Teſtimany of him, 1—5, The Diſci- 
ples fail down for fear : Feſus toucheth and encourageth them : 
Churzeth them to conceal the Viſtn till he #s riſen : They asþ about 
the Coming of Einas : He proveth, that he was already come, 6—13. 
Rebubing that unbelieving Generation, healeth a Lunatich : Un- 
belief. the Cauſe why his Diſciples could not cast out the Devil, 
14—21. He frrerelleth his Suffering and Reſurre&ion : The Sor- 
rip *f his Dijciples thereupon, 22, 23" And worketh a Miracle 
to p.iy Tribute , 2427. 


7 A* D after fix days, Jeſus taketh Peter. James, 
and John his brother, and bringeth them up 
intv an high mountain apart, 

2 And was transhgured before them , and his 
face did ſhine as the fun, and his rayment w23 white 
as the light. 

Both Mah and Luke have recorded this Hiſtory. 27rk faith, 
c.1Þ.9. 2,3. His Rayment bec:me fhining, exceeding white as Snow ; 
fo as m Fuller on Earth can white ther. Luke ſaith, chap. g. 28, 29. 
And it came to paſs, about eight dys after theſe Sayings, he took Pe- 
ter, nd Film, and Fames, and went up into a Mountain to pray. And 
W he pred, the faſhion of his Countenance was altered, and his Rays 
ment was white and gliftering. All three agree the place, upon a 
Afpuntain, Matthew faith it was fix, Luke ſaith eight Days after 
re preceding Diſcourſes. Lnke mentioneth our [.rd's praying, 
witch neirner of the orker mentioneth, and faith his Transfigu- 
»4tion began whillt char he was praying. They all agree the Com- 
pany thnac was with our Saviour, Peter, Fames and Fohn, (which 
were the three our Savicur took with hira when he went to pray 
betore his Patfion, JWutih. 26. 37.) Peter was to be a great In- 
ſtrument in carrying on the Work of the Goſpel. Zzmes was he 
wiom #2rod killed, Acts 12. 2. Fohn was he who our-lived all 
the Apuſtles; he intended to have theſe three Witneiles of his 
Amy, Meth. 28. 37, Fe preparerth chem for thar, and for the 
fucure T:!timony they were to give him, by making chem Eye- 
Wirneiies of this his Glorious Transfiguration. This, as to his Perſon, 


lay in the Chanze of his Counrenance, looking glorioutly as the 


St, 2nd his Rayment looking extraordinarily white. 


2 And behold there appzared unto them Moſes 
and Elias talking with him. 


MATTHEW. 


4 Then anſwered Peter,and faid unto Jeſus,Lord, 


it is good for us to be here: if thou wilt, let ys 
make here three tabernacles, one for thee, and one 


for Moſes, and one for Elias. 


Mark adds, chap. 9.6. For he wiS not what to ſay, for they were 
afraid : Luke addeth, chap. 9. 31, 32, 33. Who appeared in Gl: : 
and ſpahe of his deceaſe , which nf gre accompliſh at Feraſaler? 
But Peter, and they that were with him, were heavy with ſlee by 
and when they were awake, they ſaw his Glory, and the tw) = 
that ſtood with him. And it came to paſs, as they departed Sow 
him, Peter ſaid unto eſis, Maſter, it is good for us to be here 8& 
—— not knowing what he ſ.:id. $0 as the Hiſtory ſeemeth i» hs 
thus: After fx or eight Days, Chriſt cook Peter, Zames and Pohn 
and went up into a Mountain , and prayed ; while he prayech 
his Diſciples fall afleep ; waking, they faw him with his Face 
ſhining gloriouſly like the Sun, and his Garments whice as Snow 
and rio Men talking with lum about his Death and Paſſion 
whom they (by Revelation) knew to be Mvſes and Elia. They 
were ſore afraid ; and Peter nor well knowing , or confiderins 
what he ſaid, faith to Chriſt, Maſter, it is good for 14 to be hers, 
Let us make here three Tabernacles, one for thee, one for Moſs; wh 
for Elize, Ir is moſt likely, that Moſes and Elias appearcd in their 
own Bodies : As to Elias, there was no difficulty, for his Body 

was taken up to Heaven in a Fiery Chariot: For 319/es, it is (11d. 
the Lord buried him in a Valley , in the Land of Mhab, over-againg 

Beth-Peor ; but no Man knoweth of his Sepulcher unto this dxy, Dey: 

34+ 6. The Devil and che Arch-angel had a Diſpute abour his B11 

Fude 9. Ir is very probable Ged raiſed up the Body of Miſes tor 
this Transftzuration-teſtimony , that by the Law and the Prophets 

(repreſented in Myes, (the Giver of the Law) and Elias, one of 
che moſt ramous of the Prophets) the Diſciples mizht be con- 

firmed in their Faith concerning Chriſt, as the true Meſſias; and 

alfo fortified againſt the Scandal and Temptation of that lencmi. 

nous Death, which he was ſoon after ro undergo; and thar thets 

three Apoſtles, being the higheſt Number of Wicneſſes by the 

Law of Moſes to confirm a thing, might be judged ccmpetent Wir: 

neſles of what they ſaw and heard. Do nct think Peter's ſavins 

Let 15 build here th»ee Tabernacles, Nc. proceeded trom any Plez- 
ſure or Satistaon that he had from this Glimpſe of che Divine 
and Excellent Glory ; for how could this confiſt with thar Feyr 

wich which, Mark ſaich, they were poſſciied ? Bur that, as 35 

ſaich, He wiS$t not what to ſay; or ( as Luke) Not bnwing wht by 

ſaid; which I take to be as a reaſonable, ſo the beſt excuſe cn 

be made for the Errors and Weakneſs diſcovered in his Speech, 

as if Moſes-and Elias, or Chriſt, could have dwelc cher:;, g5c, 


5 While he yet ſpake , behold, a bright cloud 
the cloud , which 1aid , * This is my beloved Son. !! 


Mark and Luke relate the ſame, without any conſiderable V+ + 1j; 
riationz only Luke faith , They were afraid as they entred int the © 
Cloud, Ir ſeemerh thar the Cloud did encompaſs them, ſo as they 
ſeemed all as if they had been within the Cloud. This ſtil} in- 
creaſed their Fear. Ir 1s obſerveable , that God did very often 
make his Appearances to People in a Cloud, making the Cl) ids hi 
Chariets, Exod.16.10. and 40.34. Numb.11.25. Plal.104.3, To 
reach us Humility, not to pry roo much into his Secrets, who co- 
vereth himſelf with chick darkneſs; and likewiſe to cor/it % 
weakneſs, who are nor able ro behold him, as he is; This is fad 
to be a bright Cloud, fo differing from the Cloud in which he 
appeared under the Law ; but without doubt ir had ſomething 
of a ſhadow 1n ir, and was choſen of Chrift for ſome abatement 
of the brightneſs of his Glory. This Cloud encompaſſeth C618, 
Moſes, and Elias; and alfo Perer, Fames and Fohn. | And tehili « 
wwice out of the Cloud; ] They ſaw no viſible Shape ; no more did 
the Jews, Deut. 4. 15. Only as St. Peter (who faw ic) expreſiet 
ir, 2 Per. 1.17. There came ſuch a woice from the Excellent Gli); 
He ſpeaks of this very time, as may appear from wer. 18. Tic 
Voice is the ſame which was heard upon the Bapriſm 0. Loris, 
chap. 3. 17.Only here 1s added to it, Hear him. q.d, You need 10 
Elias to inftru& you , Hear him. Thus AMvſes ſaw what he hid 
before Propheſied of, Deut. 18. 15, 18. fulfilled ; He in his Mt 
niſtry, as a Servant in the Houſe of God, had prophefied, tht 
The Lord would raiſe up a Prophet ffom among# their Bre-hren, |? 
unto him, and put his Words into his Mouth, and he ſhoulc. ſpeak ut? 
them all that God ſhould command him , Deur. 18.8. and t. 15 
Unto him you ſhall hearken. God had now fulfilled that Word; 
and he declares, that this Propher was his Son, his beloved S9n, 
and commands them to hear him. Which Words eſtabliſh Chriſt 
as the only Do@7 and Teacher of his Church; the only One wh 
he had betruſted to deliver his Truths, and Wi!l, to his People; 
the only one to whom Chriſtians are to hearhen. Nor doth t15 
deſtroy the Miniſters of the Word , who are no more chan tle 
Interpreters of what he hath ſal,and are no more to be regardec, 
than as by them we hear Chrit ſpeaking more plainly, and !'t- 
quently unto us. This appearance of God from time to time 
a Cloud , and that not in any viſible Shape, but in an Exce#? 
Glory, cauſing a Voice to be heard; let us ſee the Audaciouſnels 0: 
thoſe, who by any PiRures or Images pretend to make any REPIe” 
ſentation of any Perſon in the Trinity. And this Command ire 
God to us, to hear Chri$, lers us aiſo ſee the Audacity of tht, 
who take upon them to impoſe upon Chriſtians whar Chriſt never 
ſpake. 

6 And when the diſciples heard 7, they fell 0! 
their face, and were ſore afraid. "= 
7 And Jeſus came and * touched them, and {41% + 
Ariſe, and be not afraid. Ro 
8 And when they had lift up their eyes, U* 4 
{aw no man, fave Jeſus only. 


LI 


Chap. XV I 


overſhadowed them : and behold, a voice ont 0f - 1; 


* in whom I am well pleaſed; * hear ye him. 


(ha 


at ou 
1n2 t/ 
the I} 
lexvin 
ed he 
thar C 
conci] 
upon 


I 2? 
Ul3TO t 
Math 
Verity Cc: 
the Sn 
But T ſi 
wnt9 hin 
Our ar 
truce oo 
bite; thi 
lic Was 

C1 1.45, 
Elie --1 
Wm 7þn, 
Fn the 
but even 
My; _ 
dernet: to 
Preaciie 


Tar / Ha d 
UC t th 
29d Tic of 

\ 


Chap. XVIE Ge 


Mark ſaich n> More than, And ſvddenly wien t-5ey hid looked 
ind about, they ſa 1 Mam any more, ſave Feſus only with them- 
-/.07, Such is che Majeſty and Glory of God, that a Cloud will 
or {o vail it, as that a Man 15 able to behold any Appearance 
of ir vichour ſome Conſternarion; fomerhing more chan thar 
Fear of Reverence, wichour which none ought co draw nigh unto 
Fim. Paul fell 19 the Earth, Acts 9. 3. When 4 Light trom Hea- 
Vn ſhone upon him. The Diſciples here fell on rheir Faces, 
-nd were 1ore atraid. Tous lers us lee rhe Goudnels of God 1n 
Teartcninsg ro the Peop.es Requeſt, Ex1d, 20. 19. Deut. 5. 28. 
U- 13. 16, 17. and ſpeaking to us by Men like unto our felves. 
Py 36/es under the Od Teltament ; by Chri8t (that Prophet men- 
+i:ned. Deut. 18. 15» ), under che New Teſtament, and ſuch as he 
Commilfionared to declare his v ill, Heb, I. 1,2, | And Teſits 
emo ond touched them, and jaid, Ariſe and be nt afraid. | To de- 
vor them fromthe Fear cf a Spectrum, or Apparition, he couch- 
er them, ard fa1th '1n Effect, It #« TI; be nor atraid, Tiey 
Fook up and ſec the Excellent Glory, and the Cinud Was withdray n, 
as allo 31ſe's and Eli, and they and cher Lord were lett alone; 
ind he gocth down 1rom the Mountain with them. Whether 
chis M yanrdin was Tiubrr, or ſome ocher Mountain much nearer 
C1:t Philippi, is of no Conſequence for us to be farisficd in, 

o And a5 they came down from the mountain, *Je- 
ſs charged them, ſaving, Tull the Vilion to no man, 


1:5! che Son of man be riſen again from the dead. 


Marb faith the ſame, Ch. 9. t. 9. Lnko faich, C1. 9. 35. They 
Ft it cloſe, ard told ny Man in thye Dys, any 191/e things which 
thy bad ſecn. te other two Evangelifts record the Precepr, 
1:1. and Mark their Obedience to ir. The moſt probable Rea- 
{1 of rhis Charge given by Interpreters is, left his atter-Sufferings 
\h-u'd have ſhaken azain their Fairh as ro the Divine Nature of 
Chrift, betore he was by his Refurretton from ric Dcad declared 
t) le the Sn of God with Power, as the Apoſtle ſpeaks, Aom. 1. 4. 

19 And his diſciples asked him, ſaying, * Why 
then {iy the Scribes, that Elias muſt firſt come ? 

Beiore theſe Words, Mark faich, Ch. 9. v. 10, And they kept 
thit $13 ins with themſelves ; queſtioning one with another, what this 
riſing from the De.td ſhould me.m 2 Then he adderh, And they asb- 
et him, {yying, Why ſay the Scribes that Elias muſt fir8t come £ The 
Diſciples (as appearech) were as yer very impertedly inftrutted 
in th- DoGrine of Man's Redemprion by Chriſt, cho' Chriſt had 
betore told them, that as 7onah was Three Days and Three Nights 
in the Bully of the Whale, fo he ſhould be Three Days aad Tiree 
Niohrs in the Belly of the Eart', How dull are the beſt of Men 
ro apprehend Spiritual Myſteries, which are above the Reach of 
our Aer 2 The Fews had a Tradition, and recain 1c to this Day, 
Tiarbeirc the coming of the Mefts, Elias ſhould come; they 
build ic up2n, M1. 4. 4, 5. That they had ſuch an ExpeQation 
appearerh by their fendiaz to Fobn ae Baptiſt, John 1. 21. to 
know if he were he, merning Eliw the Tiſhvite, (for him they ex- 
p2#ed ) and ri1is was their great Error, and till blindech them, 
The Di/ciples had now ſeen Elijah, and pofſib'y might wonder 
at our Saviour's forbidding them ro ſpeak oi tne Viſion, as chink- 

inz that nothin could a1>re conduce to the receiving of him as 
the Iſt + Or, poiſibly eney might wonder ar Zlijah's fo ſoon 
ieavinz the Earth, the Mi. being conic, whom they expett- 
ed he ſhould come before : So as tho' they were fully farished, 
thar Chriſt was the true Meſſiah, yer they knew nor how to re- 
concile their Faith to the Promiſe, or to their Tradition builr 
pon the Promiſe. This cauſeth the Queſtion, 

11 And Jeſus anſwered, and ſaid unto them, Elias 
try thall firſt come and reſtore all things. 

i 2 But I ſay unto you, Thar Elias is come alrea- 
a. and they knew him not, but have done unro him 
whatioever they liſted: likewiſe ſhall alſo the Son 
vi 7:40 fufter of them. 

12 Then the diſciples underſtood that he ſpake 
uito them of John the Baprilt. 

Mak ſaith, Chap. 9. 12. He anſwered, and ſaid unto them, Elias 
wWiily comes firſt, and reſtoreth all things : And how it #s written of 
the Simof Man, that he muſt ſuffer many things, and be ſet at nought. 
But I ſay unto you, That Elias 1s indeed come, and they have done 
unto him whatſoever they liſted, as it #s written of him. Our Savi- 
our a;recth to the Promiſe, bur ſhewerh rheir Miſtake as co the 
truce Senſe of ir, They underſtood the Promiſe of Eltas the Tiſh- 
bit; the Promiſe reterred only to one of his Spirit, and ſuch a 
one was cone, that was 79m the Baptist, as the Angel rold Za- 
C04#1.45, Luk. 1.17, H: ſh4tl go before him in the Spirit and Power of 
Eli:s, Very much of the Power and Spiric of Elijah was evident 
mfbn, Eljj.zh was full of Zeal tor God, 2 Kings 9. 10. So was 
fm the Brit, Did Elias treely reprove not only Baal's Prieſts, 
but even A1.c5 and Jezebel ? John as fiecly reproved Herod and 
Horodits, and the Phariſees and Sadduces, Was Elizs an auſtere 
Min? Such was 7ohn the Baptift, Did Elias flee unco the Wil- 
dcrnets to tive his Lite? John Baptift for tome time, itved and 
preacited there. Elizs living in a corrupt time, was a great Means, 
cr laftrument, to reſtore decayed &e/igiom. So was Fobn the Baptis 

I te time wherein he lived. Tius nowwithftanding, not the 


' 


Jes uy, bur fome Chriltins, and tiiat not only Papists, bur 
lome Prorz//znts think, Thar beſides the Eljas, which is long 
mee come, there is another Flias, who ſhall come betore the End 
oe Warldz they found their Opinion upon this Text in a 
SICIE MENU, I, Becaule our Saviour here ſaith, S754)ae 7720- 
P94 W9:3t1 come jtrfÞ;, and Mite 1aithgA3or mer, and SH, 
99g fit, vreitoreth all things. Now Fohn the Baptis* was botis 
CM! 20G gone, NOT Aid he reffored all things « Beindes they fly, 
tat /» denied himfclt wo be E/jzr, John t. 21, And its plain, 
Ta nt the Scribes and Phurijees only, but the Dilciples under- 
Itod tic Prophecy of E/jas the Tiff-bite ; and 3at4ciy faith, that 
Yol, I, 


M ATTHE V/V. 


Chap, NY 


Elias ſhould come, betore the terrible Day of the Lid; which Dy 
t:ey fay, is the Day of Judgment, in the conftant Language ©: 
Scripture. Bur to all this is antivgred, 1, Thar the Zupti?, 7rbr 
I. 21. only denied him:telt ro be char Elizs about which ti.cy 1N- 


quired according to their Tradition, 


reQteth their Error. 
ment 15 called tz terrible Day of the Lird, bur the Gofpel-time, 
Mat. 3. 10. when the 4x was laid to the Kort of the Tree, NC: 
So As 2. 20, and the Day of the Fews particular Judgment, 
which fome underſtand hinred in thofe Texrs, 4.” Thar our 
Lord frft repeateth the Words of lic, and to he faich, Elizs 
ſhall come, or is coming ; and then he expounds the Words of 
Mal.xchy of Fohn the Baptift. 5. Thar the Words of Mal. 4. 6. 
4re expounded by the Angel, Luke 1, 15, 17, and-there applied 
wo F2-n the Baptit, 6. Thac Fohn did tulal che Vords of che 
Prophet, by indeavouring the Converſion of the Jews, and pre- 
valling in a grear meaſure. 7. Thar the laſt Words in Malachy, 
Leſt T ſmite the Earth with a Curſe, plainly ſhew, Thar the Texr 
1a 3/z/achy cannot be underſtood of the Day of Fudgment, And 
tho' the Name of Elias be given to John, yer it is no more than 
the piving the Name of David ro the Meſſizs, Exch. 37. 24. So 
as there 15no other Elijah to be expetted, bur the Eljjab prophc- 
tied of by Malachy, who was (as our Saviour doth expound ir } 
7m the Baptist, whom Herod had beheaded. { They knew hin 
nt, | Their Tradition blinded them fo, as they could not diſcern 
the Prophecy of Malachy tulfilled in him ; | fo did unto hinr wh.t- 


ſever they liſted, | and (faith our Saviour) 15 ſhall chey do with 


the Son of Man; thar is, with me, who am the Son ot Man: 


14 *Ard when they were come to the multitude, 
there came to him a certain man, kneclins Cown ro 
him, and ſaying, 

15 Lord have mercy on my ſon, for he isLunatick. 
and ſore vexed : tor oft-times he falleth into the 
fire, and oft into the water. 

15 And I brought him to thy diſciples, and they 
could not cure him. | 

The ſame Hiſtory is told us, both by 3ark and Lie, bur with 
conſiderable Difference ; we have ir, ab 9. 17. thus, And one of 
the Multitude anſwered, and ſid, Maſter, I have brought unto thee 
my Son, which hath a dumb Spirit : And whereſhever he tabeth him, 
he teareth him, and he foameth and gnaſherh with his Teeth, and vinets 
away, and T ſpake to thy Diſciples, th.'t they ſhould c.1i him out, and 
they could nt. As an Intredudtion co this, Mark taith, v. 14, 


11 2. That it 1s crue, that the 
Diſciples were led away with the Jewiſh Tradition, and locked 
for Elias the Tifhbite, bur Chriſt both here and elſewhere cor- 
3- Thar not only the Day 07 general Judg- 


I5, 16. That when our Saviour came to his Diſciples, he ſaw a great - 


Multitude about them, and the Scribes, queltioning with them : And 
ſtraightway all the Perple, when they beheld him, were greatly ama- 
zed, and running to him, ſaluted him. And he ashed the Scrites, 
what queſtion you with them ? Luke gives us this Accounr,Ch. 9. 37, 
38, 39, 40. And it came to paſs, that on the next Day, when they 
were come down from the Hill, much People met him. And behold « 
Man of the Company cried out, ſaying, Maſter, T beſeech thee look up- 
on my Son, for he is mine only Child, And ly a Spirit tabeth him, 
and he ſuddenly crieth out, and it teareth him, that he focmeth again, 
and bruiſing him, hardly departeth from him. And I beſought thy 
Diſciples to caſt him out, and they could nat, When our Lord went 
up to the Mountain where he was transfizured, he letr ar the Foor 
of ir the Mulritudes, and nine of his Apoſtles; he rook only 
three wich him. How long he ſtayed chere, no Evangeliſt tel!s 
us: The Mulrtitude, and his Ditciples ſtayed wairing for kis com- 
ing, probably nor tar off ; ſome ot the Scribes were got ro them, 
and chey were arguing together: ' The Day ater our Lord and 
Peter, Fames and Fohn, were come down trom che Mount, they 
g0 ro the Multicude, who received him with grear Paſſion, and 
ſalured him: He beginneth co inquire whac they were Diicour- 
ſing about, bur was by and by inrerrupred with a certain Man, 
who comes and talls downefipon lis Knees before him, begging 
Mercy tor his Son, who (as {:rtthew reports his Condition) was 
Lunatich, and ſore vexed, often filing into the Fire, and often into 
the Water. Mark faith, he had a Dumb Spirit, chat ir tore him, 
he often Famed and Gnaſhed with his Teeth, Luke faich, Thar ir 
was the Man's only Child, that he had a Spirit, that he cried cut, 
it tare him, he foamed, and was bruiſed by it, /gc. By the De- 
ſcription of this young Man's Diſeaſe, ir appearerh to have been, 
what we call the Fulling-Sickneſs, wherein Men fal! d5wn, Fam 
and beat themſelves; with this Diſeaſe the Devil joyned, to as ac 
certain times. of the Z{5n, this Diteaſe rook him, and the Dovit 
ating with it, he was Dumb ar leaſt for the time, and tell ſome- 
rimes in the Fire, ſometimes into the Water, Famed, Gnaſhed with 
his Teeth, tore himſelf : This ſeems ro have been his Condition. 
The Father (during Chriſt's Abſence) had atrempred a Cure by 
his Diſciples, bur che Text faith, they could not; (the reaſon we 
ſhall hear afcerward) upon this he criech unro Chriſt tor his help, 


17 Then Jeſus anſivered. and ſaid, O fairhlefs and 
perverſe generation, how long [hail I be with you 2 
how long thall I ſuficr you ? Bring him hither rome. 

18 And Jeſus rebuked rhe devil, and he departed 
out of him : and the child was cured from that very 
hour. | 


Mark relates this part of the Hiſtory much more largely, Ch./p. 
9. 19, 20,21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 25, 27. He anſcvered him, and ſaid, 
O f.aithlejs Generation, how long ſhail I ve with you 11 lonz ſhall 
I ſuffer yu £ Bring him unto me, And they brought vim unto hum ;, 
and when he ſaw him, ſtwaightwav the Spirit tars him, and he fell 
on the Ground, and wallowed foaming : And he ushed his Father, 
How | mg is it ago fince this came unto him * And hs ſaid, Of 4 Chil. 
And «fi-times it. hath ca$ him int» the Fire, aud into the Faters Io 
deflvoy him: But if thou cant a any thing, have Compaſſion on us, 


}- t t «411% 


— 


466;2700-46.2004 49 ws .. BY 


” Mg ety 
”» 
PER 


"7 _ 
gr > 
ORE OS - 
Kor 97 IE a 1 ena —_ 
p $I < I's " ws Fs = — x þ OS « -— 
r p - _ #. Fe o 
=" Jy i BE OP oo. hes wy 7 - Mor: 
ae” = = ——_—— 
He en _ My 7 moan ©." + 


"4 F 
IST 44-418 
: 4 
( e 
q , t 
4 1% 1s 
Ft «+» 
37% \ : 1 
; \»8. 7: 
7»: "1" <2 
* 2 
ils 
[ 6 13 
. F*- . : 
*y 


44 £ - - _- 

27 *1.55 * aa PRs $ jo © 

x27 met CER... JAE Ex, , aF* ey 
= 


« + IN k, 
VE GS $2 
EIS vows Car 

R I 


NE 
IRR EE 


Clip, KVIL St. M AT 


and Folp us. Jeſus ſaith unto hin, If thou canſt believe, all things 
up ſh le #2: am that believeth. Ard ſiraightway the Father of 
eo Coild & ied out, nd ſaid With Tears, Lord, T believe; help my 
wriclet, ren Jeſus ſaw that the People came runring rogether, Pe 
ob uk ed ihe foul Spit, frying unto him, Thay dumb and deaf Spirit, 
I bono then, ene wt of him, and enter no more into him, And the 
Spiric cried, and rent him fore, and came out of him; and he was as 
en! dead; inſrinueh, that many {aid, He # acad. Fut Jelits took 
him by the Hand, and lifted him wp, and he aroſe, Luke relates this 


ſm reer, bur addertt nothing ro what 1s 12 the orher Evangeliſts, 
Lhe 9.41, 42. {Toen Jens onſrwered, and jzid, O Faithleſs, ana 


Pe. wr/2 Lencration, | Chriſt here calls them nor fo, with reſpect 
to juſtiiving Fairh, bur char Fairh which reſpected the Divine 
Power, 2s to working Miracles, Every Revelation of the Divine 
Wilt is the Obje&t of Faith, Chriſt had revealed to the Fews 
that he was ſen of God, and furniſhed with fuch a Power : Tis 
the Jews, and particularly the Scribes, did nor believe. The 
Faith of rhe Father of this Child was bur very weak in the Cale; 
19 more, as we 1h.ll ſee afterwards, was the Faith of the Diſciples 
ſo as he may be underſtood to relpctt them all, cho' in dittcrent 
Devrees. Ke calls chem Perverſe, becauſe they had fo otren teen, 
and experienced his Power of c:is Nature, yer their Fatth was not 
clear, and {tr-n35. He bidderh that rhe young Man thould be 
brought co him, and it was done. [ And when he ſaw him (taich 
Mah) Rraightray, the Spirit Fare Pim, Sc, Our Saviour could 
eaiily have preventcd this, bur probably he ſuffered it, that the 
liracle might be more evident. However it Jerrech us ſee how 
hardly the Devil perceth with his Poticfſion in us in any Degree, 
and how ready he is co run to the length of his Line in dowg 
us Miſchief. Chit acked bis Father, how long he had been ſo vexed ; 
his Ether tefls him from a Child. By this allo the Miracle was 
more Vluitrious, which probably was the rcaton why Chriſt pro- 
pounded the Queſtion. No Evils are to0 Invererare for Chriſt ro 
remove. Tae Father renewerh his Requeſt, and in it ſhewerh 
the Weaknels of his Faith, {If ſaith he, thou canſt do any thing, } 
his cominz to Chriſt, and crying to him, arguerh that he behev- 
©d he could do ſomething; his Saying, If thou cans d any thing, 
{peaks the Weaknefs of his Faich. Chriſt cells him, [ If he could 
Lolieve, of! things ave poſſible.) Nothing tieth God's Hands bur his 
Creature: Unbelict. It is aid, Thar Chriſt could nor in Caper- 
12m, d» 1.uny mighty Works, becauſe of their Unbelief. Upon this 
the Farher crics out, | Lord, T believe, help my Unielief. \ Men 
may truly believe, and yer have a Mixcure of Unbeliet. God re- 
wards a we.:b Ezith to Souls Jlabouring under the Senſe of their 
weakneſs, and detiring an Increaſe of Strength. Chriſt rebukes 
rhe Spirir (called a Dm and Deaf Spirit, becauſe it made the 
Perſon ſuch, thar was thus affected wich it) Chriſt commands the 
Spirit ovr, and 15 ro come our, as never mcre to enter into hum, 
The evil Spirit r2ars, renderth him, comes our, and leaveth him as 
one dead : Which ſtill confirmerh us in his Malice ro Mankind. 
He will do what Harm he can, when he cannot do us the Harm he 


would. 


19 Then came the diſciples to Jeſus apart, and 

fiid, Why could not we caſt him out ? 
20 And Jeſus ſaid unto them, Becauſe of you un- 
+ Ch. 2r, beliet: for verily I fay unto you, * It ye have faith 
21. as 4 grain of muſtard-ſeed, ye ſhall ſay unto this 
Mars 11 mountain, Remove hence to yonder place, and it ſhall 


1% 15,4, remove; and nothing thall be unpoilible unto you. 
i Cor. 13 21 Howheit, thiskind gocth nor out but by pray- 
2, cr aud faſting. 

M:k repeats only what we have here, v. 19, 21. The Reaſon 
aſhened here by our Savior why his Ditciples could nor caſt out 
this Devil, was their Vnbelirf;, nor their rotal Want, burthe Weak- 
nels of their Frith, Chrift here again lets us fee the Power of 
Fiith, and the Milchiet of Unbelief. I rake the plain Senſe of 
the Text © be this, Thar rhere 15 nothing which may rend to 
the Glory ct Grd, cr ro Gur Good, but may be obtained of God 
by a firm Exercite of Faith jn him; wherher our Saviour here 


TT HEM; 
flood not that S.1ying, and were afr.id to ah him, Lube ſaith, 1, 
9. 44. he ſaid unto them, Let theſe Sayings finb down *::14 joy 
Eurs ;, for the Son 'f .*1.m fhall be delivered into the Hands « f Men, 
But they under'*008 rt this Saying, and it was hid from them z that 
they perceived it nit, and they feired to ah him that S. ings Itis 
ſaid, Thar Criſt raught his Diicipies, as they were able to kear 
Mark 4.33.9. he tells chem, 75h.16.12.He had many things to (x3 1n- 
to them, but they could not hear them ot that time, Chriſt a 1onz time 
concealed the Dodrine of Is Paſſion, and Reſwrection from te 
Dead, trom them, until he had confirmed them in the ereat 


; Paint of his Divine Power, and 115 being the true 3/efi.ch ; now 


he bezins to deliver tits Doctrine unto them, that whar they 
ſhould now foun tee, might nor weaken their Faith in kim, as 
the Z:ffiah and the Son of Gcd: Nily, in regard of that in- 
vetcrate Opinion which had potlefled the Generality of the 
Fews, thar the Meſſtth ſhould be a Temporal Prince, and ſhould 
deliver the ers trom that Servitide under which they wcre, and 
had tor a long time been : Partly, 1n regard of the Difficulty to 
conceive, how he who was the Son of God could dye. Oncecr 
rwice before therefore he had begun ro ſpeak to them abour 
his Paſſion, Ch. 16. 21. Afojes and Elizs had ſome Diſcourſe with 
him abour it, Like 5. 31, The Text faith, They underſtood 1t wir, 
It was hid from them. Tyey perceived it mt. They were afraid 9 
as kim. {They were ſorry. } Poifibly they were forry, that they 
could nor underſtand it, and reconcile ir to the Notion of the 
Meſſizs they had drank in; for it ſeems hard co aflert, they were 
forry for what Chriſt faid abour his ſuffering, becaute the Seri. 
pture ſaith, They wnderſtsod it not, Eliinkings our Sivicur had not 
ſpoken plainly of a Matter of Fat which ſhould be, but that ke 
incended ſomething elfe betides what his Werds tecmed plainly 
co 1MPorr. 


24 And * when they were come to Capernaum, 
and ſaid, Doth not your malter pay tribare ? 


houſe, Jeſus prevented him, ſaying, Whar think 
thou, Simon? of whom do the kings of the earth rake 
cuſtom or tribute? of their own children or of ftran- 
gers : 

26 Peter ſaith unto him, Of ſtrangers. Jeſus ſaith 
unto him, Then are rhe children tree. 

27 Notwithſtanding, leit we ſhould oitend them, 
go thou to the Sea, and calit an hook, and take up the 
fhi{h that firſt comerh up : and when thou haſt open. 
ed his mouth, thou ſhalt find |} a piece of money : thur 
take and give unto them for me and thee. 


ar, tho' 1r was changed from a Sacred, to a Civil uſe ; from an 
Homage-Penny ro God, to be an Homage-Penny to the Conguerirs, 
The Agreement of this Sum, with what was required by the Law, 
rogether with what our Saviour ſaich afterward, will incline us 
ro think, that this Tax was that Aeligions Tax, mentioned Excl. 
30. and that the ColleFors were ſome Officers depured for that 
Service by the Priefs. When Peter came into the Houſe, our 
Saviour preventeth his propounding the Queſtion ro him (tcr Pe- 
ter had betore rold rhem, 7es he did,) by asking him of whom 
the Kings of the Earth uſed to receive Tribute, of their own C/il- 
dren, or of Strangers * Where, by Children, we muſt not under- 
ſtand their Political Child;en, that is, their Subje&s, bur cheir 8s 
tural Children, for otherwiſe Peter would not have ſaid of Str! 
£ers 3 nor would our Saviour have Anfſivered, Then are the Child;ai 
free; tor there is nothing more ordinary than for Princes to tc: 


tpeakerh of a Fuith of Miracles, or no, I will nor determine ; I ra- 
rier think, that he ſpeakerh here of any true Faith z We muſt 
nave the Power and Promiſe of God for its Objef, The Promiſe 
or wr bins Mirocles by a Divine Power committed to them, was 
2 parriculzr Promie made to the Diſciples, Mat. 10. and fo was 
only the Object of their Faith. Bur I rake our Saviour's Words 
rt cxtind to 4 furcher Larirude, tho' as to Miraculous Operations, 
it was ogly appiicalic tt chem, There 15nothing which God hath 
rYomilcd to give cr beftow on any, but Faith will obtain from 
fin, it attended by a fervent Prayer, to which Faſting is ſubſervi- 
ear, 4s preparing us ro ir, Thereare ſome things, which are oh- 
riined by a frm Fiith, and by more fervent and importunate 
Prices thanomhers are: A Mercy fomerimes ſeems ro us ro come 
our ot re and of God with more Dithculty and Wreſtling ter 
it; but c12rc is nothing within che Laticude of a Promiſe, bur is 
rt be done and obtained by rhe vigorous Exerciſe of Faith, and 
Ly fervent and 1mpytunudte Prayer. The Apoſtles had yer bur a 
weak and imper:ct Faith, and they had not uſed ſuch fervent 
and wp romate Praver m this Cafe, as they ought to have done, 
thence dd this Work appear fo Difficult unro chem. 
* Ch. 20, 22 * And while they abode in Galilee, Jeſus ſaid 
7. unto them, Fhe von of man {hall be betrayed inro 
Mar. bb the hands of men, 
22 And they thall kill him, and the third day he 
hail be raiſed again : and they wereexceeding ſorry. 
Aft [11t11, C:).tþs, 9. JO, ZI, 32, Ard tiney departed therce, and 
P-lje 3 in 9gÞ Galilee, ard ne would nt that any Man ſhoald know 
it, iy ce tvgnt his Diſciples, \and {id unto them, the Son of Man 


, 
j 
- 


2" 2 SW 3 PR DRIER Rho oY : " I . . « 
Is Jearvered int the i. nos 3f Men, and thoy 211 bill him, and aftei 


ccive Tribute of their Subjects. 
ro mean, 15 this: This Tribure is gathered for my Heavenly Fa 
ther : I am his Son, I am not bound to pay it. | Notwithſtanding, 
lest we offend, ] Leſt we give them occaſion to ſay, We break the 
Law of God : Go thou to the Sea ( the Sea of Galilee, which was 
near) and take up the Fiſh which cometh up firſt ; and when thou hit 
opened his Mouth, thou ſhalt find $aJnee, a piece of Momey, to the 
value of about an Halt Crown in Engliſh, How this Money came 
in che Mouth of the Fith, is a very idle Diſpute, confidering that 
he thar ſpeaks was the Creator of all things. | And pay them ji 
me and thee, | The Papits, who think chey have found herc an 
Argument for rhe Primacy of Peter, becauſe Chriſt paid this Tri- 
bure for him, and net for the other Diſciples, do nor only affirm 
whar they do not know, bur ftorger that Capernaum was the City 
in which Peter lived, (we heard before of Chritt's curing 0: 
Wives Mother there of a Fever) and chat Peter was the only Man 
of whom this Tribute was demanded. This Portion of Scripture 
affords us rhis Inſtrution : That it is the Duty of Chriſtians to vera 
ſomething of their own right, when they cannot inſiſt upon, and 04:55 
it without a Scandal and Prejudice to the Goſpel, and the Concein © 
Religion, It this were required in Purſuance of the Law, £3 
30. 12, 13. and our Saviour had refuſed to pay it, the 519-5 
and Phaxiſces would have Clamoured againſt him, as Violating 
the Law of God. It jt were required as a Civil Tas, thicy wou'd 
have Clamoured againtt him, as a Man that went abour co ftir vp 
Sedition.or Rebelliom. Having thercfore firſt aflerced his Right 
and Immunicy, he departeth from ir to prevent a Scandal. We 
muſt never parc with God's Right: Eut co depart irom our ovn, 
is not only lawful, bur oitentimes very adviſable and cxpcdient, 
Cur Saviour chuſerch rather co work a Miracle, than tO þ1Ve 
a Scand; ard by this Miracle he alfo confirmed his Immunity 


l - A >> j. ; - % # j Fo. ge A , 4 Fs 7 
t/1.-i1t ' Glee, #15 {6:21 ric tie it. rd Day, Bit the UNGKEY® 


% 


thar he was rhe .Son of him who is the Kirg of Kings, and apt 
11 Strifineſ: obliged to pay Its CHAP, 


they that received || tribute-money, came to Prter | 


25 Hefſaith, Yes. And when he was come into the ; 


Thar which our Saviour ſeemeti. 


Chap. XY} 


In a4 4 
i 
\'* 


The 7ews were by God's Law, Exod. 3o. 13. oblized to pay an jj: 
half Shekel, which was for che Service of the Sun&uary, v.16, This 11, »!; 
was paid every Year. The halt Shekel amounted in our Money to /12 7 
Fifceen Pence, or thereabours z whether this were the Tribute- 5/i/; 
money here demanded, and paid, fome doubr, and fay, thatthe Six [7 
Romans having the Fews now under their Power, impoſed this Pay- i: 1/1 
menc upon every Head, as a Tribute to the Emperor; which being 0: 7 
a Cuſtomary Payment, they thought the Fews would lefs ſtumble $i: 


Whict 
Ain 
dim of 
$31 
been 
needec 
Was cel 
Was tc 
this Dj; 
now y 
doubtle 
Places 1 
Tribute 
thar afr 
been ip 

greeth 

it now 
Point an 
SIme of 
Gul. 1, 1 
named t: 
Others þ 
the below, 
the Mou: 
fOme Em 
Vlour to 
hardly qc 
of the Ear 
great thin: 
Erernal C: 
Men are fi 
hardly bro 
Whicl arc ; 
ved himſe} 
Anfiver he 


Q 1nd 
Mim in th 


2 And 


6+ COnverted. 
FE.  I07 cntoer 
o 0. <6 T 


& Why 
this Iittl- 4 
Ol Bey YI 


% | he Ge I 
a 
4 A Fy, mae 


St. 


EN AP- Ky. 


(Chaps XVYUl I , 


C19 reprove 
| gone i by the Example of 4 little Child, I—4-. Shewerh the 
[.mzer of Offences, 5, 5. and exhyrteth to avoid them, and not 
+: oipiſe any of bis Diſciples, 7—14- Direfeth how to deal with 
: Rather that offendeth, 15—20. How oft to forgive him, 21, 


2, which he ſheweth by a Parable of a King, taking Account of 


us So wants, and puniſhing him who forgrueth not his F:llow-Ser- 


11 # 
[ hs » 


T the ſame time * came the Diſciples unto 
oſus, ſaying, Who is the greateit in the 
kingdom of heaven ? 
2b who relaterh alſo the ſame Hiſtory, Chap. 9. v. 33- 
more largely, fairh, that this Diſcourle was 1n the Houle ar Caper- 
1:47, and chat our Saviour began with them, asking them, what 
#ty bed been diſcourſing of by the way 2 That they held their Peace, for 
11 pct been in the way arguing one with another who ſhould be the great- 
+. racy might alſo at the ſame time alfo ask Chriſt the Queſti- 
on. Like in whom we find the ſame Hiſtory, ſpeakerh cf it 
only as a Queſtion thar had riſen among rhemtelves, C1). 9. 46. 
|: 5ad been the Matter of their Thoughts 1n the way, yea, and of 
ticic more Private Ditcourſe alto. Luxe laith, Feſrs knew the 
Thbts of their Hearts, We had nccd fer the Lord ar ail times 
vg b . . , 2-4 
betore our Eyes, for we arc always in his Sight. Ae incompat- 
{erh all our Parhs (as the P/almift faith) in the way when we 


tink we alſo cannor be overheard, he hearerth us, and will call | 


nx ro 4ccount for our Travelling Thoughts and Ditcourſes. They 
were art firſt aſhamed to tell the Lord whar they had been 
chinkinz, and difcourſing upon, tor Mark faith, v. 34. they held 
thoir Peace. But by and by they propound the Queſtion ro 
Chriſt himſelf, (fo faich Matthew) What do they mean here by 
the Kinzdom of Heaven? Or what gave them occation to fuch 
aDiſconrſe? Ir is moſt probable, thar rhey did nor in this Que- 
(tim, inrend the Kingdom of Glory, Bur either the Church, cr 
G1/pel Dirperſation. Or (which indecd is moſt likely) that Earth- 
ly Kinzd- which the Jews thought the Meſſg2h ſhould exerciſe 
on the Earth. The General Errour of their Nation about a ſe- 
cular Ringdom, which the Seſſivs when he came, ſhould exer- 
cite upon the Earch, reſtoring the Kingdom to Ijrael, as they Phraſe 
it, 44s 1. 6. ſeemerh to have inteted them, fo as tho” in this 
they diifercd from the unbelteving Jews, that they owned Chriſt 
to be the promiſed Meſſiah, and the Chriſt rhe $5n of God, yer 
they look'd for a Temporal Kingdom which he ſhould Admini- 
{ter, Three times we find them in this Miſtake. Here, and Ch. 
20, 24. and at our Saviour's Adminiſtration of the Supper, Luke 
22,24. and by Ads 1. 6, it ſhould ſeem thar till Chriſt's Aſcen- 
ſm, they were not fully inſtructed in the Nature of Chriſt's 
Kingdom, but expeRed that after his Reſurredtion, this Kingdom 
of his ſhould have began, and cherefore they fay, Wilt. thou at 
this time reſtore the Kingdom to Iſrael ? Some think that thar 
which at this time raiſed cheir Jealouſie, and ſtirred up their 
Ambition, was our Saviour's promiſing Peter the Keys of the King- 
dim of Heaven, Chap. 16. and paying Tribute for him, Chap, 
17. Bur neither of theſe could be; for had not the Keys 
been given equally, the Queſtion had bcen derermined; they 
needed have reatoned no more. He that had the Keys, 
was certainly -to be the greateſt; and for the paying of Tribute, it 
was roo Minute a thing to caufe fuch a jealouſic. Befides, 
this Diſcourſe of theirs was by the,way to Capernaum, where he 
now was; that, was after he came to the Houſe. Bur they 
doubtleſs fancied a Temporal Kingdom of the Meſh, in which 
Places would be beſtowed, and Chriſt by his Difcourte abour the 
Trivute had afferted himſelf a King's Sn; and rhey conceived 
thar after his Death and ReſurreFiom, (which Chriſt had - lately 
been ſpeaking of) this his Ki'gd9m would begin, which alſo a- 
greeth with what we have, Acts 1. 6. They rherctore thought 
ic now time to ſpeak for Places. They had been arguing the 
Point amongſt themſelves, and could not come to a Refo]urton, 
S2me of them were Chriſt's near Kinmen; (fuch was Fames, 
G4. 1. 19.) fome of them had more extraordinary Parts ; he 
named two of them on this Account, the Sons of Thunder; to 
others he had ſhewed a more particular Kindnefs, Zohn 1s called 
the beloved Diſciple, Peter, James a' i Form were taken up to 
the Mount to ſee his Transft:.ration. Theſe things might cauſe 
ſme Emulation and Suſpici;ns ; thei; therefore come to our Sa» 
viour to be reſolved. 1. How flowiy do we conceive, and how 
hardly do we come, to underſtand Spiritual Things? We are 
of the Earth, and we are Earthlv. 2. How prone are we to feek 
great things for our ſelves; negletting our higher Spiricual, and 
Erernal Concerns ? This Text Jers us ſee, that even the beſt of 
Men are ſubje& ro Earthly minaedneſs, Ambition, Emulation, and 
hardly brouslit truly ro underſtand, believe, and feck the things 
which arc above, Ler us now obſerve how our Saviour beha- 
ved himſcif rowards his Diſciples upon this Queſtion, and what 
Anfiver he makes to it. 


2 And Jeſus called 2 little child unto him, and ſet 


ky, him in the midit of them ; 


2 And faid, Verily Iſay unto you, * Except ye be 


E. 14, Cnverted. and become as little children, ye fhall 


. . Mt enter into the kingdom of heaven. 

' 4 Whoſvever therefore {hall humble himſelf as 
ts lite child, rhe ſame is greateſt in the kingdom 
Of re1ven, 


w 4 kw 


 HWih ltich, Chap. 6. 35. And he ſate down, and called the 
Icive, and {ail unto them, 1f ay Man deſire t 1 be firſt, the ſame 
Wil be tit of all, and Servant of all, And he took a Child, and 
Jel ne ill | [32 


Yol. Jt 


M ATTMAEM 


th the Ambitimm of his Diſciples, and exhorteth 'em to 


Arms, he ſaid unto them, &c. Lube ſaith only, that he tor the 
Child, end ſet him by him, Chap. g. 47. and v. 48. and adds, 
(.t 1 lexit amongſt you all, the ſame ſhall te great. eatic 
4 ting had it been tor our Saviour, had he intended any {uch 
Primacy 1a the Church, as the Papifts contend tor, to have ſaid 
Peter ſhall be the greatcﬆt, Here was ' 
him, 1f he had pleaſed, foro have 


: _( faich 371b ) If any 
Man defire to be firſt, the ſame ſhall be laſt if a!l, and Servant of all. 
and (which Lake adds) He that is leaft anon; you all, the ſame 


ted, and become as little Children, ye cannot enter int» the Kingdom 


Saying. Converted here e237, doth not ſrgnifte tte Change or 


5 And whoſo ſhall receive one fuch little child in 
my name, receiveth me. 

6 But* whoſo ſhall offend one of theſe little ones 
which believe in me, it were better {or him that a 
milſtone were hanged about his neck, and that he 
were drowned in the depth of the ſea. 


Mark hath it thus, Chap. g. 37. Whrfaever ſhall receive one of 
ſuch Children in my Name, recerveth me ; and whoſocver receiveth me, 
recetveth not me, but him that fent me. Then, wer. 42. he ad- 
deth, And whoſoever ſhall offend one of theſe little ones ihat believe 
in me, it is better for him that a Milſtone were hunsg'd about hi 
Neck, and he were ca$t into the Sea, Our Lord having declared 
that che lictle ones betore mentioned, ſhall be greateſt in the Kinz- 
dom of God, here comerh to ſhew rhe Care, which he in is 
Providence will rake tor them. That their Friends ſhall be his 
Friends, and their Enemies his Enemies, Whoto receiveth ſich .2 
little Child, that is, an humble Chriftian. In the next v. 1 +5 
opened by one that believeth in me. By receiving, I conceive 1s 
here to be underitood the ſhewing of any Favour, or Kindnet; 
ro them, Chriſt declares that he would take ir as done to himſelt. 
Ic is much the ſame with Chap. 10. 40,41, 42. Mark addeth, 
He that receiveth me, receiveth him that ſent me. The Reaſon iz, 
becauſe he and his Father are one, and the F:ther takes any 
Kindneſs done to Chriſt, as if ir were done to himſelf, and the 
Son takes any Kindnefs, or Unkindneſs done to any humble, be- 
lieving Soul, as if it were done to himſelf. See Chap. 25. trom 
v. 34. to the end, [ And whoſo ſhall offend any of theſe littl- ones, 
&c.] As »ffending ſ1gnifierh the laying of a Stumbling Block before 
any, ſo ir ſ1gnifierh any Motion, cr Tempration co them to Sin 

againſt God, whether ic be by Flartering or Frowning Arguments, 

tho” the latrer ſeemerh rather ro be underſtood here; fo by of- 

fending it ſignifies the doing of them any Harm upon Chriit's Ac- 

count, beeauſe they own him, and make a Profetſion of his Gof- 

pel, which befides that, it is a Stumbling Block upon which they 

fall and ſuffer as to their Bodies and ourward Concerns, 1s allo a 

Scumbling Block to their Souls; fuch Dangers being ſtrongTempra- 

tions ro Chriſtians to turn chem aſide trom che right Paths of Truck 


and Holineſs. [It were better far him that a Miljtne, &c. ] pwr G 


3»1x 6, 4 Stone in ſuch a Mill as Aﬀes were wont to draw, becauſe 
of the Heavinelſs of it. Some think our Saviour in thus Phrafe 2l- 


mit of them, and when he had taken him in his | 


Iadech ro ſome Puniſhmenc of ,notoriovs Malefatturs in uſe, not 
F ft a amongltt 


Cha D. RVT 


ef = 
How eatie 


5 * - 
4 < 
- ado cnt Coe F - — 2 
ene oor no - 
- 
—- 


Chap. XVIII. St. M AT 


amoneſt the Jews, but ſome other Nations, by tying a. Stone 
152ur tacir Necks, and throwing them into the Sea; bur whe- 
ther it be ſuch an Alluſion or no, is of no great Moment 3 the 
Phraſe ignifierh a cerrainDeſtruftion, borh in regard of the weight 
of the Srone, and the depth of the Sea. He faith, It better 
that 2 Milſtone; &c. becauſe of che Puniſhment chat ſhall be 1n- 
flicked on ſuch Perſons, beyond this Life. 


7 Woe unto the world, becauſe of oftences: * For 


% 1 Cor: 
21.19 it muſt needs be that offences come : but | woe to 
+ Chip. that man by whom the oftence cometh. 


a4 IJ 


$622 a Wherefore if thy hand or thy foot oftend thee, 
cut them of, and caft them from thee : 1t 15 better 
for thee to enter into life, halr, or maimed, rather 
than having two hands, or two feet, to be caſt into 
everlaſting fre. ; 

5 And if thine eye offend thee, pluck ir out, and 
calt it from thee: it is better for thee to enter into 
lifz with one eye, rather than having. two Eyes, T0 
be caſt into hell-are. 

ByOfſences are here meant Stumbling-Blocks to Souls,fuch Perſons 
or ARions as are to others Temptations to Sin. The World, ſaith 
our Saviour, is full of Temptations. Temptations to Sin are on 
all Hands; fome enticing and perſuading Men ro thar which 15 
Evil, others ſerting chem an Example to ir, orhers alluring chem 
by Promiſes, ochers by Threatnings and Puniſhments driving Men 
to it as much as in them ſyerh ; the World will one Day find the 
Evil, and Miſchief of it. [t mu# be that offences come.) God 
12th ſo ordered ic in the Wiſdom of his Providence, that he will 
not reſtrain the Luſts of all Men's Hearts, bur ſuffer ſome to 
walk in their own Ways. Men in Power will command thoſe 
under them, to do whar is Sinful, fright chem by Threatnings, 
force them (if poſſible) by Punifhments. Equals and Inferiours 
will fer Examples of Sin, Allure, Intice and Perſwade. | But woe 
be to thoſe by whom ſuch Offences come.) Men, faith our Saviour, 
ſhou!d be ſo atraid to fin, as they ſhould rather part with the 
deareſt things they have in the World, if chey be as dear as Eyes, 
AHmnds, Feet, rather than Sin, or indure them to be Occaſions of 
Sin ro them. See v. 8, 9. opened in our Notes on Chap. 5. 29. 

Mb hath che ſame things. Chap. 9. 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48 
only with the Addition of this Saying thrice. Where the Worm 
dieth mt, and the Fire is not quenched, Which Phraſe doth but de- 
note the Ecernity of Sinners Miſery, taken from Iſaiah 66. v. 24 


10 Take heed that ye deſpiſe not one of theſe 
*Zec.13-2. little ones ; for I ſay unto you, that in heaven * their 
Angels do always behold the face of my Father 


which is in heaven. 


Our Saviour having before declared how dear believing Souls 
are unto him, tho' their Quality, or Parts be nor like others, here 
he gives the World a further Charge not to deſpiſe, thar j1s, not 
ro Contemn or Negle& them, becauſe God the Heavenly Farher 
hath ſuch a Care of them, ſo as he hath given his Angels a Charge 
over them, Pſal. 34. 7. Pſal. 91. 11. Heb, 1.14. which Angels 
(faith he) do always behold che Fzce of my Father, which is in 
Heaven, thart is, are always Miniſtring before him, and ready to 
execute his Will, and Pleaſure; ſo as the Argument 1s not only 
drawn from the Indecency, and Undutifulneſs, that fuch eſpi- 
fing muſt import, bur alſo from the Danger of it. 7our Heavenly 
Father fo lovech theſe little ones, thar he hath given his Angels a 
ſpecial Charge concerning them, and rheſe Angels being continu- 
ally in the Lord's Preſence, are ready both to make Report how 
chey are uſed in the World, and likewiſe having Commiſſion 
from God, to execute his Vengeance upon thoſe who negle&, de- 
ſpiſe, or affront thoſe chat he harh taken into ſucha ſpecial Prote@i- 
on. Here is no Grouud in this Text for their Notion, who fancy 
char every particular Child of God hath his proper Angel to atrend 
them. Our Saviour doth not fay cheir ſeveral, and reſpeRive 
Angels, bur their Angels, and ifall the Angels be miniſtring Spirits, 
for the Good of God's Ele, Heb. 1.14. I ſee no great reaſon to 
contend for a particular Angel, for every Individual amongſt chem. 
Bur be thar as it will, che Opinion hath no Patronage from this 


Text. | 
* Luk. 19. TT * Forthe ſon of man is come to fave that which 
x0, was loſt. 


we find the ſame in Luke, Ch. 19. 10. bur applied upon ano- 
rher Occaſion. Our Saviour here riſeth higher in his Argument, 
avainit giving Offence to his little ones. All Scandal tendeth ro rhe 
Ruin and Deſtruction of him to whom it is given. Scandalum 
nm eft niſ} male rei adificans ad Gehennarn, faith Tertullian, and a 
greater than he hath caught us the ſame Leſſon, Rom. 14, 15. 
1 Cor. 8. 11, Now (ſaith our Saviour) IT am come to ſave that 
which was 1, you ought therefore to take Care, that you be nor 
the Cauſes. and Inſtruments ofany being loft. Or thus, you look 
up>n poor humble Souls, that believe in me, as mean Contemp- 
tible Creatures, therefore you think you may deſpiſe rheng: 
Were not all thoſe whom I came ro redeem, in as mean and 
defpicable a Condition, yer 1 did not deſpiſe their Souls? Did 
I come to fave them, and fhall it be your Work to deſtroy them ? 


12 How think ye? If a man have an hundred 
theep. and one of them be gone aſtray, doth he not 
leave the ninety and nine, and goeth into the moun- 
t1ins, and ſeeketh that which is gone aſtray ? 

13 And it fo be that he find it, verily I fay unto 
you, He rejovcerh more of that heep, than of the 


T HEM 


14 Even ſoit is not the will of your Father whic\ 
is in heaven.rhart one oftheſe little ones ſhould periſh, 


We ſhall ineet with the Parable, or Similicude more fulj;; 
Luke 15. 44 To what purpoſe it is brought here, our Lord haz 
rold us, 4. 14. to ſhew us, That it is not the Will of our He evenly 
Father, that the leaſt and meane$t Believer ſhould periſh. ys 
every Scandal or Offence (as I before ſhewed) hath a Tendenc 
ro deſtroy that Soul, before whom it is laid, or to which it J 
given, Take heed, faith our Saviour, of giving Scandals ang of 
fences to others, yea, tho' you ſhould have obſerved them - 
ſomething ſlipping and going aſtray, you will be more anchor 
rable to Men than you are to the Beaſts which you keep; you do 
not chus with a Sheep; tho' ir be gone aſtray, you do nor deſpiſc 
and negle& it, much leſs take Courſes to drive it further, * 
you rather leave the reft as being ſafe, and go, tho* it be inrg 
the. Mountains, to recover the Sheep that 1s loſt; and if you fing 
it, have a greater Paſſion of Joy for that one Sheep fo recover. 
ed, than for all che other. It you fee ſome Error in any of my 
Sheep, if they do wander, ſhould ic not be your Care, rather 5 
reſtore ſuch in the Spirit of Meekneſs ? as Gel. 6. 1. than to lay fur. 
ther Stumbling-Blocks betore them, and give them occaſion of 
further Stumbling and Falling My Father hath done fo for lo 
Man, my coming to ſeek and to fave that which is loſt, is an 
Evidence to you, that it is not his Will that one of my Little 
Ones ſhould be loſt. 


15 Moreover, if thy brother ſhall treſpaſs againſt 
thee, go and rell him his fault, between thee and 


thy brother, 


three witneſfles, every word may be eſtabliſhed. 


a publican. 
Our Saviour very appoſitely addeth this ro his former Dif. 


which commanded all in any wiſe to rebuke their Neighbour, and 
not to ſuffer Sin up him, pretending that ic was their Duty, in 
ſome Caſes, to offend any Perſon by that Law. He here tellech 
them, That he would nor be fo underſtood, as if they might 
not tell Offenders of their Sins, for fear of offending them: 
this had been to have with-held Charity from their Souls, under 
a Pretence of Charity : Only in theſe Reproofs we muſt keep 
an Order; which Order he here preſcribes: 1. Doing it pri- 
vately, betwixt them and him alone. 2. If that had nor itseſe( 
then taking two or three with them. 3. If that alſo proved ine- 
fectual, then telling it to the Church, 4. If that he would nc 
hear the Church, then, Let him be to thee (faith Chriſt) « mn 
Heathen and a Publican, [_ If thy Brother treſpaſs again$ the: 1 
By Brother here, he meaneth any Chriſtian, 3 Cox. s, 12 
For what hath the Church to do to judge thoſe that are without? 
[ Offend againſt _—_ Some interpret this, of Offences done fo pri- 
vately, that none elſe knoweth them bur one ſingle Perſon. Bu: 
it 15 obſeR&ed, Thar then there needed no going to himz much leſs 
were there need of any Witneſſes, for they could prove nothing, 
Others therefore underſtand the Precept of private Injuries, which 
are in Man's Power to forgive, Luke 17. 3. Others think ſuch 
Injuries are primarily intended; but yer the Precepr is not to 
be reſtrained ro them, bur to be underſtood of all Offences, whe- 
ther againſt God, our felves, or our Neighbours; and chat our 
Saviour uſerh this term, again#t thee, only to diſtinguiſh the Of- 
fences he is here ſpeaking of, from publick Scandals; for 1 Tim, 
5. 20. It appeareth to be the Will of God, that publick and 
open Sinners ſhould be rebuked before all, that others may fear, 
| The Rule therefore ſeemerh to be given concerning private Miſ- 
carriages; nor ſuch only as are done in the Sight or Hearing of 
a ſingle Perſon, bur ſuch as are not the Matter of p,blick Fame, 
nor openly committed before a Multicude; but being commit- 
red more fecretly, are come only ro the knowledge of ſome pat- 
ricular Perſon or Perſons, In ſuch Caſes it is the Will of God, 
not that we ſhould blazon and publiſh them, bur being certain 
that any Chriſtian hath ſo offended, ir is our Dury firſt t gt? 
him, and tell him of it ; that is, not only tell him what thou 
knoweſt, or haſt heard-in Matter of Fa, that he hath ſpoken 
or done, but ſhew him alſo the Sinfulneſs of ir. (If he ſp! 
hear thee, thou haſt gained thy Brother : ] Thar is, if he confct- 
ſeth the Sin, and be brought to a Sight of ir, a Sorrow for !t, 
and a Reſolution againſt ir for the time ro come, thou haſt 
gained the Soul of thy Brother. E..44 he will not hear thee : 
If he either denieth the Matter of Fa, that he did ſuch a thing, 
or (admirring that) ſtandeth to juſtifie rhe Fa, as what he might 
do; { Then take with thee one or two more, that in the Mouth of rw 
or three Witneſſes, every Word may be eſtabliſhed. ] One or W9 
more, either ſuch as may be of more Authority with kim, wholc 
Words may probably be of more Weight than thine with hin, 
or who may witneſs the Matter of Fa&, if it be denied ; or # 
leaſt, wirnefs by charicable Admonition of him, and his Conti: 
macy, 1t he refuſerh ro hearken t5 thee, and ro repent, 4 

reform. What was the Law of God in Civil and Judicial Caules, 
Deut. 19. 15. God would have obſerved in Ecclefiaſtical Cauſes: 
One Witneſs ſhall not riſe up againſt a Man fir any Iniquity, 1 fi 
any Sin, in any Sin that he finneth : at the Mouth of tw? Witreſſ:s 
6r at the Buth of three Witneſſes ſhall the Matter te eft ablithe.. 
And fo the Words in Z7tthew ſhould be tranflared, OT ©: (eas 
underſtood : Every Word, that is, Every Matter be confirmec- 
[ 4nd if he ſhall negl:# to hzar them :] Either refuſe to !| peak wit 
them, or co ſuffer them to ſpeak with him, or heartiis a 


ninety and nine which went not aſtray, 


with his Ears; it he perſiſts go deny the Fatt, or to _ 


Chap. XVII 


him alone: if he ſhall hear thee, * thou haſt gained 
PA 


16 Bur if he will not hear zhee, zhentake with © 
thee one or two more, than in * the mouth of two or , 


17 And it he ſhall neglect to hear them, tell it ang 
unto the church : but if he neglect to hear the fit; 
church.let him be unto thee asan * heathen man, and ** 

*R Abs 


courſe concerning avoiding Offences, that none might think tha 1 
by the former Dodtrine he had made void the Law, Lev. 19, 17, 2 (gi 


n 
Jap. . 
Fac 
(ail 
11's 
icrt 
nc. 
C::u 


”. 0EN; 


Sv! 
ſtrat 
Chr 
by 1 
ferc: 
Civil 
by tl 
a; [itt 
oitico 
te 7 
it 151 
to (1 
v;4s- | 
&1d ta 
4 prat 
Ocitcr 
tliis ( 
Juch | 
Jizhrel 
I, Bcc 
relatto 
Lavs V 
the Ch 
ceffary 
ſenſe, 
the Nev 
a Com 
Charch, 
publick 
meant, 
be torm 
[ 1 erily 
bo bound 
thote w 
time, tl 
ſome wh 
a Power 
ac this ty 
cular Chi 
Precepr, 
Diſputes, 
only to 1 
Church, | 
not to ] 
cut of the 
ſon was fi 
whole C] 
that Peoy 
a juſtifiab 
to caſt on 
have Com1 
wnt9 thee as 
a wile Per, 
Kow far t 
Communion 
ment, T ca 
a Civil C 
were Heath 
denied rhe 
Preach, I 
nor deny tc 
at the Pray 
times, anc 
much douly 
had mt fim 
preſent ac f 
Writ, 


Þ 3 Ve 
bind on eq 


Li 


7 7 
E © everyeſh 


We met i 
ſcrved that b 
the Ufaze of 
True or Falſe 
think thar it 
ot Ni. Calvin 
5 here 9 he « 
& tz Churc 
5 added , Je 


E Clurch, ſhou! 


fons, That 
Would confiry 
Readmiſſions 
Tue Repentar 
tt our Lorg 
CMMARICAtiNN 
© Zan an 43/3 
&19 tlie firſt ec 
Would ratige + 
Ven them to 
49 are juſtly 
arch tor N 
COmmicterh 

Into the Kind, 
ns 1: caft i 


t; L ere { 
v ve Lrallowe 


 Senie 151 


wp. XV [. 


HS OY ae © 
_—— 
- 


vt. 
'n ac if ir were no Sin; or go or ſtill in.the ſame Courſe, 
oy wo” chings are to be underſtood by che term of not Heay- 
(98 WT he ſhall not hear them, tell it to the Church, } Thar the 
lge LJ, ic 4 Noun of Mulrcicude, is evidenr, and therefore can» 
or be underſtood of any particular Perton. Some would by the 
ut": here underſtand the Political Magiſtrate; bur as this 
vi :mbraced by very few, ſo it is very improbable thar our 
wir thould ſend Chriſtians in that Age co the Civil Magt- 
-i*  wrhen they were all great Harers, and Perſecurers of the 
= mn Religion, eſpecially in Cafes that were nor puniſhable 
o_ Tudges; for no deliberate Perſon will ſay, that the Of- 
Flies mencioned in this Text , were all of that Nature as a 
/*+-1 judicarure might take notice of them. Orhers ſay, thar 
= Church is here meant, the ewiſh Court called the Sanhe- 
/.,, which had a mixed Cognizance, both of Civil and Eccleſi- 
wrt” C1127, There are Three Prejudices againſt this. 1, Thar 
"1.6 Tewiſh Court, Was never in Scripture called *EyzAn7ia. 2. That 
i js nor probable, that our Saviour would direct Chriſtians to go 
to the 72wiſh Courts 10 ſuch Cafes. 3. Thar the Sanhedrim 
\..: 0 £rcar a Court to be troubled with all Scandals, tho'rhey 
aid take Cognizance of ſome things in Religion, which were of 
4 {rand concern, {uch as Bl"ſphemy, Taolatyy, Falſe Prophets, SC. 
Q:hrors cheretore underſtand 1c of the Chrifiian Church: Againſt 
this Opinion , there 15 this great Prejudice, That there was no 
juch thing in being at that time ; bur I rake this to he a 
Ji-hrer Obje&tion rnan thoſe , azainſt che £wo other Opinions, 
1_ Becavte we need not underſtand our Saviour, ſpeaking with 
relation t2 the preſent Time, bur the Time ro come, and giving 
Lins which fhould take place, and abide from the gathering of 
the Chriſtian Clurch, ro rhe end of che World, Nor 1s ir_ne- 
cefary thar we ſhould rake the term Church here in the ſtrife 
ſenſe; in which jt is moſt generally uſed in the Scriptures of 
the New To/tament ;, for the genera] Notion of the Word, 15 only 
a Company of People called rogerher ; and 1n this tenſe, Tell the 
Ch:rch, is no more than tell che Multitude, make his Crime more 
publick: Now what that Multirude was. which our- Saviour 
meant, would eafily be underſtood, when the Churches came to 
he formed. Bur the next Verſe will make it more plain, v. 18. 
[erily I ſay unto you, whatſoever you ſhall bind on Earth, ſhall be 
fo bound in Heaven, &c.] By the Church, then muſt be meanr, 
thoſe who had Power tro Bind, and Loſe. Now tho', ar this 
time, there was no particular Church formed, yet there were 
ſome who had a Power to Bind, and Looſe, Chriſt had given ſuch 
1 Power ro his Apoſtles. Theſe were the preſent Church, and 
ac chis rime in being. They were afterwards to conſtitute parri- 
cular Churches, ro whom ( when conſtitured) in force of rhis 
Precepr, ſuch Offences were to be rold. There are yer further 
Diſputes, whether this Offence and Contumacy, be to be told 
only to the Rulers; or to the MWultitude, I ſay to the whole 
(birch, but firſt ro the Rulers, then by them to the Multitude 
not to Judge of ir , bur for their Conſent in caſting a Perſon 
cur of the Communion of the Church. Thus the Ince/tuos Per- 
ſn was firſt accuſed to Paulz then caſt our by the conſent of the 
whole Church, 1 Cor. $5. 3, 4 For it is unreaſonable to think, 
thar People ſhould deny Communion to any, without knowing 
a juſtifiable Cauſe, And to no purpoſe, for Rulers in a Church 
to caſt one out of its Communion, with whom the Members will 
have Communion. { IF he will not hear the Church, let him be 
unt) thee as an Heathen and a Publican.) That is, eſteem him as 
a vile Perſon; for ſo they eſteemed all Heathens and Publicans. 
Kow far this could reach, beyond having an Intimacy of Civil 
Communion with them , and a Communion with them in the Sacra- 
rent, TI cannot underſtand ; for as Chriſtians were Licenſed to 
a Civil Commerce with Heathens and Publicans; fo neither 
were Heathens and Publicans, ever that we read of in Holy Writ, 
denied rhe benefir of their Prayers, and hearing the Apoſtles 
Prexch, I am very well ſatisfied , that the Primitive Church did 
nor deny to Perſons Excommunicated , Liberty to be preſenc 
at the Prayers of the Church, bur ir was long after the Apoſtles 
tines, and whether grounded upon any Pradtice of their's, I 
much doubr, Chriſtians had a Libercy ro Pray for any wh» 
had mt ſinned the Sin unto Death. That they might nor be 
preſent ar ſuch Prayers, I cannot learn from any thing 1n Holy 
Writ, 


by rhe 


18 Verily I ſay unro you, * Whatſoever ye ſhall 
bind on earth, {hall be bound in heaven, and whatſo- 
everye {hall looſe on earth, ſhall be looſed in heaven. 


We mer wich this Sentence, Ch.zp. I6. ver. 19. Where we ob- 
ſcrved that by Binding, and L19ſing , was ſignified ( according to 
the Uſaze of the Zews of thoſe times) Declaring of Propoſitions , 
True or Falſe , or Fudging Things L-ful , or Unlawful. Some 
think thar it hath no furcher import here; but it 15 the Opinion 
ct Nr. Calvin, and other very Judicious Interprerers, Thar ir 
ls here to be extended to the Cenſures of the Church ; the Sentence 
& tn! Church pronounced juſtly in the Caſe of Offences, and 
s added , leſt Perſons juſtly denied che Communion of the 
Church, ſhould concemn ſuck Cenſures. Chriſt aflures theſe Per- 


FE fons, Thar ſuch Cenſures. ought nor to be ſlighted ; for God 


Would confirm them in Heaven ; as alſo ro their Abfolurions, or 
Re-admiſſions of ſuch Perſons into cheic Communion upon their 
ve Repenrance , and Acknowledgment of their Errors, Not 
Mat our Lord by this intended to confirm all Senrences of Ex- 
CNMArIation , Or © patronize any Cheat or Hypocritie in any, 
3am an 4%/olution, or Reftauration to the Church : Bur ond 
&t9 lie firſt ro aſſure ſtubborn, and impenitent Sinners, that he 
Would ratine what his Church did, according to the Rule he had 
-_l tem to A& by. Ir is therefore a terrible Text to thoſe 
_— juſtly, and duly cur off from the Communion of the 
"Ic1 tor - Notorious and Scandalous Sins: Such as whoſo 
commirrerh » and doth nor repent of, they ſhall never enter 
Mo the Kinzdom of God. And as comfortable to thoſe, who 
"ys, 1 caſt cur do truly repent, and are under Temprarions | 
» ©: atlowed up of too much Sorrow. If therefore any be { 


MATTHE WW. 


Chap. XRVT1II.. 


caſt our of any Church for proſeſſing, or ſtanding to any Truth 
of the Goſpel, or becauſe he will nor do what is fintul we 
muſt nor underſtand them bound in Heaven » tho" they be 
Bound on Earch , nor have any ſuch Excommunications any 
Terror in them. How forcible ave right Words, but theſe Argu- 
ings, what do they reprove * The Church is nor by chis Text made 
= cnn 3 nor 15 the Holy God, by it engaged co detend cl:eir 
rrors, 


19 Again I fay unto you, That if two of you {hall 
agree on earth, as touching any thing that they thall * r Tot: 
ask, * it ſhall be done for them of my Father which 22- & < 
IS in heaven. "MN 
20 For where two or three are gathered together 
in my name, there am I in the midſt of them: 


Moſt Interpreters agree, a Connexion betwixt theſe Verſes. 
and thoſe immediately preceding, as if it were a further Con- 
firmarion ot what God had faid concerning his Binding and 
Loofing in He.zuen , wharſoever they ſhould Bind or Lyo9ſe on Earth; 
and fay, the Ashing mentioned in this Verſe, ſuppoſerh thar no 
Church will adventure upon ſo Grave an A as Excommunication, 
withour askiffz his Dire&ion or Counſel 3 Nor undertzke tach a 
thing as 4b/olution , without the like ſerious asking of God Par- 
don tor the repenting Sinner : Now, faith ke, Lec che Church 
be never fo fmall, chat fo joinerh in Prayers on this Occuiion; 
what they ask of God ſhall be done. Whether it hath any - 
ſuch reference or no, or be an independent Promiſe of Chriit's 
Preſence with his Church , I ſhal! not determine, Thote who 
think this Text hath ſuch a particular reterence, yet do alto 
zrant ic a more general Promiſe of Chriſt's Preſence wich his 
People; whenever they are mer by his Authoricy, or upon l:is 
Account or Command, whether ir be tor Counſel or Fudzment, or 
Prayer, or the Celebration of any Sacred Inſlitution of his, He is 
in the mid of them, to Prote& and Favour them : What they 
ak ſhall be dme fir them, ( that is, provided the thing asked be 
good, Chap. 7. 11.) and for a righr End , Fames 4.3. andin a 
righe manner, Luk. 18.1. Fames 1. 5,6,7. Chriſt in this Texr 
eſtabliſherh che Dury of Prayer in Communion with others. He 
doth not only require of his People Secret Prayer, Chap. 6. 6, but 
alfo Praying in Company with others; the gathering together of 
his People tor Prayer, whether in private Families, or more pub- 
lick Congregations. 


21 Then came Peter to him, and faid, Lord, 
How often ſhall my brother fin againſt me, and I 
forgive him ? till ſeven times ? 
22 Jeſus ſaith unto him, I ſay not unto thee. 
Until ſeven times : * but until ſeventy times ſeven. \, PIP 


Luke hath ſomething like this, Chap. 17. 4. bur ic ſeemerh ro Mar. 11. 
have been ſpoken ar another time, and upon ſome other occa- 25: 
ſion , yer the ſenſe is much the ſame; and there are who think Col. 3. 133 
thar Peter's mention of ſeven times, aroſe trom our Saviour's 
Command there, that we ſhould forgive our Brother, offending 
us ſeven times, when our Saviour by it intended nor a certain 
and definite Number, bur a Number incertain, and indefinice. 
Bur it is a greater Queſtion, What Sinning * and What Forgiveneſs 
is here meant ? I cannot chink that our Saviour here ſpeaketh 
concerning the Churches Abſolving Scandalous Sinners juſtly Excom- 
municated , but of the private Forgiveneſs of Injurics done ro 
us3 1t 15 not the Church, bur I forgive him; for altho*' che Doors 
of the Church ought to be as open to a repenting Sinner, as the 
Doors of Heaven are, yet methinks borh the Phraſe of the 
Text, and the following Parable ( which ſeemerh co me a Com- 
ment upon this Text ) ſeems to lead us to the Interpretation of 
theſe Verſes, as to private Wrongs or Injuries; they are properly 
Sins again us , and ſuch aSir 1s in every fingle Perſon's Power 
to forgive, But it ſeems hard, that Chriſtians ſhould be obliged 
ro torz1ve another his private Wrongs, ſo often as he doth them, 
it he will go on without end, multiplying Aﬀeronts and Injuries 
ro us. © We muſt cheretore know, that our Saviour by this Pre- 
cepr doth not oblige any ro take his Enemy inro his Boſum, 
and. make him his Intimate, or Confident again; bur only to lay 
aſide all Malice, all Thoughts and Deſires of Revenge towards him, 
ro pur on a Charitable frame of Spirit rowards him, ſo as to be 
ready to do him any common Offices of Friendſhip: Thus far 
we are obliged to forgive thoſe that do us Injuries, fo often as 
rhey ſtand in need of Forgiveneſs. The Apoſtle, Colofſ. 3. 8; 
ſpeaks of Wrath, Malice, &c. as pieces of the Old Man, which 
every true Chriſtian hath pur off, and calls upon us, in alice 72 
be Children, 


23 Therefore is the kingdom of heaven likened 
unto a certain king, which would take account of _— 
his ſervants. * A Talent 
24 And when he had begun to reckon, one was { /***1 


brought unto him which ought him ten thouſand and jj 


* talents. ounces : ſo 
25 But foraſmuch as he had not to pay, his Lord *. pi 


commanded him to be ſold , and his wife and chil- twenty- 
dren, and all that he had.and payment to be made. five, after 
26 The ſervant therefore fell down.and || worſhip- five ſhil- 
ped him, ſaying, Lord have patience with me, and _ ” 5 
[ will pay thee all. ind/ed 
27 Then the Lord of that ſervant was moved and eighty 
with compatlion, and looked him, and forgave him ve» 
Pound ten 
the debt. | Shillings 
28 Bur zhe ſame ſervant went out, and found one j Befks 


of his tellow ſervants,which ought him an hundred #i, 
* Pence? 
Per 


6 _ 
Fo . $ 
,. "_ & ” 
—_ 1 _ ”s 
t: _ - » = » 47 he - PL A 
— n = . — - - - $ _ - Wes 2 
Y " —_— . > 4 - —_ 
oy - AAAS .: . . LH — " - TIA _—_ o a3 a4 b, - 
-_ W $2 en ——_ ——_ pos - ” 6 hg , . _ 
by | Fey =" 2agh OR G TAL Ls 0 F 
4 by boy th = Ho PII w» a. . - 
ba ay py —— = _ - 0 - . | 2” x ”. Ms yy By 
4 — St = Fey Fe K.4 4 S-..- > - < We< ; —_—_— - 7A = al 
tA 5, '*Z- 23.6% == T SEE” < I. x" 2 4 £ o _— 35 , a 
: en _—O On. 0 4 ' Es... T7 Pe OD a o 
"I Pe : - on mp 5.4. das » Fe ho 
m_—__ * Yn 8-5-4 - - p % 4 wm 4 00 _ y 
- , © : or = « © a MA - 
ery ,- _ + Mie I Ae > / Tow; . = F. Loc 
p. . 4 ect D , - . - . 
bw + FO » . - - 4 
E _=_ - PR , jp 


eo oy 


* Gt 4 
- PIE _ - = 
DV. =ET a rat I” 


_— 1_—_— 


a 
1 


; . " as X - 
8 w==T art" —_———— : Ro — »— ——_—_ 
_ =_ - - m_— 5 _ - _—_ 6 -< 
ins ” - - — - - - "4 _ — 
Re 5 ” ry 
. RS A _ , - * . ——— —_ gn 5 
ME, a —_— ——— : IEP you. n—_——_ 2 — 
at 5 6 I 2G © — _ - > ng m—_—_ _ ſo 4 ho - ho 
_—_ _— = = £ gw : 7: : = > : Z mo 
” "ws 5 mg ” - gt ee '"# _ yu - ct <——_ —_ * m In > ” 7.4 
_—_— * a8 1.2 - -- —_— 2 ” . = _— _- Gra by > 
- . DEE ———— SE”. ELIAS oC Me ” 
- TEND: ann EE . 


_ ———_—_—— —— ſw — — eden 
Id = = 


Chap. % VII. 


- the 3. * pence: and he laid hands on him, and took þ:m7 by 
m.m Pery the throat, ſaying, Pay me that thou owelt. 
3s ths 


eihrh part 
cf an 9unce, 


in value 


teven Perce 


h a/f-penys 


X Mar. 11. 


29 And his fellow-ſervant fell down at his feet, 
and beſought him, ſaying, Have patience with me, 
and I will pay thee all. : 

20 And he would not : but went and caft him 
into priſon, till he ſhould pay the debt. | 

31 So when his fellow-ſervants ſaw what was 
done, they were very ſorry, and came and rold unto 
their lord all that was done. ; 

22 Then his lord, after that he had called him, 
fxid unto him , O thou wicked ſervant, 1 torgave 
thee all that debt, becauſe thou defiredſt me : _ 

23 Shouldſt not thou alſo have had compathon 
on thy fellow-ſervant, even as I had pity on thee? 

24 And his lord was wroth , and delivered him 
to the tormenters, till he ſhould pay all that was due 


unto him. | 
35 * So likewiſe ſhall my heavenly Father do. 


alſo unto you, if ye from your hearts forgive not 
every one his brother their treſpaſſes. 


All theſe Verſes ( except the laſt ) are bur a Parable, which 

( as I hefore ſhewed) 1s a Similitude brought from the uſual 
ations of Men , and made uſe of to open or apply ſome Spirt- 
cual Docrine. The main Scope, or the Propoſition of Truth, 
which our Saviour deſigns to open , or preſs, is thar which 15 
firſt and principally to be conſidered, and intended : Thar, as 
I before thewed , is ro be known , either by the particular Ex- 
lication given by our Saviour , or by what went immediately 
Kofore, or tollowerh immediately afrer. The Scope of this Pa- 
7able is plainly expreſs'd , wer. 35. So alſo ſhall my Heavenly Fa- 
ther d) unto you , if you from your Hearts forgive not every one his 
Brother their Treſp.zſes. Nor is it obſcurely hinted ro us in what 
went before , where our Saviour was inſtruting Peter in rhe 
creat Dury of Frgiving Men their Treſpaſſes : This being agreed, 
4s we uſe to ſay, that Similitudes run not on four Feet , fo we are 
nor to expe, thar all the ARions of Men mentioned in the 
Parable, ſhould be anſwered by ſome Correſpondent Attons of 
God ; as Similitudes always halt, fo never more than when by 
them, God's Acons are expreſſed, and repreſented ro us. The 
main Points which this Patable inſtruQterh us in, are; I. That 
it is our Duty , eſpecially theirs who have received Forgiveneſs from 
God, to Firgive their Brethren. 2. That if they do not, they may 
juſtly queſtion , whether God hath Firgiven them , and expect the 
ſame Severity gom Him , which they ſhew unto their Brethren. 
Theſe being the main things for Inſtruction, in which this 
Parable is brought , and which we ought chietly ro eye as the 
chings taught us by this Parable; nothing hindrerh, bur that it 
may alſo inſtru& us in ſome other things , rho* we cannot raiſe 
a Propoſition of Truth , from every Branch of the Parable, 
and ſome things be put in according to the Paſſions, and uſual 
Dealings of Men, which poſſibly are in them unrightes Actions, 
and may follow from their ungoverned Paffions, which will by 
no means azrece to the Pure and Holy Nature of God. I will 
tirſt open ſuch Terms in the Parable, as may be leſs intelligible 
20 Vulgar Readers. [ The Kingdom of Heaven. | My Admini- 
fration of my Kingdom: I am come to purchaſe Remiſſion of 
Sins , end to diſpenſe out Remiſſim of Sins to thoſe who are 
:ndebted to the Juſtice of my Father , bur in the Application 
of my Blood to Men and Women for the: Remiſſion of their 
Sins , both my Father and my Self will do as a King, that took 
Account of his Servants, &c, Men muſt look for Pardon from 
my Father, and Benefit from Me as their Redeemer , upon 
the following Terms: Chap. 6. 15. | Ten thouſand wyrned, 
A certain, for an uncertain Number ; a very great Sum, Thoſe 
who have computed it, ſay it amounteth to a Milliom, and Eight 
Hundred, Seventy-five Thwſand Pounds. | He commanded him to 
be fold, and hs Wife and Children, and all he had, ) A thing 
which our Law will not ſuffer, bur in ute amoneft other Nations, 
and amongſt the 7ews in particular, as may be learned from 
2 King. 4.1. | And he delivered him to the Tormenters; | That 
15, to the Keepers of the Priſon , fo rhe next Words teach 
us , and the Greek Word often fienifierh no more , tho? it 
doth indeed ſometimes; | An Hundred Pence , ver, 28. | figni- 
fierh a ſmall Sum, hardly exceeding in our Money Fifty Sh1l- 
linzs, This Parable excellently inſtrufterh us in theſe Truths : 
1. That as Men by the Law ot Nature, and God, and the Laws 
ot Men, may be Debtors to Us, to our Reputation, to our 
Eitate; fo we are all Debtors, to the Glory, Honour , and Ju- 
filice of God. 2. Thar ir is a vaſt Debt we owe to God's Ho- 
nour and Juftice ; ro which no Debt owing by any to us, can 
bear any Proportion. 3. Thar we have nothing to pay to God, in 


Satisfattion tor our Debt. 4. That God hath a rightro demanda. 


. 


ful] Satistation of us. 5. That God for Chriſt's fake , upon 
our App:ications to him tor Mercy will forgive us our Debts, 
6. That were not fo ready to forgive our Erethren their lictle 
Injuries, as God 1s to forgive us. 7. That our Difficulty ro 
forgive our Brethren, atrer God's Eiberalicy in forgiving us, is 
a great Charge, or will be a great Charpe againſt us in the Court 
of Heaven, 8. Thar we ought to ſer before us God's Compaſ- 
11990 rowards us, and tree Love in fcrgiving us, potently to 
m2ove us to forgive thoſe who have done us Injury, and to for- 
give chem out of that Conſideration, 9. That we ought from 
cur Hearts-to forgive Men their Treſpaſſes; that 1s, fo as not ro 
Hate them, bear them any Grudge, or Malice, feck any private 
Revenze upon them, nor publick Satisfaction beyond what they 
are able to give , but be ready to do them what common Offices 
of Kindneſs, in their Straits, are in our Power. 10. That the 
nor doing of £115, will be an 1! Eyidence to our Souls thas God 


St. M ATTH E IV. 


(hs p 


hach nor indeed forgiven us , as we'! 2 a Far again ft. r 


pcderh us in this Lite, to bring us co a Temper mere co. 7, 


15 ko Come, 


CHAT. KIX. 


Feſus coming into Fudea, healeth their Sick, 1, 2. I 4... 
Phariſees Queſtion about Divorce , he explaireth tho Pg ws ; 
it, 3—9. Anſwering his Diſciples Obje&ion, ſhewerh ne ae 
riage #s neceſſary, 10—12, Receiveth and bleſſeth little Chit 
dren, 13—15. Sheweth the Toung Man how he might |\;, , pul 
nal Life. He profeſſeth his perfe& Obedience to all the Cam .. 1 
ments. Chris commandeth him further to ſell hs Gods 43h 
folbw him. He refuſeth , and departeth forrowfſully 16 he 
Chriﬀt ſheweth the difficulty of a Rich Man's og 
ven, 23—26., and promiſeth his Diſciples who had farfoak FB 
large and a glorious Reward in the other Wojld, 27—30, Tg 


T N D it came to paſs, that when Jeſus ha 
hniſhed theſe ſayings, he departed from (4. 

litee, and came into the coaſts of Judea, ber. 
Jordan. Hs 
2 And great multitudes followed him , and þ+ 


healed them there. 

Moſt Interpreters agree that both Auk, chap. 10. 1, we 
Luke, chap. 9. 51. make mention of the fame motion of. cy; 
Saviour out of Galilee into the Province of Fudea, which is her. 
expreſſed ; tho' Luke and Fohn mention ſomething largely fy 
things done in the way, of which Matthew ſpeaketh nor, | j; 
departed from Galilee : | Our Saviour had hicherro ſpent his 
rime moſtly in Galilee. The Country of the Jews was divicy3 
into three Provinces, Galilee, Samaria, and Fidea , Galilee wa; 
the more Northerly part of the Country, and was divided int 
the upper Galilzee, which 1s alfo called Galilee of the Geri; 
Matth. 4. 15. and the lower Galile? , which was contiguou; 0 
it, bur lay more Southerly, and adjoined to Samaria. Our $;. 
viour dwelt at Nazareth a long time. Chorazin , Bethſaid,, c. 
pernaum, were all Cities of Galilee. He is now taking his lays 
of this Province into which he never returned more. Fis nex; 
way into Fudea lay through Samaria, ( for Samaria lay in the 
middle, berwixr Galilee and Fudea_) and through part of it þ 
did go; for Luke g. 52. ſome Inhabicanrs of a Village belonging 
rothe Samaritanes refuſed to receive him.[ He came into the cul 
of Judea beyond Fordan. | This Phraſe hath cauſed ſome Dj: 
ficulry to Interpreters, becauſe Fudea was bounded by 7i11:r, 
and had no Coaſts beyond ir. Some fay, thar the term tn 
Zordan muſt be applied to, he came, he came beyond 7rd:n, 
the Coaſts of Fudea. Others ſay, that as Men came our ot Ezjt,tie 
Coaſts of Fudea were beyond Zordan, Matth. 4. 15. Bur ſome 
rhink it ſhould be there tranſlated, by Fordan;z the word 74 
ſignifies any Border, or fide of a Border. Beyond Jordan tiers 
fore is, on the Border of Jordan, and poffibly were beter 
rranſlated ſo, ſeeing the Word will bear it, and there wer ro 


Coaſts of Zudea beyond Fordan : It is probable, that our $i 
our coming our of Galilee into Samaria, kept on the left hand 
near to F5rdan, till he came into Fudea, which alſo bordered 01 
that River. Where-ever he went great multitudes followed hin, 
bur more for Healing their Bodies, or for the Loaves; than tit 
the Feeding, or Healing of their Souls; fo differenc is moſt peo- 
ples ſenfe of their Bodily and Spiritual Wants, Ze healed thm 
che Texr faith, bur it ſaich nor, They believed in him. 


3 The Phariſees alſo came unto him, tempting 
him, and ſaying. unto him, Is it lawful for a mant? 
put away his wife for every cauſe ? 


Our Saviour , tho' yer ar fome diſtance from 7eruſalem, jet 
was come into that Province where the Phariſees had the greac!t 
Power, and were in greater Numbers: Now they come to lim, 
Tempting him ; where the word Tempting , rather fignifics gene- 
rally, making a Trial of him; than ſtrily, Soliciting him t Sin 
They came ( as appearerh by their Queſtion ) to make « 71% 
wherher they could intrap him, and ger any Dererminarion tm 
him of a Point , for which they might accuſe him. The Que 
ſtion they propound to him is; Whether it be Lawful jir a Ms? 
to put away his Wife for every Cauſe ? The word here tranſlated 
Cauſe, ſignifieth not Cayſe, or Occaſim, but Crime alſo, So it.) 
be tranſlated Crime; but they did not only put away their Wive! 
for Crimes, but upon any Occaſion; in abuſe of char Text, 0: 
24. Tt. When a Man hath taken a Wife and Married her , and "! 
come to paſs that ſhe find no favour in his Eyes, becauſe he hath fit” 
ſame uncleanneſ$ in her: Which the Phariſees had interpreted, 0! 
any kind of Deformity , or Natural Infirmity , not meerly ©! 
Moral Uncleanneſs, Had our Saviour now anſwered , 7es , i: 
had contradifted what he had formerly delivered, Ch.p. 5: 3% 
Had he denied , they had Trapped him as ContradiQing the L 
of Moſes, Deut. 24.1. ( according to their Interpretation 0t !', 
So they had had whereof to accuſe him. 


4 And he anſwered and ſaid unto them , Have): 
ning, made them male and 4emale. 


father and mother, and ſhall cleave to his Wt; 
and they twain ſhall be * one fleſh. 


fleſh. What therefore God hath joined togeth®) 


let no man put aſunder. BY: 
Mark, chap. 10. 2, 3, 4. giveth us the ſame Hiſtory of ©" 


Diſccurle, differing a lixt'c in the Order of the Words ; bur n%r 


ns 


ble co che Goſpel ; and if nor in chis Life, ver 5n the } 366 14D 


not read,” * that he who made hem at the begiir »: 


5 And faid , * For this cauſe ſhall a man lcavs* 


6 Wherefore they are no- more twain, but 0% ' 


\v ; 
Aly Jap. f 


”" r 
n f, 


giveneſs ; and an ill Omen char fome Puniſhment from 52, a, 


” OE IN 
THY NS 


4 
R qr 1 
y and mad 


2. 


"tht as "1 
Winch 15 B 
God was x 
E had 3 mt! 
= bs 3/ ther, 
E and d:vell1 
* n Fieſh, 
wW Fri 
ik , Epi. 
Man's pure! 
E Of Ottcnce, 
ol I * 
* 4 bo h A 

| 

4 


11x: 17 
«W.4V 
F 


. 


Us 
Marry at 
Ictit her 


We met 
Y 1 {r; 
E Quiiti-n, « 
L y 1 
: Az. Orv i 
P s ci 
= ried 21111 * 
3 have £16 {;r 
» Cule nor; 
> ' MCA _ 
4 a7 - I! 1: 
E tne f 
E theſe j 
& Hp; 
b» jp Jig b] 
E WIE + ICT} « 
-- T OQi1-#3;, j 
= CIO, t 
|: tion; t T th 
'Y 1 2 
= Ma 
& cance he dj 
3 11 "Ns ' ; 
2 Ir tl UI ZTICET 
E lors 11-1114 
; "7 TOPAMECE- 
Le 2Gult 
56 "Ne 
3 Cip ay? F y a 
A Y , . 
- fi Ton es 
£ 9 ? , 
by 01; ue C326 1 
s 031 
Ba ITY 19 
v *of [ | VT _ . . 
: &i1.-0. C -y« 
M = hs bis 
! 1 Of anc 
In (7: ' : 
I * A v le] 
11, ry : 
Js Fn Wives, Pl 
E V2] Cue 
"SY A au <>, 
AY low 
, FOERG © / 
I) 12 l5 d 
M2!) he #; 
Gi? US f) VW 
LL 3 - 
, Tis 1 4 Ver 
Imp © b 
; £ wS-4 C Fife 
yr ; w* 
Liu} 


VF 
Jap. Z\-L4 
\--: 4s to the ſubſtance of his Diſcourſe. | | | 
2D neither 7e4 ncr Ny £3 Oey Ditcourſle, bur gives tem 
Poe {G1 to autiver themſelves, and racitly chargeth chem 
ogy. and Corription of the Law of God. He reter- 
; and tor that to che 


- 


. 4 #4/* 7 
\FRLgT WLHUEE ite y - (1 X 2 2 pays LV 7 , 170 
OY _y | T7 (33: j 17 wFIUm 1 1rs 7; 
oh rem (4) C!1e nr! FIl,{ Js 5:40 / "f < LITTI Ag 


ROE omelis, ae. t» 27+ and 2 24. Ira much as 1t our 
l, g You own the 2Z..k of Geneſts, as well as the 


+» C7 , FS 
12d fa1d : as es > 
Lc F448 : Ia rite L0K of Geneſis, you read che frtt 


Of Do eronmmye | k © ad che it 
;.thration Of Marriage 5 17 Was inſtirured by God himtelt ; he 

'. +-/o thd bemale, Gen 1.27, He made the Law of Marriage, 
LC Fh5ce ind f- 


| +, thata Man fhrld leave his Father and Mother, and cleave 
V9 »d they (pri! be one Fleſh; trom whence he con- 
[ pd PAE”Y 6 5 ” 

Mg or £240 TC . 
©: mce he leaves them T0 conclude, wherher 1t was probable, 

F107 EIWTLIAD & 4 2 4 8 04 Ml S 
Cx whom thev {- reverenced, and whe was fo Faithtul 1n 
"er. 4of God as 4 Servant, would Licenfe them to put afun- 
: nm Gcd had pur together : Or, whether they had not 
= {11 {Qrerpretatcion upcn the Law of Atvſes, winch it could not 
_ in Contiftency with the Law of God. Fcr tne Senſe of 
l 
] 


Man and Wire are me Fl-fh in God's Account; 


Words, Get. 1-27. and cp. 2, 24. SEE che Notes ON thole 


+ They ſay unto him, Why did Moſes then 
| 3d ro give 4 writing of divorcement, and 


COMMdN 


{ 

;r1n15 of vour hearts, ſuttcred you to put away 
mr WIVES: bur from the beginning It was not 10. 
nike ropes this a lirtie differently, Chap. 10. 3. 25 If Chriſt 
id tt 135d unto them, rat did Moſes command you * And they 
my os [uffered to write 4 Bil of Druoreement, and to lend ber 
q "tad Teins anſs: ered, and j id. Fr the hranſs of Jour 
+ be wile you this Precept , .Xc. The {ubſtince of our S4- 
vous Anfixer ſeemeth to be this: ſes gave you n9 p/ſrtiwe 
{in the Caſe; he could not make a Law direttly oppotite 
t2 the Law of my Farhcr ; but 2/Ves law the Want "nnefs and Wic- 
{ll of rour Hearts,thar vou would rurn away your Wives With» 
our any jutt and warrantable Cauſe, and to reftrain your Extrava- 
eancics of Cruelty to your Wives, or diſorderly rurning them off 
j but if1n @ Leal Cognizance of the Cauſe, .md giving her a Bill of 
[cc Indeed poſDGbly this Bill of Divorce was fomerimes ju- 
&a!ly cranred upen irregular Cavtes, and AMſes mignt connive 
it {or the preventing of zreatcr Evils, becauſe you were aways 


q 
+ 


n- 
«ge :t 


11 hard-hcarred, and ſtiff-necked People ; and you by your Tra- 


a Id ; 
dions have expounded that Law beyond Mes his Intention, 
and made a Bill of Divorce erantable in Cafes which he never 
hugh of, nor inrended in that Law: Bur the meaſures of Law- 
fulnct%, are neither to be taken from Moſes his Temporary Tole- 
riti-n and Conrivance, nor much leſs trom your Traditions, and 
Exp firions of the Law of es, bur from the Original Inſtitution 
of 3.511190, and from God's Original Law relating to it : Now 
G:4 ar Gift made bur one Woman for one Man, and {> united them 
thar he ſtiled chem one Fleſh « So as he, who purs away his Wite, 
d-th1 25 7rivcre divide, and tear his own Fleſh piece irom pieces 
which is Barbarous, Inhumane, and Unnatural... And the Law of 
God as nor, that a Man ſhould forſake his Wite when-ever he 
hid a mind to ir, bur that he ſhould rather torſake his Father and 
| bi 12, than his Wife; thar he ſhould cleave to his Wife, ving, 
© and delhns with her as a Man of Knowledge, not haring his 
E on Fieſh, Lovinz his Wife 4s his own Bady, Loving and C heriſhing 
br, Eph. 5. 28, 29. Now. how can this pothivly confiſt with a 
Mins purting way his Wiſe upon every little and trivial Cauſe 
& of Offence, or Diſhke unto her ? 

kr. o* And l ſay unto you , Whoſoever {hall put 
way his WVite, except it be for fornication, and {hall 
marry another.committeth adultery :and who ſo mar- 

rict!! her that is put away, doth commit adultery. 
We mer with the like Derermination of our Lord's upon this 
© Qudti-n, cp. 5. 32. only rhere it was {_ inſtead of commit teth 
k Aion) £2th ber to commit Adultery; that is, in Cate ſhe Mar- 
ried 4-411 : Here our Lord faich the like of the Husband. We 
have che ſame, Iar.lo ll. Lub.16.18, The reafon 15 this, Be- 
caule nothin» bur Adzitery diffolverh the Knot and Band of Mar- 
6 mage. Th they be thus illegally feparared , yer according to 
| tefar of Gd, they are (till Han and Wife, Some have upon 
theſe Words made a Queſtion , Whether it be Lawful tor che 
Wound, or the Wite fepararcd tor Aduitery, ro Marry again 
As to the Party offending, 1t may be 


"®, 
4 
1 


D, 
2 


£7 


4 


Wille each orher liverh ? 
> aQueſticn, but as to the innocent Perſon offended, it is no Que- 
3 Min; fr the 47ultery or the Perton offending hach diflolved rhe 
- int #177 by the Divine Law. Ir 1s true, thar the not 
nm Le diijolved without che Freedom of both Perſons each 
In Jnher ; hut yer it ſeemerth azainſt Reaſon, rhur both Per- 
lon inuld have the like Liberty to a ſecend Marriage, For, 
Tov Zelrereſs, is by God's Law a dead Wormon, and fo in no 
in a ſecond Marriage. 2, It is unreaſonable chat ſhe 
(0-1! mike an Advanraze of her own Sin, and Error. 3. This 
= Me rho occation of Adultery, to give a wicked Perſon a le- 
LC £9 fatigite an Extravagant Luſt, Bur for the innocent 
7.!t 1s as vnreaſonable thar he or ſhe ſtiouid be puntſhed for 
10 anorher, Bur what our Saviour {ich here, and in rhe 
"P.rulel Texts, is undoubtedly to be underſtood of Husbands 
| 900 1G, Pur away, not for Adultery, bur for other light and 
; "h 4 Taulcs, for Which by the Law of God no Divorce 1s al- 


£1 
t Pos 
0 3:3-<Fa 
(o gp 
Cit: « r 
1} vv wg 
alc 


E !- :115difciples ſav unto him, Tf the caſe of the 
E 1M) bz 15 with hz wite, it iS not good to marry. 

PR £ 4 very firanze Saying, and diſcovers to us both the 
wi winrire of Crrilt's Dilciples , and alfo rhe Tyranny cf a 
#4 STAQUCE 270 UP INtO a Culiom. The 7ews had atiumed 


as 


S. MATTHEW 


Our Saviour an- ; 


11 any occation, he made a Law, That nome ſhould put aw.ty al 


a Liberty of turning their Wives out of Doors upon every 
l1ghr and trivial Oifence, or Difſike ; rhe Diſ.iples rink 
if this Licentiouſneſs may not be allowed, ic is not gocd Oo 
Marry. So an Holy Inſticutiun 0: God urdagcs for the Prop4- 
garion of Mankind , tor che reſtraine of Extrave-onc Lift, and 


& 


tor the So:ace and Comtort of Man's Life, thould he defpiied, 
racher than thoſe unguier Luſts and Corruption +11 riiged ; the 
Morttfcation of which, would have made thi. fry Separy- 
ions both needleſs,and undetirable.Surely they the vid rater hive 
ſaid, If the Caſe of a Man be ſo with his Wifethen 691 F::G or ts wg 
Wrves had need 19 learn to deny themſelves , to comply evch with an- 
other ; to ſilence their brutiſh and buifterous Pati: chat nz 
the ſame Fleſh, they might alſo have one and t©:- me 45 
and not be like a difeated piece of Fleſh whe: tum 1 {9 
quarrel, that one piece need be cur off to pretcr-c if.2 wher; 
Bur the beit of Men have their Infirmicies , and a: (i. 7 rews 
faid , Spirits Dei non ſemper tangit corda prophetarun:;, Time ©P1E 
ot God was not always upon the Kearrs cf the Prupher $i 
1s as true, Spirits Dei, non ſemper Go ubique t:ngit c72.. , tolinnn 7 
All rat the Saints fay is nor Goſpel, Their F!:th b2''1 irs turn 
ro ſpear, as well as the Spirit in them. A fintat Liver:» © ,n- 
ceded, indulged, or comived at, by the Laws, or by t:.e Rulers 
of a Church or Piace where we live, for a long tine, is not catily 
reſtrained; and even good Men may for a time be carried away 
with che Error of ir, fo as they cannot Gifcern ir, be con- 
vinced of ir, or be brought clearly off ir, toa Contormity to the 
Wil of God, 

17 But he ſaid unto them, * All men cannot re- 
celve this laying, ſave rhey to whom it is given. 

12 For there are ſome cunuchs, which were {6 
born from 7zhe7z7 mothers womb : and there ar: ſome 
cunuchs, which were made 'eunuchs of men : and 
there be * eunuchs, which have ma6.; r:2mſclves 
cunuchs for the kingdom of heaven's ſake, He th: 
CUunucis tor the Kingdom of heaven's fake, He that 
1s able to receive z7, let him receive 27. 

Our Saviour knowing the ſinfui Cuſtom , and Practice cf the 


j 


ror thar, and his Diſciples Infirmities , doth not antiwer them 
feverelv, as what they ſaid migtic deſerve , bur reproves them 
gently ; whar he faith amounts to thus much, You &o nor con- 
' 1der what you ſay; Al Men, withour ſinning againſt God, 
, cannot abſtain trom Marriage. An Ability to live Chaſtly, with- 
; our the uſe of Marriage, is a peculiar Giit of God ; and your 
; Saying harh no place in Perſons ro whom God hath not ziven 
that G1it, Fr it # better to Marry, than to Burn. There are tome 
whom Gcd by Nature hath made unfit for Marriage. There are 
others whom Men (wickedly) make unfic for it, that they may 
gracifie their own Jealouſte. ( Thus ſeveral Courtiers were made 
 Eunichs, and fo betruſtecd with the Care of Princes Wives and 
; Concubines,) And there are ſome who have made themſelves 
Eunuchs, ( nor Caſtrating themſelves, that is Wickednets ) bur 
abſtaining from Mnriage, and yer living Chaſtly, (having mor- 
tified their Luſts, and brought under their Body ) chat they 
might be lefs incumbred with the Cares of the Werld, and be 
more tree for the Work of the Miniſtry, or be able mcre 
to grve up themſelves to an Holy Lite and Spiritual Converſation. 
Bur God , who by his Ordinance ot Marriage detigned to People, 
and continue the World, hath ;.iven to Perfons different Tempers 
and Conſtiruricns, fo as poſſibly the muſt of Men and Women 
cannor without making uſe of Marriage govern their Luſts, As 
to theſe, Marriage 1s nota matter of Choice and Deliberacion, 
| and they may,and ought to uſe it as an Appointment of God, for 
the Ends for which he hath inſtiruced ir. If there be any who 
can receive this Saying , who can without Marriaze- bridle kis 
Luſt, and fo live in a ſolute and ſingle State, 25s not co fin avainſi 
God by any Extravagancy of Luſts, and impure Defires and At- 
teftions, and deſire, and ſhall do fo, that he may be more Spi- 
ricual, and ſerve God with lefs diftration, and be a more fir 
Inſtrument to promove the Kingdom of God in the World, ler 
him do 1t. 


13 Then were there brought unto him little chil- 
dren, that he ſnould put Þzs hands on them, and 
pray : and the diſciples rebuked them. 


Mark faith, chap. 10.13. and Luke ſaith, chap. 18. 15. they 
were broughre that he ſhnwld Touch them. A doubr may fron: 
this Text ariſe in the Reader's Mind, tor what purpoſe the Pa- 
rents, or Nurſes did bring theſe young Children ro Chriſt. Ic was 
nor for Baptiſm , for he Baptized none himfelt, Foh. 4. 2. It 1s 
nor like ir was for Healing; tor tho' our Saviour in ſuch Cafes did 
tomerimes Touch, or lay his Hand upon rhe fick Pertons, yer it 
is not likely that in char Caſe che Difciples would have re- 
buked rhem , knowing that their Maſter uſed to heal ſuch as 
were brought to him. Ir muſt therefore unqueſtionably be, has 
he mizhr Bleſs them ; Matthew here faith , that he mishe pur his 
Hands on them, and Pray. The putting of Hands upon Perſons, 
when they Bleſſed them, or Prayed for a Bleffing on Perſons, was 
a very uſual Rite and Cuſtom amongſt che Zews : Without all can- 
tradidim, (faith the Apoſtle ) 25.7. 7. the leſſer was Bleſſed of 
the greater, It was a Cuſtom amongit the Fews to bring Perſons 
ro thoſe whom they lookt upon as Excelling in Holineſs, ro be 
blefſed and commended to God by their Prayers, Gen. 27. 4. and 
43. 14. The Parents or Nurſes of theſe Children by tl:is At 
declared, that they looked upon Chriſt as ſome great Frophet, in 
favour with God ; and whoſe Prayers could prevail with God,and 
whoſe Bleſſing was confiderable as to rheſe liccle ones. | The Diſci- 
ples rebuked them :} As thinking they were too troublefom to 
cheir Maſter, and nor underſtanding what Children in Health had 
o do with their Maſter , nor perhaps having betore tcen ſuch 
a Piclident. 


— 


14 Bur Jeſus ſaid Suffer little children, and forbid 
then 


Chap. A1X. 


7ewiſh Nation now for many Years, ard giving ſome allowance © 


EC 
> OA. xi 
_———— 


| git 
— 


q "on k 
Wo -* * _- - "Ae" Xie 
=> : 


_ 

x 
_ —* 
ae. wy 
1-4 : 


= 


Ds 
_——— OC 
*. -- = 
+ Ts oo » 
—_ DP LNAISTE2 Y 208 ol __ AY 
- ; s __—_ - > 
. "_ = _ — ” weaatnd 4 — 4 —— 
Rx: att %” "PIES © be - ELIE 4 pr bs 
_- « - A Re _———_— k - ah 
- a . . _— _ T s EY ” -» 
> 25% = BY =. > —— = -- -Miaw.. 3 
< IEA. > FP " =—. _ - {> 
AS ru Ma vE —_—_— —_ 4 
- —— — _ A e - j IA ” - 4 7 « 


Za LIAR 5 
4s 


* 
OS 
OE 


hag a 
* 
hs = 
—— EYE Pony 


Chap. X 1x; St. 
rhom not 15 come unto me : for of ſuch is the king- 
dom cf heaven. 


*Exod. 290. 
3- Deur. 
5. I7. 

* Ch.45.1, 
*Le.1ig.18, 


Gal. [| "A {+ 
ſam. 2.8. 


M AT 


15 And he laid Þ/s hands on them, and departed 
LNence. 

Both Mark and Lihe add ſomething to this Story. fark 
ſaith, chap. 10. 14. When Jeſus ſaw it, he was much diſpleaj24, 
nd /aid, Suffer the little Children to come to me, and fartid them 
wits for of (uch is the Kingdom of God : Verily T ſay unto you, Who- 


L - \ . . 1 : 
ſever (hull mt receive the Kingdom of God, as 4 little Child, he ſhall 


mt enter therein. Ard he took them up in his Arizs, put his Hands 
wor them, and Bleſſed them, Luke faith the time, chap. 18. 15. 
only he faich , He called them unto him, and leaves out what 
Mark hath, wer. 16, of Chri# taking them up in his Arms, putting 
his Hmds upon them, and Bleſſing them. From this Texr, Pivines 
will prove the Bapti/m of Children, becaute rÞoir's 35 the Kingdom of 
Heren, which whether we underſtand of the Church, and the 
Pi:pentation of the Grace of Chrift under the Goſpel, vi2. That 
the Gojpel-Church is made up of Infants, as well as more adulr 
Perſons; or that the Grace ot Chriſt under the Goſpel, viz. Re- 


miſſin of Sins through the Blood of Chriſt, doth belong to {ome |. 


Ciuidren , as well as to grown Perſons: Or, of the Kingd'm 
of” Glory, viz. Children ſhall go ro Heaven as well as grown 
Perſens, the Argument is well drawn from this Text : Thoſe 
who have a right co a Memberihiy in the Church, are to be Bape 
tized: Or, thoſe who have a right ro the Kingdem of Glory, 
may be Baptized. Bur oe cr both of theſe are atfirmed 1n tl:1s 
Text. We mult take heed we co not tound Infant-Buptim, up2u 
upon the Example of Chriſt in this Text; for 1t 15 certain tat 
he did not B:pr1ze theſe Children. Afark only faith, He 5k 
them into his Aims, laid his Hands 9m them, and Bleſſed them. 
The Arzument tor Infant-Bapriſm 1rom this Text 1s founded upon 
his Words uttered on this occaſion ; not upon his Pratice. Mark 
adderh , that our Saviour cold them, That unleſs a Man received 
the Kinzd1m of Grd 5 4 Little Child, he could mot enter into it, But 
«ce opened thote Words betore , WHatrh. 18. 3. Where we met 
with the ſame jn cfteR: 


16 And behold one came and ſaid unto him, 
Good maſter. what good thing fhall I do, thar I 
may hare eternal lite? 

This Biſtory is reported by Mal, chap. 10. from v. 17. to v. 23: 
and by Libe, c..18. from v.18. to v.24 Mark ſaich, When 
he was ge firth into the way, there came one ruming, and hneeled 
to kim, and ushed him : Good Maſter, What tay I do, that I may 
inberit Eternal Life ? Like ſaith, A certain Ruler asked him. Our 
Lord was now jn his way trom Galilee to Fudea, and to eruſalem ; 
There cometh a Perſon, a Ruler, whether of ſome of the Syna- 
£2ues, Er in ſome place of Civil Magiſtracy, the Scripture faich 
not. He uns, he kneelech to him , ( paying him ar leaſt a Civil 
Homage, as to his Superiour) he falures him with the ordinary 
Title thiev -ave to their Teachers, Maſter, Good Maſter : He 
propoundeth a grave Qeſtion xo him, Whar he ſhould do thar 
he mizht gct ro Heaven? Bur yer, he doth nor propound the 
Quo in thoſe rermsz, but, What Good thing ſhould T do, that T 
may have Eteinal Life 2 It appeareth, by his reſpe& ſhewed to 
Clift at his coming, and by the 2eſtion propoſed, and by his go- 
ins wp. /ojrrarful wen our Saviour's Anſwer did nor farrsfie hum, 
thac he did not come up2n any captious Deſign to entrap our Sa- 
viour, but our of a defireto learn; but yer, it appeareth plainly 
that he was a Phariſee, or a Diſciple of the Phariſees, and thought 
that he had a Power in himſelf to do fome good rhing by which 
he migkre mierir Erernal Lite z or upon the doing of which he 
might ar leaſt obrain Everlaſting Lite; tho' not asa ſtri& Reward 
for his Work, without any Conſideration of a Meſſias : He grants 
an Erern.!! State ; he declares his Defire of an Erernal Happineſs, 
he declareth his Readineſs to do ſome Good thing, that he might 
Pbtate I0, 

17 And he aid unto him, Why calleſt thou me 
500d ? There 7s n-7e good but one, zhat zs God : But 
if thou wilt enter into life, keep the commandments. 


Aurh omicreth the latter Clauſe, and only ſaith, Thou knowes? 
the Commandments: So ſaith Luke, chap. 18. ver. 19, 20, Our 
Saviour*s Deſign here was , not, to ſhew this young Man by this 
Antirer, the way by which it was poſſible, that he or any other 
might come to Heaven, bur only ro convince him ot the Errors 
of the Pharaſaical Dofrine : They would nor own Chriſt ro be 
G-d.nor ro be come forth from God: They raught Erernal Life 
to be obtainable by the Works of the Law, and by a fulfilling 
v7 rhe Law, according to that 1mperte& Sente which they gave 
ot it, of which we heard much, Chap. 5. Now (faith our Sa- 
viour) ſecing you will not own me 70 be God, nor yer co have 
c2me trom Ged, why calleſt thou me Good ? There is none 
Orizinally, Eilentially, and Abſolutely Good, but God : There 
is none Derivarively Gocd , bur he deriveth his Goodneſs trom 
Grd. Kow calleft chou me Gocd, whom thou wilt neither own 
ro be G2d, nor to derive from God? { But if thou wilt enter into 
Lite, keep ths Commandments, } This was the Dofrine of the 
Fn riſces, that Men might keep the Commandments. Saich our 
Srviour, the v-2v © Ecernal Lite according to your DoGtrine, 15 
plain beiore thee : You ſay, Men may pertettly keep rhe Com- 
mzndmenrs of God : He that doth ſo, ſhall be faved : Theretcre 
op ihe Comm naments. Nor that our Saviour thought he could 
0 ir, or thar tliere did lye a patiable Road ro Heaven that way, 
bur thar ke mighr convince him of kis Error, d4uu the need he 
had of a Saviour. 


18 He faith unto him. Which? Jeſus ſaid, * Thou 
{halt do no murder. Thou thalt not commit adultery, 
Thou ſhaltnot fteal, Thou {halt not bear talſe witneſs, 

19 * Honour thy father, and 7hy morher, and, 
* Thou {halt love thy neighbour as thy el, 


T H E I. 
pur ic in, C42p.18.20. Three Things we may obſerve: 1. T;... 


ble, 2. Nor are they reckoned up in Order. 2. The Top 
Commandment 15 exprefled by, 7h5z ſhalt Ire th; "> oak 
thy ſelf + Which elſewhere our Savicur calls the tecond Sia 
Commandmenr, and makes Comprehenfive of all the "hy 
ments of the ſecond Table. We mult not from cur "+ ona 
Order here in the Enumeration ot the Commandmenr: of. 
conclude, thar the Precepts of the ſecond Table are greater 5, 
thoſe of the firſt, or thar it is enough to keep them, in  . 
Erernal Lite : Nor yer, that che Fitch Commandment is letfer 1 wn 
che Sixth, Seventh, Eighth , Ninth, becauſe ir is. put afhfr them. 
Bur, 1. Our Saviour had reckoned up Commanders "Bois 
ro convince this Man, that he could not by keepins the c - 
mandments hope for Erernal Life. 2. He had reckoned to. 
by ſome of which he intended by aud ty co convince lim oO 
he had not kept the Commandments. 3. And thoſe of the N-n. 
Obſervation ot which ir was moſt cafie to convince him. & The 
Phariſees lookt upon theſe as the moſt vulgar and efie Com. 
mandments. 5. Becauſe Love to our Neighbour is an excellen: 
Evidence of our Love to God. As concerning the Order : 
which rhey are Enumerared , ir was not our Saviour's hufine: 


» LICtS 
here to ſhew which was the greateſt Commandment; thar þ. 
hach elſewhere determined; calling, Thou ſhalt love the L;d ;1, 
God with ail ry Heart, Sc. the firſt and great Commandmey; 


Here he 15 not Solicirous about the Order. 


20 Th? young man ſaith unto him, All theſ 
things have I kept from my youth up: what lack Iyct: 
Thofe Words, Wh.it lack I yet ? cce not in Mark or Lube, The 
youns Man underſtood theſe Commandments according to the Pj. 
riſees Interpretarion of them , who as we heard, ch.zp. 5. inter. 
preted them only as Prohibiting the Overt-Adts, nor the inward 
Luſts and HMorions of the Hearr, rogerher with the Means or 
Occaſions leading ro ſuch Afts. Paul faith, He had not known Ly, 
if the Law had not ſaid , Thu ſhalt not covet, Rom. 7. 7, Men 
thar deceive themſelves with talſe Glofles and Inrerprecations may 
think they keep the Commandments of God, and be very conj. 
denr of a Righreouſneſs in themſelves. Bur it is impoſſible orher; 
ſhould be ſo : { What lack T yer ©] He expetted Chriſt ſhou!d 
have fer him ſome new Task, and was not aware that he only 
wanted a better Knowledge and Underftanding of the Law, 
convince him of his miſtake. 


21 Jeſus ſaith unto him , If thou wilt be perk&, 
* go and fell that rhou haſt , and give to the pocr, 
and thou ſhalt have treaſure in heaven: and com: 
and tollow me. 

Mark repeats it thus, Chap. 10. 21. Then Feſus behvldirg lin, 
lrued him, And ſaid unto him, One thing thou lacke8f, 61th; x. 
ſell whatfhever thou ha# and give to the Poor, and thou ſhal: ka 
Treaſure in Heaven , and come, take up thy Croſs, and fiilw n., 
Luke, chap. 18. 22. repeats it as Matthew, only he begins ic ith, 
One thing thou lackhet. Mark ſaith, that Jeſoes beholding tin, 
[weed him; not with a ſpecial faving Love, (for he ſent himaiy 
ſad; upon his going, he tells his Diſciples that ir was a ie 
hard thing fcr a Rich Man to come to Heaven , he tells hin, 
One thing was wanting to him) bur he loved him wir fuct 
a common Love, as he loverh all his Creatures with, and mire 
eſpecially ſuch as are better than others, All char can be con 
cluded trom hence is, That Ads of Moral Righteouſneſs 
pleafing to God. He ſaith to him , [If thou wilt be pofeb:! 
That is, in keeping the Commandments of Gced. The P:3 
make a great deal of ſtir to found upon this Text, their C:- 
cels of Perfe&tiom. As if Chriſt here were adviſing only the your; 
Man to do ſomething beyond whar the -Law ſtri&ly required, i 
order to a more perfett Stare ghan' others. Bur that this cat 
nor be the Senſe of the Words will appear to him, who v! 
diligently conſider, 1. Thar this had been needleſs tor our 
viour; for direQing the young Man to keep the Communin:r!, 
in order to his obtaining Everlaſting Lite , had fſuffcient!y & 
clared that 'the keeping of the Commandments was Perte(tia 
enough. 2. He ſays, One thing is wanting to thee ; That 141 
order to thy obtaining Everlaſting Life ; which had not been, 
if our Saviour had granted him to have kept all the Cymr 
ments; for he had betore ler him know, char the keeping t: 
was ſufficient, Our Saviour therefore, by this Speech only enr 
vours to convince him,that he had nor kept all the Commanane"!s 
But ir may be objeted , How could that be ® For there wa ny Come 
mandment that oblized him to e9 ſell all that he had , and g'« "' 
the Poor 2 I anſwer: There was a Commandment , Tt '* 
ſhould love the Lord his God with all his Heart,and Soul,and Streng"; 
which he could not do, unlefs he had an Keart ready t9 0X) 
any Command God ſhould lay upon him ; which our di 
puts upon the Tryal by this ſpecial Precept. 2. There vs 
Commandment, That he ſhould love his Neighbour as himielf, any 
that he ſhould not C5wvet. Now not to be ready at the Commanin" 
of God liberally to relieve the poor Members of Chritt, argueo 
4 Covetous Mind, more in love with his Eſtate, than wit! (00; 
So as though this was nor before ſpecially Commanded , \e * 
was Commanded generally, and thar he would have urcer 
ftood , had he rightly underſtocd the Law of God ; elpeCid! 
having ſuch a Promiſe annexed, as Thou-ſhalt have Treaſure 1" 
ven. 3. Nor muſt all the Command be taken to be included : 
thoſe Words, Go /ell all that thou ha and give to the Poxr, oat , - 
following Words muſt alſo be caken in , And come, ind 16 
up the Cr1fs, and follow me. PerteQion here is not made 70 jt 
in a voluntary Poverty only, bur 1n coming atter, and tfo110%"z 
of Chriſt with a free raking up of the Croſs, In ſhort; No ot 
can be perfe& in keeping the Commandments of God , rat an 
mt live God with all his Heart, Soul, and Strength : Nor FR b Q 
Man pretend to this, that hath not an Hearc ready £9 096) © 


+ © 


a.cl 


- / - aj Co: 
in all things, whe;her more generaily, or more ſpecta-.) _—_ 
- S .? Mmange 


Chap. X] 
Mark adderh, Defeaud not, chap, 10. 10, bur Lut-- doth n-+ 


1 
KY 


are no Commandments mentioned, bur choſe of the tfecyri 5 
LIL? i 4s 


mel tc 
M211 t 


Mark 
(ud to / 
to the | 

[{ ds, 
hww has. 
am of ( 
Neale, 
Jaiti, Ct 
How har, 
Fi tt us 
Rich Ma 
young N 
Soul, an 
rhe way 
whar goo, 
tor more, 
ments tot 
dampr an 
thy Body t 
Or tuck 94 
cs, Sell nw 
have done 
tal and In 
Wich-his D 
have up2r 
Luke and 
Matthow « 


*(' / 
[al 
ids 
[yr 
*of 
- 
[ m 
4 « 
Jo 
Lo 


li 
avit 


Pariily enter 

feems to ay 
4s much as 
Kingdom 0 
Mark) why 
Expotition, 
mts the Kj 
Corrcthon, 
tat fome j 
Wh fayins 
Neod! 6 : Bu 

realUn upar 

laken all to 
forthe comm 
Hal rhy's tin 
any Favour f 
We 6, 20, 5 

Rich, as havi 
ſelves, the [ 
| IChes as jn t 
E all Rich Perſon 
E Vere ail Rich 
Mn, Gy: He 


\ 


þ Thinvs, nor j 
o ſhe, [i 


af | SE, ? 
s iNit io 
DB UCnz our Hea! 


Is 
tein, 4s '5 


0 F® i 8 > w- 
i0h C1 7 & #7 7 PD 
i< x v9 ww f*' 
Lo5 
ep nf whe 
all Or Which 
= - iiCi 


t : rv -__ " 
or *X'CN Man 


jup 


Q, 1: 


df 


XLX. 
ded. Nor can any Man fulfil the Duty of the ſecond Table, 
— ur firſt fulfilling che Duries of che firſt; for it our Love to 


we ciphbour flow not trom a Love to God, it 15 no Ac of 
Obedience, and conſequently no tulfilling the Law, which 1s 


- fulfilled by mecr doing the External Dury of ir, bur by do- 
= «char is required in ir our of an Obedience unto God, which 
canuor he without a firſt loving God. 


-» Bur when the young man heard that ſaying, 
he went away forrowtul, tor he had great poſleſiions. 


14 faich the fame, Ch. 10. 22. So doth Luke, Ch. 18, 23. He 
was forry char he had ever propounded the Queſtion, or that the 
Terms were ſuch as his coverous Heart could nor comply with, 
He would have had Heaven, 1t he could have had it cheap: Or 
*- may be he would have parted with ſomerhing for. it, bur to 
G11 1/1 was an hard Saying : Or he was forry to fee himlelt fo 
con;ured, and convinced, thar whatſoever he Dreamed, he had 
or kep: che Commandments, and had nor an Heart prepared to 
obey-God in one thing. Ir 15 not laid, Bzcauſo he loved hy great 
P:1/ſin;, bur, for he had great Pofſeſoms + Yer the firſt 1s 1h- 
-cnded. Ic is an hard thing for us.co have a great Concern 1n 
he World, and not to love 1t more than God. He went away, 
he would hear no more of that Ditcourſe: How many would 
hive Heaven if they might have ir upon their own Terms ? How 
fy are Willing to come up to Gad's terms? How falſe 
and Acceittul are our Hearts? They will perfivade us we have 
done all, when indeed we have done noting, nor are pre- 
pared to Jo any Thing in Truth and Sinccrity? We are not 
P. f4, fmerhing is wanting to us, till 79 Will, ro do wharſoc- 
ver God requirerh of us, be prefent wich us, tho, when it comes 
r00, We may Want Strength to pertorm. 


nor kc 


22 Then faid Jeſus unto his diſciples, Verily I ſay 


Er unto you, that * a rich man lhall hardly enter into 


. the kingdom of heaven. 

24 AndagainT fay unto you, It is eaſier tor a Ca- 
mel to go through the eye of a needle, than for a rich 
m1 to enter into the kingdom of God. 


Mark ſaith, Chap. 10. 23. And Fefiws looked round about, and 
(id to his Diſciples, How hardly ſhall they that have Riches enter in- 
i) the Kingdom of God ? And the Diſciples were aſtoniſhed at his 
Words, but Teſs anſwereth again, and ſaith unto them, Children, 
hw hard is it for them that truſt in Riches, to enter into the King- 
dim of God? It s eaſier for a Camel to go through the Eye of a 
Needle, than for a rich Man to enter into the Kingdom of God, Luke 
ſaith, Ch. 18.24. And when Jeſus ſaw that he was jſorrowful, he ſaid, 
Hw: hardly (hall they that have Riches, enter into the Kingdom of God ? 
Fy it 3s caſter for a Camel to go through a Needle's Eye, than for a 
Rich Man to enter into the Kingdom of God, Our Lord ſeeing the 
young Man that came co him fo briskly wich fuch a Zeal for his 
Foul, and appearing Warmth of Defire to be inſtructed in the 
righe way to Heaven, and asking tor a 7 ro be fer him: Firſt, 
what good thing he ſhould do in order co that end, then calling 
tor more, when our Saviour had reckoned up fome Command- 
ments to be obſerved, What lack T yet, ſairh he? Go away quite 
dampt and forrowtul, when our Saviour faid nor to him, Give 
thy Body to be burned, no, nor yer, cut off 2 Right Hand, or Foot, 
or bluch out 4 right Eye. Only part with ſome of thy Circumſtan- 
ces, Seil wh.tt thou haſt, and give to the Poor, A thing he might 
have done, and have been a Man ſtill perte& both as co his Eflen- 
tial and Intezral Parts, He hence takes occation -ro diſcourſe 
Kich-his Diſciples, che Danger of Riches, and the il] Influence they 
have up>n Men's Souls, with Relarion to their Erernal Weltare. 
Luke and Mark. fay, he tpake it by way of Queſtion, How hardly ? 
Matthew delivereth ir as ſpoken poſitively. 4 Rich Man ſhall 
Þ.;/1v enter, &. The Senfe 1s the fame, only the Interrogation 
ſeems to aggravate the Difficulty, and ro tortifie the Aﬀermation, 
+ much as to ſay, A Rich Man ſhall very hardly enter into rhe 
Kingdom of Heaven. The Diſciples were aftoniſhed at this, (faith 
Mark which made our Savi>ur ſay 1t over again, with a little 
Expotition. - How hard is it for them that truſt in Riches, to enter 
into the Kingdom of God? Which Expofition 1s fo far from a 
Corrcthon, or Abatemear cf the Severity of his former Speech, 
that ſome judge it rather a Confirmation of it; for he goes on 
with ſaying, If #s eafrer for a Camel to go through the Eye of a 
Needle, Bur why ſhould this aſtoniſh the Diſciples, who had no 
real;n up2n this Account to Fear for themſelves, who had for- 
laken all to follow Chriſt? Poſſibly, becauſe ic was fo contrary 
tothe common Opinion of the World, who did not only as in 
Mil 1hy's time, call the Proud Hzppy ; but thought God had ſcarce 
any Favour for any bur the Rich : In Oppoſicion co which,Chrilt, 
Lube 5, 20, 24. Bl:ſſeth the Por, and pronouncerh Woes to the 
Rich, as havins received their Conſolutim. As to the Words them- 
ſelves, the Detizn of our Saviour in them was not to condemn 
Riches as in themſelves Damnable, ner yer to deny Salvation to 


E; jo © thy 1 g 7” 
= UA Perſons; Our Lord knew, that Abraham, Tjaac, Zacob, Fob, 
& Veal Rich Perfons, and yer in Heaven, fo was Davif and $S9/1e 


mn, G7. He alfo knew, that Riches are the Gifts of God, good 
Things, not in themſelves Pernicious : His Defizn vas only to 


& hew, Thar they are dangerous Temptarions, Soljiciting and En- 


= CN, Ourtlearts into fo great a Love of them, and Aﬀection to 


= MEN, 2s !5 not confiftent with our Duty, with reterence to 
i ood; and 21vings the Hearr of Man fuch Advanrazes for the Luſts 
E: ere, C2etorſmeſs, Ambition, Oppreſſim, Luxury, (lome or 0- 
mer, ot which are Predominace in all Sou!s,) thar ic is very hard 


s 
= 

2 *,\ ny? 
k: Ky 4 ft 


'1 Man, fo far to deny himiſcit, as ro do what he muft 


3 a, !! ever he will be ſaved, For thoſe Words in 37h, Them 
1 I #7 172 Riches, TI rake them rather, to give the reafon of 
ie Diteulry, than to be an Abacemenc of whar he had before 


-_ {21d Es Th = —— Ns . . . 
p 4 Porto #17 in Riches is to place an Happineſs in them, to 
pro 


St MATTHEW 


ficulry of kaving Ric hes, and nor placit;z our Felicity in them : 
oerng ſecure becauſe of them, and having our Hearts cleave u;- 
to them, ſo as we cannor deny our ſelves in them, ro cbey 3ty 
Command of God : And the ſuftering them to be Temprations 
to us, to Pride, Luxury, Ambition, Oppreſſizn, Contempt, and D-- 
JPifing of others, Coverouſneſs, &, Upon theſe Accounts cur S4- 
viour goeth on, and faith, It 3s ezſffer fir a Camel 7" 20 through JE" 


Eve of a Needle, than for a Rich Min tn enter int" the Kinoa'm © 
God, Which doubrleſs was 4 Proverbial Expreſſt-n in ute then 1- 
monegft che Jews, ro ſignine a thing of erear Dithculcy, by terms 
:tmporting Impoſſibilicy : Or, elfeche Phrate may tioniie an in2- 
potſibilicy, withour the extraordinary Influence or Divine Graco 
as Our Saviour feemerh to expound 1t in the nexr Yertos, ; 

23 When his diſciples heard it, they wereexcecd- 
ingly amazed, ſaying, Who then can be taved : 

26 Put Jeſus beheld them, and {aid unto them. 

J * Pg. Py . *. . y 4 
With men this is impo{lible, but * with Gcd all 
things are poltible. 


Mart: faith, -They were aftoniſhed out of Meſure, ſymg amme 
themſelves, &c. All three Evangcliſts 2gree in the fame Sub- 
ſtance of che other Words. Bur why are the Difciples-amazed ? 
Or, why do they lay, who chen can be ſaved? Are Tere Not in ail 
Places more Poor than Rich Perſons? The Dilciples might rea- 
fonably conclude, that Poor Pertons were by their Poverty alſo 
expoted ro many great and dangerous Teinprations ; that even 
they, tho' they had nor Riches, ver mizhr coo much place 
Felicity in them, and Cover whar they had n-t ; and irom hence 
Collett a Difficulty tor any ro ger to Heaven. Our Saviour f11ch 
unto them, | 1!i7h 3ten this 3s impoſſible, but with God all rhings a-- 
P:ſble.) Is Men indeed were lcir all co themtelves, none would 
be ſaved; the Blackamoor cannoc change his Skin, nor the Le9- 
þ.wrd his Sp3ts. Bur Ged can bring Men to Heaven by the mighty 
Power of his Grace, he can chanze a Rich Man's Kearr, and take 
ir oft trom roo much Love of Riches, and make him to detpile 
and*contemn his Wealth, and to pur his Truſt in the Livin God : 
Or, a Poor Man's Heart, and make him alſo Poor in Spirir, and 
Rich in Grace. 


27 * Then anſivered Peter. and ſaid unto him, 
+ Behold, we have tortaken all, and followed thee; 
what {hall we have therefore : 

28 And Jeſus ſaid unto them, Verily I ſay unto 
you, that ye which have followed me in the regene- 
ration, when the Son of man {hall fit in the throne of 
his glory, *-ye alto ſhall fit upon twelve thrones, 
judging the twelve tribes of I{racl. 

Mark and Luke repeateth the Words of Peter in parr, bur nei- 
cher of chem have chiis pare ot our Lord's Anfiver, particu- 
larly reſpeG&ting his Apoſties. We heard betore, Ch. 4. 18, 21, of 
Peter, and Andrew, and Fames, and John's forſuking all, and fol- 
lowing of Chrijt when he called them, the others doubrlets did 
the fame: Peter obferving, that our Saviour lad nor the Strets 
ot Men's Salvation, either upon Riches, or Poverty, bur upon 
the Frame of Men's Spirits, cheir Humility, Selt-dental, their O- 
bedience to, and Readineſs to tollow him; rejoynerh ciiete 
Words, and faich, We have forſaken all, und followed thee, what 
ſhall we have ? Somie think that he had an Expecarion of ſome- 
thing in this Lite, according to the Notion which the other Jews 
had, and it 15apparent, the Ditciples tiad fome Tintture of a ſe- 
cular Kingdom which the Merz ſhould excrcite. Bur confider- 
ing our Lord's tormer Diſcourte could net be fo incerprered, 
and the Diſciples queſtion, Who then cen be ſaved? | c.nnot 2 
gree thats And for the fame reaton I cannot agree, rhar 7: 
coming of the Son of Man in hs G!ory, mentioned v. 28. ſhould be 
underſtood of his coming in his Mediatory Kingdom, (as ſome 
would have ir) bur of his laſt coming, which 1s moſt properly cal- 
led, The coming of the Son of Man in his Gl5ry, mentioned i The/. 
4+ 15,15, 17. ud. 14. and that the ching here promited ro 
che Apoſtles 15s nor a Preterence 1n tne Church, bura turther De- 
Tree of Honour, and Glory in the Day of Judgment. | Yu which 
have follnwed me in the Regeneration : | That 1s, at this time, 
while I have been by my Dodrine Reforming the World ; In che 
Regeneration of my Church, while I have been purcing it into 4 
new Stare. Some make rhote Words, In the Regeneration, to re 
ter to the next Words. In the Regeneration : That is, In the D.:y 
of Judgment, when Chriſt thall come in his Glory. The Apa- 
{tle indeed, A&Fs 3. 21. calletch thar Day, 77 time of the Reſtitu- 
tim-of all things. And the Prophet tpeaks of it, as the c:me ot 
the New Heavens, and New Earth, I}. 65. 22. So doth rie Apo- 
ſtie,. 2 Pet. 3.13. and Fn, 1n Rev. 21. 1. It 1s nor much ma- 
rerial ro which part we apply the term. | 7ou that have followed 
Mme.) Thar is, who have tollowed, and tha!ll go on, and tollow 
me; tor this Promiſe cannot belong to 745 the Son of Perdict- 
on: | 7 ſhall fit upon twelve Thrones. | Judges and Princes uſe to 
have 4ſſo/Þrs that fir wich chem in Judgmenc, He mentions 
twelve Thrones, becaute he had now rwelve Diſciples, his Apoſtles; 
and tho” afterward ud teil away, yet Matthias ſucceeded. 4&; 
1. 25. $0 as the rwelve Thrones ſhall not be empry, but nlled 
up wich ewelve that followed Chriſt (tor ſuch a one was J/.:7741- 
as, As 1. 21.) [ Judging the twelue Trives of Iſrael.) Tio' the 
Tribes were Thirteen, yet they ufually went under the Notion 
of Twelve, becauſe Levi was not counted, as having no parti- 
cular Poficfion : Thar is, judging the Z08 {or their Linbelict, 
and nor Reception ot me : Judging orhers alfo; bur Judgmenr 
{hall begin ar che Houte of God. Doubtlets ch1s Promiſe 1m- 
ports, that the Apoſtles ſhall have a higher Place 1n Glory ac 


% 


nds a... rf f . » . p /» 

MOEVG Cur ſelves a Security from them, 1D as to be c.rc!cts of 

I Firer ou +1 , - ON : i = + 

Oar Happineſs, Pſal. 49. 6.47 52. 7. 1 Tim. 6. 17. That 

4k} MIKE 't fo Nard tor a Rici Man to be laved, is the Dij- 
Y 1f 


che zrear Day than ordinary Belicvers: Yer the Apoſtle Luigi, 
Tv? Saints ſh.atl jadge the World, 1 Cor. 5. 2. 

29 And every one that hath forſaken houles,or ! 16 
thren, or ſiſters, or father, or mother, or Wite, of 
G 4 -- Clitldreus 


by Mar. To, 
28. Luk. 


$8. 28. 


7 Ch: 4.20 


Luk. 5. 


bm 


P Luk, 2 


Chap. ALDX. 


LEY 


28, 23, 3: 


; s 
I: +7? 4 | 
I 4.74, 389 
£ 1. þ; 18 
0 8; 
+ 341 | 
Kh; : | Y 
ty. 4 rhe! f 
Fe Ig 
j- £4 'ÞF 
pre: ' 
ret \ i 
4" 
LIN | $ 
? P:! : 
-F 4 


> 80. = boa. > IP. III 
SI Zo 7 OY 


pR_ 
— 
POR 
Lat nIneny 


wt .- 


EC ba bd. 


——_ p R - "_— Dy _— ——_ . I". E i - Ark _ 
- "uy LETT - * % J_— P, 0 8-2 om _ El . 4 Sw — ow - W 
Ea got a ZI, RL "It | *a * ” ” - de hd —_ ys 
=" Xo TEC C4 * : «. _ - i "= wr - 7 - 
DE SE ns SE + -—=> Ine IR —_-. ns Sp : i te 
5 FEED == CEOS S 2 ——— . >.> D. 
y 5 - _ - — &. m— - 4 
. 2: == = Y — 
7 52 - 


_ "I 
, >» 
o_ *%.," "8 - c = 
dl rot fe RR ALIENS 
FR, - __ D 7 _ 
- Sy 22 W_ E 
= 


Chap. X X. 


St. 


children, or lands, for my name ſake, ſhall receive 


*Chap. 20. 


16, 
| Ser In 
ch. 18. 28. 


11 hundred-fold, and ſhall inherit everlaſting lite. 


Mark faich, Ch. 10. 29, 30, 31-—Fr my ſake, and the Goſpels. 

And he ſhall receive an Hundred-f5ld, now in this time, Houſes, _— 
Brothren, and Siſters, and Mothers, and Children, and Lands, with 
Perſccutions, and in the World to come, Life Everlajting. Luke 
fairh, Ch. 18. 29. — For the Kingdom of God's ſake : Who ſhall not 
receive manifold nnre in. this preſent time, and in the World to _ 
Life Everlaſting. The Words are a liberal Promiſe, and we mu 
contider, 1. To whom it #s made. 2. Of what its. The former 
Promiſe reſpe&ted the Apoſtles, and was ſpecial, as appears 
Dy the number of twelve Thrones. This reſpetterh all thoſe, that 
ſh2u'd forfake any thing. Houſes, Brethren, Lands, 6.209% Fond 
thers, Mothers, Wife, Children, for Chris : Which 1s expreſsd by 
three Phraſes for my Name's ſake, for the Goſpel ſake, for the —_ 
t1n of God's ſake. (All of the ſame Import) rather than they wil 
forſake me; and the Profeſſion of my G/pel, rather rhan they 
will fin againſt God. The Promiſe is, 1. Of an Hundyed-fold in 
this Life. 2. Of Eternal Life. We muſt notunderſtand of an Hun- 
dred-fold ia Specie, but in value. Theretore Mark faith, he ſhall 
receive what he hath in this Lite with Perjecutions : What 13 there- 
fore this Hundred-fold in this Life? 1. Joy in the Holy Ghoſt, 
Peace of Conſcience, the Senſe of God's Love: So as with the 
Apoſtles they ſhall rejoice, thar they are thought worthy to ſuf- 
fer any thing for the Name of Chriſt, 4s 5. 41. They ſhall 
with Paul and Sil#s, Ads 16. 25. fing inthe Priton ; with thoſe, 
Heb. 10. 24. The jyfully the ſpoiling of their Good's, knowing they 
have in Heaven a better, and an enduring Subſtance. This inward 
Joy and Peace ſhall be an Hundred-fold more, than Fathers, and 
Mothers, or Brechren, or Siſters. 2. Contentment. They (hall have 
2 contented Frame of Spirit with che little chat is left, rho' they 
have nor ſo much to drink as they had, yer they ſhall have lefs 
Thirſt, Phil.4.11,12. 3. God will ſtir up the Hearts of others 70 ſup- 
ply their Wants, and that Supply ſhall be ſweerer ro them than their 
Abundance was. 4. God ſometimes repays them in this Life, as 
hercſtored Fob after his Tryal ro greater Riches. Bur they ſhall 
have a certain Reward..in another World, Eternal Happineſs. 


20 * But many zhat are firſt, ſhall be laſt, and 
the laſt ſhall be firſt. 

So ſairh Mark, Ch. 10. v.31. We have much the ſame Sen” 
rence, Luk. 13. 39. and Ch. 20. 16. The Jews that are counted 
now the Fir#, neareſt ro che Kingdom of Heaven, ſhall have no 
Place there : And rhe Gentiles look'd upon as moſt remote from 
ir, ſhall be admitted into ir. The Phariſees and great Do&fors, 
who think themſelves Fir#, that is, neareſt che Kingdom of Hea- 
wen, ſhall be laſt; and rhoſe whom they count Laſt, ſuch as 
ſhall have nothing to do with Heaven, ſhall be counted the Firs, 
ſhall have the Precercnce, the chieteſt Place in Heaven. Tr is a 
general Sentence, and may be applied variouſly. Bur if we con- 
fider, what Diſcourſe follows, we fhall fee Reaſon to interpret it, 
as an awakening Senrence to the beſt of Men. Ir 1s the Apoſtles, 
to thoſe who had forſaken all to follow him, ro whom he here 
faith, But many that are fir8t, ſhall be laSF, &c. As much as if 
he had ſaid; you have forſaken all, and followed me, but you 
had need look, and conſider from what Principle, with what 
Love, and to whar End you have dene it; you had need keep 
a Watch upon your ſelves, and ſee that you hold on, and thar 
you have no Confidence in your- felves. For many, That are 
Fir# in Profeſſim : Firſt, in the Opinion of others, Firſt, in their 
own Opinion, and Confidence, at the Day of Judgment, will be found 
to be the Loft in my and my Father's Eſtcem, and Reckoning : 
And many who make not ſo great a Noiſe, nor have fo great a 
Name, and Repute in the World, and who have the loweſt and 
meaneſt Opinion of themſelves, will be found Firſt, and Higheſt 


in my Favour, The Day of Judgment will truſtace many ExpeGta- 


tions. 


TH AP. JXX. 


Chriſt, by the Similitude of Labourers, called at ſeucral times into a 
Vineyard; proveth that God ws in Debt to no Man, 1—16. Going 
with his Diſciples up to Jeruſalem ;, fore-telleth his Suffering and 
Reſurreion, 17—19. Rebuking the Wife of Zebedee, for her am- 
bitions Reques8} and Ignorance, teacheth hu Diſciples Humility and 
Lowlineſs, 29029, Two Blind Men earnefHy crying after him, 
he taketh Compaſſion upon *em, and reſtoreth their Sight, 30—34. 


i F OR the Kingdom of Heaven is like unto a 

man that 1s an houſholder, which went out 
early in the morning to hire labourers into his vine- 
yard. 

2 And when he had agreed with the labourers for 
a || peny a day, he ſent them into his vineyard. 

2 And he went out about the third hour, and ſaw 
others ſtanding idle in the marker-place. 

4 And ſaid unto them, Go ye alſo into the vine- 
yard, aid whatioever isright, I will give you. And 
they went their way. 

5 Again he went about the fixth and ninth hour, 
and did likewiſe. 

6 And about the eleventh hour he went out, and 
tound others ſtanding idle, and ſaith unto them, Why 
itand ye here all the day idle ? 

7 They ſay unto him, Becauſe no man hath hired 
us. He faith unto them, Go ye alſo into the vine- 
yard, and whatſoever 1s right, zþat ſhall ye receive. 

8 50 when even was come, the Lord of the vine- 
yard faid unto his Reward, Call the labourers, and 


MATTHE WV. 


give them zhezr hire, beginning from the laſt unc, 
the firſt, : 
9 And when they came that were h:red about th. 
eleventh hour, they received every man a peny, 
10 But when the firſt came, they ſuppoſed th1; 
they ſhould have received more ; and they likewif: 
received every man a peny. p 
11 And when they received 77. they murmure 


againſt the good man of the houſe, ? 


hour, and thou haſt made themequal unto us, which 
have born the burden and heat of the day. 

13 But he anſwered one of them, and ſaid. Frienq 
I do thee no wrong : didft thou not agree with mz 
for a peny ? 

I 4. Take 7hat thine z5,and go thy way : Iwill give 
unto thislaſt, even as unto thee. 


my own? Is thine eye evil, becauſe I am good > 


+ for many be called, bur few choſen. 


1n 1t, bur the 16th ver, So the lat ſhall be firſt, and the fiſt 111} 
Fir many are called, but few are choſen. Some here by Fir$, wn. 


Or, who have the higheſt Opinion of themſelves. By Lf, they 
underſtand Perſons who are of meaner Note and Reckoning in 
the World, and have loweſt Opinion of themſelves. The fornir 
ſhall be 128 as to the Love and Favour of God, and any Reward 
trom him, and the other ſhall be firſt. Others by the Kir/t, un. 
derſtand the Fews, who were the firſt People God had in the 
World, and more dignified than any other by Priviledzes: By 
rhe Laſt, the Gentiles, who came laſt into the Church of God, 
This ſeems to be direftly intended by our Saviour, who perfettly 
knew the Pride and Invidious Temper of the Fews, who valued 
rhemſelyes upon their Prerogative that they were che Church of 
God, when the World lay in Wickedneſs ; and were apr to re- 
ſent as an Indignity, that the Gentiles ſhould be called into the 
Church, and be made equally Partakers of Spiritual Priviledz 
with them. Having now fixed the Scope of the Parable, the lnter- 
preration is eaſte. | The Kingdom of Heaven, |] that is the Sove- 
raign Diſpenſation of God in calling Nations or Perſons to par. 
rake of Spiritual Benefits in his Church, and conſequently 9fErer. 
nal Blefledneſs; [ 7s like unto a Man that is a Houſhalder, which 
went out early in the Morning to hire Labourers into his Vinejad,) 
The Houſholder is God the Father, -compared by Chriſt t an 
Husbandman, with geſpe& to the Culture of Vines, Fob. 15.1. To 
one that hath a Vineyard, 7/. 5. 1, 2, &c. The Vineyard is the 
Church; the Work is that which concerns Eternal Salvation, 
borh of our own Salvation, and of others that are committed to 
our Charge; or that are within the Compaſs of our Adtivity to 
do them Spiritual Good. The Labourers are eminently Perſon 
in Otfice, and generally all that are called by the Goſpel. The 
hiring of them imports, the gracious Promiſe of the Reward pub- 
liſh'd in the Goſpel ro thoſe who will work. The Peny isthee- 
ward, comprehenſive of the Spirirual Priviledges, that Perſons in 
the Church are made Partakers of. [ Men ſtanding idle in the Mar- 
ket-place)] ſignifies their Negle& of the great and proper Work, 
for which they came into the World, to glorifie God, and ae 
their Souls. | Hs going out at ſeveral times, and calling in ſome 
the Vineyard,] at the third, ſixth, and ninth Hours, implies the 
Calling of the Zews in the early Age of the World, and hisſend- 
ing the Prophets in ſundry times, when they were degenerated, 
ro return to his Service. | The calling ſome at the tenth hour, | pat- 
ticularly, reſpeRs the bringing in the Gentiles by Preaching te 
Goſpel, who before were without the Knowledge of God; and 
the Way to Life. The Even is the timeof Accompts and{Recon: 
pence. The Murmuring of ſome, that they received no more that 
thoſe that came later into the Vineyard, primarily and imme: 
ately {ignifies the Envy and Vexation of the Jews, thar the Get 
tiles ſhould be equal Partakers of the Grace of God with then- 
ſelves, who for ſo many Ages had been his peculiar People. T'! 
Houſholder's vindicating himſelf, is from rwo Conſideration: 
Whercin ir appears, that his Liberality to ſome is perfettly col: 
ſiſtent with his vpn ro all. 1. That he agreed with them for 
a Peny, which they received : The Fews enjoyed thoſe Externi! 
Priviledzes of God's Covenant which they fo much valued them: 
ſelves for, till they cur themſelves off by their obſtinate rejcfting 
his Grace. 2. Thar he mighr do what he pleaſed with his 0 
He was Maſter of his own Favours, and it was Malignity t0 04% 
his Bounty to others, which was nothing prejudicial ro what v6 
due by Agreement to chem. Our Saviour concludes the Parable, 
that che La? ſhall be Firff : The Gentiles ſhall be made Partake!9 
of the Goſpel, with the bleſſed Priviledges atrending to it. A! 
the Firft ſhall be Lait : Tha is, the Jews ſhould be deprived 
thoſe Priviledges. And Analogically in every Age, foine v9 
are firſt in Preſumption of their own Merit, in Profeſſion, 4 
Reputation, bur nor in real Holineſs,. ſhall be laſt in Gods Ac 
count ; and thoſe who were ſincere and diligentin the Chriftiat 
Calling, tho' diſyalued by the World, ſhall be preferred before 
them : | For many are called, but few are choſen.) This is the Rez 
fon of whar is faid before: Many are called by the Extent 
Preaching of che Word into the vifible Communion of tlie 
Church : This is the evident Meaning by the reading of tc at 
rable, wherein "ris ſaid, Perfons were called at ſeveral Hours, ©" 
prehending the Miniſtry of the Prophets and the Apoſtic:, Fo 
all the Succeſſion of Preachers in every Age. And few 915 © 


dzz0c 


ſen: Thartis, by the free ang unchangeable Decree of 099 ©, 


12 Saying, Theſe laſt have || wrought but one 


i5 *Isitnot lawful for meto do what I will with ; 


16 * do the laſt ſhall be firſt, and the firſt l1f - 


We find this Parable only recorded by Sr. Matthew ; nor have % 1: 
any thing to guide us in underſtanding the Scope of our Saviour 


derſtand ſuch as are of greateſt Repute and Eſtimation in the W1;[;7. 


Chap, XY 


Or ops! 
Mgt, 


blelfe 
weh 
teach 
courſ 
and Fo 
g1Ves 
that t] 
Death 
inſtrut 
knew 
them a 
fir for 
ly of 1 
before 
ſhould 
ould d 
rw 
upon, ar 
theſe th 
God wh 
ſtent in 
them wi 
foretold | 
the third 
arming : 
Weſhat,: 
and wher 
have ſhak: 
coming of 
the Son of 
flod none 9 
them; the 
enough, by 
they could 
nor get ov( 
exercifing : 
the third D, 


4% 20 Th 
| Children, 
firing 4 C< 
21 An 
Nath unto 
fit, the ons 
left, in thy 


Mark faith 
- eaee, cam 
"Jr us hat 

I fhld d9 i; 
uy me on thy 
Watthow's fay 
0511 foe doi 
l on had nere 
»ecauſe Chriſt 
7, and others | 


| OUS Secular Rir 


Exerciſe in the 
Wears from 7 
9M Vias Silom 


_ Pc : . 
ily God in ! 


, PiUſtnding all 


Vol. II, 


up. XX. St M AT 


: nal Life, and to partake of ſaving Grace in orderto 
h ome This is the main Scope of the Parable. 
ric | 


And Jelus going up to Jeruſalem, took the 


r” ſciples apart in the way, and faid unto 


twelve D! 


m B-hold, we go up to Jeruſalem, and the Son of 


11 be betrayed unto the chief prieſts, and unto 
_— and oy {hall condemn him to death, 
: A + And {hall deliver him to the Genriles to 
mock and tO ſcourge, and to crucifie þ1m72 : and the 


om r. third day RE {hall riſe again. 


(56+ -rÞ and Lube give us Account of this Paſſage, Mark. 
= ry ( ok ms 32s And they were in the way going up to Feruſalem, 
_ Jos went before them, and they were amazed, and as they fol- 
_ 4 th were afraid, and he tool» again the twelve, and began to 
ge” then: what things ſhould happen unto him : Saying, behold we 
te : Jerk ſal&m, and the Son of man ſhall be delivered unto the 
$4: Priefts, and to the Scribes, and they ſhall condemn him to death, 
ps $4 him to the Gentiles, and they ſhall mock him, and ſhall 
- - him, and ſpit upon him, and ſhall kill him, and the third day 
al viſe again. Lube harh ir, Chap. 18. 31. Then #e took unto 
him the twelve, and ſaid unto them, Behold we go up to Feruſalem, 
id all thinzs that are written by the Prophets concerning the Son of 
| mn. (ha'l be accompliſhed ;, for he ſhall be delivered to the Gentiles, 
o_ (ball he mocked, and ſpitefully intreated, and ſpit up, and they 
ſol (courge him, and put him to death, and the third D.y he ſhall riſe 
124ins And they underſtood nane of theſe things, and this Saying was 
bid om them, neither new they the things that were ſpz1ben, O-r 
Mefſed Lord Was yet upon his Road from Galilee to Feruſalem; 
we have here an Account of ſome of his rravelling Diſcourſe, ro 
reach us ro make uſe of all rime for edifying, and profitable Dif- 
courſe, Mark faith, char as they went, Jeſus went before them, 
md they were amaged, and as they followed they were :fraid. Mark. 
gives us NO ACCOUNT of any formidable Object in their Eye: Thoſe 
that think they were amazed to 1ce him make ſuch haſte ro his 
Death, forger thar Luke ſairh, chat afrer our Saviour had further 
inſtructed them in this, they underſto:d- it not 3, but probably they 
knew he was going into the Neſt of his Enemies, and this made 
them afraid. He callsrohim the Twelve, (it was not a Diſcourſe 
fr for a Multitude) and gives them an Account very particular- 
ly of what he had twice or thrice before taught chem ; he had 
before told them of his Dzach and ReſurreRion, and thar he 
ſhould be betrayed to death; here he deſcribes the manner, they 

wid deliver him to tbe Gentiles; (to Pilate and Herod) he de- 
ſcribes his Previous Sufferings, he ſhould be ſcourged, mocked, ſpit 
upon, and the kind of his Death, he ſhould be Crucified; thar when 
theſe things came tro paſs, they might be aſſured that he was 
God who had fo pun&tually foretold Things to come, nor ext- 
ſtent in their Cauſes, bur meer Conringencies. He comforteth 
them with two Things. I. That it was according to what had been 
foretald by the Prophets. 2. That tho" he died, he ſhould riſe again 
the third Day. They had need of this fore-warning, for a fore- 
arming; for conſidering that they now looked upon him as the 
Meſſiah, it might well poſe them to think how he ſhould die; 
and when they had ſeen all theſe rhings come to paſs, ic mighr 
kave ſhaken their Faith; but being fo particularly forerold the 
coming of rhem to paſs, rather confirmed their Faith in him as 
the Son of God, than weakened ir. Bur Luke faith, They under- 
flod none of theſe things, Thar is, ſurely, they believed none of 
them; the Saying was hid from them. The Words were plain 
enouzh, bur they could not reconcile them to their Reaſon ; 
they could nor conceive how he who was the Meſtah could die ; 
nor get over the Prejudice of his being a Temporal Prince, and 
exerciſing a Kingdom in this World: For his riſing again the 
the third Day, could nor believe 1r, 


4 20 Thencameto him the mother of * Zebedees 
| children, with he\\ſons, worſhipping h:m, and de- 


? 


firing a certain thing of him. : 

21 And he ſaith unto her, What wilt thou? She 
faith unto him, Graht that theſe my two ſons may 
fit, the one on thy rjght-hand, and the other on thy 
tft, in thy kingdorn. 


Mark faith, Chap. 10. 35. And Fames and John, the Sons of 
Zebedee, came unto him, ſaying, Maſter we would that thou ſhould 
@ for us whatſoever we deſire, And he ſaid, What would you that 
I ſhould do for you £ They ſaid unto him, Grant unto us that we may 
fit, ne on thy right hand, the other on thy left hand, in thy Glory, 
Matthew's ſaying, In thy Kingdom; Mark, In thy Glory ; leaves 
vs 11 fome doubr, whether theſe two Diſciples, and their Mo- 
ter, had here ſome Carnal Notion of the Kingdom of Heven ; 
becauſe Chriſt had before ſpoken of ſome that ſhould be firſt in 
tt, and crhers laſt, or were in fome ExpeQation of ſome Glori- 
| us Secular Ringdom, which Chriſt after his Reſurre&ion ſhould 
Exerciſe in the World ; for that they had ſome ſuch Thoughts, 
aprears from Luke 22, 24. Ads 1.6, This Mother of Zarmes and 
fobn vas Salome, Mark 15. 40. A conſtant Follower of Chriſt, 
Mat. 27, $5, 56, Matthew ſaith ſhe ſpake, rk faith her two 
Sons ſpake, They would ficſt have had a general Grant from 
Citiſt of whatſoever they ſhould asþ, or a certain thinz, Bur wiſe 

1 uſe nor to grant ſuckRequeſts; OurLord acks tem whar they 
VOould defire? Then do they betray theirAmbirion. W 25 there ever 
* more un'eaſonable Requeſt than for them ro be Suicors for 
vreat Places tro him when he had bur now told them, he was 
bolgto be Spit won, Scourged, Condemned, Crucifizd ? Yet there 
| #9 Good in it, they by it diſcovered a Faith in him that nor- 
| "I—_ all this he ſhould be exalted, and have a King- 

'0!. ID 


T HEIWV. 


dom. Bur how Carnal are our Conceptions of Spiritual and Hea* 
venly Things, till we be taughr of God a right Notion of them? 


22 Bur Jeſus anſwered and ſaid. Ye know not what 
ye ak, Are ye able to drink of the cup thar I ſhall 
drink of, and be baptized with the bapriſm that I 
am baptized with? They iay uno him,We areable. 


Mark hath the fame, Chap. 10. 38, 39, Our Saviour gently 
reproves them tor their inadviſed Petition, and again mindeth 
them, thar he was firſt to Suffer, and then to enter mto his Glory, 
and that by much Tribulation they alſo muſt enter into the 
Kingdom of God, which was a thing fitter for their prefenr 
Thoughts, than firing at his Right Hand, and Left Hand ; tor we 
muſt ſuffer with him,if we will be glorified together, Rom.8. 1 7. How 
ready are we to ask we know not what? (Are you able to drink of 
the Cup, &c.] The Sence is, are you able ro Suffer whar I am ro 
Sutter? Hereby our Saviour intimates, That thoſe who are the 
treeſt, and greateſt Sufferers for Chriſt, ſhall have the greateſt Re- 
wards from him. Chriſt here exprefleth his Sufferings under the 
Notion of Drinking a Cup, and being Baptized with a Baptiſm. A. 
C#p 15 an ordinary Meraphor in Holy Writ, by which a Man's 
Portion in this Life is expreſſed, whether ir be a Portion of 
good Things or evil. Pſ. 11.6. Iſa. $1. 17. Fer. 25. 15. Lam. 
4-21. Chap. 25. 39, 40, 42. Fohn 18. 11. Drinking of a Cup is 
uſually pur for Suffering, Fer. 49. 12. Ezehb. 23. 32. Obad. 16; 
The Metaphor being as ſome think, taken trom a Cuſtom in ſome 
Nations, t9 pur MalefaRors to Death by giving them a Cup of Poy- 
ſon to diick;, or as others think, trom the lewd Cuſtom ar Com- 
porarions to force Men to drink oft cheir Cups. To be Baptized 
with the Bapti;m I am Baptized with, hath the ſame Import. See 
Luke 12. 50. Afﬀfliions are ordinarily compared in Scriprure to 
Waters : To be Baptized, is to be dipped in Water ; Meraphori- 
Caily to be plunced in AﬀiQions: Iam laich Chriſt to be bapti- 
zed with Flo, overwhelmed with Sufferings and Aflitions, Are 
yuu able ro be ſo? [They ſ:y unto him, we are able.] This was as 
raſhly ſpoke as the other. How little do we know our own 
Strength? Ch. 26:55, When Chriſt was apprehended, they all 
forſ-3k him and fled. 


23 And he faith unto them, Ye ſhall indeed drink 
of my cup, and be baptized with the baptiſm that I 
am baptized with : but to fit on my right hand, and 
on my left, is not mine * to give, but it ſhall be groen * Chap: 
unto them for whom it is prepared of my Father. 35: 34: 


Mark hath the fame, Ch. 10. 39, qo. Our Saviour here tells 
them, that as he was firſt to Suffer, and then enter into his Glo- 
ry, ſo they that ſhould be glorified with him, ſhould alfo firſt 

uffer with him; for none ſhall be Crowned bur chute who 
ſtrive Lawſully, 2 Tim. 2.5. And all that will live Godly in 
Chriſt Jeſus ſhall ſuffer Perſecution, 2 Tim. 3. 12. Bur who 
ſhould be higheſt in the Kingdom of Glory, his Father muſt de- 
termine upon whoſe Wil! the Diſpoſal of his Kingdom, and che 
Preterences in 1t depended. This Text hath been abuſed by 
thoſe who have denied Chriſt's Deity, and Equality to the Fa- 
ther, as if it ſerved their Purpoſe, becauſe Chriſt here denierh 
it in his Power co diſpoſe of the Kingdom of Heaven; bur be- 
ſides, thar he elſewhere aſſerts the contrary. John 10. 28. g& 17. 
2. Chriſt dorh nor here ſpeak of what was in his Power bur what 
was his Office as Mediator; fo his Work was to encourage them 
ro fight the good Fight, nor to diſpenſe our Crowns to them. 
Or elſe, he ſpeaketh of himſelf as Man, as he ſpeakerh, John 
14. 28, Nor indeed doth Chrift here deny that ir was in his 
Power, bur only, that it was in his Power to give this Preference 
to any, except thoſe for whom his Father had prepared ir : 
Note the Greek is, 8 &5iv &4'v ISva d&AM ois etna, That 
is, Is not mine to give, but to them for whom it #s prepared : So 
that thoſe Werds | it ſhall be given to them) which our Tranfſla- 
rors pur in, were better Jett our. All this was before ordered 
and determined by God, and he could only diſpoſe of the 
Kingdom of Gcd, according to the Erernal Council, *Aaau' 
(which we tranſlace but) hath here the Force of & wy (unleſs) 
as in Mar. 9.8. 2 Cor. 2, 5. Beſides that, ro ſhew the Order 
of the Trinity in working ; Att of Power and Providence are uſus- 
ally aſcribed to the Father, raough by ocher Scriptures ir appears 
chat the Son in them co-operateth with the Father. 


24 * And when the ten heard zz. they weremoved « x te 34; 


with indignation againſt the two brethren. 


Mar. 10. 41. Here is not yet a Word of Peter's Primacy, or 
any Claim he pur in for ic: Nor, it ſeemerh, had the others any 
Apprehenfion of ſuch an Eſtabliſhment; for then neither would 
Fames and John have pur in for ir; nor would all che Diſciples 
(among whom Peter was one) have been fo diſpleafed at the- 
Ambirion of James and Fohn, yer they ſeem to be fick of the 
fame Diſeaſe, and to have been diſpleaſed only, rhar they had 
the Start of che Motion, and had pur in their Perition firſt. 


24, 25» 


25 But Jeſus called them unto him, and faid, Ye 
know that the princes of the Gentiles exerciſe domi- 
nion over them ; and they that are great, exerciſe au- 
thority upon them. 


26 But * it ſhall not-be ſo amongſt you : + but *1Fet-5-3- 


7 Chap. 


whoſoever will be great amongſt you, ler him be "7; 


your miniſter. 
27 And whoſoever will be chief amongſt you, let 
him be your ſervant. 


So Mark hath much the ſame, Chap. 10. 42, 43, 44 Luke 
hath alſo much the ſame, (bur ir ſeemerh ſpoken ar anocher __ 
Gge 2 ub. 


—» ai 
—— 
wx » = 4.8 


OT nin Ob OA As oo NS, 9+ Pe 
w. - - \F1 
: POE 


Chap. RX, 


MAL, 9. 35: 


—_ 


—— — 2 
—_— a 055 - 
c _—— < - 
pn 


p __ X 


[ a * 
* 507” * 
oe 
* * ty 
8 | 
S; 

; 

1 "3% 
x 8 14 / 
& ' oh 
8 QTY, 

: $44 : 
+++ 2] 
ue. 
#15 
* 


* Luk. 22, 


_—y 
a / 


I 4. 
* Tir.2. I'4. 
$ Pele 1.19. 


&t M AT 


Luke 22, 28, 25, 27, I ſhall not here intermeddle with the Diſ- 
pures lome have tounded on this Text: Whether there may be a 
Civil Moagiltracy among Chriſtians s A thing undoubtedly Fo- 
reign £o che Seate of this Text, Or, Whether Chriſt here eft abliſh- 
eh + Parity ann ft Miniſters; which I do not think our Lord's 
Detizn here: Nor yer, with that ocher Queſtion, Whether Mint- 
ters of the Grſpel may take upn them the Exerciſe of any Civil Power. 
Thar which 'our Savizur here intenderh, is, 1. Tv diſtinguiſh 3s 
King {3m from the Kingdoms of the World : Thoſe Kingdoms are 
over Men's Bodies and Eſtates, his was a Spiritual Kingdom over 
the Hearrs and Confciences of Men. Or rather, his was a Kng- 
dm "f Gly, where there would be no need of Rulers and 
Aaginr:tes, as in the Governments of the World, nor any fuch 
Exerciſe ot Authority as is here exerciſed in the Government of 
Eirthly Kinzdoms, and Polities. 2. To condemn Amoitin, and 
Pride in his Diſciples, as making them moſt unfic tor this King- 
dom; which is a thing he had betore raughr tnem. The way to 
be greateſt in Heaven, is ro be humbleft, ro be low, and mean 
in our own Eyes: Tis I think to be the propereſt Incerpreta- 
tion of this Texr, our Lord by it CorreRing the Erroneous Opt- 
nion his Diſciples had of the Nacure of his Kingdom as alſo their 
Pride and Ambition, and pretſing up them otier Studies chan 
how ro be che greateſt in any Earthly Kingdom. It any do 
think, rhar in chis Text our Lord hath ſome Reſpect ro the King- 
dom he hach upon Earth, he rarher checks Ambition, and an Af- 
feRatin of Superiority, chan any thing elſe, and lers us know, that 
luch as L5ve the Preheminence are moſt unfir for ir: Thar the 
Werk of Heads of the Church is but a Miniſt;y, not a Domination ; 
and thar thoſe who are firreſt for ir, and deſerve moſt Honour 
in the Church, are thoſe char leaſt feek and.affect it : And rhoſe 
moſt unworthy of char Honour, who moſt hunr atrer 1t. Bur I 
preter the fir{t Senſe given of chis Text. For cercainly,what our Sa- 
viour here faith, was nor only occaſioned by, bur had a great Re- 
larion co che Perition of James and ohn with cheirMorher 3 and che 
bearins Rule, and exerciſing Auchoricy mentioned here, relares 
to the Kinzdom, menrioned in char Perition; which I think Can- 
noc be underſto2d of the Church, which was a Kingdom of. Chriſt; 
which they as yer lirtle underſtood; bur they ether meant tne 
Kinzdn «of G!yy, entertaining Carnal Conceprions of thar, that 
there would be ſome Superioricy, and Interjoricy there amongſt 
the Saints, which our Saviour kere Corre&eth their Miſtake in, 
or <lſe chey fancied a Secular Kingdom to be exercited by Chriſt 
on Earth, after his Reſurreftion from the Dead. Our Saviour 
Corretteth this Miſtake alſo, intimaring that his Kingdom ſhould 
be of another Nature, and the way to be higheſt in it was to be 
Himble, and Low, and Mean in Opinions of our ſelves. 


23 Fven as the Son of man came not to be mini- 
{tred unto, * but to miniſter, and * to give his lite 
a ranſom for many. 


$9 faich Mark, Ch. 10. 45, The Apoſtle faith, Phil. 2. 7, he 
made himſelf of no Reputation, and took upon him the form of a Ser- 
v:mt. Our Saviour had before raughr chem, that the Diſciple is 
mt ae his Maſter, Such, faich our Saviour, as 15 the King 1n 
my Kingdom, ſuch muſt che Rulers and great Perſons 1n 1t be: 


' Sce whar a Kinzdom I have, I came not to be Miniftred unto, 


bur ro Miniſter; to ſerve the Neceſfities of Men and Women's 
Souls and B2dies : And to give my Life a Ranſom for many, au- 
Teg, 4 Redemption Price; the Apoſtle uſerh &y7avTes, Which 
fizninerh a Price paid inſtead of another, 1 Tim. 2. 6. Soasthere 
15 19 turrher Satufation, or Price to be paid for any. 


29 And as they departed from Jericho, a great 
multitude followed him. 

20 And behold, two blind men fitting by the way- 
fide. when rhey heard that Jeſus paſſed by, cri- 
cd out, ſaying, Have mercy on us, O Lord, thou ſon 
of David. 

31 And the multitude rebuked them, becauſe they 
{hould hold their peace: but they cried the more, 
faying, Have mercy on us, O Lord, thou ſon of Da- 
vid. 

232 And Jeſus ſtood fill, and called them, and 
fiid, what will ye that I thall do unto you? 

23 They ſay unto him, Lord, that our eyes may 
be opcned. < 

24 So Jeſus had compathion on them, and touched 
their eyes: and immediately their eyes received 
{fighr, and they followed him. 


Mark repearcth the ſame Srory, Ch. 10. from v. 45. to the 
end, wich ſeveral more Circumſtances. 1. He mentionerh only 
one Blind Mm, and namerth him Bartimeus the Son of Timers. 
He ſaith, the Blind Man was Begging, Mark ſaith, when Chriſt 


came #2 Feſizs. Be further adds, that Chriſt ſaid ro him, Go thy 
way, thy Faith hath made thee whole. Luke relateth the ſame, Ch. 
18, v. 35. roche end, he faith, As he was come nigh to Fericho, 
he mencionerh bur one Bind Man : In repeating Chriſt's Words, 
he ſaith, Feſizs /2ith unto him, receive thy Sight, thy Fairh hath made 
thee wile. And immediately he received his Sight, and followed him, 
glorifying God; and ail the Perle when they ſaw it, gave Praiſe unto 
GoZ, Our Lord preſently gives his Diſciples a Demonſtration of 
whar he had ſaid, Thar he came to Miniſter, to ſerve even the 
pooreſt, and moſt Deſpicable Creatures. Fericho was a Ciry not 
fir from adm, 7oſ. 3. 15. It was taken, of. 6. and upon the 
Diviton or the Land, tell within the Lot of Benjamin, 7oſ. 18. 
21, Our Saviour touk it in his wav from Galilee to Feruſalem, 


T HE W. 


Probably theſe Biind Men, or Batime 

mentioned by 312k and Luke, hearing Siri Vho alone is 
firſt on the tude of Jericho nexr Galilee, and then gor bin” lare 
other fide, as our Saviour was leaving the Town, nSirw ON the 
Luke lay, as he came nigh, and the two other Evan eliſt on 
he went out of Fericho, he ſare begging. Bartimeus T; bei, lay, as 
ſhould ſeem ) rhe moſt known, and the moſt Famous Ng as It 
mentioned by {z;k and Luke; Matthew (naming oo 15 alone 
there were Two, which Mark and Luke deny nct bees Lairh 
only che Name of one ot them, they mention onl; one Nowin 
ſpeak ro our Saviour under the Notion of the Son of D; oy 
which they own'd him as the true Meſſias; for that w avid, þ 
by which the 3efſias was known amongſt the Tews — a Title 
ro the Prophecies ot him. They ask him for Mercy _ cording 
nue 1n their Cry, tho' the Multirudes rebuked them wh = 
thinking, chey only came to ask fome Alms, and were potſibly 
porrunate, ſeeing our Lord ſcemed nor to resard SO 1m- 
tomerimes tryeth our Kaith ( by Delays ) how ir will how Go 
bur he never fruſtrateth ic. This mindeth us of cur = 
Pray without ce:fing. Chriſt ſtops, callech them a&ks them 
they would have? They ſeem moſt ſenſible "of =o : whar 
Wants, and Antwer, | Lord that our Eyes may be open ed.) Ocily 
hart Compaſſion on them, toucherh their Eyes. Chriſt Jeſu 
rimes, bur not always, in healing rouched the affefted Parr =_ 
(as Luke faith) he ſaid, Receive thy Sight. The Mir,” and 
wrought; they preſently are able ro ſee. Luke adderh, | 6 
Chriſt faid, Thy Kiith hath made thee whole; we have mer _ 


Dury, to 


the fame Paraſe betore. I have made thee whole, but thy F:ith n 
me hath prevailed with me to do ic. Their Faich in hi« Power _ 


lcen in their owning him as the true Meffi.ch, fo alle x: a: : 

2, In their imploring his Mercy, and going on in their Gab. = 
thar Nature, tho' rhey met with a Rehbube. F:ith, ard __ 
Prayer do great Things with G-d, becauſe of his Com - "84 
The Prayer of Faith ſhall ſave the Sick, Fam. 5. 15. ſes r _ 
Tre EffetFual kervent Prayer of a Rightews Man #vaileth hey 
Nor is any Man to Mean, and Contemprible in the W. rd (Theſe 
ewo Blind Men were Beggars ) bur it they can believe © "a 
Lord Jefus Chriſt, it chey wili lye in Chriſt's way, if t!,cx ci 
cry unto him, and nor give over their Cries, chey ſhall artzj i 
our Savicur's Hands greater things than ti:eſe. This Miracle... 
eth God Glory from the Multicude, and from the Blind 5 
oniy P/aiſe, bur a Reſolution ro follow Chriſt. This ſhould tn 


re Effect of all Salvarizns wroughc for us. Mercy is then gui; 


| improved, when it bringeth forch in our Hearts, Glory and Priiſe 


ro God; and engagerh us to follow rhe Lord Jeſus Chriſt, 9, 
Saviour had wrought his former Miracles in Galil-- whicre 4p 
Witnefles of chem were remore, he hatch now two Wit les ” 
the Province of Zudca, 'who go along with him toward: Ten : 
lem : Where we ſhall find him in the nexr Chapter. 4 


CHAP. XXL. 


Chriſt ſending two Diſciples for an Aſs, rideth thereon to Jeruſalem, 
I—7. The Multitude honour him in their Actions and' £111 
tions, 8—11. He goeth into the Temple, and dyiveth out 5.145 
and Sellers, and vindicareth his {5 doing, 12—16, Being hurcy 
curſeth the fruitle}s Fig-Tree, 17—22, The Phaviſees wb xy 
gave him his Authority * He asbeth them whence the Bntin f 
John was ? and putteth them to Silence, 2327, By anſwering 
the Paraule of the two Sons, they condemn themſelves, 28—32, 


The Parable of an Houſholder planting a Vineyard, and letting it 
out to Husbandmen, who ſlew all that were ſent to them. (iS 
demandeth what was fit to be done to ſuch ? They condemn ihan- 


ſelves, and ſeek. ro lay Hands on him, 33—46. 


I AN D when they drew nigh unto Jeruſilem, 
and were come to Bethpage, unto the 
mount of Olives, then ſent Jeſus rwo diſciples, 

2 Saying unto them, Go into the village over: 
agaitutyou, and ſtraightway yeſhall find an a6 ticd, 
and a colt with her: looſe zhem, and bring themur- 
to me. 

3 And if any man fay ought unto you, yeſhal 
ſay, The Lord hath need of them; and firaightwaj 
he will ſend them. 


This famous Story of our Lord's Entrance into Feruſalem, 18 tt: 
corded by Mark and Luke alſo: By Mark, Chap. 11. 1. by C4, 
Chap. 19. 29. There is little Difference in the Relation of '! 
thus far; afcerwards we ſhall find more. I ſhall confider whit 
they all ſay, that I may ar once give the Story perfet, 1k 
faith, Bethpage and Bethany : He faith, Tou ſhall find a Colt tied, 
whereon never Man ſate. Luke hardly varieth ar all from Mark, ® 
leaſt in nothing conſiderable. Our Lord was come now very lg! 
Feruſalem; Bethany was bur Fifteen Furlongs from Jeruſalem, al 
was about two Miles, wanting an eighth part, Joh. 11. 18. 
was the Town of Lazarus, Fohn 11. 1, Matthew names 00) 
Bethpage, which was a place ar the ſame Diſtance, ar the Foot! 
the Mount of Olives, 1o called from the Plenty of OliveTiet 
growing there : This Mount was betwixe Feruſalem and 5": 
page. Iris like our Saviour was at both theſe Towns, for 314% 
and Lube name both. From one of them he ſendeth rio 
his Diſciples ro a Village near Hand, telling them they _ 
there find, at their Entrance in, an 4/9 tied with a Colt, which 
yet never Man ſate. Mark and Luke only mention the Colt, be- 


cauſe Chriſt rode only upon the Colt. Matthew mentions nf 


Als, for the fulfilling of the Prophecy, of which we ſhall _— 
In the next Verſes. (Looſe them, and bring them to me - Al j 
any Man ſay ought unto you, ( which he knew they would, For 
Mark and Luke tells us they did ) Tour: ſhall ſay, The Lord - 

need of them.) Not our Lord, but the Lird of Heaven and py 


not 
G.4, 
eha 
WA 
arc 
bac! 
the 
ehct 
evid 
all | 
Man 


whi 
5 
com 


4 C0 
Th 


Zim, 
thee ; 
an AjS, 
no mc 
{horr / 
them | 
are f21 
the Me 
filled 11 
eo che | 
hold, 7 
vation; 


[ and 4 
tical of | 
the ſeco! 
plainly fi 
Perſons 1 
loman's tt 
People r. 
the Fews 
under the 
State, up? 
Zachari nl, 
Meſſ.h 
Hearts , / 
his Rinzdc 
ned their « 


6 *f 
manded 


Mark fa 
the Colt tie, 
and they 
unto them, 
even as Jeſs, 
chap. 19. 1, 
even as he h1 
Owners there 
ſaid, The 
Chriſt's Diſc 
Diſciples : 
make Obje& 
Danger to t 
exaQt to wh; 
they find, as 
them, asks, \ 
hath need of 


7 And 
01 them tt 

8 And 
ments in 
from the t 

9 And t 
followed, | 
t David : * 
the Lord, } 


Mark faith. 

cus, and c.a$1 
mary ſpread the 
of the Trees, 4 
before, and the) 
i he that comet 
9 Our Father Di 
m the hizheR. 
19, 35435, 37, 
they calf their ( 


he w - 


T1, 


EY 
= as mg, eVe. 
le my/, Iftude t 


"4s ot this, 
"WY Wer? Comme tr 


RX | St. 
up. , houſand Hills, [Hath need of þ 

trel upon a thouſand Hills, | Hath need of him, 

whoſe are GE - he who had Travelled on Foor hed 

not for ang i: could have gone the other rwo Miles : But 

Galile? = he enter inco Jeruſalem, as was Propheſied of him, 

char j1E MIS And he will ſtraightway ſend him.) The Words 

Zech. 9+ 4 m4 be underſtood as a Promiſe of Chriſt to ſend him 

arc my it M more likely chey are intended as an Affurance to 

backs wes char che Owners would make no Ditficulry ro ſend 

the V! Frofe Inſtructions (conſidered with the Succeſs) were an 

—_ Ar2ument of Chriſt's Divine N.zture, who could tell 

"ll Varticular Circumſtances , and alſo which way the Heart of 


Man would incline. 

4 All this was done, that it might be fulfilled 
which was ſpoken by the prophet, laying, | 

5 Tell ye rhe daughter of Sion, Behold, thy king 
cometh unto the, meek, and fitting upon an als, and 
4 colt, the foal of an als. 


The Words are, Zech. 9. 9. Remyce greatly O Daughter of 
Zim, ſhout O Daughter of Jeruſalem, Behold, thy King cometh unto 
thee: He ts FuSt , and having Salvation, Lowly , and riding upon 
an Afs, and upn 4 Colt the Foal of an Aſs. Tie Evangeliſt quoreth 
no more of them, than ferved tor his purpoſe, John in rhe 
{hore Account he giverh of this our Saviour's Encrance, gquoreth 
tem ſhorrer, Joh-12. 15. The tormer parc of che Words 
are found, 1/4. 62. 11. The fews agree this Prophecy to retpect 
the Meſſt «<, emo rhey were ſo blinded , as nor ro fee it was rul- 
flled in Chriſt, { Tell you the Daughter of Zion , | Propheſie you 
the Jews, to the Cirizens, and Inhabirants of eruſalem, [_Be- 
hold, Tay King cometh to thee. ] Thy Spiritual King, having Sal- 
vacion;-che King promiſed and torerold that ſhall bring Salva- 
tion, LOO ] char is, ſhall ſhorcly come ro rhee tor chy Profic 
1nd Advancage. Aud you ſhall know him by this, he thall come 
My, Gnaniz Por, Aﬀtited , Mean, Lowly : | Sitting upon an 
48,) an Afs uſed to bear Burdens, (fo the Word f13nifies;) 
[and a Colt the Foal of an Aſs,] Not upon borh, they are Exeze- 
tic] of each other. The firſt denoted the Species of the Beaſt, 
the ſecond irs Aze: There was not any Prophecy of Chris more 
plainly fulfilled than this. Aſſes were of Old, Beaſts rhar Grear 
Perſons ufed to ride On, Jud. 10.4. Chap. 12, 14. But after $0- 
hmm's time, the Fews got a Breed of Horſes; ſo as only Poor 
People rode upon Aﬀes, moſt reſerved for Burdens; whom could 
the Jews poſſibly expett to ſee coming , riding imo Feryſalem, 
under the Notion of a King brinvinz them Salvation, 1n 1o little 
Srate, upn the F2l of an 48, bur che Perſon Prophefied of by 
Zacharixh, chap. 9. 9, whom they themſelves Confels ro be the 
Mſih2 And had nor there been a ſtrange Veil upon their 
Hearts , Herod”s Courtiers, and Pilate's might have underſtood, 
his Kin2dom was not of this World, nor he fuch a King as threat= 
ned their Grandeur. 


it. 6 *And thediſciples went, and did as Jeſus com- 
manded them. 


Mark faith, chap. 11. 4 And they went their way, and found 
the Colt tied by the Door without, in a place where two ways met, 
and they loſe him. And certain of them that ſtood there, ſaid 
unto them, What d you looſing the Colt ? And they ſaid unto them, 
even as Jeſus had commanded , and they let them go. Luke 1aich, 
chap, 19. 1, 32, And they that were ſent went away, and found 
even as he had ſaid unto them ; and as they were looſing the Colt , the 
Owners thererf ſaid unto them , Why looſe you the Colt * And they 
ſaid, The Lord hath need of him. The true Obedience of 
Chriſt's Diſciples is ro be learned from the Pratice of theſe two 
Diſciples : They diſpute nor the Commands of their Lord, nor 
make Objeions, nor raiſe any Diſputes, nor are afraid of any 
Danger to themſelves; they went, and thar ſpeedily, and are 
exat to whar their Lord had Commanded chem ; . accordingly 
they find, as he had ſaid ; they looſe the Colt; the Owner ſeeing 
them, asks, Why they looſe the Colt : They tel him the Loyd 
hath need of him. 


7 And brovght the aſs, and the colt, and put 
01 them their cloaths, and they ſet h7m: thereon. 

8 And a very great multitude ſpread their gar- 
ments in the way; others cut down branches 
from the trees, and ſtrawed them in the way. 

9 And the mulritudes that went before, and that 
followed, cried, ſaying, Hoſanna to rhe ſon of 
e; David : * Blefled is he that cometh in the name of 
the Lord, Hoſanna in the higheſt. 


Mark faith, chap. 11. 7,8, 9, 10. And they brought the Colt to 
Jeſus, and ca8t their Garments on him , and he ſate upon him. And 
many ſpread their Garments in the way, and others cut down Branches 
of the Trees, and ſtrawed them in the way : And they that went 
before, and they that followed, cried , ſaying, Hoſanna ! Bleſſed 
is be that cometh in the Name of the Lord. Bleſſed be the Kingdom 
of our Father David, that cometh in the Name »f the Lord. Hyſanna 
m the highe. Luke hath it yer wich more Circumſtances, chap. 
19. 35.35, 37, 38, 39, 40, And they brought him to Feſus , and 
they caSt their Garments upon the Colt , and they ſet Feſus thereon < 
And os the went, they ſpread their Cloaths in the way : And when 
he was 1131), even now at the deſcent of the Mount of Olives, the 
we multitude of the Diſciples beg. to rejyce and praiſe God with 
a ud voice for all the mighty Works they had ſeen, ſaying, Bleſſed 
be the King th.2t cometh in the Name of the Lord ;, Peace in Heaven, 
and Gloyy in the Highest. And ſome of the Phariſees ffom among$t 
192 multitudes ſaid unto him, Maſter rebuke thy Diſciples : And he 
ved and ſaid unto them, Tf theſe ſhould h1ld their peace, 
in Stzes would immediately cry out. 7ohn alfo gives us ſome 
Account of this, chap. 12. 12,13. On the next day much People 


MATTHEW. 


Chap. XX.1. 
coming t 9 Feruſalem, toob Branches of Pulm-trees, and went foi th 
to meet him, and cried, Hoſamna : Blejſed be the King of hx My 
that cometh in the Name of the Lord, They bring the 48, and the (met 
Colt ty Fejus, who had no Saddle, no coſtly Furniture tor him | 
they were glad to lay on the Atſes back ſome of their Garments, 
and to fer Chriſt on the Colt; and in a kind of a natural Coun- 
try Triumph , made up without any kind of Art; tome threw 
cheir Cloaths in his way, ſome cur down Bouzhs of P——_ 
C Palm-Trees faith John) with theſe they beſtre.y the Kio y 
Chriſt at Bethany in his Journey had done 2 Famous Mics 
railing up Lazarus trom the Dead, John ſaith, c<:5, 12, 18 os 
Fame of this made many that were in 7erwulerm, who were come | 
chicher againſt che Patlover-Time( tor Fob.1 2.1. ir was bur fix Day 
before the Paſſruer ) go our ro meer him, and joined v.irh hed 
who came along with him trom Bethany ; they cried all alcn _ 
they came, AHoſunna to the Son of David, Bleſſed is ho S, po. 
cometh in :hz Name of the Lord. Hhſanna in the Hiheft, Bl: Jed 
Js the Kin; ain 'f our Father David, Peace in Seven and > a 
in the Highef, Many of thefe Expreſſions ſeem to bc taken 2 
of Pſal. 118. 24, 25, 26. Their aying the Garmenrs upon the 
Als, and throwing them in the way, was a Cuſtom they uſed 
rowards Princes, as appears, not only by many Records cur of 
Profane Authors, bur irom 2 King. g. I3. Where the like was 
done to ehy, upon his being Anointed King over J\-ae!l, For 
the Acclamations, they were alfo ſuch as were ufual to Princes - 
Whether Hanna ſignifierh, Suve now : Or, {-lp! we pray 4 
Or, whether ir was a Term by which they expretled their He 
tire of G94 Succeſs, or Proſperity to the Pej /-m to whom they 
apply'd ir: Or, whether it was the Name of fome Song uſed in 
their Fe/tivals, is not much material; rhey by this Acclamation 
acknowledged him a King, the Son of David : they Bleſſed 
him, they withed him Peace, Honour and Glory. Tius was che 
Acclamation of the Mulcitude, who doubtlefs had but a tmall 
and impertet knowledge ot the Divine Nature of Chriſt . bur 
yer looked on him, as the ' S-m of David, as the Meſſi th, "The 
Phariſees ( ſome of which ir feemerh had mixed chemſelves |. "2\W if | 
with this Multitude, ) were troubled ar the Acclimation and Ir. | pd 
( as Luke tells us ) ſpeak ro Chriſt ro rebuke chem : bur he 7 wy | 
anſwereth, Tf theſe fhnwld hold their peace, the Stanes "would Im- : | Ni. 
mediately cry out. It 1s a Proverbial Expreffion » the Senſe of | *3 | | 
which 1s alone to he attended. The Senſe is this: The Time | | 

1s come ſer by my Father tor che Publication of my Kingdom, and 1 Ht | 
declaring what I am; and when God's Time is come, the Thing " 4: ad "il 
muſt come to paſs, by one Mean or anvther: If theſe Children od "1s, OR "bt 

of Ah5raham ſhould hold their peace, God is able of theſe Stones 
ro raife up Children to Abraham, and they ſhould do the ſame 
ching, publiſh me as the Son of David, the Kins in Zion. 


” 


10 * And when he was come into Jeruſalem, all 
the city was moved, ſaying, Whois this? 


1x And the multitude faid , This is Teſus th 
prophet of Nazareth of Galilee: Jeſus the 


Y Mar.1t. 

I5, 

Lu.1 9s 45, 

Joh. 2. 13; ji 

15, 1% (of. 
Such an unuſual Sight might well affe& a great Number in 

Jeruſalem with Admiration and Aſtoniſhmenez the People etpe- 

cially giving Honour to him as a King, and calling him the Son 

of David , and certainly, bur thar the Meannets of his Appear- 

ance, and Meanneſs ot his Followers, put uninterefied Men our 

of Fear, and gave Herod , and Pilate tome Security, char there 

was no Attempr on Foot againſt che Civil Government , our 

Saviour and his Followers would have beer Apprehended, as 

Raiſers of a Sedition and Rebelliomm. Bur the Multicude now cave 

him no other Title , than that of Feſws the Prophet ; which yer 

was enough to diſtinguiſh him from other Prophets ; tor 

he was Feſus a Saviour , and the Prophet , forerold , Deuter. 18. 

I5, 18,19, 


12 And Jeſus went into the temple of God , and 
caſt out all them that ſold and bovght in the rem- 
ple, and overthrew the tables of the money- 
changers, and the ſeats of rhem that ſold doves: 

13 And ſaid unto them, Ir is written, My houſe 
{hall be called the houſe of prayer, * but ye have 
made it a den of thieves. 

14 And the blind and the lame came to him in 
the temple, and he healed them. 


* Jer.7.11- 


This piece of the Hiſtory, is related by two of the other Evan- 
gelifts, bur wich grear difference. Lube before this, men- 
cioneth a Diſcourſe upon the way, upon our Saviour's firſt fighe 
of the Ciry, and his Prophecy of the Deftruftion of ir; bur no 
other Evangeliſt mentioning 1c, I ſhall paſs it over, till I come 
ro his Hiſtory, Mark hath rhis part of the Hiſtory thus, 
chap. II. IT. And eſis entered into Feruſalem, into the Temple, 
and when he had lobed round about upon all things , and the Evens 
tide was come, he went out to Bethany with the Twelve. And on the ' 
morrow , when they were come from Bethany, he was hungry. —» 
( Then he relates our Saviour's curſing the .barren Fig-Tree, WE if; 
which I leave till I come 'to ir 1n order, ) Ver. 15. And they REP He 
come to Feruſulem , and Jeſus went into the Temple, and began to VERS: 
ca8t out them that ſold and bought in the Temple, and overthrew the Meg 999 Lung 
Tables of the Money-changers, and the Seats of them that [ld Doves , 
and would not ſuffer that any Man ſhould carry a Veſſel throgh the 
Temple. And he taught, ſaying unto them , Is it not written, My 
Fuſe ſhall be called of all Nations the Houſe of Prayer ? but y»u have 
made it a Den of Thieves. And when the Even was come , he went 
out of the City, ver. 19. Luke ſaith , chap. 19.45. And he went 
into the Temple , and began to ca$t out thyje that jold therein, and 
thoſe that bought, ſaying to them, It is written, My Horſe is the 
Houſe of Prayer, but you have made it a Den of Toieves. — And 
he taught daily in the Temple. Ir is plain by all the Evanzeliſts, 


* 
x 
: x 
x 
t 
3 
t , 
i 
4 
1.F 
[2 
% 
: x 
i : d 
JD : 
8.79! 
| ih 
: gs 
: 
$8145 17 by 
: + 14 4 
s & :' 
0 « i 
- ” s 
: 
: . 
i# + 
*% 4 
4 $I 67 
I's." 4 
: % 4 WW 
" £4. 746+ 
[ : 
\| , 
44 1 
4p . 
; 0 
4 "© 1] 
x '3 8 


- _ 4 » 
90+ + —_ " 
1 4 e 4 
- * My : q 
i - » W. 
, * 


"4 were cyne to the Feait, when they had heard thai Jeſus was 


thar our Saviour coming to 7eruſalem five Days before the 
Paſſover, 


w Cr Oe OI 
%** 22 
—_— 
_ mx I. 
2-67 Age INS" 
ys. PI" + wn 
* : 
—_— 


—_s © wr 9s a” *; 
wn 7 y = pu - p - a 
- . £- "2a WIS. 2 
_ - OR 4 _—_—_— _ 
x ae, —— — 
—_ 


= 4 £ 
nn 


£2 ge SA 
> vo £ 
we 7-1 T7 7 


Chap. XRRX1. Ot. 


M AT 


Paſiover, went every Night to Bethany , about rwo Miles off, 
and returned in the Morning to the Temple, where Lube faith 
that he Taught daily. The firlt Day, it ſhould ſeem bv Mark,ſchat 
he only came into the Temple, lookr round about upon all rings, 
and with rhe Twelve went out to lodge at Bethany, By his 
-0ing into the Terrple, we muſt underſtand only the Outward 
Coure, tor the Prieft; and Levites only mighr enter into the 
Taner Court, and the Holy Place ; and the High Prieft only might 
enter into the #ieF of all, Tho' Mark mentions not Þ:5 
driving our the Buyers and Sellers the firſt day , bur recitetn ?: 
as if it had been done the ſecond day of his coming , yet the 
beſt Trterpreters think that it was done the firft day, as Matthew 
and Luke ſeem to hint ; nor is any thing more uſual, than for the 
Eyangzeliſts ro fer down Things out of the Order o Time 1n 
which they were done. Some Learned Authors 10 the Hebrew 
Learning tell us, Thar in the Outwar? Court, Was 2 daily Mar- 
ker of ſuch things as the Jews uſed for Sacrinces , Wine, Salt, 
Oil, Oxcn, and Sheep Bur ir being three or four days betore 
che Paſſover, the Market ws much greater , becauſe of the 
great nulticude of Lambs thet: ro be ufed. By the Law, Exod, 
30. 12, 15, every one alſo was to bring an half Shekel. For 
this purp2ſe there were Tubles of Money-Changers , Men that were 
furniſhed with half Shekels ro change with the People, thar 
every one might have hisha!f Shehel , and thoſe chat fo changed, 
allowed ſome lictle Profir to thoſe that changed their. Money, 
which Gain-was called Kiazvg4G + thence the Changers were cal- 
ted K:anvCrozi, Money-Changers. Thoſe rhat ſold Doves were 
there, to firniſh che Women that came up to cher Purification 
wich thcir Offerings according tO the Law, £277. 12. 6. This 
was the reaſon cf that great Marker, which our Lord found in 
the Outw.zd Court of the Temple ; and it is nor likely that our 
Lord ſhould ſec theſe Abuſes the firſt day, and take no notice 
of them, bur come the next day and corre them ; which makes 
Interpreters think, Mark in this Relaton poſt-poned this parr of 
the Hiſtory. Here ariſe rwo Queſtions, 1. Whether it was un- 
lawful for them to ſell theſe things in that part of the Temple ? 
2. Admit it weie, By what Authority did our $viour do ths? To 
the firſt ic muſt be ſaid , Thar had ir not been unlawtul, our 
Saviour would nor have reproved them, for turning Ins Father's 
Houſe, and the Hſe of Prayer into a place of Merchandife, Nor 
would he have driven chem our in ſuch a Zea}, overcurning 
the Tables, gc. which he had done alſo once before, oh. 
2.15, The Temple was built by God's dire&on ; n2r only de- 
dicated by Men, but God's Accepration of it was reſtified : Ir 
appeareth by 7oh. 2. 19. It Was 4 Tjpe of Chrif's Body, We know 
there were [peci.cl Promiſes made to thoſe that did Pray toward 
it, 1 King. 9. 3- God faith, he had haltowed it, that 1s, fepa- 
rated it from Common Uſe to his Service, among{t-ocuer things 
for an Huſe of Prayer , Ifa. 55. 7. Now tho' we read or no 
other things ſold rhere, bur what werc uſetul for Sacrinces; yer 
this was a Civil Uſe, and 2 Profanation of that Holy Place, be- 
cauſe there were Marker-places in Jeruſalem in which theſe 
things might have been done. It had been againſt Decency, it 
the Temple had not been Hallowed in this manner, if ſuch chings 
had been done in the Synagagres , being Places fer apart, and 
commonly uſed for God's Worſhip ; bur ro uſe the Temple 1n thus 
manner, fo ſpecially Hallowed , was doubtleſs a great Profa- 
nation of that Hy Place. As to the ſecond Queſtion: By what 
Authority our Lord, being no Publick Magiſtrate, did theſe things 2 
I am notſo poſed to determine thar, he being the Eternal Son 
of God, and now in the Exerciſe of his Regal Power, as I am 
to give an Account how 1t came £0 paſs, that the Prieſts, and 
Scribes, and Phariſees never queſtioned him for what he did ; 
for if any will ſay, That wepreſently ſhall read of their raking 
Council againit him: Ireply, Bur we read of nothing relating 
ro this laid ro his Charge. Nor do we read of their Queſtioning 
him , when he did the ſame rhings betore , an Acconnr of 
which we have in 79h. 2. For tho' I know fome ſay, thar our 
Saviour did this Fure Zelotarum, That the Jews hada Law, That 
any mighr puniſh, even to Death, ſuch as profaned the Worſhip, 
or Holy things of God; which they juſtifie trom Deuteron. 13. 9. 
and the Examples of Phinehas killing Zimri and Kosbi, Numb, 


25. 5, and Mattaniah's killing the Jew, Sacrificing to Idols ar | þ 


Modin, and the Kinz's Commiſſioner, of which we read in 2 Mac- 
eah. 2. 24, 25. yer this doth no way give ine any SatisfaQtion ; 
for as on che one fide, I ſhould nor have known how to haye 
defended the AR of Phinehas, if God had nor by and by juſti- 
fied him, nor do I think thar the Law in Deuteron. 13. 9. 15to be 
expounded of private Perſons : So on the orher fide, 1t the 
Prieſts and Scribes, and Phariſees, had not known of ſome Law 
rhat juſtified our Saviour in this A&, I can hardly conceive they 
would have ſo quietly put it up; eſpecially conſidering that pro- 
bably their Profit was concerned, it they had for Gain Licenſed 
taoſe Traders, to a Place within the Compaſs of the Temple; 
as is very probable. Being therefore fully ſarisfied , That our 
Saviour who was Lord of the Temple, and tro whom the Spiric 
was given without meaſure, did no more, than he might lawtully 
do, 1 am willingly Ignorant how it came to paſs, raar he mer 
ith 15 Oppoſicion in it, becauſe God hath nor pleaſed in his 
1,4 to inform us. Ir is certain that he did the thing, and 
char ic was a thing fit ro be done, and that he, as the Son of God, 
had Authority to do ir, what made them rake it fo quietly, I 
ca9nor tell, nor is ir neceſſary for us to know, nor of any great 
advantage. 

15 And when the chief prieſts and the ſcribes 
ſw the wonderful things that he did, and the 
children crying in the temple, and ſaying, Hoſanna 
to the ſon of David; they were fore diſpleaſed, 

16 And ſaid unto him, Heareſt thou what theſe 
fiy 2 And jJelus ſaith unto him, Yea ; have ye never 
texd, Out of the months of babes and fucklings thou 
haſt purfected praile. 2 

The other Evangeliſts fay nothing of this part of clus Biitory ; 


ſaw it, they marvelled, ſaying, How ſoon is the Fig-Tree witherea 


T H E W. 


The wonderful rhings here mentioned, are his Healing the z;; 
and Lame, of which we read ver, 14. The Cry of the Child int 
doubtleſs more £..ptcafed them, ir was of the fame nature = 
char of the Mulcicude in the Way, and in the Streets wh 
Lord came inro Jeruſalem , they owned Chriſt as the M "4 
and gave him Praiſe, and wiſhed all manner of Felicity ow 
The Phariſees ſhewing a Diſpleaſure ar the Acclamation Ge 
reterreth chem ro what was written, Pſal. 8. 2, There it js 9 
haſt founded, or ordained Strength, that is, a ſolid and firm Pr ny 
A PrediQion that from the Teſtimony of ſuch weak Perſons tt | 
glorious Power of Chriſt ſhould be proclaimed., and irom l 
mean and deſpicable beginnings, great and glorious things ſhoulg 
come to pals. 


17 And he left them, and went out of the 
into Bethany, and he lodged there. 

18 Now in the morning as he returned int, the 
city, he hungred. 

19 And when he ſaw Fa fig-tree in the w 
came to it, and found nothing thereon , bur 
only, and faid unto it, Let no fruit grow on thee 
hence forward for ever. And preſently the fis treg 
withered away. 

20 And when the diſciples ſaw 77,they marvelleg 
faying, How ſoon is the fig-tree withered away > * 


21 Jeſus anſwered and faid unto them, Verily | 
ſay unto you , If ye have faith and * doubt not, ye , 
[hall not only do this whzch 7s done to the fig-tres * 
but alſo if ye ſhall ſay unto this mountain , R: 
thou removed , and be thou caſt into the fa; i; 
{hall be done. 

22 And * all things whatſoever ye ſhall 2 # +: 
prayer, believing, ye {hall receive. Ver 


Like hath norhing of this Paſſage, but Mark relateth ir with * 
ſome Variatim , and Additions: The Variation is only a; t $, 
Time, No co which the Evangeliſts were not curious : ) Mtthay 
relates this Miracle , as done in the Morning of the ſecond Day 
as Chriſt and his Diſciples returned from Bethany, fo duth 1}, 
chap. 11. 12. but Matthew ſpeaks, as it the Diſciples diſcerned it 
preſently withered. Mark mentions it, as not diſcerned to he 
withered till the next Morning, ver.20. Mark faith, wer, 13, &; 
the time of Figs was mot yet; which breeds a Dithculry, why our $; 
viour ſhould curſe the Fig-Tree for having no Fruit, when the cime 
for its Fruit was not come, (of which more by and by.) Mar kaith, 
V. 21, 22, that Peter calling to remembrance his Maſter's curſing the 
the Fig-Tree, ſaith unto him, Maſter, behold, the Fig-tree which thy 
curſeds is withered away : And Feſus anſwering _ unto them, Hrs 
Faith in God : Then repeats the ſubſtance of whar Matthew hath 
mn v, 21,22, To which Mark addeth, v.25,26, And when )." |\ird 
praying, forgive, if ye have ought again$ any ; that your ith all 
which # in Heaven, may forgive you your treſpaſſes. But if you a) wi 
forgive neither will your Father which 3s in Heaven, forgive yu yur tie 
paſſes. When our Lord had been in the Temple, and driven our 
che Bnyers and Sellers there, he went our of the City to li: at 
Bethany, either to avoid the Noiſes of che Ciry, ( now very ful of 
People, the Paſſer being ſo nigh) or to ger a more private pice 
tor Prayer.He returns the next Morning;and being an hunzr\,and 
ſeeing a Fig-Tree inhis way, he goes to it, finds it full of Leaics, 
bur no Fruit on it: He faith unto ir, Never Fruit grow m the 
more. Mark faith , For the time of Figs was not yet : Why then 
doth our Saviour curſe this Tree * Some think thar by Time, 1s 
here meant Seaſon, ( as indeed the Greek Word often fignifieth) 
theſe would have the meaning to be, For it was not a Seaſmutl? 
Tear for Figs.But this rather augmenteth, than abates the Difhculry; 
tor why ſhould our Saviour Curſe ir, for having no Figs, when 
the Year was ſuch, 4s was not Seaſonable ? Others therefore 
think, that ov ſhould be 80, rhen the Engliſh would be , |{tzr: 
ewas, was a time of Figs. For this itis ſaid, 1, That the 62%, 
Spirits and Accents were ordinarily left out in Ancient Copies 
which 1f they be taken away, the Words are the ſame, 2. That 
this was according to Truth, for it was a time of Green Figs 
at leaſt ir being near Feryſalem, and bur three or four days before 
the Paſſover, abour which time they reaped their Corn, as ap- 
pears from Lev. 23. 16. Deut. 16.9. and it is plain from Cart. 
2.13. that in the beginning of their Spring,their Fig-Trees put fit 
Green Figs. - But when I conſider, that none of the Anctent 
Tranſlations are according to this Cririeiſm , bur as our Tranfla- 
tions; I conclude, that the Antients underſtood it cy, not , alt 
itſeemerh too bold to interpret the Words contrary to their Una- 
nimous Senſe. Others therefore tell us, that Fig-Tiees, or at lealt 
ſome kind of them ( like 0range-Trees) had Leaves and Fruit 
upon them always, ſome Green, fome half Ripe, ſome tull Ripe, 
and that theſe kept on their Leaves all the Winter ; So thar our 
Saviour ſeeing Leaves, might be led to it with an Expeftation 
of ſome Fruir put forth the former Year , for the time for the 
Ripening of Fruit, of chat kind that Year, was not come, 4 
finding none, he Curſed ir. Thereby in a Type, fhewing what 
ſhould be done to barren Souls, who have only Leaves, 10 tie - 
Fruic of Righteouſneſs. Or, what if we ſhould ſay, that he did 
nor Curſe ir with any reſpe& to its want of Fruit, but only h 
ſhew his Divine Power, working a Miracle ? [And preſently 7: 
Fig-Tree withered away. As ſoon as our Saviour had Curſed It !t- 
began to Wither. Mark tells us this was the next Morning, w_ 
11.20, which made Peter ſay, Maſter, behold the Fig-Thee wil a 
thou curſed is withered away. Matthew faith, When the Dici['c? 


City 


&, 


away! Upon this, our Saviour telleth Peter and che reſt, | _— 
if they had Faith, and doubted not , they ſhould not on!) , 


y . . «A + tas 
that which he had done to the Fig-Tree, but if they _ Ss 
Mountain, Br removed , and cat into the Sea, it ſhouts #0 tet 


Chap. X 


aA, he \ Gr, 
leaves Fix 


Only he thus pre 
thite # 


L 
ha. XA 


This 1 
in Pra 
betore 
hat 1 
{trainc 
c3 ce 
CCIVC 6 
ch. vv 
to d:i 
Fuich ; 
fil2s i 
to £4en 
witch 1 


({uch al 
fr tht 
the Ped 
gicuiar ] 
now, | 
muſt Þa 
Pri: , 


v1th Ci. 


,, him, as 
&.c. rity GO 
[27 this au 
Mark t 
Prieſts he. 
and overt 
kiw the) t 
People wa 
they came 
ple, there 
Elders, aid 
And wh , 
ClidPs 19. 4 
Prieſts, at 
him: An 
ay attent 
every Nigt 
1Nz, and 
People wet 
wan mim, | 
Miracles w] 
and the E/, 
he one Rea 
diving the 
tie Peop!'e; 
butary Peop 
whom, tho”! 
ligion, yer th 
fir them to þ 
of their oven 
any Tumulrs 
thity did of 
openiy atrer 
ome previal 
both by 2: 
agreed upon, 
ity he did th 
mentioned b: 
to 7im, c 
avour his Dog) 
D:in? to t] 
Evident that 
Only queſtion 
enough, tor i 
bably have ac; 
they knew he 
they came frc 
thoriry: Ou 


| gives them, v 
Miraculous 0] 


24. And 
alſo will a: 
[ In like-w 
theſe thing 

25 The 
ICLVEN, Or ( 
elves. ſayi; 
Will fav ont 

25 But | 


" Pople; for 


27 Andt 
tell, And þ 
What athor 
i. 22,28.29.5c 
13/p 1 


E77S -< J'S, (ls he 
[! 


Uninp/ Sha act. 
\ os **1 THC Cnief 


; 


"0, Which m; 
IG 52 our Say 


hat. d©.4þ 
1 


14tth. 17. 20 Mok hath the fame, cbap.12.23. Luke 
> 44,17. 6. It is an Exprelfſion which ought nor to be 
Net + jarcher chan co fignitie, Thar there is nothing conducive 
roy of God, and our own Good, bur believers may re- 
tf --»c Hand of God, if they can belicve withour doubting 
raps [har they would have ſhall come to paſz. I tee no reaſon 
£21. Eo gee”s of a Fiith of Miracles, as different trom other 
Mw mores" only thus differed , That rne Diſciples (the Apo- 
F mn '2an) had 4 Power given them, and a Promiſe made 
ay” : og ir chey ſhould be abie ro work Miraculous Operations, 
an Ps Ken given to orher Chriſtians, ſerving only the particular 
ge Rt of thar time, to give Credit to rhe Golpel, The Ge- 
6! Propoſition is true, and ſhall be made good ro every Be- 
. Toit whatſoever G11d is made the matter of a Promiſe 
clach are all Good things) ſail be gruen to believing Souls, praying 
£ thom Bur there WETe ot Old ſpecial Promiſes, not made ro 
"4s People of God. in general, but to particular Perſons, tor par- 
"ilar Ends; We cannot expect ro do , or obrain ſuch things 
mw, Nothing is roo big for true Faith to obtain, bur that Fairh 
ft hive a Promiſe to lean upon , and it muſt be ſhewed *"by 
P;08 » 4s tor. 22. Mark adds, that ir muſt be allo arrended 
wh Corrity; 4 Charitable Hearr ready to turgive, and Afually 
£:jvinz our Brerhren their Treſpaſſes: But-it 15 no more than 
we mer wich in Matthew, chap. 6. ver.14,15. where we opened 
to Seate of thole Words, 
111, 22 * And when he was come into the temple, the 
us chief prieſts and the elders of the people came unto 
- him, as he was teaching, and * ſaid, By what autho- 
&., rity Gocſt thou theſe things? and who gave thee 
7.27 this authority ? 
| _ hach before this, chap. 11.18. And the Seribes and chief 
Priefts heard it « Thar is, his turning the Buyers and Sellers our, 
and overturning the Tables of rhe Money-changers , and ſought 
kw they might deſtroy him : For they feared him, becauſe all the 
Priple was aſtoniſhed at his Do&rine, Then wer. 27. he faith, And 
hey came again to Jeruſalem , and as he was walking in the Tem- 
ple, there came to him the chief Prieſts, and the Scribes, and the 
Elders, and ſay unto him, By what Authority doest thou theſe things ? 
And wh g.ve thee this Authority to do theſe things ? Luke faith, 
chap. 19. 47, 48 And he taught daily in the Temple, but the chief 
Prieſts, and the Scribes, and the Chief of the People ſought to deſtroy 
hin: And could not find what they might do, for all the People were 
wry attentive to hear him. Ir 1s plain that our Saviour went 
every Night to Bethany, and returned to Jeruſalem every Morn- 
inz, and daily Preached in the Temple. And Lube ſaich 5 the 
People were very Attentive fo hear him, In the Greek it is, Hung 
1n him, hearing him. They were alſo much aftefted with the 
Miracles which they had ſeen him working : So as the Scribes, 
ad the Elders feared him, ( faith-Mark..) This poſſibly mighr 
he one Reaſon, why they made no Oppoſition to our S4viour, 
driving the Buyers and Sellers out of the Temple, viz. For fear of 
the Peop'e; tor we muſt remember they were a conquered Tr1- 
burary People, and under the Juriſdiftion of the Romans, under 
whom, tho' they had a Liberty tor the Exerciſe of their own Re- 
lizion,yet they had not ſuch a Poiver as before : It was not Lawful 
fir th-1n to put any to Death, Joh.18. 31. And tor the preſerving 
of their own Liberty, they were obliged ro take heed of cauſing 
any Tumulcs for Matters concerning their Religion; fo as what 
they did of this Nature, they did by Craft rather than plainly and 
openly arrempring it, Mar. 14. 1. It is likely they might have 
ſome previous, ſecrer Councels, what Method to take, mentioned 
both by Mark and Tuke : The Merhod it ſeems which they 
agreed upon, was firſt ro fend to him, to know, By what Autho- 
rity ho did! thoſe things, and who gave him ſuch Authority * This 1s 
mentioned both by Matthew and Mark, they ſent ſuch a Meſſage 
to 71hn, chap. I. Ig, 20, 21. They had ofcen queſtioned him 
abour his Do@rine, and had gone by the worſt, he juſtifying his 
D:#rinz to their Faces. For the Truth or his Miracles, it was fo 
Evident thac they could not queſtion chat : They theretore now 
only queſtion his Authority ro Preach. The Queſtion was caprious 
enough, for if he hd ſaid by a Divine Authority, they would pro- 
bably have accuſed him of Blaſphemy: For an Humane Authority, 
they knew he had none , according to their Rulcs for Order, for 
they came from the Court thar ſhould have given rhem ſuch Au- 
thority: Our Saviour well enough underſtanding their Deſign, 
gives them, who would not underſtand his Divine Mifſion by his 
Miraculous Operarions, a wary Anſwer. 


24 And Jeſus anſwered , and ſaid unto them, I 
alſo will ask you one thing , which if ye tell me, 
[ in like-wiſe will tell you by what authority I do 
theſe things. 

25 The baptiſm of John, whence was it ? from 
heaven, or of men? And they reaſoned with them- 
| ſelves. laying, If we ſhall fay, From heaven, he 
will fav unto us, Why did ye not then believe him ? 

25 But if we ſhall ſay, Of men, we fear the 
;, D-ople; for all hold John as a prophet *. 

27 And they anſwered Jeſus, and ſaid, We cannot 
tell, And he faid unto them, Neither tell I you by 
What authority I do theſe things. 

We have the fame without any conſiderable Alteration, Mar. 
il. 27,22,29,30,31,32,33. Luke alſo records the ſame Fiſtory, 
CMP. 20, 1,2, 3, 4,5,9, 7,% With no conſiderable difference, 
only lie thus pretacerh ro ir: And it came to paſs, that on ine of 
912 &:ys, as he taught the People in the Temple , and Preached the 
01pe!, tre chief Prieſts end the Scribes came upm him with the El- 


' 
T2 


betore, 


co 0 


ncT.: 


liever: 


St MM ATTHE IW 


mite is inrexpreted bY Vir. 22. [ Al things whatſoever ye ſhall ask 
rod fing®- ſhall receive, | We met with the like Expreſſion 


in Prayer) » 


pr ohibiting any ro Preach in the Temple wichour Anchoricy from 
the Chi:f Prieſts and Elders. If any one think this was not an 
appolice Antwer to the Queſtion prop -unded to him, 1, They 
Ougit to contider , that our Saviour did cruly judge they deferved 
no Anſwer ; tor his Works had teſtified of him, that he ated by a 
Divine Power ; he ſhould not need rell them ſo, in fo many 
Words. 2. In very deed there was a dire& Anfiver couched 1n 
this Queſtion ot our Saviour. I pray, faith he, by whar Authority 

did 7ohn Preach and Baptize? They could nor fay by an Human? 
Authyrity, for they knew he was nor Licenſed by cheir 3: Rers 
[c muſt tollow that he Aﬀted by vercue of an extraordinary Divine 
Mitfion, to do I (faich our Saviour) and have given you 4 -reater 
Proof of it than ever Fohn Baptis did. But our Lord well knew 

that the Phariſees had a greater Reverence for Fob tlie Baptiif 
than for him, and that many of the People had a great Opinion 
of John, indeed greater than of him, our Saviour c:mir Exting 
and Drinking, as he expreſſeth ir, (mY is) being of a more free 

and fociable Converſation, which did nor fo pleaſe the Pharifai- 
cal, moroſe and ſupercilious Humour ; he theretore chuſeth to 
reach them by a Queſtion, in which as ſoon as they could reſolve 
themſelves, they might know by what Authoricy he did, what 
he did. Beſides, by the Baptiſm of Fohn, mentioned in our Sa- 
viour's Queſtion, is not ro be underſtood only his Adminiſtration 
of B.iptiſmn, bur Is Do&rine, and indeed the whole of his Mini- 
ſry : For as his Baptiſm js called the Baptiſm of Repentance, 1o the 
Phariſees here argue, thar if they ſhould ſay Fom Heaven, he would 
lay , Why then did you not believe him 2 which muſt be underſtood. 
of his Do&rine. A grear part of John's Do&rine was,that the Merch 
was come, that Chri was he, Joh. 1. 20, he pointed to him and 
faid: Behold the Lamb of God, who takes away the Sins of the 
World, which had they believed, they would never have come to 
him with fo filly a Queſtion » The Phariſees theretore rightly 
judged, how they would be cnfnared, if they had faid 7obr's Bap- 
ti/m and Dy&rine was from God, for then a Divine Faith was duc 
to 1s Words,and they muſt have owned Chriſt to be the Meſſi.th. 
Bur why did nor they ſay of Men? The Text fairh, They fearet 
tne Peple, Thoſe who will nor fear God, ſhall have fomerhing 
to fear ſordidly, and ſlaviſhly. The People all owning 7ohn as a 
Prophet, a Man thar had an extraordinary Mifſion from - God, 
and Commiſion to reveal the Mind, and Will of God ; and would 
have cried ſhame upon them, had they drſparaged him, as one 
thar ſpake of his own Head : They fay, We cannot tell, Herein 
they lyed. Our Saviour replies, Neither do T tell you, &c. Nor, 
I cannor tell you, bur I do nottell you : I will tell you no more 
chan what 7ohn hath long fince told you, and what if you will, 

you and all Men may know by my Miracles, | 


28 But what think you ? A certain man had two 
ſons, and he came to the firſt, and ſaid, Son, go 
work to day in my vineyard. 

29 Heanſwered, and ſaid, I will not : but after- 
ward he repented. and went. 

30 And he came to the ſecond, and faid likewiſc: 
And he-anſwered, and ſaid, I go, fir, and went not. 

31 Whether of them twain did the will of his fa- 
ther? They ſay unto him, The firſt, Jeſus {faith unto 


the harlots go into the kingdom of God before you. ch 


publicans and the harlots believed him. And ye, 
when ye had ſen zz, repented nor afterward, that 
ye might believe him. 


Matthew alone menrtioneth this Parable, The Scope of it is 
taught us , ver. 31, Th? Publicans and Harlots go (that is, ſhall 
go) into the Kingdom of Heaven before you ; That is, you Phariſees. 
Who theſe Phariſees, and who the Publieans were, we ſhewed 
betore, Chap. 3. 7. The Publicans were very odious to the Fews ; 
Sce Mar. 2. 16, Harlots are great Sinners. By the Kingdom of 
Heaven, here is meant , that of G/ory, Our Lord's faying, thar 
Publicans and Halots ſhould go in before the Phariſees, doth nor 
imply thar they ſhould tollow. Ir only fignitiech char ſome 
who nad been Publicans, ( as Matthew, and Zaccheus ) and Har- 
lots, were in a better Condition than theſe Phariſees : He proves 
ir becauſe they had ane the Will of God, which the Phariſees nor- 
withſtanding all their fair Profefſion , had not, bur reſiſted ir ; 
and particularly, in the Miniſtry of 7ohn the Baptist, who came 
ro them, In the way of Righteouſneſs , Preaching the true Dofrine 
of Righreouſneſs, and living an Holy and Righteous Lite ; upon 
che hearing of whoſe Do&rine ſome of the Publicans, and other 
great Sinners had believed in Chriſt ; bur the Phariſees, tho' 
chey heard his Dofrine , ſaw his Converfation , and fav others 
repent , and own Chriſt, yet were fo tar from Believing , thar 
chey would not Repent, that they might believe ; they would nor 
be awakened to any Senſe of their finful Courfes, nor amend 
any thing of their tormer Ways , that they might receive Chriſt 
and imbrace his Righreouſneſs, and Salvaticn, For alrho 
Evangelical Repentance is the Fruit of Faith , yer that Re- 
pentance which lierh in a previous ſenſe of Sin, and a Refolu- 
tion to leave Sinful Courſes , goeth before ir. | Now «© Illu- 
ſtrate, and preſs this home upon the Conlciences of theſe 
Phariſees, our Saviour brings this Parable ( as Nathan did ro 
David, 2 Sam. 124 1. and 11.) thar they might , being Con- 
victed, Condemn themſelves. Hence the Parable is eafily un- 
derſtood : The Man mentioned 1s God, The two Sons were 
the Phariſces, a People highly pretending Obedicnce ro rhe 
Law of God, and making a great ſhew ot Religion; and che 
Publicans and Harlots great Sinners , bad and vile People, ma-. 
king no Pretence to Religion ; God faith co che one, and che 


97%, Vich makes it plain, that their Queſtion principally re- 
ce 55 Our Saviour's Preaching, It ſhould leem, they had a Law 


other,Go and work in my Vineyard,chat is, do my Will, Do the Work 
I command you to dos The Phy jyces, fs By porrires and F. -# 
malitts, 


Chap. XXSt 


them,* Verily I ſay unto you, that the publicans aud * £uk 7 


| 32 For * John came unto you in the way of * Luk. 3. 
righteouſneſs, and ye believed him not : * but the 12, 13: 


—— - - - _ 
— 4 I Ne nm ng — —— «; 
FWD == : =_ITDIC III 
= 85 b.. ' : 4 ” IT _ = _—_— 
EIN —— k 
A - % 14 


Cha Pp. XXL 


* Cant. 8. 
FS 12. 


* Pjal.2. 7. 
Heb. 1. 2: 


St M AT 


maliſts, by their ovrivard Pretence , and Profeſſion ſay ; Sir, 
I £1, but vt go wt, all their Retigion 15 a van Shew, a meer Out- 
tide Appearance. Others, by their Lives declare, That they 
wif mt 22>. Bur yer upon ſecond Thoughts, having their Hearts 
touched by the Finzer of God, they do God's Work. { Which 
ef them did the Will of his Father £ They ſay to him, tie fi 8. \ 
This is plain, for what was the Will of the Hzther, bur that they 
Mould do the Work he fer them ro do ? This the lartcr did not 3 
tie Fathcr's Will was not only that the Son thould give him a 
C:p. and a Knee, and Complement him, bur char he thould go to 
Wark in the Vineyard. It is the leaſt part of Gcd's Will thar 
Men thould give him good Words, be a httle Complemental,and 
Ceremnnir us roward him, bur that they ſhould Repenr and Believe, 
and Obey his Gafpel. This, fome Publicans and H.rlots did , the 
e-nerality of the Phariſces refuted. It 15 an hard thing to convince 
2. oral, Righteous, Civil Man, that he lacks any thing to Salva- 
tion; and hence it is, that Prof.;me Perlons many t1Mmes repent, 
beheve and are ſaved ; when orchers periſh in their Impenitency 
and Unbelief , -becauſe they think they have no need of Re- 
pontance , or any further Righteouſneys, than they are poſlefied of. 

22 * Hear another parable. There was a certain 
houſholder which planted a vineyard, and hedg-d 
it round about, and digged a wine-preſs in it, and 
built a tower, and let it out to husbandmen , and 
went into 4 far country. a 

Mark hath this Parable, chap. 12. 1. Luke hath it, c.:þ.20. 9. 
\Who is here mended under the Norion of an Hoyſholder, or a 
Mm, we arc td by the Prophet Jaiah, chap. 5. 1,2. It 5 the 
End of Hills , the God of Tſrael; the Houle of I\rael, and the 
Men of Fudah are his Vineyard, his ple1/.nt Plant, Ver. 7. he 
hedzed this Feople by his Providence ; God otren compareth 
his Church to a Vineyard, Deut. 32. 32. P/al. 80. & Fer. 2,21. 
the other Expretſions of making in it a Wine-Pre/s, or a Wine-Fat, 
fiznifie no more than thar God had provided tor the 7ews all 
things neceflary for Uſe or Ornament; his Letting of 7t out "to 
Fehavdmen , and going into a far Country ; 1ignifies that being 
himſelf, as to his Glorious Reſidence, in Heaven, he had be- 
truſted the Church of the Jews with an #igh Pricff, and other 
Prieſts and Levites. ; 

24 And when the time of the fruit drew near, he 
ſent his ſervants to the husbandmen, * that they 
might receive the fruits thereof. = 

25 And the husbandmen took his ſervants, and 

2at one. and killed another, and ſtoned another. 

26 Again, he ſent other ſervants more than the 


Erit : and they did unto them likewiſe. 

Mark agrees in the ſubſtance, bur mentions three ſingle Ser- 
yants ſent, and then many others. The firſt he faith, zhey caught, 
and heat, and ſent away empty. Ar the ſecond he ſaith, they cas? 
Stones, wounded him in the Head, and ſent him away ſhamefully 
h.mdled. The third he faith they killed, and tor others, they did 
beat ſome, and kill ſome. Luke ſpeaks ro the ſame Senſe : I ob- 
ſerved before ,- that we muſt not look ro fir every particular 
Phraſe in a Parable 1n the Explication. By the Servants here ſent 
to the Hirsbandmen are doubtlefs to be underſtood thoſe extraor- 
din.y Prophets, whom in the corrupt State of the Fewiſh Church 
God ſent to reprove rhe Prieſts, and to admoniſh the Prieſts as 
well as the People, of the Duty which they owed unto God, in 
Obedience to his Law, And the various Phraſes here uſed, to 
exprets the Indignities offered to the Servants, do bur ſignifie the 
various Abuſes offered to many of theſe Prophets; of which are 
Inſtances in 1 King. 19. 10, 2 Chron.35.16, Neh. 9. 26. er. 44. 4, 
5, 6. 7eremiah was beaten and impritoned, fo was Micaiah, Za- 
chariah lin in the Temple, SC. 

27 Burlaſt of all he ſent unto them his ſon, ſay- 
ing, They will reverence my ſon. 
Marl faith, He had but one Son, his well beloved, chap. 12. 6. 
Luke faith, 20.13. Then ſaid the Lord of the Vineyard, What ſhall 
Ido? Twill ſend my belred Son, it inay be they will reverence him, 
when they ſee him, God 15 here brought in afting atrer the man- 
ner of Men, ufing all probable means ro ger their Rent, we 
muſt nor tancy, thar God did not know what Men would do. God 
after 21} his Prophets , ſent his only $91 to the Zews and to their 
Prieſts, his well beloved Sm; he ſaid, | Perhaps they will 
reverence my Sn; ) Theſe Words muſt be underſtood, not as 
Expreſſing what they would do, or what appeared to God pro- 
bable char rhey would do, bur as expretlive of what they ought 
to do, and whart-God might reaſonably expe& from them. 

28 But when the husbandmen ſaw the ſon, they 
ſaid amongſt themſelves, * This is the heir, * come. 
It us kill him, and let us ſeize on his inheri- 
tUnce. 

29 And they caught h:m, and caſt him out of 
the vincvard. and flew 7. 

Art and Lube have the ſame with no conſiderable Altcra- 
tion. Our Lerd here Prophefieth his own Death , by the 
means of rhefe wicked Prizſls, and fo both lers them know, 
tar he Was nor ignorant of what was in their Hearts, and they had 
been already (as we heard before ) raking Counſel abour, by 
which chey might again have concluded, rhat he was the Son of 
God , and one who knew rheir Hearts z and he alſo let them 
know, char they ſhoald not ſurprize him, and that he was nor 
afraid of them. { But when the Hughandmen ſaw the Sm , they 
ſid, Tris it the Heir. | Thee Words ler the Phariſees (to whom 
ro2ctiuce with che People, he ar thar rime ſpake) know, that 
ricmtelves knew he was the Son of God, and were Con- 
tiled in their own Conſciences , that he was the true Lord of the 
Church, Th this was not true cf all that had an hand in Cruci- 
[yins Chritt, For Pl ſaith of lome of them, that if ;hey had! 


T HEM 


had known kim , they would not have Crucified the Ly f Ii 
yer ir was doubtleſs rrue of many of them, and thoſe the mor 
knowing men amongſt chem. Bur herein did their moſi Pro; 
gious Blindneſs, and Madneſs appear, that when they knew Pa 


chey ſhould think 1c poſſible ro prevent his being ſer a; Ki? 
upon the Lord's Holy Hill of Sion. - One would think this were 


impotſible to Rational Creatures? But why ſhould we thin}; (-; 
How many are there in the World this day, that are Convia 
in their own Conſciences, and do believe that the Ways, and 
People whom they proſecute to their Ruin, yea to Death; jc fin 
are the Truths, the Ways, the People of God, yer they — 

Kicking againſt the Pricks; and tho' God makes many of tj 

periſh in their Enterprizes, and ſuffers them nor to come 4; +1 
Hoary Heads to the Grave in Peace. yer there ariſeth another jy 
ſtead of this Hydr.z, a Poſterity approving their Doings , 1r,; 
thinking , tho' their Fathers failed in this or thar little Pcjic, To 
they ſhall prevail againſt God, and his Inheritance ſhall he th... 
Wiſe Providence thus firrerh Saints for their Crown, and tis: wy, 
Sinners to prepare themſelves for the Day of Wrath. ; 


40 When the lord therefore of the vineya;| 
cometh, what will he do unto thoſe husbandma : 

41 They ſay unto him, he will miſerably deltrcy 
thoſe wicked men, and will let out Þzs vineyard 5; 
other husbandmen, which thall render him the tryir; 
in thcir ſeaſons. 

Mark relates the latter Verſe, as Chriſt's own Words, <þ, 12,, 


ſo doth Luke, chap. 20. 15, 16, adding, thar When they he 
they ſaid, God forbid. Ir 1s ſaid, to Solve this Dithculty, 1, Thr ;/ 


-liy 
ka 
UC 


s 


ſay unto im, ) muſt nor be underſtood of the Phariſees, bur "i 
ot the Hearersz the Phariſees 1a1d only, God forbid, 2, Other; 
think the Phariſees and Elders did at firft ſay as is here expreſ 
bur our Saviour then telling them, They were the Men , 1nd 
opening it turther to them, they faid, God forbid, Ir is very py. 
ſible the Phariſees and Elders might firſt ſay it, and that our $. 
viour confirming and opening their Words , ſhewing them hy; 
they had given Judgment againſt themſelves , they ſaid , 5: 
forbid; 1o both they might ſay theſe Words, and Chriſt 41, 
This I rake to be the moſt Satistatory Anſwer. By thoſe Wyrg; 
alſo our Saviour declares, That his Church ſhould ſhortly t+ 
taken out of the Hands of theſe Phariſees and Elders and P;1:3; 
and put into the Hands of his Apoſtles and a Goſpel- Miniſtry, 


42 Jeſus ſaith unto them. Did ye never read in th: 
{criptures, The ſtone which the builders rejected, the 
ſame is become the head of the corner ? This is th: 
Lord's doing, and it is marvellous in our eyes, 

4.3 Theretore ſay I unto you, * The kingdom (f,, 


God ſhall be taken from you, and given to a natic © 


bringing forth the fruits thereof: 


44 * And whoſoever ſhall fall on this tone, {hall «x; 


be broken : but on whomfoever it {hall fall, i will 1; 
grinde him to pouder. 


Mark faith, chap. 12. 10, And have you not read this Seriptue, 
The Stone which the Builders rejefed, #s become the head of th: Ci: 
ner * This was the Lord's doing, and it is marvellous in vn Fi: 
Luke ſaith, chap, 20. 17. And he beheld them, and ſaid, Wi 
# this then that w written, The Stone which the Builders rejeGed, s 
become the head of the Corner * Whoſoever ſhall fall upon that Stir, 
ſhall be broken ; but on whomſoever it ſhall fall, it will grinde him, 
pouder. It is more than probable, that our Saviour had more 
Words with them upon this Argument than are left us upn 
Sacred Record , { for John hath ler us know, that we are nc: 
ro expect that all he did or ſpake ſhould be written, chap.21.25; 
and nor as every Diſcourſe or Aion, ſo nor all Words in tlc 
ſame Diſcourſe, nor all Circumſtances relating to the fame 4 
on,) knowing themſelves, and their Mafters to be the Husband- 
men , with whom the Lord had betrufted his Vineyard the 
Houſe of Iſrael, it is not reaſonable to think they ſhould be 
very patient to hear that God would miſerably deftroy then 
as Wicked Men, and commir his Vineyard co the truſt ot others 
We cannot therefore in reaſon imagine , but that rhey ſhould 
reply ſomething to that, as thinking it a ſtrange thing that he 
ſhould afferr, That for the reje&ion of him, God would rex! 
his Ancient People , and caſt off rhe Church of the Fews. To 
ſhew this was nothing which ought to ſeem ſtrange ro them, hc 
asks them , Did you never read in the Scriptures, The Stone, Xc 
Luke ſaith , He beheld them and ſaid, What 3s this then * 4s 1 
che Phariſees had charged him with ſpeaking wichour any War: 
rant from the Word of God, there was no ſuch thing in the La 
or Prophets. To convince them of their miſtake, or at leaf! 
that there was nothing in what he ſaid which needed 0 
pear ſtrange ro them, he ſaich, Did you never read ? Or, Have "i 
mt read the Scripture ? (fo Mark relates ir,) Or, What 5s this then * 
as Luke hath ir. The Text he quoterh is, Pal. 118. 22, 23+ 
is manifeft char the Fews underſtood thar Pſalm to be a Prophec) 
of Chriſt, by the Peoples Acclamations of Hsſmna ; for the ſub- 
ſtance of thoſe Acclamations are in the 25 and 26 Verlcs © 
that Pſalm. Save now T beſeech thee O Lord / O Lord, 16 eſcecs 
thee ſend now Proſperity : Bleſſed is he that comes to 114 in the Mm 
of the Lord. Hofhiah na, FJ) JW , Save 7 beſeech the: This 
they underſiood of the Meſſiah, ' This they had heard cried ut 
ro our Saviour. Saich our Saviour in that very Pſalm, you may 
read,The Stone which the Builders reje&ed, is become the Head J 1 
Corner. Before he had compared the Church to a }in./1% © 
ſhew their Obligation ro bring forth Fruit ; here co a Building, 
to denote God's dwelling in ir. The Builders here intendc6, 
were the Heads of the ewiſh Church, who nor only ÞY Ew 
own Prerences, bur by their Calling were Builders , and ougit 
to have been Builders, rho' indeed rhey proved Deſtroz?rs, ane 


Pullers down, inſtead of Builders, The Church is cllewi'r* 
compared to.a Building, 1 Cor. 3. 9. Epheſ. 2. 21. and che Teac! 


\ 


Cha P. X 


to W; 
Diſcc 
vern? 


wp, XXII. St 


ers in it tO Builders, Roms 15. 20. Gal. 2. 18, Our Lord 13 here 
compared to a Stone, becauſe he 1s the onty arm Foundation. 
The chief Corner-SHMe, M whom all the Building fitly framed, graweth 
unto an Holy Temple In t he Lord. In whom aljo we are fir an Habl- 
ration of God through the Spirit. Eplef. 2. 20, 21, 22. called by 
the Prophet 1/uiah, Ch, 28. 15. A Stone laid in Zion for a Filn- 
dation, a 1 yed Stone, 4 precrotes Carner Stone, a ſure Foundation. 
Which is applyed ro Chriſt, AdFs 4. 11, Rom. g. 33. 1 Pet. 2. 
FER Se # become the Head of the Cerner, ] thar 1s, the 
ict, tic principal Stone-in the Building, Left they ſhould be 
ſtartled ar this, he adderh, | This is the Lord's doing, and-it 3s 
Marvellous In our Eyes. | This may ſcem ſtrange ro you, that 
thote who ſeemed ro be Builders and Pillars, ſhould be rejetted, 
and thrown away 3 and no wonder, tor it is the Lord's doing. In 
the Reformarions of Churches from groſs Corruprions. Gcd doth 
always fome extraordinary things, which we are not ar prefent 
able ro reconcile ro our Reaſons, Y. 43. (which ſome think ſhould 
have been pur atter the nexr Verſe) Our Lord tells them plain- 
Iv. That God was removing his Church from them to the Gentiles, 
Which he callerh a People thar ſhould: bring forth the Fruits there- 
of,” | And whoſoever ſhall fall on this Stone ſhall be broken ] There 
will be many that ſhall be offended ar Chrift, his Perſon, his 
Doctrine, his Inſtirurions, upon which Acccunt he is called a 
Stano of Stumbling, Rome. 9. 33. But they ſhall be broken, If 
they tuke Offence at me, ſo as rhey will not belicve on me, nor 
r=ccive me, It will be their Ruin, { But on whym{-ever it (ball fall, 
it ſhall grinae kim to Powder. | Tf rhey thall go on to Perfecure 
me. ane my Members, fo that T ful In them, they ſhall he ruined 
3 irreparably aud irrecoverably with a morc dreadiul Deſtruction. 


45 And when the chizf Prieſts and Phariſees had 


\ heard his Parables, they perceived that he ſpake of 


them. ; 

46 But when they ſought to lay hands on him, 
they feared the multitud -, b-cauſe they took him 
tor 1 Prophet. 

1orb hath much the ſame, Chap. 12. 12. fo hath Luke, Chap. 
25, 19,20. But Luke adds, Tncy watched him, and ſent out Spies, 
which (hou!d feign themſelves juſt Men, that they might take hold of 
his Words, that {5 they might deliver him to. the Power and Authori- 
ty of the Goavernour. Theſe wretched Men were convinced in their 
own Conſciences ; they perceived he ſpake of them. They had no- 
thing to oppoſe to what he ſaid. They could nor deny, bur 
chat the P/almiF, Pſal. 118. 22. ſpake of the Meſſtas. They 
could not bur own that they were the Builders, and that they 
had refuſed him, yet their Luſts and Intereſts would nor ſuffer 
them to obey theſe Convittions, to receive, and to embrace 
Chriſt, and prevent that Kuin which was coming upon them. 
They durſt not apprehend Chriſt for fear of: the People. They 
had nothing to lay to his Charge, they theretore ſend our Spies 
to watch him, to fee if they could catch any thing from him in 
Diſcourſe, whereof to accuſe him before Pilate rhe Roman Go- 
vernour in Fudea at this rimes 


CHAT. AA 


M 


Tre Parable of the Marriage of tre King's Sim + The Fews invited, 
and refuſe to &@me, 1-3, The Gentiles called, 5, I0. The Car- 
riage and Sentence of him that had nt the Wedding-garment, 
12—14. Chrift ſheweth that Tribut? ought to be paid to' Caſar, 
16—22, Ercountreth and conruteth the Sadduces concerning the 
Reſurretim, 2333. 
ard great Commandment, 34-40. 
the Phariſees about Chriſt, 41—-45. 


He aiheth and confoundeth 


ND Teſus anſwered, * and ſpake unto them 
\ again by Parables, and ſaid, : 
2 The kingdom of heaven is like unto a certain 
king, which made a marriage for his ſon, 


lk 14, Þ 


bidden to the wedding : and they would not come. 

4 Again, he ſent forth other ſervants, ſaying, Tell 
them which are bidden, Behold, I have prepared 
bor. ;.2, my dinner : * my oxen and my fatlings are killed, 
| and all things are ready : come unto the marriage. 

5 But they made light of zz, and went their ways, 
one to his farm, another to his merchandiſe. 

6 And the remnant took his ſervants, and intreat- 
&d them ſpitefully, and flew them. 

7 But when the king heard zhereof,he was wroth: 
and he ſent forth his armies, and deſtroyed thoſe 
murderers, and burnt up thelr city. 

3 Then ſaith he to his ſervants, The wedding 1s 
ready. but they which were bidden, were not worthy. 

o Go ye therefore into the high-ways, and as ma- 
ty 4S ye ſhall find, bid to the marriag_2.. 

10 So thoſe ſervants went into the high-ways. and 
g1thered together all,as many as they found. both bad 
and good; and the wedding was furniſhed with gueſts. 
- And when the king came in to ice the gueſts, 
Hg be ſaw there a man * which had not on a wedding- 
L; 7 garment: 
dkw,;, 12 And he faith unto him, Friend, how cameſt 
© 15.15, thou in hither, not having a wedding-garment ? 


"5%. And he was ſpeechleſs. 
Vol, It, 


2 And ſent forth his ſervants to call them that were | 


M ATF FEM 


al—— 


Anſwereth the Lawyer, which is the fir$t |þ 


13. Then aid the king to the ſervants, Binde him 
nand and foot, and rake him away, and caſt him * 
mo outer darknels: 
gnalning of teerh. 
1.4 * For many ate called, but few cre choſen. 


there thall he weeping and 


Lube hath this Parable, Ch. 14. from wv. 15. to 25. which hath : 


made divers Interpreters think, that 3t.ztth»w hath pur jr our of 
ts due order, for Luke reports ic as fpoken long betore, and 
that not in the Temple, bur at 4 Ph.wj/ees Houte where he was 
ar Dinner, and upon Occaſion of one of them ſaying. Blejſ-a 
he that ſhall Eat Bread in the Kingdom of God. Eur | know no rc2- 
lon why We May not allow our Saviour to have utcd tlic ſme 
Par.tble rivIce, in ewo differing Companies, and upon two ditferent 
Occations, eſpecially conſidering rhere are remarkable Differen- 
ces 1n Luke's and Matthew's Relation. I ſhall theretore leave ric 
Contideration of Luke's Relation, till I come to char Chaprer in 
his Goſpel, where I ſhall mect with it in Courſe, and cofifider 
only what Matthew fairh, We muſt remember this 1: a Yara- 
ble, nor an Hiſtorical Narration. The firſt Verſe tells us, | [hen 
Jejus anſwered, and ſpake again to them in Pardbles.\ Hz mn; f%+od, 
thatis, He began a Diſcourſe (fo the Word very otren H:nifics) 
Our Saviout hath neither given us any particular Explication or 
this Parable, nor any Proparabola or Epip.wab»1z; any Sznrence, 
betore, or after the Parable, guiding us as ro the Explication, 
except ,only that ſhort Sentence, v. 14. Fr m.ny ave c:l/od, but 
few are c<hyſn, which rather puiderh us 1n tie Explicarion of the 
tour latrer Verſes, than of che whole Parable, yer ir is not hard 
for us to find out our Saviour's Scope in this Parable. Ir teemerh 
to be double. 1. To inform thoſe to whom he ſpake of the De- 
ſtruction ſuddenly coming upon the Jews, for cheir RcjeAion ct 
the Goſpel, and of the calling of the Gentiles, 2. To let us 
know that neither amongſt the Jews nor Gentiles all ſhould be 
laved whom God called by the External Miniſtration cf che Gof: 
pel: Bur thcſe alone who belonging to the EleGion of Grace, 
ſhould be tound in the Day of Judgment, having on the Wed- 
ding-Garment. So then, the Kingdom of Heaven here ſignifies, 
the Way or Equity ct God in the Diſpenſation of the Goſpet, or 
the Adminiſtration of things in order to the Kingdom of Glery. 
The King here mentioned muſt be he who is che King of Kings, 
The Marriage for his Som is the Exhibition of the Covenant of Grace, 
which whoſoever layeth hold on, Taiah 56. 4. is by Faith unt- 
red to Chriſt; which Union is often expreflced in Holy Writ un- 
der the Norion of a Marriage, Pſal. 45.10, 11. Eph. 5. 23. 75cs 
Or rheir Union with him in Glory, Rev. 19. 9. The Perſons bid- 
den were the Jews, The Servants that called them to the Wed- 
ding were thoſe that were faithful amongſt their ordinary Teach- 
ers, or the Prophets, ſuch as Taiah and the reſt, whom they re- 
tuſed to hearken unto. The other Servants might fizmifie John 
the Baptiſt,. and rhe Twelve, and others ſent out by Chriſt, ro 
tell them that Chriſt was now come, there wanted nothing but 
their coming to him, and receiving of him. Their making 
Light of it, going one to his Farm, anther to his Merchandize, and 
others taking the Servants, entreating the Servants ſpitefully, and 
ſtaying them, ſignifies the Jews general Refuſal ot che Goſpel, 
and rhe particular Rage, and Malice of fome of them, 
fhewn in their abuſing ot the Lord's Prophets, and Meſſengers, 
and which he knew ſome of them would furcher ſhew' azainſt 
Stephen and Zames. The King's ſending forth his Armies, and 
flying the Murderers, ſignified the coming of the Roman Armies, 
and their utter deftroying Jeruſalem. The ſending of the Ser- 
vants into the High-ways, and inviting all choſe whom they found 
to the Wedding, ſignified the Apoſtles, going ro the Gentiles, and 
Preaching the Goſpel to all Nations, which much inlarged the Ter- 
ricories of the Church, garhering in many who profeiſed to ac- 
cept of Chriſt, bur nor all in Truth, and Sincerircy. The Kings 
coming to ſee his Gueſts, ſignifiech Chriſt's coming ar the Day of 
the laſt Judgment, with hs Fan in his Hand, throughly 85 purge bus 
Flair, His finding one without his Wedding Garment, fignifiech his 
finding many Hypocrites at the Day of Judgment. The Gueſts 
ar Weddings were either wont to pur on their beſt Cloaths (as 
we uſually do) or a particular Garmenr which was then in uſe, 
and was worn by them who were invited ro Weddings. By 
the Wedding-Garment here 15 meant Chriſt, Rom. 13. 14, who 15 
at this Feaſt, borh the Bridezroom, and the Meat at the Feaſt, 
and rhe Wedding-Garment alſo, in divers Reſpetts. It is but an 
idle Diſpute, whether Faith is meant, or Love, neicher the one 
nor the other ſeparately, but Euth that worketh by Love, What- 
foever God requirerh of us that we may be made meer for che 
Kingdom of God. Without Faith and Hlineſs nane cm ſee God. 
His being Speechlefs, ſignifies, That choſe who have lived under 


{ the Profeſſors of Grace and Salvation, and have reze&cd chem, net- 


ther believing in che Lord Jeſus Chriſt, nor bringing forch Fruits 
of Holineſs, will, be without Excuſe at the Day of Fudgment. And 
che King's ComMMnding his Servants to bind him H.md and F17t, Sc; 
ſignifieth, Thar all ſuch Perſons as live wichin the Church, un- 
der the meansof Grace, yer dye impenirent, and Unbelievers, 
having not by a true Faith received Chriſt as their Saviour, and 
brouyhe forth the Fruits of true Repentance and Holinefs, ſhall 
get nothing by their being wickin the Church, and Externally 
called, bur ſhall be thrown to Hell as well as others; rhe Pains 
of which are here exprefled by Binding Hand and Foot ; lying 1n 
Outer-darkneſs, Weeping and Gnaſhing of Teeth, as in crhcr Places 
by a Worm that ſhall never die, and a Fire that ſhall never go out : 
All Metaphorical Exprefſions fignitying che Vexations and :nro- 
lerable Puniſhment of the Damned in Hell: Fr (faich our Savis 
our) many are called, but few are chyfen, Ve mec with this Ex- 
preſſion before, Chap. 29. 16. where the Scnfe of it was not fo 
obvious, as it is here. Some by it here underſtood, a C22tce unto 
Life Eternal ; Nor withour reaſon, if char be underftood by the 
Marriage-Supper, as it is Rev. 194 9. And ir appears to be partly 
ar leaft che Senſe of it here, in char the Perſon without the Wed- 
dins-Garmenr is doomed to Eternal Miſery, - It we by che Mar- 
riage-Supper underſtand an ve _ Chrijt hete, or the Bene- 

H Þ ts 


© LS 
? FB! 4 "FE 5. 
Fill! 


er, 8 Þ SH 
"1 I WE | 46 
f #6 I | "(A 
2 I | Wb let 
Eo KN 4446. [Rc NE 
- F Res 5 138 'K 
It. Ip * | Fl 1.51 
* C11.v 
1: 
* iO! EVE f 4 
*..40 * 1 ; 
5, | 
[ ; 
| 
x : E 
'F 
Þ 
© £ 
| 
' ; 
a 
. "+; 
f | FY [3 
l 


z 
s 


1 


"Ms 
we: 21:3 


i 5 _ 


— - 


»1 P | R = 
_—_— —_—— bs 
"2 - 

SS Ee. 


SE, 


—_— =" - ——Ez _ wh ” ——— D "MCI - 9s p_ 
—_ - "> - < RY m——_ = . —— 
COPIERS : & — ” 
- Ly _ a ———_—— Moos LOS w_ 
_— = i. -—- -4 Rn Sreanas £& —— ab. 
nee aps ERR Rn. _— 4 _ —_— x1 | b _ 
> EET Se IE In I>" or Dy. —_ ; _ —_ 
—_— 1 b ID => 
——_— 4 _ . Cn IR = 
g S. re  — 
== 5 > > - = _ 
, F 3 + fon" 4 *Y 


Earn — na ne 
——_—_—emcy en - yn —— 
OS 
-— — = == - c 
JT = —_ = 
- > © —_— _” 
5 Yer gk — 


— —__ _—_—— ——_— ———_—— 


Chap. RX}1. Be. 


firs 29wing from thar, we muſt by Chzſen here underſtand Effe- 
&u.uly cailell, being made Parcakers of that fpecia}, diftinguithing 
Grace, which bringerh Salvation. The Goſpel 1s Preached to 
many, whem God doth not favour with his ſpecial Grace, ſo as they 
receive it, convert and are ſaved. The tormer part of this Pa- 
rable doth hint us the reaton why the Jews rejected the Offers of 
Grace and Salvation made to chem, viz. The Power thar the 
Temprations from the World of Pleaſure, Profir, and Honour 
had upon them. As the latrer part allo ſheweth us che rrue 
realon why any are laved, to be from the free Grace of God, viz, 
becaule chey are Ch1/en, choſen to Erernal Life, and particularly 
tavoured to be made Partakers of his ſpecial, and diſtinguifhing 
Grace. 

15 Then went the Phariſees, and took counſel 


how they might entangle him in Þ/5 talk. 


Muck, Ch. 12. 13. ſaith, They ſent unto him certain of the Phart- 
feos, and of the Herodians, to catch him in his Words. Luke aich, 
Ch. 20. 20. They watched him, and ſent forth Spies, which ſhould 
feien rhemſelves juſt Men, that they might take hold of his Words, 
that { they might deliver him to the Power and Authority of the Go= 
wvernour, His Life was what they ſought for. This they had no 
Power allowed by the Romans to. take away withour the Sen- 
tence of Pontius Pilate, the Romm Governour. That they might 
have ſomething ro accuſe him of before him, which he might 
condemn him for, they firſt cake Councel. They ſaw he did no- 
thing worthy ot Dcarh : They therefore iſſue their Councels in 
a Retolurion, to ſend ſome Perſons to diſcourſe with him, under 
the Pretence of Conſcientious good Men, to propound ſome 
Queſtions to him; kis Anſwer ro which, might -give them ſome 


Opporcunity to accule him of Bl.z/phemy or Sedition. The Men they | 


picch upon, were ſome of them Phariſees, fome Herodians. 


16 And they ſent out unto him their diſciples 
with the Herodians, ſaying, Maſter, we know that 
thou art true, and teacheſt the way of God in truth : 
neither careſt thou for any man, for thou regardeſt 
not the perſon of men. 

17 Tell us therefore, what thinkeſt thou ? Is it 
lawtul to give tribute unto Cefar, or not ? 


Mark hath the ſame, Ch. 12. 14. So hath Zuke, Ch. 20. v. 21. 
There is a grear Variety of Opinions, who tFEefe Herodians were ; 
we read of them in an early Conſultation againſt Chriſt with the 
Phariſees, Mare 3.6. Some think they were Foreigners of other 
Nations, whom #erod being Tetrarch of Galilee, had brought in 
from Contiguous Pagan Nations; bur this is not Probable, for 
then the Phariſees would have had nothing to do with them, 
Others rhink, thar they were ſome of Herod's Guard, or Soldiers; 
bur neither is this Probable, conſidering the Iffue of their Coun- 
cels, to ſend ſome whom Chrift ſhould not know, nor be trigh- 
ted with. Others ( which 1s more probable) think they were 
ſome of thiſe Jews who f.cuoured Herod's de, and had forgotten 
the Liberty of their Country, joyning with the Conqueror, and 
taking his Parc, Ochers think they were Sadduces, Others ſay, 
that rey were Perſons, that were of a Mungrel Religion, made 
up of Zudaiſm and Gentiliſm. Mar. 8. 15, Our Saviour bids them 
beware of the Lezven of the Phariſees, and of Herod; which 
makerh ir Probable, That the Herodians were not only Courtiers, 
and for the Roman Intere?, bur that they had imbraced ſome 
particular D»#rines, much differing from the Phariſees; it is 
likely, they were Leavened with ſome of the Do@rine of the 
Sadduces, denying Angels and Spirits, and the Reſurrefion, Ir is 
plain, that they were ſome of Herod's Faion. What their Prin- 
ciples were as to Religion, is not ſo plain, nor of much Concern 
to us to know. They begin their Diſcourſe to our Saviour, with 
a grear Complement, Maſter, a Name the Jews did uſually zive 
ro thoſe whom they owned tor Teachers. {| We know that thou 
art true | cne that wili rell us che Truth, and ſpeak as thou think- 
eſt ro be true: { And teacheſt the way of God in Truth, neither 
careſt thou for any Man, for thou regardeſt not the Perſon of Men. 
Thou wilc tpeak nothing, our of Fear, nor far any Favour or 
Aﬀe&ion : Burt plainly rell us whar is Truth, and what God 
wou!d have us do, 1:1 the Caſes we offer co thee. In theſe 
Werds they give us the true Character of a good Teacher ; he 
muft be a good Man, True, one that will truly teach Men the 
way of God, and in the fairhful Diſcharge of cheir Dury, nor be 
atraid of the Face of Men. But herein they condemned them- 
$clves ; for it cur Saviour was fo, whiy did they not believe in 
him, and obey what he taught them? | Tell us therefore what 
rhinkeﬆ thou? Is it lawful to give Tribute unto Ceſar, or not 2 } 
But how came this to be a Caſe of Conſcience ? What doubt 
c:uld rhere be, whether Men for their Peace might nor lawfully 
part trom their own, eſpecially ſuch a little pare of ir? Some 
think, thar tliey ſpake with Relation co thar Wicular Tribute, 
which was. demanded, which they think was that half Shekel, 
Exod. 30. 12, 15. paid by the Fews every Year, which was to 
g9 for rhe Sc:rvice of the Tabernacle : They ſay, that the Ro- 
mins had ordered this Payment to go the Emperor, and this bred 
tne fvcſtiom, Whether they might lawtully pay that which was 
appointed, as a Teſtimony of their Homage to God, and for che 
Service of the Temple, to a profane uſe. I muft confeſs I can- 
not fo freely azree to this, wanting any good Proof that the Ro- 

*7m.ens exatted that Payment for the Emperor, and thinking it a 
very probable Argument to rhe contrary, That the Tables of the 
Aomney-Ch.mgers, who changed the People's Money into half She- 
kels, fir tor roar Payment, was now continued. And if that 
Payment had been now altered, and turned' to the uſe of the 
Civil Government, cur Saviour's overturning thoſe Tables, and dri- 
ving the Money-Changers our, had offered chem a fair Opportu- 
nity co have charged him wich Seditiom, which they did notdo 
epon thar Accourr. I rather theretore think the Queſtion pro- 
pounded was concerning the Lawſvineſs of making any Payments 
ro the Emperor, Tocking upon him as an Uſurper of Authority 
ever a free P25pie, That the Fews were very tenacious of their 


M ATTHE EW. 


I 
s 


Chap. RY | hap 


Liberty, appears from 79%. 8. 33. And without doubr th had 
moſt ot chem paid ſuch Taxes, as the Roman Emperoy laid”, e ral 
chem with no very Good Will. Now theſe Hypoctrites tur * and 
into a Caſe of Conicience; God having made the owe a 6 a _ 
People, whether they ſhould not fin againſt God. *; Tee | her, 
chete Civil Taxes to a Pagan Conqueror * There was one Th Kers | on 
and Judas mentioned, Aets 5. 36, 37. who made an Infurregic,? jag 
upon ir. This was a Queſtion Caprious enough. For if he ON | Seve 
faid it was Luwful, he had probably incurred the ad COVE 


Odium of the 
People, which was what they deſired ; for they had apprehend 

him before this time, bur tor tear of them. * It he had {aid + | ae 
is not Lawful, they had what they ſought for, a fair Opportunj . 
for accuſing him, and delivering him-up to Pontizes Pilate, wh 


Roman Governour at this time amongſt chem. nor 
18 But Jcſus perceived their wickedneſs, and iq } Joi OT 
Why tempr ye me, ye hypocrites ? , 205 
19 Shew me the tribute-money : And | they | M 
brought to him a || peny. (S?eCe Quel 
20 And he ſaith unto them, Whoſe zs this Imape | 0 na 
and || ſuperſcription ? Serzy 4 4 
21 They ſay unto him, Ceſars. Then faith he 2! ond t! 
unto them, * Render therefore unto Celſar,the things by , Mari 
that are Ceſar's; and unto God, the things thar 456 * Gur _—_ 
God's. 4 Mitial 
22 When they had heard zbeſe words, they mar- Romy; bur oi 
velled, and left him, and went their way. roles 
Mark hath che ſame, Ch, 12. 15, 16, 179. So hath Lube, Ch jn Mat 
20. 23, 24, 25,26. Our Saviour, faith Luke, perceived their ah; 
Craftmeſs, how fubrilly they went about to entrap him, He alt; ge 
them ro ſhew him the Tribute-Money : The Fews had two forts nor t 
of Money, Shekels and half Shekels, which was Money proper would | 
to them ; and Romen Coin, Pence, and Seſterces. Their Tribure yas 
was paid in this Coin. Accordingly they bring unto him a P41; $0-the% 
a Roman Peny as much in value as Seven Pence half Peny in hr It you | 
Coin: Which it ſeems was the Poll-money, which the Romy; or 
exaQtcd of every Head. The Coining of Money was always look: & 18G 
upon as an Ad of Soveraign Power, hence the Uſurparion of i eacy dl 
is made ſo Criminal ; Moſt Princes ufe ro have their Efivies bien we 
ſtampr upon their Coin, and ſome Inſcription abour it with their wing 
Names, and ſome Words expreffive of their Dominion over ſuch ahora 
places, where their Coin is Currant: So as the Admiſſion of ; _—_ 
Prince's Coin as Currant amongſt a People, was a Teſtimony of tall cor 
their owning, and SubjeQion to fuch a Prince. Such an Image on Ke 
and Superſcriprion this piece of Money had : Upon which cur ON. 
Saviour concludes, | Render therefore unto Ceſar, the things nhich 1,0 ©0 | 
are Ceſar's, and unto God, the things that are God's. ] Althy' Ce/a Voug val 
be an Ulſurper, yer God hath given you into his Hands; youve Advameg 
owned him by accepring his Coin as Currant amongſt you, His dien, Non 
Right, and God's Righr are ewo diſtin& things. Religion do RD 
nor exempt you from your Civil Duties, and Obedience to Prin- 5 yy = S 
ces in things wherein they have a Power co Command. Prince: RejurTeC 
have Power to impoſe Tributes upon their Subjedts for the Min: " p alon 
renance, and upholding of the Civil Government, Let («ly _ ue 
have his Due, and ler God have his Right : You are a Company _ of 
of Hypocrites, who by this Queſtion would make me believe you " wig 
have a great Zeal for God, and his Rights ; and thar y: u culd CW b 
not pay Taxes, that yuu might afſert God's Right over you, this m—_ wy 
is your Prerence z but indeed your Defign is to try me, if yu . Ss 
can perſiwade me by any Words of mine to encouraze youto > w 
any Sedirion, or As of Diſlcyalry ro your Civil Governcur a 
[ ſee no reaſon for it; Ceſar hath his Right, and God ha: kis will þ | 
Right ; you may give them borh tlLeir Rigits; and fo vou ouzhr wi h 
ro do. God's Kingdom is of another Nature than the *Kinsdoms Fa | 
of the World. His Law forbidderh no Civil Rights. Thus cur deg 
Saviour anſwers their Queſtion ſo, as he maketh chemo con- Mabe Þ: 
demn themſelves, it owning the Civil Magiſtrates Power, they Whig 
did not give him his Rights; and fo as neither Ce//rr, nur vet And a $7 
the People had any juſt Cavfe of Exception againſt him f-r tis in the We 
Words. This Anſwer turprizech them ; chey marvel, and go Luſt, 


cheir way, having play'd their Game, and got nothing. 


31 I 
| haveye 
God, { 
= 22 
& Ifaac, : 
Lis. Of the 
bW, 22 


Were aj 


22 The ſame day came to him the Sadduces.which 
{ay that there is no reſurrection, and asked him, 

24 Saying, Maſter, Moſes ſaid, It a man die, ha- 
ving no children, his brother {hall marry tis wite, 
and raiſe up ſeed unto his brother. 

25 Now there was with us ſeven brethren, and 
the firſt, when he had married a wife decealcd, 
and having no iſſue. left his wife unto his brother. 


© . _ IM. 'k ! 

26 Likewiſe the ſecond allo, and the third, unto 4; 7.28. 0 
the 7 ſeventh. thete W; 
27 And laſt of all the woman died alſo. in the by 


28 Therefore in the reſurre&ion, whoſe wit? —— 


{hall ſhe be of the ſeven ? for they all had her. © Words | 


1 
Mirk thus repeats the fame Hiſtory, Chap. 12. 18, 19, 2% 0% | ag bor! 
So doth Luke, Chap. 20. 27, 28, 29, 3o, 31, 32, 33. Concerning ws 
the Sadduces, we have before ſpoken; they were a Sect amongſt pn 
the 7ews, much differing from the Phariſees, as may be ſeen, As ons, Cai 
23.8, Amongſt other Erroneous Tenets, they denied che Re/ur- ay , 


reetion, as may be ſeen in thar Text, as well as chis ; and (which 
indeed was cheir Fundamental Error) they denied Spirits, and 
conſequently the Immorralicy of the Soul in its ſeparate Eſtate. 
Their Defign feemech nor ſo much ro have been, ro have drawn 
out a Diſcourſe from our Saviour; which might have couche 
his Lite, (which was the Phariſees Deſign) as to have expoſed 
him, by bringing him to an Abſurdiry. To this purpoſe they 


enink th 
Ir 07 tho 
Our Sty+, 
act vcd, 


fy] 97 t! 


put a Cate ro our Saviour upon the Law, Dexr. 25. 5. where God 


Naa 


wp, XXIL. 


St. 


had ardained for the Preſervation 


ral Tribes 
and one of 
mt MATT) 


bor. 


ana 


Es 
fioult\ 5 


of NCA} 


nor knowing the {Criprures, nor the power of God. 
Cor in the reſurrection they neither marry. 


ATR 
a \/ 
PF . 


God in heaven. 
34k hath the ſame, Ch. 12. 24, 25. only he propounds it asa 


» hk The Children of this World 
Sith ReſurreFion of the Dead, neither Marry, nor are given in 
Aaiildg 
A / Ul % ard 
rect 
Miſtake, That there 7 
bur 0; Relations £00 z, and the Stare of the World to-come ſhould 
be like the Srate of this World, in which for the Propagation and 
2ncinuance of Mankind, Men and Women marry, and are given 
in Marriage. Now, faith our Saviour, Your Error 1s bottomed 1n 
Drance, becauſe you know not the Scriptures, (which 1n- 

%eq is the Foundarion of all Men's Errors in Matcer of Faith ) 
nor the Power of God. If you knew the Power of God, you 
won'd know rac God is able to raife the Dead. To confirm our 
Ezich in the ReſurreCion, the Scripture every where fenderh us 
© the Confideration of the Divine Power, Rom. 8. 11. Phil. 3.21. 
If you knew the Scriptures, you would know rhar God will raiſe 
the Dead, and the State of Men in the RefurreCtion ſhall nor be 
1 in this Lite, where Men and Women dye daily; and in cafe 
mey did nor Marry, and give in Marriage, the Generation of 
en would quickly be extin&. Bur (faith Luke) They who ſhall 
{lo occomted worthy to obtain that World, and the ReſurreFion from 
1 Did, It is manifeſt by the firſt Words, that the latter Words 
are not to be underſtood of the General Reſurre&imm (ro which all 
thall come worthy or unworthy) bur of the ReſurreFion unto Life. 
Thar Refurrettion which is not the meer Effet of Divine Provi- 
cence, neceſſary in order to the laſt Judgment, bur rhat Reſurre- 
oro Life, which is the Effe& of Chris Purchaſe. And this 15 
obſervable, thar the ReſurreFion from the Dead will be of fo little 
Advantage; nay, of ſuch miſerable Diſadvantage ro wicked 
Men, that the Scripture ſometimes ſpeakerh of the ReſurreQion 
as it it were peculiar to Saints. I Cor. 15. 22, Phil, 3. 11. So 
in this Text, hence Luke calls them afterward the Children of the 


your 13n 


Reſurrz&imz not that others ſhall nor riſe, but the Children of 


G14 alone ſhall be the Favourites of the Refurre@ion; thoſe who 
ſhall riſe as Children to an Eternal Inheritance. Concerning the 
Se of Perſons in the ReſurreFion, our Saviour thus deſcribes it : 
Tiar Men and Women there ſhall be as the Angels, not in all 


things, but in the things mentioned, which are Two, One of 


them mentioned by Matthew, borh by Luke, 1. They ſhall not dye 
ary mire. 2. They ſhall not Marry, nor be grven in Marriage, The 
firſt ſhewerh rhe Needleſnefs of the latter; for one great 
reaſon of Marriage was t2 ſupply the Gaps which Death maketh 
in the World ; bur Men ſhall nor dye any more, therefore there 
will be no need of Conjuzal Relations amongſt Men, more than 
ann2 Anvels, The Children of this World (faichLuke) Marry, and 
are given in Marriage. Marriage was only an Inſtitution forthis 
Worid, and is to continue no longer than this World ſtands 
f:r the Stare of Men in anotherWorld will be ſuch as needs ir nor, 
bein a Stare of Immortality, ſo not needing it for Propagation ; 
knd a St.zte of Perfe&ion, and ſo notneeding ir for mutual Help 
the Atairs of Man's Life, nor a Remedy againſt extravagant 
ult, 


31 But as touching the reſurreCtion of the dead, 
have ye not read that which was ſpoken to, you by 
God, faying, 


L iſtac, and the God of Jacob 2 God is not the God 

is, 1 the dead, but of the living. 

* 233 And when the multitude heard zÞzs, * they 
were attoniſhed at his doctrine. 


A 


Mrz hath the ſame, Ch. 12. 25, 27. So hath Luke, Ch. 20. 
37,38. only Mark and Luke mention the time when God ſpake 
tele Words, —In the Buſh, that is, when God appeared to Moſes 
1 the burning Buſh, Exod. 3. 6. and Luke addeth, for all live unto 
vm, Mark alſo faith, Concerning the Dead that they Riſe, have you 
mit read in the Booh of Mojes * Our Saviour 1n the toregoing 
Words nad by the by afſerred the DoQrine of Angels; here he aſ- 
*&rts borh che Do&rine of the Immortality of the Soul, and alſo of 
e RelurreGion of the Body; and tho' Cardinal Perron, and 
Naldmate the Jeſuit boldly aflerr, rhar the RefurreGion of the 
-Y anno be proved from hence without taking in che Tra- 
28 we the Church; yer, notwithſtanding cher Confidence, 
think lang have a greater Reverence tor- vur Saviour's Words, 
age Car not only the Immortality of the Soul, bur the Reſurredtj- 
nts allo, 1s irretragavly proved by his Argument of 
ours: To make out winch, theſe things are to be ob- 
+ 1. God dorh not fay I have been, bur I am : He ſpeak- 
i 0f Ir ms when he Ipake ro Mes, and not of the 


of the Inkeritances of the ſeve- 
and Families diſtin, That if Brethren dwell together, 
them died, leaving no Tjſue, the Wife of the Dead ſhould 
y unto 4 Stranger, her Husband's Brother ſhould go in unto 
' tche her to him to Wife, &*c. Now they either knew of, 
' 1 ſuppoſed a Cafe of 1teven Brethren, fucceffively Marry- 
ne Woman , chey defire ro know, whoſe Wite of the 
79man ſhould be in the Reſurrection ? Inftead of dil- 
Acucenets, and putting our Saviour upon a Dit- 


> Teſas anſwered and faid unto them, Ye doerr, 
«or are given in marriage; but * are as the angels of 


Queſtion ; D3 ye not therefore err, becauſe you know not the Scrip- 

> Like ſaith, Ch. 20. 34,35. And Jeſus anſwering, ſaid un- 
Marry, and are given in Marrti- 
But thev which ſhall be accounted worthy to obtain that World, 


Noither can they dye any more, for they are equal to the 
are the Children of God, being the Children of the Reſur- 
Tie Diſcourſe of rhe Sadduces was borromed upon this 
{ſhould nor only be a Refurrection of Bodies, 


b 22 *lamtheGod of Abraham, and the God of 


MATTHEW. 


Iiaac, and Zacob, bur the God 
l:1mtelt rhe God of 
as a Eenefadtoy, 
People or Perſon, 
tO Avraham, Gen. 17. 7. I will be 4 God to thee and thy Seed, that 
Hu, of thee and of th Seed. oP - : 
MEET Yy 3. Abraham, Iſauc, and Zacob, doth 
not frgnifie part of Abraham, Iſaac and Facob, but their entire Perſons, 
which confiſt of Bodies as well as Souls, 4. God is nt the God of 
the Dead; he doth nor ſhew Kindneſs ro them if they be Dead, 
and ſhall Rite no more, 5. In this Lite, Avi aham, Iſ.cuc, and 
Jacob, received no ſuch ſiznal Kindneſs trom God, bur cthers 
might receive, as great Kindneſs as any ot them did. Hence 
now our Lord proverh, as the Immortality of rheir Souls, ſo the 
ReſurreGtion alſo of theirBodies, that God might theiv "himſeit 
che God of w : . : : 
ic God of whole Abraham, Iſaac, and Facob, Gerrard faich, The 
Argument of this Text is made clear, by Heb. 11. 15, it herefore 
God 3s not aſhamed to be called their God, for he hzth prepared for 
oo 4 City, This is that which made God to be truly called 
_ God ;, becauſe he hath prepared for them a City, which City 
ey could never poſſeſs withour a Reſurredtion. It is yet furcher 
added by ſome, That God's Promiſe ro Abraham of the Land cf 
Canaan was in theſe Terms, Gen. 13. 15. To thee will I give it, ard 
thy Seed for ever : Not only to thy Seed, bur to thee; 1o to Iſrac, 
Cen. 20. 3. tO Facob, Gen. 35. 12. Exod. 6. 4, 8. Deut. 11. 21. 
The Promiſes ſeemed nor to be fulfilled in giving cheir Poſterity 
the Earthly Canaan, which Abrah.um, Iſaac and Facob lived notto 
enjoy, bur ro extend to the Ref prepared for the Peopic or God; 
the City mentioned by rhe Apoſtle, Heb. 11. 15. which God bad 
Prepared for them, to juſtine kithſelf ro be thoir Got, Now 
thiscould nor be prepared for their S5ts meerly, which were 
2ut a part of rhem, and hardly capable of p-rfet Happinels 
wichour 2 Re-union with the Body, chere being in it fuch an 
innate Defire : Nor was it reaſonable, that rhe Bodies of theſe 
Saints, having been Sharers with their Souls in their Labours, 
thould have no Share in their Reward : Therefore from that Co- 
venant of Gud with Abraham, Iſaac and Facob, our Saviour firm 
ly proverh their Reſurre&ion. Lube adderh, Fir all live unto him. 
Not live unto him only as their End, but inthe ſame Senſe, as Pat 
fairh, Rom. 6. 10. of Chriſt, In that he Iiveth, he liveth unto Gd : 
Thar is, with God. So faith Lube, 45raham, Iſrac and Frcvb, 
tho' Dead at preſenr, Live with God, and they, andall che Chil- 
dren of Abraham ſhall Live to God; that is, with God to all E- 
rernity. Matthew addeth, When the multitudes heard this, they 
were aſtoniſhed at his Dorine, Poor People, they had been uſed 
ro hear Diſcourſes from the” Phariſees, about the Traditions of the 
Elders, Rites, and Ceremonies, waſhing Hands before Met, and the 
neceſſity of waſhing Pots and Cups, and the Sadduces declaiming 
againſt rhe Dottrines of Angels and Spirits, and the Reſurre#ion ; 
they were aſtoniſhed ro hear one inſtructing them in things con- 
cerned their Souls, the Reſurre&ion and Life Eternal, and Con- 
turing their great Teachers from Books of Scripture owned by 
themſelves; for the Sadduces, tho' rhey had no great Regard to the 
Prophets, yer they owned, and payed a great Deference to the 
Books of Moſes. 


| time r9 Come. 2, He dorh not 


34 But when the Phariſees had heard that he had 
put the Sadduces to filence, they were gathered to- 


gether. 
35 Then one of them which was a lawyer, asked 
hm a queſtion, tempting him, and ſaying, 

36 Maſter, which zs the great commandment in 
the law ? 

37 Jeſus ſaid unto him, * Thou {halt love the 
Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy 
ſoul, and with all thy mind. ; 

38 This is the firſt and great commandment. 

29 And the ſecond zs like unto it, * Thou ſhalt 
love thy neighbour as thy ſelf. 

40 * On rheſe two commandments hang all the 
law and the prophets. 


Mark relateth this Hiſtory more fully, chap. 12, from ver, 28, 
to 34. And one of the Scribes came, and having heard them reaſon- 
ing together, and perceiving that he had anſwered them well, ashed 
him, Which us the fir$ Commandment of all? And Feſus anſwered 
him, The fir of all the Commandments is, Hear, O Tjrael, The Lord 
thy God is one Lord ;, And thou ſhalt love the Lord thy God with all 
thy heart, and with all thyſoul, and with all thy mind, and with 
all thy lirength: This is the fir Commandment. And the ſecond is 
like, namely this, Thou ſhalt love thy Neighbour as thy ſelf : There is no 
other Commandment greater than theſe. And the Scribe jaid unto him, 
Well, Maſter, thou ha$t ſaid the truth ; for there is one God, and there 
is none other but he. And to love him with all the Heart, and with ali 
the Underſtanding, arid with all the Soul, and with all the Strength, 


and to love his Neighbour as himſelf, is more than all whole Burnt-Of- 


ferings and Sacrifices. And when Jeſus jaw that he anſwered diſcreet- 
ly, he faid unto him, Thou art not far from the Kingdom of God. And 
no Man after that durſt ask him any Queſtion. Luke omitcerh this 
Hiſtory, only ſubjoinerh co our Saviour's Anfwer to the Sad- 
duces, chap. 20. ver. 39, 49+ Then certain of the Scribes anſwering, 
ſaid, Maſter, thou haſt well ſaid. - And after that, they * dur$F not 
as him any Queſtion at all, There are different Opinions of In- 
rerpreters concerning the Deſign of this Scribe, called by Ifirthew 
4 Lawyer, in coming co Chriſt with this Queſtion. Some think 
char he came upon the ſame Errand withthe others, co entanzle 
him in his Speech. Others, thathe came merely out of a defire 
to be more tully inſtructed by him, and char Tempting here 11- 
nifies no more than Tying him; nor for a bad end, bur as lie 
Queen of Sheba came to prove $9/o,mm with hard Queſtions, © 


have an Experiment of his Wiſdom. Our Savtour's fatr rrearins 
Hhh2 him; 


Chap. RXI.. 


ſay, I am the Lord of Abraham, 
of. Now where-ever God. ſtiles 
any People, or Perſon, it always fignifieth, God 
and one thar doth, and will do Gocd to fuch 4 
It is a foederal Expreſſion ; as where he {aich 


* Deurt. IG; 
I 2. 3049s 


Rom.13.3- 
Gal. 5. 14: 
jam. 2. 8. 


TC. Jo 33: 


x —— - — 
 —_ "=: B —_—— 
EHP RS 2 9b 
Ir a a 8 - = _ q +. S348 
NS £6 g _ IE Y -= Ly a= _ AAA” 


_ 
- —_ 
< A 
TEES pn 
a+ =. Gar 
. * ” or, » II 
— = pu — 
oy £ bo 
= _ S- - 
_ = 


Chap. XXII. St. 


Ty Cor. 
I wy 25s 


Feb. 1.13. 


& 190.12, 


13. 


M 4 T 


him, and the Commendation he gave him, rogerher wich his fair 
ſpeaking ro our Saviour, and Commending his Antiver, induce 
me to think rhat he came on no1ll Deſign. Befides, that Opi- 
nion of ſome, that he came hoping to hear our Saviour viline 
their Ritual Precepts in Compariton of the Mcral Precepts, feem- 
*th ro me not improbable, tor himſelf conſents to whar our Savi- 
our 1aith, and addeth, that To love the Loyd our God, Sc. is more 
th.m all Burnt-Offerings and Sacrifices, His Queſtion was, Which 5 
the firſt and greateſt Commandment £ Matthew ſaich, the great 3 
Mb faith, the firſt : They have both the ſame Senſe, and our 
Saviour, v. 38. purs chem rogerher. Feſws ſaith unto him, Thu 
(halt love the Lord thy God with all thy Heart, and with all thy 
Sol, and with all thy Mind, Math adds, with all thy Strength. 
Ic is to be found, Deut. 6. 5. only there is nor with all thy Mind. 
Like puts it in, Ch. 10. 27. It is bur the ſame thing expreſied 1n 
divers Terms; for with all thy Soul, is Comprehentive of Heart, 
Mind, and Strength. Mak adds a Pretace, Hear O Iſrael, the 
Lord thy God us one God, Thou ſhalt love, SC. Thoſe Words only, 
1. Stirred up the Pcople's Artention. 2. Shewed the Reafon of 
the following Precept, which is fully expretſed in Matthew, It 
any ack, to which of the Ten Commandments 1s this to be refer- 
red? It is eaſily anſivered, thar it is the Sum of the four firſt, 
which Comprehend our Duty toward God. Our Saviour's ex- 
preſſing them by [wing God, thews us that the Law of God was 
10t fulfilled in the Obſervation of the Letter of thoſe Command- 
Ments, but doing theſe Things which God commands out of a 
Principle of Love; the higheſt Degrees of Love to Gcd, They 
idly Interpret this Precept who Interpret it only an Obligation 
upon us to Love God as much as we are able in our Lapſed Stare 
the E:!! of Mm loſt God no Right of Commanding, and telling 
us our Duty. The Law doth undoubredly require of us Love fo 
God in the higheſt Degree, to be ſhewed by the Aﬀs of the 
whole Man, in Obedience to all his Commandments, and that 
conſtantly. Ir is our only Happineſs rhar che Law 1s in the 
Hands of a Mediator, who hath thus perte&tly fulfilled it for all 
thoſe who believe in him, Rom. 8. 3. and accepterh of us, rhe 
Will for the Dced. Thus the Moral Law is a Schoolmaſter that 
leaderh us unro Chriſt. Our Saviour juſtly calls this rhe firſt 
and grear Commandment. 1. Becauſe God is to be ſerved be- 
fore our Neighbour. 2. Nor can Love to our Neighbour flow 
from any orher true Principle, than that of Love ro Sod, nor 1s 
our Ncizhbour to be loved, bur for God's ſake, and in Subor- 
dination unto him. | And the ſecond 3s like to it. ] Commanding 
Ljve alſo. So that as the Apoltle faith, Love is the fulfilling of 
the Law. (Thy Neighbour.) That is, every-Man, | as thy ſelf, ] do- 
ing as much for him as chou wouldſt have him do for thee, 
and doing no more againſt him, than thou wouldft willingly he 
ſhould do azainſt chee. As truly and ſincerely, as thy ſelf. | On 
theſe Two Commandments hang all the Law and the Prophets.) 
There is nothing commanded in all the Old Teſtament, bur may 
be reduced to theſe Two Heads. This is the whole Duty of Man 
there commanded. The whole Book of God 1s our Rule, and 
we are obliged to every Precept init. Moſes ſummed up all in 
the Ten Commandments, to which truly interpreted, all the 
Precepts of Scripture are reducible. Chriſt ' here brings the 
Ten ro Two. The Apoſtle brings all to one, telling us Love is 
the fulfilling of the Law, There is nothing forbidden in Scri- 
prure, but what offends the Reyal Law of Love, either to God or 
Man: There is nothing commanded, but what will fall under it. 
Atzrh adderh, that the Scribe applauds our Saviour, as having ſaid 
the Truth, and confeiling, that the fulfilling theſe rwo Precepts 
was more than all Sacrifices and Burnt Offerings; in which he agreed 
with Samuel, who long ſince rold Sau!, that to obey was better 
than Sicrifice; and it needs muſt be fo, ſeeing that all the true 
Value of Sacrifices lay in the Obedience by them given to the Will 
of God. Chriſt cells rhe Scribe, | He was not far from the Kingdom 
- of God.) He who once rightly underſtands the Law of God, and 
hath caſt off char filly fancy of thinking to pleaſe God with Ri- 
tual Thinzs, hath made a great Proficiency under that School- 
Maſter, who it rightly underſtood, will ſhew him the need of 
another Righteouſneſs chan his own, wherein to appear before 
God. 


_ 41 While the Phariſees were gathered together, 
Jeſus asked them, 

42 Saying, What think ye of Chrift 2 Whoſe Son 
is he? They ſay unto him, The $97 of David. 

43 He ſaith untothem, How then doth David in 
ſpirit call him Lord, ſaying, 

4 * The Lord ſaid unto my Lord, Sit thou on 
my | _ till I make thine enemies thy foot- 
ſtool. 

R 45 If David then call him Lord, how is he his 
Qn ? 
a6 And no man was able to anſwer him a word, 
neither dur{t any man (from that day forth) ask him 
any more queſtions. | 


fark hath this Story, ſhortly repeating only the Subſtance of 
ir, Ch. 12. 35, 36, 37. adding nothing ro it, but concluding. 
And the commom People heard him gladly. Luke repeareth ic as 
ſhortly, Ch. 20. 41, 42, 42. For the fight underſtanding of this 
Diſcourſe of cur Saviour to the Phariſzes, we muſt know, thar 
cho' the Ph.wiſees and the Jews 1n general did expett a Meſſtah 
or a Chriſt, ver they expetted no more of him, or in him, than 
rhar he ſhould be 4 fn, the Sn of David, deſcended from his 
F:imily according to the Pronuſe, 1/4izh g. 6. and dreamed only 
0.74 Secular Prince, who ſhould deliver them from their Ene- 
mes, and reſtore rhem to the'r Ancient Civil Liberties. Chriſt 
{cciag a pack of them rogetiicr, rook the Liberty, which he had 
a'l,ved chem towards himſeli, ro propound a Queſtion or two 
ro them. Iitz Queſtion was [ Wozt they thought of Chriſt * ] Not 


THEW. Chap. XX1 


of himſelf, bur of the Meſſt.:h whom they expetted ? Who 
he ſhould be? They ſay unto him, {The Son of David "Joy Son 
one who ſhould in a right Line be delcerded irom 7 , "2 Ss, 
was a conſtane and uncontrouled Tradition am-nsft - Tis 
Hence Mark ſaith, the Queſtion was propounded p46 ages ; 
Scribes * Luke, hw ſay they, that Chrijt is, that is is 54 ” | ON 
Son of David / This was a common received Opinion _ e d 
them, which our Saviour by the next Werds doth n-: TIN 
di&, but only argucth that he muſt needs be fomcrhins mg * 
For (faith he) { How then doth David in Spirit eall him "atv 4y . | BED 
Pſal. 110. 1. Mark ſaith, -David himſelf ſaid by the Hily C1. bot 
David was a Prophet, and ſpake by Inſpiration trom the H - 
Ghoſt. A&s 1.16. 77 2, 30. Luke ſaith, in the Pſalms woes 
we may obſerve, thar Pal, 110. was David's Palm, not 4 rn 
compoted by ſome other jor David, as ſome contend. gps 
David have called him Loyd, whom he knew to be mecrly Ns ms 
One that ſhould only deſcend from him? He would have ſia . 
The Lord ſaid to my Son, or will ſay to my Son. { The L197 rx h 
Fehouah ſaid to my Lord : Sit thou on my right Hand.) Would Di 
via ſpeaking Propherically by the Holy Ghoſt concernins "1 ; = 
Meſſiah, had he believed he was to be his Son, and no Sg ; wy 
have ſaid, that ebwah ſhould ſay unto him, ſit on my p;.." | 
Hand, a Place of the higheſt Honour, Dignicy, and Favour, Fen 


til I make thy Enemies thy Fortjtool, \ that is, for ever? For w;j1 ord 
doth nor fiznifte a Dererminate time, See the Nores on Ch i F | 
25. | If David then call hiia Lord, hyw 4s he then his $9n ? ] Tha b rf 
is, how 15 he then no more than his Son, no more than 1 _ ds 

19 0 


Man? Our Saviour by this Arzument dorh neither go about 4 : 
prove, that the Chriſt was not « oe the $>2 of Livid, nor thar ; fg 


he was the Me145 himſelf, bur that their expeFed Meſſics or Qu 
Chriſt muſt be more than a meer Man, otl:erwife D:vid would ite 
never have called him Ld; nor yet prophefied, that Tebruh hin:s 
ſhould call him to Sit at his Right Hand. Matthew concludes with oh re 
telling us, that as the Sadduces and rhe Scribes were Non-pluſt of 61d 
before; 10 now the P/7.771jees Mouths were alſo ſtopped. 23; Which 
ſaich, rhe Common People heard him gladly. Matthew faith, [ Bs They 
Man was able to anſwer him a Word, neither durſt any 2.m ad hin Law C 
any more Queſtions, Nor ſhall we hear of their croublins him Endea 
with Diſpures any more; they now ſee Diſputing will not @ tliem, 
their Buſineſs; rheir next Buſineſs is ro confule how to take 4. their 1 
way his Life, which is always the Courſe of Proud and Maliciy pretfin 
Men, given over of God to ruin, to conceal their Convictions £501, 
and proceed to execute their Luſts and Malice, rather han they In dcil 
will not have their Ends, Burt before they meer. with a fir 0p- tian ch 
portunity, we ſhall have ſome excellent Diſcourſes from gu; ot Hun 
Saviour to the Diſciples, and the Mulritnde. Compa! 
" £ - ? 

CHAP. XXII. Wb 

Chrift exhorteth the Multitude, and his Diſciples, to obſerve their large 
Dottrine, but not imitate their Prattice. The reaſon why, 11, Our 
Shewing their Ambition, exhorteth his Diſciples to beware of them fo WhAr 
5—12, Denounceth Woe for their hindring the Goſpel, dewing not OI 
Widows Houſes ; for their Covetouſneſs, for preferring the G1{i;- 02MeS | 
fore the Temple, and the Offering before the Altar : For theiryi- rm, £9 
ciſeneſs in ſmall, but negleet of weightier Matters : And fir thir ances of 
Hypocriſie, in External Obſervance, and Inward Wickhedneſs, 13=%%, tacir Mc 
He threateneth them with Eternal Deſtru&ion, for 4buſang al is CHEIP T 
Killing his Meſſengers; and pathetically bewails the ſaid Eft cn tem 
and Condition of Feruſalem, 34—39. [.vge the 

Cf 1015 

ip.tho Imt 

L E he ſpake Jeſus to the multitude, and tohis OS 
diſciples, _ th 

2 Saying, The Scribes and the Phariſees fit in ecs 
Moſes ſear. a, if 
3 All therefore whatſoever they bid you obſerve, wn Hear 
zPat obſerve and do; but do not ye after thzir Tvat yu ; 
: X* E Tim hat 
works: for * they ſay and do nor. *kit whoregial 
* J-ps dic 


Our Lord having now done with the Phariſees, turneth his 


it . Ll by R Tr 
Diſcourſe to the more docible People, who (as we heard before) e Rivb 


becauſe, : 


heard him atrencively and gladly, Mar. 12. 37. Lk. 15. 4% Bl; Colo 
Our Saviour foreſaw that ſome unwary Hearers might make minded t 
rwo 111 uſes of what he had ſpoke againſt the Scribes and Phi member aj 
ſees. 1. Some might report him an Enemy to the Lazy, tle reſtrainec 
Interpreters of which the Phariſees were. 2.Others might contemn Service, 
the Authority of the Law, becauſe he had repreſented theſe Men, other Pzc 
in whoſe Hand the Interpretation of it at preſent was, ſo cruly con- Bind his 
remptible: Whereas, ' on the other fide, many might run int? torn thej 
Errors of PraRice, from the Example of the Scyibes and Phari?:s, web the 
their Magiſtrates and Teachers, Againſt all theſe Miſtakes I i: their # 
caurions them in this Chapter; ſhewing, that he did nor under- 


M \, 
LM 2vz. 
"Ys . 


value the Law of Moſes, nor would have his Refle&tions on tl | hwiſes, 
Phariſces prejudice any thing which they caught them of it, 3 E - CO God, ( 
according to ir ; neirher would he have his People take che Copy & ©5725 anc 
of the Law from their Actions. [The Scribes and Phariſees fit E Other Me 


Moſes Seat : | Theſe Men were the ordinary Readers and Infer- larting th 
preters of the Law of God. Moſes is here pur for the Lav, ® Fi: v 
Luk. 16. 31. If they hear not Moſes and the Prophets : And fo v. 25 leen of N 


They have Moſes and the Prophets. Atoſes his Seat fignifierh the * =o 
Seat appointed for thoſe that gave the Sence of the Law, or Jus” 64 
ment upon ic; thus Ads 15. 21, 2 Cor. 3. 15. Moſes in old time ie chi 
hath in every City thoſe that preach him, being read in the S195 + 
every Sabbath-day. Their way was, while they Read the Scrip of A 
tures, they Stood up, (paying a particular Reverence to the pure wo 


Word of God) Luk. 4.15. when they had done Reading, rhe? = h; 
Sate down and opened it, Their Sitting in the Sear of 31es cid a <p 
nor ſignifie a Succeſſi:n tro Moſes, ( for he had no Succeſſor, bills Þ- vr Savi 
the Mediator of the Old-Teſtament,) bur the delivering and ner” Ry, 

preting the Doftrine and Lai of 34/es, Dr. Lightfo2t thinks 1 Keg yk 


is rather to be underſtood of the Chair of Magiltracy, than tt: 
Do#rinal Chair, The Paariſees being exerciſed in taar, it Ty 
# a 


l>, dL 1: 


Ls 15, 


% MM 4'F 


-ſtood of both z for the Reading, and Interpreting the 
| v, chicty belong'd to the Series, | All therefore whatſoever 
hid yi objervey 02ferve ant do, | That 15, wharſoever is in 
141 97, Wen eNEY bid ycu obferve , and do. The Term All 15 
© be underft d reſtrainedly, with retpett to the Subjett, Mar- 
©» Portis tpoken of , 1N mulcirudes of Scriptures. Our Sa- 
138102 his Ditctplcs fo otren againſt rhe Leaven or 
CG Mon, and their Traditions, plainly ſhewerh us, that muſt be 
"me Saujcut it, Let nor the Law of God loſe irs Authority 
vn becauſe of theſe Wicked Men, He doth nor com- 
4d them Fo Rear none but them, for then to what purpoſe did 
ei lf Preach, Or fend our the Twelve, if none might hear 
A!! char can be concluded from this Text is, That the 
af G {, or Word of God", is not to be deipiſed whoever Reads, or 
"1... jt, He goeth on, | But after their Works dv mt, for 
©.» nl d mt. We are Naturally more led by Example 
-1n iy Precept : Men had therctore need be Caurioned againſt 
1 1rvinz Teachers. Od Phil-ſphum qui mon ſapit ſibi, A Man 
i necd very well know che Medicine, which he taketh from 
. 0: 4:cian he teeth fick cr rhe ſame Diteaſe, when he himſelF 
retuiett and abuminates Ir. He that ſys and doth not, may be 
{.:74, bur nor imirared, There may be a time, when Men can 
ordinarily hear 89 erhers, Wii was the preſent Cate, 
1 * For they bind heavy burdens, and grievous to 
horn .-and lay zthz--2 on mens thoulders, but they 
{-lves will not move them with one of their 


y 
I 
l@ UNGT 


+ 
! 


(T7 6 


= Cu 


he 
them 
f1n0ers. 
Our Saviour ſaich the ſame of the Lawyers, Like 11.45, The 
>. {os here mentioned, were not their Traditions and Ritual 
hin -; (C413 would never have before commanded his Diſciples ro 
+1-.u1t do them;) but the things truly commanded by the Low 
if G14, efpecially the Ceremonial Law, call'd a Toke, Ad. 15, 10. 
1c(fay che Apoſtles) neither we nor our Fathers were able tn bear, 
They are, faich our Saviour, Rigid ExaRors and Preficrs of the 
L1y of God upon others, bur will nor themſelves ufe the leaſt 
Endeavours ({uch as the putting to of 4 Finger) themſelves to do 
tem. 1. He blameth them, that cheir own Lives no way anſwered 
ter Doftrine. 2. It may be , healſo blameth their roo rigid 
preſfin.; rhe Liw in all che minute things of it. There may be a 
t301i-rous prefſing of the Law. Good Teachers will be faithful 
in dciivcring the whole Countel of God, yer teaching no more 
tian chemſelves will endeavour to praftiſe; and being conſcious 
© Kumane Infirmity, they will do it with great Tenderneſs and 
Compatſion, joining Law and Goſpel both rogerher. 


- But * all their works they do for to be ſeen of 


pl 
mcn : they make broad their phylacteries, and en- 
1115e the borders of their garments. 

Our Saviour had, ver. 4. blamed rhe Phariſees for not living up 
t© whar they taught, preffing che Law of God on others, bur 
nor doing: nor indeavouring to obſerve it themſelves. Here he 
blames them, for doing what good things they did for Oftenta- 
tin, £9 be Icen of Men, and abounding in their Ritual Perform- 
ances of more minute Concernment, in the mean time negleQing 
their Moral Duties, { Al they do, they do to be ſeen of Men A this 
is t!:c1r main end, to be feen of Men; for this he had retſe&ed 
on them, Chap. 6, {| They make broad their Phyla&eries, and in- 
Lvg2 the Bwdess of their Garments. | For the right underſtanding 
ci this we muſt have recourſe to Num. 15. 37,38. And the Lord 
(pats unto ſes, ſaying , ſpeak unts the Children of Iſrael, and bid 
rom tht they mabe them Fringes in the Byyders of their Gar- 
monts, thrayghout their Generations, And that they put upon the Fringe 
i tho Birders, a Ribband of Blue, And it ſhall be unto you for a 
tringe; that you may look upon it, and remember all the Command- 
ments of the Lord, and do them; and that you ſeek not after your 
own Heart, and your own Eyes, after which you uſe to g3 a Whoring : 
That yw may remember, and do all my Commandments, Deur.22. 12, 
Tin ſhalt make thee Fringes upm the four Quarters of thy Veſture, 
whyewith thou coveres thy ſelf. In obedience ro this Law, the 
7:95 did generally wear fuch Garments thar had Fringes, and 
blue Ribbands annexed to them. The 7ews at this Day do it nor, 
becauſe, as rhiey prerend, they have loſt rhe true way of Dying the 
Blu Colour, required in the Law, The End why God com- 
minded them, 1s exprefſed : That they might look upon it, and re- 
momber all the Commandments of the Lord, and do them; and be 
reltrained from cheir own Invearions, and Imaginations in God's 
Service, They were alſo a Note of DiſtinQion of the Fews from 
other People, Befides theſe, Ged Commanding that they ſhould 
bind his Laws, Fr 4 Sign upm their Hands, and” as Frontlets be- 
#221 t92ir Eves, Deur. 6. 6, 7, 8. they made them Parchments, in 
wel the Preceprs of the Law were written, which they bound 
i mer Freeads, and Arms : Theſe were called Phyladferies, 
M ez) tO beep; things whereinthe Law was kept, The 
©7225 tor a Boaſt how Tealous Keepers they were of the Law 
2d, (than which thev did noching lefs) made theſe Phyla- 
©/27 and Ribbands broader, their Fringzs much longer than 
"2157 Ment; this is thar making broad their P2yla&eries, and in- 
liring the Borders .of their Garments, which our Lord here 
11u1s upon, done only for Oftentation, and that they mighr be 
leen of Men, 

6 * And love the uppermoſt rooms at feaſts, and 
ine chief ſeats in the ſynagogues, 

2 And greetings in the markets, and to be called 
omen, Rabbi, Rabbi. 

Ve have the ſame apply'd to the Scribes, Iark 12. 38, 39. 
a 43- Mark adderh, Which love to go in long Clothing, 

 SvIGur 1n thete Words doth not blame a Diſtinction in 
SN and Places; for he himfelf hath raughc us, that thoſe 
wn em King's Palaces wear 1oft Rayment, and being ofren 
ag iter and Lord, never reflefted on them, who called him 
” 4 14v1038 done amils; he only blameth the Phariſees 4mbis 


7 HE W. 


tron, and filly Aﬀe@tarion of theſe !irtle thin, teeking their own 
Honour, and Glory, or an undue Domination ; there is therefore 
an E7np'/i; ro be put upon the Word L:ve. They might take 
Salutation., and the upper Rooms, if offered them as their due, tur 
keeping Civi! Orders, but net affe& them. 

8 But be nor ye called Rabbi: for one is 
* maſter. cen Chriſt, and all ye are brethren, 

9 And call no man your father upon the 
* for one is your father which is in heaven, 

10 Neither be ye called maſters : for 9: 
maſter, even Chrift. 


your 
earth : 


'S 15 YOUTL 


4-15. nor called che Galathians his little Children, G2). . 


call'd himſelt- a Do#or of the Gentiles, 1 Tim. 2.7. 2 


For mn thai Scuil. God alone is 
Men's Father z Chriſt alone their Maſter. Paſtors and Teachers 
In the Church are all bur Miniſters, Minifters of Chrii ro publiſh 
his Will, and to injoin kis Laws; n-r_ muſt any te owned 2s 
Maſters and Fithers, to impoſe tlicir Liws and ULeRtrines, This 
1s tivice repeated, becaute ſuch is tne Corruption of Hnmane 
Nature, that ic 1s very prone, not only to attctt rchefe Swelling 
Titles, bur alſo to exerciſe thcte Exorbitant Authorities. 


11 * But he that is greateſt among you, {hall be 
your ſervant, 

12 And * whoſoever ſhall exalt himfſclt; ſhall be 
abaſcd ; and he chat thall humble himliclt, thall be 
exalted. 

We have what !s ver, 12, twice 1h Luke, chap,14.11, and 18.14. 
Theſe Verles expound whaz went beiore; and Jer us know, 
I. That ic was not a Tile, but the 4ffe&t.ctiom or a Title which 
he blamed. 2. Not a D»&5jhip or Majterthip, but ſuch a Do&ox- 
ſhip, or Maſterſhip, as made a Man too big ter the Miniſtry of 
rhe Church ; ſuch Honour as hired up the Man's Heart above hit 
Work. He is an Infamcus Do&r7 in the Church of Chrift who thinks 
himſelf too High, cr roo great £2 be 2 Miniſter in ic : for God 
will abaſe, and Men ſhall abate ::im who exalrerh; himſcir. God 
refiſterh, and Men uſually contemn and deipite rhe Prod, eſpe- 
cially Miniſters who are ſo. Both God fhll Exalt, and Men ſhall 
Honour thoſe that humble chemfelves both to 12:1, condeſcending 
ro thoſe of low Degree; and to their Work , rhinking not che 
meaneſt Miniſtry ro Souls, a Work beneath them, 


13 But wo unto you ſcribes and Pharifees, hypo- 
crites; for ye {hut up the kingdom ot heaven againſt 
men : for ye neither go in your {clves, neither ſutter 
ye them that are entring, to £0 1N. 


Our Saviour now cometh ro denounce Eight Woes againtt the 
Teachers of thoſe Times, the Scribes and Phariſees, Luke 1aith, 
chap. 11.5. Wo unto you Lawyers, for you take away the Key of Know- 
ledge, you entred not in your ſelves, and them that were entring you 
hindred, It was written of old , that the Prieſts Lips ſhould 
preſerve Knowledge. God hath commiurred the Key of Knowledge 
to the Miniſters and Gut:des of his Church; nor thar they thuvid 
rake iraway, bur that the People might Seek the Law at their Mouths, 
becauſe they are the Meſſengers of the Lord of Hoſts, Mal. 2.7, Now 
fairh our Saviour, you have Taken it away; this Matthew calls a 
Shutting up the Kingdim of Heaven agairf Men. Dcing what in 
them lay ro keep Men trom the Knowledge of the Mind and 
Will ot God; neither chemſclves Teaching them the Know- 
ledge of,God, (which yer was their Othce and Dury,) nor ſuttering 
others ro do it'who would. | You will neither go in your ſelves, net- 
ther will you ſuffer them that are entring to g2 in. | Your lelves are 
roo Proud, or Lazy to Preach the Goſpel, which is rhe Way to the 
Kingdom of Heaven; and when others would, you fufter chem 
not ; nor yet will you ſuffer the People, who have an Hearc co it, ro 
hear ic. For this he calls chem /HHpocrites even times 1u chis Chapter, 
they pretending ro be Teachers, and Openers of the Door ro the 
Kingdom of Heaven, when indeed they did fhur ic; and denoun- 
ceth a Wo to them, comprehending char Ruin which foon atrer 
came upon them, and their City by the Roman Armies; and that 
Eternal Damnation which ſlept nor, and was duz ro them, There 
are no worſer Men in the World than /Hpocrites ; Men pretending 
highly to God, yer neither themſelves doing heir Duty in umbra- 
cing the Goſpel, nor ſuffering orhers to do it, bur doing what 
in them lies co hinder People from the Means by which they 
might come to the Kingdom of Heaven. 


14 Wo unto you Scribes and Phariſees, Hypo- 
crites: for * ye devour widows houles, and tor 4 
pretence make long prayers; theretore ye {hall re- 
ceive the greater damnation. 

Mark hath the fame, chap. 12. 49. and Luke, chap. 20. 47. 
If any ſhould think that /3ng Prayers are here condemned ,. he 
will be confured by Luk. 6. 12. where he will find chat our Sa- 
viour continued all Night in Prayer to Gods Ir is the End of their 
long Prayers which alone our Saviour blamerth ; their making 
them a Pretence to devour Widows Houſes : Which whether they 
did as intcreſted in the Civil Power, (in which 1t 15 cerrain the 
Phariſees amongſt the Fews were employed,) or by Virtue of thier 
Eccleſiaſtical Power, or Influence , perſwading filly Women co 


give them their Eſtates, or ar leaſt ro give a great parc of tem 


Chap. RX X11. 


* Tins 
3. 5. 
Tir, 1: 11: 


—_—_ wy 
. . 
o P. -- 


"| 
| 143 
4 ba 
ad i 
if 
5 28 
| 44 
3.4 
+ . 
Bp 7 
= 
AQ 0" 
$736 
2 8: 
| } 4. 
V2.1, F + 
Ml; B:{£ 
Af 1”; 
£ 4 173 ET ES 
K $4434 
Wh: ! 
4f F $£/] 1! 
* #7 FX 
FORTE 


Chap. XX 111. 


PEXOQ4.29, 


St, M AT 


to the Service of the Tabernacle, that they might Pray for their 
E>uls, was an Abominacion ro Gd ;, nor only tor the Hypocrifie 
of ſuch Prayers defizned for anorher End chan they pretended ; 
bur becauſe God had taken upon him rhe ſpecial Care, and Pro- 
tetion of the Widows. As our Saviour had before blamed their 
Relizious As for the Oftentation in chem, ſecking only their own 
Honour, and Applauſe: $9 he here blameth chem tor cheir Co- 
ect. Detiyn in them. 


15 Wo unto you Scribes and Phariſees, Hypo- 
crites: for ye compals ſea and land, to make one 
proſelyte ; and when he is made, ye make him two- 
t51d more the child of hell than your {-Ives. 


. A Third Wo followerh, exprefled in this Verſe, becauſe they 
Corrupted their Proſelytes, bath as ro Doctrine and Manners, ſo 
as they were twice more the Children of che Devi), and in danger 
of Hell than before. A Proſelyte was one, who coming from 
ſome Pagan Nation relinquiſhed 7s, and worſhipped One True, 
and Living God. Of theſe Writers tell us there were two forts: 
One that only profeiſed ro Belicuve and Worſhip One God, tho' he 
did not embrace the Fewiſh Religion, ſuch a one they ſuffered ro 
live amonzſt them, and called him A Proſelyte of -the Gate. 
Others embraced the Fewiſh Religion, and were admitred into 
their Church, by Circumciſion, and Baptiſin, and Sacrifice, ( as rheir 
Writers tell us) cheſe they called Proſelytes of Righteouſneſs. Our 
Srviour ſaich the Scribes, and Phariſees, Compaſſed Sea and Land ; 
thar is, would take any Pains (ir is a Proyerbial Expretfion ) to 
make one a Proſelyte ; nor was this blame-worthy in them, bur 
thar which followeth , | That they made him twice mare the 
Child of Hell than before :] Corrupring chem with cheir falſe 
Doftrine , and ſetting them Examples of an ill Life. Their 
Buſineſs was not to turn them from Sin unto God, bur meerly to 

' convert thei to an Opinion ; if they had once got them 1nro 
their Church, ſo as they could make their Markers of them, never 
rezarding their S2uls more, nor to preſs upon them rhe Re- 
fxrmation of their Lives, that they might be ſaved. Thus Prieſts 
and Jeſuits at this day go ro China, Fapan, to Profelyre Men to 
the Rom.m Fiith ; and uſe all imaginable Arts to ſeduce Perſons 
rn and bred under the Profeſſion of the Proteſtant Religion, 
in Proteſt..nt Countries, and boaſt much of their Converrs ; bur 
he who looks upon the Scriptures, and confidereth the Lives of 
the moſt of their Converts, will eafily ſee they are but rwice more 
the Children of Hell, being Licenſed, by their Indulgences, Par- 
dmms, Abſolutions, nay by their very Caſuiſts, to live moſt prodigious 
Impious Lives; to ſay nothing of their Damnable Errors 1n Mat- 
rers of Faith, 


16 Wo unto you, * ye blind guides, which ſay, 


_ **5* * Whoſoever ſhall ſwear by the temple, it is no- 
* Chap. s. thing; but whoſoever {hall ſwear by the gold of 


the temple, he is a debtor. | 

17 You fools, and blind : for whether 1s greater, 
the gold, or the temple that ſanCtifieth the gold? _ 

18 And whoſoever ſhall ſwear by rhe altar, it 1s 
nothing; but whoſoever {wweareth by the gitt that 
is upon it, he is || guilty. 

19 Ye fools, and blind : for whether is greater, 
the gift, or * the altar that ſanctifeth the gitt ? 

20 Whoſo therefore ſhall ſwear by the altar, 
iwcareth by ir, and by all things thereon. 

21 And whoſo {hall ſwear by the temple, ſwear- 
eth by ir, and by * him thar dwelleth therein. 

22 And he that ſhall ſwear by heaven, ſweareth 
. by the * throne of God, and by him that fitreth 
44 thereon. 


Our Saviour here ſheweth the falſe DoErine, which the Pha- 
riſces tor their own Gain taught the People concerning Oaths. God 
had commanded thar rhey ſhould fear and ſerve the Lofd their 
God, and ſwear by his Name, Deur. 6. 13. and 10. 20. He that 

ſwexreth by any Perſon, or Thing, doth ewo Things: He artri- 
burerth co the Thing, or Perſon by which he Sweareth, a Know- 
ledge of che Heart, and the ſecret Intention. 2. He callerh upon 
the Perſon or Thing, by which he Sweareth, to be his Fudge; or 
to take a Revenge upIn him, 1n caſe he doth not believe in his 
Heart what he afftirmeth, or denieth witch his Words, to be true 
or ralſe; otherwiſe an Oath 15 no Security at all. From whence 
appearecth , That it 15 unreaſonable tor any to Swear by any 
orher than God, who alone can have a Knowledge of the Truth, 
and Sinceriry of the Heartz and thar he, who Sweareth by any 
Creature, commitreth 1do/atry in his Heart, and in his Hearr 
doth indeed Bla{phem?, paying a Divine Homage to a Creature ; 
and attributing to che Creature, what only agrceth to the Creator. 
The Phariſees, as it ſeemerth, had caughe rhe People, that ir 
was lawful to Swear by che Creature; bur all Oat?s by Creatures 
did nor bind to the Performance of the thing promiſed by 
fuch Oaths: It a Man ſwear by the Temple, or by the Altar, 
It was nothing ;” no Man was bound by ſuch Oaths, to pertorm 
the thing, for which ſuch Oaths was given as a Security. 
Bur it any Man ſwear by the Gold of the Temple, or by a Gift which 
he brought to the Altar, theſe Oaths did bind him. By the Gold 
of the Temple, 1s not to be underſtood the Golden Veſſels uſed in 
rhe Temple; nor the Golden Plates, with which the ſeveral parts 
of rhe Temple thined ; bur the Gold which was brought as an 
Ofcring into the Temple , and pur into the Treaſury chere, of 
witch, and of the Gifrs, the Priefts and Officers abour the Temple 
had a conſiderable ſhare, which made them equalize an Oarh by 
theſe, ro an Oarh made by the Name of God ir ſelf. Our Saviour 
tcre ſheweth che unreaſonable Folly of the Tradition, and calleth 


| koneth up. Faith, by which ſome underſtand Faith in Go, 


THE I. 


the Gold, muſt ir ſelf be more eſpecially Holy, thar is, ſeparate & 
an Holy Uſe, The Temple was Holy , ſo was the Altar betore the 
Gold was brought into 1t; but the Gold was not Holy, till ir v5 
brought into the Holy Place, and there offered. >; "py 
He lets them know, that Oaths by the Creatures once made dig 
oblige, as much as if they had been made by God himſeif The 
were indecd finfully made, for Men ought nor to have fires 
by Creatures; bur being made, thoſe who made them were het 
ro perform them , 1f the Matter of them were nor ſinful, t- 
he that ſwears by the Altar, ſwears by it, and all the "ons 
thereon : And he who ſwears by the Temple, ſwears by ir gi. 
him that dwelleth therein : And he who ſivears by Hearn ſwear 
by the Throne of God, and him that ſitteth thereon.” For none _ 
ſware by Inanimate Things, could poſſibly. be imagined to cj 
theſe Things which he knew had no Lite, no Senſe, ng Know: 
ledge, ro be a Witneſs to the Truth of his Heart, as to whar þ. 
believed, or what he intended. So as though he that Gyearet) 
by the Creature, be a Profane Swearer, yet he is Bound by his 0,14; 
he indeed ſwearing by the God of thoſe Creatures : He hath reator, 
ro repent of the profane and unlawful Firm of his Oath ; hu i; 
the Matter be, what he may without Sin perform, he is bound !,, 
his Oath to the Performance of it. + 


23 Wo unto you Scribes and Phariſces , Hyg. 
crites; for ye pay tythe of mint, and  anije, «c. . 


theſe ought 
other undone, 


We have much the ſame, Lyk.11.42. only there it is, 7 73tþ;Cl,;,; 
Mint, and Rue, and all manner of Herbs, and paſs over Judgment, $1:,* 
and the Love of God, Ir is maniteſt by our Saviour's Words in 
the Jatter part of the Verſe : Theſe ought you to have dine, that 
he doth not blame the Phariſees ExaQneſs in Tithing Miz, 
Aniſe, Rue, Cummin, and all manner of Herbs; bur their negletting 
the weightier matters of the Law, Faith and Love to God, Judgment 
and Mercy, The Levites having no Inheritance , God ordained 
Tythes for their Maintenance z of which alſo the Poor were to 
have a Share, Lev. 27. 30. Num, 18.23. The Phariſee boaſted, 
Luk. 18. 12. that he paid Tythe of all he pofleſt ; Chriſt here 
acknowledgerh , thar the Phariſees were exa& in their Payins 
Tythes , but he blames them for their Partiality, neglefting the 
weightier things of the Law. 2. For their Hypocrifie, they were 
only exa& in theſe little rhings, that they might be taken notice 
of, as Scrupulous Obſervers of the Divine Law; while they omitted 
thoſe things which were of much more weight , which he rec- 


bur the moſt, Faithfulne/?, and ſincere and hone8? Dealings with Men, 
in oppoſition ro Fraud, and Cheating , and Circunrentions, Jul 
ment, by which he means 7uſtice, giving to every one what is 
their own. Mercy, by which he meaneth a Charitable Behaving, in 
helping ſuch as are Miſerable and Aﬀi&ted. Lowe to God, which 
is the true Root our of which all things ſhould flow ; and « in- 
deed comprehenfive of all our Duty roward God , as well as the 
Root of all our Good Works towards Men. 


them tor it, Blind Guid2s; for in reaſon, the Temple Sanftitying 


24 Ye blind guides, which ftrain at a gnat, and 
{wallow a camel. 


It it a Proverbial Expreſſion uſed amongſt them, againft ſuch as 
would pretend a great Niceneſs and Scrupuloſity , about, and Zeal 
for, little Things ; bur in Matters of much higher Concern and 
Moment, were not nice and ſcrupulous at all : And this indeed 
is both a certain Note, and an ordinary Pra&ice of Hypocrites, There 
1s no Man that 1s ſincere in his Obedience to God, bur hath re- 
ſpe& to all God's Commandments, Pfal. 119. ver. 6. Tho' ſome 
Duties be greater, of more moment for the Honour and 6!" 
of God than others, which a Good Man will lay the greatelt 
ſtreſs upon, yer he will negle& nothing which the Lav of God 
enjoyneth him : Bur concerning Hypocrites, theſe Two Things 
are always true: 1. They are Partial in their pretended 0:- 
deence : 2. They always lay the greateſt Screſs upon the leaſt 
Things of the Law, Bodily Labour, and Exerciſe, and thoie Thunss 
which require leaſt of the Heart, and leaſt Selt-denial. 


25 Wo unto you Scribes and Phariſees, Hypo 
crites : * for ye make clean the out-fide of the cp 
and of the platter, but within they are full of &x 
tortion and excels. | 

26 Thou blind Phariſee, cleanſe firft that wh 
7s within the cup and platter, that the out-fide «i 


them may be clean alſo. R 
Luke hath this, chap.11. 39,40. as occaſioned by the Phari/ee”, 
wondring that he Waſhed not before Dinner. Inſtead of £19 
tion and Exceſs, he hath Ravening and Wickedneſs ; and addeth. 
Tou Fools, did not he that made that which is without, make that 
which 3s within alſo ? Bur the ſame thing might be ſpoken 2 
rwo ſeveral times: He ſpeakerh there to the Phariſee, with ROM 
he Dined, ver. 37. Here he ſpeaks to the Diſciples, and the 
titude, Our Saviour's Deſign here ſeemeth ro me not t be 4 
Condemning of their Lezal or Traditional Waſhings of Pots at 
Cups, Which he elſewhere retle&Qeth upon, bur by way Ot Alle- 
fion only ; to blame them that in their whote Converſation, chey 
rather ſtudied an External Purity, than the Inward Puri ok 
the Heart; whereas if they would firſt have looked ar Fury 
of Heart, the other would have followed thar. A Man mY be 
Ourwardly pure, and Inwardly filrhy and impure : But no Man 
can have a pure Hearr, but he will live a pure and holy oy 
for the External Ads are burthe Imperare Acts of the Soul: 5 
of the Abundance of the Heart, the Mouth ſpeaketh ; and according 
to the Inclinations and AﬀeRons of the Heart the Foot mover” 


C-vicurs 
te Hand, and all the bodily Members aft. For Our gfe” 
PP + 


Chap. XX1 


and cummin , and have * omitted the weightic =,.; 
matters of the law, judgment, mercy, and faith .* 1% 
ye to have done, ard not to leave thelh= 


Ag? n 
IV! C41 


Omerati M Þ 
© "iſhed betwee 
Z "Iidom of G 
E DPPers, Wile Me 


P,, \ tis 


# called 

ot the 
L 11, 29 
crites 
and g; 


Luke 
chers of 1 
witneſs, | 
them, an 
Difcourt 
& build or 
” been fla 
of God, 
their Rig 
to perfiva 
livedin th 
have had 

21} 
that * y 
* Prophet: 
Bb 22 F 
33 
Fcanyee 
 You(fa 
from thoſe 
 Bl>:4 comm 
- and Carriagy 
© Bill yer furt, 
E killedche Pr 
> thefame Spj 
- killed them, 
= Ou, Go you 
- 1: ſomething 
& full; you arc 
& the Damnatic 
* 24 Wh 
3 and wiſe 
6 hall kill | 
F ſcourge in 
| City to city 
| 35 Tha 
; blood ſhed 
E !ehteous { 
of Barachi: 
; and the alt 
E 36 Verj 
© (Ome upon 

Lube fairh 
Þ Ord, I will (on 
| full fly, and 
E Pu ſhed from 


am of G 


ies; Men aur 
WC, and Me 


"ity *De Bl 


XXIII S. MAT 


Application of this to their Traditional Waſhings, I ſhall ſpeak to 
ir when I come £0 Luk. 11.39. 

,- Wo unto you, Scribes and Phariſees, Hypo- 
cries: for ye are like unto whited ſepulchers, 
which indeed appear beautiful outward, bur are 
hin full of dead men's bones, and of all un- 


hap 


wil 
clcannels. 

- 2d vel 
unto Men » 
iniquity. 
thar the Ph 


: ſo ye alſo appear outwardly righteous 
but within ye are full of hypocrifie and 


irude is of the ſame import with che other, to ſhew, 
riſces had only a Vizour of Scriftneſs, and Holineſs, 
when in the MEAN time their Hearts were tull of Luſts, Hypocriſie 
and Iniquitye ne Jews had two forts of Graves, tome tor Or- 
dinary Perſons , which appeared nor, (ro which our Saviour 
likened the Ph.riſees, Luk. 11. 44-) Ochers that were covered 
with Tmbs, which were Wont ro be kept whited, fo as they looked 
very tair ourwardly, but had within nothing bur Rorrenneſs and 
PurretaQion z tO theſe he comparerh them in this place. They 
were Men that made a great ſhew, bur had norhing of any in- 
ward Purity or Cleanneſs, but were tull of Iniquiry : Thus Paul 
called Ananias a whited Wall, and Pſal.s. 9. The Pſalmi$t faith 
of the Throat of che Wicked, thar 1t 15 an open Sepulcher, 


20,X Wo unto you. Scribes and Phariſees, Hypo- 
ctiteS: becauſe ye build the rombs ot the prophets, 
and garniſh the ſepulchers of the righteous, 

20 And ſay, If we had been in the days of our 
fithers, we ſhould not have been partakers with 
them in the blood of the prophets. 


Lube hath ir, chap. 11. 47- Wo unto you, for you build the Sepul- 
chers of the Prophets, and your Fathers killed them : Truly you bear 
witreſs, that you allow the Deeds of your Fathers, for they indeed killed 
them, and you build their Sepulchers. Ir 1s plain by our Saviour's 
Diſcourſe, chat che Phariſees were ar great Charge oft-times to re- 
build or adorn che Sepulchers of che Lord's Prophets, who had 
been ſlain by the Jews in former Ages, for reſftitying rhe Truth 
of God, and the Sepulchers of other Righteozs Men dying for 
their Rightewſne/s, This they did like a Company of Hypocrites, 
to perſivade the World of whar they alfo ſaid , That Had they 
lived in the times of thoſe Prophets, and other good Men, they would 


hve had no Hand in their Blood, 
21 Wherefore ye be witneſſes unto your ſelves, 


| that * ye are the children of them that killed the 

F prophets. 

t: 22 Fillye up then the meaſure of your fathers. 
23 Ye lerpents, * ye generation of vipers, how 

F can ye eſcape the damnation of hell 2 - 

You ( faith our Lord) confeſs that you are lineally deſcended 
| from choſe who killed che Prophets : You have not only their 
t Bb-4 communicared to you, bur their Spirit; your Behaviours 
- and Carriages rowards me, and my Diſciples have witneſſed, and 
* xillyer further teſtifie, char you are the Children of thoſe who 
Þ killedthe Prophets in a Moral,as well asa Natural Senſe; you inherit 
> theſame Spirit, and are full of the fame Malice and Rancor.They 
| killed them, and you bury them. Seeing there 1s no reclaiming 
& you, Go you on, { Fill up the meaſure of your Fathers Sins.) There 
| 1sſomerhing more ro be added, to make the Iniquity of this Nation 
E till; you are a Company of Serpents, Vipers, that cannot eſcape 
& the Damnation of Hell. 


| 24 Wherefore behold, I ſend unto you prophets, 
| and wiſe men, and ſcribes, and * ſome of them ye 
\ {hall kill and crucifie, and * ſome of them ye ſhall 
þ icourge in your ſynagogues, and perſecute zhem from 
| City to City ; 
25 That upon you may come all the righteous 
\ blood ſhed upon the earth , * from the blood of 
E lIghteous Abel, unto the blood of Zacharias, the ſon 
E od Barachias, whom ye ſlew between the temple 
| and the altar. 
36 Verily I fay unto you, All theſe things ſhall 
* Come upon this generation. 


& Luke faith, chap. 11. 49, $0. Therefore alſo ſaid the Wiſdom of 
| Od, Twill ſend them Prophets and Apoſtles, and ſome of them they 
| ſoall fy, and perſecute. That the Blood of all the Prophets, which 
"45 ſhd from the Foundation of the World, may be required of this 
 'ee4:1m, From the Blood of Abel, to the Blood of Zacharias, who 
| "iſhed between the Altar and the Temple. Verily T ſay unto you, it 
4 we be required of this Generation. Luke ſaith , Therefore alſo ſaid 
F ah am of God : Matthew faith, Behold T ſend, Chriſt is the 
2 "Iidom of God; he here tells them, he would ſend chem Pro- 
; " Wiſe Men, Scribes; Luke expounds it by Prophets and Apo- 
; Men authorized by Chriſt to reveal unto Men the Will of 
Ml, and Men that ſhould be extraordinarily inſpired to inable 
pcm nereunto, Scribes, that is, Perſons inſtrufted ro the King- 
"a y ”9d; a_new ſort of Scribes, but much' ficrer for their 
y = che preſent Scribes. | And fome you ſhall kill ard cru- 
; "Fang Our Lord in this onely foretels  whar Uſage both 
= roy his Apoſtles ſhould meer wich from them ; which 
? pray in whar the Scripture rellerh us of the Scourging of 
Hap 1c Sroning of Stephen, the Killing of Zames, &c. betide 
_ "ucitying of Himſelf, [That upon you; }] thar is, as he ex- 
OG It, ver. 38. | Upon this Generation may come all the Righteous 
P "\. Matis, the Blood of Rightens Men ; [ From the Blood of 


&!o 'S.. of . 
"1 4% Blood of Zachariah, ſhed upon the Earth, &c.) Here 


ef ww _ bk. hed 


T H E W. 


ariſe Tio Queſtioms : 1. Who this Zachariah the Son of Burs- 
chiah was? 2. Hw it could fland with God's Tuſtice, to bring the 
Guilt of the Bload of former Generations, upon that Generatim 2 As 
co the tirft, ſome have gueſt the Perſon ſpoken of, ro have been 
one Z:chariah the Son of Baruch, who was the laſt flain upon the 
raking of Feruſalem, as Foſephiss tells us ; bur our Saviour h-re 
ſpeaks of a thing paſt, nor to be atrerwards done : Others think. 


ic was Zachariah che Father of Fobn B.pti, but we have no proot 
thar he died a violent Death : Others think, it was Zacha- 
riah, who was one cf the ſmall Prophets ; but there was no Temple 
in his time. Ir is moſt probably concluded to be Z.chariah the 
Son of Feh1jata, whom the Fews Stoned with Stones, at the Com- 
mandment of Toaſh, in the Court of the Fuſe of the Lord, 2 Chron: 
24. 21. The Father's Name indeed doth not agree ; buc firſt, 
Jehjada ( as many of the Jews had ) might have two Names : 
ſome think 1t was the fame Zachariah who 1s called the Son of FA 
Berechiah, 1a. 8, 2. Our Saviour nameth Abel, who lived Be- 
tore the Law, and Zachariah, who lived under the Law, borh 
flain for Righteouſneſs fake ;. that under them he might compre- 
hend all the Martyrs flain in chofe two Periods. Ochers judge, 
that theſe two are named , becauſe we read of Abel's Blood cry- 
ing, Gen. q. 10. and Zachariah's praying (when he died) That 
the Lord would require his Blood, For the other Queſtion, It is but 
Righreous with God to puniſh the Sins of Parents vpon their 
Children; and tho' ſuch Vengeance doth nor ordinarily reach 
further than the Third and Fourth Generation, yer where ſucceed- 
ing Generations go on in the fame finful Courſes, ic mav reach 
turther, and oft does , Iſa. 65.6. I will (faith God) recompence 
into their Byſom your Iniquities, and the Iniquities of your Fathers toge- 
ther. That was the Cafe here ; they tilled up the meaſure of 
their Fathers Sins. Therefore Chriſt cells chem, rhart Vengeance 
ſhould ſleep no longer, but come upon that Generatim ; which 
happened in the utrer Deftruttion of 7erv/clem, within leſs than 
forty years after.” Our Lord concludes with a Pathetical La- 
mentation over Feruſalem,and a turcher Confirmation of what he had 
ſaid about their Ruin. 


27 Q Jeruſalem, Jeruſalem, thou that killeſt the 


thee, how often would I have gathered thy chil- 2: 


28 Behold your houſe is lett unto you deſolate. 

29 Forl fay unto you, Ye ſhall not ſee me hence- 
forth, till ye thall ſay, * Bleſſed zs he that cometh * 
in the name of the Lord. : 


We have the ſame, Luk. 13. 33,34. {[ 0 Feruſalem ! Jeruſa- 
lem !) The doubling of the word, thewerh the Vehemency of 
our Saviour's Aﬀettion. { Thou that kille$ the Prophets, and ſtones 
them which are fent unto thee. } Thou haſt killed, and abuſed, and 
arr yer going on to do the like, not taking norice of the Ven- 
geance of God upon thee before for this very Sin, 2 Chron, 36. 
16,17. Nehem. 9.25. | How often would T have gathered thee 2 | 
Giving thee all External Means proper to have retormed thee, 
and reconcile thee to God. | As an Hen gathereth her Chickens un- 
der her Wings: ] Which if thou hadft accepted, and imbraced, 
the Chickens are not fafer under the Wings of the Hen from the 
danger of a Kite, than thou wouldſt have been from Enemies. 

But thou would$} not.) Inſtead of hearkening ro my Prophets, 
thou killedft them, and didft ſtone rhoſe ſent unto thee ; and to 
didſt voluntarily reje& Me, and all my Offers, and Tenders of 
Grace, Mercy, and Prote#ion, through the meer Obſtinacy of chy 
perverſe Will. l Bend your Houſe is left unto you deſolate.) Both 
the Temple, in which you place fuch a Confidence, and your own 
dwelling Houſes ſhall be deſtroyed, burnt and razed down, or ar 
leaſt left wichour you as Inhabitants, { For T ſay unto you, vou ſhall 
not ſee me henceforth, till you ſhall ſay, Bleſſed is he that comes in 
the Name of the Lord, | T will appear no more to you as a pub- 
ck Preacher after two or three days, for ever; and you, that 
the other day fo envied the People's Acclamarions to me, Ble/- 
ſed #s he that cometh in the Name of the Lord, ſhall be glad your 
ſelves to ſee one of the Days of the Sin of Man, and lhall ſay 
the fame thing, Bleſſed #s he, 8c. For whereas ſome interprer 
the term Till, &c. of the Day ot Judgment, or the Time when 
the Fews ſhall be Converced, I take chem to be ſtrained In- 
rerpretations, Till here certainly 1s to be interprered, as P/al. 
r1o. 1. and Matth. 1. 25, and this comporterh with the Hi- 
ſtory ; for after this time , our Saviour appeared in the Temp!s 
publickly no more. For the Diſputes raifed from ver. 37. abour 
God's ſecret Will , whether he ſerjoutly Willed che Su/vatim of 
the Jews, &c. I take the Afrrmative Part to have no Founda- 
rion in this Text; for Would T, is plainly enough here interpre- 
red by the foregoing Word , Sending them Prophets, and other 
Miniſters to pertwade them to Repentance, and Reconciliation with 
God : As the uſe of Means proper to an End, appear to us In- 
dications of the Will of him that uſech chem. 


CHAF. XX 


Feſus foretelling the DeſtruFion of the Temple, ſheweth what and h1w 
great Calamities ſhall precede it, 1 —28. The Sign of his Coming 
19 Fudgment, 29—35. 'TheDay and Hour unknown + Therefore 
he exhorteth to watch, and to be ready, 35—44. Like a faithful 
and prudent Servant, in all readineſs expecting his Maſter's 
Coming, 45—51. : 


I N D Teſus went our, and departed from the 
temple, and his diſciples came 79 him tor to 
ſhew him the buildings of the temple. 


Chap. XX1! L 


prophets, * and ſtoneſt them which are ſent unto *2 Chr. 24. 


dren togerher,even as an * hen gathererh her chickens *Pſa.17.8- 
under Þer wings, and ye would not? <9 leq- 


Pſal.1182. 
5, 


Cha.21. 94 


2 And Jeſus ſaid unto them, See ye not all theſe ,  , 
. a” s * PT , be let UK, 19. 
things ? Verily I ſay unto you,* Therz thall not beletr ,. 


here 
ke 1 


_ © A F. 
—___- _ x " # 
- _ Se —— AFL. 
——- —— "- 
6 _ = <0 = — 


Co "COU TR INC reins 1 A. a. mt 


hz- 5ne ſtone upon another , that ſhall not be 


thrown down. | RL bas 
Mark faith, chap: 14. x; 23. One of his Diſciples. Luke laith, 
Some, rs 21, $, T6 faich, The Diſciple ſaid , Maſter, what 
#n.nner of Stanes, and Buildings are here * Luke faith, They ſpake 
how the Temple was adorned with divers Stones and Gifts. All =_ 
Evangeliſts agree in the Subſtance of our Saviour sReply. Chr1 
had now done his Work in the Temple where he never came 
more, and was going towards the Mount of Olives, where we fhall 
find him in rhe next Verſe : His Diſciples, eirher one of chem or 
more, probably one in the preſence of the reſt, eicher — 
(conſidering the Struftufe of the Temple) whether 1t = - E 
deſtroyed, .or ar leaſt rhinking ir pity char ſo tamous 2 vtru _ 
ſhould come. ro Ruin, come to him, admiring the re 
Buildings. Moſt think this was the Temple builded by Zorobabe 
almoſt fix hundred years before, though 1t received great 
Additions by Herod, (for we have no Record, that that Temple was 
ever deſtroyed.) Incredible Stories are related abour the —_ 
ſions of che Stones, and the Ornaments of it. Our Saviour ” 
unto them, | Verily T ſay unto you, there ſhall not be one Stone Zh 
upon another :] Thar is, this brave goodly T: emple ſhall be mm 5 
Ruin'd: Nor ( if we may believe other Hiſtories) did thus wo 
phecy fail as tothe letter of it. Tits the Roman Emperor One 
Feruſalem about forty years after this, commanded his Sou _ 
to ſpare the Temple when they entred the City, bur rhey in tne 
Rage burnt of it what was of a combuſtible nature z and Tur- 
ms Rufus left General of his Army, when he went away, drew 
2 Plow over it, as God had ſaid, Ferem. 26. 18. Micah 3. 12. 
Zion (hall be plowed like a Field : And when after this , Alip- 
pius by the Command of Fulian the Apoſtate atrempted the re- 
building of ir with the help of the Fews; it 15 reported by 
divers, that Balls or Globes of Fire roſe up from the Foundations, 
deſtroyed many of the Workmen, and made the place inacceſſi- 
ble for any further ſuch Atremprs. So juſtly are the Dt- 
vine Threatnings to be feared, whatever improbability of rhe 
contrary appeareth ro us. We are very apt to betaken with rhe 
oliſtering Proſperity of Sinners ; bur we ought to meaſure the 
Duration of it, from the Revelations of the Divine Will , nor 
from our own Reaſon or Fancy, to Remember the Temple of Feruſa- 
1m. There are no places ſo ſtrong, bur an Almighty God is 
able to deſtroy, and Sin is enough to blow up. We may alſo 
obſerve how little God values Splendid Houſes of Prayer, when 
they are made Dens of Thieves, 


\ 3 And as he fate upon the mount of Olives, the 
diſciples came unto him privately, ſaying , Tell us 
when {hall theſe things be? and what /ha/! be the 
ſign of thy coming, and of the end of the world ? 

+ Eph.5.6. 4 And Jeſus antiwered, and faid unto them,* Take 


Col. 2. 8, heed that no man deceive you. 
18. Mark faith, chap. 13. 3. And as he ſate upon the Mount of Olives, 
2 Thefl. 2. over again the Temple, Peter, and Fames and Fohn, and Andrew 
3+ ahed him privately, Tell us when ſhall theſe things be, and what 
1 Joh, 4. 1. fhau be the Sign when all theſe things ſhall be. fulfilled ? And Jeſus 
anſwering them, began to ſay, Take heed let any Man deceive you, 
Lube ſaith, chap. 21. 79. And they ashed him ſaying, Maſter ! but 
when ſh.ull theſe things be ? and what Sign will there be, when theſe 
things ſhall come to paſs ? And he ſaid, Take heed that you be not 
deceived, Mark names the Diſciples which came to our Saviour 
privately, Peter, James, Fohm, and Andrew. They ſeem to pro- 
pound Three Queſtions tro him: 1, What ſhould be the Sign 
"of the Deſtratio of Jeruſalem? 2. Of his Coming * 3. O 
the End of the World 2 It is probable they might ſend theſe Four 
to propound theſe Queſtions ro our Saviour, Three of them be- 
ing ſuch to whom Chriſt had ſhewed Signal, and ſpecial Favour 
before. Some doubt whether the Queſtions propounded were 
three or two; if but two, the Coming of Chri muſt either be 
the fame with the ff, or with the /a#, Thoſe who underſtand 
Chriſt's Coming as a diſtin& Period from the other two, think that 
the Diſciples refer to that Secular Kingdom , which they fancied 
that the Meſſiah ſhould Exerciſe in the World. They defire to 
know the Signs of theſe Times, that is, Prognoſtick Signs, which 
might before-hand inſtru& them that the Time was nigh even 
at hand. They name two things here which Time hath rold us 
were to be at more than fixteen hundred years diſtance one 
from the other; for Hiſtorians tell us that Feruſalem was de- 
ſtroyed within ſeventy or ſeventy-one years after our Saviour's 
Birth, within lefs than torty years after this Diſcourſe ; bur ir 
is probable, that they put them together, as believing that Feru- 
ſalem ſhould nor be deſtroyed , till che Day when Chriſt ſhould 
come to Fudge the World, and that the Erd of the World, and of 
che Jewiſh Srate ſhould come together. And as we all are na- 
rurally curious ro know things that are to oome, ſo theſe Diſci- 
ples were in this thing particularly curious, having ſome particular 
Apprehenſions of the Coming and Kingdom of Chriſt, accord- 
ing to the miſtaken Notion which a5 gene had of that Kingdom 
which their expeted Meſſiah ſhould Exerciſe in the World. i 
Our bleſſed Lord at another time , As 1.7. told them, 7t was 
mt for them to know the Times and Seaſons, which the Father hath 
put in his own Power : he therefore giveth them no ſuch certain 
Signs of theſe rhings as they could from them certainly conclude 
che particular Time; bur yet gives them ſome Signs from 
whence they might conclude, when they ſaw them, thar 
che Time was haſtening;, which Signs, tho' fome have diſtin- 
guiſhed, appropriating thoſe in the tormer part of the Chapter to 
rhe Deſtrufticn of Jeiuſalelr, and thoſe in the latter parr ro 
the Day of Judgment, yer they rather ſeem in our Saviour's Dit- 
courſe mixed rogerher. And Time which is the beſt Interpreter 
of Prophefies, muſt expound them te us. The Deſtru&ion of 
Feruſalem is a thing paſt many hundreds of years ſince, fo as by 
thoſe Hiſtories which we have partly in Holy Writ, partly in 
other Authors, it will not be hard to pick out what our Saviour 


St M ATTH E W. 


which were common Signs both of chat Deftrution 
rhe End of the World ; and 1t 1s agreed by Divines tt 
Deſtruttion of Jeruſalem was a Type of the Deſtruction 
World, and therefore moſt of the Signs are common « 
Paul was brought ro: Rome in the beginning of the Reizn © 
Ads 27. Other Hiſtorians tell us he and Peter were put to Doy;!: 
abour the end of his Reign, , within a year or tw S502 
was deſtroyed. Our Saviour pretaceth his Di 
Signs with an uſual Cation ro his Diſciples. 
Man deceive you.] 
5 For * many ſhall come in my name, ſaying, + 
I am Chriſt, and ſhall deceive many. "14k 
Mark hath the ſame, chap. 13.6. Luke, chap.21.8. faith Var 5, 
ſhall come in my. Name, ſaying, I am Chri#, and the time & ..... ; 
near ; go ye not after them. Our Saviour ſeemeth to haye 
this as a Sign common both to the Deſtruction of 
aud the End of the World; tho' poſſibly before the Deſt 
Feruſalem, while the Fews were in Ex 
a Temporal Prince or Deliverer, there 
afrerward ; for every one who could g 


f _ ſake, for a Teflimony again them. Luke faith, chap, 21.1! 
But before all theſe, they ſhall lay their Hands on you, and jeiſau 


things muſt come to paſs, but the end is not yet. 


and peſtilences, and earthquakes in divers places, 
8 All theſe are the beginning of ſorrows. 


from our Saviour's Death to that time, was full of Seditions and 
Inſurre&ions, both in Judea, and elſewhere. The Truth of cr 
Saviour's Words as to this, is atteſted by Zoſephus largely fron 
Chap. 11. of his ſecond Book of the Wars of the Jews, to the 
end of the fourth Book. Beſides that there was great Wars te: 
rween Ortho, and Vitellius, and Veſpaſian, the Roman Emperor ho 
ſucceeded Nero. We read of one Famine, As 11. 28, which 
Azgabus there Propheſied ſhould be in the rime of ClaudiniCz:, 
Of Earthquakes in ſeveral places, mention is made in diver iſ 
ries. Our Sayiour tells them, thar theſe things ſhould be, but the 
End ſhould nor be preſently ; which any one that will read 7 
phus his Hiſtory of the Wars of the Fews, will ſee abundant) vr 
fied upon the Taking of Feruſalem þy the Roman Armies, 


and ſhall kill you, and ye {hall be hated 
rations for my names ſake. 


for they ſhall deliver you up to Councils, and in the Synagzi ji 
ſhall be beaten, and you ſhall be brought before Rulers and King i 


you, delivering you up to the Synagogues, and into Priſms , tix 
brought before Kings and Rulers for my Names ſahe. And it (vi! 
turn to you for a Teſtimony, Our Saviour knowing that his Diſc 
ples Minds ſtill ran upon a Secular Kingdom, here calls c# tie 
Thoughts, by giving them a Sign of his Coming, an Account 
thoſe Perſecutions and Tryals, which they ſhould undergo,xtit 
his Coming, either in his Power to the DeftruRtion of the 7 
or in his Glory at the laſt Day; the Aﬀfligions ſpecified ate, 4 
being hated of all Nations , delivered up to Councits , beating in it 
Synagogues, caſting into Priſons, and being Killed ; all which tap 
pened to the Diſciples of Chriſt before the DeſtruRtion of 7? 
ſalem, The Chriſtians were counted a Se every where Þ% 
again$t, As 28.22, Stephen was ſtoned, 4s 7. 29. Fane 
killed with the Sword, A&s 12. 2, Paul and Silas were Mp! 
ſoned, Aﬀs 16. 23. Paul five times received of the Jes j! 
Stripes ſave one , he was thrice beaten with Rods, once 51% 
2 Cor. 11. 24,25, He was brought before King Agrippa, and Fifth 
Peter and John were call'd before the Council, As, cnap. + * 
and 5.21. So as all theſe things happened before rhe Deſtruttion® 
Feruſalem, and this may be interprered as a Sign of that 87 
Deſtruction; bur nor of thatonly, for the Tex faith, 704 
hated of all Nations; which came to paſs afterward when Citi 
anity was perfecured by Heathens for three hundred years i%* 
ther. Mark ſaich , This ſhould be done for a Teſtimw) 4% 
them, that is, the Perſecurors, Luke ſaith, It ſhall tun !0 JouJy 
a Teſtimony. The Perſecurions of Chriſtians are, 1 A 7" 
again$ the Perſecutors, of their Ingratitude, and Cruelty, and ” 
tred ro the Name of Chriſt, 2. They are a Teſtimony 75 the Fi 
cuted, of their Faith, and Paricnce, and Courage, (9c 


10 And then ſhall many be offended, and {hal 


betray one another, and ſhall hate one another. 

Mark faith, chap. 13. 12, 13. The Brother ſhall betr) the wy 
to Death, and the Father the Son, and Children fhall riſe #P may 
their Parents, and cauſe them to be put to Death. And 0 Jo "an 
ted of all Men for my Names ſabe. Luke faith, chap. 21-15 ©, 
you ſhall be betrayed, both by Parents, and Brethren, and Kinsf phy 
Friends, and ſome of you ſhall they cauſe to be put to Del be Andi 
ſhall be hated of all Men for my Names ſake. | Many ſpall bene = 


intended for $:gns of thar Deſtruftiongtho' there are ſome Signs 


The meaning is, thall curn Apaſtaces, 


and cy 
Jt thy 
ot the 
0 both, 
Nero 


0 after Fe: 1l4/-1, 
icourſe of het 
[. Take heed th,t 1, 


draweth 
eiven 
Feruſatem, 
ruttion of 
peQtation of a Meſh 1; 
were more of them than 
fc et a Party together to ©. 
Jour his Sedition and Rebellion, gave our himſelf co be the Ch i 
Ot this Nymber are faid to have been Theudas, and Judas 
lee mentioned by Gamaliel, As 5. 36,37. 
alſo reckon rhe Egyptian, 


18, 
Of Gali. 
Amonelt thefe fome 
mentioned Ags 21, 38, and Sim ;.. 
£45, who gave out himſelf to be ſome great One, and the People 
accounted him the great Power of God. Such th | 
and probably may be more toward the End of the Worldg many 
were deceived by the Impoſtors, Chriſt warnerh his Diſciples con. 
cerning them. 


6 And ye ſhall hear of wars, and rumours 
wars, ſee that ye be not troubled: for all t*/; 


ere have been, 


"S101 
ns 


- 

Mi Tm 

Sits 
n 
| 


7 For * nation ſhall riſe againſt nation, and king: 
dom againſt kingdom, and there ſhall be faming, 


4 


Mark hath the ſame, chap. 13. 7, 8. Luke hath alſo much the 
ſame, chap. 21. 9,10, 11. only he addeth, Fearful Sights, and gi; 
Signs ſhall there be ffom Heaven. Interpreters think this Prophecy 
did chiefly reſpe& the Deſtruction of Feruſalem ; for the tine 


9 * Then they {hall deliver you up to be fit," 
If 
bo 


. ke 
Mark hath this thus, chap. 13. 9. But tabe heed t9 yu [i 


# Ao crc 
mblins at chele sf” 
um &- a Fit! 


on 


1 t 
Th 


L 


De! 
(2 th 


-N7Þ 
3Þ, 


ane y A 
Lt kE 
UiNcrs 
Otcr 


tL Kn 


Cit! *t1 
& Pare 
}. . 
HUVEC 1t 
A (5 t 


+ ZIIWwWA 


Freed 
underftan: 


e 1atre 


$4) tliat 
Text; 
U ( tors 
Would, it 


[TY Fi y he to 


4) ir it 
% ty 


Chap. XX1ſWiu». 


A 


I. 5, 


T T7 
; 


16 1.0 
0! Ueto] 


He hi 


v4 ) ( 
44 


; ills 


A 
Us £7; 


C'1ap.11, 3 
C':2n. 12, 


und 


" FOI 
iy . 


} W WW 


Vur 
Of 


+ AC 
! + 
ie. 


— 


, XXIV. 


a 64:4jons, and perſecutions for the Goſpel. | And ſhall betray one 
© 1...) We read of 1cveral Apoftates in Hely Writ, 1uch s 

i Thormogenes, Demas, Hymencis, Philetus, and others; bur 
Tos SR nor bcing written thar were done, we have no partt- 

- Record of 1uch Treicmery, as 1S here mentioned, Bur 1t 1s no 
+ than We may reatonahiy pretume was done J tho? we had 
_. cen afſured ot it, £0 juſtifie our Saviour's Predittion. There 15 
. crime of grcat Perſecution, bur proves a time of great Apoſtacy, 
" : me Tretc95). Ic hath beena conſtant Obſervation, That no 
"4 :2:mes £0 that degree, with Hatred upon the Account of 
en - Nor is what Cur Siviour here precited more than 
©. tftory of all Ages of the Church have juſtificd, 

;r And * many tfalie prophets thall ariſe, and 
Mill decelve Many. 
And becauſe iniquity {hall abound ,the love of 
ny {hall wax cold. 

ore are tro Signs more givelt. 1. The Abounding of Fal/e 

+ Tone Abatements of Chriſtian Zeal, and Love to God. 


Kor che Matter Of Ter, 11, WE {hall meer with 1t more tully, ver. 
_ 4. By the 45omndings of Iniquity here, we may eicher un- 


ve Goſpel ; er, 2. Tie 4pſtucy of fuck as are Profeſlors. Both 
o(e are great Temprarionsz and cho' they will nor extinguitn 
\r Foly Fire which God hath kindled 1n good Souls, yet they 
v2 ofe-rimes a very il] Intluence upon them to abate ot rhetr 
mer Warmth in the Ways of God. Or it we underttand it 
if L422 t Brethren, the Apoſtacy of Profeſſors much coolerh 
the Chriſtian, nvt knowing who they may rruft, and coniide 11 as 
{n.cor0, If by the abounding of Iniquity, we underſtand the 
pu0igs of Prof.meneſs 1n the cencral, ( wjuch always allo 
\\nderh m2ſt in times of Perſecution ) that allo hath no ſmall 
Litucnce up>n Chriſtians Warmrh 11 their Projetfion, to cool 
ind abare ic. eb. 10. 25, 2 Tim. 1.15. and 4.15. 
> But he that ſhall endure unto the <cnd , the 
\me {ſhall be ſaved. 

we have the fame, My. 13, 13. we.alfo met with it betore; 
2 It is a Promiſe to Pertcverance.z eſpectally co 


"4nd. the Rive, and Malice. and Cruelty of the Enemies of 
ſ 


- 
- 
4 
- 


{1 Perteverance as is joined with Forticude, He thar ſhall not 

b; rempred co Apottacy through rhe Afﬀictons of the Gotpel, 

bar ſhall patiently and courageoutly indure all the Suffterings 

«ich ſhall follow the Profettion of the Goſpel , ſpall be ſaved, 

nr preſerved , and ſo {ved with a Ten:poral Salvation, yer 
- {141} be erernally ſaved. 

[1 And this goſhel of the kingdom thall be 

reached in all the world , for a witneſs unto all 
naric5, and then ſhall the end come. 
So ſrith yl, chap. 13. 10, Some think that the End men- 
cned in the cloſe or this Verſe, referrs to the Deſtrudion of 
Tri{alems, others, that ic reterreth to the Day of Fuagmert. It 
we rake World (as it 15 often taken) tor the Gentiles in oppoſition 
to the 72s, Synechdochically , the whole being pur for a great 
part, ic is moſt certain, that before Fernſalem was deſtroyed, the 
Gel wAich 1s here called the Goſpel of the Kingdom, either be- 
cauſe ir ſhews the Way to the Kingdom of God; or becauſe it 1s 
tir Sacred Inſtrument by which Chriſt ſubduech Mens Hearts 
to himfelf, was Preached ro the World, thar is, to the Gentiles, 
and chat to a great parc of them : P.u/ alone had carried it trom 
Jorualem to Iilyricum. The Romans Faith was ſpoken of through. 
our rhe World , Rom. 1. 8. Paul, Coliff. x. 23. iaith 1t was 
prezcied to every Creature, See alſo Rn, lo. 16, and 15. 16, 
C://1.5, 1 7771. 3.16, Bur others chule by rhe End here, to 
underſtand che End of the World, 

15 When ye therefore ſhall ſee the abominarion 
of detolation, ſpoken of by Daniel rhe prophet, ſtand 
11 the holy place, (who fo readeth, let him under- 
1:3 ) 


Ct 7 ns Re 


Mart, chap. 13. 14. faith , Standing where it ought nit. Here 
Two Queſtions: I. What 3s here meant by the Abomination of 
Deslitions ? 2, What Text in Daniel our Lord referrcth to As 
t the latter, rhcre are three places in Danicl which menrion 1t ; 
Ch.1p. 9. 27, Far the Overſpreiding of Abominations, or, (as 1t 1510 
tcMarzn) With the Avominable Armies he ſhall make it deſolate. 
C'lp.11. 31. They ſhall place the Abomination that maketh deſolate, 
Cp. 12, 11. From the time that the daily Sacrifice ſhall be taken 
0» 'y, and the Abymination that maketh deſolate, ſet up. Mr. Calvin 
UKS tat the Text in Daniel here referred to, is that Dan.12.11. 
Gs lay, that it 15 thar Dan.g. 27. contending that thoſe rwo 
Omer Texts ſpeak of Antiochus , which is the very Reaſon given 
ny Ctacrs to the contrary. lr 15 of no great conſequence to us 
tU Know wich Verſe our Saviour referreth ro. Be ir which it 
Would, it was ſpoken of by Danict the Propherz by which Quo- 
Liu our Saviour doth berth give hs Teiftiznony ro chat Book as 
4 part of Zy Writ, and alfo lets his Ditciples know, thar 
wat nc told rhem, was bur what was Prophefied of, and fo muſt 
"vec it Accomplithment, and that che Fewiſh Worſhip was to ceaſe, 
As ro the Second Queſtion, amidſt rhe great variety of Notions 
wWour it, Þ take theirs co be rhe beft who underſtand the Avzmi- 
(401 0 De/olatizns , to be meant of the Roman Armies ; which 
1, P4de up of Idojacrous Souldiers, and having with rhem 


I 


Mily 427na le Images , are therefore called the Abomination ; 
lvle Words { of Deſolativns) are added, becauſe they were to 


PS /2:17/017 defolate; and fo Sr. Lube who hath nor theſe 


f-ropls > . : - . 
Hour Lord, you ſhall fee the 4b2minable Armies and in the 


St MATT HAR 


—_ 


he once ſuffered rhe 77y Plice to be p2liured by the Aominati® 
Armies of Antiichus, which he torerold; to he will again fuller 
Tie Holy Plice to be pollured Ly cc Abominable Armics of ri. 
a Ihall make the Boty ace delojate, which was Propio- 
tea Oy The Propher Daniel, as well 28 the toriner, Tiicrciore 1th 


OUT Saviour, when you fee rhe Rome Armics pirch tcir Foprs 
before Jeruſalem , be you then aflured,, God wil) oive Poril alert 
- 4 


into their Hands, and then ail char 1 bave foreinld tail elme wo 
pa!s, 

16 Then let them waichk be in Tedca Þ Poe into 
the Mountiins. 

17 Let him which is on the hou top, not come 
clown to take any thing out of his howz : 

Is Neither Jet him which is in the acld, return 
back 10 take his cloaths. 

Mark hath this, ch.tþ. 13. 14, IS, 19, Lube ſaith, co. 21.21; 
Then let them that ave in Judea flee to the Muuntains, and !ot them 
which are m the mie$ of it depart out,and let natthem that are in the 
Countries enter thereinto. The import of all this, is no more than, 
Ler every Man with as much fpeed as he can, ſhiit tor himfelt, ior 
as Luke faith,then the Deſolationot Feryſulem is ni;zh «for as jc ad 
derh » | Theſe are the Days of Vengeance, that oll thires which 1 e 
written may be fulfil:d. Ler none of you think the Storm will over ; 
ior Wen you fee this, be atiured the time is come when all 1 
have ſpoken of this City, ſhall be accompliſhed, 

19 And wo to them that are with child, and to 
them that give ſuck in thoſt: days. 

20 But pray ye that Your flizht be nct in the 
Winter, nether on the fabbath-dav. 

Mil: latch nothing of the S$abbath-day, chap, 12. Lukes hath nA 
what Matthew hath, ter. 29. 15 t» them in this Text, is only 2 
Pirafc reſtitying our Saviour's Compaiſion on ſuch, and 11:d:cative 
ot the addition it would make to their Miſery , 25 !t would 
retard their Flight, Upon this account alſo, he Þids rhem © Pr 
tmeir Flight might not be in the Winter, neither 3n the Saotati- lov. ? 
The Winter would narurally recard cheir motion, through ty 
cold, and moiſture of it. The $:65zth would be 2 ral bin 
drance 1n regard of the ſuperſtitious Opinion thcy had of rhe 
$29bath, that they mighe not upon that Day detend themfeiver, 
nor flee from their Enemies beyond chic length of a S:bbark-day's 
Fourney, Which was bur ewo Miles; Our Saviour humeth them, 
char their Flight muſt be further. When our Saviour ſpake this, 
the Fewiſh Sabbath was the Day of Holy Reſt; and he know rhac 
altho* by his Reſurreftion he thould Sandine a new $455.1h, yer 
the Fews would nor for a time underſtand thar the old $2bbath 
was abolifhed. Here is cheretore no eftzbliſhment of the old Sabbath, 
to be obſerved afrer his Keſurreim. The praying that tlicic 
Flight might nor be upon the Sabbath-day, reſpetted cnly either 
their 7e/77974 T0 their Flighr, which the Sabbarh would give chem, 
(in cafe they ſhould keep ir,as an Holy Reft,) or rhe addition oi 
Trouble it would make in cheir Spirits, when they contidered 
thar was the Day in which they were wont to go to the Houle of 
Prayer, keeping 1t a Day of Holy Reft unto God. 


21 For* then ſhall be great tribulation, ſuch as 
was not ſince the beginning of the world to this 
time, no, nor ever {hall be. 

22 And except thoſe days ihould be thortned, 
there ſhould no flelh be fived : bur tor the cicfts 
ſake thoſe days ſhall be {hortned 

Mark harh the ſame in efte&, chap.1 3.ver.1g,20, Luke, chap. 2: 
23,24.ſpeaks more particularly : Fy there ſhell be gr2.t diftrefs in the 
Land, and wrath upon this People. And they ſhatl fol by the edge of the 

= 2 ke - hc iS 5 F - 
Sword, and ſhall beled away captrue into al! Natizns , and Forufalers 
ſhall be trodden dywn of the Gentiles, until the times of the Gomtiles are 
fulfilled, Theſe Vertes muit be underſtood with reference to 
the 7owiſh Nacion , and whoſo thall read in Foſzphis rhe tiſtory 
of the Wars of the Fews, will cafily agree, there is nothing in ali 
the foregoing Jewiſh Story, which we have recorded in Scripture 
like unto ir; che final Deftruftion of chem by Tits, was rather 
an abatement of Miſeries they ſuffered by the Fations wirh- 
in themſelves than any thing clic. And rchus ſome think, char 
God fhortned rhofe Days of their Mifery, by ſending che /12n.n 
Armies to quiet their Seditions and Fattions amongſt chemſelves, 
which were more cruel one to another ;God promiſerh ro ſhorter: 
theſe Days for the Elects ſake , that were among$ this ſinful Pe:ple ; 
ſo rhar as this City was taken 1n lefs than fix Months, fo was rheir 
whole Country, 1n leſs than eighreen Months more : And if the 
Lord had not in Compatſion to thofe amongtt chis People, wac 
belonsed ro his Ele&ion of Grace, thortned thete Days of Calz- 
mity, both by ſending the Roman Armies to quiet their Intefiine 
Divitions, and then giving chefe Armies fo quick a Victory, none 
of rhe Jews would have been letr alive, which indeed any one 
will judze, thar ſhall bur read rhofe Hiſtorics, 
* Then it any man ſhall ſay unto you, Lo. 
here zs Chriſt, or there : believe 27 not. 

24 For * there ſhall ariſe falſe Chrifts, and falſe 
Prophets, and {hall ſhew great figns and wonders, 
inſomuch that (if iz were pollible) they ſhall deceive 
the very elect. 

25 Behold, I have told you before. 

26 Whersfore, if they {hall ſay unto you, Bekoid, 
he is in the delart, go not forth : behold, b- 7 is the 
ſecret chambers, believe zt not. 

Mark hath much the ſame, chap. 13. 21, 22, 235- TRecc :3 m 
doubr, but chat our Saviour here hach a ſpecial Reipett to ctuole 
Perſons, who about thetime of rhe Neſtrithion of 2 4/iigr , £2 

J 3 x F1ag 


TR at 
Chan. XX Iv. 
L 


TR Op re fr ne fo 
- . 


<b br aiibg 


ERA 6's, 

"1 OR ARG. 
40 AE 

|: 34.5 ue; 

I BH} | 
$14 


Site 
ty 
£ 


{BY TY... 
'N.1 _—Y 414 
A 20: Vf" A 
Ui 6 MO NGN 
, 43? þ &! dat © S | os" oh 
FO 6 001 Wh 24-706 1080 
"VE BY he | 
t-* +3; SY IE 
i | HS } LN by 
"wtF 4. = "534 3: LPPLE 
FT. Be 10) TORT 3s £2 ">, 
* RP j wks VF 
” DENSE 08: ED 


. a AS - cy ET 
-: =. - — - w—_ acorn di... —— 
- - —_ —— 
<v4 a* —_— - - _e > £ x - 
47 ap ——_ weary 4 = 2” 2 - op —_ 
ts we. & 5 te \ 
. I 24 ln. 4 -. 5 : 
_ = _ _ 7" y > = 
= Z >= __ 6 "18Z = ” rhe "— 27 - — = 
EET hd TED on SE” TT. CS. _- 
—— — _— - ———_— — * = _ Se _—_— - a = _ - 


v Toe! 3. 
IS. 
A:t. 2. 20. 


Chap. RXXITIV. Ot. 


M 4A T 


king advantage of the Jewiſh Expedtation of the Mefſuab 45 A See 
eular Prince who ſhould reſtore chem to Liberty, ( an Opinion, 
which as we have often heard, had intcaed the generality of the 
Jows; and not 4 little even the Diſciples of Chriſt) made them- 
jelves Reads of Parties, and pretended rhat they were the Meſſt.ch, 
the Chi, thereby to incourage People to tollow them, and to 
find up tor their Liberty ; of which kind there were teveral men- 
rion-d Hot't in che Hiſtory of Joſephs, and in the Romar Hiſtory, 
relpetins thofe rimes. Our Lord theretore caurioneth his Dit- 
ciples azainſt ſuch, and chereby rakerh chem off cheir Expetta- 
tion of any tuch Secular Kingdom of the Meſſich, as they had 
creamed of, He tells them, that there would ſuch Perſons arite, 
and tome of them theu'd do great Signs and Wonders , inſo- 
much har if ic were pcffible, they would deceive the Eleft of 
Gt, bur he had prayed for chem; only rhey muſt alſo watch and 
take heed , that they might nor be cheated , and deceived by 
them , tho' they came with never ſo tair Prerences; for his 
Comin:; would be quire of another Nature , and his Kinedom 
would be a quite other Kingdom. 

27 For as the lightning cometh out of the eaſt, 


and ſhincth even unto the weſt : {o thall alſo the 


coming of the Son of Man be. | ; 
28 For whcereſvever the carcaſs is, there will the 


eagles be gathered together. | 
Luke hath much the ſame, Luk, 17. 24, 37» The Diſagree- 
ment of Incerpreters, about the Coming of the Son of Man here 
fpoken of , makes a Variety in their Interpretation of theſe 
Verſes. Some think the Coming of the Son of Man here ſpoken 
of, was his coming to deſtroy Feruſalem, which he ſaich, will be 
ſudden like the Lightning; for tho' che Thunder be expetted 
aforeaand, as following the Lightning, yer norhing goes betore 
ro pive notice of the Lightning, but ir comes ſuddenly. Theſe 
Interpreters make the Carca/s mentioned ver. 28. to be the Body 
of the Fewiſh Nation, deſigned ro be deſtroyed , and the Eagles 
to be the Roman Armies. 7ob faith of the Eagle, chap.39. v.30. 
Where the ſlain are, there 3s ſhe ;, Habbakkuk , chap. 1. 8. laith the 
{ime of the Chaldean Eagles ; They ſhall fly as the Eagle that haſteth 
zo eat. Some underſtand by the Coming of Chris? here, his coming 
in his Spiricual Kingdom. The Preaching of the Goſpel ſhall be, like 
the Lizhtning z you need nor liſten after rhoſe char ſay, Lo here 3s 
Chri , or Ls he 4 there, for my Goſpel ſhall be Preached every 
where; and where the Carcaſs is, where my Death , and Reſur- 
reftion fhall be Preached, all the Ele&#, My Sheep that hear my 
Voice and follyw me, ſhall be garhered cogether. Others under- 
ſtand ir of Chriſt's Coming ro Fudgment, which is compared to 
Lightning for the ſuddenneſs and univerſality of ict. There faith 
Chriſt I ſhall be , and all my Saints ſhall be gathered togerher. 
Lube ſeemeth to ſpeak of this , Luk. 17. 24, 37- Thar Phraſe 
{ Whereſoever the Carcaſs is , there will the Eagles be gathered toge- 
ther,} 1s a Proverbial Speech ſignifying, That ie will need no grear 
Labour to brinz things, which are naturally joined by an innate 
Deſire, cither of them co the other ; ſo thar ic 15 applicable in 
more Caſes than onez and whether that Diſcourſe in Luke were 
at the ſame time when this was, I cannor ſay; our Saviour's Diſ- 
courſe on this Argument, Luk. 21. hath nor theſe Verſes, and 
is part of a Diſcourſe which Luk. 17. v. 20. 1s faid to have been 
begun at leaſt ro the Phariſees. Bur I ſhall further conſider what 
Lube faith, when I ſhall come to that Chapter in him, 


29 Immediately after the tribulation of thoſe days, 
* {hall the ſun be darkened, and the moon ſhall nor 
give her light, and the ſtars ſhall fall from heaven, 
and the powers of the heavens ſhall be ſhaken. 


Mark faith, chap. 13. 24. In thoſe days after that Tribulation, 
the Sun ſhall be darkened, and the Moon ſhall not give her light, and 
the Stars of Heaven ſhall fall, and the Powers that are in Heven ſhall 
be ſhaken. Lube faith, chap. 21. 25. Ard there ſhall be Signs in 
the Sun, and in the Mom, and in the Stars, and upon Earth diſtreſs 
of Nations with perplexity, the Sea and the Waves roaring « Mens 
Hearts failing them for Fear, and for looking after thoſe things which 
are coming on the Earth, for the Powers of Heaven ſhall be ſhaken, 
Interpreters are much divided in the Senfe of thefe Wurd:, 
wherher they ſhould be interpreted of Chris's Coming to the Last 
Fudement, and the Signs of that : Or, 2. Concerning the Deſtruction 
of Feruſalem. Thoſe who interprer ic of the Deſtruttion of Zeru- 
fſalem , have the Context to guide them, as alſo the Reports of 
Hiſtorians, of ſtrange Prodigies ſeen 1n che Air, and Earth,betore 
the Taking of ir; likewiſe the word Immediately after, 8c. But | 
am more inclinable to interpret them of the La$f Fudgment ; and 
ro think that our Saviour is now paſled to farisfie the Diſciples 
abour their other Qxe/tion, concerning the End of the World; 
for altho' Chriſt's Coming may ſometimes f1gnifie, that remarka- 
ble At of his Providence in the Deſtrution of his Enemies ; 
yer the next Verſes, ſpeaking of his Coming with great Power 
and Glory, and of his Coming with hu Angels, and with the 
found of a Trumpet, and Gathering his Ele from the four Winds ; 
che Piirafes are 10 like the Phraſes by which ne Scripcure expreſ- 
ferh Chriſt's Coming to the Laſt Judgment, 1 Corinth. 15. 52. 
1 Tye. 4.15. end Chriſt ſpeaking to his Diſciples asking of him, 
as well abour that, as the Deſtruction of Feruſalem; I ſhould 
rather interpret this Verſe, with reference to the Laſt Judgment, 
chan the Deitru&tion of Feruſalem before ſpoken of; or ar leaſt, 
tharcheſe Signs ſhould be underſtood common borh to the one, 
and the other; as divers of the other Signs mentioned 1n this 
Chapter are.Some do think;rhat the darkning of the Sun and the 
Mom here, the falling of the Stars, and the ſhabing of the Powers 
of Herven, are to be taken Metaphoric:lly, as fignitying the great 
Change ſhould be in the Eccleſiaſtical and Civil State of the 
Fews ; and it is true, that ſuch kind of Expreffions do often in 
Scripture ſo fiznifie, If:r. 13. 10. and. 24. 23. Exeh. 32. 7. Foel 
2, 31, © Bur without doubt the lireral Senſe is nor to be excluded, 


THEW. Chap. XX1 


great Prodigies ſcen before the former, fo the Apoſtle 
us thar there will be ſuch things ſeen before th ns 
ment, 2 Pet. 3. Io, 12, © Day of Judg: 


30 ind then ſhall appear the Sign of t 
man in heaven : and r 4 {hall all . ow gh 
carth mourn, and * they ſhall ſee the Son of _ x 
coming in the clouds of heaven with power and 0 
great glory. 

31 * And he 1hall ſend his angels with 


great * Chap 


|| found of a trumper,and they ſhall gather togerher 4: 4 
his elect from the four winds, and from one end of | 2": | 
heaven to the other. >" | a 
Mark, faith, chap. 13. 26, 27. And then ſhall they ſee the 59 .c Fi i f 
Man coming in the Clouds with great Power and Glory. And ther I 7 f 
he ſend his Angels , and ſhall gather together hw Ele from the 's | ſ 
Winds, from the uttermo$t part of the Earth, to the utter — | a 
Heaven, Luke laith, chap. 21. 27. And then they ſhall ſe: the 5 | - 
of Man coming.in a Cloud with great Power and Gloyy, 4nd rg | M 
theſe things begin to come to paſs, then look up, and lifr up your 11: ” tl 

for your Redemption draweth nigh. Interpreters are alſo divided | 
about theſe Words, as about the former, ſome underſtundins 721.7 M 
al t 


them concerning the Deſtru&ion of Feruſalem, arid judeins 7 
by the Sign of the Coming of the Son of Man : is probabſy ons | Fo 
ſome Prodigy, or ſome Comet ſeen hetore thar Deſtru&ion, Which [ 


ſhould be of char nature as it ſhould make the Fews ( here called thi 
the Tribes of the Earth) ro mourn. They by the Angel, and ep 
Trumpet mentioned ver. 31. underſtanding the Miniſters of the whe 
Gotpcl, who after the Deſtruion of eruſalem ſhould £9 and Sor 
Preach tlie Goſpel over all che World, and fo gather in the Ejeg no 1 
into the Goſpel-Church. Bur I cannot agree this Senſe, and 4; 1 Jt 15 
ſaid, rhe moſt Interpreters expound theſe Words of the 1; his « 
Judgment. Whar is meant by the Sign of the S:n of Dan, all are cinu 
not ſo well agreed ; rwo of the Evangeliſts ſay only the 5:1 f 15 1C 
Man: Matthew mentions, firſt the Appearance of the $1zn f jj; than 
Son of Man, then the Son of Man himtelf;, probably ir fignigerh ſcien! 
ſome great Prodigy that ſhall be ſeen before char grear arid ters. ot M 
ble Day. Thofe things which incline me t© think thar the Dy Wor 
of Judzment, not the Deftruttion of Feruſalem, is that which or bt 
is ſpoken of in theſe Verſes, is, 1. Thar all the Phraſes ar: jich 
as the Scripture uſerh ro expreſs Chriſt's coming to the liſt 1:gs. 3 
ment: His Coming in the Clouds of Heaven, Marttt. 26, 64, Rev, com: 
I.7. the Tribes of the Earth mourning, Rev. I. 7. His coming with | 
che Angels, and the ſound of a Trumpet, Marth. 25.31. Mar.8,z8, Ger.7. 5. * thi 
1 Cor. 15.52. 1 Theſl. 4. 16, His fending his Anyels ro gatia OS 
the Elect, Matth. 13. 49. 2. The Trives of the Earth muwjr; BIVIT 
ſeems ro ſignifie more than the Twelve Tribes of 1/rael. 4: The pito | 
which Luke hath, Look up, and lift up your Heads, for the I); f 29 
your Redemption draweth nigh; ſeemeth kardly applicable to the he : 
Deftru&tion of Jeruſalem , rather to the Redemptim of the 2:; _ 
mentioned Rom, 8. 23. For the Goſpel before this time «3; of mM: 
carried to the Gentiles ; Nor do I knuw, that that is any were Luk 
called Redemption. Thoſe things which have led ſome Learncd It ſhall 
Interpreters to expound ver. 259, 30, ZI. of the Deſiruttj-n which : 
Feruſalem, are, I conceive , thole Particles , Immediately jr fion, ww 
the Tribulation of thoſe days, ver. 29, and the Particle then, v.32, Saviour 
together with v. 34. where our Saviour faith, This Gener.:tim ſpall laft Fud; 
not paſs till all theſe things be fulfilled. Bur the Term Immec/.”:\y his Com! 
after rhe Tribuiarion of choſe Days, may fignifie nor only the De- V. 43, 4 
ſtrution of Feruſzlem, but that and all the Cilamiries ct t!-f of great 
Days, that ſhould follow thar, ro the End of the W-r'd : 3:4 Gen. 6, 3 
it 15 very uſual for Propherical Scriptures to ſpeak 1+ ci; | 3 
come long after, as if they were preſently to c-me ri Paſs, {/2-7, Fl. 40 
32.35. and the Day of Judgment is crdinariiy 1p; kev ct, 4s it be take 
ic were at hand, 1 Theſſ. 4. 15. 7a.«. 8. 1 70. 2. 18. but: 0 41 i 
dencte the certainty cf it, and ro keep us fr. m Sccuriry, ard the one 
to let us know that a thouſand Years in God's fight, are but 
as one Day, 2 Pet.3. 8. For uw. 34. we ſhull give the Sue Some 1 
of it in its order. | —_ - 
22 Now learn 2 parable o! the fig tree : When much in 
his branch is yer terider, and putteth torth {Cutts re of which 
know that ſymmer nigh: | Mom : 
33 So likewiſe ye, when ye ſhall ſee all th: Frag 
things, know * thar it is near, ever; ar the doors. * thar Com 
34 Verily I ſay unto you, This generation {all preceding, 
not paſs, till ail rheſe things be tulhlled. ps 42 * 
25 * Heaven and earth {hall paſs away, but my * your lor, 
words {hall not paſs away. WW: 243 * 
Mark hatch the very ſame, chap. 13. 28, 29, 3o, 31. fo hath My * houſe h 


Luke, chap. 21. 26, 30, 31, 32, 33- Oi; he ſaich, The Fig-Tice, 
and all Trees, when they now ſhn9t forth, ye ſee ard frow 0 ui 
own ſelves that Summer is nigh at hand : $9 ye, when ye ſee the? 
things come to paſs, know you that the Kingdom of Gd # nigh «t 
hand : Verily, &c. By this Similitude of the Fizge7ice ( 1.4 
therefore by Luke a Parable ) our Saviour doth nor cnly dc, !! £9 


Mel 


A come, he 
þ; uttered 
bs 44 T] 


inform them, thar theſe things which he had rold chen;, 151d / Mark ſai 
be as certain Signs of the approaching of the Deſirudti o it 7. oy = - 
ſalem , and the coming of his Kingdom; as the Fig-Trecs, aud acning 1s 

7 our Saviou 


other Trees putting forth of Leaves, is a fizn of the appr. acl110g 
Summer, as Cant. 2.13. But thar as the Froſfts, and Sn. i, 40 
Cold of the Winter, doth nor hinder the Trees trom bring!lg 


Old World 
be always x 


torth Fruir in the Summer; ſo theſe Tribulations and Troubles —_ 4 
ſhould be fo far from hindring and deſtroying Chriſt's Kingdom, per "CMarged 
thac they ſhould prepare the World for ir, and promove 1c; 19 _— 

—_ al t 


az that they might know from theſe Tribulations in ue, char 
the Kingdom of Grace was at hand, and began; ſo from the fol 
lowing Tribulations upon the World, they might know that 
his Kingdom of Glory was alſo haftening. { Yerily I ſay #10 3 
Tis Generation ſhall not paſs, till all theſe things be fulfilled. ] THI 
are ſeveral Notions Men have of that term, 7s Genera; 


therefore an 
mn 2 tha " 
Our Saviou 
ls Diſciple 
vf 1uch a 


waether we underſtand che Text of the Deſtruction of Feruſalem, 
er of his coming to his laſt Judgment; for, as fiſtorians cel! of 


ſome by it underſtanding Markind; others, the Generation © 


Chriſtians ; "is! ning of 


. XXIV. 


Chap 
| Chriſtians ;, © / p 
Jeſs our Saviour MEAans che Set of Men that were at that Time in 
the World : Thoſe who were at that Time living ſhould nor all 
dyc until all theſe things ſhall be fulfilled ;, all rhat he had ſpoken 
with reference fo the Deſtruetion of Jeruſalem; and indeed the 
moſt of choſe Signs which our Saviour gave, were Signs common 
horh ro the Deſtruction of Feruſalem, and the laſt Judgment, 
abating only Chriſt's Perſonal Coming in the Clouds, with Power 
and Glory. So thar conſidering, char the Deſtrution of Feru- 
ſom was Within leſs than forty Years after our Saviour's ſpeak- 
*1s chefſe Words, 1o many as lived to the expiration of thar 
Number of Years, muft fee the far greater parc of theſe Things 
actually fulfilled, as Signs of the Deſtruftion of Jeruſalem; and 
flfilling, as Signs of rhe End of the World. | Heaven and Earth 
ſhall pafs away, but my Wards ſhall not paſs away. | By this Expreſ- 
fon our Saviour confirmeth the Truth of what he had 1aid, 
afluring choſe ro whom he ſpake, That altho' there ſhould be a 
Change of the Heavens, and rhe Earth, 2 Pet.3. 10,12,13. which 
Men commonly look upon as the moſt ſtable , and abiding 
things, yer che Truch of avhar he had ſaid ſhould nor fail. 


26 But of that day and hour knoweth no 
.-. man, no, not the angels of heaven , * but my 


Father only. 

Mark addeth, chap. 31. 32. Neither the Son, but the Father, [ Of 
+h:t Day and Hour, | chat is, the particular Time when the /ea- 
wons and the Earth ſhall paſs away, as he had before ſaid, or 
when the End of the World ſhall be, which was one of the Que- 
fins propounded ro him by his Diſciples, v. 3. { knoweth n Man, 
no meer Man ; nor have Men any reaſon to be troubled at ir; tor 
jris a piece of Knowledge, which the Father hach referved into 
his own Power, and his own Pleaſure, from the Anzels, who con- 
cinually behold his Face ; nay I my felf as Man know it nor. Nor 
is ir more abſurd, or derogaring trom the Perte&ion of Chriſt, 
tan for to ſay, chat Chriſt as Man, was not Omnipotent, or Omni- 
ſcient, &c. By the way, this gives a grear Check ro the Curioſity 
of Men's Inquiries atrter the particular Time, or Year when the 
World ſhall have an End, or the Day of Judgment begin, 


or be. 


27 But as the days of Noe were, fo alſo {hall the 
coming of the Son of man be. 
38 For as in the days that were before the flood, 
Ger.r. 5. * they were eating and drinking, marrying and 
giving in marriage, until the day that Noe entred 


pico the ark, : 
29 And knew not until the flood came and took 


them all away ; fo ſhall alfo the coming of the Son 


of man be. 

Luke hath much the ſame, chap.17.26,27. where he alſo faith, 
It ſhall be as in days of Lot; but I ſhall configer whar he faith, 
which ſeemeth ſpoken ar another time, and upon anorher occa- 
ſion, when 1 come to his Seventeenth Chapter. Two things our 
Saviour ſeemerh here co teach us: 1. That Chris coming to the 
laft Judgment will be ſudden, and not lookt for; upon which account, 
his Coming is compared in Scripture to rhe coming of a Thief, 
v. 43, 44+ 2 Pet.3. 10, Rev. 6.15, 2. That it will be in a time 
of great Security , and Debauchery , ſuch was the time of Noah, 


Gen. 6. 3, 4y 5e 

17. 40 * Then ſhall two be in the field, the one ſhall 
| be raken, and rhe other left. | 

41 Two women ſhall be grinding at the mill, the 
the one {hall be taken, and the other left. 

Some refer this ro the Coming of Chriſt in his Kingdom of 
Grace; ſome to his Coming 1n rhe w of Judgment; 1t 1s true 
of both thoſe Cominigs. God ſhews the Freeneſs of his Grace 
much in the Converfion of Sinners, and makes Diſcriminations 
of which we can give no Actount , as he tells us, Luk. 4. 25, 26, 
27,28, Bur it ſeemeth here racher ro be underſtood of that 
Separation which Chriſt ſhall make at the Day of Judgment, of 
the Sheep from the Goats, the Eleft trom the Reprobates 3 for of 
that Coming cur Saviour ſeemeth to be ſpeaking , both in the 
preceding, and in the following Words. 


ip: 42 *Watch therefore, for ye know not what hour 
your lord doth come. 

ki2 43 *But know this, That if the good man of the 
8 houſe had known in what watch the thief would 


- come, he would have watched, and would not have 


8.10, , 

þ;. uttered his houſe to be broken up. 

bis 44 Therefore be ye aiio ready : for in ſuch an 
hour as you think nor, the Son of man cometh. 

Mark faith, Tabe you heed, i711 «::{ Pray, for you know not when 

the time is, chap. 13. 33. What our Lord here meaneth by 
Watching is exfily garhered , as well by what wenr betore, where 
our Saviour had been ſpeaking of the Security and Luxury of the 
O!d World, as by whar followerh, v. 44. where he bidderh them 
be always ready; and therefore Luke, ch.21. 34. expounds rhis 
mus: And take heed to your ſelves, le at any time your Hearts be 
Ter-charged with Surfeiting, and Drunhenneſs, and Cares of this Life, 
and ſo that Day come upon you at unawares ; Fir as 4 ſnare ſhall it 
"ame on all them that dwell on the f.ce of the whole Erith. Watch you 
therefore and Pray,that you may be cccounted worthy to ejzape all theſe 
ings that ſhall come to paſs, and to ftand before the Sin of Man. 
Our Saviour in theſe Verſes, from the Incercainty of the parti- 
caar Time when che Day of Judgment thall be, prefiezcth upon 
lis Diſciples a Sob:7, Heavenly and Holy Lifez intimating , thar 


[] 


wi, ; G : 
» ich a Life only , they can make themiſclves ready tor the 


S M ATTHE W. 


- others the whole Generation of the Fews; bur doubr- | ſhall appear in his Power and Glory. He preſſerh this from hat 


which common Prudence would teach any Houſholder : viz. It 
he knew in what Watch of the Night a Thicf would come, tc 
watch, and not ſuffer his Houſe to be broken open ; thar is, in 
what cime of the Night, ( for the Fews divided the Nighe inco 
the Fir8t, Second, Third, and Fourth Watch, as the Romans divided 
ic for Relief of their Military Guards.) Now (faith our Saviour) 
you, knowing that here will come ſuch a time, and not cerrainly 
knowing at what time, ſtand concerned to be always Watching 
and Praying. 


45 Who then is a faithful and wiſe ſervant, 
whom his lord hath made ruler over his houſhold, 
to give them meat in due ſeaſon 

46 Bleſſed zs that ſervant, whom his lord when 
he cometh, ſhall find fo doing. 


him ruler over all his goods. 


We have much the ſame, Lub. 12.41, 42, 43. whether ſpake 
ar the ſame rime, and upon the fame occaſion or no, I kno nor, 
Ic 15 ſaid there, v. 41. that Peter gave occaſion to this Diſcourſe 
by ſaying, Lord ſpeakef thou this Parable to us, or even to all 
Our Saviour replyeth as here ; only Luke faich, Who is that fuith- 
ful and wiſe Steward ? The Queſtion intimates thar chere are 
but a tew ſuch. The Diſcourſe plainly reterreth to the Miniſters 
of che Goſpel whom Chriſt leaverh in cruſt with his Church zo give 
them their Meat in due Seaſon; he declareth the Blefſedneſs of 
thoſe Miniſters thar ſhall be found faichtully difcharging their 
Truſt, and chat the Lord in the Day of Judgment will exalr 
them to a much greater Honour according to thar of Dan.1 2.3. 
They that be wiſe ſhall ſhine as the brightnejs of the Firmament ; and 
they that turn many to Righteouſneſs, as the Stars for ever and ever. 


4.8 But and if that evil ſervant ſhall ſay in his 
heart, My lord delayeth his coming, 

49 And ſhall begin to ſmire hzs fellow-ſervants, 
and to eat and drink with the drunken : 

50 The lord of that ſervant ithall come in a day 
when he looketh not for him, and in an hour that he 
IS not aware of; 

51 || And ſhall cut him aſunder, and appoint h: | Or, cue 
his portion with the hypocrites : * there ſhall be 4m of. 
weeping , and gnaſhing of teeth. 


Luke hath much of this, chap. 12.45. But and if that Ser- 
vant ſay in his Heart, my Lord delayeth his coming, and ſhall begin 
to beat the Men-ſeruants and Maia-ſervants, and to eat and drink, 
and to be drunken; the Lord of that Servant will come in a Day when 
he loabeth not for him,and at an Hour when he us not aware, and will 
appoint him his Portion with Unbelievers. It that Servant prove 
an Evil Servant, preſumerh upon my not making ſuch haſte r9 
Judgment as he thought I would , and ſhall prove a Perſecucor 
of my People, or a looſe and debauched Perſon; I will come 
ro his Particular Judgment betore I come to the General Judg- 
ment, and ar ſuch a time as he ſhall nor be aware of me, and 
deſtroy him, and give him his Portion with ſuch as believe noc 
my Second Coming , and with ſuch as are one thing in Proteſ- 
ſion, and another thing in Praftice, in Hell, where the Condition 
of poor Creatures will be Miſerable, as the Condition oft choſe 
rhar Weep and Gnafſh their Teeth. By this Parable our Saviour 
doth quicken his Apoſtles, ro whom he intended to leave rhe 
Care of his Church when he ſhould be aſcended into Heaven, ro 
a faithful Care of the Flock committed to their Truſt; and alſo 
lers us know that in ſucceeding Ages, there would arife a Gene- 
ration of looſe and debauched Miniſters, and ſuch as would per- 
ſecure the ſincerer Profeflors of his Goſpel, who could not 

comply with their Do&rines, and Lives: Of which as all Azes 
of the Church have given a Proof, ſo the time ſince Popery hach 
prevailed in the World, hath given a more plentiful, and abun- 
dant Proof. All which Extravagancies are incouraged from rieir 
Atheiſm , and Unbeliet of Chrift's Coming ro Judgment. He 

alſo ſhewerh how ſevere he will be againſt ſuch Perſons : He 

will come upon them betore they be aware of ir, and | cut ther 

in pieces. ] The Word ſignifies ro cur them in Two Pieces, as 

the Fews were wont ro divide their Sacrifices : or (as ſome think) 

as ſome Pazan Narions were wont to puniſh Pertidious Perſons, 

and ſome more Notorious Malefators ; and give him his Porcion 

with Unbelievers, and Hypocrites in Hell, Chap. 13. 42. and 

25. 30. The Caſe of all Perſons that live fecurely, and de- 

bauched Lives , becauſe Judgment is not ſpeedily executed, will 

be ſad : Bur the Cafe of Miniſters that do fo will be dreadful. 

They are a ſorr of Sinners, whom God ſeldom ſuffererh to live 

our half rheir Days: and when he doth , yer they ſhall nor 

eſcape the ſevereſt Damnation of Hell. They betray a greater 

Truſt, and lead Mulritudes to Hell with them, and 1o are the 

greateſt Traytors againſt the Divine Majeſty. 


CHAP. Xx 


The Parable of the Ten Virgins , repreſenting the Duty of Watc:ful- 
neſs, 1—13. The Parable of the Talents entruſted with three Ser- 
vants « Tye Approbation of them that Traded well : The Sentence 
and Puniſhment of him that Laid it up in a Napkin, 14--30. Chris 
deſcribeth the La8# Judgment , 31—46. 


I Hen ſhall the kingdom of heaven be likene! 
unto ten virgins , which took their lamps, 
and went forth to meet the bridegroom. 

2 And five of them were wiſe, and five were 
foolith, 


ming of Chritt, and ro ſtand betore the Son of Man when he 


Vol, It, 


£31 2 23 They 


Chap. XXV. 


47 Verily I fay unto you, * That he ſhall make * chap.25, 


* Ch.$8., 12, 


Chap, XXV S. MATTHEW. 


I Pet. Js 3. 


Revilf ts, 


So 
hey that were fooliſh, took their lamps, and 
200k no oy] with them : : : 
+ Bur the wiſe took ovl in their veſiels with their 
- 


17s. 
5 While the bridegroom rarried , they all ſlum- 
bred and flepr. : 

5 And ar midnizhr there was a cry made, Behold, 
the brid-groom cometh, go ye our ro mect him. | 

- Then all rhoſ2 virgins aroſe, and trimmed thelr 
{amps. 

$ And the fooliſh faid unto the wiſe, Give usof 


vs your oyl, for our lamps are || gone our. 


o But the wiſe anſwered, ſaying , Not ſo, leſt 
there be not enough for us and you : bur go ye 
rather to them rhar {:11, and buy tor your {Ives. 

10 And while they went to buy, the bridegroom 
came; and they that were ready, wenr in with him 
to the marriage, and * the door was [hur. : 

11 Afterward came alſo the other virgins, ſaying, 
Lord, Lord, open to us. 

12 Bur he anfivered and ſaid, Verily I fay unto 


you, * | know you nor. ; 
12 * Watch theretore,for ye know neither the day 
ncr the hour wherein the ſon of man cometh. 


For che underſtanding of all Parables, I have formerly ſhewed, 
That Pars are Similizzdes brought trom ſome Earchly Things, 
or Afﬀtiens, to Hiuſtrace ſome Heavenly Doftrine, - or Spiritual 
Myitcrics, and intinuace them inco our Practice. For the right 
underſt.nding of all Purables, rhe firft and principal thing ro be 
atcended ro, is the Scope and main End ot the Parable» Whar 
Ecaveniy DoGrine iris, which our Saviour by that Earthly Simi- 
licude dc{i-nerh ro illuſtrate; or what pra&tical cliing 1t 15 which 
he deti.ncch by that Parble ro preſs, I have ſhewed , our Sa- 
viour loinetimes more particularly ſhewerh chis, exprefſing whar 
he meanr by the ſeveral Things, and Aftions mentioned in 
the Purthle. This he did, Chap. 13. in the Parable of rhe 
Sower.and of the Tires of the Field : Bur in moſt Parables he doth 
nor 1, but from ſomerhing going betore, or coming atter, gives 
us Lizhr enough ro know whar his main Deſign was, and leaverh 
to us by char co interpret the ſeveral parts of the Parable. Here 
he hach lett us a ſufficient Light to know his Meaning: 1. From 
his Diſcourſe in the latter end of rhe foregoing Chapter, where 
he had been preſſing the Dury, and Prudence ot Watchtfulneſs, 
from the Incerrainty of the Time of his Coming. Ir 15 maniteſt 
that he is purſuing the ſame Deſign till, by the 637 wean, 
or, the Saying with which he cloſerh this Parable, wer. 13. Watch 
3e therefore, for you know neither the Day, nor the Hour wherein the 
Som of Man cometh. Tins Watchfulneſs we had interpreted, by an 
Oppoſition ro Sin , both of Omifſion and Commiſion ; taking 
heed of having our Hearts over-charged with Surteiring, and 
Drunkenneſs, and Cares of this Lite. Luk. 21. 34, 36. Ta- 
king heed of ſmiting our Fellow-Servants, eating and drinking with 
the Drunken, diſcharging our Trust faithfully ; Miniſters giving to 
the Houſhold of Christ cheir Portion in due Seaſom, Ch. 24. ver. 45, 
49. being ready for the Coming of Chriſt, ver. 43. Praying, Luk, 
21. 35. This our Lord had preſlcd there particularly on Mini- 
{ters He is here in this Parable preffing the fame Duty on all ; 
and in this Parable furcher opens the Duty of Watchfulnefs, not 
only as oppoſcd ro Slumbring and Sleeping, bur as comprehending 
a gerring of our ſelves ready, (as he had faid , Chap. 24. 44.) 
aud chis Readineſs he alſo turcther openeth 1n this Parable under 
the Notion or having nor only Lamps, bur Oyl in our Lamps, To 
theſe purpoſes he rakes up this Parable, which we ſhall not ſo 
well underſtand without urderſtanding their uſual Rires, and 
Cuſtoms ar ieddings, which were theſe. 1. Their 2arriages were 
ordinarily in the Night, 2. They uſually had young Men that at- 
tended the Bridezroom, and young Virgins that attended the Bride at 
ber E:the;'s Hſe, The young Men attended the Bridegroom 
theſe were called the Children of the Bride-Chamber , or the 
Friends of the Bridegro:m or Bride, Mar. 2.19. Joh. 3. 29, The 
Weddins b:ing in the Night, there was need of Lamps. When 
rhe Bride,ro:m came, the Bride-Maids, who were attending che 
Bridz, went forth to meer the Bridegroom with Lamps lighted to 
condutt him and his Companions into the Houſe, and ro Her who 
was to be the Bride, When they were entred the Door was ſhut, 
and the Marriaze proceeded. Our Saviour now to quicken his 
Audi:ors ro the Witchfulneſs before ſpoken of, ſuppoſerh ſuch a 
Aizricg? and Ten Virgins, (the uſual Number at ſuch Solemni- 
rics) He ſupp»ſeth theſe Ten Virgins, to have been, half of chem 
1K;/e,and half Fooliſh ; rhe Wiſdom of the one,he makes to lye in 
getting their Lamps ready, and furnithing chemſelves in rime with 
Oyl ro reed rhem, that rhey might not go our, erther while they 
waited for kis Coming, or in their Condutt of him. The Folly 
© otners he makes ro lye in their want of this Care, fo as when 
the Eridegroom came their Lamps were out. They would have 
borrowed Oyl of the ochers, but they had none to lend them, 
{+ as they were ſhar our of the Door of the Bridal-Houſe; and 
tho* they knocked could cbrain no entrance. It 15 nor hard now 
ro apply, rhe ſeveral Parcs of the Parable ro the End tor which 
this Parable 1s brought; provided that we do not expet thar 
Similitudes ſhould run on tour Feer , or that every minure Cir- 
cumſtance in a Parable fnould be firred in the Explication. The 
tcingdom of Heaven (which in Scripture. always fignifics that of 
Grace or Glory) here f1yninech thar of Grace ; the State of the 
Ciurc! is likened to Ten Virgins; theſe Ten Virgins are Profeſſors ; 
ter Limnps and their going forth to meet the Bridegroom, ſignific 
their Joinr-profeſſion of rhe G:ipet, and cheir ExpeFation joyfully 
0 mect Chriſt (who 1s the Bridezroom here meant,) Pſal. 45. 14. 


Joh. 3. 29. { Five were Wiſe, frve Fooliſh. ) This ſignifieth 
difterence of Profeſſirs; tome have Lamps, make a Profeſhns 
bur have no Truth ot Grace; others have the Root of the Matter 


| in them, a true Kazirh, and Love which feeds Men; Profetſion 


The Bridegroom's tarrying, i1gnifies Chrilt's delaying to come tg 
Judgment ; their Slumbering and Sleeping ſignifies the Infirmities 
of the beſt , Who leep, tho' their Hearts wake ; and the deeper 
Security of cthers in their Sinful Stare. The coming of the Bride. 
groom at Midnight, tignifiech Chriſt's coming in a dark time of 
Troubles and Attiittions, or at a time not looked for. The Vir. 
gins trimming their Lamps upon the Cry made, ſignifies the Care 
of Pious Souls, more etpecially upon any Notices of Chriſt's 
Coming, to prepare themſelves for the Meeting, and Reception 
of him. The fooliſh Virgins late diſcerning that their Lamps Were 
our, and that they wanted Oyl, lets us know, that Hypocrites and 
tormal Protet{ors will roo lare know, that Proteſſion without 2 
Roor of Faith and true Regeneration will ferve them in yg 
ſtead. Their asking the wile Virgins to lend then ſome of theip 
Oyl , with their retuſfal , becauſe then they thould nor have 
cnough for themſelves, lets us know the wotfui Sins that Hy- 
pocrites will at laſt be pur co, and how vain cheir Hopes are 
who hope to be relieved from the Grace and Good it/o;bs of 
others. Their g1ing to buy Oyl, and their being ſhut out befcre rhey 
recurned, and Knocking in vain, and in vain crying, LJ Pen 79 
21s; lets us know, Thar as rhe Tree falls fo it muſt lye ; Th; 
afrer our Buying Time in this Life, mentioned J/a. 55. 1, 2, is ex. 
pired, our Stare will be determined : That we are concerned to 
take the Counſel of Syomon, Ecclef. 9. 10, Whatſnever thy H.1;7 
findeth to do, eſpecially for our Souls, to do it with thy might . fir 
there is no Work, nor Device, nor Knowleage, nr Wiſdom in the Ge11 6 
whither thou goest, Theretore we are all concern'd to Watch, tar 
1s, to. look that we have nor only Lamps, bur Oy! ro feed oyr 
Lamps , and to keep cur Lamps burning , becauſe we hny 
that the Bridegroom Chriſt will come, and we do ner know 1; 
what cime he will come to the General Judgment, or vur pr. 
ticular Judgment ; tor when we dye , we can d« no more + 
make our ſelves ready for the great Coming of C 5ſt ry jug... 
the World, but muſt appear before him as we £ our of ©; 
World. No Oyl, ater che determination of cur Lives, ij! 
be ro be bought; no further Preparation of ovr telvcs j5 5 
be made, As our Lite leaveth us, Judgment will find us. 


14 For the kingdom of heaven 7s as a wan trz- 
velling into a far country, who called his 1 
ſervants, and delivered to them his goods : 


I5 And unto one he gave hve || talents, and «© ,*; 
another rwo, and to another one, to every muy /- 
according to his ſeveral ability , and ftraightw; '-; 


took his journey. 


There is much the ſame Parable, Luk. 19. 12. but the difference 4 


is ſo great in the Narration, and the Time, and Circumſtance, id 
Scope, ſeem 1o different, that the beſt Expoſitors think it :1/- 
ther,,and ſpoken ar anorher time, tho*' there be much « ti; 
in that: I ſhall therefore leave the Conſideration of ct: +1 
Luke, until I meer with it in him, (tho' ſome Interpreters do t'.;;; 
this the fame with that) and only conſider this as 1t 15 Letrre 1; 
in this Evangelif, By the Kingdom of Heoven, is duubcichs ic,; 
to be underſtood the Oeconomy of Ged's Frovidencs in this G1 cl. 
Diſpenſations; the Man travelling into a far Country, is (» 
aſcending up to Heaven, who when he aſcended up mn high, cn 
Gifts unto Men, Eph. 4.8. By the Goods, which the 21,n is ſud 
to have delivered to his Servants, are to be underſtood rhe Gifts 
which God givech to Men, being himſelf (as to his glorious Pre- 
ſence, and his principal Refidence, which is in Heaven, at 1 
grear diſtance from us) asa Man in a far Country; for I feeno 
reaſon to reftrain- theſe Gifrs to ſuch as flow from Ch riit as 
diator, but rather chuſe to interpret it generally of all the Giis 
of God, whether of Providence or Grace. Whereas v.15. it is ſaid 
that this Man divided his Goods to his Servants inequally, to one 
Five Talents , to another Two, to gncther One, to every Man is 
cording to bis ſeveral Ability ; it f1gnifietrh only God's inequil 
Diſtributzon of his Gifts of the Sons to Men according to his own 
good pleaſure; which is true, both concerning Natural Parts, 
Wit,Underſtanding, Fudgment, Memory; and concerning thoſe which 
che Heathens call Good Things of Fortune,as Kiches, Honours and Di;- 
nities ; Chriſtians call chem the Good Things of Providence; unde! 
which Notion alſo come all acquired Habits, or Indowments, ſuch 
as Learning , Knowledge, Moral Habits, 8c. which tho' acquired, 
are yer Gifts; becauſe ir is the ſame God who gives us pwr t0 
get Wealth, as Moſes ſpeaks, Deut.8. 18. who alſo gives Men Poxe! 
ro ger Knowledge, and upon Study and Meditation to compre- 
hend che Natures, and Cauſes of Things, and alfo to govern, and 
bridle our Appetites. Or. the Gifts of more Special Proviaenc!, 
or Diſtinguiſhing Grace. I take all thoſe Powers given to Men, 
by which they are inabled ro do good, or to excel orhers, ' 
come under the Notion of the Go9ds here mentioned, whici 
God diftributech inequally according to his own good Pleafure, 
and as ſeemerh beſt ro his Heavenly Wiſdom, for the Govett- 
ment of the World , and the ordering of the Afﬀairs of ©!s 
Church ; of all which God will have an Account one Day, and 
reward Men according to the Improvement, or no Improvemen;, 
which they have made of them in their ſeveral Stations. 


16 Then he that had received the five talents, 
went and rraded with the ſame , and made. 1b: 
other hve talents. : 

17 And likewiſe he that had recerved two, he 
alſo gained other two. | 

18 But he that had received one, went and dg; 
ged in the earth, and hid his lord's money. | 

rac 


This part in the Parable only ſheweth the different Uſe, na 


WF] 


Chap. Xx1ſp- - 


CO! 


tho! 
Day 
Men 
r1Cs, 
Joyn 
cheil 


2 
and 
live 


belt 
« 


and {: 
beho! 


£5 
fiith! 
thing, 
enter 
This 
ſome P 
ment 0 
them vv 
truſted 
Judgme 
here th 
Equalit) 
Gitts wt 
Wo ha) 
& hathble 
© Others © 
and Opp 
it they 
as thoſe 
of ocher 
of the P 
do make 
teacheth 
ſtruct us 1 


24 T 
came an 
hard ma 


E gatherin 


25A 
talent in 
26 H 
wicked : 
Teap wh 
not ſtraw 
27 TI 
money t 
| thould 


We muſi 
Similit des, 
Ic 1s brough 
1nſtrud vs 1 
to. lay the b 
God himſelf, 
dread of hi 
trom Labou 
with which 
that if there 
diji Izuifhin 
Will, he 1h; 
hereafter f, 
Cale conde 
reap wher 
mn, 2, 
Cuſung » will 
Unprofitahle 
Sloth, and \ 
ut a meer 
he had dre 
could; he \ 
en he tho 
a as juſt 
heir leud a 
eir not he 
epent and 
Wicked and 
Were nor Fl 
Wake your ( 
*\ Power in 


] 


bo XXV.. St. MATTHEW. Chap. XXV. 


Men and Women make of thoſe Gitrs, whether of common Pro- | did nor give you a ſpecial Effeual Grace ? Bur had you. not a 
widance, or Of Grace , eſpecially common Grace, which the Lord | Power to keep from the Taverns and Ale-houſes * To keep trom 


p Some make a great Ule of them tor the | Lying, and Curſing, and Sweari Nee > ww 

ſtowed ON them. , : S» 8 ana Swearing, and open Profimation of my Sab- 

any of cher Maſter , for the End which God betrruſted | baths * Had nor you a Power, ro Rod - fm to. Pr hy it 

tem with chem, £O'Wit, the Glory of his Holy Name, and the | you had tc» your urmoſt uſed the Talencs I gave you and I had 

$41yacion of cheir Souls. Others make no uſc ac all of them for | been wanrting in my turther neceflary Intluences of Grace, ve 
C - 5 J 


0\oſe Ends might indeed have faid ſomething , bur when you made no uſe 


io After 2 long time, the lord of thoſe ſervants | % che Talents you had, why thould 1 ruſt you with more ? £ich 

g 4 k th with then COMEs by Reading, Heat ing, Praying ; you had a Power to theſe 
cometh ana TecROone | 1, things, theſe Talents you had, Why did you not Read,” Her 
God in the Day of Judgment, will call all Men to Account for | Pray, that you mighr Believe? It you took me to be th GT. 
choſe Gitts which he hath given them, how they have uſed the | 4 Maſter, why did nor you do what was in your Power to do. that 
Days of Life, the Meaſures of Health , their Knowledge, Wir, | you mighr find me otherwiſe? If you had done what lay FR 
Memory, Underſtanding, their Wealth, Eftare, Honours, Digni- | your Power to do, in the uſe of thoſe Talents, which 1 gave 
Relations, all their Nacural, or Acquired Habirs, all their En- | you tor that End, you might then have blamed me it 1 had not 
7c. for che Honour of his Name, and che Advanrage of | given you more, bur you never tryed my kindneſs in ſuch a 
_ : So _ -_ are nor Ruined by any Severity of mine; bur 

. . our own Sloth, Negle = 
20 And ſo he that had recelvecd five talents, came Partble reacherh us , Ther God in ce laſt 
and brought other five talents,ſaying, Lord, thou de- | Day of Judgment, will be found Juft; and Sinners will all be 


liyercdft unro me fivetalenrs: behold, L have gained | found Liars, and cheir Damnation will be of chemſelves, 
beſides them five talents more. . 3 28 Take therefore the talent from-him, and give 
21 His lord {1id unto him. Well _ - ny g0OU | 1t unto him which hath ten talents. VAR ON: * 
WE 2 I10t , 22 - 7 : . Sis 


T1CS, 
Joyments, 
cheir 01 Souls. 


and faid, Lord,zhou deitveredft unto me two talents : 
h-hold, I have gained two orher talents beſides them. 

23 His lord faid unto him, Well done, good and 
fiichful ſervant; thou halt been fairhful OVeT A few 
things, I will make thee ruler over many things : 
enter thou into the Joy of thy lord. 

This parc of the Parable teacheth us only theſe rhings : 1. That 
ſome Pertons in this World make a very good Uſe and Improve- 


bath blefied chem,rho'ir be nor proportionable ro theService which 
others of greater Parts, and who have had greater Advantages 
and Oppcrcunities have made it; if Men have bur #0 Talents, yer 
it they gain other two, they ſhall go to Heaven ar laſt, as well 
as thoſe who have had five, and improved them ro the gaining 
of other five, We muſt rake heed ot concluding trom his part 
of the Parable, thar thoſe who have moſt given them ordinarily 
do make the beſt Improvement ot them ; for daily Experience 
teacheth us the contrary z. neither 1s the Parable brought to 1n- 
ſtruct us 11 any ſuch rhing. 

24 Then he which had received the one talent, 
came and ſaid, Lord, I knew thee that thou art an 
hard man, reaping where rhou haſt not ſown, and 
eathering where thou haſt not ſtrawed : = 

25 And I was afraid, and went and hid thy 
talent in the earth : lo, there thou haſt that zs thine. 

26 His lord anſwered and ſaid unto him, Thou 
wicked and flothful ſervant , thou kneweſt thar I 
reap where I ſowed nor, and gather where I have 
not {trawed : ; 

27 Thou oughteſt therefore to have put my 
money to the exchangers, and then at my coming 
| ſhould have received my own with uſury. 


darknels:there ſhall be weeping and gnathing ofteeth, 


God often in this Life, depriveth Men and Women of thoſe 
Gitts which he hath given chem , and they do not mike uſe of 
tor the Glory of his Name, and the Gocd of their and others 
Souls, the great Ends for which he hath berruſted them with 
chem : Bur this ſeems nor to be here intended, this Text reterri ng 
to the Day of Judgment : All therefore that we are to under- 


and others Souls. For all thote that have heen Unprofitable,Hell will 
be theip Portion at laſt, where cheir Mifery will be,as of thoſe that 
live in extreme Darkneſs, continual Weeping , and Gnaſhing 
of Teeth. The ſubſtance of whar is in ver. 29. we mer with 
Chap. 13. 12, | To him that hath ſhall be given, &c.) Bur Ithink 
the Proverbial Speech here , is applied differently trom the 
Application of ir there. There, He that hath , ſeemerh to fig- 
nite, He that hath in a&ual Poſſeſſiin; for it is ſaid betore, Be- 
cauſe it is given to you, to know the Myſteries of the Kingdom of God. 


So thar I take thar Text, to contain a Promiſe of the Encreaſe ot 
Grace to thoſe that have the Seed of God: Whenas the Ap- 
pearances of ir, in others ſhall nor laſt, bur vaniſh away. Kere 
plainly, He that hath, tignifieth , He that maketh a good and true 
Uje of what he hath ;, and thus the Parable expounds it. So as the 
Senſe 1s: He that hath any Talents from God, and maketh Uſe 
of them, and improverh them for the Honour and Glory of God, 
ſhall be rewarded, with further Gitrs of Grace, or Glory, But if a 
Man hath not; that is, Hath, buy is, as if he had not, making no 
Ute of whar he harh for the Glo+y of God , thoſe Gifts and Tu- 
lents which he hath, ſhall be of no Profic and Advantage, bur 
miſerable Diſadyanrtage to him ar laſt, 


upon the throne of his glory. 


30 And caſt ye theunprofitable fervant into * outer * C11.8.12- 


31 * When the fon of man ſhall come in his glory, FZec.14. 5. 


and all the holy angels with him, then ſhall he tir Ch.16. 27, 
I Theltl. 4. 


32 And * before him ſhall be gathered all nations: Jute 4 


. few things, * I will make thee ruler oVeEr Many | and he ſhall have abundance : bur from him thar Luk.2. 18. Log 0 WEBS 
things: enter thou into the Joy of thy lord. hath not, {hall be taken away even that which he & 19: 25» | WE7T% 
22 He allo that had received two talents, came | hath, CREE 17 


FNOR IO ; : ſtand by chis, is, That no Man's Gifts, whether of As 1 
ment of thoſe Gifts and good Things which God harh betruſted wrec, of what Advantage foever they have © wadp this FRY. 
them with, according to the meaſure wich which God hath be: Lite, will be of any Profic to him in the Day of Judgment, unleſs 3 Hg 
ruſted chem. 2. Thar thoſe who do ſo ſhall in che Dayot } 1... 5.14 in this Life uſed them to the Ends for which Gcd gave PRed "fl 
Judgmenr have a liberal Reward in che Kingdom of Glory ; called | 1m. In that Day he will loſe all, and che Glory of Heaven ſhall "2 ht 
here the Joy of their Lord. 3. That God dorh nor expett at | 1. 1 portion of them that have had great Talents of Fil ® * 
Equaliry of Service from all, bur a Service proporcionable co thoſe Learning , Wit, Riches, Honours, Spiritual Gifts , or any thing of ihr" 2 
Gitts which God harh given Men , 'and rhofe ſhall go ro Heaven. | 14... 411. but of thoſe only, who have uſed theſe rhings to the ms i i WIN 
wo have made a due Improvement of the Gifts with which God | 4 19 nd Glory of God, and to the Advantaye of their own &* 


We muſt remember thar weare in a Parable, which (as other and * he {hall ſeparate them one from another, as a Rev. 1. 7. 
Similitudes) cannot be expedted 1n all chings co agree with what ſhepherd divideth his ſheep from the goats : *ROM. 14, 
ic is brought ro illuſtrare. This parr of che Parable doth chietly 33 And heſhall fer the ſheep on his right hand, 72: 
inſtrutt us in theſe ewo Things :That it # the Genius of Wicked Men, | 1nd the goats on the left. _ 5 to. 
to lay the blame of their Miſcarriages upon others ;, of t-times upon ; : : ZEK.20, 
God himſelf, The unprofitable Servant here pretends that the Our Saviour having ſpoken much before of his Spiritual King- 37- & 34- 


dread of his Lord, as a ſevere Man, was that which kept him 
trom Labouring , and making an Improvement of the Talent, 
with which his Maſter hath intruſted him. Thus many think 

that if there be an Fle&jon of Grace, or any thing of ſpecial, and 
diſiinzuiſhing Grace, and Man hath not a perfe Power in his own 
Wil, he ſhall have ſomething ro excuſe himſelf by before God 
hereafter for his not Repenting , and Believing : God in ſuch a 

cale condemning Men for Unbelief, and Impenirency, ſhould 
reap where he did nor fow , and gather where he did not 
liraw, 2. Men in their Excuſes, which they frame, inſtead of Ex- 
cuſmg, will but Accuſe and Condemn themſelves. The Lord of the 

- unprofitable Servanc tells him , that che Faulc lay in his own 
Sloth, and Wickednefs, and his dread of his Lord's Severity, was 
| ut a meer trivolous Prerence, and unreaſonable Excule; for it 
he had dreaded any ſuch thing, he would have done what he 
could; he would have pur our his Money to the Exchangers, and 
ten he ſhould have receivedhis own with Increafe. And ſhall nor 

od as juſtly another day reply upon choſe who think ro excule 

heir leud and wicked Lives, their Impenitency and Unbeliet, from 
mer not being Elected, not having a power of themſelves ro 
Repenr and Believe, nor receiving his Etficacious Grace. O you 
Vicked and florhful Wrerches! Did you ſuſpect, or fear you 
"Tenor Elefted? Why then did you not give all Diligence ro 
EF Peyour Calling and Eleftion ſure? Do you plead the want 
| ® Power in your own Wills to Repent and Believe, and that I 


dom which he exerciſeth in his Church , comerh now more 17, 2c» 


ſer up, and exerciſe in the End of the World, tar different trom 
chat which the Fews dreamt of, and his own Diſciples ſeemed co 
have ſome ExpeRtations of. | When the Son of Man, | he who now 
appearerh to you in the form of a Servanc, and only as the Son 
of Man, | ſhall come in his Glory, a glorious Maniteſtarion oft him- 
ſelf; he now appeareth cloathed wick Fleſh, bur he thall appear 
in his Glory, {and all the hily Angels with him:] He fhall come 
with ten thouſand of his Saints, Fude 14. with his mighty Angels, 
2 Theſſal. 4.7. | Then ſhall he fit (atter the manner of grear 
Princes) { upon the Throne of his Glory, | he ſhall appear in greac 
Splendor; | And before him ſhall be gathered all Nations , | that is, 
all Perſons thar ever were, Or at thar time ſhall be in the World ; 
the Quick and the Dead, Ads 10. 42. 2 Tim. 4. t. 1 Pet. 4.5 
He ſhall ſend forth his Angels, and fay ro them who are his 
Reapers, Chap. 13. 39. ' Gather together fi the Tares, and binde 
them in Bundles to burn them, but gather the Wheat into my Barn, 
He by his Anzels , ſhall ſeparate them one from another, as a 
Shepherd, who fecderh bath Sheep and Goars rogerher, ar Night 
ſeparaterh chem one from another ; So che Saints of God, who 
are like Sheep for Whireneſs, Gentleneſs, Innocency , and teed 
in this World together wich ſtinking and /ſcivios Goats , the 
Wicked of the World , compared to Goats for the filrhy Quali- 


ties by which they reſemble chem, yer ar the Day of —_— 
; ri 


plainly ro rell chem, whar kind of a Kingdom he ſhould furcher C1-12. 49- 


—_ — _—_—_—_— 


- RE br tes br 2 
a FS XY es \ 


_ L —. @ is = wW_ _ —_ _ — . bs _ 
- 7 E nr . : : ; - ; . a 
He ow. it rr - — Py —_—_—__ ————_— - —_—_ _ - - 
J_—— 8 my PH - G 
R y bt Y ; 
«5 _ _— _ . _ mo & _— — <2 4 = gin a _ _ __ _ « - 
c 4 '” SY oo # _ oy w gk - th PE _ % ys ——_— - 
I Þ J P & ms Y 
- " . - _ . _ AY; - FP ” . 
> 8 « k _— 4 HAS 
be X — <A - þ - - 6 »— 4 4 _ —_ - * 
a9""y, 7 10 RE Int _ = . : - <—_ Ceci 4% - « x07 "0% OT IE — OO _ — A — " _ 
=y = —_ —— LY __ I nn < * =o 0 TY "== . — _ —- —F.- bY SIT. ? wa = : = - > 
——_ WP = - WESC A: EEE oor EE L — Bi. wn ep IT. gu "=6 FD» ” ; _—_ 4 - - - b h- g - # 
_ ., Y -- ” - ps _ 1 n= _ ” _ .- _ > 
—_—— , _ *- - P —— - _ 4 " 7 - $ : —_ _ - = + £262. 2. 5 0 _- _ « "Io _ = 
- - _ PIER os Sov 4 be WA Y _ -: = FX T - _ - -— = 
2 " ws 
-- - TI ED IE ERS NTT — = -_— l - = - £ £ - p——— ly 
EE _ a RI——_ _ 


> RXV. SI MAT 


Ghrilt fall ſeparace them: { And be ſhall ſet the Sheep at his right 
#:nd,\ The righr Hand, 1s the place of Honour and Digmty, 
and he place fer Favourites : Then Chriſt ſhall exalr his Saints 
to orcat Honour and Dignity, and ſhew them his Favour ; and 
[ ihe G5.ts on the left Hand, | Wicked Men ſhall riſe to Shame and 
Cx:2embt, The Right Hand Men of the World, ſhall be at the 
Lett Hand of Chrift, Ir thall be then ſeen, thar becauſe they 
are People of no Underſtanding, he rhar formed chem, will ſhew 
(1631 No Favour, 


2.4 Then ſhall the king ſay to them on his right 
FA hand, Come ye bled of my tarher, inherit the 
*©123p-22: Kingdom * prepared for you from the foundation of 
22 1. the world. 
$0. The King, that is, he who was before called the Son of Man, 
who tall chen fit on the Throne of þus Glory , he ſhall ſay co has 
Saints, to thoſe on his right md, thoſe whom he deſigns ro Ho- 
nour and to Favour, [Come ye Bleſſed of my Father ;] You whom 
my Father hath Bletled with all Spiritual Blefſings in me, who 
were alſo Bleſſed in his Ftorn{ Thoghts : For there Was 4 King- 
dom prepared for you from the Foundation of the World ; you 
have nor purchaſed ir by your Works ; no, ir was prepared for you 
before ever you were. You were Blefſcd in my Farher's Eternal 
Thouzhts , fo he prepared a Kingdom tor you; and you have 
been Blefſcd fince with all Spiritual Bleſſings through me, fo you 
are nov prepared for ir: Theretore, Come and now Inherit it, as 
_ that which you are fore-ordained and born unto, as char which 1s 
| ircely given you, nor purchaſed by you. 
* Jat-27- 25 * For] was an hungred, and ye gave me meat: 
*Heb.13.2. ] was thirſty, and ye gave me drink; *1 was a 
ſtranger, and ye took me 1n : 
25 * Naked, and ye cloathed me : I was fick, and 
ye vilitzd me : I was in priſon, and ye came unto me, 
27 Then ſhall the righteous anſwer him, ſaying, 
Lord, when ſaw we thee an hungred, and ted zþee £ 
or thiiſty, and gave zÞce drink ? 
28 \When jaw we thee a ſtranger, and took zhee 
in: or naked, and cloathed zhee £ 
30 Or, when ſaw we thee lick, or in priſon, and 


Came unto thee ? 

| 40 And the king {hall an{wer and lay unto them, 
' Prov. 17% Verily 1 {ay unto you, * Inaſmuch as ye have done 77 
*+ | uato one ot the lealt of theſe my brethren, ye have 


ic 5. 6.10 : 
done 17 unto me. 

The Recompences of the Laſt Judgmenr, are according to the 
Tenour of our Good Works, and the Deſert of Evil Works. The 
King here gives the Reaſon of his Gracious rewarding Sentence : 
[Er I was an hungsy, and ye fed me.) This doth nor imply an 
Deſerr, much lefs any Worthineſs of Equality, berween the Wor 
and che Reward ; bur that Evangelical Works, the Produtts of 
unfeigned Faith and Love, qualifie us by the Covenant of Grace 
to receive it. The Cauſes ot the Reward are either, che Original 
Cauſe, the moſt free and rich Mercy of God, or the Meritorious, 
the moſt perte& Righreonſnels and Sacrifice of Chriſt; and the 
Good. Works here recired, are infallible Signs- that the Per- 
formers of them are the Objets of the Divine Favour in Prede- 
ſtination, and are cruly unired to Chriſt, Beſides, in the Goſpel, 
which is the Law of Grace, God has eſtabliſhr a necefſary Con- 
nexion, berween Faith, that works by Love, and the Bleſſed 
Reward ; and accordingly Evangelical Works are the Condition 
of our Title, that qualifies us ro obtain the Kingdom of Glory, 
freely pronnicd tor Clirift's ſake ro obedient Believers. And in 
this relpect the driſpeyting the Reward, may be laid ro be an AR 
of Juſtice, namely in che Faichtul Performance of the Promiſe; 
as in the Forgiving Sins, (which is an At of pure Mercy,) God is 
is ſaid ro be Faithful and Jus, 1 Joh. 1. 9, Our Lord here 
reckons bur one Species of Good Works ivftead of many, as is 
uſual in Scripture; and he rather chvſerhto inſtance in Works of 
Chirity, than of Piety. 1. He know; the Hardneſs of Mens Hearts : 
and 2. Thar che Pocr rhey ſhould always have with them, eſpe- 
cially ſuch as would live Godly, and 1o be more than orhers, 
our of Favour with the World. 3. He knew how acceptable 
theſe were to his Father, avd had a mind rhe World ſhould know 
ir, Mica 6. 8. Ta, 58.7. Exech. 18. 7. Mat. 9.13. 1 Foh. 3. 17. 
And hereby declares , thar Ads of Charity ro Men's Souls, 
makes us fit Subjetts for rhe Divine Mercy in the Day of Judg- 
ment, 2 Tim. 1.18. The Anſwer, ver. 37. | Then ſhall the 
Rinhteous anſwer him, ſaying , &c.} only teacherh us rhis, Thar at 
te Great Day the beſt of Men ſhall bluſh and be afhamed, ro hear 
G:d ſpeak of any Good Works they have done, and be ſwal- 
lowed ur in the Admiration of God's free and infinite Grace in 
rewarding any thing which they have done ar fo liberal a Rate. 
And the King ſhail cr./wer and ſay unto them, $&c. ) This onl 
corfrmeth whac we had , Chap. 10. 42, Thar Ciriſt looketh 
upon Atts of Kindnef done to the meaneſt Godly Perfons, and 
will reward them, as if they had been done unto himſelf; ſo 
thar rho” our Charity muſt nor be limiceq only there, yer ic muſt 
be chlifctiy ſhewn ro rhoſe of the Houſhold of Faith; ocher Cha- 
riry may be ſhiewed in Obedience to the Command of God, 
and have irs Reward; but none can to properly be 1aid co he done 
co Chriſt, as rhar which is done ro thoſe, who are his true' 
Members. ", ! 

41 Then ſhall hefay alſo unto them on the left 
hand, * Depart tromme, ye curſed, into everlaſting 
fire, prepared tor rhe devil and his angels. 

a2 For I was an hungred, and ye gave me no 
mear : I was thirſty. and ye gave me no drink: 


* 1 - 
"cri 4a 
TS, 12. 


s . 


42 I wasa ſtranger.and ye took me not in: naked, 


THEW. Chap, XY hap. - 


and ye cloathed me not : fick, and in priſon ang The 


ye viſited me nor. Sy 
4.4 Then ſhall they alſo anſwer him , ſavins Rig 
Lord, when {aw we thee an hungred, or athirſ oa finc 
4 ſtranger, or naked, or lick, and in priſon, and dig Life 
not miniſter unto rhee 2? | oy 
45 Then ſhall he anſiver them, ſaying, Verily | -— 
ſay unto you, * Inaſmuch as ye did z? not to one 4 +3... alvra 
the leaſt of theſe, ye did zr not to me. ark. Eve 
| The great King, and Judge of the whole Earth, had before 0M _ 
given Sentence for thoſe on his right Hand, who are now pol. ub 
teſſed of their Kingdom, and fit with him to Judge the weor(g. (hal 
He now comes to Sentence the Goars at the left Hand , whoſe End 


Judgments ro Eternal Miſery; lying in two things : 1, Ina hs. 
p.rture from God, 1o as never more to have any Favour from him 
2, In a Senſe of Pain and Miſery, exceeding thar which Fire cauferh 

tro a Body conſuming with it. In this Lite wicked Men Te 

capable of ſome Preſence of God with them, and receive levery] Cliff 


Favours trom God, in Gitts of Common Providence, at:d Coy, feri 
Grace,which might ferve,eirher as Incouragements tv .ilure co hill 
or Means to help them; in turning to God; bur havin - abuled cit 
rieſe, che Righreous God in that Day will rotally depare jr. win; 
them, and they ſhall receive no more Tokens ot Ki:dul; jg afte 
Favour trom him : And whereas, by the Advantages ttey };,q Piec 
trom ſuch a Preſence of Divine Providence , as God was pie4i,q Chri 
in this Lite co allow them , they lived in fome dezrce. © him 
Pleaſure and Liberty, which they were not thanktul for, tc, breal 
ſhall at char Day be adjudyed tro Eternal To;ments. Ner ſhall th; Wine 
Juſtice of God he impeached for difproportioning Eternal T.;. Pete; 
ments to Temporary Sizmines; fur che Infinirene!s of the 1. thric: 
jeſty offended, to which SatisfaQtion is due, is to be contidere!. bubet 
and is fo amneſt Men, who think it reaſi-nable to reconnz1; and | 
a Prince, or Noble Man, for an Injury dene c©:; them, witi: Te appret 
Thouſand Pounds, which they would nor recompence to 4 wed, 
Equal, with fo many Shillings. Befide, tur every Sinn þb;;h him 4 
ſinned in ſuo Tnfinito, ro rhe utmoſt Line of tus Time, and waned we bi 
nothing, bur more Time to have ſinned more ; tor he },c and R 
Will ro have finned infinitely. Tius everlaſting Fire. is [49 ;1 

be | prep.ired for the Devil and his Angels : | N:.c becaule ics jo; I 

allo prepared for Men , but the Evil Angels were adjudged .- i; 

betore Man had finned, fo char Man comes bur into a ſhare 17h Y 
the Evil Angels; and by this God alfo lers us know, that tl pa4t, 
are the Children of the Devil, by Evil works, Joh. 8.: 44. 1 7, bi 1. the pal 
3. 8. Having determined their Puniſhmenrs, and pronounced F crucife 
rheir Sentence, he comes to juſtifie himfeif in it. | 6; 1s Marh 1 
an hungry,and you gave me no meat,&c. ] For here may be unceryrated Unlexven 
as a Cauſal ; for tho' none. merits his own Salvation, ver cyery Unlexven 
Sinner's DeſtruQtion is of himſelf, and he mericerh his Concems becrer un 
tion. The mentioning only of Sins of Omiſſton, and thiſe cyl the follon 
as to Aﬀs of Charity, doth not only reach us, thar Sins of Oniſtn the Paſſor 
are enough to Damn us; but that Omiſfions of Ads of Chuiy Lev. 23. 4 
to the diſtreſſed Members of Chriſt, are ſuch Sins, as it nt te- Inſtituto! 
pented of, and waſhed off with the Blood of Chrift, are enyh Month A% 
ro Condemn us to the Pir of Hell; and ſuch things as God dxh if the Fu 
keep in Mind, and will in a more ſpecial manner reckon ih this Lamb x 
Men for, I cannor paſs by a Refle&ion, which I find almcſ al E PFurteenth 1 
Interpreters make upon this Text. If choſe in the Day E Erningss ( 


Jadgmcmt ſhall be ſenr to Hell, who do nor feed the poor Men: 
ers of Chriſt , and give them to drink, when chey are ttirſy; 
what ſhall be done ro rhem , who pluck the Bread our of their 
Mouths which they have got in the Sweat of their Face, and ill 
the Drink which their own Labours or others Liber:liry tath 
given them to drink? If thoſe ſhall have their Porcion iwiththe 
Devil and his Angels, who give not Entertainment to them when 
chey are Baniſhed and Strangers, what ſhall hecome of them 
who are Inſtruments of their Baniſhment , and to make them 
Strangers ? If ir ſhall go ſo hard with thoſe, that Cloach themnor 
when they are naked, what ſhall become of thoſe, who any vay 
help to ſtrip them Naked ? If thoſe ſhall nor eſcape the Vengeance 
of God, who do nor Viſit them when they are Sick, and in Priſ'n, 
where ſhall they appear, who caft chem into Priſons, and are meas 
ot thole Diſeaſes that ſhorten their Lives, by their Barbarous 
Uſages of them? Thoſe that ſmite their Fellow-Servants, had 
need be ſure, that it be not for Well-doing. Our Lord here tell 
us, that the Wicked in that day will fay, {When ſaw we thee an hu 
gry, &c.] They did nor deny, that they had refuſed to give Bread 
to the hungry ; bur they deny, that they ever ſaw Chyiit an (ur 
gry, and did not feed him. Perſecutors have always 11! Names t9 
give the Servants of God, pretending ſtill a great Reverence 
tor God, and Chriſt. Bur mark our Lord's Anſiver , and chat 
with an Oath ; | Verily T ſay unto youginaſmuch as you did it not tm: 
of the lea$t of theſe, you did it not to me, Ir is no matrer whar you 
thought of, or called choſe ro whom you ſhewed no Mercy; you 
fee they are here at my Right Hand: you might have knowl 
them ro be my Sheep; you ſaw them Hear my Voice, and F#- 
ing me; you in caſting them into Priſon, caſt me, in ſtarving chem, 
you ſtarved me, and in ſtripping them of their Goods, you trip: 
me : Therefore, *Go ye Curſed into Everlaſting Fire , prepared ji 
the Devil and his Angels. 


46 And * theſe ſhall go away into everlaſting *- 
puniſhment : but the righteous into life eternal. 


So then ir ſeems they ſhall Riſe as well as the other : Thoug! 
they -live in the Lands of the Grand Sejgnior, or the Great Highs 
they ſhall nor ( as ſome filthy Dreamers have chought) have ſuch 
4 Quiet ſleep in the Graves, but thar the Sound of the Laſt TrumP 


> - afterthe Si 
L theflſh of t 
den, but 19: 
Herbs; moth 
min, it y 
Lins girded 
Hand, the 
Piſts, and 9 
Seven Days | 
teenth Day o 
at Even, 
Wrance in 7 
E:Yptians, a 
out of Ezypy 
may be read 
Ws a Fi2ure 
calleth our P 
he Law of 
Numb, 28, x 
Bread (as n 
 Vxation, T, 
Ot the firſt p 
At the P.z(ſy; 
Dor-Poſts's 1 
be prinbled 
Pchul Socie 
Wards they y 
foſtedand e 
the caten /}. 
and Staves 11 
tlejp Journe 
(in tOken of t 
Ear 't firing 
wee, whe 
"NON was m 
"rteenth Da 


ſhall awaken them. Nor are they our of the Juriſdi&tion of Fn ho a, ang 
char ſhall be the Judge both of the Quick and the Dead. NT BW > Bs 
ſhall they eſcape a Judgmenc without che Law, becauſe tne) nave Th: Day, 
Sinned wickour the Law : Fr the inviſible things of God, ff w__—s MO - Wa 
Creation of the World, are clearly ſeen, being under/Ioad by the Wi taking _ 
"2 40 


that ere made, even his Erernul Power and Gedliea! , ROM LE 


f.1 4 


| 21, 


wp. XVI 


all go inco Everlaſting Punifhment nor a Puniſhment for 
Origen thoughc ; ) bur the Righteows, thoſe who ſhall 
be fo adjudged » being made 10 1n tins Lite, by the imputed 
<«hreouſnz/$ of CÞrift, and accepted as ſuch tor their holy and 
ery Converfacion, cho' in many things imperte&, thall go into 
be nal; which doth nor ftgnifie a meer Eternal Exiſtence, 
Lije & the worſt of Men ſhall Live Erernally, or elſe they could 
_—_ c capable of Erernal Puniſhment,) but an Happy and Blefled 
_ which ſhall never hive an End ; and chus' Eternal Life 
—_— (j:nitierh in Scripture, being oppoſed to Erernal Death, 
—_ ſting Fire, the Wcrm that never dieth, @c. Thus 
—_— Chriſt's Kingdim of Grace; or rather, thus ſhall be- 
wen Fi Kingdom of Glory; all his Enemies being pur under his 
am and none remaining bur rhis Glorious King , and thoſe who 
(h4ll be his crue Subjetts z ot which Kinzdom ſhall be no 


End, 


They th 
4 time, (as 


CHEAT AAVL 


Chriſt acquainteth his Diſciples with the time and manner of his Suf- 
foring, 1, 2+ The Rulers aſſemble, and conſpire how to take and 
tif him , 3—5S+ A Woman in Simon the Leper's Houſe, with pre- 
ci Ointment anointeth his Head : Hs Dijciples dijpleaſed;, He 
cindicateth her goad Work, and promiſeth it ſhould be publiſhed here- 
after for her Memorial, 6—13. Fudas corvenanteth for Thirt) 
Pieces of Silver, and betrayeth Feſus to the Chief Prieſts, 14 —16. 
Cirift heepeth the Paſſer, and declareth that Fudas would betra) 
him, 17 — 25. Tuſtifieth his La$t and Holy Supper, bleſſing, 
treabing and diſtributing Bread , and bleſjing and giving them 
Wine , 26 — 30» He foretelleth their Offence becauſe of him : 
Peter's Confidence « Chri$ aſſures him tht he would deny him 
thrice, 31—35» 4» Agony and Prayer in the Garden : He re- 
tubeth his Diſciples for their Droufineſs, ond warneth to atch 
and Pry , 36—45%. Fudas betrayeth him with a Kifs : They 
apprehend him ; Peter attempteth to reſcue him, but is yepro- 

wed, 47-56. They lead Feſus to Caiaphas , examine, and find 

him guilty of Nothing « They accuſe him of Blaſphery, and baſely 
ue him , $7—68, Peter denieth him thrice, hu bitter Sorrow 

and Repentance, 69——75. 


l N D it cameto paſs,when Jeſus had finiſhed 

all theſe ſayings, he ſaid unto his diſciples, 

2 Ye know that after * two days is the feaſt of 

the paſſover , and the Son of man 1s betrayed to be 
crucihed. ; 

Mark faich, After two days was the Fea# of the Paſſer, and of 
Unleavened Bread. Luke laith, chap. 22. 1, Now the Feat of 
Unleavened Bread drew nigh, which is called the Paſſyuer. For cur 
becter underſtanding of whar the Evangeliſts ſay here, and in 


the following parr of this Hiſtory, we will conſider the Lavw of | 


the Paſſover, in it's Inſtitution, which we find in Exod. 12. 3, (5c. 
Lev. 23. 4, (Fc. Numb. 28. 16, (xc. In Exod. 12. we finds its firſt 
Inſtitution, and the Occaſion of ir: Upon the Tenth Day of rhe 
Month Ai/an, they were to take up a Lamb for every Houſhold, or 
if the Houſhold were to2 ſmall , they might take in their Neighbours , 
this Lamb was to be a male without blemiſh, and to be kept up to the 
Furteenth Day, then to be killed in the Evening ; or betwixt the two 
Exzn.ngs 3 (that is,as is moſt probably judged, fome time that Day 
after the Sun beganafter Noon to decline, before the Sun did ſer) 
the fleſh of this Lamb was that Night to be eaten, neither raw, nor ſod- 
den, but ro1ted with Fire, with unleavened Bread, and with bitter 
Herbs, nothing was to remain till the Morning , and if any did re- 
main, it was to be burned, They were to eat it, with their 
Lins girded , their Shoes on their Feet , and their Staff in their 
Hinds; they were to ſtrike the Blood of the Lamb on the two firs 
Poſts, and 5n the upper Door-Poſts of the Houſes where they did eat it. 
Seven Days they were to eat unleavened Bread, beginning on the Four- 
tenth Day of the Month at Even, and ending the One and Twentieth 
t Even, This was to be to them for a Memvrizl of their Deli- 
wrance in Egypt upon God's deſtroying the Firſt-born of the 
E:ytians, and ſparing them; and their Deliverance and coming 
our of Ezypt, and was to be an Ordinance unto them for ever. This 
may be read at large, Exod. 12, from v. 3. to v. 21. This alſo 
was a Fizure of the true Paſſover Feſs Christ, whom the Apoſtle 
calleth or Paſſover, and the Evingelift calls the Lamb of God. 
The Law of the Paſſover was again repeated, Levit. 23. 5,6, 7,8. 
Numb, 28, 16, The fir$ and /4 of the Days of Unieavened 
Bread ( as may be ſeen there) were to be Days of an My Con- 
v%ction, There were ſome differences betwixc rhe Obiervarion 
of the firſt Paſſover in Egypt, and their after O'fervarions of it. 
Ar the Paſſover in Foypt , the Blozd was to bc jprirk/2{ on the 
Dor-Poſts; in following times, the Bl-9d and tine Zit were 
be prinbled upon the Altar z ar the Pier in Egypt, evcry 
Pl Society flew the Paſſover in their own Houſe , bur atrer- 
wards they were all ſlain in the Temple, and then carried ro be 
roaſtedand earen by the ſeveral Socictics. The Pa{ſover in Egypt was 
tobe caren ktanding, with their Loins girded, their Shes on their Feet, 
and Staves in their Hands, in token of their bcing ready to take 
teir Journey our of Egypt £ Bur in their following Paſſovers they 
(in token of the Liberty inro which God had broughr them) did 
Eat it firring 5 hence, we ſhall find thar Chri& ſaute down with the 
!welve, when he are the Paſſover. In other things the Obſer- 
*101 was much alike. They ftritly kepr to che Time, the 
Firteenth Day of the Month Njj4n or /46jb, which anſwererh part 
ot our Warch and April. This great Feſtival was to be kept after 
1 Days (faith our Saviour ;) whether the Two Days are to be 


| Uiderſtood a5 including or excluding the Day when he ſpake, is 


"can, and nor material for us ro know; provably he ſpake 
"is ON che Tieſday ( as we call ir, ) Friday being to be the 
ooiſirer-Dagy, { And the Son of Min is betrayed to be crucified. ] 
19 he was not yet afually Betrayed thar we read of, yet he 
ney _borh what Counſels his Adverſaries had already been 


ting 1 
412, and were further about to rake, and whar was inthe Heart 


ot. MATTHE W 


of Zudas; he therefore forewarneth his Diſciples thar when 
the thing ſhould come to paſs they miglic nor be ſurprized, 
and might know that he was the Son of God who could tore. 
rel furure Contingencies, tho' he was alfo as tlc Son of Man to be: 
Crucificd, 


3 Then *alſembled together the chief pricfts, and * Pſal;2, 2 
the ſcribes, and the elders of the people , unto the Aﬀts 4. 


palace of the high prieſt, who was call:d Caiaphas, 

4 And conſulted that thcy might rake Tofis by 
ſubrilty, and kill Þzzv. : 

5 Bur they ſaid, Not on the feaſt day, lei there 

be an uproar among the people. 
_ Mark, chap. 14-1. faith, The Chief Pricſts and the Scribes 
Jought how they might take him by craft and put him to Death. Luke 
laich much the tame with Mark. They had before this been 
feeking how ro deſtroy him, Lub. 19. 47. nor was it the firit 
time they had made a Formal Council abour ic, Fob. 11. 47. 
bur now again they mer, The Place is nained , that was the 
High Prieﬀt's Hall, the Councellrs were the Chief Prieſts, Scribes, 
and Elders. The Marrter of their Deliberation was, to K{! Chris, 
and how they might do ir by Subtilty, for they were atraid of 
che People who had a great Eſteem for our Saviour, becaute of 
the many Miracles he had wroughr. Bur they faid, | N77 on the 
Fealt-Day, ] that was now within two Days; and in order to it, 
r1e City as {full of People, and they were atraid (as they were 
concerned being a Conquered People, and having but a Preca- 
r1ous Liberty for their Rel1gion) of cauſingany Tumults ; chis awed 
them, not any great Religion for the Feſtival, tor all things now 
were out of order with them ; their High Priest was choten an- 
nuaily,and ar the Will of their Conquerors; fome little Appearance 
they had of their Ancient Religious Government, but ic was in no 
due order. 

6 Now when jeſus was in Bethany, in the houſe 
of Simon the leper, 

7 There came unto him a woman having an ala- 
baſter-box of very precious ointment, and poured ir 
on his head, as he ſlate at mear. 

8 But when his diſciples ſaw zz, they had in- 
dignation, ſaying, To what purpoſe zs this waſte 2 

9 For this ointment might have been ſold for 
much, and given to the poor. 

10 When Jeſus underſtood zz, he ſaid unto them, 
Why trouble ye the woman 2 for ſhe hath wrought 
a good work upon me. 


11 For ye have the poor * always with you, buit * Deac.1 e. 


* me ye have not always. 7 = 
12 For in that ſhe hath poured this ointment on on 


my body, ſhe did zz for my burial, 


ſpel ſhall be preached in the whole world, zhere 
{hall alſo this, that this woman hath done, be told 


for a memorial of her. 

This Piece of Hiſtory (or one very like it) is recorded by the 
three other Evangeliſts, Mark hath it wich very little difference, 
chap. 14. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. inſtead of for much, v. 9. Mark hath 
a preciſe Summ , three hundred Pencez and adds, rhey murmurcd 
again8 her : and ſome orher little differences he hath in Words, 
rather than in Senſe. Luke, chap.7.36. we read, One of the Pha- 
riſees deſired him that he roould eat with him; and he went into the 
Phariſee's houſe, and ſate down to meat. This ſeemeth nor to 
be the ſame Hiſtory, tho' ſome think it is. And behold a 
Woman in the City, which was a Sinner, when ſhe knew th.t eſin 
ſate at meat in the Phariſee's he , brought an Alabaſter-Brax of 
Ointment, :n4 ſtood at his Feet tehind him weeping ; and began to 
waſh his Feet with Tears, and did wipe them with the Hairs of 
her Head, and kiſſed his Feet, and anointed them with Ointment. It 
is plain , this Phariſee's Name was Simon, by ver. 49. Like fur- 
ther adderh a Diſcourſe berwixt our Saviour and rhits Fh:1i/ee, 
trom ver. 39. to the end, (which I ſhall in irs order confider. } 
Fohn relateth it, chap.12. 1,2, X. Tien Feſus, ſix duys before the 
Paſſruer, came to Bethany where Lazarus was which had been dead, 
and was raiſed from the dead. There they made him a Supper, and 
Martha ſerved : But Lazarus was one of them which ate at the 
Table with him. Then took Mary a pound of Ointment of Spihen::rd, 
very coſtly, and anointed the Feet of Jeſus, and wiped his Fv2t with 
her Hair , and the Houſe was filled with the Odhur of the Ointment, 
Then ſaith ne of his Diſciples , Judas Tjcarint , Simon's Son, which 
ſhould betray him, Why was not this Ointment jold fir three hundred 
Pence, and given to the Pooy ? This he ſaid, not that he cared jr 
the Poor, but becauſe he was @ Thief, and had the Bag, and bure 
what was put therein, Then ſaid Jeſus, Let her alone ;, again$} the 
Day of my Burying hath ſhe kept this. Fir the Pory always yu have 
with you, but me you have not always. Whether all rhe Evange- 
liſts relate one and the ſame, or divers Stories, is the Queſtion, 
Luke's Relation ſeemerh che molt different ; he faich rocking of 
chis Simen being a Leper,and relaterh this Hiſtory immediately atrer 
chings done in Galilee. All che other three agree this Patiage ro 
have fallen our at Bethany, within tw2 Miles of Feruſalem. It 15 
very probable char Matthew, and 31a h, and Fopn recite th2 MC 
Story ; they agree 1 to have happen'd 1n Pethany, at a Supper 1n 
Simon's Houſe; they agree in the kind of the Ointment, aid in 
our Saviour's Diſcourſe upon the thing, The difference in che 
time , John mentioning, {11s Days before rhe Pailover, and 3/.;t- 
thew ewo Days, will be cleared, by confidering , thar Sc. 7obn fets 
down the preciſe time when our Saviour Came t9 Beth.my, wWhica 
was ſix Days before the Paſſover ; Sr. Matthew ſers down rhe tnme 
when the Feaſt was made,which was ewo Days betore the Pattpver : 
ſo that our Saviour had bcen four Days in Bethany, betore he was 

entertained 


Chap. XRXV'T, 


18. 20. 
13 Verily I fay unto you, Whereſoever this go- 28. 22: 


© £L4N, SRV I. 


St M AT 


-errzined in the Houſe of Simon, and Anointed by Mary for his 
Wien Clriſt came our oi Galilee, roward Feruſalem, he 
imac (2 we heard betore) ro Bethny, Mar, 11. Ts chere he was 
(ne-rrained 27 4 Supper by one $1791, who had tormerly been a 
/ 154, and probably had been curcd by Chriſt, who theretore 1n 


ay Iconortzined him, and made hima Supper, where (faith 


«Jt .aak;RENMA 
Phra tervad, Lizmis late ar Mear, whom, chap. 11. he 
1d note r4ilhd from the Dead, There comes a Woman (* Fobn 
Nth ber Nene was Moy ) and rakes a Pound otthe Ointment 
of Stttenard , tz/thow and Hark lay wn was 1nan Alabaſter-Bix; 
75% taich (he did .nint vis Feet, ad wiped them with her Hair. 
"Y1rtbew 2nd York fay nothing of her anoiuting his Feet, bur of 
un Head only. Though theretore Opinions both oft ancient and 
nudern Divines be very various, fome chinking that the Evange- 
liſts tpcak bur of one Anoincing ; others, thar rhey ſpeak of two z 
ethers, that racy ſpeak of three: yer it ſeems moſt probable char 
thev ſpeak of two, one of which js mentioned by Like, a Year 
before this; the other is mentioned by Matthew, 34 [,, and 7obn. 
VIi>fo deliberately reads over the Hiſtory in Luke, and com- 
pare:{ it wich che Record of it in rhe chree others, will fee Rea- 
tons cno2uzh to conclude that Litho tpeakerh ot another Perſon, 
and another Time, and anorher Place; tor cercanly 57mm me 
Phtzriice, and Simon rae Leper, Were not rhe ſame. Beftdes, we 


ON 
ve x} 
bt Se kt ot 


- _ 


read in £be,that that 55/17 carp ar our Saviour, tor Ictting ſuch 
1 finful Woman come. near him. Here js nothing like it 1n this 
Story: 1 fall therefore here conſider the Hiſtory, as reported by 
our Evanyeliſt. raking in what Mark and John have, to make 1t 


comp!eat, 3/:tthew and Mark fay 1t was in Bethany, in the Howe 


of Simvn the Lopor. Fo/m mentionerh nor the Houſe, bur adds, - 


that Lrooizs was at the fame time at Supper with our Lord, and 
thar Marth wained, It will not frem hence follow that our Sa- 
viour was at the Hoale of L132, (as ſome think; ) for as the 
emer Toincelitts exprets another Honie , ſo 7obn gives no ſuſpt- 
cinn of any Ich ghing, bur by mentioning the preſfence of La- 
rich 3nd his two Sitters there; which might be, and one of 
thouzh they were at the Houſe of a Friend. Theye 
ome 179 lil a Tromaun (fo ſay Mathew and 21k; John Taith it 


L "We, = - - 
wis 34, cone cf the Siſters of Lugarims,_) ſhe having an Ala- 
i 


F2CIN Wait. 


19,2 143% 


t or-Bx of Cintrment very precious, poured it on bus Head as he fate 
ut Tit, Join faith the Ointment was of Spikenard, very coſtly ; 


1nd that the aninted his Feet, and wiped them with her Hair; and 


Gus 


rar 726 Quantity of it wasa Pound, fo as the Odour of it did fill 


fr 13 certain, thar in thoſe Exftern Corniries , this was an uſual 
Eathion to entertain their Gueſts ar Banquets, by Anoinring them 
zirh Ol, ro which the P/almi# alluderh, Pſal. 23. 5. This Wo- 
mn ſeemerh to have exceeded the uſual Complement of rhis 
rature, in the ind of Oil ſhe uſed, the quantity of 1t, and in her 
eminting his Feet, (which ſhe poſſibly did inftead of waſhing his 
Feer, which was very uſual with them;) in theſe things ſhe 
ſhewed the greatneſs of her Love rothis Gueſt, When Þis Diſci- 
ples {.nw it, they had indignation, ſ.zying, To what purpoſe us this 
waſte ? Z2larh adds, they murmured at the Woman they ſaid, 
FTÞis Ointment might have been ſold for much, and given to the Poor, ] 
Aink and Fobn ſay , for Three hundred Pence. _ ſaith ir was 
Fs Tearint that ſpake the words, and gives the Reaſon for it, 
becauſe he b112 the Bag , into which the Price of the Ointmenc 
{ had it bcen ſold ) muſt have come, and he was a Thief : He 
ſpake nt rhis our of any regard to the Poor, bur to himſelf. Ic 
is likely other of che Diſciples might alſo think thar ic was too 
grear a 1f.:/e up>n ſuch a Complement. Our Lord underſtand- 
ing it, vindicateth the Woman. 1. He tells them, Thar ſhe had 
done a £34 Work. Adtions not forbidden by the Divine Law, 
ror commanded in it, take up their Goodnefs or Badneſs from 
tacir Principles and Ends; what ſhe had done, was done our 
of a Principle of Love to Chriſt, and for his Honour and 
Gioryv, ſo ic was a good Work. 2. He tells them, Thar they 
hid the Pry with them always, but they ſhould not have him alway. 
A Work may be gocd, done at an extraordinary time, and upon 
an extraordinary cccation ; which 1s not ſo, if brought into or- 
dinry prafice. Chriſt here declares that he had no deſign ro 
diſcouraze the Relief of the Poor, but they would have daily 
occaſions to do them gcod, but he was not Jong to be with them. 
3. He teils them, That fe had poured this Ointment upon him 
o21in8t his Burial. That 1s, It this Coſt had been ſpent upon my 
Dead Body, you would not have blamed her, Un thoſe kiad of 
Pertumes, boch Moiſt and Drv, wz2re much uſcd 1n their Em- 
taimi!,” Dead Bodies;) I ain about codie ; I have often told you 
fo; You believe 1t nor; She believerh ir, and hath our of her 
Love to me, but beſtowed tuck a Coft upon my dying Body, as 
you would v9t have blamed, had it been beſtowed upon my 
ard Body, $5 ſhe ſhewed her Eiith in Chritt's Words, as well as 
is Perſ2n. Or it this Woman did not do 1t with any ſuch 
[arenrion, yer ( faith our Saviour ) the harh done the thing; I 
{h.:!! fuddenly die, and the hath bur anointed me afore-hand, 
and is certainly as much excuſable as thoſe that ſpend more abour 
B-dies already dead, Finajly , he tctls tnem, | That Whereſoever 
thi: G ofpol friild be preached, what ſhe had done ſhould be told to her 
Hmur and Pratie, for a Monorial of hcr. | Chriſt ſeeing that her 
Adqtion proceeded from an hearty and burning Love to him, 
accepterh hc AR, as an extraordinary Act of Kindneſs ro him, 
and proportioner}; her a Reward, Without Love, it a Man give 
all his Gocds ro the Poor, it fignifieth nothing : Bur 1f there be 
Love in the Heart, it makes the Gift acceprable. Love feldom 
under-dorh in an At ot Kindneſs; and it cinnor over-do, where 
Chriſt is the rrue Object of ir. Men, wio know not our Hearts, 
may be rea-'v to blame us for A&ions which God will highly 
commend and reward. The Evanzelis having thus far digreiied 
{rom his Diicourfe (probably ro give us an Account of the Rea- 
fon of 7:25 his Diſzult co our Saviour) he now rerurneth to a 
Diſcourſe about what was done ar the Cuuncil he had told us of 
1. 3.4.8 Thefcar of an Uproar amongſt the People, ſeemed 
to be that alone which made them ſhy of Apprehending him on 
PF; 


te Feaſt-Dav. 


'> 22m, She did cerrainly anoint both his Zeaz and his Feet. | 


TH £EM 


14 Then one of the twelve, called * Judas 34 
rior, wc unto the chief pricſts, . 


& A11C 


and I will deliver him unto you > Ard tt; 
nanted with him for thirty picces of filycr. 
16 And from that time he ſoughr OPPOrtunit: 


47> = Es Rea 
"SS "F.:%\0 


betray him, : 
4 Bod Ds : 
AMil: faith, chap, 14.10. 4nd Fudas Iearirt ne of the iwelyo ws 
unto the Chief Prieſts to betray him unto them. And when tw. 1... © 


it, they were zlad, and promiſed t9 give him Money. And 6. ads 


Luk, 220 Zo Then entred Satan into Trdas firnam-d Iicariot. toi; 
of the number of the Twelve; and he went bis way, ant ig 
with the Chicf Prielts and Cattains how he might betray Ex = 
them. And they were glad, and cyucnanted togive him Atm «1 
he promiſed, and ſught opportunity to betray him anto them ©... 
abſence of the Maltitude, While they were butic in Cc: inci! rus 
(che Chief Priefts, and Scriles, and Elders) how thicy mi. þe "I 
prize Chriſt, wichour making a Tumvir; 7udas firnamq 1; 
r15t, one of the Twelve Diſciples ut our Lord, infticared |; wr 
Devi), who poffibly did rake Advantage of Fudas's Dillgn;r: 


that we Ointment was not ſold, and he had not the Money N 
pur inco the Bag, or that Chriſt check d him 10 openly befc;e #; 
Diſciples,) goes to the Council, and offereth them to berryy i; 
unto thew, without making any noiſe in the Ciry. This heirs 
what they deſired, and were conſulting how ro effect, the? 
were glad of tuchan Offer, and agreed with him for a Surm «7 
Money. No Evangeliſt but Matthew in this place, mention:-! 
rhe particular Summ, which was Thirty Pieces of Silver, Interrre. 
ters do very probably think that thete Thirty Pidces were Tir 
Staters Or Shchels of the SanFuary ; which beings but ot the Valuo 
of Two Shillings Six-pence a-piece , amounted but oo Ti... 
| Pound Fiiteen Shillings in our Money, which was the Summ «. 
pointed by the Law, Exod. 21.32. to be paid for a Servant 5. 
to death by the BeaS of another, the pooreſt and mcaneſi Price 


» 


| any Perſon's Life : Judas left ir to them, and rhey ſet the meanc] 
Price 1maginable. There are orher Opinions abcur the \;';- 
of theſe Pieces of Silver, bur this is the moſt probable, eſyec;;'; 
| contidering the mean Opinion theſe Men had of Chriſt, and tt: 
Deſign and Intereſt to depreciate him az much as might he ; ;r4 
the Prieſts were the great Men 1n this Council, who moſt provyh; 
agreed with him for ſuch Pieces of Money as were moſt in »/z 

amongſt the 7Zews, It may bea juſt matter of Admiration;gharcte; 

ſhould make ſo cheapa Barzain vith him, conſidering char they 

doubtleſs, (had he inſiſted upon it) would have given himm:. 
bur there was a Prophecy to be fulfilled , winch we find 2.11, 

v.I2..S9 they weighed for my price thirty pieces of Silver. And the Li; 

ſaid to me, Cas it to the Potter, A goodly Price that I was prin:d ;; 

of them. IT ſhall have occaſion, when I come to chap. 27.9. t2 6 

courſe that Text furcher. The Price was ſer by the Conc] 0: 

Heaven, which had determined this Degree of our Lord's Huns 

liarion, Thar as he took upon him the form of a Servant, Þ ti; 

Life fhould be valued at the rate of an ordinary Servants Lit, - 
Tho' therefore Zudas was covetous enough to have acked nrre, 

and ir 1s like the malice ofthoſe Councellcrs would have egg ttm 

to have given more, yet it was thus ordered by the Divine Cu: 

ctl. Chrift muſt be ſold cheap, that he might be the more det 

the Souls of the redeemed Ones; for Thirty Pieces of Silt t: 

covenanted with them, and they promiſed ir to him ; whether i 

was now paid, or when he had done his work, appeareth not, 

From that time (faith Matthere ) he ſought how he might cynzrizs) 

betray him. Luke expounds this, & TE 9 1s, Without Tumylt, ©.22.5, 

He was now fixedly refolved upon his Villany, his Ly# wind 

bur Opportunity, which ſoon after offered ir ſelf. 

17 Now the firſt 42y of the feaſt of unleayered 
bread, the diſciples came to Jeſus, ſaying unto him, 
Where wilt thou that we prepare for thee to eat the 
paſlover 2 

18 And he ſaid,Go into the city to ſuch a man,and 
{ay unto him,The maſter ſaith, My time is at hund, [ 
will keep the paſſover at thy houſe with my diſcipks 

19 And the diſciples did as Jeſus had appoints! 
them, and they made ready the paſſover. 

No one of the Evangeliſts relates this Hiſtory fully ; but 3% 
relareth rhe former part more fully than Mathew : Mar. 1412, 
| £3, I4, 15,16. And the fir day of Unleavened Bread, win !'” 
killed the Paſſover, his Diſciples ſaid unto him, Where wilt thi 194 
we go and prepare that thu may's eat the Paſſrver * And he ti 
eth forth two of his Diſciples, and ſaith unto them, Go ye ts!" 
City, and there ſhall meet you a Man bearing a Pitcher of Was), 
follow: him : And whereſcever he ſhall g in, ſay you to tie good Mai 
of the Houſe, The Maſter ſaith, Where is the Gue&-Chamber Wh"? 
ſhall eat the Paſſrver with my Diſciples * And he ſhall ſhew 3% * 
large? Upper-Room furniſhed and prepared, there make ready fil # 
And his Diſciples went foxth , and came into the City , and :i's 
az he had ſaid unto them ;, and they made ready the Paſſer * 1s; 
chap. 22. 7,8, 9, Cc. differerh a lictle in the former part of © 
Relation : He faich, Then came the day of Unleavened-Breas, 
the Paſſroer mu# be billed : And he ſent Peter and Fobn, j-9i"s » 


0. 
be 199 
i, 


vw 
ſ* 
Va 
_ 
£1? 


and prepare the Paſſover, that we may eat. Ard they [cid Wi 
Where wilt thou that we prepare 2 And he ſaid unto them, 55%% 
when you are entred into the City, there ſhall a Man meer yt "uot 
$9 he goerh on, ver. 10, 11, 12. varying ſcarce ar all rom vt 


Mark faith. The Variations of the Evangelijls are of 19 re 
. ! A !;- 
menr ; none contradicterh the other, only one hatin 10M- 


$ or » ar Pot 
cumſtances omirced by the other. Our Lord was now at Beth 
whither he went every Night from 7eruyſalem. The Da) __ 
come for the billing of - the Paſſover, What” that Day Vo "1 


/ : 4 , " +ho trI [os 
Law hath fixed, Exod. 12.6. The Furtecnth Day of the firs 1" 


= 
9134 


( Niſan) in the Evening 3 or, berwixt the £vo £49747 5 


4c 


Cha P. XJ 


12 And j2id zato them * What will ye oiv« +... » 


KS "INS y 
4aw V WHT 2 «l,} 
- » 


f x 4 do ut . & 
hw he might conveniently betray him. Luke hath this ver mc re tully 


% 


ciples 
ſtruC 
1079 
whor 
in, al 
Mat; 
He 
Gues- 
who 
IT al Pi 
miner 
them 
the He 
all thr 
mande, 
the P, 
which 
readin; 
When 3 
the Lat 
Fourre 
it, or & 
purpoſ; 
thus ea 
the Terr 
tar, ant 
oftered, 
with ſo 
the Pric 
at the | 
ple, n* 
Law, EZ: 
we find 
the Blind 
and Levi 
great t1m 
Blood wc 
cleanſe tl 
Four or 
They did 
the Day, 
the Clock 
Evening | 
Was not 1: 
what the ; 
not told v 
was made 
paring of 1 
as to this 1 
liſts to ac 
let us knov 
Cloſe of t! 
Evangelit 


20 N 
With the 
21 An 
You, tha 
22 An 
Very one 


BY 22 An 


his hand 
me, 
24 The 
ut Wo 11 
betrayed : 
not been | 
25 Thi 
and faid, 
laſt ſaid, 
Hark at 
Fhe Ez tina | 
"(11s Ce 


7 þ s | 
OG; in #3; FF 
f , ul 


/ 


Pina 4* 

) Þ 55 hs 
? TE ? Ne 
Fj» x 
£ } 

f£ 38/41 k 
FI : - Ms 
ed prop 
x "' .- 4 
b ' 

UG f 

/ 


tap. XVI. S. MAT 


: reed) betwixt the declining of the Sun after Noon, 
hare W of As Sun ; for they counted one Evening began 
— "ne Sun was declined, which was the ſecond Evening of 
_ and another Evening (belonging ro the enſuing Day) 
= _ at Sun-ler. Berwixt theſe two Everings, the Paſſover 
_— be killed z now chis Fourteenth Day was called The fr/t 
wa Unleavened Bre.cd, tho' ſtrictly ic was nor ſo, according 

be Jewiſi Account ot Days, trom Sun-ſer to Sun-ſer ; bur ir 
OY ter the Roman Account, who count the Days as we do, 
-"m Midnigpt 19 Midnight : For the Jews began their Feaſt of 
wo Ks” Rread, from their Eating the Paſſover : So as their Four- 
pag Day mult needs take in 10 many Hours as were betwixt 
por ſertin? of the Sun, and Midnight of the firſt Day of unlea- 
an / read, which held to the end of the Twenry-firft Day. So 
were Seven entire Days with a part of another, Matrhew and 
Mark bring in che Ditciples firft asking our Saviour (knowing his 
Reſolurion to keep the Paſſover) where he would have it prepared ? 
He ſaid (Le fairh) ro Peter and Fohn, Go into the City to ſuch 4 
1m &, Mukand Luke here 1upply ſomething omitted by 
34:thew, for Matthew only mentionech: cheir going ro the Maſter 
of +2 Juſe, and telling him from Chriſt, The Maſter ſaith my 
Cme is at hand, T will keep the Paſſover ar thy Houſe with my Diſ- 
ci1les, The other two Evangeliſts mention more in their In- 
{-uctions; telling us, thar he told them, that when they came 
inco the City, T/ey ſhould ſee a Man carrying a Pitcher of Water, 
whom they ſhould tollow into what Houſe ſoever he ſhould go 
*n. and there they ſhould fay to the Maſter of the Houſe, The 
Mater ſaith my time #s at Hand, TI will keep the Paſſouer at thy 
Hhuſz with my Diſciples. Mark and Luke add, where 15 the 
Gied-Chamber ? No doubr, bar at thar time moſt Hovthoiders, 
who had convenient Houtes, Cid prepare Chambers for the ſeve- 
ral Paſſover Companies. Our Lord here gave his Diſciples an e- 
minenc Proof of his Divine Nature, in to particularly telling 
them what they ſhould meer wich in the City; and diipoſing 
the Hearr of this Houſholder, to fo tree a Reception of him. For 
all three Evangeliſts agree, | That the Diſciples did as Jeſus com- 
manded, and found as he had jaid unto them, and they made ready 
the Paſſover. } There was a great deal ot Work to be done, of 
which none of the Evangeliſts fay any ching. Some upon the 
reading of this, may be thinking, Where they had the Lamb 2? 
1hen was it offered ? 8c. According to che Law, in Exud. 12.3. 
the Lamb was to be taken up the Tenth Day, and kept to the 
Lourreenth ; it mighr cicher be brought by thoſe that did Ear 
it, or bought Ar Feruſalem, for they had great Markers for thar 
purpoſe, ſome Days before rhe Patloyer : Whether all the Lambs 
thus eaten by the Paſchal Socteties, were firſt ro be brought to 
the Temple, and then «*;1{ed, and the Blood ſprinkled on the 4/- 
tar, and poured out ar che Focrot it, and their Far and Entrails 
offered, I much doubr ; I rather chink, this was only to be done 
with ſome or them, inſtead of all. That ſome were ſo killed by 
the Prieſts, their Blood ſo ſprinkled and poured out upon, and 
at the Foot of the Airar, I doubt not, tho' God having no Tem- 
ple, n-r Altar built ar char time, there be no ſuch thing in the 
Law, E3d. 12, but at Hezekiah's Pafſover, 2' Chron. 39, 16, 17. 
we find the Levites killing the Paſſover, and the Priefs ſprinkling 
the Bli1d;, but as I ſaid before, I do nor think, thar the Priefts 
and Levites killed che Lambs for all the Paſſover Societies : The 
great time that 1t mult have taken, and the vaſt quantity of 
Blood would have been, the long time it muſt have taken to 
cleanſe the Entrails, makes it appear impoſſible ro be done in 
Four or Five Hours, for they had no longer time to kill it in. 
They did nor begin to kill till after the Evening Sacrifice for 
the Day, was done with, and that was berwixt Two and Three of 
the Clock, and they were to finiſh by Sun-ſet, tor then the other 
Evening began : This inclineth me to think, that every Lamb,: 
was not {> killed and offered, only ſome inſtead of all. Bur 
whar the Diſciples did as to theſe Matters, the Scripture harh 
not told us. It is enough for us that we are told the Paſſover 
was made ready, and we may be aſſured thar nothing in the pre- 
paring of it was omitted, which by che Law of God was required 
25 to this ſacred Aion. Ir was not the Buſineſs of the Evange- 
liſts ro acquaint us with every particular Circumſtance, only to 
let us know that our Lord did keep the Paſſover, and in the 
Cloſe of rhar Zeaſt inſtirure his Supper, ro which Relation our 


Evangelit now comes. 


20 Now when the even was come, he ſate down 
with the twelve. 

21 And asthey di” .t, hefaid, Verily I ay unto 
you, that one of you thall betray me. 

22 And they were exceeding forrowful, and began 
| Every one of them to ſay unto him, Lord, is it]? 

41.9 22 And he anſwered, and ſaid, * He that dippeth 
| HiShand withme in the diſh, the ſame ſhall betray 
me, 

24 The Son of man goeth as it is written of him: 
ut wo unto the man by whom the Son of man is 
betrayed : ir had been good for that man if' he had 
not been born. 

25 Then Judas which betrayed him, anſwered, 
and 1aid, Maſter, Isir1? He faid unto him, Thou 
haft ſid. 
fart; Tath rhe ſame, Chap. 14. v. 17, 13, 19, 20, 2I. And in 
We Evoring he cometh with the Twelve. And as they ſat and did 
fall fe/i's ſaith, Verily T ſay unto you, one of you ſhall betray me 
PI exo; with me. © And they began to be ſo:rowful, and to ſay 
" ) bir, one bv one, Is it I? And he anſwered, nd ſaid, It is one of 
", Pilve that dippeth with me in the Diſh. The Son of Man in- 


= 


"rt £02t'n, os it Is Wiiiten of him; but wo unto that Man by whom 


1 3am us betr1:d ; Grad were it for that Man if he had ne- 
eo bym Lake lacth, Chap. 22. 14, 15,16, GC. Ani when the 
\ p}. 17. 


T HEW. 


with you before I ſuffer: For IT fay unto you, 1 will not any more eat 
thereof unitl it be fulfilled in the Kingdom of God. And he took the 
Cup, and gave Thanks, and ſaid, Tabe ths, and divide it amongſ(! 
your ſelves : For T ſay unto you, I will not drink of the Fruit of the 
L ine, until the Kingdom of God ſhall come. Then Luke pafſeth co 
our Lord's Inſticution of the Supper: Lube mixeth the Diſcourſe 
about the Perſon thar ſhouid berray him, with che Relation a- 
bour the Inſticurion of the Supper, contrary to the Relacion borh 
of Matthew, and Mark, and 7ohn , ſo as we may reaſonably think, 
that Luke miſplacerh ir, giving us an accoun; of thar Paſſage, 
V. 21, 22, 23. Within his Relation of the Hiſtory of his receiving 
the Paſſover, and inſtiruting of the Supper, which immediacely 
followed each other, bur nor ſtriftly in thar Order in which our 
Saviour ſpake them; which appeareth plainly, by che other three 
Evangeliſts, ro have been during the Eating of the Paſſover, and 
before the Inſticution of the Lurd's Supper. For che underſtand- 
ing of the Hiſtory, we muſt underſtand ſomething of the Fewiſh 
Order, 1n their Eating of the Paſſover ; which was this, as we 
have it deſcribed by the Learned Dr. Lightfoot. © Their ſicting 
ar Mear was commonly upon Beds or Couches, made for that 
. Purpoſe, with the Table before them : Now at other Meals, 
they either fat as we do, with their Bodies ere&, or when 
G they would enlarge themſelves to more Freedcm of Feaſting, 
- or Refreſhing, they ſar upon the Beds, and leaned upon the 
; Table on their Left Eibow ; and this, or the other Poſture, 
x they uſed indifferently ar other times, as chey were diſpoſed z 
; buc on the Paſſover-Night they thought they were obliged to 
_ ule this leaning Compoſure; and you may take their Reaſon 
; for it in ſome of their own Words. They uſed their leaning 
; Poſture as Freemen do, in memorial of their Freedom. And 
* Levi ſaid, Becauſe it is rhe manner of Servanes co Ear ſtand- 
_ Ing, theretore -now they Ear fitting and leaning, to ſhew chac 
' they were got our of Servicude into Freedom, ———Upon 
; rhis Principle and Conceir of Freedom, they uſed rhis manner 
ot Diſcumbency, trequent!y, at other times, bur indiſpenſibly 
chis Night, fo far different from the Poſture enjoyned and 
; practiſed ar the firſt Paſſover in Egypt,when they are ic with their 
: Lotns girded, rheir Shoes on their Feer, their Sraves in their 
. Hands, and in haſte, Exod. 12. 11. And as the Thoughe of 
: rheir Freedom diſpoſed them to this Leaning, repoſed, ſecure 
, Compoſure of their Elbow upon the Table, and their Head 
: leaning on their Hand; ſo ro Emblem our the Matter the 
more highly, they laid their Legs under them, fitcing on them, 

and laying our their Feer behind them. (Thus che Woman, 
Luke 7.38. could conveniently come at our Saviour's Feer to 
waſh, anoint and wipe them.) * Thus removing and acquitring 
* their Legs and Feer, as far as poſſible, from the leaſt ſhew of 
* ſtanding to attend, or readineſs to go upon any one's Imploy- 
© ment, which might carry with it the leaſt colour of Servitude, 
* or*Contrariety to their Freedom. Now according to this man- 
* ner of Sirring and Leaning are the Texts to be underſtood, a- 
© bout the beloved Diſciples leaning in the Boſom of Jeſus, 7cn 
* 13. 23. and on the Breaſt of Jeſus, Fohn 13. 25. and 21. 20. 
« Avaxeiuey©- i x0aTw &X 6nd, 6h T2 Sn; which 

ſome Tranſlators, nor having obſerved, or ar leaſt nor expreſ- 
© ſed, they have intricated the Reader, in ſuch groſs Conceprions 
- abour chis Matter, as that ſome have thought, and ſome have 

piftured Fohn repoting himſelf, or lolling on the Breaſt of Je- 
« ſus, contrary to all Order and Decency, Whereas the manner 
« of ſitring together wasonly thus : Jeſus leaning upon the Ta- 
« ble with his Left Elbow, and fo turning his Face and Breaſt 
« away from the Taule, on one fide: Fohn ſar in the ſame Po- 
« ſture nexr before him, wich his Back towards Jeſus, his Breaſt 
c Or Boſom nor ſo nearas that Fohn's Back and Jeſus his Breaſt 
. did joyn together, and touch one another, bur ar ſuch a di- 
, ſtance, as that there was ſpace for Jeſus ro uſe his Righr- 
. Hand upon the Table, to reach his Mear ar his Pleaſure; and ſo 
tor all the reſt, as they ſain like manner. For ir is bur a ſtrange 
; Fancy, with which ſome have farisfied themſelves abour this 
. Matter; conceiving either, thar they lay upon the Beds betore 
: the Table, one tumbling upon, or before the Breaſt of ano- 
: ther ; or if they ſar leaning on the Table, thar they ſar ſo cloſe, 
: thar the Back of one joyned to the Breaſt of another; chey 

far leaning, bur with ſuch diſtance berween each other, thar 
* the Right-hand of every one of them had Liberty ro come, 
* and go, berwixt himſelf and his Fellow, to reach his Meat, as 
* he had occaſion, ———Thus far that Learned Man in his 
Diſcourſe of the Temple Service, in the time of our Saviour, 
Chap. 13. By which Diſcourſe we may learn, 1. Thar the 
Fews, at the Eating of the Patlover, uſed the very ſame poſture 
as at other rimes they did Eat their Mear in. 2. That this was 
not lying along, bur ficting upon their Legs, and ſomerimes 
leaning their Head upon their Left Eibow ; yer at ſuch a diſtance 
one from another, as every one that ſat mighr freely uſe theit 
Rightr-hand to take their Meat, and reach it co their Months: 
Nor did they always fic at Mear ſo leaning, bur ar their Pleaſure, 
leaned, or not leaned, only at the Pſch11 Supper they always 
leaned, as an Emblem of their more periet Liberry. By this 
we eaſily underſtand what is meant by Chriit's ſzrtinz down 
with the Twelve, aſter the manner of that Country in earinz cheir 
Meat. { And as they did eat, he ſaid urto them. ] For the un- 
ſtandins of this, we muſt a lircle enquire into the Jewiſh man- 
ner of Eating that Holy Supper, which I will rake our ot the 
atore-mentioned Learned Author, in the ſame Bok and Chap- 
rer, Paragraph chird. ©* They being rhus ſer, che firſt ching 
« rowards this Paiſover-Supper, thar they went about, was, thar 
© they every one drank off a Cup of Wine. Sc do their own 
Diretories and Riruals about this thing inform us. Now the 
Conſideration of this is of mighry uſe to us to help us co under- 
ſtand che rwo Cups mentioned by Luke, Chap. 22. 17. And 
again, ver. 20, The latter was the Cup which cur Saviour coft- 
ſecrared for the Inſtirurion of his Supper, as is plain by the Con- 


ſecrarion of the Bread mentioned immediately betore it, ver. 19. 
Kkk The 


Chap. XYXRVL 


Hour was come, he ſat down, and the Twelve Apoſtles with him. "4nd 
he ſaid unto them, With Defire have I deſired to eat this Paſſiver 


—_— —— — —_———_—__ —2T _ 
” i» - . 
2 == 


_— 4 - 
£: 


£349, A; , 
wd 


II, 


« _ 
_ , 
_ = - <>» J 
"= = you —_—_ 
—_ < 
4% mu un © S ; &s « - 
2 * of 2 7 W4 
jy - : ge x- - 
"_ os - # - 4.4 _ " 
2 — Le 6. A : 
» "EBT _——— 
EX oe ot. - _ : - 
- V = _ 
> 
Br to 


5 I <a. Lei 
- 2a 4 x oa 
Fa ib. 
x "-Iddtt 


vr HD 


| AMinv, 
Gr. Cofi;s 
biwv gioen 
thanks, 


i ®, WF. 


Chap. RR V1; 


St M AT 


ec, t, 17, was their firft Cup of Wine, which 
over Supper, mentioned by Like on- 
Iv. Our Saviour's giving Thank: when he rook it, was but his 
; | Luke bctore chis mentions 
{ne Words of ear Saviour, vis,16. [iWth deſire have T defired 


The Cur mention 


to Ext this Pali wito you before I (iiffere 


ns; ag * ; 
*pid pot Ot v 


I have theretore earneſtly detired ro Ear this Paſſover with you 
beter 1 dig, to pur an end to this Legal Service, which hach 
ang continucd fo many Years, and hath all this rime been bur a 
T'vpe of me, and my Death, and Ovation for Sin, Fohn 1. 29s 
109. 5. 7. For thi: is the Loft Patſouer I fhall Ear with you, Or 
thar you thu!l Ear betore ſee you rife things tulallcd mm Gotpel 
Providences, which this Scrvice doth bur Typine, Its indeed 
was bur the Pretace to the Paſeh.y Supper, nor doth Luke mrones 
on more of it, only addeth, tv. 13. Fr I will nt Drink of the 
Fit of the Vine, until the Kingdom of God ſhall come. Ot which 
Words I thall here ſay neri:inz, tor they are doubtleſs by Luke 
pur our cf the trne Order, being both by Mark and Matthew 
mentiuncd, at fp.ken attcr rhat Cur SAavIOur had Bleiicd, and ta- 
ken the Sacrainental Cup. 03 45 queſtionleſs the 21, 22, Verics 
mn Lib ſhould have been before the Eighreenth, according to 
the Order in which 34:hew and Hark purterh them, and v.10. 
ſhould be put after v. 20, and 10 allo both DATNOW and Mark 
do place them. Luke ment:oneth no more of the Paſchal Supper, 
Jer us therefore return tn our Evangeliſt, [And as they did Et | 
thar is, the Patchal Supper, which (according to the Law) Exod. 
12.8, was the Low, or Kid roaſted, which they were to Eat 
with ule cond Bred, and bitter Herbs. The Jews had an Hun- 
Ired Traditional Bites, which they obſerved abour che Paſchal 
Supper, | | ] 
vince lyſtictution. The Law required no more rhan che Earing of 
the Lamb, or Kid roaſted, wich unleatened Bread, and bitter Herbs. 
Az to their Drink ir pretcribed norhing, they vere letr to Liber- 
ty; for their Tradition of four Cups of Wine to be drank, CC. [ 
cannor tind any of the Evangelifſts mentioning our Saviour s u- 
{1-6 of any ſuch thing, bur very probably, he Drank Wine at 
his Fieaturs, as at other Meals, keeping only to the Rule of the 
law. Now futh Matthew and Muk, | And as they did Eat, he 
[.nid, Verity T jay unto you, that one of you ghall Betray me. | He had 
butore rold them the San of Man ſhould be betrayed, Ch. 17. 22. 3 
20. 18. where he had alſo told chem he ſhould be Scourged, Mock- 
ed, and Criucified; but he now cometh to diſcover the Traytor to 
them. One of you 2 (4 they were exceeding ſorrowful, and began 
every one to {ty unto him, Lord, is it T?)) They were forrowtul 
thac he ſhould be Betrayed by any, but more troubled, that one 
of themſelves ſhould be ſo Accurſed an Inftrument; every one 
miſtraſts his own Hearr, and fairh, Ts it 1? Chriſt replyeth, | He 
that dirpsth his Hand with me in the Diſh, the ſame ſhall betray me. | 
The Dith here could be no other than the Diſh at the Paſſover 
Surpyr, probatly the Band of Fudas was at that crime with our 
Saviour's in the Diſh, for we read of no more reply from any, 
>ut from 7d. Our Saviour adderh, [ The Son of Man goeth as 
it is Written of him, but Wie unto that Man, by whom the Son of Man 
i betr,ed. Tt had been good for that Man, if he had not been Born.] 
By theſe Words our Saviour dooming the Traytor, tho' withal 
he tells chem, Thar for his ſuffering ir was determined by God, 
forerold by the Prophets, and 10 eventnally necefſary; he was 
mat drazged to ir, | the Son of Man goeth.) Bur God's Decree as 
to the thing, did neither take away the Liberty of Judas his 
Will in Atins, nor yet excuſe the Fadt he did. | Woe unto that 
Mum by whom the Son of Man is betrayed.) A Text worthy of their 
Study who will not underſtand how God ſhould Decree to per- 
mir Sin, and make a fintul AR, as to the Event neceſſary, with- 
our being rhe Author of Sin. As to our Saviour's Death, Gcd had 
determined it, forerold it, it was neceflary to be, bur yer Satan 
pur the evil Morion into the Heart ot Judax,and Judas afted freely 
in the doing what he did. {| Then Fudas which betrayed him, anſwer- 
ed, and ſid, Maſter, is it I? and he ſaid unto him, Thou ha$t ſaid. | 
This (as. I ſaid) makerh 1t very probable thar the Hand of Zudas 
was in the Dith with our Saviour's, dipping 11 the Sauce, when 
our Saviour tpake rheſe tormer Words. That Fudas as well as 
re other Ditizples was with our Lord at this Action, 15 out of 
doubr. Thar he ftayed*any longer, may very well be queſtion- 
ed, not only becauie 7ohn faith, Ch. 13.30. He then having re- 
eerved the Sop, went immediatcly out, bur becauſe one cannct in 
reafon think that his Guilty Conſcience ſhould ſuffer him to ſtay 
beyond that Word, or that our Saviour would lave admicted of 
rhe S-Cicty of fo Predigious a Traytor at his laſt Supper, the In- 
fit.urion of which immcediatcly followed. 

25 And as they were cating, Jcſus took bread, and 
| bled 7, and brake z7, and gave z7 to the diſciples, 
and 111d, Take, car. this is my body. 

27 Ani he rook the cup, and gave thanks, and 
gave 77 1them, ſaying, Drink yeall of it : 

23 For this is my blood of the new Teſtament, 
which is ihed for many, *1or the remiflion of fins. 
29 Burl {oy vnto you, I will not drink henceforth 


" of this frairof the vine, until thar day when I drink 


Ire with you in my father's Kingdom. 
20 And when they had ſung an || hymn, they 
Went oNt into the mount of Olives. 


es tis with no contiderable Difference, Chap. 14. 
7, 22, 24, 25, 26. Cnliy be faith, They drank all of it, and —ſhed 
{1:2 121th, CUT SaVIOUT upon his giving the Erecad, faid, 


- 


#''is is my Body which ts gen for you. This do in Rememorance of 
ro Lilewie al9 the Cid after Supper, ſaying, This Cup is the 
hem Tellmont in mp Sloud, hich is ſlied for you, From the 24th 


Jur there ſeems to have none of them been of any Di- 


1TH © 


Verſe alſo to the 33d of his 22d Chaprer, ke gives ws 5-, 
tfurcker Liicourtes of our Saviour with Peter, and wo 3;;c 54 
ples, bur no other Evangeli$ mentioning them in tx 
and Luke no where ſaying that they were ſpoken in the G., 
Chamber, IT thall not contider them rill I come to tha: Cliaprer 5; 
Lule, | And as they were Eating, | that is, while Ley were bon 
amy 
LL. Dy «i b mc el aA y ES 8 M 11 
tlicir very 26 of Earing the Paſchdl Lamb, with theſe Woras 
ls, 


BU he 


trom the Sun-ſer of this N:2hr, 
follow, that the Lord's Supper muſt be Eaten with unleaveneg 
Bread, For tho' our Saviour be to be 1mitated in his Attions 
relating to Goſpel Worſhip ;, yer not in fuch of them which þ d 
plain Reterence to the Fewiſn Worſhip, and were there nfticureg 
tor a fpectal Reaſon, as unleavencd Bread was, to pur Uiemin 
mind oi the haſte in which they came out of Egypt. Our My 
our at tins time could ulc nv other than unleatened Bread, for ng 
Other Was to be had. | And Lieffed it.) He did not only 414 
| 79anks ro God tor it, aud beg his Bleſſing upon it, which (a+ we 
have before oblerved) was our Saviour's conſtant Pratiice where 
he did Ear Ercad, bur he jct it upart, and Conſecrated it tor ; Part 
ot is lift Supper. It fecmeth very probable, that this j: 75 
be underſtood here in the Word, Bleſſed it. For altho the Jews 
and our Saviour ordinarily uted a fhort Prayer and Tharbs:;1;n; 
betore they did Eat Mear, thereby fhewing' that they oirned 
God as the Giver of thoſe things, and depended upon him jor 
a Bleffing upon them, yer we no where Read, thar they Gid 6 
during the ſame Meal,as often as they put Bread into their Mout';s, 
Luke (as we heard betore) made a particular mention of Gyr 
Saviour's Bletſing the Patchal Supper. The mentioning of yr 
Saviour's Bleſſing of this Bread, mani:eſtly leadeth us to a ney 
Nonon, and Inftirutzon, and the repeating of it again, v, 2 
upon his taking the Cup, doth yer turther confirm it, thar yr 


_ 


Saviour's B/:{jing both rhe one and the other, fignifieth to vs 
nor only ls giving Thanks ro God, and begging of Ged's Blef. 
ſing, as upon ordinary Food, bur his SanRtitying the one, and 
the other tobe uſed as a new Goſpel Inſtitution, for the Remen. 
brance of his Death. | And brake it, and gave. it to the Diſciples, 
whether (as ſume ſay) the Maſter of the Jewith Feaſts was won; 
aſter begging of a Bleffing, thus ro break Bread, and to give jc 
ro all the Gueſts, I cannot tell; 1 know no Scripture we have 
ro aſſure us of it; cercain 1 1s our Saviour brake 7t, and did 
g1vc it. to his Diſciples; that he gave ir into their Mouths, they nor 
rouching it with cheir Hands, or that he gave it into every 
one of their particular Hands, the Scripture faith nor, nor is i 
very probable, except we will admir, that he changed the Po. 
ſture he was in; tor let any judge how probable ir 1s that one 
ſicting upon his Legs, Leaning, or nor Leaning, ( rhe conſtanc 
Poſture they uſed in Eating, whether the Paſchal Supper, orany 
other Meals) keeping his Poſture, could reach it to Eleven fer. 
| ſons in the ſame Poſture, to pur it into their ſeveral Mouths, or 
give it particularly into every one of their Hands ; it is there- 
tor2 more probable, that he put the Diſh, or Veflel in whichthe 
Bread was from him z to him that fate next to him, and i it 
was conveyed trom Hand to Hand till all had taken ir, after he 
had firſt ſpake as followeth. Thoſe who can think otherwiſe, 
muſt preſume that our Lord changed his Poſture, which I am 
ſure 15 not to be proved from any place of Holy Writ, {41d 
ſaid, Take, Eat, this is my Body, (Luke adds) which is givin fir 
you. Do this in Remembrance of me. | Paul puts all together, 
I Cor. II. 24. only for Given he faith Brohen. What Conteſts 
have been, and yet are berwixt' the Papifs, Lutherans, and 
Zuinglians (iince called Calviniss) about the true Senfe of thote 
Words, This is my Body, every one knows. The Papiſ; make 
the Senſe this ; This Bread onee Conſecrated by the Priest, 15 ft eſent- 
'y turned into the very Biily and Blood of Chri, which every Commu- 
nicant Eateth. Hence are their Adorations to it, their E/evatins 
of it, their carrying ic about in Sofemn Proceſſions, &c, The Lt 
therans, tho' they fee the Grofs Abſurdities of this Senſe, yerſay, 
That the true and real Body and Blood of Christ, in its true Subſtance, 
1s preſent with the Bread and Wine in the Sacrament, and Eaten ty 
every Communicant, Both theſe Opinions agree in this Abſurdity, 
Thar Chriſt's Body now muſt be no true Humane Body, for ve 
know that all true Humane Bodies are ſubje& to our Sen/es; and 
in one place, that they cannot at the ſame time be in another, much lets 
a Thouſand, or Ten Thouſtnd Places ar the ſame time. Bur ne!- 
ther rhe Papi nor the Lutherans will hear of any Arguments 
trom that Head, bur ſtick to the Letrer of our Saviour's Words. 
The Zuinglians ſay the meaning is, This ſiznifieth my Body, In tie 
ſame Senſe, as it 15 faid, Ch;i8 is theWay, a Door, aVine, a She) 
herd; and it 1s faid of the Lamb, Exod. 12. 11, This is the Lord» 
Paſſer ;, yer they are far from making this Ordinance a bare 
empty Sign, bur do acknowledge ir a Sacred Inſtitution of Chiriti 
in the Goſpel, in the Obſervation of which he doth vouchſate 
his Spiritual Preſence, ſo as every true Believer worthily recct- 
ving, doth Really and Truly partake of the /ody and Blood of Chill: 
char is, all Benefirs of his bleſſed Death, and Paſſion, which 15 un- 
doubredly all intended by our Saviour in thefeWords ; and when 
he faith, Tke, Eat, he means no more, than that true Believe! 
ſhould by the Hand of their Body take the Bread, and with hci 
bodily Mouths ear ir,and ar che fame time by che Hand and Moutti 
of Faith, receive and apply all the Benefits of his Bleſſed Death 
and Paſſion ro their Souls; and that they ſhould do this 7 we 
membrance of him ; that is, (as the Apoſtle, 1 Cir. 11. 26. & 
pounds ir) ſhewing forth the Lord's Death till he come. Ic follo i: 
eth : | Ard he tork the Cup, and gave Thanks, and gave it 19 iT" 
faying, Drink ye all of it : For this is my Blood of the New Teſts 
ment, which is ſhed for many for the Remiſſion of Sins. ] Chrilts 
raking of the Cup, and giving of Thanks, were Attons © 
ſame Nature with choſe which ke ufed with a Refatien 5 


a 
5. 
4 


. 


£ £44 


Chap. X% 


Fe 
any 
l:ic 
Mo! 
on! 
you 
1511 
in k 
ſuch 

tapi 

Caf 

30, 


by 1t 


Crint 


[ 


th 
In 


P) 


Dif 


ay 


nn 
P), 


Say! 


{19 


A i 
FILE! ti 


F'Y Ky 
Y , 
5 

fa 

F . y 

4 tt 


F 
« 87? 


bed 


[ 


the / 
an H 


2 Ly 


y {A tht h 


9 Chis 
os rv 0 
t / Fit . 


5?2 Cr 
> LL { 
ernnd 


ther' 
be fa 
ſuicc 


md j 


Wal 


whett 
Grd n 
Praifi 
Or 171, 


yu 
uch 


than © 


cm, 


Tir ch 


our 


Gad, a 


inted 


hearts, 

[They w 
time Wa 
Pands « 


turl; 


Cr to th 


(the 


"M \ 
Pe Ople | 
C 0 / Ives 


fo ca 


growing 
Nothing 
anon ret 


our, 


. 


Wis 31 
ottende 
I will - 


il by 


th 7 


, 
''s (t 


46+ (1 


{XVI 'D. 
p. AAVL 
Bread, Of which I ſpake before: Ler the Papiifs and Luthe- 
mw ; _ whar chey can, here mult be two Figures acknowledged 
- pes 5 words. The Cup here is put tor the Wine in the Cup 
—_ gr Meaning of thele Words: This # my Blood of the New 
_ jos + muſt be: Ths Wire is the ſign of the New Covenant. 
why tney ſ-uld nor as readily acknowledge a Figure in thoſe 
Word:, [ts s my Body, | cannor underſtand, The Pronoun 
Toicin of Greel, 1s in the Neater Gender, and applicable ro thc 
{2 (17, Or LO the term Blood; bur ic is moſt reaſonable to in- 
— ic: Tos Cup, That 1s, the Wine 11 this Cup, 1s the Blood 
of rh Now C9%.vnant Or Tejtlament 3 Thar 15, the Blood by which 
te Aw Clark 15 confirmed and eſtabliſhed, Thus the Blood 
-1:,2t H1251fiech in ſeveral Texts, Exod. 24. 8. Zech. 5. 


t tj2t 1 
4 ; 266 2, 20. Heh. 10s 29. | Which is ſhed for many, for the Re- 
7.» 0 $ins, ] to purchaſe Remithon of Sins; and this Jets us 
kr, that by 61Y, here canner be underſtood all Individuals, 
\f-': nc A tay, char Chriſt purchaſed a Remifſion ot Sins tor 
wh, ſhall never obtain it, which how he could do, it he 


INa1lys 


0 
icr $3, 1s very hard to underitand. [| But Tay wto you, that 1 


6 rot Fenceforth Drink of the Fruit of the Vine. I obſerved be- 
#.ro, that Luke pars rheſe Words betore the Inſtitution of the 
6 : per, and Joc think that rhey properly belong to that place, 
1uc 1 underſtand no reaſon tor it, *Hatthew and Mark both pla- 
© jr here 3 nor doth it ſeem probable, rhat after theſe Words, 
-ur Saviour ſhould preſently Drink of it, in the Infticurion ot 
1.is Supper z ſome here Obje& our Saviour's drinking after his 
Fejturrcttion; bur beſides rhar, it cannot be proved that he drank 
any Wine z ncicher did he otherwiſe ear or drank ar all, bur co 
{icy that he was indeed rifen (tor he Hungred and Tuirſted no 
more after his Reſurre&on.) Or elfe by this Phraſe our Saviour 
only meant, I will no more participate in this Ordinance with 
you, [ Until I drink it New with you in my Father's Kingdom, | that 
isin Heaven. Sore will ſay, Shall there then be drinting of Wine 
in Heaven? Anſ, No, neither doth the Particle Vntil l1gnifte any 
ſuch thing : Bur the Joys and Pleaſures of Heavca are often Me- 
raphoricaily ſer our, under the Norton of ſitting down to Banguet, 
Chap, 8. 11- Supping, Rev. 3» 20. Eating and Drinking, Luk, 22. 
22, Our Saviour calls chis New Wine, to fignifie, that he did not 
by ic mean, ſuch Wine as Men drink here : I will not henceforch 
drink of the Fruit of the Vine, bur both you and I in my Fa- 
ther Glory ſhall be ſatisfied with Rivers of Pleaſures which ſhall 
be far Sweeter, and more Excellent than that which is bur the 
ſuice of rhe Grape, and rhe Fruit of the Vine. | And when they 
had ſing an Hymn, they went out into the Mount of Olives.) That 
che Jews were wont to cloſe their Paſſer-Supper with ſinging 
an Hymn 1 do not doubt : Nor that they. had tome particular 
Plalrs, or Hymns, which they uſed ar that rime ro fing: Bur 
whether ir were any of theſe that our Saviour at this time Praiſed 
Gd with, I cannot tell, much Jeſs, whether he deſigned this 
Praifing of God, with particular Relation ro che Paſchal-Supper, 
or 17is Supper, which he had now inſticured, or both. The In- 
uiries after theſe things are bur inſignificant Curioſities, fir for 
fich as have more mind to look into rhe Skirts of Holy-Wrir, 
than co find our of it what may be of Profit and Advantage to 
them, Our Saviour doubtleſs intended by this to inſtruct us, 
T:iat the Ordinance of his Supper 15 an Euchariſtical Service,where- 
in over Souls are moſt highiy concerned to give Thanks unto 
God, and as Singing, is an External Action, which God hath ap- 
pPinted to exprets the inward Joy and Thankfulneſs of our 
Bearrs, fo it is very proper to be uſed at that Holy Inſtitution. 
{They went out to the Mount of Olives.) Our Lord knew that his 
time was now come, When he muſt be aGtually delivered into rhe 
Finds of his Enemies; that he might not therefore cauſe any 
Diſturbance, cirher ro the Maſter of the Family wherein he was, 
crro the City, tho' it was now Midnight, he goerh our of the Ci- 
ty (the Gates being either open, (becauſe of the Mulritude of 
People ) very latez or elſe eaſily opened to him) to the Mount 
> Olives, A Mountain in the way, betwixt 7eruſalem and Betha- 
”, © called, as is thought, from the Mulritude of Olive Trees 
growing upon, and about it. The Evangelift as yer mentionerh 
nothing of Zudas, who now was gone to Plot his Work, and will 
anon return co accompliſh ir. In che mean time ler us follow our 
Saviour, artending to his Diſcourſes and Atons, 


1s, 31 Then faith Jeſus unto them, * All ye ſhall be 
oitended, becauſe of me this night : for it is written, 
| will ſmite the ſhepherd, and rtheſheep of the flock 
[0a] be ſcattered abroad, 

2 22 Butaſterl am riſen again, *I will go before 
you into Galilee. 

22 Pcter anſwered and ſaid unto him, Thovgh all 
men {ball be oftended becauſe of thee, yct will I ne- 
ver be oftended. 

L1,, 24 Jelus ſaid unto him, * Verily I ſay unto thee, 
(N2t this night before the cock crow, thou ſhalt deny 
me thrice. 

A md Lo . - 

35 Peter ſaid unto him, Though I thould dye 
Vita thee, yet will I not deny thee. Likewiſe alfo 
id all the diſciples. 

; Mark harh the ſame, Ch. 14. 27, 28, 25, 3o, 31. only v. 30. he 
4 tf; This Day, even this Night, before the Coch crow twice, thou 
Joat neny me thrice. Luke, Ch. 22.31, 32, 33, 34+ hathit nor en- 
= bur he hath ſomething of ir, with tome Addition, tlius : 
"4 12 Lord fuid, Simon, Simon, bebold Satan hath defired to have 
”"', \:t be may fift you as Wheat. But Thave prayed for thee, that 
"7 "111 may not fail, and when thou art converted, ſirengthen thy 
* OY Ar be ſeid unto him, I am ready to go with thee both in- 
101% a8 t9 Death. And he ſaid unto him, I tell thee, Peter, 

” fre Cock ſhalt not Crow this Day, before thou ſhalt thrice deny that 

923708 7%% Thote who read the Evangeliſts, muſt remem- 


MATTHE W. 


i jn their ſtead, ſuffering che Wrath of God due to them 


ber thar they did nor write our Saviour's Words from his Mouth, 
bur trom their Memories, and theretore muſt be allowed to vary 
in their Expreſſions, and in Circumſtances. giving vs only ar 
Account ot the Subſtance of Words and Attic ns, a5 their Mc- 
mories ſerved them; from whence alſo ir is, thar ſome of them 
have ſome Circumſtances, nor in the orhiers. Our S:viour's Dc - 
ſ1gn here in general 1s to inform his Diſciples of ſ(meching whic!) 
would happen iy and by. { Al ze (taith he) ſpall le fjinded, bc- 
cauſe of me this Night. | The Word offended is of a very larze 
Signiticarion in Holy-Wrir; here, it ſeems ro fiznifie Ji/turbod, or 
troubled , tho'it we take it ſtrifily tor kunbling, ſo os to fin, it was 


4 


true enough, tor that happened, (as we ſhali fee anon ) which 


made them to forſahe Chris and fly, which doubtleſs was their 


Sin. { Þv it is written, T will \mite the Shepherd md the Sheep cj 
the Flock ſhall be ſcattered. The Words are, Zech. 13. 7, Tl.e 
Words there are Imperative, ſmmit? the Shepherd, Thereare Gditfc- 
rent Opinions, whether rhar Text 15 primarily to be underſtood 
ot Chri#, or ir be only a Proverbial Speech, which the Prophes 
made ufe of with anocher reference, which yer Chis} dorh ap- 
ply unto khimfelt. I do more encline tothink, that Chyif here 
interpreteth the Prophecy to relate Primarily ro himfelt, tor he dork 
not ſay, As it is faid, but, As it is written; yet confider it as a 
Proverbial Speech, 1s 1s true of orhcrs alſo. But certainly our Sa- 
viour deſigned to uphold the Spirirs of his Diſciples, by letting 
them know, that tho' they ſhould ſee the Shepherd ſmitten, thar 
is, Himſelf, who js the Good Shepherd, 7h. 10. 1. and is called 
by the Apoſtle, the Great Shepherd of the Sheep, Heb. 13. 20. the 
Chicf Shepherd, x Pet.$.4. yer they ſhould not be diſturbed; for, 
I. It was n» more than was Propheſied concerning him, Zech. 123. 7+ 
2. Tho” art preſent they were ſcattered, yer ic ſhould not be 
long, for he ſhould Rjje again, and then he would g before them 
into Galilee, which was tulfiled, as we read, 3. 15, 7, Upon 
theſe Words, Peter, whom by all the Goſpel Hiſtory we tha!! 
obſerve to have been of the hizhett Courage, and f riwardeft ro 
ſpeak, faich, [ 7h9 all Men ſhould be offended, yer will T never be «f- 
fended.) .Thete doubrlets were his prefſenr Thovghts, this his 
ſudden Reſvlution, here now ſcem ro come in our Saviour's 
Words to Peter, mentioned by Luke only, Ch. 22. 31. { Simon, 
Simon, Satan hath deſired to have y-a, that he m:y fift jou as Wheat. 
But I have Frayed that your E:ith might mt fil, when tha art con- 
verted, flrengthen thy Brethren. | Touls in the Plural Number, and 
co be interpreted by 7ou all, rho' our Saviour diretech his Speech 
only to Peter, who firſt ſpake, whom he callech by his own Name; 
and doubſlerh ir, to fignifie his Earneſtneſs in giving him warn- 
ing. { To ſift you. ] In ſifting there are ewo things. 1, The 
ſhaking of the Corn up and down. 2. The Separation of the 
Grain from the Duſt, or its Seeds mixt with it : Satan hath defi- 
red, or hath obtained Leave of my Father, to trouble you all, 
ſhaking your Faith this and that- way, Bur I have praved, thac 
alcho' che workings of your Faith be ſuſpended, and the habir of 
your Faith be ſhaken, yer it may nor utterly fail, bur che Seeds 
of God may abide in you: You ſhall nor wholly fall away, bur 
be renewed again by Repenrance z | and when thou art comvertex, ) 
when thou haſt fallen, and ſhalr have a Sighr of chy Error, and 
be humbled for ir, endeavour to ſtrengthen thy Brethren's Faith : 
we may obſerve trom hence, 1. That Temptatims are fiftings. 
God fitts us to purge away our Droſs. Satan fitrs ns, 1t ic were 
poſſible to take away our Wheat, 2. That the Devil is the great 
Tempter, Others may hold, and moye the Sieve, bur he is the 
Maſter of the Work. 3. That he hath acontinual Deſire to be ſifting 
in God's Flow. 4. That he hath a Chain upon him; he muſt ask 
God's Leave to trouble his People. 5. That God 5ften giveth him 
leave, but through Chri8's pleadings, he ſhall not Conquer, He may 
fitc and trouble a Believer, bur che Believer's Faith ſhall nor fail 
6. That in the Hour of Temptation we ſt.mmd in Chris Strength, by 
the Vercue of his Interceſſion. 7. That {apſed Chriſtians, when 
the Lord hath reſtored them, ought to endeavour to Ilrengthen and 
eſtabliſh others, Jeſus ſaich ro Peter, | Verily I ſay unto thee, that 
this Night before the Cock crow thou ſhalt deny me thrice. Live 
faith, Thou ſhalt deny that thou knoweſt me. Mark faith, Before tho 
Cock crow twice: And fo interprereth Mztthew, tor he denied 
Chriſt but once, before rhe Cock did crow once. How little do 
we know our elves, rhat cannot tel] what our Hearts will be three 
or four Hours ? Peter was too confident of the contrary, ard re- 
plierh again, upon our Saviour telling him: | 7h.zt if 211 fork? 


deny him, he would nat. $9 alſo, they all ſaid, | bur what happen-+ 


ed we ſhall hear more by and by. 


25 Then came Jeſus with them, unto a place 
called Gethſemane, and faith unto the diſciples, Sit 
ye here, while I go and pray yonder. x 


Mark leaveth out Yonder, Ch. 14. 32. Luke ſaith, Ch. 22. 29, 
He came out, and went as he was want, t1 the 3bunt of Olrves, and 
his Diſciples followed him. And when he was at the pluce, 12 ſaid un- 
to them: Pray that you enter not into Temptation, And he was with- 
drawn from them a ſtones caſt, and kneeled aomn and Prayed. Whe- 
ther this Gethſemane, were the name of a Garden, cr ot a }'7/.1ge, 
wherein was a Garden, is not much material for us to know: 
In Feruſalem they ſay, they had no Gardens, bur their G.r.ens 
were withour the Gates; certain It 15, 1t was on the other inde 
of the Brook Cedron, Joh. 18. 1, and either in, or ar che Foor of 
the Mount of Olives. Thicher Chrift went with his Diictple : 
That is, Eleven of them, we {hall hear of che Tweltch by and 
by. Luke faith, thar he bad his Diſciples Pray, tht tho; mit 
mt enter into Temptation: Thete Words Matthew and 37k 
have, after Chriſt's firſt return ro them : They fay, he now laid 
only, Sit you here, white I go and pray yonder. | 


27 And he took with him Peter, and * the two * ch, 4,2; 


Chap. AAVL, 


ſons of Zebedee, and began to be ſorrowful, * aud * Joh. 124 


very heavy. | | 

23 Then ſaith heuntothem, My ſou is exceeding 
ſorrowful unto death, tarry ye here, and watch with 
me, 


KR kk>» FLAN. 


27, 


4h! FX 
+. 
i 
x 
"4 gi 
WEL. 
| G 
-* . 
Lid 
4 *11 0! 
gþ ſ: 
A 
| 7? \ 
i dF 
+ 4 


7 
Y 
I. 
3 
bo 


P. XX VI. Ot, 


Mob names the three Diſcip'es, Ch.14. v.33,34+ And he taketh 


wich tim Peter, and James, and John, and began to be ſore amazed, 


wid $3 be tory hozuy, And ſaith unto them, ty Soul 3s exceeding for- 
roxfil wnto Death « Tarry ye here, and Watch. The three BOG. 
of bis Tr.amftiiuration, Chap. 17. 1. he takes alſo ro be irneſs . 
his Az:1v, { He began to be Sorrowful, and very Heavy. ] The Vs ” 5 
in the Greek are expreſſive of the greateſt Sorrow 1magina le, 
which he furchcr exprefleth!, v. 33. ſaying, [My Soul is exceeding 
ryan ful unto Death. \ This was not wholly, 
his <a bes hp Death, for he [aid down hu Life, 71 _ _ ir 
Fom him; nor yet, 79 conſider how his Diſciples would be - t'; 
but in the Senſe he had of the Wrath of God due to Man for - 
wi:ich he now felr, bearing our Sins. So as this Was part, 9 
2 grear part of his Suffering, as appears by kis tollowing _ 
Prayers for the patſing away of that Cup, his near x as It oo 
Drops of Blood, Luk. 22. 44. The Angels coming aB | min __ 
unto him, Luk. 22. 43. Luke ſaith, he was 11 an Ag, WIUC 
ſizrifcth a great inward Contli&. 

29 And he went a little further, and £1] on his 
face * and prayed, ſaying, O my Father 11 l be 
polible, let this cup paſs from me, nevertheleſs not 
as I will, but as thou «1/7. 

Mark faith, He went foward @ little, and fell on the Ground, _ 
Prayed, that if it were poſſible, the Hour might paſs from him. Anc 
hs ſaid, Abba Father ! All things are poſſtble unto thee, tuke oo 
this Cup from me: Nevertheleſs, not what I will, but what thou 
wilt, Ch. 14. 35, 35. Luke ſaith, He was withdrawn from them 


abut a Stmnes caft, and kneeled down, and Prayed, ſaying, Father if 


ha be willing, remove this Cup from me : Nevertheleſs, not my Will, 
a be FI Here are wo diſtin& Forms of Words, bur 
all azrecing in one and the ſame Senſe. Matthew ſaith, He 
went .t little further, and fell on his Face, and Prayed, He at his 
firſt Motion carried bur three with him: Peter, Fames, and 
7Fohbn, now he leaves chem, bur nor tar, Luke faich, about a Stones 
Caf, Fervent Prayer loves Privacy, and Chriſt by this teacheth 
us, that ſecret Prayer is our Duty. [ He fell on his Face, ] Luke 
faith, He kneeied; he poſſibly ar firſt Kneeled, then fell on his 
Eic2: Weread in Scripture of Sitting, Standing, Kneeling, and 
Proftr.ztion uſed in Prazzr, the frit and laſt rarely: Standing and 
Kneeling were the moſt ordinary Poſtures. David prayed fitting 
?n his Houſe, 2 Sam. 7. 18. Abraham fell on his Face, Gen. 17.17. 
So did AT/es and Aon, Numb. 16. 22, 45.  Proftration was ordi- 
narily uſed in grear Paſſions, hardly otherwiſe in Prayer. | Say- 
inz, O my Father, if it poſſible, let this Cup paſs from me + Never- 
theleſs, not as .T will, but as thou wilt.) Mark firſt tells us the 
Sum of his Prayer, then faith, he faid, Abba Father ! All things 
are poſſible unto thee : Take away this Cup from me : Never theleſs, 
mt what Twill, but what thou wilt. Luke faith, he ſaid, If thou 
be willing, remove this Cup from me : Nevertheleſs, not my Will, but 
thine be dane. Lube's, If thou be willing, expounds Matthew's, If it 
be poſſible. A thing in it ſelf may be poſſible, which conſidered 
in irs Circumſtances, is not fo; thus = it 151n Mark) All things 
are to God prſible, bur yer it is not potſible for God co alter any 
thing which he hath decreed, or faid ſhall comero paſs, becauſe 
God is not as Man : On? that can Lye, or Repent, Bur it will be 
Objeted. Did not Christ knw, that it was not poſſible * Did nor 
he himſelf, v. 54. ſay, Thus it muſt be. lanſwer, Ir is one thing 
what he knew, as he was God, and of Councel with the Father; 
and arcr1er thing what he Prayed for, as Man : Befides, our Sa- 
viour's laying, Tf it be poſſible, doth not ſuppoſe that he knew ir 
was poſſible : Ir ſignifierh no more than this, Father, my Humane 
Nature hath an Averfion from this heavy ſtroke, fo as 1f it were 
poſſible, ir craves of rhee a Diſcharge from rhis Curſe ; | Never- 
theleſs, not my Will, but thine be ws The firſt Clauſe is bur the 
Expretſion of the natural (bur nor ſinful) Infirmity of his Fleſh: 
The latter a perfe Refignation of his Will co God, In the &rit, 
he tells his Facher, what his natural Fleſh would crave, if it mighr 
conſiſt with rhe Will of God. In the fecond, he begs that what- 
ſoever his Fleſh craved, yer the Will of God might be done. And 
herein he ſers us a perfe&t Partern for our Prayers tor deliverance 
from Temporal Evils, viz. With a Submitſion ro the Will of 
God. By this our Saviour doth nor declare himſelf ignorant, or 
incertain of the Divine Will: Only, as tho' the Perſon that died 
was God-man, yer the Humane Nature only died: So, tho* the 
Perſon that prayed was God-11an,yert he only prayed, as he was Man, 


40 And he cometh unto the diſciples, and findeth 
them aſicep, and faith untoPeter, What, could yenot 
waich with me one hour ? 

43 Warch.and pray, that ye enter not into temptati- 
on: The ſpirit indeed zs willing, butthe fleſh zs weak. 

2. hath the ſame, Ch, 14. 37,38. Luke hath nothing of our 
2aviour's going the ſecond, or third time; bur kath ſome other 
Patlages, wc: we ſhall confider by and by, and telleth us bur 
cnie, Of his Anding the Diſciples aſleep, which we ſhall alfo take 
notice of, 12 ther Order, Whetier Chriſt came this firſt cime, 
oniy to Peicr, and 7ams, and John, whom he had left nearer to 
i:m, or ro rhe other erght, lete ar a further diſtance, I cannot de- 
t::7mine, bur think the firſt moſt probable : {He ſaith unto Peter, 
ad lot Fames and John, What could ye not Watch with me one 
#:4r © | You Peter, that cven now werrt ſo reſolute for me, and 
you 7.25 and Fohn, that rold me, ou could Drink of the Cup 
wheicof T Drank, and be B:iprized with the Baptiſm I ſhould be Bap- 
iinod with, ht? Do you taine the firſt time? [Watch and Pray, 
et ou enter not into Temptation.) Here he calls them to a greater 
IWztching, ſpiritual Watching, 1n Oppoſition ro Security, that they 
mite not tall under cheir Femprations. By watching, he dire- 
cierh them to the uie of ſuch Means as were within their Power to 
nie; by adding, Pray, he lets them know, thar it was not in their 
Power to ſtand withour God's Help and Affiftance, which muſt 
be obtained by Prayer, and upon their Praying, ſhould nor be 
Cenied thein, | The Spiris indeed is Willing, but the Fleſh is Weak. ] 


MATTHE WV. 


The Spirit ſanQtifzed Þy Divine Grace, 1s reſolved with Con» 


* - Parr, 13 
apt to taint and fall away, when terrible Temprations affauir vs; 
Therefore you ſhould earneſtly pray for Supernatural Strengih 

as | 


upon the Senſe oft 


ſtancy ro perform its Ducy ; bur the Fleſh, the ſenfitive 


and be Vigilant, left you be ſurprized and overcome by them 
The Words ajſo, may have an unmediate Reſpet to their bein G 
overtaken with Sleep 1n this Hour of Chriſt's Summons; tho the 

reſolved AﬀeRionarely to attend him, and cleave to him, 7 


4.2 He went away again the ſecond time,and pray. 
ed, ſaying, O my Father, if this cup may not pak 
away trom me, except I drink it, thy will be done. 

4.3 And he came, and found them aſleep again, 
for their eyes were heavy. 


Mark faith, Chap. 14. 39. 4nd again he went away ard prayed, 


ſaying the ſame Words. And when he returned he found they aſlcep 
again (for their Eyes were heavy ) neither wi8 they what t aniwey 
him. ( Saying the ſame Words. ] How our Trantlation came :» 
cran{lace this ſo I cannor rell ; in the Greek it is 73y &v]2p 2.50. 
which muſt be Tranſlared, The fame Word, or the lame Speech 
not Words, (it that were the Evangeliſt's Senſe.) Bur that ir j: 
nor, for, as it is plain, our Saviour uſed more than one 154, (; 
ic 15 as plain, ir was nor che ſame Speech, or Form of Words, for x; 
have mer with four different Forms already. Our Loxd prayed 
bur thrice, ſo as he could not ſay the ſame Speech. Bur riryry 
here ſignifies Matter. —Speaking the ſame Matter, or to the lame 
Senſe, and thus we tranſlate ic, Mar. 1.45. Mar. 2. 2. and jn 2 
mulricude of other Texts, in Correſpondence with the 27:14; 
NAT. | He comes to them a ſecond time, and findeth them ee). ] 
So quickly did they find the Truth of what he had tut no 
raughr them, That the Spirit is Willing, but the Fleſh is Weal, fo 
there is no doubt but. they did whar they could ro keep them. 
{eives awake. * 


44 And he left them, and went away again, and 
prayed the third time, ſaying the ſame words. 

4.5 Then cometh he to his diſciples, and faith, 
Sleep on now, and take your reſt ; behold, the hour 
is at hand, and the Son of man tis betrayed into the 
hands of finners. 

46 Rifle, let us be going : behold, he is at hand 
that doth betray me. 


Mark ſa\ch nothing of this third Praying, but faith, 4rd t- 
cometh the third time, and ſaith unto them, Sleep on row, and tabe 
your reSt, the Hour #s come, Behold the Son of Man s betrayed int 
the Hands of Sinners, Riſe, let us go, lo he that betrayeth me is a 
Hand, What the meaning of ſaying the ſame Words js, we heard 
before, praying to the ſame Senſe, or ſaying the ſame thing, or 
matter, tho' uting other Words, as it is plain he did. Like 22, 
43. rells us, | There appeared an Angel to him ſtrengthening kim] 
This is nor the firſt rime we read of Angels appearing and mini- 
ſtring ro Chriſt. They did ſo, Ch. 4. 11. atcer his Conflict vith 
the Devil, in the Wilderneſs, Now an Angel appeared tohimin 
che Hour of Temptation, Then he had without, Troubles; burnow 
he hath within, Fears, being in a great Agony. Thus ic i taid, 
John 12, 27. that he being in a Contli&, and praying, Fit», 
ſave me from this Hour; but for this Cauſe I came unto this Ki, 
Father, Glorifie thy Name. A Woice was heard, ſaying, 7 hate th 
Glorified it, and will glorifie it again. There the Anſiver wa te- 
ſtified by a Voice from Heaven, here, it is by an Ange!, (fo God, 
Dan. 9. 21. let Daniel know his Prayer was heard) Hannah knew 
another way, by the Peace of her Spirit after Prayer — hor Cours 
tance was no more ſad. How the Angel Cid ſtrengthen him we 
are not rold. Ler no Man think that he who was the $92 of 
God needed an Angel to ſtrengthen him : He was not now cxer- 
ting his Divine Vertue, bur by his ſuffering ſhewing tha he 545 
truly Man, and as to that Nature, made lower than the Anvcl. 
Luke addeth, | And being in an Azony he prayed more eaineily, 
and his Sweat was as it were great Drops of Blod, falling dwn to 
the Ground, v. 44.) Theſe Words are expreſſive of the ereat 
Contli& of our Saviour's Spirir, which was ſuch as thruſt cur 
Sweat like great Drops of Blood ; whether they were very Blocd, 
or Sweat with fome Mixtare or TinQure of Blood, is very hardto 
determine,nor of any Conſequence for us ro know, It is no unul 
al thing for Bodies co breathe our Swear in ordinary Contlicts ct 
Spiric, this was much more than ordinary. Lhe ſaith, 71! 
when he rofe up from Prayer, and was come to his Diſciples, te find 
them Sleeping for Sorrow. And ſaid unto them, why Sleop you* Riſe 
and Pray leS ye enter into Temptation. All three Evangelifis agree, 
char Chrift coming the third time found them Sleeping; Like gives 
one Reaſon of it for Sorrow, . Their Sorrow added to their Wait}- 
ing,may be fome Excuſe for their Sleeping, rho” otherwiſe it as 2 
time which called for more Waking, The Evangeliſts do not {o 
well agree in what Chriſt ſaid to his Diſciples. Luke faich, Ri? 
up and pray le$t you enter into Temptation. Matthew and Mark lay, 
he ſaid, Sleep on now and take your Reſt, &c. he might ſay both, 
Nor can we determine whether he ſpake thoſe Words fericul!y, 
as willing that they ſhould take their Reſt, (for they could be 110 
ther uſctul © him, whoſe time was now come he was bctry- 
ed, and rhe Traytor was art Hand ;) or, with ſome Refleicn up- 
on them tor their Drowfineſs, which rhe Words going betcre, 
What, could you not Watch with me one Hour 2 Seem to hint to Us. 


47 And while he yet ſpake, lo, Judas one of the 
twelve came, and with him a great multitude with 
{words and ſtaves from the chiet prieſts and cla! 
of the people. 

Mark faith the tame, Chap. 14. 43. adding alſo the Seribe: 
Luke ſaith there was a Multitude, and Fudas went before 1797; 
adding, that he drew near to Feſus to kiſs him, Luk. 22. 47+ I "ne 
asK how Zudas knew where Zel' was at that time of che Neth © 


Chap. XXVIÞx 


Ges Us MO@a tl A POSE. __ 


48, 
of / 
Free! 
ſtill 
oft 

Frie! 
by a 
ſa, 2 
nor 4 
callin 
Diſcy 
tray2g 
ia th 


FI 
ſtret, 
a ſer 


wely! 


54 
led, t 
£ Matt 
Fo Ch, 14. 
ly, drer 
of his E 
And me 
Right Ea 
he touches 
with for 
Ving a $) 
off bis Ri 
Peſus unt 
my Fathe 
how Chr 
ſatisfied 
"hich Y 
to be ſpc 
cers (as 
Wing u 
Peter ) & 
High Prie 
4v!Our re 
&UN into i; 
ſhould Per 
Perſons t 
and this 
Sword Z1 
and thar 
2, Secont] 
me, it I 
and he ſd 
5 theref, 


wo 


0? 


wn 


$$ 


XXVI. 
Morning. Fobn ſarisfieth us, Ch. 18. 2. And 


in the 7 
none - par plougt'y him, knew the place, for Feſus oft-times re- 
Judas —_ with bis Diſciples. And then goerh on, Judas, then 
orted HI ed a Band of Mer, and Officers, from the Chief Prieſts 
Þcuing _ - es cometh thither, with Lanthorns, and Torches, and Wea- 
a ney <killed in the Jewiſh Learning tell us, thar the or- 
_— Guari of the Temple belonged to the Prieſts, and ſuch Ot- 
_ hey employed ; bur upon their great Feſtivals, the Ro- 
_ yin added a Sand of his Souldiers, wi.o yer were under 
= — of the Prieſts. Ir is choughr theſe Othcers, Souldt- 
the _ thers, Came wich a Warrant to apprehend our Saviour 
"_ As Jewiſh Sanhedrim or higheſt Court, which was made up 
_— " Priefes Scribes, and Phariſees, and the Elders of the Pev- 
: , he | had Torches and Lanthorns, becauſe ir was yer dark, be- 
of. bo Day was broke. Swords and Staves to be ready againſt 


any Oppaticions Fudas the Traytor comes before as their 


Leader. : 
48 Now he that betrayed him, gave them a ſign, 


ſaying, Whomloever I ſhall kiſs, that ſame 1s he, 


him faſt. : 
w_ And forthwith he came to Jeſus, and 1aid, 


hail maſter, and kifled him. 


\ Ch. 14. 4%. 4, 45. differs not, only inſtead of Hold 
M - he w_ Lok him away ſafely, and inſtead of Hil Mi 
-r | he faich, iter, Maſter. There 1s in theſe Words nothing 
JiFculr or doubtful, Zudas had given them a fign how to know 
Cixiſt, char was his Riſſing of him, being come where he was he 
ſteps ro our Saviour and kiſſed him, by which he let chem Know, 
chic he was the Perſon againſt whom their Warrant Was. 


59 And Jeſus faid unto him, Friend , where: 
fore art thou come? Then came they and laid hands 
on Jeſus, and took him. 


Mark fairh nothing of what Chriſt faid ro him. Luke, Ch. 22. 
48, adds, that Chriſt ſaid ro him, Fudas, hetrayef# thou the Son 
if Man with a Kiſs * Whether Chriſt uſed this Compellation of 
Friend ro Judas, ro mind him whar he formeriy had been, and 
{till ouzhrt ro have been, or as a Common Compellation, (as we 
oft uſe ir) is nor much material. A Rifs is the Symbol of 
Friendſhip and Kindneſs, and therefore very improperly uſed 
by a Traytor and profeſſed Enemy, (yer fo uſed by Foab ro Ama- 
ſa, 2 Sam. 20. 9. ) That makes our Saviour ack him, if he vere 
not aſhamed to betray the Son of Man by;a Kits. 7uaas, by 
calling him Maſter, Maſter, acknowledged he had been once his 
Diſciple. By. his Kiſs, he pretended Friendſhip to him, yer be- 
trazza him. O the . depth of deſperate Wickednefſs which is 
ia the Heart of Man ! eſpecially ſuch as Apoſtatize from a for- 
mer Profeſſim ;, they are commonly the worſt and falſeſt Enemies 
of Chriſt, and his Goſpel. 


51 And behold,oneof them which were with]eſus, 
ſtretched out his hand, and drew his Sword,and ſtroke 
a ſervant of the high prieſt's, and ſmote oft his ear. 


\.. $52 Then ſaid Jeſus unto him, Put up again thy 


ſword into his place; * for all they that take the 
ſword, ſhall periſh with the ſword. 
$2 Thinkeſt thou that I cannot now pray to my 
Father, and he ſhall preſently give me more than 
twelve legions of angels? ; 
1 54 But how then {ſhall the * ſcriptures be fulfil- 
led, that thus it muſt be ? 


* Matthew relates this Hiſtory ſhortly, but Mark much more, 


” Ch, 14.47. he ſaith no more than this. And one of them that flood 
ly, drew a Sword, and ſmnte a Servant of the High Prie$St, and cut 
of bis Ear. Luke alſo relates ſomething of it in, Ch. 22, 50, 51. 
And me of them ſwmote a Servant of the High Prieſt, and cut off his 
Right Ear, And Jeſus anſwered and ſaid, Suffer ye thus far, and 
he touched his Ear and healed it. John relates the ſame paſſage 
with ſome more particulars, Chap. 18. 10. Then Simon Peter ha- 
wing a Sword drew it, and ſmote the High Prieſts Servart, and cut 
of bis Right Ear. ( The Servant's Name was Malchus.”) Then ſaid 
Feſus unto Perer, Put up thy Sword into the Sheath. The Cup which 
my Father hath given Me to Drink, ſhall I not Drink it 2 It any ack, 
how Chriſt and his Difciples came to have a Sword, he may be 
{arisfied that they had two, from Luke 22. v.35, 36, 37, 38. 
(which Verſes being in none of the other Eyangelifts, I have letr, 
t5 be ſpoken to in their Order.) The Diſciples feeing the OHi- 
cers (as was ſaid v. 50) laying Hands on Chriſt, as Luke faith, 
bnwing what would follow, One of them, (St. Fohn tells us ic was 
Peter ) drew a Sword, and ſmote off the Right Ear of one of the 
High Prie$'s Servants. John tells us his Name was Malchus. Our 
Saytour reproverh Peter, commanding him to put up the Sword a- 
gin into its Sheath, and telling him, That he who taketh the Sword, 
foul Periſh with the Sword, Tt is to be underſtood of private 
Perſons raking up the Sword to deſtroy their Lawful Magiſtrates, 
and this Lefſon ir teacherh all Chriſtiars; Men muſt have the 
Sword given orderly into their Hands, before they may ufe it, 
and that no private Perſon can have againſt the Supream Hagiſtrate. 
2, Secondly, (faith our Saviour) I needed nor thy help ro deiend 
me, 1tI were to make any defence, I could pray to my Fither, 
and he ſhould give me more then ewelve Legions of Anzels, there 
1 therefore no need of thy drawing a Sword in my defence. 
3: The Scripture (ſaich he) mu be fulfilled, Tt was Propheficd of 
me that F ſhould be thus uſed, and thoſe Propheſies mult 5e Ful- 
hike, Having reproved Peter, and filenced his Paifion, Lye 
tells us, he begged leave ſo far as to torch bis Ear, and he healed 
”" 3 tus doing good to thoſe that hated him, and workings a Mi- 
racle n the ſfighr of chem, which (had nor rheir Hearts been har- 
ned) might have convinced them g@ borh of his Innocency 

ind lis Divine Power ; bus they take no notice of his 


St. MATTHEW 


kindneſs, Now he applicth himſelf to the Multitude of his Ene- 
mies. 


55 In that ſame hour ſaid Teſas ro the multi- 
tudes, Are ye come out 1s agiinſt a thick, with 
{words and faves, for to take me ? I 1ate daily wirk 
you teaching in the Temple, and ye laid no hold on 
me. 

56 But all this was done, that * the Scriptures 


LC 


of the prophets might be fulfilled. Then all tho dif 
ciples forfook him, and fled. 


Mark harh the ſame, Ch, I4. V. 48, 49, 50. Luke, Ch. 22. 52, 
$3. hach ir chus, Then Zeſus ſaid unto the Chief Priefts, and th 
Captains of the Temple, and the Elders which were come 19 him. B: 
ye come out as againſt a Thief, with Swords and Stave; ? When 1 was 
daily with you in the Temple, you ſtretched forth no Hands ovaintt mo 
But this is your Hour, and the Power of Derbneſs. What cur £u.m- 
geliſt reports as ſpoken to the Rabble, Luke reporrs as tpulen ro 
the Chicf Priefts , and Captains of the Temple { thar is, of rhe 
Souldiers, who at that time were the Guard of the Tennls ) fone 
cf which ir ſhould ſecm, came along with the Kabe, ro whom 
our Saviour diretterh his Speech. [ [ſate daily with you Teachins in 
the Temple. Tobſerved before thac it was their vſual manner, ter 
choſe rhac Taught in the Temple to Sit while chey Tauzhr, ro 
Teſtifie their Authoriry, Chrift when ke came up co the .;ſ5wer, 
was wont to Teach in the Temple, | and you Lid no bold on me] 1 
did nor hide my felf, nor go about to raiſe a party to detend 
my felt, bur quietly caught in the Temple, If I had bcen Suliry 
of any Crime you might eafily have raken me; why arc you now 
come our agzinſt me, as againſt a Thief, upon whom you had 
need to raife the Country? Why come you apainſt me with 
Swords, and Stavcs, as if you thought I would make ſome Ret'- 
ftance to defend my ſelf? You never ſaw any ſuch ching in me, 
as ſhould give you a jealouſie of fuch a thing? [But all this was 
ame that the Srriptures of the Prophets might be fulfeiled.) The m:- 
ny Scriptures, which ſpake concerning the ſufferings of Chriſt. 
Luke addeth, | But this is your Hur, and the Power of darkneſs, } 
Thar is, this 15 that which God hath determined. Wicked Men 
and Perfecurors of Chriſt, and his Goſpel, have their #1. There 
is 4 time which God in his wiſe Counſels hatch ſer, and derermi«. 
ned, when for the Tryal of his Peoples E:th, and Patience, he 
ſuffers the Devil by vile and wicked Men, who are his Inſtruments, 
ro impriſon, and otherwiſe vex, and moleſt kis People. Thar 
ſuch a time is their Hour, and whar they do is by the Permiſſion 
and according to the Counſel of God, and but an Hur, a deter- 
mined, and ſhort time, are great Arguments for to perſuade us to 
the Exerciſe of Faith, and Patience. [And the Power of darkneſs.) 
Artime when the Prince of darkneſs is putting forth his Power : or 
che Power of darkneſs, that is, a time of exceeding great darkneſs of 
AfﬀiQton to me, and my Diſciples. Wicked Mens Hour is always 
to Chriſt's Diſciples the Power of darkneſs. [ And all his Diſciples 
forſock, him and fled. ] Probably all of them fled ar firſt, tho Perey 
and anorher came back again : Or, All here fignifieth the molt of 
them, We never know our Hearts upon che proſpett of great 
Tryals, until we come to grapple wich chem, and to be ingaged 
inthem. Theſe Diſciples had all ſaid, They would not forfake 
him ; when it comes to the puſh, nor one of them ſtands by him. 
But aſtho' they ſhrunk ar firſt, nor withour che Providence of God 
permitting them thus to fail in their Dury, then Governing their 
tailers to his own Glory, yer they again rerurned tothcir Duty af- 
ter Chriſt's Reſurre&ion, owned Chriſt, preached his Goſpel, and 
ar laſt drankof rhe Cup which he Drank of firſt, and were Bap- 
ized with the Baptiſm wherewith he was Baptized. Al] muſt nor 
be Condemned for Flight in a time of Perſecution. We muſt 
obſerve whether they Apoſtatize from their Profeſſion, or whe- 
ther they do nor return again, before we pals a Judgmenc againſt 
them. 


57 And they that had laid hold on Jeſus, led hi: 
away to Cataphas the high pricſt, where the ſcribes 
and the elders were afiembled. 


Mark, Ch. 14. 53. faith, They led Feſus away to the High Prie/, 
and with him were aſſembled all the Chief Prieſts, and th? Elders, 
and the Scribes, Luke faith no more bur Then z9:y torb him, and 
led him, and brought him into the High Pri:t's Fuſe, Ch. 22. 54. 
ſohn ſaith, Then the Band, and the Coptain, an:! th2 Officers of the 
Fews, took Feſus, and Bound him, And led him away to Annas firſt, 
for he was Father-in-Law to Caiaphas, who was the High Prieſt that 
ſame Tear. 7oh. 18. 12, 13. All things were now our of order 1n 
the Jewiſh Church, Regularly, their Zzh Prieſts were to be ſuch 
as derived from the Eldeſt Son of Aron, and were to hold 1n cheir 
Place for Life, bur they were now choſen Armually, and their Con- 
querours ruled the choice as they pleaſed. Yer lome think, 
chat in rhis the Jews kepr ſomething of their Ancient form, and 
the High Prieſt was choſen Regularly of the Houſe ot Aaron and 
for Life, bur the Romans vihen they lifted rurned him our, and 
ſold the Place to another, and ſuch a one was Caiaphas, who was 
ar that time High Prieſt, Son-in-Law to Anas, their carrying ot 
Chriſt firſt ro Annas his Houſe, was no more than to ſtay there a 
while till Cziaphas and the Council which was appointed to mecc 

thar Morning at the Houſe of Ciaphrs, could afiemble. 


58 But Peter followed him afar oft, untothe high 
prie{t's palace, and went 1n, and {ate with the 1zr- 
vants to ſeethe end. 


Mark adds, Ch. 14. 54. and warmed himſelf at the Fire. Lube 
faith, Ch. 22. 54, 55+ Then took they him, and led him, and brought 
him to the High Prieſt's Houſe, and Peter followed af APMP, and when 
they had kindled a Fire in the midſt of the Hall, and were (et down 
rogether, Peer ſate down amongſt them. John gives us a more parti- 
cular account, how Peter came into che Hall, Ch, 18, _ And 

mon 


Chap. AXV U 


* Lam. 4+ 


>. 


” 
— 


<< ——_—_—— 


--. 
” _— 


= 

Vi; 

{i.'s 

i 
: 

i 

4; # 


i -: 
" 44 # 
: + 


= - - 
OD 


KEEL 


Cr EI Ie OI 
u__- p ” 
Rs - 


d Bw 
ETD 
, —-— 


ws 


"*S- lb Y 2 50 : —— O 4 
n 94 th ———— _ © _ 
> 4 2099p 2m ——_— — = a - - - - _ — - = _ 
Mp o IS ; mn — ——_ W - - - _—_— <, - - It 5 n - 
5 A - _ x * - — S, _— + -< —_— - - _ x - — , p——_ = 4 4 o - - - > — Pi 
_ i 4 py _— -, ww - _— - _ _ " _ _ —_— _ - —— —_ - _ oe 
"A - A . — EE p_ + => _—— mn : ere 3 A” ent - : = . - = ” I - 94 ” X _ ——_ 
HTS. __ 4 ; FX 7 " > I In; T : ry 0 P. L - — - - v by - . Wo - - - . < I - _ —og__ -w 1 "—_— - — —_ 2 A LOI 
| us 2 .. , a Mo : . 
- TX" S- hy. Mildoe—— thnas 6 - « * " - , : . _ Fe 4 1 ieE = Fo _ \ : — d f Is: _ G- - 
4 - s J = , A C: 2 I 6 % 27 INE _— NR » = v : ee... "7 perrme, Did { So = —- F ” 
, *E, Fr : - To, : —— - 6 a > Ng > _ m_—_ v - F p ; . - PF > FEET 2c ©* es £34 Eau a hs ws a bn Lc ee - > - _ 
- -- —_ _ > " SE -- - - E + Rt - _—_ i - Pe —_ _ 4 x . — - - S3I% — —_ —_—— f"> ws ——=—- No ny ———— __—_ —» = —_— _ _ ” A —_— « 
d - - ” : G ——_ - A ne > a - - : = 2 == = 4 _ -_ = E - i IEC 3 - - x = 7 3 bl pa Ja pn « ro ny 52 
=_ - >< , —— hx. "#3 x" © ET S _ —_ ” " wo _ % 4 G T p, "Za - 4 - ond - n ba os bo a - « po 7 IV ” PP TS © 
N— -_ C . —_ SIS - _— che he o mY + < - y- - —_— % = = 4 - hb = = nn 0 - > —_ = a - - m 
CI_z > wr; oo gr A _ "y — " s : Sa © -  ——4—— CS 2 . - tay — y_ - - _ - hn _ —_ 5 - - - —— = - 0 
o "_ 2 2, - = — yr = > - = Da n_Y OO IEEE IF - fn IG « _— . ” _ 
. y Geo 3.56413 : - & 9 - -— -— ——d . —_— - _ D io X — o_ -—_ - — — 
wo X — a 5 - - - -— - ay —_ o prog 2-- 6 ; 34 
- —— _ z . _—— = - = . . ————_ —_ \- ———_ - _ _ Y 
v 5 ITS. - OLI 2! > _— 2 \-» __ 4 =" a7 A KH ——e - — _ oe ”— — bs PO — 


PN ehS———— 
4 _ 
ack " 


EI 
-IE:}) 


= 


- one way, Or anotner, bur they will make a Shew ot Juſtice, 1 


* Cliap. 27. 
Fo 


RAVI St 
» A ® 0 
J nn Parer Gi owod Feſces, fo did amther Diſciple; that Diſciple was 
our wines 12 Fob Prieft, and went in with Feſus into the Palace of 
(po Bi Friejt, But Peter Sod at the Dy without, Then went 
wet that other Ditcifle, which was known unto the Heh Prieſt, and 
tnako unto bar that hopt the Dor , and brought in Peter. Some 
think char ehis other Diſciple was John himſelf, but it 18 not pro- 
ave that 754m and the High Prieſt ſhould be fo well acquainred ; 
is is more probably jadged, Thar ic was none of the Twelve, but 
one who favoured Chriſt mare ſecretly, ſome Citizen of © Zernſ«- 
{:1: whom the Hizy Prieft tavoured, or atleaſt knew by Face, and 
hid {me reſpet for, and therefore he was admirred 1Nn, and he 
hefped Peter in, who being come in, and a Fire kindled 1n the 
Hall, the reft of che Company fare down and warmed rhemſelves, 
by che Fire, Peter allo fare down amongſt chem, being defirous 
to ſee the end. 


-9 Now the chief prieſts and elders, and all the 
council, ſought falſe witneſs againſt Jeſus to put him 
to death, : 

60 But found none: yea, though many falſe wit- 
neſſes came, yer found they none. Art the laſt came 
rwo {ille witnellcs, 

2f.nb Expounds this latrer Verſe, Ch. 14. v.56. Fir many ber 
falſe Witne(s agin!t him, but their Witneſs agreed not together : It 
is plain thar they had taken up a Refolurion ro deſtroy Chriſt 


the Execution of their Malice, The Council being fate, it 15 not 
ro be thought thar they had then Leiſure ro ſend about tor Wit- 
neſſes, hut out of their Malice, they ſcrewed, and fifted ſuch 
Witneſſes as were brought, to ſee if they could ger any of them 
upon their Oachs, to atfhrm any thing againſt him, which H 
their Law was Capital.| ManyFalſe Witneſſes came,yet they found none, 
Thar is, no two agreeing in the ſame Story, asthe Law required, 
Deut. 15. 15. fora lingle Teſtimony was none. Vox unius es Vox 
mins. A fingle Witneſs, is no Witneſs. Or none that could 
reſtifie any thing of a Capital Nature, Many cameand Witneſ. 
ſed Trivial things, but none Wiznefled any thing which rouched 
kis Lite, till at Taft came two falſe Witneſſes. 


61 And ſaid, * This fellow ſaid, Iam able tode- 
ſtroy the temple of God, and to build it in three 
days. 


HATTHESW. 


Mark faith, Ch. 14. $7, $8, $9. And there aroſe cert ain, and bare 
ſalſe Witneſs againſt him, ſaying, We heard him ſay, T will deStroy this 
Temple that is made with Hands, and within three Days I will build 
another made without Hands. But neither ſo did their Witneſs agree 


- zozether. Theſe are called by the Evangeliſts, falſe Witneſſes ; our 


* Ha.<3. 7. 
Ch. 22.12. 


Saviour ſaid, John 2. 19. Deſtroy ye this Temple, and in three Days 
Twill raiſe it up, (ſpeaking of his Body, as Zohn tells us there, v. 
21. he did nor ſay, 1 will deffroy this Temple made with Hands, 
and within three Days I will Build anther, made without Hands. 
But Mark fairh, Theſe Witneſſes could nor agree 1n their Tale, 
or their Teſtimony; tho' agreeing was not ſuthcient ro make him 
guilty of a Capital Crime. The High Prieſts muſt ute ſome other 
ATtS, 


62 And the high prieſt aroſe, and faid unto him, 
Anſiereft thou nothing ? what is zz wh:ch theſe wit- 


neſs againſt thee ? 

62 Bur * Jeſus held his peace. And the high 
prieft anſwered and ſaid unto him, I adjure thee by 
the living God, that thou tell us, whether thou be 


the Chriſt the Son of God. 


Myrk ſpeaks to the ſame purpoſe, Ch. 14. 60, 61, The High 
Prieſt expected a long detence, and fo to have had matrer of 
Accuſartion againſt him our of his own Mouch, Chriſt diſap- 
pointerh him, ſaying nothing ar all, either our of M:deſty, or not 
thinking whartthey ſaid of any Moment, or worthy of any reply ; 
or pernaps leeing thar they could not agree in their Talc, 1o as 
what they ſaid was ot no force againſt him, The High Pries 
rherefore comes at Jaſt ro examine him Ex vfficio. Mark aith, 
Ch. 14. 61. Again the High Prieſt ashed him, and ſaid unto him, 
Art thou the Chriſt, the Son of the Bleſſed ? Luke ro give usthe Sto- 
ry of Peter from his firſt coming intothe #'7zh Prie/t's Hall to his 
g01Ng Out, entire, interruptcrh himſelf a lictle in his Relation of 
their dealings with Chriit, and then relates ſome Indignitics of. 
fered him, which the other Evangelifts do not mention ; which 
feem to have heen offered him, while the Souldiers and the Ra- 
ble had him, before he appeared in the Council, Ch. 22. 63, 64, 
65, 65, 57, And the Men that held Jeſus mocked him, and Smote 
hin, and whon they had Blindfolded him, they ſtroke him on the Face, 
and ashed him, ſaying, Propheſie who is it, that ſinote thee ® And 
1any other things bl.aſphemonſly they ſpake againſt him. And as (1m 
as it was Day, the Elders of the People, and the Chief Prieſts, and 
the Scrives came together, and led him into their Council, Then he 
mentioneth nothing of whar the Witnefles ſaid; poſſibly becauſe 
jr was nothing cf Moment; nothing upon which chey proceeded 
againft cur Saviour for lis Lite, but goes on.—Saving, Art thou 
the Chriſt, tells? Patthew ſaith, Art thu the Chriſt the Som of 
the Living Gad? Mark, the Son of the Bleſſed. Te is plain both 
from ti's Text, and from John 1. 49. that the Jews did expett a 
Afeſj; t/, who fhould be rhe Son of the Ever-living and Bleſſed God : 
hur whegher they underſtood rhat he ſhould be rhe $9 of Gad by 
Nature Wd Eternal Generation, or only by a more ſpecial Adoption 
than che whole Jewiſh Nation was (to whom the Apoſtle ſaith be- 
lonzed the Adptizn) I cannor ſay. | T adjure thee to tell us,) chat 
is, as ſome ſay, I charge thee upon thy Oath to tell me (bur ir 
2rh not appear that rhey had given any ſuch Oath ro him, the 
Guilty Perfonggras not wont to be forced by an Oath to accuſe 
himtelt; nei is 1t very probable, that our Saviour would have 
taken fich an Oath : The Senſe therefore ſeemerh to be rather) 
L command, or require, cr charge thee, as Solemnly as if thou 


| 


Chap, XXY Jap. 


hadſt raken an Oath (as in the prefence of God) to tell us, Or 


charge thee with a terrible 1imprecation on thee, if thou "Mk dc 
falſly, or wilt be filent, co declare if thou be the Chriſt the Sc ſt 
of rhe living God. ks Fe 
64 Jeſus ſaith unto him, Thou haſt ſaid : never. h 
theleſs, I ſay unto you, * Hereatter {hall ye ſee the *Plt, j0! 
Son of man * ſitting on the right hand of power. Ing * Gaps t- 
coming in theclouds of heaven. : Fig " 
Marl:, Ch. 14, 62. ſaith, And Jeſus ſaid, T am, and yy ſhalt Ken, \: | 
fee, &yc, Luke laith, And he ſaid unto them, If T tell you, ba " i2..-4 '# 
; : . » JU will © 
nt believe. And if T alſo ask you, you will not Anſwer me. n,y fop I Thel, | } 
meg). Hereafter ſhall the Sm of Man fit on the Right Hm if the 15. 
Power of God. What all the Evangeliſts ſay, pur together, makes B+ 1.% 
up our Saviour's pertet Anſwer. To what purpoſe (faich Chil 
ſhould I Anfiver you ? This 1s nowbut a Caprious Queſtion , nc rh 
propounded by you to that end that you might be ſatisfied 1x m 
the Trurh, bur only ro enſnare me, for if I ſhould tel] you 1 _ F114 
you would not believe it, If 1fhould argue the matter with *hy | 
you would give me no Anſiver, I have given you Proof encyst! 
but yer, Caiaphas, thou haſt ſaid the Truth, I am the Chriſt he ”— 
Son of the Ever-living Blefled God , and to confirm vou further: 
Hereatrer you ſhall ſee me, whom you think to be no more chan wa” 
the Son of Man, ſitting on the right hand of the Power if God, ,..4 _y 
coming in the Clouds of Heaven, There 1s a time for 4 Man tg my 
ſpeak, and a time for him to hold his Peace : In the matter of gi 
Confeſſion of Truth, the ſeaſons for Silence, or Speech, are to 1; aſl 
judged from the Honour and Glory of God; when we ag = 
nct be filent without betraying the Truth, we are boung :, ito? 
ſpeak. Our Lord therefore, being ſo ſolemnly adjured in tt one 
Name of God, to tell them what was the Truth ; now confeſſerh, ” 
and denieth nor, thar he was the Son of God, and tells them "Wh 
Hereafter they ſhould ſee ir, Whether the term Hereafter, rejer RO! 
to the time ſoon following *( as &7' «477 in this Evangeliſt, and AM. 
a7 Rvyv, itt Lube ſeem to ſignifie) and be ro be underſtocg at | 
ot Chriſt's ReſurreQion, his Aſcenſion into Heaven, the coming rt & 
of rhe Holy Ghoſt, and the carrying of the Gofpel to a!l Narinrs ER 
orto the day of Judgment (which the New Teſtamenr often Jiarti 1 
ſpeaks of, as a thing at hand, and that Phraſe coming in the C!1y7; ether c 
of Heaven, feems rather to fignifie) or (asothers think) to yt him, | 
referring the fitting on the right hand of Power, to the former, und Ml 
the coming in the Clouds to the latrer, 1s hard rodetermine, t Name 
65 Then the high prieſt rent his cloaths, ſaying, Ho 
He hath ſpoken blaſphemy ; what further need have nam, 1 
we of witneſſes? behold, now ye have heard hislaf dec 
phemy. es 
66 What think ye, They anſwered and ſid, * He *1z, his Mo 
IS guilty of death. 16, Peter, 
Mark hath much the ſame, Ch.'14. 63, 64. only he faith, 7!vy - all, 
Condemned him to be Guilty of Death, "4 Ch, 22. 70, 71. faith, Pray, 1 
Then ſaid they all, Art thou then the Son of God, And he” ſaid wn fake h 
them, ye ſay that T am ? And thej ſaid, what need we any futie Wicked 
Witneſs * For we our ſetves have heard f his own Mouth, Thisrend- To tel 
ing ot Cloaths was a thing very ordinary amongſt che Fews, uſet baftily 
by them in Teſtimony of Sorrow, and of Indignation : They uſd rand " 
1£ 1n Cauſes of great Sorrow, and Mourning, even before the 1: Tempta 
_ ba formed into a Nation. We find it Praticed by Rey ain ; 
en and Facob, Gen. 37. 29, 34. and by Facob's Sons. Gen. 44. 12, ar ahagy 
by 7oſhua and CA he 4 6. by PA ud. II. = Wa. firſt De1 
deed he thar was High Prieſt was forbidden to do it, Levit. 21, to, 75 t 
which Command, yet the Jews reſtrain to his Prieſtly Garments, 21d ur 
bur upon other occaſions he might rend his Cloarhs, as Caiath:s dony 
here did. It was uſual in Caſe of Blaſphemy, both ro ſhew their vily IN 
Sorrow tor it, and Derteſtation of it, 2 Kings 19. I. Fer. 36.24. Mark 
Afts 14. 14. So as they Convicted our Saviour, rot upon Oath; f "a Pete, 
Witneſſes, but upon Words which they interpreted co be Bl:/p/e- J-1e He ( 
my, The High Prieſt , being bur the Preſident in this Council, r'ought 7 
asks the Opinion of the reſt of the Council. They all condemn 1:0Red, 4 
him as Guilty of a Capital Crime, which is here Phrafed Guilt) if Lira, hy 
Death; that is, one who by their Law ought to die, bf ON 
alt Vert 
- 67 * Then did they ſpit in his face , and bufkred *cnl A good 
him, and * others ſmore hi» with the || Hams of TP -n riſe nc 
their hands, _ 
68 daying, * Prophefie unto us, thou Chriſt, Who {0:; this Derc 
15 he that ſmote thee ? * [26 jhdid) 
Mark hath much the ſame, Ch, 14. 65. And ſome bgg.m to pit on "_ _ $i, 
him, and to ever his Face, and to buffet him, and to ſay unto hin, ER, hi 
Prophefie : And the Servants did ſtribe him with the pains it ther Gray, 
hands, Tho' there be nothing more Barbarous and inhumane, {Je Ty 


than to add co the Afﬀidtion of the Aﬀitted; yer this is nomore 
than we ordinarily ſee done by a Rabble of brurtifh People; !pit- 


. . A , þ Urn 
ting 1n the Face, was burfan ordinary Token of Contempt, M7 abs, 
12. 14. Deut. 25. 9, And perhaps in all theſe Indignirics, 7. wt bs 
was a Typeof Chriſt, 7. 50. 6. if that Text be nor to be under- nn 
ſtood of Chriſt immediately, in the mean time ir lets us fee, that 7 _ "ke 
there 15 no Degree, or Mark of Contempr, or Shame, or Suffer- F i, 
ing, which we oughr to decline , and grudge ir, for the Name a+ 
of Chriſt ; who tho' much more Excellent than us, yer tor Cur F OW 
ſake Endured the Crofs, and Deſpiſed the Shame. More > + 
Ca 
69 * Now Peter ſite without inthe palace: and *J Verne wh 
damizl came unto him, ſaying, Thou alſo waſt with 15? of G 
Jeſus of Galilee. Ci, hors 
- © - 7 « l 0 4 
70 But hedenied before them all, ſaying, | know him, 7, 
not what thou ſayeſt, "5 wenr 
£ A RM 3 d and ] 
Mak hath this, Ch. 14. 65, 67. only he faith, Peter Was © e of 7h, 
neath in che Palace, and Farming himſelf. Luke hath tis __ v2 his Fa 


Sor 
Lv 


lap. XXVIL 


j# ) with him. 


Ie, 


what he ſaich of Chriſt's Examination and Con- 
ch.tp. 22. 55, And 4 certain Maid beh:ld him, as he 
and earneſtly lockt upon him, and ſaid, This Man was 
And he denied him, ſaying , Waman, I know him 


Cory betore 
Gemuarion 5 
(1p by the Fire, 


i 


it, We beforc lett Peter in the High PricSF's Palace, warming 
+ ſelf ty the Fire amongit the Servants, It 15 a dangerous ching 
'\r Coriſtians co come into Places of Tempration. A Maid comes 
-. 3-1, and chargerh him to have been with Chriſt, whom the 
| 1c 7-15 of Galilee : So they called Chriſt, fomerimes 7e/u45 of 


© - 74, rhe Ciry in Galile2 where Chriſt lived rhe greateſt parc 
© his Lite: He denicd before them all; {5 loud thar all heard 1t. 
1.» mt what thou ſayest , or ( as Luke-falth) I know him nt , 
hy; kaww him nor what thou f.tzc8t. 


. 


-1 And when he was gone out into the porch, an- 

- 1:01 d {ivy him, and faid unto them thar were 
ore This {clo was allo with Jeſus of Nazareth. 

- » And again he denied with an oath, I do not 
now the Man. h 

17447 hath the ſame, cap. 14. 2&7. 70. more ſhortly. So Luke, 

8% Ir is like Peter upon the firſt Alarm, began ro ſhitr 

-nzr, and was Zor into the Porch, bur there another meets him, 
with the fame Charge. Here to the former Lie which he had toid, 
1nd here repeareth , he adds an Oarh for the Confirmation ot 
whit he had laid. What are the beſt of Men when God 
[exves them to their own Strengrh? Bur the Tempration , yer 
grows Inghcr. = 

-2 And after a while came unto him they that 
{095d by, and ſaid unto Peter, Surely thou alio art 
one of them, for thy ſpeech bewrayeth thee. 

-1 Then began he to curſe and to ſwear, ſay:7g, 1 
krow not the man. And immediately the cock crew. 

Mak, chap. 14. ver. 76, 7!. faith, And a little after, toey 
wt Itord by, ſaid again to Peter, Surely thou art one of them, ji t129!! 
wt a Galilean , and thy Speech agreeth thereto, But he vegan t9 
1177 md t1 ſwear, ſaying, I know not the Man of whom you ſpe-th. Lube 
hatli ir, ch.ap. 22. $9, 60, And about the ſpace of an hour after, all- 
ether confidently affirmed, ſaying, Of a truth this Fellow a!jo was with 
hin, for h2 s a Galilean. And Peter ſaid, Man, I know nt what 
thin (get, 4nd immediately the Cock crew. One ſpake 1n rhe 
Name of the reſt, char were gathered abour Peter, and he chargerh 
7:2 confidently ; and he might well, tor John faith, chap.18.25. 
thar this was one of the Servants of the High Prieſt's, being his Kin- 
1m, whnſe Ear Peter cut off, he ſaid, Did I not ſee thee in the Gar- 
dn with bim 2 Temptations always grow upon us, in the Com- 
pany of wicked Men. Here Peter adds to his Lying, Swearing and 
(:rfmg; all confirming of whar he had ſaid, 1n the Denial of 
lis Maſter, All in an exad fulfilling of whar Chriſt had cold 
ſ*ter, v. $4. tho*he was then ditficulr ro believe ir: To teach 
us all, not ro preſume too far upon our own Strength, but ro 
Pray, that we be nor led inro Temptation. While we ſtand to 
rake heed left we fall, and in order to it, to avoid the Sociery of 
wicked Men, and Places in which we probably may be tempred. 
To texch us alſo Chariry ro lapſed Brethren, and nor too 
haſtily ro condemn our Brethren, for falling a ſecond and a 
third time into the ſame Sin ; eſpecially, while the ſame fit of 
Temptation holdeth. Ir is added ; | And immediately the Cock 
nor) that is, the ſecond time: So faith Mark, chap. 14. 72- 
who had mentioned the Cock's firſt Crowing, v. 68. upon Peter's 
firſt Denial of his Maſter. 


-3 And Peter remembred the words of Jeſus, which 


4 
VEL 4 


. id unto him, * Before the cock crow, thou {halt 


ly me thrice. And he went out and wept bitterly. 

Warb faith, chap. 14. 72. And the ſecond time, the Cock crew 3 
nd Peter called to mind the words that Jeſus had ſaid unto him, Be- 
f:12 the Coch craw twice, thou ſhalt deny me thrice; and when he 
rmaught there he wept. Luke ſaith, chap. 22. 61. And the Lord 
zimed, and lockt upon Peter, and Peter remembred the word of the 
Lid, hyp he had ſaid unto him, Before the Cock crow, thou ſhalt deny 
me thrice, And Peter went out, and wept bitterly. We have 1n this 
laſt Verſe Peter's Repentance, and the Occaſion and Cauſe of it. 
A good Man may tall, and thar foully, bur he ſhall nor tall, fo as 
to rile no more.David lay longer than Peter under the Guilt of his 
v1n, but huth of them wept bitterly. He went our of the Porch, 
Vither he went is not faid ; poſſibly he was atraid , ro whar 
tis Derettion of him might riſe, or elſe ſought a Place (as 79- 
201d) to weep more privarely,and plenrifully chan he durſt do, 
7 t10uhkt convenient to do in the Porch of the High Pricft. 
Thar Which cave occaſion to this ReffeFiom was, the Crowing of 
2 Cob the ſecmd time, and his Remembrance of the Words 
( Jews, ver. 34. Our Memories ſerve us much in the Buit- 
linets of Repentanc?, and therefore, thar rhe Soul ſhould be with- 
Gut hnowledoe of che Law of God, 15 nor good. Peter remem- 
"Wd whar Chriſt had perſonally ſfai4 ro him. True Penirents 
ate till excired ro Repent ance, by remembring the Law of God, 
"at Clhrift hath in his Word faid to them; and .confidering 
Wi vn Ways. The Crowing of the Ck rhe ſecond time, 
"CPM tO remember the Words of Feſus, for he had faid, 
"72 1.2 Cork crow twice, &c. Bur the Care of his Repenrance, 
-2pretied by Lukes The Lord turned, and Iy1hed upin Peter. More 
ol he undcritood by this LZo9& of Chris upon him, than the 
©-iT caſt of Chriſt's bodily Eye £ With that Look there was a 
40 watch went from Chriſt which healed Peter, exciting his 


[ 
s 


©: Grace, and affiſting him in che Exerciſe of it; which 
. "ic Influence of Grace , 1s neceiſary to every renewed Soul. 
I "it 199Er upon Fudss, when Judas kiſſed him, yea, and ſaid 
4 mM, Fudas betrayest thu the Som of Man with a Kiſs? _ Yer, 


Wo He lookr upon 
'er, and he went out, and wept bitterly, He lookrt only upon the 


bt 1 6 *y , Bs 4 
Ss 4 4 ms bur he lookt upon the Heart of Peter, as well as 
&po2 his Face, 


MATTIMEM 


CHAP 


Pr Hp TENN ! f 
Tho Ciief Priejts taking Counſel 
17 : _ 
ro I” late, 


"0 <0 


P . As 


him #517 Wd 


_ 
Io 
ho elf aths dawn hho i; 
#3%& CHi!T2ff) AN IT 5 1&% 
I 


agait $7 7 / 15 . (7! « 1 


-y , 
I, 25 Z HA 15 YOpenrett * 


WES bd I 
1/T1,2Vv , 17 1:44 f - 5 yr bf j_ * — -t 
of Silver in ths Teinple, and Runzet) imei s Too! (5:2 of 
- . .* 0 S Q” AT WIE -—L » SY ei 
i, g 30s Chriit Arrataned ard dccned both o Fitzie , Bn 
S&I - » 4 TITLE F 3 ns #£F;; Ul * 
3} A / J "r= Wo HP a 7 pn F 4 , "8. ne far Te 
Saks Ret24/c PIR < Ho 35 aaMmonifhod of ow Wis ; 2:1 
CSTTE” os \G , > 5 4 TC =, , - AR ; y 
Fiiing t9 dA) with him s T2 1Xnts; $ CD!f> 6G.xrI2h ;6 {1.4 a {; 
- ad 1 ie 80 ow f - 3 »v7t% vj 
7 [ *7e% » FY a. i 4 —— , J 
that Chr15t 1 y UE CYAUCITCAM 3 Il EC 2». F; FL en TT 788 ' 37 2 + 
Fane Anetaond Sill: OTA 1+: var 
A mmads 4 ACCHAT CS mine; INNCCENE Do I iey Invifte 7, (2! 
Ul is W ” 
1TH) #$ 61 3% JETT - 0) 4 + - = p_ P # ? V 
Up corſolves and Childje: » <4, <5 CM97 4! F-£04 
ITPITY — SY gy > a EeY IF. 
C1 IRON . 41 {Je 5 Jl diers Abi! GC $17 2 $ NTT; i 


W1!/1) Tnorns 5 and meche 3 and cruciRod » 29=—33, Tr: 
F megar with Gall to drinb : They part bis Gamers; - wor 
4 -t% eel jor TTL oh =e* 


over Mrs Head his ACCU! 2/151 5 ani COHCIfi2 729 #1O12TeS Wir 
- P A C 5 
3 oo) "4 - M . F _ - 7 n - - , : £ 
him, 34 — 38. "Trey revile, and blaip*:1 ity tÞ:..h arch 
17; PY EO 2s } _ I. E , % , 
"1H 4 $9-—44+ Darkne/s over all Fro Land tom the ta, ty ts 
to the ninth Dir: He ciriety, and Vieidwiin ut the Girl : 
y , . / 4 + 'o « 4&6 « 
11> 7 "of ' 3,509 Frets x » a , / . . 
Ti: | ail of the Templ: ren; U;aves mfer; avid Saints arife ; 
Tie Centurion cnjoij. th Chris t1 ho tho Con "0, 18-56 
” » S& WICH IS lt yg yy -S'J. 


Fojeph begging 
Tomb, $7—61, 
62—55, 


i '#] J h cr FO q n . 
ue © ay of J<(i15 5 burieth if '1t PIs Vew 


Ti 
”; {- a »3* » l. , » 1 + . : . 
Tre 4\HEOW ſet Ile SUN 3 And JOE & LI ATC 9, 


I Hen the morning was come, * all the chic” 
prieſts, and elders of rhe peopl-z, 
counſel againſt Jeſus, to put him to death. 

2 And when they had bound him. they led þr 
away, and delivered him to Pontius Pilate the 
VErnour. 

Mut, chap. 15, 1. faith, And flrajohtway in the morning th: 
C hief Priefts held 2 Conultation with the Ellers and Scrit : 


+ > . 
6h ins SCTTL —_ C>F:ih 


' 
LOOUN 


C) | LEY 


— 
- 


Ma yho! *- g's Pry 0 ELLEN! - , . = 
{5p whole C uncil, ard bound Feins, ard Carried bim away, aiid 
delivered him tn Filate. Luke laith, chap. 22. IT. 4nd. the 
3 / - pw F : : _ = : jvc 
Vw hole multitud? of Fem 1} ant IE4 is/N1 7) Pilnte, J Ns 


chap. 18, 22. faith , Then le, "they T's from Cainpnas , unto the 
Hull of Fudgment, and It wiis 2ar!, p und th " Maes 5g wW-H1f 7:55 
into the Fudgment-Hull , 1:3} they ſi-zld be defiled, but that 
they might eat the Paſſreer, It any ask why, having Condemned 
Chriſt, rhey did nor pur him to Death ? 7ebn wells us, wer. ZE. 
It was not law ul for them to put any one to Death. They had al- 
ready our of their Malice to Ciriſt, broken ſeveral of chew own 
Canons, or Rules oblerved in ordinary Capital Cauies ; Sitiirg 
n the Nizht-time, and upon a Fejtival-Dazy. They mult nave 
notorioully broken another, if they had theniſclves on 
char Day pur him ro Death. Ic ſhould ſeem by their [t.ning Ste- 
phen, Aﬀs 7. 59. they had a Power in ſome Cales to put 
Perfons-ro Death ; bur Chriſt was to be Crucitiod , and as to 
that kind of Death they had no Power. Sce 7h. 18. 32. Be- 
ſides thar, we muſt conftider ic was the Paſſrver-Day , and 
Stoning any Man to Death , required a Concourie of People ro 
throw Stones, and they were afraid of Tumults, The Roman 
Governour had the 2/itia in his Power, and could berrer 
prevent, and ſuppreſs Tumulrs than they could do. Finally, 
Chriſt. was by his Death to give Teſtimony to his Kingly Office 3 
and the Fews , as we ſhall hear , had this to charze him wich, 
Thar he made himſelf a King; this was a Civil Cauſe, and to 
be adjudged by Pilate the Roman Gr corny amongſt them. In 
che Morning therefore, conſulting how to pur Chriit :o Death, 
they delivered him to Pontizes Pitare, having firſt bound him ; 
( for tho' he was bound upon his firſt Apprehenfion, yer it 1s 
probable, that chey had loofed him, when he came in the Hail ©: 
the High Pricſt, and now bind him a ſecond time, when the\ 
carried him before Pile.) Fobn ills us, har chey would not 
themſelves go into the Firidomont-Hull, left they (hid Us defiled, 
but that they might eat the Paſſer ; which Words have in them 
a Diiticulry, and alſo give us an Account of a moſt inacountable 
Swper/lirion 3 tor the Patloyer, they had eaten ir the Niztir be- 
tore, But we muſt know, that nor the Paſchil Luynb only, bur 
all the Sacrifices offered any of the Seven Days were 4!to called 
the Paſſ>ver, Deuter. 16. bh, ce. Ir was now the Fi Dy 
of Unle.wvened Bread, bur there were to be Offcrinss this Day, of 
which they were to eat, which in a large ſent? are called che 
Paſſrver, Bur how in2ccouncable was the Superſtition ct thete 
Hypocrites? They made no Conſcience, when chey had earcn 
the Paſchal Lamb in the Evening, to ſpend te whole Nighc 
in conſulting how to ſhed Innccent Blood , and Condemning 
of Chriſt; bur they pretend now C-»/cjence, char chey will rot 
£0 1nro a Pagan's Houle in the Morning , ( tor that was te De- 
filement they feared) having nottuns to do to fit in ſudlgment 
with him, . 

3 Then Judas which had betrayed him, whe! 
he ſaw that he was condemned, repented himfc!t, 
and brought again the thirty pieces of filver to the 
chief pricſts and elders, 

4. Saying, I have ſinned, in that I have betrayed 
the innocent blood. And they ſaid, Whar zs zbat to 
us? ſee thou zo tha. 

5 And he caſt down the pleces of filver in the 
temple,and departed.and went and hanged hinmicit®. 

Matthew (who alone reports this piece cf Hiſtory) interruprerh 
his Relation of our Saviour's Tryal before Pi{ate, wich an Ac- 
count of 7udas's End. We mult nor interpret 7-7, ſtridtly, f© 
as think Zudas did this ar the time when Chriit was carried 
before Pi!zte, bur ſome ſhort time after ; for rhey went imme- 
diarely from the High Prieſt's Hill to the Fudgment-H:l!, and 
ſtay'd chere until Chri was Condemned by Pilate; vetore they 
rerurned to come into the T2mple, Bur potlibly ic was chat day, 
after Pilate had Condemned him; or within jome ſhort Brac after, 


| Hig ; tet | 
Chap. XAVII Wi We HK 


F 


LL! © 2. 
a4 ak © 


* 
55 


{ 
by ct 
y | 
TH 
' ' '} 
t'F 
FRalþ 111141 
-f* | 
A '| . 
V7: | 
n W 


FAR 1,1%% 


St. MATTHEW. Chap. XXy 


a godly price that 1 was prized at of them, And I took the thirty pic 

of Silver, and T ca# them to the Potter in the Houſe of the Lyx 7 P "a 
a very hard Text as i: lies in the Prophet, to give a juſt " ch 
of. The Propher was one of them who Prophefied after = 
Caprivity of Babylon, yer ter. 6. he plainly Prophefieth of G = 
Deſtru&ion of the Fews and ct Feruſalem: Which Defirudi a 
being (after that of the Ca!deans) tro what it ſhould refer; bar ts 
che laſt Deſtrution of the Zews by the Romans, I canner - 
derſtand : ver. 7. he ſaith, f will feed the Bloch of the $1,161,” 
thar is, the Flock defigned for the Slaughter, or drawing = , 
the Slaughter, even you, O Poor of the Flock ! Chriſt came in Perf, : 
ro feed the Church of the Fews, bur they alſo abhorred hin. +. 
char he abhorred them, and reſolved to caſt them quice of, _ 


hap. XXVII 
Chap. P. W, ao Chap 
1s (25 it is ſaid ) Repented himſelf; that is, began to be 

-- 2-4 in his Conſcience for what he had done. The Con- 
{on 07 the worlt of Men, will nor always digeſt Mire and 
but Dmetimes throw it up, yea tho' ic harh firſt incu- 

4 pyioned them. Sin is ſiweer in the Mouth, bur bitter 1n 
to ell, All Repentance is not faving: Nor doth all Con- 
© 7» of fin obtain Remiſſm. Judas here repents, and con- 
tciuh le bid ſinned, and his particular Sin, in betraying 4n Inn- 
con2 P2141 4 yet he findeth no Mercy. He hath nor an Hcart to 
bes {>roivenefs, nor ro apply himſelt ro Chriſt for Remedy. But 
te Antiver of the Chief Prieſts and Elders, 15 very remarkable: 
Fiat is that tous? Toh thou to that.) Wretched Judits? He 
1:4 bh--n the Servant of theſe wicked Mens Luſts, and tor a 


Cc.it 


_— = 


r—_ — na 
h-. 


—— —_ FIYSS 

—— — —_— 
5 — nt bs. 
<> —— —— Rate Lag 
© SEL 4 * - - 


poor Waves ſerved them in the higheſt A&t of Villany. He falls 
into a Diſtreſs of Conſcience for what he had done. - What m1- 
ſerable Comforters do they prove ? Temprcrs never make good 
Comforters. Thoſe who are che Devils Inſtruments, ro command, 
hire, entice, or allure Men to Sin, Will afford them no Relict 
when they come to be troubled, for what rney have done : Nor 
will jc now fatisfie the Conſcience of Zudas, to remember that 
he had a Warrant for apprehending Chriſt , and atted Miniſte- 
rially. The Prieſts will not cake rhe Money ; [ He throws it down 
in th: Temple , and goes and hangs himſelf. ] How grear is the 
Power of Confcience, ſiniting for the Guilt of Sin? Tudas could 
have no hope of a berter Lite, fo as all his Happinets lay in the 
rime of this preſent Life. Yer, he 1s not able ro allow himlelt 
that. The Devil that entred into his Hearr, to tempt him; now 
encreth again to perſivade him to pur an End to his Miſery 1n 
this Lite, by haſtning himſelf ro an Eternal Miſery. Let all 
Apoſtares rirning Perſecutors of Innocent Perſons, read this, and 
Tremble. There is a Difficulty of reconciling this Text to that 
of Libe, Afts 1.18. where it is ſaid of him, That he falling head- 
toms bu:  aſunder in the mid$, and all his Bowels guſhed out. That 
which is uſually faid , is, that he fell from the place where he 
hanved himſelf,and wich the fall burſt himſelf, 1know there are 
ſome others, who think thar the word &77yZam, need nor be 
eraniJaced, he himmced himſelf, but he was ſuffocated, or ſtrangled. 
©xme think the Devil ftrangled him, and threw him down 
a Precinice. Ochers , that he was ſuffocated by ſome Diſeaſe, 
whici cauſed a Rupture of his Body. Others think (as we 
trantlate ir) that he hanged himſelf, and ſwelling his Body brake, 
21d all his Bowels guſhedout. Concerning the manner of his 
Death, we can determine nothing, bur that he was ſtrangled, and 
tz Byeels gufied out; both thefe the Scripture aflerts, bur how 
it was, We cannot certainly tell. 


6 And the chief prieſts took the ſilver pieces, and 
fiid, Ir is not lawful for to put them into the trea- 
ſury, becauſe it is the price of blood. 


God, Deut. 23. 18. had forbidden to bring the Price of a Whoye 
or a Dog into the Temple. This they had interpreted of all filthy 
Gin : Upon which they thus determine, that ir was nor lawful 
for them to put the Money they had given Zudss for fo 
ſordid 2 Service as that of Betraying hs Maſter, into the Cheſt, or 
Place which they had, where they kept the Moneys given for the 
Repairs of the Temple; and in this they were right enough , per- 
haps; bur in this they ſhewed themſelves Rapelly blind Hypo- 
crices, that they ſaw not ir was much leſs lawful tor them, who 
hed hired him to this ſordid Action, to be employed in the Ser- 
vice of the Temple; for 7/z. 52. 11. thoſe that bear the Veſſels of 
the Lord, ought ro be Holy, Thus to juſtifie our Saviour's Words, 
they ſtrain at a Gnat, and ſwallow a Camel. 


7 And they took counſel, and bought with them 
the potter's field, to bury ſtrangers in. 

8 Wheretore that field was called, The * field of 
blood unto this day. 

9 ( Then was fulfilled that which was ſpoken by 
Teremiah the prophet, ſaying, And they took the 
| thirty pieces of filver , the price of him that was 
ns ai 4 || valued, whom they of the children of Ifrael did 
of 1b2 chit. Value 
dm of 1- 1o And gave them for the potter's field, as the 
Fare. Lord appointed me.) 


They at laſt refolyc what to do with the Money, which was no 
Err Summ, ( tor as we notcd before, it exceeded not Three 
Pounds and Fitreen Shillings.) They would not curn it to their 
own privare Uſe, for (probably) ir was before raken our of the 
Treaſury ; neither would they again return ir into the Treaſury, 
becauſe it had been made ufe of as the Hire of Blood. They 
rheretore azree to buy wir!t it a ptece of Ground , ordinarily 
known by che Name of the Potter's Field; probably becauſe ſome 
Porter had digged Earth, and chrown the wafte of hjs Por-kilns 
there. ſo as it was of no great vaſue, Thus Field, che Vulgar up- 
on tis Purchaſe ot ir by the Prieſts, called many Years after, 
Ze Fil d of the Blond, (Then was fulfilled that which was ſpoken by 
Fo1:my the Propher.) The Evangeliſts uſe this term fulfilled , as 
{ havc before noted, in very different Senſes: 1, Sumerimes to 
expreſs the Accompliſhment of a Prophecy. 2. Sometimes to 
exprel: the fulfilling of a Type, or anſwering it by the Antitype. 
2. Somerimes to expreſs an Alluſton ro ſome other Scriprure, men- 
rio0ning ſome Matter of FaQ, of a like nature. For the Texc here 
guaed , we have no ſuch Text in the Writings of the Prophet 
Jeremy, which are upon Sacred Record, Feremy indeed did buy 
a Ficld by order from Gcd, Cp. 32. 9. to declare his Faith in 
Grd's Promites, tor the Return ot the Fews our of Captivity, bur 
he bought it ot his Uncle Hanancel, and for Seventeen Pieces of 
Silver, and that he was a Potter, or that the Field was calied by 
thar Name, we do not read. The neareſt place in the Prophets to 
tliis Text is Zechar t1.12,13, And T ſaid unto them, If you think 
gd, give me my price : So they.weighed for my price thirty pieces of 
Silver, And the Loid ſaid unt) me, Cat is unto the Potter ;; 


*AR.1.19. 


8, 9. ſohe broke firſt his Staff called Beauty, rook away all th 

Glory and Beauty of thar Church. Then as it were in 7 ndigns. 
tion, he ſaith, If you think good, give me my Price. What Requita 
will you give me for my Labour amongſt you? 5 they wes}. 
for my price thirty pieces of Silver. Their ſelling of Chriſt to 
a Traytor tor ſo much , ſignified cheir high Contempt of him 
And the Lord ſaid, Ca$t it unto the Potter , a goodly price that | "eh 
prized at of them ; and I tack the thirty pieces of Silver, and c.# (hm 
to the Potter, in the Houſe of the Lord, The Evangelj# indceq 
doth nor quote the very Words of the Propher, bur the Subſtznc. 
of them. And for my part I think, that the Evangeliſt here i; 
fulfilling, meanech the A4ccompliſhment of the Prophecy in Zcch.yj if 
For I know not what other tolerable Senſe to make of the Pro. 
phecy; if we do nor tay the Prophet ſpake in the Perſcn f 
Chriſt , forerelling his own Coming amoneſt them, their Reje. 
ion, and Contempr of him, and his utter Rejection of they - 
ant Propheſying as a piece of their Contempr and Reje#imn F 
him, cheir ſelling him to Zudos for Thirty pieces of Silver, (a moſt 
contemprible Price ) and God ſo ordering it by his Providenc- 

thar this Money ſhould again be brought them, and this -:;::;: 
Field ſhould be bought with ir. So as Ithink, that Text ir; 
tulfilled here, more than by Alſuſzon, or as it was Typical to this 13 
and that this 4&# was the very thing which chere is prophoſo2d, 2n6 
here fulfilled. But how Matthew faith, This was ſpoben !; 7:51. 
the Prophet, is an harder Knot, Ir is obſervable that Zech.;1.;} 
hach many things found in Feremy,and it 1s not improbable, t!1; 
the very ſame thing was Prophefied by Feremy , tho? afterizard 
repeated by Zechariah, and only in the Writings of Zechu ih left 
upon Sacred Record. Matthew having now given us an Acccun: 
of the Fate of Fudas, returned to our Saviour, carricd (as we 
heard ) before Pilate. 


11 And Jeſus ſtood before the governour ; and th? 
governour asked him, ſaying, Art thou the king «f 
the Jews? And Jeſus ſaid unto him, * Thou faych, +, 


Mark hath the fame, chap. 15. 2. So hath Luke, chap, 2, 4. 13, 
John relares it more diſtinly, John £8.29. Pilate then went 11; 
unto them, and ſaid , What Accuſation bring you againſt this 11m ? 
They anſwered and ſaid, If he were not a Malefattor, wewnul! 
not have delivered him up to thee. Then ſaid Pilate unto them, 
Take him and Fudge him according to your Law. The Jews theifn: 
ſaid unto him, It is not lawful for us to put any Man to Death: 
That the ſaying of Feſus might be fulfilled which he ſpake ſyrifing 
what Death he ſhould die. The other Evangeliſts ſeem to hve 
g1ven us the Story of this our Saviour's firſt Appearance before 
Pilate, ſummarily. Fohn ſeems to have given us ir more orderly, 
and parcicularly. Ir is the courſe of all Judicatures , to require 
the Accuſers ro ſpeak firſt : Pilate therefore asketh, what Accu 

ſation they had brought again® him 2 Their Anſiver was vey 
malapert, [ If he had not been a MalefaFor, &c.] What was i: 
to the purpoſe ? Suppoſe him never ſo great a MalefaQtor, muſt 
1t not appear he 1s ſo, before a Judge Condemns him ? Theſe ac- 
cuſers (as ir ſeemeth) were of the ſame Mind that the Papiſts ate, 
Thar the Civil Magiſtrate is to be Executioner to the Ch:rch; and 
when the Eccleſiaſticall Power hath Condemned a Man for He- 
reſie, or Blaſphemy, the Civil Magiſtrate hath nothing to do, 
but wichour his own Hearing the Cauſe, to pur the Perſon to 
Death. But they met with a more 7 Judge, tho' he were 


| an Heathen, Say ye fo, faith he, [ Take him then, and Judge him 
| according to your Law.) 


This he either ſpeaks as deriding them, 
and ſcorning what they would have pur him upon ; or elſe no 
thinking he had deſerved any thing worthy of Dearh, knowing 
they mighr wichour him Scourge him , or inflict ſome lighter 

Puniſhments, They reply, [It is not Jawful for us to put any fat 
to Death. ) Iris very queſtionable in what Senſe they ſpake ls 
Thoſe thar affirm that the Power of Judging , and Determining 
in Capital Cauſes, was before this time taken from the 7ows, mule 
affirm, rhat Stephen was put to Death in a Popular Tumult; for 
he was after this ſtoned to Death by the Fews, At. 7. 59. Which 
15 nor probable, conſidering what we read of him, chap. 615,15» 
called before the Council, and Witneſſes uſed againſt him, and have 
no Record of any Notice-the Civil Magiſtrate took of the Ft 
as a Diſorder. I therefore rather think their meaning was, Tis 
15 with us a Feaſt-Day, on which it is not lawful for us to pit 
any to Death withour thy Conſent: Or, Iris not lawful torus 
to pur any to Death , for eny Civil Cauſe ; for ſaying, he 15 0 
King ; for it is manifeſt by the Queſtion which Pilate firlt put 
ro him , upon his ſecond coming into the Hall , ment!0n* 

7oh. 18. 33. in which all the orher three Evangeliſts agree, 4 
they had charged him with ſaying, that he was the King of the Jews: 
To which all that he replyed, which is recorded by Matthew, 
Mark, and Luke , is, Thou ſayeft it : T am nor bound to accuſe 
my ſelf , Who witneſſes this againſt me ? But John faich that 
our Saviour ſaid, Sayeft thou this thing of thy ſelf, or did others tel} 
It thee of me ? Pilate anſwered, Am IT a Few 2 Thy own Nation, and 
the Chief Prieſts have delivered thee to me; What haſt thau done ' 
Teſus anſwered and ſaid, My Kingdom is not of this Warld © 7] * 
Kingdom were f this World , then would my Servants fight, 1" 

ſhould mt be delivered to the Jews; but now us not my Kingdom fro 


hence. Our Saviour, by this Anſwer to Pilate's Queſtion, ſees 


vY 


tt ons 2 7jenels; 
| to vindicate his Right, not co be Condemned wichout V/2070,* 


k, 
bet 
fout 
then 
1n L 
7 hey 
zeach 
coni 
Mint 
Ady 
he as, 
that 
bimſc 
Hero, 
weh 
no n 
Tetra 
vernd 
have 
where 
viour 
not to 
but a ( 
Herod 
him of 
he hope 
him 7 
Chief 
Hered 
and ar; 
And th 
before 1 
Hiſtori 
moſt © 
Herd | 
the Cu 
have « 
Exped 
viour | 
flung, 
Scribes 
Guard, 
ſend h! 
pleaſed 
ciled to 
them, 
acainſi 
have de 


T5 
releaſe 


\ 


15 
Barah| 


t7 
Pilate: 
© You 
1s 
him, 
« Marks 
releaſed 1 
FA one, 
Rue Ini) 
Jarrefj; ” 
as he had 
bill yp th 


Wc. X2VIE 


* i That every one who was of the Truth,did hear his Voice. | This po- 


£5 how many things they witneſs againit thee ? 


which if others had told Pilate this, they were bound to have 
produced. Pilate tells him, He had it nor of Hhimſelt; he was 
Ln Jew, bur chey were thoſe of his own Nation who had deli- 
verad him co him, and therefore askech him what he had done, 
Then our S1VIOUr openeth himſelt, nor denying that he was the 
King of the Jews, bur relling him he was no King of this World ; 
tis Kingdom Was a vPITITURL Kingdom, and he might know what 
Kin 2 he 5-45 by his Retinue, and thoſe who rook his part ; for it 
ke had [aid Claim © any ſecular Kingdom, he thould have had 
{me appearing £0 rake his part, and ro Fight tor him ro d2liver 
1m from his Enenues, bur he ſaw he hat none. Pilate laying 
hold of tis Words, replies, Art thou a King ? Jeſus anſwered, 
Thu {azeft that Tam a King, to this end was I Born, and for this 
Cue came T into the World, that T ſhould bear Witneſs to” the Tiuth, 
Eery one that 3s of the Truth, heareth my | oice. Pilate ſuith unto 
bin, What is Truth 2 Our Saviour ftill uſfecth Prudcnce, and 
i:ceps himfelt upon a cluſe Guard, Ir had been dangcrous for : 
|im, direAly to bave owned himſelf a King. He thereture only 
«ils Pilcte, That he ſaid he was a King, and that he came into 
2c World to bear Teſtimony ro rhe Truth, and furrher adds, 


{ck Pilite, who had no Norton of char Truth which Chriſt ſpake 
of; he goes out as it were deriding nim, faying, What # Truth ? 
Preſently he goerh our to the Jews, v. 38. and tells them, he 
frqd in him no fault at all, and offers to releaſe him ; bur this | 
we ſhall meet with in cur Evangelift by and by, the paſſages ; 
kerero mentioned are cnly relared by John : Excepring only the 
Queſtion, Art thou the King of the Jews * and our Saviour's An- 
tiver, Tu ſayſt it : Which is reported by all, 

12 And when he was accuſed of the chief priefts 
and elders, he anſwered nothing. 

12 Then fairh Pilate urto him,*XHeareſft thou not 


14 And He anſwered him to never a word : inſo- 
much that the governour marvell-1 greatly. 


Mark ſaith much the ſame, Ch. 15. 3, 4, 5. Theſe things were 
before Pilate went out «to the People, and told them, that he 
found no fault in him ar all: and offered to releaſe Barabbas unto 
them. Then ſeemeth co me to follow in order, what we have 
in Lube, 23. from the 5th. wv. to the 17th. in theſe Words, 4nd 
they were the more fierce, ſaying, He ſtirreth up the People, 
zeaching from all Fewry, beginning from Galilee to this place. The 
conſtant charge which we ſhall obſerve was laid upon all the 
Miniſters of the Goſpel from Chriſt's rime, Tzrtullizs, che Roman 
Advocate, thus charged Paul, gc. | when Pilate heard of Galilee, 
he ashed whether the Man were a Galilean. And as ſoon as he knew 
that he belonged to Herod's Furiſdidtiom, he ſent him to Herod, who 
himſelf was alſo at Jeruſalem at that time.) Afﬀter the Death of 
Herod the Great, who died ſoon after our Saviour was Born (as 
we heard before) The Scepter departed from Judah, there were 
no more Kings, The Government of Jewry was turned into a 
Tetrarchy, divided into four Provinces, each of which had a Go- 
vernour, who was called the Tetrarch of that Province. You 
have che Diviſion, and the Names of the Tetrarchs, Luke 3. 1. 
where you will find that Herod was Te*trarch of Galilee. Ovr Sa. 
viour being taken within the Juriſdiion of Plate, it ſeemerh 
rot to have been neceſſary for Pilate ro have ſenc him ro Herod, 
but a Complement to farisfie his Curioſity, For (faich Luke) When 
Herod ſaw Feſus he was exceeding glad, for he was deſirous to ſee 
him of a long ſeaſon, becauſe he had heard many things of him, and 
he hoped to have ſeen ſome Miracle done by him.Tiven he queſtioned with 
him in many words, but he anſwered him nothing. And the 
Chief Priefts and Scribes Stood, and vehemently accuſed him. And 
Hercd with his Men of War, ſet him at nought, and mocked him, 
and arrayed him in a Gorgeous Robe, and ſent him again to Pilate. 
And the ſame Day Pilate and Hered were made Friend's together, for 
tefire they were at Enmity between themſelves, This is now all 
Hiſtorical, and hath in ir nothing dirficule. Chrift had ſpeor 
moſt of his time in Galilee ( which was Herod's Terrarchy,) hi? 
Herod had nor ſeen him, yet he had heard much of him, and had 
the Curioſiry ro defire to ſee him, hoping thar our Savitur would 
have wrought ſome Miracle before him. Bur he failed in his 
ExpeRarion, He propounds ſeveral Queſtions ro him. Our $1 
viour being not before a proper Judge, anſwerech him nv- 
thing. Soas there was nothing done, only the Chief Prizfts and 
Scribes followed him with Incefſant Clamours. Herod and- his 
Guard, vilifie and mock him, put him on a Gor+e: us R<-he, and 
ſend him back co Pilate, All the efte& of this was, Herod was 
pleaſed wich Pilate's Complement, and tr--- rhat Dar -was recon- 
ciled to Pilate, tho* rhere hid been a former En.aity berwixt 
them, onlyas we ſhali hear hereafter, H-rod Decreeing nothing 
a4ainft Chriſt, Pil.zte made ſome uſe of ir, in his endeavours to 
have dehv<red cur Saviour. 

15 Now at that feaſt che governour was wont to 
teaſe 110 the peonie © prifoner, whom they would. 

15 And they had then a notable priſoner, called 
Barabbas. 

17 Thzre'ore when ther were gathered together, 
Pilatefaid v to them When will ye thar Ireleaſe un- 
you? Barabbas, or Jeſus .vhich is called Chriſt ? 
13 For he knew thatfor envy they had delivered 
him, 

2 oy ſaith, chap. IS. V.6, 7, 8, 9, To. Now at that Feaſt, he 
Ke ea unto them one Priſoner, whomfoever they defired. And there 
3 GER Barabbas, which lay bzyund with them, that had 
rm 5 ag im with him, who had committed Murde* in the In- 
gn h. = And the Multitude crying atnud, begun to deſire him to ao 
ii val ever done unto them. But Pilate anſwered ther, ſaying, 
Ye that T reteaſe unto you the King of the Fews 2 Fi ne bnew 


S MATTHEM 


Priests myved the Pevple that he ſhould rather reteaſe Exrabbas 1:79 
them. Lube hath this patlage of che Hiſtory more fully, C/.;p. £4, 
13, 14, 15,15,17, 18, And Pilate when he had called together tne 
Chi-f Prieſts, the Rulers, and the People, ſaid unto them, - You have 
brought this Man unto me , as one that ferverteth the Perle, and be- 
hold Th.cving examined him before you, have found n9 fault in this 
Man touching thoſe things whereof you accuſe him, No, nar yet Berod : 
for T ſent you to him, and lo thing worthy of Death z done unto 
him. Twill therefore chaſtiſe him, and releaſe him « For of neceſſity 
he muſt releaſe one unto them at the Fatt, Aud they cied out all 
at once, ſaying, Away with this Mun, and releaſe unto us Barabbas : 
Who for a certain Sedition made in the City, and fir Murder , was 
caſt into Priſm. PJolm, Chap. 18. 38, 39, 42. {uich, that when 
he went our, he rold them he tound nv iaultin him ar all. But 
you hve a Cuſtom, that T ſhould releaſe unto you one at the Paſſvoer : 
will ye therefore that I releaſe unt) y%4 the King of the fews ? 
Toen cried they all again, ſaying, Not this Man, but Barabbas' Now 
Barabbas was a Robber, The Hiſtory is plain, Pilct» difcerned 
upon his betore-mentioned Examination of Chritt, char our 
Saviour had done nothing amiſs, bur was cnly Loaded with 
the Malice and Envy of the Chief Prie$ts and Scitbes ; this made 
him reſolve ro do what in him lay to deliver him. He firſt tells 


many things , bur had proved againſt him nothing Crimin3}. 
Thar he had ſent him to Herod, in whoſe Juriſdiction he hat 
lived, bur neither did Herod find any taulc 1n him. Now there 
was a Cuſtom thar ever at the Paſſer, rhe Goverrour relcated 
a Prit>ner ar therequeſt ofthe People: The People defired he 
would keep their old Cuſtom 1n this particular, Pilate propound- 
eth to them, to releaſe the King of the Jews. The Chief Prieſts 
untluence the People to declare their Difſatiztation ar thar, and 


| ro Name one Barb, a Priſoner who was a R 6:2, and had 


been guilty of an Infurreftion, and of Murder commiricd in the 
Infurre&ion ; accordingly rhe People cry out, Not this 37un, Lit 
Baraboas, This makes him again to rerurn to the Fudgment- 
Seats 


19 Whenhe was ſet down on the judgment-ſeat, 
his wite ſent unto him, ſaying, Have thou nothing 
todo with thar juſt man ; for I have ſuttered many 
things this day ina dream, becauſe of him. 

20 But the chief prieſts and elders pertzaded the 
* mulrirude, that they ſhould ask Barabbas, and de- 
{troy Jeſus. 


Matthew only mentioneth this paſſage of Fil ate's Wife. Whe- 
ther it was when Pilate ſare upon the Judgment-Seat the ſecond 
time (the Story of which we have heard) or atrerward is un- 
certain, nor is ic material, ſhe doubtleſs reterrerh ro feme late 
Dream, which poffibly the might have after her Hushand was 
gone from her, for he was called early. Whether this Dream 
was cauſed by God for a turcherTeſtimony of Chriſt's Innocency , 
or were meerly natural cannor be derermined, Burſtill che cry 
holdeth, Not him, but Barabbas- So much Influence had the 
Wicked Prieſts upon the People. 


21 The governor anſwered, and ſaid unto them, 
Whether of the twain will ye that I releaſe unto 
you ? They ſaid, Barabbas. | 

22 Pilare faith unto them, What {hall I do then 
with Jeſus, which is called Chriſt : They all fay 
unto him. Let him be crucihed. 

23 And thegovernour ſaid, VVhy what evil hath 
he done? But they cried out the more, ſaying, Let 
him be crucified. 


23. vb. 20, 21, 22, 23. laith, Pilate therefore willing to releaſe? 
Jejus, ſpake again to them : But they cried, ſaying, Crucifie him, 
Cruciize him. And he faid unto them the third time, Why, 
what Evil hath he dine? I have ſound no Cauſe of Death in 
him, I will therefore chaſtiſe him, and let him g%. And they 
were inſtant with loud Vorces ; requiring that he right be Cruci- 
fied : And the Voices of them and of the Chief Friejts prevailed. 
Fobn, Chap. 19. trom ver. 1. to the 13th. bach yer more Cir- 
cumſtances relating to rne latter pare of this T574l, which tol- 
low. Then Pilate therefore took Feſus, and /courger him. And the 
Souldiers platted a Crown of Thorns, and tut it in his Head, and 
they put on him a Purple Rove, And ſail, HA'! King of the Fews, 
and they ſmote him with iveir Hunds, Pilate therefore went forth 
again, and ſaid unto them, Behold, I brinz him forth unto you, 
that you may know Tfind no fault in him. hen came eſs f ith, 
wearing the Crown of Thorns, and the P iiple Robes And Pilate 
ſaith unto them, 'Behold the Man. When t 'e Chief Priejts therefore, 
and Officers ſaw him, they cried out, ſaying, Crucifhe him, Crucine 
him. Pilate ſaith unto them,Take ye him, and Cruciſte him, for Tfind 
no fault in him. The Jews anſwered Dim, We have a L:w, and ty 
our Law he ought to die, becauſe he made himſelf the $'m of Gods 
When Pilate therefore heard that Saying he was the mire fi aid, And 
went agin into the Fudgment-H:ll, and ſaith unto Feſus, Whence art 
thou 2 But Jeſus gave no anſwer. Then Pilate ſaith urt» him, 
Speabeft thou not unto me ® Knowelt thu nt that T hte Power 
to Crucifie thee, and have Power to Releaſe thee * Je/is faith 
Thou couldeſt have nm» Power at all againſt me, except 1 Were 
given thee from. abwue : Therefore he that hath delivered me 
unto thee, hath the greater Sin. And from thercejorth Pilate 
ſought to releaſe him, but the Jews cried out, ſaving, If 
thou letteſt ths Man gn, thou art not Ce'ar's Friend: He 
that mabeth himſelf a King, ſreateth again Ceſar. T have 
nat given the Reader ar one view, What all the Evanzeliſts 


ſay, as thinking it ſcarce poſſible from them all, ro fer oy 
L] the 


Y? x q Is. y . . FE p Fi 
"997 the Chief Priets bad delivered him for Eny ) But the Chief | 
Vol. Il ; 


them that they had brought him before him, accuted him <f 


Chap. RX VII. 


*Toh. 18; 


ACry 
ht — 


i 
Act. 3. 14- 


Mark hath the fame, Ch. 15. v. 12, 13, 14. So alſo Luke, Ch. . 


W - 
_— 
* 


PIRES nary te, 2 arid * 
— x" Fr 7 5 ” W== —— 
Ed ad PEI Y . ns ES 
rn == 


> EIN 10s 


_ CLE 
> 6) 


SE MATTHEW. 


the Order, kow t.inzs paled ar this Tryal; bur only chat I 
rnhowwe notive of Whar vas remarkable 1n 1t, relarcd trom 
one ur other 0: them. Tac reaton of our reading 1o otren ot 


Pills ping ul, and then azain coming to the Fudgment-Seat, 
fecmert ro oe; beeaute as wo herd betore, the Fews would not 
come inns. Files Boutt, bur ftood ar rhe Door : And on the 
erhor tie ] conceive. that he could not procecd Judictally, bur 
troing wo the Trims, or Sear of Fudgment. So 4s, tho' he 
ei proceed 1 Judgment within the Houſe, with the Artcn- 
Cance of is own Servants, Souldicers and Ohcoers ;, yet, when 
be had ary ing to propound to the Jews, he Went our. we 
exmor tink that the Evanceliſls report all che things the fews 
Cjetted a7ainit our Saviour, nor 41ll rhe Queſtions by Pontiins 
P:\:ro propiunded to him. For the Evangeliſts rells us, Sum- 
mirily, Tar they accuſed him of many things; and Pitate faith, 
Hewet ou wr how many thmm:« they witneſs 1g.trst thee ? There 
wa, * leems, bur one thing that they myſt inſiſted upon, char 
was, his making himfelt a King ; as 00 wiaich we heard becore, 
ky our Lord cleared himfelf, In the whole Proceſs of this 
Fri, theſe things are remarkable. 1. Our S.viN'S Silence. 

. ; : O b- OW F a GS, THE iv 

Vil ate's E jt), 3. [he Re m1 Mudne!s "f the Chief 1 res oP 
S©: ibes nd Pole, Our Saviour's Silence confirms to us char piece 
or che Law of Nature, To. mn Man js bound t0 _ hime!f. 
Pi.ge's Equiry appears 10 many TtLINSS, Te He would not C-n- 
demn him withour 2 particular hearing of his Caufe himſclt ; 
he £:0u'd not torce Titm © accuſe himfelf; he accepts our Savi- 
ours Yindication cf himfeif, as to the great Thing wherewith 
be wis Char ed ; he ewice declares, thar he tound no taulr 1n 
Eim:; he ſtudies Expedients, ro deliver an INNOCent_ Perſon from 
ticir Rave; he fends him ro Herod, and obtains his Concurrent 
Sutrave ht his Innocency ; he offereth to releaſe him according 
© 2 Cuſtom hey had at the Paſſover, to deliver one, whomſo- 
ever they defired ; when rhis would nor do, he cauſed him to 
be Scaur :ed, then brings him ove to them again, hoping ro. 
have m ved them ro Compatfion by that lighter Puniſhmenc of 
him. The Raze and Madnels of the Fews, principally of rhe 
Chi-f Prietts and Scribes, appearcd 1n their urging, to have had 
our Saviour Condemned withour hearing their exceſſive Cla- 
mours azainſt him, their preferring one berore him, who was a 
RuWher, 2 Murcerer, one thac had made a publick Infurrettion 
racir imiſting 1 much upon the kind of Dearh chac he ſhould 
6, viz. by Cruciſying him, tho' in that, they did both tulal 
the Councel of God, who had determined, That he ſhould be 
mats a Cuiſe fr us and ic Was Written, Curſed is every one that 
bh. eth npm the Tres, Gal. 3.13. and what hinifelf had Propheſted, 
char he 1hould be delivered ro the Gentiles, and they ſhould Mock, 
and Scruree, and Crucife him, Mat, 20. 17, But that which 1s 
moſt remarkable, is, The Providence of God, for the Eviden- 
cing of our Saviour's lanocencv. Pilate's Wife calls him a Fu 
Mn ; Pilate twice tells them, That he found no fault in him. They 
are able ro fay norhing; when Pilate asks them, What Evil he 
hid done 2 Ezrod objets nothing againſt him. He 1s meerly 
Condemned upon the bruriſh Clamour and Rage of the Rabble 
jncenſed, and jer on Fire by the Chief Prieſts and Phariſees. The 
Arc of theſe his Adverſarics is alfo obſervable, becaute it is the 
ſame which the Enemics of the Goſpel deriving from this firſt 
Patrern, have ever ſince obſerved in the Execution of their 
Malice againſt the Preachers, and fairhful Proteffors of che Go- 
ſpel. They durtt nor infiſt upon the Do&rine which our Saviour 
Preached, which was the true Cauſe of their Malice againſt him, 
buc brin:; him under a Charge of Treaſon, and Sedition ; as 1t he 
had gone about ro make himielt a King in oppoſition to the Ro- 
man Enperyr ; tho' there was not the leaſt pretence for any ſuch 
thing. and if chere had, none who conſidereth thar rhey were a 
Corquered People, and how Zealous they upon all occaſions 
liwv.cd chemielves for their Civil Liberties, can 1magine they 
}i4 any great kindnefs for Ce/ar. Ir 1s very obſervable, That Mi 
lice tgamit Religion and Godlineſs, and 4 Defire of the Extirpation 
iced Men. To ſerverhis, they not only deny their own Rea- 
'», and Principles of common Juſtice, but deny themſelves like» 
wile in ſome other Lu#s5, And herein they ſhew rhemſelves the 
true Sced of the Serpent, and rhe Children of the Devil, whoſe 
Works they do: who tho' he be the Proudeſt Spirit, yet to de- 
firoy a Soul, will abate his Pride, cruckle ro a poor Witch, and 
£0 upon her Errands. 

24 When Pilate ſaw that he could prevail no- 
thing, but rather that a tumult was made, he took 
warcrs and waihed his hands betore the multitude, 
ſwing. I am innocent of the blood ofthis juſt perſon: 
tee ye 10 7t. 

25 Then anſwered all the people, and ſaid, * His 
blo-d b- cn us, and on our children. 

25 Then releaſed he Barabbas unto them : and 
when he had fcourged Jeſus, he delivered him to be 
crucihticd, 


Muik farth, Chip. 15. ver. 15. S9 Pilate, willing to content the 
P-ple, reio-jed Barabbas unto them, and delivered Feſis, when 
he ht Scourged him, to be Crucified. Luke, Ch,tp. 23. 24. faith, 
Ard Pitate gave Sentence that it ſhwld be as they required. And 
be rele.tfed unto them, him that for Sedition and Murder was cut 
int» Priſm, whom they had dcſired, but he delivered 7eſs to 
their Wild, 7ohnlanth, Chap. 19. v. 12. When Pilate thei efre heard 
tout ſaving, He brought Jeſus fiith, and ſate down in the Zude- 
mreit-Set, in 4 place that is cailed the Pavement, but in the He- 
t; ow, G.bathz, And it was the preparation of the Poſſreer, 
ont dit the frxth our, and he faith unto the Jews, Behld your 
Icing, Put they ciged ont, Away with him, Crucifie him. Pilate 
teitn unto them, Shail T Crucife your King £ The Chief Prieſls an- 
{wee He have no King but Celar. Then delivered be him there 
Joie Wn, {ein ta be Crucified —— Fire are three Accounts 


of it, .md the Profoſſars of it, s the Predominant Luſt in the Hearts | 


>ndcmn 
ther T.. 
7ohn ſaith, It was upon the hearing of that, ſaying, 1; thr p 2 
this Man go, thu art not Ceſar's Friend : Whiſrer er mal Ig 
ſelf a King ſpeaketh againſt Ceſar. His fear of beings accuſe 
che Emperor Tiberins, as Favouring one who made hiandole » 
King ; eſpecially, 1t his oppoſing the 7ews in their dei.re wt 
Duath, ſhould have cauicd a Tumulr, was queſtionlc;: i}-& v564s 
ting that moved him co give Judgment in this Caſe «-rirary pen 
his own Conſcience; and this is the meaning of l..s contentins 
the People, mentioned by Mzrk. Its plain, by the whole "<A 
he had no mind to gratifie, cr gain Favour with them ; " 
conſidering how jealous and ſuſpicious a Prince Titerivs war ” 
was Pilate's Inrereſt ro q:tet them, and to give them no _ 
tron of Accuſing him unto the Emperor. { He tub>th Wars; m 
waſheth his Hands before the Malti+n:.) Irwas the Liy of Gra 
in Maneflaughrer, where he thar flew the Man was not known, tt, 
Prieſts and Elders of the Ciry, that (upon meaſure, ſhould !, fund 
nearelt to the dead Body, ſhould take an Heifer, and bring i; "I 
rogh Vallty, and ſirike off its Head, and waſh their Hunds or 14 
Head if the beheaded Heifer : And ſay, Our Hunds have 11; ſped t! | 
Bland, neither have our Execs jeen it, Devt:. 213, 2, Li q Foo 
Some think thar Pilate, living amongſt the Jews, had learns |. 
Rire trom them ; bur others think, that it was a Ritc uſed in » 
teſtations cf Inn*cency amongſt other People, as well as the 7%. 
But ic was a grear Fondneſs in Pilate to think this excuted*};.. 
and treed him from the Guilr of cur Saviour's Death; tcr t ths 
was fuch an inſeparable Guilt clove to the Att, as nothing cou'd 
expire, bur that Blood which he ſpile. Thote who rake upcn 
chem the Truſt of execuring Laws, had nced. take heed via 
they do, for the Law will not excuſe them in the Court of Hez. 
ven, unleſs it be tound according to the Law of Grd, yi; 
Pilate did, he did bur Miniſterially , The Law Condemnce, rc; 
he; bur it it be underſtood of the Law of God about &/.:/71.11 
co which the Fews undoubtedly referred, John 18. 33, 36. it _ 
miſ-applied. If it were a Roman Law, Pilate oughrro have cop. 
tidered the Equity and Juſtice of it, and whether the Fa& 44; 
proved or no. Plate kad twice owned, There was 1 f.wul; jn 
Sim, His Waſhing kis Hands could not purge him of the ur 
der Whereof he was Guilty in his Condemnarion ; he dd ty; 
proteſt againſt what he immediately was abour to do. | Then ,; 
ſwered all the Penple, and ſuid, His Blood be upon us and ons (il 
dren. | His Blood, that is, the Guilt of his Blood be UPUN us, (+, 
A moſt ſad Imprecarion, the Efte& of which hath been upon 
that Miſcrable People, now more than fixtcen hundred year:,\ 
{ Then releaſed he Bu; abbas to them ; and having Scourged Feſusc,) 
The Scourging was before this, and ſo Recorded by St, Titn 
(for we cannot imagine that he was rwice Scourged.) [Ee deli. 

4 . _— 4 
vered him to be Crucified : ] Not to the Jews, bur to his own Of;- 
cers ; for it was a Civil Crime that he was accuſed of before p;. 
{ate, and Crucifying was a Roman Puniſhment. 

27 Then the ſouldiers * of the governour tock [e- 
ſus into the common || hall, and gathered unto hin ty 
the whole band of /oul/dters. = 

28 And they firipped him.and put on hima ſcar- (a: 
let robe. 

29 And whenthey had platted a crown of thorns, 
they put 27 upon his head, and a reed in his right 
hand : and they bowed the knee before him, and 
mocked him, ſaying. Hail, King of the Jews. 

30 And they * ſpit upon him, and took the recd, * li 
and {mote him onthe head. Chuzs 
31 And after they had mocked him, they took 
the robe oft from him, and put his own rayment on 

him, and led him away to crucike him. 

Mark hath che ſame, Chap. 15. 17, 18, 19, 20, Only he faith, 
they put upon him a Purple Robe; Fohn ſeemeth to mercion this 
a litrle our of order, Chap. 15. 1, 2, 3, 4. as done before his Cot 
demnation ; for rho' ſome think rhar Matthew and Murh rather 
mention theſe things our of their due Order, yer the Abuſes ſeem 
more likely tro be done to a Perſon who was Condemned, and 
ſo Dead in Law, than while he was upon his Tryal. Writers 
rell us, that none might be Crucified before he was Scourged, and 
chat not with Rods, (which was the Jewiſh manner, bur ict 
Whips, (tar more cruelly ;) but whether 1t was before, or aitec 
Condemnation, we are nor certain: He was Condemned upon 
chat Article. That he ſhould ſay, He was the King of the Jes» - 
To mock him therefore, they ſeta Crown on his Heag , but 0 
Thwns; They puta Scepter into his Hand, but ic wasdf 4&e:4- 
They bowed the Knee before him, as was wont to PrYices , Ti) 
put on him a Robe of Purple or Scarlet, borh which were ulcd v 
Princes : In ſhort, they pur upon him all che Indignicies 41% 
Marks of Scorn imaginable. When they had chus glutced hems 
ſelves, rhey reſtore his own Garmentro him, and lead him away 
to the Place of Execution. Who can read theſe chings v1 4 
believing Heart, and dry Eyes, if he remembers, that our YT 
plarted che Crown of Thorns fer upon our Saviour's Head, and 
made the Whips with which he was Scourged ? Our Stolinac'is 
(when we read theſe things) are ready co riſe againſt the Pag? 
Souldicrs ; bur how little did rhey do in Compariſon ot wWhai 
Chriſt ſuffered for our Sins? Who can read theſe things, and 
not be tortifned againſt Tempracions, from Suffering, it We 
own the Goſpel, and Cauſe of Chriſt? Our Sufferings il com: 
much ſhort ot what Chrift hath ſuffered tor us. 


32 And as they came out, they found a Mn 0! 
Cyvrene, Simon by naine : him they comp=I:.9 1. 
vear his croſs: 22 Aid 


$[ob ry 
Vie 


Chap. Xp: 


terneſ. 
that 
Myrrl 
It was 
them 
their 
our $. 


bleſs th 
VF, ANC 
tiemſe 
for Pe 
have C 
threatn 
Suſten; 
hefore 
Enemy 
ſhould 
e.C Fy | 
A Prov 
and ut 
ſhall 8 
for Fea 
ri/e to | 
(F 9. 6 
end ſha 
a thus. 
Proverh 
nally, 

them th 
YOu, Wi 
Fudgme) 
gntly ap 


rp. XXVIL 


vi 
And when they were come untoa place called 


A? 
Golgotha, that 15 to Jay, a place of a skull. © 
24 * They gave him vinegar to drink, mingled 


42d when he had talted zhereof, he would 


not GIN. 
Wark ſaith, Ch. 15. 21. And they compelled one Simon a Cyre- 
ated by coming out of the Country, the Father of Alexander, 


1-17 Dih) {'s: 
1.0 FIT. we” + j . - 

nt Rufits, 75 te.tr bus Croſs, And they bring him unto the place Golgo- 
S, which is, being intel preted, ihe place of a Sill, And they gave 


4s to drinl Wine, mingled with Myrih;, but be recerved it nt. 
Like is Jarger in his Account of the paſſages, berwixt his Con- 
demnation and Cructtix1on, Ch. 23. 25,10 33. And as they led 
him, the} Liid hold on ne Simon @ Cyrenian coming out of the Coun- 
try, and on bim they lid the Crrſs, that he might bear it after Jeſus 
id there followed him a gi oi Coimpuny of People, and of Women, 
which alſo bewailed , and lamented him, But Jeſus turning unto 
them, ud, D.tugiotei 5 of Feruſalem, weep ne for me, but for YIUr 
"and for your Childien ; For bebald the days are coming, in the 
which the" (hell ſay, bl:fjed re the Brien; and the Womb that never 
bare, 8nd the Paps WRC) newer gave Suck, Then ſoail they begin 
i ſoy 1 the Mountains, fl on 1, and to the Hills cover its. Fir if 
they d) (irs, in 4 Green Tie?, m hat ſt: be done in the Dry 9 And 
\ haye were 21ſ) 1w9 ther Malefaors led with him to be put to Death, 
in, Ch. 19. 17. fairh no more than, And he bearing hws Croſs, 
" wt {wth into 2 jlce, oiled the place of a Skull, which is called in 
14, Aatthew, and Mark, and Luke ſay, That a 


ſeltes, 


$1is 


Gilethaz, Lofts calls it Calvary, they are both Names of the fame 
Siznification, 77-2 place of a Skull; the one is the Hebrew Term, 
the other Latine : | And they gave him Vinegar to drink, mingled 
with Gall.) Mark faith, Wine mingled with Myrrh ; There is fo 
great a Cognation between Wine, and Vinegar, that it 1s no won- 
der if one Evangeliſt calls ir Vinegar, another Wine, which, 1t it 
be acid, is Vinegar. The Word tranſlated Gall, ſignifies all Bit- 
terneſs  wherher it be cauſed from Gall, or Myrrh. Some think 
thar ſome good People gave him Wing, and the Soldiers added 
Mirrh co it. Bur this 15 a great incertainty ; Certain it 15, that 
it was an ordinary Favour they ſhewed to dying Perſons, to give 
them fome Intoxicating Potion to make them leſs ſenſible of 
their Pain: Ir is probable it was ſomerhing of rhis Nature ; but 
our Saviour was not atraid to die, and ſo had no need of ſuch an 
Antidote againſt rhe Pain of ir; he refuſed it: We ſhall find 
they afterward gave him ſomerining co drink alſo. Zuke tells us, 
that great multicudes foliowed him to the place of Execution (which 
is ſtill very ordinary) Lamenting him, to. whom our Saviour 
ſath, Daughters of Jeruſalem, Weep mt for me, but for your ſelves, 
ard for your Childjen , and then propheſieth the Miſerics that 
ſhould follow his Death to that degree, thar the Barren ſhould 
leſs themſelves ; and they all ſhould fay to the Wountains fall on 
vs, and to the Hills cover us. He bids the Women weep only for 
themſelves and for their Children : For how much betrer 1s it 
fr Perſons of any Tenderneſs ro have no Children, than to 
have Children, and ro ſec them daſhed againſt the Stones, as was 
threatned to B.rby/5n, Pſal. 137. 9. or to Kill them for the Parents 
Suſtenance, as ir happened in 44's time ; or to fee them ſlain 
before the Parents Fices, as it happened to Zedekiah, when the 
Enemy took 7ersſzlerir, Fer. $2. 10. The People alſo, he faith, 
ſhould (as it was of old propheſied of thoſe of Samaria) Hof. 20 

8. Ciy to the 3ient zins t9 cover them, and to the Hills to fall on them: 
A Proverbial Exprefſion,co fignifie their wiſhing rhemſelves dead 
and under Ground ; or expounded by 1/ziah 2. 19. And they 
ſhall g2 into the Holos of the Rocks, and into the Cares of the Earth, 
for Fear of the Lord, and for the Glory of his Majeſty, when he ſhall a- 
ri/e to ſhake terribly the Earth. See che like Expreſſions, Rev. 6.16, 
(5 9. 6. In thiſe days, Men ſhall ſech Death, and ſhall not find it, 
end ſhall deſire t9 die, and Death (hall flee from them. | For if they 
thus t) the green Tree, what ſhall be done to the dry 2) It is another 
Proverbial Expreſſion, which may either be underſtood Imperſo- 
nally. If they do, that is, if ir he thus done to. If God luffers 
them thus to do to me, who am his Son, whar ſhall be done to 
you, who are bur as dry Sticks, and fo fitter for the Fire. If 
Fudgment bezin «t the Houſe of God, where ſhall the Wicked and Un- 
gully appear 2 1 Pet. 4. 17, 


R219 25 And they crucified him, and * parted his gar- 
ments, caſting lots : that it might be fulfilled which 
was ſpoken by the Prophet, They parted my garments 
amonglt them,and upon my veſture did they caſt lots. 

36 And ficting down, they watched him there: 

27 And let up over his head his accuſation written, 
THIS IS JESUS THE KING OF THE JEWS. 

28 Then were there two thieves crucified with 
him: one on the 11ght hand, and another on the leit. 

Hark, Ch. 1<, 24. 25, &c. ſaith, When they had crucified 


þ;: [1,1 - ; - . % . , 
n, they parted his Garments, calling Lors upm them, what every 
* Ioud take, ard it was the third how , and they crucified 
Fo, I, : 


S MATTHE W. 


him : And the Superſcription of his 4ccuſation was written over, The 
King of th Fews. And with him they Crucified ewo Tirieves , the 
one on his A:ght Hand, and the other on his Left. Ard tho Scripture 
was fulfilled , which ſaith, 4nd he was numbred with the Tr.n{cref- 
ſors. Luke 23. 33. faith, 4nd when they came to a Place called ©a1- 
vary, there they Crucified him, and the Malefafors, ene in the riche 
Hand, and the other on the left, Then ſad Telus, Enber ferom 
them, for they know not what they ds, 4nd the, ported his Raincnt 
and caſt Lots. John tclleth us ſome further Circumſtzr.cee Tobn 
19.418. Where they Crucified him, and two others with hin, 5 « 
ther fide one, and Jeſus in the midſt. _ And Pilate wrote x ith ard 
put it on the Croſs, and the Wiiting was Telus of Nazareth, the King 
of the Jews : This Title then read many of the Jes, fir tho place 
where Jeſus was Crucifed was nigh to the City, ond it was wiitten in 
Hevrew, and Greek, and Latin. Tyen ſaid the Chief Prices of the 
Jews to Pilate, write not the King of the Jews; Lt that ho {tid} I am 
King of the Jews. Pilate anſwered, what T h.r2 written 7 have 
written. Then the Soldiers, when they had Crucificd him, to: b his Es 
ments, and made four parts, to every Souldier a part, and alſ his 
Coat , now the Coat was without Seame woven from the t9Þ to the 
brttum + They ſaid therefore amongſt themſelves, Let us 15; rend jt 
but caſt Lots for it whoſe it ſhall be: That the Scripture might be 
fulfilled, which ſaith, They parted my Rayment anon them, a fea 
my Vesture did they ca8t Lots. Theſe things therefire the S$1:ldivr, 
did, And tnNey crucified him, That 1s, four Souldiers, a5 we learn 
trom 7ohn's Narration of this matter of Fa&; ir feemerh this 
buſineſs was affigned ro four more eſpecially : This Crucithir> ws 
a bitrer, and ſhameful kind of Death, norin uſe amonett the Jews 
but amongſt the Romans, the manner ot ic is nor particulariy 
known to us : Buras it is deſcribed by Writers, a piece Ot Woud 
was erctted, which was crofled with a Bar. upon rhe rop. The 
Bcdy of the Perſon being faſtened to the main piece of Woce. 
[115 Arms were extended, and nailed to the Crots Bar, or picce ct 
Timber, and his Hands and Feer were nailed. {ail laith, Ut 
was about the third Hour, Which with us was about Nine of tic 
Clock : So haſty they were, in deſtroying this juf Perſon, thar be- 
ewixe Midnight, and Nine of the Clock in the Morning, they a - 
prehended him, Tryed, and Condemned him in the $.mheat im, or ac 
leaſt, ina Court of High Prieſts, and Elders, and then betore Pi- 
{ite the Roman Governour, and led him co Þ= Crucified, and nail- 
ed him to his Croſs, The Evanzeliſts tell us, he was crucified in 
the middle, berwixt two Thieves (of whom we ſhall read more 
atrerward.) Several Scriptures of the Old Teſtament, were fnl- 
filled in this Crucifixion of Chriſt. They pierced my Hands and my 
Feet, P/al. 22, 16, was fulfilled in his nailing to che Croſs, In 
his being crucified berween two Thieves, was fulfilled thar I/2.53. 
12. He was numbered with the Tranſgreſſors. That of the Pfalmiſt, 
Pſal. 22, 18. They parted my Garments amongſt them, and upon my 
Veſture did they ca Lots, was fulfilled, in the Soldiers parting of 
our Saviour's Garments (as their Fee) bur how could they parc 
them , and yer not rend them? poffibly they parted his other 
Garments, and only did caſt Lots for his Coat, or upper Garment. 
Or, ic may be they valued ir, and agreed each Man's ſhare, and 
then caſt Lots for the whole. I ſee no Ground for their Aﬀerti- 
on, who ſay, thatin ſuch Caſes they only ſtripped the Condem- 
ned Perſon of his upper Garment. Fohn's Relacion feemeth to 
oppoſe it, he ſairh, And alſo his Coat, Matthew, Mark, and Fobr, 
all agree in the Tnſcription, which Pilate drew to be put upon his 
Croſs, ſignifying the Crime tor which he died, only 7ohn purs 1a 
thoſe Words (of Nazareth.) Thus Chriſt died inthe Atteſtacion 
ot his Kingly Office. This Inſcription angred the Zews ; they foli- 
cit Pilate to alter ir, and that it might be, Who ſaid he was th- 
King of the Jews. But Pilate refuſed, ſaying, Wh.:t I have wr it- 
ten, I have written. There was nothing more pleaſing to Pilate, 
than this, (as he thought) ro deride the Fews, as having ſuch a de- 
ſpicable Perſon {as he judged him) their Kinz: In the mean 
time rhe Counſels of God have their Effe&; Chriſt in his Death 
15 declar'd ro be the King of the Fews. Lube faich, thac Chriſt 
ſaid, Father forgive them, for they know not what they 41, Whether 
theſe Words were ſpoken, when our Lord was firſt Nuiled to the 
Croſs, or afterward 1s not much material. Lube relates them be- 
tore the Soldiers, parting his Garments, Our Saviour by them de 
clares himſelf a true Paſtor, and Shepherd of Souls, reaching 
his Diſciples no more, than he himſelt did praQtice, Chap. 5. 44. 
He had taught his Diſciples to pray for them, who deſpitefully uſed 
and perſecuted them ; himſelf here praiceth ic : The Malice of 
Men ought not to quench in Chriſtians the Grace of God, Let 
us now condder the paſſage that happened, from the time he was 
nailed to the Croſs, until the time of his Expiration, which was 
morethan three entire Hours, 


TOE IEEE. 
vt F< SEC 


him cn Ci- 


29 And they that paſſed by, reviled him, wagging 
their heads, 

40 And ſaying, * Thou that deftroyeſt the tem- 
ple, and buildeſt 77 in three days, fave thy ſelf: If 
thou be the Son of God, come down from the crols. 

41 Likewiſe alſo the chief prieſts mocking him, 
with the ſcribes and elders, faid, 

42 He ſaved others, himſelf he cannot fave: If he 
be the King of liracl, let him now come down from 
the croſs, and we will believe him. 

43 * He truſted in God; let him deliver him 
now, if he will have him : for he faid, 1 am tas 
Son of God. : h 

The thieves alſo which were cruciged with 
him, caſt the ſame in his teeth. 


Mark relateth this part of the Hiſtory wich no Macerial Gir- 
cumſtance differing from Matrhew, Ch. 15. 25. 39,37; 3% Luke 
6.43 a 142th, 


Chap. XX VIE. 


| 
TR: We! 
TER Ms! 
S :: 
: {4 
| Y 
a 
4 Mb 
| f: 
# 
ik. # 
# 


XCh.26.57. 
Joh, 2. 15- 


P;. 2.2: 


_S 


SGT pou wer CITIES Las att 
. , ST intaate”. % 3 ap 
$a” m_ Vn EAI a——_— _ _ 


2p 2 


XR VII. St. 


af cn « 4 Ay Ch? 7 MAILCT: "'S h; h 
faith, Ch. 23. 36, 45) 41.42, 43. 4ndone of the Malef.teors w 


« 3 72/257 
$610 3H, 


{, if wand iis - 
thay nat four Gl, ſeems thy art in the ſame Condemnation, and we 


min cr 102, wren Ft cuneft into thy Kingdom. 


wit? Fin, | eiily T ſay wito thee, To Day thu ſhut be with me mM 4 by 
r1diſe, Fobn laith, Ch. 19. 25, 25, 27, 28, 29. Aow Tree ſtoog ' 
the Cr ili of Felns bas Fother, and his Mother's SIS, AMrry, Ihe 
Fife of Clecpias, and Mary Magdalene. When 7/5 1NereJore Jak 
: TS" , 4 2 4? v2 f j [ 
bis Morhor, aud the Difciple Randing by whnn he led, be jauh 
£4 5% EVE INE "-/ » 1);Gitln he- 
his Wthor, þ 177. beald thy Son. Then j.117H he t9 the Diſciple, VE 
«4 PY - ded } a A * 5) F. K. - 5 OEM 6 "If __ 
ht thy Fvgher, and from that time the Dijciple 199% hog ro bis own 
fame. After this, Jews knowing tht all things were _ accom- 
Sc + { oY = 4 of hy 6 I 4 ; : £S ! 7 w-.þ 1 
PMlijhed, that the Seriptire might be fulfilled, faitn, 1 T9175. Now 
und they fil. d a Spunge with 
Liregar, and put in up;n Hyſop, and put it to his Mouth. When Fe- 
here; wr, he ſaid, It is finiſhed. Mut- 
thow and Mob relate more particularly, What __ ——_— 
i y ' 1 7 4 jy © o rom 
cur ſuffered, while he hung dying up2n the 1 al Na wt 
Paſſengers. 2. From the Chief Pric$-, Scribzs and Elders. NOtIng 
- =” A. ”y 2 
is more inhumane than ro meck uct 


our 1S Mz; 
Chief Pric$ts; en 
High Privift ', 


F-ws, but the Fliors of Tjrazl, fnuuld be i> b- 
acc themſelves undecently to a Man in the extreameſt Miſe- 


at this time to have been prayinz, but aifo forgetting all Reve- 
genre 1 Goo, tolav, He trified in God, let him now deliver him, if 


M ATT H E I. 


voice, yielded up the ghoſt. 


ſaich, Ch.mÞ. 23. 44. Th.it it was about the fi1th hy wn” 


har is, cither iuch as had been in the Oice ot 


49 Thereſt faid, Let be, let us ſee whether Elias 
Will come to ſave him. 
50 Jetus, when he had cricd again with a 15g 


SS  »t 


Mark hath the ſame, Chap. 15. from v. 33. to y 


Vo 38, 


L:be 
| £7.41 » NA [1Ce was 
a durlnys over 'ail the Earth, unto the wnico Hire 4nd th 
was d.:rhned, and the Vail of the Temple was rent in tho »:;, 57 
when 7ejus had cried with a loud Voice, he feid, Fither into th 
Hands I commend my Spirit, And having ſuid thus, - > ; os 
th: Ghoft. 7obn faich no more, Chap. 19. 30, but thar —-_ : 
bowed his Head, and gave uþ the Ghoſt. Ir 1s ſaid, Zorn 19 I. 
It was avout the ſixth Four, when Pilate brought torch Cliriſi kiy 
the 7ews, how rhen could he be Cruciticd ar the ti; 7 "Hg 
and che Darkneſs begin at the fixth. The different wie 
Fews and the Romans had of counting Hours, mule vs tt. .. 
a loſs ſomerimes, as ro Circumſtances of ti; w reconcile 4... 
Scriptures. But as ro the preſent Diiiculry, it is faid thy 11. 
Zews as they divided the Night into four Watches, 1o they allo 
divided the Day into four Parcs, each Parc having ts Detcrn. 
nation trom the ſucceeding Yart, by whick Name all tie inter. 
medtate time was called, Thus when the third Hour (which wick 
us 15 Nine of the Cleck) was paſt, they called a'! che tiz.c}; 14,17 
till paſt Twelve, Thus Pil.zze Condemned Chriſt in the eginnin. 


Tai ets 


5 08 


j 3-7 65 . 
ifs {34tIt Ald 


about the fixth Hour, which is true 1f it were fome ſmall time 4. 


ter, | There was Dail refs over all the Land, till the ninth Hur] 


/ 
% 


J)-p. 2.1%. 54s that God, that ſh.l aeliver you out of my Hands ? | bur over oil the Earth, that was under the ſame Hemiſphoye, 3. No 


and the moſt prodigious Patterns of Arheiſm, and all Wicked- 
neſs. It Jets us alto ſee to what a Degree Malice and Coverout- 
neſs will Debauch Souls, and teach us to- fear finning againſt 
cur Lizhr, and Convictions. All chis was forerold by the Pro- 
the Event, by no means excuſed the Sinfulneſs of the At, nor 
made God the Author of theſe Mens Sins. Matthew ſaith, [ The 
Thieves alſ» which were Crucified with him, caſt the ſame in his 


pher David, Pſ. 22. v. 8. and ſo muſt be. But the neceſſity of 


Teeth 1 Luke ſaich, Only one of them did ſo. Some think that 


at the firſt they both reviſed him, bur the Heart of one of them 
was chanzed while he hung upon the Croſs; bur it 15 no unuſu- 
al thing in Scriprure ro uſe the Plural Number for the Singular, 
and the Number may be underſtocd, not ſo much to refer to 
the Pertons as their Qualicies, they were both Thieves, tho* bur 
one of -them revited uur Saviour. Or whar hinders, but that 
they both mighr defire Chriſt ro pur forth his Power to deliver 
them, rho! one of them further reviled him by Words which 
the Evanveliſts have not ſer davn. 
theſe Thieves rebuked his Fellow, and cleared Chriſt's Innocen- 
cv. Thus Gcd had that Honour trom a Trict, which was de- 
nicd him by the Chief Prieſts and Elders. He can of Stones raiſe 
up Children to Alrahim. He begs of Chriſt ro Remember him 
when he came into hs Kinzdom, diſcovering an Eminent Fiith jn 
Chris, he is rewarded, by Criſt relling him, To Day thou ſhalt 
be with me in Paradiſe. A plain Texr to prove that Souls neither 
Sleep nor Dve with the Body, bur immediately paſs into their 
Erernal Manfiens. 7obn addeth, that there ſtood by the Croſs 
of Tefus, his Ms, and her Siſter, 2fary the Wife of Cleyphas, 
and Mary Magdalene, and mencions cur Saviour's recommend- 
ing his Morhez +5 tie Care of his beloved Diſciple, and rells us 
obs John's Care of her: The other three Evangecliſts mention 
their being there, bur ſtanding atar of, which night both be 
true, they being nearer the Croſs ar firſt, rhen removing them- 
ſelves turther of. Jokn turther mentionerh their givins our S4- 
viour (upon his ſaying I thir) Vinegar to Drink, It is very pro- 
bable, this was bur a Kindnels they did uſually ſhew toMaletaQtors 
dying thar kind of Dcarh, when they were fo long a rime dy- 
inz, but the Evangeliſt rells us, that in our Szviour's Caſe there 
was a Scripture to be tulfilled, Pf. 65, 21. In my Thirſt they gave 
me inez.wr to Drinb : Whether David there ſpake in the Perſon 
of Chriſt, or what was at that time primarily tulfilled in David, 
was at that rime fulfilled in Chriſt as his Anzitzpe, is nor much 
material tor us ro know ; tharthe Textrelfated ro» Chriſt, and was 
filled in him, we are afſured by the Evangeliſt, This giving 
of Cliiift to Dripk, was diſtin trom char we meer with hefore, 
as may appear by the many different Circumſtances, That he 
refuſed: This he receired, and ſaid, I 7s finiſhed. My Paſſion 
1s a3ithed, or unon the fimthing, 

45 Now trom the h«th hour there was darkneſ; 
over all the land uinto the ninth hour. 

45 And about tie ninth hour * Jeſus cried with a 
loud voice Jaying #1 Fl, lhmaſabachthani, that is to 
fy, My God, My God, why haſt thou forſiken me 2 

47 Some of tiem that ſtood there , when they 
heard thair. faid. This man calleth {or Elias. 

45 And ftraighrway one of them ran, and took a 
2, Tpurge, and filled 77 with * vinegar, and put 77 on 4 


*; po _ 4 X *Y To - Jo 2&1 
ICU, 40 1's 1M to G13%8, | 


Luke tells us, that one of 


No more doth Luke, Chap. 23. 45. 
theſe things. Ir pleated God to give a Teſtimony againſt chis Fi2* 
digious piece of Wickedneſs, by prodigious Signs, boih in i 
Heavens, and on the Earth : In the Heavens, the Sun (as We hedid 
betore) ſuffered an unuſual Pretcrnacural Eclif/c, 
three Hours, In the Earth, there was an Earthquake, to 02t 
degree, that the Rocks were rent by ir. Earthfukes were ſoine- 


. So that plain. 
ly chis was a Miraculous Eclipſe, nor cauſed by the Interpefirion 
ot the Moon (as other Eclipſes) but by the Mighty and Extracr;. 
nary Power ot Ged, which made an Heathen Philoſopher at a g5oy: 
diſtance cry our, Either the Divine Being now ſuffereth, or ſmpa te 


| zeth with one that ſuffereth , he is ſaid to have ſeen this Eclipte 


in Feypt. [And about the ninth Hour, that is, about Three «+ 1! 
Clock (as we reckon the Hours) Jeſus cried with a loud Veice 
"oy 


= 


: Eli, Eli, or Eli, Elvi, Lamaſabaitthani. | The Words are 7; 


tho' M:rk reports them according to the Syriack Corrupiicn 
the Diale&, They are Duvid's Words, Pſal. 22. v. 1. Dri! 
wasa Typeof Chriſt, He that was the Son of David uſerh Daits 
Words, poſſibly ſpoke by David in the Perſon of Chriſt, God; 
torſaking any Perton or Places, muſt be underſtood with rete- 
rence not ro his Eſſential Preſence, for ſo he filleth all Plces 
and 1s preſent with all Perſons, but with reference to the ii. 
feſtations of his Providence for our Good, thus when God withhold; 
his good Providence from us, either wich reſpe& to our ou: 
ward or inward Man, he is faid to forſabe 5s. A total forſding 
either of our Bodies, or of our Souls, is nor conſiſtent irh 
the Being of our outward Man, or the Spiritual Being or Lite 
of our inward Man All forſakings therefore in this Life are 
Gradual, and Partia!. The forſabing which Chriſt chereſere 
here complains of, was nor the Total withdrawing of Divine x 
vour, and Affiſtance from him, (that was impoſſible) and in- 
confiſtent with the firſt Words teſtifying his Relation to God, 
and Affiſtance in him, bur it muſt be_underſtood with reipett 
to God's Conſolatory Manifeſtations, and thar is teſtified by his 0- 
therWords,related 9 Luke, | Fzther, into thy Hands I common in 
Spirit, ] Which Words having ſaid, he gave up the Gb ({iy 
Mitthew, Mirk, and Luke.) Fin addeth, Thar he bore! ts 
Head, and yielded up the Gk;8t. Words added, to confirm wha: 
he elſewhere ſaid. That he laid down his Life, none torh it fon 
him. Hiscryiag twice at this inſtant with a loud Voice arzucd 
his Spirits not fo ſpent, but he might have lived a tery Minute 
longer, bur he freely laid down his Life. The People faxing, 
he calls for Eljas, when he ſaid Elj, Eli, ſpake them to be few, 
who to this Day dream of an Elias tro come, and ref;r2 al 
thinzs. That they no better diſtinguiſhed berwixr #1; and Eli, 
muſt be attribured either to the Corruption of their Dialed, he 


ſaying Eloi, Eli, (according to the Syriack Corruption: of che 
Term) or their roo great diſtance from him. 
him upon ic, was but Conſonant to their former Behaviour to- 
ward him, while he was upon the Crofs, Their giving him the 
Spunge with Vinegar, and Hy/5p, we before gave an Account of. 


Their mocking 


51 And behold, * the vail ofthe Temple was rent ** 
in twain, from the top to the bottom ; and the carth *: 
did quake, and the rocks rent, | 
52 And the graves were opened, and many bo- ' 


dies of Saints which flept, aroſe, 


53 And came out of the graves after his reſurre- 


ion, and went into. the holy city, and appeacd 
unto many. 


Mirk, Chap. 15. 38. mentioneth only the rending of th: Vails 
Fobn mentionerh none 


which laſted 


- 


times no more than Indications of God's Power and Myje!ts * 


$ 


Chap. XX 


A - 
& Vs 
1 


| [OM 


7.0 
au tt, 
W.'70o 
FIRCE 
ban! 


T1.) 
4 "tt 


fic; 2 
p7 hat 
ed trot 
Witty 0 
Lnve a 
tarned 
ednel: 
dare, qt 
ſy Yea 
ſo od 
Ming ah 
G. litze, 
alth 14 
and 79 
three F, 
theo'2 ww 
he ſy 
Trl. p 
mended 
the Cro, 
comin 
19 dot} | 
terpoſer] 
therefore, 
remin 
an High ( 
tht tha, 


} 


the [ e780 
brals nm | 
He, and } 
ſaw it Gag 
Faith rue, 
the Yeripty 
And 7 "Ih F 
14vo NIFCo 
fifreench q 


XXVIL 


«nd ſome think, th2t by tis Earthquake,Chrift declared his Divine 
e153, 8, Joel 2.10. It ts cercain, chat v. 54, the Centuril 
Og 2d tram i, this w.ts the Sm of God, Bur Eart hquakes Were 
CO oemos nor only the Indications of the Divine Majeſty and Pow- 
6 Pn atto.of his Wrath, P1.l, 18. 7, 8. Joel 3.15. Nahum I. 6. 
fo Vt Qoubtict was this: To thew char the Earch abhorred 
Pcs Men had done, Beſides theſe, The Vail of the Temple 
"oo ee Of che Evangciiſts mention jr. Ir 15 nor much ma» 


Ll 
Cis j 


BT \---r1er tis were chie ourivard Vail, or rhe imvard Vail, 
Po. tho probably it was rhe inner Vail, By th 1s rending 


$4 Vail, Gd reſtiaed his wrath againſt the Jews, and thar he 
1.:vins his Temple amon;;ſt chem, The Vail alf- was a Type 
- Cirpiſt's Flelh, . #:5. the Antirype being Benr, it was 
"m2 that the Type ſhould alſo be to. By this allo was 
"x tae ene Temple Service was nowat an end, and to conri- 
"ono 1.2:0, and the Partition-Wall berwixe Few and Genlzles 


AWqR 
I O, Se 
i 


P! 4s " - . . 0 

Oo tied Cont, For whar Matthew fpeaks, v.52, $3. of the 
A358 7g I .  -M * > Gs . 
Coreg pening, and tre Bodies of the Saints ariſing, &c. probably it 


© per Till Chris ReſurreFion, only Matthew purs it in here, 
we 1-10 up 2CEhNET all the Prodigious things that happened, tor 
1th nimfelt faith, v.53. They came wet of their Graves after 
no mrotin, ard it is not likely that che Graves opened any 
© /idcrable time betore chey came our of their Graves. Thele 
> the Predigics which arrended the Death ot our-54vieur, 


- . F2OTYy 
In ISS | vi kw - 


1 


- 1 Now when the centurion, and they that were 

ith him, watching Jeſus, ſawrthe earthquake, and 

h1{- things that were done, they feared greatly, fay- 
Truly this was the Son of God. 

-- And many women were there (b-holding afar 
£1 * which tollowed Jeſus trom Galilee, miniftring 
voto 1M. 

-6 Amongſt which was Mary Magdalene, and 
iy the Morher of James and Joles, and the Mo- 

' Zichedee's Children. 


1 - 


ter ON 


Mil ſich, Ch. 15. 39, 49, 41- And when the Centurion which 
ſw { ror againſt him, ſaw that he fo cried out, and gave up the Ghoſt, 
% Cid, Trily this Man was the $5n of God. There were alſo Women 
lingo of er off, amongſt whom was Mary Magdalcne, and Mary 
1h vor fer of [ames the leſs, and of Joſes, and Salome ; wh alſo 
wh b2 was in Galilee, follhwed him, and miniſtred unto him, and 
wy offer Women, which came up with him to Jerulalem. Luke, Ch. 
1 , 4 7, 43, 49. ſaith, Naw when the Centurion ſaw what was done, 
hs Glrifed Got, ſaying, Certainly this was 4 righteous Man. And 
all the People th.zt c.cme together to that ſight beholding the things which 
wo no, (rate their Breaſts ard returned. And all hs Acquain- 
tance, nd tho Women that followed him from Galilee, ſtord afar off 
tilding thee thinzs, We heard betore, v. 35. Thar the Sold1- 
ers (tte dn and witched Christ. The Centurion here mentioned, 
was th2 Captain of this Watch ; he feeing the Earthquake, and 
al the other thinss that were done, (faith Matthew) Mark faith, 
Em ho Car that he Cried out, and gave up the Ghoſt, He Gliri- 
ferh God, (faith Luke ) Matthew and Mark tell us how he aid, 
Truly this Man was the Son of Gifs Luke laith, he ſaid, Certainly 
bis was 4 rizhtens Wm : he Glorined God by a Confeſſim of the 
Tit, to the Glory of God, ſaving, he was a Righteous Man, and 
fic 2 Righte ws Man, as was alfo the Son'of God, Ir ſeems very 
p! hahle, thar this Caprain hving amongſt the 7ews, had learn- 
& tram them rheir Expettarion of a Meſſtzh;, and ipeakerh this 
with refrence to thar, and acknowledgeth that Chrift was he, 
Lie adderh, Thar all the People that came to fee that ſ1ght re- 
trned, Smiting their BreaRs, being convinced of the great Wick- 
edneſs commirred by their Zgh Pricſts, and Chief Prieſts and El- 
dc, and {caring thar Vengeance which tollowed in leſs than for- 
ty Years. | And many Women were there | theſe Women had fol- 
I9%::4 Chriſt our of Galilee : Two only are named here, 37; 
M.:{:izre. who probably had her Name from Magdala a Ciry in 
G.lilez, and Mary the Mther of James and Foes ; Fames the Lels, 
with 1h, ro diſtinguiſh him from Fames the Son of Zebedee, 
and the 37:they of Zebedec's Children, theſe ſtood atar cit, cheſe 
three F,vanzeliſts ſay. John told us, Ch, 19. v. 25. Thar two of 
the were ſo near the Croſs, with the Morher of our Lord, rhar 
he ſpike ro them. Here we read nothing of the 279ther of our 
I, probably ſhe was gone with 7obn ro whom Chriſt had com- 
mended her, and the reſt withdrew, and ſtood turther off from 
the Croſs at this time. Matther» goerth on now, deſcribing the 
cominz of Joſeph of Arimathez to beg the dead Body of Chriſt, 
{9 doth Marb and Luke , John 19. 31, 32, 33, 34 35 36, 37+ Is 
terpoſerh ſomerhing rending to complear the Hiſtory. Tre Jews 
theroſnve, becauſe it was the Preparation, that the Bodies. ſhould mt 
remit up the Croſs on the Sabbath day, (for that Sabbath dry Was 
an High day,) beſought Pilate that their Legs might be broken, and 
tat they might be taben away. Tyen came the Soldiers, and brake 
the Le:s of the firft, and of the other which was Crucifizd with him, 
But when they came t9 Feſus, and ſaw that he was de.tl already, they 
brahe mt his Legs. But one of the Soldiers with .t Spe. pierced his 
he, and firtheith came there out Blond, and Water. 4nd he th.:t 
(aw it bear Record, and his Record is true, and he kaweth that he 
[aith rue, that you might believe, Fr thoſe tings nie done, that 
the Scriptures (ould be fulfilled, A Bone of him (hall nt be broben. 
Ant 071m amther Scripture ſaith, Trey ſhall Ile upon hiz whom thoy 
have prorced, The day upon which he was Cructiied , was the 
hifceench day of the Month Niſan, upon the Fridzy, as we call it; 
ens appearech trom this Texr, which ſaich, Ir was the Preparati- 
M *5 the Fewiſh Sabbath, and that $4%bath the Evanzcliſt faich, 
Favan 22h Day; not becauſe as fome think the Jews put off their 
Pu ro that Day, bur. becau'e it was the ſecond D.iy of the 
Felt of Unleaven'd Br 1.ud. Ir is rrae, Jobn 10. 14. I is 
Wd the Prepet tin to the Paſſuer, buc we muſt remem- 


y-v 
WW as 


- 


St. MATT REM 


ber, that all the ſeven Days of unleavened Bread, were ſo called, 
as] oc:ure Noted, This Day was indeed the Prepar tion eo the S.:b- 
bath In the Paſchal Week, tor orerwiſe we mutt fay, rhac Chritr 
did nor Ear the Paſſ»ver che ſame Day char the Jews Eid , which 
Poppin many lexriebe dculienand old nei 

= Lam | y the Priers, tor thev would nor 
have K:Jled 1t the Day hetore. Iris cherefire moth probable char 
Fohn 19. 14. muſt be expzunded by v. 21. and the Preturatin 
of the Paſſer, V. If Was ths Freparation to the Sabl ath, Which 
taliing within the compats Ci the teven days cf unizavercd Bread. 
was a great Day with them, eſpecially heins ;o Day fullowing 
the Eating of the Paſchal Lamb. Ey the Law Pere. TRA we 
B:dy of none that was hang'd was © avide all Nizhe upon the 
Tree. Tr was herwixt three and four of lock in wie Afer- 
noon before chart Chriſt died; they uicd to ter f,me hours averr 
tor Preparation to the Sab5ath, which thar Nighr bezan 2: C;on 25 
the Sun was ſer ; this theretore makes chem to £o in 7: 1, 
deſire the Legs of them that ſuffered might be byi{en, 3'il 5:0 grapes 
cher requeſt, The Souldiers break the Legs ct the two Thicys: 
bur when .chey came ro Chriſt, they found him dead, ard |: 
nor his Legs, buta Souldicr with a Spear pierceth his Ste, Th 
Evangclift rakes notice of rheſe Minute rhings (and ailureth ws ho 
ſrv them, that we might believe) that he michr thew us how in 
every pant the things of old ſpoken concernin; Chrift, were ful- 
filled 1nÞ1im. Chriſt was the rue Paſchal Lamb, 35 ro which the 
Law was : That 2 bone of it ſhould nt te lyoken, Ex94, 12, 45, 
Nun. 9. 12, cr elſe the Evangeliſt reterreth to P[:l. 24.59, where 
it is ſaid of a Aightons Man: He heepeth all his Bones, that mt ore 
of them is broven. Our Saviour's Side was pterced, and thor alfo 
is recorded, ro Jet us know the fulfilling ot that Scripeure, £ec/r. 
12, 10. They ſhall logk on him, whom they hve pierced, 


' 
FI A C! __ *r 
Cala A\SA.YX 


A 
_— - 


57 - When the even was core, there came 2 rick 
man of Arimathea, named Joſeph, who alſo him- 
{elf was Jeſus his diſci”!2 : 

55 Hewent to Pi] irc, and begged the Body of Te- 
ſus : then Pilate commanded the body to bedelivercd. 

39 And when Joſeph had taken the body, he 
wrapr it in a clean linnen cloth, | 

67 And * laid it in his own new tomb , which * 
he had hewn out in the rock: and he rolled a 
great ſtone to the door of the 1epulchre, and depar- 
ted 4 

61 And there was Mary Magdalene, and the othes 
Mary, fitting over-againft the ſepulchre. 


Mark hath ir, Chap. 15. from v, 42. to the end. Aid ww 
when the even was come, becauſe it was the Preparation, that is, the 
Day before the Sabbath, Joſeph of Arimathea, an Honourable Cour:- 
cellor, who waited for the Kingdom of God, came and went in boldly 
unto Pilate, and craved the Brdy of Feſus. And Pilate marvelled if 
he were already dead, and calling unto him the Centurion, he ashed 
him whether he had been any time Dezd. and when be knew it cf 
the Centurion, he gave the Body to Joleph. And he brought fine Lin- 
nen, and togk him down, and wrapt him in the Linnen, and laid him in 
a Sepulchre, which was hew'd out of a Rock, and rolted a fone to the 
dvr of the Sepulchre. And Mary Magdalene, and Mcry the Mother 
of Zeſus, beheld where he was lai, Luke hath it, Ch. 23. 50, ggc. 
thus. And behild there was a Man Named Joſeph, a Conncellsr, 
and he was a gozd Man, and a ju$t, The fyme Mn had not conſented to 
the Counſel, and deed of them ;, he was of Arimathea 2 City of the 
Zews, wh» alſ1 himſelf waited fr the Kingdom of God, This Mar: 
went unt) Pilate, and begged the Brdy of Jeſus. And he tock it dawn, 
and wrapped it in Linnen, and laid it in a Sepulchre, that was hown 
in Stone, wherein ncver Man bejore laid, And that Day was the Þ» :- 
paration, an! the Sabbath drew on. John reporcs ic with tome ad- 
ditions, Ch. 19. 38, 39, 49, 41, 42. And after this Joſeph of Ari- 
mathea, bein; > Diſciple of Feſus, but je ctly for fear of the Fows. 
bebught Pilate, that he might tabs .ow.ty the Bray of Feſtrs, and Pilate 
gave him lexus. He came therefore and tool; the Body of F-jus. And 
there cam? ali9 Nicodemus (which at the firit c.ims 14 Fejus ty 
Night ) and brougot 4 Mxiure of Myrch, and Aloes dh34t an bimdred 
pound weight, Then to5% thoy the Body © f Je ws, and wind it in Lin- 
nen Cloths, with the Sfices, as the manner of th: Pews is t5 Bury. 


Now in the place where he was Crucifz.! , Ihye was & 
Garden, and in the Garden a new Sepilchre, wherein never 
was Man yet laid. Tnere Iaid they Fejirs therefire , becauje 


of the Fews Preparation Day, fir the Sepulchre was nizh at Hand, 
All tour Evaneelifts (as we lee) repeat this Hiſtory, one ſupply- 
ing what is wanting 1n another, towards the Complearnefs of ir. 
Nor muſt we think ic is for nothing ſo punfually relared ; much 
depended upon the Worlds Saristaftion 12 the Truth, and Cer- 
rainty of his Death, Burial and Reſurrection, (tlicy are three great 
Articles of our Faith.) We have theretore here punttuaily detcri- 
bed his Burial, with all the Circumſtances of it, As ir is with 
us, fo it feems it was with chem. The Bodics of thoſe who dy- 
cd as MalefaQors, were taken to be in power cf the Maziftrares, 
to diſpoſe of as they pleated, tio” they were ordinarily granted 
upon Peticion to therr Friends and Relations. Tae Perfun who 
begzed the Body of our Saviour, 15 deſcribed to us by his Name 


Foſeph, by his City Arimathea Cehere 1t feems he was boin, or 


had his Manfion-Houſe, tho? he reſided in Ferifalvm ) by his 
Quality, both his more Extcrtor Qudity, and his more 77erio Qua- 
lifcation, As for his oueward Quality, Wit ſaich, he was a 
Rich Man” Mark faith, He was an IDimurbl? Counſe!hir, Lite 
4'fo calls him 4 Coumſelby , but had nor conſented ro rhe Coumſet 
andD-od of them, Thar is, of them who had examined and Condem- 
ned Chriſt. Whether he was a Member of the Fewith Sanhearim, or 
of Pilates Comeil,Crtho'the laſt be nor probable jor nad been a Coun- 
ſellor formerly , bur nov was n2t fo, 15 hard c2 gerermine, = 

is 


Chap. XXVIT. 


: 
. 
"ATS 
_= > 
d = 
- } hy 
ag £ 
- 

L 

. 


HA TITTY 


ee We 


— 


op geen 


= 
T = A 

D— — Cyl. — - 
—— _ —— 


}:: Quality, doubtleſs, made his Acceſs more free to Pilate. He 
wort In boldly to him (laith Mark :) his Quality in the City, and 
Þ: Love to Chriſt, borh contributed to this Boldneſs. For his 
more imv.rd Qualifications, Matthew and John both tell us ,_ 
was 2 Diſciple, one thar had learned of Chriſt; though 9/2" - 5 
us it was ſecretly, for fear of the Jews, Joh. 12, 42. Among Ie 
Chief Rulers, many belizued on him. As bad as thar Ser 0i Rulers 
was, which now ruled the Jewiſh Afﬀairs, (and a worſe could mor 
be.) Chriſt had ſome Ditciples amoneſt them (as well as attcr- 
wird in Ner's Court) theſe, for tear of the Jews, caſting chem 
0: of the Synagogues, durſt not openly own Chriſt, bur ſecret- 
ly loved him : Foſeph and Nicsdemus were to of chem. And by 
ler us know what the Diſciples of Chriſt are, and ſhould be 3 
this Fep? 15 deſcribed by Luke to be a good and a juſt Man ; by 
Mk, ro be me who waited for the Kingd'91m of God : A nh 
one who bclicving what Chriſt had 11d , both concerning _ 
Kingdom of Grace and Glory, lived in the Exped.ttion of ark 
tis. Man begzgzerh of the Governcr che Body of Chriſt. Pi We 
wondred that he ſhould be ſo foon dead, bur enquiring of the 
Centurion, and hearing that he was dead, he commands that ts 
Body ſhould be delivered unt9 7oph, The manner of che Jews 
was neither to have Gardens nor Burying-places within the City, 
but wichout the Wall: It ſhould appear, char rhis Foſeph had a 
Garden-place wirhour the Ciry, and near to the place where Chriſt 
was crucified, and in thar Garden he had cur out of tome great 
Sane a Sepulchre for himfelt, (3ztthew calls it his own New Ti omb, 
which he had hewed out of the Rock) the other Evangelists do not 
call it his own New Tomb, only Luke and ohn obſerve, it was 4 
Sepulchre in which none ever before was laid, SO as when they 
found him riſen from the Dead, they could not ſay it was ſome 0- 
ther Body ; for there was no other Body 1n the Tomb. Bur be- 
{cre ther laid in the Body, both Matthew and Mark obſerve, 
that Foſeph wrapped it 1n fire Linnen : And Fohn furrher adderh, 
ha: they Embed the Body ; to which purpoſe it was that Ni- 
-+2-*:45 (rhar Ruler who came to Jeſus by Nighr, of which we 
zve the Story, 7ehb. 3. with whom our Saviour had a Diſcourſe 
abour Reccner.ction) brought che mixture of Myrrh and Aloes, of a- 
tut an hundred ppund weight. Fohn adds, As it was the manner of 
the Jes to bury; not ordinarily, but Perſons of greater Note, 
whole Eſtates were ſuch, as they could bear fuch an Expence. 
Tis was the beginning of Honour done unto Chriſt, afcer that he 
had paſled through his loweſt degree of Humiliation. Maiy 
AMuigdalene, and the other Mary, that is, the Wife of Cleopas, of 
whom. we heard before, ſtayed ro fee where he was laid, and 
took their Sears over-againſt rhe Sepulchre, Luke faith, Ch. 23. 
&5, The Women alſ? which came with him from Galilee followed af- 
ter, and beheld the Sepulchre, and how his Boay was laid. And they 
returned, and prepared the Spices and Ointment, and reſted the Sab- 
þ ;th-Day, according to the Commandment. It ſeems they fare bur 
a lictle while (as Afatthew ſaich) right over-againſt the Sepulchre, 
bur went Home, and prepared Spices and Ointment to Embalm him; 
but would nor do it on the Sabbath, which was now beginning, 
thinking thar it would be time enough upon the Fir Day of the 
Weels Matthew faith, that foe rolled a great Stone to the Door 
of the Sepulchre, and departed 


62 Now the next day that followed the day of 
the Preparation, the Chief Prieſtsand Phariſees came 
together unto Pilate, 

63 Saying, Sir, we remember that that deceiver 

*Ch.15,21, faid, while he was yet alive, * After three days I 
& 17. 23; Will rife again. 

& 20. 19, 64. Command therefore that the ſepulchre be 
Mar. 9 31. made ſure until the third day, left his diſciples come 
& 19: 34: by night. and ſteal him away. and ſay unto the peo- 
Luk. Ge 22, p B 2 a ? \ y P 

& 18: 23. ple, Heis riſen from the dead: 1o the laſt error ſhall 
& 24. 0. he worls than the firſt. 

65 Pilate ſaid unto them, Ye have a watch, go 
your way, make 7t as ſure as you can. 

66 So they went and made the ſepulchre ſure, 
ſealing the ſtone, and ſetting a watch. 


This part of the Hiſtory is recorded by no other Evangeliſt ; 
the recording it by Matthew, contributeth yer further to evidence 
che Truth of Chriſt's ReſurreFion : For here was all imaginable 
Care taken to prevent a Che.zt in the Cafe, The next Day that 
followed the Day of the Preparation muſt be the Sabbath Day, 
AMuk 15. 42. Theſe Superſtitious Hypocrites, that quarrelled 
wich our Saviour , for his Diſciples (being hungry) plucking Ears 
of Corn on the Sabvath-diy, and tor his healing him that had a wi- 
thered Tand, chap. 15. 13. can now themlſclves go to Pilate, to 
fer kim on work, to command that the Sepulchre ſhould be m2de 
Flt til the Third Day : They alledge, that Chriſt, whom they im- 
piouſly call that Deceiver, aid, while he was alive, that he would 
rije again the Tir d Day, toantwer the Type of the Prophet Jonas. 
c24P. 12.33, 45. They were doubtleſs jealous that there was more 
Truth in thule Words, than they were willing to believe. They 
pretend alfo a ivar, left his Diſciples ſhould come privately by 
Night, and ſteel his Body away, and then fay he was riſen. 
Bur was thts a probable thing, that a Government ſhould be a- 
fraid of a few p2or unarmed Men? They were doubtleſs convi- 
ted in their own Conſciences, thar he would riſe again from the 
Dead ; and to prevent tis coming out of the Sepulchre, they 
would have Pil:irocommand, that the Sepulchre ſhould he made 
Jurc. Pilate telis chem, thar they had a Watch, a Band of S91di- 
ets, Which he had commanded at this time to attend chem, ei- 
ri;er for cie Guard of the Temple, or ocher things about which 
rev would employ them, they might make the Sepulchre as ſure 
as they couid, {5 they went and made the Sepulchre ſure, ſealing 
rhe Strong, and ſetting a Woich, } Vain Men! asif the fame Power 
that was neceilary t raiſe and quicken the Dead, could nor alfo 
remove th 572ncy and break through the Watch, which chey had 


H MATTHEVW. 


ſet ! But by this ther Exceſſive Care, and Diligence, inſteaq of 
preventing Chriſt's Ref urreion, as they intended, they have con. 
firmed the Truth, and Belief of it to all the World; $9 dot! 

God take the wiſe in their own Crafrineſs, and turn their w; _ 
into Fooliſhneſs , that he may ſet his King upon his Holy #11 | 


Zion. 
CHAT AXYHL 


Women reſort #0 the Grave : An Angel declareth the Rehreg; » .c 
Chriſt to them,1—6. En ineth 'em #9 bid his Diſciples t5 mes; }: : 
ar Galilee, 7,8. Chriſt himieif appeareth tn the Womon : They -ncy 
ſhip him : He fendeth 'em t his Breth; ©, 5, 30. 7 20 
large Sums of Money 9 the Souldiers, to f.if1 103g nn oo, 
ſurrefion, 11-15. Chriſt on the Mount appeareth to his Dilci; "aſe 
They worſhip him : He declareth hu Power in Heaven ond E145. 
15—18. Sendeth them to Baptize and Teach all Nat ins, , ind 
ſeth his Prejence with them to the end of the World, 19, <0, 


DP... AY 
abit 4” 


toh2 {\(t- 


erm, 


YI 1H» 


_” * the ||end of the ſabbath, as it began to dawy 
towards the firſt day of the week, came Mary 
Magidal:ne,and the other Mary,to ſee the ſepulchre. 


We are now come to that part of the Goſpel which treateth 
C 


concerning the ReſurreFion of Chris, and the Converſe which he 


his A/cenſ;on 1nto Heaven. Matthew and Mark are the ſhorteſt in 
this Narration. I ſhall therefore only confider what Mztthy 
faith, and what the other Evangelifts ſpeak, as to the ſame things 
which he mentioneth, leaving out what the orher Evaneelifts 
have (not art all mentioned by him) to be Diſcourſed in their Prc. 
per Place, We heard before that Mary Magdalene, and the «. 
ther Mary, had prepared Spices and Ointment to Anoint the Body 
of Chriſt, but the Sabbath-day being ar Band, they would nc; 
by that unneceſſary Attion pr::tane the Sabbath, as Lyke tells y; 
Ch. 23. 36. They reed on the Sabbath, accyding to the C:ommng. 
ment, The Sabbath ended with them at the Setting of +» 5. 
They did not go as ſoon as the Sabbath was ended, but aiter it 
was ended, as it began ro dawn towards the Firſt Day of the Week, 
The Firſt Day of the Week began with them as ſoon as the $7. 
bath was ended, fo as the Firſt Day of the Week, was a third 
part ſpent, therefore Mark reports the time, Mark 16. 1, 2, 4: 
when the Sabbath was ſpent, and ſays that Mary Magdalene, ind Ng 
ry the Mother of Fares, and Salome had bought ſweet Spices, that 
they might come, and Anoint him, And very early in the Morning, th: 
fir Day of the Week, they came unto the Sepulchre at the riſing f the 
Sun. Luke, Ch. 24. 1. faith, that upon the Firſt Day of the feel, 
very early in the Morning, they came unto the Sepulchre, bringing the 
Spices which they had prepared, and certain others with them. Jin 
faith, Ch. 20. 1. The firſt Day of the Week, cometh Mary Magdalene 
early, while it was yet dark, unto the Sepulchre. As to the tine, 
Three Evangeliſts ſay it was upon the firſt Day of the Week, ear}; jn 
the Morning, about Sun-Riſing (ſaith Mark) while it was yet db 
(faich Jon) theſe now interpret Matthew's 8.3 onCfdmyy, which 
doch not ſignifie, In the Evening of the Sabbath, but in the Een. 
ing of the Sabbaths, the end of the Week. The Jews in Honour 
ro the Sabbath, called all the Days of the Week Sabbaths. The 
firſt of the Sabbath, the ſecond of the Sabbath, g&yc. So as i 
ouCfiamoy is well Tranſlated by our Tranſlators, In the end of the 
Sabbaths. The Evening or Night following the Sabbzths, fol- 
lowing the Seventh Day, which was the Sabbath. Nor is 74 
ro be taken here ſtriftly for that time of the Night, which 
we call the Evening, but for the whole Night, which muſt be 
reckoned to continue until the Sun-Rifing of the Fir/i-Day if the 
Week, and fo Matthew expcunds himlſelt, adding, as it begin t! 
dawn towards the firſt Day of the Week, that is, the firſt Artificial 
Day(as the Day is accounted from the Sun-Riſing, to Sun-Setring,) 
otherwiſe it was upon the Firſt Natural Day of the Week, which 
began from the Sun-Setting before. Matthew mentions the com- 
ing of Mary Magdalene, and the other Mary, who, Mark ſaith, 
was the Mother of Zames and Salome, to the Sepulchre, 7iin 
mentioneth only Mary Magdalene, but itis not probable ſhe wen: 
alone ; and two other Evangeliſts ſay alfo the oher Mary. Like? 
faith, there was certain others with them.. There might be divers 
with thera, though one only be named by 7ohn, two by Matthes 
and Mark, as being the principal Perſons in the Company, Aud 
chough Matthew only mentioneth their going ro ſee the Sepulciye, 
yet Mark telleth us, that they wenr alſo to ansint his Body : And 
Luke faith, they carried the Spices prepared for that end. Thi 
Faich, as it ſeemech, was yer but weak, as to our Saviour's Re- 
ſurceton. 


came -and rolled back the tone from the door, and 
ſate upon It. : 
3 His countenance was like lightning, and his 14! 
ment white as ſnow. - 
4 And for fear of him the keepers did ſhake, and 
became as dead men. 


Matthew alone telleth us this ; all the other Evarigeliſts 2gree: 
thar when the VVomen came, they found the Stone rolled away; 
which caſed che Women of the Sollicitude they had as they came, 
ſlaying amonegſt chemſelves, ho ſhall roll us away the Stone from 
the Dor of the Sepulchre ? Matthew faich, an Angel deſcended, and 
rolled away the Stine, and came and ſate upon it. This Angel had 
aſſumed a Shape ; for he appeared ro thoſe thar ſaw kim, as 70 
his Countenaznce, like Lightening , as to his Garment, as one cloathed 
in exceeding white Linzen, white as Snow, Whar doth che Watct 
all this while ? Matthew faich, they were afraid, ſpo9% and be- 
came like dead Men. Luke and John make mention of 9 Angels: 


nor indeed needed there any Angel ar all to remove the Scone, jp 
this had been all he had come down for ; He chav was your 
hs : 


Marin: 


\ is hq 
TT the Cl 
J **6 Jl 


had upon the Earth tor Forty Days, Acts 1. 3. until the time of '* "* 


2 And behold, there |j was a great earthquake; for |q, 
the angel of the Lord deſcended from heaven, and j- 


Il hap 


{ Ps \ 
72000: 2 
aller. 1 


«1, 


ja}! "ol 
v2 )10h 


W.1C 
Ling | 
C23 [6 
th: a 
Yu, 1 
livere 
D:y | 
Fd he k) 
rot; 
ef Jai 
things 
and t} 
chap, 
th: D 
anay t 
tad hi 
Ciſtind 
came 
Ck? ,; 
la a /; 
trally 
the Ea 
thicy 10 
livin? ; 
them © 
Cirift? 
tas Dit 
them ti 
lid un 
Parced 
great j; 
unielie 
OBSY176 
ard WW 
Fer at 
a. 7} 
&jjen, 
2ur duc 
you!s, a 
te Dif, 


belleys r 
Divinz Ri 
bur thiak 
Bur God 


Paint, 
9 Ar 
Teſirs mt 
and hel 


IO T 


I hap. XX VII [. 


» MS 


Jp RY, Yo: 9 yg BD Gs 


» 
a 


the Spirit, could by the {ame Power have rolled away the 
> Bur as it was fir, thar the Angels who had been Witneſſes 
ſhould alſo be Witnefles of his RefurreQtion ; thar 
tc who was juStified in the Spirit, ſhould be je-n of Anget;, 1 Tit. 3. 
15, {o it WAS NECCHATY: tharthe keepers might give a juſt Account 
m9 Pilate, te Cicf P! tejts and Scribes, And no wonder that they 
were airaid, and as dead Men , when as all dyporitions of this 
z4C 6 a , G 

" naturaliy 4 ; ; Cll 
cs upuln chem, and mizhr juſtly tear whar their Maſters ſhould 
Ji\ts » y 


{vr them, when they found the Body was mitfing ; eſpecially 
op  {ecin.7, or being ſenſible ot the Eurihquiche, or great Concul- 
fog ot che Air. (For though we tranſlare ic Earthquake, yer the 
Greek faich no more than oer91425 pay as.) Befides, rhar the 
vreſence of the Angels feemed reatonabie to prevent a Chear, by 
os tome other Dead Eody into the Sepulchre, and to direct 
"> Women who were now coming toward the Sepulchre, for 
nov Were nor yer come : when they were come, they found rhe 
<tone rolled away : And Matthew's Relation how the Stone came 
:noved; was doubrlets nor from rhem, but from the Keepers, or 
thme £o whom they had relared 1c. 

- And the angel an{wered and ſaid unto the wo- 
mcn, Fear not ye: tor I know that ye ſeek Jeſus, 
which was Cruvciiied, 

\.. 6 He isnot here: for heisriſen, * as he ſaid: 
7 come ke the place where the Lord lay. 

- And go quickly and tell his diſciples that he 1s 
ritcn {rem the dead; and behold. he goeth before you 
:oGalilee there ſhall ye ſee him; lo, have rold you. 

$ And they departed quickly trom the ſepulchre, 
with tear and great joy, and did run to bring his 
diſciples word. 


by 
Sronces 
o; his Paſſion, 


1k, chap. 15. $,5, 7. And entring into the Sepulchre, they 
[op 4 young Mm ſirting on the right-ſide, cloathed in a long white gar - 
"ment, ana they were affrighted, And he ſaith to them, be not af- 
frighted; you ſeek, Jeirs of Nazareth, which was Crucified : be Pr 
ii en, he 3s not here : behold the place where they laid him. But go 
viur 32.19, and tell his Diſciples, and Peter, that he goeth bef:re you 
jt) Galilee; there ſhall ye jee him, as he ſaid unto you. And 
they went out quickly, and fled from the S:pulchre, for they trembled, 
wid were amazed, neither ſaid they any thing unto any Man, fr they 
were gfraid, Luke faith, chap. 24. 3, 44 And they entred in, and 
fund not the Body of the Lord Feſus. And it came to paſs, as they 
wii much perbleaed thereabout, behold, two Men food by them in ſhi- 
ring Garments, And as they were afraid, and bowed down their Fa - 
2, 12 the Exrth, they ſaid unto them, Why ſeek ye the living among 
th: dead 2 he is not here, he is riſen. Remember how he ſpake ppto 
yu, while he was yet in Galilee, ſaying, The Son of Man muſt be de- 
livred int» the Hards of ſinful Men, and be crucified, and the Third 
Dy riſe again. And they remembred his Wards , atd returned from 
the Sepulchre, and told all theſe things unto the Eleven, and all the 
1:8; it was Mary Magdalene, and Joanna, and Mary the Mother 
> James, and other Women which were with them, which told theſe 
things to the Aps$les, and their Words ſeemed to them as Idle Tales, 
and they believed them not, Fohn faith, of Mary Magdalene only, 
hap, z0. 2, Then ſhe runneth, and cometh to Simon Peter, and the 0- 
thzr Dijciple whom Jeſus loved, and ſaid unto them, They have taken 
away the Lord out y + Sepulchre, and we know not where they have 
laid him. Matthew, in this Relarion, omitreth many chings more 
diſtinly related by che other Evangelifs. When the Women 
came to the Sepulchre, they firſt entred in, ſo fairh Mark and 
Lik: ; ir was within that they ſaw the Angel, habited as 1t were 
in a ng White ſhining Garment ; they were affrighted, (as we na- 
turally are upon Apparitions,) they bowed down their Faces to 
the Earth, The Angel bids them nor ro fear, he knew that 
ticy tought Feſus of Nazareth, who was crucified ; Why ſeek ye the 
living among ſt the dead * He is not here ; he #s riſen. Shewerh to 
tem the Place where his Body was laid; minderh them oft 
C:rift's Words cothem in Galilee, chap. 17. 23. bids chem $O rell 
lis Difciples, (ark add: ; and Peter, ) thar he was going before 
theminco Galilee, and thac there they ſhould ſee him, as he had 
lad unto them, Mat. 26. 32. Mark 14. 28. They quickly de- 
parced from che Sepulchre (as Matthew faith ) with fear and 
great yy, Mark faith, trembling and amazed, 7ohn doth nor ſay, 
ancelieving, but he ſaith ic in effe& ; for he ſaith, thar rhey ſaid 
© Sin Peter , They have taken away the Lord out of the Sepulchre, 
art w2 bnow not where they have l1d him. The cauſe ot cheir 
*car and Amazmenr, was doubtleſs the Apparition of the An- 
hl The Cauſe of their tudden Joy, was the News char he was 
vn, rold them by rhe Angel. Ir appeareth that their Joy was 
*ut Hadden Haſh of Paſſion, nor riſing trom the certainty of their 
>3U's, a5 to the Truth of whar they heard, becauſe they faid ro 
ine Diſciples, rhar they did not believe ir, bur upon ſecond 
"12s, concluded that ſome Body had removed our Saviour's 
6:4y; neither did che Apoſtles themſelves believe 1r, as appear- 
cm by Lube, he faich, rhey looked upon 1t as an Idle Tale. John 
ih exprefly, chap. 20. 9. As yet they knew not the Scripture, that 
"2 8/2 riſe again from the dead. They knew it notionally; bur 
R <VG!0 norgive a firm and a fixed Afent to it, they did nor be- 
"© Ht Ic was nor, ic ſeemerh, in the Power of their Wills to 
"ISVE DS Article of Chriſt's ReſurreRtion ; for as they had a 
Divine Revelation of rhe rhing trom Chriſt himſelf, ſo we cannor 
wit ak they had Mind and Good-will enough to believe ir. 


ur God had not given them the Power of Faith as to this 
vill, 


9 And as they went to tell his diſciples, behold, 
ſeſismer them, ſaying, All hail. And they came, 


ws. A 2 , 4 
. 2 held him by the feet, and worſhipped him. 
10 Then ſaid Jeſus unto them, Be not afraid * go 


S. MATTHEW 


fright us; and tey had ſuch a Conſcience of 


i Lord, and that he had ſpoken theſe things unto her. 


{hall they ſee me. 


_ Yatthew repearerh this very ſhortly. 27:k fairh, chap. 18.5. 
Aow ren fejus was riſenearly, the firft day of the Web, be optear- 
ea firit 20 Mary Magdalene, out of whom he hd c:5 jJeten Deuts. 
And ſhe went and told them that fhe had been with vim. as they 
mourned and wept. Ard they, when they had heard that FRgage: PR 
live, «nd had been ſeen of her, believed nt. Lube faith, Then 
(that 1s, when Maiy Magdalenc and the other 2';ry had come 2rd 

*,* » . / - 
rold che Diſciples what they had ſeen and heare, though ar firft 
they gave NO credit to 1t) aroſe Perer and ran unto the Sepidckre, 
and St»ping aown, he beheld the linnen cloths laid by themſelves, and 
aeparted, wonaring in himſelf «t that which was come to paſs, Lite 
24. 12. ohn relacerh this more diſtin&ly, in c>.2p, 20, 3, 4 5.Xc. 
Pcrer therefore went forth, and the other Diſciple Chem Toins ton ot 
as ver. 2. and that was Jen hinifelf, who wrote thar Goſpe!, 
Fotn 13. 23.) and came to the Sepulchre, ſo they ran toth togothor. 
and the other Diſciple did out-run Peter, and came fir{t to the Seput- 
chre, and he ſto:ping down, and looking in, ſaw the lirven clot; lyins. 
yet he went nt in. Then cometh Simon» Perer fulowing him, and 
went into the Sepulchre, ard ſeeth the linnen cloths lic, and the N.:p- 
kin that was about his Heas,, not lying with the linen clothy, but 
wrapt together in a place *y it ſelf. Then went in alf) that other Dife:- 
ple which came firſt to the Sepulchre, and he {ow and telieved. Fi .15 
yet they brew mot the Scripture, thai he muff 1./e again 1 11: the Ven, 
Then the Diſciples went away again unto thcir on hn. Stu Mary 
fiood nihout at the Sepulctre weeping ; and as ſhe neft, ſhe flooped 
down, and looted into the Sepulchre, and ſeeth two Angels in white, rhe 
one at the He-d, he viner at the Feet, where the body of Jeius had 
lain, and they [cy unto her, Woman, Why weepeſt thu 2 She | aith una 
to them, Becauje they h.ve taken awey my Lord, and Throw not where 
they have lid him.— 4nd when ſhe had ſaid thus, flo turned hoy 
jeif back, and ſaw 7eſis landing, and brew not thot it was Zeſus- 
Fejis fairh unto her, Wom.cn, Why weepeſt thou 2 Whom ſeekeft thou 2 
She juppoſing him 19 be the Gardener, ſaith unto him, Sir, if thon ha{t 
bone him hence, tell me where thou haſt laid him, and Iwill tahe him 
away. feſin ſairh ynto her, Mary. She turneth, ard ſaith unto him, 
Rabbi wnich us to ſay, Maſter, Feſis ſaith unto her,Touch me not, for I am 
not yet aſcended to myFather;, tut go to my Brethren,and {y unto them, 7 
aſcend unto your Father and my K:ther, and to my God ard your God. 
Marv Mazdalene came and t:!d the Diſciples, that ſhe had ſeen th: 
What there 1s 
particularly to be nored upon the ſeveral Particulars in 7obn's Re- 
lation, I ſhall obſerve when I come to thar Chapter of Febn - 
I have only ar preſent rranſeribed it, thar ſrem the comparinz 1c 
wich the other Evangelifts, we might underſtand the Order cf 
this Hiſtory, [ And as they went to tell his Diſciples. } Thus fecm- 
eth to be the ſecond going, and the Order ©o be” rhus : When 
Mary and the reſt came to the Diſciples, and rojd them they had 
been ar the Sepulchre, and what they had there ſeen and heard, 
they believed ir not : bur yer it being cloſe by che Ciry, and nct 
knowing what to think, Peter r ſolves to go and ſee, and fo dorh 
John ;, they both run, bur 7-bn com: there firſt, bur goes nor in- 
to the Sepulchre, bur only looks in, and ſaw the Linren Cloths ly- 
ing. Peter comes (tr it was very near the Gares of the City,) 
he goerh in, ſeerh the Linnen Clochs, and che Napkin: Then 
Fohn allo advencureth to go in, and ſaw, and believed: He is the 
firſt 15 ſaid ro have believed. Then they wenr home. Bur Mary 
ſtaid, weeping, and now and chen looking into the Sepu'chre 
ſhe ſeerh nor the Cloths only, bur ewo Anzels fitting, the cne ar 
che Head, the cther at the Feet ot the place where the Bcdy of 
Chriſt did lie. They ask her why ſhe wept? She tells them, 
becauſe rhey had taken away her Lord, and ſhe did nor know 
where they had laid him. Now faith 7obn, when ſhe had ſaid 
thus, $50521 6is 7% em7w, We tranſlate it, ſhe turned her ſelf 
back, and ſaw Feſus ſtanding , John 20. 14. which ſeemerh ro 
contradid our Evangeliſt Matthew, who faith, 4s they wert to tei? 
hs Diſciples , | behold, Feſus met them, and ſaid, 4 Hil.) Our 
Tranflaricn now would make one think that {ary was ftill ar the 
Sepulchre, and there looking back, the ſaw Jeſus; and this feem- 
crh cither to aſſert chat Mary faw Chriſt ewice, once ar the Sepul- 
chre, once in her return to the City ; or elſe ro contradit A::- 
thew : Bur the Greek Words may be tranſlated, She was turret 
backward, chat was going back to rel] his Diſciples, and mec Chriſt, 
who ſaluted her, ſaying, 4H Hail. Though Mary Magdalene be 
only named, and pcifibly all the Women who were with her ar 
firſt, did nor come back with her the ſecond time; yer it is plain, 
ſhe was not alone : For Matthew ſaith, They came and held him by 
the Feet, and worſhipped him : He bids her be not afraid, but go and 
tell his Diſciples , they ſhould meet him in Galilee, For the other 
Difcourſe berwixt him and ary, we ſhall meer wich 1t when we 
come to that Chapter, in Sr. John's Goſpel, where ic 15 mention- 
ed. Mark fairh, That when they had heard he was alice, and had 
been ſeen of her, they believed not. We do not read, that the An- 
gels appeared either to Peter or John, much leſs char Chrilt as ycr 
ſhewed himſelf ro them: So they had only the Teſtimony of 
Mazy as to theſe things, and their own View of the Empty Sepu!a 
chre, and the Cloths lying by. How hard a ching 1t is to believe 
Spiritual Myſteries above the reach of our Rezſon £ 1o hard, that 
no Revelation of Fleſh and Blood 1s ſufficient ro beger fuch a 


Faich. 


11 Now when they were. going , behold. 
ſome of the watch came into the city, and 
{hewed unto the chief priefts all the things that 
were done. 

12 And when they were aſſembled with the elders, 
and had taken counſel, they gave large money to 
the ſoldiers. 

12 Saying, Say ye, Hisdiſciples came by night, 
and ſtole him away while we flepr: 


15.5, 


1 4. A na 


4c 


Chap. RAVI, 


| tell my brethren that they go into Galilee, and there 


Fu 
136 * 
363; ! 
{ 
$4] 
4 FY, 
1 ki 
vx, 7&1 
6." 17” 
14 
41 16 
d 
s 
LW.-#7 
' 
. 
«1 
5 


gs en wes os ts I ce eee aa ery - 
O__ "; yy” Pr 
be = 


TI 4 
: "3 | 
: by 
: 
: ['Y. 
ti. 33% C. ; 
: 
LU 
v 


———— 


'F 
4 : 


_— ” 
» ” b 4 o 
Lan ” « 4 he. Z - 
a > 3265. 5005, neo; 
rods ops Pom > 
_— Y " £3 L 


AgpB<——22" 
ES 2, 


In, 


- 


HAS ” 
FS., 


» 0 ———_Os 
__ _ 


a 


1+ And if this come to the governors ears, We will 
porſine him, and JECure you. 
1 $9 they took the money, and did as they were 


d) 


Py 


taught: and this ſaying is commonly reported a- 
morglt th2 Jews until this day. 


No other Evanceliſt hath this Paſſage, which was neceſſary to 
. - 1 
il 


} f 

t> palk rhar 3/4tthew ſhould knory of the Earthquake, or C oncuffion 
CG 12 

(.cr all cis was done, and Chriſt riſen, be:ore the Women came, ) 
I: C:ne cut by the Witch; or by Pilate, ro whom the Watch IC- 
lated it; or elſe by ſome of the Pris and Elders, who did nor 
keep Countel fo well as others. 2. To ſhew the horrible Wick- 
edneFs of theſe Priefts and Elders, that would thus cover the Blood 
ticy had fpirvith a Lie, and Subornation : Thus one Sin re- 
cuircs more to defend ir. 2. Toler us ſee how {imple People 
vill ſhew themſelves in their Malice, Whar a Story here was? 
I; they were aſleep, how could rhey know that Chriſt's Diiciples 
came by Night and ſtole him away ? Would no Noife of rolling 
away the Stone awake them? Maitce will not allow Men Delibe- 
ration enouzh to ſhew themſelves Wiſe. God infaruaced theſe + 
Men, that ſucceeding Ages might know they were fuborncd. 
Here we have alſo the ground ot that Fable with which the Jews 
pretently filled all the World. 


15 Then the eleven diſciples went away into Ga- 
* Ch. 25. lilee, inro 2 mountain * where Jeſus had appointed | 
4 them. 
17 And when they ſaw him, they worthipped 
him : bur ſome doubted. 


The other Evangelifts mention ſeveral other Appearances of 
Chriit, which we thall confider when we come to them. This 
was in Galilee, upon Chriſt's Appointment, either betore or af- 
cer his Reſurrection, we cannot certainly ſay when or how. Some 
think (upon what Grounds I know nor, but becauſe the Evange- 
lifts mentions no more) that this was the tamous Appearance 
mentioned by the Apoſtles, when he was ſeen of more than frve 
hn.d-24 Brechien at once, 1 Cor. 15. 6. The Text ſpeaks bur of e- 
[even tar went into Galilee ; it is pofſible more might meer him 
there, bur we have no guidance of Scripture to conclude it. 
[ S517e worſhipped him, ſome doubted. ) Thomas we know did ſo, fo 
mizkr orhers: Bur ſome think rhar it had been beter tranſlated, 
S070 bad doubted : underſtand no ſufficient Reaſon for it; for 
it is not certain that this was after his other Appearances Mmenti- 
oned by the other Evangelifts, 


13 And Jeſus came, and ſpake unto them, ſaying, 
*C1.11.27. * All power is given untome in heaven and in earth. 
Luk.1c.22. 19 Goye therefore and teach all nations, bapti- 
yo £5” zing them in the name of the Father, and of the 
& 15.2. Son, and of the Holy Ghoſt : 
Heb. 1.2. 209 Teaching them to obſerve all things whatſo- 


. = 
—_ : 
w—_— —_— \- vo -_ 
ar - 
- + wal I - 
_— __ _ ww 
- = = > 


OE CEE 
=o s 
CEE CENENES ——— 


Chir, RXVII EMATTHRHEMR 


———— 


, to go up and down the World, Preaching the Goſpe 


are a grear part of any Nation, if not the greateſt part ; a; 4 

rc hough amongit ine Jews, thoſe rhat were converted to Fong al. 
iſh Religion, were itrit inſtrutted in the Law of God WR 
were Circumcifed yet the Ezthers being once admirreg te 
dren were Circumciled at Eight Days old ; nor were the; 
any Covenanc different trom us, though we be under a more 1 

Manifeſtarion of the fame Covenant of Grace, of whic}: OT 
cifion was a Sign and Seal to them, as Baptiſm is ro us, "Eg 
are capable of the Obligation of Baptiſm ; for the Obligation ons 
from che Equity of the Thing, nor from the Underſtandin; . 
Capacity of the Perſon. hs are alto capable of the ſam ey 
leges 3 for of ſuch is the Kingdom of God, as our Saviour hat}; = 


; BL . taughe 
us. [4'l Nations, ] The Apoſtles were by this Precepr obliged 


! 
preſently. So it 1s plain, that the Apoſtles bn. Ivy ir 
Commitſion from Ag. 1, 8. & 3. 26. & 13. 45. & 18 pi 
G:l. 2.7. They were firſt to Preach, and to Baptize amonoſt the 
Jews, and then thus to Diſciple all Nations. Puftors and 7. —_ 
who ſucceeded the Apoſtles, were not under this Obligation 
but were to be fixed in Churches gathered, as we learn hom ah 
&s of the ApoStles, and the Epiſtles of the Apoftles. They * 
this Commithon, have Authority in any place to Preach, arg K 
Baptize, bur are not under an Obligarion co fix any where, hyt+ 
g0 up and down Preaching 1n all Nations, | Baptiging them in th 
Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghot,) Bn. 
tizing chem, is no more than waſhing them with Water. We _—_ 
of the Bapti/m of Pots and Cups, Mark 7. 8. ( we tranſle = 
W.jhing) which we know may be, by dipping chem in Water, 
by pouring or ſprinkling of Water upon them. Ir is true the 
firſt Baptiſms of which we read in Holy Wrir, were hy Dippin:; 
of the Perſons Baprized. Ir was in an Hor Country, «here | 
might be at any time, withour the danger of Perſons Live. 
where, it may be, we judge it reaſonable, and moſt refeml)jns 
our Burial with Chriſt by Baptiſm into Death; but we cannct hink 
1t neceſſary, for God loveth Mercy rather than Sacrifice, andthe 
Thing ſignified by Baptiſm, viz. The waſhing away of the $:ul's Sin; 
with the Blood of Chri$, is in Scripture exprefled ro us by Pouring 
and Sprinkling , Ezek. 36. 25. Heb. 12. 24. 1Pet. 1, 2, [ In the 
Name of the Father, &c.] In the Greek it 15 63s T3 ovoue, int ths 
Name. In the Name, doth not only import the naming of te 
Names of the Father, Son, and Holy Gho$, upon them; bur, 1; 
Authority, or (which is indeed the chict) intro the Profeffion cf 
che Trinity of the Perſons in the one Divine Being z dedicating the 
Perſons Baprized to God the Father, S-m, and Holy Gho8, and there- 
by obliging them to worſhip and ſerve God the Father, Sim, and 
Holy Ghoſt ;, tor in Baptiſm there is both a ſolemn Dedication of the 
Perſon to God, and a ſolemn Stipulation. The Perſon Baptized, 
either covenanting for himſelf, that he will be the Lord's, or his 
Parents Covenanring for him,that he ſhall be theLord's, which Co- 
venant doth both oblige the Parents ro do what in them licth in 
order to that End, and alſo the Child ; the Parents Covenaning 
for no more than the Child was under a Natural and Relizious 
Obligation to perform,if ſuch Covenant had never been nate by 
1ts Parents on 1ts behalf, | Teaching them to obſerve all things wit- 
ſoever T have commanded you.) There is a Teaching muſt go betcre 
Baptiſm of Perſons grown up 3 and this was the conſtant Fraffice 


they 
1c Clif. 
cy under 


X 2.% ever have commanded you : and lo, I am with you 
alwiy. even to the end of the world. Amen. 


Mark faith, chap. 16.15. And he ſaid unto them, Gs ye into all 
thellorid, and preach the Goſpel to every Creature, He that believeth, 
and is baptized, ſhall be ſaved; but he that believeth not, ſhall be dam- 
ned, And theſe figns (hall follow them that believe ; In my Name 
they ſpall caſt out Devils, they ſhall ſpeak with new Tongues, they ſhall 
the up Serpents; and if they drink any deadly thing, it ſhall not burt 
then; they ſhall lay hands on the Sick, and they ſhall recover, Our 
Blefſed Lord, in theſe three laſt Verſes, 1. Aſſerteth his Power and 
Authority. 2. He delegates a Power. 3. He ſubjoineth a Promiſe, 
The Power and Authority which he atlerteth to Himſelf, is, 411 
Power bt in Heaven and Earth, A&s 10. 36, 42. Eph. 1. 20, 21, 


Teaching and Governing hs Church ;, a Power to give Eternal Life to 
whomloever he ple.:/2d, This was inherent in him, as God Blef- 
fed tor ever; given to him, as our Mediator and Redeemer; gi- 
ven him when he came into the World ; but more eſpecially 
confirmed to him, and manifeſted to be given him at his Reſur- 
redtion and Aſcenſion, Phil. 2. 9, 10. Having declared his Power, 
he delegates it: | Go ye therefore and teach all Nations a The Greek 
is, veFrrvoa7t make Diſciples all Nations; bur that muſt be 
firſt by Preaching, and inſtrufting them in the Principles of the 
Ciriſtian Faich. And ark expounds it, telling us our Saviour 
faid, Go ge into allthe World, and preach the Goſpel to every Creature, 
that is, to every rexſoable Creature capable of hearing and receiy- 
ing ir. I cannot be of their mind, who think thar Perſons may 
be Baptized before they be Tavght; we wanct Preſidents of any ſuch 
Baptiſm in Scripture, though indeed we find Preſidents of Perſons 
Baptized, who had bur a ſmall degree of the Knowledge of the 
Golpcl, bur ir ſhould ſeem thar they were all firſt raughr, that 
Feng Coridt was the Son of God, and were not Baptized, ill they 
protefied ſuch Belict, As 8. 37. And 7ohn Baptized them in 
fordan, confeiſing their Sins, Mat. 3. 6. But it doth not therefore 
{ollow, mac Children of fuch Profefiorsare not co be Baptized, for 


2. Power of Remiſſim of Sins, Luke 24. 47. of Congregating, | 


te Apotics were commanded to Baptize all Nations. Children 


of the Apoſtles. Ir is fir Men ſhould a& as Rarional Creature, 
underſtanding what they do. And there is a Teaching which muſt 
follow Baptiſm ; for Baptiſm without Obedience, and 1 livin; up 
to that Covenant in which we are engaged, will ſave n25$ +], bur 
lay it under a greater Condemnation. The Apoſtles might Teach 
nothing but what Chriſt had Commanded them ; and they were 
bound ro Teach whatſoever Chriſt had Commanded rhem. Here 
now 1s the Rule of the Baptized Perſon's Obedience, We are bound 
to no Obedience, but of the Commands of Chri$, and to : j' 21 
Obedience of them , under the Penalty of Eternal Condenn.@.” 
When Mark ſaith, He that Believeth, and 4s Baptized, {4 (+ \-- 
ved ; it doth not imply that Baptiſm 1 abſolutely neceilury i 31. 
vation, or inthe ſame order with Faith in Chri/t ; bur chat the Ct 
tempt of it 1s Damnable, as being a piece of Preſumprivay; 112i 
ence 3 and ſuch a Faith is to be underſtood here, under > Not 
on of Believing as worketh by Love. [ And Io, I am with yi! a: 
way, even to the end of the World, 1 am, and I will be with y6#,and 
thoſe who ſucceed you in the Work of the Migiſtry, beinz called 
of me thereunto : I will be with you, prote&ing you, and upho! 
ding that Ordinance, and bleſſing you, and all others of mv Fatt 
ful Miniſters that labour for making Me and my Goipel know! 
with ſucceſs to the End of the World ; nor of this Age ovly. Vt 
the World : My Miniſtry begun it you, ſhal! nor fail ; nor ſha//'4 
adding cf Souls ro the number of them who ſhall be ſaved (454 
Token of my gracious Preſence with you ) fail, till the Worid 
ſhall be derermined, and che New Hevens 29nd the Nov E479 
ſhall appear. What Mark addeth c5.. --0*ng the Signs 70 
ſhould follow thoſe that believed, had a parcicuiar reference 59 5: 
Times immediately following Chriſt's 4erfron into 7:77, ard 
to be underſtood of rhoſe Xfiraculous Operations winch were 120k 
wrought by the 4poles, and others, for a furtj:0; uu inatol 
the Dofrine of the Goſpel by them Preached. Matthew 1435 05 
thing of them here. There is no promiſe of Chriſt's Preenc 
with his Miniſters, to enable to ſuch Operations to the £7 0 7 
World ; bur with his Miniſters, Preaching, Baptizirg, and 72" - 
Men to obſerve and to do whatſoever he hath commanded then, Ic tl 
promiſed 70 be, till Time ſhall be no more. 


St, MARK. 


Chap. XXV [ 


haps 


yy 


2 —= YT 


Y 


Th: 
Ange 
dings 
Meſſas 
Hi 1; 
Chriſt 
Life, 
eppoſat: 
that ] 

from 4 
latte 
highe! 
as to 
of Chyi 
Ing of 
Was m 
by Jacy 
firſt in 
Publich 
Law at 


It had 2 
had the 
+ 1, vx 
Mal, 4. 
Plies to 
Luk, i. 
him by þ 
fer, and 
Called th 
Birth, L 
thew call: 
that he vx 
and d;rjx 
the Mogi, 


The ARGUMENT. 
Haut the Author of this Compendious Hiſtory of the Goſpel, was none of the rweivue BEE. 5: evutent foe; 
1/9 Till read over their Names, Matth. 10, and Mar. 3- That he WA4s 0Ne of the Sevent; . whom Cirilt f: ot 
out afterwards, ts ſaid by ſome, bt upon what Evidence I canner tell. That he was a Di/t:n!; of Cori 
;5 oat of queſtion. T here was one John, ſurnamed Mark, AQts 12. 12. Some wmnk he was ET, ys _—_ 6- 
thys Gojpel, but others doubt it, the Antients always callirg him Mark. We read of a Mark, Siffer”s 39:19 Bari! t 
Col. 4. 10. and we read of Mark imployed in the Miniſtry, 2 Tim. 4. 11. Peter calls one of this Name tis Sor 
i Pet. 5. 13 Paul calls one of this Name his fellow Labourer, Philem. v.24, He who was ſurname Matk Cad; 1 
lobn 45 bis Prenomen) went along with Barnabas to Cyprus, «pon the diſſe:; fſioa betwixt Paul and bim, A6ts 16.2 
How many diſtintt Perſons are mentioned in Scripture of this Name, and whuh of them was the Evangelift, we # 2. 
rot light enough in Scripture to know by (which yet we ſhould not have waned, had it been material for ts 10: bo0 
and Writers give an uncertain Sound concerning this Evangeliſt. Some would have lim to be one, {9n.e another. 276 
.ave thoug ht thts Goſpel was dictated by Peter to Mark. We gre alſo told, that he wrote this Hijto; y at Rome, t#4: 
Preached the Coſpel inEgypt, and was the firſt Biſhop of Alexandria,where be was buried, dy:ns i the Eighth year 
of Nero. Theſe are the things which Men may believe,or forbear to believe, as they ſeeRe fſon,coming *9 45 only up 
the Credit of Writers, who are ſaid to have rote, what we havec* their Writings, at leaſ three k:41dred Years ajter 
Mark's time. oft valuable Imerpreters agree him to have wrote in Greek,tho' a Native jewgand weil underlt andins 


= 


that Langgage. Hierom tells us, that he wrote-it at Romie upon Peter's aiftating, at the deſire of ſome Chriſtians ; 
but theſe are great uncertainties, and we want Evideiice from Scripture, that Peter ever came at Rome, tho we 
brow that Paul was carried thither Priſoner. Hts Hiſtory is much ſhorter than that of any of the other three F v.a.ge- 
lifts; yet in ſome particular parts he added very much to Matthew's Kelutions. He ſeeraeth much to have comp.s ed 
Notes with Matthew, and hath very few things which Metthew hath not, (tho? be owmitterh many things which he 
hath ) which hath much ſportned our Annotations «por this Goſpe), Mitthew berins bus Hiſtory with the Geneatony 
and Birth of our Saviour. Like begins bis with ſome things that preceded the Birth of John the Baptiſt, and of 
our Saviour. Mark beginneth with the Preaching of Jokn the Baptiſt. The Divine Authority of this Book »« - 
ver came in queſtion, nor can come, unleſs Matthew and Luke be queſt ;oned alſo, for be bath very little that is not 1:7 
one of th1ia 5 That ts what we are m'ſt cſpecially to attend unto; for from thence it followeth, that what he wrote, t5 
tbe Object of our Faith, 43d the Rule of our Life, as to things pratlicable by 4s. 


GHAP. [. let us know that he was more then meer Man, And indeed whe, 
but he who was the Son of Gf, cold faly reveal his bather's 
Wilt ; determine th? Law of 3595s, 2nd introduce a new was 
of Wuorlhip, ana | Jonth «- we iery of Salcation, bid from al pro- 
ceding Ages, tlio, not from all indiv; nu! Porn in them : 

'it ariving Chritt into the Wilderncys, is tempred of Satan forty - As It IS WPLCTCN Li Une PYOP! . 7 ESCHAE 
&iys , in the end miniſtred wnts by Angels, 12, 13. Fobn being | My Meſſenger betore thy tace, which 514)l prep 
mp! ET, PFe'us preacheth the Kingdm of Heaven : Calleth Si- way before thee. 
p ev®,} . - 


mton ant dnorew, woo were þ HOIFS WUD Fames and Jobn, [ 4— 200 2 bd The voice of __ Cryin - 1:5 $%{45 Wi ornne . Bro 
4 ; & 4 ! «3 wy Lab walk v LW 1 4,9 G] 3 
e J n £ F l Wo 5 3. Jr [ 

pare ye the way of the Lord; 


r 


Tre Office and Rbtilim of Fohn, 1—$. He ſhewerh the Diznity and 
Power lo Chrilt, and the Spirituality of his Bptijm, x—8. Feſus 
coming fiant Galilee, is baptized of him in Jordan. The Spirit de- 
ſcendeth 3g mm: Toe Fitier's tetimony of himgg—11. The Spi- 

Ji" 


4 

_- 

wa 

. N 
=> 


fi? preachetn at Capernaum ; and caiteth an wiclean Spir't out of 
Þ) 


a Mawr: the People ama. at ts Itrine, 21—28;, Cureth Pe- ; EL : Ge 4 ok SEE 
ters Mother-in-law of a Feaver;, and healeth many Diſeaſ>s, | The Prophets, Matty 21 { Lute, Cianen the unigolts } tx : 
29-=34. He departeth mio aj'{itaiy place z all Men ſeeb for him : P tefied of this begining bi GIG <3 OI DCs Metiitchy LOI PICHEY 
Preacneth throughnit all Galilo 25--20. Tleanſets a Leper : p_—_ before tl. Gre it betng ſrouid COme UND £2, P, 42; 122TGINACT 
chargeth him ta conceal tit 5 bit he publiſhech and blazeth the {nould come bctore ME TO pc TEE ACSC, = 
mattcy, 4O——4 Fe '_ 1. expounds UOUN LUEIT A FH Yor TP 10-79 31.17, & E. 251! 
, 74 ſhall &f vef We DIR 11 $9 371 it Ant MP w f a 1 ts, 57 Farn | 
inni - vets of tre Fathers to the Citldren. ani tie Kite dion tn toe WA 
1." FHE beginning of the goſpel of Jeſus Chriſt;the| ,,,, of the juft'x 14 make ve«dy a vearnand for the Lids Jibn 


hangs ! . , by li1s Preaching, tirucd the Eirs of, the People to hv Sound of 
The Tojpel ſeerns to have fuken 1ts Name EV&LYAAOY from the | the Grypel, and f prepared them for Thrift. oce the wither 10+ 
Ang:i's Words to the Shepherd's, Lak, 2. 12. 1 111g you 09d Ti-| plization of theſe v ords in the Notes on 3/Uto. 2. 2 4% 18, 19, 
dings of great Joy : (For the Word in the Greek, ſignifies a gd | Tris Name given to John cane Baptiſt, A 329 C1047 145 1s. THE 
Meſſage, or good News, or Tidings : ) It tonctimes ſigt:iTeth the| right Notion »f a Goel Minfor, Here: is but a #102 0 1thg, [pete- 
Histirical Narration of the Coming of Chriſt ; 7obn Baptiſt s, and ing what Gd hath nr't ſuggeſted rob him. Thus, Ev14 a. 15, act 
1 f ' ' 9 "hgh : 
Chriſt Preaching, and what he dd 1n the World; his Birth, | ſth w/v ſes, Tha (halt heal ano thi id put wards into is 
Life, Death, &c. Sometimes the Dat/rine of Salvation by Chriſt, 10 | wouty, and 1 witl be with toy outh, and with his Wutn, 
cppy/ition to that of the Law : Sometimes ihe Di/penſ.atton of it, or ; "I ; GW, 
4+ * John did baprize in the wilderneſs, and preach +:-,-, 


from Ages, openly to the World. It teemeth here to fignifte the | the baprtiſin of repentance || for the remiſſion of lins. Luk. 


: 2 - ONS > SR tu 0 
called the Baptiſm of Repentancs, becaute Repenraneo Was thy fret 


. = . ? "2 07 op Þ 7 Eee IgG Kkeasiheo ff rw... 
thing ke Preached, a Seal of winch #.p7779 was to C5 tht Gat 


. . . > * Fo Yb a la > a. 17 5:9 777 f "4 ir F Fw _— nf 
Kingdom of God is Pregched, and everv Man prefſeth into it, Mat _ on hy _ vom yy _ the EET LIDO 
II. 13. Lyk. 16. 16, So as John's Preaching was the beginning of WAI Ic uſed to prets Reponiz1ce, we on 


made known, yet it then began to be plainly and puvlickly de- 6 And John was cloathed with Camei's hair, an 
Cared to the World : He was the firſt in whom the Gypel-Pro- with a girdle of a skin about his loins, ard bs £id 0: 


hed * I ney. f Ley 
it had 4 more fuil complement in Chriſt, Two Propheſies at leaft Foc" UEY W200 oY Notes EIS. =: 
had their Complement in Fobn, which we find in Malachy, Mat. | 115 Was all eXp1d \ _— There EEE, 21roe 
3- 1. which the Evangeliſt mentioneth in. the next Verſe; and, | 7 And preached,laying, I nerve Comer ane mens 


Mal. 4. 5. concerning Elias firſt to come, which our Saviour ap-|than I * after mezthe latchet of whois [10905 4 at 20% #1 


* to John, Mat. 11. 14. Chap. $. 11. and the Angel before hum, worthy to ſtoop down, and nnzlooſe. 
"& 1. 17. betides Tjztuh's Prophecy, Ja. 40. 3- applyed unto nt tone ot ca ea.botheital 
him by Matthew, chap. 3. 3. and in the third Verſe of this Chap- 8 | indeed nave eas ee; yo ph - mo oo _ 
er, and by John applycd to himſclf, Joh. 1. 23. This Goſpel is | baptize you * with the Holy Ghoi | 


called the Gojpel of Jeſus Chriſt ; becauſe the Hittory of Chriſt's | We had the ſame with very little &ritere 
Birth, Life and Death. is the matter of it. Chriſt was by Mat- 3.11. See the Notes there. : FE” 
thew called the Son of David, the Son of Abraham, to let us know o And It came to pals in thoſe days,that Jeb is as * O& I'Þ: 
that he was truly Man, a Native Jew, and of the Royal Family, from Nazareth of Galilee and was baptized ct John tn 

and d:rived from thoſe two tramilies, to whom the Promites of - : - : 
the M:Jias were made. By + ark he is called the Son of God, to Jordan FM mim] 12 And 


Gol. 2+ 


i y 
22 on } - Py & 24445 &£ 
. = - « 
=> " Fr "2 DC *, > br1 5 . 
2 [N fne a IFAHh $5 J 


| 


P £ 


i 


Frags aid'2; 


Who 4 = 


< : S. 
AP DEG II DUTT 5, 997 


5am. 
Forty ad 


2» 

nap. I 
(1 1152s * 
*Mae -.-4 19 And ſtraightway * coming up out of the water, 
0 7 he aw the keavers | gpeied, and the Spirit like a dove 
& rent. delcending upon 4M 

ir And there came 2 voice from heaven, ſaying, 

* F1.7. 2. 5. * Thouart my beloved Son, In whoml am well plce- 
« 41+ ſed. 14 . | 
17. Chrift. who, Lib 2. $1.went with his Parents to Nazareth, and 
Chap. -- 7- wis fwj.t to then, atrer he hid been diſputing with the Doetors 
kuk. 3- 21, jo the T-mnyle, row GOCE from Nazareth, a City in Galilee, to that 
—_ part Of Gulilee near Fordan or rather to Bethabare,where Fobn was 
Bupirzin;, and was Bp ized ; ſee the Notes on Matth,2.13, 15, 17» 
Fob1.28, where this piece of Hiſtot y 15 more fully rclated. Luke 
addeth,that Chroit was now about thirty years of Age. 

:2 * And inmcciately the ſpiricdriveth him into 
the wilderneſs. | 

13 And he was there in the wilderneſs forty days 
tempted ofSitan, and was with the wild beaſts : and 
the angels miniſtred unto 21m. | 

Both Hutthew aud Labe rclate the Hiftory of our Saviour's 
tempta'i2ns by the Devil more fully, S2e the Notes on Mat.q.t.2. 
Auk fait immediately, but it i5 not to be taken ftridtly, for the 
7 ut afecr 4 day or two, as it ihould ſeem. 


'2 - 
£4 5» -+ 


; : 
od Luk. +} « 


next moment, Þb 

#Mat. ,.12, 14 Now aftcr that * John was put into priſon, Je- 
Luk.4 14 fascame into Galilee, * preaching the goſpel of the 
"N44 23 kingdom of God. | 
1s And (aying, 'The time is fulfilled, and the king- 


dom ci God is at hand repent ye, and believe the 
goſpel. ' : ; 

It ſhould ſeem that 7341 had but a ſhort time, wherein he ex- 
erciſed his vablick Miniſtry 3 he was the Son ofa Prieſt, Zachartas, 
Luk 1 13. and it 15 proSidle that he centred not upon his publiek 
Minijiry till he was thirty years of £ge. (it was the Sacerdotal 
Aze, and the Age at which Lybe telleth us our Saviour entred up- 
on iis publick Miniſtry z) He wis but abut fix Months older than 
our Szyicur, and was impriſoned as ſoon as our Saviour entred 
upon his Miniſtry ; indecd before we read of his Entrance upon 


« 'M 4 & K. 


afeded at the hearing of Chr:it, with aStonipoment and ati ,.: 


2n, but of few that believed it him {| Fo be 
it bad Authority. | A fmell Cerivative from tis, 
the Gravity, awful Preſence and Authority (which as , 
of God ) we fee {till given ro faine faithful N:izilicys 
luch eſpecially as God maketh a mere eminent uſe < 
vertion of Souls. But this great Preacher nad 
mane meaſure | ngt as rhe Scribes, | the ordinary 
7ews, who read their Lectures of th 
without Life and Power, as the Hearts or the Poop!'e | 
at all affe:ted with them, no more than with the @u; tel/ins 

ther the tellers nor hearers were w.llls 


affected, 


of God. 


it. Upon his Imprifonment, Chriſt beginneth to Preach in Ga- 
lilce the Goſpel by which he fet up his Kingdom, and which 
leadeth Men to the Kingdom of God. | And ſaying, The time is 
ſulfite! ,] the time determined of God tur the Revelation of the 
Meſſiss, ard the Grace of the Gofpel through him,foretold by the 
Prophets, Dain. 2. 44. Hei:ce Chriſt 15 laid to have come in the 
tulneſs, and in the dijpenjation of the fulneſs of :1me, Epheſ. 1. 10. 


= 


Gal.5. 4. 4nd the Kin:dom of Gal is at hand | the gracious Diſpen- 
ſation vo! Gcd in the Goſpel is at hand,or hath approached. | Repent 
#2] Turn from the wickedneſs of your ways,andy belzeve the Goſpel, } 
or in 1h» goiret s, to believe the Gejpel 15 one thing,to helzeve in the 
Galbe! Cs it 1 thee in tic Greeb) is another. The former Phraſe 
fonif.s romore thin arm and fhxed affent to the Propoſetion of 


the Golbet s, bi to betrewe tu the Goſpel, 15 to pizce our hop: of Sal- 
vatian tn the Podtrine aud Promiſes of the Cofpel, which are the 
proximate Out of our Fatth, tho' the primary Object of it be 
the Pon tf the Mediator. There'is a Repent.mee, that muſt go be- 
fore E.airh, that iz, the Applicative ofthe Viomiſe of pardoning 
Mcrc: to the Scul, tho true Evangelical Repentance, which 15s a 
Sorrow for Sn, towing from the Scnie of the Love of God in 
Chriſt, be the Fruit and Efﬀett or Faith. Our Saviour's Preach- 
162 4grceith with the Baptiſts, Mat, 3. 2. Toh. 3. 23. 


i6 Now as he walked by the Sea of Galilee, he ſaw 
Simon and Andrew his brother caſting a net into the 
{ca, tor they were hlhcrs. 

7 And Jeſus ſaid unto them, Come ye after me, 
and 1 will make you to become Fithers of Men. 

< wat. 1. 18 4nd ſtraightway they * forſook their nets, and 

- Luk, © followed him. 

4s 19 And when he had gone 2 little further thence, 

he ſaw James the ſor of Zebedee, and John his brother, 
who alio were in the ſhip, mending therr nets. 

20 And ſtraightway he called them, and they left 
their fathcr Zebedee 1n the ſhip with the hired ſer- 
yanpts and went after him. 

We heard of the Call of theſe four 4p5les before, 11 Matth. 
4. 18. In thc Notes upon which, may bc found whatſoever 1s ne- 
ccifiry for the explication' of theſe verſes, (having norhing new in 
them} as alſo the reconciling of what ohn ſaith, chap. 1. 4c. about 
the cathing of Andrew and $7mon to what theſe two Evangeliſts ſay 
avvut 1t. 

12. 21 * And they went into Capernaum, and ſtraight- 
1, way on the ſabbath-day he centred into the ſynagogue, 
and tau: ht. 

22 And they were aſtoniſhed at his doQrine, for he 

2, *tanght them as one that had authority,and not as the 

Rye icribes. 

We heard before that the Sjnz;9-yes were much of the Nature 
of our Parih-Churches, . places where People ordinarily met toge- 
thr on the Sabath-dars, to Worſhip God by Prayer, and reading 
the Law and the Prophets, and hearing the Words of- Exhortation. 


-» 
5 
P_> 

Ls 

ful 

{> 


of 1.x 
MAt., 


LS; 


Cirift ordinari'y Preached in them, - The Ex angelifts often men- 
tron the Peoples: admiring, being amazed and aſtoniſhed at his 
Podtrine; but it is one thing for People to be aſtonzſhed and a- 
maze at a new Dottrine, and to admire the Preacher, anothcr 
thing ts believe : We read amongſt the Jews, of many that were 


a tale, with which ne) 


anunclean ſpirit, and hecried our, 
24. S3ying, Let us alone, * what have we to dg 
with thee, thou Jeſus of Nazareth ? art thon come rq © 
deſtroy us? I know thee who thou art, the holy One 
of God. 


Luke reports the ſame paſſage 3 he ſaith There was a Man 1. 
had the Spirit of an unclean Devil. The Devil is called an wn;/.., 
Spirit, 1n oppoſition to the Spirit of God, which 15 the Hily $yi. 
rit, Tre Man that had this unclean Spirit, or rather the #4! , 
Spirit in the Man cries out, | Let as alone, what have we t5 
with thee? ] He douhtleſs fcared what followed, UF. That he 
ſhould be catt out. He counts himſelf deſtroyed when be «1p. 
not do miſchief, like wicked Men, who arc the Seed of 
old Serpent, who Prov. 4. 15, Sleep not except they have 11; 
miſchief ; and their Sleep 1s taken away, unleſs they have 1,1; 


ſome to fail, The Der! here ownerth Chrift to be 


[4 


»,134 
C171 


= 1 
it 4 33 a 
is Kal) 


Thy np, 
WA.ilC 


much 


FC” EN9 
". 35 
= o 

» vie ax 1 
] CaCi}erc OJ » 


but {5 couliy, "2199-4 


«IQ 


15 


23 * Andthere wasin their ſynagogue a man wi-! 


'Tn0 


[ 


«1 
4 1t'N 
Chi. 


7 he Hy (7 


25 And Jeſus rebnked him, ſaying, Hold thy prace, 
and come out of him. 

26 And when the unclean ſpirit had torn him, and 
cried with a loud voice, he came out of him. 

It 15 both here and in many other places obfervable, that when 
the Devi!s made a Confeſſion of Chritt, yet neither Clirilt nor 
I1s Apoſtles would cver take any notice of it, 
advantaged from the Confctfion of known Lyars, (as the Devil 
was from the beginning) Chriſt needs not the Devil's teſtin- 
ny, cither to his #olineſs, or his being the Sor of God 3 nor would 


Truth 1s never 


he have Pcople allow the leaft Faith to the Devii's Words ; nor 
was he to be impoſed upon by the Devil's good Words ; he 1s 
to make no Truce with him, but to deſtroy him, and his Works ; 
he therefore chargeth him to hold his peace, and to come our, 
[ And when the unclean Spirit had torn him. | The Greek word 
here cats 1s 11] tranſlated torn, as appears by Lith. 4. 35, 
where 1t 1s ſaid, It did him no hurt ; the word ſtgnifties no more 


thoſe pofletied by Devils, had only their Members made ut: ot 


than a violent Convulſtion, or Shaking ; and it 1s obſerved, thit 


by the Deviis, but without any wounding or Jaceriation 9: 


them. 


[ He cried out with a loud voice, and came out of ii 


'#+1 


bo 


O how loth is the Devil to part with his Pofſefion ; but poif- 


bly alſo Chrift wou!d have him cry out with a loud Voice, 


that his miraculous Operation might be the more taken 19- 


tice of, 


27 And they were all amazed, inſomuch that thy 


[1 


without the uſe of any means, a 
ſhe did not recover graCually, but in a momevr, aud IC | 
degree as ſhe could minifter unto them, ſuppoſe at Dun! 
Supper, &Cc. : a 
32 * And at evening, when the ſun did {ets fo" 


out Devils by ſome forms of Invwcatiin they had , but | 
commandeth them out ; ie neither did it by. any kind of in 
from any compa with the Devi, nor vet by any Inv! 
God, out by an Authoritative Command : This was now 
7ews, and cſpecially confirming a new Do#rine that he hd | 
liſhed. But ſtill wercad of no believirs, m2 agnition v1 
God ; or the Son of God, or the Meſſtus, and Savinur of thr 


id 
vs 


y 
ty ov! 


DV) 


t » 


queſtioned among themſelves, ſaying, * What thing is; 
This ? what new doCtrine zs this ? for with authority 
commanceth he even the unclean Spirits, and t 
obey him. 


ag 


»4 Fes 
l "> | 


11: 
only the generality are amazed, they cauld not obtain of the: 
ſelves to believe this new-Doftrine, nor vet ſo far command tit 
Paſſions, but they muſt be ſtartled and amazcii at it. 

28 And immediately his fame ſpread abroad; 
throughout all the region round about {;alilee. 
The Fame of his Miracles, rather than of his Lottrine; by 
this means many were brought to him to be cured ; many were 
brought alſo to hear him 3; ſome of whom believed, others were 
hardened. 

29 *And forthwith when they were come ut ofthe ,,, 
ſynagogue, they entred into the houſe of Simon) 21d ; ; 
Andrew, with James and John. 

30 And Simon's wives mother lay ſick of a fever;and 
anon they tell him of her. 

31 And he came and rook her by the hand, and 
lifted her up ; and immediately the fever left bcr 21 


ſhe miniſtred unto them. : 
Sce the Nores on Matth. 8. 14. where we met with ti 
ſtory. Our Saviour ſometimes ſhewed his Power in Diſc! & hop 
from ſuch as the Rulers of the S;nazazuc: appointed thereunto, accounted incurable. The Miracle appeared, I. {1 Y > Bot 
2. In the Inſftantaneouſneſs of 197 04 


Ct) 
%. 4+ 


H! 
iS not 


- 


t 
WV Or 


bones: 


F112, Devil's K 


leprofie 
.49 2 
*ﬀNt hin 
44A 


> 4 
wy Mat 


Ot 


| 
the 
Sav 
mad 
tity 
toc 
Was 
Ing, 
as to 
to g1 
is hi 
for h 
that 
Laith, 
I. 17 
tat 1 
Cott 1 
K C0: 
of Pre, 
and St 
mean t 
{ am 
how it 
how at 
ourne 
ſe)f, m 
do not 
its no 
Adinin 
Preaci; 
of iis þ 
ſecret Pr 
we muff 
Lord an 
Others vw 
thar If th 
Non to i 
there is ; 
Men fron 
the loye 


42 A 


4 


1 


IC ; 14.41» 


N ry 71 caſes, G. 
| devils 10 


«1 
p- v17V 


47 


Cl. . iN 
Wo 4 


1, Devil's Kingdom to another. 
612, 


"fore day, he went out, and departed into a folitary 


Li ext towns, that | may preach there alſo : for * there 


.1.c4:c419 and them 


bt: 
thal | 
"” :5 vathered rogether at the 
door: , F 
34 A many that were ſick of divers dif- 


many aevile, and * ſuifered not the 
, |; becaule they knew him. 
* Sabbath-day, (as appeareth from what went 


F ? [1 
if \WWao tI:; Cook 
* 


Ein was jel. n ; , . 
ned, the Jews thought it unlawful fo carry any Burdens ; but 
1fter Sun-lct thi'1 judgcd it Lawfui, The uſage of the Particle 
4/1 here, ver. 32, 33. is again obſervable to ſhew the Vanity 
07 thoſe who will from general Particles, conclude Propoſitions 
contrary .to the anology of Faith, thofe Particles bcing often 
aſc4 in a reſtrained Senſe, Luke faith, that the Devils cried 
wt, To art Chriſt the Son of God, | And he rebuked them, ſuf- 
foring then mt toſpeak | becauſe (or, that they ) knew him. Chriſt 
dcfired not to be pubitihed fo ſoon under that Notion, but he 
much Ic{ defired the Devil's teſtimony in the caſe : ſee ver. 25. 
15%; 16, 19: The good works of the Devil and his Sced, are 
indeed a Dofamation to Caritt and his Seed, 


35 And in * the morning riſing upa great while be- 


place, and there prayed. 

Sc:it Prayer ſtands commended to us, as by the Precept of 
Crit, Matth. 6. 6. So by his frequent Example, to teach us 
tht our Duty 1n Prayer, 15 not dilcharged without it, we arc 
to pray with alt Prayer and Supplication ; There is m publich 
Pr.yzer a more united ſtrength and intereſt; But 1n /e- 
21 Pr.cjer an advaiitage for more free and full communication 
of our Souls unto God, Chriſt ior this chuſfcth the ' Zforning (as 
the time freeft from Diſtra&tions and Company,) and a ſelitary 
V/ice 4s tigteft for a ſecret Duty. 

36 And Simon, and they that were him, fol- 
lowed after him- 

37 And when they had found him, they ſaid unto 
him, All men ſeek for thee. 

38 And he ſaid unto them, * Let us zo into the 


fore came I forth. 
39 And he preached in their ſynagogues, through: 
out all Galilee, and caſt cutdevils. 


Peter probably piticth the Multitude, becauſe many amongſt 
them needed Chrift's Preſence for their bodily infirmities. Our 
Saviour knew their Hearts better than Peter; and that whicn 
made them fo much ſeek for him, was either in ſome a curio- 
tity to ſce Miracles wrought, or at beſt but a defire of ſome 
bodily benetit from him + Whereas his working of Miracles 
was but a ſecondary Work, ſubſervient to his Work in Preach- 
ing, and done to confirm his D*&rine, and to advantage them 
as to their Faith in bjm as the Me/zas. As therefore he refuſed 


Cluj ; 1AR IC. 


j qe and offer. for thy cleanſing thoſe things 


them. 


and to blaze abroad rhe metre, infoinuclthat Teſs 
could no more openly enter into the City, but was 
without in deicrt places ; and taey Came LO ili from 
every quarter. 

We before had this piece of Hiſtory, Matth. 8.2. To the 
Notes upon which, 1t is enough to refer our Rezdtr; we ſhall 
alſo meet with it hereatter in Lub, cp. 5. Our Lord's heinw 
mved with Compaſjiin, or afeFed in his Surely. the Word 
itgnines) 15 often ulcd as Expretſive of the Cavic of his 43 of 
Mercy ; Thus 10 curing the Leper, he at once buth Tcwed hi 
ſe!f the $9 of Man ; one-who could have Compoſt on ov in 
mites, and ind2ed rould not but have ſucha Cormiſrratii.y to. 
ward Mankind 3 and the Son of Gad,, that he could 93 an i, 


by a Touch, or bv the Word of his *ower command cf 4 pip 
cate of fo difiicult Cure. For his Charging of him 5 {3 pi hjn 
to any Man, we are not able to give a perfect aocourc of 27 


whether it was to avoid a Suſpicion of Offertition ; or to 2yoi2 
a Throng of Company pretfing upon him 3 or to avcid the: 
Odiam which he knew the doing of thete mighty Works wou! 3 
bring him under with the Scribes and Poorcfees , until Oi 


. dd p 
"4 
, i 
be? 4g/TLD 


time came for the fuller Revelation of bimfelf Mucly 1cih ca: 
we tel! how to excuſe the Leper for doing contrary t.> this 


Charge, which we ind many others to hive done, who fad nf 
like Charge 3 yet we read not of our Savioui's blaming oem 
for it. Mark addeth, that his Publication of 1t could, | fhat 7 fig 
could na mvre openly enter into the City, but was withur jn ee 
places: } By whici is to be underiiond only Places !ub inhay 
ted fome rink, places near the Shore. whereby going into ; 
Ship (as he oftca aid); he could more eaftly quit him{!f of tie 
Throng cf Poopic for (as If tviiowetn) they cam? ty tm fro 
every quaiter, 


CGH: EK 


_ Rb E By” . " FED yoeT NE 0 : 7 - > 
Chriit F124 AIRI 64% { it; C1 WA! 'N, heute: 4) 1G l's £ NT | f, oa x.!/ v2. 


The Phariſees charge him with Blaſpheri:s, x—12 4&e call- 
eth Leu from the weceit of CuStyn, —-t1. Vindicateth his 
eating with Pablicins and Sinners. 1g-—i7 And hu Difci- 
ples fir mot Faſting, and plichin; tte Ears of Comm on tf 


Sabbath-day, 18—-27, 


ſome days, and It was nolled that he was it 
the houle. 


inſfomuch that chere was na room to receivethem; no, 
not ſo'much as about the door : and he preached the 
Word unto them: 


to gratifie the Curioſity ofthe Phariſees 1n giving them a tign; 
ſs here our Saviour takes no notice of the Multitude ſeeking 
for him z bur ſaith to his Diſciples, { Let #s gs into the next Towns i 
that I may Preach there alſ> : for therefore am F come forth | Paul, 
ſaith, that God ſerit him not. to Baptize, but to Preach, I Cor. 
I. 17. Our Saviour ſaith not, Let us. go int) the next Towns, 


that Tmay work Mixacles, but that T may Preach there alſo; he! 


Goth not ſay he came forth to work Miracles, but to Preach ; How | 


K cones to paſs, that ſome are polletled of fo {lighty an opinion 


and St, Pay! counted to be their principal Wark 3; where, 1n the 


mean time, they pretend to derive it from Chriſt, I cannot tell : | 


{ am ſure Preaching was the greateſt part of Chriſt's Work ; 


of Preaching, as to think that it 18 ricedleſs, which our Saviour} 


3 And they come unto him, bringing one ſick of 
the palhe, which was born of four. | 

4 And when they could not come nigh unto him 
for the preſs, they uncovered the roof where he was ; 
and when tney had broken z: vp, they let down the 
bed wherein the lick of the pallie lay. 

5 When Jeſus ſaw their faith, he faid to the {ck 0: 
the palſie, Son, thy fins be forgiven thee. 

6 But there were certain of the {cribes fitiing there, 
and reaſoning in their hearts. 

7 Why doth this man thus ſpeak dlaſyhem:;s; ? 


how it comes to be the leaſt part of Miniſter's Work fince, or, X who can forgive ins but God only ? 


how any of them think it ſufficient to diſcharge that Work by 


Journez-men, wl.ich he thoughr not beneath him to do him- 
ſ]f, may deſerve their Examination, which make it ſo. We 
do not ſay that Preaching is a greater Work than Prayer, or that 
it is not Miniſter's Duty to Pray z nor yet that 1t is greater than 
Adiiniftring the Sacrament 5 but this weſay, we read of Chriſt's 
Preaciiing often in the Synagogues, on the Mountain, in a Ship 3 
Ot 11s pablich Praying we read not, though of his private and 
ſecret Prayer often, We read expreſsly that he Baptized none 3 
we muft have leave tothink that our greateſt Work, which our 
Lord and his Apoſtles were moſt. imployed in, and do think 
others will be of.our Minds, as ſoon as they ſhall underſtand ; 
that if the end of Preaching be not turning Men from one Opi- 
110n to another, but from the Love and Practice of Sin to God, 
there is as much need of it now as ever z and that the turning of 
Men from cone Opinion to another without a change of Heart,as to 
the love of Sin, is but a turning of Men from one quarter of the 


40 * And there came a leper to him,beſeeching him, 
and kneeling down to him, and ſaying unto him, If 


3 And immediately when Jeſus perceived in his 
ſpirit, that they ſo reaſoned within themſelves, he 
aid unto them, Why reaſon ye theſe things in your 
hearts ?. | 

9 Whether is it eaſier to ſay to the lick ofthe paj- 
ſie, Thy ſins be forgiven thee ? or to ſays Ariſe, take 
up thy bed and walk. 

10 But that ye may know the Son of man hath 
power upon earth to forgive fins, ( he ſaith co the hick 
of the pallie, ) 

11 I ſay unto thee, Ariſe, and take up thy bed, and 
go thy way into thine houſe. = | 

12 And immediately he aroſe, took up the bed,and 
went forth before them all, inſomuch that they were 
all amazed,and glorified God, ſaying, We never 147 
it on this faſhion. 

We read the Hiſtory of this Miracle, Matths g. 1. Fo Cur 


tou wilt, thou canſt make me clean. 

41 And Jeſus moved with compaſlion, put forth 
41s hand and touched him, and faith unto him, I will ; 
X thou clean: | 

42 And as ſoon as he had ſpoken, immediately the 
fProlie departed from him, and he was cleand. 
. 43 And he ſtraightly charged him, and forthwith 
*1t him away 5 | 

44 And faith unto him, See thou ſay nothing to 


Notes upon which I ſhall refer my Reader ; having there taker 
in thoſe paſſages in this Evangeliſt's Relation, which, 26:10 
had not, I ſhall only take notice of ſome fery things (not the , 
touched upon,[” He preached the Word anta them. | The Word 
God, the Goſpel. There are other Words, but that bs # 
Word, Matth.13- 20- and in this Goſpel, cop. 4+ 14 £47. 30> 
20. Lub.1. 2. AF. 17. 1i. The moſt excellent wv ord, and Wc 
only Word to be preached, ver. 7. Why doth thts Min ſeat, B:aj 

phenies ? who can forgive Sins but Goa 2 $0 as it was on 24l | 2.12 
then received, that none but the Creattsi coulda apcoarge The 
Debs, none but Gad coald fargtve Sis. 3Buc how A pigitt Carth C75 
things ? Our Saviour did not fay till afterward, that ie 7» 


r 
»”> 4-41 3 


% & 
\Js 
the 


"nv nant but go thy way, ſhew thy lf to the 
TI9l, 2. 


| 


; 1 AE 
\ Mam 2 ; : 


45 * But he went ont,and beran £5 publiſh 7 much, ! 


c* \ ND again he entred into Capernaum, after * 


* which Moſes commanded for a ceftimony unto Ley. 


3 And ſtraightway raany were gathered together, 


EY 157 
bk Hy” 


Cha D. I 


-— 
= 
'. Dre 


p ot - - 
— EE > —___ - PRI __ ——— =] 
FEISS A ut__ _ - 
-— = mw 3 : ——_y - . » ” has - = 
DP . - . WU. - td — - —_— 
a. A nw 4 - Sa. a - 2 
_ __ 4 . Jahn ZS 4% 
X . ”_ - - - . a —— . — 
k a - 2” Ie Ben ES 
_ ” * -—- SI - - <= —_ 4, —_—  _———C-- - 
LI 44% in Fm at : - a > "£4 - ge KEE” © 
. # 
yo » T » . -- . > _— "=. _ - 
— p K - < £ - = b A - « <4 "__ 
- - > _ - _ : = - pc - 
PR XA” _ " 6 I —_—— _— g 3a P Ps 
——_ -- 1_— - - _ be ve 4 AY Yn Cn I IE C——— _ 
: s . RE - FTE ol FW = ad 
- - @oewumn cn W . =” Y —— = "x <>. 
—_—_—— : | 4 = oh y * A :, A 
- - Fe => _ TE" Ie — 0 1 RS... » _ off "RY 
T > - < —_ SE -, pct ye - - 
< , : R Mo - ” _ o- : Hon 1 by by ; Rn #, 
> ” ” = - hd g 
þ +2 _ -— — y - - Fac . wg * 3. £308 


Chap. II. 


pave him las Sins. What Blaiphcmy was there in this faying, Thy 
Sins are forgiven thee 2 But wat it none but God coutd forgive 
Sins ? could alfo any but God te!l unto Men their thoughts 2? 
x Chron, 28, 9. 2 Chron. 6. 30. Pjal. 7. g* For. 17.10. 1 Sam. 1647. 
That Chriſt could tc!l their thoughts, was matter of Demonſtra- 


S. M ARK: 


tion to them, ver. 6,8. Why might they not alſo have 
allowed him a Power to forgrue Sins ? But they could not for 
this charge him with Blyphemy, which was their malicious De- 
iign. ; 
13 And he went again forth by the Sea-ſide, and 
all the multitude reſorted to him, and he taught 
them. 2 

Still it is faid he fanght them, thereby letting his Miniſters 
know what is their Great Work: And therefore they ſhould be 
Perſons apt to teach, as Paul direteth Timothy. 


+ Mat. 9.c. 1+ Andas he paſſed by, * he ſaw Levi, tbe ſor of 


Luk. 5. 27. Alphens, ſitting at the receipt | of cuſtom, and ſaid 
|! Or,the Ca- unto him follow me. Aud he aroſe, and followed 


ſt»m-houſe, him. 
_= 15 And it came to paſs, that as Jeius ſat at meat in 


Cuitzn was his houſe, many publicans and ſinners fat alſo with Je- 
paid, ſus, and his diſciples: for there were many, and they 
followed him. ; : 

16 And when the Scribes and Phariſees ſaw him 
eat with publicans and ſinners, they ſaid unto his diict- 
ples, How is it that he cateth and drinketh with pub- 
licans and finners. : 

17 When Jeſus heard zr, he ſaid nnto them, They 
that arc whole, have no need of the phyſician, but 
they that are ſick. I came not to call the righteous, 
but ſinners to repentance. 

We had this piece of Hiſtory with ſome Addition in Matth, 

o. G.(where he was called Matthew ; Marbþ and Luke, both call 

him Lev?,}it was ordinary with the Fews to have two Names 

"CE See the Notes on MHatth. G. | 
ik. 2 38 And* thediſciples of John, and of the Phari- 
© *” fresnſed ro faſt; and they come, and ſay unto him, 

Why do the diſciples of John,and of the Phariſees faſt; 

but thy diſciples faſt not ? 

19 And Jeſus ſaith unto them, Can the children of 
the bride-chamber faſt, while the bridegroom is with 
them *As long as they have the bridegroom with them 
they cannot faſt. 

20 But the days will come when the bridegroom 
ſhall be taken away from them, and then they ſhall 
1n thoſe days: 

 0:,,22,, 21 No man alſo ſeweth a plece of || new cloth on 
\"*%& an old garment: elſe the new piece that filled it up, 
= >  takcth away from the old, and the rent is made 
Worſe. 

22 Andno man putteth new wine into old bottles, 
elſe the new wine doth burſt the bottles, and the wine 
is ſpilled, and the bottles will be marred : but new 
wine mult be put into new bottles. 

See ail this opened in the Notes on Matth. 6. 9,&c. The Sum 
of all teacheth us, 1. That Faſting 1s an Exerciſe ſuted to Af- 
five Diſpenſations of Providence, and ought to be proportio- 
ned to its Seafon. 2, That new converts are not to be diſcou- 
raged by tco ſevere Exerciſes of Religion, but to be Trained up 
to thcin by degrees, 

23 *Z.nd it came to paſs that he went through 


*\ uk. IF . . » 
%* *” the corn- fields on the ſabbath-day,and his diſciples be- 


$, QC 

* Dcut. 23- ganas they vent to * pluck the ears of corn. 

25. 24 And the Phariſces faid unto him, Behold, why 
do they on the ſabbath-day that which is not law- 
ful? | 

* 1Sam.2s, 25 Andhe ſaid unto them, Have ye never read * 

4. what Daviddid, when he had need,and was an hun- 


gred, he,and they that were with him ? 

26 How he went into the houſe of God, in the 
days of Abjathar the high-prieſt, and did eat the 

* Lcr.24-9. fhew-bread, * whichis not lawful to eat, but for the 

prieſts, and ;gave alſo to them which were with 
him? | 

27 And heſaid to them, The ſabbath was made 
for man, and not man for the ſabbath. 

2$ Therefore the fon of man is Lord alſo of the 
Abbath. 


1ood of Abimelech, and probably Abiathar affiſted his Father in 


"Ih 
(ita 
Mark calls it the Time of his Priefthood. Beſides, that tho. 
words 6% Aftalas do not neceifurily fipnifice jy the  - 
Abiathar, as we Tranſlate it, no more than 643 alernasts "%y 
niftes in the carrying into Captivity, but about the time PP 
the time in which it was, for Ahbimelech was preſencly ditor © 
(poſſibly within a few days) cut oft, as wo 1cad 1 Sam. 22, 11 
18. And Abiathar, was a more noted Man than his yather Ms. 
melech, enjoying the Pricfthood more than torty' years, and 


to David. 
CHAS. BI. 


Chriſt on the Sabbath healeth a withered Hand, 1-5. The p;; 
ſees Conſpire again8t him : He departeth thence : The Multitute 


againſt the Holy Ghoſt ſhall never be forgiven, 21—29, Wha 
his Brother, Siſter, and Mother, 3—3 5. 


there was a man there which had a withercg 
hand. 
2 And they watched him, whether he would lica! 
him on the ſabbath-day, that they might accuſe him. 
| 3 And hefaithunto the man that hed a withered 
hand, Þ Stand forth. 


kill ? but they held their peace. 


hearts,he ſaith unto the man,Stretch forth thino nand, 
and he ſtretched zz out, and his hand was reſtore; 


whole as the other. 

Sce the Notes upon Matth. 12.5. The wordmpuac: uſe, 
ver. 5. may be underſtood to fignifie Blindneſs, or Hardnejs, 15 i 
may derive from 7ggs, Callus, or mugs, Cecus ; but the Derivi. 
tion of it from the tormer beſt obtains 3 Hardneſs being a quality 
in a thing by which it refiſteth our touch, and ſuffers vs not t5 
make an impreſſion upon it ; that ill Condition of the Soul, |; 
which 1t becomes Rebellious, and diſobedicnt to the Will f 
God revealed ; ſo as it 1s not affe&ted with it, nor doth it make 
any impreſſion of Faith or Holineſs upon the Soul, is, as uſua!l; 
calied, Hardneſs of Heart. But for th2 Argument of this Hitty;y, 
proving Acts of Mercy lawful on the Sabbath-day,it is fully fhu 
ken to in the Notes on Matth. 12. 

6 And the Phariſees went forth, and ſtraight 


they might deſtoy him. 
7 Burt Jeſus withdrew himſelf with his diſciples to 


the ſea: and a great multitude from Galilee follows! 
him, and from Judea, 

8 And from ſeruſalem, and from Idumea, and fron 
beyond Jordan,and they about Tyre and Sidon,a great 
multitude, when they had heard what great things he 
did, came unto him, 

9 And he ſpake to his diſciples, that a ſmall ſip 
ſhould wait on him, becauſe of the multitude, left the; 
ſhould throng him. 

10 For he had healed many, inſomuch that tlicy 


plagues. 

11 And unclean ſpirits, when they ſaw him, fc'l 
_ before him, and cried, ſaying; Thou art the$01 
of God. 


not make him known. 

Who theſe Herodians were, we cannot learn plainly from Holy 
Writ z it is moſt probable, that they were a Civil Fation, who 
took Herod's part, and were ſtiff for promoving his intereſt, and 
the 1utercſt of the Roman Emperor, (whoſe Subſtitute Herod Was) 
with theſe the Phariſees (in other Caſes their imp'acable Ec: 
mics) mx Counfels how they might deſtroy Chriſt. Cr 
gives place to their fury, (his time being not yet eome,) 4% 
withdraweth himſelf from their fight, being followed by 80 
Multitudes, who in the fame of his Miracles, or the hopes £1) 
had of receiving ſome good from him for themſelves, or for tic! 
Friends drew after him, Some of theſe are ſaid to have com: 
from 1dumea, which was the Country of Edom, and diſtinEt iro 
Zadea anciently, as may be gathered from Fofe 15. 8, and No 
34+ But whether it was at this time ſo or no, is doubted. "_ 
Lord commandeth the Devils not to make him known, not &© 
{iring any ſuch Preachers, 


13 And he goethupintoa mountain, and he cal 
_ unto him whom he would, and they came une 

im. 
14 And he erdained twelve, that they ſhould Þ* 


'ne Exccution of the Office, and ſo fuddenly ſucceeded, that Frm 


with him, and that he might ſend them forth ** 
15 Any 


being the Perſon who was made famous by carrying the Eobad 


13 
k 


I 


HAV T- 


follow him: He healeth their diſeaſed, and cafteth out Di; 
6—12. Ordaineth his twelve Apoites to preach and wort« nit; 
cles, 13—19. The Multitude flock unto him : His friend; elfeem 
him mad, 20, 21. The Scribes charge ham with having 4 1. 
vil : He confuteth their Blaſphemy: and ſhaweth, that the 9:, 


L ND he * entred again into the synagogue, an; . 


4 And he faith unto them, Is it lawful to do good hy 
on the ſabbath-days, or to do evil ? to fave life, or to 


5 And when he had looked round about on ther, 3%: 
with anger, being grieved for the || hardneſs of ;þ-6j;" 


took counſel with * the Herodians againſt him, hor *v; 


c > 


preſſed || upon him for to touch him, as many as lad; 


12 And he * ſtraitly charged them;that. they ſhould -: 


» 
« m_— 


P51, 


1n the 
thew 
Name 
Cep1a 
He all 
bedee, 
Name 
SUrs 9 
aloud, 
declar! 
Spirits, 
Connſe 
the nun 
did not 
himſelf 
Tiſciple 
Nor yet 
DiIciple 
Iren *0 
Srvice 
Perſons 
Lite, 1) 
mitfon 
this, tho 
in the C 
Ged thy 
Church, 
judge as 
PCarancc 
2. God, 
DMinister, 
elitrance 
appeared 
y then, 
know, tf 
the Good 
ſters. A 
FCCEIVEs nn 
elther for 
dain Ley 
Perſon : 
to Contr 
Ordinarily 
Jud dif 
Chriſt no 
elowſhi 
Uur Fellg 
ccaled in 
Ui] be al 
20 A 
that th 


21 A 
There 


Th iÞs Þ 


evils Rh . | 
out jis piece of Hiſtory, or rather ſomethi 1: to which | 


” 


we have f115) Om "7 yt 
Ne poli yoth in Matthew, and 'n £ab2;on'y Mary hath this » 
17 VYCLat-5 


\ocul1ar tO himſelf, that our S4v1our did tits upon 4 Mountain. | 
ml oh Opinion of Bucer, that this was the Mountain at the | 
foot of which he preached tine Scrigon largely recorded, Mat. | 
. . o, =, and (as ſome judge) more thortiy by Luke, >. 6. he 
chinketh the Multitude here mentioned, i the fame with that 
_ Mat. 4+ 25. aud Luk, 3. 7. and that our Saviour did 
= nto this Mountain to Preach, or Ordaia his Difct- 
\'es, but only to Pray, and to Diſcourſe with tome of his Diſ- 
ciples more privately avout Spiritual Myſteries. That 1t was at 
this time that he continued all Night in Prayer to God, Luk, 6. 12. 
and in the Morning called unto him fuch of his Diſciples as he 
thought fit, and diſcourſed with them in his Intentions concerning 
them, telling them, 1. That he had choſen them to be with him 
ordinarily,to be Eye and Ear Witnetles of what he ſpake and did. 
>. That he deſigned ſoon after to jend them out to Preach ; which 
ve read he did, chap. 6, 7. Mat. 10. 1, 3. to grve them a Power 
1 beal Sickneſſes, and to cait out Devils ; fo that this Chapter only 
-cntioneth Chriſt's Elejon of them,not his actnal Sending them, 
«hich is diſcourſed chap. 6, as alſo Mar. 1o. 1. theſe things be- 
107 privately tranſacted on the Mountain. Bucer thinks he came 
down inro the Plain at the foot of the Mountain, according to 
{ul. 5.17, and there preachzd that Sermon mentioned Mat * 
"I 6, 5. (as we betore ſaid) The Evangclift telling us, that 
he called ts him which of his Diſciples he would, let us know, 
that he ch1ſe them, and not they him; that the Choice of them, 
was of his Free Grace. an1 Mercy : And his continuing all Nigrict 
in Prayer before this Choice, let us know the Gravity of 
the Work of Chuſing Perſons fit to be ſent out to Preach the 
Goſpel. ; 
19 * And Simon he {irnamed Peter, 


notgo up | 


S. MAR K, 


ficth his Neighbours the Citizens of his city, or his nearer Re!2- 
tions, thoſe who belonged to the Family of which he was,C fox 
he had ſome Brethren that did not beliove in him. Joh, 5. « thc 
went to lay Hands on him ; that is, to take him from the Ma't:. 
tude, which preſſed upon him by force (for ſo the Word toni 
es, ) for they Jaid, He us beſide himelf, Yet. Various ſences arc 
given of this word, but certainly the mGtt ordinar;, Intornreta- 
tion of it doth beſt agree to this place. They ſiw our Etvione's 
Warmth of Spirit, and Zcal in the Proſecution of that £27 which 
he came into the World, and did not fo weil underitand 1:5 = 
ſon.or Miffion, and receiving the Spirit not by mczfure ; and 6:0 
take what he did, to !x: the produt and effe& of 2 natural tnfr- 
mity, and unperfc& Head, and diſordered Rnafn, Tha youns 
Prophet ſent by Eliſha was counted a mad Fcl/ >. by Feiu's C ng 
: = ; / v2.4 

rades, 2 King 9. 11. ſo was Paul by Feſtus, A#.25.24. 05 by the 
Corinthians, or ſome crept in amongſt them, 2 C5. <, 53, We are 
naturally enclined to enquire the Cauſes of ftrange arid vnuſi©et 
Effeas, and cannot always diſcern the true Cauſes, and ofein 
make falfe Guctſes at them. 1 am not ſo prone as 1 (1: ſome to 
condemn theſe Friends or Neighbours, or Kinſimen of Chritt, tc. 
lieving that they did verily believe as they ſpake, nut vet £ 1;v 
underſtanding that the Spirit of the Lord in that mcaſurc w3s zz, 
on him, but through their Infirmity, fearing that he had 16; 1» 
under ſome Diſtradtion, and charitably offering their i:clp to 
him. The next words tells us of a far worſe ſence the Scrives put 
upon h15'Adtions, | 

22 And the ſcribes which came down from Jernſ:- _ 
lem,ſaid,* He hats Beelzebub, and by the prince of ,/"" 


the devils caſteth he out devils. 


« 2 
t-» 


23 * And he called them unto him, and faid unto # mar 15 


them in parables, How can Saran caſt ont Satan ? 25. 
- 24 And if a kingdom be divided againſt ir ſelf, that 
kingdom cannot ſtand. 


1:2 179 And James the ſon of ZLebedee, and John the 
14 brother of James, (and he {irnamed them Boanerges, 
4 which is> The ſons of thunder,) 

18 And Andrew, and Philip, and Bartholomew, 
and Matthew, and Thomas, and James the ſon: of Al- 
pheus, and Thaddeus, and Simon the Canaanitte. 

19 And Judas Iſcariot, which alſo betrayed him : 


and they went into an || houſe. 

Matthew nameth the Apoſtles upon his relating the Hiſtory of 
their Miſſiin, or ſending out. Mark nameth them upon their 
:/-#im, or firſt Choice. But theſe Evangel:f{ts agree with Luke 
in their Names, ſaving that Zube calleth him 7udas, whom Mat- 
thaw calls Lebbeus ; and Mark, Tnaddens : fo that he had three 
Names. Chriſt changeth the Names of $719, whom he called 
Cephas, or Peter, Joh. 1. 42. We have the Reaſon, Mat. 16. 18. 
He alſo changed the Names of Fames and Fohn, the Sons of Ze- 
bedee, calling them Boanerges, about the Etymology of which 
Name Criticks much diſpute. Tne Evangelifts tell us it ſignifies 
Sons of Thunder ;, thereby mincing them of their Duty, to Cry 
alzd, and to Preach the Goſpel as on the Houſe-tops, or perhaps 
declaring what he knew was in the Fervour and Warmth of their 
Spirits, We muſt not here enquire too narrowly 1nto the ſecret 
Connſels of God, in fuffering a Son of Perdition to come into 
the number of his firſt Minifters : Chrift did it not, becauſe he 
did not know what was in his Heart ; for before that, he ſhewed 
himſelf a Devil, by Informing againft his Maſter. Chrift told his 
Liſciples, that he had chofen Twelve, and one of them was a Devil. 
Nor yet becauſe he had no otliers to ſend 3 he had multitudes of 
Diſciples 3 and he who of Stones could have raiſed up Chil- 
Iren *o Abraham. could ealily have fitred out a Perſon tor this 
&rvice ; Nor yet did he do 1t, to let in any Sots and Scandalous 
Perſons into the Miniſtry ; for we read of no Scandal in fudas's 
Life, We ought to believe that God had wiſc Ends in the Per- 
mitſhon of this, and that Chriit did out of infinite Wiſdom do 
this, though we pofſibly are not able to give a ſatisfaftory Account 
inthe caſe. What if we ſhould ſay, that Chriſt, by this, inſtru- 
ed thoſe that after his Aſcenſion ſhould have the Care of the 
Church, not to pretend to judge of ſecret Thinzs; but only to 
judge as Man ought to judge, according to the outward Ap- 
pearance, leaving the Judgment of the Heart to God alone. 
©. God, by this, armeth his People againſt the Scandal of wicked 
Minis2rs, ſuch in whom Corruption way break out, after their 
entrance into that Holy Kun@ion, though before no ſuch thing 
appeared, that they may vot think the Miniſterial Ads performed 
by them, to have 'becn Nullitics. 2. God by this alſo lets ns 
know, that the Efficacy of the Ordinance doth not depend upon 
the Goodnefs of the Spiritual State of the- Miniſter that admini- 
fters. A Bell may call others to hear the Word, though it ſeif 
rcerves no Benet by it. in the mean time, here is no warrant 
etther for People to Chuſe, or the Governors of a Church to Or- 
gain Leud and viſibly Scandalous Perſons ; Jadas was no ſuch 
Perſon : nor vet for Pcop'c to own, or rhe Governour of Churches 
to Continue Leud and Scandalous Yerſons in the Miniſtry, God 
ordinarily not b'efſing the Labours of ſuch. No ſooner had 
Judas diſcovered himſelf, but he went out and hanged himſelf. 
Ut no longer allowed him his Company, nor the Diſciples their 
Flowthip, There is a great deal of difference, with relation to 
cur Fellowſhip and Communion, betwixt ſecret Wickedneſfs con- 
«ed in the Heart, and open and ſcandalous Sianing, though 
v1 bealike dangerous to the Soul of the Sinner. 

20 And the multitude cometh together again, * ſo 
that they could not ſo much as cat brezd. 

21 And whe || his friends heard of zt,they went'ont 
iv iay hold on him : for they faid,He 5s beſide himſelf. 

Thcre is no ſmall Piſpute, who are here called our Saviour's 


- 

. » 
—_ 
. 


25 And if a houſe be divided againſt it ſelf, that 
houſe cannot ſtand. 

26 Andif fatan riſe up againſt himſeif, and be di- 
vided, he cannot ſtand, but hath an end. 

27 No man can enter into a itrong man's houſe,and 
ſpoil his goods, except he will firſt bind the ſtrong 
man, and then he will ſpoil his houſe. 

28 VerilyI ſay unto you, * All fins ſhall be forgiven * 1 54), -. 
unto the ſons of men, and blaſphemies wherewith 15 
ſoever they ſhall blaſpheme : 

29 But he that ſhall blaſpheme againſt the holy 
Ghoſt,hath never forgiveneſs, but is in danger of eter 
nal damnation - 

30 Becauſe they ſaid, He hath an unclean ſpirit. 

Here 15 no Paflage in all this piece of Hiſtory, but what the 
Reader will find opened in the Notes on Mat. g. 34. and Mat. 

I2. 31, 32. 33. to which I rcferr him. 

31 Therecame then hisbrethren * and his mother, + ,;. -. 
and ſtanding without, ſent unto him, calling him. 3z5,2..2: 

32 And the multitude fate about him,and they faid 
unto him,Behold, thy mother and thy brethren with- 
our ſeek for thee. 


33 And heanſwered them, ſayins, Who is my mo- 
ther, or my brethren ? | 

34 And helooked round about on them which ſte 
about him,and ſaid, Behold my mother and my bre- 
thren. 

35 For whoſoever ſhall do the will of God,the ſame 


is my brother, and my ſiſter and mother. 
See the Notes on Mat: 12. 45, 47, 48, 49, 50- 


CHAP. IV. 


Chriſt in a Ship teacheth the Multitude by Parables, rt, 2: The 
Parable of the Sower : He explaineth it to his Diſciples, to whom 
the knowledge of the Myſteries of God were given, 2—20. Tho 
Parable of the Candle and CandleSich, 21—25. Of the Seex 
growing inſenſibly. 26—29, Of the Grain of Muſtard, the lca't 
of all Seeds,yet becometh greater than all Herbs, 29—34. At the 
riſing of a Storm, the Diſciples fear, and awabe Cvrilt, 35—38- 
He rebubeth the Storm, and their Unbelief : They are aſta- 


niſhed, 39——4T» 


I Ae he began again to teach by the ſea ſide,and 
there was gathered unto hima great mulri- 
tude, fo that he went into a ſhip,and fate in the ſea, 
and the whole multitude was by the ſea on the land. 
2 And he taught them many things by parables, and 
ſaid unto them in his doctrine z 


We may obſerve, that our Saviour often preached by the Sex 
fade, the reaſon of which was, doubtleſs, he had there the COL: VE= 
nience,by a Boar or Ship,to quit himſelf of the incouvenicnce of- 
the Peoples prefſing upon him : He was now in Ga/ilee, which 
bordered upon the Sea. [And he taught them many things by Pa- 
rables, and ſaid unto them in his Do&rine | Some of thoſe things 
which our Lord taught his People by Earthly Similitudes, arc at- 
terwards expreſſed 3 but probably he taught them mary more 
things than the Evangeliſts have left us upon Record. And [ait 
unto them in his Dodtrine : ] That may be underſtood 1n a doulge 
ſenſe : Either underſtanding by Dorine, his way of Tecchinz, 
which he affeted, and made much uſe of, viz, by SIREOREes 


-_- 
\ 


1 \r1p+ 4d, : » 3 4 - ' , - . 0 . 
Friends, 619192 av'7e, the who were of him, whether 1t fignt- 


Chap, TV. 


| 
? 
' { : 
«1 . ; 
RS TORE! 
| (0 A Fr 
#t.4-1 | 
FI. + | | 
vr p 
FRik 01-4) 
Fat. :\ bf 
TUM 
bes 1 
"4 
Way |. 
1; w 
":% 
o i 
"w 
x 
#3 (3 hl 
3-43 ©. s ! $*} 
es 
47 #tsg i 'Y; 
? \ : "OTE | (2M 
of 2 | i py» 
; q "2 br "R$ #5 &» 
WOW R9: $: Lf bib 
Jt Mb ; HHP > Sly 
| Faſt ${4(f; IH ib: 
Ty} (#4 : if) ew it 
Wok 1 RES GL, 
| L BU bla. 4 Vit ms 
| XY : 4 j1 
; ; i yt LY 
$200 
{ 1 % ©. 


_- 
A 
be 
_ 
#47 Bog 
he 
5.4; 
. ama + 4 oc 
em RR 
9. = 
= 
4 como DÞA>. 
_—_— OO - 
» ow 
1 &. 
POR ney nm 
[4 a”; 
4 
-_ 
Ds,  ——_— 
PCC £56 2 2% 
ER 
Fe; 


Luks8., 


G» 


Or elf thus, That he intermincd with the Doctrine wich he 
taught them, ſeveral Parables, tome of which here tollorw : 

3 Hearken, * Behold, rhere went out a ſower to 
fow : 

4 And it came to paſs, as he. ſowed, ſome fell by 
the way-ſidc, and the fowls of the air came and de- 
voured It up- 

s And ſome fellon ſtony ground, where it had not 
much earth, and immediately it ſprang up, becauſe it 
had no depth of carth. 

6 But when the ſun was up, it was ſcorched 3 and 
becauieit had no root, It withered away. 

7 And ſome fell among thornsand the thorns grew 
up, and choaked it, and It vielded no fruit. 

8 And other fell on good ground, and did yield 
fruit that ſprang up and encreaſed, and brought 
ſorth ſome thirty, and ſome ſixty; and ſome an hun- 
dred. 

9 And he faid unto them,He that hath ears to hear, 
let him hear. 

10 And when he was alone, they that were about 
him with the twelve, asked him of the parable, 

11 Ard he faid unto them, Unto you ir 1s given to 
know the myſtery of the kingdom of God: Eut unto 
them that are without, all theſe things are done In 
parables : , 

12 That ſeeing, they may fee, and not perceive ; 
andhearing, they may hear, and not underftand ; leſt 
3t any time they ſhould be converted, and zhezr ſins 
ſhould be forgiven them. 

13 And he ſaid unto them, Know ye not this pa- 
rable ? and how then will ye know all parables ? 

1.4 The ſower ſoweth the word. 

is And theſe are they by the way-ſide, where the 
zord is ſown; but when they have keard, ſatan com- 
eth immediately,and taketh away the word which was 
fown in their hearts. 

19 And theſe are they likewiſe whick are ſown on 
ſtony ground, who when they have heard the word, 
immediately receive it with gladneſs: 

17 And have no root in themſelves, and ſo endure 
but for a time : afterward, when affliction or perſecu- 
tion ariſeth for the words ſake immediately they are 
offended. 

18 And cheſe are they which are ſown among 
thorns : ſuch as hear the word, 

i9 And the cares of this world, and the deceitful- 
neſs of * riches, and the luſts of other things entring 
in, choak the word, ard it becometh unfruirful. 

20 And theſe are they which are ſown on good 
ground, ſuch as hear the word, and receive zt, and 
bring forth fruit,ſome thirty-fold,fome fixty,and ſome 


an hundred. 


Seethis Parable largely opened in the Notes upon Mat. 13. 1. 
The Parable is recorded both by Matthew, Mark and Luke ; and 
15 of excellent Uſe: 1, To ſhew the Excellency of the Word of 
God, which is here {as in other places) called, The Word, It 15 
the Seed of God, the good Seed, and the Excellency of the Or- 
dinance of Preaching, {for that is the Seed fown.) 2. To ſhew 
us the different Effet of the Word preached from Moral Diſ- 
courſes, and Philoſophical Diſputes, from which can be ex- 

eAcd no Fruit 3 but where the Sower ſoweth the Word, there 
1s yet a very different Effet. Some bring forth the Fruit of 
Faith and Holineſs, and the Abiding Fruit of it, though in dit- 
ferent degrees : But many, yea, the moſt of thoſe that hear it, 
either bring forth no Fruit, or no Abiding Fruit, (witch 1s 1n- 
deed no true Fruit.) The Cauſes of this are, fome Mens per- 
funQory and carcleſs Hearing, never regarding to meditate on 
it, apply it to their own Souls, or to hide it in their Memories . 
Others, not ſuffering it to fink into their Hearts, and to take 
root in them, though it may at preſent a little afe& them, and 
make them Matter of Diſcourſe: Other Fcns Thoughts berg 
taken up with Buſineſs, and the Care of this World, ard tiicir 
Hearts filled with the Love of the Things of this Lite 3 whict; 
they. cannot part with, when Trouble and Perſecution for thc 
Owning and . Protefltion of the Goſpel arifeth. 3, It Iikewiſc 
teacheth us a ſure note of unprofitable Hearers of the Werd ;, as 
alſo of thoſe whom the Word 1s likely to profit, and have any 
good, and ſaving ctfeft upon « The former hear, but never 7c- 
gard whether they underftand what they hear, yea or no : The 
others are not ſatithed with hearing, unleſs they underttand 3 fo, 
thoſe who went to him to know the Parable, were not the Twelve 
only (who are often called hx Diſciples emphatica!ly,) but thct 
othcrs that were about him,to whom it was given 1» know the Myte 
rres of the Kingdom of God. 4. The moſt of our Saviour's Hearer 
were dou\tleſs Members of the Jewiſh Church, yet our Saviou: 
ver, Hi. fires the moſt of them thoſe that are without ; whicl. 
teach:tit us, that not only ſuch as are out of the Pale of th 
Church, but thoſe alſo who are out of the decreo of Elcfior- 
thoſe to whom jt is not given t bnow the Myſeries of the Kingdow 
©% 94, are mm Chriſt's account withzt. For titer things con- 


Chap. IV. S. M ARK. 


cerning this Parable, they are fully ſpoken to in our Na+. 
Mat. 13. PE 


21 And he ſaid unto them, * Is a cangl- brouet' 
Bug i 


be {et on a candleftick ? 


The import of this Verſe may be learned from 274, « L 
where the words are, and applyed by an Exhortation ©. 
nels, veing an Argument drawn from the End for ti 
receive Gifts and Grace from God, which is not only ©. 
own Advantage, though (like the Husb:ndman) tho@ ; 
have it, reap rſt of their own Fruit, but for the Gooo 1n. 
vantage of others alſo Some thivk that Chrift 1c; . Fa 
of bimſcit, who is the £325t of the IWorld, and therer po 
this Parable unto them. But the Context 11 Metthow S 
tothe true ſence of the words, I ſee no reaton tor us to” buf a 
{elves in {carching out another, eſpecially when the Congoxtc., 
lo fair with the foregoing Words, where he had Leen def + 
the g99d Ground, by bringing forth Fruit, fome tj, © 
{ixty, ſome an hundred-fild, What therefore the (hwin- ;1, 5.) 
in the good Ground, mention'd in the Parable is, that is the 1:1.) 
ng up of a Canal? 1 this Verſe ; and the Light ſhewed 51 +1 
lighted Cand!2 not put under a Veſſel, or a Bed, but in a cr. 4. 
Stick, 1s the ſame thing with the Fruit before mentioned, 
22 *FÞFor there1s nothing hid, which ſhall go + 
manifeſted:neither was any thing kept fecret;bur that 
it ſhould come abroad. 
23 *Ifany man have ears to hear, let hin hc 

[1205 

B+ 

yy 


Urs 1 


Our Saviour, Vat. 19. 26. ſending out his Apoftics.- fxit 
them, Fear them mt therefore 3; that is, not vour Enumic: + 
Pcrfecutors 3 for there is nothing covered, that ſhall nit be (e504) -1. 
and hid, that fhall nit be known. The ſence of which wys: we 
chere ſaid might be, Though your Innocency be now hid, vie 
it ſhall be made kno*«#n; or though the Goſpel be now hid, 1:4 
preached in a little corner, and kept ſecret, it ſhall he mye« 
manifeſt, avd come abroad. Both Mark and Lube have it ij. 
mediately aiter the Parablc of the Sower, where it doth not ſec 
to have the ſam2 ſcuce as here. But more general Prove); 
common Sayings may be variouſly applyed to Things to which 
the common tence and import of them will agree. Some here 
apply them thus ; There 1s nothing in the Prophecies coneerr- 
ing Me, which ſhall not be manifeſted. Which agrees «i:! 


T's 0 IF 


che ſence of thoſe who interpret the former Verſe concerni;; 
Chrift, as ifhe had been giving a Reaſon why he opened the 
Parables to thoſe that asked him of it, But thoſe who interpret 1: 
to the ſence which it beareth plainly, Mat, $. 15,15. make th; 
ſenie thus; For though you may play the Hypocrites, 2n: 
under a Protetſion of the Goſpel, but hide the Hypocrific, Li: 
and Corruptions of your Hearts ; yet that Mask will nc hog 
always ; there will come a Day of Judgment, which will man. 
feſt and diſcover all, and bring to light the hidd2n :!lings »: 
Diſhonzfty, What we have wer. 23. is but an uſual Conciufr 
which our Saviour hath-often made uſe of in many grave and in 
portant Diſcourſes. 


hear: with what meaſure you mete, it ſhall be me: 
ſured to you; and unto you that hear, ſhall more 
S1VEN, | 

25 Forhe that hath, to him ſhall be given: an! 


ST 1" 


which he hat h. 

Whoſo conlidereth the connexion of theſe words, jr : 
meaſure you mete, &c, with the firſt words in the V-ri., 7 
heed what you bear, and compares the former with t!:o 71141 c 
Texts, Mat. 9. 2. Luk. 6. 38. will wonder what the tor. {now 
be of the Argument; for in buth the parallel Texts, the 11th 
words in this Yerſe ſeem to be uſed as an Argument to perſv.cce 
them to Fujtice and Charity tewards Men, from the Punithmen: 
of the Violations of the Law concerning them, by way of A 
lation; nor are there any Sins fo ordinarily as thoſe of £114! 
kina, {9 puniſhed : bur they can have no ſuch force here, t2!. 
lowing thoſe words, Tike heed what you hear, But, as ! {aid 
fore, there 1s nething more nlual than divers applications 0t thi 
ſine common Saying, cr Proverbial Expreſſion ; the Saying | 
true, wiiether it be underfiood of Men, or of God, As we? 7 
wit'> God, ſo will God deal with us - | Take heed what zou Pear 3 
Luke taith, how you hear. Take heed what you hear ;, as riucn a, 
Take heed to what you hear, that you may recetve the Wits 
nor as Seed by the Way-tide, or in thorny or ſtony Grovic. 
put as 11 good Ground : tl:is ſeemeth rather to be the ſence © 
our Sav10ur, than to give a Caution, by theſe words, f9 Men 
to examine what they hear; fearcning the Scriptures, whether 
what they hear, doth agree with them ; though that allo be '"- 
Duty of ail conicientious Perſons, as appeareth from A:!. i”: ** 
bor ſaith our Saviour, GcJ will deal with you, as to Þ15 1” 
videnice- as you deal with him. If you allow the Word ot ©” 
but a light }caring, you ttall reap from it hear'd, a va +l 
-rofht and Advantage : tron 


t]h1s appeareth to be the fenc*, 710% 
to:lowing v.0:ds, | 4nd ite vu that hear, ſhall mire 5 $047 1 
'nat is, Unto you that bear, io as to attend, nunder/rard, 
heathen and obey, God will give further knowledge 0 
Myſteries « { For he that hath, to him ſhall be given, XC. | 39-0: 
-encral Proverbial Expreftion, which the Reader may 4104 ©: 
!a the Notes on Mat. 33. 12. & 2%. 25. 
26 And he ſaid, So is the kingdom of G0:; 
man ſhould caſt ſeed into the ground, | 

| ' nd day,onu 
27 And ſhon1g ſleep, and riſe night ana Cay, or 


t, () 4 


2 4 > © 


leed ſhould ſpring and grow ups he knowern r0T 


Chap, [ 


to be put under a buſhel, or under a bed ? ang .” 


24+ And he ſaid unto them, * Take heed what you? (- 


i [ 


Gr 


If ul 
relat! 
ler us 
Hear! 
what 

ſetih 1 
wi1;CI 
1-11. 
God + 
j: 111 j 
tie G 
"ot ful 
Suci | 
Ci}urc 
11t0 f 
to tl 
expect 
p1't | 
videnc 
out th 
and fl} 
bruit 
eradua 
then tl 
ful: m4 
putfctl 
tu lv £C 


COnmrh 
tle Vi 

Proteit! 
tcthon 

of Vert 
God wy! 
fown ; t 
This I t 


30 
kin dc 
C0112 


=. 
F*1tis fo! 
& 12. 001n t 
E324 
cometi 
branch 
Lhe ſha 


Wen 
wil id 
ible to 
tins tim 
th: IT iN} 
(ur ro tÞ 
Id 10 tf 
ALCE of 
T2; 33* 
Word 1 
34 | 
and wh 
his diſc 
From 
Our S4vic 
g:liſts, k 
two of t 

' pl; 


&1 I 
WIA 4 


. 1:7 


v 


Ll 


Fi 


'M 


V S MARK rin, I 
[V. \ 15D. V, 
Dri » Ire of ls Par als en 'y FE > ; : 
8 Tor the carth bringeth forth fruit of her lelt, f <nquire wg fon For 1Ithovgh Fane nf his Parull'; were 
& gi : l ' 
oa M ” a - p* : D ain anc Cattle 10) $1 Us TTY, Toy 't '$/ EEE y! ”, d4 | 
" then rhe ear ; atter that, the full corn | © 3 WISCTILI IC, vol Cf, TROL Qtr 
rſt the blade, ” : , SdV ings, vecaute the Dattiine t,uht iy tom - 
In The £20 PET > ; [710.15 Conti nctous Hearer: would ther, fore cite f ene 
29 Bur wen the frut 15 | brongit forth, imme- | P.:-.a6te, EXPpaubuld to them 5 theſ> were bile Dn en 
> RY jE: 3 gr 5 — »y £5 - ” 5 9 3H 7 * 4 ( « ? | x J —— a : : Kos. 2s - 
date) INC | (Cf h Il the [ICKiCy becaule Le harveſt I5 MLONEO Vel , 44 Tt \ h1 In itt VV a 5 WOajWT CS dial [ p_ f | . 5, 
alu in or by which he taught the Moltirude, F, Ki C1 '"N 
(OM-- ; Hearers, their contenting them folvus Þ i; a mi erin find 
Our Evangeltlt a19ne tzketh notice of this Parable z nor hath] ,F Words, which thes <1 not vader ERS £4: 7 h Ty 
wag " %s I p « V {4 f a Jai”) » Let *V rYAl To 1 Tr j bo _ EE b 3 mn -# wa ; ca Y aetl;; {2% ] 1h. 
it any Paſta Expitcat! N 41:ccyd, It we expound 1t with } extian that they made no Coricionc bk 1 Le 
relation to what went bctore, the lcope of 1t 4ecimetit fo be, to fact; '9 whan it was not ctyven tt» bmw the WG: Ee * 
let us know, that God wilt ave an Arcount of ydicn, 1197 ther L do's nf G3 but ſuch UPOI wh __ YO REAP 9 ! A 
lg "IO EPs Reo frire we bs not: anne al ads So " Wh ms | NY 7 SS 20 CrOPICE 
Hearing Of Þ1: Word ; and eniure fore Mcn had nced to take heed | r,44 vx 15 to be fulfilicd, Ti. 5. c, x. . 
hat «oy hear (as Mark ſaith J) anu Dow they rear (as Lube phra- _ : SEES 
a et OO 4 : --- C 1 2 F 4 * , ! 7 Fs, ? AN —— C * 42 24 
Ct it) rus the 2th. Verſe £xpoundcth tle former wath the 35 * And the ſame EMS when tne cnc ? me, , bal 
oy " hp , hn? 1 rin + 9A 3* » "y 4 "4459 Y 's ' + "m -) - n — R a - ” ay —_ £, 
kelp af Our SavIOUT 9 E xXPOt10191 O; Ne P ar able " re Tares, GN as 1:1th UnCO them, Let 15 j2a1$ OVCi BAntnh the other - . 
ch hehad told us, Mat. 13. 35. Tre Harvelt is the End of tre] (ge. . ; 
\V 1:11? , , - . . . 
1» the Reapers are the Ange!;, There 15 another Notion of pu 
World 5 the ACare I. : : 6 Ard when they had for «At the minirien th. 
God's Harvelt, Mat. 0. 37. atid F537. 4 35: where God s Harveſt PR, - ak | a th y had 1cNTl d whe. LC EPUT 122, 
- ries a Pcople cnclined and prepared to Hear'and to Receive y LOOK M1... even as he was in the ſhip, ard there 
$1.01 a , 1 " i F . . p ' c Wh - bt 
ne Gojpcl. But w:itnal, tlits Pnrctle of cur Saviours may be | WETE allo with kim other litrlec ſhips. 
_ hy 1 WM IC ® Rf re EG fas 4 Fae | . C3 x * . 
f further uſe to us {| The Kin;tm of God 3s, &e.] That 15 37 And there a:oſfe a preat ſtorm of wind, and the 
Such is the Providential Ditpentarion of G: d, 1n gathering I'S waves beat ito the ſhip ſo thar it was now full 
Curch by the Mmnittry of the Word, as Mens caiting of Seer 233 And hewas io 2 wi ; , c *Fp" 7s 
»t0 the Ground, When the Fiu-bandman hath caſt Þ15 Seed ; was 11 toe hit der Part of the hip.atlep 
TIC FREW 4 "= . ts , . 8 - [| - SEU a * ——_ 
into the Ground, he 15 no more ſuincitous about 18, nor doth he on a pillow * and they awake him, and {3\ UNTO Mit 
expect to diſcern the Motion of it; but having done what 1s his Vaſter, carelt thou not that we p-rith? 
| A 1.3152 | 1? SETS f } ”=_ Fe Tr J}CT t} O T7 F w? 'E d] as . ' — 
part, Bc po = —_—_ AE: Prog - Gogs = 39 Andhe aroſe, ard rebuked the wind; and {aid 
VIdeRCo. INC 1TH WINGS. WIN *FHIT 0} F4 Je» j jc nor WIE unto the Sea Pe = {1,1}, Mn. 4 Oy F 1 
out the Inducn ce of Heaven, both in the thining of the Sun, i » ace. be {till :and the wht d cexiied, and 
nd the falling of the Dew, and of the Ban ; neither doth its ITE Was great Calm. 
Fruit appear prefently mn 1% tall Ripcncts and Perfcition, bur 40 And he fGid unto them, Why ate y< ieurivls 
:ridually 15 made perfect ; | ftrft there appears the BYude,the A-rb. how is it t har ye have no faith ? 
ho tr, then the Gram, | winch by degrees vroweth to- its OED © : — 
then the Ev", th ns OE op Oe. OO 41 And they feared exccedingly and laid one to 
{| mazmtude, and then harencth, and then the Hushandm.n another, What m 5 Mad - hy 
- , 6 = PR . — . +4 5 a4 ; - »? £d © +] 
putteth in his Sickle : fo the Vinifters of the Goſpel ought farth-| . F » 7 HACMANNET IT MAN 15 TNIS, TNAT EVEN LiiC 
{iv to a0 thor parts, in ſowing the S.cd of the Golpe!; then Wind and the ſea obey him ? 
n0t to bc rwO {oil1citous, but to 'CaVC tic rtuc unto god. Where Tins P1ece of :hifrory 1% recite ty Maitthoew and {ut *, "436 WW '9 
the Seed falls upon gn1d Ground, the Word wall not be untruttful. as by our Evazeeliſt, ind tat with rio contidera) V4ibatn 
The Miniſter of the GOP! doth not PECTEHELY d11cern the fruit cne fron anoti er; what; in it yanter” Explication. :3 av t4 
of tis Jabour 3 he at hiſt, It way be, fect nothing of it, but 1>| found in the Notes on Hat. 8. 23, &c Criſt ad bac ine 
! 4 3 BAS *.» - As S . / VT > EL 8 . . . . "es 
ready to cry out, I nw LibMured In varn : but though the Seed | ing, and being weariced, and tizcd wit! tbe Mu ite 10H 
lie under the C'ods, and frems choaked with the Corruption of preffing upon kim, gave order to crofs the 1, and to vo ove 
Man's Heart, yet 1f the Sul he one fo who 1t {15 given to knw] on the ottier tide; then (to ſhew us he was truly N and 
bots hs Mt. \C(nld it (hall ſoring « hs SHE l, ef | - 
the W.ſteries of tre Kingdom j 0 Id, c matt Ipring out, the Word took. upon him tie Infirmitics of cur Naturez io com; e'1 
Wi. he {opt OE fo be Ioff . but nie will ſprinz the Blade. then hiaſelf [oO tleep upon a Pillow, 1n tic i.indeor part of Gtbhjido ' 
vil appocr the Ex, The Frutt of the Word preached, appcars | There happencth a great Storm cf Wird, nut without Cirriit's 
wr degrees 3 Dmetiunes, at firit, onlv by creating good Inciini- | kriewledge and ordering, that lic mizlr, upor: * iccaficin: 
trons 12 the Soul, ard Dctircs to [earn the way of the Lord more | both try his Peoples Faith, and alio thew his Din Power, in 
verſettly 3 then in Acts further tending to Perfection 3 at Jaſt 1n|ftiiling the raging of the Sea. As Man he tor , w_the 
conmmecd Habits of Grace. If 1s not thus with ail ; in ſome |} ſaine time he was the truc Witchm.mn of hract who never fuirr- 
the Word brings forth nothing but the Blaze, a Inttle outward | bereth nv ſleepeth : The Storm encreaſets til there was » 4ropt 
Protcition, which detindleth away, and dies; 1n fome the Pro-| quantity of Water come into the Sip, and they 64 end to 
ton ho.ds longer, but tncy never come fo confirmed Habits | periſh. In the Mount of the Lord it jhatt bs fren, God iftn for 
of Vertue and Hojinelſs, But there will come an Harveſt, when i hears from bclping h1s Puople til fe aft hour. Then they 
God wr'l come with his Sickle, to reap the Fruit of his Sced | awabe him + He arilzth, reukes the Wind avd ihe aver ; 
ſown ; therefore Vea had need tak” ER WO and vow they hear.| ufeth no means, - but by the Word of his Px: » 4c mmandcth 
] q > a+ th:ic » * 7 4 ) Þ- o 1 * 1 ”'y 74 ; b 
This 1 take to 56 fhe lence cf this P arable. the Wind and Wavcs to be ft 1 = 104 h- 4io re;uxcti f35 Bit- 
R , c:ples for want of Faith, wio ver did not ditcern that be was 
/ 8 = / b eos 
Z0 And he ſaid, W hereunto ſhall we liken the. not Man on'y, but the A4nihty Grd. as cppears by ther words, 
kin:dom of God ? or with wiat compariſon ſhall] we | tncy faid one tc another, What manner of Man us ti ? 
compare 1t * 
A OE 54 — M : OF T. (; H A ” VF. 
31 tt islike a * grain of muſtard-ſeed, which whiten 
RL. j- - _ 57 Fu > wn) oofdo 
4 lo D , SY | ** ſ __ EY < , : IP > ot ” _ 
3 SY 10Wn in the earth, 15 leſs than all the eds that! Chriſt, in the Countrey of the Gadavenes, diipaſſi]ot' 2 Wan of a 
 deln The earth. Legim of Devils, and per mitteth them t9 29 ints the Swine: The 
. . N : » + a, re; a ; My / t , . } 2 M th, - A / ; = _ | Ode 
32 But when It 1s ſow ng it groweth up, and be- Gad a CINE) Pra) him } depart I 1c Wn BJ? 4 / G ? / pal, an 
meth vreater rt ll hert nd. Oo departeth, and publiſheth what had be! dwe throggrut Doon- 
COMCL! &TCAtel C12N At WIDS, an 2 OOLeth Our great polts, 1—20% A Woman ſub of a Bonds Ile, by truiching bas 
branches, 10 rhat the {owls of the alr may lodge under Garment, is made whole : He comfort et) ner, and Cc mmronte:t 
the ſhadow of It. her Faith. 21—34. Raiſeth the Ruler s Datghter from tre 
Dead, 2 —4 2 
' % ; CLE Y 35 4 & 
We met with this Parable, Mat. 13. 31. where the Reacer , 
SE... ; es en SES wo orrom: of if 1c - anita s/ P a- "= x og 
WI! 11d \ + laws Q1VEN thic ITHWTLES Of J}i» It IS l } F9}; Ciqgl il of : X*- 1 1 - y LuUR.S 
p s v8; CI G5 ti DS) - - * 14.3 ate 
ue foretellins Te great Succels that rhe Goſp21, which at| I ND they * came over nnto Fe OMICr _ 
this time was refirained to a little Corner of the World, and of the ſea, into the countrey of the (ada- 
tar mer with (1440) acceptatice, ſhou'd have, after Chriit's Re- | renes, 
lurcton from the Dead : Whi th Prophecy we imd was fuittl- 2 And when he was come out of the {hip i: .7e- 
A __ I. : ſ 4 > F| } hae ir s i t 1 C ' * . . : . - 
4 10 the Aputtl. - LIME, ang hath been further fulfilling in all diately there met him out of the tombs, 2 man with 
Ages of the World -fnce that time. Goicte 
; an unclean ſpirit, 
 33* And with many fſach parables ſpake he the : "NCEINS 
3 Whohad his dwelling amongſt the tomize, and 


word unto them, as they wete able to hear #t- 
34 But without a parable ſpake he not unto them : 


and w 
his diſciples, 


hen they were alone, he expounded all things to 


From hence we may gather, that all the Parables by which 


Our Saviour inftruſted his Hearers, arc not recorded by the Evan- 


e-11\ts, though many be, and ſome mentioned by one, ſome by 


wooft em, which are not recorded by the other. 
Chriſt diſdained not to accommodate his 
+cthnd of Preaching to his Hearer's Capacity, neither 


Fre avte t2 hear tt. | 
N vi A 
| * . Y ugh . .* % % . . 
BU Tatft: rut Miniſter of Ci:rift do it. 

OUT SE © Lanoy 

| ; *"4F'v F+ - + Ts _ 71 4 W = SI. 
9 v, Undcritanding ard Protit of his 
tt. Fers 6 ; 

Hen } 1nd Divale fhom{ 
As "Wi; . ys] £5 « | 
Ut 0 7 without a Parihle ynto the 
, ye; 2 - 1 al , 9 NL 7 
mt l 8 \W{itl UNC {Cal AQ, IL L 

11 74 uy . R PO _ _ 
and th IENOUVLeS 5420 HAVE NC BICATT 
Ar, vote Y "oy OY $* . G6 I Þ 

COU OF STIL 5 "LIVE thetc 
2 That : difcer carft £9 3 
: 
uy Arn dQ rule. 3 4 23 


'Vcs v ith their own Noltlcs. 


? Fs. 
Tear NO 


+17 Fi 


[ As they 


He Preacheth in thc 


ze ant Methed, that Preacheth beſt to the 
| Other 
indeed but trice with the greateſt Work under 
That he 
Thar hc 
rantave for their Underſtanding 


Hearerss; 


Im. WAIs, I, 
{nguerce upon ter 

three Advantages. 
with a defire 


! 


\ 
» 


no man could bind him, no, not with chairs : 


4 Becauſe that he had been ciren bonr | wit 
fetters and Chains, and rhe chains had been plucke 
aſunder by himgand the jerrers broken 1n pieces - net- 
ther could any man tame him. 


s And always night and day he was in the mov2n- 
tains,and in the tombs, crying, and catting humic 
with ſtones. 

6 But when lc ſaw Jeſus afzr off, he ran and wor- 

ipped him, 
—_ cried with a loud voice, and faid, Wha: 
have I todo with rhee, Jeſus, thou Son of the molt 
2igh God ?I adjure thee by God, tnat thou torment 
Me not. 

Z (For he faid unto him, Come 
{thou unclean fpirir-) 


out of the man; 


5 And 


[ 
od 
x 
fu ' 
/ > [ 
bs : # W. ..i4} 
= + 
; 14 ” 
a def 
i 
} HH 
pi; : 
"SST 
wF 


" J bf » 1 
1B POR: 88 
GH is 1 IEURY 
3 t Fc: 


2 TIE. ay ' 4 


> — = 
iden ME Os 120; =” ad 


- - 

> Th 
» at) 
'Y 5 


—_— - 
+ Conkle, 
i C | 
SD IT 
ann, as, 


OO” PO 8 
IREES 


- 


FL. 1 LF | * i 
: "a, # fy At |1X y + 
RIOTS | BF 

l I : $28 { : 

bay, 23 0 IR HET v4 v3" 2 % 

bn &* þ- 04% ' n | & 4+ 
> ad 


pe” 


7” tO 
o And to asxed hims What 5 thy ame ? And 
nc aniwerce, Taying, My names Legion: for we arc 


720 y- : ; | 
0 And he befonght him much, that he would not 
£2 them away ont of the countrey. | 

:: Now there was nigh unto the mountains a great 


+ + 
iS . 


+2rG of iwine feeding. | 
i2 And all che devils beſought him, ſeying, Send 


* = Þ 6 
z34 SD £45 


£10axcd in the [ca. : * 
14 And they that fed the ſwine fled, and told ze in 


the city, and in the countrey--And they went out to 


ſee what it was that was done- | 
15 And they come to Jeſus, and ſee him that 


was poſſeſſed with the devil, and had the legion, lit- 
ting, andcloathed, andin bis right mind, and they 


were afraid. | 
16 And they that ſaw it, told them how it befe] 


him that was poſſeſſed with the devil, and alſo con- 
cerning the ſwine. : 
17 And* they began to pray him t depart out of 


their coaſts. 
138 Ard when he was come into the fhip, * he that 


had been poſſeſſed with the devil, prayed him that he 
£1241t he with him. 

is, Howbeir, Jeſas ſuffered him not, but faith unto 
him, Go home to thy friends, and tell them how 
ercat things the Lord hath dove for thee, and hath 
-2d comnalhion on thee. 

20 And he departec, 2nd began to publiſh in De- 
capolis how great things Jeſus had done for him : and 
2:| Men uid marvel, 


This famous pjece of Hiſtory hath the Teſtimony of three 
Evangeliits, Mfc, Mirb, and Lube. - We mcering with it 
in Matthew, dil not only largely open what Paiſages Matthew 
hath about if, but what both Mah and Lube have, Sce the Notes 
on Mat. e. 23, :e, go, &c. We lhall only anzex here ſome 
ſhort Notes, Interpreters judge the Country of the Gergaſenes, 
2nd of the Gaturencs mentioned hore, to have been the tame 
lometimes receiving the Lopountnation from one Cty, 

tames from anther y the Devils are called Unclean 
Spirits. in oppotition to the Huy Spirit, fc we have formerly 
Ihcucd ; 25 aifo, why they Eelght to be abuut Thmbs, We have 
alto ſhened the Devi's Power, which (oy God's permifſion) he 
excrciſeth vpon Men; ſore le piſofferh, and ateth the part of 
the Sow; in them fefpecially as to the /comatzue Faculty) theſe 
are properly call'd Demmachs, Frgoy uct tf others he apfiitteth 
more, as 3 firetgn Agent, ofncring Viv cace fo them: others he 
more fecre*\ intlucnceth by {ipreſiions avd Suggeſtions ; Thus 
he ſti'l rarrurels workerh mm the Children of Dijobedience, Eph. 2. 2. 
Nor arc thc Feopite of God free trom tnis zpetus, though being 
ſuccoured by Chriſt, they arc not ſo ordinarily overcome, Of 
the mighty Power of the Evil Ang-!s, to break Chains and Fet- 
ters, we necd n-t doubr, conſidering, that though falſen from 
their firft Righteouſncſs, they yet have their natural Power as 
Spirits. | T adjure thee by Gad, | is no more than, 1 ſulemnly en- 
treat (hee; 1t hath not the force of, Swear unto me by God, (as 
ſome weuld have it.) Matthew mentioneth two of theſe Demz- 
macks; :lark and Luke but one. There were doubtleſs two, 
but protably one of tiem was not ſo raging as the other, and 
therefore icſs taien notice of, Some think one of theſe Men 
was an Heathen, the other a Few : Becauſe the term Legion, 
which the Demonack gives himſelf, is an Heathen term, figni- 
fiving 4 Squadron of Soldiers, about Six thouſand, or more, as 
ſome reckon. 2. Chriſt was nw in a Countrey fall of Henthens, 
3. ihe Woman of whole Cure we ncxt read, was a Syropheni- 


4 2 
fome- 


ns 4p 
1 YUts VV :3 


T S. M A R K. Oh 


the Explication of this Hiſtccy, fee the Notcs on 314 » Y 
25, 29. | 
21 * And when Jeſus was paſſed over azzin by fri. 
unto the other fide, much people gathered rt; EI 
and he was nigh unto the ſea. TR 
22 And * behold, there cometh one of the | 
of the ſynagogve, Jairus by name, and when |. - 
him, he fell at his feet, | 
23 And beſought him preatly, ſaying, My jj... 
daughter lieth at the point of death, 7 pray thee com. 
and lay thy hands on her, that ſhe may be tated, 414 
ſhe ſhall live. 

24 And Jeſws went with him, and much People 
followed him, and thronged him. 

This who'e Hiſtory alfo is recorded both by Matthew ang 
Like; and we have already, 1n our Notes upon Mat. c, jg, x. 
fully opened the ſeveral Patſages of it mention d vy all 6, 
Evangelifts, to which we refer the Reader. Chriſt was _ 
come over again into Galilee, where, though the Temy/s _ 
not, yet there were Synagogues where the People did ordinari', 
ailemble to wirſbip God, Nor were they without Order in the. 
Fynagogues z they had one whom they called the Ruler of +, 
Synagogue, who directed and ordcred the Affairs of that parti. 
cuiar Synagogue : it 1s more probable, that Zairus (here tir. 
tion'd) was 11 that ſence fo calied, than becaute he was One cf 
the Court of Twenty three, whici the Fews are ſaid to have hy 
1n every City. 


25 Anda certain woman * which had an iffic (,, 
blood twelve years, .,' 

26 And had ſuffered many things of many phy. 
cians, and had ſpent all thar ſhe had, and was nothir- 
bettered, but rather grew worſe, x 
27 When ſhe had heard of Jeſus, came in the pr;;; 
behind, and tonched his garment. 

28 For ſhe ſaid, If I may touch but his cloths, | 
ſhall be whole. | 

29 Ard ſtraightway the fountain of her blood 1;; 
driedvp: aidſhe teliin her body that ihe wes hc2lgg 
of that pi3gue. 

30 And Jeſus immediately knowing in himic!\\ that 
* yertue had gone.ont of him, turned him abut it; the « 
preſs, and faid, Who touched my cloaths ? 

31 And his diſciples feid unto him, Thr: 
the multititude thronging thee, and ſayeſt thou, 4 10 
touched me? 

32 And he looked round about to ſee her that }:1 
done this thing. 

33 Bur the woman fearing and trembling, knowiz? 
what was done in her, came and fell down before him, 
and told him all the rruth. 

34+ And he ſaid unto her, Daughter, thy fah,, 
hath mede thee whole z go in peace, and be whole of © 
thy plague. 

See the Notes on Mat.c. 18. upon this whole Hiſtory, cot: 
taining a Paſſage which happened in the Way betwixt the Plice 
where our Saviour firſt heard of the Sickneſs of Fairus's Divth 
ter, and his Houſe, whither our Saviour was now going ; 
ſhall, in theſe Hiſtories, obſerve our Saviour propouuc ing fevers 
Queſtions to Perſons : Of the Hatter to which they related, 
could not be preſumed. to be ignorant, being. as to fits bivite 
Nature, Oniniſcient; but he only propounded them tor ft: 
bettering of the Know!edge of thoſe to whom or amoagli win 
he ſpake, that his Miracles might be more fully and Gift)! 
underitood : ſo alſo he 1s ſaid to have known many thing - 
here, that Vertue was gone out of h1m, Ys hich he only know, © (0 
was God, and knew all things. It 15 alfo obſervabſz2, how Ci: 
cncourageth the firſt Rudiments of Saving Faith in Chrilf, + 
that we read of this Woman, 1s. that ſhe faid, 7 7 mir 


ond | 


cian, It is vbſervable, that a Multitude of Evil Spirits is called 
by the Name of The Devil; becauſe, th-ugh confidered as -indi- 
vidual Spirits, they are many; yet in their Malice, and mif- 


touch the Hem of his Garment, T ſhall be whole : This ws 17vC 
ſhort of her owning arid receiving him as her Lord an! 4 
t amounted tono more than a Perſuaſion ſhe Had of !1 v5?! 


cnevous Defigns againſt Mankind, they are as one. Oh that the 
Yeopic of God were as well united 1n Deligns for 1s Glory / 


Power and Goodnets, and that with reſpz@ to the Heirs 9 4 
Bodily Diftemper ; neither doth it import her Bee ns, 1s 
be the Eternal Son of God, but one to whom Cod (hid col27 


Sore Interpreters ftart a Queſt! here, not very catie to be re- 
ſolved, viz. What made the Devils ſp defirous that Chriſt would 
not ſend them out of the Countrey? Their Anſwer is not impro- 
bable, Thut 1t was a Paganith, Ignoraat, Sottith Place, where 
uſually the Devil hath the beſt Markets, and the greateſt Rule. 
For as it 1s faid of Chriſt, that he could not do much in ſome 
Places where he came, beczute of their Unbelief : ſo neither can 
the Devil do much 1n fore Places, becauſe of the Faith of the 
Goſpel received by them. Hence it is obſervable, That as the 
Devil 15 not able to play his Game in anv place amongſt Chri- 
ſtians, as he doth at this div amongtt Heathens c fo he hath much 
leſs Power, at tlils day, in Places where the Word of God iz 
more generaliy known, and more faithfully preached, thin in 
other Places where People are more ignorant of the Scripturcs, 
and have lefs faithful and frequent Preaching. In the latter, 
he dealcth moſt by more inward Suggeſtions and Impretſions. 
Our learned Dottor Lightf9%t oblerves it probable, that this 
City or Country was gcncrally mad” up of Pagans, or apoſta- 
tized Fews, becauſe they nourtthed ſo many Swine, which to 
the Jews were unciean Beaſts, For other things relating to| 

[ 


[1 
. 


nicated a Power of Healing ; in this confidence {ho comet Wh 
him, and touchcth the Border of his Garment ; fe © prozent' 
healed ; Chiiſt ſaith, | her Faith had made her whole, | GH mes 
ſurcth her Faith by the Light and Means ſhe had rt. ccives 
accordingly rewards it; and if the Notion be truc, nat + 
he Healed the Body, he alſo Healcd the Soul, t5:'- 4 
beginning of a greater Faith in her, 

35 While he yet ſpake, there came from t:” ruler 
of the ſynagogues hoilſe, certain Which ſeid, tt 
davghteris dead, Why troubleſt thou the Mattcr «-; 
further ? | 
36 As ſoon as Jeſus had heard the word thi! | 
ſpoken, he ſaith unto the ruler of the {ypagog 1c; + 
not afraid, only believe. 


37 And he ſuffered no man to follow him, FLU 
cer, and James, and John the brother of Jatrcs- Q Ani 


3 'd. Fe _ 


him: 


us 
63 #4 


tr) te: 


::, Were 


theſe 
given 
Wrou! 


We 
Notes | 
Place « 
Birth, 
& 15. 
in they 
a'ſo put 
Text m 
ſtant Pr 
It 15 tru 
Scriptur 
Vere the 
Aflembl 
ſent; th 
tion ; f 
them, 
ve find 
may be : 
That ww} 
Whence « 
2, Tof 

They coy 
of their 1 
have ſuc} 
Miraculo; 
makes it; 
Jears of a 
Penter os 
ne Gid tc 


n 


r 


» 
gthe | 
—_ 


faPs VI. 


ys 


32 Ard he cometh to tie houſe of the ruler of the 
(ynagogue, and ſeth the tumult;and them that wept 


and wailed greatly. _ _ 

And when he was come in, he ſaith unto them, 
Why make you this adoe, and weep? the damſel is 
not dead, * but ſleepeth. : 

40 And they laughed him to ſcorn: but when he 
12d put them all out, he taketh the father and mother 
\thedamſel, and them that were with him, anden- 
*reth in where the damſel was lying. 

41 And he took the damſel by the hand, and faith 
anto her, Talitha cumi, which is, being interpreted, 
Damſel (I fay unto thee) ariſe. 

42 And ſtraightway the damfſel aroſe, and walked, 
for ſhe v/as of the age of twelve years : and they were 
aſtoniſhed with a great aſtoniſhment. 

43 And hecharged them ſtraightly, that no man 
hould know it : and commanded that ſomething ſhould 
be given her to eat. 

There is nothing in this Hiſtory needeth further Notes for 
Explication, than what we gave in the Notes on Mat. 9. to 
alich 1 here referr the Reader, There 1s nothing more unac- 
countable in all the Paſſages of our Saviour's Life, recorded by 
the Evangeliſts, than the Charges that he gave to ſeveral Perſons 
healed by him, That nd Man ſhould know it : Eſpecially if we 
conſider, 7: That he did not charge All fo : He bid the Perſon 
potſeiled with the Devil, ver.. '29. of this Chapter, go home to his 
Frionds, and tell them how great things the Lord had done for him. 
>. That he could not expedt to be concealed, had they yielded 
ghedience 3 for his Miracles were done openly, and it was not 
like that all would keep filence; nay, he commanded the Leper 
to 9 and ſhew himſelf to the Prieſts. 3. Few of thoſe thus charged, 
&:d keep filence. Nor do we ever find that Chriſt retle&ted 
Eame on them, trom which yet we cannot acquit them. But 
we muſt not think to underſtand the Reaſons of all Chriſt's 
ations and Speeches 3 he had doubtleſs wife Ends in doing it, 
though we do not underftand them, 


CHAP. YL 


Chrift preaching in his own Countrey , is contemned, and ſheweth 
hw they diſhonour a Prophet of their own, 1—5. Sendeth 
out his Apoſtles with Power over Unclean Spirits, 7—13. The 
Opinicn of Herad, and others, concerning Chriſt , 14—15, The 
Reaſen why John was Beheaded, 17 —28. His Diſciples bury 
him, 2c. Toe Apoſtles return, and give an Account to Chrift of 
what they had done and tangit , 3933. Feſus pitying the 
Multittcz, teacheth, and feedeth them miraculouſly, 34—44. 
Walteth 1 the Sex tn his Dijciples, and conforteth them, 45—52., 
Coming 1) Genneſarzt, healeti 41 that touched him, s3—g<. 


| MX NDhe went out from thence, and came into 
{A his owncountrey, and his diſciples follow 
him: 


St. M AR K. 


| thirty years of age, and it is not provanle tuat ne lived ai! theſe 
years 1n [dlenefs. | The Son of Mary, the Brother of Fumos aro 
Foſes, and Fada, and Simm,) That is, the Kinſhnin 15 moſt in 

terpret 1t,) ſuppofing Mary the Mother of our Lord had nc 
more Children, I ſhall not determine it. They fay, ther 
four were the Children of Mary, Sifter to the Mother of __ 

Lord, nnd the Wife of Cl25þas, chap, Is. 429. N- 100 Py BY 
We read of Fames, Fiſes and Sale, as the Children of th: 

Mary ; but of Fuda and Simon, we read not. | Ant they wors 
offended at him : That is, Although they heard fuch thins: 
from him, and ſaw ſuch mighty Works done 1y him, as they 
could not but think required a Divine intluence and Pox;- 
er 3 yet becauſe by their Reaſon they cou'd not compre 

hend, how One who had almoſt thirty years lived as 2 Hoch a. 
nick amongſt them, ſhould come by any ſuch A cquaintance: 
with, or Extraordinary Influence from God , their Patſjon 
quickly went over; and though they were more modeſt, than 
with their corrupt Teachers, to ſi, he did this by the Devi/ . 
yet neither would they receive him, and believe him, but lizht- 
ed and deſpiſed him ; as if God's Influence had been tied to their 
Schools of the Prophets. 


own kin, and in hisown houſe. 


_ he laid his hands upon afew ſick foik, and healed 15- 25. 
EPem. > 


he went round about the villages, teaching. Sata, 


Experience tells us, that Familiarity breedeth a Contempt. Aur Lic 13. 
Saviour (though there was a deeper Cauſe) aftigneth this a3 the 

cauſe why thoſe of XN.t.24:th paid him vo greater Reſpect, Un- 
belief in us, bindeth the Hands of God : | He cwld thers do no 

mghty Works, &c.)} Hecould nit; not from a defeft of Power. 

but the Exerciſe of Divine Power is always regulated by Wit- 

dom ; and in conſiftence with his Wiſdom, he could do n: 

mighty Works there : For the End of our Saviour's Miracles 

being either to Convert Unbclicvcrs to the Faith of the Gotpel, 

w to Confirm Weak Believers in it, he foreſaw, that the per- 
:zorming ot Miracles there, wouid be without any Saving Ei- 

fe, and ſuſpended his Miraculous Power. Beſides, he was 

Iighly provoked by their obſtinate Infidelity, and would noc 

work great Wonders amonegſt them ; only he curerh a few fich 
Perſons, (And he marvelled ot their Unbelief. | Kis Divine 
Dottrine was ſo convincing, and the Fame of his Gloriou: 

Works done in places near them was ſo univerſ2] and cr:dib!-, 

that there was juſt cauſe of his rational Wonder, that they did 

not Believe, Though our Saviour left: them in their [n#delir7, 

he did not his Blefſed Work, Cening round about the V*!'1gc- 
teaching. ] Still Preaching appeareth to have been our Saviour 5 

great Work, how Iizhta thing foever ſome make ci it. I can 

not but obſerve, how littl: Reaſon Men have to glory in, cr to 

truſt to any External Privi'cdg:53 how little other Aids 2nd Aff 
ſtances, without the ſpecia! Intlu-nces of Divine Grace, i12nif: 
to the begetting of Faith in Unbelicving Souls, and removing 
their Prejudices againſt the Vottrine of the Goſrel, Chrifts 9:1 
Country isas bad as any othet. 


2 And when the ſabbath-day was come; he began | 
tn teach in the ynagogue: and many hearing h1m, | 


|... were aſtoniſhed, ſaying, ® From whence hath this man | 
' theſethings? and what wiſdom # this which 1s 


viven anto him, that even ſuch mighty works are ; 
wrought by his hands ? 


3 Is not'this the carpenter, the ſon of Mary, the | 3 


brother of James and Toſes, and of Juda, and Simon ? 
and are not his ſiſters here with us ? And they were 
offended at him. 


We mect with all this, Mut. 13. $3, $4, $5, $5: See the 
Notes there. By his own, queſtionleſs is meant Nazareth, the 
pace ofhis Education, though Bethlehem were the place of his. 
Eirth, hence he was uſually called eſs of Nazareth. Luke, chap. 
4. 15. naineth Nazareth 3 but though (finding that place athxed 
intheMargin of our ordinary Bibles as a parallel Text) I have 
alſo put it into the Margin z yet I cannot be confident, that this 
Text mentioneth the ſame Motion of our Saviour''s The con- 
ſtant Pratice of our Saviour on the Sabbath Days, is obſervable : 
it 15 true, he had a liberty there to Preach, and Expound the 
Scripture 3 but without doubt, many things of Ritual Nature 
vere there done, which our Lord was far from approving 3 their 
Aſſemblies being not Idolatrous, hc judged it no Sin to be pre- 
ſent; the main things done there, were of his Father's Infſtitu- 
tion ; for other things, we never read our Saviour touched at 
them, Still the Effe& of our Saviour's Preaching to the Jews, 
ve find to be Amazement and AſtÞniſhment, but no Faith. Men 
May be affeted by the Word, that are not converted by it : 
That which troubled them, was, They . could not imagine 
whence our Saviour had his Power to do thoſe mighty Works. 
2, To ſpeak things importing ſuch 4 Wiſdom given unto him: 

hey could not conceive how one that had never fate at the Feet 
of their Doors, bnt had been bred wp as a Mechanick, ſhould 
have ſuch v7iſdom and Knowledge, or ſuch a Power to work 
Miraculous Operations. (Is not this the Carpenter * This 
makes it appear probable, that our Saviour did, tell he was thirty 
Jars of age, work with Joſeph in his Trade, whether of a Car- 
enter of a Maſon, (for Tiyvw fgnifies either.) Tt is certain, 
ne did tot begin to appear publickly, and to Preach, till he was 

Col. 2o 


J 


to ſend them forth by two and two, and fave them Luk. 1: 
power over unclean {pirits. 

8 And commanded them that they ſhonild take nc+ 
thing for therr journey, fave a ſta only : no frrip, 7 


bread, no-|| money in Their parſe: 1 Brafs, 7 


$,0 reg / '# ol fa 


Mark had before told us of the Ele&rm of the Triclre, ch; 

14. Which neither Matthew” tor Lube mention hero. THe 
iveth us an account of their Wiſion, '. Inch 35 
both them alio. The [rſtrotions which Fc gave them , 
much the fame with what we mcet with 1n Mat. 10. and there 
opened : He would have them, upon their firſt **ifion, com- 
mit themſelves to, and find the Experience 01 the Divine Pro 


mentioned ! 


* . hs 
11 Braſs, 


. y I Anil 

vidence : And therefote he chargeth them, 1. To take no amet ah 
. = oy 6 PINT 

Money, as a Reward of their Pains. 2. Not to go provided Bra. Et 

rals © 


with any Suftenance, or. Money to buy any. only they might 


Y bd . .* . . | EIT 
take a Walking-ſtick in their Hands : for as Matthew reports 1t, yo os jr 
he forbad them taking any Staves to bear Burdens, as ivell 43 any ref 6 

ez FM? 4 


Scrips ; or it may be, he meant two Staves, that if one had any 
way miſcarried, have been broken or lcſt, they might have anc- 2-7 es, 
BIG W3 « 


ther at hand. 5 


9 But * be ſhod with ſandals : 2nd not put on two apivw + 
coats. 5 rats 72 


Go in yout ordinary Habits, making no Proviſion for ya 
ſelves, as Travellers, who think they may necd fomething be- , -"-- 
fore their return. | | han a fi 

10 And he ſaid vnto them, In what fllace ſoever ?:7n,; 
ye enter into an houſe, there abide till ye depart from 2.0. », 
that place. 


11 And * whoſoever ſhall . not 'receive you; 207 "M-( 1. 


hear you, when you depart thence, * ſhake of tho dre : a By 
under your feet, for a teſtimony againſt rien. VYerily © 17% © 
L fay unto you, it ſhall be more tolerable tor Sodom = 
+ and Gomorrha in the day of judgmentysthan tor that + Gr. 
city. | 

Matthew, chap. 10. gives us 4 larger Copy di thc inſi-aQ1573 


given by Chriſt to the Twelve, than Coth ether Wer); of 
[Nunn } F 1, 


4 But Jeſus ſaid unto them,* A prophet is not with. *Luk.,. -.. 
out honour, but in his own countrey, and among his 1 4 4: 


5 * And he could there do no mighty :work, fave * © > ge 


6 And he marvelled becauſe of their unbelief. *And "_ mp 


Mat, 10. 7 


Chap, VT. 


7* Ard he calleth unto him the twelve, and began *;24, r9. 7: 


in tern #03 WMh- 
1. ney. Mat- 
ire fem farts 
mntner Golz 
ir Syuver, 


(Cl > 

RA, Y £ 

[ain See Vicw tg Cpencd in the Notes upon Marth: 
15, 10» 


;2 And they went out and preached that men 


b. 
ſoutd repent. ; : 

:2 And they caſt ont many devils, and * anointed 
with ovi many that were ſick, and healed zhem. | 

They cxocured both the Trufts which Chriſt had repoſed mn 
them, P;2ching 1/12 Gojre!, aad by Miraculous Operations con- 
Arming the Doftrine which they brought, to be from Heaven. 
7 tn apts, and Chriſt, and the Twelve, all Preached the ſame 
Litirtty Repoiit : That 15, turn from vour Ioracr ſinful Cour- 
>; which it Men do not, Chriſffs coming will proftt them 
nothing. ; Ard aminted with Ofl many that were fick!} James. 

> tins 4ncinting with Ol al's in che Name of the Lord. 4t 
: 1pa:c9 ainongft Learned Men », whether this Anointing 
with O 7, was the ufing of Cyl as a Medicine, having a Na- 
tural Vertue (for it 1s certain in that Country ticre WEre Oyls} 
that were of preat Natural turce for healing) or only as Sacra- 
mental-and Sumbilical, fignif\ing what they did was from that | 
Undim »f te Spirit of Chritt, which they had received, not by 
their own Power or Vertue, and repreſented by Anomting with 
Or], that is an cxccllent Lenitive, tne refreihing and recovery | 
of the Biſcaſed. But it is not probable, contidering that our 
Lord ſent the Diſciples to confirm the Dottrine of the Goipe! 
ve hich they Preached, that he ſhould dire them in theſe Opc- 
rations, to uſe means of a Natural force and eiherey, which had 
at leaſt much abated of the Miracle; befides, ].umes bids then 
Amin the Sich with Oyl in the Name of the Lord. So as tney 
dourtlfs uſed Ort as Symblical; teftitying, that what they did 
eas not ty their own Power and Vertue: Nor did the Apo- 
fiics always uſe this Rite in Healing. Pefer and Jobn uſed 1t 
not in their Healins the Lame Man, Ads. 3.6. In the Name of Je- 
tr Chriſt ſay they} avis and walk, ver. 15. He declareth the 
{1% of it, ently to hav, that Chrift's Name, through Faith in 
his Nang, was that which made the Lame- Man whole. So that 
;*t being koth a free Rite, which they ſometimes uſed, and fome- 
tc not, and a Rite annexed to Miraculous Operations, to dc- 
cart the E9.G% was from Chriſt, nst from their Power; in a 
MICICH ou ard Extraordinary, not in a Natural and Ordinary 
ay Of Operation z the Neccffity of the uſe of it fill 1s very 
np=rcinently urged by ſome, and as impertinently quoted by 


2272, £9 prove the Lawfulneſ of Ritual Impoſitions. 


*Jam «<. i. 


o 
o 


is And kings Herod heard of hin, (for his name was: 


Forced abrozd) and he ſeid that John the Baptiſt was 
rilon rom the dead, and therefore mighty works do 
ſew forih themſelycs in him. 


* Mar. :4. 15 * Others faid, That it 1s Elias And others 
3 id, That it is a prophet, or as one of the pro- 


15 Put when Berod heard zhereof, he faid, It 
wha l beheaded, he 1s riſen from the 


2 ic. 17 For * Hero!) himſelf had ſent forch, and laid 


hold upon John, au bound him in prifon for Hero- 
tas ke. his Lrother Philipswitez for he had mar- 
100 her. 

8 For John had faid unto Herod, * it is not law- 
f1] tor thee to have thy brother's wife. 

i9 Therefore Herodias had a il quarrel avairſt 


FT oy,12 16. 


S M AR K. 


the Will of any. 7. Laſtly, We may obſerve how tar 21,1 


* were Pany coitr.g, and golng, and they hed no lets 


— 
[2 


28 And brought his head in a charger, aro -.. 
it to the damſel, and the damſel gave it to "44 ini 
ther. Eons! 

29 And when his diſciples heard of ie, 
and took up his corps,and laid it in a tomb, 


We meet with this Hiſtory in Matth. 14. to which rt ...- 
the Reader, having there taken in the moſt conſiderg,.. .. 
in the Relation of the ſame thing by Matthew or "ers 0g3 
calleth him #rod the King, whom Matthew and Lybo 11.4 © 
trarcch. Herod was Tetrarch of Galilee; but winder that oy = 
cxcrcited a Regal Power within his Province. The 5” 22 a 
ſtory teacheth us ſeveral things. 1. The Notion of ; Ny ys 
Miniſter, He 1s one that dareth to tell the preateſi " M—_ 
what they do contrary to the plain Law of God. » "a boy 
teacheth us the Malice of Souls debauched with Luft [: a 
not cnough for Herodtas to have John in Priſon, where bh Rs 
do hcr no great prejudice ; ſhe muſt alfo have his Head _ 
off. 3. The 1Jl Influence of Corrupt Perſons in Princes "pig 
Herod had in his Government appcared no cruel Bloody kg 
Our Saviour in great quiet Preached the Goſpel and ro, r 
Miracies for the Confirmation of it within Herod's juriſdiction, 
in Galilee we nd no enquiry made by Herod after him, no : h 
ing him in Queſtion ; and for John the Baptift, he did not _ 
Tolerate him, but orought him to his Court, Reverenced þ;. 
as a Juſt and Holy "an, did many things upon his nſtrufticg: 
heard Dim gladly, but by the Influence of Herodias Chis Courti..” 
being at leaſt ſilent in the Caſe) he is prevailed with to = 
him to Death. 4. The Arts likewiſe of theſe Perſons are 0: 
vable ; they take the advantage of his Jollity on his Birth-g,... 
when in the Exceſs of Mirth, it was likely he would he _ 
caſic and complying to grant their Requeſts, 5, We may aſs 
from hence learn the Miſchiefof Raſh Oaths, and Genera] Pro- 
miſes, eſpecually wien they tiow from Souls ignorant of the Ly: 
of God ;, for had Her:d underſiood any thing of that, he could 
not have thought that his Oath could have been the Bune c« 
Iniquity, or obiiged Itim to any finful AR, 6. We may at 
underſtand the Mercy of God to that People, who arc ves. 
ned by Laws, whoſe Lives and Liberties do not depend up," 


1. 
? " 
Wine 


P_—_w—y 


may £0, and yet be far enough from any ſaving Grace, Tt EF wit 
may have a Reverence tor godly Miniſters 3 they may jour ths 
gladly ; they way do many things, The Hypoct ite hath (-» 
principal Luft jn ;vInch he mult be pratified.and cannot bear , 
proof as to that, 

309 And the Apoſtles gathered themſelves untg 7. 


= 


ſas, and * told him all things, both what they >: 
done, and what they had taught. 

When Chriſt choſc the Twelve, it is ſail, chap. 4. 15, 7; 
he ordained twelve, that they ftuld be with him, and tt 
might ſend them forrh to Preach : And to have Power to te; 
neſjes, and to ca$F out Devils. $5 that till Chriſt's Af 
thought they went out from him to preach and work * 
yet they ordinannſy were with htin, receiving furs! 


fiructions. When they had preaciied, and in his Name vows 
many Miracles, they again returned ro Chriſt, and gave tin 4 
account boch of their Dotrine, and of the Curcs they tit 0. /, 007 1 


wrought. 
31 Aid he ſa!l unto them, Come ye your ſelves a- 
part, into acetert place, and reſt a while; for ther 


ſure, 16 much as to eat. 
32* And they departed into a deſert place, by fu «1 


him, aid would have killed him, bat ſhe conld} . : 
| P:rivatcly. ny 
j1OT- EY 
11. 20 For Herod feared John, knowing that he was{| 33 And the people faw them departing, and | In 
& 2,.2% A inſt man, 2rd ar holy,and || obſerved him ; and when jny knew him, and ran a foot thither, ovz of ll ci | dif 
| 9, T2, he here him, he did many things, and heard him |ties, and out-went them, and came togcihtcr ito 70g 
bin. Bladly. him. ten 
ole n \ ie! ! pr | Fs wn 
21 f nd when a CONVENIENT day WAS come, taat He- Matthew makes the Cauſe of this Motion ot our vav:0r. I Verv © 
red on his birth-day made a ſupper to his lords, high ſhave been his receiving the Report of Herra's dealing with | of Ou 
captains, and chief eftatcs of Galilee. the Baptiſt, 2s we often find him yielding to the Fury 0 © Praver 
22 And when the daughter of the faid Herodias | Adverfarics. Hark, afſigns — pen, (4s LNCTE 124y and b+ 
i ple everal Reaſons or Motive i A £41012 OF NISH1O7, | 
came in and danced, ard pleaſed Herod, and them j\©=® Revfons or ects  andto the fame Acticn or 39907, ſech ) 
TP + A he bd aid s viz. That both himſclf and his Apoſtles might nave 4 Bo God { 
T.Hal fare w ch um, The: XINg ata unto the damſel, ret. The place which he choſe for his Reccfs, 1s calicd 4 "tl! ſerve x] 
Ask of me whatſoever thou Wilt, and 1 will elve It jplace ; not becauſe it was wholly not inhabited, bet very © his Peo, 
thee. {lv inhabited. Zuke ſaith, It was a defart place, [2:15:!9% + and My 
City called Beth/aida ;, probably ſome large Foreſt, os 09870 I Vu 
«7 Wt £ ad x 7 Ny 19.87 wh” 5 P J : S 9 SONS: ; , 
Eſth, Ge 23 And he 1ware unto her, Whatſoever thou ſhalt Poſture, which belonged to that City, aud took a Denaminict® 
3. Oe ask of me, I will give # thee,unto the halt of my king- |from it. It was a Place on the other fide of the Water, it © 4s 
dom. went to it by Ship. But this Water was but a Lake, ©15-", © might 
"" 4 Bid [2d the Sea of Tjberjas 3 for the People fetching a lift © I ( 
£4 And ſhe went os pn _ unto her mother, Compaſs about, went thither on foot, and out went tie --- | 43 4 
What 21 I as ? and ſhe ſaid, Ihe head of John the | of the Ship. wind 
watch 


Baptiſt. 
25 And ſhe came in ſtraightway with haſt unto 


34 * And Jeſus,when he came out, ſaw mc - Lute upon 


the king, and asked, faying, I will that thou give me | ple, and was moved with compaſſion to 21d ThE WF them. 
by and by in a charger, the head of John the Bap-|cauſe they wereas ſheep not. having a ſhepherd, oy 
tiſt. he began to teach them many things. II: ſea, th 
26 And the king was exceedins ſo . for bs When Chriſt came out of che Ship, on the otÞcr —_ | » Tli6 

. ry 5 tet HA yer LOT INS Water, he found that the People had out-wenr the St 5 ag { Olt, 
caths {ake, and for their lakes that ſate with him, he | :vcre come about with a deſire to hear the Wor « ; he Cori290res | 50 
weuid nor rej=& her, what Miſerable —_ and cn ag: bad, fo that 52% 0 | And im 
: : ; , .C as Sheep without a Shepherd, having none 

, 27 And immediately the king ſent an executioner, —_— RO worſe than Ns chough he _——” unto th 

"ne 6 ' and commanged his head to be brought, Ard he WENT | came hither for ſome Reft and Repole, yet ic mn ah we ., fraid, 

9 THEN 4+ ; 


id, © 2nd bcheaded him in the priſon, 


(clf 2s to his Bodily Crayings, to do goor 


Jr A 


hap, VI, 


«pv, 


&-{} Preacheth to tet, and Toacheth them many things, then 
Ir me fil 1s DoCtrine by a NM; iC 5 the elat 4) 
re confirms th his oct v a Miracle 3 the Relation of which 


fgljoweth to V2. 44. 


33 And when the diy was now far ſpent, his diſci- 
ples Cane unto him, ard ſaid, This is a deſert place, 
and now ©he L109 #5 far paſled. 
26 Send them away, that they may go into the 
-:ntry round abour, and into the villages, and 
;y themſelves brezd, for they have nothing to 
'- He anſvered,and ſaid unto them, Give ye them 
-5-r: and they ſay unto him, Shall we go and buy 
two hyndred penny-worth of bread,and give them to 
tel f : 
13 He fairh unto them, How many loaves have ye? 
30d jet. Ard when they knew, they ſay, Five, and 


(wo fiſhes: 


9 And he commanded them to make all fit down 
{7 coMPanics upon the green grals. 

"a0 And they fate down by ranks, by hundreds,and 
by Ffties- 

'41 £nd when he had taken the five loaves, and the 
+9 fiſhes, he looked up to heaven, and bleſſed, and 
br2ke the loaves,and gaverthem to his diſciples to ſet 
refore them 3 and the two filhes divided he amongit 
them ail: 

42 And they did all eat, and were filled, 

43 And they took up twelve baskets full of the 
fragments, and of the fiſhes. 

44 And they thar didear of the loayes, were about 
fye thouland of men. 

We mret with the Relation of this Miracle, Matth. 14. 1«. 
15, 75. and thalt 2g'1n meet with it, 72h. 5, 
vith (0:36. more particular Circumnftances, tiling us 1T was P/ 
lip that moved our Saviour to difinifs them 16 feaſouaoly, trar 
ey mizht provide thewſolves Fond, and making G:rift to pro- 


pound the neitions tt Philip, where they ſhould Luv Brea 
Coucafr frem, He ajts telis us, that It was Andrew who 
tl gar Srwiour, That there was a Lad there had five Barlev- 
.iv0s, and $1.0 Fiſhes: But, all tarce of the Evangeliſts agree 


1 tlie main, bath as to the Quantity of V1tuals, five Loaves, and 
wg Files, and the £uantty of the Perple ted with them, Five 
"24117, and the Number of the Laets ful of Fragments taker 

un, which was twoive. 4 "Mn alfn 4c4cth 'hic Effet of this M1- 
ic wpo2 the Nujtituds, F7b. <4. 14. Trey ſaid, this is of a 

; come into te Harld, For further 


7 bed TAY 
ruth that Propher that (31: 
4 b- 


{xp.:042101 of this pizce Of his Story, te the Notes on Matth, 
Lt. Is. aid on Fob. 6. 5, 55.7, Wc 


+ A 
A 


43 * Ard ſtraightway be conſtrained his diſciples to 
into the ſkip, a: to Et unto the other fide be- 


« JPY "Y 34-VE " $4 } ” 
into Bethlaiga, walls 08 19! 


1t away the peo- 


45 And when he had ſent them away, he departed 
1250 2 MouNTtatn TO Pray. 

{f this Beſert where Chriſt was, were as Lube ſaith, chap. 5. 
10. 4 Detert belonging to Brthſauita, thois words gig To: may 
Tor Brloyr Say arc 1} Trarllatec unto Bethſaida, and the ar. 
cinal Nite 16 our iarger Bibles 15 better, over againſt Bethlaida, 
Our S2vtour here firſt ſends away his Dilciples by Water, then 
he diſmillech the Vultirude to go to their own Homes; then 
he goeth up into a Mountain to pray. We tind Chriſt very of- 
ten in the Vuty of Secret Prayer, very often chufing a Moun- 
tain Cas a place of Sotitude ) for the performance of it, and 
verv often making uſe of the Night for 1t, which 1s alſo a time 
ot Quietncfs and Solitnde ; which lets us know, that ſecret 
Projer is necetfary, not only for the bewailing and confetling, 
and begping Pardon for our Sccret Sins, (for Ciriſt had no 
ſuch ) but for our more free and more near Communion with 
God ; for although God filleth all places, yer we ſhali ob- 
frve that God, in his more than ordinary Communion with 
1s People, hath not admitted of Company, of which Abraham, 
and Myes, and 7:::0b, and all the Prophets are ſufficient inſtan- 
ces, 

47 And when even was come, the ſhip was in the 
miſt of the ſea, and heatone on the land. 

43 And he ſaw them toiling in rowing : (for the 


wind was contrary unto them) and about the fourth 
watch of the night he cometh unto them, walking 


kc upon the ſea, 2nd * would have paſſed by 


them, 


42 But when they faw him walking upon the 
= they ſuppoſed it had been a ſpirit, and cried 
Out, 


Jo For they -all faw him, and were troubied. 
And immediately he talked with them, and faith 


= them, Be of good chear, it is I, be not a- 
raid, 


St. MAR K, | 


57 fs 
ines, IF. 
h =4 ws ag 7 a a9 
the wind ceaſed : and they were fore am 2d in them- 
ſelves beyond meaſure, and wondered. 
32 For they conſiderad not the wir 2c of £40 (go 
for their heart was hard2n2d. 
See the Notes on Matth. 14. 21. By the Jos br vn 
the Lake of Genneſaret. The foul Watch of the X% vas 
ter. four in the Morning, The torccoing pire of the Neo 
our Saviour had ſpent ane upun the Mowniin in Pr... 
[ They were fore amazed in pemjelics, and wand; ox rs 
| [:tered not, &c. ] Had they diligently :onfid.--4. by at Fow : 
five Loaves and two tithes were muitiniyc. - ” a quanticy £6 
tecd five thouſand Men, beſides Women 5% Giiorgn - tho, 
would not have been amazed, either at the 11); 35 £ it {afe!! 
walking upon the Water, or at the Wind coat when hy 
into the Ship ; Eut theſe thinzs had not made that duc , wnoc: 
ſ10n upon their Hearts, vhich they ought co lave done 1 he tim; 
was not yet come, when Chritt would have his Divine Nyc; 
fnlly revealed. to ther ; 41d til he opened their Fro, ic 
wrought 1n tlicir Hearts 2 full perfuation of that; it” we. 
in their Power fo to apprehcn it, as to give a full attent 2 | 
and accordingly to id, This > that which is here called #--- 
neſs, or Blindneſs of Heart, 
$53 And when they had paid over, they £2115 
into the lard of Grrnetarert, and drow tn the 


ſhore, 
54 Ard when they were 
ſtraightway they knew him. 
55 Ard ran through the whoie rc; | 
bout,and began to carry about in beds rh that wer 
lick, where they heard he was. 7 


= 
OMe Gu 9, 


th,- A 11. 
» 4&4 ow 1:k i 


{M 
XRnCew 


Q72? ES k, 
_# i + $ Lihi4;'s 


5% And whitherſoever he entred into villezos, ar Sl 7 Mtg gd 
cities, O7 Country, they lat the ick In the frees, on 4 [1.0098 
beſought him thar * they might touch if it wer? but, | _ wt..} | 

z? & 


— 


- 
L 


| nm were made whole: 
Foha reiates ir | 


tion of the elders, but eat bread wit. 


= © hold therradition of men, AS 
51 And he went up unto them into the ſhip, and | tups, and many other ſack: Nik: 


Ugl, 2, 


the dorder of his garment, and as a.any as toticiucd iv 


See the Notes on Matth. 14. 34, 3%, 36 The Charity of this i=7> ;| 
People to iciir 10k Neighbours, 1s very cominendal e, and ia- Taye” 
firutive of us as to our Duty to do goad fo ofhzrs 25 5 their in 4 
bodily Wants and N. cclſities, fo far as we ar blo + Buy tow FP 
muci greater is that Chzrity, which 1s ſhewed t.: ;- CTLO has 
'1nviting thein to Clift, thit they may he Snivitoally jieÞ.  d £ | 
It iwas not their touchins the Hem of is Gert ww 17 of Þ ie 
Body, which healed the'e fick Ferſons 3 rho who [4 iP 
Hand 1n Cructfyingof him, dil both; } it was , i 

nN c 


went ou* from Chriſt upon tie Teltifiocation nf 
cuming to him, 21d tour! : 102 
of his Garment + Neither is ic Men's cormos to the Co: 


g:2tion; and tearing 02 Vord of God, th:it wil | : 

Sonis, unleſ; there gootlh {forth 2 Divine Vo, iro0m Gie £ - 

rit of Grace upon Men's Iſungring and Thirfting ace Chit 

his Ordinances, and by. Faith Jlavins b90{% uvon Tr Pron 
exhibited wn the Preavhiing o7 the Guſp?!, 
GHAP Vit, 

The Phu te?s Oar? bis Difciples t 1 $1272 £14 "a 
Elidirs m eating Bread wit) 11% a rands, J-=g. Coryr 
chargeth them with FHipycrihe, anZ 61 : c 
of God with their Ti aditins, S—13. 124c.ot : 
nt what girth it», bus whit enncth co to 

| 
Man. 14 —23. Ca#ir2th a Bovil wit 9 MLL s 
Hs fk bs .*þt i» wif? x ) | 


Daughter, 24-—-3%. An?! 

Deaf, and had an Impe 11nent in 34 Spencn, 41-37. 

i FTHen care toectler the Phariizes, and cer- 
tain of the Scrides, which came irom jeruy 

ſalem. 

2 Ard when they ſaw ſome of his diſciples cat 5r2ad 
with! defiled (that is to ſay, with unwaſhen harden 
they found faulr. | | mon 

3 For the Phariſees, and all the Jews, except ihcy 


waſk their hands || oft; eat not, holding the trafliiions : Vo 

of the elders. "ng 
4 And when they come from the inzric2t. 2<cpt £925 ». 

waſh, they eat not. And many oto27 £91525 £259 1 

be which they have received to hold, & the walning | 


7 reſtele 231 nt 
of cups, and | of pots, and of braſen velicls, and n: 
|| tables. 


& Then the Pharifees and Scribes a$%ed tn | 
. . s - y'Y Sx o 4 : / ; 
Why walk not thy diſciples according to 50 Tat - 1,/ 


hands ? EO | 
6 Heanſwered, and faid nnto tncn. Ver he 
This people honoureth me with 7-77 tip, fur 
heart is far from mc. 
| bo. al «how worthin mics caching 
Howbeit, in vaia do they worimp mics ws 
for doctrines the commandments 21 men 


. A P 1 © Cy t; 
For layine aſide the commanainot. ws : 
5 Ni "caſhing of £04 3:5 


T:1C 
| B.- * Es = 
2 THINES ye CO, 


A, 4_ 4 BE. 
(7? Nis Vv- 


— 


3U0>.: 


oF? 


OTE IG 
"= = WS" Sgt? She, = 


_ - wart = mt S———_—. 
JI. £ = —X 4 <£ 
MD.” en earn _"_ — : 


— b 
-: _ - 
CI ” —_— —— m—_ 
-& 2 + 2 = a, 
py _ — — _— — le An ha — —_— 
= "_—_ Ws 
I ” 


Re o———_ 


Chap. VII S. M 


4 Or, iFra- 
fi0 att; commandment of God, that ye may keep your own 


tredition- ; 
io For Moſes faid, * Honour thy father, and thy 
*1other : and, * Whoſo curſeth father or mother, let 


kim die the death. 
1s But ye ſay, If a man fay to his father or 
'- mother, 7c # Corban, that is to ſay, a gift, by what- 
= 5 Jocyer thou mighteſt be profited by me, he ſoall be 
*AMat.l5. 5- jree. : | ; 
12 And ye ſuffer him no more to do ought for his 
ſ{ather or mother. 
13 Making the word of God of noneeffect through 
your tradition, which ye have delivered - and many 


{uch like things do ye. 

See the Notes upon the nine firſt Verſes ot the fiftcenth of 
Mathew. By the Notion of Tradzi79ns, our Saviour under- 
ſtandeth not ſuch things as were delivered to them by God mn 
his Law, but ſach things as were delivered to them by the E!- 
ders, that is, their Rulers in the Church in the former timesz 
for, ver. g. he oppoſeth Traditions to God's Commandments, and 
ſaith thc'latter were negle&ed by their Zeal for the former ; to 
give Countenance to which Tradztzons, as the Papiſts would 1m- 
poſe upon us to believe, that Chriſt communicated ſome things 
to his Apoſtles, and they to the Primitive Churches, by Word 
of Mouth, which have been ſo Tranſmitted from Age to Age 3 
fo the Fews pretended that God communteared his Will 1n ſome 
things to Mbſes, which Fſes d1d not publiſh to the People. 
And as the former pretend a Power by Chriſt left to the Church 
to determine Rituals; ſo the Phariſees (their true Predeceſ- 
fors) pretended a ſuch-!1ke Power amongſt others, beſides the 
divers W.:hinzs mentioned by the Apoſtle, Heb. g. 10. Amongſt 
the Carn.i! Ordinances impoſed only until the time of Refomation, 
they had invented many other Waſhinzs 3 as, ſeprmenta Legis, 
Hedges to the Divine Law. They wafhed their Hands often 
when they came from Market, or before they did eat; not for 
Decency and Neatneſs , but out of Religion, left they ſhould 
have been defiled by touching any Heathens, or any polluted 
things; and not their Hands only , but their Pots and Cups, 
their Beds and Tables, and Brazen Veſſels 3 as indeed there 15 no 
op, when once Men have patied the Hedge of the Divine In- 
ſiitution, of which Popery 15 a plentiful Inftance, where it 1s 
hard to diſcern an Ordinance of God in the Rubbiſh of their 
Superſtitious Traditions. And 'tts very oblervable , that Super- 
ſtitious Men are always more fond of, and zealous for, the Tra- 
ditions of Men in their Worſhip, than keeping the Command- 
ments of God ; it is with the Papiſts more hainous to V7late 
Lent, than to Violate the Sabbath ; for a Prieſt to Marry , than 
to commit Whoredom. This Zeal in them ordinarily produ- 
ceth a. Negle@, or flight Eſtcem of the plain Commandments 
of God. So it did in the Ph.zriſces, ver. o. Upon which our 
Saviour calleth them Zypocrites, ver. 6. 
Kr/hipping of God was Vain, Sinful, and Idle, and Impertinent ; 
there was in it a Derogating trom the Authority of God, and 
Arrozating of an undue Authority to themielves, by their Com- 
mands making thoſe things neceſſary, whicl, are not fo; and 
2 common'y jt haopeneth, when humane Inventions are over- 
uraz2d. and multiplyed, ſome are urged Deſtruttive of the Di- 
vine Law; fo it was with theſe Phariſees ; fo they had done 
as to the fiſth Commandment , (of which we have ſpoken 
plentifally in our Notes on Matth. 15. 8. ) Our Saviour g0- 
eth on. ſhewing their Ighorance and E'indneſs, in imagi- 
ning that any perfon could be defiled by Eating with Unwaſhen 
Hands. 


14 * And when he had called all the people unto 
him, he ſaid unto them, Hearken unto me every one 
of you, and underſtand. 


> ExXO0t. 295. 
32,  Deut. 
©0136 
*FX0OJ. 21. 
T5. Lcv. 


* Mat. Is. 
10. 


Gur Saviour's calling all the People unto him, before he ſpake 
what next followeth , and his Prefacing that Diſcourſe with. 
| Hearken cvery one of you, and underſtand, ] Lets us know, that 
what he was about to ſay was a Point of great Moment, wel! 
worth their Learning and Obſervation, 


15 * There isnothing from without a man, that 


+ Mat. 1c: entring into him, can defile him - but the things 


24 that come out of him, thoſe are they that defile the 
man. 
L 16 *If any man hath ears to hear, let him hear. 
Vat. 11, 


i The Addition of theſe Words, If any Man hath Ears to hear, 
5 let him hear, confirm what I obſerved before, that our Saviour 
lookt upon what he faid as a Truth of very great Moment ; and 
withall, as ſuch a Notion, which carnal Hearts, and ſuperſtiti- 
ous Perſons, had no Eais to hear, This great Truth was, That 


9 And he ſaid unto them, Full well ye! rejett the | 


and telleth them this | 


ARK: 


17 And when he was entred into the houſe from 


parable. 


ing was plain enough. But Cuſtom is a ereat Tyrant 


Liike 


blinded them, and lockt up their Souls from reccipins +. 
and ſpiritual InſtruQtions ; we ſee the ſame thing every a,. 
What an heinous thing do the Blind Papi/ts think ;- 
eat Fleſh in Lent, or on one of their Fith-days? Never 
fidering by what Law of God ary Nen are reftrauc] 1 ſich 
things, Our Saviour in the next Words checks tiicir Bind. 
neſs. 


18 And he faith unto them, Are ye fo Without 
underſtanding alſo ? Do ye not perceive, that Whatfo- 
ever thing from without entreth into the man, it can. 
not defile him ? 

19 Becauſe it entreth not into his heart, but int, 
the belly, and goeth out into the draught, purging all 
meats, 

20 And he ſaid, That which cometh out of the max, 
that defileth the man. 

21 * For from within, out of the heart of men, .. 
proceed evil thoughts, adulteries, fornications, mur. .** 
ders, | 

22 Thefts, covetouſneſs, wickedneſs, deceit, la. 
clviouſneſs, an evil eye, blaſphemy, pride, fooliſ. 
neſs. 

23 All theſe things come from within, and de5! 
the man. 

Chriſt checkerh his Diſciples for underſtanding things no %.-- 
| ter : Ignorance is more excuſable in thoſe who are Stringer; ty 
God and Chriſt, than in thoſe that have Rel:tion to him. j 
our Saviour's Enumeration of thoſe things which come cut c; 
the Heart, ſeyeral things are reckaned up which are the 0; 
actions of the Tongue, Eyc, Hands : but our Saviour fait!;, 
theſe flow from the Heart ;, for the ARions of the vutwars My 
are but the imperate Aions of the Will, and things 1% 1. 
[maginations and Underſtanding, betore they come at the vw, 
to be choſen or rezetted. Here are but ſome Sins reckons :: 
ſtead of many ; for it is truc of ail our Evil Aﬀtions, this 
are arſt hatched in the Heart, and are firſt entertained 12 v 
Thoughts, in our Underſtandings, then choſen by our Wills; 
and then the bodily Members arc commanded by the %yl -» 
the Execution of them. Mark reckoneth more than ariie,; 
but in both the Enumerations are imperteRt, and fome Sins ar: 
named inftcad of all, Nothing but Sin defileth the Man; $1 
hath its firſt riſe in the Heart, and tloweth ſrom thence, Ser fur 
ther the Notes upon Matth. 15. 18, 19, (Fc. 


['* 
% 


24 And from thence he aroſe, and went into the 
borders of Tyre and Sigon, and entred into an houſe, 
= would have no man know zt, but he could not b: 
hid. 

25 Foracertain woman,whoſe young daughter had 
an unclean ſpirit, heard of him, and came and fell « 
his feet. 

26 The woman was a || Greek, a Syrophenicis: 
by nation, and ſhe beſonght him that he wo:1d c:3 
forth the devil out of her daughter. 

27 But Jeſus ſaid unto her, Let the children 5:5 
filled,for it is not meet to take the childrens b5cal 
and to caſt zt unto the dogs. 

28 And ſhe anſwered and faid unto him, Yes, Lord 

yet the dogs under the table eat of the children; 
crumbs. 

29 And he faid unto her, For this faying,'sc 
thy ways the devil is gone cut of thy davgi- 
cr. 

30 And when ſhe was come to her houſe, ſhe found 
the devil gone out, and her daughter laid upon. bc: 
bed. 

Matthew rccordeth this Hiflory with fevers! conficcr:-” 
Additions» Sec Meatih. £5. 21. where we have ia1f£cy VE5 
cd it. 


< ih 


31 * And azain departing from the coaſts of 1 ve 


« Man mn the ſight 5f God, (for of ſuch Defilement he alone |2nq Sjdon, he came unto the ſea of Galilee, througi 


ſpeaketh} cla be defited by nothing but what came from within 
im. How eaftly wopld a Popiſh Dofor have anſwered this : 
Doth rot Dzſobedzence to the Churches Commands come from with- 


the midſt of the coaſts of Decapolis. 


1 \"p- bl p= Loaf ; 
32 And * they bring unto him one that was C**!, 


4 


in us? Our Saviour therefore muſt be underſtood of ſuch og. and had an impediment in his ſpeech, and they v*icec 


as come from -within, in diſbedience to the Commands of G9 
fuch are thoſe which he mentioneth,- ver. 21, 22. For all 
tings that come from within, do not dcfiſe the Man. And it 


: | him to put his hand upon him. 


33 * And he took him aſide from the mu: tices © 


:: true, that a Diſobedjence to the Commands of any Power, whe- | and put his finger into his ears, and * he ipit, > {11 


ther Civil or Eccleſiaſtical, is a thing which cometh from with- touched his tongue. % 


in, and defileth a Soul, if it be a Difobedierce in ſuch things 
which God hath given them a Power to Command ; Lut if not. 
the Caſe is otherwiſe. 


a' 4 


34 And looking up to heaven, * he fighed,and ſeit * | | 


unto him Ephatha, that is,Be opencd. 3 


Chap, Y] 


ad, 


the people, his diſciples * asked him CONCerning the * 


here four 


1a] 


LY 
t 


Rs. Wes a a. wer ow... xa... 


All tþ 
Wrought 
Which ww 
men and 


wp. VIIL 


7 man : but the more he charged them, ſo much the 


Ot. 


35 And ſtraightway his ears were opened, and 


the ſtring of his tongue was looſed, and he ſpake 


Jain. 
26 And he * charged them that they ſhould tell no 


more a great deal they publiſhed ze. 
ard were beyond meaiure aſtoniſhed, ſaying, 
He hath done all things well; he maketh both the 
deaf to hear, and the dumbto ſpeak. 
This Hiſtory 1s recorded by Mark only. | And again departing 
from the Coaſts of Tyre and Sidom. } We heard, ver. 24. of his go- 
in into thote Coafts 3 ſome think that our Savicur did not go 


out of-the Jewiſh Country, though he went to the Coatts of 


Tjre and S:don, which were Pagan Countrics :] He came unto 
the Sea of Galilee, through the midſt of the Coaſts of Decapolis. \ 
That Decapolis was an Mnion of ten Citics ſo called, is plain by 
the Name . But what thoſe Cities were, and whether- they lay 
on the ſame fide of Fordan that Galilee did, or on the other 
fide of Fordan, 15 diſputed : moſt think they lay on the Galt- 
lean ſide; | One that was Deaf, and had an Impediment in his 
Speech, | Some think that he was Dumb, but the Word 1ignifies 
one thar ſpake with difticulty 3 fo as it 15 likely his Deafneſs was 
aot Natural, (for all naturally Deaf.are alſo Dumb ; we learn- 
ing to Speak by Hearing 3 } beſides, that 1t is faid after the Cure, 
that he ſpake plain 5, 1t was probably an accidental Deafneſs hap- 
pening to him, after that he could ſpeak. Their beſeeching 
Chriſt to put his Hand upon him, proceeded from their Obſcr- 
vation of him very often to uſe that Rite in his Healing fick 
Perſons. | And he took him afide from the Multitude,] uot ſeck- 
ing his own Glory and Oſftentation, | And put his finger into his 
Ears, and ſpit, and touched his Tongne.] All theſe things were 
ex abundanti, not neceiſary Aﬀtions, or naturally efficacious ſor 
his Cure 3 but our Lord fometimes uſed no Signs or Rites 3 fome- 
times theſe, fometimes others, as it pleaſed him. And Lohing 
ud t) Heaven, he ſighed*] pitying the Condition of Humane Na- 
ture ſubje&t to fo many Milerics, Defets and Intirmities ; and 
ſaith; | Ephatha, that is, be opened | By the Word of his Power 
he made the World, and by the Wird of his Power he upholds 
it; and by the ſame Word of his Power he reſtoteth any lap- 
ſ:d or decayed part of it : He ſpeaks, and it is dwne. | And 
ftratzhtway his Ears were opened : | Nature obeyeth the God of 
Nature, Concerning his Charge of them not to publiſh it, and 
thcir Diſobedtence to it, I have had occation once and again 
to ſpeakz and muſt confeſs, I can neither ſatisfte my ſelf in the 
reaſon from my own Thoughts, nor from what IT read in ©- 
thers, This Miracle hath no otter Effect than the People's 
Aitmiſhment and Confeſſim, that what he did was well done; 
which was the common Effe&t of Chriſt's Preaching and Mira- 
eles upon the moſt. 


Ca AP. VIE 


Cirilt feodeth the Multitude with ſoven Lnaves, and few Fiſhes, 
1— Refuſeth to ſhew the Ph.urijees a Sizn, 19-—13. Warn- 
eth his Diſciples again the Leaven of the Phariſees, to—21. 
ReShreth Sight to the Blind Man by ſpitting on his Eyes, 22--26. 
He asbeth his Dijeiples the People Opinion of him. Peter con- 
feſſeth him to be the Chriſt, 279— 5. He fore-telleth his own 
Paſſim and Reſurretion « Rebubeth eter, Z31—33. Exhorteth 
to Self-denial and the Crojs : the B-neft of ſo doing , and the Loſs 
and Shame of thoſe that negleft it, 34 —38. 


i IN thoſe days the multitude being very great, and 
having nothing ro eat, Jeſus called his diſciples 


M AR K. 


there twelve Backets fu!l of Fragnicat> were taken ny, hore bus 
ſeven, We mecet with the ſame Hittory, AMatth, ns. yg ku the 
Notes on that place. Eoth Miracles t-3;hed Chr:ift to ftiaye atted 
by a Divine Power, and were certaigiv wrovets tc prope "tha! 
the DofArine which he delivered to them was fog Cy 

of them ſhew the Compattion that he jad for Thie Som of M<n 

ſhewed to them not only with relztion to their Soi EE 
aifo to their Corporal! Wants and Infirmities, j n both ow pr etings 

commended to us, troin his great Example. the relinious--©o- 
ftom, of begging a Bleſſing upou nur E192 ven we fir ores 6 
it, and receiving the good Creatures of (34 with Thanh, Fr} 
ving. From both of them we may learn, 1m the doins of He 
Duty, not to be too follicitous, what wo that et 57 Bs we 
fhall drink. God will ſome way or other provide tor thoſe who 
neglect themſelves to follow him. From both we mnuv 1'fo Fiat 
our Duty to take a provideat care to make no waſte Gt the 5906 

things which God lends us. Theſe are the chict thins; this 1:t- 
ory attordeth us for our lofiruttion. 5 GE 


p ns 
Gad ; horh 


10 And * ſtraightway heentred iuto a ſhip wit! 


tha. 


cempting him. 

n 12 And he fighed deeply in his ſpirit, and faith, 
V hy doth this generation ſeek after a lign ? Verily 1 

ſay unto you, There ſhall no ſign be given to this Tenc- 

ration. 

13 And heleft them, and entring into the ſhip e« 

galn, departed to the other ide, 
Matthew ſaith, he came into the Coaſts of Mi3tala; 1t 1% pro- 
bable they were two contiguous Tratts of Land. We ofcer? 
read of the Phariſees coming to our Saviour to ask 2 Stgn : Fiad 
they not 51gns? What were all the Miracles he wrought but 
Signs of bis Divine Power and Milfion ? But they ask for a Stn 
jrom Heaven; ſuch a Sign, as Hoſes, Toſhua, and Elijah gave them ; 
by this means making a trial of his Divine Power. Our Savi- 
our, Wio never wrought Miracles to fatisfie ven's curioſity, 
but only to confirm their Faith, refuſ-th to thew them -env ſuch 
S1gn as they defired, and leaves thete Coats. ; 

14 Now the diſciples had forgotten to take bread, 
neither had they in the ſhip with them more thai; on: 
loaf. 

15 And he charged them. ſaying, * Tale heed, and 
beware of the leaven of the Phaciſces, 2nd of rhe lea- 
ven of Herod. 

16 And they reaſoned among tiemſe!yes, ſaving, 7: 
z5 becauje we have no bread. 
17 And when Jeſus knew zr, he ſaith unto them, 


ye not yet, neither underſtand? have ye your hearts 
yet hardened ? 

13 Having eyes, ſee ye not ? and heving ears, hear 
ye not ? and do ye not remember ? 

ig * Whenl brake the five loaves among five thouy- 
ſand, how many baskers iu!} of fragments tock ye np ? 
They ſay unto him, Twelve. 

20 And * when the ſeven among four thouſand, how 
many baskets full of fragments took ye up ? And they 


unto hir7, and fairh unto them, | 

2 Thave compaſſion on the multitude, becauſe they j 
have now been with me three days, and have nothing 
to eat. | 

3 And if I ſend them away faſting to their - 
houſes, chey will faint by the way, for divers of them ' 
came from far. 

4 And his diſciples anſwered him, From whence 
can a man fatisfie theſe men here with bread in the 
Wilderneſs, 

5 And heasked them, How many loaves have ye ?: 
And they ſaid, Seven. 

9 And he commanded the people to fit down on 
the ground : and he took the ſeven loaves, and gave 
thanks, and brake, and gave to his. diſciples to ſet 
_ them, and they did ſer them before the peo- 
ple. 

7 And they had a few ſmall fiſhes : and he bleſſed, 
and commanded to ſet them alſo before them. 


$ So they did eat, and were filled: and they 


took up of the broken meat that was left, ſeven bask- 
ets. 


6 Ard they that had eaten were about - four thon- 
land ; and heſent them away- 

All theſe Verſes gives us an account of another Miracle 
wrought by our Saviour, of the ſame Nature with the other 
Which we had, chap. 6. Only there tive thouſand (beſides Wo- 
men and Children ) were fed with five Loaves, and two Fiſhes ; 


icre four thouſand are fed with ſeven Loaves, and a few Fiſhes , 


ſaid, Seven. 

21 Ard heſaid unto them, How is it that ye do 
not underſtand ? 

We met with this whole Iliftory, with ſome Additions in 
Matth. 16. 5, 6, 7, (Fc. See the Notes there. It teacheth us 
both a Leſſn of Humane frailty, and what is our Chi$/tzn duts : 
Of our Frailty, in not confidering the Works of the Lord tor 
us, ſo as to make any uſe of them for the time to come. God 
doth his great Works of Providence to be had in Remembrance ; 
and that not only with reſpe& to himſelf, that fic might be 
glorificd by us upon the Remembrance ot them ; 2nd this not 
only by our rejoycing in him, but alſo by our 7z4/tizg 1n hive, 
and not deſponding under ſuch-like Ditticultics, 25 God by 
any of them hath delivered us from z but alto wit refuet to 
our Duty, that we might in preſent Exigencics reiteve cur 121ves 
from former Experiences : And if we do not thus conceive ol 
God's Diſpenſations, we do not perceive nor underfiand tie 
Meaning and Will of God in them : Though we have Eyes, w* 
ſe not; though we have Ears, we hear not; and in remem- 
bring, we - remember not; our Remembrance is of no vene- 
fit, no advantage at all unto us. Our Saviour indeed dt not 
at all fpeak here of bodily Bread. though he did bid them ©<- 
ware of the Leaven of the Phariſees, and Hero; he ipax0 to 
them: about the Do@rine of the Phariſees ;, and fo Heitiho tes 
us, they (afcer this reproof) conſidered, that he (ater #15 Ac- 
cuſtomed manner) ſpake to them under a Paraboi1ce! Expret- 
ſion : Saith he, what though you have forgotica fo vring 
Bread, do not you know ? have not I by two Miracuious Ope- 
rations, taught you, that Iam able to furniſh you with Eread, 
though you have none, or ſuch a quantity as is very inſuffici- 
ent? God expeReth of us, that we ſhould { keep in mind 
his former Diſpenſations of Providence to us under Straits and 
Difficulties, as to truſt in him. when his Providence brings 72 


again ito the like Difficulties ; yet nos dechoing vie om 
} 


11 *And the Phariſees came forth, 2nd began to © 
queſtion with him, ſeeking of him a fien from heaven, 
pw 1 


Why reaſon ye becauſe ye have no bread ? * Perceive © 


7 M:. 
his diſciples, and came into the parts of Dalmann- ©* 


wm 
$a a. 


ded » 
ak ay mms EEIES mon — di 
ans a. es Age 
So ———— 


mtu HRT. 
Ne EEE 


< 
— 
w 


py —— _ 
F245 8 , 
cn » M - - ———M 
nts. lcd (4 
. —_— 


tht.) AY. 
vr "- 


þ, 4 ", - 
4 zat. | 6; 


S. M 


my roatongble and Toft Means for providing for our felvec. 
thus Paid Snow. and anderſtond, that God had delivered him 
mm the Zim avd the Bear, while going againſt Gliah, 1 Sam. 
_ F!> ago ita ground of his Conadence, ver. 37. fo alſs 7ſat. 

\, And Paul, when he concluded God would detiver, bc- 

nie he bay Hlivered, God, Pjul. 73. 14. when he brake the 
eds of 1.:viathan in preces, gave him to be Meat to the Pevple, 

: the Wilderneſs; he intends former Mercices to be food 
tur i1i> Prople in following Straits and Ex1gences. 


- 
- « 


- 

k - 
y*3 rn,5 
o »o'fs 


22 And he cometh to Bethſaida, and they bring 
2 5jiad man to him, and beſought him to touch 
Him. 

23 Ard he took the blird man by the hand, and 
ied him out of the town ; and when he had fpit on his 
zyes, and put his hand on him, he asked him if he 
jaw ought. 

24 And he looked up, 2n: jaid, I ſce men as trees, 
walking. : ; 

25 After that, he put bz hands again wpon his eyes, 
and made him look vp: aid he was reſtored, and faw 


every man clearly. : 
26 And he %at him away to his houſe, ſaying, 
*Mat. 8. 4. Neither go into the town, * nor tell zt to any man in 
Ci, $s. 43. the town. 
This Miracle is only mentioned by Mark particularly ; poſſi- 
bly becauſe of two Sinzularitics in it. 1. With reference to 
the Signs he uſed. 2. With reference to the gradual Cure. Our 
Saviour ſome: imes uſed fore S1gns 1n his Miraculous Operat1- 
ons, ſometimes he uſed none, but by the Word of his Power alone 
healed them : In the Signs he uſed, to let the People under- 
ſtand there was nothing in them, he often varicd ; ſome- 
times he laid his Hands upon thcm, fimctimes he took them 
by the Eand, ſometimes he uſed one Sign, ſometimes another, 
Here, 1. He tahes the Biind Man by the Hand, 2. He leads him 
out of the Town ;, the Inhabitants being not worthy to ſce a Mi- 
racle. It was one of the Cities uptHratded by our Saviour for their 
Impenitency and Unbelief, 371th. 11. 21. 3. 7 ſpit on his Eves. 
So hap. 7. 33 4. Then he trice put bis Hands on him. 2. Chriſt 
was wout to heat at once, here he healeth by degrees ; fo as the 
za ing of this Elind Man was a true pattern of his Heaitng 
ſpiritual Biindncs, which uſually is done gradually, but per- 
#cfica at laft as this Sodily Curc was, 
27 And Tjeſ:s went out, and his diſciples, into the 
towns of Ceſarea Philip3i: and by the way he asked 
+ we. re bis diſciples, fayirg unto nem, * Whom do men ſlay 
I thatlanr | | 
28 And they a»Cyored, * John the Baptiſt : but 
'. 14.2. forme ſay, Elias; anc. ethers, one of the Prophets. 


Per, and thnofc thar followed him, mdped Chriſt to be 7ohn 
the 3at;7 rnijed from the Dead, or to have the Soul of Fohn the 
Barth, cloathed witt other Fleih. Others concerved him to be 
Elias, of whom they were in expcitation, that he ſhould come 
bufore the Meſfius, Others thonght he was Zeremiy, as Mat- 
thew faith, or one of tic 012 Prownets 2 they corid not tell what 
to determine of cnewho appcarcd to them in the ſhape of a 

Jan, but 6id ſuch thipgs as nove cou'd do 3 but the Druine Power. 
cithcr 7mmed;ately, or mediately, putting forth it ſclt 2n an hu 


4 


mane Eody. 


20 And he ſ.ith onto them, But * whom ſay ye 
thatl am ? And Peter anſwereth, and faith unto him; 
Thou art the Chriſt. 


30 And he charged them that they ſhould tell no 
man of him. 


Luke reports no more of this than Mark ; but Maithew reports 
it much larger, giving ns a further Reply of Chriſt to Peter, (See 
the Notes on Matth. 16. 1g. ) which we have there diſcourfed 
largely upon. I ſhall only ſay here, That if fo great a Point as 
Peter's Primacy had been underſtood by Chriſt's Diſciples of that 
Age, to have been ſettled by that Anſwer of our Saviour, it 1s 
likcly two of the Evangeliſis would not have omitted an Ac- 
count of it, If they had forgotten 1t, there 1s no doubt but 
ſome or other of Clirift's Pifciples would have put them in 
mind of it. Our Saviour's Charge, that they ſhould tel] no 
Man of him, ſcemeth to hint; that although our Saviour was 
willing to be taken notice of as a Prophet, yet he was not wil- 
Iing as yet to be taken notice of as the Meſſiah, or Son of God ; 
winch latter Matth-w reports as added to his Confeftion 3 and 
perhaps both 3{1rh and Lave fn their following Words, give us 
the Reaſon ; for if we obſerve it, he immediately falls into a 
diſcourſe of his fi.Fering + and he might poſſibly think, that a 
weak Faith of his Divine Nature would be overthrown by the 
ſnghtof Ins ſubſcoquent Sutferinzs, So that he reſerved the pub- 
lication of himſcit to be the Son of God, until the time when 
C as the &poſtie faith, R2. 1. 4. ) he was declared ſs with Power, 
- 3a to the Spirit of Holineſs, by his Reſurrection from the 
Doac » 


E fHaf, 1<. 
1c. rt. 


; 31 Ard* he beganto teack them, that the Son of 
21. & 175, Man mult ſuffer many things, and be reje&ed of the 
22. elders,and of the chief prieſts and of the {cribes,and be 
kijled, and after three days riſe again. 

Our Lerd- 3x elſewhere Aid to have taught his Diſciples ac- 


A R K; Char 


icording as they were able to bear, or to hear 1yhaot 1. Gn 
unto them. He did not at the firſt teach them Nat AA 
ſuffer Death the Dodrine of the Croſs of Chriſt, was IM 
Wine, not fit to be put into old Bottles ; yer neceiiy;e; « 
taught thew, lcſt when they ſaw it ſoon after, they j}; 351," 1 
cen” offended, as indeed they were to ſome depreo, 1, +. 
ſtanding the Premonition they had of it. With the 1; 

of his Suffering, he joyneth aiſo the Dofrine of his Ru oc. 
the third day « ſo ſaith Matthew ; Mark ſaith after thru 1... 

uz, which feemeth to be a difference between the two þ 1, 
gelilts, and alſo a Difficalty, when ic% certain thit our <5. 
did not lie three entire days in the Grave. But cither Mah _ 
kons the ttme from his firſt being betrayed and upprehen py 
it was after three days, and Matthew ſpeaketh only of the tr... 
which he lay in the Grave, that was but part of three dc, 
elſe it was the fault of our Tranſlators to tranſizte pg) ;; 
becauſe indeed it often fo ſ1gnifies, when as it fometin;c5 lis difie 
?n, which had better fitted this Text to make it agree with Wat. 
thew. This 18 Grotizs and B2za's Obſervation, (fec his Notes on _ 
Text,) and is abundantly juſtified by Matth. 27, 64. where Non 
Adverſaries dcfired of Pilate, that the Sepulchre might be wo 
faſt, tos Tis peiTYs 17% eas, wntil the third day; becaule hc hag 
ſa'd, while he was alive, ws]e Teas nwegs tyler, after ty * 
days I will ariſe, which 1f they had undcrftood of, after tha 
thira day fully ſpent, they would not have petitioned, that t.. 
Sepulchre thould have been made faſt only until the third 7, . 
out it 15 plain they underſtood it, the third day he would Site 
So after three days, here is, After the third day 3s come, not 1+. 
ter the third day is paſt ; which neither agrees with Matches: 
nor yet with the Truth, Ifany deſire further to make out th. 
Notien, he may read the Learned Beza his larger Notes on thi; 
Verſe. | 


4» 


- a 
i 


or 
f)rer ) 


32 And he ſpake that ſaying openly. And Peter 
rook him, and begen to rebuke him. 

33 But when he had turned about, and looked yr 
his diſciples, he rebuted Peter, iaying, Get thee 
vehind me, Satan : for thon ſayourcſt not 14> 
things that be of God, but the things which be of 
men. 

It is from hence,manifeſt, that notwithſtanding the Con. 
on of Peter, that he ww the Chrift ; yet they had a very in;:;. 
te knowledge of the buftnels of the Redemption of Mai 
the Blood of Chriſt, and a very imperict Faith, as to thy 151. 
poſtatical Union of the Pivine and Hnmanc Nature 18 the 
Perſon of the Redeemer : For had Peter known theſe © 
ne. would have ſeen a neceſſity of Chriſt's Dying and þ1 
rection from the Dead, in order to the Redemotion and 5 
tion of Man ; and would nreiihcr have diffraded our - 
from it, nor doubted of the Fruth of whit was ſpoken t- 
who was the Truth, and could not 1lye, Our Saviout's <:11., 
him, & gegrers, thou ſavoureſ] wt, might have been mor 1:- 
vourably tranflated, 7h» underſiandeft int, or, thin minte(t r:; 
and muſt not be underitood of a total ignorance, or repard'cw 
neſs, or not relithing, bat of a partial knowledge, the wait ci 
1 due regard to, or favour of the thivgs of God. Thou pre- 
ferreſt thy carnal AtﬀeCtion to me, and indulgeſt thin 0a 
Deſires to the hinderance of 'the Honour and Glory oi 6c, 
and the Salvation of Souls, which I came to purchaſe by thei: 
my Sufterings, and fo art a Satan, an Adverſary to mr, wi» 
-ame to fulfill the Will of my Father ; and muſt not therefore 
zive the leaſt car to thee, who, in what thou ſayeſt, doſt i: 
teek, and take care to plcale thy ſelf. This leadeth him to ti 
tollowing Diicourſe, 


34 And when he had called the people unto hir, 
with his diſciples alſo, he ſaid unto them, Whoſcere 
will come after me, let him deny himſelf, and taie vn 
his croſs and follow me. 


Our Saviour hearing P-tcr fo ſtumble at the new: 


him and the reſt of the Crots which himſeif was to onde s 
and taking notice of his exce-ding fondreis to gratitie him. 
co the prejudice of a far greater Good 3 he no:; tejls them Of 
Law of his Diſcipleſpip, that as he was not to pleaſe im}, 5 
to decline Aﬀtictions for the Goſpel, fo neither mult ay 59 


would be his Followers z they mnſt all deny them lves, ti: ! 
the Croſs and follow him. And bccauſe this was an 1;-r4 ©! 
ing to bleſh and Blood, and what was to be their cert i! F 
he preiſcth it upon them by ſeveral Arguments to the £29 cl 


this Chapter. Sce more in the Notes on Marth, 12, 32. & ir 
24» 


25 For* whoſoever will ſave his life, ſhall Joſe ': '2 


but whoſoever ſhall loſe his life for my fake; and ti"* 
goſpels, the ſame ſhall tave ir. 


We met with this Argument twice in Matthew z to the ot 
upon which I refer the Reader : Mark adds thoſe words, 4" 
the Goſpel ; thereby teacliiug us, that a ſuffering for ts 14#- 
the Goſpel ; that is, for owning the Propatitions 01 it, ON > 
up to the Precepts cf it, is by Chriſt accounted a ſoff?71ns *- 
Chriſt's ſake. "Puggy here muſt ſignifie Life, (as it 15 raul 5, 
for a Man cannot joie his Soul for Chriſt's ſake and the voi 
The meaning is, He that will deny, and abandon me 91d 
Goſpel, out of a deſire to fave his Temporary Life, ſil! '0© 5 
or at leaſt ſhall loſe his Soul's portion in a better Lites but * 
that is willing to loſe his Life, or will run the hazar' on 4 1 
my ſabe, for his owning and profeſſing me, and the Fair Vt n 
Goſpel, or living up to the .Rules, ſhall either fave 17 77 Sen”, 


by tle ſpecial Working of my Providence for him, Gcve/fls 


the; h 
with 
10 th 
which 
leſs 9 
famoy 
Chrift 
841 tc 


Crna 


for Ejj. 


6 Fe 
Araig 


A 
o 


——_—Y 


nap 1%. 


7 


3H . 


+he whole world, and lo{e his own ſoul ? 


. and of my words, in this adulterous and finful genera: 


-* 12 cometh in the glory of his Father,with the holy an- 


M A 


:1; out of his Perfecutor's ſ12ns, or ſhall be recompenced with 
O | Life, of MUCH MOr2 Y2.v00, 


St. 


! 
j 


an Eternd 


36 But * what ſhall it profit a man, if he ſhall gain 


.— Or what ſhall a man give in exchange for his 
{foul ! 

Lube faith, If he tiſe himſelf, and be caſt away, Though Vuyiv 
was rightly trantlated Life in the former Verſe, the ſenſe juſti- 
&ing that Tranſlation of it there, yet here it 15 as truly tranila- 
od Soul, for there are mary things which Men value in pro- 
-ortion with their Lives, their Honour, Eſtates, nay many va- 
'1c their Luſts above their Lives 3 and Chriſt himſelf here teach- 
oth us, that his Diſciples ought to vaiuc his Honour and Glory, 
ind their ſtcady Profeifion of Faith and Holineſs above. their 
Life; becauſe he that will loſe his Life, ſhall ſave 1t, See the 
Notes on theſe Words, Maith. 16. 25, 


33 * Whoſoever therefore ſhall be * aſhamed of me, 


rion.of him alſo ſhall the Son of man be aſhamed, when 


Ya 
gels. 


Ti1ofe Words occurring twice in Matth. 10. 33. chap. 15. 27. 


ve beet; before ſpoken to : ſee the Notes 01 thoſe Texts, Luke 
rercats them moſt perfectly, as here they are recorded. Mah 
expounds Eube's Words 3; where he faith, that Chriſt thall come 
in 11s on Glory, and of the Father, and of the Angels. By the 
Girms of the Fbly Angels, 1s meant no more than attended by the 
Hi! Angels, according to Matth, 13. 41, and 1 Theſ. 4. and other 


Scriptures Matthew ſaith, chap. 16. 279, For the Son of Man ſhall 
ene in the Glory of hs Father, with the Angels, and then he ſhall 
reward every Han according t) his Worbs chap. 19. 32. | Whoſoever 
Aut dens me bee ten, him will T deny alfa before my Father whici) 
* in Hon, ) There are two Patfions which prevail upon Men 

to mike re 2 Apc.itatize 1n a Day of Temptation, Fear and Shame ; 
the tirſi prevariced upon Peter, 1n the H7zh Priets Hall; the fecond 


R K. 


and a voicecame out of the cloud, laying, This is my 
beloved Son, hear him. : 
3 And ſuddenly, when they had lookea round a 
bout, they faw no man any more, ſave Jeius only with: 
themſelves. 
9 Andas they came down from the monntain, !: 


charged them that they ſhould tell no man wha: Tainzs 
they had ſeen, till the Son of man were rijen from +; 
dead. 

10 And they kept that ſaying with them%ives,que- 
{tioning one with another, what the riliyz from +h;- 
dead ſhould mean. : 

_ Both Matthew and Luke, as well as Jf1rh, bear Record to 
Truth of this Hiſtory. See the Notes on Mutth-, ch. 17, 4 
Our Saviour was pleaſed thus to fortifie thefe three. 35 14; 
ciplcs agnnft his Pathon, which they were Joon to tee , 
difo to confirm their Faith as to his Divine Nature. Why 3! 

and Eltas, rather than any others appcared, is but a uric 
Qucition of no great uſe tc us, if reſolved, and not PuITHDLC £4 
be r:folved. Theſe three Diſciples , by this Apparitior , ſro 
our $4v1our owned by Myſes, who gave the Law; and by E{-.: 
In great Repute both of thein with the Few. 
pcs could know neither of them {dead many Hundreds of your: 
before they were in being) but by Revetation « Probavly Crifl 
fold tem who they were, What their Diſc.urte with Topit 
was in the general, 3 hew tciteth us. I'here i: no contidera!:- 
thiag 1n this Evangelijts Relation, which we did not meet witte 


Lays 


Ls p—_ p 


in Matihezw, which may ſupcriede any further labour about i* 


ticre, 


11 And they asked.him ſaying, Why ſay the ſerites 
xthat Eljas muic firſt come? 


12 And he ai{wered, and told them, Elias verify 


/ 


cometh firſt, and reſtoreth all things, and * how it +: 


Tie three Bite. 


we. nd ao 1nftance of any good Man guilty of in Holy Writ; and | WTIEEEN af the Son of man, that he muit ſuffer n:2.» 
it oft certatuly arzues a rotten, and a corrupt Heart. When things, 2nd * be ſet at nought. =—_ 
Ment i. K1t bencath their Honour and Quality to own the d-fſ- | _ : 
pied 104 m Higned Truths and Ways of God, this 1s not onv a 23 But 1 lay unto yOu, that Elias iS indeed come, 
Cm. you » _ m_ gens ten gs or Tag: EI au they have done uato him whatſoever tlicy liſte, 
ca an” ſuch Verſons look for any thing leſs ands 01 oy Ou 4. 
Ciiift, tag that he ſhould think it nh more beneath his | ©? ” nr pn a 9 TS = 
Honour and Vigaity in the Day of Judgment to own them. Clu won had 192 acknans, Apa Ditctples that he mould jeJ, | :1C 
Fews had a Prophecy, n 't only that the Meſſras ſhoulu come, tr" 
| that Lc /huld bo cut off. Dan. 2. 25, but mt for hinfetf: Only 
CHAT. IX this hindred the Corti ty of their perfnation that Chrilt was hs. 
becouſe Elis ws wt yt cone, wihym they did expert, Mal. 1. «& 
Chrift, trceins Peter, Fames and, Jon, in'o @ high Mountain, s| bor they cxpeftcd the Coming of E£& in Perton 5 when as 1: 
transfi.reds Wiſes and Elias appear and taik with him, 1—18. | Prophecy was te be underſtand of one #n the Sriri* and Pope: 
Tre Dijciples queſtion D1m avout Flizs's Coming : He afſureth them of Elias, as the Angel expounded if, Zzb. r, 35. Thcoy aif 
tht be was cone, 11 —13. Repinveth the Unoelief of the Per-| expe@ted that Fijs. when bw come. thoult make a gron: 
ples and upon the Fatth of the Parent, cafieth a dumb and al change in their Wort and brings of 191ngs again * 
deaf Spirit ot of his Child, 14—27. The Reaſon why his P1-j but ſtil! their Eye was twnon a [any Change, and 4 x: froring « 
ciples could mt cal? him out. 28, 2c. Fire-teif-th them of h#s| them to that Liberty of their Cruntrs, which Ghev foarmoriy on 
ff er7ng ant ReſurrectiNn, 25—22, he txheth a little . hi'a' tored ; whereas the Propin V, Mai. 4- 6. *$ expourdire -!:v tin, 
mt bis Arms, and teacheth iis Diicipſos Bumility and Kindneſs\ Anzel, Lib 1. 15, 15. And many of the ChSitopn of Te rol reli gs 
ane t1 unnther 2.2. —2 Feller tovm, not to forbid any to work turn to the [14d their God to tn th eurts 5+ the | 
Mmacles in bis Name, 48a Showeth the danzrr of fence 5 to the Children, an the diſobenient t1 tne Wild of the jul, =» mn 
Io martifig then do re Sins « The 3crefit of {5 ding, with the ready a Perple prepared jor the Lord The © ifeipies boi Tow, 
Pi lnent of nezletting. #19 milcbinf of Aprif.ucy 4250. {| were under the © rejudives of thel: Notions ahout F/; 3: 4 
0. | monly received by the Dr&s of their Church, anc) 
1 / ND hc 5:6 nfo thom, Verily ? ſay 1170 You, | rality of "__ Feople. ; Fo _ We 6a AIMWETS, 
A EE. os at atracss kt here Was true 3 E145 (1Þat 15, one 7a fre Spire and 
'# b. tnaar Cnerc Uo lONME 07: TRE?! NAT Itand L900Y was, according to the Prophec: of. Milzciy. fo com 
which \12)] not ralro of cath, tl they have ieen the' Meſſtas, ut they had cver-tookt kin, * 1Tndce 
kingdom of God come With power. { was C..me, Marth Ir. 14. And by his Preaching the Port 
| ; : ; ; _ | of Repenrance for the Rem? 19n of Sins, £36 evdcaroured th nlfong 
To tae of Death. 1s the ſame wit" to Die, or to begin to Dze,| ajj things ; that is, fo mike a zreat Change in the "carts Ind 
or to exrronce Death; Compare with this Text, Pſal. 34- 8 Lives of the Fews 3 yt they had put i tra to death, Ho furtter 
Lil, 14. 24+ 79%. 8. 42, Heb. 2.c. Heb 5. 4, 5. T Pet. 2. 3. | TH] tgleth them; That John had told them of the Son of Man, th:it 
the, have ſeen the Kingdom 9 God come. | Our Evange'ift addeth, | y@ muſt ſuffer many thivgs, and be ſat at nonzht ; He did indced 
with Pover It cannot be meant of the Day of Judzment, unel: } te11 them ſo, when, 0b. 1. 2. he pointed to him paiſing by. 
in the Type of it, wi1c1 was in the Deſtruction of Jeraſalem 3 of | 1nd ſaid, Beho!d, the Lamb »f God, who tabeth away "or, tabih 
which many underſtand it for fome of the ApoFl2zs more doubt up, or, beareth} the Sins of the World. So that this was no juſt 
lefs of Chrift's Diſciples, out-lived the fatal Ruin of that once prejudice to thicir believing thar he was the truc Mei. 
famous Ciry. Others underftand here by the Kinzdom of God, ; 
Chrijt Rejurre&ion from the Dead, when Chriſt's Kingdom be- 14 And when he came to bis diſciples, he ſaw 2 
gal to be fully made known, Acts 10, 42. K , I 
] . great multitude about them, and the ſcribes gueſtio- 
i.:2, 2 Andafter ſix days, Jeſus taketh with him, Peter, | ning with them. 
and James, and John, and leadeth them up into an i5 And ſtraightway all the pcopie, when they be- 
high mountain apart by themſelves, and he was trans-| ye1q him, were greatly amazed ; 22d 7anning £9 hi, 
heured before them. ſalated him 
. . 7 _ That or oO 
3 Ard his raiment became ſhining , exceeding] 16 And he asked the ſcribes, What queſtion Fo 
Whireas ſnow ; ſo as no fuller on earth can white| | with them ? ES 
them, When Chriſt came down from the Mountain of *1a751tg hyde tent 
; , tion to his Diſciples, which ne had left at the Foot 07 the viuun » 
4 And there appeared unto them Elias, with Mo- tain; he ſaw a great Muſtitude got together atout tie, wi 
ſes, and they were talking with Jeſns. diſcerned ſome Scribes (Companions of the PParijees one + 
b _ «. | ers of the Law) mixing themſelves with his Ditcipiet Joo hte 
5 And Peter anſwered, and ſail fo Jeſus, Maſter, it guing with them: They had often aftemptec our S470, 4 
1 g0od for 13 to be here 5, and let us make three ta- | no purpoſe. but their own 5hame and Confuſio! OK S S chic 
crn2cles, one for thee, and one for Moſes, and one| fence they fall in with his Diſciples, who _—_ yet —_ n ks 
or Eljas. Faith ; over them they hope to gct a great 03; "4AM = 
: Evangeliſt doth not plainly tell i what the ri Djobt- —_— 
[5 For he wiſt not what to fay, for they were ſore| their Diſcourte was. Though tticre be no. gay 
airalg, Scribes in this Diſcourſe purfued ther Uottgn fo 2Xporr eve) 


Chap. IX 


7 And there was a cloud that overiiadowed them. 


15M 
pie” "5s 
fl» i. 


0 2-9 
I=# +: * - 05.—E 
REESE IA DTE > 
6 pr 


' 

| q, 
FI hy l 
|; 08-248 
$224; 


je b je 8 . ” , | _ 
F _ 4 ws Hes - i _ jm £ . 
x 4 b 8 a . 4 
ac. wy - m_ " _— v FS. > ——_ 1 3 Bet 
——— —_—— 4 bo—_ 2467 == _ oe —_— _ Y Om . - = _ 
 ———————_——— TS ——<S - - — yn OI - - 
— - poommocn - _— —_— —_— < = —_ _ 4 
; - 4 = Cr I nts "many — XZ. — — — 
. he e 2 Ag n 
. _ _— Ws 7 Y ” 4 < * 
y: / * 


26-5 
, 26 as 5 _— 3 
— - ood nag tb "pr ron 
2 : BY math ontontatpeciſ—oes 
C— —_ —_ 5 - 
+ 
& & W - 
5 
- wits 
wy p 


— oe 


ER : _ ES = DC 
—— op ——_— __—_— === 
PTE En OE. > CI I A ROI 
: ; ——— , 


=== &-- "Mz 
5 + S 
A wo 


Chap. IX. 


"Op hrift and his Diſciples, aud to that purpoſe taking ad- | 
weed Our Saviond's ablerice, diſcourſed with them about 
many Things 3 yet Mr. Calvin doth (not 1mprobably) judge 
that a great part of their Diſcourte was about our Saviour's Caſt- 
ing out of Devils, and thetr Power in that thing derived from . him, 
they being at the preſent non-pluſt, and not able to exert that 
Power in the caſting out of a Devil, with which one was poſ- 
(fed, who in our Saviour's Abſence was brought to them. 
That which maketh this probable, is not only that this Ac 
of our Saviour more troubled and gall'd them than any 0- 
;her, and pnt them to that miſerable Refuge, (out of which 
our Saviour had lately beaten them,)to ſay, 77.t he caſt ont 
Devils, by Beelzebub the Prince of Devils ; but alto, that when 
our Saviour coming in to the timely Reſcue of his Diſciples, 
asks the Scribes , What queſlion you among your ſelves ? It 15 
$t41d, 

*Lak.c. 32, 17 And * one of the multitude anſwered, and ſaid, 
Maſter, 1 have brought unto thee my ſon, which hath 
a dumb ſpirit. : 

18 And whereſoever he taketh him, he{| tear- 
eth him , and he foameth; and gnaſheth with his 
teeth, and pineth aways and I ſpake to thy difci- 
ples that they ſhould caſt him out, and they conld 
not. | : 

i9 He anſwered him,and faith, O faithleſs genera- 
tion, how long ſhall I be with you ? how long ſhallI 
ſuffer you ? bring him unto me. 

20 And they brought him unto him : and 
*Ch. x. 26. when he ſaw him, ſtraightway the ſpirit tare him ; 

and he fell on the ground, and wallowed, foam- 
ing. , 5 o 
21 And he asked his father, How long is it 
ago ſince this came unto him? And he faid, Of a 
child. : ES 

22 And oft-times It hath caſt him into the fire, 
and into the waters to deſtroy him : but if thou 
canſt doany thing, have compaſſion on us, and help 
v9. 

23 Jeſus faid unto him, * If thon canſt be- 
lieve, all things are poſſible to him that belic- 
veth. 

24 And ſtraightway the father of the child cried 
out, and faid with tears, Lord, I believe, help thou 
my uabeltef. 

25 When Jeſus iaw that the people came run- 
ning together, he rebuked the foul ſpirit, ſaying 
unto him , Thov dumb and deaf ſpirit, I charge 
thee come out of him, and enter no more into 
him. 

26 And the ſpirit cried , and rent him ſore, and 
came out of him, and he was as one dead ; inſomuch 
that many ſaid, He is dead. 

27 But Jeſus took him by the hand, and lifted him 
up, and he arole. 


' 28 And when he was come into the houſe, his dif 
ciples asked him privetely, Why could not wecaſt him 
out !? 

29 And he faid unto them, This kind can come 
forth by nothing, but by prayer and faſting. 


4 Or, aath- 
eth bm. 


*®LuKk.17. 6. 


This famous Hiſtory is alſo recatded by two other Evange- 
liſts, Matthew and Luke ; we have opened it in our Notes on 
Matth. 17. 14, @c. and conſider'd what Mark and Luke have to 
compleat it, For our Inſtrution we may learn ſeveral things 
from the Confiderition of it. x. The great Goodneſs of God 
'n preſerving us from the Power of Evil Spirits; as alſo the dai- 
!y Working of his Providence for our Preſervation : What but 
t!:is kept this Man from being deſtroyed by the Fires and the 
*Yaters into which he had been often thrown by the Evil Spi- 
rit. 2, That the ſhorter the Devil's time is, the more he ra- 
geth, ver. 20. This is true, both as to the Devil himſelf, and 
hls Inſtruments, Rev. 12. 12. The Devil is come down unto you 
having great Wrath, becauſe he knoweth that he hath but a ſhort 
tzme. Thus in the moment of Converſion, Chriſtians often 
meet with the ſtrongeſt Conflicts of Temptation. 3. The fault 
15not in Chriſt, but in our ſelves, if we receive not that Mer- 
cy from him which he hath, and which we ſtand in need of, 
and beg from him.——#f (faith Chriſt) th canſt believe.---— 
4- God rewardeth weak Faith, where it is attended with a ſin- 
cere deftire of increaſe. This poor Man ſhewed a very imper- 
fect Faith, in ſaying, If thou canft do any thing 3 but it being 
in ſome degree fincere, the Lord rewardeth it, thongh weak; 
he deſiring an encreaſe of it; and that God would from his 
Goodneſs ſupply what was defeRive in his Faith. $5. The great 
Cures both of of our Bodies and Souls, in ſome Caſcs, require 
more extraordinary and importunate Addreiſes , and Applica- 
tions unto God, more eſpecially where Evils are more invete- 
rate. For other things relating to this Hiſtory, ſce the Notes on 
Matth, 17. 14,05c. ; 


30 And they departed thence, and palled through 


S. MARK: 


Cha E 
Galilee, and he wonld not that any man ſhouj* "Sg 
it. Ks 

37 For he tanght his diſciples, and ſaid unto ther. 
The Son of man is delivered into the hands of me, 
and they ſhall kill him ; and after that he is killed, i 
ſhall riſe the third day. , 


32 But they underſtood not not that ſaying, ang 
were afraid to ask him. 

Onr Savjonr, as the time of his Suffering approached mx. 
nearly, did more frequently inculcate it to his Diſciples ; tha 
being fore-warned, they might alſo be fore-armed again} +... 
Temptation of it ; and we Jearn from Luk, 24, 21: That all ww. 
too little z for when they ſaw theſe things come to pac. they 
began to flag as to their Faith. They faid, ver. 21, Bt ,; 
truſted it had been he who ſhnuld have redeemed Ijrael. Our x,. 
viour, the Son of Man is delivered, which 1s expounded », 
Matth. 17. 22, 23. The Son of Man ſhall be betrayed. He wag jj. 
ready delivered in the ſure Counſel of God ; and what gz 
hath revealed ſhall be done, becauſe the Certainty of the px. 
felt is often in Scripture ſpoken of as a thing already qy,, 
That Phraſe, Ver, ZI. the third day, THTET) nude, eXPounds 
that other Phraſe which we mectwith, chap. 8. 31. ute 75 * 
nukeas, which we Tranſlate after three days ; and make; 
the meaning of the Evangeliſt plain to have been, as we &. 
termined it. 


33 And he came to Capernaum, * and being in,,.. 
the houſe, he asked them, What was it that ye dijpy. * 
ted amongſt your ſelves by the way ? 


34 But they held their peace ; for by the way they 
had diſputed among themſelves who ſhould be the 
greateſt. 


This Ambition of the Diſciples we have had occaſion xt; 
to Diſcourſe of in the Notes on Matth. 18. i. It was fours. 
upon their miſtake of the true Nature of the Kingdom 9: 1, 
Meſſiah, which they at this time, and a long time after, '«c:.; 
to the time of Chriſt's Aſcenſion, as appeareth by A#s 1. 5.1. 
derſtood of a temporal, ſecular Kingdom 3 10 the Adminif;,. 
tion of which, he ſhould deliver. the Fews from all Slavery 1:4 
Bondage : this made their Minds fo often run of Djznities 41. 
Places, which he ſhould in that Adminiſtration have a Po :» 
diſpoſe of. This made the Mother of Zebedee's Childrey pete. 
tion for Places for her two Sons. | 


35 And hefate down and called the twelve, 
faith unto them, * If any man delire ro be firlt, thr+c.,. 
ſame ſhall be laſt of all, and ſervant of all. Tye 

36 And * he took a child, and ſer him in the mids, . 
of them : and when he had taken him in his arms, tz 
ſaid unto them, 


37 Whoſoever ſhall receive one of ſuch children 
in my Name, receiveth me: and * whoſoever fhill« y, 


receive me, receiveth not me, but him that fent ;; 
me. 
Matthew's Recital of this paſſage, expoundeth Mark ; he ſitth 
Chriſt ſaid, Except ye be converted, and become as little Children, 
ye ſhall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven: Whoſjever there 1r 
ſhall humble himſelf as this little Child, the ſame ts greate!t in 
the Kingdom of God : And whoſo ſhall recerve one ſuch little Chill 
in my Name, receiveth me. Luke alſo relateth this paſſage fome- 
thing more ſhortly, but without any Contradittion to what i 
'aid by the other Evangeiiſt, The Senſe 1s platn, our Saviour's 
defign was to check the Ambition and Ignorance of: his Dilc:- 
ples; never more unreaſonably ſheiwed than now, when 2 lit 
fering-time was ſo hard at hand. He at arft did it by Word 
of Mouth ; telling them, | That if any Min deſire t) bo ful, (: 
ſhould be laſt of all : ] The leaft valuable in the Eycs of Ga ; 
and he would have them value ſuch a Perſon leafi. Hun: 
is that which moſt Exalts a Soul in the Eyes of Chritt, and {:- 
teth it higheſt in his Eſteem. But it 1s obſervable, our Loru 
doth not ſay, He that is firſt, but he who defireth to be fr 
God is a God of Order, not of Confuſion ; there can ©. : 
Order without a firſt, as well as a laſt. But Chriſtians {%: 
ſters eſpecially, for he is here ſpeaking to the Twelve) ou! 
to be ſought our for, not to ſeek places of Preheminence 4's 
Dignity : He that is fir? in ſeeking them, is uſually //! 1s t 
any true Worth defexving thew, and ought la!t to 07.: 
them. Then he teacheth them Humility by the Type of 4 
tle Child, which he ſetteth in the midſt of them, tellin; tle 
they muſt be like that little Child, (ſaith Matthew) not it 3 
things, but in the want of Ambition , in a careleſneſs 4s to !'':- 
great Things of this Life. And whoſoever entertain'd or 110: 
ed kindneſs toſuch a one, Chriſt would take it as done to I! 
13132 


ſelf; and what kindneſs was ſhewed him, reached not to hit 
only, but to his Father who ſent him. There are 4ilo ot: 
things in little Children commended to us in Holy Writ 3 
this is manifeſtly what our Saviour here intendeth. 5ce tlic Nuts 
on Matthew, chap. 18. ver, 1, 2, 3- 


38 And John anſwered him, ſaying, Maſter, W*'- 
ſaw one caſting out devils in thy Name, and he follow- 

ed not us, and We forbad him, becauſe he follow*® 
not us, 


14P- 


- . Bp 
vi LT” 


TW f 42 
4 (4? ONes 
” 7 mill 
4 5, Calt 

124, 
| * Fe 


43 
bette 


two 
ver be 


44 
not q1 
45 
ter fo! 
to be 
Quenc| 


46 
10k qu 

Cliſe 47 
P f-tis be 
With o 
helt-fir 


_ 
by » 


 of-Ui 


14D; IX. St. M1 | 4 


39 Bat Jeſus faid,Forbid him nor, * for there is no | 


man that ſhall do a miracle in my Name, that can 


lightly ſpeak evil of me. a ; 
140 * For he that 1s not againſt us, is on our 


part- 
Here a Queſtion ariſeth worthy of our Diſcuſſion a little : 
thcie Miraculous Operations were performed by a Di- 


N2C1N; We _ a A g p mp 
vine . Wo and for ſuch an End as the Confirmation of Chritt s 
Divine Power, how could any one caſt out Devils in the Name 
4- ['Y » . 


:\ Chriti, and yet not follow him and his Diſciples? _ 1. It 1s 
ap \ront, that this Perſon was no Enemy to Chriſt, or his Goſpel, 
oy what Our Saviour ſaith, both ver. 35. and 40. 2. It 1s evt- 
dent, that the caſting ous of Devils was no ſaving Effet of the 
jioly Spirit : Chriſt ſaith, Matth. 7. 22. that ſome ſhould ſay, 
In thy Name have we caſt ort Devils; to whom, in the Day of 
iudgmcnt, he would lay, Depart from me, I knw you not, ye 
wrters of Intquity. 3+ It 1s plain that this Man was ne ſuch 
Perſon as Sceva's Sons, of whom we read Ads 15. 14, 15, 16. 
gr the Devils reiiſted them, though they alſo uſed the Name 
of Chriſt, It was a Time exceeding famous for ſome of the 
inore Extravrdinary Gifts of the Holy-Ghoſt , anZ it 1s not to be 
wondered, if fome 1n this time, for the Glory of God, received 
fume Crumbs of that plentifn! Benevoience, though they were 
but imperſett Diſciples, yet being no Enemies. Caiphas Prophe- 
lied, Job. Ile gl, 52» And though [ do think tiar the Children 
of the Phariſees, m<cntioned Matty. 12. 27. as Pertons that cait 
out Devils, is bcſt interpreted of thoſe ſent out by Chritt, ( the 
Twzlue and the Seventy, ) yet ſome are of another mind. Some 
*<hink this Man, though he did not follow Chriift and his Diſci- 
ples as a conſtant Companiou, yet was one who favoured, and 
had reccived the Goſpel; or elſe one of John's Diſciples z and 
{> ne, who, though he was not formally joyned with the Fol- 
'owers of Chriſt, yet was a Friend of that great Bridegroom. 
30 as Fohnand the reſt forbidden him, fecmed to be guilty of 
tio no ſmall Errors. 1, Emying for Chriſt's ſabe, as Foſhua did 
for Miſes hisfake, Numb. 31. 28, as Fohn's Diſcipies did for their 
Maſter's ſake, Joh. 3. 25, Willing that Chriſt, and thoſe whom 
he ſent out, ſhould have all the Honour of thoſe Miraculous 
Operations. 2. Limiting the Grace of Christ to that Congregation, 
which followed Chriſt, and the Twelve: A thing that good Men 
are t09 prone unto. How much better was the Spirit of Paul, 
who tells us, Philip. 1. 15. That although ſome preached Chrijt of 
Envy and Strife, yet he rejoyced, and would rejyce that Chriſt was 
Freuched, whether in Pretence or in Truth, ver. 18. Chriſt would 
have all his People of ſuch a Spirit, as not to hinder, but com- 
mend ; not to envy, but to rejoyce in the doing of good by 
any, whether they did follow him or no. Some do think that 
at that time it pleaſed God, that for the Honour of his Son Je- 
lu: Chriſt, he did concur with thoſe that named his Name in 
ſuch Miraculous Operations. Sure we are, that Chriſt repro- 
veth John, and commanded them not to forbid this Man : gi- 
ving this fora Reaſon, That his owning the Name of Chriſt 
ſo far as to uſe it in ſuch an Operation, h::1 at Jezft fo much 
kindneſs for him, as he was no Enemy, Ii: would not Curſe 
him, nor ſpeak Evil of him, which coincth ur * thr of the 
Apoltie, 1 Cor. 12. 2. For Man ſpealyng by the Spir'© 1 God, calt- 
eth Tejrts accurſed ; and no Man can fay feſus 15 the - ord, Lit 
by the Spirit. | For he that is mt againſt us, 3s on our part.) If a 
Man be not an open Encmy to Chriit, he cught fy be preſumed 
fo be his Friend, at leaſt ſo far as not to be diſcouraged in doing 
2g00d Work, 


41 For whoſoever ſhall give you a cup of water 
todrink in my Name, becauſe ye belong to Chriſt, 
verily I fay unto you, he ſhall not loſe his re- 
ward. 


We meet with the ſame in ſubſtance, Matth, ro. 42. There 
the Phraſe is, In the Name of a Diſciple 3 here it is Expounded, Be- 
cauſe you belong to me; In my Name, upon my Account believing 
you have a Relation to me. 


tif.?, 42 * And whoſoever ſhall offend one of theſe little 


z <4 Ones that believe in me, It 1s better for him that a 


/- mill-ſtone were hanged about his neck, and he were 
calt into the ſea, 


See the Notes on Math. 18. 6. 


43 Andif thy hand offend thee, * cut it off: it is 
better for thee to enter into life maimed, than having 
two hands, ro go into hell, into the fire that 1hall ne- 
verbe quenched - 


44 * Where their worm dyeth not,and the fire is 
not quenched. 


45 And if thy foot offend thee, cut it off : it isbet- 
ter for thee to enter haltintolife,than having two feet 
to be caſt into hell, into the fire that ſhall never be 
Quenched : 


45 Where their worm dyeth not, and their fire is 
not quenched. 
47 And if thine eye jj offend thee, pluck it out : 


_ one-eye, than havins two eyes to be caſt into 
fire: 


Tiot 2: 


R K Ch 
$ EN T3 73), 
& 


48 Where their worm dyetit not, and the fire is 


; NuT q":enched. 


See the Notes on Matthew, CUP. ge. VF. 29, 3”. where the 


ame things occur, ( Hatihew only mentions tne [jaiid, and rhe 


Eye, ) Ail have the ſunc Signiticancy 3 viz. That it 15 better 
to deny our telves in ſome particuar fatisfattion, than to luzard: 
Eternal Salvation for the gratifying tic 4 ppetite 11 It, 


49 Forevery one ſhall be ſalred with fire,and * cye- * 
ry ſacrifice ſhall be ſalted with alc. 


The Phraſe of this Text 15 ſo difficu!r, and the S2y/> of it fo 
necetfary to be underitood, that it hath detervidly cxoroiſed the 
parts of many Interpreters and given them: x Latitude to abount 
in {nterpretations. Thote who would rightly underſtand it, mutt} 
have a Retroſpettion to the tix Verſes wamediatcly precedins. 
where our Lord had perſuaded the Mor: incation of cur miſt 6-- 
led and profitable, or pleaſ:at Luits, under the Notion of c- 
ting off the Right Hand or Foot offending, and plucking 147 tis 
Right Eye, nnder the Penalty of going into the Five that (pal | 
ver be quenched ; Az alto to the Law, Levt. 2. 13. which rags 
thus : And every Obla'im of thy Meat-offet ing ſh.ilt thou ſejon 
with Salt, neither ſhalt thou ſuffer the Salt of the Covenant of it; 
God to be lacking from thy Meat-ojfjerins + with a! thine Oferinzs, 
thou ſhalt offer Salt, 2. They muſt ocxt confider the N.turs r 
Salt and Fire. It 1; of the Nature cf Sal:, by drying up ©. 
over-much moiſture in Meats, to preferve them from #? atro 


faction. 2. To cauſe jm.ut to living bleth: And of Fire 722 je- 


perate things not of the ſame kind in Compounded Bodies, and 
alfo to cauſe pain and ſmart, 3. They muft know, that every 
one 1n the former part of the Verſe, is the ſame witii ev2ry Sa- 
crifice . in the latter part. For every Man and Woman hvigs, 
will, or ſhall be a Sacrifice to Goa, Godly Men arc not 2-1 
Priests, 1 Pet. 2. 5, $. Rev. 1.6. and 5. 10. but Sacrifices, Km. 
12. 1. wicked Men, though indecd they be no Pricfts, { v«©- 
luntarily giving up themleives unto God, ) yet they ficuil be 
Sacrifices like the Sacrifice in BJ2rah, JJ. 34. 6. or in the N5:tb 
Country, by the River Eupyrates, Jer. 44. 19. See alſ9 Exeb. 35 
I7. Zeph. 1. 5. Thc Saints are both Pri-#s and Sacrifices, Tackle 
things premiſcd, the dithculty or the Text ts not great. Cur 
Lord had vecn 1n the former Verſes perſuading the Mortifica- 
tion of Mens dearcit Lufts, under the Notions of cutting of 
the Right Hand, or, Foot, and plucking our the Right Eve; 
and pictling this Exhoctetion from the Elgiblineſs of it, rather 
than (keeping thein } to le trruct int> Aeil, Where the Wim 
never dies and where the Fire never g02t) out, Now (laith he 
in this Verſe, ) | For every one ſhall be ſalted with Fire, and every 
Sacrifice ſhall be ſalted with Salt.) God hath a Fire, and a S:z!r, 
which every Man muſt enduce: He hatin a Parging Fire to tak: 
away Men's Droſs and Tin. Some he B.ptizeth with the Fly 
Ghoſt, and with Fire, Matth. 3. 11 Luk. 3. 15. And he hath a 
Confurning, Tormenting Fire, a Fiery indignation, which {hat 
devour the Ade: ſorties, Heb. 10. 27. It 1s true, the Lords [a- 
cred Fire of nfs Holy Spirit, will Iike Fire and Salt cauſe ſmart, 
while 1t pargeth out our Lults, like the cutting off of a Right 
End or Foot; but judge you whether 1t be not better to en- 


dure that ſmart *i;un to endure Hell-fir?; for every one mutt 
| endure one of tlick ; vea, ar.d cvery cone muſt be falted with 


Fire. The vaints {at {te tcalon. 1 with Influences of Grace. 
Epheſ. 4. 29. Col. 4. 6. And tey that by the Holy Spirit of 
God bepreſcrved bv i111 through the Power of God to Salva- 
tion, till their Purifv © 58-art, and Heolintis of wie, Natl uſue 
in an Incorruptivility of Being, and Bletfed State, « Cor. x 5. $2 
$3, $4. They hal] be Salted n, or with Fire ;, that is, preicived 
1n or by the Holy Fire of Geds Holy Spirit, ( nor is Saltin- 
with Fire ſo hard a Metaphor, as being Baptized with Fire, fecus 
to be, nothing being ſo contrary to Fire as Water ts; ) others, 
viz. wicked and ungodly Men, who will not endure this Fre, 
nor be ſalted with this Salt, ſhall yet be ſalted with another Fire, 
and with anther Salt, which 1s the Fire that never 25s out, meg- 
tioned in the 44, 45, an4 48 Verſes, which will caul: then a 
much greater pain and ſmart; and in which beiag ſeparated 
from all their Comforts and Satisfactions, they ſhall be /c«/ted'; 
that is (C as to their Beings ) preſerved. that they may be rhe 
Objects of the Eternal Wrath, and Juſtice of God; tor every 
one mnſt go through one or the other *:re ; ever Soul mult 
be ſeaſoned with the one or the ot!:er Salt, Now judge you 
then, whether it be not more adviſeable for you to be Szafoned 
with this Salt, though you indeed iball endure ſorve ſmzzt 1n 
your Ads of Mortification and Selt-denial , than to endure 
Hell-fire, where you will te Salted too as well as Burned ; that 
13, not Tormented only, but preſerved iu Torments, fo as you 
ſhall never conſume, but be ever dying; for with one or other 
of theſe Fires, every Perion, every Man or Woman breathiing 
muſt be ſalred and ſeaſoned, as of old 3 every Sacrifice was to be 
Seaſoned with Salt. 


ſaltne, wherewith will you ſeaſon it? Have fait 


ther. 


We met with the former part of this Verſe Matth. 5. fee the 
Notes on ver. 13. In that Text he compared his Dilcapics, waz- 
ther Preachers or others, to Salt, becauſe by their Dottrine, and 
Holy Life and Example, they as it were kept the Wor:d iwzet. 
[ do not ſee why we ſhould not ſo underſtand him ſpeaking 
here ; underſtanding by Salt, Perfons ſalted, teaſoned with the 


5 better for thee to enter ints the kingdom of God | 


Knowledge of the DoQrine of Chrift, and with the Fear and 
Love of God, theſe are good : But if aay appearing ſuch, Apo- 
ſtatize, or be lazy and inaRive, what are they good for ? or 
what ſhall ſeaſon them ? | Have ſalt in your ſelves, and peace one 

[O00] with 


50 * Salt is good - but if the falt hath loft its * Luk.r4 34- 


in Your felves, and have * peace one with ano amet 


9.4 


> —= 
Ne a or Ee rag 
_ OE rm— rr mn rt en rn "= a eiee—mo——c——_ 
by 6+ 5 
- ” _ * => 


DEI BEER Lrernr an nn mn rr —_—_ —— 


I "* 
LU» 
. ou 


, 4 * « 4 , - , 

* ah i eolern in 38 1:rtle difForcnt Sonſe + In 
T4590 another. \ Hoge DUT iS LUNG TIT] Q 3G RioanaCuit OULLC os [t 
> i - . © i rs a I "by 17" . | ANGER II! 19/2 Jalrors 
«ho farmer Senſe, reniſulves wire the Sal! ; here they are com 


manded to beep Salt in thoinjelves. They coult not have bcen 
+./* ro Scaſun others, if themſelves had not tirtt been ſalted with 
-+Cci0us Habits of Knowledge, Faitn, Love, Fcir of God : Now) 
(ith our Saviour ) Keep tis Salt in jour jelves z let not this Holy 
j-- din fram the Altar 3 take heed of Joting your Savour, and 
tin Poacz ane with anther. Its onething in the Nature of Satr 
nite and brit the Parts of the Body ſalted togetiier ; fo 45 the 
14;nG of 41 Union and Peace one with another, wall declare, 
By this (faith the Apoſtle ) 


that vor 1eve Salt in your ſelves. 
wo bn we re Tranſlated from Dzath to Life, if ws Jouve the Bre- 
Hop, In order to which, Men muſt avoid Envy and Emulation, 


; > > F 5 0. - el G 
13 Contoutis for SUPCT!OrITtY, Wc. A Contcii of which Narurc, 
Lie 21 Occafion of t! 


4 Yb *(C.xqa + Cpe 
of theſe D1itcourics. 


EMAP.I-$. 
2.7 -, Tudes diſnutoth with tha Phariſees Cv cernins Drvarce, 
Ci; #0 f/ JH tit, arſputotn WTI © 'L *5 3 _ . ky (nl 1 
- P . - "If «as ” ?/ 
be Recon ntl ” 4 B © 7 h lt; FT { MLA ”, ant i diſple aſt [# 
LI bY bEELY , ps ra © a - = $ 1A 4 4 » ) T 
z thoſe that rebagod them, 13—-10 Nj; utteth the Tiung 


Kat 31 the wes to Eternal Life, 317 —22. Shewerh hy Dijciples 
bo difficulty of a Rich Man's entring. 7009 Hexven, 23-—2. And 
Rewind of tie that flhw him, im t96, and in the World to 
 Teetoleth bis Sufferings and Uſage at Jeruſa- 


— 


re, 25—31. 1  ' as .2* 
97, ID—o2.i., R-ohuberh fh : Ammo 4s Dyjrre oy P90 of his Diſ- 
> , = bh uy | J wh gp [44 p *% . 
cetl=s, and forbiadeth Lordſhip over cine anmraer, 35 —dq5e And 

Toreth t: blind Bairtiinems PIS fight, 4/-— 52» 


APIS 
21 / = | | 
d5n : 24d the people relort 2n70 him agan z and as he 
Was w303t; he taught them 2gaih- 

xthing in this whole Chzpter, but what we found 


EX7.0 ino8ro 33, 
vb «Vic IiwWEL 

: ! F 

4c on the nincicenth and twenticth Chapters of Mattnew 3 


Vhea Cir ift hag 
ker, Ce \W.t5 Ti (; >+Ll J 
y 1 : FYREITY - Y._'d Vw any 2.2 b j a 
through £.:277.1, ard cometh 1ato the Provinee of Zudea, which 
being the clicteft, ail tha: 12 which J-rafalem was 3 he was there 
; 4 1/4 v 1 ] j, bi ; n F Y "7 . ſ He I, ,* © ” 
4197e than bofore troubled with the Scribes and Phariſees 3 who 


Were now watching him in all his Words and Adtions, that they 


jj oe; now he departcth from Galilee, pafleth 


m1chtiiave lomewttt WNELcOT TO acculc Am, 


2 And the Phariſees came to him, and asked him, 
Is it *lawful for a man to put away his wife? tempting 


Tha 
$81a” : 


22.1, thew adds, jor every Cauſe ;, that is, for any Czuſe, un 
1/1 


- 


leſs 


AM A R K. 


from the Words of this, and the Parrallel Texts, Thar Px 
Divorced may not marry againz as if God's End in the |... 
Divorce, in caſe of Adultery, were meerly to ſeparate tho wn. 
from the Husband's Bed + Whether the Perſon that hath ive; 
Cauſe for the Divorce, may Marry again, may be more * "is * 

not only becauſe ſuch Perſons are Dead Perſons in the 1; _. 
God, but becauſe ſuch a Liberty granted, would open a þ-1....: 
c1te to Iniquity of that kind, while, Perſons weary gs «:.. 

Correlates, thould by this means gratifie their Luſts. 4 7 
obtain their Deſires. But I ſhall not determine it ; Certain, ;- y 
our Saviour here ſpeaketh only of Divorces for Trivial Cans; iy, 

the Law of God doth not warrant 3 and in ſuch Cates v1. p.. .* 
Marrying again muſt neceſſarily commit Adultery, becays. +. 
Band of the former Union holds. As to the Qucttion, Who. 
Divorces be lawſal in no Caſes, but that of Adultery ? Sec the No | 
on Matth. $5. and on Chap. 15. - 


that brought them. | 
14 But when Jeſus ſaw zt, he was much diſpleaſ,, 
and faid unto them, Suffer the little children to com: 


kingdom of God. 


not enter therein. WT, 

19 And he took them up in his arms, put his hang; 
upon them, and bleſſed them. 

This is reported both by Matthew and Luke, only they het; 
omit what we here have, ver. 15. By the Kingdom of 6:4, 1, 
doubtleſs to be underſtood the Word of God, or rather the Gr; 
of Chriſt in the Goſpcl. He that doth not receive it with Aunjj;z, 
and Modeſty, without diſputing, without malice, like a Iittle Child, 
ſhall never come ro Heaven. 


him, Good inaſter, what ſhall I do that I may inheri; 
eternal litc p 


Lube C:ith he was a Ruler. His Queſtion ſignified, That |; 


Souls 3 aid that he defired 1t, and that he was willing to 


hctj-vod fuch a thing as an happy, eternal Exiſtence of good 


fomcthing in order to the obtaining a ſhare and portion in 


4 y © To 7 ; * / INC OE | My 
for Adultery; Iur 1o the Yaaxrjces N 

4 wt kP : . . _ ih _ = A r BY s n > FE j 
ritting Divorce, Dent. 24. 1. Taxing advatitagt Or th 
_ F ny } = of BE A > Hoof NF a. M4 "_, AS: >r03 :} 
FJ} ſhe fri 1 faV2ur Ot 1s Ezes, | aid inter; IS { 

J ; - a4 E I C wok x , _ At -+ CO ; 
cleanrefs following, of a3y Gefurmmity, Of one: 


lik. 


"6 Try 
di. ve \/ i 


3 Ard he anſwered, and [aj3 vt V/ hac did 
Moſes command v2.2 
re; als * a rod to write a bill 
FCC2ent, and £0 PuUL ws away | 
© Ani Jeſ:s anſwered, and ſid unto them, For; 
the hardae of your heart, he wrote you this pre-| 
cept. 


5 Fat from the beginning of the creation, * God | 
made them male and female, 
- * For this cate ſhalla man leave his father and 
. mother, a. Jcicave to his wite, 
* 8 Andtheytwain ſhall be one fleſh: fo then they 
arc 3 merc Lyailn, but one fleſh. 
9g What therefore God hath joyned together, let 


no Man pur aſunder. 
The Order of the Diſcourſe, as recorded by Mark, ſomething 


diftereth from that jn Mi/rws;, but the Evangelifts were not | 


C2 iccuratcin that, but took carc only to ſer down the ſubſtance 
of the Dijcourte, as apprars from the Relition of feveral other 
parts of the Eiſtory, In the Notes on Matth. 1g. 3, 4, Oc. 
the Reader will find whatſoever ſtands in need of Explication, 


10 And inthe houſe his diſciples asked him again 

me inatter. 

T And he faith unto them, *# Whoſcever ſhall put 
i aw2y his wite, and marry another, committeth adul- 

tery agaiclk her. 


I2 


O 
Lan) 
« 
"- of 
Þ] 
fo) > 


Ard if a woman ſhall put away her husband, 
204 ve marricd to another, ſhe- committeth adul- 


- IIS / 


CC: © 

Maitnew, chap... &. 32. and 19. 9, interpreteth this paſſage of 
37154. by addin» thoic Words, | Except in caſe? of Fornication, 
19. but Mirth alone hath what 15, ter. 12, which concerneth 
He Wnman, which hitch made fome doubt, whether the Wo- 
man, 16 caſe of the Hughands Adultery, may Sue a Divorce 
fon him: but the moit Judicious Interpreters fay, There is an 
£guz! Right on both tides: T am ſure the Reaſen is equal on 
buth fidcs. The AGultery of the Husband difſalveth the Tye 
and Covenant af Marriage, as well as the Adlaltery of the Wife. 


ane 


| interpreted the Law P:'7- | 


Ir, 
'} 18 And Jeſus faid unto him, Why calleſt thou mc 
Jn | g09G ? there 1s no mar good, but one, that is, God. 


| commit adultery, Do not kill, Do not ſteal, Do nit 14" 


dren,how hard is it for them that * truſt in riches, t0 ot 
enter into the kingdom of God ? 1: 


That is Originally good, and Supremely good, or Perfe&ly 5:1, 
Herein our Saviour doth not deny himſelf to be God, hu 
checketh him who did not believe him ſuch, yet called hin 
Good. 


19 Thon krcoweſt the commandments, * Ds not#:;: 


bear falſe-witneſs,Defraud not, Honour thy father *: 
mother. 

20 And he anſwered, and faid unto him, Mafer. 
all theſe have I obſerved from my youth. 


That 15, in that Latitude to which the Do&ors of the 7exi! 
Church at that time expounded them. 


21 Then Jeſus beholding him, loved him, and fail 
unto him, One thing thou lackeſt, go thy way, {ll 
whatſoever thou haſt, and give to the poor, and thou 
ſhalt have * treaſure in heaven, and come;take up the '!:: 
croſs, and follow me. | la 

22 And he was ſad at that ſaying, and went anay*” 
orieved, for he had great poſſeſſions. 


Sce the Notes on Matth. 19. 15, r7, 18, dc. Chrift had at 
humane Compaſſton towards fo civil a Perſon ; but ſheet 
him, that LZove was the fu'fillinz of the Law ; and that Ls !: 
ſeen in a Reſolution, to yield an Univerſal Obedience to the Will 
of God. Our Saviour impoſeth a ſpecial Precept upon him, 
conjoyned with two general Precepts, concerning all the Diſc: 
ples of Chriſt ; to which his not yielding Obedience, ſhewed that 
he was miſtaken in his Notion, That he had from his Youth bei 
the Commandments, though it might be true according to thi! 
Law-Interpretation of them given by the Phariſees. 


23 And Jeſus looked round about, and faith unto*1; 
his diſciples, How hardly ſhall they that have rici:: 
enter into the kingdom of God ? 

24 And the diſciples were aſtoniſhed at his words. 
But Jeſus anſwereth again, and faith unto them, Chil- _ 

: 


}5 


25 It iscaſier for a Camel to go through the cy* 


a needle, than for a rich man toenter into the k112 
dom of God. 


26 And they were aſtoniſhed out of meaſure, ſay1!'s 
among themſelves; Who then can be ſaved ? 


ff i yet 4 more zropadles and yorcaionan'e Opinion of ſome 
- & 


13 * And they brought young children to him tha; * '.: 
he ſhould touch them, and his diſciples rebuked thy (* 1.; 


* le, 
unto me, and forbid them not: for of ſuch is the. . 


15 Verily 1fay nn o you, * Whoſoever ſhall not 4: | 
ceive the kingdom of God asa little child, he ſhajj "1 


t7 * And when he was gone forth into the way, *v.. 
there came one running,and kneeled to him,and askeg 1, 


Weg 
lea 
7eC 
[0C 
(01 

5 
Son 
and 
dea 

5 

and 
Uay 
$0 
time 
Wa, 
net: 

Out-1\ 

Sufte: 

tha: ] 

and [, 


1 , 
flie 5; 


for the 
to the; 
were C 
Fickout 


Withall 


40 | 
fo hand, 1: 


4 them fo 


41 A 
Much dj 


See the 
Oy wir 
Tame an 
4 done } 
bary, ever 
done ly c 


16 * li; 
SITE 
(165 +47 0) 


yp. £>- 


ave left ail 
13VC Cl 6 G15 
, 46s 


: jal: fits 


o hand, is not mine to glve, j| but :x ſhall be given to 
; them for whom it is prepared- 


| Our C 


St, M 42A 


27 


vc the Notes ON Matth, 19. 24, 24. where the ſame Hi- 

JC Cs ” To . \ WS '% 23 

5 ory occurred, and 411 the Additions t& 1t here are opened. 

ICT) 

13 * Then Pcter began to ſay unto him, Lo, we 
11d have followed thee. 


And Jeſus looking 0P07 them, ſaith With men | 
- + x impollible, bur not with God: for * with God all 
, i thing3 are poſſible. 


R K. 


rule over the Gentiles, exerciſe lord{hip over chem: 


and ther great ones exerciſe authority 179: them. 
ever will be great among you, ſhall be your mini- 
ſter : 


$ I fi a Oro > = | 
20 4nd j-5:s aniwered, ard ſaid, Verily I fay unto ! 


ou, Ther is NO Mai Tr6at hath left houſe,or brethren, ; 
", iNers, Of father, Or mother, Or wife, or children, 
irs, for my lake and the goipels, 

. Bur he hall receive an hundred-fold,now in this 
\\n:2, houſes, and brethren, and ſiſters, and mothers, 
-- 4 chiidren, and lands, with perſecutions, and in the 


-of1d to cole eternal lite. 
1 *2ur many that are firſt, ſhall be laſt, and the 


See the Notes on Matth, 1c. 27, 28. Our Saviour having 
(14d the 701, Cipeclaliy ſuch as had (tripped thervlelves of all 
-r iis ſake, and the Goſpels : Peer raiſed up hopes to himſelf, 
11,4 no Riches To truſt in, or have his Heart cleave unto, 
[nz haq firipped himſelt of all that littie he had ro®*fullow 
Cirift, Chriit aifurcs him, thar neither he, not any other that 
tid donc 1», ſhould by 1t loſe any thing ; for though in this 
Lice they thould have Perſecutions, yet they ſhould be amply re- 

dinYulue, 17 not 10 Spect? 18 this Worid, and with infinite 


© 11d, 
,pincf 10 the ncSt. 
* 


jy 


1p 


32 Andrhey * were an the way going up to Jeriſa- 
lm: aiid Jeſus wenr before them, and they were ama- 
7ed, and -s they followed, they were afraid. And he 


} 
; 
- 


took again the rwelve, and began to tell chem what j 
things ſhouid happen unto him, 

33 Saying, Behold, we go up to Jeruſalem, and the 
Son of man ſhal be delivered unto the chier prices, 
and unto the {.ribes, and they ſhall condeinhn him to 
death,and ſhall deliver him to the Gentiles. 

34 And they ſhall mock him, and tall ſcourge him, 
2nd (hz!] fpir upon him, and ſhall kill kjm,and the third 
day he ſhall rife again- 

Sce the Noutes on Math. 25. 19. This is at leat the third 
time that our Saviour 1n{irutterh his Diſciples as to his Paſlion, 
toward i 1 he wis now going, and that with fuch a read 
nc, Lu a0 the Airazervent of his Diſciples he led the way, and 
out-went thaw, It 1s ole: vable that Chriſt here deſcribeth his 
Suttermys more particularly than before, He tells them here, 
tha: he !nous be firſt delivered to the Chief Priefs and the Scribes, 
and tiiey ihould Condemn him. Then they ſhould deliver him to 
the Gent/los, C ſuch were the Romans and Pontits Pilate, ) they 
ſrould Mach bm, Scourge 21m, Spit on him, put him to death ; but 
h-inould rife again the third day. Luke adds, chap. 18. 34. 
Ty:1 urd2s ftoud nure of theſe, ant rhus Saying was hid from them, net- 
ther kn:w they the things which were ſnolken, How hardly do we 
believe what ſeems contrary to our intereſts ? but we are to hear 
tor the tirme to coine, This Premonition was afterwards of* uſe 
to them; they remembred the Words of Jetus when the things 
were come to paſs, Preachers Words are not lott, though at 
preſent they be not believed, or hearkned to, 


1” I ..-— 


1 


35 And James ard John the ſons of Zebedee come 
unto him, ſaying, Maſter,we would that thou ſhouldeſt 
do for vs whatſoever »e hall delire. | 

36 And he faid unto them, What would ye that. | 
I ſhould do for you ? 


37 They ſaid unto him,Grant unto us that we may | 


it, one on thy right hand, 2nd the ottier on thy left 
hand in thy glory, 


33 But Jeſus ſaid unto them, Ye know not what ye 
asK: Can ye drink of the cup that I drink of? and 


if baptized with the baptiſm that I am baptized 
ak 


39 And they faid unto him, We can. And Jeſus 
laid unto them, Ye ſhall indeed drink of the cup that 
[drink of, and with the baptiſm that I am baptized 
withall, ſhall ye be baptized. 


40 But to ſit on my right hand, and on my left 


+1 And when the ten heard it, they began to be 
mich diſpleaſed with James and John, 


og we green on Matth. 29, 20. where we have ſeen the ſame Hi- 
xa o 8 or no Variation 3 only Matthew tells us, that 
ys n Fohn did tnat by their Mother, which Mark reperts 

nc oy them. in Verſon ;; but there is nothing more ordi- 


Iary. even ; : a 
1h Fn 1n ov common Diſcourſe, then ro ſpeak of that as 
ue 


confiderable Ditterences. 
the other two Evaiig: lifts but one : It 15 probable the one wa: 
the more remarkable, and his Father a Perton of fome Note : 
therefore he 15 mentioned alto, the other probahly ſome obſcr.- 
rer Perſon. "LN 


v9Y Our telves, which is done by another on our beh:1f, at 


wag ommand or Solliciration. 


9 vr, much, 


44 And whoſoever of you will be the <l:iofeft, ſha!l 
be ſervant of all. 

45 For even * the Son of man came tor to Ge mi- 
ſtred unto, but to miniſter, and © 
ranſom tor many. 

See the Notes on Matth. 20. 35. w! ere we fit to 8 


p Lb CV ' of 
LO Fa y A a4 nt i11te Pl 


molt Verbatim. Thoſe that think 1t worth the wii: +: x : 
what Critical Men fay about that Parefe, 5; f2xi;"-. 


which we Tranſlate rh9e that ure accounted ty Kite, nay _—_ 'f 
im Pol? Sympſts Criti-ram. When atl is faid, deutr cf te 5 
dexuſcs in waithew, and ou Soxuy]es ago, and Luke's Ut Coo: 
aas, llgnific the ſatne Perſons. And aur Trantlitions mii. 
juſtifiavly have Tranflared theſe Words, The &nſzrs, -.5 thi : 
are accounted to Rule, (viliici is a Tranſlation the. Ate Puts 


ciple vill hardly bcar.) 


46 * And they came to Jertcho © and as ke wen: 
our of Jericho with his diſciples, and a great number 
of people, blind Bartimevs the fon of Fimevs, fate i; 
the high-way-ſide begging. | 

47 And when he heard that it was Jeiis of Naza- 


reth, he began to cry out, and ſay, Jeius, thou fon of 


David, have mercy on me. 

45 And many charged him that he ſhould hold his 
peace; but he cried the more a great deal, Thou fon 
of David, have mercy on me. 


49 And Jef1s ſtood ftill, and commanded kim to be 
called :; and they call che blind man, faying unto him, 
Be of good comfort, riſe, he calleth thee. 

50 And hs caiitng away his garment,rok,and came 
to Jus, 


51 And Jeſns anſwered, and ſaid unto him, tat: 
wilt thou that l ſhonld do nro thee ? The blind man 
laid unto him, Lotdzthat 1 mygiut reve ny fight, 


52 And ſeſusſaid ento him,Go thy way,” *hy faith 
; hath made tne whole. And immediately he x wred 
his fight,and foilowed Jeſus in the way: 


This Hiftory 1s 2 meer Nirrative of 4 m#tter 01 bat, :n the 
Relation of which no Difticultics occur which ftand tin need 6f 
Explication. Matthew, Mark and Lure rolute 17, with bit twy 
Matthow mentioneth tivo Biind Men, 


Lake repores 1t done when he came near 1m Feric 


Matthew and Marl, as he went out of Jerzch5 ; but though Like 


ſaith. that he ſate Begging by the way as thev came ni2h 


Jericho, yet he doth not (oy tte Miracle of hi: Cure was wrought 


GHAa FE = 


Chriſt rideth in Triump? to. Fernſalem, 1-—11. Being hungry, Ci) 
jet the barren Fig-tree. 1214 Purzeth the Temple, 1 g—15- 
By the withering of the Fig-tree, he ſheweth the Power of Fait',, 
20—24. The neceſſity of forgiven others, when we? 
Fmrgiveneſs, 25, 26, The Phavijees queltinn Chritt about hz Alt 


thority : He putteth them to Silence + with the Bapti1im of Ionr . 


27-33 


Ha ND when they came nigh to jerulalem, unto 


Bethphage and Bethany,at the mount of O- x,y;..; 1. »- 


lives, he ſendeth forth two of his diſciples, 


Matthew faith nothing of Bethany, mentloned by Mart aud 
Lube, jt was the Town of Lazarus, Fol. It. 1- } 


Some nm. 
that Bethany was rather a Trad of the Moznt of 0!rces, than ' 2 
Town ; and that Bethphage was a kind of Suburbs to {212 
at the remoteſt part of which Bethany began 3 but the Tow 4 
ſelf call'd Bethany, was fifteen Farlongs, nezr two Mts from 
ſeruſalem, It was the place from which Chritt Afcordea <4 


Heaven, Luk. 24. 50. A Savbath-days Jourrey from Jeraſalcr: 


+, « v4 


Aﬀs 1. 2: at ſome diſtance from theTovwn called Betrany 2100 
ELLE porks bios be 
this place called ſtill Bethany upon the Eoranrs 0s SO ge, FH 


ſent out two of his Diſciples, 


2 And faith unto them, * Go jour wey into Tg, 
village over againſt you ; and as {con as Ye be EnTTCC 
mM Both the Evangeliſts agree in | INTO It, YE ſhall find a colt tied; wherecn never man fat, 
a1. © 0t1eT parts of their Relation,and in the following Diſcourſe | looſe himzaid bring bim: 


+. 4 


Goa s3z i 


i- 


43 But ſoit ſhall not be among you : bt whoto- 


pray 1” 


wo att re wx 


Cnap, XI, 


42 But Jeſus called them to lan, and faits unto 
them, * Ye know that they which arc accounted ! ro 


o- 7 


'L "> 


Aa 


#5 


toh- 52, 7 


Ss 19.4 
dont, £< 


1 
[3 ; 
# 

*. 

F þ 

J 


Ji LINA 4 
l. ' 1.1 8 
Fs i #232 7 7% 
l | Is 1TH Pi I * 
the $1650 ; Hl 
h ' 4 | Fi if ', Tf di If F: io 

#:! 11 He 18 i *+- 
q. I's L of F. *; f 
{.3- ? on Is q.! 

: M4 þ 4 i d Fri 


he * 

FEUK. 

ns Y 

> Y$ve 
2. 

{lt Is 


S. M 

XMaithea: ſaith, An Aſs with a Colt, Tie other Evangcliſts 
fpeak only of the Colt. The Heathens, by a Light of Nature, 
ſhewing them there was a Reverence and Honour due to the 
Divine Being, were wont, in the ule tney made of Creatures for 
any DIvine Service, to uſe ſach 25 they had not before uſed 
fr common uſes : The Phliftines, 2 Sam. 6* 9, ſerding home the 
Ark, Jet it cuanew Cart, and tnl two Mich Kine, on which there 


A R K. 


from Bethany, he was hungry. 

13 And ſeeinga fig-tree afar off, having Jleaye. 1. 
came; if haply he might find any thing thereon: ..: 
when he came to it, he found nothing bur leaves 
the time of figs was not yer. p 


ail 


*1\Q 
3 Tor 


12 * Andon the morrow, when they yours cx, 
- =» LUNP " 


never came Toke. 
ſach a Colt, for the farther notice of the Miracle, (Colts being 


s 4 


when Aarſt Backed, more uaraly, ) or for ſome other wiſe end 


which we know not. 


3 And if any man fey unto yon, Why do ye this * 
fay ye that the Lord hath need of him, and ſtraight- 


way he will ſend him hither. 


4 And they veat their way, and found the colt 
ticd by the cioor without, ina place where two ways 


met, and they iooſe him: 


5 And certain o{them that ſtood there, ſaid unto 


them, What do ye,looſing the colt ? 


6 And they faid unto them even as Jeſus had com- 


manded,and they ict him go. 


See the Notes on Matth, 20. 18, 19, @c. All along the 
Story of our Saviout's Life and A@ons, we thall find ccrtain 
Power and Vertue : His knowing Men's 

and dec'arations of ſuch his Knowledge to them : His 
Contingencies, being able to te!] 
Perſons ſuch particulars as no Man could know : How could he 
who was not God, have told the Diſciples, that at their entrance 


Indications of his Divine 


thoughts, | 
certain Prediction of future 


into the Village, they ſhould find a Colt on which never Man 
ſate, that the Owners would not rcfift Strangers to take it away ? 
Yet notwithſtanding all this, his Diſciples very imperfeRtly be- 


lieved him to be ſo, until he was rifen from the Dead, The 


time was not yet come when Chriſt would have this publiſhed ; 
and while he gave them a Power to belicve it, 7. e. to have a 
Zull perſuation of it, all theſe Moral Arguments were not ſufficient 
t work in their Hearts a-full perſuaſion. 
Chriſtians of that time, ſeemcth to have had theſe three Gradati- 
ons. 3. They belizued him a great Prophet, that had received 
oreat Vower from God. 
5 the Son of David; and now and then they would drop ſome 
Expreftions, arguing ſome perſuaſions that he was the Son of God. 


\. Laſt of all, they came to a firm perſwaſion that he was truly God, 


12 val as Man ;, after that he was riſen from the Dead, and de- 


clared with Power to be ſuch as the Apoſtle faith ; yet what 
means imaginable could they have had more than, 1. A Voice 
2. The Spirits deſcending in a viti- 


from Hexven declaring it. 2 
hie Shape. 3» The great Miracles he had wrought by Sea and 
Land, commanded the Winds and the Waves, healing incurable 
Dias. and a!l others in an inſtant, without uſe of Rational 
Means, raifing the Dead, &c. 4. His telling their Thoughts, fore- 
telling ſuture Contingencies, Cc. yet all theſe produced in the 
Generality of the People no more than Amazement, and Aſtoniſh- 
ment in the Apoſtles themſelves; rather a Diſpoſition to ſuch 
2 Faith, or an Opinion or Suſpicion of ſuch a thing, than a firm 
and fixed Perſuaſion concerning 1t. 


7 * And they brought the colt to Jeſus, and caſt | He found nothing but Leaves, for there were mo Figs z as if it hu 
their garments on him, and he ſate upon him. 


$8 And many ſpread their garments in the way, and 
others cut down branches off the trees, and ſtrawed 
then 1n the way- 


9 And they that went before, and they that follow- 
ed, cried, ſaying, Hoſanna, bleſſed # he that cometh 
in the Name of the Lord. | 


10 Bleſſed be the kingdom of our father David, 
that cometh in the Name of the Lord, Hoſanna in the 


higheſt. 


We met with all this in Matth. 21. ver. 8, 9. See the Notes 
there. It appeaceth by our Saviour's fending for the Coz, that this 
little Rural Triumph, and the Acclamations attending it, were 
defigned by him,. both to ſhew the People, 1. That he was the 
King whom God had promiſed to ſet upon his holy Hill of Zim; And 
2. That his Kingdom was not of this World : For (as he elſewhere 
faith) if his Kingdom had been of this World, his Servants would 


But cir Saviour probably made choice of 


The Faith of the 


2, they owned him as the Meſſiah, 


14 And Jeſus anſwered, and ſaid unto jt, N; 
eat fruit of thee hereafter for ever. 
heard ze. 

15 * And they come to Jeruſalem, and Tefi; i 
unto the temple, and began to caſt out them tha; lg 4 
and boaght in the temple, and overthiew the r2a11.. © 
of the money-changers, and the ſeats of them "In 
ſold doves. Wy 

16 And would not ſuffer that any man ſhov]d ca... 
any veſlel through the temple. iN 
17 And he taught, ſaying unto them)[s it not w;;- 


7 9 man 
And his Gſttplos 


p] 


of prayer ? but * ye have made it a den of thieves, 


him, becauſe all the people were aſtoniſhed at 
dottrine. 
19 And when even was come, he went out of the 
CitY. 
Sec the Notes on Matth. 21. 12. Where having ſo largely ſpg 
: - Y 1P0- 
ken to this part ofthe Hiſtory, conſidering alſo what Marb and 
Luke hath to compleat the Hiſtory, few Words will be need; 
about ithere. Though Mark ſeems to relate it fo, as if the 5:4 
day Chriſt came into the Zemple, lookt about it, and Gia «.; 
more t1i!] he came back from Bethany (whither he went that Nioh 
the next Day, yet the other Evangeliſts Relation of it wu! 
make one think otherwiſe ; beſides, that Interpreters thin i: 
not probable, that our Saviour the firſt Night ſhould only los 
abour, and patiently ſee and ſuffer thoſe abuſes : Moſt do thr. 
fore think, that our Saviour the firſt Day di4 caſt out thoſe (417 
fold and bought in the Temple. In the Notes upon Mitthy 16 
have given an account of the Market in the Court of the Gomil; 
which was the ontward Court of the Templz, where, throus) 
the Covetouſneſs of the Prieſts,ſome ſay there were conſtant Shops, 
In the Temple there were, the moſt Holy place (into which ti; 
Prieſts, only entred) and the Holy place into which entice 1 
the Circumciſed, whether Native Jews or Proſelytes: Theſe tn, 
places they accounted Holy. But there was alſo a Court which they 
called the Court of the Gentiles, of which they had no ſuch cſtcen, 
but allowed the keeping of Shops and Markets in it, eſpccially 
before the Paſſover. Concerning our Saviour's driving out thſe 
Buyers and Sellers, ſee the Notes on Matth. 21. 12, 13. Inthvſ 
Notes alſo T have fully opened the Hiſtory concerning our $:- 
viour's Curfing the Barren Fig-tree, and given what account |n- 
terpreters do give of the difficulty arifing from ver, 13. As to 
which, I have nothing to add here, ſave this only, offering it to 
Learned Perſons to confider, Whether the Senſe of theſe Wards, 
30 1V xaze3s guvyov, be any more than, For there were n ki; 


been, £ wncay ovXa SOS yaugds there ſhould neither fipnihe 
; the common Time when Figs ute to be ripe, nor yet fignihe the 
Seaſonableneſs of the Year for Figs, but partictlarly relate tothut 
Tree, which at that time had no Figs. But cnough hat! vec! 
before ſaid as to that Text, 


20 And in the morning,as they paſled by, theyfar,,, 
the fig-trce dried up from the roots. bs 


21 AndPeter calling to remembrance, faith unto 
him, Maſter behold, the fig-tree which thou curicdl; 
is withered away. 


22 And Jeſns anſwering, faith unto them, Hd 


a. vj 
*+4 8 


faith || in God. *w 


28 For verily I ſay unto you, that whoſoever ſha! 
fay unto this mountain, Be thou removed, and 6: 
thou caſt into the ſea, and ſhall not doubt in his 
heart, but ſhall believe that thoſe things which i 


have fought for him. So it may be ſaid, You may know his 
Kingdom that he ſpake of, was not of this World, for if it had, 
there would have been found a more ſtately Beaſt than the Colt 
of an Aſs, or at leaſt a Saddle for that z the ways would have been 
covered with Tapeſtry, rather than poor Men's Coats and. Cloaks, 
and other Heralds, would have been found, than a Company of 
Children, and poor Men crymg Hiſanna. This was ſuch a thing, 
25 wou!d but have Ridiculed a Government to be afraid of, nor 
indeed (to give Pontizs Pilate, the Roman Governour, at this time 
in Feruſalem his due) do we find him the leaſt diſturbd, though 
the Scribes and Phariſees (which were tae Jewith Churchmen, ) 
ſeeing their Kingdom going down, were ſomething nettledz and 
though they had more Modeſty than to bring this little Triumph 
in judgment againſt him, yet their great Charge was, his decla- 
rinz 20d making himſelf a King. In order to which, this was the 
ercateſt Shew he ever made. 


a full perſaaſion, that whatſoever we ah of God according 


faith, ſhall come to paſs, he ſhall have whatſocver b: 
faith. 


Sec the Notes on Matth. 20. 21; Tt is, I confeſs, the Op:119f 
of many excellent Interpreters, whom I Reverence, that tne 
main End of our, Saviour's Curſing, and Blaſting this Fg tic 
was to iet his Diſciples ſee in a Type, what would be thc Con- 
ſequent of a Spiritual Barrenneſs, That Spiritual Barrenne's '- 
excceding dangerous, is out of queſtion; our Savionr fc4t heth 
it us plainly by another Parable of the Fig-tree, Luk, 13+ 7: C1 
and the Apoſtle teacheth us it, Heb. 6, 9,8, But I cc nothing 
to guide us to any ſuch Interpretation of this Aﬀtion of ar, 
which was a Miraculous Operation by which, as he, 1- Plain” 
ſhewed his Divine Power. So, 2. theſe Verſcs inform us, hat 


K . Ws . ! I*, 
it was his defign to ſhew his People the Power of F.it? ; pgs 
- J z 


WY a01CH 


11 * And jeſus entred into Jeruſalem, and into the 


teraple; and when he had looked round about upon j |; ir... relating to this Story, about which Interpretrs 


211 things, and now the ever-tide was come, he went 
91t unto Pethany with the twelve. 


Will, and which may tend to his Glory, ſhall be done for us: 


© - . o » - 2 ale» ,C * ie 
Interpretation of this AﬀRion of our Seviour's, folvcs - = 
oing 

fo diſquicted themſelves, 
es. Hl 


a 3 


ten,* My houſe ſhall be called |of all nations the hyp +, 


13 And the ſcribes and chief prieſts heard jt and fit) 
tought Xhow they might deſtroy him, for they feareg***! 


IS * (i 


Qs) 


» 4 


Mat, £1 


* - 
- 
' 


11; 
4 3vw 
+ 


' 15. 


1: People: * for all men counted John, that he was a 
{2., Propher indeed. * 


\ Chap. X11. 


T7. 


y 


. T AT he began to ſpeak unto them by parables. 


z- - 39+.f adout it, and digged 4 place for the wine fat,and 


' will tell you by what authority Ido theſe things, 


of men ? anſwer me. 


A* SL, 
+ " i152 
WW . WELLS 


"and ye ſhall have rem. 


. ought againſt any, that your Father alſo which is in 
heaven may forgive you your treſpaſles. 
26 Bur if you do not forgive, neither will your Fa- 
ther which is in heaven forgive your treſpaſſes. 
Sce the Notes on Mutth. 21, 22. and chap, 7, 7. and Matth, 5. 
14, In which Texts we before met with what we have in theſe 
Verlcs, teaching vs the Necetfity of Faith and Charity to thoſe 
who would fo pray as to find acceptance with God « This alſo 
lets us know the Neceſſity of Peoples full Satisfaction, that what 


things they ask of God in Prayer, are according to the Will of 


God, without which it 15 not poffibic they thould pray with a 
fa!l perſuaſion that they ſhall receive whatſoever they in Prayer 
15x; of God. And becaule it 1s impolfible we thould in this Point 
be fully ſatisfied without a Divine Revelation, as to things not 
necetſary to Salvation, our Faith or Perſuation can rite no higher, 
chan a full perſuaſion, that if things of this nature, when we asþ 
them of God in Prayer, be ſuch as are for our good, and for God's 
Glory, we ſhall receive them. The Caſe was otherwiſe as to thoſe 
to whom Chriſt had given a Power to work Miracles ; what 
they asked of that Nature, they muſt know it was the Will of 
God to effeRt by them, and they could not without Sin doubt of 


tf. 


27 And they come again to Jeruſalem ; * and as he 
was walking 1n the temple there come to him the chict 
yricſts, and the ſcribes, and the clders, 

23 And fay unto him, By what authority doſt thou 
theſe things? and who gave thee this authority to do 
theſe things ? 

Our Lord went every Night to Bethany, (two Miles, or near ſo 
much } and returned in the Morning to Feru/alem , our Saviour 
walk'd, and taught in the Teinpic. Matthew ſaith the Prieſts and 
the $c11hes came to him as Be was Teaching. Mark ſaith,as he was 
Walking 3 poffibly he at the fame time both walked and raught, 
for in is whole Story we thall obſerve that he loft no time, if 
he were walking by the iligh-way,or fitting in the Houſe ; where- 
ever he was, we fſti]] find tum Teaching. See the Notes on Matth 
21. 23. where we had the ſame thing, 


29 And Jeſus anſwered,. and ſaid unto them, I will 
alſo ask of you one || queſtion, and anfwer me, and 1] 


30 Thebaptiſm of John, was it from heaven,or * 


3t And they reaſoned with themſelves, faying, If 
we ſhall ay,From heaven : he will ſay, Why then did 
ye not believe him ? 


32 But if we ſhall ſay, Of men, they feared the 


33 And they anſwered, and faid unto Jeſus, We 
cinottell, And Jeſus anſwering, faith unto them, 
Neither do I tell you by what authority I do theſe 
things. 

ce the Notes on Matth. 21. ver. 24, 25, 26, 27s where are 
th: fame Paſſages opened. A Prophet here, ver. 32. ſignifieth 
one extraordinarily 1nfpircd, and ſent of God ro reveal his Will, 
O45 his Baptiſm muſt needs be from Heaven, This Reputation 
7n it ſeems Unicerſally had, fo as to hive denied his Baptiſm 
'5 have been from Heaven, had been to have expoſed themſelves 
to the Mockings, if not the Rage of the Feople, which they were 
loth todo. It they had ſaid from Heaven, they had accuſed them- 
ſelves for not beiieving him, ob, 7. 48- This makes them chuſe 
rather to make themſelves doubtful in the Caſe; and giveth our 
Saviour a fitting occaſion to deny them fatisfaQion, as to what 
bey acked of hum. 


CHAP. XﬆIL 


Tre Parable of the Vineyard let out to cruel Husbandmen,ſhereth the 
Rejediton of the Fews, and Calling of the Gentiles, 1—12. Chri#t 
eſcapeth the ſnare of the Phariſees, about Tribute to Ceſar, 13—17. 
Relliberh the Sadducees Error about the Reſarredtion, 18—27. 
fiſreroeth a Scribe, which # the greateſt Commandment, 28—34. 
Con! «t2th the Phariſees Opinion of himſelf, 35—37. Cautioneth 
ac ainit their Vain-glory, Ambitim aud Hypocriſie, 38—40., And 
conmenteth the poor Widow's Offering above all, 49—44» 


A * certain man planted a vineyard,and ſet an 


Duit atower, and let it out to husbandmen,and went 

1.10 3 far Country. 

2 And at the ſeaſon he ſent to the husbandmen a 

©!vant, that he might receive from the husbandmen 
T3: cf the vineyard. 


©. 


MDLOTITY 


So MARK 


24 Therefore Ll jay unto you,* Whar things ſoever 
e Qefire when ye pray, belieye.that ye receive them, 


23 And when ye ſtand praying, * forgive,if ye have 


there* is no reſurrection; and they asked him, fay 
ing, 


Sadac, Scholar to rms 
oftheir Hereſie, was their Maſter's teaching them, That they mu{b 
wt ſerve God, as Servants for Rewards. 
EC . ef i* 
 Puniſhments in another Life. They denied the Imm3) ality 0) 
the Sui, and the ReſurreFron of the Bogy, and Angers anu oprrtts 


4 And arain he ſent unto them another ſervant. 2; 
at him they caſt ſtones, and wounded him in the head 
and ſent him away hamefully handled. 

5 And again he ſent another, and him t 
and many others, beating, ſome,and killirs £76 

6 Having yet therefore one {on,his well hoo 
ſent him alto laſt unto them, ſaying, T!.2y wil 
rence my ſon. | 

7 But thoſe husbandmen ſaid amor of 
This is the heir, come lerus kill him, <1 c' 
tance ſhall be ours. 


1 
4.4 1% 


out of the vineyard. ; 

9 What ſhall therefore the Lord of the 
do? he will come and deſtroy 
wlll zive the vineyard unto others. 


COTner. 


In our eyes. 


way. 


the Notes on Matth, 21. 32, (Fc. The twelfth Verſe telictir «5 


have not,) that he alſo told them, Matth. 21. 43." There; ve 7 ©: 
unto you, That the Kingdom of Gal ſhall be taken from you, an! 


planting a Vineyard, is to be underſtood, Goc who, 7/15 # 
8, 9. brought a Vine out of Egypt, and caſt out the H.th,cr; 

planted” it in the Land of Canaan, and pretared 71:12 
cauſed it ty tahe deep root, and it filled the Land - 
covered with the ſhadow of it, and the Boughs thorcif wn 


for. it. 


Stones out of it, and built a Tower in the midi of it; an 


which Sod hedged by his Providence, and gave them all means 
neceſ{ary for the produCtion of Fruit, The Scrvants ſ-nt to re- 
ccive the Fruit, fo abuſed by the Husb4ndmen,{as wer. 2, 3, 4, «.) 
were the Prophets, 2 Chron. 35. 16. 15 a compendtous F.xpotiticr 
of thcfe Verſes. They macked the Mejſengers of God, and d:{piſ:d 
his Words, an d miſuſed his Praphets. The Son mentioned, as 
ſent at laſt, was Chriſt, and the latter part of the Parable is Pro- 
phetical, fore-telling what they thould do unto him, and alſo 
of the Ruin of the Jewiſh Nation and Church, and the paſting 
of the Goſpel to the Gentiles, who ſhouid more freely believe in 
Chriſt, and embrace and receive the Goſpel ;, fo as they ſhould not 
obtain their End, but Chriſt, though rejeed by them, ſhould 
yet be the Head of a far larger and more glorious Church, ac- 
cording to a Prophetic owned by themſelves, as a piece of Holy 
Writ, Pſal. 118. 22. Sce more in the Notes on Matth.. 21, 
&f 

13 * And they ſend unto him certain of the Pha- 
riſees, and of the Herodians, to catch him in his 
words: 


14 And when they were come, they ſay unto him, 
Maſter, we know that thou art true, and careſt for 
no man : for thou regardeſt not the perſon of men, 
but teacheſt the way of God in truth: Is it Iawful to 
{ive tribute to Ceſar, or not ? 


353 
I 92 


15 Shall we give, or ſhall we not give? Bit he 
knowing their hypocriſie,ſaid unto them, Why tempt 
ye me? bring me a || peny, that I may ie #:. | 


16 And they brought : and he faith nnto them, 
W hoſe 5s this image and ſuperſcription ?And they {aid 


unto him, Ceſars. 


17 And Jeſus anſwering, ſaid unto them, Render 
to Cefar, the things that. are Ceſar's; and to God, 


the things that are God's. And they marvelled at 


him. 
See the Notes on Matthew 22. 15+ 


138 Then come unto him the Sadducees, which fay 


The Sadducees moſt probably derived their Name irom one 
Antizonas Socheus . Tt is faid that the Occaiton 


Upon which they build- 
d their Notion, That there 1s ro Reſurrection, no Rewards nor 


! And they caught him, and beat him, and ſens him 


Wits EL d 
A 


e* 
Acts 4 2% = 


attributed all to Free will, denying Fatc and "OAY : 
they. 


ali mad: 
a Wine preſs therein, and he looked that it ſhonld bring torth Grams 
Iſai. 5. 2. The Church of the Fews than was this Yiie. ard 


10, XIF 
1:9; %EL- 


m 
ICY 


4 


3 


hoy kilicd " 
oy kilicd : 


” 
PIl he 
= »+ Y<L 


6 OV Ea 


themſelves, 


LQUCT i= 
g And they took him, and killed him, 43nd c2% bin; 


vineyard 
the husbandren, and 


10 And have ye not read this ſcripture? The fonn 
which the builders rejected, is become the head of ric 


11 This was the Lord's doing and it is marvelicys 
12 And they ſought to lay hold on him, but fearc4 
the people: for they knew that he had ſpoken the pa- 
rable againſt them : and they left him,and went their 


This Parable is related by Matthew, and by Lube alſo : Sec 


that the Rulers of the Jewith Church knew that he had 7;-3!;-1 
this Paravle againit them ; and they needs muſt know it, con!i- 
dering what Matthew adds to this Parable (which Mart an 1 2 


4 


-_S” 


ven t5 a Nation bringing forth the Fruits thereof, By the Man 


" ey *t} 
*; *,-44 3,3 
DD [7s Efi!7s ' 


, F 
y 2 ; » _ 
ere UI-'e Fe 


goodly Cedars: ſhe fent out her Boughs unto the Sex, ant her Bran- 
ches to.the River, It was a noble Vine, a right Soed, For. 5. 41. 
God planted in it a fiuitful Hill, he fenced it, end :athercd the 


. 


lj 4 piece 
Cain worth 
in 04 Mas» 
ney [even 
pence calf 
penny, as 
Mat 12. 28, 


* Nat. 22, 


23, 24, Fc: 


Lit 20. 37 


- 


Nat. 22, 24 


"8-7 W-L 


S, M 


throv roiectes I cds. 
058 Jt : +3:495+ They feemed to be a kind of Ratimal Divines, 
tat would own and believe nothing but what they could fa- 
hn by ther Reafon, or was ubvious to their Senſe ; and their 
LP ortrine was Exccllentiv ſuited to Men's Luſts, who defire not 
troubled with apy thoughts of a World to come. No- 
5341417 note hows the Degeneracy and Debauchery of Humane 
1, than this * That to gratine their Senſual Appetites more 
jrovly tn the thin; of this Life, they will be content to think 
+ 4inivilatizn, Colnch Nature, not debauched, abhorrs _) and 
07 quitting all Hopcs of Eternal Life and Happineſs, that they 
ma; have i trinciple to warrant their living Jike Beafts ; They 
em ts 0ur Saviour, thinking to flout him and Its Hearers out 
1 the Dotrive of the Reſurredim, as having infuperable Dith- 
Cuitics to clog it. But he that takes the Wiſe 1n their own Craf- 
tint. ſhews theſe- Wiſe Men, that all their Wiſdom was but 
Fully, and their Argument wholly procceded ex 7znratine E- 
lencia; from their not anderſtanding the thing they would Phi!ofo- 
phiſe about, 


19 Maſter, Moſes wrote unto us, fa man's bro- 
ther die, and leave his wife bchiod him, and lcave no 
children, that his brother ſhould take his wite, and 


"C74 


»5, 22d owned no Sciptures, but the Five | dom of God. And no man aſter that durſt a 


AR K: 


: 5& him 
any queſtion. 

See the Notes on Matih. 22. 35. where whatſocvcr 35.54. 3... 
hath, 1s opened. © ere 


35 And Jeſus anſwered and ſaid,white he * tgyo!,} 


in the temple, How ſay the Sc ribes that Chrit 
{on of David? 

36 For David himſelf ſaid by the holy 
* The LORD ſaid ro my LORD, Sir thoy 
right hand, till I make thine enemies thy foot{t9,}, 

37 David therefore himſelf calleth him Lore, ang 
whence is he ther his ſon? Ard the common people 
heard him gladly. 

See the Notes on Matth. 22. 41, 42, &c. Mitthew ſaith that 
Chriſt ſpake this to the Phariſees, who were very tar from 1c. 
knowledging Chriſt God-man, or indeed expefting a 142/11 har 
ſhouid be to. Had they owned Chriſt, and the fi \ poſt; ; 
Union of the two Natures in hin, the Anſiver had been cafic. 


Ghoſt, 


tical 


IN Y + * 


EF Deut. 5.4. 
Luk.1o. 27. 


—— 


TFLev.15.18 


raiſe up ſeed unto his brother. 
20 Now there were ſeven brethren, and the firſt 


took a wife ; and dying, leſt no ſeed. 
21 And the ſecond rook her and died, neither lefr 
he any ſeed, and the third likewiſe. 


22 And the ſeven had her, and left no ſeed : laſt of 


all the woman dicd alſo. 

23 Inthe refurre&tion therefore, when they ſhall 
riſe, whoſe wife ſhall ſhe be of them ? for the ſeven had 
her to wile, 

24 And ſcſis enſwering, ſaid unto them, Do ye 
not therefore err, becauſe ye know not the ſcriptures, 
neither the power of Gcd ? 

25 For When they ſhall riſe from the dead, they 
neither n arry, nor are given in marriage, but are as 
the angels which are in heaven. 

26 And as touching the dead, that they riſe : have 
ye not read in the book of Moſes, how in the buſh 


. God ſpake unto him, ſaying, * 1 am the God of 
Abraham, and the Ged of Iſaac, and the God of Ja- 


cob ? 


27 Heisnot the God of the dead, but the God of 


the living, ye thereforedo greatly err. 


The trae Queſtion about the Reſurredion, was, Whether the 
R:dies of the Dead ſhall riſe or no? not whether they ſhall afiſe 


with the ſane Culities, AﬀeFions, Powers, &c. They are fown 


and Qualities difporng them to Adtions only neceffary for the 
ſupporting the Natural Life , ſuchas Hunger and Thirſt, &c. Or 
for the upholding the World, that while one Generation yaſ- 
ſeth, it might be ſupplyed by another ; Such az an Appetite to 
Maitjage, &c, What needs this, when all Generations ſhall be 
determined in the Everl'ſting World 2 So as, in Truth theſe 
Learned Mcn ſhewed themiclves Dunces, wholly ignorant of 
what they came to argue upon. They ſhould firſt have proved, 
that there would be any need of Waves, or any ſuch thing as 
Marriage, aftet the World ſhould have an end. In the mean 
time our Saviour proveth the Reſurrection out of the Writings of 
Moſes, owned by themſelves. for Hoiv Writ, Without a Reſur- 
rettion, Abra2am would not be Abrahum, nor Iſaac, Tjaxc, nor 
Facob, Facob: See the Notes on this part of the Hiſtory, 1atth. 


22. 24, (Fc. 


28 And one of the Scribes came, and having heard 
them reaſoning together, and percetving that he had 
aniwered them well,asked him, W hich is the firſt com- 
mandmeat of all ? 

29 And Jeſus anſwered him, T he firſt of all the com 
mandments z, * Hear, Olltrael,the Lord our God is 
ore LORD. 

20 And thou ſhalt love the Lord thy God with all 
thy heart, and with all thy ſoul, and with all thy 
mind,and with all thy ſtrength: this 1s the firſt com- 
mandmert. | 

31 And tke ſecond #5 like, namely this, * Thou ſhalt 
love thy neighbour as thy ſelf: there is none other 
commandment greater than theſe. 


32 And theScribe ſaid unto him, Well Maſter, thou 
haſt ſaid the truth, for there is one God, end there js 
none other but he. 

22 And to love himwith all the hezrt, and with 
all the underſtanding, and with all the foul, and with 
51: the trength, and to love bz neighbour as him, 
is more than ail whole-burit-offerings and ſacrifi- 
Ces. 

34 2nq when Jeſus ſaw that he anſwered diſcreat- 
ly, he ſaidgunto him, Thoy art not far from the king- 


of the Scribes, which love to go in long cloathing,ang 
* love ſalutations in the market places, | 

39 And the chief ſears in the ſynagogues, and the 
uppermoſt rooms at feaſts : 


damnation. 


See the Notes on Matth. 23. 5. and wer. 14. The more %.; 
and Women want of real Worth and Value, tre more they fc 
themſelves, a Reputation from their Habits, either the Gris, 
or the Riches and Gautery of them, and ths more they court 7; 
ties of Honour and Dignity, and affett External! reſpect. wh... 
as nobler Souls detpite thele things, being like Pitures yy. 
drawn, which need no Superſcription to tel} Men what or who: 
they are. Good Men are ſatisfied trom themſelves, and as n:; 
carelis of their Reputation, fo neither careful who Men tay th; 
that they are. But theſe Veries are more fully difcourſed 
Matth. 23. to which I reter the Reader for fatisfaction. 


41 And Jeſus fate over againſt the treaſury, 1 
beheld how the people caſt || money into the treaſfiry 
and many that were rich caſt in much. 


' 

, 
Ay 
+ + 
L1 


. 


v 1; 


unto them, Verily I ſay unto you, * that this pour " 


Tr 
[Nt 
+ 


ſhe of her want did Ceſt in all that fhe had, evez: all hor 
living. . 


This 15 the only place of Hiſtory in this Chapter, which «: 
did not before meet with in Matthew, Luke hath this, chap. 21, 
ver. 1, 2, 3, 4+ For the underſtanding of this Hiſtory, both 3; 
to the Letter, and profitable Inſtruttion ariting from it, we muſt 
know, That 1n the Temple (where our Saviour now was) there 
was a Tiezſury, or rather Treaſuries. And famous Dr. Li:ith:; 
ſaith, there were Treaſure-Chambers called Lejacoth, and thirte:n 
Tj eaſure-Cheſts cailed Shyphersh, ali called by the geyeral Nam: 
of Corban ar Corbonah : Two of theſe Cheſts were for the 6: 
thebel, which every Jſraelite was to pay according to the Lz::, 
Ex14. 30.12, 13. There were Eleven more, the Infcript.on 
on which ſhewed what Money ſhould be put there. 
price of the two Turtle Doves, or two young Pigemms, 2, Fir ti: 
Burnt-Offering of Birds, 3. For the Money «offered to buy Wd 13 
the Altar, 4. For thoje who gave Mone; to buy Frankincen'e. $4 
thoſe who offered Gld for the Mercy-ſeat. 6. Fer the Reſidii: of 
Money for the- Sin-offering, 7. For the Reſidue of tho 7 ny (i & 
Treſpaſs-offering. 2. For the Reſidue of an Offering of Birds. ©. #.” 
the Surpluſs of a Nazanite's Offering. 10. For the refduo of «# 1*- 
per's Treſpaſs-offering. - 11. For whoſoever would offer an 0/7: 5 
the Herds, The Fraclites tied to their ſeveral. Offerings, 57s 
not tic to provide themſelves, but they might ©; 
Sunums of Money, with which the Prieſts provided thc ; 304 
1: there were a Surpluſage, 1t was put into one or otic: oi: 
Cheſts. Theſe Cheſts were placed in that part of the 107, 
which was called the Court of the Women , not becauſe 7 1s 04) 
Women might come there, but becauſe Women migi:t £9 
further. - As the Court of the Gentiles (into which Jews came | 
was fo called, becauſe the Gentiles might go no further. Cf 
Lord ſo ſate, as he obſerved Men come and put their Ofc::97; 
into one of theſe Cheſts, He ſaw many Fews that were 5: 
caſting in much Money of Silver, or Gold, or Braſs, £1ougi £4 
money was moſt 1n uſe. Amongſt others a poor Widow Cite, 
ſhe threw in two Mites, which make a Farthing, As to Us: v- 
lue of what ſhe threw in, let us hear the Learned Dr, £1;.775 5-4 
his Temple Chap. 19. © The Weight of the picce Of >: 
& ver mentioned in the Law, was Three hundred and tel: 
** Barlcy-Corns. The Wiie Men added to it, and made it tt 
 hundrcd eighty four middle Bariley-Corns. This made oY 
« Denari, cach Denarizs made fix Meas; which in N JE wy 
time was calied a Gera), The Merah made two Ports NS, = 
Pondio made two Jſurins or Aſarinſſss, The Aſiv1u5 of hy 


1. for the 


oo, 
SF 


fs 


LES 


CF 
La 


Ld 


CD. 
3 9's; 


42 And there camea certain poor widow, and ſh; A; 
threw in || two mites, which make a farthing. 10: 
43 And hecalled unto hin his diſciples, and faith ::* ; 


widow hath caft more in, than all they which have caſt 
Fatural, but they thail arite Spiritual Bodzes, without AﬀeRions | INLO the treaſury. | 


Falco? 
Woly! 


44 For all they did caſt in of their abundance; hy © 


IS The 


38 * And he ſaid unto them in his dotrine,Beware ... 


Su[| ſp. 


40 * Which devour widows houſes, and fer a pre. - 
tence make long prayers : Theſe ſhall receive greater © 


0 
A. 
«4 


41% 
þ i560 
i 
$oow 
1, 
Ld . 


21, F 
be, heed 


Ty! 


1 Vers p] 
bi, theſe 4; 


hap, 38511, M £ 
«© no, was the Weight of Tour Bariey-Corns, the Weight of a 
« wits tas half a. Baricy-Corn. According to this Rate, the 
Widows to Mites made 1n Stiver the Weight of a midele Bar- 
oy Cort. Tins our Saviour calls All that ſhe hd, and all her 
1: The Greck 18, All ner life; that 1s, all that the had to 
ſtain hor Life. Artds Montane thinks that that which is meant 
- i] C127 ſhe had to upheld her Life f5r one Day, For it 1 (aid, 
| y was uſually recko:cd the Livelyhood, or a 


Of. 


5 2 —— 


. 
) ; þ : 
hat f331: Quaiktit 
Cafficicncy for 4 Poor Man for a Davy. 
& in more than any ofthe reſt ; rot more ſtriftly, but pro rat. 3 


F'Y, cs Rr To PUR” - p , 21 
1 what ti © WECTC abie to do, with what ine was able to 


CO 11.41 : , : it wh 

do, The two great inſtrations which this Hiſtory affords us, 
- , J aneawdl,. 7 y* " 10” wY - PG - PR = - 
arc, 11 Tia the paviei joit of People are nt excujed j;9m 81 :d Works, 
\ Cor. 2. 2, 3» 2+ That God in his acceptation of our good Works, 
/ bs at tj): Apart, the Will and Ajt2CtDns, nt at the Quantum of 


7 7 
3 4» 


what we d 2 Cor. 8. : If there be fw$F a willing Mind, it 7s 
accepted, nt according to what 4 Man hath mt, but according to what 
i path, It 15 ODcalence and Love which God accepteth, not the 
Quantum of the Gitt. 


CHAP. AM 


"3 po . + ATR, - 1-1 8 "Sy up 
Chrit freetellzth the Deitruttimn and Ruin of Ferujalom, 1-—8.Com- 
frteth his Nifſcifics atam!t Perſecution, g—13, Sheweth how 


, . ir , , L 1 s oo 
they mizht eſcape, to propag ite the Gojpel + the Calurittes of the 
- - J g f . 4 *3% 5 Id PT 19 . , 5B s: Ee bb . - 43s . Py - 
Tops it thoſe X.1vs5 þ- F X71) f ot ) 47 .411'T fil o C\ {its and Propiets, 
} A 


Sheweth the Manner « his laſt Coming to Judgment, 


L 


[.4-—23- 
' ws - : T . 
" 24---21- And exharteth t1 Watchjulneſs againſt that time, and the 


*Wn? of Death, 32--37»+ 


-:..1*% A ND ashiewent out of the temple, one of his 
ditciples ſaith unto him, Matter, fee what 
manner of ſtones, and waat buildings are here. 
2 And Jefus anſwering, faid unto him, Seeſt thou 
Þi:-:+ theſe great buildings? * there ſhall not be left one 
{one upon another,thart hall not be thrown down. 
The periſhing Nature of the ſplendid, and gay things of this 
world, are fitter Objects for the Meditation of fuch as arc Chriſt's 
Diſciples, than the Splendour and Magnificence of them, efpe- 
cially wken they are the P:ivileges of a tinful People. Sin will 
undermine, and blow np the moſt famous Struttures, It is a 
zood thing for Chriſtians not to ſet their Hearts upon them. See 
the Notes on Matth. 24. 1. 


» Andasheſate upon the mount of Olives, over 


Chriſt ſaith, the ha | 


ZY Bo (4139, AM 

ore the Deſirudtion of Jertr{5w + thor WA tin 

Feed GS the laft Day, v<t it is molt prota. they WH be 
gicater uefore the Day of Judgiaent, than at any tins before ; 
and tor f22rf#! Sigh-,, and great Signs from Heater, tiey ordina 
r1!y-g0 betore fome great Judgment of God unzi placcs: 2nd 
therefore the Obſervation of them by the teatinen, (.s we earn 
by £11y and others) ſeems but to be 4 piece of XN. il R Rea 
and Ciriit giving theſe things as Signs of the wn, roms hays 
firſt of Jeruſalem, then of the Wor'd, will wike winkin Cir; 
[t14ns Þ.hold them with a Religious Fear, to) nor ro hd re 
<Ke to expound them particularly, or Fiophoiy upon then, Cer- 


tzizly we ought to look upon thoin, a3 prominin, $571 
great Worx of God, and utually of Jud me: 


9 Bur * take heed to your ſelves : {>> they hall d& 41 


liver you up to councils, and in the Iynagoonucy ye ſhall 1 Lu 
be beaten ; and ye ſhall be brought boiore vilers ang of 
Kings for my ſake, for a teſtimony againſt then; 


This, fo far as concerneth thoſe to whom Clicit? (4, bh 
ly bea Sign of the Deſtru4ijn of Fernſalem ; but fo fir as wt 090.) 
cth others, it is alſo a Sign of the End of the Worid + It is ( | 
Sign he gives them : The Perſecution oi tlie Mi = 
and the Saints of God, for the Preachin;; aud Urol. or 1 
Gotpel. See the Notes on Matth. 24. 5. 


10 M And the zoſpel muſt firſt he put! ed 254, 
all nations. 
1 am prone to think that cur Lord pives this 


ZICL 


S1gn of the Deſtru#;on of Feruſalem, but of the End 1 too wor fl, | Is! 
and the latter principally , for before the FEollruchon ot jrrw * | ' 
[?m, (which was in lefs than forty years attec Cle i/y's Dy : 
Goſpel was not Preached to af Natimns, otherwite than 


tgmtics very many. And 1 dothink that if rlcvs fat have the , 
Goſpel preached to thein before the iy 07 Julgnent, at | | 


P8047 ] | ' 


. —» WOT - 1 2 ' 
ther manner than either it was poſſible it {hold bu proactued 1 TREE! 
them within forty years after the Dear of Chritt, or than wn] Rf # | 
places have had it preached amongſt them to this Ezv. For thu Fr | 


the Holy Scriptures, and Eccletiaftic.l Hiſtorians, g1ve us a fonic: 
thing large Account of the Golpel being Preached in Friar, Agr! "tf | 


and 1n Africa yet we have little account from any ef them, v1 \ ; 
its being Preached in America, 1 am n-t wholly 1snorant of T2008. i 
what thoſe Writers tcll us of Thomas the Apoſtle tits Preachin: tc 1 Þs 
the Indzans, and of Trumentizs and his Colleague 3 but they ary ve "3 : F-4 
ry few Preachers that any Storics give an account of, puny to ty < 
Indians, whither I believe the Golpel niuſt go butore that Cliritt : 4.19 
comes to Judgment, oi 
F | 

17 * But when they ſhall lead yor , and deliver you * tu 1: f 
up, take no thought before-hand what ye ſhall ſpeak, *!- 5 < 
neither do ye premeditate: but whatſoever {hall be gi- -*'* ! 0 j 


ven you in that hour, that ſpeak ye :; for it is not ye 
that ſpeak, but the Holy Ghoſt. 


See the Notes on Matth. 10. 19, 20. By tuke no Th#ght, he 


(3a z6ainſt the temple, Peter, and James, and John, and 
by | Andrew, asked him privately : 

" W::: 4 * Tellus, When ſhall theſe things be, and what 
_ b:'- ſz] be the ſign when all theſe things ſhall be ful- 
ff) filed. 

aj: Mattizew puts two Things more into the Queſtion, IWh.:t ſhall 
' it be the (gn of thy Coming, and of the End of the World ? The beft of 
Tre Men have 2 great Curtofity to know futurities, Things that ſhall 
th hercafter come to pais. All the other part of this *Chapter is! 


ſpent by our Saviour 1n an Anſwer to theſe three Queſtions, 
( according to St. Matthew, ) or this one Queſtion, according to! 
Hick and Lube. Some hive attempted curtioutly to diſtinguiſh 
vxrwixt the Signs intended by our Saviour, as relating to each! 
ferio): But certainly thoſe Interpreters do judge beſt, that 
thick our Saviour intended to let them know, That the Deſtru- 
on of Jeruſalem ſhould be a Type of the DeſiruRtion of the 
World at the laſt Day ; and that the ſame things ſhould go be-| 
for> the one, and be Signs of 1t, that ſhould go before the other.; 
and whoſo readcth the Hiſtory of Joſephizvs, of what happened 
before the Defiru@tion of Jers/r/0mm, and atter this time, will find! 
that there Were few or none of thele Signs, that are here men-! 


means, take no anxious Thoughts to difquiet your ielves, 


12 Now the * brother ſhall betray the brother to . 


: SS NMtC. 9.6; | 1b 
death,and the father the ſon: and children ſhall rite 1s, 21,15 bs 
up againſt their parents, and ſhall cauſe them to be 2- | Ws 
put to death. of 4 

13 And ye ſhall be hatred of all men for my names Lat 
ſake : but he that ſhall endure unto the end, the lame * 5ir. xe v4 fi 
ſhall be ſaved. 2%, moult nl 

ly , ; = pt | 4 
This is hut an Amplification of the fifth Sign, g.vin vs vr, 0, |. ſth; of Oy 
8; 1h A 


viz. A furious Perſecution, eminently made goud it the ſ2wwtjh ol! 


tied, butcame to paſs, before the dreadful Deſtruction of that | Perſecution, before the Deftruttion of Jeruſalom. in the UV. oy | 
fo famous Place 3 yet we muſt doubflefs look for many, if not} Perſecution, for Three hundred years after Chriſt, In the #cp, . Wane it” 
al the fame things to come to paſs betore the general Deftructi- Perſecution at this Day, See the Notes on M:tth, 2.1. 15, , {9 ik 
630f the Wor'd in the laſt Day. F. h 4. 
, 14 But when ye ſhall ſee the abomination ot Ceio- [+ 
5 Ard Jeſus anſwering them, began to ſay, * Take| jarion, + ſnoken of by Daniel the prophet, ſtanding *2u2 | 


b "ced leſt any man deceive you. 
6 For many ſhall come in my name, fa 
Ciriſ; : and ſhall deceive many. 


ying, I am 


_ Sec theNotes on Matth. 24. 4, 8+» This 18 the firft: Sign, fol- 
n.cdvctore the Deſtruttion of Jeruſa/em in part, and which hath 
vecn iuihli1og ever fince; and probably before the Day of ſudp- 
ment, the number of ſuch Impoſtoys will increaſe. 


mn 7 *Andwhen ye ſhall hear of wars, and rumours of 
!1-wars, be ye not troubled : for fc :hings muſt needs 
be, but the end ſhall not be yer. 


$8 Fornation ſhall riſe againſt nation, and kingdom 
vi. *gainſt kingdom : and there ſhall be earthquakes in di- 
1 ers Places, and there ſhall be famines, and || troubles : 
hi, Lielſe are the beginnings of ſorrows- 


_Fatthew adds Peſtilencies. Lube ſaith, . Peſtilencies, and fearful 
91yhv's, and great Signs from Heaven, See the Notes on Matth, 
24. 0,7, 8, Here are two or three more Signs put together, 


T5 
LL 


where it ought not,(let him that readeth n:derftalt.,) 
then let them that be in Judea flee to th- inountastns. 
15 And let him that is on the houle-topy, not 
down into the houſe,neither enter theretn, £9 582 aly 
thing out of his houſe. : 
16 And let him that is in the fic, not turn bact 
again for to take up his garment. | D 
17 But wo to them that are wich child, and to 
them that give ſuck in thoſe days: | | | 
13 And pray ye that your flight be not in the Wit: (WIR kf 
rer. ESE $14 
19 For in thoſe days ſhall be afMiiftion, ſuch as waz 


a0 Aer: 
: : LS Ip 
>; ind 


| 


not from the beginning of the creation whicu God p 
created, unto this time, neither ſhall be. 2 

20 And except that the Lord had ſhortacd thoſe 
days, no fleſh ſhould be fared : but for ric [ects lake: f:} 
whom he hath choſen, he hath ſhortnes tie 0ays- 'M 


Fg I) - , 
7. x IX a I. 7. VO 9 4 'C 
- Se the Notes on Matth. 24. 15, 16. 17. Where We Mis j 


65 t Wars, and remours of Wars, £40.:5 Commotions in Nations 3 which | opencd all theſe Paiſages. This S:gn doth _ oy ; 

thouvh they may Le at officer tir 5, yet probably may be more; the Deſtruction of ſeruſalem, and can have no rel: Hon to — i 
? extrandinary before the Pay of lndpment. 2. Famines, PeSj-} of the World. In our Notes on Math. 24 —_ {OO Pk "I's 
g PRC and Exthgyal - #1 Sizhts and Apparitions in the | is meant by the Ab5mination &f Defol as, je =_ Fra &1 
17 nn, and the Aeuronr, En were (as [ph tells us) wa Daniel it referreth, Lube expounact'1 it, £2.00, at. 20. Wine al! '% 


ED FY 
Cilla * _—_— 


> 

N- . 
Se 

ry F of 


Pet 


= = . — I , - __ —_ » SIS > —_——_ - — - — i= <4, ie — = "I. > Ae” , " 
"=; Ono on... 6 _y Dore Cm >. C ——_— . RE OEM -w. . ot —— — —__— = ' 
> _ — ry = —_ = : "I end. > x a . . - - _ 5 7 —— . = - A , _ — 
9 - —_— > - —_ . " — _ "PF, _ - —- ay - on J a > F 7 —— 3” ——_— 
Oo - "”" 4 : —_— : . packet” w__ - 
wu - = - « DE FOR N "- _ 
q y'- - -" © —__ -. _ M's ” A, ” © . - _—_ — _ 
- — - = &= > , - p - = - 6 _——-—_ —— _— - - —_—— —_ _ KL A 5 . w ,. 
- o pn - - pe . — - _ — - — > - wh £ = —— — — _ nes ad - ag £ ———_ Kd g_y 
7 , : - - yy 1 x: —— ; _ In - = _ — * — = 
3 be nrt "a : EI __ oo = > : Hens < - ann 7 : I = , 
R. | —cul—_ - * I % I ns J ne IM 2. : _— —_— _ s _> 8 
0 2 Ir 2 , ſee : * oy 2 Sb cars -—+ ” _—_ = = —_ ve ov. ks k > Þ1 POE TY - ' gn og. 2 
PRA Ks 1 2am wb Wa, 7” o—_ —_— A . 2 4 = i ow p 4% -- , 2: o_ > : "A742 «5 4 ant A 7" "———_ - , - o 
Ws WIDE P- g t 2 & Rs - As "ae > ws _— = a : BY hd % ” - " was A 2M ty G- 
- ; o oy np A = $4.” Bn. > = o F- ; - = _ _ , a = - * - - _ 
_- —_ _— - > ' - ho |  . wy . gc S 7 " LY we - » _ a _ 
= : —— © : . "R____ = : - - C 7 _ _ F So ” _— > 4 ————— 
pu * aa, Z —*>@.- \ —_— - ©. REY = = > . * . on _ « a i 
4 ——_— . CE Cs " EC k X — _ - - 4 _ . . E RT » __ £ i Wn 972 IIs * n TLIC" + + - _— - 
-- 22x22. onde , nm od nk nn _ Mags 4 in th OD & = ho enum gh "= a —— - - 6. TE - x - _ : IE 
Fl . _— _ - —_ ECARDS = BEARS - P—=op _ __ « 90. oth. . =; & "x N  —_ = 
——_ -— — Es + I TIED r- 2 es cm . ns = - - : AA ___ 
= wm d. IIIa Ez > — : = ” — —_—_— > X = , " 
= W J - wo - ” 2 hn oo van cd ty Rap en ce a." mn " _ ” —— _= - ry + - —_—_ = - ay———— - ET =S 
_ ” ” jew. ty = - > Siz5 > CN ies. aa _ ww py pals by - = © = tt > gen > 
yr So. 7 : . —_— bY - — _ tn 
- Dy . n | . y x ”* 6 Rn - pe SR 
"4 » - by > A oe <a. a. at —Y ” 4 Fu - : . pony —_— ——_— = A—— hs - 
: % p wy G - : > ee " — —— _ = -- - -— 2 —_— m—_—_— - ar" 
= "4 yo —< Phnom BY - PS, > 4 . 3 - TE -- . - & —_ _ at. 4b - 
- JS — } — , : b _ : =. 2 - : — — . 
; : ; £ wo ” my _— js _ I . 
_ . . = _ p k = - - © . > * 
"* _ _— - ” ou - _ 


6 wy 


«- 


np > it 
Cohan, ALLEY, 


4 Namnabie, for the Idois that in them were worſhipped. The 
S4on was this, When yu ſhall ſee the Roman Armzes beſteging Jeru- 
uom, be aſured God will foon deliver it into their hands, what- 
ver vain hopes Men may ſuggeſt of their holding out, er dri- 

-192 them away. Let every one of you with all imaginable 

-- dition ſhift for your ſelves : God will ſurely deliver up the 
1 win that time comes. And before the taking of the Cty, 
hc cl} them, there ſhall be ſuch AfﬀMiRion (by reaſon of their 
in*ctiine Fations and Diviſions, ) as never any People cxperien- 
ccd. As to theſe things, ſee the Notes on Matth. 24. 15, 16, 
CCs 

+4. 179, 21 Andthen if any man ſhall ſay unto you,Lo, here 

. > 21+8 z5 Chriſt, orlo, he there : believe h1m not. 

22 For falſe Chriſts, and falſe Prophets ſhall riſe, 
and ſhall ſhew ſigns and wonders, to ieduce, if i were 
poſſible, even the elect. j 

* ©.t.2.17,. .-23 But take ye heed - behold, | have foretold you 

all things. 

See the Notes on Matth. 24. 24. 24, 25- The Hiſtory of Jo- 
ſephius, and thoſe Roman Hiſtorians who did write the Hiſtory 
of thoſe Times that went immediately before the Deftruion of 
Jeru/alem, and give us account of the Taking of that City, are 
the beſt Commentary on theſe Verſes. It hath been often ſaid, 
That the Jews were in expettation ofa Meſſtas, and are fo ſtill 
But by him they underſtood not a Perſon who ſhould be God- 
man, and fave his People from their Sins, and fet up a ſpiritual 
Kingdom in the World, but a ſecilar Prince, who ſhould come 
of the Huſe of David, and reſtore them tov their civil Liberties. 
So that the Name «cf Chriſt was a fair Name to Patronize any Re- 
bellious Fattinmn, where the Leader would arrogate it to himſelf ; 
( eſpecially if he could pretend to the Houſe of David; ) Near 
the Dcſtruction of Jeruſulem, ſeveral Perſons uſed theſe Arts to 
draw People after them to defend tnemicives, and to ſtand up 
for their Libertics. Our Saviour having diſcerned his Diſciples 
tinurcd with this common Error of tie Nation, and knowing 
what would come to pals, gives them warning to avoid theſe De- 
luſions, and not to run after ſuch Pretenders, to their Ruin and 


Deſtruction. 


* Mat. 24 24 * But in thoſe days, after that tribulation, the 
29, BO 31- ſun ſhall be darkned, and the moon ſhall not give her 


_ RieZ Ss light. 
ol 25 And the ſtars of heaven ſhall fall, and the pow- 


ers that are in heaven ſhall be ſhaken. 
26 And then ſhall they ſee the Son of man coming 


in the clouds with great power and glory. 

27 And then ſhall he ſend his angels, and ſhall ga- 
ther together his elect from the four winds,from the 
uttermoſt parts of the earth, to the uttermoſt part of 


heaven. 

The Utage of theſe Phraſes ; of the darkning of the Sun, and the 
M0n, ane the filling of the Stars, to ſNgnifie the Ruin of Nations, 
and Changes wrought in them, as in Jaiah 13. 1o. as to the De- 
ſtruction of Babzlom, and, Exek. 22. 7. to cxpreſs the Change the 
Providence of God made by. the Deſtruftion ot Egypt; as alſo to 
fignific the change made in the World, by ſetting up the Goſpel ; 
to which purpoſe they are uſed by Joel,chap. 2. 31. hath given In- 
terpreters a Lattiude, to interpret theſe Verſes with relation to 
the Deſtru#jon of the Jews, which made a great Change as to the 
Jewiſh Church and State. 2. And with reference to the Change 


made by ſetting up the Goſpe]-Church : But the 25 and 25 Ver-| 


ſes incline me rather to interpret them ef the End of the World. 
For though thoſe other Expreſſions are uſed to expreſs great 
Changes and Mutations, yet it is not faid of aty of them, [| Then 
* ſhall they ſee the Smn of Man coming in the Chads, with great Power 
and Glory. And then ſhall he ſend his Angels, &c. ] Which Phraſcs 
do ſo agree with thoſe Texts, where Chriſt's ſecond coming 
to Judgment is expreſſed certainly, that I cannot but think our 
Saviour ſpeaks here with reference to that. See Matth, 13. 41. 
1 Cor. Ig, $2. 1 The. 4.16. REV. 1. 7. 


* Mat. 24 28 * Now learn a parable of the fig-tree. When 
22 . her branchis yet tender, and putteth forth leaves,ye 
Luk-21. 25- know that ſummer is near. 
31> 5955 29 Soye in like manner, when ye ſhall ſee theſe 
things come to paſs, know that it is nigh, ever at the 
doors. 
30 Verily I ſay unto you, that this generation 
ſhall not paſs, till all theſe things be done. 
31 Heaven and earth ſhall paſs away : but my words 
ſhall not paſs away. 
See the Notes on Mutth, 24. 32, 23; 24- where we met with 
the ſame things,alaoft word tor word: So as more Words need 
not to be repeated here in the Explication of theſe Verles, 


32 Bat of that day and tar hour, knoweth no mar, 
no not the angels which are in heaven,neither the Son, 
but the Father. 

23 lake ye heed, watch and pray : for ye know 
not when the time Is. 

Sce the Notes on Matth. 24. 35, 42. 1tc3 later ultimus Dies, ut 
objervertur omnes Pies: God Hath concealcd from us the know- 
;EEpe ct the laſt Day, that we might watcl: all our Days, See 


S. MARK. 


ſh ..; tos Toruclem compajſed with Armies, the Roman Armies : | 


| Chap. LOT on 


the Notes on Mathew, in what ſenſe Chriſt faith, he dia Tos 
know the laſt Day and Hour. Watching is oppoſed to St, _ 
there is a natural Sleep, and a ſpiritual! Sleep, of which << 
ſtle ſpeaks, Rom. 13. 11. Epheſ. 5. 14. The latter is here Apo: 
pally intzyded, to which the Watching here command 580 
yoſed, and tignifies an induſtrious diligent Care "<p" ite Op- 
ſclycs from Sin, upon a proſpett of the laſt Judgment: CEP Gu; 
Confideration of the uncertainty of the particular egy Ut, 
when it ſhall be : Together with ſuch a bodily Watchin; FD 
be ſubſervient unto that end, and fit vs f5r "Ri 
Watching principally intended, 1s a ffr/vimmg neginlt $3 
the ſpiritual Sleep: And thus 1t is exvyunded by "WV "oy 
35. compared with ver. 34, 35+ &3 dp. 21 


"4 
Rez may 
wut #1. 

Cit, 


Which '5 


34 For the Son of man 13 as a man taking a far 
ney, wholetr his houſe,and gave authority to es he 
vants, and to every man his. work, and commande, 
the porter to watch. _— 

35 Watch ye therefore (for ye know not when ti | 
maſter of the houſe cometh, at even, or at mid-ni _ ' 
orat the cock-crowing, or in the morning ) th 

36 Leſt coming ſuddenly, he find you ſleeping, 

37 And what I fay unto you, I fay unto Wl 
Watch: | ; 7 

In thc Greek, thoſe Words, For the S-n of Man 4, arc nc 3. 
thoſe, or ſome ſuch like, are neceſſarily to be underſto9d,t; wak | 
up the ſenſe. The Watching here again twice called tor. jc -i, 
ſame with that before mentioned. The Senſe of thcic Verſes ; 


the ſame as before; the uncertainty of the time when ©6+.n 
cometh to Judgment, ſhould eblige all Men to be diligent a1 


—— 
«tl, v4 


induſtrious to keep themſeives from Sinning, that they jr; 1. 
ready at woat time foever he cometh : He mentions cal ti, 
four parts of the Night ; having ſpoken of Sin under the oe... 
of Sleeping, and Holineſs under the noticn of Watching, 
l 
CHAP. XIV. l 
The Rulers conſpire again/t Chrifl, 1, 2, 4 Woman aninte!t: |. 0 
Head, 3—5. Judas betrayeth him for Money, 1c, 15, (;.:; 
eating the Paſſer, ſhewerh how he ſhauld be betrayed of ui - 0 
I2—21. He injlicuteth his laſt Supper, 22—2g. EForec:211.., : 
his Dijciples of their Offence, and Peter's denial, 26-31 " 
Agony and Prayer : He reproveth bis diſciptes for their $1-iv : " 
and exhorteth them to Pray and Watch, 32—42. Funds. i... 
eth him with a Kiſs : The Mullitude apprehend him: His 1 5 op 
ples flee and forſahe him, #$3=—$2. They accuſe Chriſt of Bl; oh W 
my before the High-Prieft : They cover his Face and tif |. Ma 
$3—5g. Peter denieth him thrice + Calling to mid the j7, :; co1 
of Feſus, repenteth and weepeth, 66—72. nec 
Its 
1* Fter two days was the feaſt of the palover,»:; | 
and of unleavencd bread : ard the ©: : ſe 
pricſts and the ſcribes fought how they might tz; 5 thi 
him by craft, and pur him to death. Ik 2 
2 But they ſaid, not on the feaſt- day, leſt there be tha 
an uproar of the people. It. 
Matthew ſaith the ſame, only he bringeth it in, as ſaid to tlc * 
Diſciples by Chriſt. This muſt be ſaid upon that day in the the 
Week, (which we call Tueſday,) for Friday was the Paſlwr-dn, 2« 
when began the Feaſt of Unleavened Bread. Sec other things in the f 
the Notes on Matth. 26. 1, 2, 3. Lo 
In th 
3 And being in Bethany, in the honſe of Simon | 2 
the leper, as he late at meat, there came a womar hs: wth 
ving an alabaſter-box of ointment of ſpikenzrd, | very | 0 _ y 
precious, and ſhe brake the box, and poured it ou his, 4 
head. Y 
4 *And there were ſomethat had indignation with” FT 27 
in themſelves, and ſaid, Why was this waſte oi the”? Mþ ende 
ointment made ? F371 will 
5 For it might have been ſold for more than ti:e: 6, n, _ 
hundred ||pence, and have been given to the poor. "ey 
And they murmured againſt her. By 
6 And Jeſus ſaid, Let her alone, why trouvle ye 29 
her ? ſhe hath wrought a good work on me. oltend 
7 For *ye have the poor with you alw2ys, 21%» 2: oo 
whenſoever ye will ye may do them good : but ms ys it Thee, 
have not always. Crow t 
8 She hath done what ſhe could : ſhe is come atore- ah, 
hand to anoint my body to the burying. he & al 
. . We & 
9. Verily I ſay unto yon, Whereſoever this goſpel 
ſhall be preached throughout the whole world, 7: See thi 
alſo that ſhe hath done, ſhall be ſpoken of for a menmo- Ms 
rial of her. | Gethſen 
See the Notes on Matth 26. 6, 9,8 7c. where tis pic? © while 
Hiſtory is fully contidered, with the differing Circurnitznccs 70 [ 
lated by our Evangeliſt, and by St. Zohn. 7 a A 
| ron tlie 0 ny al 
10 And Judas Iſcariot, one of the twelve Wis . heavy, 
to the chiet prieſts to betray him unto them. - "i 
And when they kgard «tr, they WEE we” oy brrowfy 


P? of 4-48 


VChap: XIV. . | 
-omiſed togive him money. And he ſought how he 
might conveniently betray him. 

Seq the Notes on Matth. 26. 14, I5, 16, 


| 12 And the firſt day of unleavened bread, when 
- $x#- they || killed the paſſover, his diſciples ſaid unto him, 
FJ W here wilt thou that we go and prepare, that thou 
i. 2 7» mayeſt eat the paſſover ? | 
þ 5 13 And he ſendeth forth two of his diſciples, and 
| Gich unto them, Go ye into the city, and there ſhall 
meet you a man bearing a pitcher of water : follow 
M-» 
_ And whereſvever he ſhall go in, ſay ye to the 
goodman of the houſe, The Maſter faith, Where is the 
oveſt-chamber, where ſhall ear the paſſover with my 
diſciples ? : 
15 And he wlll ſhew you a large upper room fur- 
niſhed and prepared : there make ready for us. 
16 And bis diſciples went forth, and came i nothe 
city,and found as he had ſaid unto them: and they 
wade ready the pallover. 


Se the Nztes on Matth 26, 17,18, 19, 


17 And In the evening he cometh with the 
twelve. 

18 And as they fat anddid eat, Jeſus ſaid, Verily 1 
fay unto you, one of you which eateth with me, ſhal] 

tray Mme. 

19 And they began to be ſorrowful, and to fay 
urito him one by one, Isit 1? And another ſaid, Is 

[? 

20 And he anſwered and faid unto them. Ut is one 
of the twelve that dippeth with me in the diſh. 

21 The Son of man indeed goeth, as it is written 
of him: but wo to that man by whom the Son of man 
is betrayed : good were it for that wan if he had ne- 
ver heen born. 

See the Notes on Matth. 26. 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 28. where is 
open2d what-ever 1s necetlary for the urdcrſtanding of theſe 
Words, i which nothing of moment is varied, ſave only that 
Matthew eporceth Judas, as being at this time particularly dif 
covered. fon hath nothing of this, ualefs the Supper mentio- 


ned, chap. 13. were this Supper z of which more ſhall *be ſaid in 
ts Order. 


22 Andas they did eat, Jeſus took bread, and bleſ. 
ſed,and brake zt, and gave to them,and ſaid, Take;ecat, 
this ismy body. 

23 And he took the cup, and when he had given 
thanks, he gave ir to them: and they all drank of 
It. 
24 And he ſaid unto them, This is my bloud of 
the new teſtament, which is ſhed for many. 

25 VerilyIfay unto you, I1 will drink no more of 
the fruit of the vine,until that day thatI drink it new 
F inthe kingdom of God. 

#4 26 And when they had ſung an ||hymn, they went 
out into the mount of Olives. 


See the Notes on Matth. 26. 26, 27, 28, 29, where the 
very ſmall differences betwixt our Evangeliſt and Matthew, and 
Like are alſo conſidered, 


WW 27 And Jeſus faith unto them, All ye ſhall be of- 
. WE. fended, becauſe of me this night: for it is written, 
Mr the ſhepherd, and the ſheep ſhall be ſcat- 
tered. 

” oF © 28 Bit *after that I am riſen, 1 will go before you 
'..$ #to Galilee. 


53 
» IK, % 


oltended, yet wil not I. 

14 14 39 And Jeſus faith unto him, Verily I fay unto 
10 i UF £08, that this day, ever in this night before the cock 
; crow twice, thou ſhalt deny me thrice. 


.31 But he ſpake the more vehemently, If TI ſhould 
© with thee, I will not deny thee in any wile. Like- 
wit alſo aid they all. 


this | ce the Notes on all the Diſcourſe, Matth.25. 31,32, 33, oc 


32 And they came to a place which was named 
Gethſemane: and he faith to his diſciples, Sit ye here 
while ſhall pray. 


33 And he taketh with him Peter, 2nd James, and 


John, and began to be ſore amazed, and to be very 
22; eavy, 


brrowful unto death: tarry ye here, and watch: 
Uol. 2. 


St, MAR XK, 


35 And he went forward a lictle, and fell on the 
ground,and prayed, that if it were poſlible the hour 
might paſs from him. 
36 And he faid,Abba, Father,all things are poſſible 
unto thee, take this cup away from me: *nevertheleſs, 915. 32. 
not whatT will, but what tho wilt. 
37 And hecometh and findeth them fleeping, and 
faith unto Peter, Simonzſleepeſt thou?couldſt not thou 
watch one hour ? 
38 Watch ye, and pray, leſt ye enter into tempta- 
tion : * the ſpirit truly ready, but the fleſh is weak. » Ck © 
39 Andagain he went away and praved, and ſnake OY 
the ſame words. | 
49 And when he returned, he found them aſleep 
agaln, (for their eyes were heavy, ) neither wiſt they 
what to anſwer him. 
41 And he cometh the third time, and ſaith unto 
them, Slcep on now, and take your reſt: it is enough, 
the hour is comme; behold, the Son of man is berrayed 
into the hands of finners. 
42 Riſe up, tetus go ; lo, he that betrayeth me is 
at hand. 


Se the Notes on Matth, 25. 35. to ver. 4%. 


43 And* immediately, while he yet ſpake, cometh * £4 £2 
Judas one of the twelve, and with him a creat multi- {7 * 
tude with ſwords and ſtaves from the chief prieſts,and © * 
the ſcribes, ard the elders. 

44 And he that betrayed him had given them a 
token,laying, Whomſoever I ſhall kiG, that fame is 
he ; take him, and lead him away faſely. 

45 And as ſoon as he was come, he goeth Rlraight- 
way to him, and ſaith, Maſter, maſter, and kifſed 
him. 
See the Notes on Matth. 25. 47, 48, 49, 50» 


4s And they laid their hands on him, and took 
him. 
47 And one of them that ſtood by, drew a ſword, 
and ſmotea ſervant of the kigh prieſts, and cut off ris 
car. 
48 And Jeſis anſwered and faid unto them, Are ye 
come out as againſt a thief, with ſwords and w:r5 
ſtaves to take me ? 
49 I wasdaily with you in the temple, teaching, 
and ye took me not: but the * ſcriptures muſt oe fal- *r 22. 4, 
filled. ' i 
59 And they all forſook him, and fled. de 
Having to compleat the Hiſtory of the Patſion, eſpccially 45 
to what is ſaid of it by Matthew, Mark and Zate, in my Notes 
on Matthew, coniidercd all pailages relating to what Marthew 
faith : The things here mentioned being opened in our Notes 
on Matth, 20. 47, 48,49, 59+ need not here azain be calarged 
upon. 


” 
op k 
- 44% 


51 And there followed hima certain young man, 
having a linnen cloth caſt about his naked body, and 
the young men laid hold on him. 


52 Andhelefr the linnen cloth, and fied from them 


naked. 

This part of the Hiſtory is only recorded by Marh: What 
hath made ſome affirm, that this was St. Fohn, I cannot tell, 7151 
was one of the eleven that were with Chrift when ds came ; 
and though we find him aſleep a little before, yet we read not 


that he was gone to bed, nor can conceive there was any at or 
near the place. The Garment in which he was, in ail provabt- 


lity, was a Night-garment, It is certajn it was a looſe Garment, 
| he could not elſe, when he was apprehended, have fo ſoon quit 


' 
i 
1 
i 
! 


N 4 29 But Peter ſaid unto hims Although all ſhall be himſelf of it ; and being quit of that, it ſeemeth he was quit of 


all ; for the Text ſaith, be flad from them naked z nor doth thc 
Text give him the Honour to call him a Uiciple of Chriff at 
large. Probably it was ſome young Man, who being in his Bed, 
and hearing the noiſe of the Multitude going. by his Lodging 
with Swords and Staves, got up, flipt on his Night-garment, and 
followed them to ſee what the matter was 3 and they having ap- 
prehended Chriſt, he followed them. And poſſibly his unuſual 
Habit made them take the more notice of him, ſtaying when 
the Diſciples were all fled. Nor can the reaſon be well given 
why Mark ſhould record ſuch a paſlage, unleſs it were to ic 
us what we muſt expe from the raze of Perſecutors; vi7. 7'.tt 
our own innocency ſhould not defend us. This young Min v5 not 
concerned in Chriſt, only came as a Spettator, witiout any 
Arms. But the Sword of Perſecution uſeth not to diftinguitn 
perfetly. The Beſilish, (they lay) will ily at the Picture or a 
Man, 

53 * And they led Jeſus away to the high prieſt,and * Luk. 22- 


1a $4; £5, 6h 
with him were aſſembled 2ll the chief prieſts, and che | 9: + $94 


34 And*faith unto them, * My ſoul is exceeding | e1gers, and the ſcribes. 


C[Ppp] 54 And 


Chap. XIV. 


* Fat, 


 *#Ch.15. 
Joh. 2. 


Tila. $3. 7. 


* Mat. 24. 


ZS. 


S[u.22. $5. 
Joh.18. 25. 


fore the cock crow twice, thou ſhalt deny me thrice.| 17 And they cloathed him with purple,and plattz) \. 70 make 
And when he thought thereon, he wept j| a crown of thorns, and put it about his {c9/, © he, 
jOr,he wept All four Evangeliſts give us an account of this Hiſtory of Pe- 138 And be o i; im, Hail king 0 i! On. 32:+h, 
abundantly. ter's denial of his Maſter. We have confidered what hey all ſay Jews II On, Hail 1 4 the es 
Or, he began to compleat the Hiſtory in our Notes on Matth. 26. 6g, go, 71, : F 8 LEES ad tha +. 
tn weep. 72,0 To which I ice no reaſon to add any thing but the] £99 ANd they ſmote him on the head wit 7 771 Bi Evanpeliits 


Chap. XIV. 5? 


vt. 
54. And Peter followed him afar oft, even ints the 
palace of the high prieſt, and he ſat with the ſervants, 
and warmed himſelf at the fire. 
2E. 55 * And the chief prieſts, and all the council 
ſouz ht for witneſs againſt Jeſus to put him to death; 
and found none. 
56 For many bear falſe witneſs againſt him,but their 
witnels agreed not together. : 

57 And there aroſe certain, and bear falſe-witneſs 
againſt him, ſaying, | | 
>: $58 * Weheard him ſay, I will deſtroy this temple 
1c. that is made with hands, and within three days I will 
build another made without haids. | 
59 But neither ſodid their witneſs agree toge- 
ther. 
60 And the high pricſt tood upin the midſt, and 
asked Jeſus, ſaying, Anſwereſt thou nothing? what 1s 
it which theſe witnefs againſt thee * - 
61 But he held his peace, and * anſwered nothing. 
Again the high prieſt asked him, and faid unto him, 
Art thou the Chriſt the Son of the Bleſſed ? 
62 And Jcſns ſaid, I am - and * ye ſhall fee the Son 
of man ſitting on the rizht hand of Power,and coming 
in the clonds of heaven. . 
63 Then the high prieſt rent his clothes, and ſaid, 
What need we any further witneſſes ? | 
64. Ye have heard the blaſphemy : what think ye? 
And they all condemned him to be guilty of death. 


65 And ſome began to ſpir on him, and to cover 
his face,and to buffet him, and to ſay unto him, Pro- 
pheſie. And the ſervants did ſtrike him with the 
palms of their hands. 

This Hiſtory of our Saviour's Examination before the High 
Priet we had Marth. 26. from ver. 57. to 5g Sec the Notcs there. 
It fhould ſeem the High Prieſts and Council were very eager upon 
this thing. This Council ſeems to have ſat up all Night, for early 
in the Morning tlicy carried him (condemned by them) to Pilate; 
and bcfore twelve they brought him out of the City co be Cru- 
cified, Theſe wretched H\ pocrites had but the Evening before 
been taking the Paſſer : It was now the Feaſt of Unleavened 
Bread. This was now the Firſt-fruit of their Thankſgiving to 
God, for bringing them out of the Land of Ezypt : Beiides, that 
their keeping a Court of Judgment in a capital Caſe, or an Holy- 
dav, or in tie Nizht, were things againſt all Rules of Order, But 
the Rz,.c of Perfecutors can be neither bounded by the Laws of 
God or Men If the Szrvants of God ſtill be thus treated, they 
are in this more like Chriſt, who hath told them, That the Dij- 

cirle #4 mt above his Maiter. But ſee ſurther in the Notes on 
Matti. 26. 


65 * And 2s Feter was beneath in the palace;there 
cometh one of the maids of the high prieſt. 
67 Aud when ſhe ſaw Peter. warming himſelf, ſhe 
looked unon him, and ſaid, And thou alſo waſt with 
Jeſus of Nazareth. 


62 But he denied, ſaying, I know not, neither un- 
deritand | what thou ſayeſt. And he went out into the 
porch ; and the cock crew. 


69 Anda maid ſaw him again, and began to ſay to 
them that ſtood by, This 1s one of them. 


70 And hedenied it again. And a little after, they 
that ſtood by, ſaid again to Peter, Surely thou art ore [i 
of them: for thou art a Galilean, and thy ſpeech a- 
greeth thereto. 

71 But he began to curſe ard to ſwear, ſaying, ] 
know not this man of whom ye ſpeak. 

72 And the ſecond time the cock crew. And Peter 
called to mind the word that Jeſus ſaid unto him, Be- 


Obſervation. 1. How contemptible means God often uſeth t5 take and did ſpit upon him 5 and bowing their KOCTS; 19:7 | 
ſhipped him. FE Pm 


dywn our Pride and Self-confidencies, 
humbled by the means of two Maids, 


Peter,a. great Apoſile, is here 
2. How naturally one Sjn 


draws on another. Peter fiiſt telleth a Lye, then to Lyins, addeth ! of Gs It is noe 3, 
Sweating and Curſing. 3. How neceſſary it is for thoſe that would the purple from him, and put his own Clorhes GN ny lined. g« 
heep from Sin, to keep out of Sinners company : T am (faith David)] and led him out to crucifie him. Won Pc. 7 
« companion of them that fear thee, 4. How profitable words from E Vir (21. o 
God are for the time to come, though at preſent we find not the This Hiſtory of our Siviour's Examination before, 27 Co! whathc.. 
uſe and advantage of them. 5s. How different the Sinnings of Re- | demnation by Pilate, together with the Indignitics oferes - | EF @ thoj. cn, 
probates and Saints are, as to the conſequences and iſſues. Judas | after his Condemnation, is recorded in ſome degree or © 2! The-@ 16h 
Sins, Repents, and Hangs himiclf, Peter goeth out and weepeth | all the four Evangeliſts ; by the comparing of ehich, it 04 3 WF wy ge. 
vitterly. Jud repented unto Death. Peter repenteth unto Life. | pear that Mark hath left out many material Circutnitaics, = F 7c 11 h;vs, 


See more ivith reference to this Hiſtory, in our Notes on Matth. | pa 
25. 75. 
frallical Ct of the Jews, 


MAR K 


W hat will ye then that I ſhall do wnto him who v: 
call the king ofthe Jews? 


called Pretorium ; and they call rogether the 5 
band, : 


Thus far we have heard Chriſt's Trial before the Zccle-| have compared, and contider:d them all, and thatl chit * 
Thus far what he ſaid, chap. 10. 33. [the Rea.ter, Only obſerving, 1. Hw mich more favis 


Chap, XY 


and they have (as we have heard) condemng? þin to ls. 


he alſo ſaid there, — And they (Dull delivey hiin to the Gentile 5s _ 
: - : - S. And 

they ſhall mock him, and ſhall ſcourge him, and ftal this ys. _— a 
, Jy +> or: bit. 


and ſhall kill him. We muſt fee thoſe Words veriticd ; the on 
ſuing part of the Hiſtory 1n the next Chapter, ca ny 


1 


CHAP. 


AV. 


The Rulers bring Jeſus bound before Pilate, to have tim 0 N65 
1-—14. Pilate, topleaſe the People, ſcourgeth and doljyuy,e,*, 
to be Cructfied : Simon the Cyreman  beareth Is Crois - Rc þ 
cifie him, and part his Garment : Two Thieves cruciand with 1) 
all revile him, 15—32. Hu Cry and Death, 33==33. _ 
turion confeſſeth him to be the Son of God, 39— 11. 


mathea burieth him, 42-—47» 


: The Ce. 
Joſeph of ai. 


N D ſtraightway in the morning the chies 

prieſts * held a conſultation with the elders * Fi. 
and ſcribes, and the whole council, and bound Jeſs, Macy, 
and carried him away, and delivered him to Pilate, © 


See the Notes on Matth, 27. 1,2. Pontizs Pilate was the R: 
man Governour in Jadea at this time, Tub, 3. 1, The Reatons p 
their carrying Chriſt to him, when thev had condemned him +. 
Death for Blaſphemy, (a Crime cogneicible betore them, 2 4... 
peareth in the Caſe of Stephen, A&s 7.) lee in our Notes : i »4 
thew, What time in the Morning they carried him het .ro 1: 
late, 18 not ſaid, only Jn f:ith it was early ; and wo _ 
was about the S7xth hiar when Pilate difrtled him TOM : 
him condemned, (that is, with us, twelve of the Clock, ) f> |;.; 
bably they were with Plate by fix or ſeven in the Mm; 
This Morning was the Morning after the Evening in which a 
had eatcn the Puſſpwver, and ti firſt Day of their Feaſt of V Ss 


Ree 


vened Bread : So little did they regard God's Ordinaace. | 
2 * AndPilateasked him, Art thou the ki:> of 1% 22-1 


the Jews? And he anſwering, faid unto him, Jy 

ſayeſt it. 

3 And the chief prielts accaſed him of many thirs;: 

but he anſwered nothing. : 
4 * And Pilate asked him again, faying, Anfiverep © ** 

thou nothing ? behold how many things they witrer, .." 

againſt thee. rs 
5 But Jeſus yet anſwered nothing ; ſo that Pit; © 

marvelled. '. _e : 
E * Now at that feaſt he releaſed unto thei oro. ©» AC. 

priſoner, whomſoever they deſired.  _ 

7 And there was oze named Barabbas, which ly 


4a. 

* » 
a 
28: 
4 + 


bound with them that had made inſurrection within, i the 
who had committed murder in the inſurrection. : 
8 And the multitude crying aloud, began to del: 5 
7ini to do as he had ever done unto them. _ 
9 Burt Pilate anſwered them, ſaying, Will ye tht ak 
releaſe nnto you the king of the Jews ? , 32 
10 (For he knew that the chief prieſts had delivered LECT 
him for envy.) | vere( 
11 But * the chief prieſts moved the people;that he © us 
ſhould rather releaſe Barabbas unto them. F Carkni 
i2 And Pilateanſwered, and faid again 1nto then, 34 


CS A. c 
"VOICE; 


6 . 
bet 
L&lng I 
_ \W, 


13 And they cried out again, Crucife him. iOriake 
14 Then Pilate faid unto them, Why, wiz "383 
hath he done ? And they cried out the more cxcecc- Heard 7, 
ngly, Crucifie him. kg. 36 Ai 
15 And /oPilate willing to content the poryle.tt- Ri. 200 put 
eaſed Barabbas unto them, and delivered Jeſus, 1491 oY 210! 
he had ſcourged him, to be crucified. | HM Qoy 
I6 * And the ſonldiers led him away into tt 12 k.. 37+, 


v* J 
« U) Fd. 
go. 2s Tae g 


20 And when they had mocked him, they £99: 


rts of 1t. 


In our Notes on Matth. 27. Ter. 2. 3, & © . Ne wie; 


-” PET 
eh p95 cn: . 


d *4 LC 
- i" **.44 0 4 
r wh 
C117: Eur .. 
| Boe © ©. 
\ 


1s mide goog © He 7 1-livered tothe Chief Prieſts, and the Scribes, \tound from a Gertile Heathen, tag from the Jewiſh #5 19 te mig, 


hap- XV. 


and n A - HY , 
wr bept upon his Guard, not accuting huntelf, 3. The horri- 


blo debanchore 2 thej? Priests, that they would prefer a Mur- 
+, and Seditizus Perjon, before a myſt innocent Perjon, 4. The 
weakneſs of 4 corrupt cart to reſiſt an ordinary Temptation. 
Pilzte was Convinced tic Profecution was Malicious, that there 
was uo Guilt in Chriſt; ver he mult content the People, and is 
bafely afraid of ener miropreſenting him to the Roman Emperoar. 
Tout the Paint upon which Chiilt was Condemned, was his 

is jriritual Kingdom in, and over his Church ; for 
3:1c!atmed any Claim to any Earthly Kingdom betorc 

Pilate, 3s the other Evangelitts tell us. 6, AHhw punetuaily the 
Wnds of Chriit are, by the Providence of God, fulfilled : We 
have now hzard naw Chriſt was deltycred- to the Genti/es, by them 
m-cbed, {courged, (pf upn, and now going to be killed: 75. How 
Chrit] 1.44) made ils our bitter Waters IWweer 5 Sanctitying every 
Croſs to us, 4nd taking tie Turle out of it : He was reviled, im- 
vriſoned, mocked, ſcourged, {pit upon, and laſt of all killed ; 
he hath tafted of all thele bitter Waters, and by that taſte they 
arc made wholeſome, and medtcinal tor us z and he hath learned 
us, that there 15 no 1gnomay, ihame and contempt, no indignity 
and />2cics of Surfering for his fake, jn which we may not boaſt 
and glory, a being thereby mide comftornable to the Sufferings 
1nd Death of Chrilt ; And if we juffer with him, we hail be gbri- 


ho togethere 


malnt 1/nMs 
ho eN aur! } 


21 And* they compel oneSimon a Cyrenian, who 
4 nated BY, COMIng Our ot the country,the father of A- 
*lexander and Rutus, to bear his croſs. 


k, 2 
22 Aud they bring him unto the place Golgotha, 
which is, being interpreted, the place ofa ſcull. 
23 And they gave him to drink wine mingled with 
myrrhe : but he received ze nor. 
12, 24 And when they had crucified him, they * parted 
1c. 22- his SArMents, Caſting lots upon them, what every man 
ke il. hon1d 2KE- 
& 25 Ang *itwas the third hour, and they crucified 
14, Die 
«25 And * the ſiperſcription of his accuſatien 
\ . wis written over, THE KING OF THE[| 
JEWS. 
27 Aad * with him they cructfie two thieves; the 
0:0 on his right hand, and che other on his left. 
Ang the tcriprure was jaifilled which faith, *And 
Þ 3" he was numbered witli rranſgretlors. 
2, 29 Ara they that pailed by, railed on him, wag- 
citg Their ncagdgand laying; All, * thoy that deſtroyeſt 
the remnic,and butideſt ze tn three days. 
:9 vavethylelt, and come down from the croſs, 
31 Likewiſe alſo the cnief prieſts mocking, ſaid a- 


— _— + 


2» P 7 x 
& lo 29 

Fans 
2” 


\\ 
} 

1] 
2 


7 
\ 
LIC 


S, MAR K. 


ot Favour only, but Fuſtice alſo. '2. Hw cloſe our Savi- 


"Sr" . A 
- k 6 oP _ , . ' 
Croſs ; whitſhever they intended, our Saviout refuled it, [tavit 
Wine to uphold hi "MC | ; ; ; 
ne to upnold mm, which they knew not of. 
relating to this Story, ſee the Notes on 4:t, 


For utncr thinss 


53293 $3* 


27». 
38 * And the vail of the temple was rent in twain, Sg 
from the top to the bottom. hn 
39 And when the centurion which ſtood over 
againſt him, ſaw that he to cried out,ard eve wn the 
ghoſt,he ſaid, Truly this man was the So, of God. 

40 There were alſo women looking on afar off, a- *Luk. 
mong which was Mary Magdalene, and Mary the mo- 
ther of James the leſs, and Joſes, and Salome : 

41 Whoalſo when he was * in Galilee, followed 
him,and miniſtred unto him ; and many other women, 
which came np with him unto Jeruſalem. 

The Prodigies happeninz upon the Death of our S2viour 
the Paſſages happening betwixt the time of his Expiration 
his Burial, arc more largely reported by the other Evans -!; 
than by Mirkh; we have put them all together, and coniider 
the Patlages relatins to them in our Notes on Matth, 

52, 53, Wc "EN 
| 42 * And now when the even was come, (becauſe Rk. 
It was the preparation, that is, the day before the fab. 
baths) 

43 Joſeph of Arimathea, an honourable counſellor, 
which allo waited tor the kingdom of God, came ard 
went in boldiy unto Pilate and craved the body of Te 

ſus. 

44 And Pilate marvelled if he were alre:dy dead, 

and calling nnto himz the centurion, he asked him yy te- 

ther he had been any while dead. 

45 And when he knew 77 of the centurion, he gave 
thebody to Joſph. . 

46 And he bought ae linnen, and took him down, 

and wrapped hi in the linven, and laid him in a i&- 
pulchre which was hewen out ofa rock, and rollicd a 

ſtone unto the door of the ſepulchre. 


ind 
and 

ifs 
el 


. <t, 


Py 7 #830 
<< , 0 v CT 


47 And Mary Magdalene, and Mary the mother of 
Joſes beheld where he was laid. 


The Circumſtances of one Saviours honourable Eurial, as re- 


lated by this and the other Evangelifts, are gathered together,and 
opencd in our Notes on Matth. 29. irom ver. 57. to 66. 


C H AP. XVI. 


moag themſelves, with the ſcribes, He ſaved others, 
himielf he cannot ſave. 

32 Let Chriſt the king of Iſrael deſcend now from 
thecroſs, that we may ſee and believe. And they that 
 Verecrucified with him, reviled him. 

"uf : 33 And * when the fixth hour-was come, there was 
| Carkneſs over the whole land,uantil the ninth hour. | 

ki. 34 And at the ninth hour Jeſus cried with a loud 
* voice;laying, * Elo Elotlama-ſabachthany ; which is, 
bing inrerpreted, My God, my God, why haſt thou 


ioriaken me. 
35 And ſome of them thar ſtood by, when they, 
v beard zt, fatd, Bchola, he calleth Elias. 
36 And * one ran,and filled a ſpunge full of vinegar, 
2 $2: 204 putz! Onareed, and * gave him to drink, ſaying, 


is | [et alone, ler us fee whether Elias will come to take 
9 tim voyn, 


11 "oF... 357 * 4nd Jeſus cried with a loud voice, and gave 


1 . 
TEL 


fl 1: tne ghoſt. 

_ Tomake this Biftory compleat, a4 the other Evangeliſts muſt 
nuited. and compared with Hil, who omitteth many con- 
Macrihtc patloges recorded by theme have done it in our Notes 
Li On Hath, 27. 32, 22, #90 ©1411 irefer the Reader, both for 
Ve underſtanding the Loveral paligs of this Relation, and recon- 
1, Cu any forall differences borwint che Relations of the ſeveral 
hs Fr angelitis. It is the Obiervation of tome, that when in Scrip- 
"yy ure the Father 12 made known by che Son, or Sons, it ſignifieth 
E bn " More Eminency wm the Sons, than 11 the Father. Mary 
1 | Uk WT this Sromon was 4 P47a%; though it be not certain, yet 
yes tt 's 9! 1:prooavleythat this 4/exandey was the ſame who 15s men- 
(100 tioned, 4&; 15, 33. perſecutcy their by the Jews; and Rufus he 
Bon Pin laluteth, Rom, 15, I 3. Calling him choſen in the Lord, 
FR !  14Y they were both at Ryime, where they judge St. Mark was 
; : Oo wiote this Hiſtory 3 and that Mark mentioneth them, 
2 20 c0nd atteit the Truth of this part of the Fiſtory. 

2 : ©7722 bare Chriſt's Croſs, (or one end of it ; ) there is all we | 
"y, NA 01419, The Sons believe on him, who died upon it. So 
= 2 Voie Grace, fixing waecre it pleaſeth. Concerning the 
y OE tne with Myrr22, we ſpake in our Notes on Matth, 27. 
©, WF; of Saviour> friends gave it to him to refreſh him: 
hn "ip OEPIOUVaDIE IT was given him to intoxicate hum, that 
We "ge I Cs Lentih!ic of the pain he thould endure upon the 


Clo 2, 


We are now come to the Hiſtory of our Saviour”s Reſur- 
rection,hrs ſeveral appearances to, and converſe with hrs 
Diſciples, fromthe time of his riling from the Dead an- 
to the time of his Aſcenſion up into Heaven, which was 
forty days. Of all the Evangeliſts, St. John #s moſt ſill ;n 
his Relation of this part of the Hiſtory of our Savior, 
which we ſhall conſider mn order. for bis two laſt Copter s 
are wholly ſpent in this part of the Hiſt ;ry. In the me 
time, 4s we did in our Notes on Matth. 28 tate notice 
only of what Matthew bath upon thut A gument; jo we 
ſhall in the opening of this Chapier of Mart, rave 9: 
tice only of what Mark hath, not concurrent with , ak 
completory of what Matthew bad before ſaid. (For what 
be hath of that Nature we ſhall refer the Reader to 0%ur 
Notes on Matthew.) And here we: will alſo take in 
what Luke hath, that tends to the fuller rclation of any 
thing which Mark hath, not medling with what John 
hath, but reſerving that till we come to open the fuller 
Account of this whole Hiſtory in the twentieth and one 


and twentieth Chapters of 23s Goſpel, 


Women on the Sabbath came to the Grave, t—4- An Ange! decla- 
reth t) them the ReſjurreFion of Chriſt; and ſendeth 'em to ac- 
quaint bis Diſciples and Peter of it, 5—$. Chriſt appeareth fuji 
to Mary Mazdalene : She telleth the Diſciples of it ; they dijbeliere 
her, 9—11. He appeareth to two of 'em going to the Country, 
12, 13, Then to the Eleven, and upbraideth their unbeltef and 
hardneſs of heart : Commiſſioneth 'em to Preach the Goipel, an? 
Conferreth on 'emthe Power of Miracles, 14=1. And aſcendeii 
up into Heaven, 1g, 20. 


I ND when the Sabbath was paſt, Vary Magda 

lene, and Mary the mother of ſames, and 52- 
lome, had bought tweet ſpices, Ltnat they migat Come 
and anoint him, 


About the time when thev came, ſee the Notes 0n Hatth, 29.1, 
which ts alſo further expreticd 11 the next Verikes. 


- ; ' "_ . + | Jp ) 
2 And very early inthe morning, the firlt day of 


bo 


* the week,they came vnrto tt e !epulghte 2C the ring «at. 20. 


of the 13n- 


0. 


2, 
{ 
Lot 
! 
' p15; 4 
Hal | 
: 9 : 
IF +4 
2154688 
4 
1: 
4b 
A 5 
ky |. 
i 
[ 
I. 


Chap. XV] 
Lic [3 &A% | 


--. & 


1 — 
k i —_ 


7 Oy 1 OR 


-— "p71 
5 
"Is 
ts. GEES = 


Tz 


—_— 


S. 
—— 


4 


Chap. XVI 


Matthew faith, As 3t Legan i9 darn toward the firſt day of the 
Week, p91 tarth, they Came earl: while it was yet dark, Luke al- 
ſo {th voy early, But it is manifeft from the Fiſtory, that they 
canic #2 ent tine, of which Ark may ſpeak, paifing cver thicir 
firſt Comnug. 


3 Ard they fid among themſelves, Who ſhall roll 
us aw2y the {tone from the door of the ſepulchre ? 

4 {\nd when they looked, they ſaw that the ſtone 
was rolled away ) tor It was very great. 

Theſe were their Thoughts as they were coming : ( Concerning 
the Guard which tiicy had ſet by Piles permiiſion at the 111- 
portunity of the Jewith Fricfis and Rulers, it is probable ( tic 
day before being the Jewith Sabbath, in the obſervation of win ch 
the Zews were very ſtrict) they had not heard, fo were not fuilt- 
c:tous as to them, but they kucw of the Store rolled to the much 
of the Scpu.chre 3 but they were in vain follicitous, when they 
Camc they found the Stone rolicd away. Chriſt was riten before. 

£]o120.11, JAnd *entring into the ſepuichre,they ſaw a young, 
Tuk. 24 4. Man fitting on the right fide, cloathed in a long White 

garment ; ard they were affrightcd. 

5s Ard he faith unto them, Be not affri 
feek Jeſs of Nazareth, which was crucitic 
riſen, he is 20t here ; behold the place wire they laid | 
(12M. 

7 Eut go your way, tell his Gif. iples, and Peter, 


Lhat he goeth be:ore you into Galilee,there thall ye ſee 
* car. o6, him, * as he ſaid unto You. | 
32. Chap B Z2ndthey went ovt quickly, and iid from the. 
14. 28, Jſepuichre: for they trembled, and were amazed, net- } 

ther {aid they any thing to any man: for they were, 

afraid. 


Both Lxle and j:52 mention two Anzcls in the 11aDit of young 
Men; Aa::52w ſpeaks of one ſrtting umn the Stcne, Thev might 
ee him ſitting ypon the Stone, and yet find him within aiſo ; the 
motors of angels are quick and und:tcernable to our {rle, or 
the Stone might be rolied inward. That they were affiighted is 
uo wonder, coniidering how apt weare to be ultighted by any 
Sppariitons, Concerning what the Angel ſaid to theie Wo nen, 
read th-- Notcs on Matth. 22, 7,8. They preſently ilv from the 
Serulcire amazed, ſaying rothing to any till they came into the 


City, whcere they tell it to the Diſciples, 


o Now when Jeſs was riſen early the firit 4:y of 
*'oh 20.14. the week, *he appcared firſt ro Mary Megdalcnc,*ont ; 
* Luk. 2. 2. of whom he had caſt ieven devils. | 
10 4:d ſhe went and told them that had been with ' 
him, as they mourned and wepr. 
11 And thcy, when they had heard that he was a 
lize, and had been ſeen of her, believe nor. | 
Concerning this Appearance of Chriſt t, Mary 3742.7alens, fcc | 
the Notes on Matth. 28. 9g. and more fu'ly on Job. 24. 2, 5 4., 
who gives a more full Account than any other of this Appear- | 
ace. 
12 After that, he appeared in another form unto | 
twoot themzas they waiked, and went into the coun: ; 
Ery. 


' with neW tongues, NEL 


S. MARK Chap. xyſeu 


13 And they went and told zt unto the reſidue : nei. 
ther believed they them, 

Of this Appearance, St Luke gives us a very large 
Luk, 24. from Ter. 13. to ver. Zo. Sce the Notes on ti1y 


a+ 41 
Cid hd iter 
"FUL 
2 


A vr 
a2 nt 
J 


14* Afterward he appeared unto the eleven 25 th. 
lat || at meat, and upbraided them with their untljcc | 


and hardnets of heart, becauſe they believed not tl 


: R lem *** 
which had ſcen himatter he was riſen. 
This moſt probably is the Appearance mentioned, Dub 4. .5 


1h. 20. 15, ee the Notes there. 
15 And he ſaid unto them,Go ye into all the zwor].! 
and preach the goſpel to every creature. - 
16 *He thar believethand is baptized, ſhall be "AS; 
ved : bat he * that believeth not, ſhall be damneg. 
17 And thele ſigns ſhall follow them that believe. *1.)..., 
*1n my rae ſhall rhey caſt out devils, they ſhall {pea} Qs 


! fo paſs while he bl-ſjed them, be was parted from them, a! 


18 *They ſhall take up Frpents, and if they gri; 1; <5 
any deadly thing, it ſhall not hurt them; they gz 4; 


: Jay hands on the lick, and they ſhall recover. 


See the Notes on Matth. 22. 19. where what we have {1c 
largely explained, 


19 So then,* after the Lord had ſpoken unto then Þ.. 
he *was received up into heaven,and ** fat on therigh: +," 


| ( 
hand oi God. 
Matthew faith nothing of our Saviours Aſcenſion ; Mauch (ws 


eth of it verv ſhortly. Lyke faith, And he led them gut w 5h 
Bethany, aud he lifted" np his hands, and bleſſed them, Ani i ., 


with great 139. And again gives us this part of this Hiſtory .: 
fully, A#s 8. from ver. 1, to ver. 12. We ſhall in our Noe 


up ta Heaven, And they worſhipped him, and returned to io 17 : 


Luk. 24. ſpeak more tully to this, Wears told, As 7, 2 «1 7; 
Chriſt was f-ity Days upon the Eaiih after his Rejurredli n; ww; 71 
ver. 9. Thata Chy1did recetve brim He 1s ſaid ro jir on tre Rite * 
hand of God. to diitinguiiit hum from Angel, whoſe places 1; St 
but places of Miniſtration, 6 
C07 
20 And they went forth and preached every-where, 07. 
the LORD working with them,and *confirmins the... lat 
word with ſigns following. Amen, ket, 
Here 15 now the tiiftory of a great dcal of following tr: 
ſhortly Epitomized 1n one Verile. The firſt motion of the £':. Li] 
; ven to Jerujalem, Lug. 24. 52 And this was accorcinz! 
the exprets Command of Chriſt, ver. qc. Tyrere ther were cnn, / 
ally in the Temple praiſing and bleſſing Gid, ver. 53. Ads 1. 1 A 
At Jera.ulem they went mto an upper Room +: There the; contig a 
with go accord i Prayer and Supplications, ver. 14. and cho 3;::- 1 
th s fer the twelfth Apr/He, Ads 2. The Hly Gho came upp ll 
them. ſtil! they cortinued Preaching to the Jews.,till, 4s 1, 1: 2 
| they Jews by their Unbelzef and Perſecution ndgins theriet: - li 
worthy of Eternal Life, they turned to the Gentiles, of Gol s conmnies [7 
their Word, that is. his Word, tpoken by them, with S7gns f !!in- 4 
ing, the whole Hiſtory of the. As of the Apoſtles is an avian! oy 
Proc. al 
1 
A 
Whit 
, 2 


br. i. f fre 

15. of tl 
3 

unde 

Gl. Writ 
lus. 


Ke as CITE move m——_ — I thin: 


WhN9.e 
Lube q 
tho th, 
t 1s tg 
P; Wer 
Peraily 
their N 
Gods | 
Evange! 
\Vrite a 
the Few, 
eYen fo 
there We 
file Na: 
Which tj 
Abe do: 
early ; hy 
( int for 


They . 
i M7s 


” -4xFY 
/# 


Sr LUNG 


sf. 
46403 þ 


- Ds 151 
PW Vestnn 
G "] 


| W 
&* «+ 
S |. i, 


' [WE 
4 


St. LE Wm 


The ARGUMENT. 


Oncerning the Penman of this Fiſlory,the certain time when he Wrote it, aud the occaſion of bis -{c2110 o/ 57 wo 
have little ia Holy Writ ;, and there u ſuch an uncertainty in Traditions, as ut i hardly worth th,- «phy vn 

} a : £ 

Tranſcribe what Men bave but giteſſed at. "Fov thoſe who would have him to be Barnabas, or exe of the ye. eh 


wo TY 
& —'S 


they ſeem nt to have conſidered what Lute h1imjelf ſaith, Chap. 1. 2- that he Wrote, as they delivered then to ti 


which fiom the beginning were Eye-Witneſſes, and Miniſters of the Word. Zy which is fairly bined 1: 6; hi 
b- was 79 Ene-Wirneis, nor (from the firſt at leaſt) a Miniſter of the Word That there was one Like Cotems 
Doi 2HTEOUS with Paul, and his Fellow- Labourer, appeareth from 2 Tim. & T1. Philemon V. 24 Col. 4. 4. #2 both 
which latter Texts hes juynca with Demis, ana inCol. 4.14. be ts Called a Beloved Phylician. The three Te s 
ſcem al ro ſpea of one ard the jams Perſon who (p' 0. 29'y ) at firſt prattiſe Phylick, afrerwaras betas mate a D;ſcipie, 
exerciſed the Miniſtry 1, 1t is generally thought that this was he, who was the Perman, both of this Hiſtory, ond of 
+ Acts of the Apoitles Whether by Nation ie was 4 Syrian, 9r 4 Roman, vr of what cather Nation, is bat ax 
rnprofie ible Specu! ation. T oat Ie Was an Evaigelit we 0779p, tA 1, one i|pired by Goa to Tranſmit to the iVorla, 
the Eiftory of ene Birth, Lite, Deuwrn, Relurre-iion, and AIcenton of our Savinur, as ſo of the Atts of the Apa- 
f-les, wntil Panl was 4 Pritoner at Kkeme. For bis Hiſtory of the Goſpel, /o far as it relates to Chriſt Eimfelf, Flo 
cont aineth m-liny remarkable things, not mentione:# by tre other Evanzehſis. The Generation of John B:priſt. he 
Filer o Zacharias. The Angels comir's ro the Blefled Virgin, Eliz: beths Exclamation, and Salutation 9 ber. The 
A 


[ublicution of Chriſt's Birti tothe Shepnerds, with ''1c things ſp ken by them The Teſtimony which Simeon 271 Anna 


gave TO Chriſt. The occaſion of Joirph and N".. ,'s gong to Bethlehem; the Cri ami ances of et Svinurs Birth 
there; His diſpit1,ro w.ti2 the Dottors at * <-c [ears of Aze, are things reported by 20 017167 EvarSeliſt, and of oreat 
wie to Complear the Hiſtory of T ©11 1/7e Baptiſt and of Chriſ? , Befides that he hath many Pavohics (xs thoſe of the 
loſt Sheep, the lo T.0..c, andof the Prodigal, QC. that are to be found in n other Ev img! 
viral other Parabics and pieces of Hiitory ; to ſay nothing of drvers Circumſtances, in thoſe Parab 
Hittory (which other Eva: geliſts have recorded ) omitted by them. He dedicateth h:s Bnik to ſome Friend, eithey Mp 


med 1 heophiius, or to whom the Signifiration of that Name (which #s a lover of God } 7 iis Fudomris 
well azree. Thettme when heMroteit, 1s uncertain ; ſome wonuid have at ro be Wiittcy the Fifteenth, ſme the Two 


- ” 


ind twentieth, ſorue the Twenty ſeventh Tear aſter our Saviour's death. The matter Written by him is wich mnve 0; 
concern to 5 to know than theſe Circumtances We have in our Annotations ſpoken to thoſe things which eo ments- 


? W 


exerl (before recorded by Matthew or Mark ) more ſhortly, To other things which we ta him if mo wich, mare 
largely. 


ERAS L not ſo able duly to digeſt them (for moſt think att fhew, 2ob ant 
John wrote after.) Or potF]', becauſe there being then no pront- 

Lukes Preface, 1==4. The Parentaze and Life of Zachavi is and Eliza- | 1ng,nut all in Manuſcripts, becauſe he thought his Friend Te prilies 
beth, 5—7. An Angel appeareth to Zacourtgs in the Temple, and | to whom he knew ſuch an Hiſtory woutd be graretu!) :1_ thi not 
promo him a Son, &—14. Diredims emcorniags his Education, | nave come to the fight of thoſe Manuſfc: ipts) he undertakes {not 
wth a Deſortp 1m of his Office, 1g-- 15 Zuicnuttys n) 3:Uieving, | without the direttion of the Holy Spirit ..> 4ppeared afterward) to 

Ss Ira Dumb fr a Seaſon, * 8 —20. Elizabeth Cancery th. 2 26. | Compile an Hiſtory of theſe rh1ags, to winch he was crther 1ncou- 
Tow Angel Gaviret uititeth the Virgin Maiy, and teffe ts 221 hat hr | raged by the example of others,or ex ited by tre Miftakes of choſe 
(hail Conceive, and bring joito a Sen. which is the F'n "of G d. | who had done it 1li, having the advantage perfetly to under/t.mmd af 
25—36 .ind acel.creth to her, hyy that ner Siffer Elfecf2t,y (| things from the firſt , moſt think that this advantage aroſe not from 
it. vie bring forth a Son, 36 —37. Mer goth to Eliznbery, who | his Pertonal Knowledge, bnt his Converſe: with the Apoſtles and 
m/aily recetved and bleſſed ber, 32—453. Mary praijeth God | other Mimiters of Chriſt ; for he ſaith no more, v. 2. the! | CVep 

C 


. 


w t 
4 [3 ſ 4 7 Ti barbs wWYy Q 7 . « AL gag ) 4 . 2 BS T » ? 500 Ep $0 4.5 
G0— 5 *o E!17 lWwetnh bring?, al tn 2 3! N, £65—<&, WWFN) Deny Cir (As Fey delivered thom unto) HS, WHICH from the berzrnnin? Were F'ye . 


o . yr! 4 ” bl , y » b , - ba A , " ”* . St , > . - , ' 
Cum: 7.4, Is Calied {LEA g35—93., Gutlodry recaoueretn his Sprech Wines, and Miniſters of tre ord. | By which 1t feemerh to bo 
/ , = #* 


, . et 1 *.""Y . : FEY I ' 1 pl jp * 7 ; - 
and ?Prophetteth of Chitl, and of Fohn, <4—79. wh; growing (trons j ated to us, thit he wis no Eye-witne's, nr Minzter of the M 
77 Spire Awelleth in the Wilderreſs, 85, To underfſtard by the Wird 1n that v. Chritt (whom [bn indee 
_ O Ha i > > £> , > a =4 lars , | 5 "noo ** 
| j 'OR as mach as many have taken in hand to ſer zragnts Jon's I eo | >> Rprp gia 
DOT 2 ge A - the Evaugeiiſts, doth ordinarily f1gnifte the Goſpe!, and no where 
fortli in order a declaration of thoſe 2 | 4p... * | = 
Me M gd bel; - LDgs Chriſt, but1n Jobhn1. 1, 2. &c. | That thou mizhtes? know the ccv- 
r *5 x 0 , - = t | = . . . . - - Fa 1 
Which are moſt iUTCLY 211C\ cd aimoug us. tainty of thoſe things wherein thi haſt been inftrufed } That this, 
2 * Even as they dclivered them unto us, which by the Relation of others. Betore I pats this Preface, I !ha'l min 


A - 
nz T 
I _ 


” v 


J 
UID 


. * irow the heginning were eye-witneiles,and miniſters | ſome Obſervations upon it. 1. That eveu from the boginu 1s there 


the word. Dos — 
"+ 1 ,* whetner Care inten c CEL 'm, 1 IT WE TMAY CE. ve: 

3 It cemed 8020 £0 me alſo, ha\ ng had perfect any thing of Eccle/1aftical Hiſtory there were fome i110 7:/>0/v,and 
underſtanding of all things from the very firſt, to | before the time of the Goſpel there were Aprovyphy tf itin(s reloring 


61.1. writeunto thee in order, moſt * excelle:;t Theophi- | to the Hiſtory of the Id Teſtament, No Writs but 092 Joripe 


F» ” A ANTS Tt *;1N 43+» v7 
» A; « VV 1.38 & EI) } Les 
/ 


— 


lus. tures deſerve our Faith.(other witc than the 
, as 4 <3 4 _—_ abs c rf ib.» 15 fav 

+ That thou mighteſt know the certainty of thoſe | Che, Eng ne Pl 1 2 
thinzs wherein thou halt been inſtructed. Witneſſes. 3. Men ought ts have perie# urderitanding matters 
— Ene's Evangelical Hiſtory fath this peculiar to it ſelf. That Fact, before they Write them, Whoio Writs 1 USP vpon lwCcr- 
nereas the Hittories of the other Evangelizts are written to the | tainty, impoſeth upon all tuture Ages. 4. 4 [Kinwledge of Coitarr 
wno.e World, having no particular Toſcription, or Dedication, | tjes, 5s, what all 2034 Men oughr to aim at in i/itin;, and Rea tin? 
em os 11s to. bo particular Perion, named Theophilis, for | [t is a mean Soul that can fecd upon an 1NCertuinty and key are 45 
10 met Name figniticth, one 7h. lveth God, yet T cannot think | mean that ſpend their time in cat. ring tuch Food for reaſonable 
'© 15 ko9e taken here Appellatively, it being commouly uſed as a | Sguls. Mens underſtandinzs are given them for Novler uics that 
—_— Name, Patents in former Ages giving Children Names ge- ; to gain the Notion of a Falſe-hood,and they are low-born Souls that 
OL OR exprefhive of their Cin:drens Duty to God (that by | can ſpend their precious Hours in ſuch Cookery, It the Sauce with 
er Names they might be put 1n mind of it ) or Expreittve, or! which they ſerve it up be never to Artificial, 
vods Mercy to themſelves in giving them ſuch Chilaren. The 


"rite an account, of the things which were cortainly believed amonz ff : %, 
ve Jews.) Some think that Luke nere 1nileteth its ſome, = ; of Abia, and his wite was of the daughters of Aaron, 
©&02 10 carly had given falſe accounts of our Saviours Hiſtory ; for ; and her name ws Elizabeth. 
_ were ſeveral pretended Goſpels wrote, called, The Goſpel of j- The Holy Gholt tor i nhmtely wiſe Reaſons, givet't v7 nere N-2c- 
Wag ab, of Thom ss, Mathis, Nicodemus, and many others { count both of the time when ſobn the Baptit was 0, 0G a0 
"1 the Church ſoon ſaw cauſe to reject. But others think that | ofhis Parentage. { It was in the tim? of Herd 17 {Ke1rg of JH -,] 
ihe doth not at all refle&t,and poſHiblv thoſe Figments were not fo ? th2t is, he who was the Son of Antipater (not 201 7 7 2 Fett anc. & 
early ; but Lube ovierving that many did Write this famous Hiſtory, j Galilee, of whom you read, Luke 3. 1. who put John Bapicit 0 
Ln fc me potitoly for want of due information, not fo exaRly as 1 Death,that was thi-ty one,or thirty two + cars after 7.415) he 15 U-u* 
ig migit, Vet as they were delivered to them, fram {uch as from ! ally called Herod the Great, who tought his way to tic Govere- 
> oginng were Eye-witneſes, and Miniſters of the Word, but poſ- | ment of the Jews (under the Aom ins ) and 


"> Mit uot b2 able fo exatly to infirm) or the Writers ! the Slaughter of the Jewiſh Sanc2d1im by vihieh me 


caine to tis Thr:ne by 
30s he a fo e$- 
Un;uiinca 


X in * the davs of Herod the ting of «14 
Evangeliſt here ſuggeſteth.ſ That many h ; 5 There was in - TS 

HEL ol . F any had t. "ON 7 H. nd orde i 't . . . ThE il» > Che 

- l : ken in Hang,orderly to\ 14 a,A certain prieſt named Zacharias, * of the courſe, » ©b:. 


_ 


be 
to 
& 


__ 


RD — Sy 


ip. I. 


s © U 
WW 
tinguiihed 31 fiic Government, which tall his time Feld in the Trive| 
of Jazah, tho rot in a iinglc Perſon, (for that was deſtroyed in 
J>b1, foun witer the time of Frdas Haccaberss j yet 1na Selett Num- 
Mo on of that Royal Tribe. So that 1n this Herod's time the Pro- 
phecy of dying Jacob, Gen. 45 10, Was fulnlled. The Scepter,thar 
i. the Government departed from Juda, and the Lawgiver from his 
Foet wiich was a certain Sign (in order to the fulfilling of that Pr'- 
phetie ) that Sil%, that is, the Meſjtss was Coming. This tor the 
tune. | 4 cot. Prieſt, named Zacharias ] ſorae will have him to 
have bcen the &#i;h Priesf, or Ins Deputy 3 but that cannot be, for 
the Hich Prieit was but one,and fo not within the Courſes of the 
Pricſts, but of the Eldeft Family from: Aaron 3 and tho 1t be ſaid 
v. 0. that his Lit was to Burn Incenſe, vet it muſt not be underſtood 
of the Incerſe mentioned, Lev. 15. 12. to be Burned upon the 
early Day of Expiation, (which indced none but the High Pricft 
micht do. ur of the daily Incenſe mentioned in the Law, Exod. 
20.67, 2. which any of the Pricſts did in their Courſcs. Tins 
Zucharias { wes of the Courle of Abj.. } The Eldeſt Son of Aaron 
was alwavs the Hizh Prieſt ; his other $0ns Were Priefts : in a long 
Courſe of time, their Deſcendents ſo Multiplyed, that they were 
too many 2!l at the ſame time to Miniſter in the Temple David 
therefore divided them intoCourſes;eachCourſle waited theirMonth, 
x Chron. 24. e, 6, there is an account of the Diſtribution of the 
Prieſts into tivency rour Courſes.In D.rwfds time the Eighth Courſe, 
was the Courſe of Abia, It appeareth by Nehemiah 12.4, 17. That 
after thc Captivity they kept the Denominations of theſeCourſes, but 
it is probable the order of them was altered, We Read of Abiah, 
in Never. 15, bot whether his was then, or at this time when Lake 
Wrote his Goſpe!, the Eighth Courſe, 1 cannot tell. It is cnough for 
vs, that Zachari.» was one of the Ordinary Prictts of the Courſe of 
Alia; whoſe Oftice it was to ſerve in the Temple 1n his Courſe 
(whnci was the Courſe of ſuch as deriva from tne Abia, mentio- 
ned 113; Chron. 24+ $4 6.)| And [21s Mije W 1. of ti1e Daughters of A4- 
ron, anther Name was Elizabeth ] Tis is added not to fignifte 
P24c:rrzy his obcdience to the F1vin: Law, which obliged the 
Friefts to inarry within their own Tribcs.tor the reaſon of thatLaw, 
heing omy to prevent the Confuſion ot the Inheritances, which 
foil by Lot t6 che feveral Trites, and by tie Will of Gcd were to 
b- fo kept diii.ndt 1 the Tribe of ze having no ſuch Inheritance, 
might 1ntermis. with any other Tri22, and did fo, the Hizh-Prieſt 
was uoly obliged to Marry ſforne of ts own people, Levit. 21.14 
nd Tetnadu, 2 Kings 11. 2. Marricd one of the Tribe of Juda, 
but it is addcd to frew the Honcurableneſs of Elizabeths Stock. 
Moſes and Aion, were the two firt Governours of the Jraelites; 
Fliaveth was not ©:,1% of the Tribe of Levi, but deſcended from 
Aarmn, whom God mace thc : ;obleti-Famuy of the Levites. Her 
Name was E/iz.theth, It 15 an Hebrew Name, Exod. 6. 23. and 
(25 you may ſce there) was the very Name of Aarons Wife the 
Daughter of Aminadh, and Sifter of Naſhon. As it may be vari- 
yy Written 1t tgniaeth, The Rej?, or tne Oath, or the Rod of my 
UT". 


6 And they were both righiteous before God,walk- 
ing in all the commandments and ordinances ot the 
LOR D, blameicls. 


That they were no! Righteous by 2 perfett Legal Righteouſneſs, 
teing not guilty of any Sin 1s certain, for {5 there is none Rzghte- 
045, n2 not one; but ſo Righteous, as that Gud accepted them and 
looked upon thcm as Righteous, as Abraham believed, and it was 
zmputed to him for Righteouſneſs, tho he Sinned in the denial of 
his Wife, 7c. oras it is ſaid of David, 1 Kings 16. 5. He did 
that which was right in the Eyes of the Lord, and turned not aſide 
from any thing which he commanded him ail the Days of his Life, 
fave only in the matter of V:71ah, [They alſo walbed in all the Com- 
mand:nents and Ordinances of the Lord, Blumeleſs, | A Man's Blame- 
lets Converſition before the World, is a piece of his Righteouſneſs, 
but will not make up alone ſuch a Righteouſneſs, as will teſtifie his 
Acceptation v ith God, or Rrghteorineſs before him 3 he muſt in 
the ftirit piace, Wah in the Commandments, and in the Ordinances of 
fot, there 15 2 Duty towards God, as well as toward Men : and 
that Duty lics © the keeping his Commandments, his Ordinances ; 
for rhe fear of 3/2 Z3rd, muſt not be taught us by the Precepts of 
F722, Yea, andin aillthe Ordinance» of God,having a reſpet to 
a1] Gods Commancaments, and making this his conitant Courſe and 
Prattice, not doing it by fits ; he muſt alſo be blameleſs towards 
Net. Hero 1 2 fiue Pattern of what a Married Couple ſhould be. 
eipcotally v.ncre the Huzband waits at the Altar, and is imployed 
Mn the Hivoly things of God. A B77» muſt be blameleſs, « Tim. 
Z. 2.0.3. A Deacon Gravwe, ot doubie Tongued, not given to 
much Wine, a9? greedy of ifithy Lucre—v. 10. Blameleſs; and 
LF Even 13 muft i277 Hives be Grave, nt Slanderers, Sober, &c. 
fch were Zuichaitrs ink E/zrabeih, Such ought all Miniſters of 


p 
roo for Trp) andg”þ thi Vang © | 
Ti ot. Ip «1394 Lanes :k Þ y TS TIE 


7 And they had no child, becauſe chat Elizabeth 
was barren, and they both were zow well ſtricken in 
years. 

Amnait ail Emrtily Eicthogs, there is nothing we more defire 
ten Cnidren, in whom we have a kind of Perpetuity, living in 
17 Sprotes alkd 1 Gur Pullcrity, when we are dead in Nature ; ut 


gr Speci 
God Tor Our Tivil, doth often deny us other good things whici; 
c the greet ©: atopr defircs, fo he doth often deny his own 


2.53}:£ 

People £116 £ cat 1 : 
trot fiolke 19 whom oe at length giveth 1t. Barrenneſs in Ihe! 
i: 4 Reprozch. Sert. 2c.nd 1 San. 1.6,There was a promiſe 
t Aragon ofa plrriiful Sed 5lence amongit the Jews, the that 
was Barren bard's thought not telf.or was judged by others a Ge- 
Palin Daughter of Aprabann. HEoth Zachariah and Elizabeth were 
nu wel firicken in Year: God chuſeth this Woman naturaliy 
Earrcn, abd now Aged aifo, tc be the Morher of John the Bap- 
t7:7, therein woruing a double Miracle 5 and it 1s obfervable in 
Holy Wiitthat when3od dcilnld to 44v WomanChildren for ſome 
Jorg tic, and thea opened tot Wombs, they were the Mothers 


kg. Somctimes he witholdeth it a long time 


8 
Ki 
was with Sarah, Auchei, the Wite of Manzah, Hannah, 1 Sons wa 
this Elizabeth. | = 
8 And it came to paſs, that while he executed the 
prieſts office before God in the order of ;;; 
courle, | ; 
9 According to the cuſtom of the prieſts Oflice, ki. 
lot was * to burn incenſe when he went into the tern. *:; 
The Frieſts were Multiplied to an exceeding Number Wa 6.4 
an account of more than 4006 upon the return out of the Caneic., 
ty of Babylon, Fzra 2. 35, 37, 38, 35. They were doubricys it... 
wards multiplyed to a far greater Number, Joſephirs tojls ye 
were a Thouſand 11 a Courſe; whether they huid to tony... 
Courſcs as in Davids time or no, I cannot tell, There or, *—y 
ral parts of the Przeſty Office, which it ſeemeth by this 5c. 
Pricſts of the Courſe that Miniftred,divided amongft them 1y.. 1, 
4 Lot,one part of tlicir Work was to Burn Incenſe Morning and Ox 
163. It ſeems this was that part of the Prieſtly Oitice, which Zacha- 
7145 was by Lot to Exerciſe. - 
10 And the whole multitude cf the people were 


praying Without, at the time of incenſe * 
we are told, that the order of the Jewith daily Service was this, 


y LY 
after. 
+} 


is OP 1 
»aial ih 


ſuch of them whoſe Lot it was)went into the Holy Place t9 Burn 
Incenſe according to the Law, Exod. 3o. 7. When they went in 
A Bell Rung to give notice that it was the hour of Prayer ; here 
were conſtantly there, 1. The reſt of the Priefts of the ſome Ci; 
2, The Levites, 3, Their Stutimary men, who repreſented the while 
Congregation, and lard their hands upon the Beaft ſlain, 4. So ma. 
ny more of tie People that wouid Yoluntarily come, and jr 4; 
very ordinary for many to go (thus we read AFs 31 of Peter ans 
John going imo the Temple at the Hour of Prayer) theſe made ty 
Multitude of whon it 1s faid, that while the Prieft was B:rnjn: 7;. 
cenſe, they were without; not without the Temple, but jn (he 
Court of Ijrae!, without the Holy Place 1n which the Fict 43; 
Burnmng Incenſe. { Prazzng, Io they uſcd to do pr ivatciy by them- 
elves. There is a Text in Ecclo/ralticirs, Ch. $4.15, which thy it 
benat Canonica! Scripture, yet as Creible as atiy other Civil Hiſts. 
ry,and will much heip to make the Readers underitand Uic order of 
the Jewilh Service, and what tis Texc ſaith. 

11 And there appeared unto him an angel of the 


cenlſe. | 

Tho' we Tranſlate it appecred, yet in the Greek it is, there wx 
ſeen of him. An Anzel indeed was there, whether the Angel Us: 
briel or no, or in what form be appeared, it is wot ſaid. It : 
by ſome obſerved, That until the Viim and Thummin ceaſed, 
No Angel aypeared to any Prieſt Executing his Oitce after thi; 
it 15 obſerved by others, that moft appearances of Angels to tl 
FR were, when they were umploycd 1n their Service 1n tlic Terr 
PiCs 

12 And when Zacharias ſaw him, he was troubled, 
and fear fel] upon him. 

Te are naturally aftrighted at ſadden, and unuſual things; 
but eſpecially at any Divine appearances, whether God hinſclf 
takes a ſhape, or Authorizethan Angel to do it. So was Davie, 
Ch. 10. 5, 8, and Aanah and his Wite, Jud. 13. 20. and Pail, 
A#s g.for tho God doth not make theſe appearances to aitright us, 
yet ſuch is the Imbecility of our Natures,that we cannot but be ſhy 
at them, and ſtart from them; and it is but reaſonable, that God 
ſhould by this means, bath declare his own Glory,and Majeſty, and 
alſo humble his Poor Creatures, and make them more Impreſſive, 
and Receptive of his Divine Revelations. It is reaſonable God 
ſhould keep and declare his Majefty, tho we keep and declare out 
infirmity, 

13 But the angel faid unto him, Fear not, 7 
charias, for thy prayer is heard, and thy wife Eliza- 


John. 

Although the Great God uſeth ſo to ſhew himſelf to the be't of 
his own People,as to imprint upon them a ſacred aw of 1115 92j.its, 
yet he never ſutfereth the Souls of his People to fink under tho!: 
apprehenſions. The firſt Words, the Angel ſaith to Zuch1r:45 are, 
[ Fear not Zacharias } IT ar no bad Meſſenger to thee, but « goci 
Metſenger from God, to tell thee, [ Thy Prayer is beard | Thi: :: 
good news to any Soul. But of what Prayer the Angel here {p25 
cth, is a little further queſtion.for it follows, [ And thy 1:72 E174 
beth ſhall bear thee a Son. ] It is believed that the Pricti v ala hs 
Burned Incenſe,did offer up Prayers, but that he had now ores 
Prayers to God for Ifſue,is not ſo probable. conftidering that >9ti) hy 
and Elizabeth were well ſtricken 1n years, and probably pait Ch1!- 
dren. Some therefore think that thoſe Words, And thy it 7 tr 
zaheth, 7c. are given him only as a Sign, that his Prayers were 
card. And added to fignifie, that, asa further Mercy to him 0042 
what he asked, Elzzabeth ſhould conceive. Nor do I fec any £0209 
why we thould reſtrain the Prayer mentiones,to the Prayer he 12% 
-1y. made,and not expound 1t of thoſe manyPrayers which £4774 
1145 had before made, which tho God had delay'd to Anſrver, Y** 
the Angel atſures him, ſhould now be anſwered with Relition 55 
lilac, | And thou ſhalt call his Name John ] which is the ſem? With 
Foh:nan in the Hebrew, and fignifies Graciows. The Anzel dircttes 
7:jeph to call Chriſts Name eſis, Becauſe he wss to ſave 115 #90 
from their Sins ; and he ductteth Zacharias to call his Sons N wh 
Fohn, becauſc he was to open the Kingdom of Grace, and t& £15? 
the Grace of the Gy/pel, throvgh Jeſus Chriſt. 


Ic of it} 
None ought to have fo mean thoughts of theſe Wores 0 * 


$4 , 


of 10:nc Emifcit Pertots vom God made great uſe of Thus it 


Angel, as to think that they are only cxpreffive of that ce 


WoL. + 


ple of the L O R D. Lev.ts,,, 


Twice 1n the Day the Prieſts {whoſe Courſe it was to Miniſter,or wy 


Lord, ſtanding or the right tide of the * altar of in-'i.3 


beth ſhall bear thee a ſon,and *thou ſhalt call his name * 'e, 


14 || And thou ſhalt have joy and gladrefs, 259... 
*:many ſhall rejoyce at his birth. thr? 


Chap, iP. 


w 


6; or ch 
juſ 
( 
her 
plac 
Was 
$pr 
ase 
unc 
thi: 
Ob 
adc 
me 
I0, 
Ph 


I ſ, 5 ſhall be filled with-the Holy Ghoſt, X* evan F Fg bie 
þ 1. 15 mothers womb. 


=p Go, 


which commonly diſcovercth it ſelf in us whenGod giveth us Sons, 
eſpecially after 2 long Barrenneſs, but of a farther Joy and Gladneſs 


= 


Parents ſhould have upon 4 ſpiritual account afterwards expreſt, 


h1 . OD | l rett 
Many ſhall renyce at his Birth, | Fohn &. 36. they rejoyced in his 


S LUMY 


{;zht, the glad Tidings of the Meſtth being come into the World. 
Was b 


Which he brought. The Papiſts think they have a ground here for 
their Holiday they keep to his Honour,and their apilh carnal rejoy- 
cing, which certainly was not fo valuabie a Thing,as for an Angel 
© foretcl. The Angel Speaks of tne great Acceptation with the 
People (Mary of them) which Fohn's Doctrine ſhould have; ſo that 
45 our Saviour fait, From lu Tays the Kingdom of Heaven ſuffered 
Lilence, and the Vinlent did take tt by force. But he farther opencth 
Meaning 1n the following Verſes, 


15 For he ſnall be great in the ſight of the Lord, 
and ſhall drink neither wine nor ſtrong drink, and he 


hits 


16 * And many Of the children of Iſrael ſhall he 


turn to the Lord their God. 

We have 4 natural Ambition to be great, but it is only to be 
great in the fight of Men ;thence one Man coveteth Riches, another 
Honours, and Reputation 3 but the true Greatneſs is,to be great zn 
the ſight of the Lord, who doti certainly judge with the trueſt and 
moſt infallible Judgment. In Ged's fight, he 15 a great Man of whom 
God maketh a great ule ; eſpecially in turning many Sou!s to him- 
{1f, Conſider 7-bn ſeparately from his Work,and the Concurrence 
of God with his Work z he was a very litile Man,and fo looked up- 
an by the Pharijzes and Rulers, who wou'd not belteve in him. His 
Father was an ordinary Vrieſt, For Titles and Dignities, he had 
none 3 Jobn the BaptiSt was his higheſt Title. For his Cloathing, he 
ws not cloathed in ſoft razment (as Princes Chaplains ) he was 
eloathcd with a Shin, with Camels Hair, and had a Leathern Girdte 
abaut bis Loins 5 yet Chriſt ſaith of him, Among theſe that were b1rn 
Women, there had not riſen a greater than Fohn the Baptiſt, Uc 
114 no Paiace,no ſtately Habitation ; he lived moſtly jn deſert pla- 
co: little inhabited. Nature was his Cook that provided him Lo- 
zuſts and wild Boney. Where was his Greatnels but in this 2 He 
was 4 £rcat and faithful Preacher of the Zoſpel; and God bleflea 
iis Labours to convert Souls. They are little Mea, that do little of 
the Work for which Sod hath ſent them into the World, and 4: 
little Good 1n the1r Generation, f #e ſhall drink neither Wine noy 
\trmng Drink. | By $irong Drink 15 meant any Drinþ which ordinari- 
iy intoxicateth, This was the Law of the Nazarites Numb. 5, 3. It 
was forbidden the Prieits during the time of the!r Miniſtration, up- 
on pain of Death, Levit. 10. g. No Lovers of Wine and jtong Drinh 
can he Great Men in the fight of God, The Miniſter of the Goſge! 
muſt not be one g7ven fo Wine, 1 Tim- 3.3. Tit. 1. 7.| Ang he ſhalt 
be filed with the Holy Ghoſt, even from hs Mothers womb. ] This is 
tru-,both as to Prophecy (which is an extraordinary Gift of the Ho- 
ly Ghoſt _) and alfo of the tJoly Ghoſt, conſidered as a jantifying 
Spirit renewing the Heart | For many of the Children of Ifrael ſail 
he turn to the Lord ther God. Then it ſeems there is another Con- 
vernon 2efidles the Convertion of Men from Paganiſm. Fohn (with 


J 


the atfiftince of the Holy Ghoſt ) was an Inſtrument to turn many 


of the jrazlites, ( who :iready verbally owned the true God, but | ceed ; and we mult allo 


were drencht'd in Errors and Superſtitions,and looſnefs of Life,) to | 
tz Lord their S0d,by Repentance ; and this he did,by Preaching 
voth Law and Goſpe) to them. This made him a great Man ; for 
Dar. 12. 3+ They that turn many to Righteauſneſs, ſhall ſhine as the 
Stars ſor ever and ever, | 
17 And he ſhall go before him in the ſpirit and 
power of Elias,to turn the hearts of the fathers to the 


p þ; or children, and the diſobedient|; to the wiſdom of the 
juſt, to make ready a people prepared for the Lord. 


God was laſt ſpoken or he muſt therefore be the him mentioned 
here,before whom Fohn the Baptiſt was to go,according to the Pro- 


perience of God's Power 1n ſuch Caics, 
Abraham deiired a Sign as to this,that God would give h1m a Chia, 


fo have preached the DoGrine of Repentanco for ihe Remiffen of 
Smns,and to have preached,faying, Repent . for the Eingdmm no Hedven 
at band. Allo deiaming the Phariſees, who wer? the grcit Enc- 
m1es of Chriſt, by detetting to the Peovle their Hy Thus 
he made read; a People prepared for the Lid. : 
18 And Zacharias ſaid unto the 
| bo4 ' »* ,» 
ſha!l I Know this *fortaman old man, and my wite *” 
well ſtricken in years. 

The Words are much the ſame with thoſe of 4brah; 
Whereby ſhall I know 1 ſhall inherit it, viz. the Land of C, 
Mary,v. 34. of this Chapter, when the fime Ange 144 cold her he 
ſhould have a Chiid, v.31. faith, How thall this be, j-eing 1 bnow 
not a man ? Gidemn alſo asked 4 Sign, Jid.5. 5. To our appearance 
and Judgment there ſeemeth no great vifterence 2ctwine cheſe,and 
Zachariah 1n this place asking a Srgnz only Zachariah here oppoſeth 
his own Senſe and Reaſon to the Words of the Angel + vet we thall 
hear a ditferent iffue of this Queſtion, or Anſwer to it, 

I9 And theangel anſwering, ſaid unto him, I ain 
Gabriel, _ that ſtand in the preſence of Ged: and am 
ſent to ſpeak unto thee, and to ſhew thee theſe glad 
tidings. 

20 And behold, thou ſhalt be dumb, and not able 
to ſpeak, until the day that theſe things ſnall be per. 
formed, becauſe thoa believeſt not my words, which 
ſhall be fulfilled in their ſeaſon. 

It 1s by ſome obſerved, Chat before the Cpiivity of Brbylin, we 
read of no Name of any Angel, who have oo Naines 2s wr have, 
but aſſume Names to declare the nature of their vaiftration ; and 
that Gabriel figmfieth the Faw ,or the $rrcgth of 72d, becauſe the 
declaring of the Goſpel, whici tio Apoſtic deilurcs, Rom, 1.4 5.The 
: ower of God to Salvation, ſecmth to have been his pecutior Minit - 
{tration We read of this Gabriel, Dan. $. 15 and 0 21.where we 
19d him foretelling the Weſt s,and the working of Mans Redem- 
ption ; to which i rophecics he dountlel> reters Zach iriah nn laying, 
T am Gabriel. We again thall mcet with him, v.:6,27. 67+ months 


(Ore 
wi -. + 


Þ 


m,Gonns.9, 
mann? And 


after this, appearing to the Virgin Hay, aid telling her the ſhould 


bring forth the Meftah. He addeth, | thut Hand inthe preſence of God | 


as the good Angels always behold the Preſence of 5ur heave: ly Father 
{a5 our *aviour tells us} and are ready to x ſent avout his Meſſ:ges, 


(whence is the Name of Angels) They are calicd God s Winiftors, 
P/al. 103. 21. ard 194. 4-| and am fent t2 ſpeab vnt» th2e, und 19 
thew thee glad 111-5. 739 tent me on purpoſe to declare this thing 
to thee. Which Zacyirnch might have known ty the Time and 
Place when he appoared,at thc REO! Prayer, at the Altar fa the 
Holy Piace. where the Evil Anzels uſed not to few thernſelves. 
{ And beholi thou fl be drmb, and nx; able £2 [peak until the day 
i hat theſe things (hall be performed, | Tnvmcs Fave perglex:d them- 
ſelves to pive a juſt ACccour:t of this f1:ns ©: 1 Mmont of f5 good 2 


ol! 


Man. Whetiier they have ſaid encugh to Satisfaction, I cannot tell, 
A5raham,upon the fame Queſtion, was gratificed with a Sign, Gen. 
15.910. ſo was Gideon, Jud. 5, 17. Where there is no difference in 
the Words,or in a Fa#,there miy be a great difference in the Hearty 
and its inward Habit and 32tims from which thoſe Words pro- 
w God to ſce that better than we can diſcern 
itby the Words. Before Arm's time, we read of no ſuch Ex- 
neither do we find that 


but oniy as to the Lord's giving his Poſterity Canaan, Betides that , 


'1t is ſaid, Ver. 6. FH belteved,and it was counted to him [37 Rignteuf- 


neſs 3 aad the Apoſtle cxtcileth his Faith, Rom. g.tg. 8:ing mt weak 
in the Faith. he conſidered not his own Body ww dead, wh2n be wi 
about an hundred zcars o{d,ncr the Deadneſs of Sar3in's womb, He fFag- 
gered mt at tie promiſe thraugh unhelizf, but was ſtr1g in faith, 27- 
ving glory to Grd, being ſully perſwaded, that what he had promiſed 
he was able to perforin, $5 as he as ed not 4 Sign for the begecting 
of a Faith in him,(he believed the i.ord without 2 Sign ; }oniy, fear- 


phecy, Mal. 4. 5, 5. from whence isan evident proof, That Chriſt! ing his own Heart,he asked a Sign tor the farther Encreaſe and 


was the Lord our God, before whom 7Jo'n the Bapti t came, in the 
Spirit and Power of Elias, and therefore he is called Elias, Mal.g.s. 


azexpounded by Chriſt; Matth. 11. 14. Wark g. 11. The Jews not | his Deſire. It was only the Privation of Speech until the 


underſtanding this,keeps them in a vain Expectation of a Meſſiah to 

this Day, and of a perſonal Coming of Eli before him. It 15 the 
Obſervation ot ſome Learned Men, that where the Word Power 15 
added to the Spirit,or Holy Ghoſt, it figaifies a more than ordinary 

meaſure and influence of the Spirit ; as in this Chapter v. 35. Ads 
IO. 38. 1 Cor. 2. 4. 1 Theſſ. 1. 5. But I rather think, that by that 
Phrafe,[ In the Spirit and Power, here is meant, with the ſame Zeal 
and Frawe of Spirit that Elijah had. We have before in our Notes 
upon Matthew, ſhewed in how many things John the Baptiſt was 
lixe Elijah,to ſay nothing of his Habit, and the Severity of his Life, 

in reſpe& of the moſt corrupt time wherein they both lived, their 

Fatthtulneſs in their Miniſtry,their Warrath and Zeal in their Work, 
their Boldneſfs,nct fearing to reprove Princes for their Errors, CTc. 
| 11 turn the hearts of the Fathers to the Children.) Malachy addeth, 
and the hearts of the Children to the Parents ; inſtead of which Luke 
lath, and the Difobedient to the Wiſdom of the Ju$, that is, to bring 
both 75442 and Old to Repentance. The Hearts of the Fathers a- 
mongſt the jews to the Dottrine of Chriſt and his Apoſtles their 
Children; and the Hearts of the Jews, which with reſpe& to Abra- 
bam, aac and Jacab, and David, are Children to the Dottrine 
hich they embraced,and the ways of God wherein thoſe juſt Men 
Walked, which is the Do&rine of Wiſdom. To reconcile many 
among!t the Jews to that which ſome of th:m own and profeſs,tho 
others of chem arc yet Apoftatized, and yet led away with the Su- 
perititions of theſe degenerate and corrupt times. | To make ready 
4 Perple prepared for the Lord. ] To acquaint this part of the World 
wth the 37:ſi 5,and to prepare them for receiving him and his Do- 
QArine,which is preſently to be revealed by himſelf 3 taking off 
PcoplesPrejudices,and diſcovering and commendingChriſt to them. 
Or by bringing Men to a true Repentance for their Sins, - and a 
lenſe of them,till which they cannot believed, to prepare them for 
more internal Reception of the Lerd Jeſus Chriſt, For Jokn is ſaid 


Confirmation of his Faith. Echdcs, Zachartuh s Punithment was 
gentle,and of that Nature,that it allo carried with it n Anſwer to 
Wrrds of 
the Angel ſhould be fulfilled. { Becauſe tho believedſt nt my Words, ] 
The Words of God b+ his Metfengers are-to be be'teved ; and the 
not believing their Words which they ſpeak truly from kim,aud as 
ſs ſent, is a Sin God will ſeverely puniſh. It 15 all one,not to vbe- 
lieve God,as not to believe thoſe whom he ſends, ſpeaking what he 
bids them. {Which ſhall be fulfilled in their ſeaſm ) The Unde<lief 
of Men thall not make the Word and Promiſe of God of no efteet, 
But God's Promiſes have their Seaſons, before whici2 we mult no - 
expe the Accompliſhment of them, Hab. 2. 3. 

21 And the people waited for Zacharias, and mar- 
velled that he tarried fo long in the temple. 

22 And when he came out, he could not {peak unto 
them,and they perceived that he had ſeen a vition in 
the Temple, for he beckned unto them, and remained 


ſpeechleſs. 
23 Andit came to paſs, that as ſoon as the days 
of his miniſtration were accompliſhed, he departec : 
his own houſe. : 
While the Prieft was in the Holy Place, the Pcople were 10 22% 
part of the Temple called the Cour? of Iſrael, or the Core of 192 = 


ple, praying : When he had done, he came out, an  bleniza them 
according to the Law,Numb. 6. 23, 24. where is tne FO Cr ice 
ſing which he uſed for this the Peopie waited botore nov wear 
home. Whether the Angel's Diſcourſe with Zachor:5 mo —_— 

241 ie 


: Prieſt was wont to ſtay,it is uncertain 3 vut fo 
{ came out,he was not 


or his Amazement at the Viſion made him ftay longer © 
he did,and when he 
able to pronounce the BleTing, n ipeak 
at all,only he beckneth to them, by which the People og that 
he had ſeen ſome Viſion. Yet Pumbneſs being nave of thoſe Doul'y 


DefeRts for which by the Law they were &t9 be remoyed gs 


Ar $A 
NOV <q v_p 


Chap. J, 


angel, * Whereby * Gen: 


i 


: 
[01 
'' 
: 
i 
l; 


A 
k» 
| 
; 


—_ 


! I} 
' " 
4 
> $85 
155 
F © "Y 
v2 oh 
ts h 
4 
We 


5 


means > 


A—_— 


+ 


gu : ; c — A - . _ 0 f, * < 4 - Wc 4 en = - om Cn 0 —_— 
4 A R . "4x32 % ky Je . by * ASHER ;c po ay — po 5 =O 4 
" 4 _ ” "Y a +, : . 
, - wu . - _ - 8 
> EX - wy : : 66 * 4 : P . . . a _ 
pe - o " $- WO maar my 4 Pr 2 Fax » . 4 vw * : abe© 277 "2OXEXZ L —- —— = FE _— = - I = 
_ Z ”—x " AF - . — —_ + on þ 40 p 224 rs , 5 _ a 
—_ 4 'E £ = " 
. SY " 4 - SR - at. rages < 8 a n - »,- m—_— _- *- < a - ns = "2s pa —_—_ 
4 a 4 S A G > = Þ A _, Irs ” > - SF. __—_ _ —_ ys < - : —_ cnn eng _ - ——_— : - T—— — —_— =— MDA EIT 
-— + =Ir< - a, EF SEL Z — - © DISA. 4 _ 2 <- - SO 4 => P-=>3 : GC , b EZ IT o - - - - em —— ug s : - 
. . "2A - - - wh IP p- - eh - Lo — h — - CELDT. — —— _ _ — — ——_ . . >. ——— —— — <P; —_ - 
wo >< yy yo : —_ —_ =_ —_ ah ni prog nn ynertr er err - om i — g <—— _—_ © ——. — - - 0 — _ eas - re 
- mY — l _— = : gem "8 = . _ re cy ens" = L.. - — —_ —_ 4 - R— —_— pt OS — — pee DO - —_ 
2 _ * nn I er a —_ a 4. * 3 —_— MM. 3 p 2 PR ey rg ; att fo ch Ws . - << -- x = - 
a> — e 44 - 4 - oe >... 6 F s . - G 4 _ » —_ Le, eto, » 7F * jp Me _ Et, - 4 Fs e : 
, . Y __— 4 _ ” w_— _— 2 _ - wen - 4 _— <FT 2 _—_—— cs wowtaxry —_ CER! "he ee 2 09x6Þ - = RY o -. a + -—_; y b- - v 
- WT ICE A - g £ RY ns we Og 7 i _ penal] m 6 - 4 $ <<. 0 : nC n - mm —_— 4 s ore one _—_— h "AL k —_ — . - 
Ne mn me ? ” ” C && -» © . Px IV 4 > > MIR 1. - « p * -x =; _ AN = po . - - =Y - = : ———_ x - _— - _— TS _ 
w_—_. Ads. - <a 4 0 = SOS the 4 : 4 - . _ a x - — x : : 
th 4 D : - + RS . ” bo — m -— —_ 7 A « - + S a ky” : - - _— : . a 
as. ” FR... 7 2>S, : - PE 4 + _- wat ee .- bh __ wy) : = % v4 —” O => - 
— — 4 : 2 » : , - - - 
Fa 4 £ w _ - 


—— 


* © 
+ oe EE 
4- þ 


©, -  W-Ts 


Mat. Y, 18, 


j{ Or, G94 
ſave thee, 
or rej1yce. 
1] Or, tbo# 
that haſt 
obtained 
fawvur. 

Or, thou 
that art 


freely belo- 


Chap. I 


S. LO 
Pric 1; Office, nor having any great Work in which he uſed his | 
Tone during his Miniftration, which was more the Work of the 
Haus, he accompliſhed the Days he was to Miniſter, and then de- 
parted to his own houſe 5 for the Days of their Miniſtration, they 
had thcir Lodgings in Buildings appertaining to the Temple. : 

24 And atter thoſe days his wife Elizabeth concet- 
ved, aud hid her ſelf five months, ſaying, 

25 Tis hath the Lord dealt with me, in the days 
wherein be looked on mezto * takeaway my reproach 

" aMONS, WEN- : Z - 

How long aſter thoſe Days the Scripture ſaith not, but 1t 15 pro- 
bable it was ſoon 2trer; as in the Caſe of Abraham, And 1n the 
Caſe of Manabs \vite, Fud. 13. 3. who conceived preſently after 
the Revelation. | And hid her ſelf frve months. | Not that ſhe hid her 
ſeit from ſecing any Perſon, but the concealed from thoſe whom ſhe 
ſaw the Hopes that ſhe had of her being with Child ; and per haps 

' what her Hutband had let her know by Writing of the Revelation, 
he had from the Angel ; not that ſhe her ſelf doubted the Thing, 
( that were unreaſonable to preſume,after the ſeeing of her Husband 
made dumb for a Sign of it, and her next Word will let us know 
thecontrary,) vat to avoid the Diſcourſe of People upon ſo unuſual 
a thing, who might poſſibly think her too vain 1n ſpeaking of a 
thing to improbable and unlikely as this was. In the mean time ſhe 
did not conceal her ſelf from God, but faid,| Thus haththe Lord dealt 
with me, ] AſcribingLall to the Power of God, who keepeth the 
Key of theWomb in {iis hand,and maketh the Fruitof it his Reward. 
| Inthe days wherin be Imbed upn me. ] It 1s the ſame with Verſe 48. 
He hath regarded the low eſtate of his Hand-maid The Favour of 
God to his Creatures is oft expreſſed under this Notion, Pſal. 25.18. 
and 84. 9. and 112.132. [To take away my reproach among men. |] 
Barrenneſs is no more than a Reproach amongſt Men ; 1t was more 
cſpecial'y a Reproach to Fewiſh Women, not fo much in regard of the 
Expettation of being the Mother of the Meſftas (for none could ex- 
pett that but a Virgzn, ja. 7. 14-and ſhe of the Tribe of Fudab, to 
which the Meſſiah was promiſed, and one of the Houſe of David, 
to whoſe Family he was promiſed as a Branch ) as in regard of the 
ſmccial Promiſe to Abraham, to whom a Seed was promiſed, nume- 
rous as the Duft, and as the Stars, to which the Barren Woman could 
contribute nothing. It is a great Mercy when God favoureth his 
People with aiis Providences which take away their Reproach among# 
wen,and 4 juſt Cauſe far his Peoples thankful Acknowledgment, 

26 And in the fixth month the angel Gabriel was 
ſent from God unto a city of Galilee, named Naza- 
Tet; 

27 Toavirgin * eſpouſed toa man whoſe name 
was Joſeph, of the houſe of David, and the virgins 
nare was Mary. 

[n the irxth Month, that 1s after Elizabeth's Conception 3 thas it 
is exyounded aftcrward,v. 36, { The Angel Gabriel] the ſame Angel 
that had appeared in the Temple to Z4v4rtas, who ſeemeth to have 
h:d a ſpecial Miniſtration with ret-rence to that part of God's W1!l 
which was predidtive of the Meſſtzs,| he was ſent from God,(without 
whoſe Command the Angels do not move) to a Cty of Galilee called 
Nazarcth.] There 7:{eph lived 3 from thence he went, Chap. 2. 4. 
The Angel came to the Virgin, who 1s here deſcribed by her Name 
Mary, and her Relaiion, ſhe was eſpouſed to one Foſeph,who is ſaid 
to be of the Houſe of David. Matthew produceth his Genealogy 
to prove him to be ſo. 


23 And the angel came in unto her, and faid, | Hail 
thou that || art highly favoured,the Lord 7s with thee, 


bleſſed art thou among women. 

Virgins betrothed, until the Conſummation of their Marriage, 
were ordinarily kept in their Friends Houſe : thither came this An- 
gel, and ſaith, | Hail thou that art highly favoured.) The Word 
Trantlated Hail, fignifics Rejoyce thou; or, is as much as God ſave 
thee., It is not the Form of a Prayer (as the Papiſts uſe it) but an 
ordinary Salutation, as much as, God ſave you, or Good-morrow, 1s 
amongſt us | Toou that art highly favoured, Keyagloutyn,the Word 
comes originally from yaes, which fignitteth in Scripture two 
Things: 1. The free Love and Favour of another beStowed on any. 
thus 1t is taken v. 45. thou haſt found Favour, Eph. 1. 6. to the Praiſe 
of the Glory of his Grace, 2. It ſignifies good Habits in the .Scul, as 
2 Pet. 3. 18. Grow it Grace, Col. 3. 16. Singing with Grace in your 
Hearts, Heiice the Verb, a Participle from which the Word here 
uſed 1s, may fignifte-two Things : Either, Thou haſt received Grace 
or Favour from God or, 2. Thou that art full of gracious Habits. 
The firit ſeems to be 17s Senſe in this place.It followeth in theVerſe, 
{ Bleſſed art thou. ] So alſo it is expounded v. 3o. For thou haſt found 
t:vour with Gods $2 as the Virgin was the Obje& of Divine Grace, 
a we are,and therefore not to be prayed to as the Fountain of Grace, 
She her telf had nothing but what ſhe received, This whole Verſe 
{cenicth to be only a Salutation ; there 1s nothing ofa Prayer in 1t 
The Angel doth only take notice of her as a Favourite of Heaven, 
one dear unto his Lord,with whom God was in an eſpecial manner, 
ang whoin Go bleticd above the rate of thoſe ordinary Bleſſings 
with which he bleiſeth other Women. - 

29 And when ſhe ſaw him, ſhe was troubled at his 
ſay ing,and caſt in her mind what manner of ſaluta- 
10n this ſhould be. 

it ſezracth that the did not only hear a Voice,and ſaw an ordi- 
ory Appearance,but the Appearance of the Angel was attended 
w th ſome Manfettation of the Glory of God, which affeted her, 
and made her admire what the meaning of this ſhould be,that God 
inhoud fead an Anzel to her,and with ſuch a kind cf Salutation. 

39 And the angel ſaid unto her, Fear not, Mary, 
for thou haſt found favour with God. 


This expounds thoſe Words, Thou art highly favaured,v. 28. and 
ſets her know, that he came upon no ill Defign unto her, neither 
upon any Humane Errand,nor yet with any Meſſage of evil Tidings 
from God ; for, ſhe was one for whom God had 2 favour. 


' Type of Chriſt's, 2 Sam. 7. 13. P/al. 2. 6. and 172. 1:. Jags 


K E. Ch 


31 And behold, thou ſhalt conceive in thy womy, i 
and bring forth a ſon, and * ſhalt call his name Jeſyg, « ,, n 
32 He ſhall begreat, and ſhall be called the fon of 1, ® j 
the Higheſt,and the Lord God * ſhall give unto him & 
the throne of his father David. "Ka a 
33 * And he ſhall reign over the houſe of Jacob fg; !' ' 
ever, and of his kingdom there ſhall be no end,  ®* v 
Theſe three Verſes contain the Subſtance of the Angel's Meſſage Tok w p 


or Errand to the Virgin, to tel: her ſhe ſhould be the Mother ©, 
Son , by what Name ſhe ſhould call him; and what he ſhouid y ; 67 
In telling her this, who knew her ſeif to be a Virgin, one who hag be 
not known Man, (as ſhe exprefles it, v. 34.) he plainly mindeth ' : 
her, that the Prophecy Jah 7. 14.ſhould be fulfilled in her, Thy; 
far the Angel's Words fignifics a Promiſe. | And thou ſhalt call 3;; 
name Jeſus } The Angel, Matth. 1. 21. ſaith the ſame to 7ejeph, anq 
expounds it,adding.for he ſhall ſave their People from their Sins : ang 
thus the Prophet expoundeth 1t,who faith 7a.7.14.his Name ſhoylg 
be called Emanuel. There were two of tius Name betore, 7:3, 
or Jehoſua, both of which were great Types of Chriſt, as b-jpg 
great temporal Saviours to the Jraelites. The one brought they 
into. Canaan; the other led rhem out of Babylon, Ezra 2. 2. But thi, 
was yet a more excel!ent Jojhua, who was to ſave his People (roy 
their Sins. The Angel farther goes on deſcribing nimyfay ing, | 
ſhall be great.) Tfaiah had ſaid Chap. 9. 5. his Name fhall be cajjgy 
Wonderful, mighty both in words and deeds, Luk 24-19. And ſhall j; 
called the Son of the Higheſt, ] that is, the Son of God, who. is oftcy 
in Scripture made known by this Name, Gen. 14.19. P/4l.92.;.4;6 
83. 18. Mark s. 95. He ſhall be called t2 Son, that 15, he fhall be 5, 
for this Phraſe ſo ſigniticth often, 7/.17ah 1. 25. John 1. 12, forh: 
ſhall be known, and declared t9 be ſo, Rom. 1. 4. Peter fo cilled ! in, 
ſo did the Centurion who attended his Croſs ; God hirnafelt called hin 
ſo, P/al. 2. 9. and that in a Senſe agreeing ts none but him, ng no 
to the Angels, Heb. 1. $. much lcfs to Saints. | And the Lind G1; 
ſhall give unto him the Throne of his Father David. | Not the Ter. 
poral Kingdom, but the Spiritual Kingdom, over the fame Peggy's 
over whom David ruled, trom whom he is deſcended. It appearer;; 
from many Paſſages in the Prophets, that David's kingdom was ; 


Amos 9. 11+ Hence we find the Name of P:uid given to Chrif, 
Jer. 3o. 9. Ezek. 34. 23. Ch. 37. 24. Hoſea 3. 5, | And he ſhallryjn 
over the Houſe of Facob for ever,and of his Kingdom there ſhall be mend] 
Jacob was the Father of the Tweive Tribes of Jrael ; So as th: 
Houſe of Jacob primarily ſfignifieth the Jews, who were the natwa! 
Branches 1n this excellent 0l:ve. Chriſt's Kingdom extended heycnd 
the Houſe of Jacob, but it began there, his Law went Afrft out 
S7mm, and he was in the firſt place tent to the 15/t Sheep of Tie; 
he was the Miniſter of the Circumciſion, Rom. 15, 8. others were to hs 
Jjoyned to the houſe of Jacob, Iſatah 14. 1. Or Jacob, and the His of 
Jacob, may fignifte the whole Church, all that ſhould believe 1n 
Chriſt. The Rod of his ſtrength went out of Sion, Pſal. x 1c, 2. tho 
his Kingdom was not contined to Jacob. All Believers who worſhip 
God in the Spirit and rejozc: in Jeſus Chriſt, are by the apdſilc 
determined the Circumciſion, Phil. 3. 3. and he is a Few, who 150: 
inwardly, Rom. 2. 22. | And of his Kingdom ſhall be no end. \ Thi 
both expounds the Words for ever, going juſt before, and alſadi- 
ſtinguiſheth the Kingdom ot 'Chriſt trom all Kingdoms of the 
World,wkich all have their Periods; and alſo affureth us of the 
Continuance of the Goſpel-Church, which is Chriſt's Kingdom, till 
his Kingdom of Glory be revealed : And this agreeth with tlis 
Prophecies of the Old Teftament concerning the Kingdom «f the 
Mettiah, and the Typical Kingdom of David, Yſal. 145, 13. 1a) 
ge 7. Dan. 7, 14. Micah 4. 7. 


34 Then faid Mary unto the angel, How ſhzll this 
be,ſeeing 1 know not a man ? 

There are fome would excuſe ary in this Reply, and fel's ut, 
theſe Words ſpake in her no doubt that the things ſpoken b; the 
Angel ſhould nor come to paſs, only Admiration, or a Dejre to! 
farther informed which way God would effe&t ſuch a wonder c! 
Providence. Others think her Words hardly e:cuſable from atlGuii!, 
tho the more excuſable, becauſe there had yet been no ſuch 're- 
dent made in the Wor!d of the Divine Power, asto cauſe 4”; 
ta concetue, and bring forth a Son. The next Words, Seeing Iki #17 
a Man,ſeem to import, that ſhe underſtood the Anzel of the preien! 
or paſt time,that the had already conceived,or ſhould immediate.) 
conceive,againſt which ſhe obje&ts her not having any cars 
knowledge of any Man. For the Notion of ſome Papijts,that wou'd 
from hence impoſe upon us to bclieve,that Mary had vawed Frrgint 
ty,as if the Senſe of theWords were, I am reſolved nzver to now 541% 
it 1s ſo ridiculous,that no Man of ordinary Senſe can allow it © a 
beſides that there were no ſuch Vows that we ever read of,ar:975'! 
the Traelites, nor could any ſuch be made;but by the Lai 0 G06 
might be reſcinded,if made when the Virgin was in hcr F2i.et* 
Houſe 3 and befides that,it is very improbable, tbat a je1!! yet 
man ſhould make ſuch a Vow in whom Barrenneſs was 10 450 
proach, and who look'd upon it as a Curſe : I fay berries 
things, who can have ſuch unworthyThoughts of the Bicited 5:18!" 
as to think that ſhe ſhould, having made ſuch a Vow, 29:1; & 40 
Eſpouſal to Foſeph to mock him? But ſhe certainly underttuod tic 
Angel as ſpeaking ofa thing in being,or which preſently {100d ® 5 
and tho ſhe believed whar the Angel ſaid,yet is defiro:'s of farthet 
SatisfaRtion how ſuch a thing could be out of the ordinary courie 


of Nature, Blot: ? 

35 And the angel anſwered and ſaid unto het» The of thy 
Holy Ghoſt ſhall come upon thee, and the power ol Eliza 
the Higheſt ſhall averſhadow thee - therefore 4i!9 that ; r her, 
holy thing which ſhall be born of thee ſhall be calles RN 
the Son of God. wor, | 


Tlduf: 


[The Holy Ghyſt (who is alſo called here the Power of 71? Hu / 
ſhail come upon thee : it is a Phraſe which ſignifteth a jecial an. _ 
caliar influence of the Holy Spirit ; thus we read of the Prophcts,i- 


| the Spirit of the Lord come upen them, 2 Chron. 29. 14, Fc. 


Tt vf* 
UOAISL 
. 12.5 


ve hd 
* # 
- 


[ 


.- Fed a fp2cial Inflaence of ti12 Holy Spirit on them, efficacious, ſo | 
thy put them upon 4 preſent Prophecying. There is 4 common In- 
>ence of God upon the forming of all Children in the Womb, 
1. 10+ 2. Pſal. 139+ 15- But this Phraſe denoteth an extraordinary 
ir] Influence of the Spirit, changing the Order and Courſe of 
and giving a-Power to the Blood of the Virgin,by him ſan- 
to coagulare alone to the forming of a Body of a Child : This 
wo terioully yet expreſt by the next term,| overſhadow thee,] 
hich | rake TO be 4 modelt Pirale, ſignifying only a Supply of 
| 1» 4 divine creating Power, 1a a moſt miraculous man- 
Fre alin that holy thing which ſhall be born of thee, ſhall 
« $52 of God, ) AS Adin was called the Son of God, Ch. 3. 
Creating Power) ſupplying as to him the place of Fath-y 
1 M44, and to Chriſt ſupplying the place of the Father, tho ncx 
"£1, Mother 3 for (faith the Angel) he thall be born of thee. But 
ethit Mus of Fleſh ſail be an holy thing, becauſe tho born of 
1. and ileth of thy Fleſh, yet of thy Fleih firſt ſanfified by the 
1-1, Ghoſt coming upon and overſhuadowing of thee. He ſhall be 
--{-1(\ ; not that he was not ſo by eternal Generation, (of which 
> Ano here ſpeaks not) but the Werd, the Eternal Son of God, 
ni was in the Beginhing, being thus made Fleſh, and perſo- 


+1liv united to thy Fleſh, the whole Perſon ſhall be called the Son 


of God. 
26 And behold, thy conſin-Elizabeth, ſhe hath alſo 


conceived a ſon in her old age: and this is the ſixth 
month with her who was called barren. 
37 For * with God nothing ſhall be impoſſible. 


What a particular notice doth God take of the Children of Men ? 
he knoweth our Relations. | Thy Coufen Eliz4h2th. | Rere ſome make 
1". 4 Queſſion how Elizabeth, whov. 1 was one of the Daughters 6f 

". Aron, and conſequently of the Tribe of Lev?, could be Couſiin to 
Mairywho was of the Houfe of David, and conſequently of the 
Tribe of Jada (as our Evangeliſt proveth Chap. 3. ) becauſe of the 
Law.Numb. 35. 6, 7. But Couſen may be taken in a large Senſe, as 
Paul calleth all the jews his Kinſmen, Rom. 9. 2. Or they might be 
Couſins in a ſtri& Senſe, for the Daughters of the Tribe of Levi 
might marry into any other Trizes, having no Inheritance to carry 
away 3 to prevent which was the Law, Numb. 36. [And this is the 
ſixth Month, &c. ] From her Conception, by which time Women 
uſe tobe at ſome certainty about their Quickning : You muſt not 


wp. 


7 
J 
1Nec 
Nature, 


@ 7 F*® 
NO wm m ri 


4 62 
4 » c 
Mans ACT, 


Tx *- # 
NeT, | B&B we? 


El 
CAMPTZ 


by R1S 


tne + 


Ws 


ICH | 


f 


{ Fa 
$16 
»1 v 
3 


Ll 
t 


S. LUKE 


1a great Satisfa&tion to her, to hear her Kinſwoman; by the Spicit of 


co 


Comad 
£0} 


hap, ] 


4 + 
another Manner thati any Creature can bo {id to be 
the Fullneſs of the Godhead dwelt in hit bodily. 

43 And whence. # this to me, ther the 
my Lord ſhould come to me *? 

Elizabeth in theſe Words ackrnowledguth both tic Tacarnation of 
Chritt, and the Union of the Divine and Humor Netturs in the on 
Perſon of the Mediator ; ſhe acknow!-dpeth Chit hier Lord, and 
Mary te he his Mother. | ; 

44 For loalloon as the voice of thy iiutation ſound - 
ed in mine ears, the babe leaped in my wort for iov. 

By theſe Words Elizabeth declarcth,thit ſhe loozee upon the Mo- 
tion of the Child in her Womb, upcn 3:7 | 
ſo.nething more than natural. 
45 Andbleſſed s ſhe that believes, ; ſor there ſal jor, :/ 4: 
be a performance of thoſ things which were told hey tore Ha 
from the LORD. ek a 

Some will have this given as a Reaſon why Z!iz.1h22h pronounced 7 PH 
her Bleſſed 3 Becauſe ſhe believed, that what God had {::% ſhould have 
its effect, as Chap. 11 28. when the Women bictfed tz Wom!: thar 
bare Chriſt, and the Paps that gave him ſuch, Ch-ift ſaith, 1g. r.2- 
ther bleſſed are they that hear the Word of God and Ivep it. ary was 
blefled not in this ſo much that the brought forth Chriit, as in th's, 
that ſhe. be/zeved in him, The Words arc certainly 2 great Coutir- 
mation of what the Angel had before told her, and it mult reeds 2: 


biefled-; 


mother of 


1 
F 


©9 


£ 


£ 


” 


e 
KK.) 


WW 
) © 


Gov + 3c / , £ 1 
$3.4<43;01 of her 


Prophecy coming extraordinari! 
Angel had before told her. | 
46 And Mary faid, my ſoul doth magniſfie the Lord, 
47 And my ſpirit. hath rejoyced in God my Sa- 
VIOUT. 

We are now come to the famous Song of the Bleſſed Virgin, up- 
on whom alſo the Spirzt of the Lord comes upon this Occaticn. She 
firſt ſolemnly gives Praiſe unto God, then by Various Expreſſions 
declareth the Power and Goodncfs of God, ſhewing him wortny to 
be praiſed; and laſtly, applieth what ſhe had ſpoke more generally, 
to the particular Bufinefs of Man's Redemption. Our magnif)ins 
God, is not by making him great, as he magnifieth us, as it is v. 45: 
but by declaring. and ſhewing forth his Greatneſs, She faith, her 
Soul did magnifi2 the Lord, and her Spiri* rejpyced. Soul and Spirit 


y upon her, corutirming what the 


therefore think this 7mpoſſtble;, for you know Elizabeth was counted 
barren, and was old,yet ſhe hath conceived. [ And with God nothing 
Is impoſſible. ] I bring you a Mcflage from God, to wham all things 
are poitible. This was an ordinary Saying amongſt them, Nothing 2s 
imt9ible with God, Our Saviour uſeth it ſeveral times, Mar. ro. 29. 
Math, 19.26. Nor needed we any Scripture to prove that nothing 
could he impoſſible to him who is the firſt Being,the firſt Cauſe, and 
the Fountain of all Power, and to whom all things are ſubje&. No 
confilerate Man will from hence conclude that things are poſſeble to 
G2d whi:h wou'd derogatefrom the Perfe@ion of the Divine Being, 
:1d are [ImperfeRions In us: nor yet that any thing 15 poſſible to 
207, the contrary to which he hath willed, But God can do what- 
327 ne can wull, | 

;> And Mary faid, Behold the handmaid of the 
ord, belt unto me according to thy word. And the 
:12! c:cparted from her. 

1c2 1.1.2 T ſpogen (faith Job Chap. 40. 5. ) but I will not anſwer. 


are but two Words ſignifying the ſame Thing, an1 importing, that 
ſhe glorified God heartily, and with her whole Soul ; and teachinz 
us, that alt praiſing of God with our lips 15 of no tignificancy with- 
out the Conjunttion of the Heart with the "Tongue. | In Grd ry Sa- 
viour.) So Hannah, 1 Sam. 2. 1. My heart rejyceth in the Loyd, mine 
horn is exaited in the Lord, This is true ſpiritual rejoycing, when 
the primary Obje& of our Joy is not the ſenſible Good, but the Good- 
neſs of the Lord to us, in giving us that g»od thing. 

48 For he hath regarded the low eſtate of his hand- 
maiden : for behold, from henceforth ai! generations 


ſhall call me bleſſed, 


Our Te ;aflators have here rightly tranſlated Tamar, Low eſtate, 
Mary doubtleſs doth not here coinmend her own #umility. (15 fome 
Papiſts would have it,) but magnitieth God, for that he had reſpect 
to her who was of ſo mean and low a condition 4 for tho ſhe was of. 
the Family of David, yet that Family had for many years beer. bro- 
ken aud afflifted, and ſhe was now eſpouſed to a Carpenter, which 


111172 manier rae Virgin ſpeaketh : I will diſpute. no more, [ am 
ine Lora's Servant, let him do with me whatſoever he pleaſeth. This 
Prraſe, Bolotat tDe Darimaid of the Lord, doth.not ſpeak her the Lady 
an; Qrven of Heaven, (.: the Papiſts ſtile her ) but it ſpeaketh her | 


£7111, and Reacinels to give up her ſelf to the Lord's Pleaſure z | 


wows do according to wit the Angel had ſaid unto her. The An- 
£d having diſpatched his Errand, and obtained what he came for, 
acenueth into fjeaven. 

39 And Mary aroſe in thoſe days, and went into 
the hill-country with haſte, into a city of Juda. 

40 And entred into the houſe of Zacharias, and ſa- 
luted Elizabeth. 


x | NManythink, that thi; City where this Zacharias lived was Hebron, 


her ſent and Conſent unto Sod. She addeth -a Prayer, That God | ; 
| hath God ch:ſen, x Cor. 1. 23. That m fleſh (hould glory in hu prejnce, 


before called Kirjath-Arba, Joſh. 14. 15. for that was a City in the 
mountainous part of Juda, one of tie Cities of refuge, and belonging 
to the Pricits, Joſh 20.7. But whether it was ſo or no, cannot be 
crtunly determined 3 She probably went not only to rejoyce with 
Elizabeth her Kinſwoman, bnt alſo to ſtrengthen her own Faith, as 
to the Revelation which ſhe had received, by finding that true,which 
Ui Angel had told her concerning her Coufin Elizabeth. 


41 Andit came to paſs, that when Elizabeth heard 
the falutation of Mary, the babe leaped in her womb: 


and Elizabeth was filled with the Holy Ghoſt. 

| The Motion of the Child in the Womb of the Mother after her 
time of Quickening is paſt, and the more than ordinary Motion of 
!t upon ſome extraordinary cauſe of Joy, is no unuſual thing with 
Women in thoſe Circumſtances ; but doubtleſs, as this Motion was 
more than ordinary, fo it had a more than ordinary Cauſe, being 
auld from the Holy Spirit of God ; and ſo the beſt Interpreters 
Jade, What is afterward faid of Elizabeth, that ſhe was filled with 
{re 17 Ghoft, is expounded in the next Words (wherein ſhe pro- 
pictieth of the Spirit of Prophecy. 


42 And ſhe ſpake out with a loud voice, and faid, 


ſpake her Condition low and mean, tho deſcended from the - Royal 
Family of David. And thus God uſually magnificth himſelf; he chu- 
ſ:th David from the Sheepfold to be king cover Iſrie! ; he much de- 
lighteth to exalt ſuch as are low ; he chuſet> the fooliſh things of the 
World to confound the wiſe, the weak things of the World to confound the 
mighty, and baſe things of the Warlt, and things wmch are dejpiſed, 


v. 29. | Henceforth (ſaith Mary) all generations ſhail call me Bleſſed. 
[t is no mean Favour of God when God giveth us a Name 1n the 
World, and that not only in the preſent, but in ſuceed:ing Gene- 
Yrati2Ns 

49 For he that is mighty hath done to me great 
things, and holy #« his name. 

That which is obſerrablc hoth in this Verſe, and in this whoie 
Song, 15, how the bleiſed Virgia atcributes all to God, and atcriveth 
nothing to her ſelf, 5x any Merits &f her own 3 much like unto her 
Fath er David, P/al. 11s. 5. Not unto 1, O Lord, mt unto us, but ut 
to thy Name give Gor; for thy mercy and- truths jak? 3 And herein 
ſhe teacheth thoſe Generations which ſhe had even now faid thould 
call her Bleſſed, how to take notice of her, viz. as one mghtly 11vour 
ed of the Lord; one for whom God indeed hid done great things, 
but not as one who had merited any thing at God's hand ; much lets 
as one to whom we ſhould pay a greater Devotion than ta her 5on, 
and ſpeak to her that ſhe ſhould command her $9n, (according to the 
blaſphemous Devotion and Idolatry of the Papijts.) Mary 15s very 
careful of giving ſucceeding Generations any occation from her E*:- 
preſſions for any ſuch Superſtitions. [ And holy s bis Name. k Rot, 
that is, glorious and venerable | his Name] that is, he himſelf 15 glo- 
rious, and holy, far above the Conception and Comprehention ot 
poor Creatures. 

50 And* his mercy s on them that fear him from * Exod, 
generation to generation. | _ 

Having celebrated God for his Glory and Majestr, ſhe here cc ebre- 
teth him for his Mercy, which extends to all, but eſpecially 15 ſhewed 


to ſuch as fear him : She certainly reſpe&eth the Promilc = _ 


IT 


beds er ret oas, th 


> 0 
ns NS. AF b A . i 
OI. ate dT. - —— - —— @— > 
_—_ q onegy — __ _ - 
= - HS 5 E 
* -_ - - 
= av = 4 bd o 
a TS 


Bleſled art thoy among women, and bleſled # the fruit 
of thy womb. 

Eltrabeth vſeth the ſame Words to Mary which the Ange! had uſed 
by we, Ver. 28. That is,Thou art an exceeding happy Woman,not 
OO but one whom God hath greatly favoured, and ex- 
©canely bleffed, and made happy. And [ Bleſſed is the fruit of thy 


Won! . , 
ap Tho the fame Word be uſed, yet is not to be underſtood of 


Tladucf 


Wal. 2. 


* Cegree of Bleffing, Chriſt was anointed with the Oyl of 
- 220ye his Fellows, and bleſſed in another Senſe, and after. 


to be the God of Abraham, and his Seed, but declareth th > be 
: moſt eminently made good to thoſe who are truly PI0us, all Picty 
| being expreſſed ordinarily in Scripture (eſpecially in the Oig = 
| ment) under the Notion of the Fear of God : Ve nave K, mo = 
: fame Words Pſal. 103. 17. It is elſewhere expreſſed under the No- 
tion of Thouſands, Exod. 20. 6. ſignifying not only the Extent of the 
' Divine Goodneſs to all his People, but the continuance of it for ever. « (1, 07, 
51 * He hath ſhewed ſtrength with his arm, he hath & <2. 


ſcattered the proud in the imagination of their hearts. *Pl.32. 
[Qqq ] <2 * He x Pet. 5. 4. 


JGe 
I 
a 


che. 


— $5 —_—_— _ 
mn. <——_—_— 7 I . - —_ _— Ig ns ee me — 
— = - _ ” © ts . at 
Go Sts. IE — 4 n , - 
Ae "PUTS" Wor aomons - owl <_=—_ ..- VI "2 — - = 
« = . = - a” = hs, _ 
haneomrnmnaen FFT rn mann — ——_ _ = _— —_— _— -- —— 
8 " = a ——_ x + A SSD —_ B - - = — 


Char A 


*iSam.2 C. 
(oc. 


Plal. 11 3.5. 


© Pl. 34-1C. 
. the rich he hath ſent empty away. 


x Sa4t.2. 


Wy 0 


fer. 3t 
=O, 

Si; A 
T 4 i«als | PD 


9 


* \Cr. I 


| a: || LO 


£2 * {He hath put down the mighty from their ſeats) 
and cxalted them in iow degrec. ; 

[n theſe verſes the Virgin celebratcth both the Power and Juſtice 
of God, as ſhe before liad done his Holinejs and his Mercy, and 
Goodneſs, Thc ſtrength of a Man is much fcen in the effeds of his 
17; hence God, who hath no ſuch parts as we have, is yet ſpoken 
of as if he had an arm, by which no more 15 ſignified, than a migh- 
jy Power, by which he bringeth things to paſs. Exod. 15. 16+ Iſa 
*o. 10. & 8. 12. Pſal. 38. 1. So 1n many other texts. { He hath 
catered the proud in the Iaginat7ons of their hearts. ] Jethro, Exod. 
13. 11. knew that the Lord was above all God's, becauſe in the thing 
wherein they dealt proudly he was above them. The Proud in Scripture 
often figniries wicked men,as the humble ſignifies good and holy men. 
but Prod in a ſtrict ſenſe, fignifieth Men that have an high op1- 
nion of themſelves. Now there is nothing that a Proud Man dealeth 
more Proudly in, than in following the imaginations of his own 
heart, There (faith Mary ) God ſcattereth them,turning their Coun« 
{e's jnto folly, and confounding them in their orn 1maginations. 
| He hath put down the mighty from their Seat. ] thus he did by Pha- 
ranch, Nebuchadnegzar, &c- He pulls down fome, and ſets up others. 
From>otion-is not from the Eaſt. nor from the Weſt. | And exalteth 
12m of low degree.) This is G-d's way, thus he exalted Moſes, Joſeph, 
[--c05, David. God thus ſhewcti his mighty Power, and ſuperin- 
tendency upon mens aftaiis. lie doth what he pleaſeth with Men, 
vet what he doth is infinitely wi/e, j/t and good. 


53 * He hath filled the hungry with good things,and 


la this Scrtence, the Holy Virgin celebrateth the equity of 
God in the Government of the World, proportioning Men 1n ſome 
degrees one to another, that the rapactous qualities of ſome, might 
not gain all to them, whi'e others have nothing. The Notion of 
hungry, ſpeaketh Perſons in want, and craving 4 ſupply. The No- 
tion of Rich, ſignifieth Perſons that are full. God bleſleth the 
Poor, piticth the needy, while he negletteth greater Perſons. Some 
apply it to thoſe whon: Chriſt blefſeth, Matth. 5s. who hunger and 
thirſt after Righteouſneſs, and expound the rich, of thoſe who think 
they have no need of the Rrzhteouſneſs of Chriſt. In this ſenſe 
it is a/ſo true, but whether the Virgin intended it here or no I 
know not. ; j 

5+ He hath holpen his ſervant Iſrael, in * remem- 


” brarce of his mercy, 


55 *Ashe ſpake to our fathers, to Abraham and to 
his ſeed for ever. 

In theſe Verſcs the Blefſed Virgin celebrateth God's Mercy toge- 
ther with his truth 5 withal ſhe hath here a reſpe& to God's particu- 
Jar goodneſs, and Mercy in the ſending of the Redeemer. The 
Word which we here tranſlate hath helped, fignificth he hath ſuſtain- 
ed, oras it were lifted up with his hand, his Servant Iſrael, or his 
child Iſrael ; he calleth Ephraim, his dear Son, his pleaſant Child, But 
by Tract he mcancth Believers, thoſe of Abrahams Seed that lived in 
the Faith, Hope, and Expe&ation of the Meſſiah the children of the 
Promiſe, Rom.s. 8. thoſe who are Jews inwardly, Rom. 2, 2g.. the 
true Circumciſion, Phil. 3+ 3» ?raelites indeed, John 1. 47. This 
ſhe ſaith God had done, not in remembrance of their merits, but 
his own Mercy, Ezeh. 35. 32. but of his own free goodneſs, and 
Mercy, ard in the jufiling of his Promiſe made to Abraham, 
Gen. 17. 15, the extent of which Promiſc is declared, Rom. 5. 6, 
7,89. and that ſeed of Abraham, his ſeed as the Father of the 
Fairbſul, ſhall be for ever, and the virtue of the Promiſe ſhall hold 
to then: tor ever. 


56 And Mary abode with her about three monchs, 


and returned to her own houſe. 

It is moſt probable that ſhe ſtaid with her until ſhe was brought 
to Bed, not leaving her juſt at the time of her Travail, but ſhe ſtaid 
not long after but went home 3 by this time ſhemuſt her ſelf know 
that ſhe was with Child, and here in the trae order of the Hiſtory 
cometh in what we had, Matth. 1. 18, 19,20, 21, 22, 23, 24+ Sce 
the Notcs thcre. | 

57 Now Elizabeths full time came that ſhe ſhould 
be delivered, and ſhe brought forth a ſon. 

58 And her neighbours, and her couſins heard how 
the Lord had ſhewed great mercy upon her; and 

* they rejoyced with her. 

The Angel told Mary, v. 36. That it was then the ſixth Month 
with her; after this Mary was with her about three Months, which 
made up her full time ; ſo ſhe was delivered, and brought forth 
a Son, to ſhew the truth of God's promiſes, that we may all learn 
to zive credit to his Word. For the Neighbours and Kinſwomen 
of Elizabeth to come, and to rejoyce with her, was but according 
to the ordinary cuſtom of friends to this Day, like enough to hold 
fo the end of the World. But the Religion of Perſons in that age 
poſſibly is not in ſo ordinary a praftice,in I mean the taking notice of 
the influence and goodneſs of God to thoſe who receive ſuch Mer- 
cies, Weare fallen into an age, where congratulations madeto 
tricnds, upo2 any good things happening to them are ordinary, and 
meetings alſo to make merry, (as they call 1t ) upon ſuch occafions ; 
but at! how little is that God, who openeth the Womb, and a 
reward from whom Cinidren are, taken notice of 2 how [little is 
his rower, and gooancls 12 ſuch Providences taken notice of, in 
tuch mectings, and made the ſubje&t of the diſcourſes there had 2? 
Elizabeths Neighb ours and Couſins, take notice | haw the Lord had 
ſhewed great Mercy unto her. | The Mercy of a Child, of a ſafe deli- 
very 18 the Birth of a Child, are great Mercics, and ought to be the 
firſt and principal things taken notice of ia ſach rejoycing meetings, 
otherwiſe the Mecting 15 more like a Meeting of Pagans, than of 
Chriſtians. 


59 Anditcame to paſs, that on the eighth day they 
came to circumciſe the child; and they called him Za- 
Charizs, after the name of his father. 


K E. 


he ſhall be called John. | | 
61 And they aid unto her, There is none of th 
kindred that is called by this name. l 
The Law for Circumciſion, Gen. 17..12, Levit. 12, 
ly for it to be performed the ezzhth day. We find nothi 
cd in Scripture, either as to the Perſon who was to perfor 
office of the Circumciſer, or as to the place, Exod. 4. 24, » m the 
met Moſes in the Inn, and ſought to kill him, becauſe he had - God 
cumciſed his Child, and Zipporah his Wife did it. It is ſaig wa Cir- 
terwards did it in the Synagogues, but there is no Divine.” af- 
in the caſe. That the name was gtven to the Child upon its > 4, 
ciſfion, appeareth not from Scripture. It is ſaid, Gen.21.,, = 


3+ Was firja. 
ng COmmang. 


Abraham called his Son TJaac, and. then, v. 4. he Circamcies * 
Son Iſaac being eight Days old, We read of no name glvcn by Zim 
PP 


rah, to her Child when ſhe Circumciſed him : But the name +, 
at Circumciſion declared. It is moſt certain that John was circa, 
ciſed in his Fathers houſe, for we fin his Motver was preſent = 
at that time was not ina condition to ftir abroad, They called hi 
Name Zaeharias 3 whence we may obſerve the ancient uſage of "ny 
ing to Children the names of their Fathers, and kindreg, Than 
all probability is the reaſon of ſo many odd, and unjuſtifabt 
Names given co Perſors, (ſuch as are Namcs of Heathenith Gods 
and Goddeſles, not fit to be named amongſt Chrittians, 75 ) = 
derive from Pagans z and tho ſome Heathens changed their "ion 
when they turned Chriſtians, yet many (probably) did not and by 
a long traduRion, (the Names of Parents being given to Children 
the Names of Pagan Idols, ſuch as Fortane, Diana, and the like 
are by a moſt ſordid practice made the Names of Chriſtigns: a 
thing which certainly ought to be reformed; for it is a doing hone 
to thoſe Idols, if the giving a Perſons Name to a Child, be (as we 
ordinarily account it) an honour done to the Perſon wliofe Name is 
ſo given. The Jews from their beginning ſeem to have had a ke. 
ligiun as to this, giving Names to their Children, either ſignificatize 
of God's mercy to them or their Children, or their own duty t, 
Gd 3 and the Names of the Parents, or ſome of the Kindred, were 
in honour to them given to their Children ; therefore when Eling- 
beth (who knew the Counſel of God as to this Child, either by 
ſome Writing from Zachariah, or ſome Revelation to her 
heard thcm call him Zachariab, ſhe contradifted them in this thing, 
and nameth him ſobn z They obje& that none of her kindred 1;;. 
called by that name. 

62 And they made ſigns to his father how he woul 
have him called. 


63 And he asked for a writing-table, and wrote, 


all. 

It was the Parents place (the Fathers eſpecially ) to give Ci. 
dren their Names. Zachariah was Dumb as yet, they therefore make 
Signs to him 3 he by Writing declareth, that his Name waz Trim 
that is, He was ſo named already by the Anz-l, therefore there ns; 
to be no furti2er diſpute about it. The Friends marvel at the ©. 
ſent of beth the Parents in the caſe, declining all the Names of ther 
Kindred. 

64 And his mouth was opened immediately, ard is 
tongue /ooſed, and he ſpake,and praiſed God. 

The Angel, v. 20. inflicted the Paniſhment upon him 19 l:n:e:, 
than until what he had ſaid ſhould be performed ; now it wat vc: 
formed, God looſcth his tongue, and he praiſe!h God, by tlc Sar; 
which we ſhall by and by meet with. ; 

65 And fear came on all thet dwelt round 2bout 


throughout all the hill country of Judea. 
66 And all they that had heard them, laid then 


ſhall this be? And the hand of the Lord was with 
him. 

By fear here 1s to be underſtood, an awe, and Religious reve- 
rence of God caufed by theſe miraculous operations, As 2. 43; 
Fear came upon every ſoul, and many Wonders, and Sjzns were dit? 
by the Apoſtles, [' theſe ſayings | PIpeTa Tarr. It is an Henan, 
theſe doings, or, matters, or, things, were publiſhed throu;hout a! 
the partz of Zudea, adjacent to the City where Zacharis dwel!, 
V. 39+» And thoſe ſerious People that heard them, poncered 0! 
thers, conſidering the work of the Lord, and did think, That 
Child would prove no ordinary Perſon. [ And the hand of th? Lys 
was with him.) By the hand of the Lord: is meant, the /:x*# 0! 
the Lord, his Providence, Love, Favour; thus the Lord is ſaid tf? 
have been with Samuel, 1 Sam. 3. 19. The hand of the Lord 0!: 
fgnifteth the Power, help, and affiſtance of the Lord, 1—C#? 
28. 19. Pſal. 80. 11. The hand of the Lord upon a Perſon, fometire* 
ſ1gnifieth the Spirit of Propheſie, Ezeb. 1. 3. & 40; 1 but thi: 5+ 
different Phraſe, denoting only God's ſpecial favour to 70%, v4 
ing over and proteQing him, cauſing him to grow vp al £0 
to improve in knowledge, (Fc. 


67 And his father Zacharias was filled with 2 Ev 
Ghoſt, and propheſiea, ſaying, rn :; 
We muſt not think that Zuchariz was before this time 2th 
of the Holy Ghoſt ; we heard the contrary before, 4. 5. £8 00 nw 


ly Ghoſt at this time came upon him by a particuicr, 58 To 
eſpecial impulſe, as it did upon the Prophets, whom 012 Spit mT: 
ved but at ſome ſpecial times to Propheſie, tho it at ail tine. 60" 
and wrought in them, as an holy ſandiiying Spirit; tis 15 7 - 

of Yy Os\ 


good by the next Words which tells us he Prophected. wilici 


1gnifieth any ſpeaking for, or inſtead of another, 203 is 197 on, 
applicable to ſuch ſpeakings, as are foretellings of £11795 1 {CN (has 
afterward come to paſs, ut unto any ſpeaking for, or iniced & 
God, in the Revelation of his will made known unto vr FP = 


Propheſie there are both Preditions of what ſhouts cvime 5 


60 And his mother anſwered and faid, * Not /o 3 but * ve; 
1 


ſaying, * His name is John. And they marrel(g* i: 


them : and all theſe j| fayings were noiſed abroad: 


up in their hearts, ſaying, What manner of child - 


up. I 


cerning Juhn, and concerning Chrift, and alſs applications of what was 
before ſpoken of them by the Prophets z and it is obſerved by ſome, 
that it is an Epitome of all thoſe ancient Propheſzes, and that there is 
init, 4 compendium of the whole Doctrine of the Goſpel. 
63 Bleſſed be the Lord God of Iſrael, for he hath 
' # viſited and redeemed his people. 
,c. 15 69 * And hath raiſed up an horn of falvation for 
| ..1-. us in the houſe of his ſervant David : 

"70 * As he ſpakeby the mouth of his holy prophets, 
which have been ſince the world began. 

God is not the God of J7a?l only, but of all the Nations of the 
Eat! 11d ; but ke 15 peculiarly called the God of Jrael, both here 
and in many other places, Pſal. jt. 13, & 72.18, & 105.48,(5c.in 
rezard of the Covenant which he had ſpecially made with them, 
and the ſpecial advantages they had, mentioned by the Apoſtle, 
Rom. 3. 2+ To them were committed the Oracles of God, and Rom. 9. 4. 
to them pertained the Adoption, the Glory, the Civenants, the giving 
of the Law, and the ſervice of God, and the promiſes. Zacharias yro- 
nouncctn God Bleſſed, and deſires that he may be Bleſſed, that is, ho- 
noured,and celebrated,and ſpoken well of, for that he had vifited and 
redeemed is People. The Word may be extended to all God's de- 
| twerances of Jraet, but it feemeth to be here more ſpecially reſtrain- 
| | ed, by whatfolloweth to the Redemption by Chriſt, [ And hath raiſed 
| "in horn of Salvation for them.) An horn of Salvation ſignifies a 


ap, 


'Ver, | 


1, 23e 6+ 


up an . Omg mg" : 
mizhty power'ul Salvation, by a Metaphor taken from Beaſts, which 
7ht 


exert their Power by their Horns. The Beaſts ten horns, Dan. 


mucl1 . 4, Shay 
are expounded to be ten Kings, v. 24 ſo where David ſaith 


ut v.11 cur of ali the Horns of the Wicked, fo Lam. 2. 3. where God 


i {jd to have cut off all the Frn of Iſrael, | inthe houſe of his ſer- 
: vant David.) this agreeth to the Prophetic, Fer. 3o. 9. where Chriſt 
j 
: 


is called David, They ſhall ſerve the Lord their God, and David their 
King, whom T will raiſe unto them 5 wio is alſo called a righiems 


S. LUKE: 


Chap. II. 


- 77 To give knowledge of ſalvation untoſhis pcople, 

l y the remiſſion of their ſins. wo 
- [ _ the Dottrine of Repentance to Mer, that they mav cy. |Or, fir, 
= _ 10n of Sins, But it ſeems more natura} ro teach Peop!e 

nat the only way Dy which they can attain Salvation, is not By any 
righteouſneſs of their own, but by obtaining the free Pardon, and 
remithon of their Sirs, by Chriſt and his Richtcouſnet: : Plat. 22, » 
which 1s in ſhort to Preach the Gofpsi, which Rom. 2.15.is the Power 
- 1 13 £Vffoe Soi Joef3d Er't £& ©, {7 

of God to Salvation to every one tht belieuttin, £37 tiercin is 365 
righteouſneſs of Ged revealed, from Faith to E vith, | 

78 Through the j tender mercy of ow God Or, 24. 
whereby || * the day-{pring from cn 


2180 22tq VINEEG .. * 


: hr anch raiſed unto David. God is ſaid to have raiſzd up this Hon of 
. | Salvation in the houſe of David, The Houſe of David was now 
x down,/Japſed,and decayed : God promiſeth to raiſe up te the 1jraelites, 
0 a mighty Salvation irom the Houfe of David. This was fulfilied in 
: Chriſt. | As he ſpake by the mouth of his haly Prophets, which have 
| 6zon ſince the World began. } All the Prophets, or many of them zt 
, eat, Prophefied of Ch-ift as the Son of David, and of a great Salva- 
; tion to be rated up to Zrael, from thts houſe, 

: 71 That we ſhouic be ſaved from our enemies, and 


from the hand of all that hate ns. 
72 To perform the mercy proz:iſed to our fathers, 


314 coremember his holy covenant. 
: This was that which GoG had told them by the Prophets, that a 
17s mighty Salvation ſhould ariſe to them out of the houſe of Daud, 
\Þ by which they ſhould be ſaved from their Enemies. By winch E:e- 

mics the genctality of the Jeivs underſtood rheir temporal Enemies, 
t- made of Fleſh, and Blood, But Zacharias ſpeaking by the Spirit of 
Ke Prophetic, mult needs have a truer Notion of it, as it fignities our 
, ſpiritual Enemies. All this 1s attributed to God's Mercy, and faith- 
4 tulneſs, his Mercy freely looking upon his Creatures in Diſtreſs, and 
bj Miſcry ; lis ſuithſulneſs in remembrance of his holy Covenaur, 
a made to Alum, Abraham, David, &c. but it is more particularly 
; explained, 
1s ki. 73 Theoath which he ſivare to our father * Abra- 

6 13, ham. 

a | God firſt gave Abraham his Word, Gen. 18, 18. then he confirm- 
_ ed it by his Oath, Gen. 22. 16, The Apoſtle to the Hebrews, faith, 
Is phen God made promiſe to Abraham, becauſe he could,ſware by no great- 

»7, he ſware by hin/elf. 
3 74 That he would grant unto us, that we being de- 
© "0... livered out of the hand of our eneniies, * might ſerve 
£ him without fear, 
" 75 In holineG and righteouſneſs before him, all 
' ' the days of 0:11 life. L 
. Thus Zacharias by an infallible Spirit, expounds the Covenants, 
; and Oath; of God to Abraham, and David, not as they appear to us 
y at firſt view, as if they were promiſes of a meer temporal Kingdom, 
45 and a Victory for the Jews over their En-mies, togecher with a 
"_ ſplendid ſta: for them 3. ( which was ail the Scribes and Phariſees, 
mw | andthe generality of the Jews expettcd from the Meſtah,)but as con- 
_ ; firming God's reſolution to ſend the Jews a Saviour who ſhould ſive 
— them from their Sins, the guilt and Dominion of them, and from 
Fe : the power of Bell, and purchaſe a ſpiritual liberty for them to ſerve 
on the Lord all their days without fear, in holineſs, and righteouſneſs 
LE which indeed, was tize truc end of the Meſſiahs coming. Thus far 
| RN now the Song of this holy Man reſpe&ed Chriſt, whom he ſheweth 
: " } tobe ſcent from the free Graoe, and Mercy of God, yet in perfor- 
At mance of God's truth and faithfulneſs, according to his Oath, and 
mY promiſes, and to be therefore ſent to deliver his Peopie from their 


Enemies, and to purchaſe for them a ſpiritual liverty not to Sin,but 
to ſerve the Lord without fear, in Holineſs and Righteouſneſs, The 
latter part of his Propheſie, reſpetteth Fohn the Baptist, the new 
bot Son of this Prieſt, and heavenly Prophet, 


= 76 And thou child ſhalt be called the prophet of the 
ws, 3-1. Hipheſt : for * thou ſhalt go before the face of the Lord 


<4 . loprepare his ways. 
pus E Zachatic here foretelleth what came to paſs about thirty years 
9 { After, forit cannot be thought that John began his Miniſtry before 


the Sacerdotal ape, eſpecially conſidering Chriſt did not begin ſooner, 


USs ny | 8 "TE. : 

In the Greek it is, through the Birwels of 37 A artinary on 
preifion, and very naturaj to ſignifie goat, 1d 2 ti. bo 
Gen. 43- 30. I Kings 3. 25. Our remithon of 3:1 4ouent, from Gods GE 
bowels of Mercy ; it dependcth not upon ovr {ict tins ard porige 9296. PTY 
Ces, (as Papiis dream,) but Ged's free and cence s igne 5 vir ng OE £8 
muſt be juſt, and declare his rizhteouſnes, wii he iuftitiern "# Hae 3-9 
ungodly therefore. {The Day-ſpring from on {575 1.43 v1it id 7: ths 
&valoan 45 uÞss. Some think that the Gree Word artwercch the wh P 


Hebrew Word, er. 23- 5s. Zech, 3. 8. trantlatzd tie Branch 5, the: 
venty Interpreters tranſlate it by *AyeJoan's. Fc. 52. 10 The 
Texts mamfeit!ly relate to Chriſt, who is calicd there 5 3 14 

Others think it rather anſivereth the Zehrew Word 4, woe h4 
tlate it a great Lizht, Others think, it ſhould be tranflited the 7.0, 


So they ſay Chriſt is called, Z:ch. 3. 2. & 6. 12. hut we trar{ha; 


the Braach in both thoſe places. Be it the Branch, or the 15:6, os 
Day-Spring, cr the Exit is certain Chriit is meant, vho is call.d 
the Son of Righteouſneſs, Hal. 4. 2. Titat God ini oht be juſt in tlic 
remitfion of our Sins, he ſent Thrift +o vitic us, 20d: in ovur Netwie 


to dye for us. 

79 To givelight to them that fit in Carkneſs, 
In the ſhadow of death, to gnide our feet into 
way of peace. 

Here Zacharias ſheweth us the end why God viſitzd us with 
his Son, the Branch, tne Light, the Day ſpring, the $:n of Rizhte- 
oujrejs 5 Men were in te darknets of Sin, and Ignorance. dead jn 
treſpatles and fins, at War and Enmity with God, Chriſt came to 
give them the Light of Gofpel Revelations, the [izht of Sp>irire ct 
comfort, and Salvation, to purchate Peace, and to direct them how 
to walk that the! micht have Peace with God, and at laft enter 51:2 
Peace, Tits he di4 to the jews fifty, then to the Gentiles, fee 7. 
Q 5, A-& Ar, 1, 19. | 


80 And * the -<vnild grew. 


» ard waxed ftrorg in. 
> - * © 1 . my 2—__ . ' y þ 4 - TC « * EI 
ſpirit, and * was In tne delerts till tne ay Ci Ris « FE IE 


ſhewing unto iſr-el. 


Tae Evangeliſt havi. « done with Zach.rrigs his | 


15 Propketica! Son>, 
now cometh to tz1{ us what Lecame of Fobn, He f2%h, the | 141d 
grew, and waxed ſti5n; in Spirit. | He did not only grow in tiis bg 


dily dimenſions, but 1n th: endowments of his Mind, 74 
the deſerts, that is, in places very thinly infiabited. (6m wi] hive 
this to have becn thedeferts of Ziph and Mun) ; : 
ſhewing to 1{rae}.] That is (ir al probability Y til he was about 
thirty years of aze, when Ii& came forth, as a Publick Preacher to 
thoſe parts of 1/a-/, where he ſpcut the fmall remaining part of his 
Life, of which we ſhal! hear more hereafter. 


CHAT I 


Joſeph goeth to Bethlem to be taxed with Mary his 


4. 
*. 
- 
_ 
*. 
' 
© 
—Y 
”4 
by 
w 


— Chap. 3. 23. {Thou ſhalt be called a Prophet.) that may either ſignifie, 
oh | thu ſhalt be @ Prophet, as Matth. s. 9. Joh. 1. 12. or thou ſhalt be 
cod | ©, or taken notice of, [as the Prophet of the Higheſt. | Both were 
—_ | Uucein Foby, Hewas a Prophet (tho not that Prophet, John 1. 21.) 
thai | )Y©2,andnxe than a Prophet,ſaith our Saviour, Matth, 1t. 9. [| And 
4 of 994 ſhalt go before his ſace to prepare his ways.) This was according 
"wn: WM Þ© fe Prophecy, Ia. yo. 3. Mal. 4.5. and according to what John 

4 Faid of himſelf, Matth. 3. 3. Mark I. 3. See the Notes on Matth. 3.3: 


| ins | Udo). 25 


is born, 14-—3. An Ange! appearing to the | {0 
them his Birth ; for which the Arzels praiſe God with a Tint, 
g9—1$g. Tye Shepherds go to Bety/:m to fre Chrilt, and faving 
found him , they make thu buown, 15—19., The Syepherds rotarn: 
ing, glorifie, 20. The Circurcifion of the Child, he is catle! }2- 
ſus, 21. and us preſented to God. 22—2g Simem tabins rim nt 
his Arms, bleſſeth him, and Propi*/ieth concerning hum, 26-—28. 
likewiſe Anna, 35—39. Hs Parents g:i1; up to jerajaſen, carr; 


him with chem, being twelve years ola, 45- -qz. fe dilpm oth witis 
the Doftors in the Temple. 45—33. Returneth to XNitaret 7, and 


is ſubjet to his Parents, and increaſeth in #ijanm, St tur? und Grace, 
5l, 52. : ; 
I ND it came to paſs in thote days, that there 
went out a decree from Grzſar Auguſtus, that 
all the world ſhould be taxed ||. : Or, exrol: 
2 And this taxing was firſt made when Cyrenius was j,4 * 


governour of Syria. 

3 Andall went to be taxed, every one into his own 
City. 

Ofavins Caſar, (called Auguſtus, for his proſperous atchieve- 


ments,) was the firſt Roman Emperor properly fo called, (for 7:47:15 
Ceſar had but the Title of Perpetual Difator) in the forty f-cond 
year of whoſe Reign Chriſt was Born. Fijephus fzith, in 142 0: 
and thirtieth year, Antiq. Cap. 10. Herod the Great being ar 11150 tine 
King of Fudea (being ſo declared by the Senate of Rome near torty 
years before.) It was the Cuſtom of the Romans to talre 2. particu 
lar account of the Numbers, and Qualities of ail Perions, 1n1491t- 
ing Countries under their juriſdiction, in order to the Jaying 0! 
Taxes upon them, About the time of the Birth of Chritt, there wi 
2 Decree ifſued from the Roman Emperor for furh a Cerſrte, Or 4cr 
count tobe taken of the Jews {who fore think are here only vu 
deritood by the Term, all the World ) others think, that 1% was 3 
Decree which reached all that part of the Worid wiiich was inject 
to the Roman Emperor. This truſt -it ſecmet!i was mire 
Cyrenius Governour of Syria ; whether he was 3t Tat time GUIT 
nour, or afterwards made Governour, and at tits time only a Comn- 
miſſioner for this buſineſs, is not agreeu. Fhat this Cyrenzys Was 
the ſame whom the Roman Eiſtorians call Ns ine, 15 pretty Welt 


: nent. tes 5 al fot home 
agreed, Great indeavours are uſed t9 recorctic what Luke faith gre; 


» 24934524 4 
CONmIeEw CCS 


2 
A 


to Foſephius aud the Roman HiSirians, who make YVarus not Qicmrens. 
([ Qqq2} 


= 
Row 


- = 
—_— 


= ” —_— - i 
Mn DC - ch 
=Y - 
———————__———_ 
s = — - —— 
= mn OE” I - - =; 
"= _= . _ is fans 
—_ © + - A TETRIS —— og - « 
C Z nr np 7 oe momma Aon; Fx -. - oe it + = = 
_- -—4 _—_— * - xy —— , -. = m - __ = __ 
_ ERECT TT = ET - - a Ive ——_—— : TELDIIESSE - ee 
. Ns com - _— Rs 
n pp = = a__-_- 2 Er _————- 
8 _ = So - 


— 
= ELPE 
wn 


we Se a 


-- 
_ _— 
”- 4m 
iS bg, yp 
$—_ rec + bigs 
Sr by 


Chap 


ENfat.t. :< 


"EM abiding in the field, keeping | watch over their flocks 
-.* by night. 


o J « 
m7 ht 


= "NO 
Bets * LP 


ed as to thoſe tings, 


ina Manger. God (by this) teaching all Chriſtians ro deſpiſe the 
highand gay things of this Worid, he who, tho he was in the form 
of God, and thought it no Robbery to he equal with the Father thus ma- 
ling himſelf of no Reputation—and being found in faſhion of a Man, thus 
humbling himſelf, as the Apoſtle ſpeaks, Phil. 2.6, 7, 8. 


- 
'hepherd, Jon, 1G, x, 
© 
_ 


I, ye. L © 


at this timc the Preſident of Syria : (Thoſe who d:fire to be ſatisfi- 


may read Mr, Pool's Sympſts Criticoruu upon 
*iis Text, 77c. ) Where Civil Hiltortans differ from whayi we have 
1 Bcly Writ, we are obijged to believe them miſtaken, not the 
Pon vn of Holy Writ, who were guided by an infallible Spirit 
Leaving th.reforethoſe Diſputes,and in what ſenſe this Cenſ#s is cal- 


1c the firſt, or is faid to be firſt begun, when Cyrenizs or Quirin!#s 


was retident { as being of no great Concern, for other H:ſtorians 
Eraii ririnis at this time a Commiſſioner with Cairns Ceſar, and 
\ithio fen Years after Preſident, in Succettfion to Varys.)lct us rather 
liezein obſerve the wonderful Providence of God in the ordering of 
things for the fu filling of his Word, while we think of no ſuch things, 
to which purp ſe doubtleſs this is premiſed by the Evangeliſt, Ac: 
cording to tize Counfelof God deciared by his Prophets, Micah. 542. 
Chriſt was to be Þ rn at Berhlehem, a City of Judea ; ſo the 
Citof Prieits and Scribes tell Herod, Matth. 2. 5. Maiy his Mother. 
and Fyeph his ſuppoſed Father, lived at a great diſtance from Bethle- 
kemin Nazaieth a Ciry of Galilee. God fo crdereth 1t, that tic 
Riman Empoinur (urder whoſe Power the Jews were at this time } 
orders a numbering of all his Subjects, cirher in all ins Domimons 4t 
tac {7,40 time, or at leaſt in Jud2a, and an Account to be taken of 
tEcir Perſons and Qaaiities, 11 order tothe laying Taxcs upon tem, 
to defray the Charges of the Empire. The Account of the Jews be- 
ing to be taken according to their Trives, thoſe who belonged to ea: h 
Tribe, were ordered io convene 1n the chicf City belonging to the 
Tribe of which ;hey were. Joſepb and Mary wer. bot of tie Tribe 
of 'n4ah, This Occaſion brings them both to Betalehem, being the 
chief City of thcir Tribe, to meet the Emperor's Commitione 's. So 
Chriſt came to be born in Bethlehem, according to the Word of the 
Lore.from which a Titfle ſhall not fail ; and /atile Bethlehem becomes 
not the leaſt amongſt the thouſands of Jadah, one coming out of it 
to be a Ruler in Tjrael, whoſe goings were of 0d even 'irom everlaſting. 


4 And Joleph alſo went up from Galilee, out of 
the city of Nazareth, into Judea, unto the city of 
*Tob. 7. 42. * David, which is called Bethlchem, beeauſe he was 
1Sam. 16.4+ 


of the houſe and linage of David, 


5 Tobe taxed with Mary his eſpouſed wife, being 


great with child. 


6 Ai:d fo it was, that while they were there, the 


days were accompliſhed that ſhe ſhould be delivered. 


This was th- Orcation of Jofeph's coming to Bethlehem, who either 


ſor fear of #94, or for the convenience of his Trade, (tho he be- 


longed to the Tribe of Judah) was removed into Galilee ; but he 
yieldeth obedience to the Cru Magiſtrate, and cniveth to be en- 
rolled in the Court Bozks belonging to the Koman Empire, to which 
by this Aﬀion he acknowledgeth himſelf a SubjeR : he alſo by this 
Ag publickly declared both huoſe:f and Mary his Wife to have been 
of the Tribe of Judah, and of the Family of David. We are toid it 
was the Cuſtain of the Romans to enrol! both Women and Children ; 
howcver Mary's perſonal Attendi1ice upon this Homage might have 
been excufed by her being great with Ghitd, had not the Counſcl of 
God fo ordercd it that Cirift ſhould be born there : This doubtlcfs 
carried Mary atong with Jojeph, he having now (according to the 
Apge's Pirettion, Matth, 1. 20, 24 ) roak her unto him as bis Wite. 
While they were there, Mary's time of Child-bearinz was accompliſh- 


ed. Ve have the like Phraſe, Gen. 25 24. 


7 Ard * ſhe brought forth her firſt-born ſon, and 
” wrapped him in ſwadling cloaths, and laid him in a 
manger, becauſe there was no room for them in the 


INN» 


It 5: Bucer's Note, that in the Greeb it 1s not hey firſt-born ſon, but 


3 T1gy av'mns 7 er ororoy her Son, the firſt born. He was truly 
her Son, aud her Son fir-bornz but he was not called wewr vrox'G- 
upon that account merely ; for he was the firſt born of every Creature, 
C5l. 1. 15. he was the firſt-born alſo of Mary ; but it cannot be from 
thence concluded, ſhe had more Sons, (for where there is but one 
Son, he is the firſt-born, ) | And wrapped him in ſwadling clcaths, 
and Iaid him in a Manger, &c, | Whether the Inn was in the City, 


or in the Suburbs adjoyning near to the City, 1s not mateaial for us 
to know ; not, contidering the occaſion of meeting at Bethlehem at 
that day, and the numbers who upon that occaſion muſt be there, 
3s it at all ſtrange, that a Pcrſon of no higher viſible Quality than a: 
Carpenter ſhould not find a Room in the Inn, but be thruſt into a! 
Stable ; nor was it unuſual in thoſe Countries for Men and Women 


Kk E. 
Shepherds. Not to Shepherds that were idle, but buſi:d in thcir hg 
neſt Vocations, keeping their Flocks, This Publication of hi« Birth 
is made by an Angcl, whether the Anzel Gabriel before mentioned 
or another, is not certain. This Angel ſurprizeth the Shepherds 
cometh upon them, thinking no ſuch thing, but cnly minding their 
buſineſs The Angel comes in a glorious Appearance, proba! _ 
extraordinary Lighr, for it 15 ſaid, it thoge r.und about then - Ars 
an Appearauce of extraordiniry Light is, Lube 9. 20, 32. Toat tle, 
were ſore afraid, was but natural ; we are naturally aftc&ed at fag. 
den and unuſual Appearances with Fear and Amz:ze nent. : 
10 And the angel ſaid unto them, Fear not, for he. 
hold, I bring you good tidings of great joy, which 
ſhall be to all people. 

11 For unto youis born this day, in the city of Dz. 
vid a Saviour, which is Chriſt the LORD 

12 Andthis ſhall be a lignunto you, Ye ſhall find the 


babe wrapped in {wadling cloaths, lying in a manger. 
Tho God 1n his Appearances to his People was wont fo to appear 
as to ſhew them Cauſe to revere his Majeſty, yet he always ſup- 
ported them, that their Spirits might not fail under thof:- Appre- 
henſions and Conſternations. The Angel bids them not to fear, for 
they had no reaſon to be afraid, he came not to bring them any 
affrighring Tidings, but Tidings of Joy, and that not to them alone 
but to all People, both Jews and Gentiles (for, to that Latitude the 
Text may be expounded) What was that ?| Unto y5u is bn this 4 
in the city of David a Saviour, which us Chrijt the Lord.) You have 
heard of the Promiſes of the Meſſias, of a Chriſt that thould come 
and of the Houſe of David. The Promiſes of that nature are thi: 
day fuifilled, he 1s born this very Day, Unto you, but not to yoy 
alone z he had before told them, that his Tydings of Joy ſhould «©. 
tend to all Nations. | And tbis ſhail he a Sign unto yiu. ] By thiz +g, 
(hall know the truth of what I fay, and you ſhall k .ow alfy u!;:, 
to find him. In the City of David, (that is, Bethlehem, as was 14. 
before ) you ſhall find the Babe wrapped in ſwadling clothes, and lj; 
in a manger. Where you ſhall find fuch a Bab:,t: at 15 i e,therefore | 
not offended at his low and me2n Condition ; let that be no ſtun. 
b:1ng-black to you ; I give it you asa S1gn by which you tha!l kngy 
h1m, 

13 And ſuddenly there was with the angel a mylti- 
tude of the heavenly hoſt, praiſing God. and ſaying, 

r4 Glory to God in the higheſt, and on earth peace, 
good will towards men. 

i hc Nativity of our "eviour was publiſhed firft by one 4r;;/ 
but it muſt be cclevrated by a multitu..e of Angels, who appear Prai- 
ſing God upon this occaſion. Theſe are cali'ed the Lord's tiolt, Pal, 
153.20,21. not only becauſe he uſeth them as his Armics to deſtroy 
his Enemies, but alto becauſe of the Order which is amoneſt them, 
How they praiſed God, is exprefled v. 14. they ſang, | Glory to 6:4 
in the Higheſt. On Earth, Peace and Good-will towards Men, \ The 
Words may be taken either Jndicatively,as ſignifying. That was cone 
to paſs thar Day by which God wonid have Glory, Men would hae 
Peace. and the S00d-will of God to the Sons of Men was unſpetk- 
ably declared : Or Precatorily, the Angels defiting God might hae 
Glory, and that Peace might be on Earth, and the good-will of 6:1 
publiihed to the Sons of Men, But the Vulgar Latin is moſt corrupt 
thatrendreth theſe Words Peace to Men of Good-will. When we con- 
fider that the Heavenly Ht was here praiſing God, it will appear vary 
reaſonable, to interpret theſe Words Judicatively ; the Angels hereby 
declaring their Apprehentions, and the Truth concerning this 45 
Providence, no A@ more declaring the Glory of God's Power, Wil- 
| dom, or Goodneſs 3 nor more declaring his Go9d-will towards Nei, 
and more conducing to Peace upon the Earth ; wh=ther by it e 
underſtand the Union of the Jews and Gentiles, or that Peace of par- 
ticular Souls which tloweth from: Juſtification by Faith in Chriſt; 
for tho the Text ſeemeth to ſpeak ofthr-e chings Glory to God, Pexce 
Fin Earth, and Good-will toward Men, yet indeed thev are but to; 
| the two latter differing only as the Cauſe and the Effe& : The $1d- 
; will of God 1s the Cauſe 3 Peace with, or amongſt men, is the Eft, 

Rom. 5g. I. Eph. 2. 14, 15,17. 


15 Andit came to paſs, as the angels were gone 


bl 


8 
U 


to have Lodgings in the ſame Rooms where Beaſts are kept; (it is no | hath made known unto us. 


more than is at this day in ſoine places even in Europe.) Here the 
Virgin falls into her Labour, brings forth a Son, and lodgerh him 


S And chere were in the ſame country ſhepherds 


Bethlehem was a place about which were Paſturcs for Sheep, as 
appears trom 1 Sar. 75. 16. There were Shepherds abroad in the 
mgit (tor fo the Word tignifieth ) watching over their Flocks, 
Phether the Phraſe Genifieth (as ſome think ) ſucceſſive Watches. 


ſuch a+are kept by Souidicrs and the by Prieſts, I cannot ſay. This 


maketh fome think, that it 1s hardly probable, that our Saviour was 
mori 13 December, 10 the midſt of tizz Winter, that being no time 
xnen Snepi:erds uſe 1n the night to be keeping their Flocks in the 


Þ 7.4 
+ Cs 


9 Ang lo, the angel of the Lord came upon them, 


3d the glory of the Lord ſhone round about them, and 
thcy were fore afraid: 


Chriſt was promiſed to Men, who by their Occupation were Shep- 
eras, Ven, 47. 3- He himſelf was the Chief Shepnerd, and the truc 
The firſt Publication of his Birth is made to 


16 And they came with haſt, and found Mary and 
Joſeph, and the babe lying in a manger. 

17 And when they had ſeen ze, they made known 
abroad the Saying which was told them concerning tis 
child, 

18 Ard all they that heard zr, wondred at thok 
things which were told them by the ſhepherds. 


It was Night, yet they delayed not to go, and make a Search,2c- 
cording to the Revel.itjon of the Angel ; and not in vain ; they found 
Mary and Foſeph, and tize Babe. Livine Revelations never dccelve 
the Soul that gives credit to them.Heaven and Earth may pals away, 
but nothing which God hath ſpoken ſhall paſs away without 1ts AC- 
compliſhment. {When they had ſeen it, they made knw" the ſay: 
ing, &c. ] They had no charge of Secrecy upon them, fo did well 
in publiſhing what was of ſuch Univerſal Concern for Mcn tf know ? 
Spiritual Morſels ought not to be ate alone. The Effect of their Re- 
lation, in the generality of the People that heard it, was the ſame 
which we have often met with, upon the Peoples ſecing of Chriſt's 
Miracles, viz. Amazement and Aſtoniſhment, We read nothing ol 
their Faith, The firſt was a natural Effet of a ſtrange Retatim 3 
the other muſt have been the ſpecial Operation ot God- 


19 But Mary kept all theſe things, and pondered 
them in her heart. 


gloriſying and 


20 And the ſhepherds returned , praiſing 


Cha 


away from them into heaven, the i| ſhepherds ſaid one\ 0: 
to another;Ler us row 'go even unto Bethlehem, ard” 


one 
/ by 


ſee this thing which is come to paſs, which the Lord” 


p. 08C"s 


2 
12.8 faid 
0r t 


In 
The « 
the « 
Lord 
thro 
a Mal 
tinue 
forth 
ward 
that t 
male, 
forty. 
of a \ 
Doe, 
to off 
and nc 
ſhe 
for a 
takes | 
Voung 1 
by the 
comet] 
not {ſo 
pended 
remem 
Born of 
me all 
dren 0 
Nur, | 
Lord, 
thoſe 
Numb, 
of anv 
Ifter fj 


[2 
, 
om 


} 


1004p: 


me zl 


| Ing" made of a Woman, made under the Law, Gal' 4- 4. and the 


praiſing 


fad in the law of the Lord, * A pair of turtle-doves, 


IL 


God for all the things that they had heard and 


a<it was told unto them. 


m_ different effett of theſe things upon the Generality of the Peo- 


The 


1 
BY per wondered,thinking the Story of tne Shepherds a ſtrange 


Story ; Mary ſuffereth them not to paſs out of her thoughts,nor en- 
rertaineth the-1) with a meer paffion which ſuddenly is extinguiſhed, 
hut ſhe pandereth them in her heart, both thoſe things ſhe had learn- 
«d from her Husband, ard what her {elf had heard from the Angel, 

; this ſo, which was related to her of or !5y the Shepherds. The 
elec return, that is, to the care of their Flocks. Religion gives 
: : + i ducharge from their ſecular Duties. The Diſciples had a ſpe- 
__ Cail, 1nd © ommand, that left their Nets, and their Parents, and 
{lowed Chr:{t. The Srepherds were only made occafional Preach- 
ors, p71 bac vice, they return, but [Glorifying and Praiſing God for 
ol the things 'e» had heard, and ſeen, as it was told _— which 
aroued, £ +47 they gave afirm and full Aﬀent to them, and that they 
were the ficit Fruits of Believers under the Goſpel-Diſpenfation. 


True Faith produceth great Joy, and Thanſgiving to God, and 


S. LUKE: 


25 Andbehold,there was a man in Jeruſalem, whoſ- 
name was Simeon, and the fame was jnſt and devout, 


hoſt was upon him. 


26 Andit was revealed unto him by the Holy Ghoſt, 
that he ſhonld not ſee death before he had ſeen the 
Lord's Chriſt. 

27 And he came by the ſpirit into the 
when the parents brought in the child 
him after the cuſtom of the law : 

28. Then took he him vp in hisarms, ard bleſſeag God 
and faid, 

Interpreteters have ſpent much pains in fortifying their Conjet- 
ures (for they can be no more) that this Sime;n was 1.56.2 Simeng 
the Son of Hillcl, the Father of Gamalicl,but to what purpoſe I can- 
not tcl] 3 1t can hardly bz thought that a Man of thar Note,thould do 
ſuch a thing as this ſo openly, and no more notice be taken of him. 


temple: And 
J:{us, to do for 


needs muſt produce Joy, becauſe of the Union it maketh betwixt a 
Squl. and 1ts defired objed. 
21 And when eight days were accompliſhed for 
the circumciling of the child, his name was * called 
ESUS, which was ſo named of the angel, before he 


was conceived in the womb. | | 

Ti;e time Preſcribed by the Divine Law for Circumcifion, was 
the Eightn Day,Gen. 17. 12. Levit. 12. 3. he was indeed the Law- 
ver, and as ſuch not tyed to the obſervance of the Law. But he 


Law was, Lev#12, 2. That if a Woman had comceived Seed, and Boyn 
a Man-"hild in the Eighth Day,the Fleſh of his fore-skin ſhould be Circum- 
cy;nciled, He was to make himſelf appear the Son of Abraham, 
and fo this was God's Covenant, Gen. 17. 10. with Abraham and 
his Seed after him, every Man-Child among you ſhall be Circun- 
ciſed, This 1.aw Chriſt was bound to fulnl, and by the fulal- 
ling of it in this poiot, he ſhewed himſelf a Debtor to the whole Law, 
Galath. 5. 3- and by his obſervance of it, he was to teach us our Du- 
tr, He was to be a Miniſter of the Circumciſion, Rom. 15. 8. 
which they would never have allowed him to be, had not he 
himſelf vcen Circumciſed, upon which account Paul took Timothy, 
and Circumcijed him, Acts 16. 3« By his Circumciſion alſo we were 
+ he Circumcijed with the Circumciſion made without hands, in putting 
of the Bady of the Sin of the Fleſh, Coiol. a. 117. It was there- 
fore recſonable and neceſſary that Chrift fheuld be Circumciſcd 
the eizth Day. | His Name was called Feſus. | It was in Circumcition 
before Witneſs publicxly declared to be fo ; for God by his Argel 
had given him his Name, Matth. 1. 21. We read of four uuder the 
Old Teſtament, to whom God gave Names before they were Born, 
Tax, Gen. 17. 19- Joſtah, 1 Kings 13. 2. Iſhmael, Gen. 16. 11.Cyrus, 
Iſa. 44. 23. and in the New Teſtament to Fobn the Bapti/t, and to 
Feſus Crit » Which lets us know the certainty to God of future 
Contingencies 3 for tho the Parents of Iſhmael, and Iſaac, Fohn Bap- 
tit, and Chriſt, impoſed thoſe Names 1n obedience to the Command 
of God,and there was but a ſmall time betwixt the giving of theſe 
four their Names and their Birth, yet the Caſe was otherwiſe as to 


Foſiah and Cyrus. 
22 And when the days of her purification, accord- 


That which Calvin and Brentius, and otter reformed PDivines do 

think is much more probable, that he was ſome ordinary, plain Man 

of an obſcure Quality, as to his Circumſtances in the Word. 

There was 4 genera] expeRAation of the M:ſſizs at this time, but very 
few had arigit notion of him, but lived in a vain exvettation of, 
I know not what ſecular Prince who ſhould bring them a Temporal 
Deliverance. Theſe few were tcarce any of them of their Rablics 
or Rahbans, but a Poor dcſpited ſort of Peop!e, whom, thoſe great 
Dottors counted Accurſed John 5. 48, 49. The Revelations of Chrif 
were to none of the Pharijces, but to loſeph a Carpenter, to Marv a 
deſpiſed Virgin, tho of the Houſe of David. to an ordinary Pricſ 
Zacharizs, to Shepherds ;, and why we ſhon!d fancy this Simeon a 
principal Do#or, I cannot tell. The Evangeliſt gives him his high- 
eſt Title, [ 4- juſt Man and devout, and one that waited for the Con- 
folarin of Urael.] One of the Remnant according to the Eletion of 
Grace (mentioned by the Apoſtle ) a holy, and Righteous Man, 
one, wye waited for the Conſila-i5n of Iſrael, Which is the ſame in 
Senſe with the C' aradter given of ]/-ph of Arimathea. Ch. 23. $0. 
that waited for the Kingdom of God. Simeon waited for Chriſt, that 
1s meant by the Comlation of Iracl. For it is very obſervable, that 
the Prophets ordinariiy comforted the People of God amongſt the 
Jews, agaiw-r all rheir fad tidirgs they brought them, with the Pro- 
poectes cf the coming,and Kingdom of Chrift,Ifaiah 55.13 Jer. 21-13, 
Zech, 1. 17. Herein Oid Simeon ſhewed the truth of his Pie: », and 

Devotion, that he beljeved, and waited for the coming of Chriſt. He 
1d a true Notiun of the Meſſiah promiſed. he b:lieved tiict he ſhou'd 
come, and he waited for his coming. | And it was revealed un'o kim, 
that he ſhould not ſee Death until he ſaw the Loyd;s Chriſt. 1 God by 
tre Holy Ghoſt give him this ſpecial Revelation as the reward of 
his Faith, and the Anſwer of 1s Prayers, that he ſhould live to ſee 
Chriſt Born. The ſame Holy Spirit moved him to go into the Tem- 
pleat tat very cime when Joſeph and Mary broucht in Chrif? to 
preſ-nt him to the Lord according to the Law, ar (tho it be not 
expreſt_) certainly the ſame Spirit did Intimare to him, that that 
Chiid was the Lords Chriſt. The old Man tabes him up in hs Arms, 
bleſſeth God and ſaith, 


29 Lord, now *letteſt thon thy ſervant depart in , 


peace, according to thy word. 
30 For mine eyes have * ſeen thy ſalvation. 


ing to the law of Moſes, were accompliſhed, they 

brought him to Jeruſalem, to preſent hizz to the Lord. | 
23 ASit is written in the law of the Lord, * Every 

male that openeth the womb ſhall be called holy to the 


LORD. : | ve, 
24 And to offer a ſacrifice according to that which is 


or two young PLIgcons» 

In theſe Verſes is a Record of the Virgins obedience to two Laws, 
The one concerniug the Purification of the Woman after Child-Birth 3 
the other concerning the preſenting of the ; Male-Child before the 
Lord. We have the Law concerning Purification, Lett. 12. 4 
throughout. The Sum was, That if a Woman had brought forth 
a Mal: Child. ſhe ſhould be unclean ſeven Days, and after rat con- 
tinue in the Blood of her Purifying thirty three Days, If the brought 
fortha Fem:le, ſhe was to be unclean fourteen days, and after- 
ward to continue in the Blood of her Purlfying, Sixty Six days. So 
that the time of the Womans Purification after the Birth of a Fe- 
male, was fourſcore Days, for a Male (which was the preſ-at caſe ) 
forty. After the Expiration of which time,ſhe was to bring a Lamb 
of a Year old, for a Burnt-ofering, and a young Pigeon or a Turtle- 
Dove, for a Sin Offering, to the Prieſt to the Tabernacle, who was 
tooffer it for her, and to make an Atonement, If ſhe were Poor 
and not able to bring a Lamb (which ſeems the preſent caſe) then 
ſhe was to bring only two Turtle-Doves,or two young Pigeons, the one 
for a Burnt-Offering, the cther for a Sin-Offering. The Evangeliſt 
kakes no notice of any Lamb, but only a pair of Turtle-Doves,or Two 
Tong Pigeons, Which lets us know, ſhe was Poor, aud ſo obliged 
by the Law no further. ary after her Forty Days were expired, 
cometh up to the Temple, to yield obedience to this Law. And 
nof ſo only, but alſo to preſent hey Child before the Lord, This de- 
pended upon two Laws. We find the one, Exod. 13. 2. where in 
remembrance of God's ſparing the {7aelites, when he ſmote the firſt 
Born of the Ezyptians, he gave the Iſraelites, this Law. San#tifie unto 
me all the Frſt-Born, whatſoever opener the Womb amongſt the Chil- 
aren of Iſrael, both of Man and Beaſt it is mine. So Chap, 22. IC. 
oy 34. 19. Inſtead of theſe, God took the Levires, as appears by 

amb,8. 12. yet were the Firſt Born to be preſented before the 


31 Which thou haſt prepared before the face of all 
people. 


of thy people Iſrael ; 


calls the Lords Salvation, 2. A lizht to lighten the Gentiles, 2, The 
Glory of Iſrael 3 and a Petition, that now the Lord would let him de- 
part in Peace,but I ſhall take the Words in order. | Lord / letteſt thou 
now thy Servant depart in Peace according to thy Word.” He delirethto 
die, having now lived to ſee what alone he defired Life for. It is 
a Speech much like Facob, Gen. 46. 39. when he had ſeen Foſeph's 
(whom he vhought loſt) but ſpoken here upun a much more weigh- 
ty Conſideration. The Word Tranllated depart ſignines to abflve, 
and forgive, Chap. 6. 37. to diſmiſ;, and to deliver 25 from Bond- 
age and Miſery, it is uſed to expreſs the Death of good Men, by the 
Septuagint, Numb. 20. 29. and the Noun from it is uſed to by the 
Apoſtle, 2 Tim. 4.6. Simeon owns God to be the Lord of his Life, 
who had the Power of it, and could alone diſmils him, and f1zarfy- 
eth himfclf to be an old Man, ſatisfied with Days, willing to be at 
reſt from the Miſeries of this Life ; but he beggeth to be difmiiled, 
and to die in Peace, that is, happily, ſee Gen. 15. 1c. 2 Kings 22. 20, 
Pſal. 4.8. [ According to thy Word, | that is, thy prowie mentioned, 
v. 26, But the putting of theſe Words in before ti:.ſe Words 7 
Peace, ſeems to import that he could not die in peace. tofore be had 
ſeen God's Word fulfilled to him, in which he had :i..ad- kim to 
hope. | For mine Eyes have ſeen thy Salvation. ] that «s, thy Chrilt 
according to the Revelation I had from thee. Simeon had a ſpecial 
Revelation of a Corporeal fight of Chriſt, he could not die happliy, 
till he had had that. None of us can die in Peace, till we have ſeen 
the Lord's Salvation with a ſpiritual Eye, and made App'1cation 
of the promiſes of the Goſpel, in the more general Revelation 
of his Word. { Thy Salvation, which thou ha prepared before 
the Face of all People. ] That is, the Author of Szlvation, for 
there is no Salvation in any other, As 4. 12, Simeou declares 
that this Salvation was prepared for all Pcop'e, Hatah tl. 10s 
he was propheſied of as an Enſign for the People, to it ſhall the 
Gentiles ſeek; ſo Tjaith 52. 10, Tre Lord hath made bare hi 
holy Arm in the Eyes of all the Natons, and all the ends of 


Lord, and Redeemed by the payment of Five Shekels apicce, for all 
thoſe who were above the number of the Levites, as appeareth by 
Numb, 3. 44, 45, 46, 47. and five ShebJes was the Redemption price 
of anv Male upon a Singular Vow, Levit. 27. 6. For theſe two cnds, 


Ifter fx Weeks, Foſep> and Mary, and 7eſus come up to Jeruſalem. 


the Earth ſhall jee the Salvation of our God, So Pſalm g8. 2- 
Simeon ſpeaks the ſame thing more particularly, ver. 32 [ 4 
light to lighten the Gentiles, and the Glory of thy Pele iſrael. } 
Ail the People mentioned, ver, 32. were either Gentiles or Fews. 


Simem here propheſieth, that Chriſt ſhould /7zhten the ce 


Chap. 11. 


* waitin | - | 2. 7 
Mary and upon the Shepherds is worthy of our notice. The | (Gþ,c 8 for the conſolation of lirael, and the holy wn 


Phil. 1. 22. 
*Chap.3-6. 


32* A light to lighten the Gentiles, and the glory _=_ 42. 6. 
+ 13-47- 


Tbe Song confifts of an Elogrum of Chriſt, whom Simem here & 28, 


Gent. 46: 


28, } 


$e* 55 


£ EXPIÞ Y 7 — 
KFC RRRES.2 CR =: 


a 


- a = 


WE: 2 ai IIS Ah 4 A n 
is »- . 76 < w _ 
-- 
— « 


<> 
_— _—_ — ” nd 
OE Eos TE D 
_ W—_ 


Chap, Il, 


S295 FEED 
YAC.;8.2 


* Joh. 39. 


"IL 


= * . I 
© -* his mother 


Of. 


The State of the Gertzl2s (by whom were underſtood all the _- 
le in the World, except the jews ) is often in Scripture expreſ\- | 
7-4 under the Notion of Darkneſs, both ig reſpett of the Igno- | 
\apce ofthe true God which was amongſt them, aid of their 7dola- 
irs ard Szoerſtition, and their lewd and wicked Lives, much pro-| 
Pe tones ts rhkeir Religion. Hence Paul 1s ſaid to be ſent to the ; 
Gentiics. to twra them from Darkneſs to Light, Aﬀs 26. 18. Chriſt is 
ealicd Light, "John &. 22. T am the Light of the world, he that follow- ; 
eo (alin wall in Darknejs, but ſpall have the Light of Life. So 
So, Comformable to the old Prophecies, Ja.. 60. 1. Ariſe, ſhine, 
os rho Ti-ht is come. — Ver. 2. Behold, the Darkneſs ſhall cover ; 
re Earch, ard gras Darkneſs the People, but the Lord ſhall ariſe 


. WE 
$37 


rin;n thee. — Ver. 3» And the Gentiles fhall come to ity Li 
And tpeaking of Chriſt, 1 will alſo give thee for a4 Light t 
Gentiles, that thu mayeſt be my Salvation to the ends of the Earth : 


So Ta. 42. s. Ant give thee for a Covenant of the People, for a Light (afterwards, 


of the Gentiles. Sce Pſal. 58. 3. Aﬀs 13. 47. And the Glory of thy 
Peple Wracl.] All the Earth is the Lord's, but Iſrael 15 calied his 
Sor, his firt-born, Exod, ge 22. Chriſt was the Miniſter of the Cir- 
eumciſior, Romans 15,8. To them it was that he was promiſed 3 
Ci them it was that he was born, Remans 9. 5s. Amongſt them It 
was that he preached and wrought Miracles. He came amongſt his 
own, Tohn 1. 11. It was ſaid of old, I will place Satvation in Zion 
jer Iracl my Glory. Chriit is the Glory of any People z the Preach- 
ing of Chriſt, the owning and profetling of Chriſt, a living up to 


EU KEE. 


a previous Ad of his Will determining the thing, 


|end of the World ; (Tea, a Sword ſhall pierce through thine gwy ©. 
72ht, alſo. ] as the Irons entred into the Soul of Joſeph, F/al, 1-5, 10, 
the |tel's the Virgin her Soul ſhall be wounded with the Reproach, 


< 


Chap, | 


tet an; 

{ider : In the mean time it 1s freely granted, that the ron * 
Mens Unbelief, and Malice, and Oppoſition to Chriſt, and h;- : of 
ſpel, is the Proximate Meritorious Caufe of the fall of any Soul " : 
occaſion of him. It follows | And for a Sign that ſhall be ſpaben 
gaint. ) Such a Mark as Job ſpeaks of, Job 16, 12, or ſuch 7 5;;, 
as Ijatah ſpeaketh- of, 1/atah 8. 18. Simeon here propheficth 7h - 
Chrifttand his Miniſters and People, ſhould be Ridiculed gn 
the Arrows of ungodly Men ſhould be ſhot againſt him; = 
proved true in that Age as to Chriſt, and his Apoiles ; and in "ay 
ceeding Ages as to all that derive from him, and will f hid t, _ 


Indignitics, which ſhouid be offered to this bleſſed Pabe; as it pre." 
when ſhe heard him Reviled, and faw him <; Ucified, 
[ That the thoughts of many Hearts may be revealed.] The Gf." 
times, eſpecially times of Perſecution will diſcover whom Gog 1. 
choſen, and whom he hath tot z by diſcovering the thoughts of 
their Hearts 3 1t will t!1ea ve ſeen who will receive, and who will re 
jet the M:ftzh, who is on his fide, and who will. be againit : Tg 
The Term | That ] doth denote tlie Conſequent, not the Efeg, 71. 
Preaching ot the Golpei is the Lord's Fan, by which he purceth t, 
Floor. Perſecution 1s the Lord's Sieve, by which he winnowers 
Churches, and ſeparatcth the Dirt, and Darnel, and Tares from, 
Wheat. W 


t 


. 
$4 
ON 


% 


is Rulcs, this is a Veoplies Glory. And as ſome do this more and 
better thar others, ſo in God's account they differ from others 1n 
what 1s true Glor:. 

33 Ard Joſeph and his mother marvelled at thoſe 
things which were ſpoken of him: 

Brentizs Notes on this Text. Non adimirantur quia non credunt, 
ſed quia credant, ideo admirantur. They did not admire becauſe 


Goſpcl-times, and times of Perſecution are both of thc, 

times which make great Diſcovery of Mens Spirits, by 
36 And there was one Anna a propheteſs,the Janc;. 
ter of Phanuel, of the tribe of Aſer, ſhe was of a prac 


age, and had lived with an husband feven years from 
her virginity, 


they did not bclieve, but becauſe they believed, therefore they mar- 
velled. Thev had Revelations what Chriſt was, the Angel had ap- 
pearcd to :jeph, to WHary, to Zachary, and Elizabeth, the Wiſe men 
had come from the Eaft (if as ſome think they came ſo ſoon ) yet 
th-v marvelled, they did not Contemn and mock at theſe things, 
hat certenly neither did they fully underſtand them, but in the 
General blioved the Divine Revelation. I do doubt whether before 
Chrift was J:c/ared t5 be the Son of God with Power, by his Reſur- 
reftion from the Lead. Rem. I. 3, 44 either Mary or Chriſt's own 
Piſcipies did fieadily and firmly beiteve, that Chrift was the Eternal 
&%an 0; Ged ; rig? 1t 15 clear that before that time, they believed him to 
be crit of God, and a zreat Prophet, nay the promijed Meſſtss, the 
Chriſt of God, and gonerally believed what was ſpoken of the Meſſtns 
and the Chritt belonged to him 3 but whether they did rightly un- 
derſtand that the Meſiah was to be God-man, I cannot teil. John 
Baptift ſeemeth clearett ig the Caſe, Peter alſo made a famous Con- 
feſſion of it, but many things we Rezd of Peier atterward which 
ſpcak cyen Peter's Faith in the cafe, rather the Embryo of F aith, than 
a fixed and perfett Faith. But I impoſe nothing here on my Reg- 
dor. Ter him indie as he feeth reafon, ſuppoſing a ixcd firm Faitly in 
this Cafe, yet they might Marvel, for Cliriſt #5 to be admired of them 
that. beliowed. 
24 And Sirmcon bleſſed them, and ſaid nnto Mary 
other, Echold, this ch:ld 1s ft for the * fall and 
ring again of many in Iſracl, and for a * ſign which 
z ſhall be ſpoken againſt. 
35 (Yea, a * iword ſhall pierce through thy own 
ſoul alſo) that the thoughts of many hearts may be 
[Simeon bleſſ}zd them ;] ſome may queſtzon how it was that Simeon 
bletſed Chriſt, when as the Apoſtle tells us, The leſſer 3s bleſſed of 
the greater / But we muRt diſtinguiſh betwixt a Prophetical Bleſſing, 
as Jacob þlefſed his Sons, which was nothing but a Prediction how 
God wovld bleſs them. 2. An Authoritative Bleſſing, as the Pricſts 
bleſſed the People inthe Name of the Lord, Numb. 5. Which 1s no- 
thing but a pronouncing them blcfſed by Authority from God, | 
whom God hath bleifed. 3. A Charitable or Precatory Bleſſing, 
Praying God to Bleſs them. Thus Inferiors may bleſs Superiors, 
as well as Superiors may bleſs Inferiors. The firit, or Jaſt, or both 
thoſe is to be underſtood. here, not the ſecond. | And he ſaid to 
Mzry his Mother. | Not to Joſeph who he knew was not his Natural, 
but Legal ard Reputcd Father. | Behold this Child is ſet for the fall, 
&c. | that by the fall and iſzng again, 15 here meant the Salvation 
and Pamanztion of many 15 doubtcd by no valuable Interpreters. The 
Apofile fo applyeth; 1a. 8. 14. where he is ſaid to be for a Stone of 
Tumbling, and for a Rock, of offence, to both the Houſes of Iſrael, for 
a Gin, and for a Snare, to the Inhabitants of Jeruſalem, and many 
emmgſt them ſpall ſtumble and fall, and be brol;en, and be ſnared, 
and be tiben s fo doth Peter, x Pet. 2: 8. neither is it more than 
Chrift tclieth us, Joh. g. 39. For Judgment I am come into this 
Wirtz, that they which ſee nit mignt ſee, and that they which ſee 
might be made blind, Accordingly the Apoſtle ſaith, 2 Cor. 2. 16. 
that they were to ſome, the Sawvour of Death unto Death, to others 
ene Savor of Life wito Life. The reaſon 15, becauſe they that believe 
m him fhal. bs javed ;, they that believe not ſhall be Damned, Mar. 
£5f. 16, Toin 3. $8, 36. This js now granted on all Hands, That 
Chriſt will Le the occefion of many Peoples Damnation, cven all 
that cezett, and oppoſe him, 2nd believe not in him ; and the cauſe 
of many PEOPICE S2:V3tion, even all that ſhall be ſaved, For there 
ws n9 other name given wider Heaven, by which any can be ſaved, 
As 4. 12.fee Mitth. 23.44. 1 Pct, 2. 4, g. Andit is obſervable, 
tht the Salvation of Souls by Chriit is exprefſed by the Term Riſing. 
£0 as al! are fallen, Eph. 2, 2. and have need of the application of a 
greater Power to tem tor their Salvation, than an under-propping 
of the invare power orthcir Wilis, But the great queſtion is about 
£1] as Fs ſet , whether it 5zniheth only, an event, or ſome Coun 
di and Ordinaticn of God. Let us compare 1t with other Texts, where 
the lame \ord is uled, Phil. 1. 17. 1 Thefſ. 3. 2. How ſuch great 
iffucs of Providence thould happen, without the fore-knowledge 


i 


37 And ſhe m4 a widow of about fourſcore ang 
'four years, which departed not from the tempiz, 
but ſerved Cod with faſting and prayers night 4 
day. 

| 3d Ard ſhe coming in that inſtant,gave thanks like- 
wiſe unto the Lord, and ſpake of him to all them thr 


* looked for redemption in || Jeruſalem. : 

| God took care that our Szviour's Nativity ſhould be fully 21tc{4, "i 
{ To the Teſtimony of the Angels, the Iſije-men, the Sheverde, 53. 8 
meon, hcre is added another,it is that of 4nna who is deſcribed here 35 4 
\by her Trihe, and by her Father, She was of the Tribe cf- 46, © 4! 

one of the meaneſt Tribes, and of thoſe Ten Tribes that were on 
ricd into the Captivity of Aria, having before made a Dcfetinn 
Cunder the Condut of Jeroboam) both trom the Bouſe of Di; 
and trom the true Worſhip of God, But tho tie Generality did 


yet many particular Perſons removed, to 1njoy the truce Worſhip 9: e 
God, and joyned themſelves to Zuduh, Fer. 50. g. it was prophcticd, 
that the Cildren of Urael ſhould come, they, and the Children of Judah ! 
together, going, and weepin? #9 feeh the Lord their God. Whit ter t 
ather Phanuel was, we r<ad not; ſhe is aifo further ſaid to he a 7:4. 1 
pheteſs. Such there werc among!t the Jews. We read of Det:1zh, t 
Miriam, and Huldah, to whom King 7ojruh ſent. T hey vere cl. r 
led Propnets, and Propheteſſes who revcaled the Will of God untoth: 
Pcoplc, but 1 the 0/4 Zeſtament 1t moſt general fignified, ſuch f 
God enavicd to 3:retel things which were to come. Ihe Spirit of 
Prophecy had muc” ' T2mong the Jews fur four hundred vers [ 
before Chriit 5 © : C. ming it degan to revive, This Wo- 
man fſcems t& * «6 3440 of an hundred vears old, if we ac- tl 
count the ©}: 10 vp vears here mentioned from her Widowhood, Je 
not 'f2, if wa cornnut them from hr Birth. She was but {cyen vers (1 
Marricd, al: the rer of her life ſhe had ſpznt iv Widow hood. 15): {2 
departed ni from the Temple Night or Bay, ] That is, ſhe wis fre- hy 
quently there, giving up her ſelf wholly to Religious Excrcic, fo 
Prayer and Faſting, that tlie might be more fit for Prayer, This ral 
Woman coming 1n at that inſtant, wizce Simeon took up Clhiiſt in of 
his Arms, Qc. | gave thanks likewiſe unto the Lord, and ſpike of him for 
to ſuch as the knew 1n Feraſalein, who looked for the Red. mption. bir 
of Iſrael. 1 There is no place where Cod hath had a Name, but [19 the 
ever it be Corrupted, and Debauched, hath a number that keep lg 
cloſe to God. God in Ahabs time had ſeven thouſand in 7::!. $ | 
And 1n this moſt Corrupt time, there was a Simeon, and an 4s, oy” 
and aiſo others who had a true Notion and ExpeGation of the 3%: a 7 
fiah, and theſe the Holy Ghoſt taketh more notice of than of all the = wi 
Jewiſh Do&ors, all the Scribes and Phariſees, whoſe Names are 5ottei —_ k 
while what theſe Perſons ſaid, and did, ſhall remain for a 3Mcmor?! re, Or 
- Pa rd of the "B92 
of them, wherever the Goſpel ſhall be Preached to tic ond 7 (1 anſ 
World. | 
39 And when they had performed all things =ccorc- his 
ing to the law of the Lord, they returned into 6911: = 
the 


to their own city Nazareth. 


Ifthe Wiſe-men mentioned Matth. 2. 1, had been with #71 
fore this time 3 it is more than probable, that Zerod would hive mans , 
an end of Chriſt at this time z therefore certainly it was after = 
time. Luke ſaith nothing of what we have Matth. 2. wer. 13, 1415 
19, 20, 21,22,23. of Joſeph going into Egypt, upon the Admonitiui 


of the Angel, nor his coming back z but both Matthew and Lite 4g1et | "_ 
in their dwelling at Nazareth, which he calleth their own Cy, 1! t 
there Joſeph dwelt, ver. 4. How after this the Wiſe-men Catu- me 
to find him at Bethlehem, Matth. 2. the Scripture hati 0! toid « 
us. It is very idle for any. to ſay Joſeph dwelt there ; for ten he ne 
would not have taken vp his Im there, nor been put fo i"! + 2p, | 
ſtreſs, as to have his Wife bring forth in a Stable ; Bzlides, 1 7 . Ipa 
apparent from wer. 4. and this verſe, and from Matth. 2. 22. Fe" ; Be. 
he dwelt at Nazareth. God, who ordered the Motion of tic | my 


Wiſe-men, and thcir Infiructions to be fent to Bet3ichem f0 [09K 
for Chritt, could eafily find Joſeph fome Bufineis to be dons there | foe 
at that time; whether ſome Buſinefs of tiis Trade, or tine 07 | thas 
fit ro his Friends, we cannot fay, 


of God, or how God ſhould have any ſuch tore-knowledge without 


; "IT 
al / * A ! - 


o * Ar.4 the child grew, and waxed ſtrong in ſpi- 


, 32 on him- 


This Verſc ſhortly ſummeth up all that we have in the Goſpel, of they underſtond no: the Cavins 


the Hiſtory ofthe firlt rwelve Years of our Saviour's Life, 
there could be no Acceſſion to the pertettion of the Divine Nature 
1 Chriſt, yet as fo h1s Humane Nature, he was (as we are ) capa- 
ble of Accefſion 0! Habits, and Witdom of Knowledge; for tho 
the Divine Nature was perfonally united to the Humane. Nature, 
et there was no Communication oz Propertics. 
1 Now his parents went to * Jeruſalem eyery year 
|, *ar the feaſt of the paſlover. 
i Tic Law of God enjoyned all the Males of the Iſraelites to appear 
mf -4, at Jeruſalem bzforc him, three times each year, of which the Feaſt 
48 4 of Unleavened Bread was one z but the Women ſeem not to have 
been all under the ſame Obligation; but many of them went, of 
which JHary was one , but we read not of Chriſt's going till he was 
+wolve Tears old. Some think that the Women uſed to go once 1n 
1 Year : we read that E/kanah's Wife went, 1 Sam. 1. 5,6, 7. but 
whether they generaily did ſo or no, the Scripture ſaith not. One 
thing is obſervab'e : The Phariſees and Scribes, and Prieſts, had in 
thoſe days much corrupted the Worſhip of God by their Traditons, 
yet they ret1ined the Subſtance of God's Inſtitutions, We find both 
our Saviour and his Diſciples, and other People of God, not wholly 
frfaking the Jewiſh Church, becauſe of its Corruptions 3 yet we 
cannof think thev joyned with them in any thing of their Will-Wr- 
ſn; from whence we may learn, a Tendernefs 2s to a tot2! Separa- 
tion from a Church, and tie Lawfulneſs of attending Divine Min1- 
ſirations, tho attended with Uſages which we approve not of,provi- 
dd there be no Idolatry in the Service. 
42 And when he was twelve year old, they went 


up to Jeruſalem,after the cnſtom of the fealt. 

it 15 {id by thoſe who are learned in the Jeviſh Writings,that till 
z Child was of thisage, hz was not obliged by the Law to go. We 
have 1a Scripture nothing to aſcertain us in the Caſe ; it 1s certain 
that our Saviour went at this age, after the Cuſtom of the Feaſt. that 
is, ſo as to be there about the fourteeth Day of the Month 
Nijan, 

43 And when they had fulfilled the days, as they 
returned, the child Jeſus tarried behind in Jeruſalem, 
and Joſeph and his mother knew not of ie. 

44 But they ſuppoſing him to have been in the com- 
pany, went a days journey, and they ſought him amayg 
their kinsfolk and among their acquaintance. 

45 And when they found him not, they turned back 

apain to Jeruſalem,ſeeking him. 
Tie Featt of the Patfover, and of Unleavened Bread, held ſeven 
| Days, during which time Foſeph and Mary ſtayed in Feruſalem, and 
then returned. They uſually both went to and returned from theſe 
Feaſts, in great Troops or Companies. Chriſt tarriced behind, Mary 
thinking ke had been in the Company, miſſed him not z they re- 
turb to Feiuſalem toleck him 

46 And it came to paſs, that after three days, they 
found hum in the temple, fitting in the midſt of the 
Doctors,both hearing them,and asking them queſtions. 

aitcr tiirce ays, po'fibly here is to be underſtood from the time 
they ftcle weat from Fernſalem 3 one Day they went torward in their 
Journey, a ſecond day they were coming back, and the third Day 
they found him; for it cannot be thought they ſhould be in Feruſa- 
{?n three Days betore they found him, contidering that they found 
bum in the Temple, which it-is likely was the firſt place they ſought 
for him in. It ihould ſeem that the D:#ors of the Law gave a gene- 
ral liverty to any; to propourid any Queſtions to them about the Law 
of God, to which they gave Anſwers: Bur it is very probable, that 


Wet, 
Bs 


him to 5#t 2mon;ſt them; for tho themſelves ſate on Benches yet 


| ng brought up at the feet of Gamaliel, 
t-. 47 And * ll that heard him were aſtoniſhed at his 
| | Underſtanding and anſwers. 

1.22, . What was the Subjet-matter of the DJors and Chriſt's Diſcour- 
"e 4, 'S Evainly queſtioned ; only in the general we may be aſſured, it 


hap IL | S. LL © BE: 


1" ; Bp by . * . . . . 
loncthing more than 0:410ary apreared in him, that they admitted * 


thelr Au litors uſually fate at their Feet ; hence we read of Paul's be- 


diator, and the great Prophet promiſed, that ſhou!d reveal the Wiil 


ap FR Slled with wiſdom, and the grace of God was up- of God to People ; much icfs did the yet fully and diftinaly under- 


ſtand, that he was by Nature the Erernal Son f God, She beli-ved 
ſo much as was revealed to nerclear:y concerning Chriit. It 3s /.1/f 
which he ſpabs unto them ;, they had 
not a clear and diftin&t undcritinding = 4 In the ha Frnrn 
from theſe Words cf our Saviour, and th:- Fi > 5ſhis. we may carr, 
That Inferiurs are mt {it all things under th» P; wer 'f tne 1919t] Aj 1. 
tural Superiours 3 particularly not in ſuc; things wheroin they cmmor 
yield Obedience to them without « Diſpbcedience unto God, Thor 
are ſome Caſes wherein inſtcad of obcy ing, we 2:6 bound 1 5 14s 
both Father and Mother by our Sav:our's Precept. 

51 And he went dowa with then, and cams co I: 
zareth, and was ſubject unto them. But his wother 
kept all theſe ſayings in her heart. 

we left him at Nigarety, after Mrys Pur!'t, ation, V, 29, We fhnd 
him at Nazareth now at twelve Years old. We thi!! 10W rea:i no 
more of him till Chap, 3. 23. when he came to bo 251t thiry Years 
of age. What he did in the mean time, is a YZuiincf. »f too much 
Curioſity for us to enquire, and of very little Sigiiicancy to-us if 
we knew. Some think he wrought with his Father upon his Trade : 
as I cannot tell how to prove it, 15 I know nothing 2gainft 1t, It 45 
not like he was ſent to any of the Schorfs of thetr Prophets; as he 
who could argue with the Dofors pertinently at twelve years of 4Aye, 
2nd to whom theSpirit was given not by meiſure,had no necd of the:c 
Inſtructions ; ſo their Academies were not ſuch as we can reafonavly 
tink that, Zoſeph and Mary ſhould feck any Education for him tn 
them : and know no reaſon why we thould think. that he who 2!) 
horred not the Womb of the Virgin, nor a Stable, nor 4 Main: , 
[hould abhor the Works of an honeſt Vocaticn, and not much 
more abhor an idle Life. But we diſpute about thecte things in vain. 
being ſuch as to which we can never be ſatisfied, (Gad having |:1d- 
den them from our Knowledge : ) What is for onr InſtruRion :s 16.4 
us, He was ſubject unto his Parents. This teacheth the greateit ana 
higheſt Mortals, to honour their Fathers and Mothers ; which (tuuch 
the Apoſtle ) is the firſt Commandment with promije, Solomon honour'd 
his Mother, and behold a greater than Solomon 1s here, paying hi. 
Homagealfo both to the Womb that bare him, and to his ( ſuppoled } 
Father, that provided for him, and protefted him. { Bur his 317he; 
kept all theſe ſayings in her heart. ] Mary was no forgetful Hearer, ſine 
things ſhe did not yet clearly underſtand, but the kept them in !.er 
hearr 3 and thoſe who do ſo as to Ged's Word, itall in tune under 
ſtand them. : 


and in favour with God and Man. 

If any ask how he,who was che Etzrnut Wiſdom of the Father Cwho 
is the only wiſe God) encreaſed in Wiſdom 2 they muſt know, that 
all things in Scripture which are ſpoken of Chritt, are not ſooken 
with reſpe& to his entire Perſon, but with rc tpet to the one us the 
other Nature united in that Perſon ; he encreaſedt tn Wiidim. as tic 
did in Age, or Stature, with reſpe&t to his Humine, not to his Dt- 
vine Nature, And, as God dayly magnitted his Srace and Favour 
toward him, ſo he gave him Favour with the Ncighbourho:d and 
People of Galztlee ; fo 2s thac when he came forth to be a Fublick 
Mimifter, he came forth as a Biſhop {the chief Brihop of Souis 
eſpecial.y ) ought to do, Having a good Repute even of thife why 
were without, And thus we leave our Savicur's Hiitory, for about 
| eighteen Years of which, the Hiſtory of the Golpe!l teils us nothing. 


CHAP IL 


The time of Fobn's entring on this Office, 1, 2. A fhort account of Fohn's 
Preaching, Z=—0, He exhortcth the Phariſees t9 repent ard bi 
Baptized, 1—9g. Several Queſtions propoſed to him, which he ar. 
ſwereth, To—14. Te't:neth of Chriſt, no. 3s rmprijoned by #f.- 
1d, 10, 20, Jeſus Ravti>oth ty Fohn, to whom, the Firaten: are 

| opened, 21, 22. Chriſt s Age, 2%. ard Genealgy rehearſe® 19 4.1.79 

I OW in the ftcenth year of t 

rins Ceſar, Pui.tins Prare being g2vernony of 

Judea, and Herod ten? rerrarch of Galljeczand his Dro. 

ther Philip tetrar: » 06 1tr:rea and of the 2 egion of 3 ra- 
* » . a &.* RI 

chonitis, and Lyſaria< the terrarch of Ante: e. 


" b., 4 ſomething about the Divine Law : what the particalar Themes | word of God cameunto Joh the 102 of Za: harias in the vo, 55. 
#4 7 x5, 7 *lbjedts were, 15 not material for us to enquire 3 our Saviour fo; wilderneſs. | 
mwcrcd their Queſtions, as they were all aſtoniſhed, The Evangeliſt having given us an account, both of the Birtiz ot 
45 And when they ſaw him they were amazed, and John the Baptiſt, and of our Savioar a1 uf at tne Propg2ſr's pree 
q” ” mother ſaid unto him, Son, why haſt thou thus : cc4ing and attending them both, _ greets of oper 
ſo I | accout he Hiſtory 2M MN 
© | eelt with us? behold, thy father and I have ſought a little, cometh to give us ar; ac count of me---2 FO” | alas 
I t, h ance his Publick Miniſtry, and fultli1ng et 
thee ſorro Baptiſt, his entrance upon Mmtry, Wo 5 
Tho f WINS. , it. John the Baptiſt had Six Months Scnior:ity of our Saviour, and 
bs | a. 10 lomething muſt be allowed to a Womans Paſtions, and a Mo- probably did appear fo long before him to the World, as a publick 
ir ; oo Indulgence, yet one would think, that efpecially confidering Miniſter 3 the time of 1s b Sinn was in the Fifreent? Tear of ths 
”— | Where they t —_— - «ths hams Cal inifter ; the time 15 Degrnming j DOE 
wi | thus y found him, and what dcing, ſhe ſhould not nave Ipoken F » Þ..., of Tiberius Ceſar. Tiberies Cejur was he Who-NneKxt tuco coed 
15 | ns him, had ſhe had a clear and diſtind knowledge of his Di- nies (for all the Roman Emperors after Julizs Ceſur, were cal- 
190 | atk ture, 1n Union with her Fleih. She Ypeaks to him with the led Ceſars a5 all the Kings of E:ypt were ciiled Pharachs} he was 
ree rity of a Mother, Why haft thou thus Uecalt with us ? 3s wicked a Prince as molt who ruled the Roman Empir:. #01 the 
{oh bt + - bo : » b ; & 1 1 eo y id 17te 11:3eC 2J ! d 
bow ing And he ſaid unto them, How 1s 1t that ye ſought on (in whole pag _— He fig [nies 
oy ef Wilt ve rchelaus began to Rule in his ſtead as a Ring, Duc tt 120/749 
oy made tra muſt be about my Fathers bu- changing the Government from a Monarchy to a Torrarchy (ONAt 25, 
m : a Sovernment of four) Archelaus, had only the GIVERRITCAt ON 


EN lap, . 59 And*they underſtood not the ſaying, which he 
EN 5 ®Pkennto them. 
Ho _ read it-—that I maft be in my Fathers Houſe , then the Senſe 
ps be, Why did you feck me in any other place thin the Temple, 
{on > My Father's Hſe ? there Hieth my Buſineſs. Eut the Phrale 
meth rather to fienire as we tranſlate it, He doth nere f1gnifie, 
"at God was bis Father, that Mary might have known not only 
| __ the Revelatio of the Angel, . but becauſe ſhe had not known 
Ar | "22 5 Out ſhe did not yei fully underſtand his Divine Othce as Xe 


Judea, "Herod Antipas (another Son of Herd the Great ) had Cie 
Government of Galilee under the Title or F410, and 4 P12'P 
another Son of his, had the Government of {r4724, 4nd Ir nav, 
under the ſame Title of Terrarch, And one Lyjanis had he Go 
vernment of Abilene (all four Strangers. } $9 45 af £15 move the Jews 
were all under the Government of Forcigners, the Scepter or GC- 
vernment was wholly departed from ju4e. Archelaus was han at- 
ter ſent into France, and Pontius Pilate made P rocur aror or png 
nour of Judea and Samaria. Annas and Caiphzs Were © bo -o 

© ">bſh-o 


/ 


Chap, III, 


52 And Jeſus * encreaſed in wiſdom and j| ſtature, « vcr. 


--4 Leo k mores 4 - 
2 * Annas and Cuianhas OcIng the Fig! rTIELS, TOC * Tohn, vx. 


-—— 
———_— 


we 
ge. > x4 


- 


Mu 


wa LT” - - 
% * ms # wo = _ Yap » >.> Re. 3 ry = 
SEE " —_ = = ho in «Dot — 
- ” —_ - - - - - —_ 
. E ” _ LY es. ones ba Do - 
__ = ——— ———- = 2 
f _ * Rc > r—t——_— = = on —_ 
NET. SE He non or 
on = 0 - _ -* 2 ns —_——_— =" _ 
-_—— prod ISS ny 
4. 
- 
£5. Sbooms 


Sh <2 
—_ 4s 
= 3 


Chap. i. 


reſt ; the Law of Go 
+ uber Age Price, How there caine to be at this time two 
Hizh Prieſts, is not zgreed amongſt Interpreters, Thoſe who are 
curious in this Inquiry, may fee what Mr. Pool hath Colle&ed for 
their faticfaRtion, in his Smopſes. We muſt know, that at this time 
the Jews were nnder the Power of the Romans, find all things a- 
moneſt them were out of order, Some ſay the Jews had libcrty to 
chulc their High Prieft, but then their Conquerors would turn him 
ont, and 1:1] thegplace to another. Others ſay that the MHrgh Prieſt 
had his Deputy, who alfo obtained the ſame Title. Others think, 
that as they had made the High Prieſtzod an Office, to which they 
choſe one Annually, (which was by God's Law an Office tor Life) 
fo the #1;h Pricit of the former year, ſtill retained his Title for an- 
ether vear. We arc at no certainty in theſe things. It is ccrtain 
that at this time there were two that bare the Title of the High 
Prieſt, upon what account we cannot tell. It appeareth from Fohn 
18. 13. that the ſame Men three or four years after bear this Title 3 
of Hizh Prieft, whether choſen again or no we know not. But this 
was the time,when The Word of God came unto John the Son of Ta- 
charias in the Wilderneſs. The ſame Fohn, of which we heard be- 
fore 4 The Word of the Lord came to him. commanding tim out to 
Preach the Goſpel. It is a Phraſe which is often uſed in the Old 
"Teſtament, to fignifie the Influence of the Spirit of God upon the 
Prophets, quickning them to their Work. And fignifteth to us, 
That no Man ought to take this Honour unto himſelf, until he be 
called of God, nor to ſpeak in the Name of the Lord until firft the 

Word of God cometh to him. 
3 Andhe came into all the country about Jordan 


preaching the baptiſm of repentance for the remiſſion 


of ſins. 2 
How long the time of Fohn's Miniſtry was before that he was ſhut 


up by Herod in Priſon, the Holy Scriptures do not certainly tell us 
wut it muſt be very ſhort, for our Saviours time was little more then 
vhree years, and we hear of his impriſonment in the beginning of 
our Saviour'sPublick Miniſtry. All that we have ef Fobn's Mini- 
ſiry is to be found either in this Chapter,or in Mat. 3. or in Mark rt. 
or in the firſt, and third Chapters of Fohn., From them all it ap- 
peareth, That the Sum of his Do&rine, was the neceſſity of Repen- 
tance, and Faith in Chriſt, in order to the Remiffion of Sins. His 
preffing Faith in Chriſt is moſt clearly declared by the Evangeliſt 
Zobn : Matthew, Mark and Luke inſiſt more upon his Preaching the 
Do&rine of Repentance, for the Remiſfion of Sins, and Baptiſm as an 
Evidence of it. Which Dofrine of Repentance he preſſed, both from 
Fuarzclical Motives, the Kingdom of Heaven js at Hand, and from 
Lee:i Mitives,or Arguments of Terror, The Ax Is now laid to the Roos 
of the Tree, In this ſetting an Example to all Miniſters of the Goſpel, 
ſhewing them what ſhould be the main Subjetts of their Diſcourles 3 
for we thall find that our Saviour Preached the ſame Doftrine, and 
in the ſame Method. What is here ſaid, we before opened in our 
Notcs on Matth. 3. 2. and Mar. I. 4. Fohn did not Preach that 
Baptiſm was Repentance, or that Remiſſion of Sins was infallibly an- 
nexed to it, but that the way to obtain Remiffion of Sins was by 
Repentance, and that Baptiſm was an External Sign and Symbol of 
it, 

4 As it is written in the book of the words of 
* Efaias the prophet, ſaying, The voice of one crying 


4 _ 4 4 in the wilderneſs, Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make 


{ Job. 1. 23. his paths ſtraight. 


5 Every valley ſhall be filed, and every moun- 
tain and hill ſhall be brought low, and the crooked 
ihall be made ſtraight, and the rough ways ſhall be 


made imooth. 
6s And all fleſh ſhall ſee the ſalvation of God. 


All four of the Evanzeliſts apply that Propheſie, Taiah 4o. 3, 4, 5 
to F1bn the Baptiſt, Tuke only repeats wit is ver. gs. and 6. and 
in {aiah, chap. 4c. 4, 5. and hedoth but ſhortly repeat what is in 
the Prophet, v. 5. the Prophet faith, And the Glory of the Lord ſhall 
be reveal: d, and ail Fleth hail fee it together, for the Mouth of the 
Lord hath ſpoken it. But there ** nething more uſual, than for the 
Writers in the New Te#ament, in their Quotations out of the Old 
Teitameat, to repeat the inmot the Senſe, not the Words ſtrialy. 
For the underſtanding of that Prophecy, we muſt know, that there 
the Prophet Jaiah was ſent to Comfort thoſe amongſt the Jews, who 
tearcd Sod ; partly with afſuring them that they ſhould return from 
B:iby/on, their warfare ſhould have an end, Cyrus ſhould deliver 
tem, partly with afluring them of a far greater deliverance, in and 
by the coming of the Meſſiah (of whom Cyrus was but a Type, ) 
to this purpoſe the Prophet ſets out both Cyrus, and in that Type 
Chriſt's coming, as if both were preſent, and at Hand. Kings and 
great Princes coming (eſpecially with Armies) have uſually ſome 
coming before them,as Pzoneers, to prepare their way, by Levelling 
Rough places, and removing whatioever is in the way of their Mo- 


tions, aud filling up Holes and Ditches, &c. nor are they far off 


when once their Harbiugers, and Pioneers are arrived, or are ſeen 
coming z John is here ſet. out as an Harbinger to Chriſt, to prepare 
his way, or a Pioncer to fill up Ditches, throw down Hills, to make 
Rough ways ſmooth, and every way to prepare the way for him, 
That all Fleſh might ſee the Salvation of God. And as Princes that 
have Wiiderneſs to paſs through, have more need of their Piorezrs 
to prepare, and ſmooth their ways : So the State of the Jews being 
now confuſed, as a Wilderneſs, and Corrupt above Meaſure, John 
the Baptiſt was ſent before tocry in the Wilderneſs, Cc. This I take 
to be the true Senſe of the Prophecy, and that it is mighty Vain to 
ſtrain theſe Metaphorical Phraſes, and inquire what is meant by Val- 
leys, Mountains, and Crooked-ways, they almoſt certainly ſignifie the 
ſame thing, 272. whatſoever might be and hindrance to Peoples re- 
ccrving of Chriſt, and to Philoſophiſe further about them, is but to 
ew the Luxuriancy of our Wit, rather than any Solidity of Judg- 
ment. The whole Scope of theſe three Verſes, is but to ſhew, That 
as Kings, and Princes, and Governours of Armies, have uſed to have 
Harbingers, and Fioneers, or other Offiicers to go before them, to 


TL VAS 


d, the eldeſt %on of the Family of 4zr-m remove things out of the way of them and their Retinue, and tg 


prepare their wy : So had Chriſt, and John the BaptiSÞ was the Man 
whom the Lord pitched upon for that purpoſe, by his Preaching to 
bring Men to a Senſe of their Sins, aad off from their wicked 
Courſes, and to ſhew them their need of a Saviour, that f when 
Chriſt came himſelf forth to Pteach, People might not be wholly 
ignorant, but 1n ſome meaſure prepared to receive the joyful Tidin e 
of the Goſpel, which he brought unto them, 3 
7 Then ſaid he to the multitude that came forth to 
be baptized of him, O generation of vipers, who hath 
warned you to flee from the wrath to come ? 

8 Bring forth therefore fruits worthy of | repen- 


have Abraham to our father, For I ſay unto you, that!” 
God is able of theſe ſtones to raiſe up children vnt, 
Abraham. 

9 And now alſo the ax is laid unto the root of the 
tree ; * every tree therefore which bringeth nor. 


fire. 

See the Notes on atth. 3. 7. 8.9, Io. where we meet with alj 
this with no Alteration fave that Matthew ſaith that he ſpoke rhis to 
the Phariſees and Saddyces, ſeeing them come to his Baptiſin ; th, 
he did eſpecially intend them, yet he fpake in the hearing of th, 
Multitude, amongſt whom they were. 

19 And the people asked him, ſaying, What ſh:i] 
wedo then ? 


wiſe. 

Altho the Preaching of the Law, doth not immediately Conduce 
to work in us Faith in Chriſt, yet mediately it doth, as it bring; 
Men to cry out as thoſe, As 2. 37. Men and Brethren what (hall w; 
do? Oras the Jaylor, A#s 16. Sirs what ſhall we do th be ſave) 
John Preaching God's Terrors, hath this effe& upon the Pcopie,th:y 
ask him, what ſhall we do then ? The Baptiſt's Anſwer may ſeer; 
a little ſtrange to thoſe who do not conſider, that it amounts to th; 
ſame with Daniels 'Counſel to Nebuchadnezar, Dan; 4. 27. Wheref 
O King, let my Counſel be acceptable unto thee, and break off thy $i; 
by Righteouſneſs, and thine Iniquities by ſhewing mercy to the P.;, 
and what John had ſaid, v. 8. Bring therefore Fruits worthy 0 Rs. 
pentance, Our Saviour faith much the ſame, Ch. 11. 41. Give 4ln; 
of ſuch things as you have, and Peter commandeth, rt Pez. 4, 2. 
Above all things have ſervent Charity among8t your ſelves, for Chaiiy 
ſhall cover a Multitude of Sins. Solomon ſaith, it covereth all Sin; 
Prov. 10. 12. The Peoples queſtion was, What ſhall we do ? Wh: 
are the Fruits meet for Repentance; that is, truly indicative »f 8+. 
pentance * To this now John anſwereth, He that bath two C::; 
tet him impart to him that hath none. Which muſt not be ing. 
preted, as obliging every one that had two Coats, to give 22y 03. 
but as inſtructive of us, that Ceremonies, and Ritual perſcrmarcss, 
in which that Age abonndcth, would not ſerve their turn, ivr 
true, and real good Works, relieving the Poor to their Ability, out 
of their Supettluities, out of Obedience and Love to God, not 
meerly pitying them, and ſaying to them, Go ye and be £loaticd, 
or be ye warmed, not ſaying Corban, and thinking that would ex: 
cuſe them from relieving their Parents, or other poor people, '»:t 
according to their Ability relieving them. John doth not her: 
Countenance Anabaptiſtical Leveling, he only Cautions them againſt 
Phariſacal Aypocritie, truſting to External Priviledges, ſuch 3: 
having Abraham to their Father, or ſome Ritual, and Ceremonial 
Performances, whiles in the mcan time they negleted the weighty 
things of the Law, of which Chriſt hath taught us that Meic: 
one. 

12 Then came alſo publicans to be baptized, ar! 
faid unto him, Maſter, what ſhall we do ? 

13 And he ſaid unto them, Exact no more then tit 
which is appointed you. | 

We have ſhewed often before that the Publicans were Ver, that 
Collected the Publick Revenue ; in all times, that ſort of ve have 
been charged with ExaGions of what was more than their due, Tie 
Bapti8, as a Fruit or Indication of the Truth of their Repentance, 
cautioneth them againſt Exation, thereby declaring, Tht at of 
Juftice as well as Mercy are true Fruits of Repentance, and that fc- 
pentance 15 vainly pretended, while men go on in the fame Sint! 
Courſes, wherein they have formerly walked. Our Lor: here dot!) 
not diſapprove of the Office of Publicans, nor certainly was that 
to be Condemned, if Magiſtrates may impoſe Tavcs, att! Pu, * 
ments, which without queſtion they may for the {ypport of 072 
Government for our Protection, there is no queſtion, but rey my 
appoint Officers under what Titles they pleaſe to Collett itt Dt 
both thoſe that impoſe, and thoſe that Collett ſuch Pivinwn';, 477 
obliged to the Rule of Juſtice, The former to jmpote 16 cr 
then is neceſſary for the end, and in jutt Proportion , 7 
to exaQt no more than what is appointed ticm, 


14 And the ſouldiers likewiſe demanded of him, {:7- 


Ing, And what ſhall we do? And he faid 1nto them, 


| Da violence to no man, neither, accuſe a: {2illy, 2nd 


bring out of his Store-houſe, things New and Old, '© iv: every one's 
their Portion in their Seaton, and fo Courageous, and valtiniu © i” 
not to be afraid to do it, nor for any reafon dcciine the Gong of it, 


= . <iAge" loart 
Such was John the Baptiſt, Theſe were the Roman S*1lions, RPE 


by them to maintain their Conqueſt of Jadea. Some of theſe a'l9 
come to hear Johnthe Baptiſt preach, hearing him prcis Hope let 


Chap, 11 


tance, and begin not to ſay within your ſelves, We. Or, ». 


forth good fruit, is hewn down and caſt into the "oh 


11 He anſwereth and faith unto them, * Fe that. 
hath two coats, let him impart to him that hath '''+ 
none, and he that hath meat, let him do like.” *© 


be content with your || wages. i Of! 
A gocd, and faithful Miniſter of Chriſt, ſhot!d be on» able 07 


- qi.:s 1 
I; i {3 


t, 


"4 iy #4 4 


ha 


not 

mon 
Bupt 
the © 
as a 

poſt 
Bel1, 
Corr 


Whic] 
being 
hinfe 
6, 2: 
him | 
of his 


the f 
ty will 
} 


[ 


l! hap* IIT ) 


r. VAL 


and bringing forth Fraits that might teſtific the truth of it. They 
ack what #hey ſhovid do? To them John ſaith, Do violence to no 
Man, &C- Experience hath taught all People, that Souldiers, (eſpe- 
ciz'ly umployed to keep Garriſons amongſt a Conquerea People) are 


- often very inſolent, and for their own gain prone to accuſe Inno- 


Wit fs 


, 4 the Chrilt or not; 


ul; ac 


4 
1. 26, 


" I7, 


cent Perſons 5 and the jealontie of Conquerours often allows them 
too catie an Ear 3 as alfo how apt they are by Oppretfion to mend 
their ſhort Commons, or to exact upon others, that they may ſpend 
Luxuriouſly, Al theſe are Ats, or Species of Tnjuſtice, which the 
Baptilt lets them know mult be left, it they would bring forth Fruits 
fir for Repentance. He dorh not blame the Employment of a Soul- 
dicr, but only regulates their behaviour in that imployment, Wars 
injuſt cauſes, 4re undoubtedly awful under the Goſpel, and- Con- 
{equently ſo is the impioyment of a Souldier. We read of ſeveral 
ood Centurions or Captains of hundreds, But the Souldier ſtands 
hizhly concerncd to lock, that the cauſe be good, In which he 
draweth his Sword. 2. That he bchaveth himſelf in it lawfully , 
not uſing any needleſs Violence, not accuſing any wrongfully, not 
endcayouring to mend hs Pay by any Rapine, or- unjulily taking a 
way what is anothers, either to ſpend in Luxury, or to uphold 
himſelf in his Station. From this jnftruttion of John the Baptiſt, 
we may learn ſeveral tliings concerning the Nature of Repentance. 
1. That where there 1s a true Root of Repenzance, it will bring 
forth Fruits worthy of it. 2. That Adqs of Mercy and Jutice, arc 
true and proper Fruits of a true Repentance, withuut which there 
can be nothing of 1t in Truth. 2. That true Repentarce 1s bett 
diſcovered by our abhorrence of, and declining ſuch Sinful Courſes 
2 we have formerly been a1diftcd to, aad hive daily Teinpt it1ons 
to, from the Circuin ſtances of Our Lives, and thoſe caliings. and pla- 
cez, and Courſes of Lite, wherein the Providence. of Sod hath fixed 
us. 4. That theſe things proceeding from Repentance and Faith, 
are ach proper cttets of both, as dilcover the truth of thofe Gract- 
ous Habits in the Soul, and without whic! there can be no true Evi - 
dence of them. 

15 And as the people were -1n || expectation, aud al! 
men || muſed in their hearts of John, whether he were 


It heing known to many what the Angel had told Zachari ts con- 
cernins John thirty years ſince, and what had Mir:culoufly hap- 
pencd at his Circumciilon, as alſo wiaat Zacharizs his rather had 
Propheticd concerning him, and there having been many who had 
obſerved the Holineſs, and Severity of his Life all along until hc 
came to Mans Eſtate, and knowing that the time was fulfilled for 
the coming of the Meſſizs, the Scepter being now departed from 
Iudah, and Daniel, Weeks being accomplithed, and hearing him 
Preach with that Life, and Power which attended his Miniſtry, as 
aiſ2 confidering his Doftrine, f{ not new init ſeif, being Confonant 
to the Divine Law, and the Dottrine of the Propiets but) new to 
them, who had uſed to hear of Artes and Ceremontes, and the Tra- 
ditions of the Elders, but little or nothing- of Repentance, or bring 
ing forth Fruits worthy of it, they began to Reaſon and Debate with 
themſelves,vkether Jobn the Baptijt were not the "leſſtuh promiſed, 
and in great ſuſperce they were avout it. But Jobn quickly ſatish- 
ed them as to that, not defirous to Arrogate to hunſelf his Honour, 
whoſe Metſenger only he vas, 

16 John anſwered, ſaying unto them all, I indeed 
baptize X you with water, but one mizhtier then 1] 
cometh, the latchet of whoſe ſhoes Iam not worthy to 
unlooſe, he ſhall baptize you with the Holy Ghoſt, and 
with fire» : ; 

17 Whoſe fans in his hand, and he will throvgh- 
ly purge his floor, and will gather the wheat into his 
garner, but the chaff he will burn with fire unquen- 


ckable. 


S. LUV EM 


ried her, eſpecially to turn away his own Wife to take her. 11at- 
thew reporteth this Hiſtory more fally, Chap. 14 3, 4. &c. ſee the 
Notes there, It is ſaid, that Herod, | addeth this abwve al, that 
!s, above all his former or other Wickedneſs, rhat he ſhut up John Ft 
Priſon. } This ſpoke him incorrigible in his wicked Courſes, refiſting 
the Remedy, or means to reduce him. An Hyprerite inay hear the 
Word, and do many things, but he hath alwass fome particular Luft. 
as to which he muſt be ſpared, being neither willin to part with is, 
nor able to bear any reproof far it. ; 

21 Now when all the people were baptized, * ic 
came to paſs, that Jeſus alſo being beprtized, and 
praying, the heaven was opened. 

.. 22 And the Holy Ghoſt deſcended in a bodily ſ1ape 

Iikea dove upon him, and a voice came from heaven, 
which faid, Thou art my beloved Son, in thee þ am 
well pleaſed, 


Thtz Hiſtory of our Saviours Baptiſm, is reported Loth by 3; 


bl 


thew and Mark ; much more largely by Matthew ; fee the Notes on 
Matth. 3- 13, Fc. Luke oaly addeth thoſe Wor.is, 2d Pravins, 
which tcacheth us that Prayers ought to be invned with Bavtitn,. 
What was the matter of his Prayer, we arc :t told,th | 
ing Words incline ſome ric. -Eaoiy to judoe, that he Prayed 
tor ſome Teſtimony from tics oncerning him. 

23 And Jeſus himſe!” began to be about thirty 
years of age, being (a3 was ſuppoſed ) * the ſon of Jo- 
leph, which was the ſon of Heli, 

tiere 15 amonyſt Criticks a little diſpute, hether our bleffed Lord 
at his Baptiſm (after which he ſoon began his publick Miniſtry 1 
was full #h1:t; years of Age aa 2nd ag 08 0g in the Greek, give 
occation to the doubt. Thoſe whs judge that he was thirty com- 
pl-at, conceive thai the age before which the Prictts and Lovites 
did a9 Servicc 1n the Tabernacle of God, who Numb. 4. 3. command- 
ec tne number of them to be t.ken from thirty years ofd t9 fifty, and 
it was done accordingly, v. 34, 35. Ye. David in the latter end of 
bis Life ſo numbered them, 1 Chr. 23. 3. when their number (of 
that Age) was thirty eight thouſand, 1et 1m that Chapter, v. 24- 
a::d 27, we find them numbreu from Twenty rears old and upward 
Cbut palſivly, that was for tore more itt. riour Service. ) [n Contor- 
mity to this, moft think that both Fobn the Baptitt, and Chriit en- 
tred not upon their Puviick Miniſtry, till thev were of that Age, 
but whether they wcre thirty v£3's f Age Complear, or Current 15 
- queſtion, but fo little 1 002 + \-ferves no gre? Study torceiwive ; 
the two qual!fying Wor: gg and a48Y Sue!05 would incline one 
to think Thriſt was but T.zty years of Aye Current, which is ad- 
vantaged by what others tell us, that the ews ordinarily called a 
Child, two or three zears 0d, 24 foon as it Cid but ctr upon its 
ſecond or third year. Some think our Saviour was Ten Months above 
Twenty-nine years of Age when he.w:: 2Bavrized, atter which he 
was tempted ofthe Devii forty Das, Lotore he enrred the Pablick 
Miniſtry ; but theſe arc "7 5. [Boing (Cas was ſuppoſed ) the 
Son of Foſeph. ) Joſeph was '«:1 1115 Natural Fther, tho, lo ſuppoted 
by the Jews, Zoſeph being 1: deed his Legal Father being Married to 
the Virgin when our Saviour was Porn, Marth. 5. 20. 


24 Which was the ſon of Matthat, which was the ſor 
6f Levi, which was the ſor of Melchi, which was the ſor 
of Janna, which was :he ſon of Joſeph, 

25 Which was the ſon of Mattathias, which was the 


i *®;i1 fs - 
Wells tr}: ovwv; ” 


ſon of Amos, which was the ſon of Naum, which was the 
ſon of Efli, which was the ſon of Nagge, 


26 Which was the ſon of Maath, which was the ſor of 
Mattathias, which was the ſon of Semei, Which was the 
ſon of Joſeph, which was ehe ſon of Juda, 


18 And many other things in hb exhortation preach- 
cd he unto the people. 


See the Notes on Watth, 3. 11, 12. and on Mar. 1,7, 8. John 
the Bapti$ in theſe Verſes doth not only alſure them, that he w:!3 
not the Chriſt, ut alſo lets them know, that Chriſt was coming a- 
mongſt them, and that he waz more excellent than he, and ſhould 
Baptize them with the Holy Ghoſt, and with Fire 3 with Fire as 
the $ mbol of the Pay Ghoſt ; ſo ſome underſtand it, expounding it 
as a Prophecy of the deſcent of the Holy Ghoſt, Afs 2. 3. cthers 
paſſibly better expound it of the Holz GhoF working in the Souls of 
Believers as Fire, Purging them, and Burning up therr Luſts, ans 
Corruptions. | And many other things in his Exhnrtation he Preached 
unto the People.) By which Words the Evangeliſt let us know, that 
what he and the other Evangcli: have Reported concerning John's 
Preaching, was but the Sum of it. 


19 But Herod the Tetrarch being reproved by * him, 
for Herodias his brother Philips wife, and for all the 


evils which Herod had done; 

20 Added yet this above all, that he ihut up John 
In priſon. 

Theſe two Verſes ſufficiently Confirm to us, that we-are not to 
expett to find the ſeveral paſſages in the Goſpel concerning John 
the Baptiſt, ſet down according to the order of time, 1n which they 
happened, for. the Evangzliſt ſets down the inpriſonment of John, 
before the Baptiſm of Chriit mentioned in the two next Verſes, 
which we know could not be as to the order of t1me, our Saviour 
being Baptized by John. John was in ſo gre?! Repute, that Herod 
hinfelf heard him, did many things, and heard him zladly, Mar. 
6, 25. But John was 3 faithful Preacher, and couid not but reprove 
him for his wicked Courſes, particularly for his Inceſtuous taking 


of is Brother Phifips Wife 3 for he was alive when -he- took her, 


ithe true which Hiſtorians tell us; that -Fokn was impriſoned 1n 

the fizteenth Year of Tiberizzs Ceſar, and Philip died not till the 

tyenticth, however, his Erother leaving iſſue (for we read Herodias 

1114 a Daughter, Matth, 14.) it was unlaifyui for him to have Mar- 
Gol, 2- 


27 Which was the fon of Joanna, which was the ſon of 
Rheſa, which was the ſon of Zorobabel, which was the 
ſon of Salathiel, which was the ſon of Neri, 

238 Which was the ſon of MeIchi, waich was the ſon of 
Addi, which was the ſon of Coſam, which was the ſor of 
Elmodam,which was the ſoz of Er, 

29 Which was the ſon of Joſe, which was the for of 
Eliezer,which was the ſon of Jorim, which was the ſor of 
Matthar,which was the ſoz of Levi, 

30 Which was the ſor of Simeon, which was the ſoz of 
Juda, which was the ſon of Joſeph, which was the ſon of 
Jonan, which was the ſon of Eliakim, 

31 Which was the ſon of Melea,which was the ſor of 
Menan,which was the ſon of Mattatha, which was 7/e 
ſoa of * Nathan, which was * zhe ſor of David, 

32 * Which was the ſon of Jeiſe, which was the ſor of 
Obed, which was the ſoz of Booz, which was the ſox of 
Salmon, which was the ſo of Naaſſon, = 

33 Which was the ſon of Aminadab, which was the or 
of Aram, which was the ſon of Eſrom, which was ze 
ſon of Phares, which was the ſor of Juca, : 

34 Which was the ſon of Jacob, which was te fon of 
Iſaac, which was the ſo of Abraham, which was e/2 ſor 
of Thara, which was the ſoz of Nachor, 

35 Which was the ſon of Saruch, which was zve ſon of 
Ragan, which was the ſon of Phalec, which was che ſor 
of Heber,which was the ſoz of Sala, 

36 Which was the ſon of Cainan, which was the ſor: 
of Arphaxad, * which was theſon of Sem, which was the 
ſan of Noe, which waszhe ſon of Lamech, 


C RES] 37 Which 


Chap. 1II. 


TY 2p F 
YM b. 59, 
| .* 


N : 
tot. | 42» 


- 


©%, 


Joh. 6. 42- 


* 7Zech. 12: 
12. 
* 2 SAM. 5» 


4, 
* Ruth. 4. 
7% ; 
1; Chro. 2. 
j 0s 


us Gen. Ii- 
I 


' - 5 "BY £200 . 
Cahn Aron tr 3 fe n+ «Ma 


Chap. III. 


37 Which was the ſor of Methuſala, which was the 
ſon of Enoch, which was the ſon of Jared, which was the 
ſon of Maleleel, which was 7he ſon of Cainan, 

28 Which was the ſon of Enos, which was the ſon of 
Seth,which was the ſon of Adam, which was the ſon of 
God. 

There have been great Diſputes, about the Genealogy of our Sa- | 
viour, as recorded both by Matthew and Luke. The Adverſaries of ; 
Chriſtian Religion have taken no ſmall advantage, from the ſeeming 
difference berwixt them, which even many ſober Writers, have 
thought it no cafie matter to reconcile. The Apoſtle hath caution- 
ed us againſt giving too much heed to endle/s Genea!log7es, which 
miniſter Cueſtions rather then Godly Ediſying, which is in Faith, 1 Tim. 
x. 4. yet certainly it is our Duty,as well tor the ſtopping the Mouths 
of ſuch as would Clamour againſt the truth of the whole Scripture 
(if not of the whole Chriſtian Religion ) as for the Vindicating Holy- 
Writ from their little Cavils, and thereby alſo conforming thoſe 
who are Weak in Faith, to make theſe things as clear as we can: 
It is plain that both the Evangelifts agree in their Deſign, by ſetting 
down the Genealogy of our Saviour, to prove him Lineally deſcended 
both from Abraham, and David, the two PErfons to whom was, 
made the promiſe of the Meſſtab, and the Stability of his Kingdom 3 
and alſo in the Names of the firſt fourteen Generations, mentioned 
by Matthew, and here by Luke, v. 32, 33- and to Abraham, v. 34- 
Their diſagreement lyeth in four things. 1. In the form of the Pe- 
dizree. Matthew, beginning with thoſe who were firſt, Luke with 
thoſe that were laſt in order of time. But this is no valuable Ex-. 
ception, one Evangeliſt count forward,another backward. 2. Mat- 
thew counts by three Periods, each conſiſting of Fourteen Generat1- : 

ons, Luke doth not, but neither is this of any Moment, 3. Matthew : 
ſets down our Saviour Genealogy, before he tells us any thing of his 
Conception or Birth ; Lake atter his Relation of his Conception, Birth, 
and Baptiſm. 4. Matthew deriveth our Saviours Genealogy, but from : 
Abraham, Lube trom Adam. All theſe differences, lay no Founda- | 
tion for any Exception. Several accounts are given, why Luke car- 
rieth up the Genealogy to Adam, the beſt ſeemeth to be this ; That, 
Matthew intending his Hiſtory Primarily for the Jews, judged it 
enough to prove Chriſt, the Sen of Abraham, and the Sou of David 3 
but Luke deſigning the information of the whole World, deriveth 
him from the common Father of Mankind. By which means he al- 
ſo ſheweth, the Antiquity of the Goſpel, and lets us know that Chriſt 
was he who was promiſed to Adam, before Abrahams time, and that 
the Grace of the Goſpel is not limited to the Seed of Abraham. 
Thus alſo Lake ſupplyeth what was wanting in Matthew, and truly 
deriveth both the firſt, and ſecond Adam from God, the Father of 
our Lord Jeſus Chriſt, and of us all. But beſides theſe differences 
Chardly worth the taking notice of under that ndtion) there are 
ſome ſeeming contradiftions in the Genealogies, yet :not ſuch, but I 
thiovk a fair account may be given of,to any who will but firſt con- 
ſider, 1. That they all lye, in what Lube hath, from v. 23. to 
v. 32 and from the latter end ofv. 34. to the end, So that in v.32, 
33- and part of 34. we have nothing to reconcile. 2. That theſe 
Words | the Son } is in the Greek only v.23, where Chriſt is ſaid to 
be the Son of Foſeph, but ever after itis ſupplyed by the Tranſlators. 
So as the Greek runs thus ; The Son of Joſeph, which was of Heli, 
which was of Matthat, which was of Levi, which was of Melchi, (9c. 
Which conſideration cuts off the firſt cavil how Foſeph could be tHe 
Son of Jacob, (as Matthew ſaith ) and the Son of Helt, as Luke faith ; 
for indeed Luke ſaith no more than, v. 23. And Feſius himſelf began 
to be about thirty years of age, being (as was ſuppeſed the Son of 
Joſeph,) which was the Son of Heli. That 1s, Chriſt was of Melr, 
and the ſuppoſed Son of Joſeph, but truly of Heli, the Father of 
Mary. his Mother. I know that ſome think that Jacob was alſo 
call-d Heli, (as it was ordinary with the Jews to have two Names,) 
others think that Joſeph is called the Son, becauſe he was the Son-in- 
Law of Heli, by the Marriage of the Virgin Mary his Daughter, 
( Nami cal'eth thoſe her Daughters, which were but her legal 
Daughters, Ruth. 1, 11.) in this the moſt agree, but I muſt confeſs 
I think it is Chrift, who is here faid to be of Heli, Ctho he was repu- | 
ted,ard generally taken to be the Son of Joſeph.) 3. That Luke is 
here deriving our Saviour, not from his ſuppoſed Father Joſeph, but 
from Mary his true Mother. It 1s not to be conceive that Luke af- 
ter {uch a narration of the prediftions of his conception as he had 
given us in the firſt Chapter ſhould go to derive Chriſt from Joſeph ; 
and this gives us a. fair account why the Names are ſo different from 
David's time to the Birth of Chriſt. Joſeph (whoſe pedigree Mat- 
thew relates) deriving from Solomon-who was tne Son of David 
ſucceeding him in the Kingdom. Mary (whoſe pedigree Luke re- 
lates) deſcending from Nathan v. 31. s Chron, 3. 5. tells us he was 
another Son of David. So as after David's time, the Perſons named 
which before were the fame in our Saviour's Pedigree became diverſe, 
ſome the Progenitors of Joſeph, whom Matthew reckons, others the 
Progenttors of Mary, whom Luke nameth. This anſwereth the Ob- 
je&tion, from the differing nur>b-r of the Perſons from Joſeph to 
Zerobabel, (excluding them both JMatthew reckoneth but nine, Lube 
here reckoneth eighteen in wv. 23, 24, 25, 26,27,29, From Zoroba- 
bel to David, Luke reckons twenty-two Progenitors, Matthew but 
fourteen (leaving out three Kings of the half Blood of Abab,of which 
we gave an account in our Notes on Matthew. 1.) ſo as the Scrip- 
ture nameth ſeventeen, tho Matthew leaves out three in two difte- 
rent Lines ; 1t 15 not impoſſible that onc perſon in ſo many years 
might have ſo many more Progenitors than another, ſuppoſing 


{ 


S. LUKE. 


not probable that Lube ſhould corre what Moſes 
count I can give of it is, the Septuagint in Gen. 11, 12. have it juſt 
as Luke here hath-it ; and ir is certain,that Lube is his Quote tions gyr 
of the Old Teſtament, doth generally follow the Scptuagint, (be jy; 
the Tranſlation moſt in uſe among them.) Beza rells us of an ancicit 
Copy of the Goſpel he had, which mentioneth no Cainan. 


I give thee, and the glory of them; for that is cli 
vered unto me, and to whomſoever I willz I g1ve 1t, 


thine. 


from Gen. t1. 18. 1 Chror. 1. 25. Put in Gerefis 17, we read, th 

Sala was the Son of Arphaxad, wv. 12. whereas he is hers faid . - 
to be the Son of Cainan, and Cainan is made the Son of Arphazad. 
So as Luke maketh Sala Grandchild to Arphaxad. Moſes makes 
no mention of Cainan at all, but mentions Salah, 2s begntr 0 
by Arphaxad, Thoſe who are curious to know what is {16 fr 
the reſolution of this difficuity, may read it largely both tn "Tony 
heims dubia Evangelica, and Mr. Pool's Synopſys Criticorum, jt o Fj 
difficulty which hath excrciſed many very learned Men. aid | tent 
whether ever any yet ſatisfied himſclf in the reſolution of it, It is 
ſaid. The buac- 


The beti 
of 1t 15,that it is a matter of no great moment, for the Queſtion 
not, whether Sala was the Son of Arphaxad, ( for lo he was, tho 
Arphazad was his Grandfather, in the ſame ſenſe that Chriſt is call. 
ed the Son of Abraham, and the Son of David, and Elizabeth the 
Daughter ot Aaron, ch. 1. 1. ) but whether he was the immcdiate 
Son of Arpbaxad,or Cainan, whether Moſes omitted Cainan, or ſome 
tranſcriber of Luke added Cainan cut of the Septuagint(being then the 
current Tranſlation among them) the laſt is moſt probable. For the 
other part of the Genealogy, v. 36, 37, 38. it plainly agreeth with 
Gen. 5,5,7Fc. & 6. 1o. So that I muit profeſs I ſee no great dit. 
culty to reconcile the Genealogies, admitting the one to grve the Ge. 
nealogy of Foſeph, and the other, to give the Genealogy of Mary ; 
that indeed Mary was the Daughter of Heli, is not to be proved by 
Scripture, nor yet contradifted, but it is very probably judged 0, 
And tho we cannot prove that Cajnan, mentioned v. 35. was added 
out of ſome latter Copies of the Septuagint, yet it is more than pro- 
bable it was ſo; which two things if we acuait, I ſee no great dif. 
culty remaining, but a fair agreernent betwixt both the Evanzeliſis, 
For I preſume none will ſtumble at the alteration of ſome letter, op 
omiſſion of ſome letter in a Name, or addition to it in the end; 
there 15 nothing more ordinary than tat, when Namesare meitione] 


in ſeveral Languages, 
CHAP. Iv. 


Feſus ſafting forty days in the Wilderneſs, #s tempted by the Devil 
I—13. returneth into Galilce, and thence to Nazareth, where he 
preacheth, 14—20, and ſheweth to them why he did no Miracl:s 
there, 21-27. They being angry, end:awour io hill him, 2339, 
Christ teacheth at Capernaum on the Sabbath, 33, ,2* Caiitth a 
Devil out of a Man, 33—37. Healeth Peters Mother in Law of a 
fever, and many diſeaſed perſons, 33—41. Goeth to Preach to other 
Cities, 42==44. | 

I N D* Jeſus being full of the Holy Ghoſt, re-,, 

turned from Jordan, and was led by the fpirity,;, 

into the wilderneſs, 13, 
By the Holy Ghoſt here is to be underſtood the Gifts of the Roly 

Ghoſt, according to the Prophecy of him, J/a. 11. 1, 2. TheGifts 

of the Holy Spiritare often in Holy Writ called the Spirit, AFs 2. 

4+ & 8. 18. & 10. 44. and not only thoſe that are intluenccd with 

the ſaving Gifts and Graces of the Spirit,are ſaid to have the Spirit, 
and be filled ; but thoſe who received the more extraordinary You: 
ers of it, fuch as the Gifts of Prophecy, healing, (9c. Others beſides 

Chriſt are in Scripture ſaid to be filled with the Spirit, A#s 6. 4 

and it was ſo Propheſied concerning John, Lube 1. 15. But they had 

but their meaſure ; to Chriſt the Spirit was given not by meaſure, 

John 3. 34. [ he returned from Jordan. ] There John baptized, there 

Chriſt was Baptized by him. { And was led by the Spirit into 16 

Wilderneſs. ] 98Jo, faith Labe. d&ynx04; faith Matthew, Mark &- 

preſſcth it by the Word #xdAxce, the Words do not. fignific a wi 

lent motion, (for withont doubt Chriſt went willingly )but a potent, 
and efficacious motion. ; 

2 Being forty days tempted of the devil, and * ini: 
thoſe days he did eat nothing - and when they were! 
ended,he afterward hungred. 7 
See the Notes on Matthew 4. 2, 3, 4-* 


3 And the devil ſaid unto him, If thou be tte $on 
of God, command this ſtone that it be made bread. 

4 And Jeſus anſwered him, ſayings * It is written; 'D: 
That man ſhall not live by bread alone, but by every 


word of God. | 4 
See the Notes on Matth. 4. 3. 4. It is very obſervable that Gbri!' 


here afſerterh the Authority of the Scriptures, and tho he was fell 0! 
the Holy Ghoſt, yet maketh the Holy Scripture his Rule of Action. 


5 And the devil taking him up into an high moun- 


tain, ſhewed unto him all the Kingdoms of the world 
in a moment of time. 


9 And the devil ſaid unto hims All this power will 


7 If thou therefore wilt || worſhip me, all {hall be | 0 


FO. 


8 And Jeſus anſwered and ſaid vnto him, Get tice "1 


Matthew deſigned to reckon all, which it is plain from his leavin 
out three Kings named in Scripture that he did not. 4. That ordi- 


had each ofthem two at leaſt. Matthew had alſo the Name of 
Levi, &5c. This ſoives the difference from v. 27. where Rheſa is 
to be the Son of Zorobahel, when as Mazthew ſaith ch. 1. 13. Zoro- 
babel begat Abiud. That Abraham was the Son of Terah or Thara,and 
Terah the Son of Nachor,appeareth from Gen. 11. 24, 26. That Sa- 
ruci2 Or Sarug,was the Son of Reu or Ragan, appeareth from Gen.. 


ww 4) ooo en lee 


g behind me, Satan: for * it is written, Thou ſhalt * 
worſhip the L OR D thy God, and him only {halt thou ! 


nari'y the Jews had two Names, ſometimes three, all Joſiahs Sons ' ſerve. 


that is delivered to me, and to whomſozver # will, 1 2:22 it, are 
only mentioned by Luke, where we may obſerve, 1. 2/: 
was a Lyar from the beginning. The Pominion over thc 
the World was not given to the Angels, but to Mar ; neither ha ; 
any ſuch Power as he pretends to, being not able to do any thing 4 
71. 20, 1 Chron, 1. 25. that Reu was the Son of Peleg, (here called 'gainſt Job, till he had obtained leave from God, nvi to Eater ! 
#::!ec) and Peleg the Son of Eber, and Eber the Son of Sala appears the Swine, without licenſe firft obtained from C11: ift, 


See the , Notes on Matth, 4. 8,9, 10, Thoſe Words, v. 6: For 


the Devtt 
ei:ings OT 
hath hc 


aid 


9 Ard 


Chap, I 


Wn wh 
01,1, 
rant]; 
Teſt 
ment 
brſt p 
her 
Plaxs 
Quota 
for th 
be to 
thing 
ed Ly 
ver h 
#n In 


Vi 


CZais 


on 4a pinnacle of ——_— and faid an him, If em on eons, Ne teney Gittered not in any thing of. a2 
; Clary tor us to know and 'bulicye in order to Saivation, a';7 

E the Son 0 od calt th ſel dowa from ; ; CODES ! OCHCVE 1 order to Salvation, At? 

thou b 3 y {the frequent quotations we have -in the Ny Tollomon out of ee 


w 


hence . ' Septnagint, incline us to think th Ty it 1 Mt var: 34 £ wv 3 ' 
RN” . * © 6 . SF ahoy e F) TIC 1 Tie Wi of goff, that p:r- 
Te to For It 1s wWrItren * he ſhall g1Ve his angels charge ! ticular Perſons in Churches, ihovld make uſo at oh RY - oy 
44:8 7 ne = RN £421 L f CY, % "LIT 


12- over thee, tO keep Thee. take them for the /t/y Scriptures, not lightly and ordinarily varyioa 
, bad 4  OEAULEPSS BOY Wal YUuhe 


. . _ ' ; 7 f from them p the T; 11] $317 NF Gor 3, , ns TR SET 
nd 1n their hands tne ſnail] bear thee I 1C I " l - ho”, 112 ON IC] DUUTS:,, CCM -- BOIt UN Ofcia2ryv 
I A Ul P1 it al minifterial Gift, but tic work of 12 {tirrod Tie. | ; 


: 5 - ; : 30.8 V God LIE) it 1 (+: 
any tive thou daſh thy foot againſt a ſtone whom he more than ordinarily fo afiits, vs that they hive nt cred 


Ei 13 And Jetus anſwering, {aid unto him, * It 1s 'in any momentous thing. It this may be 24mitted 've noed not liv 
peut 19, 2:5, Thou ſhalt not tempr the Lord thy Gad. the fault upon thoſe who tranſcribed Lyts Copy. But fer us come 
; See the Notes on Mat. 4. 5, 6, 7. what Matthew calls the 77ly City, jo the Text it ſelf, { The Spirit oftnn 7417 Go? ie run me becauſe be 
{ube expoundcth Ferujalem. : hath anomted me. |  Anotnting may frame YO Cih 353.95 .. The Tn- 

| 13 And when the devil had * ended all the temj;ta- [7 %ment of the Perſra with Gifts and AVI: x1 fr bis Warts, Thus 
Wt. 4 LOT he departed from kim for 2 ſ>a{on. . hes PE Ti Te —_ IS ay 9 FeCl) 175 a! tIngs, and Chriſt 
Matthew ſaith, The Devil» left him, and benold Anzels cams and - Mt 5" 45* 4 — Er wi anNNreT wit) the 1/1 of aladneſs 

cd onto hin Late fait. he parted from his for ea 20 is Jetlwe, which the Baptil reweth to imerprct, Jn): 2, 24. 

when he had ended all the Temptation, Thoſe Words for a feaj: | , $ RE. 9; = OT je 4 - Aninting el; was 

{em to intimate that ourSaviour had further Conilifts with the U.- |. ; In | 4 NO nay mY yl neg EEE 07 190. EXE 0f 

vil than are here mentioned ; and pofſibly thoie Words ail the temp. | 1, 5”, rg hs” A 2-2 gin as p65 ran Men Synb9l ; 

tatim may hint to us, that the Devil offered more Temptations tha: Gr ns one q pl 6o gg err, = 6 nah 

the Evangelifts have recorded, tho' ſome atiirm that ali Temptations Li by 4D Meg = Rs Hah 0 a blom David was 
fall under thoſe which are thc heads of theſe Tempratinns, and think | 5,7 0 I 24» 12s 13e BY TRE APITTE 100 hore 6 ior We. i COR- 


t 450 


£ 5 "> : : £2: a. cctv 1-114 2a7, excitin? and « uickenins Chr:tft to the npreſenr Fro 

thoſz Words for a ſeal, igNne until the time of kts '*aiſron, © hen PE = Pe. Me hy WIG & Cirity 60. tHe PFALCUe EgCOU: 
/ 2s us, > . S 2 WY }.s OG ES —y g.* By, 41 14} Of fi'vps CITUCC, to WW HIOR God [$1 [<. ; Mt Ax 171;t 1 ” hr; 7 'vH 18 yo 

he entred 11t9 the neirt of Fu ts, aid acmecd all his Inftrumentrs a- pay es — ; ; = a" IQL 00; 
, }T Oi - no ihim. 2. #ittin? big, ovine lim the Sir * on. 

wie Ti 3 LENSES Ge 26 big foorfoy ine Lhe alfil tic ODirait nar DBY 


aint this Captiii of our Salvition, ' | | : 
game this Capt tal 4s meaſi eo MA; o IN A þx; Yep rot = } C | 
L | . - 1. : hr $08 } bre. 2, 1907 Calicd Fm £9 the exc;icrte of it 4 an oecaute tho 

I4 And, Jeſus returned 1n tae power Oi the {Þ11 ILin- | ford had eyz2ncd MM. to prepared; and row fo called firm, the 


to * Galilee, * and there went out a fame of bim grit nor excited, an quickencd tim God ftirreth ur none to 


f137- through all.the region round about. Ad tram the Brice of the Viniftry, whom he hath at nt2 
"iy 2. : ' y F . > #5 wit} Gifts {ry the 07 Fed. ne ft, Mit wth £4.90 3 + ern int T4570 
412 15 And he raught 1a their iynagogues,being glorificd | P77 7957.7 700 07 mango 9f We But whit vas this cmpio! mon 
$1 14 cr I] to w..1c: Chr was #nowfed 2 evatryer;teriiars ts Progch ihe Gripet 
01 all. Le : - , \eothe Par, } This was. fit greet wor; bf cur Lori and Saviour 

Both Matthew and Hark maxe the occation of our Saviours going t,, Pregetss and whit 2 The RR -:* Apa 34 
; : K fb : «} dC: atl31 Wilt : W-.- es, E Ak S f2/ SaLUATI3N 1 
into Galilee, to be his hearing that Jo'n was cait int) Priſm. But '+, to) ——_—_— | ER. | 
into Galile : : , 5 X aſt int; Fon —__ 0 VIOMW w] Yo 1 5 En aNde tonic that ae INCA 


certainly Matthew and Mark ſpeak of 2 ſecond going into Galilee,and | jy oh. Wor'd- 5 bv 2 four ER. re 
mean by it Galtlee of the Gentiles, which was 1a the j»7oilichion ct| titted as ws 4 frenid EEE on 3 ini = 
Philip the Brother of Herid Antipas 3, elſe one might adiitre, why | g9 was oye bh e:-* rol: "a 12-9 7p Ps nd. ” 
Chrilt ſhould go into Galzlee, upon hearing that Fohn wis caſt 7nco' dutds.65 p _ \ rhav'o a. pol = ” ome” Kr ory 
Prinz that had been for i1m to have thrown himſelf into 772196" | Sel for _ HH Fg : hs EE AT cal gas hag bu 
Mouth, before that his time of ſuffering was come 3 but it fhow! tau jy on pon io kr: + 5: Soy Ge —_ 2 
feem that after his Temptations, he firlt went to Capernawy, where | iu gy: + T EEE... qe nor i 
hedid not ſtay many days, Fobn. 2. 12, and then to Nazareth,” which | , 07 oe ee Cn nnd, Os C0 ny $092 
1 . Sp Age Fay ' 7- 49,40 Torrach Miniſters what Eralmzs faith, Nuila nobis ani- 
was his own Country z but others think tat all the Evangclifts peak |, "25a 52415 {4 ohor. pro a3 Damings ol3ie mari nap off Far antShy 
ofa ſecond going into Gatiſe, to which 1 cannot agroe if Kaxw-rb rhe nt 90 P19 6 Doninis ele mh mn. ef} dedignatug 
. ,4+hs , EY ry3G oa) + > =» Yu tfofods ang! : &<# s - oth - 9 a y . 
were within that Galillee, which was called the lower Gafzlze, and' ,,+ +, pe Bloor or 7 # CES ++ 2s es rt BY ec A 
was within the juriſdiftion of Herod Antings, who was the letrarcy difehai; on not to pry wor Banjos "Md ts this Ir wg or 420 =s 
of Galilze, and the Man fiat lad impriſoned Fern, aud afterworrs | .,, Girenrhciiion "7 nimſelf FR ted to pbcatre ; gy 9 Sat 
cauſed him to be buitcaded., [And Ne tauzht in their Synagogues. | i ther thus pn hey : ir, aha of ſuch on _s p32 2 Qp2rth ppt 
had thereputation of 2 Propyzt, which procured him that livert* | 9.40 be underſtood in the next Weoids [He bath ſent me to heal 
of ſpeaking 1n 21 thoſe 0 Where e- Jeu ccicarated: their pub*Prg. broken hearted | whether wounded in the fenſe of Sin, or melted 
lick worſhip 3 being g/57jre, that 15, admired, and honoured 0 | 1 the ſenſe of Mercy ; the wholc-nezrted, are ſuch as fee no need of 
_ - repentance, uo need of 2 Saviour, Chriſt came not. to heal theſe. 
23, IG And he * came to Nazareth, wiere he had been | The while reed nxt a Phyfictan, It followeth, | to Preach deliuo;ance 


M\ltt, 
» Mark 


, 
» : f n o +, l 7 1htie « ka b: 1, > K TV þ * - > TS Sio roo ti Wow 7 T 4 
. brought up, aud as his cuſtom was, he went into the her ns _ agg - ona ae 
- er LVICE Wt COErt 13 A WAY 1OF ENCIT GEUVET; @e, [| AN FECg® 
d] 7 4 C53 1. , je UE bl . £ J . 4 = . I 
Yo ſ1 nagogue on the {abbarh Gay) and ſtood up tor to ering 9f f1z4r to the Bird, | to let all Blvd finners know, cit there 
o read, : !% on eyc-lzive dficover'd which 17 applycd will r:icover thor ſpirt- 
P ; —* ifs A þ " C42 ” , «,* RITA - 
$ We heard before, Ch. 2. 20% oh, that Cariſt Was brought up at ful ſight. 4 Fl, tet ar lhe: ty then: tat Fre braiſed. 1 It S ©0f theo 
id Rexaretn 3 we rad of him at Nazareth, Matth, £3, gg. But TI miuft {ame iignticancy, with binding up the broken tn heave, | 25 Preczct 
©, conf:fs I doubt, whether Matthew there, and Luke here ſpeak of | -5e acceptable rear of the L17d.) Tre truc Tabilee, whin crery Soul 
re the ſame time, Gt the Nature of the Jewith $YNIgOgues, and thr [may be ſet free from che bond of its Sins, 2 Cor. 6. 5. the year of 
be order of Worthip there, 2nd tie reading of the Scriptures im them, We] God's 22908 Ti VW1;1i, that tlc time v7.'S NOV COME. when Ut cones Noathe 
N- have ſpoken betore in our Notes on Yat!h. 4. 23. 2, he that fired Sodgand wrought Bighteoulneis, NOWdG 52 accepts 
is 17 And there was delivered unto him the book of | :4 with him, 3 10, 35, 
I ba ! j Jr L , fo ? 7 - - ; = C3 t* A - 
nt, the prophet Eſaias, and when he had opencd the book, 20 And he cloſed the book, and he Save # again 


kefound the place where it Was written, to the iter, ond fate down - Ard -the eyes of al) 
18 The ſpirit of the Lo:d # upon me, becauſe he|them that were in the !yn2gogue were faſtened or 

hath anointed me to preaci: the goſpel to the poor, he | him. | 

hath feat me to heai the broken-hearted, to preach de-| 21 And he began to fay unto them, This day 4s this 

liverance to the captives, and recovering of light to the| ripture fulfilled in your ears. 

blind, to ſer at liberty them that are bruiſed. Chrift obſerveth the order uſed in their Synagognes, when he that 
iI9. To preach the acceptable year of the LORD. officiateth had rcad ſuch a portion ont of the Law as was _ppormiee; 
The Words differ in ſome things fro the Words of the Prophet | 2r out of the Prophets, as he pleaſcd, hc cloſed the Book, Key opp 

out of which they are quoted, 1Ja!uh 51. v. 1 where is nothing Roll, and gave it again to the Officer, whoſe wors 1t was to orig 


f —_—— "v5 of ; | þ ay it up. And then ſate down, 
of recovering of fight to th? Blind; but they exatly agree with the |! and then to carry 1t back, and lay Ir UP. Bs 
ering of fight to P whiles he made his exhortation upon it. This Chrift 61d, the Peo 


in *fx 
2 I IN 
ans 


z0n 


en, "Det 
ery 


't YI $11 407 - ' - oy =. V5 - ? / 3 ; Ui Mad 
wilt Sep:uazint ve rfion, only v. 15. ti:cy have agazoar ts call, anc Luke "ION = | "6 
c hath polls P;p hb accor4ins to which nrovbably os ies E ple being in the mean time very attent to hezr what he would iy; 
1 0! l z1evzes, fo Preach, accoriing to whtth provavly te CODIE I'S Ken. 8 ; - 
I ; - , : ri He begins to ſpeak, and telleth them, This was a Propnecy con- 
I. te Septuagint in uſe with them were. It was thi manner in the | HE ICS |, a WE In 


cerning him. [This day is the Scriptare fulfilled in your ears. | That 
is, it is fulfilled in me, either primarily, or as I am the Antitype © 
Cyrus, We muſt not think that this was all which Chriſt ſaid, Þu# 
thus he began his diſcourſe. 


Synag);u2s ior the iminifter (an Oihcer appointcd [0 that purpoſe, 
lee wv. 10.) to bring- the Book of t':c Law or of the Froonets, which 
was tobe read, and to &2liver it to him that officiated jor that rime, 
Who when he had read,re-delivered it to the ſameOicer to be laid up. 


Books of the Prophets, he that -ficiated, was more at liberty to read: p = . RA 2 

wu what place, and proportion 'i1e pieafed. Our Lord readeth, 1/a. And rney ſaid, * Is not this Joiepas fon SO > 0a 
51.1, which (accordins to the Septu.zgint copy) was as Luke here | All that heard our Saviour in tne Synagogue bare tim wilnets, GO: 
tatilated 3 and by the way, this cuſtom of ti;2 Writers of the New what 2 Not that he was the Meſ/tas, much Jeſs the So ol God 
Te2ment (writing in Greek) to quote Texts out of the Old Teſta- | they praiſed his diſcourſe 1n opening the Prophery, they Gid NOT UE 
nent, very often according to that+ Septu.cgint Tranſlation, may | lieve in him, but they admired the Wiſdom,and Pictv of by antgour- 


— 


——- 
19> 


* 1 refh ct .; : . F +he Grice of Cod in him. lis 2i2ct- 
ſhalt *1 trſt give us ſome account of the difficulty we met with chap, 3. | ſes, they admired the effe&s of the Grace 07 Con 1 7 A 


her y 4 C 5 þ 0 - . 4; Y C7 nat I C co LOS "Y 2 
where $ul4 was made the Son of Cainan, and the Grandchild of Ar- | cus Words 3 but fee the wretchedueis a ea: nal Feoarts ' 
ax . . - z Hhoak th bezinoninGgs oz any cg- 
Maxad, whereas Moſes mentions no Cainan,Gen. 11. Luke taking the | pronenefs to take up prejudices to C02K tr: Ys aa on _ 
quotation out of the Septuagzint might put it in according to them, | vittions 1n themſelves. They do not admire tl FOWer Or 1273 


thou !5 


, For 6 os — Cds 
it, are ” they have it in Gen. 11, 12. Sccondly it may learn us not to | Grace, that could fo far influence one ©: nes - = Tema 

Devi too curious as to minute things in Scripture, for had it been a | they took Chriſt tv have had, but dreaming * ob pany, cj rag 
ngs of thing of moment the Holy Spirit of God had certainly never ſuffer- muſt come with obſervation, and the coming lire hs g 4 _—_— 4 
jath NC ed Lube to write after their Copy, either there, or here. God ne- | in great outward ſplendour and m_ trey oY hy - : m_ 
ning 4” ver had a Church in any place, but he ſoon ſtirred up ſome to make | becauſe ( tho of the houſe of David) they were of 15 mes TOE 


er 1810 *n Interpretation of the Scriptures for their uſe, and ſo far affiſted| quality. 


wUgl. 2, CRrr2] 23 Ar, 


LY 


[4 


, 


Ard 


Tiicir Writers tell us, that the Books ct Moſes were divided into ſe- 22 And all bare him witneſs, and * wondered at. + 
reral portions, which they wee tied to read in order 5 but for the | ,p,. gracious words which proceeded out of {11s monty. 5; 


haps IV. S. LUKE. Cap, 


g And he brought bim to Jeruſalem, and ſet him in that tho they might differ from the Z2b-op Toxt.or the geork. 


wr xe irs. 


is + : 
47 ) |; ©; j | 
! Fat 4 LM0T.. 
ot } a Y = " 
is. EE: | al 
* Wil Wk P10 ON 
$4,034 » IE" 
$2 (45-0 
Hd | 
- & 
, T1] £ 
{oy tk 
i 154 : 
7 Fo 


FF, 
Hy 
'7 
Y 
$4 ' 
\s 
81 ; 
+41 
+31 
- - 
#2 
1 \ 
l ' 
i 
g. 7 
bj i 
: 
\ 
: - 
4 ? 
o 
2} 
ſis. ry 


Y 
IP; & 
F bg bo 
* i ! hh x 
a8) 
F j 
is 0 
of 
F 
(1 
= 
"of 4 
4 WE. 1.1" 
% | as 
i WI 
s { : 


L 8... } 
$517 4 af. 551 
ad +! : ' * 
$1. , S 
| : 4 by bi. 
Ly : _ 
4 Ba Y FX 
: F-4 
wo 
: L 7 "4 þ } o 
: A 23 oe! 
> : | I ” 
db”, -$ 
, ; », 
WY 
{ Wc 
4 »o- 
i 4 : | 
» I bn l 
Us T 
7-168-794834 
» 5 , '#T. | 4 
4 : 47.7 vþ # 
1 F f+1 *; 
z T | : 
4, . 4 t : 
» 4 ©; 
i - i 
4 | 4 l 
þ> 
? po 4 


hs 
<< 
—— 


"wed. 
Fe 


ro 
ao. oe —— a - 
— IPPPEY - 
—_— — 
A _ 
> — 
22H 
. —_ —_— 
wn RD 


/ ' 
| 60 
«fl Fs: 
alle (08 
[Of \ : I hy $ 
\ q/ bf ; aL i 
bd $: 
| 


S. L U K E, Chap, IV. je 


+3 - 1 with their Fore-fathers in 1 
23 And be ald unto them, Ye will rely fay unto paring them with her Fore the in the time of @uband Pra. = 
me this proverb, Phy ficlans heal thy lelt: what _—_ them, that the Grace of God ſhould paſs to the Gentiles, while - fn 
f.4- 13 we have heard done In * Capernaum, do alſoherein , ſhould be rejetted, they are not able to bear him. Thus 44s. 22 «ig 
Zo thy country- = the Jews heard _ xs [qe —_ repeated God's Commitlion to 
- , X } him, to go unto the Gentiles ; tnen they cried, away w; 
CS pe head, Veray biaay unto you; ©'No proj inthe Earth, for © is me ſe be ould ge Tent © fo 
-1t, 33-Pket is accepted in his owncountry. | ing to the old Prophecy, Deat, 32. 21. (applied to the Jer Freed: 
Chriſt here tells thoſe of Nazareth, what was in tbeir hearts,v7-| the Apoſtle, Rom. 10. 19. _) that becauſe they had moveg Ira 
Tl.at thcy 11 their hearts contemned him, becauſe of the meanneſs jealouſie, with that which is nt God, he would move them as - ty 
ot his  arci.tage, and challenged him to confirm his Dofarine by ſie, with them that are not & People, and provobe them to ne 
Miracles urging that Nazareth was his own Country, and Phylict-|#9/j/h Nation. This is further matter of obſervation. 26s Go 
au;s in the firſt pſace ought tocure themſelves, and their Friendsand j'eq Sinners, who cannot obtain of their Luſts, to be a; ol ag ; 
tiofc of their own Families 3 they therefore cha'lenge him to work | a5 others, yet are ordinarily ſo proud, as they have no patic wy 
ſome ſuch Miracles, as he had betore wrought in Capernaitm,as they | hear that others are better than they , or have or ſhall __ pn 
had heard. He gives them the reaſon why he did no Miraclcs a-| mgre ſpecial ſhare in God's favour. Thoſe of N azareth, —_— 
moneſt them, viz. becauſe he diſcerned that they contemned them, | ;n the Synagogue heraing theſe things, as filled with A on 
as is very uſual for Perſons, according to that common ſaying, | No| chriſt out of the City, as not fit to live among them, and "a, 
Frophet is accepted in his own Country. | The reference here to {ome to kill him, by throwing him down headlong from the brow of the 
things done before this time 1n Capernaum, would incline vs to think H1l upon which their City was built, | But he paſſing through wy 
that after Chriſt's Temptations, he firſt went to Cana of Galiee,| mjdg of them, went away. ] How he got out of their hands, -wi vo 
where he wrought hs firſt Miracle, Zohn. 2. 1. turning the Water | they had laid hold of him, the Scripture doth not tel! us, nor 57 
into Wine; then to Capernaum, where he ſtaid not many days, | gur concern to be curious to inquire; we read much Gon, : 
Fobn. 2. 12. then to Nazareth, but hearing that John was caſt into cape, Fohn. 8. 59. when the Jews hal taken up Stones to ſtone Leg 
Priſon, he removed from Nazareth to Capernaum , out ofthe Ju-| we know it was an cafie thing for him who was God as well a; M 
riſdition of Herod, under the milder Government of Philip his| eg quit himſelf of any mortal Enemies : but how he did it ES 
Brother. : blinding their Eyes, or altering the Nature of his Bodv, and makin 
*Jam.s. 17. 25 But I tell you of a truth, Many * widows were it inperceptible by them, or by a greater ſtrength then they had 
WT x $6503 in the days of Elias, when the heaven was ſkut (which the Divine Nature cone cafily ſupply his Humane Nature 
up three years and fix months, when great famine with) who is able to determine : : 
. 31 And * came down to Capernaum, a city of G 
was throughout all the land. lil q he ch he fabbach & M\1:t.,1 
26 But unto none of them was Elias ſent, fave un-| Es - For ot —_ __ aDDath-Cays. 
to Sarepta, 4 city of Sidon, unto a woman that was a hi = 1 L yp oniſhed at his doCtrine; * for * 11, 
5m is word was with power. 


-any lepers were in Iſracl in the time of} Capernaum wasa City 1n the other Galilee, under the juriſdi&io 
-/ grad can Av of Philip, whither Matthew and Mark mention our Saviours motion 
3 


Elifcus the prophet: and none of them was cleankd, upon the report of the 1mpriſonment of Fohn. Philip is not only © 
faving Naaman the Syrian. by Hiſtorians reported of a leſs bloody temper than his Brother ze, 

The two Stories to which our Saviour referreth are thoſe 1 Kings| but Herod having taken away his Wife, it is very probable,that there 
17. 9. 2 Kings 5. 14. But the queſtion 1s what our Saviour intended was no good underſtanding betwixt him and Philip. So that two 
to teach them by theſe ſtories, which made them ſo exceeding angry | things promiſed our Saviour more quiet in Philips juriſdiction, 1,Th: 
as we ſhall find by and by. Tanſwer, fevcral things,none of which] tameneſs of his temper. 2. The Hatred betwixt him and Her. |: 
pleaſed them. 1. The freeneſs of God's diStingaiſhing Grace. That] appears from v. 23. He had been at Capernaum before, but ſtave 
God was not bound to give to all the fame aid, and means off very little, haſtening to his own Country of Nazareth in the other 
Grace, that he gave ſome. This is a Dofrine the World were Galilee , from thence he now again removeth, hearing of Fohns In: 
never patient to hear, That God will have Mercy on whom he will priſonment, and ſeeing the baſeneſs of his Country men ; when he 
have Mercy. We would fain make God a debtor to us ; thoſe of Na-Þ came there,he keeps on his courſe Preaching upon the Fewiſh Sabbat; 
zareth, think they had as good, if not a better right to Chrilt's Mi-} not aboliſhed till his Reſurre&ion, It appeareth by v, 32. that 
racles, than thoſe of Capernaum, I tell you, faith Chriſt, God 1s a] he Preached in the Synagogue here alſo, It is ſaid, That the People 
Sovereign in his Ads of Grace, and afeth freely, and I can do no| were aſtoniſhed at his Do#trine. Ajtoniſhment is one thing, Believin; 
Miracles, but where he will have them done, 2. That 7 # through] is another. Men may be fome ways and to ſome degrees affe8:d t 
the fault of Men, if they receive not the benefits of Divine Grace. If| the Word of God, that yet are far enongh from believing, as the 
the Jjraelites would have entertained Elijah, he might have been | moſt of theſe Capernaites were,elſe Chrift had never upbraided them, 
ſent to them, as well as to Sarepta. If the Lepers in Iſrael, would | as he did Matthew 11. 23. | For his Word was with Power ] That 
have ſought out, and come to El7jah they might have been healed 3 | this Phraſe is to be underſtood only of thoſe powerful, and mira 
if you would have received me, and believed in me, you might|Jous operations, by which Chriſt confirmed the Word which he 
have ſeen what thoſe of Capernaum did, it is becauſe of your con- | Preached to be from God, T cannot yield ; it is better interpreted by 
tempt and unbelief, that I can ſhew yon no Miracles. If any ſay, if | Mark, 1. 22. He taught them as one that had Authority, not as the 
God had putit into the hearts of the Widows in Iſrael, or the Lepers | Scribes, and to be underſtood of the gravity, and ſpirituality of hi; 
there,they would alſo have entertained Elzjah, and have thought out | Dofrine, his Majeſty and Life in the delivering of it,and the Pow: 
and came to Eliſha; why did not God put 1t into their hearts ? To | of God going along with it for the convi&tion of Sinners; to al! 
this the anſwer 15 ready, Who art thou that diſputes with God ?| which were added his miraculous operations, of which the Evange- 
Why doth the Clay reply upon the Potter ? Even ſo O Father, for | liſt goeth on giving us a more particular account. 


ſo it pleaſeth thee ; however the faileurs of the Lepers in Jyael, and 33 And in the ſynagogue there was a man which had 


the Widows there, and of thoſe in Nazareth, was in a great mea- _ | , : ; 
ſure in their duty, as to things within their Power to do by vertue j © ſpirit of an unclean devil, and he cried out with z 


of that common Grace, which God denieth ro none ; he might juſtly loud voice, | 
deny hisſpecial iniluences, while they negletted to make uſe of his 34 Saying, || Let us alone 3 what have we to do! 0: 
17 choNG oy rnvg 6 That in 4p dare 7 go Pe with thee, thou Jeſus of Nazareth, Art thou come to 
God, and wrought Rizhteouſneſs, was ever accpted of him. God ha : 
no reſpect to Chis Country, or that Country ; he ſent Elias to do [OY us Iknow thee who thou art; the holy One _ | 
good to a Syzonian, and Eliſha to do good to a Syrian, while he neg- OL OO. : k E A 
iced the ingrateful, and diſobedient Jraelites. Thus he alſo not} 35 And Jeſus rebuked him, ſaying, Hold thy peace, | Nats A, 
obſcurely hinteth, that for their unbelzef, and reje&jon of, and diſ-jand come Out of him. And when the devil had throw! | % =y 
obedience to him, God wonld ſend his Goſpel to the Gentiles, and | hjm jn the mids, he came out of him, and hurt hin Wn 
rcjeft them, which came to paſs within a few years after. None j F 
of all theſe were grateful ſounds in the ears of the Men of Nazareth ; Es | 
you ask me (faith our Saviour) why I do not ſuch things hereat | 3s And they were all amazed, and ſpake among 
Nazareth, as 1did at Capernaum. I was not ſent to you. No 2 but themſelves, ſaying, What a word # this ? for with au- 
were not they ſome of the loſt Sheep of Iſrael ? Ah |! but Chriſt was no thority and power he commandeth the unclean ſpirits; 
more ſent to all J-ael,than Elias was ſeat to all the Widows in 1ſrael, and they come out 
He was ſent to Preach to them all,but for any ſpecial fignal favours, Y y . : face 
he was ſent but to ſome, and thoſe ſome were ſuch as did not proud-| _37 And the fame of him went out into every place 
Iy reze& and contemn him, but receive him. of the country round about, 


28 And all they 1n the {ynagogue, when they heard | We met with the ſame Hiſtory related as done in Capernaum, anc 
1 1 with the ſame circumſtances, Mark x. 21, 22, &rc. To the Notes 
_— gs, were filled with wrath. upon which we refer the Reader. ET 


29 And roſe up, and thruſt him out of the city,\ "2 ardhe aroſe out of the ſynagogue, and entred 
? f Or, Z9ge, and led him unto the || brow of the hill whereon their Rt Simons houſe «: And * te —- "mother was 
city was built, that they might caſt him down head. |, 4 4 grcatfever z and they beſought him {o: 


108g. h 
_ - ; --+ | ber- | 
30 Put he palling through the midſt of them, went +0 Auiibe ood ar 3 and rebuted the-ferers 


his Ways f 
: : ; ſhe aroſe, and mint 

Unhappy Nazareth! where Chriſt had now lived more than thir- —_— left _ And immediately Ihe aroic, 

ty years, they had fecn him growing up, increaſing in Wiſdom, and j IFTEd Unto them. eee hats" 3 d Marh. Sce the 

Statare, and in favour bath with God and Man, Chap. 2. $2. They had | We wet with this Hi ws” 4 ot in Matthew and Mark. . 

had the firſt fruits of his Miniſtry, and v. 22. they bare him witneſs, | Notes on Matth. 8. 15. and Mark 1. 29, 30. ” 

_ 4% 5 of » __ -+omi an v4 array 44 o _— OO 40 Now when the ſun was ſetting, all they _— 
ey knew his Education, ſo as they could not think he had this Wiſ- ; 7 them unto him? 

dom, and Knowledge, from any advantages of that, but muſt have any lick with _Givers Giraſey, —_ hem aol healed 

it from Heaven ; yet when they hear him Preaching, and but touch - and he laid his bands on every one of Them; 3: 

ang them for their contempt aud rejection of him,and tacitly com-| them. '4 And 


- hap. IV. 


V up V. 


41 A 


ku 


1d devilsalſo came out of many,crying out,and 
Thou art Chriſt the Son of God. And he re- 


Chap. V. 


ſaid unto Simon, Fear not ; from henceforth tho: ſta), 


catch men. 


ſayings 
1 ſay poking them, ſuffered them not to ſpeak - || for they 
i ihe knew that he was Chriſt. ; 
M See the Notes On Mark, 1. 32, 33, 34. where we met with the 
Crit ſame things. . : 
42 And when 1t was day, he departed, and went in- 


roa deſarc place, and the |eople ſought him, and came 
unto him, and ſtayed him, that he ſhould not depart 


from then. _ 
3 And he ſaid unto them, I muſt preach the king- 


Jom of God to other cities alſo: for therefore am | 


ſent» : 

44 And he preached in the ſynagogues of Galilee. 

See the Notes Mark, 1. 35, 35, 37, 38, 39. where that Evangeliſt 
reports the ſame things, that this Evangeliſt mentioneth, only with 
more circumſtances, Mark ſaith, he went out a greet while before day 
into a ſlitary p/ace to pray. He ſaith alſo that Simon and others 
followed hinr, and found him, and told hiw, that all Men ſought 
h!m, Luke addeth that the others defired him not to depart from 
thence, They deſired his ſtay, in order to his Miracles, the healing 
of their Sick, diſpofſetling Dzmoniacks, gc. Chriſt replied (as Mark 
ſaith) Let us 8&9 into the next Towns, that IT may Preach there alſo, 
for therefore came 1 forth. Lake faith, he toid them, He muſt Preach 
the Goſpel of the Kingdom to other Cities alſo, for therefore he was ſent. 
Accordingly, (faith Lake) he did Preach in the Synagogres of Galilee. 
Marb adds alſo that he caſt out Devils. How can any think, that 
Preaching the Goſpel, 15 not the great Work: of the Miniſters of Chriſt, 
but Prayers are to be preferred before 1t, or adminiſtring the Sacra- 
ments greater * when 1t 15 expreſly ſaid, That Chri/t Baptized none but | 
his Diſciples, John 4+ 2+ and Paul ſaith Chrift ſent him not to Baptize, 
but ro Preach the Goſpel : And Chriſt omitted opportunitics of work- 
ing Miracles, that he might Preach to other Cities, and only wrought 
Miracles to confirm the Dorine he Preachecd ; and* we fo often 
read, of his going about Preaching and Teaching, never of his Pray- 
ing, but alone with his Diſciples or in a Mountain or ſolitary place ; 
(tho doubtleſs he, or ſome others did pray at their worſhip in the 
Synagozues ) unleſs any will beſo mad as to think, that the ſole end 
of Preaching, is to convert Men from Fudaiſm, or Paganiſm, to an 
outward owning and proteſſing of Chriſt, tho under that profeftion, 
by reaſouof thetr ſottiſh ignorance, and debauched lives, they remain 
twice more the Children of the Devil, than many Jews and Pagans 
are, What was Chriſts great Work, is certainly his Miniſters, viz. 
to Preach the Goſpel of the Kingdom. 


GHAP. V- 
Chriſt teacheth out of Simon's Ship, I—3. 4 miraculous draught of 


= 


Fiſhes; Chrift promiſeth to make his Diſciples Fiſhers of Men, 4—10. 
They leave all and follow him, 11, 12. He cleanſeth a Leper, 
13—16. Lawyers come to hear the Do#rine of Chriſt, 179. He cu- 
rethone ſich of the Palſie, 18-=20, Whereby he proveth his Auths- 
rity to forgive Sins, 21-26. Calleth Levi, 27. Hz leaveth all 
to follow him, 28. Levi's feaſt ; wherein Chriſt eateth with Pub- 
licans, 29, Wherefore the Phariſees murmur, 30. He Vindicateth 
his ſ doing, 31, 32. and defendeth his Diſciples for not faſting, 
33—39- 

] NDitcame to paſs, that as the people preſſed 
| upon him to hear the word of God, he ſtood 

by the lake of Geneſareth, 

2 And ſaw two ſhips ſtanding by the lake : but the 
tſhermen were gone out of them, and were waſhing 


their nets, 

It isby many Interpreters thought that Zuke in this Hiſtory to the 
eleventh verſe, doth but give us a larger account of what Matthew, 
chap, 4. 18. and Mark, cbap. 1. 15. told us ſhortly. The Sea of Ga- 
lilee, Cas they call it) and the Lake of Geneſareth were both the 
lame, receiving the different denomination from the oppoſite Coaſts 
betwixt which 1t was. TIzez Jv Aiuvnv had been better tranſlated 
#p5n, or at, than by the Lake, for without doubt the two Ships here 
— were upon the Water, tho poſſibly faſtened as uſually to 
tie Shore, ; 


'3 And he entred into one of the ſhips, which was 
Simons, and prayed him that he would thruſt out a 
little fromthe land : And he ſat down and tavght the 
people out of the ſhip. 

4 Now when he had left ſpeaking he ſaid unto Si- 
mon, Lanch out into the deep, and let down your nets 
fora draught. 

5 And Simon auſwering faid unto him, Maſter, we 
have toiled all the night, and have taken nothing: ne- 
vertheleſs at thy word I will let down the net. 

6 And when they had this done,they encloſed a great 

multitode of fiſhes ; and their net brake. 
_ 7 And they beckned unto ctheir partners which were 
in the other ſhip, thar they ſhould come and help them. 
And they came and filled both the ſhips, ſo that they 
began to fink. 

S When Simon Peter ſaw #t, he fell down at Jeſus 
knees, ſaying Depart from me, for I am a finful man, 
OLORD. ; 


Mat.s,1 


Mat, Il 


9 For he was aſtoniſhed, and all that were with him, 
at the draughr of the fiſhes which they had taken. | 
10 And ſo was alſo James and John the ſons of 


followed him. 


11 And when they had brought their. ſhips to 15 
* they forſook all, and followed hi bo ods, 


Im, 

Here 1 a plain and orderly ſtory related with many circumſtat- 
ces, tending to ſhew us the Power and Intluence of God upon Ment 
Succeſles, in their honeſt, and ordinary callings, and alſo that God 
Aath a Command upon the Fiſh in the Sea,together with an account 
of Chriſts call of Simon Peter, to be a Preacher of the Goſpel. The 
only difficulty is to reconcile this, to what Matthew tells us. Char 
4.18, 19, &c. Matthews words are theſe. And eſis wallins b 
the Sea of Galilee, ſaw two Brethren Simon calle? Peter. and PS Rd 
his Brother, caſting a net intothe Sea for they were Fiſher ep er 4s 
ſaid unto them, follow me, and I will make you Fiſhers of Men. Anz 
they flraightway left their Nets, . and followed hin, Ana going 0n 
from thence, he ſaw other two Brethren, James the $21 of Zebedee 

and John his Brother, in a Ship with Zebedee their Father mendin.s 
thetr Nets, and he called them, And they immediately left the Ship, 
and their Father and followed him. Marks relation doth much asree 
with Matthews. The ditferences are in theſe things. Matthew 1nd 

Markſpeak of Chriſt's calling theſe Diſciples, as he was walhins by 
the Sea. Luke ſeems to mention it as done in the Ship. Arſe Lube 
doth not ſay, that Chriſt ſpake ſo to Simon in the Ship, tho he doth 
indeed mention thoſe words to Sima, before he mentioneth theſe 
bringing the Ship to Land, becauſe poffibly, he would give account of 
all that Chriſt did or ſpake together. 2, They might be out of the 
Ship, walking by the Seca, before he called Fam?s aud John, whoſe 
call Luke doth not mention, but Matthew and Mark alone. 2. Mat- 
thew and Mark, mention no Ships, nor going of Chriſt into any. 
nor any draught of Fiſhes. Anſ. Matthew faith, that he ſaw Sime:: 

and Andrew caſting their Nets into the Sea. But there is nothing 

more ordinary tian for one Evangeliſt to relate more fully what ano- 

ther repeateth ſummarily. 3. Matthew and Mark ſpeak of Andrew 

being with Simon. Lube mentioneth Son alone. Anſ, Luke denies 

not that Andrew was there, and we are lure Simon alone, could nct 
:nanage the Nets with ſuch a draught of tiſh. 4. Matthew and 

Mark ſpeak of the calling of Szman, Antrew, Fames, and John. Lathe 

2nly of the calling of $719m. Anſ. It doth not follow from thence 

chat they were not called during Chriſt's wa!k by the Sea after he 

came out. of the Ship; Matthew and Marb aflure us they were 

s. Matthew and Mark fay, that Fames and John were mendins their 

Nets, Anſ. Luke faith nothing to the contrary, for he doth not 

mention their call at that inftant when S:mon's was. That immedi- 

ately after ſuch a draught of Fiſhes,their Ners ſhonld want mending, 

1nd they ſo imployed, 1s nothing at all ſtrange. So as it was like 

there was a little diſtance of time betwixt the call of Peter, and the 

athers, yet Luke omitting ſome circumitances mentioned by Matthew 
and Mark, as well as adding much to this Hiſtory by them omitted 

faith (at leaſt) of more than ore, Tiey forſook all, and followed him. 

Heace appeareth that there may be a cohereat Hiſtory; taking in 

what all three Evangeliſts ſay, only allowing that Chriſt came upon 

the Shore, and walked by the Sea fide, ſome ſhort time, before hc 

called James and Fohn, The Hiltory 1nftrutteth us. 1. How good a 

thing it is for Men to be employed in their honeſt callings, tho never fo 

mean. There God meets People with Bleffings. 2. How much it 3s 

our duty to yield obedience to God's Commands, and how advantaginus it 

will prove, how contrary ſoever they appear to our ſenſe and Reaſon. 

3» Upon whom our Bleſſing depends, iet our labour be what it will. 

4. That it is the works of Mimſters of the Goſpel to catch Men, to gain 

Souls to God. 5. How powerful God's calls are. They forſook_all and 

For the differcnce betwixt what John ſaith, Chap. 1. 

49, 41. of the call of Andrew and S!mon, from what the other three 

Evangeliſts ſay, we have ſpoken ſometiing in our Notes on Matth, 

4. 18, and ſhall add more when we come to that place in Fohn, In 

ſhort, John ſpeaketh of another time, before that either of them 

were called to follow Chritt. 

12 Andit came to paſs, when he was in a certain 
city, behold, a man full of leprofie, who ſeeing Jeſus, 
fell on h# face,and beſought him, ſaying, Lord, if thou 
wilt, thou canſt make me clean. | 

13 And he put forth his hand, and touched him, {ag- 
ing, I will, be thou clean. And immediately the Jlepro- 
fie departed from him, 

1+ And he charged him to tell no man, but go and 
ſhew thy ſelf to the prieſt, and offer for thy cleanſing, 
* according as Moſes commanded, for a teſtimony un- +14. ,; 
to them. S, 21, 22: 

15 But ſo much the more went there a fame abroad 
of him: and great multitudes came together to hear 


2nd to be healed by him of their infirmities. 

ce the Notes on Matth. 8. 2, 3, c. and on Mark 1. 40, 41,75. 
Matthew reports this Miracle done when Chriſt came down from the 
Mountain, and i mmediately after ſaith, that he entred into Caperna- 
um, v. $. Mark alſo concluding the firſt Chapter with this piece of 
Hiſtory, he begins the ſecond with telling us, that he entred into Ca- 
pernaum after ſome days. So that ſome think he was near Capernazu, 
within the bounds of it when he wrought this Miracle, but there 15 
no certainty of that, : ; 

16 And he withdrew himſelf into the wilderneſs; 
and prayed. | ; 

We meet with Chriſt often commending to us the Duty 0 5ecyet 
Prayer, by his own example, as he had done by his precept, Mat. 6. 
and always chuting for 1t, the moſt private and retired places, to 
teach us to go and do fo likewiſe,often to pray to our Fatner, which 
ſeeth in Secret ; and his example more pretlerh us, becaule we nave 
much more buſineſs with God in Prayer than le had ; he had no 
Sins to confeſs, nor to beg Pardon for, no need co ask tor any fan- 
Rifying habits of Grace, Wc. It is poſſible alſo that he withdrew 
into deſart places oft times, to avoid all th 


d&j 
>». 4 \ 


T; 


27. 
Ch. 12. 2* 


5 


ew of Oftentation, or 


*bedee, which-were partners with Simon. And Jeſus 


But fup- 
poſe 


dangers of tumults and to obtain a little reſt for bimſel?, 


, " - 7 ' WS "I 
4 he Zoe, P 
- TOY ERESSY g - _— _ +> x 7 "IV". i 
- >—— wS bg : - _ — - — 9 y_—_ * 
Tong - > - a - . —_ — tener _ = DSDE=2= — = = = 
7 - np - - _—_— -- — pda, w_ _ 2 —— _—_— —_— = > 
$ ,Z s - cY 4 R OP — > a GS le G - " _ 
_— ws rs - - <P ee ban 2p, y > p IQ>* | yr : : WP 4 = c—_ : 3 - .. —= - 
: —__ _ ie _ ——— - Y £544 KI. > h—— T —_ a ws * 44 rn” y—_— > __ Py : _ = _ _ 

” -> - LE od £ 1.4 dey« "Y on wa 0 * au D 4 Las OO - - - _ 
© NCTE = Ic i N o S > 5 =» - 35<- = _ _ as a 3-=edngt 0 PIETI <- 

Ez IDE: P oo tr _ -_ _—_— > _—_ _ = OE” g - rms £2” a ef 3-4 > ” 

_ 4 4 —_ DP? Bit 1 19s hath —— 2 ; I=Y - JE ES REES G VvY 7:0 - ——— . Py _ Pa hu 0 
= IT won, foo 8 ES » Rr M4 - - 6 EE DIR ” 4 5 4 XY = I p wm 5 w 
—_ F 4 Wy . Y " r= = - - —— + - - Coo =: 
Az 9 wont ed, DE. a had "X> Er ue. > = - - _ " dah - 
- = - - CTA" 5 _ -. aa LESS. >= 3 ) " - 
5 = 2 "© 


_ 


—_— 


=n1 Y Ie 
pay vt; 


K- — _ 
« x «5 > X85 


_ 
” 

_—_ ——___ WF. 4. V 2 

- Ou — 3+ 


_——_— 4 


oy _ <5 > - _ - CR. . 
e) L.A PE; = wits I BD 4 — = x. w= Y _ — S2<= : RR... vals _—_— As FIR 
- - b=. = a x " oy KITS 2... pmnaig : A OE LOR * bh ——__ 
- I o - S_ = OY mages . : " - + 
- _ , . _ , C - 7 - 

r - £ " - * — . % l, . — . = WE __— 

"oY _ | 7 co & . _ . ; $a >» DIY . - 8 -Wv _ 

2 ©E ——=07 _ Ka = D ' : -> tm _ - c : ” X "> (O's C7 35 "TD T 

— eco 2; 9 © 'h wr a —_ \ L "=: a a pd. $$ 2 I : » "L.8 
CR %: F933 py Q . * 4, ++ 5 qptien : -  -— - 2.1 5 =E K n "> 2 = —— pv a 

4 - . ay ner . - : : T : ” Toe 

25 g __ 3. CIRC : , __ vo - "ts a « _ IIS _ = 

4 =: : A 8 2 id * - I q Is bt % modes : CE + 2 : A 
_ : =y - Was ba  ———_ dF, = 2— 2 ot Fol _—RHE=> ba Pr HRC = i oy WES. os SR - « 
; 4 at ad . A d— — . - . —— o - 
4 ” ,- U Y 1 > TT —_— Me = T - 0 Dd. VL D F = h 
ns - r a of O - - A. eget _ UN — o ; Ae = EELuS 6 4 
F, - . = 4 4 + E = Sr CT _— 
a. _— i b - . in. ; —_ 
—— ay. 


_ 


bh YL 
: — OS 
< —— _ - 
— 


RETER 


poſe that the reaſon of ſis Motto 


therevy UNags 


V. d. 


dies) it tbould be much more 1a: Of Chriſtians. 


molt at leire from their publich Employmer . 


17 Arg it came to pals on a 
tcaching, 


| 
Tialani 


the LORD was preſert to heal then. 


We ihall obfcrve that the Scribes and Phariſees : 2uch haunted our 


Saviour where ever he came, cither to cavi! :t tim, or out of curl 


ofity to ſre the Miracics he wrought. It ſecus they were many of 
them preſent at this time z but here ariſeth a queltion or two. 1, Htv 
it 1s ſaid,the Power of the Lord was preſent with Chriſt to heal , had 
nut Chriti :!:is Potver of healing rhen at all times? Anſ. Doudtlcts 
| ſhe Divirz 
Nature once united to the Room was ncvirfcparated from Chriit, 
but it did not alvwavs put forth it fe'f, bci3g a5 to that wirettel by Is 
I 


he had, fr he was alwais the Ld that heale:h us. 


oy 


Will. Butas the end of Chri ifs Mirocis, was for the confiimnation 
we lhe! obierve thus motly after Preaching, he 
2. Quit, Who are here meant 
[ by them Tay reading the Words 072 woy'd think them related to ihe 
Phariſees and Poetors of the £ 7, of tone of which we read, that they 
| cures tt Chriſt inade upon 


of his Poftrine ; $2 


wrouzht his MNiraculons epcrations 


" | JE - -* bf r Fa ; A "o'%. v?1 
Were SICK, noO0r GO We reda GI 47 


9, vet the ſpending of his leiſura- 
ble hows in communion with his Father, is very imitable for US 3 
Chrifi 14/00 idle hours, he was always cttter Preaching Or Healing, 
vud tn otiicrs, or Praying, thereby paying an homage 
to God ; :fit coald be 41 of rhe Roman, (with refpett tohis Stu- 
They ffruld never 


be leſs al-:r, then when they «ie alone. nr lejs 1d!e, then when they are 


certain day as he was 
there wer? f-heriſees ani a-Ctors of the 
I:w fitting by; which were come out of 2:cry town of 
G2liice, and Judea, and Jeruſalem, and the power of 


nd to Preach in their Cities, not in the Difcintcs * 
they had noCitics. but 13 the jewiſh Citics, the * 1:18 of that Coun- 
try, yet tho verſe mcntioneth no other Pertors 
twelve Diſcipics, 
ſons pref-nt than the Pharizes, and Doftors of th. Law, vet there 
doubtlets were many others, and ſome among!t-ticn :ibouring un- 
dcr Chranical diffempers, of ineſe the Text is to be underſtood. 


might bri: 
upen the houte-rop, ang let tnv cown through the ti- 
ling with bz couch, 15to the nuuſt before Jeſus, 


them. 4nſ. We muſt know that ſometimes in Aoly Writ, theſe 


relative terms are put out of duc 679-3, 251m Math, 11, 1. where 


we have 
: Þ ' , PORE IF". wy Ex SMOÞY ; I 
and end 5 eommunains his tw oli: Diſciples, he dopurtea fence, to T2A4cn 


Antit came to paſs, when Fer'us had made 


thee Words. 
. 

itics pOOr Men 
"ar Tefus. and te 
So here, tho the verſe mceation th ne other Per- 


18 And behold, men brought in a beda man which 


was taken with the palfe : and they {ought means to 
bring him 1, and to Jay bin betore him. 


i9 And when they conid rot fin by what way they 
Z 317 10 becante of the mnttitude, they went 


C 
c 


20 And when he ſaw their faith, he ſaid unto him, 


Man, thy fins are forgiven thee. 


21 And the ſcribes and the phariſees began to reaſon, 


ſaying, Who is this which Tpeaketh blaſphemies ? 


*Pſal. 32.5, X Whocan forgive ſins, but God alone? 


Ha. 43. 25. 


22 But when Jeſus perceived their thoughts, he 


anſwering ſaid unto them, What reaſon ye in your 
hearts ? 


23 Whether is cafier to ſay, Thy ſinsbe forgiven 


LUKE. 
and there was a greet company of publicans, anq 
others that ſat down with them. of 


his diſciples, ſaying, Why do ye cat and 
publicans and ſinners ? 


that are whole need not a phyſician, 
lick. 


which Evangc'iſt;, have aiſo recorded this ca! 
calls him Matthew; Miri and Lite call him Levi, There 
thing more ordinary amorgſt the Jews, than for Perſ>n5 45 1, 
two Names. ib tells us his Fathers name alſo, layins | 
Son of Alph:;vs. © he 
lican, one ln7loyed in the gathering of the - Publich Revenys + 
pirt of it which aroſe from the exportation and jmpatution of on. 
modities 3; for he was fr'tinz at the receipt of Cuſion, 7 wad 
TIIENCC C 

Diſciple ; 
with hin ſeveral other Pubiicans and others. 
geliſts iy netting of Mytthews preparing tis feait ; but it i: in. 
plyed in them;for they take notiee of!1is ti , 


= h A «6 "po Aa « J 6 il 
and of ovr S$:viours tzking notice of it, 
- . 2 vv - Fa -_ 1 *g 
tion of hiufeif. Sc 


k . m7 ” C ” ! GS. : o A - - —E PRE 
adds, £ilit 'TH3 [.o! LE it fo Bi ( v [4 CLF * 9 [ at 415 
Fon TP FRO 7, TE Bn nl 
nedis, I wit FAS; Ver «TIT / & ( 1 i% ti 1% 
7 NJ " p - n F4y F POO 2s 
ON of Our S4VIiCurs cafire aft, 


of the bride-chamber faſt, while the bridegroom is with 
them *. 


ſhall be take! away from them, and then ſhall they if: 


pntteth a piece of a new garment upon an ol: if 
otherwiſe, then Doth the new maketh a rent, ard the 


thee, or to ſay, Riſcupand walk ? 


24 But that ye may know that the Son of man hath 


power upon earth to forgive ſins, (he faid unto the ſick 
of the x allie) I ſay unto tlice, Ariſe, and take- up thy 
couch, 5rd po into thine boule. 


25 Aid kwmedt tely he roſe up before them, and 


took up that v-.hereon NE juyy and Geparted to his own 
houſe, gloriiying God. 


26 And, they were all amazed, and they glorified 


God, and were filled with fear, ſaying, We have ſeen 
ſtrange things to day. 


See the Notes on Matth. 5. 2. and on Marh. 2, 3, CF. Both thoſe 


Evangeliſts record the fame it:ry with vecy ſmall alterations in the 
Phraſe, nothing 1n the ſenſe, 


Inſtead of the laſt Words, We have 


ſeen ſtrange things this day, Matthew faith, they glorified God, who 


had grven this Power unto Men. 
effeCt this Miracle had, was, 1. Amazement. A thing was 
underſtood not how it could be cficficd. 
Druine Power as to the effet. They therefore glorified God. why 
had gruenſuch Power unto Men. - 
upon Chriſt as a great Prophet, to whom God had communicated 
f.ch a Divine Power, as of old he had communicated to 


By which appeareth that all the 
done they 
2, They apprehended x 


Hiſtory. Sce the Notes on Muith, g. 14. Mark. 2. 18. 
thew and Mark ſay, - That thcy were the Diſciples of 7b: ho 
came, and thus ſaid to our Saviour. 
former Evangeliſts, we have fully opencd this picce of iiiftcrr, 
Join the Baptiſt was of a more ſevere depertment, than cr Siolour 
thoug'it fit to ſheww himielf, and complying more with the prod 
ces of the Pharjiees,ftho in much more fincerity } in their exercitc: of 
diſcipline,the Phariſees aid more eafily get his Diſciples ts | nil 
then in this addreſs to onr Saviour, = 
did it more ou: of infirmity, and th2 Phariſees ont of Mail 
they might have whereby to leiſen Cirriſt's reputation nog! the 
Peopic 3 thus weak, tho' good Men,are often drawn it by thu vis 
are more ſubtil, and Malicious to promote their defigus. Bciides ne 
naturally defire to be the ſtandard to all,and that others N.ould tie 
their meaſures from us,and Zohr's Diſciples poiſibly might Jiave alitt,e 


So as it Is plain, they only looked 


Elijah, 


and then to Eliſha, Left any ſhould ſtumble at what is ſaid,thar they 


unicovered the Houſe, and let him down through the tiling, 
the roofs of their Houſes built as ours, they muſt know, 


fancying 
that the 


moſt of their Houſes were builded ( like ſome amongſt us ) with 
flat roofs, which were covered with fome {lates or ſtones, ſo as they 
might eafily he uncovered, and this appecareth by the Commang of 
God, DPeut. 22, 8, conerning making battlements on the tops of thc&ir 


Houſes, 
ned, was plainy the D7uino Power and Goodneſs, 


The objeet of the Faith here mentio, 
butnot as coming 


to prevent ceinities, 


os Chef Ori inal 2: Zrorn it od 
rom Chriit Originally, as Eremicl God, but as an Infrument by which 


God convered it to men unde 


” {: 14 
Py i. 


miſerable circumſtances as this 


poor Man was. 


27 And atter theſe things he went forth, and ſaw 


a publican named Levi, fitting at the receipt Of cuſtom, 
ans he ſaid unto him, Follow me. 


23 Ard heleſt all, roſe up, and followed him. 
29 And Levi made hima great feaſt in his own houſe 


and his diſciples plucked the ears of corn, 


30 But their ſcribes and pharifees murmnreq aPainſ 
Urink with 


31 And Jeſus anſwering, ſaid unto them, ©. 
but they nat Bd 


32 [came not to call the righteous, by; linners to 


repentance. 


T on If vb M 

ad ON Mal y #3 Moth 
"hp ns, 

! of £2V?! I 


'See the Noteson Matth. 5. 9, 19, 


4 


TH, at 
+\ Ps, 
ae fri. 
WiSno. 

ud ye 
Ws th 


"£ 5A 4" | 8p I s n Py, SIO 4 45 ' 
Ay agree 11 11S einployment, tht he was 1 BY 


Tz 
£ 


dich 


5 CG W114 Form 
vic Þ>7 ho Fo[lnyos bi + tizat 3% OAVE 1 his rd Vi 
V1 i 13::M, "OS J? "STE J ei, acti wii gas ec up 115 Nate fo !"C Ne 
11 gratitude, [Taftihew or. Levi 18vitcs inm © a fea 


Fo 
it, darn 
1 $ok 


The other two Elan. 


v4.7 23+ Y I - * 
ins at met in his how 


- 
? $16 
"LY 


w* 


, - hs 2. > p P 5 oo SOR He Pu *} > nyt . ! \1 > bas 
and cf the ofcnre taken at it ; by the Soribes and tho Phariſc: 


- 
® td . 
+3:02.49 ya; ;»-y0 I> dye S - , " 
= 0 FO! WV | "| 44. a%it C11 uſt; "> 
q ' " ojvipE rs 
o tie N3tes berore Mite; 


«1 


mentioned. Oily Myts, 
C9 ; {ff and l- 71 3 2.2 be k 

ſacrifice, Liur for ths © 

er, tee tie Notes on Noth, \ - 

73 41) 


L432, 35, 


33 Aud they aid unto him, Why do the Cifipr 


of John fzit o!ten, and make prayers, aud likes. 
the diſciples of the Phariſees 3 but thine ear 54 
drink? 


34 And he ſaid unto them, Can ye make the childron 


35 But the days will come, when the bridegroon 


in thoſe days. . 
35 And he ſpakeaiſo a parable unto them, No mx 


piece that was ?aken out of the 12m, agreeth not with 
the lg. 
37 And no men putteth new wine intc oli bottles 


- - . o e a 14 ; 
elle the new wine will bur the borties, aud be ſpilled, 


and the bottles ſhall periſh. 

39 But new wine mult be prt inte rew bottiss ; 
and both are preſerved. 

:9 No mar. alio having drunk eld wirc, ſraicts 
way aefireth new : for he faith, The old is betre:, 

We have alfo both in Mattvew and Mark met with this picee of 
Bolt Mat 


In our Notes upo! tt tio 


*t1 

ay , "— #0 

Tho probably 7:vry T:1.cples 
, Ufat 


k 


» 


of that envy for their Maſters ſake, which we find thei fict of. 7 
3- 26. Our Lord,who might have told them, that he was to be fit 
exemplar, and not they is, dealeth more gently with thew, and 


gives them ſufficient rezſon why, as vet, he did not inure fit Di 
ciples to thoſe ſeverer As of Re/1:1m. 
rejoycing ttme they. were like to have. 
when he ſhould be gone from them, (before which it would 80! »: 
long,) they ſhould have time to movrn, 
ly entred into his Diſcipleſhip,and therefore not at F&rit ro V4 011-0! 


s | 510 


7. Becauſe this wis i fit 
He was now with Ui; 


# —— 
8, Tt they Wore bit c _ 


raged, that they might not have a temntation upon them, 70 [cv 

off as ſoon as chey began, But. fee the Notes morc fully unon 52 

ſame Hiſtory in Matthew and MHarh. 

GHAPT. VI. 

Chriſt deſendeth his Diſciples ſor plucking the es of Comm, 1nd © 
reth a withered. hand, on the Sabbath, and 7lt;,ieth in; 2? 
aving, 6—11, ' Chuſeth twelve Diſciples, i 2-15. 

fuck and poſſeſſed Perſons, 19-—19, Tell>th ther: by, 
who mt, 20—26. Exhorieth to obſerve for oval precip?! 
Teacheth that a man ſhould logh to bimgetr ej: e ho reps rout? « 
39—42. And that we may niw the tree by its Ew. 435740 
Proveth by a ſimilitude of a hyuſe built on a rack, tout we 


only know, wit do his will, 45=-49. 
.N D itcame to pals on the ſecond feboath 3: 
the firſt, that he went through the c 


rubbing ehem in their hands. _ | - wi 


Chap, \ 


/] 


Sd. ak. aw ac. i 


(0 


the 
his 
] 
ned 
Se 
wine 
Ctrcu 
wha 
the ] 
very 
with 
Creat 
obſer1 
been ( 
than t 
canno! 
tiſh Sc 
I2 
out 41 
1a pr: 
'Tho: 
MTPC2u 
that hoy 
we {hal 
why it 
not to. 
he coul 
place fo 
That © 
though 
ers ; he 
lpend 
Evange 
Uap!e, 
Out of Þ 
and by 
Colnme 
the ſam 


VI hin- VI, 


2 And certain of the Phariſees ſaid unto them,Why 
do ye that which is not lawful to do on the ſabbath 


days?! 


S EE UKEE 


; And Jeſus anſwering them, ſaid, Have ye not | rebbeus and Thaddeus b 


{named Peter,the other is called Simn Zelntes here. ' Simon the Ca- 
; naanite by Matthew and Markh. Two whoſe Names were Famesz 
The one was the Son of Zebedee, the other was the Son of Alphers. 
Two whoſe Names were Jada; the one is called Thaddeus by Mark 3 
y Matthew, Judas the Brother of James by 


read fo mnch as this, * what David did, when himſelf; Luke (this was the Penman of the Epiſtle of Juze,) and Jad x Iica- 


«. 21+ wasan hungred,and chey which were with him : 
How he went Into” the houſe of God, and did 
rake and eat the ſhew-bread, and gave alia to them 
_ that were with him, Which is * not lawfl to eat, but 
'* for the prieſts alone # 
And he ſaid unto them, That the Son of man is 
LORD alſo of the ſabbath. 


See the Notes on Matth. 12,1,2, 3. and on Mark 2.23, 24. There 
are ſeveral guelſcs what day 1s ere meant,by the ſecond Sabbath af- 
s the firſt, The Jews had ſeveral Sabbaths, beſides the ſeventh 
dy Sabbath which was weekly, all their Feſtival Days were called 
<1hbaths. In the Fourteenth Day of the firft Month, at cven began tbe 
Piſover,02 the fifrcenth Day began their Feaſt of Unleavened Bread, 
«hich lield ſeven Days, every otie of which was called a Sabbath; 
bat the firſt day, and the ſeventh day, were to be Days of Holy Con- 
-1cxtian, in which no work was to he done that was ſervile, Levit. 
22.7, Then they had their Feaſt of firſt Fruits. Fifty Days after 
that they had their Feaſt of Pentecaſt- Some underſtand by theſecond 
$4hbath after the firſt, the ſeventh day of the Feaif of Unleavened 
erect, Others their ſecond great Feitival. It is very hard to re- 
ſalve, and not material for us to know. For the Hiſtory it ſelf ſee 
che explication 1n the Notes on Matth. 12, 1,2,3,4+ R 


6 And itcame to pals alſo on another ſabbath, that 
he entred intothe ſynagogue and taught - And there 
vas a man whoſe right hand was withered. _ 

7 And the Scribes and Phariſees watched him, whe- 
ther he would healon the ſabbath day, that they might 
fnd an accuſation againſt him. 

$ But he Knew their thoughts, and ſaid to the man 
which had the withered hand, Riſe up, and ſtand forth 
in the mIds. And he roſe, and ſtood forth. 

9 Then ſaid Jeſus unto them, 1 will ask you one 
thing, Is it awful on the ſabbath days to do good, or 
ro doevil ? to ſave life, or to deſtroy zt ? 

10 And looking round about them all, he ſaid unto 
the man, Stretch forth thy hand. And he did fo - and 
his hand was reſtored whole as the other. | 

11 Andthey were filled with madneſs; and commu:- 
ned one with another what they might do to Jeſus. 

See the Notes on Matth, 12. 10, and on Mark. 3. 1, 2, 3. in both 
which places we met with the fame Hiſtory, and with ſome mote 
, ctrcumitances. Mart tells us that the ſubje& of their deliberation , 

| what they might do to 'Zeſiu was, how they might deſtroy him, this 
) | the Evangeliſt maketh the effe&t of their madneſs, &yoras, and he 
| very properly ſo calls it, For Men to anſwer Arguments and reaſon 
with violence, is for them to a& like Mad-men, not like reaſonable 
Creature z yet to thew the degeneracy of Fumane Nature, we ſhall 
obſerve there 15 nothing hath been more ordinary, when Men have 
been Conquered by reatoning,and have nothing reaſonably to oppoſe, 
| than to fly to violence, and with Swords to cut knots, whici tney 
19 | cannot untie. Nor can there be a greater evidence of filly, and bcu- 
"0 | tiſh Souls, ind a baffled cauſe. Sn 
i2 And it came to paſs in thoſe days, that he went 
out intoa mountain to pray, and continued all night 
!a prayer to God. : 
og | Thoſe who ſiraining this Text would Interpret the Words, 4 7 
= | e7pxwy1 for the place of Prater, will be concerned to find us out 
"Al * that houſe of Prayer, which ſtood in this Mountain, or to tell us where 
[te  weſnall find in Holy Writ any place but the Temple fo called, and 
why it ſhould be ſaid,that he went out into a Mountain topray,if it were 
not to ſiznifie unto us,that he ſought a privacy and retiredneſs, which 
BL | hecould not have had in the Tempſe, nbr in any other common 
a place for Prayer. Thoſe Interpreters certainly judge righter that ſay, 
FR | Thatour Saviour being about to ſend out his Twelye Apoſtles, 
ml { thoughtſo greqt a Work ' ſhould not be done without ſolemn Pray- 
a | es; hetherefore feeketn a place of Privacy, and goeth thither to 


Dic } ſpend ſome more time than ordinary in the duty of Prayer z and the 
fi | Evangeliſt ſayeth that he continued all Night ; fo ſetting us an Ex- 
oy, | 4npl, what to do in great affairs,cſpecially ſuch 'as are the ſending 
8 + outofPerſons to ſo great an employment, as. that of the miniſtry, 


and by his own example commending to us what Paul afterwards 
canmended, Epheſ. 6. 18. Col. 4. 2. Continue in Prayar and Watch in 
the ſame with Thank(giving. OG 
13 And when it was day, hecalled unto him his dif- 
| ciples: and of them he choſe twelve, whom alſo he na- 

"* | med Aoftles. 

' :.. 14 * Simon, whom he alſo named Peter,and Andrew 
his brotherz James and John, Philip and Bartholo- 
mew. : 

15 Matthew and Thomas, James the ſor of Alpheus, 

and Simon called Zelotes. 

16 And Judas che brother of James,and Judas Ifcariot, 
Which alſo was the traytor. 

| We have twice already met with theſe Names'of the twelve Diſci- 

P:c:, whom our Saviour called Ap»/Hes, intending them not only to 

eaty ve with him, and to have a more ſpecial Communion with him, but 

110 to be fent out with Power to Preach, baptize, and to Work Mi- 

\ and racles;, ſee the Notes, on Mat, 10. 2, 3. and Mark 3. 14, There were 

* "2 them, two, whoſe Names were Simon 3 The one Chri/t 


= 
I 


riot the Traytor ; the other fix were all of differing Namcs. «What 
occurs of dithiculty as to their Names, fee opercad in our Notes on 
Matth. to. 2, 3. gnd Mar. 3. 14. | 

17 And he came down with them, and ſtood in the 
plain, and the company of his diſciples, and a great 
multitude of People out of all Judea and Jeruſalem, 
and from the-fea-coaſt of Tyre and Sidon, which cane 
to hear him,and to be healed of their diſeaſes, 

18 Aud they that were vexcd with unclean Mmirits, 
and they were healed. 
16 And the whole multitude* ſonght to touch kim, * Mat. 14- 
-—y there went vertue out of him, and healed them 35: 
all, | | 
. Such paſſages as theſe we meet with ſeveral times in the Evange- 
iſts,who not Writing a particular account of the ſeveral Miracles 
wrought, or Diſcourſes made by our Savionr, oftentimes they ive 
us a general account of more than they particularly mention. Some 
think that Lube referreth here to Mark. 3. 7, 8. but Mark feemetk 
rather to refer to a Multitude that followed him, before he weat up 
to the Mountain, which yet might be the ſame People coming again 
the next Morning, and waiting for Chriſt s coming down from the 
Mountain. * 
20 And he lifted up his eyes on his diſciples, and _ 
—_" * Bleſſed be ye poor, for yours is the kingdom of * Mat. 5: 2- 

od. 

* Ti, 

21 * Bleſſed are ye that huvger now, for ye ſhall + 
b * | 65. 13. 
— Bleſſed are ye that weep now, for ye ſhall * 1,55. 5. 
augh. | 
22 * Bleſſed are ye when men ſhall hate you, and *Mat 5. rr. 
when they ſhall ſeparate you from their company, and 7 Pct. 2-19. 
ſhall reproach you, and caſt out your name as evil, for © 3: 14+ 
the Son of mans ſake. 
23 * Rejoyce ye in that day, and lzap for joy, for 
behold,your reward & great in heaven, for * in the like * at-7.7. 
manner did their fathers unto the prophets. 


* Act G& 4 [- 


There are many that think that what Lube hath in theſe Verſes, 
and ſo to the end of this Chapter, is buc a ſhorter Epitome of what 
Matthew, hath in his fifth, ſixth and ſeventh Chapters, and that 
vuth Matthew and Luke mean the ſame Sermon Preached at the ſame 
time. The things which favour this opinion are, 1. That Sermon 
is ſaid to be Preached upon.a Monntain ; this, when he came down, 
and ſtood upon the plain (by which ſome underſtand only a plaincr, 
and more level part of tne Mountain,) 2. That very many paflages 
in the remaining part of this Chapter,are plainly the ſame with tho'c 
we findin one of theſe three Chapters in Matthew. TI cn hurdly be 
of that mind. 1. Becauſe of the Phraſe here uſ:d, he came down, 
and ftooad in the Plainit 1 emeth to we hard to interpret that either 
of the top of the 4:0untain (wiiica might be a plain) for how then 
could he beſaid to come down ? or cfa plainer p'1ce of the Mentain, 
2. The NVultitude deſcribed there are faid to have come from Ga!z- 
lee, Decapolis, Feruſalem, -Fudea, and bevond Fordan, Thefe are ſaid 
to have come from Fudea, Feruſalem,and thc Sea-caaft of Tyr* ant Si- 
don. But thirdly,Principally from the great diffcrence 1n the Re'-t ons 
of Matthew and Luke. 1. Many large Dijcoarjes are not touched by 
Luke, viz. Chriſt's whole Diſcourſe in giving a true Interpretation 
of the Law, his Diſcourſes, Matth. 5. about Alms, Prayer, Fiſting. 
2. Lube here putteth three Verſes together, wherein there are 
Woes denounced, of which Matthew ſaith nothing. Now tho it be 
uſual with the Evangeliſts to relate the ſame Diſcourſes, and Mira- 
cles with ſome different Circumſtances, yet not with ſuch confidera- 
bie differences, and Variaticns. Matthew records nine Bleſſ?dneſſes 
pronounced by Chriſt. *Zake butgfour, and thoſe with ccnfidera- 
ble Variation from Matthew. As for thoſe things which incline 
ſome to think it the ſame Sermon, they do not ſeem to me Conclu- 
dent. For what they ſay as to the Place,it rather proves the contra- 
ry. Matthew ſaith, it was when he had got up into # Mountain, and 
ſat down. Luke ſaith, he was come down, and ſtood in the Plains 
Nor is it more conſiderable,that moſt of the paſſages in this Chapter, 
are to be found in the fifth, fixth or ſeventh Chapter of Matthew z 
for, as they are not here exadly repeated accorcing as Matthew Re- 
cites them, ſo what ſhould hinder but that *our Saviour at another 
time,and to another Auditory, might Preach the ſame things which 
concern all Men? Leaving therefore all to their own Judgwents, I 
ſce no reaſon to think that this Diſcourſe was but a ſhorter Co- 
py of the ſame Diſcourſe, referring to the ſame time and Company. 
This being premiſed, let us now come to conſider the Words them- 
ſelves,comparing them with the Words recited by Matthew [ Bleſſed 
be ye Poor,for yours is the Kingdom of God. | Matthew ſaith, Bleſſed 
are the poor in Spirit, for theirs #s the Kingdom of Heaven. It 15 
true, neither Riches, nor Poverty Bleſs, or Curſe any Man, and 
none that are Poor are Bleſſed, if they be Proud and High-minded, 
nor any Rich Man Curſed, but he that placeth his Portion, or Con- 
ſolation in Riches 3 yet Chriſt here by the Antitheſrs, ſeems morc 
particularly to dire&his Diſcourſe, to relieve his Diſciples diſcoura- 
zed by their Por, and low Eſtate in the World ; by telling them, 
that whatever the World thought, they being h1s Diſciples believins 
in him, and following him, were-1n a better condition than thoſe 
that were Rich, and had their Conſolation in this Life. [Bleſſed are 
ye that Weep now, for you ſhall laugh. 1] Matthew ſaith, Blefjed are 
they that Mourn, for they ſhall be Comforted. The Senſe is much 
the ſame, you that are in a ſad afflited State (being my Diſciples) 


1re bleſſed, for there will come a time when God ſhalt- wipe tears jrom 
pL 


Chap. VI. 


Chap. VI. 


your Ey 
Matthew 
ouſneſs. 
neither are they 
truly ſecketh after, and Studyctn Rightcouſncls. | Bleſſed are ye 
when Men ſhall hate you, 
their Company, and fha!l Reproach 
Evil, jor the Son of Mans jake. | 
which are Pe 
of Heaven, 
and fhaitjay all manner of Evil azainst you, falſly for my ſa' 
true the 
are proncunced Blefled, but the Words are very different, and here 
are forue Species of Perſecution mentioned, that Matthew meilti0n- 
eth not pirticularly. I. 
their Names as Euil. 
Le underitood of Impriſmmment, . 
thoſe Circumſtances are ſeparated from the Company of th-1r rclatt- 
ons and Country-men, but it may alſo be underſtood of Eccle/rajtical 
Cenſures, and thus it agreeth both with our 
15. 2. They ſhall put you out of the Synagngues, and with 7ohn. g. 22. 
where we read of a Decree they made, that if any aid confeſs that 
Fejus was the Chrift, he ſhould be put out of the Synazozue. Therc 
rc 
time of Ezra, when their Governour w75 oPt a Seabſtitute under a 
Pazan Prince, who did not give their Conguered Subj-&s a Power 
to put ary to Death, but left them fo Excrciſe any lighter Puniſh- 
mente, 
that think ſo. For as it is not reaſonable, that God left the Church 
ofthe Jews, without thar Power that Nature Clotheth evcry Socic- 


tv with, to purge out fit ſelf (fch as 


es. © Bl-ſet are you that Finger nw, 
ich, Bleſſ2d are they that Hunger and Thirſt 
It is truce. Hungring and Thirfting are no Bleſſings, but 
Curſes to a truly Righteous Soul, or a Soul that 


and when they ſhall ſeparate you from 
zou, and caſt out your Name, 45 
Matthew ſaith, Bleſſed are they, 
rſecuted for Righteouſneſs ſake,” for theing us the "Kingdom 
Ble(jed are 1e when men ſhall -Revile you, and  » oct you, 
2 \ 15 


-noral Senſe is the ſame, Sufferers for the Name of Chrift 


cry 
wo 


Separating the Diſciples. 2. Caſting cut 
entioned, may indeed 


The” Separating here m 
for Yerſo.is under 


or Baniſhment, 
» / 5 


Saviour's Propitcey, Fon 
ſome that think that the Jews Exerciſed no ſuch Power till thc 


| cannot Shbſcribe to th: judgment of thoſe Learned Men 


5 


arc not fit Members for it, 


ſo it wili not enrer into my thoughts, that all were to be put f2 
Death, of whom God ſaid to often, he, or they ſhall be Cut off from 
his, or their People, as in Cafe of Uncircumciſion, not receiving the 
Patſover in its time. So as I do not think that the latter Jews de- 
rived this Praftice from an humane Conſtitution, but from a Divine 


EL 'LOUKE 


for vou ſhall be filled. } , the Goſpel, that the way to Heaven 1s wade fo broad, that it is not 
aſter Righte- | eaſie for any to mils it. 'o 


27 * But I ſay unto you which hear, Love 
endnics, do good to them which hate you. 


YOur® 


which deſpitefully nſe you. 


Wwe met with theſe Paecepts, Matrh. 5g. 44. ard their Difcarc, 3 7, 
Gala 


the Senſe of them. Sce the Notes there: 
29 *And unto hin thar finiteth thee on the one | heck 


offer alſo the other, and him that takerh away * th; 


cloak, forbid not torake thy coat alſo. kg 


We met alſo with a paſſage much like this, in this Verſo, 2:44 
$- 39. the General Senſe of which was, as I then faid, A Probibitty 
of private Revenge. It 1s therefore there prefaced in with a more ge | 
neral Precept, Reſiſt not Evil. But belides this there ſeems to he jy jr 
a ſo a Prohibition of vexatious Suits and Moleſtations of others, tho, 
under a Colour of Law, therefore Matthew ſaith, If any Man wid 
ſue thee ar Law, and take away thy Cloak; and it may ve thought 1 
more ſpecial Precept relating to thoſe times, when they had none but 
Heathen Magiſtrates, and in ſome meaſure to be expounded by 1 (4, 
6. 5. aad to be a Precept given with reſpe& to the Reputaticn of tho 
Goipel, that.it might not be Scandalized by Chriſtians going to Lay 
before Infidels. It is moſt certain it doth not forbid the ute of the 
Law. whether for the defending, or recovering our juſt Rig|1ts, only 
the Irrezulur, or Scandalny uſe of it ; fee further the Notes on Math, 
YI. 

30 Give toevery man that asketh of thee, and of 
him that taketh away chy goods, ask them not 382th, 

Matthew hath much the ſime paliige, oniy. le faith, Gree r, ln 
that,&c. not to every oe tht r5heth of thee, and for trnelatter Cl. {, 
he hath from him that won. -urrow 6 £28, 


yk 
Ya (Þ. 
LIC IE 


cepts of our Saviuur muſt be inter: reted,not according tn 
Senſe of thg Words, ::3 if every Mz i were by them 0 :yed, with 


hap, 


'\ ) 


28 Bleſs them that curſe you, .and * pray for them © 


) ha 


ir 
\ | & 1 
* Ahh. / 


oy 
«at, I 
a1 


* 
45 F1y- 


vilfl. 
* a4,,0 


| 
| | 
Law. Now weare told that the Jews had three Degrees of this | regard to his own Alilities, or C.rcumſtances of Perſons begs:: 
Separatim. Some they meecr!y ſeparated from thezr Communion 5] gf acking of him, to give to every one that bath the Confidence 1 3 { 
others they Anathematied, «hat is, Curſed 3 others they ſo ſepara- | ack of him, but as cbliging us to Liberality, and Charity, ac or%ins 
ted, that they prayed againft them, that God would mike them Exam- | tg our Abvities, and the truc Needs, and Circumſtances of ou? _—_ | 
ples of bis Vengeance, and ſome think (but I judge it bat a Gueſs)that | prethren, and in that order which God's Word bati dircficd ic; 0 
theſe were thote vInners unto Death, for whom John would not ha e] firſt providing for our own Families z then doing good to th: (i, i- 
Chriſtians Pray.1 Jo. 5. 16. Now it 1s certain that the Jews Exercl-| ho1q of Faith, then alſo to others,as we are able, and ſce any of th:m 
ſed not the loweſt degree only, but the higheſt againſt Chriſtians, | trye ObjcRs of our Charity. Nor mu't the ſecond part of the Verſ - 
and alſo made it their buſineſs by Letrers, and Word of Mouth to | Le interpreted, as if it were a reſtraint of Chriſtiaus from purſus; if 
Reproach them all over the World, As, 28. 22. Now Chriſt pro-| of Thieyes, or Opprefſors, but as a Precept, prohibiting us privitc | 
nounceth them under theſe Circumſtances, Bleſſed, if they ſuffered Revenge, or too great contending for little things, Gc.tee the Note d! 
"WY AT . . bs 3 au LUTY j 
theſe things for his Name ſake. This caſting out of there Names @ | gn Matth. g. 42. Fri 
Evil, doth not only ſignifie,their blotting out their Narres out of the . | 
Rolls of the Church, but the defaming of them in the manner before 31 And as FOR would that men ſhould do to you, do aa 
mentioned, which was like to be a fore Temptation to the Diſci- ye alſo to themlikewiſe, bi 
ples, againſt which he further Armeth them, ſaying, Rejoyce ye in| See the Notes on Matth. 7. 12., This is the Law of Nature, tli þ 7.2, Ol 
that Day, and leap : for 7”), for great us your reward in Heaven, for| Golden Rule of ali Juſtice, and may alſo ſerve for a Guide to usto fai 
in the like manner did their Fathers unto* the Prophets z ſec the Notes | expound the former Verſes, and ſome other Precepts . of Chart! in yo 
ot: Matth, g. 12. this —_— Men in all theſe Cafes ſhould comider what they 
_ : would be glad, and think reaſonable that others ſhould do to them, 
*Amos.6.1. 24 But * wo unto you that are rich, for ye have | were chey in their Circumſtances, and the others had the ſame abi; = 
Jam, $s- 1. received your Con ſolation. ty, oradvantage todo good to them, and by this they ſhould mc nor 
Not becauſe you are Rich, but begauſe you are not Rich towards |{ure their Acts both of Juſtice, and Charity. Sins 
God, becauſe you look upon your Riches as your Portion, as your 32 For if ye love them which love you, what thai: trar 
9 or, you that are Rich in the opinion of your own Righ- | have ye ? for ſinners alſo love thoſe ther love them. gre 
tcoutneſs. : . . 
"SM « w 33 And if ye do good to them which do good toyon, oa 
a.65.13 25: o unto you that are full, for ye ſhall hun-| what thank have ye ? for ſinners alſo do even the Crou 
ger: Wounts you that laugh now, for ye ſhall mourn | ſame. . and 
and WeeP. 24 * And if ye lend to them of whom ye hore to'i! 1 he; 
Our Saviour muſt be underſtood, either of thoſe who are Sinfully | TeceIve, what thank have ye? for ſinners alſo lcndto _ 
full, or at leaſt ſuch as be Spi-itually empty z thoſe that are full, are | ſinners, to receive as much again. wn, 
£4 hs - fangs that hunger ; If we take hunger for an Hungring| See the Notes on Matth. 5. 45, 47. The Strength of our Sivl- ens 
and Thirfting after Righteouſneſs, as Matthew ſpeaks, thoſe that are | ours Argument lyeth in this, That God exp<eth, that thoſ: who P, ry 
Sy are - wn as _ filled with Wind, an high opinion of their own | have received more Grace, and favour from God than others ard _ " 
Rig 1teouſneſs, If we take Hunger for a want of the neceſſaries of | who make an higher profeſſion than others, ſhould do morc in 0% them. 
this Life, then fulneſs ſignify eth either a Sinful fulneſs, with Drink, | dience to the Poſitive Commands of God and the Revelation: of 1s wiſes, 
or Meat, or ill gotten Goods, or_at leaſt for ſuch as are Spiritually | Will in his Word, than th ho Li k -oht of nature its 
Ss be Kenatedelt or © £Coq: ally 1 , than they who Live mcerly by the light ot nature, afts « 
pry ge, or Grace ot God; there will come a time f and live up meerly to theLaw of Nature . on, 5 
25 they _ _— Rich Dives wanted a little Water to Cod! ; any 
11s Tengu2. So by thoſe that laugh muſt be underſtood. ej Io - | , h 
thoſe that are Sinfully Merry, or at leaſt thoſe that have Amon 35 But love as va CNENNES, and do good), ard _ 
cauſe of Spiricual Joy. By Mourning and Weeping threatned to ſuch lend, hoping for notning again, and your reward ſhall, 13 tic 
+ = pp the 0 $99 of God upon them.in this Life, or in be great, and * ye ſhall be the children of the lig-,, MR... 
0 Ih 6h 4-7 _—_ ere there ſhall be Weeping,and Walling, and = for he is kind unto the unthankful, and * te. Par 
« ; evil. 
26 Wo unto you when all men ſhall ſpeak well of | 36 Beye therefore merciful, as your father 3ls wa 
you,for ſo did their fathers to the falſe prophets. merciful. In. TOP Now 7; 
. . orc k 
A good Report of all, even thoſe th ; | a 
thing. —_ 29 all bs 6 Moab +1 bro fy 6 - -* amr SG, know not how to agree what I find many Interpreters juz! My 
ing any juſt occaſion & their ſpeaking ill of th 7 y avoid- | that this Text 1s a Prohibition of Uſury. I ſhould rather interpret 1! of 
3. a O peax1ng 111 of them, and by doing all | more largely, as a Command # & . +] to tl agg 
the Atts of Kindneſs and Charity, that may commend Religion to! Ci SC'Y's ana tor Aets of Mercy, with refpett to ' dent C 
the. Butthe World is ſo Corrupt, that uſually none g 0 | Circumſtances of Perſons, obliging us not to with-ho!d a Clarita. thew bn 
Coles of than the Dt te * 4 Mi are worſe | Hand, fron our fear, that jf we lend we- ſhall loſe what we !enl, ti | 
POKeN of, tnan the belt Men. And this is true of no fort of M d obligsi ; ny CY Me wh 
more than of the Miniſters of the Goſpel; neither the rock en, | and ovliging us, that if we find the Circumſtances of any, tht immedi; 
OHd,: nor Jobs the Barkift, nor Chriſk wor on ales © op ets of ; fireth us to lend him for his neceffity, ſuch a quantity of vMoncy © | Rake oy 
ood Wards from thi wicked ty 4 - vPayms 4 _ _ Goods as we can.ſpare, and we can well enough bear the lots 9f, !3 bre ſet 
Prophets of old, were in much greater Creditwith —_— - - alſe | the Providence of Ged ſhould render the Perſon unable to 1cp4Y 9 P'araly a 
ws Jews] thap the thopd enerality of | we ſhould not be awed by ſuch a fear from Ads of Charits, 90! Tjees 
» than the Prophets of the Lord. The Doftrines of th ; 2 erf OF 
e | give with a Reſolution toloſe it, if God pleaſe to diſable the Fer!9" Who the 


Law. and the Goſpel are fo contrary to the moſt of Mens Luſts. a 
It 154mpoſtvle that the moſt of theWerld ſhould be ay 
or fo thoſe win faithfully declare it ; this t 
end the Paprits and-ther Friends in our age 
$64 anderitcod, that as 1t was the buſincls of the Phariſees in their 
©221C,10 1t hatit been the bufineſs of the Popiſh 
the Law of 30d. as Men may Hatter themfe! 
Leotcrs to it, tho, they keep their ſeveral Luſts, 


Reconciled to it, 
he Phariſees in their Age, 
have for ſome time ſo 


_— 


Caſuiſts,ſo to Expound | 
ves that they are not 
and ſo to Interpret 


to whom we lend, ſo as he cannot repay u*, For the quciion 8 
bout Ujury, as to which ſome conceive this Text a Prohibition (11 
15 not a place to handle it in the Latitude. I do not thiok it 9 
ever abſolutely forbidden to the Fews, they might take it of 5/4 
gers, and that not only of the Canaanites, whom ſome iy they 
might kill (which T doubt after their agreement to a quict Conte 


” 
7 


tion) but of ot! er Strangers alſo who came not urdcr the Deron? 


tion of Canaanites, That argued the taking cf Utyry t& Le not Fo 


ere no 
The Iz} 
Probahie 
"5, IVE 
"N\eighboy 
t Yn of 


-— 


| nap. VI, 


| ha 


forbidden, and not abſolutely, ant univerſally forbidden, but reſpect- 
ively, only with reference to their Brethren of the fame Church and 
Nation, 10 rather to be reckoned amongſt the Municipal Laws of the 
2s, than the Common Laws of God for all Mankind. Beſides 
char, amongſt the Jews there was !eſs need of it, partly in reſpett of 
their Years Of Jubilee, and partly in regard their imployments were 
chiefly 1 Husbandry, and about Cattel, which called not for ſuch 
Sums of Money, 45 Merchandizing doth. Nor is it to be referred 
ro any of the Ten Commandments, unlejs the Seventh, Thou ſhalt not 
Steal, which forbidding Sins agaiatt Charity, and ſuch Sins againſt 
Charity being their forbidden, as are The rabing away the Goods of 
another againſt their Will, and without a njuft cauſe, I cannot ſee, 
how the lending of Money for a moderate uſe, when it is helpful, 
and relieving to our Neighbour, ſhuuid be any hind of Stealing, 
when his good Will appeareth 1n the Contract; por can there be any 
injuſtice 11 1t, where there is a Quid pr» 410, but a Proportion for 
what I am indammaged by the loan z unlels any will lay it is un- 
uſt, becauſe againſt the Law of God, which is to beg the Queſtion, 
this Argument being brought to prove 1t 15 not contrary to the Law 
of God. The Exacting of an undue Proportion for Uſury, or a mo- 
derate Proportion, when we piainly lce, our Brother is fallen into 
Poverty, and cannot pay it, may be forbidden, as a Sin againſt Cha- 
riry, and that love that we ought to thew to our Neighbours, and 
the Mercifalneſs here required, wv. 35. yet, admitting the Law of God, 
Dent. 23- 19, 20» fO be interpreted of all Vſury, (which it leemeth 
hard, for then the Jews might not ſe: for any thing more at twelve 
Months time than if they were paid prelently, for the Words are 
Uiury of Mony, Uſury of Vittuals, Uſui y of any thing lent upom Uſury J 
ir concerned the Fews only betwixt themlelyes, not in their dea]- 
ings with any Strangers which is plain, V. 20. foalfo, Exod. 22. 245. 
where the Terin Poor 15 alſo putin as it 13, Leuit, 25. 35, 35, 37. 
gy which Texts the Pfalmift muſt be expounded, P/al. 15. 5. It 
way poſſibly from the Equity of that Law cblige us, to be more 
kind to thoſe that are of the ſame Nation and Church with us, than 
anto others, eſpeciaily ſuch as are no Chriſtians ; and amongtt thoſe 
that are Chriſtians, to thoſe that: are Poor, than to thoſe who have 
better Eſtates. But as I faid in the beginning, I had rather inter- 
pret the Precept of the Text more largeiy, as a general precept or 
Mercy, from the Example of our Heavenly Father. 


37 Judge not, and ye ſhall nor be judged, condemn nor, 
and ye ſhall not be condemned, forgive, and ye ſhall be 


forgiven. 

See the Notes on Matt»). 7. t.and on Matth. 5, 14. where we have 
diſcourſed, what private Juzgings arc here forbidden, and what for- 
gtving 1s here required. 


38 * Give, aud ir ſhall be given unto you, good mea- 
| | ſure preſſed down, and ſhaken togerher, and running 
7.2, over, ſhall men give into your bolom,  * For with the 
* fame meaſure that ye mete withal, ic ſhall be mealured to 
you again, 

To let us know how God favoureth Atts of Charity and Juſtice 
we ſhall obſerve, that there are no good Deeds, that God ſo reward- 


nor any Sins, which God fo puniſheth by way of Reftaliztions, as 
Sins contrary to theſe, eſpecial'ly ſuch as are more eminently con- 
trary. -This Verſe ſpeaks of Acts of Charit'., Give, and it ſhail be 
given to you, and that not bare mcafure, but good Mealure, Pretfed 
down, and ſhaken together, and running over z nothing can more 
Concur to make good Meaſure, than the thaking of the Buthel, the 
Crouding and Preffing down of the Corn, or Meal with the Hand, 
and the Pouring in till the Meafure runneth over. So as that which 
is here promiſed, is a plentiful reward to Charitable and Merciful 
Ations, cither from the Hand of God more mediately, God ftir- 
ring up otFers to be as Kind to us as we are to others, or more 7m- 
mediately, himſelf t leffing us by his inexpe&ted Providential Diſpen- 
lations 3 to this purpoſe are abundance of Scriptures, Deut. 24. 16. 
Pal. 41. Tt. 2, 3. Prov. Fl. 25. and 28. 27. 2 Cor. 9. 6. If Men will 
not be 10 jult,as to requite the good which their Brethren have done 
them, having it in their Power, 1et God will be faithful to his Pro- 
miles, and by his Providence take care, that thoſe who have done 
atts of Mercy, not in a mecr Commiſcration to Humane Conditi- 
on, but 11 a juit obedience to his Will, ſhall not loſe by what they 
have done,they ſhail be rewarded fully and plentifully, finding again 
(rho it may be after many days) the Bread which they have caſt up- 
on the Waters, according to his command, 

Can the 


39 And he ſpake a parable unto them, 


blind lead the blind ? ſhall they not both fall into the 
ditch ? 

BY a Parable here is to be underſtood a Proverbial ſaying, which 
hath ſome darknefs in it, as being brought to expreſs, or ſignifie 
more thin the Words naturaliy do expreſs. Proverbial Specches 
«re apphcable to more things, and in more Caſes than one. Nor 1s 
to be -xpefted thar in all that the Evangeliſts give us an account 
of, as to the ſayings of Chriſt. we ſhould be abie to find but an evi» 
dent Connexion. They ( queſtionlefs) Wrote much at leaſt from 
their Memories, and fet down many ſavings without reſpe@ tothe 
Ume when our Saviour ſpake them, or the matter of his Diſcourſe 
ummnediatelv preceding them 3 we need not therefore be careful to 
Make out the Connexion «of theſe Words of his, with what was be- 
lore ſet down, in the Parallel Text, Matth. 15. 14- Our Saviour 
Paitly applveth theſe words with reference ro the Scribes and Pha- 
es, the Jewilh. Leaders, their Do&ors, and Teachers at that time, 
Vho themtelves being 1gnorant of the true Senſe of the Divine Law, 
vere not Itke very wel: to Guive others, but with them tq fall into 
ive Mtch, that is, into Ruin and Deftruttion, from whence a very 
Probable Connexion of them here. with what went b<fore may be ob- 
TC; for as appears from Matth. &, he hid in the preceding Ver- 
"> AIVEN an intcrpretation ofthat Law of God. Thou (halt love thy 
"1,9bour as thy jelf. much differcnt from what the Phariſe:s had 
OEM, Wit lied capounded it, Marth. 5. 45+ Thou ſhalt love 

viol. 2. 


Ss LUXE 


tum per ſe, in its ſeif evil, but only malum probibitum, an Evil as | 


eth by Retaliation as ſuch which are the Produtts of theſe Habits : 


VL 


Chap. 


rhy Neighbour, and hate thy Enemy, Making a great many Bray- 
ches of Love to Men, more than they made, Now (laith he) Thiy- 
13 the Will. this is the Law of my Heavenly Father, The Scribs: 
and Phariſees, your preſent Do&ors and Teachers g9 much below thr: ; 
but liften not to them, if you mind to pleaſe God z themſelves arc 
B!11nd, and know not the Will of God, and if you foilow ther, 


what can you expett more than ſuch an cvelt, as where one Blind 
Man lcads another 2? 


4O The diſciple is not above his maſter, but every * * Mat 5.42. 
one that | is perfect ſhall be as his maſter. { Or, ſhat 


This was auorher common ſaying, which our Saviour applveth, 9? perjectes 
* age i 2 bl 3 
Matth. 10. 24. fohn 15. 20. to comfort his Diſciples concerning 4 £5 


— . 


their Sutferings, becaufe he was firſt in Suffering : here he apolieth 794/f*”- 
it to t1gnifie their Duty in doing, Some appiy this with reference 

to the Phariſees, and fo make a Connexion betwixt thix and the for- 

mer Verſe, where he had faid, If the Blind lead the Blint, they ithatlt 

both fall into the Ditch. For, The Diſciple s not above bis matey | 13-0 
none muſt look to learn of another, more than the Te:cher know. 108L! 
cth himſelf. But it is better applied to Chriſt, and is as much ;« | 

if our Lord had ſaid, Iam your Maſter, you are my Diſciples, ang 

by that Relation ingaged to learn of me, and to follow me. T hive 

taught you no wore than I am ready to prattiſe, I am Merciful, f 

forgive, I give, looking for nothing again. I do not look that you 

ſhould do any thing above me : any thing as to which I have not ſet 

You, .or ſhall not tet you an Example, but your perfe&icn lyeth in 

comitfg as near to me as you can, in being as your Maſter. 

41 And why beholdeſt thou the mote that is in thy bro- þ 
pans eye, bur perceivelt not the beam that is in thine own oy 
eye ! 

42 Either how canſt thou ſay to thy brother, Brother, 
ler me pull out the more that is in chine eye, when thou "UBD 
thy ſelf beholdeſt not the beam that is in thine own ble 04 De 408 
eye Thou hypocrite, * caſt out firft the beam out of * $ee Prov. eg h*þ 
thine own eye, and then ſhale thou ſee clearly ro pull out 18. 27. hi + | 


the more that is in thy brothers eye. Fiat} 
See the Notes on Matty. 7. 3, 4, 5+ 11087 


43 For a good tree bringeth not * forth corrupt 
fruit, neicher doth a corrupt tree bring forth good 
fruir, | | 2 

4.4. For * every tree is known by his own fruit, for + 1c, ; 2. 3 
of thorns men do not gather figs, nor of a bramble-buſh Ca 33, 2 | "gt 
cher - they grapes. + Gr. a (OY 

45 X A good manout of the good treaſure of his hearc, ED - 'S 
bringerh forth that which is good, and an evil man out of S ES | ' 
the evil treaſure of his heart, bringeth forth that which , | 
is evil, for * of the abundance of che heart, his mouth * Mat- 12: | | 
ſpeaketh 34” 

Sce the Notes upon Matth, 7 15, 1+, 18, 20. The 43, and 44. are 
expounded 1n the 45. v. Men and Women here, (as in other Texts j 
of Scripture) are compared toTrees with reſpett to theirRoot andFruit, | 
and the dependance the Fruit hath upon the Root, and the Natureof 
the Tree» The Heart of Man 1s made the Root, that heing the Princi- 
ple of humane Adtions, as the Raot is the Principle to the Fruit ; 
for all the overt &thions of a Mans Life, are but the imperate Ads of 
the Heart and of the Will. Hence it 1s that a Will renewed. and 
Sanctitied in a Man and made Conformable to the Will of God, | 
doth not only will, and chuſe the Will of God, love it, defire it, $7 BIT 
and delight in it, but commandeth the Tongue to dire& its Dif- gs th 
courtes conformable to it, and alſo commandeth all the Members of at | 
their Body, in their Motions, and Order, to Act conformably 3 | TN | 


and on the contrary the unrenewed, and ſanftified Will of Man, 
doth not enly rcjett, and refuſe the Will of God, but direceth the 
Tongue to Words contrary to the Divine Will, and all the Members 
ofth - Body in their Motions and Order, to a& without any reſpett | 
to, or aw of the Will of God. 4. IR 
| * M, | 39/00 
46 * And why call ye me Lord, Lord, and do not the Mags - F,.1þM | 
things which I lay ? | Ch. 13, 25: | | 
47 Wholoever cometh to me, and heareth my fay- 
ings, and doth them, I will ſhew you to whom he is 
like. 
48 He is like a man which builc an houſe, and dig- 
ged deep, and laid the foundation on a rock, and when 
the flood aroſe, the ſtream beat vehemently upon that 
houſe, and could not ſhake ir, for it was founded upon a 
rock. 


49 But he that heareth and doeth nor, is like a man 
that without a foundation built an houſe upon the 
earth, againſt which the fiream did beat vehemently, and WG 
immediately ir fell, and the ruin of that houſe was Ws. 
great. | 

See the Notes on Matthew 7. 24, 25, Oc. where we before met j 1 ls 
wit" the ſame thing. The Sum is, Mens Hopes of Salvation build- 1 hit 
ded upon any other but Chriſt alone, or Builded upon Chrift, with- 
out a Sincere Study, and Indeavour to keep the Commandments of F 
Chriſt, are vain Hepes; and tho till a Storm of Afiz2Fjon, or 
Temptation comes, they may pleaſe themſelves a little with them, 
yet when they come to dye, or when any notable Temptation af+ 
faults them, or aiy great Atriiction cometh upon them, then they 
will fail them, and they will ſee the Folly and Vanity of them + 
What is the Hope of the Hypocrite, when God takes away his Soul 5 
Job 27. 8. | 


[.S £83 CHAP; 


Chap, 


- unto him, taying unto him, Lord, trouble not thy elf, 


I, 


r7 


Vii. 
| CHAP. 


Criſt bealeth the Centiiins Servint : and commendeth his Faith, | 
1—10. Rai'*th a Widoe's Danghter at Nain” from the Dead, 
11-—17. Anjwere/h the queſtinns of Fohn's Dijcrples : an proveth 
by his works, that he is th? Meſſiah, 19—23. Commenteth the Of- 
fice of Fohn, 24—23, Tre Publicans julitne God, bur the Phariſees 
contemn kis Courjel, 253, 39. Chritt uplraideth the Jews wicket 
Cenſures wd*r th? fimilitade of Children's prattice in the Market, 
31—35- Eatin; in Stmons fuſe, a Wyman waiheth hy feet with 
bey tears : Simm offended at it : Chriſt defend:th her, by a frmatt- 
tude of two Deotors, 35—g0. 

I TO W when he had ended all his ſayings in the 

audience of the people, he eutred inco Caper- 
nauln. 


2 And acercain centurions ſervant, who was dear unto 
him, was ſick and ready to dye. 

3 And when he heard of Jeſus, he ſent unto him the 
elders of the Jews, beſeeching him that he would come 
and heal his ſervant, 27S 

4 And when they came to Jeſus, they belought him in- 
ftantly, ſaying, Thar he was worthy for whom he 
ſhould do this. ; 

5 For he loveth our nation, and he hath built us a 1y- 
nagogue. » 

6 Then Jeſus went with them. And when he was 
now not far from the houſe, the centurion ſent friends 


V 


for I am not worthy that thou ſhouldeit-enter under my 


LUKE. 


Lis ) - 4 
' were moved at the fight of her Sorrow, and confideration of h 
_ 


. 
Tha 


” 


7% 
DJ, 
we read, that ſhe her ſelf ſpaxe to him. Only our Saviour's "Se 
loſs. It 15 obſervable that our Saviour wrought his healing Miracts 
1. Sometuncs at the motion, and deſire of the Parties to be heal FR, 
2. Sometimes at the detire of others on their behalf. 2. -—Miih 
times of his own free motion, neither themſelves nor others {';.;.: © 
lim for any ſuch Att of Mercy towards them, and that in the ;j,,.* 
tirlt Miracle:(of which Matthew and Luke gives us an accoun: v.. 
and Watth, 8. ) which he wrought after his famous Sermon on «: 
Mountain, he gave us an inftance of all theſe, in his heat; 
Leper Perſonally beſeeching him, ot the Centurions Serya: 
lntreaty of the Elders of the Jews, and of the Widows $9: he 
upon his ſight of the Womans Afiittion, none Soliciting him; "aw, 
by ſhewing vs that we ought rot to ſtay our Hand from doing —_ 
when we have proper objetts and opportunities before us, unt;j 2 
be importuned, and Solicited therevunto. Chriſt faying to her Wen 
not, forbad not the Natural expreffton of her Pailion ; but fientf\cy 
{\u1dain,and not expedted Reſurre&1on,ſfo as ſhe ſhould not Woes ey 
out Hope. This ſaid he cometh, and touchcth the Biere or the Coin 
a::d faith not, Young man / In the name of God 1 ſay unto thee 4;i;, 
but, | Toung man T Jay unto thee Arije. ] Thereby declaring to ther, 
(would they have undcritood it) that he was the Son of God, 2nd 
while he was on Earth, had a power, 1a aud from hitafelf by th, 
Word of his Mvt'1 to Command the Dead to Ariſe. His wy;q 
was effettive, and to cid. ce 1t, it 15 ſaid, That he who was Dez 
fat up ( ſoas all wighr i notice of the Miracle ) and began ty 
ſpeak, And he deliveict fs 7. bis Mother, To let him know, hi; 
puty to be ſubje& to her, a1? ti? Juriidiftion the had over him. 


16 And there came a fear on all, and they glorifyed 
| God, ſaying, * T har a grear propher is riſen up among us, 


. ? 
n the 
NS of the 


iT at the 


roof. 


7 Wherefore neither thought I my ſelf worthy to come ; 


unto thee, but ſay in a word, and my {ervant ſhall be 
healed. I 24 


$ For Ialſoam a man ſet under authority, having un- ' 


+ 5r. this der me lſouldiers, andI fay unto + one, Go, and he goeth, 


1.11, 


ſ| Or, corn. 


*AQ. 9.42, 


and to another, Come, and he cometh, and ro my lervant, | 


Do this, and he doeth it. 

o When Jeſus heard theſe things, he marvelled ar him, 
andturned him abour, and faid uno the people thar tolow- 
ed him, Ifay unto you, | have not found fo great faith, 
no, not in Iſrael. | 

10 And they that were ſent, retuining to the houle, 
found the 1ervant whole that had been fick, 

See the Notes on Mafth. 8. from v.' $5. to v. 1. whcre we have 
conſidered all the differences betwixt Matthews and tubes Reiation 
of this Miracle. We have in it remarkable, 1. The Humanity of 
the Centurion to his Servant, to teach us Chriſtians to do the like. 
2. The profitableneſs of gaod Works, the Centurions love to the Fews in 
Building them a Synagogue, gaineth their Applications to Chriſt tor 
him. 23. The Humility of the Centurion, he did not think hinfſelf 
worthy to appear in Chriſt's preſence, nor to receive Chriſt ints his 
Houſe. 4. Kis Faith in Chriſt?s Divine Power and Goo4neſs. Tt doth 
not appear, that he bejieved that Chriſt was the Eternal Son of God, 
but he did at leaft believe, that he was clothed with a Divine Power, 
or had a Divine Power Communicated to him from God, by which 
he was able, at a diſtance, and by no more than a Word, without 
Application of humanc bational means, to command off the Diſtem- 
p-r of iis Servant. $5. The Powerof Fatth in God, and its accepta- 
blenefs to him. Chriſt doth not only effe& the Cure, but predicate his 
Faith, to be greater than lic tound amongſt the generality of the Jew- 
iſh Nation, who went for the only People of God at that Day, and 
had much more Light, and means to diſcern that Chriſt was ſcat of 
God fer the good ct Men, than this Roman Captaia had. 


11 And it came to pals the day after, that he went into 
a City calied Nain, and many of his diſciples went with him, 
and much people. | 

12 Now when he came nigh to the gate of the city, be- 
hold there was a dead man carried out, the only fon of his 
mother, and ſhe was a widow, and much people of the 
city was with her. 

13 And when the Lord ſaw her, he had compaſſion en 
her, 2nd {aid unto her, Weep not. 

14 And he came and touched the |; biere, and they that 
bare him ſtood itil] - And hefſaid, Young man, I ſay unto 
thee, * Ariſe, 

15 And he that was dead, fat up, aud began to ireak : 
And he delivered him to his mother. 


Live alone Fives vs an «count of this Miracle of our Saviour's, 


Matthew mentioneth only the raifing from the dead of Zi his: 


Daughter, Like addeti ris, Fohn adds that of Laguus, 7:ln 11% 
by which our Lord did mightily fſhew his Divine Power, and gave 
us fone firft Fruits of the more general Refurrettion, as weil as de- 
Clared himſclf to be, as he etewnere ſaith, the Reſurredi;n and the 
Life. The p'ace where this Miracle was done, was cailed Main. 
H. Stephen Heb, Cald. Gr. UT Lat. nomina, &c. teils us it was a City 
or Tov/n about two f1'cs from-AMount Taber, at the Foot of the 
leſſer Mount #Z2r::5n, near to /2ndor, It was the Cuſtom of the Jew; 
to bury their Lead without their Cities, Chritt met this Dead Bod\ 
carrying out. He was it ſeems her only Child, and ſhe was a Wi- 
dow, fo under a great &midtion; God by this Providence having 
queneved the only 7out, {2 had lefs in rack, | And when the Lord ſaw 
her (the Text faith) be bud compaſſion on her, and jail unto her, 31 cef 
not, | None muycd jim on the behalf of the- Widow, neither do 


Judea, anu throughout all the region round about. 
The People hore ſaw. the Divine Power, manifeſtly exerted; for 

' the Revs of the Cicuds, the Womb, and the Grave are three Keys, 
' Whic:. tF.ir Teachers had taught. them were kept in God's Hind 
J'O0ne. 4.1 ſenſe of the Divine Preſence Naturally fills us with 
, fezr. Some, even the worſt of Men, are flled with a ſtupid fear 
, of Aftonifſiument and Amazement. Pious Perſons, or thoſe tit are 
411c.1.ed to Picty, are filled with a Fear of Reverence, ſuch a Fear xe 
read of, Chap. 1. 65. ſuch was this; for it iſſued in a predication of 
he Name of God, and a giving to him Praiſe, and Glory. For that 
aGreat Prophet was riſen among(# them © Thus far God Bleſſcd this 
' Miracle to make them look upon Chriſt as a Prophet, a Great Pr1pjzt, 
; and to look upon God's A in his ſending him, as an A of rex 
kindneſs to the Jews, for that is here plainly underſtood by th:m, 
ſaying, God h.th viſited his Peavle, as before, Lahe 1.53. and this 
Riimour was toread abroad all that Country, 
' 18 And the diſciples of John ſhewed him of all the{s 
things. 

19 And John calling unto him two of his diſciples, {n: 
t:em unto Jeſus, ſaying, Art thou he that ſhould come, ot 
| look we for another ? 

20 When the men were come unto him, they faid, Join 
Baptiſt hath ſent us unto thee, ſaying, Art thou he tht 
ſhould come, or look we for another ? 

21 And in that fame hour he cured many of :hejr inir- 
mities, and plagues, and of evil ſpirics, and unto many tic 
were blind he gaye ſight. 


how that the blind ſee, the lame walk, the lepers are clean: 
{ed, the deaf hear, the dead are raiſed, to the poor the gol- 
pel is preached. 

23 Andbleſfſed ishe whoſoever ſhall not be offended in 
me. 

See the Notes on Matth. 11. 2, 3, 4, Oc 

24 And when the meſſengers of John were departed, 
he began to ſpeak unto the People concerning John, What 
went ye our into the wilderneſs for to ſee ? A reed ſhaken 
with the wind? 


25 But what went ye out for to ſee? A man cloathed 
in ſoft rayment ? Behold they which are gorgeouſly apP3* 
relled, and live delicately, are in kings courts. 

26 But whrt went ye out for to ſee? A prophet? Yea 
ſay unto you, and much more than a prophet. 


27 This is he of whomir is written, * Behold I ſend my 


fore thee. | 

28 For [ ſay unto you, Amongſt thoſe that are born 9 
women, there is no greater prophet then John che Baptit; 
bur he that is leaſt in the kingdom of God, is greater i" 
te. Wo 

See the Notes on Matth. 11. 7, 8, g. where we met wii - 
Teſtimony concerning ſohn, given by our Saviour with ſome con 
derable enlargements, 


29 And all the people that heard h:, and the publicans 


L 
y 


John. 5+ 
30 But the Phariſees and lawyers | rejected ” 
counſel of God | againſt themielves, being nor Þapt! 


£532 
Lily 
A 

O! 
Zu 


A 


juſtified God, being baptized with the baprilm ot 


UL 


+4) 
fv! 


_ 


and, 1 har God hath vilited his people. *Chiy 
17 And this rumour of him went forth throughout al fot, 
Tg. 


22 Then Jeſus anſwering, faid unto them, Go your | 
way, and tell John what things ye have ſeen and heard, * * 


meſſenger before thy face which ſhall prepare thy way 5 pg 


pl 

pl 
\ 
L 


of him. a 


friend 
35 


I 

See tl 
2..0 Q * 
us 1efF1 
feiwe, 


the diff 


6, 


x 3 
* Vould 


lp. VIE 


Matthew hath not this Addition to our Saviour's Commendation 
of Fobn, but it is of great uſe to introduce our Saviour's following 
Diſcourſe. The Evangeiift- here divideth the hearers into two ſorts, 
The firſt, were the Common People and] the Publicans y the former were 
deſpiſed by the Jewiſh Dritors, and Rabbzes, as a Rude Illiterate fort 
of *cople,the latter as a Noforiouſly wicked fort. The econd fort 
were ti:e Phariſees and the Lawyers ; of the former, he ſaith, that 
the; being Baptized with the Baptijm of John, Tuſtified God, that 15 
tlicy owned, and Publicxly declared, and Predicated the Goodrelſs 
and Juſtice of God 3 they approved of wiiat 59d had done, and Bleſ- 
ſed his Name for lending amongſt them ſuch a Prophet as Zohn was ; 
they owned and received him, and were Baptized by him. Whoſo 
velieveth the meſſage which God lſendeth. and obeyeth it, he juſtifi- 
eth God, he that doth not, Accufth and Condemneti) God, fee ohn 
3-35 1 John. 5. 10. But the Phariſees and the Lawyers, that is, the 
©-11hes, not the Scribes of the People, ( they were but A#uaries, or 
Pyblick Notaries,) but the Scr192s of the Law, whoſe Ofjice it was to 
Interpret, and give the Senfe of the Law. Theſe rejeed ; the Word 
ſometimes ſignifies to deſpiſe, Ch. 10 15. 1 Theſ, .4. 8. Heb. lo. 28. 
ſometimes to diJannul, as Gal. 3. 15. ſornctimes to reje&, as Mar. 7. 9. 
Ch, £. 26- It ishere Interpreted ';y thoſe Words, Not being Baptized 
of him, We muſt underſtand the Senſe of jf8iJeozy by conſidering 
what is here meant by &anv Js fegs the Counſel of God, which 
ſome will underitand concerning the Purvoſe of God within him- 
ſelf, Others concerning his Reveat!d Wii, his Counſel as revealed 
to us. The matter ſeemeth to me. but a ſtrife about a Word, which 
is ſometimes taken in one Senſe, ſoynctiines in another. The Will 
of God is but one, only as every one of us keep ſome part of our 
1.ind to our ſelves, and revea! other parts of it to our Servants, and 
Cl;ildr:n 3 So God wio hath Determined and Willcd ail Events, con- 
cealeth ſome part of1t from his C1 eatures, and Revealcth :nother 
part of it to them. It is the Wi! of God, that this, aud that, and 
the other Perton ſhould Believe, and be juved. He Revealeth as to 
this, thus much of his Wyi'l. that whaſo Believeth, ſhall be Saved; 
but for that other part of his will, that this, and that, or the other 
Man ſhall Believe, this he concealeth, trill he gives them a Power to 
Beljeve,and to receive the Goſpel, and then his Will in this particular 
is Revealed. Suppoting then we here underſtand by Azafy 78 Oe7, 
God's jecret purpoſe to be under(ftond, how 1t 1s proved that it muſt be 
underiond of his ſecret purpye fir thetr Salvation? why ſhould it not 
be underſtood of the fecret Purpoſe and Coui:te! of Gcd,to grve them 


| Fo the means of Life and Salvation? God from all Eternity purpoſed to 
give the Jews the Miniſtry of 79bn the Baptiſt and Chriſt, as means 
for their Salvation, not which ſhould be certainly effeRive of it, but 


that ſhould have ſuch a Tendency towards it, as without their own 
refuſing, and oppoſing them ihou!d have been effettive, and was in 
, | their cn Nature a proper means 1n order to it : they reje&, and re- 

| fuſeit; by this they rejefted the Counſel of God, the effeR of his 
Counſel, and ſo judged themſelves unworthy of Eternal Life , by 
reglcting, deſpifing, and rejefting the uſe of that means, which 
was the Produ of an Eternal Purpoſe to fend them ſuch means. This 


SS. LO ER 
| 


6 Couric] of God 1s ſaid to be rejefed towards, or againſt themſelves ; 
tr: it as God s At it was towards themſelves, that 1s,for their Good ; 
nt if «-- refer ic to their Ad of Rejetion, or refuſal, it was azainſt thom- 
X felw-, a judging of themſelves unworthy of Eternal Life. We cannot in 
tis lace Tranflate it Diſannul,or Fruftrate.as Gal. 3. 15 underſtand- 
1... *:as to the Dive Ac,for who can Fruſtrate or Diſannul the Wil! 
0 o* 'vrpoſe of Man, as to an Aﬀﬀ of his own, within his Power to 
190 p"rpoſe ? tho indeed as fo the Event it may be Diſannullzd as to any 
e4 ce as toanother, if it be made to depend upon the Action of 
Go, another. Beſides, what need any further Explication of this Phraſe, 
x} of ReieFing the Counſel of God againſt themſelves, than what follow- 
a; eh, Being not Baptized of him, that is, not receiving John's Dofrine 
of Repentance, for the  Remiſſin of Sins, and bringinz forth Fruits 
our wirt%s of amendment of Life, nor ſubmitting to Baptiſm as a Teſtimo- 
fl ny o' ſuch Repentance; for the Baptiſm of John in Scripture fignifi- 
7 eth 11s whole Adminiſtration, the DoRrine he Preached, as well as 
al the Ordinance of Baptiſm by him Adminiſtred; and ſo muſt be Inter - 
vOl-- prieted where our Saviour ask'd the Phariſees, whether John's Bap- 
im was from Earth or from Heaven, and they durſt not ſay from 
d 1n Heaven, leſt Chriſt ſhould have ask'd them, Why then they Believed 
him not ? They were not Baptized of him, is the ſame thing with, 
They would he none of his Diſciples. 

F 31-And the Lord ſaid, Whereunto then ſhall [ liken 
_ the men of this generation ? and to what are they. 
Vhat like 7 
aken 32' They are like unto children ſitting in the market- 

place, a;d calling one to another, and ſaying, We have 
athed piped unto you, and ye have not danced, we have mour- 
appa- | nedto you, and ye havenot wept . 
-: 33 For* John the Baptiſt came neither eating bread, | 
Yea, | nor drinking wine : and ye ſay, He hath a devil. 
24 Theſon of man is come eating and drinking, and. 
ad my ye ſay, Behold, a glutronous man, and a winebibber, a 
ay be- #1 friend of publicans and ſinners. 
25 But wiſdom is juſtified of all her children. 
zorn of vee the Notes on Matt. 1r. 16, 17. where we have this ſmart j 
aptiſt "Fon upon the Scribes and Phariſe?s, and the generality of the j 


They were neither pleaſed tull nor faſting, but cenſorious of 
Trent manner of living oft Zn and Chrift, John ſhewed a ' 
more auſtere and ſevere Humour, and lived like a Rectyſe; you 
20 nothing elſe to C. v, you faid, FH” had a Devil. IT have choſen 


or (ER the dif 


vith th! 


\c conſt tot a les Innocent, but a more free Converſe with* Ven of all ſorts, 

end eat, and drink as other Men ; of me you ſay. that I am a Wine- 

- 4116 «5.2 Glution, a Friend of Publicans and Sinners. Such was their 
ublicans perrerſencft. that 


procceded from their Eumity to the Dottrine of 


oy Baby 
1rilm of | join 4nd Chriſt, 


: turned up, and the might with convenience enough, come at t her, 


w b 35 * And one of che Phariſees defired him that he 


. eb 5 hh , "0. 4 . 
4 * OO vould eat vith aim, And he went irto the Phariſees 
þaptizes \ ule, and fate down to mear. 


Uol. 2. 


'S 
= A _—_ 
1 Q 1, 


This was no ſmall Civility from a Pharitee. for the Phirifes were 
ot all others in the Generality of them, the 101} | 


deat : TIE d:peradte, and 1n- 
2 dans ©.2cmics of our Saviour, But Gol |:1t!: tis -umber armovgit 7 
py Nations, and all ſorts and orders of ci. Our Sivicur 45 was Wii 9 
ſaid before, was of a lrce, arid Open Converſe. 0nd rover refuſed 2.5% |; 4; WY 
Drink with Sinners purtuins fuch Deſigns s ; | ' Wy 
I, : Crip VE j*| 
he = ha . F j 14 $44 
37 And behold a woman in the city, which was a i 


linner, when ſhe knew that” [elus tate 
Phariſee's houſe, brought au 
ment, 

38 And ſtood at his f2et behind him weenins, and 
began co waſh his feer with tears, and di4 wipe -: e;: with 
the hairs of her head, and kiſſed his feer, and anoint..d | 
them with the ointment. | 


: "> 
in T2 


at meat 
atal2iter box of 


Wat hath made any Interpreters imagine this wo the £, 16 "9. 
ry which is mentioned, Matth. 25. Yarl 1:, and I9'n 15. 5 2 "tt 
cannot tell, The iiſtories agree ſcar: e in a2) this, v: | PSs ef. 1. 
vringing the Alabafter-Box of Ovntment, and the n0; : | 
Saviour's Feet, whereas there wa- nothios 'N thoſe Cont; iaog _ 
ordinary. That Anointing was done in 32 bam, withig who oe, | 
of Jeruſalem, this in Galilee, Thar. 11 the Yo:fe 50 one Sinn tho | 
Leper, this in the Houſe of one Simm a Porifros, That, a [ile ( (boy 
this a_great while, before our S+510ur's Pation. A” DOES BP # 
vs oitened, at this Simon the Phaiiſce was ofented. Thoge Chrit I 3 F 
Viadicates the Woman from one head of Argumene. here from ar Wk. 
ther. Queltionlels this is another quite difercot pic ce of Hittor : 
L And »%ehald a Woman in tc City which was a Simmer, 1 Chat is 2 ] 
remarkabie Sinner, it is a Ward peveraliy fo 1d, ard cnptica +» | | 
Women, tigniftes a P-9i#1iite, or at Jeaſt one of an 1 Report as 
Chaſtity; ws, referreth here to the time paſt, tho la + pa#, ſhe 
hd lately been infamous and notorious, but it apveireth by wh eT | | 
followeth, that ſhe was not fo now, otherwiſ: Cn in tho In ni- | 4; 64-14 
on, and Vogue of the People z a-cording to whoſe oinion. th) £49) | 
uncharitable enough, Que ſemel fuit mala, ſomper profirnitur, ef ni t- GT EG 
la in exdem genere mali, a Perſon who hath once ban bad is inks '$ | 
pretumed fo to be, through their jgnorance of the Power 21 Dicine (7 
Grace in changing the Heart, or their Maiice ava:ft, and Envy to- 4, WH} 
wards thoſe who Hearts they fee fo changed. But wiatever this {1h 
Woman had been, it ſeems Ged had affetted her '7. wt ih the Vile” 
Word which Chriſt had Preached. and fiiled it «wit! tie rure Love is | 
of God ard Chriſt, inſtead of its former fu!lnefs of impure Love, we td 


and made her Sins as bitter, as they had been former! -!--Cnt to 
her. She hearing Chriſt was Eating Meat at the Houle * 7mm the }. 114 
Phariſee, makes no noiſe, but cometh behind him, bringing »n 41a- | 4 
baſter-Box of Oyntment, {| And ſtd at his Feet behind him. woeping, " 
and Waſhinz his © Feet with her Years, and wiped them with the Hairs 

of her Head, Kiſſed his Feet, and Anvinted them with Orntment. | 

Weeping in the Senſe of her Sins, and fo plentifullv, 2: ſho waſhed 

tie Feet of Chriſt with her Tears, ſpoke a broken and a Conrrite 
Heart. | Wiping them with her Hair, | her Hair with which ſh- had | 
offended through Wantonneſfs, Plaiting it, and Adorning her f:!f by 

the dreſs of it to allure her Lovers, ſhe now uſcth to teſti4- her Ab- 

horrence of her former Courſes,and | Kiſſed his Feet and An-inting them 

with the Oyntment. | The Kiſs is a Symbol of Live, and not of Love 

only, but of Subjetion and Worſhip ; by this the bath ſhewed her 

Love to Chriſt, and alt5 her Subjeftion to him, the Kiifed Chrift in 

the Pſalmſts Senſe, Pſi, 2. 11, It was not a Kiſs of {ove -n'y, 

but of Reverence and Subjedtion, like Joſephs Ki's to Jacob, Gon. 45. 2. 
Moſes his Kiſs to Jethro, Exod. 18. 5. ray of the- Hizheſt Reveronce, 
for ſuch was the Kiſs of the Feet, and to teftifhe her At1-2tion of 
him. Thus the Idolaters Kiſſzd the Calves, I), 13. 2. int Bl, 
1 Kings. 19. 18. wathing and anointing with 0z1, wis $41 
Complement they uſed in thoſe Countries, for Cleanſing und Cool- 
ing the feet; ſhe had been a great Sinner, ſhe now ſhievs the yro- 
foundeſt Sorrow, greateſt Love, Humility, SubjeRtion, 7c. But 
ſome may fay, How cold ſhe come behind him, ſittinz at Meat and 
do this? while we fit at Meat our Feet are h{*fore us. This con- 
firmcth the Notion I mentioncd before,in my Notes on Wat. 25. 25: 
concerning the Jewiſh manner of ſitting at Meat, which was KX-9/- 
ing and reſting their Bodies upon their Legs leanins backwards + 11- 
mitting that, a!l that we here read of this Woman, was very catic 
for his Legs being thruſt out backward, the Soles cf his Feot were 


% 7% 
COM 


behind him to waſh, and to wipe and to anoint them, wiich it ; 
is hard to conceive how ſhe could do, admitting him to have ate, as | 
we do, putting our feet forward under the Table. | W401 


39 Now when the Phariſee which had bidden him, "YG 
ſaw it, (he ſpake within himfelf, faying, * This man, * Ci. 15. 2, F 
if he were a prophet, would have known who and waat 1 
manner of woman 2h #, that touched him, for ſhe ts a 
ſinner. — | 

How eafily are perſons, (tho ſeemingly well inclined ard fiir, ) 
offended, who have not the Love of G-d rcoted and grounded 13 


«. 


their hearts ? Did then all Ven who were Prophets. knew Perior 
at firſt ſight ? It is certain they knew no more of Peoples 3427's and 
lives, than God vwas pleaſed to reveal to them knew con ' F 

verſe with them, and obſervation of them. 2. Suppot fe nad 0 RS 1 
heen a Sinner, might ſhe not he a convert now, ar & 4 not hey RD: c.-4 
behaviour toward Ckrilt (before mentioned ) witne? 2 chat © £1 
her? 3. Admit the had been yet fuch a Sinner. ft might got ing 
touch Chriſt * This was indeed a Pharifaicei error, 190% 2:1 not | 
of ticir own, Religion, and all Perſons notorious for ime Sins; Ys 
were in the ſame order, as Lepers, and other Perſons that were Le- 
viticall;, or Legally Vnclean. foas none might toucit them. ut : that 
>ontact made them allo Unclean. It is {11d, alfo of the Samaritans, 
that when they meet a Jew, or a Chri'tz.in, they woud f5rſt call 
ou: to him,Do not touch me, That there was of old fi.ch a Party 
2mongſt the Jes that cryed., and by thy ſelf, come nit near t9 me, - 
fr T am holier than thou, 1s plain from 1a, 55. v. 5. 


C 421 of 
+1 Av 
OT aQii_tV 


ar 


'T 

i 

' * 
r7249-31f 
ati Qt) % 


eb ns 
» @ + ba ©, 


y S192 ] 40 Ang | (Ha'6! In. | N 
OR: 


[1 

is {1% 
f., 
: 


Py T - 
P 6 re - _ - 
o N 
N \- - 
Coon —_ - 
- ah i 


_—_— X TS -”=—— 1,7 


— 
—_ 


ſi | Chap. VIE 


ſj See On 


Match. 
22. 


” 
JT. 


- within kimſelf. Chriſt lets him know that he knew the thoughts of 


ding in Eclievers, is not the cauſe of their knowing of him, but 


-3. within themſelves, * Who is this that forgiveth fins 


% 


Ms 


40 And Jeſus an{wering, {ai4 unto him, Sumon, I 
have ſomewhat to fay unto thee, And he faith Maſter, 


12y On. : | 
41 There was a certain crediror which had two deb- 


tors, the one ought five hundred || peuce, and the other 


fitry. 
* And when they had nothing to pay, he frankly 
forgave them both. Tell me therefore, Which of them 


will love him moſt ? | 

43 Simon anſwered and ſaid, I ſuppoſe that he to whom 
he forgave moſt. And he ſaid unto him, Thou haſt 
rightly judged. ; : 

44 And he turned to the woman, and faid unto St- 
mon, Seeſt thou this woman ? I entred into thine houſe, 
thou gaveſt meno water for my feet : but ſhe hath waſh- 
ed my feet with tears, and wiped them with the hairs of 


her head. 
a5 Thou gaveſt me no kiſs: bit this woman, 
fince the time I came in, hath not ceafea to kils my 


feet. : 
45 Mine head with oil thou did not anoint ; but this 


woman kth anointed my feer with ointment 

47 Wherefore 1 ſay unto thee, Her fins, which are 
many, are forgiven; for ſhe loved much : but to whom 
little is forgiven, the fame loverh little. 

43 And he ſaid unto her, Thy {ins are forgiven. 


Our Saviour treateth h1s hoſt civilly, but yet letteth him know, 
that hc both knew his heart, and the he4rt of this poor Woman, 
whom he had ſo uncharitably retletted upon. Sm, v. 39+ ſpake 


his heart. have, ( faith he) ſomething to ſay unto thee. So he civil- 
fy obtaineth leave of him to ſpeak Simon ſaith, Maſter ſay on. Our 
Saviour tells kim, There was a certain Creditor, &c. It 1s obvious 
by our Saviour's application of this Parable, v. 44, 45, 46, 47. that 
he whom Chriſt here intendeth under the notion of a Creditor 2s God, 
That one of the debtors that did owe five hundred pence, (that 1s, a 
oreat Sum,) was this Woman ; whether Simon were intended by the 
other or no.is not eaſily determined ; but admit tne other was 6 Setve 
zny one that was a Sinner, but not ſo notorious a Sinner z God for- 
gives freely both the one and the oth©r, Chriſt asks which would 
love moſt ? Simmn tells him, that Debtor to whom moſt was forgi- 
ven. Chriſt tells him that he had judg.d rightly ; whence obſerve, 
1. That as all Sins, ſo all Sinners are not cqual in the fight of God; 
all are guilty, but there are degrees in guilt. 2. That be ens Sins 
leſs or greater, fewer or more, thoſe who have leaſt vill ſtand in 
need of pardoning Mercy, and Forgiveneſs. 3. Thar God is free in 
the forgiveneſs of all Sins, be they few or more. Ze frankly forgave 
them both. 4. That Chriſt firſt ſpeaketh of theſe two Debtors as be- 
ing forgiven, then of ticir /ovi!ng much; and of their being forgiven 
25 the cauſe of their loving much. $. That much love will follow 
a great forgiveneſs ; a great Sinner(one IF mean who hath been ſo) will 
hard!y ever be able to ſatisfie himſelf, that his much 1s forgiven, if he 
doth not find his heart very warm with Love fo God. 6. A true 
Loveto God and Chriſt will be ſeen in all ats, which may be de- 
monttrative or declarative of jt. Chriſt turns to the Woman, and 
ſaith to Simm, &c. Kiſſing, waſhing of feet, anointing with Oyl, were 
uſual Complements of thoſe Countrics, by which men ſhewed their 
reſpett: and kindneſs, to Stranz?rs and Friends, For Waſhing of Feet. 
ce Gen. 12. 4. (0 19g. 2, Jid. 19. 21. 1 Sam. 25. 41. 1 Tin, $. 10. 
For anointing with Ol. Sce Pſal, 23. 5. CF 45. 7. This Woman had 
excceccd the uſual kindneſs and civility of theCountry toward Chriſt, 
they were wont to Ering their Friends Water to waſh their Feet, 
2nd p::ſhbly a piece of Linnen to wipe them, ſhe waſheth his Feet 
with her tears, and drieth them with hcr hair, They uſed to anoint 


TV KEE. 


Theſe were either the Phariſees, who thought that Chrift blaſyr. 

med, in arrogating to himfeltfſuch a Power as belonged to Cog alpte- 
or the others, who ſpeak this rather in admiration ; but it ; None, 
ble the former are here meant. > prof. 


ved thee; go in peace. 

Thy believing in me as he who hath Power on Earth to for 
Sins, and accordingly making application to me, and thi; 
working by Love, Gal. s. 6. producing in thee this hearty ſorrg;; - 
thy Sins, a ſubje&ion unto me, and ſuch teſtifications of thy = oy 
thou art able to make, hath been an inſtrumental cauſe of that $ hag 
tion, which floweth from me as the principal cauſe, Rom, 15 
we have ſuch another expreſſion in Matth. g. 22. Mark. s, 34. th; 
the ſaving here mentioned, be much more excellent than that 4 4 
ſpoken of. Faith is profitable both for the good things of thi; _ 
and thoſe of the Life which ts to come. And with reference tg \ - : 
Salvation is aſcribed to Faith as the inſtrumental cauſe, not to wk, 
dience and Love, tho the Faith that doth us good mult worb by L i 
and be evidenced by an Holy Converſation. | $9 in Peace, ] is a "—_ 
which was the uſual valedition among the Jews, as much _ s 
Farewell, or God he with you, they under the term of Peace, com o 
hending all good : but when we conſider who it is that ſpeakteth, 
and what immediately preceded, we have reaſon to think this w,. 
a more than ordinary Complement or Farewell, even as much as is 
comprehended under the term Peace, which 2s I before aig js. .; 
200, but more efpecially that Pc *ce mentioned by the Apoſtle, Ram 
5. 1, as in efftetct Faith. Go fli, way a blefſ=d and happy Wo. 
man, and in the view and ſenſe of thy own bleſſednefs, and he Kh 
croubled 2* thc Cenſures and Reflexions ©. $percilious Perſon; who 
m.y dc. »r overiook thee becauſe thou haft bezn a great Tlaer 
God hath yp. '--: 4 thy Sins, and this I afiure thee of, only take 
heed to kcep wud iwfnatain that Peace. 


GCHAT, YTHL 


Chriſt travelling thre every City, Preacheth the Goſpel, his Diſciples 
and ce : in Women miniſtring to him, x—2. The Parable of the 
Sower, 4 s, Which he explains to his Diſciples, 91g, Cm. 
pareth his Dorine to a Candl? jet in a C.ndleſtich, 16—15, Ts. 
leth, that to him that hath, more (hall begruen, and from him that 
hati; not, (hall be taben away that which he hath, 18. Shewey 
who are his Broth:r, Siſter and *'u:her, 19 21. Rebubeth tho 
Wind, and ſlilleth the Sea : :—25. CaSteth out a Legion of De- 
vils, 26 30 and 'ermitteth to enter into the Swine, 3I==40, 
He going with Jairus t« heal his Daughter, cureth a Woman if i 
blandy Tue, 43 45. and Raiſeth Jairus Daughter frm the 
Dead, 49— 56. 

N D it came to paſs afterward, that he wer: 

throughout every city and village preaching, an 

ſhewing the glad tidings of the kingdom of God: and the 
twelve were with him ; 

2 And * certain women which had been healed of evi +4. 
ſpirits and infirmities, Mary called Magdalene, * ou ;,.. 
of whom went ſeven devils, Mir 

3 And Joanna the wife of Chuza Herods ſteward, and 
Suſanna, and many others which miniſtred unto him of 
their ſubſtance. 

Still I cannot but obſerve, that Preaching the Goſpel, and thereby 
ſhewing the glad tidings of Salvation (the principal means to 
bring Men to the Kingdom of God, whether that in this Life. or the 
Kingdom of Glory, 1n the Life which is to come, ) was Chri#'s great 
Work. His working Miracles was but ſubſervient to this, and for 
the confirmation of the Dottrine which he Preached ; hence when 
a People ſhewed a contempt of his Word, he refuſed to work any 
Miracles before them.« How any one can dream, that either Pray-- 
ing, or Government, or adminiftring Sacraments, or any thing elſe, 
ſhould be more the work of a Miniſter of Chriſt than Preaching, 


thy Faith 


22, 


iS ai 


the Zed of their Friends with Oyl, ihe anoints lis Feer, They uſed 
to kiis one anothers Cheeks or Lips, ſhe kifleth his Feet. They kitſed' 
their Friends once, ſhe &aſed not to kiſs his Feet. Upon this Chritt 
who before haq forgiven her, dec'areth her to be forgiven, firſt, in 
the hearing of Sm, then he doubleth his Words unto her. He had 


told Simon before that the Creditor had frankly forgiven them both; 
his adding here, Her fins which are many, ſufficientiy evidenceth that 
ſhe was ſhe, whem he intended by the debtor who 9wed much. Hence 
we may judge how little ground the Papiſts have, to urge this 
Place to prove. that Nemiffen of Sins is procured by our own merits 
and ſatisfafiions. Love here 1s not mentioned as the cauſe, but 
as the cffe@t of the Remifftion .of Sins, and that which our Saviour 
here defigned to inſtru Simon in, was, Firſt, That whatſoever this 
Woman had been, ſhe was not now ſuch a notorious Sinner, as he 
fancyed; her Sins were forgiven. 2. That God having thus favour- 
ed hcr with the Grace of Remiſſion, had alſo kindled :n her heart a 
Love towards 1m. 3. That this Love wrought in her heart in 
ſome proportion to that love, which God had magnified upon her, 
therefore (he loved much. . 4. That Men and Womens love to God 
and Chrift, wil!,and ought to be according to that Love which they 
have received from Chrift. $. That much love to God, will bring 
2 great ſenle of God's Love to the Soul, Fobhn 14. 21. The Particle 
6/4 which we Tranſlate becauſe, doth not always in Scripture ſignifte 
the cauſe, but wav be trauflated therefore, or for what cauſe; See 
Fohn 14. 17. you hnaw him, for he dwelleth in you ; the Spirits abi- 


the ce of it, ſo thatfor, in that place is as muchas therefore. So 
in Mark g. :8. 6j4 1s as much as for what cauſe, or, for what reaſon 2 
we tranitate it, whv could we uot catt him out ? So here, Her Sins 
_ are many, are forgiven, tor which cauſc, or reaſon, ſhe loveth 
much. 


49 And they that ſat at meat with him, began to ſay 


allo ? 


may juſtly amaze any thinking Soul that ever read the Goſpel. 
Chriſt went every where about Preaching, and the Twelve were with 
him, ſometimes hearing (as his Diſciples) ſometimes Preaching ; 
ſome Women alſo were with him, ſuch as had been healed of evil $i- 
rits and other Diſeaſes. Mary Magdalene was one, out of whom he 
had caſt ſeven Devils, that is, many Devils. Moſt think ſhe had 
her Name from Magdala, a City in Galilee, where ſhe was bred, 0r 
dwelt. It is a great error to think ſhe was the Mary mentioned, 
Fohn 11. the Siſter of Lazarus ; ſhe lived in Bethany near to Feria 
lem; yet it is plain from Mark 16. that ſhe was at Jeruſalem at the 
time of Chriſt's Death and ReſurreRion, but ſo were many that fol- 
lowed him from Galilee, Mark. 15. 14. Lake. 23. 49+ [ 4nd Joann 
the Wife of Chuza, Herods Steward. Chrift hath his e# in ail 
places his Foſeph in Pharoahs Court, his Daniel and three Childre® 
in Nebuchadnezzars Court, his Saints in Nero's houſhold, Phil. 4. 2 
his Joanna in Herods Family 3 this was that Herod Antipas, Tetrarch 7 
Galilee, he who put Fohn the Baptiſt to death, and himſelf with b1s 
Soldiers mocked Chriſt ; poſſibly his Steward was as bad, but # 
Wife was one that followed Chrift, knowing that tho her Husband 
had Power over her Body, he had none over her Soul. [ Ant!" 
minifired to kim of their ſubſtance.] 1hey were not aſhamed to * 
ſeen following of Chriſt, tho doubtleſs they met with ſcoffs cnoue'' 
Nor were they aſhamed to be reproached for their former failing, 
was Chriſt becauſe of their foriner Lives or the Life of ſome of then 
to have them following him. Tt is a Glory to Chriſt, and fo the 
Church of Chriſt to have great Sinners brought to him, and brough! 
into it ; the only ſhame is to ſuch as being in the Church, or 
tending at leaſt to be Chriſtians, are Debauchees ſtil. Chriſt did 0 
give himſelf for a People, that were pure, and holy, without jp! , 
wrinkle, but that he might ſan@ifie them and cleanſe th-m, _—_— 
waſhing of Water by the Word, Eph. . 25, 26, 27. Following Ci" 
they mniſtred to him. This was according to Chriſt's Doftrine, m——_ 
Io. 10. and his Apoſtles after him, x Cor. 9. T1. 2 Cor. 8 9. 14: ” 
Some of them might be Virgins, ſome Widows, fome Wives(who I: 


an allowance for themſelves from their Husbands, ) however, it Co! 


»- 


, Ch 
2lve & , % -# 


5o And he faid to the woman, * Thy faith ha!; cf Mar 
$2, 


\ © BW 
* 4 


Gap. VI 


j 
hath 


] birſe fr on 
| the have 


Sec 


ke wy 
x8 Y 


ve no Rot *0 cove of wizt was their 
. 2 -£ alt wtrinls atrts 6: Hnck on ; Tei 

the 1,ord of at, rehicn either _the;r Hus-ands or tiney poilciſed, Nor 
was Ciritt alhurmnca to Ye un ne Dukes of crhers, Wie he was 
providins {(piritual rood for the S's of alj, 2 Cir. B. 9. 


and when much people were gathered together, 
and were come to hum out of every city, he ſpake by a 
rable 
; A ſower We!:1r out to fow his ſeed : and as he fowed, 
ſome fell by the ways ſide, and it was troden down, and 
the fowls of the air devoured ir. 
6 And ſome feil upon a rock, and affoon as it was 
ſprung up, 1t withered away, becaute it lacked moi- 
ure. 
"_ And ſome fell among thorns, and the thorns ſprang 
up with ir, and choaked it. | | 
8 And other fell on good ground , and ſprang up, 
"2nd bare fruit an hundred-fold and when he had ſaid 
rheſe things, he cried, He thar hath ears to hear, let him 
ear. 
, * And his diſciples asked him, ſaying, What might 
> this parable be * 
"© 10 And he faid, Unto you it is given to know the 
myſteries of the kingdgin of 0d : bur to others in pa- 
_ rables 3 that * ſeeing they might not ſee, and hearing 
they mighr not underſtand. 
14 Now the parable is this : * The ſeed is the word 
of God. 
12 thoſe by rhe way-ſide, are they that hear ; then 
cometh the devil, and taketh away the word out of tiic:r 


: : i3 They onthe rock, are rvey, which when they hear. | 
: receive the word with joy ; and theſe have no roor, | 
: which for a w hile believe, and in tire of cemptatiuu 
) fall away. 

? ' 14 And that which fell among thorns, are they which 
_ | when they have heard, go forth, and are choaked with 


Tucrands, to him who was | 


into the ſwine . 


place into thie lak: 


went up tnto the tiup, cad returned back _ 


things God hath done unto thee. 


KA E. 
26 And they arrived at the country of the Gadarenss 
which is over againſt (alilee. Z 

27 And when he went forth to land, there met him 
-_ of the City, a certain man which had deyils loag cine, 
= _ cloaths, neither abode in any houte, bur itn 

23 When he ſaw Jeſus, he cried out, and fe!} down 
before him, and with a loud voice {aid, What have | to 
do with thee, Jeſus thou £on of God moſt high? I beſeech 
thee torment me nor. : 

29 For he had commanded the unclean ſpirit to come 
out ol the man. For oftentimes it had caught him, and 
he :.as kept bound with chains, and in fetters : and he 
brake the bands, and was driven of the devil into the 
wildernels. 

30 And ſeſus asked him, ſaying, What is thy name ? 
And be ſaid, Legion, becauſe many devils were encred 
into him. 

31 And they beſovght him that he would not command 
them to $o our into the deep. | 
; 32 And there was there an herd of many ſwine feed- 
ing on the mountain - and they beſought him char he 
would tuffer them to enter into them. And he ſullered 


them. 


33 Then wenr the devils out of the man, and entred 

and the herd ran violently down a ſtzep 
7nd were choiked. - 

54 When thy that ted them faw what was done, 


| ; r>ey fled, and went and told jr in the city and in the 
hearts, left they ſhould believe and be ſaved. * 


mecry, 
35 Then chey went out to fee what was done, 2:14 


Came *n Tei 5 and found the man out of whom the devils 


«er: 4-9, {itting at the ee of Jeſus, cloat! d, aud 


i IS 2, 4 1171, and they were afraid. 


36 TÞ., ao which law it, told chem by what means 


he tha. was rciziled of the devils vas healed. 


37 Ibhen the whole rricunde of the country of the 


Gadarenes round about, * betought him to deyart from * As 15. 
them ; for t! 


wor: tal 2227 fear : And he 5” 


v- vous 


38 Now the man out of whom the devils were depart- 


ed, beſought him r+:.. he might be with him, But Jeſus 
1ent him away, taying, 


39 Retnrn to thine own houſe, and ſhew how great 
And he went his way, 


and publiſhed throughout the whole city, how great things | 
Jetus had done*unto him, 


40 And it came to paſs, that when Jeſus was returned, 


; | cares, andriches, and pleaſures of rhjs life, and bring no 
L | fruir to perfection. 

; 15 But that on the good ground, are they which in 
t * an honeſt and good hearc, having heard the word, keep 
d | it, and bring forth fruic with patience. 
16 We have had this Parable Matth. 13. 2, 3, 4 and Mark 4. 1, 2, 3. 

| See the Notes on both thefe Chapters, 
il +4, & 11, 16 No* man when he hath lighted a candle, covereth 
ut 5B it with a veſſel, or putterh ir under a bed : but ſerreth 

hs it on acandleſtick, that they which enter in may ſee the 

nd light, 
of Þc the Notes on Matth. s. 15. and on Mark 4. 21. 

t.'>, 17 For * nothing is ſecret, that ſhall not be made ma- 
. nifeſt « neither any thing hid, that ſhall not be known, 
the 2:- and come abroad. 
eat p22 This we have a*{2 met with twice befgre. Sec the Notes on Mat. 
for $15. Mark 4s 21- 
jen 18 Take heed therefore how ye hear : for whoſoever 
ws hath, to him ſhall be given 3 and whoſoever hath not, 
I. ..., from him ſhal] be taken even that which he || ſeemerh ro 
ng, ki; have. 
pel. | See the Notes on Math q. 24. and on Mat. 13. 12. & 25. 29. 
- 19 Then came to him his mother and his brethren, and | t 
St- could not come at him for the prels. 
n be 20 And it was told him by certain, which ſaid, Thy 
_ mother and thy brethren ſtand without, deſiring to ſee 
ned, | thee. 
uſa | 21 And he anſ{wered and ſaid unto them, My mother 
t the and my brethren are cheſe which hear the word of God, 
_ and do it. 
þ All Tee the Notez on Matth. 12. 45. Mark 3. 31. 
= 22 Now it came to paſs on a certain day, that he went 
inch if into a ſhip with his diſciples : and he ſaid unto them, 
th b1s et us go over vato the other ſide of the lake. And they 
ut wr lanched forth. 
5 3 But as they failed, he fel] aſleep, and there came 
to be down a ſtorm of wind on the lake, and they were filled 
10ug! wit] water, and were in jeopardy. 
Gem, \, 24 And they came to him, and awoke him, ſaying, 
—W Vaſter, matter, we periſh. Then he aroſe, and rebuked 
rough! i? wind, and the raging of the water : and they ceaſed, 
Ir pe 2nd there was a calm, 
id 0 , 25 And he faid unto them, Where is your faith ? And 
a 10's ey being afraid, wonderd, ſaying one to another, |! 

Chrilt Rat manner of man 1s this ? for he commandeth even | | 

Mitt) '7 Winds and water, and rhey obey him. ; 
= wad | _ Ter whole Biftory we have alſo before met with, both in Matth. | ! 
— cl 5+ 4d 3\0% 4 37, See the Notes upon both thoſe Chapters. 


FR 


fort, thy faith hath made thee whole ; g9 


the people g134ly recaved him, for they were all waiting 
for him. 


We have had this whole ftory Matth. 8. from v 22. to the end, 


and Mark 5. irom v. 1.to 24. Sec the Notes on both thoſe Chapters 


41 And behold, there came a man named Jairus, 


and he was a ruler of the ſynagogue, and he fell down 
at Jeſus fzer, and beſought him chat he would come into 
his houle. 


42 For he had one only daughter, about twelve years 


of age, and ſhe lay a dying. But as he went, the people 


hronged him. | 
43 And a woman having an iſſue of blood twelve years, 


which had ſpent all her living upon phyſicians, neither 
could be healed of any, 


44 Came behind him, and touched the border of 


his garment, and immediately her ifſue of blood ſtanch- 
ed, 


45 And Jeſus taid, Who touched me ? When al] de- 


nied, Peter, and they that were with him, faid, Maſter, 


he multitude throng thee, and prets tee, and ſayeſt thou, 


Who touched me ? 


46 And [eſus ſaid, Some body hath touched me, for 1 


perceive thar virtue is gone our of me 


47 And when the woman ſaw that ſhe was not hid, 


ſhe came trembling, and falling down before him, ſhe de- 
clared unto him before all the people, for what caule 
ſhe had touched him, and how ſhe was healed unme- 


diately. 


48 And he ſaid unto her, Davghter, be of good com: 
in peace. 


49 While he yet ſpake, there comech one from the 


ruler of the ſynagogues houſe, laying ro him, Thy daughtez 


s dead, trouble not the Maſter.. 
5o But when Jeſus heard jr, he anſwered him, {ay- 
ng, -Fear not, believe only , and fhe {hail be made 


whole. 


31 And 


Canap, VII 


Mi 


$2 —_ 
po_ 

: ©: —EALE « 
_ lh + - *. 


- - _—_— p 
- 3 Z Same 0g net mmmmnnen 

Si _—_— — 
RE - — —_ 


Chap. IR. 9. 


5i And when he came into the houſe, he ſuffered no 
man to goin, fave Peier, and James, and John, and the 
father and the mother &* the maiden. 

52 Andall wep: and bewalled her, But he ſaid, 
nor, ſhe is not dead, * bur fleeperh. 7 

53 And they laughed him. to ſcorn, knowing that ſhe 
was dead. 

54 And he put them all out, and took her by the hand, 
and called, 1ay ing, Maid arite. ; 

55 And her tpirit came again, and ſhe aroſe ſtraight- 
way : and he commanded to give her mear. 

56 And her parents were aſtoniſhed : But he charged 


them that they ſhould tell no man what was done. 

We had both theſe picces of Hiſtory twice before related by Mat- 
thew, Chap. 9. 18. and by Marb , c<; 5. from v« 22, with ſome fur- 
thr circumſtances. See the Notes on both thoſe Chapters, Chriſt, 
v. 45. ſaying, Who touched me? And again, V. 45. ome body hath 
touched me, for TI perceive that Virtue is £32 out of me, doth not 
argue that Chriſt knew not of the Womans coming and touching 
him, or did not voluntarily ſend out that Virtue that healed her, far 
be any ſuch thoughts from any Pious intelligent Souls 3 ſhe was not 
healed by her touch of the border of his Garnient, but by his Powerful 
Will, commanding ſuch miraculous cff:& ; he only ſpake this to 
bring forth the Miracle into light, which was wrought ſecretly, ſo 
as the Pcople took no notice of it, /-:ling Virtue wenr out of Chrift 
upon an aft of his !77l, not nece{ſa ty, From v. 55. 15 confutcd the 
Atheifia of thoſe who would make the Soul tt be meerly the Crafts, 
or ſome atfettion of the Body, and it is proved to be a being that 
can ſubfifk of it {cIt, i a ſtate of ſeparation from the Body. It 1: 
ſaid, Her Spirit returned 424in; not Chriſt gave her a new Spirit. 
Chriſt here did not exert a creating Power, only ſent forth that 
Cower with which he was clothed to +a» the Dead, For other things 
obſervable from-this ſtory, Tze the Notes before-mentioned upon the 
parallel Texts. 


W eep 


il ſolin I, 
12, 19. 


CHAP. Is. 

Chriſt ſending forth bu Diſciples t1 proxch the Goſpel , giveth them 
power over evil Spirits, and to heal the fich, 16. Herod defirerh 
to foe Chriit, 7-—=9. The Apoſlles- return with joy, To. Chri/t 

feedeth tree thiafnd 3.cn, with five Loaves and two Fiſhes, 11I—17. 

Divers Orimons of the People concerning Chriſt, 138--21. He fore 

tellth his Crucifixion and BReſurrectiom, 22, Exhorteth to confeſs 

hw ty the benejus thar attend it, 23 27. Transfigureth him- 

FIf before three Diſciples, 28 —— 35. Ca#eth out an unclean Sji- 

rit, 37 Ci Telleth his Dijciples who ſhould be the greateſt amorg 

them, 45 48%. Dehortech them ſrom forbidding any to coſt out 

Devils in his Naine, 49, 5. Journeying to Feruſalem is refuſed by 

the Samaritans, and reproveih 3s Dijciples for their deſire of Re- 

wVenze, SI—-—62. 'y 


I Het: he called his twelve diſciples together, and 
gave ther power 144 authority over all devils, 
and to cure difeaſes. 

2 And he ſent them to preach the kingdom of God, 
and to heal rhe fick. 

2 And he {zid unto them, Take'nothing for your jour- 
ney, ncither ſtaves, nor ſcrip, neither bread, neither 
money ; neither have rwo coats aNtece. 

4 And whatſoever houle ye enter into, there abide, and 
thence deparr:. 

5 And wholoever will not receive you, when ye go 
out of that city, ſhake off the very duſt from your feet 
for ateſtimony againit chem. | 

6 And they departed and went through the towns , 
preaching the goſpe!, and healing every where. | 

We nave heara ct the churn of theſe twelve Diſciples and their 
Namcs, chop. 5.13. Ih 3.14. Our Saviour choſe them to be 
with hirm, to lcarn of kim, 23d to he inſtruted by him, and to be 
Witneſſes of what he fa14, and did 5 after ſome time thus ſpent, he 
ſends tiiem forth to Preach the Goſpel, and giveth them a Power to 
confirm the Dottrine which they preached, by teveral miraculous 


operations. A7atihey takes no notice of their E'ef7jn, only of their 
Mijfom. Both Afrh and Lube take notice of both. The 3, 4, «, 6. 


Verſes, give us an account of the inſtrutions he gave them, we mer 
with tom all befor, and a more full account of them. See the 
Notes on Hat:h. 15. 1,2, 3 7,8, 9, 10. and Mark 6.9, 8, 5. 

7 * Now Herod the tetrarch heard of all that was 
done by hfm, and he was perplexed, becauſe that it was 
-v{, {aid of ſome, that ſohn was riſen from the dead. 

8 And of ſome, that Elias had appeared : and of others, 
that one of the old prophers was riſen again. | 

9 And Herod ſaid, ſohn have I beheaded, but who is 

this of whom | hear fuch things ? And he deſired to ſee 


+ Mat. 14. 


him. 
This Herd, was 772534 Antipas the Tetrarch of Galilee, who had 
behcaded oor the j7,pitff, Fe heareth of theſe great things done by 


Chriit, and Hymoper, ſaith the Evangel;t; it is a Word that fignift- 
tif a great diſturbance, and perplexity of Miid, when a Man-1s in 
doubt and fear, and Engweth not what Counſels to take or follow ; it 
3s vicd, Cube 24.4. Als 2. 12. As g. 24 As no. 17, The other 
Evanrgelifis tay 22rd bimfclt guctied it wis Fohn the Baptiſt, whom 
he had bchcaded, Oh! the: power of +-guilty Conſcience ? He had 
murdercd Foln, now te 18 afraid his 6h haunted him, or that 
t1S Soul was entied inte anviter Body, that it might be revenged on 
PLN 3 omers gpoilcd virinuily. Herod knoweth not what to think; 
vut Ooitreth co. foe Chit, poTruly chit he might make up ſome 


LU AE. 


Cha Bl 


judgment about him, poſſivly out of meer curiofitvr, Put wa c., 
not that he did ſee tim, until Pilate ſent him to him after 11.5 Dig 
mination of him, Like 22. 8. _—_ 

10 * And the apoſtles when they were returned, tolg 
him all that they had done. * And he took them "Mar 
went aſide privately into a deſart place, belonging 4 
city called Bethfaida. : 

11 And the people when they knew it, followed 
| him : and he received them, and ſpake unto the, of 
the kingdom of God, and healed them thar had neeq 5 
healing, ; 


The Evangeliſts give us but a ſummary account of thinss, yy. read 
of the Miſſion, or ſending out of the Apoſtles, v. 1. Here we reg, 
of their return and giving their Lord an account of thcir diſcharge of 
the truſt he had repoſed in them. Being returned, our Szviur «. 
eth with them into a place near 'Bethſazda, not much inhabited, 14 
therefore called Deſare. He never wanted followers, nor an her; +, 
reccive them, and to take all opportunities to do them good, 14,1, 
followed him, he vecetveth them, and Preacheth to them for the 9g, 
of their Souls, and healeth thoſe amongſt them that were fick - 
teach us to joyn Spiritual with Body, and bodily with ſpirituzt 
Alms, Spiritual Alms, ſuch as inſt-u:Hm, reprogf, counſol, gre 4; 
much better than thoſe that relieve only bodily wants, as the Soy! 4; 
better than the Body. Spiritual Alms, , without bodily relief, Som 
ſuch as are able to give them, are fittcſt for ſpiritual! pcctons ; Carta! 
ignorant People, that have no ſeaſe of ſpiritual things, mit ty 11, 
Children al'ur'd into a ga0d opinion of the things and ways of $14 
by ſome bodily Charity, and fo taken by guile and enticed to +1 
knowledge of God, 

12 And when the day began to wear away, then can; 
the twelve, and faid unto him, Sena the multitude away, 
that they may go into the towns and country roy1g 
abour,: and lodge, and get victuals; for we are here in ; 
delarr place. 

13 Burt he ſaid unco them, Give ye them to eat. Ang 
they ſaid, - We have no more but five loaves and twy 
fithes ; except we ſhould go and buy meat for al] this 
people. 

14 For they were about five thouſand men. And he 
ſaid to his diſcipies, Make them ſit down by fifties in 


ang * Mat Tim 
the 13, * 


M317 


company. ; 
15 And they did fo, and made them all fit down. 
16 Then he took the five loaves, and the two fiſhes, Wy 
and looking up to heaven, he bleſſed them, and brake, 1 


and gave to the diſciples to ſet before the multitude. 


17 And they did eat, and were all filled, and there i 
was taken up of fragments that remained to them, twelve In 
baskets. 

The Hiſtory of this Miracle is recorded by all the four Evanzzlif:, _ 
See the Notes on Matth. 14.15. and on Mark 6, 35, We ſha!l again 
meet with it, 7ehn 6. 5. with ſome further circumitances. Lu: fir 
hath nothing but what we have before met with, : 

18 And it came to paſs as he was alone praying, hi; Ine 
diſciples were with him : and he asked them, ſaying, | 
* Whom {ay the people that lam ? he bel 

I9 They anſwering, ſaid, * John the Baptiſt : but; DIL 
ſome ſay, Elias : and others /ay, that one of the old pro- ; 
phets 1s riſen again. _.. doy 

20 Ke faid unto them, But whom fay. ye that I am? cd 
* Peter an{wering, ſaid, The Chrift of God. Fa ar 

21 And he ſtraightly charged them, and commanded ve 

| them to tell no man that thing, 4 

22 Saying, * The ſon of man' muſt ſuffer many* God 
things, and be rejected of -the elders, and chief prieſts,” whit 
and ſcribes, 'and be flain, and be raiſed the thiri EF 4. 
day. Ws Ei | fort 

Mathew and Mark tet] us this diſcourſe paſſed at Ceſared Philipy!, men, 


Cor at leaſt one of the ſame import) Matthew alfo gives us 1 ac- 
count of it with more circumſtances. See the Notes on Mctthew 
15. 14. | As he was alone praying.) That is, free from the mult: 
tude ;. for the next Words tell us; the Diſciples were with him. The 


| $, = F 
nid t 


&;-.tO as 


22 v. is not to be found in the other Evangeliſts z and if Lulz hath Of 
reported theſe Words in the right order of time, they afford us 4 Chriſt 
probable reaſon of what is v. 21. Why Chriſt would not yet be publiſh- their $ 
ed, as the Chriſt, or the Son of God. Becauſe he was to ſuffer, and it fir ma 
might much have ſhaken Peoples Faith, as to that Point, if they hd Paxiſe 
ſcen the Perſon, whom they believed to be the Son of God, ſuifer- Prophe 
ing ſuch things, and ſo deſpitefully uſed as he wasz he theret-re «- Will, 
tired to be concealed as to that, unti] he ſhould be declare: to be #4: God ht 
Son of God with Power, by his Reſurre&ion from the Dead. _ ; 
| 0 
23 And he ſaid tothem all, If any man will come after Peter & 


{cy h; 
© harch 
+ 2 Ch to h 
: Vitude, 
Hiſtor 
Faith 7 
It, kng 
ns Ne 
ied by 
1nd the 
ive hit 
CINCer] 
Mts (es 
HI 


me, let him deny himſelf, "ind'take up his croſs daily, and 
| follow me. F — 
_ - 24 For whoſoever will fave his life, * ſhall lot? 1%, * 
but whoſoever will loſe his life, for my take, the tame ** 
{hall fave it. 


We have met with theſe Words before, Matth, 15. 24, 25: NX 1% 
38, 35. Mark 3. 34, 35. Sce the Notes on thoſe places. 


P ' 
$18): 
jay 


25 For what isa man advantaged, if he gain 1% V 
world, and l[ofe kimfelf, or be catt away * 
Sec the Netes 00 Matth, 15. 26, Mult 8 gv» - ph 


\ 
- 


ia C 


) ap. I S. &Y 


my words, of him ſhall che ſon of man be aſhamed when 
it 3- 38: he ſhall come in his own glory and jz h# fathers, and of 
« 2+ che holy angels. . 

27 Bur | cell you of a truth, there be ſome ſtanding 
here which ſhall not taſte of death cill they ſee the king- 
dom of God. 


Se the Notes on Matth. 16.28. Mark g.1i. Luke ſeems here to 
have recorded ſeveral layings of our Savivur, ſpoken not all at the 
44:1 IMC. 

23 And it came to pals about eight days after theſe 

0s, 11125 | {ayings, he took Peter, and John, and James, and went 

up into 2 MOuntraln to pray. . 

29 And as he prayed, the faſhion of his countenance 
was altered, and his raiment was white and gliſtering. 

' 20 And behold, there talked with him rwo men, which 

were Moſes and Elias. 
31 Who appeared in glory, and ſpake of his deceaſe 
which he ſhould accompliſh at Jeruſalem, 
1.2.17 32 But Peter, and they thar vere with him, * were 
I-5 heavy with ſleep : and when they were awake, they ſaw 
his glory, and the two men thar {tvod with him, 

33 And it came to pals, as they departed from him, 
Perer ſaid unro Jeſus, Maſter, it is good for us to be 
here ; and let us make chree tabernacles, one for thee, 
and one for Moſes, and one for Elias, not Knowing what 
he {aid, 

24 While he thus ſpake, there came a cloud and over- 
ſhadowed them : and they feared as they entred into the 


cloud. 


And there came a voice out of the cloud, ſaying, 
lt317- + 1 his is my beloved Son, hear him. 

26 And when the voice was paſt, Jefus was found 
alone : and they kept zr cloſe, and told no man in thoſe 
days any of thoſe things which they had ſeen, 


See. the Notes on Mat. 17. 1, 2, 3. andoa Mirk g, 2, 

37 And it Came to paſs, that on the next day, when 
| they were come down from the hill, much people mer 
| im. 
| 33 And behold, a man of the company cried out, ſay- 
2 | ing, Maſter, I beſeech thee look upon my fon, for he is 
e | mineonly child. 

| 39 Andlo, a fpirir taketh him, and he ſuddenly crieth 
i our, and it teareth him, thar he fometh again, and brui- 
11 ſing him, hardly departeth frem him, 

": 40 And | betoughr ——_— to caſt him out, and 
7 they could not 

i 411 And Jeſus anſwering, ſaid, O faithleſs and perverſe 

© +, generation, how long ſhall I be with you, and fufter you ? 

v7, bring thy fon hither . 

Mey 42 And as«he was yer a coming, the devil threw him 

” down, and tare him ; and Jefus rebuked the unclean {pi- 
rit, and healed the child, and delivered him again to his 

ll facher. 

a4 See the Nutes on Mitth. 17, 14. Mick 9g. 14. 


* 43 And they were all amazed at the mighty power of 
any * 0 God ; bur while they wondred every one at all things 


mg which Jetus d:d, he f{aich unte his diſciples, 

hird I. 4, * Ler theſe ſayings fink down into your ears, 
| for the fon of man ſhall be delivered into the hands of 

ithp!, men. 

w_ ;. 45 * Put they underſtood not this ſaying, and ir was 


nid from them, thai they perceived it not ; and they feared 


nulti- 

"The &;-, to ask him of that faying. 

hath | Of the Peoples Aſtoniingment and Amazement at the fight of 
4 us 4 Chriſt's Miracles, we often hear much ; of their embracing him, as 
abliſh- their Saviour, and owning him as the Chriſt, we read little. Thus 
and it far many of them were coracz indeed the moſt (the Scribes and 
y had Phariſees, and Sadducees only excepted) believed Chriſt was a great 
ſufer- Pripiet, a Man ſent of God : authorized by God to reveal his 
re de Will, and impowered from God to 60 many things which none but 
; bet! God had »#jzinally a Power to do. Others were gone a ſtep farther, 


\1z. to believe not only that he was 2 Propyet, but that Prophet forc- 
wid by Abſes, Deut. 18. 1c. -Fohn v8. 21, 45. the Chriſt of God, as 
Peter expreticd it, he that ſhould redeem Iſrael, Luke 24. 21s That 
icy had not a truc Notion of the Meſſizs, either as to his Perſon, 
that the Divine and Humane Nature were united in his Perſon 3 or 
% to his Worb , that it was not to redeem Iſrael from their bodily ſer- 
VItade, but from cheir Sins only, will appear to any from the whole 
tiftory of the Goſpel. Nor indeed doth our Saviour haſten their 
Faith in this Revelation, I mean, the perfetting and confirming of 
it, knowing that it would be a great ſhaking to their Faith in him in 
<115 Notion (and indeed as the M2ſſtas) to ſee him fo ſhamerully abu- 
ied by the vileſt abjetts of the People (as he was at his Paſſion.) 
ind then hanging upon the Croſs, and dying, until they ſhould alſo 
ice him liy tits own Power riſen from the Dead, and beconfirmed 
concerning the truth of his Refurreftion, Where therefore He ſaw 
* r * ts red or Precious Faith ſpringing uP, 4s it did 11 Peter and divers 


th * 


26 For * whoſoever ſhall be aſhamed of me and of 


AE 


not diſcourage nor blame it, but highly commended it ; fo neither 
d1d he pleaſe to ſtrengthen it, to as to put them out of ail doubt 4- 
bout it, and often charged them not to publiſh it abroad, and tends 
himſelf to prepare them againſt this great Obſtacle, which he ſaiv 
would be in their way, to wit, hs ſufferinzs. This is the ſecond 
time now that in this Chapter we find him incuicatin» ir, ard there 
was need of it, for the Evangelift telleth us, that they underſtood it 
mt, 1t was hidden from them. They couid ealily underttand bow ant 
ordinary Prophet might be delivered into the hands of men; : but 5:2 
the Meſflas, the Chrit, that Prophet, he, of whom ſome of them te. 
lieved that he was more than a meer Man, how he thould be this 
delivered, thus ſuffer, they could not underſtand z and they ſaw 
Chriſt as to this point fo reſerved and private, and forviddins the 
publication of it, that they feared to be too particular with hin 
about it, 


45 Then there aroſe a reaſoning among them, which 
of them ſhould be greateſt. 


47 And Jeſus perceiving the thought of their heart, 
took a child, and fer him by him. 

43 And faid unto them, Whoſoever ſhall receive this 
child in my name, receiveth me, and whoſoever ſhall ce- 
celve me, recetveth him that ſent me, for he that is leaſt 
among you all, the ſame ſhall be grear. 

Sce the Notes on Matth. 18. 1. Mark g. 33. - This Paragraph ſhew- 
eth what need there was of the preceding Diſcourſe, that our Savi- 
our ſhould prepare them with a preinforming them about his Suffer- 
ng; that when they ſaw it, their Faith in him, as the Meffiat:. 
might not fail ; for they were polleſſed with the common Notion of 
their Country, that the Meſſias ſhould deliver them from the Tem- 
poral Preffures which they were under, and exerciſe a Civil or Mili- 
tary {ccalar Power ; this made them think of places of Priority and 
Greatnels, about which we often find them diſputing. Our Lore. 
to bring them off that falſe Notion of him and his Kingdom, he ta- 
keth a Child, and f-iteth him before them, and C:ith, Whoever ſhut 
recetve t:)s Child, &c. What Lake ſaith, mutt be interpreted by 
what we had before in Matthew and Marb. This Child, that is, 
one tht 1s as humble 25 this Chiid, &Fc. Sce the Notes before men- 
tioned, 


49 * And John anſwered and faid, Maſter, we ſaw one * Se? Num: 
caſting out devils in thy name, and we forbad him, becauſe £!- 25. 
he followeth not with us. | 

5o And Jeſus ſaid unto him, Forbid him not, for * he * Chap. 13. 
that is not againſt us is for us, 23- 

Mark taith farther, that Chriſt added, For there is n9 man which 
ſhall ds a miracle in my name, that can lightly ſpeak evil of me. Sce 
the Notes on Mark g. 38, 39. 


51 And it came to paſs, # when the time was come * yark 16. 
char he ſhould be received up, he ſtedfaſtly {er his face to 19. | 
g0 to Jerutalem, ACS I. 2 
From this to ver. 57. we have a piece of Hi$h5ry recorded by no 
other Evangeliſt but Luke; but is of great uſe to us, both to let us 
know, that our Saviour /aid down hy tife, n» man took it from him ; 
ard to let us ſee to what heighth Differences about Religion ordinart- 
ly ariſe, and what Intemperateneſs 1s often found, as to them, in the 
Spirits of the beſt of people, as alſo what the Will of our Grand 
Mattcr is, as to the Government <f our Spirits in ſuch cafes. The 
going up of our Saviour to Feruſal:m art this time, was his Jaſt Jour 
ney thither. When the time was come that he ſluld be taken up, 
& Ty ojanANpER mes nuipes f dyaniinles dvrs. That is, when 
the time was drawing nigh, when Chriit thould atcend up 1nto Hea- 
ven; ſo the Word is uſed Mark 16. ig. AGs 1. 11. 1 Tim. 3. 15. 
But why doth the Evangeliſt expreſsit thus? Why doth he nct lay. 
her he was to ſuffer, but sk:ppcth over his Death, and only racat: 
oneth his Aſcenſion, 1. That 1s included, Chriſt was firft to liifier, 
and then to enter into his Glory. 2. Chriſt's Death is called a {if ting 
up from the Earth, John 12. 32. 3. What if we. ſhould ſay that 
Chiſt's Death is thus expreſt;to let vs know that the Death of Chriſk 
was to him a thing that his Eye was not ſo much upon, as the Glory 
which hc 1ummediately was to enter into after ; ſo as he calls his very 
Death a taking up, as that which immediately preceded jt, thereby 
tzaching us to over-look Sufferings and Death, as not worthy to be 
named or inentioned, and to look only to that taking up into our 
Father's Glory, which is the portion of all Believers. When they 
dye, they are but tahen up from the Earth, and though our Bodics 
ſtill ſtay behind a while, Death having a power over us, yet of them 
alſo there ſhall be a taking up. Upon both which takings up our 
Eyes ſhould be ſo fixed, as to over-look all the Sufferings of this Lite 
as not worthy to be named. | He ſtedfaſtly ſet his Face fo go to jeru- 
ſalem.] Some think this was not our Saviour's laſt motion thither 
before his Paffion ; but then it would nor have been ſaid ggzowms 
EceuZa, be ſet his Face, or he confirmed his Face. He was now 1 
Galilee, Jeruſalem (that killed the Prophets_) was the place defigned 
for his Suffering 3 betwixt Galilee and Feruſalem lay Samaria, throug: 
which he was to paſs. ; 

52 And ſent meſſengers before his face, and they went, 
andentred into 2 village of che Samaritans to make ready 


for him. SS = | 
53 And they did not receive him, becaule his face was 


as though he would go to Jeruſalem. | 
The Land of Canaan was by Foſhua &ivided among ali the tweve 
Tribes of 1j7ael, as we read in the Book of Fojſhaa, chap. 14, 15, 19, 17. 
Sail, David, and Solomon (after the Death of 7oyþaa, the Judges, 
and Samet) ruled over them all z but Reho9oam the Son of Sofunr. 
following the Counſel of the young men, ten Tribes revoited fron: 
the Houte of David, 1 Kings 12. 17, 18» feroboam brought them tC 
Ie:latry, v. 25. ſetting up Calves at Dan and Bethel. So as that tnere 
was a prpetaal difference between the Jjraelites and thole that aGnc- 


d #7 


read to the Youſe of David, both vyon 4 Civel and Aftzgiohs AcCOUNFs 


f 7 FE” Pr” - ”- 6: \ E . S $ . bv NY j G ; V . 
PCH, (3519 IC 35 Wan dgprebended him more than Man,} as he d1d 
R { 


ay cz E 
4 6s, * 


by 
5 p l : : - 
$36 4 | iD 
F Bail 
ry . " F 
RE þ . 
: | - 
»v# ' - fb 3 : ? 
. |, : : 
% # L533 i p) : 
: : 
4 . 
+#6 
v1 7 . 
hd 9 ; mee s 
$1 : 1 
-- 277 : | £ 
z *1 »« ;: 0 
: : 
: . 
: : 
: 


Chap. IX. 


ws: 


51i And when he came into the houſe, he ſuffered no! 
man togoin, tave Peier, and James, and John, and the 
father and the mother &* the maiden. | 


52 Andall wep: and bewailed her, But he ſaid, Weep 


not, ſhe is not dead, * bur fleeperh. 
53 And they laughed him to ſcorn, knowing that ſhe 


was dead. 
54 And he put them all out, and took her by the hand, 
and called, laying, Niaid arile. : | 
55 And her {piric came again, and ſhe aroſe ſtraight- 
way : and he commanded to give her mear. 
6 And her parents were aſtoniſhed : But he charged 


them that they ſhould tell no man what was done. 

We had toth theſe picces of Hiſtory twice before relatcd by Mat- 
thew, Chap. 9. 18, and by Aurh. ch. s. from v. 22, with ſome fur- 
thr circumſtances. See the Notes on both thoſe Chapters. Chriſt, 
ve. 45. ſaying, Who touched me? And again, V. 45. me body hath 
touched me, fir I perceive that Virtue is g3n2 out of me, doth not 
argue that Chriſt knew not of the Womans coming and touching 
him, or did'not voluntarily ſend out that Virtue that healed her, far 
be any ſuch thoughts from any Pious intelligent Souls 3 ſhe was not 
healed by her rouch of the border o{ bis Garment, but by his Powerful 
il, commanding ſuch miraculous cff:& ; he only ſpake this to 
bring forth the Miracle into {ight, which was wrought ſecretly, fo 
as the Pcople tock no notice of it, /7-3ling Virtae went out of Chriſt 
upon an att of his 1777, not nece{ſu zl. Fiom v. 55. 15 confuted the 
Atheifia of thoſe who would mike the Soul tr be meerly the Craſts, 
or ſome aifetion of the Body, and it is proved to be a being that 
can ſubfift of it (cit, i a ſtate of ſeparation from the*Body. It 1: 
ſaid, Her Spirit returned 424;n;g not Cirift gave her a new Spirit. 
Chrift here did not exert a crvating Power, only ſent forth that 
Power with which he was clothed to +2j/> the Dead, For other things 
obſervable from-thiz ſtory, fre the Notes betore-mentioned upon the 
parallel Texts, 


CHAP. 

Chriſt ſeidins forth bu Diſciples t» | the Goſpel, giveth them 
power aver ei Spirits, und t9 heal the fick, i—6, Herod defirerh 
to foe Chriit, 7-9 The Apolles return with joy, 10. Chri/t 
feedeth tre thoafind Bon, with fiv? Loaves and two Fiſhes, 11—17. 


IA. 
, 


$i 3 2 
TP »£1 


Droers Otintons of the People concerns Cariſt, 13--21. He fore 
tellotl; bis Crucifixion and Reſurrection, 22, Exhorteth to confeſs 
ha by the benejus thas attend it. 23 27, Transfgureth him- 


FIF before three Diſciples, 28 —— 35. Ca$eth out an unclean Spi- 
rit, 27 Ti Telleth his Dijciples who ſhould be the greateſt amorg 
them, 45—qg%. Dehorteth them from forbidding any to coſt out 
Devils in his Nane, qo, <->. F7iirneying to Jeruſalem is refuſed by 
the Samarit.as, and revrov?.h vs Diſciples for their deſire of Re- 
vVenze, $I=-—62. | 


I Hei: he called his twelve diſciples together, and 
gave thera power ua authority over all devils, 
and to cure dileaſes, 

2 And he ſent them to preach the kingdom of God, 
and to heal rhe ſick. | | 

3 And te {aid unto them, Take'nothing for your jour- 
ney, nxicher ſtaves, nor ſcrip, neither bread, neither 
money ; neither have rwo cots aNece. 

4 And whatſoever houſe ye enter into, there abide, and 
thence depar:. 

5 And whoſoever will not receive you, when ye go 
out of that city, ſhake off the very duſt from your feet 
for ateſtimony againſt chem. | 

6 And ihey departed and went through the towns , 
preaching the goſpel, and healing every where. : 

We have heera cf the chuſrng of theſe twelve Diſciples and their 
Namcs, chop. 5. 123. ; Our Saviour choſe them to 'be 
with him, to lcarn gt kim, 2nd to be infiruted by him, and to be' 
Witneſſ-s of what he fait, and did ; after ſome time thus ſpent, he 
ſends tiiem forth to Preach the Goſpel, and giveth them a Power to 
contirm the Dottrine which they preached, by teveral miraculous 
operations, 27ztineyp takes no notice of their Elefin, only of their 
Miffem. Both AMarh and Lube take notice of both. The 3, 4, s, 5. 
Verſes, give vs an account of the inftrutions he gave them, we mer 
with them all berferc, and a more full account of them. See the 
Notes on Mat:h, 15. 1,2,3 7,8, 6, 10. and Mark 6. 9,8, 5. 

7 * Now Herod the tetrarch heard of all that was 
done by hm, and he was perplexed, becauſe that it was 
{aid of {ome, that John was riſen from the dead. 

8 And of tome, that Elias had appeared : and of others, 
that one of the old prophets was riſen again. 

9 And Herod ſaid, ſohn have I beheaded, but who is 
this of whom | hear ſuch things ? And he deſired to ſee 


At mb 5 , 
>E.t . T4 «ye I {fo 


him. | 
This Herd, wis 75nd Antipas the Tetrarch of Galilee, who had 
vehcaded Zovn the j*.jitf!, Fe heareth of theſe great things done by 


Chriit, and groper, Jaith the Evangelit; it is a Word that fignif- 
tif a great diſturbance, and perplexity of Mir:d, when a Man'1s in 
doubt and fear, and kngweth not what Countels to take or follow ; it 
28 vſcd, Cube 24.4. Ats 2. 12. As g. 24 As ro. 17. The other 
Evangeliſt ty. 7 Wmfclt gucetied it was 7ohn the Baptiſt, vhom 
he had bchcaded, Oh! the power of 4-guilty Conſcience 2 He had 
murdered 7oln, now he 17 afraid his Gb haunted him, or that 
his Soul was enircd inte anviter Body, that it might be revenged on 
PLn 3 overs groiicd virinvily. Herod knoweth not what to think; 
but Coltroth co. for Chritt, poly thit he might make up ſome 


”F, R 
Tir us 


FE TV A Et 


| him : 


| them to tell no man that thing, 


judgment about him, poſſivly out of meer curiofity, Pyr ws _ 
not that he did ſee kim, until Pilate feat him to him after h;5 ©. 
mination of him, L:ke 22. 8. CA 


10 * Andthe apoſtles when they were returned, told. 


* And he took them, ar qa, 
ul; 


him all that they had done. 
went aſide privately into a deſart place, belonging to rh, 
city called Bethſaida. , F 

11 And the people when they knew followed 
and he received them, and ſpake unto them g 
the kingdom of God, and healed them thar had need of 
healing, 

The Evangeliſts give us but a ſummary account of things, ws 74,4 
of the Miffion, or ſending out of the Apoſtles, v.1. Here we reag 
of their return and giving their Lord an account of their diſcharge of 
the truſt he had repoſed in them. Being returned, our Savigur 5. 
eth with them into a place near 'Bethſazda, not much inhavired, <. 
therefore called Deſart. He never wanted followers, nor :n livarr to 
reccive them, and to take all opportunities to do them yoog, "Mg 
followed him, he recetveth them, and Preacheth to them for the 59, 
of their Souls, and healeth thoſe amongſt them that were 6:5 +. 
teach us to joyn Spiritual with Bodily, and bodily with ſyirtqys 
Alms, Spiritual Alms, ſuch as inſtrutim, reproof, counſel, are x 
much better than thoſe that relieve only bodily wants, as the Sq! is 
better than the Body. Spiritual Alms, without bly relief, from 
ſuch as are able to give them, are fitteſt tor ſp:citual pectons ; 4-4 y 
ignorant People, that have no ſenſe of ſpiritual things, miſt by 111 
Children al'ur'd into a good opinion of the things and ways of 5,1 
by ſome bodily Charity, and fo taken by guile and enticed tg "_ 
Knowledge of God, 

12 And when the day began to wear away, then can; 
the rwelve, and faid unto him, Sena the multitude away, 
that they may go into the towns and country roy 
abour,: and lodge, and get victuals; for we are here in 
delarr place. 

13 Bur he ſaid unco them, Give ye them to eat. Ang 
they ſaid, - We have no more but five loaves and twy 
fithes ; except we ſhould go and buy meat for al] this 
people. 

14 For they were about five thouſand men. And he 
ſaid to his diſcipies, Make them fit down by fifties in 
company. 

15 And they did ſo, and made them all ſit down. 

16 Then he took the five loaves, and the two fiſhes, 
and looking up to heaven, he bleſſed them, and brake, 
and gave to the diciples to ſet before the multitude. 

17 And they did eat, and were all filled, and there 
was taken up of fragments that remained to them, twelve 


baskets, 


18 And 1t came to pals as he was alone praying, hi 
diſciples were with him - and he asked them, ſaying, 
* Whom {ay the people that Iam ? "" 

19 They anſwering, faid, * John the Baptiſt : but;y; 
ſome ſay, Elias : and others /ay, that one of the old pro- © 
phets 1s riſen again. 

20 He faid unto them, But whom fay. ye that I am? 
* Peter an{wering, ſaid, The Chrift of God. Fa 

21 And he ſtraightly charged them, and commanded 
+\ 


wn 


22 Saying, * The ſon of man muſt ſuffer many 
things, and be rejected of..the elders, and chief prieſts,” 
and ſcribes, 'and be lain, and be raifed the third 
day. . NS -6 

Matihew and Marb tetl us this diſcourſe paſſed at Ceſarea Philiry, 
Cor at Jeaft one of the ſame import) Matthew alfo gives us un ac: 
count of it with more circumſtances. See the Notes on Matthew 
15. 14. | As be was alone praying.) That is, free from the mult!- 
tude; for the next Words tell us; the Diſciples were with him. The 
22 v. is not to be found in the other Evangeliſts 3 and if Lule hath 
reported theſe Words in the right order of time, they afford us 4 
probable reaſon of what is v. 21. Why Chriſt would not yet be publiſh- 
ed, as the Chriſt, or the Son rf God. Becauſe he was to ſuffer, and it 
might much have ſhaken Peoples Faith, as to that Point, if they 14d 
ſcen the Perſon, whom they believed to be the Son of God, fuiler- 
ing ſuch things, and ſo deſpitefully uſed as he was; he therefzre 6: 
fired to be concealed as to that, until he ſhould be declare: to be 7! 
Son of God with Power, by his Reſurre&ion from the Dead. 


23 And he' ſaid to them all, If any man will come atte! 
me, let him deny himſelf, and'take up his croſs daily, and 


follow me. 


24. For whoſoever will fave his life, X ſhall lol? ic, b 
but whoſoever will loſe his life, for my fake, the 1am” 
ſhall fave it. : 


We have'met with theſe Words before, Matth. 15. 24, 25. X ** 
38, 35» Mark 3. 34, 35. See the Notes on thoſe places. 


- : wy tha V bots 
25 For what isa man advantaged, if he gain 62 
world, and loſe kimſelf, or be catt away * 
Sec the Netes 00 Matth, 15. 25. Muk 8 gv+ _— 


Cha LY 


” 


God ha 
v1z, t9 
tid b 
Peter e 
{cy h; 
that th 
A to hj 
Vtade, 
tiſtory 
baith 1 
If kno 
1s No 
ied by | 
ind the 
iv kim 
CINCcep 
Mts lve 


y:uCre 


9. + & 


nap I'X: 


” _ words, of him ſhall che ſon of man be aſhamed when 


ark 3. 38 he ſhall come in his own glory and 2 b4 fathers, and of 
T:1., 3- the holy angels. 

27 Bur | tell youof a truth, there be ſome ſtanding 
here which ſhall not taſte of death cill they ſee the king- 


dom of God. | 

Se the Notes on Matth. 16.28, Mark g.1. Luke ſeems here to 
have recorded ſeveral layings of our Saviuur, ſpoken not all at the 
14:1e FIC. 


23 And ir came to pals about eight days after theſe 
Io: 11's | fayings, he took Peter, and John, and James, and went 
up into a4 Mountatn to pray. 
29 And as he prayed, the faſhion of his countenance 
was altered, and his raiment was white and gliſtering. 
' 20 And behold, there talked with him rwo men, which 
were Moſes and Elias. 
31 Who appeared in glory, and ſpake of his deceaſe 
which he ſhould accompliſh ar Jerutalem, 
h:r..1? 32 But Peter, and they that vere with him, * were 
ic: 5- heavy with ſleep : and when they were awake, they ſaw 
his glory, and the two men that ftvod with him, 

33 And it came to pals, as they departed from him, 
Perer ſaid unro Jeſus, Maſter, it is good for us to be 
here ; and let us make three tabernacles, one for thee, 
and one for Moſes, and one for Elias, not Knowing what 
he ſaid, 

24 While he thus ſpake, there came a cloud and over- 
ſhadowed them : and they feared as they entred into the 
cloud. 

35 And there came a voice out of the cloud, ſaying, 

t317- + his is my beloved Son, hear him. 

36 And when the voice was paſt, Jeſus was found 
alone : and they kept zr cloſe, and told no man in thoſe 
days any of thoſe things which they had ſeen, 


See the Notes on Math. 17. 1, 2, 3. andoa Mirk g, 2, 


37 And it came to paſs, that on the next day, when 
they were come down from the hill, much people met 


hm. 

33 And behold, a man of the company cried out, ſay- 
ing, Maſter, I befeech thee look upon my fon, for he is 
mine only child. 

39 Andlo, a fpiric taketh him, and he ſuddenly crieth 


7 | our, andit teareth him, thar he fometh again, and brui- 
1 t fing him, hardly departeth frcm him, 

: 40 And | betoughr thgg/Hciples to caſt him out, and 
- they could nor 

1 41 And Jefus anſwering, faid, O faithleſs and perverſe 
BY 6 generation, how long ſhall I be with you, and ſuffer you ? 


bring thy fon hither. 

42 And as«he was yer a coming, the devil threw him 
down, and tare him ; and Jefus rebuked the unclean {pi- 
rit, and healed the child, and delivered him again to his 
facher. 

See the Nutes on Mutth, 17. 14. Miuk 9. 14+ 


n? 


| 43 And they were all amazed at the mighty power of 
any * God : bur while they wondred every one at all things 
which Jefus d:d, he fairh unto his diſciples, 

ll. 44 * Ler theſe ſayings ſink down into your ears, 
| for the fon of man ſhall be delivered into the hands of 


liph! men. 
gs ; 45 * Pur they underſtood not this ſaying, and ir was 
_ nia from them, that they perceived ir not; and they feared 
The &;-.to asK him of that ſaying. 
hath Of the Peoples Aſtoniinment and -Amazement at the ſight of 
| us 4 Chriſt's Miracles, we often hear much ; of their embracing him, as 
abLifh- their Saviour, and owning him as the Chriſt, we read little, Thus 
and it far many of them were comcz indeed the moſt (the Scribes and 
y had Phariſees, and Sadducees only excepted) believed Chriſt was a great 
ſuer- Priphet, a Man ſent of God : authorized by God to reveal his 
re de Will, and impowered from God to do many things which none but 
be th! God had 9rizinally a Power to do. Others were gone 4 ſtep farther, 
'1z. t9 believe not only that he was 2 Prophet, bat that Prophet fore- 
ew told by Jbſes, Deut. 18. 15. Fohn 8. 21, 45+ the Chriſt of God, as 
> GItel Peter expretied it, he that ſhould redeem Iſrael, Luke 24. 21s That 
and {cy had not a_truc Notion of the Meſſizs, either as to his Perſon, 
that the Divine and Humane Nature were united in his Perſon 3 or 
+ ic, * 3 to his Work , that it was not to redeem Iſrael from their bodily ſer- 
"ol _ Vitade, but from their Sins only, will appear to any from the wnole 


Hiſtory of the Goſpel. Nor indeed doth our Saviour haſten their 
| Faith in this Revelation, I mean, the perfefting and confirming of 
& 1% | It, knowing that it would be a areat ſhaking to their Faith in him in 
«11s Notion {and indeed as the Mzftas) to fee him fo ſhamefully abu- 
ied by the vileſt abje&ts of the People (as he was at his Paſſion.) 
ind then hanging upon the Crofs, and dying, until they ſhould alfo 
c him by his own Power riſen from the Dead, and beconfirmed 
concerning the truth of his -Refurretion, Where therefore ne ſaw 


,< Fot Ms tred of precious Faith ſpringing up, as it did it» Peter and divers 
| PU6KS, (95119 IC 35 Dann dfprehended him more then Man,)} as he did 


26 For * whoſoever ſhall be aſhamed of me and of 


} 8 _- Chap. IX. 


not diſcourage nor blame it, but highly commended it ; fo neither , 
d1d he pleaſe to ſtrengthen it, to as to put them out of ali doubt 4- 
bout it, and often charged them not to publiſh it abroad, and tends 
aiunſelf to prepare them againſt this great Obſtacle, which be ſav 
would be in their way, to wit, his ſufferings. This is the ſecond 
time new that in this Chapter we find him inculcatiny It. ard there 
was need of it, for the Evangelif telleth us, that they underſtood it 
mt, 1t was hidden from them. They couid eaſily undartiand tow an 
ordinary Prophe: might be delivered into the hangs of men ; but 22> 
the Meſſias, the Chri, that Prophet, he, of whom ſome of them te 
lieved that he was more than a meer Man, how he thou!ld be thus 
delivered, thus ſuffer, they could not underſtand ; and they ſaw 
Chriſt as to this point ſo reſerved and private, and forbidding the 


publication of it, that they feared to be too particular with him 
409ut 1t, 


45 Then there aroſe a reaſoning among them, which 
of them ſhould be greateſt. 


47 And Jeſus perceiving the thought of their heart, 
took a child, and ſer him by him. 

43 And faid unto them, Whoſoever ſhall receive this 
child in my name, receiveth me, and wholvever ſhall ce- 
celve me, recetveth him that ſent me, for he that is leaſt 
among you all, the ſame ſhall be grear. 

Sce the Notes on Matth. 18. 1. Mark 9. 33. This Paragraph ſhew- 
eth what need there was of the preceding Diſcourſe, that our Sav1- 
our ſhould prepare them with a preinforming them about his Suffer- 
ng; that when they ſaw it, their Faith in him, as the Methah. 
might not fail 3 for they were poſſeſſed with the common Notion of 
their Country, that the Meſſias ſhould deliver them from the Tem- 
poral Pretfures which they were under, and exerciſe a. Civil or Mili- 
tary {cular Power ; this made them think of places of Priority and 
Greatneſs, about which we often find them diſputing. Our Lore. 
to bring them off that falſe Notion of him and his Kingdom, he ta- 
keth a Child, and {-tteth him before them, and ſ:ith, Whyever ſha 
recetve t:)s Child, &e. What Labe ſaith, mutt be interpreted by 
what we had before in Matthew and Marh. This Child, that is, 
one that 15 as humble 2s this Chitd, &c. Sce the Notes before men» 
tioned, 


49 * And John anſwered and ſaid, Maſter, we ſaw one * Sc? Num. 
caſting out devils in thy name, and we forbad him, becauſe *!- 28- 
he followeth not with us. 

5o And Jeſus {aid unto him, Forbid him not, for * he * Chap. 13. 
that {s not againſt us is for us, | 23- 

Mark taith farther, that Chriſt added, For there s no man which 
ſhall ds a miracle in my name, that can lightly ſpeak evil of me.  Sce 
the Notes on Mark 9. 38, 39. 


51 And it came to paſs, # when the time was come * park 16. 
char he ſhould be received up, he ſtedfaftly {er his face to 19. 
0 to Jerutalem, ACts I, 2 
From this to ver. 87, we have a piece of Airy recorded by no 
other Evangeliſt but Lube; but is of great uſe to us, both to let us 
know, that our Saviour /aid down hy tife, n» man took it from him ; 
ard to let us ſee to what heighth Differences about Religion ordinart- 
ly ariſe, and what Intemperateneſs 1s often found, as to them, in the 
Spirits of the bcſt of people, as alſo what the Will of our Grand 
Mattcr 1s, as to the Government «<f our Spirits in ſuch cafes. The 
going up of our Saviour to Feruſalzm at this time, was his laſt Jour 
ney thither. When the time was come that he fuld be taken ap, 
&y Ty G2 fATANPBIR Tas Nutpd; F ayaninilies avs. TN Is, when 
the tune was drawing nigh, when Chritt thould atcend up 1nto Hea- 
ven; ſo the Word is uicd Mark 16. Ig. Ads 1. 11. 1 T7. 3. i5- 
But why doth the Evangeliſt expreſsit thus? Why doth he nct lay. 
her he was to ſuffer, but skippeth over his Death, and only ment: 
oneth his Aſcenſion, 1. Thai 1s included, Chriſt wzs tirft to iifier, 
and then to enter jnto his Glory. 2. Chriſt's Death is called a !ifting 
up from the Earth, John 12. 32. 3. What if we ſhould fay that 
Chiiſt's Death is thus expreſt,to let us know that the Death of Chriſk 
was to him a thing that his Eye was not ſo much upon, as the Glory 
which he 1mmedately was to enter into after ; ſo as he calls his very 
Death a taking up, as that which immediately preceded jt, thereby 
teaching us to over-look Sufferings and Death, as not worthy to be 
named or inentioned, and to look only to that taking up into our 
Father's Glory, which is the portion of all Believers. When they 
dye, they are but taken up from the Earth, and though our Bodics 
ſtill ſtay behind a while, Death having a power over us, yet of them 
alſo there ſhall be a taking up. Upon both which takings up our 
Eyes ſhould be ſo fixed, as to over-look all the Sufferings of this Lite 
as not worthy to be named. | He ſtedfaſtly ſet hy Face fo go to jeru- 
ſalem.] Some think this was not our Saviour's laft motion thither 
before his Paſſion 3 but then it would nor have been ſaid @pgzowmr 
Ereufe, be ſet his Face, or he confirmed bis Face. He was now 1n 
Galilee, Jeruſalem (that killed the Prophets_) was the place defigned 
for his Sufferigg 3 betwixt Galilee and Jeruſalem lay Samaria, througt: 
which he was to pats. ; 

52 And ſent meſſengers before his face, and they went, 
and entred into 2 village of che Samaritans to make ready 


for him, - Sy ; 
53 And they did not receive him, becaule his face was 


as though he would go to Jeruſalem. | 

The Land of Canaan was by Foſhua divided among al! the tweive 
Tribes of 1j7ael, as we read in the Book of Foſhua, chap. 14, 15, 19, 17. 
Sail, David, and Solomon (after the Death of Zyþaa, the Judges, 
and Samet) ruled over them all z but Rehoboam the Son of Solon: 
followinz the Counſel of the young men, ten Tribes revoited fron: 
the Houte of David, 1 Kings 12. 17, 18> feroboam brought them tc 
I:latry, v. 25. ſetting up Calves at Dan and Bethel. So as that there 
was 2 perpetual difference between the Jraelttes and thole that acnc- 
rec to the Youſe of David, both von a Cirel and Retygi9hs AcCONT: 


cy Gt - 
A 6a, * 


Im 159 68 
Ne 
* 


i 
Ly $ 
tt -f {inte | 
+% [87V + 3! 
99 0.44 1f MR: 16 
fa i; Fo ET 
] it ' Ns 1 | v3 CG 
"es; ['M ? Hh 6 
fla 14.4%) 1 . 
FS. 40084 2 C 
B# Wet 
'F: ? it 1 6 ; 
ih $ 


— IX "I 
_ - _ _ - _ Ln oy ”l 
+ T8 =». PR '. -- -_ 
PREY I 5 po cy 
"ts « py w— 
: Fc Cs dn i ke ,——_ rs —_—_ . 
eV Des, + L 
= — COR pe 
SETS rote => —_ E L, 
New _ - 
= i : — l "" Vas ry Si 
"—— 5 —— = 


Chap. IX. 


This hetd for about two hundred and fixty years. In the time of 
Itſhs2 their lait King, the Aing of Ajjv i, after a Siege of three 
years, takes Samariz their head City. Of this we have an account, 
2 Kinzs 17. 6. as alfo of thoſe Sins which had provoked God to give 
them up into iis hands. v. 24. of that Chapter, we read that thefiing 
of A4j]j1;2 brought men from B,bylon, Cuihah, Avah, Hamath, Se- 
pharcaim, and placed them in the Cities of Samaria, inſtead of the 
children of Ijrael ; he removed the moit of the Jews, v. 6. of that 
ckap. and placed them in Hal, and in Habor, by the River of Go- 
zan, ia the Cities of the Medes, Aftcr this there were ſeveral Mutati- 
ous in the Government of thoſe Countrics, We muſt not imagine 
that all the Jews were carried away, but the chief and principal men : 
and we read in that 17th chap. that a Piic/} was ſent back to inſtru 
the new Colonies how to worſhip the God of the Country 3 becauſe 
the Lyons infeiting them, they conceived their non-acquaintance with 
the methods of Worſhip ufed toward the God of that Country, was 
the cauſe of it, 2 Kings 17. 25, 275. But yet v 25. the people of the 
ſeveral Nations brought thither, worſhipped their ſeveral Idols, as 
may be rezd there : After this,about an hundred and fixty years,theſe 
Places came under the Dominion of Cyri@, who gave the Fews a li- 
berty to return; but it chietly concerned thoſe that belonged to the 
Kingdom of Judah ;, for we read Exra 1. 5. that they were the Fathers 
of Tuda, and Benjamin that roſe up to return. The Samaritans were 
their Enemies as to the Building of the Temple, Exra 4. 5: Afﬀter 
this, they fell under the Power, firſt of the Grecians, then of the 
Romans (under which they at this time were :) This old Feud, both 
upon the account of their former civil Difference, and their diffe- 
rence in Religion, ſtill held, ſo as there was a great Enmity (eſpect- 
ally occaſioned by their difference in Religion_) betwixt thoſe who 
belonged to the 7r4bes of Fadah, and Benjamin, and the Samaritans 
who were indeed Idolaters. The Jews (for ſo now were they only 
called who adhered to the Houſe of David ) had no dealings with 
them, John 4. g. tho it be the opinion of ſome, that there were com- 
mon C1yilities betwixt them, and that the rigidneſs lay on the Few- 
iſh part, rather than the Samaritans. Galilee lay beyond Samara, 
and it ſhould ſeem was more generally inhabited by Native Fews. 
The King of Ajſjria planted his Colomies (C1t 15 probable) more in 
that which was now more ſtrifaly called Samaria, which Jay in the 
Heart of the Land, which might be the reaſon that the Inhabitants 
of that part now called $.maria, were more abſurd and grofs in their 
Worſhip than the Inhabitants or Galzfee, amongſt whom Chriſt ſo 
long preached. From whence (as was before ſaid_) Chriſt going to 
Feruſalem to the Feaſt, was to paſs. The Samaritans refuſed to receive 
him, which ordinarily, it is ſaid, they did not to Paſſengers 3 but 
potſibly, their knowing that he was going to the Feaſt, was the cauſe, 
or his Attendants might be more than they liked. When we come 
to Fohn g. we thall hear more of the Religious differences betwixt the 
Fews, and the Samaritans. This is enough to have at preſent 
Noted. 

54 And when his diſciples James and John ſaw this, 
they ſaid, Lord, wilt thou that we command fire ro come 
down from heaven, and contume them even * as Elias 
did ? 

The Hiftory of Elrzs (to which the Diſciples refer) 1s doubtleſs 
that, 2 Kings 1. 10, where Elzx, not without direftion from God, 
called tor Fire from Heaven to deſtroy thoſe Captains and their Fif- 
ties, which the King ſenc to take him. 

55 Bur he turned, and rebuked them, and ſaid, Ye 
know not what manner of ſpirit ye are of. 

56 For * the fon of man is not come to deſtroy mens 
lives, bur to fave rhem. And they went to another 
village. - | | 

The term Sp;rit ſometimes f:gnifies the inward Motions, Propen- 
1:ons, and Inclinations of the Soul, influenced either from the holy 
Spirit of God, or from the Evil Spirit. So the Term is uſed 2 Tim. 
i. 7. You do not (ſail our Saviour) confider what kind of motions 
theſe are which you indulge your felves in. The Caſe of Eltas, and 
this Caſe, had threc remarkable Differences. 1. The People of 1/rael 
at that time had been in an Apoſtacy,but of few years (comparatively) 
to theſe Samaritans; they were fallen into it in the ſight of the true 
Worſhip of Ged at that time upheld in JFuda. They were not only 
ftiff in it, but the King ſends theſe Captains to apprehend Elzas, for 
declaring what God had commanded him to declare. Theſe Suma- 
7:tans were under the Prejudices of Antiquity and Preſcription for 
many hundreds of years. kiiſtories tell us, that the Samaritan Tem- 
ple, on Mount Gerazzim, builded in oppoſition to the Temple at Feru- 


Salem, was builded by one Sanballat, Darius's Governour in thoſe 


parts, to be revenged on the Fews, for turning his Son-in-law Ma- 
naſſe trom the Prictthood at Feruſalem z which if it be true, the Sa- 
maritans had been fixed now in their falſe Worſhip more than five 
hundred years. Nor were theſe that we read of, any of the Heads 
and Rulers, but probably ordinary Country People, rooted fo long 
?n this corrupt way, and doing this in Zeal to their own Temple on 
Mount Gerazz7n, and fo inclined to ſhew no favour to thoſe who in 
any Devotion were going to the oppoſite Temple. Chriſt pitieth 
thcm under theſe Prejudices; and tho' he doth not approve of their 
Worlh:p, yet he did not think- that the way to change their minds, 
was to call for Fire from Heaven againſt them, nor would he be fo 
levere agatnft them. It 15 not the Will of God, that we ſhould ap- 
prove of any corrupt Worſhip, and joyn with thoſe that uſe it, but 
neither 15 1t his Will, that we ſhould by Fire and Sword go about to 
luppreſs it, and bring Men off from it. Antiquity, or the Prad#ice 
of or Forefathers, 1s no ſufficient Plea to juſtific any Worſhip. (It 
was the Samaritans Plea, Fohn 4. 29.) but yet where any ſuch pre- 
zudice againſt the Truth 1s, 1t calleth to us for mild and gentle Beha- 
viour towards ſuch*as are under thoſe diſadvantages for the receiving 
of the Truth. 2. But Secondly, there was a difference in the Call 
9 Eltas. He was an extraordinary Prophet, who did nothing of this 
nature but by an immediate Impulſe and Dire&ion ; ſo as what he 
did was in Zeal for God, guided by a Knowledge of the Will of God. 
the Diſciples had no ſuch Call. 3. The Times differed ; Elias aR- 


<q under the Legal Diſpenſation, which was more ſevere 53 They 


L'LTUVULIE. 


” 
Chan 
were under the more mild and gentle Difpenſation of the cr... 
And in this Queſtion they did but indulge their Paitions _ = 
deſire of Revenge : therefore (ſaith our Saviour } 7,y ——_ 
what manner of Spirit you are of, Our Saviour Jets then, 70 of 
that they were under a more mild and gent:c Ditpentation by ” - 
pounding his own Example. | The fon of man (ſaith he) "0 j . , 
deſtroy mens lives, but to ſave. | The term trantiated 1 j4, "a og 
alſo Souls ; but if we conſider the Apoſlle's Queſtion, which "ig 
whether they ſhould call for fire from heaven, to detiroy he $6” 
but to deftroy them as to their Lives here, it will well nov) WP, 
fie our Tranllator's rendering it in this place Lives. Yau (7. ra 
our Saviour, by my mealing the fick, raiſing the dead, toc. tr; Sowa 
bufinels is not to make my Miailtry ungrateful to Men *, my 
ways prejudicing them in their outward Concerns, 1f jr Aa 
trantlated Souls, 1t 15 yet a great Truth. Chriſt came not tg "Vn 
Mens Souls, but to bring the means of Salvation and Etern, = 
pinels ; if they rezed theſe, and perith, their Deſtruttivn ofthe. 
{clves, ; Et 
57 And it came to pals, that as they went in the wy 
a certain man ſaid unto him, Lord, I will follow this 
whitherſoever thou goelt. 
58 And Jeſus ſaid unto him, Foxes have holes, gig 
birds of the air have nelts, but the Son of man hath ng; 


where to lay ht: head. 

Matthew ſauth, this man was 4 Scribe. See the Notes on Matt. 
8. 19. Let thoſe who have ſtately houſes, and think them worth 51g. 
rying in, or that they are things fit for Men to value themlclves uy. 
on, dcſpiſing their poor Brethren that want ſuch Accommodation: 
of this Lite, digeſt this Text. 

59 And he ſaid unto another, Follow me : But he lad, 
Lord {uffer me firſt to go and bury my father. 

60 Jelus ſaid unto him, Let the dead bury their dead, 
but go thou and preach the kingdom of God. 

See the Notes on Matth. 8. 21. How free 1s Divine Grace ? Th; 
Scribe offers to follow Chriſt. Chriſt encourageth him uct, 7 
another that made no ſuch offer, he firſt ſpeaketh, ſaying, Fol n; 
and will admit of no Excuſe. 

61 And another allo faid, Lord, I will follow thee, 
buc let me firſt go bid them farewel, which are at hong 


at my houle. 

62 And Jeſus faid unto him, No man having put his 
hand to the plough, and looking back, is fit for the king- 
dom of God, 


Matthew (who mentioned the other two) mentioneth not this 
thicd perſon. Some doubt whether we well Tranſlate theſe Words 
SmorelZacn mais 6:5 F oixoy pas, bid them at my houſe farewel. 0r 
whether it were not better Tranſlated, to order the things or priſms 
relating to my houſe. Let it be 'Trantlated either way, it {i;-ihe a 
too much Worldlineſs of mind in this Diſciple, which our Swwwur 
checketh in the next Words, ſaying, No man having put his hand to 
the plough, and looking back. eig 7x «mow to the things behind, s {# 
for the Kingdom of God, Some think it 1s an alluſion to the Story of 
Eliſha's Call, 1 Kings 19. 19. Elijah paſſing by him ploughing vit) 
twelve Yoke of Oxen before him, i. he with the twelfth, Cat is 
mantle upon him. And he left the Ox and ran after Elijah, and ſaid, 
Let me, I pray thee, kijs my father and mother, and then TI will jillw 
thee. Be that as it wall, here is a plain alluſion to the work & 4 
plough-man, and a comparing of a Miniſter of the Goſpel in [vs 
Duty, with the plough-man in his Work. The Plough» man 15 001- 
ged to look forward to his Work, or he will nevergraw his Furrows 
either ſtrait enough, or of a juſt depth 3 {© muſt a Miniſter of the 
Goſpel,if he be once called out of ſecular Employments to the ſervice 
of God in the Miniſtry, he is bound to mind and attend that ; that! 


enough to take up the whole Man, Wo whole Strength and T:me; 


he had need of no other things to nitAdjor look after 3 the things 0t 
the World are things behind hum : not that God debarrcth his Mint- 
ſters (in caſe of Exigence) to work for their Ercad with their 
hands, as Paul did ; but they ought not , without apparent neceſſity, 
to intangle theniſelyes with the things of this Life, ſo as to mus 


them their butigeſs, 


CHAP. X. 


Chriſt ſending his Diſciples to preach, inſtrueth them concerping thet 
Fourney, 1—12, Threatneth certain Cities with heavy Judg1.0ns 
for their Impenitency, 13—16. + The Seventy return Tejojcing - 
what they through Chriſt's name had done, 179—20. He retuinen® 
thanks to bis Father, 21— 24. Anſgereth the Lawyer 5 Quejiion 3 
teacheth him what he muſt do to inherit life eternal, 2 5— 28. 
leth him who is his Neighbour, by a ſumilitude of @ man falling M's 
Thieves, and relieved by 4 Samaritan, 29—37- and being entertalle 
by Mary and Martha, preferreth Mary's Piety before Martha 5 ae 
fulneſs, 38—g2. | 

I Frer theſe things, the Lord appointed other ie 

venty alſo, and ſent them two and two _ 
his face into every ciry and place , whither he himtcti 


would come. b 
We heard before of @hriſt's firſt Fleding, then tending out _ '% 
ch. 6. 12,13, 14. andch. g. wv. 1, 2, 3. and v.10. We heard ol _ 
Return, and giving an account ot their truft to their Lord 5. " ” 
their particular Account was, we no where read, but it W4> 7 
our Saviour judged, the Harveſt too great for the hands of the 
bourers. He therefore now rcſolveth to ſend out Seven) wa 
The Names of theſe we have not in the Evangeliſt, only 14: C Ir 
ſent them out, and that he ſent them #wo by two, which might be m 
their better mutual Afiſtance each of other, and alſo for thetr —_— 
Teſtimeny one for another. When God ſent out the wy _ 
Rors and Governours of his people, he ſent two, Moſes an | o__ 
Fohn Baptist ſent two of h1s Diſciples to Chriſt ; Chrilt, £2. 32 3 


? T6513 fo) 
. ASS : TS 21 IECNIE LL © 
fent two of his Piſciples to prepare the Pallover, Therc cc be 


( 


Debay 
Such 
Comp 
the F, 
Of, an 
ficmſ, 
Ng 80 


PD, 
aes th 


het 
«ens 
2 at 
net h 
tion 5 

Tel- 
am, 
rained 

(ait- 


r le- 
efore 
mlcti 


wilt 
{ thiets 
what 
1ch 43 
he La 
more- 
Chriit 
he fol 
nucull 
"Ondu- 
Aero 1 
«22+ bo 


r?3 {9 
11S - 


1c 


:s, 2 Therefore {aid he unto them, * The harveſt truly 
&e! 3-55 great, but the labourers are few, * pray ye therefore 


68, 4 * Carry neither purſe, nor ſcrip, nor ſhooes, and 


tio. 7 * And inthe t5me houſe remain, eating and drink- 


FI: 16 But into whatſoever city you enter, and they re- 


'* 11 *Even the very duſt of your city which cleaveth 
? $+.0n vs, we do wipe off ag-inſt you; notwithſtanding be 


p X. 


athing myiterious in this. Man is a Sociable Creature, and it is 
ood for him to be alone ; we cannot deterinine that our Saviour 
12d any regard t0 the numvers of Twelve and Seventy ; though it 1s 
certain that both thoſe numbers arr-Opglt the Jews ſeem to have had 
a more tan ordinary Charatter, Twelve being the pumber of the 
Tribes of Jjraet, Gen. 4c. 28, in Elm they found Iwelve Wells of Wa- 
ter 5 according to the numoer of the Trives, were the Twelve P1l- 
Jars, Exod. 24+ 4 and the Twelve Stones in the Breaſt-plate of Fudg- 
nent, E£x0d- 28. 21. and the number of the Cakes for the Shew-bread 
was to be Twelve, Levit. 24. 5. The trinces of Jrael were Twelve, 
Num. I: 44* and Twelve Men were {cnt to ſpy out the Land of Ca- 
naar, Deut- 1+ 25: So we ſhall obſerve, that na multitude of things 
they kept f0 the r-1mber of Tweive.; fon, 1n his deſcription of the 
New Jeruſalem, which he ſaw in his Viſlon, ſavs Rev. 21. 12. it 

had Twelve Gates, ard at the Gates Twelve 4ngels, and on the Gates 
were the Names of the Twelve Tribes,atid the Wall had T; welve Foun- 
dations, &- And for the number of Seventy ; Facob's Family,when 
they went down into Egypt, were Seventy Souls, Gen. 46. 27. They 

mourned for 7acob Seventy days, Gen. 50. 3. At Elinrthey met with 

Seventy Palin Trees, Numb. 3 2. $- The poſterity of Zacob was 1n 

Babylon Seventy Years. The Je Win Sanhedrim, or great Courtcho- 
{cn upon the Advice of Zethro, is ſaid to have connited firſt of Se- 

venty, then of Seventy-two Perfons. So as the numbers of Twelve 

and Seventy ſeem to have been Numbers to which the Jews had ſome 

reſpett. Whether our Saviour, 1n the Choice of thoſe whom he 

6rſt ſ.nt to Preach the Goſpel, nad any retpe or no to the Jewiſh 

Value for thoſe Numbers ; or deiipned by it toſhew them, that he 

was about to ſet up 4 new Kingdom and Government, which though 

differing Tom what they had exerciſcd formerly, yet in ſome lit- 

tle things ſhould nave ſine conformity to them, we cannot dcter- 

mine, We ſhall find the ſame Powers and Authority given to theſe 

Seventy as tO the Twelve, and the fame Injtra&ions , how ſome come 

to imagine a difference of Order betwist them I cannot tell,no ſuch 

thing appeareth from the Inſtrutions given che one or the other 

upon their tirſt ſending out, 


ben 
nets 


the Lord of the harveſt, that he would fend forth la- 
bourers into his harvelt. 

See the Notes on Matth. g. 35. where theſe Words are put im- 
mediately before the ſending out of tne Twe,ve Both the Twelve 
and the Seventy, all that Chriſt ever ſent out, were to be Labourers 
in the L»rd's Harveſt, 

3 Go your ways, Pehold, I ſend ye forth as lambs 
amongſt wolves. 


flute no man by the way. 

We met with theſe Inftructions before, arid opened them in cur 
Notes on Matth. xo 5G. and 16. only thcre we had not theſe words, 
and ſalute n> man by the waz, The meauing of that 15 no more, 
than make all poſſible fpced, 2 Kines 4. 29. 

5 And Into whatſoever houſe ye enter, firſt ſay, 
Peace be to this houſe. 

6 And if the fon of peace be there, your peace ſhall 
reſt zpon it, if not, it ſhall turn to you again. 


ing fich things as © i:£y give, for the ® labourer is wor- 
thy of his hire. Go nct {rom houſe to houſe. 
If, ee the Nutes on MHa'tth, 10. i1.and on Mark 6. 10, 11. The In- 
ſiufions, as tothe ſuvſtance ot tnem, are the ſame here and thete, 
though a jittie differing 1h the Terius, 

8 And into whartſgever city ye enter, and they re- 
ceive you, eat ſuch Mings as are ſet beiore you. 

9 And heal the fick that are thetein, and ſay unto 
3: them, * The kingdom of God is come nigh unto you. 


ceive you not, go'your ways Our into the ſtreets of the 
lame, and ſay; 


 yeſwe of this, that the Kingdom of God 1s come nigh 
unto you. 
12 ButI fay unto you, it ſhall be more tolerable in 
that day for Socom than for thar city. 


We have met with the ſame Inſtrutions before 1n Matthew and 
Marb. Sce the Notes on Matt!. 10. 11, 14. and Mark 6. 10, 12. 
there is ſome difference in Words. Matthew ſaith, Enquire who 1n 
the City s worthy, and wv. 13. If the bouſe be worthy. Luke faith, 
I the ſon of po.cce be there 3 they both mean the ſame thing. If there 
beany in it rthut Lelongs to God 5s Eleftion of Grace,any whom God 
tended by vou to call, and make partakers of the Yeice of the Goſ- 
pel. For othicr thivgs relaring to the opening of the Words, ſee the 
Notes before mentioned. Only we may from hence obſerve for our 
Inftrution, 1. That it is the Will of Chriſt, that his Mimiftzrs ſhould 
not be too follicirous for a Livelihood. As the Labourer is worthy 
of his lire, fo he that ſends them into his Hirveſt will ſee they ſhall 
be fed. Let rl;cw louk to their Calling,and to the fulfilling of their 
Minifiry, God wilt fee they ſhail be fed. 2. That the Society of 
Miniſters of te Gofſp-l in Cities and Bovſcs ſhould not be with 
Debauchees, but with thofe that are woith»,ſo far as Man can judge 3 
Such as are their Maſters, Friends, and Servants, ſhould he their | 
Companions. 2. Thott are mett worthy in places, amongſt whom 
the Son of Peace 1s , Men and Women that have the moſt Knowledge 
of, and Cove for Chiift. 4g. The Miniſters of Chriſt ought to carry 
ficmſelves with alfiaropingttc Cavility, withing good to all, and do- 
ng good to all, &. Chit s Miniſters ought not to make their Bel- 
nes their God. ol, fo 


AQ. *-- 


S. LUKE: 


| have a promiſe, that bcing refitted, he ſhall flee from them. 


Chap. X. 
2 Divine Licenſe to take and uſe for their Neceſſities ſuch things -25 
men give them. 7. Chriſt expects that his People ſhould maintain 
his Miniſters, not depriving the Labourers of their hire, nor uz 
zlinz the mouths of the Oxen that tread out the Corn, 1 Cor: go 9 1c. 
nor preferring their Servants for their worldly cccafions before ſuch 
as labour for their Sou s, ard in that Work are God's Mefſengers ts 
them ard his Servants in the tirtt place, though employcd in watch- 
ing for Peoples Souls. 8. [ſhenot giving a Livelihood to Miniſters, 
is a not receiving them, 7, ce. that 15, provided the People be able. 
% People by not rece:ving the Goſpel of Peace brought them by 
faithful Miniſters, ſhall do them no hurt, their Peace ſhall return un- 
to them, ; They ſhall be a ſweet ſavaur unto God, even as to them 
that periſh. Their Judgment is with the Lord, and their Work with 
their God, though they /abour in vain, though Iſrael be ny: zathered 
they ſhall be glorified. Men proportion their Rewards according to 
Succeſſes of Servants ; God more juſtly proportioneth his Rewards 
to Mens Sincerity and Diligence in their Labour. 10. If men refuye 
the Goſpel,yet they ſhall know the Kinzdom of God is come nizh unt» them. 
If they will not be ſubjef to his Kingdom of Grace, yet they thall te 
lu>dued by the Kingdom of his Power and Juſtice. 11. There will 
come 4 day when Men that have the Offers of the Goſpel and Peace 
and refuſe them, {lighting and deſpiſing his Miniſters and their Mef. 
ſage, will find, that they had better have lived in S227 when it 
was burnt with Fire and Brimſtoue. Their portion of Wrath in the 
day of Judgment will be larger and bitterer than the Portion of the 
Men of Sodom. Let all who live in our days hear and fear, and in 
time break off their Sins by a true Repentance, leſt they go to Hell 
at the higheſt diſadvantage. 


13 Wounto thee Chorazin, wo unto thee Bethſai- 
da; for if the mighty works had been done in Tyre 
and Sidon which have been done in you, they had a 


hon while ago repented, ſitting in ſackcloth -and 
alhes. 


14 But it ſhall be more tolerable for Tyre and Sidon 
at the judgment, than for you. 
15 And thou Capernaum, which art exalted to hea- 


ven, ſhalt be thruſt down to hell. | 
See the Notes on Matth. 11. 21. 


16 * He that heareth you heareth me, and he that * john 13. 
deſpiſeth you deſpiſeth me : and * he that deſpiſeth me 29 
deſpiſeth him that ſent me. * 1 Thell: 


See the Notes on Matth, 10, 40. 4» 8. 


17 And the leventy returned again with joy, ſaying, 
Lord, even the devils are ſubject unto us through thy 
name. 

As we before read of the Twelve coming back to give Chriſt an 
account of their Succeſs, ſo we here havethe ſame of the Seventy z 
whetier this Joy of the Seventy was more Carnal than it ought, 
they rather rejuycing in that new Power which they had received 
from Chriſt, than 1n the Demonſtration of Chriſts Divine Power, 
and the Confirmation of the Dottrine of the Goſpel by theſe mira- 
culous Operations, is hard to determine ; for though Chriſts reply 
ſeemeth to have a Check 1n it, vet it is ſo qualified by the Term Ra- 
ther, v. 20, that we cannot from t...1ce abſolutely. conclude any 
ſuch thing fronr it, Here 1s a ditference to be obſerved betwixt 
Chrifts aud his Diſciples caſting out of Devils, Chriſt did it in his 
2wn name, by his own Word of Command, Power and Authority ; 
the Diſciples did it in Chriſt's Name, and by a Power and Authori- 
ty derived from him. 


13 And he faid unto them, I beheld Satan as Light- 


ning fall from heaven. 

Lightning comes ſuddenly, and with Thunder. The Thunder of 
the Goſpel brought down the Devil as Lightning z anc indeed this 1s 
obfcrvable, the Devil is ſo butie in no places where the Goſpel pre- 
vails, as 1n places where that joyful Sound is not come; whether we 
conſider kis Power with reference to mens Bodies or Souls. This is 
one general advantage of Goſpel-preaching, the Devil will not en- 
dure the ſound of it, ſoas to impoſe upon mankind at that rate 
which he doth upon 1gnorant perſons that are Heathens, or oniy 
differing from them in chat they are Baptized, and call themſelves 
Chriſtians. Chriſt ſaw thi, as God, for the Devil 1s not viſible to 
humane Senſes, as neither are any Spirits z which ſhewed the Iarpu- 
dence of that Popiſh Impotor in Germany, who ſelling Indulgences 
(by which he pretended Souls were delivered from Purgatory) call'd 
to the people to look up and ſee them fly away. But Chriſt could 
ſee it as God, for he certainly knew that it would be, and that it 
already was the bleſſed effect of the Goſpel. 


i9 Behold, *I give unto you power to tread on ſer- * Mar. i. 
pents and ſcorpions, and over all the power of the **: 


enemy, and nothing ſhall by any means hurt you. 

Chriſt doth here, 1. Confirm the power before given to theſe Se- 
venty for working Miracles,that they might not think thar it ceaſed 
upon the determination of the firſt Miſſion. 2. He confirmeth 
his promiſe to them for his preſence with them, and proteCtion of 
them. Interpreters think here is a manifeſt Allufſion to Pſal. 91.13; 
Thaw ſhalt tread upon the Lyon, and Adder, the young Lyon, and Aa- 
der, thau ſhalt trample under thy feet. Which muſt be underſtood 
figuratively, the Senſe being, that nothing ſhould hurt them. This 
promiſe was more ſpecially verited for ſome years in God's prote- 
&ion of the firſt Miniſters of the Goſpel until they had done their 
work 3 and ſhall be fulfilled in a Senſe to the end of the World, 
according to the promiſe in Pſal. g1. Nothing ſhall hurt their Souls 
as to the favour of God, and their Eternal Happineſs, nor their Bo- 
dies ſo far forth as, or fo long as, God in his Wiſdom ſhall.judge 
fit. They have a farther power alfo given them more- common tc 
21] the Miniſters of the Gotpel ſent by Chriſt, yea, and toall Chrifti- 
ans. They have a power over all the power of the Enemy. God will 
not be wanting to them in a power to reſiſt the Devil z and they 


& thinzs as are ſet befuie you, 6, They have 
K7h "Te | 


CTtt] 20 Not- 


Chap. X. 9, L 
; 20 Notwithſtanding in this rejoyce not, that the 
ſpirits are ſubject unto you, bur rather rejoyce, be- 
* Exod. 32. cauſe * your names are written 10 heaven. 
32. It is an uſual thing in Holy Writ, to have Prohivitions delivered 
Iſa. 4. 3- in Generaj Terms, which muſt be underſtood in a reſtrained Senſe. 
Dan. 12+ + That it is ſo here, appcareth plainly by the Word Rather, prefixed 
Phil. 4. 3+ to Rejayce, in the latter part of the Sentence. For it was doubtleſs 
> juſt cauſe of Joy ard Rejoycing to tnem,that Chriſt had houvoured 


tem with Juch an extra>rdinary Gift and Power, bet not of fo muct | 


Foz. as to know that treir Names were wrote inthe Book of Life 3 
for a: the good was intinitely greater, ſoa proportionabie Joy was 
requi:/1*e upon the atturance of 1t. The Expreſſion w1itten zn Peaven, 
js equ.y2{cnt to the be:ng wrote 7n the byyk of Life, whereby 18 fign- 
fied, citi» r the certain Detignarion ct ſome to ctcrnal Life, or effe- 
cual Calli.'-. Weread of this book of Life, Rev. 3. 5. and 2Ce12. 
Is. and 21. 7. 29. and 22. 19. it iscail:d the Lamos buok, Rev. 13.8» 
and it js faid 1t i. Whierten from the fund ation of the world, which 
will juttifie thoſe © -ines who underftand it of a particular ElecF;on 
from Eternity, V/hereas ©: 55 objeded thit when amongſt the Twelve 
there was a $9n of Perditzon, * i< unreaſon2ble to think that all the 
Seventy were cle Veiſc!s, It i477 aniwercd, that our Saviour's 
words were true according to the uu: 77 2 > caking, 1f the 
generality of them only were ſuch.Nor nced out £44001 be under- 
{tocd as afſerting, all their Names were {o writt.n, but only allect- 
ing the greateſt cauſe of Joy to be, if men can by their Calling find 
that their Elc&ion is ſure. From our Saviours words we mav 1nfcr, 
I. That there is a Boob of Life, an Elettion of Grace. 2. That there 
are Names wriiten in this Book, it is an Ele@Qion of Perſons, 3. That 
Men may hnow that their Names are written in that Byyl otherwiſe 
they could not rejoyce : no man rejoyceth, but in a good with 
which he hath ſome degree of Union. 4. That this 1s a greater 
cauſe of Joy, than for a Man to know that he hath a Power to caſt 
out Devils, Men may be made uſe of to caſt out cevils in Chriſt's 
Name, who yet may go to the Devil at laſt, Matth. 7, 22. Socan- 
not thoſe whoſe Names are wri:ten in the b5oÞ of Life. But I cannor 
underſtand that ourSaviour in theſe words afferts that all theNames 
of the Seventy were wrote in that book. The tendency of his Diſ 
courſe is rather to quicken them to give al! diligeace to make ſure 
of this cauſe of Joy, and Rejoycing. 
21 In that hour Jeſus rejoyced in ſpirit, and faid, 
I thank thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, 
that thou haſt hid theſe things from the wiſe and pru- 
dent, and haſt revealed them unto babes : even ſo, Fa- 
ther, for ſo it ſeemed good in thy light. 
22 Allthings are delivered to me of my Father, and 
* Mat. 22.no * man knoweth who the Son is, bur the Father, 
18. and who the Father 1s, but the Son, * and he to whom 
John 3. 35, . 
the Son will reveal him. 


* John 6, | 
41> 40» See the Notes on Mat. 11. 25, 27. where we met with theſe 
words of our Saviour. 


23 And he turned him unto his diſciples, and ſaid 
privately, Bleſied are the eyes which ſee the things 
that ye lee, 

24 For 1 tell you, that * many prophets and kings 
have delired to fee thoſe things Which ye ſee,and have 
not {een them, and to hear thoſe things which ye hear, 


and have not heard chem, 
Sce the Notes on Mat. 13. 16,17. 


25 Ard behold a certain lawyer ftood up, and 
tempted him, ſaying, Maſter, what ſhallI do to inherit 
eternal life ? | 

26 He ſaid unto him, What is written in the law ? 
how readeft thou. 

27 And he anſwering, ſaid, * Thou ſhalt love the 
Lord thy God With all thy heart, and with all thy 
ſoul, and with all thy ſtrength, and with all thy 
* Lev. 19. mind ; and * thy neighbour as thy ſelf. 
hy 28 And he ſaid unto him, Thou haſt anſwered right - 
* Lev.12.s. this do, and * thou ſhalt live. 


Ezek. 20. Theſe four Verſes would incline one to think that Lube here re- 

TI, 13» cords the ſame picce of Hiſtory, which we met with Matth, 22. 35. 
and Mark 12. 28. (See the Notes on both thoſe Texts,) but neither 
of thoſe Evangelifts have the foliowing part of this Diſcourſe;which 
makes me doubtful whether Lube ſpeaks of the ſame Perſon coming 
to Chriſt which the others mention, A Lawyer he was, who came 
to our Saviour upon a deſign to Tempt, that is, to make a tryal of 
him whether he would deliver any Doftrine contrary to the Law of 
Moſes, It is plain, that he fancied that the Eternal life which Chritt 
preached was to be obtained by doing what the Law required, Our 
Saviour agrecth it, that if he did what the Law required, according 
as ke himſelt had given an account of it, he ſhould live, I apprehend 
no ad{urdity, to attirm that our Saviour ſpeaks here of living Eter- 
nally, Its rather abſurd to fancy, that our Saviour did not anſwer 
ad idem to the thing about which the Queſtion was propounded. 
Neither 1s Salvation impoſſible, becauſe the Law in it ſelf could not 
give Life, but becauſe of fe weabneſs of our Fleſh, ſo as we cannot 
fall it, So that conſidering our intirmity, the Law ſerveth to us 
only as a Schn1lrnaſter to bring us to Chrift, and as a Mark which we 
ought to ſhoot ar, though we cannot ſhoot home 3a rule to direR us 
in our duty, though we cannot perform or fulfil it. 

29 Bit he willing to juſtifie himflf,, faid unto Jeſus, 
And who is my neighbour ? 
This Lawyer's Befire to juſtifie himſelf, ſpake him an Hypocrite. 

The reafon of that Queſtion Ii» 7s my Neighlmur, was the Notion 
of the Nejzhb:zur (mentioned in the Law) which the Scribes and 


Fx Pet.1.10. 


* Deut. 6. s. 


templation, and that this was that good part Mary had co9/en. 


V Kk E 


and Benefaors, at leaſt none but thoſe that were of thcir-o%. N 
tion or particular Scct, and had taught their People tliat the, __ vet 
hate their Enemies. Our Saviour (this being but 2 21 e A 
ſtion contidering the received Interpretation amongſt ” on 
Lai of God,) doth not think fit to anſwer his Queſtion dirc@]\ ws 

i telling hima ſtory, maketh him anſwer himſelf, ASE har 


i 30 And Jeſus anſwering, ſaid, A certain man Went 


down from Jeruſalem to Jericho,and fel] among thieves 
Þ] 


which ſtripped him of his raiment, and 

aud departed, leaving -imhalf dead. 27 

| , 3 1 And by _— _ came down a certain prieſt 

'That way, and when be ſaw him, he pa 

other kde -2 Sean _ "= 
32 And likewiſe a Levite when he was at the Place 

_—_ and looked on him, and paſled by On the other 

&. 

33 But a certain Samaritane, as he journeyed, came 
where he was, and when he ſaw him, he had comPaſtion 
on him. 

34 And went to him, and bound up his woungs 
pouring in oy] and wine, and ſet him on his own 
beaſt, and brought him to an inn; and took care of him, 


to him, Take care of him ; and whatſoever thou {peng- 
eſt more, when | come againlI will repay thee. 

36 Which now of theſe three, thickeſt chou, wa; 
neighbour unto him chat fell amons the thieves ? 

57 And he ſaid, He that ſhewed mercy on him, 


Then {aid Jeſus unro him, Go, and do thou likewi& 
:T 15 Cerraiu. that the Principal Scope of our Saviour in this Hiſtory 
:2r Parable, was to convince the Lawyer, that every one is our Ne? 
bour to whom God offered us an opportunity of doing good, whetiier he te 

of our Nation or R.ligion, yea or no. ' Every objed of our Merc 
| 1s Our Net;hbour, whom God requireth us to love as our ſelves; thy 
was quite contrary to the common Dottrine of the Sc1ibes and Plz. 
, riſees, interpreting the Law, Thou ſhalt love thy Neighbs ur as thy fel, 
and excellently ſerved our Saviour's defign, to thew this Lawyer thit 
he underſtood not, much leſs obſervea the Law of God in thit mn. 
ner as that he could juſtifie himſelt from the Violation of it. He 11. 
fo by the by ſheweth him, that the Samaritans, whom the Tews ſy 
much abhorred, better underſtood the Law of God than the 1:1. 
Heal Guides of thoſe times, who yet pretended to be Teachers fir 
co others 3 for ſome of them by the Light of Nature diſcerned then. 
ſelves obliged to do good to every one that ſtood in need of their 
aelp; or if not by the Light of Nature, yet by the Light of Rew2/;. 
tion in the Law of Moſes ;, but the Scribes and Phariſees by ter falle 
[nterpretation of the Divine Law, had taught People to oniit preat 
part of their Duty required by it,and ſo could not hope to be juſii- 
ed or to obtain eternal Life and Salvation from the obſervation oft 


38 Now it came to paſs, as they went, that heen: 


tred intoa certain village: and a certain womai nam 
ed * Martha, received him into her houſe. 


at Jeſus feet, and heard his word. 

iuterpreters thiok this Village was Bethany, and that this 3th; 
and Mary were the fame which are mentioned 7ohn 11. 2. Inn: pro- 
tably were not fo frequent then, and in thoſe places, as they are 
now, fo as ſtrangers were often receivedgin private Houſes, Chriſt 
loſeth no opportunity of Preaching the Sſpel. While they were 
preparing Supper, he was entertaining the Family with the glad 
Tidings of the Goſpel, (the fea made upon the Mountain if (a 
things, Ia. 25. 6.) The Lips of the Righteous feed many, It was 
their Faſhion co have their Diſciples fit at their Doors feet, to hear 
their Ward ; there Mary fixcth her ſelf, 
40 But Martha was cumbred about much ferving, 
and came to him,and faid,Lord, doſt rhou not care that 
my ſiſter hath left me to ſerve alone? bid her therefore 
that ſhe help me. 
Two things are blameable in Martha. 1. That ſhe made too much 
ado about the Entertainment of our Saviour ; that ſhe entertained 
our Saviour ſhe did well ; but herein ſhe erred, that ſhe made her 
Entertainment of him ſo troubleſome, as it would not give her [cave 
to take that advantage which ſhe might,or ought to have dove, from 
the Entertainrhent of a Prophet. 2. That ſhe is diſplealed with 
her Siſter, becauſe ſhe would not lend her her hand, but choſe r1- 
ther to fit at Chriſt's Feet, and hear his Word, and ectirct! Clit 
to ſend her away to her Aſſiſtance. 


41 And Jeſus anſwered, and faid unto her, Martha» 

Martha, thou art careful, and troubled about maiy 

things. 

42 * But one thing is needful. 

_ that good part, Which ſhall not be taken away fron 
er. 


Our Saviour plainly blameth Martha for her too great Sol icitud C 
and Trouble to provide a Dinner or Supper ror him, whe had Meat 
to cat which ſhe was not aware of, it being his cat aud Drink to 69 


the Will of his Father, and to preach the Goſpel. i.;cerpreters much 


trouble themſelves in determining what that one thing 1s winch 0uf 
Saviour here faith is necdful. Some think our Saviour 1@ai!fh - 
more than one diſh #. enzagh 3 but this certainly is too 1yiv 4 Selle 


Others would have this onething to be a Life or Meditation go" - a 
Jf 


Phariſees had, who comvtcd none their Nezzhbours but their Friends | ry had thus ſpent her whole Life, they might have ſaid ſomctinung 


+ 
4\ 


» 
39 nd the had a ſiſter called Mary, which alſo * gt: 


A 
4 


pl 


And Mary hath cho-*? 


Chap, ) 


35 And on the morrow when he departed, he took! g.... 
out || two pence, and gave thezz to the hoſt, and ſaid Un» 22.2. 


ON 


Þ 


With 


vive | 


b. 1, 


1 hats / 
o den; 


3,000, & 
VeiCh 


Q 


I hap, Xl, WA F U 


{ar this. But certainly Mery's cniing to taxC advantage of Chriſt's 
any, rather to [pena an hour or tir 18 hearitg lum, than in 
ga ſupper for hin, v 1'i prove no {uch thitig. I ſhould in- 
t gener.tly,concermng ti? care of the Souf with reference t0 
Eternit!. Tat is certainly the ane Thing necej}ary, that was the bet- 
ter part, which Mary had choſen, as to which Chriſt would net 
diſcourage Þcr,nr any way blunt the edge of thoſe holy detires he 
12d kindled in ÞEr an c<ffect of winch; ſtudy and care,was her fitting 
at the Feet of Chrift, to I1car bis Word, ; | 
CHAP. Xb 
Chriſt by the deſire of his Diſciples,teacheth haw to pray, t—-4. and 
w in Faith. ſhall be heard, 5 —14. Caſteth ut a Devil 5 Con- 
Hteth thao that fay he did ſo by B-e!z2bub,- 1423. Sheweth 
the wretched 7 ondttton of that Wan into whom the unclean Spirit re- 
turneth, 24—2% A 10M an bleſjeth the womb that bare him ;, with 
his anſwer, 27, 22. Telleth that as fonas was a ſt:n to the Nine- 
vites, ſo the Son of Man ſhould be tn the Fews, 29, 3.. Sheweth 
under the ſtmilirude of 4 Canil-, that rhe Grfpel muſt fhuriſh, 
1=-35. Reproveth the Scribes, Yhariſees, and Lawyers, for thetr 
Cruelty againſt his Apoitles, 37==532. Wheiefire they liy a ſnare 
for him, $3z 54+ 2 : 
x ND it came to pals, that as he was praying in 
a certain place,when he ceaſed,one of his dif 
ciples fzid unto him, Lord, teach us to pray, as John 
5: allo tau. ht 11S diſciples. 

I This ſeemeth to be a different time from chat mentioned byMat- 
thew,wherc our Saviour direftcth '.;s diſciples to pray there his 
direction was part of his Sermg: on the 9wunt, Beſides,the doxology 
or concluſion 15 here I-ft out. It 1s ſaid here, { As be was praying in 
a c:rtain place. ] Chriſt Looked upon all places as holy cnough for 
Prar er. It alſo looks as it at this time our Saviour was not at his 
more ſecret Devotions, bur with the tie] ve,( which were ItsFami- 
ly} praying with them { 2w/2en he ceaſed.” [his 15 very obſervable a- 
eainſt thote who pretend impulles of tte Spirit, to difturh Mini- 
fters inthe time when they are praying and Preaching ; it may ea- 
fly be known-from what 5pirit.ſuch impulles are. The Diſciples of 
Chriſt often propounded queſtions to hun atter Preaching, but ne- 
ver interrupted him 1n his V Vork, nor before he was retired into 
an houſe. They now come to be intormed about Prayer, but they 
| ſtay till he had firſt ceaſed. Ve having no account in holv writ of 
| Johns Diſciples asking him, . or his teaching of them to Pray, are 
| more at a loſs, to determine whether our Saviour did intend that 
his Diſciples ſhould uſe theſe V Vords, as the phraſe here ſeemeth 
to import,or only pray this fenſe.ufter th9ts manner,as Matthew ſaith, 


compat 
prepartn 
terpret 1! 


indeed nothing can be concluded trom either phraſe by any judi- 
cious perſon. For as we read 11 many piaces in Scripture, that 
Chrift anſwered and ſautd, when it 1s manifeſt the meaning 1s, he 
l ſpake V Vords to that import or tenſe, ( the Evangeliits reporting 
: the V Vords ſpoken with variations of expretfion, }lo when we pray 
: we may fav, Our Father which ait in Heaven, &c. tho we do not 
- uſe the ſame V Vords and Syllabics. 
5 2 Andhe ſaid unto them, when ye pray, ſay, Our 
, Father which art in heav@n, Hallowcd be thy name. 
: Thy Kingdom come. Thy will be done;as in heaven, 
y  foinearth. 
*[l ,o, 3 Give us| day by day our daily bread. _ 
"Ty L' 4 And forgive us our lis ; for we alſo forgive eve- 
t att ry one that is indebred to us. And lead us not into 
tha temptation, but deliver us from evil, | 
[0- Se the Notes on Mitth. 5... ich fo compareth this prayer 
are as it is recorded by Mirth will find the form of V Yords difiering 
riſt if, more things than one.not onl” theDoxology or Concluti"n 1s left 
ere out wholly by Luz, but for oruzerv there, we 1) Ve 14.9 NUEERY 
lad here. for dpceanuare. Litls hath cuagna; PI ws 3 nets apizuey 
(tt Tis 00TH; Huor. WE Have here x; 22 &uU7U 471515 mavT1 
was mom iy, trom vv hence plainly appears that our Saviour did 
ear not 1nteyd ro oblige his Ditiigl > to tl. ſame Syllabicul words. but 
ouly to words of the ſarze import.that 15, to praying tor the ſame 
"gs things \ct that Chriſtians have a tberty to uſe the Fanc words is 
hat out of queſtton,and as much out 0! queſtion that the have a I1- 
: berty to vary, ſtill keeping therr eves upon the matter of this 
ore Prazer, ard not forgetting that, when they go unto God 11 that 
holy Duty. 
wch 5 And he ſaid unto them, Which of you ſhall have 
ined a friend, and ſhall goin unto him at midnight,and ſay 
her unto him, Friend lend me three loaves. _ 
599 6 Fora Friend of mine | in his journey 1s come to 
xith me, and I have nothing to ſet before him. 
: £4 7 And he'from within thail anſwer and ſay, Trou- 
Jiri ble menot : the door is now ſhut, and my children are 
with me in bed 3 1 cannot riſe and give thee. | 
thay RB. & [ay unto you, * Though he will not riſe and 
Jany vive him, becauſe he is bis friend : yet becauſe of his 
4 \ importuyity, he will riſe ard give him as many as he 
rho" ucederb; 
rol 9 414 1 {ay unto you, ask, and it ſhall be given you: 
ket, and ye ſhail find : knock, and it ſhall be opened 
tude; | UtO0 you. 
vent Lhe plain meaning of our Saviour in this Parable,tz to teach us 
to 69 F Ul weought not ©nly fo pray, but to be mportunate with God in 
much Praver. To con tne? 7n pra'er as the A poſtic phrafeth 1t Col. 4 2. 
h ouF Ld to Watch thereunto with all perfeverance, Epi. 6. 18, this m 
th 169 > Gitthis calicd a raithuay unpudence, which tho 18 our Language It 
Sen? Fr geared! v taken wn ab 13 ſeuſe, vet here figmfietn no more, than 
a Con- an Pty b{tnefs.or periutng our Pctitions, notwithfianding delays, 
f Ma- TT denia's, For thoſe V Vords,v. g. Sce the Notes on Matth. 7. 7. 
£10 | viittlic fa..c Y Yords arc fornd. 


+ - 


} . aa w 
ans Go, 2» 


4 Similitude of a friend and a father, ſheweth that thoſe that | 


Po For every one that asketh, receiveth : and he 


that ſeeketh, findeth, and to him that knocketh, ic 
ſhall he opened. 
11 *Ifa ſon ſhall ask bread of any of you that is *"r-1 4.2 
- father, will he give him a ſtone ? or if hc ack a fiſh, 1-19 24: 
will he for a fiſh give hima ſerpent ? STE nn 
12 Or if he ſhall ask an egg, will he offer him a 
ſcorpion ? | 
13 If ye then, being evil, know how to give good 
gifts unto your children: how much more ſhall your 
heavenly Father give the holy Spirit to them that as% 
him ? 
See the Notes on Matth. 7.8, 9g, 10, 11. As our Saviour's detion 
in the former words appeareth to be our information.that thoush! 
:the hand ofGod be full of good things proportioned to ail the ne- 
ceiſittes of his Creatures z yet they mult not expe to have them 
without askng,he will tor them be enquired of by the houſe of If-act, 
Ezek, 35. 37. and all his promiſes for the coiletion of £19 thinzs 
mutt be interpreted with a ſuppoſition of Peopics ſeeking them at 
his hand 3 as ailo that every lazy,cold, formal Praying will not o&- 
tain them,at the hand of God,but the working, fervent Praver + 
the righteous availeth much : So his farther deſign in thele Verfes 
leemeth to be, to let us know, that fervent and importunate prayer, 
will not prevail with God to give us any thing, but what ſhall be 
good for us ; tor he knoweth that the general defire of our Souls, is 
tor nothing but what 15 good;if we ask for things hurtful,it is but 
4 lapſe or miſcarriage of ourTongues,cauſed from the blindneſs and 
1gnorance of our minds. No man knowingly will ask any thing 
of another that thall do him hurt;zand though our Children,thrcagh 
eneir want of knowledge and judgment to difcern betwixr things 
that are good or evil for their Bodies, may ask of us, and cry un- 
to us, for things that are hurtful; yet we who know that they 
would not ask for them,if they had the uſe of their reaſon, and 
well knew their noxious quality,confideting their circumſtances, 
will not give them to them.So our heavenly Father tho he heareth 
us cry ing for ſuch things,as he knoweth (contidering our circum- 
ftances ) would be miſchievous.and hurtful to us; yet he will not 
give us any thing of that Nature,and fo in-denying the words of 
our Lips, he yct anſwereth the general Scope,and deſigns of our 
Seuls, which 1s to have only what is good for us ; But if we ask 
any thing which is good,and wholſome for us, and profitable unto 
us in the circumſtances in which we are,we may be ſure that God 
will give them to us, as we may,that an earthly parent will deny 
nothing to 1s Children crying, which is in his power to give,and 
which he knoweth to be good for themzfor the Nature of all good, 
leth in the conveniency and ſuitableneſs of the thing,to the wants 
and neceiſities of the Perſon that receiveth it. and every ſuch 
thing muſt alſo be according to the will of God ; according to his 
Promiſe, Pſal. 83. 11. to with-hold no good thing from them that 
live Uprightly. Soas both Gods fatherly relation, and the know- 
ledge we have, that he is a God that cannot lye, nor repent, are af- 
ſurances to us that whatſoever good thing we ask, we ſhall obtain of 
him, and nothing elſe, altho we ask and cry for it. Therefore 
whereas Matthew ſaith, Chap. 7. 11. How much more ſhall your Fa- 
ther which 7s in Heaven, give goo! things to them that asb him, 
Luke taith here, How much more ſhall he gtve his Ho'y Spirit go them 
that ash him, < 
14 * And he was Caſting out a devil, and it was _ I 
dumb. And it came to paſs,when the devil was gone ENT 
out, the dumb ſpake : and the people wondered. 
Che Devil 1s here called Dub, from his effe& upon the Demoni- 
ach, in reſtraining his uſe of his Tongue. 
15 But ſome of them ſaid, He caſteth out devils 
through Þ Beelzebub, the chief of the devils. +Gr Bret. 
16 And others tempting him, ſought of him aſign £445.14 
from heaven. | P v.18,1gz 
17 But he *knowing their thoughts,ſfaid unto them, +john 
Every kingdom divided againft it ſelf, is brought to 
deſolation, and a houſe. divided againſt a houſe fall- 
et 


” 5 
«+4 C » 


h. 
18 If Satan alſo be divided againſt himſelf, how 
ſhall his Kingdom ſtand ? becaule ye ſay, that I caſt 
out devils through Beelzebub. 
19 And if I by Beelzebub caſt out devils,by whom 
do your ſons caſt them out ? therefore ſhall they be 
your judges. 
20 Bur if I with the finger of God caſt out devils, 
no doubt but the kingdom of God is come upon you: 
21 When a ſtrony, man armed Keepeth his palace, 
his goods are In Peace. 
22- But * whena ſtronger then he ſhall come vpon «1c, ,.. , 
him, and overcome him, he taketh irom him all his Col. 2. 4, 
armour wherein he truſted, and diviceth his {polls- 
23 *He that is not With me, 1s againlt me, and he *t.12 5-2, 
that gathereth not with me, ſcattereth. 
Sce the Notes on Mutth. 5. 34,35 and 12.24, 25, 25,27.4nd on 
Matk 3. 22, 23, 24, 25, 29, 27s 
24 When the unclean ſpirit is gone out of a man,he 
walketh through dry places, ſeeking reſt : and finding 
none; he faith, I will return unto my houſeqwhence L 


came Out. | : 
25 And when he cometh he findeth it ſwept and 


| garniſhed, 


Trans 26 Then 


PET 1 

IE 

{ 

| 

'T + 

2] TN. 

£1 | 
Outed 
$1108 
' | 


S27 o 
' 2; = - 
i i - - 
+ . - . 
a ch. = 4 ” hs " 
—_ = _ F—I3S...! 
_ _ - ——- —— —_—_ woe a — "— 
gow _ "nega ” 


> . - 2 TS- 4 conn oo FRET Fora = 
. — ——_ 


— - 


Y 5 we - 
os = ry. in arts 


Chap. X1, 


Men and Women, as ever he had. 3. If he recovercth it, their 
latter end is worle than their beginning, Heb. 6. 4. Of 10. 26. 
2 Pet. 2. 20. 


26 Then gocth he, ana taketh to him ſeven other 


ſpirits more wicked then himſclf,and they enter in,and 
*Johns.14- qwell there : and the * laſt ſtate of that man is worſe 


then the firſt. 


See the Notes on Matt. 12. 43, 44, 45+ From thefe Verſes we 


mav obſerve, 1. That the Devil may in ſome fort, and degrec, be 
caſi out of rerſons and places,whilc yet in other reſpe&s,they may 
be his hauſe, and he may dwell in, and amongſt them. Their bo- 
dics, their Country may be in great meaſure delivered from his 
Power, and hc may yet keep poſſcttion of their Souls. This ordina- 
cily happeneth in places where theGoſpel is faithfullyPreached,tho 
there remain abundance of Men whoſe lives evidence, that the De- 
vil hath a teo great poſſeſſion of their Souls, yet thoſe places, and 
Perſons inhabiting in them,are more freed from Witchcraft,and the 
power which the Devil exerciſcs (by God's permiffion)upon Men, 
and Womens bodies, and Cattel,75c.than other more Paganiſh and 
ignorant places. He may alfo' in a ſcnic be faid to be caſt out of 
Perſons, that are reclaimed from vicious, and debauched lives,yet 
are not brought home to God, only are more enlightned, and 
more under the Power of reſtraining Grace, yet their Souls may be 
his houſe. 2. The Devil caſt out in any Degree, is unquiet till (if 
poſſible) he hath recovered as ful! a Power over,and potletfion of 


S LUKE Chap, y 
liekt, 
lphr, 
eive+ oc. 

Qs &, 


27 And it came to paſs, as he ſpake theſe things, a 


certain woman of the company lift up her voice, and 
ſaid unto bim, Bleſſed # the womb that bare thee,and 
the paps which thou haſt ſucked. 


28 But he ſaid, Yea, * rather bleſſed are they that 


hear the word of God, and keep it. 


We are very prone to bleſsPerſons from external priviledges,and 


the favours of Divine Providence which do not at all change,or at- 
fe& the hearts of thoſe to whom they are given ; but God looketh 
with another Eye upon Perſons. Chriſt doth not here deny his Mo- 
ther to have been Bleſſed, her Couſin Elizabeth, ch, x. 42.had pro- 
nounced her Bleſſed amongſt Women,and the Angel had before called 
her Highly favoured, and told her that ſhe had found fawur with 
God. But our Saviour here declarcth that her Bleſſing did not ſo 
much lye in that her Womb bare, and her Paps gave ſuck to him,as 
in that ſhe was one who heard and hept the Word of God;for he pro- 
nounceth all ſuch as did ſo,principally Bieſſed. Nor muſt we ſepa- 
rate what God hath put together,the Bleſſing is not pronounced to 
thoſe who barely hear the Word of God,the Bleſſed and the un- 
bleſt, pariter adeunt, pariter andeunt, they may go to Church to- 
gether, and hear the Word together, but the Bleffing is to thoſe 
that hear the Word of God, and keep it. See Fames 1, 22, 23. 
The VVord to ſome that hear it may be a Savour of Death unto 
Death. The Soul that through Grace is made obedient to the 
VVill of God, is a more happy Soul than the Virgin Mary was, 
conſidered meerly as the Mother of Chriſt, without the confide- 
ration of her Faith, and Holincſs. 


29 And when the people were gathered thick toge- 


ther he began to ſay, This is an evil generation, they 
ſeek a ſign, and there ſhall no fign be given it,bur the 
ſign of Jonas the prophet. 


30 * For as Jonas was a ſign unto the Ninevites, 


1-.& 2. 10. ſo ſhall alſo the Son of man be to this generation. 


31 * Thequeen of the ſouth ſhall riſe up in judg- 


ment with the men of this generation, and condemn 
them: for ſhe came from the utmoſt parts of the 
earth to hear the wiſdom of Solomon ; and behold, 
a greater then Solomon # here. 


32 * The men of Nineve ſhall riſe up in judg- 


ment with this generation, and ſhall condemn it, for 
they repented at the preaching of Jonas,and behold, a 
greater then Jonas # here. 


See the Notes on Matth. 12, 39, 4o, 41, 42. Matthew ſaith,theY 


were the Phariſ2es that came to him,defiring to ſee a ſign ſrom Hea- 
ven ; they did the ſame again, Matth. 16. 1. Chriſt was very ready 
to work Miracles,toencourage and confirm his hearers Faith, but 
not to ſatisfie unvelievers curioſity. Inſtead therefore of ſhewing 
them Signs from Heaven, he denounceth the juſt judgment of God 
againſt them for their not believing in him. See further the Notes 
upon the aforementioned parallel Texts. 


33 No man when he hath lighted a candle,putteth 


t in a ſecret place, neither under a buſhel ; but on 
a candleſtick, that they which come in may ſee the 
light. 


VVe met with this fimilitude, ch. 8. 16. and Matth. 5.15. Sce 


the Notes on thoſe Texts. It was a kind of Proverbial Speech, and 
to applicable to divers Subjefts. Some think thet our Saviour 
bringeth in theſe Words as a reaſon why he would ſhew the 
Phar:ſees no Sign, viz. becauſe he knew it would do them no 
good, it had been like the lighting of a candle, and to put it un- 
der a buſhel, which no Man doth. Others think that by it he 
defigns to give an account, why he v. 28. pronounced thoſe bleſ- 
ſed who heard the Word and did it, becauſe prattice, and giving 
light to others 1s the end of all hearing. 


-4 The light of the body is the eye: therefore 


when thine eye is ſingle, thy whole body allo is full 
of light ; but when thine eye is evil, thy body alſo is 
fult of darkneG. 


35 Take heed therefore, that the light which is in 


thee be not darkneſs. 


36 If thy whole body therefore be i! of 
having no part dark, the whole ſhall be tull of} 
as when the | bright ſhining of a candle Corh 
thee light. 

See the Notes upon Mit. 6. 22. Our Saviours ſpecc| 
verſes,is plainly both Elliptical(ſomething being in it ſelf tg, 1 
derſtood )and alſo Metapborical, The ſenſe is this, what th- » - 

to the Body, that the Soul, the Mind and affc&tions arc og 
whole Man. Now look;as the Eye 1s the Organ by which light i; ws 
ceived to guide a mans ſteps,fo that if that be perfect without ay, 
direftion how to move and att 3 butif that be vitiatcd by ji, 

mours,the man knows not how to dire his bodily ſteps. *$9 ;+ 
mansSoul( which anſwereth the bodilyEye)more elpecially a baſs 
underſianding, or judgment be darkened, perverted, prejudices .. 
his affetions be debauched or depraved, he will not kno how c.. 
move one ſtep right in his duty 3; but if his underſtang;ys þ gs 
right notion of Truths, and he judgeth aright concerning th. 
things, and ways of God, and his affe&tions be not deprive 
then the whole man will be in a capacity to receive the Light 2nd 
Revelations of Truth, as they ſhall be communicated to him, cy;; 
as he who hath a perfe& Eye receiveth, and js able to make ij. 
of the bright ſhining of a Candle. 4 

37 Andas he ſpake, a certain Phariſee beſonght 
him to dine with him - And he went in and fat down 
to meat. 

This is the Second time we meet with our Saviour at 1 Phi. 
ſees houſe. He faith of himſelf, that he came eating and arinl;1; 
that is, allowing himſelfa free, tho innocent, converſe with aj 
ſorts of People, that he might gain ſome. The Phariſees were x: 
to the generality of them, the moſt bitter ſtubborn and implacz. 
ble EnemiesChriſt had,yet he refuſed not to go and fic at Meat with 
a Fhariſce, 

38 And when the Phariſee ſaw it, he maryelleq 


that he had not firſt waſhed before dinner. 

Matth. 15. 2+ the Phariſees quarrelled with the Diſciples upon 
this account, here this Pharzſee 1s offended at Chriſt hinrelf, My} 
gives us the reaſonof it, Mark 7. 3. For the Phariſees,*and ll ts 
Fews, except they waſh their hands, eat not ;, holding the traditicy 
the Elders. Concerning this tradition of theirs and the ground of 
it, ſee the Notes,on Matth. 15. 2. and Mark 7. 3. we would all + 
infallible and therefore cannot allow others to d:iii from us in x 


rite which hath no foundation in Gods Word, and w2:::' at thoſs 
who cannot ſee with our Eyes, nor pra&ice according *: ''r1y. 
titudes, 


39 And the Lord ſaid unto him, Now do ye Piz- 
riſees make clean the outſide of the cup and the pl:t- 


wickedneſs. 
40 Ye fools, did not he that made that whichis 


without, make that which is within alſo ? 

We have much the ſame tho delivercd in another form, witha 
denuntiation ofa Woe, Matth. 23.85. See the Notes on that Verſe, 
We muſt not imagine that our Saviour here refle&eth upon the 
cleanſing of Veſſels in which we put our Meat and Drink, for un- 
doubtedly as to them, the Phariſees waſhed both the inſide, and 
the outfide. And the conceit of them is amiſs who think that by 
the inward patt, v. 39. He means the Meat in their Diſhes, which 
was gotten indeed, by ravening, and _— Extortion, &c, for 
itis an hard interpretation of the inward part of the platter,to ſay, 
by it 1s Meant, the Meat in the platter ; but neither doth our $avi- 
our ſay, the inward part of the Diſh,but your inward part,by which 
he plainly means the Soul. Our Saviour doth therefore certainly 
compare the Phariſees to Diſhes or Platters, waſhed, or ſcoured 
only in the outſide ; and blameth their Mypocriſie in this; That 
they were mighty ſolicitous about an outſide purity, and clear- 
neſs; but for the inward purity of the Heart and Soul,they took 
no care at all about that z they were very ſcrupulous about un- 
defiled hands, but nothing at all about having their Soals, and in- 
ward Powers, and affetions undefiled. This he telleth them was 
moſt egregious folly ; for God that madethe Body, made the Soul 
alſo, and therefore would exatt a purity in the inward, 2s well a3 
the outward Man,eſpecially conſidering that he /oveth truth mth! 
inward parts, 


have : and behold, all thingsare clean unto you. 


Some tranſlating it,Give ſuch thing as are within for Alms, otlicrs, 
ſuch things as you have, others,ſuch things as are neceſſary, others, ſit) 
things as ye are able,as if yyws were to be underitood betore i 
ErovJe according to what you have. Others, What things remain, aftcr 
the ſerving your own neceſſities, and a juſt reſtitution to thoſe whom 
you have wronged. Others think it is but a Connexion of our et 
viours ſpeech, and the Senſe is, Moreover there is but one tn!" i 
be done, Give Atms, &c. as if it were 98 &p8y. I do not fee but Our 
own Tranſlation is as good as any, and gr} ſeems to bc under- 
ſtood in theGreeh, According to what you have, which is truly,anc jult- 
ly your own, not theirs whom you have wronged, nor your Cre g 
tors,nor your Families for their neceſſities, Grve alms of all th.it, 
( And behold,all things are clean unto you. ] Net your Souls are clean, 
tho that muſt firſt be, yet our Saviour is not here dirctting that, 
or the means and Methods for it ; but all things are clean 151% 
you may lawfully and without Guilt uſe them, Tit. 1.15. 0!9%** 


4 In ” 
Ro . 
JC SS» - 


pure,all things are pure ; but unto them that are defiled and unbelt ; 

ing, is nothing pure. Our Saviours Words are a plain Enortt” 
o o ® N I : . 1f 11}- 

to Repentance, that lieth in the change of our minds. 48d (4! © 


+ 4 


ward change of our minds,muſt be evidenced by the clienge 0: af 
Ations, and particularly by a Reſtitution in Caſe of wiv! ©, 


to anv. The Phariſees were a-Coyctous Rapacious GENcrattu!, 5 


mixture of il humors, @c. the Body from it takes a full and 171. 


= TT {f Y 
1102 theſe 9/27: 


© Un- +51 


ter: * but your inward part is full of raveningand,. 
Libs 


41 * But rather give alms of ſuch things as| you'll 
1% 


| 


TIATv Tet ivoy]e JiTz FAenwoodyny.] The Word &x{y]a bcing 27: 
Word not ordinarily uſed 1n a ſenſe which will fit this place,hath "2 
made a-great abounding in their own ſenſes amongſt Interpreters. *s 


— 


inthe 


| you FI 
I, Ds. 
ing 4 Gi, 
ehath | G 
reters. * i 
zthers, 
15, ſuc) 
tore [4 
4 aftcr 
whom 
ur $4 
thing t; 
0ut Our 
andere 
nd juſt- 
Cred:- 
1] th.it, 
6 (lea, 
ng that, 
mn 001" 
Unto the 
nbelteu* 


AIG 


1 
[] P 
SEES | 


haps Xl, 


4. 


Ny. 5 
- 


of 
to be 
81:ic)» 


Sd LU AMS 


Extortion, devourin; Widows Fuſes, &c. Their Repentance was 


might CVIGCRCE their Hearts to be traly chinged ; and then ſaith | mean time, their hearts were as fuil of Malice againft the Trurti: 
, 3 


our Sav1 
e with 4 ! 
—_ he {o,tor no Soul can Repent truly without the Jathuence and 
Atfiſtance of Divine Grace, which God giveth not, bur to thoſe 
Souls which are Waſhed witir the Blood of Ciiriſt. So that before 
4 Soul can Procuce the Fruits of true Repentance,it muſt be juftifi- 
ed by Faith,and Sandtified by the Spirit of Holineſs.Or if we un- 
derſtand it Only of that Repentance, which an unjuſtified Soal may 
have, yet even that may fo far profit,as to have our outward things 
ſo bletfſed to us that we may uſc them wi:huut any Pollution or 
Guilt, and havc them outwardly bleſt to us. | 
42 But wo unto yon Phariſces, for ye tithe mint 
and rue and all manner of herbs,and pals over judg- 
ment and the love of God : theſe ought ye to have 


done, and not to leave the other nncone. 


our, all things will be clean to you, which otherwiſe will not 
11 your Tradt: tonal Superſtitions Waſhings. And needs it 


See the Notes on Matth. 25. 23. There arc two great Notes of 


Hypocrites. 1. To be more cxatt in, and Zealous for,the obſerva- 
tion of Rituals and the Traditions of men, than in and for the ob- 
ſervation of the Moral Law of God, 2, In matters of Morality to be 
more exa&t,and (tric in,ana for little things, than for things more 
grave and weighty. There 15 no Command :tnent of God lo little 
25 we may neglect,or deſpiſe, or difobcy it ; but yet there is a diffe- 
rence in Duties, and we ought to have a firſt regard to the great- 
er, then to the lefler. ; 

43 Wo unto you Phariſees, for ye love the upper- 


moſt ſeats in the ſynagogues, and greetings in the 
markets» 

See the Notes on Mat. 23. 6, 7. Their fault was not in their ta- 
king them, but in their affeting them, and in being Ambitious of 
them, God is the God of order, and we are bound to give honour, 
+9 whom Honour belongs, but Pride and Ambition are deteſtable fins, 
eſpecially in ſuch as thould be Teachers of Humility, and the Vani- 
ty of all things below. : 

44 Wounto you ſcribes and phariſees, hypocrites, 
for ye are as graves Which appear not, and the men 


that walk over them, are not aware of thern, | 

See the Notes on Matth. 23. 27. where our Saviour compareth 
the Phariſees to whited Sepulch;es,here 5e compareth them toSepul- 
chres,but not as there,to denote their Hypocrifie,appearing white, 
but having nothing within but Rottenneſs 3 but upon the account © 
the Contagion of them,and their Po//uti9n of others that were no 
2ware of them. To underſtand our Saviour, we muſt confider the 
Levitical Law, Numb. 15. 15. where we ſha!l find that not only he 
that touched a dead Body,but he that touched a Grave was Legally 
unclean for ſeven days. Chriſt here aliudeth+to that, tho he be 
ſpeaking not of Lega!, but Moral uncleanneſs. By reaſon of the 
Law afore-mentioned,the Jews took care to white their Graves,that 
People might ſee them, and avoid that danger. To ſuch whited 
Sepulchres,Chriſt compares the Phariſees, Matth, 23.27.But ſome 
Graves might not be whitcd, or the Co'our waſhed off, ſo as the 
did not appear,and Men «<culd not be aware of them, but ran into 
a Poiluticn by them. To ſuch Graves he in this place compares 
them, They were Men that Extcrnally appeared not to be what 
they were, The Jews took the Phariſces for great Saints (the 
firiteſt Se& of their Religion) fo ſiritt they were in their duties 
to their Traditions, Gy. which external Severity and formal be- 
haviour,covered their Extortion,and Covetouſneſs,and Malice,and 
Erroneous opinions, ſa as People did not ſuſpett them of any ſuch 
Guilt, 

45 Then anſwered one of the lawyers, and ſaid 


unto him, Maſter, thus ſaying, thou reproacheſt us 
alſo, 

This Lawyer was 2 Scribe of the Law, v. 44. The Work of theſe 
Men was to interpret the Law,the Phartjees ſtriftly obſerved their 
Decrees, and Interpretations. The. Lawyer therefore ſpake rightly 
in thinking our Saviours Words had ſome retlettion upon Men of 
his order,but he wofully erred both in thinking his own order was 
unblamablc, and alſo in clling our Lords juſt reproofa reproach- 
ing them.But by this he gives an occaſion to him, who uſed rightly 
to divide the Word of God, and to give every one their portion 
out of it, to let them know wherein they were faulty, as well as 
the Phariſ-es. | 

46 And he ſaid, Wo unto you alſo ye lawyers, for 
ye lade men with burdens grievous to be born,and ye 
your ſelves touch not the burdens with one of your 
fingers. 

Sec the Notes on Matth. 23. 4 

q7 Wo unto yous for ye bnild the ſepulchres of 
the prophets, and your fathers killed them. 

48 Truly ye bear witneſs that ye allow the deeds 
of your fathers : for they inceed killed them and ye 
build their ſepulchres. 

49 Theretore alſo faid the Wiſdom of God, I will 
fend them prophets and apoſtles, and /ome of them 
they iha!! lay and perſecute - 

50 Thar the bio9d of all the prophets, which was 
hed from the feundation of the world, may be requi- 
red of chjs generation ; 

*. 51 * From theblood of Abel unto the * blood of 


n Ks jj. ®* 07, 
Zcharias, which periſhed between the altar and the 


" | 1! . « - 
temple: verily I fay unto youy it ſhall be required of 
this generation: | 


and ayainſt Chriſt,and thoſe who came to revealGods will to them 
4s ever were their Fathers againſt the Prophets;and ſaith our Savi- 
our, 1, who am the Wiſdom of God tel] you,that I ſhall ſend ws 
Apoſtles and Prophets, and ſome of them you ſhall Kill a . 
{hall perſecute ; that all the Righteous Blood that hath Soon ſhed Mn = 
Earth, from the Blood of Abel,to the Blood of Zacharias my " Fo omg 
which mind being in you the ſame as in your perſccuting Pods: 
cctſours, your Buiiding and Adorning the Old Prophets Tombs ; 
not (as you would have it thought) any Teſtimony of your his 
"ar to the Prophets ; But rather to your Fathers that killed chews, 
a Kind of Trophey for the Viftory your Fathers got over the nro- 
p'1cts of the Lord ; ſoas by that AR you give a Teftimmy that + ou 
own them as your Fathers who killed the Prophets, and ern, In 
wit they did,tor if you truly honoured their Memory you would 
not r<tain the ſaine malicious bloody Mind. It is grots Hypocritic 
for Men to magnifie the Servants of God in former Aves, and in 
the mean time to Malign and Perfecute the Servants of tlic tame 
God, ina preſcnt Age, owning but the ſame Truths,and living u , 
to the ſame Rule. Sce furthcr Notes on what js jn theſe Verſes os 
the Notes on Matth. 23. 29. where the ſame things are 12id with 
larger Circumſtances They truly honour Martyrs, that live the 
ſame lives they did, and adhere to the fame Truth: of God, in a 
Teſtimony to which they Dyed. ay 

52 Wountoyou lawyers, for ye have taken away 
the Key of knowledge: ye entred not in your ſelves, 
and them that wereentring in, ye hindred }. 

Matthew ſaith,c. 23.13. For you ſhut up the Kingdom of Heaven a. 
gainit men,&c.l take the ſenſe of theſe words to be, You have taken 
dway knowledge, which is the Key by which men enter into the 
Kingdom of God, Tho knowledge it ſelf be but a common Gift. 
and Men may have great meaſures of it, and yet perith for ever, 
I Cor. 13.2, yet it is the foundation of all ſaving Grace,Rom.10.14, 
Hhw ſhall they believe on him, of whom they have not heard 2? So how 
thall they obey a rule they do not know,or Repent of thoſe Sins 
which they do not know to be ſo ? So as thoſe that are the hinder- 
ers of Peoples coming to the knowledge of the Will of God.are the 


vilcſt Inſtruments upon Earth in hindering Men and Womens Sal- 


vation. The PapiSs are highly guilty of this,in keeping their Lai- 


ty from the Scriptures in a Language intelligible to them.B 7 
were the Scribes guilty of ths *The Jaws were never rage 
from Reading,or hearing of the Law.It was read in their Synagogues 
everySabbath Day.But we muſt know that Knowledge is highly 
advantaged by an Interpretation of the Mind and Will of God : 
But how did the Scribes take away this 2 They Preached and in- 
terpreted the Law of God. Anſw. They gave not the true ſenſe of 
it, but fo Preached, that Pcople were ſcarce any whit the wifer, as 
fo the Knowledge of the Law of God, only they made People un- 
derſtand their Traditions, and Ceremonies : their Do#rines were 
the Traditions of Men,Now they occupying the places of Teachers 
and no better diſcharging their Work,inſtead of giving took aw ay 
knowledge from them,and proved blind t eaders cf the blind Who- 
ever they are that arrogate to themſelves the Office of Teaching, 
and ſupplying the place of Teachers, and either do not make 
Preaching,and 1nſtruQion of the People under their charge,their 
vutineſs, or who Preach in ſtiles,and methods their people under- 
{tand not zor who Preach other things,than what they prove to be 
the revealed Will of God. fall deeply under the Condemnation of 
this Text. See further the Notes on Matth. 23. 13. 
53 Andas he faid theſe things unto them, the 
{cribes and the phariſees began to urge him vehement- 
ly, and to provoke him to ſpeak of many things. 
54 Laying wait for him,and ſeeking to catch ſome- 
thing out of his mouth, that they might accuſe him. 
terein the vile Genius of theſe wretched Men was ſeen, Chrift 
was 2ecome their Enemy, becauſe he told them the truth. His Re- 
proots 1n order to their Reformation, and amendment do but fill 
them with madneſs againft him. Nor are wicked and MaJicious 
Men at any time Fair Enemies, | they urge him vehemently, ] and pro- 
voke him to ſpeak many things, they lye at the catch, in wait for 
him ; hoping that in his many Words, and Anſwers to their many 
Captious. queſtions,they ſhould hear ſomething from him, upon 
which they might form an Accuſation againſt him, to Pilate the 
RomanGovernour,for his blood was that theyThirſted after.If it were 
thus done to the Green-Tree,let us not wonder if it be ſo done al- 
ſo to the dry. The Hearts and PraQices of Malicious and Wicked 
Men in ſucceeding Generations do (as in a Glaſs) anſwer the 
Hearts of Perſons of their Spirits, and Morals in preceding Gene- 
rations, Malice will never regard Juſtic? or Equity. 
, CHAP. XII. 
Chriſt admomiſheth his Diſciples of the Leaven of the Phariſees, 1-—3» 
«Telleth them, who they ought to fear, and who mt, 4, 5. Exhorteth 
to tru on God's Providence, and to confeſs his Name : Dehorteth a- 
gainſt Blaſpheming the Holy Ghoſt, 6—12. Biddeth them 1 be- 
ware of Covetouſneſs, under the fimilitude of a rich man, who built 
greater Barns, 13—21. Exhorteth them by the Exampl's of Ra- 
vens and Lillies, to ſeek firſt the Kingdom of God, 22— 32. Like- 
wiſe t9 Charity, 33, 34- and Watchfulneſs, 35—40. He de- 
ſcribeth the ations and rewards of a faithful, and the ans an.t 
puniſhment of an unfaithful Servant, a1—48- Telleth that he 
came to ſend fire on Earth, 49—53» Exhorteth to reconctl;ation 
with our Enemies, $4—59« : 
iN the mean time,when they were gathered toge- 


ther an innumerable multitude of people, inſo- 
much that they trode one upon another,he began to 


iay unto his diſciples firſt of all, Beware ye of the 
leaven of the Phariſees, which is bypocrilie, : 


Pl. 
” s 


Chap. XII. 


See the Notes on Matth 

. __ TERig, V7: : - 4 ny Je 2 » 23. kfO VL, Mm p ay * 

evidenced »y contrary it rh ; thoſe were Works of Zuſtice and | company of wretchedHiypoerk * Hi Fork Word ba ws like a 

God calieth to the Hraelttes for the firſt, Tſatah 1; 16, 17. | 10g the Memories of the Prophets under the Old Teſt ir oNOur- 

Chriſt calls to fne Phariſees tor the latter. Such Works of Mercy as | 4 great care to repair, and to adorn their Sepalchres white Jn om 
5 +: © 


| Or,jf5rbatd, 


Chap. $11. 


+> Tim, 


” 7 
a 4* 


-_ 
-_ 


We read of ſuch a Caution given tc tie Diſcip'es Matth.16. 6. 
Put that is not the ſame caution with thiszthere ne compared their 
Dofrine toLeaven,for the aptnets of 1t to infect others,here he com- 
parcth their Lives to the flame thing,and tor the zame reaſon : this 
appearcth to be the ſcnſe of our Saviour here,becaule be faith their 
Leaven is Hipacriſie. There are none lo Ike to do miſchicf to the 
better ſort of Fcople,as thoſe that under a masx,and Exterior Diſ- 
guiſe of ſeverity and ftrictncſs, indulge theniuelves 1n corrupt 
ons, and Vicious [nclinations. 

2 For there is nothing covered, that ſhall not be 


revealed ; neither hid, thar {tall nor be known. 

It is a Proverbial Expreſſion , thoſe,and Parabvlical Exprefſions, 
may be applied in feveral Cafes, and to ſeveral Subjetts ; we have 
met with this before variouſly applyed, 37. Ic. 26. Mar. 4-22. 
and in this Goſpel, Ch. 8. 17. Here it is appited, as an Argument 
againſt H\pacriſie, or the concealing of naught) and corrupt hearts 
under the Vizor and Diſguiſe of Demure 9K, or fair converſ(a- 
tion. In the Day of Judgment, Sinners !hull waik naked,and men 
ſhall ſee their ſhame 3 God will in that Day make known all the 
Sccrets of mens hearts,to be ſure the ſecrets of their hearts whoſe 
1niquities are not forgiven, and whole Sins are not covered. 


3 Therefore whatſoever ye have ſpoken in dark- 
neſs, ſhall ve heard in the light, and that which ye 
have ſpoken in the ear in cloſets, ſhall be proclaimed 


vpon the houſe-tops. 

we have ſomething very like this, Matth.ro. 27. ſpoken by way 
of precept. It ſeemeth to be a ſentence alſo varioutly applied 3 1t 
may be left indiffcrent to the Reader, whether he will underſtand 
it asa promile of thie Publication of the Goſpel (to which purpoſe 
it ſcems to be ſpoken in the form of a Precept, Mat. 10. 27.) or 
as a furtker enlargement of his former Viſcourle, V. 2, 

4 Ard I izy nnto my friends,Be not afraid of them 
that kill the body,and after that, have no more that 
They can do. 

5 But I will forewarn you whom you ſhall fear» 
Fear him, which after he hath killed, hath power to 
caſt into le!) ; yea, I ſay unto you, Fear him. 

See the Notes on Mat. 1c. 28. wire we met with the ſame : 
From this to the 13th v. our Saviour Armeth bis Diſciples to en- 
counter thoſe ſtorms of Perſecution, which he knew they would 
meet with after he ſhould -be taken up into Heaven.Here are two 
Arguments in this Yerſe, 1. The own drawn from the Impotency,or 
Limited Power of the moſt malicious enemies z they can Kill the 
Body, but can do no more. 2. From the mighty power of God, who 
can caſt us into Hell , Maithew ſaith, who can caſt Body and Soul into 
Hell Fire ; Whence it is evident, 1. That there are Puniſhments 
beyond this Life; all mens puniſhments will not end with the kill- 
ing of thcir Bodies 2, That men have Souls as well as Bodtes,and 
both Souls and Budi-s of Sinners will 1n the ReſurreAion be made 
capavie of Eterral Punif}.racnt. 3. That the ready way to bring 
us under that Miſery, is to be morc afraid of the wrath of Men 
thin of tte Wrath of God. 

6 Are not five ſparrows ſold ſor two farthings, 
and not one of them is forgotten before God ? 


7 But even the very heirs of your head are all num- 
bred. Fear not thereforc, ye arc of more value then 
many ſparrows. 

Sce the Notes on Matth 10. 29, 30, 31.0ur Saviours third Ar- 
gument is brought from the Providence of God, both his Genera/ 
Providence upholding the Beings of all his Creatures,ſfo that he for- 
getteth not a Sparrowy,tho Creature of to minute a valuc,that two 
of them are ſold fora Farthing (as Matthew ſaith} or five for two 
Farthings (Cas Like faith) yea,he fo remembreth them, that one of 
them falis not to theGround without his knowledge and leave, faith 
Matthew.Zut betides this, God excrciteth a more ſpecial Providence 
towards Creatures with retcrence to their Dignity and excellency, 
20w(faith our Saviour )you arc of more value than many ſparrows, 
you are ſo as Men,ycu are more fo as my Diſciples,eſpecially as mv 
Miniſters and Emoatladors. The very Hairs of your head are numbred, 
god will regard your moſt minute concerns. 


8 * Alſol ſay unto you, Whoſcever ſhall confeſs me 
before men,him ſhall the ſon of man alſo confeſs before 
the angels of God. 

9 But he that denieth me before men,ſhall be deni- 


ed before the angels of God. 

See the Notes on Mat. 10. 32, 33. Here 15s a fourth and fifth 
Argument, drawn from the rewards, and Puniſhments of ſuch as 
thail confeſs,or deny Chrift before men. Confeſſi-n here ſignifies, 
the owning, and adhercing to the Truths, and Ways of God, in a 
time of oppoſition ; the reward promifed,is,Chriſts owning thoſe 
that do it at the Day ot Judgment; before theFather(ſaith Matthew) 
before the . 'ngels, ſaith Luke. Chriſt hath no need of our owning 
him. his truth and ways ; we way by it be profitable to our ſclyes, 
but not to him;we ſhall have need in the Day of Judgment of 
Cliritt's owning us. By the dental of Chriſt, 15 nteant our Apoſtacy 
from the Truths,or ways of God ; the denial of his truths, ways,or 
iarecet in this World it implicsa perſecuting of them, but ſignifi- 
cth ſfoincthing much leſs, a denial Hy words,or a forſaking and not 
adhicreing to them. The puniſhment will be Chriſts denial of us in 
the Pay of judgment. What that ſigniheth Maithew tells us, c. 7. 
v. 23. I s4ll prejeſs unto them, 1 never knew you. Depart from me, I 
knw ye not, ye workers of Iniquity z and Matth. 25. 41. he ſhall ſay 
to them on the left hand, depart from me ie Carſed int) Everlaſting fire, 
prepared for the Devil and his Angels, This mult be underſtood not 
af tuch, as deny him, as Peter did, in an hour of zreat Temptation, 
and thcn go cut and Weep bitterly, and agata return unto him, 
but as luch as perift in fuch demals, and return nut to Confels 

WO. 


CZ UKE 


'Son of man, it ſhall be forgiven him, but 
that blaſphemeth againſt the holy Ghoſt, i; 


10 And whoſoever ſhall ſpeak a word againſt tho 


wito hin 

ſhall I. \ 

be forgiven. : Ct 
See the Notes on Mat. 12. 31. and on Mark 3. 26. 


11 And when they bring you unto the LYn2gogues 
and unto magiſtrates, and powers,take ye no \ 
how or what thing ye ſhall anſwer, or what ye hall 
ſay. | | 

12 For the holy Ghoſt ſhall teach you in the fame 


hour, what ye ought to ſay. 

See the Notes on Mat. 1o. 19. Mark 12. rt. 

13 And one of the company ſaid unto him, Maſter 
ſpeak to my brother, that he divide the inheritance 
with me. 

14 And he ſaid unto him, Man, who made me; 
judge, or a divider over you ? 

This Paſlage certainly isnot recorded for nothing; if it teachet!) 
us any thing,it 15 this, That matters of Civil Fuſtice belong mt t1 
thoje whom Chriſt ſends to preach his Goſpel. That work is enouoh 
for them ; Chriſt here retuſeth the Oftice fo much as of an Arlitr,. 
tor. A very learned Author tells us,that the praftice of hrinsiys 
Civil Matters before Eccleſiaſtical Menas Judges, began in the Cay. 
trvi'y of Bubyl;n,the Jews by that means avoiding the bringing their 
differences before Pagan Judges, which the Apoſtle aifo perſuadeth 
at large to the primitive Chriſtians,in x Cor. 6. 1, 2. Oc. But thy 
the Miniſters of theGoſpel ſhould be imploycd,or might be 'mploy- 
ed inchem, doth not appear by the Apoſtles ; nay r Cor. 6, 4. he 
ſpeaks the contrary, ſet them to judge who are leaſt efieemed in :;, 
Church.Theſe furely were not the Elders in it.Under the Rimaz,, 
the Jews had more liberty,having Civil Courts made up ofPerfyn; 
of thizir own Religion,to whom our Saviour turns ovcr this Man; 
being not willing to move out of his calling,as a Minilter of the 
Goſpel. As Chriſt's Commiſſioners, it is moſt certain,that no 31gj. 
{ters of the Goſpel can intermeddle in civil Judgments ; whether 
thoſe who are ſuch Commilſioners of Chriſt may yet as mens con; 
miſftoners a, it ſtands thoſe in hand who ere ambitious of ſyc!} 
an Employment,and can find leiſure enough tor it,and are calle 
to it,to inquire ; | thall not intermeddle in that Controveriic, T9 
me, the proper Work of the Goſpe) is Work enough. 


I5 And he ſaid unto them, Take heed, and beware 
of covetouſneſs, for a mans life conſiſteth not in the 


abundance of the things which he poſleſſeth. 

The TAzovs£i here trantlated Govetouſneſs, 15 an immoderate 
deſire v1 .4viig of this Worids Goods, which diſcovers it (cf. 
ther by aurightccus Ads in procuring, or uncharitable omilfions 
for the keeping of the things of this Life. It is that giAaguas, 
Love of money, which the Apoſtle determineth to be the rootot 
all Evil, It is alſo diſcovered by a too much thoughtfulneſs, whit 
we ſhall Eat,drink,or put on ; or by the too great meltings of our 
hearts into our bags of Gold, or Silver, All theſe come under the 
notion of that Covetouſneſs, which is here forbidden. In ſhort, vliat- 
ſoever it 1s that hindreth our Contentment with the Portion God 
giveth us upon our endeavours,though it amounteth to no more 
than Food,and Rayment,according to the Apoſtles Precept,1 7in.s, 
8. and Heb, 13. 5. this is what Chriſt warneth his Diſciples to be- 
ware of, he gives us the reaſon, | For mans Life conſiſteth nit in th2 
abundance of what he poſſeſſeth.') Which is true, whether we under- 
ſtand by Life,the ſubſiſting and upholding of our Life,or(as lite is 
often taken )for the Happineſs and Felicity of our Lives. Abundance 


juſtifie. what our Saviour had ſaid in theVerte mamedately pen 
ing, That a mans life lyeth nat in the abundance of whR4t mY Mogelne 
for ke who hath the greateſt Polſettions, may dy 45 10942 de 3:0 


15 not necetfary to uphold our Lives. Ad manum est quod jat eſt, laith 
Seneca, Nature 1s content with a little. Sudamus (laith he) at 
ſupervacanea.We ſwet only to get Supertluities. Nor wil} abandiuc? 
protect our lives; it will not keep oft an Enemy,but rather tempt 
him 3 nor fence out a diſcaſe,but rather contribute to it, as ings- 
ging us in 1mmoderate cares or Labours to procure, and keep 1t, 
or as expoling us to Temptations, to Riot, and Debauchery, by 
which inens 1:ves are often thortened.Nor doth the Happineſs 7f !i'? 
tye in the abandance of what we poileſs. Some Philoſoplicrs deter- 
mined rightly,that ſomething of this. VVorlds good, is necelfary to 
our Happineſs of life, but abundance is not. The poor are as merry, 
and many times more ſatisfied, more healthy, and more at eal;, 
than thoſe that have abundance. It is a Golden Sentence which 
deſcrves to be Ingraven in every Soul. 
16 And he ſpake a parable unto them, faying, The 
ground of a certain rich man brought forth pleoritully: 
17 And he thought within himſelf, ſaying, What 
ſhall I do,becauſe I have no room where to beſtow my 
fruits ? 
18 And he ſaid, This will I do, I will pull down 
my barns,and build greater,ard there will I beſtow all 
my fruits and my goods. | 
i9 AndI will fay unto'my foul, * Soul,thou halt + 
much goods laid up for many years ; take thine calc, _ 
eat,drink, and be merry. ON” wo 
20 Bur God ſaid unto him, Thou fool ! this night '+y, - 
ſhall! * thy ſoul be required of thee ; * then who: 
ſhall thoſe things be that thou haſt provided ? _ 7 w 
21 So # he that layeth up treaſure for himſcli; and fog 
is got rich towards God. bras 
The Evangeliſt lets us know, that theſeVerſes contain not a NaF- Fla: 


Uiel) 


ratrue Of 4 matter of Fac, but only a Repreſentation Of 1011 _ 
| ' _ ne . > o if 'y Bu 
that is too ordinary, by a Fitious Story. The Scope 0! © >. 


We.CT-" 


16. 2» 
c WY 


1t 


Chap, 


49943) Is ' 
1othilg \Cte b 


ha 


—_ A ds a... a... ee... 


Preſu 


Laſtly 
and t} 
it wer 
what | 
Wenty 


XII 


hath not where to lay down his Head, and may be taken away at a 
time when he 15 1njoy1ng the fulleſt Satrsfactions that he can promiſe 
himfelf, or the Creature can afford him. Therefere he a&teth not 
like a wiſe and rational Man, that takes care to lay up for himielf 
Treaſure 01 Earth, and 1n the mean time neglettcth the Riches of 
Grace: The Senſe of the Parable 1s to be [caraed from the 633 au- 
aj which we have, Vv. 21- So he that layeth up treajure joi 
hamelf: So fooliſh, and unwiſe 1s he, Fc. But from this Parable 
we may make general Obſervations. | 7. That God maketh his Sun 
to ſhine, and his Rain to fall on the juſt, and on the unjuſt. Men 
may have laid up much Earthiy Treaſure, who are yet very pour 
towards God. 2: That the 1ocreaſe of Riches increaſeth Care. The 
rich Man ſaith, What ſhall do 2 The difference betwixt the Bezger 
and the Rich Man 15 but ins, both are ſiying, What ſhall I do ? 
The Begger faith, What ſhall T ao t» get Money ? The other ſaith, 
What ſhall T do with it now T have it? 3. Woildly Mens Fruits are 
their Goods, V+ 3- they are fo 1n their Efituw,ation, and they arc ſo as 
they are the whole Portion that ſuch fhould have from God. 

_ Great Eſtates and Enjoyments of this Life, have a very inticing 

uality in them, they make us loth to die, -and willing to thinx we 
{hall live many years. 5. They 1ntice us to a ſpiritual Sloth and Se- 
curity, and to ſing a Requiem to our Souls. 5. They 1utice us I 
ſinful Mirth and Luxury, Eat, Drink and be Merry 7. He that hath 
moſt, may have h1s Soul taken from him in a Night. 8. A Man is 
no longer owner of the Goods cf this Life, than he can keep an 
Eartiily PoſletTion of them. $5. When he dies, he knoweth not 
whoſe thoſe things ſhall ve, not whether kzs Son or Strangers ſhall 
Inherit them 3 nor, if his Son doth happen to meet with the Coun- 
tenance of the Law, doth he know whether that Son thall bea wiſe 
Man or a Fool. 10. Hence it appears to be the moſt egregious Folly 
imaginable, for Men to ſpend their time, and ftr.ngth in gerting,and 
laying up Treaſure upon Earth, in the mean time neglecting, or not 
duly cndeavouring to be Rich :owards God, Both 1. in that Grace 
by which the Soul 15 juſtified, and accepted, 2. and alfo in that Grace 
in the Exerciſe of which alone he may giorine Ged ; this latter is that 
which the Apoſtle calls, 1 Tim. 6. 18. a being Rich in good Works, 
ready to diſtribute, willing to Communicate, &c. where he mentioneth 
only one Spectes of good Works, tor, whereas Wiſdom lies in the 
choice of the beſt end, and then ot the beit means to obtain it, 
and the beſt Circumſtances in the uſe of thoſe mans, the world'y 
Man failing in the heft, not chuiing the beſt end muft needs be a Spiri- 
tal Foal, And indeed, of all Folly that is the greatett, whica is 1e.n 
in the choice of a worſer, and more 1gnoble end, before thar which 
is of more advantage, more noble, and excellent, as certainly rhe 
2cquiring of an eternal happ.acts aud felicity 1s, before an acquiring 
3 meer tranſitory, and wacertain fclicity and fatistation. = 

22 And he ſaid unto his diſciples, Therefore I ſay 
$-22ynto you, * Take no thought for your life, what ye 
57: ſhall eat 3 neither for the body, whar ye ſhall pur on. 
23 The life is more then meat, and the body 2 more 


then raiment. 

24 Conlider the ravens, for they neither ſow nor 
reap, which neither bave ſtore-houſe ror barn, and 
God feedeth them : How much more are ye better then 


the fowls. 

25 And which of you with taking thought can add 
to his ſtature one cubir ? 

26 If ye then be not able to do that thing which is 
leaſt, why take ye thought for the reſt ? 

27 Conſider the lilies how they grow : They toyl 
not, they ſpin-not ; and yet I fay uvuto you, that Sc- 
lomon in all his glory was not arrayed like oge of 


theſe. 

28 If then God ſo clothe the grafs, which is to day 
in the field, and to morrow is caſt into the oven, how 
much more wi he clothe you, O ye of little faith? 

29 And ſeek not ye what ye ſhalleat, or what ye ſhall 
(ſk? drink, neither be || ye of doubrful mind 
W* 530 For all theſe tnings%to the nations of the world 
* ſeekafter, and your father knoweth that ye have need 

of theſe things. 


See the Notes on Math. 6. from v. 25. to v. 33. where we before 
met with all that is here. The thoughtfulneſs here foroudden,is not 
moderate, prudent thought fulneſs, or care, But 1. A diftruſtful thought- 
ye fulneſs, 2. Duirating or dividing Gates, fuch as make a Man live in 
at ſuſpenſe, and to be wavering 45 a Meteor, wi wirwwerCegls, Or, 
ny 3. A thwghtfulneſs for high things, as ſome Intcrpret tnat Word : 

But poiſibly it better ſignifies ſucl: a thoughtfuineis to be farbtaden, 
as keeps the mind of Man from reſt, 1n a continual mo7zon and Flu- 
(uation, or 4. Any ſach thoughtfulneſs, as 1s inconſiſtent with our 
feering juſt the Kinadom of God. Againſt this thoughtfulneis, our 
Lord Arms his D:ſciples, with the confideration, 1. Of their de- 
penance 3n God neceſſarily ſor their Lives, which are better than Meat 
and Rayment, v.24. 2. Of the Providence of God, which extend- 
nz to all orders of Creatures, particu'arly to ſuch as meerly have 
Life (ſuch are Vegetables, the Graſs and Flowers) and ſuch as have 
#!y Life and Senſe (ſuch are the Ravens) it cantot be reaſonably 
preſumed, that it will be wanting 7 Men, who are the moſt nobie 
order of Sublugary Creatures, having Being, Life, Senſe and Reaſon 
(which is the Image of Gcd in Man). 3. From the contideration of 
the Vanity of this Care, by which we cannot Contribute a Cubif to 
wy Stature, 4. From the conſideration that the Heathens make theſe 
Flings their care, whom Chriſtians ought to excel, as Knowing more, 
and living under more excellent hopcs and prom'ſes than they have. 
Laſtly, from the contideration of their Relation th God as a Father, 
and their F.thers bnowing what the! have necd of,of whum therefore 
it were unreaſonable to prefume,that he ſhould ſuifer them to want 
Wt 15 necefiary for his Children. See more in the Notes beforc 
uncitiourd on Yatth. 5. 25, 


X||t2p- 


vn 
all 


7 
IT FE 


le, EY 


S LUKE 


| 31 But rather ſeek ye kingdom of God, and=1t 
theſe things ſhall be added unto you. 

—_— CR the Kingdom of G Xt, ard theo Rightenuſneſs 
l £ Je things ſhall be added, &c. The particle TAN Are- 
tixed here to Curie (which we Trantlite Rothor (ob yk elkes- 
pound Matthews mrpgmy, firs jeek. and likewiſe cx _ = : "ou $4- 
V1ours meaning, when he ſaid, The n1» Thoyoht what 3 u {þ al ear 
XC. That is, let not thoſe be your vol or p:incip.! chouphr-,@4in 
etlam, tantum maxime, but allo, and mo! or chictly; ſec ke 
the Kingdom of GoZ,that Kingdom mention«d in the next Verle: « ad 
all theſe things ſhall be added to you, eitiver 19 430. of thei :o7 
1 Sufficiency of them, with a contented fatictied 11nd © "ri 
in the Notes on Matth. 6. 33. | om. 


good pleaſure to give you the kingdon. 

_ Vur Saviour had mentivied a Kingd)m, ve 3t How mints too 
21g 4 thought was this for Fiſhermen, and others of hi: ror 4 
-rS to entertain ? he therefore here atſurerh them of the thiys that 
they ſhould have a Kingdom,and theweth them that their Title to bs 
wis his and their Fathers Will. The they were a littlo E/3ct ad {£2 
not like to Conquer a Kingdom upon Earth for themſelvess et the 
:hould have a Kingdom. from the free Donation of him, who wo 
Kingdoms to give, and would give it to them becauſe l;e was their 
eather, By this Kingdom can be underſtood notning cle, but that 
itate of Honour, G1ory and Dignity, which Bclicvers ſh. have in 
the World thar is to come, whicn they ſhall have not from Merit 
but Gift z not from the firſt god Motions and Inclinations of their 
own W1ll, but from the free Motions cf the Divine Wil. 2nd there- 
fore they had no reaſon to fear that God would not provide Food 
convenient for them. He that had provided a Kingdoin for them 
winch he would one Day give uato them, would ccrtainly provide 
Bread tor them, and ive 1t to them. : 


your ſelves bags which wax not old, a treafure in the &% 4 
heavens that taileth not, where no thief approacketh, 
neither moth corrupteth. 

34 For where your treaſure is, there will your heart 

be alſo. | 


The1mmutable purple of the Divine Being to Glorife the Diſ- 
ciples of Chriſt, The freedom of the Divine Willi, in the Gif o£ 
Heaven and Glory, ace neither of them cxcluſive of, but incl:.dc 
and ſuppoſe thc1r Duty to uſe ſuch due Means. as he h+th gr: +4 
them, in the uſe of which they ſhall. obtain what he hath purpo!: d 
for them, and promiſed to them, ſome of which are vere dirc&cd 
aad preſcribed. | Sel that you have, and give Alms, &c.] It is a 
precept of the fatae import with that, Matth. to. 1. Mark 10,21, 
Tho poflibly, The Precept here given to the Diſciples of Ci:ritt gC= 
nerally, is not to be Interpreted fo ſtriftly as ſeemeth to be our Sa- 
viour's meaning in thoſe Text:, as to the young man. tor 1t ſecms to 
have been a ſpecial Precept to him, laying an Obligation up'n him 
to makea preſent Aual Sale of all he had, and it 1s plaia that he 
ſo underſtood it. To this Chriſtians are not oblige? gc nerally by 
this precept, 1. But to be ready at the cal! and command of God 
fo part with all, for ſuch utes as God thould fhew thum : not ty fet 
their Heart on Riches, P/al. 62. 16. to be ready to dillrivute, and 
willing 10 communicate, 1 Tim. 6, 18. remembring thar God /:wet/ 
Mercy rather than Sacrifice, Hof. 5. 6. M.trh. 9. v3. To give of our 
Superfluittes, Luke 3 11. To make Friends «four Vam nm of un- 
righ eouſneſs, Luie 16. g. Nay®t the ncceffitics of the yeopl- of God 
be ſuch as requires 1t, for the ſubſittence of Chrifituns, to ſell what 
we have,rather than othv rs of Gods people ſhould ſtarve,cling ro- 
ting our own 1n fucha cafe, which Cliriftians did in the primitive 
State or the Church, Acts 4. 34, 35, 37. For the other part cf, 2 2, 
and v. 34. ſee the N'+tcs 0n Matth. 6. 20, 21. : 
35 Letyour loy.;s be girded about, ard your lights 


burning, 
36 And ye your ſclves like unto men thar wait fer 
their Lord, when he will recurn from the wedding, 
that when he cometh and knocketh, they may onc:: un- 
to him immediately 
The firſt words o the forticth Verſe expound the tt. teftirlh. Ro 
Je therefore always ready alſa. inthis ſenſe we fiud ti. Phrat. uf:d, 
1 Kings 18. 45. 2 Kings 4- 29. and G. 1. Fob 48. 3. and 4o. 7. Jer, 
1. 17. In thoſe Eaſtern Countries, both Maſters ai! 5crvants were 
wont to wear long Garments, which tney were wout to Gird up, 
either when they went to Fight, or when they were to 7 atel, nods 
12. If. 1 Kings 18. 46. Or when they wert o»t about any Service, fee 
Ch. 19.8. Fohn 13. 4. this was a piece of their prevuration, We 
read of the Girding about of the Loyns of the mind with T,uth, Ep. 
6. 1.4. and with habits of Grace and Virtue, I et. 1. 13, wheretore 
Gird up the Loyns of your minds, be ſober, and 19pe to the end. The 
tice rhraſe, and 10ur Lights burning, is of the ſarae import, relating 
to the Lords coming from the Wedding, mentioned v. 35. For 1n thote 
Ccuntries their Weddings were celebrated in the Night, Chritt's 
coming to Judgment, whether our particular, or the more general 
Fudgment, 15 that which is here ſet out co us under the notion of a 
Mans coming home late at night trom a Wedding. Nor 1m:p oper- 
ly ; for in this Life Souls are united to Chriſt, Eph. 5, 32. when 
Chriſt ſhall have done his Work of that nature upon the Farth,that 
all the Ele& ſhall be gathered, then ſhall he come to Jud ,ce the 
World, ie would have all his Feople be ready for that Div, and 
waiting for their Lord, that I1s coming mas be 1wilcone fo thum, 
37 Bleſſed are thoie ſervants, whom rhe Lord when 
he cometh ſhall find watching - verily | ſay unto yor!, 
that he ſhal} gird himſelf, and make them to {it down 
to meat, and will come forth and jerve them. 

38 And if he ſhall come in the ſecond watch, or come 


in the third watch, and find them lo, blelled are thoſe 


ſervants» 
39 And 


32 Fear not little flock ; * for it is your Fathers + ». 


,4 
LT 


bay 2 an 


Chap. XI1, 


T T 
" 


-3 * Sell that ye have, and give alms : provide « \R, 2.45; 
AR.2.45 


MESS = "IrIE 


vpn ——— 


F23=-Y - _—_ - 
dons 2 
»D 


ISAT _ 


I, 


pr ONT..2 


CR 


Fes 
<< 
'” - or 
® 4 - 
% 
"6% ——_ 
"s Ao Arno Aa + 
—_ 


-— 
=o a 


bY 
- yy” mate 5 
- —— 
A: nes 6 oe V2 a> : 


Chap. 


had known what hour the thief would come, he would 


X11, 


39 And this know, that if the good man of the houſe 


have watched, and not have ſuffered his houſe to be 


broken through. 
* Mat. 21. 40 * Beye therefore ready alſo, for the Son of man 


44. and 25+ Qmeth at an hour when ye Think not. 


I3- 


2ark1 3433+ Watchfirlneſs, which fignifieth, 1. A Negation of ilcep, 2. AN 10- 


The Duty which Chriſt is here pretfing upon [1s hearers, is 4. 


Se 21+ 34+ 4, Grious keeping our ſelves awake with reference to ſome particular 
-hefl. 55 end. The end here exprellcd, 1s the happy recerving of Chriit 


* Mat. 25. 
-2T. 


coming to Judgrreat ; from whence 15 8vicei.t, t»at the watching 
here intended, is a Spiritual Watching. which 18 4 denial of our ſelves 
a5 to our Laſts. and the ſleep of Sin, which is compared to ſleep, Rom. 
13. 11. Epheſ. 5. 14. 4nd an induſtrious keeping our ſelves from 
ſuch ſleep in order to the coming of our Lord, who will come, at an 
hour when we think nor, v. qo. His coming to us 15 uncertain, and 
will be to many ſurpriſong. This watchfulnet> he prefſeth upon his 
hearers, x From the reward the Lord wil give 16 ſuch Perſins. | He 
ſhall gird himſelf, and make them fit down to Meat, and will come fort? 
and ſerve = ag Very high Metaphorical exprefſions, ſignifying no 
more than thit he will put upon them a very high Honour and Dig- 
nity, and ſatisfie them with a fulneſs of Happineſs and Glory, and 
they ſhall be ar reſt for ever. Thc ſtate of Glory 1s elſewhere ſet 
out under the notion of drinbing new Wine in the Kingdom of God, 
and eating and drinking in his Kingdom. 2. From the benefit which 
they will have by watching in this.” That et the Lord come when 
he will, whether in the ſecond or third Watch, they will be ready, 
and thev ſhall be bletſed. 3. He prefſeth it allo from the ordinary 
prudence of Men, who if they have an intimation that a thief is com- 
ing, wall watch, and prevent the miſchief that might enſue by the 
breaking open c<therr Houſes. But concerning thoſe words, ſee the 
Notes on Matth 24. 43- where we met with them before uſcd up- 


on the ſame occaſion, ; 
41 Then Peter ſaid unto him, Lord, 


this parable unto vs, or even ro all? ; 

42 And the Lord ſaid, * Who then is that faithful 
and wiſe ſteward, whom hs lord ſhall make ruler over 
his hovſhould, to givezkem their portion of meat In due 
ſeaſon ? ; 

43 Bleſſed s that ſervant whom his lord when he 
cometh ſhall find ſo doinsg- 

44 Of a truth | fay unto you, that he will make 
him ruler over all that he hath. 

45 But and if that ſervant ſay in his heart, My lord 
delayeth coming z and ſhall begin to beat the men- 
ſervants and maidens, and toecat and drink, and to be 
drunken. 

46 The lord of thet ſervant will come ina day when 
he looketh not for him, and at an hour when he is not 


ſpeakeſt thou 


| Or,cut him ware, and will || cut him in ſunder, and will appoint 


of. 


F Jam.g.17- 


him h:s portion with the unbelievers. 


47 And * that ſervant which knew his lords will 
and prepared not himſelf, neither did according to his 
will, ſhall be beaten with many ſ?ripes. 

48 But he that knew not, and did commit things 
worthy of ſtripes, ſhall be beaten with few ſ/ripes, For 
unto whomſcever much is given, of him ſhali be much 
required, and to whom men have committed much, of 


him they will ask the more. 

Sce the Notes on Matth. 24. froin v. 45. to the end, where we 
met with the ſame Parable, but here expretied more largely, and 
with more Circumſtances. Matthew hath not the IntroduQion to 
it, which we have here, v. 41. It was occaſioned from Peters ſay- 
ing to Chriſt, | Lord, ſpeal::/t thou this Parable unto us, or unto all ?] 
Doth this Duty of Watchfulne/s concern ali thy Diftiples, or only us 
that are thine Apoſtles, the Miniſters of thy Goſpel 2 The ſubſtance 
of what our Lord ſaith in anſwer to Peter, from v. 42. to v. 49. 1s, 
Peter, I ſpake it to all, I have not the meaneſt hearer, but is con- 
cerned to watch againſt my coming : Eut zou that are Miniſters of 
my Goſpel, are moſt eminently concerned. Others are concerned 
up2n the pain of eternal Damnation to have the Loyns of their un- 
derſtindings girt about with truth, the Loyns of their rainds girt with 
ſobriety and hope, to have their Lights burning to be every way, 
and always ready, watching againſt fin, abſtaining from it, and in- 
duitriouſly keeping themſelves from any obedience to their Luſts, 
in a proſpe& of my coming to Judgment. But you that are to be 
Minitters, are more highly concerned than others. You are the Ru- 
ters of my Hmſhold, the Stewards of my Myſteries, x Cor. 4. 1. your 
Work is to give the reft of my People their portion of meat in due 
ſeaſon; it you faithfully do this, you ſhall be blefſed, holding on in 
doing of it to your lives end, fo as your Lord find you fo doing. 
Gut 1f any of you ſhall be found, who out of any Atheiſtical Princi- 
ples, not 1n heart beheving what you preach to others, but ſaying, 
either that I wil not come, or not ſo ſoon but you may fleep a while, 
and wake time enough to prepare for iny coming ; if they, who 
ſhould be examples to my Floek,and are the Rulers over them, ſhall 
give reins to their Luſts, and cat with the Gluttons, and drink with 
the Drunkards ; if they who ſhould feed my Flock, ſhall fall to the 
worrying of it, inſtead of fecding, beating my Men-ſervants, and 
Maidens, the Lord will not ſpare them long, but be upon them be- 
fore they are aware Kat Nyomwinu and cut them in pieces, (the 
word ſignifies to divide into two patts) as thoſe Nations were wont 
toſerve the vileſt tranſgreffors, Traits and Rebels, and violaters 
of their Covenants ; they ſhall be moſt ſeverely dealt withal, ve. 47. þ 
Thez fhall be beaten with many ſtripes, Becauſe they hnew their ma- 
Pers will, and did it ut. Ignorance of the Divine Will, will not 


% 


EE LUKE 
| wholly excuſe the finner of Ignorance : he ſhall be beaten, bur hi 
\ ftripes ſhall be few ; his damnation ſhall be gentle compared with > 


to others, but doth it not himſelf. Our Saviour further tells 


faithful in giving the Servants of Chrifts houſhold their 


 vits Kingdom, which is not divided againſt it ſelf 3 


Miniſter, that knows his Maſters will, but doth it not ; tcacheth jr 


That tjis juſt Judgment of God upon lewd and ſcandalcus them, 
ſters, is juſtified by the ordinary prattice of men, who require oy 
where they give much, and ask much of thoſe to whom they "pon 
committed great truſts, God looks upon wicked, looſe ang  Seuy 


«4 lous and miſchievous Miniſters, as the greateſt tranſgreffors, ng 'M 


will deal with them as ſuch, There will be degrees in the Punid 

ment, as well as in the rewards of another Life. Such on: 
have taken upon them to be the Rulers of Chriſts houſh11d, the "hey 
ards of his Myſteries, if they be vile and wicked, if they pon 
rFing 5 
its ſeaſon, muſt expett the deepeſt place in the bottonileps Pits £ y 
know more than others, they have more committed to their way 
than others, their examples do more harm than others, their bak 
are greater than others, and the fiery Furnace will for they ” 
heated over ſeven times. on 


49 Iam come to ſend fire on the earth, 
will , ifit be already Kkindled ? 


Some of the Ancients here by Fire, underſtood the Zbly Ghip c. 
the Preaching of the Goſpel, with thoſe flames of Loyve, and holy a 
fetions which that cauſeth in the i:carts of good people ; but this In 
rerpretation cannot but be looked upcn as ſtrained to thoſe who 
compare this verfe with v. 5I, 52, 53. and the parallel Text l2 
Mat. 10. 34. 35, 35. By Fire here therefore is to be underſtood t! 
diſſenfion or diviſion 12entioned, v. 51. with all thoſe Perſecution; 

b 


and whaz 


verſccutions, or Wars,or any kind of troubled ſtate of things is often 
expreſſed in Holy Writ under the notion of Fire and Water, « 
Fload . for though Fire and Water are oppoſite in their qualities &t 
they both agree in the common effc& of conſumption, waſting and 
deſolation, <hriſt ſaith, he came to ſend it, becauſe he foretaw this 
woula be a ccrt.in conſequent, tho not a proper and natural eff: 
of the Preaching of the Goſpel. Chrift may be ſaid to come to ſen 
a Fire in the ſame ſenſe, as hc that is imployed in the removy4] of 1 
filthy Danghil, may be ſad r9 come to ſend a ſtench; his deſign is ty 
carry the muck away, and in due time. he will have done it, but in 
the mean time it ſends out a much greater ſtench than before it wi 
ſtirred. | And what will I, if it be ciread; hindled ?T Not to tals 
notice of what crirical Author: ſay, about the figr:ification cf the 
Particles, or the Phraſe here uſed, I take the true ſenſe to be, 17: 
fire nothing more than that it were already |iailed; nor was this any 
more inconſiſtent with the goodneſs and holineſs of Chri?, th 
for a Goldſmith to wiſh the Fire was kindled that ſhou'd ſeparate 
the droſs from the pure metal, or than for Chriſt to defire thit }; 
floor were throughly purged. Chriſt doth not defire the fire for the 
fires ſake, but for the ſake of that effe&t it would have, in ſroaratiy; 
in kis Church the good from tac bad ; it was a thing he ſaw would 
be, through the oppoſition the world would give to the Preaching 
of the Goſpel, before his Goſpel would obtain in the -world; j 
would, faith he, that what they do, they wou!d do quickly, that 
they would ſpit their Venome, that my Father might make ther 
wrath to praiſe him. Whereas ſome interpret it indicatively, 3 
if the fire were already begun, & d-&y1p2y can hardly. be f [t- 
terpreted. 


50 But I have a baptiſm to be baptiſed with, and 


how am I || ſtraitned till it be accompliſhed ? 

This Baptiſm ſpoken af here by our Saviour 15s the ſame mentioned 
Matth. 20. 22,23. and can be underſtood of nothing but his Pafſion, 
the accompliſhment of which he hinteth us was to be, ere the fire 
(before mentioned) would blaze up on the Earth. Concerning this 
he ſaith he was ſtraitned till it was accompliſhed ; not that he willed 
the influencing the heart of Fudas to betray him, the heart of Pi 
late to condemn him, or the hearts of the wicked Jews, to Accuſe, 
Condemn and Crucific him ; but he willed theſe events for the mani- 
feſtation of the Glory of his Father, in the Redemption of the 
World by him. As the Woman big with Child heartily wiſheth 
that the hour of her Travel were come and over, nor for the pains 
Jake, which ſhe muſt endure, but for her own eaſe ſake, and the joy 
ine ſhould have of a Child born into the World. 


51 Suppoſe ye that I am come to give peace on earth ? 
I tell you, Nay, * but rather diviſion. 

52 For from henceforth there ſhall be five in one 
houſe divided, three againſt two, and two againſt 
three. 


53 The father ſhall be divided againſt the ſon, and 
the ſon againſt the father : the mother againſt the 
daughter, and the daughter againſt the mothcr : the 
mother in law, againſt hec daughter in law, and ths 
daughter in law, againft her mother in law. 


See the Notes on Matth. 10. 34, 35. Our Savicur in theſe words 
doth but purſue the ſame Argument, which began v. 49- f9 ſhew 
what would be the conſequents of the Doftrine of the Goſpel, And 
hereby they might have underſtood a deſign in our Saviour fo Cote 
vince them, that the buſineſs of the Meſſiah whom they cxpettec,i\4? 
not to exerciſe a temporal, but a ſpiritual Kingdom and Power 3 notto 
reſtore to their Nation a civil Peace, but to purchaſe th.ir r<9c* 
with God, and to bring them to that Joy and Peace which 35 4 Col- 
ſequent to believing. For as to the external ſtate of things 1: would 
be much more troubled than it was before ; our Lord forciaw how 
fenacious both the Jews and Pagans, and in ſucceeding 2zes as" 
ans alſo would be of their Idolatries and Superftittous rights and ul 
ges, with whom their believing Relations not comp! yiog, there 
would greater feuds and animoſities ariſe than ever weic befores 
the Father would hate the Son, the Son the Father, &c. a 
the Eoſpel came among the Heathens, they were entirely the A 
but when by Chr 


. 13 be. ſeparated 
thoſe who belonged to the eleftion of Grace ſhou'c be _— 


Chap, X11 


Wars, (5c. which are theeffedts of it. A Prediftion, or threatning of 


+ My 


(0t.10 


Mark 


XIII 


through the Devils rage, and Mens lufls, there would be continual 
feuds, and diviſions. 

4 And he ſaid alſo to the people, When ye ſee a cloud 
riſe out of the weſt, firaighrway ye ſay, There cometh a 
ſhower ; and fo 1t 1s. - 

5 +nd when ye ſee the fouth-wind blow, ye ſay, There 
will be heat 3 and it cometh to paſs, 

56 Ye hypocrites, ye can diſcern the face of the skie, 
and ofthe earth : but how is ir, chat ye do nor diſcern 
this time ? 

we met with a Diſcourſe of the ſame Nature, Matth. 15. 2. Sec 
the Notes there. Theſenſe of our Saviour is, that God by his Pro- 
phets had given them more certain Signs and Revelations of the 
coming of the Meſſiah, and of the Nature of his Ringdom, and the 
effects, and conſcquents of it, than were written in Nature of any na- 
tural effedts, and upbraids their ſtupid ignorance, and unbelief, that 
they could give credit to, and diſcern the latter, and not the former, 
whereas the former were much more certain. 

g7 Yea, and why even of your ſelves judge ye not what 
isright ? EE 

Z * When thou goeſt with thine adverſary to the ma- 

ſtrate, 44 tho art in the way, pive diligence that thou 
mayeſt be delivered from him ; leſt he hale thee to the judge, 
and the judge deliver thee to the officer, and the officer 
caſt thee into priſon, 

x9 I tellthee, thou ſhalt not depart thence till thou haſt 

aid the very laſt mite *. 

Our Saviour made uſe of this expreſſion, Matth. g. 25. to per- 
ſwade Peace betwixt Brethren ; here he uſeth it to perſwade Men to 
dcquaint themſelves with God, and be at Peace. ; 
ing of the laſt Judgment,there was no fitter foundation, upon which 
he could build an exhortation to Repentance, and making our Peace 
with God. In not doing of it, he telleth his hearers that they did 
not of themſelves judge what was right, for if they did, they 


S. LUKE 


ho their Faftjon was fuch. The Reader 


He had been treat- ' 


| would judge themſelves as much concerned to come to an ag cement , 
| with God, as they did ordinarily to come to an agreemert with 
Men. Now if amongſt Men they had an Adverſary, they did not 
judge it Prudence to ſtand out with him till the Sentence of the 
| - Judgewere paſt, and thev were impriſoned, nor tocome out till they ; 
had .paid every farthing of the Debt, and Charges wherein they 
were Condemned ; but to agree while they were in the way, before 
they came to a final judgment in the caſe, that fo having compound: ; 
ed the caſe, they might avoid the judgment. So in the caſe betwixt i 
God and their Souls, if they judged right, they would judge that it 
was not their Wiſdom to ſtand out till the irrevocable Sentence 0 


is at liberty to chuſe which 
{ , for [ find no other account given 
by any. The latter is prejudiced by our Saviour's calling them 
Galileans, and advantaged by the deiperate hatred which rhe Tews 
had to the Samaritans, Which might make them more prone to 
cenſure any paſſages of Divine Providence ſevere towards them. But 
what the certain crime, or provocation was, we cannot ſay; we 
are ſure that de fa#a the thing was true ; Pilate did mingle the 
Blood of ſome Galileans with their Sacrifices, of which a report was 
broughr to Chriſt. We are at the ſame loſs for thoſe eizhteen upoy 
whom the Tower of Siloam fell. Silve or Silo was the -Name of 4 
ſmall fountain, at the foot of Mount Zim, which, as we are told 
did not conſtantly,but at certain times ſend out Waters, which run- 
ning through hollow places of the Earth, and Mines and Quarries 
of Stone, made a great noiſe. Taiuh mentio:1; it, ch. 8.6. There 
was alſo a Pool in Feruſalem which had that name, and had 2 Wall 
built by it, Neh. 3. 15. Chrift ſent the Blind Man to go and waſh 
there, Foh.g. 7. Turrets are (as we know) very uſual upon Wa'ls. It 
ſeems one of theſe Towers fell, and ſlew eighteen Perſons, come thi- 
ther either to waſh themſelyes, or by reaſon of ſome healing 'virtue 
in thoſe Waters upon what occafion we cannot determine, but there 
they periſhed. This Story ſeems to have been ſoirething o'der than 
the other. Our Saviour either had heard, what ſome Pcople had 
ſaid, or at leaft knew what they would ſay upon thoſe accidents, 
(for we are mightily prone to paſs uncharitablc Jadgments upon 
Perſons pcriſhing ſuddenly,eſpecially if they dye "”y aviolent Death), 
As he therefore took all occaſions to preſs upon them Repen' ance, 10 
he doth not think fit to omit one fo fair, and tho he doth not 
by what he ſaith, torbid us to obſerve ſuch extraordinary Providen- 
ces, and to whom they happen, but wiilcth us to hear, and tear ; 
yet he tells them, there were many Galileans as bad as they, who 
unleſs they repented (that is) beivg ſenſible of heartily turned 
from the wickedneſs of their ways,would periſh alſo : Thereby teach- 
ing us, r. That Puniſhments come upon Pcople for their Sins, and 


of theſe he thinks moſt probable 


; more ſignal Puniſhments for more ſignal Sinnings. 2. That altho 
' God ſometimes by his Providence fignally puniſheth ſome for noto- 


rious Sinnings, yet he ſpareth more ſuch Sinners than he ſo ſignally 
puniſheth. 3. That therefore nore can conclude from ſuch tignal 
Puniſhments,that ſuch Perſons puniſhed, were greater Sinners than 
they. 4 That the beſt uſe we can make of ſuch reports, and ſpecta- 
cles of notorious Sinners more than ordinarily puniſhed, is to exa- 
mine our ſelves, and to repent, leſt we aiſo periſh. 


'6 Helſpake alſo this parable, * A certain man had a * Mat.2r: 


fig-treeplanted in his vine-yard, and he came and ſought 19- 
fruit thereon, and found none. | 

7 Then ſaid he unto the drefſer of his vine-yard, Be- 
hold, theſe three years 1 come leekiag fruic on this fig- 


Chap. XIII, 


'rree, and find none, cut it down, why cumbreth it the 
ground ? 

8 And he anſwering, faid unto him, Lord, ler it 
. Jone this year alſo, till I ſhall dig about ic and dung 


Condemnation was paſſed upon them, but in the way, during the 
time of this Life, they would make their Peace with God, and re- 
form their Lives before that great and terrible day came. It is a 
Sign the Papiſts are at a woful loſs for Arguments to prove Purga- 
tory, when they make uſe of = Text, becauſe it is ſaid, = _ '1ts 
not depart thence til/ thou haſt paid the uttermoſt farthing, as if 7 - , ; that 
this Text ſpake of a Priſon for Souls from which there is an out-let 3 9 - — fruit, well : and if not, chen afcer tha 
ſuch another Argument will prove. from. Pſal. t10. r. that Chriſt thou! a 8 Cur _ og hereth with th din> diſcourſe. 
ſhall not fit at the right hand of his Father, b-cauſe God only ſaid to Ttits raiave very fitly cohereth wi e Freced!N; Ties 
him fit there until I make thine Enemies thy foatſlool. And that Fo- There = _ ap - hearers know, _ - _ _ _ they 
; it ic (ai . 1, he ners, and hath a longer patience wit em than others, tho 
oo Yer hang” > ye) androgen rin oy . Tat be every whit as great cranſereſſors, in expeQation ſtill that they 
have before ſhewed that that term, tho it be excluſrve of a time paſt, | ſhould bring forth trait, yet if they anſwer not the means which 
yet doth not determine a future time, God uſeth with them to bring them to repentance, they [hall not be 
} CHAP. XIII ſpared long,but vengeance ſhall overtake =_ ilſo. = wo pam 
, : OY . that this Parable concerned not the Jews onlv, but all Mankind, or 
b) the Example of the Ts, and toe elghivey hee: more eſpecially thoſe who are in the Liv of the Church, judge well, 
wnrt Ar dre rogr eee ie ae oe ue —y provided that they allow it to have been ſpoken with a primary re- 
which end, he telleth them the Similitude of the barren Fig-tree, ference to that Nation amongſt whom Chriſt had now been vreach- 
6—9, He healeth a omen on the rag "Th — ir A ing and Working Miracles three years, and expeQed the fruits of Re- 
rit of Infirmity eighteen years, 1013. 7 _ be f, 4 f pentance, and Reformation from them in vain. I do not think it 
the Ruler of the Synagogue, 14—17, Comparet 2 , NY Nrive any prejudice to this, that the Vine-drefſer begged but for one year 
Heaven to Muſtard ſeed and Leaven, 18—22, Ex "= 4 . _ longer, whereas after this Chriſt had patience with them forty years, 
—_ af 108 —_ G 2-20 i > before they were deſtroyed ; for one year may not be intended ſtrid- 
eauſe of Ferod's deſign : He complaineth of their Cruelty, and fores . ly, (tho the three years be) but to fignifie ſome little rime more, that 


tellth their ruin, 31 3 5+ : im th d 
- the Apoſtles might uſe all probable means to reclaim them, an 
J Here were preſent at that ſeaſon, ſome that told make x vo more G-uitful. Grotizs thinks the term of three years is 


him of the Galiſeans, whoſe blood Pilate had . uſed, becauſe every fig-tree (not wholly barren) brought forth 

bed Jets anſwering, 6d neo them, Suppaſs yo] thier niet cnt ay Bon conn 

1 ſ e U e Ve; ble, but may be of ill conſequence, ©, 

that Fe En — _ brug _— 4a ; that tens days of Grace exceed not three years z yet thus ao 

becauſe " FRI mma hy os? * | obſervable, that when God ſends a faithful Miniſter to a place, the 
e tney fuftered fuch things : 


00 7: reateſt ſucceſs and bleſſing of their Miniſtry is within a few of 
3 | tell you,Nay : butexcept yerepent, yeſhall all like- Nuke firſt years ina place. The Parable doubtleſs extendeth much 
wile periſh | 


further than to the People of the Jews and yn us _ _ = R 
. in CG . That wnere God plants any one within the pale of his Church, he 
4 Orthole eighteen upon whou te" townr-in n—_ zooks he or ſhe ſhould bring torth che fruits of Repentance and Faith. 
&1!, and flew them,think ye that they were ſinners || above 
all men that dwelt in Jeruſalem ? 


That many are ſo planted, yet bring forth no fruit. 3. That 
there Sages. time beyond which God wiil not bear with 
.5 Itell you, Nay : but except ye repent, ye ſhajl all like- 
Wile periſh, 


barren Souls. 4. That barren Souls are not only uſeleſs, but alſo 
ſpoil others Jay yiv. x&Tagys, they make the ſoil unprofitable. 
The Holy Scriptures giviog us no account of theſe two ſtories, to 
which our Saviour doth here refer, and thoſe who have wrote the 


A quench-coal ſpoils the Fire. $5. That fiithful Minifters will be 

very carneſt with God to ſpare even barren Sou's. 5. That it 8 

j i ; their work and duty to uſe all probable means to mak« oarren Souls 
Hiſtory of the Jews having given us no account of ther, Interpre- 
ters areata great loſs to determine any thing about them. We read 
0! one 7udss of Galilee, who drew away much People after him, 


fruitful. 1 will dig about it and dung it. 75. Thata beuring truit at 
and periſhed, As 5 37. It is ſaid, that he ſeduced People from 


= 
PT) 


1 1 T: ai without 
laſt will. fave Souls from ruin, and deſtruQtion. 8. | 
it, every Soul tho ſtanding in God's vineyard, will at laſt periſh e- 


ſVuu)l 


\ ' - lly, 
their obedience to the Roman Emperor, perfivading them not to ac- | <0 _ tithe f — 
pr = | aching in one of the {ynago 

mowledge him as their Governour, not to pay tribute to the Romans, p bes 5 he was te hing ynagog 

| s gueſſed by Interpreters, that ſome of this Fa&tion coming up to | 1a N TE 
= ine Paſſver, (tor they were Jews) Pilate fell upon them, and flew 11: And behold, there was a woman which had a = 
gk them while they were ſacrificing, Others think that theſe were | of infirmit eighteen years, and was bowed rogerner, 
\ De- ſome remnant of Fudns his Faftion, but Samaritans, an@ {hin while I iſs lift up her felf. 
e De a or. Frag Fee and could in no wile lift up . 
riſk cy were Sacrificing at their Temple in Mount Gerazim, and that 4 wha Je ſos fow her, be called her to him, 
ates, (io Samaritans} they were called Galileans, becauſe Juls the head | 12 And W 2 2 


UYol. 2. 


— 


_ nt en Ee ee neon eo A 
y 7 
"boa = 


- Exod. 2c. bath-day, and ſzid unto the people, 


LD 
* Matth. 
12. 10. 


Chap. 6. 7. 


*Ch.15. 4 


and ſaid unto her, Woman, thou art looſed from thine in- | 


firmity. | | 
ka he laid bis hands on her : and immediately ſhe 


was made ſtraight, and glorified 2 i: SO _ 

Tho the Greek ve m the -abbaths, Wh might fignine any # 
of the Week, 3ct it is manifeſt by what followeth that this Miraci 
was wrought upon the &venth day which was the —_— vn 6 
elſe the Rulcr of the Synagogue would not have qua eelicd mg oy 
Saviour about it. What is meant here, v. I. by a Sprtt of _ 
mity, would not eatily be determined, whether only a very 8 oy wi 
firmity, or an Infirmity, in the bringing and continuing # CG 
upon her the Dec! had a great inſtrumentaiity, but for V. : EY , p 
ſhe is ſaid to be one that Satan had bound ;, the was 2 =, oracle 
bowed down that ſhe could not lift up her ſelf, and thus the hac So 
for eighteen vears, ſo as tize diſtemper was invetcrate, and ou - Þ G 
courſe of ordinary cure. Chriſt, who as to Peoples bodily 4 __ 
ties, was ſometimes found of thoſe that ſought h1m Not, ſeeing her, 
calleth her to him, and ſ1ith, | {3man thou art lofed from thy PRs. 
ty, He laveth his hands on her, and immediately ſhe was flraight.] c - 
invetcrateneſs of the Diſcaſe, and the inſtantancouſrcts of the __ 
without the ufe of any means, m«de the Miracie evident. The Wo- 
man for it gave thanks to Gvd, for that 1s meant by 8: 


wifted God ; 
ſhe ſpake ſome things to the honour, and Glory of God who had 
healed her 


14 And the ruler of the ſynagogue anſwered _ 
indignation, becaule that Jeſus had healed on the lab- 


days in which men ought tro work - fit them there- 
fore come and be healed, * and not on the {abbath- 
day. . 

anſwering here figniiies no more than he ſpate, as 10 4 nr" 
of other places in the Goſpels, The ſews were both very Supertit1- 
tious, and very uneven,as to the Santification of the Sabbath. Super- 
flitians becauſe thev would not Eo many things, which by God's Law 
they might do, ſuch as applying means to heal the Sick, defending 
themſelves againſt Enemies, &c. Uneven becauſe they would do d1- 
vers things of equal bodily labour with thoſe things which they pre- 
tended to ſcruple, one of which we ſhall here our Saviour by and 
by inſtancing in. This Ruler ſtudied to defame him before the Peo- 
ple. His pretence was, this was a Work, and ſuch a Work, as might 
be done in 11x day. Let us hear how our Saviour defendeth him- 
ſclf. 


15 The Lord then anſwered him, and ſaid, Thou hy: 
pocrite, * doth nor each one of you on the ſabbath loole 


his ox or hy aſs from the tall, and lead him away to wa- 


tering ? 

16 And ought not this woman being a daughter of Abra- 
ham, wkom Satan hath bound, lo, theſe eighteen years, be 
fooled from this bond on the ſabbath-day ? 

Our +aviour here callcth this Ruler of the Synagogue Hypocrite, 
for his impucence in ſo ſevere a retfettion on him for doing on the: 
Sabbath-Day, a Work of that Nature, which he himſelf did, and 
thought himſelf blameleſs in the doing of, and his friends ordinar1'y 
did, upon whom for ſo working he did not refle& ; thereby teaching 


us one note of an Hypocrite, viz To reflec upsn others for things which | 


we do 1ur ſelves. This Ruler of the Synagogue and his Party indeed did 
not heal on the Sabbath D.cy. But what kind of Work was healing ? 
was it not a Work of Mcrcy 2 what ſervile labour was there in it? 

tis only ſaid Chriſt called this poor Crezture, and ſhe came, not 
ſhe was brought to liim. What did Chriſt do 2 he only laid his 
hands iron her, and pronounced her Icofed from her infirmity. 
Now the Jews would ordinarily apon the Sabbath-day, looſe a Beaſt 
from the Stall .to go and drink at a Pit, or ledd it thither, was not 
this a greater Jab2ur 2 Fow came this to be Lawful, and not that 
aft of Mercy which Chriſt did ſhew to this poor Creature ? Their 
at was capable of no other excuſe, than that it was an Ad of Mer. 
cy. and 2good Man wril ſhew Mercy to his Beaſt ; it could be no 
AQ of Piety, nor of V:ce{ity; for a Beaſt may live one Day without 
Water, or at leaft might have had Water ſet by 1t the Night before ; 
nay our Lord's Work of Mercy was much more Notle. Theirs 
was toa Beaft, his to on? of MHenlind, to a Woman, and ſhe a Few- 
b Woman, a Daughter of 4bran4am, a Fathcr upon whom they much 
valued themſelves, and their whole Nation, Matth. 3. g. Fob. 8. 39. 
Their Beaſt might tiot be Sick, The was under an Infirmity, and. 
that no ordinary Infirgmity, ſhe was in the hands of the Enetny of 
Manitnd, bound by Satan; nor was" her afhittion of a few days con- 


elnuance, ſhe Had becn fo bound erghteen years. 


- 17 And when he had ſaid theſe things, all his adverſa- 
ries were aſhamed :. and all the people rejoyced for all the 
Zlorious things that were done by him. 

- Tt 159ne thing to be aſhamed, another thing to be convinced, fo 
45 to confeis an error 5 they were aſhamed. that they were ſo put to 
ſence before the People; but we read of no confeſſion of their error, 
and miftake, and bzgging Chriſt's Pardon 3 the People rejoyced and 
gave thanks to God tor all the glorious things that were done by 
Sur Saviour. 


: 18 Then {aid he, Unto what 1s the kingdom of God 


like ? and whereunto ſhall I refemble it ? 

19 it is like a grain of Muſtardeſeed, which a man took 
and caſt inro his garden, and it: grew, and waxed a great 
tree: and the fowls of the air lodged in the branches of 
it. - | 2 A ek, 
+..20 And 25210 he laid, Whereunto ſhall 1liken;the king- | 
fdom of God ? ES of, {of 
_ 21. It is like leaven, which.a woman took and hid in 
*aree meaſures of meal, till the whole was leavened. 


. 


* There are {jx 


See the Notes on Matthew 123. 2C, 22 + They SA 9s 
rables by which Chriſt ropes ihe, a Wo = the Faq 
notwithſtanding the preſent ſmall appearance of the efticacy of is Nh 

22 * And he went through the cities, and villages *v 
reaching and journeying towards Jeruſalem. 2? Marks 7 

Still wherever we tind our Blefled Lord, we find him feack;., 
and that not by an exemplary Life only, but by Word of ll 
There are different opinions whether our Saviour was now ;: +=" 
ing towards Feruſalem, with reſpe&t to. the Paſſiver, or ſome oth. 
oreat Feſtival of the Jews. : 

2.3 Then ſaid one unto him, Lord, are there few thi: he 
laved ? And he {aid unto them, | 

24 Strive to enter in at the ſtrait gate : for many 
[ ſay - unto you, will feek to enter in, and ſhall no þ+ 
able. 

Our Saviour hath told us, Matth. 7. 13. that ftraizht is the way 
and narrow is the Gate, that leadeth to eternal Life, and few thers 
be that find it. Upon this exhortation 1s- founded dyaitck 
contend, or ſtrive to cnter in at this ſtraight Gate, a Word which 
tignifies a Jabouring againſt oppoſition, and the utmoſt endeaygy; 
of the Mind, and Body ; not that our own Iabouring will bring \; 
thither, for eternal Life is the Giit of God, and without the ing. 
ence of his Grace we can do nothing effe&ually; but to let us know 
that the Lord will give Heaven to none but ſuch as labour ana 
ſtrive for it, yca and alſo ſtrive lawfally. He tells us that many 
thall ſeek and ſhall not enter. Either ſeeking in a wrong way, of jn 


J 
Wer 
+ t 


- 


Kingdom of God 3 and many who ave the Laff, up93 thet2 acc 


| 
an undue time. By this Speech of our Saviour's he diverts them 
from that curious Queſtion, about the number of thoſe that ſhall 
be ſaved. That was not ſo much their concern to know, as that they | 
ſhould be ſome of that Number, | 
25 When once the maſter of the houſe is riſen up ; 
and * hath ſhut to the door, and ye begin to ſtand * vi 
without, and to knock at the door, ſaying, * Lord, '*. } 
Lord, open unto us : and he ſhall anſwer, and {ay unto you, 2 , g 
I * know you not whence you are. he : 
26 Then ſhall ye begin to ſay, We have eaten and c 
drunk in thy preſence, and thou haſt taught in our d 
ſtreets, B 
27 But he ſhall ſay, I tell you, I know you ng , 
whence you are; * depart from me all ye workers of -;; bo 
iniquity, | | tt e] 
Our Saviour 1n theſe verſes doth repreſent himſelf by a Man, O! 
who having invited gueſts to his Supper, ſtays till all thoſe who th 
were invited, and accepted the invitation, were come in ; then ri- m 
ſing up, ſhuts the Door, and after that is ſhut, turns a deafcar t9 Je 
any that ſhall come knocking, let them plead for admittance whet C: 
they can plead. By this Parabolical expreffing of himſelf, he both Ta 
| openeth in part, what he meant by the foregoing Words. May $a 
ſhall ſeek to enter in, and ſhall not enter, and alſo lets us know, that of 
there is a determinate time, wherein Souls muſt (if ever) accept of E; 
the offers of Grace and Salvation when they are made to them, th 
which if they lip, they will not be able to obtain of God an entrance no, 
into the Ringdom of Heaven. Seek the Lord while he may be found ſer 
ſaith the Prophet, I/a. 55. 6. 7. In an acceptable time I have heard too 
thee, (faith the Prophet) T/a. gs. 8. which the Apoſtle, 2 Cor. 6. 2. and 
applyeth to perſwade Mer that they ſhould not receive the Grace of Pre 
God (in the Goſpel) in vain. What this determinate time is, God of C 
hath hidden from us, and it is probable that it is not the ſame as to ful, 
all Perſons. We know nothing to the contrary, but while there & wha 
life there is hope, which warranteth us to Preach Faith and Repen- Tca 
tance to all. Weare alſo further inſtruted, That no outward Pri- day 
viledges, tho Chriſt hath taught in our Streets : No external afts if free! 
Communion with Chriſt,tho we can ſay, we have Eat and Drank with brar 
him, will juſtifie our hopes of entrance into Heaven, if in the mean but 
time we be Workers of iniquity. We had much the ſame, Matth. 7.21, whit 
22, 23- Seethe Notes there. thoſ 
28 There ſhall be weeping and gnaſhing of teeth, when = 
ye ſhall ſee Abraham, and Itaac, and Jacob, and all the = 
prophets in the kingdom of God, and you your ſelves w4 
thruſt out, | $& 
29 And they ſhall come from the eaſt, and from the = 
weſt, and from the north, and fro: the ſouth, and ſhall ſit - 7 
down.in the kingdom of God, phet: 
We have the ſame Matth. 8. 11, 12. only he faith, only from the meat 
Kaſt, and from the Weſt. . See the Notes there. Wailing, and gnaſhing viou 
of teeth, are uſual expreffions by which the pains of the Damned ar* Hhly 
exprefſcd ; eſpecially by the Evangeliſt Matthew, ch. 8. 12. c. 15. 
42, 5s Ch, 22. 13. Ch, 24. gt. ch. 25. 30. One cauſe of this vexat!- h | 
on of Spirit expreſſed under this Notion, is the Jews ſight of the reit pnet 
and happineſs that their Relations, nay ſome to whom they upon Ofter 
Earth were Enemies, ſhould enjoy in Heaven. Nay which ſome hen - 
which were Heathens ſhould enjoy there, when as they that too: not 3 
themſelves to be the only Church, and to have the fame right to tile | ; 
Kingdom of Heaven, that Children have to the Inheritanccs of the!! S\ 
Father, ſhould be caſt out, as having no portion there. GG And 
: +20. time 
3o And behold, there are laſt which ſhall be fir!t, a 
and there are firſt which ſhall be laſt. By 
This is a Sentence which our Saviour often made uſe of, and n9! 45rd 
always to the fame purpoſe, See the Notes on Matth. 19. 3%: = the + 
20, 16, Mark. 10. 31. Asto the ſenſe of them. here, 1t 15 pain. _ are /; 
Saviour here forztelleth the Converſion of the Gent?les 5 but FE : kunity 
donot take the Gentiles to be all who are intended under the Not!0" Shin, 
of the Laſt, but divers others alſo, Men who both in their ___ to effe 
of themſelves, and in reality with reſpe& to Priviledge, arc ! w__ but th 
whether in reſpe& of-Gifts, or Office, or the means of Grac?, Cl * '- have d 


feſſion, will many of them be the laſt, that is, furtheſt off from - 
4JOLC UN:? 


4 


_ hp. 
1 1 


112,25 


time come when ye ſhall ſay, * Blefſed & he that cometh | 


XIII. 


will in the Day of Judgment 62 fir, that is, appear ſo, as having 
more of the favour of God, and be ſo, taken to Heaven, when the 
others ſhall be caft to Hell, Matth. 11. 29D, 21, 22, Oc. 


7 The ſame day there came certain of the Phariſees» 
ying unto him, Get thee out, and depart hence : for 
Herod wil kill thee. 
32 Ard he ſaid unto them, Go ye and tell that fox, 
Behold, I caſt out devils. and I do cures ro day and 
to morrow, and the third day [I ſhall be perfe&- 


d. 
; 33 Nevertheleſs, I muſt walk today and to morrow, 
and the day following : for it cannot be thar a prophet 


periſh our of Jeruſalem. 

It is plain from this Text. that our Saviour was at"this time in 
Galilee, for that. was the Tetrarchy, or Province of Herod Antipas, 
who is the Herod here mentioned : whether theſe Phariſees came up- 
on their own heads, or as ſent by Herod is not fo plain, nor ſo well 
agreed by Interpreters. If they came upon their own heads it is 
certain they came not out of kindneſs, for the whole Hiſtory of the 
Goſpel, lets us know, that the Phariſees had no kindneſs for Chriſt, 
hut were his moſt implacable Enemies, and continually conſulting 
how to deſtroy him 3 but they either came to ſcare him out of Galli- 
1:e, whoſe repute was ſo great, and who 4id them ſo much miſchicf 
there. or to drive him into the rap, which they had laid for him 
*n Judea But it is moſt probable, that they cime as ſecretly ſent 
by Herod, who tho of himfclf he be report:d to be of no Blood 
diſpoſition, yet upon the Phariſees *continu | Callicitatiovs might be 

rſuaded to ſend them on this errand, chuling rather cunningly 
to ſcare him out of his Province, than by viclence to fall upon 
him. This opinion looks more probable, Becauſe v. 32. Oar Sa- 
viour ſends them back with a Meſſage tn Herod, Go and tell that Fox. 
Herd had gained himſclf no reputation amongſt the Jews by his 
Murthering John the Baptiſt, whom the Jews generally valued as a 
Prophet, and probably ſeeing our Saviour exceeding him in popular 
applauſe, he was not willing to augment the Odium which already 
Jay upon him for that Fad ; vet to gratine the Phariſees (many of 
which were in his Province) he was willing if he could effeRt it 
cleaverly, and without noiſe, to be quit of Chriſt, eſpecially confi- 
derins (as we before heard_) he had an opinion that he was obn 


Baptiſt riſen from the Dead, or the Soul of Fohn the Baptiſt in ano-| 


ther Body; and poffibly he could not tell what might be the eftet 
ofhis Ghoſt, ſo haunting his Province, It 1 certain, that either he, 
or the Phariſees, or bot+, had a mind to have him gone ſome whither 
elſe, to which purpoſe this Meflage is brought to him. Our Savi- 
aur either diſcerning Herod's craft in this thing, or having obſerved 
the craft he uſed in the whole managery of his Government, that he 
might keep favour both with the Roman Emperer, and with the 
Tews, hids them, Go and tel! that Fox, T do not much value their 
C-'rfcal obſervation, who obſerve that it is not 4Awmers £xeiyn but 
reyry that is, this Fox, from whence they wnuld ooſerve that our 
Saviour might mean the Phariſees, not Herod, nor is there any need 
of it to excuſe our Saviour from the violation of that Law of God, 
Exod, 22. 28. Thou ſhalt not revile the Gods, nor curſe the Ruler of 
thy Perple, which Law Paul reiiz&ed on, Aﬀs 23. 5g. and pleads ig- 
norance for his calling Ananias, a Whited Wall ; for we ſhall ob- 
ſerve that the Prophets all along (being immediately ſent from God) 
took a further liberty than ay others, in ſeverely reproving Kings 
and Princes. Elijah tells Ahab it was he that troubled Tſrael ; the 
Prophets call the Rulcrs of the Jews, Rulers of Sodom, and Princes 
of Gynorrah, dc. But Chriſt may be allowed a liberty neither Law - 
ful, nor decent for otter Perſons, no tho they were Prophets, But 
what is the meſſage which Chriſt ſends by theſ Phariſees ? [Bebold 
Icaft out Devils, and I do cures to day, and to Merrow, and the third 
day T (hall be perfefed.) Tel' him, faith he, what 1 am doing, Tam 
freeing his SubjeQs from m2l-ſtations by ev'l Spirits, and the incum- 
brances of many Diferſes What do I do worthy of Death ? I have 
but a little time to troub/e him, for ina little time I muſt Dye, 
which is that which he means by being perfeFed, ( It is plain that 
thoſe Words ta Day and to» Morrow, and the third Dav, muſt not be 
taken ſtrialy, for Chriſt lived more than three Days after this.) If 
this will not ſatisfie him, tell him, (ſaith ovr Saviour) That 1 muſt: 
wall to Day, and to Morrow, and the Day following. IT know, that as 
to this thing fam not under his Command, or Power, I mult walk, 
&c, My Dars are not in his hands, and T know that he cannot 
bill me, [ for it canmt be that 2 Prophet perth out of Feruſalem. ') Feru- | 
falem is the place where I muſt die, not Galilee; the Sarhedrim fits 
at Zeryſalem who alone can take cogniſance of the caſe of falſe Pro- 
phets, and Jeruſalem is the place where the People muſt fill up the 
meaſure of their iniquities by ſpilling my Blood. Upon this our Sa- 


S. LUKE. 


ending of his Miniſters faithfully 


viour breaketh out into a ſad Lamentation of the caſe of that once. 


Hil City, the praiſe of the whole Earth, 


34 O Jeruſalem, Jeruſalem, which killeſt the pro- 


phets, and ſtoneſt them that are ſent unto thee: how j 


often would 1 have gathered thy children together, as a 
hen doth gather her brood under her wings, and ye would | 
not * 

35 Eehold, your houſe is lefr unto you deſolate : 
And verily [ſay unto you, Ye ſhall not ſee me, until the ' 


11 the name of the Lord. 


= _ innocently, and diligently 
opie trom grievous Diſeaſes, and the Powyer of $ it 
_ poſleſt and tormented them? 3. When the ER. 
i nt. God - Pcople have done what they can, they (ſhall finiſh 
—_ meow) er ag the time God hath ſet them. 4- When they 
the permits +- = Work, they ſhall be perfeted. Death is but 
ON g £16 oalnts, 2s it was the perfetting of Chriſt. s Nen 
alt Dye as at the time, @ at the place which Go: hath ſet. 5. God 
10Ite! to reveal his Wil IS ; 
declaration of his willingneſs to gather them under os pe "his 
ſpecial favour and protettion. 7. The perverſe Wills of Men are 
thoſe things which hinder Men and Women from being gathcred 
8. Temporal judgments, and that of the ſevereſt Nature «wi; rſt 
or at laſt follow Mens contempt of the offers of Grace and Salva- 
tion. 9. Thoſe that do contemn che means of G ace, ſha!i not ſe2 
them lon Te ſhall not ſee me, 10. The Proud <corne's 
and Contcmners of Chriſt and his Grace, ſhal' one Day w: » that 
= _ or might m_— unto them in the Name of the Lord ol 
o bu | 

—_— now contemn w wt hereafter they would be glad they might 


CHAP, XIv. 


Chriſt healeth one Sick of the Dropſie on the Sabbath day, T6. Res 
proveth the pride of the Phariſees, and exhyteth them ty humility 
and hoſpitality, 7-—14. The Parable of a great Supper, fr m 
which the invited excuſe themſelves : wierefore he upbraids . hz 
Jews with their Ingratitude ; and telleth tem their rejedtinn, and 
the calling of the Gentiles, 156——24. Sheweth *em what they mu 
do, that will be his Diſciples, 25——33- and telleth the unvrafita- 
bleneſs of unſavory Salr, 34, 35 _ 


AZ D ir came to paſs, as he went into the houſe of 
one of the chief ?hariſees to eat bread on the tab- 
bath-day, that they warched him. 

2 And behold,there was a certain man before him which 
had the dropfie, 


3 And Jelus anſwering, ſpake unto the lawyers and 


Phariſees, ſaying, * 1s ic lawful to heal on the ſabbath. * TOY 2 


day ? 
4 And they held their peace. And he took him, and 
healed him, and ler him go : 


$5 And anſwered them, ſaying, # Which of you ſtall « x, -,. 
Dceut. 22:4» 


have an aſs, or an ox fallen into a pir, and will not itraight- 
way pull him out on the ſabbath day ? 


6 And they could not anſwer him again to theſe 
things, 

We have before obſerved the freedom of our Saviour's converſe ; 
ſometimes he will Dine with Publicans, ſometimes with P iſees, 
becoming all things to all Men, that he might gain ſome. Chriſtians 
certainly have the ſame liberty ; the matter is not in w':ofe houſes 
we are, but what we do, or ſay, how we behave our ſelves there. 
[o his going to a Phariſees houſe, he gives us a great Precedent of 
ns ya ers. for the Vhariſezs were his great Enemies, 
and we ſhall obſerve no great kindneſs ſhewed to him in the invita- 
tion of him. Whether this P:1ariſce be ca'led one of the chie® of the 
Phariſees, becauſe he was a Member of the Sanhedrim or a Ruler of 
a Synagogue, or becauſe he was one of the Eldeſt and greateſt Repute, 
15 not worth the inquiry ; thither he went to eat Bread, tht is, to 
take a Meal with him. Itis a thraſe often uſed to tignifie Lining, 
or ſupping, for they ordinarily under the Notion of Bread, under- 
ſtood all manner of Viftua's. It was on the Sabbath Dav. In the 
mean time the Evanzeliſt tells us, they watched him, to wit, whether 
they might hear an: thing from him, or ſee any thing in him where- 
of they might accuſe him. It happened there ws a Wan who had 4 
Dropſie, whether cauſaily, or brought thither on purpoſe b« the Pha- 
riſees, the Scripture ſaith not, te was not there with ur a Diviae di- 
re&tion, to give Chriſt an occaſion of a Miracle, and further to in- 
ſtrut People in the true Durine of the Sabbath. Cliriſt upon the 
Sabbath begins us a Diſcourſe proper for the Day, asking the Pha- 
riſees if it were Lawful to heal on the Sabbath Day? They make him no 
reply,Chrift healeth him, then Preacheth a Doctrine tb them, which 
he had twice before inculcated, in the caſe of a Man who had a 
withered hand, Matth. 12. 10. and of the Woman whom Satan had 
bound. of which we heard, ch. 13. 1g. viz. That wrhs of mercy 
are Lawful on the Sabbath-Day. Then he juſtificth his Fa& by the 
confeſſion of their own pradice, in lifting up Beaſts fallen into Pits 
on the Sabbath-Day. His Argument is this. If it be Lawful on the 
Sabbath-Day to relieve a Bzaſt 3 it is much more Lawful to relieve a 
Man. But you do the former. The Evangeliſt reports th2m put 
to ſilence, but ſaith nothing of their ConviRtion. It is an eaſier thing 
to ſtop Malicious Perſons Mouths, than to remove their prejudices» 
Malicc will ordinarily hold the concluſion, when the reaſon of the 
Soul infeRted with it is not able to juſtifie the premiſes. 


7 And he put forth a parable to thoſe which were btd- 
den, when he marked how they choſe out the chief rooms ; 
{laying unto them, 

A Parable here hath ſomething a different ſignification, from what 
it more ordinarily hath: in the Evangeliſtsz it uſually ſignifies 2 St- 
militude, here it ſignifies either a Wiſe ſaying, or a Dark j-y:n;, by 
which he intended ſomething further than in the Parable he expreſ- 


ſed, which he expounteth, v. 11. We may obſerve frum hcr&c,that 


See the Notes on a'th. 23. 37, 38, 35. Theſe five laſt verſes | the Dining of Friends together 6n the Lord's Vay is not Uplawful, 


a£C.. . . 
aord us much for our inftrucion. 


ae tons, and will like [jons tear and rend when they ſee an oppor- 
tunity ; hut when tney ſee i convenient. then they put on the Fox's 
Sn, doing the ſame thing by ſu>tilty, which they durſt not attempt 
ko effett 5y cruclty. 
but the Children of the Devil could have found in their hearts, to 
have defired Chriſt togo out of their Country, who did nothing 


Ugl. 2, 


1. We may from them learn - 


4 


the craft of the Enemies of the Goſpel, as well as their Malice, they : 


: Lat . 
2. Their Malice is as much perſpicuous : who : 


bl 


only they ought tolook to their diſcourſes, that they be ſuitable tv 
the Day. : 

g When thouart bidden of any man to a wedding, fit 
not down in the higheſt room - leſt a more honourable 
man then thou be bidden of him ? _ 

g And he that bid thee and him, come and fay to 

| (Vuu2z 7 thee, 


Chap. Xtv. 


Preach the Goſpel, deliver 


Sa $A rr % 


A's 
ih 


Rte Dat > 
w.K 4 4 


» — —— "i en 
—44:- adws. wo” A 


— dn. 


LE £5 
+ 


Cnap, 


* Nch. 2.10. 


* REV+1 9.9. 


Towing Paravle. 


- The firft {aid unto 
' Tet. 


deferred unti! the Reſurrettion of the Juſt, but” then they will not 


REV. 


take the loweit room; : 
10 * But when thou art bidden, go and fit down 1n 


the loweſt room ; that when he tha bade thee cometh, 


ſay unto thee, Friend, go up higher, Then ſhalr 
WE Thdrthip in the prefence of ..them chat fit at mear 


ith thee. 
- po te whoſoever exalteth himſelf, ſhall be a- 


baſed ; and he that humbleth himlelf, ſhall be exalt- 
ed. 


Two or three Moral Irſtruftions we have in this Parable. I. That 
the Law of Chriſt juſtifieth none in any rudeneſs and incivility. 
2. That the Diſciples of Chriſt ought to have a regard to their Re- 
utation, to do nothing they may be aſhamed of. 3. That 1t 15 aC- 
cording to the Will of God, that honour ſhould be given to thoſ:. 
to whom honour belongetiz 3 that the more hononrable Perſons, 
ſhould fit in the more honourable Places. Grace gives Men no CX- 
tcriour preference z tho it makes Men all glorious, yet 1t 15 within. 
Put the more Spiritual Inſtruftion (for which our Saviour put forth 
this FYarable) is in v. 11. Our Saviour had but now in the ſight of 
theſe Phariſees, curcd a Man of a bodily Droptie he 1s now attempt- 
ing of a cure of the Spiritual Dropfie, of Fride in their Souls. He 
had before denounced a Woe againſt the Phariſees, for loving the 
zrppermcSi places in the Synagogues, ch. 11. 43+ and told us, ay 
22. 6. that they [ved the uppermoſt Rooms at Feaſts, and poſivly he 
might at this Feaſt ſee ſomething of it: He therefore applieth his 
diſcourſe by preſſing upon them Humility, and ſhewving them the 
danger of Pride, which tho it be a vice ſeated in the heart, yet by 
ſach little things diſcovercth it ſelf in the outward Converſation. He 
tells them, That God is ſech an Enemy to Pride, that he ordinarily 
{o crdereth 1t in the Government of the World, that uſually ſclt- 
exaiting P-ople arc by cnz means or other abaſed, and brought to 
ſhame, and contempt, and thoſe that are low in their Own eyes are 
exalted, and if it doth not fo fall out here, yet this will be, what 
ih at che lait Day befal them, in the Day of God's righteous judg- 
ment. Sce the Notes on Matth. 23. 12. We ſhall meet with the 
ſame again, ap. 18% v. 14+ 
12 Then faid he allo to him that bade him, When thou 
make a dinner or a ſupper, call not thy friends, nor 
thy brethren, neither thy kin{men, nor thy rich neigh- 
bours ; leſt they alſo bid thee again, and a recompence be 


made thee. | 

13 Eur* when thou makefſt a feaſt, call the poor, the 
maimed, rhe lame, the blind : 

14 And thou ſhalt be bleſſed ; fer they cannot recom- 
penſe thee : for thou ſhalc be recompented at the refur- 
rection of the juſt. 


Many :hings are delivercd in Scripture in the form of an abſolute 
and univerſai Prohibition, which muſt not be ſo underſtood,amongſt 
which tis is oze inſtance; none muſt think that our Saviour doth 
here a' 'olutely, or univerſally forbid, our invitations of our Brethren, 
or Kinſmen, or :ic}: Neighbours, or Friends, to Dinners, or Suppers 
with us; there was nothing more ordinarily praCtiſed amongſt the 
Jews, Chriſt himſelf was at divers Meals ; but Chriſt by this teach- 
eth us, I. That this*is m aft of Charity, it is indeed a Lawful a& 
of Humanity and Civilityz and of a good tendency ſometimes to 
procure Amity and Friendſhip amongſt Neighbours and Friends, 
but no ſuch A of Charity, as they could exped an heavenly re- 
ward for, . 2. That ſuch Feaſtings ought not to be upheld in pre- 
judice to our Duty in relieving the Poor; that 1s, they ought not to 
be maintaned in ſuch exceffes 'and immoderate degrees; as by them 
we ſhall diſable our fſeives from that relief of the Poor which God 
requireth of us as our Duty, with reſpe& to the eſtate with which 
he hath Bleſſed us. 3. That we may moſt reaſonably expect a re- 
compence from Heaven for ſuch good Works as we do, for which 
we are not recompenſed on Earth. 4. That God's recompences of 
us for doing our duty in obedience to his Commands, are often 


fail abedient Souls, ] 

15 And when one of them that fate at meat with him 
heard theſe things, he faid-unto him, * Bleſſed 5 he that. 
ſhall eat bread inthe kingdom of God. 

Whether this Perſon had any groſs Conceptions of the Kingdom 
of God, as a State of cxternial Happineſs, and ſenſible Satisfattions 
T cannot ſay, tho it be the opitnton of ſome valuable interpreters, he 
might mean no'more than, Bleffed 1s he that ſhill come to Hea- 
ven, and enjoy the Celeſtial Pleaſures ard Satisfattions there, for 
that Bleſſed State is called the Mar/iage Supper of the Lamb; and 
Chriſt ſpake to his Diſciples in this Diale&t, when he ſpake of drink- 
ing Wine with them in his Kingdom. But this paſſage, both lets 
us know the g9cd intluence of, ſpiritual diſcourſe to ſet the Tongues 
of others on Work, and alto_it lets us ſee, what good HeCitations 
may be founded almoſt *upon any Subjefs, if we have any heart 
thereunto. This gives our Saviour an occation to- put forth the fgl- 


16 Then aid he unto him, A certain man made a great | 
ſupper, and bade many: - , 


17 And * ſent his ſervants at {upper-time to ſay to] 
them that were bidden, .Come, for -all things are now 
ready. 7 
18 And they all: withone con/ezt began to make excuſe; 
him, Ihave bough a piece of ground, 
and I muſt needs goand ſee it: 1 pray 'thee haveme excu- 


T9 And another ſaid, I have bought five yoke of 


Ss. LUKE. 


ES.1 y 4 wi; to| Oxen, and I go to prove them : I pray thee have 
ve this man place, a:d thou begin with ſhame 2 Ine ex- 
thee, Give this man place, P culed. 


ter me, cannot be my diſciple. 


20 And another ſaid, I have married a wife, and there 


fore [| cannot come. 


21 So that ſervant came, and ſhewed his lord theſ. 


things. Then rhe maſter of the houſe being angry, aid 
to his ſervant, Go out quickly intothe ſtreeis and lanes of 
the city, and bring in hither the poor, and the maimeg 
and the halt, and the blind. ; 


22 And the ſervant ſaid, Lord, it is done as thoy haſt: 


commanded, and yet there is room, 


23 And thelord taid unto the ſervant, Go out into the 


high-ways and hedges, and compel thent to come in, thi; 


my houſe may be filled. 

24 For[fay unto you, that none of thoſe men whick 
were bidden ſhall taſte of my ſupper. 

We met with the ſame Parable, Matth. 22. r, 2, 3. where we hag 
the moſt of what 1s here, and many other coniiderable Circumſtar. 
ces. See the Notes on that Chapter. Chriſt's Primary 1atention 
by this Parable, was certainly to foretel the Rejedion of the Fews fo; 
their Contempt of his Goſpel, and the Reception of the Gentiles, They 
were thoſe who were firſt bidden, that.1s, called, and invited by the 
Preaching of Fohn the Baptiſt, Chriſt himſelf, and the Apoſtles, to the 
Receiving of Chriſt, that ſo they might be prepared for the Marriage 
Supper of the Lamb, mentioned, Rev. 19. 9. The Gentiles as a mae 
Ruſtick People, are ſet out under the notion of ſuch as were in 
Lanes, Streets and High-Ways, It alſo informeth us of ſome great 
Cauſes of Mens reje&tion of the Grace of God offered them in the 
Miniſtry of the Goſpel. x. Their Worldly Cares, and buſineſſes, 2, Their 
Senſible injoyments, and pleaſures, which did not hinder mg On- 
ly, but one or other of which hinders the moſt of People till from 
receiving the Grace of Chriſt tendred in the Goſpel. They ar: cither 
not at leiſure to attend their Souls, or they muſt enjoy things ſenſible 
and ſenſual in a degree in which the enjoyment ot them 1s incon- 
ſiſtent with that Duty which God requireth of them who would he 
ſaved. Perimus licitis, moſt Men Periſh by their Sinful x/e (or 4. 
buſe rather) of things 1a themſelves lawful. It may be obſerved a1. 
fo, that the two firſt ſorts made a kind of mannerly excuſe, ſaying, 
T pray thee have us excuſed ; but the laſt Peremtorily ſaid, I cant 
c1me. Tho ſecular imployments be great diverſions of us, and 6 
hinderances of our minding things of htzgheſt Concernment, yet Sen. 
ſual ſatisfaQtions and pleaſures do moſt Drown, and Swallow up the 
Soul of Man, and keep it from minding Heaven, and Heaven! 
things. There have been a great many Words ſpent about theſs 
Words, Compel them to come in, v. 23. It appeareth to be almoſt the 
unanimous Senſe of the Ancients, That no man ought by Tempy al 
Puniſhments to be compelled to the Profeſſion of the true Fajth. Some of 
them have a little differed about ſuch as having once embraced the 
Dodrine of the true Faith, and afterwards ſwerved from it ; tho the 
truth of it is, they can be no more Compe!led than the other, for the 
Will admits of no V7olence. Be the Truth what i* will in thoſe points, 
certain it is, that External Compulſton,hath no Colour of Foundation 
in this Text. They are the Miniſters of the Goſpel thar ar< thus 
ſpoken to, who we know by Chriſt's Commiſſion had no Civil Poy- 
er committed to them. Nor do we ever read tiat they exerciſed any 
in order to the bringing of the Gentiles to the embracing of 


the Faith, nor do Servants ſent out to invite Men to Feaſts (5 the 
were_) uſe to pull them in by Head and Shoulders, or to drive them 
in by Whips, and Cudgels, only to uſe the beſt Arguments they can 
to perſwade them. Chriſt never preſcribed any S;.:»ifþ Converſins 
of People. Man is preſumed tobe a Rational Creature, and taveii 
even by Nature to chuſe things, which he ſees are or may be 0: 
higheſt Importance and Concern. So that the very opening to Men 
the Riches of Divine Grace, fitted to their loſt and undone State 
(which muſt alſo be ſhewed them) is a Compullion of them, or 
would at leaſt be ſo, if Men by the tall were not Corrupted s t» 
their Wills, ſo as they will not follow the DiRate of their under- 
ftanding- But notwithſtanding the depravation and averſeneſs of the 
Carnal will, yet as many as the Lord will pleafe to ſhew Mercy to, 
by joyning the efficacious Operations of his Spirit with the Exteri- 
our call in the Miniſtry of the Word, ſhall come in. The Words 
are dvayuacoy world make it neceſſary for them to come in, 
which no Cudgels, no bodily puniſhments can do, for they hare 
their choice, whether they will dye, or do it. 
I4. 22» 
in it 15 certain he uſed no Swords or Staves, or Whips, cr pcCuni- 
ary Multts to inforce them. A Word of as high an import is uſed, 
Chap. 24. 29. of the two Diſciples compelling Chriſt to ſtay with 
them arageficoas]:, fo Gal. 2. 14. avayrdtes, Why doft thou force 
the Gentiles to Judaize 2? Yet it 1s certain Petey neither exerciſed,nor 
ca'led in the Power of the Magiſtrate, to force the Gentiles. But 
'whenMen began to ſpare their pains as to their tongues, to aver-Pover 
-and prevail upon Mens Hearts, then they began to compel them by 
Civil Ceercions, and to call in the Civil Magiftrate, to the effetting of 
what they would have, whiles they themſelves would do nothing, 
and thus contrary to all Senſe and Reaſon, they expounded enete 
* Words, Compel them to coine in, | 


It is uſed, Matth, 
Chriſt compelled his Diſciples to go into a Ship, iydynarw, 


25 And there went great multicudes with him ; and he 
rurned, and faid uato them, | 
26 * If any man come to me, and hate not his fa- « p. 


ther, and mother, and wife, and children, aud brethren; :.-: 
and liſters, yea, and his own life al{o,he cannot be my difci- 
'ple. 


27 And whoſoever doth not bear his croſs, and come af- 


We met with'much the. ſame, Matth. ro. 279. Thc fum pow 
Words is, That no Man can be a true Diſciple of Chriit, att 
veth any Friend, or anything a preference to Chriſt 10 fc a __ 


p 


Chap, KV aj 


I. S! 
Build, 
new | 
they « 
151nfh 
like tc 
they r 
not be 
Parab 
dition: 
up of 
Priace 
Confec 
politio 
Deril; 
can do 
Not rec 
flght w 
by a fir 
*12ht, 
NaNag 


34 
Where 


35 
hil ; bi 
him he 

Sce th 
the moſi 
Saviour 
gu0d, a x 
4dN Outyy, 
away fro 
1s Profe 

damnah], 
&d to ha\ 
lie be ſea 
lome thi 
make wit 
211nſt thy 
en hear, 
Often thy 
Nercfore 
0 My Re 


Y ip. XIV. 


=>... Tk. ©. ab I: ire 


ons of his Heart. Chriſt muſt be loved, above all, | It appeareth 
that the words muſt not be interpreted rigidly, for then, 1. They 
would oblige us fo 4 ching impoſſible in Nature. For no man ever yet 
hated his own Fleth, but Iyveth it, and cheriſheth, Eph. 5. 29. yet 
Life is one of the things mentioned, which we ought to hate. 2. It 
is Myrally impoſſeble : For the Law of God commands us to honour 
ous Father and Mother, tor the non-obſcrvance of, or teaching contrary 
to which Law, teachiag the people to ſay Corbun, (It s a Gift what- 
faever $14 mayeſt be profited in by me.” Chriſt ſo ſeverely refle&ed 
on the Phariſees. Himſelf therefore doth not here teach others to 
hate their Fathers or Mothers, taking Hatred in a ſtri& and abſolute 
Senſe. 1 any man hate mt, fignitycth here no more . than, If any 
Man doth love his Father, Wife, Children, Brethren and Siſters, yea, 
and his own Life more than mc, he cannit be my Diſciple. Nor is 
this any ſenſe put upon the Term hate, different trom what muſt be 
the ſenſe of it in other Scriptures, Gen, 29. 31. When the Lord ſaw, 
hat Leah was hated, that 15, leſs loved, as 15 expreſſed, wv. 3o. ſo it 
muſt be interpreted, 1n v. 33. It alſo fignificd Jeſs loved, Deut. 21. 
18, 17. Matth. 6. 24. Fohn 12. 25, We met with the ſubſtance 
of what is here v. 27. in Matth. io. 58. and Mark 8. 34. See the 


Notes on thoſe places. 


28 For which of you intending to build a towre, fit- 
teth not down firſt, and countech the coſt, whether ye 
have /»fficient to finiſh jr ? 

29 Leſt haply after he hath laid the foundation, and 


is not able to finiſh zr, all char behold jr, begin ro mock 


him, : 
39 Saying, This man began to build , and was not 
able ro finiſh. : ; | 

31 Or what king going to make war againſt another 


king, fittech not down firſt, and confultech whether he 
be able with ten thouſand-to meet him that cometh againſt 


him with twenty thouſand ? 
32 Orelſe, while the other is yer a great way off, 
he ſendecrh an ambaſſage , and defireth conditions of 


ace. 
"a So likewiſe, whoſoever he be of you, that forſa- 


keth not all that he hath, he cannot be my dilciple. 

Our Lord had in the Parable of the Supper ſhewed what thoſe 
things are, which keep Men from imbracing the Call of the Goſpel, 
towit their Hearts too much adl.erence to, and imbracing of ſent1- 
ble, and ſenſual things. . For the avoiding of which Temptation he 
had told them, wv. 25, 26, 27. that if they loved any thing in the 
World more than him, they could have no porti»n in him, they 
could not be his Diſciples, or Cas Mutthew faich) they are not wor- 
thy of him. Nay, more than this, they muſt take up, and bear 
their Croſs, and come after him, Pere he dire&ts them to the beſt 
Expedient in order to the performance of theſe Dutics, ſo hard to 
Fleſh and Blood, That is, to fit down before hand, and think 
what it will coſt them to go through with the Profetſion of Religion. 
This he tc!'s them, ordinary Prudence direttcth men to, when they 
go about to build, or fight. As to the firſt they make as good an 
eſtimate as they can of the Charge. As to the latter they conſider 
both the charge, and the ſtrength that they are able to produce, to 
make oppoſition. So ſaith he, tauſt th.y do who will be his Diſciples, 
1, Sit down and contider what it will coft them to became the Lords 
Building, what old Foundations of Nature muſt be digged up, what 
new Foundation muit be laid, how many Stones muſt be laid before 
they can corne up to a Wall level, to the promiſe wherein Salvation 
is inſured. 2. Then they muſt conſider what Oppoſittons they are 
like to meet with from the World, the Fleſh and the Devil. And 
they muſt be ready to forſake ail for Chrift, tho' it may be they ſhall 
net be attually called out to, it. Only we mutt remember, that in 
Parables every branch is not to be applyed. We muſt defire no Con- 
ditions of Peace from our ſpiritual Adverſartes. 3. In our counting 
upof our Strength to maintain the ſpiritual Fight we muſt do as 
Princes uſe to do, who uſe to count the Forces of their Allies and 
Confederates, as well as their own : So we muſt not count what op- 
poſition we alone can maintain againſt the World, the Flefh and the 
Deyil ; but what Chriſt (who is in Covenant as to theſe fights) and we 
can do together. So as Conſideration and Predeliberatien here 1s 
not required of us upon any account to deter us from the Fight (for 
fight we muſt, or dye Eternaily) but to prepare us for the Fight, 
by a firm and ſteady Reſolution, and to help us how to manage the 
*:2ht, looking up to Chtiſt for his Strength and Affiſtance in the 
Managery of it. 

34 Sait 5s good : bur if the falt have loft its favour» 
Wherewith ſhall ir be ſeaſoned ? 

35 lr isneirher fir for the land, nor yer for the dung- 
hil; but men caſt ir our, He that hath ears tq hear, let 


bim hear, 

dec the Notes on Hatth. gs. 13. Hark og. $0. where we met with 
the moſt of what we have in theſe Verſes. By Salt in this place our 
Mv1our ſeemeth to mean a Chriſtian Life and Profeſſion. It 15 a 
$04, a novle, a zrcat thing to be a Chriſtian - But one that is ſo 1n 
an outward Profe{{i>n mav loſe his ſavour. Tho' a man cannot fall 
away from Truth, and rcality of Grace, yet he may fall away from 
1!!s Profeſſion, he may be given up to believe Lics, and imbrace 
damnayle Errors, he may ſhake off that dread of Cod which he ſeem- 
c« to have upon him, and then what is he good for wherewith ſhall 
he be ſeaſoned 2 He is neither fit for the Land nor the Dungbtl. As 
lome things will ſpoil Dunghils, fo debauched Profetfors do but 
mage wicked Men worſe, by prejudicing and hardening them a- 
2u1nſt the ways and truths of God. [. He that hath Ears to hear, let 
en hear.) It is an uſual Epiphenomena, or Sentence by which Chriſt 
oiten thuts up grave, and weighty Dilcourſes z the ſenſe is, you had 
beg need to look about you, and to undertake tne profetſion 
My Region vron ſack weighty Grounds and Frinciples as will 


9d LUKE 


Chap. 


carry you through the praQice of it to th2 end, againi? all the oppo 


fitions you ſhall meet with; for if you apoſtatize from your Protc1- 


ſion, you will be the worſt of men, neither fit for the Churc{, nor 


for the World (for you will make that the worſe) indeed fit for ny 


thing but for the Fire of Hell. 


CHAP. XV. 


The Phariſees murmur againſt Chriſt, b : 7 
Wears ag Ur ag, ecauſe he receiveth Sinners, 1, 2 
Chriſt juſtifieth himſelf by a Parable of loſt hoes we 


em 


5 j 


4 


Father recerveth with Fo ag , ; 
- y, Il—24., and defendeth againſt his mur- 
muring Brother, 25——32. 4 aefen gainjt his mu; 


ſinners for ro hear him. 

2 And the Phariſees and Scribes murmured, laying 
This man receiveth ſinners, and eateth with them. : 
A [ have ſo often taken notice, that the Term A? in the New Te- 

ament 15 very often uſed to fignifie, not all the individuals of thi: 
Spectes, or order of Men to which it is applyed, but only a great 
and confiderable number of them, that it is needleſs ag1in to repeat 
it, None can imagine that every individual Publican and Sinner in 
thoſe parts, where Chrift now was, came to hear Chriſt, but only 
many of them, or ſome of every ſort. Thus Publicans and #uvlts 
centred intathe Kingdom of God, whiles the Children of the Kin: 
dom, and ſuch as appeared to lye fairer for it, were caft out. The 


who were the rigid obſervers of their decrees, and interpretations, 
— they were diſturbed, and troubled at it. Thinking that 
becauſe the Law appointed no Sacrifice for bold, and preſumptyu 
ous Sinners, therefore there was no Mercy in God for them, or thoſe 
of whom they had ſuch a Notion, and that they were ipſo jure Ex- 
communicated, and therefore Chriſt ſinned in Eating, or Drinkin« 
with them, or in any degree receiving of them. And from hencs 
concluding he was no Prophet. As if becauſe ordinarily perſons are 
known by their Companions with whom they converſe, therefore it 
had been a general Rule, as if one might have concluded, that tlicir 
Doetorſhips were 1gnorant, becauſe they converſed with them tha: 
were ſo, for their Inſtruttion ; or could conclude, that the Phy/zcian 
is ſick, becauſe his Converſe is with the fick, for their Cure and 
Healing. A man is not to be judged to be ſuch as he converſcth 
with neceſſarily, or in order to their good, which was the end of all 
our Saviours Converſe with theſe Sinners. Beſides, were they them- 
ſelves without Sin ? The root of their uncharitableneſs was their opi- 
nion of their own Righteouſneſs from the Works of the Law, ac- 
cording to their own jcjune Interpretation of it. But let us hear our 
Saviour's Reply. 

3 And he {pake this parable unto them, ſaying, 

4 What man of you having an hundred ſheep, if he 
loſe one of them, doth nor leave the ninety and nine in 
the wilderneſs, and go after that which is loſt, until he 
find it ? 

5 And when he hath found zr, he layeth jr on his 
ſhoulders, rejoycing. 

6 And when he cometh home, he calleth together hs; 
friends and neighbours, ſaying unto them, Rejoyce with 
me, for I have found my ſheep * which was loſt. 


See the Notes on Matth. 12. 12, 13. where we met with the ſine 
Parable, tho' not related with ſo many Circumſtances. The ſeventh 
Verſe which is the Epiparabo/e, ſheweth us the principal thing, whic! 
our Saviour by this Parable deſigneth to teach his ticarers and us 
alſo, viz. That Chriſt s ſo far po rejefing the greateſt Sinners, that 
repent , and fly unto his Mercy, that if it were poſſible, he ſhould t he 
a greater Satisfa&ion in ſuch an iſſue of Divine Providence, than in a:! 
the glorified Saints. No repenting Sinner, let his Sins be as many 
and as great as they cane, ſhall be unwelcome unto Chriſt, tiving 
to him with a broken Heart (reſolved againit his former Courſes ) 
for Pardon and Mercy. But as it happeneth to them, who by Study 
and Praftice make great Experiments, they can hardly find out what 
they moſtly ſeek for, but in the way to it, they will find out ſevera! 
other Notions, which are of great uſe to them : So it will fall out to 
them, who diligently ſtudy the Parables of the Goſpel. Tho' fome 
one Truth be that, the eggplication of which our Saviour doth chiet- 
ly intend ; yet the Parable will alſo afford ſome other profirable 1n- 
ftruſtions, not unworthy of our notice and regard. The Min here 
intended, is Chriſt, who was the Son of Man, as well as the Eternal 
Son of God. The Hundred Sheep fignifics' the whole number of his 
Ele, whether in Heaven or on Eartt, whether yet called, or here- 
after to be called. The Sheep going aſtray tignifyeth all the Elezf, 
who are by Nature Children of Wrath as well as others, Dead in Trej- 
paſſes and Sins, Eph. 2. 1, 3. Here is mention but of one Sheep 40 
gone aſtray, tho? there be many, to let us know the Love of Chriſt to 
every individual Soul, that it but one of them had been to have been 
Redeemed, he would have come down from Heaven to have Re- 
deemed it. The Ninety Nine «it in the Wilderneſs, ſeem to me tc 


| be the Ghrified Saints, they are the only juſt Perſons who need no Re- 
' pentance. The Country Mans going after the loſt Sheep till he finds tt, 


then bringing it home upn his Shoulders rejoycing, fignifies the inane 
Love of Chriſt, both in leaving his Fathers Throne, and the Society 
of the Glorificd Saints, and Angels to come and to ſek, and tofave 


' that which was loſt, to pay a redemption-price for them then ſend- 


ing his Holy Spirit, and the Miniſters of his Goſpel to invite, and et- 
fe&tually to perſuade them to accept of his Salvation, truly repenting 
of their Sins, and alfo preſerving them through his Power by Faith, 
unto Salvation ; ( for it is upon his Shoulders, that any Elect Soul 1s 
brought home, It is his Eye muſt find them, and his Power that,muſt 
bring them Home). The Country-mans Rejoyctng, and calling in; 


Neizhboars to Rejozce, &c fignifyeth the ſatisfaQtion and well pleaſed- 


veſs, 


: Of 4 
Leprofie, Of Silver, 8--10. and of the loſt Prodigal Son, Shi bh 


Scribes who were the Interpreters of the Law, and the Phariſees, 


'Þ 


CY o . 
I Hen * drew near unto him all the publicans and * Mat. :.z +, 
Cht. 7. 35 


Þ ” o . wi I Pet. pM 
7 I fay unto you, that likewiſe joy ſhall be in heaven , . __ 
over one ſinner that repenteth, * more then over ninet 


Ine 1 y * Chap. £, 
and nine juſt perſons which need no repentance. 


3» 


£ 
” + 
_— 0 $ >, 
fn" > d . - 
« k £2 ; - A = 2 - 
wb, ER. ==. Rs Py at” £, Dans 2 5h WS 
T a: — _———— —  —  — __— —- ud 
P ” = : i wy . — * >.» = 
I —— = ic. DA1 <4 ” g . m__— - : 
. b yo te po * x : _—_—_- 
WL, . -_ ho ogys ” k 
R 


Chap. RV. 


neſs of Chriſt in the Converfion of Sinners, which 1s more plainly | 


+ Gr. 
drachms 
here tranſ- 


lated a prece 
of Silver, 


the eizhth 


v. 7. [T1 ſay unto you, that lihewiſe there ſhall be Foy in 
Hoawen over ene Sinner that repenteth, mare than over Ninety and Nine 
juſt Perſons,which need no BR epentance. ] We have much the ſame again, 
w. 10. Icavirg out the comparative part, There aiſo 1t 1s : "There 3s 
Foy in the preſence of the Angels of God, ] We will conficer the Expreſ- 
fions - in both the Verſes togeth.cr. As to which there may ariſe 
theſe Queliions. 1. 2#, What 1s here meant by Fey in Heaven 2 The 
Inhabitants oft Heaven are God. the blefled Angels, and the glorified 
'Saints, how can they be ſaid to rejoyce, whereas reſycing is in us the 
' produtt of a Pattion, by which we Triumph iu our Union to fome 
good, which we before wanted. 1. Anſ, When Terms expreſſive 
of cur Paiſions, are applyed to perfe@t Beings, we muſt underſtand 
them ſo, as tiiey alune can agree to ſuch Beings, ſeparated from 
thoſe Excetſes, which they have in Beings more imperfett. Foy ſig- 
nifieth nothing but the full ſatisfation of the Will in- a good obtain- 
ed. Thus God 1s ſaid to rcjoyce in his People, Ja. 62. 5. 2. fu. 
Who are theſe Ninety Nine juſt Perſons that need n» Repentance ? (For 
the number, it is but an incertain number put for one certain). 
2. Ar. 1. Some by ſuch as need no Repentance underſtand, ſuch as 
think ſo of themſelves, tho' indeed they do need it. 2. Others un- 
derſtand it comparatively, ſuch as if compared with others need no 
Repentance. 3. Others by Repentance underſtand Penance. Such 
ſober perſons as ſtand in no need of being called to a Publick Con- 
feffion, for the ſatisfation of the Church offended. I had rather un- 
deritand it of the glorified Saints, wheſe Society Chriſt left, when 
he came to work out our Redemption. For the others it had been 
no great matter for Chriſt to have told them, that God, and the ho- 
ly Saints and Angels, rejoyce more over one repenting Sinner, than 
over Niuety and Nine impenitent Sinners, and ſelf-righteous perſons, 
who continually grieve him, and whom he abhorreth. But then, 
3. Yu. How can 7t be ſaid, that God, and the Angels, and Saints, 
more rejyce over one repenting Sinner, than over Ninety Nine glorifi- 
ed Saints ? Anſ. It is univerſally agreed, that Chrift ſpeaks here of 
God, and of the Angels, after the manger of Men, of whoſe Na- 
ture it is to expreſs more Pailion upon a new Objett that pleaſeth 
them, than upon others that they have been long pleaſed with. 
As a Farent rejoyceth more over one Child recovered from the Jaws 
of Death, than over all the reſt of his Children, Tho' nothing can 
be new to God, that 1s, which he did not ſee, and fore-know, yet 
ſomethings may be new to him in fads eſſe, as done and fulfilled ; 
and tho' we muſt not imagine any Mutation, or Alteration of the Di- 
vine Being upon any Emergency amongſt men, yet to expreſs how 
infinitely pleaſed Gcd is, in the Repentance and Converſion of 
great Sinners, he 1s ſet out, as receiving an avgmentation of fatis- 
fation in the effeting of it; ſuch Expreſſions as theſe condeſcended 
to by God for our Conſolation, muſt not be ſo flirained by us, as to 
occaſion any unbecoming thoughts of God, Qu. Some query how the 
Angels know of the Converſion of a Sinner, and from hence the Papiits 
'wouid ſome of them infer, that they know our Hearts, becauſe that 
is ti ſear of Converſion. An. Both the Angels, and the glorified 
Saints :lſo may know it by Gods revealing it to them. 


8 Either what woman having | ten pieces of filver, 
if ſhe loſe one piece, doth nor light a candle, and ſweep 
the houte, and feek diligently ill the find ze ? | 

9 and when ſhe hath found zr, ſhe calleth her friends 
and her neighbours rogether, faying, Rejoyce with me, 


expreſſed, 


part of an for I have found the piece which I had loſt. 


ounce, which 


cometh to 
Jeven pence 
half-penny, 


an1 equal 
to the Roman 


penny, Mat, 
I8. 28, 


10 Likewile I ſay unto you, There is joy in the pre- 
ſence of the angels of God, over one Sinner that re- 
penreth. 

This Parable (as appeareth by the concluſion of it) 15 of the fame 
1mport with the otiier, and need no further Explication. Ey both 
theſe Parables, our bleſſed Lord lets the Phariſees know the end he 
aimed at in Converſing with Publicans and Sinners, wiz. In order to 
their Repentance and Converfion, than which nothing could be 
more grateful, and well-pleaſing to that God who defireth not the 
Death of a Sinner, but rather that they ſhould turn from their wick- 
edact:, and live. Of tie ſame 5mport 1s alſo the following Parable, 
which taketh up all the remaining part of this Chapter. 


11 And he faid, a certain man had two ſons: 

12 And the younger of them ſaid to his father, Father, 
give me the portion of goods that falleth to me. And he 
divided unto them hs living. 

13 And not many days after , the younger ſon ga- 
thered all together, and took Ms journey into a far 
country , and there waſted his ſubſtance with riotous 
Hving, | 
. And when he had ſpent all, there aroſe a mighty 
famine in thar land ; and he began to be in want. 

15 And went and joined himſelf to a citizen of that 
country, and he ſent him into his fields to feed ſwine. 

16+ And he would fain have filled his belly with the 
__ thar the ſwine did eat : and no man gave unto 

im. 

The Scope of this excellent Parable, is apparently to magnifie the 

Grace of 50d, who is willing to receive and ro treat kindly the great- 


'cit Tranſgreitors, ſeriouſly repeating and turaing unto God 3 but 


in it we are alio, 1. Taſtrutted in the original ſtate of Man, like 
that or a Child in his Fathers Houſe, happy and wanting nothing. 
2. The moſt miferatie eftate of fallen Men, tuch eſpecially as run to 
great cxcels of Riot, 3. The true way of a Sinners returning to 
God. 4. The readineſs of our gracious Father to receive, and his 
wonderful kindnefs in the receiving and imvractivg repenting, and re- 
turnirig Sinners, 5s. The Envy that is ſometimes found in good 
Souls to others receiving (as they think) more favour from God 
ein they do, 6. The Gentleneſs and Mcekneſs of God in dealing 
with v7, notwithſtanding our Infirmitics and wiſ-becoming Paſſions. 


S. LUKE, 


God is again herc repreſented under the notion of a M 

two h_ Some that are his Children by Regeneration = 0 
Creation : he having given them that believe, a Right to be calls} = 
Sons of God, Fohn 1. 12. Others, that are his Sons by Creation ons 
The latter are here repreſented under the notion of a Tounger 0 
This younger Son 15 repreſented, as diffatisfied with living in his Fa 
thers Houſe, defiring his portion, &'c, All Men and Women by 
Nature were equally the Sons of God, being all in Adam who was f 
All men ſwerved from him, in Adam all ſinned, all dyed ws 
ſome again by Grace are returned to their Fathers Hiufe, Oths: 
challenge a Relation to God, as his Creatures, but are not of their a 
thers Houſe, but defire only a portion of the good things of this 
Life, Some deſire Honours, ſome Riches, all of them Life a y 
Health, G&yc. God, like a liberal Father, gives ſome of thete = 
things to one, others to another ; to ſome more than one king = 
ther, whatever they have of this Nature is from him who maketh 
his Sun to ſhine, and his Rain to fall upon the Juſt ang Try 
Wicked Men when they are thus furniſhed by God, quickly take Help 
Fourney into a far Country, are more alienated and eſtranged from 
God by lewd and wicked praftices, than they were by Nature 
Wast their Sub$ance, the Health of their Bodies, their time of Life, 
their Eſtates, their great and honourable Capacities, by giving yp 
themſelves to lewd and riotous kinds of Life, to the high dhe. 
nour of Almighty God. It pleaſeth God by his Providence, ſome. 
times to bring theſe men into ſtraights z when they are fo brought 
they will take any baſe ſordid Courſe to relieve themſelves ; rather 
than they will think of returning to their Heavenly Father, of ther. 
ſelves they will rather chuſe to ſerve Swine. But if they be ſuch x 
belong to God s ElcQtion of Grace, the Providence of God will ne: 
leave them : though there be little Food for a Soul in the Hubs of 
ſenſible Satisfations 3 yet they ſhall not have a Belly full of them, 
God will bring them off from fatisfa&tion in any thing, and mike 
every Condition uneaſfie to them. 


17 And when he came to himſelf, he ſaid, How mar 
hired ſervants of my fachers have bread enough and 9 
ſpare, and | periſh with hunger ! 

18 1 will arife, and go to my father, and will fay mnt 
him, Father, I have ſinned againſt heaven, and before 
thee, 

19 And am no more worthy to be called thy for: 


make me as one of thy hired 1ſervants. 

Every Sinner is beſides himſelf. His Reaſon Iacqueys to his Luſt 
and Paſſion ; he is governed by Appetite, and that rageth in him, 
while his underſtanding is blind, and cannot diſcern betwixt G04and 
Evil and when he hath in any meaſure diſcerned any thing, his 
Will is ſtubborn and chuſeth the Evil. Converſion is but the return 
of a Soul to it ſelf. The firſt thoughts of which Converſion ariſe 
from a Souls Confideration, what a poor miſerable Creature it is, 
ready to perith for ever, whiles never a poor Soul belonging to God, 
no not the meaneſt ſervant in his Family, wanteth any good thing 
that is neceſſary for him. Theſe things increaſe in a Soul thoughts 
of returning to his Heavenly Father, through the Operation of the 
Holy Spirit of God. (For of our ſelves we are not ſufficient ſo much # 
to think one g20d thought.) 


20 And he arofe, and came to his father. But * when ** 
he was yet a great way off, his father ſaw him, and ”y 
had compaſſion, and ran, and fel! on his neck, and kifed ' 
him, 

The way of a Sinners returning to God muſt be by ariſing, going 
to the Father, conteſſing his Sins with the aggravations of them, 
diſclaiming any Goodneſs, any Righteouſneſs 1n himſelf, humbling 
himſelf ro God's Footſtool, [7 will ariſe, (faith the Prodigal ) and 
go to my Father, and ſay unto him, Father I have ſinned againſt Hea- 
ven, and before thee, and am no mcre worthy to be called thy Sm. mah? 
me as one of thy hired Servants. And he aroſe and came to his Father. ] 
He aroje from the ſleep, and bed of fin, and came unto bs Father. 
We arc not here told by whoſe ſtrength, or in whoſe affitance he 
aroſe, and came, We muſt remember that our Saviour is here re- 
preſenting a ſpiritual Notion, by an ordinary humane Aion ; now 
Men have an innate power to natural Motions, tho' not to ſpiritual 
Attions.. We are elſewhere told, That no Man cometh to the Fa- 
ther, but by Chriſt, nor doth any Man come unto the Son, but he whm 
the Father draweth. Every one as he is taught of the Father, comet? 
unto the Son and again, that tho' we be ſaved by Faith, yet it #18 
of our ſelves, it is the Gift of God, and Phil. 1. 29. It # givent0# 
on the behalf of Chriſt to believe. Theſe are. but ſeveral Expreſſions 
ſignifying by the tender affeRions, and gracious reception of Earth- 
Iy Parents of a returning prodigal Son, the exceeding readineſs of 
our Heavenly Father to receive penitent ſinners ; he 1s fo far from 
diſcouraging great ſinners from taking up thoughts of returning vn9 
him, that he cheriſheth the Embryoes of ſuch Reſolutions, 7 jor 
(faith the Pſalmiſt) I will confeſs my Tranſzreſſions unto the Lord, 4 
thou forgaveſt the Iniquity of my Sin, Pal. 32. 5. God ſeeth tne 
firſt good motions, and ſtirrings of our Hearts, towards him, 
and he needs muſt do ſo, for he ſtirreth them up in us. There's pig 
ſacred fire upon our Altar, but firſt cometh down from ench 
whiles yet the Soul is far off from believing, and cloſing wit! Chril 
actually, and hath but ſome thoughts of that tendency, God _ 
upon it, incourageth ir, meeteth 1t as it were half-way 3 and 11 _ 
if he did not, our Goodneſs would be but like a Morning eh 
which would quickly paſs away, our firſt Inclinations would peril. 
like an untimely Birth before it had ſeen the Light. 


21 And the ſon ſaid unto him, Father, I have hs 
againſt heaven, and in thy ſight, and am no more Wor'®) 
to be called thy ſon. 


-— 
Now the good Thoughts and Reſolutions of the S1nncr +a _— 
Aion, and the firſt. ot it is an Expreſſion of his Convittions, = 
Humiliation by an humble Confeſſion of his fins, with th-1r bye] 
vations, as committed againſt God, and tht in the tight 0 Name 
and this God, his FatPer ; his unworthineſs ſo much 2s of the ? " 


Chap, Xj 


<2me } 


With 
apait 
Cont! 
lipnit 
Ing © 
lis R 
with 
Mirth 
fir th 
Temp 


came 

Cancin 
26 

theſe t 


237 
thy far 
ved 


28 


29 
22ny 


X 


| hap. XV- 


' he was loſt, and is found, 


2 " 
of a Son to ſuch : Father, The petitionary part of what he reſo!v- 
ed upon, V. Ig. 15 not here again repeated, but to be underſtood, 
Men may by tis common Grace of God denyed to no Man, have 
ſome 202d thoughts, but tney dye away, anJ come to no maturity, 
gnleſs the Holy >pirit of God breathes upon them, and maintaineth, 
and upholdeth them in tne Soul 3 bur where the Lord defigneth a 
thorough Change in a Soul, the Spirit of the Lord comes, and con- 
vinceth the Soul of Sin, and. of Righteouſneſs, and where he doth ſo, 
the Reſolution ripeneth into Attion, and produceth in the Soul a 
true and hearty Contrition, and confetfion of its fin, with humble 
Petitions, and a retignation of its ſclf to the Lord's Will, and a 
caſting of its ſelf upon God's free Grace and Mercy. 

22 But the farher faid ro his ſervants, Bring forth the 
beſt robe, and put z7 on him, and pur a ring on his hand, 
and ſhoes on he feer. 

23 And bring hither the fatted calf, and kill i: ; and 
et us ear and be merry, 

24 For this my ſon was dead, and is alive again ; 
And they began to be 
merry- | | 

we muſt remember that we are in a Parable where a finncr is 
repreſented to us under tie notion of a Prodigal Son, God under 
thenotion of an Indulgent Father. A Repenting Sinner, under the 
notion of a Prodigal returning to his Father, confeſſing his Error, 
etitioning his Father for Mercy, acknowledging he deſerveth none, 
hut caſting himſelf upon his Fathers Goodneſs and Mercy. It is ob- 


«ſerved by an Eminent Author, That amongſt all the Parables, this 


is one of the moſt famous, and wherein is the moſt full and perfe&t 
Repreſentation of the thing intended to be repreſented, and an ap- 
licableneſs of every part of the f1militude to that which it is brought 
£o reprefent. This part of it repreſenteth the Grace of God to tru- 
ly repenting Sinners. We before heard, his readineſs and willing- 
neſs to receive them, this part lets us fce the manner how he wall 
treat them. As in caſe of Apoſtacy ; the ſecming Righteouſneſs, and 
Profeſſion of Men ſhall not be remembred, Exel. 3. 20. and 33. 13. 
f in caſe of a true and hearty Repentance, the fins of a Soul ſhall 
not be remermbred, ja. 43. 25. The Father taketh notice of the 
Prodigal's leaving his Fathers Huuſe, or waſting his Eſtate riotouſlly, 
but ſaith, Bring forth the beſt Robe, Tay MANY THV apwTHY, and put 
a King upon his Hand, anz Shes upm kis Feet, and bring hither the 
Fattzd Calf Ty wager mw arrevny. I find ſome Interpreters, 
who by the fatted Calt are willing enough to underſtand Chrift ; 
yet interpreting the beſt Robe, Innocency, or Inherent Righteouſneſs. 
Nor is it an 11] Interpretation, if we contider, That God at the ſame 
time, when he imputeth the Merits of Chrift to the Soul for Zuſti- 
fication, doth alfo put his Spirit of Alineſs 1nto the Soul, by which 
being renewed 1n the inward Man, this Man brings forth tie Fruits 
of Holineſs unto Righteaufneſs, Ezeh. 35. 26, 27. But why we ſhould 
not underſtand both the Phrates of the application of Ckrifts Me- 
rits, and the Imputation of his Rightcouſnefs to the Sou], I cannot 
tel], conſidering, that the Church of Lacdicea is counſelled to buy of 
him White Rayment, that ſhe mizht be cloathed, Rev. 3. 18. and that 
thoſe Chathed with White Robes, Rev. 7. 14. arc faid to have Waſhed 
their Robes, and made them White in the Blood of the Lamb, and that 
tho” the Habits of Grace are tomnctimes in Holy Writ, compared to 
Chathing, (Be 1e chathe4 with Humility, faith the Apoitle) yec theſe 
are not j AJ} 1 @pary, | fhould therefore rather chuſe to interpret 
'the killing of the futted Calf for the Prodigal Son, as repreſenting, 
that Application of the Blood of Chriſt, which is made to every tfin- 
ner, that truly repenteth, and maketh its application to God for 
Mercy 3 and the be Robe, the Righ:ewſneſs of Chriſt, in that 
moment reckoned unto the Soul {thus believing) for Righteouſneſs. 
Further yet (to conttder it only if the Parable) the Word Jvourz 
Stertfice the tatted Caif, ſeems, to fignifie what a great Cauſe of 
Thankſgiving to God, as we!l as 75y amongit Men, the Converſion cf 
a Sinner 1s. -We that arc Earthly Parents, or Miniſters of the Goſpel. 
ſould not receive the news, or fee the viſible probability of a Souls 
teing converted and returning unto God, without offering a Sacr1- 
hiceof Thankſgiving unto God, for doing ſuch things for men, and 
without 3 truc, and hearty rejoycing 1n our ſelves. But to return 
apain to the meaning of the Parable, | Zet us eat and be merry, | 
Contiger thefe Words, as the Words of an Heavenly Father, they 
tipnific unto us, that the eternal God, from the Day that a repent- 
Ing foul hath the Biood of Chriſt applycd to it, and is cloathed with 
I11s Righteouſneſs, is at Peace with the Soul, hath a Communion 
with it, and that it from that time, hath a true right to ſpiritua] 
Mirth, and rejoycing, for Light is ſown for the Rightenm, and joy 
fs the upright in heart. Tho' poſſibly the ſoul at preſent through 
Temptations, cannot appretend it, and be not aftually poſſeſſed of 
tiat foy, and Peace which followeth believing, yet it hath a right to 
it, ard indeed none but that Soul hath any thing to do with Peace.It 
rolloweth, | For this my Son was dead, and # alive again, he was lo$f 
an is ſymnd) & tinful Soul is a dead Soul, as the Woman that 
tiveth in plcaſare, is {aid to be dead while (he lives, by the Apoſtle, 
: 1c Converſion of a Sianer, 15 4s: a Reſurredtion from tlic Dead, 
Nor is any Soul capable of any truc Mirth, till it be reconciled to 
vUd through the Blood of Chriſt, © » 


25 Now his elder fon Was in the fietd : and as he 
came and drew nigh to the houle, he heard muſick and 
Gancing, | 
. 26 And he called one of the ſervants, and asKed what 
.inele things meant. 

27 And he ſaid unto him, Thy brother is come ; and 
hy father hath killed the facred calf, becauſe he: hath re- 
caved him ſafe and found. » 4315 - 

28 And he was avgry, and would-nar go ut :. therefore 
-2Me his father our, and intreared him.” **” - 

29 Ard he anf{wering, taid ro hs father, Lo, theſe 
may years do | ferve thee, neicher cranſgrefled [ at 


K E. 


any time thy commandment , 
velit me a kid 
friends, 


30 Bur as ſoon as this thy fon was come, which hath 


devoured thy living with harl ra Pie wire 
the fatted calf : riots, thou halt killed for him 


31 And he {aid unto him, Son, thou art eve FE FREIE: 
and all thar 1 have is thine deooadirage,. 


32 Ir was meet that we ſhould make merry, and be 
glad : for this thy brother was dead, and is alive acain : 
and was loſt, and is found. eds 

This laſt part of the Parable, is not ſo exaUtly applicable to that 
which it is brought to repreſent, as the former parts are. But it 
{-rveth excellently to ſhew us that Envy, which is found in our 
Hearts by Nature, to the Spiritual Good and Advartage of others. 
[wo things are obſervable 1f it. 1. Mans Peetihne and Envy 
2. Gods Mzelneſs towards us under our Frowardneſs, By the eldef? 
Son ſome think, the Jews are repreſented, whoſe pecviſhnefs tc. the 
Gentiles, and the offer of the Grace of the Golpel to them, is made 
appear to us from many places of Holy Writ. Others think that by 
the Elde$ $1n are repreſented Aypacrites, who ſwelling in an opinion 
of themſelves, and their own Righteouſneſs, have no paticnce to heart 
tat any others ſhould be preferred in the favour of God before then. 
Why may not we far, that Ai are underſtood by it, even the beir 
of Gods people, who (if they narrowly fearch their own Kearts ) 
will tind ſomething of Pride and Envy remaining in the b{t of 
them : And as the former prompts them to judge theinſelves as much 
deſerving the Favour of God, even in ſpecial particular Diipentat! 
ons, as any others, ſo the latter inclineth them to repine at ſuch Dis. 
penſations of Divine Grace, as others receive, and they want two 
Corruptions which we are as much concerned to keep a Watch uy. 
on, or againſt, as any other, ſpeaking both a peeviſhnefs to the Ho- 
nour and Glory of God, a diflatisfaction in his Diſpenſ:tions, and 
an ofter at the Controulment of his Wiſdom and Juſtice, and 2:\o a 
great degree of uncharitablencſs ; our Eye being Evil becauſe the 
Lord 1s Good. Beſides, that it ſeemeth to put in a cla'mof Merit 
and the Soul that indulgeth it ſelf in ſuch thoughts, ſcems to ſay that 
he hath deferved more than it doth receive ; for without ſuch 2 
ſuppoſition, it is the moſt unreaſonable thing imaginable, that any 
pcrton ſhould be diſpleaſed that another ſhould have a greater ſhare 
1n the Favour of God than he, whites himſelf. receives more than he 
can lay a claim unto, and God may do with his own what he p!ca- 
feth, The Meckneſs of God in dealing with us under our Froward- 


2 and yet thou never g4. 
thar I might make merry wit! 


nefs, is as much remarkable. | Sin (faith this Father in the Parable D, 
thou art ever with me, and all that T have is thine. It was mect 
that we ſhould make merry, and be glad, for this thy Brother was dead 
and is alive again, was bſt, and is found. ] This muſt be under- 
tiood of God, eripurmans as ſpoken after the manner of Men, 
who ſhew greater Paſſions upon the receiving of 2 go2d that is new 
to them, and poſſibly ſurprizing, than they ordinarily ſhew upon 
the view of a good of which they have had longer Fruition ; fo it 
confirms what was before laid in v. 7, 10. We muſt take heed of 
thinking tnat any thing can make a change or alteration in God, but 
muſt look upon 1t only as an expreffion of Gods high ſatisfation 

and well-pleaſedneſs in a Sinners Converſion, and turning unto him, 
fo as if it were poffible any good ſhould more-than other aﬀe& the 
Divine Being, it would be this 3 fo as this whole Parable is of ex- 
ceilent uſe, not only to inſtrutt Sinners in their miſerable ſtate till 
they be reconciled to God, but to deliver them from all Temptations 
to Fear, that heartily returning they ſhall not be accepted. 


CHAP. XVL. 


By the ſimilitude of an unjuſt Steward, Chriſt exhorteth them to make 
Friends of the Mammon of unizghteouſneſs, 1-—t2. Sheweth that nz 
Man can ſerve two MaSters, 13. Reproveth the Covetous Phuriſee, 
14, 15. Teacheth, that the Law muſt be fulfilled to a Title, 15, 17. 
The parable of the rich Man and por Lazarus, 12 31. 


[ ND he ſaid alſo unto his diſciples, There was 
a certain rich man which had a ſteward ; and 
the ſame was accuſed unto him that he had waſted Eis 
goods. = 
2 And he called him, and ſaid unto him, How is ir 
chat I hear this of thee ? give an account of thy ſteward- 
ſhip: for thou mayeſt be no longer ſteward. 
3 Then the ſteward faid within himſelf, What ſhall I. 


2 


[ cannor dig, to beg I am aſhamed. 


houſes. 


to my lord ? © 

6 And he faid, An hundred + meaſures of oyl.. 
he ſaid unto him, Take thy bill, ard fir down quickly, 
and write fifty. 


And he faid unto him, Take thy bill, 


{core. 9” | : ES 
$ And the lord commended the unjuſt ſteward, be-/ 


are in their generation wiſer then 


liehe, 


do ? for my lord taketh away from me the ſteward(Fip, Je DD 
The word 
I am reſolved what to do, that when I am put out tranſlated 
of the ſtewardſhip, they may receive me into their 7%«/ures, 
' ſignifies 
© AY meajure 
5 So he called every one of his lords debters unto po ini 
him, and faid unto the firſt, How much owelſt thou un- ;jns pa;n 
w- andt 
And quarts. 
EtER. 45» 
"i Mm | tGr.Corus- 
7 Then {aid he to another, And how much owelt Heb. Cor: 
thou? And he faid, An hundred meaſures of wheat. 2b » 
and write four-/12ri19th 4 


iM eaſure 
contagn'ns 

| j l ourteen 
cauſe he had done wiſely, for the children of this world b,/els and 
X. the children of potrle, 
: "EI ” Eph. geT, 
Fiiergra * Thell. 5.6. 


ke yy ba. I : 
bs 9 4 * 90; ng 


"9 A 4 


>X 
- m—_ 


CY PUBT TEAR 15.4 477% 


nw —_ 


Chap. XVI S. LUKE. Chap. Xy 


: 7 uzht this Parable was very obſcure, and Fulian obedience to his Will in our diſtribution of them, 2. Or, ma 
Kg 6 p3.-96 hap tozether with ſome of the Heathen Philoſophers, | Chriſtians our Friends, fo as we may have their Prayers : w wo 
þ. took occaſion from it to approach the Do(trine of Chriſt, as teach- [ when ye fail] when you dye, when ye fail of any more comfort 
Fe fpoach ins and commanzdins righteouſneſs, But there will ap- | trom them, | they may recerve you into everlaſting Habitations,)] Th 
6A no ſuch Lifficulty in it, nor cauſe of Reproach to Chriſt and | Holy Trinity, or the blefled Angels (whoſe Work it is, as we ſhall 
his Doctrine from it, if we confider what I. have before hinted - | hear) to carry Sou's into Abraham's Boſom, may receive you into 
That it is no more neceflary to a PR | - all _ —_ in | Heaven. * 
it ſuppoſed be juit and honeſt, than that all the parts of 1t be true 10 X ic faithful in a 2 Tz A 
va che of Fatt. whether paſt, or poſſible to be 3 for a Parable 15 not ful at bs _ _ —_ ER = mon ts faich- * Chatg 
deſigned to inform us 1n a matter of Fat, but to defcrive to us our |, & alſo i 7 J nt eaſt, IS un- 
\ Duty, under a fiftitious repreſentation, nor doth every part of a | JUIT AO IN rouch. E 
Parable, point at ſome correſpondent Duty to be done by us, but This is an uſual Sentence, (our Saviour made uſe of many ſuch » 
as to which kind of Speeches it is not neceſſary they ſhould he UNi- 


the main Scope for which it is brought, is principally to be attend- nd eches 
ed by us, and other pieces of Duty which may be hinted to us, are verſally true, it 15 ſufficient if they generally be fo. Beſides, that 
to be judged of, and proved not from the Parable, but from other | our Saviour plainly ſpeaketh here according to the common opinion 


Texts of Holy Writ, where it 15 inculcated. . The main things in and judgment of men, Men ordinarily judge that he who is faith- 
which our Saviour ſeemeth deſirous by this Parable to inſtru us, | ful in a little thing, ot no high concern or moment, will be faithfyj 
are, I. That we are but Stewards of the good things God lends us, | 1N what is of an higher concern, or greater moment, and if the 
and muſt give an. account to our Maſter of them. 2. That being | have found a perſon unfaithful in a ſmall thing, they will conclude 
no more than Stewards intruſted with ſome of our Maſters Goods | that he will be ſo in a greater, and not truſt him ; tho! ſometime; 
for a time, it is our higheſt Vradence, while we have them 1n our | it falls out otherwiſe, that one who 1s faithful enough in ſome trj- 
Truſt, to make ſuch an uſe of them, as may be for our advantage, | fling things, proves unfaithful in a greater truſt, where unfaithfy. 
when we give up our Account, Thus we ſhall hear our Lord in neſs will turn more to his profit 3 and on the contrary, he that j, 
the following Verſes expounding his own meaning. To this purpoſe | unfaithful in a little thing, may prove more faithful in a greater, 
he ſuppoſed a Rich Man to have a Steward, and to have received but none will truſt to that, and that is our Saviours deſign. to teach 
ſome Accuſation againſt him, as if he imbezelled his Maſters Goods | us that God will do by us, as we in the like Caſe do by our Servants, 
committed to hls truſt. Upon which he calleth him to account, and | or Neighbours. 

_ —_— he ior metry I. no qr, jo oe wo nr} _= 11 If therefore ye have not been faithful in the yr. 

eward to be one who had noother means of Lively-nood, -| .* G 
ſiftence, than what his Place afforded him 3 a Man not uſed to La- I WY who will commit to your truſt the 


bour, and too proud to beg. At length he fixed his Reſolution, to . : 
ſend for his Maſters Debters, and to abate their Obligations, making | This Verſe now oppoſeth the Unrighteous Mammon to the tne 
them Debters to his Maſter for much leſs than indeed they were 3 by | Riches, which would ſtrongly incline one to think, that by the 
this means he probably hoped, that when he was turned off from his | Mammon of Unrighteonſne/s before mentioned » Our Saviour meant 
Maſter, he ſhould be received by them. He ſuppoſeth his Maſter to only talſe, and deceitful Riches. By the true Riches, I cannot think, 
have heard of it, and to have commended him, not for his Honeſty, | 15 meant the Goſpel, which indeed is ſaid to be committed to truf 
but for his Wit in providing for the time to come, What was of the Miniſters, but not of all Chriſtians. I had rather interpret 
Knavery in this Steward, 1s honeſt enuugh 1n thoſe who are the | it of ſpectal effettual Grace, which is of all other the true Riches, 
Stewards of our Heavenly Lord's Goods 5 ſuppoſe Riches, Honours, and ſo it teacheth us this great Truth, That God is juſtified in the 
Parts, Health, Life, or any outward Accommodation, viz. to uſe our denial of his ſpecial Grace to thoſe, who do not make a due uſe of hi 
Lords Goods for the beſt profit, and advantage to our ſelves, during | 9/7771 Gifts and Graces ; and indeed here will lie Mens Damnation, 
ſuch time as we are entruſted with them. For tho' an Earthly Lord, becauſe they do not make a juſt uſe of that common Grace which 

they have, and might make a better uſe of them than they do, if 


and his Steward, have particular divided Intereſts, and he that ma- 1 | 
keth uſe of his Lords Goods for his own beft advantage, cannot at 54 Sagan be faithful in that, God would not deny them the te 
iches. 


the ſame time make uſe of them for the beſt advantage of his Maſter, | | 
yet the Caſe 15 page ard ys COPE! Lord cn US. 4 _ I2 And if ye have not been faithful in that which is 
pleaſed God ſo to twiſt the Intereſt of his Glory with our highe bs « ; 
Good, that no Man can better uſe his Maſters wart for the advan- m_— a who ſhall &v6 you that which is your 
tage of His Glory, than he who beſt uſeth them for the higheſt good Lee; » ; PER ' 
profit, and advantage to himſelf : Nor doth any man better uſe them | .. > e queſtioned whether daairewy might not have been 
tor his own Intereſt, than he who beſt uſeth them for Gods Glory. | 7 ted Foreign, as well as another Mans, for fo Interpreter 
So as here-the Parable halteth, by reaſon of the diſparity betwixt expound that Phraſe. If you have not been faithful in things that 
the things that are compared. And tho' the unjuſt Steward could | 7? Km you, which are little, compared with things that are 
not be commended for the honeſty, but only for the policy of his within us. Yet Riches are indeed properly not ours, we are but 
the Stewards of them, and part of them are other Mens, and only 


Afticn, yet we whc »re Stewards of the Gifts of God, in doing the fied 5 ; ! 
like, that is, making ute cf our Maſters Goods for our own beſt pro- = ed into our Hands to diſpenſe them according to our Mz 
fit, and advantage, way ac? not only wiſely, but alſo honeſtly ; | ;*** order. Grace is our own, eſpecially juſtifying and ſandif- 
and indeed Chritt in this Parabic hlameth men for not doing fo, | 19s Grace z becauſe it is given us cf God ſolely for our own uſe 
[ The Children of this World (faith he) ae wiſer in their Generation, _ advantage. We uſe to ſay , That thoſe who have been bad 
than the Children of Light. 7 By the Children of the World, he mean- | 0 04Pr5, ſeldom prove good Maſters. In the truſt of our Rictes, 
cth ſuch as this Steward was, men who regard not Eternity or the we are but Servants, God will not give out of his ſpecial faving 

Grace , to thoſe that abuſe the truſt of his common Gifts and 


concerns of their immortal Souls, but only regard the things of this 
Life, what they ſhall Eat, or Drink, or put on. By the Children of 


Light, he meancth ſuch as live under the Light of the Goſpel, and ; 
.Teceive the common Illumination of the Goſpel : tho' if we yet un- 13 No ſervant can ſerve ewo maſters : for either he 


derſtand it more ſtrictly, of thoſe who are Tranſlated out of Darkneſs | will hate the one, and love the other ; or elſe he will hold 
into marvellnus Light, 1t 1s too true, they are not ſo Wiſe, and Po- | to the @ne : 

litick, and Induſtrious for Heaven, as Worldly Men are to obtain and ane roo deſp iſe the other, Ye cannot ferve God 
their ends in getting the Worid. He faith, The Men of the World are Se the N _ 

wiſer in their Generation, that is, in their hind, as to thoſe things, e tne Notes on Matth. 6. 24+ 

about which they exerciſe their Wit, and Policy, than the Children I4 And the Phariſees alſo * who were covetous, heard * Mit 
of God. all theſe things : and they derided him. ih 

| Concerning the Phariſees Covetouſnelſs, we have often heard before 

* Mat.6.19. 9 And I fay unto you, * Make to your ſelves and indeed they were fo from this Principle, That none but the 

& 19. 21. friends of the | mammon of unrighteouſneſs , that | Rich, were happy, and bleſſed, and that all poor People were cur- 


iTiw-5.17. when ye fail, they may receive you into everlaſting ha- | cd, John 7. 45. in oppoſition to whom ſome think that our Sari 
j!Or, Riches. bitations. our, Chap. 6. 20. bleſſed the poor. The promiſes relating to 
That by Mammon here is meant Rzches, 15s univerſally agrecd, but = — TE, and made to the Jews, were generally - 
whether it Originally be a Chaldaich, or Syriackh,, or Punich Word poral Bleſſmgs, though under them Spiritual Mercies were 4 
. - Mg > | underſtood. As Fypocrites c d have their be- 
ell agreed. The Chaldee Paraphraſt, uſet! H. YP _— OT CE 0D VE bam” 
1s not ſo well agree phraſt, uſeth it, Hof. 5. 11. [1044 Luſts tonched” and mend . have Dan's | 
But the Hebrew there, 15 quite otherwiſe, (according to our Tranſla- ti , | ca, ana Pperions that have dr ank in an Error, ti- and f 
: - ins ind the dt is pes. ro ere no patience to hear it contradifted ; ſo the Phariſees had no patl | 
tion) They willingly followed the Cammandme if the notion | +5 hear that DoR hich. croff: 4 taupht pable of 
of thoſe be true, that ſome of thoſe Nations had an Idol called Mam- d ſtruck hei rine, whicly crofled what they ha -, d lome A 
| " hev made the God of Riches. anſwerino the Grecian | 329 ſtruck at their darling Luſts. They derided him. The Wo | ke 
mon, WACIN kt ey f F4 5 r gf t C ecian {ed fi n f h d . . © f n and 4 diſtir 
Plutcs, It fairly Interprets the Chaldee Paraphraſt. "They followed | £02 189! 'yetn a Ceriding with the higheſt degree of Scor they is 
the Command for Idolatry, for ſuch was Fereboams Commandment, POTN Blefſecth 
mentioned in that Text, and from thence it might be that the Ig And he ſaid unto them 5 Ye are they which | 
Syrians and Punichs called Riches Mummon. We have the Word juſtify your ſelves before men ; but * God know- * pl 23 
'!n the New Teitament four times, thrice in this Chapter, once eth your hearts: for ® th hi h is highly eſteem-*:5 mefits, 
Math. 6. 24. It is called the Mammon of Unrighteouſneſs, by an d - : _— WR guy Gohr of 7: ofom. 
Mebraiſm, it is as much as the Unrighteows Mammon, by which we ed amongſt men , 1s abomination in the ig 
muſt not underſtand il] gotten Goods, (for God haterh Robbery for a God. 
Burnt-Offering. We mult reſtore ſuch Goods, not mike Friends of | By juſtifying here is to be underſtood either ant appearing before 
them :_) Bur Riches arc ſo called, becauſe of the manifold Tempta- | Men, as juſt, and firit obſervers of the Law ; or 2- A predicating 
tions to Sin, which ariſe from them, upon which account they are | of themſelves as juſt : You (faith our Saviour ) make 4 fine ſhew ant 
alſo called Dzceitf, But others think that it is ſo called in oppo- | great brags amongſt men 3 but God's Eye goeth deeper, he kno*” 
lition to the true Riches, mentioned wv, 1t. So that the Mammon | eth the Heart 3 what Pride and Covetouſneſs, and Hypocriſie lodg- 
of  Unrighteouſneſs, is the Mammon of Falſhood, or hurtful Riches. | eth there. Men do not know your Hearts, but God kooweth thei tranflareg 
Riches of hurtfulneſs, dla ſometimes fignifies Hurt or Wrong , | All is not Gold by God's Touch-ſtone , that Gliſtreth in Mans F)*r nes the 
and edgy ledere, mcere. Of theſe Riches, which are no true | Nay many things which arc highly eſteemed amongſt men, 43 aged nicth th 
Riches, and which deceive the Soul, and do hurt and miſ- | ters of great Devotion and Picty, and Merit, and which they ap- With, that 


Grace, 


Lazar, 
By th 


chief to a Soul, expoſing ic to Temptation , Chriſt commands | plaud others for, are in the ſight of God no better than Abominait "ch by 
us to make Friends, either, 1. To make God our Friend, not by | ens. This highly obligeth all, not to make their eſtimate of _ ord wh 
Keriting trom him any thing By cur diſpoſal of them, but. by | from the yalue, aud eſtimate which Men put upon them gf _ * Ne Ble 


hap- XVI, 


ever = p : . 
ag Fe abomination in the {ight of God. 


16 The law and the prophets were until John, ſince 
that time the Kingdom of God is preached, and every 
man preſleth INTO IT. 

we had the Sum of theſe words, Matth, rr. 12, 13. Sce the 
Notes on thoſe Verſes. The Connexion of theſe Words in this place 
ſeems to be this Do not thick it ſtrange, that I Preach ſome Do- 
&rines to you, which ſeem new to you, tho indeed they are no other 
than was before contained in the precepts of the old Teſtament : For 
the Law and the Prophets, the preaching of them, held but till Zohn, 
ſince whoſe time the Goſpel hath been Preached, which gives you a 
clearer light into the Will of God, than you had before, and it plea- 
ſth God to give it a great acceptation in the World, tho you reje& 
*t every one preſſeth, that 15, many preſs into it, ſo as God will not 
want 4 People, tho you mock and deride the Goſpel inſtead of im- 
bracing of it, as you ought to do. 


17 * And it is eaſier for heaven and earth to paſs, 
than one tittle of the law to fail. 

Likewiſe you ſcandalize me, as if I came to teach a new Do- 
Arine, contrary to the Law, and the Prophets. I tell you the quite 
; 5 18, contrary 3 Heaven and Earch ſhall paſs away, before one tittle of the 
Lay ſhall pats. Your vain interpretations of the Law, ſhall be de- 
ſroved, or amended, but the Law of my Father ſhall remain as a 
certain rule of Life, to his People, until the World ſhall have an 
end. 


13 * Whoſoever putteth away his wife, and marri- 
eth another, committeth adultery : and whoſoever 
marricth her that is put away from ber husband, com- 


mitteth adultery. = 
Fee the Notes on Matth. 5. 32. where this is expounded, as alſo 
in the Notes on Matth. 19. 9. Mark 1c, It. 


19 There was a certain rich man which was cloathed 
in purple, and fine linnen, and fared ſumptuouſly every 


pſ1], 162+ 


40. 


gl, 6, 


| Ce 70 


aV. 

c And there was a certain beggar named Lazarms, 
which was laid at his gate full of ſores, 

21 And deſiring to be fed with the crumbs which fell 
from the rich mans table : moreover the dogs came and 
licked his ſores. Ts, 

22 And it came to paſs that the beggar died, and was 
carried by the angels into Abrahams boſom : The rich 
man alſo died, and was buried. 


It is a Queſtion of no great concern {or us to be reſolved about, 
whether this be an Hiſtiry, or Narrative of matter of Fact, or a Pa- 
rable. Thoſe that contend on cither fide have probable Arguments 
for their Opinion, and it may be they beſt judge, who determine it 
to be neither the one, nor the other, but a profitable diſcourſe, that 
hath in it ſomething of both. - Our chief concern 1s to confider what 
our Lord by it defigned to inſtruct us1n. And certainly thoſe do not 
judge amiſs, who think, that this diſcourſe hath a great reference to 
what went before, v. 9, 19. where our Saviour had been exhorting 
his hearers, to make themſelves Friends of the Mammon of Unrighteouj- 
ref, as alſo to the Phariſees deriding him for his Doctrine, v. 14. 
Our Lord by this diſcourſe letting them know the danger of Cove- 
tuſneſs and Uncharitab/enejs, and allo letting them know that what 
5 highly eſteemed among$t Men, may be abomination in the fight of God. 
He telleth them there was a certain rich Man, who lived in great 
Plenty and Splendour, his cloathing was Purple and fine Linnen, that is 
exceeding coſtly, and ſplendid 3 his Fare or Diet, was delicate and 
ſunptuous, and that every day ; from whence may eafily be conclud- 
ed, That if he had an heart thereunto, he might have ſpared ſome- 
thing for the Poor. Nor were the objefs of his charity far off, 
There was a certain Bz2gar, whoſe Name was Lazarus, poor enough, 
for he was full of ſores, and would have been glad of the Offal of the 
Rich Mans Table 3 but the Dozs were more charitable than their Ma- 
fter; we read of nothing which the Rich Man gave him, but the 
Dogs cane and licked his fores, What was the cnd of this 2 The 
Begzar dicd, and he was by the Angels carried into the boſom of Abra- 
ham, that is, into Feaveri. Some will have the Phraſe ſignife, one 
of the chicfeft Manſions in Heaven. Abraham was the Father of 

. Believers, and an hoſpitable Perſon while he lived upon the Earth, 
Lazarus is expretſcd to have been conveyed to him. There are ma- 
ny things diſcourſed by Men of Wit and Learning about this Abra- 
n&n's byjom, but the beſt center here, that by it is meant Heaven, 
and from hence two great points are proved. 1. That the Soul is ca- 
Þable of an exiſtence ſeparated from the By, and therefore is not, as 
lome Athieſts Dream, a meer affe&tion of that, and an accident, but 
4 diſtin& ſpiritual ſubſiſtence. 2. That the F 
they depart from their Bodies, immediately paſs int9 an eternal ſtate of 
Bleſſedneſs. 


23 And in hell he lift- up his eyes, being in tor- 
wry and feeth Abraham afar off, and Lazarus in his 
olom. 


24 And he cried and faid, Father Abraham, have 
mercy on me, and ſend Lazarus, that he may dip the 
A of his finger in water and * cool my tongue; for 1 
:1 Mtormented in this flame. = | 
\* Kat oy mh ef S'4, and in Hell. The World hath been filled. with 
Ciputes about the true ſignification of the Word ef Jyg, whicit 15 here 
tanflaed Hell, The moſt probably true notion of 17 ts 3, thatit f1g- 
nes the fate of the Dead, both of the dead Bod:, and ſoit oft=n fig- 
nricth the Grave, and of the departed Soul. A very Learned Man 
With, that if he raiſtaketh not, This is the only Text in Scripture, in 
"Ml by 1t 1s to be underſtood, the place of Torments. The Hebrew 
ore which 3s tranſlated by this, 'far more often ſignifying the place 


Pls bots TH 


0 * Vit 


u 
Coal 


Wal, 2 


ouls of the Good, when 


S LUKE. 


thing, but many things which are highly eſteemed amongſt 


Chap. XVI 


died, than the place whither Sinners went ; but ». 24. Makes it ap. 
pear, that here it ſignifies Hell, properly ſo callcd, as it importetit 
the place of the Damned, We muſt underſtand our Saviour 1n this 
whole Naſumag to ſpeak to us hguratively, that by things which 
we underſtand, we r-ight comprehend ſpiritual things, Heaven and 
Hell are at too great a diſtance for Souls in each to diicourſe one 
with another ; neither have Souls any Eyes to lift up. We are by 
this taught, 1. That as the Souls of good Men when they |cave their 
Bodies, go into an Eſtate ofeternal Bliſs, where are Abrah um I, 
and Facob, and enjoy a felicity which we are not able to exrrefc. 
but is ſet out to us under the Notion of Abrabyun', b:/m, to let us 
know that it is a place of reſt, and Communion wit! Saints, and 
the ſame felicity which Abraham the Friend of God doth enjoy - 50 
the Souls of wicked Men when they leave their Bodies, thall 80 intv 
4 place of Torments, the greatnets of which being ſuch as we are not 
able to conceive, they are expreſſed to us under the Notion of beins 
tormented by Fire. 2. That it will be a great part of the mniſcry of 
Damned Souls, to underſtand thoſe to be in a ttate of happinet: 

whom they in this Life have ſcorned, deſpiſed, and abuſed, and it 
1em to thoſe hletfid 


may be, have been Inſtruments to haſten tl 
3+ That there will come a time when the proudeſt Sin- 


Mantions. 
ners w1ll be glad of the help of the meaneft Saints, if they corid o- 
tain 1t. Father Abraham (faith the Rich Man) tend Lazurys, that 
Lazarus, whom, when alive, I ſuffered to lyc at my Gate full of 
Sores, and would not (relieve. 4. That the ſtate of the Dainned 
will be void of the leaſt degrees of Comfort and Satisf1&tion. The 
Rich Man defireth but a cooling of his Tongue, with ſo much WA. 
ter, as could be brought upon the tip of Lazr9 his finger. 5, This 
the Tongue is a Member, the abuſe of which will in another Life, lye wery 
heavy upon IoS$t Souls, 
25 But Abraham ſaid, Son, * remember that thou + 
In thy life-time receivedſt thy good things, 2nd like- 
wiſe Lazarus evil things: but now he is comforted, and 
thou art tormented. | 

26 And beſides all this, between us and you there is 
a great gulf fixed : ſo that they which would paſs from 
hence to-you, cannot neither can they paſs to us, that 
would come from thence- 


We muſt ſtill remcmyver, that all theſe things are ſpoken in a Fi- 
gure. The great Gulf here mentioned, to be fixed between Hea- 
ven and Hell, 1s too wide for Perſons on oppofite fides of it; to be 
heard communicating their Minds each to other. All that our Savi- 
our deſigns to let us know, 1s, that the circumſtaices of Damned 
Souls, arc ſuch, that if it were poffible, they would beg the iclp and 
affiſtance of the meaueſt Saints, whom they have in this Life moſt 
ſcorned, deipiſed, or abuſed, but as they will have no ſuch opportu- 
nitics as to crave any thing at their hands ſo if they had, they 
could not receive the leaſt relief from them, their ſtate is determin- 
cd, they are fixed for Eternity, and there can be no chaige of theic 
condition for the better. Abraham 1s here brought in calling this 
Man $S9n, cither as lineally deſcended from him, or being a Member 
of that Churci of which he was the Father. It will add to the Tor- 
ments of the Damned, to hear and confider the former mcans, and 
advantages they have been under tor Salvation, if they have de- 
ſcendcd from Godly Parcnts, or have been Members of the Church 
of Chrift. | That in thy Life-time thou receivedſt thy gond things, 
and libewiſe Lazarus evil. ] The good things which the Rich Man 
received, werc no more the cauſe of his Damnation, than the evi! 
things which Lozarus met with, were the cauſe of his Salvation ; but 
the Rich Mans 111 uſe of the former, and Lazarus his good improwu- 
ment of the latter, through the Grace of God beſtowed on him, 
Tho it be not ordinary with God to give the ſame Perſons the up- 
per and the nether Springs, yet he ſometimes doth it, of which 
Abraham, and Lot, and Fob, and David, and Jfaac, and F:c2h, and 
Foſeph of Arimathea, are ſome Inftances ; but the term, thy, Ngni- 
fies the error of this Rich man ; he lookt upon the good things of 
this Life as his Portion, thoſe were the things which he ſet his heart 
upon, and let his heart run out unto the negleGting the good things 
of another Life. Lazarus received evil things, God gave him a 
mean afflied Portion in this Life, bur he was found patient, and 
glorifying of God by a quiet ane believing ſubmiffion to h1s Will un- 
der them. | Now he 7s comforted, and. thou art tormented, | $0 then 
:t ſeemeth that departed Souls do not ſleep, as fome have dreamed. 
if they did they could neither have been capable of Comfort or Tor- 
ment. [And beſides all this there is a great Gulph fixed, &c.)] the 
meaning of which 15s no more than, 1. That the ſtate of Soils apon 
their ſeparation from the Bodies of Men and Women, is deterinined and 
fixed, As the Tree falls, fo it lyeth. 2, That therc 15 no Commerce 
or Intercourſe betwixt glorified and damned Souls. The Pap:$s paſ- 
ſage from Purgatory to Heaven, is a new found way, -or rather a new 
tancied one 3 1f Purgatory be (34s they pretend) a place where Souls 
are tormented, it may be admired how they ihould pats over this 
Gulph : it ſeemeth Abraham did not know the way, Saint Peter knew 
as little ; this is one of his pretended Vicars new diſcoveries z but it 15 
no wiſdom in any Souis to truſt to this patſage, of which Abraþam 
knew as little as he did of our Prayers paſſing to them, or to God 
for them 3 for there is y&7ua, ui3e t5nerywbor, A great Gulph eSta- 
blifhed. +7008 | | | 

27 Then heſfaid, I pray thee therefore, father, that 
thou wouldeſt ſend him to my fathers houſe. 

28 For [ have five brethen ; that he may teſtifie unto 
them, leſt they alſocome into this place of torment. 


that the Rich Man would not hear when he lay at his Gate 
full of Sores, exhorting him to do good, and to diſtribute, to grve 
Alms of all that he. had, and to make himſelf Friends of the Man:- 
" mon of Unrighteouſneſs, he would now have reſtored to the Earth 


fob 21.133 


Him, 


2&5 = -- 
8 
on 


again ; his Soul before the general Reſurrection reunited to his Body, 


that he might go unto his Fathers houſe, and give them warning,' 
that they might not come into the miſery which he felt. But is 
there any Charity in Hell ? Is there any there, that with well to Souls 


a—_.. 4 
6 = "Is 


} 


+ bed, vhither the Saints, and _Parriarchs went when —_— 


. upon Earth ; or rather are not damned Souls like perſons infetted 
Xxx} viitt 


M 1 


tht others might be made as miſerable as 


Lib. 


Chap. VI. 


ith the Plague, detirous zht 
--+:hy ig :* orave and acuic Author 141th, he prayeth Bot for 


them but for himielr, that te mizht net be the more miteravic by 
the company of thoic 5311 p01 THC {:rth were his near Relations, 
. hun. l 
Rketh all in a Figure,and tht which our Saviour by thele exprethi- 
ous detigneth to inſtruct us 118, 15 10 MGTE than this; That altho 
Arheiſtical, and prous and haughty Souls 1n this Life, MAKE A mock 
at Hell, and at the wrath of God to be revealcd after this Life, and 
deſpiſe the poor Scxvants-of God, who by their Dotrine, or holy 
Life, and Example would teach them better things, yet they ſhall 
find the Fire ot Heil fo hot, the Wrath of God {o terribl2 and in- 
tollerable, that if ou could 1magine, that Souls under thoſe miſerics 
could have the Jeaſt dramm of Charity, and good Nature left in 
them, tho they apprehend themaiclves paſt all hopes, or recovery tO a 
better ſtate, yet tlicy would bug thatfome of thoſe faithful Miniſters, 
or godly Pcople, whom they have rcjzited, deſpiled, and abuſed, 
might be ſent to every Friend they have in the world, to warn them 
from doivg as they have done, and running the hazard of thoſe Tor- 
ments they feel for doing of ſuch things. The Paprits who idly go 
about from hence to prove a ſenſe in departed Souls of the ſtate of their 
Friends that are yet alive upon the Earth, can derive very littie com- 
fort trom that {peculation, out of this Text ; which if *t could 
prove any thing of that nature, could prove no more, than that 
Damned Souls have ſuch a Senſe, and mignat by the ſame Argument 
alſo evince their Charity. Put figurative expretfions muſt not be fo 
tentered. I have thewed what I judge to be the true inſtruftion 


from this paſſage. _ : 
* ia, 8,20, 29 Abraham ſaith unto him, * They have Moſes and 


. 15, the prophets ; let them hear them. 
moe Go2J. Chriſ an repreſenteth to us the Genius of Wicked and Carnal 


7 17. 11. Men, that would be converted by R-velations and ſ-me extraordi- 
nary Signs ; if thev could fee one 7:er from the dead, then they 
would believe the Rejwredion ; it they couid ice a glorified Saint, or 
hear or ſec 4 datmnoes Soul, then they wouid believe an Heaven and 
an Hell: he herc briggs 10 Abraham faving, Toy Dave Moſes and the 
Prophets, tet thera near them. God Wi: have Men believe the Propo- 
fitions of his Wed, aad live up to the rule cf Lite pretcrived there, 
and not expe to have their curiofii y {itisfied, by neeClefs and ex- 
traorditary Revelations. Bur is thetic then co need of the Goſpe] ro 
bring Men to #-cavcn ? Doubtleis tiicre 15, but tat 15 included 1n 
Avvies and the Propoets, who a! propbecied ot Chriſt, tho mor” dark- 
iy than he is revevied in the Nev Te!ta'nent, Had ye believed Moſcs. 
ge would bave believed me, for he wrote of me, John 5. 4%. and 'v, 39. 
Search the Scrip: ures, far m them ye think thus 104 have eternal life, 
and they ic(itfie oj me: Now they at that time, had no Scriptures to 
ſearch, but thote of Moſes and the Prophets z for the new Teſtament 
was not at that time Written. : 

30 And he ſaid, Nay, Father * brabam : bat if one 
went unto them troin the dead, they wlll repent. 

21 And he ſeic unto him, If they hear nor Moſes and 
the prophets, neither will they be perſwaded though 


one roſe from the dead. 

How vain is Man it his imaginations! We are prone all of us tc 
think after the rate that this Rich Kun 1s here brought in ſpeaking. 
That altho pertons be deaf to the ſound of the Word, yet ſome ſen- 
fible evidence of the Wrath of God, would make a change in their 
hearts and lives. There js no ſuch thing. There is not poſſibly in 
all the Book of God, a Text that more ſpeiks the deſparate hardne/s 
of a Sinners heart, than tnis, nor a Tc&t which looks more dread- 
fully upon Pcrſons fitting under the means of Grace, reading and 
hearing the word of God, and yet hind not their hearts ſo affeted 
with the reading and hearing of it, as thereby to be brought to re- 
pentance, and Faith, and ſuch holineſs of Life as it requireth. If jt 
were pottible tit ſuch Men and Wornen ſhould fee one come out of 
the bottomicſs Fit, tearing his Hair, and wringing his hands, and 
gnaſhing his Tceth. and bewailing his Miſery, and begging of them 
to be wiſe by his Ex:mple, telling thcm for what Sins he is made fo 
miſerable,and with tcars and higheſt expreiſions of Paifion, beſeeching 
them, that while they lave time thcy would leave off thoſe courſes, 
acquaint thewſelues with Goz, an! be at Peace, that thereby good 
mizht come wnio them z they would not yet believe, nor repent, nor 
would this have any further cffe& upon them, than a little Paſſion, 
Till they could get the din out of their Ears, For tho ſenſible evi- 
dence, be the higheſt advaniage in the World to moral ſuaſjon ; yet 
theſe thinps arc under no Fivice Appointment to ſuch an effe, 
Henceforth jet us wonder 19 moie that a Drunkard ſees his Compa- 


But %e mult rememver that our Saviour here |, 


V .Kk E 
CHAP. XVyY. 


Chriſt dehorteth from giving offence, 1, 2. and admoniſheth them f 
give one anther, 3, 4. The Diſciples pray for increaſeaf pr” I: 
a deſcription of the power thereof, 5, 6. Ten Lepers cleanſed | irony : 
of one only 1s thank ful, 7—19. Telleth them in what manne —_ 
Kingdom ſhould come, 29—25. A deſcription of the la$t times : *, 
pared with thoſe of Noah and Lot, 26 —37, FOO 


I Hen he faid unto the diſciples, It is i p 
PF but that offences will come : but is oye 

through whom they come. 

2 It were better for him that a milſtone were hg, 

ed about his neck, and he caſt into the ſea, then that te 


ſhoula offend one of theſe little ones. 

See the Notes on Matth. 18. 6, 59. Mark 9g. 42. This ter; 
Irgrdraw is uſed in the New Teſtament very variouſly ; in the Pai 
ral it figniftes any thing which may be an occaſion of miſchief to "n 
ther. Man confiiting of Body and Soul, may by ſomething be made 
to ftumble and fall, either with reference to the one, or to the other. 
thus Levit. 19. 14. Thou ſhalt not — put a ſtumblins block before tha 
Blind, WID Macſkil, Heb. fo Prov. 24. 17. the mitchief done to 
our Souls 1s by Sin, > as-in the New Teſtament it often lionifies 
any action of ours, by whici or Brother is made to fin, which, i. 
ons may be gd and neceſſury, and then the ſcandal is taken, not pj. 
ven z. Or wicked and abominavle, hence we call ſome Sins ſcantalug 
S1ns, fuch as give offence to others, and are cx2mples alluring them 
to Sin, - Or thirdly, Aﬀtions whici in themſelves are of indifferent 
Nature, ueither coin:nanded nor forbidden in the Word, Our take 
ing one part in theſe tions, rather than another, way be a Scandal, 
nat 1s, an Offence, What our Saviour here ſaith, is certainly trye 
concerning all theſe kind of Offences, conſidering the Complexion 
of the World, and the Corruption which is in Mens hearts, 7 i im. 
Poole but that offences will come. But I muſt confeſs I incline to 
tink, that the Offences primarily intended by our Saviour here, zre 
taoſe of the firſt ſort, and that by them are meant Perſecutians of the 
People of God, to the Authors of which our Saviour denounceth 
Woe. So that our Saviour by this, lets the World know, the ſpeci. 
al protcttion under which he hath taken his People, ſo as tho he 
kuew there would ariſe thoſe, who would hurt and deſtroy in his ho! 
Mountain , yet he declares, that they ſhall not gO unpuniſhed, byt 
they had better dye the moſt certain death imaginable, (ſuch myſt 
bs the death of him who is thrown into the Sea with a Milſtone 1 
20uT his Neck) than to that degree expoſe himſelf to the Vengeance 
ot God ; a guilt of that Nature, that there is not much more hope 
for him toeſcape Gods Vengeance, than there would be of a Mane. 
caping with his Life, whom we ſhould ſee thrown into the Sea, with 
« Milſtone appendent to him, I do very well know that it is al 
highly dangerous to tempt or ſollicite a Child of God ts Sin, either 
»2y our Words or Attionsz but I do not think it the deſign of our 
Lord in this place, ſo much to expreſs that as the other. 


3 Take heed to your ſelves : If thy brother treſpak 
againlt thee, * rebuke him ; and if he repent, forgives py 
him- 19, 
4+ And if he treſpaſs againit thee feven times in a/®s 
day, and ſeven times in a day turn again to thee, ſaying, 
I repent ; thou ſhalt forgive him. 

Matthew hath ſomctning of the ſam2 tendency in Ch, 18, 21, 
mentioning it as an anſiver to a Queſtion which Peter propounded to 
our Lord ; but the circumſtances of both relations are ſo different, 
that I cannot think them the ſame, but do belicye theſe words {yo- 
ken at another time. This Dottrine of the forgiveneſs of our o&- 
tending Brother, is prefſed upon us in ſeveral places in the Golpet, 
and .New Teſtament, and that upon the graveſt Arguments imazina- 
ble, Matth.6. 15. and 18.35. Mark 11. 25, Chap. 6. 537. £5; 
4+ 32. from whence we may juſtly conclude it a duty of very high 
concernment for us, both to underſtand, and to live 11 the praftice 
ofit, It ſignifies the laying aſide of all thoughts or deſire of revenge 
nour own cauſe, The precept is not excluſive of our duty in ſeeing 
the Glory of God avenged upon Murderers, Cc. Nor yet of our 


ecking a juſt ſatisfaftion in a legal way, for wrongs done to us, re- 
lating to our Limbs or Eſtate, fo far as the Perſon 1s able to do it; 
much leſs doth it require the making ſuch an one as hath ſo injured 
us, our intimate and boſom Friend. That which it requireth 1s the 


laying afide all Malice, or deſire of Revenge upon our Neighbour in 


nion drop down dead bcfore him, yet preſcntly cries again, fill the} a caſe wherein our own Name or Honour is concerned, and is fitly 


Glaſs; that hur.deeds of Shiners arc daily hurricd down to Hell jn 
their vickedn is, and yet their Compamions rake no warning. In 


joyned to what went before ; this Malice, or deſire of Revenge, being 
the root of all the miſchief that Men voluntarily do one to another, 


a fight at Sex or Land hundreds drop, yet thcir Companions do not | eſpecially of that which thev do to the innocent Servants of God. 


fly, tut arc held up by their Stomachs, and Paſſion, and their Ears 
are made deaf by the noiſe of tie Druras and Trumpets. 
World hundreds ef $1nners drop daily into the Pir, yet the reſt of 


5 Andthe Apoſtles ſaid unto the Lord, Increaſe our 


So 1n the faith. 


Tho we be not to ſeck a Connexion of all thoſe ſpeeches of our 


Their Companions tumble them into their Graves, and never coni1- Lord which are rccorded by the Evangeliſts, they ſometimes heap- 
der the work of the Lord, nor conſider the operation of his hands, ing together many of his golden ſayings, without ſo much as regard 
rill they alſo like Shcep be laid in the Grave, and Death comes to to the order of time when he ſpake them, or their dependence each 


iced wupon thein, and Hell to devour them alfa. 


This now to thoſe| ,, another ; yet he that wiſely obſerves the preceding diſcourſe tor 


290 Ay eaniſi4or nop chi nent St : - Sp n L a 6 , 
that duly confider not things, ard in particular do not conſider this charity, will eafily obſerve an excellent Connexion of this verſe with 


Text, leemeth firanze and amazing, but it is no more to be won- 


the former. 


No duty required of Men and Women, more gratcs 


dred at, than that hundreds read, and hear the word of God, and upon Fleſh and Blood, than this of forgiving Injuries 3 nothing that 
are not by it converted and changed. It is not to be expected, that = moſt of Peonls fad tudor wn put in practice, ſo as indeed 
#ny Providence of God thould work upon thoſe Souls any ſaving whoreathere- is F 1 root of Faith. this Ervit will not be found. It 
change, upon whom the word doth not work, Thar is the ordi- is Faith which worbeth by love, Till the Soul cometh ſteadily and fis- 


vance of God with which the holy Spirit joyns it felf, which alone 


edly to agree to thoſe 


ropofitions of the word where his 15 re- 


can produce thiis change, It God works not this change by it, he quired as the indiſpenſible Will of God 3 nay till it comes firmly to 


will work it by nothing elſe ; tho he ſometimes maketh uſe of ſuch 
Providences toward Souls to whom he intendeth pood, to make 


reſt upon thoſe promiſes and hope for them which are m 
duty ; finally till it comes to have received Chriſt, and 


ade to this 
forgiveneſs irom 


them obſcryc, and attend to the word better, in order to fo bleſſed him, and conſiders it ſelf bound to forgive, as God for Chrilts lake 
Þ 


21 fic, 


hath forgiven it,Eph.4.32.it will hardly comeup to the practice of U1:s 
duty. Hence it 1s that unregenerate Men are uſually 1mplacz 


ble,raail 


cious, always ſtudying Revenge. Nay ſo imperfe& axe the habits 


' wenn” C 
wy OF R110 » 


Chap, RV] h 


th 


th 


fit: 
ty 
1 
whe 
ſpir 
and 
whi, 
all, . 
this 
vant 
ſtan 
day, 
they 
vant: 
thei 
Com 
Were 
Lore 
Ing, 
He ac 
ly ts 
ſuch 
make 
Ing u] 
wear, 
Drink 
ther. 
them 
them ] 
ſuch ol 
V. Io 
COMM ty 
Gloria, 
We hay 
ſtruec 
abilitie 
Mid, 
bot cea 
that thi 
when 
1. Bec; 
+ That 
he hath 


Lunt, by 
- 


V | h 1P- X YI [, & 
workings of Faith in Be! zevers, F 
to forgive. The Apoſtles therefore y 


creaſe our Faith, atter hearing this diſcourſe, 


ery properly Pray, Lord in- 


Stviour had before preſſes the DG; ins f Charity; tie hid 
alfo thewed *hat muſt ! | 


9c the io T6 "> os 4 [we 
- Others make the Con- Ic here {hey eth us what we bags " ST was _ wig 
nexion thus, Lord we have now heard thee diſcourting our duty as | in ſuch atts, 232. not to merit a. tid. | 7 Ol 
to Love, nw increaſe ou; Faith, dilcourſe fo us ſomething for the 20Pe to re 
increaſe of tat, But the former 5. 


izemeth to be leaf} ſtrained. By 
the way we may obſerve from hence, that us the beginnings j1 the in- 
creaſe of our Faith mu be from Gag - 


: In things fruly and ſpiritually 
good, witheut him we can do nothing, 
* 6 And the Lord ſaid, If ye h 
muſtard-ſeed, ye might fay unto this ſyc 
chou plucked up by the roots, and be thoy Planted in 
the ſea 3 and it ſhould obey You. 
Matthew hath in EF:& the la:ne C:VaÞ. I7., 20, 
mizht ſay unto this Mountain, See the Notes there. T cannot be of 
their mind who think that cu; Saviour i: 15, and the Parallel place, 
ſpeaks oniy of a Faith that WOFKs mtr aculors Operations, the objedt of 
which muſt be a Divine Revelation or Promije mad 
Pcrſons, that they ſhall þc iviec to do things (by 
God) out of, and beyond th. orainary COurſe of I do 
believe that in both Texts our Lord Celigns to theiy the great ho- 
nour he will give to the ex 


erclie of the Grace of Faith ; ſo as 
nothing which ſhall be for te honour of God, and the 


rd of God. 
Celve a reward fr : 


ence to his Will, ow 


Oni nfs 
_ £4} $ F 


2d faith as a grain of 


aMICnNCe and 
inkfulneſs ; y 

lite to the true :: d regular perfo 

we do, ang Our Duty, ; nf 


do all whatſoever 


we i nuch more 
PCrTorimances are ſo lame and upertet, that tt: 
We do, amounteth not to the leaſ} Part of wh 7 


tho he faith Jou 


tl 'H01 


their Voices, and 


ſaid, 
dVve m ICY on US. 

h : = good of Chrifts {t way #5 7 7 i 7 

thoſe that exerciſe it, aud which God hath .promied, ſhall be too mode RY hs Galilee to eruſulem, 

nard, or great an atchjievemene for it ; yet will jt not thence follow, 7 vt ten 

that if we had Faith, th it 


iSd full perſuaſion that God wouid do 
ſuch a thing by us, and 2x rcit and conndence In God relating to it, 
we might remove Mountains, or caſt Sycamine-trecs into the Sea, 


for nc ſuch Faith in us nc;v could have a promiſe for its obje&, fo 
as ſuch a Perſuaſion would be no Faith, but 4 meer Preſumption, 
But there are other things as d1iFcult, for which all believers have 
promiſes, Stn ſhall have n Domingnn over you, Reſiſt the Devil 


and he w!1l flee from 10, &c. 


Lepers met him, for tho #1 


ere 2of Cogoth« 
JHctan, © The 5 


O teitthe his diſpleaſ 


Nttcd Hy 
threatened 4s the Mark of God 1 


$15 2:1, 
VIICH, 
upon Men for Sith; hows: ns -.. 
the ch X * a J » 29. 2 
2nd there are dutics to be performed ns ns $9.4 7 ng n't be healed. od fent jt upon 37 
by us, 45 hard in the vicw of OUPr natural Eye, 45 removing Ayn: . A cr c 
tains, amongſt which this of fo 


T3. 32. ontempt of Myfoz, 
houſe with it, 2. $ 3- 29, Gehari ſufforect 
and S010g after Nam for a bribe, 2 K ings 
tor ulurping the Frieſt's Offic 2 Kings x 
0 Chritt for Merc < 


rgiving [lyuries, js not the leaſt, eC. an, 
pecially to ſome nutury] feinpers. But (laitit our Sdviour 2 do not 
think it impoſſible to do,you have ſaid wel! fo 17e, Lord increaſe our 
Faith, for if you had Faith os 4 


grain of Muſtard-ſeed, either ſo Sage | 
454 grain of Muſtard-ſ:.-q 


Dau Clirleth 


Js 2F. 


©, | S* S- Theſe ten 1. 
Y, Mercy with relpett to tj 


er Afﬀitic ne 

; tf truc) or fo lively and working, that| 14 And when he ſaw them, he laid unto them, 
had 1uch a principle of Life in it, as a grain of Muſtard-leed, you [ New your {elves unto the Prieſts, And it Cane tor 
might do any Duty, reti{t any lemptation, mortife any Corrupti- that as they went 

on, and you th.:t have g Cer S1VEN you, and a Promiſe made vou 


tor working Mtracic 
ved, &c, < 


7 But which of you bavins a ſervant Plowing, or | fl offeri 
feeding cattel, will lay unto him b 


"ont, they were Cleanfed. 
It was according to the Divitze Law, Levy, i4- 2, 
remo- Per in the day of his clezn t!hould be bro 
to judge whethe Was healed yea or no 
wy /STIETE Preſeribed, Chrift | 
h enat he mizht © ove the L 
y 2nd by, when | C [4 ce tne L 


5, Might ſay to this Syeamine-tree, be 


\ ie Pg of 
otng hin as our x 


Which iloog atar off 


WS throun! 5. 


[2 
» * cp x 7 c 
att d..G & ©. 


* 5 = : 

00 We ſhi! of 
- FJ" j «f* 
POR fom-: Parq, 


1 by it for his © 


215 


Chap, XVI. - [i f 


: 407 meeriy 15, 
G34, by 2 
» 48d gyur 


Servants, 
| done a!] that he 
eaxing 1t 
"ICH 15 lnidced requi- 
2 800d work which 

Outd a!'ow us to 
When our 
© eICT? pare whar | 
© leave undone, 


ls, as he Wert to Jeruſ.l-m 
that he paſſed through the mj Mar; ; 


there 


— 


Jef. ; 


£1 3 1.72, 


"I 
F y ? 


$5. 3 


14%P 


KMOg U-. A 


. Per; Cr y 
/ 


ug unto the rieft, 


Viet, part] 
p ths a winch his vacher hid iven A the 
; Cale, Þdr ly ta 1C mize ndve a tel; mony. of this hi Miracy! S 
he is come from the field, Go, and fit down to Operation. We ſhall ſerve tht our Saviour cured Home bn 
meat ? at 4 diſtance from thei ; fome by the word of hi; Power onl: tho 
8 And will not rather ſay unto him, Make ready | hc der ag » the ſame place; Others by touch; 
; - . CCrtalniv choſe ; 
wherewith I may 1up, and rird hy elf, and ſerve me | Pa 


till i have eaten and drunke 


usS to vary 
n; and afterward thou ſhalt 
cat and drink ? 


cure, to let peoplz know 


ad 110g V:rcue Was loherune 3h m, 
and that the proceeding of it from him, was not TYCA to any re- 
L | mony uſed at the doing of the Work, which he uled or on. ited ac- 
9 Doth he thank that ſervant becauſe he Cid the cording fo Nis pleaſure, ; 
things thet were commanded him 3 I trow not. 15 And one of _©nem, when he ſay that he was 
10 So likewiſe ye, when ye ſhall have done all thoſe | kealed, curneg Pack, and with a lou 
things which are commanded you, ſay, We are unpro- | God, 
table ſervants : 


Was our du-| 16 And fel] down on b;, face 


at his feet, 

thanks : And he Wis a Samaritans. 
[t is moſt Piooal'e tha x1: 

Pricit, accorditis ty 7! 

Savious, and the: 

that this &Yijying 

Chriit, ſigniq- 


are plainly a Parable, a part of 4 diſcourſe 
wherein our Lord , under an earthly fimilitude inſtructeth ys in a 
ſpiritual Duty. This duty 1s ealily learned from the Epiparavole, v.10, 
and it lieth in two things. r. That we ought t) do all thoſe things 
hich our Lord hath commanded us. 5, That we, when we have dne 
al, are to lob for our reward, nt of debt, but of Grace, 


& 0145 Lopir firit ſhow | Hinſcdf « 
HENEMent and the U'rCMHQNR Of © 
iFcturncd to glve our S4V:ouvr W208 Some £73: 
God hore n cMitDacd, 2:4) his-03..: 
; 


alving hin 


4 : "y oh 
& v% ta £44 I7MoCiL LES it. 
} 
12 OH 33 $537 
CizlO BY 03+ 


d voice Scrificd 


2 adi LIT KS 2 

£ C2 fame lns, [ Coul;t i Deciuſo nad 7. ay TT 

He illuſtrateth | eth from tits ſtory Iufticient 75 CONVInce ys, *!,-+ »,,, 1 Oked upor 

this by a Similitude or Parable. He ſuppoſeth a Man to have a Ser- Chriſt as God; way i __ r:9 appecr that his | i825. vifey - 

vant Plowing or tcrding Cattle for him. By Servants we muſt under- high 45 to belicy © a1 fne "Teffreh, te fon of Ds; id; they 1 peak 

ſand, ſuch Servants as they had in thoſe Countrics, who were not | to him only Woes 2 nutiwn of Flies, Miter, v. 12. 't is plain thes 

ay Servants, or Covenant Servants, who are only obliged to work velieved him at icalt tO ca great Prophet *ent from Led, ond cloath. 
their hours, or according to their Contrars with us ; but ſuch Ser. | cd with a power from Gog 

VANS, aS Were moit uſual amongſt the 


* TI chuſe rather ther... 
m, who were bought with 


bus falling dwn on is face at his Feet, as an hwmtjc poſt 
Verence, which thoſe Nations did often uſe tn ©) P[ome\ « 
pericrs by ; not as 4 poſture of Adoratinn, 4nd that his 2 'oriffin 
God was a Praiting of him, as the Principal eficj-;: . 

wg, and his giving thanks to Chriti 
Gods inſtrument jn the cafe 
- | Samaritan. 
Common-wealth of T5 


their Money, or 7aken in War, who we 
Command 


re wholly at their Maſters 
7, ezrd 


all their time was their 


3+” P27) c2;4 
At, tell 


TEE) 


-1, 4nd at night to be come in from their Labour. ard be was a 
© 4585 them which of them would think er, v. A Stranger to the 
ly to ſet the IC Samaritans were, 


laid, Were 
but where are the nine ? 


ael, as all t| 


17 And Jeſus an{wering, 


. ? 
Ig up their long (Garments, whic! cleanſed j 


1 they 
Mem, that 


afterwards 
luppole they do that 


there not ten 
to they thould Eat and 


I cre are not found thar returned to give glort 
WitEGut murmuring, he asKeth | to God, ſave this ſtranger. 
thers a24in, whether they would taks tncmſelves Obliged to thank Thele ten Lepers were 2 repreſentation of al! Mankind, not rioro 
them for doing the things which their Mafter commanded ? He tells than one of tea that receive {1gnal Mercies from the bountiful hand 
them he luppoleth. they Wou'd not take themſelves to be under any | gf Divine Providence, cometh to ij 
uch Obligation, Now what is the meaning of all this, he tells them. 


v, IL. Lp likewiſe ye, w "e1N Yoa hawve done all thoſe thit 
COMM th ed Jou, fa "| 


Wo are unprofitable Servants] for t 
Glorious and Blefſed G benefit by 

* have done that which was 
rutted Fiat we are wholly the Lords, all our ti 
Wilities; we are. obj I 
!td, and Soul, and Strength. . 
ot ceate, r1j] the Lord-ccaſet! 
Wat the Lorg Dy his revealed i 


glve God any 
Thus he maketh his Sun to ſhi 


and upon the Urjuſt, Men cry 
liim not when they are raiſed | 
V1Our lets us know, that this their Way 15 their folly, 


Io And he * faid unto him, Ariſe; 
thy faith hath made thee whole. 
It15a wonderful thing to obſery 
aryoes of Faith, Chril; encoura 
yeareth to be no more than ap 


ſuitable homage. 
ILupon the ſuit, 
9 God upon their Beds,but glorific 
P- But this Interpretation of our $4- 


85 which are 
he infinitely 
Our fervices; 


7 Commanding ; till we have 
vill Jets us know we bave to do, 3. That 
"en we have done all, we ſhall have merited nothingat Gods hands 
*c4uſe we are Servants, 2, Beciule we have but done our duty. laſphemed 4) but by the power of God, and that he 

+ That the Lord may delay our reward till. ive have done all that | God. This 6; 1th Chriſt honoureth 
© hath commanded us. 5-:That jphen wo Pave i+, it is not. a rewards; | tobe meatured from the Revelatio 
Cunk's Fug of Gra, Thi: Parable is excellently 24ded to the former dif { from the Copo/tion which 

EH >. 


e what ſmall Rudiments, ang Em- 
geth, and rewardeth. His Faith ap- 
erſuaſton that Chriſt 614 not do what 
'!nngs he did of this Nature, by any Magical Art, C45 the Phariſee 
Was 2 Nin ſent of 
» COMmendeth, rewarderh Faith 15 
2,which he who be! icve:h hat! 1, and 
ne encountreth ; a uttle Faith v pon a little 

i XKXx 2 J Kagt:o 


89 thy way ; +; 


It.0.23, 
r. 5. 34: 
Q, e2. 


ly Faith ; 
*CLVCS 25 Our end 


7 ORE 
W's 
54 100-40 


© > F 
»* + % 
_ ————— 


| | Chap. 


{| Or, o«t- || with obſervation. 


2 ae ” 
—S —_ 
= > wo 


= 


Bs. 


hd 


__ 
HE *# 


M 
4 EDT 
» w Tt ' 1 
— Ln KYASS NT - . A, . wy © om _ 
—— . - n : - ——_ $.- : . CL. 7 cxmne—n—— -” Jo : 
gromr>— th - : 2% —_ Cat . 7 2 "n= pw 7 Ts : k -> > 
——> _—TE % Ana -* IP -——_ - I ; £ =. wy My i CY 720% 
- - = _ EOIITONn — _ - : DI —_ = Pon : —_ . —_ 2 . abs 
, £ ww) p_—_— —n _ b SD — —elIar—_ ——_ w— EST ———— == 
* Ns 2 __ pra —_— . : ph = r NA _—_ A —_——— 7 _ . - v Y . ErIItEm= oo ——— 
”-= » _ p, _ - 43 »*%h - " — —_ W- - —_ —— ”. - c_ 
* = > _ "ay ; «a Xx -- Hr "_ . ; 5 - by! p on Sm — a= = —————_— Ss 
> a £7 ; _ oo Pe 4 4 3 ” 2 « => St p al — My no Ep." - bg —_ , - 
hw Pee " - * + 24 SE). 5 "— $ = ” "x , R a - j- 230 þ. 7 - 
« _— ORIENT. . > - 2-64 ;T > 7 DW "I F —_ « i - « 49 —_ bel - "——_ 
x7 F - #22 4 - C = = Fn. - - ” 2 
_ — a - LES: .G- — x _ S 
1 S FF; wes, 4." 2 = goes © or #5 _ ""—_— = WO ES a. 
* - - —_— 4 EO" ES . _— OO Ine ny. - \. by 44 he: FO o- - ” : # _ 
y_ = EPR = zz — ——— m2 — Sos nn wk. "_—_ : 
_—_ OD - : - 1299 2:06 a - > — L_—_—_ _ : 
_ __ - " . om - SS _ JOY ay 34 — . "A wn a - -—_ <s A 4 
_ a - — - Ns + WF" — II ap we IIS - N . GET = pa IESE.. - 
. —_ : re Sacb Sr bs OB og oo Lao. - 52 - NERD SG "90; : ite = of - - 
LR FE TA _ 4 a « I mals F 


\ 

- > 4a 

ry - < 
y 


XVII S. L 


Light; ana maintained 2gainſt a great Oppotition is a great Faith; 
tho little in it {cf yet great with reſpect to the circumſtances oi 


him or her that belteveth. 
20 And when he was demanded of the Phariſees, 


when the kingdom of God ſhouid come ; he anſwer- 
ed them, and ſaid, The kingdom of God cometh not 


Whether the Phariſees ſpake this deriding him, who in his diſ- 
courſes had been often mentioning a Kingdom of Goa to come, Or 1N 
ſimple ſeriouſneſs, (for they generally expectcd the coming of a Meſ- 
fiah, and a ſecular Kingdom, which he ſhould excrcile on the Earth, 
particularly over the Jews, having firſt defiroyed the Gentiles) 1s 
very hard to determine ; their mcan opinion of Chriſt, inclineth 
ſome to think the former ; their generally received opinion about 
the Kingdom of the Mera, giveth ſome countenance to the latter. 
Our Saviour's anſwer fittcth them, whatſoever they intended by 
their queſtion. { The Kingdom of God, ( ſaith he) cometh not were 
ezpamipiiogces With obſervation.) The word fgnifteth a ſcrupulous and 


4» ks; . 
ſuperjtitzous Obſervation. Thus the Vero trom whence it cometh f1g- 


nifieth, Gal. 4. 10. The Verb alſo ſignifieth a captious Obſervation, 


Mark 3. 2. Chap. 6. 5. and 14. 1. and 20, 20. Ads g. 24. But 
that ſenſe cannot zgree to the Noun uſcd 1n this place, the gene- 
rality of the beſt Interpreters agree the ſenſe here to be, with exter- 
nal Pomp and Splendour, and therefore Beza expounds the Noun here 
by a Periphraſis, Ita ut obſervars poterit, 1 ſuch a manner as 1t can 
be obſerved. As if he had ſaid, Men have taken up a falſe Notion 
of my Kingdom, as if it were to be a ſecular Kingdom to be ſet 
up in the Worid, with a great deal of Noiſe and Pomp and Splen- 
dour, ſo as Men may obſerve itand gaze upon its coming : But that 
which | call my Kingdom is not of this Nature. Our Lord expound- 
eth it in the next Verſe, The Kingdom of God zs within you, it 1s of a 
ſpiritual nature, not obvious to humane ſenſes, but exerciſed over 
the hearts of my people. Whether our Saviour ſpeaketh this in reply 
to the Phariſce:, or (as ſome think) beginning a diſcourſe with his 
Ditciples, which he further perſueth, I cannot determine. 


21 Neither ſhall they fay, Lo here, or Lo there ; 


"Gr,aomzft for behold the kingdomof God is ji within you. 


The /atter words of this verſe ſec fairly to admit ofa double In- 
terpretation ; as [9] here may ignite, the Diſciples of Chriſt, who 
had reccived Chriſt a& their Lord. over whom he cxerciſed a ſpiri- 
tual Dominion and Juriſdiction 3 or as it may reſpe& the whole 
Fewiſh Nation, a:nongſt whom the Kingdom of God was now exer- 
ciſed, by the Preaching cf the Goſpel, an'! power of Chriſt put 
forth in the caſting out Devils, and other mit ulous Operations. 1 
incline to the latter, as differ:ng from thoſe that think theſe words 
were ſpoken with a pccultar rcipe& to the Diſciples, I rather think 
them a reply to the Phariſces, as correQive of their falſe Notion, 
and apprehention of the Meſſruh, as if he were yet to cone, and to 
ſet up a temporal principality, for it is ſaid, v. 22. And he ſaid un- 
to the Diſciples, as if he dig] but then ſpecially apply his diſcourſe to 
them 2 jagy thus ſignifieth, Chap. 7. 16. Fohn 1, 14. You (faith our. 
Saviour) are much miſtaken as to the nature of my Kingdom, atic 
indeed of the Kingdom of the Meſſiah, in the expeRation of which 
you live. It is not a Kingdom of the ſame nature with the K1n;- 
goms of the World, it cometh not with pomp and ſplendour fo: 
Mcn and Women to obſcrve ; they ſhall not ſay, Zo here he cometh, 
or Ls there he gocth, the Kingdom of God 1s now in the midft a- 
mong you, tho you obſerve 1t not. 


22 And he faid unto the diſciples, The days will 


@ K E. 


Before my Kingdom ſhall appear in that Glory, I muſt (ye; m1 
ag Z Z 5 211 RE 
ny things, and be rejeCted of this Generation; you miy bu ſeduced 


to think that I am going to put on a Crown as a ſecular Prince to d 
liver you from your Encmies : Alas ! I am going to a Crct; - i a 
have.a day, but this-1s mine Enemies day, and the power of ( __ 
both with refercnce to me and you. Look for nothing in, 9g; fro n 
this generation but to ſee me mocked, ſcourged, ſpit upon, buffeted. 
hanged upon a Croſs, rezetted by Men, theſe will be the iiſues of D ; 
vine Providence, asto this Generation : look for better th 2 
after, but look for no better from, or in this Generatio:. 

26 * And as It was in the days of Noe, ſo ſha] 
be alſo in the days of the Son of man. 

27 They did eat, they drank, they married wiyes 
they were glven in marriage until the day that Noe tt 
tred into the ark: and the flood came and deſtroyed 


them all. 


INgS here. 


28 * Likewiſe alſo as it was in the days of Lot, * Gen. ts 


they cid eat, they drank, they bought, they ſolg, they 
planted, they builded. | 

2.9 But the ſame day that Lot went out of Sodom, jt 
_—_ = and brimſtone from heaven, and deſtroyeg 
them all. 


' 30 Even thus ſhall it bein the day, when the Son of 


man is revealed. 

See the Notes on Matth. 24. 37, 38. Our bleſſed Lord in theſe 
Verſes doth both declare the ſurprifal of the jews with that Judg- 
ment which was coming upon them, and of the World, with hi 
coming in the day of Judgment (of wiich the deſtruftion of Jer. 
ſalem was a Type} and alſo forewarneth them to take hced that 
they might not be ſurpriſed ; he tells them, that in the days of the 
Son of Man , (So that he ſpeaketh of more than one day) the day 
of his power and the deſtruttion of the Jews,and in the day of Judg- 
ment, the Antitype to the former, it ſhall be as in the days of Nt: 
and of Lot. In the days of thoſe Men, neither the men of the old 
World, nor the Men of Sodom would hearken either to Noah or Lt 
who were Preachers of Righteouſneſs to them, and gave them Ex- 
amples of ſober and holy Lives, but gave up themſclves to. luxury, 
and lived in a careleſs diſregard of any thing God was doing, until 
the very day that Noah went into the Ark with his Family, and 
the Flood deſtroyed all the reſt ; and till the day that Lot went out 
of Sodom, and Fire and Brimftone came a2wn and deſtroyed all 
thoſe who were left in Sodom : So it would he before the final ruin 
of the World. Till the very days came, and Men felt it, the genes 
rality of Men would not believe it, nor make any preparation tor it, 
But in our Lords propounding theſe two great Examples to thew,he 
alſo lets them know their duty, and wiſdom, viz. to watch, and 
2e upon their guard 3 with Zot to get out ready to go out of Sid, 
with Noah to prepare an Ark upon this admonition which he gave 
them. There are no ſuch figns of approaching ruin to Perſons or 
Nations, as Security, and the abounding of fin and wickedneſs not- 
withſtanding the warnings which God giveth them by his Melſer- 
C 


2 


IS. 

31 In that day, he which ſhall be upon the houſe-toy, 
and his ſtaff in his houſe, let him not come down to 
take it away : and he that is 1n the field, let himlike- 


wiſe not return back, 
Theſe words ſeem to relate fingly to the Deſtruion of Feruſalen, 


come when ye ſhall delire to ſee one of the days of the | we had theſame Math. 24. 17, 18. See the Notes there. They 


Son of man, and ye ſhall not ſee 7r. 


only fignifie the certain ruin and deftru&tion of the place, and arc 


Our Lord ſpendeth his farther diſcourſe in this Chapter ina fore- | our Saviours Counſel to his Diſciples, not to linger, or promiſe 
warning of k15 Diſciples of thoſe great troubles which Mould fol- | themſelves any longer ſecurity there, notwithſtanding what any fal? 


Jow Ins departare from then. 


At preſent the Bridegroom was with | Chrijts, or falſe Prophets ſhould plainly tell them, but to make as 


them, and they could not mourn, for many years after that he was {much haſt away out of it as they poffibly could. 


deparied from them, tho dzys of the Son of Man continued, that 15, Go- 
ipel days, times wherein the Goſpel of Chriſt was freely Preached to 
them. 
days of the $5n of Min, and ſhall not ſee them. Theſe evil days be- 
511, when falſe Thriſts and faiſe Prophets roſe up, which was moſt 
eminently a little before the deſtruRtion of Feryſalem, which hap- 
pened avout forty years after : every fattious perſon that had repu- 
tation enough to make himſelf the head, and leader of a FaQtion, 
{rating his advantage of the common error of the Jews, that a Me/- 
{12h .a Chrift was to come, who ſhoufd cxerciſe a temporal Kingdom 
over the Jews,) would pretend to be, and.give out he was the Me/- 
f:ah, to draw a Fattion after him. This 15 that which our Saviour 
fiith in the next Words. 

23 And they ſhall ſay to you, See here, or See there: 
£0 not after tbe», nor follow them. 

24 For as the lightening that lighteneth out of the 
one part under heaven, ſhineth unto the other pare un- 
der heaven : ſo ſhall alſo the Son of man be in his 
day. 

Sec the Notes on Matth. 24. 23, 27. You will (faith our $a- 
v1our) have a great many falſe Chriſts, and falſe Prophets ariſe, and 
foolith credulous People will be deceived by them, and come and 
tell you, £9 yonder 15 the Meſſteh, or Lo he is in another place, but 


But (ſaith he) make uſe of that time, for it will not hold! ,,s ſhe became a Pillar of Salt. 
long, there will come a time when you ſhall defire to ſee one of the. 


believe them nor. $0 it is in Mark 13. 21. Follw them not, ſaith 
fube. The Son of Man ſhall have hjs Day, a Day when he will 
COMe 11 a glorious 3naance to Judge the Quick and the Dead ; but 


it will come upon the world like Lightning, that ſuddenly ſhineth taken, and the other left. 


irom one part of Heaven to another, ſo as no Man can foretel it, or 
obſerve the motion of it, Some do think that by the Day of the Son 
ef Man here, was mcant the ſpreading of his Goſpe!, but certainl,, : 


ſpec the day of Judgment, and that dreadful ſepara 
be in that day betwixt the Sheep and the Goats. 


32 Remember Lots wife. | 

We have the Story, Gen. Ig. 26. She looked back from behind fim, 
Lot and his Family leaving S:4om, 
ſhe either looked back, as not believing what the Angel had ſaid, or 
as moved with the miſerable condition of the place, or as [oth to 
leave her Eſtate, and Goods ; however in diſobcdierce to the coin- 
mand of God, v. 17. Eſcape for thy Life, look not back, neither ſta 
thou in all the plain, eſcape to the Mountain ; leſt thou be conſumed. G 
turned her into a Pillar of Salt. It is a dreadtul caution againſt as- 
belief, diſobedience, worldly mindedneſs, contempt of Gods threatrings, 
and keeping a love for the forbidden Society of lewd and wicked Pet- 


ſons, 


33 Whoſoever ſhall ſeek. to fave his life, ſha!) loic 
it - and whoſoever ſhall loſe his life, ſhall preſerve 
It. 

That is, whoſoever in diſobedience to my command ſhall uſe arts 
to preſerve his Life, ſhall loſe it, and whoſoever at my comman 
ſhall be ready to loſe it, ſhall preſerve it ; or if he loſeth his Be” 
he ſhall preſerve his Soul. See the Notes on Matth. 1c. 35: and 15. 
25. Mark 8. 35. 

34 *1I tell you, In that night there ſhall 
in one bed ; the one ſhall be taken, and the 
be left. 

35 Two women ſhall be grinding together ; the one 
ſhall be taken, and the other left. 

36 || Iwo men ſhall be in the field ; 


See the Notes on Matth. 24. 40, 41. 


it is a ſtrained ſenſe, nor was the ſpreading of that a thing ſo ſudden, , Ch1;'s day in the Preaching of the Goſpel, but that ſeemeth not t9 


but more gradualiy, and obſervably accompliſhed. 
25 But firſt *muſt he ſuffer many things, and be re- 


5 31. & jetted of this generation- 


: be the Senſe of this Text. They can hardly An 
ſtru&tion of Feryſalem ; it was ſo univerſai as hardly any where te! 
left. 


be applyed to the de- 


37 Ang 


be two men *:1: 
other ſhall 1: 


the one ſhall bed 


"” 
14k v 


wt 
Theſe Verſes ſeem £0 re” .,, 
tion whiclf ſhall Cpt 
It js true allo of 


[ If * T:n, F 


fait] 


6.19% 7 
cry ( 
then 

8 
vert 
faith 

We 
Ve 
and a} 
cent] 
ſure h 
wards 
not 
hand 
engtl; 
TY 


3 
[ There 
from } 
{eto 
the CC 
Fudre 
Them 
may 
M% Th 


| 
— 


haP- d.< Y IL 


And they anſwered and ſaid unto him, Where 
Lord ? And he faid unto them, W hereſvever the body 


- thither will the eagles be gathered together. _ 
, 1c2rning the ſenſe of this Proverb;al Expreffion,and the various 
nr of it by Interpreters, Sce the Notes on Matth. 24. 28. 

me Evangelist (where it 15 owug 00t 7]awe (as in Matthew) the 

- — there properly {ſignifying a dead Body, the word here a living 

m_ it ſeems to be applied to Chriſt's glorious coming to Fudg- 

Body) where I ſhall be, who am to be tie Judge both of the Quick 

me he Dead , thither ſhall all the World be gathered before me,but 

_ ints eſpecially, who have Eagles Eyes, Senſes exerciſed to diſ- 

*Y : hetwixt Good and Evil, to diſcern me as their Redeemer, and 
a ne Meſſiah, according to that, P/al. 50. 5,6. Gather my Saints 

ana ris unto me, thoſe that have made a Covenant with me by Sacrifice. 

_—_ the Heavens ſhall declare his Righteouſneſs : for God is Fudge him- 


elf. 
CHAP. XVII. 


brit exhorteth them to hold on in Prayer, by a ſimilitude of an importu- 

_ Widow, 1——8. Telleth that God heareth and juſtifieth peni- 

_ ſinners, by a ſimilitude of a Phariſee and a Publican, 9 I4 

Little Children brought to Chriſt, 15 17. Heteacheththe Ruler 

what he mu$Þ do to inherit eternal Life, 18 23. and that the rich 

| are ſearcely ſaved, 24q—27. Promiſeth great recompence to thoſe that 

\} forſake all and fellow him, 28—30. Foretelleth his ſuffering and 

Reſurretion, 3I—34- and near Jericho, openeth the Eyes of a 
blind man, 3543» : 

I A N D he ſpake a parable unto them, 70 thrs end, 


ey * that men ought always to pray, and not to 


i faint- 
if This Duty of Praying always, 15 inculcated to us ſzveral times in 
fl, 5+ the Epiſtles, as may appear from thoſe Texts quoted in the Margen, 
; which we muſt not interpret, as an Obligation upon us to be al- 
ways upon our Knees praying 3 for thus our Obedtence to it would be 
inconfiſtent with our Obedience to other Precepts of God relating both 
to religious Duties and civil Adtions, neither was Chriſt himſelf al- 
ways praying 3 but it either lets us know, that there is no tim? in 
which we may not pray 3 as we may pray in_all places, every where lift- 
ing up pure hands without doubting (as the Apoſtle faith.) ſo we muſt 
pray at any time. Or, ſecondly, It 15 as much as pray frequently, 
and ordinarily 3 as Solomon's Servants are ſaid by the Queen of Sheba, 
to ſtand always, that 1s, ordinarily, and frequently before him, I 
Kings 10. 8. and the Jews arc ſaid always 70 have reſiſted the ſpirit 
of God, As 7. 51, That 1s, very often, for they did it not in eve- 
ry individual att of their livesz or elſe in every part of time, knit- 
ting the Morning and Evening (the general partsof our time) to- 
gether by prayer. Thus the Morning and Evening Sacrifice, 1s cal- 
Ied the continual Burnt Offering, Exod. 29. 42. Nehem. 10. 33. 
Or as it is in Eph. 6. 18. ey mzy]i aaugr : In every ſeaſon, when 
ever the providence of God ofters us a fair ſeaſon and opportunity 
for Prayer. Or Mentally praying always, intermixing good and pi- 
ous Ejaculations with our earthly, and moſt ordinary Occaſions; or, 
having our hearts at all times ready for Prayer, having the fire always 
on the Ajtar (as was required under the Old Law) tho the Sacrifice 
be not always offering. And not fainting, which 1s the ſame with that, 
Eph, 6. 18. Watching thereunto wth all perſeverence, and Col. 4. 2. 
Contiaue in Prayer, watching thereuntz. Not fainting cither by rea- 
ſon of Gods delay to give us the things we ask of him ; or through 
lazinels, and remitſion of our Duty, before our life doth determine. 


y This is now what our Saviour defigncth to teach us in this parable, 
c which followeth, 
; n« 2 Saying, There was Þ in acity a judge, which fear- 
- (1.94 not God, neither regarded man. | oo 
2 And there was a widow in that city, and ſhe came 
unto him, ſaying, Avenge me of mine adverſaries. 
t, 4 And he would not for a while : but afterward he 
. faid within himſelf, Though I fear not God, nor regard 
0 
to man 3 : J 
n- 5 Yet becanſe this widow troubleth me , I will 
fo avenge her, leſt by her continual coming ſhe weary 
od me. og 
. 6 And the Lord faid, Hear what the unjuſt judge 
" ſaith. 
6.1% #7 And * ſhall not God avenge his own ele, which 
Ii- cry day and night unto him, though he bear long with 
ve them ? : 
$ 1 tell you that he will avenge them ſpeedily. Ne- 
rts yertheleſs, when the Son of man cometh, ſhall he find 
4 faith on the earth ? 
76; Weave here the Parable, and the Interpretation thereof, both 
v, 1, 1nthe Proparabole, or the words 1mmediately going before it. 
mn and aifo in an Efiparabolz, or ſome words following it, which ſufh- 
1 : Cientiy explain our Saviour's ſcop2 and intention in it, viz. To af- 
all ! lure his people, that tho the Lord ſhew a great deal of patience to- 
wares wicked men, who are the enemies of his people, and doth 
Nite not preſently an{wer their cries for deliverance of them out of their 
nand 3 yet if they go on crving to him, he will moſt certainly at 
bei th length deliver them. To this purpoſe he tells them a matter of 
i ht fait, which either, had happened, or might happen in the World, 
a” {.Toere was in a City a Fudge, which feared nt God, &Cc. ] v. 3, 4, 5. 
) re- —_ irom hence he concludeth, arguing 4 minre ad majus, from the lef. 
all oo {er to the grcater, and iudecd there is an Emphaſis 1n every part 0! 
> of the compariſon. This was an wnjuf Fudge, God 1s a Righteous 
t to Judge. Ke did this for a Sr-,anger, Gods people are his own Elect. 
> de- Then he atfured them, that God would avenge them ſpeedily We 
here my from this diſcourſe of our Saviour, obſerve ſeveral things. 


2% That all the wrongs and iniurics which the people of God ſuffer 
S | P 


S. EL UET 


Chap. XVII, 
in this Liſe,ſhould make them fervent and frequent in prayer to Cod 

for redrefſing them. 2. That notwithſtanding their prayers, Gd 

may bear with their Enemies long, for fo much time as they ſhall 

think a long time. 3. If Gods people do not taint, but contiiae 

night and day crying to him, God will hear them, and aven=e tiem 

of their Adverſaries. The power that I'mpcunity \iath upon 1ioful 

Men, may confirm us in this thing, and ought to ingage us to pray 

without ceaſing and fainting. | Nevertheleſs when the Son of Man 

cometh, ſhall he find Faith on the Earth} When Chrift thail come 

to Judgment, he will find very few whote hearts have no+ tain:- 

ed ; there will be multitudes who are fallen away trout the 

power that temptations have upon the frailty of humane Nature ; 

By Faith here ſeems to be underſtood the true 1nd proper effects or 

Fatth, growing out of it as the Fruit out of the Root. This Premc- 

nition of our Saviour alſo ſerved for an excellent caution ts his C1ſc:- 

ples, that they would watch, and take care that they might be nr: 

of that part of the Stars of Heaven, which by the Dx.c5ms Tail thou'd 

be caſt down to the Earth. 

9 And he ſpake this parable unto certain which truſt- 

cd in themſelves || that they were righteous, 3nd actpl- i! Or, & 5e- 
ſed others. 

By the Term certain or ſome, he unqueſtionably underſtandeth the 
Phariſees and their Diſciples, who (as we have a'l aloug in the t;- 
ſtory of the Goſpel obſerved) were a Generation of Men, wits were 
eminently guilty both of a boaſting of themſelves, and a ſoy nirg and 4; 
piſing all others. | 

10 Two men went up into the temple to pray ; rhe 
one a Phariſee, and the other a Publicane. 

Who theſe Phariſees, and who the Publicanes were we have tad 
frequent occaſions before to tell. The Temple ſtood upon an ti! , 
therefore they are ſaid to 4ſcend, or go up. They had in the 7: 
ple ſet hours for Prayer, as may be learned from 4s 3. 1, At 
which ſome of all ſorts went up to pay that homage unto Goc.. 
Our Saviour mentioneth but two, having in it no further deſign than 
by this Parable to inform his Diſciples, how much more acceytai;ic 
to God the Prayers of broken, humble, contrite hearts are, thouzh 
the perſons poſſeſſed of them be ſuch as have been, or at leaſt have 
been reputed great Sinners, than the prayers of thoſe who are typ - 
crites, and proud, and come unto God pleading their own Righte- 
ouſnels, in order to the obtaining of his favour. 


I1 The Phariſee ſtood and prayed thus with him- 

ſelf, * God, I thank thee, that I am not as other men * icz. x. 15. 

are, extortioners, unjuſt, adulterers, or even as this and 58. 2. 

publicane. Rev. 3- 17- 
From hence we may obſerve that Thank ſziving is « part of Prager. 

It is ſaid he prayed, yet we read not of any one Fetition he put up. 

His ſtanding while he prayed is not to be faulted, (that was an uſu- 

al poſture uſed by perſons praying) unleſs the Pharijee made choice 

of it for Oſtentatzon, that he might be the better taxen notice of ; 

Which was too much their fault, Matth, 6 5. whether the Term 

eos £av]dy, with himſelf, in this place ſignifieth, that he only pray- 

ed 1n his heart, or with a voice that could rot be heard, or only 

that he prayed by himſelf, 1 doubt, for though our Saviour, who 

knew Mens thoughts, could eafily repeat his prayer, ſuppoting it or- 

ly mental, or at leaſt with a voice not audible ; yet this ſeemeth not 

fo ſuit the humour of a Phariſee, whoſe whole deſign was to be 

taken notice of, ſeen and heard by others : He faith, [God Tthanh 

thee, that T am not as other Men, Extortioners, Adulterers, &c.] But 

was this olame-worthy 2 may we not blefs God for his reſtraining 

Grace, not ſuffering us to run into the ſame exceſſes of Riot with 

other Men ? Doubtlels it is both lawful, and our duty, provided, 1. 

That we ſpeak truth when we ſay it. 2. That we do not come to 

plead this as our righteouſneſs before God. But this Phariſee, 1. 

(peaks this in the pride of his hetrt, in the juſtification of himſelf. 

2, In the ſcorn and contempt of his Neighbour. 3. Though he 

were guilty of as great fins as theſe, though of another kind, In the 

mean time we obſerve, That he did not attribute this Negative good- 

neſs, of which he had boaſted, or that poſitive goodneſs, which ke 

will tell us of by and by,to the Power of his own Will : He gives thanks 

to God for them. 


12 I faſt twice in the week, I give tithes of all that 
I poſlefs. 


Twice 1n the Sabbath, ſaith the Greeh, but that is ordinary to de- 
nominate the days of the week, from the Sabbath ; the meaning is, 
twice betwixt Sabbath and Sabbath, The learned in the Jewiſh 
Rabbins tell us, that the Jews were wont to faſt twice in a week, 
(that is, the Phariſees, and devouter fort of them) once on the ſe- 
cond, another time on the fifth day Cwhich are thoſe days which 
we call Munday and Thurſday..) From whence ſome tell us that Wed- 
neſday and Friday, come to be with us Faſting Days, or Fijh-d.y-. 
The Chriſtians in former times, thinking it beneath them, to be ics 
in theſe Exerciſes than the Jews, would have alſo two Fafting-days 
each week, and thoſe not the ſame with the Jews, that they might 

not be thought to Fudaize. If that Cuſtom had any rrue Antiquity, 
| I doubt not, but they faſted after another rate, than the Papi/ts or 
others row do, who pretend a Religion to thoſe days, But neither 
was the Phariſees pradtice, nor the prattice of Chriſtians in this 
thing to be much admired or applauded. For Faſting was always 
uſed in extraordinary caſes, and the b:1nging extraordinary Duties 
into ordivary pradtice, uſually ends in a meer Formality. It 15 a 
good Rule neither to make ordinary Duties extr.ordinary, C7 ATE ; 
\ Nor yet extraordinary Duties ordinary ; the doing of the firſt ordi- 
narily, ilſucth in the loſs of them, and quite leaving them cit 3 the 
latter, in a formal lifeleſs performance of them. [1 zrve Tithes of all 
I poeſs.] The Emphaſis lycth in the word AP. Others paid Tithe 
ot Apples, and ſome Fruits of the Earth (of which alone Tithe was 
luc) but the Phariſees would pay Tithes of thole things,: as to 
hich it was genefally held, that the Law did not ſtrialy re: 
quire them, ſuch as Potherbs, Eggs, Milk, Cheeſe, Our . Saviour 
- )ire them this Teſtimony, that they paid Tithe of Mint, Amns,, 
"1nd Cummin . -Matth. 23. 23. Re, and al manner of —_ 
| votre 


| 


: pM _ 7 i4. 
117 .YIERE2GHE 


7% EIT Tong: 


*”. 
-— 
EE 


YT fs 


anger” 


=_ . [__ 
= - aig Lean ” pF 
4 > > <3 <8 Sx 8 A —T- = £ —_— —_ - . 
wo n—_— TAX gays a S — moms - ke F GISE P==_ 
_— i” Fa : : : == : = Dt —_ Bo X 
" ak. A —4 -&. Po oo - ho ea — "oh a. N Aa CLE as y ow —_ + 4 a ®. 
; 6 my . ns = > FER : , : = * © 
= Zia. _—_ "= a , 4 2 2 L many * L 
- = - , = - w7 23> - , - = — 8 - - 
i my C1 IT. ET anY yo EO tes wean - 4 IIs - $ Ling "© - Ong - ._<-x- he. ? 
- > 4 as; ” "EL "4 - <= « a - 2 yo - 
- EW uo 4 B22 2 £ 2 . - 4 : 5 == = So - —_ ir. 2 
- " - _ oo — * - — - "7 . = _ "oo ere ”y a : 
be Pa X Go > 2 +0 Es LA - - - ms . Lange ng - 
_ 4 : on I —5= ; : _ 3 he” 
- VB bee —_— IT ba =_ . 


181-7 


. "as wu - 2 0 I 4 . A - 
ot $ as / MEN n j - 
A . _—_ et "pany. + 
.. "M2 = * [4 L ba. n Ob. » d - o- 4 4 
Air . Ky. ov - = way. 4 r* 258 oy h 
hd - Jn ASICS ba Ce w__ _— f 
——. 5. I - 
Te 


So, 7 
ws OO 


| Chap. XVilI, S. L 


Luke 11. 42. This Pharilhs boaſted of his Exa&tnzls 1n two thirgs x 
neither of which were required particularly by ine Law of God. 
Nor did he amif> in theirs, it he hat not omitted the weightte 
Our $429Y Our chargerh £m to have done in both 


14 


things of the Laws: 'o have 
the Texts beforc-incutivned Eut how came tnele things to make 
bim a vlca for his juſtitic.tion before God ? wil hey 
toxuſmeſs becaute he did thiys winch God d19 not command kim, 
whillt in the mean time he omitted thoſe things which God had 


g 
commanded ? Or, what did theſe trings 11g 1 


done out ct a root of Love? The Law 1s, Tom fſhil* Ive tre Lord | 
the God with all thy heart, and how could they be performed out of ; was his immoderate love of the World, and the things tlc 


Love, when mv? was one of the things which cur Siviour chargeth 
them to Fave orwitt.d £ Of che ſame pature re other Works, Jun 
23s buildivs of Churches, and Hoſpitals, and Aims-houles 3 the Fruit 
is gocd, 1: the {v9 be good. But 1f they Le done out oi Oſtentation, 
or opinion of mei7ting at ods Ranas, Mens Money, (1otwithftanding 
theſe things) will perith with them, for Heaven 15 not to be pur- 
chaſcd by our Notcy, 
13 Ard the publicen Rtanding afar off, would not lift 
up ſo much 5s his eyes unto heave, but Lnoce upon his 
breaſt, ſaying, Gog be merciful to me a ſinner. | 
Thoſe who faucy te Publie.in it:od afar cf from the Phariſee, 
becauſe the Phariſves wourd Iutter rone but thofe of their Sect, at 
leaft none that were under ſach a notoriety of difrepute a» the Pav- 
lieams generaily were, t9 come near ten 5 ſuppoſe him to have 
been a Jew (whicit is not impotfoue | if he were a entitle, he mutt 
ſtand 9 far off as tice Court of the Gentifes was from the Court of Ijrael. 
This Prublican's bunility in his iddr=t. to God, is defcried by his 
Poſture ; he look: p23 the Eaith. > one bat thought nimielt un- 
2. Bu bis Aon, He jrnote upon Inns 
Breaſt, as on fu! of forrow avd troudle, 3. By the matter and 
form of his Praycr, Bc coutetleth himſelf a Stanzr. He fiyeth uot 
the free Grave: of God. Here's n0t a word of boaſting, that he was 
not ſuch. or fuck, 1-7 vet that he ard thus, or thus, Fle confellth 
himſelf a Sinner, a miſerav Sinner, and fleeth to the iree Grice 


of God, thereby inftrufting vs how to muke our Application: 


worthy ty 1908 toward Hiivaen. 


to God, ditcl1hy, any Soodndls or fiigittcouſnels 14 our felvcs, 
101 Mertrs Of Chriit, and the free Grace of God 


and ticeing 00 '«.: 
in, MIU MH 

14 I tell you, 1 ois man wet down to his hoſe jn- 
ſtified rarver then ts other : * for every Gne That Cx- 
alterh bimſcii, ſhall be abaſec, and he that haiwibleth 
himfelt, ſhzil beex2red. Uh 

Thitified, F exon Gr, we Tranilate-rather than te proer, not that 
the other was at Ul iu icd by god, the ofitcr was juibbi:od by him- 
{clt only, aid thoſe of his paity. The Pablican was juttiticd by God. 
I; followetn. {For every onethat exaltets hrajelf Tu! be abaſed, ) &c. 
It is 5nother ©3 our Saviours Sert-.ic., oft: atuic ule ot by him, 
Matth. £3. 12. and iu ts acipel, Chap, 14. «+ 1- 
the ordinary profiice of bics, but nere to God ; In the ways of his 
Procitorce, ne 1ififteth the proud, and gives G:ace to the Humble. 
The Ueicd Virguni magnifeth God on this ac: upt, Chap. I. 5g, 52. 

15 And they brought unto pin 3'to infants, that he 
would touch tnem ; but when ## Diiciples ſaw zr, they 
reb..x:d Then. | 

- y ® . 

16 Bur Jeſas calicd them uvto him, and ſaid; Sn 
little chilgrcr to come nnto mc, aid forbid them not : 
'* 1 Cor. 14. for of * ſu. 1 1s the kingdom of Got 


;,5> 


Catll 


* J0022.25- 


2:ceive the kingdom of God as a little child, ſhail in no 
Os . p 4 - 
'f wiſe cnter tore. 
Sce the Notes on Matth, 1c. 13. Mark 1o- 13. where we before 
met with this pi-ce of Hiſtory. 
18 And 2 certain ruler asked him, ſaying, Good 
Maſter, Whet ſauill do toinkerit etcrive! life ? 
19 And Jeſus faid vato him, Why calleft thou me 
zood ? none #5 good five ont, that i God. 
20 Thon kyoweft tho Commandments, 
RS oe HR ETH, nor font 
zt BULLY, $5 UUL axtfrg a #0 NO IiooQ1s 26 Nar 


I2, 13. COn3Mm 
1 20M 8 7k NOS OT Ls tc Bas - 
om. 3. 0. GON TRE WIEDESS ? HONGUEY MY IArhecr and thy mother. 
I = a 2 BY. TE 27) P. 79 0 Sg | 0 FRY . ESR : 
E pn. 6. 2 21 Ana he {219,41} theie rgpave I kept from my \ outh UP. 


vr 


22 Now when Jetus licerd thoſe things, he ſaid vn- 
4 th "0 k, | Hs — OW: Jong "PAD 
* Mat,*,r;, ©9 DIET Y ot lackeft thou cn: * Seil all that thoy 


2) 
We 
$3 


1 . 
4. 
3 bas 
C $5441.53? 


21. trezi:! 2: and come, toilow me. 
| ! G. Os # | 3 23 »” - "Oh, + 1 _— I - 2 &* @ a 
EEERSI9 , 23 ie heard this, he was very forrowfal : 


trier | rot come to Chriſt that he may have Life, but fancy he 
he vicad his Righ- ; 


tiznifie, if they were not i whole revealed will of God. 3. That every Hypocrite hath fon. 


It 15 applied to | 


Fm 
WE : 


17 * Verily 1 fayunto you, W hoſoever ſhall not re-} 


* Do nct | | ] 
| Meftah which they had taken up. However our Saviour thought fit 


©© iacuicate them, to prepare them againſt the offence hey might 
; take at them, when the providence of God brought then; forth, It 


; unto Jericho, a certaiu blind man 


CK E 


z of God, asto the Letter of them. He may come to the 


{tha , Miniſters «7 
| the Goſpel to be further 1nftrufted, But hercin he will ters oj 


fail. He wv ' 
Honahiertonaglygoicne mmm oy ſhould g 
| ſomething meritorious of it; he doth not aright underſtang +; , 
- Law, and that there 15 no going to Heaven that way, but by _— tte 

f& obſervation of it, and therefore fancieth him{c]f in « $1, © 
! ter Eſtate than he is. 2 It inſtrufteth us in this, That ore - 
' coming to Heaven by works, but by a full and perfc& obeg; _ SW 


Na 
i: 


j 


Luſt or other, in which he cannot deny himſelf, This Rulcys i. 


Sl . - . reot, 4 
| That it is a mighty difficult thing for any Perſons, but *” ION? 7 
; fuch as have gre«t potlcffions on Earth, to get to Heaven, * ry, 
; cult and almoſt 1mpoiſible, as 1t may appear to Men, yet tori... 1 
impoffible with God ; He can change the heart of the rj 
incline it to hirmſetf, as well as the heart of the poor, The xi.) ang 
hath more Impedimetits; but be Men rich or poor, wit... .. 
powerful Iniluence of God -upon the Heart, without his frce G : 
no Soul will be ſaved. 

28 Then Peter ſaid, Lo, we have left 2H, and (1. 
lowed thee. 

29 Ard he faid unto them, Verily I fay unto yo, 
there is no man that harh left haule, or parents, « 
brethren, or wif-, or children, for the kingdom of 
Gods ſake, 

30 Who ſhall nci. receive manifold more in this 
pretent time, and in the world to come life everlaſi;s 

- » '5* 

Sce the Notes upon Mctth. 19. 27, 28. 29, 20. atid on My;l, 
10. 28, 29. The difticu'ty 15 ofly to reconcile, v. 30. to Gage 
Providences. bor the etcrnal Life promiſed ju the World to come 
"nat ma ter of Faith, and not fo much as ſcemi:.gly contradideg 
by any Vrovidence of God. , But how many Joſe much f.;r Chi 
that in this Lite do not receive manifold more, or an hundreg; 
fold ? An. It 1s true if we underſtood it in jpecie. But the Promiſe is 
not to to be uwiterpreted. It 1s enough, if they, do receive much 
more 7n valore, tu vilue upon a trve ard juſt eſtimation, Ang thi 
cvery Suftercr for Criſt hath; cither, 1. In Joy and Peace 1nd 
aiſuraiic ' ct G.ds love, whici 1-4 thouland times more. 2, Or * 
leaſt in cantent.:tion of mind, with that ſtate into which the P:cyi. 
d«1:ce 0; God briageth them z this alſo is much more, as any vil 
judge 1t a hyppic: ſtate never to Thirit, than to have much Dri! tg 
iattsfie the Appetite, 

31 * Then he tock unto bim; the twelys, and 
unro thein, Behold we g9 np to Jernſalem, «7 
things * that are written by the prephers conceinige 
the-Son of man ſhall be accompiiſhe; wow... 

32 * For. he ſhail be clivered 
and ſhall be mocked, and pitet! 
ted on ; : 

33 And they ſhaii Tonrge £721, ard put him 

1 11e agiin. 


Yb 
\. 


lay? 


Cid *ng 
d 9] 21. a 
MUREC- 

unto the Gentiles, » 1: 
ly intreated, | 


to death (72 
2nd rhe third day he fic! Wo 
| 34 And they onderſtocd nouc of theſe things : and 7a 
{ this ſaying was 13 from them, neither knew they th: 
things winch were Gc)en. ; 
We Ball frorrvarg itn rar t1!tory of our Saviours pation, ſrea) 
theſe things c*#4R;y fullilied, ard our Lord here affureth his Difi. 
{ Pics, that it v1 Tut 2 2CCOmpiiihment of all that was prophetic 4 con- 
| NIE wc nor was pbcm. more than 2 had told tim, 
» 0. 22, 32210.. Ve 4. SHY. 25, A Harb 15, 27, 2% 
| yer 7 is ſaid, Ti they una?r{l09d Tone 'F thets 7 on : The Wake 
Aras eatie enough to be unc=:f. 36, hut they could wot recoronle 
them to the notion of the Mefſta which they Had drank in, they 
could not conccive how the M-yjah that thou'd reduc I4ael, hould 
dye, or be thus barbarouſly vied by thoſe wagn bio came to Re- 
deem, or Save, We have great need to contiger tve!l 4. hat Notions 
| we entertain concerning the things of God. AIJI inis Olindvel:, and 
Unvelief of the Diſciples, was bottomed in the falf- Nution of the 


1s good for us to hear, tho 1t be only for the time to core, 
35 * Andit came to pals, that as he was come nigh * it 
fate by the way-lide 7” 

begeling. | 
This blind Man was Brtimens, the Son of Timeus, as Mail, tells 
us, Mark 10. 45. Matthew mentions two, the other two Evinge- 


for he was yery rich. | | 
24 Ang when Jefns faw that be was very fHrrowful, | 
+ Prov, 17. he fatd, * Bow hardly ſhell they that have riches enter 
20, mts the kingdom of God ? 
25 For ir 15 ealer tor a camel to go through a nee- 
dles eye, then fora rich man to eater into the kingdom 
of God. . 
26 nd they that heard i, ſaid, Who then can be } 


liſts but one, as being more famous, either upon his own, or 515 F2- 
thers account, 

36 And hearing the multitude paſs by, he asked what 
1t meant. 

37 And they told him, that Jeſts of Nazareth pal 
ſeth by. | 

33 And hecryed, ſaying, Jeſus thou ſon of David, 
have mercy on me. 


faved ? 
* Jer. 32, 27 Angdhe ſaid, * The things which are impoſſible | 
oh with men, are poſlible with God. | 


| 


Ve have mct with this Story at large, Matth, 19. 16. And 
with (17 not the ſame) very like to it, Mai To 7, 18. Sec the 
Notes on both tio'e places, The iiltory is of great uſe to us. r. 
T6 brow now far a Han may 33, that yet is a great way ſhort ef a truly 
Good, end Spirttanl State He may know that nothing in this Lifc 
will make him pericttly *happy. He way defire Eternal Life, and 
$2:Vaton, F& Bay go 4 great way in keeping the Commandments 


39 And they Which went before, rebuked him that i . 
ſhould hold his peace : but he cryed ſo much the more; 
Thou ſon of David, have mercy on me. | 

40 And Jeſus ſtood and commanded him to be brougnt 
unto him: And when he was come near; he asked iii!) : 

41 Saying, What wilt thou that I ſhall do unto t15* * 
And he ſaid, Lord, that I may receive my fight» 

42 And Jeſus ſaid unto him, Receive thy fight ©” 57 7 
faith hath ſayed thee. | 70 


Chap, Yi i. 


EI ODT”: 


tre 

Fel 
asks 
of A 
well 
fore 
grea 
thei, 
camy 


and 


and 
I. 
Zac 
The 
ſtran, 
healj 
# th 
but t| 
good 
veYed 
his G 
Sod 
princi 
ices u! 
the bo 
ſ —_ 
cnange 
with 
fie Co 
eek hi 
diſpof 
lame tj 
Ve rear 
in it di 
niches C 
Wakes t 
ts C 


Y 


/ ij haps XIE. 


3 And immediately he received his ſight, and fol- 
lowed h1m, glorifying God : And all the people when 
they favs it, gave praiſe unto God, 

Se the Notes on Hatth. 20. 25, 30. and on Mark 10. 46. 
where f!: > whole Hiſtory is more fully opened. It is here again ve- 
ry remuriable, how much Chriſt attributeth to Faith, v. 42. Thy 
Faith hath ſzved thee, which can be no otherwiſe underſtood, than 
of Faith is the condition that was required in the perſon to be heal- 
ed ; for t is moſt certain, that Chriſt by his divine Power was the 
efficient cauſe of this Blind Man's healing, but he exerted this di- 
vine Power upon that exerciſe of Faith which he diſcerned in the 
Blind Man, whoſe Faith ſeemeth to be a degree higher than that of 
the Lepers, Chap. 17. 13. who ſaid no more than Fejus, Maſter : Je- 
ſus, thou Son of David was much more than this, It ſpake the blind 
Mans perſuaſion, that Chriſt was the Meſſiah z for it was an uncon- 
trouled Tradition amongſt the Jews, that the Meſſiah was to be the 
Sm of David. Chriſt rewards the leaſt Exerciſes of true Faith, but 
much more the higher Exerciſes of it. It doth not appear this Blind 
Man was fully informed who the Meſſiah ſhould be, viz. God-man, 
but Co far as he knew he profeſſeth, he calleth Jeſus, The Son of Da- 
id, 

CHAP. XIX. 
uccheus deſurous of ſeeing Chriſt, climbeth up a Tree, 1——=g. Enter- 
raineth him at his Houſe, 6--11., A Parable of the ten Pieces of 
Silver, 12—27- Chris rideth to Fcruſalem, 28—36. The multi- 
tude praiſe him with Songs, 37—40. He weepeth over Jeruſalem, 
and foretelleth its ruin, 41-——44» Purgeth the Temple, 45, 46. 
The chief Prieſts and Scribes lay a ſnare ſor his Life, 47, 48. 


_ N D Jeſ#s entred, and paſſed through Jeri- 


cho. 
Faricho was a very rich City, in the Tribe of Benjamin, leſs than 


Z 


S LUKFPF. 


* 6 And he made haſt, and came down, and received 
w_ Joytully. 
urtolity carried Zaccheus up, but Love to Chriſt brinzeth bi; 
down ; he therefore makes haſte to come down, phe be rho 
_ Joy fully, glad to entertain ſuch a Gueſt. When Chriſt cometh 
eee Arg he never brings any ſorrow to it, vor any thing but giad 
_ 7 And when they ſaw #:, they all murmured, fay- 
ing, That he was gone to be a gueſt with a man that 
IS a ſinner. | 
Al! here muſt not be taken for every individual Perſon ; that is 
not to be preſumed either of all the Inhabitants of Jericho, or much 
leſs of all that were in Chriſt's Company ; amongſt others Mary Mag- 
dalen was at this time in his Company, who had no reaſon to mar- 
mur at that, But of what ſort of people were theſe murmarers 2 
The voice 15 the voice of Phariſees who had often Cuarreiled at Chriſt 
for this, and of their Diſciples ; for there were multitudes of th 
Jews that had drunk in the ſuperſtitions of that FaRtion and kan 
more afraid of keeping Company with Sinners, thin themſelves 1. 
12g fo; ofhaving fellowſhip with their excommunicates in their hou 
les, than of having fellowſhip with their or greater works of dartnur. 
Our Saviour had beforeanſwered this Cavil , he wiil now come to 
ſhew them they were miſtaken in the Man; that he whom they 
counted a Sinner, was a better Man than themſelves generaily rag, 


8 And Zaccheus ſtood, and ſaid unto the Lord, Be- 
hold, Lord, the half of my goods 1 give to the poor ; 


accuſation, I reſtore h;m four-fold. 

Sce here the firſt effe&ts of Chriſts ſaving looks upon anv 5-2! 
The Soul preſently begins to cry out with the Prophet, 77h 6, 
Wo us me for T am undone, becauſe T am a Man of unclean Lips, - / 
1 dwell in the midſt of a People of unclean Lives, for mine Eyes hats 


twenty miles diſtance from Feruſalem, (whither our Saviour was go- 
ing) and leſs than eight miles diſtance from Jordan. See Numb, 22.1. 
it was the firſt place which 7ohaa ſent perſons to ſpy out, before he 
had conducted the Iſraelites over Fordan. Jof. 2. 2. he took it, 
Ch, 6, and curſed the man that ſhould rebuild it, Cfor he burned 
it) v, 24+ He propheſicd, that he who ſhould £0 about to rebuild 
it, ſhould lay the Foundation of it in hs First-born ,, and ſet up the 
Gates thereof in his Tounger Son, which accordingly fell out in Ahabs 
time, to one Hiel a Bethelite, 1 Kings 16. 34+ Through this Town 
or City wich now had been rebui:ded many years, our Saviour pal. 
{th in his way to Jeruſalem. 

2 And behold,tbere was a man named Zaccheus,which 
was the chief among the publicanes, and he was rich. 

We have had fiequent occaſions to hint, that the Publicanes were 
the gatherers of the Publick, Revenue for the Romans. Amongſt 
them there was an order of Superiour and Infcriour Officers : 
Zaccheus was the chief of them that were 1n that Commiſſion. 
[And he was rich,”] which 15s not to be wondred at, conſidering 
his Employment, and is particularly mentioned doubtleſs to magnifte 
the Grace of God towards him, (of which we ſhall by and by hear 
more.) As well to let us know, that tho it bean hard thing for a 
rich man to be ſaved, yet with God it 15 poſſible, (as we heard be- 
fore,) as, that tho Publicans were moſt of them Rapacious and ex- 
ceeding(y given to Extortion 3 and the love of money commonly in- 
creaſetn with the increaſe of mens Eſtate, yet Chriſt can change the 
heart of ſuch a man, and work it into contempt of Riches, and in- 
toa freedom to part with them at the command of Chriſt, or where | 
they hinder the embraces of him. | 

3 And he ſought to ſee Jeſus who he was, and could 
not for the preſs, becauſe he was little of ſtature. 

4 And he ran before, and climbed up into a ſycamore: 


tree to ſee him ; for he was to paſs that way. | 


All this was but Curioſity, he ſaw a great Crowd paſſing by, and | 


aks what was the matter. The people tell him, That it was eſis | 
of Nazareth, that famous Prophet, whoſe Fame had filled Fades as | 
well as Galilee z He hath a great curioſity to ſee him, and runs be- 
foreto find out a convenient Station, but perceiving the Crowd Was , 
great and knowing that he was too low of Stature to look over all 
their heads ſo well as to ſatisfie himſelf, he climbeth up upon a $Sy- 
camore-tree by the way fide, in which he knew that he muſt paſs. 


5 And when Jeſs came to the place, he looked up, 
and ſaw him, and ſaid unto him, Zaccheus, make hait, 


and come down . for to day I muſt abide at thy houſe. 

{ ſee n5 ground for their Opinion who think that before this time, 
Zaccheirs is heart was touched with any love, or affe@ion to Chriſt, 
The Evangeliſt ſcemeth to repreſent Zaccheus before this, as a meer 
ſtranger to Chriſt, he ſought to ſee who he was, But Chriſt's /ooks are 
healing looks, there went virtue along with them to convert Zacche- 
% thoa Publican, and to recover Peter who had denied his Maſter, 
but they muſt be ſuch /oobs, as carried with them a defign todo 
good to Souls : Chritt looked upon thouſands to whom his looks con- 
veyed no ſpiritual ſaving Grace. He that could heal by the hemm of 
his Garment touched, could change an heart by his look. How 
good a thing it is to be near the place where Chriſt 1s, whatever 
principle brings Men thither ! provided Men come not as the Phart- 
ices uſed to come, to execute their malice Zacchewus was brought to 
the bodily view of Chriſt cut of meer cxrjoſity, but being there he 
receiveth a ſaving look from him : How many have had their hearts 
changed by Gofpel Sermons, who never went to hear the Preachers 
wth any ſuch defire or detign ?- Chriſt's deſign may be executed in 
(ie Converſion of Sinners, tho not ours. He is found of them that 
e him not, and of thoſe that enquire not after him. Preparatory 
diſpoſitions in us are not neceffary to the firſt Grace. God can at the 
{ame tine prepare and change the heart. Zaccheus is the firſt Man 


ſeen the King, the Lord of Hits, Zaccheus is now made ſenile of his 
Covetouſneſs, and Hardneſs of Heart towards the poor, of his Ext1;;3- 
on, and Oppreſſion, and reſolves upon an efteRual Reformation. 
Chriſt never looks any Soul in the face, but he looks his ſcanda;ous 
S:n:1ngs out of countenance, Aﬀts of Charity and Juitice are the 
firſt Fruits of true Repentance. The World and the love of it. »5- 
cth out of the heart atſoon as ever the true love of Chriſt come: into 
It; the Soul knows that it cannot ſerve God and Mammm. In caſe of 
wrong done to others, there can be no Repentance, nor ( confequent- 
ly) any Remiffion, without Reſtitution and SatisfaRion fo far as we 
know it, and are able. T reftore four fold (ſaith Zaccheus.) True 
love to Chriſt never giveth him bare meaſure. God had no « here 
required the giving of half a Mans gords to the Poor, nor the reftoring 
of four-fold, except in caſe of theft, of which men were judicially 
convicted 3 1n caſe of voluntary Confetfion the Law was but for 2 
fifth part over and above the principal as to which a Perfon was 
wronged, Num. $5, 7. Incaſe an Ox were ftollen, the Thief was to 
reſtore five-fold 3 and in caſe of a Sheep ſtollen, four were to be re- 
ſtored, if the perſon had alienated it ; if it were found alive in his 
hand, he was to reſtore double, Exod. 22. 1, 4. In other cafes he 
was to reſtore but double, if it came to the Sentence of the judge, 
V. 9, But in caſe of a voluntary Confeſſion, he was only tied to a fitth 
part above the principal, Levit. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 5. and to bring a 
Treſp.ajs-Offering to the Lord. This was the cafe of Zacchens, being 
couched with the ſenſe of his Sin, he voluntarily confetfeth, and 
promiſeth the higheſt degree of Reſtitution. A true Love in the 
Soul to Chriſt, thinks nothing too much to do in the deteRation ©f 
Sin, or demonſtration of it ſelf in Works which may be acceptabl= 
in the ſight of God. | 


And Jeſus ſaid unto him, This day is ſalvation come 


to this houſe, for ſo much as he alſo is *the fon ofabraham. © 


that which was loſt 


j wp 5 Rs i 
It is the opinion of ſome, that by houſe is here to be undertood 


Zaccheus and his whole Family, Nor can it be denied, but that God 
when he poureth out the Oil of Grace upon the icad of a Family, 
maketh ſome of it to run down to the skirts of his Garments. Gods 
Covenant was with Abraham and his ſeed. There is a leiting upon 
whole Nations, and whole Families, where the heads of them re- 
ceive the Goſpel 3 but this 1s not to be extended beyond ſome Goſpel 
privileges, and the liberty of the means of Grace, Swme/a tyivem 
which we tranſlate Salvation # come) ſeemeth to ſignitie much 
more. than this. I had rathertherefore Interpret ths b5yſe, the head 
of this houte. | Forſomuch as he alſo is the Sin of Abraham. ] 
Here again 4 queſtion ariſeth, in what ſenſe theſe Words are to be 
underſtood ; whether that he were the Sn of Abraham, as Abraham 
was the father of the Jewiſh Nation, or as he was the Father of the 
Faithful, viz. of all thoſe who believed, or ſhould belicve in Chritt. 
Thoſe who think he was a Jew, ſuppoſe that the R»mans did imploy 
ſome Fews 1n their ſervice, to gather the publick Revenue, («hich 
is not improbable, being no more than is cone by all Conquerors) 
they have alſo to countenance them, 1. That Zaccheys 1s a name ot 
Hebrew extration. 2. That his mention of a four-fold Reſtitution. 
ſeemeth to have reference to the Law of four-fold Reſtiturim, Exod. 
22. I. incaſe of Sheep ſtolen, and alienated. 3. That the Jews 
did not charge our Saviour for eating with a perſon Uncir-umciſcd. 
but a Perſon that was a ſcandalous Sinner, Theſe make theſe viords 
to be a reaſon given by our Saviour, why he was ſo kind to Zacchexs, 
becauſe he alſo was a Son of Abraham, one of the {oft Sheep of the houſe 
of Iſrael. If I could Interpret Zowmyela: the means of Sulvation, T thouid 
incline to this ſepſe alſo; but raking 1t to ſignitic ſaving Grace, whic!: 
brings men to a certainty of Salvation, Remiſſton of Sins, and tie ju- 
ſtification of the Soul of this Pablican; I cannot but think that by - 
Son of Abraham in this Text 1s meant a true bultever z, which he 


ve read of, (to whoſe houte Chrift not asked) invited himſelf, and | 


might be and yet be a Native Few, ailo. Tio all jjrac; did not 05- 


in it did more for Zaccheu; than he expected. O the freeneſs, and \ tain, yet the Eleion amongſt them did obtain, Rom. v1, 7. All 
niches of Divine Grace / which ſecketh not a worthy ObjeR, but } were not Iſrael, who were of Iſrael, Neither (faith the Apoſtle Rom. 


makes the Object worthy, and therefore loveth it. - What a Word was\ 5: v. 7.) becauſe they are the ſeed of Abraham ave they all Chiliren. 
Nor were they other than Jews to whom Chriſt faid, F:hn 8. 29. 


2? tf / 5 [4 . » . n 
tf / Come dn, for I mat this day abide at thirg vouſe, 


- 
4 


Chap. XIX, 


and if I have taken any thing from any man by * falſe * ch. - 


ifs 


E271 FOO ITS oe -—_ 
Ll fn ERIE 9 11-47» 97 


Chap. XIX. CL 


Tf ye were Abraham's Chilton je wild to the works of Avraliam, and 
V. 44. Tou are of your Fatho the Devil, and the Laſts of your Father 
ye will ds, Our Saviour therefore in ſaying, Foraſmuch he alſ5 is 
the Son of Abraham, intendeth much more, than that he was a Na- 
tive Jew, (it indecd he were ſo, for that 15 not certain) viz, That he 
was a beltever, a Son of Avraham, contidered as the Father of the 
Faithful, a genuine Son of Avraham, rcjoycing with him at the 
fight of his Day, and velteving with him, fo as it was puted to him 
for Rightewwnejs, and Salvaticn is already come in 2 ſure 77tle, tho 
not 1n actual Polleſfion, to every Soul that js ſuch a one. 


For the} 


O KE. 
ſented in it, un 


what the thin 
A far 


Chap, Xl 


» and Servants 
Notion of ;.: 


-1 Our Lord in this 
lcemeth b 
were a=" win 
Om in 
, the 


Son of Man (faith he) is come ro ſeeb and to Jave that which is 118, 
We had the fame Mitth, 18. 11, Sce the Notes in that place, 

11 And as they heard theſe things, he added, and 
ſpake a parable, becauſe he was nigh to Jeruſalem, and 
becauſe they thought that the kingdom of God ſhould 


lnmediately appear. 


| away from 


gning amongſt ) 

them for a long time. 
maniteſtation of his Kingdom in Glo 
exalt and liberally reward his Friends, 
as ſhould be his Enemies. In order to 
up this Parable, or ſpeaketh to them 
3- 4s to the aptn of it, 


this [imilityqe 


kloneg 1, 15 


We noted before, that Jerichy was but 18 rurlongs from Feruſa- 
tem, Cwhich were not twenty Miles ) and provably this Diſcourſe was 
upon the way when he was come nearer to it. But the Principal oc- 
caſion of the following Parablc was, his diſcerning of the Opinion 
which poſſeiſcd ſome of the com pany which went along with him,that 
the time was 'now at hand when the Kingdom of God ſhould appear 3 
when Chritt would put forth ſome eminent alk of his Power, in de- 
livering them from the ſervitude they were in to the Romans, of in 
Feftrozing the unbclieving Jews and Phariſees : Or when his Goſpel 
ſhould take further place, and prevail in the World beyond what it 
yetnad done. He therefore pufteth forth a Parable ro them, where- 
in by a familiar finilitude, he lets them; underſtand, that he was 
going away from them, bur would come again, and then reccive the 
kingdom. That in the mean time he would 1mploy them as his 
Servants with his goods, and when he came, would take an account 
what uſe and improvement they had made. of them, and then he 
would both reward his Friends, and be revenged on his Enemies. 


The Parable followeth, 
12 Heſaid therefore, 
a far country, to receive 


A certain noble man went into 
tor himſelf a kingdom, and to 


8 In the exerciſe 
S and Puniſh, 
when he th 
was bur like a Nobleman, a Son of Man 
ſand. His going into a 
fo Heaven. 7? rec 


of Þ 
nents ; 
us ſpake 


and Power at the r 


Is coming again to 
Seruants, and deliv 
Gifts un:g Men, 
Naturcs, but all 


not anfivered in t!; 
The Citizens hating 
fies that the gen 

rate their hatred by 


”* 
LJ 


| Juriſdiction, His ret 4 . 
lignifies that 


e to Judge t} 
World, he ] bf the 


return. : 
13 And he called his ten ſervants, and delivered 


+ Mina 7s them -- ten pounds, and faid unto them, Occupy till I 


two ounces 
.COIMNEC, 
and an hal Com 


whe - os hated him, and ſent a meſſage 


We will not have This man to reign 


that when he was returned, t 


m, chen he commanded theſe 

Im, to whom he had given 
+ money, that he might know how much every 

man had gained by trading. 

16 Then came the firſt, fa 
hath gained ten pounds. 

17 Andhe ſaid unto him, Well, thou good ſervant: 
becauſe thou haſt beeg * faithful in a very little, have 
thou authority over ten cities, 

18 And the ſecond came, 
hath gained five Pounds. 

Ig And he ſaid likewiſe 
five cities. 

20 And another came, 
thy pound which I have ke 

21 For I feared thee, 
man : thou takeſt up that t 
reapelt that thon didſt 

22 And he faith unto him, 
mouth will I judge thee, thon Wi 
' Kneweſt that I was an auſtere man, 
not down, and reaping that I did n 

then paveſt not 
» That at m 
mine own with uſury ? 

24 And he ſaid unto them 
Irom him the pound, and Sive I 
Pounds. 

25 And they 
Pounds. 

26 For I ſay 


ying, Lorg, thy pound 


* Ch.15.10, 
laying, Lord, thy pound 
to him, Be thoy alſo over 


ſaying, Lord 


* Out of thine own 
cked ſervant, Thou 
taking up that [ laid 
of ſow : 


that ſtood by, 
C 10 him that har 


Lord, he hath ten 


ſaid unto him, 


unto YOu, * That unto every 
which hath ſhall be EVEN: and irom him that hath 
even that he hath ſhall be taken away from him. 
27 But thoſe mineenemies which would not that I 
ould reign over them, bring hither, and llay them be- 
fore me. 
The Parable of the Talents which w 
great cognation to this Parable, and 
things is the very ſame ; but the circamſtances of t 
tion are ſo differing, : k, that bo 
relate to the ſame time. ' 
Saviour might twice repea 
Not to intiſt upon t! 
(which is a work 
fanding of this Þ ave three things do do, 1. To enquire 
what ſpecial Inftrution our Saviour did in this Parable intend to 
thoſe who heard him at that time, 2, Who the Perſons are repre- 


” Mat, I3. 


Gree 
ght under: ; 


Honours, or 
Wit, & 
alf erent 


In, fi 


ccounts, 
Work, 


is 
le it ſelf, and 


) {aſcending 


- 5 ſeverity, or 


V, 

Mouths, 
nd Man wi 

What the ds, v. 

liderality in rewar 

cerning his Enetmnj 

men a long time, 

while the Heavens 


King. 
r Lords goods, b 
3- That it muſt be & 


ake great 
with for his 


pleas, 
I, belid 


e his Footſtool, He 


them in pieces libe a Pot- 
O Io. 1, and who ſhall then deliver them out 


28 And when he had thus ſpoken, he went before, 


up to Jeruſalem. | 
Feruſalem /4 we before Noted) ſtood upon an Hill, thoſe that 
went to it therefore aſcended. 


This g0ing before the Company was 
Here again Lube taketh notice ot 
wt alacrity our Saviour managed 
He knew that he was at this time 5 
uſalem ; to ſhew that he was trec- | 44. 

[2, Childre 
2 One {} 


e way, 


29 And it came to paſi when he was come nigh to 
, _ Bethphage 


] | hap- 


4. MM ____&. ac £9... ce... NB. OS 


To 


[2, 
412, 


3 [A d, 


4 higheſt, 


, that if theſe ſhould hold their peace, * the ſtones would 


9, *0und, and keep thee inon every ſide, . 


XIX | 


Clives, he ſent twoof his diſciples. | 

30 Saying, Go ye into the village over againſt you ; 
in rhe which at your entring ye ſhall find a colt tied, 
whereon yet never .man fat : loofe him, and bring him 


hither. ; 
31 And it any man ask you, Why do ye looſe him ? 


thus ſhall ye ſay unto him, Becauſe the Lord hath need 


of him. 
32 And they that were ſent, went their way, and 
found even as he had ſaid unto them. 
33 And as they were looſing the colt, the owners chere- 
of {aid unto them, Why Ioofe ye the colt ? 
34 Andthey faid, The Lord hath need of him, 
Sec the Notes on Math, 21. 1, >, 3. and Maik 11. 1, 2, 3, Ofc. 
We have diſcourſed there of Be:hphuze and Bethany, and whatever 
occurreth in this Hiſt-rv needing any exylication, 
And they brought him to Jeſus : and they caſt 
their garments upon the colt , and they ſer Jeſus there- 


on. 
36 And as he went, they fpread their clothes in the 
way. 


37 And when he was come nigh, even now at the 
deſcent of the mounr. of Olives, che whole multitude 
of the diſciples began wv rejoyce, and praiſe God with 
2 loud voice for al} the mighty works that they had 


{een, : 
28 Saying, * Bleſſed be the King that cometh in the 
name of the Lord : * Peace in heaven, and glory in the 


vee the Notes on Matth, 2. n.9, 9. Marh rr, 9, 8, 9, 10. both 
which Evatigeli{iis (M.rl moſt fill ) deferibe this great Triumvh 

39 And ſome of the Phariſees from among the multi- 
tude ſaid unto him, Maſter, rebuke rhy diſciples. 

40 And he anſwered, and faid unto them, | tel] you, 


immediarely cry our. | 

How peevith were theſe wretched Phariſees 2 to envy our Savi- 
our this little Trtumph ot c:-nung into the City upon an Aſſes colt, 
with Garments under him infte-d of a Saddle, or any ſtately furni- 
tore, and tr:ppings, and attended by a company of pour People 
throwing their Garments, and boughs of Trees in the way 4 yet theſe 
they would have fi!enced. Our Saviours Reply, If theſe ſhould hold 
thetr peace, the ſlones would immediately cry out, ſeemeth to have 
been a Proverbial Speech uſed amongſt them, to f1gnifi? a thing that 
could not be. Thns Day was accompliſhed God's Decree in that par- 
ticalar paſſzge of Providence, concerning our Saviour, which could 
not be defeated. 


41 And when he was come near, he beheld the city, 


and wept over it, 

Thoie wh-1 of ©1d blotted out this Sentence, as thinkin: that weep- 
ing was not becoming Chrifts Perfettion, ſeems to hn4ve forgotter; 
that hc was perfe& an, and a ſharer in all the natural Infirmities of 
Humane Mature, (if weeping upon the proſpet of humane miſeries, 
deſerveth no better name than an Infirmity, being an indication of 
Love and Compaſſion.) Thoſe who think that it was idle for him to 
weep, for that which he might eafily have helped, ſeetn to oblige 
Go to give out of his Grace, whether men do what he hath com- 
minded them, and is in tp:ir Power to do yea or no. Chriſt wept 
over Feruſalem as a man compatfionating theſe poor Jews, with re- 
ſpet to the miſeries he ſaw coming upon them 3 as a Miniſter of tie 
Goſpel pitying the People to whom: he was primarily ſent. 

42 Saying, if thou hadſt known, even thou, at leaſt 
in this thy day, the things whicb belong unto thy peace ! 


but now they are hid from thine eyes. 

Speeches which are the produtts of great Paſſion, are uſually abrupt 
and imperfedt. [ thou hadſt knwn,) That is, O that thou had(t 
bnwn, or, I wiſh that thou hadit known, We are ſaid in Scrip/ure 
tO know more than we believe, are affetted with, and live up to the 
knowledge of, They had heard enough of the things which concern: 
ed their Peace : Chriſt had told them to them, but they attended not 
to them, they helieved them not, and ſo cared not to dirett their 
lives according to any ſuch netions. | At leaſt in this thy dav.) The 
time in which I heve been preaching the Goſpel to thee, (for fo 1 
had rather interpret it, than of this laſt Journey of our Saviours to 
Feruſalem. ) This was properly the Jews day ; for the firſt Preachers 
of the Golpe] ſpent all their time and pains amongſt them. [ The 
things which belong t» thy Peace.) That is, to thy happinefi, for fo 
the turm often ſignifies, and it referreth as well to the happineſs of 
the outward, as of their inward man, | But now they ar? hid from 
thine Eyes.) God will not ſuffer his Spirit always to ſtrive with man, 
becanſe he is but Fleſh, not fit to be always waited on by the great 
Majeſty of Heaven. Firſt, Men thut their Eyes apainit the things 
tnat do concern their Peace, then God hideth them from them. No 
man hath more than his dav, his tithe of Grice ; how long that is 
=o can tell, if he ſleepeth out that, his cafe is deſperate, paſt re- 

edy, 

43 For the days ſhall come upon thee, that thine ene- 
mies ſhall caif a rrench about thee, and compals thee 


44 And * ſhall lav thee even with the ground, and thy 
Children wirhin thee : and they * ſhall not leave in thee 
one ſtone upon another : becauſe thou kneweſt not the 
"me of thy viſitation, 


S LURE 


Bathphage and Bethany, at the mount called the mount of 


It is a plain Prophecy of the final DeſtruQtion of 7erv 
Roman Armies, which came to paſs within 3 qty 
ter. The cauſe of that dreadful 
neweſt not the time of thy 
Wrath or Mercy ; 
of Mercy, 


Viſitation, 
Fer. 29. 10. 


of this People here, is 


intended_) was their not making uſe vi 

, g uſe of 1t, not receiving, and imbra- 
pet. ine contempt of the Goſpel is the great cauſe 

of all thoſe miſeries which come upon People in this Life, or all 

come upon them in that Life which is to come. - 


out chem that ſold therein, and them that boughr, 
the houſe of prayer - 
thieves. 

We have met with this before more fully. 
Matth. 21. 12,13. Marb. ts. 15, 15, 17. 

47 And he taught daily in the temple. 
chief prieſts and the ſcribes, and the chief of the people 
{ought to deſtroy him, 

48 And could not find what they might do : for all the 
people were || very attentive to hear him. 


See the Notes on 


few days, for it appearcth from John x2. c. that he came to Bethany 
but ſix doys before the Paſſhver, now upon the Paſſover-day he died, 
but tor the intermediate time, it is plain from the other Eranze<liſts, 
that he was wont to ſpend the Day-time at 7eryſalem in the Tem- 
ple, and at Night to return to Bethany. The chief Prieſts and the 
Scrihes, and toe chi-f of the perle, ; 3+ ;5* to deſtroy him, only they 
: rood 11 a little aw of the people, who were very attentive to hear 
him. 


CHAP. XX. 


Toe Phariſees as Chriſt by what Authority he doth theſe things; which 
he anſwers by another queStion, concerning the Baptifm of fobn, 1—8. 
Threatneth them with heavy Fuslgment, by a Parable of a Vinezard, 
9——19. Of gtving Tribute ro Ceſar, 20 -— 26. and of the Reſur- 
reetion, proved out of the Law of Moſes, 27 40. He anſwereth, 
whether Chriſt be the Sin of David, 41——44. and dehorteth from 
Ambition and Hypacriſie, 45 47» 


the goſpel, the chief 
with the elders. 


authority doeſt thou theſe things ? or who is he that gave 

thee this authority ? | 

We have 4.00g the Hiſtory of the Goſpel obſerved that the S:175es 

and Phariſees took all advantages imaginable againſt our Saviour ; 

failing in all their atts, they now come to queſtion his Authority, 

which ſeemeth not ſo much to have reſpe& to his preaching, as to 

his a& in caſting of the Ryyers and Sellers out of the Temple 3 for as 

to preaciing, they ſeemed bv the Hiſtory of Scripture to have given 

a great hberty, eſpecially 1f any had the repute of a Prophet. 

3 And he anſwered, and faid unto them, 1 will alfo 

ask you one thing ; and anſwer me : | 

4 The baptiſm of John, was it from heaven, or of 

men ? 

5 And they reaſoned with themſelves, ſaying, If we 

ſhall ſay, From heaven ; he will fay, Why then believed 

ye him not ? | 

6 Bur and if we fay, Of men ; all the people will 

ſtone us - forthey be perfwaded that John was a pre- 
net, 

: 7 And they anſwered, that they could not tell whence 


it was , | 
8 And Jeſus ſaid unto them , Neither tell ] you by 


what authority I do theſe things. 
See the Notes on Matth. 21. 24, 25. 
ſtance of our Savioars Anſwer is this, From whence had ohn his 
Authority ? He Preached and Baptized, Who gave him his Authori- 
ty ? They had ſent much ſuch another Meffage to Foby, Fohn 1. 241, 
22, 23. was Fohns Authority ordinary or extraordinary ? It 15 plain 
that he had no Authority from them, for then they would not have 
ſent to him to know who he was. He muſt therefore have it tron 
Heaven, now if they had al'owed Johns Call extraordinary, why 
ſhould not they allow Chriſts to be ſuch, to whom Fohn gave (5 
large a Teſtimony, and who confirmed his extraordinary Miffion by 
miraculous Operations, which we do not read that Fohn ever did ? 
Beſides, the Phariſees ſaw that if they allowed Fohn's Miffion to >2 
extraordinary, and from Heaven, they had obviouily expoſed them- 
ſelves to a check for not believing what he ſaid ; they therefore 
refuſe to make any Anſwer, and Chrift refuſeth alſo to fatisfie 


them, 

9 Then began he to ſpeak to the people this para- 
ble: A cettain man planted a vineyard, and let ic forth 
to husbandmen, and went into a far country for a long 
time, | | | | 
10 And at the ſeaſon he ſent a ſervant to the husband- 
men, that they would give him of the fruit of the vine- 
yard : but the husbandmen bear him, and ſent him awty 


Marh t1. 23, 29. The ſub- 


TGC. 2: 


empty. ry y * * And 


Chap. XX, 


leſs than forty yezrs 2f- 
Judgment is affigned, bec.wuj? th: 
Gods Viſitations are either of 
of Wrath, Exod. 32- 34. Levit. 26.16. Fer. 15. 2: 
any It 15 plain that our Saviour uſeth the terin 
ere in the latter, not the former ſenſe, and that by Gods Viitation 
meant his viſiting them by his Prophers, b 
Fohn the Baptiſt, and by hirnſelf, "pr boom hnwwing of it, ( Joc: 


45 And he went * into the temple, and began to caſt « Mat. 


2T- 


: ! I2, 
45 Saying unto them, * Ir is written, My houſe is * Ifz. 55. 7: 


but ye * have made it a den of * J<'-7-11- 


Bur * the ens I7: 
In 7. 19. 
© 8.37% 


| Or, hanz» OILS 
PR U . . . { "= S ; 
[ins our Saviours preact'i-g &:il} muſt be inderſtood cf a very ed on Am. 1 


ND * it came to paſs, that on one of thoſe days, * Mat. 2t- 
as he taught the people in the temple, and preached 23. | 
prieſts and the ſcribes came upon him, Mark 11 | || 
27. 


2 And ipake unto him, ſaying, Tell us, * By what * At: 4.9” 
& 7o 27, 


4 - w E. 
"> ror oem i ered oo aL, 
= ITAYG G a Py ERS 
B ts > —_— 
— __ - : - © ed =—r 


- a_——— — 4 2 


Chap. 


2. 


O. 


RX. 


him allo, and entreated {1m {tamefully , and ſent h1m 


mpty. | | 
Dy £ An Che he ſeat the third ; and they wounded him 


and caſt 7,7: our. 
_ 1hen {aid the Lord of the vineyard, What ſhall 
1 do? I will lend my beloved fon : it may be they will 
reverence im: when they lee him, 

14 But when the husbandmen {aw him, they reaſoned 
among themſelves, ſaying, This is the heir : come, let us 
kill him, chat rhe inheritance may be ours. | 

15 Eo they caſt him our of the vineyard, and Killed 
him. What therefore ſhall the lord of the vineyard do 
unto them ? 

16 He {hall come and deſtroy theſe husbandmen, and 
ſhall give the vineyard to others. And when they heard 
it, they ſaid, God forbid. | 22 6 

17 And he beheld chem, and {aid, Whar is this then 


+* Mat. 21 that is written, * The ſtone which the builders rejected, 


the fame is become the head: of the corner * 
| 18 Wholoever ſhall fall upon that ſtone, ſhall be bro- 

ken : but on whomſoever it ſhall fall, ic will grind him 
to powder, | 

We met with this Parable at large both in Matth. 21. 23, to tne 
G8, and in Ywhk 12.1. Its obvious Scope 15to let them know, that 
God in rizhteous Judgment, for the Fes abuling the Zords Prophets, 
Zohn the Bapti/t, and hiumieir, who was 11 4 few Days to be killed 
by them, would uachurch and deitrov them. 
a Churci among thc Genti es, anda that tins was No IMOrc than was 
prophetied of, V/i/. 118. 25. 

19 And the chief prieſts and rhe ſcribes the fame hour 
ſought ro lay hands en him ; and they feared the peo- 
ple: for they perceived that he had ſpoken this parable 


againſt them. | 
20 And they watched i, and fent forth ſpies, which 


* Mat, 22. ſhould * feign themſelves puſt men, thar they might take 


15, 20, 


hold of his words, thar ſo they migar deliver him unto 


the power and authority of the governour. 

Thcre is nothing ia tht V-rie', but what we before met with» 
and is opcned 11 the Note: on Muith. 21. 45, 45. of Mark 12. 22,13. 
They let us ſce us in a Glats the Sprrzt. aud Ger7zs of wicked men 
filled with M.lice againſt the Go pel. They 772 continually ſeeking 
to deitroy fuch as have any relation to Chrift, 25d to effect their 
end>, they will judge no mcans untfur, and their great art 15 to re- 
preſent them as dangerous perſors to the Cruit Governnient, 1o as if 
good mcn find the ſame things ftil: , thev have this to comfort 
them, Tyat the Diſciple is not above his Maſter, nor the Servant a- 
bove his Lord, 


21 And hey asked him, ſaying, Maſter, we know 
thar thou ſayeſt and reacheſt rightly , neither acceprteſt ; 


!] Or, of thou the perſon of any, but teacheſt the way of God 


Truth. 


a See Mat. 


18. 28, 


+ Aﬀts 23. 


6, @. 


* Dcut. 25. 


e 
5 


truly. 
© Is ic lawful for us to give tribute unto Ceſar, or 
no ? 

23 But he perceived their craftineſs, and ſaid unto 
them, Why tempt ye me ? 

24 Shew me a || penny: Whoſe image and fuper- 
{cription hath it 2 They antwered and faid, Celars. 

25 And he faid unto them, Render therefore unto 
Celar the things waich be Cefars, and unto God the 
things which be Gods. 

26 And they could not take hold of his words before 
the people ; and they marvelled at his anſwer, and held 
their peace, | 

This piece of Hiftory ve have likewiſe met with both, in Matth. 
22,15, and 3h 12. i2. Sce the explication of it there. 


27 Then came to him certain of the Sadducees * 
which deny thar there is any refurretion, and they 
asked him, 

28 Saying, Maſter, * Moſes wrote unto us, If any 
mans Erother diz, having a wife, and he die without chil- 
dren, that his brother ſhould: rake his wife, and raiſe up 
{-ed unto his brother. 

29 There were therefore {even brethren : and the firſt 
took a wife, and died virkout children. 

30 And the ſecond took her to wife, and he died 
childleſs. 

31 And tne third took ker ; and in like manner the 
feven allo. And they lefr no children, and died. 

22 Laſtof. all the woman died allo. 

33 Therefore in the reſurrection, whoſe wife of them 
i5 ſhe ? for ſeven had her to wife. 

34 And Jetus an{wering {aid unto them, The children 
of this world marry, and are given in marriage ; 

35 Eurthey which ſhall be accounted worthy to obtain 
that world, and the reſurrection from the dead, neither 
marry, or are given in marriage. 


EV AE: 


11 And again he fent another ſervant; and they beat | 


and raiſe up to himſelf 


unto the angels, and are the children of- God. boino! 4. 
children of the reſurreſtion, » being the 


ſhewea at the buſh, when he calleth the Lord, 
of Abraham, and the God of 1laac , 
Jacob. 

38 For he is not a God of the dead, but of the 


for all live unto him. 
Sce the Notes on Matth. 22. 23, @&c. and on Mark 11, 16 4. 
where all the pailages 1n this pzece of Hiſtory are fully opened. mo 
equal with the Angels, 1nv. 36. we muſt not underſtand in all t;... 7 
but in the thing mentioned 3 the number of the Elec ſhall be SON 
{5 there ſhall be no necd of marrying, or giving in Varriage 4 a, 
tiply the number of men. 2. There ſhall be no more ——_ 
mongtt men, than amongſt Angels, v. 38. | Ai live untg es v 
Abratam, Tjaac, and Jacob, were dead at the peaking of Pap 
words, yct they were not ſo in God's Eye, who was determined t; 
raiſ- them up in the laft day, and who with the ſame Eye "rages 
things palt, preſent, and to come. But ſee more in the ry 
fore mentioned. EO 
9 Thencertain of the ſcribes an{wering, ſaid, Maſter 
thou haſt well laid. Fe 
40 And after that, they durſt not ask him any Queſtion 


at all. 
The Scribes were the jewiſh Doftors of the Phariſzes Fattion, ang 
Enemies to the Saddycees  - they applaud our Saviours anſwer. ths 
= Hrdians before (in the caſe of tl + ' "as: 
asthe Herodzuns deture (10 tne.Cate of the Tribute) fo the Sadlycs, 
here are put to ſilence. He wil! now put the Scribes and #/,;:. % 
tO Hence. 


the God 
and the God of 


living ; 


is Davids ton ? 12 


hand, 

43 Tilll make thine enemies thy footſtool. 

44 David therefore catleth him Lord, hew is he he; 
his fon ? | | 

The anſwer had been eafte if the Scribes and Phatiſces, 11; 
( Matthew ſaith) were there alſo, had owned Chriſt to be the 5 y; 
God. But this they ard not own, ard fo (as Matthew tell: us) ©<z, 
22. 45, No man was able to anſw2r him a word,» neither dur\t any man 
from that day forth ask him any more queſtions. Thus Chritt nonpluit 
all his Adverſarics. 

45 Tthenin the audience of all the people, he faid ug- 
to his diſciples, | 

45 Eeware of the ſcribes, which defire to walk in 
long robes, and love greetings in the markets, and the 
higheſt ſeats in the ſynagogues, and the chief rooms ar 
feaſts. | 
47 Which devour widows houſes, and for a ſhey 
mak long prayers: the fame ſhall receive greater damns- 
rion. | 
we have met with all this before, ch. 11. 43. Matth. 23,4, -. 
Mark 12. 38, 35, 40. See the Notes on thoſe Texts, 


CHAP. XXI. 

Chriſt commendeth the ſmall gift of the poor Widow, 1——q. firete!:b 
the deſtruction of the Temple, and the deſoiatim of Feruſalem, 5, 5. 
revearſeth the ſigns foregoing the laſt Days : The tribulation and 
forrow that would come on his Dijciples : Promiſeth his aſſijiaice and 
proteetion, 5—19. Sheweth them what to do in that time, 2—24, 
Foretelleth the ſigns of bis laſt coming z and exhorteth to obſerve item 
by the fumilitude of the budding Tree, 25 33. and to exp! his 
comtmg with watchfulneſs and prayer, 34q—38. 


I N D helooked up, and ſaw the rich men caiting 
their gifts into the trealury, _ | 
2 And he ſaw alſo a certain poor widow, caſting 1: 
thither rwo mites. | | 
3 2nd he faid, Of a truth I fay unto you, that this 
poor widow hath caft in more than they all. 

4 For all theſe have of their abundance caſt in unto the 
offerings of God - but ſhe of her penury hath caſt in all 
the living that ſhe had, 

We met with this piece of Hiſtory, Mark 12. 41, 42, 43» 4 
Mark telleth us, that Chriſt was fitting right over again} tre Trea- 
ſury. Fer other thiags neceſſary to be known, to undcritand tis 
prcce of Hiſtory, fee the Notes on Mark 12. 

'5 And as ſome ſpake of the temple, how it was adort- 
cd with goodly ſtones, and gifrs, he ſaid, : 
6 As for theſe things which ye behold, the days wil 
come, in the which there ſhall not be left one ſtone vpn 
another, that ſhall not be thrown down. a 
Matthew and Mark fay, That ſome of his Diſciples ſpax< foe, 
Werds to him, and received this anſwer, as he was going out ot _ 
Temple. For th2 goodly ſtones which the Diſciples admired, WE #** 
told that there were ſome of them forty five Cubits long, — ol 
depth, and fix in breadth. The gifts here mentioned are ca%c ah 
the Greek,, &yaSipare, not dyatiuar, nor dogg. The Hatter xraess 
Sig. lignified any Gifts, Money or Plate, &c. which men = "o 
tarily offered, avavtiugm fignified things accurſed , OT _ «Fed 
God, as all the Gouds of 4j were, Foſh. 7. but this word ig 2 
ſuch Gifts or Preſents made to God, as might be hung up ane — 
ſed to open views" Our Lord to take off his Diſciples Eyes ett 


- 
'* 


+1 And he faid unto them, * How fay they that Chrig +1, 


Chap. KX} 


36 Neirher can they die any more for they are * equal * ig... 


37 Now that the dead are raiſed, * «ye, Motes« 
"EIN 


LS” 
- 


42 And David himſelf taith, in the book of * pilne Utii 
. p Pais, ...." 
The Lord faith umo my Lord, Sit thou on my right, © 


[rs 


by. 
hel. ; 


Y Chap. XXI 


Wat. 24+3* ; 
E194 ſhall theſe things be ? and what ſign will there be when 


degree, that one ſtone ſhould not be left upon another 3 which how 
it was afterwards fulfilled within teſs than forty years, ſee. the Notes 
on Mat. 24- 1, 2, 3- and on Mark 13. 1, 2, God by that Providence 
not only deſtroying the vain confidence of the Jews, who took their 
Temple to be an Aſylum, or Sanftuiry for them from the Providence 
of God, or his Juſtice rather 3 but alſo ſeverely puniſhing them for 
their profanutron of his holy place ; and letting them know that the 
time was come, When God would put an end to all-Tjpes of. the Me: 
:aþ, and alſo.to all that Worſhip,” which could not make him that did 
the Service, perfedt, as to the Conſcience, - but ſtood only in meats and 
drinks, and divers waſhings, and carnal: Ordinances, impoſed on them 
mntil the time of reformatien, Heb. g. $9, 1v. Sce further, the Notes 
on Matth. 24+ 1. and Mark 13. 1. | 


7 And they asked him, ſaying, * Maſter, but when 


theſe things ſhall came to paſs ? 

Mark ſaith, Peter, Fames, 74hn, and Andrew asbed him privately. 
Matthew brings two things more within the compaſs of their Queſti- 
on, vit- What ſhall be the fign of thy coming, and of the end of the 
Warld 2 Our Saviour anfwereth this Queſtion from v. 8. to v. 32. 
The moſt of what he ſaith, we have betore met with in Matthew and 
Marh, It is the harder to diſtinguiſh betwixt the ſigns Chriſt giveth 
of the Deſtruction of Feruſalem, and. of the dayof Fudgment, becauſe 
the Signs of both, are generally the ſame 3 and moſt Divines think, 
that God in the Deſiruttion of Feruſulem, intended to give a Speci- 

- men of the general Contlagration, and ruin of the World at the laſt 
Day : fo as Signs of the ſame kind with thoſe ſecn before Feruſalem 
was deſtroyed, ſhall be ſeen before the great and terrible day of onr 
Lords coming to judge the World. 


ſy". $ And he ſaid, * Take heed that ye be not de- 
Me-2-3* ceived : for many ſhall come in my name, ſaying, I am 


Chriſt ; and the time draweth near : Go ye not therefore 


after them. | 

See the Notes on Matth. 24.4, 5s. and on Hark 13. 5, 6, This hap- 
pened, and was abundantly fulfilled betore tne deſtrution of Feru- 
falem, and probably will receive a further fulfilling, in the latterend 
of the World. But before the deſtrution of Feruſalem, 1t was, as 
Toſephis aſſurerh us, fulfilied in many, particularly in one Thenudas, 
(whether the ſame mentioned by Gamaliel, As 5.35. or ſome other 
of that Name 15 uncertain.) 2. An Ezyptian Sorcerer, mentioned, 
Aﬀs 21. 38. 3. One Doſitheus a Samaritan?, 4. Another in the 
time of Feſtus his Governwent. «. Simon Mazus is alſo reckoned 
for one, As 8. 9. He boaſted he was the Great Power of God: 
Others alſo reckon one Menander, a Diſciple to Simon Magus. . Tt 1s 
certain there were many who arrogated to themſelves the Name of 
the Meſſiah, to countenance the heading of a FaQtion, There have 
alſo been many ſince the Deſtruttion of Feruſalem, and probably will 
be many more bcfore the en4 of the World, 2 Tim. 4. 3. 2 Pet. 2. 1- 
1 John 2. 12, 


9 But when you ſhall hear of wars, and commotions, 
be not terrified. : for theſe things muſt firſt come to pals, 
but the end & not by and by. 

10 Then faid he unto them, Nation ſhall riſe againſt 
nation, and kingdom againſt Kingdom : ; 

11 And great earthquakes ſhall] be in divers places, 
and famines, and peſtilences, and fearful fights, and great 


ſigns (hal there be from heaven. 

See the Notes on Matth. 24.6, 5. and Mark 13. 8. Time is the beſt 
Interpreter of Prophecies : what ſhall be ſeen of theſe before the end 
of thz World, weare yet to obſcrve, but the DeſtruRion of Feruſa- 
{mis paſt many hundrecs of years fince. What Commotions were 
before that, we muſt learn out of Civil Hiſtorians, who tell us of 
divers, Foſephus telleth us of an Inſurre&ion made by thoſe of Fu- 
dea againſt the Sumaritans, Romans and Syrians. And of the Romans 
azainſt the Fews, to the Deſtruttion of Twenty theuſand Jews, asalſo 
of thoſe of Scythopalis, who deſtroyed of the Jews Thirteen thouſand. 
Of the Aſcalonites who deſtroyed of them Two thouſand Five hundred, 
Of thoſe of 4/exandria who deſtroyed of them Fiſty thouſand. Of 
thoſe of Damaſcus, who flew of them Ten thouſand, They tell us alſo 
of many more Seditions, during the Government of Feliz, Feſtus, Al- 
bing and Flcrus, &c. The Text ſpeaks further of Earthquakes, the 
Greeb word fignificth no more than Concuſſions and Shakings, but 
Hiſtorians tell us of ſeveral Earthquakes that happened (tho' not in 
Fadea } before the Deſtruftion of Feruſalem. One at Rome in Neyo's 
time; another in Aſia which deſtroyed three Cities, 7c. For Fa- 
mmes, we read of one in Scripture propheſied of by Agabus, Aﬀts 
11.29, Twelve Years after Chriſt's Death there was another 1n 
Greece, and four Years after at Rome. For the fearful Srzhts, and 
great Sizns from Heaven 3 Joſephus tells us of a Comet, which for a 
Year together in the form of a Sword, pointcd over the City. A 
L',ht that ſhined in the Night in the Temple, and made it as bright 
5 1f it had been Noon-day. He teljs us alſo of a Neat-Beast bringing 
torth a Lamb jn the midſt of the Temple. Of the firange opening 
0! the Gates of the Temp/e. Of Viſions of Chariots, and Armed men. 
Ot a Voice heard in the Temple, inviting thoſe who were there to 
be gone. As alſo of a man C"vhom he names) who for feven years 
and hve months together hefore the Siege, went about crying, Wh, 
R0, *o Ferr/alem, and could with no puniſhments (which they thought 
t to inflict) be reſtrained, &c. Theſe we:e great Signs both from 
licaven and Earth. 
$24.9 . 5 . 

5.2. 12. * But before all theſe, they ſhall lay their hands 
1c, M you, and perſecute you, delivering you up to the ſy- 
25, Ngopues, and into priſons, * being brougtit before kings 
and rulers for my names fake, 

We hive all this juiiicd from Holy Writ, Ads qe 3. OF. 5. 18: 
T 12. 4. C7 16. 24. -What of this ſhail be ſeen before the end of the 
World, time muft howz” tho! the Prophecies of Holy Writ ſpeak 


>. Soy - ad. A an 
19U2"n ot that aifo, 


S. L U K $-- | Chat 


ay and ſtately things, propheſicth the utter ruin of the Temple,to that 


| 13 And it ſhall curn to you for a teſtimony. Ss 
That is, your Perſecution ſhall turn to you for a Teſtimony; for a Ti/ti- 
beg again your Adverſaries ; ſo as they themſelves thall be brought. 
y your Confetlion of me, to own me as the true Meffiah, and their 
ory which they mask under the Vizor of Religion, ſhall be open- 
y detetted, and it ſhall at laſt appear to all the Worid , that the Judg- 
ments of God are juſt, for the cruelty they have exerciſed upon you ; 
And to you it ſhall be for a Tefimony, you ſhall have an ampler OCca- 
ſton of teſtifying, both before Kings and Great Men, that 1 am the 
true Meſſiah. Your Faith, Patience and Conſtancy, [hall be made 
more manifeſt : you ſhall alſo teſtifie that my Kingdom 15 rot of this 
World, and that my Diſciples care not to.expet a Terrene Felicity ; 
It ſhall alſo bea Teſtimony to you, That you expet not your Por- 
tion and Felicity in this, but in another life, 
14 Settle zr therefore in your hearts, not to meditate 
before, what ye ſhall anſwer. 


15 For I will give you a mouth and wiſdom, which 
all your adverſaries ſhall not be able to gainlay, nor 
refiſt. 


Sec the Notes on Matth. 19. 19, 20. Marh 12.11. We muſt not 
think, that our Saviour by this forbids us what is naturally impotti- 
ble for us to avoid : That is, the forming of thoſe words firſt in our 
thoughts which we ſpeak, nor yet a prudcnt thinxing bcfore-hangd 
what we ſhould ſpeak, but an anxiozs thinking what we thou!d © PCak 5 
ſuch a thinking as thould argue a diſtruſt in God to carry «©, 
through with that Teſtimony, which he calleth us forth to give. #5 
ſaith he, I will give you a mouth and wiſdom. So he prom:/{.d Moſes. 
Exod. 4. 12, 15; That he would be with hs mouth, and t: ch ki 
what to ſay ; and he tells Ezekiel, chap. 3. 27. that he would :2n ki; 
mouth , here he promiſeth the Dilciples a mouth and wiſdon:. rat 1: 
ſuch Wiſdom as ſhould guide their Tongues when they thou'd be 
called out to teſtifie for him. This was made good to Stephin, 457; 
6. 10, The Libertines, Cyrenians, Alexandrians, thoſe of Cil:ci.c 1114 
Aſta, were nit able to reſiſt the Wiſdom and Spirit by which he (pate. 
Thus it fared with Peter and John, A&s 4; 10, 13. By refit we 
muſt underſtand conquer, or vi@oriouſly refift. The Encmics 4£ 
the Goſpel have been always oppoſing, aad reſiſting the Patrons and 
Witneſles of, and for the truth, but never yet made a Congueit ; !et 
any indifferent Reader but read, and judge the accounts we have of 
the conili&s betwixt the Papiſts and the Proteſtants in the begintins 
of the Reformation, or betwixt the Papiſts and the Martyrs it Queen 
Marys Days 1n this Nation, and judge on whoſe fide there was moſt 
Scripture and Reaſon. This promiſe hath been fulfilling from Chriſts 
time even to this day. It is true, the enemies have been able to kill 
the perſons of Chriſt's Diſciples 3 they ſtoned Stephen, killed- Zames 
with the Sword, A&s 9.099 ch. 12, They crucified Peter and Andyew, 
ſtoned Philip, baniſhed F1n into Pathmos, fleaed Bartholomop, be- 
headed Matthew, arid various ways deſtroyed many.in the firſt, and 
moſt furious times, and have ſlain many Thouſands fince 3 but the 
Truths which they preached, prevailed, 


See the Notes on Matth. 24. 6, 10. and Mark 13. 12, 13. 
13 But there ſhall not an * hair of your head periſh, 


them. When at the laſt you come to caſt up your Accounts, you 
ſhall find you have loſt rothing, and your Enemies ſhall alſo find 
that they have gained nothing. 


i9 In your patience poſſeſs ye your ſouls. 

Patience 15 either paſſrve, ſeen in a quiet free and courageous iut- 
tering thoſe Evils which God will pleafe in his Providence to order 
us for our portion 3 or Ave ſeen in a quiet believing waiting tor, 
and expeQation of what God hath promiſed. Poſſeſs your ſouls, that 
is, your ſelves. Do not decline ſuffering for my Naines ſake, but live: 
in the exerciſe of Chriſtian courage and fortitude, until the Lord 
will pleaſe to releaſe you. In this ſenſe Fames expound this Phraic, 
Fames 1.4. But let patience have her perfett Work, that you may bz 
perfef, and entire, wanting nothing. Others ſay, Foſſeſs your Soals, 
is the ſame with ſave your Souls, So it ſeems to be expounded by 
Matth. 24. 13. and Mark 13. 13. But he that indureth to the end ſal 
be ſaved. 

20 * And when ye ſhall ſee Jeruſalem compaſſed 
with armies, then know that the delolation thereof is 
nigh. 

21 Then ler them which are in Judea flee to the 
mountains, and let them which are in the midit of ir, 
depart out ; and let nor them thar are in the countries, 


enter thereinto. 


After our S2viour's Aſcenſion, t! e Seditions amongſt the Jews 
were ſo many, and they rev<l!:d fo often againſt the Rom.ms, during 
the Governments of Felix, Feſtus, Albinzs and Flors, that the Ro- 
mans reſolved wholly to dettroy them, and to that purpoſe itz 
Veſpaſiuns was ſent with an Army againſt them, who took the City. 
Our Saviour foreſaw, that when that time ſhould come, there would 
be ſome vain perſons full of Stomach for their Liverties,. that would. 
be prophecying their Deliverance, and incouraging them to hold 
out to the laſt. He warneth his Diſciples to give no credit to them, 
for God would certainly deliver the City into their Hands ; there- 
fore he adviſeth them as ſoon as they ſhould ſce the City beſtegec, 
they thould all ſhift for themſelves, as faſt as they could, for there 
was no true ground to hope for any deliverance. The time of Gods: 
Venzcance was come, when God would molt certainly fultil againt* 
that place, whatſoever he had foretold againit it, 


Jal. £: | 


[Yyy 2] 23 Bu 


16 * And ye ſhall be betrayed both by parents, and * Mic. 7. 5. 
brethren, and kinsfolks, and friends; * and ſome of you — 7-59» 


ſhall they canſe ro be pur to death. , 
Ri, And * ye ſhall be hatred of all men for my names * Mat. 50: 
lake. 2 


* Mat, 10- 
It is a Proverbial Speech, ſignifying that they ſhould have no hurt, 32+ 
or damage by any thing, which their Enemies ſhould do againſt Chap. 12.7- 


* Mat. 


22 For theſe be the days of vengeance, that * all * Dan. g. 


things which are wricten may be fulfilled. 25, 27% 
Zech.11.r- 


©& Is > p 
- _ 
_ <2 x 
- 


— 
ET OE 
— . weÞ 
PRESS 
». 0% 9 OO 
> + mo 
od ad 


SES on + 


=". 
© OD 


Wye Hikes S.. oe ® 
_ 
py 
ds 


- = : WP 
oe Dd, WEE ESE Rom a 
2 II Bo <6 = "hs ——_ RTE 5: earn 
£ = —_— \ EY ily, {ns i WE 4 hy 


x ——- 
DR. a8" 
—— 


Chap. 
+ Vat. 24. 


19. 
Markiz.17- 


* Rom. I1- 
25. 


29. 
Mar. 13«24- 


Y Rev. Is 7. 


FRom.3.23. 


* Mat. 24- 
35 


? Rom. 13> 
T3: 

x1 Thel.5.6. 
x Pet. 4. 7. 


* i Thell.s. 
2. 
2 Pet, 3-10. 
Rev. 5. 2» 
& 15.15. 
* Mat. 2;- 
42. 

Mar. 13-33. 


XR. 


23 But wo * unto them that are with child, . and to| 


them that give ſuck in thoſe days; for there {hall be great 


LK LUKE. 


diſtreſs in the land, and wrath upon this people. 

24 And they ſhall fall by the edge of the {word, and 
ſhall be led away captive into all nations : and Jeruſalem 
ſhall be troden down of the Gentiles, * until the times of 


the Gentiles be fulfilled. —_— | x 
Fyephus teils us, that in the Wars, which ended in the-taking of 
Feruſalem, by the Famine, and the Swprd-- there, perithed 1100000 
Jews, and 95000 were carryed into; Captivity. Jeruſalem evcr 
fince that time, hath b:cn troden down by-the Gentiles, the Romans, 
Saracens, Franks, and is at this day troden of. the Turks [«ntz the 
time of the Gen:1les be fulfilled.) Some, from this Text think, that 
there ſhall be a time, when the Jews. ſhall repollels the City of Feru- 
ſatem. Whether any ſuch thing can be from, hence gathered, I 
doutt. Some here by the time of the Gentiles underſtand all that _ 
betwixt the Deſtruction of Feruſjxlem, and the end of the m_—_ 
Others, the time when the Goſpel ſhould be carried over all the 
World. But their Opinion ſeemeth to me molt probable, vho wal 
terpret it of the time of Gods patience with the Gentiles. As the Jews 
have filled up their nieaſure, and now the Wrath of God 15 come 
upon them to the uttermoſt ; ſo the Gentiles ſhall have their time al- 
fo. The Romans have had their time. The Turks now have their 
time z but their Glaſs is alſo running ont, there will bc a fulfilling 
of their time too, and whether then another ſort of Barbartans ſhall 
polleſs it, or the Zews or Chriſtians ſhall recover 1t, time muſt 1n- 
rerpret, ; 
25 And there ſhall be ſigns * in the ſun, and in the 
moon, and in the ſtars ; and upon the earth diſtreſs of 
nations, with perplexity, the fea and the waves roar- 
ing ; 
26 Mens hearts failing them for fear, and for looking 


after thoſe things which are coming on the earth : for the 


powers of heaven ſhall be ſhaken. | 

We may eaſily imagine, that this was eminently 
Siege of Jeruſalem, that Mens Hearts failed them for fear ; 
Prodigies, we are told of enough, both by Joſephus and Tacitus, l. 5. 
the latter tells us, that Armics were ſeen fighting in the Air, with 
gliſtring Armour ; and the Temple ſeemed all as on Fire with Light- 
ning; he alſo tells vs of the Voice heard,and throwing open of the doors 
of the Temple before mentioned ; but telleth us few were affetted, 
but built Hopes upon a Tradition they had, That now was the time 
ut valeſceret Orjens z which was true enough, but not in their Senſe. 
But what is ſpoken here, certainly relates to the Day of Fudgment, be- 
_ which prodigious things will be ſeen, 2 Pet. 3- 10, 12. and 1t 

ollowt, 


27 And then ſhall they ſee the Son of man * coming in 
a cloud with power and great glory. 

Sce the Notes on Matth. 24. 30. Maik 13: 26. 

28 And when theſe things begin to come to paſs, then 
look up, and lift up your heads; for * your redemption 
draweth nigh. 

Matthew ſcereth to expound this, ch. 24. 31. ſo doth Mark, . 
13. 27. both ſpeak to the ſame ſenſe. And he ſhall ſend his Angels, 
with 4 great ſound of a Trumpet, and they ſhall gather together bis 
Ele& from the four winds, from one end of Heaven to the other. This 
is certainly to be underſtood of the Day of Judgment, when the Saints 
fhall be glorified as the Sons of God by Adoption, and obtain the Re- 
ademption of the Body, Rom. 8. 23- | 

29 And he ſpake to them a parable, Behold the fig- 
tree, and al] the trees; | 

30 When they now ſhoot forth, ye fee and know of 
your own ſelves, that ſummer is now nigh art hand. 

31 So likewiſe ye, when ye ſee theſe things come to 
pals, know ye that the kingdom of God is nigh at hand. 

32 Verily ] ſay unto you, This generation ſhall not 
pals away, till all be fulfilled, 

33 * Heaven and earth ſhall paſs away : but my 
words ſhall not paſs away. 

We had this ſame Parable both in Matthew and Mar, See the 
Notes on Matth. 24. 32. and Mark 13. 2 


fulfilled in the 
and for 


34 And * take heed to your ſelves, leſt at any time 
your hearts be overcharged with ſurfeiting and drunken- 
nels, and cares of this life, and ſo that day come upon 
you unawares, 

35 For* as a ſnare ſhall it come on all them that dwell 
on the face of the whole earth. 

36 Watch ye therefore, and * pray always that you 
may be accounted worthy to eſcape all theſe things thar 
ſhall come ro pais, and to ſtand before the Son of 
man. 

I take the thirty fourth Verſe to be a good Expoſition of the term 
Watch, v. 39. Avoid Sin induftriouſly 1n a-profpett of my coming 
to Judgment : for Sin is compared to Sleep, Rom. 13. 1. and Eph, 
5. 14. and as he that watcheth doth not only wake, but ſetteth him- 
felf detignedly to forbear S'ecp, in order to ſome end ; ſo he who 
&cepeth the Spirirual Watch, mult ſet himſelf deiignedly to avoid Sin, 
upcn a proſpect ot Chriſt's coming, and the uncertainty of it. Par- 
ticularly he cautioneth his Diſciples againſt Luxuiy, and Worldly- 
mindedneſs. The firſt he expreſſcth under the notions of Gluttony 
and Drunkennefs, which arc two eminent ſpecies of it. The latter 
under the notion of the cares of this Life ; not neceſſary and provident 
Cares, but ſupertuous and diftratting Cares, Theſe things he pret- 
ſeth them to avoid, !cft they ſhould be ſurprized by Crit $ coming, 


_ OT a 9__ 


Chap. XXl 


hap 


as he tells them the moſt of the World would be. He further cx 
horteth them to pray always, the ſenſe of which Precept we lhewed (ts 2: 
largely in our Notes on chap. 18. 1. He further preiſcth both they & 4 
Duties in thoſe words. | That you may be accounted worthy to eſe Mn 
all theſe things that ſhall come to paſs, ] i. e. Thoſe that ſhou! come pe 
paſs at or before the Deſtruftion of Feruſalem, or afterward. © wu 
ftand before the Son of man ] that is, in the laſt Judgment; £; HE 
ungodly ſhall nnt Stand in the Fudgment ; nor Sinners in the Congye ch 
of the Righteous, Plal. 1.6. | & 2 0"eo0R 
37 * And inthe day time he was teaching in the tem. * on ; 
ple, and at night he went out, and abode in the moune, 2 IF 
that is called the mount of olives. , 
38 Andall the people came early in the morning to hin 
in the temple for to hear him. 
In theſe two Verſes our Evangeliſt letteth us know how Chris 
ſpent thoſe few Days which he had yet to live. In the Day-time h | 
was in the Temple preaching. In the Evening he was on the Moy : 
of Olives praying, to teach all thoſe, who as under-Shepherds "ra 
from him who is the true and chief Shepherd, how they ſhoulq 
ſpend their time, preaching and praying. Tho the Scribes ang Pha | 
riſees and Sadducees, and the chiet of the Jews, maligned and deſpiſed | 
him - yet many of the People paid him a due reſpe&t, and came ear}, ; 
in the morning to hear him. In the Worlds Reception, and "ng 
tainment of Chriſt, that of the Apoſtle was verified, Not many rich 
not many wiſe, &c, but the poor of this world hath God choſen. , | 
CHAP. XXII. þ 
Toe Rulers conſpire to kill Chriſt, 1, 2. Satan tempteth Fudg t; be. 
tray him, 3 6. Chriſt commandeth Peter and Fobn tq Prepare F 
the Paſſover, 7 ——13. Eateth it with his Diſciples : Inftituteth j;; | 
laſt Supper, 14 20, Fudas's treachery foretold, 21 —— 23, His "'Y; . 
advice ro his Diſciples, 24——30. Wameth them all, eſpecially pe. : 
ter, of Satans Temptation, 31———-38. Praying on the Mount, he is Y 
JStrengthned by an Angel, 35—44. Exhorteth his Diſciples to watch il 
and pray, 45, 45 few betrayed by Fudas, 479—49. One of them hn. 13+ 
cuts off the ear of the Hiz' Prieſts Servant ; # again cured by Chriſt | 
50 53» Peter denzeth him thrice, 54 60. He lamenteth hi 4 n he 
fall, 61, 62, Chriſt before the Fewiſh Council, confeſſeth he i ths ar 
Son of God, 63 7. s \ 
df}; 
I OW the feaſt of unleavened bread drew nigh, «Aw 
| which is called the Pafſover. % 
. 2 And * the chief prieſts and ſcribes ſought how they * Plz the 
might kill him; for they feared the people. oh. 11 " 
See the Notes on Matth. 26. 1, 2, 3,4, 5. and on Marb 14, wr, *41 boy 
I, 2. . 
niſl 
3 *X Then entred Satan into Judas ſurnamed Iſcariot, * Mit: on 
being of the number of the twelve. 14,161 Chr 
And h - Mark 1s "Net 
4 And he went his way, and communed with the, God 
| chief prieſts and captains, how he might betray him unto jy 1, for 1 
them, er T ha 
5 And they were glad, and covenanted to give him LE 
money. 
, : them 
'6 And he promiſed, and ſought opportunity to betray, . inth 
him unto them & in the abſence of the multitude. 16 Chur 
7 Then came the day of unleavened bread, when the © * = 
paſſover muſt be killed. _ 
8 And he ſent Feter and John, ſaying, Go and prepare ſerve 
us the paſſover, that we may eat. | of 
9 And they ſaid unto him, Where wilt thou that we rem 
prepare ? "_p 
10 And he faid unto them, Behold, when ye are en- Sr 
tred into the city, there ſhall a man meet you, bearing _— 
a pitcher of water ; follow him into. the houſe where he Fe 
entreth in, = 
11 And ye ſhall ſay unto the good man of the houſe, 
The maſter {aich unto thee, Where is the gueſt-chamber, kg 
where [ ſhall eat the paſſover with my diſciples ? ; ſpoke: 
12 And he ſhall ſhew you large upper room furniſh: the x 
ed : there make ready. Chriſt 
13 And they went and found as he ſaid unto them : Gott 
and they made ready the paſſover. That i 
14 And when the hour was come, he ſat down, and tne time, 
twelve apoſtles with him. formin, 
Sce the Notes on Matth, 26. 17,18, 19. and on Mark 14: 12: = _ 
; Met 
15 And he faid unto them, || With deſire [ have deſired (0 James 
to eat this paſſover with you, before I ſuffer. RY of the 
a . f dejtred. Kine; 
16 Forf{ ſay unto you, I will not any more eat there! 2ppoin 
until it be fulfilled in the kingdom of God. Ry the Tir 
17 And he took the cup and gave thanks, and 1aid, here, a 
Take this, and divide ie among your ſelves. Ss ay Cot 
18 For I ſay unto you, I will not drink of the fruit 0 Fang 
the vine, until the kingdom of God ſhall come. | »ferms 
19 And he took bread, and gave thanks, and brake /'» and Dis 
and gave unto them, ſaying, This is my body which 1s 
given for you: this do in remembrance of me. _ T $0.% * 
20 Likewite alſo the cup afcer ſupper, fayivs, = uh w_ 
cup 5s the new teſtament in my blood, which 15 ſhed for ay 
ou. FE 
« 0A not 
21 * But behold, the hand of him that tetrayern me, *- ws : 
i with me on the cable. Dy ZI 
22 {} 58 


Wi 


1D. 
4 22 And truly the Son of man goeth * as ir was de- 


C termined :\ but wo unto that. man by whom heis betray- 


d. | 
T 23 And they began toenquire among themſelves, which 
of them it was that ſhoufd do this ching. 

See the Notes on Matth. 26. from. wv. 20. tov. 30. where is 
ened whatſoever Luke 'hath, that is rot in the other 
Evanzelilts. : : 

24 And there was alſo a ſtrife among them, which of 
"= them ſhould beaccounced the preateft. 

Lube only taketh notice.of this {trife, at the time of their being in 

the Gueff-Chamber. Such a ſtrife we read of, Matth. 18. 1. Q 20. 

26, 26- Mark 9. 33- and in this Goſpel, Chap. 9. 45. by which 

it is apparent, that they had been more than once arguing this point. 

But yet moſt Interpreters think that it 1s here placed by Zuke out of 
order, and ſome tranſlate 84y2]» in this Text, There had been, not 

there wa, and indeed we can hardly think ſo uncharitably of the 
Apoſtles, as to imagine of them, tliat umm. diately after their recet1- 

ving, firſt the Paſſover, then the Lcy4's Supper, their thoughts ſhould 

he taken up with things of this nature, much leſs that they ſhould dif- 
courſe of any ſuchSubjetts as theſe,efpecially alſo conſidering what our 
Saviour had told them, tliat he was betrayed into the Hands of Sin- 

ners: Something of our Saviour's Anſwer prefſing upon them Bro- 
therly Love, and mutyal Serviceablegeſs, each to other, was very 
proper to this time, which-our Saviour (tho ſpoken before) might 

at this time repeat, and Luke prefatorily to it might take notice of 

this conteſt in this place. 

25 And he faid unto them, The kings of the Gentiles ex- 
erciſe lordſhip over them. ; and they that exerciſe au- 
thority upon them, are called benefactors. 

« 26 But'ye ſhall not be ſo : * bur he that is greateſt among 
ou, let.him be as the younger ; and he that is chief, as he 

that doth ſerve, 

bn.13- 27 For whether 7 greater, he that fitteth at meat, or 
1 he thatſerveth ? not he that ſitteth at meat? but * Il am 


* - among you as he that ſerveth. 


\ See the Notes on Matth, 20. 25, 26, 27, -28, The Sum 1s, Our 
*$viour hereby teacheth all his Diſcip'es (his Miniſters eſpecially) to 
bn AﬀetQation of Rule and Dominion, as that which became 
h nrathzr than Chriſtians, and the Kings of the Gentiles, ra- 
ther'than the Miniſters of the Lord Jeſus Chriſt. This Text giveth 


> 


WſÞ 5+ 


on no Countenance to the levelling of all orders of Men. Magiſtracy is 
_ | anordinance of God, and ought to be upheld. Order alſo in the 
*47] | Church isto be obſerved, for God 15 the Gad of order; but no NMi- 


niſter of Chriſt ought to affet great Titles, nor to Exerciſe a Domini- 
on or Lordſhip, 1 Pet. 5. 3. Our Work is to Feed the Floch of 
Chriſt, tabing the overſight of them not by Conſtraint, but willingly. 
Not for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind : Neither as being Lords over 
God's Heritage, but being Examples to the Flock, '2 Cor. 1. 24. Nit 
for that we have Dominion over your Faith, but - are helpers of your Foy. 
That the Miniſters of Chriſt may not have Titles given them, ſpeak- 
1ng Honour and Reverence due to them, I 4o not know. But the 
reaſon 15 obvious, why they ſhould not affect them ro be fond of 
them : for Pride is a vain and vicious Aﬀetion, and more culpable 
| inthem than others. Their Works are but- a *'iniftration to the 
Nr, Church in putting the Laws of Chriſt relating to it in Exccution, 
tam and it 15 their greateſt Honour to be Humble, Nor doth this at all 
Degrade a Miniſter of Chriſt, for &v-n Chriſt himſelf while he was 
upon the Earth, was not as one that ſate at Meat, but as one that 
ſerved, 


28 Ye are they which have continued with me in my 
temptations. 
4 29 And * appoint unto you a kingdom, as my father 
hath appointed unto me. ' 
2 30 That ye may eatand drink at my table in my king- 
, wy and * fir on thrones, judging the twelve tribes of 11- 
rael, | 


, Theſe Verſes em to contain (though in a few more Words) the 

ſubſtance of what we met with, Matth. 19. 28, There they are 

ſpoken as an anſwer to Peter, ſpeaking on the behalf of himſelf, and 

the reſt of the Apoſtles, who had forſaken all to follow Chriſt. 

Chriſt tells them there, that thoſe which had followed him in the Re-, 

generation, when the Son of Man ſhnuld ſit on the Throne of his Glory, 

ſhould fit upon twelve Thrones, judging the twelve Tiibes of Iſrael. 

That time which our Lord there calleth the Regeneration, is the 

time, when he had been giving a new Pirth to the Church, Re- 

forming the World by bis Dotrine and holy Example. That time he 

here caleth the time of his Temptation, by which he meaneth Tryals, 

0 Aims and Perſecutions, as the Word is often taken in holy Writ, 
| Or, 10 ames 1. 82, Gal. 4.14. 2 Pet. 2. 0. Rev. 3. 10. To thoſe 
heavily of the Diſciples (they were eleven of the tweive_) he promiſeth a 
deſtr2a. Kingdom, a State of great Honour, and Dignity, as his Father had 
appornted him 3 and therefore they might ſatisfie themſeives with 
the Titles and Qualities of Miniſters and Servants while they were 
here, and be content to me et with Troubles and Temptations, as he 
ad done, t; Hunger and Thirff, &. When that time came which 
he had appointed, they ſhould then Eat and Drink at his Table, they 
ſhud fit alſy upon Thrones, "judging the twelve Tribes of Iſrael x 
»Terms expreſſive of that Ref and Satisfa&%im, that Glory, Honour, 
and Dignity, which the Saints of God ſhall in Heaven be poſleſled of. 


XXII S.. LURE 


 . And the Lord faid, Simon, Simon, behold, 

| 5% _ hath deſired to have you, that he nay ſifr you as 
Wneat, 

32 But I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail 


> Plc "0; and When thou art converted, ſtrengthen thy bre- 
ren, 


4m 


Our Lord direReth his Speeeh to Peter, 25 one who (as it wi'l Hy 
and by appear) had a greater confidence of himſelf than the reſt op- 
pretled, and as one who he foreſaw would fall more fovlly than the 
reſt, though it appears, that in his Speech he had a rcfoett to them all 
= the Word 7ou is in the Plural Number, The Devi: hid a mind to 
po = Neg all by his Temptations ( chat is here called Sifting 

marie nath Nis Fan in his Hand, and will Sift his Church, but hijs 
Sifting 15 to purge his Floors, he Sifts a particular Sou!, to purific it 
from its Luſts and Corruptions, but Satan fiftcth the Soul and the 
Church meerly to give them trouvle, and to keep them from reſt 
and quiet by continual Motion and Agitation. This we are all con- 
cerned to take notice of, that we may both be continually prepared 
for the tim? of our Siftings: and bleſs Gd who doth not ſitisge Sa- 
tans defires to fift us ; for he hath the ſame ming to winnow us now 
that he had to ſift Peter and the reſt of the Apoſtles, Bat Craith 
our Saviour) | T have prayed that thy Faith fail nt.) There is a total and 
4 partial failing of Faith. Peter's Faith did fail in part : ut the Soer of 
God did yet abide in him ; his Faith did not wholly fail ſo will it be 
with the Faith of every true Diſciple of Ckritt, '5n hours of great 
Temptation and Tryal, their Faith may, as to ſome degrees, fail 
but totally it ſhall not. They may be perverted, but thev ſhall again 
be converted. What the Apoſtic ſaith of the Bodies of the Saints 
Rom. 8. 10, 11, Andif Chiif be in you, the By4; us Dead becauſe of 
Sm, but the Spirit is Life, becauſe of Rizhtewſneſs. But if the Spirit af 
him that raiſed up Feſus ſrom the Dead, dwell in vol, he that raj'ed up 
Cinijt from the Dead ſhall alſo quicken your Mirtal Bodies by his Spirit 
that dwelleth in you, may allo be ſaid of their Souls. Tiicy have in 
them a Body of Death, and they may in an hour of great Temptations 
tail, and their gracious Habits may ſeem to dic; but if the Spirit of 
God dwelleth in the Soul, he will again quicken their Souls by his 
Spirit which dwelleth in them. ( And when thou ait Converted 
ſtrengthen thy Brethren. ] That is, when God hath recovered thee 
from thy fall, and made thee to ſee thy Error,make an improvement 
of thy recovery out of the ſnare of the Devil, by admonithing others 
to fake heed of too much confidence in themſelves, and Incouraging 
them not to deſpair tho they alſo may fall into Temptatio+; but that 
the Grace of God ſhall be ſufficient for them 


33 And he ſaid untohim, Lord, Tam ready to go with 
thee both into priſon, and to death. 
34 And he aid, I tell thee, Peter, the cock ſhall not crow 


elt me. 


This 1s more largely recorded by Matth. Ch. 25. 33 3 i, 35. and by 
Mark, Ch. 14. 27, 28, 29, 30. Sce the Notes on th..5 o/aces. 


they ſaid, — 

36 Then faid he unto them, But now he that hath 
a purſe, let him take jr, and likewiſe h# ſcrip : and he 
that hath no ſword, ſet him {ell his garment, and buy 
one. 

37 For] fay unto you, that this that is written, muſt 


38 And they faid, Lord, behold, here are two ſwords. 


And he ſaid unto them, lt is enough. 
Thoſe who interpret, wv. 35, 3S. as a Precept of our Saviour's 
impoſing a Duty upon his Diſciples : or a Counſel concerning the 
providing Arms which they might uſe for the prote&ion ard de- 
fence of themſelves, will not oniy find a difficulty to reconcile their 
notion of it to ſevera! other precepts, and the Will of God deelired 
by the Apoſtles practice, who never went about by force, and Arms 
to defend themſelves in the firſt Plantation and Propagation of the 
Goſpel : but alſo to Reconcile it to the laſt Words of our Saviour, 
who ſaid, when his biſciples told him they had two Swords, I: 5 
enough, Which he would never have faid, if he had intended any 
ſuch thing; for two Swords was much too little to hive Conquered 
that Multitude of Adverſaries, which the Diſciples of Chriſt were to 
meet with, Our Saviour doth doubtiefs ſpeak 1n a Figure, and all 
that he intendeth amounteth but to this. Hitherto I have been with 
you, and you have had my ſpecial protettion ; though you went out 
without a Purſe, or a Scrip, yet you have wanted nothing ; though 
you went without a Sword, yet none did you any harm. But the 
time is now come, when the poſture of your Aﬀairs will be much al- 
tered; your Friends will be few, your Enemies many, therefore 
you ſtand concerned to make as good Preparation as you can do in 
thoſe things that are conſiſtent with the general precept that I have 
given you. The Tragedy will begin with me ; for what is written 
of me muſt now be accompliſhed, Tſaiad 53. 12. He was numbred 
amongſt the Tranſereſſors; 1 muſt be brought before Magiſtrates 2s 4 
common Malefa&or, and hanged on a Croſs betwixt rwo Thieves. 
[ And the things concerning me ſhall ſhortly have an end: ] you will 
next come upon the ſtage, and therefore prepare what in you ly=th 
for the performance of your part. 

39 * And he came out, and went, as he was wont, to 


the mount of Olives; and his diſciples alio followed 
him. 

Both Matthew and Mark fay, he went to the place called Gethje- 
mane, but that mak«s no difference, for whether Gethſemane bgmnun- 
etha Village, or a Garden, ora Valley, ail agree it was at the F vt 
of the mount of Olives. It was a place to which our Saviour had 
uſed to go ever fince he came to Safes, and Jay m his way to 
Bethany. He went thither to pray; and his Dilciplcs followed hm. 


Pray, that ye enter nor into cemptation. Ee> 
When he came to the Mount of Olives, he firſt ſetteth liis Diſcro'es 
t» that Work, which at this Day was propzr for them. [ Pray 


that ye inter net into Temptation, ] that if it be the Wull of Gd, you 
: may 


this day, before that thou ſhalt thrice deny thar thou know- | 


* Mat, 


3 
v 
3 


4 


lark. 


I, 


Chap. XXII 


35 And he ſaid unto them, * When 1 ſent you with. * Mat. 10, 
out purſe, and ſcrip, and ſhoes, lacked ye any thing ? And 9+ 


yet be accompliſhed in me, * And he was reckoned among * Mark Is 
the tranſgreſſours : For the things concerning me have an 23. 
end, 


14: 


40 And when he was at the place, he {aid unto them, * * Mats 26. 


— 
wo g —_ 
. _— 
I _— = he + -— uh. 7 
- — ” 
9% 
þ = 


Chap, XXII. 
be delivercd from ſuch an Hour of Try as 
be overcome by it. 


may 1 am entring into 5 
or at leaſt that you may not be over 
which you will preſently be Witnelles unto, and your own which 


you ſhall hereafrer meet with, may have no Power upon you tO 
withdraw you from your Work in the Publication, or Profeſſion of 
my Goſpel, The other two Evangelifts make mention of our Savt- 
our's taking Peter, and Fames, and 7ohn with him, yet more pT1- 
ratcly. Lube mentioneth not that, but goeth on. 

1 * And he was withdrawn from them about a ſtones 


caſt, and kneeled down and prayed, 

Whether from the Eight, or from Peter, 
the Evangelift doth not tell us ; but ſome are of opinio 
took the three Ditciples along to joyn with him in Prayer, 
whom ſome acccunt might- be given of the ſubftance of his Pray@T, 
which followeth. TI rather think he was alone. 

42 Saying, Father, if thou be Þ willing, 
cup from me * nevertheleſs not my will, 


done. 

We have a larger account given us of cur Saviour's Pr 
by Matthew and Mark, Matth. 26. from 25. to 46+ 
14- fromv. 35. to 42. See the Notes there. 


43 And there appeared an angel unto him from heaven, 


ſtrengthening him. 
44 * Andbeing in an agony, he prayed more earneſtly, 
and his ſweat was as it were great drops of blood falling 
down to the ground. 
We have formerly opened theſe Verſes in our Notes, on Matth. 
26. 44, 45, 46. where we took them in, as being a part of the Hi- 
ſtory of our Saviour's praying before his paſſion. 


45 And when he aroſe up from prayer, and was come to 
his diſciples, he found them ſleeping for ſorrow. 
46 And faid unto them, Why fleep ye? riſe, and pray, 


leſt ye enter into temptation. 

The Relations which Matthew and Math give us, are both more 
particular, than that given us by Luke, to which we refer the Rea- 
der. Lube ſpeaketh but of his praying once. Matthew faith he pray- 
ed thrice. Lube mentioneth nothing of his withdrawing with Peter, 
James and John, from the other Eight, Matthew and Mark, both 
mention it. Lube maketh mention of an Angels appearing to him, 
of the Agony in which he was, and his Sweating drops as tt were of 
Blond, which neither Matthew nor Mark take notice of, yet we muſt 
not think, that either any one of the Evangeliſts,or all of them together, 
give a perfe account of all the Words our Saviour. vſed 1n theſe 
Prayers, only they tell us the Sum of them in different Words : but 
ſee the Annotations on Matth. 45. 39. and Mark. 14. where we 
have fully conſidered whatſoever 15 ſaid by any of the Evangeliſts up- 
on this Argument. 

47 And while he yet ſpake, * behold, a multicude and 
he'that was called Judas, one of the twelve, went before 
them, and drew near unto Jefus, to kiſs him, 

48 But Jeſus faid unto him, Judas, betrayeſt thou the 


Son of man with a kiſs * 
Sec the Notes on Matth. 25. 47, Gyc. and Mark 14. 43. 


49 When they which were about him, ſaw what would 
follow, they {aid unto him, Lord, ſhall we ſmite with the 


{word ? 

50 And one of them * {mote the ſervant of the high 
prieſt, and cut off his right ear. 

51 And Jeſus anſwered and faid, Suffer ye thus far. And 


he touched his ear, and healed him. 

No -ther Evangeliſt but 79bn hath this paſſage perfet. What he 
hath we have opened 1n our Notes on Matth. 26. 51, 52. becauſe 
it tendeth to compleat thet part of the Hiſtory there diſcourſed, con- 
cerning Chriſt's being apprehended. Fohn relates it with more Cir- 
cumftances, tclling us that it was Peter who drew the Sword, and 
that his Name whoſe Ear was cut off, was Malchus,and relateth ſome 
further Words uſcd by our Saviour to Peter, which we ſhall further 
conſider in their places. This raſh a& of Peter might have coſt him 
dear, for it made a Kinſman of Malchzs take ſuch notice of him, as 
he was very near being accuted by him, John 18. 26, Swords are 
dangerous things for us to uſe, until God puts them into our Hands. 
Peter ought not only to have asked his Maſter if he ſhould ſmite with 
the Sword ; but alfo to have ſtaid his Hand till Chriſt had given him 
an Anſwer. 


ames and John allo, 
», that he 
rom 


; remove this 
4 Gr. wil- ' 
ling fo re- but thine be 
NISC. 
* John. 5. 


30. 


ayer, both 
and Mark 


* John. 12. 


27. 
Heb. ge. 7» 


* John 18. 
Yo 


+ Mark. 14+ 


47 
john 18. 
10, If. 


'$2 Then Jeſus ſaid unto the chief prieſts, and cap- 
tains of the temple, and the elders which were come to 
him, Be ye come out as againſt a thief, with ſwords and 
ſtaves ? 

53 Whenl wasdaily with you inthe temple, ye ſtretch. 
ed forth no hands againſt me : but this is your hour, and 
the power of darkneſs. | 

See the Notes on Matth.' 26. 6g. and Mark 1 

l 26. $& « 4+ 48 9. It 
ſpeaketh a great dezree of Rage and Malice againſt our a Wu that 
lo great Men, as the Chief of the Pricſts, and the Elders ſhould come 
out at MiJ-melit, in the Company of the Officers and Souldiers 


to apprehend Chriſt. From theſe Verſes it appearcth that ſome of 
them were there $a. the height of their Zeal. 


' $4 Then took they him, and led h;»r, and brought him 
m4 the high prieſts houſe® And Peter followed afar 
: 


55 And when the 
hall, and were ſet d 
them: 


y had kindled a fire in the midſt of the 
own together, Peter fate down among 


&:-LUKE. 


That my Tryals | and earneſtly looked upon him, and ſaid, 
alſo with him, 


Chap. XX up 


ſat by . the fire 
This man Was 


56 But a certain maid beheld him a he 
; 4 : 

57 And he denyed him, ſaying, Woman know hin 

not. | Ones | 

53 Andafter alittle while, another ſaw him, an 

Thou art alſo of them. And Peter ſaid, Ma 

nor, 14 


d ſaid, 
n [ am 


9 And ahout the ſpace of one hour after, :arioth 

fidently affirmed, ſaying, Of a truth this 

with him ; for he is a Galilean. 

60 And Peter ſaid, Man, I know not what thoy "0 

eſt. And immediately while he yet ſpake, the as 

crew. | 

61 And the Lord turned, and looked upon pet: 

and Peter remembred the word of the Lord, how he ha 

ſaid unto him, Before the cock crow, thou ſhalt deny me 

thrice. | 

62 And Peter went out, and wept bitterly, 

See the whole Hiftory of Peter's denial of his Maſter, and of hi; Re. 

pentance, in our Notes on Matth. 26. from v. 69. to the eng 
where we have opened what paſſages relating to it, are in Math of thi; 

Evangeliſt. 

L 63 And the men that held Jeſus, mocked him, and mg; 
im. 

64 And when they had blindfolded him, they ſtroke hin 

on the face, and asked him, ſaying, Propheſie, 'who is ir 

that ſmore thee ? 


er Con- 
fellow allo was 


65 And many other things blaſphemouſly ſpake they 
againſt him, 

Concerning theſe abuſes offered to our Saviour, See the Notes on 
Matthew 26. 67, 68. and Mark 14.68. 

66 * And afſoon as it was day, the elders of the pec.+yy . 
ple; and the chief prieſts, and the ſcribes, came together, 27.1, 1 
and led him into their counſel, Mark 

67 Saying, Art thou the Chriſt ? tell us. And he fi 

, , John, e 
unto them, If I tell you, you will not believe. WP 4 

68 AndifIalfo ask yox, you will not anſwer me, norls 
me $0. rl 

69 Hereafter ſhall the Son of man fit on the right hand tt 
of the power of God, 

70 Then ſaid they all, Art thou then the Son of God ? nd : 
he ſaid unto them, * Ye ſay that I am. F YU ” 

71 And they ſaid, What need we any further witneſs? 6 
for we our ſelves have heard of his own mouth. - 
| Our bleſſed Lord before his Death paiſed two Trials or Examinz hi 
tions. The one before the Jewiſh Sanhedrim, whoſe proper Province 
was to try ſuch as were accuſed as falſe Prophets, or Blaſphentr, R 
This was a kind of Ecclefiaſtical Court, The High Prieft was the = 
chief Zudze in it, and we are told that they uſed to fit in his Pilace, | 
The other was before Plate the Roman Governour of Fudea, at thit | 
time, he principally took cogniſance of criminal things, ſuch eſpeci "x 
ally as concerned the peace of the Country, conſidered as a pur of _ 
the Roman Empire, Theſe verſes give an account only of the former, Th 
Blaſphemy was the crime they charged upon him. We cannot from d ' 
any one Evangeliſt have a full account of either of them. In cur = 
Notes on Matthew 26. from wv. 57. to 697. we have fully conft- 2, 
dered what all the Evangeliſts ſay. See the Notes on that place. , - 

CHAP. XXII. Pen 
Chriſt accuſed before Pilate, is fund guiltleſs, 1—5, He i (at # ns 
Herod, 7—1o. Is mocked and ſent back, again, 11, 12. Pilatehy Gap 
the Importunity of the Fews, delivereth him to be crucified, and in Wh 
his ſtead releaſeth Barabbas, 13—25. They compel Simm a Cytt- Law 
nian to bear his Croſs, 26. He is crucified between two Tyieves, ant Cap 
he prayeth for them : He 4s reviled on the Croſs, 27—37. The and 
perſcription of the Croſs, 38. One of the Thieves revile him, tht ſaid 
other converted, and comforted by him, 39—43. Chriſt's Death and the 

Burial, 44—46. Oth 

N D the whole multitude of them aroſe, and led o_ 
hun unto Pilate, | ble, 

2 And they began to accuſe him, ſaying, We found his 
this fe/ow perverting the nations ; and forbidding t0 give wa 
tribute to Ceſar, ſaying, that he himfelf is Chrilt BE 
King. | Ver 1 

3 And Pilate asked him, ſaying, * Art thou the King # wit oo 
ofthe Jews? And he anſwered him, and faid, Thou fay- 27 wy 
eſt it. | w thief 

4 Then ſaid Pilateto the chief prieſts, and to the peo- 1h 7h 
ple, I find no fault inthis man, _ ing, 

5 And they were the more fierce, ſaying, He ſtirrech VP |, Dye, 
the people, teaching throughout all Jewry ; beginning from: Fs 
Galilee to this place. : wt _ 

6 When Pilate heard of Galilee, he asked whether {9% and fe 
man were a Galilean. | 1.*( f0 del 
- 7 Andaſſoonas he knew that he belonged to * __ Fe 
juriſdiction, he fent him'to Herod, who himſelf was 3119 © _ - 


Jeruſalem at that time, 


8 nd 


Xl 


wp. XXIIL 


AY 


3 And when Herod ſaw Jeſus, he was exceeding glad : 


for he * was de(irous rolee him of a long ſeafon, becauſe he 


ÞP7""" 11d heard many things of him; and he hoped to have ſeen 


U 


4 
n 


d 18, 


vr 16 


18, 


JG 


{ome miracle done by him. 
9 Then he queſtioned wich him in many words; bur he 
anſwered him nothing. 


ly accuſed him. 2 

11 And Herod with his men of war fet him at nought, 
and mocked him, and arayed him in a gorgeous robe, and 
ſent him again to Pilate. 
| 12 And the lame day * Pilate and Herod were made 
friends rogether ; for before they were at enmity between 


themlelves. 


1s 13 * And Pilate when he had called together the chief 


prieſts and rulers, and the people, 

14 Said unto them, ye have brought this man unto 
me, as one that pervertech the people ; and behold, 1 
having examined h1m Lefore you, have found no fault 
- this man touching thoſe things whereof ye accuſe 
im}, 

' 15 No, nor yet Herod : for I ſent you to him, and lo» 
nothins worthy of death is done unto him. 

16 | will ckerefore chaſtiſe him, and releafe hi. 

17 o * of neceſſity he muſt releaſe one unto them at 
the fealt. = 

13 And * they cried out all at once, ſaying, Away with 
this 127, and releale unto us Barabbas : 

i9 (Who fora certain fedicion made in the city, and for 
murder was caſt inco priton) 

20 Pilate therefore willing to releaſe Jeſus, ſpake agarn 
to them, | 

21 But they cried, ſaying, Crucifile hizz, crucifie 
him, | 
22 And heſaid unto them the third time, Why, what 
evil hath he done ? I have found no cauſe of death in him: I 
will therefore chaſtife him, and ler him go : 

23 Andthey were inſtant with loud voices, requiring 
thar he might be crucified : and the voice of them, and of 
the chief prieſts prevailed. 


bis 24 Aud X Pilate gave ſentence th:t it ſhould be as they 


required. 

25 Andhe releaſed unco chem, him that for {edition and 
murder was calt into priſon, whom they had defired ; bur 
hedelivered Jelus ro their will. 


The fatory of our Saviour's Examination and Tryal, before P7- 
late the Roman Governms of Juzea, is recorded by all four Evange- 
++, nor can it be dittin&y and perfeftly underſtood, without the 
»2r13g together of what they all ſay, which we did 1n our Notes 
»:,1t/v. 27. from wv. 1. to v. 27. where our Reader will 
fad ail ſuch paſſages opened, as occur in any of the Evangeliſts 
about it, and ftand in need of explication, See the Notes there. 
The High Prieſts, and the Chief Priefts, and the Elders, had before 
d&termined our Saviour Gailty of Death for Blaſphemy; they ſtoned 
Steen 1n that caſe, A#s 7. 59, witkout carrying him before the 
Roman Governou#? at all, that we read of in that Hiſtory z how came 
it to paſs that they did not ſo by our Saviour, but make a double 
work of it 2 1. Some think fir that that was rather done in a tumult, 
though he was carried before the Council, 4:fs 6. 12. than 1na re- 
gular judicial wav, for Conquerors in thoſe times, though they 
ſoinctimes a!lowed the Nations conquered Courts of judicature 
herein they jadgcd in ordinary matters according to their own 
Las, and had judges of thcir own Nations, yet ordinarily reſerved 
Capits! Ca/zs to the cogniſance of Governours conſtituted by them 
and this ſeemeth confirmed by Foha 18, . 31. where when Plate 
ſaid, Take ye Lim, and judge him according to your Law, we read that 
the Jews replyed, It is not Lawfal for us to put any to Death. 2. 
Others thizk that they had a Power to put to Death, but 1t was not 
Lawful for them to Put any to Death 4þ9n the Feaſt Day. _ It was now 
he firſt day of Unleavened Bread, But the former ſeemeth more proba- 

C 3. Or was it becauſe they had Sedition and Treaſon - to lay to 
his charge, which were -crimcs cognoſcible only before the Roman 
Governoyy ? and pofiibly they were willing enough (knowing the 
Reputation our Saviour had with the People) to lay the Odium of his 

eat) upon Pilate, rather than take it upon themſelves, 4. Whate- 
ver were the cauſes, it is moſt certain that it could be no otherwiſe 
hat all Rightcouſneſs might be fulfilled, not a Word of what our Sa- 
VIouriaid could paſs away 3. he ha-' roretold Matth. 20. 19. Mark 
IC. 33. Like 18. 32. that he ſhould not only be betrayed. to the 
bref Prieſts and Scribes, and by them be Condemned ty Death, but 
that he ſhould be delivered to the Gertiles, to Mich. and to Scourge, 
and to Cructfiez and indeed that way of putting to Death by Crucify- 
_ could only be done by the Gentzles, and that Death he was to 
__ In the Hiſtory of our Saviour's examination before Pilate in 
h— 1. How much more Juſtice and Equity-our Saviour 

rom a Heathen, than- from the Jewiſh Church-men, tne latter 
2 o_—_ him without any Proof after all attempts of ſfubornation, 
ry _— him and ſer himat liberty, 2+ How deſperate the hatred 
; ” groweth: upon the account of Religion, 10 the hearts of wick- 
ang wn they prefer a Perſon guilty of the higheſt Immoralities, 
ebaucheries, ' viz, Seditim and Zurder, before the: molt irino- 


L 


94d 


Mt P-3{on that vor iived, ivho differed only from them 1n ſome 


S. LUKE 


| more fully, 
10 And the Chief prieſts and ſcribes ſtood and vehement- 


Chap. XXII, 


_ of Religion, at! thoſe chiefly relating to Traditions and Co: 211g 

= ut 1ndeed he interpreted the will of- Ged more firidiy tian 
1e!r Luſts would ſuffer them to interpret it, and lived anothe: kind 

of Life than they lived. Stridtnefs and Holineſs of Dofrine 25d Life {3-121 0k 

!s that which inrageth the Men of the World againſt the Preachers 4 BONN Hi gt: 

and Profeſſors of the Goſpel. But ſee the Notes on 2. tth, 27. pac 4 PH j [ 


= Pg” - 
»—-— wy —_ 
— = pe i ih = ww 
w—_ - . - > x 
> kW T% = TY > 
by 5 p a 
- - '£ - (mi 4 a. > 
== wk 6 : 
be a 7 —_— - 
"7, my 9" > "WP WP, a 
"22 >.» = = os 
2 Ce ISS ma 302 1 
os ers ys ne LE Se ne amet ae __ 
F4 £ _z 7 n_—_— ” 
- = LR " N 
DIET 
—— 
EE. FRY 


' 26 And as they led him away, they laid hold upon one Fe WE 3-4] 
—_ a Cyrenian, coming out of the country, and on { Wh A 
im they laid the croſs, that he might bear j+ after 1 WR.) ib! Re 
Jeſus. Tins. UL ſid 

See the Notes on Matth. 27. 32. Mark 


27 And there followed him a 
ple, and of women, which alſo 
him, 

= Bur Jeſus —_— unto 'nem, ſaid, Daughters of Te- 
rutatem, Weep not for me, but weep for ſelves ; and 
for your children. ; s PE OT En 

29 For hehold, the days are coming, in the which the 
ſhall ſay, Bleſſed are the barren, and the wombs that iv 
bare, and the paps which never gave ſuck. 


I'S 2TI, 


great company of peo- 
bewailed and lamented 


{eek ta deſtroy him right or wrong. Pilate u{eth all endeavours' 


30 * Then ſhall they begin ro ſay to the MOUNtatns, * ify, >, x5. 
Fall on us; and to the hills, Cover vs. Hoſ. 1c. 8. 
31 * Forifthey do theſe things in a green tree, what 8ev- 5- 16. 
ſhall be done in the dry ? oy 9. 6 | 

What is in theſe verſes is only found in this Evanzeliſt ; but being 3 25 
part of what happened in the way, while our Saviour was leading to | 
his Croſs, we hive before opened what is here in the Notes, on Matth, * a ein BR OT Oh 
25. 31, 32. They are another Prophecy of the dreadful Calami- &l 1 ABI fy 


tie*, which happened about forty years after this, at the Deſtruction TOR the wet. 
of Feruſalem. | | +. 


32 And there were alſo two other malefaCtours, lcd m4! 
wich him to be put to death. | 

33 And * when they were come to the place which is * Joh. 19. v 
called || Calvary, there they crucified him, and the ma- 17> 18 


—_—— 


lefaftours, one on the right hand, and the other on che |, - 
efr. Fol 


Mark faith here, The Scripture was fulfilled, which ſaith, And he 
was numbred with the Tranſgreſſms. We met with this before, both 
1n Matthew and Marh, See the Notes on Matth, 27. 33, and 38. 
andalſoon Mark 1 5. v. 27, 28. 

34 Then faid Jeſus, Father, forgive them ; for they * * At. 7. 60. 
know not what they do. And they parted his raiment, and '©%'-4+ 12: 
caſt lots. . AWY 

35 And the people ſtood beholding : And the rulers allo john 19. 
with them derided him, ſaying, He faved others; ler him 23, 
lave himſelf, if he be Chritt che choſen of God. 

36 And the foldiers allo mocked him, coming to him, 
and offering him vinegar, 

37 And ſaying, If chou be the king of the Jews fave thy 
elf. 

58 * Anda ſupericription alſo was written over him in * Mars 15- 
letters of Greek, and Latin, and Hebrew, T H1S IS -— 

THE KING OF THE JEWS. aj 

39 And one of the malefactors, which were hanged, 
railed on him, ſaying, If thou be Chriſt, ſave thy ſelf and 
US. 
40 But the other anſwering, rebuked him, aying, Doſt 
not thou fear God, ſeeing thou art in the fame candemna- 
tion ? 

41 And we indeed juſtly ; for we receive the due re- 
ward of our deeds : but this man hath done nothing amiſs. 

42 And hefaid unto Jeſus, Lord, remember me when 
thou comeſt into thy kingdom, 

43 And Jeſus {aid unto him, Verily I fay unto thee, To 
day ſhalt thou be wich me in paradiſe. 

44. And it was about the ſixth hour, and there was a 
darkneſs over all the ||earch, until the ninth hour. 

45 And the ſun was darkened, and the vail of the tem- 
ple was rent in the mids, 

46 And when Jeſus had cried with a loud voice, he faid, 
* Father, into thy hand I commend my ſpirit ; And having « pgy,.,_. 
ſaid thus, * he gave up the ghoſt. * Mat. 27. 

See the Notes on Matth. 27. 35, 35, tO Us 50. and on Maik 14- 

23. to 38. This part alſoof the Hiſtory of our Saviour's Paſſion, J0h-19+ 30> 
is beſt underſtood, by comparing together what all the Evanzeliſl s 
ſay, which W have before done in our Notes on Matthew, fo as we 
ſhall only obſerve ſome few things from it, as here recited, v. 35» 
And the People ſtood beholding, and the Rulers alſ» derided him, {aying, \ 
Matthew ch. 27. The chief Prieſts, Scyibes, and Elders, were there Rk 
mocking. So ſaith Mark 15. 3i. How doth Malice and Hatred for y 
Relivion ſake, not only outſhew Mens reaſon, but alſo all their M- 4 
ral Virtue - and make nothing accounted uncharitable, unjuſt, or 1n- 
decent to them, into whom this Devil hath once entred. To fav "14 
nothing of the injuſtice, and indecencies obvious to every Eye, which 2 


jj Or, Larne. 


— 
"5 > 


_ 


-» 

- 
we Irs 
Le INE 


theſe Men ſhewed upon our Saviour's examination, and Trial, It was q ; vr: 
now the Firi# Day of the Feaſt of Unleavened Bread, the Day following 419. 4h Wh 
the Paſſover Night ; or (as ſome think) the Preparation both for the uk by k 
Weekly Sabbath.and for the Paſſover, (tho the moſt judicious Interpre- "Wha #3 
ters be of the firſt Opinion) one of them 1t was ; be it which 1t would. 4100 8H 


Chap. XXUII. S. LUKE. Chap. Xx1 


If Atheiſm, and Irreligion had not been *.,the height amongſt cena ments ; and reſted the ſabbath day, * according to the *p,. 
People, had it been poſſible that the Hizh Prieſt, and the chief of re commandment. | a 
Prieſts, and the Rulers of the Jews, ſhould have ſpeat this Day, theft <ul the Notes on Matth. 29. 61. It is Beza's Obſervation 
whole time, from break of the Day till Noon, in accufing.or Condemn- theſe Verſes, That Chriſt, being oppoſed by the Devil 
ing Chriſt ? and then have ſpent the Afternoon, 1n mocking, and deri- inftruments, being now dead, leaveth two or three poor 
ding him on the Croſs as he was dying, breaking all Laws of _ it were in the Front of the Battel, inrending within a very 
ty, and decency, as well as Religion : Admitting Annas and Cap - without much ado, to Triumph over all theſe terrih] 
were not there, yet ſome of the chief of the Prieſts, the Scribes, and | |; . | 
the Elders, were certainly | ps and behaving aq _ oo 4 CHAP. XXIV. 

indecently than the common People : The People We: ; ; Wo 
 enfding him : Theſe were there michhe and deriding a dying | The Reſurreftion of _- ft, — to Mary Mardiene, and Fran v 
Perſon, But as we ſay in Philoſophy, Corrupti» optimi eſt peſſuma * two Angels, I 0; tell the * 96 they belteve mt, g=12, 
Do we ſhall find it true, that Men who are employed in ſacred things, Chriff —_ ime f to two -# "” Diſciples, in their journey to Bra. 
if the true fear of God be not in them to make them the beſt, they | mars, and in breaking of Bread, 13—32. They return to Feruſel om, 
are certainly the vilcſt and worſt of Men. We read of no rudenefſes _ ang ene cg the urn agg $3—39- Chriſt appearing 
offered to our Saviour dying, but from the Scribes, Chief Prieſts, to all bis Diſcizles, ſheweth them his hands and feet, and exe), -- 
Rulers, and Soldiers. Theſe verſes alſo afford us great Proof of the | their preſence, 36—43, Explaineth the Scripture ts them, ani 
immortality of the Soul; otherwiſe the penitent Thief could not | promiſeth his yy to Comfort them, 44—4g. having bleſſed ard 
that Day have been with Chriſt in Paradiſe as Chrilt promiſed, v. 43. | 74ken his leave of them, aſcendeth up into Heaven, 50—5, 
Nor would Chriſt have committed his Soul into his Fathers hand, if | We W upon the firſt day of the week X*, very ear|: 


. . 1 ly FL oe 
it had been to have expired with the Body, and have vaniſhed into . . - "* 
Air. For other io which concern this part of the Hiſtory of our in the morning, they came unto the lepulchre, 


Saviour's Paſſion, See the Notes before mentioned '#n Matth. 27. bringing the ſpices which they had prepared, and Certain 

from v. 35, to 50. mn _ _ 4 Mary the Mother of 74; 
, ary Magaalene, an ary tne Mother oft Z7oſes, were t! 
* Mark Ig. 47 " Now when che __ ſaw what anos _ Women that took up their feat right over againit the Sepulchre, t, 
35, 4 he plorified God, ſaying, Certainly this was a righteous | ſee where Chriſt was laid, Matth. 27. 61. Mark 15, 4 Ther. 
man. 2 F = 3" | i bought ſpices, ſome time of that Day after they knew he muſt Djs 
48 "And all the people that came together to that ſight, ' or clſe they bought them immediately after his Burial, as they went 


- ; : he . ' home, for they reſted on the Sabbath-Day. They had ng 
beholding the things which were done, {mote their breaſts, , ET IIs 2d nn, = ar 


and returned. : bY i Day of the Week. (See the Notes on Matth. 28. r. as to the part!. 
49 And all his -1 mg and the women that fol- | cyjar time) intending to ſhew their laſt a@ of love to their Fn 


lowed him from Galilee, ſtood afar off beholding theſe , by imbatming his Body. 


things. | 2 And they found the ſtone rolled away from the ſepul. 
For a perfe& knowledge of all my pgs "_ wa happen, chre. 

after our Saviour's nailing to the Croſs, till he died, and was taken, 4 o. Þ:h Foſeph had rolled to the Mouth of 

down to be buried, a!l the Evangeliſts muſt be conſulted. We have], 1. hq 147d ag Body, Matth. 27. 60. Es To 

made a Collettion of them in our Notes on Marth. 27. from DT ſealed, v. 66. and which as they came walking they were ſo trouy' 

to v. 57. to which the Reader is here referred. This paſſage about about, how they ſhould get it removed, Mark 16. 3. How it; 

the Centurion, is taken notice of both by Matthew and Mark ; only | to be rolled away Werke blot wa. od; 8. v2 ame 

they ſav, he ſaid, Truly this was the Son of God. Luke ſaith, that he : a BOOT 

ſaid, Certainly this was a Rizhteows Man. PoTibly the ſenſe 1s the 3 And they entred in, and found not the body of the 

ſame, and the Centurion by the Son of God, 4id not mean the Sm of ; Lord Jeſus. 

God by eternal Generation, but one highly favoured of God, a r1 hte- Probably when they entred in, they ſaw no Angd?s, for one m; 

ous Man, and very dear to God, and highly beloved of him, for 1t | reafonably ſuppoſe, that if they had, they would hardly have adre 

muſt be by a yorv extraordinary Revelation and impreſſion if he had | tured to enter in, but at their coming out being ſatisfied that the Body 


upon 
» and all his 
Women, x 
ſhore time 
© adverſy. 


Ly 


Ie tg 


. Ig = 
OO UNS Ry; x ans 
: -} 


——_—z — 
ER 1 A 
- - 


PO LIL + 
i = Sr nn mr 


7 


ot: 


ſo early a Faith in Gariit as God Blefſe? ior ever. I think Mr. Cal- | was not there, the Angels made themſelves viſible to them; fir ; 
vin on Matth. 26. $4. expounds it well, Non vulgarem eſſe  yy6nos ' followeth. | 

ed divinitus excitatum ſtatuit. The Centurion determined, that . ; 

Eeriſ was no ordinary Perſon, but one ſtirred up by, and ſent of i + And it came to paſs as they were mth Perplexed 
God. It isobſervab'e, that Chrift had a teſtimony from all orders of | thereabour, * behold, wo men Itood by them in ſhining, 
Men almoſt, except the Scribes, and Priefts, and Phariſees. Pontius garments, ; 


yy _ OE "vb 
Pilate, and Herod, declared him innocent. V7late's Wife acknow. s And as they were afraid, and bowed down their faces 


ledgeth him a Righteous Perſon. The Tozef on the Croſs teſtifieth he . _ 
nd one nothing amiſs. Fugas the Traitor, confeſſeth he had be: ; ro the earth, they {aid unto them, Why ſeek ye the lvng 04 
trazed innocent Blood, The Centwim owneth him to be no ordina- : among the dead || ? WE | 
ry Man, but a Kighiecrs Man, the Son of God. The multitude a!- ; 6 He 1s not here, but is riſen * : Remember hoy les, 
ways ownee him. They fee they are now run down, they ſmite ſpake unto you when he was yet in Galilee, ſn. 
their Breaſts, ſay nothing, but depart. Only thoſe that were. to | 7 Saying, The Son of man muſt be delivered int the 23 


have beenthe Teachers of others, arc blinded and hardened to their hands of ſinful men, and be crocified. and the third daytil 
| 7 5 


ruin. , 
* Mark 15. $o And behold, there was aman named * Joſeph,a coun- . goo they * remembred his words MG 


= +3» + ſellor, and he was a good man, and ajult : Theſe two Men were two Angels in humane ſhape. Sce the Notes 
Ch. 2. 26, 5! The ſame had not conſented to the counſel and deed on Matthew 28. £6 9% 
38. of them : He was of Arimathea, a city of the Jews who 
alſo himſelf waited for the kingdom of God. ©” 

52 Thismwan went unto Pilate, and begged the body of 


Jeſus. 


, Lb 
t4 | 


| 9 * Andreturned from the fepulchre, and told all theſe, 
things unto the eleven, and toall the reſt; 

10 It was Mary Magdalene, and * Joanna, and Mary *, 
53 And hetook it down, and wrapped it in linen, and the mother of James, and other women that were withthem, 


yo : which told theſe things unto the apoſtles. 
_ + kgazceney waa cam al 6 ſtone, wherein ew 11 And their words ſeemed to them as idle tales, and 


See the Notes on Hatth. 27. 57, 58. they believed them not. 


12 Then aroſe Peter, and ran unto the ſepulchre, and 
* Mat. 27. NE. = that day was the * preparation, and the ſabbath ſtooping dawn, he beheld the linen cloaths laid by them: 
£ D » by . . . » as 
Gr. Ed6Ge]o7 trigarre, the Sabbath ſhined. What Preparation {elves, and PR_ wondring in himſelf at that which w 
was here intended, whether to the Weekly Sabbath of the Jews, (that COME to pals, py: 
it was moſt certainly) or to the Paſſer alſo, which ſome will have Sce the Notes on Matth. 28. 8, 9, 10. but more fully on hs Fen 
fo have been this year put off to that Dav, becauſe of the eoncur- | 2» 3» 4: © who repeateth this piece of Hiſtory more large hong 
rency of the Weekly and the Annual Feaſt, 1 ſhall not determin e, the reſt. It 15 plain that ſcarce any of the Diſciples gave = - ” 
tho the moſt judicious Interpreters Silled in the Hebrew Writin 25, the firſt Relation of the Women; but yet, it being near f 8 nn 
think tite Paſſover this year was kept in its ſeaſorpthe Night before: Peter and Fohn thought it worth the while to go and ſee. , o 
Eut the Sabb:th, that is the ſeventh Day drew on. The Greek Word Peter alone be mentioned here, yet John 15 mentioned, Jo n 4 La 
ſ:gnifies ſhined, the propriety of whick term, hath coſt Criticks ſome | 4> 5* under the Notion of antherDiſciple ; and he is ſaid to = 
paizis to make out, for it rather began to he dark, than lightſme, | 2V5Tun Peter, and to have come'firſt to the Sepulchre, But con = 
their Sabbath beginning after the ſetting of the Sun. Some think | 28 that part of the Hiſtory —_—y ro the: emon, *n a 
the Word referred to the Erening Srar, which began to ſhine. reſerve our ſelves till we come to John 20, We now pe > _— = 
Others, that it referred to a Lamp or Candle, which they were wont | P!Ec< of Hiſtory relating to the evidencing of Chriſt's Reſurre pot 
ko ſet up, they call it Luminare deſcriminatimis, the Light of Diſcri- | FIN 1s neither touched by Matthew nor by John. | __ wg an " 
mination, which beirg ſet up in there ſeveral Families, the Sabbath it ſhortly, ch. 16. 12, 13. After that he appeared in _ fo ho 
was accounted to be begun, Others think it referred to the follow- | 2,9 em, a they walked, and went into the Country. = 
ing Day. Eut there neecs not much labour in the caſe, for by the | 2*""> 404 told it unto the reſidue ; neither believed they them. 
fame reaſon that it is ſaid, The Evening and the Morning made the ſhall now hear Lube giving us a more full and perfeft account. 


Sabbath Day, the Savbath might be ſaid d-71g&/oxery (that is, to] 13 And * behold twoof them went that fame day, wy 
begin) when is began to he Dark, not faking the Word ina proper, | village called Emmaus, which was from Jerufalem avout 


but in a Mctaphorical Senſe. bras. as" 
* Mark 15, $5 And the women allo * which came with him from | © _ 


4 - . . ' - of the 
Fo Galilee, followed after. and beheld the {| | Who thoſe two were is variouſly gueſſed ; that the —_— 
Clap. > hibo Fg was laid ; epulchre, and how one was Cleop%;, appeareth from v. 48, Some will have tne _ 
Rod $9 | | + 50 ; to have been Like, but he in the beginnirg of his Golpe! dutungh ” 
56 | q they returned, and Prepared ſpices and Olnf- eth himſelf trom Eye Witneltes, Ch, hk, V. 2. JOMC Wh: have i | 


TERS 


*V\at 


X] hap. 


rr. 


14 
na 

at. 18. 
Fi X17, , 26, 


it, 21, 


þ 19; 
Ig 


& », 6, 


XXIV. 


have been Nathaniel, others wilt have it to hays been Simon, from 
v. 24. and 1 Cor. 15. 5. But theſe things are fo uncertain, that all 
the inſtrution we can learn from them, is the Vanity and incertain- 


ty of Traditions. This Emmaus was. from Feruſalem, about ſixty 
Lurlongs, wich make ſeven Miles and an half, according to our 


14 And they talked together of all theſe things which 
had happene . 


There 15 nothing more ordinary, than for Perſons walking and ri- 
upon Roads, to make the preſent news of the time, the ſubje& 
of theil Diſcourſe : There had great things happened in Feruſalem,the 
Death of our Saviour was ſuch, and thoſe things which attended 
his Death were very extraordinary, and it is not at all to be won- 
dred that 4 Diſcourſe of them thould fill every mouth, 
every Diſciple's mouth | 
15 And it came to paſs that while they communed t0- 
gether, and reaſoned, * Jeſus himſelf drew near, and went 


with them. 

He overtook them upon the way, and joyned himſelf to their 
Company» It 15 a good thing to be diſcourſing of Chriſt, it 1s the 
way to have his preſence and company with us, | 

16 But their eyes were holden, that they ſhould not 


know him. 

God by his Providence reſtrained their Eyes, that tho they ſaw a 
Man, yet they could nor diſcern who he was, We may learn from 
hence that the Form or Figure of Chriſt's Body after his ReſurreQion, 
was not changed. His Body had the ſame dimenfions, the ſame 
quantity, colour, and figure, and was 1n it felf a proper obje& for 
humane Eyes, for otherwiſe there had been no need for their Eves 
to be held. From hence alſo we may fearn the Influence which 
God hath upon all our Members and Senſes. and how much we de- 
pend upon God for a daily Power to exerciſe our natural Faculties, 
Our Lord had no mind that theſe two Diſciples ſhould at firſt diſcern 
who he was, that he might draw out their following Diſcourſes, and 
from them take occaſion to prove from Scripture the certainty of his 
Reſurrettion. From this Text we may gather, how hard the Lu- 
therans are put to it, to maintain the Real preſence of the Body of 
Chris, wherever the Sacrament of the Lords Supper is adminiſtred, 
for this they muſt maintain, That altho the Body of Chriſt after 
his Reſurre&ion was the ſame that was Crucified, and ſo obvious to 
Senſe, yet he had not only a power to make it inſenſible, and inviſible, 
which we grant, but that he hath alſo a power to multiply it, and 
make it in one and the ſame inſtant, to be in ſo many places as his 
Supper is adminiſtred in, and alſo that he willeth it at the ſame time 
to be imperceptible by any humane Senſes in all thoſe places ; for 
it is apparent from hence, that it was not at all times imperceptible; 
it might at this time have been ſeen, ad not the Diſciples Eyes been 
held, that they couid not know him. 

17 And he ſaid unto them, What manner of commu- 
nications are theſe that ye have one to another, as ye 


walk, and are ſad ? 

Not that he, from whom the ſecrets of no Hearts are hidden, did 
not know what they were diſcourſing about, but that he had a mind 
to hear them repeated from them, that from their repetition of them, 
he might take the better advantage to inſtru them. 


13 And the one of them, whoſe name was Cleopas, 
anſwering, {aid unto him, Art thou only a ſtranger in Je- 
rulalem, and haſt not known the things which are come to 
paſs there in theſe days ? 

19 And he {aid unto them, What things ? And they 
ſaid unto him ; Concerning ſefus of Nazareth, * which 
was a prophet mighty in deed and word before God, and 
all the people : 

The things which had lately happened in Feruſulem were ſo ma- 
ny, and fo unuſual, that the Diſciples wonder that any one coming 
from Feruſa/em ſhould ask, What things? They therefore ask him, if 
he were a meer Stranger in Feruſalem, coming from ſome other 
Country, or from fome remoter parts of Fudea or Galilee ? Or, *f he 
were the only Man, who had been unconcerned in what was the com- 
mon Diſcourſe both of the Town and Country ? Still our Saviour 
draws out the Diſcourſe from them, by asking them, What things ? 
They tel! him concerning Feſus of Nazareth, a great Prophet, migh- 
ty both im Words and Deeds. In which Phraſe Stephen celebrated 
Miſes, Afts 9, 22, That is, one who did not only in an extraordi- 
nary manner reveal the Will of God unto Men, but alſo did many 
preat and mighty Works, and lived a moſt Holy and moſt Exempla- 
ry Life, and Converſation, ſo as that he was not only highly favou- 
red of God, but in great repute, and eſtimation alſo amongſt the 
People, 


20 And how the chief prieſts and our rulers deliver- 
ed him to be condemned to death,, and have crucified 
him, 

21 Bur we truſted that it had been he * which ſhould 
have redeemed [ſrael : And beſide all this, to day is the 
third day ſince theſe things were done. 


tis from hence evident, that as yet they neither had .a true No- 
tion of Chriſt as God-man in one Perſon, nor yet of the Meſſiah, but 
till remain'd in an opinion of a Temporal Deliverance to. be eff-&- 
ed for the Jews by the Meſſizh when he ſhould come. The, words 
alſo ſhewed a great weakneſs in the Diſciples Faith as to Chriſt ; they 
{peek as if they were quite ont of Breath, and their Faith began to 
W, We were, ſay they, once of the mind, and maintained ſome 
Hope, that this Feſus of Nazareth had been he whom God had de- 
\2n&d for the Meſſizh, and now 7? is the third Day ſince theſe things were 
"2, This mention of the third Day, is a good Argument to prove 
"boſe were ſome old Diſciples of Chriſt, who had taken notice 
"romiſe or Prophecy, that he fhould Riſe again the third day, 
© :8. 33. They ought to _ had patience QI Night, and to 
L9H 2 


S. LUKE 


eſpecially 


Iz 
| have conſidered, that tho the third Day were Legan, vet it was 1295 
yet paſt. als ES 
= Yea, and * certain women alſo of our company * Vat.29.2, 
made us aſtoniſhed, which were earty ar the ſepul- Var. 15-1. 
. joh.20. 18 


1 


a we 


chre. 


23 And when they found not his bod 
ſaying, that they had alſo 
ſaid that he was alive. 

24 And certain of them which 
the ſepulchre, and found jt even fo 
but him they ſaw not, 

It 15 piati rom the Relation of theſe two Diſcintes, that they had 
whatſoever might conduce to a Moral Suaſinn. Chev MF A the Rove: 
latim of the Word, from the mouth of Chrif kimſe!f, They Þa4 
Evidences from the Women, from the Apparition of Angels frc m 
ſome amon; ce:ntclves, that his Body was nor there. The Ange's 
ſaid le was Riſen. Why do they hetirate then ? vhy do es mes 
belicve ? Is the tault in the Perverſeneſs of their Wills ? Ard the 
no mind to believe, that the thing they had hoped, longed waited 
for, was true ? Certainly there f _ 


\f* 


| y, they came, 
ſeen a viſion of angels which 


were with us, went 10 
as the women had faid ; 


&©25 Pina thiy more dcfired, 


fag = 4 wy 
- > 44,4 * « —_—a - 
-x- lhe a5 ws P 


Let the Patrons of the Power of Man's Will to LE!1EVe, Or perform WAY: 
any Actions ſpiritually good, tell us (it they can) wh: cond higder COR 
theſe Diſciples aftual beiieving the Refſurre® ing a Cbritk, © + the 4 
Impotency of their Wills,, God not yet pleats to intiuace, oo ak 0! h | 
thetr Wills actually to believe, what they ka4 the orcatelt propetii- | "th # 
ons and inclinations imaginable to have 5clicvod., | if *0F 
. ' I 
25 Then he faid unto them., O fools, and ſlow of [' &+- 
heart to believe all that the prophets have {poken ! * HI} : 
26 * Ought not Chriſt co have ſuffered theſe thinss, + yer. - | Py 


and to emer into his glory ? As 17. 3- bY et boa 
27 And beginning at * Moſes, and * all the prophets, 1 P<*1.11. 6 


- 
OY 
— 


Gen. 315. 


he expounded unto them in all the ſcriptures, the things nt” OO RAY. 
concerning himſelf, | Ps 2 } [T4 
By our Saviour's form of reprehending his Diſciples, we may bath & os 20; if | | ; | 


learnz 1. That it 1 not every ſrying, Thou Fool, but a ſaving of it peyr. 38, 
from a root of Hatred, Malice and Anger, which our Saviour makes ; - 

to be a breach of the ſixth Commandment, Matth. 5. Our Saviours * fy}, x 25. 
Reprehenſion of them was out of a Principle of Love, and a Root of xx, | yy 
good Will to them. 2. That the be$t of us are very fl:w of heart to be- Iſa, -.1 
lieve what cometh to us upon the meer credit of a Divine Re*. ati. & Tgyq 
It 15 aiſo obſervable from what we have, v. 27. That 3hes aid the Þ- 5 x 
Prophets are not to be rejetted by Chriſtians, they alto have much "Ws 23 
concerning Chriſt z out of chem Chriſt inſtruQcth theſe t»;0 Diicip!es & 92. "4 
in the things concerning himſelf, ko 


4» 


£2ek. 34 4/8 
28 And they drew nigh unto the village, whicher they 23- : bi 


went - and he * made as though he would have gone X 37+ 25» 
further Dan. 9. 24» 


coming juſt out of his Journey, ſhould fa)l upon his Adminiftration 


Bread, which our Saviour never took without a previous Bleffing cf 


. E ; : ME * 20 
29 But * they conſtrained him, ſaying, Abide with $2 :» John 
us, for it is towards evening, and the day is far ſpent. 1. 4-- 


And he went in to tarry with them. Sce Getl At * of Ohh 


[ do not underſtand how tome conclude from hence the Jawfuinefs 32 25. i | be 
of dilſembling, or telling a lie in ſome Caſes, becauſe the Evangeliſt  IT-19-3 |! 4 i) 108 
ſaith, our Saviour made as tho he would have gone further, and did SEOSL NT YL 
not z for without doubt our Saviour had gonc further, if the Difct- ' ob af 
ples had not been urgent with him to have ſtaid. Nor did he ſtay long $2 
there, as we ſha!! hear by and by. . 

30 And it came to pals as he fat at meat with them, 
he took bread, and bleſſed jr, and brake, and gave to 
them, 

31 And their eyes were opened, and they knew him, 
and || he vaniſhed out of their ſight. | TOE 

Some woutd have this Bread to be Sacramental Bread, as if our c-/24 70 Ut 
Lord at this time celebrated his Supper, and ſome of the Pap?/?s are = of 

hem, 


mightily zealous for that Interpretation, thinking that they have in 
it a mighty Argument to juſtifie theic lame Adminiftratioa of 1t 
in one kind (for here is no mention of the Cup at all} but t :*y do 
not conſider, that this Text will prove (tf it be taken with 7c:ation 
to the Supper) more than they would have it 3 as, x. That Pricſts 
may conſecrate, without Wine, which themſelves will not grant, 
tho they ſay that both Elements being conſecrated, the People fut- 
ficiently partake if they ſhare but in one. 2. It will alſo prove that 
a Prieſt may confecrate without uting thoſe ſubſtantial Words , 
This is my Body. But it is a moſt improbable thing, that our Saviour 


of this Ordinance. The Text is certainly to be meant of Bodily 


it, Matth. 14. 19. How their Eyes were opened, the Evanget: £ctis 
us Some think they knew him by his form of Bleſfing., It 15 2 
wonder then they did not know him before by his Stile, in tarce or 
four Hours Diſcourſe by the way. Others think they knew him by 
taking upon him the Office of the Mafier of the Feait. T5 bleſs the 
Table, and to carve to the Gueſts. But all this is vain, He withdrew jt 
the Veil from their Eyes , which alone hindred their diſcerning ; 
him before ; for the Obje&t was viſible, only_the Medium of thetr Wh 
fight was indiſpoſed. [ And he vaniſhed out of their fight.) Our Savicur THE 


A 
> a ies- ts +4 


” _ ” « 4 ” *” 4 4 
- _ —_ GE  Sanagrs - 
woo wi roIry uf Pun - EET 
LES 2 —_— r5-+ . - 


"1 | 
had now obtained his end, viz. to fatisfie them that he was indeed 1-1 hr q 3h 
riſen 3 now he diſappeareth, for that he had a power to make 15 hi WR cit 1:9 
Body imperceptible to the Diſciples Senſes is out of doubt. . LN, 114 | h 

32 And they faid one to. another, Did not our heart. Ws DN? 
burn within us, while he talked with us by the way, and 0k AAS if be 6:6 
while he opened to us the ſcriptures. | 5 il, Ma. \Þs 

There was a mighty difference no doubt, betwixt Chriſt's Preaci- HK HREM 
; is Miniſters ; | e who had Authority, not BS TT 6 1 I 
ing, and his Miniſters ; he preached as one who nad. _— (ip OL) 
25 the Scribcs, not as ordinary Miniſters, but with more Majeſty an VERO oh 2 

D that depended MA iq q! (Oh (hos 


Power; but as to the ſaving Efficacy of his Werds, 


upon his Will. Where he pleaſed to put forth ſuch Ethcactous Grace, Fmt Art us 
there his Words became effettua}, where he did not, they were not 4 4:42 
; FES9L } fo 2 6; ls l [8 


no 


- — 
a cho « —_ 
Pants 1 =— Cn A TE, 


ern rn een erence ——_— — 
7 =_ — ye 


| 


; Chap, RRXIV. 


*John 20, 


ſo : Chriſt preached in the hearing of hundreds, who yet continu- 
ed Unbelievers, and periſhed in their unbelief. There 15 a great deal 
of difference alſo between one Miniſter's preaching and anothers; 
ſome kind of Preaching of its ſelf, makes Mens hearts to freeze, 
others make them to burn 3 but where Preaching makes our Hearts 
to burn within us, Chriſt throws in the Coal, whick the beſt Preacher 
doth but blow up ; only the Spirit of God is picaſed to work {as 


Eraſmus ſaith) ſecundum quod nafus eſt Organmm, according to the 


Inſtrument it worketh by, and to concur with rational and ſpir1- 
tual means, in order to rational and ſpiritual ends. But wherever 
any Soul is baptized with Fire at hearing a Sermon, it is alſo Baptized 
with the Hily Gho#. Chrift will not always cure blind Eyes with 
Clay and Spittle (tho he did it once.) Theſe were Diſciples before 
the Fire was kindled in their hearts, Chriſt's preaching did but blow 
it up. We ought ſo to ſpeak in our preaching, ſo to open, and ap- 
ply the Scriptures as our Diſcourſes may have a rational tendency to 
make the hearts of our hearers to burn within them, not ſo as to 
make them dead, and ſleepy, and cold, or luke-warm : and then 
to know that it muſt be Chriſt's Work to intlame them, when we 
have ſaid all that we can ſay. 

33 And they roſe up the ſame hour, and returned to 
Jeruſalem, and found the eleven gathered together, and 
them that were with them, 

34 Saying, The Lord is riſen indeed, and hath appear- 


ed to Simon. 


35 And they told what things were done in the} 


way, and how he was known of them in breaking of 
bread. 


The 34 v. compared with 1 Cor. 15. 3. makes ſome great Au- 
thors think, that Simon was one of the two, and that Cleopas (who 
was the other) ſpake this. They make no ſtay at Emmazs, but come 
preſently to Feruſalem, and acquaint the Diſciples, That for certain 
Chriſt was Riſen, and that he had appeared to them in the way, 
and was known of them at their breaking of Bread. q 

36 And as they thus ſpake, Jeſus himſelf food in 
the midſt of them, and faith unto them, Peace be unto 


OU. 
4 Of this appearance of Chriſt, Mark fpeaks, ch. 16. 14. and Fohn, 
ch. 22. 15, 20. The Salutation, which he uſeth to them was com- 
mon amongſt the Jews, and anſwereth our God ſave you, or God be 
with you, It was an apprecation of all Bleſſing, and Happineſs, 
which they comprehended under the name of Peace. 


37 But they were terrified and affrighted, and ſuppo- 


fed that they had ſeen a ſpirit. 

Spirits ſometimes (by Gods permiſſion, or dire&ion_) afſumed 
humane ſhapes. They ſeeing an humane ſhape, and not able on the 
ſudden to conceive, how an humane Body ſhould come into the 
midſt amongſt them, without any more noiſe, or notice taken of it, 
were affrighted, as we uſually are, at the fight of apprehended Ap- 
paritions. From hence we may conclude, That either the World, 
and the beſt Men in it, have been in all Ages deceived, and a few 
Atheiſts have been wiſer than them all, or there are ſuch Beings as 
Spirits, 

38 And he faid unto them, Why are ye troubled, and 
why do thoughts ariſe in your hearts ? 

39 Beholdimy hands and my feet, that it is I my ſelf : 
* handle me, and ſee, for a ſpirit hath not fleſh and bones, 
as ye lee me have. - : 

40 And when he had thus ſpoken, he ſhewed them his 


hands and hjs feet. 

If either the Papiſts, or the Lutherans could ſhew us Chriſts Hands 
or Feet, while they impoſe upon us to bclieve, that Chriſts Body 15 
really preſznt at, or in the Lord's Supper, they would not ſo fright 
5, nor make ſo many thoughts ariſe in us as they do, about their 
apprehenfions of the Nature of a Body. But while the Papiſts allow 
us fo handle, and to taſt the Bread, and we find no ſuch thing, and 
the Lutherans ſuffer our Eyes to be open, and we can fee no ſuch 
thing, -we cannot but conclude, that the Body of Chriſt which 
they talk of, muſt certainly be a Spirit, which (according to our 
Saviour's notion_) is a ſubſtance which hath neither Fleſh nor Bones, as 
we ſee the Body, they would have us to believe hath not ; that 1s to 
ſay, that the Body they talk of, is no Body. Our Saviour here proveth 


EE LUKE. 


and a piece of an Honey-comb) ſuch a Meal as we read of that he 
had at the Lake of Tiberias, Fohn 21. 9. He did not cat: to uphold 
but only to teſtifie his Life. Thus when he tad raiſed the Daughter 


| of Zairus, chap. 8. $5. he bid them give her ſomething to eat z ang 


for this end Lazarus fat at meat with the reſt, Fohn 12. 2. ang Peter 
proves the Reſurrettion of Chriſt from their eating and drinkin 

with him, A#s 10. 41. Let not profane Wits ſeek knots in Bulruſhec 

inquiring what became of this Meat 2 @'c. Let them firſttell us wha: 
became of the Meat the Angels did eat with Abraham, Gen, 1g g 

and learn to believe, that it was eafie with the Power of God toan, 
nihilate again that Meat, which was not neceſſary for the ſuftentation 
of the Body of Chriſt, now freed from all the craving of Natura; 
Appetite, tho he did cat it to ſatisfie them, that he was truly ricn 
from the Dcad. 


Chap. RY ly 


44. And he faid unto them, * Theſe are the words +, 


which I ſpake unto you, while I was yer with you, that vc, 


all things muſt be fulfilled which were written in the lay 
of Moles, and i» the prophets, and iz: the pſalms concern. 
ing me. 

The Jews ordinarily divided the Old Teſtament into the Law, the 
Prophets, and the Holy Writings, which they called the Hagiography. 
The Book of Pſalms was one of the laſt ſort, and one of the moſt 
noted among them : ſo as by theſe three Terms our Saviour under. 
frands all the Scriptures of the Old Teſtament. He tells them, that 
ne had before his Deat!; while he converſed with them, told them 
that all things (which were verv many) which were found in any of 
theſe Books concerning him muſt be fulfilled, he had told them 
Chap. 18. 31. Matth. 16. 21. OF 17. 22. (& 20. 18. Mark 9, 41, 0 
10. 34. | ; : 

45 Then opened he their underſtanding , that they 
might ungeritand the ſcriptures. 

::1e did not opci their Underſtanding without the Scriptures ; he 
ſends them thither, and he knew the Scriptures would not ſufficient. 
ly give them a knowledge of him, and the things of God, without 
the intluence and ilJumination of his Spirit 5 they are truly taught 
of God, who are taught by his Spirit to underſtand the Scripture, 
Chriſt gives a great Honour to the Scriptures, The Devil cheats 
thoſe Souls whom he perſwades to caft away the Scriptures in expe. 
&ation of a teaching by the Spirit. The Spirit teacheth by, not with. 
out, not contrary to tie holy Scriptures. 


ys «a 
by 
Ee 


» MM” ; vppr ., 
46 And faid unto them, * Thus it is written, and Ly. 


thus it behoved Chriſt to ſuffer, and to riſe from the dead ht, 


the third day. 

All the Divine PrediGtions are certain, and infallible. The Jews 
did malicioufly and freely proſecute our Saviour to death, and God 
did certainly foreſee how their Wills would be determined, and the 
Event was accompliſhed accordingly. 


47 And that repentance, and * remiſſion of ſins ſhould * 1 [1 


be preached in his name, amongſt all nations, beginning at '* 
Jeruſalem. 
48 And * ye are witneſſes of theſe things. x 


The few Words in v. 47. are comprehenſive of the great Duty 2m 


of the Apoſtles, 1: To preach Repentance and Remiſſhn of Sins. 1. h 
Chriſt's Name. 3. To all Nations. 4. Beginning at Jeruſalem. They 
were to preach Repentance, that is, a turning from ſinful Courſes, 
into a Courſe of Life conſonant to the Will of God ; and Remiſin 
of Sins, that is, upon -Repentance, this they were to preach in his 
Name, which may refer either to their preaching 3 then our Saviour 
lets them know, that they were to be his Miniſters, and to preach 

his Authority, 2 Cor. 5. 20. To be Ambaſſadors for Chriſt, Stewards 
of his Myſteries : Or elſe it may refer to Repentance and Remiſſm 
Sins, which are to be preached in bis Name, for the ſake of his Me- 
rits and Satisfation. They were to preach this to all Nations. This 
was propheſied of plentifully, Pſal. 2. 8. 1a. 49. 6. Dan. 7. 14. Hd. 
2. 23. Foel 2. 32. This was a piece of Divine Revelation, which 
Chriſt had, till this time, concealed in a great meaſure, when heſent 
out the Twelve, Matth. io, He commanded them not to go to 
the Gentiles. Beginning at Feruſalem, that is, amongſt the Jews. 
He was propheſied of under the Notion of a King, to: be ſet upon the 
Lords holy hill of Sion. So Pſal. 110. 2. Ia. 2.3. OF 28. 16. (7 60 
v. I, In purſuance of this, we ſhall find the Apoſtles preaching only 
in Fudea, till the Jews had judged themſelves unworthy of Ete nal 
Life, then they turned to the Gentiles, Afs 13. 38, 46. 


that it was his zrue Body which appeared to them, becauſe, 1. It 
had Integral parts, Hands and Feet. 2. Becauſe it might be ſecn. 
3. It might be handled. 4. It had Fleſh and Bones, which a Spirit 


49 And behold, * I ſend the promiſe of my fa-* | 
ther upon you : but tarry ye in the city of Je- oo 
hath nor. Then he ſhews them his Hands and Feet. So then our | ruſalem, until ye be indued with power from on ,,;;; 


Saviour did not think, that tte Judgment of our Senſes was to be'| high, Af 
rczeted concerning the Nature of Bodies, and his Body in particu- | ft js queſtioned by none, but by the promiſe of the Father our & 7.5 


* John 21. 
I, 


Jar, and that in its State of Exaltation, when it was raiſed from the 
Dead. Do any of them ſay that ChriſFs Body here came through the 
Door, or it could not have been here ? How ſhall that be proved 2 We 
can eaſily tell them how his Body might be in the midſt of them, tho 
it were not diſcerned while he was there : Even as the eyes of the 
two Diſciples were held, v. 16. that they could not diſcern Chriſt, 
to the eyes of the Diſciples might be held now, till he was in the 
midſt amongſt them, 


41 And while they yet believed not for joy, and 


wondred, he faid unto them, * Have ye here any 


meat ? 

42 And they gave him a piece of a broiled fiſh, and 
of an honey-comb. 

43 And he took zr, and did eat before them. 

Believed not for Foy, vet if they had not now believed, they doubt- 
leſs would not have rejoyced, but their Faith was the cauſe of their 
Joy z yet the exceſs of their Joy was the hindrance of their Faith, ſo 
dangerous arc the exceffive motions of cur Aﬀettions. Chriſt here 
gives them another evidence of the truth of his Body, he did eat 
with them, (tho very ordinary Country Diet, a piece of broiled F:ſh, 


Lord meaneth the promiſe of the Spirit, as it came down in the days 
of Pentecoſt, This effuſion of the Spirit was promiſed under the 
Old Teſtament, 1a. 44. 3. Fer. 31. 33. Exek. 36. 24. Moſt emi- 
n-ntly, Joel 2. 28. (The Apoſtle himſelf interpreting the Prophet, 
Aﬀs 2.16, 17, 18.) See alſo Aﬀs 1.8. Where the fulfilling of this 
premiſe of the Father, as it is called, v. 4. is put before —And ye ſpat 
be Witneſſes unto me, both in Jeruſalem, and Judea, and in Samaita, 
and js alſo expounded by, And ye ſhall receive power, after te Hily 
Ghoſt 3s come upon you. Our Lord alſo had ſaid, 1 will pray the Fa- 
ther, and he ſhall give you another Comforter, that he may abide with 
you for ever. In this Text, he ſaith, that he will ſend him ; {0 alſo, 
Fohn x 5. 26. and ch. 16.9. thereby confirming his Diſciples in this, 
That he was equal with the Father, and that the Holy Ghoſt was 
ſent by the Father and him, yet ſent by the Father upon the prayer © 
he Son, and in hs Name, Fibn I4. 15, 26. This Holy Spirit 15 al- 
fo called power from on high, the power of the higheſt, Luke 1. 35 
But here the Gifts of the Holy Ghoſt, may be underſtood as alſo in 
As 1. 8. where this Power is ſaid ſhould be received after that - 
Holy Gho ſhould come upon them. Until this time ſhould come, (which 
was in the Days of Pentecoſt, AZs 2. 1.) the Diſciples were bound to 
ſtay at Feruſalem, which accordingly they did. And we may from 


hence conclude, that thefe Wortis of our Saviour were ſpoken to Þ15 


Diſciplc5, 


Ay 


Mark 16- 


% 


hap. XXIV, | S. 


Diſciples, after his appearance to them in Galilee, (of which we 
faith nothing) which was the place where (as moſt think) he was ſeen 


of above frve handred Brethren at once, 1 Cor, 15.6. 


50 And heled them our as far as to Bethany : and he |, , $3 And were continually in the temple, Praifing and 


ſift up his hands, and bleſſed them. 
5i * And it came to paſs , 
he was parted from them, 


VE. 


This muſt be underſtood to have happened forty days after our 
Saviour's Reſurretion; for ſo Luke himſelf tells us, 4s x. 
he led them out as far as Bethany, not the Village Bethany, but that 


part of the Mount of 0lzves, which belonged to Bethany. 


our had been often there Praying, from thence he now 
into Heaven, [ And lifted up his hands and bleſſed them.] Some think 
that by Blefing, here is meant Praying ; and the lifting up his hands 
was accommodated to that religious Aion. Others think that Bleſſing 
here ſiguitteth a more Authoritative 4#; and that his lifting up of his 
Hands, was a ſtretching out of his Hands, as a {ign of that effeQual | per Rom, was appendent to the Temple. 
Bieffing of them. ([ While he bleſſed them, he was parted from them, 


while he bleſſed them, 
and carried up into hea- | ct pitch. 


LUKE. 


ſalem with great joy - 
bleſſing God. Amen 


We never before read of any a& of Adoy at; 
ples performed to Chriſt, be Fa ws 


God, a great Prophet, 


Meſfiah, in the mean time not rightly taking the 
3. Then | ſiah, but looking upon him as one who ſhould b 


Our Savi- 
aſcendeth 


and continued in Prayer and Supplicaticn, 


Chap. XXIV. 


32 And they worſhipped him, and returned to ery. 


which the Diſci- 
heir Faith was now come to the high- 
They did no longer Iook upon him only as one ſent of 

nor only as the Son of David, the promiſed 


According to 


his Commandment they return to Feruſalem, full of Joy: Anz were 
continually in the Temple praiſing and bleſſing God, = bl as 
I2, 13. It is faid, that being returned, they went into an upper Room, 

Some think that this up= 


| ie. But continually here ma 
reaſonably be interpreted often, or ordinarily, or at Temple hours of 


and carried up to Heaven, that is, he -moved upward, as if he had | Prayer; as the Morning and Evening Sacrifice, are called t!:2 Contin- 


been carried ; for 1t is certain that our Saviour aſcended by his own 
Power, Luke ſaith, As 1.9. He was taken up and a Cloud receiv- 


Hp to Hea- 


ed him out of their ſight, as Elijah, 2 Kings 2. 11. went 
ven in a Whirl-wind, fo Chrift 


out the help of an Angel, 


went up in a Cloud, but 10r © 
difference, Chriſt aſcended by his own power, Elijah could not with- | in him, 


with this | for our Redemption, and the Con 


al Burni-Offering, Exod. 29. 42. Numb. 28. 3. Their Work was to 
ly underſtood : 
ivg the Meſſiah 
ing their Faith 


Vol. 5 


WE } 

"int! JR 8 
i }.* 4 

ilk 1% Y"1320 

£17, 
"tt oh 
r pf ' 
I: ;* 
"i it 

: : 

6 6: 
F: 1 4 [ 
* , T 
Ee 5: [ : KK. 

10/48 [$148 

" WL 

X: 4 T1 ; #4 4 i, 

(9 1 [hs ' bh 

$318. $1 25 | , 

: "F 4 F- +67 2 
id 14."F : '- 
al TÞ. $i {; 

bs fy F #1] [ $ 4 Gb 

Y Mix digg | * 1 "4! 

8-4 24 ”} 
i ;j 4 LR 18; 17 

2H (ANI | | 


IF 


__ 
3 = 
em OO AT 5 oe 


a” 
- 
” 6.42 
oO 9 t ore were 
_ Pr ogneete 
= - 


We 0 


- 9 
——— ago - 
- - . ww 
- " _ 
"hat w 
% SY 2 
f » =—L - 
- =s 
- I 29 
p, 3 -_ 
_ —— 


*—Bg.: — 
-— —_— 


Rf aa pA 
JEL 3. Sa 
bong (8 


CLOS: 
mm 


E y - 2 Ws, SS af -4 p>.—_—_— ” 
- ,; 4 — F- 

_- w——_ -_ - I b - 4 " m_ ul - », « I" os "a n 

- m—— YI TORT LI Ton ” he Pn Rr nn = —_ —_ A. 
. os ——_—_ 55 < A N » Coos IS 
# Lz <2 4 53.2 4 ” = ” we . 

be : "FA Sy "TOI 5 

+ Poem 4 o bs 


The Perman of this Goſpel is generally 


The time when he wrote this Goſpel, 


Gal. 2. 9. 
the ten Perſecntions in the time of 11 rajan 3 
tion. 


liſts ; producing his Miracles moſt evidently to prove it. 
Baptiſm - 


Phraſe, 


CHAP. L 


Fobn proveth the Dignity of Chriſt by his Attributes, 1T—5. and by 
the teſtimony of Fohn the Bapti , who proveth Chriſt to be the 
Fountain of Life, 6 9. to create and govern the World, 1o, Il. 
and ſheweth his Bleſſing to Believers, 12. Mis Incarnation and Con 
verſe upon Earth : The glory and qualifications of his perſon, 13, 14- 
His ſurther teſtimony of the excellency and dignity of his perſon , 
Is 18, Meſſengers from Jeruſalem ſent to ah; who Fohn was ? 
His anſwer, that he was nt Christ, 19 28, He ſeeing Chri8, 
declaretk him t1 be the Lamb of God, 29 34+ The Diſciples of 
Tohn follow Jejus : Andrew inviteth Simeon to Chris , he calleth him 
Cephas, 35—42. Feſws calleth Philip, and inviteth Nathaniel, who 
achnowledgeth him to be the Son of God, 47>—5s1. 


N the beginning a was the word b, and the word was 
with God c, and the word was God 4. 


a 1. that beginning which Moſes mentioneth, Gen. nr. 1. the be- 
ginning of all things, when the foundations of the World were laid, 
Prov. 8. 27, 28. the beginning of Time 3 for before that, was no 
meaſure of Time, all was Eternity. 6 Was the Word, that is, the 
Eternal Son of God. the Lord Jeſus Chriſt, of whom more is ſpoken 
afterward. Nor is Chriſt in this Text alone called the Word, but 
s John 1. 1. Tye Word of Life, ſo Revel. 15. 13. and there arc ſome 
who think he is ſo cailed, Luke x, 2. comparing that Text with 
2 Pet. 1. 16. asalfo, Pſal. 33. 6. Nor is it an improper term by 
which to expreſs the Son of God ; for it both expreſſeth ſomething 
of his incffable Generation, as the Word is begotten 10 our Thoughts, 
and js the expreſs Image of them ; and alſo his Office in the Revela- 
tion of his Fathers Will unto the Sons of men, and revealing his Fa- 
ther to us, Math, 11. 275. and there are ſome (if they be not too cu- 
rious in their notion} who think David by that Phraſe, 2 Sam. 7. 21. 
For thy words ſake Cexpounded for thy Servants ſake, x Chron. 17. 19. 
which is the Titic of Chriſt, Ta. 42. 1.) that Chriſt is meant : Be- 
ſides, it is obſerved, that this term was more acceptable both to the 
Jews and the Heathgns, than the term of Chrj$ or the Son of God 
would have been ; for there was nothing more abhorred by the Fews 
than the latter ; and the Heathen Writers made (as is noted by di- 
vers.) a great uſe of this term, to expreſs the Name and the Power 
of God. For is any thing more ordinary with the Chaldee Para- 
phrast, than this Exprefſion, Iſa. 45. 12. I have made Heaven and 
Earth, Chald. 1 in my word have made Heaven and Earth : So 
chap. 48. 13. Mine band hath laid the foundation of the Earth, Chald, 
By my word | have laid the foundations of the Earth; this 1s taken 
from MHojes's deſcribing the Creation by God's Word of Command, 
Let there be Light, and there was Light ; the manner of expreſſing 
1t by the Word of Command, is fignificative, that all things were 
made by his Eternai Word : For would any Few deny, that God 
by bs Word created the World ? The Evangeliit therefore calleth 
Chriſt, to whom wer. 3. he was about to attribute the Creation, rhe 
Word ; not the W:idof God, (fo the Scriptures are called); to di- 
ſtinguiſh Chriſt in this Notion from the Revelation of the Divine 
Willto the Prophets, he is only called the Word, though he was the 
Son of God, Nor 15 it ſaid, that in the heginning was the Word 
Created (as 1s ſaid of the Heavens and the Earth, Gen. x. 1.) but was 
the Word ; this proveth the Eternal ExiStence of the ſecond Per- 
{on 1n the Trinity 3 tor what was in the beginning, did not then be- 
gin to be; the terin, the Word, without the addit:on of God, ſpeak- 
 eth him a ſubſiſtence 3 and it being ſaid, That in the beginning he 

was, ſpeaks his Eternal Exiſtence-3 for what had a Being in the be- 
ginmag of time, muſt needs be Eternal, nothing being whey Time 
began but what was Eternal. To this purpoſe are thoſe Texts, F/at. 
90. 2. Prov. 8.22, 23, 24,0. Join 17.5. Eph. 1.4. 2 Theſ]. 2. 13. 
Whici two Texts compared, ſhew in the beginning here uſed, to 


JOHN. 


taken to have been John the Son of Zebedee, Matth. 10. 2. ot either John 


avtiſt, or Tohn ſirnamed Mark, Aqts 15. 37. He was a Perſon mightily honoured "by Chriſt's perſonal favours, 
yr rd n= bat os the Beloved Diſciple ; you may read of theſe fawours in theſe Scriptures following , 
Matth. 19.1. Luke 9. 28. and 22. 8. John 13.23, 24- and 19. 25, 26. and 20. 1, 2. Ads 3.3. Acts 4:13, 
Thus far the Scripture guideth us: He 1s thought t0 have gone to, and continue in Aſia till the third of 
he was by Domitian baniſhed into Pathmos, where he wrote the Reyelz. 


3s uncertain ; ſome think, about the latter part of his Life ; he died the laſt of all 
the Apoſtles, judged about an hundred Tears after the Birth of Chriſt. It # ſaid that the Hereſies of Ebion ang Ce. 
rinthus, who denicd Chriſt's Divinity, and of the Nicholaitans, who held many abſurd things about his Perſon, gave 
occaſion to the writing of this Goſpel; himſelf mentioneth the Dottrine of the Nicholaitans, Rev, 2. 6. andEbion 414 
Cerinthus are thought to be thoſe Antichriſts which he in his Epiſtles refletteth upon, — 
T wo things are obſerved of him : 1. That he inſiſts more 0n the proof of Chriſt's Dzvomity than any of the Evange« 
2. That he mentions Nay or » 7m 5 Angora Ewan. 
its : Bch I think may be added, that he delivereth the Hiſtory of the Goſpel after Chriſt's ReſurreQtion 
gelits I-y cope "ks rg gives ho alſo a more aiſtintt acconnt of the four Paſſovers happening after Chriſt 
{ The neceſſity of Faith in Chriſt, and Regeneration, the Dottrine of our Myſtical Union with Chriſt ; 
the ſending and end of the Holy Spirits Miſſion, avd the advantage that the Apoſtles and others ſhould receive fron 
it. His Goſpel is moſt particularly remarkable for the ſublimeneſs and myſteriouſneſs of the matter, and ſweetneſs of his 


| 


Lam. 2. 22, and ig many other Texts, The term without him, 


be the ſame with before the foundation of the World ; ſo 2 Tim. 1, g, 
c Leſt any ſhould ſay, Where was this Word before the foundati. 
ons of the Earth were laid ? The Evangeliſt ſaith, with God ; which 
agreeth with Prov. 8. 27, 30. This both diſtinguiſheth Chriſt from 
all Creatures, (none of which were with God in the beginning ;) and 
alſo ſheweth the Vanity of Sabellizs, and thoſe we call Suaber,, 
who will not allow Chriſt to be a diftin& Subſiſtence, or Perſon 
from his Father 3 it alſo denoteth the Sons co-exiſtence, and his 
equality with his Father ; and yet, his Filial Relation ; for God is not 
ſaid to have been with the Word, but the Word was with God, which 
alſo ſpeaks a perfe& unity and conſent betwixt them. d Leſt any 
ſhould ſay, What but God can be Eternal ? or be ſaid to have heen 
and had an Exiſtence in the beginning of the World ? The Fyar- 
geliſt addeth, That the Word was God; that is, the perſon or ſub- 
hiſtence ſpoken of, and intended by him, was the Divine Bein 
which is but one, tho' in it there be three diſtin& Subſiſtences ; al 
make but One and the ſame Divine Being. The firſt thing ſpoken 
nere of Chriſt, attributed to him Eternity : The ſecond fpcaks his 
Relation to the Father ; this ſpeaks the Oneneſs and Sameneſs of his 
Eſſence with that of the Father. The term Ged, which in the fore- 
going words is to be taken perſonally for God the Father, is here to he 
taken Eſſentially, zs it ſignifieth the Divine Being. 


2 The ſame was * in the Beginning with God e, *Get, 
e Theſe Words are a farther Confirmation and Explication of 


what the Evangeliſt had faid before ; afferting the Eternity of the Vas | 
Son, and his Relation to the Father, and Oneneſs of Eſſence with the that 
Father, Whether the Evangeliſt forewarned by the Spirit of God, the G 
did add this repetition to fore-arm Chriſtians againſt thoſe Eirors Chriſ 
which did afterward trouble the Church, I cannot ſay ; but certain 
it 1s, That theſe words do effeually confate the Eunomians, who 7 
diſtinguiſhed betwixt the Word which in the Beginning was with of t 
God, and that Word by which all things were made; and the Arirns, lieve 
who make the Father to have exiſted before the Son ; as alſo the Þ F: 
Anomians, who would make the Father and the Sen diverſe both in to den 
Nature and Will. Some others make this Verſe a tranſition to the Goſpe 
Fourth, and the ſenſe to be, This ſame was not manifeſt to the knowr 
World from the Beginning of the World, but was with God uncil he Shephe 
came to be manifeſted in the Fleſh : Thus x Fohn 1. 2. it is ad, When | 
was with the Father, and was manife$ed unto us. He was manifest in Lord; 
the fleſh, 1 Tim. 3. 16. | could t 
. . n .  þ oy, . 
3 * All things were made by him f ; and without him '*" —y 
was not any thing made that was made g. and 15, 
f The Divine Nature, and Eternal Exiſtence of the Lord Clift whoſoe 
is evident from his efficiency in the Creation of the World 3 what = - 
( 


the Evangeliſt here calleth Al things, the Apoſtle to the Hebrers, ap 
chap. 1. 2. calleth the Worlds. And St. Paul, Col: 1. 16. calleth all ao 
things that are in Heaven and Earth, viſible and inviſible. Moſes calls aptiſt, 


the Heavens and the. Earth, Gen. 1.1. Theſe were all made by the - Wirn 
Word ; not as an Inftrumental Cauſe, but as a principal effcien* - only 
Cauſe ; for tho' it be true, that the Prepoſition Az, 15 ſometimes Ng Þ 

[ON 


uſed to ſ1gnifie an Inſtrumental Cauſe, yet it 1s as true, that 1t 15 of- 
ten uſed to ſignifie the principal efficient Cauſe 3 as Fohn 6. 57+ AM: revea 


| ; Texts thers gto 
$. 5. and 11. 36. Eph. 4.6. Ads 3. 16, and in many other = 
it here only denoteth the order of the working, of the Holy Trim): Thy *y 


2 Nothing that was made, neither the Heavens nor the Earth, net- 


. Bn ith- Of Johy? 
ther things viſible nor inviſible, that were made, were made _ es 4 
out him. There is nothing more ordinary in Holy Writ, __ vs . nd Is 
the laying down an Univerſal Propoſition, (where no Synecavc'r the Bus, 


uſed), to add alſo an Univerſal Negative for the confirmation 01 


; ; » not one, * 
it: So Rom. 3+ 12. There is none good ; then 15 added, mn won 
not 


3 fame, 


\Wip 


Chap» 5? 


' darkneſs comprehended it not 72. 


S. f0 


t exclude the efi-.ency either of the Firſt or Third Perſon in the 
Sn 1 the Creation Of all things ;- the Father created the World 
2 the Sol His Word'; -_ the Creation of the World is attributed to 
the Spirit, Gen. I. I. Job 33. 4o P/al. 33. 6. 


I, 


4 *in him was life -; and * the life was the light of 


en 7. ck = | 
"= in this Word was Lif: Corporal, Spiritual, Eternal ; It was in 


him as in the Fountain. Som? underftard this of Corporal life, both 
*" thefirſt Being and Preſervation of it; it is certain that this 1s in 
Chriſt for he upholdeth all things by the word of his Power, Heb. 1. 

ads 17. 28» And thus it 15another demonſtration of the Deity 
7 Chriſt. Others think, that here is ratier a tranſition from Crea?t- 
on to Redemiption ; you hath he quickened, Eph. 2. 1. Others un- 
derſtand it of Eternal Life, becauſe our Evangeliſt more generally 
taketh the term of Life, as a bencht lowing from Chriſt in this ſenſe, 
as Chap- 3+ 16+ and 4- 14. avd in a muititude of other Texts. [I 
know no reaſon why. we ſhould not underſtand it of all Life; all Life 
being iN Chritt,as God equal with the Father 3 and 5piritual and Eter- 
nal Life lowing alſo from him *n a more peculiar contidcration, as 
Mediator» 7 But though as God he diſtriutes Life according to 
their degree to all his Creatures, yet is he the peculiar light of men, 
enlightning their minds with Light, of which Vegetative and Senf1- 
tive Creatures are not capable z fo as by L72ht 15 not here to be under- 
ſtood the emanations of any lucid Bodics, as that of the Sun or Stars 3 
(for other Creatures as well as men are c:pable ofthatz ) nor is it to 
he underſtood of the L725t 97 Reaſon, though that be the Candle of 
the Lrd in the Soul ; but that L729 by which we diſcern the things 
of God ; in which ſenſe the Apoftle ſaith, Eph. s. 8. Tou were 
darkneſs, but now you are light in #52 Lord, and therefore he ſaith of 
men, exclufively to Angels, who, tho lightfome, noble Creatures, 
'et had not their nature aſſumed - by Chrift, Heb. 2. 16. Beſides 
that it is ſad in the next Verſe, that this Light ſhined in the darkneſs, 
that is, awongſt many men who ye: had reaſonable Souls, but the 
darkneſs comprehended it mt. That cannot be, that men did not 
comprehend Reaton, but even rational men comprehended not this 
Lizht of ſupernatural Revelation : So 99 15 ſa1d to have come to 
Telifie of that Light 5 who did not come to reftifie of Chriſt, as the 
Author of Reafn. Nor is there any Text of Scripture, in which the 
Term Light ſiznifteth Reaſon. 


5 And * the light & ſhineth in darkneſs /: and the 


þ He had faid before, That Life was in Chriſt, in him as in the 
Fountain 3 and the Life in him was the Light of m+n, giving Light 
to men. Now this Light which was in him, had its emanations (as 
Light in the Sun) and /th- d.rbreſs, that 15, men of dark minds, 
{the ahſtra> being put for the concrete) comprehended (that is, re- 
ceived) it nofs m This was true concerning the Fews in former 
timzs upon whom Chriſt the true Light had thined in many Types 
-nd Prophecies 3 it was alſo frue concerning the Fes of that preſent 
Aze, to whoir: throvgn the favour of him who had undertaken the 
Redemption of man, the mein of Grace were continued ; through 
the blinduef of their minds and hardaeſs of their hearts, they wilful- 
ly rejetted thoſe means of illumination whici Gad granted to them. 


6 © * There was a man ſent from God 7, whoſe name 


was John 0 : | 

1 Not the Chriſt, not an Angel, but a man 3 yet, one, than whom 
(2s our Saviour ſaith) there had not riſen a greater amongſt thoſe 
that were born of Women ; he did not come upon his own kead, 
but was ſent 3 for he was. he of whom 1t was written, Mal. 3. 1. 
Behold I will ſend my meſſonger before my face, &c, Luke 7. 27. He 
was not ſent of men, but of God, foretold by the Angel. as to his 
exiſtence, name, work, and ſucceſs, Luke r. 13, 14, Is, 16, 17. 
0 His name was 7obhn, named by the Angel, Lake 1. 13. betore he 
was born; by his Father and Mother, Luk.” x, 50, 63, when he 
was born. Fohn ſignifieth Grace 3 and doubtleſs the Baptiſt obtained 
that name, Hecauſe he was to be the firit, and a famous Preacher of 
the Grace of the Goſpel which came to the World through Jeſus 


Chriſt, 


7 The ſame came for a witneſs p, to bear witneſs 
of the light q, that all men through him might be. 


lieve r, 

þ Fibn was called a M-fſenzer, to denote his Authority ; a Witneſs, 
to denote his Work, winch 1s the work of every true Miniſter of the 
Goſpel, Fobn was the fir} Witneſs, and Witrefled a thing wholly un- 
known {before him_) to the- generality of the World ; for though the 
Shepherds, and Simeon and Ama had given ſome Teſtimony to Chriſt, 
when he was horn and brought into the Temple to be offered to the 
Lord; yet that was | hirty years ſince, and generally forgot 3 neither 
could they bear a Teſtimony to him as an actual Miniſter of the Gol- 
pel. The Apoſtles were to be Witnefles to Chriſt, A#s 1. 8. Wit- 
nefſes of his Reſurre&ion, Ads 1. 22. and 4. 33. and 5g. 32. and 10. 41, 
and 13, 31. Ail the Prophets, Atts 10. 43. bare Witneſs to him, that 
whoſoever belicveth in his Name ſhould be ſaved. So did John alſo; 
and 1nbn further pointed to him, paſſing by, and Witneffed that he 
vas he of whom the Prophets ſpake. So that the Apoſtles, and fo fol- 
lowing Miniſters, were, and are greater Witnefſ s than John. the 
baptiſt. "The Prophets witneſſed that he ſhould come ; John Bap- 
tiſt wineſ.d that he was come z the Apoſtles witneſſed that he was 
not only come, but had Died, and was again riſen from the Dead. 
9 For Job's Office wzs to givea Teſtimony to Chriſt the true Lignt, 
mentioned before z ſo called, becauſe he mabeth manifeſt, Eph. 5. 13. 
He revealeth his Father, Matth. 11. 29. He 1s the brightneſs of his fa- 
thers glory, Heb. 1. 3. who is Light, 1 John 1. 5s. and the World 
13 by him in!ightned. Tt was Propheſied, Ia. 11. 9. ofhis times, 
That the earth (hol be full of the knowledge of the Lord, q The end 
it 1bns Teſtimony was, That multitudes of all ſorts might believe 
Y him, or by it, as an inſtrumental cauſe of their Faith. If we 


H N. 


8 He was not that light /; 
of that light -. 
f John the Baptiſt was a Light, as all Saints are /i2ht in th? Lord, 


but was ſent to bear witneſs 


nfs, that he was 4 burning and ſhining light ; bet he was not that i717 


which lItghteth every one that cymetb into the World, John borrowed his 
Light from that Original Lizht ;, that Light was God, he was but a 


either wholly reje&ting God's Miniſters and Witneſſes, or e'{ adoring 
them 3 as the World 15 concerned to take heed of the f5-:ner, 1o the 
Miniſters of Chriſt are alſo highly concerned not to admit of the latter. 
See Lithe 7. 33. Ads 14. 13, 14+ but both Jobn here, and P74! there, 
were very cautious not to rob their Maſter of the honour duc unto 
him alone. t John, as was ſaid before, cam... only to hc: Witneſs of 
that Light, that he was come, aid thineth forth, 7:.4 4s the true 
Light, as it followeth, | 


9 * That was the true Light «, which lighteth every 
man that cometh into the world w. 
_ # Trueis ſometimes oppoſed to wizat 1s falſe, Zph. 4. 25. Some- 
times to what is Zzpical and Figurative, John 1. 17. Sometimes to 
what is not Original, and of it ſelf ; in Oppoſitien to all theſe Chriit 
1s the Tive Light ; he who alone deſerved the name of Light, having 
Light in himſelf, and from himſelf, x Jobn 2. 8. and- ſhining more 
gloriouſly than the Prophets or Apoſtles. w He lizhteth not the 
Jews only (as the Prophets of old_) but both the Jews and Gen:iles. 
Some underſtand this of the Light of Reaſon , but beſides, that Reaſ-n 
1s no where in Holy Writ called Lzght ; neither did ti:is illumination 
agree to Chriſt as Mediator. 
of the Lizht of Goſpel Revelation, which Chriſt cauſed to be made to 
all the World, Matth. 28. 19. Markb 16, 15. Thoſe who Inter- 
pret :t of the more internal illumination by the Holy Spirit of God, 
by which Chriſt is not revealed to only, but in #s, ſav, That Chriſt 
hath done what lay in him (as a Miniſter of the Goſpel) fo to in!isht- 
en all that came into the World ; and that Chriſt is ſaid to inlizhe- 
en every man, becauſe none is inlightened but by him; and that 
ſome of all ſorts are by him inlightened ; in one of which two lat- 
ter Senſes, the terms Al! and Every man muſt be Interpreted in a 
multitude of Texts in the Goſpel. The words in the Greeb are ſo, 
as they may either be Tranſlated as we read them, or thus, 1{%9 
commg into the World inlightened every man. A more univerſal Spirt- 
tual Light, or means to come to the Knowledge of God, overſp;ead- 
ing the World after Chriſt's coming, than betore. So John 12. 45. 
T am come a Light into the World, And it is by ſome obſerved, that 
the Phraſe, coming into the world, doth not barely fignifie a being 
barn, but being /ent into the World by the father, being SanTified, as 
iD John 10. 36. and 17. 18. 


by him y ;and the world knew him not z. 

x He was inthe place called the Wirld, and amongſt the men of the 
World: for fo the term World is often taken, chap. 15. 28. 2 Pet. 
3-6, Chriſt before he came in the Fleſh, was in it ; filling both the 
Heavens and the Earth, and ſuſtaining it by the Word of his Power, 
and manifeſting his Will to it, more immediatcly to Moſes and to 
the Prophets, and more immediately by Moſes and by the Prophets, y 
And the Heavens and the Earth, all things viſivle and invitible (as 
was ſaid before) were made by him. And x the men of the Worid 
took no notice of him, did not acknowledge him, believe 1n him,nor 
were ſubjedt to him; fo the word hnow often ſignifies (according to 
the Hebrew Idiom) Fohn 10. 14, 15, 27. not a bare comprehenſi- 
on of an Object in the Underſtanding, but ſuitable affections : So 
Matth 7. 23. 1 fohn 3. 1. This 1s not to be underſtood of all 
individual perſons in the World; for Abraham, Iſaac, and Facob, 
and David, and many particular perſons, did in this ſenſe know 
him 3 but the generality of the Wor'd did not. The Heathens did 
not (who are ſometimes called the World, diſtint!ly from the Zews, 
1 Fohn 2. 2. . 1 Cor. 1. 21.) and moſt of the Fews did not, though 
fome did. 

11 Hecame unto his own 4, and his own received kim 
not b. 

a Chriſt came into. the World, which being made by him, was in 


his own Hovſe, Land and Pofſeſſion, Pjal. 85. i. Fohn 16. 32. Toe 
Greeh word is in the Plural Number,and uſed in the places before men- 
tioned, as alſo A#s 21.6. Sometimes ſignifying mens proper Coun - 
try, ſometimes their proper houſe. But it is a farther queſtion, what 
coming is here ſpoken of ; tho” it be generally (or by many at leaſt) 
interpreted of Chriſt's coming by his Incarnation, yet that ſeemeth 
not to be the ſenſe; partly, becauſe that coming is ſpoken of, v. 14. 
And partly, becauſe in that ſenſe the Fews did receive him 3 nor was 
it in their power, to hinder his manifeſtation in the fleſh. The 
coming therefore here mentioned, ſeemeth to be intended ot his com- 
ing by the Prophets, John the Bap'iſt, and his own perſ:nal Preach- 
ing of the Goſpel. þ Whom in this way of coming, they dic not 
receive, believing neither the Teſtimony given by his Prophets, nor 
by the Baptiſt, nor by himſelf, 12hn s. 43. 


12 But * as many as received him c, to them gave he 
power to become the fons of God 4, ever ro them that 
believe on his name e. 


- 


him, believed in him, and ſubmitted to him; and to. as many as 
thus received him, not into their Houſes only, but into their Kearts, 
c He gave a Power, or a Right, or Privilege; not that they might 
if they wquld be ; but to be actually, to become, or to be the Sons of 
God by Adoption ; for Believers are already the Sons of God, Ga'. 3. 
25. 3 Though it doth not yet appear what they ſhall be in the Adopti- 
on, mentioned Rom, 8. 23. which the Apoſtle calls the Redemption 


read it 5y hams te 3 | 

Pugs ”v him, it is oſt proper to undcritand the Pronoun of John 
- apt1f - for we are nct ſaid to velieve by Chri#, but in him, in 
3 name, XC, 


(drenofc of all that believe in the name of Chriſt z by which term he 


of the body, viz. in the Reſarreim ; hence Luke 29 36. . the Chil- 
dren of God are called the Children of the Reſurreftion. 4 This is the 


cpens 


Eph. 5. 8. Nay, in a peculiar ſenſe our Saviour bearcth him Wir- 


b-fore mentioned, v. 5. that ſhineth in darkneſs, and again, v. g. 


man ſent from God. The men of the World are ordirarily 1 cxtreams, 


1o He was in the world x, and * the world was made  ;;. 


'c Though the generality of thoſe amongſt whom Chriſt came, re-| 
ccived him not in the manner before expreſſed ; yet ſome did own p;u;lege. 


Chap. L 


It 15 rather thercfore to be underſtood - 


hb. 1s 


2. and 


$2, 25 


the moſt proper ſenſe his own ; or, to the Tſraelites, which were as - 


Y Iſa. $6. 5 
Rom. 8. 15» 
2 Pet. 1.: 4» 
: John 3. r, 
| right, - or 


| 


- _ Th: _- 6 
7 * ——— - "A » -—-- 44 
NI F Sout oy Bo - - —_ —4 
— Pn. _ - - - ——_ 7 
_— FS] G "Y ad wo ons = 


6 i > 
—- 5 C > 
% ph, - 
a nes , 
- Sets "a> 
—_— —— ”- 
at SS 


$4.4 
_ _ 
m_ 
Xe ——_— 
"IA > bl = 
-74 . 


— I 2:ns 


A « 
"FAS - 


A 
= 


n ” 
i 


2 


4 n —— = X | 0% , 
= if . WK . _ p- - F © ,—_—_ ” by 4 eo 4 —_ - 
4 Z 48s es . _—_ - - _— = # 
OE" Bo _— —— bones K 's _—_— —— p a - BY - mer = - 
- S<t 6 by = a => POSI _ =—_ - - "Ie ee 4” Q F "Jo - 3 «lf De. . 4 -->, ——_— # > - N d ug ws * = . E « bi o_ Do "A : - . 
L - g _ - - ER. SIN - . = < OS ba Pw - FS TT" > . - - _ £0 — _ 
” , p A By, L—_ — dS: s . 1 <2 edwntc—es. 2g < ; " p we Lan Ee, SIT: s 5 4 —_I SY a. 
_ 3 * = <7 nm _— wac7 7 oy > fp" . 0 -— 4; - » OI—_ Jo -. - # 4 =. > 4X"; , > £ wy _ o y ey es ae v4 - hs _ - 5 _ hy +; Y fe ed = 
= is . - — - - — Frea__ . 2+ * , 's FY ” - ©, þ £ - 1:5 > — 2% 5 0 "* a. : _ - A — FA -n FR % ET ae 1 - 2 x x I ” + - E 4 
x : ” F== n 42g > Fs: — - 7 ov 44> - ef "2 * A IR" - 4 _— CET oaks 4 4 TEAS p pros - bh es : 4s 4 A” WES ,- "Oy" . . = - F Fo 
ox , A Fc "_ A £ - Pe we " ” - 65-0 "ngs mY > >. ——— - v.-_ wag Ee * _ _— mw XL J - " nog . F = a ans tt 4 PO 4 - + -* t ” . gomm— __ poem 
. 4 . _ _ i - « $2 J p x - s £ . Fi a - 4 * 4 ” - * a - QT e—_— ” 5 I ” - W — 
2 C # ey -- £ _ a _ - , þ . = m_— i = * -— - - - _— = x _ _ _ _ _ I— =- n — = - « * " 
<a” ?., c—_— <— An le can . - MN L7 _—— 2» — Lone tt =—_ ID. _ = I x , Ee <<< 2 ——_ Do” ada —_— rg Y IE Se = a. it x Ys a "AC 4 > he gs <4 => G4 - rant benny bs Art ating wp —m—— 
OS gs ho r=” 73 2 WW ——ha_gh® AIDES: G ” > - o— —__ - _ "4 —_— 2 pr = vp ad. > Ki ks _— _ . A by 24, regen \ 4 
a R LENT”. -h=Ey - > > a ee” 0.6 rd = . * - p "= . , _— X IA » a I R _ oe WIDSEE gm #4 * - 4 J - RELA : « Bl . * 5 . 
SAC. _> oy m_ b 4 a = —_ —_ _ _ EI G _ bo X, ———" : i "_” _ $ ” (. _ " ». *%-'% _ = ” >\ _ < I ” 
a tn, - ps "a = -*- & Ka <£5 nah 4 SES * ry ; o_ - " _— " - <p ex " HAT nod A : ..*; JEER. "I" oy - - Gre tt to . - - 4 « : -- 
» 7 > pa : OS £45 a & Is, WOW E i. = q - p . - p . - DT hy : : A - - % £ + 
> "= = +. 3 _— 6 % 0 w_ « by "Y 2 . = Fy ——_— . T T5 = PII 4 Su -- - th wy . , _ af . 
»-S — to er — £—> : - a. 5 1 J - ed a ae l a Py 1 £ = > 7] T m v _ - 4 = — - n ©-0 
7 \ —_ = - . .-S p———my Fg 1 r Þ . = FP ”” >> A 7 = ; C v A "> 4 : * i : b P—_ - > P_ Py Oy - "7 S . = <q A " = 0 : 
a 4 5 a 's * » hs wAE'S VL $90 6 a +a. =y —_ — ISS. bh A " 4 X 6 .- "g- . wy + - by i. h - > — A > 2" en _ Y == : _ ” 
ps - Meh x m——. : po -\ Al 2 
nll a _— * PL ——— . — od , 2 - - - Sew Gates - hen . 3: a ” 
> cx: - Inq c 4 ad x k Dr :.. eo W — « A 
ra _ * a— aq ae 2s : WOT ; . = 
a -- v 


cream -. —-; 


Chap. L 


opens the former term of Receiving : To reteive Chriſt, and to believe , 


?n his Name,are the ſame thing.To believe in his Name is either to be- 
liev2 in him. As 3.16.0r 1N the Revelation of himtelt in the Promiſes 0) 
the Goſpel.The propoſition of God's Word 15 the objett of Faith of aſ- 
fent ;, but the perſon of the Medrator 15 the object of that Faith which 
receiveth Chriſt ; and thoſe alone have a Right to be the Sons of God, 
and to the Privileges peculiar to Sons, who believe in Chriſt as reveal- 
ed in the Promiſes of the word of God, and there exhibited to 


men. 
13 * Which were born, not of blood - f, nor of the 
will of the fleſh g, nor of the will of man #, but of 


God 3, 
f Not of the Blood of Men and Women ; or not of the Blood of 


Abraham Cwhich was the boaſt of the Fews, we have Abraham to our 
Father.) g Nor from the Luſts of the Fleſh. hþ Nor from a power 
in mans Will, or mens free at in adopting other Mens Children. 
To be born, ſignifieth to receive our principle of Life 3 thoſe who ars 
the Children of God have not the principle of their Life, as they are 
ſuch, from the motions of nature, nor from the Will of men. 7 
But of God, whatever be the ſenſe of the former Words, theſe Words 
plainly aftirm God to be the principal efficient, and procreant cauſe of 
all thoſe who are the Sons of God ; for Faith, by which we are the 
children of God, Gal. 3. 26. is the work of God, Fobn 6. 29. His 
Gift, Phil. 1. 29. and men are bon again, not of corruptible ſeed, 


* Chap. 3.4 
James 1. 8, 
FGr. Bloods. 


S. fFOHN. 


truth came by Jeſus Chriſt w. 


given by Moſes as God's Miniſter and Servant, that Law by which nc 
man can be juſtified, Rom. 3. 28. In this was Aves his honoyr of 
whom you glory, Chap, s. 46. God indeed made ay 
nent uſe of him, as his Miniſter z by whom he revealed his Will _ 
you z both in matters of his Worſhip, according to that Diſpenſzr: 
on ; and in matters which concern you in your whole Converſgri. 
on ; but yet there is an eminent difference betwixt him ang Jeſus 
Chriſt, The law is no where called Grace, neither doth it diſcover 
any thing but Duty and Wrath ; it ſheweth no remiſſion, in cj; thar 
Duty be not done 3 nor affordeth ſtrength for the doing of jr 

All that is from Chriſt, all the favour of God for the Remiſſich ; 4 
Pardon of Sin, and for Strength and Affiſtance to the performance ( 
Duty, is ( not given from God by Chriſt, as the Law by app; bur) 
from Chriſt, as the Fountain of Grace ; And not Grace only, 1, 
Truth, whether taken for ſolid and rea{ mercy, or with reſpe& "A ig 
Law 3 the fulfilling of all the Types and Prophecies in it, was by ,. 
in Chriſt. 


18 * No man hath ſeen God at any time x : the one] 


e 


Y and 


declared him *, 
x No man hath at any time ſeen the Eftence of God with his 


but that which is incorruttible, 1 Pet. 1. 23. They are ſanttified and 
cleanſed with the waſhing of water by the word, Eph. 5. 
The waſhing of regeneration, and renewing of the huly ghoſt, 
Titus 3+ 5. 

14 * And the word was made fleſh k, 
16. mongſt us /, (and * we beheld his glory m1, 
Luke r. the ongly begotten of the father) », * full of grace and 


31-2nd 2.7. txyth o. 
* Matth 


19. 2. 
2 Pet.1. 17. 
* Col.1.15. 
& 2+ 3, 9+ 


* Matth. 1. 


6. 12. Pſal. 65. 2. Ja. 49. 5, 5: 

tal man. The Evangeliſt rather faith; 1 
was made man ; more plainly to diſtinguiſh the two Natures 1n 
Chriſt, to aſſert the truth of his Huinane Nature to ler us know that 


i Fohn 4. 24. Nor with the eyes of his mind underſtood the 
26+ { Counſel and will of God, Matth. 11. 27. Rom. 11, 34+ Miſes in. + 
| deed ſaw the Image and Repreſentation of God, ana had a more 6. 
| miliar converſe with God thaa others 3 upon which account he is (4; 
and dwelt a- ; to have talked with God f..ce to face, Num. 12, 7, 8: God ſaith þ, 

the glory as of 
' and God who had ſpoke to the ſame ſenſe, Exod. 33. 11. ſaith , 2, 
| _ { Thou canſt not ſee my face, for there is no man ſhall ſee me and live, Ngy 
b þ The Son of Sod, called the Word, for the reaſons before ſpecifi- ' to whom he did not diſcover his face, he certainly did not diſcoyer 
ed, was made truly man, as fieth often iigaifieth in Holy Writ, Gen, | all his ſecret Counſels. a But he who is the only begotten and 2. 
Not a vile, deſpicable, mor- } loved Son, hath ſuch an intimate Communiog with him in his N;. 

he was made Fleth, than he | ture, and ſuch a free Communication of all hi: Counſels, as it may he 


would ſpeak unto him mauth to month, even apparently , but he tell y; 
how in the ſame Verſc, and the ſemilitude of the Lord ſhall he teh; ; 


; faid, he 15s continually in his Boſom. * Hath declared him, not on. 
ly as a Prophet, declareth the Mind and Will of God, but as the X24. 


Chriſt aſſumed Humane Nature in common, not the particular na- - vens declare the glory of God; and the Firmament ſheweth his handy withs, 
ture, of any, to commend the Love of God, and to let us ſee, That { Pſal. 19. 1. Being the brightneſs of hjs fathers glory, and the exp 
his Plaiſter was proportioned to our Sore, it reached all Fleſh. The ; Image of his perſon, Heb. 1. 3- $0.as the Father can only be ſeen inthe 


Evangeliſt ſaith not, he was changed into Fleſh; but, by aſſuming 
he was made Fleſh. / And he Tabernzcled amongſt us ; amongſt us 
men, or amongſt men that were his Diſciples : The word fignifieth 
properly, he made no long ſtay. m And we beheld the ſigns and ct- 


fefts of his Glory ; mary of which were ſeen, both at the time of | 


| Son 3 nor 16 ſo full a Revelation of the Fathers Will to be expetteq 
from any, as from the Son. 


19 And this is * thexecord of John, when the Jews fent'C 
Prieſts and Levites from Jeruſalem, to ask him, Whoar 


his Transfiguration, and at his Paſſion, Reſurre&ion and Aſcenſion ; thou b ? 


the Glory of his Grace, Holineſs, Truth, Miraculous Operations, Fc. , 
nWhick Glory was the Glory of the only begotten of the Father , 


for the particle [ as ] here doth not ſignifi Likeneſs, but Truth ; 
Nehemiah 7. 2. Job 24. 14. 0 Full of Grace an Truth, as he was 
God manifeſted in the fleſh. Grare fignifieth Love and Good Will, 
out of which it was that he delivered us from the Curſe and Rigour 
of the Law (to which Grace is oppoſed.) He was alſo full of Truth, 
both as Truth is oppoſed to Falſhood, and 1s oppoſed to the Shadows 
and Figures of the Law ; and Chriſt was full of Truth, as he was the 
Antitype to all the Ceremonies, and all the Promiſes had and have 
their complement and reality in him, See Chap. 14. 179. 2 Cor. 
1. 20. Rom. 15. 8, Truth alſo may fignifie the ſrncerizy and integrity 
of Chriſt's Life, as he was without guile. ; 
15 4 John bare witneſs of him, and cryed, fſayingp : 
* Ver. 27.* This was he of whom [I ſpake q: He that cometh af- 


30. & ChaP- ter me is preferred before mer; for he was before 
3: 31- me /. 

p John was not he, but only a Witneſs to him, and he continucth to 
bear Witneſs, (the Verb is in the prefent Tenſe) nor did he give 
an obſcure or cold Teftimony, but an open, and plain, and fervent 
Teſtimony, zccording to the Prophecies, his Teſtimony was the 
Voice of one crying in the Wilderneſs. q He firft teſtified that 
Chriſt was he of whom he had beforc ſpoken ; poſſibly when he 
was Preaching in the Wilderneſs, and Chriſt came to him to be Bap- 
tizcd-of him, Matth. 3+ 11, 14+ Y He that cometh after me, in or- 
der of time, or in the Miniſterial Office and Employment, or, as if 
he were my Diſciple, John 18. 2. is become, or is made before me. 
f For he was before me, doth in the Etcrnal deſtination, and in re- 
ſpe& of his Divine Nature ; as alſo in Dignity and Eminency, confi- 
dered as a Prophet; 7.e. one that Revcaleth my Fathers Will, 
This Jsbr ſaid before, though not in- terms, yet 1n effe&t ; when he 
faid, Matib. 3. 11. He that cometh after me, #s mightier than 1, 
whoſe ſhoes T ain not worthy to bear, &c. $0 Mark 1. 7. Lake 3. 
"16. This is the firſt thing which is here mentioned, as John's 
Teſtimony concerning Chriſt, reſpeRing the Excellency of his per- 
ſon. 

16 And of his * fulneſs have all we received ?, and grace 
for grace *, 

z Of that plenty of Grace which Chriſt hath, (who hath not the 
Spirit given him by mezaſare, Chap. 3. 34» as other Saints haye, 
Atis 2. 4, 6,8.) #e who by Nature are void of Grace, whether 
taken for the favour of God, or gracious habits, have received as the 
Skirts of Aaron's Garment received the Oil which was plentifully 
poured out on Aaron's head. * Nor have we received Drops, but 
Grace wpom Grate; not only Knowledge and Inſtruftion, but the 
Love and Favour of God, and Spiritual hits, 1a. proportion to the 
Favour and Grace which Chriſt hath (allowing for our ſhort capa- 
cities 3) we have reccived Grace freely and- plentifully, all from 
Chriſt, and forhis ſake 3 whch lets vs tee how much the Grace re- 
ccivivg Son is bound to acknowledge and adore Chriſt, and may be 
confirmed in the recciving of further Grace, and the hopes of Eternal 
Life 3 and it may mard all { according to that of the Apoſtle, 2 Cor, 
6. 1.) to take heed that they recejve net the Grace of God in 


& Col. 1. 
19. & 2, 
9, IO. 


V&il. 


| 


b John's former Teſtimony was more private to the common peo. 
ple; this Teſtimony was given to a publick Authority. The Jes 
(moſt probably the Rulers of the Fews who made up their Sanhediin, 
or great Court, anſwering a Parliament with us, for the cogniſance 
of falſe Prophets belonging to them) ſent Priefts and Levites, whichu, 
24. - were Phariſees of the ſtrifteſt Se of the Fews, as to Rites and 
Ceremonies z theſe came from Feruſalem, where the Sanhedrim con- 
ſtantly ſatez and the Chief Prieſts were (if the Meſſage were not 
from the Sanhedrim it ſe'f) to ask Jobn Baptiſt who he was ; that is, 
by what Authority he Preached and Baptized ; what kind of Prophet 
he was? for they could not but know his Name and Family, he def 
cending from a Prieft amongſt them z and this appeareth to be their 


: ſenſe from what followeth. 


20 And he * confeſſed c, and denied not d ; but confel- +hy 
28, 


c He being asked openly and plainly, profeſſed, and d did not dif- At 
ſemble, nor halt in his Speech. Theſe Negatives are in Scripture 25: 


ſed e, I am not the Chriſt . 


often added to affirmatives, to exclude all Exceptions. Job 5. 17. 
Pſal. 40. 10, 11, 12, eHe did not tell them once ſo, but again and 
again, becauſe many were muſing about it, Lube 3. 15. f I am not 
that great Mefiah which God hath promiſed you, and in the exp:tts-. 
tion of whom you live, Luk, 2. 25, 38. and 19.11. John 4. 25. 
The Diligence we ſhall conſtantly obſerve in the Servants of Goc. 
in Holy Writ, to avoid the arrogating of that Honour to theralelve, 
which 1s due only to God and Chriſt ; together with Jobn's Steadinels 
and Plainneſs, doth very well become all Profeſſors, but the Miniſt- 
ers of the Goſpel eſpecially. 


21 And they asked him, What then ? Art thou Elia y ? 


he anſwered, No k. 


g John was at Bethabara when theſe Meſſengers came to him, 
v. 28, they asked him if he were Elias. The Jews had not oltiy 
an Expedation of the Meſſiah, but of Eljas to come as a Mellenget 
before him, according to the Prophecy, Mal. 4. 5. as appearcin; 
Matth. 17. 10. Mat. 9, 11. of which they had a groſs Concep!i- 
on here, That Elias ſhould come out of Heaven perſonally, or # 
leaſt that his Soul ſhould come into another Body (according t9 the 
Pythagorean Opinion) now the meaning of the Prophecy was, That 
one ſhould come like E/ias, and this was fulfilled in Jobn, Luke I 
17. as Our Saviour tells us, Matth. 19. 12. Matk 9+ 13: but 
they asked the Queſtion according to that notion they had of Eli. 
h To which John anſwereth, that he was not neither that Elias that 
aſcended in a Fiery Chariot to Heaven z nor any body informed with 
Elias's Soul, ( and thus the words of our Saviour, Matth. 17- 12: 
Mark 9, 12. are cafily reconciled to this Text. ) 7? They g9 01 
and ask him if he were that Prophet, or a Prophet, Some think that 
he meant the Prophet promiſed, Dext. 18. 18. but that was no 
other than Chriſt himſelf, which he had before denied himſelt to <r 
nor doth it appear from any Textof Scripture, that the Je = 
any ExpeRation of any other particular Prophet 3 but 1t 15 Pt, 


from Luke 9.8. that they had a notion that 1t was poſſible one 9i 
" 
fd 


the. old Prophets wight rife again from the Dead, for fo they 85, 


A [, 
u The Law Moral and Ceremonial came not by Myzs. bus ... 
. JS, Out W113 


% 


t5, 
Eyes, | Joly 
Whole 12. 


And he faith, I am not h. Art thou!| that Prophet i? Andi 4" 


Lukets 


begotten ſon, which is in the bolome of the Father a, he hat [Tn 


ww is 


Chap 4p. 


17 For the * Law was given by Moſes «, but grace and ++... 


TS On wn an mn oo oo «co aac —_ au Me. a. 


nw WA co © 


Cition 


ral ſig 
they | 
wino | 
the W 
a parti 
Eiders 


t Joby 
Is, Preferre, 
4 Yords ; 
Put thj 
to he 


D. W'#P: 


XA 


4 6 4\$, q 
4 


, 
w iq 


"rap 


3 


31 470 


fed therec 
Gre here 
a Prophet 3 


which they 

geſtion 
Neither ! 
Prophets 
ſhewed an 
foreſhewiNg, 


a ſri, 
6. An 


Prophet, 


ople they ſhould not eat fleſh one, or two, or five, or ten, or twenty 


days, becauſe they ſhould eat it a whole Month together, 


22 Then ſaid they unto him, Who art thou /? that we 
may give an anſwer to them that ſent us z, What faiſt 
chou of thy ſelf  ? 

/ Hitherto Fobn had given them only a Negative Anſwer, and 
told them who he was not ; he was neither Chriſt, nor the Elias, 


nor that Prophet they expedted ; neither any of the old Prophets 
riſen from the Dea 3 - nor any Prophet at all in a ſtri& ſenſe (as 
were the Prophets of the Old Teſtament z ) they preſs him to a 
dired, plain, poſitive Anſwer. m That they might give an An- 
ſxer to thofe that ſent them, who did not ſend them to enquire 
what he was not, but what he was =» And there were various 
talks and diſcourſes of the Pcople about him, which they were not 
willing to take up and run away witi; but they deſired to have it 


from himſelf. 
23 * Hefaid, I a» the voice of onecrying in the wilder- 


,1, nels, Make ſtraight the way of the [ord, as {aid the prophet 
2 Efaias 0, 


0 We have the ſame, Matth. 2. 3. Mar. 1.3. Scethe Notes 
there, Chenmitius thinks, that John choſe rather to preach, and 
fulfil his Miniſtry in the Wilderneſs, than in the Temple; to 


make an illuſtrious difference betwixt himſelf, who was but the 
Jord's Meſſenger, and whoſe Office was but to prepare the Lord's 


way, and his Lord himſelf, of whom it was Prophecied, Mal. 


3.1, The Lord whim yo! feek, ſhall ſuddenly come to his Hbly 
Temple; upon which account Hagga! prophecied, Haggai 2. 9: 


That the Glory of that Jatter houſe ( builded by Exra, and 
Zerobabzl , and Nehemiah ) ſhould be greater than of the former. 


24 And they which were ſent, were of the Phari- 
ſees p. 

(7) Who theſe Phariſees were, h:th been before explained in our 
Notes on Matth. 3. 7. Thev were of the ſtrited Set of the Jewiſh 
Religion, As 26. 5» The greateſt part of their Councils was made 
up of thoſe of this Set, as may be learned from As 23. They were 
the men moſt Zealous for, and tenacious of the Fewiſh Rites; and 
would allow nothing to be added to the jewiſh Worſhip to what they 
had received concerning it, either from the Law of God, or the Tra- 
tions of the Elders. 


25 And they asked him, and faid unto him, Why Bap- 
tizeſt thou then, if thou be not that Chriſt,nor Eltas, neither 
that Prophet q ? 


qThe Phariſees themſelves would allow the Meſſiah, or Elias or a 


Priphet, ro make any additions to, or alterations 1n the Worſhip of 
God, but none elſe : Hence it is, they ask, by what Authority he- 


Baptized, if he were noe of theſe ? From whence we may learn, That 
although they might have ſome Umbrage of that Biptiſmal Waſhing 
which was under the Goſpe!, to commence into a Sacrament, or faede- 
ral ſign in the waſhing of their Proſelytes, or of jewith Children when 
they were Circumciſed 3 yet John's Aion was looked upon as new, 
who Baptized adult Jews z now the care of the Sanhedrim was to keep 
the Worſhip of God ihcorrupt. and the Phariſees amongſt them had 
a particular Zeal in the caſe, eſpecially ſo far as the Traditzons of the 
Eiders were concerned. 


26 John anſwered them, ſaying, r, * I baptize with 


* Water * but there ſtandeth one amongſt you, whom you 


know not 5 ; 


! This was no ſtrict Anſwer to their Queſtion ; which was not, how 
but why he Baptized ? But proper Replyes are often cal'ed &nſwers 
n Scripture, though not appoſite to the Queſtion. * 1 Baptize you 
with meer Water s, but there hath ſtood one amongſt you, Z5yxgy, 
Or (by an vſual putting ofone Tenſe for another) there ſtandeth one 3 
(Chriſt bad been there with the Croud, Luke 3: 15, 21. and poſſi- 
bly was amongt them ſtill, when John ſpake theſe werds,) whom you 

40 not, not ſo muci1 as ore tenzs, by Face, 


. 27 He*itis, who coming after me is preferred be- 


' fore me 3, whoſe ſhoces latcher I am not worthy to un- 
; looſe 4, | 

5, t Jobhnthe Baptijt, had before to!d them, He that cometh after me, is 
ls, Preferred bj»; me, Sce the Notes there, He now repeateth thoſe 
4 *ords 3 and it is obſervable, that the three other Evangeliſts all 


Put this Paſſage before the Hiſtory of Chriſt's coming to him 
0 be Baptized,” So as it is probable, that theſe 


L S. FOAON. 
oncerning Chriſt : But others think that the article in the ; Meſſengers came to John as he was 
is not cinphaticalz and they only asked him if he were ately before or after Chriſt's Baptiſi 
for the Fews had a general notion, that the Spirit of Pro- ! he repeateth to his hearers, what he had a little before ſ1i4 of him 
ecy had left them ever ſince the times of Zachariah and Malachy | that he was to be preferred before hi . 
hoped was returned 1n Fohn the Bap:iſt,and about this they | with a Proverbial Speech, 
him, if he were a Prophet ? þ To which he anſwereth, No, 
hat Prophet promiſed, Deut. 18. 18. nor yet any of the old 
riſen from the dead ; nor yet one like the Prophets of the 
Old Teſtament, who only Prophecied of a Chriſt to come ; but as 
Chriſt calls bim, Matth. 31. 9. More than a Prophet, one who 
d declared to them a Chriſt already come ; for the Law 
and the Prophets Prophecied but until 7ohn 3 the Law in its Types 

the Prophets, in ther Sermons foretclling a Meſſtah to 
come, John did more. His Father indeed, Luke 1, 75. called him 
the Prophet of the higheft ; but there Prophet is to be underſtood not in 
but in a large ſenſe, as the term Prophecy is taken, Rom. y 2. 
d the term Prophet often ſignifieth one that revealeth the Will 
of God tomenz in which large ſenſe 7ohn was a Prophet, and yet more 
than a Prophet, in the ſtrifter notion of the term ; and in that ſenſe No 
that is, no meer Prophet ; ſo Numb. 11.19. Moſes tells the | 


—_— 


— 


with the Holy Ghoſt, and Fire, Matth. 3. 11. or with the Mot 
Ghoſt, as Mar. 1. 8. : ; : I OY 


28 Theſe things were done in Bethabara beyond Jor- 
dan z, where John was Baptizing +. 

4 The Evangeliſt had before told us what was done, theſe words 
tell us where, Some ancient Writers will have the place to have been 
Bethany but they ſeem not to have ſo well conſidered Fobn 11. 18. 
where Bethany is ſaid to have been but fifteen Furlongs from Jeruſalem, 


that this place was 7ge2y, beyond Jordan, in the Tribe of Reuben, in 
the Country of Peres, x where John at this time was Baptizing, and 
probably had been fo for ſome time. 


|cakethaway the ſin of the world b, 


y The moſt think, the day following that day, when the Meffengers 
rom Hieruſalem had been examining the B.ptift, Heinſins thinks it 
was the ſame day. and faith, the Helleniſts uſually fo interpret 2 
eTeveroy for us)e Javle, after theſe things ; but the former Senſe is 
more generaily embraced. 2 John ſeeth Jeſus coming ts im out of 
the Wilderneſs, (as ſome think) where ke iad hcen tempted by the 
Devil ; but then it muſt follow, that he was not amongſt the Croud, 
v. 26. ſtanding in the midſt of them when the Meflengers were there, 
and it ſhould appear by v. 32, and 33. that this which is here re- 
corded happened after Chriſt's Baptiſm by John Cof which this Evan- 
geliſt faith nothing ; ) it ſeer:1eth rather to be underſtood of aqother 
coming of Chriſt to John after he had been Baptized. * When Johr 
ſecing him,pointed as it were with his Finger to him (for the term Be- 
hold ſeemeth to be here uſed demonſtratively) ſhewing them the 
perſon whom he would have them caſt their Eye upon; whom he 
calls, a the lamb of God, not only to denote his Excellency, as we 
read of the Night of the Lard, Exod. 12. 42. and the Bread of God; 
Lev. 21. 21, which indeed Chriſt was, being without Blemiſh, x Per. 
1.19. But with reference to the Lambs uſed in the Jewith Sacri- 
fices, not only at the Paſſover, Exod. 12. 5+ but in the daily Sacri- 
fice, Exod. 29, 38, Lev. 1. 10. or the Burnt Offerinz, and in the 
Peace Offering, Levit. 3. 7. and in the Sin Offering, Levit. 4. 32: 
he calls Chriſt the Lamb of God, probably, becauſe divers of the 
Prieſts were there to hear 3 and (as appears, v. 39. ) it was nigh the 
time of thcir daily Sacrifice, that ſo he might mind them, that Chriſt 
was the Truth and Anti-Type to all their Sacrifices, b 5 &tgwy, The 
word 1ignifies, both to take up, and to take away ; that taketh away 
the Sins of the World, as God (to whom it belongs ro forgive Sin) 


and this he did by taking them upon himſelf (ſo it is Tranſlated, 
Matth. 16, 24.) expiating them, which expiation is followed by a 
plenary Remiffion, and taking them away, both the puniſhment of 


them, and the root, and body, and power of them ; Redceming 
them as from the Grave and Hell due to Man for Sin; ſo from a 
Vain Coerſation, 1 Pet. 1. 18. and not doing this for the Jews on- 
ly, but for the Gentiles alſo, x John 2. 2. for many in the World, 
being he, without whom there is no remiffion, As 4. 12, Nor 
dot! his gracious at ceaſe at any time, 1t 154 work he is always do- 
ing, and which none but he can do : Miniſters may perſwade, Prieſts 
of old offered Lambs and other Beaſts in Sacrifice z but he alone takcth 
away Sin, So that, as what he ſaid to tne Meſſengers of the Sanhe- 
drim, gave all the honour of any valuable cffe& of Baptiſm to Chriſt - 
So, what he ſaith here, gives him all the honour of any good effe& 
of Preaching, or any good cet of our Miniſtry ; it is he alone, 
who (when we have ſaid or done what we can} taxeth away the Sin 
of the World. 


man, which is preferred before me : for he was before 


me. 
c And (ſaith he) this is he of whom I ſaid, (as v. 15.) he cometh 
after me in order ot Time and Miniſtry, but is more excellent than L 
am. Seethe Notes on v. 15. 

31 And Iknewhim not e - but that he ſhould be made 
manifeſt unto Iſrael f, therefore am I come baptizing with 
water g, 

e This verſe is beſt expounded by v. 33. where the ſame words 
are repeated, 7 knew him not 3 and 1s added, but he that ſent me to 
baptize with water, the ſame ſaid unto me, Upon whom thou ſhalt ſee 
the ſpirit deſcending,&c.Leſt any ſhould think that Chriſt and John had 
compatted together to give one another credit,or that there was ſome 
near relation betwixt John and Chriſt, Jobn faith, I knew him not, 
for Chriſt had ſpent his time at home, -Lxke 2. 51. John had lived 
in deſart places.the Providence of God ſo ordering it,that Joha ſhould 
not know Chriſt, ſo much as by face, until that time cane, - when 
Chriſt was to he made manifeſt to Tfael. f But that God might make 
1is Son manifeſt unto J/rael, when God by an extraordinary miffion 
ſent John to Baptize with Water, he gave him this Token, That 
he upon whom he. ſhould ſee the Spirit deſcending and remain- 
ing on him, as-v. 33. that was the Meſſiah, the' Lamb of 


God, that ſhould take away the Sin of the World, _ 
wHh 


Chap, L 
Eaptizing, af cichcr immed:+ 
n, Chriſtheing yet in the Croud, 


- m. # He here iniargeth upon it 
| ik bial which the other Evange'iſts have, with a 
very little variation 3 Matthew ſaith, whoſe Shogs I am nt worthy to 

bear : that is, to perform unto him the very mcaneſft Service or 
Office. We have ſuch forms of Speeches in uſe at this day amongſt 
us, when we would expreſs the great pre-eminence of ſome one ove 
another 3 we ſay of that other, He is not worthy to tze his Shes's ; Or, 
to carry his 5hoo's after him. There is a vaſt difference between Chriſt, 
and the moſt excellent of his Miniſters ; which as to Baptiſm Iveth 
here ;. the Miniſterial Baptiſm is but with Water; Chriſt Baptizeth 


and conſequently on this fide Jordan z whereas the Evangeliſt ſaith , 


' 29 Þ The next day y, John ſeeth Jeſus coming ' to- 
him z, and faith, Behold * the * lamb of God a, which «1c, PR 


30 Thisis he, of whom [I faid c, After me. cometh a 


] 
; ; 
[4 $ 

83 
, , | 
: 
4 
-: 
3s. 
4; 
> 
i 34: ». My 
b : 
1 $4 
$29 6. 
. - 
7 
" Ls 
, 
i +147 
+2 : 


——c% - - ; 
ITS gr), Cone . = 7 
” 


. . . = —_y = o - - 
2 : — 
oh Wa"... l 
5 > on > AO-Bauk 
: . _ —_ _—_— 
_ — - . - - 
M+ 


ne: 


: - 
. L 4 
ol 8-7 
PT =” 
LE PE 
' 1h 


« 
}; 
| 
x 
\ W 

+ 

* 

1 


- 
—d 


1 


. A 
 —=— ATR. +... 
COS, I as 
>; 
—_ 


EIY ks 
22. 
Rae 


7 
= _ - 


q: ; 

mu; 
' if 

+14 


- Ton = - © $ 
4 —_— - Ts 
Sek : A * AT —_—— 
K > $4 * 
4 : % $— er 7 b 
a o—yt 3 7 4 £5... = - f 
. - "- Ry _— —_— ». 
; = my —_— ns. . vw reid ar a 4 
$4 % ” "ws — ———_— —_— pond _- 
— nm Ke a = wi - do - ys - 
_ _ <0 ys g _ - ey = . —_ 
£L# —Y þ : 4 - —_ =9 d- ”—_ * - y IF ” 
0 S >" a : ” 
" - Ek pn .\ — - Y * A Tt 
"il « - #*S FIVE ah, <a " > — - , y 
"X w — , ” : _ ” _ — . ——_—— - o 
-_ a. a ” ood _ oÞ > : 2 _— 
nn __— _— - & 4 . _ _——_— — DMECII—I—SE _ _— . , - » —q_— 
A . - %- . v4 ” . 4 - a5. bs 7 c —» Ps —_— - 
Geet 4 - « is Ry - : : gs omen ——_—_ TS * * —__ a. = A 
mn ut gre Xp DIES - ml S MI : ; . wy = EW . Mo rnnns ms en nn — LESS: . . 
Sorter re "EF: a. at Ze _ - - "4 IC. - Y © - - - — - —_ _ genes wn £ - 
7 ou Pe » - E 6 = = _ - © . 
"BSc ” woot ar 7» dtd ate n A COmn_ - - ——— — _ —_ —— _ - bs. AY _ Log 
_ wg &, - oo 7 " _ pt yo Doo re q —_ - — > —_ — INOV 
GIRLS » . FA _ ye : . _—_ « - _ © >, > 4 —_—_ - b _ = 
= - : RET z I - _y [== >< - , 4 — Fm * L et ee 8 = — qt "om wr - 4 . - —_ won 
ary) - d * oo - hg £ wo ” ” I n « oy bt L_ 5; pe] ITE - "oF ” a 
m_—_ - ” r "Su > *% » —_— 4 -z* # *%s 8 Io m4 4 2p _ - 
* d my 25, _—_ -. . 6 F. x TC 4 - ” - : R " a > — . Dp _ 
y X . AF. x: fon - » __— . p \ _ "T7 * ” - 
_ Pa. oe nd 2 V2 -þ + P%g i : 4 "4 F : 7.4 o : . w P 
_ . " 4 _ WIE » M25 a . » — % a 44 » & + 
4 a > ; ſb - — - = - . * - To. os py ” k 4. - 
- - - £ _ _- - "4 —— 
FS £* - ors 1 Y _ 


; bY 

I's * : fro 
LN IT ET. 'Y 
a. ; AL þ * 
| "7e. of : R « 4 is 

55 8 81 [ad pr. 
N38). $3582 3 28% + 7Y 
14 6}, 17 8 $2 (8 
M59 be a6? | "2008" 
' i " : * 1 iff P & 
/ (id |S 8. 4 
j { F 1% 48 ; Fs { 
af 15 w Af 'Þ } Mo 
FF TRANS 
q it 3 3 FU Ws 
(- £1} } $4; *'SI0 | 
ite: 4/208 Fe MN; | 

OR et 
ME T1000 [08 
Sg TT, 
v1 40 WIRE th 
; '; 35 "4 3 v2 W- 
£74 as 4 139 *; 24.7% *þ ; 
>} + 260} ES E-:o0008 5 

m8 [1 FL 
IG, ji 

Wn " dF 4 ” i 
3 : $7 [54 A; 

#* : [+24 #: : [BY | 
OY RUE RTE F) 
" ' 1 i 2 Ft 
4 þ ad "fs 


ap. L 
P 


I came Baptizing with Water, 


upon him. 


Water. 


who ſhould baptize with the Holy 


9. 


F did not run without ſending, nor in-, 
troduce a new rite or Sacrament without Commiſion 3 but being | 
thus ſent of God, and that I might give Chriſt an opportunity of; $;qon Peters Brother 4. 
coming to me, that I might ſee the Spirit deſcending and remaining | 
| From whence we learn, That tone but Chrift can infti- | 
ſtute a Sacrament. F79bn Baptized not, till he was ſent to Baptize with | qqper, 


JOHN. 


Ghitt. g Aud therefore (faith Zobn) : with him the remaining part of that day, x from four of the 


tiil night. 


oO 


| lodged. 


a Concerning the Call of this Andrew to the Apoſtleſhip,ſce 
. 18, and Mark 1. 16, 17. that was at another time, and in another 
Chriſt here only invited them to come, and {ee Where he 


Cha D, 


* \{ate3. 16. 


© 4ar.1.10. deſcending from heaven þ *, like a dove 7, 
iuk. Ze 22s upon him k. | 


received my extraordinary Commiſſion to Baptize, ſo it fell out to 


32 * And John bare record, ſaying, I ſaw the ſpirit 
and it abode ' 


h Saith John, According to the Revelation which I had, when I 


41 He firſt findeth his own Brother Simon b, ang faith 
unto him, We have found the Meſſiah, which is, being inter. 
preted, the || Chriſt c. 

b It ſhould ſeem that both the Diſciples (after their conver; with 


Chriſt at the place where he lodged) went together to look for Pe. 
ter, Andrew's Brother. Andrew firſt found him, and tells hin "with 


LS 
> 
TW", APs: ry 0 0m ER 


- ” 


Ge wn ils 4 9 
5 


4 Wropmes 


OO i OO III 


* 7 Poul, es 
——_—_ 


Gholt z. 


me, 1 did fee, when he was Baptized, the Heaven opening, and 4 
repreſentation of the Spirit of God, (for no man can fee God and 
live) deſcending. i The form of the Repreſentation, was like that 
of a Dove. k And it was not a meer tranſient fight, but it did for 
ſome time abide upon that Perſon, in that ſeniivle Repreſentation 3 
by that Token I knew that he was the Son of God. 


33 And 1 knew him not /: but he that ſent me to bap- 
tize with water :, the ſame 1aid unto me, Upon whom i aninted ; but he was anointed with the Ozl of Gladneſs above þj; 
thou ſhalt ſee the ſpirit deſcending, and remaining on | lows, having the Spirit not given him by meaſure. 
him, the fame is he which baptizeth with the Holy 


Chriſt in Greeh, and both fſignifie the ſame with Anointed in 


1 I was a ſtranger to him, I knew him in a Senſe, when I /eapt 7n | thou ſhalt be called Cephas *, which is by Interpretation 
»y Mothers womb, upon his Mothers coming to ſee my Mother, Luke 1. i a Stone e, 
41. but that (as Impreſſion made upon Infarits uſe to do), wore 
off. m I had ſome Impreſſion upon me at that time, when he came 
towards me to be Baptized, which made me ſay to him, as Matth. 
2. 14. Thave need to be baptized of thee, and comes} thou to me ? But 
yet I was nct certain. tho | knew he was in the croud of people, that 
he was the Perſon defizned, and whoſe work it ſhould be to Baptrze 


bably S7mon was one of John's Diſciples, and came to attend 


The Article in this place 15 Emphatical, aot meer!) prepolitive, 
other places, but ſignifying, Tat Anointed ; for other Kings, 
Prieſts, and Prophets were alſo anointed, and God's people are c; 


d Andrew having found his Brother Simon, condudts him 
ſus, 9, 44- telleth us, that Andrew, and Simon, and Philip were Gi 
tizens of Bethſaida, which was a City of Galzlee 3 how near to the 
place where 7ohn Baptized, or Chrit lodged, we cannot {; 


greit joy ) that he and that other Diſciple had found the Meſiay Pros 
phecied of by Daniel, and in the ExpeRtation of whom the Diſciples 
and the Jews lived. c The Term Meſtah in Hebrew is the ſame 


42 And he brought him ro Jeſus. And when Jeſus he. 
; held him, he ſaid, Fhou arc Simon the Son of Jona 4 + *14,, 


to Te 


Y 3 Pro» 
his Mi. 


niſtry, ſo as the Diſciples only ſought him in the Croud, and came 


with 
Engliſh, 
15 1h 
and 
I 
Fel. 


) 
liq 


- 


—2,- ot 


4 SN WEST ; . an. he 
£2 a — a . —_ > 2x = : 
4 of ba ate ” * " wo te. - re _—__ 
bo : - - "vt. 6. inte... Af 4 - 4 . % —— - wud 
- IIS +: F - > =-y - Te . "I_ 
Y v "_ - : +. $04 — "—_— > 2x - 


O_—_— 


- > 

bln 
_ ” <7 
a - 


with the Holy Ghoſt. n Until the ſame God, that had given me that 
Sign, fulfilled it to me. 


an open Teſtimuny to the World, That this Man was not meer man, 
but the eternal Son of that God, who ſent me to Baptize with Water ; 
reſerving ſtill to himſelf the Divize Power of bleffing that Holy Sacra- 
ment, and conferring the Holy Ghoft in regenerating havits, working 
like fire, in purging away the droſs of Souls, and like Water waſhing 
away tkefilth of Sin, Matthew 3. 11. Jobn 3. 5. 


of his ditciples. 


ttm, had been with Zohn. 


* Ver. 29. 


Behold the lamb of God £. g 

r Fon ſtood with two of his Diſciples, whether he was Preachin- 
or no, it is not ſaid ; but John ſtanding with them, ſaw Chriſt walk 
ing,whence, or whither, is not ſaid; but as a good man is always ta” 
king opportunity to commend Chriſt to others ; ſo John upon this oc* 
caſion, took adventage further to make Chriſt known to thoſe two 
men (who they were, we ſhail hear 1n the following Verſes) and re- 
peats the words he had ſaid before, Behold the Lamb of God. (See the 
Notes on v. 27.) Thus good and faith\ul Minifters will continually be 
:nviting their ©iſciples to Chriſt, taking them off from further confi» 
deration of themſeives, only as Miniſters to ſhew them the way to 
Chriſt. 


followed Jeſus r. | 


faith unto them, What leek ye ? They ſaid uato him, 
Rabbi, (which is to fay, being interpreted, Maſter) where 


f Or, ab;j- || dwelleſt thou « ? 
ect. u Chriſt as he wa'iked, turning him, and ſeeing two men follow- 
ing him, inquireth of their end, what they ſought; to reach us in 
all our Religious motions and ations, to do the like ; for the end 
will contribute much to ſpecifie the Attion, and to make it good or 
f bad, They give him that honourable Title, which was then in Faſhion, 
by, and under which they were wont to ſpeak to thoſe upon whom 
they reſted for Inſtruftion, whoſe Dofrine they defired to know, and 
with whom they defired to converſe, and to learn of him. 
ked him where he abode, or where he lodged ? 
39 Kefaith unto them, Come and ſee w. 
and faw where he dwelt x, and abode with him that day, 
+ That _, for it wasabout þ the tenth hour z. 
was about» OurLord difccrving the End of their following him to be fin- 
two hours cere and good, invites them to come and ſee where his Lodging 
= was ;, for te cliewhere teileth us, that he had not an #ouſe wherein 


of God, 


t God bleſſed the verbal Teſtimony that Jon had given, ſo far,that 
they ftond 1n no need of a Miracie to confirm it, but upon their hear- 
ing John ſpeak, they followed Jeſus; as yet, not as his Apoſtles ; dl 
their call te that Office was afterward (as we ſhall hear ; ) nor yet, ſs 
45 no more to depart from him z but there was created-in them a far- 
ther defire of Knowledge of him, and Acquaintance with him. 


to hide his head, They x came and ſaw his Lodgings (where, or 
of what nature they were, we are not told) but we never read 
that he quriug his whole Pilgrimage amongſt us, had any 
or ſplendid Lodgings. y The Text ſaith, that theſe two Diſciples 
avode with him that day 3 whether only the two, or three remain- 
ing hours of the ſime day (for it was now about four of the Clock 
afternoon, which auſwers the terith hour according to the Jewiſh 
Account) or another whole day, being the Sabbath day, (as ſome 
think) we arcnot told, nor can coaclude ; certain it is, they abode 


with him to Chriſt, When Chri% beheld him, te ſaid, Thu art 5;. 
mon, he knew him,and called him by Name, and told him his Fathers 


34 AndIſawo, and bare record p, that this is the Son 


s But when I ſaw that, I could not but believe. p And alfo bear 


35 © Again the next day after 9, John ſtood and two 


q The next day after that the Meflcngers who came from Hieruſa- 


36 And looking upon Jeſus as he walked -, he ſaid * 


pl 


Name Fonas, * and giveth him a new Name, Cephas, which by inter. 
pretation doth not 11gnifie an Head, (as the Popith diſputant at By; 
urged to prove him the Head of the Church, as if it had been a Gre: 
word, and came from Kg@axay 3 Or as he pretended, ritdiculouſ 
enough, from an old Gre: word Ksoas) but a Stone (as this Text 
tells us) by which name we find him called, r Cor. 1. 12. & 2, 2, 
& 9. 5. & 15. 5+ Gal. 2. 9. in other places Peter, which ſignif. 
eth a Stone alſo, or a Rock. Ceph is a Syriack word, Peter a Gree 
word ; Chriſt gave him the N:zme here. e Both Cephas and Peter are 
by interpretation, a Stone, Beza thinks, that our Saviour did not 
here give him that Name, but foretei that he ſhould be fo called, 
Cauſabon thinks, that the Name was here given to him, and with it 
new Spirit; that whereas before he was (according to his Fathers 
Name Fonas, which ſignifies a Dove) fearful and timerous ; from this 
time forward he was as a Roch, ſteady, firm, and full of courageand 
conſtancy ; but it is a greater queſtion, how this Text is tobe re- 
conciled with Matth. 4. 18, 19, 20. where Andrew and Peter are 
both ſaid to be eſpied by Chriſt, walkbing by the Sea of Galilee ; and 
Luke 5.10. where Simon is reported to be called, after they had 
taken a great draught of Fiſh z and with Mark 3. 13. and Lule 


—— 


37 And the two diſciples heard him ſpeak, and they 


5. 13- whereall the Apoſtles are named, as called at one and the 
ſame time ; doubtleſs, the Calls were different. This in Jobn ſeems ra- 
ther to be a Prophecy than a Calf. Thoſe Texts, Matth. 4. 18, 1g, 
20. and Zuke gs. 10. ſeem to be their Calls to a Diſcipleſhip ; the 
other Texts, Mark 3. 13- Luke 6. 13. reſpeRts their Eleftion to 
the Apoſtleſhip, and the miſſion of them. 


43 The day following Jeſus would go forth into Gali 
lee, and findeth Philip f, and faith unto him, Follow 


38 Then Jeſus turned, and ſaw them following, and 


(mentioned before) both of them lived there. It was one of thoſe 


me 9g. 

f Sit this while Chrift ſeemeth to have been in J»dex, (which was 
the mcſt famous Province; ) the day after Peter had thus txen with 
him, he had a mind to go into Galilee ; out of that he deligned to 
chooſe his Diſciples 3 and that being the Country where he had been 
Educated, he defigned in a more ſpecial manner to honour it vitl 
the firſt Fruit of his Publick Miniftry ; there he findeth Philip (the 
name ſignifieth a Lover of Horſes.)* g He calleth him to be his Oi 
ciple, : 


44 Now * Philip was of Bethſaida h, the City of Ar: 


drew and Peter 5. | 
h This Philip was a Citizen of Bethſaida, (the word ſignifies in tie 
Hebrew, the Houſe of Fruits, or of Huntſmen.) #7 Andrew and Peter 


Cities were Chriſt did moſt of his mighty Works, Matth. 11. 20- 


45 Philip findeth Nathanael k, and faith unto him, We 


They as- 
They came 


ſtately 


heve found him, of whom * Moſes, in the Law, and ay x 
Prophets did write 1, Jeſus * of Nazareth the 50n 0 


Joleph 21. of 

k Philip having himſelf diſcovered Chriſt, is not willing 9 - 2 
his Morſels alone, but defires to communicate his diſcovery t wh. 
thers ; he finds (whether cauſually, or upon ſearch, is not ſaid) ON 
Nathaniel, he was one of Cana in Galilee, ch. 21. 2 {T! 
an Hebrew name, fignifying, The Gift of God ; ſome think it IT, 
with Nathaniel, 1 Chron. 15. 24.) | Having found him, he tells Uh 
with great joy, that they had found him of w 
in the Law, the Shilo mentioned, Gen. e 
ned. Deut. 18. 15, the Branch of the Lord mentioned, 1/a. 4-2:  **) 
Meſſiah mentioned by Danjel, Dan. g. 25, 26- and all th 
phets, m him whom they uſually called Jeſus of 
he was conceived, there he was bred, Luke 2. 4, 51- 
was born in Bethlehem of Judah, v 4. and who was CO 
thought to be the Son of — 2s 
gui, ſpeak as was commonly ſad, though himſelf knew 416 9: _— 


(The name Þ þ 
the ſame, 


0. 10. the Prophet ment10-| 


e other V7] 
Nazareth, | there 
) Though he 
mmonly 
algo [+ 


ugg A 
If Philip did only, 47 iſh 


Weph. 


hom Moſes had WOO oy 


| Clock 
40 One of the two which heard John ſpeak, was Andrey 
2 


Mat fk h, 


| 


ll Or, th 


ante, 


8, 
þ 


(| Viy 


] 


4 


faid Unt 


of fitr 
3 10. 
laroe | 
Moht 
bonr t 
les, | 
verling 
BOL. at 
this to 
in his p 
Where \ 


eter, M 
Perſiwaſig 
red 6 wir! 

© ackn 
Me ih, 
II, 


ſo Je 


hoy ty 


T ; 4 
S. F OH N; 
other things, be is not ro be blamed ; Bat the moſt think P>zizp Wi-| 2 Ne tells him that 'he ſhould lee greater thinzs than thoſe 
-qvered here his own Weaknels, both in thinking Chrift tne Son | þ:372 that bath fall begiven, What thoſe greater thinzs ar», wwiicli 
cf Foſeph, and to have been born al Nazareth, Ir 15 certain, that our Lord here meanert, he rellerh him (in part at leati v. 5 1 ) 
the Apoltles chemſelves ar He; Yo, an on Chritts OO Fl And he ſaich unto him, Ver! ', verily, I lay 1111 
on from the Dead, had ry IR Notion of CEnruc, 35 ltg you w *, Hereafter you ſhall ſee heaven open, and *Mit.c 1 
-ue Meſſiahs Grace may contliit with great Weaknet3 as to-nnow- the angels of God aſcendi: | . I gg: 
v0: 32 angeis of God aſcending and deſcending upon ih: SHE 
" gw And Nathanael ſaid unto him, Can there any ſon — hw _ 0 | > + 
4 thing, come out of Nazareth » ? Philip faith|, © nele rings he uſhers in with a Verily verify, and dechureth | ?o, .. ©, 
g00 me ? R thetn, ipoken not to Nathanael aiOne, but to yor ; V!Js all you that 
1113170 him, Come and lee FROG are my Diſciples indeed, who are ( like Nachanae!) true Iſrae':tes, _ 
1 The wordsof P hltp begat a Prejudice in Nathanael, as LO what | in whom there is no guile, For the terms, 4men, Amen ( by us 
he ſaid, Micah 5. 2. 15 was Propheſied, that the Meſſiav ſhould tranſlated Verily, verily) ſome of the Ancients. accounted them 
come our of Bethlehem. So Ch. 7. 41. Some of rhe people ſaid, Sha} in Oath; bur the mot learned Modern Wrirers, have ſeen no 
Chrft come out of Galilee ? Hath not the Scr ipture {aid, that Chri#t | reaſon ro agree with them. Surely, ( ſee a large Diſcourſe ahour 
cometh of the Seed of David,and out of the Town of Berhlchem, where | theſe Particles in our learned F/ler, his Miſce!lmm, 1. 1. ca þ. 2.20 
David 115 2 Nazareth was not only a poor little Place, (tor fo Beth-| which nothing need be added ) it Amen is never uſed in the 0:1 
hem alſo was) bur a Place which the Scriprure never mentioned, as Teſtament, bur as a tezm of prayer or wiſhing; in the New Teſtament 
the Place from whence the Meſſiah ſhould ariſe ; a Place that God | ir 79 uſed ro aflert or affirm a thing, or asa Particle of wiſhing and 
had not honoured with the production of a Prophet. By any good prayer. The Word in the Hebrew, properly ſignifies Truth, 17. 
thing feems to be meant, rhe Meſſiah, Or any Propnet, or me 65, IG. whence Chritt (the Truth ) is called rhe Amen, Rev. 3. 145 
generally any thing which 1s Noble and Excellent and of any | As the Prophers were wont to begin their Diſcourſes with The word 
Remark : So prone are we to think, that the Kingdom ot God | of the Lord, and Thus oith the $i Wale the Trarh of what 
comes with Obfervation, that we know not how to Fancy how | they were about to ſay ; So Chriſt, ro ſhew that himſelf was God, 
great things thould be done by little means, and preat Perſons ſhould and ſpake from himſelf, beginneth with Amen, and Amen, Amen, 
ariſe our of little contemprtible Places. Whereas God chuſerh 2»e | ſometimes it is obſerved that Foyn conſtantly doubles the Particle , 
fooliſh things of the World,to confound the wiſe ; and the weak things | and faith, Amen, Amen, that is Verily, verily. Either 7 as Inter- 


np. 1: 


Py 


to confound the mighty ; and baſe things of the Por ld, ro confound preters fay ) for further Confirmation of the thing, or to get the 
the Wiſe, 1 Cor . To 25, 26, 27. 0 Phalip not knowing how to ant | orearer Attention, or to ailert as well the rruth of the Speaker, as 
ſwer Nathanael 8 Objefion, and ro remove his Prejudice, wiſheth | of the thing ſpoken. x Now the thing ſpoken followeth as a thing 
him himſelf ro go, and make a Judgment. Wiſe men ought ro promiſed, nor ro Nathanae! only, but to all Believers. That they 
do this, and not to take up Prejudices from Reports and common | /ho,/4 ſee the Heavens opened, and the Angels of God ajcendirg and 
Vogue, : . . deſcending upon the ſon of man, Some think that hereby is meanr, 

47 Jefus ſaw Nathanael coming to him, and faich the ſpiritual Meraphorical opening of Heaven to Believers by 
of him, Behold an Ifraclite indeed P, in whom 15 no | Chri't, Bur it ſeerris more properly to fignitie, ſuch an opening of 
ouile 4. the Heavens as Wwe read of, Math. 3. 16. Some underitand it of 
4 7 They are not all 1/7aelites, which are of 1/7ael, Rom. ge 6. For ne appearances of Angels to Chritt, at his Patton and Reſurrection, 
he s not a Few, which x one outwardly; neither x that circumcijion — A_— 3 > * Ges rather to referto the day of Judgment, 
which 6 outward 1#2 the fleſh : But he i a Few,which x one inwardly, of he n —_ ands 0 Angels ſhall wair upon Chriſt, as:he Judge 
and circumciſion # that of the heart, in the Spirit, Rome 2. 28, 29. "a a on _— the _ _ Miniſter = him ; which Mint- 
Ciritt ſeeing Natharael, (though he was prejudiced by Philsps mi- | - wr they lay, 1s expreſſed by the rerm _ Aicending and De- 
{take, or the common miſtake of his Nation ) coming to ſee him, | 4 þ with reference { doubtleſs) ro Facov's Vition, Gen. 23. 12, 
and ſeeing not only his body and bodily motion but his heart alfo, Facob ſaw it ſleeping, Nathanael and other Belevers ſhall fee it with 
:nd the motions of that, ſaith of him, Behold, one who 1s not only "iſ Eyes. Others Interpret it more generally, v7. You ſhall 
bornan J{rae!rte, bur 1s a true I/7ael:te, like his Father Facob, a plain — 4 —_ Miracles, as it you ſaw the Heavens opened, and rae 
Man, G:n. 25. 27+ q In whom there is no deceze, no doubleneſs of c ang" A _—_ and Deſcending. Others think 1t reterreth O 
heart; fuch oughr Chriltiars to be, no crafty, deceitful, double | ME us er appearances of the Ange:s ro Chrilt in their Mini':ra- 
minded men, but men of grear fincerity, and plainneſs of hearr, /ay- | 122.0 nm, than the Scripture records. Chriſt doth nor ſay, You 


A a 10 lk ine Gull eng ning ad Decooznpo me bruni 
DIAFN, 15. Jo Ot 


X A | declare himſelf ro be truely man, bur the ſecond Adam, in whom 
[ > . C b - n > 
45 Nachanael faith unto him, Whence knoweſt thou what was loft in the firſt, was to be reſtored. Ir is obſerved, thar 


mer ? Jeſus an{wered and ſaidunto him; Betore tha. only Ezekzel/ in the Old Teſtament, and Chrilt in the New Teſtament, 
Philip called thee, when thov wertunder the Fig-tree, | are thus called; and that Chriit was never thus called, bur by him- 
| law thee [ ſelf ; Ezekzel was doubtleſs fo called, to diſtinguiſh him from tl-oſe 
ſpiritual Beings with which he often converſed ; Chriit, to di:.in- 
guiſh his Humane Nature from his D: venue Netire 3 both which (in 
him ) made up one Perſon. Chriit calling himſelf ſo, was but a 
further Indication of his making himſelf of no Reputation, while be 
was in the form of a Servant. Others think, that che Son of Mar in 
the Goſpel uſed by Chriit, ſignifies no more than I, and me; (it 
being uſual in the Hebrew Dzaie&, for Perſons ro ſpeak of them- 
ſelves in the third Perſon } ſo upon the ſon of man, is upon me, who 
am truly man. Chenmmitius thinks that as the term M-:ſſ:ah, ( by 
which the People commonly called Chrift } was taken out of Da- 
ho ae | : - - | xzel; fo this term by Chriſt applied to the ſame Perſon, is taken oar 
ering with Friends, or reading, or praying, the Scripture faith thence roo, Dan. 7.13. Where itis (aid ; One /he the ſon of man 
ys and 1t 1s but vainly guetſed 3 1t 15 enough that by his telling came with the Clouds of Heaven, and came to the Ancient of Days, 
uns to him, helet him know, that he faw him, though he was nor | g. © 4111 thar Chriſt did ordinarily fo call himſelf, ro correſpond 
in 1s riew, and fo was Omnzpreſent, and Omnzſcient, Chrilt ſeerh us| 4 4. propheſy of Daniel, toatlerthimſelf truly man. and to de- 


where we are, and what we do, when we ſee not him ; and he ſeeth : hit . Ir 
Our hearts, whether rhey be ſingle or double, plain or falſe, and po ns Fathers: Serv $0 he Prophtey,. J< 


deceirful ; which'as in many Caſes it afforderh us: much comforr, 
lot admoniſheth us to be ar all times in the fear of the Lord. 


49 Nathanacl anſwered, and faid unto him Rabbi, CHAP. IL 


thou art the Son of Gol 7, thou art the King of If: | Chris being at a Marriage in Cana of Galilee, turneth Water into 
rael y. IWine, 1-11. and departeth into Capernaum, 12. At the Paſſo- 

t The term Rabbi, which Nathanael here giverh to Chriſt, is} wer goeth up to Feruſalem, and purifierh the Temple. 13-16. The 
of the ſame figniticancy with Rabban, and Rabboni, Fohn 29. 16.| Fes askh hu duthority ; he ſheweth bs Death and Rejurrection. 
Wan, Rabbi, Rabbi, all which fignifie Matter, and my Maſter | 17 —22- Mary at the Paſſover beizeve in him, 23-—25. 
a Name which in thar Age they nſually gave their Teachers, as a Ti- , PP ny 
tle of Honour, Math. 23. 7,8. Titles that began about the time of ND the third day there was a mar riage 1 
our Saviour ; for Brextorf rells us, Purer anriquity gave no fuch Ti- Cana of Galiiee 4, andche mother of Jefus was 
mr their Teachers or Prophers, thinking 1t nor poſſible to give there 6b. 
ro : p.crlons (extraordinarily ſent of God ) Titles anſwerable tO] , Whetherir was the third Day after that our Saviour had lef. 
firlt 1 BY * hi" Fo _ about =_ we an beſt ba = the Province of Fudea, or the third Day after Phz/ip came to him; 
hoon "Dbz whe - : Ra "I ms hwy e ry 4 T 4 - y ? ] or after Peter, or Nathanael came to him, is hardly worth the dif- 
red Ye » K2291 the leaſt. Rabban they lay, atted Dur CWO nun | uting ; if ir be robe interpreted with relation tov. 43. of the for- 
Ss bo given to ſeven after Hzllel. Nathanael calls him alſo the mer Chapter, ( which ſpeaks of the Day following ) it mult be, che 
"i rod Pa # x —_ rhe other 08604S _ _— * 33- -_ third Day after Simon came ro Chritt, chere happened to be a Mar- 

perfivafion of th; : rh F Os ef 1 _ p "— | : Ut - _ ridge in Cana of Galilee. + Some reckon three Cities of this name ; 
red fo wirt us, by many tollowng Pal wb obay ; 1 was GECH- | one inthe Lotof Manaſſes, another in the Lot of Ephrarmn, another 

| wrote oy (Heacks on _ by bis RefurreCtion trom the dead, Rom, 1s 4. in the Lot of Aſher. This Cans 1s concluded by molt Interprerers,to 
menti0- Meſkab, 7 eogeth Chritt alſo the Kzng of Yrael, that 1s, the true ||, 1... Orme mentioned, Foſ: 19. 28. which was in the Tribe of 
4. 2. the +1 Oy his was the Title of the Meſſiah, Math. 21. 5s and 27. Aſher, which wasin G aliice ; ſome others ſay, it was another Cana, 
her V7 : , near to Capernaum. b Arthis Wedding-tealt was the Virgin Ma- 
,, (there 50 Jeſus anſwered, and ſaid unto him, becaufe 1] ry, our Lords Nother ; ond ris probable, that the Perſons for whole 
ugh > Unto thee! I ſaw thee under the Fig-trec belicvett | Marriage the Fealt was So _ _ - the phat (= 
mmon) 101 t ? . "1 1 | ations. Some think from the Virgins rakin 
unlp _—_. hea ſhalr ſee greater things than thele «, agwr a = preras —_— - # was a Family where - had pets 
GEue Jer ; EY 6 | . » Þ. 21 { at Day. 

zthet eeple, and magnifies Narhanael!'s fanh from the Revelation which | * conltant Charge, or che Charge oF Ty hy * (5. 

; ©, which was but imperfect; for Chriſt had Lg no more. than 2 And both Jeſus was called, anu tis Dilcip les, to 


Ut he ht cc - ; We 
v.1 r” nad feen him under the F1g-rree, beiore Pli/zp called him. the mariace c. 


7 N:thangel wondreth how Chriſt ſhonld know him, having not 
teen of his familiar acquaintance ; / Chriit rells him, he faw him 
uncer the F:y-tree, before ever Philip called him. That was a very 
bot Country, wherein people ſought ſhadowy Places; hence we read 
of fitting under their own I/ines and Fig-rrees, Micah, 4. 4. Jech. 
3-10. and it 1s likely that rhofe bezag two luxarious Plants, that had 
large Leaves, and ran out in lons Boughs 1n hot Weather, they 
myht under the covert of theſe Plants, not only fir as in an Ar- 
bonr to converſe one with another, bur alſo perform Religious Du- 
tles. Whether Chritt ſaw him there eating - and drinking, or con- 


RS 
J 


——— —_— - - 
£ aol 3 FS - 
a —_— -y "Y — 
= cn ho i Wn ee IR FR... En - — ID 
= vv.» T . M . -» - p - ” 4 - = 
ky - ie F . £ =y m_ - _ — & 2. <4* - oy 
: apa. 4 Wo =” Fi by n "HS « + - gens = os ons 2» F F - 
® 8-4 " a 7 Laeods \ "= wo S 
Woe '- 4.48 hs ” 3" =.2Y pp 4 - > : BL... 
« --h_ 


couragerh the beginnings of Faith in the Souls of his 


i AAaas}| s Whether 


LE 


= OO Fe et on os, ef 
6 - 


Chap. IT. S.F 0 


© Whether only the five Diſciples mentioned in the former Chap- 


ter, or fome others alſo, the Scripture doth not ſay. 
D:[ciples being at this Marriage-feal{t, both lets us know, that 


fealling at ſuch a time is proper, and that the molt ſevere Religious [hear unto the 
perſons may lawfully be prefent at fuch Meetings, only they are{;. , 


obliged to keepro Rules of Frugality, Molelty, and Sobriery, 0 


a breach of which poifibly ſuch meetings may give more temprati- | 4 4.0 55 upon that account called the Maſter, or G 


H N. 


$ And he faith unto them, Draw out now 


ang 
governourof the feaſt n. And the ; 


Y bare 
n The Fes hid one who was to order rhe affairs of their Feat 
Overnour of 


ONS. it ; ro whom our Saviour directs, that ſome of this new] mad 


» And when they wanted wine c, the mother of Je- | Wine ſhould be carried ; either that they might not ſuſpe< 
4 * - by ſome art provided by him, or becauſe he was of the het : 
merit in thoſe affairs.  o Tne Servants yield the ſame ready Oye, 
ence to his commands, which they had before yielded, 


ſas ſaith unto him, They have no wine dc | 
The word *T5eenoar]0r, may as well be tranjlated, coming 

ſ-ort. or behind, as wanting ;-and fo ſome think 1t 18 to be under- 

itood ; but d Mary tells Jeſus, they had no Wine they either 


it Wag 
10. 
ded1- 


9 When the ruler of the feaſt had taſted the 1; 


ator 


h-d ncae, or ſh: diſcerned it came ſhort ; they had nor enough. It|.p.10 ae made wine p, and knew nor whence jt 11. 


ters us know the Frugality of him who made the Fealt, But whe- 
ther 2711 y told her Son of it. in expectation that he ſhould ſupply | 
it by a Miracle, or that he ſhould entertain the Company with ſome | 
P:ous Diſcourſe, while the wart ſhould be ſupplied, 1s not ſo eafie 
to derermine ; tht which ſeems to oppoſe the firit, { and molt ge- 
nerally received ) opinion, is, Thar this was rhe firit Miracle be 
wrought, which we have vpon record ; nor had our Saviour by 
any words given her hope to ſee any miraculous Operations from 
him ; for tho' ſome ſay, he had, from the laſt verſe of the for- 
mer Chapter ; yet the words can hardly be {trained to ſuch a ſenſe ; 
nor Corh it zppear that Mary was in F444 10 hear them, Bur 
yer it ſeems probable, ſhe had fone ſuch ExpeCtation, both from 
our Saviours anſwer, ©. 5. 25% from her ſaying to the Servants, 
v. 4. Whatſoerer he xcth unto yo, do it; and rho" Cont had as 
yet Gone no prublick Miracle ; yet what the Virgin might have ſeen 
of bim in thirty Years time, while he lived at bome with her, we Can- 
not tell, | 

4 Jefis faith unto her, Woman e, What have TIT to 
do with thee ? minc hour 1s not yet come g. 

e Thar it was orCinary with the Fers, ſpeaking ro Women, = 
call them by the name of their Sex, 3s plain from Mat. 15. 20% 
Luke 13.11, 12. and22. 57. Foh.4e 11. 12. Burthit ſpeaking ro 
their Relat70ns, they were wont roown their Relation in their Com- 
pellation, ſometimes is alſo evident, from 1 Kzgs 2. 20. Arkon,my 
19ther. So as our Saviours here calling the blefled Virgin, Foman, 
not Mether, isagreed by molt, to fignitie to her, that in this thing 
he did not own her. as his Mother, and fo clothed with an autho-. 
rity to command him. And indeed ſo much f rhe next words f19- 
nifie, which is a form of Speech that both fignitie ſome diſpleaſure 
for her unſeaſonable interrapring him, and alfo that ſhe had no 
Right nor Authority upon tim in this thing. See the uſe of 
the ſame Phraſe, Frdg. 11. 12. 2Sam. 16. 10 Exra 4. 3, Mat. 
8.29. and 27. 19. None was more obedient and reſpective to his 
Parents, than our Saviour, Luke 2+ 51+ therein fulfilling the Will of 
God. Fer. 35, 13. 14+ but in the bulineſs of his calling, he regarded 
them nor, Mat. 12. 48- Luke 2. 49, and hath thereby taught us 
our Duty, to refer our Obedience ro our heavenly Farher, before 
our Obedience to any earthly Relation, Mat. 10. 35. Luke 14-26. 
He hath alſo thereby taughr us, that the bleſſed Virgin 1s not to be 
preferred before her Son, ( as the Papits do) 2 Betides this, our 
Lord piveth another reaſon for his nor prefent hearkening ro his 
Mother; either, becauſe the time was not yet come ro work Miracles 
publickly ; or ro ſhew her, that ſhe was nor to preſcribe the time to 
him when he ſhould work miraculouſly; thereby alſo ſhewing us, 
7ar for rhings in this life, weare ro ſubmir our defires tothe Divine 
W:llz and ro wait Gods leiſure; yerby this Expreflion he alfo 
2:vcs her ſome hopes, that he would in his own time ſupply this 
wants 

5 His motherfſaid unto the Servants, Whatſoever 
he faith unto you, do zt 6. 

/: She plainly by theſe words, declireth her Confidence, thar 
Chriſt ſnorwith anding the Repulſe he gave her ) would ſupply | 
this want ; and therefore taking no notice of Chriſts appre- 
heniion of her, ſhe orders the Servants to be abſolutely Obedienr 
ro him, doing, without diſputing, whatſoever he bid them ; and 
indeed ſuch 1s rhe Obedience which we all owe ro God and Jeſus 
Cirilt. 

6 And there were fer there ſix water-pots of ſtone 7 
alter the manner of the purifying ot the Jews, contain- 
ing two or three firkins a piece &. | 

7 The Fes were wont in their D.ning-rooms, to have Water- 
pors ſtanding ; whether one for every Guelt, (pon which actounr 


but the ſervants which drew the water, knew q ; the 


governour of the feaſt called the bridegroom. 

p Our Saviours action, by which he turned the Water into Wine 
(being nor obvious ro the Senſes of any, as being only the ſec 
morion of his W:1!, willing the thing to be) 1s not recordeg wes 
the effect, and the conſequents of ir are. The Papz/?s would from 
hence argue, that the Bread in the Sacrament, may be called Bjeg7 
tbo' it be tranſubltantiared, as the }Yarer here 1s called I/ater, thy 
it were turned imo Wine ; butir muit be obſerved, thar ir; not 
here called Hater, withour the addition of that was made 15; 
we haveno ſuch addition in the Goſpel, where the Sacremental 
Bread is called Bread; it is not faid, the Bread which now isturg. 
ed into the Fleſt of Chri8t ; nor doth the Scripture any where, ( 
here) arreſt any ſuch Trarſubſtantiation. q The Governourofthe 
Fealt had a Cup of Wine preſented ro him, bur knew nor whznceir 
came, only the Servants, who by Chritts command, firit filled the 
Veſſels, and drew ont this Cup full, they knew. 


10 And wth unto him, Every man at the beginning 

doth fer torth good wine r ; and when men have well 
drunk /, then that which is worſe ; but thou haſt kent 
the good wine until now fe. 

r The Governonr cails the Bridegroom ( at whoſe coſt the provi. 
tion for the Featt was to be made) and mindeth him, that je 
ſeemed ro hive done contrary ro the common practice of ſuch zx 
made Featis; for they uſed to bring forth their belt Wine fit, 
when mens Palares were quickeit, and jeait adulterated ; and work 
/ after rhat rhey had drank well ; fo rhe word wsluofo (nies 
( as appears by the Sepruagines Tran!larion of the Hebrew word ſo 
figntying, Gen. 43.34. Hag. 1. 6. Not only mens diſtemyerins 
themſelves with Wine, (which it alſo ſometimes tignitieth) and 
this ſpeaketh our Tranſlation of ir, 1 Cor, 11.21. are druiten, 
Something hard; the word nor neceſſarily nor always ſo fipnifith, 
and they muſt be very uncharicable ro the Primitive Church of 
Corinth, who can think, that ir would: permit perſons aQully 
drunken to the Lords Table. Bur the cuftom it ſeerns, wa, if 
chey had any. Wine worſe than other, to bring it our to the 
Gueſts, after that the edge of their Palates was a little blunted wit 
the tait of better. 8 Now this Bridegroom, as the Goyernour f 
the Feaſt, (who knew nothing of the Miracle } thought, had kept 
his briskeſt and molt generous Wine ro the laft, thereby giving a 
grear Approbation of rhe Miracle, not only owning it to betrue 
Wane, bur much betrer than they had had before ar the Feat, 
11 This beginning of miracles did Jeſus in Cana of 
Galilee «, and maniteited forch his glory 5 and hi 
diſciples believed on him x. 

u Thefenſe is not, That this was the firſt Miracle which Chrilt 
wrought in Cana of Galilee ; but this was the firlt Mirace which 
Chriſt wrought after he was entred upon the publick Min{iry; and 
it was wrought in that Cana, which 1s within the Conf es of Gas 
flee, either inthe lor of Jebulon or Aſhcr ; yer rhere are ſome. vio 
would not have it the firſt Miracle which Chritt wrought, bucrac fri 
which he wrought in that place ; bur there is no reaſon for {uch an 
Interpretation ; for then there had been no reaſon for the following 
words, for Chriſt did not manife# hs Glorythere only ; rho! (one 
object rhoſe wonderful, or miraculous things, happening at our 
Saviours Birth, of which we read, Mat. 2.9, Luke 2. 11. 
as ſome diitinguiſh berwixt 9z7raand miracula; fo others git 
more plain and farisfactory anſwer, telling us thoſe wer? miraculo 
Operations, more proper to the Father and the Spirit ; thereby a 
reſting the Deity of Chriſt, than to Chriſt conſidered as God111: 
This was the firſt of thoſe miraculous Operations which 


ne; 


ſome think here were ſix) doth not appear. &4 For the content of 
theſe Veſlcls, it is uncertain ; the reaſon 1s becauſe the ſewiſh mea- 
fures, both for things ary and /zq:d, are much unknown to us, 
moſt Countries varying in th-ir meaſures. According ro our mea- 
ſures, theſe Veſſels ſhould contain three Hogiheads, or near it; bur 
It 1s not propable that ſo great Veſſels of Stone ſhould ſtand in a 
Room ; the end of their {tanding there, was for the People to wath 
in, before they did ear, Mat. 15. 2. Mark 7.3, and to waſh their 
Veſſels in, v:4. We are certain of the number of che Veſſels, but 
not ot the content of chem. Some ſay, they held ſo much Water, 
being rarned into Wine, w:s enough for 150 Perſons, but we can 
make no certain judgment of it, 


7 Jeſus faith unto them, fill the water-pors with 
water /, And they fill:d them up to the brim ms. 


{ Either the Water was defiled by ſoxie Perfons waſhing in ir, 
or elſe the Veſſels were nor full. Our Lord commanded them to be 


| 


filled, the Warer-pors, not Wine Vellels, with water, pure Warer 
he commands them a/! to be jil'ed by the Servants, who could yy 
relt the Miracle, that there was nothing in the Veſſels but pure Was 
ter. Rere was no ner Creature to be produced; he doth nor 
therefore commind the production of Wine out of nothing ; bur 
only the transformation of a Creature already exiſtent into a | 
Creature of another kind. | 


wrought by Chrilt Jeſus as God-man, by which w He manifeſt. 
hs Glory, the Glory mentioned, Chap. 1, 14. as of the only vegotie? 
of the Father ; his Divine Majeſty and Power. x And k# Dijcipies, 
who before believed on him, John 1. 41. 42. now more firmly = 
lieved on him, Fohn 14. 1. as a Mediator. In Scripture that is it! 
faid ro be, which doth not commence, bur increaſe from that 
and occaſion. 


12 T Afcerthis he went down to Capernaun ty 
and. his mother, and his brethren 2, an his diſciples; 
and they continucd there not many days s, 


» Capernaum was a City /ifted up to heaven, for mercies of al 
ſorts, which Chriſt forerold, Mat. 11, 23. ſhould be brought c0%1 
to Hell for thei contempr of his Doctrine and Miracles. IF v#? Ky 
the Tribe of Napthali, whoſe Lot was contiguous to Jebulon, an 4 
on the North-eaſt of it, a place where Chrift afterwards Prea K 
much, and wrought many Miracles, Mat. 8 13e 14+ and - i 
Mar, 2.1. and $. 22, a place brought ſo low. in Hierom $T1Me vn x 
it ſcarce conlitted of ſeven poor Cortages of Fithermen. 7 —_ 
chis time went Chriſt and his Mother, and his Brethren ; (by i 
term the Scripture often exprefſerh any near Kaſinen ) and i : 
ciples ; whether only the Five mentioned in the former cage "long 
others alſo, is nor ſaid : a Bur chey did not ac thar rime {tay 10! 


. : 6 to Ve 
The Servants diſpate not his Commands, | there, probably becauſe the Paſſover time, ( when they were © 


nor asKk any reaſon of his Command, but yicld that ready and abſo- | at Hreruſalem ) was ſo nigh, as would not admir any long 


L, 


|before they began their Journey ; 2nd it is likely, 


that che Com 
pany 


Chap, | 


late Obedience which we all of us owe to D'vine Precepts. They 61 
Chritt and his jchem, and fo full, that they could hold no more, 


ha 


hereti 
private 
tion, d| 
Tables, 
need w 
of him, 
Should , 
of Ley 
to that 
I, 

I6 
things 
merch 

h At 
ly tota 
It 1s ſaid 
ſufficien; 

mages, 
( tho' fo 
Thoſe w 
this caſe, 
That it ig 
ſrip ) ſhoy 
cently ! 
be no | 
only a pat 
Cation 
des its 
terwarg ' 
erence ; 


U7 Ant 


& zeal c 


Val, jr, 


hap. TI. 


S. FOHN 


hl ny mentioned here, to be with Clirith ar Capernanm, did alfol &s The Diſciples.as well. as 
3a to go along with him to the Paſſover, of which we next 

nd _ | fon, and he 2 NO repute but 

arg ; 4 «| And the Jews paſlover was ac and and Jeſns| ard with Authority to Crive 
- up to Hierafalem 5. and to body to oppoſe him ; 

aft, 


| | b Concerning the Jewiſh Paſjover, we have Once and again ſpo- David, 
a -en in our Notes on the other Evangelitts; 
m Exod. 12. It was to be folemnized yeirly, in the place which the Go: far then hs 

7 ord ſhould chuſe, according to the Law, D-ut. 16. 6, Chriſt, tho? '© 5 for they did not 
: Td naturally ſubject ro the Law, yet tofultil al 
neſs, and to Redeem his people from the Curſe of th 


5- kept the Paſſover yearly, taking alſo advantage from the con- Son of David, 
Hy FE of the People ro Fteruſalem at that me, ro make himfelt an 
wa 


PJa!. 69. 9. 


ſeem 
| Righteouſ. Chriſts Divine Nature, nor t 


5 Neſte OS (from ce this quotatior1 
l . . ls ) 1$ tobe underftoos or Chriſt, properly an literally > Or meer- 
as, his Doctrine hos _ Ewe "_- the rims aps make ly as the Antitype to David, of whom that P/alm is literally ro be 
the mention of more t - : ir A en ther ir, | Snderſtood, Some of the Lutherans think that P/a/m primarily 

tiſm and Death ; Zobr plain "yon = bis hink h = ay concerned Chrilt. Mr. Caivin, and others, think it only concerned 
; Chap. 6. 4. the lalt, Clap. we 39+ Pay won Ng _ £ Fn Chriſt as David's Antitype: The former for their Opinion take no. 
ne, tionerh _— tho more obſcurely, "4+ 5 1» Our Lord was tice of the frequent Quotation of it in the New Teſtament, Mar. 
Tet at them all. n ie Py 27+ 48. Foh. 19. 28. 4&5 Te 20, RM. 15.3. The other ur e, that 
nly 14 And found in the Temple thoſe that ſold OXCn, tn are forneching: in that Pſzln which ts agree to Chriſt, 
wr and ſheep, and doves c, and the Changers of MONEY | The matter is nor much. Fea is nothing bur a warmrh of Love and 
” ſitting d. | Anger: It is good ro be Jealous ; yea [wallowed up with Z-4l jn 
- T Mat. 21+ 14 Luke 19. a5. Is a piece of Hiſtory - ſo like thns,|4 good Cauſe ; bur men maſt take heed of the Pharifaical Zeal, 
my that ſome ————_ whether it — _ the ſame _ "9% 3ccording ro Knowleage : Chriit wag Zealous, but the Cauſe was 
RE ; atter of Fact ; bur it is 4pParent that it doth not. x E- | 800d. ; 
" Ro mentioneth ir as done three years before it, ar theſ' 15 Then anſivered the Jews &, and ſaid unto 
bs firſt Paſſover ; all the other Evangelilts menton what they report, | in} * -- whac ſign ſheweſt thou unto us, ſeeing that * Mat, 12: 
he as done at the fourch Paſſover, 2. The circumftances of the Nar. chou- doſt theſe « hings /? 33. 
1 rative make IT appear. 1. Foby Jeb ons only the Eje&1on of the k Which of the Fewe, whether ſome of the Mazgiſtrates or the Ct» $+ 39+ 
he Selers, all the orher mention = =__ oy = w the Buyers and In | Prieſts, who were more [pecially concerned for their Profir ) or the 

lers, 2, Here he only faith, they p _ 2 " athers Houle a common People, or altogerher, is noc ſaid. They undertake nor 
| place of Merchandiſe. Theothers ſay, that whereas it was written ©OJuſtitie their Fact, nor could they den 

$ it ſhould be called an Houſe of Prayer, they had made'it a Den of 


Thieves., 3» Here he only bids them thar [old Doves, take their god's 
away, The others ſay, he overturned the Seats of them tha: 
Loves ; fo as our Saviour plainly appeareth to k 
7h at his firſt Paſſover, and at the lat. For the 
he on of the parts of this Hiſtory, 
1 Luke 19. 14+ Mark 11.15. The reaſon of thei 
t Sheep, and Doves, into the Temple, 


ro 
this ſeemeth to have been their 


Abuſes in. a Church be ney 


Meſes.did, Exod.g. 30«) They h 
7 | dred years amongit them ; 
fo y Ao Gong 
mers ; 
ſtill cried to the Law 


was room enough elſewhere. 


Ee - Je niwered ar 
y 15 And when he had madea ſcourge of ſmall cords e, his "_ yrs wor ao 
» he drove them all out of the temple, and the ſheep, and} Our Saviour refuſech to 
, the oxen, and poured out the Changers money f, and Reſurrection the third Day from 
F orerthrew the Tables g. abc | whit Ar 
N e It concerns not us to inqure, where our Saviour had the ſmall] r1. 29, Our Saviours words mn 
a Cords, of which he mace his Whip ; there were doubtleſs, Cords 


ing or licenſing them ro deſtroy 
bimſelfin no Franciſcan-habit, { as the ; xs idly dream 
e 


| the reſt of che People there preſent.could 
nor bur be Veoniſhed at this ſo ſtr; 


Sorne think tha* 
the Inititurion of ir| 91d after Chriiis Refurre&t 


the following part of the Gojpel Flrſtory, w 


e Law, Gz/,| 3 this time remembred ir, and apprehe 
v 5 vita 


the Imprelſion ſeems + 
Sreater Queſtion, whether P/al. 69. 


ctrine and Sacraments are upheld, 
| POWer to call and ſend out Preach 


O give them any Sign, bur that of his 


Chap. II, 


male Per 
, to make a Whip, 

the Puyers and Sellers our of the Temple, 
bur they reinembred the words nf 
Fn here reports whar 

and indeed, w] 
oul( 
fo early ro have had a y 
hat he was 


ton ; 


erlwation of 
Or if they 


bur they ask him whar 
juitifie his Divine Authoriry, For 
Principle, that ler Corruptions an 


er ſo grear, yer they were not to be v6. 
ordinary Authority of the Magiitrare, or 
y anextraorginary Author . Such an extraordinary Au. 
hority they would acknowledge in Proph 


ers, but they expected that 
nary Divine Mittion, ſhon1d 


ers. 
ſaid ynto them #® 
days' I will raiſc 


War. [4453 
the Dead. 


!s Was the Sign to % 5. 24s 
he afterwards reterreth the Phariſees, Mar, I2, 


39. Luke 
it not be underſiood as command. 
5 bur as foretelluig what ctlicy 


( » Yery ordinary to uſe the Imperative 
) Fg But| mood tor the Future tenſe of the 14;..-; 


| Indicative, ſee Gen 42. 18. Deux, 
rela was the mighty Power of en, that.Chriſt, a lingle,] 32. 50, 1a. v. 9.10. and J4. I, F9h. 13. 27=" Deſtroy, IS a$ MUCH as, 
I private, obſcure Perſon, ſhould withour any more noiſe or oppoſi -|I know you will deſtroy, or if you do deſtroy this Temple, I will 
1 tion, drive out rhe multitude of theſe Huckſters, and overturn their | build 'C up in three Days. The Reſurrection of Chriſt from the 
Tables. Nor I think, ( after the conlideration of this Circumſtance ) dead, is ordinarily in Scripture attribured to the Father ; but here 
& need we enquire, By what Authority he did this? It was prophehied Chritt faith he would do It, and the Spirit by whom he Is faid to 
h of him, Mal. 3. 1. That he ſhould come t9 hs temple; and ». 3-| have been quickened, equally proceedeth borh from the Father and 
| Should ſit as a refiner, and purifier of ſilver 3 and purifie the Sox; his Sov. Nor is this the only Text, where it is attribured to Chriit, 
. 9 Levi, and purge them as gold and ſilver. : Chriſt here according | ſee Chap. 20. 17. 18. It was the Work of the Triniy our of it ſelf, 
Y that Prophecy, cometh to his Temple, ang begins ro Purge|and ſo the Work of all the three Perſons. Theſe Woriis were three 
i ir - | Years after this made a great Charge againlt Ehri:i, 244.25. 65, bur 
n 16 And ſaid unto them that fold doves, Take theſe| they reported them _ Nh NR 1am abie '0 dejtroy the 
L ings hence ; make not my Fathers houſe- an houſs of _ my Fora "nl4 it #n three daye. He fad only the Tem 
WY nerchandiſe'y, 9 ER Ti , = *l _ 
: b Atthis his firſt coming, he gives them that ſold Doves a liber. | 26 - hen faid the Jews, .>ty and Nx years was this 
: ly to take their Goods away ; bur ar the laſt coming, Mat. 21. 12:\ temple in building 2, and wilt thou rear it upin three 
- Its faid, He overeurned therr ſeats. Thoſe that think this preſident days 0? 
. ſufficient to vindicate privare Perſons eumultuons pulling down 7 The Fews underſtood his words of that marerial Temple in 
_ lmages, ſeem nor ro confider, thar Chriſt was no private Perſon. which they at this time were, which the beſt Interpreters think wag 
* lio' ſo eſteemed and did what he did as Lord of his Houte: the Temple builded by Ezra and Jerobabel; but how to mike it our 
Thoſe who urge it as inferring Magiſtrates and Superiours my that it was Forty ſix years building, they were not well agreed. 
4 this caſe, urge ir well; for it may well be from hence concluded Some ſay, Cyrus reigned, 30 Cambyſes 8, Dariys 6, Theſe added 
s, Thatit is the Wil of Chriſt, har places ſet aparr for publickh By or together make 44- Others ſay that the Mag: reigned more, two 
fo "P, ſhould neither wickedly be made $ of Thieves, nor yin | years. Some reckon to Cyrus 31. to his Son Cambyſes 9, Daring 6. 
en 19 Wade places for men to buy and ſellin; tho' . we can af-| Others fay that the years wherein the building was hindred, durin 
ne Me no ſuch holineſs to any place as to the Temple, which had nor Artaxer xes time, Ezra 4. 21. added to the Second year of Da- 
My a particular Dedication, bur was built by Gods order, - his ic-| rith, v. 24+ 11 whoſe Sixth year it was finiſhed 3 are reckoned toge- 
: <taton of it declared, and had peculiar Promiſes annexed to it ; t 0 The Fews thought ir {trange that our Saviour ſhould under- 
5 rn d | -ogur=tion of Chriſt, ( of which we thall ſpeak more 
Y crwar 


Yer even Nature ir ſelf reacherh, 


erence and reſpect due to ſuch places. 
all Uo beſt 


ore he had publiſhed the Dodctrine 


take inthree days, torear a Building 
lo many years. 


Thar there is a decent 
This Action of Chriſts, 


of the Goſpel, inſtructs] 21 But he [pake of the 
xn * hat thoſe who have Authority, are not always to refrain from P Bur alas, our Saviour ſpake not of their 
% + Wing Initruments of Superitirion and Idolatry, or groſs and in- | of the Temple of his 
ay cent Corr uprions ; untill People be tirſt by the Preaching of the | the Apoſtle calleth our 
ed OoGtrine Lang willingly tOpart with them. Bur if this were] 3- 16. and 6. I9. 2Cor.6. 16. Ic much 1 
8, 0 «Ke Lods houſe 


Xen, and $/ 
n Wha do Pap 


which had colt their Forcfathers 


Bodies the Temple of God, as he doth, 1Cor. 


vealeth his Fathers Nature and - 
Worſhip him, 


Peak Concerning his Bo. 
{ Would theſe blind Fews 
lorying in their Temple, Fer, 


by their ſhewing their Relicks Notion of the Temple agree to Chrift, in wh 
ch for C1, 865 to People, thereby to ger Money for thei: Prielts, and | head divele bodily.? Col. 2. 9. who re 
i 0 ſelling Pardons. Indulgences 2 &5. Never were Gods Houſes |, Willto Men, Mae, 1x. 27. and in whom all muſt , ; 
_E : that degree made places of Merchandiſes, and Dens of Thieves, | SO ag the Temple at Flier, uſalem Was every Way a molt Iflutiriouy 
8 Wy one at Cheateth for his Profit be (as he is) a Thief Type of Chritt, and Chriſt might well. f 
or TA on 2058 . p dy, ſay, deſtroy thy Temple; and thus Chriſt/ 
w Thc! nd tis ciſciples remembred thatit was WIEN, | have ſeen it) drew off the Fews trom 2 
” © Zeal of thine houſe hath eaten me up s. 7-4. and from the Temple, which w. 
"5 WM Vol, Ir Nacle was before, 


Atts 7. 47. Heb. 3. 
S| 


is but a Type, (as the Faber- 
' tohimſelf Prebgu. 
rated 


n Deſtroy . Mat. 29; 


»-» *, 


= : — 
» Adel” x 


Bonn 


tt: on 
Z T7 n—=— irs _— pct ar I _ - 
E : edi Gre St rr Ys —--—- 
M Is 
C2 "—- — 'P 


X = — me 
> IS" 0 moins anny—————_—_—_ rt ng: 
ICE Sz ens ho —_ 


Ciz5 D, TI. 


SF 0 


rned by ok Denfes, 775.5 11. Nor Coth be think far at this rune 
to ſpeak more plin!y ; for as ne knew, that the perverſe Fes, 1 
ſoeinp. world nor ſee, nor kear any ſuch Doftrine ; ſo he alfo knew, 


that his better Difcip!es were as yet weak in Faith; ani none purteth | 


rw Win? 110 Oki Botties- : 
-2 When therefore h2 was riſen from the dead 


" iis Ciſciples rememhr. d that he had ſaid this unto 


them a ; ond they believed the ſcripture, and the word 
«1:ich Ioſus hd 1aid r. : 

G Fvci Chris own Difci; les at the fir rither admired than 
pert: Cly under ovi their Loads It is fad of Cartit, Luke 24. 25. 
5 little befere 1s Afcention into Heaven, Then opened he their 1n- 
derftanding, thot they might underſtand the Scripture. The Difct 
ples did not Gill in® lv underſtand many things, ll after Chritts Re- 
ſurrection from the Dead, when they ſaw the things accompliſhed ; 
2nd when Chriti futher opened their Eyes, which was alfo further 
dove, when the Holy ghoſt came upon them 1n the days of Penze- 
coi, Thus we hear for the tzme to come 3 and the Seed which lieth 
a long time under the Clcds. ar laft ſpringeth up through the Influ- 
ence of Heaven upon it. r The Diſciples then more clearly and 
more firmly believed the Scriptures, and were able ro make a clearer 
Application ard Interpretation of theme By rhe Scriptures here, are 
meant the Scriprures of the Old Teft ament 3 ro which is 4dded, and 
the words of Jeſus. Chrifts words gavethemy a clearer inſight into 
the Scriprures of the Old Teſtament ; and the harmony of rhe writings 
ef the Od Teſtament, with Chrilts words under the New Teſtament, 
confirm the Diſciples Faith in borh. | = 


H N. 


-. 26 
"' 


C9 A © 4 


Chri$ ſheweth Nicodemus the neceſſity of Regeneration, 1-19, jp, 


Suffering, and Faith in ut, 14-15. The great Love of Goa ro 11, 
World in giving hu Son to die for 3*,16-17, The Condemyg:c,, 
them that do no: believe, 18-21 « Christ baptizeth in Fudey 1 
Fobn in Enon, 22--24. The Jews atſpute with Jolms Dife),., 
about purifying, 25. Fohn ſhewerh the Excellency and Diourtis, 
of Chriſt above himſelf, 25-36. y 


Here @ was a man of the Phariſees b, name N;. 
codemus c, a ruler of the Jews &d. 
4 The Particle there, being put in only to fit our 1d, 1, the 
Greek, where is nothing bur the Verb, - 6gnifies nothing tg Prove 
that what we read in this Chapter was done at Hreryſalem, h j; : 
diſpute amongſt ſome Interpreters, whether he was there of ng; 
ſhould ſeem by C5. 7. v. 50. that Nzcodemns his chief Reſidence 
was there'z þ-he was one of the Pharifees, who were a Sect, { 14 ve 
have ſhewed before.) which had their. Name either from an H:4;;, 
word, which ſignifieth to explain, (becauſe they were expounde;; 
of the Law ) or from another .word, whica fignifieth to dive. 
becauſe they were ſeparate from others; the Opinions have hgy 
learned Patrons. c This mans name in, Greek, fignifieth theVj2,. 
73 of the People'; d he was either the head of a Family amony the 
Fews, of'a Ruler of theSynagogue, or one of the. Sanhbedrin, i 


2: & Now when he was at Jeruſalem at the/paſſover; 


55 the teaſt day, many believed in his Name/; when 


they law the Miracles which he did-e.% 7 4 


{ To b:licve in Chriſts Name, and:to believe'in 'Chrift himſelf 


ſeemerh moſt probable he is here called a Ryler upon the lalt accoyry, 
if- we - confider Chap. 9. 50. _ 2 
2 The ſame came unto Jeſus.by night e,and faidunty 


a2 one and the ſame thing ; as 1t 1s the ſame'to' call upon God, ang \*! 1 can { 
1:2 call upon t/e Name of Goa ; ſo As 3-15: The meaning is. that: thou doeſt; EXCCept * God be with him g. q 
ey blieves) the things which were publihed: concerning his Perſon |... 
ce, yet the/Pertphrajts, Believing tm'n1s Name, 18 not yain ; 
it declareth a wrual Relacion betwixr God find rhe Word, by the 
Preebing of wInch le makerh himſelfknown to the World.” ' True 
F-ich cometh by hearing, and hearing by rhe word of God. "think 
3: 13 to no purpoſe Ldifpured here by ſome, "whether the Faith here 
merrioned was une Faith, yea or no. It appeareth by what follow- 
eth ; that it was not trae juliifying Faith. 3 but it was true in its 
kind, To make up wue juitifying faving Faith, which the Apoftle 
1. A know- 'of 
edge of the Propofarion of the Word revealing. Chriſt ; tes, fe which he bad wraught. God hath'rhis number among all Orders 
ir | 2 The ſecond' is;|and forts. ofmen.; :and thoſe rhar are his, ſhall come unto Chril; 
ſen, which is the act of the Underſtanding,” aprecing in the truth! there was 4 weakneſs'ir we Faith and Love of this Nicodem ; (his 
of rhe Word revealed, when fuch an Affent 1s given ro a'Propoſi- Station among the Fews was a great Tempration to him ) butyer 
tion, if mcerly upn the Divine Revel:ition of 1t; this is] Faith, a| there was a truth of both in him, which further difcoyered it felf, 
3- Upon this naw, (in thoſe 'who. ſavingly| Fob. 7. 56. -and. more upon Chriſts death, Chap. 19. 39. Buthere 
beticve) the Will clofeth with Chrilt as an-adequare Object ; for ir | ariſerh. a greater. Queſtion, 9:3. How Nicodemus could conclude tha 
rectiveih him, accepreth him, relies on, him as its Saviour; and | Chriſt. was a Teacher ſent from God; by bis Miracles ? 4. tit 
woveth by the AteCtions, to Love, Defire, Hope, Rejoyce. in him; | be obſerved, thar he dorh nor ſay in rhe general, that no man dos 
cominznderh the outward man into an Obedience to bis Law. Now | Signs or Wonders of any kind, unleſs the Power and Farour of God 
it is very polible, that throngh a common Influence of the Holy' | 
Spirit of God, men upon the hearing of the Ward ;. eſpecially, bav-. 
ing the advantage of {ceing miricyſous. Qperations  contirming'the 
Word, may give a true Aﬀent ro the. Prppoſition. of the Word as a 
Propotition of Truth, and yet may never receive Chriſt as their 
Saviour, cloſe with fi, truit in lim, defire, loye, .or obey him; 
this was the caſe of theſe Perſons, (many ateait of them) c{They, 
believed freing the Miracies which Cbrift did; they wanted a.due 
Knowledge of Chritt founded in the Worg,;., neither -had rhey- any [our the omnipotent hand of God could do them. For 'tis clxrby 
certain, tieady, fixed Affent, founded in. the diſcerning the .Fruth 
of the Propoſition ; their Atſent was ſudden,: founded only upon rhe 
Miracles they faw wrought, ſo as tho* rhey night have fome confi- ſearch for Traths,'to believe a Lie. . The Magicians indeed perform- 
dence in him, as a famous Perſon, and ſome. great Prince, 'from | ed divers Wonders in Egypt, but they were our done by 1f:/e1,t0 
whom they mighr expect ſome earthly good ; yet this was all, which 


. 1 5% "| Bo 
&#0:: 079 $: 


calls the Faith of Gods Elect, three things are required, 


tured by Reading, Hearing, 'Medication,” Ec. 


true Paith in its king. 


was far enough from true faving Faith. . 


24 Burt Jeſus did not commit himſelf. unto them u, 


becauſe he knew all men >». 


z: Chrif did nor take all theſe ſeeming Believers uto bis Boſom | | 1 . ; | 
x;or call them after him, nor maintained any familiar Fellowſhip heearggerVs Gar woure thereby gbran Authority and Credle wht 
ang Communion with them 3 bur made haſt again into Galslee, rill 
-i$5tums was come, knowing that in fo publick a place of danger, |. 5408 | *xvenly De 
they were not 10 be truſted ; w ſor being God blefled for og. ders by the working of Satan, 2 Theſ. 2. 9. and the h:aven)) 


hid knowledge of the Hearts of all men. 


25 And needed not that any ſhould teſtifie of man x, 


* 1 $S:m for * he knew what was in man 7. 


7 


1; Chron. Humonrs of all Men ; for 


25. Ge 


Cha; $. 64 he knew what was in them, ſearching the He 
Act. 1. 24+ Which 1s the ptoperty of God alone, 
Rev. 2-23-15. Here whar we formerly obſerved, is again obſeſrable : Thar 
oit times 1n holy Writ, for the further Confirmation of a Propofiti- 
cn, loan univerſal Affirmative is added a contrary Negative. Here. 
ariteth a Queitlion, agitated berwixt the Lutherans and the Cal- 
wmaſts, Whether Chrift as man knew all things, and what x im the 
heart of man ; they affirm ir,becauſe of the perſonal Union of the Di-. 
vine and Himane Nature in Cbrift, We fay, that althongh there be 
ſuch a perſonal Union, yet the properties of each Nature remain 6i- 
fimct ; upon which account Chrilt denyeth that he, as the Son of 
Man, knew the Gay and hour of the end of the World. Befides by 
the ſame reafon, that Omnijſcience belongeth rothe Humane Nature 
and Omnipreſence alſo mitt : 
Ivchlaſt indeed they affirm, ſeeing that dre pag quad 
abie to defrnd their Doctrine of Con{ubſt antiation, or the Preſence 6f 
the Budy and ever the Sacrament of his'Sup- 
per 18 Adminiſtied ; bur this beiag a matter Polanicet, _ —_— 
Thoſe who would be farisfied as ro whar is ſat 
may hind enough in GerarZ, Hunniwy, and Farnovits, 


x And needed not any Informancn concerning the Principles and. 
| ne perfectly knew men, not only from! 
faceir more external Acts and Behaviours; ( as we know them ) bur| he cannot ſee the Kingdom of God 7. 


arts,and trying the Reins, f We obſerved before, that the term Anſwered dork no! alwaj3 
1 Kings 8. 39. Pſal. 33. [ 


of Chriit ; Omnpotence, Infinitencſs, 


the Budy and Blood of Chriſt, where 


here diſcourſe it, 
on ether fide, 


him, Rabbi, we know that thou art a teacher come 
from God f. 5 for* no man can do theſe miracle; that 


e He came by nighr ro Chriſt, not as ſome-(too charitably) poſ. 
fibly may: think, rthar he might have the freer and leſs interrupted 

Communion and-Difcourſe with him ; bur either through fear, 2" 
poflibly ſhame.: (being a Maſter ir J/rae! ) to be lookt upun a1 
Scholar going to learn of another. - F He falureth him by the Nane 
they uſually .:gave to'their Teachers, (as we ſhewed Chap. 1.0 49) 
and ſaith, we know, by which he hinterh to us, that not only he, bt 
others > f the 'Pharrſees alſo knew thar he was a Teacher ſent from 
God in a more exrriaordinary matiner'; £ and he giveth the reaſon 
of this. ther: Knowledge, becauſe of thoſe miraculous Operttiors 


be with him.' 'But he ſpeaks particularly and eminently of thoſe 
things. which Jeſus did;' they were ſo great in their Nature, foral 
and ſolid in their' Proof, ſq divine in the manner of performingttem 
by rhe Empire of his-Will ; fo. holy in their End, to confirm a Þv- 
crine moſt bedoming'the Wiſdom and other glorious Attributes of 
God.and thar where the verification of the Prophecies concerninz the 
Meſſiab, whoſe:coming was forerold ſhould be with miraculous heal 
ing benefits; that there was the greateſt aſſurance, that none vith- 


the light of reaſon and Scripture, that God will not atfiſt by bis Al- 
mighty Power the 'Miniſters of Satan, to induce thoſe who fincerely 


convince the Spectators, that he was ſent from a Power infinitel; (t- 
perior to thkt of evil Spirits. - Real Miracles that are contrary 
the order, .and exceed the power af Nature, can only be producedby 
creating Power, and are wrought to give credit to, thoſe who at 
ſent from God, and when God permits falſe Miracles to be done d) 


trien, the deception is not invincible ; for 'ris forcrold expel, 0 
give us warning, that the man of fin ſhall come with lying 9%" 


Eine of the Goſpel has been confirmed, by real Miracles, 11comp#* 
bly greater rhan all the ſtrange things done to give credit 10 Dactrined 
oppoſite to It. ES | 

n Jeſus anſwered +, and ſaid unto him, Verily, «” 
rily, I fay unto thee, * Except a man be born|| agu" 


in the New Teſtament ſignifie a reply to a Queſtion before pray 
ed ; bat ſometimes no more than a Reply, or the beg1nnng of an" > 
Speech whether ir doth ſo here or: no, ſome queltion. Some © ” 
Chriſt here gives a ſtrict anſwer ro a-queſtion which Nicodem® 
propounded. to him, about the «way ro enter into the Kingdom 

God ; which Queſtion the Evangelift ſers not down, bat ny 
Reacer to gather from the Anſwer. Others think that .0ur yr” 

knew what be would fay, and anſwered the thoughts of h1s "= | 
Others, that he only began a diſcourſe ro him about —_ ant 
highly neceſſary for him,that was a Matter in 1/7ae/,ro unveri-anut . 
know : He begins his Diſcourſe with Ver:ly very, the upon 
which we conſidered, Chap. 1. v. 51. þ The word rranflared a 
is ayofer, which often Genifieth from above ; for figmfiet?, + # 
Farr. 1.17. and 3. 15+ 17. Ir alſo fignificth 4g427: Gil. - 
how turn you again to theſe weak and beg gerly element 5 * Thati ſos 
be fo tranſlated here, and v. 7. appeareth from Nicodemns 13 = 
(wer im the next verſe. Bur the Exprefſion oi the ſecond roy 
Birth by this word, which alſo ſignifies from aV-ve, MY pes 
reach vs,that the ncw Birth muſt be wrought in the Soul 719770, 


® DV - » apa "*, fr » To 12 T5 
(£9 ihe power of Gol, which is what was ſaid & tore,C00,1 oe 


Chap, 1 
en the Lutheran fade ; and Jancoius, an] orhors on the Caty;. 
,iſts fide; Aanchius de naturs & Atercburs Des, ly, 3 Cap. 2, 


i 


a _ 


A, 4 mas BS 0 a - Ai 


port 
ſerio 
ter t 
the$; 
about 
ſpirit 
man 1 
and ( 
Ural 
ſpeaky 
Diving 
the he 
ters al 
Tgid } 
Ment 
tſm f 
Cently 
prefer 
ſacred 
born 
mig! 
an uric 
ſhall þ 
the $pj 
- of the 
liens - 
Politior 
vized ; 
41d ry 
fon wh) 
Gmned 
bur wirt 
ly have 
(pake th 
Oblipeg | 
WOur ba 
Uty hol 
Nether h 
Vauon, 7 
Ven with, 
"nt of | 
dlpel, 
being baj 
Wen for | 
ere, be a 
Saviour al 
blood of } 
Ater of 
by our $; 
Us not thy 
Wh, 1 Þ 
"4 with, 


rily, ve" 
agun T! 


41911 alw4j9 g 
ropound 
of ante 
Some 10% 
odemi | 4 
ingdom 0 
eaves 10K 
bar Saviow 
* bis 0edb 

what v9 
eritand 3 
import © 
ared aga0m, 
fgeth, 7 3! 


;p. II. 


the neceility of v nick our Saviour preerh from the impo::ibility 
otherwiſe # 0! his ſeezng the Kr: 40m of God; by which ſome under- 
{and the Ringuom of his Glory, (as the Phraſe is uſed, Luke 13 

16.) others underitand i of tne mMAniietation of Chriit under the 
Goftel flate, or the vigour, power, and etfect of rhe Goſpel, and rhe 
Grace thereof. By jee1g of 37.15 meant enjoying, and being made Par- 
takets of it, 5s rhe term 15 uicd, P/ai.16. 19. Joh. 16.10. Revs 13.7. 
The Jes promited their w hote Nation a place in the Kingdom of che 
Mrſſiah, as they were born of Abraham, Mat.3.9. 2nd rhe Phariſees 
promiſed themſelves much from their Oufurvation of the Law, &c. 
Chriſt lets them Kriow nettiier Ol ineſe would do,burt unleſs they were 
wholly changed 1n their Hearts andÞrit:ciples{for fo much being horn 
gain fonifhierh; not forme parti:|Chanpe as to ſome things and in forme 


warts) they could never have any true ſhare, either in the Kinzdom of 


Grace in this Liſe, or in the Kingdom of Glory in that Lite which is 
0 come» "Tis uſual by the civil Lawsof Countrys, that rione enters 
intro the Poſſe{tion of an earthly Kingdom bur by the righr. of Birth : 
and for the obtaining the Kingdom of Heaven, there mutt be a new 
Pirth, a heavenly Renovation of tlie whole man, Soul,Body,and Spi 
rit, to give him a Title by the wile and unchangable Conſtitution 
of God in the Goſpel, and to qualife him tor the Enjoyment of it. 
Nicodemus ſaith unto hin, How cag a man 
be born when he is old &? can he enter the ſe- 
cond time into his mothers womb, and be born / ? 

k By the anſwer of Nicodemws, it ſhould ſeem thar he was an old 
man ; which is alſo probable, becauſe he was one of the Rulers ; he 
purs the Caſe as to himſelf ; I am, faith he, an old man, how ſhould 
I be born? {/ Can a man emer the ſecond time into kis Mothers 
Womb, and be born ? How true is rhat of the Apoſtle? 1 Cor. 2. 
14. The natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit ef God. 
What a groſs conception doth Nzcedemus, (though doubtleſs a learn- 
ed, as well as a great man ) diſcover of Regeneration, as if it could 
not be without a mans Morher travelling in birth with him a ſecond 
time? Nicodemws his queſtion diſcovers a grear deal of Tpnorance and 
Weakneſs, but yer a grear deal of ſimplicity and plainneſs in him ; 
that he did not come, as the Phariſees generally were wont ro come 
toChrilt, to carch him by captious Queſtions, hut brought diſcend; 
Pictatem, a pious Defire ro learn from him, and to he in(tructed by 
him. The Phariſees had been uſed to Study the Traditions of the El- 
ders, and ſpent their time abour unprofitable Niceties, as to the 
meaning of the Law ; fo were not at all verſed in the great things 
which concerned the Kingdom of God. The like inſtance hath been 
in latter Ages, the Pop:ſþ Divines ſpending their time generally a- 
bout nice School queſtions, ſhewing themſelves much Ignorant of 
ſpiritval things, and rhe great Miiteries of the Kingdom of God. 

5 Jeſus anſwered, Verily, verily, I fay-unto thee, 
Except a man be born of water, and of the Spirit m7, 
he cangot enter into the kingdom of God », 

m To excite his Spirit and Attention, our Saviour again expreſſes 
the Authority of his Perfon ; I ſay, and twice repeats the folemn AC. 


| ſeveration, Verily, verily, to ſhew the infallible certainty, and im. 


portance of what he propounds z that *ris a truth worthy of his moſt 
ſcrious Confideration, and ro be embraced with a ſedfaſt belief. Af- 
ter this Preface, - he declares, if any one be not born of Water and 
the Spirit, he cannot, Ec. to reCtific the carnal conceit of Nicodemns 
about Regeneration. In the third verſe, our Saviour compared the 
ſpiritual Birth with the natural, and with reſpect to thar, a renewed 
man is born a ſecond time. Bur in this verſe he exprefles the Cauſe 
and Quality of the new Birth, that diſtinguiſhes ir from the na- 
tural Buth, and reſolves the vain carnal Objection of Nicodemus. He 
ſpeaks not of the Terreſtrial, Animal Birth, bur of rhe Cceleſtial and 
Dvine; that is ſuitable to that Principle from whence it proceeds, 
the holy Spiriz of God, There is a grear difference among Interpre- 
ters about the meaning of being born of Water. The Romaniſts and 
mgid Lutherans, underſtand the Water in a proper Senſe for the Ele- 
ment of Baptiſm, and from hence infer the abſolute necefliry of Bap- 
lm for Salvation ; bur the Expoſition and Concluſion are both evi- 

ently contrary to the Truth. Indeed the new Birth is ſignified, re- 
preſented, and ſealed by Bapriſm ;-*tis the Soul and Subſtance of thar 
ſacred Ceremony; and if our Saviour had only faid, That whoever is 
born of Water and the Spirir,ſhall enter into rhe Kingdom of Heaven, 
Nt might have been congruouſly underſtood of Baptiſm ; becauſe it is 
an urcoubted Truth, that all who are truly Regenerated in Baptiſm 
thall beſaved, But our Saviour ſays, He that is not born of Water and 
the Spirit, cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven ; the excluſion 
- of the unlanCtified, is peremptory and univerſal. And our Saviour 
lens a manifeſt difference between an affirmative and negitive Pro- 
polition; when having declared, That whoever belzeves and # bap- 
137ed ſhall be ſaved; and coming to the negative, he only ades, 
_ he that believeth not ſhall be damned, Mark 16. 16. The rea- 
Mm vhy he Goes not ſay, Whoever is not baptized ſhall be con- 
Cmned, is evident ; for withour Faith, 'tis impotTible to be ſaved 
ut withour Baptiſm, even as the Romani/ts themſelves grant, ma- 
1} have been ſaved. For if we conſider the time when our Saviour 
kn Ke theſe worcs, they acknowledge, that Believers were not then 
en {Orecewve the Baptiſm of Chriſt for Salyation 3 for our Sa- 
« 4 ad this Conference with him ſome years before his death. And 
he 4 old, that before the death of Chriſt, Baptiſm was nor neceſlary, 
wan by vi, tre of Divine command, nor a8 a Means tO obrain Sal- 
= "  Thavefous the Believers that lived then,mizhr enter into Hea- 
w_ "Cut Paptiſin» They alſo declare, that Martyrdom ſupplies the 

; _ Baptiſm,and that Perſons ir{tructed in the Doctrine of the 
gy, and lincerely believing ir, if prevented by Death without 
"Sh vaprzed, rheir Faith and earneit Deſire is ſufficient to qualitic 
__ TT partaking of the heavenly Kingdom. Bur if by Water 


ere, @ 3) a, 

Wong meant the Elementary Water of Baptiſm ; rhe Words of our 
—_ directly contrary ro what they aflert ; for neither the 
'"wod © 


Was, Martyrs, nor the dehire and vow of receiving Bapriſm,are the 
Apts * Baptiſin, which they pretend is properly and literally named 
, Tvaviour, And cercanly, if, as the Apoſtle Peter inftrutts us, 


Us tn L © » P - PRYTT 
I cleanſing of the fleſh in the Water of Baptiſt that ſa 


aiul neglect, that condemneth. By Water, then we arc 16 


S. ZOHAN. 


underſtand the Grace of 13s boſy Spirit in purifying rhe Sor 


fion of Water, : 

on h;m that i thirſty, an floods upon the dry Ground. Ih. 44. 3. 
And this is imediately explain'd, I mall forr my Spirit 719 ty 
Seed ; and the Divine Birth follows, ther ſoa? fpreng np as ans 72 
zraſi, In the ſame manner the effects of rhe Holy Sjrir are expreit 
by Ez:kiel, I will pour clean water upon you, and you ſhall be ciean, 
Exeh. 35. 25. 27. and preſently after, [ wii! put my Stiri: within yore 
Our Saviour initructing a Phariſee,to whom the p:ophetical wri:tn.'s 
were known, expreſly uſes theſe two words, and in ihe ſane order 
as they are ſer down there ; firſt, Water, and then the Spzir7, that t! e 
latrer might Interpret the former ; for Water and the Spirir, by ar 
aſual Figure when two Words are employed to iignitic the fame 
thing, fignitie ſpiritual Water, that is, his Divine Grace in renew- 
ing rhe Soul ; as when the Apoſtle ſays, iz demonſtration of thr Spi. 
rit and of the Power, to ſignifie the powerful Spirir, Thus F921 
the Baptiit forerold of Chritt, That he ſhould Baptize with the Holy 
Gyoft and Fire, that is, with the Spirit, that has the force and effica- 
cy of Fire to refine us from our Drofs and Corruptions. Thus our: 
Saviour plainly inſtructs N:codemnus of the abſolute nece:liry of an 
inward ſpiritual Change and Renovation, and. thereby ſhewing the 
inefficacy of all the legal Waſhings and Sprinklings, thateould nor 
purifie and make white one Soul, which were of tigh valuation a- 
mong the Fews. Entring into the Kingdom of God, 1s of the ſame 
unportance, and ſenſe with the ſeeing the Kingdom of God, in tlic 
third verſe. That 18, without Regeneration no man can truly he 
joyned with the Society of the Church of God, nor partake of ch» 
Cceleſtial Priviledges and Benefits belonging to 1t, kere and hercatter. 

G That which is Þorn of che fleſh o, is fleth p ; 
and that which is born of the Spirit, is ſpirit 4. 

o That which was born of natural Fleſh ; for fleſh ſometimes fig- 
nifies rhe Man. So the Propher faith, 42 fleſh 5 graſi; fo Ger. 
6. 12» Al fleſh, that is, all men had corrnpe-d their way, Or, thar 
which is born of corryption, from vitiated and corrupe:d Nature ; 
(fa fleſh is often raken in Scripture, Rom. 8. 4. 5. 8, c.) p s fl/#, 
chat is, it bringeth forth ettects proportionab!e ro the cauſe ; a man 
purely natural, brings forth natural Operations. Man,as man,n:oveth, 
and eateth, and drinkerh, and fleeperh. Corrupred man bt:ngs 
forth vitious and corrnpr Frait, which often are called the We-;s 
of the Fleſh, Gal. 5.19. Fleſh here Ggnifieth the whole Man,whether 
conf1Jer'd abſtractly from the adventitious corruption of his Nature, 
or as fallen in A4am,vitiated and debauched through Luſt, q Bur riar 
Man or Woman who is regenerated by the Spiric of Grace, is ſpiritual ; 
he 18 after the Spirit, Rom.$.5. he is one Spirze with God, 1Cor.6 17 
he-1s made partaker of rhe Divine Nature, 2Pet. 1. 4. he doth not 
commit ſin. 1 Fohn 3. 9. Nothing in Operation exceedeth the vertue 
of that cauſe which influenceth it ; fo as no man from a meer natu- 
ral Principle, can perform a truly ſpiritual Operation ; and frem 
hence "tis abſolutely neceſſary rhat man mult be born of the Spirit, 
chat he may be qualifhed for the Kingdom of Heaven. 


7 Marvel not that I ſaid unto thez, Ye muſt be 
born || again 7, 


fidelity; and rhat which is the effect of Fairh. Our Saviour forbic's 
Nicodemus to marvel at the Doctrine of Regeneration, as ſtrange 
and incredible, upon an imaginary impeiſibiliry ſuppoſed by him of 
the thing it ſelf, Bur he thar believes, will judge that ſupernatural 
work of the Spirj., whereby a finful man is made a partaker of the 
Divine Nature, worthy of the highe!t Admiration. And what our 
'Sayiour had ſaid in the general before, That a man muſt he horn 
again ; he now particularly applies ro N:icodemrs, with thoſe of |.is 
order, Te must be born again. For Ntcodemus would eafily conſent, 
that the Pagans, and poliibly the vulgar Fews had need of Regenera- 
tion, to partake of the Kingdom of God ; bur that the Doctors of the 
Law, (of which number himſclt was ) eſteemed the Lights of the 
World, ſhould be under the ſame neceflity,” was aſtoniſhing ro him. 
Therefore, our Saviour to undeceive and humble him, faith, 7+ mit 
be born again, for that all are defiled with the corruption that is 
univerſal to mankind. 


it cometh, and whither it goeth r : 
that is born of the Spirit «. 


{ The Word which is Tranſtated, 3/7, being the fame which 
both here, and ordinarily in Scriprure is Tranifated $parze, hath pi- 
ven Interpreters a great hberty to abound in their (cveral ſenſes. Sorne 
thinking that it ſhould be Tranſlated, The $p#r:e, tat is, the Spirir 
of a man breateth where ir liiteth ; and that our Saviours fenſe was, 
Nicodemus, thou needeſt not to wonder that thou canit nor wit thy 
ſenſes perceive the ſpiritual New Birth,for thou canſt not underitand 
the Natural Birth. Otbers think it (ho111d be Tranſlated, The Sprr:c, 
that is, the Spirit of God bloweth where it liſteth ; bur that feemeth 
not probable, becauſe of theſe words, So z5 every one chat y born of 
the Sprrit ; which will hardly be ſenſe if we underſtani) the fr:t 
part of the Verſe, concerning the fame Spiritz and ver. 12. Our 
Saviour faith, If 1 have told ye earchly thinss, and ye believe not, 
they ſeem therefore beſt 10 nederſtand ir, who Interpret it of a cer- 
rene Spirit, paticularly, the Wind which is of a ſpiritual nature ; 
and thus by their Tranſlation, it is apparent that our Interpreters 
underitood ir. So as, tho' our Saviour fpeaketh of the motions o: 
the Ble{ed Spirit ; yer he ſpeaketh of them by way of Compariſon, 


SO 15 Every ons 


comparing it to tne motion of the Wind, of which he ſad, That 27, 
bloweth where it liſteth; not that it is its own mover, and under no 
government of the firſt cauſe ; for rhe P/almF tells us, Pſal.148, $. 
That the ſtormy winds fulfi! Gods word ; nor is any ſuch thng con- 


petible roany Creature z bur the original ob it Motion is to us im- 
perceptible. : We can fpeak forething Philofophically ro the canfs 


*7. 3. 21. *ris not rhe meer want of it, without contempt | of it, and can tell whether it blow cth tro. the Ea?, Bit, Nine, 


\ or Soto 3 but we cannot ill tne particaiar Place, v his, or from 
: whiiice 


7 


And this purt- 
fying refreſhing vertuc of the Sire, 15 promifed in the Provhectes 
that concern the ttmes ot the Me/iab, under the Mytitical Expret- 
Ti:us 'ris twofol} by 3f<zah, I mill four mater 11 


Pater [s- 
bamus & 
afro, Vit 
aurers > 
e715, Virgo 


. Or . 1 103% 
r There is a rwofold Admiration ; that which is joyn'd with In- 4v0ve- 


$ ® The wind bloweth where ir lifteth f, and thou «p..4;; 1 
heareſt the found thereof, but canſt not tell whence | cor. 2.1 3 


"7 T- 
_—_ \—Sgn -- 
4 ÞY __ 
x64 $A be. 
ot. 


: _ WRIEE 
a tet os 


_ 
a = .6 a 
” ———_y_ 6 fr - 9% W> — 
= . EE 
OH. 


2 - 
o 7 E _— « _ _ 
54 Ir. w- _— 
2-eeS SO - < __ - —— 4 7 x : "IE EL 2 DIC w*. x — -. 
- =IEt, MR a Tm. * ” ” "0 wr _ *« 
- ” " A Eo L 
- 2 * p=0 Ba __— 2s __ "20. + 4 # : * 
a ” < TIFS>- Se ve: © wwe) HD 4 » 4» 23>: 4x4 > —x FY, _ bo 
Lat "om ww . . 24 rages = _ : þ $5 s 
ar "as = DG =. 4.2 b apr by js - Yao > [- _ ” —_ 
Pa —"_— =" 3 p . 7 Se - p_ 4 _—_ $2 


a Jr 


: _ -. 
- SEES - "4 452 
Roa = TE ———___ 
f © ——_— L * = T w 
= _— _ CI « _ 


- fe p NO % he 
I a 2 S — - _ * —_ _——- 
3b 42> regen EAI iy 5 —_ : MEE CTC ITS os _ 4 
4 _ _ - . - => s C - 
K - - —_— 
»t _ 
-. - 


oC _ 


AE £4 4 


Chap. II. S. F 0 


whence it riſer. # So every one, who is regenerated from the 
working of the Haly Spirit of God, 1s changed and renewed, fo as 
ve cm give our ſelves or others no account of it in all points, as 
to the taward Operation, tho' in the effects it be diſcernable. 
9 Nicademus anf{wered and faid unto him *, How 
£c can thele things h2 we 
 Nicodemus had berore ſpoken, as if he rhoughtir a thing im- 
podible, under{tanding,our Sav.our of a carnal Generation, which 
ke knew could nut be repeated : Percetving that he ſpake of a Spirt- 
tial Birth, he is now poſed ar the Myllery of it; it being a thing, 
the Doctrine of which he had not heen acquainted with. His car- 
2al ftlapidyy hindred his under.tanding the firit Le{ſon of Chriitt- 
4:ty. tho explained hy the Son of Righteouſneſs, and his Pride 
tind:r'd him trom confefling his Tenorance : He rather judges the 
Doctrine to be abſurd and impo.{ible, The like darkneſs 1s 1n eve- 
ey unrenewed mind 3 Regereration being like That new Name, 
which none underftand bur th fe that have 1t. 


10 Jeſus anſwered and faid unto him, Art thou 
a malter of Iſtacl, and knowelt not theſe things x * 


x Oar Saviour doth not ſo mnch wonder at, as upbraid the Igno-| 


rance of Nocedemus, and all of his Sect, who went for Maſters or 
Teachers, and that in 1/rae!, who had the Law and rhe Prpohters, 
and yet were ignorant of thoſe things which were neceſſary to be 
known to every ordinary Perſon, Salvation. Will any fay, But 
where was there any thing {poke in the Books of the Law and the 
Prophers about Regeneration, or a being born again 2 anſ. What 
otter things could be meant by the C:reumciſion of the Heart, com- 
manded by Moſes, Dent. 10. 16. promiſed in Det. 3o, 6. by the 
new Heart, and the new Spirit, promiſed, Ezek. 36. 25+ 26, bythe 
clean H-art prayed tor by Dav:d, Pſal. 51. 10. A Teacher mn I/- 
rae!, ſhould from hence have underſtood the neceflity of a new, and 
of a clean heart ; bur the whole Sect of the Phariſees were fo taken 
up with the trifles of the Rites and Traditions, and the works of 
the Law, that as to theſe ſpiritual things of nearer and much high- 
er concernment to Peoples Souls, they knew, and ſpake little of 
them. 


H N. Chap, I] 


ſpoken of the New Birth, as neceſſary to thoſe who ſhall Hs ſaved 

here comes ro ſhew it in the Cauſes, and in{tancerh fir in the 1 * d 
torious, then in the inſtrumental Cauſe ; the meritoriovs "I os 
his Death ; he faith, Thar look as the Serpent was lifted up in Ws 
Wilderneſs: 2 So he, who was the Son of man mult he lifteg ws, 
that is, die upon the Croſs; the Phraſe is uſed twice more in "P; 
Goſpel, Chap. 8. 28. and 12. 32. 34» an illufion doubtleſs Au _ 
Type. Yer Mr. Calvin thinks the /ifred up here, more properl his 
terpreted of the Dottrine of the Goſpel, and by the Preaching K. oy 
and others apply ito Cir:/?s aſcention into Heaven ; and this her y ; 
Nicodemus mult be, for the fulfilling the Scripture, and the "nu F n 
of his Farther. "TRI 


15 That whoſoever believeth in him, {houtq nor 
periſh, but * have eternal life 5. K 


þ Here our Lord openerh the Inſtrumental cauſe of Fnſlificatiy, K, al 
and Salvation, that is, believing eg 4vT8y in him, Ir ig gne thin « 3 
believe him as a Teacher,another thing to believe 77 him a5 © po 
The ObjeCt of the firſt is a Propotition ; we believe a Perſon when 
we aſſent and give credit ro whar he ſaith, becauſe he ſaith ir, The 
Object of the latter, is the Perſon and Merits of the Mediator, 4 
the looking up to the brazen Serpent healed the Perſon, not by bs 


11 * Verily, verily, I fay. unto thee, We ſpeak 
& 8. 28.that we do know y, and teſtifie that we have ſeen 
X12- 4% 2, and ye * receive not our witneſs a. 
K 14+ 3 » Chriit ſveaketh only of himſelf, tho' he ſpeaketh in rhe Plural 
2446 a Number ; for in the next Verſe, be faith only, If 1 have told you 
earthly things ; he lets Nicodemas know, that he ſpake nothing, bur 
he was certain of. 7 This he expreſleth by two words, Know and 
See, which are terms expreiiive of the greateſt certainty of a thing 
imaginable; for the rerms expreſs a certainty of rhe mind, ariſing 
both from r:tional deduction, and fſenfible demonſtration ; and here- 
in cur Saviour lets his Mini{ters know whar is their Duty to teach 
unto People, v:7. What they know and have ſeen, thoſe that think 
that the Doctrine of the Goſpel would have no certainty, but for 
the authority of the Church, itand highly concern'd to reflect upon 
this Text, a Ye ought to believe what tell you upon the autho- 
rity of my Revelation ; bur fuch 1s the hardneſs of your Hearr, 
fuch your ftubboruneſs and unbelict, that you receive not my Teiti- 
mony. 

12 li] have told you earthly things b, and ye 
believe not, How ſhall ye believe if I tell ye of hea- 


venly things c ? 

b 1f 1 have ſpoken to you plain things, and in a plain Style, hum- 
bling my Phraſe to your Apprekenfions ; and illuitrating Sublime, 
ſpiritual Miſteries, which in their own Nature are more remote 
from your Apprehenfions, by plain, and obvious Similitudes and Pa- 
rables, and ſpeaking thus, you underſtand and believe not : 'c What 
would you do, it I ſhould Diſcourſe ro you ſublime and ſpiritual 
things, without theſe advantages for your underſtandings ? 


*Ch. 5.62 13 And* no man hath aſcended up to heaven, but 
Ez. + 2 he that came down. from heaven d, even the Son of 
man which 1s in heaven e. 

d No man hath ſo aſcended up ro Heaven, as to know the ſecret 
Willand Counfels of God, ( for of fuch an aſcending it muſt be 
meant ; otherwiſe, Elijahaſcended up ro Heaven before our Savi- 
our aſcended ) thus the Phraſe is ſuppoſed to be uſed, Prov. 30. 4 | 
None but Chriſt, ( whoas to his Divine Nature came down fro 
Heaven ) hathever fo aſcended thither, e even the Son of Man, who 
was 1n Heaven, (we tranſlate it, z5 ) bur the Particle @y, is of the 
Pretermmperfect tenſe. as well as the Preſent tenſe; or who 4 in Hea- 
ven, by virtue of the Perſonal union of the rwo Natures in the Re- 
Ocemer, as Acts 20, 28. weread, The Church which he had purcha- 
Jed with þ3; on blood. By re3ſon of the Perſonal union of the two 
Natures in Chriſt, tho' the properties of each Natures remain di- 
ltinct ; yet the properies of each Nature are ſometimes attributed to 
the whole Perſon. The Lutherans have another notion, aſcribing 
an Omnipreſence, evento the humane Nature of Chriſt, becauſe 
ot irs Perfonal Union with the divine Nature ; and fo affirm that 
Chritts humane Nature while it was on Earth, was alſo ſubltanrially 
in Heaven ; as on the other ſide, they are as {liff in maintaining 
thar, alrho' Chriits hamane Nature be now in Heaven, yer it is allo 
on Earth really and eilentially preſent, wherever the Sacrament of 
rhe Lords Supp*ris adminiitred ; bur this is to aſcribe a Body unto 
74 __ indeed isno Body, according to arry notion we have 
Ol 4 DOOMY. 

14 J Andas Moſes litted up the ſerpent in the wil- 


derneſs f, even fo mutt the Son of man be lifted up g. 

F The Hiltory of rhe lifting up of the Serpent in the Wildernels, 
we have, Num. 21.8.9. the people being {tung with fiery Serpents, 
43a righteous Judgment of God for their fins, as a merciful Remedy, 
God commanded Moſes, wv. 8. {Hake thee a fiery ſerpent, (chat 1s,the 
Image or Repreſentation of one of thoſe fiery Serpents } and ſet it 
upon a poie, aud it ſhall come to paſi, that every one that s bitten 
when he looketh upon it ſhall live This brazen Serpent in the Wilder: 


| 
| 
Phyſical Operation, bur from the goodneſs of God, as it was an 4 | 
of Obedience ro the Divine Inftitution for that end : So neither dot 
Faith in the Mediaror juſtitie and obtain Pardon for any Scuj, {;, 
any meritorious vertue in thar act, but from Gods graciousO:ting, 
tion, thar ſo it ſhall be ; he hatn ſc ordained, that whoſoever ſoul; ( 
reſt upon Chrilt, and receive him by Faith as his Mediator and $,. j 
viour, ſhould not periſh, bur live for ever, There are orher thing; 0 
beſides Faith necet{ary to Salvation, ſuch are Repentance, Loy ſg v 
new Obedience ; nor is Faith only mentioned, becauſe they ze 7 C 
gredients into it, but becauſe Faith is the Root of all thoſe, nd th; P14 
from which they mult neceſſarily flow, for it is as impollible that any e, Ie 
ſhould rruly hope, and truſt in, and rett upon Chriſt for thar lj | 
which he hath only promiſed to thoſe thar obey him, withoutcyin, 
to yield that Obedience to him; as 1t js impoſſible thar any ſhould jr; 
deed trait in, and reit upon a Man who hath promiſed a Rewyg 4 
upon a Condition, for that Reward, without any care to fultl th " 
Condition. Bur by this and other Places, where Faith alone in Chit - 
is mentioned as neceflary to Salvation, Nzcodemus was taught, tha ” 
no Obedience to the works of the Law without this Faith in the as 
Mediator, would bring the Soul ro eternal Life and Salvation, * 
I6 < * For God ſoloved the world 5, that he gave41o fie 
his only begotten Son & ; that whoſoever beliercth in fs 
him, ſhould not periſh, but have everlafting life / on 
z For God the Farther, who is the Lord of all, Debror to none ” 
ſufficient ro himſelf, ſo loved rhe Word, that is Gentiles 15 well zs 7 
Fews. There 1s a great contelt about the Signification of the term, % 
berwixt thoſe who contend for or againſt the pcint of univerſal Ree . x 
demption ; bur certain it is, that from this term, no more canhe (o- bn 
licly concluded, than from the term a/ and every, which in mutt Fox 
tudes of places are taken in a reſtrained Senſe for many, or allof ſuck 'T 
a Narion or Kind ; as this term fometimes fgnities all Perfons.pin c [ 
I Fohn 2. 2. the Gentiles in oppolitionto the Fewvs ; nor (adititthat pl ' 
the World fignifie here every Scul, in che place called the World } = 
will any thing follow from 17, It is proper enough to ſay, A min _—_ 
loved ſuch a Family to ſuch a degree, rhat he gave his Fitate to ir, Ss 
tho* he never intended ſuch a thing to every Child or Branch of it; icight 
fo as what 1s truth in that ſo yexed queſtion, cannot be determined erJhou 
from any of theſe univerſal Terms ; which muft, when allis ſaid or W 4 | 
can be aid, be expounded by whar follows them, and by their re- loving 
concilableneſs to other DoCtrines of Faith. God ſo loved the World can a\ 
k. that he gave his Son to die fora Sacrifice for their Sins, to die in things 
their ſtead, and give a Satisfaction for them to his Juſtice, And ral Li 
rhis Son was not any of his Sons by Adcption, but his on begotten They, 
Son, not ſo called, (as Soc:114ans would have it ) becauſe of his fin- but cl 
gular Generation of the Virgin without help of Mar, bu: from his Ittlea 
eternal Generation, #n whom the Gentiles ſhould tru, Fſal. 1. 1 is of t] 
which none ought to do, but in God alone, Dev. 6. 13. Jer- 17-5: both ; 
{ That whoſoever, &c. The term { al ) occurred, v. 15. and the Et 
there ſpoken to ; theſe words reſtrain the univerſal Term 71d, and ſefſed 
all to ler us know thar Chriſt only died for ſome in the World, 9:7; ſation, 
Such as ſhould believe in him. Some judge, nor improbably, that Tight y 
Chriſt uſeth the rerm ZY/071d, in this Verle, in the ſame Senſe, a 1 polite 
170912. 2. Our Evangeliſt uſeth to rake down the Pride of the 7*#!, 21 
who dreamed that the Meſſiah came only for the benefit of the Setd that 
of Abraham, not for the Nations of the World, he only came !0 ng 
deſtroy them, which notion alſo very well fitreth what we havein te TO 
next Verſe. | ny T1 
[1 » af 
17 * For God ſent not his Son into the World, to . what is 
condemn the World  ; but that the World through his Not 
him might be ſaved ». FIG 
m The word we tranſlate Condemn, is zetvn, ſignifies t0 Fuage, 0 " 
as well asto Condemn. The Fews were mittaken in their prov _ 
Conceits, that Chriſt came to judge and deitroy all thſoe that vere ons 
not of their Nation; thus Ch. 12. 47. he ſaith, he came not 79 1%hs oy G, of 
ut toſave the World ; noris this contrary to what he faith, £94? __ 4 
9. 39. For judgment am I come into thi world ; for that 18 © — A. oi 
ent, from the corruption of men, ſhutting their Eyes againlt tne Utanc, 


Light, and hardening their Hearts againſt the Otfers and Roy of I  22.© 
Divine Grace. Chritt will come in his ſecond Coming to Convent 1 nto the 


the WorlJ of unbelievers; bur the tendency of his coming, ” ps * and b 
not for Condemnation, bur ro offer the Grace of the Goſpel, a! 

eternal Life and Salvation to men in the World. _— 
: OE _ _ 
15 q * He that believeth on him, 1s not condem fome thin 
ned o; but he thar believerh nor, is condemned _— ng by 
dy p, bzcauſe he hach not be jeved in the Naine Of City of 7 
only begottzn Son of God g. Yo: Country of 
8 . . c Ind is 

o Whoſo firmly and ſteadily aſſenting ro the Propotitions ” Mundy, 


Goſpel, revealing Jeſus Chritt is the only and all ſufficient S60P 


av's was a lively Type of Jcſus Chritt» Our vigour having befor 


| us ; :aving in hm 
commits the care of his Soul unto him. truſting and hoping _ 


) proud 
11 were 
0 jud7e, 
\ Chap 
ex dctir 
inſt ie 
nders ot 
ondemNi 
NI was 


vel . and 


andem-? 


1 alrea-* 


D of c<h8* 


1s of the 
S 1y1Our, 
S " him 


abai'h 


1p. II. 


« for eternal Salvation, which no raan can indeed do, withour 
doing whar in him lierh, ro fultil rhe Condition upon which Chritt 
# hs -omiſed Life and Salvation ; that is, Keeping the Command- 
gre God, is exempted from Candemnation by the Law of 
ES Bur he thar believes nor the Doctrine of Carit, and does 
not upon the terms of the Goſpel receive him for his Saviour, is al- 
ready Cendemned or his obitinite Infidelity, which is the certain 
cauſe of Damnation 5 as WE ſay of one mortally wounded, that he 
i. 2 dead Man, tho he breathes for a while ; and we ſpeak in the 
{me manner of a Malefactor, convicted and atainted of a Cipital 
Crime, tho' the Sentence be not Executed, becauſe their Death is in- 
«vitable. The not believing in the only Son of God, who 1s able 
ro ſave ro the urmolt all rhar regularly cruſtin him, is ſuch a con- 
tempt of the merciful. all ſufficient and ſole means of Salvation, that 
is abſolurely neceſſary, and moſt juſt, that all choſe who refuſe to 
he ſaved by IM, ſhould periſh by themſelves. From this Scripture 
riſe rwo Queſtions. The firſt concerning che Heathens, who ne- 
ver heard of Chriſt. The ſecond concerning Infants, who die before 
hey come tO years of Knowledge, As to the former, the Apoſtle 
yath determined, Rom. 2. 12. As Many ds have ſinned without the 
Law, ſpall alſo perifh without Law. Thereis the ſame reaſon for 
thoſe who fin without the Goſpel ; they ſhall nor periſh for not be- 
lieving 012 h1m whom they have not heard, Rom. 10. 14. but for 
not obeying ſuch Revelation of rhe Divine Will as they had, The 
caſe of Infants is excluded from this Text, { ſpeaking only of adult 
Perſons } It 1s certain, that ſo many of them as belong ro the 
Fiction of Grace, ſhall be faved, and thar by virtue of the Blood of 
Chriſt; but which way God bring them to Heaven, is a ſecret to 
1s, Some from this Text have concluded, Thar unbeliet is the 
only damning Sin , which is no farther true, than, thar no Sin 
will damn that Soul which ſhall truly believe in the Lord Jeſus 
Chrilt. AR : | : 
i! 19 And chis1is the condemnation, * that light is 


| > 
> come into the workl rand men loved darkne( rather 
than light / 3 becauſe their deeds were evil c, 

- This is the reafun, the Evidence, and gieat Cauſe of Condem- 
nation, That /ight x5 come anto the IWir'd, Clift is the Light, 
Drero!d by the Prophet, I/a. 9. 2. and 42.6, and 49. 6, He is ſhiled 
in the beginning of this Goſpe), the rrae Lighr, Chap. 1. 4. that is, 
Exch in Perfection allthe excellent qualities of Light ; the Power to 
enlighren the minds of men in the knowledge of faving .Truth, to 
warm the &ffections with rhe love of ir, tO revive the diſconſolate, 
and tro make the heavenly Szed of rhe Word to flouriſh and fructi- 
fe in their- L ves. This light 1s come into the World, that figni- 
Fes not only his Incarnation, bur his revealing rhe merciful Coun- 
{of God for our Salvation, which the clearelt Spirits could never 
have diſcovered ; he has open'd the way thart leads ro eternal Life ; 
but men loved Carkneſs rather than lizhte. {They preferr'd, choſe. 
and adher'd to their Ignorance and Errors, before the Light of Life, 
the ſaving Knowledge of the Goſpel, Their Ignoranceis affected 
and voluntary, and no colour of excuſe can be alledged forir; nay 
'is very culpable and guilty, by neglecting to receive Inſtruction 
from the Son of God. # The Vices and Luſts of men are the works 
of Darkneſs, the truits of their Ignorance and Errors ; and they are 
ſopleaſant ro the carnal corrupr Nature, that to enjoy them ſecurely, 
they obſtinately reject the Light of the Goſpel ; this aggravares their 
Sin and Sentence, 

'* 20 For ® every one that dozth evil s, hateth the 

"light w; neicher cometh to the light x, leſt his deeds 

{ -hhould be {| reproved y. 

: 1 He that makes a Trade of Sin, and doth Evil preſumprouſly, 
loving and deF'ghting in it, & doth nor love the Light, x nor if he 
can avoid it, will come near it; for the Light is that which makes 
thngs Vicble, and diſcovereth them. - As1r 1s the nature of natu- 
ral Light, ro ſlew things to others as they are ; and therefore 
Thieves, and Adulterers, and Drunkards, care not for the Light, 
but chuſe the Darkneſs far the'r deeds of Darkneſs, and cone as 
Ittle abroad in the Light as they can, when they do them: So it 
isof the Nature of Chriſt and his Goſpel, ro diſcover mens Errors, 
both 3510 the obtaining of Juſtificaricn and eternal Salvation and 
the Errors alſo of mens Lives; and therefore men and women poſ- 
ſefſed of Errors in their Judgments, or delighting in a filthy Conver- 
{ation, hate Chriſt and his Goſpel ; becauſe that a diſcovering the 
right waysof God, diſcovereth the craokedneſs of their ways, op- 
polite to the traths and ways of God. 


21 But he that doth truth z, cometh to the light 4, 
that his deeds may be made manifeſt, that they are 
Wrought in God 6b, 

{ Truth here is put for true things» He who propoſeth, defign- 
eth, and aCteth nothing bur whar 18 juſt, and holy, and good, and 
what is conſonant to the Will of God. a He is not afraid ro bring 
his Notions and Actions to the Tett of the Divine Rule, publiſhed 
v7 lim, who is the true Lighr. 6 For he thar deſires what he doth 
may be made manifeſt, both to himſelf and others, rhar they are 
wrought, in, with, or according to, by, or throuzh God. ( for the 
Farticle 2p here uſed, is uſed in all theſe Senſes. 1 Cor. 7+ 39. Rev. 
14 13. ) Thoſe works are ſaid to be wrought in with, by or through 
ood, which tend ro the Honour and Glory of God, as their end, and 
'ow from him as their cauſe, which are done with his Strength and 
&liltance, and for his Honour and Glory. 


, 22 T Atcer thele things c; came Jeſus and his diſcples 
,"to theland of Judea J, and there hetarried with them, 
and baptized e, 


E Soon after our Saviour had had the foremenrioned conference 
þ th Nicodems, which it is believed he had ar Hieruſalem, (not as 
wg _ in Galz/ze; 1g then Nicodemus wauld hardly have come 
vg Yy Night 3 4 he came 1nto the Landof Fudea;z he had be-} 
- _ n te Provnice of Fudea, and in the Metropo/zs, or great 
My ot Fedea, which was Hreruſalem ; bat now he goeth into the 


{oz ? ' , ' uy 1 | 
ountry of Fuaea, Tudah and Hieruſaiem are often mentioned di- | 


alon 


CEO 


S. FO HN, 


Country, tho' within the ſame Province and Tribe, ſee Foſ7. 8. 1+ 
Toe King of Ai, his City an4 his Land, and in particular as ro Hze- 
ruſalem, 2 Chron, 11. I'4. and 20.17. and 35. 23. Ezra 2.1. Luxe 
5+ 17. and 6. 17. Chriſt and his Difciples went into the Country part 
of Fudeo, e and there hz tarried with them,and ba: zed by his Dif- 
ciples; for himſelt perſonally baptized none. Burt asin our com- 
mon Speech, fo in the Language of Scripture, there is nothing more 
ordinary than for Perſons to be faid themſelves to do, what they do 
by others, 1S2me 26, 11, 12: 2Kings 22.16. 2Chron. 34: 24. Atts 
5. 34; 

23 T And John alſo was baptizing in Anon, . near 
to Salim, f becauſe there was much water there g ; and 
they came, and were baptized þ. 

f © /Enon 15 here faid to he near Salim ; it was the Name of a City, 
as ſome ti:ink ; orhers fay , River ar Brook near ithat. City ; neirher 
the Rzver, nor the City, are elſewhere mentioned in Scripture © 
but Topographers place it on the Eaſtern part of the Lor of Manaſſes, 
not far trom Betſhan, or Scythopolis 2, there Fohn was Baptizing 3 
becauſe this /E£102 was a Brook or Rever that had much Water, which 
in Fudea was rare. There 1s:no Water more holy than other. Fob 
Bapnzed in Fordan ani in Bethabara, and in Aon. The Ordinance 
ſanCtified the Water, but did nor require conſecrated Water for the 
due Adminftration of ir. Ir is from this apparenr, ſay ſome, rhat 
both Chri/? and Fohn Baptized by dipping the Body in the Warer ; 
elſe they needed nor have ſoughr places where had been a grear plen- 
ty of Water-: Orhers ſay it is not apparent from this place, that 
Baptiſm was adminiſtred by dipping or plunging, ' 1. Becauſe a2aa2 
uae lignifies rather mary Waters, than deep, ſeveral Rivulers, or 
the overilowing of Fordan iathar place, as Beza notes, and E072 
here mentioned is found by Travellers, to be very. ſhallow. 2. Be- 
cauſe ftore of Water was nece7ary, by rea'on of the multitudes thar 
came to be Baprized by Fobr, Mat. 3. though they were not plung- 
ed, or if fone think it probable from this Texr, that ſometimes the 
Apoſtles did Baprize by dipping, yet it is at leaſt as provable;thatthey 
did not, or not conftantly, from what we read of the Apottles bap- 
tizing in Houſes, Acts 9. 17. 18. and 19.47. 48, and 16. 33. þ The 
People came to 70/2 and were Baptized, that is, great numHers of 
them did fo. 

24 For * John was not yet cait into prifon 

z For John wasnot yer in the exerciſe of his publick Miniſtry : 
not calt into Prifon, as he was ſoon after. 

25 T Then aroſe a queſtion betwee ſome of Johns 
diſciples and the Jews, abour puritying &. 

& The Fews had ſo many Purifyings, ſome legal, inftirnated by 
God, ordained by Moſes as Gods Mini:ter ; ſome Trads:0nal, brought, 
in by che Phariſees, as their waſhings before meat, Mat.1 5. Mark 7. 
that it ſeemerh an hard thing to determine, what the Queſtion was 
berwixt Fohn's Diſciples and rhe Fews, abour whar Puritying ; and 
the boldeſt determiners in this Caſe, are no betterthangue/ſers: Sorae 
would have Baptiſm to be meant here by Purifying. It would much 
conduce to the reſolution of rhe Queſtion, if we knew what theſe 
Jews were, with whom Fohns Diſciples argued. If rhey were of the 
Phariſees, it is probable, the Queſtion was about Fohns Baptiſm, 
conſidering the frequent waſhings and purifyings that they had in 
uſe among(t them. If they were other Fes, the Queſtion might be 
abour the vertue and efficacy of the ceremonial Waſhings, ordained b; 
the Law of God, whether they were meer Types, and now to ceaſe 2 
Whether in themſelves they conduced any thing to the Waſhing and 
cleanſing of a Sou! ? [ſthefe Fems were (as ſome think, \but I know 
not how it can be proved) Diſciples of Chriit, the Queſtion might be 
abour Fohns and Chri#t Baptiſm: This Netion ſ{eemeth to be favour- 
ed by what went betore ;; where the Evangeliſt had been ſpeaking 
of Baptiſm, as adminiſtred by Chrifts Diſciples, and by Fob: ; as allo 
from what followerh ,viz. Fohns Diſciples coming to him, and cora- 
plaining, Thar Chrilt by his Diſciples baptize more than their Maſter, 
Bur there ſeemeth to be this great prejudice againic the Notion of 
thoſe learned Men that have embraced that Notion, v:z. Thar the 
Queſtion 18 ſaid ro have riſen berwixt Johns Diſciples and the Fews ; 
now we want an inſtance in Scripture, where the D2/c:ples of Fob; 
are pur in oppoſition to the D.ſciples of Chr:#, and under Notion of 
the Fews: The term Ferws, generally fgnifying, that part of the 
people who adhered to rhe Fudarcal Rites and Religion ;- eſpecially 
where, (as here) it is uſed in oppoſition.either to th& D1ſc:pies of Fohn 
or of Chris, It is moit probable therefore the Queltjon was, either 
abour the Maſhinzs ordained by the Law of Moſes, or abour the 
Traditional waſhings obſerved by the Phariſees. 

26 And they came unto John, and faid unto {it 
Rabbi /, he that was with thee *beyond Jordan, te 
whom thou bareſt wieneſs z, behold, the ſame Eap- 
eizeth, and all men come to him ». 

/ The Diſciples of Fohn coming unto aim, give him the uſualtitle, 
under which in that age,they were wont to ſpeak ro thoſe whom they 
owned as their Teachers, which was Rabbr. m Their buſineſs was 
to complain, that Chri# whom they do not think fit to name, nor 
co give him any tirle, bur mention him as one much inferior to their 
Maiter, one that came to him to Bethabara, and ro whom he there 
gave reſtimony, Ch. 1.7. 34. as if Chriſt had from him derived all 
his Credit and Reputation. Their Maſter did not go to Chriit, bur he 
came rotheir Matter ; he wasnot baptized of Chri.t,bur Chrilt was 
baprized of him; he did nor give Teltimony to their Matter, but their 
Maſter gave Teilimony to him ; now ſay rhey, » he baprizeti by tis 


bod 
* 


ntly, The chief City of a Country is oft diſtinguiſhedfrom rhe: 


Diſciples, and multitudes, many of all ſorts of People ( for the um- 
verſal Particle 4/ mer, can here fignifie no more) come to him 5 
Love is Jealous, they were afraid rhat their Maſters reputation won!d 
by this means flag and be diminiſhed. Such a Paſſage we find, Nm. 
11. 28, And thus Fobn, our Saviours Diſciple, was Jealous for Chrilt 


Chap. [I]. 


F 


3 # 


his Maſter, Luke 9. 49. They all all finned, asappears by the anſwer *1COre4R7 
given by Moſes to Foſhua, Num. 11. 29. and Chrilts anſwer to Fohn, Heb. 5. 4- 
Luke 9. 50. and by the following reply of 70/52: to theſe Diſciples. Fam. 1. 17- 


enyying for his fake. 


othing. eycept it be given him from heaven e. 
notning, P g - why 


% it is f 
j Or, Fax 


* | | Mora UND Gimme 
27 John anſwered, and ſaid, * A man can jj receive 7: 


<= 


” 
-. 


"os . "3 + xd 
: —— 4 _ 
OB” 26077 0 and £3 "oo ns EL rg 


_ 


. : 
x 
: 
. 
#4 \ 4 

: i 
$ 
#4 

[; 


—_— 
_ = 
= ; yu — . pon = —-- hw - 
_— —— vos f..; 4 
re 3 
_— oo 


| — 
— 


p_ 
— 
— 


_ ——_— 
bn 


I _ 
- . by cent 
: 
On aan, 28 


a = ak 


Ay —O— 


__ 17 
CiaD, 1i1. 


» . $ 7 F.0d . *\ . TTILLED | a ' { 
9 The Miniloy. and rhe friccefy of the Mitt fir, nol bot - = 
ven a man fron; Heaven: Dath he ban: ize * | isa itgn he is ſent 
of God. Doa!lmen come to him 2 That alſo is from God. Arn ex- 


- Wa. - ts 229 a7 ones Tayl SIR 7 Iy-i . £ _ . . 2 
cellent Corretive of Ambition, Envy and Jeazoutie 3 no mat Ba} 2, Ih amore fingular and peculiar Love 3 to that, Math. TR 


in te Church of Go.l Anthority, but he ro wiom tt 13 given 107 | 


> **:m not the Chriſt p, * but that 1] am f-nr before 


y Cliri{t, whoſe the Church is by right of Redemption, - and by 
ts havin; piven up its {e]f ro him, 2 Coz, $, 5. Reis rhe Bridegroom 
ef it, Mar. 22. 3. 2 Cir. 11. s Eph. 5. 23, 25, 26. Ec. AS his 
Father wasthe Huang of the Jewith Church; it belongerh to aim 
in oe La%S5 T0 it. and to order Matters and Aﬀfirs in ft, / I am but 
$0” who 15 the Friend of the Bridegrooin, one of the Children of 
the Bo :de-chamber, Mate 9. 15. ani} hive by my Preaching PrepP3- 
ind the People of the Fears for him 4; and inſtead of being troubled 
*v hear that Le is come, I rejoyce greatly to hear his Voice. $0 fur 
1m 1 {om repining to hear that Muitirndes go ro him, that my joy 

©4177, Ghitis) 1 have no greater Satisfaction than to hear 1t. 

>> Ho mult increate «, but 1 muſt decreaſe . 

In Honoar and Dignity, and Reputaticn in the World ; he 1s 
theR:ing-fin {ro zive you notice of which, ] was but as rhe Morning 
itar } he mn't Shine every day more and more. w God hath 11- 
dc=d ved me as a Prophet, yea more than a Prophet, not to forete] 
Ck-++ alone, bur 10 potyr him to you, I have hay my rime,and fintſh- 
ed my Courſe. and God hath giver me a Repucarion proportioned ro 
tlie Work he g2ve me to do, aid tothe tine 1 which I vas to work ; 
bn I mutt every day decay, and grow leſs, and leſs as Chrilt increaf 
eth, and growerh more and more. 


*Ci.p 11 31 He that cometh from above ?, 1s above: all x: 
15. 7 hetharis of the earth, is earthly, and ſpeakerh of the 
WP 7 - ws f, . . 

31> oirth * : He that cometh from heaven is above all y : 


+ fi- that cometh from H:aven;{for it appeareth by the latter part 
of the Verſe, that is rhe ſenſe of from above) as Chriit did, not on- 
Iy inrefpe< of lis D:yine Nature, bur being (as rohis whole Perſon, 
Clonked with Majeity, and Authority from above, 1ntinitely excel- 
I: anv one whois a meer Creature y,; he that is of an earthly Oci- 
ina. fpcakerh of the Earth. Such as is a mans original, ſuch is his 
ane, fuch is lis Ciſcourfe, Tho be icnt of God, as Ch. 1. 6 
2d m7 Papuſa be from Heaven ; (fo our Saviour himſelf reſtifieth, 
Aath. £1.25. ) yermy Original 15 of the Earth, and my Relations 
an] Egorefions arc futtable ro a meer Man: Bur he that 1s from; 
jleaven excels ali, as in the Dignity of Its Perſon, fo in the Subli 
mn: of bis Knowledge. 


2+ And what he hath ſeen and heard, that he teſti- 
f:r1%2, and no man receiveth his teftimony s. 

> Another great difterence which the B.p:73t teacherh his Diſci- 
ples to put hetwisr his Teltimony and Chrilt's, 1s, that he and fo all 
other Minitters of the Goſpel, reſtifie by Reve/atzon; Chrilt reſtifieti 
not by Revelation, but from his own Perſonal Knowledge, what him 
felf hath {cen and heard from his Farher, ſec Verſe 11. where our 
Saviour had ſpoken to Nicodemus much the ſame. So Fohr1. 18. and 
&. 24, and15. 15. By theſe two terms is fiznified the moſt certain 


. Chap, I 
25 * The Father loveth the Son, and hath given ajj "he 
Heb, 2, 


f The Frernal Farher loved the World, ver. 15. but he loved the 


5 s y ! E : TE2S 7: 

?leaven; NO Authority over his Sons : : * ] ana Earth. Math. 28. 1%, to give eternal life to as many the Ez. 
EY Þ. >< 28% Ye your felves bear me witneſs, that 1 ſaid, ther had given him. John 17. 2. The keys of Hell and of Beat! Rey 
#'Az1 2 Io [ | þa 0 


1 + E: i oy his T:ftrmony, and to believe in him. . 
ry > 1 meat to you thathire my Difciitts, Did not 1 always plainly | , 36 He that belteverh on the Son &, hath everlaſting *Hihky 
tell you. thar | was nor the Carilt *-It belongetn unto Chritt alone htc 5 and he that believeth not the Son h, ſhal] not ſpe + "1! 
oa hot the Head of the Church, to fend ont ſuch as tha!l labour 1 It, |1jf>; bur the wrath of God abideth on bim &. How 
Lo veiiram thoſe that Jabour in it 5; world you have me filence Or | ppl eh hearing the propoſition of the Goſpel, fo avreeth ts ; : 
ere bin? 1 old you, that 1 was but onv of his Miniſters q, ent; Him his Heart be receiverh him as his Saviour, and wuleth ang | 
botorg Dun to prepare lis way, Foie ls 20, 23- hopeth in him, harh everiaſiing life; that is, a certain and ſt : 
>» Ho thathach the biide, is the bridergoom ; bur |Fjtjc toir, nay in the firſt Fruits ; being actually delivered from , 
EET 3 IN " irfond Gi che OVUegi com r which \tandeth, and demnation, ro which, without Faith, he 1s expoſed, om. $. 4 { 
ok careth bm, rcoycerh greatly becaule of the bride- 44 OT m_ a win Life, _ Þ <P mg Chrilt in C 
*ranms voice /: This my joy; therefore is fulfilled 7. | Wm, mt 7% rope of Tangs wo OOO Oo! WAH, be (al h 


molt certainly come /. Bur he rhar receiverh not the Goſpel. puh. 
lift.cd by him who is the San of God, and doth nor embrace him, ,c | 
his Sa viour, and yield Obedience to him, fhal! not be ſaved. The WM. 
xord here tranſlated, be!/reveri not, 1s, &nmi0ay, Which often ſigni 
fteth; one that is nor not obedient : Bur 2s 3 the command of Gy; 
that men ſould believe on by ſon, 1 John 3-23. The commangygy; i 


doth not only reſpect Love. bur Fazth in the brit place ; for Ey;j 


and infallible Knowledge of thoſe rhings which he teſtified, which 
ma.'e them worthy of all accepration : a But yer very few received 
his Teftinony, fo as to believe 1n 1t, fee Foh. 1. 11. and ver. 11. of 
tins Chaprer. 


22 He hath received his teſtimony *, hath ſet to his 
{cal, that God is true b | 

þ He who hath fo believed rhe Teſtimony of Chriſt, as to accept 
him, and ro believe in him as his Savipur, hath by that his believing, 
ſer io his Seal, that God in all lus Promiſes of the Meſſiah under the 
oid Tettamenr, 1s rrue,rhat a word hath nor failed of whatſcever God 
hati there ſpoken of that nature; according to this is thit 1Foh.5.10, 
He that beltevetb not God, hath made him a liar, becauſe he believeth 
207 the Record that God gave of his ſon. This faying doth notably 
conumend Faith, and detame Unbelief. Faith in Caritt as the only 
true Mediator and Saviour, giveth reitimony to the truth of God 
and fealeth it, Uabeliet defamerh God, and doth in effect ſay, that 
God 15 a liar. | 


24 Forhe whom Got] hath f=n: c ſpeaketh the words 
of God 4; tor God giveth not the Spirit by meaſure 
unto him e. 

c He whom Gcd hath ſent our of Heaven, out of his Boſom, not 
meerly authorizing hm as a Minitter, as the Prophets, and as Fohn 
was ſent 4, ſpeaking nothing bur the words of God. The Pro 
phcis, and the Apoſtles were ſent of God, in a ſenſs, bur nor as Chriſt 
was tent ; they ſometimes ſpake the words of God, when the Spirit 
ot Go came up9n them; bur they ſometimes ſpake their own words, 
as Nathaz did David, when he encouraged his thoughts ro build 
an. Houſe tothe Lord. Bur whatſoever Chritt (pake, was the words of 
God e: For Gud dt nor give out the Spirit to him ſparingly (as our 
&t a Meaſure, as he Goth to his Mini:ters or Saints, who have bur their 
proportion of Revelations and Qraces,9s was requilite tor their Offices 
1 which they were called;and the (ſeveral periods of time that were 
wracally illuminated. Bur in him the fulneſs of the Godhead dwelt 
POGtV, Ne Was auomted with the ol of gladucfs ibove his Felloys : 


Ram 3.4- 


worketh by Love, fo as there is an d7{i9:ia, a diſobedience in the Un- - 
terſtanding as well asin the Converſation; and he that fo belteret yy, ha 
4s to obey ſhall never come into Heaven, which felicity is here expreſ- ” 
ſed by ſec:n2 Lif-; as nor ſeeing Death, is nor dying, fo nor [teiyp | i/, th 
is dying ke And as he was by nature a child of wrath FEph,”,_, w 
ſubject, and expoſed to tize wrath of God, fo rhat wrath abide: yy. wi 
on him, not being juſtified by Faith, be. hath not peace rith Gay Cif 
Rom, 5. Is : " 
bu 
CHAP. IV. Re 
Jeſus departeth from Fudea to Galilee, 1--3. Fie meeteth with ; = 
Woman of Samaria, with whom he talketh of the living Wate, - 
3-15. and teileth her the actions of her fore-past life ; fromwhich my 
jhethinks ne's a Prophet, 16-19, He teaches her concerning tug : F 
Do ſhipping, 23-25. And telleth her that he s that Meſſiah tha; \ 
was to come 3 wherewith ſne acquaints the Inhabitants of the City. 

26-30. Telleth hy Diſciples what 1s his pranciple of Food, 3 1-38 to | 
Many of the Samaritans beiteve on him, 39--42« And coming tg 0 
Cana of Galiiee, he healeth the Son of a Kings Servant, 43-54, tis 
(7 Hen the Lord therefore knew a how the Phari- = 
fecs had heard that Jeſus made and * baptizel'® Savi 

more dilciples than John 6. | _ tis, 
a Our Saviour knew as God, from that Onmiſciency whichis inſe- SavIC 
parable from the Divine Nature, or «s man by the relation of others Orca 
b,that the Phariſees (who had the the greateit ſtroke in the Sanle- 9 
drim) and the Government of the Church of the Jews, had received Is it, 
an Information concerning him, that he bad by his Doctrine which Iam - 
he preached and confirmed by miraculous Operations, made, and by lea 
his Diſciples, baprized more Diſciples than Fohn, thereby intiaing gore 
them into a new Church. £44 
- 2 ( Though Jeſus himſelf baptized not « but bs dif yon 
ciples) of - 
© For he himſelf did not perſonally baptize any, but left it to his the Sar 
Diſciples, himiſelt attending to the greater work of Preaching the or rece 
Goſpel, by which men and women were made fit for the Ordinance this Re 
of Bapriſm. his Ha 
3 He left Judea 4, and departed again into Galilee. ſ-nſe 0 
dHe left the Province of Fudea,which was near to Hzern/alem,where Cy, EX 
tne Phariſees had their chiefeſt Reſidence and greateſt Power. e And lo 
went the ſecond time into Galzlee, whither he went once before, eſt the 
Ch. 1. 43. where he found Ph:lip and Nathanael. Galilee was a Pro- Gire 
vince under the Juriſdiction of Herod. Luke 3. 1, This motion of Mm F 
our Saviours into Galziee, is reported by Mathew, Chap. 4+ 12. and 'and þ 
alſo by Mark Chap. 1. 14. and Luke. Chap. 4.11.4. The two for- 7 M: 
mer give another Reaſon of his motion, viz. his hearing thas to the 
Fohm was Cait into Priſon ; of which, and the caule of it, ſee Mat. gave tO 
14. 3,4, 5, S Soas after that, he publickly Preached no i10re, the forr 
which might poſſibly augment the number of Chritt*s Diſciples. 59 | t 
Diſciples tollowing him : Both theſe cauſes probably concurred 10 ered In 
cauſe this motion. Fohn, who by preaching and bap:izing, had la Vaſherh 
the Foundation of a Goſpel Church in Ga i/ee, was impriſoned, an = mu 
our .Saviour knew, that the number of his Diſciples increaling upon I. 
Fohns continzment, an Information hd been carried againlt him thing te 
the Phariſees ; this made him, knowing that his time was nor yer then h:; 
come, withdraw himſelf our of the Province of Fudea into rhat 0. t Wh: 
Galilee, as well to ſupply the want there ( Fobn beingin Priſon | ls Spirir 
to provide for his own ſecurity. Woman y 
4 And he mult needs go through Samar f. tep, (ſc 

F Foſephus tells us, that Samarra is ſeated between Jude and G4- Provided 
lilee and beginneth at a Town called Ginea,Luke17- 11. and 9. 51: bence | 
52+ There were two paſſages from Fudea into Galilee, the one Wi Nicodems 
through the midſt of Samaria, Luke 9. 51. The other hroug! ul they | 


the Eaftern-parts by the Royal Valley, by Fordan, m which it is fad MN 1, A 


that Sichem was. By Samaria, malt not be underltood, the City 0 8ave ng 
Samarta built by Omrigbut the whole Country fo called,and pollztled Child 

by the A/ſr7ans, with a mixture of Jews amonzit chem. Soune th1n* s ws 
that the Evangeliſt added this, to excuſe our S.viour for going callech Hþ 


monglt the Gentiles. ominari 
5 Then cometh he to a City of Samaria, which C4 Profperir 


led Sychar g, near to the parcel of ground that Jacob them, © 
gave to his Son Joſeph 5. ; re Ml 1 eat 

2 The molt valuable Interpreters agree, that this $47, q - n Called x 
Ciry cailed Sechem ; ir was originally a parcel of a Field, bought of Ine Father 


: x EP ls x 
Facob of Hamor, the Father of Shechem, Geit- 33,19: fer ob 1.400 bulk Could tins] 


Fc had ite Spring of all in hinfelf, not the <treans oly. 


- » # ” - nd O07 G Ilat th, 
the Ciry there, ealled Shechera, 1Kings 12. 25. 10 Was IN Be Lot it of this 
; Wosk 


Vo. tn, 


LY 
1, 1 
, . 


2, 


4 
nere 
And 
ore, 
Pro- 
2n of 
| and 
) for- 
- thay 
Mat. ' 
rnores 
70/08 
ed t0 
ad laid 
J, and 
; Upon 
im 
or yer 
that of 
MN ) 38 


ad G4 
9. 3t+ 


ne W415 
hrougi 
ir is ſaid 
City 
ollelled 
"Wl 
1e rune 


poINg oy 


1 15cal- 
Jac9Þ 


| is the 
Yughl by 


1111 buils 


Lot c 
Wow 


.IV. 


Ephraim ; 7 o/ephs bones were there buried, Fof. 24 32, h. 


mount 


Jacob gave it ro his Son Joſeph, as a parcel above his brethren, Gene| rjnketh of this water, hall thirſt again 


g 22. A parcel of Ground, near unto which was this City called 
Char. anciently Sechem. ' 
'*; Now Jacobs well was there #. Jeſus therefore be- 
ing wearied with bi; journey, fatthus on the well &; 


and it was about the ſixth hour /. 


S. FO ON. 


12 Jeſus anſwered and ſaid unto her, Whoſozve: 


ww V wo 


w Our Saviour in his Reply juſtifieth rhe excel lency of that /#:795 
Water, which he had before declared to be in his Power to 9.ve.and 
his readineſs to have given to this woman, if the had asked it of £5 
from rhe pertſhing Vertue of the Water of this well. and the co. 
nuing Vertue of his Grace, which he compared to this living Wte 


! It was called Facobs, eicher becauſe he digged ir, (as we read of | No man ſo aſwaged his Thirit by drinking ofthe Water of Facovs 


ms digging a well, Gen. 21. 30. and 1ſaac, Gen. 26. 15) or 
— Bhs be Family uſed ir, as Verſe 12. k, Our Lord uſed no 
Horſe, or Chariot ordinarily in his Travels, but went on Foor ; we 
never read of him 1n a Coach or Charior, bur once upon the back of 
: Beaſt, ( that was when he rode into Hzeruſalem upon an Aſs) he or- 
dinarily travelled on Foot ; and the Evangeliſt taketh norice of his 
wearineſs.to lerus know that he was truly Man,and ſubjected to we. 
rineſ, and other humane Infirmities; and he relted himſeIfupon the 
6des of the Well /, and it was abour Noon-time, for that was ac- 
cording to their compuration, the ſixth Hour. The Sth Verſe rells us, 
his Diſciples were gone to the City to buy Meat, fo as he was alone, 
- There cometh a woman ot Samaria to draw wa- 

ter : Jeſas ſaith unto her, Give me to drink », 

1 Ic is uncertain, whether this woman was a Citizen of Samara, 
which City is ſaid ro be at two Miles diltance from this place, or one 
of that Country, which wear by that name, f for Samaria was the 
Name of that Region, as well as of a City) ſhe came nor out of 
any defign ro meet with Chriſt rhere, bur came ro draw Water; they 
having not Pumps and Wells ſo common as we have, were forced to 
iravel for Water for their neceſſary uſes. Thus it often happeneth, 
that we meet with Divine mercy when we think nor of ir. God is 
found of thoſe who ſeek him nor, nor inquire after him, 1/azah 65. 1 
which lets us ſee, how all our Motions and Actions are at the Divine 
diſpoſal and government. Rachel went not to the Well, ro meer 
with the Tidings of an Hugsband, but to water her Fathers Flock ; 
but yet there ſhe mer with Facob, Gen. 29. 9. as it had happened ro 
Rebecca before, Gene 24.15. This woman | as appeareth by whar 
followeth) was no berter rhan an Harlot; to her Chriit ( fleeing 
from the Phariſees, the great Doctors of theFers) bringeth the gla 
ridings of the Goſpel, and ſhe receives them. So admurable are the 
diſpenſations of Divine Providence n : He prevents this woman, ſay- 
ing unto her, Gzve me 70 drink, x 

8 For his diſciples were gone away into the City 
to buy meat 0. 

o This is added leſt any ſhould ſay, How came our Saviour in 
this diſcourſe with the Woman of Samaria 2 They were travelling 
upon the Road, and came near Sschem: Our Lords Diſciples were 
-one to the City to buy ſome Food for them ; in the mean time,our 
Saviour coming to the Well called Facobs Well, ſets him down, and 
this Samaritan-woman cometh to the Well, ro draw Water. Our 
Saviour being thirſty, asks of her ſome Warer to drink ; this giverh 
occaſion to the following Diſcourſe. 

9 Then faith theWomanof Samaria unto him, How 
151t, that thou being a Jew, askeſt drink of me, who 
Tam 2 woman of Samaria p? for * the Jews have no 
dealings with the Samaritans 9. 
fThere was a great eſtrangement of theFers from the Samaritans. 
1$theSamaritans having a peculiar Temple built upon mount Gerizim 
in oppoſition to that at Hreruſalem 4. Ir is ſaid, that the Ferrys did buy 
of, and ſell ro the Samaritans, but were reftrained by an Order of 
theSanhedrsm, from uting any familiarity with chem, or borrowing 
orreceiving any thing as a Gift from them, which was the cauſe of 
this Reply of the woman of Samarta, knowing our Saviour either by 
his Habit, or by his Dialect, to be a Fer ; this is thought to be the 
{nſe of ovyy26v1er intbis Texr, rhough it hath a larger ſignifican- 
cy, extending ro all kind of Commerce. 

lo Jeſus anſwered, and ſaid unto her,if thou knew- 
elt the gift of God r, and who jt is that fſaich untothee, 
Giveme to drink, thou wouldeſt have asked of him, 
and he would have given thee * living water /* 
 r Manyby the gzft of God here,underitand Chriſt, whom God gave 

to the World, C-. 3. 16. And who is the greaceſt Gift that God ever 
gave to the World; fo as rhe latter words,and who it 5,&c.expound 
the formerſ; Thou wouldeit have asked of him, and he would have 
given thee either a true knowledge of the Doctrine,or the Grace ten- 
(ered inthe Goſpel, or the holy Spirit, called Water, becauſe it 
vaſherh and cleanſeth rhe Soul ; and /iv3ng Water, becaule it is al- 

Ways running and flowing. 

11 The woman faith untohim, Sir, thou haſt no- 
thing to draw wich, and the well is deep ; from whence 
then haſt thou that living water & ? 

.* What our Saviour ſpake Mecephorically, comparing his Grace,or 
1s pirir, or the Doctrine of his Goſpel to living Water, this poor 
%oman underſtandeth literally ; and knowing that the Well was very 
Ceep, ( ſome ſay forty Cubirs ) and ſeeing him as a Traveller, not 
proided with any thing to draw with, or into ; ſhe asks him, 
a he had thar living Water ? a Queſtion much like that of 
og emus, Ch. 3.9.4 Soignorant are Perſongof ſpiritual things, 

they be enlightened by the holy Spirit of God. 

12 Art thou greater than our Father, Jacob, which 
mo 25 the well, and drank thereof himſelf, and his 
Cildren and his cattel #? 

WS wrems him, if be judged himſelf wiſer than Facob, whom ſhe 
Fr ng. _ Father ? Itis ofren obferved,that theSamaritans would 
heerie, ow with the Fews, when the Fews were in 
yg A ur in their Adverfity, conſtantly diſowned any Relation 
on 8 ere were ſome Fews (Ephraimites eſpecially) mixt with 
my —— number of 1ſſyrians, which made up this Body of Peov- 
the Fathe ih - Samaritans. Now faith the Woman, Facob who was 
aſs = of Foſeph, irom whom we claim, was a wiſe Man,and he 
-n4 no better Water hereabours for himſelf and Family, than 


Well, bur he was ſubject to Thirlt again. n 
14Buc * whoſoever drinketh of the water that I 4 all 


ſhall give him, ſhall be in him a well of water loring- 
ing up into everlaſting life y. FEI 
x Bur he who receiveth the holy Spirir, and ti; Gras rherog* 
though he will be daily ſaying Grve g:ve, and be continually deti- 
ring farther ſupplies of Grace, yet he ſhall never who!!y v:anc ef 
want any good thing that ſhall be necefſicy for him. the feed of 
God ſhall abide in him y, and this Water ſhall be in him a S9rins of 
Water ſupplying him till he come to Heaven, Bar this Text was 
excellently expounded by our Saviour, Ch. 7. 38. 39. He that belicon 
eth in me, (as the Scripture hath faid) ov of by belly (1541! flow river: 
of living water,” F. 39. But thy ſpeaketh heof rhe $ pirtt which the; 
that believe on him ſhould recerve. From which it is pln, that our 
Saviour here by the /zving Water he ſpeaketh of undertood the 
holy Spirit. : 
15 The woman faith unto him, Sir, give me «is 
water, that I thirſt not, neither come hither to draw ». 
{ I amnot of rheir mind, who think that this Woman underſt004 
| our Saviour, ſpeaking abour ſpiricnai Water, only bad a mind to talk: 
and indeed, it ts hard to conceive, how a womin of her F.lucation. 
and way of Life, ſhould underftand any ſuch thins ; bur ir is plain, 
chat ſhe did not underſtand him in what he wag diſconrling abour bar 
doth as it were deride him, beli-ving that he had no fach thing £0 
heſtow : She raketh no notice of the Water which our S:viour bad 
ſpoken of, ſpringing up ro eternal Life, bar regarding only the pres 
ent Lite, and her eaſe in that,defires favour of Chriſt only ro ſupply 
her wants in this Life, and thar ſhe might live at more eaſe : fo true 
is that of the Apoſtle, Rom. 8, 5. They that are after the feſt do 
mind the things of the fleſh. | ; 
16 Jetus {faith unto her, Go call thy husband, and 
come hither a. 
a Not that Chriſt did not know what ſhe afterward confeſt. thr 
ſhe lived in Whoredom, and had no legitiraate Husband : Ryur he 
ſaid this probably, ro check her petulancy, and mocking ar what he 
{pake abour the /1-4ng Water, and to bring her to a ſenſe of her Sin 
that ſhe might be more {it ro receive the glad T:4{ings of a Saviour, 
which he was abour to publiſh to her ; and rkis 'cems rather tr be our 
Saviours defign, in bidding her go call her Husband than ( 23 forme 
of theAncients thought } that he might betrer initruct her. Or avoid 
any Scandal to himſelf, by a longer private Diſcourſe with 3 man 
alone, who was of no betrer Repuration. 
17 The woman anſwered, and ſaid, I hrwe no hns- 
band 6. Jeſus anſwered, and ſaid, Thou haft well ſaid, 
I have no husband c. 
b That is, none who is my lawful Husband; ſhe denieth not that 
ſhe had one, whom ſhe uſed, and lived with as an Hi:sbind bur 
that ſhe had any legal Husband, ro whom ſhe clave, and to no other ; 
{till ſhe goerh on, thinking to deceive Chriit, and to pur Tricks up- 
on him c, Chriſt rells her, ſhe in this did ſpeak rrurch ; he knew ſhe 
had no legal Husband. 
18 For thou haſt had five husbands, and he whom 
thou now haſt, is not thy husband 4 ; in that ſaidit 
chou truly e. 
d He tells her, that ſhe had five Husbands, whether ſucceilively, 
the former being dead, and ſhe marrying another; or Five trom 
whom ſhe had been divorced for Adultery, is not agreed ; the beſt 
modern Interpreters judge, thar ſhe had had five Men, ro whom ſhe 
had been in Marriage, bur ſo behaved her felf roward them, that 
either for her Adultery, or ſome other froward Behaviour rowards 
them, they had given her a Bill of Divorce e ; and tho' ſhz now uſed 
and lived with one as her Husband, yer in this ſhe (aid cruly,becauſe 
her former Husbands yer living, he was not her Hushand. This 
ſeemeth more properly the ſenſe, than that after Five legal Husbands 
death, ſhe lived in Whoredom with a fixth Perſon. By this diſcovery, 


acknowledgment of him as the Mefliah. 


cthac thou art a Prophet f. | 

F Whoſe Office 1s to reveal the Will of God, and to whom Eod 
revealeth ſecret things. One to whom the Lord maketh known him- 
ſelf in a Viſion, and ſpeaketh in a Dream, Num. 12.6. The womans 
Reply ſeemerh to fignitie both her acknowledgment of Chriſt as a 
Propher, upon his telling her ſfecrer things, juſtifieth her looking 
upon him,'as one to whom God revealed things not known ordinarily 
ro men ; and that this is the import of her meaning appeareth by 
what ſhe ſaid, v. 9. to her Fellow Citizens, Come ſee 4 man which 
hath told me all things that ever I did ; bur the following verſe,in 
which the encreth into a Diſcourſe with our Saviour, abour che Con+ 
troyerlie berwixt the Fewsand the Samaritans about Horſ/-1p, let us 
know, that ſhe looked upon him as a Propher in the more ordinary 
ſenſe, as Prophet fignifies one influenced by God to reveal his Mind 
and Will unto men ; and indeed, there was no Prophe: in the former 
ſenſe, but was alfo in the latter ; tho? chere were many Proprers in the 
latter ſenſe ſent of God. and enabled ro reveal rhe Will oft God unto 
Men, who were not influenced fo far, as to forctell things to come. 
The diflerence berwixt an Hypocrite, and one truly brought to a 
{enſe of Sin, is very conſpicuous in the Example of this Woman, ffs 


doth nor deny her Sin, as Cain, G:hazr, and Anantas and Saphrra ; 


neither doth ſhe diſcover any anger upon the giſcover y of it, as the 
'Bbbb, Soraber 


Far tho , Tf 
* of this Well ; Art thou wiſer than he 2 
0. II, 


Chan. 


" Cha: 6. 


- i . _ a / = 28, 4s 
give him *- ſhall never thirſt x; bur che Wargr thar 1 54S, a 


wv = 
Pw £1 


our Saviaur both bringeth her to the ſenſe of her Sia, and allo to an *Luk.9.15- 


; p X MM 
19 The woman faich unto him *, Sir, I perceive ch, 


. 15» 


4 
6. I 4s 


5 C40 


. 
"i, 
+ ik 1 
R y : 
£ 
1 [ C 
yd , \ I 
i ! ; 
i : 4 VI . 
; 85 { ; 
4 : p 2 
} F 
« '% 1 #; 
ys : n 
© 4 *+ £ 4 þ 
"BY * L yi! 
i , 1\ 1H 
£3 SIRI PEN HITY 2.4F 
W828 LP79CE ST 6 
£ : C1 n g 
4 bh prÞ tþ { 
F' {1 * it " $; 
'*. 
MIO 1 24 
"MS , ; 
$3 : i \ '' 
F. $4 £4 + 
$"T « 
£35 +64; 3 
4 'Y IS i? 
. ol - ? 1 & 
p #b. : 
"= rs | F 
| 53. : 
x FP] oF 
$4 ; "op 
3 
i.73 irs 
k " C. 
7, ; 
F 
= 
be it | 
* h ©7 , 
WF 
| 'N Fi v# 
" 4Y; 
: M10 
: 'F F q 


LN 
_—. 5 WES 
on IE 2 
—- >» = 
I 
-_ 


} 
he 90 1-4 

' f ih IS 5 

ok 150 » h 

{+4 # ; 


— 
ns 


—— 
i» *3 


- gray 


C! 


5. # 0 


12p. TV. 


ha 
H N. Cha 


rn ta Pais of 17:0! and Tydah. and) now come, when the tive Worſkippers of Gol ſhall offer vp to him 
Senebes 29-1 Prare/res Ine WICKESF FRces O; 1/7dct ane TS zore Spiritual Horſt, not that Carnal Worfhip; and a w. 
Hiod 66 : Neither Goth the go about ro excuſe or mitigate her Sin, JA More P20 3 old Was + bo Got ary Fartier foot 4 Wore 
0s ticth her felt to Chritt as 2 Propies, toteach her what to true and real ang Tone CSS Hy Parner iecceth ſuch 
 fivt 2pIPHEL NEE 109% TO Garnet . 56 ; tar nſe weſto Worthiphim, - as thall not Worſhip him with a meer bodily laloup 
. 296 Grands Gia 7 ow Þy 47® ar un 4 a par Gich- and Homage, bur with-their Hearrs and Spirits ; nor with tho! c. 
ol 4 bn ou mode = wha ad Hd —_s -emonial performances now in uſe by Gods Preſcripr at Hieruſulm, 
oO aCqiunt ms With the Vi 11 Of 70s . but without them, I being come, whom all thoſe Services gig es 
Zur Fathers worlhipped in THOET a, | preſigure and point unts. 6: 
ye fay that in * Hizralalem is the piace wagre meDP Og on lpirit r, and they that worſhip him,, 
> worlhip 6 4. mult worſhip himin ſpirit, and in truth "Gy 
Mount Gerigim, Which was an exceecing I:g1 _— 7 God is not a corporcal Being, made -of Blood and Fleſh, ang" 
nat $:chem, Faces mage an Altar thercabouts, greg Bones, having Senſes as Bodtes have, to be pleaſed with ſenlivte 
3 /obe Iirac!, Gen. 32. 20. Some fay, that it was Upon rhat i bur he is a ſpiritual Being.the Farher of Spirits.and Seer 
ntainthat abrabem would have offercd up 1/.1:c, Gen. 22. __ a piritual Service proportioned to his Being /, and and therefore ch,;, 
{2a'! another came, Certain it is, thar trom that Mountain ne that pay a Religious Homage to him, muit do it with their Spirits 
'-5 pronounced the Bleſſings, Dene27, 12. But it is very 40959 c = and according ro the Rule that he hath preſcribed in truth and reality, 
the Woman had reſpect to none of thele, bu: to tie common wagela. £1 thewill of God ; and tho? he required of his People un. 
of theSymaritans.to Worſhip in a Temple built pon this Mountatn, der the Law a more Ritual Figurative Service yet that isnow to > 
in oppoſition to that at Hieraſalet 7 Te liory of which will be = and therefore the Woman of Samaria needed not trouble her * 
proper here to relate, forthe {ul unueritanumsg of this Text. men "| hich was the trueſt Worſhip, that at Morn: Gerizim, or My: 
«at Was OOyYernour Or S41N1774, C oniuitited by Darius 5 of this your? S101, for both of them were very ſuddenly to determine, and a new 
balat weread in Never ic who tvils us that ON of the Sons of End 2  Gobſtantial Spiritual Worſhip was to ſucceed, ro the learn, 
finb the Fith Priecl was Sn in lay tothis Sanbalat the Horonee, ing of the way and method of which ſhe was more ro attend, and 
wierefore 4 chaſed bin frem me, Ne h. 13. 28, "This Son 1n Jaws not to ſpend her thoughts abour theſe things, which were of no. 
Neme { as Foep/us tells us) Was Manaſſese He was driven out of nificancy, and tended only to minitter Queittions of auto * 
"3 -4 44 wp EE =) 100 kn (6 5 pantry hg =o 25 The Woman faith unto him, I know the Mey; | 
JO0Ie WAO HIaTiLtE al; L ays _s - . - iN : ; 
c, - Story here leaflogtns, we mul ſupply ir our of Foſepþus,who, cometh, which is called Chriſt :, when he is comehs | 
22ti9. l. 11. Cop. 8.rellsus, that he being thus driven from the Sa- will tell us all chings #. We _ | | 
ciilice, applied himfelf ro Sanballat, and would have pur his Wite| z The Woman by this reply, tho Ro - _ ſhewerh : 
away, which was Sanba/lzts Daughter, bur Sanballat promiſed him, | herſelf ro be a Few, for ſhe was one of them " o lived in an expect, l 
that if he would keep his Daughter as his Wife, he would nor only | tion of one whom the Zems called the Mcſſiah,Prophecied of by Ds I 
continue him in the Priettkood, bur make bin an High-Prieft, niel under this Notion, Dan.9. 25. 25, and by the PſalmF, P/alan, t 
ind build him a Temp!e, like that at Hieruſalem, upon Mount Gerz- which term Meſſiah figntties Chris, (that + inn ) inthe Greej; a 
21, With rhe leave of Dari ; upon this, Manaſſes itaid with San- | zz ſhe hada further Notion, That this Meſjiab ſhould be a great Pro at 
ballat, and there alſoreforted many to him whom Nehemiah had | pher. Deut.1 8. 15. yea ſhe appears ro have had a further Notion oi the 
rurned out of the Prie:thood at Hieruſalem for Marrying ſtrange | Meſſiah,viz. that when he came he ſhould reveal to them the whol c 
Wives. Sanballat was very near lofing his Opportunity through the | will of God as tothe Salvation of Man, and the Worſhip of Gd; F 
tzvour of Darius, by the Conquelt of Darius by Alexander the Great. | this Iets us know, that ſhe was one of the A/ſyr:an part of the hh _ 
But iz was regain'd by his Brother Faddus his ftubborneſs, who was| habitanrs of Samaria. If any ask how ſhe, being a Samaritan, ſhoul 
High-Prieft in Ferijalem, and refuſed ro own the new Conqueror, | know any thing of the Meſſiah, the Samaritans receiving only the x 
wich advantage Sanvailat rook,and offered Alexander the ſurrender | five Books of Moſes ? Ir is eaſily anſwered, That even the five Book f 
or all Places in his truſt to him ; and being by that means ingratiated | of Moſes make mention of the Meſſias under the Notion of the Seed > 
with Alexander the Great, he thereby obtained leave of him ro baild | of th Woman, Gen. 3. 15. the Seed of Abraham, Gen. 12. 3 5Sjjl 
a Temple in Mount Ger:7im,where his Son in law Manaſſes ſhould be| Gene 49. 10. The Prophet like to Moſes, Deur. 8. 15. And for the 
the H1:b-Priet, promiting Aiexander, that by this means the force | Meſſiah, ſhe might eafily learn ir from other Jews, chat the Perſon Y 
of the Fews would be broken, fo as there would be no danger of their | called Shiloh, and the Prophet, was called by Daniel the Mii, th 
Con{piring. Accordingly he preſently built this Temple, and ſoon as © Jeſus faich unto her, I that ipeak unto thee ys uf 
atter dyed, leaving his Son in law Manaſſes, Brother to Faddws the | yg oy, _ 
High-Prest, in Hreruſalem, High-Priejt in this new Temple which| ,, Thar ſameMe//iah,of whom thou declareſt thy felf to hare ſome co 
afterwards proved an 4/y/zm or Santtuary for any who were accuſed expe&ation, and from whom thou expecteſt ro hear all things ne. Ci 
amongit the Jews at Hreruſalem, Thus theſe rwo Temples ſtood for ceflary to Salvation. Some here enquire, why our Saviour rake Fic 
about 220 Years; then Hr canus anHigh-Prieft of re Fews at Hie-| tg this Woman ſuch a plain Diſcovery of himſelf, when as ve fn boy 
r1/aiem, deitroyed it ; but (till they looked upon the Ground as holy, | py; in the Goſpel ſo cautious,and ſo often charging his Diſciples: Sor 
and came thither to »pertorm. their Devotions. With reference 19 ro make him known. Some think our Saviour thus gratitied the par 
this {uperſtirious Practice, the Woman of Samaria faith, OurFather s Honeſty and Simplicity which he diſcerned in this Woman.notcom: ho 
iT'orſ/pped, (that is,have uſed time our of mind tro Worſhip) in this ing to catch him, bur to be inſtructed from him ; bur poſſiblyif ve befo 
Mountain. And + the Jews hold that none migat Worſhip God by: wiltly conſider thoſe Texts wherein he charged his Diſciples no: ty latte 
*acritice any where but at Hreryſalem, according to the Law, Devz.| nuke him known, we ſhall find that the rhing which he ciutioned wheat 
12. 14-266 ; them againft, was their publiſhing of him as the Son of God, which ; 
21 Jeſus faith unto her, Woman, believe me, the| our Saviour defired ſhould be concealed, till he ſhould be fo 2:c!uret fs 
hour comethz when you ſhall neither in thisMountaink, | with power by bi Reſurre&ion from the dead, Rom. 1. 4, thit tis þ 
1107 Yer at Hizruſalem worſhip the Father /, Enemies by a charge of Blaſphemy againſt —_—_ OY Y 
; Weman thou owneſt me as a Prophet, whoſe Office it is to re- | before his Hour was come, Now we ſhall obſerve that the 7:0:;h0 of 0! 
veal the Will of God uato men; 1t is therefore thy Duty to give Cre- they expected a Meſjtah, yer had no ſuch Notion of him. "i 
Cit to what 1 N33! reveal to thee abour the trueand right way off 27 And upon this came his Diſciples x, and mar- it fk; 
Vo:ſiiping God. The time is coming, yea at hand, when you | velled that he talked with the woman y ; yet no man gs 
ia!l neither in this Mount Gerz3zm, ( where your Fathers have fo| ſajq,what ſeekeſt thou? or why talkeſt thou with hers! the Þ 
long Worikiped God ſaperſtitiouſly, without any direction from him)] They, as we heard before, were gone into the City Sichemw vel, 2 
{ nor yer ar Hieruſalem, Which is the place which the Lord made buy Food, a kepr there by the Providence of God till our ſow, 
choice of for his Worſhip, Worſhip my Father,or your Father. God| g,yiour had finiſhed this Diſcourſe with the Woman of Samarza, but The Þ 
is potting an end to both theſe places, and ro all that Worſhip which came after the Diſcourſe was done ; y they marvelled polibl; at ti hows 
(hall nor inſtitute. under the Goſpel. talking with a Woman in the Road { a thing forbidden by thei Trz great 
22 Ye worſhip * ye know not what mz,we know what ditions) eſpecially a Woman of Samaria, with whom the Fw: hal the \ 
we worſhip »; * for Salvation is of the Jews 0. no Commerce x- Bur yer they had ſo much Reverence and Reſpst it ma; 
m You have no certain Rule for your Worſhip, but only do things | for their Mafter, that they enquired not curiouſly into the matte a faith 
3 which your Fathers did without any Revelation of the divine Wil!,| or reaſon of his Diſcourſe. No but uy 
by which you may be afſured,rhat what you do is acceptable ro Gody. 28 The woman then left her water pot, and we! anoth 
Ve know that God hath revealed hisWill,that his People ſhould wor-[ her way into the City s, and ſaith unto the men b, Te0ye 
flip him at Hieruſalem by ſuch Rites and Performances, ashe him-| 1, She had no ſooner taſted of the Living Water ſpoken of 5 37 
felt hath in *1ruted in kts Word, fo as we are cerrain that what we do Chriſt, bur ſhe left her Water-pnt : Thus Peter rells our Saviour, anoth 
15 accepizbleto God, For unto the Fes of 01d were committed | thar they had left all and followed him. She gocth into the City 3 9 It 
the Oracles of God, rhe ordinary means of Salvation, Out of Zong] chem ( no doubt ) or $5char, memioned ver. 5+ b and doth not her ference 
went forth rhe Law,and the word of the Lord from Hieruſalem, Iſa. ſelf enter int0 a long Diſcourſe with the Citizens, only Iuviter te Other 
8-3 Citizens ro come and fee Chriſt, that rhey might judge from rhe acat- dence 
23 Bur the hour is coming, and now 1s, when the|.ing of their own'Ears, and the {ighr of their own - - "ers that > n 
true worſhippers ſhall worſhip the Father in fpiric,| 59 Come ſze a man, which rold we all ching _ 
and in truth p 3 for the Father ſeeketh ſuch ro worſhip | VET I did ec. 15 not this the Chriſt 4: -- "tan; who hal T7 
kim « She inves them him, woder the Noienos Mm nl, BN 1, 
p Under the G@pel, and rhe Ringdom of the Meſſiah, which is = read bp gia on 451m bath left us upon facrec Ir |; 
yer further coming, and is already begun in the World, the rrue Rec = ,- gh ben at p Frrcand EEE har all thinzs ( as oiten . T1 
WWorſhippers of G3d ſha!l not Worthip him, as you Samarzrans, who lis ern things, a J G ſ! b thin $ as ſhe miglur know, 9! the P10, 
worltip you know not what, without any Ryle or Preſcripr of the gr pores tell To. rvrhars: Gy boy prey her al things if WY and by x 
Word ; nor yet as toe Hypocriucal ers, who reſt upon their Sa- nd b of rope rs wy Nav repeated" to her, as thoſe things Gn the 
crifices and Ritual performances, as if they would purge away their | 23% 1.0 2 hag dP Pr ro believe, that he v4 My 
tins Pſal.59o. 8. Iſa. 1. 11. and 66,3. Micah 6. 7. no, nor-yer as winch hv on = EI ge ion and Judgment. Na 4 
x11 note lincere Fews, who indeed do truly and with their Hearts the M-ſ:ab, ſhe offered 1t-ro rheir k Pre” "Hil DS 1n1t0 © on t 
Worſhip God : But while the firit Tabernacle was yet ſtanding which Zo Then they wen: our oi che City and came un: He tol 
K*:t5 Figure for rhe preſent Ine, by Sacrifices that could Not mare him e F + Vol, I; 
Lim that di the Service perfect as pertaining to the Conſcience »—| 6 Sirting ſtill ar the Well, they (many of rem 3! ſeat } ol mY | 
by meats and drinks, and divers Ordinances, smpoſed on them until\ (gntemn the News. as the Relation of a Woman, bur went [40- 
7c tiny of Reformation, Heb. 9. to. That tine of Peformatio: 55! 1, "Es 


o - 7 \ L. " b 4 N. 
ly bur out of Curioſity } to ſee, and to hear this $2." = 


LE 


Saviour, 
"ity $t- 
3 n10t her 
iteth te 
the ncat- 


wio ha 

| rold het 
on (acre 
as olten) 
10w, WY 
75 if rh£y 
ole ch1088 
I he v as 
TL 

710 un'0 


) did off 


hap. IV. 


; In the niean white his Diſciples prayzd him, fay- 
- aſter, eat 

ing, Mz the =-m_> fetching her Cirizens to cone and ſee, 
and hear Chriſt, bis Diſciples knowing rhat he muſt be weary and 
hungry with his Journey, and having hrought him ſome Food out 
of the Ciry, where they had been to ferch ir, they pur him upon re- 
treſhing himſelf with the Food they had brought. 

22 Bur ne ſaid unto them, I have meat to cat that 


c know not of g. X Fe 

Bar our bleſſed Lord was more intent upon Goſpellizing the 
Samaritans, than ſatisfying his Hunger 3; whar this Meat was, he 
opens himſelf, 9+ 34. DE 

23 Therctore ſaid the Diſciples one to another, Hath 
any man brought him cugbr to eat þ ? 

þ Kis Diſciples beinz yer Carnal, did not underſtand him, bur 
thought that he had ſpoke of Bodily Nouriſhmenr. See the like [n- 
fances, Mat. 16. 7+ and Ch. 11. 11. they were wondring how he 
came by Meat, and who ſhould bring it lim: So hard are we to 
conceive of Spirirualthings, nll God openerh our Eyes. 

Jeſas faith unto chem , My meat isto do the will 
ofhim chat ſent me f, and to finiſh his work 5. 

+ Our Lord, withcur any Reproof of them for their Dullneſs 
in underſtanding, and having Compaſſton on their Infirmiry and 
Ipnorance, tells them what he meant by his former words, that 
the doing of his Fathers 14/31, and the finiſhing of his Work, was 
that which he more hungred after, and took more delight in, 
than in Rating and Drinking ; this 1s what he ſought, Fohn 5. 30. 
that which he came down from Heaven for, Fohn 6, 38. As the 
Law of God was ſweeter to Davie, than the Hony or the Hony-comb, 
ſo the publiſhing of rhe Goſpel was to Jeſus Chriſt. 5 The calling 
Sinners to Repentance.and publiſking the glad Tidings of che Meſſiah; 
that was his Work, which he reils bis Father he had finiſhed, Fohn 
17, 4. Hereby reaching Miniiters and People alſo, ro prefer Spiri- 
tual things before Temporal, and the Mimiters of the Goſpel eſpeci- 


ally to prefer the publiſhing of the Goſpel (which is their Work ) to | 


any other Employment whatſoever. | 
5 Say -not ye, There are yet four Months, and cher 
cometh Harveſt & : Behold, I ſay unto you, lift up your 
i, Eyes, and look on the Fields, * for they are white al- 


ready to Harveſt ms. 

k There was in thoſe Countries, but four Months ſpace betwixt 
Seed-time and Harveft : Yer they feed themſelves (as ſoon as they had 
ſown) with the expectation of it /. My Harveli, faith our Saviaur, 
isthe gaining of Souls for my Father ; look yonder what a Troop of 
the Citizens of S:chem are coming to me, upon my Revelation of 
my ſelt ro the Woman of Samaria: I have but juſt ſown my Seed mn, 
and the Fields are white to this Spiritual Harveſt, Mar. 9. 37. In 
the judgment of the beſt Interpreters. our Saviour in this Verſe 
ufeth a Compariſon, and paſſeth: irom his Similitude uſed in the for- 
mer part of the Verſe, ferched from a Worldly Harveſt, to diſ. 
coucſe of that Spiritual Harveit, which he by and by Reaped of the 
Cirizens of £:chem coming to him ; ir is of that he ſaith, that the 
Fields were already white, by which ( as will appear from the fol- 
lowing Verſes ) he quickneth his Diſciples ro pur in their Sickles. 
Some Critical Authors, underitanding both the formes and latter 
part of the Text of a Worldly Harveti, have uſed their Wirs to 
determine how the Fields ſhould be white ro HarveFt four Months 
before it came ; but rhe n:oft and beſt Interpreters interpret the 
latter part, of a Spiritual Harvyett, and that will be alſoJultitied by 
what tolloweth. 

36 And he that reapeth receiveth Wages », and ga- 
thereth fruit unto lite eternal o, that both he that ſow- 


«h, and he that reapeth, may rejoyce together p. 

» You that are the Lords Inſtruments, to reap what the Prophets 
of old, and Fob Baptiſt lately have ſown, ſhall not loſe your la- 
our, you ſhall receive Wages 0, and your Wages ſhall not be ſmall, 
t ſhall be no leſs than eternal Life, Dan. 12+ 3. They that tyrn ma- 
7 to Rigbteonſr:cſs, ſhail ſhine as the Stars for ever and ever p. Thus 
the Prophets and Fobn the Baptist, who ſowed the Seed of the Goſ- 
p*l, and you that {ucceed them, and reap the Fruit of what they did 
ſos, ſhall have the fame Reward in Glory, and rejoyce together. 
The Plough man ſhall overtake the Reaper, and the treader of Grapes, 
him that ſoweti> the Seed \(as Amos ſpeaks) Amos 9+ 13. This Text is of 
great ule to thoſe Godly Minitters which fairhfully ſow the Seed of 
the Word, bur do not in rhelr\Life-rime ſee any great effects of it ; 
it may beit comes up when theyre in their Graves ; the Reward of 
a faithful Preacher doth nor depend upon his fucceſs in his Labours, 
but upon his fairhful diſcharge of his Work ; tho' one ſoweth and 
another reaperh, yer both he rbar ſoweth, and he rhat reapeth, ſhall 
re50yce together, 

37 And herein is that ſaying true, One ſoweth,and 
another reapeth g. 

q It was a Proverbial expreſſion, moſt commonly uſed with re- 
ference to thoſe who unjuitly invaded the Rights and Poſſeflions of 
ther men, bur as applicable unto thoſe, who by the diſpoting Provi- 
dence of God rightly inherit the Fruit of other mens Labours, as the 
Jews Inherited the Land of Canaan, Joſh.24. 13. A Land for which 
Je ad not Labour, and Cittes which ye built not. This ſaying (faith 
Our Saviour } is fulfilled in YQUs 

35 11ent youto reap that whereon you beſtowed no 
abour x ; ther men laboured, and ye are entred into 
their labours [. 

% . bave fent you to reap rhat which you did nar firſt labour for ſ; 
ans opbers, and Fohn the Bapti.and my ſelt have ſown the Seed, 
= 07 thei Doctrine prepared tor the Lord a People ; you ente» up- 

r Labours, gathering them into a Goſpel-Church. 
gy And many of t he Samaritans of that City believ- 

0N him for the ſaying of che woman, which teſtified, 


H N. 


. # That Gity was S:cherz, or S5char, but ir was within the Pro- 
vince of Samaria, from whence ir is that they had the name of $4- 
maritans, as well as Szchemites : Many of them upon the Teſtimony 
of the Woman, that he had rold her ſuch fecrer Paſſages of ker 
Life, as he could nor have told her, if he had not beeri able, if he 
had pleaſed, as well to have told her all things, believed on him : 
Thar 1s, they owned him as a Propher, and agreed to what the Wo- 
man faid in that particular, and were by it excited to come to lee, 
and further Diſcourſe with Chriſt. This juſtifieth whar our Saviour 
ſaid, That there was there a People prepared for the Lord, the Fields 
were white unto the Harve#t ; that they were thus far wrought upon 
by the Diſcourſe of a Woman, and ſhe one not of the higheſt Re- 
putation, and only telling them, Thar he had told har all things ſhe 
had done. Small means have great Effects, when Gods time of 
working is come. | 29% 
49 So when the Samaricans were come unto him, 
they beſought him that he would tarry with them s: 
And he abode there two days w. 

_ # The Sichemites being come to Chriſt, had ſome Diſcourſe with 

him, as appeatcth from 0,41, 42+ Whar the ſubject matter of thei: 

Diſcourſe was, weare not told ; we may know that it was Spiritu- 
al, and ſomerhing proper to excite Faith in them ; for believing was 
the effect of ir ; they deſire that he would abide with them, thus their 
Faith wrought by Love &. Our Saviour, that he might nor diſ- 
courage the beginning of their Faith, did ſtay with them two Days : 
For altho' when he ſent our his Diſciples, he commanded theaz 
nor to go into the way of the Samar#tans, yet himſelf was nor obli- 
ged by that Law, and did ſometimes by Preaching to Hearhens 
and Converting of them, give an Earneſt of the Calling of the Gen- 
zales, whoſe fuller Calling was reſerved to after-times, yes probably 
the reaſon why he would nor ſtay longer with them than rwo Days, 
was becauſe the time was nor yer come, for the fuller Calling of rhe 
Gentiles, and he was not willing by a longer abode with them ro 
give Offence to the Fews, berwixt whom and the Samaritans was a 
rooted Hatred upon the account of their differing Religion. 

4r And many more believed, becauſe of his own 
word x, 

x Believing ſeemeth here to be taken in a different fenſe from 
what it was taken in v. 39. from what followeth; v. 42. Thereir 
ſeemeth only to ſignific a lower degree of Aſſent, that he was a Pre- 
phet upon the Womans ſaying, Thar he had told her all ſhe had done, 
here ir Ggnifieth a giving Credit to him. asthe Chriſt, the Saviouo 
of the World, of which they were convinced by what they heard 
from himſelf. Thus that of the Apoſtle, Rom. 10.17. is juſtified, Thar 
Faith cometh by hearing; and the Influence of Chriſt npon the Souls 
of Believers is alſo juſtified. We read of no Miractes our Saviour 
wrought here, they believed nor becauſe of any Signs they ſaw, bur 
becauſe of his Word, wherein alſo they further ſhewed themſelyes 
che fir ft fruit of the Gentiles, the generality of which were afterward 
Converted to the Faith of rhe Goſpel, after that Miracles were ceaſed, 
by hearing the Goſpel Preached. ; 

42 And ſaid unto the woman, Now we believe, not 
becauſe of thy ſayingy; for ® we have heard him our 


viour of the world z. : 

y Several things may be the occaſion of Faith, which are neither 
the principal efficient Cauſes, nor the proper inſtrumental Cauſe of 
it : The principal efficient Cauſe of the Faith of theſe Samaritans 
was undoubtedly the Finger of God upon their Souls, enlightening 
their Minds with the ſaving Knowledge of the Goſpel, and bowing 
their Wills ro the Obedience of it. The proper inſtrumental Cauſe 
was their hearing the words of Chriſt, bur the occaſion of this was 
what the Woman had told them ; fo as tho' they in a ſenſe believed 
becauſe of what ſhe bad ſaid, becauſe that occaſioned their coming 
out to fee, and hear Chriſt ; yer the proper inſtrumental Cauſe, was 
their hearing Chriſt, God upon their hearing him working in their 
Hearts, an ability, and a willingneſs to receive and to cloſe with 
Chrift. Thus the Church gives us the firſt occafion of receiving the 
Scriptures, and believing them to be the Word of God ; we baving 
them put into our Hands by the Church, read them, and find ſuch, 
impreſſes and ſtamps of Divinity in them, that we conclude from 
our Reaſon very probably, that they are more than Humane Wrt- 
tings, bur never firmly and fixedly receive themas ſuch, until per- 
ſwaded of it by the holy Spirit. ;zTheſe Samaritans do not only own 
Chriſt as a Propher, nor do they only ſuſpect thar ke mult be the 
Meſſiah, bur they profeſs tro know, that he was the Chriſt, the S«- 
viour of the World. 


43 Now after two days, he departed thence, and 


went into Galilee 8. ; 

a Chriſt ( as we heard before, Ver. 3) was upon hisJourney in- 
to Galilee, only he _ rwo Days at S:chem, to gratitie the deſires 
of the Samaritans of that City, which two Days being now ſpent, he 
keepeth on his Journey. But here ariſeth a Queſtion,v:z. Whether 
he firſt went to Nazareth, or to Cana; for the Opinion of thoſe 
who think he firſt went to Nazareth, is quoted Mathew 4. 12. 
beſides iris ſaid, that Nazareth was im his Road to Cana, and Luks 
4. 24. he is ſaid ro have uttered theſe words there. Chemnitins 
thinks he went firſt to Cana, according to whar Fohr: relateth in the 
following Verſes. And the next mentioned Miracle is v. 54+ faid to 
have been Chriſts ſecond Miracle, which it could not have been, had 
he firſt gone to Nazareth ; for Luke 4. 23. thoſe of Nazarerh men- 
tion ſome Miracles which he had wrought at Capernaums 


44 For Jeſus himſelf teſtified, that a Prophet hath 


no honour in his own Country 6. 

b Chriſt ſpake thoſe words more than once, Mat. 13. 55. Mark 
6.4. Luke 4. 24- Bur the Queſtion is, Whar force of Reaſon this 
hath 2 Why he went into Gabz/ee, when as Nazareth, which was in 
Galilee, was his own Country ; for tho' he was Born in Bethlehem, 
yet he was Educated at Nazareth ; upon which account Luke 4. 23. 


© t9id me all that ever I did e. 
Vel. 14, 


it is called bis own Country, The belt Reſolution of this Difficulty is 
that by Galilee here is to be underſtood, the Country part of Galilee, 
f Bbbb32}] | excluliye 


Chap. TY. 


ſelves, and know that this is indeed the Chriſt, the Sa. *Ch- 17. 8- 


x 
us. 

» +4: - Lig 

EAN SSTE 
At 


0» | E, C 
- - ®, * . R s _ 3 ® 74 _— w / CID on a= wv T4 p” PAE187) 13V 3t2 
p wolifve ro Ns *x*, . Bits THhois wo not — dip. = is $ Feat Wi} GNr 
hone we th int Galicee, bur why he Gi not go to Nazaret/ hut 
CV OUT We tis I" - Se: Bn coo Lions: hes 
ion che Ooaritory nit ot Gaiziee, VECAaU:e ENG CUY) WAS his own 
en Mie os oy ' of 4 a 1q N , * of = $44 » 4* , ” 
COUNntry, GAG 8 COVE #5 TeC! without VUURCHT, except in his on 
SEIITIENTD 
CEoffet, »). Y " c yo = he 
: 4 pF _ bo. i > © 
as Tien when he was come into Gailec, thc 
«oF 
e 


G uiiiizans reccived him, having ſeen all the things 
tac he did ar Hieruſalem ac the feaſt c; for they 
2ifo went unto the leaſt d. 

© When he came not to Nazareth, hut to ſome parts of Gaizice, 
the Glieans emertained him Hofpitably, and this they did becaulc 
&; tha'e Viracles they had feen wrought by him at the Paſjo ver-feaſt, 
where Chrit was, Ch. 2. d For theſe Galzleans, rho' they lived at 
a great diitance from iTternfaiem, yet were obſervant of the Law 
hich commanded all the Males of the Jers to be preſent at rhat So- 
!cmity. The Samaritans ſaw no Miracle, bur believed Chriit up- 
cn his Word. The Galileans alſo received Chriit, bur their ſeeing 
<1 ins Miracles at the Fealt, is given as the Cauſe of rneir receiving 
bim, their Faith was not ſo Noble as that of the Samaritans. Bleſſc.. 
({ai:h our Saviour) are they, who have not ſeen, and yet believed, 


a6 So Jeſus came again into Cana of Galilee, 
whore he made the water wine e. And there was 


- 


+2 C2:tain | Nebleman. whoſe fon was ſick at Cape: 


naum 7. 
e Our Saviour coming into Ga/zfee, made choice of Cana, the 


F* *% = 4 , : FE 
F;7FES Lace where being at a Marriage-Featt, he turned Water into Vine, 


Ci. 2. firſt to tix it; the reafon is not expreſſed, and therefore vainly 
egciicd at by Interpreters ; there he worketh a ſecond Miracle, not 
pon the Perfon of any one of Cana, bur upon the Son of one, who 
was at Capernarum, which was a City m the Tribe of Neptrals upon 
the Shozr of the famous River Joruan f. This Perſon 1s deſcribed 
t© be one that was /ariainis, a Nobleman, whether of rhe Blooq ot 
Herod thac was Terraci of Galilee, or forme Courtier, or Principal 
Servant of his, it 15not fatd, ; 
47 When he heard that Jeſus was come 'out Oi 
J: dea into Galilee g, he went unto him and befoughr 
tim that he would come down and heal his fon & 
{or hewas at the point of death z. 
g Chrilt had been in Ga!zlee before, and in this Town, and 


wronzht a Miracle, and if this Courezer were a Ditciple of For: 
{ which ſome think, bur jr is hard ro prove) it 1s propable be had been 
at the Paſſover, and ſeen the Miracles he wrovght there, or at leait 
11ght have heard of them from ſome who were there 3 + though 
it ws a good way from Capernazm thither, yer his love to his Son 
carried hun, and humbled him to beſcech Chriit, that he would 


come downand heal 4is Son, by which he ſhewed a great weakne's 
of Faith, as if he thought thar Chriit could nor pur forth his bealiug 
Vertue ata diitance, bur his Perſonal prefe.uce was neceifary, as Na- 
aman the Syrian, thought that Ef: mult come down and lay his 
Hand upon him z; his Son it 1cems was in hutaane appearance 
dying. 

45 Then faid Jeſus unto him, * except ye ſee ſigns 
and wonders ye will not believe &. 

{ It may ſeem {trange to ſuch as do nor well weigh all Circumſtan 


ces.that our Saviour,who at other times went withour asking, ſhewed 
hinifelt ſo hard to be intreated by this Courtzer, and anſwereth him 


fo roughly ; bur we mutt not take our ſelves to be able to give a cer- 
tain Account of all Chrifts Actions, and different dealings with Per 

fons, whoſe Hearts he well enough knew. Thus. much 1s certain, 
that our Savicur always preferred that Faith which was given ro his 


bare word, betore that which waited for a Miracle contirmative of 


that word, Foþn 20. 29. Our Saviour faw that this Courtzer came to 
hun purely upon a Natural account, for the Recovery of his dying 


Son, Without a de{ire to be inſtructed in his Heavenly Doctrine, 


zherefore (as it may be preſumed} he checks this Courtzer, and nor 


humalone, bur the generality of the Zews, who were only ſtruck 
with Admiration of his Works, and drawn from Curioſity, or ſome 
temporal Benefit, to follow him, withour a due regard of his Perion, 


or the Heavenly faving Truths Preached by him. 


49 The nobleman ſaith unto him, Sir, come down, 


ere my child die 7. 

{ The Courtier, tho' probably of Spirit enough ro have ſhewn 
ſome difcontent at cur Saviours no kinder Anſwer ro him betore, 
yet was fo intent upon his Sons life, that he rakes no notice of ir, but 
renewerh his Requeſt, till diſcovering the weakneſs of his Faith, as 
ng that Chriſts Perſonal preſcnce was neceſſary to the Lite of 
318 SON» 

50 Jeſus faith unto him, Go thy way ; thy ſon li- 
veth m. And the man believed the word that Jeſus 
had ſpoken unto him, and he went his way ». 

m Our Saviour would neither diſcourage the weak Faith of this 
Nobleman, nor yet inconrage his weakneſs ; he healeth his Son for the 
e::Couragement of his Faith ; he doth by his Word, without going 
down to him, thet he might nor gratifie his weaknels, thinking thar 
h's Perſonal preſence was neceſſary ; he bids him go, for his Son was 
recovered [that 1s here meant by /zveth) 1 upon this bis Faith grow. 
cth, and ke who before only believed Chriit ro be a Prophet probably 
vpn others hear ſay, now helieveth his word, that is, was perſwaded 
Lt his 3on Was indeed Recovered, 

5: And as he was now going down, his ſervants 
met him, and cold him, ſaying, Thy fon liveth o. 

2 Tie tervants that met him to bring the acceptable News of his 
Sons recevery, knew ncthing of the Pailages thar had been berwixr 
Crrilt and rhetr Matter, bur meerly came to tell their Mafter, what 
they krew would be xicceptable to him. 

52: Then enquired he the hour when he began to 
amend ; and tney ſaid unto him Yeſterday, at the 
leventh hour, the fever lett him p, 


ET ORD. 


Chan 3 
ES. ap, \ ſa! 
p He enquireth the precile time, they tell him it was abour 41. 
feventh Hour. The Miracle appeared 1 the ſuddenneſs of the Rec. 
very, and alfo that it was without the application of means, ax ang 
any that could have produced io fudden an ef. | wg 
52 Sothe father knew that z# vs at the fame bg. 
in which Jeius had ſaid unto him, Thy fon livern, . 
and buntelf believed, and iis whole houty 

J The cireumitance of the time when iis Son recovered 321661. 
with the very Hour, when Chriit had (aid uno him, Thy (4, GS 

was a mighty confirmation to him, that he was betolden to Chris c 

his Cure, ard conſequently, that Chri!t was no ordinary Man —_ 

than a Prophet, even the Son of GoJ : r This works up his Fan th 

an higher degree : He firſt believed the report of him, then he _ 

credir ro the word that he fpake, now he belteverh lavingly, = 9s 

he alone bur his whole Family become Chriſtians. Such Initance; 
we have concerning Lydia, Acts 16, 14, 15« the Faylor, v, ; 4 and | 
Criſpus, ACts 18, 8. 


Veth go 
{} 


- * - - . ls 
number of Sick Perfone, ſome labouring wunGer on - under 


54 This is again the ſecond Miracle that Jeſus gig o 
when he was come out of Judea into Galiiee // 
/ His turning Water into Wine, Ch. 2. was the firlt, this was the t 
ſecond. and fo in order of time before any of rhoſe Miracles which 1. c 
-wrou,zht in Ga7z/ee, of which we read, Mat. 4, 23. [ 
CHAP. V. . 
Chris goetl} to Feruſalem, where he cureth a man on the $4,;j 1 
day, diſeaſed eight and thirty Tears, at the Pool of Betheſda, \., i 
whom Christ commane!s to carry away his Bed, $--15, Wherefyr. n 
the Fews lay ſnares to hill Christ as a Sabbath-breaker, 16—1;, v 
Chrit defendeth himjeif, teſtifying that he # like hu Father inj (f 
hu ations, which are particularly ſet down, 19 ——3o. Aud gz. tl 
peaieth to the teftimo;y of bis Father,and of Foin,and hi Mirac's $ 
31-37. And exhorts to ſearch theScripture,even theBooks of My; 0) 
ZB—47. d 
v Fter this * there was a feaſt of the Jews a, and t 
Jeius went up to Hieruſalem 6. Men: n 
a Tho' there bs fome thar think the Featt mentioned here was that Deciul t 
of P-»tecos!, anc others, that it was the Feaſt of Tabernacles, yet the - 
molt and be{? Interpreters ;adge it was the Feait of the Paſſover thy | 
1s here menticne” And thar this was the ſecond Paſſover which hay. H 
pened after our Saviour had entred upon his publick Miniltry, We * 
read of the tr-t, Ch, 2. 13. and from thar Verſe of that Chapters 5 
this Chayter, the Evangeli': ( as they think ) hath been relating ſy ” 
mech of car Seviours AQtons, until the ſecond Paſſover, as it wx 
tte Will of God we 1:02:d have upon Publick Aurhentick Record, fir 
and hau not been Recoried by the other Evangeliſts, who pive afur. 
ter account ot his A<:;ons cone this Year, Mat. Ch. 4+ Ch.8.Ch.g, W 
Mark Ch, 1. Ch 2. Lk Ch. 4. Ch. 5. In the time of our $4. itf 
viours Publick M:uitry ( wvich was three Years and a half) there lon 
v.2re four Paſlovers. The cther Evanoeliſts take notice but of one of or 
them, and that the 1-{/, john 15 thought to have mentioned all the Ma 
lor ; the firit C5. Z. 15. The ſecond inthis place, the third, Ch, UN 
6 4. the tourth. (+ 13, 1. Another reaſon they give why the to] 
Fea: of the Patlov-r ſhouia be here intended, is, becauſe from about thi: 
tha Lirue ro the Harv, were four Months, according to what our | 
Savior Fag fad, Ci. g. 35 bJeſus went up to the Paſſover, to bee 
Hieruſ ci, wo fhew his Obedience to his Fathers Law, Dent.16.16, W; 
2 Now there is at Hierufalem by the ſheep || market c " br 
2 pool d, wwich is called in che Hebrew tongueBeathcl* ſeize 
da e, bavivg fivg porc! «: f. Birt 
c Weread in Scripuo:s 4; Sheep.gate in Hieruſalem, Neh. 3, + = 
There was alſo'a M-. -:: for Sheep, and other Cattel, Det. 14, 26- that! 
Some theretore add | /arket, others aud Gateto the word inthe Greth wil 
lignifying Sheep, « Hear to this Gate or Market, there was a Poo], the 
xoavuCndes, fome rranfiate it a F3/b-pool, others [ more properly ) "an 
a place to waſh, or 50 Swim in {the Word deriveth from a Verbthat ns 
2gmfies to Swim, hey fay, rncre were two ſuch Pools within the hi 
compaſs of the Mi uri on which the Temple ſtood, the one Eaſt-ward " 
called the »pper Fo2;, 2 Kings 18. 17, The other Weſt-ward, near 
the Sheep-gate. The one was called Betheſda, the other the Podl man 
of Siloam, by the Kings Garden, Nehem. 3. 15. mentioned alſobj Poo) 
our Evangelitt, Ch. 9.7. 'They ſay, the Waters of theſe Pools were dow 
{upplied trom a Fountain called Siloam, which was not always full of S__ 
warter,but the water bubled up in it at certain times with a great noiſe us: $ 
coming (as was thought) through hollow places of the Earth, an! vetht 
Quarries of hard ſtones. Theſe waters of Shiloah are mentioned, thar x 
1/a. 8. 5. and ſaid to go ſoftly ; from which place theſe Waters I It is 
concluded a Type of the Kingdom of David, and of Chriit. This he- wane 
ing admirted, it is not to be wondred thar they had that healing Vet- 5 
rue given unto them (as ſome judge] juſt abour the coming of Chrill; a, 
tor it ſhould appear by Ch. 9. 7. that the Pool of Szloam, as wellas we 
char of Berheſda had fo; for in former times it is thought 10 117 6! ( 
been of uſe chiefly ro waſh Garments in, and Sacrifices when tht "_ 
were flain. Some will have them to have derived their healing VI eek 
rue from thence, bur that is vain, their healing Virrue was coudt- gs 
leſs derived from the Lord that healeth us. e This Pool n tne Mat Ol 
Hebrew was called Betheſda, which fome Interpret, The Howe of po” 9 
:rg out ; becauſe as ſome fancy, the Blood of the Sacrifices Was _ anc 
poured our bur that is a great miſtake, for that was poured ot ® a# wy 
the Altar, or becauſe Razn-water (as fome think) was poured _—_ anc Bos 
it, or (which is more probable} becauſe waters were poured to 3 : r Tl 
| out of the Conduit mentioned 2 Kings 20, 20. Bur otacrs Interpret ltely 
| ir, The Foufe of Grace, Mercy, &c. becauſe Gods great Goodne!s cute 
ſhewed the People, in giving this healing Vertue tO theſe Waters Tens, | 
F The five Porches belonging to this Poo! ſeem ro hive oe en Po 7 Dea 
Apartments for Impotent men to walk in, or ret themlIv:s on kt 
when they came to waſh themſelves in the Pool. n Ow 
3 In theſe g lay a great multitude of 17porent wh ds. 
of blind, halt, withered, waiting for the Mouns their ow 
the water h. WW ke 
g Inthefſe Apartments ( called here Porches 4-6 os Gi tour 


.\ 


the 
ard 
near 
Pool 
oby 
were 
ll of 
wile, 
and 
zned, 
x are 
is he- 
 Ver- 
hrilt; 
rell as 
have 
\ they 
7 Vir- 
loubt- 
in the 
q poure 
g there 
Our a! 
} ins 
170 1 
terpres 
dne!s 
V atets: 
1 F19 
yes I 


folks 
. JW 
ing © 


# for? 
" gnder 


nap. Y. 


, they 


\ 66 
Il, ; , 
wu, 4 Our Lord will ler this poor man know, that the Waters, and 


14,54 t00k up his Bed, and walked /, and * on the fame 


ner an9ther © SOME Blind, ſore Lai.e, 
þ the water ſhould be rroubled, 

+ For an Angel weat down at a certain ſeaſoninto 
the Poo! and rroubled the water z : whoſoever firſt af. 
rep the rrounInNg of the water, ſtepped in, was madc 
who'e of whatloever Diſcaſz he had &, 

; Thais water had not always in it thts healing Vertne 4 but only when 
+ ms (7 oubied, and this was at 4 certar ſeaſon, how often, the Scrip- 
ture hath noL derermined, (ſome will Have it tO be only ar their great 
Feats of the Fajjover and FINTECOR? ;XC. but the Scripture faith no 
ſuch thing } Nozie mult chink that tte Angel appeared in any viſible 
Shape, Vu! the ro:110g anc troubling of the Water, was a Certain Sign 
that was the ime when alone they was Medicinal, nor were ma- 
ny healed at one TIME, bur only one Per'on, that could firſt ger into 
this Water be Was healed, let his Difeafe be whar It would, The 
waters not being conitantly Medicinal, burar a certain time, when 
wereralled ; and then, 2 Not for all, bur only to him who 
could {:x.t gerin. And 3 for any Diſeaſe, of what fort, or kind ſo- 
ever (iis Diſeale was, ſuſticiently contureth the Opinion of thoſe who 
fancy that the Wazers derived this healing Vertue from the Entrails 
of the Beaits oftered 1n Sacritice, being waſhed there ; for ( belides 
that this is denied by ſome, who ſay, thoſe Entrails were waſhed in a 
Room on purpoſe for that uſe within rhe Temple ) if they had deri- 
ved their healing Vertue from thence in a Natural Rational way, 
they w011!d have exerted their Vertue upon more than him who firlt 
{teppzd in, and that not at the time only when rhey were rollee, 
nor would their Verrue haye extended to all kind of Diſeaſes. Oi 
whatever uſzrh1s Pool therefore was before, certain it 1s at this time 


God made uſe of the Water 1n it to heal, and fo as men might ſee] - 


that it heated not by any Natural, bur a Miraculous Operation. The 
Scriptures of the Old Tenament make. no mention of it, And it is 
obſerved by thoſe who are verſed inthe Ferw:ſh Rabbins, that neither 
do thcy make the leatt mention of 11, watch makes 1: very probable, 
that they bad this Vertue, nor from the time of the Building of 
the Sheep- gate by Shallum, Neheme 3. 15. nor trom the time when 
the 4jmowean Family was extinct ; or the Rebuilding, or further 
building and adorning the Temple by Herod, but a little before the 
Birth of Christ, as a Figure of him being now coming, who, Zech, 
13. 1. was a Fontan opened for the Houſe of David, and the Inha- 
butants of Ferujalem 3 and trom whom is both our cleanſing, and our 
heaing, as thele Waters, which before had a cleanſing, and now 
received alſo a heahng Vertue. 

5 And a certain man . was there, which had an in- 
firmicy chirty anc! eight years /. 

| What this mans Name was, or what his Circumſtances in the 
World, or what his particular Diſeaſe was, we are not rold ; nor is 
it ſaid that he bad lain there thirty eight Years, bur that he had fo 
long laboured under his Weaknets 3 which whether it was the Palfie 
or no, is uncertain; probably it was a Diſeaſe hardly curable by Hu- 
mane Art,and ordinary means ; for 1: cannot be thought bur in thar 
time he had uſed all rational means, which he finding of no value as 
to his Caſe, he came and lay at this Fountain, walting for a Cure in 
this way of Miraculous Operation. 

6 When Jcſus law him ite, and knew that he had 
been now a iong, time 4 char caſe m, he ſaith unto him, 


Wilt thou be made whole » ? 
m Chritt as God, knew the particular time when this Infirmiry 
ſeized him, which was cight Years or upward before our Savyiours 


S.FOHN 


v-airing for the time when 


ks - > . 
for the reſlification of the Miracle to all rhat ſhould fee them. 


L Kg. 4.» 23. 
10 The Jews therefore ſaid unto him that was cured 


4 That 1s, according to the letter of the Law ; 
not that Chriſt was the Lord of the Sabbath ; 


Neighbour. 


ſame ſaid unto me, Take up thy Bed and walk . 


ſenfible that he was healed by a Power more than Humane. 


ſaid unto thee, Take up thy Bed and walk x? 


ing in that place &. 


nor tind him, to ſhew them.gthe man who had ſo ſaid unto him. 


more leſt a worſt thing come unto thee b. 


them in this Life. 


Binh, and about the time when the Temple was re-edified, or rather | Jeſus which had madehim whole c. 


enlarged and further adorned by Herod, As man he pitied his 
Cafe 23 he asked him, 1it he was willing to be made whole? Nor 
that he doubred of his willingneſs: For what Sick man was ever un- 
viling to be healed ? Befides thar, he knew that the poor man lay 
there tor that very purpoſe ; bur that he mighr make him declare 
hismiſerable, helpleſs State and Condition, and draw our his Faith, 
and Hope in himſelf ; and trom his Anſwer take an occafion to heal 
lim, and maxe rhe Spectators more attentive to his Miracle. 

- The impotent man o anſwered, (dir ) I have no 
man, when the water is troubled, to put me into the 
Pool; but while I am coming, another ſteppeth 
down before me p. 

0 ; har his particular Impotency was, the Scripture doth not tell 
vs: Some have nor umnprobably judged It the Paltie, which depri- 
vetathe Perſon of monon, by the iroppage of the Animal Spirits, fo 
that without help he cannot move irom one place to another, which 
It 15 manifeit rhjs poor man couid not 3 for p he complaineth for 
want of help, that he couid not ger into the Pool. 

$ Jetus faich unto him, * Riſe, take up thy Bed 
and walk 9, 


(e Angel, Gerived their Power from him ; and that he with a Word 
could coas much for him, as the Waters rolled by the Angel could 
tfltcCt: He theretore bids him Ariſe, and take up hs Bed and walk, 
tat ochers might lee, and be atlured that he was perfectly Cured. 


9 And immediately the man was made whole 7, 


Cay was the Sabbath 2. 
7 The mas {trengrth returneth immediately ; he / is able imme- 
likely to a7 ife, take up bis Bed, and to waik, t All this was done 
6a the $, bbath. diy, on which day it was unlawful to carry any Bur- 
Thens, Fer. 17.21.24» And by the Few:ſ/ Canons it was puniſhable 
*Y Death, or Scourging. Burt our Saviour had a mind to les the 
#13 know that he was Lord of the Sabbath, and what had been 1n- 


of his help. 


on the Sabbath-day 4. 

d Bur the Fews made another uſe of it ; ſeeking from hence an ad- 
vantage againſt hinz, becauſe he had vzolated the Sabbath, whict 
they had often madea Capital Crime, 


17 But Jeſus anſwered them e, * My Father work- 


eth hitherto, and I work f. 

e We read of no Objection they made to Chriſt, as ro what he had 
done, cnly that they Perſecuted him, which they might do withour 
ſpeaking to him : Bur it ſhould ſeem by what we read in this Verſe, 
that ſome of the Fews had Objected ro him, his vi0/az70n of the Sab- 
bath (as they thought) yer, as we before noted, Anſwering ( in the 
Dialect of the Goſpel) doth often fignifie no more than the begin- 
ning of a Diſcourſe opon ſome proper occafion offered. Ff our Savi- 
our defenderh himſelf, from rhe Example of his Father, in the re- 
membrance of whoſe reſting from his Work of Creation on the Se- 
venth day from rhe beginning of rhe Creation, the Fews kept their 


Sabbath; who, tho' he reited from his Work of Creation, yer kither- 
to worketh, as well on the Sabbath-day as any other day, by his 


preſervation of created Beings : So (faith he) I who am the Son ot 
this Father, alſo work ; upholding all things by the word of my 


the Sabbarh-day, ſach was this. I work no other way than my Fa- 


ther {till worketh, tho? he reſted on the Seventh day from the Crea- 
LON» 

18 Therefore the Jews * ſought the more to kill him, , 
becauſe not only he had broken the Sabbath g, but ſaid 


avul withour his ſpecial Command, became lawful by it. Neither alſo, That God was his Father, * making himſelf equal 


433 USazainit rhe ſenſe of the Law, tho' againtt the lerter of ir ; 


ne Law only prohibited civil Labour, and carrying Burdens for 


with God h. 


"X0#n Profit, andin the way of their Trade; it torbid the do- 
gw nothing which was to be done as a publick teſtimony of the 
= neſs and Mercy of God ſhewed to Perſons ; and by this our Sa- 

"Opens a way for his Correction of their Erroneous Opinions 


(| 
' 


2 This yer enraged the Fes more * They had before againſt jim 
2 Charge of breaking the Sabbath, or ar leaſt reaching another ro 
break it. (in their Opinion ) þ but now he had( as they judged ) 
ſpoken Blaſphemy, calling God Father; nor in the ſenſe the Fews fo 
called him. and 21 good Chriſtians are Licenſed ro call him ; bur 
F417 xE% 


the underſtood J"* 
| Lor their Cavil argued yg.c. x1 
their want both of Faith in Chriit, and Charity alſo toward their Mar 2:24 


11 He anſwered them, He that made me whole,the 


w He makes them as good an Anſwer as could well he imagined ; 
the ſum of which was, he believed that be had thus Healed him, 
was a Propher, and ſo did what he did by a divine Authority, which 
it was Lawful for him to Obey, contrary to their Traditions : Tho? 
who this particular Perſon was, or what his Name was, were thinzs 
as yet not known to him (as we ſhall by and by read) yer he feemerh 


12 Then asked they him, What man is that which 


x The Impotent man that was Healed, ſeemed to oppoſe the Au- 

thority of God (by the Vertue of which he believed himſelf healed) ro 

the Authority of Man, which made it unlawfal for him on the Sab- 

bath-day ro rake up his Bedand Walk, The Fervs taking no notice of 

Chriſt being God, or fo much as a Propher ſent from God, do nor 

ask, Who was he, bnt What man was he that ſaid, &c. Oppoſing 

the Command of God, ro the Command Man. Iris as much as it 

rhey had ſaid, The Law of God hath Commanded thar no Burdens 

ſhould be carried on the Sabbath-day, : Now, what is that man that 

dare reach thee or any one to do what is contrary to the Law of God? 

13 And he that was healed, wiſt not who he was y : 

For Jeſus had conveyed himſelf away, a {| multitude be- | Or, froiz: 
the mult go 
» Chriſt came as a Stranger to the Pool, and only wrought this zuds #545 
Miracle, fo as the Impotent man that was healed had no time to en- w4as- 
quire who he was 7 ; and there being there a Croud of People, Chritt 

had through the People convey ed himſelf away, fo as the man could 


14 Afterward Jeſus fndeth him inthe Temple 2,and 
ſaid unto him, Behold, thou art made whole, * ſin no 


15 The man departed, and told the Jews that it was 


c It is yery uncharitable ro judge, that this poor man went to the 
Femwiſh Mageſtrates, to inform againſt Chriſt, who had been fo kind 
tro him 3; and much more probable that he went in the ſimplicity of 
his Hearr, defirous both to publiſh what Chritt had done to his Ho- 
nour, and alfo to do good to others; who might aifo ſtand in need 


16 And therefore did the Jews perſecute Jeſus, and 
ſought to ſlay him, becauſe he had done theſe things 


Power, Heb. 1.3. So that works of Divine Providence are lawful or 


LE. &. 
Chap. þ ber 
abour the true Sznctification of the Sabbath. We tha!l obſerve, tha; 
our Say1our uſed the like Phraſe to him that had the Pal fie. Maz.9. 4. 
ang to the Centurions Davghter, Mark 5. 41. Dam{el, Ar:/2 : And ts 
Lazarus, Ch. 11.43. Lazarus come forth ; which our Saviour did 
It 1s 
further obterved by ife:;;us. That our Saviour did many Miracles on 
the Sabbath day. beczuſe that day was the uſual time when the Zews 
were wont to conſult the Prophers forthelp, as may be lcarned irom 


. =" 3 : 
" Tris the Sabbath-day ; it is not lawful for thee to car. *Fx 25-12 
ry thy bed «. | Neh. 13+19 
I7. 229 


3 


Luke 6. 2; 


* Mat. I 2s 


a Walking in the outward Court of the Temple, or ſome part of 45: 
it, where People ordinarily Walked. 6 He chargeth him to fin no Ch. 8. 11: 
more, leſt a worſe thing berided him ; hereby letting him and us 
know, that Sin is the uſual Cauſe of Diſeaſes, and an holy Walking 
che beſt Preſervative of Health ; and that God had further Reyelati= 
ons of his Wrath againlit Sin and Sinners, rhan what doth or can befall 


Ch.5. 19. 


» XCh.10-34% 


*Ch.14 £22 


* To 
% F, *s 


ae er Ee EIA IDIOT, 


=y a 
= <Sos + oi<g#* "I 7 
_— . m4 - > 
wi Fr < on is 
> Doo ern oer 4 a I” : _ 
- - 4 around 
a —_— 7 ”—_ -_ 


1 


_—_— 
_—_ __— 
_—_ ——_ — 


_ 
» 


. wr nnd gen _ ””s 
c 
re 


Chap. V. 


*) 
cid iv, 


ow 


*Chi 3- 35 


S. # 0 


#1Ttee 1 ov, his proper E.ther, or {1:3 own Father ; by which (as} 
tiny ory he Fadk himfelt equal with God. Nor did he by 
that alons, make himſelf equal with God, bur he aſcribed alfo r. 
himſelf 2 Co-operation with God, in works proper to God alone: 
Nor Gid ke think th's any Robbery, P/:/.2. 6, This was on] 
Charge ; we full now hear how our Siviour Cetendeth himſelt 
againſt it. : 
15 Then anſwered Jeſus, and ſaid unto them, Veri- 
Verily, IT fay unto you, *® The Son can do nothing 
of} in;feif, but what he ſceth the Father do i: For 
whatſoever things he doth, theſealſo dochthe Son like- 
wiſe &. | 
# Conſider Chriſt as God ; fo, he cando nothing bur what the Fa- 
ther coth ; that is, nothing thar reſpected Created Beings : For it 1s 
a known Rule, That the works of the Trinity out of at ſelf ate not 
divided ; whatſoever one Perſon doth, rhe others do ; rho to denote 
the order of the Trinities working, ſome works are moſt ordinarily 
aſcribed ro the Father ( ſuch are. the works of Creatzon and Provi- 
dence ) Some to the Son, as Redemption; ſome to the Holy-Spirit, 
as SanArfication ; yer they are nor ſo aſcribed ro any Perſon, but that 
other Scriptures juitifie the Co-operation of all three Perſons. Con- 
f34er the Son as the Meſſias ; fo alſoir is true, That the Son can do 
u0thing of himſelf, but what he ſeeth the Father do, Nor is this 
any diminution to the Glory of Chriſt, nor doth it ſpeak any Imp. 
rency in him ; from whence the Arr7ans and Secirrans, would con- 
ciude his Inferiority to his Father ; bur rather his Perfet:0n,that he 
did only what pleaſed the Father: So that Phraſe ( what be ſeeth 
the Father do) is to be interpreted. And rhat Term, (can do nothing) 
ſignifies no more than, he doth, or will do nothing.See ſuch an uſage 
of the Phraſe, Gen. 19. 22. Luke 16. 3. Fohn12. 39. From this he 
Jeaverh them eaſily ro conclude, that what he had done, in Curing 
this Impotent man upon the Sabbath=day, wasthe Fathers work,tho' 
by him. For whatſoever the Father doth, or willeth, the fame doth 
the Son likewiſe. From hence will appear an eafie Solution to the 
difficulty arifing upon the firſt view of the words, v:z7, How theſe 
words can prove Chrift equal with tbe Father tohen they rather prove 
the contrary ; becauſe he can do nothing of himſelf, but what he 
ſeeth the Father do. Some ſeek a Solution in the words cannot, he that 


bi 


cannot do thoſe things which God cannot ds, 1s equal with God. 
Soine ſeek it in the word /ee 5 which they fay, tignifieth here an 
identity of Nature and Will. Some feck the Solution in the word 
do, which they ſay, ſignifieth to wil, and conſent tro, The beſt So- 
lution is to be taken from rtbof* words of hsmſelf, the Son hath 
done many things which he did nor fee the Father do, bur he did 
then not of h77yelf. Our Saviours meaning 1s plainly this: The 
$>n nenher willerh, nor can Co any thing, but what the Farher 
witterh, and doth in him : Thereiore hes one in Effence with the 
Father, and equalro him. & The Sororh thoſe things which the 
Father doth ; and as the Meſſias he doth thoſe things which the Fa- 
ther willeth to be- done. 

20 For * the Father loveth the Son /, and ſhew-:h 


him all things that himſelf doth, »: and he will fhuw 


him greater works than theſe, that you may marvel ». 


1 Both as his Son by eternal Generation, Mat. 3. 17. and alſo as 
the Meſſiah ſent by him into the World, to finiſh the work the Fa 
ther had given himto do: Andm look as a Father will make his 


XX NN, 
Rather ; and are concladed by this Toxt nct in warl; to 


Father. 


24 Verily 


Chap 


« 
Honour the 


4 


, Verily, I ſay unto you, * He 


hath everlaſting lite, and {hall nor come into condem. 
nation x, bur is pailed fiom death to lite y, 

& He that fo heareth my words, that they are not a meer Soun 
in his Ears, nor effect his Heart with ſome meer ſudden and _ : 
ing Paſſion ; bur fo, that he gives an Afſenr ro them upon my Fog 
thority, and that firmly and fteadily believeth him that fer» - 
{ the Particle on ſeemeth not well put in by our Tranſlators - A = 
Greekit is To T$p-44v71 ps } giveth Credit tothe words of my _ 
ther thar ſent me, believing that I am his only begotten Son whe, 
he hath ſent into the World, and receiving me as ſuch, "Vang = 
according to the Command of the Voice from Heaven, Ma. he 
x He hath a certain Title to everlaſting Life ; and hath receives ©, 
firit Fruits of that Harveſt, Rom. 8. 23. the incarruptible $eeq gf th 
Word, 1 Pet. 23. and already fitteth in Heavenly places in Chrig 


Jeſus, Eph.2.6.and bath the Kingdom of God within him, Luk. 1. ,, 


and ſhall not come into thar Judgment which ſhall Iflue in Etern;] 
Condemnarion y ; but is pafled out of a State of Spiritual Death 
into a Stare of Spiritual Life ; and ſhall be art laſt eternally faveg and 
paſs into the actual Fruitian and Enjoyment of Life Frerna!, ' 

25 Verily, Verily, I ſay unto you, the hour is con. 
ing, and now 1s, when * the dead ſhall hear the voices; 
of the Son of God z, and they that hear ſhall live © 

x Some undesſtand this concerning the ſpecial Reſurrection of 
ſuch Bodies as Chrilt raiſed while he was upon the Earth from Death 
to Life { of which number was Lazarw,and the Daughter of Fairy; 
&c. ) Others underitand it of the general Reſurrection ſpoken 0: 
v.28. 29. That which favoureth this Senſe is, becauſe here is no 
mention of believing, bur only hearing a Voice. Bur the moſt an 
beit Interpreters, rather underſtand theſe words of thoſe who ir; 


dead in Treſpaſles and Sins ; and the quickning and Life mention. 
ed, Epheſ.2. t. which is called che fir Reſurrefion, Rev. 20, 5, 


becauſe of what was ſaid immediately before, that ſuch a one ;; pal 


ſed from Death toLife; and what was ſaid betore, He that heareth ny 


word, agreeth with what 1s ſaid here, of hearing the Voice of Chris: 
and whar followerh, ſeemeth berter ro agree with this Senſe, Arg 
v. 28. 29. ſpeak plainly of the ſecond and general Reſurrection of 
the Body. 4 Thoſe who fo hear the Voice of Chriſt in the Goſpel 
ro givea firmand iteady Afent toir ; and upon the Credirofi, 
ſhall receive Chriſt as their Mediator and Saviour, ſhall Live etern. 
ly ; they do live the Life of Grace, and ſhall live the Life of Glor, 

26 For as the Father hath life in himſelf; ſo hathhe 
given to the Son to have life in himſelf þ. 

b How the Erernal Father hath Life in himſelf, is obvious toe. 
ry capacity ;, for he is the firſt mover, and therefore muſt hare hi 
Lite in, and from himfelf,and nor from any other: And he is the fy 
Cauſe. and therefore that Life which flowerh from him to all Crexts! 
B-inps, mui fir.r be in him, and in its Fountain. Bur in whatfenfs 
= ſaid, tha! he hath given to the Son to have life tn himſelf ;wie. 
:ger as Go. by hs eternal Generation, or as the Meſſiah and Mediator 
berwix: G29 and Man; and fo the Fountain of Spirseual life to Be. 
he vers 5 170r4 queſt1oned. Thoſe who underſtand it, as to theD). 
vine Natiire, fy, that This Phraſe, hath Life in himſelf is expreſſin 
or the Name ch0vah ; and that Chriſt is proved to be the true Fel 


- On f e that hear. *Ch 1 
eth my word, and believeth on” him that ſent me wKC; 
bod 'M 


hat 


n, 6. 


Son acquainted wirh all that he doth ; and nor only fo, bur com- 
municates all his Power and Skill ro his Son, ſo far ashe can; So 
the Father communicateth all his Power tro the Son, working all 


vab, vy hat is here ſaid, that he hath life in himſelf. But thy 
diftinguith berwixt having life from, or by himſelf* and having lfe 


EEE Ls rae 19" x 
I 
fs; Than. - 


——Ye —— — - _— -— ” 
—_ 
- . " - _ _— 
__ Ge ow Im b- . « ws a : > v 
- AS» PAs pare ne bY y y ee. - — 
_ . y—_ ==", 3 OY: fg _ 4 
- a D C 
A We: "2 $5 = I? . 
mY Tz 


®*\ati. 27- 
& 25. 1$- 
Chap 3-35: 
47. 2: 


s 1 Joh. 2. 
23- 


things in him. and by him ; and he will in and by him, work grear- 
er things than this healing the poor man 5 he will by him raiſe 
the dead, &c. » That you may marvel ; Chriſt knew thar they 
would nor believe, and all rhe effect that his Miracles had upon the 
generality of the F-ws, was but cauſing in them a ſtupefaction, a- 
mazement, and adniration, as Chap. 11, 47, whereas it was their 
Duty, not only to marvel, but to have believed alſo ; withour which 
their Admiration did bur cauſe that they had no Cloak for their 
fin. 

21 Foras the Father raiſeth up the dead,and Quick- 
neth the o, even ſo the Son quickneth whom he will p. 


#n himje;r. The Text faith, it is given to Chriſt to hare Life in 
himſelf But there are other Interpreters, who ſeem hetter to un» 
deritand it of Chr: as Medzator,to whom it is given to have Lifein 
bimſeif, ro communicate to his Creatures ; and think it is well In- 
terpreted by Ch. 1. 4. In him was Lafe,and the Life was the light'f 
men. 

27 And hath given him authority to execute judge 
ment allo c, becauſe he is the Son of man 4. 

c Tohare the Power of Life and Death, rhe Keys of both; to 
Rule and Govern the World, and to Judge it at the laſt day. 44s 
17. 3I. He hath appointed a day, in the which he will judge the 
world in righteouſneſs, by that man whom he hath ordained, &c. $0 


o He ſeemeth not to ſpeak of what God will do in the general Re- 
furcection, bur of thoſe whom the Lord raiſed up from the dead in 
the Old Teſtament, by Elzjah and Eſha. The giving of and re- 

toring unto Life, are things proper unto God, Devr. 32. 39. 1Sam. 
2. 6. p. So the Son _ whom he will. God hatk given unto 
me a Power to raiſe from the dead whom I will (as he did raiſe up 
Fairus hy Daughter, Mat. 9. 25. and the Widows Son, Luke 7.14. 
and Lazarus, Chap. 11. 43 ) This was one of thoſe greater works 
of which our Saviour ſpake in the former Verſe. 
22 For the father judgethno mang, but hath * com- 
mitted all Judgment unto the ſon r. 

g Alone he judgeth no man, he judgeth no man bur by the Son, 
no man without the Son, 7. but committed all Judgmenr in the ad- 
minittration of the Mediatory Kingdom in the Church to his Son, 
and hy his Son will Judge the World at the la! day. 


23 Thatall men ſhould honourtheSon f, even as they 
honour the Father te. * He that honoureth notthe ſon 
honoureth not the father which hath ſent him «. 

[ That his Son might be Honoured by all men, P/al. 2. 11,12. 
Phil. 2. 10. # with the ſane honour which is given to the Fa. 
therz u for the Son 1s ſent by the Father, not as one inferior to 
him. as a Servant 1s ſent by his Maſter ; bur as an Equal is ſenr by 
his Friend. F0/12 4+ 34+ and 6 38. and 7. 28. And look, as a great 
Prince, when he ſendeth his Embaſſador, expecteth that thoſe to 
whom he is ſent, ſhould give him Honour, and the fame Honour 
as to himſclt ; o doth the Farther : So that he that Honoureth not 
the Son, Honoureth not the Father which ſent him. It is a Text 
which retleCteth dreadfully upon ſuch as Honour nor Chriſt, eſpe- 


Phil. 2. 8. Being found in faſhion 4s a man, he humbled himſelf and 
became obedient unto death,gven the death of the Croft: wherefore G14 
hath alſo highly exalted him, &c. Some think thar the ſenſe is, be: 
cauſe he was that Son of Man, who was the Seed of the Woma! 
promiſed, Gen. 3. 15. The Son of Man Prophecied of by Danie!,Ct 
7- 13+ 14. And that the term, Son of man ( here) fignitieth his 0! 
fice as Mediator. | 

25 Marvel not at this; for the hour is coming) in 
the which all that are in the graves ſhall hear his voicee. 

© Donot marvel at this Power, which I rell you the Father bat 
ow me, to execute in the World Juſtice and Judgment ; to raiſe 
ome particular Perſons from a naturat Death, and whom he plet- 
ſeth from rhe Spirirual death of Sin : For the hour is coming, wif 
all rhoſe who are 1n the Graves, ſhall by an Arch- Angel, Mat. 24-3: 
1 Theſe 4- 16, hear my Voice, commanding them ro ariſe ; 4 
they ſhall obey my command. 

29 And * ſhall come forth ; they that have don? 1 
good, unto the Reſurrection of life f,and they that have 32 
done evil g, unto the Reſurre&tion of damnation &. _ !, 

f And come forth ; nor all to be made partakers of Eternal Life 15 
and Glory. There ſhall be a Reſurrection umo Life, which only 
they ſhall obtain, who have done GooJ, walking in the Commanaments 
of God ; not becauſe they have done Good, as if their Gooanels ha 
merited any ſuch thing ; for eternal Life is the Gift of Gag, Rm 
6,23. Burt others who Z have wrought Iniquity, and died without 
Repenrance and Faith in me, ſhall ciſe h, rhac rhe Juitice of G29 ma} 
by me, the Judge of the Quick and the Dead, be executed upou then 
unto eternal Condemnation. This Danzel, Ch. 13.2. callett ſham? 


Cually the Fews and Socinzans, who profeſſedly do not Honour him 
with the ſame Honour with which they yer pretend to Honour the 


and everlaſting contemit. Qur Saviour, 3448,45+ 35+ Cills ic Evers 
laſting Puniſhment. 
39 | ci 


Cernin 
You m 


35 
Vere 
{I 
Wasaf 
ſhining 
Holine 
but he 
3-14, 
Aﬀect 
did M 
Or ar |; 
they ſz 
In their 
bis Life 
ſplendic 


| for tþ 
Mnifh u 
that th 
| Not 
that of 7 
rf Þ1tne 
vlling of 
- Wroug 
vm to f 
'O0ne, ag 
Tleand j 
great Te 
force of t 
Gdthem 
More [at 
's Exprefly 
UEVICE of 
Cty of Cl 
Prubalyſe 
thar think 
WIG 


j 


/ 0); 
Por 
' er f F 


x7 
hap. V» 

20 I can of my own ſelf do nothing 7; as hear, ] 
F4 nudge ; and my j1dgment is juſt & becauſe | BE: Cck 
not MY OWN will, but the will of che Father which 


hath ſene me 7. 

; Neither conſidered as God, or as Mediator. As God the Father 
ar4 Chriſt were One, and what one Perſon in the Holy Trinity 
7orh, all do 3 fo that ne doth nothing in that capacity ſeperately from 
his Father. AS Mediator, he dit noting of his ſelf ; he finiſhed the 
work which his Father gave him to do. k As the Father revealed 
iis Will ro him for rhe Admuni.iration of his Mediatory Kingdom 
: rhe World, fo he judged ; and theretore his Judgment mult 

\-ceffarily be juit and rrue / ; for his Will was not a Will proper 10 
hin(elf, fo as 17 was not alſo coinmon to his Father, bur diverſe from 
\he Will of his Farner ; bur as his Eflence, fo his Will was the ſime 
wich his Father 5 and he being by the: Father ſent into the World to 
Jo his Will, accordingly did nothing as Mediator but what was his 
Cathers Will as well as his own ; in nothing diverſe from his Fa- 
there k as R F 

21 *IfI bear witneſs of my ſelf my witneſs is nor 

E true 7. 

1m This ſeemerh to contradict what he faith, Chap. 8. 14. Tho 1 
lear record of my ſelf, yet my recora s true : But our Sayiour here 
ſpeaking according tothe common Opinion of the Fews, or indeed 
of Men, who are ready to ſuſpect any ones Teſtimony, who tefti- 
feth of himſelf: He tells them, he could grant them this, though 
tis Record of himſelf was rrue, yet he could allow them their com- 
ron received Opinion and Saying, Chap. 8. 13. That the Teſtimony 
of one teſtifying of himſelf is ſuſp1cious ; for 1t Is certain, that a man 
may tettifie Truth of himſelf only, fuch a Teſtimony is ſuſpicious, 
he tells them, he did not only teftifie of himſelf, his Reputation did 
not ſtand upon his own fingle word. 


2 * There is atiother that beareth witneſs of me », 
and I know, that the witneſs which he wieneſlceth of 


m2 15 true 0. 

» The Father by a Voice from Heaven teſtified of Chriſt, rhat he 
was his well-beloved Son, in whom he was well pleaſed, Mat. 3. 17. 
Some underſtand 1r of Fob rhe BapriF, of whom he ſpeaketh v.33. 
Bur he naming Fob in the next Verſe, it ſeems moſt proper ro un- 
derltand this of the Farher reltifying of Chriſt, both at his Bapriſm, 
and alſo at his Transfiguration ; and to interpret the next Verſe, as 
ſpeaking of another Teltimony diſtinct from this,viz. thar of Fon 0: 
And { faith our Saviour ) I know ; that is, I am fully affured rhar, 
his Teftimony of me is true ; for God-is thar God who cannot Lie, 
but is Truth it felf. So rhat I do not barely reſtifie of my ſelf ; for 
my Father, whom ye all own to be a God of Truth, and who can- 
not lie, and whom I know to be ſuch, he teſtifieth of me, and none 
can contradict his Teitimony. 

; 33 * Ye ſent unto John, and he bare witneſs unto 
1+the truth p. 

? Ye lent Prieſts and Levites from Hieruſalem to John, Ch.1. 19. 
He was a man of Reputation among you, for all the People judged 
him a Prophet ; and he had an Intereſt in Herods Court: He bare 
witneſs ( he doth nor fay tro me, but) ro the Truth. 

34 But I receive not teſtimony from man q, but 
theſe things I ſay, that ye might be ſaved r. 

q Thar is not for mine own ſake ; for otherwiſe he did receive 
teſtimony from man, Chap. 15 +27. .A&3 1. 8. That muſt be truth 
towhich any one can give a true Teſtimony. Fohn by his Teſtimony 
added nothing ro me ; I was what Iam, before Fobn teſtified con- 
cerning me 7. Ionly ſpake of Fohns teftiruony for your ſake, rhar 

| Joumight believe and, be ſaved. 


35 He was a burning and a ſhining light /, and ye 
Were willing for a ſeaſon to rejoyce in his light 7. 

{ 1% nor ſpeak this to leſſen Fobn in any of your thoughts ; he 
Wa8a famous Light, burning in the knowledge and love of theTruth, 
ſhining both in his Dorine, in publiſhing the Truth, and alſo in 
Holineſs of Life and Converſation : He was not that light, Joh. 1.8. 
but he was a Light, not 73 es 73 &an0ivdy, but avyvOs, Mar. 
5-14. Luke $. 16. & Ard yu for a finall rime pretended a great 
AﬀeCtion tor Fob, and came with great Zeal to hear him ; ſorhey 
did Mar. 3.5: and 21. 26. Mar-1.5. hoping that he was the Meſſi, 
or at lealt Elzgs, or that Prophet in him revived again : Bur when 
they ſaw that Fohn did only bear Record to Chriſt, they grew cold 
n their Aﬀetion, not liking either his DoCtrine, or the ſtrictneſs of 
us Lite, orthe Tidings that he brought ; looking for a far more 
plendid and glorious Mefſiab than Chriit appeared to them to be. 


36 But * I have greater witneſs than that of John ; 

| for the works which the Father hath given me to 
nth s, the ſame works that I do bear witneſs of me, 
hat the Father hath ſent me w. 


| Not thin that of my Father, mentioned v. 31. 32. but than 
What of Fob; ( laſt mentioned) nor doth he ſay a truer, bur a great- 
 Pitnefſ., u The Works which his Father ſent him ro do, his ful- 
__ of the Law, his publication of the Goſpel, the Miracles which 
* \rought, were all of them works which his Father had given 
am to finiſh. Chriſt often appealerh to the works which he had 
one, as ſufficiently reſtifying of him Ck. 10.25. 37+ 38. and 14. 10. 
[lean 15.14. And 1t is plain,, that people lookr upon them as a 
__ Teltimony, Ch. 3.2+ and 9. 32. 33.., The Fews avoided the 
Pris of this Teſtimony impudently, ſome of them faying, that he 
- nem by the help of the Devil, Mar. 12.24. Others pretending 
: Ty ) that the Meſſiah was ro work: no Miracles ; but thar 
;capreſl contrary ro what we have, Ch.7.31. and 1s Coubtlels a 
ts of - later Yeargy i Bur it is a greater Queſtion, bow the Mira- 
ty ws bear witnels of lum ; and whether they were only a 
thas wg eek. certain and infallible Teltimony of his Deity. Thoſe 
Wer them an infallible Teltimony, fay, 1 That he did works 
bp. eeſedd, Joh. 15.24. 2 That he did them by his own 


vv er 1 iihbes £ FN | "Ro 
: ” \C Ge ! 'Z » 1; of of 54 Ii”l - Fa | + ©! Tit £1149 0; 11214 


Fn. 


17 


g, 1 
JICE!, 
r hath 
) rae 
e ple. 
, when 
24. 3le 
ez al 


don? #1 
t have 32. 


" 
al Life 1s 
þ only 
aaments 
neſs had 
3, Rom. 
without 
32d maj 
on then 
n ſham? 
it Ever 


zo 1c 


4+ ® 
1.6338 


i, [4 } 
EF EC Mlg $? 


S. FOHN. 


_{ s F ” 
Cinap. s 6 
all, 3. That they were Gone itn confirmation of the Doctrine to that 
purpoſe which. he Preached, which God would nor have confirmed 
by Miracles, had he not been ſent of God to work ſuch things, Thoſe 
chat think they were nor 4 certain and infallible Tettimony, ſay, 1. 

That the Prophets and Apoſtles allo wrought Miracles. 2. That our 
Saviour tells biy Apoſtles, they ſhould do 8: eater works than he ha4 
done, That the deing of them from his own Power, wes a thins 
could not be known 20 others ; fo couid be no Teitimony to them. Bus 
our Saviour did nor only Iimfelf zaiſe the Dead, catt out Devits, arid 
work other Miracles, but he gave others alſo a Power to & 'T, 
which argued an original Power in himſelf, and is more than we 
read of any Prophers or Apoltles, who, tho' they vronzht ſuca 
miraculous Operations, yer having not that Power originally 1, aud 


trom themſelves, could not communicate i: to others. 


37 And the Father kimfelt which hath fenr me,* hath + x3 c. 
born witneſs of me x: Ye have neicher hearg kis Voice 17» 


at any time, * nor ſeen his ſhape y. 

x Not oniy in my Baptiſm, and at my Transfguration hy on am- 
dible Voice trom Heaven, bur by the Voice of his Prophets, by *** 
whom he ſpoke to your Fathers. » You have no knowledge of him, 
nor any acquaintance with him. Ir is expounded, v. 33. 7» have 
not hy Word abiding in you. For tho' indeed God appeared ro the 
Fews in no Shape or Similitude,yer they, (that is their Fore-fathers } 
had heard his Voice, Dext. 4+ 12. ſpeaking out of the midſt of the 
fire, verſe 33. God being an incorporeal Being, hath no fuch Or- 
gans of Speech as we have, by which we declare our Minds unto o- 
thers ; bur God had formed an audible Voice, by which he revcal- 
ed his Will unto the Fes ; ſoas it could only be ſaid of the Fes of 
that Generation and their Fore-fathers, from the rime of giving the 
Law, that they had not heard his Voice, for Exod. 20. 19. they 
then delired that Moſes mizhrt ſpeak to them, and that God would 
ſpeak no more immediately. Accordingly he did by te Prophets, 
ſpeak ro them, Heb. 1. 3. but they would not believe rhem ; nor 
nor when he ſpake to them by his Son, who knew his Wil, 

38 And you have not his word abiding in you z, 
for whom he hath ſent, him ye believe not #. 


7 Though they had heard the word of the Lord, their Fore fae 
thers by the Prophets, and in that Generation by Fohn the Baptisi 
( rhe Meflenper ſent before Chriits Face ) and now by Chritt himfclf 
whoin the Father had ſent, yer the word of the Lord had no place 
in their Hearts, Ch. $, 37. 1t was unto them as a Tale told, they 
received the found of ir, but it was not graven in their Hearts. a And 
this appeared, becauſe as of themſelves, they had n9 intimacy of 
Communion with God to know his Mind ; fo when the Son was 
ſent out of the Boſom of the Father, to reveal God unto them, yer 
they would not receive him, ſo as to give any jteady fixed Aﬀent to 
what he revealed, and to yield him any juſt and true Obedience. 

39 * Search the Scriptures 6, tor in them ye think #Ifa 3. 2c.- 
ye have eternal life c, and * they are they which teſti- 2nd 34-1. 
fie of me 4. nn 


b The words may be read either Tmperatizely (as our Tranſlation Ang _=_ 
readeth them ) or Indicatz»e/y? you do ſearch the Scriptures, thar j ;, | 
is, .of the Old Teſtament, for the Books of the New Teſtament were «nur. 18. 
not at thar time written 5 bur as they had the Books of the Old Te- , -_ 1g. 
ſtamenr, ſo they made uſe of them : Moſes was read in the Syna- x \;ke 
gogues every Sabbath-day ; and they, (the Phariſees eſpecially) were ,, 
very well verſed both in the Law and rhe Prophets. c They did ©,,,» 
agree, that the way of Salvation and Everlaſting-life was revealed un- , - 
ro them in the holy Scriptures ; nay, they did judge, that Eternal- * * 
life was to be obtained by their obſervatiag, of the Law. 4d- They 
( faith our Saviour ) are my principal Teſtimony ; he doth nor on. 
ly fay they teſtifie, but they are they that te(tifie, No Writings 
bur thoſe reſtifie of me ; I principally appeal to them to give you 
an account of me. 


49 And ye will not come to mee, that ys migh 
have lite f. 

e You will ror own, embrace, and receive me as the true Mc/7ab 
and Saviour of the World, rho* that be the only means by which you 
can obtain Ffrhat Eternal life which you pretend to be ſecking after ; 
and rightly think that the Scripture alone can ſhew you the way 
ro. Thiele two Verſes teach us, 1. Thar the holy Sciriptures ae 
the only Writings which ſhew us the way to' Life-eternal. a. That 
not only the Scriptures of the New, bur alſo of the Old Teſtzmenr, 
are of uſe in order thereunto, tho' the OldTeſt:menc Scriprures ſhew 
us it more darkly, and thoſe of the New Teſtament ſhew it ro us 
more clearly. 3. That borh the one and rhe orher point us to Chrift, 
and to the receiving and embracing of him, as our Saviour 1f we 
would have Life: 4 Thar it is nor ſafficient for us to ſearch rhe 
Scriptures, to be verſed in, and acquainted with them, unlefs we 2:1 
Obedience to them come to Chriſt. 

41 I receive not honour from men g. | 

2 I depend not upon the ſingle Teſtimony of Men: Or, I fee: 
not, nor hunt after the Honour of men, nor regard not what they 
think or ſay of me. 

42 But I know you, that ye have not the love ou 
God in you b. | : 

h You pretend a great deal of Religion, and ro do many thin:s 
out of love to God, and a zeal for the glory of God ; bur tho you 
can cheat others, yer you cannot deceive me, I that ſearci the Heart, 
and try the Reins, and am a witneſs ro your Actions, know that 
whatſoever you pretend, the trac love of God dwelleth nt in you z 
and that is the reaſon why you do not receive me, 


a 4 
_ 


43 Iam come in my Fathers name, and ye receive 
me not z ; if another ſhall come in his own name,him 
ye will receive k&. S | 

i Tam come clothed with an Authority from my Father, fenr by 
him for this very purpoſe,to reveal his Will ro men, for their Salvation 
[ ipe-k, I Co nvthing but by the Authority of my Father which (c::t 


X . Win, l | 1.4; FI = Jy pe ©,..r 
; 10:0o Laimarmy own Glory, Hut the Crory of 1a Thiut 

$1 
N14] 


v1 3 -» 
. 


1 { 
> # _— v* 54 YO T% 4 x fo *\\4Y; \'C\ \ © "7 4 : 38 *47 
! tif 4 $4 = pF \ceL you Burge i110 CIeiyut LU ay Wt EDT 4 . ed, us i-+* 


703 © Þ 


Rom. 2-088 onather, and feck noc 


D ” 

K.: 2 Go 

; 

” 

*4ien.l2 
& 15. 12 
& 22+ 15. 
& on ſ 
* Wat 1 3. 
J 2. 
Mar. $5.32 
Lakc.9.10 


cles which he had wrouzhr, 


joe with 


S. 7 0 
him whom God f:ath fent for the Saviour of man. k Through the 
Corrupion of your Hearts, and the jult Judginent of God, giving 
194 17 #2 flrong deluſions to believe lies, 2 Tirſe 2. 11. I any Sedu- 
cers Come, without any Autiority trom God, never ſent of him, nor 
ſpeating his Words. nor ſeeking his Glory, or your Good, you will 
re-Cliy crongh receive them. 

44 How can ye believe which receive honour from 
* the honour that cometh 


on 
at 


irom God only / ? 

{ I: is evident, that by rece;ving honory from one another, is here 
to be under! 00d, theſeeking and purſuing of Honour and Applauſe 
from Men, without regard to the praiſe of God ; ſoalſo Ch. 12. 43- 
For viherwiſe it 1s Lawful for Parents to receive Honour from Chil- 
dren, Maſters from Servants, Princes, and other Magiſtrates. from 
Peojpie; bur for mento be ambitious of Honour and Applauſe of 
men, in neglect of the Honour and Praiſe of God; this 1s highly 
tinſul ; and it cannot be expected thar any ſuch Perſons ſhould fo far 
deny thernſelves, and renounce rheir own works of Righteouſnels, 
as 10 accept of Chriſt and his Rizhteouſneſs,and rely upon him alone 
for Life and Salvation. Ir is ſaid, Foh. 12+ 42 43+ That amongſt the 
chief Rulers, many believcd, yer it 1s added, v. 43. For they loved 
the frarſe of men more than the praiſe of God : But thoſe words v.4.3+ 
ſeem rarher torefer ro the Phariſees, mentioned in the latter part of 
©. 42. where a Reaſon is given, why tho' raany great Rulers belzev- 
ed, yer they Gid not confeſs Christ. becauſe of the Phariſees, Or if 
thoſe words. v. 43. be to be applied ro thoſe of whom it is ſaid, ec» 
beiieved,v 42, we mult diitinguiſh concerning believing, which in 
Ch. 12 42+ fignifieth no more than an afſent given ro him as a great 
Propiet, upog the Miracles they ſaw wrought by him: In this 
place, a true and lively Faith receiving Chriit as our Mediator and 
Saviour. 

45 Do not think that I will accuſe you to the Fa- 
ther 92; there is oze that accuſeth you, eves Moſes, in 


whom ye truſt », 

»2 There will be no need of my accuſing you, » you will need no 
ether Accuſer than that Moſes for whom you have fo great a Reve- 
rence, and for whoſe ſake you contemn me. Ch. 9g. 28 29. They 
ſaid, 17 are Moſes his Diſciples ; we know that God ſpake unto Mo- 
ter; as jor thy fellow, we kizow not from whence he xs, This Moſes 
( fairh our Saviour ) will accuſe you unto the Father. 


45 Forhad ye believed Moſes, ye would have be- 


leved me, for * he wrote of me 0. 

0 Had you given a hearty Credit and underſtanding Afent ro Mo- 
ſes; that is, to the Writings of Moſes, for fo the term is oft raken, 
Lnie 16.31, and 24. 27. you would have received me; - as all the 
Law of Msſes pointed to, and prefigured me, ſo he in particular 
wrote of me, Gen. 3. 15» Deut-18.15. = 

47 But if yebelieve not his writings, how ſhall ye 
believe my words p ? 

P Burt ii you believe not his Writings, who fo plainly wrote of me 
and whoſe Writings you ewn, and have fo great a Veneration for ; 
how cin I expect that you ſhould believe the words of one whom 
you viiifie and contemn 2 For tho' my Words be in themſelves of 
grearer Authority, yet T have not ſo much Credit with you as Moſes 
had, But how doth our Saviour affirm, v. 45. that they rruſted in 
Msjes, and deny here, that they did believe him ?_ Anſw. Some ſay 
they believed with an ?mplicite Farth ; preſuming upon the Merits 
of 4braktam, Iſaac, Tacob, bur not with an explicite Faith. Others 
ſay. they behieved in the general, that whatſoever be wrote was 
true ; bur they did nor believe them in rhe true ſenſe of them. Tar- 
0011s thinks, that the#truſted in Moſes, that they mighr be ſaved 
by their own work done in obedience to his Law, bur they did not be- 
eve him, becauſe they rejected him of whom Moſes wrote, and to 
whom the Law of Moſes was bur a School-maſter. They refuſed 
him who was the Head of the Corner, Plal.118, 22. Mar. 21. 42. 


CH AP. VI. 


H IN. Chan 
4 


4 * And the pailorer, a ſeaſt of the Jew 
nigh e. : 

e Thar is, the third Paſſover after our Saviour h23 entred 
his publick Minilry; by which we may obſerve, that 9./p, ©... 
ed many things ſpoken and done by our Saviour in the Ye As 
diately following the Second Paſſover ( for he giveth vs ; 


- , 10 [Uret a 

Account than what we have in the former, and in this ©... = 
- -" F : : On : IS, 

The ocher Evangeliſts gives us a more tull account of ther; T'. 


place whither our Saviour went, feemerh to have been tow;-4 
end of the Lake; ſo asthe People could go on Foor, ang tics . 
point of the Lake, and be there before the Ship coulg 
Water. 

5 © When Jelus then lift up bz eyes, and ſaw 1 5... 
company come unto him, he faith unto Philip, When. 
{hall we buy bread, that theſe may ear f'? 72 
_ F This 1s apparently the ſame Hiltory which we have ret ws. 
in all rhe former three Evangeliſts. Mar. 14. 13, &c. Mars, 35. &. 
Luke 9. 10,&c. See the dittering Circumttances conſidered in 
Annotations on thoſe Chapters. The other Evangeliſts obſerve. Th. 
Chriſt had firſt been Preaching to them, till it was near Njzky. 
and then bring in the Diſciples firſt moving him ( becauſe they Hat 
eaten nothing } to ſend them away to provide themſelves Fog 
This Evangelitt begins with fome words Chriſt ſhould ſpeak t, 
Philip. 

6 ( And thishe ſaid to prove him, for he him 
knew what he would dog ) 
Z Now this he ſaid, ro try what Phzlip would ſay, for he was him. 

ſelf reſolved what to do. 

7 Philip anſwered him, * Two hundred Pennyworhs,, 
of bread is not ſufficient for them, that every one «1; 
them may take a liccle b. 

hb This Diſcourſe between our Saviour and Phzlip, is reportedly 
none of the other Frangeliſts; and probably was after that which 
they report of rhe other Diſciples morion to Chriſt to difinifs the 
People, becaufe it was now rowards Evening. The number ( 25 ye 
ſhall find afterward ) was Five thouſand, beſides Women and Chil 
dren ; amongit whom Two hundred penny-worth of Bread was very 
little to be divided. 

8 One ofhis diſciples, Andrew ,Simon Peters brother, 
{aith unto him, 

9 There is a lad here, which hath five barley-loare 
and two ſmall fiſhes; * but what are they among ſy%:l 
many ? 

Io And Jeſus ſaid, Make the men fit down. Nay 
there was much grals in the place. So the men fat down, 
in number about five thouſand. 

112 And Jeſus took the loaves, and when he had gir- 
en thanks, he diſtributed to the diſciples, and the dif: 
ciples to them that were ſer down ; and likewileofthe 
fiſhes, as much as they would. 

12 When they were filled, he ſaid unto his diſciples 
Gather up the fragments that remain, that nothing be 
loſt. 

13 Therefore they gathered them together, and ll 
ed twelve baskets with the fragments of the tive barley- 
loaves, which remained over and above unto them that 
had eaten #. 

Z The Story is the ſame, in all ſubſtantial parts, with the Relat 
ons of Mathew, Mark, and Luke, in the before mentioned places, 
See the Annotations on thoſe Chaprers. 


I4 Then thoſe men , when they had ſeen the mira- 


+! 
$428 
$113 1 
CT at tha 


"IBS: 
C!O'$ tie 


Chri# feedeth five thouſand men with fiveLoaves and two littleFiſhes, 
1--13. Perceiving that they would by force make him their King, 
departeth into a Mountain,14-15.In the night walketh on the Sea, 
16- 21. The multitude ſeck Feſus, whom they found at Capernaum, 
22--25. Chriſts Exhortation to ſeek incorruptible Food, 26-40, 
Whereat the Fews murmur, 4.1--42, Chri#t telleth them, that hy 
Body 1 mcat, and hx Blood drink indeed, 43--58. Telleth them the 
eruc ſenſe of his words, 59-65, Wherefore many of his Diſciples 

29 away from him, 66--71. 


Frer theſe things a Jeſus *® 
\ Galilee b, which is the See of Tiberias c. 


a 5ome good time (fone think near a Year) after rhe Paſſages in 
the tormer Chapter, 6 Cariſt went over the Lake of Galilee ( for 


went over the Sea of| 


cle that Jeſus did, ſaid, This is of 4 truth * that Pro-fl 


phet that ſhould come into the world & oF  & 
hk When they had ſeen the Miracle of Chrifts mulnplyng Five » 
Loaves and two Fiſhes, tothe feeding of Five thouſand Perſons, bt- 
fides Women and Children; a Miracle of that Nature, that never 
any ſuch was wrought either by Moſes, or any Propher and to r6 
working of which, a Creating power was neceſſary : Thus hy 
them to a ſtrong Perſwaſion, that this was the Meſſis ; for he 1s s 
nified by that Phraſe, The Prophet which ſhould come into the Worid, 
as appeareth from Luke 7. 19. 
15 When Jeſus therefore perceived that they w_ 
come and take him by force, to make him a King 4,0 


departed again into a mountain himſelf alone 7. 


. : T7, Mountain alone, after he had ſent 
{ This motion of Chriſt into a _ mo 1 "Cer that kis Diſci 


the Fes called all great colleQions of Waters, Seas ) it is alſo called 
the Lake of T:berzas, and the Lake of Genneſareth, Luke 5. 1. Theſe 
Waters received their Name from che whole Province whoſe Coaſt 
'1ey wathed ; fo they were called the Sea of Galilee, or the particu- 
far Shore, or Cities they walked ; fo they are ſometimes called rhe 
Sea of Tiberias, lomerimes the Lake of Genneſareth, Ir appeareth 
by Mark 6. 31. that he went upon the Apoſtles coming to give him 
an 2Ccount of what they had done, and taughr. 

. 2 And a great multiude followed him, becanſe they 
ſv his miracles which he did on them that were di. 
teaſed d. 

4 Our Saviour (as appeareth by Mark 6. 31 ) only ſpake to his 
Apaſiles tro withdraw into a Defart place, and to reſt a while ; bur 
2. 34+ tho” our Saviour went by Ship, yet rhe People ran on Foot 
thither our of all Cities, and our-went them, and came together unto 


1 11 
him. Tart whick induced them, was their knowledge of the Mira- 


3 iap{ ger pry up into a mountain, and there he 
11s QLICIDICS. 


away the Mulrirude (thus miraculouſly ; 
eres taken Ship _ is mentioned by two other Evange!!'s5 
by Mathew, Ch. 14. 23. Mark. 6. 45. 46» 
expreſſed by neither of chem 3 who borh ſay, 
Pray : And indeed Fohn (who rarely mentionerh any thin 
by the orhers) is judged to have recorded this Hiſtory, 4s 
cellent Diſcourſe of our Saviours, following 
ſome particular Circumſtanices in, and about t 
tioned by the other Evangelitt ; of which, as th 
with Phzlip, was one. ſo this 
King, was another, 
and zealous for their Liberties ; the 
whom our Saviour was ar =_ rime: ; 
rhing but a Leader for a Sed1 
than $60; Afﬀs 5. 36. 37. under the Conduct of one Theu x 
Fudas of Galilee, 
Error as to the Meſſias (whom they dreamed 
gave them a colour for theſe Inſurrections, 
ger any to take upon him that prerence- 
great Miracles wrought by Chrilt, particu 


Bur rhis occaſion 011k 13 
that he rent thither to 
ing (er down 
for the Ex- 


Miracle, (o for 


this 
| nor men” 
he Miracle, f betu p 


e Diſcourie 


__—__ - 
abour their going about £0 make hm 


ing jealous 0, 
ws were a People exceeding JEa 
Galileans eſpecially, as 

So 28 they never wante any 


«iP ans 
_ F o Sci rures m 
tion or' Rebellion. Th Pp an 


The F 


; el 
mientipneth MOTc- 


of as a Temporal Prince) 
wh-n ever they gr 
Theſe men ſeeing _ 
3+lv rhat of the /0a7eT 
larly rhat of ed 


Eccleſiaſtical Hiſtory 


1 
if 


5 WaS "Les 


14 
. { FO. 


ka To r aa 
UPor, v; 


\ | 


TY 


<< as 


HS. 
342f0r 
35- Whicl 
1133 hath 
Ts t B 
8. Bread 
M7. Life; 
Uſing : 
Val. 1 


Prince) 
\ coul 
p theſe 
'os mul- 
tip! 


ip. VI 


 Hearrs, 


torh 


E $ and believe his 
\;; [0 be fed by him. 


322 —_ meat which end 
33. VNCH the Son of man ſhall give unto you « : * for hi 
33 hath God the Father ſealed -—  .- 


; B. ba, = Bread which periſherh, is nor ſtrictly to be underſtood 
ky Lit. ns whatſoever is neceſſary or accomodating ro us in this 


S.# 0 


feed five thouſand, thought Carift had been ſuch-a Meſſts [can:ray commanded, 1 the ſweat of our Face ts eat our Bread. And 


_ cxpatied - not underſtanding that the Kingdom of the true 


"7% was OL To be of this World, Chap. 18. 36. but within men 
46-4 _ more evident at the day of Judgment, Mat. 25. 34+ 
» Bur our Saviour, who never came into the World to diſturb rhe 
civil Order and Government 1n 1t, conſtantly avoided rhe giving 
the leatt occafion for ſuch a ſuſpicion: When he therefore knew, 
hor by his inſight into rhe hearts of men, or by hearing their Diſ- 
courſes, that they had ſuch Sedirious thoughrs, he withdrew himſelf 
--0 a Monntain: How he withdrew himſelf, fo as they did not 
follow him, no not his Diſciples, is a matrer which hath exerciſed 
the Thoughts of many. The Pap:/?s ſay, that he had a Power by Vir- 
tae of the Perſonal Union of the Divine and Humane Narure in his 
Perſon, 10 Make his Body inviſible, and fo paſſed from them, nor 
viſcerned by rhem- The Lntherans arenot fo confident in this, yer 
leem to incline it might be thus. Indeed both of them are concern- 
ed to maintain the poſſibility of ſuch a thing; tor withour ſuch a 
ability, neither can the Pap:/2s maintain their Doctrine of Tran- 
bſtantiation, where they hold, that the Bread in the Sacrament of 
he Lords Supper.is rurned into the very Body of Chriſt,and the Wine 
:nco his Blood, {though no ſuch thing be obvious to our Senſes) Nor 
the Lutherans their Doctrine of Conſubſtantiarion,who hold thar rhe 
v:ry Body and Blood of Chriſt is really preſent in, with, or under 
the Elements, tho' the Elements benot changed into ir. But the 
Greek words are no morethan &vsy grey @dAw, Which fignifieth 
no more than thar he again changed tvs place, which he might eaſily 
do through a multitude in a diſorder, withour their notice of him, 
and it his Diſciples did fee him,it 1s nor probable that they, knowing 
kis averſion :0 any Seditious Practices, as alfo his cuſtom to with- 
draw to Places of privacy for Devotion, would take any notice ar all 
f him. - - . 
: 16 And when even was ny come, his diſciples went 
down unto the Sea o. 

o This piece of Hiſtory is related much more fully by the other 
Evangelilts, Mat. I 4s from v. 23, to v 34. Mark 6. from v. 46. to 
2. 53. Seethe Notes upon thole two Chapters. 


17 Andentred into a ſhip, and went over the Sea 
towards Capernaum : And it was now dark, and Jeſus 
was not come to chem, 

18 And the Sea aroſe, by reaſon of a great wind 
thatblew. 

19 So when they had rowed about five and twenty 
er thirty furlongs, they ſee Jeſus walking on the Sea, 
and drawing nigh unto the Ship, and they were afraid. 

20 But he faith unto them, it is I, be not afraid. 

21 Then they willingly received him into the Ship, 
andimmediately the Ship was at the land whither they 
went; 

q 22 The day following, when the people which 
ſtood on the other ſide of the Sea p,ſaw that there was 
none other boat there, ſave that one wherein his dif. 
ciples were entred, and that Jeſus went not with his 
diſciples into the boat, but char his diſciples were gone 
away alone. 

p By the Sea, is here meant the Sea of Galzlee, or Lake ofTiber;- 
& or of Genneſareth, There our Saviour and his Diſciple had left 
the maltirude ; rhe Diſciples having taken a Boar, and paſing oyer 
on the other fide ; and Chriſt having followed them, the multitude 
probably having gone in the Night to reſt themſelves at their ſeveral 
Houſes, came again in the Morning, expecting to have found Chriſt, 
and have ſeen more Miracles ; being diſappointed underſtanding 
that both Chriſt and his Diſciples were gone over. 

23 ( Howbeit there came other boats from Tiberias, 
nigh unto the place where they did eat bread, after 
that the. Lord had given thanks ) 

24 When the people therefore ſaw that Jeſus was: 
not there, neicher his diſciples q, they alſo took ſhip- 
ping, and came to Capernaum, ſeeking for Jeſus r. 

q Made uſe of fome other Boats that were come over the Water, 
7 and went over to ſeek Jeſus : Not our of any loye to his Perſon or 
DoCtrine, (as we ſhall anon hear) bur our of a Curioſity to ſee ſome 
further Miracles wrought by him. Our Lord diſappoints rhem, but 
Preaches a moſt admirable Sermon ro them. 

25 And when they had found him on the other ſide 
ofthe Sea, they faid unto him, Rabbi, when cameſt 
thou hither ? 

26 Jeſus anſwered them,and ſaid,Verily, Verily,I ſay 
unto you, Ye ſeek me, not becauſe ye ſaw the miracles, 
but becauſe ye did eat of the loaves and were filled f 

/ They atked him, when he came thither > A curious and im- 
Pertnent Queſtion, ro which he doth not think fit to give an appo- 
ite Anſwer, bur ar firſt letterh them know, thar he knew their 
_ ts. deſigns they had in following him ; which was not 

OO raculous effects of the Divine Power, the Credentials of 

ommiltion from Heaven, and to receive him as the rraeMeſſiah, 
Doctrine : But they came upon ſo low an Account, 


27 {| Labour not for the meat which periſheth, but 
ureth unto everlaſting life , 


; all things ofthis nature are periſhing, and periſh witch the 


—— Is all Labour as to them forbidden us ; tar we are to the 


F N. 


the Apoſtle commandeth,that thoſe that will not Labour, ſhoy!d not 
ea:, and Pro. 31, 27. the good Woman is commended for 10: eating 

th: Bread of Idleneſs. But exceſſive Labour for theſe rhings is forbid- 

den, fo alois a firſt and greater Labour for, and ſeeking afcer them, 

chan after that Meat which endureth to everlaſtivg Life; undec whick 

n-tionalſo unqueſtionably cometh whatſoever is necellary by ds re- 

vealed Will, that we may have in us che hopes of Glory here, and may 

enter into the aCtual Polſeflion of that Glory hereafter. Such as are 

Firlt, The knowledge of the Goſpel; then the believin? of ir, and 

the acceptance of thar Saviour, and way of Salvation, which God hath 

revealed in it for loft Sinners; and thar holineſs of Life which Cod 

hath ,made neceſſary to it. # All which, ſaith he, I, who am the 

Son of man, (a Name he ordinarily giveth to himſelf ) will *giye unto 

you freely : Not that you are to do nething, no, Labour for it. tho' 

it bea Gzft, yer 1tis a Gift upon Labour, for all your [ ahour will 

not procure it ; there will be a great deal of free Grace ſeen when 

you have girenall dilligence w. And Chriſt muſt give it; forthe 
Father, in whoſe Hands this Life is, hath ( as men by their Seals uſe 
ro confirm the Commiſſions they give out to any Perſons to do any 

thing for chem, and in their Name) confirmed Chriſt as his Commi- 
fioner, to give out this Eternal Life to whomfoever he pleaſeth, 

28 Then faid they unto him, What ſhall wedo that 
we might work the works of God x ? 

x They eaſily underſtood that our Saviour did not ſpeak of any 
Worldly Food, by his oppoſing the Labour he mentioneth, and per- 
ſ{wadeth unto, ro a Labour for the World ; bur ill they did not un- 
derſtand what Labour he ſpake of, bur dreamt of the works of the 
Law, knowing of no other work which God commanded, but whar 
was preſcribed in the Law ; and they probably being ſome, or ma- 
ny of them ſtrict Obſervers, eſpecially of the Law contained in Ordi- 
nances, and probably, many of them of the Moral Law alſo.,accord- 
ing to the ſenſe of ir given by their Teachers; in which ſenſe the 
young Man, Ma. 19.20. being bid by our Saviour, to keep the Law ; 
and naming moſt of the Precepts of the ſecond Table, told hum, Al 
theſe things have T kept from my youth, what lack T yet 2 They won- 
dred what works our Saviour meant ; what Labour, when he ſaid; 
Labour for that bread, or that meat which endureth to eternal Life. 
Thinking that thoſe which kept the Law (in the ſenſe before expreſ- 
ſed ) had no more to do, 


_ of God, that you believe on him whom he hath 
ent 7. Rp 

» Our Lord calleththem to a Work they never thought of : The 
owning and acknowledgment of him to be the true Meſſiah ; the 
embracing and receiving himas ſuch, and truſting in him with all the 
concerns of their Souls ; which was neceſſary notwithitanding all 
their Acts of Obedience to the Law, tho moſt certainly productive 
alſo of rhar Obedience, and inſeparable from ir. This our Saviour 
calleth Tbe workof God, in anſwer to what they had faid about 
working the Works of God. Yet this will not prove that we are 
juſtified by Works, becauſe we are juſtified by Faith ; for here is no 
Diſcourſe concerning the caufation of Faith in the Juſtification of a 
Soul, bur only concerning what is the Will of God, as to all thoſe 
that ſhall be ſaved. 


doſt thou work z 2? 


x They thought ir reaſonable, that he who brought forth a new 
Doctrine into the World (ſuch as Faith in him was, they having ne- 
ver beard any ſuch thing from their Doctors the Pharsſzes ) ſhould 
confirm his Mifſion by ſome Miraculous Operation. But this was 
a ſtrange Stupidity, conſidering the Sign he had ſo lately ſhewed 
them, of feeding Five thouſand with fiveLoaves and two Fiſhes. So it 
was manifeſt they ſought for a Sign, not to promote or confirm 
their Faith, bur meerly ro feed their Curioſity ; and what our Sa- 
viour ſaid, Mat. 12. 39. A wicked and Adulterou Generation ſceketh 
after a Sign, was truly applicable torhem, andthoſe words, believe 
thee, erranently confirm ir ; for the aforeſaid Miracle ſpeaking in 
him a Creatsve Power, and being ſuch as was never wrought by any 
Creature, they were obliged to believe him, withour any further 
Sign. God ought to be believed upon his bare Word. 


is written, He gave them bread from heaven to eat a 

a Here they magnifie Moſes ; he did not bring them a Law only, 
bur confirmed it by Signs from Heaven, to be the Will of God,by ob- 
taining for them Bread to be rained from Heaven to ſatisfie their 
Hunger, Exod, 16. 15. Naw. 11. 7. which is alſo confirmed by the 
P(almit, Plal.78. 25. This Moſes did for the whole Congregation of 
1/rael forty Years together. From hence they would ſeem to conclude 
That they had more ground to believe Moſes than Chriſt; who, tho? 
he had indeed lately fed five thouſand with five Loaves, yet had done 
no ſuch thing. Nor conſidering that Moſes, in what he did, was bur 
an Inſtrument ro obtain of God by Prayer ſuch aMiracle for ſupporr- 
ing his People in the Wilderneſs, and that what Chriſt had done was 
done by a Creating Power inherent in himſelf, by which he multi- 
plyed rhar little proportion of Bread which they had, to make ir ſuf. 
cient to feed ſuch a quantity as five thouſand, beſides» Women and 
Children ; to which effect ic bare no proportion. 


32 Then Jeſus ſaid unto them, Verily, verily, I ſay 
unto you, Moſes gave you not that bread from heaven; 
but my Father giveth you the true bread from heavenc. 


b You are miſtaken in your Opinion of that Manra,which indeed 
was Bread from Heaven ; ſþ#ritual! Mear ( as the ApobiJe callerh it, 
I Cor, 10 3) Burtit was not given you by any Power or Virtue in or 
from Meſes. Moſes faid otherwiſe, when it was firſt rained down, he 
rold them, Th K the bread which the Lord hath given you to eat, 
Exod. 16. 15. It was the Lotd, not Meſes, that gave you that 
Bread c : Nor was that true gr:tual Bread ; it was only Spiritual 
(as the Apoltle calleth ir) becauſe ir was Typical, and Prefigurative 
of me. My Father giveth yau the erue Bread from Heaven : Ic 
{ Ecce ] Wag 


Cha P. VI: 


rg ——= 


cn—_ 


Mr 
Dy 
- - « 
— - = £0'% _ ds 
—S_ wo 3:4.< .. i _ > - $54 4 = 
» ——_ _ . - 
= "LI" 2 is ti 7 2 > _ 
_—_— * . - _ L- k S ® - 
- . om => - F, " Fi — 
4 dg : - 
- : þ- — 
»” WY Py h- inthe i <_"_ "b þ 


”} 
þ 


gf 


; & i : 
& i 
IT: 4; 
+ i k 
Fe 'T1, 
*3 1 Þ ; 
L's * M7. 1 
4 bu -t 
* £44 
' "1 « 
; Map A 
I&S9 4 * 
1.3 1 q 
Welt Be: fv {8 
. wad | A . 
7 
44032 $2 44'S G 
- 12 
ML + 4 
4 » 
os. [21 
\ : | 
. L TS | 
. f 15 
4+. 0 
z'N ; 
$5 1% 
& © 
? 
: 
£ - 
T4 WH + . 
$3; n 
| by 
KS in 
* t 
j q 


— 


29 Jeſus anſwered and faid unto them, * Thisis the, , fohn 33 


30 They ſaid therefore unto him,*What ſign ſheweſt »14;r. 16. 5 
thou then, that we may ſee and believe thee ? What 1Cor.1.22 


> 
Y 
ey 


3 4 4 &. 3% 
COM a ES t3-4. 


rm 


of Ba 74 
. a $ - 
——————— 


31 * Ours Fathers did eat Manna inthe defart ; as it*; Corio! 


Ghap. VI. Sf O'HN. Chap, Y; 


2. SY im 
was hs that cate yortr Fathers Pang, nat £7 os and it is he who 33 ForlI came down from Heaven,* not to do mine®* My; FE: 
OVER you 1, v 62 am the rrme Pread, of Whicn that Bread was own will, but the will of him that ſent mel. a T 
but Tyoical, a Shadows anda Figare. { Our Lord confirmerth what he had before (aid, Concerning his Chay, P 

2 For the bread of God is he wihich cometh down| Gracious Reception of Believers, and preſerving chew by his Grace 35. F 
{om h{ﬀaven, and giveth lie ano the world d, in their ſtare of Grace ; fo that they ſhall not be caſt our with Re. 


probates in the day of judgment ; from this, That he cime nor i 


dy 4 a ea 23417 i Jr) » ' a y F - X = ©» n 
1 3M, gave you Spiritual Heaverty Bread; burthar was only] |. Þ 6 any particular Will of hisown, but what was alſo the Wil 


epirizual. as it is Typical and 4; gm T1 inn as 1t __ of his Father who ſent him into the World. 

( hs Ln nr X 3 1 4142 ty 14a f 97 by . p '4Y . « . - 

trom: the mo ooy_ 9a þ "i at G T why " "ns OE he 29 And this is the Fathers will which hath ſn: me, 

upon the Farth by the Art of Man, and was therefore called the , 2 K bh og 

"a of Auzels, bu: Tam the trive Bread of Ged, fignified by that That of all which he hath given me, I ſhould loſe . 2 
Typ? who came nut Cown from the 1ower, bur from the highett nothing mM, but ſhould raiſe ITUP again at the laſt day 1.9% & " 


Hoaveis ; 3nd who 43 n0t only maintain, and uphoid Life 11 men mn For this he reyealeth to be his Fathers W1l, that of all hs "4 _ g 6; 
as that Cid. bur give Lite ro men ; and that nor a meer natural Lie. | eher kad given him he ſ-ould loſe none ; where by the F athers giving a 
ut a Spiritual aid tirmal Life ; and tharnor to the Fews only. muſt be meant, either his eternal Act ( having choſen ſome ro Frey. 
for whoic ue alone fame was, bur ro the World, : nal Life) in giving them to his Sen, for the Work of their Redemp. 
24 Then tziu they unto kim, Lord evermore give] tion, or, which is bur the effect and product of thar, the working, 
= held e. | preſerving, and upholding in _ _ _ gr Exerciſes of 
e Moll Interpreters agree, that they ſpake this ſeriouſly ; that 15 wh which wy — F by tO a agg 4 = Fo de. 
that they were willinz exongh to have ſuch Bread, (if any fuch were clareth 1t to be the Will of his Fa bet Bodies die and Ur an 
to be had ) but yer not conceivins arzghr the Nature and Excellency theſe to miſcarry ; » bur though their Boqtes c = monk, 
nf the Bread our Saviour mentioned - and this occalioned his clear} YE! Chriit ar the laſt day _—_ Ky vo to ty ſhalt 7 ca ne in 
Explication of it in the following, Verſe. particular, raiſe them up ; nor that they only _ ( tor how 
E:cp*"tcation 01 1t 177 > then fhall al! appear before rhe Judgment-ſear of God, to receive ac. 


Pa me __ 
35 And Jeſus faid unto them, TI am the preas | of cording to what they have done in the Fleſh ) bur they are thoſe 


us 


Z x a, : "—_ I - * — OS a _ 
I "x87 1 AL. _— _ 5 N a - 
"AI WER Lie beck ALOE mr rr tb PFs. Any WOES ag Pho £ 
4 -7 - —— A oe 


- Chav. 4-life #5 * He chat cometh to me, ſhall never hunger, | 11. 3.0 hall receive any benefit by the Reſurrection ; and there. 
_& 7eand he that belicverh on me ſhall never thirſt 8. tore they are called the Children of the Reſurrection ; and the Reſyr. 
= # The Bread that giverh Spiritual and Erernal Lite, and rhe Bread | r<ction,is ſomerimes ſpoken of in Scripture as if it were to be peculiar 
"i uphoiderh and maintaineth Spiritual Life. The Meſſiav,whom | ©© them, P/1/. 3. 11. By this the Certamty of the Reſurrection s 
Go: hath fentinro the World ro quicken thoſe that are dead in Tref: | ©{tabliſhed ; ir being afſerted, as the effect of the 7J/ill of God,which 
| paties and Sins, ib. 2.1. And 70 grve eternal Life to as many as the | 1One hath relitted ar any times tf % 4 
Eotes bath green 2c: Purthoſe hat have this Life, muf? come untol 40 And this is the will of him that ſent me, that, | 
me; which he Ince: prets in the next Phraſe by beheving in LEN : every one which ſceth s the Son, and believeth on him, v _ A 
Thys he taketh then cit of all groſs and carnal Conceprions ofE1ting may have everlaſting life P3 and I will raiſe him up at &ws w 
and 3 rinking im @ carnal 5 1-105/ Frm cs pri ney ro —_— the laſt day 4. b y n 
any cate NOTED kind oz Life than tney dreamt of, By be- 0 Our Lord having aſſerted the Will of God, as to the final iſſn a 
FEE, 1 B31, we tave tormerly ſhewed yo be any Gr a = and happlnels of ar ers, goes on to aflert the means by aſng th 
Cciving of (1m as: he Mecizror and Saviour o Men, and cloſing wit whichin this Life they muſt obrain everlaſting Life; thoſe ar> ſieing 3 
4 im, any - pwr; _ in - - ja SO x 4c" __ the Son.and be lieving in him ; ſeeing him nor with the Eyes of thei he 
im 5 2 and vo rhar do! h o (faith he) ſha a $5 pews ogy yy - ;| Bodies ; or ſeeing his Miraculous Operations, (both which theſe Ca. 
Tor t5, in FRET Vatzt any DNIng wp oy Bay way : Z nd pernaits did, one” yer did not believe, as he told them ». 36 ) bur 
eternal Happineſs, And for things of this Lite, he co _— OL; ſeeing them with the Eye of their minds, diſcerning him as the Mz _ 
comenient for im, ne ſhall be fed, Pal. 37. 3. See ſuch a Pronuſe ſich, and Saviour ofthe World : So fering him, as to believe eat 
Jt # 49 4 Os Rc Db have f him ; as to theſe, he confirmeth it again to be the Will of his Father 
25 Pac T faid unto you, thar ye allo have ſeen me,] char they ſhould live eternally, 4 and that they ſhould be raiſed again ho 
and bolicve not 6. ar the laſt Day ; and that by him, whom God had ordained to e - 
[: You have ſeen me in the Fleſh. you have heatd my Doctrine, the Fudge both of the HERNE dead, Acts 10. 42, which agre our 
wy immer Fo ard 4 eth with what he had before ſaid, Chap. 5,28. 
vou have {een the Miracles which I have wronghr, confirming that d hi becauſe h Sou 
Poctrine,and meto be the true Meſſias, for I have done amongtt you] _ 41 The Jews then murmure at num 7, Decaule ng obt, 
thoſe Works which neverany Man _ oi you -» of tae _ ſaid, I am the bread which came down from Heaven, x 
108 Of thoſe of whom 1t was propheſted, That zn ſeerr 7. you ſhou , . <> wh 'La: 
oh {ee, nor yet perceive Ch you have ſeen me wvith your]. 7 The F EPs WEre exceeding p _— this mm ce wg, rw { nM 
vv Eres. :nd could not but conclade by what Works I haye| ! a complaining either through Indignation, or Imparience of what for 
—_— wp TR . gin d ack men hear ſpoken, or ſee done ; the thing which offended, ſeemeth floſ 
Cone, tht Tam the rrne Meſſiah ; yet you do not. own and acknows- be his oatfins Lites ue broad and the bread of Life, bit © 
tedoe meas ſuch, nor will by Faith cloſe with me, and come unto| 7! 7 s calling himlelt rhe e74e = : H ; ' .4 
m2 ior Lite and Happineſs. becaule he faid, that he _ down from Toſuc he Son of Jo-4 ung 
LL oreti ob; frat come. rol. 4 And they ſaid, * Is not this Jelus the Son of Jo-# 11,1 bao 
27 rat : 1e FAatner give T '' v * ey” WO "—* ſeph, whoſe father and mother we know ? How 1s ty. word 
me, = hin that cometh to me; I will in no wiſe ca rhen that he ſaith, I came down from Heaven / : ; _ yo 
OLE K. ' Wy For Capernaum, where our Saviour now wag, was.not far irom att 
; Here ariſerh a great Queſtion amongſt Interpreters of various Won mg he had been Educated, and Lived near hirry Years before 
Ferſwafions, What v7247g of the Father is ere meant ; whether an | rp Foſeph his reputed Farher. Underſtanding therefore nothing of that is 
ererna! Jefignation of Perſons to eternalLije, in order to the obtaining | 1, 6:17 Miraculous Conception, by the overſhadowing of the red : 
{1 8213-08 of «hich, the Perſons fo predeſiinated are given to Chriſt, as he Holy Ghoſt in the Womb of the Virgin, they were much offended cited, 
02 who w3s 10 he the Meſſiah. Saviour and Redeemer of the World; or| .. his Diſcourſe, of his coming down from Heaven. | J2 
| | the wit: fng the Habirsof ſpecial ſaving Grace, by which Perſons are Jeſis therefore anſwered and ſaid unto them, $9 layin 
ths en:lod atually to believe. If the former, rhe Words do nor only 43 ſ; ly _ Fi 
al Infer an tfallible Connexion betwixt Faith, and eternal Life and Murmure not among your IKeIves 'P f of his Divine Nas tis ha 
> C2jv.t:on z but alfo berwixr the Decree of EleCtion,and the Collation| # By this our Saviour gives them mw Thoa = fo though ving 
of ip:c:al Grace, by which men are enabled to believe,and believing | rure,vzz- In his knowing of their Hearts an ws hy ja = og of any but w| 
zre vel That whichſeemeth ro favour the latter Opinion, is, | they were inwardly Angry and tn a Rage, be? J not their Wordsto Temp; 
that tne 1-74 13 in the preſent Tenſe; itis nor, all that the Father Words ſpoken by rhem 3 bur our Saviour neede Or R Saviour bids forepr 
Por 25109, bat all that the Father gtveth,which would incline us to| tell him what was in the ſecret of their _ a on thistotell 52 
thnk, thit though in other Texts the Fathers giving of Souls ro{ them not ro murmure at this, EINE Wen ore 4, Unto 
Ch:cjit. may tignihe his eternal Elefzon ; yet in this Text it rather] them, as followeth. to Fatherecai af 10 
f 2:32 tne Donation, or giving the Habits of Special Grace. Bur] 44 * No man can come unto me, except . a G him all 
2174 2:4 very Learned and Pious Interpreters of another mind, who| which hath ſent me draw him «, and I will raule Tee ; h T 
ti: by the Fathers giving, 1s meant the -Farhers ctuſing Souls in un at the laſt d ay. believir 
{i1, Free 1.4. Certain it 1s, that there are ſome choſen ro Lite, P : n d any co-aR10n, 0 man ha 
ard the cortuln means by which that Liſeis to be obtained, Eph. 1. # That by drawing here, isnot to be underſtoo wy bur whe- t0 eterr 
4 5. A194 25 C571 1115, That Perſons fochoſen in him, ſhall nei-| force upon the Wl, 1s a thing on all hands out of ops ments What fo 
to) ifs 0 that Lite.nor yer of that effectual means by which it ſhall] ther by it be only robe underitood a ratzonal ar _—_— / oflnence Fire, fs 
be obta.getu, Whether that ezerna/ Elettion or Donation be here in | (uſed in the Miniſtry of the Goſpel) or a farther PN tha is the Thats; 
L.nCed ern9. is not fo rnaomentous to determine. For the Feſuits| upon the Soul, inclining it ro be willing and obe = whar is ſpiti- 'ormer 
Argumevt, That we underitand it of ſuch an eternal Gift,our Sa-| Quettion. The Patrons of a power in Mans Will to rp lo ation, uſt Nature 
HYA Bl Viour rather ex2umeth, tan accuſerth them for their Unbelief, by tell. | raally good and neceffary in order ro eternal Life _ —_— ture, It j 
(16 72 AM ng 16m Mey Cond not believe, becauſe they were nor given unto! derſtand it of the former only, of which the compe Ss the Goſpel live a t- 
EP oa, | x2 Ihe as frong again{t Specral Grace as againſt Particular| Luke 14.23. is to be underſtood, for the _—_ "Grawing ere May reac 
+) On” £00193 to as if that were true, 1t could be interpreted in neither| have no other Power to compel ; but 1n ___ b Maſters ; nl "Pa 5. 
© we Senivs, Put by their leaves, it doth nct ar all excuſe them, | mentioned is.the Acts not of the SErVants, but 0 Mt "—oncluded that Uier this; 
tit ry C1 whatinthem lay to come to Caritt, (bur this Que- | of the Matters, bur of the Father, it is more _—_ + of Man, by the fieſh, 
F104 belon2s rither to Poienueal Vriters, than Interpreters) Certain| it here ſignifies a Divine Power put forth upon the 50 Proreftan 


| | Seas . Ws he Heavenly Call, and willing 10 £9 abſury! 
7T 28, Mat IE 15 FCN A gIVINg nere mentioned, as ſhall be followed} which it 1s made Obedient to the Heavenly Call, aka. 


13/7 C1 
P's 4 wing 5 . . | TY 2u8 no ſuch £ang cl 11. 
Ly a comm to Chrilt ; that is, believirg in him, and by a true Faith| with rhe Offer of Chriſt in the Goſpel ; for rhoug 1 no hes Pantiarcs 


-. :< exfily CON 
rree:v.z4 0: him ; Kand thoſe thardo ſo, our Lord faith, hs will in| neceſſarily be concluded from the word araw,yct n wes is rhe caſe it 
k> t-iſ. cat 5112, Our of Heaven ſay tome ; orhers underſtand ir of | ded from the nature of the Mortion,in coming tO _— > it hath any the Lords 
Perſevermzcez but certainly the Phraſe denyteth no more than the | Souls motion to a ſublime ſpiritual Object, ro whic « Mind the ob- cur Sayio 

freenels and readinef(s of Chritft, to receive every one who traly be- \ power of it ſelf, (ſuch 1s the darkneſs of the — \ mnleſs ir be *OUt jt b 
| F ever: him, and to preſerve him to Eternzl Life and Salvatio:. {tinacy of the Will, the depravation gg ot is able of if **onuly 
k Vino whey ave that are given t Chriſt, and thar will, or ſhall believe| illuminated and drawn by the Spirit of God: Goodneſs and Excel- _ Y have 

1:3 $7, 18 2 Secret that 1s known unto God alone: Bur this may be| (elf ro diſcern ſpiritual things,ſo as ro lee that rag Participation Mw Crit, 
, Foot tall uhat Chritt will not throw ofFany Soul thar is willing ro| lency that is in them, much lefs ro move [0varys og; meer 
T0549 #41 G35 SAVIONT 3 2nd that no ſuch Soul ſhall perith for ever. | of them. ac M0 Init, v 


"ol, If, 


+ T+ 55. Writtet 
3» _ 4: 11 15 
&. 25 zi al. Y 


i; be all taught of God. Every man theretore that 
heard, and hach learned oi the Father, cometh 


L 


cer 


TREESSTTYY © 
ab in I/arah 54+ 13s or in the Book of the Prophets ; for 
to" te words be fo be tound oniy In {/.:7,1, yer words of the fame 
| iifo ro be found in Fer: miah, Exiue!, Fogel, and Micah. 
All they whom rhe Lord bath choten, ſtall be taught of God Xx; 
T' =retore ( ſuith he } {11d I ro YOu, Every man that learned of tive 
"WM F:ther, cometh unto me... Oar Saviour proveth the Doctrine which he 
Ha had delivered tO them, from the Prophets ; not becauſe thetr Antho 
rity Was greater than his, or in any degree equal with his; bur be- 
ze the Prophers and rheir Wriciags were in greater Authority and 
Repuration with them. 
45 * Not that any man hath ſeen the Father y, 
ine he which is of God z, he hath ſeen the Fa- 
ther 4. 
'” , None muſt dream that the Father ſhould viſibly appear in the 
| World toteach men : For the Ellence of God is invitible ; none 
"bart ſeen it at any time 7, faving he alone who is the only begorten 
*." Son of the Farher 4. He hath ſeen the Eiflence of the Father, he 


y 5 knowerh his Will and molt fecrer Counſels. 
47 Verily, verily, I fay unto you, He that believeth 
on me, hath everlaſting life. 


$ [ am that bread of lite. 
See the Notes on Chap. 3+ 18. and v. 36. and in this Chap. v.35 


49 * Your fathers did eat Manna in the wildernels, 


F and are dead 6. 

b Your Fathers by nature, or in reſpect of unbelief, did eat 
Mannain the Wilderneſs, and they are Narurally dead ; { Manna 
would not always preſerve their Natural Life ) and thoſe of them 
who were unbelievers are alſo dead Erernally; their eating of Manna, 
which was a Type of me, withour believing in me, would nor ſave 
thems 

50 * This 1s the bread which cometh down from 


heaven, that a man may eat thereot and not die c. 


c But I am that Bread of Life, who came our of rhe higheſt Hea- 
rens, from the Boſome of my Father, that Bread, which a man 
eateth thereof, -he ſhall never die eternally: Eating Chriſt in this 
Text Ggnitieth no more than believing in him, ſo often before men- 
tioned under the Notion of coming to him, believing in him. &c. And 
believing is fitly expreſſed by this Notion of Eatz:ng ; becauſe as eat- 
ing isthe application of Meat to our Stomachs for the ſuſtenance of 
our Bodily Life 5 fo believing is the application of Chrilt ro the 
Soul, for the beginning and increaſe of Spiritual T.ife, and ar lat 
obtaining Lite Erernal. 

3 $51 lam the living bread, * which came down from 
heavend, If any man eat of this bread, he ſhall live 

for evere: And * che bread that I will give, is my 

fleſh, which I will give for the lite of the world f. 

d Seethe Notes on ver, 33, & 35+ Our Saviour ſooften inculca- 
| ting this,and what follows, lets us ſee both how neceflary this is to be 
"SY known, and alſo how diticult the work of believing is e. Thoſe 
words, be ſhall live for ever, expoand thoſe that went before in the 
50. Verſe, that a man might eat thereof and not die f. His ſaying, 
\ Lukth that the Bread which he giverh is his Fleſi7, ex pounds what he ſaid 
before, 247. how he 1s the Bread of Life, 2:7. by giving his Fleſh, 


- - At*a / 
111WO {Ls v 
| $ port 5 


Ch 3.1 
X &. 1 
X ver. 1 
J&+ 


55 


; that is, bis Life, for the Life-of the World, that many might he fa- 
e red « Hereby ſhewing us, that the Object of our Faith is a Chriſt cru- 


cited, 1 Cor, 2+ 2, 
52 The Jews therefore ſtrove amongſt themſelves, 
39aying, * How can this man give us his fleſh to eat ? 
2 They will ſtill underſtand Spiritual things in a Carnal ſenſe ; yer 
It1s hard ro conceive how they could imagine thar Chriſt ſpake of gi- 


. 4 US, OP + 34-436 tn: 
in tie Proninets W, And they\ Life, Eternal [ifs 
4 


r 
0T b 4OVU5 71 
yo 


: 


© f 
Fd _-_ -A1 - F.- 
' 5 Þ == # F008 + UG: a, L 3 | tails Tt - 
[ ” . S- a? £ 

; 1 Bn RIO TT FEET | SSIDY Cutts cos & wy IT, 3 . p =O: 
i L+4i Sail Loot B; % c3cre W3JN " UG; is {V6 4k E by 3? [i % 'F t \* ; _ 
' ? , * ol 
| « j | in 4 &, I J . 
i 79,09 p » 0/4 ? ' #48 £8. J j'7 I, TY , £3» : + £5 | 4 + i = , * 

'S C OOTY pl EECCIS 6G ZNURINTG E120 499i vt. C3 A II's Ss s 6 & 54 A667 61 Sha; #4 ” I.» 


Ry all 
& ® 3 499" 
__ 


- DEXEVEN Ge wiicl1t is appirent, that our Saviour taiti 
NOUNS VI TNS LEFT, 04 4 Suctainent a! eating the Fleſh, and drink- 
img tie Boo of Chri:t, 
La | * 9 44 0 . #1, 4. 24 
54+ © Wholto eateth mv fff, and deinkech my boo. Cn. 4. 142 
Fe 7 OE —_ 7 ST ol pp 
hath eternal life ;, and | will raife him v2 ac the Lil 
= 
day &, 
z He hathir in a ſare and j1it Riohr ang Tic! All ov 
WF, » Nat, and Li tvigeuot and Title, and he foll nave 
itlna certain actual Potieiiion! k And in order to it. he ſhall have 


ting what was before ſaid, that by cating the Fleſh and drinking 


J 


a clearer Diſcovery than was there of the rrve Object of thar Faith 


+4+unk 


which juſtifieth, v7. a Christ crucified, for that is 6 Smed by wuC 


55 For my tie! is meat indeed, and my blood is 
diinkindeed 7. 

{ I as a Chrift crucified, not meerty conſidered as to my Divine 
Nature, but as ro both Natores united in one Perſon, and variety 
larly with reſpect ro my Death and Suffering am indeed the Foo. ci 
Souls ; not a Typical Food, as Manna was, but a true and real Food, 
which nouriſheth them to etcraal Lite ; and rhe moſt excelient Food 
tor them. In which Senſe Chri't is called, The true Light, Ch, 1.9 
and The true Vine, Ch. 15. I. 

56 He that eateth my fleſh,anddrinketh my blood ws, 
[| dwellech in me and I in him ». . 

m He that acknowledpeth and receiverh ms, tho' he ſeeth me 23 a 
Man, conliiting of Fleth and Blood, and thar perticilarly- applieth #**'* 
himſelf ro me as dying for the Sins of the World ; and commitreth is 
his Soul in all its concerns for Life and Salvation ro me, » is unied 
tro ime, and I ro hin: He1s united ro me by Faith and Love, Eph. 
3-17+1 Fohn 3, 23,24. and 4.16. And I am united to him by a 
murual Love, Cy. 14. 23-and by my Holy Spirit. As our Bread and 
Mear, which we are Nourtthed by, doth nor dwell in us, and nou- 
riſh unleſs we eat it: Soneither doth Chrift do good to any- Sol, 
unleſs ſuch a Soul as by Faith receiveth him, and believeth in him. 
Whar 1s ſaid in this Verſe makerhir evident, thar thefe Verſes cannour 
be underitood of any Sacramemal earing, for it is not rrue, that 
Chriit dwellerth in every Soul, or that every Soul dwelleth and abi- 


6 + 


f Or, 275 


deth in Chritt, who doth Sacramencally eat the Fleſh, and drink che 
Blood of Chriitt. All Unions are either Nacural or P6:t:ical Unions. 
The ſtricteſt Natural Union, 1s that of the Head and M.mbers; the 
Vine and the Branches. The {tricteit Pelztical Union, is thar of the 
Huiband and Wife, Gen. 2.24 The Union betwixt Chritt and a be- 
lieving Soul 1s ſer out by all theſe, Chap. 15.1. Epheſ. 5. 30, 31. 

Col. 1.18. For the Nature of this Union, fee Divines, who have 

wrote on this Argument. 


57 As theliving Father » hath ſent me, and I || live | Or, fr 
by the Father p; fo he that cateth me, even he {hal co#aners 
live by met{g. 

o God is often in Holy Writ called the L7vz7g God, not only becauſe 
he hath Life in himſelf, bur becauſe he is the Fountain of Life to all 
his Creatures. Chriit here declareth his Father to be the Lzving Fi- 
ther upon the latter account, as he is the Author and Fountain or all 
Life; f and T lzve by the Father, (ſaith he} Some rranilate ir fer the 
Father, as indeed the Prepoſition H2 joyned with an Accufartive 
Caſe {as it is here} doth mo{t ordinarily fgnifie ; bur not always et- 
ther in prophane Authors, or in the Dialect of Scripture, as Mark 2.4. 
and 12. 24s Chap. 4.41, 42. It ſeemeth here ( as in thoſe Texts ) 
to denote not ſo much rhe final as the eficienmCaufe ; and fo berter 
Tranſlated by than for the Father : For Chriit in this Texr ſeems to 
be giving his Hearers an account how he came to be /:v:»2 vread.and 
to be ina capacity of giving Life to the World. Saith he, I /zze by 
the Father, who by an eternal Generation hath communicated ro me 
all rhar Life which is in him ; and hath alſo communicated re me a 
quickning Power, asI am Mediator, and fent by the Father into the 
World, to give Life unto the World: Now look as I bave Life in my 
felf from him who is the Fountain of Lite, q fo according to the Fa- 
thers Ordinatton, he that eaterh me ( thar is ) by a true Faith re- 
ceiveth and cloſeth with me as Mediator, he fhall by me live both 
Spiritually and Eternally. | 


58 Thisis that bread which came down irom 
not as your fathers did eat Manna, ani a! 
He that eateth of this bread, ſhall live ior e- 
7 There is no more ſaid in this Verſe, rhan {. 49, 59, 51. See tne 
Notes on thoſe Verſes. From this whole Diſcourſe 1t 1s 25 evident as 
the Light, Thar the Juſtification of a Soul depentera upon believ- 
ing ; and the Spiritual Life of the Soul, tlowerh not from Love or 
Obedience to the Works of the Law, bur from Faithin Jetus Chit : 
Tho' it be true,rhat true Faith cannot be withour Works;and no man 
withour Obedience in fincerity, (tho' not in perfection ) ro the Will 
of God, ſhall ever obtain etern2] Life and Salvation; but thisMoecience 
is not Faith, nor doth nor enter into the Jufitacztien oi the Soul, buL 
is the certain and neceſfary product of that Faith which juttuhets, 
which cannor be ju{tified: as irue and ſaving, withour Oveutence. In 
all this Diſcourſe there is no mention of Love or Obedience, ro whici 
the Promiſes of Lite everla.iing, and a joyiu! Refurrection are 10 of 
ren made ; bur only of eating Chritt, Earzzig bis Flejio, and avrimReng 
hi Blood : Eating him as the bread which cam? down jrom Hoa: 77,090 
which arePhraſcs no way expre._iive of Obediciice to the works of tie 
Law, but of believing.v. 47, 43,49. The orace Texts of Scrtprure 
make it plain enough, that there can be no believing witnout OMCy- 
ing, nor any eternal Lite and Salvation obtataed without bot. 

59 Theſe things laid he in the Synigogue, as bs 
caught in Capernaum {. : 


{ Tho” the ftace of the Few: Cura at this time was Co rf 


heaven 
vead r: 


” 0 
On 
% 


"4-4 of 


3 


1 | 
h vinz them his Fleſh to eat, as men eat the Fleſh of Oxen or Sheep ; 
ny but which way ſoever they did underſtand it indeed, their captions 
0 Temper inclined them ro conceal any other Senſe they had of ir, and 
ids torepreſent what our Saviour (aid, as exc*eding abſurd. 
ell 53 Then Jeſus faid unto them, Verily, verily, I ſay, 
+ Unto you, Except * ye cat the fleſh of the Son of mat 
Cr # Cat and drink his blood, ye have no life in you 6. 
im - / þ The ſhort and true Senſe of theſe words is, that without a true 
believing in the Lord Jeſus Chriſt, as he who died for our Sins, no 
- man hath any thing in him of true Spiritual Life, nor ſhall ever come 
NN tO eternal Life, Here are two Queſtions ariſe from this Verſe and 
ſt what follows. 1+ WPhether the fleſh of Chrift, that is,bu Humane Na- 
ance "re, giveth Life 2 or, all our Life floweth from the Divine Nature : 
"he Tharis a Queſtion betwixt the Lutherans and the Calrinits, the 
yt _ aftirming, that there 1sa quickeningVertue in the Humane 
"an- ure of Chriit, by vertue of its Perſonal Union with the Divine Na- 
ned ure. It sa curions Queſtion, ſerving to no greatEdification, thoſe who 
aſpe _ 4 mind to be ſatisfied in it.and to read what is ſaid on either ſide, 
here CI Tarnovius on this Texr,and Ranchy, in his Book de Incarna- 
nol 340 The other is a Queſtion betwixt the Papiſtsand us, Whe- 
| chat - "18 ang the following Verſes ſpake any thing about the eating of 
1, by ay eſp, and drinking the Blood of Chriit in the Sacrament. All 
clole yh S Janes deny it, both Lutherans and Ca/viniſts, The Papiſts moſt 
7 Clin | wt alirm ir,ro maintain their molt abſurd Doctrine of Tranſ1:b- 
aclu- wo ation, The vanity of their Afſertion,as to this Text appears,1Be- 
is 18 4 wg: a Year and upwards after this, before the Sacrament of 
h any mae 5->Upper was in{uruted, and it is very abſurd ro think that 
e ob- ; 1710ur ſhould ſpeak of an Inſtitution not in being ; his Doctrine 
. ir be Woes being whar ir was tmpo{iible People ſhould under{tand. Nor 
e of il OY 15 the Propofition true, of Sacramental eating ; for many 
pxcel- if © : w_ never Sacramentally eaten the Fleſh, and drink the Blood 
pation S my and yer he fpirirually alive,and be ſaved eternally. Betides 
Criſp © Macramental eating the Fleſh, and drinking the Blood of 
r-*M hg WE mor give Life, But the £atine here ſpoken of, giverh | 


eaous 1. both as ro matters of Doctrine, Worthip any Up 
l CEE AY | & 


Y 
- —_ 


Wh 
z 


ag 4% 


4 
— 


_ 


_— 
WS4. % + 


Fo 


- EY wm 


s - « 
8 Re Q 0 - 
w h _ = by WR hs - b- 
94% Wn OI Bs IB WEIR" Py 47% £3” 2037 Wo 
V 4 4 > - - " 


_ 


In. I——_— — 
0 - " 
$a - 
. 


_ 
ry 
< 


ws 
— ——__—_ ——— 


S. F 0 


h>ligved not, and who ſhould betray him 4 


Yo y 
iq be S Eoin gh Chitin bs Tater, ke Gig 193; Jecine their fon 
ea at rnrte Temile a: Hrornſalent, of inthe Places Or L2e puy: 
"ny __ ICH Were 0 lint SUNSPNTEECS, an wEre borh in tag:r 
; ities ; fob ic had a liberty to Teach in them, as ap 
tit bo 13 Us and many other Terms; WA) he ACCUratnge 
Iv wed, and ? ity ſnenc ine EabBarh, Or a great Part thr n TOI, 
Lies and Alembies yer by Ws Prejzence he no Way OWNEU Or oy 
A : ing Ave 4tley OT T:-ir COrrEprons, but Irequent:y anc 
v reno them only beemwe of hoſe Suprriitious Impertt 
roces, Cine benz at $15 0: 19 Idalarry praK:ied an "Ng: them) 
reid nn dil an wit was of God his Father among nem : Toe 
{me Dentice wa ſhillobierve aimongtt the Apoitiles, ullzhe gig 
Ceglared themiclres wardiced, arave tem out f on __ IJUIZORHES 
at tk ol ofthe way of the Cofvei befere the multitude, ACLSI 95 
_ Live, 213 N95 botore, Pau ſeperated The Dilciples, Gitpu- 
to Olin the Schon ot one Tyrannys. This allo is farther 10 be 
ehleryed in he Practice of our Saviour, Thar altho he went ro the 
en oe ond gh Syrg1 17925, And There joyned with the Fewſt Wor- 
{ MING BY 1341S | Father by and reproved ( as he had OCcation | 
j { EL! O78 LEY hag imn:roguced «2 luper-addcd yet he dla 
Foo iow bun hunfelt Teaching the Goſpci in oruer places beſides the 


the Spare Tie Evangelitt alſo noreth, that the Sz- 
ne where be taught theſe things. Was 18 Caper dum. a City of 
7 oo which in this was ex.2/2c.4 ty Heaven; Nat it had not only the 
+1 reached in it, but by Chriit bimfelt ; bat Tor the Contempt 
bw Botel ie {nce brouone 07999 20 Tiell,'s muci debaicd as 1t was 
9h 6nd -o {ince reduced 10a poor inconliderable 


» P Es ” ſn 
Gre exalted, being loig inc ; AF "WEBAS 
'« day uncer The Iramry Of the Norumeran Princes 
$ + & Lott, S —_ 


{» 


(>,*'5; 
(ety? 
Oc 73 
t. 
Pluce, 222d | 
Many therefore of bis GHcpies ft, ren they had 
F--370d 4-76 (Lid, Thi is an hard fayt ig fo Can hear 1c #?! 
* {yliowers, not thoſe that were lis DActpics indecd, bur in 
- ir rant followed hun £:4dt 01:4 OL CE'ttyE mM IM 5 and 
(ing {ent ) begcoed, £9 whom he dil; nut commit bimfelt 
3,24. Now many of theſe Diſciples, having heard tneſe 
49 bing no way abls 10 compretend fo great Myeries, 
- jap ng ih Eves opencd Ly the +p.rit 0! fiumination, fail 
within memnſeives. # Theſe are ſayings harc 37 impo.1ihle, to be 
, ate 10 bear 12ein r ' 00 
| (wr When jetas knew in himiclf, that his difciples 
Murimured atitzy he faid unto them, Dorn this ol-} 
{end you x 2 ; 
© Chril tho! clothed with our Fleſh, yet being alſo the Ecernal 
Cn of (G28, knew by vertne of his Divine Natrvre, Perfonaily Uni 
to the Humane Nature, what w:is in the ticart of Mie: : hence is 
this Phraſe, kocw 71 mane ; wiich 1s 0/pTſce 50 4 know icdge elncr 
trom the beartng of his own Ears, as ian heareth ; 1CLIIEF 1495 C 
mnmeGatcly from the found of their Words. (tor wr 2a U; wutnng 
they fpake audibly) or from the relation G& ohers. as v hat chey 
Had hard ; be knew in himſelf their Thiaghts by 015 Divine Pre v- 
vative and Property ci ſearching the Hoarts, and trylog te Retos 
and diſc2rning the Thoughts of men afar oIt, x Knowing their 
Thoughts, ke 1a:th, Doth this give ou OCcanon of itumbling © 
62 Thhat and it ye {att {22 the Son of man aſcens 
up * where he was xloie 7 f _ 
- Our Svicur by theſe words may ſeem rather to increaſe than to 
abate their Otience. Thar which ſtumble them, was þ1s calling a1im- 
x {elf rhe vread of E200; his athrining, That be came down from H-aven, 
Tat iecare ine 70 the Woris, Thar the way to obtain this Lite 
Pen © = was caring his Fleſk and drinking his Blood : How doth what be nov 
tclis them any way tend to farisfie them 2 He now ſpeaks of ajcenc- 
ing up to Heaven and atterteth that he was there betore. ſw. The 
tor mer aficrtior's were no way to be juititied, but upon this Founda. 
tion, that rio ne 2ppear'd now in the form and ſhipe of a Man. 
and was indee: the Son of Man, yet he was alſo God, the Erernal 
<on of God ; he therefore here plainly afſerts thar, rhar he was in 
icaven beiore he appeared asthe Son of Man upon the Earth ; and 
deſcending trom thence, did aſſume rhe form of a Servant; and for 
: further Proot of this, he relerreth them to what they were to ſee 
ur hcar, (ro know ) within fome few Manths after this Diſcourſe 
( tor this was after lis thzrd Paſſover, which was to be the lait Year 
©; 4:35 Life ) v:z7. That he ſhonld afcend up to Heaven, which it is 
very probably that ſome of them did fee with their Bodily Eyes, for 
{12 was in Gattlee when he aſcended,and Capernaum was a City of that 
110744.ce, and when he afcended,rhe men of Galz/ee ſtood gazing up 
13 He.ven after him, as appeats from A&s 1. 11. and had a Revelatt- 
11, 347 they ſhould fee him fo come again, and deſcend from Hea- 


gu 
Vo 


* 2 O87 4 yen as they hail feen tum go up. 
6. 03 * jt is che Spirit tnat guickneth 2, the fleit pro- 
fi.ch nothing a; te words that I ſpeak unto you, rhe; 
are ipiiit, and ibey are lite 6, . 
2 As ir is nor the Bread or Fleſh that a man eateth for the ſaſten- 


anceor fis Atinal or Natural Life, that doth the main work, bur 
he Soul of aman within him ; which putrerh torth its Vertues and 
For ers 13 Cauting the Digeition, Cencoction, and alteration of it ; 
V Anon winch it nountheth not the Body © 4 So the Fleſh of Chritt 
£197 Cariniiy, can be of no profit for the Nouriſhment of the Sou]; 
ror e2n the Fleth of Chrit confidered alone, or by any Vertue in 
pron iz only profiteth by Vertae of the Divine Nature;which 
Fern Prifonaily unted tothe Humane Netrreaddeth allo theVeriue 
a1 Mew to the Suferinzs and Attions of the Humane Nature ; fo 


#5776 F342: e Netare of Chitit hath all itz quickning Vectue from 
We Cenino Noture, Tris not therefore ( ſaith Chriit ) the Cirnal 


earng oi my Fleih that I wrended, rhat is a very groſs Conception of 
Yours 5 Dur Can any fach ting as that do you good : Bur the words 
tat I lpear ro you they are Spirtrual.and ſuch by the belief of which 
You may Gotaimn a Spiritual and Eternal Lite: Fer by believing 
I2vie WOrgs, and obeying them, you ſhall come ro believe in ine, 
V3 GS WAL eating my Fleſh, and drinking my Blood which I in- 
tE!eu 3 BI any Corporeal or Carnal eating, ; 

© BUT QNSTU AIC HANS Of YU That belizze not c< For 


| *” 
i7 N Cha 
A \« TY {\ 
v 3.-& 
4 &. 
* T.f.. naw fron, tie beginning, whn how | 
Fvitls &incV Li tjzn Law * v3 w__ VV £3: UiCy 


Q 


SS,» |} Re” oo! y p LL, I 73 - a _ . 5 o 
not qQuicxc. N} al! bl it Oy QUICKNECEN V homtoever It pleaferh d] ou 111%. 


deriand nor theſe things, bur have moit groſs Conception of fn, 


lime Spiritual things; the reaſon is, beczule you beltere nor 1hv 
ame of them queitionleſs did rruly believe, yer the moſt 6g buy 
for weread, v. 66 That many of them wene back, ard wa. .? 
1:78 mith him, d And though Faith be an inward fecrer Af oy 
Soul. yer Chritt knew, and from the begining, who were Beljegs. 
and who werenort ; nay he had a particular knowledze of tha: iy f 
ciple who was to tetray hum. : Wy 
65 And he ſaid, Therefore ſaid I unto you, that yg, 
M313 Can Come unto. me, Cxcepr it be given unto tir 
of my Father e. 

e He faid this, v. 44+ See the Notes on that Verſe, 

66e] From that ttme many of his difcipies went hyoy 
and walked no more with him g. M 
F His Diſciples ar large, fo called, becauſe they followed him part. 
ly to hear what he would ay, partly to ſee his Miracles, follow 
him no more : Many Profetlors and feeming Diſciples of Chriit, 
draw back and fall from their Profeſſion, rtho* none thar truly receiy: 
Chriſt ſhall fall away, bur be by the Power of God preſerved through 
Faith unto Salyation. _ : 

67 Then faid Jeſus unto the twelve, Will ye alſo rg 
2way h? 

h It is probable that ſome ſtayed beſides the Twelve; for it is\1;} 
only that many of his Diſciples turned back. Nor was our Siwjoy; 
{ who knew the Hearts of all } ignorant whar they would do ; bur!;. 
had a mind both to try them by this Queſtion, and alſoro conving; 
them rhar there was a falſe Brother amonglt them whoſe Wickedn: 
(cho? ir lay hid from rhem) would in a ſhort time diſcover it ſelf 
68 Then Simon Peter an{wered him,Lord, to whow 


z Peter,whois obſerved in the whole Hiltory ofthe Goſpel, to hare 
iſcover'd rhe horteſt and quickeſt Spirit, and ts have been firlt in n- 
"weri.s Queitioas propounded to the Twelve, as Mat. 16. 16. & 
Repli!s, Lor1 whither ſhall we go, ©c ? thereby reaching us undsr 
Tempzations to Apoſtacy, fit ro conſider whar we ſhall getby i, 
25 the tollowmny words teach us, rhat an abiding with Chrilt in 


| {teady adherence tothe Truths of his Goſpel, is the belt choice tha 


Wwe Can make. ; 
£9 * And ws believe, and are ure that thou artthats 


k We believe, (faith Peter) and art ſure, both from what we hae 
heard from thee, and from the Miracles which we have ſcen wrougtt 
by thce, that thou art the Chra#t the Son of the living God. The 
very words by which St, Matthew, Chap. 16. 16. exprefieth tha 
noble Confetiion of bis which our Saviour calleth the Reck tm 
ich he would build hy Church. Burt notwithitanding this acknos- 
i-5gment, which ſpeaks the Seeds of this Faith now fown in the 
Hezrt of- c:er, and the Hearts of the reſt ; yer whoſo confidereth 
'nc Fa{lg-'s of the other Evangeliits afrer this, will ſee reaſonto 
befieve hat their Perſwation as to this was bur faint, till Chriſt by 
his Reſurrection declared himſelf the Son of God with Power, 


twelve, 2nd one of you is a Devil ? [3 

4 Che/en, not to Eternal Life ; but to the greatOffice of an Apoſtle 
[ choter> but Twelve amongitt you, Mat.10. and of thoſe Twelveor 
is N4Con&,, an Accujer, or Informer ;, a Name by whieh the D:wl 
(who 1s ihe grand Accuſer of the Brethren ) is ordinarily expreſſed 
in Holy Writ. | 

71 > ſpake of Judas Iſcariot, the ſoz of Simon », for 
he it was that ſhould betray him, being one of ci 
twelve o. 

22 This he ſpake of Fudas 1/cariot ( fo called, as moſt think from 
the Name ot the City where he lived) and to diſtinguiſh him from 
the other Fudas, the Brother of Fames, who wrote che Epiſile that 
goeth by his Name, and is a part of Holy Writ : Foro he beingo#? 
of the Twelve, choſen and ſent out with the reſt to Preach the Gol- 
pel, and impower'd by Miraculous Operations to confirm the Tt! 
of it; yer it was he that was to betray Chriſt, as we largely read n 
all the Eyangelifts relation of the Paſſion. To teach us, That "8 
Office to which God callerh us, no Gifts ( except thoſe of Specil 
Grace ) with which God blefleth any man, can fecure him of n 
eternal happy State, nothing can do that bur a true ſaving Faith in 
Jeſus Chriit, with the Obedience of an Holy Life becoming rhe Gob 
pel of Chritt. 


CHAP, VI. 


Feſus walketh in Galilee, where hx Brethren ash him to go t0 theFelf 
at Feruſalemwith hy Anſwer, 2--9. but afterward goes private Y, 
10--13. and teacheth in the Temple, juſtifying hu Doctrine? ” 
the Miracle which be wrought on the Sabbath-day, 14-24 Foy 
ſeveral Opinions of the People concerning Chrif, 25-29- TheC " 
Prieft and Phariſees lay ſnares to hill Chrift, 30 -32, Chrit pe 
miſeth the Holy-GhoFt to Believers, 33--39- The Adeſſonger! ” 
were ſent to Chrift return without him, v extolling by Doctrine, 
40--46. Wherefore the Phariſees are at variance, 47 53» 


: . E or 
Frer theſe things, Jeſus walked in Galiee a, : 
he would not in walk Jew:y b, becaule the}Jz\ 
ſought to kill him c. _ 
a After the third Paſſover, which happened after our SA4vIOUr ol 
entred upon his pablick Miniſtry, of which we read C47, 5. * gi 
all thoſe things which we read of, C19p. 5, and 6. done by m_ _ 
our, both art the Feaſt ar H:eruſalem, Ch. 5- and after he v hich 
Galilee, Chap. 6.1. and had made thar excelent Diſcourſe, 0 ol 
we hada large Account, Chap. 6. Jeſus continued {i111 to cone 


. . F - b +} Te1 {1 y 
in Galilee, where be was, b for he would not go 1N'9 5 —_ 


Chriſt the Son of the living God &. n 


70 J<ſis antwered thein, * Have I not choſen /yous 1; 


Wore Vita © A 
vec al , 3" 


.” "po "I f p i ® }; 3 Da - 1 a : 4 TY - 
c I moy fay wharl will to you ; rae Spirit quickneth, by: it doth 13. 1;, 


hall we go ? thou haſt * the words of eternal life ;, *v; 


1 
pr 2-3 


51, 14 


j 6 
than his 


20 Upa 


9, 2O je; 


| 


+ [if i ; 7 S 4 8 
A "3? OLA a0u 6 2 
* an BA V iT. S. F O H IN, Cap: YET, "il Ch f " 14*F 
Y —_ : - Vas Ps {OTE + 
; © ennverſe there, c becauſe rheFews,for the Cauſes mentioned, Chap.| ing of the Apoſtles: And therefore Chrift faith tin that pla-o) thar i b l Fil th | 
Os ©. 18. ſought 20 kall cim: They had two things as appeareth from| 7t hated him before it hated chem. C':rilt fir publiſhed the Doctrine JR to {1 7 
4,58 cence azaintt Nite 1. Hrs v10/1tion of the Sabbath, as they thouzhr.| of the Goſnel, and fo becane the tipit Ohic& of tie Worlds hatred 3H fl oy vt: 4.4 
2. 1, ky healing him that lay at tne Pool of Beche/da. 2» Hy making | on that account. Theſe his Brethron were nor concerned that we 2 Ha! 4" Y 
lumyjelf equal with the Father. read of ar this time in the Pallication of it, nw 12d any OCCafmm Oy ; lh Mi i " Mf 
, * Now the Jews ſeaſt of tahernacles was at hind 4. |a&* n errielves known, and odious ro the World upon thar_ac- pu yi 4-8 
00 : . 4 be ount, therefore he faith, c5e Morld, (the wicked Fes here fo called 4; þ 01; 4 
[: d Tie Feat of Tabernacles was a Feaſt which God ordained the|conid not he reaſonably imagined to have any ſoiphr aber LIT | '7 
J cews to keep the fifteenth Day of the ſeventh Month, ( which ſome reem. - Bur ſaith he, me 5+ Nh a pe A = BOL! 3158 
ike 19 anfwer our September, others our Ottober ) Lev.23« 34-39.| we meet with, Ci-ap. 5 18. » Bur his ns ba gt * Fane Kh k.\ 
fer icy had gathered in the Fruits of the Land. Tt was to be kept | Chriſt, bur only for his Preaching the Doctrine of ti Gr F Dy 8 | 81! | IE 
f von davs, the firtt and laft of which Days were ro be kepr as Sab- | # 5 : - 2 ogg me Lopes. ene 0087) | 3; 
yen Ca) l | | tree Reproving them for the evil of their Works, the corrianrio:: 1 RFI | * 
Lacks ; they WETE all rhe ſeven Days to dwell in Tents or Booths, in| of their Doctrine, and the Errors cf their Life 2nd Comneeari. KT 118 ORG. | (FAT 
171m Dbrance of the _ Years they ſo _ in the 2 cok atk : t "B81 be jþ Þ 
no from Ezypt to Canaan, as we read there v. 43. Now this . i We 
_— Was _ at hand ; fo as we muſt nnd Treg fol- 5 Go ? phe ——_ this feait 0, Igo noe up. Yee uno ity: Pi 1. 
iawing to have happened about rhe Sep:ember or October before this feaſt p, * for my time is not yer full come q, OD, | RAE f 
Ciritts Sufftring, which was at the next Paſſover ; thar is, the March| »o Let nor my forhearance to go up, hinder your going up accord- W ATM ee 4 
| or 4pri! following, as we count the Months. mg tothe Law. p I have ſome particular Reaſons, why as yer 1 lk Lt Hy 
ys His brethren e therefore ſaid unto him, Depart — cnere a = _ { 3 know any ficns b: | Wt! "ws" 
. K.3-5-* "A 1 G1 , | 30A Þ or me. I that be PS EI11-41 af} 
| [1 14+ NCC) and S ene J row ya thy diſciples alſo may |'1.re ome time during the Feaſt, but my time is not ver come. I BER (ft FF 
fee the WO! Ks that thou Joe If ſhall nor be there ar the beginning of it, v. 14+ it appeareth that he Ae. NOW 2 tf 
; + His Friends and Kindred ; fee the Notes on Mat. 12. 47, 48-| came nor into the Temple till about the middle of ir, which was War N! 4. 
G f Either ſach as did believe in him, or ſuch as did nor believe, for| three or four Days after ir was began, for it held ſeven Days, 427. Wit POIROT 
. 5. all of them 01d not believe in him, would have him leave Ga-|23. 33. 34. Or his time was not yet come, becauſe he defigned to ::0 Js MS 7 
; ize, which was the far more obſcure and ignoble part of the Coun: |very privately without any notice taken of his coming ; which mutt Nt Ws. 
| try, ard go into Fudea, which was the more noble and famous Pro- |haye been, if he had at that time gone up with his Kindred and RS i 5; 
vince; 72at thoſe who in that Province followed him, might alſo| Acquaintance. if 3B. 
k ſee the Miracles which he wrought. 9 When he had ſaid theſe words unto them, he a- UM-th, kf 2 
v For there is no man 2hat doeth any thing in ſecret, [bode #41] in Galilee y. | oi 4d 
2 and he himſelf ſeeketh to be known openly g: If thou} 7 He ler them rake their Journey to Hiernfaln to the Feaſt withs HMLEIR NF 
p lotheſe things, ſhew thy ſelf to the world h. out him, and himſelf {1:11 abode in Ga//lee. OWL 
. ” fs ON 
 Thethings which thou doeſt, thou doeſt our of a defire by them] T9 | But when his b-e Nren were gone 17, then , im yigl , Wl 
wo to b! made known, and ro ſpread thy own Fame and Glory. For|went he alſo up unto the tait /; not openly, bat as ir WS! bs! 
hy this Galzlee is not a proper Place, becauſe it 1s an obſcure part in the| were in ſecrete, I $96 8; 
"6 Country. The Phraſe which we Tranſlate, to be made known, is| { He went up to ſhew his Obedience to his Fathers Commands, [9-116 
iN inthe Greek, ey Teppnoia ave; The uſage of it here ſeemeth to be| £904. 23.17. The Feaſt of Tabernacles, was the ſame with the oh (FIR! 
Gs ſorething different trum the ule of it in other places of Holy Writ. | Feag of in-gathering in the end of the Tear, whenthey had gathered an. /s 0G | 
jr Ir ſometime fgnifies confidences and ſecurity 3 and we Tranſlate it| -hezr Labours out of the Field, mentioned, Ex. 23. 16. and that w: is {Hi 
* boldneſs, ACts 13. 45. and 25. 25. and 28. 31. Phzl. 1. 20. Heb. 3.6.one of thoſe three times, ( as appears from thar Chapter } when al WH 
y and 10. 19+ But this cannot be the ſenſe of this Text ; tor 1t were no |+he Males in Iſrael were to appear before the Lord, v. 17. Chriit be- & 1, 1 1 
bt ſenſe ro read 1T, ſeec ct h to be known boldly, confidently, or (ecurely : ing born under the Law, ſhewerh a punctual Obedience ro it, and Fl HANS | 
Sometimes we Trantlate it openly, as in this Text; and Ch. Il. 54«|therefore in Obedience to ir, he would go up; but his Wiſdom dwelt FW 3. 6-1, PO 
nat and Co/.2. 15+ It ſometimes tignifierh a f' reedom of Speech, Acts 2-29- | with Prudence, and therefore # he did nor go up op:uly, nor in any RET! 7. 
and 4+ 13+ 2 Core 7+ 4» SOMETIMES 1L Ggnifieth clearneſ# and plaineſi| crgud of Company, fo as a publick norice conld be taken of him ; jl 16,5. 1 
ye of Speech, Civ. 19. 24» and I1: 14. Sometimes it fignifieth a ſpeaking bur ſecretly, to teach us, that we are nor fo ttrictly tied up ro Ritual 4 He. 
ht ;n publick Meetings, as inMark, 8.32. Ch.18. 20, Dr. Hammond notes Precepts, which concern only Rites and Circumttances of Worſhip, bh, ALY 
The that it alſo ſometimes ſignifies eo ſpeak with Authority, Acts 4. 29,31. |rhat we may not abare them ſometimes for the performance of Moral i Vit | 
tha and Eph. 6.19, Certainly the word inits primary Signification fig-| Duties, Ir was a Moral Duty incumbent upon our Saviour to pre- AN es 
ifon nifierh a freedom and boldneſs of Speech, which freedom and bolaneſs|ſerye himſelf with what Wiſdom and Prudence be could. from the NG. ft 
O- is neceſſary to him that ſpeaketh openly, and in publick Meetings ;|rage of his Enemies, till his time ſhowd fully come to yield up him - RS ball 48! 
the and is advantaged by the Authority which any Man hath to ſpeak: |ſelf to their Rage ; which was the reaſon why he, who went up now | WK 
reth Hence in a ſecondary Senſe ir may tignifie both zo ſpeak with Au-|fingly, without any Company, when he went up to the laſt Paſſo- By 149 
n to thortty, and alſo to ſprakin publick Aſſemblies 3 and this laſt, I take ver, where he was to ſuffer, went up with all imaginable Boldne(s WORE 5 
t by to be here ſignified. Ir is as our Sayiours Friends tell him, both] ang afacrity, leading the way, to their Amazemant, Mar. 10. 32» \ 91-0 EG 
3painit Reaſon, and the ordinary Courſe of the World, for men de- Then * th Cinabur tl fad # | He, 
yous | frous of Opportunities to ſpeak boldly and freely in publick Afſem-| _ It en tne yowne ougnt mim at ene icatt andy, . 1.36 JH 19 
blies, t0-kecp themſelves in obſcure Places, where are no ſuch Pub- laid, Where 1s he x : MR | If 
"Mm lick Aſſemblies. þ They theretore adviſe him, that 1f indeed he] "2 Qur Saviours conſtant going up to the Few:ſſ Fealts. made the bir HE | 
0! vronghr theſe Miraculous Operations, and were able to produce|Rulers of the Fews, who ſought to {lay him, Ch. 5. £3. at the Fat 0 i : 
oo ſuch Efects, he would not bury up himſelf and his a inf of the Paſſover, (which was bur fix Months before this ) becaute he 4 WH. (ES: > 
4d ſuch an hole as Galz/ee, but ſhew himſelt ro the more noted and Fa-| haq violated rhe Sabbath, ( as they interpret his healing the Impo- i bf $f 
M mous part of the World, which was, (as to that part of the World)] rent man on that Day, and bidding him take up his Bed and walk ) Wi Ms! 
{ Hieryalem,, and at the Feaſt now, where multitudes of the People| and becauſe he had made himſelf equal with God his Father,as Ch. : WK | 
LO would be to Celebrate the Feaſt of Tabernacles. . : 5. 18, ſeek him the firſt days of the Feait, ſpeaking of him with MIS 2-50Þ -: 
Us 3 $5 For * neither did his brethren believe in him. great contempt and ſlight. Mg 
i Not all his own Friends and Kindred 3 he came not only a-| 12 And * there whs much murmuring amongſt ne vo 9.15: "$/ i 
from mongſt his own Country-men, but amongſt his own Relations,and | people concerning him w: For * ſome ſaid, He iz a g ; | 19: 300. 
ay they received him not: Or if they had ſome Opinion of him, good man, others ſaid, Nay, but he. deceiveth the * Mar. 21. WHIRL 
p wo 2nd ſome little hopes concerning him, yer they did nor believe as people x. 46. WIE 
Gi os ons ro INES. Py _ / _— — w Our Saviours conſtant attendance ar theſe publick Feſtivals.did Luke 7-16: WT 7 
Truth = "_ Om CEN, © guage he ems a Gaſol not only creat an expectation of his being there amonglt his Ene- Ch2Þ.S- 74  pf:cih 
read Dore, ret Sons, mw To - + che Toes. Wis a ok mies, who therefore ſought him there, rhar they might deiiroy him ; Vere 4: YT 
hat 18 TS s. oe ling enourh to hive believes | 295 nel the generality of the People, who had very ditferenr FAY 
Special gag ow _ o ir = © dengan ge : Ne World res: Opinions abour him. X Sorne having heard his Doctrine, and hear- 3 1TR 
n of Honour of th ie =—_ how ſo far inclined them ) Ir - ing nothing from him but what was good and ſpiritual, tending to LRRne 
Faith in in olfib! h ye _—_— 2 hers ſhould have had-greater extermal ſhew them the way of Holineſs, and the true Path-way to Eternal NH IR 
ne Gol oo tos © hoc Aomori p i 2] Lite and Happinefs, concluded that he was a good man: Others f.19, | 6 8RP": | þ 
cars, Aids, and Affiftances for their Faith, than Chrilis Preaching |1Þ. ul 1 meer Impoſtor, one that deceived and cheated the more ' aht46 54 M8 
mo_ them, and confirming - Doctrine op — mans ionorant common People, RB 
Cns before them 2 If now they had Power in their own Wi1lls,to have . ' 2+ Ste. WB--11 f 
lookt upon Chriſt as the a Meſſiah, and Saviour of the World ; r3 Howbeit, no man ſp ake Gpemy of him, * for tea: Ch. 9. 22 V1 2NY 
HheFedf and accordingly to have received and embraced him ; what was of the Jews y. aa F tn. EIS Ba R 
-joatels, the matter they believed mor, or as yer; at lealt they believed not in| I Tho' many, both of the Gaileans, among whom he had con- g. , ., 4, WES 
el oY RE Ch nor fo atr ENS in wel Rigs "0-0 
l ' *Ma 3c nor ver [nion of Chriſt, yer the Rulers ems \ ge a- oy: 
Ty oy i Then Jeſts Laid yo them, my. tine: 5-108 Es ain{t him rl, ro durit not freely diſcourſe rheir Toougits 'Y. 
the Chit] comet, hut your time is already /. - - "A. 
Ns Weg Das y PPE Yep concerning him. Ws 13 
713} { The time of my Death, (ſay ſome) of my manifeftation ro the » THE 4. 
pers 194 Vorld, ſzy others ; bus quetiionleſs our Saviour intends no more] 14 © Now about the midlt of the feaſt, Jeius went 17 198 
Doctrine, _ bis time for going up to this Feait, for we ſhail read thar he did up into the Temple and taught -M Th WT at | 
3” . wt "Patterward ; bur (fairh tie ) as yer | canmor go up, / you may] About the third or fourti Day of the Feaſt { which conti:-d "ft Bis ' Mo-ge?! 
PT /- 2011 you pleeſe : And this be further openeth, ſaying. ( Y D -Lord being (as we ſaid before) come up privately my: i: TEEN 
we 7 *The world cannot hate you w, bur me ic haterh, | a eur nn come | Meri; 4 HAT l 
ne Jo) 4 IY agg CY , *SEt>land by itealth as it were, to Hzieryfaiem, tirft appears 1a the Lemp.s 4 AIP | [1 
-Calig 1 teftifie of it, that che works thereot are Preaching. What our Savioue at this time Diſcourted abour, 1:15 i} 40 ls iy Wilt 
fioar had Py Evangelitt doth nor tell us ; bur doubtleſs ir was the things of the 1-718 tf C "A 
5. I an! & World ; our Saviour plainly underſtanderh the men of |King:lom of God, which were the uſual Themes or onthe” rt TIT aTIR Ti 
or Sav'- * W010; men not Regenerated, Renewed, and Sanctified. Theſe [his Diſcourſe, as we may allo un.er itznd by the larter rung | 443 4610 NY, 
wenT 1:3:0 fm faith oe, Cannot as yer hare you ; there wasa time afterward Our Lord probably deferred [11s Preacnng LO The miidle of ine awed: 4; iN Me b W134 
of whici ; en Ulls p.rt ef the World haced all the Diſciples of Chriit;as Chriſt partly, becauſe the Pharzſees hear in TRRTnR after _— —_ F j Wir! | PY; 
) Converts - OG Ci 15. 1%. but that was after the DoCtrine of the Goſpel |lirtle over ; and that there might bs 2 juller concourls of People is it | 1 ij} FU 
ule, nh IM Preached, and made known Io the World by the Preagh» | hear hun. - | WW ! F 83/8 4 
Conver's ; T5 Ad A LORIN 
4 Sf | : f 


'147T 


_ 
+ 


q 
> po. - 

bat ps Z 
7 — 


ens 4 
para: hr hs 

- A Ts hs 

PLS Tu, a ; 


F 7 $4 4 
Ci 
7 oF 
"i. F 
a 
7 
. ne 2 8 
' ” ; 4 EY. 
ED # F7Y V 


ve 
Ny g cnt 
X i) . 
malt a*cy 
Lu 'T, 3U 34 b 
* [ HOU 3. 10:% " 
, | 5 - _=_ Q hs be 
: Q __ 2 6 os leg himſelf, a 
-/ x © Þ- *19 i2CC nelides * So as i 
n{vet 1:1 TIN. | P3Yuee < vill _ 
4 < 4 13h - "()} a p yaa; 'S i IT y " we Wi ine 
q p $ Yue 4 ! % UL va iels A 1K 4 
SURE 001010; WHO 1 on We MUnarily ec 
ry < * kane” OM {1 alt that 1 W3L!! Mad, ve 27's ny 
_ > $4 OFORtH] . Ot, M enove: arr ' 1% * Neap all) fl 
L 018-4 PONLoL ELTON 20U 32 Ucn 7 ley 0 
I, es J wH9 x } an o_ J8 VN it1 wm uc when aovaniing 's otl 
Y 2 of 4 2( 2 ; \ a4 wer! . Wer . © * ac bY ne \n: 
wer | IQViE 2, Forr's acted, » more ; Rep Pa.3i0ns ernthy, forme: ” 0 he 
oy kno The Fditrath 1s term © thei ty with ; the ering wk ct | 
H 3 o the | { led [i {EVE newer ——_ in Fs Wa 1 = non Peapte - (0 | 
Vino, 2 any _ is |and es ut 4 fe as 3 \ forme Py no-ct Devel rs enougi ommo! As Gelign car 
0, tail vl a 4 Sung ICU, Thou bh: Phra; roin tc Lat we D is (in e C9 2 of "#4 the? _ 
oo? oe Fu 1 oc o” 46 of 2, gh O'! [ . : Le wy day oy —_— 7 6 : wy that CES ap} 
I. ' "% » = "yy : \# & ( ' 011 ” 2 £ == Ls Tat \ L:31S "2 1 1 _ ' 1 "A it _ ' : HC. W ' - 1 \ Wo ay ho 
eek h 47 - "orng /þ hs Wn of w_ cy _— -» afons, thy ay 94 _ ;—hrgg lens 5 
l at. —_— R o ; 4 by IT. i + : ith «#3, FR ef ets . te is Nr N 4 e1K reiien jy it307 -M is Ve Je I C 0) ce ir 1 4 vious 4 iearts ad 
TW. L = bi Th. i a8} Ky PELVS Il. TIE 020% ſpe: »-o PP "VC. © YH + f oo 1 3. fl re O54 T8! tie bas 
FOND +38, TY... ICP K C111 "ad i kg d. IS | thei — = rn bap. 4h - OR [1 mens in 
} F Þ WT Xo FREE 4 My I tit af Gut incls T1 TRY ſpike. Ir Was d, CH h dei? ied wn ils of a Sy Oil 
"v7 f os o z LW, 111 C an are - 1OuT V 62 op » UGn2 | 
5 14 $4 ” Jen QUT ICE « ! = Om DD of 4 15 wc S1 onrecion no _— on Counc J have wa: 
: - $I38& BY &s TY TA Fo - t Re OT: : C1] oa ; 7 , by I. Y F 1 Q ers f1 in s . 0 ” al 4 L 4 
Or. :c- hl FH. Dot Fi Rs aq keto! ; olths n v1 f Man; WHOW — hav corily Dekgne them, Sp no ! 
i} Or, maj Dr CREE? day Þ ty 1804.5 0 L1G, 5on © Iks. FUNGI Paiſto x 'E7mPt the nto at [26 me tu d 
pars. a ff Þ ty kno'$ , 48 , he So har as | their - fo Pct knew : {aid un veth, —_ tals ha 
pike BY Kt 2 . 2 b. as ne 2T ne © In 10 vho Oto low: > At Ul f | 
- I «1 no {1 : BY Mme canrdou Is 1M rher ent 5 ed, wh hem my” and. el ». hat fails 
Aa PEae ! 4 ſet covlerncem np ps ny Fat 5 Nog. hs Knew t were | mary by w of ye Je r Sayiours ing 
pp A bo Coed (1 by 'en:; P05, ing fo, Ak c c pong be unde BY | 
1.t fot ; q Is - ED OY "mII6 ®. at he; tenfe, 0 ft; rl I an R le, ar 9 ro this lion, 0 
EF! 427 hos = ÞE we | m_— m?, and cir fe buft.1ft 2 . rac lay IT 1s t9 Ircumc; ds "1s f 
” PAC [978 MHD + not 9 {ent Jo 0. , In wh oo ne _— go naps which _ _ dl yotromy any T4 7 
' 3:30 So SN" PTY: 3 . Va.) 2 ®Yr If; Fr . . Pits UL 2 n : - I ? = Ver. y ['L 27 *athio 
"2 > N | Wn oi 7 GE YI : Jolm Leane!, ; Jamane I _ 0 a x Pt led 5 fo Te _— og Latyh taug 
8.28 Es |, 1 nel! jean 231d be « wargP? * Cut duel h beali arve XA ve-wnt of the c, Tr had 
- ?» _ "ny 4 OW: » , WE4% @ \ ii ; 0 I! & n of ” weL; Go all 7 F * it 5 pf at wh ou ar be J 7 4 m: k moit 4 
4 nts 4 7 2G Ras 4 art ONS GoiP ie LO 72 0 ich tal po Diſc © les, 11C 3To ) Fhe | ; 
I, -v bit \ O i-3L "=s. 8 je; Cola kl ir the "F101 - L - CY © ' (0) 4% 1C \ sT eo of FP me 
bo : th arc 01% Ta hems | Thx berotte G <= Ib " Norens ay clecomn LT ſhone femer va kno 
wy boi! . fuc rhet gra fear he full; he Fiſher; berw! the |, "4 {c it Gna the, or It f, the fo This ir fm 
vs Aa OF T1 n hen a Þ 1 the wm th ere ith RR 08 22 aute ch-d » fot ning h tor thy. uri 0 
V as ; Met & OH _ }ze « vhon p: ror o C HAoum h T . i hts bec bba Ol mean 26T / for | : IN acco £ it (el 
INC 1 roue 1s IL > 111 tellow es wh mung uh), bu D OC Sa efore, the: con? root, Te 2 b Me. wn 
and 'y arg 10 ne 1 {1} to! iiles ſt on! be Irs, LIC (n he here -har it b ll ma to g1 auſe, yin 
V:71zY 1m V IL ( —_—_— AGO. "© 114 ho it rhe e by nt icle ft _-— EA ea ard faC —— iy yer a 
AR r hn br 12 ho A We 4100 1OL Int 'bo 20 artic Ity, tha 4 y ery lit Ol lion ; 2 
<1. tar an, Lin; Aeon 1 ici 1s N t co 1d, W yo Par 1Micu : and , ery ore 1C1t 'Ou7 - 
zeo.r f "1m 'h C1 MYIvifi. * A! [3 1 vl » di I In he g1 iI Is, . isV an GUN lO You 5 
5 Mo « For "ay _ _—_—_- _ TE f erwiſe iris Dee wen F 
17 11 bein F Cr ins; &\ hey br e a re tO — tie 1 It ' gn; c In c 
EY N rd\ma 9 O y Ca ine it f iC am ner ag -0un us cankghuga der bou as g1v 16, 
ty, He Ig r\ Ct: tha tha nd c an rle CO thr th Ni a W Was um 'f 
bogity 2n praut/} Wi -h DoC 4 be; mia tl, anc ma 5|VYe le acc nd thus: O CO Law La his roſeljte, p 
"an HT Pre by wg follow, ann Will, ant _—_ I bab lie lain 3 OT a he es ' a Prof 
«NOW; the an 0 reac to m: is W la Of 1t, | 10 h ſhou Il pla if Mn : Mojes ora '0:.: kno 
\\ 1 (TOM C l and " Go! not {fame y his , the doe ſ vpl | . RN ly h a have, that An £3 os re , ild, 
. ILIECY iinary « Goip! io: h x the c knev 'eL 1 wie 5 Joy whic ker h in 01: , mM, os \ at, h--to le Cn . Lil him 
ga ordin: he t it GC 11 Ik ye no he! ; ma it Cc ift e from n2 Ma 1Cift-1 j 
1974 Re. t It \E nc _ k fr them ed ir mc le long. * Ircum v7 | | 
wa > of Þ. ..- trim lap a - N he (8) CLICK » de force (oy 1 ts riſe te : IſC 4, ſen 
wie LES "Mm ; Doct ataer, 1d: Ty TO nce pon f the ar IO! 4 Cir it's wy 2UTIC 's ive C dare p It 
Mit r their nis * he Fa Wo) une Iaitue de vp Oo || wh; 'E YO nor hs Circ :h-day >CC1V 'Glen ”. Lit anc 
hat nr © of 1hi >f th the les C: he Ii h abo NOW ko 5 gat had Gen. /o Cir bba! re bro}; (IO 3p 
t12aTt "= 'Or Cm > = to 'y Dok. _ by r 'Iych +? i] I » ea JeSg aw Mm, y J &2 q ay be ery vv $34 V4 1 p 
4 Wit.: F* c1 ar e IT A lio . V12l {ha [ ip hat LE: A 'aha Lav s the th- - 30ot CVeC 
by 70% commute 21535] TION, 1D 3: CC ” il, 1 "beth he *arher Crok rown G4 - my hou A IN 2 
Min tt Ne nk aff his - » OL * which ew cheer man g ON _ Molſzs ys made be this, If on 
MY & 5, 00a: he U I| GO. , eCHOon Dact + ag L 18, ai O hay to ve givenin | 
4548 iS VC in th wil t (50 hject the bu tha tam Law ſe I ) zeth bath, g w Ab 
3s ie» mM 1 apa po op Oby hat {aid ſo, it ] he cau ec ſeen Sab irval La Cour 
hx LIC IF Ml it bs tate an Ow t leed {a1 ake 23 tt be day ent he « ri 2am 
> PUN L5 all, }Cr IT bytat '4 kn ncGee E ima ill | tha & th- ume of r othe Abraj fars, 
dice k tis nethe tO OD "OUIC ne 1 I4 h ') w at m bba Arg LON oO ano en (0. x'ure k | 
Ty  #Whe 30rh tc ' fÞoL dg? COUulc _— ſed on, ry Sa hole ferva p £ giv of Nat "00 
TB JSP hy od . Gay {20 ng the is W ob place n, W hoſe if 
2 {ec} y Ley f G How ar (1 | he B42 his for ive 1 io La Ip ll X, 
Oh! » FRE Hov 1ne of ? Ho k © uly et y le on h of t bat g1ve umc to a he hat | ach « 
(STE {.1 toy J17 098 - Dock: fir * 2 (fact; 't Ir to b 'n ho S net 723t may f Circ lace ty to 15 wha uc 
ny i 07 $a GAY = hnet ey nan \ Heat im iS OW w {tre ch was ) tO ive P Du hich Pool lence 
nl) Livre « SY te. 6 rn p 21y 1 an 0 h f h rE- The (fv g 2O $ that 0 g1V ie OUr wh t the 4en 
a #4 IR TT os W. Wa: Vv i _ fr 6474 th d r {t O he ] a aw, XO ® Wa IT r [ 1$ 0 10n 53 a man t F 
C OJ3 7 +4 q) an, 4 Fl bat >21e re t = ! L E ch ht arl C1 lay ta ha 
501 ACTEW 7 OI In EVE Lere @ oo N43, (fu ugil! Th: M1 har I: thata h ſ 
"4 be? | they OY" Ir any ſhall Ul orunme He din int EN h mo hong. an ma raCt the er wereaf 
wich 1.471 ' he ©) er ro. CC t an Mo: anc C arT, (ery enr ly Þ i{ed on wer eall 
hic k.. t: 'S. ver 1: be ea fe © 1 ich is mu He Mi Ot daily iſe dot, ar 
13 "um Jar ts, ſoe « it ] liv oe ily, al! hic ) ns of Im r 0a C 0 ay Sa 
ow 1 \ the v} It TH 311C urp 0U ed, W fore ma eg he in vou cum oh aL he S 
Fe "10th &a, Bi Wi foever 9s, at S$ Pp {et Jatr h to bet Ty hn woke in y Cir d not h was 
pear 101 xc ke1ce Jy Mthing ferion uth 48" Frut I| lang in eve rear deg ys + this to be - an vhic 2 Whi bold w 
« #7 2 + woe © £17143 COPE! in al mo a fe r'Tr lalice, je hat 'TOLC in gre in iel ht -day < On, \ pf diy 4; 
Fe "oi ah 1 haw "a 9d tha Ebb rm 1 GOL pgs Obedencero ow = == he $6 A : 
T4 i God. ay 10 ot ! If he li 71) d* 37 wr id O Jels L L Abr nt os 
T5 *AC:\ [ de 2 1 w in {1 , . io u O . 510 | 
Wil? © y x7 ne'arion of : » alidge - God * _ afecions, Pai _— otm _— = vn _ but = "and f 
TOA bE Re "Y TOE) 41134 4 ils5 hat tori fe OF C1 PP 1 re ith m bl [ 5 OY, ſo 
I wb ang ] ery Izv ectto! ineth to A an oeal be , hap WO * hefo It ery his 'ere 10, les t 
1H <0 ir) eve 20 Aijed <-rin \11 c ; cu i a be 'y wth eV if it we [t- (i 
{1 Cl ha Lo on cr _ ——_o—_ 2 © corrpe God, — _ _ of redo _ did ay him as foe It Oterie | 
buy Ut $ ++ L015 Y'y ing elf Thar 111 7 to < =" 10 M. C8) a ma: ls ) aan fc OS 
524 ht 0! Patti 1108 : ſelf, h re] of vay letr tola by 7 ou 1 ure ble; ure ret Cidnor 
4 3n#-u8 £4 I! Et 4 ani ' mayp —_—_ | be lei av whe ey _ ly C 'obat IC mw 
ehe _—_—_ Fil 1 my ſlow m: Gra oy al tfa'! yo hay an, nly d} iritua #) | 
"0 ; he ſh fron to fe, ee hat give th: d no Me dam or © th pre Ree th n its0 they g 
44 pI F or fr dee il! Lite Fre nt - © -6dirgypa at|g at ale en ſeemer he Sp ignifie but dkte 
| a ut 8 of vr in nu the me hL $ Bat aſo he hay s tt hg doubt 
REM real ice inde at as 1 ſuc ſions, Ces. fire nly 1 ) 1 dly eo y, Ce |, 16, 
© $. hen and at Brech= &, live Delu ir Fa Th hink t hard] wig #* rev ; ran at 
In no 4 JIN 21 COS, Ce1VINg UL . or In their tudy it. | hay er tha Evid vder Body garc Pro. o = 
C4; {701 Trey ih Peoe a t F: > 1s, , "ONg n a { f 1T. ſom {bur [0] y a PP done h J 
Now, | Si om ifr © 2:1ion it ineth nd a f E OL IT, (as | x ven 48AG © his he a zve tno 
NO nd Pre -* trot he G! M Pai d to ſhin fe. a Ctiv is Soul, Id ha term ast ot tI ha Or, ere fi 
__ {CE MME! rd i} fach 's, an nly al Lite, efte his ou the 'hole, ing t vhat t me. by T4 
C3.5 CET 3. at ir:h + Ine!s, ope oral. or Ws C hat ly w C11 for v an] look he Wa 
TY 15 10Ns, VOtt, TN that M ith, n Felt . 4 [f / atly COI e . aga { It U tne 
j21 Ez inatic Jr INC rive Wi tohr r1 hat a ft Fa is OW ore thin e ac : m lice a Ct, rne dea 
"i $ or NOW eb h . Ee omp t ; to mn ali Fac: but the 
HEH }J:Ce% _ Dit he 1g v, T wfe 0 [ hi he fol y or c no en de dM this j d m- 
k IS L1W« het _ nr lov bl ! Ca en - (oF ty < & qd m con - an of d *; bbat did ma 
"4 5 the hin fo the {eeke him, fee # Jy g U 8 nd 1udice : CC Or | dee he Sa , | 
pt x! LO 'T es hor are [1] F 1 1C ſent us j ſons, a reju earan or ind o th your by mor 
* 45: ne : ITEa 'ath, 'n will. 1 al 3 } it b 8 £ 24 . hteo erio Re P t app - 1sn ifying r you 4* Y of 
ow 1 T S. - Ty on © kim 7 tf: him 4 hey [1g 1ndge P rea, firſ z It 1 Sanct bat hee ay 0 
- {ME cane _ TR _ Ty - +19 LY . i 1 = O adg Har he th 3 f Sa A VV " uc us m 
CT nenc 2 after OUL h oi is glory $ 1N ich rt f}: ag or j r r bba t ON 5a me j Prep reou Me 
= $4 OE OL Let his 2 {s 1 wh ro jU ——Y _ $4 ro oo tha n and igh the : 
ous —_ iking 3CAKC h.h {ne by e no F Do tot y rding f the han mn tO, 2 aR t the 
za a f work t \pe: ceket! 1tcoL re, ſpak man ly ou acco ion 0 tert onde tred tc lelt th, 
TK be Jat ice 1ght Not ſe he No nn & dge acc lat rea or C Hatr in it ot Miracle 
ith 1 i Jet] hat nrig her ule r f the m t ju V1O 3 S - do n Our : 1s1 Is n ] 
TE. > l he th ut 10th beca ivered. ſel no as a Du nd f yo ich 1, bs ly f 
& NYO I no 1 al d live himſc nd do ou f a a ſe of wh tam, tuly 
1% it ( hen God, de th le a to y eO uſly, cau on ſalz 
| LE oy th th f he ke devi th ance « hreo bec: cti ON. ro bly 
-» KYE-3 12 + et aSO 'hat ma nac may e rin ig ſes, nA arl (© a . 2 
7 In: % OCs re 21vet -dqtroader w he ma he rfo er Ca na mn f ( pro af 
aL ST 10ur 2 rin n bur a hat Bur pe adg her dem nde O Chi ſt 
= * 3% C4710 C 110ry Id [f >) F L j IN ot n Co em Mm, . C d x ( 
CET I SAvIAnl Do Glo ſelf, ſhou 6; : This. 2 ino Conde th > (ale the 74 < | 
fat me NU T IS L own him fe Ivantag men onou w do nor ving f « h . ert; @[s of has [ 
[7 :D Y E iT o j F * es . ſer Oo Il Hzie '[g hl P he chi 
» Firs Cu Th: ht his TOMm WN7PO ht Ac le trom he H have ſely me 3 ot de me k1 of ones T#: ( 
20 fouh If pony bf 4 es og ro inſt d not d ſo to be en M 
mY & SF of, y* of ro - _y F 7» 50 wo hoſe Honour 9" L nog —_ good ſaid Rn _ Ve2 210g fore, . 
4 HG . POED tg x r to ur 7 d fe t be rhoſe H dge F 4 K, © Deſis be F ROI 15 
L.& 4 ation bu Hono an nnot b W be jud; . 25 hon ſpea f the ſaid {ay tt among 
"0711 C3. AC TOTIONS, ne ther, d ca him ro him w here e © ;:ho they - | at tl . 
(Ox; 21'S No! {o1 + an Tom ht dro n is he ho 1Or fe w | &! gon heir Ho 
7 2/5 wg ir, or We \ of Info noug tte eſs 1 his ſe w pF acoqs-- _ d_ 1 | 
£77 "1 ne War, 'Vant IST an alo m uſn c ho Kkne an e © Indec I1 bo wer 
— ro Serv; he of in re On reo ove h T ho th: I! thee Jy, In '$ 
Þro Xe if 5 DC her, h but 1 in lt c igh Id m : ) W rs, tell t bol: wW ulers 0- hey ſuf} 
ſe aCts as 10th If > an e Tr unr hou d a itizens Elde to þ h kno he R he Peo- ney ſt 
| 1am ad Fan imſelf., ce; f th in no ich (h rne C:ir1 - and "oth 2ket t th et ole h Mirg 
: bh © 0 hn ance. (6 ing hic lea ! 1eſts at ehe 1 lers - hat : ena] Mz, lhe | 
SE. lane mn ady tion J hav d w be he P 1e{ts v0 ſe ſpe Ul tne 11S 11 « the -__ ; 
i 2 SISIHOrL O! o u 'n ne fro . Þr tf mh he R Ule IN 145 tl rain Meſſmn>; 
| Appl d fr tht Kec cet, eſw may ſeo nd i/ 1T he ba Is wa tra Jjet? 
030 2 f an ke he e qd de pr lio u 5(t re evil, lo, t 1e DIO {t 5 he - re rt . 
at -2 0 x 2 {-e in th n be a ake 1 Wu d- D ut Do . ISP Fea hat ve pa lim. 
pore of, : wh ener Lo ng hich mo! 2 6 But Ic 2 it he hon rer 
frog 1 ry nc . fl frau : ie He . rily S$ Wilic re 2 . Z d] *(\ þ 7 er, Ol d e £10 to [at ey 1 
64-1 1G [bi L mn "GNaruy gg ro d 1 af : V [ ledg lt vis ast 33 
mn (3 fait: out I C: fe at Frines a(t n my? L © 1 wW uri U as : 
I os up = Bu _— Divi: A noir and no yon = unto = LE "was come = > —_— _ _ means, Mm wit] 
2 Wi ah bein: hing ! 0" OW _ JO, be 'rIt, the ve prey Wa d fo cop ___ e bY ” 55 
$M - be ning -15-meet S LO DEC VV 1Ot 8 {t ſea {t ha ike -Segpnkig tC ſed 55 Whe 
Ant: re till Will 1112S. or C ly - Oly 2ht n tl:he fi Pri oy Ee L. . BY v0) uic ie [*) i 
P 4 x k any tion, oCtrit ory t like iH it ſoug Oi | The at C os hav NY: take he 5 of bend. 
11.73 b S 27K wad I No: 2» G $ . !10 fir ws r 1 th at 1d 111g Ui: s Lis | 2 1 a ib renen 
Þ a 0 "A Or" Foo [nour nd are Repurarion of ho Glo 4 nor _ n. = ;en Diſcouſing Sons, hence "_ [ bh be K 
ot Bob he he Bo 10 he R he Pe r ate chan lis: "5 'e c Va A v 1ga! 
$90 - 121.0 T : the 1ture, fircs i tharthe Honou d yet ple (otherwiſe —_ that my he \ man =—_— Ps | 
I 4 is 214 _ Fe __ to CO anifeſt bur tn F- an it TO wes {o fr ter, ue and et this KnOW 1ed go "em FR: 
or x in &e = ronger EP ro 4 T 2w , 1bou ed FR Chap he ade 6 know N1IAN fig mg” ” how 
5 Nom mach "XA T0 i Wein ſclves. ho . JC: f thi 'here Appr Ce Kn no ph 15h! " Tow!t 19y - 
"x Ho #73 C4 IT 116: hem 1 tne * FO le.}o d wt! ro it W >th Fnlet! Co:10 he 47 
© 6 98 Wi yint tot you by "8 eop hear 1 bei net, hat 5 rl 
£7 OS N | Tory RR ive V 'Y ne P DI cou wW i1t cot bat. KO q,7,0: / tO _ 
| 44d ang {6 a 28 give 2 \ t KepT, hey cou Ho rift c d th: pr old 2 
& As Ivy il < 22s g 3: aw 0 ly -[t ory! ", an TH of 5 L290: —— 
To, rikig i, Si [ET __ ne bal Tack a rey " hen © CORD, 3 + js anſwered ſu 
: ; he 1: Fi Bern > X 17, ering ft it in r , f ww o O 4 ei" S fr ww f$ a ht a } 
: !G L314 iu KCIPE © delivy 6 —_ Law. lu IS 7. . he 1s W Wi 444, 0 Scrib! 2. 6.1 
$- « 2% ! } I 3 | 4 b 17 d hs - * as 
. : 0 ITITTI unenyf ' whic! te il bu ak the be a he 1s e know alſo _— oY! {1 {is an ia: 
+ Y ; LOLS ute 2% ar Sa rror, breax to ve W ment wb; Ot n, 
pe Gn, 7, @ ds In". 2 A law h on 1 .E #) It PL The Fam! f Pt itario! 
| = 1. nas Gale "Sh = L bs "th cometh —_— cher. _ _—_— _— pane 
w 4 £84 ff Pp, os vos £5 - A 7a 4 WW y }W kr Fj ro ” 7, ”_ 
s * , d=0; f): * by [$19] / . Wer a |! H- he one no 0 __ $ : / her the 
/ - " = - Y "_ 7 u - he ») A Oo nc WA le be IT 
4-5 29: dls OMP >fe "violated 1 Blood : aa pb - Hot ache” 17 Doo wirho! 
< 3 Fxod ily bras / ſuppo th viol my the 2 > 67Þ So he fix 1o 'ofe, 
K-42 hy: NF ae, | 4 Dat ave eak ings : 0 f re oO pur] 
CY i; S £, une, 1I& Sat 11d ba to br ny thin out L YOU, g- SUP} s 
5 al my” . y ns 2L ” e = a NN H : 
Þi' 3 Por - Ir hy *11} = 7 ary | to —— think fourth 
C04 4 {\ [ Oftence > inet _— JOU117 breac f r'1E 
EE You 112 OTC INa1l!L arer 's of £1 
Lc. ? au bo vol ſe tk wang 3s by a 
TR © = th 2:pirel C1 that F tave 
1" 35 © 3 Ti $6 t 133% ; 14 n 
P: ! 4-7 1 *. 1, mo 
titre plum a 
tt 1 i » + 
Ent Ver Ment, 
& INT IR 
Comm 


. 0OSE 
'F * Cis att 
: Wal 
(3 
3 that li. 
1.37! 


- 


E 
] wilt 
at all, 

[ L's «os 
.* *S v4 

F 354 rhe 


woo 


WW 
indeed 11 
ch ingec 


] 
ho! 
| he $09 
Family | 
icula 
al ts 
; Mat 124 
+ "ed 
of 
© (ON 
O Ki 
2 | 
ide then 
101 TO gu 
J&10 

Veda 


4 


ue; 


ſo. VII. 


1d 4} 


©, 47 


"er 


bbatn 
1 your 
lice 4 
hreous 


5 nN 


obably 
e Chic 
has 4 


1ching 
tits 15 


ers lad 
rhe Peo- 
the Me/- 
reſtram 
\rrer part 
1 4s they 
!l means 


he is 131) 
whence 1, 


ured Fa- 
- that he 
the TO 
{ xo £04; 
i no Re- 
wm (h9810 
"29 


voy 


be ; thus 


!/ehem : But then they had another Tradition, Thar he ſhould 


f Bet - 
of 
Ve taken away from thence, and hidden for ſome Years, . and then 


S. FOHN, 
this Verſe is eaſily reconcile$ro v. 42. Others think, rhat) 


-? (oeak of rhe ſecond manifeſtation of Chritt. They had a Tradi- 
e'- Feech was bottomed on holy Wrir, Thar he was to come out 
ron WB 


*\ 1NEAT as A Perſon unknown whence he came. Which Opi- 
azall ru ſome, was borromed on the Revelation of rhe. Old Teſta- 
mw erp a double Generation of Chrilt, I/a. 53. $. Who ſhall 
—_ x hy Generatton? Micah 5.2. The one of which is to be un- 
< foul of his Eternal Generation, which none can declare. The 
cer 7 asro the Generation of hs humane Nature. But the Fers not 
gr" - \anding that the Meſſiah was to be God-man, underſtood both 
7 Humane Nature ; which made them fancy, that tho" he was 
L be Born al Bethlehem, according to Micah 5, 2. yer he was to be 
y ied away for ſome Years ſome whither ; fo as when he came to 
nEES the World, none ſhould know whence he came, bur he 
t eld appear a8 a man dropped GOWn from Heaven. N ow Chriſt 
having been oftered in the Temple at his Mothers Purification, went 
hack again WIEN his Parents, L!ke 2. 39. came to Nazareth, and or- 
Jingrily WENT VP 10 Hr eruſaiem ; and there he was tound Diſpuring 
virh the Doctors, Ve 4.6. And at lai, we find him relting with his 
Parents al Nazareth, and being ſubjett to them ; after which we read 
no more of him, ill he came to Fo/7 to be Baptized; fo as the Fewws 
had known and obſerved rhe whole Courſe of Chrilts Life. 

23 Then cried Jeſus in the Temple as he taughe,ſay- 
no, Ye both know me, and ye know whence I am », 


1nd * Iamnot come of my lelf, but he that ſent me * 


b - trne, ® whom y& Know not 0. 
Y 1 You migat have known me by the Doctrine which I have 


" taught, and The Miracles which I have wrought among you, and you 
had known me, if you had nor thur your Eyes  againit the Light, 

F \hich ſhonein your Face. Or you fay, and think that you know 
me. - Others think rhat it is an Ir97y, or as a Queſtion, Do your 
know me ſo well? » If you did, you would know thar I came not 
ofmy ſelf, but was ſent by my Father; and he that ſent me is Truth 
irſelf; but you know not. the Father, and therefore cannot know me 
aindeed I am. | ; 7 

29 But * I know him p, for Iam from him q, and 
he hath ſent me 7- 

p Iknow him. ſo as no-man elſe knoweth him, Mar.1 1. 27. I 
know his Efſence, his Will, his Counſels, his Laws, 9 for I am from 
tim by an eternal Generation, his enly begotten Son; rand I am 
ſent by him, as the Mediator and Saviour of the World, to declare, 
and to execute his Will and Pleaſure, as tro mans Salvation. 

' 20 Then *chey fought to take him /; but * no 
man laid hands on him, becauſe his hour was not yet 

* OMe ft, 

, / By thistime the News was come to the Sanhedrim, the great 
Court of the Fews, ro whom belonged the cogniſance of Church-AFf. 
firs, falſe Prophets, Blaſph:my, Violation of the Sabbath, &c.they 
"00k Counſel, and uſed endeavours to Apprehend him ; or it may 
xe, ſome of the ruder fort of People that were his Enemies uſed ſome 
uch endeavours, but not with any effect, for by the mighty Provi- 
{ence of God, who had fer the time when Chriſt ſhould ſuffer ; till 
hat Hour was come, mentioned alſo; Ch. 8. 20, and 12. 2. there 
1as ſucha reſtraint upon the rage of the -Rabble, yea (as we ſhall 
xreafter hear ) the Spirits of the Officers, who were ſent from 
the S-nbedrim to Apprehend him, that they had no Power to lay 
bold upon him. Men ſhall do us no hurrt till Gods time comes, 
A Sparrow falls not to the Ground without the Will of our Father. 

11 And * many of the people believed on him «, 
nd faid, When Chriſt cometh, will he do more mira- 
cls than theſe which this 9zan hath done w ? 

y Not as the true Meſſias ; for the next words ler us know, they 
didno: believe him to be the Chriſt, bur looked for him ro come;bur 
they gave Credit ro him as a great Prophet ſent from God. w And 
doubted whether the Miracles which he wrought, were not as ma- 
ny, and as great as ever the Me/1:4/3 would do when he came. For 
tho' 7ojn reports but a few Miracles wrought by Chriſt, yer they 
vere ſuch as required a Divine Power to work rhem, ſuch as turning 
the Water into Wine, multplying the Loaves, 'raifing Lazarus from 
lhe dead &c, And Fohn tells us, Ch. 20 3o. and 21, 25. That he 
ud many more Works than he hath Recorded in this Book, and ma- 
ay more are Recorded by the other three Evangeli/ts. From hence, 
may ve obſerved the Falſhood of the latter Fews, who deny that 
the Meſſiab is to work any Miracles ; fer it is apparent from hence 
that they had in our Saviours time a general expectation of great 
Miracles ſhould be done by the Meſſiah; and their expe&ation was 
truly founded upon I/a. 35. 5, 6. as appeareth by Ma. 11. 5. 


32 T The Phariſees heard that the people murmur- 
«x ſuch things concerning him, and che Phariſces,and 
the chief Prieſts ſent officers to take him ” 

S: Murm:r:d here 1s taken in a different Senſe from what ir was 
core, and Hgnifieth as much as whiſpered, or talked privately 
icy themſelves. » The Chief Prieſts, who were aftraid that 
59g Honour would abate among(t rhe People ; and the Phariſees. 
ay +ffraid rhe Credit of rheir Traditions would be loſt, if 
| 7 luffered him to go on ; and being more. eſpecially troubled for 
t Miracles which he daily wroughr, as Chap. 11.47. They ſend 


renger trom their great Court kept at Hieryſalem, ro Apprehend 


73 Then faid Jeſus unto them, * Yet a little while I 
_ you, and zhen I go to him that ſent me &. 

Preher Perm Chriſt ſpake theſe words to the Officers ſent to Ap- 
ok. ooh er to the People in the Temple, is nor much materi- 
Yours aintd ba : He by them plainly declarerh har all their endea- 
tem x M1 as vain and fooliſh ; for he ſhould yer live with 
"a Pat n 1s, (TS Was in September or Otober, he died at the 
ul; > er, which was abour fix Months afrer this) and then he 

0 and willingly lay down his Life for. the Sins of the World, 


riſe again from the dead, and aſcend unto his Father who fent hn 
into the World. 


24 *. Ye ſhall ſeek me, and ſhall not find ve a, and *C 3.” 


where I am, thither ye cannot come 6. 

a Some rhink the meaning is, Tou ſhall ſeek me, to execute your 
malice upon ine, but to no purpoſe, for 5ou ſhallnor tind mee O-, 
you ſhall ſeek meto deltroy me in my Church, and to roor out my 
Name, bur to no purpoſe. Bur the moſt probable fen'e is this, You 
wicked Fes, that now contemn the means of Grace hy me offeced 
ro you, ſhall one day be 1n diitreſs ani calamity enouzh; and wh 
you are fo, then you will wiſh | were again among(t you, bur T 
ſhall be Aſcended to my Father, b and as deaf to your Pravers, #5 
above the reach of your Malice. There 1s inuch the ſame icing {414 
in Mate23. 39+ Thar he here ſpeakerh of his Afcenlion is [L2it fr OT 
Ch. 13. 33. He ſpeaketh of Heaven as a Place where he w 4s ac rhat 
time, for ſo he was as to his Divine Narure. Itis var2ye winther 
I go ; which makes fome think, it ſhould nor here be eu; bit £74 
vado, But others reject it,becauſe it is a Poetical word, vardly uied 
in the New Teitamentr; 

25 Then faid the Jews among themſeives, Whither 


will he go, that we ſhall not find him c? will he 99 


unto the diſperſed among the || Gentiles, and tzach ws 0: C 


Gentiles 4 ? 


© The Fewvs, not ar all believing the D.vine Nature of Chriſt, nor- 
withitanding all that Chriſt had faid, and all the Miracles he had 
wrought, are at a mighty loſs to conclude what our Saviour {pike 
of, and whither he would go; they rhouzht he could go no where 
in the Land of Fewry, bur they ſhould hear of him, - and be able ro 
come where he was; they conclude therefore that he wou'd gointo 
ſome Pagan Country. d In the Greekir is, }/ill he go into the ts, - 
perfion of the Grecians, There were two moſt famous Difper- 
ſions, of which we read in Scory. The firſt was of the F-iws, ot 
which we read in ſacred Hiſtory, in the Captivities of 4/Þr;a ( whi- 
ther the ten Tribes were carried, 2Kzngs 17. 6) and Babylon, wit- 
ther the two Tribes were carried, 2Kzng5 21. 26. And that by the 
Grecians and Macedonians ; when alſo many of the Fes were dit- 
perſed by Alexander the Great, and his Succeflors. Peter direterh 
his Epiſtle to the Strangers ſcattered throughout Ponrts, Galatia, 
Cappadocia, Aſia, and Bythynia, 1Per. 1.1. And Fames directs his 
Epittle ro-the twelve Tribes ſcattered abroad. They fancy that our 
Saviour would go into ſome of theſe places, and Preach ; by which 
means the Gentz/es would be raught the Miſteries of the F2w:ſh Reli- 
2ion, which was what above all rhings they were Ilmpartent of hear- 
ing ; and yer hadreafon from the Prophecies of the Old Teſtamenr, 
to fear, v7. their own Rejection, and the receiving in of the Ger:- 
tilet, which afterward came to paſs, Rom. t1. 15. 


36 What manner of ſaying 1s this that he ſaid, Ye 
ſhall ſeek me, and ſhall not find we ; and where I am 
zbither ye cannot come e ? 

e This ſaying ſtuck in their Stomacks, and they knew not what 


Senſe to put upon itz owning nothing of rhe Divine Nature of 
Chriſt. 


27 * Inthe laſt day, that great day of the feaſt fJe- 


him come unto me, and and drink g. 


whither he would go, nor replyeth any thing ro it. The Feaft of 


Tabernacles was to hold ſeven Days, Lev. 23. 34. in which they 
were to offer up Burnt-Offerings, v. 36» The eighth Day was to be 
kepr as a Sabbath ; there was in it to be an Holy Convocation, no Ser- 
vile Labour was to be done. Chriſt on thar Day diſcourſed again to 
the People, crying aloud, and publickly, g If 2ny man be a thirf? 


let him come unto me and drinks That is, if any man {tand in need 
of any Spiritual Good, Righteouſneſs, Strength, Comfort, ©5c. Ir 
isro be found in me; ler him come to me, by Faith acknowledg- 
ing, receiving, and embracing me, as the Mediator and Saviour of 
the World, and he ſhall have from me whatſoever Spiritual Influence 
of Grace he ſtands in need of. Thoſe who remember what our Sa- 
viour told the Woman of Samara, Ch.g. 10. 14. where he compa- 
red himſelf ro Living Water, will eafily underitand this the ſenſe 
of theſe words. The Condition on our parts isexpreſ{ed 'under the 
motion of Th:irſtzng ; which we know 1s the Natural Appetite, crav- 
ing ſome liquid thing to refreſh the man under his Drought ; and ir 
is expreſſive of an exceeding great Pafſton, and ſo made uſe of both 
in the Old Teſtament and the New, to fignitie a Souls pattionate 
delire of Spiritual things, Iſa. 55+ I» Mat. 5, 6. 


ſaid 6, out * of his belly ſhall flow rivers of living wa- 19. 


h We have had frequent occaſion to open the tern of believing 9 
Chr:# : It may be doubted, wherher thoſe words a the Scritture 
hath ſaid be to be referred to the firit or later part of the Text. Ir 
ro the former, they are words expreſſive of that Faith ro which the 
following Promiſe is made, which is nor any aſſent, or flizhry cre- 
dit given t9 the word ; bur ſuch a Faith as the Scripture hath ſpo- 
ken of ; as that Faith which ts juſtifying and ſaving. # The general 
ſenſe of the Promiſes, That bis Soul ſhall abound with 2H favinz 
and comfortable Influences of ſaving Grace. The Belly fignitieth the 
Heart rhar part of man which 1scalied rhe Heart, being in the Beily. 
So Fob 15. 35. Pſal. 40. 8. the flowing of Rivers of Water,tignifieti 
the plenty of Spiritual Influences with which Believers ſhal! be ſap- 
plied ; whether Joy, Knowledge, Spiritual Gifts or Graces It any 
ask, where the Scripture fpeaketh this? Tanfwer in all thoke Pro- 
miles we meet with in the Old Teſtament, about pouring out 738 
Spirits 

39 ( * But this ſpake he of the Spirit, which they | 


was not yet given, becauſe that Jeſus was not yet gloit 
hzd 7} 
& For 


ter 0. *Lae 4: 


that believe on him ſhould receive k; forthe Holy-ghoft mots 


Chap. VII. 


1. 


4 « 
WP An 


ſus ſtood and cryed, ſaying, * It any man thirſt,” let, * Lev. 23+ 


35. 
: . : : *Qh. 6« 35> 
F Our Saviour thinketh nor fit to rake any notice of their gueſs gy 42.15, 


28 * He that believech on me, as the Scripture hath »neur. 19. 


FEET 
. iff hs 


ton ' — i oe jo —_ : TEST. <> —_ 
: LE ror tO Ret > io eb a 1; Doh es »Ie > Og nnY ye 


of Ef 
l / "Aſs q 
Hs 0 in 
. j 
' | | 
: þ 413 | 
tf 09+ | 
: 
_ il {4 
i 
4 [ i Wh 
* 
i 
'4, 4 
4 
wz 1 o 
: 
oF; 
TY 
-y jf 
F 
£ 
: 
' 
1 
2's 
*f 
"HIM" 
i 
peta Vrote | 
i 
"+ : ut i + 
4 ET 
F, by '} wy. 1? 
Pu "of vs 
$ 4 g a 1 
45. £ , fq T 
| 4 £ $- '- I 1692 
'Th I} i 3.9 al 3.2 EL 
>þ ${ Y : 5 ke oY, 
_ '# & 4, F F)) je I" '} 
"* L 40 i wb We 
[of % ' ; 
o Wo : 3 io W ; 
81 +3 $3 4» G6 
ISS 1% avg is. 
4 l : ++ k 
8 #31114 3.4 
þ- oo 
!. bs. ys | 
. iſ ex 


a 


WA . q_ k 

SS FOAN. Chap. YI 

x Of Nicodemus weread, Chap. 3.2. and of his coming by Nioh 
ro Jeſus, He now being one of this great Court, ſtands up to v 
for Chritt, yet faintly, or ar leaft wonderful prudently, ang a 
He faith no mote for him than he oughr to hare ſpoken 6. 
oreateſt Malefactor, viz. _ ne 

5t * Doth our Law judge any man before it he,, 
him, and know what he doeth y? * 

y Thar no Law of God or Nature, Condemneth any man bef 17% 
they had heard him ſpeak, or had what he did depoſed by W "es 
ſes before them, that they might know whar he did. 


k ; 4 
C12p. VII. . 
þk For the Ecarrelf reifs us, that this referzed to the Spirit, which 
poſierers were 10 receive after that Chriſt ſhould be Aſcended into 
Heaven. Thoſe Scriptures, I/a. 49: 16. and 58. I. Zech. 14. 8. 
ſem among others, to be referred to. in this Promiſe ot our Sa 


V:OUT. 


ben 


—-: TIS IS. 
——_ DAv< £ 
TIT en 


2622: 


40 T \iany of the people therefore, when they 
\eard this faying, faid, Of a truth this is the * Pro- 
Pct 28. ; 

1 The Pr:25et, mentioned Det. 18. 15. Some think that the 


t- "ad 
rm. 
PODS 


— A__——_—— 


*#C' , 6.14 


Fes expected an eminent Prophet beſides Elias, ro come before the 
M-ſſizh; and Fobn 1.21. would incline us to think ſo. Bur others 
ſay. it cannoc be proved from their Writers, that they had any Cx- 
p*Ctations of any bur Elas and the Meſſiah. Bur the Words may be 
read as well, this is a Prophet, as this1s the Prophet ; and I think 
that is the true Senſe of them. A Propher had now for more than four 
hundred Years been a great Rarity among(t them ; they having had 
noae but 76/1 the Baprift who had ſuch a Repute» 


*Ch.4-42- 41 Others ſaid, * This is the Chriſt. But ſome ſaid, 
*Ch-1- 4% Shall Chriſt come * out of Galilee » ? 


_ 7” :.. The People were divided in their Opinions about Chriſt. Some 
of them were very well inclined to believe rhat he was the Promiſed 
Meſſiah ; but they ſtumbled art the Country where alone they rook 
notice of him. For tho? he came not out of Galzlee, bur was Born 
in Berk/eczem, Luk. 2. 4. according to the Prophecy of him. M:cab 
5. 2+ Suitable to which was their Tradition, Mat. 2. 5. Yer they 
had ſeen nothing of this, tho? poſſibly they had heard ſome relation 
ef it, it being Two and thirty Years fince his Birth, bur he was ordi- 
natily called F-fis of Nazareth, and of Galilee, there he had live1, 
and been educated; fo as they knew no better probably, than rhat 
he.came out of Galzlee, which was contrary to the Prophecy, Micah 
$. 2. 

- Mat. 2.5. 42 * Hath not the Scripture ſaid, That Chriſt com- 

1 uke 2. 4. cth of the Seed of David, and out of the town of Beth- 
lehem where David was o ? 


o The Scriptures of the Old Teſtament had both defcribed the 
Family from whence the Meſſiah was to ariſe, v7, the Family of Da- 
wza, Pfal. 132. 11. and the Town which was Bethlehem, Micah 
5. 2. Which was Davids Fathers Town, where he lived alſo, ill 
God called him our to the Kingdom, 1 Sam 17. 15. and 20. 6. 


"Þ.9.1% 43 *Sothere was a diviſion among the people be- 
= 1% 19- cauſe of him p. 

P -} pin as tO their Opinions about him, as was before ex- 
relied. 

4.4 And * fome of them would have taken him ; but 
no man laid hands on him g. 

7 There were ſome that had an ill Opinion of Chriſt, and put on 


the Ofticers that came for the purpoſe ro Apprehend him z bur there 
was none fo hardy as to do its 


45 T Then came the Officers to the chief Prieſts 
and Phariſees, and they ſaid unto them, Why have ye 
not brought him yr 2 

7 Probably the Officers, Chriſt being amongſt a multitude ofthe 
People that had an high Opinion of him, durſt not adventure to Ap- 
prehend him : Some of them, as appeareth from what follows, were 
aitoniſhed at his Doctrine ; all of them agreed to return to rheir Ma- 
iter without him, ar which they are angry, and ask them, how 
ir came to paſs, that they did nor execute their Commands,in bring- 
ing Chrilt before them as aMalefattor, ro anſwer what they ſhould 
jay to his Charge. 

46 The Officers anſwered, never man ſpake like 
this man /« 


*®Verſe ZI 


J With fo much Authority, Evidence of Truth, ©. Yet they did fe 


not cordially believe in Chriſt; being under the power of Carnal 
and Worldly Aﬀections, which only ſupernatural ſpecial Grace 
could ſubdue. Theſe were ſome of thoſe, in whom the Prophecy 
of Chriit, 1/azab 11, 4. was to he fulfilled -——— He ſhall ſmite the 
earih with the rod of his mouth,and with the breath of bs lips be ſhall 
Nay the wicked. The word of the Lord doth often reſtrain, aſtoniſh, 
and amaze thoſe on whom it hath no powerful effect to Eternal Life 
and Salvation. So it was with theſe poor Officers. 


57 Then anſwered them the Phariſees, are ye alſo 
deceived 7 2 
t You who have us not only for your Maſters, whoſe Commands 
you cught not to diſpute, but to execute ; bur for your Teachers 
alſo, from whom ye might have learned better Dotrine ; are you 
ſeduces 2 Por ſo'wicked men count all who embrace nort their No- 
110ns, and follow not their ways. 


45 * Have any of the rulers, or of the Phariſees 
Acts 6- 7- believed on him « ? 
1 oor > | 7 You ought to be ruled by us, and guided by us who are your 
ar02. + Rulers, and your Teachers, fo early did the Doctrine of 2mplicite 
Faith and Obedience creep into the World) which is indeed to ſup- 
poſe an Infallibility in Teachers and Rulers, ro whom indeed we owe 
all 1mazinable Reverence ; bur we muſt live by our own Faith : 
An tho* the Ferws were bound up, Deut.17. 10, 11: t0 do accordin 
roche ſentiments that the Prieſts and Levites in Hiezuſalem ſhould 
fhew them, yer vs 11. ze mruft be the ſentence of the Law, and it was 


YON.1 242 


in Civil matters, as appeareth by v. 8. Controverſies between Blood 


and Blood, Pica and Piea, Stroke and Stroke. 


49 Bur this people who knoweth not the Law are 


curſed wp. 

# Our of the great Pride of their Hearts, they vilifie the Peo- 
ple, as not learned in the Law, and fo were Curſed, Contemp- 
trhle, and not to be regarded, as to their Judgment and Senti- 
N2!!H8. 

50 Nicodemus faith unto them, ( he that came to [| 


VO: fo Lim 
Jetus by night, being one of them & ) 


yef, * 
& | 


52 They anſwered and faid unto him, Art thoy at. 
"ont * Gali *Ma 


ſo of Galilee 2 ? Search and look, for 


lee ariſeth no prophet 4. þ 

z Nor that they thought Nicodemus was a Galilean ; they kh, 
him well enough ; bur they rake up this asa term of Reprg;cy - 
gainft him, for that he would otter ro ſpeak one word rho? yes, 
juſt, on the behalf of one againſt whom they had ſuch a perfeq jo y 
rred. a Search, fay they rhe Scriptures, and look it eve; ther ; 
came a Prophet out of Galz/ze. Suppoſe this had been truth . 5 
x. Whar did this concern our Saviour ? who was not Born in Galilee 
but in F#da in Bethlehem, the Ciry of Davzd, Luke 24, 2, Could 
not God when he pleaſed influence one of Galilee with the Spirit of 
Prophecy 2 But 3. Neither was it true ; for Nahum and Fongh Wers 
both Galileans, 2.Kings 14+25- compared with Foſh.1g, 13, for v1 
Tribe of Zebulon had their Lot in Ga/zlee, I/a. 9.1. 

53 And every man went unto his own houſe }, 

6 As little as Nicodemus ſaid for Chriſt, 1t pur a ſtop to heir fp. 
ther proceedings again't Chritt at preſent. Some think that the Par: 
if the Sadducees in the Council, who valued nor the Phariſce, Rite 


and T-aditions, took part with Nicodemus ; foas by the over.ry; 
hand of God, Chrilt at this time eſcaped their wicked Councils againit 
bun. So much is certain ; bur what Parties tn the Council concy, 
red in it, 1s UNCertalle 


CHA Þ. VIIL 


Chriſt teacheth in theTemple,obere the Scribes brang to him a wing 
taken in Adultery, 1*-6. But he fruſtrates their Intention, (4 
lets the woman go, T--11» and telleth them that he z the Ligls 
of the Forld, 12. and juſtifies himſelf by by 077 and by Fate, 
Teſtimony, 13-20. And tells them thatUnbelievers ſhal dit intlejx 
Sins, 21--25. Shewing them tio be F, and by whom he ſent, 
26--30. Hi Promiſes to Believers, 31--36. And tel them njy; 
their Father, 37--45- And reproves their unbelief, 46-47, Te. 
ſtifying that Abraham ſaw hu Day and was glad, 48-.58, Wire. 
fore they would ſtone bim, 59. 


Eſus went unto the mount of Olives 4. 


a A Mountain within leſs than two Miles of Hieruſalem, hiker 
our Saviour, when he was at Hieruſalem, was wont often to with 
draw, for Privacy and Devotion, Mat. 24. 3. and 26. 3o, Luke 11, 
37. and 22.39. _ G = 

2 Andearly in the morning he came again intoths | 
temple b, and all the people came unto him c, and hg 
fat down, and taught them d. 

b Soat our Lords laſt Paſſover Luke notes, Chap. 21. 38. That al 
thePeople came to him early in the morning in theTemple to her him. 
Our Saviours early going into the Temple to teach, and the Peoples 
dilligence in coming ſo early to him to hear,ought ro checkour ſoth- 
fulneſs in facred Buſineſs. c Multirudes of People cameto him, for 
ſo the univerſal Particle a// muſt be expounded in a multitude of 
Scriptures. d He, after the manner of the Fewiſſ Teachers, ſat: 
down, and taught them. Of rhis Caſtom of theirs, for their Doctors 
while they taught, to fir down, we have had occaſion to ſpak be- 


ore. 
2 And the Scribes e and Phariſees brought unto him 
2 woman taken in adultery ; and when they had ft 


her inthe midft. | 
e There were as they ſay three ſorts of Scribes amongſt the Jet! 
The firſt were Secretarys to Princes and great men ; ſc Sheve vs 
Scribe to David, 2 Sam. 20. 25, A ſecond fort, were ſuch 
call Scriveners, or Publick-Notaries, who made Inftruments for Pets 
ple, and were employed in their more private Bargains and Co 
tracts. Neither of theſe ſeem to have been of Authority enough 
have done this Act ; and befides, the Phariſees being joined = 
them makes it evident, thar theſe Scribes were thoſe who expounz 
the Law in the Temple, and in the Synagogues, and are therefore 
ed Lawyers; they are often joined with the Phariſees m our 5219s 
Diſcourſes, Mat. 23 13, 14, 15+ ©c. And we find them often yinng 
with them in their Diſcourſes and Actions, tending to entrap © 
Saviour ; ſuch was their Deſign at this time. _ < 
4 They ſay unto him, Maſter, this woman W# 


ken in adultery, in the very act f. 
f They bring ow Saviour a Woman taken in the At of Acute 


rery, and ſet her before him. 
* * Now Moſes in the Law commanded us,tht ſuch 


ſhould be ſtoned g : Bur what fayeſt thou b! h Male- 
Moſes in the Law, Lev. 20. 10. commanded, that ſuc = 
factors ſhould be pur tro Death ; but we read of no La _—_ , 
ing this kind of Death. And their Rule was, that _— \ Death 
ſer no kind of Death for an Offence, there the mildeſt _ Od 
was to be their Puniſhment ; which they counted mo—_ 2 
Bur they ordinarily entituled Moſes to their Traditional -- : Puniſh 
the Law ; and Death being commanded by the Law, as t y ro Ut» 
ment of ſuch Offenders,” they rook themſelves to _ ; ruled 
termine the kind of Death, as Prudence, and reaſon of frequent 
them ; ſo as probably, they ſeeing that that Sin grew + Death ſach 
amonglt them, they appointed Stoning ro be the _ " are told vs 
Malefactors ſhould be pur ro. The manner of which w h Plac?, 


this : The guilty Perſon was to be carried up 0 ſome high 


'itneſſe 
and thrown down from thence headlong, by fuoh 28 again 


 ®' T#ZF" #8 _ vox WW WE TOTO OE ACN 


- Sayiours 
2n joining 
trap out 


was [a+ 
of Aol 
hat ſuch 


ach Male- 
comMMIane 
1e Law had 
dof Death 
ling 10%: 
4dirions '0 


hap- VIII. . 


aoainkt him 3 then they threw Stones at him till they had killed him, 


t »r killed by the Fall ) or covered him if he were dead. This 
- rell our Saviour Mz5{es commanded, becauſe he had command- 
= the general, that ſuch a Perſon ſhould die ; and their Sanhe- 
drim hag determined this particular Death ta ſuch Malefactors : 
| Bur they would know what our Saviour ſaid to this. 

6 This they laid, tempting him, that they might 
have £0 accuſe him # Bur J-ſus ſtooped down, and 
wich bs finger wrote on the ground, as though he heard 


them not k. : 
; Their D:fign was from his Anſwer, to rake ſome colonrable 


rerence 10 atcuſe, and either to diſcredit him with the People, or 
, expoſe hum C0 the Diſpleaſure of the Superior Powers. If he had 
directed 10 ſend ker to be Puniſht by the Roman Governours, who 
adninitired Jaftice in Capital Cauſes, rhe People would be fir'd with 
Indignation ; for they lookt upon them as Invaders of the Rights of 
Government th-t belonged to the Iſraelires. If he bad adviſed 
chem to Pur her *o Death by their own Power, they would have ac- 
cuſed him of -edition, as an Enemy of the Roman Authority. If he 
had diſmii: her as not worthy of Death, they would have accuſed 
im ro the S.-nhedrim, as an Infringer of the Law of Mey/es, as a Fa 
yourer of Diſloluteneſs, an Enemy to crvil Society, and worthy of 
univerſal H tred. This malicious Deſign, fo craftily concerted, our 
$2yiour caily diſcovered and deteared ; whereas they thought ir 
would require his mott artennve Contideration to extricate himſelf 
from the 5nare. k He ſeemed nor at all toatrend ro what they ſaid; 
kurt itooping down wrought on the Ground ; what he wrote. or how 
he coulo write upon the Floor of the Temple (which was of Stone} 
xe v-ry idle Queſtions ; the fir{t nor potlible to be reſolved, the fe» 
cond impertinent ; for it 1s not ſaid, that he made any Impre.uwon 
upon the Ground tho" it be ſaid, he wrote upon zt. It appeareth 

lainly ro have been bur a Civert've Action, by which our Saviour 
ignited, that he gave no car to them. 


7 So when they continued asking him, he lift up 
himſelt, and ſaid unto.them, 1 He that is without fin 
among you, let him firſt caſt a Stone at her m, 


| They will not ler our Saviour alone, but importune him to an 
Anſwer. m He faith. He thar hath no Sin, let him firſt caſt a Stone 
at her, The Liw of God was, Deur. 17. 7. That in the £xecurtion 
of Malefators, The-Havds of the Wirneſies ſhould be firft upon him, 
40 pict him £0 Death. In reaſon, thoſe who are zealous for the Pu- 
niſhment of otheis, ſhou'd neirher be guilty of the ſame. nor of great- 
er Cr me themſelves By this faying of our Saviour, .we mutt not 
under'{and it the Wiil of God, that thoſe who are Magitltrates, and 
employed in executing the Lord: Vengeance on Malefa&tors ſhould 
themiclves be free from all Guilt, for then no Juſtice ſhould be 
done. The Vengance is Gods. not theirs : Ir is the Law of God 
which they execute. He only by this minds them of that Com- 
pa:tion which onzht to be found in Perſons proſecuting others jultly, 
thai they may execute Judgment with Compatlion and Tenderneſs, 
and ſach Moderation as the Law will allow them ; confidering, that 
they arenor free from Guilt, but as obnoxious to the Juitice of God 
for other Sins, as thoſe poor Creatures whom God hath ſuffered ro 
fall inco Sins punithable by Humane Judges. 

$ And ag.1ia he ſtooped down, and wrote on the 


ground ms. 

n When our $ :viour had ſaid this, he rerurneth ro his former 
Poſture and Action, Cir being not a thing wherein he was concerned, 
who was not ſent into the World to be a Secular Judge) as not at 
al regarding them. 


S.F0 HN. 


her, Neicher do I condenin theer ; go and fin no 
moreſ/. . 

r He replyerh, Nezeher do I, He did not Acquit her, for he way 
not to make void the Law of God ; nor did he Condemn her : He 
was netthera Wirneſs in the Caſe, nor yet a Secular judge, to whoni 
ſuch Judgments did belong ; he was only to ſpeak ro her, as the 
Mediator and Saviour of Man. [Go, 1 diſcharge thee, as being Co- 
ram non Fudice, before one, who in my preſent Capacity am no Judge 
to hear this Cauſe, and to give Sentence in ir. Sin no more ; what 
ever becomerh of thee as ro mans Judgment, thou haſt reaſon to 


Sin. Nor dorh he fay, Commit Adultery no more, but Siz no 
more. No partial Repentance, or Sorrow for any particular Sin will 
ſuffer a Penirenr that hopes for any Mercy from Cod ; bur a leaving 
off all Sin, of what kind ſocver it be. 


12 T Then ſpake Jeſus again unto them, ſaying, 


me, ſhall not walk in darkneſs s, 
light of life w 

& This is whar Fohn the Baprift had faid of Chriſt before, Chap.r. 
4. 5- and what Chriſt fairh of himſelf afterward, Chap. 9g. 5. It was 
propheſied of him, chat he ſhould be a lizht to the Gentiles and Gods 
Salvarzon to the ends of the earth. And old Simeon ſaith of him, Luke 
I. 32. That he was tobe, A Light co lighten the Gentiles, "and the 
Glory of his People Iſrael- Light is a thing glorious in it ſelt,and com- 
municarive of it felt unto others, ro guide them. So as Chriſt is moſt 
aptly compared to Lighr, and ſpoken of under that Notion ; as for 
his own innate Glory, ſo for the communicativeneſs of himſelf ro 
Creatures ; which latter appearerh to be chiefly here intended # For 
he ſaith, that he who followed him, believing his Doctrine,and obey- 
ing his Precepts, living according to his Direction, and his Exarhple 
ſhould not be at a loſs how to guide himſelf, nor remain in the dark- 
neſs of Sin, Ignorance, and Spiritual Death ; w bur ſhould have that 
Light, which bringerh Life along with ir, and is ſufficient to guide a 
_ in all _ Works of a Spiritual Life, and ar laſt bring him to 

ife eternal. 


beareſt record of thy ſelf, thy record isnot true x, 


x It was a known Rule of Law, That none ought ro he believed 
upon a Teſtimony given ro himſelf ; rhis is thar they object to onr 
Saviour, that tho' he ſpake greac things of himſelf, yer he was noc 
to be believed in his own Cauſe. 
 I4 Jeſus anſwered and faid unto them, Though T 
bear record of my ſelf, yet my record is true y, forT 
know whence I came, and whither I go z, but * ye 
cannot tell whence I come, and whither I goa. 

I There is a ſeeming Difficulty to reconcile the words of our Savi- 
our, Chap. 5. 31. If I bear witneſs of my ſeif, my wnrneſi # not true; 


s true : Bur the Reſolution of it 18 clear,by conſidering that he peaks 
in the former Chaprer, of his own ſingle Te!timony with reſpect ro 
them,as not of ſufficient validity ro Authorize his Divin- Vocation,ac- 
cording to the Rule of their Law, that required a double Tettimony 
for Confirmation of things ; but here he ſpeaks of the veriry of itin 
it ſelf: For I know whence I came, and whither I go, That is,I know 
from whom I have received my Commigion, ( tho' ſecret ro the 
World ) even from the Father. And yer after the accompliſhing of 
my Embaſly tor his Honour, I ſhall return to Heaven, and be glori- 
fied with the Glory I had with him betore the World was, Chap. 17. 
5- The Reaſon alledged, implies his being the Son of God ; and 


9 And they which heard #, bzing convicted by 
their own conſcience, went out one by one, b2ginning 
at the eldeſt, ewe unto the laſtoz and Jelus was left 
alone, and the woman ſtanding in the midit p. 


0 This was an Ape of very great Corruption as to mens . Lives 
and manners, as well as to Doctrine and Worſhip 5 and as others 
enormiries of Life were very common and ordinary amongſt them, 
ſoit is very probable were Adulteries; and that their Rulers and 
Teachers were not witkout great Guilt, Now, ſee the Power of 
Conſcience when fer on work by God ; theſe Accuſers Conſciences 
wereto them as a thouſand Witneſles ; they were reproved _— 
victed by them, and nor able ro ttand under the reflections of them, 
or to ſay any rhing in Anfwer to what our Saviour bad ſaid : They 
went away one aftcr another ; and potlibly it is particularly nnred, 
that they beg an at rhe Eldeft, becauſe the Conſcience of the Eldett of 
them, charged them more deeply for wore and greater Sins. p Jeſus 
was left not wholly alone, for the nexr Words tells us, that the Wo. 
manwas it1ll lett itanding in the midit ; and nu doubt bur his Apo 
liles were there, for they contiantly attended him 3 and no doubr 
Uivcrs others were allo there: But the meaning is, that he was by 
this means quit of the Screbes and Phariſees Company, who were 
Qt out of Shame, being thus Convicted by rheir own Conſciences, | 
which told them, that whatſoever this Woman was, they were no 
fit Accuſcrs. 

lo W::ea Jeſus had life up himſelf, and ſaw none 
but the woman P, he ſaid unto her, Woman, where 


= thoſe thine Accuſers? Harh no man condemned 
thee q ? 

Þ Thecloſe of the former Verſe told us, that though the Scribes 
and Phariſces were gone, yet the Woman was left in the midit, ex- 
pedting Chritts Seatence : q Chriit knew well enough that the Scr:bes 
and Pharzfees, this poor Womans Atcuſers, were gone, bur yet he 
Acterh warily, and calls tor her Acculers, and asks, 1f no man had 
Condemned ner 2 Thereby intimating, that the Law againſt Adultery 
48 a Juit Law ; and it the Crime were proved againſt her, ſhe deſer- 
ved to Die; bur the mutt firit be Convicted and Condemried: He 


2uks her, it ſhe were Condemned ? For then he had nothing te ſay. 
She tells him, none had. 


his Fathers entire Approbarion of his Office, and Fideliry in the dif- 
charge of it ; and the concurrent Tettimony of the Father with him: 
Therefore his Record was authentick and true. but they did not be- 
lieyve his Mitſion feom Heaven, nor that he was to aſcend thither 
and accordingly diſvalued his Teſtimony. 


I5 Ye judge after the fleſh b, ® I judge no man c. 


me 3 or, according to your own Paſſions and Corrupt Aﬀections, c1 
judze no man in that manner, or jadge no man alone, as it follow- 
ethin rhe next Verſe. 

16 And yetif I judge, my judgment is true, for *I 
am not alone, but I and the Father that ſent me d. 

d My Teitimony isnot to be looked upon as a ſingle Teſtimony 


for my ſelf ; rho' I do judge, yet wy Judgment is true, for no At 


of mine-is a ſingle At : I and my Father are one, and what I do, 
my Father alſo doth, thar ſent me into the World as his Ambaſſadour: 


So as if the Judgment of God be true, which you all own, grant, 
and acknowledge ; then my Judgment is true, becauſe ir is not mine 
only, bur the Judgmenr alſo of that God whom you own, acknow- 


ledge, and worſhip, and who ſent me inro the World. 

I7 * Itis alſo written in your Law, that the teſti- 
mony of two men is true e. . 

e It is written, Devts 17. 6. and 19. 15. God fo ordered itby his 
Divine Law, that every thing ſhould be cftabliſhed by rhe Teftimony 


of two Witneſles. 
18 I am one that bear witneſs of my ſelf, and the 


Father that ſent me beareth witneſs of me f. 


F 1 (faith one Saviour ) bave rwo Wirnefſes ; I am one, I bear 
Witneſs of my ſelf : My Father is another, for he bearcth Witneſs of 
me. Our Saviours Argumencation ſeemerh weak, unleſs we look up- 
on him as exempr from the condition of ordinary men, and no mcer 
man, by reaſon of the Perſonal Union of the Divine and Humane 
Nature in his Perſon. Nor mutt our Saviour be underſtood here to 


diſtinguiſh himſelf from his Father, in reſpect of his Divine Being ; 


for ſo he and his Father are one, bur in reſpe of his Office, as he 
was ſent, and his Father was he wbo ſent him. And indeed in the 
whole, he ſeemerh ro accommodate himſelf ro the Peoples Appre» 


. IT She faid, No man, Lord. And Jeſus ſaid unto 
ol. If, 


henfions of him. 


*:9 Then ſaid they unto him, Where is thy Fa- 
| [ Dddd } ther g? 


fear the greater judgment of God, if thou goeſt on in a courſe of 


* I am che light of the world :; he that followeth , 


Chap. VIII 


' *Chap. 12 
bur ſhall have the ,,, 36,46: 


and his Afſertion here, Tho:gh I bear witneſi of my ſelf, my record 


6 According to my outward appearanceto you, ſoyou judge of 47+ 


| Ws 37. 
13 The Phariſees therefore faid unto him, Thou i} BY 5 | 


*Ch, 9-29: | | t #4 L 


*Chap. 13 


#YVer. 29s 


® Mats 18+ 
16. 


ILLTED ee = 
_ a —_ Fn 


Ps NE 


Ae erage, 


* I « 
9 ae 
-— »- 7 — og = $40 


+ A y 4 


Chap. VIIL 


"Chap. 16.ther g ? Jeſus anſwered, * Ye ncither know me, nor 


*Caap. 14. 
<p 
,' 


*Phap. 13: 


* Chap. 3* 


21, 


$ \'er. 27 


taught in the Templez: and ® no man laid hands on 


S.F O 
my Pather, * it ye had Known me, Je ſhould have 
known my Father alto 5, 

Thou talke't munch of thy Father, where is he? We know no 
Either which thou hait bur the Carpenter, .Jo/eph 3 we do not look 
n;51 him as fo crevible a Witneſs ;nthe Caſe, as tro take his Teſtt- 
mony in ſuch a matter as this 3s : þ Chritt tells them, thar rhe reaſon 
why they did not know the Father, was becauſe they did not know 
and acknowledge, receive and belicve him ; for if they had received 
and belic:cd him, they would not then have been at ſuch a loſs | 
have known witere is Father was, or who he was. The Eternal Fa- 
ther is 1:01 to be known, but in, and by, and through the Son. 


20 Theſe words fpake Jeſus in- the Treaſury as he 


him &, tor his hour was not yet come /. : 

; Thc Treaſury was a publick Place in the Temple ; concerning | 
which, fee the Notes on Mar. 17.6. Mark 12. 41,43» Luke 21.1- 
Caritt Taught ſometimes in one part of the Temple,fomertimes 1n ano- 
ther : +4 But that no man ſhonld lay hol on him, conſidering tae 
jearch made for him in the beginning of the Feaſt, and rheir ſending, 
Metſengers to take him, as we read Chap, 7. 32. and the Afﬀronr he 
had given to the Scribes and Phariſees, (of which we read in the be- 
pinning of this Chapter ) was very miraculous: { Nor can any aC- 
CUNT be given of it beſides what is here given, viz. That bis bour was 
».0t 1et come. Which was the Reaſon we heard given before, mn the 
ſame caſe, Chap. 7.30, Men ſhall be able ro do nothing againit 
Chriſt, or any that belong unto him, till the time cometh that God 
hath fer in his wiſe and erernal Thoughts. 

2: Then ſaid Jelus again unto chem, I go my way, 
and * ye ſhall ſeek me, and ſhall die in your fins m 
whithec 1] go, ye cannot come », 

1 The greateit part of whart is faid here, was faid by our Saviour 
before, Chap. 7. 34+ { See the Explicarion of it there) only here, 


Father; bur they would not underitand when he fpake to the 


ned that they could not underitand. 


hath taught me, I ſpeak theſe things a. 


H N. 


e Fudging is not put here for Judicial Condernnation. tr fo; 
proving and Accuting, which 1s one part of Judgin-. ; 
and Reprove me; I h.ve many things of which I could atfo acc, 
and Convince you, bur ler me fay wha: I will, you will "+0 gr5n 
me. 7 But you will not eſcape the Judgment of my Father — 
true, he willjudge you . w I ſpeak unto men nothing by; 4, On 
is bis Will that I ſhould declare to them. wt it 

27 They underſtood not that ne ſpake to them of th. 
Father x « 
x The Fews /ag we are told ) ufed ro call God, The F 


s / Father in bi 
3 Mi, 
way of Eminency ; they underliood thar he fpake to them of his 


in of h1 
Father, or the Father, thar he meant God rhe Father of of hi 


; all: their 
Minds were blinded that they could not fee ; and their Hearts apy 


Pe. 


You ACCuſe 


238 Then ſaid Jeſus unto them. When ye hays jk 


up the Son of man y, then ſhall ye know that I am he 


and * that T do nothing of my ſelf z, but * as my 


» It is your Unhappineſs,that while I am alive, and Preach 
Goipel to you, inviting you ro Repentance, and Faith in me 
true Meſſiah, you will nor believe me to be indeed whar I am, þ,, 
you ſhall lift me upon the Croſs { for that is meant by lifting " 
as Chap. 12. 32. and 3. 14) and when the time cometh, you D 
know that Iam 7 the Light of the World, as Verſe 12, Foy after 
thar-the Goſpel began ro be Preached to all Nations. Or ty | 
am the true Meſſiah, he whom the Father hath ſenr into the Wqjjy 
Some of you ſhall then know it by thoſe Signs and Wonders tha ſhall 
attend my Dearh and Reſurrection, and ro your Shame and Conj,. 
fion ; others of you ſhall know it ro your eternal Joy and $aly; 
believing on me, then whom ye will not, now acknowledge ; - 1 
rhar what I have done, I have only done by Gommillton from ww; 


lion, 


Father, not of my ſelf ; a and that whatT have taughr, I haye y;5 


in Commiſſion from my Father ro teach. 


we ſhall find in Ezex, 3. 18, 19. which doubtleſs fgnifieth, in the 
Guilt of your tins, not removed from you, and is a threatning of 
Erernal Death, as well as Temporal in the Deſtruction of Hieru- 
{aiem: u And tiole who do fo, cannot come into Heaven, where 
Chriit 1s. 

22 Then ſaid the Jews, Will he kill himſelf ? be- 
emfe he faith, Whither I go ye cannot come o. 

o Beforerthry Gueſſed, that he would go to the diſperſed arnongft 
te Gonzales, Che 7. 35- Now they Fancy that he would kill him 
{cif ; or ejle ſpeak this in Mockery. | 

23 And he laid unto them, * Ye are from beneath, 


I am trom above, ye are of this world, I am not of 
this world p. | 

þ Yeare not only of an Earthly Extraction, Creatures of the 
Earth, tor deſcended from Heaven, as I am ; bur alſo of Earthly 
Spiras and Principles: 'You favour nothing that is ſublime and ſpi- 
17a, and therefore you do not underſtand me. I tell you, 1am 
ot of thy World: My Original is not from ir, nor am I to determine 
n:y being 1n it. I ſhall die, but I (hall riſe again from the dead, and 
aſcend into Heaven, where you cannot come. Srill our Saviour af- 
ſerts his Divine Nature ; and the ſtreſs of all, he ſaith, lierh there ; 
their unbelief of which was the cauſe of all rheir Diſputings and Er- 


inttead of you ſhall not find me, is, yoPſhall die in your ſins ; ma Phraſe 


29 And * he that ſent me is with me, the * Fuher ty 
hath nor left me alone 6, tor I do always thoſe things;5, 
( 


that pleaſe him c. 

b I have the Preſence of God with me, as I am Mediator ; the r;. 
ther hath nor ſent me into the World to do his Will, and left we 
alone without his Preſence, c for | do his Will, I drive no ſcp; 
Deſign trom my Father, but always do thoſe things which pleaſe kin, 
From whence all Faithful Miniſters and Chriſtians may learn how tg 
conclude of Gods Prefence with them, which they can no lonyer pra. 
miſe to themſelves, than they ſpeak and do thoſe things that pleaſe 
him. 


. ZO As he ſpake theſe words ®, many believed ane 


him 4. | 

d Believing on him, is not here to be nnderſtood ſtrictly of $1. 
virg Faith, but rather, of ſome preparations toward it ; they hepan 
to believe that hefſwas the rrue Meſſtas, and ro have more honourable 
thoughts than they had of him ; that this was all, will appear from 
what we find in rhe following Verſes; and believing often figrif. 
eth no more in the New Teſ/tament, than a light Afſent given to ſome 
Propoſitions in the Goſpe! relating ro Chriſt. 

31 Then faid jeſus rochole Jews which believed on 
him e, If ye continue in my word f, then are ye my 


rors. He had given them the greateft Evidence of it imaginable in 
the Works which he had done in their fight, which were nor only 
above the Power of Nature, bur ſuch as God had never Authorized, 
or eriabled any Creature to do ; yet they being deſtitute of ſaperna- 
tural Grace, did not believe in him : And they were inexcuſable, be- 


diſciples indeed g, 

e Inthe Senſe before expreſſed. Our Saviour well enough (ay 
their Hearts, and in what manner they believed, and what fort of 
Diſciples they were,viz. only Nominal : They have the Name of Dil- 


cauſe that Grace was denied them for their wilful Corraption and 
Wickednels, which they might have avoided by the ule of that com- 
mon Gr..ce which was not denied thein, 


- 24 *1 ſaid therefore unto you, that ye ſhall die in 


your tins; tor if ye believe not that] am he, ye ſhall 
dic in your fins q, 

q In the Greek it 18 only, If you believe not that 1 am. Some re- 
fer this to Chriſts Divine Nature. (1am, is the Name of God, 
Exod. 3. 14+ ) But others rather think, that Chriſt here ſpeakerh of 
hwlſcit as the Meſſtab and Mediator, and ſo the Obje&t of Peoples 
Faith ; and he, out of whom there is no Salvation: The latter indeed 
includeth the former ; for, Curſed 5 he that truſteth in man, and 
maketh fleſh bis Arm. The Text plainly holds forth an impoflibility 
of Salvation for thoſe, who under the Revelations of the Goſpel, re- 
ccive nor, and believe not in Chriſt as Mediator. 


25 Then ſaid they unto him, Who are thou r ? Je- 
?us taith unto them, Even the ſame that I ſaid unto you 
irom the beginning /. 


r What good Chriitian will not learn tocontemn the Slights and 
Reproaches of {infal Men, when he readeth a Company of Miſcreants 
ti:us uhng their Lord and Malter, ſaying to him, #ho art thou ? It is 
10 Wondzr if the World which knew him not, doth not know us /. 
The latter pait of the Verſe, as ir lies in the Greek, ts exceeding 
Cukecult, word for word it is, The beginning, becauſe alſo I ſpeak unto 
2-4, Come tink that our Saviour calleth himſelf The beginning. 
Ocers tk the Neun 1s in this place pur for an Adverb; of which 
Ve 1,ve many Inſtances in Scripture, though none as to this Noun ; 
bt 1 ſhail leave thoſe who detrre Satisfaction as ro what is ſaid by 
Criticks about this Verſe, to what Mr. Pool hath collected in his Sy- 
7:.pj.5 Criticorums, and Only conſider it as our Interpreters undcritood 
Ir, n wh1ch form 1t feemeth ro be a meer {lighting of them, as much 
5s iT he bad (atd, T have often enough, even from the beginning, roid 
you wholam; I need ſiy no more to you upon that Head than 1 


Te ave laid. Lam the ſame, and no other, than 1 ar firlt rold you Il wag 


,, 25 I have many things to fay, ani to judge of you 
;.*, bur * he that ſent me is true 4, and TI * ſpeak to the 
world thoſe things which I have heard of him w.. * 


ciples who come after Chriſt ro hear him, bur they are his Diſciples 
indeed, who make his Doctrine the Rule of their Lives. He there 
fore tells them. f Thar not a meer ſaying to him Lord, Lord, and 
yielding ſome lighr Affent ro ſome Propoſitions of Truth in the Gol- 
pel, would make them his Diſciples in truth and reality, without an 
abiding and continuance in the words which he taught rhem, 


ſhall make you free 5. Ih 
h Thar is, you ſhall more fully and clearly know the Truth; by 
which may be either underſtood of Chriſt, who ftilerh himſelf The way, 
the Trath,and the Life ; or thoſe Propofitions of Truch which Chrit 
hath revealed. There miuſt be ſome knowledge of Truth in a Soul 
before it can believe ; for how ſhall they believe ( ſaith the Apoſtle ) 
in him of whom they have not heard ? bur a fuller and clearer kno - 
ledge of the Truth is got by degrees. by thoſe who {tudiouſly ſeal af- 
ter 1, and walk cloſe with God. # And the Truth ſhall make you 
free. Ir appears by ver. 35.. That by the Truth he means hinſelt; 
there he ſaith, If the Son make you free, and indeed though Uk 
know ledge of the Propoſition of Truth, gives men ſome liberty from 
the bondage of Ignorance, and ſome Lufts, yer it is only the m_ 
knowledge ofChritt, which brings men into a perfect Liberty from #* 
Law, the rigour, curſe, and terror of ir, and from the dominionÞi 
Sin and Corruption. (ed, 
33 They anſwered him *®, We be Abrahams IK 
and were never in bondage to any man &, how laye 
thou, ye {hall be made tree /* = 2 
k How carnally doth a carnal Heart underftandSpiritual My TE 
Thus Nicodemus hearing of being born again, grotly dreamed,” - 
ring into his Mothers Wo:nb, and being born again. The m_— . 
Samarsa, hearing of Living water,dreamr of Water that _ - - 
tishe her Thirit, as ſhe ſhould never come again to the We 
draw. The Fews here hearing of being made tree, dreath of 4 
dom from humane Bondage and Slavery. To what our rey 
faid, That if they knew the Truth, the Truth ſhould make _— 
they reply, We are Abrahams ſeed, and were never 11 bon 23 -— 
any. Admitting that they were Abrahams ſeed, that 1s —_— = 
the Fews in Bondage? Firſt to Pharav9bKing of EgIP?, then SE 
chadnezzer ſing of Babylon,they were now 1n Bondage tO _— —_ 
They maſt either undecttand it of their own Perſons, chougn chei 
were Triburaries, they wete no Slavyts 5-57 cif mammal * wy 


by 


32 And ye ſhall know the Truth 6, and * the trah*Ba 


Chap, VII 


Fathe 
. [ x 111 
” Ci, 


—_—. 
ing the* Cap 
» Wthelt, 


i 


a free- . 


hap 


Low Lancet 6. 


Wil Jap VIII. 


* Chap, 


age 0 
re not 
Nebu- 
1m4ns- 
1 Tlicy 
. thetf 
Regt 


jo Go yOu, 


8.7 0 


! = 1014 'K arry” Ty {+ 7” AP if an - Fe. 
Right, ney had a r19:t 70 Le! erty 4 t:10 riiey Were under an ka 
'S. 4 8. a 
mn{f1CK d81 | - : 
—_ Chrilt ſhould ſpeak of their being made free ; for thoſe rhar are 
Ces WA Not in a Capacity LO be made tree. The Ferwws were a Peo- 
"te yer renacious of their Liberty, and gloried much in the right 
"1.-y had IO 1t. 
1 a bet ( . [> $- F [ G y jp 
24 :ſs anſwered them, Verily, veiily, I {ay unto 
' + Wholocver commirteth 1in, 15 the fervant of 
fji1 778 , EE 
. Orr Saviour here Correctern their Mittake, lerting them know, 
- he was not ſpeaking about anyCorporal bur Spiritual Servitade; 


eh - : Por: : 

not of the Freedom of mens Bodies from rhe power of Enemies, 
irs the Freedom of mens Souls from the Slavery and dominion of 
jt 4 Corrnptions. Hz that doth jin ((latth he) i the ſervant of 


0s The committing or doing of Sin here1ntended, 1s not to be un: 
1.2004 of (ingle Acts of Sin, (for in that ſenſe, who /ives and ſin- 
on 112 {The righteous man finning ſeven times in a day) fo as all 
wn world be concluded the ſervants of Sin) bur of living indul- 
_— Etitually in a courle of Sin, and m the practice of Groſs 
vng, 10 which fenſe, gorgers of 11.4 jrity 18 tobe taken, Mat 7. 23. 
&nd chis very Phraſe, 1 Fobn 3. 4. And indeed the very Heather 
-q11d ſee, thar there was no ſuch Slavery, as a Servitude to Luſts 
-n4 Pailions: Men are the Servants of Corruption, 2 Pet. 2. 16. 
under ch# Dominion of Sin, Rom. 6. 20. 

15 And the Servant z avideth not in the houſe for 
e167 0, brit the Son abiderh for ever p. 

» The Servant of fin o abideth not in the Church, (which is the 
Houſe of God) tor -ver. Look as it is with Slaves and Servants, 
they are no fixed Members of Families, they may be rurned out, they 
mav be fold over to others,they abide in Families according as in them 
rt:.y behave themſelves, ſo you who are Abrahams ſeed,asz you boaſt 
«2; olory, are now Servants in the Church of God, yet it you con - 
tnuero be ſervants of Sin, you ſhall nor for ever abide in Gods-boulſe, 
it you be not caſt our ot the Church Milirant,you fhall certainly be 
| out of the Church Triumphanr, that is, you ſhall never come 
there: p But the Son, ( ſome think he ſpeaks of himſelf, who was the 
erernal Son of God} he abides for ever ; bur I rather think he ſpeaks 
of him that is a Son by Adoption, Fo/. 1.12. Rom. 3. 16,17. So as 
this Text ſheweth us the .remarkable difference, berwixt a nominal 
Profetlor, and one who 1s a true Believer, the one is but as a 
Servint in Gods Houſe, ro whom belonzetk no Inheritance, tho' 
while he is 1n the Family, he enjoyeth fome - common Priviledges 
which a. meer Stranger hath no rizar to: The other 1s a Son, and 
hath right to the Inheritance, and fo ſhall never be cait our of the 
Family, bur abideth :n it for ever. 

g, 36 * Ifthe Son thereto: ſhall make ye free 9g, ye 
ſhall be free indeed 7, 

7 if thar term (the Son} in this Verſe be the ſame with rhe Son 
mentioned in the former Verſe, rhey mu't both be underitood of 
Chrill 3 tori 's molt certain, that here (the Son} can fizmifie no 
more thin Chrilt, zo whom alone it belonyerh ro mike Souls free 
from the {lavery of tne Law, Sin, Death, Hell. Gc r Now faith our 
Saviour, this 18 1he trve freedom. Alas! what is the treedom you 
bot of cad glory m? Tr 1s not the freedom of yuur inward Man ; 
3: you were 112 Lhe foſlett actual Polietiton of it, many a one in that 
ſnſe fr-e, hath a baſe, ſervile, Navith Mind, and 1s a ſervant to Cor- 
raption and Luits, Its only the Freedom which I give unto Souls. 
tals a true and perfect Liberty, and 1s alone worthy the name of ir. 


' 
, 
t) Wits 


LIL 
ZZ 
£4. A%s 


37 76a declare by yout Adticns. that yoa are very far fron; : 


virnde ro their Conquerors. / This made them angry, | Sp 1rit and Temper of /6r4hame 4 am one who heing ſcent of (344, 
wonom you own as your Father, have faithfully revealed the Will of 
God to you, and have never told you any thing bur the Truth, 4414 
this 1s all my Crime, for which you ſeek ro Murder me, a this was 


none of your Farher Abrahams praftice ; fo asrtho? 191 have ſom 
thing of Abrabams Mood, yer yuu kaye notaing of Alrahams Spill 


in you. 
41 You do the deeds of your father b. Then {cid 


b You imitate him who is indeed your Fathor, by « hom our $1- 
viour (as we ſhall hear more afterwards) meaneth the Devil. c This 
they fume ar, and tell him, tney were 120k horn of For !21C4tyON, v hich 


Is in our Ezg/:ſk Dialect,as much as, He are wo Brſter ds. brit it hack 


another ſenſe in this place, as «ppzarern by the nexe words. 7's 


bave one Fatier even God, thatis We own and Woritp ons God, 
who 1s our Faiher 5 which wakes very good Interirycters think 
that their meanng in thoſe Words, Ie are not born of Fornication, 
is, We areno [dolarers ; Idolatry in Holy Writ beins very ordina- 
rily compared to Whoredom and Fornications. 
2 Jelu; laid-uito them, If God were your fathc: 

+2 wH100 T9019 -161£9 L11gIMN, S) VWEre F Or I2 >ilwt 7 

ye would love me d, for I proceedcd forth, and came 


mee. 

d This agreeth with wiat we have,1Foh. 5. 1. Every one that lcy- 
eth tm thet begat, lovet him alſo that i bezotten of him. e But here 
our Savtour rather ſeemerh to ſpeak of his proceeding torth,and com: 
ing from God, as fent into the World to fultilthe Will of God as to 
the Redemprion of man, rhan of his proceeding from his Father by 
erernal Generation. Ir 1s true, That he who loves the Father, wilt 
alſo love the Child, fo far forth as he reſembleth lis Father, and 
aCcterh like unto bim; and it is as true, that he who loveth him thar 
ſends a Meiſenger, will allo love the Meiſenger, executing the Com. 
million of him that ſent him 

43 Why do ye not anderfha my ſpeech ? ever be. 
cauie y2 cannot hear my word f. 

F It is manifeſt all along this Diſcourſe, that Chrilt ſpake R:iddls: 
to the Fewws, and that they underfiood not the import and ſenſe of 
bis Diſcourſe-; now (faith our Saviour ) the reafon 1s, becauſe you 
Cannot hear, that is, believe my word, they coal and did hear ti! 
with their Ears, they heard the found of it. bur they could nor dil- 
cern the ſpiritual Senſe and Meaning of it. Ir was nor given to them 
to know the Myſteries of the Kinzdom of God. Mar. 13.11. And 
the reaſon was, becauſe they ſuffered themſelves to be blinded by 
prejudice, and by their own Lults and corrupt Atﬀections, till God 
gave them upto a judicial B'indneſs, that hea: ing they heard, and 
did nor underſtand, and ſceing they faw, and did nor. perceive. 


from the beginning, z and abode not in the truth, be- 
caule there is no truth in him ; when heſpeaketh a lie, 
he ſpeaketh of his own, for he is a liar and the father 
of it &. 


g Our Saviour now plainly tells them whar he meant by therr Fa- 
ther, mentioned v. 3$. viz. the Devil, whole Children tho" rhey 


27 I know that ye are Abrahams feed {} but ye ſeek 
t9 kill me, becauſe my word hath no place in your. 

s According to the fleſh you are deſcended from Avravam, thar I 
know, but of what Advantage 1s, or can this be toyou ? & While 
In the mean time you are umplacable enemies to me. and teek ro Mur- 
der me, who am not only an Innocent Perſon, bur am the Lord of 
Life, and came to ſave the Werld, and the roor of this is your unhe- 
bef. Did you receive and believe rhe word that I have ſpoken to 
you, you would do otherwiſe ; bur altho* rhe ſound of my word 
prrceth your Ears, and then youreceive a l:ttle of ir, yer it paſſerh 
nt into your Hearts, it hath no place wirhin you, you do not be. 
leveir, you arent affected with ir, it doth not dwell in you as it 
cuprt to JO, fo that you are not turned into rhe [ikeneſs and ohedi- 
ence ct it, Men may be Profeſſors and Members of the Church of 
623, in whom yer the word of God hath no rooting, and findeth no 
true place, io as that their Condition may be fad enough. 


5 35 * I {peak that which I have ſeen with my father 
2, ard ye UO that which ye have ſeen with your ta- 


Viet 


"ther, wp. 

4 My Father 1$8God, I declire unto you his Mind and Will ; no 
uncertian things, but what I have feen with him, that is, wharI cer- 
lanly know to be his Will. w You declare by your Actions who 
is your Father ; and as I do my Fathers Will, and what he reacherh 
me t0Go, {5 you do the works which the Devil, whois your Father, 
#7. 44, prompreth you to do. 


33 J9 They anſwered and ſaid unto him * Abraham is 


- 2.07 Father x :; Jeſus ſaid unto them *, + ri Abra- 
% . "8. 4 
*11ams children, ye would do the works of Abrahamy. 


- This was their continual boaſt, as may be learned from >{4t.3.9. 
7.07YNZ 12) their Birth Priviledge, as Abraham being the Father of 
nm whole Ze {{» Nation,and in their Cluarch Priviledge, 4brahambe- 
ng tar Head of the Few:ſÞþ Church, and he to whom the Promiſes 
*e mice. y Bur Chriſt raketh them off this Glorying, by minding 
them, that the Blood of Abraham running in their Veins, would be 
, _ h2micancy ro them, ſo long as they did not walk in Abra- 
75 Steps. Men are truly ro be accounted the Children of thoſe, not 
from whom they are naturally Deſcended, but whoſe Steps they walk 
n, and whom they imitate in their Converſations. 

40 Bure now ye ſeekto kill me, a man 72at hath told 
Jou tne truth, which I have heard of God & : 'This did 
Nat Abraham a. 


Vol AL 


were not by natural Traduction, yet taey were by imitation. þ Wit- 
fully doing the things which rhe Devil would have them do ; he in. 
{tancerh in two of theſe Luits, z Murder, he faith the D-vil from rhe 
beginning, of the World had a mind and delign againit the Sons of 
Men ; and he ever fince (as the Apoille tells us} :ath gone abort lihs 
a roaring lion ſceking whom he may devour. And in this they were 
bis true Children, uting all arts unaginable to Celiroy him whom 
God harh ſent into the World tor mans Salvation. 4 In another thing 
alſo, they were the r:ue and genmine Children, of the Devil, The 
Cevil had no Truth in kim, nor did he abide in the Truth. God 
indeed created the Angels (who afterward fell } in a are of Recti- 
trade, withour unrizhrecuſnets ; but they did nor Keep their firtl 
Station. So neither did they love the Truth, nor abide in it, bur 
were wholly Falſe and Liars, and could nor abide the Trath. 

45 And becauſe I tell you the truth, you believe me 
not /. 

1 Such is your hatred to the Truth, that you bate ime {or no other 
reaſon, but becauſe I reveal my Fathers Will, ( witch is the Truth ) 
to yon, than which nothing can evidence a greater hatred to Truth, 


nor conformity and likeneſs to the Devil 3 there cannor be a greater 
Eviderice of any ones hatred of the Truth, than the hatred of rhofe 
who tell them the Truth ; and for this very reaion becaule they as 
fo. 

45 Which of you convinceth me of {in? anc it i 
ſay the truth, why do ye nor beheve mem? _ 

7 If any of you can prove, that I have ſpoken to you any thing that 
is falſe and not conſonant to the will of 1fay Father, do it, bur wittco 
of you is able ro Charge me with any fuch thing ? If there be no f.uct) 
ching, bur I have told you what is the very truth, and the we. Of ny 
Father, as to what you are to believe and Coz Why do younort bclizys 
me 2 For every reaſonable Soul 3 a Debtor ro Truth. 


ye therefore hear thera not, becaule ye are 107 Ot Gon, 

2 To be of God here is oppoſtd to a being not ot God, and to 
may be underitood to comprehend El2:t10n as well as Reg 27 alle 
on. 0 He heareth, acknowledgeth, believeth, and pattemtiy iu3- 
mittecth to the Will of God revealed in his Word. p The reaſon 
why you, tho' with your Ears you hear the Word of God, yet 49 
not in Heart receive, and embrace, and believe 1, nor can ſubmit Ty 
ir, is hecauſe ye are not of God, nor choſen of him, not faving!y en- 


. \ - be TIT Lan © 1 ' 
lightned; and regenerated by hum. So as this Text attorys vs wn 


excellent Note, by which we miy know whether we be Regeuerated, 
{ Dddd > | Als 


, TS) 3 4 ; %. fy bs) 
£ : *'IFY A 
any - - 


they to him, We bz nat born of fornication, * we #5: 
have one Father eve» God c, % 64 


Mi! 


irom God ®, neither came I of my telf, but he tent #-£b2p. 


4 
« 
nN 
-- 


44 * Ye are of your Father the Devil g, and tic ,, 
luſts of your father ye will lob ; he was a murderer*joi-2. 3: 


; 3 - words 09:4 
47 * He that is of God », heareth Gods wores 9,* {4,6 


F'! ne | 
ll Iz [| ; 
Mi j 06.4.4 1 
397 1 4 b] HP: % 
IT hi STA 1-4 
/ z [181.185 oY Td 
| 4:41 Ut - \- 
WH 02109454 
$4 HA $3103 3 
Wat g fi. 3 
1 {196} 41 Fa 
$1148 , F "S. 
k 4134 Fs”. 
4 #; Tb 
* Mets T.. i 
' bolt 035. F Hn 
4.4 (it 1 -3P þ . 
1 Mt "ft 1 | 
, 77 *t | | 
015 8 1.9 #5314 
991 #44. of 
3 AT471 & | 
ROT 4 8D 
't þ nt 
i {Nt q 
\Mj 7 
#> VE 
$: T & 4 #4 
4 q4 tx; | . : $1 iy 
ny 
4, 


NOTTS POLL Tenn Conn 


= 


> 


- _ 
Fn - 
4 


4x: 


a: 
—— 
jo ” — 
ons Hor ane OY CNS 2 
2008 og. RES 5 - - 
- 4 ; - -_» » mw 
« 9g 
_= 
X *- 
— 
_ 


<I> 


—— — — ——— — 
Bs. $345 tp. mes TR 
= —. 
or i EE = 
__ _— ef 
” - oo 
OED 


Eno... Sao 


pra 


_"- 


ie cv” 29 
g89%'; FI Rs i 
Eien on : 


>< 


» 29 - 


| »P4 


_ 
_ 


- — 
BG "ED % 

- 
Ef 


a *%.7 
I 
EI 


RI. 
—_— he nes 


4 os EE Es 


4 


ae 


bag a Devil) bis wue tt boti ſenſes, Chit bal no Devil, 


: ; = LY hy > ap ». fthie x5 
THe n0thins that be 01), 11 for the honout Of 12!$ Father ; tits was 


Þ 
{4 


$2 And * T ſeek not my own glory, there is one that 
£1.22 and qudgeth me. 


41d 0:94, he $ount not his own Flonour and Reputation, witch both 


51 Verily, verily, Lfay unto you, * Ifa man keep 


”- 
il 


ye 2 
3 \ 


[ 


2 Fophets were cead ; and therefore to ſpeak of any Mortal mans 


- 623%) ard the Prophets are dead ; whom makeſt 


=__ 


+. » ; BS 6 bs 0 z 
b , + 45S 2, BP, ſ ; 
4 —- C 7» I : a _ 733, - 117 190-7 
102 T1 £150 _* TH 1] \ 0M} ww P3120 13 (45 V OrUe 2Y Lis ay ily 
« 3 - - ho Lag 


1 1% (3 


e2uld Tazec and Condemn you for all your hard Speeches winch 


SY iy iu? 
ty Giffering (ſenſe from what 1t 18 taken in Lug 2.4.25, where 1 
» be under{iccd of a natural Death ; of which it cannot be under- 


2nd here. for the holictt men ihall Die. Rome. 8, 1c» 


R —— I +- 
: as LI.% 
4» KI 2004 


why 1 HET J): 334M 


x ' x = 
, C di4.e- {4 Li 7 » 
iS 11,57 5 OLI Cui, 11 4t! 19: 
of 4 


20 bictlpeering that which was contrary to fenfe, and demonſtra- 


" "+-T . " 
Lv 3J4* 


IS. 


nt rt 1209 What doit thow make thy felt * Anu by the way, 


Pe with any that ſhould preier himſelf before their Father Abraham 


6 7% 4 
IEP GYyY, 


. 7 oP 2 
TfTTY SQ + (0) 
MRS TY IF 


o 


.* « Mp . 1 : ; 4 
our beltc:in? and yielding ONhect- 
Or OUT 
retro inthe Will of Gad,concerning theie 


ameris 19 20hute iti ot G | ic 
2:84 y an mbeleving cs, notiwinſianding all the P47ns te 
1c] | \ then tt enlighten and to bring then to tine five 
19 ri he rats. i pics not his Father to open rhetr 
! in te of the Hearts that they might underitang. 
BJ: 2:15:81 fatifie 31! the true and fairbful Minitcers 
 luithey fee they hive labored 1n vati, ad {pert 


ard in vain. When they bave don» all iney 
this of our Say four rrneg Thar the work mit be 
YES ts. and no more Hearts vill be changed, Than 
MY il £ Tfy Gods 
1.71 an{wered the Jews, Say we not well tat 
2 Samaritan 9, and * haſt a Devil 77 _ 
* 7211 {i2nifed to the Fers as much as an Inpo! or, or 


. 
_= 


£ Vs cr 
55 Yet® ye have NOt KNOV/N 12112 c bnt T know _ 
and if L ſhould fay Ixnow him not, I floutd be a 1;..- 
ff-3 to you 5 bur [ now hi i, and Keep His fayine , 
c Knowing here fgnities more than a Notional knowledoe of cy 
vrehending 1n our underſtanding to munch of God 7 by Nats 


__ - 
bo 


L- _ ge ton I f "4 I a - 
ra! Powers*be comprehended. Ir fignites Aﬀections, and a Cory 
Fs waili, 
1 


. ;BÞ-R +} IT raraaol et ' ID, "2 fie "- 
tion fuirable ro ſuch a Knowledge, df Zr 1 (aith onr daY!our 
o £ ' . _ » j ' 
/ %} J rF- 12 £-, $2 f ©47f)* f 7 3% 1nN*t5 C (3 7. ' By 230. 7 ng / ; fr 
{} Fry 244 +#er} ECL) know [07311, both «d3 70 (55 Ejjeiice, C 04u7jets iid DJ. 


and am fully Ovedzent to bins 
56 Your father Abraham *rejoyced to ſee my 0: 
and he law ar f, and was glad g. 

e You Glory much in this, that you have Abraham to your t 
ther, this Father of yours iorefaw my coming into theWer'd an, 
dying upon the Croſs. He ſaw 1t by the Eye of Faith in the py 
miſe which was made ro him, That ## hrs ſeed all the 


N Tti09 ys a” 4 
WW w& UVj 


eart' ould be bleſſed. Ne faw it in the Type of 1{2a:s heirs 


OfNers | 


«4 } Gay e 


was as may by Ian 
. py TTSEL 


»& + 
& 6® 


nc ny 


+. x - 1'2 
v3 


og tor the Fers looked upon the Samaritans as 8 Uetet., le | then receiving hins ins Fe, Feb $4.09. He fav it - Ay ©d, 
{ini io bad corropred the Worllinp of God v 167 TReWw BS- 1 of Divine Revelation. He ſaw my coming in the Fleſh ; my Fl 
erties in Monnt Gerrz72. Ard haſt a Devit, that 38, un20n the Crofs for Sinners ; the Publication of my Goſpel es. 
id, (Se the Nory on Chap, 7- 200 __ | whole World; by which means all the Nations of the Farth hecgne 
Pp; : »3115 452 LEUL Þ ++ is f 1.2 VEeNAITA Pevil /. bi honou | OlefG=d in his Seed. F 4 And he was TRY with the Joy of Faith. which 
If + and yoo od EGRGUr INC £. | \gives the Soul an union with an abſent Object by Faith made c«;. 
Toatis, Tam not potell-d with an evi! Spirit, as you Blat- |rain to ir, Heb. 11, Is 


3. or (as others thin) 1 ain not Mad. I ſpeak the words oi 
"and Sobcrncd., (ſor 1: 15 ſaid, that the Fes held an Opinion, 
! x 
I 


' . 
il} who were br. 


CEN) Oo S -912(1333 gt 


Yo «i Reproach tey Cali upon Chriit. In rec 
me it matt be obſerred, with how much Meckneſs the Lamb 
od recoired thee molt unworthy Reproaches catt upon bun : 

v2114y Tearn to behave our felves 1n the Iike manner under fach 


$34 +8 $.${9 4+ 4 


hit very O:ten minde hem of this, that in what he ſpake 
1d an Oihneetion they might make againtt him, and alſo con- 
4d 1hera of bis Truth and Sincerity in wazr he Gil, {bur faith be) 
Tel pot wy own Honour, yet there 1s one who concerneth 
lt in wy Honour and Glory , and you mutt expect that he 
ki 2 IPOKCHN agate 
; he ſhall never fe: death w. 
To fee Death in this Text, Ggnifieth to Die, bur in 2n ap 
1 


The boay 3s 
hat is, ir is dying) becarje of $112 Or thall die, becauſe of Sin ; 

\ Ls 11er{tood of Death eternal; and in thart ſenſe 
5 Ccitaunly trace, That an holy min that keepeth the 
ot fre D-ath ; that 1s, thall have Eterna: 
-- which is no more tan what we have often before mer with, 
ito Promite of i! erernal, to Falth and Holineſs. 


4 [4 
£ "4-7 « 
Talk $4070 >3\ 


. 
+ 1%» 


{ 


42 "Uben tfaid the Jeivs unto h1m, Now we know 
101 11:lh a devil x. * Abraham 1s dead and che 


> 301%, and thou layelt, If a man keep my ſayings 
i! never ratte of Death 7. 


- Sis: icrbe $h 
=3 


55 0; thc time we have met with this Blaſphemous im- 

anion from mthefe wretched men, Ch. 7. 29. In this Chap. ve 48. 
What ve have here, may ttrongly incline us to believe, 

© by the Pliale riecy did not intend that he was poſſeſſed with the 


it jor they here declare themſelves confirmed in what they ſaid, 
/fvianam was Cead, ( tho' the Father of the Faithful ) and 


'onirs Death, was Cortrary to every days experience, and 
+ Experience of the hohelt men” who ever.-lived. To them 
who underſtood him ſpeaking of a Natural diffoluti- 
ihe Soul and Body, this looke\] like the Language of one be. 
5 4. felt, (waich probably was all rhey meant, when they ſaid, 

7 a Newt) unleſs they uſed it asa term of Reproach and Paſ- 

' e11 winch, none can give any juit account. 

£2 &rttnou greater than our father Abraham, which 


% 
! 


EC 3s [.. 
t 1 Y ich - > 4 


- Eo cucanſcfo efcdt it, that thoſe who keep thy fayings ſhall 


1+, ton cant lo make thy ſelf Immortal, nenther Abraham, 
2 Protnets could fave themſelves from Death, they arc all dead ; 


> ka gtnotner Charge upon our Saviour, the Fes having no pari- 


bn. Ha 
SVLORES & 
q uy 
' the 
eabiclnd anfive 
i o Fonws no 44 tw 
? - 


red, Tf hembur my ſelf, my honour 
Pet 


my Father that honourcth me, of 


LOS 


: tal2 ge? a; I: t5 
oY 


a fame with what onr Savioer ſaid, Chap. 5. 31. 
Ive? © 14. (fre the Notes on both theſe 
ex mine own Honour, and Glory ; Or, 
what indeed Corh nor belong to me ; Or if 
OUT 1 > WhICa( by the next words ) ſeemeth to be 
2 16448 enie Githe Phraſe here. 6 My Father is he who Honour- 

2, by Wineung from Heaven, that T am his beloved Son : 
44 me to te World to accomylith his Work, by many 


a OM 13 


ted, were influenced by an evil Spirit, and | 
# Bet 


| V is . 


ons which are Puniſhments of Sin, fo there are ſome that 
Trials. 


old hb, and haſt thou ſeen Abraham 2? 


1 ww 29 . 


the Eye of Faith. 


& Some will have the meaning to be, that Chriſt was before 4. 


Bur thus it might have been ſaid of any of the Elect, rhar they were 
Choſen bcfore Abrahams was : It 1s therefore undoubredly ro he yr. 
derftood of Chritts eternal Exiſtence, as to his Divine Narure; and 
this will appear, as {rom other Arguments, ſo from the whole ſcope 
of our Saviours former Diſcourſe in this Chaprer, which was ts af. 


i 


{c:t his Divine Nature and Equality with the Father. 


! As they alfo did, Ch. 10. 31. Ir is in vain toenquire, where 
they nad Stones in the Temple ; rhey might be repairing ſome par 
ot it, or ſome parts of it paved with Stones might be looſe, &:; It 
is enough, thar we are a{{ured, that ſome they found. m He (id 
not go thro” the midft of them that were in this Uproar, but fri; 
thratt himſelf into the more innocent Crond, then paſſed thro? the 
midit of them. Some make a Queſtion here, how he could pi 
rhro? the midit of them: Whether he made his Body invifiole? 
(fo the Lutherans think) or whether he ſtruck his Enemics with 
Blindne's, or thickned the Air befove their Eyes. But what needs 
that Diſpute ? Admit ſome few of the Rabble to be in a Razz, the 
greateit part Innocent, it 1s no hard thing for us to conceive, how a 
Perſon diſcerning the Diſorder, may thruſt himſelf into the more In 
nocent Croud, and paſs by, eſcaping the Rage of his Encmics, 


CHAP. IX 


Chraft openeth the eyes of one that i born blind, 1-.-12. Which ti: 
brought hefore the Phariſees, to whom he relates theſame, 13-15 
They reprove Chrift as a Sabbath-breaker, 16--17. They ſend jo 
the Parents of the Child, who referreth it to their Sons Teſto, 
13--23.. ho was called and examined, 24--26. Who an[were:" 
and telleth them, that Chrift i no Sinner but of God, »27--34%- 
Wherefore he i excomunicated, 34. Chrift inſtruQeth the 01 1 
man, who believeth in him, 35--39. And ſheweth the Phari<'s 
their ſpirstual Blindneſſ, 40--41, 


AN as Feſus paſſed by, he ſaw a man which was 
blind from his Birth 4. X 

4-The Evangeliſt doth nor tell us where our Saviour was Þ4.4i'5 
by ; bur the word ſeemeth ro import, a palling by the High-2) 
ade, when he ſaw this poor man, who was born Blind; whic?!s 
particularly noted, becauſe ſuch Blindneſs is judged incurable as © 
the Art of Man. 


2 And his Diſciples, asked him, ſaying, Mater who 


did ſin, this man or his parents, that he was born 


blind 6 ? 


b The DiſciMes Queſtion ſuppos'd rwo thipgs for Truth; x« Thi 


all Bodily Puniſhments and Aflictions come upon men for 910. Ei 
That as ſome come upon them for Perſonal fins, ſo others Come "t 


on them for the fins of their Parents. The latter 1s nrgnelionae'f 
true ; lo is the former, but not univerſally, as there are OY 
are 0 


; : al nor 
3 Jeſs anſwered, Neither hath this man ſinned, NN 


nis parents c, * but that the works of God ſhout 9 


$15 20d Wonders: And you ſay, tliat this my Father is yuur 
. MC:HOFT YOU will nor give Credit io me, and my Te- 
: 26 JOU OUZLL © give Credit to lim, whom you Own 2s 


8 


| arictly, and anſwering, Thar his Aftiction cam* v in 
0 Or he could not br S%7, 


m:de manifeſt in him 4. Inn 
c Our Saviour muſt not be underfiood here, 38 mn; ON oem 
the Blind man or his Parents free from Sin; and a degre” = oO wa 


, , , wo ©. Cage yl 
ring ſuch a Punithment ; but as ſpeaking ro 313 D.fcip!: We 
BOLD ON 149 


[1 

£ 
PILE VEE > C ERS YA £ FI 
er icr zny Perional Sin of his own, {10 


58 Jc1us {aid unto them, Verily, verily, I ſay un 
you, before Abraham was, I am &- 


brahams time conititutred Mediator. As he 1s ſaid ro be the Lany 
ſlain from the Foundation of the World, Rev. 1 3. 8. So 1Pce. 1.29, 


57 Then faid the Jews, thou art not yet fifty year: 


þ Chritt was at this time bur Three and thirty Years od, and v9. 

z they dream of {Abrahams freeing him, and his ſeeing Alra. 
am wrh bodily Eyes, of witch Chriit ſaid nothing , th at indeeg 
had been a thing impoſſible, for Abraham was dead many hung 
of Years before Chrift appeared in the Fleſh ro rhe World, neither 
ccth oar Saviour fay, that he had ſeen Abraham, or that Abrahay 
had ſeen him, bur that he had ſeen his Day, his coming in the Fleſh 
nis Death, which Abraham had ſeen, nor with bodily Eyes bur with 


A 


65/9 8 4 

59 "Dhen *® took they up ſtones to caſt at him}, bu 
jclus hid himfe!lt, and went our of the temple *, goings), 
through the midſt of them , and ſo pailed by, x, | 


Al. 
#( 


Le 


, 

an)! 
i” 

fp 


ppl 


—_— 
a— 


yy ey 
_— WY. 


j, 
Q * 


- 
CD 


[ 


ny 
/ 


p15 0 


+ 2, Dy” 
of - ; , «Nl oem \ - — 4 AvnuYY Sq +? a» 1.3 
* c..v Atul fin before he was Lormm ) nor yer for any fin that n 
\ 4a?) £2. * » 066 . os SI LENS k £P $ £ *_ Yo 4 _ L 
_ DG =— com mitteds d But that the Worxs of God (73: Z41T b 
Parenns Ha Mo : et. 4 As as ro. ah oc: as is 
a »Igr10Us 9 hm . borh 1s Was ot Power 146 8ULCUNS,; and 'vys 
7”. i 2 FEE ho a 4 
+ oE Mercy In healing hum. Rs 
Et: Ducky ro £ PR: - K > 95+ +1. 
” » 7 muſt work the works of him that fene me wiile 
Hye: the night cometh, when no man Car 
WW 8 f* } ! ! 
vLO þ Math Joon ot Who ir -DOrlc 
+ The farker who ſent Chriit into the World, pave him work to 


19, Fo 17+ 4» f}1s general work was, To glorite God upon the 
Th 25 by working out the Redemption of Man, fo by revealing 
his 4111 ro the Sons of Men.and working Miracles for the gtoriying 
«he nam? of God : faith Chritt, 7 -.zve a ſet trme to work, 23, Met 13, 
"hat which he here calleth day, the rime wherein Chriſt was to Ive 
_—_ the Earth. e Lam not to be here always, there will come a 
ime when 1 mult be abſent from the Earth, then none of this work 
-11 he done. A good Argument to pertuade every Chritttan to 
work while the time of tins Lite Jalterh ; for che Night of Death 
will cone, V hen no Man can any longer work out tus S4yation : 


bur 2s the tree falleth, fo it mult lye, Eccleſ. 9g. 10+ ; 
As long as I am in the worid *, Lam te light of 


<7. 1 
% the world ge | 
>, o Theſe words as long as I am in the World, let us know what our 


o:y;our meant by zhe day, mentioned zer. 4. v3. The rime he ſhould 
be *n the World : (faith he.) So /ong a 1am in the World it 35 a 
1+ of my work to ſhe light to the world. Chrift indecd, though be 
fad let the World, is yer tlie light of the World ; bur he was the 
Lipht of the World, that part of the World, eſpecially where hc was 
in a impre eminent ſenſe ſo long as the World cnjoyed his bodily pre- 
ence 1n It : 

{ When he had thus ſpoken, he * ſpat upon the 


” :-round, and made clay of the fpirtle, and he f| anointed 


L 


the eyes of the blind man with the clay 6. 


tad þ Several myRerics Allzgories are found out by inen of [uxuriant 
fancies with reference to the manner gf our Sayiours curing Unis blind 


f man ; asif our Saviour had made choice of clay, to ſhew, that as he 


p/n ar firſt made man of the dutt of the Earth,ſo he could again cure him 


yith duit 3 And rhar his Spittle denoted, rhe efficacy of Chrilts Hu- 
manity, being now perſonally united to rhe Divine Nature : Others 
think, he made ule of Sp:tt/e, becauſe the Fews hail a great Opinion 
of the Medicinal Virtue of Spree ; and rhey ſay, torbid the Mevt- 
cinal wie of 1t on the Sabbath day, (on which day this Miracle was 
wrought) Bur all theſe things are great uncertainties, for which we 
want any guidance from Holy Writ, Ir is moſt probable, That our 
9yiour made ufe of his Sprecte in working this Miracle, becauſe he 
he had no Water at Hand, for Water was a very ſcarce thing in thoſe 
2: Countries. That which we are chiedy to attend in this great 
Miraculous Operation is Chrift's Demon {&ration of his Divine Na- 
tare, for the confirmation of the Trurh, of wh ch he doubtleſs 
wrought this great Work, :5 well as to thew Ing Charity to this poor 
Creature Fo this purpoſe he inrit maketh choice, not of a Blind 
Man only . bur one who was born {o, and ſo incurrabie according to 
all Incgment of Humane Art.. 2. He makerh uſe of no means that 
hag any appearance of a Natural Virtue in it ; nay, which was more 
ſire ro pur our the Eyes of one that ſaw, than to give faght to 
one that was blind. 

- And 14id unto him, Go waſh in the pool of St- 
loams, Which is by incerprecation, Sent, He went 
his way therefore, and waſhed, and came ſeeing &. 

; Hedoth nor only ano! his Eyes, bur ſenderh him alſo ro waſh 
in the Poo! of Siloam; We read of this Pool Nehemiah 3. 15. And 
we are ro!d, That It was a Fountain which ſprang out from Mount 
Zion. It ſhould feem, that there was a Brook of that Naine, which 
ſupplied part of the City with Water, 1ſazah 8. 6. Some think, 
they have alſo found a Myſtery in this Name, becauſe i ftigmtierh 
Sent, and think that it hath an Allufon ro Sh:/o, which was the 
Meſſias mentioned Gen. 49. 10. The Name is plainly an old Name, 
2s appears from the place I nored our of Nehemiah, probably given 
tot anciently, in acknowledgment of the mercy of God given them 
in ſending them ſuch a Brook, or Rivulet from thoſe Mounrains, fo 
commodtons fox that .great City : Or, becauſe {as fome rhink) the 
Warer did not run always, bur at certain times, as it were ſc of 
God. We read of nothinz Medicinal in this Water; only as a pro 
bation of the blind nian's Faith and Obedience, ir pleaſed our Lord ro 
ſend the blind man to waſh himſelf there; as of old Naaman the 
V1); was ſent to waſh in Jordan, He went ; and the EvargeliSt 
t !et us ſee, that rrue Faith joined with ſincere Obedierce, never 
tailcth the Expectation of them that exerciſe ir, lets us know that 
be returned ſeeing, 

8 The neighbours therefore, and they which before 
had ſeen him that he was blind, ſaid, Is not this he 
that fate and begged / ? 

{ The Evange/i# now reports the Conſequents of this Miracle; 
be being cured, returneth to bis Friends : thoſe who lived about that 
pace, bad taken notice of his ordinary fitting there, and begging ; 
now ſeeing him perfectly recovered, ask one another, 1t this were 
not the blind Beggar that. uſed to fit there. 

\ 


9 Some laid, This is he : Ochers ſaid, He is like him: 
Put ho {aid T am he m2. 

” Some conclude it was he, others doubred, bur did think he 
v.23 Ike him 2 he puts it our of Joubr, and faith, That he was the 


"IA 


I / | O WP by —_ C* oj ' - » . 
10 Therefore ſaid they unto him, How were thine 
tes Opened xz 2 
#7 accorting as is the nature of moſt men upon the ſight. of any 
=» and firange accident, they are curious ro know how 1t came to 


Yils yuh A; > - 
P'S, VID did it, and where he was. The blind man tells them, 


r . 


2.t 118 was Cnred 
th CUreys 


Yi He an{wered,and ſaid, A man that is called Jeſus 


2J, and anointed mine cyts, and laid unto my 


y T% a 


] Fr # 1.2 ? I 573 * 43 FF (7 «4 T Mm A [4 
v4 TYCY ”N - y 4 k = 
\ EW p CR A 4 ta +» vn TIP | = ab UN 44% ct 44 
= - , , je _ 
7 14, FI A.) Atth;7? Fre ng 7,2} FOIA / 
Wy aAt189%, Coun - www we fy w ws ak 4k Vs. 
- 
To 5 . % 
N ” a Tt = 491-3. , . _ \ T My 2 jt } fx 35547 "/ = 
< 2 WW w bai % V "% ! I 5 ! UiSd bY ] apcd tu - . 
.* . - 
Fay 3.20) / —_ PAINE = } oh ! 
! WT % % . ” . F et FTA, 
vii x i. [249 I y 4 4 <4 ao, 1G-CCicC! oO THEM C 
1 
35 09 Os I 
27185 E >} v\ 


-% 3 4 x, * © —_ » 
is} 11ATY Y » 4 $!,Avy . wa 1 V \ 2 >> , PTY { 
I 2-4 JIEN 321160 OQ1 WF Uo £41, vilGIChH 1Cs Tie a!d, 
? 
4 T7 
I MOW NCT PF, 
o 
Lays F3 £. RS 8.8, 
Pp. They Would know where he was; this 122 knows n9t. 


\Þ. il Comma ® 
Nat ARiOTSTIING 


pl 
83 Lhey brought to te Pharilees him 
was blind 9. 


q Wherker the Neigh:onrs, or his nezr Reſations, is not ſaid, 
tor is the Place mentioned, Waere 3:3 ConTention of Phariſees was, 
whether in the Temple, or in lome $5505 0710, or in the great Court 
which they called rhe Sarnmedrtn z nor 1s it material for us to 1qu:re 
Into. 

14 And it was the SaoMatih-day when Tzius made the 
clay and opencd nis eyes r. 

7 It was obſe xetore, That Chriſt made choice of the Sabbark, 
day, as the Day \ 
on tne Savbarh- dy that he Cured the Impotent man who lay at the 
Pool of B-t/e/day Ch. 5. 10. and upon the Sabbath-day; that he C::- 
red him why had the Withered Hand, Mat. 12. io. And now azairn 
vpon the S2h5ath-day that he Cured him who was born Blind,poifib!y 
he choſe that Day, becauſe that was a Day whereon he ordinarily 
Preacted that heavenly Doctriae, which he confirmed by theſe Mira- 
culous Works, or perhaps, that he might take occation from thence 
toinitruct the Fews, if they would have received Intirudtion in the 


chink, that it was nor lawful ro do aCts of Mercy on the Sabbarh-day, 
certain It is, that himſelf makerh that improvement of ic, Mat. 12 oc 
to ſhew them, that he was Lord of the Sabbath, and chat as his Fa- 
ther by the works of Providence workerh on the Sabbath-day,ſo did 
be, bein, equal with his Father, by which Argument he afore de- 
fended linnfelt, for che Cure of the Impotent man on the Sabvath- 
day, John 5. 17» 


15 Then again the Phariſees alſo asked him, How he 
had received histight ? He {aid unto them, He pur cla 
upon miae eyes, and I waſhed, and do lee 7. 


7 The Phariſees asked him, how he had received his Sight 2 They 
had before heard it from others, but they now defire to hear it from 


himſelf ; not (as appears out of any good defign, that they might be 
convinced of the truth of the thing, or that he who had wronghr 
this Miracle was the Son of God ; but that they might have ſomething 
ro object again{t Chritt, and ro quarrel with him for, upon their 
Traditions, with reference to the obſeryation of:theSabbath. Of which 
we are told this was one, That it was unlanful for any to anoint 
thetr eyes with ſpittle on the Sabbath-day ; they having a conceir, 
thatir was a medicinal Application. The Blind man is-nort aſham- 
ed to own the Goodneſs of God to him, ro the Phariſees, but 
_— tae ſame Story which he before bad related to the Pco- 
ple, : 


16 Theretore ſaid fome of the Phariſees, This man 
is not of God, becaulz he keeperh not the Sabbath- 
day s, Others ſaid * How can a man that is a finner 
- inch miracles z ? And * there was a divition among 
chem #. | 


s They are fo far from owning Chrift as God, the Eternal 50n of 
God, and equal with his Fatizer, that they wil! not allow him to have 
any relation to Got as one ſenr of him. Ir is true, the Sandtification 
of the Sabbath 1s fo great a piece of Religion (the whole of which is 
fomerines expreflied by it, 1/a. 56. 4. 6.) that whoſo maketh no 
Confſcienee of 1t, miy reafonably be concluled to have lirtle or no- 
thing of Godin tim, bur we mutt rightly underttand what the Will 
ol God 15 as TO that Sanctihcation, and not think that it lyeth in a per- 
tormance of lome Ritual Services, winle in the mean time we neg- 
lect moral Duties: Chriit bad kept the Sabbath, tho” not in that 
Superitimions ſenſe they thonghr it was to be obſerves, keeping to all 
their Traditions about it» #t Others of the Pbar:fees had a fometiiinx 
Leiter Opinion of Chriit, by reaton of the Miracles he had wrought ; 
conchiting, that it he had been fo bad a Man, as fome of their Pre- 
thren would have him taken to be, God would not have ailified hun 
ro Tac £0ing of fucha miraculous Works as he had done. z Thus rhe 
wit: God made a divition amongtt the Counſels of Chriits Enennes, 
bis Work: b-iny not yet finiſhed, nor the time come when he wasto 
die for the Redemption of mans. 


17 They lay unto the blind man again. What fſay- 
eſt thou of him that he hath opened thine eyes w? 12 
ſaid *®, He is a prophet x. 


Eyes? To make the Queition perfect, Interprerers think, there ought 
to be this Supplement, Oz the Sa»bath-day. What doit thou thin' 
of ſuch a man as this, who would make Clay, and apjly it ro thy Care 
upon the Sabbarh-nay 2 How can ſuch a Fact be detended 2 x Tie 
Blind-mananſwered, He z# a Prophet. It was taken for granted by 
the Ferws according to their Traditions,That at the command of aPro- 
phet it was lawful to violate the Sabbath : Which incieed is no more 
than, That God hath not in giving us a Law, bound up himfelf, but 
he may diſpence with his own Law. Their Prophets had an extraor- 
dinary Mitizon from Gog, and immediately revealed the Will ot 
God ; fo as they looked upon what they faid, as ſpoken by Gol him- 
{elf. The Blind man declareth, That he believed rhat Caritt was 4 
Propher, and being fo, his Words an Actions had an extraordt- 
nary Warrant, and therefore were not to be judged by ordinary 
Rules. 
15 But the Jews did not belteve 

had been bind, 


concerning him, 


WG DO 
[LAT »:?f5 UL ili 


- Whar Opinion haſt thoa of this man, who hath opened thine 


rue Doctrine of the Sabbath ; rhat they might not ſaperſtiriouſly: 


F- Ch. Jo 2. 
ver: 33- 
*Ch. 7. 12+ 


43s I 0,1 9s 


Lis ', 1 34 
Q ©. 14» 


+. ek wp 


- lA HIM 


"" 
Eu ez 8 


_ "Be : ME 
7 nfere of the Fers did not, or the Mulcitude, 
Roto te Terr 2 not ; for we before beard that many ol 


HG Or mon om: 634. they ho feen bim for a long time fit beg- 
. z =p beim allowed, in an the corrupt and miferablec 

no Tribamgry 1 the Ronarzs, tho! inthe feuled prof- 
berci - neo wins fech 2 biboral Previtgn matic toy thew Poor. 
that tone wasno Dealat in tracts } befides, they fad it from his 
; 4. G. but the Rulers hi no mind to Hcheve 12; and 
mope r iers fe Fri (poilibly) had been nu Eve-witnefles of bis 
bor? Mo only keard the relation from others: The Rulers 
th fore end ior ihe Pareats of the Blind inan. 


to And they acked them ſaying, I this your lon 
| : 3 was born blind? how then doth he now 
> The Parents of this Van that was Blind, in their Anſwer ſhew 
at deat of refcreticn and prudence. Three rhings the Pharafees 
nk 1. Fl hether this mere their Sen? 2. Whether {as they ſaid) 
lea i1.ce2d born Blind © 3 How he came now to ſee ? The man 
ner of tlie propenacing of the queſtion, Bo (fe ſay) ler us know 


4 
Fe. «4 £v 


whar Arfoer they would have 114d, and bat they did nor ſend for 
the Pir-rrs of this Bligd-man. out of 2 defire ro know the naked 
Trinh of the thinz. bur hoping to frigit them into a ſpeaking 
(Colbiiully ar Teal) whether it was their Son yea or no2 Or whe- 
ter he wis fark Hind when he was born, yeaor no? Bat alas ! the 
Proviiercs cf God ordering his condition to be fo poor, that he 
was vlad ws 12 for bis livelibood, made this defign vain z would 
his Parers kave gratified the Phariſees, by any ſlutfing, and in- 
Gre tAn 
10 His Parents anſwered them, and faid, We know 
is is our fon, and that he was born Blind a, 

21 P:c by what means he now feeth,we know not,01 
who hit opened his Eyes we know not; He is of age, 
im, bs ſhall fpeak for himſelf. 
Por br{ides this, The Parents of this man proved honeſter, 
Lonter. than it may be the Phariſees did expett. Fhey affirm, 

v knew that he was their Son, and that he was born blind. 
27 ice the Third Queltion, How he now ſaw, They avoid an 
ro that. being poiſibly no Eye witneſs of Chriſt when he 
wreumbr the Miracle, For this they refer them to their Son, who 
o > 


V8 135 


- 


224:e, bur a man grown, one of Ape, able ro ſpeak for him- 
{-i'; of whom they might enquire, and he was belt able, as to this 
Ling, 0 give them fausfaction. 


22 "Ih:ſe words ſpake his Parents, becauſe they 
* feared the Jews c, for the Jews had agreed already, 
that ifany man did confeſs that he was Chriſt,ne ſhould 


be put out of the Synagogue d. 
C 


SFO HN 


h They cannot frown him into a denial of the Miracte wrougt. . 
he ftocd ftoutly ro affirm, That be was born Blind, and that bs 
cured by Chriit z row rhey put nin to tell the ſtory over azain P 
ther hoping they ſhould entrap him, contradicting himſelf *s bi 
"ory, or at lea, find fometiing, upon his repeating the (t«,.. 
for th-m to take advantage trom, to perſuade the People. Thar ir y.! 
but a Chear, and indeed there was no fuch Miracle wrought wi 
[1217s ai 
27 He anſwered them, I have told you already a; 
y2 did not hear, wherefore would you hear z aan p 
will ye allo- be his diſciples :* Fort 
7 Ir is wonderful ro fee, how the boldneſs and confidence o x: 
poor man increafed,God giving him that wiſdom and courage yi. 
chey were not able to refift. He refuſerh ro repeat the (4ory 
them, telling them, He had once a!rcady told it them : But they way! 
10t give credit to him ; and ro what purpoſe was it tor hi wi 
it over again, unleſs they were inclined to be his Ditcipies? for (;.. 
think the form of Speech implieth a hearty wiſting and gefire., 
that they wonld be ſo; bur others think, he ſpeaks Ironically 4, 
he had (aid, 1 know my repeating az41n the ſtory will nct mduce 3;y i 
be his Diſciples; you are reſolved againſt that, "and therefore w/., c, 
you put me ufim a needleſs trouble ? And this feemeth to have he@. 
his {enſe by what followeth in the P ariſees reply, full of indipr4. 
tions ID Y 
23 Then they reviled him, and ſaid, Thou art hj;; 
diſciple, but we are Moſes his diſciples &. 

k Tf this were all their reviling, for rhem to tell this poor m7 
thar he. was Chrilts Diſciple, it was a very tolerable impuration.ang 
wharz the blind man had reaſon to glory in. Their guilt in reyilng 
is to be judged not ſo much from what they ſpake, (for there wi; 
nothing of greater honour) as from what heart and ſpirit they {pk 
it. A Diſcifie ſignifies, One thar followeth another, and learnety 
of him. To be a Diſciple of Chrilt indeed, was the greate{ thin, 
that ay could glory in ; yet, the impuration of it to-this blind (q,41, 
is here called a Reviling: Whence we may obſerve, That the puile 
of Reviling, is to be adjudged nor ſo much from the Words which ; 
man ſpeaketh, as from the frame of his Spirir, and delign of that in 
the ſpeaking of them. If a man ſpeakerh that of another which i; 
200d and true, Yet it he doth ir our of a defign to expoſe him, tg 
do him miſchief, and ro make him odious unto others, God 06th 1c, 
count this Revi/ing, becauſe it proceedeth from the hatred of cy; 
Brother, in our Hearr, and a deſign to do hin harm. Az.in, the? 
indeed it was no reproach to be called Chriit's Diſciple, yer they 
affixed this term upon this poor man, ont of a defign to reproacy 
him, and to expoſe him to the hatred of others: we are in the 20. 
vernmentof our Tongues,not orly vbliged re rake heed what weliy, 
bur with what hearr,and out of whar deſign we ſpeak it. A malicious 
deſign turns terms of the greateit Honour, into rerms of Revilins, 
/ Betides, they here oppoſe Ch:i and Moſes ; whereas, Mes was 


A 


» 


war 
by 
i, 


The reaſon why his Parents anſwered fo very warily, and a- 
voided ſaying any thing to the Phariſees Third Queſtion, which 
probibly they could ner do of their particular perſonal knowledge 
was, That they were :fraid of the Rulers of the Fes. Solomon 
ſ-irh, Th: the fear of Man bizrgeth a Snare ; 1t 1s often a tempra- 
ton to wer: to Ceny the Troth, or at leaſt, notro own, and conteſs 


it when GE calls ro them for a publick owning and confeflion of 


ir: bur nothing of that nature appeareth in this caſe; for it doth 
not 1p per that his Parents were preſerr when Chriſt wrought this 
great Muacle, which if they were nor, they were not obliged to tell 
te Phatſees wh t themſelves had only received by ramor and hear- 
ſ;y ; fo that their Anſwer fees bur a prudential Anſwer, ro avoid 
an Eminent danger. & For they were not 1gnorant of a Decree 
made by the Jewiſh Sarbedrim, That if any did publickly fay, or 
declare. Thar Feſnus gp is Corift, he ſhould be Excommunicated: for 
that is eant by being put cut of the Sz7agopre, 
2 Theretors ſaid his Parents, He is oÞ age, ask him : 
4 Then again called they the man that was blind 
and ſaid unto him, Give God the praiſe, e we know 
chat this man is a ſinner f. 

e They were not able to obtain their defign from the Parents of 


tw 2:0 Goa the Gloryz by whoſe Power alone, exerted by his Son 
Carnitt Jeſus, he had received his fight. But Moral Actions are 
2/'e good or bad by their ends ; and if we conſider the End of 
"e's wretched men in this action of theirs, wherein they perſuaded 
:& poor man to his Duty, the words will appear to have been ſpo- 
en from bears minding nothing If than the glory of God, and 
car Gf 2 Grlign to vility and depretiate his Son ; whereas Ga} hath 
et vÞ is Relt in his Son, and cannot be glorified with, in, and 
toroveh bm 3 wrom In The next Words, they malicioufly defame, 
Fn only fp-aking or him conempraofly.calling him 2-75 99, bur 
enmity bro e&:2Joa%5 not a inner only, Eut a notorious, ſean- 
Calous Sinnfr ; as twat Word imnorts. 


25 ticanwered, and faid, Whether he be a ſinner, 
o as, (S209 avg One thing I know, that, whereas 


tay no P -y 
vYW ctyY0 1913.1, 


now I fee o: 
7 112 p30r 47 Heibg of no higher quality than a Begger, can be 


bur a Type, Chriſt the Anticype, Moſes Prophefied of Clr:#: 
C:riF was that Propher which God had promiſed to raiſe uplike 
unto him. Moſes bur the Schoolmaſter, who led them unto 
Chriſt, 

29 We know that God ſpake unto Moles, as tot this 
fellow * we know not whence he is m7, 


They knew God ſpake to him ; yer did they know it no otlerviſe 
than by Traditzon, and the Revelation of the Will of God in the 
Law, and the Prophers. For Chriſt, rhey call him {87oy, ths fel. 
low; and ſay, They know not whence he was ; that is, They know 
of no Divine Authority that he bad; they were blinded through 
malice, and prejudice ; indeed they did know whence he was 7s 
ro his Human Nature, for they often made that the canſe of their 
{tumbling at him, That he was of Galz/ce, That his Father was a 
Carpenter, and his Mother called Ma:y. Bur they knew of no Di- 
vine Mifſion, or Authority that he had ; this they might have known 
alſo, for he did thoſe things which no Man ever did, nor could bz 
effected by any thing leſs than a Divine Power 3 bur ther tyes 
were blinded, and their Hearts were judicially hardn:d ; they itud!- 
ed to ſhut out the Light by which they ſhould have ſeen. and wou' 
not know whence he was» 


30 The man anſwered, and faid unto them, Wiy 
herein is a marvellous thing, that ye know not trum 
whence he is, and yet he hath opened mine cyes n. 
2 The opening of the Eyes of the Blind, without tae application 
of means, rationally probable for the producing f1ich an Eftect, 97. 
by the application of means, which to all Human Reſon ſeemed 9i 
a quite contrary tendency ; and this Cure wrought upon one v.19 
was not blind by fome accidental cauſe, bur-by fome defect in 4 
rurs, who had been ſo from his Mothers Womb, was fo rmariei 
an Effect of the Divine Power, as this poor man was aitonitec at 
ir, rhat they ſhould nor underttand, that it was done by ſuch 3 59% 
er cicher immediately, or mediarely : eſpecially contidering 72 75 
ph. CY concerning the Meſſras, Iſa. 35* 5, 6. To which, Chrit reire 
reth Fohn and his Diſciples for an Evidence of it, Mz. 1 1+ 5: 

37 Now we knew that * God heareth not 00170 


will p, him he heareth q. 
0 This poor man proverh, That Chriſt was from Heaven, becauſe 


SO SO. b. bY "7 » » 8 A C V a S - O ' 
pCMIINES LO NAVE had no great Ecviacationg Yer is anfwer 1s as 200d 
2 1 be exprited from one of the greatelt breeding, both for 
e*c* ſw T7 31: Tr" t 2” / L. [4551 + aiflas __ 2113 j 

« [9 bunfelt, and ts {tout alierung what. was Truth. As ro 
her Crarge UND!) 


lr Crarge u Gur 53yiour of bis being a great Sinner, he a- 
VOLT IT, UENLLg TNEMTI, as IO that he knew nothing, nur was it his 
CONCErAato enquire ; but this te knew, that he had wrought a great 
Volk on bims for wheres he hid been blind from his Mothers 


ET  F 
he had opened his Eyes; not as yer apprehending that Col! nu 8 
by purting out an immediate Divine Power for his Hcaiing), but wy 
great Prophet obtaining ſuch a Power from God, for tte CONT pou 
on of the things which he delivered. Now (faith he) we #0" 


that God heareth not ſinners. Bur the queſtion is, whar trurh 12ere 


Wart; he row A ko Gotyr bt 16 I > ir +, 

_ >, he rio A had his f1gnt ed his means ; fo as all their frowns 
coun no tempt hin to deny. the) Miracle wrought upon him, nor 
yo: 10 Ipcik 126 leaſt in abatement to ir. 


46 my TY IT N WI " Hh. A _ ; : / p 
Like 4 a by A I” they w DIM e,01N 2 What did he to 
LICE © HICGW OB2Necd th LING 


"wa. [ITY 5? 
a ww SA 


S Py Fe _ © ” ©, 1ar o "21 
15 in this Axzom, or Propoktion. Dorh nor God hear oimners Hy, 
he can hear none ; for who liverk, and finnech nor 43908 Ro. 
. y PIER IT} C39 
How did he hear 4hab, and others who were notorious vi! 


319;y DIC 


Anſw. 1. By Sinners here mutt be under{tood notorict's _ 
ſumprious Sinners, that live and go on in courſes of Sin WIE © 
1! 


% 1 - oi on; ſ J "P } Gi iis 
19d hearts : The Word here uſed, fignitiech vold prefimpri'tn 
GF Hu 


Fas 
4. 


Jodie 


I 


4:75; rot ſach as meerly through ignorance, Weaknels, 


d 
-m Concerning Moſcs indeed they ſpeak honourably, and (iy, ; 


3ut if any man be a worſhipper of God, and 007% 4s y, 


ol 


STEEL] 
$4. © oc” 


ASE 


Cha P, NT 


Y t9: 


x” 
#17 
JU 


% 5 
Y ' 
r $448 
' PS 
MI In 
Fi- 

4 
YA 
X » 
(4, ! 
OE. 


Fon 
Pe 
| 


vv 
WY 
76 


11, 
(V8.0 


I Fo} 


{a with 


= 
mey 


wk my es mb mms cn os t0 


Sus) $6 Sa. an oe as as as oe ic tm. at... ot a_- acc 209 oc oe. io. oc as  - A. 6. a a 


hap. IX. 


: firmity» 2+ God is tinder no Covenant-Obſigation 16 hear Sinners ; 
T m_ challenge no ſuch favour upan the account of any Promile, 
__ God out of the aboundings of his Goodneſs may hear them, as 
hg Ahab and others, he may hear them as his Creatures crying 
- heir Miſery, though he hears them not as his Children; or uþon 
my count of any Covenant. 3. Az tothe ſenſe of this Maxim 1n 
- . cs ir ſcemeth to be particular, and ſpecial ; and the Words 
ws 2 be re[trained to that particular degree of favour here ſpok- 
_— God uſerh not fo honour notorious and flagitious Sinners, by 
n 2 them a power to work Miracles, by which they ſhould con- 
m _ thing which they ſay. This poor man bringerh this as an 
prion ts: vw-hy Chriſt ſhould not be ſuch a notorious Sinner as they 
ſpuke him, becauſe 1t was not Gods way to honour ſuch Perſons 
with his Preſence and Atliſtance to the doing of thoſe things which 
none c-u'd do, bur by a Divine Power commitred to them, Two 
things this Man aſſumeth, or raketh for granted. I. That no man 
can work, Miracles, without a Power oÞrained of God by Prayer, as 
we [ai 1t 04s 172 the caſe of Eliſha, 2 Kings 4. 33- 2. That what 
Chriſt 41d, he aid 4 4 man. The firlt is true, the ſecond was filſe 
He was not yer convinced of Chriſts Divine Nature. nor lookt upon 
him higher, than as a Propher ; one {-1r of God, to reveal the Will 
| of God, and to work great works in the World by Prayer; as ro 
which he affirms, thar if he were ſuch a Sinner as they clamour'd. 
| God would not hear him. Soas the Quettion, How far God may 
tear Sinner?, in giving them any thing they ak of him. ſeemeth not 
at all proper.to this place. though it be enough clear from other 
Scriprares, ſuch as Pſal. 66.18. and Iſa, 1.15. That non- thar 
live n a courſe of Sin can expect that God ſhould hear, or give an- 
{wer to their Prayers ; and tho' God may give into ſuch Sinners ſuch 
things as they ask him for, which are of a meer External eoncern, 
yer It i$nOt with reſpect to anyPromiſe which he hath made to them, 
bur out of the aboundings of his own Goodneſs. p But if a man 
fearerh God, and worketh Righteouſneſs, q him the Lord heareth, 
accepteth, and anſwereth. The ſecrets of the Lord are with them that 
fear tim, Plal. 25. 14+» Prov. 3. 32. : 
' 32. Since the world began was it not heard, that any 
one ovened rhe eyes of one that was born blind 7, 

7 He proverh Chriit ro be ſent from God, { tho” it appears by v. 
33. that he looked as yer upon him in no higher Notion than a man) 
from the nature of the Miracle that was wrought, which was not 
the recovery of a Blind mans Sighr only, but giving Sight to one 
who was born blind. Now, faith this poor man, Ths #» ſuch a work 
us 1as never done by Mojes. or by anv of the Prophets who have been 
lice the Creation of the Worid, Some who have been Blind from 
ſome accidental Cauſe. and ſomething which hath befallen them, 
Fiamesand Cataratts. &c. haye been Cured ; and poſlibly God by 
his Almighty power may have given Sight to one born Blind. Bur 
we never heard of any ſuch thing done by Moſes, whom we magni- 
fe, nor by the Prophets, for whom we have the greateſt Venera- 
tion. 

33 *If this man were not of God, he could do no- 
thing [. : | 

/ Iftherefore thy man | for he ſtill apprehender bh him no more ) 
had nor ſome ſpecial Authority from God, and there were nor ſome 
ſpecial Preſence of God with him, he could do nortung thar is of this 
Nature, Ir is a work beyond the Power of man, arid beyond that 
power that we read God did ever be-truit any man with. 

14 They anſwered, and faid unto him, Thou waſt 
altogether born in ſin, and doſt thou teach us : ? Anu 
cy || caſt him out «. 


in. t The Phariſees ſeeing that rhey conld by no Arts bring this poor 
in, Bind man to their lure; either ro deny, or ſpeak any thing in a- 
batemenr of the Miracle which Chriſt had wrought upon him ; nor 
yet to agree with rhem, That Chriſt was a great ſinner ; fall at lat: 
toa downright Railing, They tell him, -e was al. ogether born 1n ſins, 
ſo were all of them; David had taught them. That there was none 
righteous, no not one; and confetled concerning himſelf, Pſat. 51.5, 
That he was conceived in Iquity, aud thatin fin by mother haa 
brovgbt him forth. They had learned from Fob, That none can bring a 
clean thing out af that which # unclean. Nothing can be clean that 1 
torn of a Woman. Job. 14. 4, Their meaning therefore in this Phraſe 
muſt be ſomething more. and poilibly rhe Ady-trve 8x05 which fig- 
nifieth whole ; we Tranſate it{as if it were 5aws) altogether, doth im 

port thus much, They do nor only tell rhis n.n, that was born in fin, 
bur that he was z-ho/e,or altogether born in fin, rhar 1s, under theGuilr 
of tin, nor do they mean only the common Corruption and Conta- 
gion of Humane narure, deriv'd trom the loſs of Gods Image in man, 
upcn the Fall of 4dam, bur ſome notorious fin. It any fay, How could 
they think that he was guilty of any ſuch thing before hz was born. An. 
It was the Opinion of Pythagoras, one of the Heathen Philoſophers. 
That when Men and Women dyed, their Souls went into other Bo- 
dies, that were then born, and in thoſe Bodies ofren ſuffered Pu- 
niſhment for thoſe enormous Acts, which they had been Guiity of in 
former Bodies. Ir is apparent, that tne Fews were ſome of them 
tainted with this Notion, from Ferods ſaying, Mat. 14. 2. Mark 
6. 14, when after"the beheading of Fob» te Bapri#, he heard what 
great works Chriſt did, That Fohr Baprift, was riſen from the 
dead, and therefore mighty works did fſrew forth themſelves im ham. 
By which the belt Interpreters think, that Herod meant no more, than 
that 7:9 BaptiFts Soul was gone into another Body, according to 
their Notion borrowe( from the Heathe's ; tor it bad heen eatie for 
Herod by Search to have found, wherher John Baptrsts Body was 
riſen trom the dead. So it is thought, that the Phariſces here ſay 

g, Thou art altogether born in fin, meant, That his Soul was a for- 
Ont cid, tlihy Soul, which in another Body had commirred, vile and a- 
208 & ! bominahle things ; and for thoſe Sins, God fer a Mark upon him, 
LETTER even 1n his Birth, and he was born Blind. Or perhaps ;rhis Phraſc 
| beniaeth no more, than a term of Revi'ing, of which, no great ac- 
; count Can be viven ; as Paliionate men in the madneſs ot their Paſ- 
23% ons, oft thiow out words ot Reproach, of which neither them- 
: eves nor o' hers can give any jutt and reaſonable account. And do- 
harde 3} 592 teacus © Thou art ſuch a marked Villain from thy Mo- 


g) 


16 


vs 


S. 70 H N. 


"4 
thap. IN 
(_ 1aP: A £ %- 
thers Woh, or thar art ſuch 5n ignorant Tleot, dot thou think 
thy ſelf fit to inſtruct vs about true and falſe Prophets, who arc of 
God, and who are nor? Surely we are to be thy Teachers, and 


not thou ours. Ard rey caft himort. Sorne think that caſting 
out here, fignifieth na wore than turnins him cur of the Place 
where they were; as the word ſizmfieth, Ats 7.58. and 13. 592. 
Others think it 1s here to be underito0d of a Judicial Excommuni- 
cation, or calt him out of Communion with the Few:ſþ Church ; 
which Iatrer ſeemeth more probable, becauſe of the notice of it 
brought to our Savicur, and the notice which he rook of this poor 
man upon rhis occaſion. It it had been only a turning bim out of 
the Place where they were mer, it is not probable, rhat it wont 
have made ſuch a noiſe. : ; 

35 Jelus heard chat they had caſt him out 9, and 
when he had found him, he faid unto him, Docſt 
thou believe on the Son of God x ? 

w As was ſaid in the former Verſe, probably by Excommunica. 
tion. x When he had found him, whether caſually, or upon an it- 
duttrious Search for him,theScripture doth nor ſay he'ſa'd unto him 
DoFt thou be/reve on the Son of Go! 2 Art thon one who art ready 
truly and ſeriouſly to embrace the MeHiah and Saviour of«the World 
who muſt not be only the Son of Man, but alto the Son of God > Art 
thoa willing to accepr, receive, and cloſe with him, and to give up 
thy ſelt to his Obedience ? 

36 He aniwered and faid, Who is the Lord, that 
I might believe on him y ? 

y It 18as much as if he had ſaid, Lord how ſhould I believe on 
him, of whemT. have not heard, (So the Diſciples anſwered Pan! 
asking them, Mhether they had received the Holy-Gho#. We have Ae 


Jo much as yeard whether there be an Holy-Ghoſt, Acts 19. 2 ) Bur 


ſaith he, Lord T am ready ro believe on him, may I but know who he g. 
Our Lord had prepared this poor mans Heart, for the receiving of 
bir, there wanted now nothing bur the due Reyelation of the Meſ- 
hah unto,him. Thais our Sav:our givech him. 

37 And Jeſus ſaid unto him, Thou haſt both ſen 
him, and it it is he that talketh with thee &z. 

3 This is as muchas, Tam he. Thou haſt not only ſeen him 
with the Eyes of thy Body, but thon haſt had experience of his Di- 
vine Virtue and Power, 1n giving thee Sight who wert horn Blind : 
Thus ſeeing alſo figmheth, Fob. 14. 9. It is very obſ-ryable here, 
Thar Miracles do not work Faith, bur confirm it : The Blind man 
had experienced here a Miracle wrought upon himſelf, but yet he 
is an Unbcliever, until the Lord cometh to give him the Revelation 
of his Word. Faith cometh by hearing ; bur together with this 
Word, we mult alſo conceive a mighty Power to have fowed from 
Chritt, inwardly enlightening him, and enabling him to diſcern the 
Truth of what he told him, and making him yer further willin> to 
receive him, and cloſe with him. F 

35 And he ſaid, Lord I believe, a and he worſhip- 
ped him 6, 

a Now is the work of Faith with power wrought in his Soul ; 
he faith, Lord, I do 2cknowledge and receive thee as the Son of God, 
1 am fully perſwaded, that thou art more than what thou art in thy 
external Form and Appearance, more than a meer man, and I give ; 
up my felt ro thee, ro be Ruled and Guided by thee. 6 And as a 
Te!timony of this, he performed ſome Acts of external Adoration tc 
him. The Word figntties Proſtratzon: He kneeled down to him, 
or he fell upon his Face before him ; we are not able to Cetermine 
what particular Act or Poſture of Adoration he uſed, but there is 
nothing plainer, than that it is to be underſtood of ſuch a Divine 
Adoration and Homage as 1s due unto God alone, for it was fuck 
as teltrfied his Faith in him, as the Son of God, whom he had Pro- 
retied that he believed him to be, in the words immediately pre 
ceeding, altho' therefore the word in the Greek, be a word uſed ſome- 
times to ſignifie that civil Reſpect which men ſhew to their Supe- 
riors ; Yet it cannot be fo Interprered in this place, conſidering 
whar went before. _ ; 

39 And Jeſus ſaid *, For judgment am I come into, 
this Worl-1 c. * that they which ſee not, might ſee d,,,. 
and that they which ſe, might be made blind e. # Mat. 13: 


c There is a great variety in Interpreters Notions, about the Jdg- | 3 
ment here mentioned. Some think that by it is meant the Divine 
Council and Decree: Iam come into the World ro execute the 
juit Will, and Counſels, and Pleaſure of my Father ; and the event 
of 1t 1s this, That ſome who ſaw not fee, and ſome who ſee, in a 
ſenſe are made Blind. Others underi*and it of Condemnation ; 1 
ain come to execute the Judgment of Condemnation : Bur thus it 
is hardly reconciieable ro Fohn 3. 17. where it is ſaid, That God 
ſent not hy ſon to condemn che Ford. The beit Notion of it is theirs 
who Interpret it of the ſpiritual Government of the World, com- 
mitred ro Chriſt, and managed by him with a pertect rectirude ant 
equity : One eminent part of this, was his Publiſhing the Goſpe!, 
the Law of Faith, the event of which is, Th:t many Spiritually 
blind, and utjerly unable to ſes the way that leadsro eternal Life, 
might ( as this Perſon that was born Blind, is now clear ſighted ) bez 
enlighrned with the ſaving knowledge of the Truth ; «22d many thar 
think they fee, ſhould by their obitinare Infideliry, be more Blind 
than they were from their Birth. Nor that I calt any ſuch i influ- 
ence upon them ; bur this happneth through their own fore Eyes : 
Tam the Light of the World, and it 1 of the Narure of Light, to 


Ch. 5 22, 


| 


| 


make orher things viſible ro men, and it hath irs Etiect, and dot 
lo where mens Eyes are not ill-effected with Humours and the 1:ke ; 
ſo the Lizht of my Goſpel by which I ſhine tn the World, m:kes the 
way of Salvation by me, ordained by my Father,* As 3. 22. evident 
aug clear to many Sovls who are indarknefs, and the ihadow of 
Death: But ic fo happneth through the Prejudices that others 
are pre-Poijetied with againit me, and the Doctrine of my Gulpel, 
by which I ſhine 10 the World, and their Iznorance, Malice, 
and Hared againit me, and the DoCtrine witca I bring, tat 
:hto' their own Perverſeneſs, and the nghteous Judoment of God, 
at laſt givinz men over io their own Delutions, tizey are mae 


Nivre 


CEN — - : 


re 
— 4 
= - 


_— 


_ barn tag rey 4% fac w__ 


Chap. X. 


$1 (2 
44 
} 

i | 


EOS 
S—- ” 


— - 


*- ph ES 


_—_— RES 
RS: RE ae 


nap A 
= Ws nn 
0 


4 —— A: 


yoor 
48 act 
” Ye 


more blind. In this Senſe, this Scripture agreeth with what was os 
phecied by 1{a*2b, Ch. 8. 14- And he ſhali be for a omg epgs - 
for a ſtone of ſtumbling, and for a Rock of offence to both the Toy by 
ef IFacl, for again, and for a ſnare to he Inhabitants of Feruſa- 
/2-m. And the words of Simcon.,in Luxe2. 34: 


Pau', Rom. 9. 73+ 


4. fthe Phaiiſees that were with him, 
of x peek Are we blind 


keard theſe words, and faid unto him, 
op F- Phariſe2s attended our Saviour, almoſt in all Places where 
he went. to catch ſomething from him, whereof they mizhr Accuſe 
him. They could nor but underitand, thar the import of oor Savi- 
ours lai Words was, Thar this poor blind Wan, now not only re 
ceiving bodily Sight, (tho' born Blind) bur a ſpiritual Ian, 
by which he diſcerned, that Chriit was the Son of 99 Sg rue 
Meſſiah, 2514 Saviour of the World ; was an Inſfance of rho - men 
zioned, who not ſeeing before, upon Chri't coming ſw; an Roan 
themſelves, and rheir Malters, were a1 In{tance of rhoſe _ & 111 
tended by ſuch as ſaw, and by his co-ning was "made Blind, for =—_ 
Saviour had often called them - Blind, and fo repreſentrd _ ” rhe 
People to whom he Preached, Mat. 15 « 14. Luke $+ 39+ TTY : ew: 
fore grew very Angry, being very Proud, and not or O - 
thoughr, or called Blind, looking upon themſelves as the greatel 
Ltzhts of the Few:i/Þ Church. 

ar Jeſus ſaid unro them, it ye we' 
ſhould have no fin þ, but now ye lay, 
fore your fin remaineth &- ; 

g It your Ignorance were fimple, and not affected, and you were 
ſenſible of ir, then your Blindneſs were not incurable, 224 your >1N 
mighr be pardoned. This appeareth to be the Senſe, from the oppo 
fition of it ; ſo ye ſay, we ſee, in the larter parr of the Verlc 3 they 
were indeed Blind, :is to any true and faving Sight of Chritt, and of 
the true way of Salvation, by believing in him ſeeing, ( as they ap- 
prehended } a way of Salvation withour Chriit, by tne works of thc 
Law, and wilfnlly ſhutting rheir Eyes again(t rhe glorious Ligut of 


e blind g, ye 
We ice z, there 


the Goſpel ſhining on them. þ You ſhould not have ſo much 31n, fo 


much Guiit upon your Souls as you now have; tho' your Igno- 
rance had bcen Sin, yet it had not been fo great a Sin, as a waltul 
ſhutring your Eyes again{t the Light ; bur, « now thar you have an 
Opinion that you ſee, and boaſt in your knowl:dge of the Law, as 
it you were the only men that faw ; and upon this Preſump:10n re- 
ject the Doctrine ot S.Ivation : k You by it do not only conclude your 
ſelves under the guilt of Sin, but your Sin remaineth upon you, not 
pardoned ro you ; which teacherh us, That withour a true and fav- 
ing {ight of Sin, and ſuch a one as carrieth the Soul our of it elf, 
to Ckriit for Pardon and Remedy, there is no hope of Pardon and 
Forgivencfs trom all the Mercy that 1s in God. 


CAAP XK 


Chri# telleth them that he is the true Shepherd of his Sheep, 1---6, 


and ihe Door, 7--11, and that hz is no Hireling, by his willing- 
neſs to lay down bis Life for his Sheep, 13-21. The Fews ask him 
mhether he is Christ, 22-24. athich be teſtifieth by hu Aftions, 2.5. 


Chrif ſheweth who are hu Seeep, and who are not ; telling rbem 
the benefits hy Sheep ſhall receive from him.26-30. Wherefore the 
Fews would have Stoned him, 31--33. but be juſtifies himſelf, and 


eſcapeth from them, and goeth to Fordan, 34-42. 


\ T Erily, verily, I ſay unro you, He that entreth not 
by the door, into the Sheeptold a, but climberh 


up ſome other way, the fame is a Thiet and a Robber b 


In this famous Parable, ( which reacheth to ver. 31.) our Sa- 
viour ſeemeth to drive ewogreat Deſigns. 1. To prove himſelf the 


zrue Shepherd, 2. To prove the Phariſees, and Teachers of thoſe 
times, Thieves and Robbers, 


a It ſhould ſeem, that the Sheepfolds in rhoſe Countries were 
Houfes,which bad Doors by which the Entry was into them. - There 
is no coubr, but by the Sheepfold is meaat here, The Church of Gad, 
in which the People of God are garhered together in one. By theDoor, 
he apparently meaneth himſelf, as he himlelf ſpeaketh, v. 1. Or ra- 
ther, more generally that way which God hath appointed for any 
that are co take charge of his Church to enter. He is both the 
Shepherd, (the true Shepherd) and the Door , the Shepherd as the 
Care, Conduct, and Government of the Church belongeth ro him, 
and 15 upon his Shoulders. The Door, as he is he whom the Father 
hath ordained to be the Chief Shepherd, from whom all who pre- 
tend to any right to Teach, or Govern in the Church, mutt derive 
both their Authority and Abilities. 6 Now faith our Saviour, Who- 
ſoever they be, rhat rhru(t themſelves into the Care, Conduct, and 
Governinent of the Church, without any Call or Warrant from my 
Father or me, who am the rrue Docr, through which whoſoever en- 
treth into the Church mult enter; and the Chief Shepherd from whom 
he mutt derive, or be a Thzef and a Robber. His very entrance makes 
It appear, That his end is not ro feed the Flock, but to feed himſelf ; 
and that he drives only a private Deſign of Advantage to himſelf. 

2 Bur he thatentreth by the door is the ſhepherd 
of the ſheep c. 

c As 1t 1s among't men, the true Shepherd goes into the Sheep- 
fold by the Door ; fo it is in the Church of God. He that taketh nor 
the Honour 0: Governing the Church to himſclf, bur being called of 
God, as Aaron was : He i the Shepherd of the Shecp. This very Ar- 
g11ment the Apoſtle uſeth, ro prove Chrilt to be the true High Prieſt, 
Heb 5.4. 5-Becauſe,be glorzfizd not himſelf to be made anHigh-Prieſt, 
bar was nude one by him, who ſaid unto him, Pſa/n 110. ver. 4. 
(quorea there allo, v.6 ) Thow art a Prieſt for ever, after the order 
or Melchyjedeck. God (whoſe the Church is) call'd his Heritage, 
hy peculiar Peop'e, &c. was the Door, by which Chritt rhe Chict 
Sepacrd, entred into the Flock; he made him the Head of the 
Church, Ephe. 5. 23- For this he is ſaid to be lent, and often makes 
himſelt known to us, under the Notion. of him- whom the Farther 
hah ſent. And the under Shepherds gult alſo derive from Caritt, 


S.F 0 HN. 


Beiod !thy C hild 1s 
fer for the fall and riſing again of many m Ir ael. As alſo with that of 


Chap 


as the Fathers Will in ſending. Chriit was his Door ; 


_—_ | So the Wj 
Chrilt in ſending others, is their Door ; thar is, 1 Will of 


their only true 


l way 
of entring upon the Charge ofthe Flock of Chriſt, Fob. 20. 21. 
my Father hath ſent me, ſo fend I you. There is a double "tn 


the one is Extraordinary, of which Mifſion Chriſt fpeaketh tg Th 
Apoſtles in that place 3 rhus the Apoſtles and fir Miniſters of 3. 
Goſpel were ſent ; Chriſt breathed upon them, and ſaid, Receive jy 
the Ko!y-Ghoſt,, Ch. 20. 22. And there was yer a fuller fending y- 
cheſe firſt Shepherds in the Days of Pentecoit, Atts 2. 17, And there 
is a more: ordinary ſending, as to: which God revealed his Wy . 
Time. 2. 2+ The things that thou bait beard of me amongſt SY 
witneſſes, the ſame commit thou to faithful men, who ſhall be i. 
to teach others. Thus the Apoſtles, Atty 14. 23. did them Ry 
dain Elders in every Church, and Pau! for this purpoſe 1 
in Creet, co ſet in order the things that are wanting, and 19 ordayn 
Elders mn every City, Whoſcever entrerh into any place in the 
Church, for the Feeding and Governing of it, that way which God 
hath directed in his Word, he entreth 1n it by the Door, he is the true 
Shepherd. Concerning Chints Tile, ang his way of Entrance and 
the firſt Preachers of the Goſpel, immediately ſent by Chriit. and 
decl.red to be ſent by rhe Effulion of che Spirit In the Days of Pr. 
ec ſt, there can be no queſtion made by any who believer\ the 
Scriptures of the Old and New Teſtament. This Text decl;res 
Th.:t « hotoever cometh into the Church with right, and as a try: 
She pherd ro ir, mult come in at the Door, by a Call fron; God as 
Chriſt was ſen: ) or from Chriſt, either by ad Extraotdinary Miltion 
or in ſuch a Method and Order as Chriſt hath in his Word dire&eg 
e:ti:er from his own Mourh, or by the Mouths of his Apoſtles, whom 
ne, Aſcending up into Heaven, left in the firſt Charge of hisChyrch, 
This 18 t:ar which every one ouzht in the firſt place to look after, 
We ſhall obſerve in Gods whole Courſe with his Church. Th ij 
the Corruption of rhe State of rhe Church, when it was eminent] 
deviated trom the Rule he had ſet, he ſent ſome by an extraordingy 
Mi:ſion ; fuch were the Prophers, whoſe Writings make up a part 
of Scripture. Such were the Apoſtles, and firit Miniſters of the 
Goſpel. Such we ſay, were our firſt Reforimers in Germany, a 
other Parts; nor is it any prejudice toit, that they were able to work 
no Miracles ; we read of no Miracles wrought by the Prophets of 
old, unleſs by rwo or three of them. Their Faithful declaring 
the Will of Gcd, and calling men back to rhe plain Law of Gy, 
in atine when the generality were notorioully departed from it 
rogether with their Spirit of Conrage and Boldneſs in their Work,way 
Evidence enough, that God had ſent them. Bur this Text odly Ge. 
clareth this general Trarh, Thar every true Shepherd coming int 
the Church, muit come in the right way, by the Door, fo the 
Great Shepherd ot the Theep did, being ſent by his Fatier, (whoſe 
the Church is ) to take care of it 3 fo much all inferior Shepher(y 
do, by him, whom God rhe Father hath made the Door; accord. 
inz to whole Directions all the Afﬀairs of rhe Church mutt be or. 
dered. 


3 To him the Porter openeth 4 ; and the ſheep 
hear his voice ; and he calleth his own ſheep by names. 
and leadech them out f. 


d By the Porter, is underſtood God, or more particularly, (0 
ſhew the order of the Holy Trinity in working) the Holy Spirit, who 
openeth the Hearts of Men, to receive and embrace Jeſus Chilt, 
who is the Chiet Shepherd, e and the Sheep are able ro diſtinguid 
his Voice from the Voice of Thieves and Robbers. Probably they 
had in thofe Countries particular Words and Phraſes, which their 
Shepherds baving uſed their Sheep to, underſtood, and moved ac- 
cording to the Direction of th-m. Some think they had alſo Names 
for their Sheep, as we have for our Dogs and Horſes, which they 
underitood ; otherwiſe ir only ſignifieth, rhar particular Knowledge 
which Chritt harh of all rhoſe thar are truly his, as the former Phraſe 
Ggnified, that Judgment of diſcerning of Spirits and Doctrines, which 
was 1n an eminent degree in the firft Minitters of the Goſpel, and 
is yet in a meaſure in Believers; by which tho” they cannot per- 
tectly and infallibly Judge concerning Truth, and the Willof God, 
in all rhings, yet they can in a great meaſure do ir, and arenor or- 
dinarily led afide into pernicious and damnable Errors, to the run 
of their Souls. g And faith our Saviour, thetrue Shepherd leadeth 
the Sheep out ; thar 18. into their Pa.tures, and true feeding Places 
This 18 eminently true concerning Chritt rhe Chief Shepherd ; when 
he came into the World, God opened to him the Door of his Church 
ſo as tho? he was reje&ted by many, ( the Builders and Rulers of 
the Few:ſh Church in particulir ) yer he was by many received, 
mulritudes followed him ; many truly believed on him, and truly 
heard his Voice ; he had a -patticular knowledge of them, who 
rruly were his Sheep ; he knew Nathanel while he was yer under 
the Fig-tree. He le4 them out into their true Paſtures, Preaching 
the Goſpcl of the kingdom to them, and ſhewing them the way of 
Life and Salvation. It 1s in its meaſure true of every inferiour Shep- 
herd, that truly deriveth from Chriſt 5 God giveth unto ſuch, favous 
in the eyes of his People. The true Sheep of Chriſt, hear them, re- 
ceive and embrace the Truth delivered by them. They take apir- 
ticular charge of them, and they lead rhem ro Chriſt, and to the 
embracing of his Goſpel ; as by the holy and true Doctrine which 
they Preach to them, ſo by their holy Lives and Converſations b& 
fore them, 


4 And when he putteth forth his own ſheep, he 
goeth before them, and the ſheep follow him 5, tor 
chey know his Voices. 


h In our Country at this day, Shepherds generally follow rheir 
Sheep, which go before them. In other Countrics, as France _ 
It is otherwiſe at this day, the Shepherds go before their Flocks, anc 
their Flocks follow them, upon ſome Sounds they make. In __ 
na, (which was the Fews Country) It ſhould feem, that the Shepherds 
ſometimes went before their Sheep, and ſometimes followed them. : 
David followed his Fathers Sheep, 2 Sam. 7+ 8. L/alm 78. 7 : ' 
Oa the orher fide, God 1s ſpoken of, P/al. 80. Ii. under £ k 
Notion of the Shepherd of Ifael, who leadeſt Foſ-t like 4 ap 
and theiſalmift, Pſabm 23, 1. ſpeaking of God 4s £8 Sep 


eft Ty 


ill of D4 D. Fd O H N, CliaD.: 
Way hap £ Yo ; | ) 
21, Ar heard, falth, ver. 2. 79% ade? we Lelde the fit waters, Chrifi | the care and condu ofthe Ciurci of God. they do ir with nn £0: 
I here ſpeaxe:h of himielf under the Notion cf 2 Shepherd thar went j.Defign ro the Souls of Peoples nor. our of any care cop reſp & unco 
to by n ce his Sicep, and whom the Sheep followed 3 and thereby lers | cheir 800d ; bur n:eexly thar they may ferve themſc/ves jn he ruin 
of tt. wg Sees the duty of all faithful Paors'in the Church, fo to ive, that | of my Peoples Souls. Dur: tha: 5; For my ena, In comino into the 
ve 04 Fo _ Flocks may follow them With lafery; Wi:1ch carnor be, unleſs World : I am NOr come to deitroy them, yr eo fave chem : I am 
ing of Ds tO Chriſt, 1 Cor, 31, I. 7 For faith cur Savic Ur, Thoſe thas cone, - char ney irhe have a Tpiri-ugl Life, and 2 aft, Erernz] 
there _ rene Sheep, they knnw y VICE; thereby Fgnifying, thar| Life ; tharthey mlgit live the Li'c of Grace nere, ard ror f:11 ofthe 
ul, » ei diſcerning berwixe Truth and damnahle Errors, which the | Life of Glory hereafrer,, and not only char they. m.'y FME1y live br 
may Le unro all rue Believers, 1 Zohn 2.'27, that their Life may abourd, through the Pt olfjng. Br, vgrhnings, 
ir. 5 Anda ſtranger will they not follow, but will lice | quicknings, ard - ortirgs of my holy 2nd 874-1015 Spirie, Th, 
ms 'rom him : for they know not the voice of ſtrangers4. | my 4c1oved may nor only drink but drink abundencty, nt only 
Titi from 1M : 1 : : | live, but live avundently turniſked ith a! the atfucrc, « and 
4" þ This he further 1nargech npon, telling x Im, That his Sheep modations of a & ritual Lie. #C.S and 2cco- 
pa ould not foilow thoſe thar did not lead them Into his Truth, ang * Jpirir <"_ . 
In the _ his ways, for they underſtood not ſach Voices, Here atiſcth a. 15 4 am tne good Shepherd : 7 he gocd Shepherd "Ezeſ,4. 
 Gog Queſtion ; Whether the Elef of God, or luch as being truly called, |Elveth his life for the ſheept. 5 23. 
""_ and believe in Chriſt, are the Sheep of Chriſt in the moſt tric and PrO-j t That g00d Shepherd, Prophecied of, T/a, 40.11. Tcannor a2oree X 3" 24. 
©, and per ſenſe, may not be ſeduced Into Errors, and led away by Strangers 2 with thoſe who think, thac Chriſt hece 'rezketh nor of himf«1; © Heb. 13 25 
b and Arſw, We mult diſtinguiſh hrſt,, berwixe ſingle Perſons, and the Be-|the good Shepherd, With reference to his Office, as he 2; the Meſſeah ; \ Fer. 5.4 
f Pex. nerality of Believers : As jn + Flock, the &cocrality keep together, | bur obly in Oppciition ro the Hiriings after mationeg, a1 a. 
1 the following the Voice of the true Shepherd; tho ſome particular Shee low, that he tus calleth himſelf, both in the one reſpeR, ang the 
Clare may wander : So the generality of Believers will be found-keepj other; but # cannot allow the latrer (enſe excluſively to the former 
a trys cloſe ro rhe Truth and Dodtrin of Chri » tho amongſt them ſome for what followeth, 1s peculiar to the Keſſiah, of w Om it was Pro- 
Pod, (ag articular Perſons may. be leduced, and led away by Seducers, Se- phecied, Day. 9.25, That he [nol be (us off, but ror for him/elf: and 
uilton, an We muſt diſtioguiſh betwixt Errors, and 422unable Errors, a Mcugh ir be true, Thar the tr ye Smeplerd will hazard his Lite for hi; 
ected, ertinacious adherence to Which, will divide the Scul from Chritt, Sheep, as Davis did, whey, he eNcountred the Lion, ard the Bear, 
Wit oy end in che ruin of Souls Chriſt's Sheep may follow Strangers, | 1 Sam. 17. 34» 35. yer jt cannor be fad robe the duty of the b: ſt 
Nurch, diſembling the Spiricual Voice of the true Shepherd alittle Way, but Shepherd, to lay down his Lite for the Sep 3 for the Life of a Man 
after, they will not follow them into fuch Errors as will plunge their Souls |'is much more Vaſubje than the ie of any Feaſt, Our Saviour there 
it n io Erernal Ruſo and Deſtrudtion. Thirdly, T CY May hear even fore doubtleſs io this place ſhewerh wherein he Was the mor excel 
ently this Voice of Strangers ſpeaking to them perverſe 2d damnable lenc Shepherd, far excelling the bf Shepherds in the World, becauſe 
nary things : but ic will be bur for 2 ſhore time, God will reduce nd} he was come, nor only to expoſe, Fazard, and adventu'e hjs Liſe, bill 
a Part brivg them back again, « ex, 28. They ſhall never periſh but actually, Wiilingly, and freely ro Ray it down, alt bb 
df the 6 This parable ipake Jeſs unto them : but they un-] 12 ut he that is an bireling, and not the ſhepherd; 14; 
on derflood not what things they were which he ſpake un-| hoſe own the ſheep are not , ſecth the wolf coming, 0: 28 
ets of to them /. : | ; ald -* leaveth the ſheep, and ficeth : and the wolf *zcch. 15, 0 1 
aring / Our Saviour was wont to inſtru them in the Myſteries of the [catcheth them, and [cattereth the ſheep. I6, 17, = ji 
God kingdom of God by Parables 3 that is, Similityges taken from "#7 » This mh deal in Sheep, either keep tt em theraſelves, or by 
wy, ſonable actions of men, which m1ght be, and.were proper Oo Exprets | their near Relations, as F.c1bs Sons, an & Davids ang Lakr thin 
k was Splricual things by : wherefore he uſeth this Methcd in Teaching, we | rers did ; or elle they hire Perſons to keep them for them. There is 
y de- are toid, Mar, 30+ IO, 11, 12, 13. They well Enough underſtood | , grear deal of ditterence derwixe the care of ar oWwrer, and the care 
into the Words jn which thoſe Parables were delivered 3 bur the Jaward of an hired Servant in any thing - Tte owner taketh 4 More Na. 
the Senſe, the Spiritual Myſteries ſhadowed our In thoſe Similirudes > | ral diligent Care, becauſe the Whole profir ofthe Sheep, «| riving 
hoſe theſe they underſtood not, neither the common fort of his Dilcj on and doing well, returnerh unto himſelf, 7 e hired S: rv2ne ma 
ds underſtood them, nor did the better ſorr of his Diſciples Oe be careful 1n hjs mesſure ard degree; bur no tuch Servanr will take - 
wy them, without a further explicatien of them, ur Lord therefore | the care that an Owner Will take; nor un the hazards ; Fat he will 
ug 10 the following Verles, comes to give them a large CXplication of run, becauſe he knoweth, that let the Fiocks thrive Never 1g well, ke 
"IO | ; h ſhall have no more +) an i.e Wages he is hired for: therefore, whar 
7 Then faid Jeſus unto them dgaln, Verily, verily I | our Saviour faith, is true, COEcerning the &Crrality of ſuch hires 8. p. 
p 4/ unto you, I am the door of the Shee CAnts, they will take ſome care of the Flocks © heep in th<j; 17m, 
e, ® Our Savigur had before been ſpeaking ot the Door in another | ſo long as there 4PFeareth no danger, bur If any danger 2Prarert, 
Notion ; there he ſpake of the door of the Shepherd, here of the. door | they leave the Sheep, ard tlce, and the Wolf cometh, and (c: fterceh 
5 of the. $þ4p ; there of the Door (that is ) the true and regular way of | the Sheep. IFRS = 
s Encrance into the Care, Condu&, and Overninent of the Church I3 The hireling fleeth, becauſe he js ap hirelins, 
here, of the true way of Entrance, not into the Church Militane| and careth not for the Sheep wp, | BY 
\ oy, bur jnco che Chureh Triumphant, Tr may'be alſo underſtood » The reafon Why, he that js 4 meer hired Servant, and tarh ng 
/ le® Door, or ws narggA and Admiffion : Into the Church Property in the Shae Þ, tleeth, Is, becauſe he is an H.reling, and det 
; Fe here upon t e Earc Czrcumeifeon; Baptiſm, External Pro. what te doch MEerly for his Wages ; ard when 3 Eange: Liſeeh 
Jin, are the Doors into the YV;/ble Church; but none unleſs by | which his Wages will ro: ballance, he wil; Ne VEr encoutter jr ke 
| iritt, thar js, by a true ang lively Falth wron he by the Spirit of hath no Property in the Shicep, nor 40y love to them, LOr care of 
| briſt in the Soul, can be 2 true Member of Chriſt's Inviſible Charch them. 
Ae po the Earth, much _ 2 Member of hj« Glorious Church In 14 I am the good Shepherd, and know * my / _ Tims 
5 All that ever.came before me, are thieves and roh- _ = known of mine 
m 10 Hircling, the Shee 
bers: but the ſheep did not hear them 7. 
3 This mutt nor 


be undertiood of the Prophets, but of ſuch 
® Came before Chriſt, | 


2. 4. all thoſe 


than by beliey-. [for them : 
Salvation of the 


] have x 'ry 


a Juſt anc 
hg 


cerned betwixe my y the voice 
refufing to »* bur tollowing me, g0Ing >; 
us both ro! 
d particularly to kno (! 
Xcellent St.epheed : 
10 they are t 


nor embrace them, . 
if any man enter 1n, he ſha1 
t, and find paſture Pp. 

» that he meant by the Door in 

Verſe, the Door of Salvati 


lon, the way by which ever 
ner into Life, thar findech Life ;®noc the door only by 
© the Church, buc by which 
ENter into Heaven ; which is 


ang a. 
hat are the 


15 * As the Father knoweth me, even foI knoiy ; 
Ilay down my lite for the ſheep -. 

Y By thete words our Saviour opcneth 

and ſhoujd j 

him, 

»| Father and Chrif3 


» how he knew +5 Je 
3 Ven as the Father KnOwerh 

: this mutu.;] knowledge betveen the 
» Was Joyned with perfeR love and delighr, Thus 
Is Sheep, not Only fu'fy ang 
r Namics ; 


3 butto x; © love 
5 Chap. 6. 35. 


73 and be that believeth in 
Pſ[al. 84. 11. as alio 
7 SdV1OUr Is choughr in this p 


ths, And 
Which Pal 
[eſcrence, 

10 The thief cometh not but for 
ad to de roy g: ] 


their good, and Ererna 
ncerity, bur th 

Pare It to the lo 
Chap, 


me 
with the 23 Pſalm; to 


ew ct only the 
arable to have a ſpecial 


» Goth Often corr- 
m, Fohn I5. C. 


and 
eve, That 


= Father 
nt DOct1 
' Chrift, 
* Þ CC:?25n 25 
ro his Father ; 24 this 
of laying down j1;:- Life, 
3 Lat is, I am ready ro ly 
'© for the Sheep. \ Ferthicy 
born into the World, is their 
are {0 tenacious of thar point, 
Every man :; as al, wherher 
pon that Principle that abſurdity mutt oor follow, That Chrift loved 
| er periih Erernally, with ſuch a love as 


the Father 
the Father, 
Eeee 


2E2OLren Son 
h'ſt 13ve thoſe © 


and to Kill, The love that Chr jti hath [ 


t have life, 
more abundantly k 
& that ownerh 


: yY Inco the care and condus 
Tech into the Skeep fold, to take 


the Life, and 
15 Sheep; bur a Thief, and a Robber, that climberh) into 
"", and to gers loro the Sheep fold 

1) Bood-will to the St 


IS wich them thar. wich 


Vol 15 tration of Authori:y from me, thruſt chemſely 


IS And 


C item, 
C5 09 know 
TEN. 
Nee, 


O}. 2 = 
MUPE Sie P Ot 


© icye 
rrue Care 
) by a Piirtte 
nVcr bowels 


x » *Nd owy. 
3 they hzve heard Wy Voice, ard dile 


NY « ns 
LY 
J 'Y I 


2 
19 


= 
3 f 


"275 


» 


$a, 
—— 
_ - 


' 
5) arbor eco xc he Foe a ee9di F- 


wi onoig yt, — = doi ap 


—_ 


47 Bs. 4 oy 


by SIR 
LR 


— 


————_ — . 44 - - 


-— Pa 


= CO—_— : 
_ Pn —_ — S 
- %. Tx - + 
. _ po ; 
_ . 
NE ekeety 
= * f - —_ « — _s - 
ws  . wage” a — —_— Pay 
' XI _ - 
of —_ * 
—_ ——— , Lp -—_ 
_ 
—_ 


—— 


SEEING 


= 
—— 


_— 
L A Lf Xx 
Lol UT + LW Be tary ns an. 


5 >. 38 F-. 


—— ret 2. 
< p P 
Rs hs 
*» "p 
: 


> 
WR re ——_— 
va - 


- « Ta. > 4 a. —— > 7 - E.G 2: in Be u SC. - —_— a <= < ave 
by *p a> * *\ Shad A 2 . : a . m. 4 - — =_ #4va mee o Bo owe &- 6.4 = L hy as © 
bs Wu <4 - % A 2 p = 5 - - - - "NP T'% © p 0 & ” "1 At oy s« . = —_ - Pl a © ws @-nk, _—_ 
. ba -_ SS ; py of " - I - - s - A _ &s 2 f \P $ s : oo. _— SP > 40 ” we 7.48 : 
ham ogy - __ ” _ A. -_ *..2 Je” y————_ » - Ss pr A o - 4a, ates A. C : : - . . , , o py - 
_ . _ pk — ———_ A, a. £43 —— os _ »- q i. — ”— 2 x p—_—_ we ; => IF -x> = __ _— » 6% yo c_ ©" ER 
a x: Q ” n 0 - _ 5 - *,- q Fe . - ” C ” $ by _—— F* + :, - x x . IX" 0 ow 4 _ "4 , 
D _ s = Q - - 0 wb _ - - - .. PR " wi wed » ” © ” d- mrs © _ . - : S 4 T w vw « - vip <a>» = _— _- ” _ . 
SS STIR £ ; w os ws. : oe t: Y oy ho > —_ WY. > fe = = 42 IT: of Iv nn, of __ - : "— x —_— —”". 
_—_ . ATT: x4 ; 4 _* 5 F werg. xy >. 4% " 4 Þ, Dodge cy = : . 4 SO - Bn _ = 4 * 45 i 3. no, Bee 5h == w_t 6 "x P-1 >» 
SY . -/ A. : o 5 . £ yy q hs _ - = >= A I_ j0 *% — 's - 4, 43 » 
_- =—_—_ = == Sz < £ —_ bas 3 324 . ” : - © ra _ F_ 7 WT Zn 4d a3 . wr —_— wy 3» bY” 13m; —_ _ «5 © » - - 
<—” —v>-——x == = => ro m_—_— = 3. = - _ = — = -—- a _ vet - S-.e——yd A c—_ ee bags ”_ : 
= = —_ - - Do -—o ——— - So === = @ : — env 7 


_ 


% A a $409 . 
by = WO LAOS 


- ; ” 
: HP. NJ. 


gf I <. 
- of 2-4 
3 tp 

liz. 4, 
3 3. 


* Chap. 2, 


19. 


* Ad. >. 


24+ 


24 he, a d mae thit'ting, and corfiderace in pailing their judgments, 
lid. Theſe are noc the worc's (to we trarſlice ic 5; the word in the 


F » - ' z” 1 2 


fie 2: them alſo I mult bring, and they ſhall hear my 
voiceb; ®and there ſhall be one fold, 2nd one ſhep- 
verd c. h 

4 Our Saviour meancth the Gen'z/es,who belonged ror tothe Jewiſh 
Sits and Church, lo were not under che ſame Laws and Government z 
f.r1 76h. 2. 2. he was notor.ly a Propiriation for the Sins of the Jews 
tur ſor the Sis of che wi ole World ; he calleth thoſe ſheep, becauſe 
the Lord knew who were his trom Ereculty 5 and they were ſhcep 
in the counci's of God, and they were ſuddenly to be made his ſheep 
by C.lliag, the Goſpel being ſocn ro be Preached to all Nations. 
+ Thea alſo, ( laich te ) 1 maſt brirg in. Itis lo written in God's 
Book, the Promiles, and Prophecies to that purpoſe muſt be ſu:- 
filled. They ſhall nor ovly hear the Voice ard Sound of my Golpel, 
chough going cur of Sion, yer ror termin2rcd in Szon, but they ſhall 
imbrace, receive, and believe chet joy ful Sound. c And there ſhal] 
5e bur one Church ,, as 1 amone Shepherd, fo there ſhall be bur one 
Flock of ſheep; one Body, ore Spirir, one hope of our Calling, one 
Lord, cne Faich, one Baptiſm, as there is one God and Father of 
All, as the Apoſtle ſpeaketh, Epheſ. 4. 4, $, 7- 

17 Therefore doth my Father love me, * becauſe I 
lay down my life, that I may take It again 4. 

4 Chriſt here afſertech Two things. 1. Thar he was about to lay 
down his life, and ſhould now very ſhoxely lay it down 3 bur yer ſo 
as he ſhould cake ir again. 7. e. rife again from the Dead, Death 
ſhould nor have Dominion over him, by which he comforceth his 
Diſciples concerning his Death, declarivg, 1. Thac he was a Freewsl.. 
Offering, as he further openeth ic 1n the next Verie. 2, That he 
ſhould nor periſh inche Grave, bur riſe again from the Dead. 3. Thar 
therefurc the Father loved him, for by chis weirs he dec Jared himſelf 
with Power to be the Son of Ged, ard the Father could not but love 
hHj= Son. ALd 4. By this means alſo he tumbled himfelf, and became 
ob<dicnr unto Death ; even che Death upon the Cruſs, Ph;/. 2.8. So 
as that che Farther had many reaſcns to love the Son, ſo amongſt 
orhers this cbedience of his ro Death, even the accurſed Dearh upon 
tie Crofs, to fulfil his Fathers Will, tor the Redewption and Salya- 
t10n of rhe Sons of Men, was not the leaſt; and by this alſo he com- 
mendeth his Fathers love to thoſe thar are his ſheep, in that his Fa- 
cher !loverh him with che more exceeding love, for laying down his 
Life, co purchaſe their Redemption and Salration, 


S. FOHN 


| 8 £ p .- 345 21: ireciion for the U-lowing, or D- i;- 
x 16 ave which are not of this | Commard and Direciton for the g, Or Dei, 
16 And other ſheep I h Fuary, or the Tabernacle; which ws the firſt H.ule we read oc : 


18 No man taketh it from me, but I lay it down of 
my ſelf: I have power to lay it down, and *1I have 
power to take it again e. * This commandment have 


{ received of my Father f. 

e No man taketh ir from re by force, withour my willing ir, and 
couſenriog to ir; the Jews and Pilate will rake ir from me, bur nor 
withcuc my free and voluntary ſurrender of It; and this Is that 
which we read, 47s 4, 295, 28. For of a truth, againſt thy holy child 
Felus, whom thou hail anointed, both Herod and Ponting Pila;e, and the 
Gentiles, with the prople of 1/raet, were gatherid togtther, for to do 
whkatſcever thy kand and thy counſel bad determined before to be done, 8&c. 
By which he aflerceth his Divine Power, and fo comforteth his 
Liſciples again{t che diſturbances they were like ro have frem the 
hehe of his Paflion, ar this time ror mzny Menihs off. And this 
(faith he) f is the Will of my Father, chat which my Father hath 
givea mc Cc:omiſfſion to do, and for which he hatch ſenr me jnto 
che World : And thus he declareth his Death to be a fulfilling cf his 
Fathers purpoſe, and an a& of Ob:dicnce ro his Fachers Will 3 acd 
indeed, 1n h15 Obedjence jn ihe rhing, lay much of the virtue of kis 
Death, 

19 LIhere was a diviſion therefore again amongſt the 
Jews for theſe ſayings g. 

g CEft by his Woras often cauſcd a Diviſion amongſt the Jews, 
ſoas tney could nor agree in their ſentiments, and cenſures abouc 
him 3 winchwas either cauſed threugh che mixture amongſt rhem, of 
ſuch as tiuly Believed, with thoſe which Beli-ved not; Or elſe from 
the mxture oþ a more cor fidering part amongſt :t.em, with others 
which were more Brutiſh, lirational, and full of Paſſhon, We mer 
wich much the ſame, Chap. 7, 43. and again, Chap. c. 16. Ir is one 
Method of God's Providence tor che celiverar.ce of his Servan's from 
unrealoneble men, to cauſe div. ſions among them 3 ſo as they cannot 
agree among themſelves, 


22 And many of them ſaid, * He hath a devil, and 
iS mad, why hear ye him þ ? 

5 S0ne of the people ſaid, te had 2 Dertil, and was mad, For 
{2s was fald before) this was che Opiuico of the Jews, concerning 
all chac were Mad, and DiltraRed, That it was by the Itluence of the 
D:-vl), and chey were infetted wich an Evil Spiiic. 


21 Others ſaid, theſe are not the words of him that 


20% a devil, « * Can a Devil * open the eyes of the! 


1 
Pþ &.6 þ $1 


s Lur ©ch-15 ef ac were !els Paiſior ate ard Ermtiſh in their Expre(- 


Grech Sizdia, fignltics things, and nutiers, as weil as Words 3 and 
by wat follows, one would think that were the more proper Tran- 
flmon of ic litre ) chey inſtarce in no words, bur in a marter of Fatt, 
2:KIng, If a Devil cod open the Eyes of the Blind ? thar is, of one 
that wis born Bind for they certein'y tpeak with reference to tnar 
Miracle wich Le had tolnely wicuyhe uLon iuch a perſon. 


22 Audit was at Hieruſalem, the feaſt of the dedica- 

tion, and It was winter |, 
| CE Thijs Verle attords Two Quettions, which have rot a little 
truwned Ine pretces. 1. What fiall of Dedication this was, 2. Whe- 
mer Leatcatins f places to the Worſhip of Gid be warrantable, or no, 
1 chac MARNACT &5 WY are Dedicaicd aimOngti the Pafziis at this day, 
fx to che firit ofrcheie, That which we have abour ic in Scripture is 
, Exud. ac, from the Fiitt to the Fifteenth Verſe, we have Gcd's 


Sc: iprure, fet aparr for the Publick Worſhip of God, We ar lit 
particular Arccunr of Moſ-s's puru+l Obedience ro that Commang 


Feaſt »f Dedication, in this ir differed from them, that je held do 
ble cke rime, for Sevev, or Eight days was the longeſt time ng 


by the Cz. 


drans, and Babyloniens, and Rebuilded by Zorobabel. Exra, and x, 


hemiah, as we read in the Books known by thoſe Names, In 4, 
ogy to the pradtice of Solomon, when they had finiſhed the Buildi,; 
of the Temple, there was another Feaſt of Dedication kept; of whis 
we read, Ezra 6, 16,17, 18, bur we read of nothing done inthe; 
Dedication, but the Offering of 100 Bullocks, 200 Rang, ,.. 
Lamber, and 12 He-Goars, and (ctting the Prieſts and ZCevites in or 
der for the ſervice of God. This Temple was defaced by tics, 
bur not wholly ruin'd ; and was Kepaired and Purified ty 144, 
Maccabeus, of which we read, 2 Maccab. 2. 23. Chap. to, 6," 5 
r Maccdb. 4+ 525 58, which Books of Maccabes, rhcugh they bu 
Cationical Scripture, yerare as good a picce of E:cleſia{{ical Hijiory 
any 3 and 7oſephss alſo giveth us an account of ir. Antiq. /, 12, cop, 1, 
We do nor read of any thing they «1d, ſaving Offerirg Sacrifire 
and ſerting things in order, according tothe Law of Moſes, and Feih, 
ing 3 Foſephys tells us, They ufed all Lawful Pleaſures. We gg Lot 
read thar cither God appointed an 4nnual Feaſt of Dedication for the 
Sartliary, nor Silomon, nor Exra, for either of the Temples; bur ve 
read rwice in the Book of Macrabes and Foſephus (writing the 5,6 
Hiſtory tells us, ) That Judas Maccabens made it a Law, That the 
Feaſt ſhould be kept yearly for Eight Days, in Memory of that ver. 
cy which God had ſhewed them. This was withcut doube the þ1} 
of Dedication here mentioned : for this Feaft began upon the Tye, 
ty-filth day of the Month Chiſiez, which anſwereth our Months of y, 
vember and December, and took in part of each; ſo ir agreeth with 
the Text which faith, That it was in Winter, whereas Soloman's Del. 
carion was in Autumn, Ezya's in the Spring, Some make a Quelticy, 
Whether Judas Maccabeus did well in appointing this .4nnuul Felft 
neither Solomon, nor Ezra having, that we read of before, dure 
any ſuch thing : acd think char our Saviour was nor at this Fel 
in any honour to the Feaſt, but only to rake advanrage of the 
multitude of People that met to Preach the Goſpel, For my own 
part, as I will not defend, ſo 1durft not condemn him: ! ſee 06 
more that he did in this, than was done Eſther 9. 27, 28. #t 
the days of Pkrim. Magiſtrates certainly have a power to appoint 
Publick Days, yea Annual Days of Thankſgivings, for Merdes 
never to be forgotten. Indeed they cannot make a day holy, fo 
as it ſhall be a fin againſt God to labour in ic, or to uſe any ples. 
ſures (as in the caſe of the Sabbath) bur they may command the 
Publick Worſhip of God to be performed on particular Dajs, ad 
Men'ought to attend fr when with conveniercy they can : Only they 
ought to take care thar ſuch days be nor ſpent in Luxury and Proface- 
neſs, and that they be for ſignal Providences, and nor ſo multiplied, 
ard frequently renewed, as that the Service of them degenerate into 
meer matter of torm. Whether Chriſt weor up jn order cothe Feall 
or becauſe of rhe great concourſe of People he knew weuld be there 
at thar time, cannot be determined. For the Second Queſtion, [t 
is nor ſo mucha Queſtion whether ic be lawful in a ſolemn and de- 


409 


cent manner, to cunſecrate an Houſe to the Publick Worſhip of God, 


by ſuch Ads of Worſhip as God hath appointed under the Gelpe!, 
ſich as Prayer and Praiſe, Reading, Preaching, and Hearing the 
Word: As whether it may be done by ſuch Rires and Ceremonies 
as the Papiſts do it with, for the which there js no lafticurien; tor 
the former, though ir may be ſome will not agree ie necefſary, yet 
certainly no ſober Perſon can deny, bur if a place be-made for 
People ordinarily ro meer in ro Worſhip God, there they may 5 
welf mcer at the firſt to Praiſe God for his Mercy, and to beg bis Pic- 
ſence, when they ſhall there meer rcgether to worſhip God, aud t9 
hear his Word, as they may meet there afterwards for Prayer, Praile, 


Preaching, or Kearing : but this ſarisfieth not che Papiſts.They firlt« 
Ic by many ſuperſtitious Ceremonies, Secondly, they plead for the it 
lineſs of che Place when ſo conſecrated. As the Ceremonies > it: 
Conſecrations , or Dedications, Bellarmine reckoneth® up E'pit 
1. The Painting twelve Croiles in the ſeveral parts cf the Houle 19 be 
Conſecrated, and lighting up ewelve Lamps, one ar every Crois, 
co lignifie the Twelve Apofiles who carried the Banner © it: 
Croſs throvghour the World. 2. The Biſhop's kuocking at the dur 
with a Paſtoral ſtaff, commanding the Devil to give place, andinic%: 
ing of God, the Angels and Sainrs, to granc thelr preſerce i067 
place 3 which they make co fignifie the openirg of peoples Hearts?) 
the reaching of the Goſpel, 3 The ſcattering of aſhes upon clit 
flore of the place, vpon which the Biſhip writes the ferre's 0! tle 
Latizand Greek Alphabet, in the Figure of a Croſs. 4. The ſpriok- 
ling the Place with Holy-water,and lighiing up Wax candles. 5: The 
arointing of the Crcfles before-mentiored, and painred on the mo 
S. The ſprinkling of the place, with a mixture of Water, Wine," 
and Aſhes, 9. The Anointing of che Temple, and the alta 
8. The keeping of a Feſtival upon jt: And forall theſe chey 124* 
deviſed ſeveral Significancies tco vain and fanciful to repeat. FO 
note of which we know not any the leaſt warranc in Hely Writ: OT 
can we conceive, how ary Conſecration can imprint any charadter G 
ho!ir.cſs vpon a place, crmake prayers cfered up in or toaard It noe 


. - ; FA” 
acceprabie z tho we know it did (o asto the Temple, beth becaue i 


1 5 ! - 
was an eminent Type of Chriſt, and alſo becauſe of the particu'ar p15 


” . o - . . *Txts5 
miſes mide to It, 1 Kin. 9. which were por applicable to che $jn45'44 
which were the Jews ordinary meeting places for publick 


Wer 

90 © 4 
ſhip, bur only ro the Tempie upon the account betnre mew 
T hough we fay char all places for rhar ule, cughc ro be uicd - ” 
imaginable Decei:cy 3 and we ought during the publick Wer!hip © 


. —_ the 
God, to carry our ſclyes in chem with all Reverence becauſe po 


None ſha 
fith, by 
29 *© 
all Hy * | 
thers h 
= All 
gife, fo 
[ervation 
dligneg 
Ive t 
'0Ng nc 
Wio can 


39 [ 


\e caule it 
ular pro- 
yr#g'guts 
ck Wer 
nioned. 


| wich at 
.rſhip 
i: of rhe 

Arge? 


my 


#4 oh 


17 thou be the Chriſt tell us plainly m. 


Ang< 


my ; And Jeſus walked in the Temple * in Solomons 


©. .2 petore ihe temple of the houſe, twenty Cubits long, and ten cubits 
"4 "This was the place where they walked in winter, though this 
".. dftroyed when Jeruſalem was deſtroyed by the Babylonians ; yet 
- -emeth that there was one builded thar was like ir, and kept thar 
ie |: ſhovld ſeem that it was a place better defended from the 
-exther thanthoſ? other parts ofthe Temple where in Summer time 
they uſed to walk. ; 

24 Then came the Jews round about him, and ſaid 


into him, How long doeſt thou || make us to doubt ? 


” Or this $o/crm0ns porch we read, 1 King.6. z that Solomon built the 


» Our Saviour was at this time within three months of his Cruci- 
fying; he had often before told chem that he was the /iz ht of the world, 
che true Shepherd , he had preached Dottrin to them, from whence 


they might eaſily have concluded what he was ; he had wrought works 


:mong them which none could do but a Divine power ; bur he had 
been very wary of telling them In plain terms that he was the Meſſiah, 
the Chriſt 3 when at any rime he had fo declared himſelf to hisdiſci- 
ples or they had owned him as {uch, he ſtill Jaid a charge upon them, 
ro tell no man of it, Marh. 16. 20, ©. They therefore come to him. 
demanding a plain refolution in the caſe ; ſome of their minds were 
in ſome ſutpenſe about it. It was bur a captious queſtion, for had he 
denied it, beſides that it had been the denial of a truth which he came 
(0 bear a Teſtimony unto; they had had a grear advancage to have 
leſſened his reputation amongſt thoſe who had believed on him as ſuch, 
Had he affirmed it he had brought himſelf in danger of the Roman 
Grverwor, for the Jews indeed expetted a Meſiah, a Chriſt, bur to 
be 2 T:mporal prince, to deliver them from their Enemies ; and for 
him to have declared himſelf ſuch a Chriſt, as they expe&ed, had 
becn fatal to them. He therefore anſwers wich his uſual prudence 
ind warinels to this queſtion. 

25 Jeſus anſwered them, I told you, and ye believ- 
ed not 2: * the works that I do in my fathers Name o, 
| they bear witneſs of me. 

n Thave in effect told it you more then once;l have told you, 
that Iam ſent of the Father, c. } have ſaid enough for you to con- 
clude it ; but you will not underſtand, you will not receive it, you 
will not believe what 1 ſay. o What need you any further witneſs of 
t, than thoſe works which I do by divine power ? by virtue of my 
oneneſs with my father, and of that power and Authority which he 


hath committed to me, that by chem I might confirm the Doin 
which 1 have taught you p. 


;., 26 But * ye believe not becauſe ye are not of. my 
ſheep, as 1 ſaid unto you p. 

p Ads 13. 48. As many as were ordained to life, believed. Here 
our Saviour giveth this as one reaſon of the Few; unbelief, that they 
were 10 of his ſheep; were they not lſ-aelites? yes, but all are not 1/-a- 
eh, that are deſcended of 1/rae/, It ſeems a very hard interpreration 
that ſome would put upon theſe ' words; ye believe not, becauſe you 
are wt teachable, and fit to be made my ſheep; the words are, vs ae 
1x TeCaroy F duov. Nor can ſuch interpretation be paral- 
lelled from any other Scripture. That by /hzep,here, cannot be meant 
members of the Church, is plain ; for they were of the Church of 1ſra- 
t, hom the Lord led as a flock ( as the Pſa/mi/? ſpeaks, Pſal. 80.1. ) 
That Believers, and ſuch as are truly called and ſanRified, are nor 
meant, is as plain; for then the ſenſe would be, you believe nor becauſe 
j!2 blieve not ; beſides, our Saviour had before {1id,he had orher ſheep 
toat were not of that fold(by which he meant the Genriles ) ſuch, for 
hom he prayed, Chap.17. 20. being ſuch as ſhould believe on him By 
ſeep therefore he meaneth, certainly, ſuch as were ordained to 1; fe, as 

$13. 48. nor will it therefore follow, thar Gods not ordination of 
them to life, was the near and immediate cauſe of their not believing ; 
bur their own ſtubborn, and perverſe wills in not repenting, that they 
mig4t believe, AS our Saviour tells them Matth 21. 32. that 1s, not 


i. and becauſe of rhe ſpecial preſence of God, promiſed to 
the 1; nblies of his people in his Name, and for his publick Wor-| 17. rt, 12. And belicy 


w My Father and I are one, not only in, Conſe] and M77, is 797 
ers are {a1d to be of one heart, AFs 4. 32.) 
bur in Nature, Power, and Eiffence ; for it is plain, thar our Saviour 
here aſcribeth the preſervation of his ſheep, nor ro the Will, bat to 
the Power of his Father. None 5; able to pluck them nr of my Fa- 
thers hand. And it is plain by what follows, char th- Fows this uns 
derſtood our Saviour : Some eminent Proteſt ant Interpreters expound 
this of an onene(s 1n Conſent and Will, doing the ſame things, and gri- 
ving the ſame deſign, both agreeing to preſerve the Sheep unto Ecer- 
na] Life ; bur ( with all reſp<& unto them ) 1 think the context im- 
plieth more, though this be not excluded. ' 


31 Then the Jews took up ſtones again to ſtone 
him x. 

x Tumulruouſly, as we read they did once before, Cha», 8. 59. 
From whence we may learn with what deſign they came tg Chriſt, 
ver. 24. plainlv ro tell them whether he were the Chriſt. Bv the Law 
of God the falſz Prophet was to be ſtoned ; but he was firſt to be ju - 
dictally trved and judged: This was but a Tumultuous ation of an 
inraged Mulritude. 

32 Jeſus anſwered them, Many good works have 1 
ſhewed you from my Father : for which of thoſe works 
do you ſtone me y ? 

y The word Tranflated good, is of a very large ſignification; ſigni- 
fying, Excellent, Uſeful, Proficable, Beauteous, &c. Whatſoever 
in common ſpeech comerh under the Notion of Good : I ( faith our 
Saviour ) never did harm to any of you, but I have been the inſtru- 
ment of a great deal of good ro you. I have given ſight to rhe Blind, 
hearing to the Deaf, healed many that were Sick of grievous dileaſes, 
caſt our many Devils our of thoſe which were infeſted wich, or potie(- 
fed by them. Do any of theſe deſerve any ſuch uſage at your hands ? 
Whar maketh you in ſech rage againſt me ? 

33 The Jews anſwered him ſaying, For a good 
work we ſtone thee not, = but for blaſphemy, and be- 


z Thelt are not the things we are incenſed againſt thee tor; we 
grant that chou haſt done many good Works amongſt as ; theſe we 
gratefully acknowledg. a Bur this is that which we are not able ro bear, 
That whereas thou art but a meer man, by thy diſcourſes thou makeſt 
thy ſelf equal with God, and fo art guilty of Blaſphemy ; ( which is 
committed as well by arrogating to our (elves what is proper to God, 
as by imputing to God theNatural or Moral imperfe&ions of the Crea- 
ture; and the Blaſphemer delerverh to be ſtoned, according to the 
Law of God. By this it is manifef}, chat the Fews underflond our Sa- 
viour, affirming that He and his Father were One; as alle: ting him- 
feff One in Eſſence with his Father, notin WY only. 

34 Jeſus anſwered them, Is it not written in your 
law, I ſaid, Ye are godsb? 

b This was writren, Pal. 82.5. The whole Scripture of the Ol4 
Teſtament, being wrote by holy Men, inſpired of Gag, and direQive 
of mens Converſation before men, and towards God, is ſometimes 
call'd, The Law, Pſal. 19. 79. It was ſpoken concerning Magiſtrates, 
and the Governors of G5d's people, who being Gods De-puries, and 
Vicegerents, intruſted to execute the Judgments and Vengeance of 
God, are dignified with the nzme of Gods. 

35 If he called them gods, nnto whom the word 
of God came c, and the ſcripture cannot be broken 4 : 

c If God Dignified thoſe Men, { and many of them were allo viſe 
and Sinful Men) with the the Title of gods, becauſe rhey had a Com- 
miſſion to Govern People according to the Law of God, 4 and none 
muſt contradict what God hath ſaid in his word ; there can be no 
falſhood in the Revelation of any part of rhe Divine will. 


[ ſaid +, I am the Son of God /? 
e Suppoſe I were no more than a meer man, yet being SanZified, 
that js, fer apart of God for the ſpecial work of Mans Redemprion ; 


and ſent of God into the World, with Commiſlion both to reveal 


Urning from'their groſs and ſinful ways, which they might have done 
by virtve of chat common grace of God, which was afforded them in 
the Goſpel, by the Preaching of John the Baptiſt, and of Chriſt himſelf. 


27 My ſheep hear my voice, and I know them and | 
they follow me 9. | 


7 This is the ſame which he ſaid ver/c 4+ (ſee the notes there. 


and ro do his Will ; yer dare you ſay, that I b{ajpheme, becauſe | 
ſaid, [ am the Sox of God” f In the place, viz. Pſal. 82.6. Where 
God ſaid of Magittrates, ye. are Gods ; He allo added, 22 of you are 


| Chilaren of the moit High ; you have therefore no reaſon to rage at 


me, though I did ſay I was the Sen of God ; being one whom the 
Father hath in his Eternal Countels fer apart for this great and 
ſpecial Work ; and aQually by his Providence ſen: into the World for 


the finiſhing and diſpatching of it. But we nwſt take heed, thar we 


Chap. X: 


cauſe that thou being aman, * makeſt thy ſelt God a. * Ch.s 19. 


36 Say ye of him * whom the Father hath ſanXifed | Ch.5.27. 
and ſent into the world e, Thou blaſphemeſt *; becauſe : Ln -t7s 


t Luk.1.35 


1 23 And Igive unto them eternal life, - and * they 


«121! never periſh 5, neither ſhall any pluck them out 
of my hand 7. 


a1 ! do give them, and I'will give them eternal life; as ſoon as they 
ſhall = _ hear, and believe my voice, and to follow me, they 
1” 0am 2 ſure right and title to it; and when my Father by his 
they & 30-1 ſhall remove them out of the world, and in the great day, 
hall all be taken up into the aftual poſſeſſion of it. 5 For they 
epbethcs periſh, but though they may fall, they ſhall riſe again by 
ons ſha * They are in my hand, and my hand ſhall preferve them ; 
ut by ever pluck them out of it ; they ſhall be preſerved through 

2 Apes Power of God t5 eternal life and Salvation. 

Al 7 © MyFather which gave them me, is greater than 


' *: and no man is able to pluck them: out of my Fa- 
mers hand. 


af ” that are my ſheep, became { by my Fathers donaticn and 
ſervation ol Father is equally with my ſelf concerned in the pre- 
tligneq t them to that happy end, to which he hath ordained and 
"gs Thoſe thar would pluck them out of my hand, and 
; em of that eternal life which I will give them,muſt be too 
who _ for me alone, bur for my Father alſo, which none is; for 
© f09 ſtrong for Omniporence ? 


32 Land yFather are one w. 
Vol. Il. 


10Ng 


do nor underſtand our Saviour here, as if ke in anorher ſenſe aimed 
ro him the Title of the Son of God ; it was enough for him art pre- 
ſent to aſſert, that the Titie well enough belonged ro him, if be in- 
deed had been no more than the Son of man, as they ſaid. 


37 * It I do not the works of my Father, believe * Chap. 


| Me not g. 2 Y 


g Our Saviour doth ofren appeal ro his Works to teſtify concern- 
ing his Divine Miſſion and Power. Theſe Works, he here calleth hc 
works of his Father ; by which he doth not only man Works that are 
vleaſing and acceptable to God, as Atts of Obedience to rhe Will of 
God, performed by Men, may be called and are, Chzp. 6. 28, 29. 
nor {us I concerve) only thoſe Works which he did by Commiltion 
and Authoriry from his Father ; which Cha>.19. 4 ne calieth :þe 
work w:hi.h hu Father had given him 19 as: bat thoſe Works which 
none buc God could do; ſuch were the multip;ication of ihe Loaves, 
Chape 6. 11,5, The curing of him who was Garn old, Chaps 9s 
4T, ©. If { faith our Saviour) 1 do not do thels Works which no 
meer Man ever did, give mz no ccedir ; but if 1 do thoſe Works 
which can bz done by no huinane Art or Power, you have reaſon to 
believe me. 


38 But if I do, though ye believe not me -, * be- 


lieve the works /: that ye may know and believe T, On. 
that the Father in me, and I in him &. Angry 
» Eeee 2 h If 17. 21. 


. 22901 a 
on E4Gkk b os IO 4.2 
bonk <a I E s ny - .. 
=, IS. &Y : on kg Rae ay > 
TS —- = 


y i + 
Cx CC rt Wt rwo= I, 


REY vV% =z 


COLORS = > nes 


—_ 


_— — <= 


ws ove. <awe wy _ 
" ne , $2 - <e 26 0 Som eamenc fs a> 
R 
- * ba ES _ _ 
_ a - > wa Þ _ © 
wa A d- Ps 
A 4 4 Cs wo A P_ - 4 , 
_ + AS. EI OS z =". 3a e224 _ « 4 4 < 
=D —_ = - Ghana | 
4 


Chap. XL 


Power, 
though 


becauſ; t - th 
Teflimody that my Works give unto it. Proper effc&ts give Teſtimo- 


ny to the proper cauſe : He who doth thoſe things which none but 
God can do, muſt needs be God, or impowred by God to do ther. 
þ This is the way for you to know, be perſuaded and to believe, That 
the Father is in me by his mighty Divine working Power, C/. 14-10. 
The Fat l-r that awelle:h in me, he doth the works; and I work in,and 
ryugether with him. This Phraſe, The Father is in me, and I in him 
teacheth us three things concerning Chriſt. 1. His Oneneſs in Nature 
and Effence with the Father. 2. His Perſonal diſtinQtion from his 
Father ; here »re two menrioned, The Fa:her and Me. None can pro: 
perly be ſaid to be in himſelf. 3. The moſt perfe&t, and 1ntimate, 
in dwelling of on: of the Perſons in the Holy Trinity, in the other. 


4 If 1 do ſuch works & can be done by no Jeſs than a Divine 
being beyond the Power and ability of all Creatures ; then, 
vou will not give credit to any bare affirmations of my ſelf, 
1fay I am the Son of God ; yer believe the thing for the 


39 * Therefore they ſought again to take him / : but 


3” he eſcaped out of their hand m. 


/ Becauſe he (aid, that the Father was in Him, and He in the Fa- 


ther, by which they well enough underſtood, that he afferted an 
union with the Father ; they did not again go about to ſtone him, as 
they did before ; he had ſufficiently Ropped their mouths,as to their 
impvtation o© Blaſphemy ; bur they ſeek to apprehend him, with a 
deſign ( no doubt ) to carry him before the Sanhearim, ( their great 
Cou:t, which had Cogniſance of thoſe things.) »» Bur as he had 
once and again b-fors. ſo he now again eſcapeth out of their hands : 
whether bv darkning the Air before their Eyes, or (as ſome would 
have ir ) making his Body inviſiule, by his Divine Power ; or what 
other way, the Scripture tells us nor, and it is great raſhneſs co de- 


S. FO HN 


« We read of a Woman, Luke 7. 29. that came behing Ons © 
viour while he was at dinner, in the Houſe of $:30y the Pharif,” 
brought an Alabaſter box of Ointment, ſtood at his Feer behin] wa 
weeping, waſhing his Feet with her tears,and wiping them wich ws 
hair; bur it appears by the ſtory, ſhe had been before 2 - 
Sinner. We read of another Woman, Marthew 26. 6, » 
14. 3. that poured a box of Ointment on our Saviours head 
was at dinner in the Houſe of Simox the Leper : Bur we in thoſs ty 
Evangeliſts, read nothing of her waſhing his feet with her tors, 
wiping them with her hair ; but in the next Chapter of this Gy . 
ver. 3- we have a ſtory, which ( whether it be the fame withihe 
ether or no, I cannot tell ) is that doubtleſs to which this Verſe > 
ferrerh : The Names and circumſtances much agree, There _ 
other Martes, ( for Mary was a very ordinary name among ray 
but this was that Mary which is mentioned, Chap. 12. 3. that aiointeg 
the Lord *with Ointment, &*c. It was her brother was Sick 


3 Therefore his ſiſters ſent unto him, ſaying, Lord, 


behold, he whom thou loveſt, 1s ſick w. 

w Chrift ( as was ſaid before ) ſeemeth to have been very familiar 
at the Houſe of theſe two Siſters, and ofren ro have made them his 
Hoſtefſes ; and if it ſhould appear by this Verſe, that in thoſe vigt; 
he had ſh2wed particular kindnefles to this their brother Latary 
who was now Sick, this makes them ſtile their Brother, him 2», 
thou loweſt, They plead no merits either of their own or his; ty 
only plead with him for his own goodneſs and love. Nor do the 
expreſs in particular, what they deſired for their Brother, thouph 
ir 15eaſily underſtood by their repreſentation of his ſtate and op. 

ition. 


4 When Jeſus heard that, he ſaid, This ſicknek is 


notorious 
Mar} 
as be 


termine. 


40 And went away again beyond Jordan, into the 


place where John at firſt baptized » : and there he a- 
bode 0. 


# Chriſts time was not yet come when he ſhould be berrayed,and 


Crucified ; it was yet three months and more toit ; He ſaw the Jews; 
at Jeruſalem were in ſuch a rage and fury, that there was no ſtaying 
in that Place : He goes beyond Jordan to Bethabara, where he 
found 7h at firſt Baptizing, John 1. 28. before he Baptized in Enur 
near Salim, Chap. 3. 23. See the Notes on John 1. 28. Poflibly he 
choſe thar place, as being a place where 704; had been preparing a 
way for him, by turning mens hearts in ſome meaſure for receiving 
the Gnſpel, and pointing ont Chriſt to his Diſciples, as the Lamb of 
God who taketh away the fins of the World. o How long he abode 
there, we cannot tell; probably, till he took his laſt journey from 
Galilee to Jeruſalem, of which the other Evangeliſts ſpake , Marth. 
20. 17, Mark to. 32, Inte 18, 31+ What he did in Galilee during 
theſe thre - months, 704n reports not, only ſaith, 


41 And many reſorted unto him, and ſaid, John did 


no miracle p : but all things that John ſpake of this man 
were true 7q. 


p God fo ordered it in the Wiſdom of his Providence, that though 


Elijah and Eliſha under the Law wronght Miracles, by which they 
confirmed their Divine Mifſton ; yet John coming immediately be. 
fore Chriſt, as his Meſſcnger and Forerunner, wrought none ; that 
f the Glory of Chriſt in working Miracles when he came, might be 
more clear and evident. This made the People, that came to Chriſt 
while he was in Galilee, ſay thus amongſt themſelves, We pid a 
great Veneration to Fehn the Baptiſt, yet he never did thoſe thirgs 
which Chrift hath done. 9 And whatſoever John told us of this Pe:-| ;v of his Father - which was to be manifeſted in his raiſing of Li 
ſon, hath proved true; Re hath done,and doth greater things than ever ; 24:2« from the dead; we muſt not judge of Chriſts love tous, by 
John did, and is in the Judgment of ſenſe to be preferred beforei his more external diſpenſations of Providence ; nor judge that he 
him : ſhould we not now believe in him ? John toid us he was the ' Aari- -o7 love us, becauſe he doth not preſently come in to our help, 
Lamb of God, who takes away the fins of the World, and told us zr mes, and in ſuch ways and methods as we would thinkrer 
much more concerning him, which our Eyes ſee is true. | 


42 And many believed on him there -. 
7 Some b:lieved on him, as ſuch whom Fohn Baptiſt had ſpoken 


him to be: _ poſſibly believed on bim 11 the fenſe mentioned, 
Chap. 2. 23. Not to the ſaving of their Souis, but as one ſent of God, ..: mo -.-Q3 i Galile; 
a great Prophet, no ordinary Man. The rage of Men ſhall not khin- corre he I RnneT, Sur m1 Porn or | 
der the p:ogrels of the Goſpel. 


CHAP. XI. 


Lazarus being ſick at Bethany, his Siſters ſend for Chrift, 1-—6. Who 


cranzelleth cowards Judea, 79—10, But in ihe mean time Lazarus 
dietl), 1i——I16. Chriſt goth to Bethany, 119—19, Whom Mar- 
the meeteth; and taiks of th: R. ſurrefion, 24 — 27. Chriſt weep- 
ing cometh i0 the Grave, 22——38. Where he findeth Lazarus 
four dares buried, 39, 43. And praying raiſeth him, 41— 44+ 
Whercjore many believe in him, 4s. Others take counſel againſt 
him, 46—$3- He departe:h to Ephraim, 54—56, The Chief 
Prief!: command congernimeg Chriſt, $7, 


'N Ow a certain man was ſick, zamed Lazarus of 


Bethany s, the town of Mary and her ſiſter 


Martha :. 


s Bethony, ( as appeareth by wer. 18 ) was nigh unto Jeruſalem, 


Py 


not wholly ar ro rriles diltance from it : bur our Saviour was not 
at this time in 7rdea, for ver, 7. he ſaith to his Diſciples, Ler ws go 
into Jud:a. Again, he was at this time in Galilee, or in Perea : and 
we ſhall find wer. 17. that Lazarry had been in his grave four days, 
b-fore our Saviour got thither : $0 as we muſt allow art leaft fix or 
ſeven days betwixt the time when Chriſt heard of Lazarw his Sick- 
neſs, and the time when our Saviour cam= to Bethany. t This Be: 
#hany 1s here only deſcribed ro us, as the place where Mar:ha and 
Mary lived, or at leaſt u here they were þorn : Some think that Be- 
t/.21,y was only a part 'of the Mount Olive: ; but others more pro- 
bably, rhink that it was ſome little Town or City, ſtanding within 
that part of che Mount O/zver ; for it is here called a Town , and 


oy 10. 38, 39. the place where theſe two Siſters lived, is called a 
Haze. 


2 (It was that Mary which anointed the Lord with 


ointment, and wiped his feet with her hair «, whoſe 
brother Lazarus was fick. ) 


\not unto death x, * but for the glory of God, that the'g,, 
'Son of God might be glorified thereby y. Ve. 


x God hath not ſent this Sickneſs upon Lazarus to determine hi 
being upon the Earth ; or for ſuch a ſeparation of the Soul of Lzz4 
7145 from his Body, as there ſhall be no reunion of it before the 
neral Reſurrection, (which is our ordinary Notion of Death : ) Go 
bath not ſenr this Sickneſs for that purpoſe, » but that he mipht be 
glorified by his Son raiſing him from the dead : God is glorified, wha 
his Son is glorified ; and Chriſt is glorified, when his Divine Power 
is manifeſted, ſo as men acknowledge him to be what indeed he js, 


5 Now Jeſus loved Martha, and her ſiſter, and. 


ZATUS Z. 

2 He doubtleſs loved them with a ſpecial diſtinguiſhing love, is 
perfons choſe in him to Eternal Life before the foundation of the 
World, given unto him by an Eterna] Donation, called by him with 
an efeQuual calling, to own and receive him as their Saviour; hit 
this Text ſeemeth to ſpeak of him as loving this family with an hy 
man love, which inclineth man to a complacency 1n an obje(t bele- 
ved; he had a kindneſs for the whole Family ; They had ſhened 
him kindneſs in his ſtate of humjliation ; and he loved thoſe that fo 
loved him, Prov. 8. 17. 

6 When he had heard therefore that he was ſick, 
he abode two days ſtill in the ſame place where he 


was 4. 

a Though he loved him and his Siſters, with a tender love, yet 
he did not preſently go to them, to comfort Mary and Marth4 in 
their ſorrow ;z nor yet to cure Lazarus, and prevent his Death ; but 
fjaid ſtill ewo days in the place where he was. He loved May, 


and Martha, and Lazarrs, but he more toved che Honour and Glo 


Iunzh): 

7 7 ken after that ſaith he to hs diſciples, Letus 89 
into Judea again b. 

b This lets us know, that Chriſt was not in J«dca, when he tt 


bur he preſently upon it, takes up thoughts of returning again 1t0 
that Province ; and indeed he was now Preparing for h:s laſt journey 
thither 3 however the Sickneſs of Lazaris, and his raiſing himfron 
the dead, was one occaſion of his ſo ſoon going up ; from which bis 
Diſciples would have diſcouraged him, as followeth. 


8 His diſciples ſay unto him, Maſter, the Jews0! 12: 


ſought to ſtone thee; and goeſt thou thither again c: 
S apſed, ſince 
c See Chap. 10. 30. There were not three months claplet, 
the Fews had ſo ſought to have ſtoned him ; and there was notes on 
for him to think, that their fury was in any whit abated. m_ 
in the other Evangeliſts, March. 16. 22, of other words they U 
( Peter eſpecially) ro diſfuade our Savionr from this journey ©2 = 
ſalem. They were afraid for their Maftery, and they were afraida 
ſo for chemſclves. 


9 Jeſus anſwered, are there not twelve hoursintir 
day ? if any man walk in the day, he ſtumbleth 0%, 


becauſe he ſeeth the light of this world 4. _ W 

4 Look as in the day there are twelve hours, in which the by 
thineth, and by giving irs light, direfts men 3n their an " 
they know how to guide their feer ; and do nor ſtumble, FM 
chey have the light of the Sun, which God hath ordained, to 


men that walk up and down in the World. 
10 * But if a man walk in the night, he 


becauſe there 1s no light in him e. 
e And there is a nighr alſo, wherein 1 7 have no 
very prone to ſtumble, becauſe they are in darkneſs, - wn" 
light to guide their feet. So there 1s a ſettime, for all t b :- ſp 
men ; a time for their peace and liberty, and a time for t oe _ 
bles and ſufferings. God Rules and Governs the World, v n -” 
are in their callings and places faithfully diſcharging their trUuil, * 


1 [1 
finiſhing the work which God hath given them to do, and their _ 


ſtumbleth, *( 


NW 
f men walk, they will be 


Chap, ( We 


7 
lien j1 

o C} 
lien in 
thany ti 
But poſ 
Into Be, 
Xs fa 
own, 
probabl 
(as all t 
relation 
culd þ; 
Other 6 
May giy 
It Was al 
rom Bet 
than foy; 
Lime to ( 
ured ny 


_— 


we 56. AMS... A+. a... FEba ME... co 


—— 


eD w 


he re 
al t ie? 5 
n 10t0 
ourney 
n from 
ich bus 


ff lat 
10 

q, (ince 
j1eaſon 
Ve read 
ey uſed 
to Jed 
fraid al 


in the 
h not, 


rhe Sun 
*5, ſo 4 
| becauie 
(0) dire 


ableth, *( 
& 
y will % 


| have 00 
 ;ſſues of 
jeir croV 
chile men 
ruſt, and 


noir C1MF 
4$ 


hap» XI. 


« not come, for their glorifying of God by ſuffering, they ſhall not 
Qumble, nor be given up to the rage of their eagereſt Enemies ; 
they are in their callings and places, and God will be a light unto 
hem : 3a when their working-rime 18 over, and the time of their 
5 kr is come, then they will tumble; becauſe then God withdraweth 
hi liohe from them ; rhey are not then under ſuch a ſpecial Prote&i- 
pou of God, who hath done his work by, and with them. This is 
as much 2s fe had ſaid before, Chap, 8. 20. No man laid hands on 
him, for his hour was mot yet Come : The twelve hours of his day 
were not al] ſpent. This duty digeſted, is of infinite uſe to quiet 
the Spirits of God's People in the worſt of times; every man hath 
his rwelve Fours, his day and fet time, to honour God upon the ſtage 
ofthe World; he ſhall not ſtumble, he ſhill not mifcarry while 
thoſe hours 2re ſpent ; he ſhall not die, he fhall nor be diſabled 
for duty, {o long as God hath ought for him to do : bur every man 
hath his night too, when he mult not expect to converſe in the 
World, without ſtumbling. 


11 Theſe things ſaid he: and after that, he faith 
unto them, Our triend Lazarus * ſleepeth f, but I go, 


5% that I may awake him out of ſleep g. 


f There 1s ſuch an Analogy betwixt Death and Sleep, that there is 
nothing more ordinary than to expreſs Death by Slcep in Scripture, 
Pegt. 31. 16. 2 Sam 7.12, 3 Rengs 1.21.2 Kings 20.21, Job 7.21. 
and 14. 12. Dan. 12.2. and in a multitude of other Texts, borh 
in the Old Teſtament, and in the New ; fo as it was evident our 
C:yiour meant he was dead, which he knew as he was God, though 
as yet he had received no relation of it from the friends of the deceaſ- 
ed. 2 But I go ( ſaith our Saviour) to raiſe him up again from the 
dead, which he calls awaking him ; purſuing the former Aeraphor, 
where he had compared Death ro a Sleep. 


12 Then ſaid his diſciples, Lord, if he ſleep, he ſhall 


do well þ. 
þ Sleeping moderately is a good ſign, we know, in moſt diſeaſes ; 
this makes the Diſciples fay, that if Lazarw flepr he ſhould do 


well. ; 
13 Howbeit Jeſus ſpake of his death : but they 
thought that he had ſpoken of taking of reſt in ſleeps. 


i Bur that the Diſciples ſhou!d not underſtand our Saviour, not 
ſpraking of ordinary ſleep, but of Death, is wonderful, conſidering 


that there is nothing more ordinary in Haly Writ, than to read of 


Death expreſſed under this Notion ; but poſſibly by our Saviour's 
making ſuch hafte to him, they conceived that he was nor Dead, bur 
enly in an ordinary ſleep, upon the abarement of his diſeaſe 

14 Then faid Jeſus unto them plainly, Lazarus is 
dead k, | 

& You miſtake me, my meaning was not, that Lazarus was fallen 
to reſt upon the abatement of his Diſtemper ; but his Soul is parted 
from his Body. 

15 And lam glad for your ſakes that I was not there / 
( to the intent ye may believe 2 ) nevertheleſs let us go 
unto him. 


/ HidT been upon the place, my kindneſs to his Siſters, and piry,| equal with the Father, and able by his own Power to raiſe the dead ; 


would haye prevailed far with me, to have prevented his Death ; bur 
tis better ( for your ſake at leali) and 1 am g!ad 1 was nor there. 
m For by this means I ſhall have an advantage, by putting forth my 
Divine Power in raiſing him from the Dead, to confirm your Faith 
in me as the Son of God, and the true Mefias : therefore, cho he 
be Dead, ler us go unto him. 

16 Then faith Thomas, which is called Didymus, 
unto his fellow diſciples, Let us alſo go, that we may 
de with him 7. 

"Thomas and Didym:s were names of the ſame ſignification, only 
Thimas was the Hebrew, and Didymm the Greek name, This is that 
Thmas, who to the laſt, ſhewed a greater difficulty in believing, 
thin many others of the Diſciples did, Chap. 20. 25. His words 
here ſignified great raſhneſs and unbelief : Let us go and die with 
him, with Chriſt { ſay ſome. ) Seeing that our Lord will nor be 
perlwaded from going into Fudea, where his Life will be in apparent 
danger, for they will put him to death ; ler us alfo go and die with 

im. Bur ir is more probable, that Thomas meant with Lazarus, 
who, as our Saviour told them but now, was dead ; and in that ſenſe, 
t was net only an expreſſion of great paſſion, but great unbelief alſq. 
We Ought not ro be affected with the death of our Friends, as ro 
wi, or deſire our ſelves out of the World where God hath ſet us in 

a10ns, which we ought to keep, until God be pleaſed to remove us, 
Beſides, Thomas ought ſo to have believed our Saviour, who had-rolg 


S. FOHN. 


up thoughts of going into Jud:a. Aﬀer this, poſſibly he lingred ene 
or two days, wer. 14. He tel's them Lazarus was dead. Our Saviour 


was willing to protra&t the time, that the Miracle might be more 
Conſprcnovs and Remarkable. 


fifteen furlongs off 9. ) 

g Thar, as we count, wants of two miles half 2 quarter. 

19 And many of the Jews came to Martha, and 
Mary, ta,comfort them concerning their brother 7. 

7 Not to pray with them for the Soul of their Brother departed, 
Thar deparred Souls are in a capacity to be advantaged by the prayers 
of their Friends, or any ſuch thing, are corruptions of latter times ; 
but they had a civil uſage of mourning for their Friends, the time 
for which was anciently thirty days ; they mourned for 7acob forty 
aays, Gen. 50.3. Fer faron thirty deys, Numb. 20. 29. So for 
Moſes, Deut 34. 8, It is probable, the days were fewer for perſons 
of an inferior Quality, but they had ſome days for all ; during which 
days, their Neighbours and Friends came to viſit them, and relieve 
them in their ſorrow, with ſuch Arguments as they had. 


20 Then Martha, as ſoon as ſhe heard that Jeſus 


was coming, went and met him s : but Mary ſat ſtil! 
in the houſe 7. 


5 It ſhould ſeem by the ſtory, Lyke 10. 41. That Martha had the 
care of the Houſe keeping upon her, Mary was more Retired ; So 
that the news of Chriſt's coming might come to her firſt, She in 
great joy ran out to meet him ; how far ſhe went we are not told ; 
bur 1t appeareth from ver, 30. that ſhe wenc our of the Town. 


21 [hen faid Martha unto Jeſus, Lord, if thou hadſt 
been here, my brother had not died -. | 

's Mary, ver. 32. faith the ſamz. They were both in an Error, 
for Lazarus his death was appointed, and determined by an Eternal 
Counſel; and he was both Sick, and died for a wiſe end, that God 
might be glorified, and his Son glorified in raiſing him from the 
dead 3 as we are before told wer. 4. Bur it lets ns ſee the vanity of 
our Natures ; who in the loſs of our Friends, are ready to think, if 
ſuch or ſuch means had been uſed, we had not loſt our Friends ; ne- 
ver conſidering our days are appointed, and we cannot pals the num- 
ber of them. If any rationa}, probable means for continuing their 
Lives be omitted, chat alſo is not without the Counſel of God, who 
having determined the iſſue, concealeth diſeaſes, or the true, and 
proper means for their cure, from Phyſirians, or ſuch as are about the 
Sick Perſonas. Nor did Martha ind Mary fail in this only, but in 
that, they made the Lord's preſence neceſſary to the preſerving of 
the Life of their Brother 3 who had he pleaſed, could (tho abſent ) 
have kept him from Death. 


22 But know, that eveſn now whatſoever thou wilt 
ask of God, God will give :t theew. 


w She ſhewed ſome unbelief in her former words, but here 
again ſhe ſheweth her Faich, but not without ſome weakneſs mixed 


them, that tho Lazarus ſlept the ſleep of Death, yet he went Go 


Wake him; which could have no other ſ=nſ>, than to raife him our | 


'with her Faith ; for by theſe words ſhe ſeemeth not to be ſatisfied, 
that the fulneſs of the Godhead dwelt in Chriſt, and that he was 


Her Faith extendeth no farthee than a belief, that he was in ſo much 
favour with God, that if he would pleaſe to intercede with God, he 
would reſtore her Brother to Life ; this ſhe meaneth, tho the raiſing 
of perfons from the dead, was a thing fo rar?, and unuſual, thac 
ſhe dareth not ro mention that particular thing, the uppermoſt in 
her thoughts. 


23 Jeſus ſaith unto her, Thy brother ſhall riſc 
again x. 

x Chriſt takes no notice of Martha's failings before-mentioned, 
( He can have compaſſion upon-his peoples Infirmities ) but appliert 
himſelf ro the reliet of her under her affl:;Qion. He doth nor rel! 
her, that her Brother ſhould be raiſed to Life preſently, nor th he 
would do it; bur only faich, He ſha riſe azain: To ler us know, 
that a belief of the general ReſurreQion is enough, and onght to be 
improved by ns, to curb our immoderate mourning and Paſſions for 
thoſe of our Friends who are dead in the Lord. 

2.4 Martha ſaid unto him *, I know that he ſha!' rite . 
again in the Reſurrection at the laſt day y. yl 

y From hence we learn, that the general Reſurrecton of 15, Dean” Cl 
15 no novel DofQtrin ; ob believedir, Job 19. 25, 27. Dante! pubiift 
ed ir, Chap. 12.1, The Phariſees owned it, tho the Saad"icce, den 
ed it; and poſſibly the Phariſ:es had bur a confuſed Noton of 17, 
Martha here makes it an Article of her Faith. 


2s Jeſus ſaid uato her, I am the reſurrection and 


of that flzep of Death, of which he had ſpoken. Ah ! To what cr- the * life = : * he that believeth in me,tho he were dead, Sb 


tOrs do our Paſſions betray us? 
_ 17 Then when Jeſus came o, he found that he had 
kn 11 the grave four days already p. 


lien 1 


'yet ſhall he live 4. = 
z Martha by her ſpeech ſeemed not to have a true Notion of 3 > 
| Chriſt,ſhe belizverh that there ſhould be a general Reſurre&ion from 
0 Chriſt came ro Bethany where Lazarus; died ; p He found he kad 'rhe dead in the laſt day, by the mighty Power of God ; bur ſhe did 
n thegrave four days, ſo as probably, Chrift came not to Bc- ; nor truly vadeftand, whar influence Chrift had upon this Reſur- 


any till four days or more after the Death of Lazarus, or near upon. ire&ion, that the raiſing of the Dead, ſhould be the peculiar work of 
wut poſſibly, it is better judged by others,thar Chriſt was not yer come | Chrift, not without the Father, but as he was Ordained by the Fa: 


into Bet hany, 


bur only ro the place where he met 3/ar:ha ; becauſe 'cher, to be the Judge of the Quick and of the Dead. Chriſt doth 


Xs faid after this, wer. 30. That Feſus was not yet come into the therefore here further inſtru& her, and tel} her, He was the Reſaw 


own, but was 1n 
Frobable, was at La 


that place where Martha met him ; which it is | -e&i0n ; where ( as is uſual in Scripture ) the Ff# is pur for the 
zarns $ Sepulcher, out of the Town, but near it, Cauſe : 1am the Reſurre#ion ; 18 no more, than I am, and ſhall bs. 


(3s al the Jewiſh Burying-places were ) where he heard from the 'the Principal Cauſe of the Reſarrefion: The Dead ſhall hear the 


relation of Martha, how long Lazaras had been Buried. Our Saviour 


Voice of the Son of God; Chap. 5. 28. He alſoadds, and oe Lije 


= have come ſooner had he pleaſed, for tho Bethabara was on the | That is, the cauſe of Life ; both chat Life which the Dead fhaJi 
=o fide of Zardan, ( ſo out of the Confines of Judea) yet if we |in the ReſurreQion recover, and alſo that Ererna! Life which 
"dg any credit to thoſe who have laboured in the ſtudy of places, ! ſhall follow. - And whoſoever looketh upon me in that Not: 

35 about forr miles off Jeruſalezs, ſo as it could not be fix miles |on, and committeth himſelf unto me, tho he dorh dye, yer he 


10M Ber kany, 
an four or fiy 
Une to Chriſt 


ured not of of his Sickneſs ; after which we read ver. $5. that he 


which our Saviour could have travelled in a leſs time | ſhall Riſe agairf, and Live Eternaly; and this Power being in 
e days. Some think Lazarus died the ſame day news | me, I am to be tyed to the laſt day, bur have a Power when I 
pleaſe to Raiſe the Deaq. Our Saviour indeed hath more wn 915 


two days ; after which it was wver+ 7. that he took {Anſwer than reſpeRed the preſent caſe, bur there was nothing _ 
UL us 


Chap, XI. 


18 (Now Bethany was nigh unto Jeruſalem, || abont j 7%: 


= 


nds 
wigs tt 
Rya__ 208 -» ont < _ _ 
ay Hr gs ed i 
Pa L- 


—_ » M7, FAA WEE. 
Fr W< __— - = 
— ne th. _ 
—— 4% 


= 's 
— w” - 
— w_ © 


__— 
_ue 
__— 


Chap. XI 


—— —* C 


- = > OO 
- 0509 bo 


— 


— 
+ 


I rnd as 


3” he eſcaped out of their hand m7. 


—— 


- — 


_—_ - — - _ go" 
= ” x % « PIE 
OOO} ET—__— En Ion rrp mo, I In Ann 
a - < þ —_ -_ _ . _ — — _—_ + oe - 
. ye a wa o_ "—_ 
: i - 


_—- 
bby 


5 s —_ - 


. 2-2 #s, + > "4 n* 
qgy—m—_ > : 
p. — _ S—— x ”y.a,* 
_— OTIS — » _ 


_— 
IISE 4 pr 2 


—T 


4 If 1 do ſuch works & can be done by no Jeſs than a Divine 
Power, being beyond the Power and ability of all Creatures ; then, 
though you will not give credit to any bare affirmations of my ſelf, 
becauſe I fay I am the Son of God ; yer believe the thing for the 
Teftimony that my Works give unto it. Proper effcHts give Teſtimo- 
ny to the proper cauſe : He who doth thoſe things which none but 
God can do, muſt needs be God, or impowred by God to do them. 
þ This is the way for you to know, be perſuaded,and to believe, That 
the Father is in me by his mighty Divine working Power, C/. 14-10. 
The Fath-r that awelle:h in me, he doth the works; and I work in,and 
rugether with him. This Phraſe, The Father i in me, and] in him ; 
teacherh us three things concerning Chriſt. 1. His Oneneſs in Nature 
and Efence with the Father. 2. His Perſonal diſtintion from his 
Father ; here zre two mentioned, The Fa:her and Me. None can pro: 
perly be ſaid to be in himſelf. 3- The moſt perfe&, and intimate, 
in dwelling of on: of the Perſons in the Holy Trinity, 1N the other. 

39 * Therefore they ſought again to take him /: but 


/ Becauſe he (aid, that the Father was in Him, and He in the Fa- 
ther, by which they well enough underſtood, that he afſerted an 
union with the Father ; rhey did not again go about to ſtone him, as 
they did before ; he had ſufficiently ſtopped cheir mouths,as to their 
importation o© Blaſphemy ; bur they ſeek to apprehend him, with a 
deſign ( no doubt ) to carry him before the Sanhedrim, ( their great 
Cou:t, which had Cogniſance of thoſe things. ) »» Bur as he had 
once and again b-fore. ſo he now agatn eſcapeth out of their hands : 
whetber bv darkning the Air before their Eyes, or (as ſome would 
have it } making his Body inviſiule, by his Divine Power ; or what 
other way, the Scripture tells us not, and it is great raſhneſs co de- 


9. 7 0, H N. . Chap, 7 ha 


, We read of a Woman, Luke 7. 29. that came behing one © 
viour while he was at dinner, in the Houſe of $:»1% the Phariſe. 
brought an Alabaſter box of Ointment, ſtood at his Fcer behin] hi? 
weeping, waſhing his Feet with her tears,and wiping them wich, - 
hair; bur it appears by the ſtory, ſhe had been before 2 ” 
Sinner. We read of another Woman, Matthew 26.5, ,, 1, 
14. 3. that poured a box of Ointment on our Saviours heaq Mm: %s 
was at dinner in the Houſe of Simon the Leper : Bur we in tho: wy 
Evangeliſts, read nothing of her waſhing his feer with her tears 0 
wiping them with her hair ; but in the next Chapter of this Goſpel 
ver. 3- we have a ſtory, which ( whether it be the fame with o%, 
other or no, I cannot tell ) is that doubtleſs to which this Verſe wy 
ferreth : The Names and circumſtances much agree. There _ 
other Maries, ( for Mary was a very ordinary name among them 
but this was that Mary which is mentioned, Chap. 12. 3, that aointe] 
the Lord *'with Ointment, &c. It was her brother was Sick, 


3 Therefore his ſiſters ſent unto him, ſaying, Lord, 


behold, he whom thou loveſt, 1s ſick w. 

w Chriſt ( as was faid before ) ſeemeth to have been very family 
at the Houſe of theſe two Siſters, and ofren to have made them his 
Hoſtefſes ; and if it ſhould appear by this Verſe, that in thoſe vigt; 
he had ſhewed particular kindneſſes to this their brother Lazy, 
who was now Sick, this makes them ſtile their Brother, kim 2j,,. 
thou loveſt, They plead no merits either of their own or his, ty 
only plead with him for his own goodneſs and love. Nor do ths 
expreſs in particular, what they deſired for their Brother, though 
ir 15eaſily underſtood by their repreſentation of his ſtate and op. 
ition. 


4 When Jeſus heard that, he ſaid, This ſicknefis 


notorious 


termine. . : 
40 And went away again beyond Jordan, into the. 


place where John at firſt baptized - : and there he a- 
bode 0. 


# Chriſts time was not yet come when he ſhould be berrayed,and 
Crucified ; it was yet three months and more toit ; He ſaw the Jews 
at Jeruſalem were in ſuch a rage and fury, that there was no ſtaying 
in that Place : He goes beyond Jordan to Bethabara, where he 
found 7ohn at firſt Biptizing, John 1. 28. before he Baptized in Enun 
near Salim, Chap. 3. 23. See the Notes on John 1. 28. Poffibly he 
choſe thar place, as being a place where 704, had been preparing a 
way for him, by turning mens hearts in ſome meaſvtre for receiving 
the Goſpel, and pointing out Chriſt to his Diſciples, as the Lamb of 
God who taketh away the fins of the World. » How long he abode 
there, we cannot tell; probably, till he took his laſt journey from 
Galilce to Jeruſalem, of which the other Evangeliſts ſpake , Marth. 
20. 17, Mark to. 32, Inte 18, 31+. What he did in Galilee during 
theſe thre» months, jon reports not, only ſaith, 

41 And many reſorted unto him, and ſaid, John did 
no miracle p : but all things that John ſpake of this man 


were true 9. 

p God fo ordered it in the Wiſdom of his Providence, that though 
Elijah and Eliſha vnder the Law wronght Miracles, by which they 
confirmed their Divine Miſſion ; yet John coming immediately be- 
fore Chriſt, as his Meſſcnger and Forerunner, wrought none ; that 
fo the Glory of Chriſt in working Miracles when he came, might be 
more clear and evident. This made the People, that came to Chriſt 
while he was in Galilee, ſay thus amongſt themſelves, We pid a 


not unto death x, * but for the glory of God; that the, 
'Son of God might be glorified thereby y. "Ws 


x God hath nor ſent this Sickneſs upon Lazar to determine his 
being upon the Earth ; or for ſuch a ſeparation of the Soul of Liz, 
7144 from his Body, as there ſhall be no reunion of it before the 
neral Reſurre&ion, (which is our ordinary Notion of Death : ) Gy 
hath not ſenr this Sickneſs for that purpoſe, y but that he mipht be 
glorified by his £on raiſing him from the dead : God is glorified, wha 


great Veneration to Fohn the Baptiſt, yet he never did thoſe things 

which Chrift hath done. 9 And whatſoever John told us of this Per- 

ſon, hath proved true; Re hath done,and doth greater things than ever 
7okn did, and is in the Judgment of ſenſe to be preferred before 
him : ſhould we not now believe in him ? John toid us he was the 

Lamb of God, who takes away the fins of the World, and told us 

much more concerning him, which our Eyes ſee is true. 

42 And many believed on him there r. 

7 Some b:lieved on him, as ſuch whom John Baptiſt had ſpoken 
him to bc: others poſſibly believed on bim 1n the fenſes mentioned, 
Chap. 2. 23. Not to the ſaving of their Souls, but as one ſent of God, 
a great Prophet, no ordinary Man. The rage of Men ſhall nor kin- 
der the p:ogrels of the Goſpel. 

CHAP. XI. 

Lazarus being fick at Bethany, his Siſters ſend for Chrift, 1-—6, Who 
cratzelleth tewaras Judea, 7—10, But in ihe mean time Lazarus 
dieti), 1116. Chriſt go:th ro Bethauy, 119—19, Whom Mar- 
the meeteth; and talks of th: R.ſurrcfion, 24 — 27. Chriſt weep- 
ing cometh 10 the Grave, 22——38. Where he findeth Lazarus 
four dares buricd, 39, 43. And praying raiſeth him, 41 44+ 
Whercjore many believe in him, 45. Others take counſel againſt 
him, 46——<53. He departe:h to Ephraim, 54—56, The Chief 
Prieſt: command congernme Chriſt, g7, 

4 hs a certain man was ſick, named Lazarus of 

Bethany 5, the town of Mary and her ſiſter 

Martha r. 

s Bethany, ( as appeareth by wer. 18 ) was nigh unto Jeruſalem. 
not wholly ar ro miles diltance from it: bur our Saviour was not 
at this time in 7rdea, for ver, 7. he ſaith to his Diſciples, Ler us go 
into Jud:a. Again, he was at this time in Galilee, or in Peres : and 
we ſhall find wer. 17. that Lzzarry had been in his grave four days, 
b-fore our Saviour gor thither : $o as we muſt allow art leaft ſix or | 
ſeven days betwixt the time when Chriſt heard of Lazarw his Sick- 
neſs, and the tinze When our Saviour cams to Bethany. t This Be: 
thany 1s here only deſcribed ro us, as the place where Marrha and 
Mary lived, or at leaſt where they were þorn : Some think that Be- 
74.:1,y was only a part of the Mount Olive: ; but others more pro- 
bably, rhink that it was ſome little Town or City, ſtanding within 
that part of rhe Mount O/:ver ; for it is here called a Town , and 
_ 10. 38, 39. the place where theſe two Siſters lived, is called a 

: AZze. 

.2 (It was that Mary which anointed the Lord with 
omnment, and wiped his feet with her hair «, whoſe 
brother Lazarus was ſick. ) 


his Son is glorified ; and Chriſt is glorified, when his Divine Poxer : 
is manifeſted, ſo as men acknowledge. him to be what indeed he js, ſ; 
5 Now Jeſus loved Martha, and her ſiſter, and 1. i 
ZATUS Z. D 
2 He doubtleſs loved them with a ſpecial diſtinguiſhing love, x n 
perſons choſe in him to Eternal Life before the foundation of the 0 
World, given unto him by an Eternal Donation, called by him with 
an effeQtual calling, to own and receive him as their Saviour; but d& 
this Text ſeemeth to ſpeak of him as loving this family with an hy: 
man love, which inclineth man to a complacency 1n an objet helo- to 
ved; he had a kindneſs for the whole Family ; They had ſhened fin 
him kindneſs in his ſtate of humjltation ; and he loved thoſethat (o 
loved him, Prov. 8. 17+ 
6 When he had heard therefore that he was ſick, (1 
he abode two days ſtill in the ſame place where he ” 
was 4. hs 
a Though he loved him and his Siſters, with a tender love, yt itis 
he did not preſently go to them, to comfort Mary and Mart; in ” 
their ſorrow z nor yet to cure Lazarus, and prevent his Death ; but Div! 
ſ}aid ftill ewo days in the place where he was. He loved Mary, "op 
'and Martha, and Lazarrs, but he more toved the Honour and Glo be [7 
;ry of his Father ; which was to be manifeſted in his railing of Le 


2472+ frum the dead; we muſt not judge of Chriſts love to us, by 
' his n:ore external diſpenſations of Providence ; nor judge that he 
dor?: :0t Tove us, becauſe he doth not preſently come in to our help, 
?t ©. 7imes, and in ſuch ways and methods as we would think rex 
; {un2h] | 
' 7 7 en after that ſaith he to h:s diſciples, Let us 80 | 
into Judea again 6, 
6 This lets us know, that Chriſt was not in J«dca, when he re- 
ceived the tidings of Lazarss his Sickneſs, but in Peres or Galilee; 
bur he preſently upon ir, takes up thoughts of returning again 1919 
that Province ; and indeed he was now preparing for hs laſt journe 
thither 3 however the Sickneſs of Lazaris, and his raifing him from 
the dead, was one occaſion of his ſo ſoon going up ; from which bis 
Diſciples would have diſcouraged him, as followeth. 


8 His diſciples ſay unto him, Maſter, the Jews0! 12: 


ſought to ſtone thee; and goeſt thou thither agaln c: 
5 | ſince 
© See Chap. 10. 30. There were not three months elapſed, : 
the Fews had ſo ſought to have ſtoned him ; and there was notealon 
for him to think, that their fury was in any whit abated. We ” 
in the other Evangeliſts, Marrh. 16. 22. of other words they ws 
( Peter eſpecially) ro diſfuade our Savionr from this journey o - 4 
ſalem. They were afraid for their Maſter, and they were a# 
ſo for chemſclves. RG 
9 Jeſus anſwered, are there not twelve hours _ 
day ? if any man walk in the day, he ſtumbleth 2, 
becauſe he ſeeth the light of this world 4. _ _ 
4 Look as in the day there are twelve hours, in which rhe hy 
ſhineth, and by giving its light, dire&ts men in their __ " 
they know how to guide their feer ; and do not ſtumble, Te 
chey have the light of the Sun, which God hath ordained, t0 
men that walk up and down in the World. 
ſtumbleth) «c 


10 * But if a man walk in the night, he 


becauſe there is no light in him e. 

e And there is a night _ vopang : 
very prone to ſtumble, becauſe they are in dar 
lioht # guide their feet. So there 1s a ſettime, for all he 
men ; a timefor their peace and liberty, and a time = — = 
bles and ſufferings. God Rules and Governs the _ 2 ol 
are in their callings and places faithfully diſcharging t — EM 
finiſhing the work which God hath given them to do, an X 


hey will te” 
f walk, they W! 
- ein" "and have n0 


W Vii Xl. 


, et 
4 in 
- but 
Maryy 
| Glo 
ff La 
s, by 
at he 
help, 


k rex 
$90 | 


he re 
all ie? 5 
in 10t0 
ourney 
m from 
wich bis 


}f lat 
nc 

d, (inct 
3 reaſon 
Ve read 
ey uſed 
to Jerue 
fradal 


; in the 
h not, 


the Sun 
I ſo 3s 
| beczule 
0 direQ 


nbleth, «( 


v 
y will he? 
| have 0 
; iflues 0 
121 crOV” 
vhile met 
euſt, 30 
heir a” 


IS 


3s not OMe, 
fumble, NOT 


night is CON®, then they will tumble; becauſe then God withdraweth 
his light from them ; they are not then under ſuch a ſpecial ProteQti- 
on of God, who hath done his work by, and with them. This is 
as much as be had ſ:id before, Chap. 8. 20. No man laid hands on 
him, for his hour was mt yet Come : The twelve hours of his day 
were not 31) ſpent. This duty digeſted, is of infinite uſe to quier 
che Spirits of God's People in the worſt of times; every man hath 
his twelve Fours, his day and fet time, to honour God upon the ſtage 
ofthe World; he ſhall not tumble, he ſhill nor miſcarry while 
thoſe hours are ſpent ; he ſhall not die, hz ſhall nor be diſabled 
for duty, fo long as God hath ought for him to do : bur every man 
hath his night t0O, when he mult not expe to converſe in the 
World, without ſtumbling. 

11 Theſe things ſaid he: and after that, he ſaith 
unto them, Our friend Lazarus * fleepeth f, but I go, 
that | may awake him out of ſleep g. 

f There is ſuch an Analogy betwixt Death and Sleep, that there is 
nothing more ordinary than to expreſs Death by $lcep in Scripture, 
Pent. 31. 16. 2 Sam 7.12. 3 Kings 1.21.2 Kings 20.21. job 7.21. 
and 14. 12. Dan. 124 2. and in a multitude of other Texts, both 
:1 the Old Teſtament, and in the New ; fo as it was evident our 
Gzviour meant he was dead, which he knew as he was God, though 
a5 yet he had received no relation of it from the friends .of the deceaſ- 
ed. £ But I go ( ſaith our Saviour) to raiſe him up again from the 
dead, which he calls awaking him ; purſuing the former Aeraphor, 
where he had compared Death ro a Sleep. 


12 Then ſaid his diſciples, Lord, if he ſleep, he ſhall 


do well þ. 
þ Sleeping moderately 1s a good ſign, we know, in moft diſeaſes ; 
this makes the Diſciples .fay, that if Lazarw flepr .he ſhould do 


well. h 
_q Howbeit Jeſus ſpake of his death : but they 


thought that he had ſpoken of taking of reſt in ſleeps. 
j But that the Diſciples ſhou!d not underſtand our Saviour, not 
ſpeaking of ordinary ſleep, but of Death, is wonderful, conſidering 


that there is nothing more ordinary in Haly Writ, than to read of 


Death expreſſed under this Notion ; but poſſibly by our Saviow's 
making ſuch haſte to him, they conceived that'he was nor Dead, bur 
only in'an ordinary ſleep, upon the abarement of his diſcaſe 


14 Then ſaid Jeſus unto them plainly, Lazarus is 
dead k, | 


& You miſtake me, my meaning was not, that Lazarus was fallen 
to reſt upon the abatement of his Diſtemper ; but his Soul is parted 
from his Body. 

15 And Iam glad for your ſakes that I was not there / 
( to the intent ye may believe 2 ) nevertheleſs let us go 
unto him, 

/ Hid I been upon the place, my kindneſs to his Siſters, and pity, 
would have prevailed far with me) to have prevented his Death ; bur 
it is better ( for your ſake at lealt) and 1 am g!ad 1 was nor there. 
m For by this means I ſhall have an advantage, by putting forth my 
Divine Power in raifing him from the Dead, to confirm your Faith 
in me as the Son of God, and the true Meas : therefore, tho he 
be Dead, ler us go unto him. 

16 Then faith Thomas, which 1s called Didymus, 
unto his fellow diſciples, Let us alſo go, that we may 
die with him 7. 

1 Thomas and Didym:s were names of the ſ:me ſignification, only 
Thimas was the Hebrew, and Didymr the Greek name, This is that 
Thmas, who to the laſt, ſhewed a greater difficulcy in believing, 
than many others of the Diſciples did, Chap. 20. 25, His words 
here ſignified great raſhneſs and unbelief : Let us go and die with 
him, with Chriſt ( ſay ſome. ) Seeing that our Lord will nor be 
perſwaded from going into Fudea, where his Life will be in apparent 
danger, for they will put him to death ; let us alſo go and die with 

im. Bur ir 1s more probable, that Thomas meant with Lazarus, 
who, as our Saviour told them but now, was dead ; and in that ſenſe, 
It Was net only an expreſſion of great paſſion, but great unbelief alſo. 
We Ought not to be afteed with the death of our Friends, as ro 
wiſh, or deſire our ſelves out of the World where God hath fer us in 

ations, which we ought to keep, until God be pleaſed to remove us. 
Beſides, Thomas ought ſo to have believed our Saviour, who had: rol 
them, that tho Lazarus ſlept the ſleep of Death, yer he went to 
Wake him; which could have no other ſ=nſ>, thin to raiſe him our 
Of thar ſleep of Death, of which he had ſpoken. Ah ! To what er- 
rs do our Paſſions betray us ? 

. 17 Then when Jeſus came o, he found that he had 


Kn10 the grave four days already p. 

0 Chriſt came to Bethany where Lazarns died ; p He found he had 
a 1n thegrave four days, ſo as probably, Chrift came not to Bc- 
any till four days or more after the Death of Lazarus, or near upon, 


lie 
th 


for their glorifying of God by ſuffering, they ſhall not 
be given up to the rage of their eagereſt Enemies ; 
they are in their callings and places, and God will be a light unto 
them : Dar when their working-t1me 15 over, and the time of ther 


| up thoughts of going into 7ud:a. Aﬀeer this, poſſibly he lingred cne 
or two days, wer, 14. He tel!s them Lazarus was dead. Our Saviour 


was witling to protradt the time, that the Miracle might be more 
Conſpicuovs and Remarkable. 


fifteen furlongs off q. ) 

9 Thar, 2s we count, wants of two miles half 2 quarter, 

19 And many of the Jews came to Martha, and 
Mary, ta,comfort them concerning their brother 7. 

7 Not to pray with them for the Soul of their Brother. departed. 
Thar deparred Souls are in a capacity to be advantaged b; the prayers 
of their Friends, or any ſuch thing, are corruptions of larrer times ; 
bur they had a civil uſage of mourning for their Friends, the time 
for which was anciently chirty days ; they mourned for Jacob forty 
days, Gen. 5o. 3, Fer aron thirry 4eys, Numb. 20. 29. So for 
Moſes, Dint 34. 8, It is probable, the days were fewer for perſons 
of an inferior Quality, but they had ſome days for all; during which 
days, their Neighbours and Friends came to viſit them, and relieve 
them in their ſorrow, with ſuch Arguments as they had. 


20 Then Martha, as ſoon as ſhe heard that Jeſus 


was coming, went and met him s: but Mary fat til! 
1n the houſe :. 


s It ſhould ſeem by the ſtory, Lyke 10. 41. That Martha had the 
care of the Houte keeping upon her, Mary was more Retired ; So 
that the news of Chriſt's coming might come to her firſt, She in 
great joy ran out to meet him ; how far ſhe went we are not told ; 
but 1t appeareth from wer. 30. that ſhe went our of the Town. 


21 Then ſaid Martha unto Jeſus, Lord, if thou hadſt 
been here, my brother had not died -. | 

s Mary, wer. 32. ſaith the ſamz, They were both in an Error, 
for Lazarus his death was appointed, and determined by an Eternal 
Counſel ; and he was both Sick, and died for a wiſe end, that God 
might be glorified, and his Son glorified in raiſing him from the 
dead 3 as we are before told ver. 44 Bur it lets us ſee the vanity of 
our Natures ; who in the loſs of our Friends, are ready to think, if 
ſuch or ſuch means had been uſed, we had not loſt our Friends ; ne- 
ver conſidering our days are appointed, and we cannot pals the num- 
ber of them. If any rationa}, probable means for continuing their 
Lives be omitted, that alſo is not without the Counſel of God, who 
having determined the iſſue, . concealeth diſeaſes, or the true, and 
proper means for their cure, from Phyſicians, or ſuch as are about the 
Sick Perſoas. Nor did Martha ind Mary fail in this only, but in 
that, thy made the Lerd's preſence neceſſary to the preſerving of 
che Life of their Brother 3 who had he pleaſed, could (tho abſent ) 
have kept him from Death. 


22 But I know, that even now whatſoever thou wilt 
ask of God, God will give :t theew. 
w She ſhewed ſome unbelief in her former words, but here 
again ſhe ſheweth her Faich, but not without ſome weakneſs mixed 
hy her Faith ; for by theſe words ſhe ſeemeth not to be ſatisfied, 
that the fulneſs of rhe Godhead dwelt in Chriſt, and that he was 
[aqua with the Father, and able by his own Power to raiſe the dead ; 
Her Faith extendeth no farthee than a belief, that he was im ſo much 
favour with God, that if he would pleaſe to intercede with God, he 
would reſtore her Brother to Life ; this ſhe meaneth, tho the raiſing 
of perfons from the dead, was a thing fo rar2, and unuſual, that 
ſhe dareth not ro mention that particular thing, the uppermoſt in 
her thoughts. 


23 Jeſus ſaith unto her, Thy brother ſhall riſc 
again v. 

x Chriſt takes no notice of Martha's failings before-mentioned, 
( He can have compaſſion upon-his peoples Infirmities ) but appliert 
himſelf roche reliet of her under her aflition, He doth nor rel! 
her, that her Brother ſhould be raiſed to Life preſently, nor th he 
would do it; but only faich, He fhad riſe azain: To ler us know, 
that a belief of the genera] ReſurreQion is enough, and onght 70 be 
improved by ns, to curb our immoderate mourning and Yaſtoi:s for 
thoſe of our Friends who are dead in the Lord. 


again in the ReſurreQton at the laſt day y. 

y From hence we learn, that the general Reſurrec | 
is no novel DoQtrih ; Job believedir, Job 19. 25, 27. Daniet pubiift 
ed ir, Chap. 12.1, The Phariſees owned it, tho the Sadducces dent 
ed ir; and poſſibly rhe Phariſ:es had bur a confuled Notion of tr, 
Martha here makes it an Article of her Faith. 


25 Jeſus ſaid unto her, I am the reſurreFion aad 
the * life z: * he that believeth in me,tho he were dead, 
'yet ſhall he live a. 


\* 2 Martha by her ſpeech ſeemed not to have a true Notion, of 
| Chriſt,ſhe belizverh that there ſhould be a general Reſurre&ion from 
'the dead in the laſt day, by the mighty Power of (rod ; bur ſhe did 
.not truly underftand, whar influence Chrift had upon this Reſur- 
\re&ion, that the raiſing of the Dead, ſhould be the peculiar work of 


2.4 Martha ſaid unto him *, I know that he ſhal' riſe . - 


Xl. 


18 (Now Bethany was nigh unto Jeruſalem, || abont | 7+: «, 


about twe 
miles, 


VU 


4 
Pg 
Ia 4 


T 4s 
. / , KY. 
Zion of the Dean” Ch, © 5 


4 
IT 


But poſſibly, It 15 betrer judged by others,that Chriſt was not yer come | Chrift, not without the Father, but as he was Ordained by the Fa 
nto Bethany, bur only to the place where he met 3/ar:ha ; becauſe 'ther, to be the Judge of the Quick and of the Dead. Chriſt doth 
x1 faid after this, wer. 30. That Feſus was not yer come into the ; therefore here further inſtru& her, and tel} her, He was the Reſur 


own, but was in that place where Martha met him ; which it is 
_ was at Lazarns's Sepulcher, out of the Town, but near it, 
- al the 7ew;ſb Burying-places were ) where he heard from the 
—_ of Martha, how long Lazarss had been Buried. Our Saviour 

uid have come ſooner had hepleaſed, for tho Bethabara was on the 
Other fide of 7ordan, { ſo 
may give any credit to thoſe 


| ref#i0n ; where ( as 15 uſual in Scripture ) the Ff2@ 1s pur ſor the 
| Cauſe : 1am the Reſurre#icn ; 15 no more, than I am, and ſhall bs, 
'the Principal Cauſe of the Reſarrefion: The Dead ſhall hear the 
| Voice of the Son of God, Chap. 5. 28, He alſo adds, ana the Life, 
| That is, the cauſe of Life; both that Life which the Dead ſhajl 


out of the Confines of 7udea) yet if we.|in the RelurreQion recover, and alſo that Ererna! Life w hich 
ity ( who have laboured in the ſtudy of places, | ſhall follow. « And whofoever looketh upon me in that Not! 
3 about forr miles off Jeruſalewr, ſo as it could not be ſix miles | 


on, and commitreth himſelf unto me, tho he doth dye, yet he 


"WY ns, , Which our Saviour could have travelled in a l&i6 time | ſhall Riſe agairt, and Live Eternaly; and this Power being 12 
Our or five days. Some think Lazary: died the ſame day news; me, I am to be tyed to the laſt day, bur have a Power when I 


«me to Chriſt of his Sickneſs ; after which we read ver. $5. that he 


pleaſe to Raiſe the Deaq. Our Saviour indeed hath more in his 


md not of two days ; after which it- was vers 7, that he took |Anſwer than reſpeRted the preſent caſe, bur there was nothing _ 


4 ” 
*Ch. 5 35, 
*Ch 3. 35. 


1Jobh. g.1-; 


I mg = wy 
ent So OY > 
- ; £\T boots + - = 


? Gr. H- 
trixhicd 


For” Jl elf. 


than 19: 41 Gf les to raiſe Up the hearts of his peo- 
- dork 1m (hi place raiſe Martha beyond the 


olato fighter LINgS, As it 1 

(Hover ol a Fieturreflion of I1-r Brother $ Body to a Natural Lite, 
to grin ot a Soirttual 2nd Erernal Life. 

»5 Ainl whoſarver liveth 6, and belicveth in me, 


51.441 nover dice, Pulieveſt thou this d ? 


tif] winch Thavwl 


* the that l»tore proved himſeif to be the ReſurrefFion, naw he 
noveth huntelt to bs 4 Life. Heſaith, he that Liveth a Natural 
1 ith be one whorxeceiverh and imbraceth me asthe true Mera, - 


4nd Saviour of the World, and committeth himſelf, and-all the con- 
61:14 of this Soul to me, hall never die, Rem. 8. 18. Tho his vody 
#4 Mr bene of Sin, yet his Spirit ſhall live becauſe of Righteout- 
neſs; in God ſhall in the great Day quicken again his mortal Bo- 
dy wurongh the holy Spirit which dw=leth in him, and is united fo 
im. < He asketh Aur if ſhe believed thiss We ſhall obſerve, 
char our Saviour, not here only, but Marth. g. 22, 28. before he 
wrought his Miraculous Operations, required Peoples Fa;7h as a pre- 
requifire. And Ma::5. 13.58. He could not do many mighty 
Works in his own Country, becauſe of their unbelief. And far. 
H-= tells his diſciplzs, that the reaſon why they could not 
cure the min Poſſeſſed with the Devil, was, becauſe of their nnbe- 
tief: ſogreat an honour hath God given to the exerciſe of Faith. 

2> She ſaith unto him, Yea Lord * I believe that 


g 20 
<-. 


into the world e. 
© This is the neareſt to the Confeſſion of Peter, Matth. 16. 16- 


S. FOHN. 


EL” k ; , allows, many rather give the rains to their Paſjimns, 
thou art the Chriſt the Son of God which ſhould come 


| much plaincr and ſimpſer jcnje of rhis Seripters, if we Jay; Th: +: 
| Son of God, taling rpm him our Nature, did 2//) free!; with ;. © 
031 017 Aﬀ Aon; (v lich are our IN rural [nfirmities } - Py oa 
rot hing ai] e rea from Kſy ut tn this, that he pad 9 Sin ; he nt, 
*his 18 a: rognted from the Gicry of Chris” ; fer he w1mtgrily 
tcd to tak» our Nature up92 h; Mc: by which (2 Dec ame bbs 9. 
FHumane Aſſections, Ana we 3071157 720e think, tut after foo FF; 
tarily ſubmitted ro tak» _— perfeit ; ap SFO 2, 8:7at he wah. 
{rom the Pajjions and Aﬀedions of it ; in this (e proved himeir +.: 
our Brother, that we migit know that he is n Medi arg fo. 
can eafily pardon our Infirmities, ard is ready tg help 6 S; 

. . o . i . . . o > POR 7 P,'7 
Infirmities which he hath experienced in his awn Ver ſq, IF 2x 
object, That ſreing our Paſſions are Sinfl, it doth nat agree to the ww, 
ture of him who was the Son of God,to jhare with us inthyom Il in nt 
* s nl . ' n " . IF = 3 ” ] Wer 
ſaith he, There i4 o great acai of difference { as totheſe Pafſions } ;.' 
rwirt us, and Chritl ; for Dtey Aj ectio1.7 are * horefore faulty, becau” :). 
are intemperate, and inorainate, ana he Ho barns ; but in Foes 
ho they be, yet they are Compoſea,aud modernte,annd in Obeatgncs es 

” : : NES "5 Ss 6 +0 Ugg, 
The Paſſions of MN are faulty por £p0 = anbaaion bo 1. As they are Tir. 
bulent, and nor Governed by the Rule of Moderation, 2. As they of 

ys- @ . . {[* 
ten riſe without any due gronnd or foundation, or are 9; dire&g ; 

t * . 7 . » hs. 
a right end. They are in us a diſeaſe, becauje we neither price, > 
refoyce Un meaſure, arud to that dexvee alonr, whit Gor Permits and 
; 11 uh it 
the Vanity of our minas, that we aregrieved ani trouble; little i 
no cauſes, being too much additled, and clexnving rs the World, 7, 

a is ol . 5 . id 

was no ſuch thing in Chriſt, no Paſſion in him tver exceeded j+; 1.1 
c * ot . FOR -x 

lounds, or was exerciſed, but upon a jui? and reaſonable cauſe. 1; 


Which our Szviour calleth, The Rock wpon which he would build his 
Church, of any that we have in Scripture ; yea, and more full than | 
that; for thoſe words, which ſhould come into the world, are not 1n | 
Peter's Confeſſion. The ſum of this is, Martha doth here profels a 
full aflent to our Saviour as the Meſias, the Son of God; he who was 
Prefigurated, Propheſied of, Promiſed, as he who ſhould come into | 
the World. 

28 And when ſhe had ſo ſaid, ſhe went her way, 
and called Mary her ſiſter ſecretly, ſaying, The Maſter 


1s come and calleth for thee 7. 

f Mary was left ar home, while Mareha, went out of the Townro 
meet Chriſt : Ir ſeemeth by this verſe, Chriſt had asked for her, 
( tho that be not mentioned before ) Martha goeth ſecretly to her 
and tells her, that the Maſter was come : ( It was a Name they uſu- 
ally called their moſt famous Teachers by. ) 

29 Aſſbon as ſhe heard thar, ſhe aroſe quickly, and 


came unto him g. 

g Marics love and readineſs to attend upon Chriſt appeareth by a 
former ſtory concerning her and her Siſter Marrha, Recorded Luke 
10.38, 39, 49 Bur the preſent ſorrow ſhe was in for her dead Brs- 
ther, together With the hopes ſhe conceived of having him reſtored 
to Life by Chriſt's coming, added wings ro her motion ; therefore 
the Evangeliſt faith, ſhe aroſe quickly, and came to him. 

30 Now Jeſus was not yet come into the town, but 
was In that place where Martha met him. 

31 The Jews then which were with her in the houſe, 
and comforted her, when they ſaw Mary that ſhe roſe 
up haſtily and went forth, followed her, ſaying, She go- 
eth unto the grave, to weep there. 

32 Then when Mary was come where Jeſus was, 
and ſaw him, ſhe fell down at his feet b, ſaying unto 
him, Lord, if thou had(t been here, my brother had ' 
not died z., 

Coming, +þ the fa#s aown at his feet, which was a poſture, (as 
we have heard before) very uſual in thoſe Countries, by which they; 
te!tned, both their civil Reſpe&s to Princes, and Great Perſons, and 
alſo which they uſed in the Worſhip of God, Marth. 2. 11. Whce- 
cher Mary did it upon the one account orthe other, dependerh upon ' 
what we cannot know ; wiz. Whether ſhe at this time was fully per- | 
ſwaded of his Divine Nature ? of which the beſt of che Diſciples till ; 
Chrilt's Reſurreftion, had but a faint and uncertain perſwafion- 
z The words which ſhe u{eth ro him, are the ſame, which Martha 
aſed, wer. 21. (See the Notes there, ) 

33 When Jeſus therefore ſaw her weeping, and the 
Jews alſo weeping which came with her, he groaned in 
the ſpirit, and -| was troubled &. 

& The Apofile ſpeaks of Chriſt, Heb. 4. 15. as an Aigh Pricft, 
e43? can be touched with the feeling of ow! tnfirmitics, and one tha: 
ec: have Compaſſion , Heb. Fo 2. Martha's and Mary's Pſion for 
their dead Brother was their Infirmity ; Chriſt is touched with the 
feeling of it: He to ſhew himſelf truly man, groaned im hiwſelf ; 
7 being natural to us, to be affe&ed with the afflitions of others, 
and to weep with thoſe who weep. Bur here ariſcth a queſtion, 
Whether Chriſt was troubled from a natural neceſſity, as we ſometimes 
cannot foritar weeping ro ſee others weep bitterly ; or out of choice * 
ſome of the Ancients think it was out of choice. Mr. Calvin and 
others think, that ir was out of a natural neceſſity ; not that he 
could not govern his Paſſions ( as we ſometimes cannot) by Reaſon ; 
bit that he could not as man forbear his Paſſion. I ſhall Tranflate 
what Mr. Calvin ſpeaks mol? judiciouſly in the caſe,determining nei- 
ther wav, but leaving it to the Readers judgment. Buz how ( faith 
he) & 2nawing, and trouble of Spivit, agree to that Perſon who wa: 
FHe Son 6f Goa = Becauſ-, t0 ſome it looketh wery abſurd 20 ſay, that 
Cir? 4; one of us, 15 jubjzett to human Paſſions ; they think Chriſt no 
ot her wi/e ar any time, either grieved or rejoyced, than as he, [0 efien 
ug be 1101ght fir, voluntarily aſſumed to himſelf thoje Paſſions oy 4a 
/ccr2t ailpen/ation. Auguſtine thought that Chriſt in this ſenſe is 
Jaid to have groaned, and to have been troubled; whereas, othcr mens 
C4/jtons tranſport them, and exercife a Tyranny over twhem, to 12 dir 
fins bance of their minds : Hz therefore thinks the meaning 1;, That 
Cy. rife ectng otherwiſe jedate, and free from Paſſims, [ometimes valun 
"47:3 rapk theſe Paſſton;:, But ( ſaith he) in any jrayment, i7 11.8 


him: 


not perform all things when he pleaſed. 


and in all caſes, have put forth þis Ltyine Power 
necef{urily, not freely, Governing his Attions 
as he ſaw moſt conducing to the wife ends of his own glo!)- 


cometh to the grave. It was a cave, and a ſtone 
upon tt 2. | 

man, and not withour human Aﬀettions : he cometh 
where Lazarus Dead Body was laid, which the Evange 
us wasa Cave, Or a hollow place in the Earth, or lo 


they were went to roll ſome great ] 
oraves, (as we ſee in the burial of our Saviour, A 


the ſiſter of him that was dead, faith unto bum, 


day &s Þe (ut 


make this yet clearer, we muft diſtinguijh-betwixt man in hi; Crag; 
on, and the Degenerate © Nature of man, as it is corrapred Spe . 
Sin : When God at firſt Crcatsd man, he Created him with Natura! 
' Aﬀfeions, but ſuch as were under the command of Reaſin : That yy 
Paſſions are now inirdinate, and rebell.ys, is accid-ntal to our Nyty. 
Chriſt indeed took our Affefions upon himy but without that dily(, 
which fell into them by the Fall, which cauſeth us that we canms by 
them and God. He was greatly troubled, but not ſo'as by his trill, | 
become diſobeaient to his Father. In ſhort, if we compare our Aft; 
with his, there will appear as grear a difference, as betwixt Pure Wa 
ter, and that which ts dirty and filthy. And the ſingle exanyl+;f 
Chrift, is enough to make us rejed th: Stoical Apathy { or want of p;; 
ſion] for from whom if not from him, ſhould we fetch the hight Ru 
Perfeftiom? Let us therefore rather ſtudy to Corrett, and Tam th1; 
diſorder, in which our Paſſions are intangled, and follow Chriſt a1 
gride, that we may bring them into oraer : Thus Paul, 1 The. g.1;, 
doth not require of us 8 ſtony ſtupiaity, but commands us to Grvern wy 
grief, that we may n0t monrn as men without hope. Fir Chriſt there. 
fore took our Aﬀetions upon him, that we by his Grace may be majlid 
ro ſubane whatſoever is vitious in themes 


34 And ſaid, Where have ye laid him ? They fa 
unto him, Lord, come and ſee. 
35 * Jeſus wept/. 


flo 

1 Weeping is not of it ſelf a Sinful, but Natural Paſſion, which A 

(as was ſaid before) doth very well agree with Chriſt, having volun- 
tarily raken upon him our Nature, and Natural Infirmitics. 


35 Then ſaid the Jews, Behold how he loved 


m Love ſheweth it ſelf as in a complacence in the objeR beloved, 
while we injoy it, fo in a grief for jr when we are deprived of it, 
The Jews therefore rightly concluded Chrift's kindneſs to Lazaru, 
from his human Aﬀettion expretſed ar his Death. 

37 And ſome of them ſaid 7, Could not this man#,,,,, 
which opened the eyes of the blind, have cauſed that 


even this man ſhould not have died o ? 

» Some only concluded Chriſt's love ro the deceaſed from his Aﬀe- 
Rion ſhewed at his grave ; but cthers make a worſe concluſien, on 
derogation fo Chriſt's Repurarion, from the Miracle he had wrought, 
Chap 9. in reſtoring him thar was born Blind ; for their ſpeechſoun- 
deth in this ſenſe ; it he had indeed cured one that was born Blind, 
certainly, he could as well have kept che man, to whom ( dead, 
he expreſſeth to grear AﬀeQtion) clear from Death. A Learned [n- 
terpreter therefore calleth this a Devzlijh Sarcaſm ; they go aboutto 
weaken the Repuration of our Saviour, from the miracle which : 
had wrought, apparently ſhewing his Divine Power, becauls he di 
not keep his Friend from dying. Ttis much like the ſcoff with whict 
they afterwards ſcoff:d him, while he hung upon the Crols, 31n:i% 
27. 42. He ſaved oth:rs, himſelf he could nas fave: Or the words 
may have been ſpoke, if not with an Irony, yet with Admirati, 
that having cured the Blind man, a Stranger to him, he did not hel 
his Sick Friend : or as if they were uncertain whether [115 Power of 
Working miracles, were not limited to ſome times, chat he cou'd 
But how weak mult this 
their Argumentation be, which could ſtand upon no other foundzion 
than this, That if Chriſt were the Son of Go, ne _— 
by his own Wildo) 


38 Jeſus therefore again groaning In himfelt P> 


[f yet further f0 be ruly 
ro the plac? 
HA teller 
me Rock. 2 
Stones to the mouth of cholz 
tthhe 27+ 69.) 

r Marti 
:m, Lord; 
tea! tour 


Þ As before, wer. 33. So thewing himſc 


39 Jeſus ſaid, Take ye away the ſtone. 


by this time he ſtinketh : for he hath bee! 


ritatjy 
ther co 
whom 
Tod be 


4.3 
aloud 


which 
Ma: ts 
U words 
ration, 
1ot heal 
zwet of 
C could 
uſt this 
.ndatto!t 
VET) 
od ated 


Y {Loy 


ofelt Þ» 
me 1a) 


he truly 
rhe plac? 
1 reileti 
9 Ard 
of tho!: 
55.) 
\[artilch 
[ orC 
2.3 tou! 


Qu: 


, Our Lord commandeth the removal of the Stono, which was 
»» rhe mouth of the Sepulcher, that che Miracle might be evident 3 
_ Li24115 © have come forth, the door of the Cave being ſhur, 
ard 2 great Stone making it faſt, would have looked more hike an 
apparition, chan 2 ReſurreQion. s Ir 1s very probable, that Mar- 
+1 chought Var our Saviour commanded the removal of the Stone, 
pot in order fo 4 commanding him to Life again, bur our of a cu. 

-ofity co view his cead Body, and therefore ſhe objeQerh the Pu- 
trefa8ion of his Body, from which the Soul was now departed 
tour days 3 85 char which our Saviour would not be able to indure 
rhe favour GL. 


46 Jeſus faith unto her, Said I not unto thee, That, 
f thou wouldelt believe, thou ſhouldelt ſee the glory of 


God 


tt 
+ Chriſt now beginneth to open to Martha and Mary, and the reſt, 
his reſolurion £0 raiſe Lazarus from che Dead by and by. Chriſt 
cich char tO us 1D his word, which he ſaith by a juſt conſequence, 
'ho he doth not ſpeak it In ſo many words: we do not read in this 
uiftory, chat Chriſt had ſpoken this in ſo many words and ſyllables, 
it he had ſpoken it in effe& 3 he had rold her, ver. 25, Thar He 
wis the Reſurrefion. and the Life, that he had Power to raiſe Dead 
Bodics from a Natural Death to Life, and thar for thoſe who be. 
tied in him, tho. they were dead, they ſhould live. 'This could nor 
Le without 4 great manifeſtation of rhe glory of God: the Power 
of God is his glory. Once have 1 ſpoken ( ſaith the Pſalmift ) yea, 
1ice have 1 beard it, that Power b:longs te God, Thou ſhouldeſk 
ſee God by me maniteſting rhe glory of his Almighty Power ; 
God glorifying himſelf, and glorifying his Son. Believing, brings 
us in experierices of God ; whereas unbelizf, as it were, limiteth God, 
:nd ricth up his hand. Et 

i4 Then they took away the ſtone from the place, 
where the dead was laid v. And Jeſus lift up his eyes W, 


and ſaid, Father, I thank thee that thon haſt heard me «. 

y The Servants, or Friends anout the Grave removed the Stone 
from the mouth of the Cave, within which the Dead Corps of La. 
zo lay. w Chriſt before his Thankſgiving ro his Father, Is ſald 
to have liſted up his eyes a poſture often uſed in mens addreſſes to 
God, Pſal. 121.1. and 123. 1. as an Indication of their belief, thar 
Heaven 78 Gods Throne : tho he fillerh Heaven and Earth, yer the Hea- 
yen is his Court where he moſt glorioully ſheweth himſelf, che Earth 
but his footſtool.. x We read here of nothing that Chriſt had ſaid be- 
fore 3 yer he giverh thanks here to his Father, that he had heard him 
The meaning 15, Thou haſt Willed, or pleaſed to grant thoſe: things 
which I defired. Ir is very hard ro determine, wherher Chriſt had 
uſed ſome audible words before this, upon this occaſion, in Prayer 
to his Father, which the Evangeliſt could nor, or did nor ſerdown; 
cr whether he only groaned in hu Spirit, ( as was fald before. ) By 
thoſe groans (not only expreſſing his ſorrow for Lazarys his Death, 
or rather ſympathy with the AfiiCtions of Aary and Martha) bur 
alſo his defires ro his Father, that he mighr be again reſtored to Life ; 
and his ſecond groaning, ver. 38. was of that Nature, which groan- 
ingsin the Saints, God underftanderh, knowing the mind of the $pi- 
rir, making Incerceſſion for the Sarnts, according to the Will of God. 
( Asthe Apoſtle teacherh us, Rom. 8. 27.) much more did the Fa- 
ther, (who was one jn Narare, Eſſence, and #ill with the Son ) un- 
derſtand chem in him, Nothing is theſe caſes can be derermined, 
much leſs can any conclude from hence, thar there js vo need of 
our uſing any words in our Prayers 3 for, altho chere be no ſimple 
abſolute neceſſity, that we ſhould uſe them in order to God's Know. 
ledge of what we need, and would have ; (for he that ſearcheth the 
Heart, knows what we need, and whar we deſire, Marth. 6. 8.) yer 
there is neceſſity for our words, in order to our obeying Gods com. 
mand, Hof, 14. 2. Luke 11, 2. There 1s a greac deal of difference be. 
wixcGods hearivg of Chriſt, and hearing us ; Chriſt and his Father 
have ove Efſence, one Nature, and Will. 


42 And I knew that thon heareſt me always y: but 
* becavſe of the people which ſtand by, I faid it, that 


they may believe that thou haſt ſent me z. 

) know thatthou always Willeft thoſe things which IT Will, and 
I Will nothing bur what thou Willeft, and haft ſept me to do in 
the World; ſo as in theſe things ic is imp?ſſible, bur thar thou 
ſhouldeſt always be ready ro grant what I ask of thee; nay, there is 
no need of my asking. 7 I ovly-give thee thanks for the Peoples 
ſake, who here fland by, who believe thee to be the true God, and 
to have an Almighty Power 3 bur will not as yet believe that I am 
thy Son, by thee ſent into the World, and that I do the works which 
[ doin thee, and fram thee, We read of many Miracles wrought 
by Chriſt; withoucr any Prayer firſt put up co his Father, Mat. 8. 2. 
and g, 6, Mark 5. 41. and 9. 25. Luke 7. 14. ufing only an Autho» 
Matveword ; nor need he have uſed any here, but only for che fur- 
ther conviRtion of che People, that he was ſent of God, that God 
whom they owned as their God: he Prayeth and giverh Thanks co 
God before them all. 


43 And when he had thus ſpoken a, he cried with 
aloud voice, Lazarus; come forth 6. | 


s When he had groaned in his Spirir, an audibly given Thanks 
to his Father for hearing of him, ard refiified, that he did this, nor 
es he ever had anydoubr of his Fachers willing whac he Willa, 

it that the People might rake notice, of his Favour, and Power with 
God, ard being ſent of him. b He cried with a loud Voice , not 
whiſpering, nor like Wizzards preping ard muttering, Iſa. 8. 19 
p t ſpeaking aloud, (> as all might hear, and underft and, thac what 
< cone, was done by his Powerful Word: he calls him by his 
ne, he hids him come forth ; they were not the words thatraiſed 


4%, but the mighty quickning Power of Chriſt, which acrend- 
©d titeſe words. : 


4 And he that was dead came forth, bound hand 
x10 T00t with grave cloaths : and * his face was bound 


S. FOHN 


C h [95 Ok 
c The faſhion of their dreſſing up the Dead differeth accordi:ig to 
the faſhion of ſeveral Countries ; among the Fews we underſtand by 
this Text, they ried a Napkin abour their Head, and ſome Clothes 
abour their Hands and Feet, They wound the whole Body with lin. 
nen Clothes, Chap. 19. go. with Spices z this was, ( as is their ſaid } 
chefr manner to bury. So A; 5.6. The young men are ſaid ro 
have wound Ananias, and carried him our, and buried him 3 and this 
is that which certainly is meant here by theſe words, hound hand and 
Foot : and here is a ſecond Miracle, thar one ſo wrapped, and bound 
up, ſhould be able ro move and come forth. d Chrift bids looſe him 
ana-let him go, to evidence him truly recovered to Life again, and 
that che Miracle was perfe&ly wrought. Abour this Miracle there, 
are two curious queſtions ſtarred, 1. #uhether the raiſing of Lagarus 
zo Life, was dome by the mter Divine Power of Chriſt, or by the Perſon 
of Chriſt ; ſo as the Human Nature, being Perſmnally United to the Di. 
vine Nature, had alſo a ſhare in it : the Divine Nature communicating 
us property of quickning the Dead, to the Human Nature ? Thar jc 
was the Perſon of Chriſt that raiſed Lazar, and he who did it. waz 
rruly Man, and truly God, is out of doubt. But that there was an 
fuch Communication of the properties of the Divine Nature to the 


Human Nature, that ir alſo had a ſhare in this effeR, is juſtly deni- 
ed, and doubred by many great Divines - bur ir is a queſtion rending 
f0 no grear profit for us .ro know. A ſecond is, Where Lazarus hy 
Soul was, theſe jour days wherein it was ſeparated from the Body ? The 
Scripture hath nor cold us this, and ir ſpeaks roo great cur loſiry to in- 
quire too firialy. Tho we are taught from the Parable of Dives and 
Ea3arm, that the Souls of departed Sainrs do ordinarily and immedi- 
arely. paſs into Heaven, or Abrahams boſom ; yer what ſhould hin. 
der, bur thar in rheſe caſes, where ic appears to have been the Divine 
will, rhar che Souls of perſons deparced ſhonld again be returned fn. 
ro their Bodies in a ſhore time 3 they mighr by a Divine Power. be 
_ under the cuſtody of Angels, unril the time of ſuch Reftauration 
of them. | 

45 Then many of the Jews which came to Mary, and 


had ſeen the things which Jeſus did e, believed on him f. 
- © Tharls, which came to vitt Martha and Mary in their mourn- 
Ing ; and coming to Mary, did go along with her to the Sepulcher to 
meer Chriſt, and there meeting him, ſaw all the paſſages relaring ro 
this Miracle f, truly believed on him as the rrue Meſſeh, Chap. 12. 
IT, 18. Or it way be, it is to be underflood more largely of ſuch a 
Faith as 1s bur a preparatory to true and ſaving Faith; for there was 
a double uſe of Miracles, 1. To prepare men for Faith, diſpoſing 
them ro give an car ro him, to whom Ged had given ſo great a Pow- 
er 3 ſoas after che ſight of them, they were more ficred ro hear, and 
inclioable ro believe. 2. To confirm Faith in thoſe thar believed, fo 
as they believed the more firmly, ſeeing the Do&rin they heard,con- 
firmed by ſuch miraculcus Operations. 


46 But ſome of them went their ways to the Phariſees, 


and told them what things Jeſus had done g. 
g Theſe Fews had the ſame means for believing, the orhers had ; 
they had heard che ſame words from Chriſt, they had feen the ſame 
Miracle wrought by Chriſt.. Whence is Ir that any of the other 7ews 
believed? theſe, inſtead of believing, run to the Phariſees co accuſe 
him.  Canany account he given of thjs. unleſs from the freedom of 
Divine Grace, ſhewing mercy where God will ſhew mercy ? Tho 
poſſibly che former wickedneſs of theſe 7ews, was the cauſe of Gods 
not giving that Grace co them, which he gave to others. 
47 * Then gathered the chief prieſts and the Phari- *PAl. 2.2. 
ſees a council, and ſaid, What * do we ? for this man Mat 25.3: 


doth many miracles -. Mee: 44 
hb The chzf Prieſt and Phariſees were 2 great pare of thar grear CH, 12, 
Council amongſt the Jews, which went under the name of a Sanh:- 
arim , and this (probably) was rhe Council they gathered ; for ver. 49. 
we read, that Caip1as the High Prieft, the fianding Prefident of that 
Courr, was amongſt them. The Miracles wrcughe by Chrift, were 
the things thar difiurbed chem, and they refle& upon themſelves for 
connivipg (o long ar him ; whar they ſhould have improved, ( vir. 
che Miracles which he wrought ) co have begor or increaſed Faith in 
chem, they mention, and miſimprove to their deſtruQion. 


48 If we let him thus alone, all men will believe on 
him z, and the Romans ſhall come and take a way both 


our place and nation k. | 
# They are afraid, thar if chey ſhould any longer ſuffer Chriſt to 
go on working Miracles, he would have a great many followers, who 
upon the credit of his Miracles, would own him 2s the Meſſiah, and 
the effe& and conſequence of this ſhculd be, they ſhould by the Ko- 
mans ( to whom they were already in ſubjettion ) be utterly depri- 
ved of thar lirile liberry rhey Indulged chem. k They ſay, the Romans 
would come (char is, with an A:my) and deſtroy their Temple,” which 
they call their Place, their moſt tamous Flace, where they met to 
worſhip God, and in which as a roken of God's preſence amongſt 
them, they (o much gloried ; yea, and their Nation ; that is, mile- 
rably deſtroy their Nation, and bring ir to utter Ruin; whether 
they really thought ſo or no,or only ſpake chjsas an Argument to haſt. 
en the Death of Chriſt, 1+ noe much material tor us ro know, Trere 
was this colour for jr, The Jews were a People very prene upon all oc- 
caſions to Rebel,and Rife up in the defence of their l1>erties,when ever 
they cculd get any Head, to give them any countenance and Condu?, 
They alſo lived in a gereral cxpe&ation of the Meftah,when che Scep- 
ter ſhould be departed from Fda, ( as it. now was, and when Dar zel's 
ſeventy Weeks mentioned, Chap 9. 24. ſhould be derermined, which 
were now fulfilled ; ſo as there was about this rime, a gereral ex- 
peRation of the Meſſ5ah, of n hom allo ir is apparent they had a faile 
Notion, and getierally cxpeticd under the Notion of the Meſſiah, nor 
the Son God raking Human Nature, and to die for their Redemp- 
rion, and then riſe agatu ſrom the Dead, and Aſcend into Heaven 3 
but a Temporal Prince, who Conquering all their Enemies, ſhould 
deliver them from all Captiviries and Servitudes, and reſtore them ro 
cheir ancienc liberties. This their expeRarlcn was known well e- 


I 9, 
Aqs 4.16. 


nough to the Roman Governors, (as appeareth by Herod's queſtion to 


-—out with a napkin c. Jeſus ſaith unto them; Looſe 
"Mm, and let him go d. 


.che Wiſe men in Mathiw 2. 4.) and they were very jealous 
which cauſcd Herod's Bloody 
act 


of the Jews on this accounts 


bt | 
4h; 
Jl q 
'S el; 
?: abi 


: .- 
-_ - : _- <> 
a "3 


a, 
- 


_ , ——=——, 4 24y 
+. eg S EY PoRxx;. 


II ns Ze 4 
Ca 


—y 8 4. - 


4 
—e 


ways 2 Ss Tg 


Chap, XL 


*Chap.18. 


I 4 


"Eph. » 
T4,t59,16. 


'he ſhould gather together in one the children of God 


: ki1tino the Children in and about Bethlehem : So as the Rulers 
bo Facncdile to the Notion they had of the Meſſiah) might 
reaſonably think, chat if Chriſt were: taken to. be he, and went.on 
confirming rhe Opinion of himſelf by theſe miracles, (o as People 
generally ran afrer him 3 rhe Romans would reafor.ably (uppoſe they 


had a deſign to Rebe!, and rnerefore would come upon them, deſtroy | 


their Temple, and utterly ruin their Nation. But bow will they 
avold this ? That which they agreed vpon we ſha!l meer vith, v. 53- 
They took cornſel to put him to death, How they were led on to that 
fatal Counſel, we ſhall hear. © 5:1 : 2I 

49 And one of them named Caiaphas, being the-high 
prieſt that ſame year /, ſaid unto-them, Ye know no- 
thing at all ”. Es x , 

! The High Prieſt by the Divine Law was to be but one, and. he 
the Eldeſt Son of Zarons Houſe 3 nor was he to be for a. year, but 
for his Life, as appeareth by a multitude of Texts 1n, the. Books of 
Moſ-55 bur all things*were now out of order in the Jewiſh Church; 
they were under the Power of the Romans 3 all places eſpecially 
thar of the High Prieft, were bought and ſold amongft chem ; Some 
fay they had two High Pricſts, others fay but one, only he had, an 
affiſtanr, called by that Name, thar had a Partnerſhip in che Honour. 
After Herods time there was no regard to the Family of Aaron, .or 
the Aſmoneans, bur the Romans made what High Pricft they pleaſed 3 
ſo as Toſephre tells us, that the Fews, who had but Thirteen High 
Prieſts from Aarons to Solomons time, which was Six, hundred and 
twelve Years; nor more than Eighteen 1n Four hundred and fixry 
years after, co the Captivity of Babylon ; nor more chan Fifceen from, 
thence; to the time of Antiochus, which was Four hundred and {our 
reent years ; had Twenty: eight berwixt the time that Herod began to 
Reipn, and 'Jeruſelem was deſtroyed, of which this Caiaphas. was one, 
and cercairily the chief, (if there were. wo at this time) and con- 
ſetmently the Prefident of their great Court, whom all atrended to, 


and his words went a great way with the reſt, He chargeth the 


reſt of the Council with folly, as not conſidering what was fir ro be 
done. i 3 FX Chae 
50 Nor conſider that it is expedient for us *, that 


one man ſhould die for the people, and that the whole 
nation periſh not 7. | 


n Never was any thing ſpoken more Diabolically. He regards not 
what was their duty, nor what was lawful for them to do 3 whether 
they might upon ny proce ſhed Innocent blood, muck, more the 
the Blood of one whoſe Life was ſpent in nothing but a gotng up and 
down in doing good : Only like a wretched Policician, who was con- 
cerned for nothing but the Peoples ſafery 3 he ſaich nor #t z5 lawful, 
bur ir is expedient for us that one man, be he never fo good, never 
fo innocen:. and juſt, ſhould die for the People, that js, ro ſave the 
whole Narion from deftrution. P * PETIA EIT 

*31* And this ſpake he not of himſelf.s ; for being high 
prieſt that year, he. propheſied that Jeſus ſhould die for 
that nation p : . s 

o So far as this was a Prophecy, he ſpake not of himſelf ; take the 
words of Cazaphas in the ſenſe rhat he ſpake them, they were ſuch as 
might well enough come our of ſuch a wrerched- mouth, ſpeaking 
out of the abundance of a vile and wretched heart, Melzus pereat uns 
quan unitas, That it was better that one man ſhould die, ler him 
be never ſo Good, Juſt and Innocent, than-thar for his ſake miſchief 
ſhou!d come upon a Nation. This was now ſuicable enough to the 
Religion of ſuch an High Prieſt : But that in this ( the words being 
capable of a double ſenſe) Caiaphas ſhould deliver a great Truth ; 


Thact this year One ſhould die for the People 3, that is, The Meſſiab ſhould| 
be cut off, but not for himſelf, as we read, Dan. 9. 26, This was no| 


more from himſelf, than the Words which Balaams Aſs ſpake were 
from its ſelf. The Spirit of Prophecy ſometimes fell upon wicked 
men; God revealed ro Phayavh and Nebuchadsezzar, ( both which 
were Pagans ) the things which he intended ro do. There was a 
time alſo when Sax! (tho a man reed of -God) did alſo Prophe- 
cy 3 and the worſt of the Princes of 7udah, had an uſe of the Urim 
and Thummim. So alſo here Cataphas, tho a vile and wicked Man, 
was here influenced by God to Prophecy, and ſpeak an Oracle: nor 
are thoſe words {| being High Priz(t that year ] ſuperfluouſly put in, 
for ic being coniiſtent with the Holineſs of God, ſometimes ro 
make uſe of the Tongues of the worſt of Men to declare his Will, 
ic (cems agreeable ro the Wiſdom of God in doing it, to make uſe 
of Principal Men, they being Perſons whoſe words are moſt likely 
to be regarded, and ſo make impreſſion upon People, The Popiſts. 
would from herice infer the infallibility of the Pepe, becauſe he is 
the High Prieſt : bur they ought co prove, 1. That the Office of the 
Pope, hath ary foundation in the Word of God. 2. That this was a 
gift given to particular Priefts, and ar paticular rimes ; for the 
Fewiſh Bigh Prieſts were fallible enough ordinarily, witneſs Aarons 
makivg the go'd:n Calf, and Uriah the Altar after the pattern of 
Damaſcis, 2 Kings 16. 10,11. The words being High Prieſt, are 
no! given as a reaſon why Cazaphas Prophecied, tho they are a good 
reaicn Wiry God was pleaſed to chuſe his Tongue, and over.rule it 
beyond nts own thoughts and incentions, to ſerve his'defign in this 
Revelation. He did vor Prophecy intentionally, as defigning ſuch a 
thing,only. materzally ; the matrer of his Words were Indeed a Divine 

eve! ation, tho his Incention and fcope was fit for none but a baſe, 
carnal Politician, God made him a Propher in whart he ſaid, tho he 
meant not ſo. 


52 And * not for that nation only /, * but that alſo 


that were icattered abroad m. | 

{ Nor for the 7ews only. The words uſed in Cazaphas hisſpeech 
were aads and E9yog, words not fignificant of the Jews only, bur 
ct other Veople alſo: m for Chriſt was to gather into one body "all 
th2 El:(7 of Goh, (who are here called the Children of God, becauſe 
they were to be (o after their being begotcen by the Immortal 
teed of the Word, and born again of Water and the Spirir ) thoſe 
rhar at prefeur were ſcattered abroad over the faceofthe whole Earth: 


S.FOHN 


Earth.” The Evangeliſt extendeth the ſenſe of Caiaphss his p.. 7 
to Gentiles as well as Jews, according to the extent of the RY 
Chriſt, declared 1 John 2. 2. / <Att of 
53 Then from that day forth they took connge +, 
gether for to put him to death 7. | # 
n They had caken ſuch Counſels before , bur row the 
intent than before, having found a jufter prerence, 45, t ©. 
a Sedition and Rebellion 3 and Iearned of their High Priet) nm 
'was more convenicht that one ſhould die, than that a whole as I 
ſhould 'be deſtroyed. The Hiph Prieſt had farisfied their Conf, 
ces ; now they make all the haſt,they can to pur rheir malicioy. _ 


ſ7gns In execuri6n, Sg 
' $4 Jeſus therefore *walked-no more openly amor f 


the wilderneſs, into a city,called Ephraim p, ang there 
continued with his diſciples 4. ” 

o For he being the true Paſchal Lamb, was to be (in 
Feaſt, and pur. an end to thar ,Type, and would cherefore 
bimſelffor that time, which was now #t hatid. p Whar this Et 
or Ephraim was, 1nterpreters, .vainly buſie themſelves in inquiio,? 
ir was ſome obſcure Ciry, and near the Wilderneſs ; ſome chin? 
was In the Lot of Benjamin, others think ic was in the Lot of Evbrai a 
and obtained irs name from che Tribe wichin whoſe Lor it was, ; 
Scripture no. where mentioneth it: and it cannor be expected bn 
'that 1n ſo many changes of Government as had befallen the Jews the 
names of places ſhould be ſo altered, that we ſhould be t alok © 
many of them: q where ever it was, it is ſaid that Chriſt and hi; Dic 
ciples continued there in ſome privacy. ; 

55 And the Jews paſſover was nigh at hand r, any 
many went., out of the countrey up to Jeruſalem hefy;s 
the paſlover to purifie ' themſelves -. Bop 

r Chritts laſt Paſſover, which was.the fourth after he had eftered 
upon his publick Miniftry 3 this. was nigh : £ He doth nct ay al 
bur many went up to purifie themſelves. There was no general % 
gal purification required before men did eat the Paſſover, but there 
were ſeveral legal uncleanneſſes, and purificarions neceMary to clempe 
men from them; now thoſe who had any ſpecial Purificatinn to pal 
wenr' before others, that they might have time to do what the Lay 
required of them. 

556 * Then 
themſelves, as they ſtood in the temple, What think 


ye? that he will not come to the feaſt :? 

- £ I find good Interpreters expounding this Verſe, of the Friends 
of Chriſt, who having uſed ro meer Chriſt art theſe Feaſts, and (ve 
tome Miracles wrought by him, did out of a good deſign ſeekfor hin, 
and inquire of each other, whether they knew, whether he intended 
to be ar the Feaſt 3 yer ir may alſo be underftood of his Enenis, tho 
it ſcemeth ſomething roo early, being ſix or ſeven days before, 


57 Now both the chief prieſts and the Phariſces ha 
given a commandment, that if any man knew where he 


were, he ſhould ſhew zt, that they might take him ». 

,,« For their great Courr had iſſued our orders for the diſcovery 
and apprehending of our Saviour, if they could any way learn where 
he was, This was in purſuance of that wicked Counſel of which «c 
read"before, wer. 33. there they decreed 3 now they cannot reſt un- 
cil chey bring their bloody devices to paſs, for which we ſhallſoon 
find God giving theman opportunity. 


CHAP. XII 


' Chriſt betng at Bethany, is anointed by Martha, 1-=3, Wherefme 

' TFudas reprehendeth her, 4—6.: and Chriſt defendeth, 1, 8. Many 

| Jews go to ſee Lazarus, . 9. whom the chief Prietis ſeeb t put to 

death, 10, Is. Chrift rideth to Jeruſalem, whom the mtitxde re- 

-- ctive with joy, 12-—19, Some Greeks deſire to ſee viſt; who 
diſcourſe with Philip thereabout, 20—22, Chriſt # glorified with 
a toice from Heaven, 23——29. Tellith the multitude the frait and 
manner of hu death : Exhorteth *em to walk in hu Light, $4—Þ 
Mary of the Zews believe in him, 379— 45. Chriſt exhorteth "ent 
Faith, 45 —50, 


at thar 
referys 


: ®F* Hen Jeſus, fix days before the paſſover, came to 
2 Bethany a, where Lazarus was, which "ad been 
dead, whom he raiſed from the dead b. 


-a From the Countrey near to the Wilderneſs where he contirued 
wich his Diſciples, Chap. 11. 54. he came ro Bethany within leſs chan 
rio miles of Jeryſalem, upon the Sabbath day, or peſlivly the night 
before 3 ſix days before the Paſſover : b Ic was the place where C 
we read in the former Chapter ) Lazarus died, and was by Chr: 
raiſed from the dead. 

2 There they made him a ſupper, and Martha fer- 
ved; but Lazarus was one of them that fat at the table 
with him c. ; 

c Thar this Supper was made in Bethany, is no queſtion; but at 
whoſe houſe there, ir Is queſtioned ; ſome think char Ir was at rhe 
houſe of Simen the Leper 3 we read indeed of a Supper made for our 
Saviour at his Houſe, both Matth. 26, 6, 7. and Mark.14- 3. 90d thet 
Simon is ſaid to have been of Bethanz;z only the Supper here ment 
oned, is ſaid to have been fix days before the Pallover, and ” 
mentioned by Matth?w and Mayh ſeems to have been bur.twO . ays 
before, Marth, 26. 2. Mark 14. 1.. That which 1s probably —_— 
ſolve that difficulty is, the circumſtances of che Supper, ans Hilo 
ry about fr, ſeem the very (ame, both In #arthew, ark and —_ 
but'*ir ſeems in Matthew and Mark, to be a little pur out of - po 
they do nor ſay, thar this Supper was two days before the loc” 
(chat ihdeed had beema contradiRion to what Fobn dorh here gy my bl 
but both Matthew and Mark firſt tell us, that Chriſt cold hs orgs 
ples, thar the -Paſſrer was ro be within wo days, and of the Cour 


Chrilt, Eph..t» 10, was to gather in one all things in Heaven and | 
E ; 4 


L , : - and the 
ſe] caken by the c<>7rf Priefts and Elders againſt Chr Wt, na 


Chap, X1 


the Jews 0: but went thence unto a countrey neg; Fs 


ſought they for Jeſus, and ſpake among *hy 


refare 
Mary 
t to 
Wit 
who 
with 
+ and 
_ 
'emt0 


1e t0 


been 


rirued 
5 chan 
night 
? ( as 
Chriſt 


ſer- 
table 


but at 
ar the 
Op our 
nd that 
mentt- 
1d that 
0 days 
ſaid 10 
Kiſto- 
Join : 
order , 
aſiovery 
relare ) 
Dijct- 
- Cou- 
d then 
relntd 


4p XIL- 


S. #OHN 


Jaterh the ſtory of this Supper ; 70hn firſt gives us an account of | by our Saviour 'on Lazarus : This incr-afed the number of thoſe 
7 


0s ed it in its proper cime and order. 


Then took Mary a pound of ointment, of ſpike- 
1rd, very coſtly, and anointed the feet of Jeſus, and 
pi -d his feet with her hair: and the houſe was filled 
qith the odour of the ointment. x ED 
Then faith one of his diſciples, Judas Iſcariot, Si- 
nons/or, which ſhould betray him, 
Why was not this ointment ſold for three hundred 
pence, and given to the Poor ? 
5 This he ſaid, not that he cared for the poor: but 
'3-1ecauſe he was 2 thief, and * had the bag, and bare what 


was put there1n. | 
7 Then faid Jeſus, Lether alone, againſt the day of 
my burying hath ſhe kept this. : 

3 For the * poor always ye have with you: but me 

| "ye have not always 4. | | 

1 Both Matthew and Mark relate this ſtory with ſome different 
circumſtances : ſee the notes upon thoſe two places, where all the 
1Rring circumſtances are conſidered, and explained, and the parts 
of this hiſtory more largely explained. 

9 Much people of the Jews therefore knew that he 
was therez and they came, not for Jeſus ſake only, 
'hut that they might ſee Lazarus alſo *, whom he had 

raiſed from the dead e. 

+ Bethany was ſo near to Feruſalem, that many of the Jews came 
thither, as well to ſee Lazarns raiſed from the dead, as to ſee 
Chriſt ; nor was this withour the eſpecial Providence of God, that 

| the Name of Chrift might be made more famous juſt before his -ſuf- 


fering. TE 
2 d But the chief prieſts conſulted, that they might 
put Lazarus alſo to death f. 


f Never was there a more unreaſonable madneſs and rage to juſti- 
fe the Apoſtles calling of the Enemies of the Goſpel unreaſonable men: 
2 Theſ, 3- 2 Suppole that Chriſt had broken the Sabbath, or had 
ſpoken Blaſphemy, yet what had Lazarus done ? 6 , 

11 Becauſe that by reaſon of him, many of the Jews 


went away, and believed on Jeſus g. . 

g Being raiſed from Death to Life, he poſſibly ſpake of it to the 
Honour and Glory of God; for this they conſult to pur him ro Death 
alſo; and their only reaſon was, becauſe that many of the Jews be- 
lieved on Jeſus for his ſake. _ 

12 * On the next day, much people that were come 
to the feaſt, when they heard that Jeſus was coming to 


; ſeruſalem, 
13 Took branches of palm-trees, and went forth to 
meet him, and cried * Hoſannah, Bleſſed zs the King of 
Iſrael that cometh in the Name of the Lord. 
14 And Jeſus when he had found a young aſs, fate 
thereon, as it 1s written, oy 
15 *Fear not daughter of Sion: behold, thy King 


"cometh ſitting on an aſſes colt. 

þ This whole Hiſtory is much more largely reported by the other 
Erangeliſts, Mat. 21. in the Sixteen firſt Verſes, Mark 11. in the 
Ten firſt Verſes. Luke 19. from Verſe 29. to Verſe 41. (fee the 
Notes on all thoſe places.) 


16 Theſe things underſtood not his diſciples at the 
firſt: but when Jeſus was glorified, then remembred 
they that theſe things were written of him, and that 


they had done theſe things unto him 7. 

i The Evangeliſt, amongſt others, confecſſeth. his own ignorance 
alſo; the Diſciples ſaw the thing done, Chriſt riding into the City 
upon the foal of an Aſs, the people ſtrewing of Boughs, and throw- 
ng their clothes in the way ; but to whar purpoſe theſe things were 
done, or what fulfilling of Prophecies was in this thing, that they 
underſtood not, ſo long as Chriſt was alive: Their eyes were upon 
the Meſieb as a Temporal Prince, that ſhould come in great State and 
Majeſty, ſoas they were wholly blinded from ſeeing any thing of 
the truth and fairhfulneſs of God fulfilled in this little Triumph of 
their Lords. Bur after that Chriſt had died, and was rifen again 
from the dead, and aſcended up to Heaven, ſo declaring himſelf 
with Power to be the Son of God ; then they began to remember 
theſe things, ſo as to confirm their Faith in him as the erue Meſſiah, 
whom God had ſent into the World. The Word of the Lord which 
we hear, and the Works of God which we ſee, tho' oft-times they 

not profit us, nor are improved by us at the preſent, yet after- 
ward become of uſe and profit to us ; it is therefore good to hear, 
and ſee, and obſerve Gods Words and Works, and to lay them up 
n our hearts, as it is ſaid, Mary pondred the ſayings of the Angel ; 
petting fruit afterwards, of what at preſent we ſee no fruit and 


17 The people therefore that was- with him when 
© called Lazarus out of his grave, and raiſed him from 
the dead, bare record. 
&. For this cauſe the people alſo met him, for that 
they heard that he had done this miracle. 
19 ThePhariſees therefore ſaid among themſelves *, 


Perceiveye how ye prevail nothing ? Behold, the world 
5 Zone after him #. 
© Theſe three Verſes let us know the 


Pies coming to ſee Chriſt, which was ch 
Val. II, 


External cauſe of the peo- 
fame of the Miracle wrought 


which was fix days before the Paſſover, ſo John ſeems to | who came to ſee his entrance into eruſa/em; but the unſeen cauſe 


was doubtleſs rhe influence of God upon their hearts, dire&ing them 
co it, for the further glorifying of his Son before his Paſſion. Bar 
this enrageth the Phariſees, to ſee that their Decree that thoſe who 
owned Chriſt, ſhould be turned out of the Synagogue, ſhould have no 
berter effeRt, but the multitude rather more owned him, and ran af- 
ter him. Here again we find the term World ſignifying zany, tho 
thoſe many made up but a very ſmall part of the World. Z 

20 © And there were certain Greeks ! among them, 
that came up to worſhip at the feaſt: 

1 It is not eaſſe to be determined what theſe Greeks were, whither 
Jews, who being ſcattered in the Grecian Country upon the Con- 
queſts which the Grecians had made upon the Fews under Alexander 
the Great, and thoſe who ſucceeded him, ſtill remaned in thoſz 
Countries, bur kept ſo much of the Religion of their Country, as 
to come up to the Paſſover, or Gentiles, which ate ordinarily called 
Greeks incontradiftion to the Fews, As 14. r. and 16. r. and 18.17, 
Rom. 1.15. 1 Cor.1423,24. Gal.3.28, But itis moſt probable that they 
were Gentiles; for tho' ſome ſay, that the Jews would never have 
ſuffered the Gentiles ro have come into the Temple to Worſhip 
yetthe contrary is plain from the inſtance of the Eunuch, .4#s 8.27. 
who wasan Heazhen, and came to Feruſalem to Worſhip, And 4s 
17. 4. We read of a great multitude of devour Greeks, in the Greek 
the word is osBomeywy, Worlbirping Greeks; and it is plain from 
the beginning, that there was a liberty for Srrangers, not of Iſrael, 
but ſuch as came our of a far Country, for the Lords Name ſake : 
And Selemen prayeth at the Dedication of the Temple, That the 
Lord would hear them : And there was belonging to the Temple, 
a Court of the Gentiles for that purpoſe ; It is called the Court with- 
out the Temple, Rev 14. 2. What Worſhip they there performed, 
:S a greater queſijor,: Some think they only prayed ; others think they 
offered Sacrifices in that Court ; from 2 Mac. 2. 35. but certain it 
is, that there were divers of the Gentiles devourly difpoſed, thar 
hearing of the Jewiſh Temple, and the ſolemn Worſhip performed 
chere, at their ſolemn Feaſts ; came, ſome as SpeQators at thoſe great 
OY others with a true deſign to Worſhip the God of the 

ewWF. 


21 The ſame therefore came to Philip *, which was 
of Bethſaiday of Galilee m,, and deſired him, ſaying, Sir, 
we would ſee Jeſus 7. 

* If theſe Grz-cians (as is probable) were Syrophenicians, their 
Country was fo near to Berhſaida of Galilee, which was Phrlips 
Town, that it is probable they might have ſome knowledge of him. 
and that might bring them to him to be ſpokeſman ; » bur ir ſhould 
ſeem they came only to ſatisfie their curioſity, for they ask for no 
more, than that they might ſee Jeſus. 

22 Philip cometh and telleth Andrew : and again 
Andrew and Philip tell Jeſus o. 

o The news of their coming, and their Errand,is brought to Chriſt 
by Philip and Andrew, who poſſibly might ſtumble art it, becauſe 
they were Genti/es, and Chrift had forbidden them to go into the 
way of the Gent:les ; they therefore firſt acquaint him with the deſire 
of thoſe Greebs, before they bring them to Chriſt. 


23 q And Jeſus anſwered them, ſaying *, The hour * 
J2 
& 7. Is 


1s come, that the Son of man ſhould be glorified p. 

? Chriſt replies, that the time was now come, when he (who was 
the Son of God) ſhould be glorified ; that is, by the Gentiles re- 
ceiving of the Goſpel, according to the many Prophecies of ir in 
= Oid Teſtament ; bur he goeth ov, telling them that he muſt firſt 

ies 


24 Verily, verily, I ſay unto you *, Except a corn * 


of wheas fall into the ground, and die, it abideth alone ; 


but if it die, it bringeth forth much fruit 4 

q Look as you fee in your ordinary. Husbandry, the grains of 
Wheat are firſt buried in the Earth, and loſe their form, before they 
ſpring and ſhoot up again, and bring forth fruit; ſo ir muſt be with 
me; I muſt be fit lifted up, before ! ſhall draw men after me ; I 
muſt firſt be crucified, before my Goſpel ſhall be preached to all Na- 
tions, and the fulneſs of the Genzzles ſhall come : bur if I have once 
_ and riſen again from the dead, then you ſhall ſee this abundant 

uit. 


25 * He that loveth his life, ſhall loſe : and he * 


that hateth his life in this world, ſhall keep it unto life 


eternal r, | 

» We had much the ſame in the other Evangeliſt, Mar. .1o. 37. 
Luke 14+ 26. Some think that our Saviour repeateth it here, to ſhew, 
that as Chriſt firſt ſuffered, and then entred into his glory, fo his 
Diſciples muſt alſo lay the foundation of their glory in theirſuſſerings, 
and by much tribulation enter into the Kingdom: of Goa : Oc what if we 
ſhould ſay, That our bleſſed Lord doth here Prophecy, what ſufferings 
would attend the firft Preaching of the Goſpch, and incourage his Diſci- 
ples to what he knew they muſt meer with and undergo, by lerting 
them know, thar the ready way to loſe their ſhare in Life Eternal, was 
ro be ſo fond of this Life, and the comforts of it, as not to be ready 
to lay them down for him : bur if any perſon hated, that is, leſs lov- 
ed his life, and a]Jl that in this Worid is dear ro him, than Chrift 
and his ſervice, he ſhould, if not be preſerved from enemies rage, yet 
moſt certainly be recompenced with eternal Life, 


Chap. XII. 


Ch. r3. 


1Cor.ls, 
6. 


Var. 16, 
5. 


Mar.8.36, 
Luk. 9.24. 


26 If any man ſerve me, let him follow me s, and «q ,,_. 
* where I am, there ſhall alſo my ſervant ber: and it & 1. a, 


any man ſerve me, him will 7zy Father honour. | 

5 This is much the ſame with that Mar. 16. 24. unleſs folow- 
ing here, be more reſtrained to ſufferring, let him follow me to »y 
Groſs ; for otherwiſe it ſeemeth the ſame with ſerving. We muſt 
not be ready only to do, bur alſo to die for Chriſt, co follow him to 
the Croſs if he calleth us to it. £ And if any man fo {erveth ne. 
he ſhall be in Heaven where 1 am, Roz. 8. 17. If we ſuffer with him, 


we ſhall alſo be glorified together. _ my Father with who:n 1 am 
; f one 


Chap. XIL _ S. FOHN. Ch 
one in Nate, and Efſexce, will honour thoſe that are my ſervants; 29. The people therefore that ood hs. _ ; 
ear 


ſo great a thing it is to be a ſervant tothe Son of God. The Father| ;- {aj : _ , 
will honour thoſe that are ſo, and eſpecially thoſe who are ſoin ſuf = _ oy It thundred a: Others laid, An angel ſpake 


ſzring, with Erernal Life and Felicity. vor abr h ; , ; 
27 Now is my ſoul troubled #, and what ſhall I ſay ? chondde ir wh TOTES ſaving ooly in this 
Father, ſave me from this hour w , but for this cauſe | gittance, as they could not tiny Het che ey 
came [ to this hour x. God's way, when he ſpake unto his people b =... 
* By Soul, is not here to be underfiood only the ſenſative part of | voice for the greater declaration of the Divine Majeſt "to have thy 
the Soul, but his whole human Soul, So Chap. 13. 21. He was frou” Thundrings and Lightnings. Thus it was at the yl amps Wit 
bled in ſpirit, Our inward troubles ariſe from our paſſions; and | upon Mount Sinai ; thus we read in Johrx's Viſions ay the Lay 
there are paſſions of grief and fear, which give us moſt of our inward | 8. 5. Of Lightnings, and Thundrings, and Voices which elche, 
trouble; Fear reſpetterh ſome evil at a diſtance from us; Grief is | from God's Throne. 6 Ir was the general opinion of the ProCeeded 
cauſed by evil fallen upon us, or ſo near, that we ſeem already to be | God always, when by Voice he revealed his mind to his _ tha 
in the Power of it. © The word here uſed is, T:]4e5]a: which fig- | uſe of an Angel to do it by ; hence (probably) as Pie fade 
nifieth no mean, bur a great, and morethan ordinary degree of trou- | at ſuch a diſtance» as they heard no Voice, thought it w who were 
ble. Chriſt was greatly troubled,tho' not ſo as we ſometimes are, when | but Thunder ; ſo thoſe who were ſo nigh, as beſides the Th nothin 
our trouble leadeth us to diſpair : Chriſt was capable of no ſinful] hear a Voice, ſaid, It was an Azge! that ſpake to him under tg 
trouble. Hence two queſtions ariſe, 1. For what rhe Soul of Chriſt 30 Jeſus anſwered, and-ſaid *, This voice 
was troubled? 2. How ſuch a degree of trouble could agree tothe Lord | hecanſe of me. but for your ſake n . Came not; 
Feſus Chriſt? He tells us, Marth. 26. 38. That he was exceedingly _ Thc Voice P i FE ſirud hel I 42, | 
ferrowful, fo as ſorrow was one part of his trouble ; and we may bee rote Take os - = p he very well, before j 
from what he afterward ſaith in this verſe, Father ſave me from this | 1 LE. tons Lo ed 1s own Name, and woul 
hour ; that Fear made up the other part of it. He was grieved, and bs b 7B wh ws not principally nor ſolely for me, but Chief 
he was afraid; ſome ſay it was the apprehenſion of that miſerable Cn wes ſer ny omg thar' am che Son of God, and he 
Death he was to die ; others ſay ar the ſenſe of the Divine Wrath |, | Jo. ry bas _ _ N. orld, by, and in whoin, he deſigneth 
which he was to undergo, Death being not yet overcome, and his g'or 'N wht ey 7 re R 
confli&t with his Father's Wrath for the fins of men, being yetto be 31 INOW 15 the judgment of this world 4: NOW ſhall, 
indured, tho' Chriſt at this time was in the moſt perfe& Obedience * the Prince of this world be caſt out e. a 
to his Father's Will, offering up a moſt acceptable, and well-pleafing | d The terms [_ Judgment ] aud (World) are taken fo variouſy ; l 
Sacrifice unto God ; yet he ſuſtaining our perſons, had a conflid to | the New Teſtament, and particularly in this very Goſpel ſy 7 in Chi 
indure even with his Father's Wrath upon that account, tho' not up- have given Interpreters a great liberty to vary in th [0 a they & y 
on his own perſonal account ; for ſo he was at this time doing that paſſage. Ir ſeemerh reaſonable to _, char a ro mag my, 
which was moſt acceptable, and well pleaſing in his ſight. As to the | pound in this Vetſe what the Voice from Heaven uttered : thr yu 
ſecond queſtion, nothin could be more agreeable than this to Chriſt, | Father had already glorified his Name, and would yet Carthe -y 
both with reſpe&to his human Nature, which had the ſame Natural | it ; how ? Now (faith he) 2 che judgment of this World ; Tha __ 
(tho'not ſinful) Infirmities which other men have; and with reſpþe& | ſome) the condemnation of the wicked men in it : and certain (ky 
to his deſign and end, to help and relieve his people under their | that the term (1rd) doth ſometimes ſo ſignifie, Chap. 1 "- 
troubles of Spirit; and as the Apoſtle ſaith, to deliver them, whe 17.6, 9. 1 Gor. 6. 2, and 11.32. But this ſenſe * ate ok 
through fear of death, are all their life time ſubyeft to bondage. So as | gree with Chap. 3- 19- where Chriſt tells us, that this his fir = 
this trouble of Spirit, agreed to him both as man, and as Mediator ; | ing was not te Condemn the World. Others do therefore þ wn 
but their muſt be a vaſt difference obſerved betwixt this trouble of | 7udgmen: better underſtand, the diſpenſation of Divine Proyi ay 
Spirit in Chriſt, and that which isin us. Our troubles are upon re- | which a great change or Caraſf - b . =  roVIdence b 
fleRions for our own fin, and the Wrath of God due to us therefore ; | by the Reformation of it. Th 'r "en of —_ gras. 
His trouble was for the Wrath of God due to us for our ſins. Our | ::0n of all things, AQs 3. 22. yay id beſtto reed, 
troubles are, becauſe we have perſonally grieved God; His was, be- | the Diliverance and Vindication of Mankind fi h a 
cauſe thoſe given to him (not he himſelf) had offended God. We | Devil, who had a long time held Mankind _ wr Yea 
are afraid of our Eternal Condemnation ; he was only afraid by a | The Devil had got a dominion over Mankind by the Fr pr 
Natural fear of Death, which naturally riſeth higher, according.to and had exceedingly tyrannized over them, keeping th « 
the kind of Death we die- Our troubles have mixtures of deſpair | part of the World in ſlavery b Ido! as SO2PIng the for greae 
diſtruſt, ſinful horrors ; there was no ſuch thing in his nile; who were no open Ldolaters gon ns Se ht 'N _ 
Our troubles in their Natural tendencies, arekilling and deſtroying ; | our Saviour, the time is come; when this ſhall be altered os _ 
only by accident, and the wiſe ordering of Divine Providence, prove | ſhall be bound up, I will deliver a great part of the World f = 
advantageous, by leading us to him, as the only remedy for troubled | yoke of Idolatry ; another part of Ah th JRatmghry the 
Souls. His trouble was in the very nature of it, not only pure and |nion of Sin. 4 The Devil, who is not by a ; Ft —_ 
clean, butalſo ſanative and healing. But that he was truly troubled, | he World, bur boafterh himſl If to be 7 any cognt the Frine 
and that in his whele Soul, and that ſuch a trouble did very well | it like a Prince fall OE Ns OS. 46-000 ied 
agree, as to the human Nature he had aſſumed, ſo to his Office, as ence, Eph. 2. "g nada che God of fi World tra web 
our Mediator and Saviovr, and the foundation of a great deal of peace, | 2 Cor. 4. 4. taking the World as his houſz d OY OY 
quiet, and ſatisfaCtion to us, is out of queſtion. The chaſtiſement of | man, March. 12. 29. ſhall be caſt - topo ng Keeping I a5 _ 
our peace in this particular lay upon him ; and they were ſome of | tho' he will ſtill be going abour like 7 L\ gy Bras 
thoſe ſtripes of his, by which we arc healed: And faith he, #har | he may devour, and moleſting th beſt or © yon, ſeeking whom 
rot 7 ſay ? - 15 the _ of a Spirit troubled. '» Fa- | yet he ſhall not prevail over Ig God nn ny "hay e's 
ther ſave me from this hoxr. This hour of my Paſſion; it is the ſame | feet ; he that had th "ER 
with that-in our Saviour's laſt Prayer, Let Yb cup paſs "hes me; ger deſtroyed, and bg og wy __ nm batt wo nope +” 
muſt be underſtood with the fame Qualifications there expreſſed, If | be delivered, Heb. 2. 14+ the OI ng - car yo _ 
is be thy wit, if it be poſſible, &'c, By his bleſſed example he hath | and God with the temptation ſhall Gs bleſſed iſſue. Ardthe D : 
_ us, ay os Fo _ - OD: whether to flie, what to = Kingdom kept up by Idolatry, ſhall a. ont meer be te 
o? For my love (ſaith David of his Enemies, Pſal. 109. 4.) th din th . ; . 
Ss Art _ but I give oy ſelf unto prayer: Rs up = - * to —_ er" eanhpe Bo Colpel, and run every frm age —Y 3 
od hath bidden us, Pſal. 50. 15. Ca# upon him in the d ouble ; * j : : "14 6 
and Saint Zames aith, Is any man afiched ? gay Fad —odymuare, d = _ L , if I be lifted up from the earth 7 will'C ; that 
CR hc GeneF it as an exec, chat we fhonkd follow bis fo 29 2E MEN UNO Meg... « Os thin 
Reps. But how doth our our Saviour pray, to be ſaved from tha: 33 This he ſaid, ſignifying what death he ſhould himf 
o_ pe” = -. ps cauſe ” came into the World. Here was | dl. "ory 
in Chriſt, a Confift, between the Fleſh and Spirir; not like ours, | f However this term of 1iftin ft 1 7 hem 
3 : prit; 5 $, F Fel up Chrift is taken in ſome other them 
—_—y _ | wh. m_ = the -"_ but betwixe his Scriptures it is by the Evangeliſt himſelf - this rext expounded con great 
was fully ed pm " 5 ry oO * and his Spirit that | cerning his death, ſo as there is no room for any other Interpretation their 
TA AIC EEE tie )-8 cone ter ebe four: —— Text: The word thatis uſed is hardly :9 be foundin Cften 
ſelf, corre&eth the Language of ki « Nat l feſh hapgt fo organ} mg (excepr where in Scripture ir relaterh co Chriſt) ſigni) be gor 
joyceth in the Will of God. I was nor (ſaith he) forced, ceth, re. | ing 70 die, or to put ro Death, bur it is very proper both to exprelstic mon 
i ode atten Rn Do ep IEA 
my people F purpole to ate tor nto the Air ; and to let us know that his Death wasa lifting } 
y people, + | up of his Name: As it was the loweſt degree of his Humuliation, "0 eh y 
28 Father, glorifie thy Name y. Then came there” was neareſt to his Exaltation. ſe was his higeſt AR of Obedience _ 
a voice from heaven, ſaying, I have both glorified je, | 2,2 al 0 His rn, ,that for which his Ferher high) Exalted "_ 
and will glorifie it again z A »| him, giving him @ Name which is above every Name, Philip-2.9 19 37 
7 That is, make thy —_ lords a nk -_ = ang” ng made his Name famous over allthe World, by " them, 
mous over - the Earth ; a general petition, but ſuch a —_ al the Goſpel roma nat, _ very wn 2 8, 
Our part . . » - » . © 
otro are grep TIA TL ntl þ! 
is then glorified, when his Will is done. B —_ Her G . + or God | lifred up upon the Croſs berwixt Heaven and Earth, yet this ſhall not Saviou 
not my will, but thy will be done. My Fleſh indeed (aith, Son ne from waxes EIT INT in God by we; _ fi bay _ 
this hour ; but Father do thy own Will, let that be do " mac mr CO Tag 7 uorys by chis I that ratien _ 
me, which will moſt tend to make thy Name Promega S =" - of my C of £ For by the Preaching of my Croſs, and P — ©. 38 
Prayer never goes without an anſwer / Cs 2 ai ble of my Goſpel to all Nations, and by the efficacious corent'y g,y fulfill 
Heaven, &c, The Lord cauſed a voice foomn Heaven i Srvod ogy Ap Era ar) or 9s —_— —_ ne wor Our x 
hb lorified it, = 44 all, and every man, yet) mulcicudes ot me 
bee Enid i, I have by the cue my gory i hp, ey ater ms, fo 26 they ll tbe an eee 1 mo, bogs Ve 
Ce Gate Thr teh ng, by Why Mieacks, | ed and rin oy egin Bin the Dread, and being bf 57 os Mn 
thou ſhalt further glorifie me by thy D =, b wil glorifie it again; I and other Miniſters of the Goſpel, held forth as the Objeft of my uhille 
the Dead, by the Bro don of he Ls O7 thy Rekacreion from } ples Paich, .to:be by them: laid boldipon in orver to their Eternt oe 
ef the Earth. g of the Goſpel, and carrying it to the end | Life and Salvation. 4 He uſed the term of lifring up (fairh che E- Counſe 
vangeliſt) to ſignifle the particular Death he ſhould die, BY ke $20, | 


» that th 
x ſack? 


- Py f of 
— = RR > ———___—— - = - — _ 
I go” wks - ono 
. —_— 
4 : , X 
w % ” > _—_ ” _ - 
_ £2 + a , WS. 
bes — OO noni fr err———nropmmnm og On OO TACO nn mere —————— eee <p—gmomn——— 
=p ant < _— — —— - —_ - ce wanny * - i —_—_— - —— 
T tif 6 " _— on A vw _ p _ =_ - 
- [3 i _ 4 Ao _- x Þ * R— 
4 _ - _ -—- m-— "7 
» > a Sap a Y h 
. 5 wg <; - W_ pa at ws *” 5 
< - ey q R : 
þ . * Pay . 
: ap 0 Ai 


— 


= Qq. na, 2. 2 i, ff, - 


= $f & IV 


=» 


_—_—_— 


2D. 


_- 
han __ _— ——_—  —— - he 
= im W& NE eee Re Es = ec———_ wo -—— oo . £< —_— 
_ ” = - - , mw WY a 
o 4 _ = «4 s a 
La ” 
- <4 - "a Y . ; 
4 — 
F bo. nn $5. aan ON » Ws ” 
= : . . _T G 
6 ; 8 =o - VL - $4 OE: - b wm ” 
BT wat" 6K W _— £ * 2 p - G _— 
ML AC - "os LF ILR 4 __ 7 I —. 
- br ro > "tt —— ——_ y_ 
"I... Loy MA. > < _ = 2 ” . g - —_ 
= _ NR. - — y E 
— < 4 _ - : V; ebb v 
ae oy oy 


© ——  - - 


y 


ſignify: 
w. 5 the 
om the 
lifting 
10N, ſo 
edjence 
Exalted 
MY 10s 
, by the 
iſters 0 
zith our 
6 Jew! 
hall not 
 inſtea 
further 
tication 
rence of 
- I ſhall 
ind wor 
having 
\poſtles, 
of p20" 
Erernal 
i the E- 
y being 


rucified 


aP- XII. , 7 


Cucified, 


he Earth, as when they were at any time Stoned, or Strangled, 

up, headed, &c. but were lifred up from the Earth to be nailed to 
or —_ and hong in the Air until they died. 

£9. _ 4 The people anſwered him *, we have heard out 

- of the law, that Chriſt abideth for ever : and how faiſt 


, 
[/ o . . 
4 aghr— again the Law is taken in a larger ſenſe than in ſome places, 


.- :« only ſignificant of the Books of Moſes, in oppoſition 
_ "ak gry other Holy Writings, as we had it before, 
to t "0. 34. for the places of Scripture which the people ſeem to 
=_ ſeem to be Pſal 110. 4. where Chriſt is called a Prieft for 
o os elſe to Dan. 7. 14. where the Kingdom of the Meſſiah is {aid 


to be 


obo mars of the Meſſiah, the people could not reconcile to 


phat our Saviour here told them of his Death 3 the reaſon was, 

| their not underſtanding the trueNotion of the Me/ſiahjand of his King- 
4m, which they fancied not to be a Spiritual and an Eternal King- 
Jom, but a Temporal Kingdom here on Earth. This made them ask, 
how (that is, with what conſiſtency to thoſe Prophecies) if he indeed 
were the Meſiasy he ſaid, The Son of man ſhould gie, (for thar they 
underſtood by the term lifted up) which maketh it very plain, that ir 
was a phraſe they uſed to expreſs that kind of Death by. They ask 
who he meant by the Son of Mari. 


light, 


8. eth/. 
th Our Saviour thinketh not fit further to open himſelf as to that 


*1t concerning the Meſiah, and his Divine Nature ; into a dire& 
iffertion of which he muſt have entred, had he given a dire&t anſwe; 
to their queſtions ; ocherwiſe what they had objefted, might eaſily 
have been anſwered by our Saviour, by diſtinguiſhing berwixt the 
exo Natures in his own Perſon ; according to his Divine Nature he 
«35 not to die, tho' he died according to his human Nature; and 
after his ſuffering and ReſurreQion, his whole Perſon, in which both 
the Divine and human Nature were United, were to indure for ever 
tut he thinks not fit to diſcourſe this point, bur return ro what 
Jim had told them, John 1. 9. and what he himſelf had ſaid, Chap. 
9.54 That he was the light of the World, tho' poſſibly by light, he 
here underſtandeth thoſe beams of Goſpel DoQtrine, which ifſued our 
from him as the fountain of light. Yer a lictle while, 1 who am the 
great light, and the true light of the World, am with you: or yer 
2 little while, the Goſpel which is light, and direRs you in the way 
to Heaven, is with you, for within a few years (under forty) after 
this, their City was deſtroyed, and their Nation ruined, and before 
that time the Apoſtles were turned away from the generality of that 
Nation to the Gentiles, A, 13. 45. and 19. 9. 1 He in the next 
Verſe expoundeth himſelf as to what he meant by walking, wiz. be- 
lieving : make uſe of the /ight, both to guide your underſtandings 
:nd judgments, and alſo to dire& your feet: for look on men in 
the World, while they have the guidance of the light of the Sun, 
know how to order their ſteps. and to dire& their feet ; bur if once 
it be dark, they know not how to direCt their feet in their way 3 
but err, and ſtumble, and fall. So it will be with you, when I 
ſhall be gone (who am the great /ight of the World, while I am in 
the World, as he ſpake, Chap. 9.5.) and not only I gone, but the 
Goſpel, which is that light which I ſhall leave behind me, be gone, 
by my Apoſtles turning to the Genziles, through your perverſe refu- 
ſal of the Salvation of it, (as 4#s 13. 46. and 19. 9.) When you 
ſhall be utterly ruined, (as it will be at the deſtruftion of your City) 
then you will walk in darkneſs, having no means of Salvation left 
you, 

\ 36 While ye have light, believe in the light m, 
that ye may be * the children of light ». Theſe 
things ſpake Jeſus, and departed o, and * did hide 


himſelf from them p. 
” » He either expounds what he meant before, by his calling to 
them to walk in the light, viz. Believing in him who is the true and 
great light of the World, Or elſe he declares Faith in him to be 
their duty, as well as Obedience, which is a point our Savionr had 
Often before preſſed : While 1 am amongſt you, and when I ſhall 
be gone from you, and the light of the Goſpel yet ſtayeth behind 
amongſt you ; imbrace me, and receive me as your Saviour, and 
yield all Obedience to the preſcriptions of my Goſpel. » Thar you 
may be children of the light ; this the Apoſtle expounds and inlarg- 
eh upon Eph. 5.8, 9.10, 11. o Aﬀer Chriſt had ſpoken thele 
things in Jeruſalem, he departed to Bethany, p where he obſcured 
timſelf from his Enemies. 


37 But though he had done ſo many miracles before 


tiem, yet they believed not on him 9. 

9 The Miracles of Chriſt did not work faith in any, yet they had 
atendency both to prepare Souls for an affent to the propoſition of 
the Goſpel, and alſo for the receiving Chriſt as the true Meſſiah, and 
Sviour of the World ; as they evidenced a Divine Power in him by 
which he wronght thoſe mighty Works ; bur yet they had nor this 
elleft upon the generality of the Jews. 

©. 38 That the ſaying of Eſaias the prophet might be 
fulfilled which he ſpake, * Lord, who hath believed 
"ur report ? and to whom hath the arm of the Lord 

Y revealed r ? 

7.20 3s that which 1/a:aþ Propheſied, 1a. 53. 1. appeared to be 
fulfilled in them; for fo rerm = ET doth 
> n Scripture always denote the final cauſe, with reſpe& to the 

-ounlel and intention of God, bur oft-times the event. So Chap. 


#20, Won 2 Cor, 1.17. The Arm of the Lord may either 
ol, Il, 


:1 which Death the bodies of the Crucified abode not 


7 thou, The Son of man muſt be lift up ? Who is the Son 


an everlaſting Dominion, which ſhould not paſs away, a King- 
ould wot be deſtroyed: ſo alſo, Dan 2. 44. Micah 4. 7. 


Then Jeſus ſaid unto them, Yet a little while 
»+jz the light with you &- walk while you have the 
leſt * darkneſs come upon you: for he * that 
* valketh in darkneſs, knoweth not whither he go- 


O H N. 


ſignifie the Goſpel, which is called the Power of God to Salation, 
Rom. 1.16. 1 Cor. 18. Or elſe the, M:fiah, who is thought to be 
mentioned under this Notion by Iſaiah, Chap. 51. 5s. and 52. 10. and 
59. 16, and 63, 12, becauſe the Father worketh by him, as a man 
worketh by his arm, Chap. 1. 3. 14. 

39 Therefore they could not believe s, becauſe that 
Efaias ſaid again r. 

s Some will have, they con! not hear, to be the ſame with they 
aid not, as Mar, 6, 5. its faid Chriſt could not do mighty works at Na- 
2areth: Or the ſame with they would not, as Gen. 19. 22, but this 
ſeemeth an hard Interpretation of 8x 1dVvay}o. It is moſt certain. that 
in all there is a natural impotency and diſability to believe ; but this 
Text feemeth to ſpeak of a further degree of impoſlibility, than thar, 
occafioned through their wilful obftinacy, and God's judicial hard- 
ning of them. 7, Becauſe 1ſaias faid, is no more than, for 1[2;a5 
ſaid; the particle doth not denote the cauſe influencing them, 
but the effe& of a Prophecy : God's word (faith che Evangeliſt) 
muſt M made good, and 1ſaias had Prophecied of what now came 
to paſs. 


derſtand with rhcir heart, and be converted, and I 
ſhould heal them -. 
_ # We have this Text (than which there is not one more terrible 
in the whole Book of God) no leſs than ſix times quoted in the New 
Teſtament, and in all places quoted and given asa reaſon of the Jews 
unbeliet in the Lord clus Chriſt, Mat. 13. 14. Mar. 4. 12. Luke 8.10. 
Acls 28.26, Rom. 11.8, It is not quoted alike in all places, bur for 
(ſubſtance the fame. The original from whence theſe quotations are, 
h Iſaiah 6.10. by compairing the Texts we ſhall find ſeveral Authors, 
nſtruments, or Cauſes of thele dreadful effes. In the original, the 
Prophet Iſa:ah is made the 1nſ?rumental Cauſe, Go (ſaith God) and 
make the heart of this people fat, &c. Matthew and Luke, in 2#s 28. 
27. mention themſelves as the cauſe : Matthew faith ; For this peoples 
heart is waxed groſs, and their ears are duil of hearing, and their exe: 
they have clijed. And in the 4#s it is, For the hear: of this people us 
waxed groſs, and their ears are dull of hearing, and their eyes have 
they cloſed. All the other Texts ſpeak of it as God's AR. The 
thing is eafily thus reconciled : God ſent to the Jews his Prophets, 
and gave them the means of Salvation : Ir is true, without the inward 
efficacy of his Spirit, they could not ſavingly believe ; but they did 
not do what was in their power to have done, nay, they did do what 
was in their power to have avoided ; they lighted and contemned 
the Lord's. Prophets, and killed them, and ſtoned ſuch as were ſent 
unto them. Thus they firſt ſhut their own eyes, and hardned their 
own hearts ; and as their Forefathers had done in their Generations, 
ſo the Fews in our Saviour Chriſt's time did alſo in their Generation ; 
ſhutting their eyes againſt the Revelation of the Goſpel by Chriſt him. 
ſelf. They thus behaving themſelves, God judicially gave them up 
to their own Luſts, permitting their hearts to harden, and ſuffering 
them to cloſe their own eye, ſo as they could not repent, believe, 
or return, and be ſaved; not that God infuſed any malice into their 
hearts, but withdrew his Grace from them after ſuch provocations 
on their parts ; fo that as. the Prophets in their Age, laboured with 
them in vain, and all the event of their Miniſtry, was but the gene. 
rality of thar peoples growing worſe, and more obdurate. So all the 
event of Chriſt's Miniſtry and Miracles which he perſonally wroughe 
amongſt them in his Age, did accidentally bur increaſe their fin, and 
their Judgment, and ripen them for their ruin, through their wilfal 
abuſe of thoſe ſacred means of Life and Salvation. The judgment ic 
ſelf was but one, wiz. a judicial hardning of them ; bur it is ſer cur 
by a great variety of expreſſions, both by the Prophets, and the Wri- 
ters of the New Teſtament. In 1ſaiah, by making their hearts far, 
their ears heavy, ſhutting their eyes : In Matthew, making their hearts 
groſs, their ears dull of hearing, ſhutting their eyes. In this Texr, by 
blinding their eyes, and haraning their hearts. In the A#s, by the 
ſame phraſes as in Marthew, in Rom. 11. 8. is added, God hath given 
them the Spirit of lumber. All the phraſes are expreſſive of the ſame 
dreadful Judgment of God ; yet it may be exprefled in this variety of 
phraſe, to ſignifie the diſtin&, particular plagues (comprehended in 
this one plague) which falls upon the ſeveral powers and faculties of 
choſe Souls, upon whom this dreadful Judgment fills, Blindneſ7 in 
che mind, ſlubborneſs in the will, Sc. Vileneſs in the &ffettions, repre- 
'pacy in the mind, &C. 


41 Theſe things ſaid Efaias, when he ſaw his glory, 


and ſpake of him w. 

w The Evangeliſt ſaith, that theſe things 1ſaiah ſaid, when he ſaw 
his glory, and ſpake of him. Iſaiab's fight of God's glory is deſcribed, 
Iſa. 6. 1. He ſaw the Lord fitting on a Threne, high, and lifted up; &c. 
The Evangeliſt Expounds this of Chriſt, which 1s an evident proof 
of the Deity of Chriſt, that he is Jehova#;, for it was Zehovah whom 
the Prophet there ſaw; And that the Revelation of rhar dreadful 
wrath of God, did not only concern that particular Age in which 
Iſaiah lived, but the ſucceſſive g2n-ration of the Jews, whom the Pro- 
pher ſaw by the eye of Prophecy wonld cread in the ſame eps, and 
uſe Chriſt (the Hcir) as cheir Fore-fathers had uſed kim, and the 
Prophets of that Age. 


42 Neverthelefs among, the chief rulers alſo many | 


did not confeſs hin, leſt they ſhould be put out of the ©* ? 


ſynagogue y. 

x Tho' the Phariſees made up a great part of the Sanhearim, vet 
there were divers others alſo mixt with them, amongſt which there 
were many of a better temper ; and it may be «ap x*7)w» here may 
not ſignifie members of that Courr, but principal men im the magi- 
tracy ; we muſt not underſtand by believing that they belizved with 
a ſaving Faith ; what follows will evidence the contrary : bur rhev 
had ſome convitions upon them, as to the creth of what he faid, and 
his being the true Meſias ; » bur they durſt nor openly dectire whar 


themſclves thought, nor publickly own and aver Chriſt to be, whar 
Ffrff x he 


Chap. X11. 


40 * He hath blinded their eyes, and hardned their *1c:. 6. g. 
| heart, that they ſhould not ſee with their eyes, nor un- Mat.: 3.14. 


Q _ 
- ——- - 


mY ; : 
Ft 
9 *F 
"2 
'T 4.3 
+ [1 
- ry 
" 3 % 
' 
"4 þ o 
1 : 4 
4 $ "+. 
q 
vt 
G Þ 
Is 
: : 
ID 
- 


«_ 


"ORF g 
— — -_ ww - 
Te ESSE DIRE - 
p 
, [ 2. 


= 
* yz 
wt 4 


web. 


' 
th 
2: 
7 


believed on him x, but * becauſe of the Phariſees they , he 


| Chap. XUI. 


hz indeed was, and they were inclinable to think he was, leſt the P-a- 


»;{-es who were Chriſt's moſt implacable Enemies, ſhould have put Chriſt waſheth his Diſciples feet, n £5, 


the Decree they had made, (of which we read) Chap, g. 22. in Ex- 
ecution upon them. 


* (15.44 43 * For they loved the praiſe of men more than the 


praiſe of God z. by = Ba 

2 For they were not willing to part with their great places 1n the 
Magiſtracy, which brought them Reſpe&t, Honour, and Aplauſe 
from men, they Valued this more than God's Honouring and prail- 
ing them. How hard it is for great men to enter into the Kingdom 
of God: : ; 

44 Jeſus cried and faid *, He that believeth on me, 
hbelieveth not on me, but on him that ſent me 4. | 

a The words art firſt view, ſeem to contain a contradittion, and 
denving the ſame AR, as to the ſame perſon; as if any man could 
believe, and yer not belicve on Chriſt ; but there is nothing lefs in 
them: by the ſame figmative way of ſpeaking, God tells the Pro- 
het $az"0/, The people had not rejeted S2mzuct, (that 15, NOL Samnel 
alone) but they had reje&ed him. So Mark g. 37. Whoſoever ye 
eciverſ mig recciveth not me | that is, nor m2 aloe] but him 6p 
7þ:/.4. g. Or elſc thus, He that belicveth on me, aot' 
wo? believe 0% 2 42.1 man, as I appear at preſent ro the World, but 
he alſo believeth on God that ſent me. - The 7ews owned one Gad 
the Father, and acknowledged him the obj=Q of their Fairh, Chap. 
T4. 1. Tor beſfewe in God: bur they were blinded as to Chriſt, appear- 
ing onlv in the form of a man. So that our Saviour again by theſe 
words allerteth his Divine Nature, his Oneneſs and equality with his 
Father, fo as he was alſo the objeQ of their Faith, as well as his 


, Pct 1 21 


ſent m2, So 1 


_ wares ; ”- as wichout danger to our Souls, we may bs 1onorane 
ather. ; of what 1s the truth about them. þ When Chriſt knew 5, 
wet | : ! th 
45 And he that ſeeth me b, ſeeth him that ſent hour {which he had once or twice before ſaid was nor come) _—_ 
we. come, that he muſt die, riſe again, and in a ſhort time aſcend to his 


6 No man hath ſeen God at any time : but he that by the Eyes of 
his mind, knows and underftands, and believeth in me, ſeeth him 
that ſent me 3 or, he that ſeeth me in my works which 1 do, ſeeth al- 
ſo him that ſent me, by whom I do theſe mighry works z thus afrer- 
ward Chap. 14 5+ he ſaith to Philip, He that hath ſeen me, hath ſeen 
the Father. He that hath ſeen me, hath not indeed ſeen the Divine 
Nature and Eſſence, but hath ſeen that perſon, who 1s one with the 
Father; the brightneſs of his glory, and the expreſs image of his perſon, 
as the Apoſtle ſpeaks, Hb. 1. 3. 

46 I am come a light into the world c, that whoſoe- 


ver believeth on me, ſhould not abide in darkneſs 4. 

c This is no more than what our Saviour hath often ſaid, Cha 
3. 19. and 19.5. and it was according to the Prophecy of him, Iſa. 
42. 6. That he who receiveth and embraceth me, as his Prie/? and 
Prophet, tho' he may be in darkneſs naturally, Fph, 5, g. yer ſhould 
not abide in a ſtate of ignorance, and fin, and guilt, Chap. 3. 36. Chap. 
8.31. Menand Women before they believe in Chriſt, are in dark- 
zeſs ; but upon believing they are tranſlated out of their ſtate of dark- 
neſs into a ſtate of marvellous light ; they do not abide in darkneſ:. 


47 * Andif any man hear my words, and believe 
not, I judge him not e; for I came not to judge the 


world, but to ſave the world f. 

e I alone judge him nor, or rather it is not my preſent buſineſs to 
pronounce ſentence of Condemnation againſt him ; I am now doing 
the work of a Redeemer,and Saviour,not of a Judge : he is condemn- 
ed already, 7ohn 3. 18. and he hath another that accuſeth,- and con- 
demneth him, as the Jews had Moſes, Chap. 5. 45. fo he hath my 
Father as his Judge, and will have my word as his Accuſer, (as in 
the next verſe) I ſhall one day condemn him ; bur that is not my 
preſent buſineſs, that was not my errandin coming into the world. 

f I came to offer the World the means, and to ſhew them the way 
to Salvation; if they do periſh, their blood will be upon their own 
heads, it is not my buſineſs to Condemn them. 


*Ch.8.15, 
26, 


48 He that rejecteth me, and receiveth not MY | him in Heaven and Earth, as in Match. 28, 18, Thathe wihisDiſ 
words g, hath one that judgeth him h : the word that |ſciples Lord; that he came from Goda, and was now going to Golagin; 
T have ſpoken, the ſame ſhall judge him in the laſt | yer to ſhew how much he lov'd his Diſciples, and to fet them Pat: 


day :z. 
2 Theſe words | and receiveth not my words ] expound the for- 
mer : not to receive in heart, to believe, and embrace the words of 


S. FOHN. 


ward ſuffereth, 6-—11, Chriſt exhorteth them to Humil; 
Charity, 12-—19. Telleth that one of them ſhould betra = 
comforteth them againſt it, 18-—21, Shewerh that he it ; : 
he would give a Sop, 22—26, Speaketh to his Diſciples a 
glorification,” 29 —33. Exborteth them to mutual Lowe 
Sheweth Peter, he ſhould deny bim thrice, 37, 38. 


N 


ſhould depart out of this world unto the Fathe 


VIng 
them 


a Tuat this was the fourth Paſſover after that he entre 
publick Miniſtry, is out of doubr, and the laſt he ever 
We have taken notice of this Evangeliſt's mention of the 0 
but how lon 
eXpreſt by 
it he day, others immediately before, as Te (the very ſame 
1s nſed, Luke 11. 38. befere dinner, and Luke 22 15. befor, 
The reſolution of it much dependeth upon another que 
cult, viz , 
who would be ſatisfied in theſe caſes, may find a colle&ion 


is ſaid 


upon 42:4. 26, It is our happineſs, that tho' ſome ſtich KNOtS orc: 
in holy Wrir, yet they are about things in which our $2lv ens 


Father ; c He having loved his Diſciples, not with a 
with an unchangeable love; he reſolveth pon the waſhing of thei 


ecr as 
2 
now 


betray him e. 
_ d Poflibly it were better tranſlated, while they were at Sy 
in Supper time, Greek P#i7ys 2avpivs, but the great queſtion i 
What Supper #s here intended ? Our moſt Learned Lightfog is vers 
confident, this was not the Paſchal Supper. : 


Chap, 
CHAP. XIII. 20 


Peter refuſeth, by: af 


') ang 
M, ang 
0 T/; 

bout |; 


Ow * before the feaſt of the pallover , 


d Whan « 
Jeſus knew that his hour was come, i 


that he, © 
rb, ha. 


loved his own which were in the world, he loveq 


unto the end c. 
d upon ki; 


Celebrated, 


th 
what follows was before the Paſſover, which On 


« 7 LY 1 It 1 - 1 . 
Before the Feaſt ] is a great queſtion : Some will have 
Particle) 
NF; Tjufes, 
| de | Quettton ax gi8. 
hat Supper it is which is mentioned? Ver. 2 TT 
: » of wha 
by moſt valuable Interpreters in'Mr: Pos!'s Synopſis Criticoyy 


mutable, bye 


a demonſtration of that love. 
And Svpper being ended 4, the * deyil having y 
put into the heart of Judas Iſcariot Simon's ſon, t | 


PPer, of 


The moſt Interpreter, 


Chriſt in the Goſpel, is to reje& Chriſt. Sn Luke 10, 16. He that 
beareth y0u, heareth me ; and he that dcſpiſeth you, deſpiſeth me ; and 
he that doth fo, þ hath one that judzeth him, that is, my Father 
who hath ſent me, and will vindicate mine Honour. i Nay, the 
words that I have ſpoken, ſhall rife up in judgment againſt him at 


the laſt day, and prove, that he hath judged himſelf unworthy of 


everlaſting Life. 
*Ch.8.38. 49 For * I have not ſpoken of my ſelf k, but the 
14 1. Father which ſent me, he gave mea commandment what 
I ſhould fy, and what I ſhould ſpeak /. 

k I do not Tpeak what I fay to you as a meer man, or any thing 
bue what is my Father's Will, and mine only, as one with him, 
1 and as ſent by him ; IT have ſaid nothing, but what my Father hath 

willed me to reveal to the World as his Will, En 
50 And I know that his commandment is life cver- 


laſting z whatſoever I ſpeak therefore, even as the 


Father ſaid unto me, fo I ſpeak 7. 


» I am aſſured that the way to Life everlaſting, is to obe 
his Commandments; and that makes me ſpeak, and deliver af] 
that, and nothing but that, which I have in charge from my Fa- 


were wont to gird up when they waited at Table, Luke 17. 8, Citi 


Ancient and Modern, ſeem to be of another mind; or i May be | 
rather a common Supper which they eat before the Paſſover ; 6; 4 
whereas ſome think this Supper was that in the Houſe of Simmthe [ 
Leper, mentioned Marth. 26.6. it ſeemeth no way probable, ng 
circumſtance inclining us to believe any ſuch thing ; and the Err 
geliſt having told us that it was after that Supper that Chriſtrodeinto Fa 
Jeruſalem, and again went from thence and hid himſelf, Chap. 12.46, a 
and then reporting this as a thing ſubſequent to it in thi; Chapter: 
It ſeemeth very clear to me, that it could not be the Supper in the in 
Houſe of Sion the Leper. e Concerriing the influence of the Devi w 
upon 7425, to put it into his heart to betray his Maſter, ſee 4; (y 
22. $8. ne 
3 Jeſus knowing * that the Father had given all m 
things into his hands, and that he was come from God, x _ 
and went to God f. ( not 
f Our tranſlating the Greek Participle #2; knowing, (which pre-U the 
perly ſignifies having known) createth a difficulty, viz. How Chrſt'; ma; 
knowl:dge of this, that the Father had given all things into highand we: 
ſhould be aſſigned as a reaſon of, or motive to his ſubſequent ation Wo 
of waſhing the feet of his Diſciples ? The ſenſe therefore muſt cer ingl 
tainly be, Tho" bh» knew; and fo it doth not import a reaſon of hisfol by t! 
lowing aQtion, but only ſignifieth Chriſt's great humiliation andcon- repe. 
deſcention. Tho* he well enough knew, that a power wa: given waſh 
perſe 
I 
tern of humility, and teach them brotherly love, and that he came ſaid 
not in the eſtate wherein he yer Was to be miniſt;ed unto, butto #1 
miniſter, Matth, 20. 28. | wp 
4 He rileth from ſupper, and layeth aſide his gar Troy 
ments, and took a towel, and girded himſelf g. heart 
g He riſeth from Supper, what Supper is the queſtion ? Wezr was | 
told, that the Zews had rwo Suppers upon the Paſchal night, which this ( 
was the 14th day of the month N:/zn. The firſt, was the Paſ1vr it fo | 
Supper, which was a Religious rite in obedience to che Law. Th: tho' tl 
ſecond, a common Supper, (as on other nights) to which our Saviour them 
added a third, which was the Lorg's Supper, To ment ſeemeth 1: 12 
ther chat their common Supper was firſt, then the Patlover Supper; flis g; 
and that Chriſt aroſe from this common Supper, to do this att. Ar th Sc 
|gu/{ine underſtood it of the common Supper ; ſo doth Bec, Pink, em, 
Tarnovius, and others, which ſeemeth ro me moſt probable ; tho 0 1d A 
thers underſtand it of the Paſfover Supper. Whatever Supper the 's Diſ 
Evangeliſt meaneth, Chriſt roſe up from it before jt was cone. "wg 
Calvin, Pares, Beza,. Petargis, Toms, and divers others amongt of " 
the Proteſtant Interpreters ; 7oler, Maldonate, and 7an(cnins, among! . w 
the Papiſts, do agree a common Supper this night, belides the Pat "a 0. 
c-al Supper, and the Lord's Supper ; from which it is molt probab! na, 
that Chriſt, as is here ſaid, roſe up, and laid aſide his garment, tb! erſt 
is, his outward looſe garment, (tor ſuch they uſed) which fervan' Ek. 3 


lor /o 
t Th 


ther: As the Father hath ſaid to me, ſo I ſpeak; Therefore | 131d one aſide, and girded up the other ; rakes a towel. 


look you to it, in rejeting me, you reje& my Father, whom you 
own and acknowledge for your God ; and in diſobeying me, you diſ- 
obey my Father, and him whom you own as your Father alſo, 


| feer, then to wipe them with the linnen cloth he had raken * All 
; was done in the form of a ſervanr, ({ they ned ro do, 35f0 8 
that came to Dine or Snp with their Lords or Maſt-r+,) 


5 After that, he poureth water into a baſon, and 


began to waſh the diſciples feet, and to wipe rhen 
with the towel wherewith he was girded h. 


- . * N,Cinlet 
þ Poureth water into a baſon : beginneth firſt.co waſh his Dip” 
1124 


. Maſter 


» #now 


Ra Ty 
| leet i, 


ind Lo 


Vants o 
fate the 


rn the 
ie Devil 
ſee [uh 


ven all+ 
n God, v 
& 
ich pro: 
Chriſt's 
hishand, 
taQion 
nuſt cer 
of his fol 
andcon- 
pas given 
« hisDif 
od again; 
-m a Pats 
| ke came 
0, butfo 


his gar- 


> Went 
It, which 
e Paſtor 
ww, The 
1r Saviour 
emeth fy 


'S among 
7, among 
5 the 2.0” 
} probable 
ment, that 
ch ſervants 
- 8, Chit 


on, and 
Pe rhens 
7s Diſciphe 
* All th! 


FLO Flo) 


Ss Thf 


hap. XIII. 


Gr He. 


5 Then cometh he to Simon Peter : And - Peter 
Gith unto him, Lord *, doeſt thou waſh my feet # ? 


th. 3 ; Chriſt in the performance of this Ceremony cometh to $7 mon Pe- 


whether firſt, or Jaſ?, it :5 not ſaid; ( and therefore the Papiſ?s 


S. JOHN 


w I have by thismy aQtion taught y0u to love, and to be ready al- 
ſo to ſerve one another, and not to think much to ſerve them ever; in 
the loweſt and meaneſt offices by which you can do them good; for 
we muſt not think, that theſe words lay a literal obligation upon 


_ ill from hence, to prove the primacy of Perey over the re aan. on ways tre feet of others ; wathing the feer is mentioned 
ag ooſtles ) Pater looks upon it with a modeſt, but ſinful and ſup 2" as Species pro Genere, a ſingle a& of ſervice, put far all other a&s 
by which we can be ſerviceable unto others; ſo it is alſo uſed, 1 Sam. 


Ritious indignation. Samuel of old determined, that O5edzence ro God 
is better than Sacrifice ; 1 1S then certainly better than a Complement. 
P:7ey in this caſe ought not to have contradifted his Maſter out of a 
complement to him, but to have ſuffered him to go on in this a& of 
Miniſtration. There may be a woſrnrary Humility, and pretended re- 
verence to Chriſt, which is indeed but ſuperſtition, and can be no 
other if contrary to any Revelation of the Divine Will. 

7 Jeſus anſwered and faid unto him, What I do thou 
knoweſt not now : but thou ſhalt know hereafter k. 

+ Our Lord ſeeing Peter's general deſign good, though ke miſtook 
is to this particular AQ ; tells him, that at preſent he did not undet- 
Rand his counſel and deſign in this Adtion, bur it ſhould be more in- | 


25. 41. and 17im. 5. 10. Scme of the Ancients ſeem to have judged 
this waſhing of feet, to have been inſticured as a Sacrament; (tho in an 
improper ſenſe) and from hence, (tho? Belarm:ine, Maldimate and 
others, deny it to be a Sacrament as well as wes yer) probably is the 
prattice in uſe amongſt the Papi, to waſh certain perſons feet eve- 
Ty Tharſday before Eaſter, (a theatrical Ceremony, rather than any 
thing of ſolid and profitable uſe.) Our Saviour certainly intends no 
more by ye ought to waſh one anothers feet, than ye ought to ſerve one 

another in all offices of love, and not to think your ſelves too good 

or t9O great, to do the meaneſt ſervices to thoſe who are my Diſciples; 
and this is thar as to which he tells them, he had ſet them an example, 
that they ſhould do as hz had done, in other aQs of the ſame kind, 


Chap. XIII, 


q [3 
No 


Ir. 6. 7 Peter rafhly replies, Tho ſha: never waſh my feet. 


telligible unto him afrerwards, as indeed he made ir by his diſcourſe | tho not as to this ſpecifical a&. : 


upon this his at of humiliation, ver. 13, 14, 15, 16. 
$ Peter faith unto. him, Thou ſhalt never waſh my 
feet. Jeſus anſwered him *, If I waſh thee not, thou 


haſt no part with me /. 
Here was a 

ſeeming Keverence for his Maſter, but (like the Jewiſh Zeal mention- 
«26. ed by Paul, Rom. 10. 2.) not according to knowledge; Chriſt rells him, 
5.5+ that except he waſhed him, he had no part with him ; that is, he 
1%. ſhould never be ſaved. But will ſome ſay, Was not this too ſevere 
for our Saviour to threaten Peter with an exclufion from a Co:xher:- 
:zuce with him in Heaven, for modeſtly refuſing to ſuffer him ro waſh 
his feet? 4. Theleaſt diſobedience nor repented of, 1s enough to 
exclude a Soul from the Kingdom of Heaven. 2. But Chriſt ſeems to 
take an advantage here, from this ceremony of his waſhing their feer, 
to diſcourſe to him the neceſſity of his waſhing his Soul with his 
blood, from the filth of fin and corruption; and of this waſhing, it 
undoubtedly is that Chriſt here ſpeaketh, the neceſſity of which is 
very often inculcated in holy Writ. 


9 Simon Peter ſaith unto him, Lord not my feet on- 
ly, but alſo my hands and my head »:. 


m Peter now underſtandech what waſhing it is which our Saviour 
[zft ſpake of, and wholly ſubmitteth to the Will of his Lord and 
Maſter ; acknowledging himſelf to be wholly defiled, and to ſtand in 

_ need of a waſhing all over. Lord, faith he, not my feet only, but my 
band; and my head alſo, that is, mv whole man. 

10 Jeſus faith to him, He that is waſhed, needeth 
not, fave to waſh h:s feet, but is clean every whit : 


' and * ye are clean, but not allo. | 

n Look as it is with perſons that have been waſhing themſelves 
in a Bath, when they are waſhed, yet walking abroad bare-foot, or 
with thin Sandals, or coverings for their feer, they will be again 
ſubje@ co pollute and dirty their feet ; ſo as they will have frequent 
need to waſh them again ; but they need not ſoon again waſh their 
whole bodies: ſo it 1s as to Souls that are waſhed with my blood, 
waſhed, and ſan#ified, juftified in the Name of the Lord Jeſus, and by the 
Spirit of God ( as the Apoſtle ſpeaketh, 1 Cor. 6. 11.) their fate is 
not to be renewed 3 they need not be juſtified a ſecond time, but 
they will have need to have their feet waſhed in regard of the re 
mainder of fin, and luſt that is in them, and will be ſo while they 
weinthe World, and the temptations which every where lie in the 
World, as ſnares for their feet ; they will have need of a daily waſh- 
ing by repentance, and freſh applications of their Souls to my blood, 
by the repeated exerciſes of faith, according to their renewed and 
repeated aQts of ſin. o You, who are my Apoſtles, are clean, you are 
wiſhed, you are juſtified ; I have forgiven your fins, accepted your 
perſons, but ot a4; the moſt of you are ſo, but not all. 


11 For he * knew who ſhould betray him, therefore 


ſaid he, Ye are not all clean p. 

þ By theſe words, the Evangeliſt expounds only what our Saviour 
meant in the former verſe, when he had told them, they were not 
a clean; for tho' the Diſciples did nor yer know that they had a 
Traytor amongſt them, Saran had before this, put the deſign into the 
heart of Judas, ver. 2. and Chriſt who knew all hearts, knew what 
was in the heart of Judas, and he ſoon after, (as we ſhall hereafter in 
this Chapter read) revealed it ; yet at this time he had not revealed 
It fo his Diſciples. Now he begins to diſcover it, telling them, that 
tho' the moſt of them were clean, juſtified, and ſanRified, yet all of 
them were not ſo. 

12 $0 after he had waſhed their feet, and had taken 
his garments 7, and was ſet down again 7, he ſaid unto 


them, Know ye what I have done to you s ? 

'9 After that our Saviour had finiſhed this Ceremony, and waſhed 
his Diſciples feer ; ( ſome queſtion whether all or no, butl ſee no 
reaſon to doubt it) » he returned again fo the Supper, which (proba- 
bly) now was near finiſhed, which certainly was the common Supper 
Which the Few; had beſides the Paſſover Supper, and probably before 
i tho' ſome think after it. 5 He asketh them, if they knew the m2an- 
ng of this which he had done unto them ; leſt they ſhould nor fully 
underſtand ir, he openeth it to them in che following diſcourſe. 

. 13 * Yecall me Maſter and Lord, and ye ſay well; 
lor /oI ame, 

5 The Diſciples in their ordinary diſcourſes, called Chrift Mater, 
and Lord; nor was it a name improper for him, for he was their 
Maſter to inftruft them, their Lord to rule, guide and govern them ; 
- #nOw faith our Saviour, Diſciples ought ro obey their Maſter, Ser- 

"ants ought to obey their Lords, and Diſciples alſo ought to imi- 

tate their Maſter. 


. 14 *IfI thenyour Lord and Maſter have waſhed your 


<4 


— x5 


- 


15 For*T havegivenyoun an example, that ye ſhould . Pet. 2, 


do, as I have done to you. « Job 
16 Verily, verily I ſay unto you, The ſervant is not 2. 5, 
greater than his Lord, neither he that 1s ſent, greater 


than he that ſent him. 

*. The Apoſtles were to take up a very high tation in the Goſpel 
Church, and our hearts are very prone to ſwell in an high opinion of 
our felves, for which the nature of man taketh advantage from every 
| thing in which we either really do excel, or can conceit that we do 
excel our neighbours: Our Lord therefore, tho” ſpeaking to the A- 
poſtles, (ome of the beſt of men) yer knowing they were (like E!:- 
jah) men ſubje& to like paſſions with other men, addeth this to arm 
them againſt anv 7--ptation to Pride, they owned themſelves as ſer- 
vants to Chriſt who was their grear Lord ; they had ſeen what he had 
done ; he therefore applizth a Proverbial expreſſion to them, which 
he alſo made uſe of in other caſes, as Marth. 10.24. Chap. 15 20. in 
both which places he maketh uſe of it to arm them againſt perſe- 
cutions; here to perlwade them to humility, condeſcention, and bro- 
therly love. 

17 * If ye know theſe things, happy are ye if ye do * James 

them y. l. 25» 

3 There he tells them, that it is not the bare comprehenſion of 

theſe things in their Notion, that woul4 do them any good, unleſs 

they brought their knowledge into pratice ; for James 4. 17. To him 

that knoweth to do good, and doth it not, it is [ins Faith without works 

is dead, and the Knowledge of our Maſters will, (if we do it not) doth 

but expoſe us to many ltripes. 

18 I ſpeak not of you all, I know whom I have 

choſen a : but that the ſcripture may be fulfilled #, He * Pal. 4r, 

that eateth bread with me, hath lift up his heel againſt Meh 

me. wig 

z I am about to tell you what will make your ears tingle ; but be O 

of good comfort, what I ſhall now reil you, doth not concern all of 

you, it concerneth but one man amongſt you. a I know whom I have 

choſen to the work of the Apoſtle{ſhip: ſo fome interpret it, as Chap. 

5. 70. Hare not I chiſen you twelve, and one of you 15 a Devil ? But the 

generality of the beſt Interpreters underſtand the chooſing here men- 

rioned, of a chooſing ts eternal life, and perſeverance in the way of 

God as a means 1n order to it, as Fp. 1. 4+and fo underſtood, here 

is a greater argument in this Text to prove the Godhead of Chriſt, as 

the Author of Erernal Ele#ion : tho' one of you bea Devil, a Trayror, 

yet I have choſen the reſt of you to Eternal Life: and this is no 

more than was Prophecied of me, and fulfilled in David as a Type 

of me : the Scripture muſt have irs accompliſhment : that Scripture 

is now fulfilled in me. | Or frort 
19 ||* Now I tell you before it come, that when it}... 


is come to paſs, ye may believe that I am heb. forth 

þ What I now tell you ſhould be fo far from prejudicing your faith * Ch. 14, 
in me, that ic ought rather to confirm and increafe your faith in me 29. and 
as the true A7-ſi2s; when (the thing coming to paſs) you ſhall under- 16. 1, 
ſtand that I know the hearts, counſels and fecret thoughts of men : 

and when you ſhall ſee the Scriptures have their accompliſhment, and 

thoſe things which were long ago Prophecied concerning the Meſias 

have their juſt accompliſhment, and fulfilling in me 2s the perſon in- 

tended in thoſe Ancient Revelations. 

20 * Verily, verily I ſay unto yon, He that receiveth « j,,,;, 
whomſoever I ſend, receiveth me; and he that receiveth yo. 40: 


me, recciveth him that fent me c. 

c See the Notes on Matth. 10. 24. The wordsof which place are 
but here repeated : either to commend to them brotherly love, and 
offices of love, which he had before recommended to them under the 
notion of waſhing one anathers fret : Or elle to comtort his Diſciples 
who might think that this treacherous villany of 7udzs would make 
them odious tothe whole World : No, faith our Saviour, you are my 
meſlengers, perſons ſent by me ; | « i!! provide for you, there ſhall be 
choſe who will receive you :; and | Jecture to all the World to incou- 
rage them, Thar I ſhall take their receiving of you as kindly as if they 
received me, and it ſhall turn to the ſame account, and that 15 a!l one 
as if they had received my Father himlelf, for he ſent me. Some 
chink that by theſe words Chriſt aggravateth the ſin of 7«42s, a5 being 
commirted againſt the Father as well as againſt Chriſt: and a moſt 
treacherous failure as to the dury of an .5pole, or one dignified fo 
much as to be ſent out by Chrilt. 


21 * When Jeſus had thus ſaid, he was troubled I 26 21. 

ſpirit 4, and teſtified, and ſaid, Verily, verily 1 ſay unto | 
> - 5 b] To 

you, that * one of yon ſhall betray me c. ET 

4 How, and in whar ſenſe trouble of pirir conld agr22 20 Chit. 


—_— 
b, 


6... © 


| leet ll, ye alſo ought to waſh one anothers feet»v. | 


- K0- f <a _ os we ) q 
Was nored hetore. C237, S334 go OE The NOTES ON that lex: # this 


fo.-qtcti 


ov = : 4 
: =. 4.-Tz- __ y- FA TS — - . - 
- __ - > $— - LS _ 7% yo 
IMG Ie + on eg 5 < 
a a .. ps 


"4 

if id 3% 
| + i #. i; 
4 L of 
Wo it 

[3 } [ E $ 

'E4 | 

7H 4 


{TR F106: ke 
| : i 4+} tt 
\ 4 4; 


Chap. XIII 


tle part, ped the ſop, he gave it to Judas Iſcariot the ſon of 


i LA er; 4 T ag * - 4 h, 
IxXFT; => WOT = GE £ ® _ 
» G— —_—_ - — _ —_— 
> £ - _ 
_ 


"ROAL—» 


& _ ————__ —— 
wo: A 


ſeemeth to have been rather a trouble of grief, that one of his Apo- 
es. ones whom he had choſen, ſhould commit ſo great a villany,than 
ztiſing from fear of Dearh. e For his next words are a further diſco- 
very of the perſon that ſhould betray him: he had ſaid before, that he 
ſhould be betrayed, and that it ſhould be by one that uſed to eat bread 
with him: but now he cometh cloſer, and tells them that ic ſhould 
be by cne of them, that is one of the twelve ; this was a cloſer diſco- 
very than he had as yer made. 

22 Then the diſciples looked one on another, doubt- 
ing of whom he ſpake f. | : 

© It ſeemeth they had no ſuſpicion of Judzs, but our Saviour tel- 
ling them that it was one of them, rhey begin ro look about one up- 
on another, rather ſuſpeQing themſelves than Fudzs, There may 
be a great deal of villany, and the greateſt villany in the hearts of 
Profeſſors, in whoſe converſation appeareth nothing that may give 
« juſt ſuſpicion to others, and the true Diſciples of Chriſt wil] have 
ſo much candor and brotherly love, that they will not raſhly judge 
and cenſure their brethren. | 

23 Now there was leaning, on Jeſus boſom g, one of 


his diſciples, whom Jeſus loved h. 

g This leaning on Jeſus his boſom, and the /ying on Jeſus his breaſt, 
mentioned wer. 25. cannot be underſtood withoutthe underſtanding 
of the uſual poſture the Jews uſed at their meals, and particulerly, at 
the Paſchal Supper : of which we have ſpoken largely 1nour notes up- 
on Matth. 26. 20. (ſee the Annotations there) Their poſture ſeemeth 
to have been kneeling, and reſting their bodies back upon their legs, 
with a leaning upon their left elbow; and this ſcemeth not to have 
been ſo cloſe, but thar he rhat fo ſate, might uſe his other hand to 
take his meat ; hence he who fate before any, ſate with his back to- 
wards him, but leaning towards the boſom of the other, which is 
Here called a leaning on (that is, towards) his boſom, and /ying on 
hu breaſt ; for it cannot be underſtood of fuch a ferting or leaning, 
25 to touch the others breaſt or boſom, for that would have hindred 
him upon whom the perſon ſo leaned, from any uſe of his right hand 
to take his meat or drink. It is apparent from hence, that at this Sup- 
per there wasnone but Chr: and his twelve Diſciples. Secondly, that 
they ſate inthis poſture of leaning : Theſe two things make it very pro- 
bable, if not certain, that the Supper here mentioned was either the 
Paſchal Supper, or a common Supper, which immediately went be- 
fore, orfollowed after the Paſſover Supper. For 1. we have no re- 
cord of any other Supper, at which were only Chriſt and the twelve 
Diſciples 3 and 2. If we may believe the Jewiſh Writers, tho' their 
ordinary poſture at their common meals was Diſcubzrure, that 15, a 
kneeling on their knees, with a reſting their bodies backward upon 
their legs ; yet this poſture of leaning was conſtantly added only upon 
the Paſſover night, as a further teſtimony of their liberty ; that they 
were notnow ſervants, (as in the land of Ezypr.) þ+ The perſon who 
ate next our Saviour, with his back next our Saviours boſome was 
7Fohn, often in Scripture dignified with the title of the beloved Diſci- 
ple, and him whom Jeſus loved, Chap. 19. 26. and 20' 2. and 21, 
7. 20. HS 

24 Simon Peter therefore beckned to him, that he 


ſhould ask who it ſhould be of whom he ſpake z. 


S. FOHN 


[f 
- read of many who were poſleſled, and violently ated by the De 


Chap. X11 


27 And after the ſop Satan entred into him o. The 
Jeſus ſaid unto him, That thou doeſt, do quickly b Q 


o That the Devil did ever fo enter into Fxdas as eG bim _ 


, is more than we read any where in holy Writ; th 
i, ſignifies 74d his free and willing giving up of hi 
vils ſuggeſtions and conduR : and in this ſenſe the Devi allo bef, 
this time was entred into Judas, Luke 22. 3, But as holy m wa 
ſaid to be filled with the Spirit of God, who had before receives _ 
Spirit, becauſe the holy Spirit came afrer upon them with fulle = 
ſtronger impulſes, and motions ; ſo rho* the Devit had former] _— 
moving Jude to this vile At, and had had his conſent to ir - Y een 
ter he had raken this mouthful, the Devil plied him with tron; - " 
tions,impulfes, and ſuggeſtions ; and now he had maſter's hives wy 
ence, and hardened his hearr, fo as he was more Prepared ” ny ” 
Villany about which he had ſome thoughts before ; he had now nn 
an unbelieving, and unthankfu] heart, been eating the Paſſover —_ 
was a Type of Chriſt, and had ſo maſtered his conſcience, as __ 
and do this, with a vile heart, reaking before with treacherous w- 
bloody deſigns againſt his Lord and Mafter : See what is the effe& = 
heart is more vile, more treacherous,and bloody,he is ewice more bo 
ſervant of the Devil than he was before. The ſop given him by Chrif 
was bur an accidental occaſion of it ; as the Devil rook more ng : 
tage from his now hardned, and further imboldned heart, Chrig 
knowing this' doth not command, adviſe, or exhort him, bye in = 
teſtation, bids him go and do what he was reſolved rodo, and which 
he knew would be quickly ; letting him both know, that he knew = | 
was in his heart, and that he was now ready to receive the effe; f 
his malice. ; 

28 Now no man | at the table knew for what intent 
he ſpake this unto him. 

29 For ſome of themthought, becauſe Judas had the lack 
bag 9, that Jeſus had ſaid unto him, Buy thoſe things 
that we have need of againſt the feaſt 7: or that he ſhou}d 
give ſomething to the poor 5. 

9g How innocent are honeſt hearts ? Charit 
the Apoſtle) altho? our Saviour had plainly enough deciphered him 
as the Traytor, by telling 7041 that he to whom he ſhould give the 
Sop, was lie ; and then by giving it to Fudes ; yet (whether they all 
did not hear what our Saviour ſaid to Fehr, or did not think of fo 
ſudden a Tragedy) they do not ſuſpe& that the hour was at hang 
when 7udas ſhould perfeR his intended Villany ; though they hear 
our Saviour bid him get him our, and do quickly, what he had to de. 
yet Judas being he who carried » that little Wt of money which 
Chriſt had, Chap. 12.6. they thought that that which our Saviouchid 
him do, as a work he had undertaken to do, was laying out fomemo- 
nies, either to buy ſome things which were neceſſary for them, for 
the ſeven days of the Feaſt of unleavened bread : either for food for 
them to ea?, or for Sacrifices for them to offer. 5 Or that it was Cur 
Saviours mind, that he ſhould out of this little Rock; diſtribute ſome. 
thing tothe Poor ; they little thought that our Saviours wordsargu'd 
a giving kim over to perfeQt the treacherous deſigns which he hid 
conceived in his hearr- 


e entrance inty 


mfſelf tothe De- 


| Of 


the wo 


y thinketh noevil, (ſi 


; Peter knowing the particular affe&ion that Chriſt had for 7ohr, 
maketh aſign to himzto ask of Chriſt which of them he meant ; when 
he ſaid, One of you ſhall betray me. : : 

25 He then lying on Jeſus breaſt, ſaith unto him, 
Lord, who is it k. 

& John accordingly doth propound the queſtion to Chriſt. - 

26 Jeſus anſwered, He it is to whom I ſhall give a || 
ſop, when I have dipped it ». And when he had dip- 


30 He then having received the ſop, went immedi- 
ately out? : And it was night -. 

s From hence appeareth, 1. That it is impoſſible to prove that 
Judas was with our Saviour, when he Inſtituted and Celebrated the 
Supper ; tho! if he were, it proveth nothing of a liberty for ignorant 
and Scandalous perſons to be there; (for Judas was not ſuch a one) 
nor yer of a Lawfulneſs for Miniſters of the Goſpel, knowing anyto 
be ſuch, to give the Lords Supper ro them. For altho' Chriſt knew 


Simon 77. 
-1 We have the ſame, tho' not mentioned (as ſpoken in particular 
to John) Matth. 26, 23+ Luke 22. 21. tho' neither of them mention 
Chriſts own dipping tlie Sop ; but Matthew ſaith, He dipped his hand 
with him in the diſh; and Luke ſaith, Hs hand was With him on the table. 
Without queſtion all the Evangeliſts ſpeak of the ſame time ; for it is 
not reaſonable to think that this diſcovery ſhould be made, and 7udas 
gone out,and that afterward he ſhould return again to eat the Paſſover. 
This maketh me very inclinable to think, that tho' the waſhing of che 
feet might be during the time of a common Supper, preceding the 
Paſſover ; yet the Supper they were now at was the Paſſover Supper : 
where, 1, Were none but he and the twelve Diſciples. 2. It is plain 
they were in that leaning poſture, not uſed at common meals, but on 
the Paſſover nights, (as Dr. Lightfoot tells us from their Writings, ) 
3. The diſcourſe paſſed at the Table is the very ſame (cho not in 
words, yet in ſenſe) with that mentioned by Marthew and Luke at the 
Paſſover Supper. 4, It 15 not reaſon:ble to think, that after ſuch a diſ- 
cover y as Chriſt now made of the Traytor, he ſhould come again to 
be pointed at, and expoſed. Concerning the Sop what it was, hath been 
ſome queſtion ; and a Learned Writer of our own, (bur in this point 
think much too critica)) hath increaſed the difficulty, by affirming 
the word here uſed [\ſwpiey]} ſignifies a piece of bread, or the lower 
part or chippings of the bread ; for which he quoteth Heſchins, who 
indeed doth fay ſo of ovf{ev, but not Joufev. The learned Annora- 
cor thinks, «| afisy is a falſe Print for Louie, but it cannot be: for 
1. There are in Heſzchius ſeveral words in Alphaberical order,between 
«ee and this word. 2. Tho' wuioy be not in Heſchivs, yer 
Lewes is, and expounded by him J2* wigy parts; now all know that 
this otey, Whichis but a diminutive derived from ops or Lops, 
can fignifie no more, than a little part, let it be of what it will ; for it 
is manifeſt out of Homer, that joyned with an adjeCive, it ſignifies a 
mouth tull of mans Fleſh, which came out of the Cyclops his mouth. 
So as the ſenſe of theſe words is, He it is to whom I ſhall give a little 
part or portion of meat, when I have dipt it : » And having dipt it, 
he gave it to 7udar the Son of Simon : not the Fudas who wrote the 
Epiltle,and who is mentioned, Chap. 14.22, but he that was the ſon of 
5:mm0n, called from his place which he lived in [Kir0r4] 1ſcarior, by 
which he did as perfe&ly deſcribe the Tr2yror.as if be had named him, 


man ſhall immediately be gloritied, by finiſhing the 


ven, to beg 


Judas's heart, yet he ated not according to his Omniſcience, butas 
the firſt and prime Miniſter of the Goſpel, ſetting us an example, not 
to judge of ſecret things, but of things open only. 2. Ir alſo appear- 
eth from hence, that it is not probable, that this was any other Sup- 
per than the Paſſover Supper ; for if it were not, the Paſſover Supper 
muſt be after this, and this ſame Supper preceding it. Our famous 
Dr. Lightfoot thinks it was a Supper in Becrhany, at two miles diſtance 
(or near ſo much) from Feruſalem. But then it muſt follow, 1. Thit 
John ſpeaks nothing of the Paſchal Supper, or the Lords Supper; and 
2. it doth by no means appear propable to me, that 7udas after ſuch 
a diſcovery of him,ſhould come again to cat the Paſſover with Chriſt 
and his Diſciples. Theſe things, together with whar I noted before, 
that here is no mention made of more gueſts than the twelve; that the 
poſture uſed (eſpecially as to leaning) was peculiar to the Paſcial 
Supper ; That the diſcourſe mentioned by this Evangeliſt, as had at 
this Supper about the diſcovery of the Traytor, is the ſame 1n {ub- 
ſtance, (tho' nor in terms) with what Marrhew and Luke report, 3 
paſſed at the Paſſover. All theſe things confirm me, that it is the Pa! 
chalSupper that John ſpeaketh of; wherher 7d was at the Lords Sp 
per, which we know followed the Paſſover immediately, depends up" 
on the ſenſe of the Particle *v9ia5, which we tranſl.ite i*nmeats't!) 5 
but doth not ſignifi2 neceſſarily ſuch a preſent departure ; but che att 
on of the Lords Supper might be firſt over, tho' in reaſon it ſeemeth 
to me more propable, becauſe of thoſe words, having receivea 52), 
he immediately went out, that it ſhould be here interpreted ſtriflly, and 
that ſhame and horror ſhould nor ſuffer him ro ſtay ſo long, a5*ill the 
ation of the Supper was over : tho' whether he were atthe Lords Sup- 
per ( as I ſaid before) ſignifieth nothing ar all ro the queſtions about 
mixt Communion, either as to the part of the Miniſter adminiſtring, 0! 
the peoples Communicating. - 
| 31 Therefore whenhe was gone out, Jeſus ſai Now: 
is the Son of man glorified w, and God is glorined 1 
him x. 

w He ſpeaketh of that which was preſently to be, 


BS , Son Ol 
ready done; the meaning is, Now the time cometh when the 50" 
work which UC 


che dead, and declaring 


Aſcending vp into Hes- 
with the Fache! 


4 f 
as if ut were uw 


hath given him to do, by riſing again from 
himſelf to be the Son of God with Power, by 
forified with the ſame glory which he h:d 


Lefgre 


Nl! 


T7 "O ew fln (D @Þ «os © 5 & 


Is Sup- 
; about 
ing) or 


Now 
ied if 


ver? n 
Son of 
ch God 
claring 
ro Hes 
Eche! 
Lefore 


World began: x And God will appear to be glorified in 
w_—_— oiſbing che work which God hath given him to do, ma- 
-Feſting his name fo the ſons of men; and by the many ſigns and 
- onders which God will yer further ſhew at the time of his Death 
= Reſurre&ion, and by the coming down of the Holy Ghoſt. 
, * If God be glorified in him, God ſhall alſo glo- 
6 '- ifie him in himſelf y, and * ſhall ſtraightway glorifie 
Td - 
| MR 
4 m_— was glorified in Chriſt by his Death upon the Croſs in obe- 
, Hence to his Fathers Will; thus Peter Chap. 21. 19. is ſaid by his 
Death to g/orifie God ; and as he was declared to be the Son of God, 
and as by him the World was brought to the knowledge of God, as 
by his Spiritual and Heavenly Do&n, by the Miracles he wrought. 
From hence our Lord concludeth, that God ſhould glorifie Chrift in 
himſelf, ſo as rhe glory of the Father and the Son are the fame, they 
are mutually glorified each in other : If the Son be glorified, the Fa- 
ther is alſo glorified ; and if the Father be glorified, the Son is alſo 
glorified ; the Father and the Son are mutually glorified each in 
other. 2 And the Father (ſaith our Saviour) in a ſhort time will fur- 
ther glorifie him, by taking him up into Heaven, and making the 
whole perſon of the Mediator glorious in Heaven. ; 
33 Little children, yet a little while I am with you a, 
ye ſhall ſeek me: and, as I ſaid to the Jews *, whither 


1 go ye cannot come ; ſo now I ſay to you b. 

s Qur baviours time of Death being very nigh, ( for it was the 
next day) he beginneth to ſpeak of it to his Diſciples more freely, 
and plainly, and to let them know, that he, tho' now dying, bare a 
Fatherly tender affeQtion to them, he calls them 1:rrle Children ; Pa- 
rents have a natural affetion to their Children, a more tender affe- 
Aion to their Children when little, becauſe in their tender age they 
are more ignorant, and unable to provide for themſelves. We find 
chis compellation uſed by Chriſts Apoſtles, Gal. 4. 19. and 1 Fobn 2. 1, 
28. and he tells them, that he had but now a little time to be with 
them before his Death, and not long after his ReſurreRion ; in which 
too, his converſe was not ſuch with them, as it hitherto had been. 
4 He told this to the Jews in Chap. 7. 34. and now he tells them the 
ſame, that they wonld miſs him when he was gone, and ſhould ſeek 
him; but even the Diſciples at preſent could not follow him to Hea- 
ven whither he was going: The unbelieving Jews ſhould never fol- 
low himthither; bnt even thoſe who were his Diſciples, who were 
born again, and whom he loved as little Children are beloved by their 
Parents, ſhould not yet follow him; his work in the World was done, 
but they had yet a. great deal of work in it to do. 


» 34 * A new commandment I give unto you, That 
9-ye love one another, c as I have loved you, that ye alſo 
love one another 4. 

« The Commandment of loving one another, is ſtritly no new 


p. 6: 


"7 Commandment, we find it in the Law of Moſes, Levi. 19. 18. often 


preſſed in the New Teſtament, Chap. 15.17. Eph. 5. 2. 1 Fohn 4.21+ 
St. Jobn in his firſt Epiſtle ſaith, it is no new Commandment, 1 7obn 
2.7. 2 Ejiſt. 6. It is therefore called a new Commandment, either 
becauſe of the excellency of it ; as new ſeemeth to be taked, Pſal. 33. 
3. js. 65. 17. Matth. 26. 29. or becauſe it is expounded in the Goſ- 
pel ina new manner, preſſed more plainly, and with new Arguments, 
and urged by a new example of their Lord and Maſter. 

on 35 * By this ſhall all men know that ye are my di- 

ad ſciples, If ye have love one to another e. 

e A Diſciple hath his name either from learning from his Maſter. 
or from following his Maſter, and treading in his ſteps ; take itin ei- 
therſenſe : Loving one another is a certain note of being Chriſts Diſ- 
ciples; for as Chriſt continually prefſed this by his Precepts, ſo he 
ſet them his own example, by fhewing the greateſt love to them he 
could ſhew. 

36 Simon Peter ſaid unto him, Lord, whether goeſt | 
thou? Jeſus anſwered him, Whither I go, thou canſt 
, not follow me now *: but thou ſhalt follow me after- 

1. wards f. | 

f Peter yet underſtood not his Lord and Maſter, and therefore ask- 
ed him whether he went ? Our Saviour ſpake of his Aſcenſion into 
Heaven, after his ſuffering death upon the Croſs ; whither he tells 
Peter he could not at preſent follow him, but afterwards ſhould. 

Believers ſhall be ever with the Lord, but they muſt wait the Lords 


ume, and firſt finiſh the work which he hath given them to do upon 


the Earth, 


M 37 Peter ſaid unto him, Lord, why cannot I follow 

thee nowg ? I will * lay down my life for thy ſake h. 
22,  & Still Peter doth not underſtand our Saviour, but tancieth ſome 
athly motion from the place where he was ; but it ſhould ſeem by 
what followeth, that he thought our Saviour ſpake of ſome motion 
| which might be very dangerous tohim. h. And therefore he adds,ac- 
cording to his uſual courage and mettal, expreſs'd on all occaſions, 7 
= lay down my life for thy ſake ; we had fuch a reſolution of his Mar. 

* 33+ JF» 

3b Jeſus anſwered him, Wilt thou lay down thy life 
for my ſake? Verily, verily I ſay unto thee, The cock; 
all not crow, till thou haſt denied me thrice z. 


' Wark ſaith, before the cock crow twice. So the other three Evan- | 


geliſts mult be expounded, who ſay no more than before the cock crow 

at mentioning how often ; bur the hiſtory makes it good, that our 
v10ur meant thrice, for it was not before the ſecond crowing of the 
ok, that Petey went out, and wept bitterly. 


CHA P. XIV. 


S. FOHN 


thoſe a&ts which were neceſſary in order to his Diſciples inberiting &4\4 1s 
thoſe Bleſſed Manſions which were prepared for them from before the | 


Chap. XIV. 


The three enſuing Chapters, continae either one or more conſola- 
tory diſcourſes of our Saviour to his Diſciples, (asappeareth from the 
firſt Verſe of this Chapter) made as is probable to chem in the gueſt- 
chamber ; (at leaſt that part of them which we have in this Chapter) 
for we read of no motion of our Saviours, till we come to the laſt 
Verſe of this Chapter. That which troubled them was, what he had 
cold them in the cloſe of the former Chapter, that he was going from 
them. By our Saviour's diſcourſe in this and the two following Chap- 
ters, it ſhould ſeem that there were three things that troubled them. 
7 The ſenſe of their loſs as ro his bodily preſence. 2. The fear, that 
with the loſs of that, they ſhould alſo loſe thoſe Spiritual influences 
which they had received from him, and upon which their Souls had 
lived. 3. The profpe& of thoſe ſtorms of troubles, and perſecuti- 
ons, which was like to follow his departure from them ; for if we 
wiſely conſider what our Saviour ſaith in theſe three following Cha 
ters, it all rends to comfort them as to troubles that might ariſe in 
their ſpirits, upon one or other of theſe accounts: the general Propo- 
ſition 1s Jaid down in the firſt Verſe of this Chapter. 


F= not your hearts be troubled a : ye believe in God, 

b believe alſoin me c. 

# viz, | hrough grief,or fear, which are the Two Paſſions which ordi- 
narily, moſt diſturb our minds; our Saviour himſelf was troubled, bur 
not ſinfully: his rrouble neither aroſe from unbelief,nor yet was in an ' 
undue meafure : it was (as one well expreſſcth ir) like the meer agitati- 
on of clear water, where wasno mudat the bottom ; but our trouble is 
like the ſtirring of water that hath a great deal of mud at the bottom, 
which upon the royling, riſeth up, and maketh the whole body of the 
water 1n the veſſel impure, royled and muddy. Ir is this ſinful trou- 
ble cauſed from theſe Two Paſſions and riſing up to an immoderate | 
degree, and mixed with a greatdeal of unbelief and diſtruſt in God, Ba 
againſt which our Saviour here caurioneth his Diſciples; andrhe Re- 19 
medy he preſcribes againſt thoſe afflicting paſſions, is a believing in = BOY. 
God, and a believing on him. 6 The Two latter paſſages in the 
Verſe, are ſo penned in the Greek, that they may be read four ways; 
for the Verb Believe, twice repeated, may be read either indicatively 
or 1mperatively ; or the one may be read indicatively, and the other 
#mperatively ; ſo as they may be tranſlated, Tou believe in Goa, you be- 
lieve alſo in me: And ſo they teach us, that there is no ſuch Remedy 
for inward troubles, as a believng in God, and abelieving in Jeſus 
Chriſt ; and thoſe that do fo, have no juſt Reaſon for any exceſſive 
heart troubles. Or elſe they may be Read, believe in God, believe in 
me: Orelſeas we read them, ye believe in God, believe alſo in me : or 
believe in God, ye belitye in me. But the Diſciples Faith in Chriſt, as 
Mediator, and God-Man, being yer weak, and their weakneſs being 

what our Saviour hath ordinarly blamed, not magnified or commend- 

ed, the beſt Interpreters judge the ſenſe which our Tranſlators give, 
to be the beſt ſenſe; and judge that our Saviour doth inculcate to them 
his Divine Nature, and again offer himſelf to them as the proper Ob- 
je&t of their Faith. You (faith he) own it for your duty to truſt in 

God, as your Creator, and he that provideth for you. c Believe alſo 
in me, as God equal with my Father ; and in me, asthe Meſf2h, your 
Mediator and Redeemer, fo as you have one to take care of all your 
concerns, both thoſe of your Bodies, and thoſe of your Souls alſo, fo 
as you have nothing to be immoderately, and exceſſively, or diſtruſt- 
fully troubled for ; therefore Le: nor your hearrs be troubled ; only 
without care or diſtruſt, commit your ſelves ro me. 


2 In my Fathers houſe are many manſions 4; if :s 
were not ſo, I would have told you : I go to prepare a 


place for you e. 

a Our Lord's firſt Argument brought to comfort them from the 
place whither he was going, and the end of his going thither ; the 
place whither he was going, was his Fathers houſe, ſoas they needed 
not to be troubled for him, he was but going home ; nor was God 
his Father only, bur theirs alſo, as he afterwards ſaith, 7go ro my Ba- 
ther, and your Father; and here he tells them,that in his Fathers houſe 
there was not only a manſion, that is, an abiding place for him, but for 
many others alſo. Our days on the Earrh (ſath David) 1 Chron.29 15. 
are as k ſhadow, and there is no abiding; but In Heaven there are yo- 
v&1, abiding places. We ſhall (faith the Apoſtle) be ever with che 
Lord: and the Manſions therezare many ; there 15 room enough for all 
Believers. I would not havedeceived you ; if there had been no place 
in Heaven bur for me, I would have told you of it; but there are many 
Manſions there. e 1g0 to prepare @ place for you. The place was pre- 
pared of old: thoſe who ſhall be ſaved, were cf old ordained unto life 
That Kingdom was prepared for them before the foundation of the World 
(that is, in the counſels and immutable purpoſe of. God.) Theſe 
Manfions for believers in Heaven, were to be ſprinkled with blood: 
The ſprinkling of the Tabernacle, and all the Yeſels of rhe Minifiry, 
were typical of it, Heb. 9.2 1,22,23. but the heavenly things themſelves, 
with better ſacrifices than theſe, (aith the Apoſtle. By his ReſurreQion 
from the dead, and becoming the Firſt Fruits of thoſe that ſleep ; by 
his Aſcenſion into Heaven, as our forerunner, He4.6. 20. by his irring 
at the right hand of God, and making interceſſion for us, he prepareth 
for us a place in Heaven : And thus he comforterh his Diſciples (asto 
the want of his bodily preſence) as from the conſideration of the piace 
whither he went, ſo from the end of his motion, which was to do 


- —_ 


_ - - 
Y —_ a — hey * w—_ Cr One 
2 - Y E = » = a x - m . - © - o=_ p. I —_— rn —_—_ —_ 
_ 9 __ = e © 44-4645 mY + "4X. Fr 
F = _—_ ob »< Th == —- _ - TR - - ws 5 
* A A Tt - 2h Mb OD AN Gr . 4 ———_ —_—_——— EIGOE an > -* . Re 
- 3 _ *s J . _ of _s -_ m— . _ —_ <1 pa, : a x : M - FL; > >. £ |” 
= Ita q , . od - jo oe? A. " ». 4 ad q g _ & TI a _ _ = . 
_ $44 Ai wt + {2 - ad” OE - p g - = — mw b ws : . 
bod Cw <2 - "= - oo o_ ; A Wi - pe 
_ a — - _ , _— - 8 - , \ q 4 
© _ LT - — *. wy % "OPIFIETTEs a. # _ —_ * - _ ws * ——" 


foundation of the World. 0 0h 
3 And * if I go and prepare a place for youf, I* Ver. 18. R018! 
will come againg, and receive you unto my ſelf h, that Chap. gi 10 
* where 1 am, there ye may be alſo. ; F600 [OTRu 
F The Particle Jf in this place denoteth no uncertainty of the J- 14 
thing whereot he had before aſſured chem ; bur hath eicher the force 

of a/chough, or after that 3 when, or after that [ have died, aſcended, 


—_ 
. 


—— 
> &- - = 
. ®., "ſt : > — MF - - . —_— ” 
-* ſi om ” © ate A 
>=5 a2 26 ey IIF , £ =_ We: © - np . _ LE = . | + 
0-00" <"s, - . hy - .: . «34 : III 2 þ 7 _ EE _— 
—_ __— = -- ” : . YZ > _ ” . _ -- — L bt 
pe ERS wo $2495 te —_— : _—_ ” = _ - ——m——__ — = — = +.» - . me» _—_— —_ 
Tow . B2e oe Sree NS rb _— —— - I 
- _ - > —_ _- . - Tv ae _ = 5 w FX "x *s, " 4 —_ - 4  — \ «> 
_ 4 tonne ; _ m—— ” e _ ” __ —_ _ _ o . = M5 ns a 9 amy G _— —— : 
—_—Y PDE: pi = - _ —_— - - 1 4 p- = ad "= _ 9 as 
TIN - % . Es ET ASIC, a> IEge > Men rae ea Ig —þ ET BRO Hee ASS <-> = hy _— 9 
- * <—_ _ _ - — = > ———_ Nah Jt "* : - _—Y - 
-_ - —_— _ gs 0 ; %.. a T7 » 4 _— - \ - JS” ” >> % . SS pt P * hoy ho A _” wt = ® 
—_ k + adwan. Wines hm yy A # MT > = 6 - us L 0 IS ” a——t _ . S, - = . & 7 _ £ = Fe. 4 
: 7x, oo pou : <'34 3": I. a * "Bp Mo» & : = Pr - " _ > - OF _ Q — 
_ bag. * boa - os $ > p a : "A, CS mes WAG 2 as ? > d -—* po My O22 : » p E 
- _ _ - _ - : b. 4 _ - of Locks " . 2" . + * i : Py 
4 _ > le . om = a ; +< 
= : wa a ”, oF = X by 4 _ ” - 9 « 
s *_ =_ 
_ 


——O9— — 
> 
= O——_— 
" 2 
Ap I Cres as 2 Sos 
- "< % _ 5 ER. © = 
: Ra = "2 
—_ Rn wi <7 5 


> k '4 
Chrif comfarteth his Diſciples with the hope of Heaven. 1 —11. promiſ-| and by all theſe atts, as alſo by my interceſſion, ſhall have mede pl:- 0% 
ry * 70 give them power to work Miracles: rellerh them that they ſhind | ces in Heaven fully ready for you, g Iwill in thelaſt day return - of! Ne] F | 
* arnied of wot hing askt in his Name, 12—15. promiſeth them the | gain, as Judge of the quick and the dead, h, and take you up info ; of'8 MTS OM 
Holy Ghy » 16—20, exhorreth them to Love aud obey his Commands, | Heaven, 1 Theſ. 4. 16,17. i That you may be made partakers of | Ms. bl 24-7140 {} 
*I—25. The benefits of the holy Spirit, 26. Chrift leaveth his Peace | my glory, Fohn 17. 22. This is called, Rom. 8. 17. a bang glorte { (1k wh T 
hs hemy27—29 awd ſheweth his readineſs to obey his Fathers will, | fed rogether with him ; and elſewhere, a reigning with kim. So as this Ft: oh; BL... 
39, 31, is a Thicd Argument by which our $01d comforteth his Diſciples at " Mig j ty * | 
: ro { : 'J: + $/\ ny 

: F- F 5 3 x bh . Th : 


by bf - " $22 Tag _— *-. « TEE 
0 wa. n Me; I w - — Os — nem ers yp -- - - _ 
A A - th. ery, Hl _ _ —_—— — 
% A. RE j * 8 2 W327 > * - X 
- pl . : _ Y * = | os = _—_ 
/ Y - _- 6 Fx I « - 
« oY £ = ow we # 2£L n—m 3 S. 
- rs, . : - _?, a " —_—_ —— x ag þ tithe Joey — — x : .- =” Was 4 a $42 - A 
pt a - >< © - - a m—_—_ T — « : 
=? - - — = - ”—_— —_ — « ; <> TÞ - IT h : E _ to rene 
—_ 0 —_— Shut L , ap——— _ - - z - : —————_—_— - , 7 . —— oor - - 
7 = N => t 07 Þ pe. _—_ —_— _ = = h- - _—_ wo he ns : 
Y Ras wanE agua 2 : : wg ere <_ —— _- I _——_—_ - - ——_ _ 7 bt —— 
q Et Res er. ——__ : - FR . I - - og m_ dl £ jy . - _ £ . : ac w_ _ - = - no hs 
RES < - 3 s mmm bens _— iL 6 © * view ——_ FRAN x £ - ; a—_—_ - a — —_ ——_— 
” J . Þ— 4 a Shy” © "I my On — : d. ——_ mew? *- _ S> 
I - = - . " d Sik - > " HA — 
4 _ - / *. 3 4 » - ,4 , — <-25= " I. Ba _— a 
- - - - - bo. w gacghs——- - __ nn Bs. = be, L W_—_ _— Bao” "0. ih ft y = KO m_ — Re RR. 
E —- IN y p—Y — a) wy, = __—_ - : " Sa £ be % J : T2 p 
en ons : ”- a WARS 4 Ly - wo þ wh pep cnt - ” —— > 
&= Ee £1 \ : =. - OY > 3-9 - * +4 25 r_— 
4p = = 94 8 - - ns” _ 20 —— » - G "9g 
n © St mans . $1 . © G == G - : BY —_ 
+a - —_ - "Ss. _ = gs ors <a + 7 AIG. 


_. 


Chap. XIiV. 


* Heb.g-8. 6 Jeſus ſaith unto him, I am * the Way m,, and * the 
; ©b-1.17-Truth », and the * Life o: No Man cometh unto the 
Ne Ie 4+ 


& 1T, 25, 


»* Ch.10.9. 41 
0 


* Cap. With you, and yet halt thon not known me, Philip : ? 


32 


4 5» 


(a hats trouble conceived for the want of his bodily preſence wirh 
them. Fom the certanty of his return to them, and the end and 
Conftgqurnt of big return : The end was tO receive them to himſelf; 
bs Confiquent, their eternal abiding with Chriſt where he was. | 


4 And whitheil go ye know, and the way ye know &. 
£ Chrift, 4cr433. cf the former Chapter, had dignified his Diſci- 
is with the familiar loving title of Lirele Children, Ir is pleatant to 
<cntider bow be contigu=th his Giſccurſe to them in ſuch a DialeR as 
+. mother would ſpezk to a lit]: chi'd crying after her, ſeeing her 
pieparing her {elf to go ab1ozd : The child cries; the mother bids 
1; be il}. ſhe is but going to ſuch a friends houſe ; it till cries, ſhe 
rel!s it, ſhs is but going fo prepare a place for it there where it ſhall 
be mnch hppier than it is at home : it is nor yer ſarisfied ; the tells 
ji «gzin, th:t tho! ſhe gocs, ſhe wiil come again, and then 1t ſhall go 
along with her, and ſhe will part no more from it: the child 1s yet 
impatient ; ſhe agen endeavoureth to (ti!) it, telling it, that it know- 
eh whither ſhe gocth, and it knows the way, by which ifneed ve, nt 
m1y come to her. ; 
5 Thomas faith unto him, Lord, we know not wht- 


ther thou goeſt, and how can we know the way /? _ 

1 Reaſon tells every one, that he who knoweth not the zerm, whi- 
ther a perſon is going, muſt needs be ignorant of the way. It 15 
plain, chat Thomas, and ſo (probably) divers others of rhe Apoſtles, 
notwithſtanding what our Saviour had ſo plainly rold rhem wer. 2. 
yet dreamed of ſome earthly motion our Saviour was making, which 
makes Thomas to ſpeak thus ; ſo dull are we, and hard to conceive of 
fpiricual chings But will ſome ſay, Doth not Thomas here contradit 
bis Maſter, who had told them, wer 4. that they both knew whither 
he went, and the way alſo? Anſwer, Some think that our Saviour 
meant no more than they ought to have known, both whither he 
went, and the way alſo. AFrve verbs in Scripture phraſe, often ſig- 
nifying no more than duty, or ab:liry. But poſſibly others anſwer bet- 
ter; they had ſome knowledge, but it was more confaſed and general, 
not diftin, particular, or certain. 


Father, but by me p. F 
- Chriſt was his own way to his Father, Heb. 9.12. By his own 
od he entred in once into the Holy place. See Luke 24. 25. Phil. 2.8, 
bur both the former words, where the Apoſtles ſpake of the way they 
ſhould go, and the following words hint to us, that Chriſt is here 
ſpeaking 6f their way, not his own. As to them, he ſaith, 7 an; the 
way; that is, the way by which thoſe muſt ger to Heaven who will 
ever come there, Chriſt is our way to Heaven by the Nofrine which 
he taught ; by bts Death, by which hepurchaſed this heavenly inhe- 
ritance for us 3 by hrs holy life and Converſation, ſetting us an example, 
that we ſhould follow his ſteps ; by the influence of his Spirit, guiding 
us to, and afliſting us in thoſe holy aQtions by which we mult come 
unto glory. » He is the Truth ; that is (ſay ſome) the true way to 
life eternal: but he is the Tr«t4 as to his NoAtrine, the Goſpel being 
the Word of Truth. Eph. 1. 13. And as truth ſignifies reality and ac- 
compliſhment, in oppoſition to the Propheſies and Promiſes all being 
but words till chey were in him fulfilled ; in which ſenſe we read of 
the ire Tabernacle, and the true holy plates, Heb.8.2. and 9. 24. Or as 
ruth 15 oppoſed to falſhood, as Truth is taken, John 8. 44. Rom. 3.7. 
o And he1s the Life, the Author and Giver of Eternal Lite, Zo/n 11. 
25. I John 5, 11. and rhe purchaſer of it by his Death ; he who by 
his DoQtrine ſheweth the way to it, and by his holy Spirit begins ir, 
and carrieth it on to perfeQtion. The Jews thought the way to it was 
by the Law of Moſes 3 but our Saviour beateth his Diſciples our of that 
Opinion ; for if the Law could have given Life, Chriſt had died in 
vain (as the Apoſtle argueth) p Therefore ſaith he, here is no coming 
to the Father, but by me ; no way for you, or any other, tocome to 
Heaven. but by receiving, and embracing, and believing in me. 


7 If ye had known me, ye ſhould have known my 
Father alſo q: and from henceforth ye know him, and 
have ſeen himr. 


9g If ye had known me as you ought to have known me, as Tam in- 
deed the eternal Son of God, ſent by my Father into the World, you 
ſhould have known my Father, with whom I am equal, and one and 
the ſame God, foasin knowing one of us, you mnſt have known both : 
bur vou ſtick in my Qutward form and appearance, while I appear to 
you in the form of a Man; and you ſtick in your prejudices ſuckt in 
from the Notion you have of the M:ſſiab, expeRting | know not what 
Tempora] Prince : Theſe things blind you as to my Divine Nature 
(perſonally united ro my Humane Nature) that yeu ſee nothing of 
my Godhead," hich if you had clearly known and believed, you would 
not have been art a Joſs ro know the Father, the brightnefs of whoſe 
glory, and the expreſs Image of whoſe perſon I am, tho' my glory 
be vai.'d by my Humane Nature. r. And if you will yet believe what 
I fav, from henceforth, you do know the Father, and you have ſeen 
the Father ſo oft as you have ſeen me. 


8 Philip ſaith unto him, Lord, ſhew vs the Father 
and it ſufficeth us -s. 


s Still P/ilip underſtandeth not our Saviour, and further diſcover- 
et a very groſs conception of the Divine Being, as if it could be 
ſcen with mortal Eyes ; whereas God had told ſes, Exod. 33. 20 
Thou canſt not ſee my face ; for there ſhall no man ſee me and live. It is 
an hard thing ro determine what degrees of ignorance are conſiſtent 
or iaconfiitent with ſaving Grace in ſouls, the Reſolution of which 
doth much depend upon thoſe degrees of Revzlation, and means of 
knowlelge which men have. 


9 Jeſus faith unto him, Have I been fo long time 


ſayeſt thou cher, Shew us the Father w ? 


© Our Saviour jtili infiſteth apen the Oneneſs of himſelf with his 
Father, and the perſonal Union of the Divine and Humane Nature in 


S. FOHN 


* He that hath ſeen me hath ſeen the Father «: and how NE hnſa MO comen in the 


Chap , XIV [ 


time, and known him, and yet znot haveſeen nor known the Fath 
w Bur that {uppoſed,none that had ſeen Chriſt, but muſt have ſeen Fi 
Father alſo, there being but one God. te 

10 Believeſt thou not that * I am in the Father, ang 
the Father in me? The words that I ſpeak ynt bo 
you *, I ſpeak not of my ſelf y: but the Father that and 1; 
dwelleth in me he doth the works z. 2, 
x It is the opinion of Mr. Calvin, that theſe words are not her Og! 
ſpoken ſo much to expreſs his Divine Nature and Being (for {© Chin 8. 4 
i5 no more known to us than his Father) as to expreſs his manng, * '%4 
of revealing it. Yet is the Divine Nature of Chriſt fully proved from 
hence. Others judge, that theſe words do clearly fignifie both the 
diſtin&ion of perſons 3 for nothing is in it ſelf; and alſothe Union of 
the perſons in the Divine Being. y. He proveth his Union with the 
Father, becauſe he ſpake not thofe words which he ſpake of himſejr 
that is, not of himſelf ſolely ; he revealed but his Father's Wijj and 
declated his Father's Mind ; and z becauſe the works which he giq 
he did not by his own ſole power, without the concurrence of his 
Father's power in thoſe Operations.* 

11 Believe me that I a” in the Father, and the F4. 
ther in me': or elſe believe me for the very works 
ſake a. * 

2 Believe my words (for that is your duty) but yer if you wil 
not believe my words, declaring to you my Union with my Father 
yet when you ſee me-doing ſuch works as none but God can do, be- 
lieve me for their ſake. It 1s true, that both che Prophets and the 4. 
poſtles ſpake God's words, not their own, to to the People,and alſo gig 
many great and mighty works ; bur ſtill their DoQrine led unto anc. 
ther, thar was Chriſt ; and their Miracles was not wrought in their 
own names, but in the name of Chriſt. E1:jh raiſed the Shunani;,; 
dead child to life by prayer to God that he would do it ; and the 4. 
poſtles bid the lame man ariſe, and walk, in the name of the Lord [e. 
ſus Chriſt. Chriſt's DoQrine terminated in himſelf; he called men 
to believe in him, and he wrought Miracles by his own Power, ang 
by a vertue proceeding out of, and from himſelf, tho" by the power of 
his Father alſo, becauſe he and his Father were one in Eſſence, 

12 * Verly verily I ſay unto you, He that believeth»y, 
on meb, the works that I do, ſhall he do alſo, and u, 
greater works c than theſe ſhall he do: becauſe Igy 
unto my Father 4. 

: þ Notevery individual ſoul thatbelieveth in me,but ſome of thoſe, 
particularly you that are my Apoſtles, and ſhall be filled with the Hy- 
ly Ghoſt in the days of Penticoft ; c You ſhall Preach the Goſpel, and 
work Miracles for the confirmation of the cruth of the DoQtine of ir, 
Yea, and you {hall dogreater Works than I have done; not more, or 
greater Miracles : the cruth of that may be juſtly queſtioned ; for whit 


YH 7 7” To" uo RE ROE EP 


Miracle was everdone by the Apoſtlesgreater chan that of raiſing Li hi 
zarus * Much leſs do I think thar it is to be underſtood of ſpeaking m 
with divers tongues : It is rather to be underſtood of their ſucceſful led 
carrying the Goſpel to the Genrites,by which the whole World, almelt, for 
was brought to the Obedience of the Faich of Chrift. We never read | 
that of Chriſt which we read of Peter, wiz. his converting :hre:th- 
ſand at one Sermon. d Becauſe I go to my Father, he afterwards - No 
poundeth,telling us,that if he did not go away, the Comforter would eth 
not come. The pouring out of the Spirit in the days of Pentecof}, you 
was the proximate cauſe of thoſe great works. Now Chriſt's going A 
to the Father had an influence upon that Miſſion of the Holy Spirit. Cor 
13 * And whatſoever ye ſhall ask in my naner,y,; call 
that will I dof, that the Father may be glorified in the = 
Son ge ; 2% p 
« Thewhatſoever in this Text, muſt be limited by what the wil "Ol Fir 
of God hath revealed in other Texts,as to the matter of our prayers; 7; the F 
viz. they muſt be things that are for our good ; ſuch things as we '* truth 
ſtand in need of, and as God hattt given us a liberry to ak; and in-" x5 the 
deed no other things can be asked in the ame of the Lord [eſusChriſt;* more 
for to ask in Chriſt's Name, ſignifieth not only the making uſe of his I Cor 
ſacred Name in our Prayers ( tho the conſtant praRice of the Church of th 
in Prayer, hath evidenced it the general Opinion of Divines, that thi 16, 1 
is a part of the ſenſe) but alſo in asking for his merits, and ſuchthings ofthe 
as ſhall be conformable to his will, and for his glory. Whatſoever the 
(faith he) you ſhall ask of this nature, f I will do. Hedoth notſiy, in wh 
my Father will do, but 7 wil do it, to teſtifie his Divine Power, and World 
Oneneſs in Power with his Father. g That the Father may be glorifis dom, 
in the Sm. God hath ſet up his Reſt in Chriſt, and will be glorifed 1s, be 
in and through him, and hath therefore given him all Power in Hei be ſee 
ven and Earth, rimen 
14 If ye ſhall ask any thing in my name, I will do), - ax 
h The words are doubled for the further confirmation of thet» ea] oy 
chat we might not doubt when we put up our Petitions toGod inthe oder 
name of the Lord Jeſus Chriſt, according to the Will of God. b 9 
15 * If yelove me, keep my commandments'”© 'WF 
; Do not ſhew your love to me in mourning, and being troubled" * » Th 
for my going from you ; but ſhew it by your Obedience to what c ker 
have commanded you. True love muſt not evapourate 1n compie” therefor 
>" diſcover it ſelf in a tri obſervance of the Commandme!?} "pang 
OT Lr0Q, "Bone Ie here 
16 And I will pray the Father, and * he ſhall 81% Wi fr 6, 


Note the 
tO beun 
abience 
ſure; 
Hiric, ( 
and to; 
Comme 
to linſy 
WAS; bt 
lating rc 
from th 


you another Comforter k, that he may abide with you, 

for ever/. 2 
k This Verſe containeth a new Argument by which our pre 

relieverh his Diſciples under their Miion for the want of bus 


dily preſence; that is, the Miſfion of the _ _—_— _ —_ 
e laifhs Miſſion 0 


che Bleſſed Spirit; for himſelf relleth us, Chap- 16. 7: _ , 


would ſend him, only for the atreſtarion of his Humane Nature hg 
2. Of himſelf, as our Mediator. 3- Of +is Father 5 concern © 


hun : for otherwiſe the Apoſtlcs might have been with Chriſt a long 


o 1 [ 
well as his own, in ſending the Holy Spirit; he here faith, / = 


Veth *y 
and 6 
Ig0 


thoſe, 

he Ho- 

el, and 

e of it, 

ore, or 

r what 

ng Las 

eaking 

ceſsful 

almoſt, 

er read 

ee than 

1rds ex- 

r would 

ntecoft, 

s going 

/ Spirits «3x 

in the Me 
th 

he Will * 

rajers; i 

75 as we 1 

and in-! 

Chriſt; * 

ſe of bis 1+ 

Church 

that this 

ch things 

natſoever 

1 not ſay, 

wer, and 

- plorifid 

clo 

in He 


doth, 
of them 
od inthe 
od. 

FA 

troubled | 
to what 1 
andmenti? 


Ml | 


all give" 
vith you 


2 
ur Savimwr 
of his bo” 
other Com 
vat he wil 
Miſſion of 
1. chat # 
cure; 31 
concern # 
uith, 1 wit 


pv 


WW: 


| 15, be made partakers of, o becauſe it neither ſeeth him, whois not to 


. come to you 5, 
> 7 The word in the Greek is Orphans, perſons without father and 
mother, who for rhe moſt part are the moſt comfortleſs perſons, 


ray the Father, and he ſhall ſeud Jou @ndther Comforter. That term, 
P wathers ſignifieth the perſonal aijtintt ion of the Third, from the Firſt 
ol Second Perſon in che Bleſſed Trinity. And the name here given 
to the Bl:{ſcd Spirit, TacgiAuſoy ( which we too narrowly tranſlate 
Comforter, ) is a term excceding proper to ſignifie all the Operations 
of the Bleſſed Spirit in and upon the ſouls of his people. The ſame 
word, 1 Jofm 2+ 2+ where it 18 applied to Chriſt ( as here it is to the 


Sprrit) 
here P 


ro comfort only, but to ex/ort, and to be an Advocate for another, 
Now it belongs to the Office of an Advocate to ſuggeſt to his Client 
what may be for his advantage » which is alſo the Office of the bleſ- 
ſed Spirit ; if he feeth his Client in an error, fo reprove, and to con- 
vince him, which is alſo the work of the,Spirit, 7ohn 6. 7. If he 
(eeth him weak, and diſcouraged, to uph0!d, ſtrengthen, and encou. 
1aoe bim ; this is alſo the Spirit's work, Eph. 3. 16 if he ſees him 
running into an error, to reffram him; if he finds him dul, and 
heavy, to quicken bim ; it he ſeeth him ready to be run-down, to 4e- 
-nd him; if he hath any thing to do in the Court, to prepare, and 
i-aw it up for himandas occaſion ſerveth, to ſpeak for him, All theſe 
things (as might be largely ſhewed) fall within the Office of an 44- 
wcate, and under the comprehenſive term here uſed. / And ( ſaith 
ou? Gyiour ) he ſhall abide with you for ever, I ſhall be with you 
but for a while, but he ſhall abide with yal fo eternity ( 24S ſome Obs 
ſerve this word, is conſtantly uſed by this Evangelift. ) Sorhat the Pr4- 
miſe of the Spirit is not to be reſtrained only to the Apoſtles and 
their Succeſſors in the Miniſtry, or to be underſtood only of thoſe 
extraordinary gifts beſtowed on the Apoſtles, and firſt Miniſters of 
the Goſpel ; but to be extended further, both with reference to per- 
ins and influences 3 and without doubr the influences of the Spirit, 
both as to Gifts and Graces, .both upon Miniſters and-more private 
Chriſtians, are much more plentiful ſince the ſending of the Holy 
Ghoſt, after Chriſt's Aſcenſion in the days of Pentecoſt, than ever they 
were before, not as to particular perſons ; a David, a Solomon, or 
ſome particular _ might have greater meaſures then any, or 
the moſt have ſince bad : bur as to che generality of Miniſters, and 
Chriſtians, doubtleſs, fince the pouring out of the Spirit in the days 
of Pentecoſt, there have been greater meaſures of the Gifts and Gra- 
ces of the Holy Spirit given out, and will be to the end of the 
World, than ever was in any Age before Chriſt's Aſcenſion; which is 
no more than what was Prophefied, iſa. 44+ 3. Foel. 2. 28. applied to 
the days of Pentecoſt, Att; 2. 17. but not to be limited to that time, 
or Age, either for gifts or gracious habits: for as the extraordinary 
gifts and powers, held in ſome degree after the Apoſtles age, (if we 
may give any credit to Eccleſtaſtical Hiſtory ) ſo both in thoſe ages, 
and ever fince, as to the generality both of Miniſters and Chriſtians, 
(that is, ſuch as are mentioned, wer. I 5. that love Chriſt, and keep 
his Commandments ) there have been fuller meaſures of gifts, of 
more conſtant ſtanding uſe for the Church, ſuch as thoſe of Knew- 
os and Urteraxce, Oc. and alſo of inward graces, than ever be- 
ore was, 


17 Ewen the Spirit of truth 77, whom the world can- 
not receive n, becauſe it ſeeth him not, neither know- 
eth himo: but ye know him p, for he dwelleth with 


| you, and ſhall be 1n you 9. 


m He here explaineth himſelf, and tells them, that by that other 
Comforter mentioned, wer. 16. he meant the Spirit, whom he here 
calls the Spirit of Truth, either becauſe he is a Spirit that declareth and 
revealeth the truth, as in 1 John 5. 6. or becauſe he teacheth us truth, 
1 7ohn 2. 27. he guideth us into all truth, John 16. 13. Or in Op- 
poſition to the /ying Spiric of rhe Devil, 1 Kings 22. 22. Moft pro- 
bably the Holy Spirit is here called the Spirit of Truth, becauſe of 
the Efficiency he hath 3s to it. Ir is he who hath revealed all the 
truth contained in the Scriptures, tothe World. Holy men wrote 
45 they were inſpired by himy A#s 1. 16, 2 Per. 1. 21. It is he that 
more particularly and eſpecially revealeth truth to the particular Soul, 
I Cor, 10. f2, Hence perſons enlightned, are ſaid to -be partakers 
of the Holy Ghoſt, Heb. 6. 4. He leadeth his People into Truth, Ch. 
16, 13, he ſealeth and confirmeth truth to the Soul : hence we read 
of the demonſtration of the Spirit, 1 Cor. 2. 4+ n This Spirit of truth, 
the World, that is, men of carnal heartsthat are of the World, and 
n whom worldly Juſts predominate, 1 John 2. 16. Chap. 19. 9g. This 
World, through natural impotency, 1 Cor. 2. 14. through wiſ- 
dom, 1 Coy, 10. 21. through Juſts and paſſions, cannot receive, that 


be ſeen with mortal Eyes, nor knoweth him affeQionately, and expe- 
rimentally ; he being not to be known by men whoſe hearts are car- 
nal and full of Juſts, p but ye know him believingly, experimen- 
tally, akGionately, favingly : q for be dwelleth in you by a myſti- 
cal Union, Rom. 8, 11, 1 Cor- 6, 17, and he ſhall abide with you, by 
hisdwelling in you, and influences upon you. 


18 * I will not leave you * comfortleſs », * I will 


therefore it is crnſlated comfortleſs ; Chriſt hath a care, nor only of 
tne peoples Salvation and Life, but alſo of their comforts while they 


S. JOHN 


5 there much better tranſlated Advocate ; and it is moſt pro- 
pable that our Tranſlators here tranſlare ir Comforter, becauſe he is 
romiſed ro the Diſciples troubled, as fitted to their preſent 
Jiftreſs, The Verb from whence the word deriveth, ſignifies not 


19 Yet a little while, and the world ſeeth me nn 


live alſo w. 

£ The World ſeeth me now only with fleſhly Eyes ; it will be 
but a little while, and the men of the World ſhall be able to ſee 
me no more ; I ſhall be crucified, and laid in the grave; and tho 
I ſhall riſe again, yet ſhall not be ſeen of them : ( we read of no 
appearances of him after his Reſurre&ion, but to his Diſciples) bur 
ye ſee me, or ſhall ſee me ; fo they did often after his ReſurreRiog 
with their bodily Eyes: or it may be underſtood of a Spiricual ſight 
by the Eye of Faith, or of a ſight of experience ; ( as ſeeing often in 
Scripture ſignifieth enjoying ) w Becauſe I live, that is, I ſhall live 
by my ReſurreRtion from the Dead, and by my glorious Aſcenſion 
into Heaven ; you alſo ſhall live the Life of Grace here ; and tho 
your bodies mut? die, b-cauſe of fin, yer your Souls ſhall upon the 
death of your bodies live; and in the Reſurre&ion, both your Souls 
and Bodies ſhall live, and together bs glorified with me; all this 
-_ _ mercy ſhall flow our to you from me as Mediator, and be- 
cauſe I live. 


Father, and you in me, andI in you y. 
x Some underſtand our Saviour here ſpeaking of the day of his 


lowing words diſcover, thar it is beft Interpreted of the day of Judg- 
ment, and the general Reſurre&ion ; for. y they ſpeak of two great 
myſteries, which the Diſciples ſhould underſtand in that day, which 
iS here ſpoken of ; to wit, The perſonal Union of Chriſt with his Fa- 
ther ; and the myſtical Union of Beligvers with Chriſt ; as to both 
which, tho the Apoſtles and Believers knew much more after Chriſts 
Reſurre&ion, and the pouring forth of the Spiric inthe days of Pente- 
coſt, than they knew before thoſe times ; yer it is a very imperfe& 
knowledge they ever had, or yet have of thoſe myſterious Unions ; 
but in the Reſurre&ion we ſhall underſtand theſe things clearly. 


ſhall be loved of my Father, and I will love him a and 


will manifeſt my ſelf to him 6. 

z Our Lord here doth repeat what he had before ſaid, wer. 15. de- 
claring that there is no infallible indication of our love to Chriſt, but 
obedience, which is here expreſt under two Notions. 1. Having 
Chriſts commandments, and 2: keeping them, they muſt both con- 
cur to make a true indication of our love to Chriſt : Ir is poſſible thac 
men may have Chriſt's Commandments in their Ears,in theirNotion, 
in their mouths, and yet not keep them ; they may hear them, they 
may know and remember them, they may talk of them, yer they 
may not keep them ; for keeping them denotes univerſa}, diligent, 
induſtrious, ſteady and conſtant obedience co them; and this 
alone will ſpeak our love toChriſt : a And if any man thus declareth 
his love to Chriſt, Chriſt declareth, that both he and his Father, will 
take a pleaſure and delight in him to do him good ; 5 and he ſhall 
not live only under the real benefits of his love to him, bur under 
the ſenſible manifeſtations of ir. Here is no mention of the Spirits 
coming with the Father and the Son, becauſe the Son dwelleth in us 
by the Spirit. 


22 Judas faith unto him, not Iſcariot c, Lord, how 
is it that thou wilt manifeſt thy ſelf unto us, and not 


unto the world d ? 

c Fudas the Brother of James, Jude 1. the Son of Alphew, not 
Judas the Son of Simon, who from the City whence he was, was call- 
ed 1/cariet, and was the Traytor ; asks our Saviour, d how it was, 
or wherefote it was that he would manifeſt himſelf to them, and nor 
to the World ? This Queſtion either proceeded out of ignorance, 
not a right underſtanding of what manifeſtation of himſelf Chriſt 
here ſpake; or out of x pious deſire,that all might be made partakers of 
the ſame grace with them ; or out of the Apoſtles modeſt Opinion of 
himſelf and his Brethren ;' as if he had ſaid, Lord, what are we that 
thou ſhouldeſt ſpeak of any more ſpecial manifeſtation of thy love to 
us, than to the reſt of the World ? Or out of a deep admiration of 


Gods unſearchable Judgments in leaving ſome of rhe World, whiles 
he made choice of others to dignifie, with ſuch ſpecial diſtinguiſhing 
favours, hiding thoſe things from the wiſe and prudent, which he re- 
vealed to babes. 


23 Jeſus anſwered, and faid unto him *, If a man * veer. 2g. 


love me, he will keep my words e: and my Father will 
love him, and we will come unto him, and make our 


abode with him h. | 


e If any man Jove Chriſt, he will keep Chriſts words ; that is, he 
will ſtudy and endeavour to keep the Commandments of Chriſt ; for 


if nothing evidenced a true love to Chriſt, but a perfedt obedience to 
his will, nonecould comforc himſelf from his obedience, or Conclude 
his love to Chriſt from it; but he that loveth Chriſt, will make it 


his buſineſs to be obedient to him in thoſe things that he hath com- 


manded, and are within his power. And my Father will manifeſt 


his love to him in further difpenſationsof his Grace ; for it cannot be 


underſtood of God's Eternal Love, nor yet of his love in Ju#ificat:on, 
and Regeneration 3 for till the Man or Woman be juſtified, and re- 


Chap. XIV. 


more? : but * ye ſee mes: becauſe I live, ye ſhall * 


20 At that day ye ſhall know, that * I az in my * Chap. 


ReſurreCtion ; others Interpret it of the days of Pentecoſt, when *'5? 
there ſhould be ſuch an effuſion of the bleſſed Spirit : but the fol- '* 


21 * He that hath my commandments and keepeth », Joh.2.5, 
them, he it 1s that loveth me z : and he that loveth me & 5. 3. 


re here ; he will not leave his people without proportionable com- | generated, he will never ſtudy and endeavour obedience to the Will 


fort for their diftreſſzs. 5 In the Greek it is, 1 do Com? to you, to de- 


of God. This love of God is the cauſe, not the effe& of our obedi- 


note the certainty, and the ſuddainneſs of his coming, which is either | ence ; bur /ove in this verſe muſt be expoundec by manifeſting in 
fo be underſtand of his Reſurref{ion, which was (as we know) after the | the former verſe ; and this is certain, that the manifeſtation of Di- 
Wdience of three days; or, which is more probable, (for after his Re- | vine love to our Souls, depend upon our walking with God, g + is 
ſurreGion he ſaid with them but a few days ) in and by his bleſſed | is alſo meant by God the Father, and Chriſts coming ro thole that love 


Piriiy, (for the Spirit 15 called the Spirit of Chriſt) who was to come, 


him, and keep his Commandments ; viz. a coming in the fwezt in- 


and to abide with them for ever. Thoit-may alſo have referenceto his | fl:2ences of Divine grace, ſuted co the Souls various neceffiries : + nay, 
coming again to judge both the Quick and the Dead, to receive them | our Lord promiſerh, not only his and his Fathers coming to, but 
t0 biinſelt, that ( as he ſaid b<fore ) they might always be where he | their making an abode with ſuch as love him, and keep his Commana- 
3s; but the ewo former ſenſes, are underſtood as more ſpecially re- | ments. Here the abiding of the firſt and ſecond Perſon in the Trinity 
Icing to cheic preſent diſtcelſc upon account of his bodily abſence | with Believers, wer. 16. the Abidingofthe third perſon with them is 


rom then, 


Vol. Il, 


alſo promiſed, which all make that preſence of God with them, ſo 


Ggge oftea 


—_— 


0 « 
- - " 4 _— 
. — F —_—_ wo; — 
v a F'Y of 6h _ , bf : _ = > « : - = - — = —ﬀ ” 
gory : —_ — ; - ns 
$2 5” Sz2 ' Pug. 4 w_ - nt 4 OS 1-4 a EO IVEY ee Az "IEF OI 
G __ f a - = .- x d - T = _ ” —_ - - " * 
. & eg 4, 3 A _- Þ. -— TM = a, 20 ——_— 
4. *— 7 + "j o 2"P _ "x : I bog A SY o ts - 
wy , hs. Si 1 2 £ OE -+ $ n : ” a Y 3 £ = . _ #F & 
ah tare Merion ere ke wat +56 Vw a 5 EE "TW: > oat | WY 
9 p v ”- = A" . % Wa = 
: ; _ if . ates WL 3 - >» & — = _— 


Chap. XIV. 


* Cha. 19. 


Ver. 10, 


*Ch.16.13, 


often promiſed to them in holy Writ: Thus our Saviour anſ\ wereth 
one part of what 71.5 ſaid, How 4 it that thou wilt manifeſt thy 
ſelf to u5? becauſe ſaith our Saviour, you love me and keep my 
words; for tho' no love, no works of ours foreſeen or ſeen, be the 
cauſe of eternal love, or the firſt grace ; yet it is ſo much a cauſe of 
further grace, eſpecially in the ſenſible manifeſtations of it, that no 
Soul mutt expe ir that doth not love Chriſt, and keep his words. 
He alſo further gives them a reaſon, as to the ſecond thing he asked, 
why he did not manifeſt himſelf to the World. : 
24 He that loveth me not, keepeth not my ſayings 2, 
and * the word which you hear is not mine &, but the 


Fathers which ſent me /. = (5k ; 

i Becauſe they did not love him, nor keep his ſayings, their ſin 
wa3s aggravated ; becauſe k the words which he ſpake, were not his 
Will only, 7 but the will of his Father who had ſent him into the 
World, to reveal his Will to the Sons of men. = rq 

25 Theſe things have I ſpoken unto you, being yet 
preſent with you m:. 

2 That is, as to his bodily preſence: for more than three years 
I have been fulfilling a miniſtry amongſt you, and have ſpoken ma- 
ny things to you. Wi 

26 But the Comforter, which is the holy Ghoſt, whom 


1 John 2. the Father will ſend in my Name -,, * he ſhall teach 


20, 27. 


*Yer. 18s 


you all things s, and bring all things to your remem- 


brance, whatſoever I have faid unto you p. : 
» The word is the ſame, which was fo tranſlated before ; ſee the 
import of it, wer. 16, 17.) he is there called the Comforter, and the 
Spirit of rruth ; here the Holy Spirit. The Father here is ſaid to ſend 
in the Name, that is, with the 4x: horzty, and upon the Mecdiation of 
the Lord Jeſus Chriſt: and two pieces of the Spirits work beſides 
Comforting, are here expreſſed. o He ſhall more fully explain to you 
all things : three of the Apoſtles themſelves had already in this Chap- 
rer diſcovered great degrees of ignorance as to the DoQtrin of the Tri 
nity, Chriſt's Union or Oneneſs with his Father, &'c. You ſhall not 
be lefr (faith our Saviour) in this ignorance ; for when the holy 
Spirit ſhall come, he ſhall more fully and perfe&ly inſtru you in 
=11 things, which [ have already inſtruQted you, and which are neceſ- 
ſary for you to know in order to your eternal happineſs : p and ſhall 
bring to your remembrance the things I have taught you, ſoas you 
ſhall more fully andclearly underſtand them ; and tho' you may have 
forgotten them, yet they ſhall by the Holy Spirit be recetved in your 
memories, fo as they ſhall not be like water fpilt on the ground, 
which cannot again be gathered up, but like ſeed ſown in the Earth, 
which tho' it may at preſent rot, and die under the clods, or ar leaſt 
not ſpring up; yet it ſhall ſpring up, and bring forth defired fruir. 
It is one'great work of the Holy Spirit, to bring the Revelations of 
Holy Writ to our remembrance, and withal to clear to us the 
ſenſe of them, and confirm our faith in them, and chiefly quicken us 
to prattiſe what is our duty. But itis to to be obſerved, that the Spi- 
rit doth not make revelations of new Notions ; it only brings to our 
remembrance what Chriſt hath ſajd, and further revealeth whac was 
before in the word revealed, tho' poſſibly particular perſons were ig- 
norant of ſuch revelations of the word : ſo things may be new, and 
newly revealed to us, which in themſelves arenot ſo. There are no 
new truths, but particular perſons may have new diſcoveries of old 
truth, which they had beſore miſapprehenſions of. , 

27 Peace I leave with you 9, my peacel give unto 
you 7 : not as the world giveth, give I unto you 5 Let 
not your heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid : 

q Peace be with you, or to you, was the Jewiſh common'ſalutati- 
en, 1 Sams. 25. 6. under that general name, they comprehend all 
manner of good: With this good wiſh they both ſaluted their 
Friends when they met them, and took their farewel of them when 
they left them. Chriſt being now abour to take hls leave for a time of 
his Diſciples, wiſheth them Peace ; nay, he doth not only wiſh itto 
them, bur he /:aves it to them, he giveth it them as a legacy, and 
that another kind of peace, and in another manner than was com- 
mon. 7 He therefore calls it his Peace revealed in the Goſpel, Eph. 
6. 15, purchaſed with his blood, Rom, 5, 1, brought to the Soul by 
his Spirits by which we are ſealed to the day of Redemption: Chrifts 
peace 15 either Union, or Reconciliation with God, or the copy of it, 
which js quiet of conſcience, and afſurance of hislove : Or an union 
with men by Brotherly love ſo often commended and preſſed by 
Chriſt, 5 Nor doth Chriſt give this peace as the men of the World 
give peace, who often wiſh peace earneſtly, never conſidering what 


S. FOHN 


* p 
Chap. y 
up. x 
that I was going to my Farber, vor, 2. from whom theo 1 Was nu. 
ſeparated, as I am God ovcr all blefled for ever; yet my gs 
rure was yet never glorified with him, ſo that I ſhall be there my 
happier than here ; being highly exalted, and having a name Fine wn 
above every name, Phil, 2. 10, « For my Father i; greater tha, Fo 
not greater in E/?zce, (as the A4rians and Socinian; would have it \ 
had many times before aſſerted the contrary ; but preater, 1, Eith ; 
the order amongſt the Divine perſons, becauſe the Father egat ps 
Son 1s begotten ; the Father is he from whom the Son proceed.q1. | 
Eternal generation : in Which ſenſe divers of the Ancients, amc ; 
whom Athazacrius, Cyril, and Auguſtine, and ſome modern Inter 
ters underſtand ir, Or 2. as a Mediator fent from the Father py 
he is greater than I, Or 3. In reſpe& to my preſent ſtate whit 
[ am here in the form of a Servant, and in my ſtate of humilia wa 
which ſremeth to be the beſt interpretation, if we conſider the —_ 
before ; Nu would rejoyce, becauſe 1 fay tenmo yok, 1 go unto the Fath : 
for the true reaſon of that joy muſt have been, becauſe Chriſt ke 
glorious ftate of Exaltation would be much more happy than hehig 
been in his ſtate of Humiliation, while he was expoſed to the ſeo 
reproaches, and injuries of men, the temptations of Satan, ©, * 

29 And * now I have told you before it come to pabs ig, 

that when it is come to paſs, ye might believe y, © * $ 

y Evilsthar ſurprize us are always the moſt heavy, and load 
rits ;'(ſaith our Saviour) before theſe things come to paſs, 
you notice of them, that when you ſee them come to PaG, you 
might not be overwhelmed with forrow, and trouble, to the hin- 
derance of your faith in.me ; but underſtanding that I haye told you 
the truth, before the thing come to paſs, you may be aſſured that] 
am not meer man, bur truly God, and receive and imbrace me, and 
reſt upon me as = Saviour. 

30 Hereatter I will not talk much with yay ,. 
for the prince of this world cometh «, and hath nothing 
in me b. « 

z I ſhaallnot have much time hereafter to reveal my mind» you 
my ſuffering is very near, the Devil whois the Prince of this World, 
Chap. 12. 31. ( ſee the notes there) Chap. 16. rr, Eph, 6. 1, 


Our ip, 
{ have given 


It 1s they ſay ; often, falſly, formally wiſhing peace, when.they are a- 
boutto ſtrike thoſe to whom they wiſh it,under the fifch rib,and when 


they are moſt ſerious, wiſh ir, but cannot give it : Chriſt leaves it to | q 


his Diſciples for a legacy, giveth it to them as a gift; if they want it, 
Tt 15theetr own fault ; therefore * as in the firſt verſe, ſo here again, 
he faith, Les ner Jour heart be troubted ; and adds, neither let it be a- 
Fraid. Fear is one of thoſe paſſions which moſt uſually and porently 
doth diſturb the hearts and minds of men ; bur there was no reaſon 
1 ſhould have this ill influence on Chriſts Diſciples, becauſe he had 
let them Peace for his legacy, and the gifts of God are withour re- 
pentance ; and if God be for us, faith the Apoſtle, who, or whas can 
be againſt us ? 

28 Ye have heard how * I faid unto you, I go away, 
and come again unto you v. If ye loved me, ye would 


rejoyce, beeauſe I ſaid, I go unto the Father w : for 
my Father 1s greater than Ix 

# They had heard our Saviour ſaying fo, ver.3. w It 15 of the naure 
of true love, to rejoice in the good of the obje&t beloved, as much as 
n its own, nay before its own; (faith our Saviour) if you loved me, 
that 15, as ye ought to love me, for our Lord had before owned, that 
they did love him, giving it as a reaſon why he rather revealed him- 
lelf, and manifeſted himlelf to them, than ro the World, (wer. 23.) 
vou would (faith our Saviour) not have been ſo unreaſonably di- 
flurbed ©t my telling you, thar I ſhall Teave you; becauſe I not only 


tid yors that 3 would come again to you, but becauſe I told you, 


- : 378. 
cerning the bread of life, upon the Loaves that were — 


He cometh by the evil Angels, or rather by vile and wicked n - 
as his inſtruments, 7udzs and the Soldiers. He doth not ay where, | 
fore he came, burit is eaſily underſtood: 6 and he hath nothing in : 
me that he can juſtly fault, and rake advantage againſt me for, he , 
findeth no guilt in me, to give him any advantage againſt me; If - 
die as an innocent perſon, and be cut off, but riot for my ſelf, (xi; , | 
was Prophecied of the Meſiah, Dan. g. 26.) but (asit is there vy., f. 
ro finiſh tranſgreſſion, and to make reconciliationfor FNIqQuit),and tt bring + 
in everlaſting Righteouſneſs. _ 
31 But that the world may know that I love thet:. Ch 
ther: and * as the Father gave me commandment, even' br 
ſo [ doc; Ariſe let us go hence 4. | in. 
c Idie notfor my own-ſin; but being found is faſhion «1 mam, 6, 
I humbled my ſelf, and became obedient unto death, even thi duth of 59 
the Croſs, (as Phil. 2.8.) to let the World know, that I love the $0 
Father, and am obedient to him, doing even ſo as he hath cams rol 
manded me. 4d Ariſe from Supper, (after which they were wont ug 
ſometimes to lengthen our diſcourſe) the Supper in Bethany as ſome --- 
think, but ro me it ſeems more probable (as I ſaid before) tobe apa 
the Paſſover Supper, and the Lord's Supper which immediately he 
followed that. And let #s go hence out of the gueſt chamber (where w_—_ 
the Paſſover was to be adminiſtred ) So as it is moſt probable, thi yu 
the diſcourſes in the two next Chapters were as they went alongin of 
the way to Mount Oliver. In this diſcourſe our Saviour hath mof aps _ 
plied himſelf to relieve his Diſciples upon their diſturbance, for thei vas 
want of our Saviour's*bodily preſence. Wo: 
CHAP. XV. o 
The #nien betwixt Chriſt and his Members aeſcribed under theparablesf 2 
a Fine, 1—8. Exhorteth"em to keep his Commandment, 9—12. have 
Sheweth bis love to 'em by laying down his Life, 13. Tilith'em k 
they are his Priends and choſen, 14—17. Comforteth em again : 1 
the hatred of the World, 18-—120. and leateth the Jews with er ou 
cuſt, 2125. andthat the Holy Ghoſt beareth witneſs of him, 26,2), 5.4 
As onr Saviour in the former Chapter had chiefly ſpent his dil _ 
courſe for the relief of his Diſciples under their trouble for the want "5. 
of his bodily preſence ; ſo he ſeemeth in this chiefly to bend his Di: Chrin 
courſe for the comfort of them under their diſturbance, for feartley hs 
ſhould, rogether with the want of the comfort they had in his bot. fo may 
ly preſence, want alſo his ſpiritual influences; to prevent which, bt Codes 
compareth himſelf ro a Vine,' them to the Branches; and ſhewe Tn 
by that ſimilicnde, the near Union they had with him, and the in- | 
uence he would, and muſt have upon them, ſo long as they $7 
did abide with him. From the Eighteenth Verſe to the end, he com- not t/ 
forts them by a variety of Arguments againſt chat black ſtorm of more 
perſecution which he had ſo often told them would ariſe after his de fTi 
parture from them, from the hatred of the World, of wicked men, Ka 
both Jews and Gentiles, that were enemies to the Croſs of Chil; cab 
and continueth his Diſcourſe of that nature alfo in the following 4s: 
Chapter. doube p 
|| Am the true vine a, and my Father is the husband- nd Coy 
mans. ; oe. 
a Chriſt had but newly come from his laſt Supper, where 4 OY 
had ſanQified the fruit of the Vine, by ſetting ir apart, as one of ” wi ( 
Elements in that holy Sacramenr, and told them wer. 18. of th rn 
224 Chap, of Luke, That he would no more drink of the fruit of cy \ & I 
Vine, until the Kingdom of God ſhould come. This (as ſome _ 6 wy : ns 
gave occafion' to this Parable, or Diſcourſe about the Yin: * - a | vc ” 
chiak that in his paſſage from the Gueſt-chamber to the Mount © _ | W. \ p 
he ſaw a Yixe, which gave occaſion to this diſcourſe, it _ hen 
him very ordinary to graft ſpiritual Diſcourſes upon ſenſibic 0 ME i "vey 
occaſionally occuring, as Chap. 4. he raiſed a Diſcourſe wht. n Ks 
ter upon the ſight of the water at Faceb's We#, and the m_ po ond Pg 
courſe about it: and Chap. 8, he founded another diſcouric by = 


E will cor 


» 
oP. 
Y0\'ss 


| Y 
e Na 


Noh 
en mg 
mn I, 
It) he 
ler as 
' the 
Cog 
Tpre- 
Tn, fo 
While 
ation, 
Yords 
hep : 
In his 
t had 
(coffs 
c 


pals, "ys 


UE ii 
given 
You 
© hin- 
dyoy 
that] 
ey and 


L 2; 


hin 


) you, 
Vorld, 
6. 12, 


| men, 
kriſt ; 
wing 


and- 


in he 
of the 
of the 
l f tht 
poſe) 
Nthers 


ive, * 


5 with 
bje&s 
17 WA 
nsdil- 
e con” 
lying- 


aterel 


XV. 


Whatever the occaſion was (of which we can affirm nothing certain- 
Iy) certain It 15, that the Notion of a Vine, with reſpe&@ to the Roo? 
" Bugy of it (for he calls his Diſciples rlie Branches) excel- 
Jendly agreeth to Chriſt, whether in reſpett of his preſent low con- 
Jition, and mean appearance ro the World (as a Vine hatch leſs beau- 
ty than moſt Plants; ) or 1n reſpett of its exceeding fruictulneſs; 
+ as it is the Baſs and Foundation of the Branches, in which 
they are, and chrive, and are fruicfal, which ſcemeth hers to be 
chiefly intended, as all the Branches are united to the Vine, in it 
*hey ive, bud, bear fruit. There are Three principal things which 
exxe Saviour teacheth us by this Similirude, 1. 7hat we have no ability 
10 do good but from Chrift, 2. That believers have a true and rea! 
Union with the Lord Feſus , which while they uphold by faith and holi- 
eſe, they ſal not want hls influence upon them, nor his Father's care 
over them, in purging them, that they may bring forth much fruit. 
4 That if any profeſſing him prove unfruitful, God will take them 
þabwgg they ſhall wither, be caſt into the fire and burned. He 
calls himſelf the r7ue Vine, to ſhew them, that rheir fruit was not in 

themſelves but muſt be found in him; or that their f-4ait could not 

-oceed from Moſes, the Obſervance of the Ritual or Moral Law given 
them by him 3 but it muſt flow from their ſpiritual Union with 
kim, and that influence of Grace which ſhonld flow from that U- 
nion, Ot elfe erue (as ſometimes 1c doth in Scripture) may fignifie 
excelent, As he compareth himſelf ro the rrue Vine, by which he 
ignifierh to us, that he 15 the true root and ſupport of our ſpiritnal 
tfe and. fruit ; ſo he compareth his Father to the Hu;bandman, to let 
us know, that his people are not only under his, but under his Fa- 
ther's care, which he afterwards more particularly openeth. He alſo, 
ver. 2, compareth Believers, or Members ofthe Church, to Branches 
in a Vine. : : 

2 * Every branch in me, that beareth not fruit, he 
5 tzketh awayc: and every branch that beareth fruit, he 
 purgeth it, that it may bring forth more fruit 4. 

And concerning his Father's care, he tells us, That as the good 
Pine-aveſſer cutteth off thoſe branches in the Vine which bring forth 
nofruit ; ſo his Father will-take away ſuch branches in him as bring 
forth no fruit. But here ariſeth a Queſtion, viz. Whether, or how any 
can be branches in Chriſt, and yet bring forth no fruit * Anſ, Some 
ay, there is no need of tranſlating the words fo, which may as well 
be tranſlated, Every branch not bringing forth fruit in ms. Indeed 
no true fruit can be brought forch but in Chriſt ; bur yet much that 
Jookes like froir, much that men may call fruir, may be brought 
forth without any true ſpiritual Union with Chrift. All a&s 
of moral D:ſcipline, or any aGts of formal Profcjien in Religion 
my be broughe forth wirhout any true Root and Foundation in 
Chriſt ; and God will in the end diſcover, and cut off thoſe who 
bring forth no other fruic. But 24/y. Men may be ſaid ro be branches 
in 1, by a Sacramenzal implantation, being baptized into him, Rom, 
6.3. and are hereby Members of the Viſible Church, and making 
2 viſible profeſſion of adhering to him and with refpe& to their own 
good opinion and perſwaſton of themſelves, tho they be not ſo in 
reſped of any true, ſpiritual, and real implantation. But thoſe who 
in the Jaſt ſenſe, are not in him, who bring no fruit unto perfeQion, 
God will cur them off, either by withdrawing his reſtraining 
Grace, and giving them up to ſtrong deluſions to believe lies, or to a 
reprobate mind, and vile luſts and affe&ions; or by taking away 
their gifts; or ſome way or other, fo as they ſhall never have any 
eternal Communion with God in Glory. @ Bur if any Man bringeth 
forth true ſpiritual fruit in Chriſt, him God the Father will purge by 
the prinkling of Chriſt's Blood yer further upon bis Conſcience, Hes. 
10.22. and by his holy Spir;e working on him like fire to purge 
away his droſs, and like warer ro purge away his filth ; and by bis 
Word, 1 Per, I. 22. by Faith, A&s 15. g. by Croſſes, and Tryals, 
Jaiah x, 25. and 27. 9. that he may be more fruictul in works of 
Hilineſs and Rig hteonjneſs. 

3 3 * Now ye are clean through the word which I 
have ſpoken unto you e. 

e Now that the Traitor is gone out from you, ye are all Clean, 
not by any works which you do, much leſs upon the account of any 
gal and cerimonial rites and purifyings, but through my word, 
you believing and obeying, Eph. 5. 25. 1 Per. 1 22. Ourclean- 
ſing is in Holy Writ attributed ſometimes to the Blood of Chritt, 
lometimes to the Spirit, ſornetimes to the Word. By the Blood of 
C:riſt we are made clean as to Juſtification; waſhed; but yet we 
had need wajh ous feet, contraQing ſoil every day in a ſinful World, 
'rom which we are Cleanſed by the purifying Virtue of the Holy 
>PIrit, working by, and together with the Word, which purgeth us 
9: our drofs, and maketh us obedient to the-Will of God. 


4 Abidein me f, and Lin you g : As the branch can- 
not bear fruit of it ſelf, except it abide in the vine: no 
more can ye, except ye abide in me /. 

; f This our abiding in Chriſt is expounded wer, 7. by an- abiding in 
"yu Words, v. 10. by abiding rn his love, an abiding in his Spirit, 1 Joh. 
* 27, a walking ar Chriſt walked, 1 John 2. 5. ver. 10. an abiaimg 
ny !n2 light, not inning, 1 John 3. 6, The Exhortation 15 without 
cubt ro an holineſs of Life and Converſation, by which our Union 
nd Communion with Chriſt is upheld and maintained, and which is 
wh &f n abiding in the love of Chriſt : Nor is-there a want of 
mnient Reaſon for this Exhortation, tho our Union with Chriſt 
wg be difolved, NOr our Communion with him wholly intet- 
upt ) It muſt be apheld and maintained on our part 


ap 


pted, becan(” ſr 
* the exerciſes of Faith and Holineſs. (2.) The ſenſe of it in our 
bouls may be eclipſed, and wholly fail, Pſal. 22.1. (3.) We may 
- away toully, rho neither totally [as Lutherans ſay ) becauſe the 
"<cd of God abideth in the Believer ; nor yet finally (as Papiſt: ſay) 
wg need therefore of all-Exkortations and Arguments imag- 
NR +, to perfwade us to do what in us lieth, that we may abide 
tad ac pes, have a great encouragement to the uſe of all poſſible 
MR er ro ablde in rhe love of 'God, from the promiſe annexed, 
wha ou that is, T will abide in you; do you ftrive, and I will 
P you to perfe&t; do you fight, and I will help you to overcome ; 


SFO HAN 


| es. ” 
fufhcient for you ; Grace wherein, 2nd whereby you ſhuill ſtand, 
Rom 5. 2. You ſhall be kepe by rhe power of Got through {3:1 
to Salvation. h Bur look, as 115 With the Branch it cannot bor 
frais of it ſelf ; bur if it be once ſip2r2:ed from the influences of che 
Srock, itdies and withereth ; fo ic will be with vou : | 
forth no fruic unleſs ve abide in me ; 

5 I am the vine, ye are the branches i: he that 
abideth in me, and [ in him, the fame brinveth forth 
much fruit &, 4 * tor without me ye can do nothing /. 


* e439y ba vey 
y ON C2471 7! 
- 


ww» 


forth no fruit ; but that Influence continoing no Plant + 
ful than a Vine is ; So wickout the continual influence of my Spirit 
of Grace upon you, you will be altogether barren and unfiuitful : 
but if you have thar influence, you will not be fruitful only, but 
very fruitful: / For without my ſuch continuing influence, you 
will not only be able co do little, but you will be able tc do nothing 
that isrruly and ſpiritually good and acceptable in the fight of God. * 


and ca!t them into the fire, and they are burned -. 

Mm Our Lord yet purtueth the Metaphor of the Vine, the Branches, 
and the Husbandman : Look (ſaith he) as it is wich a Y7ze, when 
che. time of pruning the Vine commeth, the Vine-dreifer cutterh off 
the ſruicleſs luxuriant branches, and chrowerh them by, which be- 
{ 1ng done, their greennefs preſently abateth, and they wither, -. and 
| after a time, ſome come and gather them uo, and caft chem into 
 fome fire where they are burned: fo ie wilt be with you : 1f vou do 
not briog forth fruir, God will rake from you his common influences y 
which have for a while made you to look (pecioutl-, and your Pro- 
f:{ſton, or your Parts and Gifts will wither and decay, and in the 
day of Judgment the Angels, Mar. 13. 40, 41. ſhall gather you vp, 
and God ſhall caſt you into Hell, where you thall perith as mil-rabiy 
nay, infinitely more miſerably than if you were burned with tire, 

7 It ye abide in me, and my words abide in you » *, 


ye ſhall ask what you will, and it ſhall be done unto 
you p. 

o Here our Lord expounds what he meaneth by that alizinz in 
him which he before mentioned by another phraſe {and my words 
abide in you, | my precepts and promiſes, io as you by tuith embrace 
the promiſes, and by obc#zence live up to the precepts which I have 
given you: for withour theſe, tho the words of Chriſt inay come 
unto men 1n the preaching of the Goſpel, their ears may receive the 
{ound of them, yer the Word doth not dwell and abide in the Soul : 
but it the Word abides in the fouls of men and women, p then they 
may in prayer ask of God what they will, keeping ro the condirtons 
and limicarions elſewhere required in holy Writ, accordirg 'o God's 
Will, 1 John 5. 14. believing, Marth. 21. 22, in the Naine of 
Chriſt, Chap. 14. 13, 14. for the honour and glory of God { to 
which end all our aCtions muſt be direttcd ) and they ſhall be grant- 
od A En 

8 Herein 1s my Father glorthed, that ye bear much 
fruit 4, ſo ſhall ye be my Diſciples 7. 

g. Here are Two Arguments to preis his Diſciples ab/arng ir: im, 
thac fo they might bring forth much fruir. 1. Herein ( ſaith cur 
Saviour } 15 my Father gloriffed, The plorif\ ing of God is the great 
end of our lives, 1 Cor. 10. 31. God ts glocificd by men and womens 
bringing forth much fruit, 4727:h. 5. 16. che fruit iro holineſs, Rom. 
6. 22. fruit 15 the produ@ of the Plant, from the natural morfince 
char is 1n it, nouriſhed and augmenred by the fitneſs of the Lirth in 
which it ſtands, and by the warmth of the Sun drawn out co the 
producing of ſuch efteQs, according ro the nature of the Planr, Ac- 
cording to the different narure of Plants they bring forth various 
fruits, March. 7. 15, 17, 18. Hence we read of che fruir of jin ne 
t0 death, and the fruit of righteouſneſ; unto life. The firlt 15 every 
man's natural fruit, until he be ingrafced into Chriſt : being 1n- 


[ 
' 
' 


— 


grafted into him) the foul having a new Nature given to it, being 


regenerated and renewed by the Holy Ghoſt, it no longer bringeth 
forth fruit from 1cs old Principle, and according to its old nature 
bur from its new Principle, and according to 1s new nature : as the 
cultivated Earth that 15 plowed and harrowed, doth not bring 
forth Weeds and ordinary Graſs, according to its nature, but bring- 
eth forth fruit according to the Seed thar is caſt into if, yet not with- 
out the influence of Heaven, both with reſpe&t to the dew of it, and 
the warmth which it hath from the Sun; ſothe toul b=ing regence 
rated, the fallow ground of it being plowed up, and the feed of 
righteouſneſs being ſown in it, irno more brings forth the weeds of 
lufts and corruptions, or only ordinary atts of human nature, but it 
brings forth truirs according its new nature, and the new iced vt 
the Word now ſown in it, and dwelling in it, And look as It tendz:l 
co the honour of the Husbandman, when the ground by im plow- 
ed and manured, brings forth much fruit ; fo it tendeth to the ho- 
nour and glory of God, when the fouls ren2wed, maaured, «2d 
influenced by him, bring forth much of rhe !ruit of righteouin<1s, 
and holineſs. r And tho men mult be Chritt's Diſciples before they 
bring forth any fruit, yer their bringing forth much fruit 3s chat 
which alone can evidence and makes them appear ro be the Dilci- 
ples of Chriſt. And often in Scripture bc:ug fignifieth appearing, 25 
John &. 31. Rome 3.4. 

9 As theFather hath loved me, ſo have 1loved you : 
continue ye in my love /. _ 

{ Whatour Saviour before called an abiding in 121m, and his words 
abiding in us, and a bearing and bringing forch much fruit, be here 
calleth a continuing iz his love ; tho indeed this phrate allo may-be 
interpreted by a continuance 1n the favour of God and Chriit, 
in that ſtate of love into which God hath” pur the ſouls of thote 
who are bis true Diſciples : Buc I had rather interpret it of that {ov? 
wherewith they loved Chriſt, than that wherewith Chriſt loved them. 
Go the former words are an Argument to per{ſwade perleverance, 
or a continuance in thoſe atts of holineſs by which men alone 


t, : - 
wen” you ſuch gradual influences of Grace, as ſhall be 
ot, If, 


can ſhew their true love to Jeſus Chrilt, from Ckrilt's love ro chem 
Gzgeg 2 whica 


> © 3% - 


< > 


/ That 15, [ am as the Vine, you are as rh: Branches; WICOCU: - W © 


the continu] influence of the Vine upon the branches, ther bring *119{ 1... 3 
- Y aOhVs. 
more fruit pi,;1 ES 


r 


* Y 
ACT 


«1 ] 


6 If a man abide not in me *, he is caſt forth as a *114e.. 1+, 
branch, and is withered », and men gather them, & >. : 5. 


= 


» 


6s. Ita 


-_ 
+ 
> 
a 
Fs 


_ X 
— 
. l c > —— = - L - _— KT —_— — ' i « — 
« - - Lg : a” w—— —_ * - hs 
: = T ; OE 354 A —_ / -» — m—_ _- 'T: __> m—_—_ - -- P E : 
we toe BEY kb <a pes near og Sv - _ OT J > 
EL POO OR TI 9 [; 98 g++ —c-:. ot RPGs en — Can th... _ « - i 
Y mY =, % 1" I” = + >. F - m P 


| i $6.::4 Ny. i 
Ld (f A: vis A - 
WT Bot Il 
WIN : F. f | j 
ji OK F009: 
Us Ek pb. 
; Ivy bid : 1 k 
1 A; PUN 4 
"ro in 


> ig TE Od wth 
_— ws *., > 3 


4 - —_— 
os fans f ow A hon 
k 6-246 * 4 Le... a” aaa q * 7 6 
ar —_— 2 "FER wh. pak ww. MS 55 | JO ger y 
£2 w__ . . -«k nt : E 
| 5s -— ——- "<7 abs 2 Ea oe 8 —W- x 
2-3: —— = "=: _ "_Damrey q A " oo - 
= - ens Tb. a CL TESTS 
- 2 _ — oeues __— _ CITI _ — ——_ _—_— _ A 


_—. 
cnn —_ 
Dn Wien S- 
. ps = 


* Chap. 14. 


21z 25, 


Chap. XV. 


which he there expreſſ-th ; As the Father hath loved me, ſo I have | 


loved you; where the particle as, 1s only a note of compariſon,but doth 
not denote an equality ; only ſignifieth ryurh and greatneſs ; As truly 
and fincerely as the Father loveth me ; Oc I have loved you with a 
great l:ve, bearing ſome proportion to the love wherewith my Father 
loveth me ; the Father's love to Chriſt is Eternal, Immutable, Conſtant, 
Full, and perfe&, We, and Juſt, Free in all theſe reſpeds ; Chriſt 
loverh his people as the Father loveth him ; this ought to 1ngage 
them again to love him, and fo to walk, as they may continue 1n 
thar Nate of favour into which his goodneſs hath advanced them. 


10 * If ye keep my commandments, ye ſhall abide in 
my love ?, even as I have kept my Father's command- 


ments, and abide in his love . : 

t Abiding in Chrift's love in this verſe, may be interpreted as be- 
fore, either a#ively ; you ſhall continue your love co me, according 
to what we had, Chap. 14. 15. Obedience to the commandments 
of Chriſt, being the only way to ſhew and declare the truth of our 
love to Chriſt, Or elſe paſſively, you ſhall keep your ſelves in my 
favour, I will love you: « Thus I abide in my Father's love ; Ido 
not ſhew love to my Father by my words and expreſſions only, nor 
by performance of ſome ceremonial ritual ſervices, which he hath 
required ; but by fulfilling his whole Will and Counſel, by yielding 
an Obedience to him in all things. I Jove you as my Father loveth 
me : and you muſt abide in my love, by the ſame ways and means 
that I abide in my Father's love. The Diſciple is not above his Ma- 
ſter, nor the Servant above his Lord. 

11 Theſe things have I ſpoken unto you, that my 


*Ch.16.2 4.109. might remain in you w, and * zhat your joy might 


e full x. 
w The end of my preſſing ſo much the duty of holineſs upon 
you, under the notions of abiding in me, abiding in my love, in 
my words, bringing forth much fruit, &c. 15, that I might have a 
continual cauſe to rejoice in you. Joy is nothing elſe but the ſarisfa- 
Aion of the reaſonable Soul in its union with an obje&t which it lo- 
ved and deſired. Chrift willing and defiring the perfeCtion of his 
Diſciples, according to the rational workings of humane nature, 1s pro- 
perly (aid to rejoice inthe ſatisfaRtion of his will, in which ſenſe joy 
and rejoicing, are often in Scirpture attributed ro God. x Nor doth 
Chrift preſs them to this, that he might rejoice in chem, bur alſo 
that their joy might be full: That Joy and Peace which attends and 
follows believing, Row. 15. 13. Called the peace of God, Coloſ-3e1 5+ 


A 
o | char they might brng forth the fruit of holineſs, in obed; | 
kich th al und ding, Philip. 4. 7. No man maketh| that they might brng torth the fruit of holineſs, in obedience to the 
| rd 6 qurl qu rai OY het 16 cazeth unſpeakable joy Goſpel of Chriſt. g ea, not only to bring forth fruit, but that they 
and peace to himſelf. As no man grieveth his Spirit, but alſo purcha- might perſevere in bringing forth fruit ; þ and that thus doing, they 


ſerb grief and ſadneſs to himſelf in the latter end. 


*; Thee 12 * This is my commandment, That ye love one 
4+ 9. another, as I have loved you y. 
1 Per. 4.8. , This isthat which our Lord calſed the New Commanament, Chap. 


1 John 3. x3. 34. (ſee the notes there) He had before preſſed the keeping of his 
23. 


words, continuing, and abiding in his words, keeping his commanaments, 


& 4. 21» &c, Here he tells them what was his commandment : not his only 


*Rom. 5. 


7, 8 


*Ch 14415. 
See Marth. 
I2, $50. 


commandment, but that which he laid a very great ſtreſs upon; a 
commandment moſt neceſſary to be preſſed, becauſe ſo neceſſary to 
keep up and uphold his Church in the. World ; (love being the ve- 
ry ligament of that Society) and becauſe there was a greater failure 
in obedience to this, than in ſome others, as may be learned from 
our Saviour's correQtion of the Phariſees interpretation of that Law, 
Matth. s. This he preſleth to an higher degree; as he had loved 
them; not that it is, poſſible that our love to our Brethren can 
riſe up in any proportion to that Jove wherewith Chriſt hath loved 
us : but to mind us to eye him, to preſs forward toward this mark. 
As here again doth not ſignifie equality, but a compariſon ; as truly 
and ſincerely as I have loved you, and preſſing after the higheſt de. 
gree of love. | 

13 * Greater love hath no man than this, that a 


man lay down his life for his friends z. 

z The reaſon of this 15, becauſe Life is the greateſt Earthly good 
to men under ordinary circumſtances; Skin for skin, and all a 
man hath, for his life. Now it is impoſſible that a man ſhould ſhew 
a greater love to another, than by parting with the greateſt good he 
is in poſſeſſion of for his ſake. Hence our Saviour proves, that he 
loved them with the greateſt love, becauſe he for their ſake was 
abour to part with, what in the common judgment of men is the 
greateſt good. The greatneſs of the love of Chriſt to us, is from 
hence ofren commended to us in Scripture; and our mutual love to 
our Brerhren is preſſed upon this argument, Eph 5. 2. 1 John 3. 16. 
But how did Chriſt lay down his life for his friends ? when the Scrip. 


ture tells us, That the juſt died for the unjuſ?, 1 Pet. 3 18. and thar|his own: but * becauſe you are not of the world n,*( 


white we were enemies, we were reconciled unto God by the Death of his 
Son. Rom. 5. Io, Anl. Friends muſt not kere be taken as a name 
of Relation, but only as it ſfignifteth the 6bjetts of love ; perſons we 


have ſer our love upon, whether they mutually Jove us or no ; as the | 


World was the obje& of that Jove in God, which moved him to ſend 
his only begotten Son, Fehr 3.16. Tho they for whom Chriſt died, 
were enemies by their wicked works, yet by his death they were 
reconciled ; but poſſbly the firſt anſwer is beſt, for by Chriſt's Death 
they were only meritoriouſly reconciled, and after this enemies to 
God, till they received the word of reconciliation, and believed in 
Chriſt. 

14 * Yeare my friends, if ye do whatſoever I com- 


mand you 4. 

a Our Lord preſſcth obedience to his commandments as a means, 
and inJeed che only means by which we can declare our loveto Chriſt ; 
2nd allo ufeth a new argument to preſs their obedience, from his aſ- 
fuming them jnto the #ate and dignity of his friends. 

15 Henceforth I call you not ſervants, for the ſer- 
vant knoweth not what his lord doth b: but I have cal- 


led you friends; for all things that I have heard of my their faults or fins, but becauſe they were the objeds of 


S. FOUN 


Chap, Y1 
6 By his ſaying, T call you not ſervanes, he dor ' 
them of that duty and ſervice which rhe owed to ho Ot Aiſcharg 
ſing them ro obey his commandments, he declareth chat dy af, 
owed fo him ; he only ſheweth that they were no ordinary ſer, y 
but taken into a ſtate of dignity, favour, and familiarity beyo ns 
of ſervants, and that he had not treated them like ſervants bs 
timate familiar friends. c For look as ordinary Maſters in the Won 
communicate their counſels, and whole heart to their friends _ 
ally in things which are of any concern, or may be of any advan 
for them ro know and underſtand : whereas they keep themſely >» 
diſtance from ſervants, and they only know ſo much of their mind « 
is by them to be done in their Maſters ſervice; ſo he had not 6 lv 
revealed to them their duty, what was to be by them done in his l 4 
vice, but had been more free, giving to them to know the m: Few 
of the Kingdom of Heaven ; as he told them, Mas. I3. IT, as well « 
ling them his Farher's Counſels on the behalf of them, and whatſo . 
ver he might communicate tothem ; as his Father's Will what þ 
would have them do in obedience ro his commandmens. , 
16 * Ye have not choſen me 4, but I have choſen s 
you, and * ordained you, that you ſhould go and bring k , 
forth fruit f, and that your fruit ſhould remain : that "Ms 
* whatſoever ye ſhall ask of the Father in my Name he 1% 
may yu it you h. " Mag 
d You have not choſen me to be your Lord, Maſter, Saviour Gl, 
e but I have choſen and ordained you: fo we have it in our franſl2ti- ' 
on ; but the Greek is, WYyxa, I have ſer you, or placed you'ina Nation, 
What c buſing Chriſt here ſpeaks of, is doubted amongft varion; Di- 
vines, Some think that our Saviour here ſpeaks of his choice of them 
to the Apoftleſhip, as Luke 6. 13, Chap. 6. ver. 70. thoſe who thus 
underſtand it, underſtand by going, and bringing forth fruit, the A- 
poſtles going out Preaching, and Baprizing all Nations, bringing forth 
fruir amongſt the Gentiles. But others underſtand it, of «/:8;;y 74, 
ternal Life, and the means neceſſary to it ; for our Saviour brings 
this as an argument of his greateſt love ; Zudas was in the firf ſenſe 
choſen, yet not beloved with any ſuch love ; and this ſeemeth to be 
favoured by Chap. 13. 18. 7 ſpeak nor of you all, I know who, 1 hany 
choſen : and certain it is, Auguſtine and others, of the Ancients from 
hence proved the freedom of Ele#7on, and ſpecial Grace. Both ſenſes 
may be united, for the Elever,, (ro whom Chrift was now ſpeaking 
were choſen in both ſenſes, they were choſen f for this end, to bring 
forth fruit amongſt the Gentiles, turning many to Righteouſneſs, 2nd 


eſpeci- 


14! 


might have a freedom of acceſs to the Throne of Grace, and obrain 
whatſoever they ſhould ask of the Father, in the Name, for the Me- 
rits, and through the Mediation of the Lord Jeſus Chriſt. See the 
notes on Chap. Ig. 33 14- 

17 Theſe things I command you, that ye lore one 
another z. | 

# This is but the repetition of the ſame precept we beforehad, un- 

leſs we will underſtand it as a more ſpecial charge upon them, con- er 
ſidered as Miniſters of the Goſpel; the mutual love of Miniſters 
being highly neceſſary for the good and peace of the Churchof God, 
over which God hath ſetthem. : 

18 * If the world hate you &, ye know that it hated «| one 
me before zt hated you l. bo 


& In this latter part of rhis Chapter, our Lord cometh to comfort * 
thoſe who were his true Diſciples, againſt that third crouble, from the Chr 
profpeCt they had of that hatred which the World would pour out, wa 
and execute upon them, as ſoon as he ſhould be withdrawn from 2 
them. Hatred is rooted, and originated in the heart, and is properly non 
a diſpleaſure that the mind raketh ar a perſon, which: fermenting, and hay 
boiling in the mind, breeds an abhorrence of that perſon, anger, and x 
malice, and a deſire to do him miſchief, and root him out, andrhen "Th 
breaks out at the lips, by lying, ſlanders, calumnies, curſings, wiſhing recei 
of evil, &c. and is executed by the hands, doing to ſuch perſons all Gan 
the harm and miſchief, within the power of him that hateth : All | 1nd! 
chis is to be underſtood under the general term Hate. By the World Fra 
here, muſt be meant wicked men, in oppoſition to good men ; who Joave 
are often in Scripture called the World, becauſe they are of the earth, "Iſh 
earthly ; they reliſh and favour nothing bur worldly things, and pur: # ap 
ſue nothing but worldly deſigns. Againſt this our Saviour comforts from 

chem, firſt by telling them, That this part of the World hatedhin child 
before it hated them ; which muſt needs be ſo, becauſe they hated 4.6. 
them as his Diſciples, and for that very reaſon. indee 

19 * If ye were of the world, the world would love +, _ 

way t 
but I have choſen you out of the world », therefore tic on 
world hateth you 0, that t] 

» Men and women may be in the World, yet not of the #1, than 
Of the World, here-ſignifies carnal men, ſuch as are like to the men ſufficic 
of the World in their ſtudies, deſigns, counſels, affeQtions ; 45 of the Powe, 
Devil, and of God ſignifies, Chap. 8. 44, 47. If you had affedions, What | 
luſts, and diſpoſitions like them, and drave no other deſigns than they faces, 
drive, you might expe {that as it is the nature of all men 7 oo God, : 
ſuch as arelike to them in manners and ſtuddies : ſo they would = had be 
you, cake a delight in-you, be kind to you, and do you all offices if that]; 
love : » But becauſe you are not of ſuch tempers, oy ry their n 
inclinations, but that T having choſen you out of the World, = and m; 
given you new: hearts, new frames and diſpoſirions, quite Concrary him, 
theirs ; 0 therefore theWorld diſlikng you,and ſeeing that your ce 25 
ciples are quite oppoſite to theirs, abhor and hate you, and Wh of 5. fulki] 
rcady to do you all that evil and miſchef, which is the produ wy with 
rooted hatred and malice inthe heart : This is a ſecond __— - 0 
which our Lord comforts them. It is drawn from the ca m_ _—_ 
root of that hatred, which they would meet-with : An Jove, f io; 
which being alſo ſhed abroad in their hearts. by the holy Ghoſt, pry. BY daga 
duced again in them holy affe&ions and diſpoſitions, Making than i 


Father, I have made known unto you c. 


wholly unlike to.men in the World. 


20 Remen- 


N 


hap. XV. 


S. FOHAN 


Chap. XVI. 


ef 20 Remember the wo | 
rd that I ſa) 
e a 
| __— is _- greater then the lord : =—_ you p, The | which alſo hat | 
hat cu e, tney will alſo perſc : 1t they have pe] ſe. | rage hi - ath the for 
. k (: periecute X* perſe-| -=* his Diſc ce of anoth 
ns ept mY aying, they will k you 5 if they h fill ciples under their { er Argument to 
1d, The word that I ſaid oo KEEP Yours alſo - pak: rag un = wo ſufferings ; thar = uphold, and incou- 
My humility, and a mutual ſervi o you, Chap. 13.16 q 7 But when ore than was foret as were but the ful- 
| ſake to you, M. ving of one-another j . to preſs you ſend u the comfo foretold in holy Wri 
age ſp you, atth. ro. 24, when Lfi other in love, and whi a nto you from rter 1s come * 
ot : then to you upon the very ſame a ny ſent you a on wo truth, which proc the Father a. ey , Whom I will *Luk. 24 
, , 6 _ o_ Jool to fare NY ſpeak it bo EG of me c eedeth from the Fathe _ Spirit of 49. ; 
after ; you k ter with th a Concerni r he 
EEE - Sik the Worry ee. 19.16 wa arr 
ries $ WO ſhall Incline to ke : if there be an , you| Son, and 1 4+ 16,26. as alſo hi oh Comforter, we h 
tel- our words, which are but eep my ſayings, th y of them| on :h n what ſenſe he j beadn from ave ſpoken 
ſoe- preſſed upon them. my ſayings explaine Oo =4 will alſo keep] is 6.4 6 Whar ws called the Spirit _ the Father andthe 
he =O * all th X them,and further queſtioned amongſt x POE from the F cruth : ſee the not 
for N theſe things will th the out from the Fathe ines : ſome underſta ather is here S——_ 
ſen] 's Bo on ames ſake r, becauſe they a. do unto you” wr = Pentecoſt : Grd poured ——_— ny of his nom 
en *: fy . | ow not hi ecreing, Thule char ine erſtand i n the Diſciples i 
l m that | *h< 6 ole that and it of th iciples in 
3: ol - " —_ ſake, here ſignifies n j Yo beck work, heave ned —_— it of the ra Spirits Erer- 
= Ek no moet ray oo me hg Gags mn on 
ew ; 5 and this they W , and profeſſi T1 16. e ſame uſc eptuagint uſeth imſelf, 
Mas rnowledge of Faith 1n, © y would not do ing me and 28, Burch uſe of a eth the ſam , 
, Or love for hi , If they had und the generalic parallel word, C e word, 
a T (a Senn ro in holy We and _ OE : fe we —_ wang =o rd ern = —_ Trcerpreers think b = ind 
lth fanding, but ſuch ants comprehenſion of Hs Fr arly in this Gof- bs ſending. 2 H the Spirits — oly Spirir. 1.Becauſe Chr; 
ton, ous, to the bringin ym rehenſion of it. as i pes: et by our under- ſcemeth farthe aving himſelf pro 5 from the Fathe rill 
5 Di- tnowledge an ry- g forth of all ſuch eff.4 s operative and efficaci 3- The word h r to deſcribe him miſed to ſend the $ r, from 
hem _ ES onteition. "Soo: rhis Feciranin acaer peo fignif lara rr Th Jp ny 
; " arm th _ Soas this Text per to ſuch a gnifie a temporal mi t any where uſed j rom the Fath 
thus firſt, from the ho em againſt the hat containeth t proceed fi poral miſſion. S re uſed in the N EN 
) d of th wif rea from the Son? . Some will ſa ew Teſtame 
eb The ſecond choca rpg of the —__ & the World : Th denied this, and on? Anſ. The G y, but doth not the Spi - 
orth x : e ignoranceand blj , for Chriſt's Na : | Church , and this is the princi reek Charch in | e Spirit 
32 *If I had indneſs of mes ſake ches that principal T atter ages h 
te Jl not come an of the perſons. | ©. Brannfi hacked Orchadit have they reſt on 3 9 
ings x, had not had ſint: * but ROW ſpoken unto them. the called rhe Cote of faith he wins +7 re entity TOM _ 
enſe +. their fin #. they have no * cl ? Y | there were of Chriſt, Ram 8 Im. 2. Becauſe he 1 ed if, 
0 be ; They had not had thi . cloke for | viour her 4 perſonal relation ber 4, 9+ Gal. 6.3. Becauſ ohm 
wo = me : Or they had _ yo fr ni ſin, of not knowing h proceeding ns _ er > a7? 4 ax wins — — 
rom we; or they had had ad ſuch degrees of fi ing him that | think th eFather ; that they mi Im, here only n a. 
ds heir in. Ignovance _ to ſay 1n excuſe in, as they now of him b at he ſpake arrogantly y might not ſuſpe&R hi ameth his 
. ons” fo ,both by thoſe g1 Mtlye £ The Spiri ogy Teſtimo 
ing) wholly, but 1t will ex bs c the Will of God air; Figs r a cover for j©0 the hea y thoſe gifts with whi pirit he ith ſhould ny, 
bog 1 forks of the — e them in part ; and ill not excuſe ſinne rts of GolJ's people ich he was to fill th uld reſtifie 
: -ords by the latter part nd this laſt rs| 27 And* the Apoſtles,and 
he — — no cloak mpg. coy - the Verſe, _ to be ſhave been with alſo ſhall bear witneſ. A 
they could not hve: CES in his Pking the _ c If Chriſt had R a = a(lds alſo g——_ the bexkaning 2 becauſe * ye fads 1.8 
bb have had bh "__ _ Was rr geen. erm ws = =_ mo —_ of Colo : EN and their "Luke 1.2 
> Me- 26 44. but now Gi h ! we knew not what 5 an they would nd they were . I. 2, 3. bein be Jareicu arly the A : 
| - Chriſt uld | from th re competent wi . 8 choſen witneſſ: por 
e the no pretence ; I am itn OUr Saviour, they h 1 Was, as Matth , mt e beginnin tneſſe: becauſe th e, ATs 10 
toth . come, I hav ave no cloak, - | ftimon nning of the publick Mini ey had been wi $4 
= ERR have rveld my Ether mindand ll oy of his pies and ofthe Eu Ch both fnd the Ter 
m_ Opn _ 20451-4006 did, on cn _ thoſe C H ] th jorued Sogn; 
4.60 2 oO c . 
d, uns ? ing He that hateth me, h ut by a Chriſt Comforteth his Diſcs AF AVE 
= is agreeth with what he ateth my Fath wiſer of the Spive: Diſciples againſt 
"ern error of the World - fn at he had, Chap. 5.2 cr alſo W. Pages. F e Spirit, and his work perſecution, 1—4. by hi 
God while yet they —_ gi "at many in it would . 3» It is a common row jb rom em, and again ſ, » 58g F« Telleth Js Pr o- 
| qe: CR ws ef CH pretend to love God, | will Mm acl ren by *em, 16— 19, That ther fir 
F Pp $151M ble: 1s Goſpel : ? rom! 2, 22 .y ——»22, Exh oy 817 (or* 
ated *; ms ateth alſo him that ( poſſible; whoſoever h pel: Now and comf, ſe, 23==27. Telleth* orteth em to 
| e, and no man ent him. God th ateth him who i orteth em in their Fai em he ſhould leave th prayer : 
'Ff muſt be an ps can hate Chriſt or b e Father, and Chriſt od Heſe thi aith, 29=—3 3» e Fhe World, 28 
ala} is bi is emy to his Father : and e an enemy to Chriſt, b yr ings have I ſpok : 
= FX tho: who ſhould be th = tho og oggrrain ofthe a ho op meine OT 106 ps 
areality God's enemi e their enemi e Diſciples of |. heavil ou ſee thoſe forms 
from 2 nemies. em1cs, were ſi y upon you th orms of perſecuti . 
4 If I had ach as were | 20Y <mpratio » they may not gi cution ariſe 
perly none not done am aſham d n to you to deſiſt give you an © G , and 
othe : one th ed to ow iſt from ccaſion, 0 
- hens _— _ LY ——— which _ of wn OD and the profeſſion of _ _ be afraid - 
| then x Our Saviour off zAld ated both me ar x : but now | ſigni , 7 the more fi prepared for, ſoa * EX vils un- 
* ; e and m ignifie either 1 e ſink us: Offendi » ſ0as being ſurpri 
iſhing fron from God and n appealerh to his y Father to immoderat ending here prized 
on from God, and alſo to works, both her y.|*9 any Apoſtac te trouble and afflifti therefore 
ns all nniving and iounntiing for the Jews i ro own his Miſ:  Apeliney, "or remillion of afMition, or being tempted 
. Al them h racing him, for whi inexcuſable, in thei 2 * The uty. ing tempted 
Tl EMy=-r- ie which ln purpoſe heme think tha deer 
. who not read that ev rand Yirtue. Chriſt did __ $ as no man did think that he d , at whoſoeve kill 2 YJEA4,*Ch 
- earth, Joaves, the givi er man did; ſuch id ſome works, as 6 Th oth God ſervi illeth you, wi "YI 
id pure fo many rf few. ght to thoſe that abc —_ multiplying of _ thoſe ws Synagogue, 45 it 2 _ 6 : 2 111 T0 7 
mforts aogiven men — = - for ſuch ns bo Jig 0 Fe e healing of and Cities, is A pms — which tas Scripture to ſignifie 22 oy 
ed him rom that in which o do, he did them 1 id, which God had people met t r to the Jews ; b y had in Country T 
hated child tolife, b ich men did them. E! OE different ma as tothem ogether 1n any place SORES ſignifierh an zſT: by of 
3-6. but » but 1t was by Praver : ijba raiſed the Sh nner | þ,ch . Our Lord here, in 4 it as well agreeth to -mbly of 
m ET TE Tong rn nin pur theaquren which he 
nary wa raying at the raj 424reth. We Jews fi es, that wh e former Ch 
Id m,*C OE ay, was by his e raiſing of L e read s firſt ſhould E vhen he ſhould b apter, fore- 
| y than thatuſ is word of command Lazarus ; but his ordi and I k xcommunicate th e taken from th 
e the Beſides, it i tuſed by thoſe men b wi , which was a quite dj ordi- ns nown not why, wh em as Heretick VET, the 
: - nd , What ou : C s, or Schiſmaticks : 
ae Cn rome en fr the general —_— wrong ſing ng 4 > mg mg mg 
Warla, at there had be rom God, tho m e 7-ws did not look tho at firſt i ny of the Pope n done, and 1s yet d 
— Whit than Z1;; zen nothing in the mi any of them did ; ook | þ it was applicabl re, c Asalſo the latter cl IE 
Elijah, or Eli the miracles w id ; and admir| 4:3 &- of blaſph cable to the Few: clauſe, whic" 
of the ſufficient far 8 h iſhay or the Pro rought b Ch . did G P emy, in whi h py; , who ſtoned Steph , 
, phets had d y Chriſt, more |; od good ſervi ich 1t 15 2Ppare p#hen upon a 
&ions, Ower, and bs fy ve convinced them one ; yet it had bee it alſo referred rvice, and doubtleſs As nt, that they thoughr ch 
n they What he did uſt be ſent and Author; that he aGted b en the end rred to others, eve $ ſlew many others, yet _ 
fi . Now faith uthoriz'd by and y a Divine end of the World. | n as many as ſhall , yet certanaly 
to love ces, ſuch work 2ith our Saviour. i y and from God to d And * 7 ; all do the fame thin 
1d ove God, and ns ſu h Man could 7 ie not done before their the h nd * theſe things will th _ 
ces of ad been nothin ch as God never anth oÞ+ Power derived fi Ir y nave not known th ey do unto you be al 
ns and wan ls ing —_ now it is : NOR m- to do. thei _ _- This is but what our as” ra nor me 4 , becauſe * Ch. , ; | 
e ; , A L 
d, have __ _ malicious J-f _—_ z and knowin eg hs ” underſtood all _ ter, (fze the nor: = as to his Father, wer. 21, m_ 
crary £0 1d malice agai 1gns againſt g to15, yet d , | 411 periecurions f 1 thar verſe) of the 1 Cor. 2.9 
k him againft my-F inſt me, rhe , going on in of of good men ſpeak 1 and teacheth u CR 
il b y*Facher, who ſent n - woo declare an hatred tin = - Father, and of Ley 94.04 eomatiafere Tent be 
will be 2 : 1e, and ve in ſach ignor; riſt ; and ce both 
a8 of 6 fulky = this 9" , me as ſent ' by | baptized, an } or wagredeny che light _— = are that con- 
te” 8 het ia writawn in aſs, that the word mi | ugly fant ſo great a profelſio [3-6 Ln 
uſe and | Without a cauſe : 0.10 their law z * Th might be made the cauſe of 41ers curn AG; 5 Religion, yer will 
got for Hm par:icle [th Ry, ey hated me to God's io De ecution. And is ſome "te eR here 
V's love, y the conſeque | at] here apain de cauſe of their Fi: people, to conſider that th eviation of trouble 
ſt, pro” , Meſes, but the wk le + Law here poof - the final cauſe, but goa ; and it is > know God od green wgrdboge + = | 
aol again e whole Scri ; » «th not ftrifily the now, | er if they k k er, or Je | 
. k - g ſe w prove of them '{ at chey will 1! 
tha ” Prophecied rm) ſaith our Savi wo ac have once |,,- 4 But * the j m_ ll 
Lemzm- a was fulftled in rhe being {ry Fophet Dowids pag more —_ _ A— _— I told you, thatwhen th 
a as my T yes nd * theſc . : at I told O f 3 '9- 
ype -beginn e thin $ I faid you © & 14» 29. 
» *DEgLNNINg,; becauſe I was _= YOu not unto you at the * See bh l; 
” }- C Mi 
ES þ 
9 wn 


+ 


_” Y 
ws 1 


> 
ES ate " 
* Valr® 


s L. 050n; ut ts 3 


ESES 1 wo? © LLP Pines; a 
on I IR ne Dt 


ye 2 


hs > 
S 
w———_ & 
” <A 24-4 en i Ree AY 
OT — 


Chap. XV i. 


f Chap.14*fqo 


IG, 26» 


& 25, 26, 


4 Or con- 


VICE 


« Whatſcever I have diſcovered to you fortierly, of my going to 
my Father, the coming of che Holy Ghoſt, your ſufferings from the 
World 1 have told von of before ; you will ſee that they will mot 
certainly come to pals: then you will remember whatlI have ſaid un- 
tn you, and I have roid you them en purpoſe, that you may remem- 
be: them, and thereby know, that alcho I am in the form of a man, 
vet 1 alſo am God bleſſed for ever : and did know things that ſhould 
afterwards come to piis, and could tell you the rruth about them. 
Z And having been with you, I have not fromthe firft of your con- 
verſe with me, rold you theſe things ; that is, thoſe which relate to 
the Warlds dealing with you, (which, he had rold them, 31arth. 10. 
16, &c. bar that wasatrer ſome good whiles convert: with chem ) 
nor yet had he ſpoken to them at firſt abour his Dzath, RefurreCon, 
and Aſcention, becauſe he was w:th them,and ro ſtay with them fome 
time, during which time he bare the brunt of all; the whole hatred 
of the Fw: was poured out upon him, and for thoſz other things 
relating to his Death, and Aſcenſion, and the ſending of the Spirit ; 
he who taught his Diſciples, Mark 4. 33. as they were able to 
bear them, and concealed theſe things, till by his other DoCtrin he 
had prepared them to receive this Revelation ; and their was a ne- 
cefſity of his revealing them againſt his bodily abſence, by the pro- 
miſe of that other Comforter the Holy Goſt. 

5 But now I go my way to him that ſent me g, and 


none of you asketh me, Whither goeſt thou h ? 

g Tho I did not tell you this from the beginning for many wiſe 
reaſons ; yet I now tell you, that T muſt die, but ſhall rife again 
from the Dead, and go to my Father, who ſent me into the 
World to finiſh that work which I now have done, and fo am 1e- 
turning from whence I came. þ And tho indeed ſome of you have 
cnriouſly asked me, whither I go, ( as Peter, Chap. 13. 36.) yet 
none of you ſeem tov underſtand, or fo ſeriouſly as you out to 
enquire, Whither I go, or ſo much to be buſicd in the thoughts of 
that. 

6 But becauſe I have ſaid theſe things unto you, ſor- 


row hath filled your hearts -. 

i But all your thoughts are taken up about your ſelves, what you 
ſhall do for want of my bodily prefence ; and ſorrow for that hath ſo 
overwhelmed your hearts, that you cannor enough deliberate with 
your ſelves, as to conſider either my or your own advantages, from 
my Death, Reſurre&ion, and Aſcenſion. 7 : 

7 Nevertheleſs, I tell you the truth; It is expedient 
r you that I go away k: for it I go not away Þ, the 
Comforter will not come unto you /; but if I depart, 


I will ſend him unto you m7. 

þ He goth nor fay it was expedient for him, tho this was truth- 
for his human Nature was not till his Afcention glorified, as after- 
ward, Chop. 17. $. but he faith it was expedient for zhemm. The Saints 
may defire a diffolution, but it is for their own advantage, P/z1. 
I» 23. Chriſt defires it for their advantage : / becauſe the Holy Spirit 
could not come upon them, ( as in the days of Pentecoſt ) until he 
by his Death had made reconciliation for iniquity ; and God had ſo 
ordered the Counſels of Eternity, that Chriſt ſhould firſt die, riſe 
2gain, and aſcend into Heaven, and then he would pour our his Spz- 
rit uprn all fleſh, as one eminent fruit of Chriſt's meritorious Death 
and Paſſion, 4#s 2. 32, 33. Eph. 4. 11. We are not able to give 
cettain reaſons of the Counſels of God ; but the reaſonableneſs of 
them in this very particular may eaſily be concluded : That the 
ſending of the Spirit might appear to be the fruit of Chriſt's Death : 
T hat the Aeſiah's influence upon the ſending of him jointly with the 
Father, might appear 3 for he was to be ſent from Chriſt glorified, 
Ch 7. 39. That the Spirit might glorifie Chrif?, as we have it, Ver.14. 
for ( ſaith that verſe ) He ſhall rec2ive of mine, and ſhall ſhew it unto 
you; and that the World might better underſtand the Myſtery of 
the Trinity : The Father was by all owned to be in Heaven, The 
Son Aſcended up to Heaven in the preſence of many witneſſes. 
The Spirit deſcended from Heaven with great majeſty and glory, as 
mav be read, At: 2.2, 3. 

8 And whenhe is come, he will | reprove the world 


z of ſin, and of rightcouſneſs, and of judgment o. 

7» When the holy Spirit is come in the day of Pentecoſt, he by his 
inward operation in mens hearts, and by his gifts beſtowed upon you 
that are his Apoſtles, will reprove the World. By the World here, may 
be meant all men and women, as it is uſed in fome Texts; neither is 
the operation ef the Spirit here mentioned, to be raftrained to carnal 
and wicked men. The Word tranſlated Reprove, 1. Lets us know : 
that the holy Ghoſt is here mentioned, not in the notion mentioned, 
Chap. 14, 16. as a Comforter, but in the larger Notion” ( there menti. 
oned ) as an Advocere, {which poſſibly had been a better tranſlation 
of it, ver. 7. than Comforter as We tranſlate it, for it is not the 
proper work of the Spirit conſidered as a Comforter, zo reprove ; but 
it 1s proper enough to the notion of an Advecare to do it) The word 
here tranſlated Reprove, doth often ſo ſignifie, and is ſo tranſlated Luke 
3- 19. Chap. 3. 260, Eph. 5.11,13. It fignifieth real Rebukes , 
Heb. 12. 5. Rewv.3. 19. Bur it alſo fignifieth to Convince, John 8 
9.46. 1 Cor. 144 24. 2 Tir 4. 2. Tits 1, 9. and in ſeveral other 
Texts; yet it isone thing to convince the underftanding, and judg- 
ment - another thing ro prevail upon the will, by reaſon of the 
tora] corruption of cur Souls ; fo that we will not imbrace what we 
confets 15 truth,nor do what we know is beſt, but through the ftub- 
borrinefs of our Will, we refit thelight and convition of our Under- 
ſtandings. The holy Spirit js here promiſed, not only (as before) to 
Je:d men into truth, by a work of i]Jumination, but to bow the hearts 
and wills of ſome in the World, ro the imbracing of it, and living 
tip ro it, whilſt others yet remain without excuſe. o The things of 
which the Spirit is promiſed to convince the World, are Sin, Righte- 
y_ and Judgment, which are further opened in the following 

erſes. 

9 Of lin, becauſe they believe not on me p ; 

? Here moy ariſe ſome doubt, whether theſe words import, that 
the Holy Ghoſt ſhould convince the World in general, or of that par- 
ticuhr fin of not beli:ving on the Lord Jeſus Chriſt ; the firſt ſcem- 


4 


S. FOHN 


ſion, or rather of their more imperfe&t ſtate. 


he will guide you into all truth w : 
ſpeak of himſelf x ; but whatſoever he 1 
thal] he ſpeaky: and he will ſhew you things to come <- 


bowing of the will ro the obedience of ic. Ir 15 1aid, 
ſhould guide the Apoſtles into all truth ; that 15, 2 


<th beſt to agree with the eighth verſe, where convincing of fin is 

tioned, without the addition which we have here ; and ic alſo 1 Men: 
;greeth with the effcQ of the Spirit, for the holy ſpirit doth no: c veſt Q> 
[the World of one fin only. 2. The ſecond ſeemeth to be Brom 
[the addition of thoſe words, becauſe rhey live not in me x whit " by 
'may be underſtood, only as a a particular great inſtance of on ſet 
which the Spirit convinceth the World. Tr was the great fin Pk 
age, that, tho Chriſt wascome into the V/orld, and had IK that 
manifeſt evidence that he was ſenr of his Farker, yer the gener; 
of the men and wom:n in thar part of the World into which he s 
come, would not receive and imbrace him as the true Meſa, : v. 
| faith our Saviour, when T am gone to my Father, ] will "Ip on 
| Spirit, and he by his gifts given to my Apoſtles, ſhall fo nos. 
great part oft he World, that they {h4ll have ncthins to "i ws J 
wholly inexcuſuble in their not receiving me at the rrye he. b 
Saviour of the Wor id, Others, he ſhall by his inward os 
their hearts, ſo convince of lin in not &e{icvinge in me chat ther þ., 
believe in me, and be ſaved. T "es all 


10 Of righteouſneſs 4, becauſe I go to my F; 


. 
y 
A 


liter, 

and ye ſee me no more r ; 
7 A ſecond thing of which theSpirit is promiſed to convinc; tha 
World, IS Righteouſneſs, by which al] Interpreters *Oree, 15 _—_ 


the Righteouſneſs of Chrift.Only:fome would have it to be underf; d 
of Chriſt's perſonal Righteouſneſs, which is inherent in him . _ 
which accounc he IS called the Tut one, the Righteous _ 93 
Then the fenfe is this; The 7ews now ſay I have a Devil, ang al 
our Devils by Beelzebab ; they accuſe me as an Impoſtor and Seduce. 
call me a friend of Publicazs and Sinners ; bur when the holy ak 
which I will ſend, ſhall come, he ſhall convince the World, tur 
was a juſt and righteous perſon, and not ſuch a one as they hare Vilee 
ly repreſented me, which was fulfilled in a great meaſure, 4: 
Chap 2. Chap. 3. when ſo many were converted, and jovncd , the 
Church. 2. But the beſt Interpreters underftood it of that righteouſ 
neſs of Chrilt which is communicared ro men in juſtificztinn of 
which ſo much 15 ſpoken in holy Wrir, 1ſa:2h 56. 1. and __ 
Dan. 9. 24. fer. 23.6. and in many other Texts ; fo as the Syjir 
is here promiſed as inftrufting the World in that true righreonſne, 
by which a Soul 6an be juſtifi-d, and therein borh corretting thee: 
rors of the Pagan World, who thought the light of nature enough 
ro ſhew them the way to Heaven; and alſo of the 7-»:j} t;,; 
who thought the righteouſneſs of rhe Law ſufficient ; by ſhewirp 
them that no righteouſneſs wonjd do it, but the riphteouſnes of 
Chriſt reckoned unto them for righteouſneſs, and apprehended ty 
Faith. » Chriſt's going to his Father, did hoth evidence him to b; 
a juſt and righteous Perſon, however wicked men in the World hig 
repreſented and traduced him; ( for the Father would not hive re- 
ceived him, if he had been ſuch a perſon, ) and alſo evidence th 
as was Prophecied of the Meſſias,Dan. 9. 24. he had finiſhed :herra. 
greſſion, made an end of ſm, made reconciliation for iniquity, and 
brought in Everlaſting Righteouſnſs : for it could not be imaginsd, 
that he ſhould have an acceſs to his Father, before he had finiſhed the 
work which his Father had given him rodo, Chap. 17. 4. and ſai 
our Saviour, ye ſee me no more : That is, after my Alcentioa you 
ſhall ſee me no more; or after my death ye ſhall ſee me n0-more, 
to have any ſuch ordinary converſe with me, as hitherto icy huve 
had: for I ſhall not aſcend ro return again to you, but to lit :tthe 
right hand of my Father, till I return again to the laſt judgmen:, 
11 Of Judgment 5, becauſe * the prince of this" 
world is judged 7. 7, 
s Thethird thing to convince the World of which the Spirit pro 60 
miſed, is Fadgmenr. There is a great variety amongſt Interpreters in 
their ſenſes, what is to be underſtood by Judgment in this Text, Mr, 
calven thinks, that by it is to be underſtood a right or-3:r of things ; 
che Devil who is the Prince of the World, had made 4 great difor- 
der and confufien.in the World ; Chriſt having judged him, brought 
in a Reformation, and reſtored things into order again. Others un- 
derſtand the term of that J#dicia! Power which Chriſt obtained at- 
ter his Aſcention .into Heaven, when rhe Lord ſaid unto him, Sit 
thou on my right hand, untill I make thine enemies thy foutſtul. Pal. 
110. I. As 2.34, 35. Others underſ}and ic ot th? Government 
which Chrift exerciſeth over, and upon the Souls of his peopl; 
once delivered our of the power of Satan by the obedience of Chrilt' 
Death. Others underſtand it of that 44 pewer given to Chriſtin 
Heaven and Earth, mentioned Matrh. 28.18. Phil. 2.9. Os 
underſtand it of "that perverſe and corrupt judgment which tht 
World exerciſed upon Chrift and the Apoſtles : Others underſt:n! 
it of the Judgment of Condenination, The Wo:!d ſhould by tis 
Spirit be convinced, that they lay in wickedneſs, and expoſed toete! 
nal Condemnation : z when they ſhould ſee their Father the Dew» 
who arrogates to himſelf the title of the Prince of the World, and 
exXerciſeth a tyranny over them, caſt out, and overcome. , 
12 I have yet many things to ſay unto you, but 7 


cannot bear them now -. 

u Not any new Articles of DoQrin or Faith ; for C7. 15: 15. 
he had rold them that he had made known unto them 4+ 74:%g" 
which he had heard of the Father, of that nature ; but ſome tings 
(probably) which concerned them, with reference ro the!t Once as 
Apoſtles, the Cor;ſtitution, State, and Government: of the Churen ; 
bur ſaith he, you cannor bear them row ; wit. in regard of their pal. 


l 


"IE 

13 Howheit when he + the Spirit of truth 1s come "71, 
for he ſhall not :( 
ſhall hear, 7." 


w The word which we here tranſlare [g+ia:_} 6dvy1196 if 2 FO dot 


great emphaſis; it ſtritly ſignificth to be a £742 of 144 Fu). nt 


dings bur ris 
ehac che 5p1'# 
I necetfary 9% 
whatſoever Chriſt had revealed co them, becauſe in their pret<n? yy 
ney were not able to bear it ; whatſoever ſhould be #7 707 ps 


only to diſcover truth as the obejt of the underſtan 


Chap, Xy 


yg MIS MN SD. ES men oc oc. ao... ec. 


Netnt 
ſtood 
Upon 
» © 
1 call 


1 


$136 


Ucer, 
Ppitit 
that| 

& vilz+ 

, Ati 

'0 the 
180ul- 
nN, of 
FI Vo, 
 Splrie 
vinels, 
the &- 
*nough 
World, 
hewing 
ſnefs of 
ded by 
n to be 
1d had 
ave te 
ce that 
fe 11an e 
ty, and 
2pin2d, 
thed the 
nd {ach 
10a Jou 
0-more, 
cu have 
lit atthe 
men, 
of this'l. 
pl 
1t 18 pro- (0 
SErers 1N 
ext, Mr, 
' things ; 
eat difor- 
brought 
hers uny 
ained af 
him, Sit 
gl. Pjal, 
VernMeNt 
s p2opk, 
f Chrift's 
Chriſt in 
_ Ori 
which the 
nderſt:nd 
14 by ttt 
ed tottel” 
he Dew! 
orld, and 


P 
if Ve 
) but \ 


19, 15+ 18s 
po thange 
\me tings 
t (}f.ce as 
& Church ; 


” their pal. 


"Re. L 
CONE | 5, 
hall no. (i 


3 COME <+ 
£a wo dot 
wy , Nt 
5 bur fins 
2 es 
Tele $p1'i 
{ary TALILL) 
. T 1x37 # 
refent 1d 
2, 2i7} f'0 


2T ITE 
4 


ip. XVI. 


1.10, 


-. -rder totheir planting, ordering, and governing the Church 
roy _ Chriſt had not while he was with them, acquainted 
th , mich and people-were to expeCt from the Apoſtle, upon whom 
cor irt ſhould come 1n the days of Pentecoft, and fo influence them, 
ys Y thoſe things they ſhould nor beat a loſs to underſtand the Will 
"£ God, which they ſhould communicate unto others; and they: 
* »rto look upon what the Apoſtles ſo revealed, as the mind of 
Chiſt: « for the holy Spirit ſhould not ſpeak meerly from himſelf, but 
5 om Chriſt, with whom he was eſſentially one; as alſo from the 
Father, ? whatſoever the Father and the Son willed he ſhould com- 
nunicare, that he ſhould reveal to the Apoſtles : z And he ſhall reveal 
co you things that are to come, being in you the Spirit of Prophecy. 
The Apoſtles in their Epiſtles, and in the book of Revelation, fhew- 
ed not indeed all things, bur many things which were, and are to 
come fo pals : ; 

14 He ſhall glorifie me 4, for he ſhall receive of mine, 
and ſhall ſhew it unto you b. __ 

3 That is, he ſhall make me famons in the World; as by the ex- 
eraordinary gifts which he ſhall difpence and give out, fo particularly 
by ſhewing you things to come : 5 for he ſhall guide and lead you in- 
rono other truth, but that which I have revealcd, or which it is my 
will he ſhould make known and reveal. - 

* All things that the: Father hath, are minec : 
therefore ſaid I, that he ſhall take of mine, and ſhall 


ſhew it unto you 4. 

; All the Divine Z/?nee, Wiſdom, Power, which is in the Father, 
are mine: I am in all things that concern the Deity, one, and equal 
with the Father ; 4 and that was the reafon that I ſaid, that he ſhould 
take of mine, and ſhew it to you; which 1s the ſame as if T had ſaid, 
He ſhalleake of my Fathers, and ſhall ſhew it to you ; for all thar the 
Ether hath, is mine ; I and my Father are one in Eſſence, Wiſdom, 
Power, Oc. 


16 A little while and ye ſhall not ſee mee, and 
zeain, a little while and ye ſhall ſee me, becauſe I go to 


the Father f. 

e Imuſt die, and fo for two or three days you ſhall not ſee me; 
f but after that ye ſhall ſee me again, when I ſhall be riſen from the 
dead. But becauſe of the laſt words, becauſe 1 go to the Father, which 
ſeem to give a reaſon of the firſt clauſe, poſſibly by rhe /:rrle while 
ficſt mentioned, our Saviour means the whole time, from the ſpeak- 
ing of thoſe words to his Aſcenſion into Heaven ; for all that time was 
not more than ſix weeks ; and by the /i::l: while mentioned in the 
Jatter part of the verſe, our Saviour intends the whole time from his 
Aſcenſion, untill his coming to Judgment, and ſo the reaſon is proper 
which is added, Becauſe 1 go to the Father ; for being ſo Aſcended,and 
fat down at the right hand of God, we are told that there he maſt ſir, 
till God hath made all his enemies his footſtool ; and by the Apoſtle, 
that the laſt enemy to be deſtroyed is Death, and 4# 3. 21. Whom 
the heavens muſt receive, wntil the times of theveſtitution of all things, 
"_- God hath ſpoken by the mouth of his holy Prophets fince the world 

£gan,. 

17 Then ſaid ſome of his diſciples among themſelves, 
Whats this that he aith unto us, A little while, and 
ye ſhall not ſee me: and again, A little while and ye 
ſhall ſee me: and, becauſe I go to the Father ? g. 

g Chriſt had uſed much the ſame expreſſion to the Jews, CHap. 
J 33. Tet 4 little while I am with you; he had ſpoke the ſame to his 
Diſciples, Chap. 13. 33. yet it is plain from this 17. wer. that his 
Diſciples did not underſtand him. What need have the beſt of us of 
the Tlominations of the bleſſed Spirit, rightly to conceive of, and un- 
derſtand » cog things ? Theſe DoQrines of his Death, Reſurre#i. 
" Aſcenſton, and coming to Judgment, our Lord had inculcated to 
hs Diſciples, not only in the two Texts afore mentioned, bur alſo 
Cray, 8. 21, 22» and 12. 33, 36. and 14. 2, 4» 12, 28+, and in this 
Chapter, Vere. $. Jo 

18 They ſaid therefore, What is this that he faith, 
Alittle while? we cannot tell what he ſaith h. 

þ Still they do not underſtand what he meant. Who ſhall hereafter 
arrogate to mans reaſon or underſtanding a power to comprehend 
Spiritual myſteries ? Had not the Diſciples reaſonable Souls? will 
ny faythey had nomind to underſtand them ? certainly none can ſa 
ſo. Some Jay the fault of the Diſciples not underſtanding theſe 
tings, upon the obſcurity of our Saviour's phraſe, and his Parabo- 
_ expreſſion of them : others in their ignorance of our Saviour's 

eſurretion from the dead; others in their not underſtanding the 
— of time; bur certainly it is beſt imputed to the Diſci- 
p es inability to conceive of theſe chings, and the prejudices of their 
mY error concerning the Temporal Kingdom of the Meſjias. 

the where it will, the weakneſs of the Diſciples may be reaſon- 
: Ten not to be greater than is incident to the beſt of men ; 
mm *mey were fo dull of hearing and underſtanding, we may rea- 


ſonably concej - 
nceive, that we are not i 
nfirmite. , not free from the like impotency and 


| 19 Now Jeſus knew that they were deſirous to ask 
ok and faid unto them, Do ye enquire among your 
cs of that I ſaid, A little while and ye ſhall not ſee 


qt fn again, A little while and ye ſhall ſee me k ? 

ha TR of this Verſe there is nothing difficult, but . in the 
w vid it there is much inttructive : We learn from hence, That 
will ors may as to ſome points be ignorant as to the mind and 
be wil yet they will be defirous of further inſtruction in it. To 
wing , y and contentedly ignorant, is not conſiſtent with a root of 
hx 4 4s 2. Chriſt knows the deſires of our hearts,. before they 
follow © a to him by the words of our lips 3 bur yet it will not 
out mates may ſarisfte our ſelves with inward ſecret deſires,with 

our lp = 42 «nown by our lips, for God requireth the Calves of 
bans _ ell asthe deſires and groans of our inward man. 3-b Chriſt 
Gerefore *, (0 Teach thoſe whoſe hearts he ſeeth deficous to learn ; 


S. JOHN 


and lament, but the world ſhall rejoice ! : 
be ſorrowful, but your ſorrow ſhall beturned into joy »2. 


20 Verily, verily I ſay nnto you, that ye ſhall weep 
and ye {hl 


/ Our Saviour'sreply is no literal anſwer to the queſtion, or ex- 


poſition of the term which appeared fo difficult to chem to und: - 
ſtand ; bur yer it is a ſubſtantial anſwer, by which he let them know. 
that he ſhould be abſent from them for ſome time, which rim* 
would be tothem a time of mourning, 2nd ſadneſs, as he had before 
told them; that when the Bridegroom ſhonld be raken from then. 
then they ſhould mourn; that time would be to the wicked part of 
the World, a time of mirth and jollity : » But their ſorrow ſhould 
be turned into joy when they ſhall ſee him again, both upon his Re- 
ſurre&ion, and in the general Reſurre&ion. The time of this 1ie 
is the worldlings hour, and for the molt part the power of darkneſ;, 
to ſuch as love andfear God ; bur as the worldlings joy ſhail ar laſt be 
turned into ſorrow ; ( they compals themtelves abour wich ſparks, 
bur they ſhall at laſt lie down in forrow) forthe godly man's ſorrow 
ſhall be rurned into joy ; Chriſt will ſay to che good ſervant, Er:er 
t hou into thy Maſters joy, Marth. 25.23 ' 

21 * A woman, when ſhe 1s 10 travail, hath ſorrow, *Ifz.26 17. 
becanſe the hour is come : but as ſoon as ſhe is delivered 
of the chlld, ſhe remembreth no more the anguiſh, for 


joy 3hat a man is born into the world 7. 


2 Our Lord compateth the ſtate of the Church in this life, and 


more eſpecially in thoſe ficſt and moſt furious times, to the ſtate of 
a woman that is big with child, and in her travail ; when he faith, ſhe 
hath ſorrow, thar is, great pain, becauſe God when he curſed the 
woman for her tranſgreſſion, made this her portion, Gen. 3. 16. 7 
will greatly multiply thy ſorrow, and thy conception ; in ſorrow thou jbalt 
bring forth children ; and when her weeks are fulfilled, her hour is 
come to feel the effeR of this curſe, the fruic of the firſt womans 
rranſpreſſion ; but no ſooner is ſhe delivered of a child, bur ſhe for- 
getteth all her throws and pains, for joy of a child born into the 
World. Such (faith our Saviour to his Diſciples) is your eftate ; you 
are aSa woman intravail, fo will allthoſe that believe in me, be, to 


the end of the World. 


22 And ye now therefore have ſorrow : but I will ſee 


you again o*, and your heart ſhall rejoice, and your 
joy no man taketh from youp. 


o (The whole Church, Rev. 12. I, 2. 15 compared to a Woman 


with child, crying, travailing in birch, and pained to be delivered; ) 
during this time of your :rava;!, you muſt have ſorrow. AY thoſe 
that will live godly in Chriſt Jeſus, muſt ſuffer perſecution, 1t is ap- 
pointed for all men once to die. It is appointed for God's people, (eſpe- 
cially under ſome periods of time) to be dying daily, killed all the day. 
long, as the Apoſtle expreſſeth the ſtate of Chriſtians in his time, Row. 
8. 36. quoting Pſal. 44. 22. (which ſheweth the ſtate of the Church 
in the Qld Teſtament to have been the ſame. Burt (faith our Saviour) 
it is but as the hour of the womans travail; it will be ſharp, very 
ſharp, but it ſhall be ſhort : p For I wil ſee you 2gain, and then your 
heart ſhall rejoice ; which cannot be underſtood of Chriſt's ſeeing 
them again afrer his Reſurre#on ; for before that time, we read of 
few or no ſufferingsof the Apoſtles or other Diſciples. Ic muſt there- 
fore be underſtood, either of the Yi/iration of 155 Spirit filling their 
hearts with joy and peace, or the vi/tation of his Providence ; or ra- 
ther of Chriſt's coming to the Jaſt Judgment, when all that have be- 
lieved in Chriſt, ſhall ſee him with joy unſpeakable ; and then a4 
tears ſhall ba wiped away from their eyes, and they ſhall enter into the 
joy of their Lord, and figh and ſorrow no more, nor ſhall it be in 
the power of all their enemies, to deprive them of their joy. 


23 And in that day ye ſhall ask me nothing 9. Verily, 


verily I ſay unto you, Whatſoever ye ſhall ask the Fa- 
ther in my Name, he will give :t you r. 


9 That the day here ſpoken of, is that before mentioned, wer. 22. 


when Chriſt promiſed to ſee chew again, and that their hearts ſhould 
rejoyce, is without queſtion ; but what that day is, (as we before 
ſhewed) is not ſo well agreed. Some underſtand it of the gMeral 
Reſurrefion, when Chriſt ſhall come to Judgment, when all askings 
for ſarisfattion as to any thing which we doubt, ſhall ceaſe 3 and 
this ſeemeth ar firſt the plaineſt ſenſe : you ſhall then be made per- 
fea; as you ſhall want nothing, ſo you ſhall ask nothing: But be- 
cauſe of the following words, which plainly refer to the time of 
this life, others diſtinguiſh concerning ask:ng, and by asking here un-« 
derſtand, asking by way of queſtion, for further information, not by 
way of prayer for ſupply: and indeed the Greek word enforceth 
that ſenſe; for it is not aiJ1os]s, which ſignifieth to ask or beg, as in 
prayer, but $e&w]1os);, which ſignifieth to ask for a reſolution in caſe + 
of doubting; now tho! itbe true, that in the day of judgment when 
we ſhall ſee Chriſt as he is, and know God as we are known, *we ſhall 
have no occaſion to ask any queſtions; yer becauſe rhe following 
words ſpeak of an asking in Prayer, which is proper to this life ; it 
ſhould ſeem, that the day here mentioned, 7s ſome time before the 
laſt Judgment : what that ſhould be, is the queſtion. 1r is certain- 
ly beſt underſtood of the time after the effuſion or pouring out of 
the Spirit in the days of Pentecoſt ; of which time it was Propheſied 
by Foel, Chap. 2. 28. That God would pour out his Spirit on all fleſb : 
their ſons and their daughters ſhuld prophecy, their old mea ſhould dream 
dreams, and their young men ſhould ſee viſions, As 2. 17. and to which 
time 1/aiah had a reſpe& in his Prophecy, Chap. 11. 9. that the Earth 
ſhould be full of the knowleage of the Lord, as the waters cover the Sea. 
So as theſe words, you ſhall ack me nothing in that day, ſignifie the 
great light that ſhould upon the coming down of the holy Spirir, 
ſhine in upon their Souls ; ſothat they ſhould no longer have any ſuch. 
doubts as they now, had, and found much the ſame thing that we 
have, 1 John 2.27. But the awointing, 
Spirit ] which ye have received of him, avideth in you : and you need not 
that any man teach you: but as the ſame anointing teacheth you of all 
things. We muſt not too rigidly interpret our Saviour's words here, as 
if they werea promiſe of ſuch 2 tare in this life, when either the preſent 
orſucceeding Diſciples of Chrift ſhould be ſo filled with knowledge, as 


Dby which is meant the holy 


e ſaith, Dg 5 - 
Saſttive ? I am rea Je enquare among ſt your ſelves, &c. Are you in- they ſhould have no further doubrs,or need not to ask any thing of Chri/t 
that 


dy to teach, and inftru& you. 


Chap. XVE 


1.544 
WA 
7:8 


' 


FE 


bo Oy 


- 
o 
oo 
$2.27 d 
- 
< » ———_ _— ; 
_— + = "2." © 
ne - —=Z4 R p er erti. ” , 
= ” - TÞy , - _— _ —"-— 365. &” 
- * £0 I 
med TS a, 148» g - 1, 7-Sy e® 4 . S 
_ _ ty "1 -—- b- -. 
"MTS 4 a = wer a. Cons MM 


” = 2 _=m 
Ta he 


bt % T - 
Dm « LY ” S7S 
« : . 4 _ SF quity 
- ” - | ths ning 
» 55 
-— eg Orr WE Ate 
__ : - : 


4 


»— Ix 
_— 


— 
yo ww 


_ 


IERES #>- - FEI 
AW 


Chap. % VI. 


* Ch 15.1 


f Oy, para» 


es. 
j Or, para 
bles. 


* Ch.17.8, 


*Cha.13 3. 


x1 
þ Gr pore- 


Die. 


{chat is, to be reſolved in any thing.) Our Saviour here ſpeaketh 
only comparatively, to fignifie the great difference would be as to 
knowledge, b=twixt them in their preſent ſtate, and what ſhould be 
afcer the pouring out of the holy Spirit; they ſhould then fully under- 
fand what Chriſt meant by his ſaying, A little while, and you ſhall not 
ſee me : and again, # litcle while, and you ſhall ſee me : becauſe Igoto the 
Father : and ſhould not need ask him queſtions about that, or many 
other things which they were now at loſs about, as Jer. 31. 34+ where 
the Prophet ſaith, They ſhall trach no more every man his neighbour, and 
every man his brother, ſaying, Know the Lord : for they ſhall all know me, 
frem the greateſt to the leaſt. It muſt not be interpreted (as ſome have 
done) to ſignifie a needleſnefs of Miniſterial teaching ; ſo neither muſt 
this Text be interpreted, to ſignifie a n:edleſnefs of an inquiry of 
Chriſt for further ſati>faRion ; bur only as ſignifying the vaſt diffe- 
rence in the degrees of knowledge, after the holy Spirit ſhall be pour- 
ed forth, from what was even inthe beſt of men, beſore that time. 7 In 
rhelatter part of the Text another word is uſed, ic is not 62w]no#e, 
but «/]nos1s. Our Saviour there plainly ſpeaketh of rheir asking in 
Prayer ;and his promiſe is, that to ſupply their defeQs of their know- 
!edge, and the want of his perſonal in{tru&ion, they ſhould obtain by 
Prayer from the Father, all that was nec<fſary for theirdiſcharge ofthe 
ropherical Office, Mar. 7. 7. Chap, 15, ver- 7. Chap. 16. 24. See the 
notes on thoſe Texts. "RNS + 
24 Hitherto have ye asked nothing in my name -: 
.ask, 2nd ye ſhall receive * ; that your joy may be full z. 
s All the Prayers of believers under the Old Teſtament were ac- 
cepted upon the account of the Mediator ; who was Typified by the 
Temple, and the Ark, where their ſolemn Worſhip was performed 
by Divine appointment But the cxplicit naming of him, was nor 
vival in their requeſts. Indeed the Propher Daniel enforced nis re- 
queſts for the Lords ſake 3 which may peculiarly reſpe& the Meſſ1as, 
the promiſed Mediator. Our Saviour in the Form of Prayer diQtated 
to his Diſciples, gave no direCtion of addreſſing themſelves to God 
in his Name. But now he was ready to accompliſh the Will of his 
Father, by off-ring himſelf as an expiatory Sacrifice for ſin, and 
| thereby reconciling God to them ; and the prevalency of his Interceſ- 
fion depending upon his Meritorious all-ſufficient ſufferings ; he di- 
re&s and incourages them to pray with an humble confidence in his 
Name, for all the bleſfings they ſtand in need of. And 'tis matter of 
exceeding joy, that notwithſtanding their unworthineſs of the Jeaſt fa- 
vours, yet they are affured of obtaining their peritirions offered up in 
his Name ; for the Father wsa ſo pleaſed with his voluntary obedi- 
ence to the death of the Croſs, that no bleſſing is ſo good or great, 
but he moſt willingly beſtows for his ſake to all humble ſupplicants. 


2s Theſe things have I ſpoken unto you in | pro- 
verbs: but the time cometh when I ſhall no more ſpeak 


the Father w. 

u That by Proverbs is meant any dark ſayings, 15 plain from the 
oppoſition of the Text, of that term, plainly. Chriſt had ſpoken, tho 
not all things, yet many things to them in dark phraſes, and under 
many figurative expreſſions; but (faith Me) :he rime cometh, when 1 
ſhall ſhew you plainly of the Father ; that time is either Chrilts ſecond 
coming, or after the.pouring out of the Spirit, which latter is moſt 
probably what our Saviour doth here intend, becauſe of thoſe great 
meaſures of knowledge, which at, and after thattime were given one. 
He had before given to his Diſciples to know che myſteries of the Ling- 
dow of God, far beyond others, Mat 13. 11. but yet it appears by 
Chap. 14. and many other Texts, that they had a very confuſed and 
imperfe& knowledge of the Trinity,and Chriſts oneneſs with the Fa- 
ther, and their mutual Perſonal relation one ro another. 


26 At thatday ye ſhall ask in my name: and I ſay 


not unto you, that I will pray the Father for you . 

x When the Spirit ſhall come, then you ſhall fully and clearly un- 
derſtand how to put up your Pfayersto the Father in my Name: hi- 
therto have you done it imperfe&ly, not fully underſtanding what 
you did ; but when I ſhall have poured out my Spirit, then you ſhall 
fully underſtand what it is to Pray in my name, and you ſhall accord- 
ingly do it : he doth not deny, that he would ask the Father ; for the 
Scriptureelſewhere plainly expreſſcthit, Rom. 8 34. Heb. 7. 25. but 
he onlytells them, rhathe ſaid wot ſo ro them, the reaſon of which he 
tells us in the next word, 

27 For the Father himſelf loveth youy, becauſe ye 
have loved me, and* have believed that I came out 
from God z. 

» | need not tell you, (to beget in you a confidence that your 
Prayers ſhould be heard) that I will pray to the Father for you; for 
my Pather himſelf hath ſuch a love for you, that you may from 
thence aJone conclude, that he will hear you: z and tho my Father's 
Jove fo yolt be an everlaſting love, which hath no cauſe in the crea- 
fure;. Yet 25 to the manifeſtations of my Fathers love, they are further 
drawn forrh by the love which he ſeeth you bear to me, and by your 
receiving me who am the A:{ſi2h, and came forth from God, to per- 
form the work of mans Redemption. 

28 * I came forth from the Father, and am come 
into the world a: again, I leave the world, and go to 
the Father b. 

a Tho l be inthe World, yer my original is not fromthe World: 
Iam one with my Father, equal wich him, God bleſſed for ever. 7 
came forth from him, as one ſent in the fulneſs of time to diſcharge 
the office of the Mef/ias : the World (the place fo called) was neither 
my Original, nor yet ismy home : bI am preſently leaving the World 
again, and going fo my Father, 

29 His diſciples ſaid unto him, Lo, now ſpeakeſt 
thou plainly, and ſpeakeſt nol] proverb c. : 


c Our Saviour having now plainly told them, that he was leaving the |- 


Wor!d, put an end to their inquiries, whither he was going, and ſa- 
tisfhed them that 1n his former expreſſions of going away, not for a 
while to bu {cen, he meant no earthly motion ; c this they confeſs had 


S. JOHN 


vnto you in || proverbs, but I ſhall ſhew you plainly of 


Chap, Xy1 


no obſcurisy at all in it, Thefe words zre fo intelligible, tc th: 
is no reaſon for any of us to ask thee any thing about the ſenſe of 
them. 


30 Now are we ſure that * thou knoweſt all 
and needeſtnot that any man ſhould ask thee 4: by this * 1 


* we believe that thot cameſt forth from God. ' Chg 
4 This confirmeth us in that Faith or perſwaſion, which we bef 7.8. 
_ tho it was in us but weak, that indeed thou art come forth __ 

od. 


31 Jeſus anſwered them, Do ye now believe « 

e Some read the-words (not as a queſtion) You do now b2l;es, 
well you believe at laſt ; you had reafon enough to have 
fore this time. 
32 Behold the hour cometh, yea, is now come, 
* ye ſhall be ſcattered*, every man to his | own f/ 
ſhall leave me alone : and * yet I am not alone, hec 
the Father is with me g. 

f Tho you profeſs that now you do believe, you had need | 
your Faith ; there is yer a trying time coming upon you, when vour « 
Faith will waver, and you who have been ſo long my followers, wi 1 
leave me to ſhift for my ſelf, and every one of you ſhall ſhift for Your $i 
ſelves; this came to paſs preſently after, Mar. 26.56, Thoſe whothink , © 
they ſtand, had need take heed leſt they fall; .thoſe who think they, © * 
Faith ſtrongeſt, ought ro be thinking with their ſelves, what the, + " 
ſhall do, how they ſhal] be able to ſtand in a day of ſharp Try], M. 
ny in a calm time appear to be Profeſſors, and Believers; who when 
Affliction and Perſecution ariſfeth fqr the Goſpel ſake, will fall away 
and leave Chriſt alone : g Yet ſaith our Saviour, 1 am not alone, breayſ; 
the father is with me. No man is alone, who hath the preſence of G54 
with him. Chriſt knew that in all his Sufferings he ſhould haye the 
Preſence and Aſſiſtance of his heavenly Father. 

33 Theſe things I have ſpoken unto you, that jn #'kk 
me ye might have peaceh. In the world ye ſhall haye & 
tribulation z : but be of good chear, 1 have overcome ba 
the world k. (@ 

h By peace here, is not ſo much to be underſtood, Peace with Gyy: 
which, yet we have from Chriſt, and through Chriſt, according 0 
Rom. 5. 1. Being juſtified by faith, we have peace with Goa,through ur 
Lord Fejus Chrift, Nor yet peace of conſcience, which is the copy of 
our Peace with God: As a peace of mind, a quier, ſerene calm teq- 
per, which indeed is the effe& of the other, as the cauſe; that yoy 
might not be croubled and diſturbed, neither for my ſake, nor yet for 
your own. 5 Tho in the world ye meet with tronbles, which yoy 
will certainly do, becauſe the World hateth you, & Be of gud (ju 
( faith he) I have overcome the world ; where by World isto be un« 
derſtood, all Temptations from it ; whether from the flatteries, or 
from the frowns and troubles of it. We are ſaid to overcome the 
World, but we overcome it as Soldiers, fighting under Chrift who is 
the Captain of our Salvation, and his ViRory is our Vitory, 1 54bn 
4- 4.and 5. 4, 5.Chriſt overcame the Prince of the World, and caf 
him out, as we heard before ; and he hath overcome Sin, and we 
him, and in the midſt of all Tribulations, are more than Conquer: 
through him that laved us, Romy 8. 37. This was our Saviours lit 
Sermon, which we have upon ſacred record in Holy Writ. 


CH A P. XVII 

Chrift preparing himſelf for Death,prayeth his Father to glirifie hinaul 

to giveeternal life to Believers. 1-—3. Sheweth how faithfully bt ats 
conpliſhed his work, 4-8. and prayeth for his Diſciples, that he wuld 
Preſerve them in love and charity, and keep them from the evildf thi 
world, 9—19. prayeth for all that would beliewe on him through thir 
word, 20—23. 4nd that they might be with him to behald hu gliy, 
24—26, 


F ren words ſpake Jeſus ; and lift up his eyes to*l 
heaven, and faid a, Father *, the hour is comet," 


elorifie thy Son, that thy Son alſo may glorifietheec, ' 
# When our Lord had finiſhed his Diſcourſes, of which we hart 
had a large account in Chap.14,15416. he goes to prayer, as hetauph! 
us when we pray, to dire our petitions to the father ; fo in this bt 
ſerteth up an example ; and before he ſpeaketh, it is ſaid he !ifr1du 
his eyes to Heaven, as his Fathers Manſion-houſe ; who tho he filth 
Heaven and Earth, yer doth in Heaven moſt manifeſt his glory and 
rhereforc teaching us to pray, he commandeth ug to ſay, Our Fatir 
which art in Heaven ; not excluſively, as if God were not on Earth 
ſo, but eminently, as Heaven is the place where he moſt gloriouly 
manifeſts himſelf. Lifting up of the eyes was an uſual geſture in prajer, 
and but an indication of the Souls being lifred up, ?/l. 121. !. 3 
123. I. yet no neceſlary geſture : for we ſhall at another time find 
our Saviour faling upon his face when he prayed, Mar.26.3 9. Mark 1g 
35. The lifting up of the Soul to God, wherein the main and Spur 
cual part of our prayer lies, doth neceſſarily require thelifting vp 
the eyes. The Publican caſt down his eyes upon the Earth, the 
ſenſe of his unworthineſs. Our Lord lifes up his eyes, and faid, Fs 
ther the hour is come ; that is, the hour of my Paſſicn, the time — 
in thou haſt determined that I ſhonld die : c now make thy 50n 8 ” 
rious, by raiſing me from the dead,by taking me up to Heaven, : } 
giving me aſſiſtance from thee to do the work which I haveto 0,t0 
drink this bitter cup : that ſo I being riſen again from the h_ 
aſcending up to Heaven, may make thy name famous, by po . 
thy 7uſtice, Goodneſs, and Truth, upon the Preaching of the Golpe 
all Nations. ; m4 l 
2 * As thou haſt given him power over all _ 0 
that he ſhould give eternal life to as-many as thou 1 - 


iven him e. k 
: @ I ſee no reaſon for any to contend here, that by #2 #*/ be 
le& only who ſhall be eternally ſaved, are to be underſtood : chem 
power undoubtedly extenderh further than ro the Ele, ( delienen 
only for Salvation) he hath a power over Reprobates and _ wo. 


things, : Chy, 


elieve, tis 


believed he- 


that 'M 
and 31, 
auſe tht 


ook to 5 | 


| 


S. FOHN 


Chap. 


* a condom? chem, a well as over his E'eX to bring tkem to Erernal || Divine Powor that | haye wro1the thoſe Miranles which I have 
« ba | lied I valvacion The former part of the Texc ſpeaket h of che | wrought 14 fo | have wan es Etny Name unto them, 2nd they 
Chir $4668 era] Power 477 avehoriry, oy Whio'1 ne Farne had already have received the rinkfeflation and | Revelation of thy Nam: unto 
by wie" Cl wa giorfous purr1ng all hinge nnder his feer, and cauing |] chem 
E ail knees «ro how 43.00 unt3 vim 3 which are other phraſes by witch 8 Fr [ have givenunto them the words®* which thon * Chip 
2 17 exDpreiic: d, x Cor. 15. Z7. ard Fbz!, 2. 10. I h1s : eff PLEETN » PE Oe wh IDEs PI th 
the Over On Saviour exccureth according to the Counſels ot | g4VE wx _ _ the \ have received them p,? MG nave "5 
gt known { 19 


t ro their fiich or onvQclief. 2 A+ ro 


thoſe glve cn to 


furely that I came out from 11 Thee 7, and they-have ©,.,* 


— TT : © 
Cre, that I {t ul 44 in th ak it ac, and With the PE. Of o DEENOY me 1t thou d1dit ft end me Hp. . 
| piine chett it oy pgs = der w I FR es Pai prear-th WE on : [7 hits orm r pare of kts rp or 4 is comment!inz ro hj + Saks: ie 
t' Ma oy orb ER, - pre bs wed, mor rh 00 6 ; = bo « OY hier. "1, | wy I: | tad - FE an) _—_ © them, bur 
C3 o_XP# 97 Ig :cewe are to obſerve, thi wu nal Life , + feE F576 ay TOM? 17S © UNC 5 OE INOS all choſe who claim 
| chat ©? RE EE SIO SPIT a ER SE SR os he Name of his Miniſters what 15 [21D Gurty, i. ro give to their 
7 Mat + .rthe Son glves only to. fich'as roe Parncr ich giver ml By lhave no word bur vwhar God hath given rhem, It Chrift fine 
ll b c-6701) Cov Wl ; lo an 2] ſhail not be ſaved; forthe wim {| as] pie he oe : hb; —_ L rut Conti 
"C1 MT = Fi. 1 's plaviy Tr tract: y 7 { Iimiis tf: OA Ces cali ef hy OD OY 1s Farner hath given io Im, CEXERnL ly we 
q ws = fig At Fi to _ 4+ or riohe ro ig vie need not alce 136 1 1:1 ; w__ pats bo allo. We Cn ipe: K what we lift, nor wh JUMCEnN 
wlll name +  fearch the Rotls of the Ecctral Countels 3-for all wham Fin EST ried up to Gods word. p He commendeth 
Ul op GE Mo That! comonnto kim. ant gor nf RS '{- oy that they had received them, not only the ſound 
ur + tite ey wy ; - =. _ 5% o chet : : IE _ E: = C wy {fs 4 Ir © 2r*, NOr ans y th- no ron ot them in their uvder. 
ok g , R$. _ Le workne of the <oirir ond cap: ih | TINS HEEL rad | braced and believed them; 9 and had from 
Mt Es 57 Chrift. an giving, up of cr ;1o bs Contutt].p7 ne © an? authoricy of -chentlatemerete to bim as the true 
1ey TG; om: de _ 15 10 Cane « a, and was (ent trom God. Tho they were nor 
» me Cats -and ii} we find chit, we hive a {$908 os we hin priect fa10t HO the E: ern, Son of God ; yer 
en ; Be TI. A | icy DELLCY [11:2 one thar came from God, and was ſcnr ot m5" 15 
ay, Y, J Ks ' I = tt jor ri CO larhl | PR | ne promied Sic fit - whi ich ſecmed ro have been that degree of 
aſe \nd * this 15 life eternal, that they might know | Fairh which Chriſt moſt infiſted upon as to his Diſciples, vreill by his 
Jod t! true God f, and felus Chr it whom tho: { ſt e&i20 trom the dead, he declared liim'elt ro be the Son of God 
the h: at 7, tu Po Ver 5 £412 al along this Gol! pet, Its diſcourſes, and the mira- 
5 = wi.o deny che Divine Nature of C1559, think thy have al " | vrOUgiic, i:zd a Particular tc NCENCy. | to prove himſelf 
ze C JE UTent from tis Þoxr, where Cir t hey [3% }iLeakIng | : p ens: TOON] Fra =: che Yu Son of God 3 and the Diſciples 
e,, 041 Eatier, cal-th him £©< only grve God, Bur Divines at bane TOLING K PC -rſvafion of rhis alſo, 
mex the t© 112 94/7 Or alone, , 12 t0 be applied Lhe Bhs bo a w2 em} 4 pray | tor them, 1 pray not for the world s: but 
61! ; id the ſenſe oo S Prout dd Sigler = is pd Chr for them which thou halt given me, for they are 
TEE! > «tf 1:5 dDDEreTL OM Tr /oIHhEþeE £O Her; 'Q 
Gud; ay | , pa” which he could nar {the Fatticr were T ct thi HC 7. 
; ; o” or fries a a5 another tom me 308, The ttm on'y or ally: _ : TI - a Y id eemeth here to ſignifie all mankind, for Wnom Chri:2 
— Ls ed ( Ss £54 OR * Trintcy, but only of ©} n rials 7M , doth not pray ; to ſore Interprer al of Neprobates, 
tems fits, te pos of tHe HIER OCN, WI: ch are uo poris5 Io rim. 6. 1s | Otfiers of Pelle ves by Criſt afrerward _ ech for the Wo wid, 4er. 
5 and mn mazy ofner Scrivrares, ſo Math. 11,27. Whereir 15 FIT dy 20. that Is, for - ch who, tho they ar pretent Ws Undbeltc. ors, .yer 
don | x 12ne baowerh the Son, bat the Father 1, neicher $1:9weth any the F.x-| ſhould be! >rou ir tO believe by the apoſtics fin; iſtry, | bu: to reach 
o_ ts; but 1 *C9n 5 where ten. faive dow ave exciude re Joly S2- | us 05 _ guifh.in Our Prayer, cur Saviour here d: ſtinguifke __ ind 
char nit, Be [ct 5, Lie COM 27978, Is 35 Scripture 0 HerVed, nor aways ro my NY Pal CONDOS, for his choſen ones, which he doth No prey 
Je UN exchud< all o7t.er, 4s 2: Þ 6.47. Our >aviour faith, 1 15 Life eter-| OF OR We Det oi others ; Theſe t he defcriveth ro be ſuch 2s his 
es, Ot nal 13 know 027% % —_— on/) tre God Tar 15, ?Cis tne way ro Erer: Farhcr { ( whoſe rhey were ) had given him, elrher by an Ecrernal dv- 
e the pl @ifes wh; 15 an ArGanary figure uked in Roly Writ. g ite adds, | Na ton, Or by working falth in them, 
ard 3eſ#1 Ch-5/? whom tha haſt ſent 5 by v hich he lers rs know, thart' 7,5 Ang all mine arethine, and * thine aremine: and * Chay: 


z wy 1% | ” fs On 44 ian 75 
the ahcr cannot be 1aving 4 kng 2wn, bur in and'b+ che $09, Nxow/; 


in t;, is eric , tigatazra nat Sa meer coinprehending of 


nd we Ci::if jn m:ns Nortons, bur the receiving Chritt, believ 
query Joving ang © bong hes, Wc 
urs : *] have glorifed thee on the carth »*.: I have fi-1 


rind the work which thou gaveſt me to do 7. 


s 


4b G6: Miracles which FT have woug” er, God could no be glorticd by 


im,ond þ, ( it. oh the 2QGIron of any 10g to his þ SIN 1.11 ws bo - only by | 
\y be 86+ m3 ing co the worid his Farchers gouanel, jultic-, mercy, full, 


1100, and others of hr Attributes. 
ent 115 Farher, 15 exprefi, v22, 
Ras £19en TIN. in Commiſion, Bur how could 
e522 &7 FM zhe fins of men, which was the 5 incepal proce of bus 
&n%, Irivas fo n1 Igi, thac he (pe: ks ot bt a5 aifeat 
be 7 11, ſam x0t in the w, rid, h-cautc he is tobe lo ft 
j0t parks Apatn, he ſpeaks of what he was tuily retolved to co, 
& 1 jr were already done. 

5 And now, O Father, gloriſic thou me with thine 
own felt, with the glory * which 1 had with thee before 


12 wiuld 
il of this 
gh their 
} glory. 


7 Q C Way GY \0'Y + 1 t ? NF - 
by fniſhicy the work whe 


» ; 
Br {Sr IVY TH WW? 3.24 


res to'l 
ome bl þ 
1Le Cc: 
we hat 
hetauph! 
n this ht 
; lifted vp 
he fillzth 


| 1y whici as ro my Divine N:ture I had with thee ke- 
fore (he frayed _— of £: & World, he COMMiNU HC: IT Ae a!fo TO ny Hu- 


oryj Mane Nat vr, tat my whole 1erfon may be maine glorious, From 
ur Fathrr hence is. v2) t CONC Iugded againi! ticle which deny the Godhead cf 
"py 7 F 7 md . ® Ll ho ® , y , . [ 
outs that Ci Fed with 1s Father before rhe Wold 


\ Earth: 
gloriouly 


"ad tiOT Cer Eterpa! Gods 


Fl 
j Tloſs ck been. tf he 
4 Out tit h1s Per- 


l L 
here te eps of (11s Father, Tha: that glory might thine 


Fd : F . 4 
FG, Ina Qt! 


ing 1 him, : 


k / 2: Preaching che Goſpel, by living up to the kule of thy L3wv,; 


y dore; low. 11. 
"EINE L2H 
'C a CTL-e ; 


be expofed in the World, wherein they are all ro live and 
7 Thar they may be ore, one body,and in one Spirit, chat t they may 


Tam florified in them yz, 16. 15. 


! In the Gre2b, the 4djeZives are of the neuter gender, ſo a the 
Senie is nor, All my friends, or all my Diſciples are thine alf O 3 bur, 
all my thinos are thine, and al! thy things are mine ; which js no 
' more than he hart before often ſaid. Chriſt and hes Far ther have all 
Fronts cc non neither of them have a9vy thing thar is nor che athers. 
They ore one, and 3% ' aLree !n one3 they ha: 'e the ſame E/ jence,the 
fame 12. the ſame = ibites, the feme Friends : # and E am ({aich 
'Our ) oP 2fred, or made By >flous in them, by their ow: aing, 
receiving, and imbracing me, ard accepring me as their Savicur, So 
as this YOu comained ro Arguments more, inforcing his Pericion 

on the hetialt the <. 1. His Fatiicis probriety in them, as well 
is his 2. Their love im, and the glory which redounded to him 
froin their faith and hotineſs. 


it And nowl am no more in the world w, but theſe 
are 1n the world x, and I come to thee. Holy Father, 


NUr Ea 


keep through thine own name y, thoſe whom theu h: al 


gIVen me *) that they may be one * as we arc x. 


EM etrm Fortd in this Verſe, ſignifies not the men of the Wi-id,* 
NDF any 1417701747 party of them, (as i it ofren ſignittiec!:) bur 7ho Þ 4/14. 
ble Ro *rh: Earth, Our Saviour ſich, he is no more 23 wo | 
'Hecauſe he was to continue on the Earth bur a very ſma!! time; hip 
( faich he ) x theſe my Diſciples are like to abi: le in the World wht 
T have leſtir; they willſtand in need of th 'Is h:Ip, te be armed 2 

gainit all che remparions they will meer with from the Worle. 7 
am coming to tee, y therefore I commend th-m to rhee, teiecch- 
Ig tlee, that thor throu; 1h thy Power wouldeit } KeeD choſe, yh oO 1Nn 
; £1v1ng themſcives up ro me, have alſo given chemſclyes vp to r] ee 5 
Ter tnetr-owning thy Name ('which 1s as a ftrong tower, Pro v.18, 10. 
krep then from all re re: rpiations and danprrs, £0 which they will 
i COnverie, 


OW 072 Fork oze Faith, core Bartiſm, &c. that they may be one in 
COVE and affe wn, as we are, in ſome proportion ro that Urion which 
15 heraixe ehife and me, tho not In an equality, This Prayer of our 

Savluurs doth oblige 2ll thoſe who jn avy fiaceriry own Chriſt, co 
fludy Urn ion both 1n Opinion and £ \fleGinn ; aid allo give us ground 


In prayer ; 
in pres (ona: Mcdaror 
Let ; ] vs ey wy \T \* . 
ime find | 5s Ihave manifeſted thy Name unfo the men * which 
gorrs tou gaveſt me out of the world 7 - thine they were, 
oy an lam T ; Tp” ; 
-ngope ad thou gaveſt them me ; and they have ke pt thy 
Wor! ”"_ 
e UI a 2, 
thy nth 3 + wu "op [ 7 ; ; 
g faid, F* Fi 4c he openeth ths former phraſe: I have &otifiet thee pou 
me where 19; 11 wa done by mani! cit] 2 the Lords Nance, proclaiming his 
y Son glo- 3 GN ap ML er. \uU Wittht, 1; 7 t it; w il. M1K3539 f1:-97:75u5 "1 (LF hereby 
aven, of 0} * all 0 | 20wn 3 ;th's 'Che' {t 414 both by 1s vo: ds, 2nd by his 
ve ro do,t0 y $ _ ye — hq one, ( 28 hc ith ) « 1 ail thote WHhReEm rhe 
- dead, and or 130 £1ven him, by an Aa of his E ;ernal Counſel ; and by 1n- 


wr...” '?Ncarts to own and receive him vwhen he came Into che 
e Goſpelto _,  Rerells his Farher, thar is thy were 3 his choſen ones, and 
{1 Ko giver them uato Chrift, rhar he ſhould redorm them wich his 
Il Aeſh 4, * lake re care of thelr Salvation; ind he faich, When I came 
hou haſ i = eveaicd thy W Vil unto them, they have nor ftubbor -nlv and obſti- 
; | MY, IS the gen: rality of the Jews, thur their eyes azainft the lighr, 


ubliſhing 


of hopes, rat there is atime coming, when there ſhall be a prearer 
meaiure of it £1:n we ha ve ſee in thoſe miſerably divided rime3 
wherein we have lived, and do yet live. 


2 While I was with them in the world *, I kept -?-£ 


awe in thy Name 4 - thoſe that thou gaveſt me, 1 have _— - ag % 
kept * b, and none of them 1s loſt *, but the ſon of PCr> 13. 5, 6, 
dition c * : that the ſcripture mioht be fulfilled 4, * Clap, 


an] cy led 1nzin 
E wr, & 7} hy WW: {ll revea Iced: My Hut rey 7 4iyC h eard,received, 
fejb, the x gt and o2eved thy word, 


ris - L 
xd; Ch , / Ov tney have Enown that all thinzs whatſoever 


cho rothe® Wn... 1... 


a Chriſt ſpeaks here of himſelf as one who had already di<d, was ! 13. &% 
Riſen, and Afceniled, rho none of all theſe things were paſt, be- 
cauſe thev were ſo {uddenly to come to paſs. [ have( faith our Sa. 70» zad 
viour ) for all cnerime that I have abode in the World, and conyerſ- 13: I. 

cd with them, kepr them zn thy Name, z. e. in the ſteady owning and * P21. 
- | profeſſion of hy Tinch 3 or ( it we read It throygh thy Name ) it fip- 199+ 87. 


Tnbeliev), och "IVE 2n me, are of thee 7. 
MG far de proficiency inthe Dofrin whi Ic h I have 
; _— ew; rf 22: rho the Phariſ es ſay, "that 7 caſ o:7t D2vZ/s by Bel! 
Wes” no D hy "vile, yer they believe -3 and are perlvade ary th It 
Vol 3s OREN T Lave taught wem is from thee, and thay it {5 by 


nificth t!:rovph thy Power, and the influence of thy Grace, b I have 


ror fo kept all that came to hear me, bnt all thoſe whom thow 


EATCT? 


GhtHh 


XVUL. 


* Chay;£, 


— 


— 


Te On enene n 
ry 
— Re 


Pawns 7 
- 


_— 


hap. XVII. 


ther fiyntfie ore defſtinztes to Perdicion, or one that walketh in the 
hizh and right rozd t- Percitton, or rarher bochz one who —_— 
pa't over in Cods Er-rna] Counties, as tO ſuch as frall be ſaved, hath have I alfo ſent them into the world ». 
by his own wilul apoſiocy brovehr himfeit to Frern.ald Perdition, _ _ | 
t& ſuch a guilt as I know thow wile ceifiroy him. & And by this te 
Holy Scripture 15 fulfilled. Pal 105. 8,5. tcr that is the porcion Apoſtle, as I was fent by 
of Scripture here intended, as is apparent irom 42s r 20. where 
the Apoſtle applicth that Text ro Juds, who 1s here ſpoken of, 
Other Scriptures alſo were thus fulfilled, Pſa, 41.9. compared with 


Fobn 13. 18. : 
[3 And now I come to thee ec, and theſe things 


ſpeak in the world, that they might have my joy fulfilled 


in themſelves £ 


; had ſenc cur as his Embaſſadors, 
axcti fill in the preſent renſe. Theſe words were not! . . . 
futlled TE x r121s 4 As 1.3. he converſed with his FP And * tor their ſakes [ ſanftifie my ſelf 
Diſ:iples fore! days afrer his ReurreQicn ; bur Chrift was now ſhort-| they alſo might be ſanctified | through the truth 2 
ly coming, therefore he ſaith 1 come | And fait he, while i408 in! p FS Part, 131 Th 
the W:rl?, I [peak thee things; I pur up this prazer, rj;ar the Joy of | a Sacrifice acceptable, and well pleafing in the ſight of God * aud jn. 
My pcople may nor be diminiſhed by my going f.om ihem, by: deed lanttifying inthe ancient notion of ic urder the Law, dig ordi- 0 
tarwita they can no louvger { as hitt;erto ) rejoice in my bodily varily fignifie the ſerting of perſons and things apirt to the { 
preſence with chen:, they may yer r: joyoe, that I ain aſcended ro my | Service of God, which was done legal/y, by certain ritual 
Father ; that they land commended to the care of thee my Father, | and ceremontes, and js ſtill done inwardly and ſpirituall 


c 


by chis my jait Prayer. 


even asl am not of the world :. 


fre: ernal Life and Happineſs. } 

2 I cake more to be underſtood here, by Chriſts giving his word be ſanfiified. Not only eur Er PPIDels, bur jj the 
uPro his Diiciples, than his Pr caching the Solpel intheir ears; other. choſen of Chriſt, tha: we ſhould be holy and without blame befor: bin i 
wife Chriſt had no more given theſe his Diſciples kis word, than he] j,,,, 3 and wichin the purchaſe of Chriſt; hence the Apoſtle fath, FX 
had given it to many thouſands of others who were yet 18 the World, 5» 25. That he gave himſelf for his Church, that he might janligs mn 
and whom the World hated nor. The ſenſe therefcre !s, I have ; | 
not oply Prezched thy word in their ears, but I have opened their 


S. FOHN 


gaveſt me by che AR of thy Eternal Counſel 3 Or whom thou gaveft 
me to he my Apotiles: cand *56-210f wy ths cy an — rw 

e Sin of p2raition, none of them bs lo whom thou gaveft me by t ] 
< as oife, none of tem whom thou gaveſt me © be my Apoſtles, | adding, thy word is Truth ; I a ON ard Goſpe 
bur on2y Who tho he was my ApojHls, and in that ſenie given to ms, | have Preached ro _—_ Is hr, &, oy mad, 
yer was never given re by thy Erernal piſt, as one to be by me Ee- | the REOERE ) char S, It 1s 40 t = " Is day the 
E&:em-d, and brought to Erernal Life and Salvation ; for he was A falſe Prophets, nor like the Do ig bs IE Cs, whi 
Son of Perdi:iom. We have this term ?pplyed to Antichrilt, 2 Thefſ. | rrue, partly falſe ; butir is ru + c fn inde 
2.3. As the Son of Death, 2 Sam. 12. 5. ſignifies one appointed to| Blood of Chris which cleanſeth - f th the hea 
d1e, or thar deſerveth to die. And the Chi/d of He, Hatth. 23. 15.]15 applied to the conſcience by the Spirit, which is th 
izgnitech one who deferverh Hell, io the Son of Perdition may <&1- 


; 14 I have given them thy word 2, and * the world | cious working of che Holy Ghoſt. Chriſt faith, that for his Diſciple 
harh hated them, becauſe they are not of the world h 


Chap, Xy 


neareft the meaning, through thy Truth, that 15, through the kng 
ledge of thy truch ; as the Gentlles are ſaid ro have had thejr Vis 
purified by faith, A#s 15.9. n He Opens What he meant by wb 


I which 3 
a, as ſome think, ” 
Do&rin of 
ch Is Partly 
ed jt 1s the 
mt, Jer thi; 


| e Sandtifier, 
1 2nd through the word of God Preached and 2pplied to the 


Scu!, 
18 *. As thou haſt ſent me into the world 


* Een *6, 
" 


0 Thar is, My Father! they have nor thruft themſelves int help 
Imploymenc, they have nor run withour ſending 3 for as I am thine 
thee, ſo I have ſent them, The Apoſiles 
indeed were not ſent for the ſame end in all chings that Chriſt v1 
ſent, who was ſent to purcnaſe Salvation for men, as well as 
Preach the Goſpcl : but they were ſent in part for the ſame work for 
which Chriſt was ſenr, and they were ſent by him who had authox;. 
[ | ty to ſend them; and as it is bur reaſonable for Prin 
thoſe whom themſelves ſend upon cheir Embaſſies ; (6 It Was bye 
reaſonable that God ſhould defend and prote& thoſe Whom his Sn 


P, that, | 


p 1 Sandifie my ſelf, here, is no more than I fc: my felt ; 


clal/a; 
ritual Performance? 


. by Regene. 
ratfon, and renewing of the hearts of men and women by the eff, 


ſake he ſanRified himſelf, being borh che PrizF and the Satnifie, 
7 Chriſt ſer apaic himfelf as a Sacrifice for his people, that they migh 


| 


mezns to it fel} within the Counſel of God ; hence we are laid to hy 


| cleanſe it with the waſhing of water z and our Saviour here faith, thr 


I uy oa he ſer aparr himſelf for a Sacrifice for our fins, that hls people might l 
hearts to receive, and believe it, and bowed their wills .-O 4. COM. Sanflified through the truth 3 char is, by recelying the truth, no: 
Pliance wirh ir 3 (© as the word dwelleth in their Hearts, is ingrafred| j1 heir cars only, bur in their hearts, in the love of ir a0d bring. pr 
in 95 _ Bey = —_— the nom 5 5s _ : *] ing forth the fruits of ir in all Holineſs of life and covverfation, ar 
1s obſervable, That when ary Soul is give o Cnrift by his Father, a 3 - - 
Chriſt will moſt certainly fi or laſt 99 unto thar Soul his'word in £0 Neithe1 Pray I for theſe alone = but fo1 themalſo f] 
thar ſenſe ; rhar is, ſo as it (all receive, believe it, and be turned in-| Which ſhall believe On me through their word r, i of 
to the likeneſs of it, h And fo- this che World hath hated them, for} 7 Two things are evidenr from this Verſe, x. That Chriſt did nor Li 
thy word hach made them to be of another Spirir, from carnal, | pray for any Reprobates, not for any that were and ſhould die ue. Rs 
looſe, and Worldly inen ; they have other atte&jons, other inclina- | levers ;he prayed before thoſe for who aQually did betleve; he Prat. my 
tions, other deſigns and ſtudies ; they are not of the World z in that eth here ſor them that ſhould believe ; bur we never read that he pray: Hip 
reipeR, as T am nct of the World : tho in other reſpe&@s not ſa;! ed for any others : Now whether he laid down his life for thoſe for glwy 
for Chriit as to his Original, was nor of the World, which they were, | Whom he would not pray, lyeth upon them to conſider, who are _ 
of the Earth, E:rthly. confident, that he died for all and every man. 2, That by perſors ſelf 
hat thou ſhouldeſt take t1 e,£5ven 10 Chriſt, cannot be underfiood believers as ſuch ; for Chr ior 
15 1 pray not that thou ſhouldeſt ta e tnem 'ont of |}. prayeth for thoſe that were no aRual believers, but ſhould be. the | 
* Mar. 6. the world, hut that thon ſhouldeſt * keep them from [lieve. 3. That faith cometh by hearing ; Chriſt here prajechfor the 
I'3- the evil &. thoſe thar ſhould believe through their word, thar is, the Apoſile be the 
1Joh 5.18 k Chrift doth nor pray that his Father wou!g rake up his Saints | Preaching the Goſpel. | : thou 
out of this finſul and troubleſome Worid into Heaven, becauſe he] 2r * That they all may be one, as * thou Father, at ers, an 
—_ that they wee wt of - * cody - 1a wh mg d;'in me, and1 in thee 7 3 that they alſo may be on in! emec 
ur ne prays that the Lo We ; ſ e Evil One O | . , 
ſome thaw? have ir cranſlaced) or from the evil thing ; by which we |S © * that the world may believe that thov haſt ſents 25 


muſt nor underſtand wha: is penally and affliively evil, bur on! 


E 
what js finfully evil: ang by his example he hath directed us how | 7 Our Savjour here prayeth on the behalf of ſuch as 'hould beljerey 
we ought to pray ; not for death, nor abſolutely for a deliverance {on him, Thar they might b2 one in Faith, and ene 18 ororherly loft, 
from che evils, and miſeries of this life 3 bur char we May be delj- | Whoſo confidereth this 45 2 piece of Chriſt's prayer for Believer 


vered from choſe remprations to fn, to which a multicude of ſharp 
tryals and afflitions will expoſe even the beſt of men. 


16 They are not of the world, even as Iam not of | nnees, £20nor bur nouriſh ſome hopes, ( how improbable ſocrri 


the world /. 

7 This is the ſame thing which he had Gaia before, wer. 14. which 
he again repezrech, either to fix ic in their memories, that they call- 
ng it co their minds, miphr direft their lives accordingly, or be 
thereby forrificd 2gainſt the hatred and malice of the World ; for 
which purpoſe ke told thery fo before, Chep. 15. 2 9. ad again jn this 
Chapter, v2, 14, (ſee the Notes on Verſe I4. 

* Ch.9.46. . k 7 »auCtifie them through thy truth »* : thy word 
IS Truth z, 


”m It 8 doubted amongſt Interpreters, whether Sanfiſying in this 
place, fiprifieth the confecrating, depuring, or letting the Apoſtles 
apart, and preparing chem for the work of the Miniſtry jn which 
they were to be employed ; as rhe word ſignifi-s, 7er. 1. 5. or the 

rengthening and confirming their Habits of Grace, ſo as they 
mighe be able to encounrer the remprations they ſhould mect with 
from th= hatred or oppofition of the World ; or 3 the perfe&ing of 
them in Holineſs. Mr. Calu;y faith, our Saviour here Prayeth, 
_ that God would *PPropritte them unto himſelf: 7 and he ſ:,eweth 
how this js done, through, or in the trath; that is, ( ſome ſay 
through thy truth ingraven, ang impricted upon their hearts by 
thine Holy Spirit, which was promiſed to lead and to guide them in. 
to all ruth, Cha). 15, 13. ( lay others ) through thy Spirit, which in. 
dred is the Sandtiiier ; and we have met with ewice, called, The Sp1. 
"ot of Trith, Cha). 14. 159, Some ſay, Senflifie them in thy Truth, 
5 80 More than SanRific them truly, in oppoſition to thar lega] 
Sandtification of Pr telts, ©. of which we read in the Books of Ex. 
0445 and Leviticis, Others would have ir to thy Truth, that is, 


[MC ?. 


and that St, Paul hardly wrote one Epiſtle to che Primitive Apoſidb 7. fuitabe 


|cal Churches, jn which he did not preſs this by moſt potent Av ru. an 
| err P 
| appears ar preſent ) thar all the ſincere Diſciples of Chriſt, ſhall o 04, wi 
day arrive ar the keeping of the Unity of he Spiric ir: the bond from þ 


Peace 3 and likewiſe look upon themſelves in poinr of duty, obliel ofren 
to endeavour jr, To which pitch of perfeQtion potfibly Chit "0 him 
mighr ſoon arrive, if Superiours weuld after the Example of the 4p n &2 1 
ſtle, Ads 15.28, lay upon their inferijors no more chan neceſſary thin 5 work 
4nd equals would learn to contend for truth in love, and to walk vlih 
cheir brethren ſo far as they have attained ; and as ro other thing! 
to ſorbear one anther in lov; and wherein any of their brerhren are 
otherwiſe minded than they are, ro wait till God ſhall revel! i , 
chem, Phil. 3. 15. s Bur this is nor all the Union which an 
prayeth ſor; he alſo prayeth thar they mighr be one in the Fatheran 


the Son ; that is, thar they might believe; for Faith is that _— 
by which we are uvited to, and made one with God and Gn 
others interpret ir of Obedience, or ſuch things wherein God : 
ther and Chriſt are one, ec. For, altho ſo many as arc _ 
to Life ſhall believe, yer that they might believe, is A - 
er: @# This our Saviour prayeth for, for the ſurcher glory © Pe 
which is that which he meaneth by the Worlds believing that 


) [had ſent him; there being no greater evidence that Ghvift is tit 


true Meſſerh, than the general acceprance of the Do&rine of _— 
(pel, which he brought throughcur the World ; for who cat —_ 
that a new DoGrine brought into the World by one of _e Bl -ſcpsdf 
putation than Chriſt had in the World, and propagated by Ny _ 
a greater quality than the Apoſtles were, ſhould _—__ wa, 
<ft part of the World, if he that firſt introduced ic, ha —_— 
irft ſent by God into the World, and che Apoiles had pocaclind 
craordinarily influenced and afliſtcd by God as tothe Vrop4Z 


to the Preaching of thy Goſpel. Bur our Tranllation ſeems to cms 


if, after Chriſt was aſcended Into Heaven, _ bite; 5 


ciples 
'Mihice, 
might 
[I the 
f0 be 
bin in 
» bh, 
k and 
, that 
might 
1, not 
bring- 


196 


did nor 
> unde» 
Ie Prat 
le pray- 
ofe for 
oare(o 

rſons 
Fei 
uld be- 
yerh for 
Apoſiles 


er, art | 
one in} 


| {ents 


F 
] beliere1t 
Fly lore 
eljerers 
Apoſidl 
nt Arg 
ſoever i 
ſhall ok 
> bond 0 
y obliged 
Chnſtias 
' the Ay 
ary things 
walk with 
er thing, 
erhren are 
veal 110 
ich Chill 


Father and 
hat Grice 
Chriſt3th0 
od the Fir 
2 ordained 
rr Of Pra: 
d of God, 
p that Gol 
with is We 
of the 6% 
an 10906 
| grearctit 
7 pe:lcts0 
n the gre 
4 not bd 
ot bens 
pa gacln % 


22, Aid 


ip. XVII. 


one 
u By 


S. FOHN 


2 And the glory which thou haſt given me, I have 
piven them 1: : that they may be one, even as we are 


CHAM AV. 


Chriſt goeth into a Garden with his Diſciples, nt. where Tudaes comer; 
% betray him, 2, 3. The band of Soldiers at Chriſt's Speech fallerh 


glory here, ſome underſtand the Heavenly glory ; but then | #o the Earth, 4—9 Peter ſmiterh off Malchs's Ear, whevefore 


Oneneſs mentioned in the latter part of the | Chriſt rebuketh hi T0 > 

they mult underſtand the Pp: | rift rebuketh Sim, 10, 11. Chriſt is brought before Aunas, th 
a bo of the Union which the Saints ſhall have with Chriſt and his | Before Caiphar, 12—14- Two Diſciples fo — Chrif. ng +aog 
Father in glorv, 1N another World. Others underſtand the Divine | erh him, 15 —18.  Caiphas Examinerh Chriſt concerning his Dy- 
Nature, of which the Apoſtle, 2 Per. 1. 4. faith, believers are made | &rin,. 19—21. One of the Officers ſmiterh Chri ff, whom "be re. 


partakers zk 


his ſeemeth to come nearer, for the more men and wo- | proverh for it, 22——24. Peter dexicth him twice Mr, 25—27 


men are made partakers of thar, the more they will ſtody the unity Chriſt is brought before Pilate, who enquireth after his Accyſation, 
of the Sp?rit- Others underſtand 7 he power of working Miracles, by and declareth him innocent, and witld hawye veleald him, 28—36 
hich Chriſt is ſail to have manifeſted his glory, Chap. 2. 11. and | Bur the Fews require Barrabbas, 40. ; ” 


the effet of this Power, Chap. II. 40. iS called the Glery of God. 


Others underſtand rhe Preaching of the Goſpel, in which che mini-| Having ſo largely diſcourſed the Hiſtory of our Saviours Paſſion, 
\-ation of the Spirit #5 glorious, 2 Cor. 3- 8. and the faithful Miniſters | in our notes upon the rwenty fixth, and ewentv ſeventh Chapters of 
a the Goſpel are called :he Glory of Chri#?, 2 Cor. 8. 23, w Our Ma:thew, where (to make the Hiſtory entire) we compared what 


caviour either again repeats his prayer, that they might be one; or 


the other Evangeliſts alſo have about ir ; I ſhall refer the Reader ro 


elſe declareth that he had communicated his power, his glory to the notes upon thoſe two Chapters, and be the ſhorter in the notes 


chem, that they might be one, as he and his Father are one. 
23 I in them x, and thou 1a me, that they may be 

made perfect in one y, and that the world may know \\ 

that thou haſt ſent me, and haſt loved them as thou 


haſt loved me z. 


x 1 in them, not only as my Divine Nature 1s united to their 
fleſh, bur as I have made them partakers of my Spirit, and of the 
Divine Nature ; as I have loved them with a ſpecial and peculiar 
love, and am the Head, they the Members; 1 the Vine, they the 
Branches : 9 and thou in me, the fulnsſs of the Godhead dwelling in me 
bodily ; 1 being the brightneſs of thy glory, the expreſs image of thy 
Perſon, Thou alſo doing whatloever I do, and accepting and ap- 
proving of it, as Chap. 14. 10, 2 that they may be made perfect in | 
one, (the Greek is, &s £y into one) In one Body, whereof Chriſt is lage was at the foot of Mount O/ive7; and che garden mentioned, 


upon this and the following Chaprers. 


forth with his diſciples over the brook Ce- 3*- 
dron a, where was a garden, into the which he entred, 
and his diſciples 6. 


a Matthew hath nothing of theſe diſcourſes, or Prayer, which we 
have had in the four Jaſt Chapters; no more have any of the other 
Evangeliſts, who yet all mention his going into the Mount of Olives, 
afrer his celebration of his laſt Supper. Marth. 26. 30. Mark 6. 26. 
Luke 22. 39, Our Evangeliſt fairh he went over the Brook Cearor: 
into a garden. The others ſay nothing of a garden, but mention his 
coming to & place called Gerhſemanz, It is probable, that this Vil. 


was a garden near that Village, and belonging to ir, (for they had nor 


Chap. XVIII 


Hen Jeſus had ſpoken theſe words *, he went * Mat 24. 


26, 


| theef; but * I have known thee g, and * theſe have 


the Head ; which body is the Church, keeping an unitv of Faith 


All believing the ſame things in matter of faith, and thofe things no 
other than what thou haſt revealed, and I have revealed 'as from 
thee, a This, O Father ! will be a great evidence, both that thou 
hat ſent me, when the World ſhall ſee thee bowing mens hearts to 
the obedience of the truth of rhy Goſpel, and that thou haft loved 


them with a tender and everlaſting love, as thou haſt loved me. 


loveſtme before the foundation of the world 4. 


b Here our Saviour willeth his Diſciples Erernal Life ; or rather 
prayeth to his Father, that he would preſerve his Diſciples unto, 
and at laſt beſtow upon them Eternal Life and Salvarion ; fo as the 


24.* Father I will, that they alſo whom thou haſt 
given me, be with me where Iamb; that they may be- 
hold my glory c which thou haſt given me : for thou 


> | their gardens within their Towns, but without ') now the way to 
this was over the Brook Cedron, of which Brook we read, 2 Sam. 
I5. 23. David paſled over it when he fled from 4bſalom; and 1 King. 
2. 37. where it 15 mentioned as Shimei”s limmzt, which he might nor 
paſs. This brook was in the way towards the Mount of 01:wes ; 
b which being paſſed, he with his Diſciples went into a garden . be- 
longing to the Town Ge:hſemane. 

| 2 And Judas alſo which betrayed him, knew the 
place: for Jeſus oft times reſorted thither with his 


diſciples c. | 

c We read that Chriſt when he was at Jeruſalem, was wont at 
night fot privacy to retire to the Mount of O/ives, Luke 21. 37. and 
22. 39. and itſhonld ſeem that he was wont ordinarily, to go to this 
garden ; which made 7adas know the particularplace where he might 


phraſe, whom thou haſt given me, is not to be reſtrained ro the Apo- find him. 


files, but to be extended to all thoſe who belong to the eleQtion 


of Grace, ſhall hereafter be made heirs of Glory, and have everlaſting 


Life and Happineſs. This he expreſſeth under the notion of being 


with him where he is, as Chap. 14. 3. which 1s called a being ever | ther with lanterns, and torches, and weapons 4. 


with the Lord, 1 Theſ. 4. 19. and certainly this muſt be the higheſt 


a4 The Evangeliſt here paſſeth over all mentioned by the other 


Happineſs to be where the Son of God is: c That they may behold my | Eyangeliſts, about Jas his going to the High Prieft, and contraQ- 
go, 1s the ſame thing with, that they may be made parrakers of ing with them, and cometh to relate his coming to apprehend him 


my glory ; as to ſee death, is in Scripture-phraſe to de ; and to 
ſee life, is to live ; ſo to behold the Glory of God, is to be glorified, 


with a band of men that he had obtained from the chiet Prieſts and 
Phariſees for that purpoſe. By band, we muſt not underſtand a 


«For faith our Saviour thou haſt loved me before the foundation of | Rz,42% Cohers, as the word ſignifies, but ſuch a convenient num- 


the World, both as thy only begotren Son, and as the perſon in 
whom thou haſt choſen all them, and whom thou haſt ſer apart to 
be the Mediator between God and Man, and therefore I know that 


ber out of that band, (probably ) which ar the time of the Paſſover, 
guarded the Temple, as was ſufficient to take him ; they came with 
lanterns, and torches, (tho it were the time of full Moon) to make 


thou wilt glorifie me, and that thou wilt in this thing hear my Pray-| the ſtricter ſearch ; and with Arms, fearing where no fear was - for 
ers, and plorifie them alſo, whom thou haſt given ro me to be Re-| 7,2,, (their leader)could have told them, that he was not wont to 


deemed by my Blood. 
'25 O righteous Father e*, the world hath not known 


9. known that thou haſt ſent me h. 

e It is obſerved, that the ſervants of God in Holy Writ, have 
5.uedin their Prayers to give unto God ſuch compellations as have been 
7. ſuitable rothe things which they have begged of God in their Pray- 
ers, and proper to expreſs their faith in God, for the hearing of ſuch 
their Prayers. Chriſt here calls his Father by the name of Righre- 
0%, with relation to the argument which he here uſerh, which is 
tom his Diſciples tnewledge of him ; under which term ( as very 
ofren before ) is comprehended, their acceptance of him, believing 
N him, love to him, &*c. Father ( ſaith he) thou art Rrghteors 
(15a piece of thy Righteouſneſs to render to every man according to 
work, Job 34» 11. P/al. 62. 12. Prov. 24+-12. f The men of the 
World hate thee, are ignorant of thee, rebellious againſt thee ; g but 
I have known thee ; | have known thee, and have made thee known, 
and | have been obedient ro thy Will, and theſe my Diſciples have 
known me, and known, that is, received, imbraced me, as one ſent 
by thee as the Meſſiah. —=_ 

26 And I have declared unto them thy Name, and 
wil declare zt 7 : that the love wherewith thou haſt 


loved me, may be in them, and I in them &. 

By the name of God, is to be underſtond God himſelf, and 
whatſoever God hath made himſelf known by, his Word and Goſpel, 
his Attributes and PerfeRtions. And after my Reſurre&ion, I will 
Yet further declare it to them, who are yet in a great meaſure ig- 
norant and Imperfe@ in their notions of thee ; & that thy love where- 
with thou haſt loved me, may be further communicated to them, 
and be derived to them, and abide in and upon them for ever ; be. 
caule Lam in them ; ( ſo ſome would have it read, tho the word be 
11%, which properly is, and I,as we tranſlate ir) The words are bur 
i repetition. of what our Lord hath often ſaid, and illuſtr.ted Chap. 
5.9. by theparable of the Vixe and the Branches ; and teach us this 
on; That Chriſt muſt be in thoſe Souls who can pretend to any 


ſire nthat love of God wherewith he hath loved Chriſt, 2 Cor. 13.5, 


go with any great company to the Mount of Olives. 
4 Jeſus therefore knowing all things that ſhould 
come upon him, went forth, and ſaid unto them ; 


Whom ſeek ye e ! 

e This Evangeliſt ſaith nothing of what the other Evangelifts men: 
tion, of the ſign that 7udas had given them, by which they ſhonld 
know him ; nor of Judas his kiſſing of him, or our Saviours reply 
to him, (Jeb; all along his Goſpel, mentioneti very little of what 
is recorded by the other Evangeliſts.) It muſt be fuppoled, that at- 
ter Zudas had kifſed our Saviour, our Saviour himſelf came forth, 
and asked him whom they looked for ? Hereby thewing, that he laid 
down his life, and no man took it from him; he could eatily have 
delivered himſelf out of their hands, (tho I think they are roo cha + 
ritable to 7udas, who think that it was that which made F422: diſco. 
ver him, not that he defigned his death) he had once and again be- 
fore ſo eſcaped them : But now his hour was come, he treely offers 
himſelf unto his enemies, and asketh whom they looked for, : 

5 They anſwered him, Jeſus of Nazareth. Jeſus ſaith 
unto them, lam he. And Judas alſo which betrayed 


him, ſtood with them f. : 

f They tell him 7eſus of Nazarerh, Chriſt was born in Ber 5/e/:-4 
Fuda, Matth. 2. 1. but his Father and Morher lived at Nazarcch, a 
City of Gal/lee, Luke 2. 4, 39. where he lived with chem, tr. 51. 
hence he was called 7eſus of Nazareth, from the place where he lived, 
and moſt ordinarily converſed, Mar. 21. 1t. and 26. 71, Mark 1. 24. 
and 10. 47. and 14. 67. and 15,6. Chrift replyeth that he was the 
man, and it is Particularly noted, that- Judas was with his Armed 
company. 

6 Aſſoon then as he had ſaid unto them, I am he 


they went backward and fell to the ground g. 

z For a further evidence to the World,chac Chriſt was the Son of 
che Everlaſting Father ; it pleaſed God in al! the p=riods of his life, 
to ſhew forth by him ſome Atts of the D:wine Power; What had 
Chriſt ſaid or done, here to proſtrate his armed Adverfaries ? He 
had only asked them who they lookt for ? and he+-.:-7 that it was 


a mot your ſelves, that Feſws Chriſt ts in you exgept ye 92 repro- 
ite; 
Vol. II. 


for him, told them he was the man: they are ftruc« -Ira 


and inſtead of apprehendiog him, ſtart from him, a. . 
Hhhh 2 


3 * Judas then having received a band of me, and * Me, -5. 
officers from the chief prieſts and Phariſees,cometh thi- 47. 


IS 
: 6 
BCA » < ''> = CS. 
SIN WS 
— ——_— 


a - ” 
' 
root 1 nee 
bh mt * == py 
IE NEAT =D = wh 
© I —— — 
: - —— 


Chap XVIIL 


S. JOHN 


torhs gronnd. If there were fo mach Myeſty in, and ſuch an eff-&t | 
of the Jr of Chrift, in one of the loweſt a@s of his humiliation ; 
what will the Voice ofa glorified Chriſt be to ſinners, when heſhall 
1ermn las a fudge ro coaderan tae World ? And what will the 
fc& ofthir be npon his enemies? How eaſily might our Saviour 
love cicapel, now that his enemies were fallen to the ground ? but 
refſufreth them to riſe vp again, to rake him, and to carry him 
away, fo fh:w that he iid down his life freely. 


7 Then asked he them again, Whom ſeek ye ? And the noteson Chap. 11. 51.) | 


eds £200 X EN . . 
then aid, jones bog ig © 08 SRO RES (hn > Now Caiaphas was he that gave counſe] 
S Jeſrs an why Bs | have told you that I am Fe, Jews, that it was expedient that one man ſhould 4 
thereiore ye ſeek me, let theſe go their way h:  |the people 9 | 
b Oar $rviour queſtion, and their antwer, are the ſame as before, 7 Ot his giving that counſel, and the wickedneſs of ; 
They fi] down, hur they roſc up again, and go on in intheir wicked proved an Oracle beyond his intention) we difrontes i c 
of (0) 


vr re This 1 - —_ £- they may be under fome 

pirpole. h1s 15 the genius of all finners; they M th - . 

_ . IPs e Notes on Chap. . meaning of the MW; 
conv;tions and terrors, bur they get our of them, if God doth not ROE ) the Ar" _ izh Prieft Was 


concur hy bis Spirit, and ſfanRific chem as means ro make a through 
ching? in their hearts : Tho thoſe words, Le: theſe go away. might 
be int-rnerd of the a: med men that came with. the Gtticers, of 
crc fremed no {uch need to carry away an unarmed man 5 | 


ſame year pl. 
2 That his Son-in-law Caiaphes was the High Prieſt 
which we had alſo before, Chap. 11. 51. bone we -hoeM 
lirgely, about the diſorder of the Jews in that mot corr 
when that place was beſtowed without regard to the famj] 


ear 


y of Aary 


Who! 


of his Diſciples, being peri0ns againft whom they had no war, | high prieſt s, and went in with Jeſus into th 

1 -- < F 4 ' ra b "4 Aa © 7 
Qur Lord hath a care of bis Diſciples that they might not ſuffer | (4p high prieſt. Place 
with him, r When Chriſt was apprehended, the other Evangeliſts tell us, 4} 


b GS _ - hin } ; - as . 
9 That the ſay ns might be fulfilled N nich he is Diſciples forſvo% him and flcd ; but it ſhould ſeem that Peter, who t 


*Ct, ate £ Of them which thou gavell me, have I loſt all along the Golpel Hiſtory, hath appeared more torward, and 


Mm Mat. 25, 


To, 


Mark. 


47. 


| $998. bold, 22d daring than any of the reſt, came back ; bur who that 
; Bur were thoſe words of our Saviour, Of tim who then G1 gi. Ather Difciple Was that went in with him, and 11 favour of whom 
wu me, 1 have {15k me, 10 be underſtood as to a Tempor y toftar, TeTay v3 acmitred, we arenot fold : It 15 but a conjefure of thoſe 
or of an <t::rnal! d=(trufQtion ? Some of the Ancients were of 6p14/0a, ! 0 think it was John, for John was a Galilean as well as Peter, and 
that they were tc be underſtood of a /offng with reference ro a Spiri- | 011d have been as much ro be queſtioned upon that account as 
tua! 2nd Eernal State; bur that they were 2pplicable alſo to a loſiug as | "cre was, They Judg more probably who think it was the Maſter 
to this ic ; 7 think that they are applicable to boch, and thar in 161i, © the Houſe where Chriſt had eat the Pafſiver, and celebrated his 
Text, thy ce primarily to be underſtood of a loſing asro a Tempu- , Supper 3 or ſome perſon of note in Jeruſalem, who by reaſon of his 
141 Deach anc D Aruftion Ir was Chrift's purpofe, tat e/ever of his| reputation, might have free acceſs to the chief Magiſtrate, than one 
twelve Annit'.s fhanld ontlive him, receive the promite of the Fa-jof the Apoſtles, who were bur mean perſons in the account of 
ther,-in the pouring out of the Spirit, and be his inſtruments rocar- | the Zewr; +5 this Diſciple who ever he was, was one that had ſome 
ry the Gefoct over a greac Part of the World: this they could nor| familiarity and acquaintance with Caiaphas, which it is no Way pro 
have Cone, had they been pn: ro death at this tins, he therefore re- vable that either 94x or any of the Apoſtles had, 
folved no: to leote them in this fenle, but to uphold and preſerve their 


he iid to racſe Officers, you have the perſon whom you ſeck for ; for | , . . L 
thee tv Diſciples you have nothing 3g1nſt them, letthenr go away ; high prieſt, and ſpake unto her that kept the door, 
and b; © is Power upon their hearts he eff=cted ir, fo that they had a and brought 1n Peter e. 

liker:- 25 forfuke him and to flie, and ro ſhift for themſelves. : This fuather confirmeth the conjeQure of choſe, who think that 


10 * Then Simon Peter having a ſword, drew it, | 9:5er Diſciple was none of the Apoſtles, bur a favourer of Chriſt, ha 
lived in 7eruſalem, and was of ſome repute either for eſtate or place ; 


tho hol SSN »” l K 
and imote the iygh P1 jeſt's ſet vant, and cut oft his right ſo as he had not only an acquaintance with the High Pricf, but alſo 
14 ear k, The tervants name was Malchus. with his family ; and could gain admittance into his Palace, nor 
þ Ir is thought that this ation of Peters was before the apprehenſi. only for himſelf, but alſo for his friend. es 
2 6f our Savionr, tho after the diſcovery of it, ( as our Evang<elift 17 Then faith the damoſel that kept the door, unto 


re; -7t5 it ) beceuſe upon the apprehenſion of our Saviour, both Me. , MR . 
Cho, boi and Mark 4 50. agree, that the Diſciples fled Peter, Art not thou alſo ove of this mans diſciples ih 


and ir c2n hardly be thought, that if Perer had feen his Maſter appre- He ſaith, I am not. 

hended, ke would have adventured upon fo daring and provocative « This is Peter's firſt denial of his Maſter ; betwixt which and hi 
an afticn - ncr could Chriſt had he been firſt bound, have ſtretched | ſecond denial, (of which Fohn ſaith nothing till he comesto v4.15.) 
ont his hand, to have touched his ear, and heed it. Leaſt any ſhould j che Evangeliſt interpoſeth many things mentioned by the othe: 
wonder how Peter came by a Sword, we may read Luke 22. 38. that | Evangeliſt. 

the Diſciples hal rwo Swords amongſt them, probably broughe our of | 18 And the ſervants and officers ſtood there, whohad 
Galilee fer the defence of rhemſcIves and their Malter, againſt af | 11.7 2 fre of coals, for it was cold and they warmed 


faults 7.5m robbers in that long journe?- — a : - 

11 Then ſaid Jeſus unto Peter, -Put up thy ſword C— : and Peter ſtood with them, anc warmed 
OIL YT IPY l X © 7 . Oo jr 1C . 
into by of Incath / : the cup prigcn my Father hath given w Heres nothing in this Verſe, which needeth any explication, 
me, ſhall! not drink It 2 * 1 : ; : unleſs any ſhould ask, how it could be cold weather ar thattime of 

/ The orher Evangeliſts report th:s past of the Hiſtory with many Irp,, year, ( about April 14.-) eſpecially in a Country where it now 
more circumſt:nc-s ; particularly our Saviour's miracilous healing was the time of Harveſt > which may eaſily be reſolved. It was 
Machis again ; Tee the notes on Mat 26, 51, 52, 53, 54- MOIr-14.47, now ahount three of the clock in the morning, and we know that in 
45, 49. Lite. 22. $0,"F1, With what pretence, ſome both of the An-| $411mer ( the Spring eſpecially ) nights are cold; befices, that in 
cient and Modern Writers think, that Peter did not fin in this ation, thoſe Countries that are more EquinoGial, the nights are !onger, and 
I do not underitand, when Our Saviour did not only (as 70hn faith) conſequently colder towards the morning, as the air hath had more 
command him to put up his Sword again mto its ſheath, bur alſo as| time to cog], 
Ma: th. tells us Chap. 26. 52. told him, Thar al they that take the] 1, E The high prieſt then asked Jeſus of his diſc 
ſword, thit is without commiſſion from God, jhould pcrijh with rhe _ -" FX 
fſe-ord ; he uſed that argument according to the other Evangelifts : | P>CS) and of his do gaſes ”; he 7ud: 
Thi Evangeliſt tel!s us of another, »n The Cup which my Father, &c, | * Quzſtions about Seaicion or Rebellion belonged not to the Juaze 
That is, ſhall I not fieely and chearfully ſubmir co the Will of God | of this Court, but fell under the Cogniſance oftite Roman Govern 
in ſuffering whar he witſeth me to ſuffer ? The term cup is often in | they being now a Conquered people, and Tributary to the Rowan'3 
Scripture to ſignifie peoples meaſure and proportion of afflition and who, tho themſelves Heat hens, granted the Few: their Boy y 
ſefering, which God allotreth them ; ( poſſibly the Metaphor is ta- {fo Religion, and Courts in order thereunto ; as alſo a liverty 0 
ken from the cuſter: of tome Nations, to put ſome kinds of Male- Courts for Civil cauſes. The High Prieft therefore faith gr, 
faters to death, b- giving them a c#p of poyſen) See the notes on 31ar-| Chriſt about his being a King, bur only inquizeth of mm _ Fu 
thew 20 22, and 26. 39. Iris a goed argument to quiet our Spirits | Prin. What particular queſtions he propounded to —— 
rolled by any 2MiGive Providences. They are bat a cup, and the cup | Ot read ; only in general he inquired about the Dottrin he ra 
a Bar 54 both lors ws, Preached, and rhe Diſciples he had tenr out, which rag Fafa j 

12 Then the band, and- the captain, and officers of | ſame cauſe, to ſe if he could bring him under the y = cincip 
took ] dt Lond him © Prophet 3 for that, and Blaſphemy, and Idolatry, were hr toe 
the Jews took Jeſus, al 946265 oat. . . | cauſes thar fell under the Cogniſance of this Courr, as appeared Ir 

o As ts uſual ter Officers to do with ordinary maleſaQors, which 


are e Ciiminals; th t ft; between Chrift and tl _—_— 
re great Ciiminals ; they put no diftrrence between Chrift and the "RP 1 
moſt villanous Thi:ves and Murderers. There are many conjeQures _ Jeſus anſwered him h Fr and in the 
why Chriſt was firſt led to Amos, whereas Caioptas wis the High | WOL ld y I ever taught 1n the ſynagogue, ant ſecret 
Pricſt that vear, not Ann 45, (as the next word tei!s us) but it is un-| temple, whither the Jews always reſort z, and 1N 16 
Certain 4 wnwed , i, 1160p wh hc ws | 6 pos Jpn = have I ſaid nothing a, _ 
way to Caz2phas his houſe, cr that he lived in the fame houſe wit . ; , Friends, 2 The 
bs Son in-law: 3 or ont of an kenour and reipe&t ro him, being the y To all forts of men, my Enemies as gs" wasin Jeri 
High Frift's Father, or to pleaſe the o!d man's peeviſh eyes with Jews for mlteuNion NE ene emp, "Mal were wont 
ſuch a fghr, or by this means to draw /wn.z tothe Tryal of Chriſt , 4/7, 2nd whither three times in the Year, all -_ blick aſſemblies 
or becanie he had a more than ordivary hand about the appre- to come from al] ues of the Country Ln by the — Tha FI 
herding hiov, or to take a dire&tion from him what to do : we can- | *f = Jews, and in the places __ ei aha T have publickly 
net give a certain account why they uſed this method ; we are only | 291g IN ſecret, contrary 2:0: agyer pag at ir hath been tf 
| ; taught; tho T have Preached in other places, yet it na 


certain they did it, and that they did not carry him before him as . : "2: : 
High Piicit ; for the next words tel! us, , ſame thing which I have ſaid n pablick. \. Why 


Chap, XV] 


13 And * led him away to *Annas firſt, For he w 
father-in-law to Caiaphas,which was the hizh prieſt that Mo 
F7. 


Uk, 
;| 0- 4 
More Ange 5 
UPt time: ;.,..* 


and bought,and fold, or conferted at the will of the Conquerors, ($. 


ls leh 
0 the, 3 
ie for 


J (tho It 
re ( fre 
thar right or wrong, whether they had any juſt accuſation 20tinf 
Chriſt or no, yet they might for expediency put him to death, bo 
his death, might prevent mutinies and ſeditions amongſt the people 


15 Þ * And Simon Peter followed Jeſus, and {; did' 
vet the next words make ir evident, that they are to be underſtood) another diſciple. That diſciple 7 was known unto thesl, Ul 


RE Por T2 xt m_" 1 16 * But Peter ſtood at the door without, They 
live.. for theſe ends to which he had deſigned them ; and therefore went out that other diſciple, which was known ante 


[ ſpake openly to the'l 


\ 094%,g In 


100 
Cain! 
HA, 


Mak 
(4, 


Lute 
bt 


—_ —— —_— = FRI 


Ma 


now |, 
Civil 
civil G 
as Judg 
early 1! 
AX of r 
that the 
and unc 
thing w 
lhe; we 
might e1 
Wghe bef 
Palch t 
Some fa 
ae eat 
P alover 
vals mig 
kept it at 
this is dl 
Ver alte 
Ceding 
the Þ; It 
The Fea! 
day, wh 
Mornin L 
acrifices 
followe 
taken, » 
Lyd thy 
the mez 
that the 
Korgin 
licover, 


\V] 


did" Me, ment Was at this rime, thar an inferior Oi:zer dared to ſtrike a fup- | 
the 5? wr denn” — tore the Judgmen:r-ſeart, and defending unto thee /. 

. Mark himſelf from their own known :ulcs and meihods; for what hai ' : : 7 5 . C3 : 
[0 ſy "ur Faviour ſaid or done, mare than making uſe of the liberty their 1 They had in their Sanhcdrim before, Judged him guilty of Blaſ* 
$4 2's ; ; "gh a , Y phemy, Matth. 26. 65. But this they durſt not mention, left P:/ 

Lil own Law allowed, not conteliiczg any thin; apainſt himſelf, t . : gr —--Splaragcy 
a it ing them upon the proof of a wg ras J ah gr - but puoſs ſhould have rej:&ed them, as being not concerned in queſtions of 
who? 24p0 notice taken of chis i 64g o h;s charge ' yet we [their Law ; they therefore only exclaim agauinft him in the general as 
nd rock a great MalefaQor, bur of what kind, they do not ſay. It ſhould ſeem 
tha 23 Jeſus an{wered him, if I have ſpoken evil, bear they would have had Pilate have added, his civil Authority, to con- 
_ witneſs of the evil : but if well, why ſmiteſt thou me 4? firm and —_— —_ org _— without ſo much as hear- 
h : ? ; * ling any thing of the cauſe, ( ar this day frequent in Popijh Coun- 
- 4 Our Saviour could eaſily have revenged himſelfupon this Officer ; |eries) but they mer with a more «ont Jadge b cg 

and bur to ceach us our duty , he only gently reproves him ; and] "Wy bs Bec 
bags boy V 3 rhe proves him ; an ers hin T1 id Pil | . 
mY know, thar he d1 | Not b:have himſelf as one ought to do inthe face |. 31 Jen 1al tlate unto them, Take Ve him and 
ho of a Court of Juſtice, where hz had both a liberty, and a prefent op- jndge him according to your law 92. The Jews there- 
Ir porrunicy co have accuſed hm, it he had fpoken ill; and if he hd [fore ſaid unto him, It 1s not lawful for us t 
Is ſoken well, there was no-reatvn for his ſtriking them » oO put any 
| one (* Now A had " man to death z. 
2 nnas na 1- 4 
: of if, 24 þ ent him bound unto Calaphas| » 1 will jndge no m2n before my ſelf firſt hear, and judge of hi 
ome the high prieſt e. ) 2 | ES M 
' pro ; crime ; yon have a Law amongſt your ſelves, and a liberty to queſti- 
e The words in this 34h wer. are only to Jet us know,thar theſe | P22 and judge men upan it, proceed againſt him according to your 
hoy? things were not done before Anas, but before Caiaphas the H.gh Law. » They replv Ir was not Iawful for them to put any man to 
en My Þriejt, to whom ( as to his proper Judg ) Aunas had ſent hin! bound dearh : We are are aſſured by ſuch as are exerciſed in the Fewiſh Wri- 
) thes8, js he was ar fit brought to him; a pre Thar the power of puttivg any to death, was taken away from 
00r # Rs | : the Jews forty years before the Defliruciien of Jeruſalem. Some fav, i 
J 25 = SIMON Peter ſtood and warmed himſelf : was nor taken away by the Romans, but Errors own CozHurt : They 
hd They alc the1 erore unto him, Art not thou alſo one tought it ſo horrid a thing to put an 1/raelire to death,that wickedneſs 
that of his diſciples ? He denied it, and ſaid, I am not. ot al Jorts — ſuch 2 heighth amongſt them, through the im- 
# ; 4 ; ; ;  [punity or too Jighr puniſhment of Criminals, that their Courts durſt 
_ KB * == feryants of the high prieſt being his [not execute their jaſt Authority. And at laſt their great Court de- 
_ man, whoſe car H Qter cut off, ſaith, Did I not ſee | termined againſt rhe putting any to death ; nor ( as they ſay ) was 
thee 11 the garden with him ? wid re ro — by _ Jews, _ in ſome popular Tumult, after 
27 Peter thei . ; YI Ee their Court had prejudge the per on by pronouncing him guilty of 
= Sor ly 1 denied again, and immediately the Pr at: ſome capiral Crime : which ſeemeth the cafe of Stephen, 
W f. AFs 9. 
pe: f This Hiſtory of Perers denial of his Maſter the fecond time, | 32 * That the ſaying of Jeſus might be fulfilled *Ch.12.32. 
r.25,) "hpi ys: AO Matth. 26, 69,70, 71. Mark 14 69, 70.|Which he ſpake, ſignifying what death he ſhould : 
ru. we 22. 59, 59. with ſeveral circumſtances not mentioned by 7ohn. |dic o 
ole! Fe thenotes upon Matthew 26. 69, Oc. os _ 

: o Chriſt had before this time told his Diſciples char he ſhould die 
ohad a 29 & * Then led they Jeſus from Caiaphas unto [and thar by the death of the Croſs, as we read Marth. 20. wk - od 
rmed the hall of judgment g, and it was carly h x and by his Providence ordererh things accordingly, to let us know, «!;ar 
rmed > themſelves went not into the judgment-hall leſt ey” rage bz "ore 7 whe _ Cover fring was no Z-wiih 

' they 6 . © 07299 death ; na e 7ews puthim to death, they wonld have 
; xl ſhould be defiled : but that they might eat the ſtoned him 3 bur he muſt remove the curſe from us, by being mad2 
regs -omatls a curſe for 15, being hanged on a tree, which was Jooke vpor XS an 2C- 
, . . . I h ] 'tl, "A . . S [i 2 K T Ice ve 
: £The Chief Prieſts having in their Savhedrim done with our $a- eng dearh oy 2 13. Th Jews therefore knowing nothin 1 
It was viour's caſe, and judged him worrhy of death, as we read Mar: / this Counſel of God, yer execute it, by refuſing themſelves to prot 
hat in 26.66. Mark 14. $4. which two Evanpeliſts " welehs Ziad wh mig him to death, and putting ir off to P:/are, tho poſſibly their defign 
8 . SD” 2 Cy ated Ut was hurt TT 7; ir, ; N. 4 nll” 
that in Hiſtory of Chriſt's Tryal before the Sanhedrim, with many more tis he wag edinm of it. Thus God maketh the wrath of 
er, and meg than Fehr doth, ( ſee the notes on thoſe Texts) rhey EEE k | 
4 more _ mod ues por any Ecclefzaſtical Conrt, to the Court of the] 33 * Then Pilate entred into the judgment-hall © 7f.c, =: 
Wil Magthtrate ; ether kept 11 P:/ate's 2 n RT IRR - : Fx Nan ale 27 
Giſci civi} Governor under the Ri Pines oa, EET _— py and called Jelus, and ſid unto him, Art thou 1- 
 CUUICL- . i nere at Je e he f: 319 
* Jadg; which was therefore called the Ha of Judgment, hþ How ERS GER Jews F. ] 
ſl dar we cannot tel], bur early ir was ; probably abour five or |, ? The ordinary place of Jndicature, f om whence we tead before 
Do "a , : lack. 7 The 7ews would not go into the Judgment-hall, he went cur, in civility tothe Jews, whoſe ſuperſtition (as we before 
_ and wy might not be defiled, (for they account it a legal pour ion heard) kept them from going there guring the Feſtival: g9 He c:i- 
verty j "om earqies to 1 00g into an Heathens Houle, or to touch any led Jeſus to him privarelv, and asks him, if he owned himſelf ro b2 
erty 0 "hy , ach an Har hen had touched) now the reaſon is afſigned why | the King of the 7ews ? The confeſſing of which, (for withour doube 
thing t0 Mi hoy afraid of contrating any legal pollution, viz. That they they had ſuggeſted ſome ſuch thing to P-/are, and con!d not prove 
Jout his rt W: the Paſſover, Oby. But had they ne: eaten the Paſſover the it) had bronght Chriſt under P:/ate's power, he being Governor fo. 
—- 6g « ; hat was the time proſcribed by the Law, to the letter of the Romans. and fo concerned to enquire upon any that pretended to 
_ had = A ere « no don$t but that our Saviour ftritly kept himſelf ? Aauſ.| *®Yy Regal Power over that Conquered people. 
_— ” nia ws ng eres = dey when they — 34 Jeſus anſwered him, Sayeſt thow this thing of thy 
F a fall 7 Axia » Tall efore the Sabbath, rhe TT , . 4 2 
pl 20 vom puroff tobe kept on che Sabbath, that two great Belti ſelf, o1 did others tell it thee of me 7: 
ch from kept it pgs e kept two days ſucceſſively ; ſo as, tho our Saviour | 7 Our Saviour neither affirmeth nor denieth : tho we be bound 
tne time appointed by the Law, yet the Jews did not. Bur ,whenever we fpeak,to ſpeak the truth, yet we are not bonnd all times 


ap. XVIII 


11 Why askeſt thou me 4? ask them which heard 
me, what I have ſaid unto them : behold, they know 


what I ſaid ©: 

a We are told by thoſe chat have written about che Few!/h order 
heir Courts of Judgment 3 That their C:1:tal Cauſes always b2gan 
Wb the defenſitive part 3 and that it was lawful for any to ſpeak for 
rhe defendants, for a whole day together ; ( tho they did not obſerve 
this in the cauſe Of Chriſt) and their mcti,od was not to pur the De- 
-ndaxt; to accuſethemſelves, but to examine witneſſes againſt them; 
Oar Saviour cherefore appeals to their on order, and ſays,Why. askeſt 
2 It was, Jaith he, no ſecret ation ; I ſpake publickly, ask 
ar heard me ſpeak, they know whar Dottria 1 preached, and 
falſe Do&rin 


22 And when he had thus ſpoken, one of the officers 
| , which ſtood by *, ſtruck Jeſus | with the palm of his 
;1.hand, ſaying, Anſwerelt thou the high prieſt fo c ? 

7) This Jets us ſee in whit indecent diſorder the Jewiſh Govern- 


int 


thats Me 


them th | 
can accule me if I dclivered any 


S. FOHN 


neſs, and not at all ſcrupling either immediately before the eating the 
Paſſover, or prefently after ir, in their great Feſtival to defile them- 
ſelves with the guilt of innocent blood ; nay, had Chriſt been ſuch a2 
malefaCtor as they pretended, yet the bringing him into judgmenr 
their proſecuting, and accuſing, and condemning him, and effifting 
ia his Crucifying, were not works fir for the day before ſuch 3 So- 
lemnity, or the day after it, which was ſo great a Feſtival ; bur there 
1s nothing more ordinary than for perſons over zealous as to Ritu- 
als, to be as remiſs with reference to Moral duties. | 


- Pilate then went out unto them, and id » What 
qacculation bring you againſt this man & ? 

þ The Roman Governor humoureth them in their Superſtition 3 
( the Romans having granted them the liberty of their Religion) they 
(cruple to go into the ordinary p'ace of judgment ; he goes out ro 
them, and calls for their Acca/atioz of Chriſt, according to the ord:- 
nary and regular courſe of judgments. 

30 They anſwered and ſaid unto him, if he were not 
a malefattor, we would not have delivered him up 


his 1s denj 
denied by other very Learned men, who tell us, the Jews ne- 


to ſpeak the whole truth. Our Saviour deſirech to be fatisR-d from 


Chap. XVIil. 


the? Ve Ws , ; : 
tO r altered their day for keeping their Paflover, neither for the ſuc- | 2*/a7e, whether he asked him as a private perſon for his own faril- 


- eding $: l : | 
jn the es ar nor any other reaſon. They ſay therefore, that by faQtion, or as a Jnage, having received any ſuch accufution againſt 
ſecret The Feast = which is mentioned in this Verſe, is to be underſtood, him? For if he asked him as Judge, he was bound to cail them to 

ty arrange _— - 17. Which was tobe kept the fifteenth [the proof of what they had charged him with. 
: : aS al e "to WW) - - 4 .- 
;. z The morning to the evening os cha We wk —_ 25 _ anſwered, ASENNEE 1 aide own hat 

. hs . Ps os . = 1 a ' . » . 
$1n _ Gt, which all went under the name of the Faſo becxalbeben _ and the chief P rieſts have delivered thee unto me; 
Gn ke = wg " _ days of the Paſchal Feaſt. Thus the term Paſſover i: What haſt thou done s ? 
| fo 1 £ 7 . As © . . p . 
have (aid Lid thy God, « ” ys ow > prog en ſacrifice the Paſſover unto the} * The ſam of this is no more, than that he did not deviſe this 
publick!y the meanin 7 of thoſ _ - the herd, According to this Notion, |captious queſtion, for he was no Jew ; not concerned 1n, nor rezard- 

ole words, That they might ear the Paſſer, is, 11g What they had in their books of the Law and the Prophets ; bur 


w Pg in their Paſchal ſolemnity, keeping the Feaſt he was accuſed to him by thoſe of his own Nation : and he wal 
« Beir asit wilhthefe Hypocrites in it notoriouſly \firons to Find ver the truth, and to know what he b24 done. 


vr hypocriſie, fcrupling what cauſed a legal unclean: / 


been the that they mighr 
<Wording to tt 


Why covered th 
EF) 


A? 4 POE s "1 
po — — —— — 
PET > OT — 


Sx 


-_ 


en 


moe i 


—— — _—— 


— 
ona 


+ <a 5 £b wi 
REES 


= . . 
hn, erm —ro— mY —— - Rs a tra mb a m_— IR CR "*u. > 
- a —_— - ERS; : -_— Fn 
- = _ - —-- nw ” —— n—_ - - =o eons $4 ——_— —- - 
- - ID " - > ; 4 b _ = _ 
5 ? 3 Th -s - = - _ . 
RN ; ; : g GEW__ DDS ++ dn . 
T 4.2 - room,  - ns I SE, eb = Mens + Y Eo 5 ©4 
_ A . _ . _ 
* 
Way : 
- th . OE &s i . - ”_ bs. - > ww 5 - eh - 
j 7 "Mer ' : : ad 4.3 AE - - 4 = - " 
" < IS 6 —_ TAE £2, < VL XZ R.I4 9 —_— - - —_— . Iv - 4 n a” m— 4 _ 
— Dairy: » 2B. EE ” nag = o_— - Lo - —- _— ttm med X 
S5 - E) MP. x 


_ —— 


> een, pm = : mm: n— q 
_ w . J q - 
- w— <- © x bow 
x” 12 _ 
y ha 
% eta - 
& on A. Bn ” " I's _ 
- > wetter: . _ nam = < _—_— = 
— — —_ I - o 7 "= — _—_ - ———_—_ +. x7 Pra _ X —_— = - IH — = 6 I + 
—_— PRES =AL -—- To TRE,” ES. __ = _ — rl hn Fa A —— 
— AEESougrmter = area TE © EM = © —— ER DWEEE = — Ea — 


” 


I en er re ee ne 


r3. 


— 


* Mart. 
24. 


*Mar.1 5.C, 


*AdR.3.1 
? Luk. > 
19, 


29, 


Chap. XIX. 
*rTim.s. 36 * Jelus aniwered *, My kingdom is not of this| 


5.15 my ſervants fight, that I ſhould not be delivered to the 


Luke 23.4. all b, 


? Mar. 27. | wm * Pilate therefore took Jeſus, and ſcourged 
T 


world t: if my kingdom were of this world, then would 


Jews: but now is my kingdom not from hence ». 


£ That 15, I cannot deny, but that I am the Kg of the Jews, but 
not 1n the ſenſe they takeit ; nor ſuch a King as they look for in their 
{cab ; my Kingdom 1s ſpiritual, over the Hearrs and minds of 
men, not Earthly and Worldly, And of this thou thy ſelf mayeſt be 
convinced ; « for was there ever an eazrhly Prince apprehended, and 
»ounged,for whom none of his Subjes would take up Arms? Here's 
none of my Difciples rakes up Arms, or offererh ro fight for me ; 
which is a plain evidence, that I pretend to no Kingly power in di- 
Rurbance of the Roman Governmeht. 

37 Plate therefore ſaid unto him, Art thou a Ring 
then w? Jeſus anſwered, Thou ſayeſt thatI am a King x. 
To this end was I born, and for this cauſe came 7 
into the world, that I ſhould bear witneſs unto the 
truth y. 
VOICE Z. 

w Pilate ſeerns to have ſpoken this, rather in deriſion and mocke- 
rv, than out of any deſire to catch him in his words : x Chriſt NCI 
ther owneth himſelf to be'a King, nor yet denieth it, but tells P:lare 
raat he ſaid ſo; and to this end he was born, and for this cauſe he 
came into the world, to bear teſtimony to the truth, z. e. I cannor 
denv bur that T have a Spiritual Kingdom, that is :9uth, and I muſt 
atteſt the truth ; » Ic was a part of my errand into the World ; z and | t 
every one who ls by Divine grace diſpoſed to believe, and love the 
truth, will hear and obey my DoQtrin. | 

38 (| Pilate ſaith unto him, What is truth a? And 
when he had ſaid this; he went out again unto the 

*/: Jews, and faith unto them *, I find in him no fault at 


a Pilate (as prophane perſons uſe to do ) thought that our Savi- 
our ſpeaking of 7ruth, and a Spiritual Kingdom, did but Canr, and 
therefore asking him, what he meant by truth, he never ſtays for an 
anſwer, but goes out againto the Fews, whom he had left without 
the door of the Judgment-hall, and 5 tells them he fornd no fault in 
him. Whatever the quality of the Kingdom was, of which our Sa- | 2 
viour ſpake, he judged that his pretenſions to it were not prejudicial 
to the Authority of the Emperor, nor the Tranquility of the State ; 
and would have diſmiſt him from their unjuſt proſecution. 


39 * But ye have a cuſtom that I ſhould releaſe 
unto you one at the paſſover : will ye therefore that 1 
releaſe unto you the King of the Jews c ? 

c Whence this cuſtom came is uncertain ; moſt probably from the 
Romans, who in ſome honour of this great Feſtival of the Zews, and 
n humor of them, granted them the life of any Criminal whom they 
deſired. Pi/ate propounds Chrif as the priſoner whom he had moſt 


mind to releaſe, perceiving thathis proſecution was of malice, rather 
than for any juſt cauſe. Fi 


4- 40 * Then cried they all again, ſaying, Not this 
3- man but Barabbas. Now * Barabbas was a robber 9d. 


a But ſuch was the malice of his Adverſaries, that tho Barabbas 
was one that had committed murder in an Infurre&ion,yet they chuſe 
him rather than Chriſt. (See the notes on Marth. 27. 15,16,17,18.) 


Chrift is ſcourged, mocked and abuſed by the Soldiers, 1-— 5. The Rulers 
would have him Crucified ; but Pilare, releaſed. 6. The Jews appeal to 
Their Law.7. Wherefore Pilate examinerh him more ftrictly,8—11.and 
feeking toveleaſe, us threatned with Ceſars diſpleaſure. 12—1 5. Where 
fore he delivereth Chriſt to beC rucified. 16, Chriſt beareth his Croſs, 
and Crucified between Thieves. 1 7,18. The ſuperſcription of the C roſs. 
19—22. The Solgiers part his garment, 23—24. He commendeth 
hu Mother to the Diſciple whom he loved, 2 F—27. Giveth up the 
Ghoſt. 28-30. They break the Legs of the Thieves, but peerce Chriſt; 


fades 31 —37. Chriil # buried by Joſeph of 4rimathea, 38—42. jall 


ma, 


3. FOHN 


people, and to ſecure his own tation, 
the Roman Emperor againſt him ſhould have prejudiced him, 


thorns, and the purple robe. 
them, Behold the man e. 


Every one that is of the truth, heareth my —_— mock-dreſs, brings him out again to the people to may 
y. 

. 6 When the chief prieſts, therefore, and officers ſax 
him, they cried out, ſaying, 
Pilate faith unto them, 
for I find no fault in him g.. 


by our law he ought to die, 
the Son of God 7. 
h The Law they mean,is the Law for putting falſeProphers to dexth, 


Deur. 18. 20, # By the Son of God here, they 
God, in all things equal with his Father ; otherwiſz it Was aterm 


unto Jeſus, whence art thou? 
anſwer m. 


therefore he 
greater ſin p. 


Chap, 

They mocked him c when they ſaid, Hat! king of thy 
yet ſpake a great truth, (tho not in their ſenſe) The or 
liſts ſpeak of more indignities offered him. 
15. 19.) 


Jews ; 


4 Pilate therefore went forth again, and faith ung 
them, Behold, I bring him forth to you, that ye ay 
know that 1 find no fault in him g, ! 

d Pilate appeareth convinced in his own conſcience, that Chrip 


had done nothing worthy either of death or bonds 
reſiſted that 


5 Then came Jeſus forth, wearing the crow 


n 
And Filate 


e He therefore, afrer Jeſus had been fcourged, and dre 


f Our Lord findeth more compaſſion from Pilate, (tho an 
han he found from thoſe of his own N ation ; yea, thoſe that 


pplicable to themſelves, whom God calls his Son, his firſt-born, & 


now for any in this ſenſe to arrogate to himſelf this title, who indeed 
was not fo, was Blaſphemy, and that in the hjoh 


gae depree, and 


brought him under the notion of a alſe prophet of the deepeſt 11. 
bur this was injuriouſly applied to Gale! ; ans 
to be equal with the the Father, and was ſo declared by God him: 
ſelf at his Baptiſm and Transfiguration; and who had made his Divine 
Power appear by fuch works as no meer man ever djq. 


who thought it no robber 


8 q When Pilate therefore heard that ſaying, he 


was the more afraid /; 


{ Ir ſhould ſeem, that the Rowans permitted Judgments tothe», 


according to their own Laws, which the Roman Governour was to fee 
executed ; or elſe ſeeing the rabble in ſuch an heat and diſorder, he 


aring ſome breaking out. 


9. And went again into the judgment hall, andſaith 
But Jeſus gave hin 


»: Our Lord, who knew the ſecrets of all mens hearts, very well 


knew, that tho Pilate had for ſometime withſtood his temptations 
CH A ÞP. XIF. = he would at laſt yield ; he alſo was ready to lay down his life, xs _ 


knew was determined for him; having therefore made a rexſpnable 


defence, he thinks fir to add no more of that nature. 


10 Then faith Pilate unto him, Speake# thou not 


unto me ? knoweſt thou not, that I have poiver tocru- 
cihe thee, and have power to releaſe thee 7. 
» Pilate ſeemeth ſomething diſpleaſed, that Chriſt would he 10 


more free ; 
whom they derive it. 


men in Worldly power, are too prone to forget from 


11 Jeſus anſwered, Thou couldeſt have no power 
againlt me, except it were given thee from aboves: 
that delivered me unto thee, hath the 


p her Evanpe. 
( See the notes on Ma;t 


» and a preat whil 
. - E 
ſtrong temptation which' be was under, to pleafe the 


left any complaint made tg 


faith untg 


Crucifie him, crucifie hin 
Take ye him, and crucihe him: 


eathy ) 


ed higheft to Religion amongſt them: Pilare would have neg ru 


they cry out for his blood. g Pilate leaves another teſtimony "%e 
hind him, that what he did at laſt overborg with a great Temprition 
he did contrary to the conviQtion of his own conlcience, 2nd i; yer 
declineth the guilt of innocent blood. 


7 The Jews anſwered him *, We have a law h, and Lai 
becauſe * he made himſelf " 


mean the eterna] Son of 


a It was the cultom of the Romans, when any one was to be Cry- 
Cified, firſt ro ſcourge him ; but (as it appears) Pilate ordered it, ho- 
Ping, that tho he could not prevail by any other art with them, yet 
by this be might, and they might pofſibl+ be ſatisfied with this lighter 
for it appeareth by wer. qth and 12th, that Pilar had a 
mind to releaſe him, if he could have ſatisfied the Fews, tho he had 
to oppoſe the ſtream, and to do what himſelf 


puniſhment ; 


Not courage enough 
rhought was juſt, jn deſpight of their oppoſition. 


2 And the ſouldiers platted a crown of thorns, and 


ar it on his head, and they put on him a purple 
robe b, 


6 The other Evangeliſtsalſo mention a reed put into his right hand: 
th: Crown, and the Purple Robe, and a Scepter, are all regal Enſigns ; 
they give them to Chriſt in derifion of his pretence to a Kingdom, 
and inthe mean time themſelves proclaim what he had ſaid, Thar his 
Eingdom was notofthis World ; for tho earthly Kings wear Crowns, 


yet rhey uſe to be of Gold, not of Thorns ; and their Scepters uſe to 
be Gold not Reeds. 


. 3 And ſaid, Hail, King of the Jews: and they ſmote 
him with their hands c. 


o Our Lord checketh P;1are modeſtly for boaſting of his Anthority 
as a Judge to abſolve or condemn him ; declaring, that all the power 
he had was derived from God, who in his eternal Counſels had deter- 
mined this thing, which muſt therefore come to paſs : p But vithil 
lets him know, that this neither excuſed him,nor much leſs the 7-27, 
who were to execute the Divine purpoſes. Pilatc was to look to Gods 
revealed Will, not his ſecret Counſels, of which he could have no 
knowledge ; but he faith, they who.had delivered him to him had the 
greater fin ; he did a& bur as a Judge upon their accuſations, they 
procured the falſe witneſs, they would not be ſatisfied without his 
blood, and they ſinned againſt much more light. 


12 And from thenceforth Pilate ſought to releaſe 


him q : but the Jews cried out, ſaying, It thou let thi 
man go, thou art not Cefars friend » *: Whoſoerer , 
maketh himſelf a king, ſpeaketh againſt Ceſar. 


9 He ſought all fair and plauſible means to releaſe him, being con 
vinced in his own conſcience, that he was an innocentman: 7 - f . 
Jews double their clamors, and (according to the uſual adts of F* 
phants) quit their charge as to Religion, cho that was the t! ” " 
rea} cauſe of all their malice ; and purſue only the charge whic : "I 
proper for the Cogniſance of the Rowan Governor, of piece his 
bellion, and tacitly accuſe P7/are as a Traytor, and being falle 19 


eral . 


Xly 


but 


of 


Ned up 


e their 


18.0 
bt 


tary t 
all chit 
faith, | 
guinl? 
there 1x 
bor moy 
bit Ceſ; 
them. 
" 16 
be cru 
 b Th 
lipnified 
delivere, 
[es ) led 
I7 , 
called e/ 
Golgot! 
4 See 
expound 
tothar ; 
Croſs, T 
theſr Cirj 


Xl) 


Tews 
0 ſee 
C) he 


ath 
N10 


well 
100% 
Fx 
ble 


not 
CT» 


he ho 
from 


er al 
Ve 0; 
1 the 


vority 
JOWecr 
deter- 
vithal 
Jews, 
| Gods 
ve 0 
ad the 
, they 
Zut bus 


leaſe 
t this 


ever «1 


g con” 
wut che 
" Syc0" 
ne and 
h Was 
or Re 
to his 

ecult, 


.XIX. S. 7 


ft, if he ſhould ler our Saviour go 3 for no man could ſer up him 
fel 25 a King, bur he muſt proclaim himſelf a Traytor to the Roman 


Emperor. | 

F 3 {| WhenPilate therefore heard that ſaying rt, he 
brought Jeſus forth, and ſat down in the judgment-ſeat, 
ina place that 1s called the Pavement, but in the Hebrew, 


Gabbatha #- 

t Thar ſaying, that if he ler Jeſus go, he was nor Ceſar's friend, P:- 
late was a man that loved the honour thar was from men, more than 
the honour avd praiſe which {s from God , and was more afraid of lo. 
ſing his Place than his Sou!, and cculd no longer refiſt the remprarion 
he was under: #4 He brought forth Chrift, and fate down 1n a place 
called the Pavement, becauſe it was paved with Stone, Lu: in the He» 
ew, (mixed with rhe Syrzack ) Gabbtha, that js, an High Place, for 
ir was their manner ro have cheir 7adgmenz-ſe2ts higher © chan ocher 

arcs of che room where they were, 


14 And it was the preparation of the paſſover w, and 
about the ſixth hour x : and he faith unto the Jews, Be- 


hold your King y. | | 
w The preparation to aity feaft, ſignifies che day before jr, becauſe 
on that day they prepared whacſoever according to the Lawwas necel- 
ſary for the Solemnizatioy, Tome much deubr , wherher 1n this 
place the 7-4ſſ602) fignifies firitly the Paſchal Sypper, which it ccu'd 
nor doy if the F-ws ficict's this year kepr to the Law 3 for the fuur 
tcenth day of rhe month Niſan atevering, was the rime when moſt 
certainly Chriſt kept ir: who are ic the night neſore. Ir is titer efore 
more probably choughr, that by che. Paſſ9ver here, is meant cheir great 
Feſtival, '*hich was pon the fifccenth day. * ( See the rotes on Chap, 
18. 28.) x 7obn tells us jc was about che ſixth hour , char is, inthe 
#larter part ofthe Interval, berween nine of the clock in the morning, 
and civelye at noon: {or the diviſion of the day according ro che 7ews, 
was in four parts * the firſt was from the riſing of the Sun, till our 
vine inthe morning, ard was called the third hour; the other was 
from the rh1-d hour tothe ſixth, thac js, relive of the clock at noon ; 
the third divition was from their ſixth hour to the ninth,char is, rhree 
of the clock wirt us in che afcernoon ; the fourth divifion was from 
the pioch hour to Sunſer, that is with us ſix of the clock in the even. 
ing, when the Sun js In the Equizox. Now, nor only che time when 
any of theſe hours came, was called either the third or ſixth hour ; 
tur the ſpace of three hours allotted to each diviſion, was ſo called 
when the next divifion began ; ſo the time of our Saviour's Crucifixi- 
on is recorded by Mark to be the third hour : thar is,the whole ſpace 
fromnine a clock to twelye, was not quite gone, tho ir was near ar an 
end, And by che Evangeliſt, here 'c1s ſaid, that it was abouc the fixth 
hour, that ls, near our twelve of the clock. And thus the differem 
relations are clearly recorded. 


15 But they cried out, Away with hz, away with 
bim, cruicifie him. Pilate faith unto them, Shall I cruci- 
"ſie your king 2 ? The chief Prieſts anſwered *, We have 


no king but Ceſar a. 

{ The more Pilate ſought to quier them, the more they rage, con- 
mary to all djRares of reaſon; whey God hath determined a thing, 
al chings ſhall concur to bring it about. Pilate mocks them when he 
lah, ſhall T crucifie your Kivg? 4 Yet o fierce was thejr malice a- 
gdnlt Chriſt, rhat ro compel the Governour ro condemn him, ( tho 
tire were not a people under Heaven more zealous for their [1berries, 
I"rmoreimpatienr of a foreign yoke ) they cry our, We have no bing 
it Ceſar ; That is, the Koman Emperor who had Conquered 
them, 

1, 16 * Thea b delivered he him therefore unto them to 


be crucified, And they took Jeſus and led him away c. 
 b This muſt be ar or abour twelve of the clock, for that muſt be 
lipnified by the fixth hour, ver, 14. Cc Pilate condemned him, and 
delivered him to che executioner, who ( as the tnamner is in ſuch ca. 
ſes ) led him away. 
17 And he bearing his croſs went forth into a place, 
lledebe place of a ſcull, which is called in the Hebrew, 
Golgotha 4. 


O H N. Chap. XAIX 


ay: The 7ews thought ir would he a Ciſgrace to them, thit Chrilt 
fhou'q be reported auroad as their Bing, thercfore they d: fire an al- 
reration of the writing, : 

22 Pllate anſwered, What I have written, I have 
written h. 

þ Bur Pilat? refuſed to pratifie them, ard I-cs them know he 


"_ not be diretted by them whar to Write, nor alrer any thicg 
of it. : 


23 © * Then the {ouldiers, when they had crucifi- *Tuke 23, 
ed Jeſus, took his garments and made four parts, to + 
every ſonldier a part, and alfo his coat: now the coat 
was without ſeam ||, woven from the top through- Ab k 
ca; Wrougiir, 

2 Bath Matthew, Chap. 27.35. and Marh I5. 24. mention this 
parring of Chrifls garments amongſt them, which mutt be unde; ſlogd 
of his inward garments 3 which ſome tell as might eaſily be done, be- 
cauſe their garments were made up of four parts, bur his cutwazd g4Ur- 
ment which js called his coa', was all of apiece. 

24 They ſaid therefore among themſelyes,Lect us not 
rent it, but caſt lots for it, whoſe it ſhall be : that the 
ſcripture might be fulfilled, which ſaith, They parted 
| my raiment among them, and for my veſture they did 
caſt lots. Theſe things therefore the ſouldiers did !. 

 & This made them chute raiher to caſt Iots for that, than to divide 
Ir, as rey had done his inward garments. Bur there was ſomething 
, More 11 1c than the Souldiers knew 3 Chriſt hereby proved atruz <n. 
'tztyp? ro David, who ſaid of himſelf figuratively, -ſal. 22. 18. Ti ey 
\Þart My garments amongſt them, and cal} lots pon my veſtlure; by which 
ihe meainr no more, thanthar his enemies loaded themſelves with iis 
© : thoſe words which fizuratively were true of David, proved 
Iicerally rrve as co Chrift, Thus vile and wicked men are ſulfilling 
tie Scriprures, when they lictle chipk of it, 

X- T . * Matr, 27, 

25 T * Now there ſtood by the croſs of Jefits, his $.. Mart: 
mother, and his mothers ſiſter, Mary the wife of || Cleo- 15. qo. 
phas and Mary Magdalen /. Luke 23, 

{ Thefe words | the wife Jare not in the G:e:4, bur ſupplied by 49- 
our Tranſlators ; which leaves ir doubtful, whether thac Mary was I 07, Cleo. 
the Wife, or the Mother, or the Daughter of Clzophas. Þ4S- 

26 When Jeſus therefore ſaw his mother, and the 
* diſciple ſtanding by, whom he loved », he faith unto *Chao-13, 
his mother, Woman, behold thy ſon 7. I 

m We have ofcen heard rhar Fohn was the beloved Diſciple, and EN 
uſually expreſſed under the notion of him whom Jeſus loved. n Our 
Lord commerdcth his Mother to the care of Fihn, whom he had or. 
dered to rake care of her, as if he had been her own Son this letteth 
us know, thar 7oſeph was at this time dead, otherwiſe, it is not Dr0- 
b2ble, thar Chriſt would have commited his Mother to any other 
Guardian, 


27 Then faith he to thediſciple, behold thy mother. 
And from that hour that diſci ple took her unto his own 


home. 
o He alſo reciprocally commenderh his Mcther to Jobn to he cared 


I. * i 


for as his own Mother. From thar tice Mary went home, and lived 


with 7obn. 

28 After this, Jeſus knowing that all things were p. 
now accompliſhed;that the ſcripture might be fulfilled OTE 
ſaith, 1 thir{t. 

29 Now there was ſet a veſſel full of vineger : Aud #211: 27, 
they * filled a ſpunge with vineger, and put it upon hy{- 48. 

ſope, and put it to his mouth p. 

þ Daviz laid, P'a!, 69. 21. to figrifte his enemies mu'riplying aftij. 

Gtons upon him, They gave me al.o 2:1 for my meat, and in my tiirlt 

tney gave re vineger to Grin, which he ſpake merapiorical'y z parc 

of theſe words were withour a figure licerally! fulfilled jn Chrift, who 

was the Son of David; for he crying out upon the Croſs ch:2t he thir- 


al. 59, 


d See the notes on Matth. 27.31,32,33, Where, whatſoever needs j{t*d, there being no orher liquor ar hand, or this being fer on p1r- 


expounding on this Verſe, may be found, arid this Text is reconciled 
tothar 3 which &llech us, thatone S:on, a man of Cyrene, bare his 
Croſs. Their places of Execution C as uſnally with us ) were without 
thelr Cirjes, 

.'8 Where they crucified him, and two others with 
lim, on either fide one, and Jeſus in the mid{t. 

Sce the notes on Marth. 27. wer. 38, 

19 And * Pilate wrote a title, and put iton the croſ;. 
And the writing was, JESUS OF NAZARETH 
THE KING OF THE JEWS. 

Ke the Notes on Matth. 27. 38, 


20 This title then read many of the Jews: for the 


poſe for this end, they dip a lpunge in j7,ard give it to him to rink ; 
whether ro ſtupitic his ſenſes,or to prolorg his life in tho#- roriments, 
or barely ro quench his rhirſt, is hard ro determine, 1- 5: provable, 
char ic was ſuch a kind of refreſhment 2s they allowed roordinary m2- 
lefadtors in his circumſtances, the particulars of which ulage we are 
not able ro determine. 


30 When Jeſus therefore had received the VINerer, 

he ſaid *, It is finiſhed q : And he bowed his head, and *©MP-1 7. 
gave up the gholt 7. B 

4 When Chrilthad raſted the vineger, he faid, 1 E fni7:d, That 

{s, Thave now done and ſuffered 21! things which lay upon me in this 

life ro do and ſuffer. r Having ſaid this, he bywed his hzad, and gave 

wp the ghoſt, They are terms expreiſive of death ; and our Savivurs 


Place where Jeſus was crucified was nigh to the City & - free ſurrender of his Soul unre his Father. 


"yy was written in Hebrew , and Greek, and La-| 
: | p 
a a! their places of Execution were within two furlongs, FR, 
ot f Ir was wrote in allthree Languages, that notthe Jews 
5 Aung ſuch ſtrangers as were come up to the Feaſt, might un- | 


l | 
21 Then faid the chief prieſt of the Jews to Pilate» 


Writenot, The king of the ews; but that he ſaid, 1 
a king of the Jews, 7, ad =Y : 


31 The Jews therefore becauſe it was the prepa- 
ration 5, that the bodies ſhould not remain upon the 
croſs on the ſabbath-day # ( for that ſabbath-day was 
an high day « ) befonght Pilate that their legs 
might be broken, and that they might be taken a- 
way mw. 

s Tr was the Preparation, nor to the Paſſover,(for that was celebrated 
the night before ) but to the weekly Sabbath,and they judged accord - 
ing to the Law, Deut.21+23. that the land weoald be defied, if the a 

905 


os 
_ 


S ZN. $90 . po ns I” Lv - A 5 
"4.4 2 _ 66 25g =P - 
G4 goes LIES NT = x" : : 
_ ICT " w ” - ” oo - _ OW 
*. ” 4 - _— IG Ds, G__ a - x av +240 Se vo gm by 
F4 "& - > Pe " 0 Ag a 6 > g=. "71 Yau ws BOS. 
I D "Ks Gi Wo ” - 4 E» 4 ” _ 
©: Sart3o> TIS  MIESE ax * 2 % ; 45 : 
F J *s G > __ ; » > - oY . bonne os ” - 
{4 LYDE X54, OP" 7 PAPER a #7 h —_ . 
7 "Re ” yy 4P 4 p 4 
_ hn Chas - Ba ro na 2 I 6 , > — 


F. Footy hn 4 «6 
CES” be nn ARES THE 


5 O -H* N. Chaz, v@P 

lap, X 

, : ' [1 hey immediarecly buried Chrift, becauſe the +; | an 

+6: buried that day 5 but their bodies ſhou'd TE- | Li There t me eres hold day x SCaule tNe time, | 

Lohr eſpectaily on che Sabbath which began, called the Preparation ( for the woe c w Was iO called ) was 
-Nifo jg An this 10K t1 W35 4 more than Ne! hand. See 4 fuller account of the Hitiory Ci Our vaViour's 


iri&'y 
nigh x 
- ' _ RS. y vo : \ '/ A- = ; Faliton 

ecad ; which, andrhiclait day, ecre Bott! oF Evangelifts, is compared rogerher, ana made one compleg; 
ſeen, Leiit. 23, w This makes them HUtory. 


x Wav DE 1 4 
Pjut, that rhe Bodies mizhr be taken down, and CHAP. XX. 


«6s * 


p- nn ate _ 


_ 


i that ther l-g« nght be broken, left an) life remaining | yy Magdalen goeth to the Sepulchre, witch ſho {indeth eMPry, n=, 
y | | jevive and cicape. | Mary jeets three Angels in the Sepulchre, 4+ -—-1% Chia; 
. . © _— 2 — = ' v p - bY 94 / } , T l + j : : 
- the ſouldiers, and brake the legs of | jelf appeareth to Mary, and commandeth her 3g" os £ eiples 
{ WS: - 0% ws OF ? 1 pe aret F LFIAETY FP j 
the other which was cructhed v ithl Reſwreeticn, 14————18. He appeareth to hs Diſciples a 


L 


> 
nYY 
come» 


of by 
| "tk 
ing, 19, 20. *Tiverh them power to jorgive ſins, and tc retain 11,1 
21-——22 Thomas believeth nat 18d hunſeif had ſeen him, gn4 hen 


» 4 


CP _—_— is _ c » To v ; "KC - IEF F A pu 
=_ they Came to {cius, and {av that ne was p nfeſſerh rim, 24 29. Zohn giveth a reajon, why veje figy 


? 


rake not h1S 1045S w#/2tier, 
t:2- & ET 5 <25, 0.0 nor Chri:its, bd The Evangeliſt S, Tobn. giving a ſul'cr ACCOUNT than the other Evan 
11. dad. It is very polite in a ramial courſe, gclilts, of Chriſt Reſurrection, and tits Coave-le upon rhe Exch for® 
Me fare Gonnct, orc may die tooner than | ty days, until he alcended vp ito Heaven; we have in our note: 
an tt orotumed, that the cauſe of our Savi- | the ocher Evangelifts heen ſhorter, referving our ſelves for 
3, Se notice tatlure of bis TÞpirits ſooner, bur his oma ir, et!l we ſhould come to theſe two laft Chapter: 
rv ſaute ek ts Sou! : : Evanpe Mt. 
© te fouldiers with a Ipear pierced He * firſt diy of the week 2 cometh Mary Maog,.*: 
2=Uwith came there out blood and wa- len early when it was yet dark, unto the $61.1. 
__  []chre6, and ſeeth the ſtone taken Away TIror: the {ep 
- Giers io rake ſore of him, pieced his tide. | ore 
4 nat there pretently vame torth blood,and va.) aptew faith,ln the end »f the Sabbath,as it began 20 dawntny} 
> ui come ot blood js no wonder, FOr et ma. py, gg on ,fthe weebz he allo mentionerh another Mary in company 
\- {ih water, B'ood 90jng Cong! died, 3t Is oremnary with Mary Mazdalen. "Mark tells us, thar other Mary was the marke; 
ET gn ErE ks. Rnd Deliver, Ama of Fames and Salomr, Like ſaith, Chap. 23. 55+ They came, retertirg 
« in che hollow part or the bicaft, there are Watety, | ro the Women, that came with him from Galilee, For the time, 1;4, 
iv humonrs in the Men brane tht ww: mpaikch ng faith, 7t was wen the firſt day of the weeh ; Marh \aith, zt ras whey F 
\cing pierced, and the water Et on, the NVIER OIE2-| apy. wp ff, b Our Evangeliſt ſaith, 3t was while it was 44h, 
e-lfrily, Bur yer inregard of the vox words, Me That i vo rar aoarthew'y 5.18 N SefZTwor, which we tranſlate, 71 the gay # 
ay an he Knowe h ther fe OY » WC. moſt Divines if be Sabbath 8 muſt he ?nrerpreted by Marh, when the Satbaty ws 
17e ES me myffery 1n thts water and tha, which| pit; and indeed Matthew plainly cxpounds hin:(clf; adding a5 it 
Cirifts Gd pierced, Some woule have the two Sucrd | poryy by lawn toward the firſ day of the week ; which muſt beſcyen 
+, tired by thi water and a - Chrift, 1 Jebn! cight hours after the Jewilh Sabbarh was ended ; (for that ended wich 
by wit and bloods, That Is, lay TMETPTC- | 1156 ferting of the Sun the night before.) The orher Evanceliſk 2) 
e expiation of fins by 1s Moc d, and thc /a- us, thar the deſign of their coming, was to ſhew their laſi af cf lon, - 
TE Fe Sogt open ir: 93 9 _ bone he | in anon, or imba/ming the body of Jeſus; for which purpoſe 
oP "ering the 7ew/ Types Mm Suryifices, | they had brovght marerials the right wherein he was crucifice, byr 
+ of Fd het . : | |retied on the S$abbarh-day, which ending about Sun-ſcr; r1obably, 
2 An Io tht (2p A bare record, and his record | chevy ſlepr ſome tours, 40d early jn the morning in the ex 1light, they 
we 204 he knoweth that he ſaith true, that ye | come wiri their Spices. Hence appears, that there 1s no cyntradh 
4+: belie: * | Ron at all berwix: the four Evangeliſts, about the time Cf theſe ro- 
ht bY | mens coming to the Sepulchre. Matthew ſaith, 2t was about the doyy. 
; ; ing of the ir}; day of the weeb; Mark (auth, it was when the Satbath was 
paſt 5 Luke ſaith, 7t was wpon the fir(t day of the week 3 ſo (ith; 
which would make one admire, that ſo many ,words ſhould haye 
online wee Sons that the ſeorinture wen ſpent by Divine:, in yntying a knotherc, where there i indeed 
bs ares FINS 404 of SE I none. £© Tho John in his Hiſtory of ovr Saviours Bvrial, fatth no- 
tn fled *, A bone of him ſhall not be brok-| thing of any ſtone rolled ro rhe mouth of the Sepulchre; yer Mit 
thew doth 3 and of rhe Few: ſealing of It, and ſerring a warch, 2:atth, 
wor (herean; thing of this, bat in fulfilling of the Scriprur: :| 27. 64, 65, 65. Mark, Chap. 16.3. rells ns alſo, that riſe women 
ods Law about ihe Poſlver, Exod. 12. 45. Numb. g, were thoughrtul as they came, who ſhould roll the ſtone away ; 2nd 
che {t | 37atthew tells us how it came rolled away, uz. by an 4ge! : Jom 
S. 7. } th o -2 bye oj A (tn [1 be | T - F | Ci.rh nothing, ur that the ſtone was rolled away. So char che ſl 
nn hoze oficChrifts body, Jiey might Fave G 3141 y runs thus; Early on the (int day of the week, an Angel in a gi0- 
| ar by the Paſco! Lamb. r12us appcurunce ( deſcribed by Mark ) cometh down, rolieth 45a 
A nd again 1nother {cripturc ſaith, & | the one \rom the mouth of rhe Sepulchre, ad Crit _—_ po. 
23.4.5 "al hoy wink þ «ter, ihofe omen came with Spices and were U:cughtiu as they 
$305 ON MME OM. cy ET a” . - yy; ae, ho fould roll away the ifione 3 bur when they cameo the 
2 he lod 4: - 45-96] thy it n tae vet /\S pu!ciie, they found that, as iO thar, their cares were ncediclsy 
QUO UM, HAT JC WAS he Ply MCNUCICU, 452. i F 


__ 


_ I IRE CITY og nn ern— — 
— ab 


01 
4 fuller 
of thi; 


—_— 
Ay 


5 —_— ” EG, {4 dg 5 
7 . _ oy > —_ ws - _ ST i 
EO AT - x — 
"6 - nd 4 v7 -- S 
_ Pn. © 


4. Ls 
a Ras 2 
= Oe er IO 
= RF ISE 


- = 


* £m A rt 


> $2 ,2 
- Lo» » #1 


*{; : #1 TC 


fable, for Fon ſavy it, J4049 Du record, and 
roo, and 1 liſhed jr, that men m elicve that he 


Je 1 __ " - - _— _ Ki » f 
| a'] the legal Types and Figures holr comeglc- 


LPS; 


, es Tn Oey 3c 


» 4 . Ls 
i1Cai; O11! 


Pre - An 5 
pn Se 


tor the Aore was rolled away to their hands, 
2 Then ſhe runneth 4, and cometh to Simon Peter, | 
and to the * other diſciple waom Jeſus loved :, an 
ſaith unto them, They have taken away the Lorc ol a1 
the ſepulchre, and we know not where they have 1a 
him f. 
d That is, Mary Magdalene ran into the Ciry to tc!1-Pcter 5 © 
* of : | char feermmerh to be the reaſon why Join mentions ouly hcr 80! 
>v And there came alſo Nicocemus which at the | agd 


CE? 


i 
after this Joſeph of Arimathea ( being a 
. LEE EE ab aka "PE 
but tecret! or * tear of the [Jews ) 
, | | way the body of ]e-| 
. - 22 En 92s RCTS FRG 
FS: and Pilategave mum Icave : e came theretore and 
Look the budy 


% 2 A k _ . Fi 
Ser tFEenMics ON ul £7, G9, 


_— ? —-_ 


ALT leg 


: the Sepulchre ; bur vcr Luke 24. 10. makes not My) 3/ng44.e) ON 
Came to Jeius )Y night c and brought a IMIX- | but 70anra and Marty the Mother of Zames, the reporters OL fue wy 
EEE olnoct ont 1dr the Apoſtles ; bur poſſibly ſhe was the forwarde:it anc firit repre 
of myrrhe and aloes, about an hundred pound |ro = oy mY P EEE NT af thee things 1 ht 
(17117 &:. | | EF" Labs 24 9 bur pt Aibly, her chicf diſcourſe was with $6:1m 2e:t7, 01 
F! « hiflory of Ni od: 7 17Gj1T TO Our Caviou He" "4 5 SO" , im. har her LOT 
| < btitory of N7 a: yg *F w_ et 7;bn, the beloved Diſciple : f ſhe complains ro them that bo 
i At $ O-14j-87 Ve 11.3897 GD; To 2 © Co iy © ol o = ' . . * Ly? 4 
cl he © att ei je Ito ee EO} was removed our of the Sepu'chre, whither and by whom ſhe Kot” 
12 5p 127 Coleen the Sannearim, Chap. 7. $0.1 Bur how did they know that? 2ark fairh, they entred 100 's 
cre tl nw, where he thews his Jove to higt Pt. oe gs on "9 ee aber. 2 ic fhouls ſeem Of 
: herndiecd nound welplhit of aiyrrbe and! ? pulchre, Cop. IO, 5, Or it that Were alt Ty '—— ae with 
yg oo Ky i bats io PROm bo. | ver 11. of ths Chapter. They gueiled rhat the body was gone Ve 
LL) UC2S UICA 113 CD31] : Cit CO- 4 , 2 Ry 
guy { cn 10308 they ſew the fone rolled away, and tie door open 46 
(ILL. £ (5637s. 4 Yo UW: 8 - "a o Y, NET AW LI 
KO. Ielus, and wound it| 3 Peter therefore went forth, and that othgr © 
FLY bi 4 3 - 
. age o the ſepulchre g. 
as the manner of the! ple, and came t the 1cp IP nn 
Lib? Chas. 24. 12. mencions Peters going, On!y Upon. 
aalens report 3 but he muſt be expounded by this — le 
*— ther Nv y 
tn he 3 ms bencified. there + So they ran both together : and the othe1 vl [ thing 
' [NOW i111 CRC NIace vn C > CTUCH LC 4+ : : Ss on R 11Ichres. 
41 NOW IN WC) NT {ilar ( le) did out-run Peter, and came firſt to the ſepulchre' _ and bf 
was a garden / 3 and in the garden a new 1CPuc It, þ Who exprelly ſaith, char Peter and on went rogethery 4nd Un which 
WHETEH Was REVEL man Vet laid LO \ John out-1un Peter, and got firſt ro the Sepulchre. Cy * th lin-* wu 
: ; : » : . F . _ - M10 1 (IC 1114” Wig r 
” bis all their cnpient were our of the City, as alſo g their! 5 And he ſtooping down ard looking iny aw | ns x 
| pizcis 3 Which viually were Yauts, or Caves within the ncn clothes lying ; yet went he not 1N 2. / 


> : 4 (1 the Wa} to 
{ 7 7Johnſtooped down and looked into the Sepulchre, an chre, 


I - y_ —_— . EO! F 0 nn . 
here lad they Jeius therefore, becauſe of the linnen clothes lying, bur he would nor adventure 70 go nd well difficy 


i ! 
. 
: 
F 
% +4 
. 
v . 
: 
. 4 
: P IT 
$ is 
+ £\ 
WW 1x , » 
: 3 £ a8 
” GE Is 
*. 3; be o 
© of 
# T 
k 3. ; 
43 *Þ. 
p14 Ki 
(1465; 
Fo 
; F 
£ } 
L : 
"+ ( : . 
: : : 
x1 : 
i# M F 
413 ifuk 
: 
j - 
Bar jp 
- 
{View © 
* ©. 
4 
F uy 2. 
fi 
4 or # 
} a> + 
, 12.4 
i, 2 
2 ; 
: 0 
l 9-5 614 * 
i £43 : 
f WA J 
LY S007 & 
' i 
. FY- 
2 f 
: 5 
=: 
4 
F 
” 
: 
f : ; $ 
; 4 : 
$0. is * 
£ 
p40 Go 
þ : 4 6 
I" " 4 ; 
'S| A 
Ke 4 
. ty , 
ds BL 
oF, 
4 
2 + 
y 7 
w 
Ss þ P 
© 
a #4 4 
þ x 
| k 
. 
, E || 
I 
k : [' i 
& 


T) / 1 


- — 

- 8 F on > ppt” Y 
ob TO CER; 
m2 ore no 


bY a #9 L-ECLTIILTO 


- 


4 
de at _ 
i - 


2w3 preparation-Z.y for the ſepulchre was nigh at' 6s Then cometh Simon Peter following _ = 
4 4 Fob bs p 'into the ſepulchre, and ſeeth the I1nnen clothes Ut; 


*net 
Ppariy 


nN'\ 
AR! MW 
"ING ret 


Mk 


I 
No 21 = - RBI 
X _ 4 
oh \ - \ «SY - IX = 
_—_ 
x" - wa _ gy = —_— w# jo We . 
__— —_ 
d x _ w_— —— S—_— 
> ==, —_ : 
ID 


_ 
7 mor 
”_ "2 = 


WO 
1 inty 71 


$09 


nd ſaw ic 


| «511 
ind \\ um 
Jie; 


7 Ag) 


j, 4 
with the 


ic ſelf Þ. 


: But Peter, who all a!ong the Goſpe] appears to have been the 
hoideſt Spirit, goeth into the Cave, and feeth all the linen clothes 


1ving there, and the napkin that was about his head lying by ir (elf. 


g Then went in alſo that other diſciple which came firit 


9 the ſepulchre, and he fawand bclieved /. 


< ing Peter adventure in, adventureth allo, and ſeeth the | 
Paretwnny- d befieveth that Chriſt was rifen from the dead ; or 
hink) that as the women had ſaid, ſome body had taken 


am? things, aN 
(45 ſome £ 
him aWay- 


For as yet they knew not the * ſcripture, that he muſt 
riſe again from the dead 7m, 


*5. they did not fully underſtand thoſe Scriptures of the 
 — Pol 2.7. and 16. 10. and 11o. and the Types of 


the Old Teſtament, by which Chrifts Reſurre&ion was fortold and 
prefigured. 
10 Then the diſciples went away again unto their own 


home 7. 

\ Piter and John when they had been within the Sepulchre, and 
{-2n that the body was not there, they went home ; believing verily, 
1c what the women at firſt cold them was true, that ſome body 
had -emoved the body out of the Sepulchre; whicher, they knew 


nor, 
11 { But Mary ſtood without at the ſepulchre, weep- 
ing : and as ſhe wept, ſhe ſtooped down and looked into the 


ſepulchre o, 


» That the Mary here mentioned, was Mary Magdalene, appeareth 
from wer. 14. compared with Mark 16. g. which ſaith, he appeared 


firſt to Mary Magdalen. 


12 Andſeeth two angels in white, {itting, the one at the 
head, and the other at the feet, where the body of Jeſus 
ad lain : 

13 And they ſay unto her, Woman, why weepeſt 
thou? She faith unto them, Becauſe they have taken 
way my Lord, and I know not where they have laid 
hm p. 

» The other Evangeliſts differing in their accounts of this part of 
the Hiſtory, have raiſed ſome queſtions here not eafily to be relolved; 
Matthew reports thus, Matth. 28. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6: And behold, there was 
a great earthquake ; for the Angel of the Lord deſcended from heaven, 
and cam: and rolled back the ſtone from the door, and ſat upon it, His 
countenance was like lightning, anda his raiment white as ſnow. And 
far fear of him the keepers did (bake, and became as dead men. And 


the Angel anſwered and ſaid unto the women, Fear not ye : for 1 know | 


that je ſeek Feſus, which was cracified. He 8s not here: for he is 
riſm, a: he ſaid : come, and ſee the place where the Lord lay. And 20 
quickly and tell his diſciples that he is riſen from the dead; and behold, 
hr neth before you into Galilee, there ſhall ye ſee him + lo, 1 have told 
yu, And they departed quickly from the ſepulchre with far and great 
ity, and did run” t0 bring hs diſciples word. And as they went to tell 
hn: Diſciples, behald, Jeſus met them, &c: Mark faith, Chap. 16. wer, 
13,48, 6, 7, &c. And very early in the morning, the firſt day of the 
2k, they came unto the ſepulchre at the riſing of the ſun. (Where by 
the riſing of the Sun, muſt not be underſtood its riſing above the Ho- 
iz; but after midnight (asthe Learned Caſanbon hath noted ) when 
the Sun, and Stars begin toaſcend) 3. And they ſaid among them- 
ſelves, Who ſha/l roll us away the ftone from the door of the Sepulchre 2? 
4. ( ind when they looked, they ſaw that the ſtone was rolled away) 
fi it was ery great. $5. And entring into the ſepulchre, they ſaw a 
yung man ſitting on the right ſide, clothed in a long white garment, 
and they were affrighted. 6. And he ſaith unto them, Be not affrighted ; 
je ſeck Jeſus of Nazareth, which was crucified: he is rifen, he is not 
here : behold the place wherethey laid him, 7. But go your way, tell 
bis Diſciples and Peter, that he goeth vefare you into Galilee : there 
ſhall ye ſee im, as he ſaid unto you. 8. And they went out quickly, 
and fled from the ſepulthre ; for they trembled, and were amazed: nei- 
ther ſaid they any thing to any man; for they were afraid. Luke re- 
ports this part of the Hiſtory thus, Chap 24. ver. 1/7. ro the 1 32h. 
1. Now upon the firſt day of the week, wery early in the morning, they 
came unto the ſepulchre, bringing the ſpices which they had prepared, 
ond certain others with them. 2. And they found the ſtone rolled away 
from the ſepulchre, 3. And they entred mm, ard found not the body of 
the Lord Jeſus. q. And it came to paſs, as they were much perplexe: 
thereabout; behold, two men flood by them in ſhining garments. 5. Aud 


at they weve afraid, and bowed down their faces ts the Earth, they ſaid: 
mto them, Why ſeek ye the living among the dead? 6. He is 16; mere 
but is riſen : remember how he ſpake unto you when he was yet im Gali» | 


le. 7, Saving, the Son of man muſt b? delivered ima the hands of Sins 
ful men, and be eruc:fied, and the third day riſe again. 8. And they re- 
Wembred his words, 9g. And returned from the ſepulchre, and told theſe 
tlings unto the eleven, and to all the reſt. 10. It was Mary Magdalene, 
aid Mary the mother of James, and other Wimen that were with them, 
which told theſe things unto the apoſiles. 11. And their wards ſeemed 
'% chem as idle tales, and they believed them 107. 12 Then aroſe Peter, 
ang ran unto the ſepulchre, and ſiooping down, he beheld the linen clo: hes 
aid by themſelues, and departed, wonaring in himſelf at that which 
94 *0 come topaſs. Concerning the perſons that went ro the Sepul- 
"Ure, and the time of their going, there is (as we have ſhewed) lirtle 
"mculty in reconciling the Evangeliſts. The prearcſt diffzrence 
Ifemcth ro be abour the 4992s that Mary ſaw ; whether the ſaw rwo 
Fparitions of Angels, . or bar one; and one Angel, or rwo, and 
"ECRIPg the time when {he Coax them, whether before or after 
VI. 


linen cloaths, but wrapped together ina place by 


And the # napkin that was about his heau, not lying i that Peter anil John h:d hoon in the ſopnichre. Matthew ſaith, to: 


Jelus 49, 


way r, 


Maſter 7, 


God x. 


2. 34; 1% 


1 | Ter anal jour Father, to my Ged end your God 
| den!y leave them... yet | ſhall go but t9 wy Frrber, and 2y God, ani to 
| heir Father and their Ged, | 


18 Mary Mag: 


ſtone was rolled away, and the Anye! ſar upon the ſton? ; (this 
be withovt the Sepulchre.) Aark ſaith, they eniring inn the 
puichre, they law (an Angel in the thape of ) @ 32 1 
Luke and John {peak of two Anpels, bur 
without it. There is no doubr, bur tlic apParit;”:: : 
Angels ; one of winch might be ſeen withour tu T3, firing 
ſtone, to ler the women know th: \ 
them within, fitting one at the head, the other ar five ? 
| place, where the body of Jetus Jay. ? 
Whether rhe women faw the Angsls, before that Per 2 
been ar the Sepulſchre, or after ? Some link that it was befns ©, bn, 
is no way probable ; tor it can hardiy be though-, bur that if ti 
ſeen the Argel at the firit, they wou'ld nave old th. 
Peter and John at leaſt; nor world Mary have wid Perce ind 7. 
(as wer. 2.) They had taken away h-» Lord, &c. tor th: 
them, Hz was riſcn 
who ſay norhing of Peter and 7o4ns coming to the Sepulci:. 


* 
anu Def: 


. . 

+ py-18D 4 + *5 .Y 
«a [1 * 
bali aft ve 


9 And preſently Chriſt himſelf appearcth ro her, tho at {if 
did not know him. 

15 Jeſus ſaith unto her, Woman, 
whom ſeekeſt thou ? She ſuppoſing him tobe the pu; yener, 
faith unto him, Sir, if thou haſt born him kence, tel} 
me where thou hait laid him, and 1 will take him a 


why weepet thay: 


Cha; 


23 al 


. 
P + & , 4+ > 
TR [{!6£ 2? 
/ 


” Y A, Sn 
HR 1 the Y<;* 35% 1 


bd of OOTY 
« 


1 r b-3 Wop 
he had rolled it away . 


623 * %+* 4 £ 
% + ».4 * ST 7 *% þ | 
5 


«rf and /0 


EE VEea 's 4 . 


wy Por PRES þ 
SI . \TS.34 


So, that altho by forme of the others rel ior; 


L 


ſeems as if the women ſaw the Angel before their coming tt f27re 
themſelves, yet indeed it was after, 1 
the door open, the ſtone rolled away, 
and told it the Diſciples ; Peter and John came to tee, 1 
ti5fed, return, leaving Mary ſtill ſtanding at the Sepuicire weep: ; 
then the ſtooping down and looking into ihe Sepulchre, both fary 
the Angel fitting on the ſtone, and alio r!:: two Angels v iti the 
depulchre, who fully revealed the ReſurcQion to her. 


The wemen tnit £:me, {4 
fright they rium back, 


? 


” 
PP « A 


14 * And when ſhe had thus faid, ſhe turned jiev 5If + 
back, and faw Jeſus ſtanding, and knew not 


» 


N. 
1 


4 


r Either theſe words paſl=:d before the Angels had told her that {1 

was rife, Mark 16. 6. Luke 24. 5, 6. Or {which is the moſt proba- 
ble) Mary was hard to b=lieve what the Angels had rol. 
ly ; bur coming out of this Sepulchre, Chriſt appeareth; ro ker, whom 
ſhe knew nor, but thovght him to have been the Purton that Hd the 
charge of that garden where Chritt was buried,” and thr he for his 
own conveniency had removed the dead body ; ſhe thercto;Þ detiies 
to know, where he hail diſpoſed of it, having a mind co remove i7 
to ſome honourable place of Lurial, 


I6 Jeſus faith unto her, Mary s. 
ſelf, and faith unto him, Rabboni, 


? a Mo. tra 
atErt iO tatlg- 


She turned her 
which is to fay, 


« Chriſt calleth her by name, making ſuch a ſound ashe certainly 
knew ſhe underſtood ; 7 the callech hin Rabboni, which is, as much 
as tolay my Maſter. 

17 Jeſus ſaith unto her, Touch me not : for T am 
not yet aſcended to my Father  : £ 
thren w, and ſay unto them *, 1 aſcend unto my Fa- 
ther and your Father, and tw * my Gaud and vour 


oO to My bre- 


4 There are in this Verſe two, no mean difhcultes, the one abou; 
the ſenſe of the Prohibition, when our Saviour forbad this woman to 
touch him ; when after his Returrettion, Ma:irh 
the Women to hold him by the feet ; and himſelf, wer. 17. of this 
Chapter, called 7homas to thiuft his hands into the hole of his fide. 
There are many opinions about it, the beft, ſeems to be the opinion 
of thoſe, who think that our Saviour ſaw Mary too fond, and , too 
much in the imbraces of her Lord, as if ſhe thoughr he had ben 
raiſed up to ſuch a converſe with them, as he had 
and this ertor is all which he taxeth her of, not forbidding her any 
kind of rouching him, fo tar as to fatiifie her [=3f thar he was truly 
riſen from the dead : bur reſtraining any tuch groſs conception ; 
The other difficulty, What force of a reaj#n there could be for Fon not 
touching him, becauſe he had not yet Aſcenaed ? Is much lolvel by 
that aniwerto the former; minding Mary, thathe was to Aſcend 
to his Father, tho he had nor yet Afcended ; and ther:fore nor to be 
enjoyed by them with fo much freedom and familiarity as before. 
w But ( faith he) go and tell »»y Brethren, thu 14. my Diſciples, 
whom the Apoſtle tells us he 1s not 2ſhamed to call Brethren, H-5. 
# Thar L fſcend, that is, 7 ſhall jhavtly afcond to my Fa- 
Thol thall very fud- 


Ic {fit red 


elns Deach ; 


Iene came and toid the diiciples, rhar 
; ſhe had ſeen the Lord; and thai he had tpoxen thete thing? 
ITO RET Ye 


7 This was that fiſt appearance of ourLord after his Reſurre&ion. 
to Mary Magdalen, after that he was rHen from the dead, mentioned, 
Mark 16. 9,16. which the reported to the Diiciples; bur Mare faith, 
they believed her not, wer. 11. Matthew tells us of another apperrance 
of his, Chap 28. wer 9. to the women asthey went from the Sepul- 
chre, when they held him oy the feet, and wo? fhipped Lim Lnke teIls Bs 
of a third appearance to the two Diſciples as they were gorng 5© 
Emman ; which is alſo ſhortly rouched by Mark, Cp. 16.12, 13. but 


it is there ſoid, 7hat they beltewicd them not 


John: mcntioneth nenther 


of theſe ; theſe Were al} the ſame day that h- roſe, fo was alſo the nexc, 
which is menvoned by our Evargtlift in the following Verles. 


79 Li 0 Fiie- 


4 <2 oy 
Tg Wy > | Wh 

"Aw <— 

_ —_ <4" 


En —_— 
"EET 
— 


£5 


F: 
—_—_ 
Fc be 
_— P 
— _ 
" hab” 
tas, —_ . X 
4 g Tar E- - Kg ns 
—_- < : —_ . L 
mn 4 + OY - 
: » 


jo I'S ae ers 
—— <4 


F* % 


- o—__— 


a” tw. 


- 


- ——_ .. 


» 


OR SE 


—_— 
— 


, pes A 
_= 


limes HF: ©... 1-200. 
_ Sz - 
5 =y a 
rag copay” - a CM 
- a 
* A 


mY _ "i hey 
La TEE, A 1 Ye, 


bY 


+ a6 
p——— _ by - 


I 
mm nes he 
RES 


3% "pf 
o 19 41 
; \ hs 


hut 
I; + 
0+ 


A # 
Noa 4% Vert 22202 


$ 


———__—- — 
TI — 


+ wt * 7 
SY . = 
A. _ —_— —_m—_— w—_—_ 
"i. _ —_— : ” 
L q ——- 
* V 
= "Rant a: ts 
IX 


" 


mer” 


—_ Ps. -* 
- a>\ * " 
I nn Ss Og aa 
Re —_ 


1 oe. wr 3+ 
* = Be: Y 
a T7 
” -_ e IS. Y, 
TEST» Sm 


_ 45A 
"K—>$x=- 


* # _ 2m wy s s 
s. ns — —& FL 4 _ ar og "= : - - 
DRE. == - —— 
—- - _— - 


© Rene ws 
2 = £5 ” ©, 
nos eng 
- q . 


TE. te 
La - - 
Wn a 


_ 
_ p— 


I 
IT 


*\ 
i\ 


> 7 0 

& * Th-1 the ſane day at evening being the firſ 
: - when the doors were thut, where the 
es weie atlf.niltq for fear of the Jews a, came Jeſus 
in the wmidit, and faith unto them, Peace be un. 


L » 


his Verſe, Chap 24 2g. Where the two Diſci- 
was tryards eurning, and the day was far fpent ; 
: called the afternoon evening, as well as the time after 
err and Zobr tells us exprefly, it was yet the firft day ofthe week. 
Fhis 1pporance is vigueſtionably the ſame, mentioned Luke 24.36. 
For it i: fad, the rwa Diſciples went immediately to Jeruſalem, where 
thay Sound the deven gathered togethicr, ana ditcourſed of the Lord $ 
»*carance to them ; and while they ſpake, Jelus came and ſtood 1n 
mid} of ther, and faith vrto them, (as here) Peace be #0 J0u. 
« The Ditciples had ſhut the doors of the place where they mer, for 
fear ofthe Fews. b Bere is a great queſtion betwixt the Lutherazs 
and Calvzzifs, how Chriſt came in 2mongſt them when the doors 
were hut? whether he went through the doors remaining ſhut , (which 
the Lutherans fiifly maintain, as a ftrong. proof of the poſſibility of 
the real preſence of the bedy of Chriit, 1n» with or under the Ele- 
ments of the Lord's Supper ; tho we obje&t, that tots 15 to deſtroy 
the nature of Chrit's body, and toaſſgn him a body, which indeed 1s 
no body, being net obvieus to the ſenſe, nor contincd toa plac? _ 
which muſt pierce another body, which is contrary to the nature © 
3 body according to our notion of bodies. ) The Lutherans object, 
3. That here is a plain mention of the doors being ſhut. 2. No 
mention of the opening of them. 3. Nor of Chnit's entrance upon 
1907s, windows, roof, or by any ordinary way, as men 


OPENNY any | . 
fe to cater into houſes. 4. Nor had he foentred, would there have 


L 

Lib expornd: 
q « - 

9 p- f ne, tt } 
»/4al EE SEES. wm 


: . 
- 
. 3, g* c42e 
v0! , hes 


| hen 2nvy occaſion for the Diſciples raking him for a Spirit, as 1t 15 


plain they did, Like 24. 37. The Calvinſts on the other {ide object, 

_ Thar it © not f2id, that he went through the doors. 2. That if 
he had von? through the door, h2 would not preſently have called to 
them to have ſeen him, and handled him ; by which he evidenced, 
that his body had fnch dimenſions as our bodies have, and ſo could 
nor 70 through a door ſhut. In ths Ducherans reaſon, the fourth 15 
eny conliderable, the three firſt have no force ; becauſe all circum- 
Pmmce. ofaGtions are not record:d in Holy Writ. Nor is there much 
Frcs in the ath. for the doors by his miraculous Power, opened and 
hr, and he thewed himſe!fin the midſt of chem, and uſed to them 
the uitual ſalutatioin amongſt the Jews, Peace be 70 you. 


20 And when he had fo fiid, he ſhewed unto them hs 
hands and hjs tidec *. Then were the diiciples glad when 
they faw the Lord d. | 

c Like adds, his feet roo. Thoſe parts of his body where were the 
ro undeniable marks ef the death he had ſuiſered upon the Crots 
a Thenthe Diſciples, who gave lictle credit ro What Mary Magdalene 
and the other Women, and the two Diſciples going to Emma had 
reported, believed ; ſeeing the Lerd, and being exceeding glad at 
this confirmation of their Faith, 


218 Then ſaid Jefus to them again, Peace be unto 


fat. 23.18. You e*: as my Father hath ſent me, even fo ſend 1 


Ch 17. 18. you f. 


wy 


e The repeating of this ſaſutation, {peaketii it more than an ordj- 
nary complmeat, or form offiluration, It figniftzrh his reconcilia- 
ton to them, norwithſtanding their error 21401 toking him, and fly- 
ing ; i; prepared their attention for the grezt things thar he was now 

peak fo them; it alfo fignified, thar he was about to Preach 
00.1 of Peace to all Nations. f | have now fulfilled my Mini- 
2nd am aow ging to my Father whofent me; now by the 

'e Autuority that T am fent, I ſend you, to gather, inſtru&, and 
covern my Church; I fend, orT will fend you cloathed with the ſame 
Aurgority with which T am cleoathed, and tor the fame ends in part 


1: . y 
Whit TIT wasent, 


, 


22 And whon he had faid this, he breathed on them and 
faith unto tim, Receire ye the holy Ghoſt g. 

7 The Apolles couid not be apprehenſive how great a work their 
[1:4 had Ja:d upon them, in ſending them as his Father had ſent him, 
io car;y the Goſpel over the World ; Mo ( faid Paul afterward ) is 

theſe things * Our Lord therefore fortifies them with 
33 ear2eJe of that more plentiiul eftafion of the Spirit, which they 
aiterward icceived 1 the days of Pextece/?. They before this bad re- 
ceived the Spirit, as 2 Spirit of Saniijfication, and had received a 
rower to Work Miracles. They did not rill after this, receive the 
£:/7 of :0ugues, &c. Bur he here aflures them of the preſence of the 
{10!y Spirit with them, in their more ordinary Miniftry,in inſtru&ting 
and Governing the Church. This conferring of the Spirit upon them, 
be confirms to tem by breathing, as an exterior ſign or Symbal. 
The name $pr77, fignifieth a breath; and it is ſaid, that in the Crea- 
{107 (od breathed into Adam the breath of life. Chriſt breatheth into 
his apoſtles the holy Spirit ; thereby ſhewing, thar the holy Spirit 
proceedeth as from che Father, fo alſo from him ; as the breath of a 
man proceedeth from bim. He alſo uſeth words, expounding his aQi- 
v0 12 breatinng, and carrying with them an Authority, which be. 
125 ence tpoke, the thing was done, 


3 bg OY ad 
ETICBEL! j 7 


23 * Wholſdoever fins ye remit, they are remitted 
unto inem, aud whoſeloever ſms ye retain, they are re- 
tained b. 


- Whether 3a:th. 18. 18. be a parallel Text to this, I doubt (ſee 
the notes nothat Verſe ) Our Lord here ſpeaks of the /ins of perſons ; 
whoſe fins ſorver ye remit, Oc. he ſaith there, whatſoever you ſhall 
bind o: looſe. This Text hath cauſed a great deal of conteſt. All 
remifſicn of tins, is either 4«thoritative; io it is moſt true, that zone 
-an forgive ſinbut God ; and if we had no Scripture to prove it, yet 
r=alon will reil as, none can diſcharge the Debtor but the Creditor 
to whom the debt is owing: or elſe Miniſterial. Thus he who is not 


A, 

HM 

the Creditor, (amongſt men) may remir a tebt by vitueeF , 7... 
of Attorn:y maCeto him, Authorizing him ſo todo. The Se: 
therefore arongſt Divines 15, M/4ct her Cprift in thi; ext, Ts Big: 
aut herity to his Miniſters attually 19 a'ſcharge men of th; guilt of Gi. 
ſims * Or only to declare unto them, that if their R, Ls 
Faith bc true, their ſins are really forgiven them. The former i. 

many contended for ; bur 1t doth nor feem realonable, j_ Th,. (7 
ſhould betruſt men with ſuch a piece of hisPrerogative. «1, » © 
God who knoweth the falthood of mens hearts, and the inabiliey 
the bet Miniſters to judge of the trnth of any mans Faith o: Mts 
tance ; 35 alſo the paſſtonsro which they are ſubje&, ſhould Pive tot 
any of the Sons of men an abſolute power under him, ang ;. 1. 
name to diſcharge any from the guilt of fin ; for certain it jc. 1. 
without truce Repenrance and Faith in Chriſt, no man hath his "ol FR 
given; fo as no Miniſter that knoweth not the heirrs of men = 
poſſibly ſpeak with any certainty to any man. ſeying, His fm _ 
forgiven. Whar knowled;e the Apoſtle: might have by the Spirit of 
diſcerning, we cannot lay. Bur certain 3t 15, none hath any ſuch ce, 
rainty of knowledge now of the truth of any man, declaring his Faith 
and true Repentance ; from whence it is to me apparent, Thar 2 
man hath any {urther power from Chriſt, than to decluety het 
that if indeed they truly bzlieve and repent, their ſins are really for. 
given. Only the Miniſter being Chrilt's Interpreter, and Embaiſigg. 
and betrer abic ro judge of true Faith and Repentance than Othee: 
(tho not certainly and infallbly) fuch declarations from + Eaithf;) 
able Miniſter, are of more w23zght and authority than from other; . 
and this is the moſt I can conceive ſhould bein this matter ;.2ng that 
if by thoſe words any further power be granted to the Apoſtle, ir 
was by reaſon of that power of diſcerning Spzrits, 1 Cor. 12, jo, which 
ordinary Miniſters ſince the poſter £3zes, or in latter Ages, cans; 
with any modeſty pretend unto. : 


24 © But Thomas, one of the twelve * called Didymys 
was not with them, when Jeſus came z. "G 


i Whether Thomas had ever ſince they all forſook our Saviqurin th. 
garden and fled, returned again to a communion with the ref}, ,, 
was abſent through ſome occaſion, 1s not ſaid ; but upon this ſore 
have ſtarted a queſtion, Whether Thomas being abſent, received the 
Holy Ghoſt at this time as the reſt did 2 Some think he did nor, he. 
cauſe of his unbelief. Some of the Ancients think hedid ; for vw 
11. 26, 27, When God gave out the Spirit to the ſeventy Elders 
Eldad and M:dad (tho abſent) had their ſhare of it, wer. 27. the oye. 
ter 1s not much. 

25 The other viſciples & therefore ſaid unto him, We hire 
ſeea tne Lord, But he faid unto them, Except Iſhall (;s 
In his hands the print of the nails, and put my finger jntg 
the print of the nails, azd thruſt my hand into his fide, | 
will not beiieve /. | 

& It is nor faid what Diſciples, whether any of the Apoſtles, or 
fome others, told Thomas of this appearing of the Lord unto them. 
{ But Thomas eminently declareth his unbelief, which argues him x 
yet much ignorant of the Deity of Chriſt ; and having given too lit- 
tie heed to what Chriſt had rold them of his rifing again the third 
day. 

26 © And after eight days m, again his diſciples were 
within, and Thomas with them : Then came Jeſus, the 
doors being ſhut, and ſtood in the midit, and faid x, Peace 
be unto you. 


m After eight days, ſignifieth here the eighth day from the Reſur- 
rection, counting the day wherein Chriſt roſe for one ; as we call 
thole third days Agues, which have bur one days intermiſſion, and 
thoſe quartan Agues, which have but ewo days intermiſſion ; ſo Mark 
8. 3t. Itisfaid, After three days he ſhall riſe, that is, the third day. 
This appears the moſt probable ſenfe of the phraſe ; the Diſciples 
beginning from Chriſt's ReſurreQtion ts keep the firſt of the week, 
for the weekly Sabbath ; and having met on the Reſurreion day, 
met again that day ſeven night, hoping ( probably) for ſuch a pre- 
ſeace of Chriſt with them in their meeting, as they had before ex- 
perienced ; nor was their expeCtation vain. Ir appears alſo further, 
from Aﬀs 20. 7. and 1 Cor. 16. 2. That Chriſtians wzre wont ordi- 
narily to meet togerher the firſt day of the week, for Keligious exet- 
ciſes ; which from Chriſt's Reſurre&ion, or Inſtitution, or both, 1s 
thought to be ca!led Rew. 1.10. the Lords day : Nor indeed do we 
find in all the Scripture of any Congregation of Chriſtians, on th? 
Jewiſh Sabbath, bir upon this Cay; tho indeed, we find that the 
Apoſtles (and poſlibly ſome other Chriſtians) did meet together with 
the Jews, 1n their Synagogues on their Sabbath ; but we havenotio 
much as one inſtance after the Reſurre&ion, of any Congregation, 
where Chriſtians only were aſſembled upon the Fewiſb Sabbath. Thomas 
at this time was with them. It is ſaid again that Chriſt came,cand 
ſtood in the midſt of them, the doors being ſhut ; concerning wiuca 
phraſe, ſee the notes on wer. 19. 


27 Then faith he to Thomas, Reach hither thy finger, 
and behold my hands; and reach * hither thy hand, 
and thruſt it into my ſide : and be not faithleſs, but be- 
lieving 0, 

o We had need take heed what we ſpeak wherever we are. Cri 
had not after his Reſaurre&ion ſo ordinary and frequent a converie 
with his Diſciples, as he had before. This is the fifth cime that we 
read of Chriſt's appearing to them ſince hisReſurre&ion. He kne% 
what words of unbelief 7homas had uttered, and accordingly apply- 
eth himſelf to him, in a wonderful condeſcention to his weaknels : - 
bids him reach his finger, and his hands, and behold his hands, wn 
thruſt his hand into his ſide. So pitiful is our Lord, and compal- 
fionate towards the infirmiries of his people. 


28 And Thomasanſwwered and aid unto him, My Lors 


Ls 


and my Godp. 


ſiemed 


T1 
hitherto 
them 
miſng tf 
Occaſion, 
by St. 5 


2 T 
Called 1 
and yh; 
ples 6, 
bAll t 
taither, ; 
tieſe ſeve 
07 near © 
Nther at 
3 Sl 
ſz} untc 
and erite 
augitn 
6 Peter 
heard ; an 
kl tothe 
and Conſt; 
lowfy: tl 
W fomert'; 
Others x &0 


thing tha 
5/ 


ty 


; 
War a... 
Over i190 

O'S] 


4 But 
0) the ſhe 
Uo, 
eProbab! 
Nt now bh; 
Io fro, 


? 
i! y . 
04 7108jp Pp 


4 16, 
' 5 The 


"79 INas. M._ 
HA 2 


Lord ! to WIC 
m _ ” whomlT believe. 
Vat in the GolPp?, 
by his Reſurre&tion 


: as Thomas d 1 
6.1 Pg he {:wed Faith at Jaſt, being the firſt thar acknowledged 
ny 


mt 4 over all bleſſed for ever ; the obje&of peoples Faith and 
G__ —_ his Lord ro whom he freely yielded up himſelf as a 
ama ro be guided and condutted by him. 


ſus ſaith unto him, Thomas, becauſe thou haſt 
Gen me, (hON haſt believed 4* : bleſſed are they that have 
4 - ren, and pet have believed 7. 


Thou believeſt rhar I am riſen from the dead, upon the reſtimo- 
7: ty ſznfes ; thou doſt well in that, thou haſt ſeen, thou haſt felt 
n\ ww A ir is. 4 more noble faith to believe without any ſuch ſenſt- 
m3 1 4480 Faith is properly an aſſent given to a propoſic ion, up- 
ble £1 gimony of Revelation, which if itbe but human, it 1s no 
en m_ an human Faith ; as we give credit to what our neighbours 
more! we have not ſeen it with our own eyes, nor heard it with 
rell 11s,  mediately, nor had it made evident to any of our ſenſes. 
our  evelation ro which theaſſent is given be from God, we call the 
If the that isgiven £0 it a Divize Faith: fo that to give credit to a 
llent 1 the evidence of ſenſe, is properly no believing. other - 
we — a5 ſenſe confirms what we have before received by a Divine 
rom This is a ſure rule, that by how much our faith ſtands 
Ns need of an external evidence of ſenſe, the ſtronger it is. 


- 204* And many other ſigns truly did Jeſus in the 
preſence of his diſciples, which are not written in this 
hook 8. TY 
" paſhge plainly refers ro whatſoever ſigns we read of in any 
hl of S:. 7ohn's Goſpel; and lets us know, that the Evangeliſt could 
Ko :4ded abundance more to the Hiſtory of the Miracles which 
Ci wrought upon che Earth, .. 

z1 But theſe are written, that ye might believe that 
ſelus is the Chriſt the Son of God ?, and that beheving ye 


A 


declared to be the Son of God with Power, Rom. 


29 


} 


hom I wholly vield, and give up my ſelf, and 
It is obſerved, that this is the ficſt time, 
the name of God is given to Chriſt ; he was now 


id not ſhew more weaknels and unbelief at che 


H N. 


fl 


new not, butin order to what he intended to do ; to make them 


6 And hefaid unto them *, Cal the net on the right 
ſide of the ſhip, and ye ſhall ind. They calt therefore, 
and now they were not able to draw it for the multitude 
of fiſhes g. 

£ Tho they had before laboured in vain, vet their Maſter's com- 
mand incourageth them to go to work again ; then they rake a mul- 
tirude of fiſhes ; a prefoge fey fome of that great ſucceſs which the 
Apoſtles ſhould have in their fiſhing for mea. 


7. Therefore * that diſcip! 
unto Peter, It is the Lord. Now when Simon Peter 
heard that it was the Lord, he girt Þrs fithers coat unto 
him, (for he was naked) and did caft himſelf into the 
ſea þ. | 


h There is a great diſpute amongſt Critical Writers, what this 
fiſhers coat was ; whether a looſe coat, or the garment next his skin, 
or a Fiſhermans flops ; it is a- point not worth the diſputing ; it was 
ſome garment that might: modeſtly cover him when he came to 
Jelus, and yernot hinder him in his Swimming. 


8 And the other diſciples came in a litcle ſhip ( for they 
were not far from land, but as it were two hundred cubits/ 
dragging the net with fiſhes Z, 


; The other Diſciples came in a little fiſhing-boat, dragging the 
net with fiſhes ; probably, becaule it was too heavy to be Jifred up 
into the boar, 


9 As ſoon then as they were come to land, they ſaw a 
fire of coals there, and fiſh laid thereon, and bread &, 


k As to the queſtion whence this fiſh came, there are three opini- 
ons ; ſome thinking, that our Saviour catch'd it out of the Sea- with 
out a net, or by his Power commanded it to come to his ſervice. 
Others think, that the Hiſtory is tranſpoſed, and this Verſe ſhould 
in its true order come after the eleventh : but-it is moſt probable, 
that Chriſt by his Divine Power created the fb, as well as the coals 
and the bread. 


10 Jeſus ſaith unto them, bring'of the fiſh, which ye 
have now caught. | 
11 Simon Peter went up, and drew the net to land full 
of great fiſhes, an hundred and fifty and three : and for all 
there were ſo many, yet was the net not broken /. 


ITn this one Miracle, there is a complication of Miracles. 1. That 
having fiſhed all night and catch'd nothing,they ſhould at Chriſt's 
command throw out the net on the ſide of the Ship next the ſhore, 
and ſo moſt unlikely to have plenty of fiſh, and catch ſo many' 2. 
That before their fiſh could be brought on ſhore, they ſhould ſee a 
fiſh broiling on coals, and bread lying by. 3. That notwithſtand- 
ing the multitude of fiſh, the net ſhould not be broken. 


12 Jeſus ſaith unto them, Come axd dine. And none 
of the diſciples durſt ask him, Who art thou ? knowing 
that it was the Lord m. 


1 It was in the morning, and may as well be tranſlated, Come, 
ard br eak your faſts, as come, and dine; they now knew it was the 
Lord, if not by his face and voice, yet by this Miracle; therefore they 
durſt not ask him for fear of a ſharp reproof, after he had by ſuch a 
Miraculous operation made himſelf known to them. 


13 Jeſus then cometh and taketh bread, and giveth them, 
and fiſh likewiſe », 


nu Thoſe who queſtion whether our Saviour himſelf did eat, ſeers 
not to conſider what is written, As 10. 41. where it is expreſly ſaid, 
He did eat and arink with them after þe roſe from the dead : which he 
doubtleſs did, ro ſhew that he was truly riſen from the dead, and his 
ſeeming Body was not a Phantaſm, and meer Apparition of a body, 
but the ſame true Body which was Crucified, tho now more glort- 
ous, and not cloathed with thoſe infirmities which it had before 
his death ; from whence it only followeth, that he did not ear to 
farisfie his hunger, but only ro confirm the truth of his ReſurreQion ; 
he did before this eat with ſome ofthem. Zyke 24. 30. 


14 This is now the third time o that Jeſus ſhewed 
himſelf to his diſciples, after that he was riſen from the 
dead. | 


0 That is, the third day, for upon his ReſurreFion-day he ſhewed 
himſelf, 1. 7o Mary Magdalene, Chap, 21. 14. 2. To the two dif. 
ciples gozng to Emmaus, Luke 24. 15, 25. 3. To the women going t9 tell 
his diſciples, Matth. 28, 9. 4. In the evening to his diſciples, met, 
Chap. 20.19. All theſe are by 7o-n counted for one time, becauſe 
they were upon one and the ſame day. 4. That day feven-nighrt he 
appeared to them again, Cha. 20. 26. 5. After this at :5e Sea of 
Tiberias, mentioned in this Chapter. 


15 © So when they had dined, Jeſus faith to Simon 
Peter, Simon ſon of Jonas loveſt thou me more than 
theſe p ? He faith unto him, Yea, Lord ; thon knoweſt 
that 1 love thee q. Re faith unto him, Feed my 
lambsr. 

> More than the reſt of my Diſciples love me ; for fo Peter had 
profeſſed, when he rold our Saviour, Matzth. 26. 32. Tho, all men 
| ſhould be offended becauſe of thee, yet will 1 never be offended. q Peter 
now having by his Temptation learn?d more hum'lity and modeſty, 


L 


the = : 
he. night have life through his name. : 
1h. 'Nut he had wrote theſe to introduce his Readers to believe that 
ers, Tus Chriſt "was the Son of God ; a thing of ſo great concernment 
late othem, thar their Eternal life depended upon it ;: for through his 
Naine aloze, Eternal Life 15to be obtained, AF. 4. 12." 
ale y 
" CH AP. XXI. 
it0 Clrift gppeareth to his Diſciples when they were fiſhing, 1—5. Giveth a 
| great drought: of Fiſhes, whereby they knew him, 6—-8., Dineth 
with "em, 9——14. Aheth Peter thrice, whether he loveth him, 
—_ 156—-17, Telleth him by what Death he ſhould glorifie God, 18, 19. 
Chriſt retproveth his queſtion, concerning Joon, 20—=23, @ £073» 
im ft ronveth his queſti _ Bhs 
__ eluſon of obn*s Evangelical Feſtory, 24, 25. 
) lit- - 
ard 'A Frer theſe. things Jeſus ſhewed himſelf again to 
the diſciples at the ſea of Tiberias ; and on this wiſe 
rere ſiened he b4mfelf a : 
the  5Afer three ſeveral appearances of Chriſt to his Diſciples, which 
eace lnherro were all of them in Jeruſalem, Chriſt ſhewed himſeIfagain 
vthem in Galrlee, whither he had ordered his Diſciples to go, pro- 
: miſng there to meet them, Matth. 26. 32. Mark 16. 7. Here the 
c w eccahon, and circumſtances of this his third appearance, are related 
, a n by $t. John. 
Mok 2 There were together Simon Peter, and Thomas 
ny aled Didymus, and * Nathanael of Cana in Galilee, 
_ ad the * ſous of Zebedee, and two other of his diſci- 
1 Cay, ples b, 
a pre» b All the Diſciples were either there in ſeveral places, or going 
Ire Ex flither, according to Chriſt's direQtion before mentioned ; but either 
arthers tixſe ſeven were there before the reſt, or elſe they lodged together , 
tordi- i near one another ; ſoas theſe only are here mentioned as being to- 
$ 4 ther at this time, and ſo witneſſes of this Miracle which followeth. 
(014 1 . . . 
Jo we 3 dimon Peter ſaith unto them, I go a fiſhing c. They 
on the lk unto him, We alſo go with thee. They went forth 
hey - ad entred into a ſhip immediately ; and that night they 
ages” Wit nothing d, 
gation, P:ter-and divers others were Fiſher-men, as we have formerly 
Thomas teard ; and had Boats which they ſo imployed. Tho they were cal- 
n2yand kltothe work of the Miniſtry, yet Churches not yer being gathered 
which ad Conſtitured able to maintain them, they did not judge it un- 
iu. 1imploy themſelves in honeſt vocations, which might bring 
poneing of a livelihood 3 no more did Pan afterwafd. d The 
finger, a re.0)veto go with him : they went, but that night caught no- 
hand, * ang, th: Providence of God ſo-ordering it, that Chriſt's Divine 
ut be- Wermight Le ſeen 18 commanding fiſh into their nets, 
4 But wiien the morning was now come, Jeſus ſtood 
Chr he ſhore : but the diſciples knew not that it was 
*OnVEr WW, 
hat we Pr. -—_ 
s _w_ % Frobably their diſtance from him was the caufe that they did 
; apply: Co: him, tho they had {zen him once and again lince his Reſur- 
fs; he ge from the Dead : others think, thar by the Providence of 
Nl " 6 ezes were hoiden, that they ſhould not know him, as Luke 
compal- £ 
Sg hen - Jefus faith unto them, ? Children, have ye 
'y Lord \:4 2 Ley anſwered him, No, f. 


" 
Vo!. I], 
H fy 
the". 


' doth nor reply, Lord ! chon AGO [ lovethes mors than theſe; 
BIEE hs 


Chap. 
F He asketh them if they bad any thing to eat ; not becauſe hz 


more attentive to the Miracle which he by and by intended ro work, 


waom Jeſus loved, faith * 


| 
' . 
j ( j 
bs} "4 ; 4 \, { 
WOLF bn i 
IL £4 1-3) ' 
W-:{-1 BE 
x i 4 * ©. 
$9 - by [ 
OR 6 
. 1.448 ' | 
4 Ks Bott: | 
Lute 5. 4, Wa 
of s $5 's 
6, / | fi Hy 
d 5 q % 
; þf A003 © 
F OMBALR(F\ 1h 
"A. of BP I 
MA "IS 'T « 
{ {3% hf 
Bit 
We | 8 att 
[I 4}! 


. n—_ 


4 x" —_ 
=__ - : - - *:m2 Xa 5 
- _ ——_— m- - 
« 44 op 27 - o + _ __ . _ 
_- _ _—_— _— - T wy, 4 \ ——_ . —_ 
Y A - = we - EE EG EE] T% = NE 

> > - - - » 4 hi 
_—” on w- - _ "_—_ « 22; a 3, -»- 4 - 

” - . 6 Gn 4 F - p pn ir 22: -— ba 44 ' 

y . - —_  , fm 

q > 


S 


: : a *C Cer Mets 4 


Com. WF eee 
—_ & . , 
_ 4 , wo - "3 Is 


R_ 


o warn 
wo 


- Ig _—_—_ 

4. G4 

= Y 
ID 


9m tne $2 > 
RE —— 
I- 
” = 
« > 
ur 
* a6 
as we 


I 


EIDInD, © 


B PB 07> rot oe ee 5 - » 
in - Fr _— = L —_— 
- . s — wo_ , = 4 S P— y AIR 
FIC 4 ——_ « 4 ag fre. 7's ES _ . Fats - —_ 
E 2 — —_ — ” = ®3z {28 4 R k = Ne J-- __ uk « L 
% hs _—_ j _ C y * - y tea Mo - - v I 4 R tho, y E 
© = mm gs. vw = 43x _ p *. 4 bd TS * = bob, 4 . — I 
” HT” \ : = - _ OSS . þ . =—_ - -- - _ 
"INIT. i o "BE I - —— Lp rn " 4p oo” St > . _ T oy ho - * ” 
— = > I : i 24 . & C b _ g . 
N H 2 4 fey x = - > > Cn © RY CLAS. dps © — _ i A - " 
_ — a-— _ E p : "I ”. pH - «F7.. . L + rs — A —— 
- £& PI Mine ty Ae Sn Ws, uv" Ry , po een, -Ingas<- - -2—= - EW —_ - —_— JT 
K - : = ___ © PA av —_— W __ 
_ wn es ear - w n —_— i _ - D aq <= _ = 26 penny 
_ " pu a Senn eee nes beg - — =— Bn SY = _ = -, ern os _ COTE. - —_o————_ ————_— == = pe « _ '- as 
-.. - ens ——— ” . 4 —_ Ip. U 4 ” Et > FLA —A jo ERP, 
Wo > ISS -— —= - 2: "= 5 : tA £4 DIC - mt A "I : 
ISIS oo20on4t TIS. SS COIIEY _—— £ v2 _ = _ — : FEES ICE _ _ oa. 0 - - A == Th hon y 
wo. — —— — . : "FIT? : D _— ny" an EEC 7 , > - = 
- _ by = —_ - = — _— 


Chap. 81. 


- on!y 2verreth the truth and ſincerity, not the degree of his love | ther he world wet : for he was nor better than his Lord, w! 
- Clviſt replies, Feed my Lambs : by which he underſtands his peo- | Was WIVNg, and Fleth weak. Whether our Saviour by tþ; 

his Church : Not the Paſtors of ir ( as if Chriſt by this had | mand, Follow me, intended the imitation of him, his gc.. 1s Com. 
| particular kind of his death, 1s uncertain ; unleſs, we with. 


*Ch.13.36. 18 * Verily verily, I fay unto thee, When thou waſt 

As 12 young, thou girdedf{ thy felf, and walkedſt whither thou 

pe wouldeſt ; but when thou ſhalt be old, thou ſhalt ſtretch 
forth thy hands, and another ſhall gird thee, and carry thee 
whither thou wouldſt not. 

7 19 This ſpake he, ſignifying by * what death he ſhould 

14. glorifie God. And when he had ſpoken this, he faith un- 


> j 0 


MER : 
Tells Peter the chief Paſtor over the reſt of the Apoſtles) but the 


:ommunity. The Papiſts from this Text argue for Peter's Primacy, 


12d Authority over his fellow Apoſtles, as well as over the members | 


of the Church. Bur, Chriſt ſaid not to Peter only, but to all the r<ft 
of the eleven, Matrh. 28. 19. Mark 16 15, 16. Go ye, preach the 
Go{pel ro all nations ; and it was to the reſt as well as to Perer, that he 
(hid, Chsp 20. 22, 23. Whoſe ſins you remit, thiy are remitted, SO 
as it is apparent, whether Feeding, only lignifies inſtruEting, or feed- 
ing by Dottrine, or (as moſt judge) comprehends government and 
ſignifies that univerſal charge which Miniſters have over the Church ; 
the ſame power which Peter had, was alſo committed to the other 
D:iciples. 

16 He ſaith to him again the ſecond time, Simon ſor 
of Jonas, loveſt thou me ? Hefſaith unto him, Yea, Lord, 
thou knoweſt that I love thee. 
my ſheep. IN 

17 He ſaid unto him the third time, Simon ſoz of 
Jonas, loveſt thou me ? Peter was grieved, becauſe he 
ſajd unto him the third time, loveſt thou me? And he 
ſaid unto him, Lord, Thou knoweſt all things; thou 
knoweſt that { love thee. Jeſus ſaith unto him, Feed my 


ſheep 7. 


; Divines here raiſe a queſtion, why our Saviour propounds this 


was becauſe Peter had thrice denied him. Some fay it was to ſhew 
his great love to his Church, which he could not commit to Perer, 
but after three inquiries if he truly loved him, who was the Lord of 
it, Others refer it to the three ways by which good Paſtors ought 
to feed the Church ; Prayer, Preaching, and an holy Life. Others 
think, that it hath reference to the three Flocks, that Peter was to 
feed ; the Jews in Judea, the Gentiles, the diſperſed amongſt the 
Gentiles. 


tohim, Follow mek, 


k This 19 verſe, givesus the general ſcope of werſe 18. wiz. That 

- 5t was 2 prediQtion of that particular death by which Perer ſhould die, 
which was (if we may believe what the Ancients have generally 
reported, and we can have no other proof ) by Crucifying ; in 
which kind of death, the hands of the perſon Crucified, are ſtretched 
out and nailed to the Croſs. But which way hedied, we cannot cer- 
tainly affirm ; the Evangeliſt afſureth us, that our Saviour ſpake 
cheſe words with reference to that kind of death by which Peter as 
a Martyr wasto glorifie God ; nor is it any objeCtion againſt his Mar- 


He ſaith unto him, Feed 
| # Our Lord only checketh the curiofiry of Perer, ang 


queſtion thrice to Peter ? The moſt of the Ancients agree, that it | 


tyrdom, that our Saviour here faith, that he ſhould be carcied whi- 


.H-N, Cha 


j - 
! 


| Text to be interpreted by Chap. 13. 36. and 2 Per. j\ 5, 

| _ 20 Then Peter turning abour*, {eeth the Ciſcipls 

Jeſus loved, following ; which alſo leaned on has 

; at ſupper, and 1aid, Lord, which is he thar bet 
thee /? 


| Icribed. 


\ 


' ſhall this man do m ? 
| mn Do is not in the Greek, nor poſſibly is ſo properly addeq 


' ſenſe js. What ſhal) become of this man ? Whar {hal} belies ® 
ate 2 


' What ſhall he ſuffer ? 


22 Jeſus ſaith unto him, it T will that he'ta;; 
come, what 7s that to'thee? Follow thou me x. 


'fo attend things which himſelf was concerned in; t 


or abide upon the Earth until Chriſt's ſecond coming 
concern, without regarding what others did, or 


example. | 


that that diſciple ſhould not die: yet Jeſus fig 

him, He ſhall not die: but, If I will that he farry till 

come, what zs that to thee 0? 
o But the Diſciples knowing the particular kindneſ; oy; Caviow 


had for Joby, upon theſe words not duly attended to, concyg 
John ſhould abide upon the Earth to thefſecond coming of Chip 


24 This is the diſciple which teſtifieth of theſe things 
and * wrote theſe things: and we know that his teſtimony 
1s true p; 

? John who wrote this Goſpel, was that Diſciple whom Jeſus by. 
ed, who leaned on our Saviour's breaſt at ſupper, and enquiredukg 
ſhould betray Chriſt ; of whom Perer ſpake, wer. 21. and who teh. 
fieth theſe things, both concerning Peter, and Concerning himſelf 
and the Church : the ancient Church knew his teſtimony was true 


25 * And there are alſo many other things which Jeſs 
did, the which if they ſhould be written ery one, | 
ſuppoſe that even the world it ſelf could not contain the 
books that ſhould be written q. Amen. 


9 But none muſt imagine, that all Chriſt's Sermons, or Miracle 
are recorded in thisBook, or in any of the ather- Goſpels ; the War 
would have been too much Killed with Books, if all ſpoke or done 
by our Saviour had been written. There is ſo muck written, $i 
pleaſed God we ſhould know, or was neceſſary for us to know, fo 
the true ends of fuch Revelation : To beget and increaſe faith in w/ 
and to promore and direC& holineſs. 


CR ——  —________——— — —_— 


'ofe Spices 


h. or t];« 
low el. 


! 
Wr-, 
WIG 
hr, - 
105 1 vJ 


'aJe:t 
| J That is, he ſaw John, whom we have >fren before heard C, ; 
| © 0 Ces 


21 Peter ſeeing him, faith to Jeius, Lord, ang * 
lat 


\ till [ 


= mind; lim 
e11ng him &. 
' was not concerned what became of John, whether he ae} 

KF, 
* It was Py, 


. . hat hee; a of 
them, himſelf to execute his Maſter's command, and ny, 
) i 


23 Then went this ſaying abroad among the brethren, 
not unty 


With the 
Humanir 


Church 
Pl Pare ; 
Ot it, 


mer B, 
nſetr] 
be refe! 
made 0 
Nles had 
it by G 
Mat. 2 
Holy 8 
I 
paſtion 
forty « 
\Kingdo 
8(z 
with th 
them to 
bute to 1 
0n occaſ 
bis Aſces 
Unto Al 


eaven , 


1 ap. I. 


J 


| CO» 


ak The Acts of the Apoltles. 


ra_ —— % : 
nel. The ARGUMENT T. 
ug. Eis Book hath beeu held by all Chriſtians to be Canonical ; and eſteemed, though amongſt the hardeſt, yet among [t 
the brighteſt Jewels that ſhine mn the word of God, Tt 1s an Hiſtory concerning the Church of Chii}t in irs Infancy, 
 Whe and ſhews Gods wonderful care for it, and Powerful Providence over it : It begins where the Goſpel ends, - which the ſame 
: Author (St. Luke) had wrote ; and is of great uſe to prevent and confute ail feigned ſtories concerning the Lives and 
Py” Dadtrine -of the Holy Apoſtles, Sr. Luke having accompanied St, Paul, and having been an eye-witneſs, and an ear- 
is ha witn2ſ5, 04s certainly the fitteſ® to Record what that great Apoſtle did and jaid; and if moſt of this Book be token up Con 
cerning him, it is becauſe, (ſpeaking of the reſt of tbe Apoſtles, x Cor. 15. 10.) He laboured more than they a!. 
j i In this Book there is an account of many Sermons, Preacht by the Apoſtles and Apoſtolical men, upon the moſt neceſſary 
parts of our boly Religion, as the Death, Reſurrection aud Aſcenſion of our bleſſed Saviour ; of Gods mercy through 
nds im im, and of the life to come, &c. and withal, how holy men lived an/werably to their Profeſſion and hipe. 1 ho, when 
bim, he we read theſe things, ſeem to ſpeak unto us, and tell us, (what they ſay was inſcribed upon the Statue of ſon? deified Heroz } 
—_ & f-ceritis ou = eritis ficut nos. Jf ye ſhall do as we have done, and ſuffer as we have ſuffered, then ye ſhall be 
” *f as we are, 
came f (Glorious and Happ) 
llow his | | 
CHAYPT L | _ publickly be manifeſt ; and thar that Prophecy 1a. 2. 3. might be 
ethren 4 account of what the Author's former treatiſe contained, i. e. what | tulfilled. n Of my Father, Luke 24. 49. That is, the holy "Spir:r 
boy: ] Jeſu did and taught, 1, 2. how he appeared by infallible preofs | promiſed by our Saviour in his Fathers name, John 14. 26. and may 
| - after his Paſſion, 3. how he charged his diſciples to wait in Jerula- well be called che promiſe ; without which all other promiſes wouid 
ry Eu lem for the. Father”s Promiſe, q. 5. they aik of him the timeof | be of no vaJue unto us. 
Iſraels reflorat ion ; he rebuketh their curioſity ; ana promiſeth them the 5 For 0 John truly baptized with water q but * Je * 1, x. 19 
r Saviour huly Ghoſt, that they m_—_— witneſſes = him in the world, 6—8. | ſhall be baptized with the p holy Ghoſt 4, not many days Ch. 4. 
oneluded After his Aſcenſion, Angels appear, and inform the diſciples of his hence "Y 4 
Chit gxcond coming,” 9—11. They return to Jeruialem, and continued in : , IO 5 2m os 
- rajer and ſupplication, 12—14. Peter exhorteth to eledl an Apoſtle | * Mat. 3-11. Water being of a purifying Nature, plentiful. and 
things,  ſapply the vacant place of Judas, 15—22. Twoappointed: They _ to come by. p His Gifts and Graces, which were, (as water 
eſtimony pray to God for direBion, 23—25- Matthias by lot choſen, 26. on Baptized perſons) largely beſtowed upon them on the day of 
; Pentecoſt. 1. That the Apoſtles and all others might be affured of 
1; THe former treatiſe have I made 6, O Theo- | the DoQtine of the Goſpel. 2. That they might be enabled to 
Lars philus c, of all that Jeſus began both to do and _ _ gag __ obey our Saviours commands left with 
| | them. Ir 4 was but ten days after his Aſcenſion ; but our Saviour 
ho teh; <> d T7 2 g 
ure ” tes "efers unto the Goſpel Wrote by this Evangeliſt. 5 Se. would not prefix a cettain day, that they might watch every 
Wa5 true 1uke, who was undoubtedly the pen-man of this Book ; which | 9Y; Wh | | 
1h Foſs hears Teſtimony unto, and confirms ( if need were ) that other. 6 r When they therefore were come together, they ask- 
ch Jeſus : Ffeemed the ſame name with Jedidiah, ſignifying beloved of | ed of him ſaying*, Lord s, wilt thou at this time reſtore Af. 
j one, God, or one that loved God : who he was, is not certain : ſome | apain the kingdom to Iſrael ? Ih 3 
tain the have taken the name appellatively, It is evident by the Epithere | *,, gither the 120. mentioned wer. 15. of the 500, mentioned 
given unto him, Luke 7. 3, thar he was one of great Authority, | , cop 15. 6. That they might more readily obtain an Anſwer, 
Mirae baving the ſame Title which Ter:u/lus gives unto Feſtw, As 24- 3- | they joyn in the Queſtion : 5 Which was taken away by the  Ro- 
te Way and the chief Captain unto —_ Act's a : A— not many | -1azs, and by Herod ; and they exp=Qed ſhould be reſtored to them 
noble are called, 1 Cor. 1. 26, yet EXZENUS MIS TaFace Unto | by the Meſſiah ; underſtanding the Prophecy Dar. 7. 27. to this 
ke or done PAaccy 7 
WY ſome of all conditions. 4 This w = ar _ _ VIZ, - purpoſe. 
1tten, 31t Life, Do&rine, and Death of our bleſſed Saviour ; al- | * . . NO 
know, fo _ —— ern or deed of our Saviours, could not be | , 7 And he ſaid unto them * 2, It is _y for you to KNOW * Niar. 2.1. 
Faith in us/ nteſſed, John 21, ule. yet the Evangeliſt was faithful in with-hold- the 4 times or the ſeaſons, which the x Father hath put in 36. 
ing nothing which was neceſſary tor the Church to know ; and his own power, 
kaving no room for unwritten Traditions. | . |  # Our Saviour blames their curioſity about ſuch things as are not 
1 * Until the day e in which he was taken up, after that neceſſary to be known ; and yet though our Saviour does not in 
be through the holy Ghoſt f had given commandments un- his Aniwer tell them what chey defired ro know, he tells them whar 
whe apo es whom he had choſen IS you _ " mw roknow. I he petition of wicked men, 
' ; WS: ES nay, of Devils (as when they crave to go into the Swine) is ſome- 
eThatis, the day of his Aſcenſion. This wh — the for- | time granted according to their will. But the praver of the Ditciples 
fer Book (his Gojpel) unto this, thewing 10w tar he had proceeded | of Chriſt is anſwered to their beſt advantage, (though it does not 
"inſtring down the DoRtrine of our Salvation. f Which ware may | ſeem to agree to the matter of their delice.) = How Jong any mercy 
bereferced, either to the commandments he gave, or the ctoice he | ſhall be deferred ; when it ſhall be given : * Who is fons & origo 
made of the Apoſtles; both being by the Holy Ghoſt. The Ap0-|{ Deitatis : to whom Chriſt, eſpecially as Meajaror, and in tour itead, 
— Pn 5 w_ —_ _ _ ne —_ a me refers all things 
It dy L0d, ecially to publith th? GoJjpel tro the whole World, . : _ S 
, 28. 19, And £ hs at Jeruſalem till the coming of the hob —_ feof oy. | £9 mp " _ x fps f, 4- 
Holy Ghoſt, Lnke 24. 49. : PL. = || Or, The 
1*;To wor aig he ſhewed himſelf alive after his neſſes unto me, both in a Jerufalem, and in all Judea, raph; Wor: 
raſtion, by- þ many infallible proofs, being # ſeen of them | and in Samaria, and unto the uttermoſt part of the CES 
forty days, and & ſpeaking of the things pertaining to the | arth. | ; you. 
kingdom of God : » Nor till then, not of their own ſtrength, but of Gods grace, 5+ Luke 24: 
| g(i e.) The Apoſtles þ eating, drinking, ſpeaking, walking appeared by Peter's denying, and the others leaving of our Saviour, , 
wh them: nay ; rt Prgeny very wniads. —_ permitting z, andthat I am indeed the promiſed Meſſiah : my DoQtine, Life, |. ts. 27 


them to be touched. God ſuffring Thomas his infidelity ro contri- | 
bute to the ſtrengthning of our Faith. i Not continually, but up- ! 
n occaſion as he pleaſed ; it was ſo long from his RefurreCtion ro 
bis Alcenfion : and the ſame ſpace in which God ſhewed himſelf. 
unto Moſes in Mount Sinai, So long alſo he was pleaſed to ſtay |; 
with them, that he might more abundantly teſtifie the cruth of his | 
humanity, and of his Reſurre&ion. & Either his Kingdom in | 
aven, the Church Triumphant. or his Kingdom on Earth, the | 
wurch Milirane. What future bliſs and happineis he was going to 
ax; And what means they ought to uſe towards the obtaining | 
01 It, 
F 4 And {| / being afſembled together with them, com- 
—_ marded them that they m thould not depart from Jeruſa- 
lm, but wait for the 7 promite of the Father ©, which, | 


farh be, je have heard of me. 

iÞy his order, or Converſing frequently with them, as thoſe 
thar Table together. »» Otherwiſe the Apoſtles would have ab- 
Td Feruſalem, as reeking afreſh in the blood of our Lord : and 
tiere Chriſt choſ- to pour out his Spirit, that he might ſhew forth 
G glory in the ſame place where he ſuffered Ighominy. There 
| - would have his Apoſtles to abide, that they might ben.gher 
0 Mount Oliver, from whence he was to Aſcend ; as allo that both 


Ws Aſcenſion, and the coming of the Holy Ghoſt; might fnort! 


Death; Rceſurre&ion and Aſcenſion, which we ſha!! reſtifie to all the "——_—— 
World by your Prezching, and holy livipg, working miracles, © : 
a Places where your teſtimony ſhall be moſt oppoſed. Theſe words 
are both a command, to tell the Apoſtles what thizy ought to do, 
and a prediction of what they ſhould be enabled to do. 
9g And þ when he had ſpoken thei things c, while they 
beheld, he was 4 taken up, and a e cloud received him out 
of their ſight. | 
b Mark 16. 19. Lnke: 24. 51. As {ie did not aQtually give up 
his life til] all was fulitlled, fo he did not leave the World till as was 


| revealed by him, that was neceijary for us : c that they might be 


eye-witneſles, and moſt nnexceptionable. & Not by an externaf 
help of Angels, but by his own power, and the agility of his (now) 
glorious body. e This, though a rrue cloud, yet was a more 
than ordinary glo1tons one ; {uicable to the Majeſty of hiin that 
uſed ir. 

10 And f white they looked ftedfaſity toward heaven, as 
he went up, behoid g, tv9 men Rood by them in5” white «x74. . & 
apparel ; | | J 

f Chriſts aſnent was the more Jezfurely, that he might delighr 
their eves and mind ; but eſpecially confirm their Faith the more, 
Bchold, £ Arg els in the ſhape of men ; + which Ange]s ordinarily 
apptated 1, 19 Ac» they rerntiicd their nate punt} : as alto 

ry 


' 
wh) 
F FE .,; ES 
L A oo Pf 
2 i 5 + TT 
j F ) b: 07 * * 
*%* T o*: > 
t , Y + 71 5 : P. 
Kb ; a2 1:05 7 FX. 
 $28.4%Y 
wy ; 
ap. T3 : 
ory 


_ "mot 


— 


A = 
— 4 an 
I EE ot 


Es PETE 


—_— : . 
\ m_ 6 1% gs 2 - - 
2547 ng OT = : ” 
nu" cate ys >< . - - . 
_ - - | V - je -— 4 = pay oo. +4 
FO INS n+ the du ire P- i TIE watts i 4 , 2 ” OE a T: - < —_— 
RS os a % ; c fi 
= £ h 
. MN —_ — a— = = ” 
ai 4, . ” . " * br as + - . _ 


- —t2 hw... 4 


ge op er—_—_  - 
—_— 
———_ 


ax 


I& n py a þ- " 
5 . f is . 
> 3 On AH IR > mn we _ ——_ 
I 3 == Oo_——— WH I oy ——n——— 
_ » - F, - 
. _ = _ =_ -— _ p_ 4 
: $ ——— 
- _ - 272 F pea — o - 
_ ae 
» < Fw "_— 2 


. - 
_ Z . 
—_ 7, _— 

Lo 


+ 
Een th FOO arts Rec rrgge 
a . ** 


_—_— 
VR 


m— pay © =_ — Wo " _ 
TE» = 2 = 
> I de — xe 
— "A Re Ron 
. = = = Py > po _ Ss 
" C ” —_ 0 PP Y - 
a ——— wa » of babar ory oe - 4 
A . . OS J 
4 ' Ray > = $8 2 ” _ 
_ -_ - ow - 4 = wt — — —— 
£6 had as - 4B 
ch 8 os vat > > 
” 
E 


at 


TIED. 


= 


Chap. 


"Dan 9. 13- : ; , 

= 4.9 as ye have (een him go into heaven, : 

Mar. 13.36. # The two Angels ( in the form of men ) before mentioned : 
Luk. 1. 27, & That is, the Apoſtles who were of that Country. / T hey are 
| Thef, 1.16, rouz'd our of their extaſie they were in, at that glorious ſight ; ro 
> Ther 1, Iearn what was ſo much to their and our advantage, #2 1. Vilibly. 
10 2 In aclond. 3. By his own Power, 4. With the like Majeſty. 
Rev. 1. => 5. With the ſame Soul and Body. 


* Mart. 10. 3 


4  T V> 


*Luk. 6. 16: 


[. 


to repreſent the joyfulneſs of the errand they were uſually ſent 


Upon. ; 

PT ; Which alfo ſaid k, Yemen of Galilee, why / ſtand 
ye gazing up into heaven ? This ſame Jeſus which is taken 
up from you into heaven, * ſhall 2 ſo come, in like manner 


12 Then returned they unto Jeruſilem, from the mount 
colled » Oliver, which is from Jeruſalem a o ſabbath-days 
Journey. ; 

» Which B:thany was a part of, as firuat2 towards the byttom of 
it, remorer from Jeruſalem. Hence Luke 23. 59. Citters not from this 
place ; from bence the rather our Lord Aſcenued that he might rC- 
ceive his glory, nich the plac? where he began his ſuffering ; (in 
the garden where h- endure 4s agony, and was betrayed ) and 1n 
the view of Jcruſa:m, where he hid been condemned and {corn'd.. 
s About a mile or two, or ſuch a ſpac2 ; as by Gods appointment 
was betwixt the Ark and the people. Jeſb. 3. 4. | - 

13 And when they were p come in, they went up 1nto 
an q upper room, wheie abade both * Perer r, and James, 

'and John, and Andrew, Philip, and Thomas, Bartholomew, 
and Matthew; James the ſon of Alpheus, and Simon Ze- 


lotes, and Judas the aber of James 

p To the City, and to the Houſe : q The fame probably where 
they had k-pr the Paſſover, and partook of the Lords Supper : 
howſoever for its Jargenels, capable to receive ſo many. r.As 
Elder, and firſt called to the Apoltle-ſhip, is generally firſt named 
and here eſpecially his name firſt ; and their names are repeated, 
to ſhew, that though they fal in forſaking of Chriſt, they did rife 
again in profefling of him ; and that notwithſtanding their Apo- 
ſtacy, they were continued after their recovery - in their fornier 
Office and Dignity. : 

14 * Theſe all continued s with one accord tn prayer and 


ſupplication, with the £ women, and Mary the mother of 


Jeſus, and with his brethren «. 

s With great reſolution, notwithſtanding all oppoſition and 
contradidtion they met with : Prayer and Supplications for mercies 
they wanted, or preventing of the evilsthey feared. £ Their Wives, 
or ſuch women hoebally, as we read of Mar. 27. 55, 56+ « That 
is, his Relations and Kin{women which frequently 1n Scriptare are 
called Brethren. 


WS ACTS. 


-knoweſt # the hearts of allmen, ſhew whether oftheſsty ; 


15 © And in thoſe days x Peter ſtood up y in the midſt 
of the diſciples, and ſaid, ( the number of names to- 


gether were about an hundred and twenty.) 

x Betwixt our Saviours Aſcenſion and Pentecolt, » As generally 
ſpake for, and amongſt the Apoſtles; but now eſpecially, to ex- 
preſs his zeal and faithfulneſs to our Saviour, whom he had ſo lately 
denied; he being alſo deſigned the Miniſter of the Circumciſion, 
which place he began now to execute. z Or perſons abont an 
hundred and tweaty ; probably, Chriſt had converted many men, 
but theſe might be either men of name or quality ; or meant of fuch 
az, wer. 21. had accompanied with Chriſt and his Apoſtles, and 
were delign'd for the Miniſtry. 

1:6 Men ard brethren a, this Scripture 6 muſt needs 


have been fulfilled, which the holy Ghoſt by the mouth of 
David ſpake before concerning Judas*, which was c guide to 


them that took Jeſus. 

a An ordinary compellation z Speaker and Auditors were He- 
brews of the Hebrews. b wiz. Pſal. 41. 9 muſt needs be falfilled : 
yet God's foreknowled ge and prediftion, excuſed not Judas his fin : 
© Not onely leading them in the way when they took our Saviour, 
bur being direQor of their Counſels againſt him. This the Apoſtle 
premiſes to abate the offznce that the horrible fall of 7adas might 
have occaſioned. 

t7 For* he was numbred d with us, and had obtained e 


part of this miniſtery . 

a Being one of rhe twelve Apoſtles. » Zaag, not as if Judas 
was made an Apoſtle by lot, as Marth:zs afrerwards ; bur by the 
Providence of God, by which every lot and caſual matter is go- 
verned : and to ſhew that the dignity did not befall him, or any of 
the other Apoſtles, becauſe of their deſcent, (from Aaron ) or from 
nature, or from any deſert whatſoever, but meerlv from Gods good 
will and pleaſure, f Then the Apoſtles Office is Miniſterial, and 
they werenot Lords over Gods beritage. 

18 Now this man purchaſed a field g with the reward of 
Iniquity ; and falling headlong, þ he burſt aſunder in the 
midſt, and all his bowels guſhed out. 

Purchaſed a field; g which 7J:dzs might have a3reed for at that 
4 and . yer the ..chief Pci{ts hanght ( as Mar. 27. 7. ) bya 

range providence, leading of them to that purchaſe ; howſoever 
eventualiy he bought it, as throwing back to them their money 
which payed for. it. Þþ 127. 27.5, Fr is ſaid he hanged himſelf, 
which unplyinz onely his death by ſuffocation ; whether he dyed 
our othorror of tis fat, or laving violent hands on himſelf in ſuch 
cicumfiances as may agree With this relation, it is not material to 
determine 

19 And it was known uttoall the dwellers at Jeruſalem: 
faformuch as thet field is called in their proper tongue 7, 
Aceldama, rhar is to fav, The field of blood &. 

: i The Syriack Language then im viz afrer rhe Babylomſh Captivity, 
* As borgat wita the price of Cariſt's blood, and ſprinkled with his 


the feaſt of weeks, Exod. 34: 22.  becaule it was tO be obſerved 
ſeven weeks after the feaſt of unleavened bread, Deut. 16. 9. It 
was the feaſt. of the firſt fruits of wheat Harveſt, Ex0s, 34 22- 
and on this day (to anſwer the Type) the ſpirit was poured out IN 
ſuch a plentifal manner, as the firſt fruirs of Chriſt's Aſcending 
into Heaven ; beſides, the Law was given on this 
1, 11. and *twas expedient that the Goſpel ( Chriſt: L-w, jhou'd 
be publiſhed on the tame day : and it being on the fictt day of ths 
week, it did recommend and honour the Lords day, as 


Chap 


20 For it is written in the book of Pſalms 1, Ie ; 
habitation be deſolate, and let no man dwell therej, -., 
His *[| biſhoprick m let another take. ZI 
' IViz, Pſal. 69. 25. What there is in general ſpoken by n,. ., C1: 
concerning his enemies, 1s here applyed, particularly tg 5 Og 
who betrayed our Saviour ; whoſe Type David was, 2; Deg _—_ 
Fudzs, His'm Charge or Office, or Prefe&ure ; as of a " Sis 
over his flock. - olerd 


21 Wherefore of theſe men which have Cempaniey 


"$ 


» 
Livy 


with us 2 all the time that the Lord Jeſus went in and or , 


among us. | | 
» There were to be twelve Apoſtles in the Chriſtian Chyyct 
anſwer unto the twelve Patriarchs, and'twelve Tribes in th. —_ 
Church ; accompanted with us in ordinary converſation, "4 Fir 
charge of his Miniitry, and gatheriag of Diſciples among yy wy 
22 Beginning trom the baptiſm of John p, unto 114 
ſameday that * he was taken up from us, muſt one he. «, 
dained to be a q witneſs with us of his reſurrection, L 
p When Chrift was Baptized by him, and by that Confcc;x;, 
began the Miniſtery, and publiſhing of the Goſpel, ( which 
hiftory of his Immacnlare Conception d1d preface to.) 4 Aj] hs 
things being confummared in that, ir being the moſt difhcult tg, 
believed; and therefore God was; plealed to atteſt it by ſo mzny «. 
witneſſes. | bo | lhe 
23 And they appointed two, Joſeph r called Bari; 
who was ſurnamed Juſtus s, and Matthias 7, 
_ r Or, Joſes, the ſame name called Barſabas in their Common 
rongue ; and ( 5 probably for his integrity) amongſt the Rong 
who then ruled over them. - Some think the' ſame with yy. 


thanacl, 
24 And they prayed, and ſaid, Thou Lord®, which, 


thou haſt choſen. © DR & 4 

# The other Apoſtles being choſen by Chriſt immediately, it was 
neceſſary that he who was to a& in the fame. Office, {hould be $1 
choſen afrer the fame manner. Knoweft che hearts, which is Go; 
Prerogative onely , all others may be, and often are miſtaken by our, 
ward appearances. 

25 That he may take parr of this Miniſtery x and 
Apoſtleſhip, from which Judas by tranſgreſſion fe!}, that 


he might go to his own place y. 

* %Ayeov, Every ones Station in the World, is orderd by the 
Providence of God, and their part or portion 1s aſſigned rothem ; 
and fo the Apolitleſhip was unto the Apoltes. » Hell or Ncftulinn, 
not 'intended by Judas, but righteouſly by God appointed for him, 
whileſt he was im the World, (eſpecially after his betraying of our 
Saviour) he was an Uſurper init; and as bad as the World ws, it 
was too good for him. That theſe words ſhould be vndaftood of 
Matthias s ſucceeding into the Apoſtleſhip of Judas as into hisown 
place, is the Jeſs probable, becauſe as yer he was not choſen in- 


to 1t. ; ad 
26 And they gave forth their lots z ; and the lot fel ” 
upon Matthias, and he was numbred with the ele int 
Apoſtles *:, | bo 
z The manner is not ſo certain, or neceſſary to be known ; but and 
the whole diſpoſing of the lot being from the Lord, as Prev. 16. Con! 
ult, they were thus as it were immediately choſen - by Go!, and 7 
were Confecrated by Chriſt himſelf: no Apoſtle ordaining another, one 
bur all of them being called and ordained by Chriſt. ©. The rl} Gali 
of the Apoſtles, and the whole Church agreeing with that Divine a 
choice which was made. of 
- H A P. II. ts 
The Apoſiles, on the day of Pentecoſt, filled with the holy Ginſi: and Gull 
ſpeak with oxher tongues, 1 12, Are admired at by ſome, d. 
ſeoffea at by others, x3. Peter confuteth the mockevs, ou: of tht her 
Prophee Joel, 14. 21. proveth that Feſus was riſen from the dai, 'A 
and exalted at the right hand of God, 22 — 36. The hear Pronoy 
being convinced. are by Peter bid to repent and be baptized, 3) men d; 
aſſuring them that the Promiſe is to them and their ſeed, 38—10. Erglifh 
Three thouſand converted and baptized, 41. They ſtedfaſtly continet m ieak, 
the Apoſtles Dofrine, in breaking of - brea4 and prayer: and havin Ze | 
their goods in common, the Church encreaſeth daily, 42 ———4) beſt. 
I ND when the day. of Pentecoſt « was fu 9 
come, they were all with one accord 6 ina lers in 
place. In Pog 
a This feaſt-was fifty days after the feaſt of unleavened brzad 0! ej 
Paſſover, as Levit. 23. 16. whence it had its name, and was calle t Bitwe 


now en: 
ume efp 
I.meq 2 


To 
0 Lih 
ang Pro 
) Wh 


day, Ex3d. 19. 


our Say10ur 


Cx blood; 


had before by his Reſurre&ion on that day. # As if they had bu Uineſ; 
one mind, in ſo many bodies : in one place ; probably, thut mention ud imb 
Chap. 1.13. , Rood 7: 

2 And ſuddenly c there came a ſound from haven, 35 0 Wi n 544, 
a ruſhing mighty wind 4, and * it filled all the houſe ! _y 
where they were litting, , rx 

c The Apoſtles themſelves nor expecting it. 4 To preparet ra to buv ; 
ta atrend the more unto what they thould hear and fee moey the Vere © 
alſo ro ſignifie the unexpetted and powerful progrets WHIC i  Righr, 
Goſpel ſhould have: it may be to cauſe rhe greater concour'e | (9; obſe, 


\thar place, it being an uſual manner ; and God w 


oald mace clus 


ns 1 
14. 1nkty 


Tec | 
9) UE 


p. Wap. Il. The A 


"b{ 1. 
\Urg 


Lis tharg 
| 


} 


Diving 


» and 
þy ſome, 
0 the 
he dead, 


tinge 
d hang 
47. 

s full 
} 1n 008 


bread 0t 
74s called 
obſerved 
6.9. It 
{34 27: 
ed Out IN 
\\cending 
Exod. 19: 
w) ſhow! 
day of ths 
It Say1our 
y had but 
mentyone 


en, 350 
2 houſe 


e arethe! 
frer wards * 
which Ws 
ncourl? (0 
| mare thus 
NL16647 


wks 


"pecan f to ſpeak with other tongues &, as the ſpirit gave 


o 


5 implying they ſpake each Language in its perteQion after an Ex- 


= * 


er diſperſions . Thus in part was fulfilled whar was prophelied, 


Miracle more publick. e To ſhew that the Cpirir ſhould be beſtowed 
on them that were mer there, and on all the Church throughout 
che World. 4 : ; - 

2 And there appeared unto them cloven tongues f, like 
as of hire 2, and It ſate upon each of them h. 

To figaifie the variety of Languagzs which th Apoſtles ſhould 
ts enabled ro ſpeak ; to qualifie them to Preach rhe Goſpel unto all 
Nations , and to remove the obſtacle which the confuſton of 
Tongues caus'd : g Which reprelented, x. The ligit that the Apo- 
Ales ſhould impart. 2dly. The fervent heat and Zeal which they 
thould be endued with. 3dly. The Goſpel's ſpreading in the World, 
:nd carrying all before it, prevailing over all errors. gthly. The 
nurity and bolinefs which they and all that Preach the ' Golpel ought 
ro appear withal. + Remained, as far as was neceflary for the found - 
inc of the Chriſtian Religion : and was not as the gifr of Prophecy 
heitowed onely occaſionally, as on Nathan, Samucl, 


4 And * they were all filled with the holy Ghoſt 7, and 


them utterance /. 

; Thoſe gifts and Graces which proceeded from him. The Apo- 
Res having them all in a more excellent manner than formerly, and 
the gift of Tongues ſuperadded. k Than what were vernacular or na- 
-vral co them. / arophsyyedus, ſignifies more than barely to ſpeak ; 


cellenr, Eloquent and powerful manner ; as from the holy Ghoſt 
whoſ: works are perfeCt, 0n vox hominen ſonat. 
5 Ard there were dwelling at Jeruſalem, zz Jews, devout 


men, out of every nation under heaven z. 

1 Not onely conſtant Inhabitants, but ſuch as had on occaſion 
their Lodgings there, partly, out of a conſtant reſpect, which both 
-,»; an Profelyres had for that place,(for the Temple 2ni their wor- 
thip ſake ; it being alſo a place for Learning and Education, as ap- 
nezrs by the Colleges and Synagogues mentioned, Chap. 6. wer. 9 ) 
Bur efpecially now rhe concourſe from all parts muſt needs have been 
very great ; 1t being one of thoſe times in which all the Males were 
e1:092ar before God. To which might be added, the great ex- 
nation they had of the Meſſiah made them tro omit no occaſion 
cfinquiriag concerning him ; the Prophecies concerning the time 
of his coming being fu}filled, and they could not be ignorant of the 
many and great things concerning the true Meſſiah, » Whither the 
5:9; kad been difperſed in the ewo or three greater, or other 


lia. 43 $5 : R . 
6 Now + when this was noiſed o abroad, the multi- 


tude came together, and were || confounded becauſe 
that every man heard them ſpeak in his own lan- 
guage p. 


l # ” © ' - 
C PPP AN | A 31 y-3 ' F723 - ION. 
% + * % x4 vb 4 aiil 01a 11:4796 L W if 


wo 


! 


Ti | (in Hog 1! 
LY "> *? oO OO _  * " ey, = y # 'Y ", 
r tongues the wondertyi works of God, b 
” ns 


| OU 2 


= p x / I A 5 = . "Vf Þ YN p 
þ Thr wonderful WOrks of God ; Oe  D13f8 witch Ger had Wondror 


from the dead, which was a moſt wonderſuf work - and th2 na: 
argument whereby the World was Corveitcd, and unto Which idling 
Apoſtles bare witnels. 
t2 And they were all amazed c, and were in Coubt, y- 

ing one to another, Wit meanert this 2 FO 

e So wer. 7. ££1529]0, they were as in an ext offe, (tire nbjeftt wan tan 
theſe wonderful things ; ani therefore they defirz on: of apt | 
be reſolved concerning them. 
13 Others 4 mocking ſaid, Theſe men ere full of - gow 
wine e, 
d Viz. Toe Scribes and Phariſees, and alfo the Inf1ubirants of 74; 
and Fernſalem ; who not underſtanding the Languages of other Ne. 
tions might think the Apoſtles did but babble, and talk id!cly or ruc--. 
Iy, when they fp:ke with other tongues. e Or ſweet wine; whic! 
drunk, may in<briate, and might be had ar that time, tho' the f.'1 
Vintage was not yet. 
14 & Bur Peter ſtanding up f with the eleven , lifr up 
his voice, end ſaid unto them, Ye men of Judea þ, and ai 
ye that dwell at Jeruſalem z, be this known unto you, and 


hearken to my words : 


Flr ſp+3ks his extraordinary courage: Aﬀeer his tumbling and £11, 
he runs tis faſter, being recovered ; and begins to verific his name 
which our Lord had given him, ſhewing himſelf as firm and fied 
asa Rx:k. g The other Apoſtles, probably, ipake roo in diver; 
anguags ; but by reaſon of rhe ſhortneſs of St. Luke's intended 
Narrative, and it being to the ſame purpoſe, their Sermons are omit- 
ted. - þ Such as came from other parts of the Country ; # Sach as 
were conſtant In habirants in that City. 

I5 For theſe k are not drunken /, as ye ſuppoſe, ſeeing 
It 1s but the third hour of the day m. 

& This proves that the orhec Apoſtles ſpake as well as Pcrer, and 
were vindicated by him. { He mildly and ſolidly contures their 
calumny. » The which anlv-ers to our nine a clock in the morning, 
and was the ordinary tine four their morning Sacrifice and Prayer, 
befor: which time they did not ear or drink any thing ; nay, 'tis 
thought on Feſtival days, ir was afual with them notto ear or drink 
until the (ixth hour, thar is. noon-time 2 that they might be more 
intent upon, and fit for the ſervice of the day. How little ſoever 
(ro our ſhame) ſuch an argument would be of proofnow, it was in 
their ſober times very concluſive. 


16 But this is that which was ſpoken by the prophe:. 


oFither the miraculous wind was heard, or the report of what Joel a 


had hapned was ſpread abroad. Either out of ſhame, that they 
had ain Chrif, whom God! thus extraordinarily glorified ; or out of 
admiration of ſo extraordinary matter. p Probably, not that the 
ſime words ſpoken by the Apoſtles, were diverſifyed according to 
every ones underſtanding, for then the miracle had been wrought 
in thei Auditors, and not in th? Apoſtles : but that the Apoſtles did 
{1k to every one in their proper and moſt intelligible Language , 
and this was the gift of Tongues, which for ſome time after alia was 
continued in the Church. 

1 And they were all amazed, and marvelled, ſaying 
one to another, Bchold, are not all theſe . which ſpeak 


73 God does ordinarily, before that he ſends judgments, and 
does his ſtrange work, endeavour to reclaim them by mercies : 
Not onely Joel, bur 1ſaiah, Jeremiah, and Ezckiel, and others Pro- 
phefied before, the deſtrudtion of that people and.Countrey, by 
Nebuchadnez3ar ; but now btfore the final and total ruine, God ſent 


greater, and more than theſe, and endued them with a greater mea- 


ſure of the Spirit ; cleater and tuller Jight to {o:ewarn them of, and 


deliver them from wrath to come. 
17 * And it ſhall come to pa$ in the laſt days o faith "IA. 44. 3 
God, +I will pour out p of my ſpirit upon all fleſh g :an 


Callean @ 3 your ſons and your daugliters x ſhall propheſie, and your: 


q IJ 
TLSSTED q . 


thought of on that account, than the ordinary fort ofthat Nation 
vere ; beſides, they thought no Prophet was to be expeQed from 
Galilze. John 1. 46. 

8 And how hear we every man in our own tongue 7, 
Witreſn Wwe were born ? 

! Atzatzog, Vignifies commonly a different way of ſpeaking, or 
pronouncing in the fame Language ; as our Southern and Northern 
men differ fome words in pronunciation, tho” ſpeaking both the 
Ey/iſh Tongue. Gods works being moſt perfe&t, the Apoſtlesmight 
ivak, not only the fame Language, which all underſtood, but in the 
a = iliom and propriety of ſpeech, which agreed to every one 


9 Farthians, and Medes, and Elamites s, and the dwel- 


2 Tim. 3. x. Hebr. 1. 2. 2 Pet. 3. } asalſo called the /aft time, 
1 Pet. 1.5. 1 John 2.18. Jude 18. becauſe we are now under the 
laft, and perfeQeſt diſpenſation of the things of God ; and no other 
is to be looked for until the conſummation of all things, p Before 
the Spirit was given in leflcr meaſures, and comparatively but by 


drops, here a little, and there alittle; now more largely, even to 
overflow. q All forts of men, as well Gentiles as J-ws, contrary un- 


to their proud conceit, that God dwelt in none our of the land of 
Ijracl. rFulfilled in Amma the Propheteſs, Like 2. 36. and ia the 
four daughters of Philip, Chap. 21.9. 's Thele were formerly, ej- 
ther repreſentations more inward to their mind, as Eſay's and Jere- 
miah”s were : or more outward to their bodily eye, as Daniel's was 


ers in Mctopotamia r, and in Judea #, and Cappadocia, Chap. 5. 5. and ſuch as Petey had, Chap. 10.11. t By dreams God 
n Pontus, and Alia x, ſomerimes manifeſted his will, asto "0 5 but this is by St. Perer 
Th 


:Deſcended from Elam, Gen, 10. 22. thought to be the Perſians. | accommodated to the Goſpel times. 


e Prophets ſpake ſuitably to 


! Between the ewo Rivers 7/gris and Euphrates, u The Apoſtles be- | them unto whom they preached.; and the Apoſtle rightly under- 
1g Galilcans, ſpake a diſtintt DialeCt from the reſt of the Jews, till | ſtands by theſe-expreſſions, the manifold and more clear Revelation 
now enabled to ſpeak as they did. x Someparricular diſtrict, at that | of the will of God ih Chriſt, | 


ime eſpecially ſo called, as 1 Pee. 1+1. otherwiſe the places afore- 
rMcedere in 473 in a larger ſence. 


18 And on my ſervants, and on my handmaidens z, 1 
will pour out 1n thoſe days oi my ſpirit, and they fhall 


1oParygia, and Pamphylia, in Egypt, and in the parts | propheſie - 


" Livz2 about Cyrene, and ſtrangers y of Rome, Jews 
and Proſelytes z | | 

, 1 Who came either to Jeriſalem to worſhip, or for any othe 

nels : It is evidenr, that many in or about the City of Rome 
ud imbraced the Jewi ſb Religion : and of themit may be under- 
001 Jowy, The other mentioned, ver. 9. were ſuch as then dwelt 
hem, theſe were ſuch as lived elſewhere, oneiy now came to 
"or or ſojourn there. z Theſe were of two forts, The one, ſuch 
me over from Paganiſm unto the Jewiſh Relig:on, and were 


# To ſhew what all ought tobe that hope for to receive any ben 2- 


fir or comfort fromthe promites ot God, either in che Law or Go- 
ſpel, the Old, or New Teſtament ;. viz. ſuch as ſeek and ſerve Gos : 
bur- to the diſobediear and unbelieying, there i3 not a comfortable 
word in all the Rook of God. Some .read without the Pronoun 
ſervants and handmaids ; to ſhew- that God doth not deſpiſe men cf 
the loweſt rank and condition in the World, but that the promiſe 
of the Spirit is made unto them alfo. 


19-And I ſhew wonders - x in teaven above, and 


Fs enely to obſerve the Preceprs of Noah, and enjoy'd a liberty | fgns in the earth beneath ; blood and fire, and Va POUT of 
” oy and ſell, Live, and Converſe amongſt the Fews : hence they | ſnoak. 


V's e © 
b = yOu Proſelytes of the gate; the other wete called Prof lytes 
_&Yconeſe ; tor theſe were Circnmciled, and took upon them 


x As St. Peter had declared the promiles noo Fuck as would be 
drawn by the cords of Love : fo her?, 0: the oiher fide, he uſeth 


Mohler i»: - f wi 
IO FrVation of the whole Law of Moſes, and had all the Privi- 
5 VIOBBING 10 ths people of God. 


threatnings, and declares the terro:s oi thi Lord, if fo that chey 


will not Fe perfiraded Theſe wonders were fych 23 did prieceds 
2b: 


C ! d, 7 ” - 
'3 [7 3% =J '\ PEEP | a * 2. $ « I WE yy ” ' ? _ : 
ne Apes be OLIONSES © Ts LANG ( i Crete, no. Ea Mu ( 13:4, 


Hs 402067 » = J y 3 ; OP 0 : ? , 
derfuiy wrought, efpeciully th: Returrecuon of our bleticd Saviour 


ſtrong for the faculty) they conid nor father the cafe on reainn co 


g Ezek. 11. 19. 


gc | Zech. 12. 10, 
1 Without Literature, or good Education, they being worſe | J6ung men ſhall ſee vifions s, and your old men ſhall dream john 7. 38. 
dreams 7. + Chap. 10. 
o In the time of the Meffiah, called the af? days frequently, 45- 


- 
m——_— Þ 
—7 


5 N_—_ _ A 6 % > _ 
= py + +7 —- \F2t = + a A 2 - 
k > 1 "C < » E =— - \ , 
. : C P C5 - - >S 2 - - 5 
- C » - S 7%: <a" @ 
of a -- « = ” _ bY "—— _ _— ” _ p D " 
5 4 "= x _ - _ ——————_ DER A I ”— ' T. = : ; 
D_ So = g SAT > . - . f - * . b- 4 
w a T " w_ = _— =Y T 1 - 
— - wV _ + : £ = c "+ 4 = 5; Ts oe - + 0 
- Ins GT TIN a" Wo -- a : med rc eye 4M 7D PAR , x " .- 
, £ . \ . A w = - on oF " df 'S 
hn OY FEY So DRE : => = ED ts oe goatigs  - : I nnd 
- - "* A - _— 1 n— St tr © 
_ . -- - mm. _ ".— Bayne , ns. - VEIL * © ade x . ods,” 
_ a. a i. — d-1 * -_ - = =_—_—_ _ bo => oY 


= tt aero Meter 


oy 
—_ 
. 4 
wy VGA C5 =o REP 4s 


4.8: 
» 
. 
% 
® a 
* . 
#3 
4 t [ 
* : 30g. 1 
. 7 
"" *; 
F h 
? : 
& © oi 
|. 
£ I» . T7 
' YN 
4% 
SK. 
be 4 
- 
4 [1 
_] 
J 
47 
Y % 
| ,d, 
v ;* 
oo ty 
> £ 
: a 
> < > 
»,+ 
gw 
I POE; df 
þ ' 19 PF: 
wh. TL: [+ 
ans y) 
4s £ 5 pm . 
4 I v 
£7 iS. 
TT 4 
6 23 
; : jt bh 
bl 
£ : 
f 


Chap. Il. The 


#CTS 


the Deſtrnftinn of Fcrefal-m, or ſhall ſorerun the DeſtruRtion of the | >8, Mumb. 5. 2. and 13 divers other places, W213 that Gonifies + 


whote Werid. 


20 Ihe ſun ſhall be turned into darkneſs y, and the 
men info blood, before thet great and notable &z day of 


the Lord come. 


This avrees with the other words in the fore-cited Prophecy, 

How thzie amazing figns fhall. be tulfiil-d, whether 

literally, and by v har means; Or whether onely, that the conlter- 

nation and head vpon men fſh:ll be fo grext, as expeQting rhe 

change of the whol- trame of nzrme; is not ſo material for us tO | rqyalue him. y As being Anointed , 
z £71parvn, Manifeſt | God. 


, -, 
oct 2 :F. 


knew, as it is t© be always preparea for 17. 


and r/lyſtriov day; and it may be taken in a comfortable tents, 
and will be a comfortable day indeed, ro all that preparedly wair 
for it ; for *Uis the day of the Lorg, "ts Conift's day, in which he 
wil! be magnitied over his eacmics, and 72 his friends, children, and 


| {crvants. 
* Rom. 1c. 21 And it (hall come to paſs, that * whoſoever ſhall call 
EI on the Name of the Lord a, ſhall be faved. 


a That he may prepare thus a people for the Lord ; rae Apoſtle 
ſhews by what means they and we may cicape. Pray in faith unco 


him : The Name is that whereby any one 15 known ; 


Prov. 10. 10. 
rinncth mito it, and i ſafe. 


22 Yere: of Ifracl, hear theſe words; Jeſus of Nazareth 
bþ 2 man apyroved cot God among you, by miracles, wonders 
12d figns / whick God did by him in the midſt of you, a 


/ 
= 
cc. 


ye your ſelves alſo know e : 


b For fo Pilate had c:licd our Saviour through contempt, 1n his 


SETEES 


monſtrated, and beyond any - 305275 ly 5 _ to be _— . 

for this was that great truth St. Peter Preacned upon, that Chriſt } Es - = | 
4 ob Pilate had 1-4 okay and called Tejus of Nazareth, was | 7: 10 and elſewhere 1s recorded of him, which they firmly believe, 
indecd the So of God, and the true Meiliah. ) & The critical 
diff-rence is not fo material; It was ordinary to add many .words 
indeed all forts of 
wondertul works Chriſt did, and fo many, an4 ſo great, as no variety 
e Thole- that are not convinced, are felt- 


to ſh:w rhe greatnels of the matter {poken ot; 
of words can expreſs. 
cond-mned, 

Chap. 4. 28. 


ed hands have crucified g and flain : 


F That the Apoſtle might cake away the cfience of the Croſs of 
Chriſt, he declares unto them , that he did not ſufter by chance, bur by 
the wiſe and holy Providence of God, who had ordered, and by his 
Prophets forerold, what he ſhould ſuffer before he did enter into glory, 
Luke $4. 26. Yet this did no way excufe thoſe who were inſtrumen- 
tal in his death ; for notwithſtanding Gods determinate Counſel con- 
cerning it, he tells the Fews wicked hands Crucified him. The de. 
tzrmination of God, as it does not neceſlitate to, ſo it does not ex- 
cuſe any from fin. (g) By the Romans who were truly. aye, with- 
out any Law of God : What the Jews nrged or occaſioned the Rowen 


to do, 1« charged juſtly upon them as their AQ. 


Ver. 32, 24 * Whom God hath raiſed up h, having looſed 7 the 
Clap. 3. 15. patns of death &, becauſe it was not poſſible that he ſhould 


& 4-1--x be holden of it /. 


Tc. 1G. 40.00 


& 17.31. 
"50 + 24+ he ſufficiently ſhews it. 


9 & y - -, ſignifying either a cord or pain, the metaphor of - looſing agrees with 
"a * {-it. & Tho our Lord endured no more pain, after he had ſaid, 7t is 

m 4 Jaifilled. and had yeilded up the Ghoſt : yer whileſt he was in the 
It!, . X 


* fucit an one as David ſpeaks of. 


25 For David ſpeaketh m concerning him; I foreſaw the 


Lord always before my face, for he is on my-right hand # 
tat I ſhould no*- be moved. 


” Pi-1, 16.8. 7 forcjaw the Lord always before my face. In the Pſalm 
the Apoſtle following the reading of the 
cventy, then in 1.ſec and known; and tothe fame ſenſe; for by Faith | alted and t having received of the Father the promiſe of ti: It 
we both fee Ged, and place our confidence in him. David, and 
eſpecially our Saviour. doing and enduring allthings as in the ſight of 


i'1s,, 7 Lave fet rhs Lord : 


God, whom he knew to;be.both careful of him, and ready to help 
him. Thus io all tzoubles, there is no ſich approved comfort, as 
the je. ing or acknowledging the Will cf God concerning them, his 
Power to preferve us under them, and his promiſes to deliver us 
trom them. Ch;;? and all that are Chrifs, do corflit under the eye, 
and 1n the ſighr of God; as Souldiers whilſt rheir Geners! looks on. 
» Tae place of tiz Advocate., for one that is accuſed or en- 
dangered. 

26 Thcrefureo did my heart rejoycep, and my tongue 9 
wes glad , moreover allo, my fleth » thall reſts in hope 2. 


0 Becauſe of Gods nearneſs to, cr preſence with him. p Chriſts | 


and his peoples joy is ſolid and true, real and inward, and may bear 
thereſt ; Res ſewera eff verum gaudium, g In the 16. Pſalm, wer. g. 
tis Y glory, as the tongue is trequently called ;z communicating our 
thovghts or apprehenfions by ſyeech, being the excellency of a rea- 
lonable Creatire, » Or »y body + s Orbe in the grave, as in a 
Tabernacle, (ordinarily a moveable, always no durable abiding|place) 
* That is of the ReſurreRion, and going out of that Tabernacle of 
the prave. 

27 Becalite thou wilt not leave my » ſoul in hell x, nei- 
ther wilt thou ſufter thine holy One to ſee corruption. 

# Phat '$ 2e ; the Soul is put 'o* the perlon, as Rom 13. 1. Lit 
ever; (uu be /rbjec?'; and ſoctimnes for a dead Body, as Levir. 19. 


23 Him *, being delivered by the determinate counſel 
i Chap.3.30- and foreknowledpge of God f, t ye have taken, and by wick- 


+146 pl h Chriſt roſe by hizown Power a Gos'; it being perhaps too ſtrong 
23: *© 3+ met to be given at fiift ro ſuch who were under fo great prejudices 
againſt our Saviour : but by conſequence in,the following diſcourſe, 
; The ſame word 72FT, varioufly pointed, 


1 The: rr, BH9ve, being under the power of death, the pains of death are ſaid 
TAY $ : _ to be Jocted at his ReturreAion, 1 Long, much {for ever; being 
34D. I}, 20G. 7 


3 


Soul, is fo uſed. »« The & ns, is pur either for the grave, or f, 
the place of the damned. Being theſe words are alledg*d as 2 Sg 
of Chriſts Reſurrection, and that our Saviours Soul was rs 
Paraciſe, where he promiſed to the penitent thief that he mn + 
be with him, it ſeems rather to be meant of the grave, ur; 
cording to this Prophecy, could not hold our blefſtd S2viours "Wii 
ſo Jong, as that it ſhould corrupt in it. If David by his $01 Oe 
did mean our Saviour, becauſe he was as it were the Sou! Kr 
Soul, and Life of his Life, it ſhews how he did, and how we —_ 
SanQlified , and ſear 4. 


28 Thou haſt made known to me z the ways of 
life ; thou ſhalt make me full of joy with thy counc. 
nance 4. 

z God is frequently faid to make theſe mercies known to us, wh;., 
he beſtows upon us: ( The ways of Life ; ) of atrue Lite ; whict . 
life indeed. David in theſe words celebrates Gods delivering of him 
from his grievous afflictions and exile : (in which he was looked v1, 
on by others, and by him!elf, as a dead man) yer was broughc 2am 


. . . O 
to ſee the Temple, and enjoy the Ordinances of God : Wittiqur 


and the Lords In hp . : 
: ; = . which, his life was no life unto him. So our Sayi . 
Mme js his Attribures, Goodnefs, Power, Wiſdom, Faithfulnefs, &c. j* , Our, after hj; 


The name of che Lord uw a ſirong tower: the righteous 


Deathand Paſſion, arofe, and Afcended into Heaven, and live, 

ever-to make Interceſſion for us. a That is, with thy preſence or 

manifeſtation of thy love and favour. s 
29 Men and biethren 6, || let me freely ſpeak Unto 0 


you of the * patriarch David c, that he is both ey *1K; 


* {and buried d, and his ſepculchre is with us unto thi; Capi 


_— — — 


Gay : 

6 St. Peter beſpeiks this attention and favour ; intimating, ke x4; 
one of the ſame Nation with themſelves, than which nothing cools 
more recommend him. c David was had in great veneratin, ang 
his memory very preciousamong{t thispeople,as was Abrahan,”, 1[z,, 
and 7acob's; who were the chief of their Fathers : das in the ; xj, 


4 Or Monument is with us; either not wholly ſpoiled by the Barbary 
enemies, who had deſtroyed Jeruſalem ; or rather repaired after the 
Captivity, to keep up the memory of fo great and gooda man, Py; 
by this ir appeared, that David did not ſpeak theſe things cop. 
cerning himſelf, who muſt needs have ſeen corruption ; (them(sys 
being witneſſes) for onthat account they reſpeQed his T omb, as be. 
ing the Repoſitory of his aſhes. 

3o Therefore being a prophet *, and knowing that God *p, 
had ſworn with an oath e to him, that of the fruit of his :Ti 
loyns f, according to the fleſh g, he would raiſe up Chrij h 


to (it on his throne z, 

e Not barely had ſworn, which had been ſufficient ; but ſworn; 
an Oath ; to ſhew the excellency of the matter, and the neceſſity of 
our believing of it, asalſo the ſolemnity ofthe words, Þſal 132.1, 
FSuch as ſhould deſcend from him, as the Virgin Mary did, o& 
to his human Nature, which our Saviour did truly partake of being 
in the form of a ſervant. þ By the Power of the Holy Ghoſt in the 
womb of his Virgin-mother as to his Incarnation ; and by the (ins 
Power out of the grave, in his Reſurre&ion. i As Lukz i, 32, 33, 
Not asa Temporal King, for his Kingdom is not of thu world; but 
as David ruled overall the people of God, ſo does Chriſt and ſhall do 
for ever. 


31 He ſeeing this before &, ſpake of the refurretticn of 
Chriſt /*, that his foul was not left in hel), neither did'ff 


his fleſh ſee ccrruption. 

k By a Prophetical eye ; unto which any thing that was revea''d 
was as certain and manifeſt. as ought could be tothe eye of the body, 
{ By the fame Prophetical Spirit, and with the ſame certaintr. which 
he ſpake of the Incarnation, he ſpake alſo cf the ReſurreQion, Of 
the reſt lee wer. 27. 


32 * m This Jeſus hath God raiſed up, | whereof weall' 


are .witneflzs, j 
» Whom ye Crucitied, and we Preach ; [ whereof we are all wits 
aefſes] they had now received thz power ſpoken of, and promiled, 
| Chap. 1. and teſtifie what they had heard, and ſeen, 3nd felt, and 
| all agree in ; tho they could get nothing by ir, but hatred, and per: 
| ſecurion, nay, death. 


33 Theretore * being by the right hand » of Goder-'C 


holy Ghoſt v, he * hath ſhed forth this, which ye now ſept 
an d hea g. 


c 
» That is, by the Power of God, ſpoken after the manner of men; «(1 
the right hand being char we commonly doany thing with : Some 
read af the right hand of God ; and then the Apoſtle Preaches Cluiſts 
Aſcenſion to, and his being juſtified by God, the* he had oxen 
condemned by men. o Pſzl. 68. 18. p In the fiery cloven tongues: 
9g In the divers Languages which are ſpoken. 
| 34 For David is not aſcended intocke heavensy : but h? 
faith himſelf*, The Lord faid unto my Lord s, Sit ch0u 00 '1 


my right hand. I 

r Hence St. Peter here proves that theſe words ſpoken by 04% ,; 
were not principally to be underſtood concerning himſelf, but con 
cerning Chriſt the Meſiah ; for Davida, as to his body, was 10 ff 
Sepulchre, which on that account was kept amongſt them. e 
Eternal Father unto his Eternal Son, who was now made fleſh: by 
our Saviour proves his Divinity, Matth. 22. 45. The words here ! 
ferr'd to, are Pſal. 110. x. 

35 Until I makethy foes thy footſtool r. ey 

2 Chriſt is Commiſſionated and impowred to reign over, an bf 
vern all Creatures, and 'all their a&ions, till the conſummation 
all things, ſo long as the World laſts ; in which he, h15 peop : 
and truths, will have enemies, Eh. 1. 29, 21, 22 Io 


- 1, -: 3 
| 27 


\ 


34 Therefors 


Chap, | 


but on 


In: 
pri 
few 
ver 
whe 
dens 
and ; 


be f 


Terat 
iT 
=_ 
ay fo 
Autho 
Salrati 
Plane | 
In wie] 
ſuch «© 


4I 
aptiz 
about 

2 Yo 
never 
& 6. 0 
This w 
and of x 
if this 


42 
lottri 
Prayer 

d Th 
NOt on 
9 Theſe 
Plrer x; 
heir Cl\ 
uſed by 
and br (Y 

and Pr, 
IS Clef] 
ayers 
Praying 
down m 


the Kin, 
43 
WOnde 


7 Thy 
© Perf 


P 1 FI. The y $S k 51 $ 2 x F 
j P. ” FE PRES 1s os Gi 
246 Therefore 1 let all the houſe of Tſrae] know affured-| now hapned ; ſo thit by this m2ans, the Apoſtles wer- bad in gre 
ly, that God hath made that. ſame Jeſus whom ye haye j *ſiem and reſpeC by the people jy 
” cified both Lord x and Chriſt 44 Andalithat velieved were together 5, and * ho ols « co, | 
! " : D = J 
94 This i the concluſion which the Apoſtle infers from the premiſes, things common 7, Ee : J2: 4 
; lying what he h2d ſaid very cloſe and home ; or it would not in s Not that they lived togerher in one hore or Freer, bur thas 1ifew 
FF celyhood have had ſo good an effe:&. Ye have Crucifed, ye are | Mer (and that frequently ) rogethzrin the holy ex-roites uf their {fe 


d e Men. 
| = Chriſt King over all the people of God, 


ion ti ) 
of God, declared by God to be fo, and owned toz ſuch by all tha 


believed in 1. 


37 { Now when they heard this * , they were prick 


of the apoſtles, Met 


« go 4 ? 
x 7 
" foreto!d, Zecn. 12. nar | . 
p Apoſt'e had given them, wer. 29. a Not what we ſhall ſay or be. 
id lieve ; Converſion, if real, goes further than Profeſſion, and is in 
or h-zrt and deed, not in ſpeech and\word onely : they defire to know 
or  thezebe any hope, that ſuch ſinnersas they, might obtain forgive- 

| þ& of their fins. : | 
ni .$ Then Peter ſaid unto them *, Repent, ard be bap-| 
: Cup tized every one of you in the Name of Jeſus c Chrift for 


2 holy Ghoſt e. | 

X } Which includes amendment of life, Match. 3. 7. Luke 3.8. 
1d ;Not excluding the Name of the Father and_ the Holy Ghoſt; in 
ng whoſe name, as well as in the name of the Son, they were to Bap- 
cs, tize, Matth. 28. 19. but the name of Jeſus 1s here menrioned, becauſe 
"5 they had not yet known, (but perſecuted and ſlain him ) whom 
ed, h-nceforward they muſt profeſs, and that they look for pardon and 
ray &lation onely through him. 4 Thus Sarl or ' Paul 1s faid ro waſh 
the away his fins by Baptiſm, Chap. 22. 16. and this Apoſtle elſe- 
But whzze fays, that Baptiſm ſaves us, 2 Pez. 3, 21. which he explains 
0N- t b:, not the putting away of the filth of the fleſh, bur the 
- anſixer of a good Conſcience, ©. e 1. His internal gifts, confirma- 
be. 

— ſecking with tongues, which they heard ; both, or cither of theſe, 
_ Ra according to their conditions or ſtations, God would beſtow upon 
[1s 2 tem. | 


B, 29 For the promiſe is unto you f, and'* toyourchildren, 
and to all chat are afar offg, even as many as the Lord 


w our God ſhall call b. 
1 , fLik taty ſhould +doubt of pardon and grace, their ſia having 
e& been {o great 3 St. Peter here gives them a ground of hope, they be- 
King ing the e-ſcendents from Abraham, un:9 whom eſpecially chis was 
n the promiled, Jer, JI. 3+ g That is, to the Genres as well as to the 
{an Ts, who were ſaid to be a people near unto God, as the Gentiles 
ſu wers ſ1'd tobe afar off, IJaiah 57.19 Eph. 2. 13. h Vocation, 
$ whether external by rhe word onely, or internal by the Sp:rit alto, | 
alldo depends on the pleaiure of God ; but the ſame promiſes of pardon 
and acceptance upon Repenrance, unto the Fews, are as cffeEtual to 
on of -<9 unto by any of the Gentiles, as by any formerly amongſt 
r af 2 And with many other words z did he teltifie, & and 
__ echort, Saying, ſave your ſelves / from this untoward ge- 
= i The S2rmons of the Apoſtles, or of our Saviour, are not all ſet 
i; town by the holy Writers ; bur onely ſo much as God ſaw necet-: 
ſary for his Church to know and believe. & Uſing Gods Name and . 
weall' Auhority and calling him as ic were to witneſs. / No leſs than the : 
] Salvation of our Souls, depends upon our forſaking wicked and pro- 
. Plane perſons 1n thewr ungodly courſes. m The whole World lies 
al. wits n wickedneſs; but eſpecially the Scribes and Pharitces, and other 
n__ ſuch declared enemi2s of Chriſt Jeſus. 
it, a . =" 
wo 41 © Then they that gladly received his word », were 


baptized: and the fame day there were added unto them o 


about three thouſand ſouls. 
2 Some ſtill remained in their unbelief and hardneſs of heart ; tho 


04 £x-*C 
> of the Pt 


w ſeept! £ ! 
WK 1h, c. 0 Tothe Church, or the 1 20. formerly mentioned, Phil x. 15. 


This was the effe& of Chriſts prayer, Luke 23. 34. tor his perfecutors; 


of me" andof the promiſe of the Spirit now fulfilled, whereby in the day 
Chuiſ of this Power they were made willing. | 
11d been 42 And they continued ſtedfaſtly p in the apoliles 


trine and fellowſhip, and in * breaking of bread, andin 
prayers g. 


congues + 


but hi! ? This ſpeaks the reality of their Converſion, 'and that they were 
chou 001 ndt onely for the preſent aff:&ed with whar they had heard and ſeen. 
I5 q Theſe three parts of worſhip were frequently, it not always in thoſe 
| David puter times u{ed rogether: tho ſome underſtand by breaking of bread, 
but col = avi fellowſhip and community ;: yer 67-%z;g being a holy rite 
«as in tht *r _ our daviour, at the inſtitution of his Supper, Marth. 26. 26. 
\ 5 The + _—_ of bread being here pur in conjuntiion with Preaching 
ſh: henc* fchien? "8: the ceicbration of the Eucharif, 1t not oncly meant, 
1s here If uly to be underſtood 1n this place. (Prayers) all rhoſe kind of 
"ay*1s mentioned by -St, Pa. 1 Tim. 2. 1.4s alſo their frequent 
Praying, is implyed ; thus by an united force, they laboured ro pull 
. and $0 the jo orcs upon themſelves and others, and ro do vioence unto 
\marion © | ingdom of Heaven. 
nis pep. Wl 43 And fear came upon every ſoul r : and * many 
y Cor. iy Wonders and fins were done by the apoſtles, 


ea _ 3 IS, Upon every man; not only on them that were preſent, 
 harely” " P*!1waded ro believe on Chriſt, whom the Apoſtles Preached ; 
0a luch 21/0 os were inforny'd of thoſe miraculous things which 

Vol. II, 


"them ; for to this purpoſe he was the Chriſt, or the anointed : Yet known in th: Church. - This was one!y at thr plc: 


k od in their heart 9, and. ſaid unto Peter, and to the reſt 
and brethren 'z, What ſhall we | meu and 22: now : nay, after this, the ooitiiion v; hich p21. 2s 


the remiſſion of ſins 4, and ye fhall receive the gift of the 


never men ſpake as the Apoſtles now ſpake, with divers tongues, | 


" Terufalens, 
1: Clarity Of 9th ers, 
; may well bepreſumed to be extraordinary : and there is nn fuck 
. | thing as community of goods here requi-el or profiifed. Chriſt; 
Gotipt] does nor deitoy the Lav? ; and the ergith Commandment is 


{ fall in force, which ir could nor be, if there were no propriery, or 


ts 


- | and at that time, when the wants of ſome, nd :! 


j . . . ? ' . , 
| fold, 15 adjudg'd by 'this Apoſtle to nave been Azaxins his own, ad 


Fo great and true their grief,, they were cogcern<d as if they had ' fo ION the money too which he had reccived tor it, C bps 5. 4: 
b2©n run thorow 3 (the pains the mind ſuiFrs are moſt acute) this wes | And theſe,” all things which they had in commen, muſt cither be 


chan that any of their poor brethren ſhontd have 


45 And ſold their poſſeſſions and goods, and * parted * 14. 53 + 

them to all men, asevery man had necd. 

_# Thoſe proportions of their eſtzte they ſet apart to this cliuritable 
work; whether they "Cid ariſe our of the file of Houſe and Land, 
called pofefſions, or of any Chartels or moveable eſtate, called here 
| goozts ; bat that they did nor diveſt themſelves of all propriety, ap- 

pears in that vre find ſoon zfter this, Chap. 15. 12. Mary thz motk<r 

of 5t, Mark to have a houſe, and - Lydia after the was baptized, 

did not renounce any propriety in her howule, Chap. 16, 15. bur 
intreated St. P.au!, and thoſe who were with him, to come i1ito her 
Hoſe, &7.; | -: net 2 
' 46 And they continued daily with one accord in the 

temple x, and . breaking bread y [| trom houſe to houſe 2, !| 07, At 
| did eat their meat with gladnels a and finglencl of vos, 
heart. | 
x In the Court and porches of rhe Temple, whither the peop'e 


tion, and Rirengrbning in the faith, 2. External gitts, as that cf! qijq uſe to reſort, at the tims of the Morning 2nd Evening S2cct- 


| fice, and Prayers ; that by mezas of the great concoufs ar fol 
; times, they might have the better opportunity to Preach the Goſpel 
L_— them ; caſting char ner where they found moſt Bih, » Not 
| onely Celebrating the Euchariit, bur their Love-feafts which they 
uſually had at that ume, a3 1 Cor. Ii. 2 33. 2 Now ere. NOW 
there, as they couli conveniently; the Richer alſo entertainiag 
''their Poorer brechren ar theic Tables. a If the former word bz 
| underſtogd of the Sacramear of the Lozds Supper, then theſe words 
{peak the grear Spiritual ſtrength, cheer and comfort they got by 
it: if we underſtand them of the ordinary meat which chey will- 
ingly beftowed one upon ancther, the Rich were more than recom- 
penced with inward peace and ſ{atizfation, for what they gave un- 
ro their poor br=thren. 


45 Praiſing God b, and * having favour with ell the * Lake 2.5 
peopie c, And t the Lord added tothe Church d daily ſuch <93Þ- 4+ 3 
25 ſhovid be ſaved. Rom. 14.1 

} Chap. 5. 


b Acknowledging him who teacheth one to want, and another to 
; abound : & that 15 generally to be underſtood amongſt them that © 


| continued yet without the pale of the Church ; the goodneſs, meck- 
; ; nels, and patience of the Apcttles, and. rhe reſt of rhe believers, 
tration 772, ' did wonderfully prevail ro beget a good opinion of them. d Salvari- 


{ on'15 ( to be ſure ) onely from the Lord : Not Peters Sermons, no, 
. norathe Miracles of fiery cloven tongues, and rhe ruſhing mighty 
winds, could have converted any, buc Ag 7: #rJoy that which was 
ſignifizd there, wiz. the powerful operation of the Spircic of God in 


their hearts, 
CHAM ML 


Peter and John going up to the Temple, cure a lame man-: he walketh 
and praiſeth God the people jil'd with wonder and amaz:ment, 1—10. 
eter profeſſeth, this work was nos done by their power and holineſs, 
but by faith in the name of Jeſus, whom they had denied , crucified, 
and God raiſed from the Dead, 11—18. He exhovteth them to ve= 
pert ance, that their ſins might be blotted out, by Jeſus Chriſt whg 

was (ent ta tern thera from their iniquities, 19—26. 

1 Ow Peter and John went up together into the 
temple a at the hour of praycr 6, being the ninth 
hour c, 

a Not to communicate with the Jews in their worſhip, which was 
now antiquated ; but that they might have a larger field to tow the 
ſeed of the Goſpel into, and therefore it was moſt probably, ſome 
Sabbath or Fefival-day ; and not unlikely in the evening of that 
great day of Penrecoft, { of which in the former Chaprer. ) 6 That 
God mult be worſhipped, and daily prayed unto; the Law of Na- 
rure, and poſirive Law of God requires: but fays Maimor, there 15 
no obligation by virtue of any command of Ged, unto 2ny number 
of prayers, nor to any certain prayers, nor to definite rime of prayer. 
| Howloever, they did viually pray thrice a Cay, and tnought cacti 
of thoſe three times recommended unty them by one of the Patrt- 
archs, braham, Iſaac, ard 7acob. Howloever, the time of offerinZ 
up the morning and evening Sacrifice, was recommended or Com- 
manded by God, as a time of prayer. A Sacrifise being an actual 
prayer, as the other is real or verbal. « About three a clock in the 
afternoon, the time of the evening Sacrifice. 


was carried, whom they laid daily e at the gate of the tem- 8. 
ple f, which is called Beautiful g f, to ask alms þ of them t job. 9. s. 
that entered into the temple : | 
d And not by any caſualty, that ſo the miracle might be rhe 
greater, and the Power of th: Gol of Nature appear. « By which ir 
I Kkkk OED 
{ >» 3a: #k 853 « 


2 And * a certain man lame from his mothers womd d # C1;p, ;,; 


+ 


5” -_ 
a $4*> eat x bins if 


-——_— - 
-— ©. = CY. = 4.4 Iprppa _—_— 54 w_ © 
aac eh 2 5 et 


Chap. ITE. 


This man out of pride, being un- | 12 © Ang when Peter ſaw it, he anſivereq 
wilhng ro beg of the Geztiles, rhough Proſelyred, ( whom they people, Ye men of Iſrael e, why marvel ye at thi 
did centern } or our of policy, hoping to receive 7 ory Jews, 

whom he is nearer related to, h Poverty isno ſign of God's dis avour; ; Re ; : = A, 
( cur b{{{kd Redeemer is in an eſpecial manner called Caput holineſs f, we had made this man to walk ? 


eps from that of the Gentiles. 


. 

” 
was manitch, that it could not beby any correſpondence betwixt the | been in the Court of the Gen+i{z5, and that of the Few; 
Anoft ics and ce 'ame man upon this occaſion. 7 Where there muſt ourward and inward Court ; bur rohave contain'd a Seat part of;! 
needs be the greater notice taken ofhim, none goINg 1N or out, but Court of the Gentiles, if the whole Court of the Gentiles mah; - 
ſuch as might fee him. g For the excellency of the workmanſhip : | be ſo called, as being indeed bur 2 porch, or an entrance 1,9 41 
Ic was at the entting into the ſecond Court, or the Court of the | Court of the Jews. 


look ye ſo earneſtly on us, as though by our ow 


# | but lamencls in this man, divers miſerics, and calamities | a For 4; ſaid, an ordinary Hebraiſm , though no queſtion ».. 


12 0ta-1s, bing them to the knowledge of Chriſt, and Salvation | put unto him ; thus the Evangeliſt tells us, that our Saviour ; 


2d and ſaid, when there was no previous queſtion {; poken of 
” 


3 Who feing 7 Peter and John about to go into the | 11. 25. Nay, Jeſus anſwered and ſaid unto th. fig-tree, Att, 


temple, asked an alms. : q: 
s Though lame; every one hath ſomething that is truly valuable, f 
and” matter of praiſe and thanks unto God. 


14. Thats, he ſpake powerfully unto it. e An iIngratiating 
pellation, they ever valuing themſelves and Others on thar 
Holineſs, were it never ſo real, and great in men, cann 
the leaſt Miracle, although it is it ſelf, all things conſidere 


4 And Peter taſtning his eyes upon him & with John, ſaid, great one. d, a vers 


© The eye ffs the heart, and ſpeaks the compaſſion he had A2co he God of our fathers hath glori 
JEL greet ol he did not diſdain thorowly and ſeriouſly Jacob, t T 8'orifled 


ot this poor man, , - 
to behoid : he excites the lame mans expectation, and requires 


T3 * The God of Abraham, and of Ifnac, and o- 


bis Attention, that he might the more mind the manner and means | preſence of Pilate, when he was determined to let oy 


God the glory 


of his cure, and be the better prepared to give 


5 And he gave heed m7 uito them, expeCting to receive 
ſomerhing of rhem. _ : 

1m Wirth his eyes and mind too, bein 
this he was commanded to do, 
hopes : Thus we receive of God daily, 


g intent upon the Apoſtles, 
and it ſucceeds 
more than we can ask or 


6 Then Peter faid, Silver and gold have I none #, but 
ſuch as I have o give I theep : In the Name q of Jeſus Chriſt 


of Nazareth r, riſe up and walk. 

2 That is, at hand or about me, neither had 
the Apoſtles abounded indeed, but in grace, 
power from Chriſt to heal. 
eftcCual for thee. 9 Inthe 
Chriſt ; and truſting unto his promiſed 
to things that are net, as if rhey were. 
called, and being known by that name, the 
it, though it had been b 


he much elſewhere ; 


? I apply ic to thee, and will make ir 
command of Jeſus 
aſſiſtance, who 
viour was uſually ſo 
Apoſtle does not decline 
y many (without cauſe) given him by way 


7 And he took him by the right hand s, and lift him 
up , and immediately 7 his feet and ancle-bones 


s Notdiſdaining to take hold of a 


: poor cripple or beggat ; as alſo 
being fully perſwaded of Chriſts preſ; 


nce with him for his cure : and 
the more evidently appear, that this was the wor 
and on a ſudden, 


od, who can without means, 
# Whence his lameneſs did 
unto the weak, Be ſtrong. 

s And he leaping up x, ſtood, and w 
with them into the temple, walking, 
praiſing God. 

x Thus was fulfilled that Prophecy of 1ſaiah 
ſpall the lame man leap as an hart ; and chus the ] 
that he was perfeCtly cured; though in an in 
leaping, and praiſing God, to whom alone he att 
and pertett (and therefore) Miraculous cure ; 
; the Apoſiles words he knew 
thing, but God is all in all unto him : and he did 
t- truth of the Miracle that was wrovght upon h 
Soul rejoyced in God is Saviour. 


9 And ail the people ſaw 


bring ought to 
thus God can ſay 


alked, and entred 
and leaping y, and 


, Chap. 35. 6. then 
ame man maniteſted 
ſtant, walking, and 
ributed that ſudden, 
he attributes no- 
did little or no- 
this to evidence 
Im, and that his 


thing unto the means 


him walking and praiſing 


y done, that none co 
enemies of the Goſpel are 


z I his Miracle was ſo publick) 
matrer of at ; which the 
tcls, Crap. 4. 16. : 

19 And they knew that it was he 2 
at the Beautiful gate of the temple : 
with wonder and amazement b at tha 


which ſat for alms 
and they were filled 
t which had hapned 


MD Ce en, 
—_ OS 


a The very fame lame beggar, 
many : 6 being ſo much cor. 
2 little while before, when he 
rcafoned well, John 9. $2. 
F.at any opened the eyes of o 


probably notoriouſly known to 
trary to what they had ſeen bur 
alms; and as he 
was it not heard, 
blind : So it was never 
of him that was born 


had begged their 
Since the world began, 
ne that was born 


y ftrengthened thus the feer 


1s And as the lame man which w 
| the people ran top 
called Solomor, 


as healed, held Peter 
ether unto them in the 
3, greatly wondring, 

unto them, they having been the 
od rowards him ; as alſo 
he might relapſe : He that 
could not bur be as much ſur- 
2::ge upon him. «<Not that which 
was deſtroyed by the Babylonians, 
2 Kirgs 25, 9. unleſs 
ed by the fire, when t 
re burncd : ſome morſe] 
evouring element, fire ; or 
Temple, in the 1 
4 thence called by the 
t any wonder that a por 
much as Chap. 
d, this porch is t 


Ml 
an John þ, al 
® : 

porci: that is 
 % In an extaſy of thankſulneſ; 
iniiruments of ſo T1 


221 a mercy from G 
ney were gone, 


ound ſo great a chang 
Priz.-d, as they thar fa 
was built by S9/ormon, for that 
a5 the reſt of the 
this porch might 
of the Temple we 


often elcaping the Jaws 
be it was builr in there. 
place where Solomons porch 
ormer name thit was ſo much 

ſhould hold ſo many thou- 
4- 4. five thouſand of them 
ho:2ghr, not onely to have 


4121219 to be converte 


g0, 

£ He mentions them, becauſe the promiſesof the Meſſiah ws m:4, 
to them. Hath glorified his Son Feſt, or his ſervant ; forſ; alohe 
is called, 1ſa. 53. 11. and that he might redeem us, he took vgs. 
him the form of a ſervant, and was obedient to the dearh Fu 
Croſs, and did that great work of Redemption, which Gog Cent him 
into the World to do. þ The Rulers, at whoſe commang Our bl&f:4 
Saviour was apprehended, bound, and delivered unto Pilare, 11, 
27. 1,2. 3 This ischarged upon the common ſort of people alſo 
who were earneſt in crying, Mat. 27. 25. His blood be upon ut and 
our children. Their ſin is here ripped up, and their fore fezrc! 
thequick that they might entertain the word of Salvation wit 
greater attention and deſire, 

14 But yedenied the Holy On? &, and the Ju? arg 
defired 2 murderer /to be granted unto ou. - 

& Chriſt the Anointed ; when they cryed our with ONE Voies 
John 19. 15. We have no king but Caſar ; diſclaiming Our : 
and his being anointed over them : 1 To wit, Barabbas; crying our 
Johu 18. 40. Not this man, but Barabbzs, which much 9runed 
their impiety, when the choice was given unto them 6 (1; Fo 
vaſtly different; the juſt Jeſus, and the murderons Barabhqs . they 
choſe the latter to their Dceſtru&ion and Confuſion unt t; re- 
— day © Where will blindneſs of mind, and hardne(; of beart 
end ! 

I5 And killed the [| Prince of lif> m, ® wliom God" 0: 
bath raiſed from the dead T3 Whereof we 7: Wit. He 
neſles, *(1 

7 As God, he is the Author of our Temporal life roo, in whon | 
ve live, and move, ©. and in whoſe hand is our breath ; but Clif 
as Mediator, is the guide and way to Eternal Life, 71 146 
Theſeare ſaid to have killed our Saviour; though neither Hu cr 
Pilate, nor probably many (if any) of them that nailed him w the 
Croſs, were preſent; but it was done for their ſakes, 2nd :r ther 
deſire, and therefore by their means; and *tis here charged upon 
them, asdone by them. 

I6 And his name x through faith in his name o hath 

made this man ſtrong, whom ye fee and know: yea, the 
faith which is by him, p hath given him this pertet (0und- 
nels in the preſence of you all. 
z His power ; for by it heis known as men or things are by their 
ſeveral names ; or the Name of Chriſt is put for Chriſt himſelf, a5 
the Name of God is put for God commonIly. o Calling by Faith on 
the Name of Chriſt ; being thorowly perſwaded that he could ard 
would heal this cripple. p Nor onely Faith, as on Chriſt a> its 
objeF : but by and from Chriſt as its Author: Faith bein; twice 
made mention of in this cure, there being required Faith in -:::rt0 
heal, and in the lame man to be healed. 

17 And now brethren 7, I wot that * through ignoranc'l 
ye did zt r, as didalfo your rulers s. 7 
9 Leſt the Corroſive in the 13, 14, 15. verſes, ſhould pierce toofir, 
to prevent deſpair in his Auditors, the Apoſtle uſeth in this 0/4 
Lenitive ; calling them yet, Brethren, though guilty of ſo great 1 
miſtake in their judgment, and fault in their praftice. » Wharlo- 
ever they did againit Chriſt, whom St. Peter Preached, was out ot 4 
double error. 1. About the place of Chriſt's Birth, ſuppoſing him to 
have been born at Nazareth. 2. They were Ignorant of the nature 
of his Kingdom. s Whoſe fault vas the greater, as having {duced 
others, &'c. Yet St. Peter opens a door of hope by repentance, even 
for them alſo. wo 
18 But thoſe things which God before had ſhewed by 
the mouth 7 of all his prophets, that Chriſt ſhould ſukirr, 
he hath ſo fulfilled x. 

7 The Prophets did all ſpeak the ſame things, as ifthey had ſpoken 
out of one mouth, as they did ipeak by one Spirit. « God picd yo 
ignorance of ſome, and the malice of others, for his own holy pas 
and that it wag Prophefied that Chriſt ſhould ſuffer, is very plu, 
Iſa. FO, F, 6, 7- ' $ vn\r 
19 © * Repent ye therefore, and beconverted, PTY 
{13s may be blottcd out Y, when the times of reirc{11ng 4 
ſhall come from the preſence of the Lord #. 
x This is the true end, uſe, and application, both of rhe Y 
ceding Miracle and Sermon, to pertwade unto an dey 
Converlion. Y Alluding to the manner of writing upon Tad'ss 1 
thoſe times, and nor much diſgreeing from what isin uſe _— 
us» who write upon paper or parchmenc; there 5 2 b99< # 0; 


"Y 
, # 


A. E. XK Ti 
membrance, and a record of all our fins kepr, Fer. 17. 1» 4 4 


id tg 
a the 


\ } 
Redecme, 


» Thatis, g.. 


Ufito the 
S 2 Or Why 
o! POYer 0: 


7 Per, 


& Con. 
XCgur 
OT Caute 


X his Son Ty 
Jeſus, whom he delivered þ up, and {|| denieq Dim ;the Ma 


» aid 


_ when all things ſhall be reſtored to that condition from which mm 
ron put them : for the fall hath maim d and difordered the whole Uni- 
Fu verſe; and probably, there is not that excellency in any of the 
"3s Crcarures, which there was at firſt, before wan (for whom they were 
My made) by his fin brought death to himlelt, and as 1t were a dead 
"ay colour over all them ; this makes th: whole Creation groan and 
mY mvail in pain unt!l now, Rom. 8. 22. But the end of the World 
and will bz a time of reſtitution of all rhings, unto man eſpecially ; who 
Fs ſhall be then reſtored unto God, and tO a bletizd Immortality : tor 
the unleſs this be granted, all their Preaciung and Propheſying was in 
vain, 1 Cor. 15. 14. ; 
ard -, 22 * For Moſes truly ſaid unto the fatherse, A Prophet 

" ſhall the Lord your God raiſe up unto you, of your bre- 
oice chren, like unto mef: him ſhall ye hearin all things g 
mer whatloever he ſhall ſay unto you. 
out, » Their Anceſtors in the wilderneſs, Dewz. 18. 15. as alſo in the | 
ated 8 ver. St. Peter names here but one of their Prophets, but a moſt 
019 remarkable one. f 1. In Wiſdom. 2. In Miracles. 3. In being a 
they Mediator betwixt God and his people. 4. In their being both our of 
pre- their brethren, ( i. e. of the ſeed of Abraham) 5, In that they were 
_ both ſent from God after an extraordinary manner. g If any Pro- 
4 phe did come amongſt them, and did foretel future things which 
5040: came to paſs, or did work a real miracle, they were bound ro believe 
vie. Heb him, if he did not endeavour to draw them to worſhip a falſe God ; 

(1 and by conſequence they were bound to have believed our Saviour, 
tout whotaught chem onely to fear that crue God, whom the Law and 
iſ all the Prophers tad ſpoken of. ; 
a6 3 And it ſhall comeo pals, ha: every ſoul 4 which 
g, ct will not hear that Prophet z, ſhall be deſtroyed from 
the mong the people F. 
their þ That is every one. 2 That is, believe and obey him. & Asthoſe 
Vpon that diſobeyed Meſes were deſtroyed, many perithing by ſtrange and 

ſudden deaths, Numb. 16. 3. Oc. We read of Korah, Dathan, and 
eta 4:ram, and all that belonged to them, ſwallowed up for this ſin. | 
the Thz Apoſtle demands, Heb. 2. 2. How ſhall we eſcape, rf we negle& ſo 
and} great ſalvation ? For a greater than Moſes 15 here, and God hath un- 
dzrtaken ro require it of every one that will not hearken unto him, | 
» Dt. 18. 19. | 
Kos 24 Yea, and all the prophets from Samuel J, and 
ith on thoſe that follow after, as many as have ſpoken, have | 
1d and likewiſe foretold of theſe days. | 
ay It [Though'there were ſome Prophets betwixt Moſes and Samnzl, yet 
7 twice they were but ſuch as Propheſied in ſome particular exigencies and 
P2241 caſes; and in Samuel's days the word of the Lord was precious or rare, 
1 Saws. 3. 1. but then David, that lively Type of Chriſt, appearing 
Jrance*L at the Throne, the Meſſiah began to be more diſcovered in, and by 
10 him: Bzſides, Samuel was the firſt who wrote his Prophecies, and 
nofit ereed the Schools of the Prophers, and therefore he 15 firſt mentioned; | 
_"—_ and the date of the Prophets 15 here begun from him. 
great 1 25 Ye are the children of the prophets 7, and of the | 
Vile covenant » which God made with our fathers, ſaying 
w—_ 3, unto Abraham *, And in thy ſeed ſh3llall the kindreds o , 
gt «of the earth be bleſies p. | 
duced ” ® The-Patriarchs, Abraham, Iſaac, and Facos, are called Pro- 
; even phers, P/al. 105. 15. and did Prophetie, foretelling things to come, | 
Oc The Diſciples of the Prophets are alſo called their Children or 
ed by 90nS, 2 Kings. 2. 3. and fo theſe pretended and defired to be ac- 
fr counted, 2 Children of the Covenant, are ſuch unto whom the 
Mt Covenant belongs, which God made with Abraham and his ſeed ; 
ice they are called the children of promiſe, Rom. 9. $ Gal, 4. 28. 
| ſpoken and the children of the Kingdom, Mas. 8. 12. And this Covenant of 
aicd tit God with Abraham, was the cauſe, that notwithſtanding all the ſore 
ly ends: and heavy calamities of that people, God did always preierve ſome, 
y ple *Md tiiere was a remnant ſaved. o Families or Nations. p Through 
Chriſt who is this ſeed of Arraham, all mercies in this World, and 
at your *v Erernal Life in the World ro come are beſtowed ; grace, and glory, 
ſhing 5 ad every good thing. 

7. 26* Unto you firſt q, God having raiſed up his Son 
che pre: Jeſus, 7 tent him to bleſs you, in turning away every 
z1Ce one of you from his iniquities 5. 

[abi k | Lhe 7:w5 and Inhabitants of Jeruſalem, who are the loſt ſheep 
among" ® the bo fe of Iſrael. St. Peter gid nor yet know that the Gentiles 
ox O) 1h vol. Hl 


_ , 
Ty; S 


Iz, £**. 


11P- II. 


Th AEM 


ih is writttn with 2 pen of ſron and with the paint of @ diamind : ſhould be called, until he was raug'it it by the viſion, 77 
| | 


Chap. IV. 


I'9 


4 + - 


JH go fin 3s pardoned, it 15 faid to b2 blotred our, 1j2. 44. 22. and | moſt taroughout ; and CaOUg'Y our Saviour hid told the Aroſties, 
not (0 be found any more, though it ſhould by lought for, Fer. 50. | thac they ſhould be his wicnetles to the uttermoſt pr of the earch, 
-0. 2 Or, times of cooling ; as afflictions are called a fiery tryal, fo| As 1.8. they underſtood it onely of thoſe of th-ir own Nation, 
deliverance from them, 15S a featon of reireſhing or cooling : Such | {cattered o: diſperſed abroad, 1 Pet. n. tr 7 Whi.h wo.d does n 
a time of refreſhing ſhall come in this lite, commonly trom many | onely reter to the ReſurieGion of Chriſt, bur to hi. (+, 17 coub ituced 
rroubles ; but when this Jife ends, a Gzliverance cores from all | and appointed to be a Prince and a Saviour ; this fri, f4id, 3 gr-- 47 
«Mi&10nS 00 them thar truly fear and jerve God. a Gotl's preſence | Propher is riten up amongſt us, Zike 7, 16. and Gol kick talted wa 
+ the cauſe and ground, from whence all the refreſhment his people ; a hon 07 Satvation, Lake Cy. } Lowioever, 1th by verve of Clif 
rake, do are ; Heaven would not be Heaven (a place of bliis and | being rated trom rh: dad, ans carrizd into bis King Com, that 
olory) without. It : and as God 15 the objeUt of our beatitude, fo he | are bleti2d. 5 I 1515 the greats! biefing indeed ; h ace on: 
5 the giver Of all comforr, and his Spirit is the onely Comforter. | bath his Name Impoicd by Grey on him,  AZze, 1 2a:Jed 
20 And he ſhall ſend Jelus Chriit 5, which betore wa { 2 becaule be fave: his peopie om tharkoas; ind withour ri 
hed unto you : | being ſaved from out fins, nothing can be ate. to us, fr, 2. 
reac ; Fo : . , | 11, and 57. 21. There is no peace [aith my Gol to IF PRE We 
To remove all evils and miſeries from his people. When that}, - has 18 am be earned _ TS 
bog ne - ol. ares ef it os © ES any oz urne mn Oe NIQH!ES, 17 1s th OULHN tis 
Fan ſhines, all clouds and miſts are ſcattered : this reterrs eſpecially to | bleſſing of Cod in Chriſt, ] 3 LOU Ll 


Chriſt's ſecond coming, which 1s here promited to encourage us t9 
and to deter us from doing evil : as alſo to move us to re- 


do good, 


-ntance, and to comfort us when penitent. 


21 Whom the heaven muſt receive c, until the times of 


refticucion of all things 4, which God hath ſpoken by 


the mouth of all his holy prophets, ſince the world began. 

; Thar is, contain after it hath received him, as a real place doth 
true oody ; for ſuch Chriſt's body was, which was received into 
Heaven, and Heaven 1s the Palace and Throne of this King of Kings, 
:nd Lord of Lords, where he ſhall reign until he hath pur all his 
enemies under hisfeet, 1 Cor, 15. 25. 4 Or, reſtauration of all things; 


|  - D's 


The Rnlers, being grieved and of ended at Peter's Sermon, annvclicyd bn; 
examine the Authority of Peter and John, 1—7. P-te: fl-d wich 
the hily Ghoſt, tcſtifi:th that the lame man was hoaled'by the Pimer of 
Jeſus : He us the ſtone rejeFed by the builders; | 'y whom alone there 
z ſalvation, S—12. The Rulers convinced of thts Mirac'c, yet ftraitiy 

| forbid them to preach i the name of Jeſrs, 13 —18, Th-; arclare no: 19 


leave off: return totherr company aud report what had bean 
They ail pray unto God for bo/dnifs, ana vlefſing in preachiy 
God teſi:fi::hthat their prayers are heard by an Ear: bonate,axd by fil- 
ling them with the holy Ghoſt : their mutual love and concord $1 hoy 


BC } Q=-- 5 }. 


ATTY + 
- a® - [, » LL” _; - 
bl 6 JC bs ora , 


| fel their goods to fups'y the poor © which Barnabas aljo th, 2.) 7. | 
{I N4 as they ſpake unto the people, the prieits 'J 
and the || caprain of the temple a, and the Sade! Or, Ran MN 
_ ' * 4'F 
duces Came upon them 5, Pi&a. 
. . 5 Wy.£4:% 
a The Commander over tho'e Soldiers who were appointe? to gvard | ht - 
the Temple, and provide that no diforder might happen, by reato1 t FE 2% 


, ofthe multitudes thar came to worſhip there ; 
was a Roman, and not of the Fewijh Nation, m lefs ths chit ot HH 
| any of the courſes of rhe Pric!ts, ro whom this term cannor 5 

6 Tnzle were moſt invetzrite againft the Gofpet, - wi 


and mott 2: obab!y 


vals 
Mita 


—  - 


re, 


2 


— 


whole main 
Article 1s the Returre&ion, which they denicd ;- and thus eic'; 
man, Zews and Gentiles, agres againſt Chiift, as was foreto!d, yz! 
2 35 

2 Being grieved c that they taughr the people, and 
preached rhroughJetus the reſurrection 4trom the dead. 
c Or angry to ſuch a degree, that it was a great troubleto then. 
The DoGrine of the RefurreCtion alone, could not but vex the 
; Sadduces who denied 1t : but it did mere Mi then , rhit the Apo. 
| {tles Preached itthrough Jcfus ; afkerting, noc en{-ly the Retvrietion 
; Of our Saviour, which the Jews gave to much mouey unto the $61dj- 
ers to hinder the report of, Mat. 28. 12, 13. but alfo that Chriſt was 
the Author of the ReſurreQion, an the firſt fruits of them that fleep; 
and becauſe they inferred from Chriſts Reſurrection, that his Dit- 
ciples ſhould rife from the dead alſo. 

3 And they laid hands on them, and put them in 
hoid e unto thenext day : For it was how even tide. 

e Some think, this not to have been ſo Nrait a cuſtody as that of 2 


F; 


priſon : bur that rather the Apoſtles were delivered to ſome, thar 


promiſed that they ſhould be torch coming ; the prediction cf our 
Saviour. began now to be fulkiiled, Luke 21. 12. They fhill Lay their 
hands on you, and perſecute you, Howloever, God was pleaſed to fut- 


fer pertecution to come by degrees on his Church ; after the Sun was 
down, (Chriſt was gone from them) it was not preſently pirch-dark- 
neſs with them. God always remembers his peoples condition, and 
his own promiſes ; and lays no more upon them, than they are ab!z 
to bear, 

4 Howbeit, many of them which heard the word. 
believed f; And the number of the men was about fi 


" 
thouſand g. 

f Faith cometh by hearing, and heariug by the word of Go, Pom. 
10. 17. Tt being the ordinary means which God hath appointed ; 
the Apoſtles themſclves make uſe of it rowards the conviction of this 
people. g The number of the hearers 15 not intendel to be fer here, 
or in any other place; but either theſe five rhoutand,. were ſuch a5 
were Converted at rhis Sermon, or rather the number Converted by 
St. Peter's former Sermon, Ch. 2. 14, 41. were at this S:rmon made 
thus many ; howſoever the increaſe which God gave was very grear 

5'& And it came to paſs on the morrow, that theit 
rulers, and eiders z, and ſcribes, 

bh The Sanhearimor great Council. 5 The Magiſtrates of the City, 
Scribes, Do&ors, or Teacher, of the Law, &c howſoever theſe mich: 
be diſtinguiſhed, they are all as one againſt the Doctrine of the (0. 
ſpel, and endeavour to pur out ti:e light, as foon as it began to ſhine, 
as Herod would have killed Chrift in the manger. 

6 And * Annas the high prieſt, and Caiaphas &, and * 
John /, and Alexander 2, and as many as were of the 
kindred of the high prieſt », were gathered together ac * 
Jeruſalem 0. 

k Both theſe are ſaid to be High Prieſts, Zuke 3. 2- whether they 
bare this Office by turn each other year, as ſome think ; or that 
the Reman Power, pur in and out whom they pleaſed, and in cour- 
tefie he that was laid aſide, ſtill retained the title during kis life, is 
not very material. / Thought to be the Son of Awmmzs. m A man of 
great repute amongſt them, as Joſephus ſays. n Their relation many 
times preferring them toa place in their great Conncil or Sanhedr:im. 
o Or in Feruſaler ; either ſuchas were in the Ciry, being called co- 
gether on ſuch an extraordinary occafion ; or elic they ſent alſo un- 
to men of greateſt note, that lived nigh thereunto. 


- And when they had ſer them in the midſt p, they 
aSked By what POWer 9, Or DY what n:mer have VE* Þx.L 54 
Nat. 28. 23. 


7. - 
3 2IN10-47- 


a 
- 


| done this 2 
3 S dirs Ch. ri 1 7 


ikkkky! 


V's 


The 4 


e The $3r-67:41 or great Council, did fit in a circular form; 
2nd the Apctles being to antwer for themielves, were placed fo as 
they might better h-ar, and be heard. 4 Natural, or Supernatoral 
and Divine. r Art whote command, or in whote Authority. they 
inquire whether they did pretend to be Prophets, or perſons extra- 
ordinarily font, ©c. Though the Miracle which they had wrought, 
 Thewed fuliiciently by whoſe power it was done; yer of this they 
were willingly ignorant, and inquire onely that they might tin 
marter out of the Apoſtles own mouths, for which they might 
blame or puniſh them. 

& Then Peter filled with the holy Ghoſt 5, faid unto 
them, Ye ruiers of the. people, and elders? of Ifrael, 

s Guiding, and frengrhaing of him, in what he did ſpeak, by 
which ſo mightily Peter differed from himſelf, that though formerly 
he was afraid of a ſervant, and denied our Saviour, new he 15not 
afraid betore the Rulers ro confeſs him. # See wer. 5. Theſe were 
cipecially the great Council, in imitation of the Sevenry, which 
Moſes appointed by God's command to help bim in the burden of his 
Government, N»mb. 1. 16, 24. 

9 If we this day be examined # of the good deed 
done to the impotent man, by what means x he is made 
whole; 

# Juridically called in queſtion ; 'ris a forenfical word. Of zhe 
zood geed ; though they ditputed not the Authority of the Court, yet 
they afſert their int-gricy 3 that it was no other than a good deed 
they bad done, which Rulers ought not to be a terror unto, Rom. 
13. 3. x That isin the words ofthe queſtion which was propounded 
unto them, ver. 7, By what Power, or by what Name he us maae 
W#I91e £ 

10 Be it known unto you all, and to all the people 
of Ifreel y, that by the Name of Jeſus Chriſt of Na- 
zareth z, whom ye crucified, whom God raiſed s from 
the dead, even by him doth this man ſtand 6 here before 
you who'e. 
© » The Apoſtles are not diſmayed, but make their boldneſs ſpoken 
of, ver. 13. to appear ; they Preach Chriſt ro all of them, and wiſh 
they couid make bim known to all others, z See Chap. 2.22. 8. e. 
4 God the Father : our Surety was diſcharged by God himſelf, who 
had laid him in the priton of the grave forour depts. This6 the lame 
man that was made whole being prefent, was an ocular demonſtration 
ofthe Miracle wronght upon him. 

11 This is the ſtone c which was ſet at nought of you 


builders 4, which is become the head of the corner e. 

c Alluding to the Pſal. 138. 22. in which there is a Praphecy of 
what was now fulfilled, fee Chap, 2. 23. d So by their Office they 
were, and ought to have been fo indeed, and ate here ſo called, 
that they might be minded of their ducy, viz. to increaſe, ſtrengthen, 
and beautifie the building, and not to demoliſh, weaken, or de- 
tice it. e Or the corner-ſtone ; Chriſt is frequently fo called, 
Mzaz. 21. 42. Mark 32.19 and thar, 
upholds the whole building . 2. He 1s a Rock or ſtcne of cfience 


3. He i- moſt precious, 1 Pez. 2. 6. as the corner-ſtones are uſually 
the Jargelt, fineft, and beſt. 4. Chrift 1s a light co lighten the Gen- 


tiles, as well as the glory Of th? peo. of lirael ; and both Gentile 
and Jew are unitcd in him, nd favea by tm, as the corner-ſtone is | 


equaliy necethary tor both fides which arc uaited in it, and born up 
by 28. 


12 * Neither 15 there ſalvation fin any other g : for; 


here is ncn 1C ] Ven 7 given : : 
there is nene other Name þ uncer heaven 7 given og ! credib!e, who had io long known what it was to be without tie uls 


' of his limbs, which now he injoyed. 3. Whom they couldnotthem- 


men whereby v.e muſt be laved. 

f For Soul or Body. g Paſcn or thing. + Becauſe in diſtreſs 
men did utually call upon, their many faile gods by name, as O 
Eaal hear us, s K:7gs 18. 26. 
Pricſt or King ; efpecially referring unro Moſes, in whom they did 


truſt, and therefore under the Golpcl eſpecially, we muſt lift up | 


our hearts. | 
13 { Now when they ſaw the boldneſs of Peter and 


Tfohn, and perceived that they were unlearned & and. 


n 
q 


| 


n0Tant mens, they marvelled, 


& Not wholly unlearned, but fuch as were without any polite 


Learmng, or more than- ordinary Education, ſuch as every one a- ; 


' 
: 


monglt them had. 7ldiots, fo the Greck word from whence ours | 


"Nd larger iphrc, than the walls of theirown houſe ; having never | 
been Magittrates, or Teachers ofthe Law, or any way publick per- ' 
ons; and ipake onely their mother Tongue. » Which theſe Rulers | 
might ealily take notice of ; many of them frequenting his company ! 
to9, Matt. 21, 23, Like 18. 8, John 12. 42. | 

14 And beholding the man which was healed ftand- | 
Ng » with them, they could ſay nothing againſt ico. {| 
© Whereas, before he was either carryed, or was forced to lay 
gown. # They conld not deny but that it was a good deed, and j 
thas it was miraculouſly done. 

15 But when they had commanded them to go aſide 
our of the council p, they conferred among them- 
ſelves q. 

| Þ The place where the Counci] mer; for the Apoſtles were not 
dilmifled to go away at their lberry, q Ir was their joynt endea- 
vour to ſtifle the Goſpel, and would now conſult abour the beſt ex- 
pedient, bur they would not ler the Apoſtles hear, leſt they might 
4 the weakneſs of thzir proofs againſt them, and againſt the 
run. 

16 Saying *, Whar ſhall we do» to theſe men ? for 
that indeeda notable miracs hath been done by them xx 
martcit to all chem chat dwell in Jeruſalem, and we 
cannot Gorly 2: 


come, fignitying fuch as was brought up at home, and never ated ; 


"y 2 n 
G3 C 
proceeding with the Apciiles ! they mighr Icem to bave th. inns 
in their hands, and yet they are evidently overcome by ions } 
rs, viz by both the Apoſtles and the lame man, and &;...:.:, 
bv the evidence of this Fa& its ſeiF; though they did not bg. *. 
beinz unjuſt, yet they were loath to ſeem to be fo, and thereds, 
they take Counſel to hide it, or palliate 1t before men; more val; M 
their credit, than the Salvatioa of their own, or Other nin 
Souls. : ; 
£7 Bur thar ic ſpread no further among the pegyj. 
let us firaitly chreacen them -, thar they ipeak hencete;;, 
to No Manin this name F. 

s The Pleonaſm here uſed, implies a very ſore and heavy three. 
ning ; as of the grievouleſt puniſhment upon rhe molt heinous 66 
; Either, 1. by Preaching, or 2. by praying 1n it, or 3, by gy... 
Miracles again by it. 'D 

18 And they called them, and commanded themng; 
to ſpeak at all z, nor teachin the name of Jeſus ;; 

# Neither privately nor publickly. x As his Apoſtles and Nij;. 


© 


| ſters ſent from him. 


19 Bur Peter and John anſwered y and faid unto they 
Whether it be right in the fight of God z, to hearkep 
unto you more than unto God, judge ye 4. . 

3 Both ſpake by one and rhe ſame Spirit, and agreed in one 114 
the ſame anſwer ; they are not ſollicitous what will beſt bring them 
off at preſent, but z from whom-nothing 15 hid, and why! j; 4, 
avenger of all wrong. The Apoſtles ſeem to reter tO a commony 
reccived rule amongſt their Rabbins, which alſo they make uſe 
Chap. 5. 29. We ought to obey God rather than men. a In the greats} 
matters of our moſt holy Religion, God hath nor left himſelt with. 
out a witnels, or a thouſand witneſſes in our own breaſts and CON» 
ſciences, Amos 2.411. DIE” 

20 For we cannot but ſpeak 5 the things which ye 


have ſeen and heard. 


ſpeaking, becauie of the neceſfſity' which was Jaid upon them, and 
the woe which would have befall'n them, if they had not Preaxche 
the Goſpel, 1 Cor. 9. 16. If any man denies to bear teſtimony for 


! man to a truth, he ſins; how much more does he ſin, who fo;- 
bears to wicneſs for God, and at the command, or at the ſending of 


God ? 
21 So when they had further threatned them, they 
let them go c, finding nothing how they might puniſh 


— Omer 


' ſame tatt upon further evidence. 
eh Roos an evil, or fin, nor the apprehenſion of Gods diſpleaſure and wrath 
* PECANS JE TEAMS ADC | which deterred them; but the fear or favour of the people. The 


: 
corruptions that are in the world, are over-ruled for the 99d 
Rom. 9. 33. a$ many run upon, and are huit by a corne:eſtone. | P | good of 


# Whether Parriarch or Prophet, ' 


T4 | and they tnok know- 
;&lge of them, thattney had been with Jeſus mz. ! 


Gods children in it; e not only ſuch as believed, but others alſo 


' could not but confels, that this was the hand of God which had 


made the lame'to walk, and rejoice 1n it, and by conſequence haye 
a very great venelation for the Apoſtles, who were the inſtruments 
EM 
22 For theman was above forty yearsoldf, on whon 
this miracle of healing was ſhewed ; 
F 1. Therefore the harder to be cured. 2. The man was themors 


ſelves bur have often ſeen, and heard begging. But if he bdl.id fo 
many years in the porch of the Temple through which our Saviouz 
frequently entred, how came it to pals that he vas not curedbciore. 
Wedo not read that our Saviour denied any who cam: for cure. 
There need no other anſwer, bur that all times and fcaſons are 1n 
Gods hands, who juſtly forbore to fend deliverance ii thi; very 
tice, and now metcifully ſent it; eſpecially, reſerving this Miracle 
for the confirmation of the truth of the Goſpel, and ot the Apoſtles 
themſelves in the Preaching of it. 

23 And being let go g | 
company, and reported all þ that the chief-pricits i and 
elders had faid unto them. 

Z They wen: 70 their own company ; the reſt of the Apoſtles and 
believers, who have a ſpecial propriety and delight in one another, 
ſheepwith theep, and goats with goats ; though the ſeparation wil 
be made at phe Jaſt day, the foundatien of it is Jaid here. þ To 
fora tie of what they might expeC&, and encourage them to 
hope tor theIike deliverance. 5 What hath been ſaid concerning 
them, might be added, that theſe it may be were the firſt or chick 
in the courles, which David divided the Prieſts into, which diviion 
was oblervedtill our Saviours time, Cake 1. 5. 

24 And when they heard thar, they /lift up their voce 
to God with one accord, and ſaid , Lord, thou art 
which made » heaven and earth, and theſea, and all that 
in them is : : 

k Their own company, believers, unto whom they went. / Et- 


ther jointly with one heart and Spirit agreeing in the ſame wor p 
or ſaying Amen to the ſame thing, » They begin prayer with {uc: 


a reverend compellation, asſuited beſt to the matter of their pray 
and praiſes ; whether by Lord they meant their Saviour, __ 
uſualiy ſo called by them, or God the Father ( becauſe the word ber 
is not Xyes, bur Sigomora) isnot material ; for when any P 
in the Trinity is invoked, the other are included ; for we WO! 
the Trinity in Unity and the Unity in Trinity, 


erlon 
thip 


1 The Creation and 
. . o , 'F us 
Covernment ofthe World, isa good conlideration £0 confirm 


under all rhings that befal us here. 


1 hf 
25 Whooby the mouth of thy p fervait Dari. a 


A ' 
Oo SJ} 111 
m—__ TY. [1 


r Ar what a Joſs zre theſe great men, about the mann «c.1,.. * 


b In a moral , not in a Phyſical ſenſe: they could not refiuin © 


them *, becauſe of the people 4: for all men glorified fx 
; God e for fthat which was done. Luk 
c For the preſent; for amongſt them no - acquittal wo pe. 19 
' remptory or abſoJute, bur that they might be tryed again for the . 

a It was not the ieniz of the {1 


* they went .to their own*F 


belure 
by wh 
fowarg 
What 4 
by the 


a 2 Av © 


evider 
praye: 
Cition 
made) 
Cod g 
In the 
of God 
ful me 


32 


. Of one 
' thaty 
but t 


: As 


at les 


F-] — ff £5 wi 
SZ U3 O00 co << _ 


" 20 .- ——— 
£3" 59 


-e haye 
IMments 


rhom 


> more 
le uls 
them- 
laid fo 
2V1OUL 
{ore 
- CIR» 
Jre 1 
; very 
\[iracle 
\nolitles 


r own *( 


> 1 and 


Hes and 
1nother, 
on will 

þ To 
them t0 
cerning 
or chick 
diviſion 


r VOICE 


rt God 
all that 


"Wo Ei- 

e words, 

-ith ſuch 
17 prayer 
who was 
/ord her? 
[ per{on 
. worlthip 
1010 An 

onfirm V3 


vid hall 
i 0 


bo . 
13 whom thou haſt y anointed, both Herod & 


The 4 


ſaid, Why did the heathen q rage, and the people in that place; that it was even then commanded. 


:m3gine 7 Vain chings? 


; Through the Holy Ghoſt by the mouth of David ; fo "ris read in 
and ſhews, that what David and other holy 
rom the Holy Ghoſt, and is to be attended unto, and 
believed as ſpoken by him. p Servant or Son 3 David's relation to 
God, is mentioned as a greater dignity than his being ruler over fo 
eople. 9 Shews the unreaſonable fury wherewith the e- 
f God pcerſecute his people » without cauſe, bur what them- 
(-1ves imagine Or Make, and in the event failing oftheir end; for a 
k for the good of them that love God, Rom. 8. 28. And the 


many ancient m_ : 
men ſpake, was 


great ap 


T3emies 0 


things war : 
Mood of Martyrs have been found to bez the ſeed of the Church, 


Theſe words are quoted out of P/al. 2. r. 
" 26 sThe kings of the earth ſtood up, and the z rulers 


were gathered together « againſt the Lord, and againſt 
his Chriſt. : 

Theſe words do not vary in ſenſe from what weread, Pſal. 2. >. 
tur are the ſame for ſubſtance. 5 Not onely ſuch who in a ſtrict [cnſe 
we call Kings, butany chick Governors, as Herod and Pilate were. 
; The Sanhedrin Or great Counſelof the Jews. u God looks upon it 
as done againſt him, whatſozver !s done againſt them that fear him 
thus the Jjraelites are ſaid to be gathered together againſt the Lord, 
Numb. 16. IT. who were gathered againſt Moſes and Aaron. u Our 
6:viour Was 2t the right hand of his Father ; but they who aff: his 
members afflidt nim ; he cries trom Heaven to Saul, Why perſ:cureſt 
hou me 2 Chap. 9. 4+ ard had betore told his Diſciples, Luke 10. 16. 
W that geſprſeth Jou, acſpiſeth 7%. 

27 For * of a truth againſt thy « holy child Jeſus, 
and Pontius 


7 


. not that every one parted with all hz had, tor that had taken away 


CTA 


5. 4 neither was it praiſed any where bur at fer 
rather it was praQtifed there, thar blievers migr. thaw what C: 

they gave to our Saviours prediction concerning the d=ltruction 
that place ; in which they did not care to have or ret2{11 
There might be fomething 


CODE. "v4, fax * 
WW. Fs! : 

j == 
»ril nl 

«s { +» & 

- 


ms RG 
ily Ca)titc, 
_ 
[1 


to00 to commend this prabtice of the 


Church in that ſeaſon : The whole Church upon the marte; DCINS 1N 
Jeruſalem, and conliſting of tuch as lived a far cf, and were by Per- 


tecurion to be driven ſuddenly farther ; had nor fuch a mcan;; been 
yielded to, it muſt have periſhed withour 2 miracle. 

33 And with great power / gave the apoitles witneſs 
of the reſurrection 2 of the Lord Jeſus, nd * great grucer 
was upon them all. 

[ By tundry miracles which they wreaghr, as aſe by their bold. 
neſs with which they ſpake; it being no {mall wonder rg foe and hear 
ſuchilliterate men teſtifying the truths of the Gol l, amid fo many 
Learned Rabbins. m The Returrection was th: greateſt point in 
controverſie, which being granted, all things concerning Chriſt and 
the Goſpel could not be denied ; and therefore hers ir 1s eſpecially 
mentioned. 7 Favour and acceptation ; men could not bur think 
well of their DoEtrine and ways, whom they ſaw ſolanocent and 
Holy, Meck and Good, elpecially God's Grace was manifeſt in tl:cir 
words and aQtions. 

34 Neither was there any among them that lacked: 


for as many as were o poſleſlors of lands, or houſes, fold 
them, and broughtthe prices of the chings that werg 
ſod. 

0 So far forth as might relieve the preſent necefities of bzlicver; : 


- 


Pilate, with the Gentiles; and the people of Iſrael were | (at leaft) the ute and force of the eighth commandment, as Chap. 2. 


achered together. 
x It ſpeaks Chriſts dearneſs to God as a Child, and obeying of 
God asa Servant. y To bea King, Prizſt, and Prophet to his 


, 2 Afﬀtranve agreement againſt Chriſt, his traths and peo | pie : 4 
Church 5% 3g 5 nd people, | nd did ſel] their fee-fimple. 


(Geutiies and Jews never combin'd fo together). Henceforth it is 
no diſhonour tO any, If they follow that which is good, to have 


24. (for where there is no propriety, there can be no rh<#) now 
| Chriſt came nor to diſſolve anv Law, bur to fulfil it; the meanings 
' then 1s, that theſe early Chriſtians, would not onely part with their 
revenue, bur rather than their brethren ſhould want, they would, 


35 And Jaid ther: Cown at the > apoſtles feet ; and 


j 
vrezt and many enemies, forſo had our Saviour ; nor is it any ho- | diſtribution was made unto every man q according as he 


Nour £9 any, to perſecute and deſpiſe ſuch ; fo did rod, Pilate 
Tudns, Oc | 
284 For to do whatſoever thy hand.”. and thy counſel: 
determined before to be done. | 

s The Apoſtles mind not fo much ſecond canſes, in what our Sa - | 
viour or themſelves ſuffered, but fee and acknowledge God in all ; | 
who makes a ſtreight line with a crooked ſtick ; and 15 Holy, Wilt | 
and Good in over-ruling, and permitting the greateſt evils, and does | 
dſerve to have praiſe for all things, Epheſ. 5. 20. ſee Chap. 2. 23. 
-. Thy Power and right to diſpoſe of all things ; alluding ro Leviz. 
16.8 x5 the lot caſt for ths two goats, (the diſpoſing of which be- 
ng from the Lord, Prov. 16. 33.) did determine, whether of the | 
coats thould be Sacrificed, and whether thould eſcape ; ſo it was 
not without a Divine diſpoſition, thar Chriſt was made a fin offering 
for u5; tho this no way excule the wicked inſtruments of his death 
and ſuftcring. _ 

29 And now Lord, behold 6 their threatnings : and i 
orant unto thy ſervants, that with all boldnels c they | 
may ſpeak thy word. 

b They had acknowledged God the maker of Heaven, wer. 4.4. and | 
xcco;dingly here they defire, that from Heaven his dwelling place, | 
he would behold them and their fufferings ; as all things are vilible | 
touch 35s fit above us. c Freeneſs, or pretence of mind, here tran- | 
ſated bo:dneſs, which in a good cauſe ( for Chriſt and his cruth ) is! 
(as all good gifts) from the bather of lights, James 1. 17. and our 
Saviour hath promiſed that it ſhall be given unto us in that hour | 
what to lay, Luke 12,11, 12, 

z0 By ſtretching forth thine hand 4to heal : and that ! 
fens and wonders e may be Gone by the name of thy ' 
holy child Jeſus. 

d They detire nothing elſe to embolden them, but God's owning 
them and their work. e Miracles were then neceſſary, as being 
the ſeal bf their Commiſſion from God ; they defire ro have this 
Patent with chem, to ſhew as oft=n as occaſion ſerved. By the 
Power and Authority of Chriſt; for Chriſt alone they ſought: ro ad- 
Vance -_ magnifie, and nct themiclves by all the wonders they 
Wrougnre, 

31 And when they bad prayed *, the place was 

* ſhaken f where they were aſſembled together ; and they 
were all filled g with rhe holy Ghoſt, and they ſpake the 
word of God with boidneſs 5, 

} Miraculouſly moved up and down on the waves of the Sea, to 
evidence God's preſence with them, and acceprance of them and their 
prayers 1n an extraordinary menner. g According to their con- 
ations, whether Apoſtles (tor whom theſe prayers were eſpecially 
made) or private believers. + This was the grace they asked, wer. 29. 
Cod gave itthem, and with it all other graces necefſary for them ; 
In their difficulties and wants, the greateſt and holieft inthe Church 
*God, muſt goto God to be ſupplied, and prayer is the moſt ſucceſs- 
ful means, * ; 

|. 32: And the multitude of them that believed, * were 
© Ofone heart, and of one ſoul f : neither ſaid any of chem, 
that ought of the things which he poſietſed,was his own & 


ut they had all things common. 

2 ASif one heart and one ſoul, had moved that multitude ; to 
- ure there was one {pirit in them all, that is, the Spirit of God, 
ning ole grace they agreed in all truths, and in hearty afteQions 

1 765 one another. & Infomuch, they were as willing, that 
*t they had might be enjoyed by their necefſitous brethren, as 
themſelves ; The community of goods was not commanded, 

1 tat libaty, and was chofen as moſt expedicnt at ſuch a time 


2 


—_—_ A 


— 


| meet with divers terminations or endings. 


had need. 

p 5ubmitted them to the Apoſtles diſpoſal ; this metaphor is uſed, 
: Cor. 15. 27. Me hath pur all things wader his fees, q The poor 
mans want, 15 the fitteſt meaſure for our relief, 

35 And Joles r, who by the apoſtles was ſurnamed s 
Barnabas (which is, being interpreted, The ſon of con- 
folation) a t Levite, and of the countrey of Cyprus z. 

r Some read Joſeph; the Hebrew names when turned into Greek, 
s Full of Contolation ; 
not. onely in that he gave fo liberally towards the relief of the poor, 
parting with his poſſeſſions for them ; bur that he excelled inpro- 
pounding inward and Spiritual comfort unto poor andrich; being 
of a mild diſpoſition, and fitted to handle gently fuch wounds as the 
terrors of the Law had made. # Tho? a Lewite, he mighrhave Land 
either in the right oc his Wife, or given to him and his Anceſtors ; 
as we read was to Phineas, Joſh. 24. ut. otherwiſe the Lord was the 
Levites portion in an eſpecial manner. 7 The Jews being diſperſed 
all over the known World ; fome dwelt in Cypris, as Foſes?, parents, 
Sal's parents dwelt at 72/7, rho at this time both Saul and Foſes 
dwell in Ferufalcm. 

37 Having « land, fold zz, and brought the money, 
and laid :z ary rhe apolttes feer. 

x This 1s aa inſtince of what was ſaid, wer. 34, 35. and Feſes pro- 
bably is inſtanced in it, either becauſe he fold a greater quantity of 
Land, as having large poſiefions; or as being one of the fiift thar 
was rematkable in this kind of charity. y vid. ver. 35, 


C HARV. 


Aninias and Sipphira his Wife ſell:ag their poſſeſſion, 11g it at the Avca 
ftles feet, yet for lying and Hypocriſie ar? prnijhed with a ſudden Death, 
I 10. Fear falls upon all, 11. The Apoſtles work many wonders ;; 
raiſe the ſick, aud caſt out Deviis ; to the increaſe of the Cherch, 
12—16. The high Prieſt, moved with indignation, apprehenas and 
Imprifors the Apoſtles, they were delivered by the cinnil of the Lord, 
and Commanacd to go and Preach in the Temple openly, 17—20, They 
are fercht our and broug ht before the Council, and examined: They 
defend themſelves, ana teſtifie of Chriſt, his ReſurreFion and Aſſintion, 
21 ——=J2. The Council intending to flay them Gamalie] ael:yers 
them ; they are beaten, and rijoyce thereat, and every where daily 
preach Jeſus Chriſt, 33— 42. 
I Ur a 2 certain man named Ananias with Sapphira 


his wife, ſold b a Pollcfſion. 

4 A dreadful inſtance of God's indignation againſt Hypocriſie and 
Sacritege, which we have an infallible teſtimony of; which is the 
more remarkable, becauſe ſuch fins eſcape the puniſhment from men, 
either as not known, or not difliked ; yet the damnation of ſuch as 
are guilty of them, flumbereth nor, 2 Per. 2. 3, I: being the glory 
of God ro ſearch out matters farther than men can, or liſt to do. 5 Ar: 
Eſtate, Houſe, or Farm. 


2 And kept back c part of the price, his 4 wife alſo be- 
ing privy to it, and e brought a certain part, and laid is f. 
at the apoſtles feet. | 9, | 

c When they had vowed the whole to God and his ſervice, whicka 
made it a robbing of God; whatſoever pretence they might pcf- 
ſibly have, of detaining ſome part for their own neceſſities in old 
age, or time of fickne!s ; arguing a great diſtruſt in that God, 
whom, when they had made a vow, they pretended ro give them- 
ſelyes and their ſubſtance unto, 4 Her ſubjeCtion to her husdand, 
nor excuſing her partaking in his fin and puniſhment. e Thetwwam- 
bition carried them thus far; they would ſeem devout, charitable, 
6. add their coverouſack hindred them from going farther,f wid. 
Chap. 4. 35- 


4 Rur 


C778, 
04 2 2nd fi) - 


a 
” I 


”X 


ew - 
_ x" --* 
- -*% y 
OP 3 : one 
E. Fd FA 
OOER. 7 IR 4A. 
— C a 
- pn . 
4 


- - LS - e 
p4 : . — i . , . k E... k p ” ; nt 
þ "46% a worms - » we - — —— o_— - _ "a a 4 " —_— 
. 4 J TIT" 7 +a. es =2 II . =o pm © 8 
: -——_—_— . ” jo - : _ - ay 
_ ” _— a—_—_— = _- _ - Ce ni > Wreweres — SST, wr: 
». = "= p _ - - — yorm - - og " _ _— — - 
» % : . * - 4 mp—_— _ 
ſh Ba . . =" - 2+ , = 
by > & . - -— 20 vt "04 A - . . jun "> ee ' ” a © - « — £66035 >. _ - hr ms _ - : 
- 0+ 5» S II". <—* ” Fy 2 by — : La 2-00 w_ be . s : . , \ => 7s » , — : _ -< - - : 
a; 72 - ns - < 55 I — oe ng 5; : - ME nn ſo _ ; X —— — AW... _- "rr : 
P - 4 - : , J —_—_ - . _—_— d : - o w_ : - 3 - Z - - _ . ; ._ gt i p yoo xv by "IT . 
3 PI. . - - a _ *1:.4S. - mw : 's . - - ” i, 0 "I =, pt 7 "x 2 S- yo þu b CS EOS, TA 
he RW > ' k . , 7 = 72 = 4 4. = Oo a - 2 : k _ e 4 = OY E , ws 
..2,v - Ss 2s. f or”, ds - + Salagd > + _ b 4 PA mt 1 4 : a Bun * ; - - A wor Toes Fa . RV wa c - : : —- N 
A "4 ; % 2 ; 6/7 &YA A - Ry s #. ph 7% 3 <.at PF 94, 
oz 4 -— 4 poo : q ol E *S . _ 6; WE bo om 504 <M Tz 4 FE - = R757 p ” . v ; b. . 4 - Al 4 
p « : ) hs ks * mare” X 6 s : 
. A : "2 7 8 : h " . > ” _ 0 =e A 4 "SY GT Ss my % n 4 C - þ 
@ 7 MG 4 Ine — "os "> —_ I a * : * be cl Us * > _ w— - 6 
£ ks - : + E z - - e 
: ” 1 ur == ” - . "content as 


—_ 
_ wat 


"FT " _ ® , 
: - SP pYg: > 2-6 Se b- l : 
- = on 
a bn in mo opredn: = 
= 
- * | 


p3 


—-. 


s TI a - - 
- HED. Was -- 
oo ms I-58 
Pe: 


- '» of 
1 _— 
tesl 4 


_— 


+ 
LE 4x, 7-7 
dey» 6- 
%* oy L - % 
CE es = es wt : 
A i _ - wax > - 
" > 4 x »  * = —_- - mee 
29> a” Go . I h 
4 "7 > - << 6 «4 
—— PI 4 a 


= a I 


4 

F 

h : 
o: 4 
1% 


SE — 
a as 8. ate 


————— 
he" => <<gy> 60- Ro Sar" s amor dbi 


Ie ers res ee eee een 


yn 


3 - - 


= -_ 
_ _- 


| ona nrn——_—_—_— —— wn - 
_— - Ro 


Þ.V; 


The A 
3 But g Peter ſaid, Ananias, why hath þ Satan fille 
thine heart [| co ; lye to the holy Ghoſt,and to keep back 
par: of the price of the land? _ | 
g Peter knew this deceit by the infpiration of the holy Ghoſt; it 
beiny moſt probably, not otherwiſe likely ever to be difcovered. As 
when the heart is filled with hor ſpirits, 1t is daring and bold, to when 
Saran filled their heart, theſe wretches venture upon deiperate 
courſes, and provoking fins. z This tin 1s £41d to be Iyingeo tas Holy 
Ghoſt, becauſe they againſt their own cenſciences, and the Spirit of 


God too witneſſing with their ſpirits, Ru. g. 1. As allo 2dly, be- 
he Spirit 


cauſe they pretended onely tolerve their own turns , now The Sp1r 
3s in a peculiar manner the Spirit of holineſs, and the author of it in 
us, whom they pretended to bave been moved by, bur faifly. And 
Liftly, defrauding the poor members of Chriſt of ther right (for ſo 
by their vow it became to be ) they Iyed to the holy Ghoſt, who 
confticutes and eſtabliſhes the Church, and accepreth theſe gitts as 
given to God, and not to men. ; 

4 k Whiles it remained, was it not thy own? and / 
after it was ſold, was it not in thine own power ? 
Why haſt thou » conceive this thing in thine hearc ? 


Thou haſt not o lyed untomen, but unto God. 

þ A ſufficient argument, that there was no command (even then) 
to neceſſitate them to part With their Eſtates; but onely what the 
preſent and eminent neceſſity of the Church did perſwade them vo- 
Juntarily unto.  / The doubling of thisexpoſtulation, makes the con- 
viction the more forcible. »» As a Steward under God, to do what 
thou wouldeſt with it according to his Will ; and none are, or can 
be otherwiſediſpoſers of what they poſlels. » It ſeems hence, that 
it was a deliberate, and prepenſed iniquity. 0 In thar lying unto 
God is ſooften charged, and no expreſs mention is made of Ananias”s 
vow; ſome excuſe him of Sacril:ge, and charge him the deeplier 
with Ambition, Covetouſneſs, Lying and Hypocriſie, to the Apo- 
ſtles, whom he intended to deceive. 

5 And Ananias hearing theſe words, fell down and p 
oave up the ghoſt: and qgreat tear came on all them 
char heard theſe things. 

p Expired, and dyed. Some inſtances of Gods extraordinary 
Judgments upon finners, werein the beginning of the Jewiſh Church; 
25 upon the man that gathered ſticks on the Sabbath-day, Nuns. 15. 
25. and upon Nadab and 4b:bu, Levit. 10. 1. Andſo here inthe be- 
ginning of the Chr:ſiian Church, to be as marks to teach usto ſhun 
iuch ſins, and to teach us, that the God with whom we have to do, 
1s greatly to be feared; and this miraculous way of puniſhing no- 
rorious ſinners in the Church, was accommodated to ſuch a time, 
in which Magiſtrates were ſo far from defending the Church, thar 
they themſelves were the greateſt enemies unto it. q Let others alſo 
hear, and fear, and do fo no more. 

6 And the r young men aroſe 5s, wound him up, and 


carried him out, and buried /1;m. 

r Such as were preſent at that time, and fitteſt for that employ ; 
s According as they were wont to do to ſuch they intended to pre- 
pare for Sepulture. Read what was done to the body of our Savi- 
our, Mark 15. 46. 

= And it was abcur the ſpace 7 of three hours after, 
when his wife, not « knowiig what was done, x came 
in. 

z This circumNtance is expreſſed to confirm thetruth of this Hi- 
ſtory : * Not ſuſpeQing any fuciithing, the was the lels inquiſitive; 
and ſuch a conſternation and dicad wa: upon all that were there, that 
they durſt not tel] her, I-{t they thou'd offend Peter ; as alſo pro- 
bably, 1:t they ſhould with fo iucden and fad news grieve her. 
* Into the Church or place, where they were met together. 

8 And Peter z aniwered unto her, Icll me whether ye ; 
ſold the land & for fo mucin. And ſhe ſaid a, Yea, for 
ſo much. 

7 An ordinary Hebraiſm, by which one that ſpeaketh, firſt is ſaid 
to anſwer, it it be tending towards any diſcourſe eſpecially. z The 
certain price iS not mentionsd, as not being neceſſary to the inten | 
ofthe Holy Ghoſt in this Narrative ; but be it more or leſs, it was 
the fame which her husband had {aid the land was ſold for. a She 
had agreed with her husband what to fay ; and one tin draws on a- 
nother, till it ends in perdition. | 

9 And Peter ſaid unto her, How is it thar ye have 
agreed together 6 to tempt the Spirit of the Lord ? 
Behold c, the feer of them which have buried thy 
husband, are at the door, and d ſhall carry thee 


OUT, 

6 This expreſſion of tempting God, or the Spirit of God, is not 
uſed amongſt prophane Writers ; and this fin isnot (at leaſt to ſuch 
a degree) committed amongſt Pagans and Heathens, and is to be 
dreaded by all that profeſs the Goſpel. As often as men fin againſt 
their conſcience, and their conſciences condemn them in what they 
do, fo often they dare, tempt, or try, whether God be Omniſcient, 
ard knows of, Or Holy, and Powerful, and will puniſh their fins ; 
which they find at Jaſt ro their coſt. c This the Apoſtle j foretells 
ere 1t came to paſs; the more to confirm his Authority and the truth 
of the Goſpel. d Afcer thou art dead, to thy burial. 

Toe Then the fell down ftraightway at his feet, and 
yielded up the ghoſt : And the young men came in and 
found her dead, and cart ying her forth, buried her by 
her knsband. 

e The fame fins mect with the ſame puniſhment ; God is no re- 
ſpeQer of Perſons, Jew or Gentile, Male or Female. 

It And great fear came upon # all the church, and 
upon 85 v many as heard theſethings. 

F Thus tpon rhe {miring of ſo mary men 1n and about B+#+- ſhe- 


UT8 


Chan | 


: : vi) 

fore his holy Lord God ; and upon the ſlaying of Vzzah, , 5. : | 
5 - 4 3-6 Pha "" 205,69 
David Way atia%} of rlie Lord, D:jcite juſiiiiam Wnti. £ Our of "B 


palc of th: Church, Gods judgucats do reſtrain in a Seat mech 
wickea men. Soalry 
12 & And * by the þ+ honds of the apoſttes we... 
IE: - OE Ms "7 SiC Obes 
many 6gns and wonders wrougnt 7 among the People 46:71 
I 


And they were all with one accord & in | Soom... 1; 
or ch. : "" 
hb By the Apoſtles Miniſtry : though they were holy and Excellent 
men, they were bur inſtruments ; the power they aGted i .._ 
Gods; which alto they had prayed for, and acknowledpeg 
4. 30, # Generally among the meaner fort, according to th. 
ſton, have any of the Rulers believed on him 2 Joby 9, .g w_ 
many mighty, wot many neble are called, 1 Cor. 1. 26. þ A |. a br 
capacious place, where they might with greateſt convenience = 
and lee what was done and faid, : y 
13 And of / * the reſt durſt no man joyn him ;,,. 
them : bur the People magnified them. Wl 
I Such who were not ofthe common ſort of people, and heref.,, : ; 
to be diſtinguiſhed from them; or of the re, (more largely) wh, 17 % 
had not joyned themſelves to the Church, being amazed ar th; bs , 
ment on theſe two Hypocrites, durſt not make a forma] ſhew ofh>. 
ligion, unleſs they had a thorow per{wafton in their mind COncernins 
the truth ofir, and a firm reſolution in their converſation tg py 
an{werably unto it. "Y 
14 And believers were mz the more added to the Lirg 


1ultitudes both men and women, 

” This explains the former verſe, and helpsus againſt mig.1:.. 
it ; for this wonderful judgment was ſo far trom being a hinge, 
to the truth of the Goſpel, that 1t 1s turned to the furtherance of; 
tor tho great men, and ſuch as were infincere, were terrified fign; 
owning Chriſt and his Do&trine, others did more readily imbric: 
them by reaton of it, jy 

15 Infomuch that they brought forth the ſick ino1 110: 
the itreets, and laid 7h on beds and couches, thar grin} 
the leaſt o the ſhadow of Peter paſling by, might org. 
ſhadow ſome of them. 

z Into every ſtreet generally taken, it being a common praftice 
where they came, and not in one ſtreet onely. o Thele weak 11g 
unlikely means , did more ſhew the power to be of God, and w;s 
the greater confirmation to the truth of the Goſpel ; and thus w;s 
fulfilled what our Saviour had promiſed to the Apoltles, and {ich 
as ſhould believe in him, John 14. 12. that they ſhould 6 mates 
works than he did, y 

16 There came alſo a p multicude out of the cities 


IJ 
of | 


round about unto Jeruialem, bringing ſick folks, ang * *Ya 
them which were vexed with unclean ſpirits: andthey . 
were healed q every one. 
? The variety and grievouſncISof theſe evils, did but them 
commend the power which was preſent with the Apoſtles, q&n 
evidence, that thete cures were not wrought by ſecond cults; tor 
the beſt Medicines do not always ſucceed; as allo, in thar they were bi 
perteCtiy and fuddenly cured, who was thus miraculouſly cured; m 
the God of Nature, reſtoring Nature, beyond what means and ut 0! 
could do. v1 
17 © Then the high prieſt 7 roſe up, and all ttey 
that were with him, which is the ſe of che Sadduces 2nd fot 
wers filled with : {| indignation, 1; 
r Movel at the report of thele things, went out of the Councilto ' ng 
obſerve what was done. s There were both Phariſees and Saiincrs le 
in their Sanhedrim or great Council, as appears AFs 23,6. but the | 
High Pricft and a great part, were at this time Sadduces, t Or ial, yo 
which 1s the bcft, when Kkindled ( as the fire on the Altir} ?:om Ul 
Eeaven, regularly 2Cting for Gods truth and word ; and the torſt, / 
$7 hn PI . ; bc For this 
when enflamed by carna] afte&ions, and ſer upon wrong 0bj:ts tor 
telf ends, The pique theſe Sadauces had againſt rhe Apcitics and ; 
their Doctrine, was, becauſe they taught the ReſurreCion, whit 
the Sadaucesdenicd. | Nan 
. . . a1 
18 Andlaid their hands on the apoſtles, and put them ing 
in the common priſon, Or al 
See Ts 4. 3. that 
. ot, 
19 But the * 2 angel of the Lord by night 5 opened + ; 
the priſon doors, and brought them forth, and ſaid, &! [id 
a God uſeth the Miniſtry of Angels, tho he might otherwite do jo 


what pleaſcth him; An Angel rolled away the ſtone from the door 
of the Sepulchre, 4gels miniſtred to Chriſt, Matth. 4. it. And ar? 
all miniſiring ſpirits, ſent forth 10 miniſter for them who ſhall 6: heirs of 
Jalvation, Hebr. 1. 14. And encamp round about them thi! fesr Gia, 
Pal. 34. 7. 6 And ſhut them again, after that the Apotiies Were 
gONE Out, aS apr2cars ver. 23. 

20 Go, c ſtand and ſpeak lin the temp!e to the people 
d, all the words of e this life. 

c The word implies courage and ſtedfaſtneſs of mind, as well as 
ſuch a poſture of the body. 4 Withour preferring ſome accept- 
able truths, before others more ingrateful, if necef]ary towar 
their Salvarion : Chriſt for a time did limit them ; they might no: 
tell any that he was Jeſus the Chriſt, March. 16. 20. nor the viton 
which they had ſeen in his transfiguration, AMatzh. 17. 9- Now this 
prohibition is taken off Thus the Sun does not [ſhine in his full 
glory all ar once. e Some admit of an Hypallage, and Yn che 
pronoun to the other ſubſtantive, reading in this place, Theſe wars» 
of life; and the rather becauſe by 2his life, is ordinarily nodecing 
the preſent, remporary life, as in 1 Cor. 15. 19- but there needs 
not this tranſlatitious ſenſe ; by zh7s life, the Ange! might very ® - 
underſtand eternal life and Salvation, for that was it which ths kw 
duces denied, and for the Preaching of which life the Apoſtles wer? 
impritoncd. 


Ficth, 1 Sam. E. 29, they wiſely demand, 0 3s able to ſtand be- 


21 Anz 


|| j 0; 
at at * 
Vere 


ittice 
k ard 
| was 
$ Was 

ſuch 
reaber 


\Ities 
nd * "Nat 
ley 


"More 
q An 
$5 10L 
' Wers 
ured; 
nd att 


rey 
and 
Or 
alto 
lauces 
It the 
:eal, 
{rom 
'orſt, 
Ic for 
) 31d 
which 


tham 


zened *C 
j, © 


ile d0 
e door 
ind ar? 
heirs of 
rn God, 
; Wer 


cople 


well as 
accept- 
ward 
pat 090 
2 y1LON 
OW this 
his full 
yn che 
ſe woras 
eritoo 
e needs 
ry well 
he Sa4- 


+278 
es VW wo 


[ Anu 


- 
* >» 
4 _—-- 


C23 
-. 


4 
4. 


”” tre temple, and the z chief prieſts heard theſe things, they 


6, them without q violence : * For they feared the people, leſt 
1. they ſhould have been ſtoned. 


Unto th-m, but him whom they had worſhipped from their fore- 


1 © Prince and a d »Saviour, 


EY £ ; 
The A 
* when they heard that, they entered into th 
»r And f wnen tney heara tar, tiey entered into the 
remoleg early 11 the morning, and taught. But the high 
i} came, and they that were with him, and called 
> þ Coucil together, and ail the z ſenate of the chil- 
iren of Iracl, and ſent to the prifon to have them 
nr 11910, s : ; | 
' Having received a command from God, they reſolve to obey 
\ rhe; than man. g Taking the lirtt opportunity, rho they could 
{enſible of the danger they ran into + The Sanhedrim or 
© Council. : The Judges of their inferioc Courts, or rhe chief 
"nonpit the Prieſts or Senators : either living 1n the City, or com- 
-10 «cher upon that feſtival occaſion. ; 
"+ Byt when the officers came, and & found them not 
;n the priſe, £45:7 returned, and told. 
"2 Theſe men, thus fenr to hinder the ſpreading of the Goſpel, 
111d not but be a means of confirming it, when they ſaw and de- 
1,..4 what they found ; fo catily can God make ute of what is in- 


tm ratt 
' 
nOL hut oe 


C43 


where he 1s. 
and 1stherefore alſo called repentance unto life, Che. 11, 18, 


- 


32 And * weare his wittetles of 
that 7 obey him. 


a goad proteſſion tor us, 


by his Power. 3. 


where there 15 no repentance and amendment, 


1d againft his crutch and people, unto the advantage of either. heart, and took counſel to flay them. 


23 Saying, The prilon truly found we ſhut with all 
!\ifety, and the keepers ſtanding without before the doors: 


"ut when we had opened, we found no man with- 
I 411 means imaginable were uſed to fecme their priſoners ; but 
when God will dehver, what can keepthem ? when God will work, 
who can hinder ? Jeb 11. 10. It is ſtrange, har fo great evidence 
of the innocency of the Apoſtles, and truth of their Do&rine, ſhould 
be incff:&12! ; bur prejudice is 1nſuperable, unleſs to the mighty 
Poirer of the grace of God, and this blindneſs cannot be cured, but 
by Gods Ep/2p4 at ha. : : 

' 24 Now when the high prieſt, and * the m captain of 


» doubted of them whereunto this would grow. 

1m The Commander over the Soldiers, who were ſet to guard the 
Temple, either to ſecure the treaſure there, or to be in a readineſs 
to ſuprels any tumule thereabouts ;_ Pilare ſpeaks of this, Mazrh. 
+7, 65. # The heads of the Families, or chief of the courſes of the 
Prieſts, o By what means theſe wonderful things were done ; for 
they were loath to fee and acknowledge God in them. 

25 Thea came one and told them, ſaying, p Behold, the 
men whom ye put in priſon, are ſtanding in the temple, 
and teaching the people. 

p$o true is thor in Iſaiah 8. to. Take Counſel together, and it 
ſhall come to nought 3 but the counſel of the Lord ſianaeth for ever. 
Plal. 33. 31: : : 

26 Then went the captain with the officers,and brought 


7 They might peradventure, think it needleſs or impoſſible, to 
bind th:92 againſt their wills, who had opened the prifon, and ſo 
mirculouſly came out ; howloever another more certain reaſon is 
civenof it : They ferred men 17ore than God, who had done ſo 
creat things amongſt them. 


27 And when they had brought them, they ſet them be- 


fore the r council : And the high prieſt asked them, 

r When they are about to dothe greareſt injuries, they prerend to 
right ; and will not judge thera, without giving them leave to an- 
lwer for themſelves. : 

23 Saying, Did not we firaitly s command you, that 
you ſhould not teach in # this name ? and behold, ye have 
filed Jeruſalem with your doctrine, and intend to bring 


this v mans x blood upon Us. 

5 As indecd they had, 4s 4. 13. hence they aggravated the Apo- 
Ales crune as done out of malice, and not our of ignorance, & Thes 
Nume, this mans blood, are odious re:fle&ions, tuil of contumely 
2vainſt our bleſſed Saviour ; as if he had not been worthy the nam- 
ing by them. # They ſhunned not the fin of murder, bur are afraid 
or aſhamed of the impuration of it ; as many icruple not to commit 
that wickedneſs, which they would be Joath to be thought guilty 
of. x The puniſhment of his blood-ſhedding. 

29 © Then Peter y and the other apoſtles anſiwered and 


{a1d, We ought to obey God rather than men. 

7 This they all agree in ; and it is the common ſenſe of all con- 
ering men. As So:rates in his Apology told the Athenians T im- 
brace ar:d love you, O Athenians, and yer I will obey God rather 
than you ; this the Apoſtles had formerly afſerted, Chap. 4. 19. 

30 *2, The God of our fathers raiſed up Jeſus, whom 


je fiew and 4 hanged a on a tree. 
3 This is the rather mentioned by the Apcſtle, that they might 
no: think our Saviour, or they his Miniſters, Preached any other God 


athers. a A tree, or wood, which is rather mentioned than a Crols, 
tht rhe alluſion co Der . 21. 23, might be more full ; wherehe thar 
1s hanged on atree is accuried ; and in that Chriſt was made a curſe 
ior 1s, Gal. 3.10. . 
3! * Him hath God exalted with iis © right hand tobe 
: for to e give repentance to 
Iſrael, and ft torgivenehs of lins. O 
5 
: 0 See Chap. 2.33. c To conquer and ſubine all his enemies, to 
G&trpd and prote&t his ſubje&s. 4d To ſave from fin according to 
hs naine Jefus, Matth. 1. 21. viz. from the condemnation that 1s 
ee uno it, and the poilution that is required by 1. Repentance 15 
tle gift of God - and aothins does more avail with us to repent, 
than the love of Chriſt, ( his bicer ſuffering and death ) by whom 
tle world is crucified unto us, Gal. 6. 14. and if repentance 1n- 


malicions, 6 zag 4345 29795 T0 wy Cv HAD; » 


named Gamaliel m1, a doctor of the law, had in reputation 
among all the people, and commanded to put the apoſtles 7 
forth a little ſpace. 

{ This Sect was accounted more mi!d than the Sadducer, wm Tis 
thought that this man was the ſame, at whoſe feer Paul ſate, Chap. 


many other ſtories concerning him are doubtful; howloever God 
made uſe of him, tho as yet an enemy to his Church and people, to 
plead for, and proteCt them to his Power ; God can effe& any thing 
withour, or againſt means, and ſuddenly to make ſuch as were a- 
gainſt him, to be for him and his truth. » That they might con- 
ſult amongſt themſelves what to do with them : thus Chap. 4. 


i5. 
35 And faid unto them, Ye men of Iſrael o, take heed 
to your ſelves, what ye intend to do as touching theſe 


men, 

0 A wiſe and good c2ution ; for he that injures another, brings 
the worſe miſchief upon himſelf; both in the ſenſe of having done 
evil, and in being expoſed to the revenging hand of God, whoſe 
property vengeance 15, Hcbr. 10. 30. 

36 For p before theſe days roſe up, -7 Theudas boaſting 
himfelf to be ſome body, to whom a number of men, a- 


bout four hundred, joyned themſelves : who was ſlain, and 


to nought. | 
Þ Probably under the reign of Auguſt, as hewhom Foſephus men- 
tions, was another under the reign of Claudirs, g Some tuppoſe it 
a contrated name of Theodorws, as Deas is thought io be of Demerrizs 
tho others think it to be of an Hebrew original, = 
37 Afterthis man roſe upr Judas of Galilee, inthe days 
of the s taxing, and drew away much people after him : 
he alſo periſhed and all, even as many as obeyed him, were 
diſpcrſcd. 
7» Whether this was the ſame Judas, who was called Gau/onire , 
from the place of his birth, a Town in or 1car Galilee ; and Galller,s 
from the Province it felt in which he was born, isnot fo mate: jal 
ro diſcuſs. Joſephus makes mention of rwo of this name. 5 Setting 
down all their names at the command of the Row.un Emperor; where. 
by, 1. They profeil2d themſelves to be his ſubjefts. 2. They pay- 
ed him a certain rate, in tok-n of ſubjection, for every head, as 
Poll-money. 3. By this means he knew che number ofhis ſubjeQs, 
and the ſtrength or weaknels of every Province; this was another 
vr than that, mentioned, Zvuke 2.2. which is there called the 
lk, 
28 And tnowl ſay unto you #, Refrain from theſe men, 
and let them alone : * for x 1f this conſe], or this work 


be y of m-n, it will come to nought :; 


partly, out of his moderate and mild difpoſirion ; partly, our of 
fear, Jeſt if they flew the Apoſtles, they might incenſe the Romans, 
who were very jealous of their Auchority ; and had taken away thz 
power of Capital puniſhments from the Jews. x This Argument, 
or Dilemma, which Gamaliel ules tor the iparing of the Apoſtles, is 
of force either way ; (as that queſtion our Saviour propounds con- 
cerning the baptitm of John, Marth. 21.25 ) » This firſt part is evi- 
dent, tor that building alt needs fall which 1s built upon the fand, 
Matth. 7. 27. 


39 2 Bur if it be of God, ye cannot overthrow 


God. 

z. The other part of the D:I:-mma, Prov. 19. 21.*1/aiah 46. 10. The 
counſel of the Lord, that ſhall ſtand ; and it mult needs be fo, for all 
power 1s his, in whom we live an] move, Cap. 17. 28. @ Phev 
who afflit, and conrend with people unjuſtly, tho they little think 
{s, ſet themſelves againſt God who will overcome ac the laſt, and 
triumph over his, and Ins peoples enzmies. 

40 And to him b they agreed ; And when they had cal- 
led the apoſtles, and c beaten them, they commanded thac 


they ſhould not ſpeak in the name of J-ſus, and let them 


[11,15 : . AS a4 . } p 
©4925 newnels of lite, (as it docs) who would not walk in that way 


Wh... - _—_ I . - «gal 
iu our bieted Lewd hath recommended,” and in which onely we \ 30. 


# If e Y 


Ch: 


p : p Fo fy > : W : : WE. YN 4 4 , 
| Can 1njo7 aim ? tht doing as he did, we rey come at laſt to be 
f Which never fuls ro accompan; true repent:nce; 


Z They refuſe not to bear their teſtimony for Chiiſt, who witzeTel 
þ The holy Ghoſt does witneſs, 2, . By 
the Apoſtles, through his grace and ſtrength they bear their record, 
2. By all che miracles thar were wrought, for they were onely done 
y embling any to believe theſe things, which 
belief is his work. 4. Not to tay that the boly Gli” was 1 witneſs 
of the things concerning Chriſt at his Baptiſm, and the ſeveral a:- 
teſtarions he gave, ſaying, This is my beloucd Sou. Matth. 3. 17. 
z Some read, believe in 2im, which is tothe lame purpoſe ; for thers 
1s no true repentance where there is no faith ; nor no ſaving faith 


& They grinned with their teeth, yiſibly thewing the rage ar.d 
fury that was within them, by which they were as ſawn and divided 
alunder ; malice ail rage being a grievous torment to the crueland 


34 Lhen ſtood there up one in the council, a / Phariſee, 


22. 3, that he was the inſlruQtor to Barnsbas and St. Stephen, with 


ap. Y 


; a theſe rh:ings, and jo * John 75 
z alſo the þ holy Gloft tf, whom God bath given to them 


26,” 27. 
+ Ch. 2 


33 * When they heard that, they were & cut to th;* Clzp 7.50. 


all, as many as {| obeyed him, were fcattered and brought ji 0+, 2; 
lived. 


*. Prov. 27. 


30. 
# He undertakes to adviſe them what they ſhould do in the pre- 154, g. x». 
ſentcafe. « Have nothing to do with them, as Pilate's wife adviſed Marth, 1 «. 
him concerning our Saviour, Match. 27. 19. Gamaliel interpoſes, \ ,_ : 


it; It haply ye be found © even to fight a againlt *.Chap. o. «. 


& 23.0: 


- wh » - 
——-a 4a L 
— » k 
Ws - S . <> - 
. = —_— ets s »- . —_ 
i ed i ep — . RN —_ - - _—_ << _—_ n : - 
2D 0n..Ah GABE ID, 4 er ops = —- a +; - b 5 > 
* - - _ —— - > -, gn. -- 
x2 — _ . —EXKES. SIE on w 
A P "Eo" Sans Ie tho I RE : oy 
how 4 c-— 
ER ” _ a DG 5-4 = . 
-_ by by \ 
ol 


4 
_— 


by 
> 


<1 — ado Ga en it Mite te ai 


4 
i. 
7 £ 
: 
TE F 
, v 
7 
” 
: 
4 
. 
: 
4 
: 
( 
} 
x 
» 
a xp 
» 
+ 
v 
[3 
i" 
: 
: > 
2 
; 
k 
' 
8 
T4 
: 
4 - 
} 
. 
{it * 
$ . 
- 
- 4 9 
n : 
4 5] 
4 
« 
. . 
: 
\ 4 
Ls 
» 
v : 
: 
: 
4 
: 
3 
: 
gs £148 
. 
. 
” - 
; : 
> : 
» g* 
: 
A - 
r 
Þ of 5, 
L by 
8 
N i- ! 
Fr i*, 
= { 
{hk 4 
0 £ 
Ly $94 
f $3. 
x 
: : 
= 
s 
& 
\ 
' q . 
=. 
y f 
T by 
: a d 
"& 785 15% 
A! * 3x4 
. 
: * CO: ( 
K&S 
L 5 
1 
& ® 
= [07 8 
wo 
IF. -£* 
: 7% 
* $A 20 
# : 4 
_ 
IV 
; I 4 
> 
"x * 
: A 
— » © ow 
o > 
; 
; 'Wiz + 
& "4-1 
\y 4 
WE + © 
E 


- : 
bo end 
= 


_ were T 
47 55m (04G HM rene x ——— 
. IE => 
4 by ot ; 
- —_ a a "4 
5 =». »- 
—_— - 


* FE: 13.17. 


EE P 
- 3% ſhame for þ his name. | 
argued full periwaſion of the truth, and great reſolution to | 


The A 
Zihev yielced to tus reaſon and arg:iment, being perſwaded and 
convince by it, 6 This was what oar Sav our hal foretolJd them, 
Aa:, 10, 17, rd thits the bn b.nimen took thz houthoiders lervants 
and b-at tnzm, Az? 21. 35 They bud power yet left them by 
Remaz, tO puniih offenders in their Synagogues, bur nut capitally 
nor peblickly. & In this they left the good advice of Gamalie!, who 
had warned them not t tight againſt Goa. . 
41 © And they departed trom the preſence of the council 
* rezozcing that tney were f counted worthy to ſulicrg 


! 
rae 


LiAlhotws 


7 


e it 
abide by ;r, that chey could account ſuch a diſgrace for Chriſt ſake, 
to bzan honour. f 'Tisa condeſcenſion and favour, when God ules 
any to give teſtimony unto his truth, although it be by their ſuſter- 
ing, Fil 1. 29, Unto jou it is given, wot one!y 80 belicye, but x9 ſufſer; 
25 ifo ſuffer for Chrift, were as great, if not a greater gift than to 
believe in him. g Scowmrging being a ſervile and diſgraceful puniſh- 


ment. + Chrifts name, or tor Chriſts ſake, to aflerchis truth, >. | 


ſom? Co nog read the Pronoun, but the name put abſolutely for Goa, 
as was uſual amongſt the Fews, out of reverence to Gods name, left 
they ſhould prophane ir. : 

42 And daily 7 in the temple, and in & every houſe, they 
ceafed not to teach and preach Jeſus Chriſt, 

; This is rhe fame with what we read, 47s 20. 20. publickly, 
and from hovulz to houſe ; that ts, inthe Temple, and publick places, 
they preached unto the 7-ws, and in more private places, (or houies) 
where they ſaw it needtal ; vato ſuch as they converſed with. k& They 
viiited their flock, and inſtryfted, exhorred, comtoited them as 
their condition reguired + Seeche power of the grace of God; theſe 
were the men who for{oo!: Clriſt, when the Sonldiers came to ap- 
prehend him ; thcy dur( 10! be teen 1n hiscompany : yet now they 
prof, his Name, and abide by their profeſſion, chough they are 
deriace and beaten tor 17. 


CHAP. VI. 


By reaſ1n of the Murmiering of the Grecians againſt the Hebrews, ſcven 
men ware cheſvir fir Deacons and ordained, 1——6. The Word and 
Church tnicreaſe and multivly, 7. Stephen one of the Deacons, full 
of Feich 5a Power, warket is Miracits, 8. The Synagogue of the Liber- 
tines *iſe up ngainſt, but couia act r2/ift rhe Wiſdom ana Spirit by which 
he [pake. 9, IO, Fal/: Witneſs (r:00rmed ic teftifie egainſt, and accuſe 
hm of blaſphemy againſs the Law aud Tewpie : His face inthe 
Coriieil, jhincs as an Angel, 11-—-1I5, 


, \ Ty... i thoſe days, When the number of the diſciples 


| wes mittiplied, there arote a murmuring of the 
[ Grecians again the mebrews, becauſe their 22 widows 


xerenerleticd in tie Gailv mibiitretion. 


4 


I Teeſe were not ſach, as are elleirkere called Greets, cither as 
being of that Nation, or mors generally taken for all Gentiles at 


large; bur they were (as to their O:igiunl ) Fews, and defcendei 
from {ſuch ofthem, who in fever! national calamities, were Torced 
( or choſe ) ro Jezve their Countrey. and fly to Alexandria, and 
divers other piaz;s; yet kept theimſeives unmixed with orher 
Nations, retaining the knowledge of Gol, and coming to werthip 
upon the ſolemn Feaſts; only eifufing the H-5rew Language, they 
were more acquainted with the Gree# Tengue, (then, commoniy 
ſpok-n every where) and uſed the ho!y Seriprure Tranſlated into that 
Languige, which made them the rath2r called H-lenifts or Grecians. 
mm They were not taken, as others, into the Coliege, 
of widows, who in that time had fore care of the poor: or ra- 


ther, becauſe they were not fo largely allowved, or carefully looked | 


after ; for thote that ſold their goods, being Hebrews, they mighr 
not bz fo render over the Helleniſ/s, whoſe eſtates lying farther 
off, could not fo readily be fold for the relief of them elves or 
others. 

2 "Chen thez twelve called the multitude of the diſciples 
unto them, and faid ®, Ic is not reaſon that we ſhould 
leave the e word of God, and ſerve tables. 

z For ſuch was their number now again, Matthias having ſupplied 
the place of Judas; this is that bleiſ:d number, or rhe root of it, 
which God hath ſo much magnified. o Preaching of the word, and 


' Other duties belonging to it; either providing for the agape and 


* the 
20d Linn, and 


love-Feaſts, or diſtributing to the necellities whereby they might be 
ted, and their tables provided. 

3 Wherefore brethren * p, look ye out among you ſeven 
men of q honeſt report r, full of the hoy Ghoſt 5s and 
wiſdom, whom we may appoint over this b 

Þ As carefully and circumſpe&ly, as ye would ih.any caſes of 
your Own concerns. q A good direRtion, that obliges*o this day, 
12 a] elections of any for the ſervice of God, and his Church. » Of 
The glits and graces of the holy Ghoſt, which were not beſtowed on 
tle apoſlticsoncly. 5 Or prudence, and Skill in the word of God, 
waich oncly is abie to make a man wile unto Salvation, 2 7m. 
3-15. 

4 But we will # give our ſelves continually to a prayer, 
end to the minifiry of. the word, 

; Wew1ll ftick cloſe, and with perſeverance, to this work. u The 
tx0 great i mpioys ot.a Miniſter of jeſus Chriſt ; to pray unto God 
$7 FE PLople, and to ipeak unto the people from the Lord ; theſe, 
CoLgn great eUfinelics, they durit not delegate from themiclves un- 
& others to pertorm for them. 

5 © And the ſaying pleaſed the whole multitude : 

'S T1 : * - 
And (hey choſe x Stephen *, a man full of faith, and of 
nely Gholt, and Philipt, and Prochorus, and Nicanor, 


-armenas, and Nicholas a proſelyte of 


Ariioch. 
&A & 1 4 _ _ 2 = - " . 

# Vl theſe o21ng Greet names, 'tis likely they were all Hel/eniſ2s, 

and EzIcended tom Hebrew Parents, but born in foreivn Countries s 

er amopgit tne Jews they might have other names, which St. 


4 


or number | 


G 7 % 


Lnke wining this Hiſtory , tranſlated into Greek 38 
- he A 
6 Whom they {et before the apoſtles : And wh 
| had 2 prayed *, they a laid ther hands on them. 
' 2 Prayer 1s the falr, which ſeaſonzth and ſanRifieth a11 thi 
a A 1ite uſed in the, Church of old, r. Intheir Sacrifices, z; Ws. 
\ 2. In their bleMings, Gen. 48. 14. 3. Tn their delignat 
a charge or office ; thus Afoſes or Joſhua, Numb. 27, 18. 
thence it was eaſi}ier derived unto the Goſpel-Church. © 
bleſſing thus the children which were brought unto 
19. 13. and thus alſo were Miniſters ordained in the Pri; 
2 Tim. 5. 22. E 
 #* And * the word of God increaſed ; and the 
| . . . . » 
| of the diſciples multiplied in Jeruſalem greatly ; 
' great b company of the pricits were obedient ynrg jj 


| faith. | 


194]. 
unye 


| tereſt in a]l likelihood, heightning their oppolition) yer great is 
| eſpecially the ſpirit of truth, and did prevail ; and though in its j.; 
| the number might not be ſo great, as to becalled a great mult; 


| wonderful, and the fewer might paſs for a many. 


| more than we praCtice, fac quod dicis & fides eft. Aug 
8 And Stephen tull of faith 4 and power, 
wonders e and miracles among the people. 


did theſe wonders publickly. 


diſputing with.Stephen. 

f Synagogues were as Colleges in our Univerſities, being uſed $6; 
Inftruction and Learning ; and were diſtinguiſhed according tothz 
perſons that frequented them. The Jews fſpeak of no le3than 48 
Synagogues at Jeruſalem : a vaſt number, and, probably, incre;{{4 
by theſe here mentioned. g Some think, theſe were natives of acer- 
tain Countfey in 4Fica, from whencethey wereſa called ; but more 


: . Gentile, 
and none could ſpeak more plainly of the calling TM to 
than Aalachi, Chap. x. 11. and yet when _ 2pP'y 


£ 


(lh P. 


ve Chap, 


en they 


oe, 20.15, 
19ns unto . ; 
and tron © © 
ur Saviour 
"IM, Mat 
IUYe Times 


and a 1; 


b None fo violent oppoſers of the Goſpel as theſe were, (thei: ;,. 
7h, 
If 


Piet 
ag » 


yet conſidering who they were that were converted, it Was vers 
] m c Chriſtianity ;; 
not a bare ſpeculation, but a prattical Religion ; and-'ve belieys ſe 


Uid prey 


@ Enabled to Preach, diſpute, do, and tuffer all things thrgygy, 
Chriſt. e Of whom he cured many, or among the people, in tha j.. 


9 © Then there aroſe certain of the f ſynagogue, which 
is called the ſynagogue of theg Libertines, and bh Cyrenjang 
and Alexandrians, and ot them of Cilicia, and of Aj, 


ha 


To 
G 
,& 16 


z 


r*(0 


N 1 


Jo 


probably, they wee fach as were manumitted or made free, (a5 the 
word is commonly ulcd for ſuch) and in a middle conc:tion between i 
ſuch as were free-born, and fuch as were bondlJaves ; and migh: c 
detire to freonent with thoſe of their own rank. + Thorg!i ſerer1! 
places are called Cyrene; this (from whence they took their name) h 
was in AF1ca In all likehood, it being joyned with that of the t 
Alecandrias: So God plealtd to prepare the Helleniſts, (or Jexrby X 
craduction) for the Gentiles were not yet called ; rhat they might all il 
hear the Goſpel 1a the Language they underſtood beſt. n 
10 And * they were not able 7 to refiſt & the wiſtom+5 F 
and / the ſpirit by whici he ſpake. If d 
; They did oppole it, but incfizQually, & The foolifhres of Gb $i 
is wiſer than 11czz, 1 Cor. 1.25. What then is his wiſdom, through = 
which this holy manſpake? 7 The holy Ghoſt direQ!ng him, and Ut 
putting a Divine Power upcn what he fpake, according tothe pro» , 
mile, Mat. 10. 20. ; # 
£1 22 Then they ſuborned men, which ſajd, We hare yo 
heard him ſpeak blaſphemous words againit Mofes, and «- tik 
| gatzſt God. ; the 
2 What theſe blaſphzmous words were, we have verſe 14. which mo 
ſhew, that the veil was yet over their hearts, and that they could ot 
not indure to hear, that the ſhadows muſt flee away, when the vnn Gay 
is riſen, and the T'ypes be aboliſhed, when the ſubſtance oftle things | 
Typified is exhibited ; for this truth was all the blaſphem) thiskoly anc 
Martyr w7a5 guwlry of. {ha 
i2 And they » ſtirred up the people, and the elders, and þ 
the ſcribes, and came upon him, and caught bim and 6 
brought him to the council, | "k 
» Being overcOme by reaſon and arguments, they betas? them- = 
ſelves to all the evil arts imaginable ; they ſuborn witnelks againk ey 
St. Stephen, (as was done acainſt Naboth ) and (that we read 01) mig 
never before ; they make the people, and the number, ( waich a whe 
uſually the worſt} on their fide; then they coinplain of h19 Fog 
the Prieſts, &c. and Ielt any, or all theſe, ſhould fall, they hay hs 
violent hands on him themſelves. Sin goes on as a Current, 4 "_ 
never ops, unlets an Almighty word be ſpoken unto 1t £0 0 10 
further. l 4 
| 4 ti-h Cid, This ma and 
13 And {et up o falſe witneſſes, whica 1eic _ O the: 
ceafeth not to fſpzck blaſphemous words againft £115 00g wh 
place, and rhe law. ds -#*; 
o They ming!cd in their teftimony, falie thing* wi — trey, 
they who wimeed againſt our Saviour had done. ps viel 
mighr poſiibly have inculcared what our Savicur had —_ the y 
Luke 19. 43. and both have been very innoccnr ; for _— does 
them ipake with any ebhorrence of, much I-1s blaſphem) «9 47.4 
the Law or the Temple ; bur in that the wirnelles oadbr® "% 5 
added to their words, they ars deſervedly branded as fall "on jp Be 
fallws inmu, falſts m omni, 1s a granted Maxiun 22 the calc ws b 
witnels-bearing. =} if U 
14 For we have heard him ſay, That this Jeſusof __ T | ” 
ſhall deſtroy p this place, and ſhall change the [| CUNons, "oy. 
which Moles delivered uz, RY + bury | 
p Thar is the Temple; Jeremy had foretold this may = hs Gods, 
did efcape, though very narrowly, Jer. 26. 12, 16. 1 Sana leaſt | 
Propheſied of the deſtrution both of the City _— har 4 
Dar. 9. 26. and yet theſe were in great reſpect amons i, did 


95 by 
bit all 


(om *| 

I 
of Gab 
rough 
1, and 
© pr0s 


e have 
2nd 4- 


which 
could 
ke $nn 
things 
wist.oly 


rs, and 
1 and 


2 thet- 

againſt 
ead 0i ) 
vaich 1? 
F him 09 
they ly 
ant, al 
0 $0 n0 


15 MN 
«is holy 


ruths, as 
Steh/;008 
foretold, 
either Oc 
vy again 
xted a 
vices; 
e Cale 0l 


& 
/ 
if 


a0, and 
aniel had 
zandul'): 
je 
e Gentiiz!) 
; came tf 

apP'y 


L& 


op. VIE. 


wply thel 


gry, from whom all glory deſcends to Angels or Men. 


l, 


DP a 


would 


The 4A 


z things more home, and cloſ:, they could not indure 


a” And all that far in the council, looking ſtedfaſtly 
on him, ſaw his face as it had been the q face of an 
anoel. 


With an extraordinary Juſtre and radiancy, above what ap- 
ars in men, whereby they might be diſtinguiſhed, as Match. 28. 
4 ;. aff:Qting the beholders «with admiration ; thus Avfes his face 


did ſhine. 
CHAP. VIE. 


Srephen defends himſelf ; ſh:wing how God made a promiſe to give the 
land to Abraham and his Seed, 1— 8. Joleph ſold into 
Foypt , fnaeth farow beforePharaoh, and made Gruernour over all 
the Land, 9. 10. Great Dearth and AfﬀfliF'on in Egypr, and Canaan, 
11. Jacob jendcth his Sons ro Egypr for Corn, 12. Joſeph che 
Second time maket h himſ-lf known to his Brethren,and they to Pharaoh, 
13. Joſeph ſend-:h for his father and all his kinared, threeſcore 
and fifteem Souls : Jacob dieth in Egypt : buried in Sichem : The 
people multiply in Egypt ; they are cruelly entreated by a new King, 
14-—— 19. Moſes bory and nouriſhed for the Son of Pharaoh's 
Daughter, and educated in all th: W:ſdom of the Egyptians, 20—22 

his Brethren, killeth an Egyptian ; being upbraided for it, 
f-eth into Midtan, 23 '0. God appearing #0 him, ſendeth 

"*im to deliver his Brethren out of Egypt, 3&——35- He bringeth 
them terough the Red ſea into the Wilderneſs, 36. Propheſieth of 
Chriſt to come, 37. and receivith the Law, 38, The people commit 
Lolairy with the Golden calf ; Gods Judgment thereupon, Z9-----43. 
The Tabernacle ſet up, and remaining tid Solomon builded t he Temple, 

z,—50. Stephen furt her ſhwweth therr obſtinactes in reſiſting the 

Ho!z Ghoſt, Fl---53- They being moved againſt him, ſtone him to 

d:ath : calling upon God he commatteth hs Soul unto Joſua ; kneeling 

dren and praying for them, he fallcth aſleep, 54-—- 60. 

; Hen ſaid » the high prieſt -, Are theſe things 
| ſo? 

» Who was refolved to condemn any, right or wrong, that ſhould 
n:otels Chrift, as appears John 9. 22 5 That he might ſeein juſt, 
he gives him a kind of liberty to anſwer for himlelf; not to defend 
his Do&trine, but to know out of his own mouth, whether he Preach- 
ed it, Or NO, 

2 And he ſaid, Men 7, brethren, ard « fathers heark- 
en; The x God of glory appeared unto our y father 
Abraham, when he was in » Meſopotamia, before he 


dwelt in a Charran, 

t Totake away any prejudice they might have conceived againſt 
kim; and to recommend, not his perſon ſo much, ashis Dottrine 
to them ; he calls them Brethrew, 1. As hoping 1n the ſame pro- 
miſes with chem. 2. Obſerving the ſame Law. 3. Worthipping 
the ſame God. # A word of reſpe& (eſpecially) the elder a- 
mongit them, or his Judges : thus the Roman Senators were called 
Fathers, and Magiſtrates ought to be reverenced as the Fathers of 
their Countrey. x Who is allo called, Pſal. 24. 7. The King of 
By this 
and what follows, St. Stephen would ſhew that he honoured the 
te God, and thought reſpeCtively of the Law, the Temple, and 
the Patriarchs, whom he was accuſed to contemn and diſgrace. 
3 He names Abraham, becauſe he was accounted the firſt Father 
and Patriarch of the Jews, and had the firſt clear .promiſe that 
the Meſſiah ſhould. come of his Seed. z Meſopotamia is ſometimes 
tiken ſtrictly for that Countrey, which lies betwixt the two Rivers, 
the Tigris and Euphrates, from whence it had its name ; ſometimes 
more largely, including Chaldee, and fo 'tis raken here. a A City 
ofthe Parthians, in the borders of Meſopo:amia, towards the Land of 
Lanaan. 

; And ſaid unto him 6b, Get theeout of thy countrey, 
andirom thy kindred, and come into the land which cl 


ſha!ll ſhew thee. 


b This command given unto Abraham, we read of, Gen. 12. 1, 
5,6. and 1s hzre the rather ſpoken of by St. Stephen, to prove that 
dranam was in the favour of God, and did truly ſerve him, before 
he ever ſaw the Land of Canaan, and_ before th? Ceremonial Law 
was given by Meſes, and much more before the Temple was built ; 
and therefore it could not be blaſphemy in him, to hold that God 
might be fexved without thoſe ceremonies, and worſhiped elſe- 
wierethan in Jeraſalem. c This was the glory of Abraham's faith, 
tat it lubmitred abſolutely to God, and enabled Abraham to go he 
knew nor whither, Heb. x1. 8, for God did notſo much as name the 
Pace he would have him go unto. 

4 Then* came he out of the land of the Chaldeans, 
and dwelt in Charran : And from thence, when his fa- 


ther was dead, he removed him into this land wherein 
fenow dwell, 

d abraham had as great a love to his kindred and native Coun- 
rey, 45 Others have ; but he had a greater faith, which made him 
Yield to Gods call and command, and follow from place to place 
the wili of God, who is ſaid here to have removed Abraham, and 
” chuſe the Inheritance and habitation: for his people, P/al. 

7. 4: 

5 And he gave him e none inheritance init, no not / 
"29 4 to f let his foor on*; yet he promiſed that he 
*-14 g1ve it to him for a poſſeſſion, and g to his ſeed 
ater him, when as yet he had no child. 

h Tis true that Abraham had a field, and the Cave of Machpelsh, 
" 9. but char was of no uſe to Abraham whilſt alive, but to 
ur bim in when dead ; befides, it wasnot as an inheritance by 
* f Whereby the 
tha ma of ground 15 meant ;\ hence Sr. Stephen would prove, 
_* Graham's happineſs, and theirs too. if they rightly underſtood 


*, Md not —_— upon the enjoyment of that place and Country. 
ol, BI on 


PS 4 rh 1917 
U1jis 31g 


"0gItt, but it was purchated wich his money. 


hs of * 


Z Faith met with a double diticulty, not onely forawam mit 
believe he ſhould have all thar Counirey given lum tor an ink: t- 
tance, 1n which he had not a foot of land, but he mwt alto 52- 
leve, that it ſhould be his ſeeds after him, when 35 he had n2 
children ; but thus faith is :he eviacnce of 1hings nat ſeen, H-zb. 


Chap. VII. 


$i. $i 

6 And God ſpake on this wiſe, That his ſe2d þ fhould 
{ozourn in a ftrange land, and char they thould brins 
them into bondage, and intrear hex 4 evil four hundred 
years. 

_ 4 As men which dwell in kouſes that are nor their own - which 
teem to contradict the promiſe mentioned in the foreooing wer!y : 
but it 1s onely to make Abraham the more believe agnnll hone. 11 
hope, as *tis faid, Rom 4 18. though there were never to many 
difficulties more, for what God hath promiled, fiith would ove: - 
come them all, # This very fpace of tour hundred years, is alſo 
mentioned, Ger. 15. 13, 16. Which is thus computed, trom the 
birth of 1ſzac ( the promiſed fred ) ro the birth of 73:06, fixry 
years; from 7acob?s birth, ro his going into Er pt, one bundred an 
tity years, . fiom thence to their deliverance out ot Egg}, tweao 
hundred and ten years; this period is accounted, Exod.” 12. 4e, 4: 

to be tour hundred and thirty years; which allo St. Paul reckons 
by, Gal. 3. 17. but then thirty years is adiled unto the account, 
being the ſpace of time betwixt the lirſt promile made unto 45rahan; 
of this feed, and the birth of Jſaxc, in whom the promiſe was 
co be fulfilled : St. Srephen here reckoning onely from the birth of 
Iſaac. 

7 And the nation to whom they ſhall be in bondage, 
will q I judge, faid God: And atter that ſhall they come | +16. 3:10 
forth, and * ſerve me r in this place. *Ex 3.3: | PAM IENEY | 

9g Or, puniſh ; and fo the Egyptians were punithed, not by humane 64 be AS 
means, but by D:vine power, and with Gods own immediate hand, v.4f 
and that in the fulnets of time, the very night in which God”s A311 pf n 
promiſe was to take A-& : and rher-fore 'tis a night to be much Woe oh nv 
obſerved, Exod. 12. 42. as ſh:wing, that the Salvation of his peop!e. | | 
and che deſtruction of his enemies flumber nor, 2 Pet. 2.3. » In 
Mount Horcb, The reaton why God delivers his people is, thar 
chey may ſerve him, as Lv{? 1. 71, 75. and fo long as God hath 
v6 work tor them to do in this World, he will preferveand deliver 

17. 

s * And he gaves bim the covenant of : circumciſion : * Gen. 17.9, 
t and ſo 4br:bam u begat liaac, and circumcited him 1% == 
che eighth day: {land Iſaac begar Jacob, and * Jacob 1% *t2 | 
begat the x twelve patriarchs. = 


2 FAY Gen.25 25. 
s Abraham of whom he was tpeaking. # OF which Covenant, L yo. 


- 


= es, hw 2" 
, _ I 
area « 
mags -- - Ap 


+ -.- rat 


£07 ach tart Lets Too 


+ 1 inet 


Circumciſion was the fign and ſeal, by which on the part of Abraham a" £2-5's 
and his feed, 1t was ſtipulated, that they ſhould put offall carnal at- 4 203 
3 J* 23s 


feCtions, wafter the promile : ſo that the promiſes were not given for 
Iſaac's fake ; but 1/aac was given tor the promite ſake : which made 
theſethings more fir to repreſent Goſpel grace, which St. Stephen was 
Preaching of. x The heads of the Tribes, from whom they were 
denominated. Of this Genealogy, ſee Mar. 1. 1, 2, &c. and the Hi- 
ſtory of it in Geneſis. 
9g * And the patriarchs moved with y envy, & fold « Ge, - +. 
. ; F I, * 

Joſeph into Egypt 4: but God was with him. 28. 
y Enraged; the holy Martyr accommodates his apology fo, as that Pf. :05. 17. 
they may yet have occaſion to reflz& on themſelves : 7 tor as they 
had ſold our Saviour unto ſtrangers, ſo had their Fathers told Joſep 4. 
» To favour, and bleſs him ; for Gods preſence brings 21] good a- 
long with it: with this he comforts himlielf and others ; thar it was 
not without example or precedent that God ſhould be with fuch 
whom their perſecurors could not endure. 

10 b And delivered him out of all his afflitions, and 
*gave him c favour and wiſdom in the ſight of Pharaoh 
king of Egypt ; and he made him governour over Egypr, 


and all his houſe. 

b The effe& of God's preſence with him, which to his people is al- 
ways In an eſpecial manner, not onely as he is with all other Crea- 
cures ; but as the Soul 1s with the Bodv, moſt effzQually, fo is God 
with them, c Thus God brought Daniel into favour, Daz. 1. 9. 
and hath all hearts in his hands. 

11 Now there came 4 a dearth over all the land of 
Fgypr and Canaan, ande great affliction ; and our fa- 
thers found f no ſuſtenance. 

d This is mentioned, G2z. 41. 54, ©, e As ſeidom any milchiet 
comes alone: Rapine, and many dilcaies tollow Famine. f Any 
courle diet ; graſs or herbs. : 

12 But when g Jacob heard chic chere was corn in 
Egypt, he ſent our our þ tathers firſt. 

g The hiſtory is known, Gen 42, 1. 4þ Our Progenitors, 73:06 
Sons, from whom we are defcended 

13 And ar - the ſecond ::me Joſeph was made knownto 
his brethren ; and Joſephs kindred was made known + 
unto Pharaoh. | 

; Upon their ltecond coming into Egype, Gen. 45. 3, 4, 16. Joſeps 
made himfelf known unto them. # For the continuance of thei: 
ſuſtenance, and fulfilling of what was foretold. 

14 Then ſent Joſeph, and called his father Jacob to 
him, and * all / his kindred, threefcore and fifteen m * Devt.- 12. 
fouls. 22; 

{ His affinity, and not conſanguinity onely, which may be the 
reaſon why, though in Gen. 46. 26. it 1s ſaid, that all che ſouls 
that came with Jace into Egypt, were ſixty ſix, (it being then added, 
they were all fuch as came our of his {oyns) yet it 15 faid, they were 
ſeventy perſons, Qer. 46. 27 . Zaccb, Foſeph, and Joſzph's rwio fons 
(who were alfo of the promiſed ſced} being added unto the number. 


* Gen.Al 37: 


In this account of Sr. Stephen his Sons wives might Ye added, hich 
| (£1]} 3 make 


by 


CI STEN __ > , _ — . 
ren 1 __ —_—mw =} oh 
no ry So «Spe ww BL pgs yy 
Wes Swag . , 
SiMe ns wes waact;; —>——te nb. 


- = » _—_ > — 
> =p __ "FI 
eng x —— CY ” 
- MK.” -» 
—— —_ 
a es ws 
- A I 5 -* 
4 "= — bd Ba —_ 


$5 Earp ang 


_ 


% 4 
_— , _- K - — , | . 
P ? - A a W1 - } - w—_ £ : 
-— A = . p q R —» =Y "_ x 
; k - FI" : - - 4 - x wt EIS - lo ig 
> w « 13 TT kt, Grads oe r_— * wy gi __—_— —_— s : 
a A —— - pe © A Ar s, : . v. by by at's whe X 
% — = w_ > _ . - Fl ” 4 KY " w__ 1 - 5 " — 
- 4 Y & 2U.35 py d 43, _—_—y Ko et - « 
. * © K Rab . $i A > 4 $_— ES 76 * A ” p- p F007 - p 5 wo * «< x - PI 
w_ - _ ” = a bt 2 : : >. 3 : =: "# l > | . 
%s" ” - Ing < pe 4 _ "ls e 2 > " L "LOIN { _ - Cs : 6 _ ——_ Fe rn.” y we FR PE p- - 
_ _ _ _ > = by kg ans -— = H- 45S = _ I. _ o > 'L - ” et a.” , Q Rn 
Ss —_ - rags —_ IS Wc PS 3"). hn, hen - _——_ _—_ = x —=- PI... ——_ h5-20- 8s end * —» 3 ER þ 6 C wx ES hos rw” ” - 2 - > *w@I? "ns Lugt 24 64 - wn oe — 
a -— FILE —_— - . * 6 ——_ - 7. "42 © TUITR. nm ag7 ——— a 2 I OY - PLD IR "BU Po Wn 5. > wy i a a - -4 : ſes > eb 4 : BR 6 _- 
— x 4 L Y < «7 ———__— p—_ Dry —_—_ - 4 < > T- - .. —— Bog T3 K DD —__— = yr” _ oregon yo —_— = —_—— - - "I. —_ 8 NS. TT = Sz _ — = « A : : - " * b __——_ * 
. AEis7.£ - 5 £2 . ty — I os - - bd _ ——_—— = A DV) I SY > -— &- . IE - . = T.. -=F 44 = - X "T2, D <= - kann _ . —_— ry > - : L 
"ts Wh bas 5 RN SL HY DOT >. A = _ _ — ” Faq - Sha roons: <= as. So —— = - "IJ o = -£ "> = KITE > av fe - "0D ER © a a. > n » - —_— _ — I — = _ — ——— -— - = 
6 _ a + 4 4 > , — __ - - : = _ . , -— - — pq no DM =; .. = EI. 2 == © be i A CEN SP I Tom OE END , ;- y_ © © —vEs ” - x 
- L _ n Mlb eden" EY : 2 . 5%-m:5> _ —— - - - = ——_— F - — \ -_ - _ FY 
4 " ” - Pre gs — o- h 
tn — - R Iv my - . a - a I > - 
GIS 4 "ET Cr - z. > 4 I I - _ =o.” es 


| L : 
i / 
Chap VII. ihe 4 
F - 
y L.x y 
maks up ſovent) fi : 4 F% - 
but it 1: nat of any con!2quence asto faich and holy living, which 
are 05%) v neceliiry unto Salvarion: the wonderful increaſe to to many 
hand -4 rhoulands of men, beſides chileren, ſpoken of Exod. 12. 37. 
norwickfandiog the babarous cruelty of the Egyptians, 15to be 
ad.nired, m The nobler a«.d better part by which tacy are numbied, 
according unto which they are eſteemed by God. . 
\« * So Jacob went down into Egypt ft, and died, 
he. and cur farhers, 


434 


w J-o, 4£ 


+ Geil.. 


} 


þ) >! 


JD 


wb 


111i b Se. $cepn pits them in mind of, the rather thathe might 
intiioicc, No Counticy, nor Place, nor Temple wee lo neczthary, 
Fur the notwithſtanding ( they bad none of them ) thuir tore-ta- 
ther, 8:9 liveand dic in the fear and favour of God, although in 
E210:, out of the promiſed Land, ©c. Pp 
16Ard * Te carried over into Siczem, and laid 
[6 At: 0 WETE CAITIEU OVEDT | SIC3CM, 
, a * 1 "iS , : 
in the + {epulchre thatp Abraham bought Tor a ſum of 


It 
4 "is ,” k . _ 0 + a F L 5 : Fa a 

- vpn -31% mony of the fons of Emor the /2 wer of Sichem. 7 
X33: 19. 'o burv him in Canaan, according to 


o That they card Je/r/# 7 | 
the oith he made then take, Gen. 59. 25. IS Certarn, anu that 
this was defired to be Cone for him out of faith, Heb. (1, 22, 
kt ir jenor ſo certain, (un!zf this place be to underſtood) t1r the 
i ofthe Parriarcts waie to tranflited afrer their death - Yer it ls 
very likeiy ; foc fri, they had 25 much reaion C0) de{ire ir,.. as 

Jeb hid ; they believed rhe fame promiles, and had an intere! 
in that Land as well 23 bs. Secondly, Their poſterity bare the ſame 
reſpct unto them. rhae Toſep,'s Pannly did ro him. Thirdly, Ic 
ſ--ms alike reafonable, that none of thole ewelve Heirs to the Land 
ofCanzran, {hold be Teft in the Land oi bondage. P Tins place 
T ack1owledged ro he moſt difficu'r, and the dithultie; are better 
not to be mentioned, than iloived ; which the nacure of thete notes 
(08 to mention 0ch2r rez{ons) m1ght cccalion 5 Wheloever will 
contider the int:nd-d thts: of che tory, w.th the utuil Idioms 
of the brow Longuags, from which it was deduced, may take 
this ava Piraphrale 0p04 the V. hole Ver!e: * and 7actb, and our 
©fr1 rs cid, and were ren.oved to Sici7cm, and were lad 1 Se- 
* p. ] hes in that which Abraham bau che for mon-y,and] in char that 
© was bonghr from che $0.4, of Ezor, the Father 01S hem Dr. Light- 
" fo.t in locum. : X 4 
15 Bar when the tine of 4 the promiſe drew nigh, 
* Ex. 1.7, Which God had (worn to Abratain *, the pe pie grew 
we and muitipied im I gypr, 
PL 105. 254+ 9 Ot th- tuifilling of the promiſe ; eirher of the increaſe of his 
ſeed, or of th:ir deliverance our of Bondage, tur both were promiſed, 
Gu 22. 17. thourh at that very time thete were the greatelt endea- 
vours to hinder euhcr, v hen God accomplithed both. 
13 Till anoib?r Kng arole, which » knew not 
Jotcpy, 
r Th: werds, are tiken from the Septuagint, Exe. 1. 8. ; 
19 The fume ,dealr ſubritly with our kindred, andevil 
nrected cur fathers, * ſo that z they caſt our their 
vourg children, tothe end they might not live. 
 Pharioh refolves tb deal { as he thought ) wiſely, Exod. 1. 10. 
and "ris acknowtedged, that the Ezyprians dealc ſubrilly with them, 
P/al. 165. 25. For they donot at once Ceſtroy them, which might 
have been ko rdous, (the Iſraclites being fo numerous) neither could 
E574 well pare ot ence [o many Inh.ibirants ; (rco great and ſud- 
den c/acutiugs, caute fwonings ) but they endeavour their ruine 
by degrrs, 7. Waſting them by hard Jabours. 2. Commanding the 
M dw va qrivarty to kill their Ma'es. 3. 8 Caſting out, or expoſing 
avy whonthy foind ſpared. Yet this people, attempted upon 
Þy 'o MINY -crcr and O01 11S TUO bring them ro deſtruttion, 
Go. J'd proferve, ail lohe will bits Church, (which chey did typifie) 
maugrz a'l the endeavours, the molt porear malice can uſe againſt 


ET. 7 22. 


If, 
*Fx.2. 2 z0 * In which time Moſcs was born, and f was s fex- 
WF . 6 : £ * 2 . . > 
I, ceevi.s far, end Bolyifhed upin his fathers houſe three 
k 'C Fe months: 
LO y 7 


@ Ur fair to God ; which though ſome underſtand of the inward 
beaury. of the nuind, (which is indeed the moſt admirable ) yer in 
th:s place there 1s no moreto be underſtood by it, than the wonder- 
fu! beauty of his Boy, which Gud beſtowed in an extraordinary 
meaiure vpon him, that it might be a means to attract the care and | 
pty of Pharaoh's Davghter, as it a t-rwards came to pals ; beſides | 
that which is eminent in any kind, 1s by an Hcbr»1{m ſaid to be of 
God; Upon this account Nizeveh is Called a City of God, Jorah 3. 
3» And weread of Jcache!'s great wieſthngs, or wieſtlings of God, 
Guy 3. $. 


£5Hi «QF. oi 


21 3tu when Þe «: wes Coft out 7, Pharachs daughter 
Ok 1) Vp, 26G4 nourithed him for 2 her own fon. 

x Ex: oicd und jd ir. E227, 2 2 &c now was the time tor God to 
> ; : an Pjal 27.10. y An enemy to Goo": Iſrael! ; yer * 
God C1] 3.ake wick ho ro DIi2g UP. and edycazte Moſes who was 
fRetr d-11. e:Er, 2 K\de i t: 0045 him ior her $0n, Exod. * EY _ 


£402 &5 ©2523 £2 4CITL 


” X _ - 4 
rc him UP, 4% 


' q 
14 vil OT UIHApLY 


«es icurned 2 in all the wiſdom of the 
Fyyptians, and was wighty in þ words and in c deeds. 
a ihe Ez yþtinms weie: Ncient!y tag ons for Learning, eſpecially in 
Aſtronomy , and {ome other paris 0! Phiioiophy. 6 He was Eloquent. 
cHlis deeds were ual to his words: He could do as well as ſay, 
what became him. 
is * « E LE z "oy > ot 
23 anc wnen ne was full c fourty years old, it 
came 7 into his heartto viſit his brethren the children of 
£1icCl E 
e This Aye of. Mor ts nct {et down in his Hiſtory ; but they 
ROT Have IT by t14.untion, which 1s here confirmed unto us by the 
rs 1 "hu no Es je oy ae Moje's ſpenr in Pharaoh's Courr, 
P5485 TIE (Chg its and reiolutions to have been fiom God, 


x. 1. (> 
22 Aſi Moics 


* Exod.2.11, 


ve. There are other accounts of this difference ;} 


U T S. Cha 


that ſach a great Courtier ſhould fo far debaſe himſcIf; therefore th; 
is deſervedly attributed unto his Faith, Heby. 11. 25. which i; rh. nk 
'of God, Eph. 2. 8. -. Bit 

24 And ſecing one o/ ther ſulfer wrong e, he deſendeq 


him, and avenged him taac was oppreiied, and finge th. 
Egyptian : 
e This fat of Moſes ſome defend by the Law of Nate, which 


1!lows us to proreCt the innocent; bur many things we know Wer 
done by an extraordinary warrant, Which we are not to imitgre. 
aor by our own Authority to avenge our felves or others. | 
25 || For he ſuppoſed his brethren would have ungee. 
ſtood, how that God by his hand woulddeliver ther. 
2 


bur they 5 underſtood not : 

f This they might have inferred, 1. From his extraotdinary 3. 
liverance out of the Egyprians hands,. and out of the River vj, 
young. 2. From his readineſs to detend them, ('twas wondcit,). 
thac luch an one as he was, and might have been,thould mind them ; 
3. Fromthe drawing near of the time of their deliverance, which 
they could not without negltence be, wholly ignorant of g By bis 


means and Miniſtry. + Stup:dity 3s fr2quently charged upon this 
; people: They then did not receive ſes, as theſe now would not 
; receive Chriſt. : 
{ 26 And the next day z he ſhewed himſelf unto them 
; AS they ſtrove,and wot:ld have & (et them at one again! 
' ſaying, Si1s, ye 2 are brethren; why do ye wrong ong 
' to another? 
i As one appointed by God to deliver them,which he had ev'den. 
ced betore. & With great earneſtneis,and as far as words could do, he 
| compelled them. / Thcſe wo:ds are mentioned, Exed. 2,13, but 
' ſomething other wiſe than here 3 bur the ſenle 1s h:re and there the 
| ſane. wm Brethien, nor fo being all deſcended from Abraham ind 
| the Patriarchs; but in that they all worſhipped one an4 the fare 
; God, which is the greate!t obligation ro concord and agreementthur 
can be ; and it any « ffeacz be given, or trelpals committed, It oblige 
us as much to p-is it by and pardcn it: Forgive the treſpaſs of rj 
ſervant of the God of thy father, Gen. 50. 17. 
27 Bur he char » did his neighbour wrong, thruſt hin 


over us ? 

a The injurious-are moſt averſe from peace, and one ſin make," 
way for another. o This was a cautlels cavil, eſpecially from fuch 
41 One as had known what Moſes had done, as an eflay of his being 
| the deliverer of Gods Ijracl 

25 p Wilt thou ki!l me as thou didſt the Fyyptian 
yeſterday ? 
 p He charges this great crime upon Moſes, to hinder him from 
further rep:oving of him ; though recrimination do not make him, 
or any other more innocent; yer men ordinarily uſe it, as if it 
were tone fatisfaftion to them, that they are not wicked alone; 
but that others are as bad or worſe ; this better befits an Z2;tian 
than an 1ſracl:ze. - | 
29 Then fled Moſes g at this ſaying, and was a 
ſtranger in the land of r Madian, where he begat two 


ſons. | 

9 Knowing that what he had done to the Egyprian, . would be dil- 
covered to Pharaoh, and his life in danger. 7 Inhabited by the 
poſterity of Madian Abraham's Son by KReturah, Ger. 25.1,% 
Moſes was fourty years in Ezypr, fourty years in Madian, with 7cthra 
or Jether, who was called alſ; Revel Exod. 2.18. and Hibah, Nom. 
10. 29* and theother forty years in the wilderneſs, which makeup 
the hundred and 'twenty years ef his life, Dear. 34. 7. This mikes 
to St. Stephen's purpote, to prove that God is always with them that 
fear him, in whar Country or place ſoever ; as he was with Araham 
in Meſopotamia, and with his p:ople in Egyps, fo with Ayes in 
Madan. 


30 Ard when s forty years were expired there ap- 


peared to him in the wilderneſs of £ mount Sinz, as 
angel of the Lord in a » flame of fire in a buſh 

s So long it pleaſed God to try Moſes his faith, and his peoples 
patience. # To the Dcetert of Arabia, where the Law was atter- 
wards delivered, Exod. 18. c. and 19. 3. « Not a Created but ths 
Increated Angel, the Angel of th: New-Covenant, as may bt. ſem 
ver. 32. and by Myſcs patting off his ſhooes becauſe the place x5 holy, 


r 
} 


great admiration hath fome fear joyned wirh it ; Gods 
though in mercy, was ever fall of cerror and amazement ; 


jance ? who chen ſhall be ab!z ro abide # 


Exod. 3.7, 5. he 1s alio in the four firft verſes of that Chap'rr called 
Lord. x God ſtillappeared in ſucha manner as was moſt 11ſtruQive 


: Jofrplas Cays, Thar AMe,:5 was lo beautitul, that all who ! ro them he appeared ro, and to us; as herein a flame of fire in s buſh, 
paſled by, ictt heir bLuliucts they were abour, to gaze at him. | 


to ſhew thar he was with his people in all their ſufferings, and would 
{o provide, that they ſhould not be conſumed by them ; chey might 
be purified, bur ſhould not be deſtroyed. 

31 When Moſes ſaw iz, he y wondred at the fight: 
And as hedrew near to behold zz, the voice of the Lord 
came unto him. | 

y Sceingthe buih on a ime, and not couſumed ; contrary t2 the 
narure of devouring flames, that be might be convinced of Gods pre: 
fence, and mate the more atrentive ro what God ſhould tay, a 
Prepared to y1eid obedicnce unto it. 


32 Saying *, 1 2 am the God of thy fathers, 900+ 


God of Abraham, and the God of Iſtac, and che God ye 
of Jacob. Then Moſes 6 trembled, and durit not be- 


| hold. | 


z That he might know from whom he had his Commiſſion, ay 
by whom he was to be ſent. a Mention is made of thele, bCCAuIE 


God had made unto them rhe promiſe of delivering tne1lr PO 


which he was now about to do; the time being fully come. 5 


©; Whar wil 
Jcr yYenge* 


33 Then 


fterity, 
"AT 
{7A » 


his appearing be, when he ſhall come in judginen® to ren 


b. VI 


away, ſaying*, Whoo inade chee a ruler and a judge, 
ee \ 


'F/ 


Ii 
| Or, v; 


VII. The A 


,» Then aid the Lord to kim, c Put off thy ſhooes 


VIP: 


3 | ; 
OM thy teer: for the place wheie thou {tandelt isdholy 
or0u7d; 


; Either out of reverence to the Ntivine preſence, as Joh. 5.15. 
or that thereby he might ſh2w that he reigned himfelt wholly to 
Gods will and difpoſal ; as in Ruth. 4. 7. Ihe kinfman by pulling 
off his ſhooe and giving 1t to Boaz, did reftzn all bis right he might 
hve had t9 R479 and rhe inberitance. ad Witleit God manifeſts bis 
preſence {i1CTreC. | Bm 

24 2 1 haveſeen, I have ſeen the affliction of my peo- 


\ 1. . 7 which is in Egypt, and I have heard their groaning, 
"= 1nd 7 am Core down to deliver them. And now come, 
p | C C 


| will fend tee into Egypt. 

+ S:eing 1 have ſeen, T have atrenrively ſeen and conſillered ; Tr is 
doubled tor to [new the certainty of it ; if earthly parents, efpecial- 
jy look after their Children when Weak, much more our Heavenly 
Fither. fF Though bur ſighs, and ſcarce framed into words & Spoken 


afrer the manner of men, according vnto which God 15 faid to come 
1own unto any, when he delivers rhzm from their rronbles; an1 
. to g0 from them, when he leaves them 1n them, fee Exod. 3. 7, 8. 
from which place according to the reading of the Sepruagine, theſe 
words are taken, | : 
R 25 This Moſes whom they refufed,faying, Who made 
theea ruler anda judge ? tne fame did God fend 72 bea 
, ruler and a + deliverer by the z hands of the angel which 
aypeared to him in the buſh. 
: h Or a Redeemer ; but onely as a Type of Chriſt, in whom alone 
; we have red-ption through his blood, Eph. 1.7. As Moſes by the blond 
it of the Paſchal Lamb, biought foith, and ſaved the people of Iſrael. 
6 j The power of the Angel ; it was not Afes, but God that wrought 
4 {6 great Salvation. . 
" i& 36 He brought themout, after that he had * ſhewed 
at & Lwonders and ſigns in the land of Egypt, and in the / 
A |Xp.4 ſea, * and In the wilderneſs forty years. 
in } Godcould with the leaſt word or motion of his Will, ſave his 
1 ople; but be chuſerh fo to do his wonderful works, that they may | 
m bc had in remembrance. {?Tis not agreed why ris fo called ; but 
of + 6, ( this name Of that Sea 15 mentioned in prophane Authors. This whole 
; verſe, as divers others, refer to the Hiſtory cf it in Exod, from the 
Ma beginning fO the fifteen Chapter. 
- & This is that 2 Moſes which ſaid unto the chil 
ch 27 A # 4 
Ng « dren of lirael, ® A » Propher ſhall the Lord your God 
raiſe up unto you of your brethren ||, Iike unto me F, him 
al 7 ſha! ye o hear, 

n St. $:0pe would ſhew, that he was ſo far from ſpeaking againſt 
om Mo Gf, tas they fallly imagined) that he recommended none but him, 
= whom af:/2» had to long before ſpoken of, » Chriſt the Metliub, 
fit and head of the Prophets. See Chap. 3. 22. o Or obey. 
oy > 3$* This is he chat was inthe pchurchin the wilder- 

neſs; with + q the ange! which ſpake to him inthe mount 
JF 5-Sina, and 2zrh0U7 fathers : who received the r lively 
wo oracies to give Unto us. 

p Or, Congregation z; with the reſt of the people in all their 
dil- Ghcult Journey. 4 See "wer. 30. of this . Chap. r Gods Law and 
the Word 15 ſo called, as the onely rule to wa.k by unto Life, Dear. 
WW 32.47. It is there ſid to be our life, and it is tne onely ordinary 
Wore: means of a Spiritual and holy Life, which it begers and pre- 
- ſerves . 

Num. ; 

_ 29 Whom s our fathers would not obey, but thruſt 

nakes bm from them, and 1n 7 cieir hearts turned back ag«in 

that to Egypt, 

1am ;Their glory being in their Fathers, St. Stephen minds them 

& 10 tizt many of them rebelled againſt God, and his ſervant Moſes ; 
5 tliey { their poſterity ) now were reb-llious againſt Chriſt, who 

> aÞ- cam? to fave them, as Zoſes before had done; but from a greater 

4 bondage, and by more valuable means, # Not ſo much rowards that 
Countrey, or food they had there, (Garlick and Onions ) as to- 

eople wards thei: Idolatry and Supertition ; as 1n the following vetleap- 

after- Ou 

oh .,, 40* Saying unto Aarcn, Make us « gods to go be- 

i ſeem fore us: for as for x this Moſes which brought us out 

= of the land of Egypt, we y wot not what is become 

calle of him, 

rugive 


a buſh, % According to the Eryptions, who held that there were many 


vas? Gods, and divers degrees of Gods they therefore fpe.k in the 
"nioht plural number : x Though they confels the great deliverance wrought 
2 by Moſes bis means ; yer how contempribly do they peak of him. 
Goh: 7 They could not bur know that Moſes was gone up into the 
y Mount unto God, at his command, and had nor forgorten them. ; 
Lot but had I:ft Aaron and Hur to govern them; yet they foon forgot 
both God and Moſes, notwithſtanding the Jarge and Jate experience 
yo the = had of his wonders ; this is lett upon record againft them, Pſal. 
ds pre- 00, 13,21, 

ay, and 4 And they z madea calf in thoſe days, and offered 
F lacrifice unto the 2 iGo], and brejoyced in cthe works 

, 6 0% + 0 Cf their own hands. 


e God fie 


. © In imitation of the Eg 39tions, who worſhipped their God Apis 


not b&+ | in that, or the like form of an Ox. a The Calf which they had 
made, which they could not be fo fottiſh as to rerminate rheir wor- 

an, and PIN, knowing that they themſelves had made it, and it had not 
becaule made them ; yer they are for this charged.to have commirted Idola- 
poſterity x, Gr. 10. 6, +, 6 Which joy they exprets by feaſting, lingios, 
bar wes Ex02, 32.7. £90 @T:'s Idol and Idois, generally are 
$41 10%» "Ro, P/al. 15.4. and 135 i5. which is enough to ſpeak their 


mit XF ; 4 . .* .. 3 
punts and Vanity 5 vain Man Can make but vain Gods. 


4 Then God 7 curacd, and e gave them up to wor- 


ohat Wil 


y 12s 
x Yell» 


CF 
i a 4 
if jn the buy 


{hip fthe hoſt of heaven. ; as it is writte: 2 
of the Prophets, O ye houſe of Eiraet 5, have ve offcrgd 
to me ſlain beaſis, and facrifices, by the « | 
2 Io wh FIVLS wb "þ Sasw 4 
a 
years in the wildernels ? 

a From being as a Father to chem, to be a Tides over them 
puniſh chem ; whereas formeriy he had bletſed them. e Thi. 
deed to aeliyer them 10 Satan, God with hoidins his grace which thes 
had abuſed, Row. 1. 24, :5. and giving them up, {ro f4ll fig Ne 
{1a unto another ) though not p-lirively, vor pormifiely; £ The 
.tngels are fo calied, Zike 2. 13. but ir is rather hope 
ſtood of ihe ſun, mom, ard ffars, which wr calle. 
1/3. 40.26. g The words here referred ro, are 5: 


4 
{:id robein the Buck In the flaguiar number, becaut 


4 
\ 


politive queſtion does vehemently deny, that they liad offered any 
| Sacrifices unto God, whilelt they were 1a the wildernsf,; byr at tha 
| lame time they oft-red Sacrificzs unto luols; tor when they hid cor- 
' rupted Gods worthip their Sacrifice was as n9 Sacritices y 


—_ 
3 


unto him, 
Ijaiah 1.12. and 43+ 23- 

43 Yea, ye z took 1Þ the tabernaclez of Moulech,and 
the ſtar of yourged / Remphan,zz figures which ve made 
to worſhip them: and | z will Carry you away o beyond 
Babvlon | 

z On their ſhoulders, as they did the Ark. & The idol of the 

childcen of Ammnmn, which the 72elites were etpecially forbid- 
den to worthip, Lv 18. 21. and Lev. 20. 2, yer they did ordinarily 
worlhip him, 2 Chron. 28. 3. Jer. 7.39. Ard thee was an high 
place built by Solorzcn for him, 1 Kings 11. 7 Toe fahernacle of Molech, 
was either a cheſt or prels ta which that Idol was pur, or th Chapels 
into which the wo:ſh+ppers of Meech were adiniried ; accenlins to 
rue quality of the Offering which they brougat. Which of the 
plancts they intended ro buzour bereby, whether the Sw, or Marr, 
or Saturn, it matters not fo much ; any of theſe, or any other of 
their Gods, might be called Aflech, taking rhe word appellatively. 
I Remphan in the place here cit:d, 15 called by .the Prophet Chinn 3 
w hich 1s one and the lame Tdol in both places, the Prophet callins 
It by-1ts nam# then in wir; and Sr. Stephen like unto the name the 
Septuagint had cailed it by; whether Saturn was intended by rhis, 
as fome think, or Hercules asothers; 1t 15 not our preſent buſineſs 
to enquire. Images and repreſentatives of the hoſts of Heaven, or 
of the Planets. o The Prophet Amos faith, beyond Danaſone, Ans7 
5. 27. here St Srephen does not contradict the Prophet, for they 
were carrved away b:yond Baty/ov, muſt needs be carryed away 
beyond Damaſc:z, as theten captive Tribes were, ( unto whom this 
was threatned ) 

44 Our fathers had p the tabernacle of witneſs in the 
wilderneſs, as he had appointed, [| ſpeaking unto Moſes |! Or, 7779 
that he ſhould maks it 9 according, tothe fathion that he /24#*- 
had ſeen. 

p Called allo the Tabernacle of the Congregation , Exod. 33.7. be- 
cauſe about it on all ſolema occalions ths people aflembled. Here 
"tis called the Tabernacle of witneſs, becauſe God here teſt 'ficd or wat- 
neſſed his g!orious Preſence; and efpecially, becauſe in it the Ark of 
the Covenant, the Law, and tliz Teſtimony were kept. 4 Exod 25, 
40, Heb. 8. 5, Moſes was charged not to vary from the prefcripr ; 
God' being jer'ous of his own appointments : Now this is the rather 
ſpokzn of by Sr. Stcp/en, that be might prove that the place where 
God was worthipped in, had varied, and charetore might allo now 
bechanged. 

45.* Which alſc our fathers [|thart came after,brought # j,g;-.; 
i ” 4 a © Es | CN - Ne RNs 
in with r Jeſus into the polieſiion of the Gentiles, whom !| Or, Haw. 
God drave out before s the tacs of our fathers, unto the #75 received, 
days of David. 

r Or 7ojhna ; it being the ſame name, as appears allo, Ie. 4.8. 
onely Jetus 1s more according rorhe Greet uſe : Joſb1a vras a type of 
Jeſus, and agreed with him in his name, . and in the reaſon of his 
name ; hehaving alſo faved the people, and brought them into the 
promiſed reft; yer thz difference is as great b-rween them, as betwix* 
the Heavenly Canaan, and the Earthly, 5s They were not able to 
look upon an J/raelite, whileſt God was for them. 

45* Who: tound favour before God, and : defired * r Sans, 

: As Luke. 30. uſt was David's earnett reque?, that he might 
any ways glorifte God , efpectaily in his worlhip, and rhar he might 
know wh-re the Ark ſhould reſt, and where the Temple vas to be 
built, as Pſa/m 132. declares throughout, 

47 * Bur x Solomon built him 7 an houſe. 

» 1 Kings 6. 10. 2 Coronicles }. 1, 2. y A fixtand ſtable Structure, , 
not moveable, as the Tabernacle was. 

48 Howbeit* z the moſt High dwelleth not 2 in tem- © : fin 9.57, 
ples made wich hands, as faith che Propher. 

2 This is alſo Sr. Paul's Do&rine, Chap. r7. 24. which divers a» 
mongſt the wiſer Hearthens were perſwaded of; for God cannot be 
comprehended in any place, no, not where he 1s worthipped ; and 
therefore they did fooliſhly conceive, that the worthip of God vras 
ſo tyed to the Temple, as if he himſelf had been included in it. 

a The Primitive Chr:ftians abſtain:d from calling the places of their 
aſſembling, by the n.me of Temples ; and were charged by ther 
Pagan-enemies for having no Altars, or Temples, or Images. 

49 b * Heaven 7s my throne, and earth zs my foot- 15. 
ſtool : Whar c houſe will ye build me ? faith che Lord : & 25 > 
or what is the place of my reſt ? 

b The place ref:rred unto, 15 I\azah 66. 1 c That ihall be big e- 


= 


VN 


. Fon . _ X . 
n2vgh for one fo great as God is, 1 Kings 8. 27. 
H : by 7 p a -1! | _— | PERS: 
50 4 Aith not my ehand made all theſe rhings ? 
4 As appears ia the Hiſtory ofthe Creation, C2». r. 1. e Spoken 
vnto our capacity after the manner of men, and implies that God 
is r00 great, toſtacd in n-e4 of Temples or PHcrings ; and that 


33 Then Vol, FE. 


od [1 } WE 
CHILES | xe 


to find a tabernacle for the God of Jac:b. Clap. 13322. 


72 
x M- 


Dt 
4; 


« _- nt 


fs - *Y 
T5" gs; 


——— 


c——_— 


- 4% 


Chap. VII. ar AGTS. Chay, 


by the witneſſes, if they had not teſtified true, iq rye 1h 
themſelves the guilt of the blood thir was ſpilt, and freed « UPon 


ſ 
= 236 . : le [Es 

y * o > 4 = . 4 »*/ y ' _s 2 
ple, who onely followed them in the Execution. þ Their Upper 


what worſhip he requirss, 15 not for his own ſake, for our righte- 
ouſneſs caanot profit him ; but for mans fake, that he mighr be exer- 
ciled in thedurics of Religion and devotion. : : , * Boo ppeie ; 
*Ex. 32.9. $51 Ye *f ftittnecked, and yg f uncircumciſed in | char they might carry, and caft down the heavier 
: | ones. : 
- . 1 - 1 - 7 p l olt . #3 
I(aAs. + heart, aid þ ears, JE do always relift the holy : Gh 59 And they ſtoned Stephen, calling upon G,1 
F Lev.29.41. 25 vour & fathers did, fo do ye. ſaving i, Lord Jefus * receive my & ſpirit, a, 
Jer. 4 4.X 6. fA metaphor taken from heifers that are unaccuſtomea unto the yoke, | 19) SG 2 4s —_—_ ar” Pte * pr. 
to. & ©. 276. 7. . : my we XC Ws <IOR i Stephen called upon him whom he ſaw ftandins and t! "© 
ano Such as had Nill depraved aff:&tions, which they ought to have ah « _ "@HUNzS, ANd that was 
8g SUCH a! G } EET | "hs SIO our Saviour. & Or my Sod; Thus our Saviour com OO 
put away rather thin the foreskin of their fl-ſh; for they were Cine 8 bis Sadtes BR. II. 66. and.oh; mended his 
commanded to circumciſe their hearts, Deut 10. 16. which alto God a rang = rY d comfi BY himi; ok "_y eqs Dilciple It. 
promiled to do for his people, Deur, 30 6. And St. Paul was not Coy redbryan 4 hae ins = els f1 F "; tat tt be ſure bij; 
the firſt who ſpake of a twofold circumciſion, Rem: 2. 28, 29. but | 2007 MONC De Pale, WHAMOCYEL BECAME ON HIS ody. : 
6o And he / kneeled down, and cried with a 1q,, 


God looked always to the inward and Spiritual part of his own | | 
O:dinances, and mens obſervance of them : 4+ Such as were not ſo | voice, Lord, Nt lay nat this ſin to their charge. Ar 


much 4 willing ro hear, and know thir duty. # Speaking by bis | (hen he had (aid rhis, he » fell aſleep. 
Prophets and Miniſters, and exhorting to true and ferious piety ; / A poſture uſed in moſt earneſt Prayers; and iffo, he P..... 
by this St. Stephen would abate their glorying 1n circumciſion, | ge earneſtly for hisenemies, as tor him{elF; Ro, eas 
which they ſo much boaſted of. & Thus the Prophet Exekzcl, 6. | them kneeling, and: for himlſzIt flanding. = Do ner wes. or 
44. unto which may be bcre alluded, as is rhe mother, Jo 15 toe reckon or impure ir, that it may not reinain againſt FR 2 
daugh;er. hinder their Convertion ; This our Saviour commanded, Mat. ® 
$2 Which of the Prophers have not your / fathers this he praiſed, Luke 23. 34 And whoſoever can thus pray fir 


periecured ? And they have flain them which ſhewed | his enemies, and do good for evil, hath a great evidence thar the Opt. 
rit of Chriſt is in him. » He died; his Death being thys expretſ4 


RP A . > 7 

* Ch. 3. 14. before of the comitg of the ” Juſt One, of whom ye io-thar, ' x. fe died ques enee Gillen into « fete, 2 
have been now 7 the TRY ersand F murderers of his certain hope of the Reſurr-Eion. 3. As ealily to ate 

7 This is the rather (aid ro ſtain all their glory from ſucceſſion, again by Faith, as one that {ſleeps is ro be awaked by us. 4 "5 

and their Anceſtors, Mat?. 5. 12. and 23. 31,37. MM Our Iaviour ordinary Hebraiſm to expreſs Death by flezeep; which m:de 6 

deſervedly, and by way of eminence 1s ſo called ; as nor onely be- | 2.142 5 among'!t them, with whom it was frequently Wes 

ing himſelf 7, and fulfiling all righteouſneſs ; bur being the Lord prelizd. | wa 

CS AF. YI, 


our righteouſneſs, Jer 23.6 and 1» of God made unto us, 3;/dom, 
Righteouſneſs, Sanfification, and Redemption, 1 Cor. 1. 30. This 
word is uted in a forenfick lene, and 1s the fame with /zwocent, and | Th, Church at Jeruſalem being perſecuted, 7 ſcattered abroad: Stephen 
oppoſite to guilty ; whereby St. me Ep Ren vindicates our Saviour, not- buried with great Lamentacion, :32. Saul eroubleth and impriſmuck 
withſtanding the ugjuſt {nrence patled bye upon him. zIn hiring ſome of the Church, 3, 4. Philip Preacheth at Samaiia, and ws. 
Judas. 0 Ia that they excited Pilate to es emn him, and aberred | 7,,y, Miracles, to the joy of the people, 5—8. Simon, who with þ. 
Sm the Souldicrs and others, IN EXECuring OL MM. * : Sorcery had bewitchea the people, believeth, and with many #ther: i 
Ex. 20. 1. 53 E PRES nn law by the [4 diſpoſition ons js —— "04, Fan _ hands upon thim, 
of angeis. a ave q not Kept z7. they recerve the holy Ghoſt, I,q—17. imon off cre? micney to bay 
P Or. Mimtery of Argels : The commandments were publiſhed | the {ike Power, 18, 19. but Peter ſeverely reproveth hm far = 
from then. Minitterially, or the Son of GuJ, (called an Angel ver. | -ypocrifie, and exhorteth him to repentance, 20-—-23. be defreth 
35.) accompanied with the Militia of Heaven, ( for *cis a Military Peter ra pray for him, 24. The Apoſtles returning to Jeruſilem, 
Metaphor) did in the midſt oi that glorious retinue give the Law, | Preach the Gefpel to _ CO, 25- The Lord ſending Piyliy - 
Deut. 33. 2. Pſal. 68.8. Gal. 3. 13, 19. q They tranſgrefſed the | to Gaza, he meeteth an Emuch of Ethiopia reading Ila. 5, -. 
Law, though ſo gloriouſly delivered by Angels, and therefore it | and preacheth Jeſus unto him, 26 35. he is baptized, $6, 
was no wonder it they _ the Goſpel, that was publiſhed by ſo | Philip ſeparared from him by an Angel, and found at Ao, 
mean and contemptible Miniſters. 39, 40. 
54 © When they heard theſe things, they were » cut | 1 A Nd Saul was conſenting unto his death. And 
to the heart, and s they gnaſhed on him with 7hezr 4 at that. time there was a 6 great perſecution 
teeth. againſt the church which was at Jeruſalem, and * they «1 


See Chap 5.33. 1 They wereangry to madneſs. s Gnaſhingof | were c all fcattered abroad throughout the regions of 


teeth is the curſeof the damned, Mat. : ba. Wich you BY _ {ins | Tudea and Samaria 4, except the apoſtles. 

- 4550p - ; = TE TR IO OT DF 2 AT: Bang, would _ a Well-pleafed with it, (as the word implies) and did approve it 

they have endure ! ie m ; | 1a thought, word, and deed, AFs 22, 4, 20. which ishere noted inthe 
55 But he ; being full of the holy Ghoſt, looked up beginmag the narrative concerning this Great Apoſtle,that we might 

ſtedtaſtly intro heaven, and ſaw the » glory of Ge, | conſider 5:& ££ £72,whata great change the grace of Cod did make ; 

and w Jeſus x ſtanding on the right hand of God, which was by him, and is by us the more to be acknowledged and 
t Filled with grace ſuirable fo his preſent rryal and ſuffering. magnified. 6 Nor as heretofore againſt the Apoſtles onely ; but 


* _, as . . 's y J x I 3 > » ? Wn . F - 
The glorious God, or ſo much of the Throne and glory of God | 29 It was againſt the uw hoje Church. c The mulritudeof belie- 
vers, at leaſt as any as could flce; which was allowed, or ratkr 


as Mortal eyes are capable for to fee; w being Juftified by God, tho' we . - 
condemned by Pilate : x and ſtanding ready to affilt and comfort aj] | <2Mmanded, Mate. io. 23, when they were perſecurcd in one City 
that ſhould ſuffer for his ſake. | = 5p whe" path y ws. my as were —_ amongſt _ 
* Mar. 3.16. 56 Andlaid, Behold 7, I fee * the heavens opened, | |, 0*9<<* 05 Ap m_— 4+ 24 grage arabigerer's 
and z the Son of man ſtanding on the right hand of | cle + 7 nu ae Pane Fe faolpe inal Places whither the 
anda tz the Don © a g O Ignt Nand Or | came ; fo that what was intended for the hinderance, God didover- 
God. rue towards the furtherance of the Goſpel : as he did afterwards 
» God not ſuffering any Ciſtance to hinder this refreſhing ſight, | PF. r. 12. and ſtill does, and ever will do. d Who were com- 
z 50 Chriſt is frequently called; and Sr S:-phen would by this manded to ſlay at Jeruſalem, Chap 1. $. there they were to make their 
inform them, how vain they were in ſtriving againſt Chriſt or his | beginning, Luke 24. 47. and trom thence to proceed unto other 
t; ath. a As an Auvvcate, Soldier, or Captain for Stephcn ; - or as | Parts, 4/a. 2, 3. and whileſt Cod had any work for them to 10 W 
one ſhewing the prize unto him, which ha was now running for, | Jeruſalem, they knew that God could and would defend and wan: 
and had need to be incouraged with the ſight of : But it {ſeems | fain th-m in the midſt of their enemies : as he had done the oub 11 
ſtrange, that St. Stephen ſhould teil the Zews of this Heavenly vi- | fhe fire, Exod. 3. 3. 
ſton, being zhey did not ſe it, alchough in the ſame place with 2 And edevout men Carried Stephen to his burial and 
him ; bur this he might do, 1. Our of his ardent love to Chriſt, | * made great lamentaticn over him 
defiringto magnific him, 2. To invite his enemies to Repentance ; | , jr Was an argument that they were devout ( Religious ) inde:d, 28 
now Heaven was opened, and Chrifts arms were ſtretched out to re- hat they d _ age Ms, Phe wee” orc 5 dfurouw 
ve them. 3. Tolbinder any foal being afraid:ro own Chrig. | ©. ey ur!t amongſt ſuch a multitude of perſecucors, and fur 0 
md hid fry” wa To 46x * i; £9": TIT —_ ft "Re » | Zealots, own their eſteem for St. Stephen; Ir was piacular among! 

i Goubno hes - Fo ping Ar Ong mem, | the Fews, to rouch the dead Corps of tuch an one as was put to Death 
wy ihewing them taeir judge, and minding them of his IVENGCr. | for biafobomow my - > 2 bite him, as 
[ | ; lg op ©4647 > "Hat®-10- Mg or blaſphemy ;, and theſe perform ſuch Fungal rites for him, 

5. Ihat he might atizit himſc!f ro be an eye-witnels of Chriſts be- | @Q... P34 a} 26-0 2 
: A 2 gry” ho 2d hilt be ade tach di were utcd for fuch onely as were of note and Eminency. As t 
* « Woo; 44341! 31 OM [NC ugtd, WINCH TReyY INauUe luch MInculty to Jews were Wont to do at the Funeral, eſpecially of Eminent perlons$; 

3 —"_ "2 LW ha. =—_ thus 1t was done at 7acod's Interrment, Gen. 5. u/t. and thus had been 

Wi ! a they o cried oOuc with a loud VOICE, and done more larely act Lazarus's Funeral, Torn 5M evVel by Our SAVIOUT 

c ſtopped thor cars, and 4 ran Upon him with one ac- | himſelf, wer 25. Which Jamenrtation wes the greater, becauſe of 
Cort. the Churches 10h ar luch a time. h 

6 The rabble, or mut'tude. c That they might ſhew the grear 3 As for Saw] f * temade havock of the churci, * 0 
dereſtation of what was faid, and might nor contratt any guilt from entring g Into every houſe,and h haling men and women / þ 
it a This violence an,tury was both againſt the Law of God,and the committed them to prifon 
Law of che Land ; and the number of Zealors, (there were ſome a- ; by . ._ 5, and Gi 
moneſt thit pzople eminent!y © " } Saul was a degree beyond the ordinary ſort of perſecutors, ® 
mong ir p-op!e eminent:y to called) provoked the Romans to de- was, as hedoes ack jad f himſelf ently injurious, 1.757 
ſtroy both City and Tempte; ng na ny wor i097 ge nin OS A bs -— hairof their 

F _ : # pF . l » - £ LiOUIe uiter nhoule ArINT NONE. $ , 

1 Kin. 2. $5$ And e* caſt him out of the city, and f ſtoned him: | head:. © ; This to be ture emi ay er retained power from the 
oY and t the g witneſſes laid þ dow ir Cloth | hs "aſap he riches 
Luk. 4. 29. - | 4 s laldl > down their clothes ata young | Romans to do : All thisis but as a foil, to illuſtrate more tf 
+ Ch 22 wi mais feet, whoſe name was Saul. of Gods mercy towards Sazl. ye 

. *#& Vs . - E 4 * 4 
£ Thar rhe City might not be polluted with his blaſphemy. 4 Therefore they chat were ſcattered abroad, went x, 
7 of paniſhment was appointed for fuch as ſeduced themto the | & every where preaching the word. Ci 
—_ 'p 40 ao Gods, Derz. 13.6, ic, and though all power of | þ Now the partition-wall was abour co be b 
F4 7 þ nay OY boon _ m_ them, ay ew themſelves con- | the Gentiles ro be taken into the pale of rh Chur 
£ Who were by the Law to caſt thetic on ge arrempr 7 | this firange means rowards it. The Diſcip'ss are forced ro If 
Call TA& UE LONE, Deut. 17. 7. WAETEs | their lives out of Feruſalem, and have an opporrenity 09 Chriſt 


& (7 


1 
roken down, 9 
ch; God provides 
fy to! 


_ 


vofWtop. VIE 
TIP: [II Ms 
p "Mp X | 3.4 d 
Chriſt and "a 3 a wt $f 
ny 4 Je Goſ el © A pq F £4208 x $f 
r tight to come Out Fe 9-96" they came : th 4 C T 5 Wy 146: 
- 4 Tents of Sem Gen. * r nels, and | ” i tnus God x o P '- #t \Þ is y 
Then / P pe makes Faphcrn to d can make” yo W C WORN. cos 08 
| hip went dow well ia the | © 3 WwW ty when I DAR ly bo "MW | ii ki 
1 and preached Chrj ntoth s tOr the 7:8 the -2 2433 p| BIN. af 
z Chriſt ut ne mcty of : 12M thar they mi y were C s Al: MA FOIL 
*P { Not the Apoſtte, | Ito them y of Samaria m Peter and 3. 18y Might s re Come dow F —_ ty nba iy 
"Jl les rema! (90h DUt the Deac * 2 | tha tor and Fohn : gUT 9 TECCIVE th Own, Pra} ad - Soak H4..4f 
15 ans ained at Feruſale 42 eacon of tl:; lf believed 2: 23 Inthi | 8 CE THC ho! : Ct md wk 72 F: 481 bo 
is a City, nd 2 Countre lem, as Ver. 1. m that name : for the A o Thoſe ex ma amongtt wi this parti=ular the 21) Tie Ctt tetel Woh" 
\ : rey . , S7 . OM >: | STr20ra?! it whom the + als aev 4: i D 1Þ94 ? 
I 24. here'tis taken f y, fo caikd fro 9AFMATLG 15 2 Nt po- | Miracle ron; 5h Ter? wer? {ve he did ncr pri7 for all {4 3 $4 
en for that C n1 the chief C: 14me both oft | es. Oe. Se Ch rs of Tong [everal we 7 tor all "R, * 
A Ade DoErine of Chriſt 7 or at leaſt a _ Ciry, I Kings 16 16 For ”R ws C24. IC ongues, of Pi onhefs Nena.” Vir 12 4 | 
2 . i © 4 1 Sy ""E BY L Ny —” 'Y OS YING NA 7 l Wa bt : 
_ an groriOu: Dolrratiic miraculous Bir "a thar Countrey onely they . FO of jing, of working Welty 
; \nd rhe peoplic v 10 2215 Na , together watt , ized 2 13 the 7 Nons of then SPLEN | 
(1 : 0 me 2Cr wWItn hs { W499» (FOpevn : 4 3-54 Hooks _ V'! p 
yy choſe rhings 4.x 5 roy one _— _ FS..s By which it is plaia tf v name of the Pane * Ch. 19. 2, TIA (+ 
—=— 1p fÞ; " gaveh aving grace, 1s PraNFINu hs tor: lance : 621.00 b 
ed Ayer” _m_ he did P I ake, hearing p and _— unto in 414 iy on w_ neant. Go A Ghot, a5th Wh $ 4 
or A good preparati : <eing tl xftowe , for faith 1s the Yr lo b2 was pe he Avthor co AY 6 SN 
A cometh by rad paration towards thei g [11G ——_ d upon ther pt y the gifr of God S fallen upon 2] oþ C: "f ball bs \ 
Y evidences Of tl 7» Rom. 10. 17. Thef Converſion : ſee! ſens i ned, Chap. 2. 2 S the author ; bur he w: ji Fain I&Þ;; bl | 
to ey EE the truth he ſpake : 2 Theſe Miracles ; leeing fair, y and committion 7 8. q 1. They w rc ian tame P: 1; UNH: 
" rity for V har he (aid Þ4 & & - by which | _ were as {o - - | unrno 2nd THHION Mat 5>8 9 F were bane a: ramnary Wee. np . i #7 
. i 1e lt: : Jan &.0 _ ire uni # 2h N 2 dly P « Fi_Led Ev . Su * 4 : 
for 7 For uncl 33 - » ewed Gods : Y Jfus Chri , ited with a1 JY i) bapt it p; iis aurito $21) 
pt- out of Many _ ſpirits 4,crying = Aurtho- 17 TH, SY m, Rem. CG. 3, pos they now b: om +0 , 
= y ig Witil © "Nr my are banti a, THIN | |: | 
k4 taken 1 WI at Were pcoliclied 2; 1 a loud voice,c: receive nr *laid they re; } are baptized into Wt | theft 
ul f with palties, at ied 2-11 them: came eived the hnly Gho mer hands L - | be OIOY 
by This is frequently «Fans chac were lam : 2nd many | ed "ON this layin 'F 3hoſt. | ON nem and th [I "I 
2 - 4 10 n S i CU Ker Fan by ou ON 5 COIL Ly L "74 't l 4s; 
all = " —_ 8. =_ 4.41. —_ Mat. 8. 9 , = healed. a Fo any Tm hand: of the Apoft :S, * Ch £4 £ +Þ 4; | 
I 9 1 ept f1 10w loatl rb 1.26. and | W1 , leems evid ne 1C Apolt' Ci (Hes tras ro * & $5.5 _ 4; 
Y” rhey are called « rom torm . ath theſe evi a" an vith to ent from t! es did conf; ROLL inten > 5 w 8418.7 Þ 
oy : ucl:an Spiri enting and evil Soirits ar rongues, the contex onfrm for f. 10, 6 "Top } ! 
ſhgare men Fl . z Spirits be . N deſtro 4 | 1tS are Book ny b and worki Page ext. s T! 6 T-,0r _ > Wo $1 49H '£ 
: c nto It, ww > a, ecaule the - yinNg of us : %\ iSlo ofte ſ, ng ot Mir: ' Ie rower S oc '817 EY: q ack + 
Soul; r And , Which 1s Spirt y delight 1n 11 - and | 18 A ten ſpoken of in thi toc --- whic wer of ſy=2; OR 
Gu other dit - Spiritual ul ] in 110 and p nd wh} . 11 fs 2CCC2y hs V Uuch thr RS” Poa dg pl 1-54 ;& 
Mark 16. 1G, 1 ifeaſes and inti nc eannelſs » andin-]2A AN» 1en Sim , CCCeption. 1OUZNOUt Kat + 38" 
. 1O, T7. that a 2 infirmites ; " and dcehile poittes 3nd 20N faw th: Ka C CNL 141 t Is 
. "ame, or by his pow they which be): S$- this was the SF hands, the 7 ho!: at throut lavin: I Oh. M | 
” 3 And there was ave Hoald core. IONS: em money ES war aiven, has: ofthe W508 
wy wass great jov | cure in Chriſt | - 7 Thoſe ext ' given, he « otfere | Ms 
rhe Babes + _— for the =O Jy nz that City | viſibly wi ny gifts bf z, ti 24 oftered | | 
' fs or the word of 'rought upo : | | Gods " 4 udiv'y; and lui INTE mentioned [1's 
vr cheir Souls ; Joy 1 reconciliation, : n their bodies ; | OE ES makes v ! by this indec w ge, for thi lr ; 
wa Jom of God of Sy the Holy Ghoſt, and Satrnckbes-this Ba apa | _—_ thels rd by be = 2 pt the Ms apptarecd TY 
Vs he for : 9 iT , 15 one of the eff: ched unto | WR and Sc irir ard gifrs : how $ # This notori great change "3 
Tit the formerly beloved Ci he defpil; -&s of che Ki d Spiritual g11ts £<15 1Nuch more ious Hypocrit 7 k 
ftran + of 4 e City of 7 Þ: ed Samar py - King- | I'9 SUVviny A +of God £ nore valuab! : YPOcrice TS! "its 
* by 1245 a rerations do : - eruſalem ; v2 14 rejo 'C | £ b 4 = PE. (31V > a _-_ IC are ai . : if 
$ does the free , repine at th DyCe, and evert Tay tamcte e MC aiſc thi IC 11 - ; 
meth 9 Bur there wa ee grace of God e Golpel ; ſuch | lay hands, þ; 2 £1S POW 
. <4 » hy y 4 ” (> usgS 0 - y »4 5 = w.4 ” + Fa, 
em, 45, before time IN —p Certain man Called $; 0; Eg 11 "= We» the _ on whomſo- 
ulip - witched the le e's city * uſed #« ſorce imon, which *) Boa © he might ne nes = 1 y Ghoft. 
4 2 - O + NERO... er . ©) WV protcilkzd oy TY IJ! tix Or US JYLITAC es. | oC 
: Was Y fome alnaril "IM. VE and x þ and ainbiiu _ by 111117) , Or conhrm tt Ie did not 
=35, "me great one » BIvINg ou >, lakes. os hoes al bur out of an ir the rrurhs of <a 
4 Ma 'F- . t that h had dons beyond c<eep up his r : of an infatiab! of the Go- 
otus, gica: inchantm Imfelt bevedrhachis 11S TepUtari table deſire » 
an extaſie to be entS, a5a Wizar  20Bur| hat he Was abl ion ; fleeing | re of gain 
amaze zzard 2 & dey alprp - hore TOM 
\nd _ or at leaſt had = and afraid of Oe them as men in thee, a faiu_ unto him , w_ Apoſtles 
. . q (oy : : 
ON wa er hom i] aowee Ga __ with him = Mn been | 2Y be purchaſ we haſt's Wag es periſh wich 
: n bl - . P Fees. . Jia Lol 8 [ 
hey *( him, inſcrib' 3 A ning that wars Pay rnmns” Hiſtorie: _ : » Aformal —_—_ with money © taat ch8 giftot God 
Ml imon the hol a Statue { « ſpeak | 2P99 54m .£Xecration or curk : *M 
1s of to To wh oly God e ſet upatR b on himſclt; e, Nv Mat. ic *2 
- 0 re b . tone:) . » LO. >, 
the or om they all ga me tor | pented. zOur h : bur always to be y on liis money | 
greateſt, ſay1 gave heed z ' be exceedins (i carts are condition: ey, bur aſc 
wen 00, , This @ man 1 the leaſt t | foill rake: g lintul, as here, whi ched over ; our tho. ualeſs h2 
nthe : Shewi is the great o' a7 ” , which made his w our thoughts m . 
migit dition is phos. how general their mi power of | b 1 Thon haſt neich ords or dclire; we 
ne the grace —_—— ro CA er was, and | vo __ is Not riaheds = nor lot in this | 
d and himſe! "oy "Fi fi iſtakes, 1 8 no. conm- | 5 ok. 0 Inheri the fi: m3 ; 
gs — be that God, rag of this - _— prevented by | in the pe ang or thare 2 flack fight of God. cer : for 
belies Gintile t he was the Mc any Nation | , That he gave ou | Lite which w DE conterrin , faing as thi ; 
- imtiles. 1c Mcſſias of the Fe eld to be the chi ok. i to be a oy each ſy A the Holy Ghoſt s. towit. cab 
ratt P 'S| At Ws, and li (87 C ww] y » * VIE: ter . as 1 no EE . 54; b or in [ : , et {4% 
a1 1d to hi the God 5 . Spirits, which 1 of it. 6 T part in . that <re: n: 
 Uiy | 0 him b.che of the | s, which 1s a he Apolt Ir, neith? e: nal 
t time he h; they had ; E | exdctud 11C1 1$ mentioned poftle had rhe gif 2r art thon £ 
them, ad c bewit regard, be > Aa che tore "+ 1 Cor. 12 12 gift of diſcerni —_— 
, and | bThey acquiet* 1:ched them 4 wi becauſe thatof lo pture, 2 7:2 aregoing verſe, and ii 10. which mig cerning gt 
z al it- iefced in w! with forceri ng 'F i 7» » and 1a diver ihr caute ih 
- they h not attending one] o = he ſaid, and yi —_—— bod 22 c Revenc th ivers other place = (he 
. earts : fo rrue 1 o his w 2 "IC : CE : there 1aces of Scri 
bow —_— 1s that © hv with hots = — unto =_ God, if pcrha crc of this thy wick 10G 
"Wards, - in his ow ur Savio "8 , butwith l 2; forgiv crayls che t] y WIC dnelc 
riſz vp in 1 1 name, ki | ur ſays, 7o/ ca Tae given th : e trhouz2he of chi edneſs 
e Come p 10 judgme SP Who 91M will ye rFeces » Jon 5. . | k 100, O t of chin p and { 
or was aid by Ch: nt againſt m ceirve. Theſe S 43- It any | c The one! e heart ; 
6 1heit : y Chriſt oft men, wl e Samarita | This i nely remedy may b | £\ 
: of their wi :iſt, and ſuch ITY who do not t ns ſhall is is a zedy and OT & | 
—_ "yy ha my —_ not ater von ſent. c -_ _ what ſhould Red's ey as ut N were nocrwile) deſpe | 
Kon he did o WONACLS a5b . nc ves. and c ] em 45 our true R : wk ON . ut w! YU 3 wherh rate caſa : A 
| maine & C19, } the permiſl] ould nor a& thc} . : \CPENtance RS ; hether Sz tner frue rene mo” 4 | $ 
a ion of God CT NCI TEA- pardo., and fo — congition mon Magus re Pentance 
oulh 11 2» Bur eaten oh , and Satans power It. 4 forgivencls; but ergo? which God mamas wer? $i 
y C , . By 1S . : ropol- by 1% 1 
:/and wks f concerning - believed Philip 23 Eor 1 "erc ar from being 6-503" ey B37 ts A 
i , = Py 7 Y - . FTC , jy 2 Y 01H Wn; | 
_ fel.-s Chriſt S kingdom of G 4 preaching the neſs, and iz the cive that thou art i ule of WIT: el. 
ind 1% any , they were baptized y=- and theme! ww 3 nl bond of iniquity in the 4 gallof bitte "4 oh 
1Nd&c0, 2.0 x - #2. ns ith a7 . F - _ 
fur 0us ang they were bapti oth men and z _ i rh nan Mais Der. 29. 18 6 "6 
j venant; the )aptized s « ſuch as man ad confſtirutic 25.29. 18.0r gall I 171% 
mongl their ['ai mou muſt fit oo being adult and ſt | any Cres ara be compare rution, and difpofi gall and bitter. TRA; 12418 
aith in Chr: evide ” 4 ranger arure hÞc! Pal 4 B ipoliro : T1288 
= of Grace i Jo 2nd reli me their rights unto i oersfrom the naltefbith ich corrupted. A _ renee - we! ” of Soul or uh 9 2587 
1M, 3 fame } 4 Go the Kin 2 their Converſi ir. and profel: | f bitternel5, 18 y<r 0 n or $:z , wich the gal! p fe Ot DIG 
e. being gdon OY verlion fT " PFO ſo MM 3 as fe "i Yet woriz th imon Moo e gall of FRF 3. 19 
As the eW Ying begun | gdom of his Gl : he Kingd ee OE born in ti : than to have {agus to be «bf PLoe 
v OINe Were * ory +; . iINPUO Mail WW _ It 331 41 Ss W1UaVe tne OD & 1 > A048 | bs 
perlon$; Pope under the »* Fhry a is one ” _ I C—_ Tohu'9. 34 ws , aich the Ro ry: - YO | all ; 
2d been ara MEn pel are as caP: Jeaven hereaf 2 had ſinfrom his birth i CnOtes MOTC 1 ces upbraided ths "Ip" bike © 6 
ag K pable of thi wereafrer | 2pm in inigqui is birch in bi c intended rt! tn blind We” if 2Þ 
Saviour I? The - this ſeal of c| Sg N inianity im ; thu ac chereby, tha of ne, F 
A n Sim = cne Co- Paul ly: un ; 4 A. : Pal. SI < . $ Dalit he TOR. + OL an thr {x00 1 
a 4 n mo ke 1-1ft b x « J© a - eWwa / wY TILES tr" 
cauſe of he was ba: . ON himſelf h b " "Y 9. T Ws troowH, of h-inad nd thus may thoſ Is, That he wa; 's +1 b p 
6 red, bel prized, he ;contin Fats ed alſo : and when | 7; hivaltc hows, (3i ant the fleſh, and © fe expreſſions of Sr RT RIE ik 
2; HTed, DEno;dIn; ved with Philip, when | ine ns ES anew ar; Par emerge WW" ARE I] 
hurch,*C at don INJ the þ , it Phi] ' not : rrer and of ible or out: ve ſpirit R AF. it 
©, © t miracl nlp, and w poiſon fo deadly 4. poifonous thi utward thing could Norm. , Hoa: 6 094 
omen / & . es and i19 — ON- | dezter him f _ tirher tO ets, ſin 15 —M could thew VIE iN \ 2:1 "od 
" —_ believed with an Hi igns which were [1 Set, das __ judgient Sr. Rake NG 00 "Mak 1 j4 4 
xs, and but his vaviour had ee Hiſtorical Faith, that 1 fin 1; Wes Tris re2d of th? =_ us fin ir fe1E = chrearned 7o [8 Cj 
ID 1 Tim heve eng be ſure orgy and did * rue. | © is with anoiner ; be — INIQUity oo. ah D2 Fatt; er MEB+! 6 | 
R Fa a R is hear ea all th ” UE rom th | , : "0 AS powerfnily 3 $244 oO e ſevercd #0 JHA J 9 6. (). X bv $0 
rof thei Chriſt which ; 7, or » e while ; . e dead ; 3.4.3 H- ae & ercd or Diok ne , 4: 
o , Which or pur ole . ; neith , 1660) cantw F token, and ett {5 
he riche5 us the M, the forw: pt him conſt aw of|h . {GP ne, tha » GU NRIG af i $4 
| finger of G Magici ardeſt of tl nſtantly co ave ſpok , thar none of rhe j, Pray ye g&. 27 
ro ans of : he Profeflors mpan en, Come up! th : V Veto F | EY 
| went I OY Exod. 8 gg wn wed og of Chr ale wry So _— upon me. oe things vw hicn Ve , Nur © v -F 
) TY * 19. a;tnOoU : cknowle es had fp: "7 IN VINCE YE 21. 7 T IRE 
4Now wh gh their he: wledge th ad ſpake} nced, that h : 7, WW 
eard en the arts were hard ae | (rod, he nm ro be - and Ie Was indeed WF: - 44 
tha apoſtles : ardned \ he detires thi ; and know ed ſuch «48 
- Ee bo » * . ITC5S wc Wl a as 7 #4 / 
UN, 4s ſent unto O_— had receiv —_— were at Jeruſalem pi VC IE _—_— them. f the _=_ - he —_— = 141 IVE 
provides ! em / Perer Ed tne WO and probably, feari fied with tl <ipns himſelf > JT PREY 
ro fy #7 EI ſent _ and John rd of God, they beta} him ; gr ing the uni threatning 07 57. oo be a true we RES 
O Preacn l; Philip had P thar they migl ; which *cis likely he nt of 4:41 and # EY; "Oo. BE wad It; 
ri vical authocir reached amon oF further confirm th 25 And they wl y he had heard of. nd Szpphire ks WRT 5: ib 
1urch in $47.4 os , and by Apo- h da G14 re tifhed and 1k Fs Fe 
a. po- |the goſpel in m , Teturned to Jeruſal 1 preached the i*.4 ol 
g. Not onely "ny villages of the \ alem and preac 8.14 als 
} In the his Ko, ks $47 =+ \ 2; me a" Go 12d j Bs; | 4 ns of 
C it Cit ' b R Var1ywans | 4 , 
ity, bur in the {m1 opts "FX 4 a2 
Malleſt Villages,” thee Wow ha. 4 #. 
fic) SI0T | a +, 
x; 83 7 


4 
——_—— 


= 


p — avt _— OE 7 ac... 
$. %.. fag — p 


"PIC Rce 7 


- —_ 
"$4.4 


44 " 
=; Loan 


The 
ore: Anollles ſpend their pains; for fo it was promiſed unto them £ 
that they lhou'-! recen e power to do, Chap, 1. 8. | | 

C " Ip || i \ Fe Wwe ILY : 
25 And the angel of the Lord ſpake unto Phiiip, | $ 
aving, Arie and 50 roward the ſouch unto the way 


[ 


hut gacih down from Jeruſaiem unto Gaza 6, whici! 


of xo Gaza's, one diſtinzuiſhed from the other, 
"ar/ert bur rather there were two ways nnto one 
7, ant tat It was not the City, bur the way unto 
«hich is called detert 3 by which diffcrence here mentioned, rhe 


- 


agel admoniies 7/:5p, not to go the ordinary road ; bur th- 


FO.On . 4 2 A As B95, Wb 
nore 2nG{ual rowu over the Niountains, which was rarely fra\ elled f 


; bot wasnow neceilary robe gone in to meer with the Eunuch: 
30. 


Erhiopia,an eunuch & of gre:taurhority under / Candace 
Giieen of the Erhiopians, who had the charge ofall her 


ACTS 


Qtions, (a5 for us, 2 Cov. 4 17.) ls becoming obzdient wn: 1 


ſtion( God fo ordering it ) brings 1 the ditcoute comer, 
Swiour, f This the kunuch ight well make a Queliton, ber ' 
'aiah Iimielf fuffered mvch under Maus/ 


eath, vas the cauite way he was fo highiy exalted, _ 

24 And the eunuch anſwered Philip, andiaid, I pra 
) ens ; | 10 

hee e of whom ſpeaketh the Cropher this ? f of hinj!; 


il; 
«Lit, 


or ſome other man ? 


e The modeſtly inquilitive man does get underſtanding ; thi, qne- 
DT 


, 
i 


EF 


way 


he 4 ſame ſcripture, and preached unty Lim : Joi; lz,s 
g So they were ſaid ro do, when they began ro ſpeck vi 4 


Z5 Then Philip g N 0xered his mouth, and began 1+ 


ellth our wandrings, and ordereth our ſteps. n weighty matter. +þ Shewing that the Prophet in thac mg 1s, 
* And he aroieard went : and behold a © z manof Propeccy, [a, $3. could not mean 1uch things of hunle!;, a; 
Ferer.y, or of any other. ;- I hings in that Prophecy are 3 
unto our blzii:d Saviour ; but to none ele, 


Ut 


Vole hy l «a 
UP walls 


36 And as they went onzbeir way, they came ung 


rrea d had * come to Jeruſalem 2 for to wor- | / 
7 and had Þ con Je E *" |k certain water : And the eunuch aid, Seeberes ware; » *r., 
CB what doth hinder me / to be baptizet! ? "2 


; The E:hiopinus were the moſt deſpicable unto the Jews ; and 
Homer Calis them, + 0:74 arSrey ; bur God would now ſhew, that 
there is no diErencc of Nations with him ; bur in every Nation, he 
that worketh righteouſneis, ſhall be accepted, Chap. 10. 35. &In 
vieat cfteem 1n Courts, eſpecially to attend on Queens, to avoid all il 
ſuſpicion; here that prophecy was fulfilled, 7/a. 56. 4, 5 Though 
both in the Hrbrew, and (anciently) in the Gree# tongue, an Eunygh 
ſignified more largely, vis. any attendant in the Chamber. 1A 
nzme comnon to the Queens of that Countrey ; as all the Kings of 


Be:hſora, or a River called Elea:heru, which in that road mi 


- 
: 
4 

= 


k This water 1s ſuppoſed to be a Fountain in a Town cath 


ieeds be pail:d over ; it being otherwiſe very dry, and wyter ye 
carce there, | Although 10 was not expreliy mentioned, Pi; 
1d informed this Eunuch concerning baptiſm, its narure, an 


4 
194. 
UL, 


which made him expreſs tuch delice afrer it ; which elle he hd no; 
done. 


37 And Philip faid, If thou believeſt 72 with all thin; 


Ezyp:t were called Pharach's, and the Emperors of Germany are Called hearr, thon mayeſt, And he anſwered 360 ſaid, nv, 
Colors. wm heing a Profelyte, he had been to worſhip God 1n that believe that Jeſus Chriſt is the Son of God. la | 


tol:mn F<ſtival of rhe Patlover. 


28 Was returning, and fiiting in his chariot, zread though we can diſcern no other, yet God can, arftl will not bs mart. 0%. 
ed ; Philip in Gods name? requires a faith with all the heart, ang nx 11+ 


L-ſaias the prophet. 


He had ſome knowledge of the true God, whom he came to j ſuch as $:407 Mage had, who is ſaid to believe, and be baptizig, v1 & 


worſhip, 2nd he endeavours after more ; and to him that thus 


bath, ſhell be given : and they that thus ſeck, ſhall find ; God will | rightly underſtood : The Eunuch was inſtructed concerning (jo 
our of the Law, and was one of them that waited for his Salvacign. 


which here he acknowledgeth to be onely found in Chriſt, whoy 1 
owns to be the Meſſiah, who made his Soul an off:ring tor (in, :;, 


rather waik a Miracle, than that any that ſincerely deſire, and 


=o? "okr endeavour to know him, or his will, ſhould be dilap- 
Pointed. 

29 o Then the ſpirit ſaid unto Philip, p Go near, and 
q jovn thy [elf to this charior. 

o The Spirit, either by the Miniſtery of an Angel, as ver. 26. 
or by infp:ration 1n1mediately by himielf. p So near that you may 
ſpeak with him that fits in it. 9 Stick cloſe unto it, and leave it 
nor, 

zo And Philip r ran thither to him, and heard him s 
read the Prophet Efaias, and faid ;, Underſtandelſt thou 
whatthou readelt ? 

r Haſliiy to obzy the Divine command, and coveting to gain a 


o "oY Co 
Soul: $s with 


» A verbal profeſſion is not a ſufficient beli:ving, Rez, z 5, _” 


- 


13. 2 This was the onely thing neceſfary, either thenor ng, i 


vt 


53. 10. and did bear our griefs, and carried our jorrows, 727.4 


and was wounded for our tranſgreſſions, 1/2. 53. for all theſe t!;ys; 


Philip had told him were meant of our Saviour, which he 41 tx. 
lieve vere fo to be underſtood. 

33 And he commanded the chariot to ſtand ſtill : in; 
they went down botho intothe water, both Philip a;4 
the eunuch ; and he baptized him. 

o In hot Countries this was uſual, to baptize by dipping the boy 


| in the water ; and to this the Apoſtle alludes, when he tells theG 
rinthians, 1 Cor. 6.11. that they are waſh:zd, but God will ye 
"MA PE : cy icrifice; ſprinkling being aſking 
z loud voice ; *tis like, to inftru& tome of his atten. | EY» and _ ſacr, fic Ks; _% =— effeQual a be 2 

and as ſignificant alſo, repreſenting the ſprinkling of the blocd ofth: 


Gantt, 7 Wichout underſtanding, our reading is butas the tinkling Paſchal Lamb, of which we read, Exod. 12. 3. which preſignife 
, " »A Ueb. #2 . F HV y14124 


of a Cy mbl. 


the ſprinkling the blood of Jeſus, that Lamb of God which take + 


bh. for s , T, ' WY 
31 And IC aid t, How 7 I,except ſome man ſhould way the fins of the world ; and our hearts muſt by it be ſprinkled 
gvide me ? and he delired Phibp that he would come Up, | from an evil conſcience, Hed. io. 22. Ir is not the more or the |: 


and fit with him. 

« A wonderful modeſty and hv-1'? cy in ſo great a man :he takes | 
well P/:{;p's interpoling, and queſtioning with him ; he acknow- | 
I-dacs his igmorence, and detires farther inttruction, and condelcends 
to be t2:.ghr by one fo ravch his inferior. 


0 


of the outward Element, which makes the Sacraments Nc Qual, but 
they are eft:Qtual onz]y as they are Gods appointment, an attie 
ed upon <ccording to his will, 


39 And when they were come up out of the water, 
l 


: the p Spirit of the Lord caught away Philip, chat ti; 


at x a yl a "IM, . k . . y 4 . . , 
32 i he x place of tne {cripiure which was read, was eynuch taw him no more: and he went on his Way 4 
this, He was lead asa ſheep to the ſlaughter, and like | rej yCing. 


a lamb & cumb before his ſhearer, to he opened nor his 
_ 
noutn; 


x Gods Providence 15 remarkable, thit the Eunvch ſhould be | m 


reading this very Scripture, which contains 10 fundamental truths, | him. j 
| Ln | fans 1 -Þ (C ; 1s Cha 
' fiiied, he had peace with God througa our Lord Jetus uit; 


2nd which he had moſt need for to be informed of : The words 


Eu;,uchs tight and company, that thereby the Eunuch might? ti? 


p Philip was ſuddenly, and extraordinarily taken away fromti 
zore aflurcd of the truth of thoſe things which had been taught by 
g The rejoycing was the eftect of his faith ; being now ju 


r:f-1r<d unto, arein 1/2 5;. 7. whether read in the H:brew tongue, | Rem. 5, 1. 


which the Eunuch Taight have learned of many Fews liviny in | 


40 But Philip was » feund at Azotus : and pailis 


Erriopis ; Or whether they were read out of the Tranſlation of the through, he preacned in all the Cities, till he camet 
Seventy, which was then in common uſe, is not ſo neccil:ry an in- Ceſar __ 


Guiry ; borh being ro the ſameintenr and purpole. 3 Chrift was 1n- | 
died asa jbep for his patience : | 
his own cate ; Mr efpecially he was asa ſheep, in being a Sacrifice 
for us; the true Patchai Lamb that cauſerh the deſtroyer to paſs from 
us; and yet he is our Shnerherd too, to ſupply and prelerve us, 
Pix; 23. I. 


;t 


foÞ' Nis 
e Piilijhint 


» Philip was ſet down by the Spirit at 47d of th 


Y Vo? opening Wis meuth to defend | "HW" 

YU 4647 CT en . . N , A qo { 
NS c d which is called by the Sepruagint Azotue 5 names Ot perions and 

; places, do in tract of time vary. This place had been farr.0.5 


. WS A La 
he I1G&ol D:gon, 1 Sam 5. 3. and for being a chief place: 010 


Philiftines, thoſe enerniesto Gods Church ; but when he copies, Ci 
' caſt Saran out ofhis ſtrongeſt holds: Thus Axorws is accounted tailth 


23 ins hishutm- vation his judgment wastaken away, | ns aabhe: Foes ans 
TOW 


and who fhe!} declare c his generation d for his lite is 
taken from tne earth, 

a ha our bI:ikd Swiour was in bis loweſt condition, and the 
neo degree of his exinanition ; {ks foul being made a Sacrifice | 
for us, and {u!tering © that detertion for a time, we had merited for } 
ever 3 and bn body Jaid in the grave asin a priſon; Thzn þ hs * 
2, 22778, Tac puniſh'21:a7 which was 1n{l.cted on him in our {tead, 
was 1aken amy; 108 he brake the bonds of death, and opencd the 
priion-goor : 10155 Wes foretold, although in ſomewhat differing 
apretions, by the Prophet 1aiah, 53.7,8. c Thoſe that ſhall 
hb. bronght forth by this travail ef his Soul, are innumerable, or 
his own Eternal generation ( who could do ſuch great things, as 
overcame ceath ir zelt for us ) is mexpreitible; bur by generation, 
others ( more to the ſcope of this place } underſtand Cariftts dura- 
tion. or abiding. notwithſtanding thit he died, 34vze does often | 
_—_— GUration 5 and thus *ts an ardinary expreflion with the | 

ropnet. 12129 34.10.17. from gourration 30 generation; NOW noe | 
C2 comprenend chat erernal duration of Chi iit who dizs no more, | - 
Rom. 6 9. and of wacie Kingdom there is no end, Luke 1. 33. 
&@ Chriſt acquired bis glory by his ſuffering; his very excecdirg | 
gieat Weight of g'ory, Was indced wiought for him by his atfli- 


> 


| 


| unto the þ high prieſt, 


CHAP: IX 


' Saul obtaining Letters of the High-prieſl, gocth to Damaſcus, 7 2:7 


ſecure the Diſciples of the Lord, 1, 2. By a Light from Heavin, '* 
#5 tuck to the earth : Chrift himſelf rebuketh, and jmitein hum " o 
El:naneſs for perſecuting him : ſendeth him into the city © if Fe 
thre day, 3—L— 9 The Lord ſendeth Ananias to him ; j1:9"s 
that he is a choſen Veſſel, IO i6., Ananitas panrens 277 HA 
03: his eyes ; he receiveth his fight, ts filed with the holy G89, ae 
baptized : Preacheth Chriſt to the amazement of all, ana pun 
7:70 in ſirength againſt the Jews, 17 — 22. The Council _ 
£111 him : but he eſcapeth, and goeth to Jeruſalem : The Diſciples _ 
believe not, he is @ Diſciple ; Barnabas ſhzweth how Chrils —_— 
peared ro him : he i: jext to preach to Tarſus, 23- ” ar = 
coming to Lydda, healeth Eneas. ſick of the palſre 018 - oy: 
32--—=--35. he is ſent for to Joppa, ani raiſeth [abitha fro ## 


tag 


dead : Many belirge in the Lord, 36 43: 
Nd * Saul yer « breathing out threatnings 2 - 
laughter againſt che diſciples of the Lord, wer 6! 


and £{ 


s 2 


Chay [ 


EW 
\ Unto 
told | 
tS; 
J bot 
P3Per, 
be h.4 
tink { 
tm þ 
it han 
the tr 
nor l© 
mmeg! 
Withou 


OY 


met 


ſ:fh1nh 
n> and 
045 10 


0 TO 
&S, Ca 


| chuth 


 1oper- 
wen, 
101 wil 4 
taſte! y 
ſ20173 
15 [ands 
ft, ans 
growe. 'd 
intena 9 
les cher? 
had #1 

Peter 
ht year's 
from 563 


4, wel 6: 


th, 


19. 


= 
&* 


12. 
153. from heaven, 


| 


"cher rhey Were Men or e Women, he mignt [1 Ng them / racle : but if it be underſtood ofthe voic We 
. o [S] SE 1 $3 SLLLOUYL T OI. .C {21 


X. The #C F.C 


© Luke intending 4 natrative of the wonJerful converſion of rather by ſtanding tilt, here, is onely ment. tho; led Gre 
St. Paul, lers us know what manner of perſon he was before his amazed,. thy remained in rhe places Fi EMA 4, Rn, wv Fegn 6 
converſion, that none mighe deſpond of the grace of God, who | going torward. Thus the Angel forbad £5 and hi Cond _— 
earneſtly and heartily ſeek it. a So full of rage within, that the or ſtand in the plain, Gen. HOLE ine tae chev fronid 7 i} J 
cam was ourwardly apparent, which that inward fire had ſent forth; forward. x The greater difficulty, is ©; —— ny _ ps 
nothing leſs than deſtruQtion of the Church is aimed at by its ene- | with Chop. 22. 9. where it js extretly Cid, ar rhe BE 

mies ; whileſt Saul was one of them, he hunted afrer their precious hear the voice ; but i: is there ad lcd Or tim that ſ-1%k: unto" Sa! 
lifz too. 6 Who did uſually preſide in their grear Council, in | fo that they might hzar the voice of yauf, as a 52 
which they did take COgNIZAINCC of fuch marters ; the blood of Stephen | and wonder whom he {51k unto, or what for fo Pt 74 
did not quench their thirſt, but increaſed ic ; they would fpijl more | not hearing the voice of lum that tile uno fe 

till. ; 22.9. ItiS ſaid ; and it ſeems very ':leoty he -th Rl nb i 
» And deſired of him letters to Damaſcus c to the | the voice of Chrit, for we re) Bika a: of i! Ay —_ 
\ynagogues, thar if betound any d fofthis way, whe- i 


5 


T*F 
5 


| verted ; and being [fe in their infill, ele ts I 
| fpe&ts the more undeniable witnely of » e of eh Nt 
| = of FOREST, 997 40 a 4 *- 1 : ; 'Þ in 407 D:dces, 
l n2n cre) miI1gne h-3r Nr Q+ Q:S IT h REST; :; .} * nw Fo _ 3 


Y vy b 'S & 


baund unto g Jerufalem. 
; This Council, though it fate at Jeruſalem , had a power | which that votce made ; but not hear it are ont oo), Or io 33 19 
(whether commanding or recommending) over al] the Synagogues ! underftand it, as in a paraile! cafe, Jotn it. 29. Thi my. (rig 
within or without Judcs. d This was eminently fo called, being | ro hear the. voice that fpoke 1470 Chrift © Goa Heaton, he oh 
the way of God, and the way oft Life, and tire onely right and | hard ir {© contaſzely, as ther they thr whe ir 144 onety L _ | 

true way. Any proteſſion, perſwaſion, or manner of life, 1> cailed | der: To bh: 1. re,/they th ae converted, and th » Brea rhoawa 


; way frequent!y in Scripture, 1 R'm9s 15. 26. P/al. gr. 11.0 ele 


»4 
FY <> " 


converted by the word of Go nay hear the word : bur »f--r 

their extraordinary rage, that would nor fpare the weaker | very ibis manner : = is apa A cn : 

0x, who are generally pared on that account : F Which ſhews | it inwardly fpiricuajly, cff:Chual'y. } Theſe Few rareeth. 

chit he carried many with him to the further aggravation of his | with Se. Pal, are {iid ro tee no man: bu: the exprefion here 

lin £ Where they had power to judge of ſuch chings, and out | imports their doing thetr uwrmoſt for co fre him thar ſpake 6 tha! 

of which it was 1mpoſſible that a Prophet ſhould periſh, Zyke | God made a diffcrence , Dan. 10. 7. in the viſion we red 67 
there. 


HA 


- 
* 


” 


| 
| 
| 


POS © 
[Pe 118d 


= b_- 


* = 2 . . 
WCre Opencad, he:aw to men : bur rey led himby SH 

* T2 « * } F \91 | gn E 4 b bi ” : ; 
$ FR hand, aig b COUP 1773 IEIFO Danaſcys. F 

þ He was near to Damaſcus before tais wonderful Vitton, that be- z When te opened i wy a5 at ether time's when he 419 riſ 
ing truck blind he might be the ſooner Id chither; os alſo, that 4 co fee, the giuric:;s Night 1 fo dazied him; thar be cont {82 
Ys 0p p 7 s bi > T4 4 7 | ', ey I 1y "PE — © 3 ! * 'y I E : +þ . - Y go 
the miracle might bz Ire Cali and pubiickly &NO\ il, Dimaſciy | norning ; oh $ £21: was «NG li ren are veiice ther CONVEL OM ; 
being the chief City of oyr'a : aid though A2VOUr {1x days Journey | Hs I. the th:ny© af 2796 an, ati F oN- er) ried in the I iw win 
from Teruſalem, inhabited by many JEWs, Z This was done al NOOfns ' notwitaſtandinyg tic th b> {34u, 211d le GL ro 11:5 Hivi Linz (7s he 0g i 8 
div, the rather that the light whici Pad ſaw, might apoyear to _ be | know. © 

" of of A Ui GIVES; 7 cas lignt - was a ſym! c ] ; ? 
beyond tinat - hich the SUi1 give 3 and Tis 22 ba dz a lymbol Oz | Q) Ard he \W2S 2 T1CC Gays Witllour 10 nd neither 
tir inward light, wherewith his mind was now to be enl:ghtned ; b gid eat nor drink : = 

p y 6: r3 p - ; 1 g 6 pu © {\ 14S $34\J Ci ! y 
153ilo of the puriry of the Do&rine he was to Preach, and holinels i © © od 

þ 4 . "0 py a 50;ne Ve OM | 12t 1513 the thre 
of [is Lit: which he was to kad, and molt probably ir was cauſed by | : _ © RSVETROUSHT FN2t HO 54> SiH 
= v_ . nro the tiira rncavens, vhich he tpeaks © F I 

the g/orjlized body of Chrift, which app-arcd unto him. ; Inro the tra rcicavens, vihich he ſpeaks of, 2 Cur +. 2. þ. 


Ij- 33: Y .. : OD | 
2 And * as he journeyed he came h near Damaſcus : | 8s And Saul arcfe from the earth; and when & his exes 


and ſuddenly there ſhined round about hint {za lighc} 


[$98 xe 


EEG ! vy . . FEE Y Ep 4c 
| Ieeins ratatr to have b<en afrer wards; God weutd howtoi, 


/ [ » , | } o « ! - Ig - y = & _ . 
4 And he & fell to the earth, and neard a Voice lay ; this humbl- 3:4 try um, and oxcite his dependince waolly 


'Er. BY 

Ing UNLU him 7, Saul m7, Saul, why periecureit chou z ! him, ana that he mMIgat uu wi reftior d tphr the more. 6 Tha, 
me ? | faulting he might be more iarenr in Prayer ; tor faſting docs prey: 
+ $211 fell to the earth, ſtruck with the amazing light and terrible . for Prayer, and theretore tatting and Prayer is to often put r6:24+ 
voice of Chriſt ; as alto with theſenſe of the preſence of God, which | ther, Mats. 17. 21. Chap 13 3. In thoſe places thzy could taft longer 
he knew was thus reverenced by Daniel 8. 17. and 10. 9. / The | Without prejudice to their healch, than among!t us, and I might 
name $zv/ is the rather mentioned, to mind him and us of his per- | add, were more willing to faſt for any Spiritual advantage, than we 
ſecuting of Chriſt in his members; as his name-fake had perſecured } ve- ; 
David who was a type of Chriſt : mand ris ingeminated or doubled, | 10 @ And there was a certain diſciple of Damaſcus, 
not onzly to —_ aad m—_ Now 5 but es the _ his | Nnamec ce Ananias, and to him ſaid the Lord in a viſion, 
love to him, and Cormmileration Of him. 2 Chrit Was 111 Haven, | | he faic 2110 x ( 
beyond Saul's rage ; bat Chriſt and his Church niake bar one body ; | A _ = laid d, pho, I ar vere, Lord, 
ts Cirift fays, | was hungry and thirfly : Mar. 25. 35. Ae ad as ons af che Coe Lens 
their afliFions he 3 afflicted, 1. 63. 9. bur me is here emphatically i 542 Sen 6 (: = ne po or Seronctng © Af ae ns D HCIPICS 
ſpoken, as if our Saviour had minded him of his great love ang | certain d Thereby = ving Mie der >-<: erp = Pants Rage 

wa A a b. . "If Rs : xe bn , 
bis 20 00k; TI —— __ then ſhouid | ectizge, and to do as God ſhould bid him, - as Saz:%e! to E!7, 
ie perle | I 0AM. 7. 4. 


5 And he ſaid 2, Who art thou Lord ? Andthe Lord | 1t And the Lord /::dunto him, Arife, and go into 


s > ( 
2. 
a Y 
Ny 2 
4 > - 


ad, iam Jeſus thou perſecuteſt : * 7; ;s hard! | ſ = ey 
, fad, Lam Jeſus p whom thou p hard the ſtreer, which iscalled ſtraight, and enquire in the c 


tSaul was in a great conſternation and doubting, whether it ! 
ws Gol,or an Ange). p Though he did noc 1atend this per lecurion , 
ziinſt Chriſt z yet our Saviour looks upon the good or evil done 
unto hi, members, as done unto himfelf q This kicking ogainſt 
the pricks is a proverbial ſpeech, taken cither from Oxea, or Slaves, 
whom they uſed with goads to prick on to their work, which. 
when they Kicked againſt, or oppoſed themielves to, they did not 
b:t the goads or pricks, but themſelves ; fo ſhall all peifecutors 
fad that their miſchiefs recoil upon theinſelves ; Chriſt and his 
members ſhall be made more glorious by it: This meraphor iS com- phets. 1.2 a. | 
mon 1n Scripture, Dea?. 32. 15. 1 Sam. 2.29. Yr The pricks Sau 12 7 And hath ſeen in a viſion a man named Ananzias, 
had kick:d againſt, were the Sermons and Miracles ot Sr. Stephen coming in, and putting bes hand on him that he might 
ana Otner: | : ; 

EE ; receive his ſight, 
6 4nd he trembling and aſtoniſhed, faid, s Lord + If thisverſe be the words of Fe, Lake, -contining the Hiſtory, 


hold f, he prayeth, 

2 God tellerch our wendrings, and knoweth our aboad2, and 
mindeth hz, eſpecially in rheir forrows, which was $345 caſe, 
f He ſpent choſe three, days ſpoken of, - vez. 9. in att; of great hy. 
miliarion, in which bs world alfo nor cifte any food ; this is 
revealed to manias, thr hs might not fear to po unto him; a 
great change ; iv Su alſo amangit them that pray 2 A greater 
wonder than that the other Sax! formerly was amongſt the Pro- 


I * What wilt thou have re to do 2 And the Lord ſaid then they muſt be includ<d im a parenthetis, the ſenſe being intire 
* Unto him, Ariſe, and go 7 into. the city, and it ſhall be 


wirhour them ; bur they fcem to be the words of che Lord continu- 
tld thea whar thou muſt do. h | ed ro Mair, ics a how h2 had provided tor his welcome to 
Sil being tho: owly friumbled, and brought to reſign himſelf Saut, Ps ns ARES , L have ' 
ibolly to God, mikes this queſtion, giving up himFif as a white 13 Then Ananias anſwered, Lord, I nave neard by 
t 
os done Gol o00d fervice, (as 1s ſaid many PORN — thv 7 faints ac Jerifalem : | | 
ok 10 too, 7-472 16. 2.) but he is now peweriully broug| roft. þ His detign and commiltion could not bur he noiſed abroad. 
on ts ooſtinzcy "- that pertwalton = Damaſc#s, ore wy near ;- The Diſcipies of Chr:ft are called $424z7s . becauſe 3. They are 
the ink, ba wes my wage ted wn nao 3p Or - dedicarcd unto the Lord in their bapritiy, 2. Phzy are £21kid UNC 
WE mY” v on an Fermi _ gy" 3-4 ' V+ holineſs. 3. Piey d:d then Iivehoiily. and exemplarily. 4: Ana 
, +10 CEITAIA 3 Dizt AT 3S Cerrann tar he Was x20d tak], raughr ſo muſt all. that hope for any beacht by their being Diſcaples of 
© meviately by Chrift bi: vel?, as he reſt) 11es, Gal t. 12. and in that Chriſt, &«. ; 
rneitp fre: inlrution he ws boric wr 1718 35] 24, And here he hah authoriry from che chie 
Mun, Sean. ——/xrphag Sens 14 honour bis 6wn Ordinance, | Prieſts, © bind all that call on chy name. 
n, eres, Þog 72 OE One re ; "Wi _—_ þ Here Ananias ſhews the ſtrength of his excuſe ; forfleſh an 
of Cox Omen the Minitry and uſe of means, which arethe'power |. Ten: him axin Mfr Exod » Cod by * hs th 
d unto Salvation, Rom. 1. 16, and thus, though God could | blood cried in am as 94975, Ex42. 4, 13.450 By arm WHong gu 

We inft:ufted Cornelrs by the Angel which appeared unto him, wilt ſend 


J . u : D 
( Þ 4 * DII ks. . > ' : 
lr thee ro q kick againſt y the pric | ho::ſeof Judas for en: called Sax * of Tartus : for be: * cy, 


Paper, for Chriſt to write what h2 would upon :' He had chotghe þ many of this mn *, how muci evil he hach done to * ye+ 7 


Cond, o. 3 yet he is commanded to ſend for Pc:er, and to hear from | 15 But the Lord faid!unto him, Go thy way : for * *Ch 103 2. 


, 3* 
lim what he ought to do, Chap. 10. 6. 


7 And * the men which journeyed with him «, ſtood fore + the Gentiles, and kings, and » the children of 


weechlels x, hearing a voice, but y ſeeing no man. lirae] 


beg Cr9p, 26, 14. theſe men are ſaid to be fallen to the earth as 
M3 Saul, which tity might at fir be, and now role up ; or | 


he is / a choſen velizl unto me, co bear my naine ws be- © 2%. 27 


IQOMm. 1 I. 
Eph. 3. $. 
3 Ii. 3% 


I The whole World is God's Fabric! :-d the' Clch eſpecially F Rom. 1.5, 


(1 CV | 
Is; C1.25. 22. 


One” re een 
EA ALS 


_ - EET I _- 
> S*. * 6. - 
5 r --- = - 
DO LH On” OR 74 £70 WS. A - 


- 


- 
s ? 


: . 
. 


Chap. IX. 


«C8. 22. 12. 
f C1. 8. 17. 


*—X WIA 


ene. 


The 4A 


is his houſe; not'onely in the whoſe World, brt in the viſtb 


Church there are all torts of utenſils, ſome for higher, others for 
meaner uſes ; $au! was to be a veſſe] unto honour, Rem. 9. 21. into ,T,. aqmitred to intimare fllowſhip and commy 
which the treaſures of Gods word was to be put, 2 Cor. q. 7. though | the Diſciples. þ Paul was ſufficiently known by 1: 

2 » ' 4 E P , Fee fx 2 ? _- b «dill 
he was but an earth-n veſſz] : 4 of 09 0 Ig - are | Feruſalem, and many had felt his rage. i But how could the 1c. 
Io. urte or INT3TES NAP CS, 0 _s . Yo _ $- * TR - ulg,o 
dat ieliins ofthe - va ths be ignorant of his converſion ſo long, if it was thrze years after 3 > 
| m I his myttery of the calling of the Genrzles BNDLs 4, {it ſeems by Gal 3. 17. Toanſwer, which, may be confidereq, | Th. 
tc {pread 2broad, and to be made more known, which was nid 1n great diſtance betwixt Jeruſalem 'and Damaſcus, ( (ix days journey 


Preach the Goſpel, G37. 1. 


1 Thej. 3. 3. 


thule promiſes, 1/a 49 6. Jer. 1. 10. 
16 For* I will ſhew him how great things he muſt 
ſufter for my names fake. 
o He ſhall ſuffer as great things as he ever did cauſe, or inf}iCt 
the hatied of his own Countrey-men the Jews, and the tury of ch 
Gi:/er; fee the catalogue of them, 2 Cor. 11. 23. And were tier 


ever ſo many ſuff:rings heaped upon one man ? And yet thoug! all 
thele were forerold unto him. and certainly forexnown by him; yet 
he would Preach the Golpel for all that; much was forgiven tim, 


an. he loved much, 


17 And * Ananias went his way, and entred p into 
the houſe, and 4 } putting his hands on him, faid -,Bro-- 
ther Saul,the Lord even s Jeſus that appeared untothee in. 
the way as thou cameſt, hath ſent me, that chou mighreſt| 


receive thy ſight, and be [| filled with the holy Ghoſt. 


p The houſe of Judes with whom Sar! lodged, as ver. 11. 9 Con-: 
cerning this, ſee Chap. 6. 6. beſides, what may be {ard of this im- L ve | 
poſition of hands cl{-where : The curing of 5t Paul's blindneſs, was | Par, others by Barnabas, who teilified theſe things pans, 


one reaſo1 of putting his hands on him here, tor {oit was ordinaril 


done towards the ſickor infirm ; they laid their hands upon them 
to heal them, as it was promiſed that they thould do, Mark 16. 18. 
y Sal was become A4nanias his Brother, as profeſſing the ſame faith, | 


and heir of the ſame promiſe with him. 


happened. 


CTS. 


e/to g joyn himſelf to the diſciples: but they were 


© 


2. The little correſpondence berwixc the Rings of rhoſ> DIices +7 
0' and Aretas, 3. The periecution which was at ern! 
binder the Converts of Damaſcw from going thither, ;. p41 ,..*, 


' 
. 
d4 / 


e Arabians, of which before, 


-' 29 Burt & Barnabas took him, and brought },,, :, 
the apoſtles, and declared untothem how »4 he hay To. 
the Lordin the way, znd that he had {poker ks 
and how he had preached bo!d'y at Damatcys int}. 


naine of Jelus. 
& Of 82rnav.zs mention is made, Chap. 4. 35. who is thousts, 


ro whom Baraabas brought Pau!, were Pcter and Fames 


elſewhere, 


y ' Paul. 


———— 


' OUt at Jeruſalem. 
o Living amongſt thzm, and freely converſing with them, 4, 


s .mnanies mentions what i : : . x 
. | 1s, with Peter, and James, andthe reſt of the believer., who hd oy 
had hapned to Par in the way, that Paul might be affured that he | _* I Ts 2 » WO 0:dnoy 


was ſent from God, for none e!fſe could have told him what had | 


no ſuſpicion of him. 


29 And he ſpake boldly in the name of the LordJe(y, 


18 And immediarely there fe!l from his eyes as it had and diſputed p againſt che Grecians : but they yen 


been : ſcales; ard he received ſight forthwith, and 


aroſe, and was baptized. 


| 


about to ſlay him. 
? Hellenifts, of which Chap 6. 1. ſechas were born, in fire 
parts, bur of Jewiſh parents ; theſe Pal choſe rather to diſpute with, 


As ſcales of Fiſh: Ir was no ordinary blindnels, nor from | becauſe theſe had cailed the perfecurion againſt Srephen, and Paul hid 


any ordinary cauſe, and could not have been cured by common 
means, 


19 And when he had received meat , he was ſtrengih 
Then was Saul certain days x with the diſciple 


Which were at Damaſcus. 


# St. Paul coul not but be much weakned with his journey, fear, 
grief, faſting, and conſtant praying; and now he takes a prudent 
care of his health, that he might be further enabled for the ſervice of 
God, to what place foever he ſhould be appointed. x Sarl is no 
ſooner changed, but he changeth his company and acquaintance ; 
he reſorts to none of the Rabbies of the Fews, but to the Diſciples of 
CT: he would love any, learn of any, that had Chriſt for their 
Maſter. 


20 And ſtraightway he preached Chriſtin the y ſyna 


gogues, that he is z the Son of Gud. 


3 The Apoſtles ſpake unto the Jews firft, either that they might 
convert them, or at leaſt take away all excuſe from them. 
doubtleſs he ſpake largely unto, though it be not here expretled ; 
but he had an abundance in his heart, having taſted the power 
of the grace of God in Chriſt, and out of his heart his inourh 
ſpake. | 
21 But all that heard 5/m were amazed, an ſaid , 
It nct this he chat deſtroyed them which called on this 
name in Jeruſalem, and came hither for that intent, thar 


he might bring them bound unto the chief prieſts ? 


2 This great change is a moſt unaccountable thing, and might 


t uly cauſe amazement ; but ex quovis ligno fit Mercurius, cum digitus 
D.: {it ftatuarius, Nothing is too hard for that God in whole hand 
Saui's heart was, 


22 But Saul increaſed þ the more in ſtrength, and 


confounded the Jews which dwelt at Damalcus ©, pro- 
ving that this is very Chriſt. 


þ True grace thrives by exercile and oppoſition : The word here 


uſed, manytaketo be a Metaphor from builders, who in ere&ing 
their Fabricks, fit one piece or part to another, and then bring them, 
and joyn them rogerher ; thus St. Paul did, in bringing forth, or 
guoting the pionules in the Old Teſtament, and ſhewing their ex- 
.aQtly being fulfilled 12 the New Teſtament, or in the Goſpel of our 
Saviour Jeius Chriſt ; and he ſpake with ſuch an evidence and de- 


; 


monſtration of the Spirit, that ne did as 'twere conſtrain men to be 


of his opinion : c Which was the: ſum of the Goſpp-1, 


2; © And after that 4 many days were fulfilled, the 


[ews took counſel to kill him : 


a God wou!d not preſently expoſe h'm to conflits bur inure him 


to ſuffer by degrees ; as alloit pleated God ro ſpare him fo long nigh 

unto that place where he had wrought fo grear a miracle for him , 

the ſenleof which might the more be upon himſelf aM others alſo, 

for he continued here three years, as may be ſeen, Gal. r. 17, 18. 
. excepting onely a journey into Arabia. 


24 Bur e their laying wait was known of Saul : And 


they watched the gates day andnight to kill him. 


e The Jews, who ſtirred up Aretas the King of Damaſcus againſt 


Paul, 2 Cor. 11.32, 33- Now began thoſe things foretold, wer. 16. 
to be fulfilled. 


25 Thea the diſciples took him by night, and flet him 


down by che wall in a basker. 


f As Rahab did the Ipies> Joſh. 2.15. and Michal did David, 


i Sam. 19.12, 


+ Ch. 22.17- 


26 And * when Saul was come toJerulalem he aſſayed 


| 


2 Which 


furcther-d them in it; and he was very dehrous to unweave that wh, 
and giveihem an Antidore unto whom he had formerly given Poiton; 
© | being <ſpecially concerned tor their Souls, whom he had help&dtg 
$ ; deſtroy. 

39 Ii hich when the brethren knew, they broughthin 
down to q C#ſarea, and ſent him forth tor lariys 

7 There were two Towns of this name, one a Coaſt. Town 
ſpoken of Chap. 8. 4o. the other was called Caſarea-philing, 
nigh Mount Lebanon. r St. Paul's birth-place, where among(t 
his Relations and Acquaintance, they might hope he wouldh: 
ſafe. 

31 5 Then had chechurches reſt throughout al/Judea 
and Galilee, and Samaria, and were 7 editied, andy 
walking in the fear of the Lord, andin the « comfort f 


the-holy Ghoſt, were multiplied. 

s When Pail was ſent away, againſt whom they had the grater 
flpite, as having been as zcalous a perſecutor as any amongſt them, 
£ The Church is frequently compared to a building, and every bx- 
liever to the Temple of God, 1 Cor. 3. 16. and 6.19. which Go 
dwells in; from whence this Metaphor is taken. # Walkng 1 
progreſſive r otion, and 1o is building.an adding to a Struturetillic 
come to perfcCtion ; which ſignifies, that theſe believers increaki 
daily in the knowledge of God, in true Piety and Charity, Ot, 
x The word alſo ſignifies the exhortat ion of the holy Ghoſt, luchex- 
hortations as were given from God by the Apoſtles ; to beſure, the 
comforts of the Spirit, are nor withour our obedience to the com- 
mandments of God; and it ſtems to be given hereas the recſon vl 
the Churches were edified, and did thus increaſe ; becauſe bel.zve!s 
walked in the fear of the Lord; and nothing perſwades more effc<tual 
ly to the embracing of Religion, than the holy living of {uch 25m? 
profeſſiom of it. 

22 T And it came to paſsas Peter paſſed y rhorowolt 
all quarters, he came down allo to the & ſaints which 


dwelt at Lydda 9. 

» Where the Diſciples that were diſperſed had planted Church. 
z See ver. 13. aA little Town about the weſt bank ot Jordan » 
far from the Mediterranean Sea. 

33 And there hetound a certain man named s Enexs, 
which had kept his bed 4 eight years, and was lick 0! 
the palſie. 

a Tis ſuppoſed this Eneas was a Jew, though now living 3: 
Lydda ; and that St. Luke here names him by the name the on 
called him by; he being amongſt his own Countrey-men _ 
Hillel. 6 To thew the difficulty of the cure, and oreatnels Of 


Muacle. E- 
24 And Peter f:id unto him, Eneas c, Jeſus Chil 


makerh thee whole : ariſe, and 4 make thy bed. And 
he aroſe immediately. 


c Theſe words are not a prayer, (though they were not yoo 
without Peter's lifting up his heart to Chrilt in prayer) _—_— 
miſe to this ſick man of health and recovery, declaring _—_ 102 
he ſhould receive ir, that he might kaow whom to ackno'1s N 
and thank for ir. d Our Saviour bids the ſick of the pallie '0 ans 
and take uphis bed, Mark 2. 9. and ſo he command the — 
man, John 5.8. Here Sr. Peter bids this Paralytick t0 wr © 
bed; which ſeems more ſtrange, being he was commannmey 
ariſe, ſo that now he thould have no need of having oy ſhew 
but "cis ealtly-anſwered, that being it W4s ons ar ye nd 
| how fully that he was cured : rhe meking of f!» b:J, anc : 


wing 4t 


p10Vs 


; Chap 


Ea 
. . , . '7- 

afraid of him, and F4 b-lieved nort that he was 81 ifn, 
Non xi; 


q 


Crg x 
£ n, M12 


have ſpent a great part of the three years in his journey amey 0 54 


have been Paul's Fellow: Nitciple under Garatzel. I Theſe Ag, 
. . ag » Ivy, 
, 1.18. who being the Apoſt'es of the circumciſion, or hiyjn, 
| Judea under their charg2, werz ab:ding at Feraſalem, which 22 
other Apoſt'es probably were ablenr, being tounding ot Chr). 
2 youve tak: thei? things tro have been r&/41-4 % 


28 And * he was with them o coming in, and gying 


* 


» 
4 
on 


nN 


Lo 


x 
1aP- X. 


ore'en 
With, 
zl bud 
t ned, 
Poilon; 


Ipedt 


thim 
1% 

Town 
talippi, 
mongſt 
ould bs 


Judea, 
and 
fort of 


: prenter 
{ them, 
very Ix: 
ich God 
king 18.4 
wretillit 
increaſed 
ty, O's, 
[uchex- 
ſure, the 
the come 
Jon why 
hel.2vers 
eff Jual 
25 Max? 


JrOWOut 


which | 


Church 


(/ Ene#, 
s tick 0 


tiving 3 
Je Grec1ans 
nels of the 


izs Chuil 
j, And 


ot ſpoke" 
but a pſ0 
rom WhoM 
cnovwledge 
tie to 30" 
; impor 
ro make 8 
\manded iQ 
hed Mae: 
Id £0 ſhe's 
[id a+ M' 


AN 


1het 
ove both to himeif and others, that he was recovered .as any thing 
elle could do. ' 
:5 And all char dwelr ar e Lydia, and f Saron, faw 
4 - 
him, and turned to the Lord. 
> Verſe 32. f Saran is the name ofa City, 1 Chron. 5. 16. but 
here it is rather the name of a Country, (which the maſculine arricle 
uſually ſhews) lying between Mount 7/abor, and the Lake of 7:- 
berias, a Very fruitful plain, ? Crop 27. 29. Cant. 2. To the 
owning of his trath. Lrror & ifin fundamentals ) keeps us from 
God. . -————_— 
26 © Now there was at 2 Joppa a certain diſciple 
named + Tabitha, waich by interpretation 15s Called 


CT S 
I Here was a Citain man in » Ccfarea, called z 

£ Corneltus, a centurion of the band a called the 
Ttalian band, 

) In Ceſarca Paleſtin:, as it was call'd in contra-di{tin3ion to 
Ceſarea-Philippi. z A Roman by his name; which name was ordi- 
narily to be tound amongſt the timilies of the $ci2:0%s, and Syils's 
a A Pand anſwers either to a Regiment amongſt vs, orto 4 Leginy 
amongſt the Remans ; (this latter was far greater than the former.) fr 
was Called the 1:alian band, as being compoled of 112/71 Soldiers. 
and might be ufed as a guard of the Proconiul, who-dwe!t ar 
Ce/area ; who was that Feliz we read of, Chad 23.2 

2 A b devout man, and one that feared God c with 


Dorcas : this woman was ; full cf good works, and? 
ns-decds whi..h the did. | 
A port town, ſee Chap. 10. 5, Theſe circumſtances of places þ 
and per{ons, are {ct down to evidence the certainty of the Hiftory. 
þ Tab:t/a, according to the Syr/3ck dialect then in ute amongſt the | 
%-ps, and Dorcas As the was called amongf? che Greeks ; it being j 
common for the ſame perſon to have two names, on? Hzbrew and the | 
other Gree, as Thomas who was called D:aymius, and Cephes who 
was called Petcr. 7 She was rich in good works, whici are the beſt 
riches, Jatlongeſt, and go fartheſt, | 
;7 And it came to paſsin thoſe days,thzt ſhe was ſick, 


' 
ail 


Uq 


and died : whom when they had & waſhed, they laid 


her in an upper chamber. 

k They wathed the dead, and anointed them, to fit them for their 
burying, and eſpecially to ſhew their hope of the R=ſurteCtion ; 
which {ome think St. Paw alludes unto, 1 Cor. 15. 25. 

$3 And foraſinuch as Lydca was nigh to Joppa, and 
the diſciples had heard that Peter was rhere, chey ſent / 
unto him two men, defiring 4:2 thar he wou'd not | 
delay to come to them. 

| They ſent for Peter, that he might come to comfort thoſe that 
were concerned in the great lois of ſo good a woman, and it may 
b: not without ſome hopes of her recovery by a Miracle from St 
pcter 3 Which is the Iikelicr, becaute they ſo much haſten his coming 
to them. 2 She being already dead, and they preparing for her 
burial. 

;9 Then Peter aroſe and went with them. When 
he was Come,they brought him into the upper chamber: 
and all the widows ſtood by him » weeping,and ſhewing 
the coats. and garments which Dorcas made while ſhe 
was with them, 

n Ic was ſtrange that Peter ſhould be ſent for, or that he ſhould 
go 0n ſuch an account, wiz. to raiſe one that was dead ; but God, 
who had ordered this Miracle for the manifcſtation of his truth and 
glory, ſo wrought in their hearts, that they did this out of faith. ; 
though 1f others ſhould think to imitate it, 1t would be but pre- 
ſumption. o Here needed no mourning women to be hired; the 
dzath of this woman was a common loſs : theſe coats were made by 
Dircarin her life time, to cloath the poor and naked withal. 

40 But Peter p put them all forth,and q kneeled down | 
rand prayed,and turning him tothe body,ſaid, Tabitha, 
ariſe, And opened her eyes : and when ſhe ſaw Peter, 


ſhe ſat up. 

p P:ter putthem out, that he might pray the more earneſtly with- 
ent diftraQtion, or interruption ; thus E£/;ſhz ſhut the door to him, 
: Kngs 4. 33- When he prayed for the Shunamite's Son. 9 This 
his kneeling 15 mentioned, to recommend reverence in our praying 
unto God. # Peter by his betaking himſelf unto Prayer, would 
ſhew, that he could do nothing by his own power, but ic muſt come 
from above ; and he had every mercy, as much precariouſly, and 
by prayer, as any other. 

41 And he gave her his hand, and lift her up ; and 
when he had called s the faints and widows, preſented 
t her alive. 

: Such who had ſent for him, and now were gathered together, 
to ſee what eff:&s his prayers might have. #£ And in perfe&t health, 
all were that were miraculouſly cured ; for the Lords worksare 
perf:Q&, Dent. 32. 4. 

42 And it was known throughout all Joppa ; and #« 
many believed in the Lord. 

4 This cure was wrought, and all the other Miracles were done 
to bea means ro make the Goſpel to be believed, which he pub- 
Iiſh?d, and was an undeniable proof, that this Do&rine was from 

ven ; for none cou!d do fuch things, ualeſs God were with him, 
or rather unlefs God did them by him ; So thar this Miracle wrought | 
by St. er, did more good to the Souls of many, than to the body 
of this relieved woman. 

43 Andit came to paſs, that he tarried x many days 
in Joppa with one Simon a tanner. 

« The Miracle had onely prepared them to receive his Do&rine, 
Wuch Petey tarried ſome time with them, to inſtruct them in : The 
Miracle had prepared the ground, and now he takes this ſeaſon to 
low the ſeed of the word into it. 


CHAP. X 


Corneling being a devout man, is commanded by an Angel to ſend for 
Peter, ro be mnſirutied by him, 1-————9, Peter ſeeth the wiſion 
of a7 1anmcy of Beaſts, 9 16. Cornelius's ſervants enquire for 

cer : who being warned of God, goeth with them to Calarea, where 
Oornelius received him with oreas reverence, 1] —>—26. Peter 
relateth what God had fbewed him : fo dorh Cornelius, 27 JJ 
Peter preaching Chriſt to Cornelius, and his family, the Holy Gif 


4! t4 4 I pe "my A y FE _ 7 . 3 . , 
Jaberh upon ail ;_ They ſpeak with ftirange tongues ; and are baptized 


j IEter, 3 qumoemnowgs, 


YoL IL 


all his houſe, which gave much alms to the people, and 
prayed to God dalway. 

6 This Cornelirzs was a Profelyte of the gate, or ſuch as obſerved 
the ſeven precepts of Nzzh, and lived without giving iny cftence tc 
the Fews. » It was a very good 1tgn that he teared God, in thac 
he ingaged all his houle to do rhe hke, at leat outwardly, which 
was as much as he could do ; this was fpokei by God in tbrahrm's 
commendation, Ger. 18.19. &d He did not neglett the feafons of 
prayer, eſpecially the time of offering the morning and evening 
Sacrifice ; which by prayer they delired to partake the benefit ot, 
by which Chriſt our Sacrifice, and his merits were figured unto 
them ; Cornelis indeed prayed always, or at all cimes, raking time 
in a moral ſenſe, for the ſeatons and opportunities for ſuch a duty ; 
(as weare commanded to give always thanks gg#fph. 5. 20) but he 
could not pray always, or at all times, taking time 1n a natyra/ 
ſenſe ; for then he muſt have negle&ed all other duties; howlo- 
ever, his endeavour was to keep his heart always in a praying dit- 
polition. 

3 He ſaw ina e viſion evidently, abour f the ninth 
hour of the day, an angel of God coming in to him, 
and ſaying unto him, Cornelius. 

e Not ina dream or rapture, but fenfibly and plainly, Ff Their 
ninth hour, was with us about three a clock in the afternoon,being 


the ordinary time for the evening Sacrifice; and by conleguence 
their time of prayer, Chap. z- 1, And this devout man docty nor 
teek Gods face in vain; Cornelir had been faithful in a little, and 


God would give him much : Rather than he ſhould wont further 
inſtruction, who had improved whar he had already ; God here {ends 
an Ange!, and foon after an Apoſtle unro him.. | 

4 Ana when hz looked on him, he was g afraid, and 
ſaid 4, Whatisit Lord ? And he faid unto him, Thy 
prayers: and thine aims are come up tor a & meinorial 
before God. 

Zg The Angels appeared in fo great ſplendor; all admiration hath 
ſome fear with it. + This is equivalent ro What wile thou have me 
to do ? And ſhews that Cornelius was prepared to hear the mellage. 


£ Prayer and alms are joyned together in our Saviours diſcourſe con- 


cerning them, Mat. 6.1, &c. in the Apoſtles order about them }. 
1 Cor. 16. 1. Alms are our Sacritices now under the Goſpel , P-:/, 
4.18. Hcb. 13. 16. k& An alluſion to the offering np of incenſe 
under the Law ; the ſmoak of the incenſe did aſcend ; and to David 
deſires that his prayers nnght alcend to God ward, P/al. 141. 2, thus 
under the Goſpel, prayers are retembled to incenſe, Rev. 8. 3. That 
prayers are ſaid ro come up for a memorial, is but the purſuance of 
the ſame Metaphor ; for Lv. 2.2. the frank-incenſe, ©. was the 
memorial there commanded to be burned ; and all this onely to re- 
preſent unto us, how well-pleaſing the prayers of his people are un- 
ro God through Chriſt, and that God keeps in remembrance all thoſe 
things they thus deſire of him, and in his time and meaſure (which 
are the beſt circumſtances, beſtows all upon them ; bur ler nor pray- 
ers and alms, which God here hath put together, be put aſunder, 
and in due time we ſhall reap. 

5 And now ſend men to / Joppa, and call tor oe 
Simon, whoſe ſurname is Perer : 

IA Town that was memorable for Jona>'s taking ſhipping there, 
when he would flee from God, and decline his methage, Jonah 1. 2. 
-m The Angel would have declared the Goſpel, and inftructed Co7- 
relircs ; bur he ſends him to Peter, God being willing tor to konous 
the means of his own inſticution. 

6 He loigeth with one » Simon a tanner, whoſe houſe 
is by the ſea-iide : He ſhall tell thee what chou oughteſt 


to do. 
2 Theſe particulars when found true by Corneliizs, did very much: 
advantage him towards h1s belixving whar Peter in the 2ame of rhe 


Lord did tell him. 
- And when the angel which ſpake unto Cornelius. 


and a p devout ſoldier of them char qwaiced on him con- 
tinually, 

o Theſe Servants doubtleſs Cornelizis had infteuted, as appears 
wer. 2. and God blefſes him withsfaithful and fuccelsful ſervice tiom 
them. p No condition, 9r temptation, too hard tor the grace 0: 
God to overcome; both Centurion and Soldier, are willing to 
hazard all they had, rather than not to obey God, and come t© 
the knowledge of J:ſus Chriſt. 9 This Soldier for his Rel:igion's 


'ris no ſmall matter to have. one near ns, 


God. 


them, he ſent chem to Joppa. 
7* Thus on Cernelins's fide, 


 Y 


for 
=TY * ! —_ ”- = . £ . * 1 4 4 # - 
9 &| On the morrow 2s gy Wert On f£Ncr journey. 
Yau £1 c ; 2 ? 
\ MM mn: Ang 


Chap. X. 


was departed, he call:d two of his o houthold fervante, 


ſake, and his holy lite, was takzn into nearer atrendance on Corre/rzs ; 
that hatiy power wit; 


8% And r» whenhhe had declared 2!l 75/7 things unto 
4 G- 
all things are diſpoied fownrds bis re- 


ceiving of the Gotpel ; and the ſame pt ovidence at the ſame time. 
diſpotes all things on 2crer's part roward his coming to publith it . 


Y 


ae 


— _ 


: 
" 
s ' od 
. - : 
0 
k z '* 
”* : 
IF 2 
1. $4 
y (4 % : 
«£59 4 
” _ 
# 
+I; 
A 4: 
+7 - 
4 Is + IT 
xt : 4 
- » 1} = 
r n 4 "4 
4 bY : { 
G * | 
4 , 
l #3:.3 44 
o its : 
P > v! 
> : : 
, : : 
LI ; 
be 5 | 
. © z , 
.- LFXF 
: - ks 
- 7 PF 
= 3 
. 
py 
. F 4. 4 
iT; : 
as | 
£87 = * 
. 
. $5 . + f 
3 " "SS. 
8-4 4 1 =- : 
834.5 ' 
. / - > li 
Y 'F 4 
vY ; 
its 
"FP 
. 
j Tx 
: 
RS. 
i j 5 
va . 
Z , 
: l ""\ 
c on 
x 4 
L b: \ ; 
4 y : 
'» 
L . 
"& 


: } 1 
p 
F] | 


PE 


I» L; — + 
® - A . p . 
—_———_— Or ——_— p — en > — 
—_ — —— 4 " hy m 
2 po TI 9 


- 


DO 
Rem - 
7 ES _ 


San 
ROS 


= 1 a0 


—_ 


- to en. ſl < ho ln BE =o rh 
- Oo IOYUYEY — ES— AERIE ooo oi 
" : M1. —_— - dS. ath LES 
® 


——— 
« 


©, $a 
TL 


ws do 


- 14. 7: Eten @eny thing thatis e COMIT ON Or UNCiean: 


*Mat.15 31. time ©, What God hath cieanied, that f Call not thou 


+ 4- potjuted : The 7ews did imagine, that by unclean creatures, were 


The 4 


Ss. 


} * . » . - = [l my a7 

216071, Or iNie-day, and 1s accounted one of the three times or pray<r; 
{i-: O/op. 3 1.4 28d WAS AS the Jews ſay, recommended to them by 
> 2: howlozver 1t was the time when they might b{gin to prepare 


che Evenins Szcrifize 3 none of theſe cauſes nezd ro be alſigaed, for 
Corte] :1s this blefl:d Apoltle did watch unto prayer, 1 Per. 4. 7: and 
defiroufly laid hoid upon all opportunitizs to poar Our his Soul un- 
to God 
1o And he became « very hungry, and would nave 
4 : "7 . fe p 
but whi's tzexy made ready, he x fell into a 


Catch. 

Trance. : 
« He might be more than o:dinarily an hnngred ; to fit or ſur 

the viſion, which is hereatier mentioned. x The moſt excellent 


way of Gods manit-fting himiclt unto man, 15 by a trance : ( and 


» = : 
UT 8% 
carefully non what he hears fiom Gods words, 
[zave him withour ſufficient infireCion. 
20 * Ariſe o theretore, and getthee Cown,and go yin 
chem p, doubting nothing : for | have ſenr them, © 
o Immediately pur thy {cif upon th2 journey. p Spend no +4. 
in ditpeting within thy If, bzcaule that they, unto whom chews 
{cn for, are not Jews, as 
21 Then Peter went down to the men which we: 
ſent unto him from Cornelius; and ſaid, Behold, J an 
ne whom ve leck : s what #s the cauie wheretigre wv 
are come ? 
s Peter being in 10 ſmall conſternation, and not perfectly lngw!... 
whithzr all tis teaded, makes the more exit inquiry, | 8 
22 And they ſaid, Cornelius the centurion f, a juſt 
man, and one that « fearecth God, and of good Fepor: 
among all the nation ofthe Jews, was x warned try 
God by an hcly angel to ſend for thee into his houſe arq 
to hear words cf thee, "Nt 
: That they might ſpecd in their meJage, they labour to prev; 
a!l prejudice Peter might have agunft Cornelirg, who was a Gey;,; 
by ritle ; telling him, 1. That he was a juſt man, ( as 3; (1g 6 
Joſeph, Mats. 1. 19) ». That he u worthipped therrue God, the ſims 
with the Jews, and not the falſe gods of the Gentiler, 5, That hs 


Ch Far? nl 


Ky, 
God will ne 


Ver 


V2 


T2mns 


oO . I . . . 
in Which God makes himſelt known unto 
is diver[ly expreti:d : cis certain, 


at the four coiners, and ler down to the earth: 

p Either vifibly to his corporal eyes, as to St. Stephen's ; or rather 
mentally, more tuitably roche raprure mentioned 1n the former verſe, 
z Which night fignifie, that Heaven that was ſhut to the children 
cf ren by the firſt Avam, was now by Chritt the ſecond .{dam, 
epencd to 21} behevers. a This word ts raken for any utenfil, com- 
n.c1.Iv utcd about the houſe; and with the ſheet here ſpoken of, 
beats an Anus) 1Ga Tob'e, ard Table-cloath amongſt us : b So 
cathercd vp © knit, that the Vyands verſe 12. mighr not fall down. 
Ang this Coin 1 jaw to come from Heaven, to ſhew the liberty of 
tking b'n:and other Gratz/es 1nto the Chuich, did comefrom thence 
Cnelz., 

12 Whercin were all manner of ſour-footed beaſts of 
the carth, and c wi'd beaſts, and creeping things, and 
fow)s of the air. 

c As well vnclean beaſts, ſuch as were forbidden by the Law ; as 
clean, ſuch as by the Law mig hr be eaten. | 

13 And there Canic a voice tohin, Riſe, Peter ; d kill, 
«hd car. 

a Otthat then ſeefſt, without any exception, whether they by 
c!can, or (formerly) unclean creatures : The moral of which com- 
mand is, that he raght now converſe with Jews and Gen tiles indif- 
terently. and ac. 5 tous thele allo the word of Lite. 

14 But Peter fa'd. Not fo, Lord *; for I have never 


e Thete word, mey fignifie one and the ſamething, and the latter 
explain the fort.cr, ſhewing that choſe rhings areſaid to be common, 
v itch the Law by {6 bidd:pg them, had made wncleay ; Others 
e1:kefome arfference ; and by things common, underſtand all forts 
ot creates, which were forbidden to the Fews, but were commonly 
ted vpon by a! Nations round about them : and by things unclean, 
they underitaua ſuch as by accidenr became ſo, as when any of the 
creatures pzrmitted for ule, was ſtrangled. 

15 And the voice /pake unto him again the ſecond 


g Common. 
7 Donor wake in thy eſteem, or praQtice, as common : # that is, 


Rant the Gentiles, (as by clean creatures they won}d have themſelves 
to be underflood) howſfoever they oppoſed Common unto Holy ; indeed 
a holy man 1s (as they called him) a finzolar man : *®twas God that 
Ceanted Cornelis, rurning him from idolatry to the worthip of the 
true God, from darkneſs unto light. 

16 I hits wes donebthrice: andthe vellel was received 
up again into heaven. 

2 Wheieby this great myſtery of the converſion of the Gentiles. 
and taking them into the Church might be the more confirmes, ang 
tixed 1a St. Peter's, mind. : 

17 Now whiite Peter z doubted in himſelf what this 
viton which be had ſeen, ſhould mean ; behold Z, the 
men wilch were ſent from Cornelius, had made enquiry 
tur Sinions houte, and ſtood before the gate. 

- Recolictting himſelf; for the viſion had fo aff:Red h , that 
it had put him into a kind ofextafie, out of which wherFhe came 
unto hmſclf, & the two ſervants and the Soldier which Cornelizs had 


ſent, 
L : 
I And / called, and asked whether Simon which 
was ſurnamed Peter, were lodged there. 


/ Being ſtrangers, they addreſs themiclyes to ſuch of the houſe as 
came to the duor. 


drawn off 


was reputed a p os and good man, and {oit would be no difpzryc, 
ment to the Apoſtle ro go unto him. » This argument &t, p;;, 
could not deny. When Gods command 1s evident his peop!: ;;; 
determined, and reſolved, 

23 Then called he them in, and lodged them, Any 
7 on the morrow Peter went away with them, and . 
cain 2 brethren from Joppa accompanicd him. 

» He delays not to obzy the Heavenly viſion; but as 45-4}, 
took his journey the very next morning after that he had reccire 
the command, Gen. 22. 3. fo did Peter here, and bz dar, quic;;; 
dat, he doubles his obedience, that obeys ſpeedily and cheerful}; 
z Theſe Brechren were fix in number, as Chap. 11. 12. Who might 
undertake this journzy, 1. Out of refpeCt to Peter, * to accompun; 
him. Being moved at the extraordinary viſions that wa 
ſpoken of ; bur efpecially, 3. diſpoſed by the Providence of Go 
to accompany St. Peter, that they * might teſtifie the grace of (4 
that was come unto the Gentiles, when it nyght be atterwardj Mee 
ſtioned. 

24 And a the morrow after they entred into Ceſare; 
And Cornelius waited for them, and had called tz. 
ther his þ kinſmen and c near friends. 

a Joppa was abour fifteen Leagues from Ceſare, fo that the nz 
day atter they fet our, they might eaſily come from 7oppathither, 
6 His Relations, « And ſuch as he had the greateſt love and kindn 
for, he thought that he could notexpreſs it better, than by giving 
them an opportunity to hear the word of Life, and to gain inſt. 
ction for their Souls; and probably, t1oſe here ſpoken of, were r2c- 
koned as friend;, and near friends by Cornelius ; becaule they wire 
ſuch as with him had forſaken all Pagan Idolatry, and wer Wor 
ſhippers of the true and Living God. 

25 And as Peter 4 was Coming in, Corneiius ne: 
him, and fell down at his feet, and & worſhipped 
him. 

d Into Cornelicy fiis houfe, for he haſtned to meet with lim 
e Cornelizs worlhipped withthes moſt humble, civil worthip ; but 
he could not rhink him to hz God, and therefore he did give him 
no Div:ine Worſhip, he having forſaken the Idolatry of the G:ili; 
but might perhaps think him to have been an Angel, and intended 
ro worſhip him accordingly, for which he is blamed in the follow- 
ing verſe. | 

26 But Peter took him up, ſaying /*, Stand vp; Ig 
my ſeit alſo g am a man. Ret 
; Flriscertain that Peter did think this Worſhip Corn: ;ins (ave Kh 
him, to haveexceeded ; and here he blames him for it; te'iing 
him, he g was bur a man like unto him, and he needed not give 
any further reaſon ofhis reproof, for man muſt adore, but by n9 
means inay be adored; no, nor take too much hogour to him- 
iclf. 

27 And as he btalked with him,he went in,an-l ;ound 
many that were come togerher. 

hþ They went talking together intothe houſe ; probably, of tt: 
goodneſs of God that they ſhould be direRed fo happily unto 0n: 
another; for they could not bur fee, and acknowledge God 1n 
it. 


A 


- * 


28 And he ſaid unto them, Ye know how * that !t:j, 
is an unlawful thing for a man thatis a Jew, to KEE & 13 
company with, or come unto one of another nation p. 
= » Eph, 
but God hath ſhewed me, that I ſhou!d not call any * 
man common or & unciean. 
: God himle)f did ere& a partition-wall betwixt his peop!e, 
other Nations, Jews and Gentiles ; hence by Gods own comm 
the Jews might not have any familiar converſe with the ny 
eſpecially, they might not marry with them : The Jews _—_ '” 
had made this partition-wall much larger, and they held 1t un K 
ful to eat withany of the Gentiles, or to go ſo much as 170 tt 
houſes; hence that objetion made vpon this occaſion aga1? Ir 
Peter, Chap. 11. 3. kNo man 1s now unclean by any —— 
uncleanneſs, becanſe he is not circumciſed, or becauſe he Fo bog 
ſprinkled with the blood of bulls, #4. 9.13. yet fin batt , neſ 
the whole maſs of man-kind, and theyarz equally by nature M9!" 
unclean 


and 
mand, 


_ 19 @ White Peter z- thought on the viſion,the » ſpi- 
rit faid unto him, Behold, three men ſeek thee. 

* vet bimfſelf to medirate upon that he had ſee , and heard, 
ie holy Spirit informs him farther. Thus whoſoever meditates 


. 
3; 


A p 21 179 
29 Therefore came I unto you without [ gain-fay! s 
s fr I) 


afloon as 1 was ſen for »:: I ask therefore, for wha! 


tenit ye have (cnt for me ? 


 W3p- 


"'F 23, 
16.5 ; Cornelis does not intend to declare by this, how long he had 
+ ted; buthe tells him, when he being faſting, ſawthe viſion, which 


Y. The 4 


came about, partly by the viſion, and its interpretation ; partly, by 
what he might have heard from them, thar Cornelins ſent for him, un- 
ro whom Cornelius had declared the whole matter, as we find verſe 
g, yet Peter's queſtion 1s bur neceſſary, for to give Cornelius an op- 
Oreunity to acquaint his friends, who were met there, with all that 
had paſſed. : ; : 
zo And Cornelius faid », Four days ago I was faſting 
antil this hour, and at » the ninth hour I prayedin my 
. = . 
houſe, and behold, a p man ſtood before me 1n 4 * bright 


clothing. 


£2 
> 


wasfour days betore ; at the ſame time of the day. o The ninth hour, 
which was atime of prayer, it being thetime of offering the evening- 
Gicrifice, ſee Chap. 3- 1. P A man 1n appearance, but an Angel in- 
deed, as in the 3- verſe, q Why Angels appeared in bright or white 
raiment, ſee Chap. 1. 10. : 

;1 And ſaid, Cornelius, thy prayer is heard, and 
thine r alms are had in remembrance s in the ſight of 

od. 
wg Of which, ſve the 4. verſe. 5s Unto which, not onely the 
ourward cifr, but the inward aff:Ction is viſible - and this 1s 
peculiarly in the ſight of God, the other may be ſeen alſo by 
Men. 


/ Or delay. # Peter did in a great meaſure know the buſine(s he| 


Chap. X. 
n 37 f The word 7 ſay you know, which was publiſhed 
raroughour all Judea, and * began from Galilee 7, atter * Luk. 4; 14 
the baptiſm which John preached 

f They had heard of the DoQrineof the Goſp:! by common 
fame and report, ( which could not bur ſpread abro:d ) all might 
know that Chriſt and his Apoſtles did Preach, thour' thefs mizhr 
be 1gnorant of the particular DoQtrines which they taugar, and 
which Peter was now lent to inſtrutthemin; or by 5/2 word, ( in 
an uſual Hebraiſm ) the matter of the Goſpel may bz meancd, 2s 
the Life, Death, and Reſurre&ion of our blf:d Szviour, whit 
they could not but have heard ſeveral reports of. F. Wao, as rliz 
Elijah which was promiſed, Mal. 4.5, was the forerunner of the 
Lord. 

38 How God h anointcd Jeſus : of Nazareth with £ 
the holy Ghoſt, and with power, who went about / do- 
ing good, and healing all » that were oppreſied of the 
devil: » for God was with him. 

& It was uſual to anoint their Kings, Prieſts, and Problizts, unto 
all which Offices Chriſt was anointed by bi: Father ; hence called 
Chriſt, as in the Old Teſtament the Mctfiab. 5 The Apolite is nor 
aſhamed of this name, though given to our Saviour by way of 


contempt ; he gloried in the crols of Chriſt. 4 Chriſt was indued 
with the Almighry Spirit of God , ard with the power of it, 
[ All the miracles our ble{ſ:4 Saviour wrought, were works of 
mercy, for the benefic and relief of thoſe upon whom he wrought 


32 t Send therefore to Joppa, and call hither Simon 
whoſe ſurname is Peter; He is lodged in che houſe of 
112 Simon a tanner, - by the ſea ſide; Who, when he 
cometh, ſhall ſpeak unto thee. 

; The ſubſtance of this verſe, is in the fifth and ſixth verſes before- 
going ; Cornelius might ſay this to excuſe his ſending for Perer, being 
a ſtranger to him ; as alſo to encourage Peter to ſpeak in ſuch aman- 
ner as God had appeared in. 

3.4 Immediately therefore I ſent to thee ; and thou 
haſt x well done that thou art come. Now therefore are 
weall here preſenty before God, to hear all things tha 
are commanded thee of God. 


s As an hungry Soul delays not to ſend for food, afloon as he 
knows where to have it. x Which does not onely approve of Sr. 


P:rer'scoming ; but thank him for ir. » We will ſet our ſelves to 
attend to thy words, as if we ſaw God looking upon us; whom 
wecall to witneſs that we are ready to do whatſoever he ſhall re- 


them ; he could have wrought miracles to deſtroy and ruine ſuch as 
viould not believe in him, v-hich he was often provoked unto , 
(nay, his Apoſtles would have h:4 him bur © permir them by tire 
from Heaven to deſtroy rhe Samaritans, Luke 9.54; and he wou!d 
not) The deliverance: our Saviour fo often wrought upon tuch 
as were pollefled of Devils, was to ſh:ew unto them that he was 
come to deſtroy the works of the Devil, and co caſt him out of the 
Souls of men, who were Spiritually poſſ:flzd by him, which alto 
our Saviour did, jo that it was a happy calamity for them, which 
brought them to Chriſt. # God was with our Saviovr, 1. By his 
mig and Jpower doing fuch miracles. 2. In his extraordinary jove 
to him, Matth. 3. 17. and alxays hearing of him, 7ohn i 1. 42. and 
alſo, 3. God was with Cariſt, &nwSo5, in the tulnefs of the God. 
head, Coloſ. 2.11. 

39 And weare o witneſſes of «!} things which he did 
both inche land of th jews, and in Jeruialemp ; whom 
they ſlew and banged cn a tree, 

o The Apoſtles, whom Chriſt had choſen to go in and our with 


quire of us: Thus it becomes every one that would profit by the | him, and tobe eye and ear-witnefles of all that was done by him, 
Word of God, to attend upon it ; .men do not behave themlelves | Or agzinft him. p Their kijl:ngof our Saviour, - 15 the rather here 
5 b:fore God, and therefore they injoy nothing» leſs than God i ſpoken of, to ſhew how rightfully the Jews were now tobe forſa- 
in an Ordinance, and are as if God had taken no notice of , ken, and that they had ne cauſe to complain of the calling in of 


p; bg 

Ren, 
us ave Kt 
tel ng 
Of oe 
t by 09 
to lum: 


round 


, of the 
nfo 0n? 
God 11 


that If «1, 
© KEEP & 13 
ion *: £0 
all any Eph, 


Je, and 
DMMmanuy 
| Genti#5, 
1emlelves 
c unJa® 
nro tall 

ainſt NG 
ren oNl 
he 15 Not 
eh defiled 

morally 


them. 

14 Then Peter z opened 44 mouth, and faid | 
1g. * Ofa truth I perceive that God is no & reſpecter of! 
perſons : 


£ An expreſſion uſed (as formerly) in matters of great moment as | 
' Yatth 5. 2. @ God does not accept of one becauſe he isa Jew and | 


judiced by his Education, had been carryed along with that error © | 
the Jews ; againſt which notwithſtanding, God had declared himſelf * 
even unto them,®* Deut 10. 17. Which is alſo confirmed unto us 1n ; 
the New Teſtament, Rew 2 11, 1 Per. x. 17. fo that our being 
ofany Nation, or any condition, rich or poor, honoured or de- 
ſpſed; as the one ſide recommends us not unto God ; andon 
th: other ſide, it will not hinder us from being accepted with the 
Lord, | 
35 But in b every nation he that c feareth him, and ' 


worketh righteouſneſs, is accepted with him. 

b Even though Romans or Tralians, of which Nation Cornelius 
W, and might probably be worſe thought of by rhe Fews, becauſe 
icy ſuppoled themſelves to have been hardly uſed by them. c Theſe 
two particalars include the oblervation of both Tables of the Law : 
The fearing of God comprehends piery, that is, the true Worſhip 
of the true God ; and working right2ouſreſs, includes all the duties 
to our neighbour; and both deſcribe a truly good, and holy. 
os ſuch as Cornelius was ; unto whoſe wb this 1s to be ap-, 
P19. 

364 The word which God ſent unto the children 


n _ preaching peace e by Jeſus Chriſt, He is Lord 
ol all, 


' 
! 


betwixt God and the Jews, but berwixt him and the Gentiles allo ; 
he a4 ſent vnto 1ſ-ael by his Prophets formerly, 1ſa. 57.19. God 
'sſaid to create peace to him that is afar off; rhe Gentile, as well 
35 to him that is near, the Few, Pſal. 72. 7,8. 1ſa. 49 6. and 

tint $4lvation was not limited ro the Jews onely, might be known | 
unto them by the examples of Melchiſedech, Job, and Naaman, who | 
did no ways belong unto them ; but this was now more manifeſt : 
God Preaching this peace betwixt himſelf, and all Nations indiffe- 
rently by Chriſt, 1. In his own perſon Preaching this, Mats. 8. 
1,12. and telling them that by his death he would draw all men 
untohim, John 12. 32. 2aly. This peace is Preached ro be had 
by Cluiſt, or onely through Chriſt ; by the Angels themſelves, Lake 
2 Iz, And 34!y, by all the apoſtles and Miniſters of the Goſpel, 
©h 2.13, 14. ſpeaking to the Gentiles, St. Paul ſays, Ye whoare 
arr off, aremade nigh by the blood of Chriſt ; and it was their 
conſtant DoQtrine, that there was no name under Heaven by which 
men could be ſaved, bur the name of Chriſt, Chap. 4. 12. and that 
iv Was all one wherher they were Greeks or Jews, ©. but Chri#t 
_ and in all, Coloſ. 3. 1tz. fo that in this Do&rine, there is an 
"_ harmony berwixt the Old and New Teſtamenr, the Prophets, 
_—_ Apoſtles, c Chriſt is Lord, not of the Jews ot one people 
Ky; but of the Gentiles, all Nations alſo, as Mar. 28: 19, 20. 


*, 3: 29, 
Vol. IL 


the Gentiles, being themlelves had in ſuch a manner reje&ed Chriſt ; 
but eſpecially, that they who were here mer, and we, al] might 
conſider, how muchit coſt our bleſſed Saviour to deliver us from 
ſin, and hell, Gal 3. 13. He was made a curſe for us, as Devut, 
21. 23. thatthe bleſſing of 4braham might come upon us, Gal, 
3. 14. | 

4o Hig God raiſed up the third day, and - ſhew- 


r:je& another becauſe he is a Gentile ; though St. Paul bzing ”__ 'ed him openly 


9 Leſt theſe Gentiles be deterred from believing in Chriſt, ahd take 
offence at his Croſs : St Peter Preached unto them che Reſurre&ion, 
which ſuddenly and powerfully followed. r And this he tells chem 
was unqueſtionable, as appeared by al! the ways that any thing can 
be proved by ; Chriſt was ſeen, and heard, and felt after his Reſur- 
rection, asthe beloved Diſciple tells us, 1 John 1. 1. and manifcſted 


his victory over death far us. | 
| 41 s Not to all c{þeople, but untor witneſſes,choſen 
; before of God, even to us, who did eat « and drink with 


himafter he roſe froin the deed. | 

s Chriſt after his ReſurreQion appeared not to the wicked Jews ; 
for being to ſuffer 10 more, his enemies were not vouchſafed a fight 
of him ; and thus he did not manifeſt himſelf unto the world, 
John 14. 22, # Theſe witneſſes were the Apoſtles, - who were cho- 
ſen by God himſelf immediately ; and the vacancy ſupplied by lor, 
which was at God's direQion, Chap. 1. 24, 26. The metaphor here 
uſed is taken from the otdinary way then in uſe of chuſing men 


' into offices, which is here alluded to. « Though in the Gofpel-Hi. 


ſtory, we do not read that our Saviour drank after he roſe again ; yer 
it is ſufficiently implied, being he did eat, and make a meal with 
his Diſciples, Luke 24. 30,42, 43- John 21. $2. and eating 1s put in 


: Scripture for the whole refeQtion, Mat. 15. 2. compared with Luke 
a The Word of reconciliation betwixt God and man, not onely - 


. 36. 

42 And he x commanded us to preach unto the peo- 
ple, and to reſtifie char itis* he which was ordained of « ch, r7.51 . 
God ro be z thejudge of z quick and dead. 

x Our Saviour gave this charge ro his Apoſtles before his Aſcen- 
ſion, Mat. 28. 19. Mark 16, 15. Luke 24, 27. and forerold thar 
they ſhould execute this his charge, Chap. 1. 8. » That God hath 
ordained to judge rhe World by Jeſus Chriſt, Scripture abundantly 
teſtifies, John 5. 26, 27, 2 Tim. 4.1. 1 Pet. 4. 5. And this is here, 
ſpoken of the Apoſtle, and was given in charge by our Saviour to 
be principally Preached of by them all, becauſe the ReſurreQion of 
Chriſt, and the glory of his Kingdom in this World, is clouded by 
the blindneſs and hardneſs of men; as alſo, becauſe it is of the 
greateſt concernment unto all, that at any time hear the Word of 
God, to be perſwaded of this, chat Chriſt, whoſe Goſpel and 
Word they hear, will judge them according unto it. = Such as 
ſhall be alive at the coming of onr Lord to Judgment, 1 The. 


&« IF. | 
43 * Tohim agive all the Prophets witneſs, that +... 2,524, 
through 4 his name whoſoever believeth in him, ſhall re- Mic. 7. 18. 


ceive remiſſion of fins. | | 
3 This our Saviour had told his Apoſtles, which St. Peter hete 
fMmmme}] Preaches 


£ 
o 
'Y —_ br A. * RS > 
TS TEE CE Be EO CEC = www 
- _ —— —— by — R I 


= 


ddd, 7 »A T - y 
—— ca ale. nee = 
= —_—_—— 
tg 4 i = 
PEEEIOI 


—T; 


oo = 22 e 
—_ ——_ 


" _ 
> 


- > wee EDS - 
. © — vo 
We Fa == 


WS rs 


mer 


I BS 
—_— A = 
- f EE OC 
= +> . ® 
- I _ - \—_ $62 , PF AT TTOOR , Me 
- m5 ww: 4 - W, 
Sort Da pai - Ps.” 4. _—_ : — " = 
q - Ty : RE IS ET. F .£ 
_ — to a hoon = = - - 
__ ” = D TO2D . p _ — -— - - 
I =? : IRA «by : - - 
_— nay repre LE. . - : 3 - . A bh 2 
LS = i . w - 7 by P 


Mm tem 
sf 


> iS Oo 
Poaches to bis Auditorss Tr was included in the very firſt piomiſe 
woo 3d by Moſs, Cen 4.15. Tre ſ.ed of the woman ſhall break the 
we ! oof nd 4 continued through all aves of rhe Church, to 
FPOT OA 5 CBA ; oY © ——_ Y 
Manic in ſuch d-grecs as it pleaſed the witdom of God to make 
it kongn ; Fs certain that all the ceremonial Law CONCErning Sa- 
erificcs, Cid rift fie this very thing ; for by ir, it did appear , that 
"I - {helins of blood thers was no remiſſion of fin, as Heb. 9 
e:, and *tis manif:it by the light of nature, that the blood ot bu/l; 
and roats, could mot toke away fins, as Heb' 19. 4. © But through 
Corilis name, for his fake. and by vertue of his merit, who died for 
our jiur, and role ag.3in for our Juſtification, Rom. 4.25. We ſha# re- 
ecive rewiifion of fins, Held. 0. 13, 14+ 
i. 44 Whilec Peter ver ſpake theſe words d, the * holy 
5. Gi-it {ell on all rhem which heard the word. 
c That God might miraculouſly ſhew his approbation of what 
P.cor had 1hid, and to aflare Pererof the rea) Converſion of theſe Gen- 


$:les, which all the Jews did make ſuch a difficulty to believe. 4 Such 
fiery tongues in a _vitivle ſhape, as had app2-red unto the Apoſtles, 
Chap. 2. 3. Whereby the inward powerful cftcQs of the Spirit upon 
their hearts was fionified, what wonderful effects had this ſhort Ser- 
mon ? And doubtleſs, were prattiſers but as fincere, and hearers as 
intent, now adays, as then, we {hould find that the hand of the Lord 
1s not thortnzd. 


45 And ec they of the circumciſion which believed, 
atonified, 2s many 25 Came with Peter, becauſe f 


were alt becal 
thar on the Gentiles alſo was poured out the gift ot the 


holy (31140ft. 


e Such as were not onely them!clves circumciſed, but born of 


who are thus called, Gal. 2. 12. f Theſe 


circumcifed parents, Ga | | 
{anding the many predictions of the calling 


not minding, or under 
of the Gentiles, thought that Chriſt was onely promiſed unto the 
JEWS ;; 
convince them to the contrary. g Pouring out, ſpeaks the 
abundant meaſure in which the Holy Ghoſt was given unto 
tem. : 
46 For they heard them ſpeak with þ tongues, and 
magnitie God, Then anſwered Peter, | 

þ W.th variety of Languages, or ſtrange Tongues, as in the day 
of Pentecoſt, Chap. 2.6. i An ordinary Hebra:zſm: for ſpeaking, 
theuzh the fiſt part ofany Diſcourſe. And Perer knowing that this 


miraculous Fiery Tongues did ſhew, that thele Men did partake of 


the ſame Spirit from whom the Apoſtles had received them, he makes 
an inference fiom thence. 

47 & Can any man forbid water, that theſe ſhould not 
be baptized, which have received the Holy Ghoſt as well 
as We? : 

þ This queſtion, as Chap. $.36. is without queſtion, and denies 
thar any can orbid Water, that is in order to Baptize fuch as theſe. 
As if th Avoitte had argued thus: They that have the Grace 
Honifed or pruwled, have a right unto the Seal of the promiſe : 
Pr: ofe Gentiles have the Grace fignifizd ur promiſed in Baptiſm ; 
they had the inward part, and therefore the outward part could 
not be denied unto them. He thar hath th2 Inherirance, may 
claim the Writings, VWex, and Parchment tnat bzlong unto it, 

a8 And he commanded them to be baptized in the 
name of the Lord, Then prayed #2 they him to tarry 
2 Certain days. 

2 Thar is, in the Name of oor Saviour. But this doesnot imply, 
hat that they were Baprizcd according to our Saviours preſcription, 
Ataztth. 28. 19. but the Jews by their Baptiſm, they were become 
the Lords, { and had given up their names to Jeſu Chriſt ) under 
which Title the Lord, not only our Savi 
Anointed him, and the Spirir by whom þ-- Anointed, 1s to be 
und=:food. » Cornelius and the reſt ofhis Friends, which he caufed 
to be preſent. Ar tieir entreaty Percy and others that came with 
him (as As 11.3.) tarried there, that they might further inſtruQ, 
confirm, and comtort them: (as the beſt have ever need ro learn, 
and to grow in Grace and Knowledge ) and by this Percr ſhewed 


AUT S 


7 They were ſuch Jews as converſed with them of the Chyrc?, .... 
” it, JN 


and were amazed to fee now ſuch an Argument as might | 


bur the Father who ; 


argued againſt them tor taking in the Gentiles into any 
with them. Bur it may be that the believing Jews might for ati. 
be vety weak, and offended at it, until they were further "WS $ep 
the following Relation of St. Petcr, *.* Till then they difoureg. " 
brought what Arguments they could againſt ir, EO OY 
3 7 Saying, Thou wenteſt in to men uncircumcijc 
and didſt eat with them. I 
+ Thas 1s the ObjeCtionthey make againſt Perer, That contri; , 
the Traditioneof their Elders, and Precepts of their Wiſe Men, he 3 
familiarly converſed with the Gentiles, See Chap. 10 28. this the 
look upon as Piacular, although no converſation in order to _ 
gaining of the Gent:{es unto God, was ever forbidden ; but only fuck 
as might withdraw the Jews from God. "0 
4 But Peter s rehearſed rhe matter fromthe beginning 
and expounded iz by order unto them, ſaying, ; 
s This great Apoſtle condeſcends to the leaſt and weakel} amongſt 
them, and gives an Account of what he had done, and the Reajg, 
that moved him unto ir, if by any means he might gain ſome, 10, 
confirm others. ; 
5 * I wasin the city of Joppa praying, andin a trance, 


great ſheet, let down from heaven by four corners an; 
It came even to me. 

See this whole Narration ſpoken to in the foregoing Chapter 
; To ſhew that he was eſpecially concerned in this Viſion, it bzing 
for his inſtruQion and regulation. 

6 Upon the which when I had « faſtened mine eye; 
[ conſidered, and ſaw four footed beaſts of the ear} 
and wild beaſts, and creeping things, and fowls of the 
alr. 

« It ſpeaking his great intentiva of mind upon it 3 (Go 6 
ordering of it, that it mich: leave the greater impreflion VD0n 
him. | 

7 AndI heard a voice faying unto me, Ariſe, Peter 
ſlay, and ear x, 

«= He might now uſe them without any diſtinftion jndif., 
reatly. 

Ss But I ſaid, Not ſo, Lord : for nothing » con. 
mon or unclean hath at any time z entred into my 
mouth. 

7 St. Petey here avoucheth, that he had lived in this ceremoni!] 
Righteouſncſs, though he thought himſelf far from being juſj. 
_ thereby. z He abſtained trom all the appearances of thir 
vil, 

9 But the voice anſwered me a again from hez- 
ven, What God hath cleanied, haz call not thou com: 
| INOTL | 
| 3 This is twice ſpoken to St. Perer, that it might be thenere 
; unqueſtionable with him and others : it ſeeming othervil: 
| very ftrange;- and it may be therefore twice by St. Luke re- 
| corded, 

Mi And this was done 6 three times.: and all were 
'drawn up again c into heaven. 

6 For the ſame reaſon but now mentioned, That God might 
| more abvndantly manifeſt this Myſtery of the calling in of the 
| Gentiles, which had been fo long id. c All this was trom Hz 
;Ven; unto which allo ir tended, namely, to bring the Genizs 
' thither. | | 
11 And lehold, immediately there were d three men 
already come unto the houſe where 1 was, ſent from 
Celarea, Unto nie. 

d yo many fent : and ſuch a Jonrney willingly undertaken, forto 
gain InſtruCtion in the way of Lite. | ; 

12 And * the Spirit bad me go with thero, nothing* | 
doubting : Morerver, theſe e ſix brethren 2ccompanied&1; 


that he looked upon himfelt and others as not bound to obſerve thoſe 
Precepts (of the Wiſe Men, as they called them) forbidding them all 
Janiitaricy with tae Uncircumciſed. 


CiFAT. XL 


Pater rermring to feruſulem, 75 accuſed ſor going tothe uncircumciſed ; 
or +þ 72 [1c Def C2, 7s approved, I - 18. The diſpcrſed Be- 
fevers pregeh the Goppel at Phenice, Cyprus, axd Antioch, where 
m7: oy fre power of 292 Lord believe, 19---21. The Church at Jeru- 
Falem ſend 55 Barnbr 7 Antioch, to confirm them that believe, 


-» 


me, and we enrred f into rhe mans houſe : x 

e Whom they might hear reſtifie the ſame thing, that in ti! 
mouths of fo many it mighr be eſtabliſhed. F This Man meant, 
15 Cornelizs, concerning the entry into his Houſe, and converis 
with him, the doubt or controverſie was that he was now fp:i- 
ing to, 

i3 And he ſhewed us how he had ſeenan g angel 
in his houſe, which ſtood and faid unto him, Send men 


22---24. he departeth to Tartus, ro feck Saul; borh return to 
Ant'o:n, where :he Diſciples are cailcd Chriſtians, 25,26. Agabus | 
faretlleth the famine : The Diſciples fend relicf tw the Brethren in | 
Judea, &y the hand of Barnabas and Sau!, 279 ——30. | 

Fi ND cheapoſiles 0, and brethren that were in 

> Jude, heard that the P Gentiles alto had re- 
ceived the word of God. 

o Tie reit ofthe Believers, -who had not onely one God to their 
Father, but cne Church co their Mother, and were born of the | 
lime Spirit, and were ied by the fame Milk of the Word of God. | 
p Fins was a moſt incredible thing unto them who were of the Seed 
of ,draham according to the Eieth, and were not acquainted with 
Thar MyRery that Abraham thould have a Seed of his Faith, upon 
whom all rhe Promiles were eatailed, Theſe looked vpon the Gen- 
:ies as moſt execrable perions, fuch as the Apoftle deſcribes Epreſ. 2. 
12, that had rg hope, and were without God, and therefore no leſs 


A x ;f SE » 1 3M » —— 3 —_ _ 9 ww 3 
than a nie, ad that well atrcfied,as this was, could make them 
Ch : then ouon. 
F, £ We = | \ & "YE . - * A -* ” va ' 7% ”X' » 2f 
2 Gt WAOEN TELL WAs CMIMS UD fo 'eruſalem q,they 
x '*. 1 . 5 + L * 
ICC Of rna Fir FP 0 3 ATRE * PAT. b| 
jilai V/ wo Ww a L C UOCOINSE! 07 « Contended with him, 


to Joppa, and call for Simon, whoſe ſurname!s 
Perer : 

£g Who by reaſon ofhis appearing a Man, is in Chap. 10. 39: Cale 
leda Man. 

14 Who ſhall tell thee 4 words, whereby thou, and 
all thy houſe ſhall be ſaved z. 


þ God promiſes that un0o1 hisobedience to this Oracle, 1n ſending 
for. Peter( he ſhould te!l Lim thoſe things that were neceiiary i be 
known. # By him and his whole Family unto their Salvation 
Whatſoever was formerly the caſe of ſuch as obeyed the Precept © 
Noah (as they were called ) after Chriſt is come, and Preaclizd Wi 
ro the World, there is no other way unto Salvation but chrouga 
him. | 

15 And as I k began to ſp2ak, the Holy Ghoſt felon 
them /, ason us at the beginning. 

k Whilſt Peter was ſpeaking, as Cp. 7. I. 
on them, as in the day of Pentgeoit, Chap. 2. 4. he bad fi 
Apoſtles, either vilibly by Fic: y Cloven Longues; OF rat 
traordinart]y enduing them v-ich che Gift of Tongues ; £4 
moſt illiterate amongſt rhem to ſpeak in any Language, 2c- 
any to underſtand, towards their Salvation. \G Then 


7 The Holy Ghoſt fl! 


llen on the 
her by ex- 
bling the 
d{a} tor 


fellow thin 


I faw a viſion, A certain vellel deſcend, as it had been ; g.. 


v1 [1 


ear! 


Poſe « 
\y 


þ 


th. " 


for to 


hing* (þ 
ned &15 


n fit 
neant, 
nverie 


ſpraks 


ingel 
men 
meis 


0, Cal 


and 


-nd1ng 
- 16 be 
vation- 
pt» ot 
2d un- 
1-0ugt 


ell ofn 


oft fel! 
on the 
: by ex- 
ing the 
{al for 


Then 


= 
A, 


The AGCTX 


*z - [9 
uv! Nin . .C + M2 - 4” WP 3 ! A 4 = \ 2 _ SS V.. 5 = . a 
6 Then remembred I the word » of the Lord, how; ons. For all which they might cry Grace, Grace. By the Gracs of 


I 


1 4 f 2 
63 v 


= . . > 237 6 14 : : - = - 

Te ſaid 2 John Indeed baptized o with Water; our pe rode _ - _— _ o_ encrealing of tas Churc\ , 
Gy i 1, . T3 » IJ.) «7 br , N = he, O 1T 1UCH as OUT © aved. k This 15 matters of I; 
_ be baptized . « WICH the Lit (3Hhoir, Eh F Heaven, Luke 16. 7, and of all ſuch 235 are hs i] Sans X 4 
, Of Chriſt, who is every where fo called, » But theſe words | and preparing for that Blifful place. 1 Firm ard 6254» 
7 x " *  C1C p par - * ace. 1rM and iizC 
ſem rather ſpoken by St. 7ohn himizif, Marth. 3.11; Mark t bo p ES 
"mates no difference. For, Firſt, Wharſoever a Diſciple 

5 a MAaxes 10 UtNISrentEg. OT iiat, tiatloever 4 Bifci Je ] "O! » p 5 —_— * 
which C,ve in his Name Ic 15 2 26 If were fon by hi: CIC : _ would keep cloſe to the profeſſion of cas Trut!y Gi Cirrif- 

*Jurifh JOY OR PO ITTE'y 2%. 99 23. 28 BY WT'S | POE Pihis purpoſe of heart [ 4 9. a | 
Ctr] id } [ no” B Cor mh Ti . - OG al j P Pe 07 ear; 15. the ſame vv ith the while heart - Ee -) 
that carer? Fo, KEAVET 13 Ne. DUt, HEZONU: Y, hough this Was jpozen | Which muſt be joyned _— OM cho Gop CORE I 
by the Baptift, it was fpoken by our Saviour alfo, Chap. 1.5. o By] Wars , ae 00 LOWS Aru and 


".:.» the great diff:rence 15 implied betwixt outward Baprill > % 
i. the great diff:rence 15 L EWIXE outward Baptiſm 24 For he was » a good man, and * fi! of the Hoty 


and 


7 0 
1.4 a5 


, . . 2 = 
That come what can come, tribulation or ditrif., Lf no: tcath 


i” 


VO o 
* A. 


tes 'bomfaever, though the Bantiſt himſelf) and the 2 
A 4ninifrred by WiOn OV EL AIMPOINT. PITS Dit Mie ) ana ne "»” 6 J 
Ho Baptiſm of the Holy Ghoſt, which, a5 Fire, {efarates power- Ghoſt, and of Faith, and o much peop'e was addet} un- 


Golly the «kum and drois of {in from us. .*. The extraordinary Gifts | 10 the Lord 
of the ypirit. . , : - : 7 Barnabas 15 here deſcribed to be beyond wht te Tows called 2 
I7P Foraſmuch then as God gave them the like giftas | Rightzous Man, who wou'd fay to his Neighbour, That which is 
be d:d unto us, who believed on the Lord Jeſus Chriſt q, | Y0815; i5yours; _— "_ ne 2s 1057 meaning fork 23 
He Fey A 2 /0U:d GO NO Wrong ; but Barnabas as the gooz Mar in their efteern 
what was | that I "_ ———— n (foch an ens ag the Apull s f ke rn on Rn, 
» The Apoſtles Argument 3s cogent : They who have the Grace | woyjd dare to die ) had aftually made, ard not called onely, that 
miked by Baptiſm, ought to have the Seal of thatGrace ; but | <1; i np ; : ——_— wee arora, 
Gonitied by Baprifm, gar to. ; which was his, his poor Neighbours; {«1!; l 
WU | - ren gs, "aero O: hs as his, p elghbours, felling what he kad to he- 
the Gen:tles had the Grace _—_ pF y Daptim. r they who have | flow upon them, as Chap. 4.35. o His good works accompany ng 
the inward Baptifin , may not be enited the outward, As he that | hi; good preaching, might be a great means of the Converlion Ff is 
hath a right to an Inher:r2nce, caanot without Injuſtice be denied many. : ws 
te Writings and Seals thereunto belonging. 4 To deny Baptiſm 
unto any, unto whom it dota belong, 1s ro withſtand God, and to Saul 
kep back the -Toxcn of Gods Love from ſuch uazro whom it is | Þ? DAU : 
"4 2 Þ Sal or Parl being Barnabas Friend and Acquaintance, whom 
s ® bat . 4a I” _ 4 y - py , - 
i$ When they heard theſe things, they » held their — had EY hers nina ok S—_ Chap. 9. 27. 
Soo - Wn OS now to ſeek him, that th 1oht advite a; 
Pe4ce, and glorified God, 490g, Then hath s God a. anna _— mighr adviſe and ftrengthen oae 
Lge he Cancil . Dent. Po 5 : 
alſo unto ce. GEntiies granted repentance z unto life. 26 And when he had tound him, he brought him unto 
» They were fully fatisfizd with the reaſon Sr. Perer had given Antioch. And ic caire tn paſs, thar Sg” le y 
th:m of his admitting the Gentiles unto Baprtiim, and fellowthip with h ry : * wo <4 | my at q a Waole year 
him ; wiſely inferring from what Peter had ſaid, That it wasof God, | *EY allembled themſelves [| with the chu: ch,and taught þ Or, 7» 
what hz had done, who was to be acknowledged init. 5 Repentance much people; and the diſciples r were called Chriitians Chzrch. 
is the Gift of God, as well as Faith, or any other Grace, 2 7:m. 2.| firſt in Antioch, 
25, Or CAN the greateſt griit aft the hearc with true godly ſorrow, g Frequency of meeting to partake of the Ordinances of God 
uncil Gol hath guickened 1t. 7 2 called Repentance unto life, be- | is the great reaſon why the Goſpel was fo prevalent in this place, 
carle God hath appointed that 1t ſhould precede our entrance into | r Which wiil be renowned fo long as the World laſts, becauſe here 
life. _ Res | . the Banner of Chriſt was firſt publick!Fſer up, and Men Liſt:d un- 
19 % Now they which were « ſcattered abroad UD- } acer GM : and this by Divine Authority, (for the Word 1Nports no 
0 the perſecution that arvie about Stephen, cravelled as | /*15 ) and that it was not. a name they gave themſelves, much lets 
faras x Phenice, and 7 Cyprus, and z Anrioch, preach- | /& 5.2 22ms the Eneaues of Chrilt;anity gave unto the Profeſſors 
Bra. ot 27, ior they called them Nazareans or Galileans, aut of contempr. 


- nt than "04 " 1.2 BUITt } i I | ! F ; "2 1 m, . . . 
Ing t: erd to non? but untotheJewson!y., ButGod would have Chriſts Diſciples to bz called Chriſtians: not 


a $2 fre bath It been from the beginning Ot the Golpe), that-P only as Scholars were amongſt the Greeks called from their Maſters 
ſaugitts Meri pr i4m eſt | men Eccleſtiz. St, Srepien 5 Geath ; and the | (viz. Platoniſts, Pythagoreans, &c ) toteach us whom we profels to 
pzrſecytion upon it, Was a great moans of difleminating the Golpe). | learn of, and to bs inftruted by; burto mind us of our UnSion 
Thus all things work for good. &« tie Country «bout Tyre. ' » An }( for Chriſtians are anointed Omes) i John 2.27. and are made by 
Wand in the Medrrerr anew Sa. 2 The Mciropolrs of Syria. , This | Chrift ( in a Spiritualſenſe ) Kings and Prieſts enro God and his F2- 
explains what was brielly faid, Chap. 8. 4 and fhew'd what places ther, Revel. 1. 6. 
the Diſciples were ſcattered into, and Preached in. They preached 27 © Andin theſe days came s Prophets from Teru- 
to the Jews onely becauſe they were not yet perſvaded of the "N os Mets y pac. CrtyU- 
calling of the Gentiles; God fuiicring them to be enlightned by gy Ne noch. : | 
degrees. - oo age vo ag __ =—_ One nd even _ to = IC. 

any 4 1 mich God did furniſh fome of his Church wichal on 
—_ - __ pops a men - "_ ( _ ſuch an extraordinary occalion, Ephef. 4s t. whereby they did 

feng, WNICH WHEN tNEy WETE COME TO Þ {ANTIOCNIPAKE | before-hand fignitie future chings tor the good of the Church, as 


untothe c Grecians, preaching the Lord Jeſus. 


25 Then departed Barnabas to * Tarſus, for to ſect * cs, + 


* Ch.6'4 


cy 


a 
% 
- 


LE 


re. 
a They were fuch as were born in Cyprus and Cyrene, but had 23 And there ſtood up one of them,named * Agabus, * Ch. 21. ts 


+ r habitation in Jeruſalem ; and now upon the Perſecution there, | ang ſignified 7 bv the Spirit, That there ſhould be great 
I: unto Axtioch. 6 Which by this means in time became the dearth th b 211 cha L.4- "i "a 
%r1\z/em of the Gentile-Chriftians, whither their greateſt reſort eaFfril © rouvg out all the world: which came to pals 1 
wa, c Here they of the diſperſion taught notonly tuch Hellenifts the « deys of Ulaudius Czlar. 

3 are ſpoken of, Chap. 6. 1. who were born of Hebrew Parents, ft By a revelation irom the Spirir, a5 one ©f his Gifts. and not 
tough living out of the Country of Fudea 3 but ſuch alſo amongſt | by Judicial Aſtrology, or any other means real or pretended. For 
tix Gntiles ( who are generally called Grecks fince Alexander”s | it 1s a Prerogative of Cod onely, to toretell things ro come, as 1/*, 
tinz, who conquered all thoſe Nations round about, and brought | 41. 22, 23. # This Famine Szezonivs and other Heathen Writers 
n his own Language amongſt them ) who forfaking Folatry, and | make mention of, though lome place 1t one year, 2ndſomse in a- 
worthipping the True God, were called £2%uzyor, Devont or Re- | nother year of Claudius his reign, it may b= there were divers 
ligiew perfons, ſuch as Cornelius is ſaid to be, Chap. 10. 2. And thus | famines, or one migar conrinue divers years; bur thus God, who pro- 
God by degrees brought in the knowledge of himſelf, and his Son vided for the Patriarchs by mens of Joſeph's foreſecing of the ſcarcity 
Jus Chriſt. a Which knowledge onely 15 that which is neceflary | 1n Egypt, and elſewhere ; pr vides tor his Church now alſo by a lize 
uno Salvation 3 and that only which Sar determined to know, | prediction. Gods Oimnitcience 15s exerted for his Churches pre- 
1 Cor, 2, 9. tervation. 

21 And * the e hand of the Lord was with them - | 29 Then thediſciples, every man « according to his 
and fagrexr number believed, and curned unto the | abiiry,derermined co fend reliet unto the brethren which 
Lord, y dwelt in Judea. 

e The Power, Afiſtance, and Working of God-exprefſed by x Which 15 the merſure whereby we muſt mere ont unto others, 
thethnd ; which is the Org2n or Inftrument Men uſe in Working. | Ze 11. 41. we are t give alms of fuch things as we have, or ac- 
This Hand, or Work of God was manifeſt : Firth In the Miracles | cording as we are able. » Thele brethren- or believers in Judes, 
which thzy wrought. Secondly, Inthe Converfion of any by theſe ; W-r= very poor, by realon otthe extraordinary maliceand perſecution 
Miracles. For theſe alone cannor ſotten a heart ; as appeared in | of the Jews againſt thzm, and therefore recommended by St. Par! 
P.arach, whoſe heart was hardened by them. F Faith and Con- | unto them of A:4ais, (elpectally to the Corinthians) and to the be- 
V1!on are wrought by the Hand of the Lord, and are his Work. hevers in Macednza. G 
But in vain is Faith pretended unto, waen there 1s no change in 
- arlagy Life. What God hatin put together, none may put by the hands of Barnaby _ Saul. LG 

a : z lotne oirles ; or it the as CIS Probable ) were gone on 

22 © Then tidings of theſe caings cameg unto the | ,f Teruſalem, — the Goren or chief of the Chunk for 
*$0f the church which wes in Jeruſalem : and they | the famine being to come over all 7:ez, *ris moſt probable, thar 
ſent forth þ Barnabas, that hs ſhould go as far as the other Churches, belides that in Jeruſalem, did partake of this 
Antioch , bounty. 

8 This Pleenaſm ſeems emphatica!, to ſhew with What readineſs CHAS AHI. 
nd delight the Church heard the news cf che Converſion of fo-many _ : AER G 
to Chriſt. þ Of Barnabas we read, Chap. 4 36. who had given ſuch | Herod wezerh the Church, and kilerh James, tmpriſoncth Peter : the, 
earneſt of Love t> God, and true Fairh in Chriſt, for whoſe ſake Church prayeth for him : he us delivered by an Angel : and cometh t9 
he fold what he ha, 6 the honſe 0 f Mary, and "_—_ t9 all there aſſembled what the Lord 

2? boy he cam A had 6 OP 4300 had done, 1——-— 19. erod ſmitten vy ax Angel for his pride, 
God ho, Ko eqns a and had Rs Sato panting 20—=—23. The Ward of God multeplic,) © Suites an Saul re” 

, was k glad, and * exhorted them all with / pur- p I 
oſe « CET. - ? : turn from ſerulalem, 24, 25. 
Poe of heart they would » cleave unto the Lord. 
: Which appeared in their Convertion, being. made manifeſt by 


5 eh x / T a bd w qe (_ 
v forth vis harids þ to vix ec cet inatipechurch. 


| | PR Wy - . . x » -— 
"= protclhions z and antwered by their Pious livesand Converſatt- | Tha 
4 a re 


39 * Which alſo they d:d, and ſentit & tothe elders © Ch. 15.25. 


LN TOwabnutthart time, « He 4 the king || ftretched | Or, {528 


F- 
Co IT. AF 


= 


_—_ ha + + 
y- >_>» car wr 6 
BD IIEEDG 


== Ut Sa 
_—_ by. {2 an -— 

wt Sa 997 
G4 2 wot 


» - : 
bad h_ 
pI a <A ” p_> 
IN 7% 935 
gr. wg * 
- »* porn rg 
”—_ ot —_— ha 
- "+ Wh GED. — 4 
en Fa 6 
_- - _ 
. y_ : 
. x — x0 _— 
b. OLE - _—__—_— 
we -——_ 
y _ 


a 
©” 0A 


* Mat. 4 21. 


*Fx.23.15. 


Chap. 


"on 
tg 

X1 

a There were ſeve1a] Hevods mentioned in Scripture, being all of , 
the funily of Hercd the grear, ( by whoſe name they were called, 
3. He: od that killed the children in Berlehems, called A4fcalonita ; ano- 
ther that beheaded St. John, and derided our Saviour, ( this Herod 
wa: ſurnamed Antipas } the Herod here ſpoken of was called /gr!ppa; 
the Son, or as ethers think, the Nephew of Ariſtobulzs, and was 
the Father of that Agrippa we read of, Chap. 25.26. being Vice- 
roy, or King under the Roman Emperor : This Herod did not onzly 
kill ſome, bur 6 puniſhedothers with baniſhment and blows; and c e- 
{pecially the Goveinours of ohe Church, knowing how much all tut- 
fer 1n them. 

2 And he killed 4 James the * brother of John with 
the ſword. 

& Who had efpecia'ly rke care of the Church at Jeruſalem ; one 
eminent amongſt the Apoſtles, an1 one of the Sons of Thunder ( or 
Boanerges ) for his zealous and earneſt Preaching, and therefore the 
more hated by Herod ; ſo that which our Saviour had foretold him, 
came now to paſs, Matth. 20. 23. that he drank of the cup our Sa- 
viour did drink of. There was another James, who wrote the Epi- 
file, known by his name, and was called 7ares the lefs ; becauſe as 
ſome think, he was brought to the knowledge of Chriſt after the 0- 
ther, of whom we read, Aarki Fo 40. 

3 And becauſe he ſaw e it pleaſed the Jews, he pro- 
ceeded further to take Peter allo. Then * were f the 


days of unleavened bread. "SO 

« All the poſterity of Herod the great, by his example ſtudied chict- 
ly to pleaſe the Rowan Emperors, and to gratifie the Jews wherher 
by right or wrong : f Or the Paſſover, which Feſtival ſolemnity 
laſted cight diys; and God over-ruled the hypocriſie of Herod, ( for 
he did not out of piety obſerve this time ) for the preſervation of 
Peter ; and Herod might fear ſome tumult of rhe people, in ſo great 
2 concourſe, for which he did defer it ; howſoever, the perverſeneſs 


* of the Jews is very remarkable,who were,mad withrage againſt Chriſt 


* Juh.21. 13. 


i! Or, Int ant 
and earneſt 
praver tas 
made. 


* Ch. 5. 1c, 


and his Apoſtls, at ſuch times in which they pretended to ſerve the 
God of love and peace. 


4 And * whenhe had apprehended him, he put him 
in priſon, and delivered him to g four quaternionsof ſol- 
dicrs to keep h.m, intgnding + after Eaſter to bring him 


forth :to the people. 

g There were lixren Soldiers appointed to keep Peter ; the 
Romans uſing four Soldiers at a time to keep Ceptry, and the Jews 
dividing their nights tnto four watches, there were enough to re- 
lieve the others, and to ſet a new watch as often as was required 
for every night; of which four at a time, two were with the pri- 
ſoner, and perhaps for the greater ſecuriry, bound with the ſame 
chain; Md two did always ſtand at the door or gate ; and this 
they might the rather« do, out of great caution, having heard 
what Miracles Pefer did ; and that he had been delivered by an 
Angel out of priſon, Chap. 5. 19, h That day in which the 
Paſchal Lamb was eat, on Which the Fews would. put none to 
death, that they might not eclipſe the joy of that day. # Todo 
with him what they would, leaving him to their mercy, or rather 
cruelty, 

5 Peter therefore was kept & in priſon ; but || prayer 
was made / without cealing of the church unto God for 
him. 


& Till a fir time to offer him up as a Sacrifice unto the people ; ſo 
balely do wicked men ſtoop for their ends : The onely help or hope 
poor Chriſtians had, was fiom prayer, (preces & lachryme) there are 
no quaternions of Soldiers can keep the paſſage ſhut thatis towards 
Heaven. ! Continued, long prayers, without intermiſſion ; but alſo 
fervent and earncft prayers, nouns, with all the might of cheir 
Souls ; remembring the Apoſtle now in bands, as bound with him, 
Hcb. 13. 3. 


6 And when Herod would have »» brought him 
forth 2, the ſame night Perer wass ſleeping berween two 
ſoidiers, bound with ptwo chains, and-the keepers be- 
fore the door kept the priſon, 

»m To be put todeath. » This is a night to be remembred, as 
that in which God delivered his 1/7ae] out of Egyps ; when both were 
come to the urmoſt extremity, and at the pits brink, then ſo God 
does his marvellous Work of deliverance, that it ought to be had in 
remembrance, Pſal xo5 5. o Innocency hath this advantage, and a 
good conlcience acquieſces in the providence of God ; it hath God 
to its friend ; and if he be for us, who can be againſt us? p See 
veiſe 4. To which may be added, Thar with one chain, St. Pezcr's 
right hand was bound to the Soldiers Jefr; with the other chain his 
Ietr hand to the other Soldiers right ; for ſo was their manner for 
their greater ſecurity, rhat chey might not J:r the priſoner eſcape, 
thus pe; {ccutors areskyfu! to deſtroy; bur no device can avail againſt 
any whom God will ſave. 


7 And behold * the q angel of the Lord » came upon 
hin, and a slight ſhined in the priſon : and he : ſmote 
Peter on the fide, and raiſed him up, ſaying, Ariſe up 
guickly. And his chains fell off from h;s hands. 


g Whoſe office is to miniſter for the heirs of Salvation, Heb. 1. 14. 
and who willingly fulfil this Will of the Lord; r as Luke 2. 9. Sud- 
denly and unexpettedly. 5 Whether this light was from the bright 
body the Angel afſumed, or from ſome other cauſe, weare nor rold; 
and therefore it is not neceſſary for us ro know ; bur it was a light 
one!y to Peter ; bur darkneſs to his keepers ; as the pillar of fire in- 
highrned onely the 1ſraelires which made them borh the more {ſtrange 
and miraculous. # The Angel ſfinote Perer, ( asone jogs, or gently 
Nrikes another) ro awaken hun ; Thus God was waking, though 
Peter lepr ; and by bis ; providence. watches over all his people for 
their preſervation : Chains could not hold any whom God will have 


free ; every thing loſes its face, when God {uſpends or withdraws 
tis concurrence 


wr ACT A 


Chay, Y ; 


$ And the angel faid nrito him, « Gird thy v1 . 

arty vas | Y {elf, ang 
bind og thy x ſandals: And fo he did. And hef:jrh un 
co him, Caſt y thy garment about thee, and follow 5. 

# The cuſtom being ro wear long garments, they were RE a, 
ro go about any buſinel(s until they had girt their garment; to Ga, 
hence Jeremy is commanded to get a gudle, Jer. 11. r, aboue 1c.” 
when he was to be ſent on God's errand, x The anda); we... — 
other than ſole-leather, bound or faſtned with thongs, , T7. ite, 
permoſt veſt (anſwerable to a cloak amongſt us.) God fainifl. ©. 
people thus with necetlaries, and he w:ll have them uſe the, 1 
35 they are able to ſerve them, even then when he is wok... = 
miracles fot their deliverances. "KY | 

9 And he went out and followed him, and wig ,,. FF 
chat it was & true which was done by the angel , by, 
choug ht he ſaw a viſion. a 

z The greatneſs and ſuddenneſs of the deliverance, wa, (,., 
it amazed him,it ſeemed incredible unto him ; not that he queg; a 
Gods power br goodneſs ; bur knowing that he was tg (yg, c_ 
Chriſts name ſake, he might the rather nor look for ſuch a deliverance 
and when it came, be as one that dreams, as P/al. 126. 1, Gogth;,.” 
fore bringing his people to ſuch extremities, that his Salvation mich 
be the more aſtoniſhing. | 

1o When they were paſt the afirſt and the ſecony 
ward, they came unto the iron gate 6 that leadeth yy. 
to the city *,which c opened to them of its ownaccarq.,, 
and they went out, and palied on through one fires , 
and forthwith the angel departed from !1:m, : 

a Guard or Sentinels. 6 The outmoſt gate that Jed our of ;4, 
priſon into the Ciry, (not that the priton its ſelf was out of the Cir; 1 
c God worketh a ſeries of miracles in their fir place and time, j, 
could have done them all together, and have opened this iron gate 
before hard, when he condutted Peter through thefirſt, then through 
the ſecond watch; bur it is good for Peter and us, to be cenyinre 
that we ſtand every moment in need of God's condu& and dzljje. 
rance. 

11 And when Peter was come 4 to himſelf, he jy 
Now I know of a ſurety, that the Lord hath * fn; lis 45 
angel, and hath delivered me e out of the hand of Here 
and from all the expectation of the people of th: 
Jews. 

« Out of that amazement, which ſo many wondet1ful thing; 1yq 
wrought in him, that he could not compoſe himfelfto rifles upon 
what he had heard and ſeen; he knew his deliverance was real 1nd 
effectual, e From Herod who had reſolved to have Killed him, x 
he had done James, wer. 2» and from the peoples expcQation, who 
_ heard the report of Heroa's reſolution, and longed tor the fulfilling 
OI 1f, 

12 And when he had conſidered f the rhins, hecanc 
to the houſe of Mary the g mother of John, whoſe fur: 


name was þ Mark ; where many were / gathered t:ge- 


One 


f 


t 
ther, praying. 
f Peter being delivered, meditates upon the greatneſs of the danger c 
that he had been in, and the goodneſs of God that had delivered 0 
him, and this whileſt walking in the ſtreer, and going along; no h 
place can exclude good thoughts, and holy meditation', g The o 
Mother is here deſc: ied by the Son, as the more known perlon ; fr 
here the parenr gains reputation, and to be remembred in this Scti- l; 
ptnre for her Sons fake. Thus a wiſe Son made a glad Mother, a I 
Prov 10. 7. h Some think, this was he that wrote the Goſpel call:d an 
by bis rame. 7 In this time of perſecution the Chriſtians met ſecret: a 
ly, and in |mai} numbers as they could ; theſe here mentioned, are 
chought to be private Chriſtians, becauſe it appears by the 17.4, an 
that Famcs, &c. were not there. i 
13 Andas Peter knocked at the & door of the gate, a s 
damiel came / || to hearken, named Rhoda, [C fpo 

& This was the outwardmoſt door to the Porch, or Court before py per 
the houſe. / Peing in a great fear ofa ſurpriſal, they ordered on? ;þ det 
to obſerve, and give an anſwer unto any that ſhoald come to [ir 
the houſe ; which was the more heedtully done, becauſe it was! art, 
an unſcaſonable rime of the night ; yer theſe holy men broke thi An 
reſt, and expoſed themſelves to many fears and dangers, rath! bear 
than not to allemt le ro ſerve God, when they could not lerve hun 
otherwile. Bn, 

14 And when ſhe knew Peters voice, ſ1e opencd nt VO! 
the gate 2 for gladneſs, but ran in, and roid how Peri! _ 
ſtond before the gare. 

m As one from her ſelf, not knowing what to do for gladnels, hi , 
Great and ſudden paſſions, have cauſed ſtrange exraſies, and death if Wy 
{e]f fomerimes : I he Spirits in grief lowing too faſt unto the heat þ Ca 
to fortifie it, and in joy leaving the heart as faſt, to meet the object I 
that caulſeth ir. U:roq 


15 And they faid unto her, Thou art » mad. But "hi 
ſhe conſtantly affirmed that it was even ſo. Then fad :fin 


, 

they, It is o hs angel. pile 

z Thou ſpeakeſt thou knoweſt not what ; thinking ber, out of cept « 
fear to have been diſcompoſed in her mind. o Some have thought, "Si 
that by Peter's Angel, no other was meant than tome Meſknget bows 
from Peter, which they might expe& from him in ſuch a calc as he vf Bay 
was in ; now though &1:aG, ( the word here ) ſignifies a Meta little , 
ger or an Angel, indifferently; yet how could Rhods then know be p' 


it to have been Peter's voice? A meſlengers voice being (oJ0! _ 
like his that ſent him, than another mans. They did probably I, 24 


mean, ſome Angel that had atſumed Pezer's ſhape, and 1mirate plie 
his voice: And the Jews having had a conſtant opinion, that at dT 
leaſt every good man hath a guardian Angel which God appoints Ours Þ 


to him for a mzans of his preſervation; might be apt tO _—_— Plicd 
thar this wasthat Angel whoſe charge St. Perer was, Mar. 1% 1% 


though :has Angel ſpoken of, Gen 48. 16. moſt probably m che 


n,e 


; "89-16! zd £ is 
| Tj Sc I} L*SS2 | Wl Mi Fy 
" 018 Tir AY $: (_ 11D. Ai, WELINHOR 
Ys = MD _ E448 4 ws P 
. , : 5 . RE mu 4 I PEG VOY ft if 06 GL. / 
J, þ- Angel of the New Covenaft, and not a created Angel, being Jacob} abroad. So tree ic 15, that Perſecntors by tae pulizng down of tl; 5:-0ke I # + vj 
d 111jcth in his name ; yer the opinion of tutelar Angels, though not; Church, do but build it v5. ijþ4 ii L's 
"4 ; Þ Vo - . . 1 3 1 : | * : < "+ 
; certain Or needful, 1s to this day ta0ught probabl?, 28 Ang Barnatas and Savlreturncd e from Toru (lem, lg { if *> | k 
” 16 But Peter p continued knocking: And when they j when thev- had fulfilled fiir [[minftery 2nd took with I Os, Cliroe NR 24. hi 
M — s X - J "= = ws _ [| ©2444 45 . gn 52 > þ *C0ah - 3 3. obl © F F tic x16 " 
- had opened 7e door, and faw him, they were aſtoni-| them g John whote frnmmewas Mark 2 AR $61 f 
0K 16 L C ”" wa 4 4 . ” 177 7 
* NP e They returned unto Ariiech, ff om whence they were font 12S "3%..; +280 
N {nev. : P : 5 . » xy VWViis CNS WEIIOS: 'S) J BY S343 '& 4CHh »” \-#/ "{* \. q j 4 P | 
*y p Peter might be unwilling to have his entrance into the houſe} 11. 26, :0 to carry the benevol.nce of che C{ uh 07 2290, 20 POLTR: | 18: 
; deterred, 1. Out of fear of being taken again, and his life concerned | that of Zudea, f Piis was the vo niſt:ry-or Service icy ware 27 4 | 0% 
" voor it, } Out of an earneſt defire to [>2 the brethren whom he pointed ro do. g U. wiom becare, Fe je ro. | NAMI | IF) 
# miohr hope to meet with there. 3. Our of zeal to declare the mercy bo | Mm | 80 
vl ia . . = SD . ' . . - 1 ' / H T 1 | : 121 
1+ of God towards him ; this fire Was kindled in him, and he lovght (; LZ A TY. * HL. | if þ | 00'S; 
C veſnl for:1t. 4 - _y P a © m_ # Bos ee] Am A £ 2 | pi i 4 if J 
; 15 Buthe * q beckoning unto them with the hand to "I ara aro -wh TM wt Ext Oe Wii vi NY. 
PLL . ! = - Fear at g4AMmMyr, ——5 - erg Tully, FX: Dediiry of--£ | Wl +! 
i0ly & hold their PEace, declared uUnro them how the Fr Lord Conmtrrey dcſiretnh t9 h:ar the Ira of Gov [ ', 4 "6 As | Fa 
s "1g ® _ 6 a M0 F A - : - : ' C'S ” a - Sh 3 b BN SG, AN * >. '* S©9IFGE Cy | j 
ut had Lrought (1M out of the þ! Hon, And n , ſaid, Go ſeek-th to tirn 11 from r he farts, CS, Pai! 7 p TITTY } 'I & 3' wy 
{hew thele things uUntro s James, and tc the brethren. him with Blindneſs: The Deprty believes the Devin FRO Wi! { F 
. 4 % JOY. OF 42m 1 REDS a < ro Pero wy Ry 93 a ; off Bac : $415 
as And he departed, and went into: 4nother Place. FOR _— , "-—_ ” eat, | ae: : J. ' | # 1207C2 + ; | : 
Ned o I: was uſual by the motion of the hand, both ro derfie gs ; n- "Ps _ EEE” © ns A OO OO D808 oy. 
for Clence, and to crave audience. 7 Peter gives God the glory, s fa wee ch 4 $ DEL oat —__ ORR OY 8 2h ee OO 1308: 4 'F 
ce, though an Angel had been the means of his delivery. s This 5 _ yo _ Ty 25, W945 pag ft, an rat} wy 33 "} | 
R " iem th 2; To . ts Dreaicied ty Y; > om - dS I 
Ce- 5 ames was the von of Alpheus, Matt, 10.3. Mark 3.19. and log 1 6k: a7" Jo my , Wy p Figs 4 Bk ” - David, Rn wt Pg '® 
, *J iy p ) L 5).46 22 S ;- i 6 1477 3 © 12.233 9; Z&ET 7.2 0 a , «+3 E 
git lucceeded the other James, (rhe brother of John, of whom wer. 2, Wee "» oy FY. ” 4 2 Me OE ED 1-1 0.0 
in governing the Church at Jeruſalem. # Peter could nor but know The. on = i ” —_ wy exp RA co G3 | A817 
nd 1 thould be ſought after, and rh-refore durſt not abide in one a Ne as ww Pg as —_— Fine $186. | | 
UN- Pace, left he ſhould Thas _ and cnc his friends that I : To {1 of tacgY feet azainſt tim, ani pars ty IKCON1GD, | K- 
—_ '1h , Our him. 10S tne great Apol Iz a+ Darvid formerl , : gat > > : +; 
"rd x f\ jþc 1:06.0586 4 - . . , , 4 [ Yo \ - 7 * - YO LELIFALS - ry ” * : $ - 
cer bl was hurited, @z 017 hunteth a partringe in the mountains, 1 Sam. l TOW : there were | in + the churc!; ena waSac *Cil1 7 KY 
* 26, 20. | N Antioch, certain 7 prophets 2nd r2 chirs; as 
Pl 7 p c , F a -_ py 4 g Fn By 4 FE F ol * 
en 15 Now aſſoon as « it was day, there was no ſinall | Barnibas,and Simeon that was called + Ni2.1,anl Lucius 4 
=") ſlr among the ſouldicrs, what was become of Peter. of / Cyrenes, end Man:en, which had beet: | 2ruuwpht | Or, 77: ie 
ho » The Souldiers, who were bound with Percy in the ſame chains, | up with Hercd the tietrarch, and Saul. Fiiter- Bro VN LER 
oat coJd not but en 25 they RN and with admirati- þ The true Church, which kath a being, an! whoſe boiler ard $427 ; { & *. 
ough on find the chains ſti]l holding them, though loofaed from Peter. | maker is God, Other Churches (as that of the Circumciiion) we no IRE fat; 
nced What jirange JMAgI1NATIONS they might have, 13not co be expretſed, | Chmiches or Convrevations of the Faithful. £ Theſe rio Oices Y Oh RR fn 
) K-13 . . M6. . _= -'y ONE ; nd This 7 0-5 F 
elive- though ſome guels at It. , might bein the ſame perton, as he that kd the Gift of Prophecv, i & 
19 And when Herod had ſought for him, and found | and could foretel things to come, might be a teacher ro inſtrutt the LS, 
ſad, him not, he x examined the keepers, and commanded CO but go my were RE ps ing Jo OR = 
, @ CXCEC; { & UIMIC, anotne anotner. &#& 1 hits S:mc0 
this 47 that :hzy ſhould by y put to death. And he wene down i bye ai Mey - Wh co, Pa " wine | hiryps mk tree 
; | iftinou ſhed from Simm Peter, and from Simeniths Canzanite 
: F 99 _ - R 5 * _ 7 : , - FE: þ 
rod, iro n Judea p' non, and FWOVE nw PER this name ct Niger bzing g'ven him by the Romans. I This lath 
. TeetinYg 2 . 11no , Ws. ". % - | 
| the xs That 1s judicially ; * pwr P. Ne a CT 107" -L46 eſcape of | been thoughr che n2me of Zyks, ir being more after the Lat 7: rer- 
At. Tre » They v Cn > I away ; and os moſt Pro- | mination; and that ir might bz he thit wrote the Goſpel ca'led by 
" hid babiy chought, unto Cl Ie P ace O preg ni : 2 inſtruments in | his name, and this Book of the 425. Flowtfvever we meer with ths 
le. e A - By: - a . : : 
upon periecution, God many times _—_ with in this World; and ſome- | name, Row 15. 21. Aad St. Pal ſends Salutation unto him thac 
dad times by the perſecutors themle Ves. ; was fo called. Born at a place ſo called, or brought up ia the Syna- 
n p 206 And Herod was [| highly diſpleaſed with them gogue, of the Cyrenians. Or which Czap 6.9. Either this Mnrzcx 
\, who ofz Tyre and Sidon : but they came with one accord Mr hag pparyes ry had] _ and Inſtructors 
1 : , . p F w ! 21r L 4 21N2 together. '8.4 W ira 
llling him, and having made Blaſtus f the kings a chamber. | 2 1m, their Educarion being tog-th Crna ub ooo 
"1. -heir friend leſired peace. þ their þ Antipas, Whoſet at novgit our Saviour, and killed the Bupriit. 
care : [211 "NCD rienda, GC P » Decal CU COUN- | And yer Minacn, as another Aſc s, kept his integrity in thac P,5mra/'s 
” j2 (TCV Was nouriſhed by the kings countrey, . | Court; and as Afſes, Heb. 11. 25. he chaie rather to fuifer fil Sion 
& (ur- z Theſe were two coaſt Towns in Phenzcia ; famous, eſpecially ; with the People of God, than to enjoy the pleaſures of tin tor a 
[08s the former, for her greattrading ; ard being rich, might be infolenr, | ſeaſon. - Thus there was an Obadtah in 4hab's Houle, 1 Kings 18, 
or poſſibly might tempt Rerod to a Var agaiuſt them, whoſe con-| 3. and divers bzlieve in Nero's Family, P3Zl. 4. 22, 
danger gicſt would pay the charge of 1t. _— chiet of his Bed-chamber : 2 As they 2 miniſtred to the Lord, and faſted, the 
livered or begged pardon ; there being no War yet begun. & Theſe Cities ” holy Ghoſt ſaid. * Separate me « Barnabas and Sau! 5, * Ch, « : 
7; 00 lying upon the Sea, had little land belonging to them, and of old for the work * whereunte Hl 'S LEH 
g The were forced to have their proviſion from other places, eſpecially | 1+ . 0 TOES? Y O ENNSRETIOE > : cas ” _ ns wn 
perlon ; from 5uiza ; thus Solomon gave Hiram (King of Tyre) twenty thou: ' 5 _ | ew” =o . Ms nee? = OE ans Oltice. _ pon 5g 
ws Sctt- ſind meaſures of Wheat for hi; houſhold, and twenty meatures of ; 22EFEa or Unvil _ 0 ce ON —_——_ Veing mide of © Mat. g, 5 
\cher, 3 pur: 0'] yearly, 1 Kings 5.9, 11. and long after that, they of Judah, Prophets and Feachers, tho!s W ores arz in ſznie too conjoyn'd w.ch Ro. 10.15. 
See 4 —_ . . 1 . - . - _- > - *Hy yaw 17> i £31 n 2 F 
el call:d 2nd [ral are 1aid to have traded with their Wheat in Tyre, Exek, oy ; _— = - —— "oat A. _ Heb. 5. 4. 
_ nſtruQting of the People, (for there 1s no M niftry or S=rvice whi 
x ſect + dav. H 'ed | God ny, oo than by convert and ſave Sook Yo chat all pr 
ned, ar :1 And upon a c ſetday, Herod arayedin 4 roya] | 


170 zpparcl, ſat upon his throne, and made an oration unto 


lem. 

cThis was (ſays Joſephus, cap. 19. lib. 7.) the ſecond day of the 
ſports or g14mes, which H-rod had inſtituted 1n honour of the Em- 
peror C/audins; or it may be ſuch aday as Herod had appointed to | 
determine the difference 1n, berwixt him and the Tyrians. d Such, | 


gate, a 


| \ 
rt before ply 
ered 0n2 | 


come to Lith Toſephus, as were made of Silver, woven with extraordinary | 
it Was tz 2nd did refle& ſtrangely the beams of the Sun ſhining upon it . 
-oke thzir Anelevated place, from whence he might the better be ſeen and 
 rath't ard 

, . 


>rve hun ; '5 
wy 22 And the people gave a ſhout, ſaying, e Tt is the 


ned not voice ofa god, and not of a man. 

w Pets! e Thiſe imyious flatterers deſtroy whom chey exalt ; for God will 
pull down his rivals. 

gladnek 23 And immediately fth2 angel of the Lord {more 

z death it bin, becauſe he g gave not God the glory : and he was 

the heart { caten of worms, and gave up tre ghoſt. 

he objedt fan Angel had delivered Peter; and here an Angel deftroys 


104; all that Heavenly hoſt fulfil Gods Will tor the deliverance 
fits Church, and the deftruCtion of his enemies. g Priding him- 
{tin the acclamation the people had made, and not attriburing his 
twoquence and glory to God, as the giver of them ; or rather not re- 
preving or puniſhing their blaſphemy ; whereas Peter durſt nor ac- 
&Þt of undue honour from Corzelius, Chap. 10. 26. nor the Angel 
om dA. 7ohn, Rev. x9. 10. and 22-9. hEnher breeding 1n his 
"021, or in his fleſh, after a more unuſual manner; as'tis recorded 
"1 Herod the great, that he was eaten up of Lice. No Creature ſo 
46 Or contemptible, bur ix can execute Gods Judgments on whom 
caſes, 

oy Put * the word of God 4 grew and .*. mul- 
Iplied, 


a The Word of God 1s compared here to Seed , as in our Savi- 


d, But 
hen (aid 


-r, Out of 
» thought, 
Meſienger 
\ caſe 3588 
4 Meſicn- 
hen know 

on more 
| probably 
d jmirated 
1, that af 
Ni appoints 


2 


[= 
ne 


be more eft:Qtual, as being done with greater earnefinzF and 1n- 
tention of mind, . whil{t chey faſted. 2 The Holy Ghoſt by fome 
inward -inftin& in thoſe Prophets b<tore ſpoken of, who had war- 
rant to declare it as from him. o Thele two were to be feparared 
as the fir{t-born ander the Law, Ev9. 13.12, and after them, or 
in their ſtead, rhe Levites, Numb. rs 12. So were Pau! 3nd 
Barnabas 19 efpecial manner f-parareJ tor the calling in of the 


= 


3 . 


Genziles, that great Miniſtry or Service which God had tor them to 
do. | 
2 And* whenthey had 9 faſted and prayed, and laid « Ch, 4. £ 


r their hands on them, chey ſear cer away. 

94 A good preparation to enter into any bulinets wita, whereby 
they acknowledged that all ſucceſs muſt come tiom God. Our 
Bletſ:d Saviour himſelf would not enter upon his Miniftry cill he had 
Fafted forry days, Mat q. 2. compared with the x7t1, r Barnabas 
and Sau] being called ro be Apoſtles already, this !ayiag on of their 
hands upon them fignihes; Pirſt, Their being iet apart to this parti- 
cular impioyment they were now tobe ſent about. Secondly, The 
Approbation of che Church to that Hewenly call they had, Third- 
ly, Their praying for Gods Blelſing upon them, and Succels upon 
the Work they went for. 

4 © So they being ſent forth by the holy Ghoſt, 
departed into s Seleucia ; and from thence they failed ro 
Cyprus. | | 

5 A Sea-town of Cilicia, nigh unto Autioch,and over-aniinit Cypros, 
built by Seleueus, and wasa Town of fome rote, but mentioazd 
bere only as in their patſage to Cypriz. 

5And when they were at ? Sa'amis, they preached 
the word of God 4 in the Synagogues of tho Jews : and 
they had alſo lohn to rhety Miniſter, 


at - 


C = _ bj 
Mi $2 : 


ours Parable. Aairh 12. 19. *. The number of bzhievers muJti- 
 Picd thropgh the Word, which was fown; as S:ed 1s ſfeattered 


O 1M4g!N%y 
lat. 1S- 10- 
bly W3s che 

An, 


Y & © ' ; 

t The chief City of Cyprus, now called Famaguſta , ſirvat2 a $1 0 
on the Eaſt-fide of the Iihnd , over-againlt Syria, 4 They ST HLIE 
preached here, _ and elſewhere in the Synagogues, either becaute $136. 

they found no ſuch convenient places ro Preach in; ( theſe being #05 7 *þ 2 1166 

large Stuctures, and many relorting to them : ) or rather, becaule Be Vf þ -Y 

though | Keogh? i - HIT 
, ? $4 Tk wE5 

It ys 1 

: L 'F by 


——— 


2 - 


DOS. ern 


a” 


; 
: 
| 
TA 
I's, 
23% 3 x% 
G o "& 
bot Þ 
'S ; 
: w 
* « 
4 * " 
V4 
"ds tf 
ul . 
F 
. 
' 
o 
"R 47 
l 
1% 
4 . 
: 
"3" 
43 P 
LT 
I®'{; 
ks 1 5 
{2 
b bt 
is 
"pt" 
£8 
wo 
* /: 


& | 


gy 


ES Ty nd a Wap 


x A 
wy PIT 
Gt : : 
4% (oe. on 
T S—I 
A _ v 
£ 
- , os Pr 
*. va . 


EExX. 97.11. 
2 Tim. 3.8, 


* Mar.13.33 
John. 8. 4 4. 
1 Joh. 3.8. 


Th ACT S$ Chay. x1 


thouch they weie ſeat unto the G-12i7ezs yet it was not till after | 
the Zows ſhould have refuſed the Golp2l, as may be feen through- 

out all this Book, and ia the conclulton of it, Chap. 23. 28, x As 

C7p.12. & 25. 

6 And when they had gone through the Ile y unto 

Pephos, they found a certuin & forcerer, a falic prophet, 
2 Jew, whoſe name was Barjeſus : 
3 This City vas on the Weſt-end of Cyprezs, So that going from 
Salamis they went through the Iſland , this place was famous for 
the worſhipping of Venus. 2 There were many Magiciansabout this 
time amonalt the Jews, who by their falſe Miracles endeavoured to 
brig the r23] Miracles of our Saviour into conterpt. As the Magi- 
cians and Sorcerers of Ezypt.by their inchancments tor a while, did 
ſ-:-1 to doſuch wonders, as &oſe; had wrought by the Finger of 
God, Exed. 7. 11. 

2 Wiich was with the 2 depury of the countrey 
Sergius Paulus,a prudentinan ; who called for Barnabas 
and Sau!, and detired þ co hear the word of God. 

a Whether he was Pro-Conful, or Proprietor, it is in cf the 
ſame; for he ir was that Governed the Ifland. # This defire was 
extraordinary, and wrought by God, 1n order to the firting him 
for the further mercy of his Canverſion, and Salvation ; where 
ſuch a deſire is, it ſhall be granted : 5k and ye jhall have, Luke 
11.9. | = 
& But * c Ei'ymas the ſorcerer ( for 4 fo is his name by 
interpretation ) withitood them, ſeeking to turn away 
the deputy trom the faith. 

c This is another name of him that was called Barjeſus, which 
was not unuſual, as Simen Bar jorah, Matth. 16. 17. This Elymas, 
may be taken app-llatively,and d fignifies the Magician or Sorcerer ; 
bur being it Was a Proper name unto others we read of, it may be fo 
here. 

9 e Then Saul (who alſo is ca/ed Paul ) filled F with 
the holy Ghoſt, fer his eyes on him, 

e It is obſervable, that St, Luke never before called this great 
Apoſtle by the name of Pau! : and henceforth never calls him by 
the naine of Sau! ; though there be no great difference in theſ: n2mes, 
Saul might be more acceprable to the ZFews, amongſt whom hehad 
hicherto converled. And Paul 4 more pleaſing name unto the Gen- 
files, unto whem he wasnow fent, and with whom for the fucure 
he thou!d moſt converſe. He was called Saul as he was a Few born, 
an H-brew of the H:brews; and Paul, as he was a Deniſon of Kome ; 
the Romans having thit name in good account in ſeveral of their chief 
Families. f Zxa: tor God's Glory, and Faith and Power to work the 
enſuing NMcracies. : 

to And faid, O full of all ſubrilty and all g miſchief, 
* thou 5 child ofthie devii, thou enemy of all righteouſ 
neſs, wi!t thou not ceaſe z to pervert the right ways of 


the Lord ? | 
g Padegyia ſignifies a faclity or readineſs in 40mg miſchief ; and 
that ſuch who are given to Sorcery are ealily drawn to cominit any 
kind of fin whatſoever. 4 Becaute he did his work who is the De- 
frrozer, in hindring what he could the Salvation of Sergius Paulus and 
his Family. #- To make the way of God crooked, whichis ſtraighe ; 
and rugged, when indeed it is ſmooth : that is, to lay whar rubs 
he could to keep any from coming unto, or continuing in the ways 
ot God. 
11 And now behold, & the hand of the Lord is upon 


thee, and thou ſhalr be blind, nor ſeeing the ſun / for 
a ſeaſon. And immediately tnere feil on him a miſt and 
a darkneſs; and he went about, ſeeking ſome to lead 


him by the hand. 

k The hand of the Lord is put for any powerful ation of God, 
whether in Mercy or Judgment :*hzre ir 15 put forthe Divine Power 
wherewith God ſtrikes his Enemies. / God did in Judgment re. 
member Mercy, infliQting this blindneſs only for a ſeaton, that it 
might be rather a Medic:ne than a puniſhment. 

12 Then chedeputy when he ſaw what was done be- 
lieved, zz being = aſtoniſhed at the dofrine of the 


Lord. 

2 The Goſpel which Paul Preachzd. » Finding in it ( though 
a wife Man ) depths beyond his fathoming : and all accompanied 
with ſuch a power 1n doing of Miracles, and changing of Hearts, 
and Lives; as might well amaze fo prudent, and conſidering a 
man. : 

13 Now when Paul and his company looſed from 
Paphos, they came to o Perga in p Pamphylia : And 
John 4 departing fromthem, returned to Jeruſalem. 

o A City in Pamphylia: not that there were any other Cities of 
that name; but becauſe this Region was more commonly known, 
:r bzing p a Country in the leflkr 47a, bordering on Cilicia. 
2 The departure of John; of whom before, Yerſe 6. and Chap. 
12. 25. Was blame-worthy, as C-ap 15. 38. Some think he ſhun- 
ned that Jabour and ſuffering which he ſaw attended the Goſpel ; 
o-hers ſuppole that he returned to Fers/alem out of too fond an 
z/&Qion for his Mother, who lived there ; and it may be that he 
reraining a great averlion from the Genzzles, might abhor to go 
amongſt them ; howſoever, let him that ſtands, rake heed leſt he 
fall. 

14 © But when they departed from Perga,they came 
to 7 Anticch in Pilidia, and went into the ſynagogue s on 
the ſabbath-day, and fate down, 

7 So called to diſtinguiſh it trom the other Antioch mentioned 
in the firſt Z72ſe, which was a City in Syria, as this in Piſidia, 
next to, or part of Pazphylia. 5 Either to joyn with the Jews in 
ther Worſhip, which wasnot then unlawful; or to ger an op- 
port.iuty more Fublickly to Preach the Goſpel unto them: they 


were no ſooner come thither, but they miud chat great bulineſz :!,. 
went abour. ® 

15 Andafter the ; reading of the : law and the Dro 
phets, the « rulers of che Synagogue ſenr unty thas 
laying, Ye men and x brethren, It ye have any worg 


exhorration for the people y, ſay on, 

: The reading of the Law was commanded by Mo{c; ; and th 
ſay, that Ezra commanded the reading of the Prophers aj, TT 
their Synagogues, which was uſed, as we may ſee in the 
Verſz, and to divided into ſeveral SeCtions that once 4 | Eh 
might be aJl read over, « They were luch as had rhe over-ſight *: 
this Service of God in their Synagogues, that it m!ghe L bs 
formed according to the prefcription. x An uſual compellatie” 
which the Jews gave one another, owning them to ſerve the Wes 
(zod, and profeffing a ſuitable relpett for thm, » After the _ . 
ing before ſpoken, there followed a Sermon, or Exhortaticq. 
which the Apoſtles are deſired ro make, the Rulers of the "oak, 
rogue, as "tis ſuppoled, having had fome previous knowledge of 
them, 

16 Then Paul ſtood up z, and beckning with bs 
hand, ſaid, Men of Iſrael, and 2 ye that fear God give 


audience. 

z To procure ſilence and attention, as Chap. 12. 17, aÞeſids 
the Native Jews, the Profelytes, and ſuch out of all Nation; who 
leſt the Idolatry of the Gentiles, and vow*®d the only True God. mer 
rogether in the Worſhip of God ; thele were the Se ſpoken 
of, Chap 17. 4. I: ſhews allo what they are ro do that would he: 
the Word ofthe Lord with profir, wv:z. to attend unto itin the fer 
of his Name. 

17 The b Ged of this people of Iirael © choſe our 
fathers, and dexalted the people *. when they dweltagsp 
ſtrangers in the land of Egypt, * and with an e high arm; 


brought hÞ- them out of it, I%1 

b God was the God of 1ſrae! after a peculiar manner. «Hung 
cioſen them before all Nations, to make himſelf known unto they, 
to be ſervedand Worſhipped by them. 4 And God exalted then 
in the time of Joſeph; and whilſt the memory of that grex pre. 
ſervation wrought by his means, did continue, till another Kino 
aroſe thar knew not Joſeph. e The many Miracles done by the 
Power of God towards the Iſraelites deliverance out of £:;; 
By which the Apoſtle would have them remember, that they gyed 
all which they challenged from their Progenitors, to the Grace nd 
— of God only; and that God may do with his own x hz 
pleaſes, 

18 And * about the time of fourty years f ſuffered #; 

he their manners in the wilderneſs. 21 

F This is Recorded, Pſal. 95. 10. and remembred by the Apoſtle, 4 
Hb. 3.8, 9. And to be admired through all Ages,that God ſhouldhe it 
ſo patient, or a People could be fo perverſe : ſome inſtead ofj\;;7;- 1? 
pognarp read eJeopoptenary,there being but one Letter difference (and /i# 
luch as are uſually changed into one another, ) and then it ſpaks 
Gods providing for this People all that while, and carrying them x | 
in his Bolom, as a Nurſe bears the ſucking Child, Nun. 11. 1: 
Dent. 1.31. Or as an Eagle beareth her young ones on her Wings, 
Deut. 32. 11, 12. But it ſeems God did not bear with their ba 
thers, bur deſtroyed them in the Wilderneſs, 1 Cor. 19. 5. Fill, 
(od bare long with thoſe that periſhed. Secondly, The fucceeting 
Generation took not that warning which did become them, but 
tollowed their Fathers ſteps; and whilſt one Generation wu 
wearing away, and another coming, this ſpace of Forty years was 
ſpent, through the abundant compaſſion of God towards them ; 
who did not conſume them as they tempted him to do, 1n3 
moment. | 

19 And when he had deſtroyed g ſeven nations n the 


land of Canaan, he * divided their land to them 5 by + 
lot, 


g Theſe ſeven Nations are mentioned, ofþ. 3. 10. + Theo 
being diſpoſed only as God would, Prov. 16. ut. And it was bit 
reaſonable that God having miraculoutly got this Land ( for the 
{/rael:tes did rather go to take poſſeflion of it, than to fight for it) and 
alſamed a ſpecial right unto it, chat he ſhould divide it to whom it 
pleaſed, and in what proportions he thought good. 

20 And after that hegave unto them * ; judges, abolts 
che ſpace of & four hundred and fifty years, untilSamul 
the propher. 


i Thel: Judges were perſons deputed by God to govern and 
deliver that People; their Commiſſion was atteſted uſually ») 
ſome extraordinary thing done by them, and their power ( be- 
ing immediately from God) was ablolute. & The computati01 © 
years here mentioned, hath been very much controverted : 400 
which hath the preateſt probability with ir, is, Either firſt, F 
have recourſe to the 17 Yerſe, and begin this /Era there, With Gods 
chuſing of their Fathers; "and ending it ar the time of the divt 
ſion of the Land by lot, as Verſe rg. for from the birth of Jas!, 
to this diſtribution of the Lands are reckoned 447 years; Wu 
way well be ſaid here. About 450 years : bat then the fenle15 
after that, ſach things mentioned inthe 17,19, 19 Ye you 
done; which were in the compaſs of 450 years, God _—— 
them Judges. Or, as others do refer theſe Words to wha we 
and begin: the Ara or computation from the going of th: _ 
of Iſracl our of Exypr, and ending at the expulltion of the rus 
our of Jeruſalem, which may make up this account * But wy - 
paſhge of $t. Pau7is not intended ro ſhew how long the Ju%gh 
Ruled, bur when it was, or abouc what rin:2 that they i as Fi 
alſo to ſhew what 2 long rime it rook up £0 gain rh & oe — 
poſſeflion of thar promiſed Inheritance, the x fins {t11) kerpiP3 2" 
things from them. 


21 And afterward they defirer / a king : 


, N jap. 


poſtle, 4 
ould be if 
Nrn- 
ce(and /'# 
t ſpeaks 
them 3 
I, 12, 
Wings, 
heir F4e 
. Fit, 
<ceeting 
m, but 
tion 45 
'ears WAS 
ls them ; 
do, 104 


$ in the 
m bby 


The Lot 
tf Was but 
( for tht 
oc it) and 
whom ht 


'sS, about * 
| Samuel 


overn and 
ſually by 
er ( 4 be- 
utarion 0 
2d: That 
I ht, co 
with Gods 
E the divl- 
þ of 1/as!, 
53 Wie 
he ſente 35; 


7xſes were 1. 
then 93* { 


12 Children 
he Jcbu{tt 


Þ 


the j 12ge 


| gave ceſtimony,and laid, 1 have tound David the /oz of 
Jeſſe, a man 0 after mine own heart, which ſhall fulfil p 


ing, the baptiſm of repentance to all the people of 


4 ham, and c whoſoever among you fearerh God, * to 


Of the prophets * which are read 4 every ſabbath-day, 


The A 


ave unto them Saul the ſon of Cis, a man of the tribe 


XIIL. 


"{ Benjamin, by the ſpace of »- fourty years. 

7 Their great fin in eſiring a King was, becauſe by that deſire 
thy rejected God, who had at that very time a Prophet { Samuel ) 
by whom he governed them, 1 Sam.8. 7. & 10. 1g. Thev had 
beer uader a Theocralie ever ſince they came out of Egyp: ; their 
Law, and their Governors being appointed by God ; had their con- 
Uirion been as that of orher Nations, taeir defire had not been a pro- 
VCCAtION- mm Theſe Words, by the ſpace of fourty years, are ro be 
joyned with the foregoing. Ferſe, and the other foregoing Words in 
che Verſe read with a Parenthetts : and thus they thew how long 
$amuc! che Propher ( as he is here called ) exercifed bis Prophertical 
Office, which was the ſpace hzre mentioned, partly before Saul was 
Anointed King, and in part afterward ; in which, as another Moſes? 
he carcd for and went in and our, betore the People of God, the like 
2 of fourty years. This computation of St. Pau! might allo 
1:22 more with the Sepruaginr,and be according to the then current 
-2-0:2t, Which ( nor being of more conſequence) St. Pau! would 
0t CONTLOVETE AT This time, having greater matrers to ſpeak of unto 


tac 


3” % K J ” - y 


oy 8.” 
; Fol FRY. % 
* 4" p '% 1 u- £ - - . 
28* And though they found Z no cauſe of dearth 2 * Mar : 
him, yet | defired they Pilate that he ſhould be {lain, eg 
£ He wasa Lamb withour blemiſh ; neither had he offended the => 
rabble that was ſo incenſed againſt him, urlefs by tuch valt good- £1» -- 
neſs and kindneſs towards them be branded them tor ingratirode. Jute 27: 6 
{ Matth. 27.22. The Jews $9 condemn hin, bur they covid not pur 
him to death ; the Romans, under whom they were | 
reſerved the power of life and death whoily unto cheintsl ves, ; 
therefore they deſired Pilate to confirm their ſentence, 
IT to be executed. 
| 29 And when they had fulfilled z» at! char was writtes: 
| of him, they took 1;z2 down » trom the treo, wd « lat 
vim 11 a ſepulchre. 


f 


© $4 FS » 
TH, + ph te v rad 
1Uj<CC, Oat 12G 


F, 
lis CG Calllc 


m As the giving him vinegar to drink, piercico 4 ds, P 
69. 21. fohn 19. 28, 30. n yee Chap. 5.30. »v_ 74j:55 of ,iringut he. 
and Nicodemus ; Matth. 27.60. Johu 19. 39. : Y 
P + . . by u ” n 
309 | Burp God raiſed him from the 46:5 : FEMLESES 


? Left they thould be offended at our Savicurs &viny, 


10 1117,{5;} Uk 


m—_ And when » he had removed him, he raiſed up 


uinco them * David ro be their king, To whom alſo he 


all my will. 

, God hath taken Saul away by death ; for he would not ſuffer 
David to haſten it. 0 Favoured or beloved by me, and obedient to 
me; my ſervant, as God ſpeaks of him, Pſal. 89. 20. p And here, 
that he ſhould ff all Gods Will, to wit, in governing his people ; 
for he hath a Teſtimonial upon record in Gods Word, Pſal. 78. 72. 
He that is according to Gods heart, fulfils all the Will of 
God, and does nothing by partiality; thus alſo if it be Gods Will ei- 
ther for him to do, or to ſuffer any thing, he is ready to ſet his far 
toit ; a the daily prays (undesſtiadingly ) that the Will of the Lord 
m3} b2 done. 

2 ; Otchis 4 mans ſeed hath God according to his 

romiſe, raiſed r unto Iſrael a Saviour - Jeſus. 

4 Chriſt was the Son of David, and fo frequently called, Mar. 
1.1, Luke 18. 38, 39. with reference unto the promiſe made, 
JJa.11. 1. ſpoken of Chap. 2. 3o. Kom, 1. 3. » Becauſe he lived 
amongſt the Jews, and Salvation was firſt offered unto them by 
kim, as verſe 46. s Our Saviours name 15 added, to ſhew that he 
nuely was according to his name, and what he was ſaid to be, as 
Mat. 1. 21- 


24 * When John had ficſt preached ct before his com- 


rae. 

: John the Baptiſt did not ſpeak of Chriſts coming, as the Prophets 
had done, as of a thing a great way off, or at a diſtance of time , 
but he ſpake of it as of a preſent matter, before his and their faces, 
and in their view ; Behold the lamb of God, John 1. 29, 36. 1uSo1t 
1s called, Mat. 3. 2, 8. Mark 1.4. Luke 3. 3. Repentance being a due 
qualification for ſuch as hope to receive the mercies of God in Chriſt, 
unto |ifz Eternal. - 

25 And as John fulfilled x his courſe, he ſaid y, Whom 
think ye that Iam ? I am not & he; Bur behold, there 
cometh one « after me, whoſe ſhooes of hzs feet I am 


not .'. worthy to loofe. 

x The courſe of his Miniſ/ryy, or of his life; in reſpeCQt of 
tither, he ran as one in a race. The ſenſe of theſe Words ye 
have John 1. 20, 27. & That 1s, the Mefſias, which theywere in 
ach expeCtation of, and ſo inquifitive about. a Chriſt began his 
life ( as to the flzſh ) after Job ; and he began * his Miniſtry after 
tin, and in that reſpe& may be ſaid to come after him. .*. A 
proverbial expreſſion, whereby the meaneſt office is implied, Mas. 
3 which the Diſciples or ſervants could do for their 

alters, 


26 b Men and brethren,children of the ſtock of Abra- 


yo is d the word of this ſalvation ſent. 

b He ſpeaks to the Fews according as the manner was among 
them; to the Jews he became as a Jew, «c Some think, the de- 
vout Piſ:dians, or men of char Countrey, are here meant ; bur ra 
ther it may 1nſinuate the Apoſtles hope ,concerning theſe Fews, that 


and curſed a dezth, and to take away the ſcandal of this Coll, - 
thews, that bis ReturreQtion was as glorious , as his dearth cory ! 
1gnominious, being by it declared to bethe Son of Cod with m4. 
Rom. 1. 4, : 

31 And he*® was ſeen q many days of chem - which 25: 
came up with him from Gali'es to Jerufalem, who arg © 
his wicn*!ſes unto the peop'e. 

q Fourty days betwixt his Reſurre&ion and aſcenſion, Chz>. ; 
r Chriſt was ſeen, not onely by the Apoſtles, bur of the G2/11c7; 
Women which came up with him unto Feruſalem, Match »8 1. 
and by above five handred at once, 1 Cor. 15. 5, 6. fo pl:nrifully 
would God have this great article of our faith, and obiet; of o::+ 
hope to be confirmed unto us. | 

32 And we declare unto you 5 glad tidings, how th: 
the : promiſe which was made unto thefathers, 

5 Oc the Goſpel, which is nothing elſe but the glad ridines of ous 
Salvation from Sin and tlell. £ This promiſe was f:equenrly mad: 
and renewed to their Anc-ſtors, and typified b | 
eſpecially from Ezzpr and Ba3z/om. 

33 God hath fullilled che fame unto us their children, 
in thathe hath vraited up Jeſus again ; as itis alſo written 
In the ſecond pſalm, x * Thou art my fon 7, this day * Heb, 
have I begotten thee. 

# Some refer theſes Words to the Incarnation, others, to the Rejiur- 
recon of our Saviour. Our Tranſlators lay the ftrets upon the pre- 
polition with which the verb 1s compounded : and by addinso 07.1:7; 
intend it to be underſtood of the RefurreQion ; and there is ground 
tor it in the context : for the Reſurreftion of Chriſt, is that whic!» 
in the 3o, verſe is propounded by St. Faul, as his theam or argu 
ment to Preach upon. *x Theſs Words quoted, though they do nor 
leem to be a proof of Chriſts ReſurreCQion ar the ff} view ; vet if 
we weigh them well, they anſwer Sr. Pau?*s purpoſe ; Thou art +: 


< bw - 


I 


y many dzliverances, 


r 


ſon, Pſal. 2. wer. 7. is uſhered in with , I have made thee King, 


ver. 6, and followed with, 1m: give hee the heathen for thing in- 
keritance, which was ina <ſpecia! manner to be fulMlcd afrer the Re- 
ſurreCtion ; as our®Saviour maniteits, Marrh 28. 18, 19, » Not as 
if Chriſt at his ReſurreQion began to be the Son of Cod ; he ths 
he was manifeſted to be fo, Boz. 1, 4, which befors, whilelt he 
wasin a ſuffering cendition, vas not fo apparent. Soine of the 
Ancients have underſtood theſe Words, of the Eternal generation of 
the Son of God ; Erernity being an<verlaſting poinr, and one and 
the ſame day for ever. 
34 And as concerning that & he raifed him up from 
the dead, 12 No More to return tocorruption, he ſaid 
on this wiſe a, I will give you the t b fure mercies ot i ©: 
David. Te COU, 
x . holy, or jujs 
z The former verſe was not intended fo much by Sc. Paul for a |; Jy 
proof of the Reſurre&ion, as ir was to ſhew how faithful Cod was 
in fulfilling that promiſe there ſpoken of ; hete thz Apoſtles deſign ; 
15, toevince Chriſts ReſurreRion, and that ir was agreeable to the the 79. ot 
Prophecies vhich were concerning him. a Theſe Words are ſound, *” the P AL2e 
Iſa. 53. 3. and the ſure mercies of David there; and here ſpoken of, of Fa, 53+ I, 
areſfuch mercies as were promited ro David, ( Dawid being to bez aud in "#6 
taken typically ) now the mercjes which were promiled to David,are ow PREY 
all included or {urmounted in this ; that by this Son of Dav.a ( our 4/9597 5947 
Lord and Saviour frequently and truly fo called ) God would ere& #2Þ5cÞ #1 **« 


they were ſuch as feared God ; which hope they ought the rather to 
have carefully anſwered. & Chriſt who 1s the inca.nate Word, or j 
the Word made fleſh, John 1. 14. or the Goſpel, which is glad / 
tidings of Salvation ; as if the Apoſtle had minded them, thar it | 
vas not any buſineſs which belonged unto others alone, which he : 
45 ſpeaking abour ; bur of ſuch things as pertained unto theireSal- 
12:12 ; and ſack a Salvation ( tis Salvation ) as_never greater Was, | 
Or ever will be publiſhed ; this is certain, that we are concerned in 
it for our ſelves, if we accept or neglect this Salvation, 12 15 for our 
oat : Oh that in this reſpe& elt intereft were more prevalent with 


27 For e they that dwell at Jeruſalem 7, and their 
ers*, becauſe they g knew him nor, nor yet the voices 


icy have fulfilled ther in condemning hm. 
eThe common people and their f great Council; both had a 
adin aur Saviours death. g Bur if ſo great a fault was capable 
ofany alleviation, the Apoſtle gladly mentions it. that it was done 
Out of Ignorance ; they knew neither Chriſt ;h2 word, nor the Word 
01 tie Goſpel) concerning Chriſt, though thar rhey may be made 
Faltble that this their ignorance was not invincible þ He minds 
"1 tat 1t was their fin, having hid . means whereby they might 
"*e come anto' the knowledge of Chriſt. j See Chap 4. 28. Luke 


u4 25, 26, 
Vol. 


It. | 


| AT TS FY. BY } 
q » Gb. vw Su f 


robrew 1: 


and eſtabliſh an everlaſting Kingdom, which could not b2 done, un- #7 * 
lefs Chriſt rofe again, and obtained the victory over death and the 7770+ ©-: 
grave. 6 A\'l the promiſes God hath made unto. bis Chnrch in any 

ave concerning Chriſt, aicfure and fiithful, holy and juſt; The 

Words have been varioutiy rendred ani changed - -but no Worss 

can ſufficiently exprels their ſtability ard exceliency. 

25 Wherefore he ſaith caifo inanocher Pjaſp, Thou 
ſhalc nor ſutter rhine h:»ly One to ſee corruption : 

c Theſe Words are quoted out of 2f/al. 16. 19, 11. fee Char: 
2. 3%. | 

36 For David || after he had ſerved his own generation || Or, Afte: 
d by the will of God, e * fe!l on ſleep, ard was laid f Je had inh., 
unto his fathers, and ſaw corruption : own aze, 

d Some point theſe Words otherwiſe, reading them thus; ſerved the 
David after hr had ſerved his generation, by the will of God fell a/icep. will of God. 
Which contains indeed a truth, wiz thar God hich appointed * i Kings 2, 
every ones time in the World, and that the iffue of life and death 1». 
are his; bur thus they would prove littie to Daviz's praite; for Ch, 2. 29: 
who dies otherwiſe, but according ro the determinate counſel of 
God ? But this is remembred ro David's glory, thit according to 
the Will of God, he was a publick good, and he iv'd and govern'd 
by the rule ail ſquats of Gods Word. e Notwithſtanding whict, 
he fell aſleep, and ſiw death ; bur ſuch as did not deſerve fo tre 
ritle 4 name. f Buried among? &'; -d his body 


LIKED Y 
PAC. ne 
 -* 


* 
& &C 


> 


n O n 
Et hl orkh wt £ £ © 


T.s.v 


_ 


EY 


Ma - : ti, I >, oY G3 an. ZN 


The 


£4 5: & © 
J TER 
_— by P & 3 
C] 14 2 AL $ 
. corrupted 25 theirs ; naw tihis verſe explains the former, and draws 
the argu.cut home, 1n that it proves, that the Words before menti- 
owed, could not be meant of David ; bur of one thar he typified, and 


AGCGTS Chap. x 


44 © And the next ſabbath-day came almoR the 
whole city together f to hear the word of Gog . © © 
ec The Citizens generally reſorted thither. f Some —_ 
riotiry, ſome to cavil at it, though fome allo our of love to St 
was doubtleſs a mixt Congregation, 
45 But when the Jews ſaw the multitudes, the, 
were filled g with envy, and ſpake againſt thoſe things 
which were ſpoken by Paul, þ contradicting ang vi. 
pheming. wo 
g The Jew; could not indure that the Genci/es ſhould be equa!] 
to them, ( being as much concerned againſt the Geyt/1;; "War 
exalted, as againit cheir own being depreſſed ) þ Envy . bs 
vicious humour, made they difrehth the whollomeR, and moſt 
ſaving truths : contradifting the Doctrine of the Goſpel, ang 1, | 
pheming the Preachings of1t; or going from one degree of , - j 
fiction unto another, until they came to the higheſt enmity = n 
both. | i 
46 Then Paul and Barnabas z waxed bold, and faiq 
* It was &neceſfary that the word of God ſhould fir 4 
have been ſpoken to you ; but  ſceing you pur it fron Rep 
you /, and judge yourſelves unworthy ot everlaſting life tf 
lo, we || curn co the Gentiles. Th. 
; Being nothing affrighted with the reproaches and blaſphem,, Mat.y 
they met with, which bur increaſe their zeal, as a little Water $0.16 
does the fire in the Smiths forge. & There was a neceſfity, ,, |Ch.; 
the Word of God ſhould be firſt Preached to the Jews, 1; Becauſe 8 
Chriſt was promiſed to the children and heirs of their Anceſto; 
2. Becauſe Chriſt did command it to be chus Preached, Mar, j, 
5, 6. "Luke 24. 47. Chap. 1.8. 3. Chriſt himſelf thus Preachyy 
it, declaring that he was not ſent, ( comparatively ) but to the1gg 
ſheep of the houſe of 1/rael, Matth. 15. 24. y this their con. 
tradiCting and blaſpheming, they ſhew as evidently that they 1; 
thus unworthy of everlaſting life , as if a judge had determine 
= or pailed ſuch a ſentence upon his Tribunal , or Judgment. 
cat. 


repretented, "_ 
37 Bui he whom ere 
Tr: pron, : 
L That is, on the third day. according to the Goſpel. i Was 
not under the power of death To long, as to be preyed upon fo far 
by 2t. 
28 Be it known unto you therefore k, men and 
brethien, thar * through / chis man is preached unto 
| yo: z2 the forgivenets of fins: 
i lolin 2, 12. & The uſual compeliation given in theſe caſes. 
concerning Chriſts Reſurre&ion, which onely can be meant of him 
10 his krvmane nature, here, according unto that nature the Apoſtle 
calls him, Men. mn As in Chap. 10. 43 This forgivenels of ſins, 1s 
that which the Avoſtic tb much would recommend to all to feek 
after, and magnifie Chriſt for; it being onelv chrough him ; and 
hz cou'd not be overcome by death, who could deliver us from 
111. 


þ God raiſed again, ſaw 7 no Cor- 
. 


TS O44 
| $4 » -T* 


1 Having ſpoken 


*Ro 2.28. 39 And * by him all that believe are juſtified o from 
& 8 2. all things, from which ye could not be juſtified by the 
Itch. 7.19 law of Moſes. ; 

» It is a forenſick Word, oppoſed to condemned; all that believe 
in Chriſt with th: heart, by his merit and mediation ſhall be abſolved, 
and thail not come into condemnation; and thus this agrees with 

the fo:mer Wo:d-., and ſhews us whence remiſſion of fins is to be 
had. If any will rake this Word , as ſignifying alto to be purged 
from ſin, yer 'tis evident, that the Law can bring neither of theſe bene- 
firs unto us : The Law declares what is ſin, and what the curle 15 
that is due unto fin, but not how to be delivered from them ; it 
ſhews the ſpor, but not how to waſh it off; and the ſore, but not 
how to heal it ; bur on the other ſide we are bidden to glory 1n the 
Lord ( Jeſus ) ( Who of God 15 made unto u wiſdom , righteouſneſs, 
ſar&ification, and redemprion, 1 Cer. 1. 30, o To which may be 


<3. 4 
ALA 
—- 
I - 
£ RT a I "II 
TE CNRS w.- 


«9 a_ wh , 
GE ara, RILEY 
£4 n a 
m-onruY DE En _ - 


added, that there were ſome fins which by the Ceremonial Law 
thete was no Sact ifice appointed for : And for ſuch ſins which a Sa- 
crifice was appointed for, it was not 'poſſible that the blood of bulls 
and goats ſhou'd rake them away, Heb 10. 4. which, may make 
more to admire the g:ace of the Goſpel, by which we are SanCified 
though the offzring of the body of Jeſus Chriſt once for all, Heb. 


IO. j©- 


42 Beware therefore, leſt that come upon you which 


is ſpoken of p inthe prophets, 

p Habakkuk 1.5. He cautions theſe Jews, leſt the ſame thing 
thiezrncd by the Prophet to their Fathers, come alſo upon them xz 
for fin is as odious unto God as ever , and God is as jealous of his 
honour which ſin r6bs hun of, as Ever he was, 

41 q Behold, ye r deſpiſers, and swonder, and r pe- 
riſh : tor | work a # work in your days, a work which 
x ye ſhall in no wiſe believe, though a man declare it 


UNtO You. 
g Thetz Wordsgre cited from that place in Habakkak, accord- 
iny to the read;ng of the Septuagint; St. Payl nog being willing to 
alter the Words, the Jews that were diſperſed, being ſo uſed to 
that t:anflation. eſpecially the ſenſe being the ſame with the origi- 
nal H:brew : This quotation of the Apoſtle, might alſo be taken 
from Iſa. 28. 14, 16. + For which cauſe,. in that place of Ha- 
bakt&sk they are commanded to conſider the Heathen, and are ſent 
to School unto them they contemned ſo much, who had had God 
for their Teacher, had they - not deſpiſed his Word. s Grow pale 
©1 ſhare and fear. 7 Ye ſhall be deſtroyed by the Romans your 
enemies, as your Anceftors were by their enemies. © This Work 
was a Work of Gods juſt revenge on them then, by the Chaldeans ; 
but threatned to come on thele ( without repentance ) by the Ro- 
»ans. x \Vhich deſtruttion thould be ſo great, though it was 
incredible ro them now, though ic ſhould have becn told 
them. 
42 And y when the Jews were gone out of the ſyna- 
gogUve, the 2 Gentiles belought that theſe words might 
t Or. 11 44s bs preached tothem @ the | next ſabbath. 


gwerh yy Oras fomeread, the Apoſtles, Parl and Barnabes, were gone 
ercen, or im gut of the Synagogue of the Jews. z Proſelites, or ſuch devour 
the Sabbath perlons tormerly tpoken of, who had relinquithed Paganiſm, and 
between. came to b- initructed in the knowledge of the true God by the 
Jews. a Orin ſome day betwixt the Sabhaths; The Apoſtles took 
all advantages, if there were a Feſtival ( which was alſo called a Sab- 
bath, L-viz. 16. 31, and in the 23. Ch1>, of Lever. frequently) they 
would Preach in ieaſon and out of ſeaſon ; howſoever, becauſe we 
find the Apoſtles did meet again with chem on that day ſeven-nighr 
atter, it 15 moit probable that their defire was 1o to be underſtood, 
Yee verſe 4... 

43 Now when the congregation b was broken up, 
many of the J-ws, and c religious proſelytes followed 
Pauland Barnabas ; who ſpeaking to them, * perſwaded 
(2 5 continte d in the grace of God. 


b The Congregation was diſſolved , by the offence the Jews general- 
ly hal taken ar the DoArine of the Apoſtles. c Theſe Proſelytes were 
fo called, from rheir coming over from Paganiſm, to own the true 
(rod, ive Chap, 2.10. d This grace of God, the Apoſtlesſo earneſt- 
iy exhorted them to conrtinne in; was, 1. Their preſent ſtate of be- 
Ws trmlyrelolved toterve God, whatſoever oppoſition or temptation 
tazy thonld meer with to th= contrary, which was wrought 1n them 
by the grace of God. 2. The Dottrine of Juſtifhcation by the grace 
of tod, Winch Sr. Paul had Preached unto ther, werſe 39. Or, 
TP The whole Golpel, and Doctrine therzin contained, which is cal- 

ne Trace ng 


, 
_ 


,- 
Ch. 3:22; 
& 14.22, 


r (zod, Feb, 12, 15. and the true Trace wherein we 
1% 
( 


47 For fo hath the Lord m» commanded us, ſayin, 
[ haveſetthee to be » a light * of the Gentiles, thi 
thou ſhouldeſt be for falvation unto the ends of the 


earth, 

» Becauſe that Prophecy muſt be fulfilled which we find, 1;, 
49.6. the Apoſtle infers aright, that they were commanded 
publiſh Chriſt unto the Gentiles; For how ſhall they believe in hin if 
whom they have not heard? and how ſball they hear without a Preach? 
Rom. 10. 14.' » All knowledge is ignorance, and all light i$duk, 
neſs without Chriſt. 

48 And when the Gentiles heard this o, they were 
glad, and p glorified the word of the Lord : and #4 
manyas were ordained to eternal life, believed. 

o There can be no true reſt or peace in any, to whom Catiſtis 
not manifeſted; the apoſtle telling us, that we have peacewith 
God through our Lord Jeſus Chriſt, Rows, 5. 1. And the Kingdom 
of God 1s peace and joy in the Holy Ghoſt. p They magaitid the 
goodneſs of God, which appeared in the Goſpel unto them. 9 (Go 
who ordereth the end, ordereth the means, and giveth then 
opporcunities to hear the Word, and by it gractouſly worketh 
Faith in them whom he hath appointed to Eternal Lite ; wit- 
-=_ Es Faith, purging the heart, there is no hope of lik 

ternal. 


49 Andthe r word of the Lord was publiſhed chrougt- 


out all the region. 

r Concerning Salvation to be found onely by Chriſt, and theGw- 
til:s, to be admitted to partake of that Salvation. s Like Leen 
which a Woman took and hid in three Meaſures of Meal till the 
whole was Leavened, Marth. 13. 33. 

5o But the Jews ſtirred upz the devout and « honour- 
able women, and x the chief men of the city, and **: 
raiſed perſecution againſt Paul and Barnabas, and ew" 


pelled them out of their coaſts. 

t S£0pWor, as was ſaid of the Men, ſuch as had relinguiſhedthe 
[dolatry of their Country and Anceſtors, acknowledged the Tru: 
God, the maker of Heaven and Earth. « Of great repute 2nd 
eſteem ; Women being accounted more earneſt in what way lover 
they take ; and to be fure Eve was firſt ſeduced, and in thetranigrel 
fion. * In ſome Cities there were but Five, in ſome Ten, nv 
thers Twenty, in whoſe hands the Government of the City vs 
ordinarily put ; and theſs the Perſecutors ( knowing what i 
Inflaence their Authoriry muſt needs have) by all means labour 
ſeduce, 

51 * But y they ſhook off z the duſt of their feet #*(i 
gainſt them, and came unto z [conium. 

y This was according to our. Saviour's command, Matth. 10.4 
Mark 6. 11. Luke 9. 5. ſo often it is mentioned, and ſo conſiderab/e 
a matter 1t 15 for us to know, and dread the puniſhment appon®* 
for ſuch as refuſe the Goſpel, and» contemn the Salvation uit 
by it. z Whar this was Symbolical of, is not expretled. F 
Hebrew Proverb ſays, The duſt of an Erhnick City or Count?) 
doth pollute a Man ; and they might by this repreſent, - that 
Inhabitants of ſich a City or Place, who did not entertain the (0 
ſpe], and the Miniſters thereof, they would repute as the viicf in 
ners, and they ſhould by God be dealt with accordingly. 4%” 
Chap. 14. 1. 

52 And the þ diſciples were c filled with joy, ans 
with the holy Ghoſt. 9 

b Either Paul and Barnabas in a more efpecial *manner * ”_ 
alſo ſuch as at #crg4 had believed the Goſpel, and cams win 
to Antioch, were filled with joy. c So as no place Wis IQ4 Ns 
meaner confentments. Firſt, By reaſon. of the parton of = 


Y[ 


a5 an earneſt and pledge to afJure thz other unto them. 


C H A P. XIV; 


Paul and Barnabas preach at Iconium ; many believe : A Diviſion 


ariſeth ; Paul and Barnabas fe2 into Lyſtra, 


Goſpel, ſ 
ed to be Gods, 8 
worſhip the True and Living God, iq 


18. The Jews ſtir the peo 


| ple 10 ſtone Paul to death, 19. He ariſzth, and with Barnabas de- 
parteth into Derbe, and having preached there, they return toLyſtra, , , ſoeeiall ; ! 
Iconium, and Antioch ; when they had ordained Elders, and com- ( elpectally their Pozts ) did frequently believe 
mended all to the Lord, they come to Pa:mphyiia and Artalia, 20—25. ks R 
"ld return again ts Antioch, rehearſing to the Church what God had a and others, which by tradition they mivht have heard 


dime by them, 26—28. 


Toe XFEFS 
- Secondly, The promiſe made ts them of everlaſting Life, I9 Said wi ES 
fo ly, The Gifts of the Holy Ghoſt which they had, at thar crime, id with a foud y oICE, 


Chan. XIV. 


* Stand upright on thy * Iſa. 35.6 
| Tg! thy *Ifa. 35. 
feete. And he leaped and walked. 
his ” _— 6,8. To ſhew, that he was perſe&ly racovored 
iS Lamenels : as all miraculous cures ( beins the Wort of God } 
were perk. ( being the Worl: of Tod 
11 And when the people faw what Paul 1: 


- 1 % 
at QONge, 


and there preach 5he they life ur their voices {ivino inf rhe ſreech of Tv 
7. Paul healeth a Crippl: ; They are therefore count- 4 a ths ſpeecy it 249) 
13. Paul rebutech, and direfeth them to 


caonia, * The gods are come down to vs inthe - likened Oh 23.6, 


Saw FF, GW LLA W 
3 


«| 5 a4 
a I; L\ 
Wu : 
Angels unto the 


12 And they called Barnzbas 5, Fupi 


7 I ND it came to paſs in 4 Iconium, that they M | | _ Jupicer; and Paul z, 
A went e both together into the Synagogue of the | * pens becaule he was tne chief ſp.aker. 
, Jews, and f'fo ſpake, thar a great multitude, both of jg; oy Oe Deacons "opera _—_ God. 7 Mercury was 
| «61, the Jews, and alſo of g the Greeks, believed. with Wings : 3 as 2}fo m1 afche cods... repretented 
'S, « | | c gs: Jas e Interpreter of the gods, which caulcd 
N Rom d A City in Lycaonza. - Paul and Barnabas, as they were wont | their applying of his name to Pal. 2 : 
e T Ex,» to do, thewing as great conſtancy in performing of their duty, 3s 12 Th he Pricft ot EY, Oe 
"Ia. x7 their Enemies did obſtinacy in perſeccuting them for it. f With] (5. 3 a — [ch FL ror FUPItErn nich was & befor their 
Mat. (ch evidence and demonſtration of the ſpirit and of power. g See y , Drougnc ONT), AN'L [ garlands 7 1mto the gatez,and 
wh chad. 13-4 would have done ſacrifice with the people. 
ie Ch. Bur þ the unbelieving Jews ; ſtirred up the Gentiles, | , * Th Temple ES by Oo the Patron of 
py i et minds evit 2 209i _ | nerr city, was 1n the Suburbs, / Theſe were utually in the torm 
n= _ | affected againſt & the bre — O_ pur ne Oxen which they intended to Sacrifice ; 
' t . ; and by this fign, ſhewed that they were Dedicated to Ju2;re 
lo, þ Or, a:obedient Jews, who did not believe the Truths, or obey | whom the Heathen blaſphemout] \ an the The pong of raft decin 
” the Preceprs of the Goſpe). #5 Urging, perſwading and prefling of | placed him fitting in his Chair or Throne with a Crown on his 
ol them, who of themſelves (though as yet ignorant of Chriſt, and his | Head. » The Gates or Doors of the Houſe where the Avoſties 
ons Word ) would not have been ſo crucl. & The Apoſtles themſelves, | lodged. y 
0 and others that were converted by them, whoſe common Father, 14 Which when the anoftles Barn FE” ns 
ned God through Chriſt was, and were accordingly endeared one to a- of I k w - LETTING *- ties, Bal nabas and Paul,heard wy . 
ent. ko 2, they * renr their clothes, and o ran inamons the * Mit 2 6:, 
| 2 Long time therefore abode they 2 ſpeaking boldly prog og bow, our, 
- & »inthe Lord, * which gave teſtimony unto the word of |, 6. fuch ihe $0 _— —_ qp__ oh. _ lor 
Nat » ; RE" } 2DOMINATICNE, -xprening toner greatelt Zeal tor 
the Lu —_— m_ granted p ſigns and wonders to be done ys glory ot God, and earneſtn«!s ro hinder the Idolatry efchis 
' by their NanUSs, - Leople. 
i ! To ſtrengthen the new Converts againſt the opooſition they met Is And ſaying, * Sirs, why do ye theſe things ? * Ch 19. 26, 
X oh ts. _ = : - , £ | 1995 
Fa with in the way of Chriſt, willingly partaking with them 1n their | We allo are p men * of like paſſions with you, and * Jam. 5.17. 
nay” \Aikions for Chriſts ſake. »2 With great courage, and humble preach unto yo h rp —— 
ww. confidence, as knowingin whom they had believed. » Firſt, In the wa you, l at yo _ , CUrn from thetz 7 PC. 24. 6. 8 
wack Lords cauſe, a buſineſs which he had ſent them about. Secondly, | YANIties unto the r living God, which s made hea- £16; 6. 
duks And in the Lords ſtrength, who enabled them 1n it. o The Go- | VEN, and earth, andthe iea, and all things that arg Revein 7. » 
ſpel, Fuft, Wherein the Grace of God is manifeſted. Secondly, therein : 
were Whereby it is offered. Thirdly, Wherewith, to ſuch as receive it, j » We ſtand in need of Food and Raiment, are liable to Diſcaſs 4 
| as itis conveyed. PFourthly, And out of Grace diſpenced and allow- } Heath : 41 TP En al 
q | ; | QUIC eath, as well as you are. 9 So Idols are frequently called, 1 F425 
ed to ſome, hidden and withdrawn from others. p God by his mira- | ,g Ry ”— {Ar RIG 
RY res cones che thirine of the Anofties thawed . 13, 26. er. 14. 22. becauſe they diſappoint the hopes that are 
"aſt is co et ming ths Loctrine Ortne 2APORIES, NEWER LAT IE WAS ) placed in them, and areempty Of any good which is expe&ted from 
e with rom _ ad WS them, and having nothing bur what vain Men (their makers ) beſtow 
nodom 4Dut the MultItUUC of the city was q divided : and | upon them. r The True God 1s called, 7he living God, Dez. 5. 26. 
fd the part held with the Jews, and parc with r theapoſtles. | and 7b. 3. ro, in oppoſition to thole falſe gods, who uſually were 
q Gol As it was about our Saviour and his DoE&rine, John 7. 43. only dead men, which out of Love or Fear were Deified ; 25 alſo in 
1 them r Paul and Barnabas, who were called to b2 Apoſtles, 1 Cor. 9g. that he Jives from himilf, and gives life to every living Creature. 
worketh 56. ['s By this alfo the True Goll 1s dittinguithed from falſe gods, as Fer, 
= 5 And when there was an affault made both of the | Divine W. Oy rs AA all En, _ 
\ OL UB "op » . . - (; , Orin:p 154 LIribute we Owe and Pay to aun thut made us, 
| _ _ « + ag m— with their s rulers; to we | Pſa. 100. 3, 4- It ſhon!d be contidered with what a reſpeQful com- 
rouehs :.thom t aAcſpiterully, an | tO u ſtone them. ! pellation the Apoſtles ſpeak unto this Heathen rabble, calling them, 
| ; Such as were called the chief Men of the City, Chap. 13. 50., Sirs, or Maſters; a term, furely then not unlawful to be given to 
We 11.: Thus they that were called to the Marriage of the Kings Son, | our equals or betrers. 
To Match, 22. 6. entreated the Servants deſpitefully. « They would | 16: * Who in times paſt ſuffered all nations to walk * Ch. 15.3%: 
R SR hae uſed them as ſuch who were not worthy to live, and then have | {1 rh 6; Tl gh, 
| till the "oh nanny" | | —_ in their « own ways. | 
takenaway their lives from them ; as they did by our Saviour, firſt EN - 
gy hi Sal Crncibet bd # There were two main ObjeQions which theſe Heathen Tdolaters 
DR ERR 0 Ee EINE BE, might make againſt the Goſpel and the Worſhip of the True God 
— b They were ware of jr, and x fled unto y Lyſtra| ary they are, Firs, From Sootndls;; - Foe the 
—_— and Derbe, cities of 2 Lycaonia, and untothe region Univerſality of that falſe Worthip; both which the Apollle here 
and & that lieth round about : gives a cryptical Ah{wer unto, telling them, That the reaſon why 
| x The Apoſtles did not flee ſo much to ſave their lives, asto hus- ſo many, and for ſo long a time, hid followed [dols, was from the 
uiſhedthe bind their time beſt for the glory of God in other places ; and this juſt Judgment of God upon them, as Pſal. 81. 12. Rom. 1.24, 23. 
che True they were commanded todo, Match. 10. 23. Wim they perſecute you Ways of our chuling, and nut of Gods commanding, are falle 
epute al in me city flee unto another. y There were Cities further in the Coun -| WAys {SY ; ; 
way _ try of Lycaonia, than [conium was. z A part of the leſſer 4a, nigh 17 x* Nevertheleſs he left not himſelf without wit- « Ro i. 25; 
_—_ _ ” On Tanr i. neſs, in thar he did good, and gave us * rain from hea- * Mas. 5 42: 
"City wa 7 And there they preached the goſpel. | Yen, and fruitful ſeaſons, filling cur hearts with food and 
Qu *: a Thus was verified what Sr. Pax! obſerved, Phil. 1.12. That all ; gladneſs 


thoſe things tell out unto the furtherance Ma the Goſpel ; 
] 


: rid by > . 
is labo the further for the ſcattering of the Apo 


ir feet #*0] 


which ſpread : 
WO es and Preachers of it : and 
Thouſands had not heard ot Chriſt , if perſecution had not driven the 
Miniſters of the Goſpel unto them. God working good out of evil, 
and cauſing the Sun when it leaves one part, to thine upon ano- 


x Theſe Words are to prevent that cavil, 177y des God yet conc 
' plain? And informs them, that though Gcd had nor given them, 
nor their Anceſtets, his Laws wrote in Tables of Stone, as he had 
given.to the Jews 3 yer they had had the Law written in theirheatrs, 
which they had not obeyed, though Gods manifold Mercies, his 
Works of Creation and Providence had teſtified unto them, thar 
heonly was to be feared and Worlhipped, How many Witneſſes 
, | hath God againſt ſinful man, when every Creature and Providenc? 
Wiſdom, Goodneſs, &c. and call upon us 


18 And with theſe ſayings ſcarce reſtrained they the 


ther, 

I d 
_— _ $T And there ſate a certain man at Lyſtra. impotent 
© appoint In his feer, being a cripple from his 6 mothers womb 
tion off:x6d who cnever had walked. ſpeaks his Power, 

2d, T + Such defes as are from Nature, are incurable by Art, and one- | £9 love and obey him ? Every Creature tells us that God made it, 
r Count ly to be helped immediately by the God of Nature. c This is obſer- Oe. 

that = ved and inlarged upon, to make the miracle the more appear to be 

ain thc. the only work of God, Chap. 3. 2. 
18 Vii 


bo . 9 Ihe ſame heard Paul ſpeak: Who ſtedfaſtly be 


ealed, 
4 This Paul might know by a Prophetical Spirit ; and that ex 


Or _ oinary Gift of diſcerning of Spirits might be in this caſe be- 
meer SOOT »a pon him. But withal, itis not unlikely but this Lame Mans 
with (ts attention 0+) t wW q 4 , X h 
G for emontothe Word, eyes, geſture, and countenance, might ſpeak 
15 15% ” a much 
on oft Vol. It. 


holding him, and perceiving that he had 4 faich to be 


people, that they had not done ſacrifice unto them, 

y Se hard a matterit isto perſwade any to leave off theſe ſins they 
are accuſtomed unto ; or, to reCtified ſuch Errors in R=l:igion which 
menare brought up in. 


Y 19 « And there came thither & certain Jews from 
Antioch and Iconium, who « perſwaded the people,and | 
* having b ſtoned Paul, drew im our of the city, ſup. * > CT: 77: 
poſing he had been dead. an 


{ Nnnn2 3 


d, ? 
2 [im-3. ii; 
2 Such 3 


— —— 
© WAS = 
_m_— "E 6 
© -#. x 1 a} "Wh 
q 
4 - 


= 6 ED by ho gy bn; XY 
EM 26h FOO a ANT ls 
"ee es nt __ 


= 


a. 
Ah 
KS Q 
_ - -_ 
a” S, hy 

—_— 
7 


. = 
»_ EI p - " 
_ ati bogs 
JODI ww 3 23.6, 5 ” 
Meer 0515, Sy 4 Aw 


-— 

-- 
ws 
Ke. 4.4% 
ve 


Wn Wo FT; 


"3 
i% 
{2 OT 


z4 


Chap. XIV. SE Ch, 
= Sach as mention was made of, Chap. 13:50. #s A ſtrange and | 28 And there they abode / lung time with the q 
incredible fickleneſs : But that we know how the ſame multitude ciples. lis 
who cried Hyſanna, did more ſuddainly alter their note, and cry a-| {+ To confirm them, as Perſe 22. and. alſo as our Savious w: 
gainſt our Saviour, Crucify him, Crucify him 5 ſo incertain a thing 1S drew himſelf from the Multitudes, they chaſe thaw ng = 
Worldly Honour. + The malice of Satan is every way great ; it he} (pn f.1yes a while here, our of the heat of contention ” _ 
cannot &eſtroy the Souls of theſe bleſſed Apoſtles, by making of Gato, and per. 


them to accept of Divine Worſhip, he will do his utmoſt to kill their CHAP. Xy 
Bodies. : | Shs 6 
20 Howbeit,as thediſciplesc ſtood round about him, | Difference T__ about obſerving the Circume:ſion : Paul and Barnyy 
go to Jeruſalem abort thu queſtion, 1 5. The Apoſtle; $9 
B {4 


he 4 roſe UP, _ : 11003 2M the De. b and the next day Elders conſider this matter, 6. Peter declareth the Converſing ,; 
he departed with Barna as tO e LErbe, the Gentiles by his mouth : and how God makes no difference j,... * 

c Either, in order to bury him, thinking him to be dead, as well | ,,, Jews and them, 9 £1. James conflrmech the ſane \Ferwee 
as his Perſecutors did ; or, elſe to defend him, as much as poſſibly Prophet, 12 18. and concludeth not to lay any bur} t of the 
they could, from the rage of his Enemies in that popular —_ Tr hy, aan. The Letter for ne en Us 
ſpite was moſt againſt Paul, becauſe he ſpake moſt, and Preached un- by Paul end Barnabas. 23 29. They return, and as, 
to them the way of Life. d Being by the Power of God —_ rhe Epiſtles, Preach the Word of the Lord, Jo=—"— 35, paread 
reſtored to his ſtrengrh again. e A city near to Zycaonze, tome lay | po Þ.- being at variance, depart one from the other : __ 
Init. . with Mark to Cyprus, Paul and Silas zo Syria and Cijj. 
21 And when they had preached the goſpelto that | 35 41. — : : Gil, 
city, and had f taught many, they returned again to | z Nd acertain men which came down from Judes, 


Lyſtra, and ro Iconium, 2nd to Antioch. 


them, Matth. 28. 19. For as by Circumciſion they were made be ſaved. 


Moſer's Dilcipies, ſo by Baptiſm they are made Chriſt's Dil a Theſe were ſuch as did pretend to believe, but were falſe g;. {t 
a 


CIp'2s. ”_ # thren ; ſome think Cerinthas to have been one of them. þ The 
* Ch. 11.23. 22 g Confirming the ſouls of the diſciples, | and EX- | 2+ who ware Chai; - or my 
Luke 22. horting them to continue 1n che fairh, and lay Ing that the Gate (as they were called) who were not Ciccumciſed, ang ng, 
_ 29. we mult h through much tribulation enter into the king- profeſſing the True Faith. Theſe,the Pharaſaical profeſſors, would 
on. 8. 17, ' ro OBEY have excluded from any hopes of Salvation, although Circumcigg 
O12. e It is not enough to Sow the Seed of the Word, but it muſt be | Was not commanded, but unto the poſterity of Abraham, Gy, 1, 
 Watered alſo, frequent endeavours muſt be uſed, that it may befrait- | 12, TI, 12: and Abraham himſelf was Juſtified before he wa; (ir. 
ful. Thus the Apoſtles return to viſit ſuch as they had Preached un- cumciſed, Rom. 4. 10, c According unto the Law of Moſs, for, 
to; the perſecution they had endured encreaſing their reſolution by him did renew and eſtabliſh that Ordinance unto that People; 
for God, and their ſtrengeh from him. + Leſt they ſhould be offend- although it was long before his time, both Commanded and Pradijcq 
ed at what they ſaw St. Pau! had endured, or themſelves might be John 7. 22. 
called to endure,they Preach unto them the Doctrine of the Croſs, | 2 When therefore 4 Paul and Barnabas had no ſm 
not hiding from them the miſeries which in this World the profel- | diſſention and diſj putation with theme, they determined 


fion of Chriſt, and his Truths might bring upon them. God hath that * Paul and Barnabas, and certain other of them "= 
J 


indeed dealt all along thus with his People. The troubles which the 

I(radlites met with Fa the Wildernef' in their Journey towards an ſhould 80 Up toJ er uſalem f unto the apoſtles and elders 

Earthly Canaan, did Typify the Calamities which Gods People will «bout this queſtion. = 
mect with in this World, as they Journey towards the Heavenly | & That meck Apoſtle, who was willing to become al! thing 
Canaan, or Jeruſalem, which is above. unto all men, yet hereenters into a holy War with them that woy!] 
*Tir.1.5. 23 And when they * had z ordained them & elders — Cana _ _  Choech ; bean t, 
p . . 2 would have no Works of the Law to be an ingredient intoour 
Wn overy church, and had pray ed with nay ch they Salvation ; but the free grace of God in Chriſt co be all in a1}, 
] commended them - tothe Lord, on whom they be- 2. Thatour freedom from all the Ceremonial Law, acquired by 
lieved. the death of Chriſt , might not be diminiſhed. 3. Tha the 
5 The Word properly ſignifies a fretching out of the Hand, ſuch as | ſpreading of the Goſpel might not be hindred , bur that Clif 
was uſed when they gave their ſuffrages in the EleQion of their | might be excepted, and honoured amongſt all ; now if circumciſion 
Magiſtrates, whereby was ſhewed for whom they gave their Voice; | had been retained , it would have kept poſſeſſion for all the other 
and afterwards it was commonly uſed for to conſ?:rute ar appoint ; or, | ceremonies to have continued, or re-entred, there being the ſame 
as here, to ordain to any Office or Place; which might the rather | reaſon for the one * as for other ; and the circumciſed perſon 
be done by ſtretching out, or laying on of the Handsof the Apo- | was obliged by his circumciſion to obſerve them all, Gzl.5. ;, 4, 
files, becauſe by that means the Holy Ghoſt (or a Power of working | e The Church at Antioch, where this controverlie was moved, 
Miracles ) was tiequently beſtowed, Chap. 8. 17, 18. which in thoſe | f Fames, Peter, and John, who were thought to have been then at 
times was neceſlary to Authorize their DoQtrine to the Infidel] World. | Feruſalem, the reſt being probably gone to Preach Chriſt in other 
& Such as might inſtruct and govern the Church. 7 They com- | parts. 
5G che Diſciples as a ky % gu © ox Treaſure ; as = 3 And being brought on their way g by the church, 
ufferers are to commit their very Souls to God, 1 Pet. 4.19. 7 To . ERS 
Chrift, the beſt and faithful Keonld, that he ſhould keep and further a P aſſed through Phenice, and Samaria, declaring : 
them in Grace and Goodneſs; to whole Provideace they wholly | *2& Conver ſion of the Gentiles : and they caulcd great! 

| joy unto all the brethren, 


had committed themſelves. 


24 And after they had paſſed throughout n Piſdia, | g The brethren or believers of Antioch, out of reſpe&, went put 
x of the way with them ; as alſo thereby ſhewing, that Pau! and 3ar- 


they came to Pamphylia. 4 : 

> 4.8 . nabas did not go upon their own buſineſs, or mind onely ; and thit 

Soy 9%; _ viay back which they had come, as appears by there was no Eoeion berwixt them, and the Church there. blt 

# $8 + ha . | is aconverſion or turning indeed, from error to truth, from impurity 

25 And when they had preached p the word q IN | to holineſs ; that is, from darkneſs unto light, and from 16: punere 

Perga, they went down into Attalia : , Satan, to the ever living God, Chap. 26. 18. # Nothing morercjoyces 

Þ The Coſpel, the Word of the Lord ; or Chriſt who is the Word, | a good man, than the bringing of Souls unto God, and the enlayg- 
and who is the Sum of what the Miniſters of the Goſpel Preach | ing of the Kingdom of Jeſus Chriſt. 

—_ g yrogmmns jj BP [3 i _ ; oe pong will, 4 And when they were come to Jeruſalem k, they 

Country 1n Pamprylis by the Sea-ltde. Bur the Bounds of Provinces were received of th hurch d of th oftles and 

he K q | ceived of the church, and of the apoilic 

as =} wane altered by the Komans, and {ome made larger, and others elders, and they de clared all thin gs /that God kad dons 

T , | wit chem. 

: oo And thence _ wy ;'% och, + 10 pe _ k Th:y were owned with refpe& and thankfulneſs, for thei 

-12Q been TECOMmeEnuUed TO THE grace of Wod 10D the | gr Work ind Labour in the Lords Vineyard. ! See Ch 


work they fulfilled. 14. 27. : 
+ That Antioch which was in $7ria, as appears Chap. 13. 1,2, 3. R | 

to which this relates, and is a ſufficient proof that they had not | _ 5 But ”_ there | q oſe up certain of the ſect c_ 

ſought God in vain, and that there is no better preparation or | Phariſees which believed, ſaying, That it was nee Wy, 

proviſion towards any buſineſs, than faithful prayer unto God | to circumciſe them, and to command them to keep ttc 

concerning it ; doing our duty, and leaving the event unto his| |, of Moſes, | 

4d BP mf theſe. Words be taken for Sc. Luke" (the Pen-man ofthis Book) 


27 And when they were come and had gathered the | then they declare, that in the Church of Jeru/alem wr m— 
umciſion ; DV 


* Ch church together,they * rehearſed all that God had done | that did abett the opinion of che neceſlity of curc 
24 _ (as moſt probably we may ) we do take them for the Worss of St. 
32:27. 4 with them, and how he had opened & the door of faith | > | ond. = y —_ y LO ae Fromm ar es, ch there, @ 
: —_— A #4 unto the Gentiles. | what had hapned at A::i0c54. 1 Theſe Phariſees were a Set _ j 
* © 3% 2 God being with them, and they being Jabourers with God, | the Jews, ( ſocalled fron: WP ſeparavir, and may beEng 7 
1 Cor. 3. 9. 2Cor 6. 1 They thewed how much God had honour'd | Separatifis ) ſeparating from converſe with others, by realon 0: + 
= in —_ them his Inſtruments in the Converſion of ſo many | opinion they had of their own holineſs, Zxke 18. 11. wa 
zouls. © & He had given the Gentiles an opportunity of knowing and ' togetner I0 
believing the Goſpe). The Fleece alone had hows wet before, and 6 And theo apoſtles and eiders Came tog 
top contider of this matter. ” 
econ 


all the Ground round abort it dry ; and now all the Ground is wer, 
and that Fleece was dry ; to alludeto Jzages 6. 37,' 39. by which | «Unto whom Paul and Barnabas were ſent about the d 
this myſtery was preſignified, and can only be | reſolved by that of| this queſtion, verſe 2. p They had been informed of it, and 00 


our —_ Maith, 11, 25, 26. Even ſo Eather, for ſo it ſeemed guud| they met to deliberate about it. 
77 727 (is EF, | A 4 
I a Ne! 
/ 


= taught the 4 brethren, and ſaid, * Exceyt ye tc, 
f Had many Diſciples by Teaching, and alſoby baptizing of | þs circumciſed + afrerc the manner of Moſes, ye RR 
Cal.s 


av. nb-P: XV. 


CT <&: 
6. 


Chap. XV, 


Qt 
. - And 
"1th whe 
he” role Uu n ther 
reſh þ, 11.2% h P and faid ehad b 
R : how th unto t| gen 
pr ng good xo them, en q much diſpur 
ub They argued 17a rn paar h made'choice: kno In the 
Yo h = either _— on both _—_ th ſhould hs oice am = kc. ——— ch | 
- een f n; fe des, a ar _— ez er, tl -y 
OP and from che rexiving of ro Bon conſidered the wor 7 oh * ſpeaking b _ re ron onel! v4; 
ſh many 2 12 colliſion the circu at met h what m\ 16 an y one Spiri $ the har y one ci if ! 
the of 0 ont hath 1: of adv mcilto ere,ſe ight b 42941 Af it; mon ited; i ; 
2 ur having r lighted hy: verſe pa - n; for , em at firſt e ſaid gain 0 ter hi J What o y amon ry tis af 182 | 
och _ mo Te our T—_— ho ſuch ſ> know bit - have and I dy re S2T will A <p rh P warms 4 
, . 22, and rly, fi ommi em. park 7n part . l ac l fr x6 
I- —_ cars before hich 5 the OY to ME "p* build — on. WE I had taid 'S. 
Wh" od, unto the = that Pet S chought t Cornelius? » As po voi In the d he ruin z which ; will boy 'E Q 
I * % And entiles er Preach o haveb y comme 0 2a 1M ices. If ays of th s the is fall uikd x | 
bs + ics Gods which k wan ow fon 6412: urn ; If Attvely, it gn reof, and 1 willter i 4 
vi urteen or nin \e had d it ſignif 3 The W Will ſee is $2 
( unto Hh giVIN nowe the com en Or ſed g unt ad de gnifie eW ſet | | 
_ Cod k g them the = the hea mand of | 7} =  eabernec nt on monk: wp | ba 
Ve Ui. d knew oly G res, b D ey dw nacle (as the aſlivel: Urn, taken Fr 
" elire to the deſi hoſt are avid ele o fre y had fe y, & ur:to n bot; f. 
Not - ate Go 4 bas of the G , even as __ does _ ll my : > wb -——— S Horeſhows CORY $0 
Ls ve » Anc enti . miſe abernac riptur 's their oY 11, 
s E. ant eg «ed DS I REETrnn \ 
. . - Y 1 g f « n bh bl x P = : by S el- Se p 
Ga ow hart; o ſerve 1 Giro. 8. - area A romdy = non - Cy of Devid perform, Kingdom i 2 wr” meg WU: 
lo) 7 en h as - ith SG,  W : k m tri ; or in 3 ah Wn  ® © D 15 ys ron - £1444 
hy NEED cron ce ka tend = oral at ' 
Fould pirtl this w ich he t My inary a e Gentile , and a will: would and at p h meani unio th ate. py itto a £ nely re i 
ciliog Rev. 19 OD Thu eſtified, th nd extrao es illing mind. | 2 all th the reſid vB: e Word FP inches, og n VA, 
= ' 10. and $ the z 3 at the rdinar a all ex ind. aith (- G p ue of $s of ti gh St. ex bit; 
wo 1 15 26. doth ore ee _ of Coo ry gitts rr P hr Lor _— upo men ma ne Gb h, +4 
Col ty nd pur # 091 = ccording tor the Pirie of 5 hel | nm \he Prophet, mrs erp —_— = ba 
oy ] yin $ O iff 4v 2 of s (- hu e refs , it is (q my eL "| Fs | 
eOple; J, 22 y1Ng their h Heren 1OUrs prophe rch ; { raue of remne all ch name i ord "FL. |: 
Qiſed, 22, » God hath carts cebetw Pr Ss who wer ry nt of Ed ns eas erm v0 +; 
twixt Jew now brok x by fai cen us , John | Expli ere reje » Or Eſa or as 7 om, Amos 9. JS. led BS 
Eokeſ. 2 and Gent: en do ith ; and th til cation ed, Ro «(the oth acob © WP 2 =. . , 2: 
{mall Pref. 2.1 ntile wn th y em es, , all th Ps ther $ r Jjrael which 4 4 
(al the tO 4. which w: and di he mi » W b 9 Wh e H 9. 13. on of el Ihad ch is hez2 A! '} 
i = nd tered bis grace th PE, I #þ 
| which | TS y th rac iti th in. — po O ad e 4415 
mY tory, and. _—_ oe = the theſe ally — Aa ape EEE _ egg Sarge BY 
| the inwa nd other i under e ben uch as veil from ous in om bei ado 6 ns fro Home te PLE 
ch COTS TS SEES re formerly _ Known Eyes. pd equa — Foo. called 1 
ngs the inſtrum t not to of the'l ich the nd type at thin ing of unto G gainit Ss W m che Py 
ſe, 1 : ion. is the ed amon ; and wh wal, hich bs PTR the A orid re all his t ought oo : 
So b54. 10 No efhicie zft rh oſoever i ich 1 ning no poſtle ' Is W to be W 
_ — to Now enonnt = ik Fes borne orks fr 4 
in all, * yoke upon Ore wh OT QOUr J o x Fai us before d the Ce ſurpriſc f they miot; Om th | 4 
; 1 t uſt Faith etermi remoni feof 1 e be- MES: 
wh gr nor nom of the ber ye G fication and che Wieand Hol > > cling! be offended MR AY ; 
= w E ici 0) o yall as e G ; LET, 
Chrift ther Goa w_ you _ 2ble to b ſciples wh d * topu not ef Where. —— og otliert; with he , oh AL 
nciſion whether he = good nay res þ 298 9 ch neither ta God: em, wor m my Gn > ord ough- 3 W134 yl | : 
- __ did tex | gn S. GO our | St, 7 ich from waged is, th @ Corr fi 1 wh | . 
7 en - . . 3 is 14 & 
= Ez eaten nes iv, the #5 
* þ+ or he that ſins 1 ubmitti rought G iſlikio 1s kindneſs r, and | bi - # Wh nt Opini ES ULUTU whble*sS i }4 
moved Gods patie nsin any 2 their ang Will g the calli 3 towards | V ings as w om he w onverſi Uon, c uiicd i See w07 W444 
th ; mo Fg. NCC, ind, 1s , Wer . lin $ erlio cre n ould ing wy onfirmi = EY FINK - 
ta WW , Stall, Gol. Wodoens ar x poſe, wr Patew.. nor neceſſary have fied ming and appro 
\ Their ineffica 5.1, and —_— kc ; unto Gods, 20 B gr wh aber wits - ap. 
a a. gs x s. « So is ds; | fl ut th co ty urb:4 with Gen- 
_ J} 66 Bur ® wk being i ice, 3 ae Few he tries on oy naliee we write u a thould ould vr th =o yk 
ng +l "8 "" caval eir e Co ow thi ons * of 1 nto th u5ſ? e Con- i 
| e bell ows of ir cha nſide . ings of 1d tnem /* ance fe M: 
Jr6at | ord Jeſus C elieve th good thi rgeable r, .*. Eatin 7 ſtran nad” £ th or 4 & 
a All-favi hriſt at th Nngs iaco neſs, of ſcand g of Me gled a - nd fr at the 
by a grace m we ſhall rough wwe, Col. | al, and at that w nd z om x forni y abſtai 
- the . rwards i for th was _ from OTIll . Hain 
nt patt 3 The It, and -— may be w be ſaved a gra here $1n ofl c e pref: offered blood CAtiCNn.; 
nd Bar« EY w/e upo ell ſo called even b ce of th but mentio 1er caſes) ent ſtat to Idol G and * 
; 1 . (S7 be ned a esind eof th s, (asF* Fy +: 
nd that —_ which w athers ; th n us from I, it bein as the them cauſe it mongſt j ulged, e Chu wrſe 29.) " O'R 
: bþ ku no bg Ec ang purchaſed nel chem who puniſhed _— — "orb rhomgh Mor 
my } grace r themſf aw ) t the A rough-th gh Chri one ſin oth th ulcer Gentile ; not "Os ornic: ough * 1 Th - 
puwerd i2 © elves, could] the A ot. —_— Syn avind ack or Hes repur Sa nymopo-ce oof eff, 
Ws ws ; h ecdochi each T es of the y. B ed to be ver w 5 4 3 
rejoyce ard q Then be ruſlified 7 wo.” this ( was e | Blood 1 chical] able the La y cheſe 2 {0 as lo 
: enlarg: Ince tO call the by the L e neither inſt | God et out Ku be unde all the —o to be f SMS fom even by 
and wo Barnab multitud aw, b their | Food Gen. 9. 4 and ther e forbidd e think al] 
1 2 ut ood .9. 4. gf eref a gainſt any en, K4 
they them. ders God ow —_—_— Glence _ ſed on , They LH ——— # ny = I by 
2s and cThe A wrough aring w , and at Bl of the B alſo m as the efed u Shad n "ILY 
oa hat d mi gave | abſtat ood w ody of uch m Me of Ich © mas their 
d dons NRvas ind poſtles and E mon mir m fi was forbi any {lai ore t Fleſh y the [L r 
of what An decl ders the g the Genti acles | Blood :om revens den. wn Crea wakftein Goo: I frmotcer og 
| ol parts Wo; 2 mſelves atiles by | 2217 | are moſt back =; _— ag py owed for 
or thei "oo aid. by thei gave : y| & included 1 er i. —_ v. 3-17 od, w 
mo the fn which LD _—_ Rept EI no 
3 A one Soul i id at n of th acite] ar- | of ed to y1! , andt epts wh Ir is alſc atio S$, and a 
2 anſw nd e af ul is a mi tend ir he Geptil y approv chem yield ob to whicl ich they call prob eds 
ered ter th pane oh As ol, © peed drow to be edien volt rhe Pie call able ced on 
of the 11 me «: . &y h ulous V; rue] it ſelf. r un contin ce: th the P ed s | , that G 
| ve 3 ayin ad h s V/ork. \ y wonderfi 'Y (with to Chriſti inued e Apoſt roſclyr : he P th,ele 
needful, Sol fs eld their | rful : ; the! Chriſt Oe Ho Sow oats þ Eo 
P fi arn.6 4 nN and eIr pe er mo ) yer tl y. For em th: uld hav 16 Gar 5 of 
_ and Poul tad finiſh Tone Do more den burial, TIE peo 
| ſpeak r, now b ;, and was h niſhed thei en un ather, write abou It an a deadly, eremon! pgſtchem 
1is Book) | cing Preſi n Sarwar Joey ng . to| 9Þ the © - througl out gre: n wonder | Au $rng ener ve ws 
I : iden: of 4! rrat | o roſs; gh the $ ater er th id W re dead 
ere ſome vi 4h Simeon nt of this rn pr yo f Who vo, was —_ he woke yon ; pv boar -_ the ru = yoRe 
5 but 1 hi It the 'S- A hath d uncil. T inliman was queſtion t other m to conſid enying of of worſk': cil did no 
«ds of 9 Nam entiles eclared h g That is mo our 21 F amongſt — Jo rp that th our ſelve 'pping oy 
here, 0 b Or => , to rake ow God » began to thar or a Moſes uch as Peper Say queſtion 7 and kia 
- among Hibrew imon (th out of th at the fi fab preach hi of old ti God. great thi 1ey mer g 
Ingle rated rcheG pps of P Fel —_— did bath-day im, * beings hath i ings were Home 
fon of 20 ably a Sthe Gr cording : eter) ; b ekf 2 Th p read i in ev . 
bly amo > 9s, oper” ; bur $ or | as e reaſo in th ery Cl 
ends + neſt th rote It; 3 y pron t. Luke bei OON Aa n wh & ſyn = th T 
"ng, but e Gentiles, 3 Th ounced 1 ing hi confi $ the y St. 7a agogu em 
ther f0! _ of. they did es, wh ere wer ir; and imſelf rmed 1 y were de mes woul es ev 
Ws k God not mak o did fear e fome a not fo an | Purchaſe C n them ad, was b d not hav ery * Ch 
put for 3. Fox bh takes o ea peo God. a t all tim con= the Genti encord þ and bare {i ecauſe ethe Ce .h, 23.27 
Tn” t the imſelf ut of ple or ſu s Job es pro | ® tiles ſh etwi uch a | rhe remoni? aa 
_ weed by him f as Prov. _ EE = _ a Te pekly ulng —— — onto the ta 1d ryan 
e hi 5 om 2: For to o. th ple —_ unto. ng ome 1 TTY OO ong 
1 I ne or to call -— name = ie min 22 T $ 27 OR incomvenienc — - would 
5 Ar , Fo po th e h ty w nN _—_ 
it ls W ad to thi : tis glory n - name gar: bo whole SE pleaſed : Y which Ro Nt0 595 HO 
ritten is agres * and honou 5 alſo f urch it oth ugh Che hen be 
, res "th __ or | PNY © , to ea kriſtfhey had 
& WO » and ro ſur o Anti end poſtles2 ey nad 
rdsof urna tioch . chofe 2nd PE 
the med B: ; with n me e1weTr . - WT 
* rophets; as gr = pd _- and Barns of prior the OWE 
c Tha happy | e Silas, f abas; nar! ar arena vo |; 
'r at Paul concord he chief ely,d Fuc WEL X 
uch 245 h and Bar , ail 1 MS ar udas | | £1 ' 
| ad bee : rnabad mi green ; TION 1 1 L "4 | 
& of a con 1ghc be F 2s one gl2s 18 l 
(FIMENT : cr:2dired p C12 C1 . 
7: fohard it and ©! Print. 
A 1T 33 £9 oat by 
als ter 
-Þ 52:59:08 
TOTO INES, 


7 And 


< <— 


Laan — x4 ——_ _ " 
1» "Ae 7 _ 


m al nay k —_ « 
i 4 a o— . 4 PY PR__— - 
"EIS. - | 
_—_ © & " PIO S—p7 r bs = _—_ Wo PP - <p 4 - 
de * > = W— = - " _ _ - pa * DJ & 
_—— I, 0 : . * _ n w - = 
non + re em $ > o 
ny hp—r>rm——r—— $a De pg ES = - : =. 
mpg He = I Sm "= 7 26G” — : 
= A ETD = - 4 ——_ x 
> 4 OT” Oe _ 
- I bed _ peter” 1194 mugen. 


— 


_ 


FA * _ - 
4 
OS ELIT oy nn 
—_ et Lotte 
—_— 2 


LY - m———_m—_w_—_ 
Pn ry rar er I. 


be 
= _ —— —— 
AR of rat gr ops is. 6 
SW 'S: "As 6 ft - RT. 
Ls i th whih 7” CE ng On 


* 
* © 


Chap. XV, 


* Rom. 1. 5. 


T cas, word. 


* Ch. 21.25. 
.17. 14. 


and Syria, anil Cilicia. 


The 4A 


ſuſpicious, an! to root out pre-eonceived opinions, d The oe! 
ther of rhat Joſeph mentioned Chap. 1. 23. e Called Sylvan allo. 
f Noted for their Holy living, or great Knowledge, or Office ia the 
Church. s 

23 And wrote letters by them after this manner g, 
The apoſttes, and elders, and brethren ſend greeting 


unto the brethren which areofthe þ Gentiles in Antioch, 


The Letter was wiote in the name of them all, that it might 
F4 - i =tte , 


| 4 W 
{ ve the greater force, and better acceptance ; that ſo ſtrong a Cord | 


might nor be broken by the falſe Apoſtles. þ Such as out of Gen- 
riliſm, ot Pageniſm, were converted unto Chriſt ; to whom the de- 
termination of this caſe was of greateſt concern : their right of be- 
Jonging unto Chriſt, and having any hopes of Salvation being que- 
Nioned, unleſs they would be Circumcited. : : 

24 Foraſmuch as we have heard, that certain which 
went out 7 from us, have k troubled you with words/, 
{tbverting vour ſouls, ſaying, 7e muj7 be circumciſed, | 
and keep the law ; to whom we gave no /#c5 command- 
iNENt: | 

; For, Perſe 1. theſe falſe Apoſtles were ſuch as came from 
Judea ; that is, from the Church there. It is Satan's great policy 


to divide, that he may rule ; he will have at leaſt one ſhare where 
there is more than one. No ſuch fad diviſions, as Church-diviſions, 
when that ſome -of our fſclves Preach perverſe things, as Chap. 
20.30. & As if ia the profefling of Chriſtianity there would be 
no Salvation, unleis Judaiſm be imbraced, and Circumciſion ad- 
mitted, No greater trouble to a conſiderate mind, than about the 
concern of Salvation, when they ſay, Where i thy Goa ? 1 Theſe 
they did we!l put together ; for by Circamciſion they ingaged to 
the obſervance of the whole Law of Moſes : And by the Decreeing 
the 9milſion, that whole Law of Ceremonies 15 declared void, and 
of no cf:&. What Truth and Unity build up, Diſcord and Error 
pul! down- h | : 

25 It ſeemed good unto us, being aſſembled with - 


ene accord, toſend choſen men unto you, with our be- 


loved Barnabas and Paul ; 

»» With one Mind, as if they had all but one Soul (they had but 
one Spirit, the Spirit of Truth ) as Chap. 2. r. and 5.12. Their 
Unanimity adding great ſtrength to the Decree they ſent. 

26 » Men that have hazarded their lives for the 


o * care of our Lord Jeſus Chriſt. 

7 Becau!e that the falſe Apoſtles at .2ntioch had vilified Paul and 
Barnabas, and oppoſed their Do&rine and Prattice in admitting of 
the Gentiles by Baptiſm into the Church, the Council here at Feru- 
ſalem take occaſion to vindicate, and to commend them, eſpecially 
for their ſuffering ſo much for Chriſt, of which we read, Chap. 13. 
co. and 14. 19. It being moſt reaſonable to believe, that they had 
not done or tad any thing for their own ſakes, who had done and 
ſuffered ſo much for Chriſt and his Truths ſake. o For Chriſts Ho- 
Nour, 2nd the Truth of his Goſpe!, 

25 We have ſent thereicre Judas and Silas, who ſhall 
ao tell yu p the ſame things by f munch. 

> They thall inform you of the truch of whar is contained in this 
E»;/ile, that you may be more aflared,it isnot forged orcounterfeited. 
©: rhe Nicn, vid. F.rje 22. 

25 For it tzemed good q to the holy Ghoſt »,and unto 
us, tolay upon you no greaters burden than theſe z ne- 

ell.ry things ; 

q That is, unto us aſlifted by the Holy Ghoſt. The Holy Ghceſt 
ts delervedly firſt mentioned, that the Apoſtles might teſtifis that 
they dcfired ro fy, write, or do nothing in which they had nor 
the Spirit of God direQting of them : And they mention the Spirit, 
thar the ntiochians, unto whom they wrorte, might be afflured 
they were not tlaman inventions which they recommended.bur that 
they had the Authority of God for them. » As Miniſters, or 
Gods Stewards, who acquainted them with theſe things, in dif- 
charge of their dury, and that they might appear themielves to be 
faithtul. s The Yoke ſpoken of, Perſe ro. £ To be ſure ſevera} of: 
rhe things here ſpoken of, are not abſolutely necefliry unto Salva- 
rion ; or fimply, and in their own nature neceſſary, as to abſtain 
from Blood, tc. but though they are nor necetfary always, arid at 
all times, yer in this place, and ar this rime, they were neceflary 
for the pzace of rhe Church, and to avoid giving of offence to the 
converted 7ews, aid to nourith Brotherly love betwixt them and 
the Gent 7les, 

29 * That v2 « abſt .in from meats offered to idols, 
and x * from blond, and from-things ſtrangled, and from 
3 fornication; from which if ye keep your ſelves, ye 
ſhall do well. & Fare ye well. 

r Of theſes Fre more Jargely, Yerſe 20. w They were wont to 
ca:ry bore, and Fealt rpon part of the Sacrifices they had off:red 
unto their tale gods ; nay, they did nor, withour reproach. eat of 
any greater Lealts (as Oxcn and Sheep ) but they always firſt offer- 
ed iome of ihem unto their Idols. And it wasaccounted no ſmall 
impierv to eat aJv7z Izeg, part of any Beaſts which they had not 
firſt citzred up ro {ome or other of their gods. x For this reaſon 
they might not eat cf any thing that dicd of its ſelf, as Dent. 14. 
21. becauſethe Blood was not gone out of it. y Mentioned here, 


becaule fo commonly prattifed amongſt the Gentiles, and yet not 
eſtcemed a fin. Hence alſo, 1 Thef 4.3. the Apoſtle lays a very 
great charge againſt 3t. z The ordinary Apprecation wherewith 
their Letters were ccncluded, in which rhey wiſhed health and 
ſtiengrh co the party they wrote unto; inſtead of which Word, 
tome ancient Copies read geeo,.cr e&v Tvivuan ap: which is 


rendied, walk in the Help Ghoſt; or, the Holy Ghoſt carrying, or 
enabl.ng of you. A Wiſhor Prayer becoming theſe holy Men that 
made xt. + They who have tound the neceſſity of rhe Spirits 


C34 
aſſiſtance, deſire it above all things, for ſuch as they wiſh we 
unto. : 

3o So when 4 they were diſmiſſed, they coma { 
" Me to 

Antioch : and when they had gathered 5 the Multituce 
rogether, they delivered the epiltle. 

a Paul, Barnabas, Judzs, and Silas ; which two 1af were 
with the former. 6 From whom they were ſent, Perſe x, +. X 
that this derermination of the Council might be more publick 


known, as all things concerning our common Salyation ought tg 


7 


31 hich when they had read, they rejoyced 
the [| conſolation. 

c It could not but much rejoyce the Genz:le-Believers, 
were exempted from Circumciſion, and the Ceremonial Law 
it gladded the Believing 7ews alſo, that the Controverſe 
rermined, and Concord eſtabliſhed amongſt them ; but m1; 
might they all rejoyce to underſtand the Grace of the Goj 
that we are not juſtified by the deeds of the Law, but by faith, : 
Chriſt, Rom. 5. 1. Tis Word allo ſignifies Exhortazion, an j; - 
matter of Joy to be put upon ſuch excellent duties, as our mog fu 
Religion recommends, and to be deterred from ſuch erroneqy: Fic? 
as it forbids. All that God requires of us,being on]y to eſch;y Dy 
and to do good, Iſa. 1. 16, 17. 1 Per. 3. 1. "4 

32 And Judas and Silas being 4 prophets alf them. 
ſelves, exhorted the brethren with many words, ang ; 


confirmed them. | 

a Not properly fo called from any Gifr of foretelling things t 
come, Eph.g. 11. but as Doftors and Teachers in the Thy 
expounding Moſes and the Prophets, and ſhewing how ang whir 
they ſpeak concerning Chriſt ; proving out of them, that he wy 
the Meſſiah, as Ph1l:p had done, Chap. 8. 35, e Ste Chap, j,,.. 
& 18. 23. hy 

33 And after they had tarried zhere fa ſpace, they 
werele: gog in peace from the brethren 5 uni 1h; 


apoltles, | 

f A competent time ; ſome make this ſpace to be ?, yea 
g They were diſmiſſed with earneſt Prayersfor them ; fo; by Par 
is meant all kind of Good, which they delired for them, as a1; 
10. 13. kh Such of them as wereat Jeruſalem, who allo hq ſene 
them, 

34 Notwithſtanding it pleaſed 7 Silas to abide there 
ſtill. | 

; Though having performed his meſſage, he was diſcharged, irq 
might have returned, yet for the further benefit of that Chyrc) 
he continued at Antioch. : - 

35 Paul alſo and Barnabas & continuedat Anticch, 
teaching and preaching the word of the Lord /, with 
many others alſo. 

k Judas only returned to Fernſalem, to acquaint the Apoſils 
with the reception their Letter had met with, and what obedience 
was readily given to their Decrees, / So that when theſe went 
away, the Church at Antioch was not left deſtitute of faithfil 
Paſtors. When God givs: the word, great # the multitude of Preachers 
Pſal. 68. rt. 

36 © And ſome days afrer, Paul faid unto Barnabas 
Ler us go 2 again and vilit our brethren in every city 
where we have preached the word of the Lord, and [ 
2 how they do. 

» It is not enough that they had ſown good Seed, but they mul 
take care leſt ir be plucked up, and Tares fown in the ſtead of it, 
by :he wicked one, Matth. 13. 19. A Husband-mans work is ner 
at an end, neither is the /aborr 7n Gods wineyard. n Not io much 
looking after their Bodily welfare, as how their Souls fared, whe- 
ther they continuel in the Faith, and Integrity of life, 


c for 


And 
Was g&. 
pel; ang 


37 And Barnabas determined to rake with them *John, i 
whoſe ſurname was o Mark. : 1. 
o This John or Mark, was Siſters Son to Barnsbzs, as Colſ.111 
4. 10, Phd 


38 But Paul chought not good to take him with them, 
whe departed from them p from Pamphytia, and went 
not with them 9 to the work. 

p This deferting of Paul and Barnabas by John, is mentioned, 
Cap. 13.13. 9g The Work unto which the Spirit had clled them, 
Chap. 13. 2. which was to offer Life and Salvation unto ti? 
Gentil-s, and to gather them into the Fold of Jeſus Chriſt. Thi 
Objection was very conliderable, and ought to have weighed 
more than this 7/u's propinquiry, or nearneſs in Blood unto 
Barnabas, 


39 And the contention was ſo ſharp between them, 
chat they 7 departed aſunder one from the other : And 
ſo Barnabas took Mark, and failed unro s Cyprus; 

r As Abraham and Lot parted, Gen. 13. 9. yet keeping the Unity 
of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace; loving of, and praying tor 
one other ; as we may judge, being both'good Men. But they 
verified here what they had ſaid at Lyfra, Chap. 14. 15. we "i 
men of like paſſions with you ; yet God over-ruled theſe very diviſions 
betwixt Paul and Barnabas, tor his own Glory, and the inlargement 
of the Kingdom of Jeſus Chriſt, ſeveral places being by this mean 
bleſſed with the Goſpel. And this refle&ion upon this John Mart 
is thought to have made him for the future more diligent and valiant 
in the cauſe of the Goſpel, which occaſioned that kind Salutation 
from St. Paul unto him, Co!off; 4. ro. 5 An Ifland inthe AMeaicerranto 
Sea. 

40 And Paul choſe Silas, and departed, being recom 
mended by the brethren unto 7 the grace of Go. 


z The favour of God, as Chap. rg. 26. which the wiſcl - 
JOIN)» 


that they ks 


: 


Az 


\ V 
P <&\ pap- 


ity 
the 


Yar, 
Peats 
atth, 
ſent 


er 


and 
Urch, 


och, 
with 


joſtles 
ence 
went 


uthful 


Achirt, 


abas, 
city 
ud ſu 


y muſt 
1 of it, 
$ Nev 
» much 
|, whe- 


Tohn, tc 
15.0 
$ Colef, 21 


them, 
| Went 


1tioned, 
d them, 
nto tis 
t, This 
weighed 
od unto 


} them, 
And 
US; 
ze Unity 
yiog for 
But they 
we att 
diviſions 
rgemen! 
115 means 
bn Mark ) 
1d yaliant 
alutation 
iterranean 


' TECOM 


21% : ; ? , 
;:, Tmotheus, the ſon of a c certain woman, which was a city of that part of Macedonia, and f a colony : and we cry. 


wo 


{ $And they paſſins by Myſia®, came down to « 
L, 


Pk 

Ke wattl 

XVI. The A CG y 4 * Chap. de k Pit | 
holieſt ag wr oe x need of 10 a}l their undertakings; as alſo his| | 7 a iona the reliQs of the fimous City of Troy ; or, the Country Pet ok. 
. alli ance. ; fNerea Outs . 1; þ- "Ws > , 7 , , v F " Wh */ 
gracious Conduct an ; CE En , IN which che Ciry of A4ticonia was built. 415116 

41 And he went through « Syria, and Cilicia x, con-| 9 And a viſion appeared to Pau! in che niche: There ol IR 
frming the churches. ſtood 2» a man, a 1/''s 


Where there were ſeveral brethren by reaſon of the diſperſion] Come over into Mac 
3- unto whom 


that was upon Stephen's death, Chap. 11. 19. and x5. 2 


p the fore-cited Letter was wrote, » putting them in mind © 


al 


couraging of them to perſevere in the profeſſion of it, 


ing ready to anſwer any Objection that could be brought againſt 


Il. 


Gi AP. AV. 


Paul coming to Derbe sndLyſira, circum:iſeth Timothy, and taketh weindeavoured to 
; giveth the Churches, by which 10g, that the Lord had catled 1 5r 

he travellech, the decrees of the Elders of Jeruſalem, 4, 5. they are - cated us for tg 
forbidden to preach the word at Aſia, 6. Paul in a viſion invited to 
13. Lydia's heart open'd ; She and 


him in his journey with him, 1—5. 


reach at Macedonia, 7 
her Family baptized, 14, 15. he caſteth the Spirit of Divination out 


of a certain Damjcl, 16 — 18. Her Maſttr fal/ly accuſes Paul and Silas, $17 


thy are ſconrged, and impriſoned, 19 24. They ſing praiſes un- 


ts God in priſon ; an Earthquake opens the Doors, 2.5, 26, The Jailor 


intending to kill himſelf, is prevented by Paul, 27, 28. he believeth, 
and with all his houſe i baptized, and ſheweth them kinaneſs, 
29 —— 34. The Magiſtrates ſend to let them go; Pau), ſhewing him- 
ſelf to be 8 Roman, and b:atcn uncoudemned, will be brought out by 
themſelves : which is alſo done. 35 ——40. 

1 "J* Hen came he to « Derbe and Lyſtra : and be- 


hold, a certain diſciple was there, * named 5 


Jewels, and & believed ; but his father 2»25 a Greek : 
a Of theſe Cities ſee Chap. 14. 6. b Who was known unto Paul 
from his Childhood, 2 7:mm. 1.5. and accompanied him in many 
Journies, 2 Tim 3. 10. and 1s called by him, his work-fellow, 
om.16. 21. c Called Eunice, @ Being one of them that had believed 
in Chriſt in Fudes, and had a holy Woman to her Mother named 
10s, Although it was not Lawful for a Few to marry a Woman of 
another Nation, yet ſome think that a Zeweſs might marry to a 
ſtranger, as Efther married to -thaſuerw. e Of Gentile extraftion, 
and therefo re not Circumciſed ; yet he is accounted to have been a 
Proſelyte. 
2 Which * wasf well reported of by the brethren that 
were at Lyſtra and Iconium. 

f Though T:m0thy was well known unto Paul, yet he would not 
Ocdain him withour the teſtimony of others concerning him, of his 
boly life, and knowledge in the Scripture, = 7im. 3.15. which he 
did excel in. f : 

3 Him would Paul have to go forth with him ; and 
took and circumciſed him, becauſe of the g Jews which 
were in thoſe quarters : For they knew allthat his father 


was b a Greek. | 

e Who could not yet be perſwaded that the Law of Circumciſion 
vas abrogated. Pau! who became all things to all Men ( that he 
might fave ſome) Circumciſed 7;m9:hy that he might not offend the 


the Goſpel of Chriſt, which they had heard and velieved ; and en-| extending to the Archipelago 
; and be- | | TN 


wn ; 
RS 
Bn es 
yr Deny" dd 
2-100 


- _ 
5 woes 34 I 


of x Macedonia, and praved him, ſaying. 
w'An Anoel i edonia, and y help us, ip 
n Angel in the appearance and likenels ( in habit and d2- 


f, meanou | 
) to one of that Country. & A Grecian Province in 6 176P2 tl 
| 7 - Petag0e 3 AS to our Souls with the ſaving + 3.88 
for poo) the Goſpel , (God tend; the Miniſters of-.rhe Gol! ſhe : ' q - 
1e uv — - oY ; "xy DEER gy < "ay % Y k kt 
, help Iuchy as would otherwiſe periſh with the Goipel, Salvatica 4a 


| COmes, 
10 And after he had {een the vifien. 


- jinmediately 4 
go into Micedonia, :afuredly gather- 
LR, ! b Ke. 
PIeich the Go- 
ſpel unto them. 
z As ſoon as Gods Will was manif-tcd, they mike an dean 
> ay k * : d 6 > a4\S aw } * 
= objecting againſt the Journey & df. Late, the Pen-man-ot 
this Book was one of them that wene, ( the others vere Pau! 
4 - 4 & -z 


as, and Timotheus ) and therefore fpealss in the Plaral Mam: 


ber. 

11 Therefore looſing from Troas, we cans with a 
firaight courſe ro 6 Samothracia, and the next dy to 
cNeapolis ; : 

6 An Ifland fo called, becauſe the Tnhabitants came partly out of 


L » . X : 
, Thrace, and partly from Samos, & This Heapoles was a City in the 7x 
confines of Thrace and Macedonia. $ {7 * 


12 And from thence to 4 Philippi,which isthe || e chief 1 Mr.ch- ©. 


ce - oat: 
> =] 


TD 4 << > — pa w - tow = <ow ” p' 
re ths 9 Pg 4 be Fatt d WD - mae: IP RS 
þ : ED _ g —_— 5 | Th 
4 b/ —- _ : i - Fo —— FIZ . + 
Meteor ft te 2. ns . _—_— . _s 
Po —_— K -. Xt 3 $22 tr - 4 
h - * 
ow S a _ af 


; were in that city abiding certain days. bt 
| 4ACity fo called from Philip the Father of Alc::ander the Gre: Bt. 
, Who repaired a ruined Town, and caufed it to b= called by his | 
name. e Or the firſt Ciry in the paſſage from Samorhracia unto h 
Macedonia, f Where many Roman Citizens went to inhabit ; and j 2 
whoſe Inhabirants had the freedom of the City of Rome. To the "PH if \ 
Church in this City Pau! wrote an Epiſtle. WULRT 10.3 
13 And onthe tſabbath we weat out of the city by + Gr. $44. WU TA 
a river ſide, g where prayer was went to be made; and bach-daz. 
we fate down,and ſpake unto the women which relarted 
thither. | 
* g In thoſe places where there were not enough to build a Syna- 
gogue, or could not obtain leave to do it, the Jews inthoſe Countries 
choſe more private places to mect in, which uſually were near 
Rivers, or by the Sea-ſide, removed from the noiſe and obſervance 
of the Multitude; and theſe places were called Proſeuch:s, from 
the Prayers which were uſually made there ; and to one of theſe, 
Paul and the reſt went, taking that occaſion to meet with them 
whom they might preach the Word of Life unto. + The Women 
are here named, as being more numerous in thoſe Oratories, 
or ſuch as moſt willingly heard and attended unto what was 
ſpoken. 
14 And a certain woman named 7Lydia, a ſeller 
of purple, of the city of & Thyatira, which / wor- 


bomber nn 
— ne, 
- ” 


7wiſh Converts, 1 Coy. 9. 22. but would not Circumciſe Tizms, Gal. 
2.3. leſt that he ſhould harden them, and offend the Gentile. Theſe 
diffrent things require a ſingle Eye, to the Edifying of the Church, 
and the Salvation of Souls. þ Timothy was uncircumciſed, although 
kis Mother wasa Jeweſs ; for according to their Talmudiſ# the Mo- 
ther could not cauſe her Child to be Circumciſed againſt the mind of 
liz Father. 

4And as they went through the cities, they delivered 
tiem the ; decrees forto keep, that wereordained of the 


: apoſtles and elders which were at Jeruſalem.. 

i The determination of the Council, mentioned Chap. 1 5. 20, 
29. kBy common conſent, and not of one onely, wholoever he 
Were, 

5 And ſo were the churches eſtabliſhed / inthe faith, 


and » increaſed in number daily. ; 

lBeing rightly perſwaded in the nature and uſe of things indif- 
rent : and 1n general, of things neceſſarily to be believed. 22 So 
that this viſitation ofthe Churches had a double benefir. Firſt, Tr 
ſirengthned them that were already converted. Secondiy, It added 
more unto their number. 


6Now when they had gone throughout » Phrygia, 
and the region of Galatia, and were o forbidden of the 


holy Ghoſt to preach the word in p Aſia. 

1 Phrygia and Galatia were parts of 4//a minor.” o They were 
forbidden of the Holy Ghoſt by fome Revelation, (though the man- 
ner 1s not known.) p For that time, though afterwards Pau? preach- 
td there about two Years together, Chap. 19. io. Thus God ( the 
great Houſholder) orders the Candle to be removed from one Room 
unto anothef; ſends, or rakes away the Light of the Goſpel, to whom, 
and as often as he pleaſeth. Our Calling, as well as our EleQion, 
8 free; and we may ſay with our Saviour, Mat. 11. 26. Even fo Fa- 
titer, for ſo it ſeemed»good in thy ſight. 

7 After they were come to q Myſia, they aſſayed 
80 into 7 Bichynia : but s the Spirit ; ſuftered them 
Not, 

7A little Country near 7Troas. r Another Province nigh unto the 
Ine place, over-againſt Thracia, bordering upon the Black Sea. 
'The Spirir of Je(us, or of God,as ſome Copies read. £ The Journey- 
ngs ofthem that preached the Goſpel, as well as their Words, were 
direted by God ; they might. not ſay, Do, or Go, bur according 
0 the Will of God. __ 


r0as, 


Jeſus Chriſt, all her Family, whom ſhe conld undertake to bring 


ſhipped God, heard 7s ; whoſe zz hearts the Lord opened 
=_ ſhe o arrended unto tne things which were ſpoken 
of Paul. 


: So called from the Country of that name. ſhe being born in 
Thyatira. k A City therein; andnow lived with her Family at 
Philippi. 1 Being a Proſelyte, and one of chem who had lefe the 
Heatheniſh Idolatry, and owned the one, only and true God ; bur as 
yet unacquainted with the Goſpelof his Son our Saviour. #2 Flearr, 
in Scripture-ſenſe, ſignifies both the Underſtanding and the Will : 
thus with the. heart man believeth unto righteouſneſs, Rom. 10. 10. 
Her underſtanding was inlightned, her heart changed ; ſhe now 
loved what ſhe before hated, and hated what before ſhe loved. x This 
was the Lords work : according unto what our Saviour himſelfhad 
ſaid, Fohn 6. 37, 44. No man can come unto me, except the Father, 
which hath ſent me, draw him. And yet we may in a ſenſe open our 
hearts, by uſing-ſuch means as God hath promiſed to ſucceed for 
that purpoſe, Revel. 3. 20. and eſpecially when in a ſenſe of our 
inability and neceſſity, we implore the free Gracz of God, and ingage 
him to work in usaccording unto all his good pleaſure. Ocherwile 
creating a Clean heart within us, as *tis called, Pfzl. 51.10. 15 be- 
yond the power of Nature. o Hearing is an inſtrud&ive ſenſe, and 
Faith cometh by it, Rozn. 10. 17 . but it muſt then be accompanied 
with attention. 


15 And when ſhe was baptized p, and her houſhold, 

ſhe beſought 7, ſaying, If ye have judged me to be 

faithful inthe Lord, come into my houſe and abiderhere, 

And * q ſhe conſtrained us. * Gen. 19.7 
right to Baptiſin, by reaſon of her Faith in & 33+ 1t- +44 

Þ When Lydia bad right to Baptiſm, by realo al nyt —_ 

up in the knowledge of Chriſt, were admitred to that Ordinance Heb. 13. 2. , 1,36 

alſo; as all the Seryants, and fuch other as were born in his Hoale, 1 tl 

or: bought with his Money, were Circumcifſed with 457aam, Gen. pf [ods RR 5 

17.12, 13. Now the Goſpel does not contra& in any reſpect, SOS 181 63 

but enlargesthe privileges of Blievers in all chings. And it they ha 4 be 8 Yb 

might under the Law have their Children and Servants admitted 

into a Covenant with God ( which could not bur rejoyce Religious 

Parents and Maſters, who value the Relation they and theirs have 

to God, above all Earthly things ) ſurely under che Goſpel none of 

our Families are excluded, unlefs they wilfully exclude rhemt2elves. 

9 As the two Diſciples that were going to Ea conftrained our 

Saviour, Luke 24. 29, With all carne jnircaties, ang joving 


violence. 
16 & And- it came to paſs, as w2 7 wentto Prayer, . yy” 
© « 4 32s Ph. 2 - nd f1 P. * - C 4 oy C1 
419 damfel, noffelied with a fſoirit 5 fl of divination, 2.0 
/ 3.37% 


my. 


£ " 9%, a _y þ- "oe 4 —_— « a, 


AF: 7 -x 4x; 9 d os Fo 
cis on _ "P "hy 
Ps AT RCA Rt 9 gan > 
LH 
> x 7 . jp 


- Wy $ 4 & HJ Ch 
Chap. XVI. The 4 ap. X1 
F Ch.19.2.1. mec Us, Whici brought her maſters * much gain by immediately * all the doots were opened, and every one 
5h (oothfaying - band o were loofed. M 

» Towards the place where their publick Prozers were uſually} = How foon is Prayer anſwered, when the fulneſs of time ;; 
made. 5 Or, of P::40m, the name of peo, from the place where come ? So nigh is God urito all rhar _ upon him, Pſ;;/. Is. 4 
be was worſhipped ( which wasafterwards called Delpht ) and from & 145. 18. # An gy” » Gram ly precede ſome wonderfy] 
whom all Evil tpirits, that pretended ro Divination, . were called { matter; as Mas. 2B. 2. And although God could have delivers 
P3thors ; as that tus Woman made vitof to delude Saul by, 1 Sam.j theſe his Servants without an Eurthquake ; yer to thew the ny;; 
®: that their deliverance was bis Work , and it was no artifice, gr 
19 To ime followed Paul, and ws, and cried, ſay-| force of their = £ = = now ahi - 076g after this mange: 
EE ke ©rfarks of the moſt Koh Gog, | 5 Either, by the Tartaquate, or lome fecret power of an Ange 
12g, ! 4BG&CMCenNae ine Iervants of C1 , D >| or by God himſelf immediately, that the Apoſtles and gi... 
winch ſhow unto as the way nf ſalvation. might know, that the Souls of Men {hould be unloofed ang (., 

; T'be Bevil nick! be torced by God to confefs this; or,, bej free by them, whoſe Bodies for that puipole, were now free) ,, 
mickr a0 it voluntarily by Gods permiſſion : Firſt, To draw men | Gog. ND 7 
on co h-ieve kim in other things, being he commended the Servants 27 And the keeper of the priſon pawaking GUt of h;; 
of Cod, and ipate the truth in this. Secondly, That by flartering ſleep, and ſeeing tne priſon-doors open, he drew ourhis 
of Sr. Perl, be might puff him 2p, and occalion him to fin. But]. , 3 os et himelc . 1 4 is 
2n Evil fyirit (or an Evil man} when bedifjembles as the were good, [woſG, _m OY ag Tens  PPoung tha 
is then wok of all. . | the priſoners had been fed. 

15 And this ſhe did many days. But Paul being «| p By the Earthquake, which being upon an extraordinary ,... 

ſion, could not fail to do all thac God intended by it. 9 j{g, bo 


grieved, rurned and faid ro by . 254 wh Ls of ſuffering a-more cruel death : for all Jaylors, who Ice apy p. 
thee x in the name of Jeſus Chriſt ro come out of her. ſoner eſcape, were to ſuffer the ſame punuthment that the Prifhn. 
* Mar. 16.17. And he* came out the ſame hour. < | werethought to have deſerved ; and felf-murder was very Colas 
u St. Paul was grieved ; either, for the Maids lake, who ſuſtered ſo | amongſt boththe Romans and Grecians. But whatſoever their py; 
much by her being poſſelſed with this ſpirit ; or, for their fakes who | Joſophers have ſaid of it, it muſt necds have been a very grey Pro. 
were fedaced by him. w St. Paw (as our Saviour had done, AAark | vocation againſt God, to ſhew fo great an averſion from Gods Wil 
3. 25.) refuleth the teſtimony of the Devil ; for he being the Father | giſpoſing of them and their concerns in this World, and challenging 
of Lves, John 8. 44. makes every thing he ſays to bz ſulpeCted ; as | or daring of him to do worſe by them in the World to come. Mes 
*is an uſval puniſhment of Lyars, that they are not believed when | myſt have {ad comforts, and take deſperare reſolutions, that coy. 
they ſpcak the truth ; and the Devil never ſpeaks any truth, bur | rgthis once. ; ; | 
EET intention to deceive. x By the Authority and Power of 28 But Paul cryed with a loud VoICE, ſaying, Do thy 
Clift, ſelf no harm : for we are 7 all here. ; 
195 And when her maſters ſaw that the hope » The other Priſoners were ſmitten with amazement ; neither 31 
of their 3 gains was gone, they caught Paul and they mind (or it might have been kept from thei) thar the door 
Stlas, and drew them into the {| market-place, unto the | were opened, and their chains looſed : bur as for the Apoſtie, th: 
- $2'ers. | ſame God who wrought this deliverance for them, might infor 
3 For ſhe was a ſervant, or ſlive ; and being very advantageous, them of _ -— i Ey _— _ 79 oy is of the 
might have many that had a ſhare in her. z The profit could not Jaylor and mis GY Tn = _ erty: - cir VoGtrine might 
bur be contidersble, for -they were to come with the rewards of | Þ© magnified, which 4 NCAIIS FLSKANS= ; 
aivinition in tacir hands ; as they did to Balaam, Numb. 22.7. a See 29 Then he called s for a light, and ſprang In, and 
the next Yerſe. , |camer trembling, and # fel] down before Pau] 2n/ 
20 Ang brought them to the þ magiſtrates, faying, | Silasj; 


Theſs mcn c being Jews, do * exceedingly trouble our | 5 Or lights, which Priſons are not uſually without. : Wh 
ſuddain and great change can God make ? He comes trembling to 


$*(, 


Or, Conrt, 


4 


1 Kings 


17: City : | 
af 17. 6. þ The ſame who are called Rulers : and the word here ſhews, | thoſe fect. which he had put into the Stocks ſo lately. » By which 
he would oniy give a civil reſpe&t unto them, it being an crdinay 


xt they we der the power of the Sword, and ruled . ; Arr 
- A phy "cheled the Ries ſpoken of in the =—_ BD Rice amon,.ſt the Eaſtern Nations (as endleſs Examples in Scripture 
might bz ths Cizil Magiſtcares of the City, and the Magiſtrates here witneſs) to pay their reſp=&> : and from them it ſpread itsflfint 
wentiond might be the Commanders of the Forces therein ; they | 974% * Boon Reſpect Pauland Silas do not refuſe, becauſe it wa 
carried them, 45 they did our Saviour, from one. to the other, the barcly Clyl!s Anau did ſhew the humility and brokenneſs of the 1y- 
more tod ſgrace them, and to obtain the greater puniſhment for lors heart. Yet Pete would not accept of the like from Cimis 
them, c They mention their being Jews, becaute ir was a moſt Chap. 10.5, 26. becaiie it was more than abare civil Relz:t 
odious name unto all Men , by reaſon of their diffrent Opi- which Cornelius wor:1d have given him. HE 
n 0351n Religion, and diverfiry of manners in converſation from z3o And brevgur » them out, and faid x*, Sirs 1, 
all, ; what muſt I dv iobe ſaved? " 
21 Ardteach cuſtoms which are not lawful for us to | w lato his own apartment in the prion, or to ſome more opens, f 
recelvz, n2i:her "0 oblerve, being d Romans. and free place. x A ter: «-f reſpe&t givenby the R034 anc Grecian 
d There was at Philippi, as appears, Perſe 12. a Colony of the | *9 ſuch vw bor they ho-ourd, as now the Jaylor did theſe {ceming 
Romans, and they were governed by their Laws , by which they / ly moſt contemptible OS He :1:ght have ſome knowlecg: ct 
might make no innovation In Religion without the conſent of the future ſtate, (which I; &Fre Enqt :1cS -frer,) I, By the Very ml Ct 
Senate, and afterwards of their Emperors ; which here theſe per- Nature. 2, Tradirioi: 3. The Dottrine of the Philotcyier 
ſ-cutorsalledge. eats tus frequenting o_ Jews _ -% 6 7p -_ _ _ 
2 ; | - | and 1in dangers, as to 4:2 things of this World, are brought toico! 
2z And thee multirude roſe up together againſt chem : afcer no Wor ! every one prays in a ſtorm): bur this 


_ 


en ED OI * 
= n ln, - A - 

« Ss - _— of 

S 5oow a 
MG» LEG een ant ET 

_ by 
PP 2% rb eenn,; Tn 
” k- = = + 


a "» PE” Fn. > p 
a — - 
, ”y A 
ys al he oils 
Ta” " = —— 
"ors Ee. "Jim AF 
Fees 4490S gy > 
— = 8 - - 
OU py 
4 III 2 enbe Wa 
= — 


TS 


*2 Cor. 11. and the magyſtrates ren oft their clothes, * and com- onely when God 1s pleated ro ſzaftity ſuch fears and diſaſters ; 6 | 
1: M manded to beat her. therwiſe all the plagues of Epgypr do but harden them the mor. | 
1 Thel. 2.2, « rar} p_ _—y oe cannot Authorize Opinions ! Exod. 7. 3. 
or Prattices. 7 Pau!'s and S:lzs's Clothes, ro diſgrace them the more, -y Cad ® : 6 
or in order unto their being ſcourged, though ſome think thar the | x37, AN FÞEY faid *, Believe z on the LordJeliss 
Magiſtrates rent their own Clothes in deteſtation of the pretended | Chrit, anc Ly0U {halr b-ſaved a, and thy houic. 3 ; 
Biaſphemy whica was aid to Paul's charge ; as the High Pricſt did, z This is the ſum of the Goſpel. Chrift apprehended by faith,1 
Mark 14 63. ſerves for Wiſdom, Righteoulnels, SanCiification, and Redzmprion, t 
1/'Y 23 Ani whenthey hadlaids many ſtripes upon them, us ng ROE: Tag es gopher mw g - t 
wo , 4 : _ BY. PX - 4 . we, > Þi , ap. . 9, V es TH. , 
a they Caſt rhe into prifon , charging the þ Jaylor to * Soba . OE a.quench:s the fiery darts of the devil, Eph. 6. 16. 1 1 
| keep tnem ſafely, is deſervedly called, a moſt holy fairh, Jude 20. @ Thea fhaltly Y 
_ & Partly, by the Littors or Execurioners; and partly, by the | this means come to obtain that life thou doſt ſoenuch deſire aite!; KM 
furious Ravble. 4 This Jaylor (of whoſe Converſion we read here- | an4 not on:y thy ſelf, but ( God that gives more than we 2 k) tay 
after) nis name was S'c2/anas, as may appear if you compare 1 Cor. | children and family ſhall be ſaved; in as much as the Covenants 
7. 16. with what follows by St. Zuke in this Story, Of him alſo we | where it is entred into, is not only with them , but with tell 
r22d, 1 Cor. 16. I5, 17. children. P; 


4 oo Fav - ;  pPhary jm . 
S 3 Who Baving —_ war ging thruſt them} +2 And they ſpake unto him the þ word of the Lord, 
6 fog  1NNET prion, and made their teet faſt in the ! and to c all that were in his houſe he | 
oC hs 1 | b Expounding more at large that which they had brie!!z Pt 
Z Thus tney dealt with Joſep, Gen 39. 20. compared with Pſz}. | pounded in the foregoing verſe, as concerning the Natures 21 
105. 13. and with Jeremiah, and with Fohn Baptiſt. SanForum ſors | Offices of Chriſt ; e{pecially his ſuffering for our ſins, and riling 
eft, © non moleſie fercnaa. ; again for our juſtification. c Their fellow Priſoners not exemp*” 
25 « And ar & mid-night Paul and Silas prayed, | unto whom it was a joyful confinement, being by this means M#* 
ana lang / praiſes unto God: and the priſoners heard | G99 5 Freemen. . 
them. 33 And he took them 4 the ſame hour of che night : 
* No — or _ where Prayer agg EI_ \g God, and waſhed their ſtripes!; and was baptized, he and f a 
@ prevalent with Om : nay, it faunds the ſweeter when on the | his ſirai ; 
Waters of afliftion a good Man pours it forth unto God. 7 That , aightway ; | oof his faith, and real 
they were counted worthy to ſuffer for Chiiſt: And being all things a He did not delay to ſhew forth the fruits 0 K p Ms 
are over-rulcd for the good, and conduce to the advantage of them converſion. e Which his ſtripes had made, uſing Tuch menmel no 
that love God , Rem.8. 28. they owe unto God thanks for all ms 12" rw o- —_— cpm £ -_— pon their po 
things through Jeſus Chriſt ; which is alſo requir : 32. O: Baptiſm adminiftred withour any day, 9, and W 
- 2c Sh) 4 ch is allo required of them, Eph, ſeſſion of Faith in Chriſt, we have had Examples, Chap. 8. 3% © : 
10. 47. andin the 1574. verſe of chis Chapter. " ww; 


. » mls 
34 And when he had brought them g into hishoul »Y in; 


Gn. Tons v6 as oo. 


*Q, 
* Ch. 4.31. 25 © And ſuddenly there wasa » great earth-quake, 
{2 thar the foundations of the priſon were ſhaken : and \ 


o 


ot + 98 ? 
*% $7 740 


It his 


that 


0cC4- 
Ir fear 
Pri. 
foner; 
dinary 
rt Phi- 
TC Pros 
$ Wil, 
enging 
Min 
t come 


o thy 


her did 
e doors 
tes, the 
inform 
n of the 
© Might 


), and 
ul and 


Wit 
bling to 
y Whuch 
ordinary 
criptures 
sſelfinto 
ſe 1t wat 


adzr tears, 
ht to look 
but this 1 
ſters ; 0- 
he nor; 


1rd Jelus4j 
; 6 
by fxth,1 | 
d2mprion, 
Ch as wore: 


Wo 


fire after; 
> ak) toy 
Coven 
with thell 


he Lord, 


rielly pro- 
1fures 
and riling 
exempted, 
jeans Mas 


night e, 
and f al 


1 and res! 
01545 Mgt? 
er. 15. 
3 the !l pur” 
8. 35. 0 


P. bg jap. XVII. 


2 
on) 


"toi on both ſides. 


a; 
The A 
he ſer þ meat before them, and z rejoiced, believing in 
God with all his bouſe. 


Which was cloſe unto , or a ſeparate part of the Priſon, into 
which they did alcend, being betore in a low Dungeon. # Paul 
and Silas had been long faſting; and in any ſcafon of the night it 
was a mercy to them to have a Tble {pread for them. z Finding 
the cff:&s of his faith, peace with God, and joy in the Holy Giolt ; 
which was not a little augmente, in char he had his Family admit- 
ted into the Covenant ot God's Grace, they alſo believing, and be- 
ing baptized. ; bs : 

5 And when it was day, the magiitrates ſent & the 
fergeants/, ſaying, Ler rthole men go. 

þ Their Meſſengers, or Officers, which did carry a Mace, ora 


Rod, from whence they had rheir name. /Probably being terrified 


with the Earthquake, which if it had not beein general, they could 
not yet have heard of. Their contciences might alfo accuſe them 
tor having unjuſtly punith'd them tor a good deed which they had 
Jone, only to gratilie the rage of the multitude ; as alfo becauſe 
hey had acted againſt the cuſtom of the Romans ( though they did 
not yet know thar they had the privilege of Roan Citizens , ) 
and | bad beaten ſtrangers without any legal trial, or form of 
LaW- ; : ; 

;6 And the keeper of the priſon told this» ſaying to 


Paul, The magiſtrates have fent to let you go? now 
therefore depart, and go In Peace. 

m Bcing glad that he might releaſe them. Neither does he bid 
them go, as defirous to be rid of tpem ; bur not requiring any fees , 
he lets them go to preach the Goſpel, and fulfil their Miniſtry, with 
his prayers and well-withes. 

27 But Paul faid » unto them o, They have beaten 
us p openly q uncondemned » *, being Romans, and 
have caſt us into priſon ; and now dothey thruſt us out 
privity ? nay verily, butler them come s themſelves,and 


fterch us our, 

1» The Officers who were ſent to the priſon with the meſſage about 
their liberty. o The Magiſtrates who commanded them to be beaten, 
are juſtly charged with the beating of them; as 1f they had them- 
ſelves dons It. p It was no ſmall aggravation of their injuſtice, and 
theſe holy mens ſufferings, that they had, fer the greater ſpite unto 


GF & 
in this place St. Pau! wrote two of his Epiſtles. This City was 
built by Philip, in memory of a Victory he obtained over the 


Theſali. d It ſeems that there was no Synagogue in either of the 
other places; but that the Jews of the other Ciries reſorted unto 
the Synagogue in this; all theſe three Cities being in Macedonia 
The lending away of Pauland Silas, £229.16. 29. to gratific the mad 
multitade, was a means to bring the word of talvation to theſe 
places. 

2 And Paul, as e his manner was, went inunto thery. 
and three ſabbath-days reaſoned with them f out of the 
{criptures. 

e Who was faithful unto him that had calieq him, and took «!j 
occaſions to do his Maſter's work, f The Liw and the Prophets ; 
which they owned to be of Divine Authoriry : and from the ho!y 
Scriptures alon? all knowledge in the things of God, and of our 
ſalvation, muſt be fetched. It any ſp2ak of theſe marters not 8ccord- 
ing to them, it is becauſe they have no light in them, th. $. 20. What 
Scriptures Sf. Par! alledged, are not fer down ; bur they were ſuch 
as our Saviour had made uſe of, Luke 24, 27: for the ſame purpoſe. 

This was cuſtomary with Pal, to preach theſe things unto the Few; 
firſt ; as Chap. 13. 46. till they had pur the viord of God from them 
by their incredulity. 

3 £ Opening ard halledging, thar Chriſt muſt i needs 
have ſuttered, and riſen again from the dead : and thar 
this & Jeſus || whom I preach unto you, is Chrilt. : i:Or, i horn 

g The Scriptures which he had quoted. The very entrance inr9 I ſaid. 

God's Word giveth light, Pfal. 119. 130. + Making the truth con- 

cerning our Saviour, which he preached, fo plain to the eyeof their 
underſtanding, as any thing which is expoſed to the view of our 

bodily eyes. #7 Comparing the words of the Prophets concerning 

Chriſt, with thoſe things which were done and ſuffered by him, Þſa!, 

22. 6. Iſa. 53. throughout, Matt. 16. 21, Luke 24. 26,46. k That 

Jeſus whom Paul preached was the true and only Meſſiah ; and 
that what was written of the Mefſhah, was fulfilled in him. 

4 * And ſome of them believed, and /conforted with * Ch. 28. 24: 
Paul and Silas, and of the #2 devout Greeks a great - 
malticude, and of the chief women x not a few. 

{ Were fo aff-&ed towards them. as that they were willing totake 
the ſame part or lot with them. The word imports the neareſt and 
intimateſt friendſhip and union ; even ſuchas is conjugal. ' m Such 


them, openly ſcourged them. q For they were not tried, or per- 
mire to ſpeak for themſelves, » Having the privilege of Roman 
Citizens ; Which was fomerimes given to whole Communities; Now 
ſuck by their Laws might not be bound, much leſs beaten (and leaſt 
of all uncondewn'd ) without the conſent of the Romans. s This 
the Apoſtle ſtands upon, nor fo much for his own, as for the Goſpel's 
ſake, that it might nor be noiſed abroad, that the Preachers of it 
were wi-ked and vile men, and did deſerveſuch ignominious puniſh- 
ment. Though they were as innocent as doves, 1t became them al- 
ſo to be as wile as ſerpents. 

13 And the ſergeants told theſe words unto the magi- 
ſiratzs, and they # feared when they heard that they 


were Romans. 

: For the P-ans (under whom theſe Magiſtrates were ) made it 
by their Laws to be Treafon thus to abuſe any of their Citizens. 
God over-ruled their tear of man, for the deliverance of his fer- 


Vants. 


39 And they came and « beſoughe them, and 


$44. brought her out, and * deſired hem to depart out of , 


the city. | 

v Two things the Magiſtrates had to defire of them, 1. That they ! 
would excuſe the wrong done unto them, which they feared leſt the | 
Romans might revenge. 2. That to avoid further miſchiefs (as they / 
thought) they wou!d leave the City. But the words here uſed do | 
ſignifie alſo, that they comforted them, as well as beſought, or ex- | 
horted them : both by word and deed they ſought ro make amends 
for the injury they had offer'd unto them; and defired them to de- | 
part for their own ſafety, leſt the people ſhould expreſs their rage | 
and madneſs more againſt them. | ; | 

49 And they went out cf the priſon, and entred into | 
tve bouſe 5f Lydia : and when they had ſeen the brethren, | 


they x comforted them, and departed. 

w Of whom, wer. 14. They do not ſhun dangers, fo as to negleCt : 
their duty. In reſpe& of the tribulation they had endured, and | 
vere ſtill to endure, or exhorted them to prepare for ſuffering, and 
tolubmit unto God in it, and to make an holy uſt of ir. 


CHAP. XVII. 


Pan! reaſoning with them of Theſſalonica, Preacheth the Suferings arid ' 
Reſurrefion of Chriſt, 1—-3. Some believe. 4. others raiſe an 
wproar, and draw Jaſon before the ruler of the city, 3 
aud Silas, being ſent to Berza, preach ; many, having ſeaxched the 
Scripture, believe, 1012, Jews com? from Theſſalonica, and ſtir 
vp the people there alſo, 13: Paul conduFed ro Athens, 14. and 
there prieved to ſee their Idolatry, therefore daily diſputeth with the 

ews, 15—17; The Epicureans and Stoicks mock him, 18, he © 
brought upto Areopagus, and examined about his Dofrine, 19-22. 
te ſheweth their Superſtition, and Idolatry, 23. reacheth them the 
Worſhip of the true God, who made all things, 24—-29, Exhorteth 
to repentance and Faith in Chriſt, who would judge the World, God 
having raiſed him from the dead, 30, 31. Some hearing of the Re- 
urrefTion, mocked ; but others believed, 32-34. 
1 Ow when they had paſled chrough « Amphipoliis, 
and b Apollonia, they came to c Thellalonica 4, 
where was a ſynagogue of the Jews. 
s A City near to Philippi, fo called, becauſe the Sea came up 

b ACiry near to Theſalonica. c This Theſſa- 

lmigs was one ofthe chiefalt Cities of Macedonia; Unto the Church 


of that Nation as were become Prolſclytes, who had renounc'd the 
Idolatry and wicked conver{ation of the Heathen, amongſt whom 
they lived; and had joyr.£4 themſelves to the Jews ; atleaſt ſo far 
{as to hear the Law and the Prophets read and expounded in their 


| Synagogues; and did worſhip butone God, and Cid injury unto 
none Ot thzle we frequently read in this book; as ver. 17. and 
chap 13.42, 43. and 16. 14. » A conſiderable number . of theſe be- 
lieved; yer chap 13. 15. ſuch had ſtirred up perſecution again Pax! 
and Barxabas 

5 T Bucthe Jews which o believed not, moved with 
p envy, took unto them certain q lewd fellows » of the 
baſer ſort, and gathered a company, and ſet all the city 
on an uproar. and aflaulred the houſe of s Jaſon, and 
ſought to bring them : out to tiie people. 

oOr were nor convinced, or perſwaded by St. Paul”s Sermons 
and Arguments. p Or, zeal; which as fire in the chimney, its 


; due place, is uſeful and neceflary ; but when fcatter'd abroad, and 


out of its place, is moſt dangerous and deſtructive. q Such as ſtand 
in Markets, and pub]:ck places, gazing, and having nothing to do. 
r To what mean and baſe atts do not blind zeal, and t e of 
perſecutors deſcend ? 5s Some think this to be the Greek name which 
the_Helleniſts did uſe for Jeſbhua, or Feſw. This man was one of 
the diſperſion, who came from Fudea into Szria ; and from thence 
into Macedonia; and 15 famous ſo far as the Word of God is preach- 
ed, for being the Hoſt ro Pay! and $:/zs5; and is mentioned Rom. 
16.21. *t For to flay them. Nothing but their blood could 
quench the thirſt of their perſecutors : But having no juſt cauſe for 
the ſpilling of it, they are willing to have others to bear the odium 
of it. 

6 And when they « found them nar, they drew Jaſen, 
and certain brethren unto the rulers of che city, cry- 
ing *, Theſe that have w turned the world uptide down, * cy. ; < : 5 


are come hither alfo ; * 
Being withdrawn, to avoid the popular rage againſt them, 


b; 


| they charge Innovation vpon them, as knowing how jealous Rulers 


are of any alteration. Thus whatſoever miſchiets betz] the Stare, oz 
whatſoever was odicus and abominable, was in the Primitive times 
111 charged vpon the Chriſtians. The Enemies of God's Church 
cloath his ſervants in beaſt skins (painting, and repreſenting them 
in what forms they pleaſe, ) that every one may hunt and worry 


, them. 
9, Paul} 


7 Whom Jaſon hath x Teceived : and theſe all do 

contrary to thedecrees y of Czlar, faying *, That there « 7 ;;.. 24.5. 

is another & king, oze Jeſus. Joh. 19, 52. 
x Privily, and with delign. » The Romans before they were 

brought under their Emperors (and after rhat,) did nor fuffer any to 

be called King without their allowance and approbation; which was 

alſo much valued by ſuch uaro whom that Honour was beſtowed by 

them. z Bzſides Ceſar, who was called the Lord of the World. 

This is like to the charge laid againſt our Saviour ; but moſt malict- 

ouſly both then and now, and wholly againſt their own confciences ; 

For they themſclves expetted the Metitah to be a King, John 18. 

36, 37. and refuſed and rejetted him, becauſs his Kingdom was 3 

ipiritual Kingdom, and notef this World. 


s And they troubled « the people, and che þ rulers 
of the city , when they heard theis chings. 
a Hearing ſomething to have been done »gainſt the Reman State, 


Vol; II. 


under whom they were, and not knowing what it might come tc, 
) | Oooe} Df 


Chap. XVII. 


v —— , " 
4 . : - _ 
—- = s - " - as ward — y —_ - - 
py Fa & , p _ . ” arr s 
, l a - « 0 » ER Od 
» » 35 with . + = 4 A —_ 4 
4 , = jp CO” 4 K-55 ” F- a —— 
L ; I AB. on ry tn - "I ku _ 
| G - " 1 G A Seb So p_ 4 t 4 4 4 os ——- - 
2 - ” of -. * _ we ” P—_ I 
* I . Fu b —- I —_ W © FR £ - K 48 
. > gia =_ ” P < at - S ? M rs —_— _— = -- : c————_— Po Nan 
: wh , Ta» - «= - - - — 2 9'P G36 "I" © . _— Ys ba " «tt Ea « X a 245 S 
- * F- A, "I Re - 2 pn %s >_—_ _ " - — — -- _ —_—_— —o—_— = — bp * IT _ _ : = way rn2roeuag - 
= > 7 #3 . 2 9 4. Be _ > — - —_—_— y=Y —_—— - watt . ” , - y _ 
© aw, < ERNDIET © : x hae Te FEE ” ms ” —_— —— - v is, . dk $25 
_— Gam ey” 0 pt 2 p27 perks 4 : m——_— : 
*. = - c _ aw Ms " a2] . 
. 6 - m - _ ws by - - - = — — —_ 
_ _= - Pp wry” LEG a . _ £1 ye A & 
- - 4 # 197, wt . > - - _— 
ſt. « ” - 23 _ __ 
- 


Fall >. i& 
BF £ 
" I py \ 'v 
mill iT Tis f | 
: v. 4 
| me &. 
uf TR:\'JÞ "$*,- } 
/ 1 'l bl 4 
$7: - Ag, wo ? 
"4 i T ' 
£118 11.0 (8 ? 
lb 3 
of 9-16. b 
Lott M 
ns 41 : 
'* | $ . f 
$--1: Jt 
vt; T8931 ' 
1.1; | 
M'{; 


g_ 


_ So 
Rn bn mutt 
-- - » 4 we a 
— 4 - ”. — JEL 
: xz y 7 : _— Rt <: of 
4 © > 2 
. T7 a . »: ae CIR TOE 
>, And} b.  E ack, 


jd 
- 


— 
0 Rs. 44-1 "WER wo _—— wo of 
4 , Me .- __ m__ Amt 


XJ 
WY Xa 


L 


Chap. X VIE. 


* Ifa. 34.16. 
Luk. 16.29. 
zoln 5. 39. 


and made ule of chem : And woula we alſo lay aſide all filthineſs, 


i Qt Fu; of 
las. 


The A 
or how it might be conſtrued. þ For fear of an inſarreion and | 
tmuit. | . : 

9 And when they c had caken ſecurity of Jaſon, and 
ofthe other, they let them go. | 

c Either being ſarisfizd with their anſwer, or having Bail for their 
appezrance, if need were ; the word only hinting their being fatis- 
fed, or contented ; as Mark 15. ſ5. ; 

10 © And * the brerchren immediately ſent away Paul 
and Silas by nightunto Berza : who coming 15:ber, went 
into the e ſynagogne of the Jews. 

d A City alſo of Macedonia, not far from Pella, and The:ſſalonica. 
e They went {till firſt unto the loſt ſheep ofthe Houſe of 1/rae!. In 
which Paul's invincible love which he ſpeaks of, Row. 9. 2. does 
manifeſtly appear. The Jews had every where endeavoured his de- 
ſtruction ; he ſtill requites them (what he may) in promoting their 
dalvatzon. , ; 

11 Theſe were fmore noble than thoſe in Theſſalonica, 
in that they received the word with all readineſs of 
mind and g * fearched the þ ſcriptures daily, whether 


thoſe things were fo. 

f The Jews of Beraa did excel thoſe of Theſſalonica, not ſo 
much in birth as in diſpoſition : They were not fo prejudiced and 
obſtinate ; they patiently heard Paul; they ſeriouſly rhought upon 
what he had ſaid, and compared.it with the Scriptures. And thus 
God gave them the preparation of the heart; and they brought 
their empty Veſſel). No wonder then that the Oyl of Grace ran 
into them. and filled them. The Jews do call their Learned men, 
the ſons of Nobles ; and according to that expreſſion, theſe Bereans 
that had ated fo ingenuoutly and wiſely, were ſaid to be more 
Noble. g Truth dares abide the Teſt; only falſe Wares need a 
dark ſhop ro pur them off in. + The Scriptures on]y are our 1n- 
fallible Rule ; for they come from God, = Tim. 3. 16. who cannot 


lye, Titxa 1. 2, | 
12 Therefore many of them believed z: alſoof ho- 


nourable women which were Greeks, and of mcn not 


a few. 
# God blefling his own gifts, and giving ſtill unto them that had, 


and ſuperfluity of naughtineſs,and receive with meeknelſs the ingraft- 
ed Word, which is able to fave our ſouls, James 1. 21. we ſhould 
hnd the hand of the Lord not to be ſhortned, but his Word as pow- 
erful, as piercing, as converting as ever. 

1; But when the Jews of Theſlalonica had knowledge 
that the word of God was preached of Paul at Beraa, 
they came thither alſo, and & ſtirred up the people. 

k As the Waves are ſtirred with the Wind; a fit Meraphor to 
repreſent the fickle multitude by ; that as the Sea now rolls one 
way , then another ; or as tottering buildings that ſhake with every 
wand. 

14 And then immediately the brethren ſent away 
Paul /, to go as it were to the fea : but m Silas and 
Timotheus abode there til]. 

{ That they might give overthe purſuit of him; or at leaſt, be 
diſappointed if they did purſue him, being he went on foot to -2thens. 
» The fury of the perſecurors not being lo hot againſt them as a- 
gainlt Paul,wtho was more known or maligned than S:/zs or Timothems. 
Or, thele might abide there longer , having their Relations in 
Macedonia, 

15 aAnd they that conducted Paul, brought him un- 
too Athens : and *receiving a commandment unto Silas 
and Timotheus, for to come to him with all ſpeed, they 
departed, 

» Who accompanicd him, 


and had undertaken ro ſecure him. 
0 The Greece of Greece, or the Eye of Greece ;, as Greece was accounted 
the Eye ofthe World ; and yer with all its Learning did not attain 
to ſaving knowledge. unti} Pau! came and preached it. Satan's j 
malice fiJl cauſes the Goſpel to ſpread. 

16 © Now while Paul waited for them at Athens, 


his fpiric wasp ſtirred in him, when he ſaw the Cityq | wearied themſelves with their ſupplications unto all the gods of 


wholly given [| to idolatry. 
Þ Moved, and ſhargned, being highly afſeQted with divers paſ- | 
fiuns; 1. With grief for fo learned, and yer blind and miſerable ! 
a place. 2. With zeal, and an holy deſire to inſtruc and inform ! 
'f 3 With anger and indignation againſt the idolatry and fin that | 
bounded jinit. g Or as the marginal reading hath, fu of Taols. | 
For we rezd, that there were more Idols in A4thens, than in all 
Greece belides; and that it was eaſier to find a God there ( thar is, : 
an Ido}) than a man; their Images being as numerous as their In- ! 
habitants, 
17 » Therefore diſputed he in the ſynagogue with the 
Jews, and with s the devout perſons, and in 7 the market 


daily with them that met with him. 

r AS ver. 2. ſtill giving the Jews, if there were any, the priority ; 
or having by that means an opportunity to ſpeak unto the Pro- 
ieiyres of the Gentiles. s Who are the devout perſons here meant, 
ſee Chap 13.43. 7 Becauſe of the concourſe thither; throwing the 
Net of the Goſpel where there were moſt Fiſh , and he himſelf 
proving, as he exhorted others to do, in ſeaſon and out of ſeaſon, 
= 4547). 4.2, 

15 Thencertain « philoſophers of the Epicureans,and 
ot the Stoicks, encountred him: And ſome faid. What 
WwWwill this [|babler ſay ? Other ſome, He ſeemeth to be 
a letter forth of x ſtrange gods : becauſe he preached 
Uto them » Jeſus, and the reſurretion, 

_ « Yoth theſe fects of Philoſophers were the moſt oppoſite to 
£1irſtianity of all iliery : 1. The Epticureans ( fo called from one 


f 


| olds 6- Chap, Nr 


Epicuru) did generally deny, that the World was made, or that ir 
governed by God ; as alſo, that there were any Rewards or Punit,. 
ments for men after death, holding nothing co be good but wy}... 
was io to their ſenles : And if fo, were indeed {wine rather than _ 
2. - The Storcks were ſo called ' from the place where the 
firſt ; and held as bad Opinions asthe other did ; and denied, t, 
rthe:r Wife men were inferior to their Gods; and in fome reſhed 
preferred them before their Gods ; which their Seneca was nor þ.., 
trom, Epiſt. 73, And no wonder if ſuch men oppoſe the Colps 
whar they may. w They make Paul ſo contemptible, comp, 
him to ſuch as live by the off: falls of Corn, which was ufeg tobe 
gathered up as they fell down in meaſuring, and left to be {eq upon 
by the meaneſt and pooreſt of the people. x They might aigongf 
the Athenians bring in by publick Authority as many Gods as they 
would, bur none out of their private Opinions; which was the &' 
charged upon Socrates. y So ignorantly, or maliciouſly did the, 
pervert St. Pau/'s words, that they accuſe him for makingcheR.. 
ſurre&ion a God too. Probably they heard him often Naming the 
word, and magnifying of the RelurreCtion, as without which, y, 
were without hope. | ; 

19 And they took him, and brought him z yy 
| Areopagus, ſaying, May we know what this new dy. /q,, 
ctrine, whereof thou ſpeakeſt, x ? my 

z The city of Athens was divided into five Wards, or parts; on; tle ly 
of which wascalled Areopagus, from the Temple of Mars. Which Civ, 
ſtood upon an hill init ; nigh unto which Temple, orin ſome pur 4iy 
of it, was their chiefeſt Court kept ; and here they judged of al] Re. 
ligious Affairs : here they condemned Diagoras, Protagoros, 1 
Socrates ; and hither they bring Pau!, though rather to enquire of 
him (there beingthe reſort of Learned men) concerning his Dottrine, 
than to condemn him forit. : 

20 Forthou bringeſt certain a ſtrange things toquy 
ears: we Would know therefore what thele things 
mean. 


a The greateſt Obje&tion which theſe men had againſt the Goſye| 
was, that it was ſtrange and new. That 1t 1s not new, wasapparent, 
it having been inthe Old Teſtament (as the ripe fruit 15in the bloſſom) 
ſolong ago ; and their own Superſtitions were but fo many Api 
imitations of God's Worſhip. . And if theſe things were ſtrange unty 
them, they might thank themſelves, who had not made due en. 
quiring after them ; and had by their not improving the light ofN,, 
tire, provoked Goll to with-hold further manifeſtations unto then, 
Rom. 1. 24, 28. 

21 For all the Athenians, and 6 ſtrangers which wer 
there, ſpent their time in nothing elſe, bur either totel 
or to hear ſome new thing. | 

6 Which muſt needs have been a conſiderable number, 4th; he. 
ing then a famous Haven-Town and Univerlity ; and theſe ſtranger 


might eaſily take this itch after News from the Natives, who xr 
noted for it by Theophraſius, Demoſthenes, &c. 

22 © Then Paul ſtocd in the midft || of c Mars-hill;q, 
and ſaid, Yemen of Athens, I perceive that in all things#1# 
ye are d too ſuperſtitious. Gi 

c See wer. 19, d Sometimes this word is taken in a good ſenſe; 
many then, as now, taking Superſtition to be Religion. Butit is 
often taken ir: a bad ſenſe. Thus Theophraſtus ſays, that a truly pious 
man isa friend of God ; &S% Saumduiuwy xoAaut ©58 ; butthe 
ſuperſtitious man is a flatterer of God. Now this word being then 
of a kind of middle ſignification, the Apoſtle would ſeem not to 
bear coo hard upon the Arhemans, who were devout and religious, 
according to the meaſure of their knowledge, and whom he delied 
to win by love and gentlenels, 

23 Foras I paſſed by, ande beheld your [| devotions, | 0: 
I found an alcar with this inſcription , TO THE: 
UNKNOWN GOD. Whomtherefore ye g igncrant- #7! 
ly worſhip, him declare I unto you. ” 

e Any thing unto which Divine Worſhip and Honour is given. 


I 
1 


Y Mx vr 


] 
l 
my 0 


'f Ir is ſtoried , That in a Plague-time, when the Athenian had 


cher Countrey, they were adviſed by Epaminondas ( a devout man 
amongſt them,) to ereC&t an Altar unto that god who had the power 
over that Diſeaſe, whoſoever he was ; which becauſe they did not 
know, and would be fſurenot to omitin their devorions, they erelt- 


! ed an Altar unto him under the Name of the Unknown God. Some 


there was a more general Inſcription, To the Gods of Aſis, Eur! 
to the unknown and ſtrange Goas ; though the Inſcription 
the Apoſtle mentions 1n the fingu/ar Number, might be uſualtoo : 
for the 4thenians, who entertain'd all manner of Gods, fearing leſt 
there ſhould be any which they had not heard of, for their greater 
ſecurity, as they imagined, would have an Altar for ſuch alſo. Now 
this Unknown God, St. Paul ſays, which was worſhipped by them, 
was the true God : For, 1. They had an apprehenſion, chatChrilt 
was the true God, whilſt that wonderful Eclipſe ar his Death Was 
effeQually conſidered amongſtthem. - Hence it is ſaid, chat Dimyſ 
cried out, Deus ignotus in carne patitur. Now the unknown &9 
ſuffers in the Fleſh. 2. The Gol of the Fews, whoſe Name the cog 
took to be ſo ineffable that they would not undertake to ſpeak 1t ; 
and who was not wholly unknown to Plaro and Pythagorns 3 3 
who is truly inviſible and, incomprehenſible, mighe upon that aC- 
count be thus ſtiled amongſt them, . 

24 God that 4 made the world,and all things therein, 
ſeeing that he is Lord of heaven and eatth, - dwelleth 
not in temples made with hands: 

h This ſeems to be direQed againſt the Epicurean”, who _ 
that the World was without beginning. 7 As if he could ng 
to them, or circumſcribed by them : Yer God did in ſome relp* 


dwell in his Temple, where he did manifeſt himſelf more —_ 


ſay, 
and Africa, 


XN 


It i; 


ſh. 


en, 
Tat 
hat 
oY 
tree 
\pel 
Ing 
0 de 
ÞOn 
no} 
they 
fault 
they 
C Re. 
7 the 


» We 


Unto 

Y Coe|0t 
hl. 

3 One fit 

which Co 

te part ty 

111 Re- 

, and 

wire of 

Xtrine, 


toCur 
things 


Goſpel 
PParent, 
bloſſom) 
y Apib 
136 Unto 
due en» 
1t ofN4. 
tO them, 


h were 
r totell 


At hint ts 
: ſtrangers 
who ar 


Jars-liil,'g, 
11! chings #2 


0p 


20d ſenſe; 

But it 1s 
ruly pious 
- butthe 
Deing then 
>eMm not t0 
| religiow, 
\ he deſired 


2 YOIONS, | (0; 
O THE: 
gncrant- 
- 17h 


ur is given. 
henians had 
the gods of 
Jevout man 
1 rhe power 
1£y did not 
;, they erelt- 
God. Some 
Aſus, Eur0y? 
» Inſcription 
> nſual too : 
fearing [el 
heir greater 
1 alſo. 06 
ed by (he 
; be Chriſt 
Fr Death Was 
that Dimyſ 
known 9 
ame the Jews 
ro ſpeak It 5 
hagoras 3 a 
zpon that at 


gs therein, 
* 4welleth +( 


vs, who held, 
could be ried 
ſome reſpe 


more clcar!y 
than 


ha vp, <s 
=_ 


s 
147 
L3V 0 


j 


2 


wW 


| p and that all men, 
P4C%, are under this command of Repenrancez and curſed indeed 


XVIL 


of God. 


iife, and breath, and all things ; 


þ God 1s not worſhipped or ſerved by holy men, becauſe he 
«ancs their ſervice, or any thing thar can be offered unto him ly | 
them 3 bur becauſe ir is their dury and advantage to be imployed in 
his ſervice and worſhip, P/al. 50. 10, 11, / The breath of lite, | 
G:3. 2. 7. Andinthis reſpet God 15s called che God of che Spirits ! 
ot all fleſh, Numb. 16. 22. as the cauſe of life and breath in al! 
creacures, bureſpecially in man 3 which made that charge ſo great 
23. lt, that his breath was in Gods 


againſt Belſhazzar, Dan. 5+ 2: 
hand ; and yer he had nor glorified him, 


26 And hath made of #: one blood, all nations of 


The 4 


han in other places: But that was a type of Heaven, the Thionc 


23 Neither is worihipped with mens hands, * as 
þ though he needed any thing, ſceing he giveth to / all 


men for to dwell on all the face of the earth, and 


hath determined # the times before appointed, and 


mei.c2g the * bounds of their habitation. 
> m1.Jo teach all charity and compaſſion towards one another, 
2, As alſo to admire God 
more in that variety that appears in mens ſhapes and voices, bur 
eſpecially in the diſpoſitions of their minds 3 whenas they all come 
from one ſtock and ftem. # The Apoſtle afſerts the providence of 
God againſt theſe Athenian Philoſophers, rhat nothing comes by 
chance, or a fortuitous concourſe of Atrromsz but that God is in 
every thing, though men know it nor, or rather will nor conſider ir, 
Job 7. 1. and 14. 5, 14+ This Dofrine was preached by Moſes, 
who tells the people, thar God 1s their lite, and the lengrh of their 
days; thar they might love him, and obey his voice, and cleave 


being ſo nearly allied to one anorher. 


unto him, Dexut. 30, 20, 


27 0 That they ſhould ſeek the Lord, if haply they 
p might feel after him, and find him, though he be 4 


not far from every one of us. 


o The Apoſtle tells theſe Philoſophers, ro whom he ſpake, the 


true uſe of their Philoſophy, to improve their knowledge of naru- 
ralchings; ro beger in them by ir an admiration of the God of Na- 
ture: for as from him, ſo for his ave all things, Rom. 11. 26, p And 
although God himſelf is incorporeal, yer the things which he made 
are pa!pablez and did they ſeek as they ought, they might find a 
great deal of God our by the creatures, in, which his Wiſdom, 
Power and Goodnels is manifeſted, Rom. 1. 20. 4 God filleth all 
things, eſpecially he is near in che effects of his Wiſdom, Goodneſs 
and Faithtulueſs, by which he orders and diſpoſes of all things 
the fal.ing off of a hair from our Heads, 


» O | verſion might have a greac influence upon many 


"SiH: 6 


4 Js Chap. HI. 
31 Becaulz he hath 2 appointed a day in the which 
li. 411 } . p 

* ne will judge the world 6 in ri:hteonſnefs, c by that *Ch.10.42 
man whom he bath ordained 3 whereof he hath 4 :iven 
{| alſurance unto all men, in that he * hath raiſed him 
from the dead. 

_ 4 That God will judge the world, his enemies have with tremb- 
ling acknowledged 3 but when God wiil judge rhe world he hath 
{ conceai'd it from his triends z yer the ti.uc is already er, Pſal, 
99. 13. 2 Cor. 5. 10, and ve ought to te daily prepared for ir. 
b Shall not: the Judge of all the world do right? «© Our blelſed 
Saviour, called here man, ſuitably rt. Lis deach and reſurre&ion 
which Sr. Paul Preached of, as allo as mar he is thus hi.hly exalted 
tor his debaſing of himſelf for our ſakes, Phil 2. 9, 19 11. 4 An 
undeniable proof or argument, ir being ſo ifficule a matter ro 
believe a world ro come, when we fce all thirgs remiin as chey 
did in this world; and eſpectaily to believe, thar in the general 
judgment, Chrift whom they had Judged, Con 'emned and Fxe- 
cuted, ſhould be Judge: God therefore did glorifie him, by raifing 
him from the dead, that they and we mighc nor be faichleſs, bur 
believe, Rom. I. 4 


32 © and when they heard of the reſurrection of 
the dead, e ſome mocked : and fothers laid, We will 
hear thee again of this. matter. 

e The Epicureans, whom Paul had ſpoken againſt in his Do&rine 
of . the ReſurreQion from the dead, and Jucigment ro come. f*Tis 
thought the Sroicks, who did nor think the Returre&ion to be im- 
poſli le, bur did acknowledge Rewards and Puniſhmencs in the 
world to come 3 yer, though this ſeem moſt likely, che G.ace of 
God is free and powerful, ard can ſubdue, any unto ir felt, We 
are ſure that there be different Soils inco which the ſeed of the 
Word 1s caft, Marth, 13, 

33 So Paul departed g from among them. 

g Leaving whar he had faid, to God's Bleſſing, and their Conf 
deration, 

34 Howbeit, certain men ,*, clave unto him, and 
believed : among the which was Dionyſins the þ Areo- 


pagite, and a woman named z Damuis, and others 

with them. 

| 4+*, In morethan ordinary friendſhip, they were as glewed to 
him, great ws their love ro the Apoſtle, by whom their eye 
were opened ; nay, by wheſe Miniſtry they were caiſed trom the 

+ dead, + One of that grea: Council mentioned ver, 19, whoſe con» 

2 Who is 

' thought to have been an honourable woman, Such are menctoned, 


4 Foith, 
* Ch.2.24 


28 For in him r we live, and move, and have our * ver, 12, or ſhe might h..ve. been ſpecially eminent tor ſome Grace 


being; as certain alſo of your own 5 poets have ſaid, 
For we are alfo his off- ſpring. 


7 He 1s the God that made us, that preſerves us, and not we 
our ſelves; he keeps us as in the hollow of his hand, and com- 


paſech our pachs. Our breath is in our Noſtrils, and when we ſend |; 
it torch, we have none to take in again, unleſs God furniſh us with | 


it, a5 out of his own hand. s Aratss a Greek Poer ; nor thar Sr, Pal 
thought ro derive any Authority trom theſe Poets, unto what he had 
fad; bur thar he might ſhame chem the more by the Teſtimony -of 
ther allowed authors, Such Quotations as theſe are (as the bring- 
ing in of a Gree into the Temp. e) very rare 3 yet beſides this, we 
meer w1:hche like, 1 Cory. Ig. 33. Titys Is 12, 


29 Foraſmuch then as we are thee off: ſpring of God, 


8* we « ought not to think that the Godhead is like 


unto gold, or filyer, or ſtone graven by art and w 
mans device. | 


t This 1s ſpoken by the Apoſtle in a Poerical expreffion, according 
unto what he had cited, We are indeed the Children, and in our 
Souls bear the Image of God. Bur as many as have the Spirir of 
Adoption, they partake of Gods Holineſs, and imitace his Good- 
nels, are more like unto him, by whom they are begotten again 
wito a lively hope, 1 Pet. 1. 3. and ar the ReſurreRjon they will 
appear unco all ro be his Children, when rhey ſhall be acknowledged 


his Heirs, an Co-heirs with Jeſus Chriſt Roz, 8. 17. « Taking . 


man in his natural principles, conſiſting of Soul and Body, he is 
not made of Gold and Silver, much lefs can God be made of them : 
Our Soul, in which we bear the Image of God, cannor be expreſſed 
by any Graving or Painting; much leſs God whoſe Image it is. 

creare tio things to be conſidered in every Image, its matter, 
and ts form or ſhape; The marter of an image, ler it be never ſo 
Precious, is much inferior ro man 3 for it lies in the earch (be ir 
Gold or Silver) for man to trample upon, until he dig it up, and 
take ir our, As for the form of the Image, it 15 that which men 
pleaſe to give ir, and man is a kind of Creator of ir; howſoever 
tis his workmanſhip, and the work is more ignoble than the work- 
man; arleaſt not to be adored by him. w According to mans will 


jo Pecfure, for the Image cannor determine it felf ro be made as 
uld, 


, 39 And the * times of this iznorance x y God wink- 
* at; but z * now commandeth ail men every where 


lO repent. | 


7X To prevent an Obje&ion, 
Might continue in 
ne 3 God is faid ro have overlooked them ; as if he had 
arts 65 unworthy of his Care and Providence : And there- 
__ [ -m corrett or inſtrut rhem. When any are left to go 
Pra ry without God's inftru&tion or corre&ion, it is a ſad 
_ = ſcorns to look upon them, or to uſe any means to 
ng _ 3 Under the Goſpel we are fo far from Having liber- 
4 ar we liſt, that we are more nearly concerned to repent 
come Holy, Rom. 13. Is. Tits 2. Il, 12, I Pet, I. 14, 
every where, without exception of time or 


left any ſhould think that they 


Wil h 
"ll he be that does nor oblerye ir, 


: 


their unbelief, and fare as well as their Pro- | 


or Goodnels ſhe excelied in, and thcreioce hath a name upon re- 
: cord inthe Word of God, 


C H AP. XVII. 


Paul cometh into Corinth, and being of the ſame craft, he worketh with 
Aquila end Priſcilla 3 the Savbath-day, preacheth and teſtifieth to 
the Jews, that Feſus was the Chriſt, ſhaketh off the Duſt of his Gar- 
ment againſt the Blaſphemers, and departeth, x ——- 6. coming into 
th; honſe of Juſtus, he baptizeth Criſpus, and all kis houſe, with ma- 
ny of the Corinthians, 7, 8. Paul 7» a viſon, encouraged by the Lord, 
preacheth in that city a year and fix months, 9 IT. The Jews 
accuſe him to Gallio of the breach of their Law, he refuſeth ther 
accuſation, 12, -- 16, They beat Soſthenes, 19. Paul witn 
Aquila and Priſcilla ſailing by 3yria, come to Epheius3 be leaveth 
them there, and landeth at Ceſnea, ard thence to Antioch, and goeth 
over all the Country (trengthning the Diſciples, 18 — 23. Apollos 
preaching at Epheſus the Baptiſm of John is more perf: fy inſtrufted 
in the ways of God, by Aquila and Priſcilla, 24 - 26. paſſeth into 
Achaia, helpith them that believe, and Migbtily conviuctth the Jews 
that Feſus is the Chriſt, 279, 28. 


———— 


I Fter theſe things, Paul departed from Athens, 
and came to 4 Corinth 

a The Metropolis of Ach11a, being a rich Sea-Town, - and 

ſcituate in the very 1thmus which joyns Poponeſics unto Achai, 

made a Roman Colony, and now Houriſhing with learned men, 

Here Sr. Paul gathered a famous Church, unto which he wroce ewo 


| of his Epiſtles. 


2 And found a certain Jew named * &4quila, born p in *Ro. 11.2, 
Pontus, lately come from Italy, with his Wife Priſcilla 1 Cor: 16» 
(becauſe that Claudius had commanded all Jews to de. !”* 


part from Rome) and came unrothem. 

b A Country between Cappadorta and the Black S2a, Ads 2.9, 
whicher the Progenitors of Agquilz, in one of the diſperſions, 
might flee from Fade ro inhavic there. c The Romany Emperor, 
who, art the beginning of his Re1yn gave liberty ro the Jews treely 
to Exerciſe their Religion, bur abour et, hr years Ifrer took away 
chat priviledge from them, which $#:t9n125 makes mention of, 
chough very much miſtaking che reaſon; With che Fews,*cis thoughr 
that the Chriſtians were-aniſhed roo tor che Pagan Romans did nor 
care to diſtinguiſh bervixt them, chey boch worſhipping bur one 
God, and agreeipg'in oppoſing their Idolatry, 


3 And be(auſe he was of the ſame d crafr, he abode 
with them; and e * wrought (tor by their occupation *ch.20,34 


they were f tent-makers. ) 1Cor.4.12 
4 The moſt learned amongſt the Fews did always learn fome 1Thel. 2.9» 

handy crafr, and ir was one of thoſe rhings which they held a 

Father was bound to do for his Child, viz. to teach him ſome 

Trade. And one of their Rabby's ſaying is, That whoſoever does 

not teach his Child a Trade, does as bad as if he did teach him to play 

the Thisf. Sr. Paul wrought with his hands, nor ſo much becauſe 

as yet there was no Church there that could maintain him 3 bur, 

1. becauſe he would not be burdenſome unto them, they being 

probably moſt mean perſons that believed there, As appears, 

| ; { Oo00q 2 x Cor, 


-- >_>; 


. 
© PISIRE 00006, 0S x 


* - ® — 4 32” 
>. = "6 Oe 
_—_ : 44 tc 
% - - - 
vw ACAST. w# g _ 
/ NO - 


++ «IS 


Dar! ” 
VNatak 
Raney 


— 


_ Xn q IE x ___ 


#4 T om” —* i 
_ L.- . oe PL K > 
Y © ['s 
- n - ok 26s - ” LV, = > 
- af—> = "We ACE 1-1 peg 
$7 Sw . + - 2 _. 
—_ — 


"A 
3 -TH : 

Kiþb/% 2: = 
S178 Vedi 
\4% i % 2» 73 
Hee! = 18-003 

TY PB Þ pk. 
KK 4) 


0 

Chap, X VIII. T he 
1 Cor. 1.26. Or, 2. That he might ſhew how rhar he did nor cover 
theirs, bur them; and ro gain noching bur Souls amongſt chem. 
Yer he afſerced his r:ghr, and the right of Miniſters, by Divine 
appointmenr, to live ot the Golpel, 1 Cor. 9g. 6, 11, 12. f Tents 
were uſed by Soldiers, and in thoſe hor Countries by others alſo, 
being uſually made of Skins ſewn together to keep off the violence 
of the weather. 

4 And he g reaſoned in the ſynagogue every ſabbath, 
and h perſwaded. the Jews, and the ; Greeks. 

2 Or, Argued and Diſputed, giving his Reaſons out of Scripture, 
and anſwering their O>jeRions, h nor only ufing cogent Argu- 
ments; bur, as ſome underſtand the Verb, ſuch as did prevall 
upon them. # Not ſuch as were of the Jewiſh race, and after the 
diſperſion uſed the Scripture in the Gre& Tongue 3 bur ſuch as 
were Gertile-Greeks, Greeks by deſcent. 

5 And when Silas and Timotheus k were come from 
Macedonia, Paul was / prelled in ſpirit, and teſtified 

5 the unto the Jews, that Jeſus || was #» Chriſt. 

& According as was ordered by him, Chap. 17. 14, Is- | More 
then ordinarily affeted, the Spirit of ntluencing his Spirit ; 
ſo that he felr an anguiſh or pain at the hearr, (a5 2 Cor. 2. 4+) ſuch 
was his grief for the contumacy of the Fews 3 ſo great was his 


j Or, 
Chriſt, 


Wt deſire thar they might be ſaved. » 1. The Chriſt, or Anointed 
wet! | that excelled all other Chrifts or Anointed ones, being anointed 
4 with Oil above meaſure. 2. The Chriſt that was promiled by the 

j Prophets, 
| *Ch.13.44 6 And * when they oppoſed themſelves, # and blal- 


FMat.10. phemed, heo+ ſhook his raiment, and ſaid unto them, 

yl k Your blood be p upon your own heads; 9 Il * am clean : 

'2s _ * from henceforth I will go unto the Gentiles. _ 

PE s They blaſphemed Pay/, miſcalling of him, bur eipectally 
Chriſt, whoſe diſhonour grieved Paul moſt, 0 His upper Garment, 
25 the manner was, Matt. 25. 65. thar none of the duft of that 
place where ſuch blaſphemy was ſpoken, might ſtick unto him. 
See Chap. 13. $1. p Or you are guilty of your own deaths and 
damnation, 2 Sam. 1. 16. Matt. 27. 25. Felo de ſe this expreſſion 
is borrowed from the Witneſles laying their hands on the head of 
the guilty Perſon 3 or the Sacrificer's laying his hand on the head of 
the Beaſt which was to be ſlain, Exod, 29. 10, Lev. 1. 4. 4q Free 
from their blood, or the loſs of their Souls, having warned them, 

4 OR and ſhewn the way of Life unto them, Extk, 33-4. He had blown 

Kc | the Trumpet, and warned the People. : 

RA 7 © and he departed thence, and entred into a cer- 

tain mans houſe, named r Juſtus, one thar s worſhipped 

God, whoſe houſe joyned hard to the ſynagogue. 

#1 Some read Titus, ſome both Tits and Juſtus, making Fi/tus a 
ſirname, as Ads 1. 23. Col. 4. 11. after the manner ot the Romans, 
s Had forſaken the Polytheiſme of the Heathen, 

8 * And Criſpus * the chief ruler of the ſynagogue, 
believed on the Lord with all his houſe : and « many 


of the Corinthians, hearing, believed, and were bap- 
tized. 

t There were ſeveral Rulers in a Synagogue, which we find fre- 
quenr mention of, as Matth. 9.18. Mark 5. 22: Their Office and 
Place was to adviſe, and give order about the affairs of the Syna- 
gogue, that ail things might be performed according to their preſcri- 
£14 UMM bed Rules; # amongſt whom ate reckoned Gains, Soſthents, 1 Cer. 
P0110 Bf I, 1. and Epenetiis, Rom. 16. g. ; : 

2L4 *Ch,23.17 9 Then * ſpake the Lord to Paul in w the night by 
a viſion, Be not afraid, but ſpeak, and x hold not thy 
peace : : 

w As Chap. 16. 9. it may be an Angel. x 'Tis doubled again 
and 7gain, as of greateſt conſequence, 1. To the Corixthians, 
whoſe Saivarion by this means might be procured, 2. To Paxl 
himſelf, whoſe Sou} whoſoever ſhould be delivered, he having 
| | diſcharged his duty, Chap. 20. 26, 29. The fierceneſs of the 

7.207 encmies of God, and his Truth, ſhould kindle a greater fervour in 
bs. abſt HIND his Servants for his Glory. Should Saran have better Servants than 
| God? Should they dare for their Maſter, beyond what the Ser- 
vants of God are willing to do or ſuffer for him ? Ji. 62, 1. Fer. 
r; 17, 18, 

10 For I am y with thee, and no man ſhall ſet 
on thee, to hurt rhee :+ for I have = much people in this 

city. 

Chriſt, in this Viſion, uſerh two Arguments to perſwade Paul 

14 to continue Preaching the Goſpel art Corinth; 1. y Becauſe he 
Br | would be with him, to ſupply, ſupport and deliver him ; as 'tis 
"47 18 promiſed to Jererzah, Fer, 1. 18. and to all the faithful Miniſters 
of Chriſt, Matth, 28. 20, This promiſe was fulfilled ro Payl, and 
ro other of God's Servants, whatſoever troubles they mer with, even 
when they were killed, they were nor hurt, Rom. 8. 26, 38. 7 The 
. other reaſon why Pau! was commanded to tarry, was, becauſe 
there were many that God would have called by his Miniſtry, aud 
thus thoſe who were not his people, God calleth his pleople, as 
Hoſea 1. 10, and 2, 23, 


11. And he || acontinued there a year and ſix months, 
teaching the word of God among them. 

2 He ſate there, as his fixt place 3 which implies his continuance 
and conſtancy in the work of the Miniſtry, 

12 © And when v Gallio was the c deputy of 4 
Achaia, the Jews made inſurreftion e with one ac- 
oy againit Paul, and brought him to the judgment- 
cat. 


6 This Gallio was Brother to that deſervedly famous Seneca, 
(who was Tutor to Nero ) and hach great commendations given 
him, as being a man of an excellent diſpoſition, beloved by all 
men, an Euemy to all Vice, and eſpecially a hates of Flattery. 


Xx Cor. I. 


|| Gr. ſat. 
there, 


ACT S. 


Chap. XVIy 


c This man was Proconſul, 4. Governing 4:haia ane all Greees ab 
[urely 3 or with the power of a Conſul. e Wicked men in their 
evil deeds are unanimous ; for Satan knows that his Kingdom would 
not ſtand, 14 ic it were once divided, 


13 Saying, This fellow perſwadeth men to worſhip 


| God f contrary to the Law. 
| f Of the Romans, who, to avoid tumulrs and confufions, dig fo 
| bid ro ſet up any new worſhip withour leave ; and the Fews In theſ 
parts having here no power to punifh St. Paul as they had at Ja 
rsſalem, maliciouſly incite the Governour againſt him ; © by * 
Law here may be meant the Law of Moſes, which they accuſe Pt 
to have broken, and ſo nor:to be comprehended in thar licence which 
they had to exerciſe their Religion, 

1+ And when Paul was now about tog open hi; 
mouth, Gallio ſaid unto the Jews, * If it were a matter 
of h wrong, or wicked lewdneſs, O ye Jews, : reaſyy 


would that I ſhould bear with you. 

£ To make his Apology, and to ſpeak in his own defence, hb As 
Murther, Theft, or any ſuch injury, which Judges do uſually ge. 
termine of, 7 I would endure any trouble ro hear and underſtand 
ir, T ſhould think irmy duty to ſufter you ro ſay as much ax you 
would in your caſe, , 

15 But if ir be a queſtion of & words and name: 
and 2 of your law,look you to zt ; for I will be no judge 
of n ſuch matters. 

k Which have been ſpoken abour the controverſies of Religion 
{ as whether Jeſus was to be called Chriſt or the Meſſiah; and whe. 
ther his Diſciples might be called Chriſtians, »: Concerning Circyn. 
cifionz as whether none may be ſaved without it. 7 He acknoy. 
ledges his unficneſs and unwillingneſs to decermine ſuch things az gig 
nor belong unto him, or he did nor underſtand. 

I6 And heodrave them from the judgment-ſeat, 

o He commanded them to be gone, having diſmiſſed their Cale; 
and if need were, added threatning an1 force, 

17 Then all the p Greeks took q Soſthenes, the 
chief ruler of the ſynagogue, and beat him before the 
judgment-ſeat : And Gallio cared ry for none of thoſe 
things. 

p Not the converted Greeks, though Sr. Axftin thought they beat 
Softhenes as an enemy to Pay! (yer ſurely they had not fo learned 
Chriſt ) but the unbelieving or Guatile-Greeks, who cared for neither 
Paul, nor Jews, but fayoured Galtio, who would have them drive 
away. 9 Some think him ro haye been the fame with (jj; 
Verſe 8. others to have ſucceeded him in that Office: And fone 
think that he was chief Ruler of another Synagogue ( for in prey 
Cities there might: be more than one); and others, that there might 
be ſeveral called chief Rulers over one and the ſame Synagoye, 
7 Eicher Nighring the Zews and all their controverſies, or prudenty 
to decline intermedling with them. 

18 © And Paul after this tarried there yet 5a good 
while, and then took t his leave of the brethren, and 
ſailed thence into Syria, and with him Priſcilla s and 
Aquila : ha: ing * ſhorn his head in w Cenchrea : for het 


had a vow. 

s Ayear and a half in all, as ſome think, which is mentioned, 
Verſe 11. by a Prolepſis; or befides that year and an half there 
ſpoken of, t Ordering every thing as it he were ro have taken his 
laſt farewel of them, as it fell our accordingly : Howloever holy 
men live in a conſtant expectation of their diffolurion. » That the 
Wifes name 15 here pur before the Husbands, have cauſed various 
ccnjeures; and 'tis obſerved, that in St. Paul's Epiſtles, whereas 
there are threetimes only mention of them both rogether, 12, Rn, 
16, 3. I Cor, 16. 19. 2 Tim. 4.19, the Wives name 1s twice placed 
firſt, to ſhew, that in Chriſt Jeſus there 1s neither Male nor Female, 
Gal. 3. 28. w Which was a Town at the entring into the Haven 
belonging ro Corinth, Rom. 16. 1, x To wit, St Paxl hic; and 
theretore had ſhaven his head according unto the Law, Xn 6, 18, 
To the Fews he became as a Few, 


19 And he came to y Epheſus, and left z them ther? : : 
but he himſelf entred a into the ſynagogue; and rea- 
ſoned with the Jews. D 
y The Metropolis of the leſſer Azz, where afterwards thac f i tie P 
mous Church was, unto which Sr, Pal wrote an Epiſile, e520 ( 
St, John wrote another, Rev. 2. I, x\ That is, Ac#illa and Pr fealth 
at Epheſus, to confirm the believing Epheſcans: whilſt, Pai! 4 Vf ot 
of an extraordinary love for his Nation, although he had ſuffered Jed 


all thoſe indignities from them, yet he would give them precepr up 
precept, and line upon line, 


20 When b they deſired hin to tarry longer tis 


with them, c he conſented not : 

b Thar is Aquilia and Priſcilla, whom Paul would not my” 
c By God's wonderſul Providence (which over-rules all our ” l 
nations) Paul having greater things to do and ſuffer for rhe Glofy 
of God elſewhere. 

21 But bad them farewel, ſaying, [ mult conkes 
by all means keep d this feaſt that cometh, 1n jou_ #iC 
lem : but 1 will return again unto you, e * if God WW, 
And he ſailed from Epheſus. : 

4 The Feaſt of the Paſſover; which is meant where Fare 
put abſolutely, unleſs ſome afrer expreſſion qualifies It : go” = 
this holy Man did out of Conſcience to the Feaſt, intend to 0 6 - 
it: for Chriſt is the end of the law to them that believe, ROM. 4 4 
bur becauſe of the vaſt concourſe from all places to Fein 
thar timez which would give him _———— , = him. 
Chriſt known to ſuch multitudes, and to gain mer _ _ heſie, 
? Though he was an Apoſtle, and had the Spiric of Fro” 


; -_ does n0t 
and might ktow whether he ſhould return or 895 Jet he colute! 


A010 
heir 
ould 


ſhip 


for. 
theſe 
to Ton 
Y the 
e Pa! 
vVhich 


his 


alter oh 


alon 


h As 
ly de. 
rſtand 
IS You 


Ines, 
Judge 


gion; 
Uo Whe. 
!rcum. 
know. 
as dig 


at, 
Cale; 


z the 
e the 
thoſe 


Y beat 
arned 
elther 
[riven 
tiny, 
ſome 
rear 
Dipht 
ur, 
litly 


ood 
3nd 
and 


r he *Ch.v0 


A VII 


hap. XI X. 


abſo'urely promiſe them to return to then ; 


iſes and Reſo'utions, as Fam, 4a 
— bring torch. Beſides, in 


22 And when he had landed 


och. , ; 
"'F Nor that Ceſarea that was in Syria, 
lem; tor the way by Joppa, though th 
me —. & Either the Church of 
or that at Feruſalem art his Journeys end ;- wh 
might be called, eminencly, The Chyrch, 
Sia, : 
23 And after he z had 
parted, and went over all the countrey 


{Phrygia in order, 1 ſtrengthning all 


h Th 


Ms a 
4 at o Alexandria, al P eloquent man 
the ſcriptures, came to Epheſus. 

1 Whois thought allo to be called Apeltes, 
Parents havirg lived there, Pp A ratlonal, 
Man. Though the Kingdom of God is not 
Speech, 1 Cor, 1, 4» 
Adorn the Tabernacle, 
them, 


25 This man was inſtruted s in 

Lord; and being t fervent in the ſpirit, 

19-3 taught diligently the things of 
only the baptiſm of John. 

y Catechiſed, or taught” viva Voce, 
Precepts and Example taught us the 
zealous to promote Gods Glory, and 
12, 11, #4 Who Baptiſed with 


the Holy Ghoſt, Matth, 3- T1. that is, 


afrer that Chriſt was Aſcended, and the Spirit 
2- 4+ But Zohn was a preacher of Repentance, 


this Dottrine z which is the 


{y than were reyealed inthe Bupiſts time, 


:6 And he began to Ipeak boldly in 


, as doubtleſs we may, it Is certain 


I Pt, 3.1, 2, Thus 


but otherwiſe it is nor Lawful for a Woman 
Il, 22, 


the y brethren wrote, 
N56 him : Who, when he 


which had believed through z grace. 

z To Corinth, which was in Achaia. 
i 4jollos helped them much { 
vhich all are the Gifts of God : bur eſpecially, 
for Faith is the Gift 
Was given unto them to believe, Phil. x. 2 9. 


* Chri 


OM. b AS Chap. 17. 3, 
ject, and Jeſus the Predicate: and then the ſenſe Is, 
Our Jeſus or Saviour. The Meſbah that 
Saviour of the World. 


CHAP. XIx. 


Paul coming to Epheſus, 
mito the Baptiſm of j 
Paul reacheth 5n the Synagogue and the 
confirming bis Dofrine with ſpecial 
chief, 8 12. 


laytth his hands on 


Womaed, I3—-16, 
of tain Arts, I79—20, 
then to Rome, 21, 

2 — 29, 


ew, 33) 34. The 
1 Nd it came to paſs, that while * 4 
at Corinth, Payl having - paſſed th 


"Per coaſts, came to Epheſus 
UCiples, 


the Lord will, to teach us what caucion we ſhould uſe in a 


our owning of God's 
Pleaſure, we acknowledge a Providence of God 


cially in our concerns ; which we defire to reter all unco, 
at f Celarea, and gone 
upand ſaluted theg Church, he went down þ to An- 


15. being we know nor what i 2 


but thar which was in | 
ay called Ceſarea Stratozis ; and which was the ſafeſt way | 


Ceſarea in his 


Ich for its populouſmeſ 


ipent ſome time 


z# This work might take up the conſtant care a 


Rom. 16. 10, 


yet this Egyptian Jewel may 
1 In quoting, Explaining, 


the way of the 
the Lord, 


s Cimiſt, who hath by his 
way to happineſs; 
mens Salvation, 
Water, bur cou!d 


they had 
ordinary Gifs of the Holy Ghoſt which followed upon Baptiſm 


pointing at the Lamb of God ; and he Baptized his Diſciples into 


the Apoſtles afterwards, Only now they knew man y things more ful. 


the Synagogue. 


w If ye allow Priſcilla to have contribured towards the Inſtru- 


4 mcck and humble | of the Apoſtles afterward 
behaviour, might be more effe&ual for the Converſion of Souls, 


Timothy was indehred for his knowledge in | and E 
the things of God, to his Mother and Grand-Mother, 2 Tin 


to Teach, x1 Tin, 2, 


27 And when he was dif, poſed to paſs into x Achaia, ircumſtances 2, 
exhorting the diſciples to receive £ Chriſt 
Was come, * helped them much | ws 


of God, Efh. 2.8, and Ic 


28 For he a mightily convinced the Jews, and that 
tz Publickly, ſhewing b by the {criptures, that c Jclus | was 
Chriſt, 


4 With great conſtanc rſeverance, and enduring of oppoſiti- 
: - Some think that Chriſt Oughr to be Sub. 


was ſent from God, is the 


ohn ; they receive the holy Ghoſt, z 


The ſeven Sons of Sceva adjuring the nnclean j the 
SÞirits by the name of Feſus, are o0Vercome, prevailed againſt and ; Kn 
Many confeſs their d eeds, and burnt their books 


entring into the 
|<. Alexander kindred from making his Apology, 


Town-Clerk appeaſeth the uprore of the People, 


5 and finding certain Goſpel, 1 In thoſe extraordinary Giſts of Tongues, 


T be 


condicionaily, 


ASFLS 


if | £ The Not 
(I our Pro- | and G4/2tiz, 


Chap. NINE 


5, Bithyniz, Fhrygia, 


but it parts; "in Whici were Pye 
C21. 18. 22, 
Wil and 


e lii4 unto them, Have Ye received þ the holy 
. F Ghoſt 192 
n all things, eſpe. 


v Je elieved ? And they ſaid unto Mn, We 


4Ve not fo much ax heard c whether there be aly holy 
Ghoſt. 

b The extr:; "dinary Gifts of the Holy Ghoft 
ſpeaking wirh Tongues, healing of the 
Verſe 6. ard Fobn «;. * for it cou'd nor 
Inſtructed and Baptized by Jobs, 
or Perſon of the Holy Ghoft ; 


ſcending upon Our Saviour ; as is rememired by all 
which {peak of his Baptiſm, 222th, 3. 15, 


F » 4as Prophecying, 
SICk, Fc, a; appears by 


orter, was accounted | 1 Evangeliſte 
Journey, Mark. x 


a : Io, [be 

, . | 3+ 22. beſide other Scriptures which teſtified of him; and - 

at Antioch that was in ! Fobx had ſpoken of him unto all he Baptized, Thar our Saviour 
| would Baprize them with the 


there, he de- 


| 32» 33- _ © This anſwer muſt be underſtood, according ro the 

of k Galatia and: quertion, of thoſe Gifts now mentioned ; and Which by the im- 
”—_ Poſition of the hands of the Apoſtles were BIVEN, eſpecially at the 

the Ciſciples. rdination of ſuc as were It be! 


om Heaven ;) 
luccels of their 


.  { Unto, as Ch; 
and q mighty IN } Parallel'd, 


] they Preached 
And this acception of theſe Words is 


52, 3.7. where it is ſaid, Thar SMutl bnew . no; 357 
aning is, That he kney nor that God was won: ſo 
0 His | £9 ſpeak unto any ; otherwiſe thar holy Man, as Young as he was, * 
| oth knew God, and ferved him, 
And he 
be uſed to ; 


Unto 4 what then wore 
and urging of | /© ÞaPptized ? 


baptiſm. 


he ſpake and | Thus the Fes are faid, I Cor. 10, 2. 


Moſes, 
o a 1 p 1 } j pq 
» * kn owing Sy Ingaged-to _ the Dodrine, and Ovlerve the Lay deli. 


loſes. 4 CY4p. 18. 25, preached 
_ Chriſt, but many things concerning him ke could nor preach, 
unleſs as 


ot things ro come : RelurreQion. The 
Baptiſt 


7 very being Beheaded before our Saviours Death, and the Holy 


having been Baptized by 
might not have 


of R- tO Repentance : and 
- qo CY Dy it were obliged wo repent: by which is manifeſt, thar the 
Whom when Aquila and Priſcilla had heard, they took Baptiſm of John, ar4 of Chriſt (which he commanded,) js one 
him unto them w, and expounded unto him the Way Of | and the ſams Zobn's Baptiſm did reſpe& Chr 

God more perfe&tly, 


» and oblige the 
and more, ir Was 2 

as is Expreſly oh. 
> and the Baptiſm 


Baptized to believe in him, as alſo £0 repent : 
of the Remiſſion of their ſins, 
4- {0 that the Baptiſm of Fobn 
» had the ſame Sign, and the ſame thin 
both (the inward and outward parr, the Heavenl 
ly parc were the ſame in both ;) as alſo they had both 
the ſameend; and therefore they were both; the fame, 
this, Thar unleſs the Bzptiſts and the Apoſtles 8 
lame, Chriſt and his Members (the Church) are 
the ſame Baptiſm : I muſt be acknowledged that thi 


ir was only in 


. I. 5, 


are now accompliſhed. 
» Including the Father, and the Ho! Ghoſt, and 


| 1nd mentioning Chrift, 
tO difference his Bapriſms from the ſevera] Bapcizings and Waſhing 
then in uſe, 


5 * When they heard this : 
the name of the Lord Jeſus. 
? The Diſciples, or thoſe thar 
Epheſians were nor amongſt choſe few thar Pay » IT Cor, 


aid in the foregoing 
tis faid, Ch b 
they were prickeg 
tor Pauls impciing 
!t might 
have been 


they were baptized In 


Thar Chriſt js 


be again Eaprized by 
further maniteſtations of the Myſtery of 


bur once alſo born in the Spirit; and no more may Chriſtians be 
Baprized twice, than the Fews could be twice Circumciled, 


6 And when k Paul had * laid bis hangs upon them, 4 Gh, 6.6, 
pollos was | fÞe 7 holy Ghoſt came on them ; and they +; Pake with Te 


(1 2, 4> 
tongues and 2» propheſied, & 10, 46. 
rough the & Thereby Ord:ini, and Authorizing of preach the 4 


©, whereby 
they 


them to 


"i . 4 «4 © 
jg - gt. - 6" 
J- FEI 7 > me => ; 
> > oo _ I CE wo. . _ _ 
LY ” ——_ ud AS ov oy » > - . TY 
—_ Px. of | - —_— _ UN 
. Fl ——_ ©. 
, - 044 veal <<, "I - s — s 
_ ® v*L2 © —— —_— » . > 
” - -* +.» o— — _ * > Gs 
Pe. *; . . _ >" —_— ns : = A TL 
1 bu ix ” 
* wt TI : x: = / 2 A %.. +. 
p 4 7 : 
wy $3e<" we _ POR ” ks bo . Fe. 7 4 "2 
EE. oh _ & SZ} 44. &'s " <Fy 
ood >; >. -þ dey _ * = - 
4 wig 2 Ea P4327; ITE 15s WT. 
. » ny of ” 
” = . - 9” _ A _ 0 


rg 
” 
A 
IT 
ae 
do 
_— 
-SSt 


NE 0 
WM" 6 Sa 
v. - OE 
- , _ - 
2, "= 
> 
RO - &-. x 
= CE 
b 5 
=. 9 


7... "Wa 
ed o pt - 
— 

- 


whe 365 
q! Hh 23 


C han, 
zL 


LEY wore fie TOMY | _ 
ro whom they Hou'd be tent. 
proper ticnie, 
or in a larger and m | 
ol God, and deciaring the hidden Myſteries of the Goſp:1 z ex- 


A E 
T be 
reach the Cofpel unto any Naticn « r 'eop;e un- 
z They Prophefied, either in 1ts 
-cino enabled ro forerel things that were to come 
more improper ſenſe, praifing and magmiying 


WIW 
LC2:E 


ACTS. 


Chap. 


- of: hs ater 6c ied: : | 

f One of the cluet of ©©e 24 Courſes into which the Priefi 
were divided, 1 Cir0%. 14. 4. or fuchas (according to rh;@ 
ruprion of thoſe times) had been High Prieſts, ang Rag Pat 
aſide, cr were of the High Priefts Family, and hoped to _ 
him, K \. AY 


wunding the Scriptures 3 ſpecially rhe Prophefies concerning Chrift, 


2E 1 CO. 14. Ie 


it 


- And all the men were about = twelve. 
: Or exaR!y Twe:ivez anſwering tothe Apoſtles, and that Blefled 


Number ſo o'ten mentioned in Scripcure, 


$S Ard he went 10to the o ſynagogue, and ſpake 


boldly, for the ſpace of three months, diſputing _ 
perſwading the things concerning p the kin2dom © 
God. 


had their Synagogues in which they 


( . . B+ TY 
g Of che Fews ar Epliſrs, For in the greater Cities the 7iws 


had their Prayers, read, an 


: - Kank N 
expounded the Law ; as alſo a School for reaching ot thelr Treology 5 


- Ei. Ts 
5. 

{; Sec Cit. 
Go 2o 


* See Ch, 
Is Zke 


EYark 16. 
aleT 


Ch, 14. 3. 


in which they treated of hard Queſtions, and _ _ matters 3 
which might occafion the Apoſtles frequenting mat pate: 
Goſpel ; which is ſo called, Row. 14. 17: becauſe the Kingdom ot 
Grace is by it ſet up in us here 3 an 
Kingdom of Glory hereafter. Bur it might 


p The 


and we are fitted by it for the 
be alſo ſo called, be- 


15 And the evil ſpirit anſwered and faid s, Jeſ 
know, h and Paul I know 3 but who 7 are ye ? wy 
g I acknowledge that Jeſus hath Power to commang 
hence 3 þ and I know that Paz, as his Miniſter, hath Aurh,* 
over me. 7 Bur what prerenſions have ye to command me _— 
Though the Devil 1s a lyar, and the Father of lyes, yer COD 2 
ro their own difadvanrage, bur rather to their advantage, a; ek 
rake it; and Satan may thereſore be believed in what he here re, 
becauſe it js tohis diſgrace 3 that will he, nill he, he is unde a}s, 
command of God, though bur ſignified to him by the laſt of j.* 
Miniſters or Servants, ; Us 


16 And the k man in whom the evil ſpirit was, le t 
on them, and overcame them, and prevailed h—_— 
them, fo that they fled out of that houſe nakeg and 
wounded. 


k By the power of the evil ſpiric, which by the permi 
God did a& in htw, Matth. 9. 28. Mark g. 4. Luke Xen _— 


itical Ki he Meſſiah, 
cauſe the Fews had dreamed of a political Kingdom of rhe. 
and the ofriftian would own thar Chrift was indeed a hing, but | 


that his Kingdom was a Spiritual Kingdom. : 

o But * when divers q were hardened, and believed 
rot, but ſpake evil || of r that way before the multitude, 
ke departed from them s, and ſeperated the diſciples, 
diſputing daily in the ſchool of one * T yrannns. - | 

The Sun hardeneth what ir doth not ſoften, andl cauſerh , 
ftench from Dung-Bills, as 1s a ” = (mell from the Mountain 

icef; and Chriſt is for the falling, 
= " x So the Dorine of the Goſpel, by reaſon of 1ts 
excellency above other ways is called, By way, the Hebrews under- 
ſand any courſe or means to any end, hence we read of the Wa) Ui 
Peace, the way of Salvation, the way of the Lord. 5 Not frequenting 
any more the Svnagogue of the Jews, where they mer only Wit! 
contradiction of their Doarine, and blaſphemy againſt rheir Savi- 
our. t Some have taken this word Ape!I tively, as denoting ſome 
great Man or Ruler, who maintained a Schoo!, or place tor In- 
firuction ; bur "cis rather a proper name of ſome private Teacher 
amongſt them : for the Fews had not only ' 
their Conſiſtories did meer, but private Schools, where their Law 
was Taught. 


10 And * this continued by the ſpace of two years 3 


ſo that # all they which dwelt in w Alia, heard the x word 


of the Lord Jeſus, both Jews and Greeks. 
£ Many of all forts: w Aſia the leſſer, or 47a ſtrifly fo called, 


lying about Epheſzs 5 the Heathens came thicher to worſhip their 


Diana 3 the Fews came abour their Afairs thither, either in their 
Trades, or Law-ſuits, x The Goſpel, which 15 the Word concern- 
ing rhe Lord Jeſus; or, the Word which he appointed ro be 
preached and publiſhed, : 

11 And * God wrought y ſpecial miracles by the 


z hands of Paul : | 
y Not common or ordinary things, or ſuch as might happen by 
chance. 43 As Chap. g. 12. by his means and miniſtry, 


12 So that from his body were brought unto the (icx, 
a handkerchiefs or aprons, and the 6 diſeaſes departed 


from them. and the evil ſpirits went out of them. 

z Our Habit and Artire being ſo different from what was uſed 
fo long fance, it cannot bur occaſion ſome variety 1n rendering theſe 
Words. Which ſome think ro ſignify two things 3 and ſome but 
one and the ſame part of their Clothes or Dreſs z the Words are 
both Originally Latin 3 the former ſo called from its uſe to wipe 
away {wear 3 the 6ther from ics heing uſually ried about ſuch as 
wore it, 5 God by ſuch ſmall and unlikely means wrought theſe 
miracies: Thar the power of Chriſt (whom Pa#! preached) might 
the more clearly appear. And that, 2dly, Such as were abſent 
might have a high value for Chriſt and the Goſpel, though they 
had never ſeen- Paz!, or heard him preach. Such extraordinary 
Works were alſo wrought by God ro magnify the Words preached 
by Peter, Chap. s. 15. as our Saviour had forerold and promiſed, 
PFol2 14 32+ 


13 © Then certain of the c vagabond Jews d,cxorciſts, 
took upon them to cal} over them which had evil ſpirits, 
the e name of the Lord Jeſus, ſaying, We adjure you 
by Jeſus whom Paul preacheth, 

c Who wandered up and down, making it their Trade and 
livelihood : as Juglers amongſt us. & So calied from their ob- 
reſting the evil ſpirics in the name of God. Of theſe Foſephus rells 
firange Stories, Artiq, lib. 8. and thinks that the way of their 
exorciting was derived unto them from S0/0207, and that they uſed 


the Name of the Gud of Abrabam, Tſaac, and Facob; as alſo of 


” 


Zt920th, and Adonai, as Ovizen teils us. Some think, that though 
there is ceitainly no power in the Words and Syllables which they 
pronounced, - yet that the True God being - rather willing to be 
known and owned by thoſe Names, than that any ſhould call on 
the names of rhe falle gods, did ſomerimes pur forth his power in 
caſting out of Devils at ſuch times, as Matth. 12. 279. Howſoever, 


there being no warrant 1n the Word of God for any ſuch practice, 


and no promiſe to at Faith in Prayer upon; were” the Words never 
ſo ſerious, and the Name of God and his Arttribures never ſo 
much (ſcemingly) maniteſted, it is a moſt ahominable Impiety. 


e Inſtead of, or together with thoſe other Names formerly men- 


tioned, 


14 And there were ſeven ſons of one Sceva, a Jew, 
aud f chief of the prieſts, which did fo. 


h | ſed, ard ſhewed rheir deeds. 


publick Schools, when | 


retains ſtill his natural power, though he hath wholly loſt his moral 
or ſpirirual power unto any goo.i: and that his violence proceed:q 
| no further, 1s to be aſcribed only to the bounds which God had le 
him; which he, being in Chains, couid not exceed or go beyond; 
nor for his want of malice, but power, ; 
| 17 And this was known to all the Jews and Greeks 
alſo; dwelling at Epheſus ; and / fear f«ll on them aj 
and the m name of the Lord Jeſus was magnified, 
! They feared (after this example of Gods nor holding then 


45 well as for the riſing guilcleſs that had raken his Name in vain) to prophane the Name gf 


Chriſt, and much more to blaſpheme or ſpeak againſt ir. » His a. 
thority, which the unclean ſpiric could nor reſiſt ; and his Dodrine 
and Miniſters, whoſe Detence God had undertaken. 


| 18 And many that » believed came, and o * confe. 


2 That believed the power which God alone had oyer Satan 
and were convinced of their fin and danger in being led captive ty 
him, o Openly declared their evil deeds. They durſt keep Fu 
Devil's counſel no longer, but expoſe and manifeſt It, that their 
ſores being laid open, the Balm of the Goſpel might more effetiually 
be pur into them. Thus Row, 10, 10, with the mouth confeſſion is 1:1 
wito Salvation. 


19 p Many alſo of them which uſed q curious arts, 
brought their books together r, and burned them before 
all men : and they counted the price of them, and found 
It s fifty thouſand preces of ſilver. 

þ Thus their good works juſtified their Faith, withour which ic 
had teen dead, Faztes 2. 24, 26. 9q Or rather, idle and 1; A'ts, 
as Judicial Aſtrology, calculating Nativities, and all Magical art, 
which the Epieſ7ans, of all others, were moſt addifed to, and 
famous for, and may be here called cyious Arts, becaule they 
were ſo called by the Epheſians, who prafiſed them ; as alſo becauſe 
theſe Arts are about Curioſities, nor neceſſary for us to knox, 
Ocherwiſe they are Dſabolical Arts, or rather devilith Cheats, 
7 Theſe Books were not ſold, and the price of them brought unto 
the Apoſtles, becauſe ir was look'd upon as the price of a Whore, 
which was an abomination, and might not be offered unto God, 
Dent. 29. 18. s What this ſum amounts to, is not ſo certain, be- 
cauſe ir is not agreed what theſe pjeces were. Some make them 
Roman, or Grecian Coin 3; and others underſtand by them, Si4z!:, 
which are the Zewiſh money, and would make this ſum fo muck the 
greater, Take them for ſo many Pence, a piece of money com- 
monly ſo called, which weighed the Eighth part of an Ounce of 
Stlver 3 as Matth, 18. 28. they make 6250 Ounces of Silver, or 
ſo many Crowns, and ſo much more as Silver is worth more jr 
Ounce. Such indignation have true Converts againſt rhe fins they 
have been guilty of, that they will nor retain any thing chat might 
cccafion there rerurn unto them : Were it a right Eye, they ould 


XIX 


Mr , 


-) 
ag | 


Ch 


_—_— AD «s 


| pull ir our, 

20 So * mightily e grew the word of God, and pre- +; 
valled. "I 

t The encreaſe which the ſeed of the Word had made, was ] 
very remarkable; or ir is a great inſtance of the power of Gods | 
word, when ir makes men willing to part with their beloved and k 
accuſtomed fins, and not ro ſtand upon faving or gaining 3 4 1 
Iſa. 55+ IT. 

21 © * Afrer theſe things were ended, Paul : propo- *Rog . 
ſed in the ſpirit, when he had paſſed through Macedo: Gil.t , 
nia, and w Achaia, to go to Jeruſalem, ſaying, After | c 
I have been there *, I muſt alſo ſee Rome. a 

z Reſolved with himſelf, or purpoſed in his hearr, as Da. 1. 15 
Yer in this his determination he had the influence and guidance 
of the Holy Ghoft, and that in a more than ordinary mMannet Þ 
as we may. ſee by the continued /eries of this Hiſtory, how Ne 
came to all theſe places here mentioned. mw Pay! traveic 0! 
through theſe Countries, and went ro theſe Cities, becauſe Ne 7 
hoped for a greater Harveſt, where he might ſcatter the ſeed io far ny 
abroad, : 

22 So he ſent into Macedonia two of them that * hi 
miniſtred unto him, Timotheus and y Eraſtus, # he ac 
himfelf ſtayed z in Aſia for a ſeaſon. SO 

x This great Apoſtle had nor any to miniſter unto him out 9! th 
State, bur out of Neceſſity, being he could not himſelt arrend (0 Co 
all the Offices of the Church. Theſe were employed by Pa#:, Sj 
ſo much to procure any Accommodation for himſelt by che _ , do 
as to ſurther a collefion for the poor brethren at uh; Til 


7, XX. The 
Jap | 
Cor. 9. 3, 4 ? There ſeem; to have bz2n two of rhis Name 
mentioned in $:ripture, Th-z one, Kom, 16. 23. andthe other, 2 Tim. 
20, The later is here ſpoken of, 2 In Epheſus, which was in 
Aſia, where Paul now was. 
4 9 


ay 1.8. 

þ.c.2, ahout 2 [| chat Way. 

*h — all things feewed to have been quiet : fo incertain are 
the ſervants of Chriſt to have any quiet heie. z The DoQrine of 
the Go!pel ; as Chap. 18. 25. ; 

24 For a certaia man named Demetrius,afilver-ſmith, 

\.-.16, which made 4 {ilver ſhrines for Diana, brought * no 

© {;nall gain untothe craftiſ-men, | 

s Theſe thrines were only, either, . 1. Pourtraits of the Temple 
of Diana, 1N which was graven, or ( by any other Art) repreſented 
that famous Structure which was afterwards burnt by Eraſtrotus : 

Or 24/p, They were Medals io which their Ido] D:ana was expreſled 

according to. her Image, ſpoken of , wer. 35. And they are called 

«re. Temples, or Shrines, becauſe they did reſemble and repreſent 
that Shrinz or Temple. And theſe the ſuperſtitious people carried 

home to their houſes and friends ; not only to evidence whar a 

pilgrimage they had performed, but to incite the more their devo- 


A &E a 


23 ©. And * the ſame time there aroſe ſo fmall ſtir | 


| bly. 


£ n ; VT” 
Char. ALIX. 
wa 

32 S5ms therefore r cried ons thing, and ſome en0- 
cher : for the aſſembly was confuſed, and che more Part 
knew not wherefore they were coms together, 

r An excellent deſcription of a popular rumuit. Whether thi: 
Aſſembly was afterwards madelegal by the Magiſt: ates retorting rhi- 
cher (though it was not called by their Authority,) and is theretor? 
callzd here, e&xzAnnz, 1s not fo uſeful to enQuire. 

23 And they drew Alexander s outof the multitude, 


che Jews putting him forward. And Alexander : beck- 
ened with the hand, and would have made his defence 
unto the people. 

s Where he could not be ſeen and hezrd, unto fome more con- 
venient place, from whence he might make a vindication or d:fence 
for them ; and that moſt likely in behalt of the Fcws, who were 
equally obnoxious to the rage of the people for being againſt their 
[dolatry, as the Chriſtians were. This A{:>ander is thought ro hay® 
been that Alexander of whom we read, 1 7im 1. 20.2 1i%. 4. 19. 
though ſome think that this was another of chat name. z; To pro- 
cure ſilence; as Chap. 12. 17. | 

34 But when they knew that he was a « Jew, all with 
2 one voice about the ſpace of two hours cried our. 
Great zs Diana of the Epheſians. 
# And by conſequence an enemy to their Idolatry ; and as they 
might imagine, at leaſt, a friend to St. Par/. w Unanimicy makes 
nor the cauſe to be good, if it were bad ar firſt. 
35 And when che x rown-clerk had appeaſedrhe pen- 
ple, he ſaid, Ye men of Epheſus,what man is there that 
knoweth not how that the city of the Epheſians y is a 
f worſhipper of the great goddeſs Diana, and of the f Gr. :5* 
mage 2, which fell down from Jupiter ? Temple- 
x Or, Secretary, who Regiſtred their As, and intervened in all oo 
their Meetings. y Each Country and City had their peculiar gods 
which they worſhipped, and rook for their Patrons; as Epheſus did 
this Goddeſs Diana. But the word here ſignifies a Sacrzf#, or one 
that looks to the Temple to keep it clean ; eſpecially that hath rhe 
charge of more folemn ſhow. or ſports in honour of aay ſuppoſed 
Deity. And theſe Epheſians took it to be their no ſmall glory, thar 
they were employed in tuch as belonged to Diana. z Though the 
Maſter's Name (Canetizs) is upon Record, yer it having laſted whilſt p: 
the Temple was ſix or ſeven times repaired, ar leaſt, if not renewed, 
and none ever remembring when it firſt was brought in amongſt 
them, the crafty Prieſts perſwaded the credulous people, that it was 
fallen from Heaven, thereby getting more honour unto it, and pro- 
fit to themſelves. 
36 Seeing then that theſe things « cannot be ſpoken 
againſt, ye ought to be quiet, and do nothing raſhly ; 
s He did more cunningly than honeſtly endeavour to evade their 
clamour, and ſtil] their rage, by telling them ( how fallaciouſly ſo- 
ever; ) that neither Paul, or any other Chriſtian or Jew, had any 
quarrel with their goddeſs or worſhip. For they indeed were againſt 
all images that were made with hands; but theirs was not fuch an 
one, it being fallen dawn from Heaven. We muſt confider he was 
but a Pagan; and his defign was only to ſtill the people : Arid 


37 For ye have brought hither theſe men, which are 
neither 6 robbers of churches, nor yer c blaſphemers of 
your goddeſs. | 

þ For they had not enter'd into their Temples. c Pau! had. 
barely preach'd this Truth amongſt them, not upbraiding them 

for their Idolatry : as Michael, the Arch-Angel, brought no 
railing accuſation againſt the Devil, when he contended with hirn, 

Fude 9 

38 Wherefore if Demetrius and the craftſmen which 

are With him, have a matter againſt any man, [|che 4law | Gr, » 
1s open, and there are edeputies; let them f impicad panes 9g 


; C- 
o ww 


One another. | ” 
da Which is firteſ} to determine all queſtions and controverſies. 
For men would be parrial in their own cauſe ; and every one chal- 
Jenge to be in the right. + Who under the Roma» Emperors or 
Conſuls, had power to hear and determine of all matters. f That 

ſo both parties may be heard. 


29 Bir if ye enquire any thing concerning g other 
matters, it ſhall be determined in 4 aſlawtul aflem- j Gs, >: 


1 37 
: nary. 
z Relating to the good Government of the Ciry, or maintaining 


' 
Fi 


| 


< 


the Eftabliſh'd Religion, which ought not in ſuch a confuſed manner 
to be treated of, + Fur in an Allembly calle1 by lawtul Autho- 
rity, whichthe Romans did uſually call, at leaſt, three times every 
month. | 

40 For we are 4in danger to becailed in queſtion for 
this days uproar, there being no cauſe whereby we may 
give an account of this concourſe. 


i He wiſely minds them of their danger : For being nnder the 
power of tne Romans, it was no lets than the loſs of their Li- 
berties to abett any Faction or Sedition : and to make a eoncourſe oz 
meeting tumultuouſly rogether, was capiral, . unleſs ir were upon 
the ſudden invaſion of aa Enemy, or to pur out ſome raging 


fire. 


41 And when he had chus ſpoken, he & difmiſſed the 
allcmbly. 


k The people were perſwaded quietly ro depart to their homes. 
Thus God one way or other, ſomerimes by frizads, and ſomerimes 
by foes, kept his Church and Peoples from being ruined : and his 
hand is nor ſhortned. 


| rions cowards this Idol. ; 

25 Whom he called together with the work-men of 

Iike occupation, and ſaid, Sirs, ye know that 6 by this 

; craft we have our wealth : | 

5 Gain. Getting, or keeping a livelihood are great temptations : 
$ ind a little pretext of piety with them, do-keep up the ſuperſtition 
| ind falſe worſhip that abounds in the World. 

26 Moreover, ye ſee and hear, that not alone ar 

N Epheſus, but almoſt rhroughour all Aſia, this Paul hath 

: perſwaded and turned away much people, ſaying, thar 
al they be no c gods which are made with hands : 

x c He tells them indeed what was St Paul's Doctrine ; but hecon- 

(ey ceals the Reajons of his DoGrine : for there can be nothing more 

G4 evident to any conſidering man, than that there is but one God 

who made all things ; as P/al.115. 34. Jer. 10.10, 
= 27 So that not onely this our craft is in danger to 

by # y 5 

he be 4 ſet at noughc; asalſo thatthe e temple of the great 
ir oodnels Diana ſhould be deſpiſed, and her magnificence 
ny ſhould be deſtroyed, whom Fall Aſia, and the world 
ade worſhippeth. ; 

d Not only that we ſhould have no more todo, and be without 
its, work ; but that it will be a reproach unto us to have had ſuch an 
ore imployment. e This is made an aggravation to the loſs of their 
nd all, that Religion ſhould ſuffer too. How much more ought it to 

concern thoſe who have a ſure foundation for what they do pro- 
Be ffs? This Templeis ſaid to have been burnt down the ſame day 
hit that Alexander was born ; and that it was two hundred and twenty 
A'S yearsin re-building, at the charge of all 4/2. g Though the 
Arts, Rmans might worthip any od (of thoſe multitudes ) which they 

and allowed ; yet they might leave their Eſtates onely to a very few 
they amongſt them ; but D:ana of the Epheſians, was one of thoſe few ; 

_ 35alſo one of thoſe twelve whom they accounted ( Diz, or Dee ar 

= majorum Gentium) Gods and Goddelks of the higheſt quality, or firſt | Populus walt decipe. 
i rank. 

__ :8 And when they 4 heard theſe ſayings, they were 

God fulof wrath, and cried our, ſaying, Great z ; Diana of 
), be- the Epheſians. 

Iron b The Argument from their profic wrought very much upon 

rn 7 them, eſpecially meeting with their prejudicate Opinions, having 

got pretended antiquity and univerſality to confirm them. # To ſhew ' 
——_ their abhorrence of what Paul had raught ; and deſiring her glory 

n ps —_ be perpetual, whom Pau! thought not worthy to be honoured 

ws at all, 

re ger : | 

5 they 29 And the whole city was filled - & with confuſion : 

ogy and having caught / Gaius and 2 Ariſtarchus, men of 

"_ Macedonia, Paul's companions in travel, they ruſhed 
_ with oneaccord into the z theatre. 

p th & Tumults and noiſe, All conditions of men , high and low, 
oo & 1% promiſcuouſly being met in ſuch uproars. / One born at Derbs, but 
3 = living at Theſalonica ; as Chap. 20.4. m Of whom we read, Chap. 
f by ; 27-2. Coloſ. 4. 10, n A place or Structure built for publick uſes; 
” ” whence, 's. Their Sports or Plays in any publick ſolemniry were 
gz © beheld. 2. Their Speech or Orations in their common Aſſcmblies 

were heard. +1. Where they puniſhed alſo their MalefaQors ; it be- | 
Jr oPO- #R0.15 ng accommodated with ſeveral ſteps or ſeats higher than one another, 
acedv Giles and of vaſt extent for theſe purpoſes. Hither, according to their | 

After cutom, they reſort, to hear ifany one would ſpeak upon this oc- | 

[ Rn cafion to them ; or rather to g«t theſe Chriſtians condemned and 
: ons executed for their ſuppoſed Sacrilege and Blaſphemy. 
gl 3o And when Paul would haveoentred in» unto the 
L net] Mople, the p diſciples ſuffered him nor. 
how * Being deſirous either ro appeaſe the tumuit; or if the worſt came 
rave it, "to die for Chriſt's ſake. y By their increaties : to whom this 
caule NC good Apoſtle's Life, from whom they had received the Faith, was 
ed fo far more dear than their own. 
F .31 And certain of the q chief of Aſia, which were 
or friends, ſent unto him, deſiring b;zzthathe would not 
ut adventure himſelf into the theatre. 

A” a. Such as had the overſight of the Plays and Shows in honour of 

+ tetr Idol gods, and were uſually their Pricfts; and were cf four 
nn not OO Ks, trom whence they had their names of 4{archs, Bithynarchs, 
gt ways > Saas and Cappadoctarchs, Whoſoever theſe were, the Provi- 
Feuſalem k > Ing ers 15to be adored, whio could our of his greateſt enemies, 
/"'2 Cor, + UP avltverers for his ſervants, 


CHAT. 


a 
A kn ub - 
6 = = : < 
Ao 4 p 
,- - —p IL. 
Ex _ 
n—_ - 


OT EY” ie 


- 
- 


- Pn 
f hn ns 


>; b5 © I. 
TEE Er  E——— 
a+ 


_— 
- [ales 


q : | : bs 
Lak 5} $1 p 
'N "F bl 
v8 } A 
by On 
Ls \ a 
{4} ; 


© 
L 
ky "ROI 9 4 ny 
WW. 


=_ 
bx eat Ls 


2 
_ - - __ _- G _—_ + a — ew 
iT FSG=% " « —— © , > <a 4 : 
A p 4 my - V3 - ee es -. >, - x - ay —— <2 _—_ PR 
on %, © 4 Po Pon 4 p . — s % re = -_ -- A - _ —_ _ - -w” * ak 2 
OR ee, IETE oc + - re 4 yy - — - > T KT: 
n - ” p ad ade N ” Sw. CD. , . 1's "6 g . 044 AS = ion & 
HET - — 2 - x wy > . o « — 4 _ _ : 
- a ” «2 "I 6 Ly FL. ">= - &X GC IERn _ - = 5 9s ae 7 w» . | 
- je _—_ 7; » P:. X _ -—_—_ CC A - * 4 - _ 
1 - . =_ p w " " - - & Þ 2, . 
A "A p < "AT = - op Wien, dots Wn ; a < , _— _ nat : _ - 
> : pO _—_ , _ LD © it 
4 AC - FR "M 4 « 6 >. << 2 de — : "Py " > 
£a - _—_ A "s - - KI | Ce - Ay - , y - 4 
SETS - bs _ £ F Sp - 04S It ety 5 oe . 38 
IF” wx X, « "yp PTE EE | £ "__ » (7 's . z 
_ _ ® + = bY : "8% IE + , _ 4 bay DI b _ 
""_ + —_ throne -. » WET Ret £443 «c : & »..4 : * \ > Fo 
- _ > — — —PEFRAIEL _- .; _. RY _ LL ASSN - : adit : = 
© - . —_ RP 4 ——_—_— - Is —_— * =. ” — _— bo: W P ES ST” 4.24 44 
> _ Ea, < NA wy - w_ —L _ Z of *—— Op =: > 4 ” «ad , p m” w — 4 
» <7 ds . * 5 A 4 - _ J « 4 wi —.. : CET ws : S.5 . - —_—— 
. . "be : - —_ ” FA £2 v q p puta ah 4 P — < 
—_ tails. RL : > 3» &2 py ACS >. =. > —— oy ns x _ _ - . s 
- BD _ - > - - , - --— = OS : . Cn hos : w——_ 4 - wa A 4s 
nd : e - -- = Jag - a 2 = = - 
= X TW card oe eo. * _ be . - FD _—_ = - 2 % _ = X "I 
— wh *W > wk; I” e " LSE. Tn ORG pgs, OI _- = Dm. TE 5 . ds - _—- = —_ —_— " he F ” - 
. - —_— : : ne, xr had. — _ Y Ho. =; - . 1 ©, I = " = - 
- ” X $ ”"_ wn = inns. HIT. oo oo - -- < —_ _ 
v. a——_— = ax - —— TE py go o 'Y ont = _— pA F. — : "s 
4 £D/ ; _—_ * y- Y PC <2 - Ay . 
_ . . — - = Py >, - —_— - = _ — 4 Az . £ a 
” ot - 5 . - BD I 
a9, —_— . 
ME Werr” (4, 


*1 Tim.1.3. 


© 30.3.1 


+} 2 


* Chap. 2. 


42, 46. 
1 Cor. 10.16. 


» 


Chap. NX. 


The A 
CHAP. XX. 


Pan! #:parterh ro Macedonia, thence to Greece, and by Philippi 70 
Troas, 1 5. preacheth and adminiſireth the Loras-Snupper, 
and cont inreth his Spoech till Midnight, 7,8. Eurychus ſinking in- 
to a dep loop, falleth out of the window, dead Paul ro the comfort 
ef a, raiſcd him to Life, 9 ——12. Coming t0 Miletus, he callcrh 
be Elders of the Church, jheweth bis care and faithfulneſs in dis 

niniF.xy to them, Faretelleth what world befal him at Jerulalem, 

ard declarcth Fe had publijhed zo them the whole connſel of God, 
© 2%. Exhorteth them to watch ever God's Flock and againſt 
theſe ericovous Wolves that wouldriſe amongſt them, 28 —— 3I- taketh 
bis leave of them, ard ſh:weth that his own hands miniſtrea zento his 
Pecejjiries, J2 35. he kneeleth down and prayern with them, 
7/0 accompany him with great ſorrow to the ſhip» 36—38. 
I Nd attcr the uproar was ceaſed, Paul cailedunto 
Y him the Giſciples a, and embraced 76cm b, and 


* departed for to go into Macedonia. 

a Took his Farewel of th:m ( and as th? manner ho 
Counties was in meeting and parting with friends, ) he kiſſed 
them, Luke 7. 45. and far more anciently, Gen. 31.55. And this 
was the tru2 ground of that Kiſs of Peace, - or the Holy Kiſs, re- 
commended, Rom, 16. 16, 1 Cor. 15. 20. 2 Cor. T3. 12. and elfe- 
where ; which was only a civility then 1n ule. b YieJding to the 
preſent fu:y of Demztrins ; not ſo much for his own ſafety, as for 
the good of the Church, that ir might not be further perſecuted for 
his fake ; and that eltewhere it might by his Miniftry be enlarged 
and bu1jt up. » | 

2 And when he had gone over thoſe parts, and 


had given them c much exhortation, he came d into 
Greec: ; 

c Wiiich after fo great a ſtir and oppoſition againſt them, the Diſ- 
ciples cold not but ſtand in great need of, that they might not be 
ofF-nded at the Crots of Chriſt ; as alſo mingling conſalations with 
his exhortations ; as th: word indifferently ſignihies, as the caſe would 
well bez; there being a ſpecial bleſſing promiſed unto ſuch as are 
perſecuted for righteouſneſs ſake, Matt. 5. 10. 1 Pct. 3. I. d Attica; 
in which Province Athens was : Otherwiſe Maccaonia was 1n Greece 
largely taken. 

2 And :here abode threo months: And when the 
Jewse laid wait for him, as he was abour to fall into 
Syria 7, he purpoſed to return g through Macedonia. 

e Som? have thought that their laying in wait » might be to rob 
him of che ColleRions which he carried with him for the Saints at 
Feruſalem ; bat molt likely it was rather to take away hislife, whom 
they hated for his zeal and diligence in the Goſpel. 7 Shunning 
their treachery and plotting againſt him. He would not tempt 
God by running into dangers, though his cauſe were never ſo good. 
g Being the {ame way that he came to Corint#. 

4 And there þ accompanied him into Aſia i, Sopater 
of k Berza ; and of the Thetflalonians/, Ariſtarchusand 
Secundus ; and Gaius of Derbe, and Timotheus m ; 
and of Aſia *, Tychicus and Trophimus. 

þ Their Names are ſet down, as being men called and known at 
that time in the Churches; and that what they did for this holy Apo- 
tle, might be remembred inall Ages. # Who ir called allo So/7pater, 
Rom. 16. 16. It is added in ſome Cipies, that he was the Son of 
Pyrrius ; which in Greek is the ſame with Rutrs in Latin. k A City 
ot Macedonia, Chap. 17. 10. 1Of whom, Chap. 19. 29. asallo of 
the others, mention hath been formerly made. mm Of Epheſus, a City 
in ſia. Tychicus ; of whom, Epheſ. 6. 21, Coloſ. 4. 7. 2 Tim. 4. 
12. and of Trephimm we read, Chap. 21.29. 2 Tim. 4. 20. Thele 
ſeem to have been the Apoſtiesor Meſlengers of the Churches ſpoken 
of, 2 Cor. 8. 23. in the number of whom Sr. Luke is to be reckoned, 
but being the Penman of this Book, he declines mentioning of 
himſelf by name ; but his praile will be for ever in the Goſpel, 
2 Cor. 8.18, 15G, 

5 Theſe going before, tarried for z'us at o Troas. 

» Whereby it appears, that St. Lyke was one of them that accom- 
panied St. Paz!, though neither here not elſewhere doth he expreſs 
his own Name. o Either the City of Troy, or the Countrey there- 
abont fo called. 

6 And we failed away p from Philippi,after the q days | 
of unieavened bread, and came unto them to Troasin 


five days, where we abode ſeven days. 

p Where they e-nbarked, and failed on the River firſt, then on the 
Sea. 9 Though St. Paul would not have the Genti/z-Converts to be 
burdened with the Ceremonial Law, yer that he might not offend 
the Jews, for a while he complied with their Rites, Chap 18 21. 
they being indeed dead, butnot yet deadly ; and therefore he ſtays 
his Journey all the time of the Paſſover-ſolemnity, inftrucing them 
11the mean while of the Nature and Life of ſuch things. 

7 And vpon the r firſt Jay of the week, when the 
diſciples came together s to * break bread, Paul preached 
unto them, reaGy to depart on the morrow, and conti- 


nued bis ſpeech 7 until midnight. 

r This was the day which the Lord had made, it being called 
from his Reſurre&ion. which was on this day, The Lord's Day, 
Rey. t. ro. On this day the Diſciples mer, and Chriſt honoured 


of thoſe 


m—_———, 


S 
o 
GT 8 
| place. The Love-Feaſts being abuſed, were ſoon laid afige. 
che other muſt continue until the Lord come, 1 Coy, 31. 6 
long Sermon indeed ; at leaſt, it would be now thought "i 
yer we muſt have the ſame Spirit, w- ; 
Catholick Church. 
s And there were« many lights in the upper cham 
ber where they were gathered together. : 
There being many preſent , and it being in the night, becy,r 
of the perſecution that the Chriſtians met with. Left they lk = 
be reproached for doing any thing indecently, they by this _—_ 
expoled themſelves, and all thar was done amongſt them oy , 
common view and notice of all. w Where 'tis tuppoſed they ry 
ordinarily meet ; as Chap. 1. 13. 7 ig 
g And tiere ſat in a window a certain VOung man 
named Eutychus, being fallen into a deep ſleep; pg 
as Paul was long x preaching, he ſunk » down With 
fleep, and fell down trom the third loft, and was taken 


up dead. 

x Diſcourſing and arguing : For it does not ſeem to haye been 
continued ſpeech, by the word here uſed. » This fall is thoughthy 
ſome to have been cauſed by Satan (through Gods permiſſion ) hy 
he might the more diſturb Paul, and hinder, or put an end ;, li 

ermon : which by the enſuing Miracle, God turned toa quite c0q. 
trary effeCt. 
to And Paul went down, and z fell on him, andey. 
bracing 4m, ſaid, Trouble not your ſelves; for; hi; 
life is in him. 

z As Elijah on the Widow of Zareptah's dead Son, 1 King; (7 
21, and Eliſhs on the Shunamite's Son, 2 Kings 4. 34. 2 Nor but 
that he had been really dead ; as ver. 9. but that upon th2 Apoſhe; 
prayer (which is to be underſtood, though it is not here expre;4) 
God had reſtored the young man to life : or howſoever, becayj: 5: 
Paul knew infallibly he ſhould preſently be reſtored to life, «27 
whilſt he ſpake, 

11 When he therefore was come up again, and had 
5 broken bread, and eaten, and talked a long while, 


even c til] break of day, fo d he departed; 

6 Either in the Euchariſt ; as ver. 7. or in taking his ordinay te. 
fection and breakfaſt. This was of long continuance and Ipeaksthe 
patience and zeal of Chriſtians in thoſe times, and will rilz yp in 
Judgment againſt a carelels and negligent Generation. &d Going thir 
part of his Journey on foot, as the reſt of his company did yo by 
Yea, aSVer. 13. 

iz And they brought the young man alive, and were 


not a little e comforted. 

e They rejoyced not only thatthe young man was reſtored tolif, 
but that by this means the Goſpel was atteſted co, and many cone 
firmed in the beltf offir. | 

13 And we went before to ſhip, and failed unto 


f Aſlos, there intending to take in Paul : For ſo had hs 


appointed, minding g himſelf ro go afoor. 

7 A City in Myfa, called alſo Apollonia, not far from Trox either 
by water or land. Paul's going on foot might be the rather, thit 
ſo he might have the better opportunity to ſcatter the ſeed of the 
Goſpel as he went, going through Towns and - Villages, and con. 
verling {till with ſome or other, more than in Sea-journeys can be 
expeCted. So greedy of winning Souls to Chriſt was chis holy man, 
that he ordered every ſtep, as near as he could, towards ic, But 
St. Paul might deſire to go alone thus on foor, that he mightenjoy 
more free and full communion with God, having only God and his 
own ſoul to converſe with. 

14 And when he met with us at Afſſos, we took him 
In, andcame to þ Mitylene. 
h An lfland ; as alſo a City 
Sea. Some think the Iſland is called Lesbos, 
ts. 


but 

1 A 
Md : n 

or We are not Member, of th; : 
ia, 


in it ſo called, in the £zea 
in which this Miry;cne 


15 And we failedthence,and came the nex: 4; over 
againſt : Chios ; And the next day we arrived at & vam6s, 
andrarried at / Trogyllium ; And the next day we cams 


m to Mi'etus. 
z A noted I{land betwixt Lesbos and Samosin the Zgean Sa. kn 


them with his preſence, John 20.19, 26. And when he was aſcend- 
ed, this day was appointed for the Chriſtians to meet in, 1 Coy. 
16. 2. which muſt neceſl:rily infer the abrogarion of the Saturday 
or Fewiſh Sabbath ; For it being part of the Command, Six days 
JÞzlr thou Iabour, they could not in ordinary have reſted the laſt day 
of the week and the firſt roo, without fianiag againſt that Law of 
God. 5 To take a meal in common cogether ; which they called 
ape, or the Love-Feaſt; 1o great an harmony and natural love 
was maniteſted in it ; which was concluded with celebrating the 


Ionia : for there are feveral other Iſlands of this Name, / A Pro- 
montory not far from Samos. m A Sea-Town upon the Continent, 
or firm land of 1on1s, 


16 For Paul had determined to fail » by Epheſus, 
becauſe he would not ſpend the time in Aſia : For * be c 
haſted o, it it were poſlible for him, to be ar Jeruſaremp*® 
the day of Pentecoſt. 

= Which wasnot ſo far from Miletus ; but leſt he ſhould hinder 
his Journey, he would not go thither. Or o as Chap. 18. 21. y 
the Lord would : for his endeavour ſhould not be wanting. p NO 
that he placed any Religion in the obſerving this Feaſt, which _ 
abrogated and done away by being fulfilled, Chap. 2. but _ n 
of the vaſt concourſe of people at all thofe ſolemn Feaſts, rs 
his opportunities to magnifie Chriſt and his Truths, might be toe 
greater , 

17 And from Miletus he ſent to Epheſus, and called 
the 9 elders of the church. ; 

9 The Governors and Paſtors of it ; Elders being he 
relpeCing their Age, but their Place; and chey might 
ſpoken of Chap. 19g. 7. 

18 And when they were come to him, he ſaid _—_ 
them, Ye know *, frem the firſt day chat Icame te 


re not a Titls 
beche Twelve 


Lord's Supper. Axd this is chisfly, if not only intended in this 


all ſeaſons, 
” Serifhy 


Chap, XN) 


» Afia, after s what manner I have been with you at'> 


g 


fearin 
*Ccon 
I? ' 
of hi 
a Pri; 
aboy 
Elpecj 
& WI 
On]; 1 
Calleg 
Meer 
J lus { 


Von 


had 
ule, 


ſ re. 
k5the 
up In 
7 that 
20 by 


Werg 


d life, 
[ CONs 


unto 
d bs 


either 
r, that 
of the 
d C0N« 
can be 
7 man, 
; But 
renjoy 
and his 


k him 


e £7000 
Mity.ene 


7) over 
©,4mM05, 
g Cams 


J21, þIn 
1 APro- 


Mnenent, 


pheſus, 
or * he* C 
jalemp V+ 


4 hinder 


b, 20. 

7, p Not 
xhich Was 
It becauſe 
5s, when 


;oht be ths 
1d called 


of 4 Ticls 
he T wel? 


ſaid uNt0 
1MC zNtO * 
h you at's. 


» Stridy 


77 
3p. NN 


_ 


— 


7s, W 


Conſcience does not accuſe him. Sr. Paul Ipake not this, as 
tins of what hz had done, or how he had been amongſt them : 
| «+ ſetring his example before them and others, to be umicated - 
a calling them for to witnels the trurh of IC, b- 
19 Serving the Lord with : all humility * mind, and 
with many # tears, and 2 temptations which hefel me by 
thelaving in wait of the Jews : | 
* In bis Apoſtleſhip or publick Miniftry ; of which, it any ©- 
vr could, he might have gloried: yer in this Office he cloathes 
himſelf with humility, as the moſt becoming garment for a Mt- 
nfter of Jeſus Chriſt ; though {o high, yerlo low. We need not 
-ry (as one did, though lronically,) Fic St. Paul,: but fic upon all 
ſuch as pretend to ſucceed in his dignity, and do not at all mmicate 
Mimin his humility, « He ſhed tcars of compaition over the ig- 
rojant and blind, hard and perverſe. It grieved him to fee how 
iroe a Dominion the God of this World had. and what a little 
rt was left for his dear Lord and Maſter Chrift Jeſus. w AfMi- 
; REN ind troubles which befe] him for Chriſt and the Goſpel's 
{ke : which are fo called, James 1.2. 1 Pet. 1.6. 
20 4nd how 1 kept back nothing that was x profita- 
Me unto Fer, bu: have ſhewed you, and have taught 

01-7 pubiickly, and trom =. houſe to houle. 
" - Uſeful in order to Fternal Life to be known orhoped for, or 
0 be. done ; {hunning no Jabour or danger; concealing nothing 
our of fear or hope of advantage, »y In the publick Synagogues 
nd Schools, =» Privately, as Chep. 2, 46. from houſe to houle ; 
not only ſpeaking publickly, and in general, but ſecretly and par- 
ticularly, as every ones condition did require, exhorting ſome, 
-cnroVIng others. And indecd a g00d ſhepherd will labour to 
wnderftind the Nate of his lock, and ro ſupply them with whar 15 
receflary and fnitable for them. Jacob ſays, Gen. 31. 39. that he 
bare the loſs, and was Fain to anſwer for all the ſheep unto Laban. 
And of how much more value re the ſouls of men, to be ſure in 
God's light, who will require an account of them ? 

21 1cltitving. botn ro the Jews, and @ alſo to the 

« Giztks *, b repentance toward God, and « faith toward 
our ] ord Jeſus Chriſt. 

« To all ſorts and conditions of men : for there 15 no differente 

with God. 6 That Repentance would be accepted from them by 
God, and that he was ready to give Repentance unto them ; as 
Ca>. 14,18. c And that Faith in the Lord Jeſus Chriſt, was the 
tec ſaving Faith, there being no other Name given, whereby we 
maybe faved. Upon theſe Two depends the whole Goſpel], and 
our alyation by it. | 

22 And now behold, T go d bound in the ſpirit unto 
ſrufilem, not knowing the things e that fhall befal me 
—_—— - 

i As powerfully perſwaded by a divine iaftine, to undertake 
tlis Journey, as it I were led or drawn to it by forcible means ; 
bring bound to obey God in all things, whom I take to be my God 
and Gaide, - my Suu and Shield : And I do not detire fo much to 
it, as to-be ated by him. This Sr. Par ſays, not as if that he 
ws drawn unto this Journey againſt his will, but leſt any ſhould 
ncmpr to difiwade him trom 17, or that he ſhould ſeem ro have 
liohteed the prediCtions of- the Prophets, mentioned, Chap, 21, 
11, 12. Nay, he might ſay this, as being as certain of his bonds as 
if he felt them already: Such things as are foretold to ſuch as 
know the Veracity of God, they ar: as preſent. Howſoever, he 
was coritent to be bound, to ſuffer, nay, to die for Chriſt. And 
35 he is poor in ſpirie who crucifies the World, and is willing to 
want, if God fees good ; fo he is bound in ſpirit, who 1s thus wil- 
ling ro be bound for the Name of Chriſt. Howlſoever, theſe 
words ſpeak his firm Reſolution to tak? this Journey upon him. 
e What the event ſhall be, in what meaſure he ſhould be bound, 
mdhmy long, he left it unto God's good Will and Pleaſure. 

23 Save that the holy Ghoſt witnelſerh f in every city, 

laying, that bonds and afflictions | abide me. 
} 1.-Thoſe that were endued with the Spirit of Prophecy, in 
very City, foretold his ſufferings; as Chap, 21. 4. 11. 2dly, He 
1d luffer more or leſs in every City or place he came to ; So great 
v45the malice of the Jews againſt him, 
l 24 But * none of theſe things & move me, neicher 

count I my 4 life dear unto my felf, fo that T might nnith 
.:my courſe & with joy, and the / mimiſtery *, which 1 
) have received of the Lord Jeſus, to teſtiftte the Goſpel 


not the grace of God. 

$ They cannot deter me from my duty. +4 I am fo far from 
karing bonds, that I would not fear death it felf, He is ſaid to 
count his Life precious, or dear, that ſpares it; as 2 Kmgs 1, 
N14, z; Hisgcneral courte of Chriſtianity, or the ſpecial courſe 
o his Miniſtry ; incither of which there is a 'Race ro be run, and 
*I112eto be got, 2 Tim. 4.7. It implies the great and conſtant 
abour that all Chriſtians muſt take in their general calling, and 
tpecully Miniſters in their particular calling, #» Cor. g. 24. 

V hich ariſeth from the Teſtimony of a good Conſcience, which 
Oy is true joy ; the other s madnets, Ecclef. 2.2. { His Apoſtle- 
hip fo called, Chap. 1. 25. and Chap. 6. 4. m So the Goſpel 1s 
Cilled, becauſe befiowed upon any Nation or People by God's 
_ only, Andalfo it declares the Grace of God in Chriſt 
Us to repenting and believing ſinners. 

25 And now behold, » 1 know that ye all, among 


Whom T have gone preaching o the kingdom of God, 


— 
. 


S& - 
The A 

Je - 
» Strictly and properly fo called; or that part of the leffer A- 
hoſe Metropolis was Epheſus. j A lingular Form for a good 
- :o uſe, if he muſt of neceflity leave his Charge or Flock when 


# 


26 Wherctore I take þ you to record this day, ti. 
Lam pure 4 trom the blood of all men. 

p TI reſtifie and affirm unto you; and I dare appeal wnto vor. 
felves concerning it.' 4 From che guilt of deſtroyins their low! 
None of them have vcrithed through my defiult, hu ing Echtut. 
ly chewed unto them the way of Life, and earn:1\ pert aded 
them to walk init. Thus according as che Lord told} Ez:4iet cl 


z . 


k 3.3717 
Pa2SHICD 
, Y 


3. 19. The Prophet thot hath warned the wicked man, hath 4:11 4210.4 
his own ſoul. | 

2-3 For I have not ſhunned to declare unto you » all 
the * counſel of God. ; 

7 God's Decree, to fave ll tht believe in Chrift ; or the whole: 
Dot&rine of Chriſtianity, as it diretts ro an holy Litc : whattocver 
. God requires of any one in order to « blefled Frernity. 'I his is 
that which the Phariſees rejected, Luke 7. 30. And to do all wicked 
and ungodly men, who retule to take. Golly connſel, or ty obuy 
his command. : 

25 | * Take hced therefore unto 


hath made you « overſeers, to w feed the church + 
of God *, 
blood. | 


s Be mindful of your own ſalvation: For he that nec!e&s his 
own, will not be carefial of the ſalvation oft another. z# 1. By 
his chooting an] nominating of them, which was then by a ſpeci] 


Inſtin&, or immediate Warrant: from the Spirir, Chap, 1. 24. 
Chap. 13. 2. Or, >. Becaufe they were conſtituted by the Apoſtles, 
who were filed with the Spirit, enabling of them to the choice of 
ſuch perſons, Chap. 14. 23. Bur alſo, 3. Wholocyer is fer: apart 
ro this Office, according tothe Will of God, is mide an Overicer 
by the Holy Ghoſt; Gold owning his Inſticrutions, and CONCUITINEG 
with them. « The ſame, who, wer. 17. are called Elders, rhey 
were certainly ſuch as had the government and care of the Church 
committed unto chem. -w As a ſhepherd does (for the Apoſtle 
continues here the Metaphor :) Jer. 23. 4. John 21.16, 17, x Our 
Saviour 15 fo called ; for the word was God, John 1,1, »y Chriſt by 
his bloody Death hath redeemed his Church, and obtained pow- 
cr to gather it, to rule over it, to prorett and preſerve it, 1ja. 53. 
ro. Phil. 2.8,9. 39. » The blood of Chriſt, called truly the 
blood of God, there being in Chriſt Two Natures in one Per- 
ſon, and a communion of the properties of each Nature. If 
Chriſt had not been Man, he could have had no blood to het - 
had he not been God, the blood which he ſhed cou'd nor have 

been a ſufficient price of Redemprion. Oli the depth of the 

Riches of the Witdom and Knowledge of God, who tound out 
ſuch a Ranſom : and the breadrh, and length, and deprh, and 
height of the Love of Chriſt, who paid this Ranſom for us! Row 

11. 33. Eph. 3.18, 19. 

29 For 1 know this, that after my a departing fhall 
grievous þ wolves enter in among you, not ſparing the 
tlock. 

a Eiticr out of this Country,- or out of thisT.ifte, þ So itt 
Feachers and Perſecutors are called, the one !eftroying the body, 
rhe other the ſoul. In this the Meraphor is pertifted 1n, the Duy- 
ciples of Chriſt being as Slicep or Limbs ; their Enerics are fy 
our Saviour him-lt called Wolves, March, 7. 15, 

20 Alto c oi your own felves thall inen arife, fpeat- 
ing 4 perverſe things, to e draw away ditciples } afcer 
chem | 

» 6 Whilſt Panl yet lived, and was only devaited trom that 
place. Several Seducers may be reckone(l up, as N.colas the Deacon 
trom whom 'ris thought the $cct of the Vicolaitans came, Rev. 2, 6.) 
Hymenens, Alexand:*, Phygelur, and Hermogenez, 1 | im. 1. 20, 2 1 umn, 
1.15, d Perverting Scripture, eftablithing their falſe Dottrines 
by Scripture, which rhey wrefſt ro rheir purpole. e As members 
are forcibly plucket from their body ; v-hich tpeak the cruelty and 
violence ot rhete Hereticks, and rhe rendernels of the Chorcl: 
towards her Members, being loth ro part from them. f Thus falle 
Teachers gain indeed Ditciples to themiclves, but not unto the 
Lord. 

31 Therefore g watch, and remember that by the 
ſpace 4 of three years, I ceafed not to wain every one 
nizhe and day 2: with teafs. 

3 Take your ſelves heed,and warn others to take heed, 5 From 
St Paul's tirſt coming to Epheſus it was three years current, wn 
now almoſt compleat, Chap. 1g. $. 10. and 2c. 3. # a great, and 
no feigned wy ; as Chriſt wept over 7eru/atem, Luke 19. 41. 
fo St. Paul over the unbelieving ews; it went to his heart 29 
think that they could nor be ſaved ; See how St. Part loved Sceuls, 
and piticd Souls. . 

32 And now brethren, I } commend you to Ged,and 
tothe / word of hi: grace, which is able to » build you 
up, and to give you » an ? 
which are o fan&ified. 

& Tt being ſo hard a matterto eſcape ſo many ſrares 3nd dangers 


the Apoſtle prays to G 


C bp 
6d for them, who is able to kevp tavin by 
his power, through Faith, unto Salvation, 1 Pet. 1. 5. and US 1 
vain to look atrer any meianer defence. 1 The Golpe!, which 
leads us to the Rock upon which we mult build, if we would nor 
be moved when the Storm comes. wm Licreating thc number ot 
Believers, and augmenting their Graces, Cod is Lud tO build, and 
ſo is his Word, berth concurring : The Golpel buitus, as a means 
appointed by God; and God builds, who bleites that incans, 
Hence he is called the God 'of all Grace, 1 Pet. 5. 10. n Heaven 
is Called an Inheritance, becauſe we have it only by Adoprion, and 


al ſee my lace no more. 
be This 15thoughtrto haye been ſpoken by St. Paul, as his preſent 
{125 and reſojution only ; As Rom. ts. 36- 0 The Golpel by 
Va I Kingdom is ſetup inthe mindsand hearts of men, 


3; 
as , 


it is given only unto Children, Rom. 8. 17. as allo, becautc IC iS A 
firm and laſting poilcflion, not for a terra of years, Or 2 Certain 
time, but for ever and ever, 0 Fw withous holineſs none jhais jce 
God, Heb, 12. 14. 
P 13 *I 

PPP 35 


your s ſelves, +, 
and to all the flock, over the which the : holy. Ghoſt 


which he x hath purchaſed with & his own - 


inheritance among aii them * Fol 
| 14. 10. 


o 
+ ? 


TO OO RT 


———— 


0_—_ _ 
FE 


. ei, 


<—— a LEI 4 
abt tear Mt ee 


IS ow, - FF. 


*_? 0 
ns { SOR Bs et 
«j6 \ , +I6E kK 
'Y; | 04-4003 "bb 
: S< 47 
98 if if 641 
vl | ii 
fy vt 
' 4 
BY 5 
1 1 
; | 
"1.0 
Fit as \Þ * 
f bh 
| | 
by [* |; 


——_ 
op 
pal 
OA ” 4 
'2 F: 
A 


SS , 
— «a » E 
—_ TY 
= 5 ba bo na..—w - 
»* that & 
may 1 
T 
2g 
um <; 


ine ro 
Fa &< b th P 
=; —_ —_— 
LF. 
Ir 
= 
s 
EF 
Fd 
a - 
Pd 


- 
x 
Oe. 
SDSS Apo _— o=_ 
4 
RN, — A 
_ of * v & 
- 4s, _ 
—_— , . 
TW . 


5 
4s 


— F} ; 


T8: 
" . 
: 
w © 
k 
" ; 
= ® þ 
#7; 
4 +: ( 
} * "Þ 
py © IJ L 
2 ' 
: TRE 
L 
\ +> 
J " 
* 5 
L . 
F 2 
<&* 
1 
+ 
2 
PR 2 
RN LAY" 
" * 
['F4 
Pp xt F wo 
$3-&{ ©; 
M4 6 
” ” 
| C (F2 ty 
£ 
iT. : 
x 
” ”" 
: 
5+ i 
þ 
, 
, 


z 
o 
: 
L = 
- . 
A 
$.OT 
0 
{OI 'S 
$7.7 
” ; - 
t 4 
4 
©. 
15.404 
- . 
Sh. 'T 
I's ? ? 
. : ; 
Bk 
"IT. # 
" 
5 
: 4 ” 
Ks k . {$i 
: : 
LT ny , . 
Ss: , #$:*: Ter. 
: ut 4 f 
; 1 SL 
IY i 11 187 ' 
'F- ano? $ 
1 0 : : : 
old - 8 4 
W1.5 ' { : 
- | T0081 4- 
t g \ 
#07 I 44 49! 13 ' 
; x : 
$1! $01 94 11240108; 'h; 
: , '1 8H 
T%-5. LY + 
”_ , { -41.4 k« TY 
'R DET: 
t ; i 
Ms : [ U 
74S”; 4 
, ſ | ET 
334.1 188! by 
13 Mt : 
! 
> 
" 
» 4 54 
«1 
44D 
FS 
BITS 
irs 
1 
F- $ 
» 81 
oth : 
#? 5 ; 
P ' 
FF 
mw - i” 
: : 
| 
p 
F 
#> 
4 pl 
"071 
: 
A 
© .*4 
TIS + - 
: : 
F : 
| £v| 1 
aff 
4 i 
4} !' 5 
nl 2, . 
MY & 
11%; 
i: 
#\ 
4 
0 1 
a 81 5 
i 14 86 
i 
) 1 h; 
3 % kb 
t; br 
1 
7 
, * 
4 
; 4 
, 
: 
Ml | 
, 
©, 
$1 &f 
f $4 
1 EF 
: 
j ; 
, 


2. 


have p coveted no mans filver, or goid, or ap- 


' 


no poken of the heavenTy Tnheritance, he tells them how 
Lewis to hove his reward hereafrer, and to wave receiving 
; here. in tus, St. Paul imitates Moſes, Numb. 16. 15. 
7 / [1 33 $+ 

24 Joo, vou veur ſelves know, that 4 theſe hands 


T k | 
Unto MY necciiicies, and to them that were 


C97 
S499, 12. 


ad * q1 1 
- Tr >  i31+e ; 7 e* Fas! 
! 4VEN? THNITT SC 


7: 57, Paid working hard (as they all knew) for a livelihood, 
L:» 18 r Cor. 4. 12. 1 Theſ. 2.9. which he gives an account 
2 754ſ. 3.8 to have been done only, that in ſuch a juncture, 
toy being poor, and the falle Teachers watching all advantages 
inſt him, be might nor then be chargeable to chem. 
'5 | have frewed you r ali things, © how that s fo 


. 2 " I 
Ihoming ye otght to ft ſupport « the weak ; and to re- 


words, of the 1.0:d Jeſus, how he ſaid, 


; WS LC 
SNEeITIONLIL NE 2”) 


8 - 4 i J 2 . Nl me 4 TE, <4 = 
It is more bleiied to x give than to receive. 


» Ag werſe 27. 5 With more than ordinary pains and conſtancy. 
- That they do not £411, or being fallen, that they may rife again. 


firerching out of the hand to retain any 
thot arc going away, or to hold up any that are falling, « In 
Krowledoe, Eaith. or any other Grace, w Paul might have theſe 
words by the relation of others, who heard them ipoken by our 
Sricur i for all things that he Zajd or did, could not be written, 
oh « O, 20. xX Not io much 11 that guns ſpeaks abundance and 


+Puence; but asit thews our Charity and Goodneſs, in which we 
(kl and imitate God. The ſubſtance of theſe words which 


zb 
A 431% 1 


The word 1p: ts the 


: divers places, 4$ Like 6. 38. and 26. 9. 


_ 
L344 


diſtreſs ; although boduy exerciſe alone do not profit, 1 Tim 4. 8. 


be hand andeye, becaulc it is a reaſonable thing to give our bodics 


devotion, 

27 And they all wept fore, and fell on Paul's neck, 
and > kiiſed him. 

z As they uſed to do their Friends when they took their leave 
of them, Gen. 45. 14- 

23 Sorrowing moſt of all for the words which he 
ſake, that they lhould ſee his face nomore. And they 
b accompanied him unto the thip, 

a The loſs of a faithful and painful Miniſter is a publick loſs, 
and many are concerned 11 it ; beſides, they had found great 
benefit by his Miniſtry, and could not but be ſenſible of their 
miſting OT 1t. Add to this, Paul's gracious and humble converſa- 
tion, and the ſenſe of mary good Oftices done by him, could not 
but have endcared himunto them. 6 Enjoying him as Jong and as 
far as they could, and expreiling their laſt and utmoſt kindneſs 
unto 1m. 

CHA PJ KXI. 

Pal ſaileth toward Syria, and cometh t0 Tyre, 1—3, The Diſciples 
difwade him from going up to Jeruſalem, but in vain, 4—6. he 
eewreth to Prolemais, then ro Calarea, and abideth at Philip's houſe, 
whoſe for Darghters propheficd, 79-9. Agabus foretelleth Paul's 
bands at Jerutalem, yet all ſubmit to the Will of God, 10—— 14. 
The Fre:hren receive him gladly at: Jeruſalem ; he relatech what 
God kad wronght by his Miniftery among the Gentiles, 15 ——— 19. 
Paul having purified himſelf and four more, entreth into the Temple, 
20———26. Thc Jews of Aſia raiſe an uproar : The People appre- 
hend Paul,” and intend to kill him, 21 —— 32. The chief Captain 
soketh im from them, and carrieth him into the Caſtle, 32— 36. 
Paul havirg obtained leave to ſpeak, addreſſeth himſelf to the people 
in the Hebrew Tungue, 37 — 40. | 


i A Nd it came to pals, that aſter we were 4 gotten 

{%. from them, and had lanched, we came with a 
firaight courſe unto þ Choos, and the day following unto 
c Rhodes, and from thence unto 4 Patara. 

a Hed parted with them, as deareſt Friends and Relations do 
one from the other ; with much difficulty and reluQance.. 6 An 
Ffjand in the Mediterranean Sea, nigh unto Crere ; where Hippee 
craic and Apelles are ſaid to have been born. c Another Ifland 
in the fame Sea, of great fame for the Coloſſe, or vaſt Image of 
Braſs which was there, accounted one of the Wonderf of the 
World. d An Heven Town of Lycis, and its Metropolis. 

2 And linding a ſhip e ſviing over unto f Pheenicia, 
we went aboard, and {et forth. 

e Whoſe Maſter and Mariners intended ſuch a Voyage. f A 
Countrey in Syria, fituate nigh the Sea (and bordering upon 
Paleſtine) whole chief City was Tyre, 

3 Now when we had dilcovered g Cyprus, we left 
it on the left hand, and ſiiled unto Syria, and landed at 
"Tyre: For there the ſhip was to þ unlade her burden. 

s Another Iſland in the Mediterranean. þ For Goods and Mer- 
chandize which ſhe had taken in at Epheſus. 

4. 4nd finding diſciples, we tarried there # ſeven days : 


*Chip.25, * who tad to Paul & through the ſpirit, that he ſhould not 


20 upto jeruialem, 

27 They tarried the rather ſo long, that they might worſhip and 
9 4 Wy , . \. : 2 YT gt" 

ferve the 016 on his Day together, & By the ſpirit of Prophecy 


Tee ACTS, 


"Y "PR 
arterWord +; 


ingly befel unto him ; ani} they being ignorant of hd 
» O® g ICS}1T il, 


wade Paul from that 


x 
* F\» 


C VEnt 
iy 
Wai 


5 And when we had accompliſhed thoſe daxc. ... 
departed, and went our way, and they | all broyst... 
on our way, with wives and children, till 2 4.., .” 
of the city : and we kneeled down m2 on the 
prayed. 

7 To ſhew their greater reſpe& unto him, being loch «, .... 
with him-ſo long as it was poſlible for them to enjoy him. «;, £* 
they did not deſpiſe his temptation thar was in the fleſh, Gy! . . 
Bur it 1s truly ſtrange what follows, That he was recoiveg 1. 11.8 
as an ingel of God, even as Chrift Jeſus. m This the Jew 71, 
traordinary occaſtons were wont to do, whilſt the Temple -— (il 
were ſtanding, wiz. make every place a place of Prayer in {.),, 
caſe, Chap. 20. 36. I 

6 And when we had taken » our leave one of another 
we took ſhip; and thev returned home again. | 

u As Chap. 20. 1. embracing one another at their parting, 

7 And when we had » finifhed 07 courſe from Tim 
we came p to Ptolemais; and laluted the brethren, an; 
abode with them one day. 

o So fir forth as to p Ptolemais, a City in Phanicin, fo called fron 
one of rhe Prolemies King of Egypt ; and is thought to be the fy-- 
with Acczo, mentioned wages 1. 3i. which ancient mane i; yo 
retained in the Syriac Tranſlation. | 

S And the next d4uy we that were of © Pans comin ©( 
departed, and came unto q Cxfarea ; and we entredjing 
che nouſe of Philip the » Evangeliſt, * which wa : 
of the ſeven and abode wich him. 

9 That which was called Ceſarea Stratonis, to diſtinguilh it from 
Ceſarea Philipp:, at the foot of Mount Libanus, as allo from inge * 
ther City,of that name in Cappadocia ; they having been allſocilled 
in honour of Ceſar, to flatter and perpetuate that Family, The 
Ceſarea here ſpoken of, was in Paleſtine, and is mentioned Chg), 
10. 1, and 18, 22. » Whoſe office and charge it was to publil 
the Goſpel, which Timo:hy is exhorted to do, 2 Tim, 4. 5. Thi 
Office 1s placed between that of an Apoſtle and of a ?aftor and 
Teacher, Eph. 4. 11. and was not ſo confined to a certain placeer 
people as the Jatter of theſe were. 5 Of the ſeven Deacons; of 
which, ſee Chap. 6. 5. Which Office of a Deacon, Philip having 
veell diſcharged, did purchaſe to himſelf this good Degree, i 
r Tim. 3.13. | 

ov And the ſame man had four daughters, 7 virgins 
which did « prophefie. 

# By their Fathers, and their own voluntary determination, 3 
r Cor. 7. 37. neither is it ſaid whether they continued in thi: 
ſtate ; but they were ſo; Propheſied ; u not by expounding tie 
Prophecies or Word of God, for 1 Cor. 14 34 + 7:m.2 12. 89 
woman is ſuffered to Teach publickly, but rather forete!ling thing 
to come, which Gift God did not debar that Sex from ; eſpecially 
it having been promiſed, F7ocl 2. 28. and in part fulfilled before, 
Chap. 2. 17. By which, God would ſhew the enlargement 01 
Mercies, and plenty of his Spirit, reſerved for tt.2 times 0: ts 
Goſpel. 


10 And as we tarried there many days, there cans 
down from Judea a certain prophet, named w Apavus 


w Of whom mention is made, Chap, rr. 28. of whote Fi 
phecy they could not be ignorant by reaſon cf the great (9 
lef&tion which, on that account, was made for the Poor at J#% 
ſalem, 

11 And when he was com? unto us, 00K 14 
girdle, and bound his own hands and teet, and faid, 15, 
» ſaith the holy Ghoſt, * So ſhall the Jews at Jeruaem, | 
bind the man that oweth this girdle, and ſhall delive! bim 


into the hands of the z Gentiles. 

* It was ordinary amongſt the Prophets to confirm, hag 
to exemplify their Prophecies by outward figns and ſymbo 5 + 
Iſa 20. 2, Jer. 13.4. Ezek. 12. 5. Bur that of Je 27: "2 
a Parallel unto this ; where the Prophet 1s commanded to max 


£7 Olt 
lhore, a5 
*4\4 


i 
P 7. 
ho » took Pauls 


rm, Or at leaſt 


o merk reſhew 
Bonds and Yokes, and to put them upon his neck, £010! 
ar. } None 


the ſubjeQion of all thoſe Nations unto Nebnehadnezzar. } **. Col 
all the ſufferings foreſhewn concerning St. Pax/, or others os ra 
Children and Servants, bur are ordered by God, who know rs 
altogether ; and they came not our of the dult, or by 
or chance, ſo as not to have been the matter of God's £016 TW 
ledge and Counſel, Eph. x. 11,* x The Roman Powers Feruſatem, 
and afterwards at Rome, ; - 

12 And when we heard theſe things, both WE, 


a they of that place, b beſought him not to 89 UP hs 


and 


Jeruſalem. R_.”. 
a The Converts or Believers that were 1 _—_ Fx > reath 
and having a tender affeCtion for him, ſee Yorſe 4. 9 


ſo earneſt were they, ag Ith' che following v2"Je- 13. The! 


Je Y 
Cl \ap, Xx 


"M4410 


af Aa Atta, ic... 


cdeils 


ed. ar 
' Tins 
for an 
Our of 


UL Wit 
MuB-; 


\2 Then Paul anſwered, * What mean you to weep, | 
- and. to break mine heart? for I am ready not to be | 
11:,d only, but 4 allotodie at Jeruſalem for the e name 


= WE £ 
of the Lord Jeius. | 
- A ſtrange ſtrife, who thould overcome by loving moſt, as in 


The AC 


rS. 


againſt Pai, 55 if their Accuſations had been the fondament:! 
_ of their Religion. w The Ceremonial Law, T1veny by 11. 
iniftry. po To live, to a& in their courſe 6f life after » chr 
cuſtoms of their Fathers, cr the rituals of Mes. 
22 = What is ir therefore 2. a the multi 
? 


necds come together : for they will hear chat © 


OT —— 


Nt betwixt David and Jonathan, 1 Sam 20. 40, &c. This un- 
-:mtcd Champion, who did not {cem to feel any of his own af- 
7:&ions and miſeries, yet grieves for the grief and ſympathy of 0- 
hors. 2nd bears a double weight in his burdens ; one dire&ly and 
:mmediately from them,as lying upon himſe]f ; the other mediare- 
iv.2s rccoiling from others (who ſufferedwith him) unto him again. 
As Chriſt's love for us was ſtronger than death, Canr. 8. 6. ſo 
uſt our love be to him again, or 1t 1s not of the ſame nature 
ir his, nor begotten by it. e His Truth, and Glory. 

1: Ard when he would not be perſwaded, f we 
.1f-d. ſaying. g The will of the Lord be done. 
FP Ashaving done theirutmoſt, and what became them. g They 
-ommitthe event unto God; thus we pray daily, That God's Wiil 
ny be done, Matth. 6. 10. Luke 11.2, andthus our Saviour, not 
his Precept, but by his Example, hath taught us, Marth. 
26. 42. Luke 22. 42. and when God's will is done, our will is done alſo, 
2611. 2. 5. if the Mind and Spirit bein us that wasan Chriſt, and 
otherwiſe we are none of his, Rom. 8. 9. 

15 And atter thote days we b took up our carriages, 
and ivent up to Jeruſalem. - -- - | 

þ As they do pack up, that ars to remove to 2nother houſe or 
ice, rot intending to come thither any more again ; this alfo 
+.4 ſkew their readineſs oz mind to endure and ſutter all things : 
© loſs of Relations and Friends, and all accommodations tor 
Chriſt, | 
16 There went with ns alſo cerrain of the diſciples of 
Cxfa-ca, {and brought with chemone Mnafon of Cyprus, 
11n old diſciple, with whom / we jhould lodge. 

; Either this Mnaſox was in their company, or rather they were 
brought by the Diſciples of Ceſarea to the Houſe of this Mzaſon , | 
who was k one of them that were converted whenPaul and Barna'as 
«05 at Cyprus, Chop. 13. 4. { and Lodgings being ſcarce at Jeruſalem 
(en all the Males were ro appear there in thoſe three annual So- 
{mnitics) it was no ſmall kindneſs to be provided for by him. 


;- And when we were come to Jerufalem , »: the 


brethren received us gladly. oo 
» Ir is thought that by Brerhrez in this place, and verſe the 


pngys 


me R— ———_ —_ 


only by 


ales Ke 
CAE 1:05 


C 15 Ve! 


< fv 
\mnpont l 


al) 


4 
”' 
- 


a3. + 

be ' 
rr liitd 5 
1% uy s 


COme. 
z Tr cannot be otherwiſ: - or what elſe remains to be done ? 
a All the faithful muſt meet; tor the Magiftrare then beins Pacan 


IN M<Iters Oo 


23 Do therefore this that we {ay to thee : We have 


| four men which have a b vow on them: 


þb Vows were either ſuch as men did make in gratitude for any 
deliverance they had received, as from Sickneſs, Storms, or any 
1mminent dangers : Or Secondly, to enable them the berter to 
ſerve God on any occaſion; 2nd then they were bound to keep 
themſclves from all thoſe things which were forbidden ro the Ma. 
zartte, as Wine and ſtrong drink, and to nouriſh their Hair as the 
Nazarites were bound to do. This Vow they made for © certain 
time, and not perpetual: The Law concerning it, you may ſee, 
Numb, 6. 434, 9. "0 SE 
24 Themtake and *,* purifie thy 1218 wit! 
and Þ2 c at charz2s with them, trncthey may * 7 
' BE ; 
tatir heads : and all may know that thoſe things where- 2. 
ot they were. informed concerning thee, are nothing, 
but 7hat thou thy ſelf alſo e walkeſt orderly, and keep- 
eſt the law. 
*.” They adviſe Paul to perform all thoſe Ritzs required of : 
Nazarite, the obſervation of which did legally purifie him. c Theſe 


| charges were about the threefold Sacrifice which were to be offered, 
| Numb.6. 16. two Turtles or young Pigeons, a Lamb, unleavened 
| Bread, and Cakes of fine Flour , as Numb. 6. 11, 12, and the 


other four ſpoken of, verſe 23. being poor, they require Paul here 
to bear their charges alſo, that ſo he might appear to be the chief 
amongſt them, and the more zealous in their Law, to take away 
the ſcandal that was raken up by the Jews againſt him (theſe Cere-. 
monies being as yet not deadly, orevil; though they were dead 
and indifferent.) 4 Which was done art the end of their ſeparation, 
and was the accompliſhment of all; and rhey burned the Hair 
which they ſhaved off, under their Sacrifices, to ſhew, that all 
their legal performances were only acceptable unto God through 
Jeſus Chriſt, who was ſacrificed for us, 1 Cor. 5. 7. and Heb. 10. 
12. e Liveſt according to the Law of Moſes, conirary unto whar 
they reported of thee. 


have written and concluded, that they obſerve no ſuch 20. 
thing, fave only that they keep themfelves trom things 
g oitered roidols, and from blood, and from ſtrangled, 
and from fornication. 

f Theſe Ceremonies (after their accomplifiment 1a Chriſt) nor 


14” q 190 

/25 $1 trench, they are meant, who being Believers, were formed into 
to i Church with its ſeveral Officers, and that they are called Diſciples 
{hit from enly, verſe 4. who living diſperſed, and in ſmaller numbers, could 
rom in0 not conſtiture ſuch a Church ; but ſurely whatſoever there is of 
Ifocalkd privilege and happineſs in this ſpiritual fraternity, Thar truly 
ly. The (:tholick Charity that was in the Apoſtles and other holy men, 
ned Chg, would not ſo confine it, as to exclude any from enjoying of it, 
0 publiſh who did not exclude themſelves by greater crimes than their pan- 
= cy innumber, or the conſequences of that could amount unto. 

— 18 And the day following Paul went in with us z unto 
DOES $ * [ames; and all the » elders were preſent. 


2CONS; Ot 
1: having 
li having 


Degree, i 


x One of the Apoſtles, though ſome think that he was a 
kinſman of our Saviours, and at this time Biſhop of Jeruſalem. | 
i Chap, 15. 6.15. not {- called for theirage, but dignity or place | 
inthe Church, L 

9 And when he had ſaluted them, he declared ppar- } 


icularly what things God had wrought among the Gen- 


. 8 
f Virgil, 


ination, 4 

ed in thit ties by his Miniſtry. 

nding tie » God had ſo done thoſe marvellous works, thot they ought to 
2 12.0 br had in remembrance-; and this was ſaid by the Apoſtle, that 
ling things God micht not loſe the Glory, nor the Church the benefit of any 
eſpecially of thoſe great things which God had wrought: Otherwiſe, St. Paul 
led befor, :cknowledges that he was the leaſt of the Apoſtles, and not meet 


be called an Apoſtle, - 1 Cor. 15.9. q and all his power was Mini- 
ferial, he was only an Inſtrument in God's hands, to be afted by 
11, as Chap. 20, 24. 

2: And when they beard z:, they r glorified the Lord, 
ind faid unto him, thou ſfeeſt, brother, how many 5s 


nent OF 0s 
ms OX (0 


ere cam 
A720. 


|; * to lignific the accompliſiment of the days of purjfica- . ,., 
1k. 


being art all neceffary, they were not impo'ed upon any that re: 
ceived the Faith of Chriſt from amongſt the G:nz:/es, or other Na 
tions ; only ſuffered for a while unto the Jews rhat turned to Chriſt 
:or the hardneſs of their hearts, and invero:ite zeal for them. 
Z Of theſe things, ſee Chap. 15. 2. 

26 Then 6b Faul took the men, and tne next day pu- 


rifying himſelt with them, * entred into the tempie, 


t10n, until that & an offering {ſhould be oitcred for every ,g- © 

one of them. * Num, 6. 
h Paul agrees to their advice, and follows it; and having ſer 13. 

ſuch a time for his Vow as might end -with the other four mens, 

he, with the four mentioned, i Gignifie to the Frieſt (that was 

concerned to know it, becauſe of the Sacrifices that were to be 

offered for them) that the time of their ſeparation was fuihiiied. 

which is kere called the days of Purification, tor the reaion intimi- 

ted, verſe 24, k Intending ro abide in the Tempſic unril all thote 

Rites were performed which were required of them. 


pt rs |, T F 4 ba wn 5 r PIR P 
vhoſc 4 \nouſands of Jews there are which believe, and they are 27 And when / the ſeven days were almoit end2d. the 
*24t oe + 5 », . 4 . = at - 7 Fi . - 
ks " Ul *;zealous of the law: Jews which were of 2 Aſia, when they faw him in the 
6, Ju , Act ; . vn + py , F Th x . RR. K 
7 Acknowledging all in that great work of the converſion of cemple, ſtirred up all the people, ard x laid hands on 


wn? Gentiles, to have been from God; and that Paul that had plant- 
ed, and Apollos that had watered, were nothing, 1 Cor. 3. 6, 7. 
! En of Theuſand:, as the word doth uſually ſignifie ; a definite, 
loran indefinite numt er, ſignifying very many : And conſidering 
Uo! what ſmall beginnings, and by what deſpicable means, and 
:ithin the ſpace of abour five and twenty years that this grain of 
Muſtard ſeed had ſpread it ſelf; and add to this, that they were 
ev, that obſtinate and prejudiced generation who are here ſpoken 
, and they were then fo many, ſo wonderfully many, who be- 
lered. + Of Ceremonies, and concerning forbidden Meats, &c. 
For the Decree of the Apoſtles, Chap 15. 23. concerning theſe 
things, did only reſpect ſuch as were converted from Paganiſm. to 
We Fath of Chriſt. And the Fews that were converted before the 
Ulperfion by Adrian (the Reman Emperor) many years after this 
Une. did nor throughly underſtand their freedom trom that:Law, 
"KM vereunder the burden of it, as appears by ſeveral Eccleſiaſtt- 
1 Iters. 

:r And they are « informed of thee that thou 
FaLne * all the Tews which are among the Gentiles to 


a2 w Moſes. ſaying, that they ought not to Cir- 


Jeruſalem, 
elivel him 


ſymbols, 5 
Fr, 27. 2. 
ed to make 
to foretheV, 

None 0! 
\ers of Gous 
knows tne 
s foreknoVe 

c alem, 
; at Jer uj 


h we, and 


p et UyI 
ba ao uM PATSGY 


31TYANg of - y TO . A 
> With 0. -108cd or Catechired concerning thee ; the Zealots had 


2 2 builinels to inftil ſuch atperfions and odious refledtions 
'| 


him. 

1 Either, 7. after his coming to Feraſalem, or rither 2, 05 
Vow ; for *tis thought that his Vow or Separition was bur fo! 
Seven days : Or, J- The Seven days of that Feat of n 
which he came unto. m Who were impiacably ſet againilt tim 
whereſoever he went, as Chap. 14. ig. and 17. 5. "Iihele Jews 
dwelt at Epheſus, and elſewhere, but were come to 
Feaſt at Jeruſalem, n By violeuce, and aguinſt Law. i. 

28 Crying out, o Men of Thaci, heip: This 15 tne 
man that teacheth all men every where 7 lt 
people, and the law, and ts piace : and p27 
brought Greeks allo 9 intothe temple, and hatch polluted 
2rougnt Greeks ajtio 4 INTOLNC LEmp.oc, ard n {VISITS 
this holv place, | 

o Minding them by this Compellation, of their being a peculiar 
people unto God, and that none might be admitted with them in 
his worſhip. p A Charge is laid againſt St, Paul conviſting ot 
divers Articles, but allfalſe z for he was a moiſt zea;ous Jover of 
that people, and taught them nothing bur the true ule and meaning 
of the Law : Butthus they had done to our Saviour, Marrh. 26. 61. 


} Care PL 
O!.Ml TEA” 'F þ 


(119 - ED, F 


-ews, which was ſo far unlawful, that they might have killed a 
Romanif he had come in there; and every one was warned by an 


Inſcription upon the Pillars ,. Mn diy dXAopuacy vv705 [6 ai 


met VAT, 


PpPpPp 3 


25 As touching the Gentiles f which believe, * we * Ch. 1-; 


NaVe *?fum. C: 
13. 18, 
Ca,45.18, 


» 


9 


——_— - 


EET pn ng "I <a I" =2n j-5=2 
ab itineraries EY TSR 3 
Fas - r = "4 
4 


St 6 
i; wt 42 
| 7. \ £44735 
of} ' @$-t4 
"RY 9 "By 
ER+) 5 of} 66 
148 : 1+ 4 - 
WM; 
#*{. "- | 
4 A 
SiT 2 7. 
i pi 
;n 4 
if 4 GIL 
4; 8 
oy | 
£97 fr. 
bh "1 
3 5+ . 
[4 O06 


—— -—. NY .#- 
TILL. wy 
. - 
a *” 


Z 
. - 
- 2 = r Pp © © NO AEDs 
"Or > 4 R I... 0 
*- - F a 


#% 


_ « 
y ——a—_ - wr = 
. : YL % 

vw "—_ — 


Verſe 17. 


*Ch.5.3 


" Ch.g 11. 


*&7T 

þ. < Abo 

wer:rz; Thar no Stranger or Foreigner might come into that 
holy p}ace. : WF he X 

29 (r For they had feen before with him in the city 


* Trophimus an Ephelian, whom they ſuppoſed that 


Paul had brought into the remple ) 

3 The Jews of 4//a, who could not but know Trophimus ; and 
he following of Paul in this Journey, either ignorantly, or mali- 
ciouily they accuſe the Apoltle for raking him into the Temple 
with him ; which was only their ſurmule, and the iſſue of their 
enraged Jealoutte. 

3» + And * all the city was moved, and the p2ople 
ran together : and they took Paul, and drew him 
: out of tne temple : And forthwith the doors were 
ſhur. - 

5 There was a general concourſe from all parts, Tantzm Religio 
potrratr, no {uch heats asſuch are which are moved atout Religion ; 
whilft the Wiſdom that is from above, is firſt pure, then Peace- 
able, James 3. 17. #f Leſt by their uprovr they ſhould, occation 
any of rhe Gentiles to come in there to quell them; or intending 
to kill Paul, they drew him thence, that he might not pollute 
that holy place with his Blood : Thus they ſtrain at a Gnar, being 
unwilling to pollute the 'Iemple ; bur they would 1wallow a Ca. 
me], not ſticking ro ſhed the blood of tue Innocent. « Either by 
the Keeper of the doors, or by the Soldiers of the Temple. 

21 and as chey wen: about oo kill nim, tidings came 

7 , 
unto the 2v chief captain of the band, that all Jeruſalem 
Was 111 2N Uproar. 

w '] he Commander in chief overall the Soldiers there ; or one 
that had the command over a Thouſand. Ar the three great Feaſts 
there was uiually a confiderable number of Soldiers at Jeruſalem, 
the continence fiem all parts being then ſo great, and the Jews fo 
IMpericto, invoke or Government, the Romans durſt not truſt 
ſuch nwltitudes withour ſome check upon them. Thus ar the 
Paſlover, when they reok and crucified our Saviour, theſe Soldiers 
weie:rade ule of, ; on 18, 12. 

;- fro x 'riaid ately took ſoldiers, and centu- 
2nd 142 gown unto them: And when they ſaw 
the chiel captain and tie 19.diers, they y lefe beating of 
Par. 

x A wordertul Providcnce of Cod for P:u{'s preſervation, that 
the chie? Captain ſhould be ſo near, 2s ro be able to hinder the 
Mallaciing of Paul ; and eipecially th.the ſhouid be detended and 
preſerved by one that was a ſtranger to him, and an enemy to his 
Religion ; y Jeſt they ſhould have been ſet upon by the So'diers, 
for bre.king the Peace, &c. The fear of man cauſed them to 
forbear whar the fear of God could not. 

32 ten the Chiei Captain came near 2nd took him, 
anu.* commanded 41; to be bound with z rvo chains ; 
and cumanded who he was, and what he had Yone 

z Whether as Peter was, ſee Chap. 12, 6. Or that he was bound 
with one upon his feet, and with the other upon his hands, it was 
exact y tulfil'd what 4gabu; had prophetied concerning him, 
werje 11, So does God provide, that not ous word of his Servants 
which they ſpcak from him, ſhall fail, and that Sr. Pau! ſhould be 
heard betore he was condemned. 

34 Andiomes cryed one thing, fome another among 
the mu'titude:; and when he could not know the certainty 
ior the mw, he commanded him to be cariied 5 into 
the c-!1 

s As 15 uſual in popular commotions, they agreed in doing 
miſchiet, but notinthe reaſon of it, b Called -ntonia, becaulc 
it was -uult in honour of Mark Antony, on the North fide of the 
Temple. I 

25 And wten he cam2-c upon the ſtairs, ſo it was 
thar he was bora d of the 1ouldiers, for the violence of 
the pcop!e 

c In the aſcent to t!.e Caſtle; &@ he was born of the Soldiers, 
exther becauſe the picals was fo great, he being in the midſt of 
them; orbeing taken vp by :hem, to ſecure him trom the fury of 
the enraged multitude. 

z36 For tne multitude of the people followed after, 
crying, «* Away with him. 

e That 1s, kill him ; for that was indeed to take him out of 
their way. The ſame ſpeech they uſed againſt our Saviour, Luke 
23.18. oÞn 19. 1y. v. hen they detired his death. 

37. And as Paul was to be led into the caſtle, he ſa'd 
unto the chict captain. f May I ſpeak unto thee ? Who 
ſaid. Canit thou ſpeak « Greek * 

f A common expreſſion in that Language, whereby he craves 
leave, and beſpeaks attention. g After the Grec:zan Empire, their 
Language became and continued to be very common in 4fia and 
Egypt, and very well known amongſt all the Romans of any Edu- 
cation or Quality. | 

35 * Arenctthcut tFat Fey ptian which before theſe 


days madeſt anuproar, and leddeit out intothe wilderneſs 


tour thouſand men that were : mu: derers * 

þ A famous Ring-leader of a Rebellious Crew, as ſome think, 
in the Reign of 1iberirs ; bur as others, in the Thirteenth Year 
of the Emperor Clauatusr, and continued till under Nero's 
Reign, and came tronv theſe Four Thouſand mentioned here 
ar tis firſt ſerting up, to have Thirty "Thouſand Followers, 
pretending himlelf ro be a Prophet; of whom -oſephus, Antiq. 

6. 20. cap. 11. 5 Or ailaſſinates, thar did wear Daggs or Stellet- 
TOES, 


39 Bur Paul faid, I * am a man which am a Jew 


& 22.3. Of Llarſus, @ city in Cilicia, a Citizen of & no mcan 


-F 


ERS ==" IEICE 


ne, IIa 


The ACTS. 


| as Chap. 12 17. and. 15. 16. 


- —— <— —__ ren—_ CC ————— 


4 £> q Fo p ” 
city: and I belcech thee, ſuffer me +5 OI 
people. i. - 
k It being the Metropolis, or chief City jn "97 OP 


Perſeus, as ſome think ; howſoever having the priviie.... Dark: | 
man Freedom; as Chap. 22. 28, | St. Pau! vs 2 
unto the people, that he might nor ſeem to © < Pies 
to be guilty of any Infurre&tion or Tumu't, This l:c DE LE, 
of Agrippa, before that he made that fimons Aboloay c:., 


40 And when ne had given him licence, Pj 5 
7 on the ſtairs, and » beckoned with th« han, 
peopie : And whei there was made a oro (7s, 
ſpake unto inem oin the Hebrew tongue, {avinc 

m As he was now abour to be carried intro the Cafe PE 
before mentioned ; n ſignifying, that he craved thor audicnc | 

; o "Ihe Hebrew Tongue beins. nt. 
ſtood by all of them, and moft gratefu] unto them. V. 
was not the pure and ancient Hebrew, which had been corrin... 
ever ſince their Captivity ; but the Syriack Tongue, which ** 
there learn2d, was called Hebrew, it having art fir't been 4... 
trom the Hebrew, and being then in uſe by thoſe who were Hens 


CHAP. XXl, 


y »*» 
y — 
i 


' 
Chit 


* 


we 


, ; FF, S 4 [ 

Paul making bis Defence before the people, ſheweth that he wa; Tex 
brought up at Gamalie]'s feet, zealous for the Law, perfocy;cy 11, 
Chriſtians, i—=—5. how he was called to, and wnyerted (1 Cl. 
in his Journey to Damaſcus, 6—— 11. amd enformed by Ang: 
of his Apoſitleſhip, 12—16. Jent by Chriff tw the Cone 
17 —— 21. which words the Jews hearing, lift up their 511i. 
and exclaim againſt him, 22, 23., The Captain commanieth j;,, , 
by bound, and ſcourged, 24. he claiming the previlegeof a Pon 

eſcapeth, and brought before the Council, 25 — — 30, | 


1 4 En, brethren, and fathers, bear ye my defznc. 
which I make now unto you. ; : 
a Although they were wicked men ,. and cruel perſccyrr.. 
St. Paul giveth them 7heir titles of reſpeft, which by the places] 
had put them in, are due unto them ; fre on, Chap, 7.2. 


2 (And when they heard that he {pak 11: the 6 i[chrey 
tongue to them, they c kept the more ſilence, An}; 


{aith ) 

b The ordinary Hebrew ; that which was taken for Hebrew, ind 

ſpoken by the Hebrews after their return from the Ciptivir 
though mixt with the Syriack; ag Chap. 21. 499 &© Ir beins mos 
grateful unto them to hear Pavl ſpeak in their Mother Tongue; 
e:p<cially they having lo great a PIejudice againſt all other Nation; 
and Languages. 
3 * 4 am verily a man which am a Jew, born in* 
Tarſus a oy in Cilicia, yet brought up in this city, 
4 at the fect of «© Gam:lie) , ard 1aug Þtaccardrerone 
/ peitect manner of the law of the £ fatheis, and wa * 
Zca'ous þ towards God, as ye all are this da. 

a The Apoſtle alludes unto” the poſture that the Diſciples 
any Rabbi, oc Teacher, in thoſe times did uſe - the Mater tifting 
in ſome high or elevared place, did teach his Scholars, who (tc 


b 
- 


o 


his feet on the ground; :nd as they grew in knowledge, wee. 
vanced to fir nearer to their Maiter, Deur. 33. 3- And Aram 
15s thus ſaid to be called to God's toor, 1/a. 41. 2. And Mar fit | 


at our Sawour's feet, Luke 10. 39. e Theſame Gamalie! who mit: 
that moderating ſpeech in the Apoſtle's behalf, Chap. 5. 3; 
} This perfe& manner of the law is Phariſaiſm, which the Apo 
ſtle was brought upin, and before his converſion mad: 3 pro-z{ 
on of, Phil. 3. 5, Not that the Apoſtle reckoned upon ny p:t 
teCtion in this profeſſion ; | 
moſt ftri# ſe& 
Ctuality and iccurateneſs, making, what they called, a H r7t BY 
the Law l 
God to their Fathers by the hand of Moſes ; bur the Traditions! 


their Fathers he was exceeding zealous in; as Gal, 1. 14. 50:3 1 ( 
lome Copies read, zealous toward; the Law - both in the june leis, Cur 
His zeal forthe Law was fincere ; not out of by-ends, Fur ou: lave 


his love to God, 
SD.D; 


but it was not according to true Knowledge. 


binding and deliverivg into piilons both men and vG 
men. | 

_# The DoQtrine and Praftice of Chriſtianity, & As mu! oh 
him lies, being one of the moit furious perſecurors that hunteeid 


the preciens life, breathing our threatnings and iflaughters wit £6) 


breath, Chap. g. r. . hat 
5 As allo the high prieſt doth bear me witnehs ard = 
all che / eſtate of the elderi:; trom whom allo 1 recciied * | 
 |2tters unto the x; brethren, and went co Damatcus, ® thee, 
bring them which were there, bound unto Jeruſalem, oo 
«0'y 


to be punithed. _ 
{ Their Sanhedrim, or great Council, m Commiſſion or Orcs mis}, 


» The Jews of Damaſcas are called brethrin, becauſe deſcen-* ke 

from the Patriarchsas well as he. And £1), as ver, 1, be WO be 
overcome that ſtubborn people with Civiliry, heaping «up £94", = 

fire on their heads, 'Rom. 12. 20, that they might be melred, © ag 
then tormed afrer a more excellent manner. / 


Wy. 


, | $4 _ LFSTF 

© And * it came ro pals that as I made my Jo! yu 
and was come nigh unco Damaſcus about noon, + 
ly there o ſhone trom heaven a great light, round a00 
nlce 


"FE; 


= 


The 1 


« As Lightn'ng ir fudden'y encompifed him. But ſee Chap. 
' S nu Love chic HoiBnm io —_ 
o, From the 24 v'r/; Where Tis Hiſtory is ſet down by St. 


Tuke, Ar here littie morc can be taken notice of, than tome 


t | Gall variety 1 the expreflions. 

: oy | - And I fell unto tie ground, and heard & voice 

| ſxying uno me 7, Sau}, vaul, why perſecutcit thou 
me. 


as 


\ As men that call another earneſtly, repeat his Name; 
when the Angel of the Lord called Ab:aharr, Abraham, Gen. 


22. 11. | 
ph... | 2g Ard I anſwered, Who art thou Tord? And 
Ws he faid unto me, I am Jetus of q Nazareth whom thou 
Wh. eerfecutelt, 
ence $ 


+ That contemned (though not contemptible) Name 1s 
owned ty Chriſt from Heaven , that they mighr not be aſhamed 
when tliey were reproached by it on Earth. Of the reſt, ſee 


Wen. Chap. 9- $- 
ren o And they that were with me, ſaw indeed the light 


and were afraid ; but they r heard not the voice of him 
that ſpoke to me. 


» Of this, fee Chap.g. 7. r This may be added to what was 
&rmerly faid, that the Men who travelled with Pan!, may be 
ſid, no: ro have heard the voice of him that ſpake, becauſe they 


} Ger 4:4 not underſtand ir, or obey it: They were not converted, as 
\nzzus Pay! was, by it : The Hebrew Language putting hearing for obey- 
ents ng; as in many Scriptures : And both St. Paul, who here ſpake, 

Va ind Luke, who penned this Hiſtory, underſtoed exatly the pro- 
him :1 pricties of that T ongue. 


Roman, jo And TI faid, What ſhall T do, Lord 2 And the 
| [ord ſaid unto me, Ariſe, and go into Damaſcus, and 
fence there It ihali be to:d thee of / all things which are ap- 
pointed tor thee to do. 


riecutors Se Chap 9g. E. f Such things as . Fnamas told him from 


aces bog Chit, were as if Chriſt himlelf had told him them : And by 
oy ;ran:as Our Saviour ſatisfied St. Paul's queſtion, What fha!l I do, 
1OYTe Lord * 

\ od ba 

— 11 And when I conid not ſee for the glory of * that 
hed lzht, being « led by the hand of them that were with 
—ptivin me, [ came into L'amaſcus. 

nv more t The” Excellency of the Obje& over-powering his fight. 


1 0ngue ; 


ns, It was a ſtrange work of God that enabled St. Stephen to ſee 
T A\aTIONS 


Chriſt (who is now ſo glorious, ) Chap. 7. 55. And it will 
bc according to God's wonderful power, when at the Reſurre&ion 
we Jral: be crabied ro look upon Chriſt in his greateſt glory. 
1 Petioid the goodneſs and ſeverity of God upon Paul : Severity 
up him 1n fAlriking of him with blindnets in his body ; bur 
goocneſs indeed to him, in enlightning, converting, and ſaving 
of his ſoul. 


12 nd * cone Ananias, a devout man according 
th? Law, having a good report of all the Jews which 
SE. \ L 

awe. 1hHere. 


born 10 
his city, 4 
rctothet 


and Wa : 


& ho ; P 
TTCT NITLDS 
cho [iteel 


> Wert te bs : DOR : 
vw This is added to diſtinguiſh him from a Proſelyte, and to 


d Abraivam | 7 
J Mary fie let them know that he had received the Goſpel, not from a Con- 
wh = « gieater jealouſie over, and lefs kindnetſs for,) bur from one like 
h the Ap unto themſelves in all things. 


13 Came unto me, x and ſtood, and faid unto me. 
| Biether Saul, receive thy tight. And the {ame y hour ] 
locked up upon him. 


> 1 Pr0.iis 
ON any P41 
16 was Wh 


H. age 02% * That in this poſture he might more conveniently put his 
is grvens! hinds upon Paul ; which we read that he now did, Chap. 9. 17. 
Tradition ind was ordinarily done upon the- miraculous curing of any. 
4 9018 3 Or, as Chap. g. 18. immediately, The fſuddennels. of the 
Janie 1 Cures, ſpake the power from whence they came : None but God 
| ur our ; laves and delivers atter this manner. 

£980, 


14 And he faid, z The God of our fathers * hath 
: Choſen thee, that thou ſhouldeſt know his will, and 


» G2 to . > i i . » S— 
the Geo Ke" vthat juſt One, and ſhouldeſt hear the voice of his 
| and v0 BR. touth, | 


z Nothing could pleaſe the People better than to hear God fo 
filed: For this they gloried in, above all things, that they 
and theirs had God to their Father, --obhn 8. 41. And nothing 
cud betrer 1tuit” St, Paul's purpoſe, who wou'd not lie under 
wat ſcandal of endeayo.ring an Apoſtacy from the Jew:jb  Re- 
$101 (tor the Goipel which he preached, was bur the ſubſance 
ind perieion of the Law; } or thathe ſerved or worſhipped 
iy other God than the God of A4breham. a jie harh taken 
lice, a Þy the hand, and by his wondcrfu! Providence brought 
thee no that condition in vaich thru at. 6 Chriſt is rhe 
40'y Cre, ſpotleſs and wi:hour Llen ith ; - God's righteovs fer- 
Mant, 1a, 53. 1:, But this is hez< the rather ſpoken, that he 
M'zbt convince thera of their ſin, in putting our Lord to Death : 
Oo though be fweer..ed his ſpeech to them in what he michr. 
Oy _ i-trer fl. tO their deſtruction ; Like a skilful 
xy Oy 1c would nor hea] roo faſt, Now Paul law Chrift 
ime Eye of his mind, it being enlightned to believe ir. him: 
nd he aw him in his Journey allo with the Eyes of his body. 


al. ac 

Þ * INUCL» 
P or 

ar hunted 10 
Ss With 6G) 
- G 5 ef 
100635, # 
) | recoi's? 
Ci 
unalcus, | 
v Af 
uſalem, 


ders 
on or Oro 
1c deſcen-e) 
;. he 
o.uD C0050 
s bs. Ni MW 
E Met, ” 


ny Tou' ney: 
0, fuck 
round bot: 


03 


bw. 4 
pro þ d 


oh, r 5"; " 9p n WF 1 
_ iJs \wliidi A DO.: 
Some read, 7 not 73; Ju er. And 
thar he was ſent to ſhrew him that whit 
God's fight; which he being blind: 
could not perceive. 

15 For thou ſhalt be his e witnef unto all mon. of 
what thou haſt ! ſeen 2nd head. 

.£ The Apoſtles were in a more foeci?} manner Chris jc. 
nzſſes; as Luke 24. 48. 7ohn 1, 7. Chap. 1.8, God 6: ins ther 
extraordinary Gifts, not for their own lakes chiciy, but to projic 
others withal : As the tree bears not fruit, nor the field yield 
its encreaſe for its {e]Jf. d Nor thar St. Pay/'s Commillion ex- 
tended only to the publithing this Wonder at his convertion : For 
he was entruſted with the Golpel, and hid char Treafurc in his 
Earthen Veſſel: Bur this Miracle is expreily mentioned, becaul: 
it was unto him and othersa great coutirmation of the Truths 
which he believed him elf, and recomn:ended to the Faith of 
others. And therefore in the coarſe of bis Vimiſtery he mentions 
this frequently ; as here in this place, and betor: King Agrir2a, 
Chap. 26. 12. and 1 Cor. 9. 1. Asalſo r Cor. 15. 8 7: 

15 And now why tarrieft thon ? ariſe, an'l be ha. 
tz:d, ande waſhaway f thy fins, calling on the IN 
of the g Lord. 

e As waſhing cauſeth the ſpots to dif@pnear, and to Fe as if 
they had not been, 1/a. x. 18. ſo does Pairdoning mercy, or 
remiſſion of f ſins, which ascompanieth Baptitm, as in the Cue 
receiver, Mat. 9. 11. 1 Per. 3 21, 22, Where tine Faith, is, 
together with the profeſſion of it by Bapr {.n, there is faiv.: [07 
promiſed, Mark 16. 16. In the mean whiic it is nor the: W ter 
(for thar only fignifies,) bur it is the Flocd of Chr © wiiich ts 
thereby ſignified, that cleanteth us from cur tins; as 1 7404 1. 7. 
Yet Sacraments are not empty and decei:tul tigns; bit God ac- 
companieth his own Ordinances with his power from en hich, 
and makes them efFeCQtual for thoſe great rhings for which {£ 111. 
ſtiruted and appointed them, g Chrift, ro whom by Bapriin: be 
was to be dedicated, 


Q 
_ 
«* 
La) 
»-- 
— 
C9 


17 And* it came to paſs. that 5 wh: I was came * ch +59 
again to Jerulatem, cren while Iptiayed in the temple, 
[ was inaz trance: 


þ This was probably about three years afrer bis converſion ; 
as Gal. 1. 18. and was one of the Viſions and Fevelations he 
makes mention of, 2 Cor. 12.1, # A Rapture and Exralic ; as 
Chap. to. 10. | : 


18 And ſaw him ſaying unto me*. Make hol, *Mar. gs. 
ind get thee quickly & our of Jeruſalem ; for / they witi 14. 
not receive thy teſtimony concerning me. 


& This St. Paul takes notice of, that it might appear unto the 
*ews that he did not out of choice, or "ccauſe he bare a gradge 
againſt them, decline them, and preach +0 the Genriles / Ag if 
Chriſt had faid, They who were appoinced unto 'ife, and were 
curable, are already cured ; but the reſt 'who are, hardney, no- 
thing remains for them bur utter deſtru&ton, 


I9 72 And T ſaid , Lore FS they 2 know that T im- pe 
priſoned, and beat in every ſynagogue them that ho- 
lieved on thee. 


»m This was Paul's ObjeQtion which he made againſt the Will 
of God concerning his leaving Feruſa/cm, and the ewr in it -- 
and ſhews how apt carnal Reaſon is in the very beſt men ro fer 7 
it ſelf againſt the Wiſdom of God, and ro argue for whit we 
fancy beſt to be done, or left undone. »n The tum of his reaſ-. 
ning 1s this, That he was moſt likely ro do more good amoneſt 
the ew: than amongſt the Gentiles, whither God was ſending of 
him; becauſe the Jews knew how zealous he had been ; nor only 
to obſerve the Law himſelf, but to procure its obſer-ation by ail 
others: And that it was no Jeſs than a Miracle which changed ig 
mind about it. He ſhews alſo by this, his great oe unto rhe 


Ver. 4- 


' 

12 
Jews, whom -he would have ftaid wirthal, had ic beea ac bis 
choice ; and did only remove from by God's command. 


20 * And when the blood of thy + mirtvr Stephen * ch, - 
was ſhed, I alfo was ſtanding by. and » contro © ne 
to his death, ard kept the raiment + of them that 
r flew him. 

6 Martyr is a Greek word that fignities # 177þ ; and is here 
and ſince by the Ecclcftaſtical Writers, oppropt f2ted 1mm ful LS 
ſuffer Death for the Teſtimonycrhey & ve rothe Truthy of 
or DoGrine of the Gofpel. p As Chep 8 1. 9 "that 5s, 0. the 
Witneiles againſt Stephen ; as Chep 7 58 For the Wiimeilc, 


htm, bur they were to Le the firſt who ttoned him, r or, rc ts 
ra Lim, 


2r And ke faid unto we er, Depait*: For I will, +, 
end thee 7 ta; hence unto the Gentiles oy 


s God repeats his Command, and by that anſwers ai] Pax”s 


Paul, and he went very far ; as appears, C2p. 5: 15. Rom. :5.19. 
Gal, 1, 17. and 2. 9, 


22 AndJ 


- mOm— —_ 


4 ay ® », 
ng L we Ty - -_ ou " = 4 £ % -- 2 Sd > _ —— - iT == v bow _— 
- — A © » : - ' s —_— PR _ 
ee arre leet cx re ol na or cr 2". S y 


' þ* >. 
6 ys - 
BE 


—— —— 
P—_— 
- m—_ 


 — ———— 


"TRAY 
F450" 


— 


wa 


= _— 


a4 


roger 


— 


[EO 


_ c gre "I *x my 
in [4 _ oo Oe it oT—_— Sr — T5 


_— 


= 


© ——_— 


=_A. 


: 
| 
v 
l 
[ 
CES." 
« 2.48 
Ek } 
on - 
IEA 
= 
S.: 
q 
4 1-4 IO 
hes | 
I8..> 
b . 
4s 
| 


\ _ _— » 
"3 pI gon 4 
> Pr F 
gt F—_ . 
- Ja 
Cw 


2 
_ of 
= A.-% 


- 


_ 


id, w * Away with 
tur 1tis not fit that re 


7 hey h:d heard iYitke reſt of St. Paul's Diſcourſe without 
either thinking it did not much concern them 


or elſe being cons inced of the 


in-laying ; 


her jt were 12g or fallc; 


to wy lurt themleives 1s mertioned, they are not «hlc ro beat 

ir, Thevch they themieives refuſed the Offers of God's 
A *ercy, yet they could not c::dure that it ſhould Le tendred un- 
1 others ; eſpecially that others ſhould be preferied betore them 
in the trendring of 1t, w That is, kill him ; encovraging one 
another to fo bubarovs a Muither, or exciting their Rulers unto 


- 


4 (CT EE + 4 
T. MNCF.” cafilt Git Z-oCal Clothes» 


- They that fored the Blaſphemer, caſt off their upper  gar- 
ments, that they might be the -eadicr to do that Execution, and 
carry the heavier ones; as Chap. 7. 58. They might alſo caſt, 
or rend them off, in ſign of grief and deteſtation of Parl's 
(ſuppoſed) Bleſphiimy. x Out of raging madneſs, having n9 
flunes at pretent iN That p-2ce tO TLYOW at him ; or ſtamping ON 
the eround firft with their feet, and taking thence the looined 
Exth, threw jt up, to ſhew that Paul had tinned againſt Heaven, 
and provoked the God who dwells there: And that he was not 
worthy to tread on the Earth ; whichas well as they could, they 


c * FI. 4% [ © 
TOUS IO '1i11, 


A 
wy 


j d 4 */J s my 
2: tlat he might 5 know wherefore they 
w .* 2] 1 . L 
O 220 DMN. 

3 Of whom, Chop. 21. 31. » Or Fort called Antonia ; as 
Chap. 21. 54. & Or, torturing (being pur to the Queſtion ; as 
the French exprefiion is agieeuble to the Greek word here uted ;) 
which went no {urther than by ſcourging; which was for this 
purpoſe vicd upon the blefied body of our Saviour, Mat. 27 26. 
b T he chiet Captain took it for granted that he was fome no- 
torious MalcfaQor whom all cried owutagainſt injuriouſly, accoun- 
ting Fox Popriti to be Fes Dez : And becauſe in that confuſion he 
couid not know the certainty from his Accuſers, he would wreſt 
a confeſlion cut of St. Paul, whom they accuſed. 


. 
SLES 
ire 


25 And as thev c bound him with thongs, Paul 
ſid unto the centurion that flood by, Is it lawfal tor 
Gu io ſcourge a man that i5 d a Roman, and uncon- 
dewred ? 

- They who were to be ſcourged, w=re bound to a Poſt or 
Column (amongſt the ews) of a Cubir and an half high, incli- 


ning downwards upon it : And theſe Thongs were ſuch where- | 


4 
with they bound Part to this Column or Pillar; and with tuch 
ail they intended to {courge him &@ That is, it is not lawful 
to icourvee a Roman ; much lets uncondemned : See on, Chap. 19, 
27, This latter, the Lav's ot no Nation that was civilized did 
Ever aliow. 

, 7 , - . 7 - 

26 When the e centurion heard thr, he went and 
told the chief captain, ſaying, Take heed what thou 
doeft; for this man is a Roman. 

e There were ſeveral Centurions under one chief Captain or 
Chiliarch ; as there are ſeveral Captains under one Colonel : 
and this Centurion might be depured to examine Paul, The 
Reaſon why they preſently defiſted from binding Paul, and in- 
formed the Commander in chief of what he had alledged , 
might be, becauſe as it was very penal to challenge this privi- 
lege falily, fo ir was Treaſon for any to deny it to fuch to whom 
it was due. 

27 Tien the chief captain came, and faid unto him, 
—yo - d \ el 
Tell ne, art thou a Roman * He faid f, Yea. 


© Jr is very reaſonable that a good man ſhould make uſe of 
fech lawful privileges as the place in which he lives doth afford, 
and his coniition may be allowed Ad 1t1Spart of thatW i{\dom 
nr Saviour does recommend, if it Goes not deſtroy the Inno- 
" the Dove, Maz:n. 10. 16, 
( . "» - o > / jj 
captain aniwered, With a great 
freedom. And Paul ſaid, But ] 


if ora relites 
'S = 

; hþ Though Panl was 
born ct Hebrew Parents, yer he was born at Tarſus, to the Na- 
tives of which Town Auguſtus had given this privilege, for the 
aſtiftance that the Citizens afforded him in his Wars with Brutus 
and Caffns; or as lome will have ir, for favouring of Jriiu; 
Ceſar, this privilege was granted unto that place by him : And 
they en the other fide, ro continue the ſenſe of his favour, 
cauicd their Town to be called Juliopolis, or the Ciry of 
© MU, 


et —— te eee er nee II eo ES ern —_— 


the certainty wherefore he was accuſed of +. 


r . WM, <4 X Ii o') 
the Holy Ghoſt. And accordingly 'tis objerved , tis Hig: 


Chap. The ACTS: Chap Xv 


29 Then firaghtway 2 Uty Cepantcd {cn 
which thou!d have [| examined kim: ang he 
captain alfo was afraid, after he knew that he w +. . 
man. and becauſe he had bound him. 


; Whohad bound him, and would have ſcour ced bi 
Crime of breaking the Privileges of the Reman Cirt:- 


GO a K } Ff 


in, þ oy 
ene, | 


| | accounted no Jeſs than Treaſon, and a Sin, as they cali. 

i . . > vi daL:EQ ;+ 

cf it. they were filewt, But when the mercy of Cod un- | gainſt the Majeſty of that People; as afterwards jr was as $;- 
- : . | an Offence againſt their Emperors. | 


3 On the morrow, becauſe he wonld have þ 


) 


nown 
ne 1 Jooked him from K;s bands, and commmands4 l 
. » . . » ha th 

1 chict prieſts and all their counſel to appear, and h;;,.. 
: a4 VIUUE: 

Paul down, and ſet him before chem. Q 
/ That he might not continue ; after knowledge, ;, F” 
(accounted} Crime of binding a Roman Citizen, S alſo Ya 
Paul might ſpeak with the greater liberty and freedom ; 1. 
own defence. m The chict of the four and twenty c@,.7. 
mongſt the Prieſts, according to their Families, or ſuc!) Rs; 
and dignity did excel in the Sanhearing FEY 


CR AFP, AXHE 

Paul cefending himſelf, is ſmitten by the Bigh Priefl's temmsy 
I, 2, fer which he ſharply reproveth him, 3— 5, Paul ſc... 
part Sadduces, the other Phariſers, projeſſeth himſelf a p17. 
call'd in queſtion for the h pe of the Reſurrefion, 6 ga Dir... 
ariſeth terween thro, and Faul cleared; 7—-—10. be i; comfy 
by the Lord, and promijed to teflifie of him at Rome, 11, "bins 
men of the Jews vow and reſelve to kill him ; Paul bath rw. ;: 
ir by his Siſter's ſon, and maketh it known to the chief Captars 
12— — 22, who ſcndeth him by night conduted by [vl1;;y; yy. 
Felixy 23, 24. The Captain's Latter 0 Felix, 25-—.,, 
which when he had read, commandeth him to be kept jn Hcrod: 
Judagment-hall, 31——— 25, 


. 


"Y Nd Paul carneftly bcholding the counſel, [3:0 
Men a and brethren *. | have lived jn all j*( 
good conſcience before God c, until this day. 


a Acknowledging himſelf to have deſcended from the Part, 
archs as well as they ; and beſpeaks, .as much as he could, their 
favour and atrention. 6 Not that he thought himſelf to hu; 
been without ſin or fault; for he acknow!edges and buxiils hi 
Captivity to the Law of ſin, Rem. 7. 23, 24. but that he iw35 nor 
conſcious to himielt of any notoricus impiety (a; Sactileee 
which they acculed him of:) Nay, he had not ſuffered willrs!, 
any fin to be, much leſs to 1eign in him. And as forhis rerſecy: 
ting of the Chriſtians, he did it not to flatter any with it, or up. 
on any ſiniſter deſign whatloever, bur thinking to {erve God by 
it, 1 7:9, 1. 13, c In the ſenſe of God's tees of im. 
whom Sr. Paul acknowledges to be the ſearcher and knower of 
the heart and conlicience. 

2 Ardthez high prieſt Ananias commanded them thzt 
« ood by him, to e ſmite him on the mouth 


a The Ofhcers probably. e Thus MAicaiah was ſmote by 
Zedckiah the talle Prophet, 1 Kings 22, 24. and Jeremiah by Pe 
ſhur, Jer. 2c. 2, And our bleſſed Lord eſcaped not this ſuttenng 
and indignity, Jokn 18, 22. Now this was the rirher infi.&«d 
on Pal, becauſe of his proteſting of his Innocency ; which dil 
refle& upon the Counci), as being injurious : But it was indeed 
no more than what was neceſlary in his own juſt defence, and to! 
the glory of the Goſpel. 


3 Then faid Paul unto him, God ſhall {mite rhe: 
/ thou whired wail: for fitteſt thou to judge me afrer th: 
law, and * commandeſt me to be ſmitten g contraty 
to the Jaw. i, 


J 

7 An excellent ſimilitude”to repreſent wick:d men, eſpecially 
Hypocrites by, who counterfeit zeal for God's glory and worliiy, 
whilſt they intend only their own profit or grandeur, Thus ou! 
Saviour compared the Scribes and Phariſces unto whited Scpi- 
chres, Matrh. 23. 27. Whited Sepulcits and Walls, thous! 


k 
4 


4 
T1) 


they ſeem fair and comely, have within nothing but rote: 
and uſeleſs rubbiſh, Now theſe words are nor to be 100-2 
upon as a Curſe or Imprecation vpon the High Prieſt ; un 
does not conſiſt with the temper of the Goſpel ; but they 3 
rather to be taken as a Prophecy or Predi&ion, St. Paul Taving 
on occaſion had the gift of Prophecy amongſt the other g1*ts 0: 


4 


And 


Pp! 


Prieſt either died, or was put out of his place ſoon after. 
thus Paul's Tmprecation upon -4lexander the Coppe'-ſmitl, ; 

tioned, 2 Tim 4.14. is to be underſtood: as alſo fever?! 050! 
Curſes (ſeemingly-wiſked) by holy men, eſpecially inthe £/47%; 
as Pſal. 1c9. 6, 7, &c. and many other places; whicn are ® 
n0 means for our imitation ; neither were they ſpoken 10 muc 
asthe Wiſhes or Prayers of fuch as uttered them, as they Vent 
their Prophecies and PrediQtions; which we know Came T0 Pr 
as that now mentioned was fulfilled in the per{on of Juaas. 3 
was contrary to all Law, Divine and Humane, that any Tou® 
be puniſhed before that he was heard ; and eſpec1a1'y 10 
own Judicial Law, which in matters of this nature me 
yet governed by under the Romaxs, Now the Jows Were 1 nn 


7 


, 


VN «v1 
be Sod  þ | = , 
<4 -af | I. 4 2 


bi hear andenqure diligently, whether the matter any was accuſed 
ich (\, of, were true, before they m1gnt give ſentence, or inlet any 
ic: puniſhment upon taem, D2#*, 17. 4, 
.: E Tas THe | ' ; en To . ; 
+ And they tht Road by, ſaid, þ Revileſt thou 
, n » "| = Sf, 0 = - 
[ Cad's High- 2rielt 7 


þ Theſe partial Paraſites take no notice of the real injury done 


0 Pr! by the High-Prieft, and readily catch at the ſeeming 
oma Spoke by Paul agaimit him. 


£ | hen faid Paul, T wiſt not, brethren, that ; he 
Wh EF was the bigh prie!t : For it 15 written, Thou & ſhalt 
SE - ſnak evil of the ruler of thy people. 


or ; ; Par! does not here Tronically fay this, becauſe the High 
” | io} had, contrary to h!s Place and Office cauſed him to be 
ſitten ; bur either, 1. Becauſe he knew now no High Prieſt 


farch, but oniy Chriſt in Heaven to be our High-Prieſt ; 
) ther | -$4-4.8. 1. Or, :aly, Rather, becauſe the High Prieſts being 
in his | 4 often changed (iniomuch as in one year ſometimes they have 
ſos. | þ:d thice,) and they being in a confufton at this time, and not 
Place mecting or fitring in their due place and order, Paul might very 


well be 1&norant WO that was, who in ſuch a multitude had 
commanded thar they ſhould ſmite him. & The Scriptures here 
| by St. Par, 1s Exod, 22. 28. 


Poe 
CitLul 


6 out When Paul perceived that the one part were 


ES | Gdduces, and tie other Phariſees, he cried out in the 
*1 4 } + . 

i 06 k.., council, Men and brethren, * ] am 1 a Phariſee, the 
l, FLY a 4 5 6 q 5 _P Se » -F y on . 
ariſe 3. - fon of a Fhariſce, * of the hops and » reſurre&tion 
ticmii e : ws na - . 
= I of the dead I am called in queſtion. 

Bury b., / In his former Profeſſion, Opinion, and Converſation; and 


force of row alſo in the points thar were controverted betwixt them : 


vaptary Ard St. Paul, with his Dove-like Innocency, does in this but 
'ers wnc! mike uſe of the Serpentine fubrilty, ro preſerve himſelf, and to 
"— e2/2 credirunts the Truths of the Goltpel. »» The Son of Pha- 
Her rc in the Plural ; either for ſeveral Deſcents his Anceſtors -had 
been of that Set ;z or thar both his Father and his Mother were 
; of ir, # Or for the hope of the ReſurreCtion , an Hendiaays :, 
[, fad, though he did not agree with the Phariſees in all their Opinions, 
n all i retin this he did : and the Reſurre&ion was the common Subject 
F | | preached upon : and the Goſpel does give us the beſt proof 
\ and evidence of it; infomuch that Pau! was taxed for preaching 
be Pativ y | ſur and the RefurreCQtion, Chap. 17, 18, And unleſs there be a 
21d, their keturrection, his preaching was vain, and his faith vain, 1 Coy, 
F to have #44; i | : 
_ ” - And when he had] {o ſaid, There aroſe a diſſenti- 
Pts: o1 between the Phariſees and the Sadduces : and the o 
willing multiinde was divided. 
"IT : Not only of the common people , or ſtanders by, but of 
ICT: the Senarors and Judges ; God by this means dividing and infatu- 
" oy b/ cting of them, that they could not bring about Paul's intended 
Rs CULTUCELON, 
KOO EL 


: 8 * For the Sadduces ſay that there is p no reſurre- 
Mon. neither 9 angel nor r ſpirit ; but the Phariſces 
Nis / both. 
FO: 2 Againſt this our Saviour argued, Matth. 22. 23, &c. q It 
4b by Bs tems trange, that they ſhould deny that there were Angels, 
*enas they owned the Pentat#uch,"or Five Books of Moſes, in 
hich mention 1s made frequently of Angels : But it ſeems that 
they underſtood thoſe places Allegorically ; either for good 
Infints or Apparitions cauſed' by God to manifeſt his mind by 
tem unto men, wreſting thoſe places to their own deſtruQion, 
1 They denied the Exiſtence of the Soul of Man, as different 
tom the Crafis and Temperament of his Body ; and therefore 
bclieved that the Soul perithed with the Body. Nay, they were 
© far from believing there was any Spirit, that they held, blaſ: 
phemouſly, that God himſelf was Corporeal. { The three things 
b here mentioned, which the Sadduces denied, may be well ſpoken 
" 0: as but two, viz. the Reſurre&ion and the Exiſtence of Spirits, 
, eſpecially, W hen Men fin with much Obſtinacy againſt ſupernatural light, 
nd worlh, God juſtly withdraws from them even natural light ; and they 
Thus ou! re puniſhed (as the Egyprians were) with ſuch darkneſs as may 
ited Sc pul- © telt, Exod, 10. 21. 


bs, '9 And there aroſe a great cry : And the * ſcribes 

) be looked va! were of the Phariſees part aroſe, and trove, fſay- 

eſt; whico ng*, We find no evil in this man : but * if a « ſpirit 
| o angel hath ſpoken co him, let us not fight » againſt 
} V0, 


$s {entering 
xr infi.Ctcd 
which did 

Need 
vas ndee 
A _ 1" 
ce, and 19! 


nite the? 
 afrer the 
Contraty 


ut they 4c 
Paul having 
Jrher g1tts 0: 


| this 3319? * Scribe is a Name denoting an Office or Place ; and the 
after. 09 S:rive; were men skilled in the Law. u Some take the latter to 
ſmith, gs c Exegetical of the former ; and that by a Spirit 1s only meant 
ſevera) ont an 4ngel, by ſuch Meſſengers God many times ſending his Meſfla- 
n the Pjams; S<StO the children of Men : Yet others by the Spirit underſtand 


hich are Y? 
ken {o muc! 
as they wel 
-aMe T0 pid" 


lophetical Revelation, and the Spirit of Prophecy, which was 
Aapected to be ſhed abroad in large meaſures about that time ; as 
*PPcars, 7ohn 7. 39. w See Chap. 5. 39. 


> Juan, ) 1 _ #6 And when there aroſe a x great diſlenſion, the 
r any ſhow Muck caprain fearing leſt Paul ſhould have been pulled 
cially ro" i > Pixces of them, commanded the ſoldiers y to go 
a". »*1, and take him by force from among them, and 


Ciirit fe 
ew PD ti —_ , . 
l vIng him into the caſtle. 


The A (6 f i S's 


Chp XAT. 


* Fends about pretended Religion are uſual'y among all men 

very ſharp, becauſe their Opinions beins the iHucs of Their ow! 

Brains, are more beloved than their children, the fruit of their 

bodies. 7 From the Fort or Caſtle, unro which there w 

Aſcent or Stair, to go up and down by. 
ir And * the night following, . the Lord & fond * Chidg, 

by him, and faid, - Be of good cheer, Pant ; tor + 

thou haſt teſtified of me 111 Feraulaiem fo nut: 

bear witneſs alſo at Rome. ; 


l$S all 


þ # \TY 
dlaiJsk 


z In a Revelation appearing inwardly to hismind ; which i; 
the rather thought to have been ſo, becauſ it is here [aid ro haws 
been in the Night; bur whether by Vilion, or Revelation, it 15 
all one as to this purpoſe, and neither were infrequent unto Pau? 

2 Cor. 12. rt. &@ So true it 1s what our Saviour hid promiſed 
and foretold, John 16. ult. In the world ye fba!l have trioulation, 
but in me ye ſhall have peace. 

12 And when it was day *, certain of the Jews *V 21, 
banded together, and bound themſelves ! under þ a |! Or, #3 
curſe, ſaying, that they would neither eat nor drink © 22% of 

wy - bf Exnxecy 
till they had killed Paul. 

6 If they did not kill Paul before they did eat or drink an; 
more, they wiſhed that they might become a Cherem or Anathema ; 
as 7ericho, and the Inhabitants thereof were, being devoted to 
utter ruin and deſtrution. Or if they did not execute this their 
wicked deſign, they would yield themſelves to be Anarhematized, 
or Excommunicated, as thoſe that had broken their Pac or 


Agreement. [ig ff i £6 
13 And they were c more than torty which had made wrap 

this conſpiracy. _ | Mabe! 10M 
c They made themſelves ſure (they thought) of killing Paul : | 5} | : b 

There were above Forty ro One. The Churches Enemies are mW. 


unanimous and reſolute. As David formerly, ſo might now Paul 
ſay, bg that are mad againſt me, are ſworn againſt me, Pal. 
102, 8, 


14 And they came to the citief 4 prieſts and elders, 
and faid, We have bound our ſelves under a great 
curſe, that we will eat nothing until we have ſlain 
Paul. 


"I 

d Whoſe Place and Office it was to have diſſwaded ſuch an 
abominable Murther : For the priezfts lips ſhould preſerve knowledge, 
Malachi 2, 7. And they could not but have been guilty of the 14 5k od 
Blood of St. Paul, had it been ſhed, who by encouraging the lg] 
Deſign, became acceflary unto it, But they had drank Blood 
very largely before now ; wiz. the Blood of St. Stephen, and the 
Blood of our Saviour, and 'tis no wonder that they thirſt for 
more : Such wild Beaſts (rather than Men) when they have once 
taſted of Blood, are never ſatisfied with it. But at what a low 
ebb was Religion, when the Chief Prieſts themſelves combine 
with Affaſſinates ? 


15 Now therefore ye e with the council fignifie to 
the chief captain, that he bring him down unto you to 
morrow, as though f ys would enquire ſomething more 
perfectly concerning him : and we, or g ever he come 
near, are ready to kill him. 


e The Chicf Prieſts are to join with the Council in this deſire 
to the Chief Captain : for they had no Authority to command 
him, f The Plot againſt Paz/'s Lite was laid very deep, and not 
eaſily to be diſcovered ; it being uſual to fend for Priſoners ro 
re-examine them, eſpecially when Religion and the publick 
Peace is concerned ; as they pretended that here they were. 
2 The ſpace berween the Caſtle and the place where the Council 
met, being conſiderable, it gave the greater advantage to the 
Conſpirators. 


16 And when Paul's h ſiſters ſon heard of their laying 
in wait, he went and entred into the caliilz, and told 
Paul. 


þ Who 1s thought to have been one of Paxz!'s Company : 
But the hatred againſt Paul by the Jews being ſo general, be- 
cauſe of his (ſuppoſed) prophaning of the Temple, they were 
not ſo curious who they {pake to of this Confederacy and Leſign. 
Or rather ; there is no Counſel againſt God : the very Birds 
of the Air, if need were, ſhall carry the woice, and that which 
hath wings ſhal tell the matter, Eccleſ. 10. 22. For he that ſirterh 
in the heavens ſhall laugh : the Lord ſhall have them in deriſion, 
PFlak 2-4: 

17 Then Paul called z one of the Centurions unto 
him, and faid, Bring this young man unto the chief 
captain :. for he hath a certain thing to tell him. 

7 The Chief Captain having the Command of a Thouſand 
Soldiers, there were Ten Captains under him : One of cheſe Pauf 
entruſts with his Meſſage to the Chief Captain, nor making any 
particular Requeſt unto the Chief Caprain, ſuppoling him to have 
{o much of the Roman Juſtice in him, that when he underſtood 
his caſe, he would provide for his ſafety ; which he was not 
miſtaken 1n. 

13 So he & took him, and brought him to the chiet 


captain, and ſaid, Paul the 7 priſoner called me __- 
im, 


= We. 


The ACTS: 


RI ache a er ee nn "es 
3 
. 


Chap. XXIIL 


w_— 


=3 
re. _ 


: 
$4. FF 
x 
F 
BK. 

'f 

£ 

4? 

i} 


7h 


RR, 
CI 
=. 


f 


bs 


: - 
£393 

gt 

fl * 


him, and prayed me to b:ing this young man unto thee, 
who hath ſomething to ſay unto thee. 

k The Centurion took Pan's Kinſman, and went with him, a5 
ke was Celired, unto the Chicf Captain, that there mjght Þe 0 
miſtake, tt that he might hear all out of the young man's 
own mouth, and be the more affeQed with it. NO 
ea; Fe: it was cuſterrary to chain their Priſoners for tne!r 
£rcater {ccurity. And God is now retncmbring of Pax 1n Jus 
tonds. 


19. Then the chief captain - took him by the hand, 
and went with 129 afide privately, and asked 4:79, What 
15 that thou Eaſt to tell me ? 


» Ie took him by the hand as a token of courtche : Theſ®e 
Commanders ſhewing an excellent example of humanity 2nd 
pity towards their interiors and ſuppoled criminals. There are 
{cyeral reaſons given of this great civility here uſed, as the chief 
C:ptain's naturally meek temper; or his policy to ſatisfy for the 
injury he had done to Paul, in binding of him being a Roman ; 
nav, Jome think that he, as well as Felix the Governour, hoped 
for money to be given unto him, Chap. 24. 26. but all theſe are 
bur eveſs, Tr is ſure, what 'of any of theſe caules were,” or 
vere not, God is to be ſeen and acknowledged in it, who hath 
the hearts of all men in his hands, and turneth them as at pleaſ- 
£th him, Prov. 27. 1. 


22 And he ſaid, » Fhe Jews have agreed to delire 
thee, that thou wouldeft bring down Vaul to morrow 
into the council, as though they would enquire ſome- 
what of him more pertedtly. | 

» Both the Council, and thoſe fourty 3nd upwards ſpoken of 
eerſe 12.13. 

21 Put » do not thou yield unto them : For there 
lie in wait for him of them mo than fourty men, which 
have bou::d themſelves with an oath, that they 
will neither eat nor drink till mo have killed him : 
and now are they ready, looking for a p promiſe trom 
thee. | 

e This the young man deſires ont of his care for his Uncle's 
(Pauls) preſervation, as allo touched with the hozronr of the 
I act if it ſhould have been executed ; and howloever by this 
means he delivers his own Soul, having done hisutmoſt to hinder 
it, Þ The Match is laid, the hand is as it were lifted up, no- 
thing is wanting to Paws deſtru&ion, but the chief Caprain's 
conſent, which the Jews afſuredly expeRed, it being but a ſmall 
couitely to grant them, to examine a Priſoner, eſpecially ſuch 
an one as upon their complaiat was committed in a Cate cogno- 
ſcible by them : But, Deus e machina, Take counſel together, and it 
ſhall come to nought : ſpeak therword, and it ſhall not flana, for God 
i: with us, [la. 8.10. 


1 Or, the chains | 


Chap, oy 
; A Title given to perſons cf great emirency is Lit ; 
it 15 SIVEN TO Theophilus, unto whom alto this Ra, Lk of Rigs 
inſcftibed, Chap. 1.1. 2 This Felix was Brother + bo; Fe 
who together with Narciſzs (the other of the Emp : Pos 
his Favourites) managed all publick affairs, and fon 
ſtorians branded for all the miſchicts of that £55: 6.ll, 
Thus Felix, and his Brother Pallas were born Slaics - 
mized by Claudius, and were ſuch as are exalted. 5 ; 
viderice will ſhew its power it hath in pulling 
up whom it pleaſeth, 

a VT onus 

27 "This man was taken of the Jews, anq 7 
have been killed of them, then came I with n 5... 
and reſcued 3 him, having underſtocd chat h- 
Roman. | | 

s He repreſents Paul's Caſe fairly and indifferentiv, Ce J@... 
ruliwg his beart and pen ; but withal, he conceais 1{i, bind. © 
him, and inſtead thereof magnifies his care of him, being 1 + 
man; and probably being touched with a ſenſe of hi, "Me 
reprelents Paul's Caſe the better. 

28 b And when 1 would have known the ens 
wheretore they accuſed him, I brought him to:th;... 
their council ; 5 

6 The Council underſtanding thoſe queſtions (as he thee 
beli ; and having yet xctained ſome Power from the po. 
concerning them, be 
| 29 Whom I perceived to be accuſed of queſtion; 
their law, but to have nothing laid to his charge wor. 
thy of death, or of bonds. | | 

e According to the Roman Laws, or Imperial Conflity;y. 
Thar he undervalued the greatthings in queſtion concerning .. 
Bleited Saviour's Death and Reſurre&ion, and the whiole Goſh) 
It 15 not to be wondered at ; he ſpake and wrote as a Pagan, 


| 1" 
\ 


«aS Off» 


CY 
dow fy ad. 2 


Wi 


God over-ruled his very flighting of theſe contiovertcs jy 
Paul's advantage, he being by that means preferved trom ths 1; 
of his enemies, 

30 And when it was told me, how that the Jeu / 
laid wait for the man, 1 ſent him ſtraightway y 
thee, and gave commandment to his acculers 1, 
co ſay before thee what they had againſt him, « Fyz. 
well. | 

a This refles upon the Jews, as being ſeditious, ard 1:11: 
to attempt againſt the Government ; as allo gives the Goreryy 
an account. why he troubled him with this Priſoner, ond 
he ſent fo great a guard with him. e The uſual prayer view. 
with they ended their Letters, as Chap. 15, 29. 

31 Ihen the fouldiers, as it was cominandei 
them, took Paul and brought him f by night t 


5 © man. 


Antipatris, 


f Not that they came to Antipstris by night ; Ut they beg 
that Journey by night, as verſe 25. and went. {5 much of i . 
they could by night, for fear of being diſcovered, and atop 


ted upon by the Jews. g This Antipatris was buiit by Ent: 


22 £0 the chief captain zher let the young man de- 
rare, and 4 charged him, See thou tell no man, that 
chon haſt ſhewed theſe things to me. 


« 7 &x . 
: FP AER Ea 


- 


_ 


_ _— = 
A *Z BE EF 
- ng we 3D nes RR _ 
ot iy A OE ye, ee 
bye : C5 - 


6 = $4, —_ - 4 - cre 
» _ x DIS = Ws — - — 
>< — =_ af - - - —_ = E=E E — 
- SS - £ a a5 _—— -4 - * - Fg 
» worn of _ m_ -_ : I ee ”  _ _—_ - — XC tf _* = _ 
2 > 20 on 2 : "P 4 Ay — by Ks - -  —— - 
X a 2 - " - 7 
>». "0 —_ A ; * - - - 
= oo A . FETs _ gm - x 
_ - —_—_ 2 — -— — n > _— 
& - — b, ” a4 ® Ns fm IT A . : Ads - : 
+ . 1 , - "7 Sore ” $092 —_ = ; " " ——— - 4 
|; be en anokin a" _—_— 4 = D CZ ULA, + 4 > Le Be ET Ste; y 
yu ton m_ *- - m_ we * OINEY "Tp, . "A Ss 
, _ lb —W . 7 ” * 2 IP 2 - - - . = 
- ....o<> « _ OY _ k 42 437 A 3 68 ” <OE _ ——> 
pgs _ —— bo _ ey ts vn 24M _—_ —_ * "Ss " _ + 
_ 7. "MPI" «tions ids 7 - - Gn -_ —— - a atinmte — 
— =_ rt we - A ——— IS - , . AA GS. 4.0m - —_— Y - * n: _ Z 
ni ER T a . m4 _ - T * - Wy C j4 - > - 
z - _ _— I, 2A _ * « 1 * _ _ _ - 
_ a Fo, ” 2 _—_— XC; 2 y —— n : - - : i = x Knead Jn. E i> 
- : - - _ ” - - w—_— S » — 1 - Y _ ” o p- CS . - 4 5 -_ - - 
; ” D W « . , - a " - 23S _— 2 >; ail SIX . a . => - + - = > i en ” F => —— & __ 
— , - = : «&. --2L - bt E - = b We: p -= — X _— ——— = > LL - IS > - _— - « A- > 4 AI * = - 
— — — Þ ob . ___—== -LY "2D 4 - "REM be . *485 p * » _ " - = CALI _ - SO _— _—_— "= nl D1 
_ 0 — > hs 7 _ : « . _—_— 1 Wn n —_ - - => = —_ = < E- _— " I _ 
-- hs : "i ——5_ wy = FP 4. , — I IXF5 -_ eemoomn g 2 on _ bes == : AT _ EY L fb l - - p _—_ -— G - = ITAL = _ i nn = JTPI2 - >. wa_ - = w .- 
25——z - #<.te os E = &; . wo 2 0 A 7: 5 TY = vY me - on — : — —_ = —— v - £ - _ - + "> Aha - , V2 —_ - 
" —— = - &: - 5 : - © —_— __ WES Py = - ny - _- 
5 Bo ot ay EY =2 5 + — b _—_ , is _——— - mY tb Bn + Fo — _ —_ el DR —_ bY - £ = = mm : 
a _ —— _ - = Ls; * . Y PPPs: A * "gr ———w - l: =_ 
7 phe an. <a E : — — - po " . . - a hens - ; y : rom A 4 — ; > 
| — inn kt ws = EEIIIESS h. CRE TAFUM «rin ct a _ ” : 2 —— —— — EE : = YoEB - ” © U : I _ — 
oe ee A 6. _ ;, - = ds WB. -— Ap 5 - » = _- - A ny -4 
& - - ” = AC - . - 0 > = 
y , of - D ” _—O 
pak < 3 * as F* 


—_— 
2602 


- ———_—— EIN 


7 The Chief Captain ſhews by* this, his care, both for 
<t. Paul, and for the young man roo ; for had it been known 
that he had diſcovered their conſpiracy, they would have ſought 
his life, and might divers ways have taken it away ; and as for 
Paul. being diſappointed in this, they would have made other at. 
tewpts againſt him. 

23 And he called unto him two centurions, ſaying, 
Make » ready two hundred foldiers to go to Czlarea, 
2nd « horſemen threeſcore and ten, and 7 ſpear-men two 
hundred, at the « third hour of the night, 


» Two hundred were tc uſual proportion or number of men 
which were under the rwo Centurions ; fo rthar they were com- 
manded to have their Companies in readineſs. s Horſemen being 
viually added for defence of. their Foot-Soldiers, # Spear-men, 
as they are called here, were fuch as handled, or threw their 
FJavelins or Darts with their right hand. Some think them to 
bave been ſuch as ourSerjeants,who.take men into cuſtody ; others, 
that they were Soidiers raiſed out of foreign Nations, and light. 


Iy Armed. & Partly becauſe in thoſe hot countries it is very | 


troubleſome to travel by day, and partly for the greater ſecurity 
of Paul and ſuch as went with him, 

24 And provide them beaſts, that they may ſet Paul 
on, and » biing him fafe unto Felix the pover- 
NOUr. 


w What a ftrong Guard and Retinue does !God by his Provie 
dence get together for the ſate-guarding of Paul ! None of all 
theſe intended the leaſt good unto him ; but God can make uſe 
of them as cffectually as, if they had had the greateſt good will 
for him. 

25 And he wrote a letter x after this manner : 

x Ir is not certain whether the following words were the Let- 
tcr its {c1f,, or only the Sum or Contents of the Letter. 


26 Claudius Lyſias, unto the y molt excellent go- 
Yernour z Felix, ſenderb greeting. 


great, and fo called in memory of his 'Fath*r Awripare: ; it vis 
about Seventeen Leagues oP. Jeruſalem , plcaſintly fitu.ted 
upon the Mediterranean Sea, between' joppa and Ce/area, 


32 On the morrow they lcfe the horſemen to 5 
with him, and h returned to the caſtle. 

þ The Footmen returned to the Caſtle or Fort ct Antmisn 
Jeruſalem, from whence they did ſct our, there being n0 tear 
any ſuch deſign upon Pal at that diſtance from Jernſalem, hi! 
the Horſemen might not eaſily avoid. 


33 Who whenthey came to ; Cxfarea, and deitre 
red the epiſtle to the governour, preſznted # Pau} all 
before him. 

i Ceſares Stratonir, as it was called, to difference !t fron 
the other. k They preſented Paul, as being their 7! 
whom they had ſafely kepr, and now delivered according 10: 
pointment. 

34 And when the governour had read the len, © 
asked of / what province he was. And when he und 
ſtood that he was 2 of Cilicia ; 

I Paleſtine and the Countries thereabouts being divided - 
ſeveral Exarchies or Juriſdictions, the Governours were 
loth to infringe the limits of one another. m A _— 
in 4fs miner, in which was Tarſus where Paul was boy 
from his birth-place he is reckoned to belong t0 that 
VINCE. 


25 I will : hearthee, ſaid he, when thine » accu 
are alſo come. And he commanded him to be Kept 
Herod's judgment:- hall. 


» I will hear thee thorowly, 
ſition 1} here uſed, does import; al 
unto all Judges, Deut. 1. 16. o For this the 0 
did reach the very Heathen, That both parti 
heard before any thing were determined. 2! #4 


0 


the whole matter, as the Prep 
and as it is commaner 
dictate of natur 
es ought to 
liquid Statueri 

got 


Rong 


& C Wile 


LIP" 
Utituton 
TUNT (" 
rung 01: 
Ie Golp;! 

4 
19an ; and 
"EXITS I0r 


} 
1 thao ry? 
Mm ls 16%} 


e Jews 
tway t9 
lors ailo 

e Fare: 


miranded 
he to 7 


, they DES 

nach of it «3 

nd atten 

Dy E:roa ts 
- - 

arci; It Ve) 

ely fitwtcd 

- 


rea, 


nen to 7 


F Antinia 
; no fears 
ſalem, iu! 


and delnic 
k Paul al 


nce if fi 
their ha; 
ording 10?" 


@ letter, It 
n he undet- 


divided 10t0 
x5 were Ve!) 
" A Count! 
ras born, 
ro that T7! 


1e 0 accuks 
be kept 


as the Prey 
15S COMM 
Jate of natYy 
's ought 
liquid " 


VIV. The ACTS. Chap. 


-Jarrery 
or | latter” | 
+ 19 be called Caſarea. 


© IHA-P. XXIV: 


Paul accuſed of Sedirion and Hereſie, before Felix, by Ananias the 

2uley, and T exrullus the Orator, 1 9. He defendeth his Faith 
and Doffrine, 10 ——— 21. Felix deferreth the matter until the 
comms down of Lyſias the chief Captain, but giveth Paul more 
liberty, 22, 23. He inſiruftath Felix and his Wife in the Faith of 
Chriſt, whereat Felix trembleth , 24, 25. yet Sſendeth for him 
often, in hope to get Money, 26. and leaveth him bound in Priſon to 


Mleaſe the Jews, 27. 


deſcended with the elders, and ith a certain 
) orator, axed Tertullus, who c informed the gover- 
nour againſt Paul. 


From the time that Paul was come to Czſarea, the malice 
:nd fury of the perſecutors was very great, ſtick not at any 
rival and pains to do miſchief with ; and ſurely we ought to be 
«earneſt in doing good, or their zeal will condemn us. 6 A 
Lawyer to form the Indiftment againſt Pavl, or to aggravate his 
jſt, and to defire Judgment upon him. Such Advocates 
uſually were the chicteſt Otators, as Demoſthenes in Greece , 
ind Cicero at Rome ; and Tertullus ſeems to have been his Crafts- 
mfr, whom the Jews hired c to draw up an accuſation againſt 
Paul h 

2 And 4 when he was called forth, Tertullus began 
to accule h11, ſaying, e Secing that by thee we enjoy 


\ 1. AT a alter ſive days, * Ananias the high prieſt 


great quietnef(s, and chat very worthy deeds are done 


untothis nation by thy providence. 


d When Pax! was ſent for to appear, being under the cuſtody 
of tlie Soldiers who brought him to Ceſarea. e It being one of 
the rules of Art, which an Orator ſeldom forgets, to endeavour 
toobtain the Judges favour, Tertullus commends Felize, who 11- 
(cd had delivered that Country from fome Robbers (like ?Ban- 
iti, or Moſs-Troopers) that did infeſt it; but is commended 


| forlittle eJſe amongſt the Hiſtorians, who brand him for extra- 
| gdinary Covetoulneſs and cruelty. p 


; We accept ir always, and in all places, moſt 


noble Felix, with all thankfulneſs. 


f We commend and admire it. Tt is moſt certain, that 


| mfriours enjoy many benefits by the means of their Gover- 


nours, who bear the burthen for the people, watching, and ca- 


| ing for them ; and thar a Lad Government 15 better than none, 

| and therefore nor only Terir lus (who may well be thought to 

| ſpe: kout of flatrery) but St. Paul himſelf, werſe 10. ſpeaks with 
vet relpect unto Felix, 


4 Notwithftanding, that T be not & farther tedious 


{ unto thee, I pray thee, that thou wouldeſt hear us of 
F tiy Clemency a few Words. 


g Hinder thee, or take thee away from other occaſions ; this is 
mother artifice of an Orator, to promue brevity, eſpecially 


| when he ſpeaks ro men of employment or buſinels. 


5 For we have ound this man + a peſtilent fellow, 


| anda i mover of ſcdition among all the Jews through- 
|-out the world, and ring-leader of the & fe of the 


I Nezarens ? 

h A P:P, or Plague, the Abſtritt being put for the Concrete, 
3 implvins, tut no word he could ute could properly fignifie 
the michicy ouſnels of that man, 2 whom he falfly charges with 
Sedition (not that the Jews would have diſliked him for thar, 
had ir been true; but) ro make St. Pau! the more odious, and 
In dinger of his Life. k Or, Hereſie, which in common uſe was 
then tuken more favourably for any Dottrine. 1 Of the Chri- 

ians; for they who out of Judea were called Chriſtians, in 
Judea were called Nazarens. The Jews did call our Saviour and 
bis followers thus, it being accounted an 1gnominious term ; 
ind they who were born at Nazarcth diſgraced by it, as appears 
by Nethangel's queſtion, Can there any good thing come out of Naza= 
rH + joh. 1,46. Yet thisname is moſt glorious, as impoſed up- 
en eur $:viour by God himſelf, Marth. 2. wr. 

6 Whoalio hath gone about 4 tO profan2 the temple, 
_ wetook, and would nave judged » according to 
0r iaW, 


m Ly bringing into the Temple (as they fallly ſuggeſted) 


| p <rcumeiſed perions : Bur Terrullus does not mention this, or 
{EW In What Par! had prophaned the Temple ; for Felix himlelf 


129 uncircumciſed, it would have reflected upon him: too 
N02, tO be accounted, by the Jews, amongft tuch prophane 
we 'S were enough to defile their Temple and Worthip. 
"ay hid a Law it ſeems, whereby it was death to bring 


2. 
$, gens intothe Temple ; and ſome think, that by the Romans 


1 


'" 


MXF had ver ; #1 l 
Sor OO allowed them to pur it in execution, yvee f 
| 


Chap. 21. 28. And this was their aim ai! alone, ws. to tike -- 
way his Life. : 


7 But the chief captain Lytias came pron ©: 


on with o great violence took 5:2 away out of 
hands, 


? YRS, " A 6 6 : 
9 So they call the bringing of Soldiers, to kind: 
atting violently ; and as far as they dare 
whom they thought nt to fivour them, * 


I thn £4: pye0 8 
[ nen 48 


I_— 
pilsy MeLU 


ALY 


Ss Commanding his accuſers ro come unto eee ; by 
—— * of whom, thy ſelf mayett rake kno«y- 
edge of all thefe things, whereot we accuſ: kim, 


v 


',* Not that the Jews would have any Witneffes produced 
and fairly examined ; but the Pronoun Bcing Cneular Is eos 
to Paul, whom Tertullus would have examined ond St tots 
queſtion, or Racked, that he might confeis whir they would hive 
had him guilty of : Or 'tis as if he had faid, (fo impudine 5: 
impicty) that Paul himſelf could not deny (if he were att 


che accuſation which was brought again him 


9 And the Jew: alſo » aiſented, ſryins, Thar thoſe 
things were {o. 


» The High Prieſt, and the reft of the $2120 that carry wc 
him, acknowledged (as the menner was} that 7rinlus had ge 
ken their ſenſe, and whar they had to !; and foine rink (1 
this their alſenr went furrher, and thar they oFercd them 
witneſfles to the truth of what he had (+1), 

19 Then Pau}, after that the pgovernonr 243 ; 
beckoned unto him to ſpeak, anfivered, Foratinch 2 
I know that p thou haſt been of many years a 
unto this nation, I co the more checitully anfiver fr 
my felt: 

o By ſome ſign with his hand. p Though St. Paul woult! nor 

. . . ! 
flatter Feliz with notorious untruths, as Tir:ullus had done, vet he 
ſpeaks very reſpe&fully, and mentions his continuance in che 
Government ; the rather, becauſe, if he had been fo {edirious © 
perſon as Tertullus world have repreſented him to have been 


=—"_ 
oily 


» 6) 
($4) 


- 


Felix could not but have heard of him, and of any milchicf cl.t 
had been done by him. 


11 Becauſethat thou mayeſt 4 nnderfand, that there 
are yet but » twelve days iince I went upto Jervfalem 
s for to worſhip. 

q Either by 'what thou haſt hezrd already, or by what 


witneſſes, when examined, will declare. » There were bur 
Twelve days ſince Paul's coming to Jeruſalem, Seven of them he 
had ſpent there, until the time of his Puritication was accom- 
pliſhed ; and the Five other days he had been in cuſtody, and er 
Ceſarca ; by which, Sr. Paul proves how unlikely it was, that 
in ſo ſhort a time, he being a itranger in thoſe parts, thould riif- 
any tumults, s He being fo far from Jufigrumnme wy miſchic© 

. 1 *- PS _ Py 4 4 i ”-5 
that he only intended to worthip Gol. 


12 * And they neither found me in rhe t; 
ſpuring with any man, neither raitinz up the pc 
neither in the ſynagogues, nor in the ciry : 


mnle - fi- . 


£ Or, diſcourſng; although it ivems nor to have been wntew. 
ful, after the Sacriſices were ottered , to diſcourſe wbour tc 
meaning of any place in the Law or the Prophets; for thus 0; 
Saviour 1s ſaid to have heard, and atked qucftions of the Bofors 
in the Temple, Luke 2. 46. yet St. au! would hereby the 
how far he was from doing ought that was unlawful, in tht 


he had forborn to go to the utmoſt of what might have buen 
lawful. 


13 Neither can they « prove tie things whereof they 
now accuſe me. 


# They could not prove cither of thole cr1mes they carged 
him with, wiz. 1. Raiſing of Sedirtion. Or, 2. Prophaning of 
the Temple, which they had acculcd him of. 


14 Put this » I confeſs unto thee, that afrer 
way which they call X hereſie, fo worihip I the God 
of y my fathers, z believing all chings which are written 
inthe law and in the prophets, 


w He makes here a good confeſſion, ind 15 indeed a followe: 
of Chriſt, who before Pontius Pilate is flid to have witneficd a 
good confeſſion, 1 Tim. 6.13, % This word is of a midde [:g- 
nification, being ſometimes taken 1n a good ſenſe, i5 Co2p, 
26.5. and thus the Greeks did uſe it ſometimes when they ſpike 
of their Philoſophers. Though the "ews cailed the Dottrine of 
Chriſt ſo in the worſt acception of the word ; which DoGrine 
this bleſſed Apoſtle is not athamed to own. . y Yet he does 
withal truly aflerr, that hz worſhipped no other God than the 
God of his Fathers, but worſhipped him whom Abraham, 1/aac, 
and Jacob (whom they ſo much gloried in) had worſhipped ; 
and z that he had no other Religion than what was taughkr tn che 
Law and the Prophets, from whom they themlelves had rec: - 
ed theirs. 


L.> 
LR 


' 


:5 And have hope towards God, 7 which they 
themſelves allo allow, that there ihall he a & roiurrectt. 
on of the dead, c both of the jult and :111tf, 

(} q q q a {t{ 5-2» 


_— 


I 
- 2 —_ = 
- Ts -” 
; 3 pa "—_— 
64 - 5 = - 
wv - << os. a 
; 3 
5 - 


CAE = -—— x "= 
NS NR En. 0 Urn 


> 


- —_ ; —4 


oy 


1] CY 


— 


— 


TE In Gree ne —_— 
pj NT > = 
NI chan wp 


_ CD m—_— =Y FIDT 
n— 
EL 


== 


aw% 4p 4 — 
—— — — — m— 


EC 4 
© Sr rv I Ir ns 


& The wiſer fort 


7: 
Belicf, and Holy Life which St. Paul Preached up. c That both 
13--S. CVen that all Cuch riſe again at the laſt day, we have aſfu- 
:nce given, AMatin. 25. 32, 33- 
toretoid expretl; , th 
{5 many fince amongſt them rhat have denied it. 


)-.1n up with it: ; l . I| 
Pie 4 may not fend God of Min in any thing ; but that 


* 
we fs. 
4 4 

- 


Ticy only 


©» brew Yb 
was {G Fir TYOM GU 


to them pu him t . | y 
tion to the Teri, and hoping tO gaill their good Will, he brought 


according 

anc $57 

44 © | 64 Tj1 | - _ 

Lur God in that general Deſtruaion of both City and Temple, 
7 | 


7 HEE . D% J 3 
R ©pPON MY 02. 


(CC 


PUrPoie : 


C 


*\ / * . ug 
$1034.) GT, 


-mencit them, the Phariſecs (though bad was 
+ chevy wee not for this Opinion perſecuted by 


tic Þc it) 11nd Yeu 'T 


$xiduces, b The ReſurreRion of the dead is again owned 


he chief matter Paul preached upon, and in which all his 
ther DoErines and Opimions did center, it being indeed the 


\ndation of that Vaith and.Manners, 1 Cor. 15. 13- of that 


7ohn 5. 28, 29. which was alſo 
unto the Jews, Dan. 12. 2, though it hath found 


16 7 And * hertin do e I exerciſe my ſelf to have 


aways a conſcience / voi of offence coward God, 
nd 122870, MEN. 


F - "In 
1 Or, at this time, and in this buſineſs ; Or, for this Reaſon, 
ro wit. becaute I believe the Reſurreion. e Tam alrogether ta- 


- This is my one thing neceſſary, Luke 10. 42. 


tk withour blame ar the Judgment»ſear of God or Man. 
are bleffe.) and happy, whoſe Belief concerning ano- 
13 Jomake them endeavour after Holineſs in this world. 


ther WW oridd 
7 , > ® . > 6 
\- Now eo a!tcr many years *, I came to bring þ 
vms to my Kavon, i and offerings. 


. 
+ 


e Tis thought Tonrtcen Years, which we find mentioned, 
* x O . "- 

cet. GC} 2,1. And therefore the more unlike to have any ſeditious 
Pradiccs there, v-here he had fo little Acquaintance. hþ And he 


icningmiſchict to his Nation, that his Charity 
upon this Journey. # Which in his condeſcen- 


ro the Law ; as Chap. 21. 26, For whilſt Jeruſalem 
1 cnc fiocd, thoſe offerings were 1n a lort permitted ; 


pur 432 eng to they wt, 
13 & Whe;c iron ccrtain Tews from fla found me 
7 puriticd 3n ug emp ncther with 7z multiude nor 


1 B's 
ICH COURLLIE 


1119404 up thoſe Alms now mentioned ; whilſt 


\ 


| was er ply ed for thc co0d of my Countrymen, who now 
JKecnte me. 7 Performing all rhings which the Law did require 
of Nazaritce, or thoſe which had made a Vow, and in which 
their ſega) purification did confiſt. w» The Mult:tnde was of 
their own gathering together ; and the Tumult, if any, was 
made by themſelves. Tr is no new thing that Chriſtians ſhonld 
be charged with thoſe miſchiefs which their Lnemies themſclves 
d:4 to make them odious. 

:9 » Whoought to have Lecn here betore thee, and 


% 
< Pa 4 
C 


if they had ought againſt me. 


The Tews of #fa, who hid cauied all this ſtir, having ſeen 


3 


Trephimus with Paxil mn the Streets of Feruſalem, and maliciouſly 
preſume that he had brought him into che Temple with him. 
Sow thete were the only proper Witnefſes, who might there- 
tore be now abſent, becaute they could tcſtihe norhins to the 


and v-hen they tiought {ſeriouſly upon ir, their Con- 


5 


[C:onces might accule them tor the clamour they had made againſt 
the Apoſtle, Chap. 21. 28. As tor the.other Jews, they could on- 
4 tlie by hear-fay, which is notTuikcient, 

22 Cr clſe - let tlieſe fame here ſay, it they had 
tornd NV CVil Guing in me, while ] 1itood betore the 
council, 

o St Pay is willing to allow the preſent Fews Teſtimony a- 
bout ſuch things as they could know, having themſelves heard 
ind {cen them ; which was wharpatled in the Council when Paul 
was brought before it, Chap. 23. 1.9. The lente of a Deity was 
more quick upo:1 men z and they mught then be truſted under 
the ie curity Of an Oarh. 

21 þ Except t be for this one voice, that I cried 
Fd . * s 3 | - - x ſ; = 
'* ſtanding among them, ouching the Reſurrection of 

the dead T am called in queition by you this day. 


As if he had ſid, Let them objeR, if they can, any other 


filet: Bur if this be a fault, to hoJd the ReturreQion of the 
ized, 1 do acknow. ledge it; and rhere need no other proof 


ering ir; not that he held any evil tobe in this Opinion ; 
i ſpeaks Tronically, knowing that tiey Guſt nor renew their 


401g: abouLiutait, 


2 And wien Felix heord thete things, having more 


purtoct knowledge 4 Ci 7ar Way, be deferred them, 
5 ES: - IMC a I ' W - by 8 

and faid, When 7 Lyſias the chief captain ſhall come 
7 _*? 8 =eny _ « . is ” _ Py 

Goun, I will know the uttermoſt of your matter, 

97 Some underfland by that way, the cuſtom or menner of the 
Priefs ro calumniate Paul: Or, 24ly, The Religion of Moſes , 
and how, and in what it differed from the Religion of Chriſt ; 
cither of which Feliz might know, and by either of them con- 
clude Paul to be innocent. Burt 3aly, By that way, as ircquently 
?n this Bool:, Chap. 9.2. and 22. 4. is meant the Chriſtian Reli- 
g50n its felt, which Felrx not only from P3rl's Apology, and 


i3/as Account of the whole matter, bur by divers other means 


di 


having raade 1ſo great a noiſe in the Wortd) could not be 
* Lorne read, he geferred then rill he could have 


The ACTS. 


4 


a more perfe& knowledge of that way, and till ry, 
Captain, ſhould come down : For there being Two thine. 
a . _ "WR . T5 |; 
to Paul's charge : 1. His evil Opinions in matters gf RE lay 
{] 


(a 


And, 2. His cauſing a Sedition. As to the firſt, pe; DE 


X Would 


4 


oy 
4,0 


detzrmine it till he had had better Information 


23 And he commanded a centurion to kegy p,,, 
and to let him have s liberty, and * that he jhgyp co 
all 


bid none of his : acquaintance to minilter, 9; 
unto him. 


s Not ſo confined as to be kept in a Dungeon, or mg;< .... 
Priſon ; but to have the liberty of the Priſon, yet {@ 4, ,, 
Chain about him ; as appears, Chop. 76. 29. and 28, 2, .; 
lations or Diſciples : for there was a Church at Ceſarca. ch "i 
48. and 21 8. When it is expedient for us, God can WE 
Comforts of theſe outward Enjoyments, Relations, anq Friend 
unto us ; and that his and our Enemies ſhall contribnre wn 
It. "0 


PTAs 
(} No 
illy 


LIT IR 
W107; 


24 And after certain days, when Felix , c,, 
with his wife » Drufilla; which was a Jewel, 1. 
{ent for Paul, and heard him concerning * the Ft . 
Chriſt. = 


« Having been out of Town to meet and conduG hig\y;s, 
w Who was Daughter of Herod the Great, and. Siſter of 1. 
Agrippa of whom mention is made in the Two following (1, 
ters ; a moſt libidinous Woman, who had lefr her Husbn ,; 
and whilſt he yer lived, was married to this Felix, whg ,.. 
taken with her Beaury. Yet Panl preached x the Goſp:] \,,. 
ſuch, not knowing what Perſons, or in what Hour God 1161. 
call, w 

25 And as he reaſoned of y righteouſneſs, +, te, 
peratice, and 4 judgment to come, Flix tremhj},g 
and anſwered, Go thy way for this time, 5 whey | 
have a convenient ſeaſon I will call for thee. 

y Theſe Two, Righreouſneſs and Temperance, the Chr!?;; 
Religion do indeſpenſibly require : And ail rrue Worthy 7), 
out theſe, will not make up our moſt holy Religion, or g:v2 © 
any the Title of a Religious or an Holy Man. But Pas! cho; 
rather to diſcourſe of thoſe than any other Vertues, by! 
Felix was moſt defeQtive in them. He would Jiy his P!4 


| = ca 
<> 


ſer 
where there was a Sore, though it pained the Patient, ind hy 
ſhould get little Thanks for his Labour. Had great Nen ty; 
ſuch faithful Preachers, it might contribute very much to hinde: 
them in their career of ſin, and by that means help to mend the 
World. 2 Or, continence ; the want of which 1s cturged upon 
both theſe great Perſons, being taxed by Hiſtorians tor Adultery, 
So that Paul preaches here as John Baptiſt did once to Herid, very 
ſuirably, though nor gratefully. Yet in the diſcharge of his Dy. 
ty he meets with no Trouble, not fo much as a Reproich, 
which probably the ſenſe of the Tudgment to corne m!ght contri- 
bute to. # Whatſoever is preſent, this 1s certainly to come : 
And the ſecret Reſle&ions that wicked men have upon it in the 
midſt of their fulleſt Enjoyments, mingle Fears and Tertors 
with them. Hence their ſurds wulners. miſgivings and invar 
guilt (as its contrary, the Peace of Goa) paſſeth _ all Unaerſtanaing 
b Feltx not liking ſuch Diſcourſe (che. Subject being too quick 
and ſearching for him,) put it off longer. And fo Men putor 
the conſideration of their Duties, and of the Judgment rizt 
will paſs upon every one according unto what he hath dons 
in the fleſh, till the Judge be, as it were, ſer, and their Cik 
called. 

26 He hoped alſo that *'© money ſhould be given but 
of Paul, thas he might Toole him : wheretorehe ſont 
for him the oftner, and communed with him. 


© Which ſpeaks the Charge to be true that the Hiſtorians 
give of Felix concerning his Covetouſneſs, for tiking hold 0: 
that part of Pauls Accuſation, werſe 5. that he is the Ring- 
leader of the Se& of the Nazarenes ; he ſuppoſed taar there veing 
ſo many Thouſands of them, they would give farge ſumms to! 
the Life and Liberty of this their ſuppoſed Ciptz.n. This dd 
ſpeak Felix (according to his Birth) to be of a fervile and buc 
Spirit, that for Money could tranfgrefs the Laws of God, and 
the Roman Laws too. 


27 But after 4 two years Porcius Peſtus came !n'9 | 
# Felix room : and Felix willing to ſhew the : ſews a 


pleaſure, left Paul bound. 


@ Either from Paal's being in Bonds, which Hiſtory __ 
is here ſetting down : Or as others wall, Aﬀer Flix had bc 
Governour Two Years over Judes ; for that Tertulln: ſlatters _ 
for, werſe 10. is not thought to have been true 3s 10 721 place, 
though he had governed the neighbouring parts lone 


rous Cruelty and Exa&ions ; infomuch that h 
his Brother Pallas (a great Favourite,) he had lo — 
Yet he did not wholly eſcape Puniſhment, but was icn | 


is S oe ftp 4 014041 3 
by Feſtus, his Succetlor, unto Nero, vis tranſit glorts ; 


and man being in honour continueth ut. 


Chap, Ny | 


17as, the c| 7 


48 "8 
4 Fr. N 


-cars beto1re. 

. 4 2 j- 4 . 1. 
e The Jews had accuſed Feliz unto the Emperor +01 his bar 
ad it not bcen #0! 
ſk his Li: 


CUAP, 


?, {ef 
Will. 
mbld © 


TH 
vy ar) | 


$ » ? 


mend the 
ced upon 
Adultery, 
rod, Very 
of his Du- 
Reproach, 
ht contri 
to come : 
1 1t 1n the 
1 Terrors 
nd inward 
derſtanaing, 
r £00 quick 
len put off 
Ment that 
hath done 
their Cike 


TIVen him 
re he tent 


\ Hiſtorian 
ing hold of 
the Ring- 
there being 
» fumms f0! 

This did 


came !nto 
e Jews a 
| 


ory, St, Li 
x had been 
Aatters 2m 
o this place, 
vears berore. 
'r [is barbs 
10t been 507 
} his Luc: 
; ſent bound 
oria mundi ; 


CHUA? 


SNTLSS 


VvY [/ The A EC Pn $: 


CHAP. XXV. 


', ns cometh into the Province, and goeth up to Jeruſalem. The 
ſew's accuſing Paul, deſire him to be ſens for to Jeruſalem, #n- 
"tending t0 kill him, 1 — 3. Feſtus will have him appear at 
Coſarea : The Jews accuſe him grievouſly ; he defendeth himſelf : 
znd a pealeth unts Czlar, * I Feſtus declareth Paul $ 
\-3ufo ro King Agrippa, and Bernice, 13 21. Agripp? 
uefireth to hear him, 22. Paul bronghe forth: Feſtus relateh 
{further his Cauſe, and how he had done nothing worthy of Death, 


250 —?). 


\ . ED : 

' ow wien Feſtus was come-intothe a province, 
after three days he aſcended from þ Czfarea 

to Jeruialem. = 
a So the Romans called any Country which they had con- 
vered with their Arms, and unto which they ſent a Governour, 
which at this time was Feſtus, being now ſet over "udaea in 
Frlixz his room. 6 Ceſarea had been the place of Reſidence for 
the Roman Governours, by reafon of its ſtrength and ſituation, 


Chap. 23. 23+ 
2 Then the high prieſt, and the c chief of the Jews 
informed him againſt Paul, and 4 befought him; 


£ The ſame who are called rhe Elders, Chap. 24. 1. d Con- 
-nued their Accuſotion and Proſecution of Panu!. So reſtlels is 
the Rage and Enmity the Adverſaries of Truth have againſt the 
Profeflors of It. 

2 And deſired f favour againſt him, that. he would 
ſnd tor himto Jeruſalem, g laying wait in the way to 
kill burn. - 


f Though it ſeems ro have heen bur Juſtice, that they might 
be allowed to try Parl for tuch Crimes as were within their Cog- 
nizance ; yet that they might che eafiher obtain their deſire, they 
beg it as a Favour. x3 Which did worſe become Magittrates 
end Prieſts, than any men, to act thus againſt the Law of Na- 
ture, and” to. be ſure aiſo againſt the Law of the Land, to hire 
Rufhans to aflaſſuiate Paul. 


4 Bnet þ Feſtus anſwered, that Paul ſhould be kept 
at Cxfarea, and that z he himiclf would depart ſhortly 
1] 
thitver, 


Tt is moſt probable, that Feſtus had been informed by Pe- 
liz of the Jews Malice againſt Paul: For Felix having been ac - 
culed by the Jews unto the Emperor, might be ſuppoſed to 
have recriminated whereſoever he had any Opportunity - 
And in all the time of his Government they were nor guilty of 
a worſe Fatt than their deſign againſt Pau!, it being Sedition, 
-nd intended Murder of one who had the privilege of a Roman 
Citizen, #-The Governours kept their Courts whereloever they 
CiNe, 


5 I &t them therefore, ſaid he. which & among you 
are ab'e, go / down with we, and accuſe this man, it 
ne be anv 2 wi-kecnels in him. 


t Fir to proſecute Paul in your behalf; as T:rinllas was, 
whom the Fews h.d carried with them formerly, Chap. 24. 1. 
[Pccaute Terwfalem wits ina Mountainous part of the Countrey,and 
mich of it built upon an Fill. m The word properly ſignifies a 
joirſh thing 5 bur it is allo taken for a wicked thing ; all Sin 
bzing Folly, and Grace Wiſdom ; as they are frequently called 
n Scripture, though the World hath another Opinion of them, 
many abzorring to be accounted Fools, and yet care not though 
they appcar molt wicked. 


6 And when he had tarried among them {| more » 


,.N tet days, he wene down unto Czlarea, and the 


L, xt Gay fitting in the judgment-feat, commanded Paul 
tO be brought | 
51%. 


? tie Margin gives an account of a divers reading, unto 


IJ. x 1474 . : A "I —_—4 . 
"21 might be added another, viz. Eight-or Ten days: which 


rung many follow, and is according unto tlie uſual expreflion 
ot Iucl a thort tpace of time, which need not to be exaltly ſer 
corn. Thus though God hath provided ſo, as there is little or 
"0 virety in ſerting down thoſe Truths or Do&rines in Scripture 
which concern Faith and Manners, or our believing and holy 
"ing; yet in Circumſlances which (though they pertain to 
cormpicat the Hiſtory or Genealogies in Scripture) are not ne- 
eli ry tobe ſo exattly known, God left them nor fo deſigned, 
SEXSTEHE us in this ſtate, whercin we know but in 'avt, 1 Cor, 
4. undamental Truths are not of ſuch a depth bur a 
AO MY wade or walk in them ; but there are lels material 
PAs luch a proftundity, that an Elephant may ſwim in them, 
"me cn of the higheſt underſtanding and deepelt reach muſt 
UY Our, ys E&96>. 
| 7 nd when o he was come, the p Jews which 
Me cown from Jerufalem 4, Rood rourd abour, and 
"0 7 many and grievous complaints againſt Paui, 
| MaIChthey could not 5 Prove ; 
Li The Judge ſar, and the Priſoner brought. p His Accu- 
TR 6s were many, and came wita a full cry againit him, 
Fol -14 - 


} 


PIR 


ITE T2” A. 


' © . - 

t1 " p = «4 7 f : _ ' F yY 4 E OD... : 
FHeſle aCculorions were, appears a the next Verte by Peil's An- 
£ ons "a. + 22 Jv i 6% » 2 - bY 
awer, j DUT tn2ey Cou:d not demonttratre 5s, ar 1s fem 

Phy Fe 4 + PEI a ® gre rats we - ; ny 
evident. And if it were Jnjferem? 9 accuſe, mn» 43 it 2? 110- 
cen? 

O WH "9 1 . * © - 11% *& —_— 
; IT ja Jot nr rot Fo ! BY 29 ; ; : % 
8 While he anf:v2red for him Cf, Noi 

= Fa 1 y i , ” p < . 

q T 3 LS 4 FY /* . —_— » : 
oa1nſt the law of the {=p mneitigr © a7 —_ 
CE © a = 3 bw ** \24 s > 4 > © * - s 4 

. * % 

T2 Leaf La "#- 1 67 fa = "1+ « oY "5%, 3 . . — "MH $8 n Wes 
PC, H#1®} w » 2 «* MIS ITY: TY þ D2T2 ; Z - | vootl L "#4 fn 
at all. 

y iſ? - a 0 a? 6 » v4*.» > =o 4 4 . - ” , F 

Paut int wers unto ©:ie T:irve C rETC9 W111 a& WAI FOE. 

” } -P I - ft x gs } NAN VQ-) x 4 L- e ? - f - 
wit; 7 TIT. He hid not otcenued CRETLIIN {oy SR. "WARE ohh 

= #. 
aways 2 Reo; CESS ons =, So tolts! f 
always a Religious Obterver or it: Nor, « 2, Avuinit the 


ple, which he went into devoutly, 314 vpor 1 Religious v 
Nor, w 3. Againſt Cefar ; having never taught my ] 


« 


of” . . {Y © y 2 e 
nor ſaid or done any thing agzinte ts Govermnent 
fn alt 2 64 ? v. 7 » 7 » q {* 
9 Pur tefrus Witlng ECD XY tf” 20S 4 3 233. 


Fd. 


7 anſwered Paul, and faid, -, Wilt thonw 995 rv £o 
Jeruſalem , als , 


Fi » £7235 Ty C - My Jy *0 wow I 
> + THNETE Ha jFacued i the'e Cl 2 2 Dion 
tore me 2 


x As his PredecefTor, Felix, before lim, C5 54. 5»: ro o:;y 
popular applauſe, and rhe good will of that Nation ; cf-c: ily 
Felix having been dilplaced vpen the complaint of the Fes 1. 
gainſt him. » Anſwerd, or ſpake- to Par! ;, 25 Chop, 2, v5. ». Io. 
frus apparently inclines to favour the Jews, though he Jnvs not 
command, bur 5k tiv's 04 Par; he being priviieved v5 1 Row we 
could nor againſt his will be forced ro acxnhow!eug! toy ops for 
competent ſJuuges, 


SAL © '; . EE i 
10 4 Then ſaid Pant, Tfrand ac v6 Criars moo men. 


1 - Lo a ! IT J. s 2 <8 - 
ſeat, where 1 ought to be jrfged : To the fows have 
$ WE. CI IN 
I done no wrons, c a5 thov very well knowe!? 


” ' » ' 1 


a Pri might jufiiy ſuſpect his jJuuges, and the pts whe 
they would have him judged , 


a © 


d allo his loyrn:y thhrho 
k ”; -1t] -h- * ons Twas 5 ! - ih - hy RARE 
nowing with what difticuirty, and not without a crew Gant 


- Ma, 7 
p_ 


he came from thence. þ He was now before Ceſar's Trivuna! 


whote Vice-gerent Fefus was; and he only oughr to judge 
Roman Citizen. c Feſtus might know that Pau! hid done the 


- 


Jews no wrong, from the Relation Felix had made unto him ; 
as allo from ſuch as wers with Felix when Paul's Catz was 
heard. 

11 * Forif I be / an offender, or have commi;:red 
any thing e worthy of death, I refuſe not to die : bur 
if chere be none of theſe things whereof theſe: accuis 
me, f no man may deliver me unto them. g I apneal 
unto Czſar. 


d If I hive injured the Jews, and my fauit be e ſuch as by 


- 


Law deſerves Death, IT beg no fivour f Accortins ro Law 


( which the Romans did punCually obicrve) before Senrence was 
paſſed. g Ir was Jawful for ny that had that Privilece of rhe 


Roman Citizens, to appeal : Neither might they be tried 104inÞ 
their wills in any Province onr of Reme, Now Pay! might 49. 
peal unto Ceſar; 1. To make Ceſar more faronrable unto him 
ielf, and to other Chriſtians. 2». Becauſe he rhought ir more 
ſafe for himſelf and for rhe Clurch. 3. He was in part admo- 
nithed ro do it by Chriſt himtelf, Co-ap. 23. 11. who bad rod 


him, that he muſt bear wirnefs of him at Rome. 


12 Tnen Feftus when he had conferred with re 
council, anſwered, g Haſt thou appeaied unto Cu? 
unto Czlar ſhalc thou & 


'.* Either of the Tews, and thoſe of the Senhearim;, far Ne 
might inform them of the: Law or Cuſtom of the Rm ms ; 
and how that he could nor bur admit of Sr Pav!'s Appe?! : or 
with his own council; it being uſual for the Roman. Pretidents to 
do nothing of moment without the Advice of their Council, 
or Aſſiſtants, g Or, witaour an Interrogition ; {her haſt appealed 
un!o Ceſar ; which F:fus was glad of, rhar without danger on the 
one hand, or ill-will on the other, he mjght ver rid of that dif. 
ficult buſineſs. : 

A d ff Ra) p d ' p / s 234 TY.24- 

13 And after certain days, king 5 Agrinoa and Der- 
nice, came unto Cxſarea to ſalute Feftus. 

þ This Agrrippa is called by Joſ-phas, th: younger, and was the 
Son of Herod Agrippa, or Agrippa the Gieit; who in this Boy; 
of the A#s is called Herod, whoſe Ucath is mentioned, Chap. 
12. 23. But this Azripps was Brother to Druſilla and Bernice here 
ſpoken of, and lived in Inceſt with her, whom viral in be 


Satyr ipeaks of : 
Barbarus incefl,o dedit nunc Agripps Som97:, 


14 And when they had been there many Gays, 
; Feſtus declared Paul's cauſe unto. the x:ng, laying, 


There is a * certain man left in bond? by Felix : Ci; 


; Either amongſt common Diſcourſe, or matter of Noveiry, <7 
and for the ſtrangeneſs of it, or for his advice about it. Hows- 
ſoever, by this means the wickednefs of the 7ews was publiſhed, 
and the ſafery of St. Paul provided for, and God's deitgn of 
publiſhing the Goſpel at Rome ut lelt turtitercd, 


4 a! 
Qqqq 2 T5 Abo'tt 


—_— _ _ 7, 
” n+ 0,20 a 
RS. if. 5 w 
- _ 
4 "ERR 
_ page _- . 


Chap. ! 


« X þ , $-L - ' oF® S, 
food TOUNnd uv voOUur mw jul, Of :00;27 Tc Jt SPY2NYESACAT ig \ i110 
P, 9 ,\ 4 _ vs -- ol b ta ” 0 


—_— — 


ar. 
- = _ 
_—_— — AX” 
© arTRs —_ — 
- od a - & 
- ras. 


Fa 33 


WS 


—: 2a - «0 - = "I CI 
boner #Clereng tos oe at T9" 


«—- 
ed _ 
. 


a 


> - "2. Þ> Dus 
p motioned i. - 


Mp 
ws 


RN EEE ne ES 


= 


2 # 
t 
| 
F 
þ y i# | 
» 
F"> 85 
.h . 
$ .» 
4 
RN 
' 
+ 7 
V7 
» 
i 
T8 -- , 
i 
o by 
HP 
on: 7: 1 
4 4 


'# 
{4 
[ Kt 
. »0, 
+ 4% 
; ik 
F 1 
M73: þ 
- f* 
$f i, 
11 
Il b 
WAR 
" g 
' 
£&* 
- & 
MF! 
t 
'T 4 
: 
: 


©KER3, 


| Or, [was 
aouwbtful 


how to cn- 


guire here 


FA 


i Or,Judg- 


38s, 


F See Cl. 


9,15. 


Chap, VSXV. 


r= About Ghom when T was at Jeruſalem, the chief 
piiefis and elders of the Jews informed we defiring ro 
lie k judgment againſt him. 

k To wit, Judgment of Death upon Peul, that he might be 
ſcircenced according to the Crimes they had laid againſt him ; 
Hyun being put for »»-dizy., Neither do they 2t all matter 
thar St. Pav!'s Cafe was not yet heard ; they would rather have 
hl him condemned unheard, as they had gotten our Saviour to 
te condemned, though the Judge declared, that he found no 
£!t in him, Luke 23. 4. which their unjuſt deſire appears by 


A 


teſts his Antwer. 

16 To whom TI anſwered, It is not the manner / of 
the Romans to deliver any. man to die, before that he 
which is accuſed, have the acculers face to tace, and 
have licenſe to anfwer tor himlelf concerning the crime 
[10 againſt jim. 

{ Fo condemn any man indif#4 caurs, without” ſuficient cauſc 


illedged and proved, is not only againſt the Faws of the Roman? , 


but of the Jews, Dent. 23. 4. Nay, againſt the Law of Nature 
and of all Nations. Yet Malice had fo tar blinded the Enemies of 
Sr. Paul, that they go about ſuch things as an Heathen reproves, 
ind the very light of Natmecondemns. 


17 Therefore when they were come hither, » with- 
out eny delay on the morrow TI fat on the judg- 
ment {cat, aid I commanded the man to be brought 
forth. 


. . . ” 

» Feftns had gratified the Jews in what lawfully he might, 
not detaining them ar Charges from their habirations : _ 
that not only commends Fefus his own Juſtice, bur Paw > 
Innecenc: ; For if Paul had not appeared guiltlelſs, he woulC 
have left him to the Rage of the Jews, whom he defired t© 
gratifie whar he could, 

18 Againſt whom when the accuſers ſtood up» 
they brought none accuſation. z of ſuch things as I 
{uppoſet. 

# For Ieflus knowing how Paul had been proſecuted by the 
"ew before Felix, and what Charge they had been ar, and 
whar Journeys they had made about him , could not think lefs 
than that he was a Capital Offender. 


19 Put had * certain queſtions againſt him of their 
own o ſuperſtition, and of one Jeſus, which was dead, 
whom Paul aftirmed tobe p alive. 


o So this B-athm Governor prophanely calls the Religion and 
Worſhip of God's own Inſtitution , and that in the preſence 
of Agrippa and Bernice, who were both Jews, or at leaſt, 
brought up amongſt them. p To have been raiſed again from 
the dead acknowledging with them, that he had been indeed 
dead, 


25 And becauſe q || T doubted of ſuch manner 
of queſtions, r I asked 4;z2 whether he would go 
to Jeruſalem, and there be judged of theſe mat- 
\CLS. 


7 Fefus pretends, that he knew not by what Rule thoſe 
Cales were to be decided, nor before what Judges; whether 
before himielf or the "ewith Sanhedrim, But this is only his 
Pretenſion : The truc Cuije why he would not acquit Pal, 
though he knew lim to be innocent, we read, werſe 9. wiz. 
that he might do the Jews a pleaſure. » He asked Paul this 
queſtion, Whether he would go ro Jeruſalem, bur with a Reſo- 
kaicn to have lent him whether he would or no, had he not 
zppealed ; bur then he durſt not; For in certain Caſes none 
could hinder Appeals, from any Judge, to the People in the 
{01n;er times, Or to their Emperor in the latter times. 


21 But when Paul had appealed to be reſerved unto 
the || hearing {of Auguſtus, I commanded him to be 
kept till I might ſend him to 7 Car. 


{ The Emperor who now reigned, and to whom Panl ap- 
pealed, was Nero, who was called Auguſtus ; this Title being at 
tirfi appropriated tro Ofavizs, who ſucceeded Julius Ceſar ; 
but out oft Honour unto him or becauſe of its ſignification , 
it became an Appellative, and was given unto all the Emperors 
ſuccellively: Nay the Emperor of Germany to this day is 
culled Semper Augrſius, t As from Ofavius, the Emperors of 
Pome had the Name of Yngruſtus, ſo from the firſt Emperor 
Julius, they buve the Name of Ceſar:. This Word C2far, which 
was the proper Name of the firſt Emperor, is, in acknowledg- 
ment of him, made an Appellative to all his Succeſlors. 


22 Then * Apgiippa ſaid unto Feſtus, T would alfo 
hear the man # my felf. To morrow, faid he, thou 
{halt hear him. 


# Agrippa being well acquainted with the Jewiſh Religion, 
if not a Jew, could not bur have heard of our Saviour, his 
Cottrine, Dexrth and Reſurre&ion ; and yet makes this detfire but 
out of Curiclity; as Herod defired to hear John Baptiſt, Mark 
6. 20. andto Jes our Saviour, Luke 23. 9. 


23 And on the morrow, when Aprippa was « 
and Bernice, with » great pomp, and were en 
the place of hearing, with the chief eg Into 
principal men of the city, at Feſtus commanias 
x Paul was brought forth. a. 


w The State, Attire, and Retinue uſed in this Solemnics ; 
much undervalued by the term the Holy Ghoſt Om 's 
(px1]272) ; intimating, that all worldly glory is — p SIS F 
and appearance, meerly,; and that as a ſhew it paſſe = 
x Here is a great difference indeed between theſe rem noe 
thus adorned and accompanied on the one ſide nd WSar 
Priſoner (l:ow@Er, the chained, as he is called Chap 4%, tho 
on the other ſide: Yet Holy Paul, with great Reſon = 
his condition before theirs. He does not delire to core. ae 
them in their eaſe and ſplendor, but with Chriſt in his Fon 
and ſufferings. Phil, 3. 10. US"ace 


24 And Feſtus ſaid, King, Agrippa, and all m. 
which are here preſent with us, ye fee y this = 
about whom all the multitude of the Jews have Fes 
with me, both at Jeruſalem ,- and alſo here, cryin: Po 
he ought not to live any longer. ie 


3 Well might Pau! be agaſt, to be friendleſs in f reg 2 
multitude, and to be ſhewn and pointed at as ; Morifter 
being made a ſpefacle ro the world, and to Angels and Ns 
as 1 Cor, 4. 9. Burt he found ſurely the berefit and efficacy 
of that promiſe, Mat. 28. 20. I am with you unto the end of th 
world. : 


25 But when IT found that * he had comming 
z nothing worthy of death, and that he himſelf ht 


_—_— to Auguſtus, I have determined to {:1 
im. 


z The Calumny of the Jews adds to the Reputation « $, 
Paul : Yo many Enemies, and {o long in finding or making 4 
Fault that might reach his Life, and yet to be diſappointed! 
Paul and his Religion are vindicated by the T eſtimony of Liſa 
the Chief Captain , Chap. 23. 29. and of Feltx, the Governcr 
Coap 24. 25, and here by Feſtns, as afterwards by Agrinpa too. 
Chap 26. 32. So mighty is truth and Innocence, th: they in 
prevail ſooner or later. 


26 Of whom I have no certain thing to write un: 
to my 2 Lord. Wherefore I have brought him torth 
before you, and ſpecially before thee, b O king A grippa, 


that after examination had, I might have ſomewhar 
tO Write, AY 


_ Nero, the preſent Emperor, whoſe Deputy #fs wi! 
in this Province, though {ome of the former Emperors refuſe! 
this Name, as favouring of too much Arbirrarineſs ; ti 
latter did accept of it. 6 Agrippa being brought up in the 
knowledge of the Jewiſh Law, though it was not his bulines 


- Judge Paul's Caſe, yer he might inftruR and inform the Julg: 
aDOUE 1k, 


27 For it feemeth to me unreaſonable to fend a 
priſoner, and not withal to ſignifie the c crimes {a 
againſt him, 


c So great a clamour, ſo hot a Purſuit, and yet after all ti 
the Judge (who would. willingly have condemned Pas! , and 
gratitied the Jews) knows not wherefore all this tir had been: 
But the more muſt he have been ſelf. condemned that durſtnot 
abſolve or free a Priſoner, who wag detained only by the pow! 
and multitude of his Adverſaries. 


CHAP. XXVI. 


Agrippa permitted Paul to ſpeak for himſelf: he related his Lij 
before his Converſion: how he was conviried, 1-————15 
called to his Apoſileſhip, 16 20, how he taug; and Jufferes, 
21—23. Feſtus chargeth him with madneſs thriugh 10 i 
Learning : he modeſtly defendeth himſelf, 24, 25. turneth pi 
Diſcourſe to Agrippa, who is almoſ# perſwaded to bs 3 Chriſtian 
26.-——28, Paul wiſheth all to be like himſelf, 29. All 11s 
- Connſel judge him innocent, 35032. 


I Tm Agrippa faid unto Paul, Thou art 7c! mm 
ted to ſpeak for thy ſelf Then Paul « firetcNc0 
forth the hand and anſwered for himſelf. 

# This ſtretching forth of his hand was, 1. To obtain 11cnce 
of others whilſt he ſpake; or, 2. To ſhew his innocencs, 
whileſt he vſes this modeſt confidence : or, 3. As orher Orato!s 
when they begin to ſpeak, move their hands. Thc Providence, 
of God wonderfully procures Pau! a liberty to publiſh 6: 
Goſpe), and to make his Caſe and Religion known. 


2 I think my {elf b happ Eing Agripp2, becauſe [ 
ſhall anſwer for my ſelf - : þ fu - before thee, touching 
all the things whereof I am accuſed of che Tews, 


8 X&VI. 


me, 


2p. 


\0 could nor be unacquainted with the Law or the Prophets, 


wi ; : 
no o which St. Paul would have his Caſe determined « Though 
and Jgrippa was not as Judge in this place, yet his Opinion and 
ner ſudgment could not but prevail much with Feftus, 

; Eſpecially , becauſe I Know thee to be expert 
uty i; «1 all .*. cuſtoms and queſtions which are among 
ves ir the Jews: wherefoie I beſeech thee to hear me d 
£110) natiently. 

«a \v 4 t . : . , 
erſon; - This 1s not flattery, bur a plain confeſſion of what was 
»l. the true ; for Agrippa by reaſon of his birth and breeding, could 
;. 18) nor be wholly ignorant of thoſe things in queſtion: 1. About 
prefers he Meſſiah : 2. About the Reſurrection : 3. About the gt- 
e With ving of the Holy Ghoſt a It being a matter that concerned 
iforace Religion, and the Lite. and Liberty of a man , nothing bur 
:cnorance or imyiety could take him off from attending unto 
if, 
mn 4 e My manner of life from my youth, which was 
po at the firſt among mine own nation at Jeruſajem, 
"_ * know allthe Jews, 
15 that | | 
e Pan] appeals to his enemies, the Jews themſelves, whethe! 
they could tax him with any enormity whilſt he was of their 
gleat & pcr{vwation : whereby he vindicates his holy Religion from being 
Lonſter, the fink and off-ſcouring of other Religions, as lfome would 
ad men; make it; as alſo to intimate , that it was his Religion which 
efficacy mzde 1:in1 to hateful unto them, and not any ill practices done 
d of th by kim. 
y c Which knew me from the beginning, (if they 
mitted k would reſtifie) that after * the moſt f ſtraiteſt ſet of 
If hath 236 our religion, I lived a Pharifee. 


© fend f This Herelie, Se&, Opinion, or way of the Phariſees 


P” G& Peru rightly commends, it we conlider it comparatively 
with the other Se&s of the Saddnuces and Efſenss ; he had called 


mM of Y 

making this before, wiz. Chap. 22.3. the moſt exaff manner of the Law 
pointed! of bis Fathers: For it is certain it was more learned and ſtrict, 
df Lyfas, ind came nigher to the Truth in many things than the other 
z0vernor, did, 
119Þa too, w 

g hg 6 And now s I ſtand and am judged for the - 


: they 0 =— : 
hope * ot che promiſe mace of God unto our fa- 


? thers : 
» The poſture of ſuch az arz held for guilty. & St. Paul 
: brings in the diſcourſe of the Reſurre&tion, which, as hat? 


U7108 UN! 
it torth 


\ orippa . - a. 
Rt | been obſerved, 1s the foundation of all Religion, r Cor. 15. 14. 
god” Chap. 23. 6. and 24. 15. now it is called the hope of the promiſe ; 


becauſe God's Promiſe did raiſe them up to this hope ; for 


fg Wi! 31, God having promiſed to be the God of Abraham, Iſaac, and ©a- 

ors refuſc & ab, gave them rather leſs than other in this world, neither had 

neſs : the they any propricty inall the Promiſed Land, bur only to a bury- 
y an) 


- ing place ; whence they might certainly infer, that there was 
inother Life to Le expected, in which God would make this 
;. his ord goGd. Par! was alto judged for the hope of the Pro- 
; mile, taking this hope tor the Salvation which Chriſt did pur- 
Clue, and Part Preach, which was alſo promiſed unto the ÞFa- 


up mn the 
is bulineſs 


the Judg? 


0 {end 2 \7. 1.15, though moſtly under types, and oblcure repretenta- 
INVES 63% tens, The lum 1s, Pau! was judged for one of thoſe two 


. Articies of our baith, vis the Reſurreou of the Boely , or a 
1 Lafe eucrla) ting, 


fer all this 
Paul, and 


7 had been: God day and night, hope to come : 


at durſtnot tor which hoes fake, king Agrippa, I am accuſed of 
F the pov! thn fn r y 
» Ly CVS 6 
i © Cr, Part Nill reckons them, notwithſtanding that Ten 


* 


Cries had been Jed captive , without returning again to this 
dy. Yer, r. There were many lett by the King of Alſyria 
in their ov-n Land ; and though for a while they joined them- 
ted his Lij telvcs nnto the Sama" itans rather than to the Jews, yet a Century 
a; or tw 0 before our Saviour's time, they returned to the Jewith 
and ſufferi!, Religionand Worſhip at leaſt a very many of them. 2. Though 
h too min the Ten Tribes never returned (as Tribes) intirely back again ; 
” turneth his many of them doubtleſs had thar love for their Reli- 


bo a Chriſtian Len and Country ; as they tock all opportunities of com- 
29. All the 


+ 


»L. 


Ing back. 3. At their firſt defection in Jeroboam's time, God 
Wiched the hearts of a great many, who rather changed 
tur Tabitation than their Religion : So that St. James might 
wel] dedicate his Epiſtle ro the Twelve Tribes, for there 


ormit» LED 3 . 
art perm we ſome who at the diſperſion were ſcattered out of e- 


«ſtretches "ar Tribe, k Now theſe with greit intention and earneſt= 

nd of define, (as when any ſtretcherh himſelf ro his ur- 

_— Os vii 'enoth to take ho!d of ought) endeavoured to obtain 

obtain Tree It Gy Salvation which God had promiſed, and the Goſpel 
'$ INNOCENCE; IEYEN it d - 


cher Orato! 
- Providence; 


dens 9 { Why ſhould ic be thought a thing incredible with 
) publiſh th 


| ICU, that God ſhould raiſe the dead ? 


| # This St. Paul ſeems to have ſpoken in regard of Feſtus, 
{UL MUAY other there preſent, who were Heathens ; or to 
©) Of the Sadauces (if any ſuch were amongſt them); as 
k  £2rippa, He believed the Prophets, ver. 27. and had out 
| them learn'd and obſerved this promile, wer. 7. However, 
OL! Wid not leave himſelf withour a Witneſs to rteſtifie ſo | 


k becgulc [ 
e- touching 


C 
es, 


T he A C ſh S$: 


; Paul thought it to be his advantage to ſpeak before 4zrippo, 


(1a 


credible, whenſoever it ſhon!d be revealed nnto them. The 
Works of Creation evidence it ; for he that can give Life unt.» 
that which had ir nor, can reftore it unto that which bh: i; 
and the Works of Providence atte® it: In evc 'y Sorins 
there is » ReſurreQion of ſuch Plants or Trees as feeme'} 
dead. Nay , the Bread which we daily feed vi was mad 
of that grain, which ourckiued except it dicd 
; GO. $4. 36. F 

9 I verily thought with my {eli, that 
do many things contrary to the 2 name 
7» Nazareth, 

- The Rcligion which teacheth Chiift 15 to be Worſhipped, 
and his Name ro be Magnulied. » Sv 
of which ſee, Chap. 22. 8. 


17716 
7718 


210T. 


+] 


'*% Ss -_ ; > - ' ns 
wICY Cailzd OL Jt 1\:: 


10 * Which thing 1 alſo did in Jeruſdtem: ant 3 1 
many of the ſaints did ] thuc up in piiſen, tovin; 
received authoriry from the chief priefts; and, whe: 
they were put to deati, I gave », my voice atzinit 
them, 

o The Profeilors of the Religion of the IToly Jeſus, 
are callcd to be Saints, Rom. 1. 7. and hive hiin for thc 
great example of holinels, who fulfilled all right. wathetk , 
and from him they have the Spirit of holinets, being funrcti« 
fied in him, 1 Cor. 1. 2, and whoſyever hath not his Snirir, 
he is none of his, Rom. 8.,g9, p Paul was nur one of ths 
Council; nor, that we read of, in any Otihce or Plice to 
judge any Perion. Beſides, the 'ews are thought ro hive 
had no power of Life and Death; and that Se, Sto ben eas 
ſlain rather in a popular cumult, than legally ; but Pas! may. be 
ſaid to do this, by carrying rhe Suifrages or rence to 
the Roman Prelident, or any others to get it ex2ce..d (tor to 
the Words will bear) and howſoever by lis apy ovins; rejot- 
cing at, and delighting in their condenmation (which was in- 
deed giving his voice, as much as he could, againit them) this 
was verified, 


1: AndT puniſhed chem oft in every {ynagogue, and 
q compelled them r torblaſpheme ; and being exceding- 
ly mad againſt them, I perſecuted them even unto s 
[trange cicies. 


when they expelled him from Jeruſalem , Go, and fſerye other 
Goas, 1 Sam. 26, 19, 


authority and commiltton trom the ;chict prieits 


abroad, and deputing lum as their Agent. 


have been now, when he appeared from Heaven with his glo- 
rious body ? And if the righteous ſhall ſhine as the Sun, 
Dan. 12. 3. Matth. 13. 43. how much more does their Prince 
and Saviour ? See concerning this Hiltory, Cap. 9. 3, &sc, and 
Chap. 22,6. 


9 Paul confeſſes that he compelled them to blaſpheme, cither 
7. By the Torments he made them to be pur unto ; or, 2.. Py 
his own example; for he confeſſed, that he had been a bliſb!1cs 
mer himſelf, 1 Tm. r, 13, :r This blaſphemy was citucr. 1, D&- 
nying of Chriſt to be the. Meſſiah ; or, >. Curling or Exe- 
crating of Chriſt, and acknowledging rhat he was juflly con- 
demned. s Drove them out of Jeruſalem and Jude ; and xccordins 
to what Paul then believed, he drave thei from the worthip 
of the true God, and ſaid, in effe&, as David's Adverirics 


U 


Y} 


12 * Whereupon as I went to Damaſcus, rt with, Be 


= 4 


t With procuratory Letters recommending him to the Jews 


- 


13 « At midday, O king, I faw in the way 1 
light from heaven, w above the orightnefs of the fn::, 
ſhining round about me, and thei which journeyed 
with me. 

# This appeared at noon-day, that it might not be ſuſpe&ed 
to bea dream or fancy. w Our Saviour's fice in the transficu.. 
ration did ſhine as the Sun, Marth. 17, 2. and he was ver on 
earth in his mortal body : How much more re{plendent muſt ir 


14 And when we were all fallen co the earth, } 


heard a voice ſpeaking unto me, and laying in the "oY 
x Hebrew Tongue, Saul, Saul, why perfecuteſt 
thou me? y @ zs hard for thee to kick againit the 
PriCkKs. 


« Whereby it appears, that Paul ſpake not now before 


Agrippa in the Hebrew Tongue, as he did before the Few; ar 
Jeruſalem, Chap. 21. ult, y This 1s a Proverb borrowed from 
the Greeks, as ſome think ; but uſed in many Languages, there. 
by denoting any who endeavour ſuch things as will ruin or 
detriment themſelves; and fo do all Pertlecutors ; for they 
cannot harden themſelves againſt God, his Truth, or Servants, 
and proſper, 706 9. 4.  pric | 

never an Attribute in God, nor ever a facuity in their oven 
Souls, but they kick againſt, and will be 
pricked by. 


Not to ſpeak of other pricks, there is 


ac laſt 


a+. 


themiclvyes 


, fF » 
And he ſaid, 


15 AndIfaid, Who art thou, Lord ? 


2 IT am Jeſs whom thou perfecurelt, 


« 71 WF © bato all, as ſhould make the Dofrine of the Reſurreion 


IF 1: 


=y 


[2 wt 
pO 
". mu 


= 4 _ 
—— _ _ 


tat 


oY: _ A a 4 __y 
- cab} $44 Cledeir wwe +; GEN 3 


= - 


LF tf | 

þ {N32 abs 
" *F T4 $45 
{ . 7 
*4 -Þ 

h; '2 


io 
67 
———_a £0f5 - 
I 


fo ME PIG 
ys W + 4 << _ if 


- 


_- 


ed 
-—_ — ma 


2-44 E - © _ a”. 
» wee - _ b bi COTSISY —————_ —__ p 
—_; GS th + - <A; 4 - - -— 

—ao_ ND 59 = AS 32 $5a0% <back a» - - 
- _ > __ 

R JI 
- an - - , " ” = E 
ETA 2 - 2 F $408 Rv ic "A Mm . —  ———— > PRI 
—_ y . - — 
> & WI 3 +47 4G ee -" - : 
o- E - LACS = — - £- th 
—ro_ ener - 


Chap. XXVI. 


"a.35.5. 
S& 42. 7. 

Eph. 1.18. 
*Col.1.13. 
iPct.2.25. 


z The Foot is trod upon on Earth, and the Head cries out 
from Heaven, as Chap. 9. 4. 

16 Bvt riſe, end 4 ſtand upon thy feet : for I have 
avncared unto thee forth15 purpole, to make thee a mi- 
nijter and a wieneb both of theſe things which thou haſt 
{:en, and of thoſe things in the which 5 I will appear 
unto thee ; 


a As Daniel was bidden by the Ange], Dan. 10. 11. to mit1- 
care his conſternation and fear. 6 St. Paul accordingly had 
inanv Viſions and Revelations, Chap. 18, 9. and 23. I. 2 Cor. 
12. 2. as he was more abundant in his ſufferings for Chriſt, ſo 
in conlolations from Chriſt, 2 Cor. 1. <. 


1> Delivering thee c from the people, and from the 
Gzntiles, unto whom now I ſend thee, 


c From this people of the 7ews, ſo in ſome Copies it 18 ex- 
preſied ; zhowſoever by the Antitheſis (and from the Gentiles) 
it is plainly to be underſtood : and God undertakes no Jeſs 
hereby, -than to deliver Par! (and all his fairhful Servants) 
from all evils 2nd enemies. Burt how 1s this performed ? and 
where is the Promiſe * St Par! was ſorely perſecuted by the 
Fews, and at Jaſt put to death by the Genr:/es, But fo long 
as it would be a mercy, and a true deliverance to Paul, God 
wrought many ſuch for him; and that, rather than fail, mi- 
raculoufly too; no Chains, no Iron Gares could detain him. 
When he had finiſhed his courſe, and done the Work he was 
ſent for, it wou'd not have been then a deliverance, to have 
been kept Jonger trem his reward, and the prize he had ran 
for. 

i? 7] To ® open their eyes, and to * turn 1h: frem 
da'kneſs e to lichr, and from f the power of Satan 
uvto God. thar tl ey may receive g forgiveneſs of fins, 
and inheritance among them that are ſanified by h faith 
that 1s In M2. 


d The eyes of their minds, that they might know God, 
and their duty towards him. Our Saviour aiſures Pan!, thar 
he ſhould do thar for the Souls of men, which he ſhould 
find effected in his own hody, being made to ſee. Now though 
this be only the Work ot God, yet to honour the Miniſtery, 
he is pleaſed ro attribute it unto his Miniſters, as being the 
inſtruments he ordinarily worketh it by ; and are hence called 
co-workers with Goa, 2 Cor, 6, 1. e This was ſignified by the 
glorious light which came from the body of our glorified 
Redeemer, which apppeared unto him. f So are all fins; 
for by them Satan Rules in the Children of ditobedience, 
Epheſ. 2.2. g Thereby intimating, that their former ſins (how 
grievous ſoever) ſhould not hinder their Salvation, who 
received the Golpel in the love and power of it. þ By Faith 
which purifieth the heart : But this may be referred either 
to our being ſanQified , or to our receiving of the TInheri- 
tance ; for both are by Faith ; and as without Faith we are 
no betrer, and do no better, ſo we ſhall receive no better than 
other men. 


19 Wherzupon, O king Agrippa, I was not z diſ- 
obedient to the heavenly v1tion : 


bog 


# I was not incredulous, I believed God, and yielded ro his 
call, as 1fa. 50. 5. which cannot be atcounred a fault in me ; 
and yet this 15 a]1 that can be charged upon nic. 


20 Put * ſhewed firſt unto them & of Damaſcus, 
and at Jeruſalem, and throughout all the coaſts of 
Judza, and en to the Gentiles, that they ſhould repent 
{ and tuin to God, and do works 2 meet for repen- 
cance. 


; & Nigh unto which place he was firſt converted, taking the 
{rſt opportunity to Preach Chriſt ; out of the abundance of his 
heart lis mouth f{peaking. 7 AsSin is a turning from God; ſo 
Repentance is a turning (or rather returning) unto God. 
»n Such as became a true penitent; for as we muſt ſhew our 
] ajth by our Works, James 2, 18. {o we muſt ſhew our Repen- 
tance by our Works alto : For to ſay we are grieved for lin. and 
we hate ſin, and yet to live in it, it is but to deceive our ſelves : 
nu (whatin vs Jay) to mock God. ; 


21 For theſe cauſes the Jews caught me in the 
temple, and went about to » kill -e. 


nu By violent hands, and indire& means, as we ſee, Ch. 2r. 
31, and asthey hed done unto our Saviour, Chap. 5. 30. where 
the lame word is uled. 


22 Having therefore obtained help of God, 0 1 
continue unto this day, witneffing both to p ſmall 
and great, ſaying none other things than thoſe 
which the 9 prophets and Moſes did ſay ſhould 
come : 


0 That Pan! continued till then alive, notwithſtanding all 
the fraud and force of his enemies, is acknowledged by him to 
be from God ; from whence he infers towards his juſtification 
_ what he had done was but in a becoming gratitude rowards 
« of ha who had maintained him in life unto thar very day. 
> Waitneſſing to 31] zorts, Princes, or People ; implying, that 


The ACTS: 


Chap. AN 
the truths of the Goſpel, and the things of God, conc« 
Agrippa as well as the meaneſt of his Auditors; ind indeed w:. 
God there is no reſpe& of perſons, and that we are 4 Sor ih 
Chriſt Jeſus, Gal. 3. 28. q Moſes was himſelf allo a Pe, 
but he is here made eſpecially mention of, becaule of Hap, 


» 


cellency above the other Prophers (unto whom God lpake f:ce 
ro face) as alſo becauſe he was the Law-giver to the +..." 
and whom, upon all occaſions they pretended to yield ob 


ro, 


ned 


Tewr 
edicnce 


23 That Chriſt Jhould » ſuffer, ad * thy þ. + 
ſhould be the s firſt that ſhould riſe trom the qeza t;. 
* and {hould ſhew er light unto the « people, and to the Cl; 
Gentiles. Ker, 1 

y The ſuffering of Chriſt was taught by Moſes in all tt. 34 
commands abour Sacrifices and more plainly by Iſaiah * 
all the ffty third Chapter, in fo much that this was ackngy. 
ledged by Tryphon, diſputing with Juſtin Martyr , although 
the generality of Jews both then and now, do ſtitfiy deny | 


'The Carnal Tews do not like to hear of a Spiritual K{s. 


dom. s Chriſt was the frft that did riſe to an immorta 1;. 
others that were reſtored ro life, died again: Beſides, Chris 
is deſervedly called the firſt, by reaſon ot his dignity and en;. 
nency, and in that he role as a head and fountain of life ty 
others even to all that live and believe in him. # A!l t 
Word of God is light bur <fpicially the Goſpel, which gi. 
covers a plain and open way unto Salvation, « to both 4x; 
,nd Gentiles, as verſe 17. 


24 And as he thus ſpake for himſelf, Feſtus ſaid with 
a lond voice, Paul, » thou art belide thy felt: + my 
learning doth make thee mad. 


w This was the Opinion of Feflas concerning Parl, an{ {1c 
is the Opinion of czrna! and worldly men concerning tych ;; 
are truly Godly. As the Prophet which came to Jezy, 
counted a mad Fellow, 2 Kings 9. 11. and the friends of gy: 


L 


as appears all along in his Defence he made for his LCec$rire, 
and his Life; but there was yet ſomewhat more than 4! cl, 
Feſtus might feel a more than ordinary effe& from Pau”s \Vori; 
and not knowing of the Spirit by which he ſpake, did rribur; 
it to his learning, or madnefs, to any thing bur to the tw; 
cauſe of it. 

25 But he ſaid, I am not y mad, moſt nc! 
ſtus ; but ſpeak forth the words of truth and 
bernels. 

3, St. Paxl with all meckneſs makes his reply to the Governor, 
and not taking notice of his ſharp cenfuring ot him, returns 
an Anſwer in moſt reſpe&ful terms unto him ; as his b!z!zd 
Maſter, who when he was reviled, reviled not again, 1 Pe!. :, 
23. X Soberneſs in contradiftion to madneis, m Modeſty waving 
the Relle&ion, and denying the charge Feftus had lud upon 
him. 


26 For the a king knoweth of theſe things, before 
whom alſo I ſpeak freely : For I am yer{waded that none 
of theſe things are hidden from him ; for this thing wa 
not done 1n a corner. 

« Agripps being educated in Judea, could not but hear of th: 
Life and Do&rine, Death and Reſurrection of our Saviour; 
as alſo of the Miracles done by him, and by his Dilcip'cs 
For as our Saviour ſays, he ever taughr openly, Few 18 
20, 


27 King Agrippa, 6 believſt thou the Prophes? 
I know that thou believeſt. 


b A Rhetorical infinuation, that could not but much aff:& 
the King and leave a ſenſible impreflion on his heart. St. Paw 
anſwers the queſtion which he had propounded, and riur 1 
favour of Agrippa; or rather blames himſelf for making that 
queſtion ; but his Cryptical inference would then be, /' 
believe the prophers, why do you not believe Chriſt of whom 4 
propreſied ? 


28 Then Agrippa ſaid unto Paul, c Almoſt thou p:t- 
{wadeſt me to be a Chriſtian. 


c Some think that theſe Words were ſpoken Ironically, ' 
ſcoffingly ; as if Agrippa had ſaid, Thou wouldeſt have me 1n*9 
ſhort a ſpace (fof ſo <y 35iya may be tranſlated) ro be brougit 
to-profeſs Chriſt ; ſome think it unlikely thar fuch an one » 
Agr:ppa would ſpeak ſo plainly as we tranſlate it 1 {uch a place, 
before ſuch an Auditory ; bur the danger ſeems not tO have _ 
ſo great from theſe Words; and if it had becn greater, wi 
knows the power of that convittion under which /g7/pp3 it on 
time was! and Paul's rejoynder does ſuppoſe the Words 0 © 
ſpoken in the ſenſe we read them in, 


2 9 A nd 


ND. 


LOUgh 
ay i, 
King. 
| lite; 
Chris 
| emi. 
life t9 
11 the 
ch dif. 
"ew5 


d with 
Mich 


Ve Quite 
4 
l 
V 11at One 
m {0 a8 


TIMES ENe 


L 


F "a 
tie ls 


L.? F 
Aa 2 
702 vw v? 


1d 


RY 
IS, hetore 
that none 
hing Was 


hear of ti 
1r 9aviour; 
\ Diſciples. 


John 18, 


| Ol 


'X ag 


Prop.ie's 


much af 
ot. Pa 

and that in 
naking that a 
n be, 15 1 
of whon 460) 


{ thou p2!- 


Tonically, © 
have me 1n 9 
0 be brougit 
1ch an one» 
\ {ſuch a plac, 
- to have been 
greater, V 0 

Agrippa it my 
"ords £9 0 


2 9 A ad 


hou, bur alfo all that hear me this day, were both 
US 


35 berween themſelves, ſaying *,- This man doeth nothing 
"| worthy of death, or of bonds, 


c 
L 1 þ Ne when * it was a determined that we jhou!d 
»£%. {ail into ltaly, they delivered Paul and certain 


| With us, 


rr Ss "ol - "Ig v 1 5 1 ' Th. 
| gait Airylene, of a peſtilent Air. e The Ship did belong 


Coaſts of 4a. 
of 


xX&VIL 


29 And Paul faid *, T would to God, that not only 


/ almoſt, and alcogecher ſuch as Tam, e except theſe 


bonds. 


1 Paul knowing how Iittle it would avail any to be almoſt 
. Chriſtian, wiſheth their PerteQion in that Protefſion, that 
ight not with the Laodiceaus be neither hot nor cold, 
Rev. 3.16. nor with the Iſraelites, halt between God and Baa!, 
1 Kings 18. 21- & Some think that by Bonds, St. Paul means 
only his Guard wherewith he was ſurrounded; bur it1s certain 
chit St. Paul was bound, in the moſt literal ſenſe, with Chains, 
as Chap. 24. 27- and he wiſhes his Auditors all che Good taat 
was in him, and to be freed from all the Evils that were upon 


they M 


(110. 

0 And when he had thus ſpoken, f the king roſe 

"7, and g the governour, and þ Bernice, and they that 
irre with them. 
f Agrippa, g Feſtus, and þ the Queen, # together with the 
Governor's Council. Although they had heard this excellent Diſ- 
courſe from the moſt Jearned Apoſtle, like the Blackmore or 
Leopard they cannot change their Spots, Jer. 13. 23. or Skin, 
having ſianed againſt former Mamfteſtations of God's Will ; 
tor ovght we read, became ineffeQual unto them, 


| 


s 


his, 


;1 And when they were & gone aſide, they talked 


| Either to their Houſes, or to ſome Apartment nigh to 
the Tribunal. {1 They acquit Par! ; for as yet Nero had not made 
thoſe bloody Laws, whereby the Protefſion of Chriſtianity was 
made c:pital. 

»> Then ſaid Agrippa unto Feitus, This man m- 
mich have been fer ar liberty, if he had not appealed 
rto © alar. 

m Theſe Judges and greet Men do, by their Opinion concer- 
ning Paul, condemn the Jews, whem they declare to have had no 
cy: for the proſecuting of him. and ſo rhoſe Caitifs retur- 
id fo *cruſalem, not only with their Labour for their + ains, 
bur being branded by the Sentence cf fo many eminent per- 
{-n:ves, not to ſay tormented with the guilt of fo foul a ta& 
in their own Conicience. Such honour have all Perſccutors, Bur, 
withall, theſe great Men ſzem to be felf-condemaed, in that 
they own Paul's Innocence, and yet dare not fer him free for 
fear of the Fews: For as for this excuſe from his Appealing to 
Ceſar, [t bound them up indeed from condemning Pal till Ce- 
ſar had heard him 3 bur they could not be bound by it from 
acquitting or freeing of him : for Paul might have withdrawn 
his Appeal ; and enjoyed his Liberty, if they had pleaſed, ar any 
tine; bur what popularity, or ſelt-ends pur them upon, they 
2: willing to varniſh over with Pretence of Layyfulnets and 
Necefhiry, 


CHAT. AX 


Paul and other Priſoners ſent :oRome by Tulius a Centrr:on, ſailing 
they come unto | air-havens, 1 Paul admonithesh them , 
and foretelleth the great Damage of their Voyage, 9, 1”. The 
Centurion belierveth the Maſter and Owner of the Ship before” Paul, 


d ©, 


and [ail by Crete, 11-13. A great Terpeſt ar:ſctk ; they caſt 
et heir Goods, 14. ——- 25. Paul comforterh *cm by tel/mmg his 
Von, 21 —=—-=-26, They caſt ont four Aichors : The Sea-men in- 
ter.d 70 flec away, are hindrecd by Paul, 27 — J2. The Pev- 
2 after a long Faff, upon Paul's Awvice, J3J—— — 37. They 


caſt the Corn into the Sea, 38. and ſuffer Shipwrack, 39 ——41. 
Terry al ſwim ſafe ro Land, 42 —44- 


other pritoners unto one named 5 Julius, a Centurion 
| © Aupulius band. 

a Upon the ſolemn hearing of P#x!'s Cate, it was refol- 
ved by 1-fs and Jgrippas, with the reft that were taken by 
Fes to adviſe concerning it. 6 Thought to have been a 
ied Man of the | amily of Julius, who 


ut 

thence took his Name, 
. , v . : R 4 , ] F we 
£ 3% Cernelius was a Centurion of the [alan Band, ice Chip. 


!", t, This Band or Regiment was called :;4/us ( or 
ine Emperai's) becauſe (as fome will) it was put of his 
Guard. 

2 'And entring into a ſhi» of 4 Adrawitium, we 
anched, meaning e to {ail by the coaits of Alia, one 
? Ariftarchus a Maccdonian, of g Thellalonica, being 


i . © - .* Fad 
? ACity in My/ia, a Provincein the lefſer 4a, almoſt over- 


The ACTS. 


Paul went with a Soldier to s 
yet it wasa 1 


and rece 


Wy 
Co 


T7 #; ©2 p 
4 F Fl \$5 - oh 
qi (ip We 1/110 
y o 1 a: ſie g 4! 1 7% 4-Mft 
uproar at Eoh-(us , C2d. 19 50 = "I [8 I 21355 ty 5 nA ! " 43 " oy : 43 '" q 
Paul's AﬀdiSicne ou EEE... .. md: ES petit Fit... | [ Wer 5 RW 
P Y- MITONS NES os 4 ravels, wi-:2s at al ol yr: { FLLYP: © 4 qitt 
A ENS at $ : % by »% +> 4 'Y _ i T 7. 7 AL 
TLC +. Rome, Cot. +. bY. | -4 (+ tis '$ F menc ( ” I T) a+ | By 904 n 
Chap. 17. : p TY 41d 7 $44 
4 : . i HF i 
» Ard | 9121, 1 4b 
A790 TC hs. & yo v5 3 HOT IRS A J RATS.» i! 
5 tl Hou fdy WE touches at '5 Sidon, d WAR 4 
DILLIILS ; a *11p = p ij \ . : 136. "4% "if 
JUN [4 COUrcen 1! \ EN __ >d [? lt, a » F , ) 28, F ; , : by, * 
[LG AY) 0 gO LN d] his Tr Qt SO A 4 d py? ain j # i "; f t; "i 
7 A "7 -- Plan 7 X q : -& 4: 2 1 Sb W458 
Y 1 LIRy M 104198# bordering upon - Pal:Aixe moni. 11 | 6M; 
Matth cl, 27 and RI : h , 5 IPON G: "bojrolbt, Laaw it :O0ned 0 1 #414 " | 
"$ SY : SEE” 5 "= P. v8. 2 © £ Ag Flix nag COCmim 2: > } af, —_—_ "Ex 3 I þ whe t 
enrurion to wnom ne commuirted tj; 1, EIT TIO TS TRORY 197 LB \20f 
nitted him, C042. 24.23, k T NOUS Tas! 


ard him (as their ma 
greattavour that he miglit converſ> 
c mig.it converſe w 


- NOR Af Nin . ! . 
we. trom them tuch Reficthments towards his Journey 
6 o UFitiliac 


aner was) 
ith his Friends, _ mw | 


. 44.4 
as he ſtood in need of Now FI OE ; Weo4-4. 
Iruth of God's Word Chap. 18. ro. . That "IP ALS THB int 2 
A "x bl - » Ss Ma: he was wich 12140 = {VE by. A | 
and ts wonderful ro conſider the Preſ-nce of Cod oh wtf | 8. is 
* p4 mn 1 { y 713+ 177 
Paul all along : which things are On Examples, thar we Das TI 9 
pur alſo our truſt in God, who hath fail te will nor leave ps. kat ; 


4 And when we had lanched ! foam ton w2 F 1% 

4 FO - ——_ A ICNY Js ' £ 2 To "" Vt $18) 
failed under m Cyprus, becute the winds wo: con- 1h 
crary, "A iy 
* 

: [ Or put to Seca, m A noted Tihnd in the Ad; ——_——— N of 

dea, of which we Icad, Cnap, EE 9..and. 2: / Their near F © 

eſt way from S:4on to Myr 2, had been to hive It: Crorys ON 

the right Hand ; but by reafon of the VV inds. they were : 

forced to go almoſt round abour the Itland, Ituvins it on " i. BEAG 

lefr Hand, , ; if | 

E=OO4 d. ' M5 ps c T 

J And When we had failed oVer » the fea of C71 q 3. 

. . To es \ %. $ : ”_ x 

» NTT 9 R Eg FR 

Cia, Pp and Pamphy li. » We Clive A3Via a C:fy Of | ' 


q Lycia. 


= o 
LET Ed 
"= - ol 


» That part of the Me*iterranran thit borders on: theſe Pro- 
vinces. o Of which, ſce Chap. 5. 9g. and 15. 23.4r. p Mention 
is made of this Province, Chap. 2. 10. and 13. 13. 9 Anothie 
Province in the lefler 4/ia bordering on PampHylia. c | 


6 And there the Centurion found a thip of » Alex. 
andria failing into Italy, and he put us therein, 

r Afamous Port-Town in Ezyp?, formerly called No, of vv] 
weread, Jer. 46. 25. unto this Place the Ship did belong, which 
; was now in the Road or Haven of Myra, intending tor 7: a!y 

whither they carried Corn, and Pcrfian and diam Commud;. 
ties from thence. 


ich 


7 And when we had fail:d fowly war, 
{carce were come over againly £ Cnidus, 
ſuffering us, we failed under « |! Cree | 
w Salmone. 


y da 


- 


s The Wind being contrary, or at leaſt very bare, 174 ; ——_ 
be their Ship much laden. z A Ciry or Pcomontory ith gs: 
z ,j Crete, which is now called Canis, 2 known 10. = _ 
Mediterranean. w ASeai-Town in C2v4y, or the catterly Promon.. 


| Or, Can- 
tory there, io called, i4. 


| 
a 
2 


> KL 
WW EG 


8 And hardly paſting it, came unto a place which ;5 
calied, The x tair havens, nigh whereunto was the City 
cf y Laſea. , 


x Or, The fair or good ſhore, that beins 1ccounted 
which is ſafeſt for Ships to ride in, or enter into. 
this Name remains © this Day (as tome te!] us) in th 
Candy, 7 called Laſor, and more in the Lind ; 
that this Town 1s not certainly known, nor havin 
ned by any Ancient Geogripher. 


the beſt 
\ place of 
e Iilind of 
yet lome think 


g been mentio- 


7 


9 Now when much time was {rent, and when 
was now dangerous, becauſe z; the faſt was now alr 
paſt, Paul admoniſhed rhers, 


z This Faſt was not any neceſſitated Abſtinence, but 
gious Faſt ; as the Word here uſed does moſt commonly lignitic - 
and the Article being put to it, it may welldenore for em; no 
and known Faſt. We read, that amonsft the %-w; Sronrad 
Faſts were oblerved; as the Faſt of the Fourth Month, of the 
Fifty Month, of the Seventh, and of the Tenth Monch Zee 
8. 19, Butthat of the Seventh Month did tirexcced them all 
it being the 3. ay 1n which the Prieſt was co mate an Atonement 
for the Pcople ; and they were ſtrictly commanded to affli ebeiv 
Souls init. Levit. 16. 29, and 23. 27. (Thus when we look 
up to him whom by our Sins we þuve pierced, we muſt 
mourn, Zcch, 12, 10.) Now this Fat was ro be obſ=rve8 
on the Tenth Day of Tjri, or their Seventh Month (which 
iS made up of part of Septemocr, and part of OGoher) : and 
then this Day, which might well be called, The Ez, £11 abour 
the beginning of Odober ; afrer which time, until March they 
did not uſually venture on the Seas, efpecially their Ships not 


ling 
cady 


WO 
th ius 


W Aaramyitium, and deſigned a Trading Voyage wong the 


f This Ariftarchus feens ro-have been a man 


2 


110} 


Y %y 


UL 


P—  —— —— 


Leing 1o able to bear a Storm as Ours are; and the Art of Navi. 
z1On being not yer any reatonable degree found out amonz(f 
(LCL, 

10 And ſaid unto them, Sirs, E4 DerctoVe ef 
 oyage will be with {| hurt and much damace, 1 
of the lading and ſhip, but alto of our þ 1iy 


FY 
LC 


I» 


Chap, XXV1.. 


{| Or, brat. 


a Paul did not ſay this ſo much by reaſon of the time of the 
year, and the Tempeſis which do utually attend it, as by a pro- 
phetical Spirit : God intending to provide for Paul in this tedi- 
ous and ditficult Journey, endues him with the Gift of Prophe- 
cy; which (when eſpecially they ſaw it verified) could not bur 
beget a great Reſpe& roward him, and might be a means of 
Salvation to many that were with him. 6 So it had been, their 
Lives had been loſt as well as the Ship and Goods, had not God 
given the Lives of all in the Ship unto Paul, and ſaved them for 
his ſake ; as wer. 24. 

11 Neverthelef, the centurion c believed the maſter 


and the owner of the ſhip, more than thoſe things which 
were {poken by Paul. : 

c T he Centurion believed thoſe whom he thought beſt skilled 
of thoſc things (as every one in his own Art) : And if he had 
not heard of Paul's Condition and extraordinary Qualification, 
he was doubtleis the more to be excuſed, 

\2 And becauſe the haven was not commodious to 
winter in, the more part adviſed to depart thence alſo, 
if by any mean: they mizhe attain to 4 Phoenice, ard 
there winter 3 which is an haven of Crete, and lieth e 


toward the fouth-v/rſt, and north welt. 

d This Phenice was a Port-Town in Candis, and not the Coun- 
try in $zria. e Being on the South part of that Iſland, having a 
Bay or Road like unto an Half-Moon or Cretcent; one Horn or 
part of it (admitting entrance into it) toward the Sowh-W:fi, 
and the other toward the North-Weſt. 

13 And when the ſouth-wind blew ſoftly, ſuppoſing 
that they had obtained heir purpole, looſing thence they 
{ailed f clofe by Crete. 7 I 

f The South-wind being ordinarily moſt mild, and at that 
time not high, they ſailed along the ſhore of Candia, not being 
afraid to be driven upon it. ; : 

14 Bur not long after there [| aroſe againſtg ita tem- 
peſtious wind called þ Euroclydon. 

g Crete or Condis. $o that they were in the greater danger, 
having a Lec-ſhore. þ This ſome will have to have been a 
Whirlwind; but the word ſignifies onely, The tempeflous Eaſt, 
or the North-Eaſt, which is a contrary Wind unto any that would 
go from Crctec to Italy. 

i5 And when the ſhip was i caught, and could not 


+ bear up into the wind, we let her drive. 

7 Being forced trom Crcte, and the Ship no longer at the com- 
mand of the Mariners, but in the ſole power of the Winds, 
k The Ship could not keep her courſe,the Winds being contrary ; 
fo that her Prow or Head (part whereof was called, The Eye 
of the Ship, and on which its Name was formerly, as now at 
the Stern, inſcribed) could not bear up according as their courſe 
did require ; whence that Expreſſ.on, a/Jogdzaudy To) aviua, 
r-hich is here uſed. 

Sic quo xon voluit, ſed quo rapit impetns unde. 
16 Andrunning under a ceitain iſland which 1; called 


{ Clauda, we had much work to come #2 by the boar. 

Called alſo Claudor, and by ſome Gaudes, and now Gozo, an 
Hand near unto Crete. m3 In this ſtreſs of Weather they would 
take up the Boat, leſt it ſhould have been ſtaved or beat in pieces 
«gamit the Ship. 

17 Which when they had taken up, they » uſed 
lieips, o undergirding the ſhip; and fearing leſt they 
Jthould fail into the p quickſands, 4 ſtrake fail, and fo 
were driven. | 
_ a% Not only ufing all Inſtruments fit for their purpoſe, but all 
hands were imployed too. o With Cables to keep the ſides of 
the Ship the cloſer and faſter together. p There were Two 
Quickſands eſpecially, tamous in 4frice, theone the greater, the 
other the leſſer, called Syrres, becauſe theſe Mountains of Sand 
ander Water, did feem, as it were, to draw and ſuck up Ships, 
they were jo ſoon ſwallowed up by them. q By the word here 
uted, Sails and their Tackle, or the Top-Maſt , may be under- 
ſtood Deckr. 

18 And we being excecdingly toffed with a tempeſt, 
the next day they r lightned the jhip. 

r Ciſting outthe Merchandize or Lading which was in it, that 
the Ship being ſo much lighter, might nor ſo readily ſtrike upon 
# Rock, or be ſwallowed up of the Quickſands, it drawing fo 
anuch the leſs Water. 

19 And the third day we caſt out with our own 

hands /the rackling of the ſhip. 
_F/ Allthe Ships Furniture which it had either for Ornament or 
Detence, and not their Ballaſt or Lumber only : So willingly do 
Men part with all things for their Lives ; which vet are-bur ſhort, 
and, at beſt, mixed with care and ſorrow, Jeb 14. 1, 2. 

20 And when neither 7 ſun nor ſtars in many days 
appeared, and no {mall tempeſt lay on #s, all hope that 
we ſhould befaved, » was then taken away. 

? Which ſhews the greatneſs of their miſery, which had not 
the Ordinary Refreſhments from the ſight of the Sun to relieve 
it. For that the Sun does cheer, is one Reaſon why our Savi- 
Our 1s called the Sun of Righteouſneſs, Mal. 4. 2. u There re- 
manned no hope inthe Eye of Reaſon, or Reckonin g upon Second 
Cauſes, or Natural Events. 

| 21 But 2 after long abſtinence, Paul ſtood forth in 
the midſt of chem, and ſaid, Sirs, ye ſhould have 


The ACTS. 


Chap. Xxy1 
x hearkened unto me, and not have looſed from Crs 
and to have y gained this harm and loſs. ws 

w Theſe did not abſtain from their Meals for any wa 
they had ſufficient proviſion ; as appears, wer. 38. —_— 
the Storm or Tempeſt roſſing the Ship and them in es 
away their ſtomach : for the Seamen, ar leaſt, were not 5; 1 
troubled with that Sea-ſickneſs : Bur, r. Their continual] "h 
employed, working for their Lives. Or, 24ly, Their Ant 
periſhing, and ſenſe of a future ſtate, might take 1 po '- 
thoughts ſo effeQually, that they minded nothing elſe _ : 
it hath been ſaid, That whoſoever cannot pray ſhould «9 + Pe 
and there he would learn it: For i their afft&ion they ey 
me early, faith the Lord, Hoſea 5. 15. » Being Pas! hag &. © 
told this that now befe] them ; as wer. 10. they were bound + 
have believed him ; which they not doing, are now deſervegj, 
puniſhed. » Harm and loſs, miſery and calamity is a1] thas a 
obedience unto God gets at laſt, whatſoever it may promiſe oY 
to tempt us with. : * 

22 And now I exhort you to be of good cheer : #1, 


there ſball be z no loſs of any mans life among you ty 
of the ſhip. 

z Provided they would do as he required of them : See .,, 
31. In Gods Promiſes there is a tacit condition, which Grab 
the Nature of the thing is to be underſtood ; as in that whict 
was made to Eli, mentioned 1 Sam. 2. 3o. Paul did fore 
this ſo particularly,thaz when it was come to pa!5,he might gain ;\. 
more reputation to the truth of the Goſpel which he preaches 
and more glory to thar God whom he worſhipped. ; 

23 For there ſtood by me this nigat the anze] o 
God, a whoſe 1 am, and whom 6 I ſerve. 

a A good IntroduQtion to recommend the true God, an +1,. 
Goſpel of his Son. 6b Panl, who knew the certainty of why; 2 
had predicted, owns himſelf to be now in the ſervice of ( 
that not unto him, bur unto God may be given the glory, 

24 Saying, c Fear not, Paul, thou 4 mult be hroye!; 
before Czſar, and lo, God hath e given thee all they 


that fail with thee. 

< The Meſſage which Gods Angels bring from Cod uny};;; 
people, is, Fearnot, Thus unto Daniel Dan. 10. 12, 19, Arq 
thus unto the holy women thar attended at our Lords Scpy]ch;. 
Matth. 28, 5. They are all Miniſtring Spirits, H4, , ,; 
d "Tis a forenſick word, ſhewing that* Pau! muſt be hearg 1:4 
tried by Ceſar. e Graciouſly beſtowed all thy Fellow-Trave!1.,; 
upon thee at thy Requeſt: For it is implied, that Par! hid pjyy, 
ed for them, and begged their Lives of God; as Ek þ.1 
the Lives of her people at the hands of King A44aſueru;, £3!» 
7. 3. There is a remarkable difference between Par! and 5inzh 
in a ſtorm, though Jonah profeiſes as much as -Pau! does i 
preceding Verſe. But Joxah 1. 9. it was little more than 4 Pro. 
teſſion in Jonah, but Paul was aQtually in the Fear and Serrice 
of God, and doubtleſs there was as great a difference in thei; 
breſts during the Storm. The true Fear and Seryice of Gol 
brings with it great Peace and inward Satisfation, which whrn 
any Jeave, they muſt at leaſt fo long be ſtrangers unto, forth: 
is no peace to the wicked, Iſa. 48. 22. 

25 Wherefore, Sirs, be of Good cheer : for? Ihe 
lieve God, that it ſhall be even as it was roid me. 

f Paul having had Experience of the Power and t aithfulnels 
of God, and had known his name, profeiicth ro truſt in him; 
and recommends Gods Veracity unto them, as worthy to bere- 
lied upon. What a great dealof good does one holy Mando in 
a place? Theſe hundreds of Men fare the better both in Soul 
and Body for Holy Paul. 2 
25 Howbeit g we * muſt be caft upon a certain'li 
iſ])and. + 

g This was given by Paul as a ſign unto them of the rut: 
what he had {aid, which when it came to paſs might 1nuce 
them to beligve the reſt ; which probably it did, and Javed Pau 
from being killed by the Soldiers, v. 42. Thus Gol preieriss 
his people, and delivers Paul, and brings all bis fately ol « 
the laſt, bur it is by Tempeſts and Storms. It may be they mui 
ſuffer ſhipwrack of all they have in this World firſt. Augaſh 
per anguſia, Through many Tribulations we mult enter .aco 07 
Kingdom of God ; as St. Paul had taught others, AT 14.2%. 
he experienced to be true himſelf. There was no 1:utli mor 
experimented than this. 


27 But. when the fourteenth night was come, 45 wh" 
Oo o . n J Is 
were driven up and down in + Adria, about midnight,” 


_ 
the iſhip men deemed that they drew near to fone, 
countrey : = 

h Not in the Adriatick Bay or Gulf of Fenice , which d1v wy 
Italy and Dalmatia (though that be alſo ſo called) but tis m_— 
is ſometimes extended to thoſe parts of the Mediterr 1497 - 
which borders on Sicily and Ionia in Greece, and muſt be Pu 
over by ſuch as go from Crete, or Candia, to Meiits 0! Maiia, 


WE, pthoms: 
28 And ſounded , and found it * twenty —_—_ 
4 Iam TQUNUE 

and when they had gone a little further, 1) YOu 
again, and found it & fifteen facthoms. __ 
i A Fathom is the diſtance betwixt the end of rhe = on 
finger in the one hand, from the end of the np 
the other hand, when the Arms are ſtretched out ; w —_ ao: 
dinarily accounted about fix feet in meaſure. * c— 
more ſhallow places they might reaſonably conclude rhit ©: 
were near unto the Land. | Then 
« 29 4w4 


Ong 
eine 


fore. 


KN 


ACTS. 


29 Then fearing leſt they ſhou'd have Fallen I upon 


Wi” 
rocks, they caſt » four anchors out of the ſtern, and 
; tor " wiſhed for the day. EE : | ' 
cauſe " 1 Of which there are very my in theſe Seas ;. eſpecially 
took -bout the Iflands. Which ſhew how great the Tempeſt was 
lons that they needed ſo many Anchors. n That they mught the 
ein better diſcover whereabouts they were. 
ps zo And as the ſhip-men where about to flee out of 
os the ſhip, when they had let down o the boat into the 
oO, ſea, under colour as though they p would have caſt 
1 (us anchors out of the fore-ſhip, | 
fore + That they might betake themſelves into ir, after they had 
nd tg left the ſhip. For, wer. 17. they had taken up the boat, and 
vedh ſecured that againſt this or the like occaſion. p Diſſembling the 
it Gil true Reaſon of their going into the boar to make their eſcape. 
le us 21 Paul ſaid co che centurion, and to the fouldiers, 
\ bs q Except » thele abide in the ſhip, ye cannot be ſaved. 
I Notwithſtanding the promiſe mentioned, wer. 24. that they 
U but ould all be ſaved, they muſt uſe means, ſo faras means can be 
uſed, although the efficaciouſneſs and truth of the promiſe do no 
ever, ways depend upon the Vertue of the means ; but the means are 
1 from made efte&tual by Vertue of the promiſe. Yet whoſoever neg- 
which lets means upon any pretext of a promiſe, he does tempt God, 
forete] but doth not rightly believe in him. » As it were pointing un- 
an the to the Mariners, and ſuch as were uſeful in ſuch a caſe. 
-Ched, 32 Then the / fouldiers cur off the ropes of the 
wn. boat, and let her fall off. 
61 Ol { The Centurion and Souldiers agreeing to what Paul had ſaid, 
did this to take away all thoughts of eſcaping, from the Mari- 
and t! ners, and leaving all upon what Paul had promiſed to them in 
rhat he the Name of his God, 
t God 13 And while t the day was coming on, Paul be- 
OP fought chem all to take meat, ſaying, This day is the 
W «tourteenth day that ye have tarried, and continued 
"OY fifting, having taken nothing. | 
| : All the Night after the Mariners were diſappointed in their 
Unto his | projet to eſcape. So hard a matter it was to abate their fear 
} And of being preiently deſtroyed ; and ſo great influente hath the 
pulchre zpprehenhon of preſent Death, and Judgment which foHows it, 
1. 2, upon the minds of men. « Not as it they had wholly eaten 
ard ind nothing all that while (for. 'tis commonly held, that none can 
aver fiſt above half ſo long without danger of Death,) bur becauſe 
I in all thar ſpace they had held no ſet mea], as they were wont 
"wr hal todo; and what they did eat was very little, and only in ex- 
: wil  tieam neceſſity, without any deſire or taſte ; ſo great was their 
1 Jn anguiſh. 
, — 34 Wherefore 1 pray you to take ſome meat; for 
Gare this is w for your health : x for there ſhall not an hair 
in their fall rom the head of any of you. ; 
of God v That they might be ſtronger to endure that pain; and per- 
h when form that Jabour which was neceſſary towards their eſcape: For 
(ort! God would have them to uſe all means for their deliverance. 
* A proverbial ſpeech uſed by the Jews, as 1 Kings 1. 52. ig. 
rf Ihe nifying, thar they ſhould not ſuffer the leaſt detriment in their 
; bodies, much Jeſs the loſs of their Lives. Thus God numbreth 
Mfulnck our hairs, and his providence extendeth over every one of them; 
\ es 5 Matth, 10. 30. Luke 21. 18. ; 
= a 35 And when he had thus ſpoken, he took bread 
\{ando in and y _ gave thanks to God in preſence of chem all, 
th in Soul and when he kad broken z:. he began to eat. 
— 3 Paul thanks God for their preſervation thitherto. And 
 certain'(l there is no ſuch encouragement to hope for future deliverances, 
l i5 when God doth give us hearts to thank him for deliverances 
Truth of already enjoyed. Bur he thanked Gcd alſo for giving them in 
Ir induce their necefſity ſuch food to nouriſh and ſtrengthen them, Mas. 
"od Pal 14. ig. and 15. 36. Mark 8. 6, 19. and one ſeaſon more to 
| preieries enjoy ic. The acknowledging of God in all things we enjoy, 
E.jy off © doth ſan&tifie them to us : Otherwiſe they do defile us; for we 
chey mul ulurp them; we holding them vy no other tenure but in Franc- 
 Auzaſt Almine, from God. Neither can they be ſerviceable unto us, 
er nro the if God withholds his bleſſing. Hence the Jews would not eat 
4 14. 2 $ Until Samuel had thus bleſſed their Food, 1 Sam.9. 13. And 
wth more our Saviour himſelf, to give us an Example, gives thanks before 
mol have the miraculous Loaves and Fiſhes diſtributed, 
Jon 6, 
__ I1, 


36 z Then were they all of good cheer, and they 
allo took [ore meat. 

: Believing Paul's words, promiling in the Name of that God 
hom he ſerved; that they ſhould all be preſerved ; believing 
thy did rejoyer, Now Paul, a Priſoner, a negleted and contem« 


midnight,” 
mo? A 
0 {ome f 


mich divides 


- this Name ned perſon, comes to be valued and credited. Whilſt they fail- 

-y.:nean ve ed with a proſperous Gale, neither God or his poor Priſoner and 

;| be paſſes Ciined Apoſtle are thought upon ; bur ina Storm or 'Tempeſt 

; of Mats. they are glad to believe and follow his direQion. Gods Stars 
farthoms: une 1n the night, and are ſeen in Affliction. | 


37 And we were in all in the ſhip, two hundred 


threeſcore and ſixteen a ſouls. 

* That is, ſo many perſons; as Chap. 2. '41. and 7, 14. Rom. 
* I, the Soul being the Nobleſt part, and the body following 

hich i - concttion, whatſoever it be; If the ſoul be holy, the body 
" gee -n0 all be glorious. But 'ris not ſo on the other fide : The Soul 
L_ ? they 5n0t hereafter as the Body is here : For Dives's Body fared well, 
de tn 2 fed and arrayed ſumptuouſly, and yer his Soul miſerably 
29 Then "ab, Luke 16. 19, 24. 


Y {0 unde 


. ! 
the middi 
le finger © 


38 And when they had eaten enough, they lightened 

the ſhip, and 5b caſt out the wheat inco the ſea. 
;. 6 The proviſion they had for their ſuſtenance, This is the 
third time that they lightened the thip, being willing that all 
their Goods ſhould periſh for them, rather than with them, Or 
theſe Heathens were ſo far perſwaded by St. Paul, that they ven- 
tured their lives upon the credit of what he had forctold them ; 
and parted with their food, and all they had to live upon, only 
upon his word, thar they ſhould want them in the ſhi P No more. 

39 And when it was day, c they knew not che land: 
but they diſcovered a certain 4 creek with a ſhore, in- 
to the which they were minded, if it were potitble, 
co thruſt in the ſhip. 

c In ſo long and violent a Tempeſt, thinking every moment 
to be ſwallowed up, they could keep no reckoning of the ſhips 
running or way ; neither were Charts or M:ps, fo uſual (if they 
had any at all) in thoſe times. & A Bay, or boſom of the Sea, 
having Land on each ſide ; where they judged it moſt likely for 
them to get on ſhore ; uſing ſtill all means tor their ſafery. 

40 And when they had {| taken up the anchors, they 
committed themſelves unto the ſea, and looſed e the 
rudder-bands, and hoifed f up the main fail to the 
wind, and made towards ſhore. 

e Rudders is in the Plural Number put for the Singular: Or 
rather, in thoſe times they having two Rudders (as by ſeveral 
paſſages amongſt the Ancients do appear,) they were both looſed 
that now they might uſe them to dire& rhe thip to the beſt ad- 
vantage in making the ſhore, they having been ried whilſt they 
were a=-drift, or at Anchor. f Which they had ler down, or 
ſtruck, wer. 17. and now that they might make ſome uſe of the 
winds, to get nigher to the ſhore, they hoifed up. As God 
doth inſtruct the Plowman, Ja. 28. 26. to he teacherh the Mari- 
ner, and every one in their Calling. 

41 And talling intog a place where two ſeas mer *, 
they ran the ſhip a-ground ; and the fore-part ttuck 
faſt, and remained unmoveable, + but the hindzey part 
was broken with the violence of the waves. 

g A Shoal, Sand, or Ithmus, where the Sea was on both ſides 
of it. þ They were now in the greateſt extremity ; and God 
ſuffers them to fall into it before that he tends them delverance, 
that he might have the more Glory by it. 

42 And the ſouldiers counſel was : to kill the pri- 
foners, leſt any of them ſhould {ſwim out and eſcape. 

# This ſpeaks their great ingratitude, that they wou!d take 
away Paul's Life, who had preterved theirs. Bur Chriſts Apo- 
ſtles and Miniſters muſt nor look for their Reward in this Lite : 
Though men cannot, or do not recompence them, they ſhall be 
recompenced at the ReſurreCtion of the Juſt, Luke 14. 14. 

43 Bur the & centurion willing to fave Paul, kept 
them from rheir purpoſe, and commanded that they 
which could ſwim, ſhould caſt :herm{e/wes ] firlt into the 
ſea, and get to land: 

k Becauſe Paul was a Roman Citizen, whoſe Death he durft 


.not be acceflary unto, It may be alſo, that this Centurion (if 


there were no more), as the Samariten that was cleanſed, did 
this in thankfulneſs unto Paul, 1 That they might be helptul 
to others 1n getting on ſhore. | 

44 And the reſt, ſome #2 on boards, and ſome on 
broken pieces of the ſhip: And fo it came to pats that 
they eſcaped »: all fafe to land. 

2» Still uſing means, though it was of God only that they had 
them; and that they were effeQtual ro them, In this Hiſtory is 
lively verified that of the Pſalmiſt, P/al. 107. 18, 19, 20. Their 
ſoul abherred all manner of meat, and they drew near unto the gates 
of death. Then they cried unto the Lord in their trouble, he ſaved 
them out of their diſtreſſes. He ſent "his word and healed them, he 
delivered them from their deftruftions, And what follows, but wer. 
21. O that men would praiſe the Lord for his goodneſs, for his wonder- 
ful works to the children of men. God hath a Tribute of Praiſe 
which is due unto him from the Readers of this Story, that they 
would acknowledge that there is none elſe who can deliver after 
this manner, Dax. 3. 29. and then to be ſure they will deſire 
that this God might be their God for ever and ever, Pſal. 48. 14. 


C H AP. XXVIIL 


Paul, and they that ſailed with him, landing at Melita, are kindly 
entertained by the Barbarians, 1, 2. 4 Yiper cleaving to Paul's 
Hand, he is ſuſpefFed to be a Murderer ; but ſhaking it off withe 
out. harm, they t ake him for a God, 3—6. Paul heale1 Publius”; 
Father of a Fever and a Bloody Flux, with other Diſcaſed Per- 
ſons, 79—9g. Paul and his Company, after Three Months, [ailing 
by Syracuſe and Regium, come toward Rome, 10—14. They 
travel forward, and then the Brethren hcaring, come out to meet 
them, 19. Paul at Rome is kept by a Sonldier, 16. He calleth 
together the Jews, and fheweth he was Impriſonsd and Bound 
without @ Cauſe, 17.—20. They diſcharge him, and aeſire t9 
hear bis Opinion of that Religion ſhoken againſt every where, 21, 22. 
which he does ; perſwading out of Moſes and the Prophers concerning 
Feſus, which ſome believe, others not, 23, 24. 


A* D when they. were eſcaped, then they knew 
that the 4 iſland was called + Mel 
# This was {foretold by mo chap, 27, 26 Andatherefore 


Irr h ouwgh 


Chap. XXVIIT. 


- Or, cut 
theanchars, 
they {ft 

thuwinthe 
Sea, KC. 


F' - AC 

d + . WAR 
=_ 

by I =_—_ 


- - 4 ” 4 9 _—_— 
TOI 41>" 


- —”» _ 4” mY 
. - . 
PX *% " - ” _ ”» 
—_— oa wc won 4 —_——_— " — 
PACE SS CES Fg & re. — > - EE 
wh - Fn - RE C IS EIS : 
: 1,00 - «>. ISS, wht) C me 21 
- "_ a 


LO ST ST 


Chap. XXVIII ACTS. Chap. Xxy 


7 = _ _—_— 
a oo as - I” .Y | ——E me - 
Cn one = o——_— ——_— 


RES”. 


Pen. » bk __—_ 
F - =2 — _ _ - 
y q x no > = i Ca 4-23 > Mt JI? __ 
_ py . CR Z " FOUL —» —— 2, s as -4 I r 
p __ © LD”. I= h * POP OD ia. : Wor L-Y 21208 
. : « oF ns _—_ - -_ wa ad — = %* — 
" we 6 "IP = " 4 " "IR A AR 
-—— ee ERR cz. a ve —LE 6K. — I 4 
« by - w_ ” 
- -—_ - . = es _ o 
CY : - *; —" wu. i Q _ ——__ « - _ 
OE - - HY 
.. V . : & 


a 


Be hg er_ I 
—-_ ee L 


by 
— 


though the Mariners knew not the Land, wer. 39. and were not” 
ible to dire& the Ship, as wer. the 15th. yet God fo ordered it, ' 


a word ſpoken by Paul did fall to the ground, bur the 
boy oo Fr 200 + by, þ Now called Malts, a little Ifland 
between Sicily and | Africa. There#is another obſcure Hfland in 
Iilyricum, that was called by this name, which ſome have miſtook 
for this place of Paul's ſhipwrack, by reaſon that this Tempeſt 
was in the Adriatick Sea; but not only the Gulf of Yenice, but 
the Sea abour Sicily, and this Coaſt, was fo called ; as Srrabo wit- 
neflſeth : See Chap. 27. 27. 

2 And the c barbarous people ſhewed us no little 


kindneſs: d for they kindled a fire, and received us 
every one, becauſe of the preſent rain, and becauſe of 


the cold. : | 

© So the Grecians and Romans called all other Nations that did 
not receive their Cuſtoms, nor ſpeak their Language, r Cor. 14. 
is. And tothis day the African Coaſt overagainſt this Hand, is 
called Barbary, d How far is this Humanity of Heathens be- 
yond that Inhumanity which ſome thar are called Chriſtians uſe 
towards thoſe that are ſhipwrack*d, and their Goods that come on 
ſhoar ? : 

3 And when Paul had gathered a bundle of ſticks, 
and laid them on the fire, there came e a viper out of 


the hear, and # faſtened on his hand. 

e A Creature ſo venomous, that not only its biting, but (ſome 
ſay) its breath is deadly : This upon the warmth of the fire, be- 
ing benummed with the cold, and now refreſhed, began to ſtir 
its {cIf, f Asit uſeth to do when it biteth. God by this Miracle 
prepares this People, not only tobe civiland courteous unto Pau, 
bur to believe the Goſpel which he preached, whereſoever he 
went. And this wonderful Work of God was (as God's Seal to 
his Miniſtry) to ſhew his Authority to be from him. 

4 And when the Barbaiians faw the venomous g 
beaft hang on his hand, they ſaid among themſelves, 
No doubt this man is a 4+ murderer, whom though he 
hath g{caped the fea, yet vengeance ſuffereth not to live. 

g So the Viper is called by that Appellative word ; from 
whence alſo comes Theriacs or Treacle, which is made out of 
Ileſh, or Trochuſles of Vipers. And if men can make an Anti- 
dote our of Poiſon, much more can God bring good out of evil. 
h It is a ſtrange ſenſe that men by the light of Nature had of Di- 
vine Vengeance; eſpecially of God's revenging of Murder. 
Fence they called one of their Furies, Tiſiphone ; as one that pu- 
niſhed and revenged Murder. Yet they were to blame in this 
caſe, 1. Becauſe they confine the Puniſhment of wicked men 
wholly unto this Life. 2. In that they did not expeC theevent : 
They judged before they knew what would be the end of Paul 
afterwards. 3. They erred, in that they meaſured the goodneſs 
or badneſs of a man's ſtate or cauſe by his proſperity or adverſity. 


5 And he jhook off the beaſt into che ire, and telt 


; no harm. 
i A Daxiel in the Lyon's Den. God is the God of Nature, and 
the moſt natural Properties are reſtrained when he pleaſes, and 


cannot be exerted without his concurrence. Thus the promiſes 
our bleſſed Saviour made, Mark 16, 19. Luke 10, 19, were fulfil- 
led according to the Letter. 

6 Howbeit they looked when he ſhould have & 
ſwollen, or fallen down dead ſuddenly : But after they 
had looked / a great while, and ſaw no harm come to 


' him, they changed their minds, and faid that * he was 


ma God. _ 

& The word ſignifies primarily to be burnt ; and then by burn- 
ing or ſcalding to ſwell, which is accounted the ordinary ſymp- 
ron of the biting of a Viper ; to ſwell or bliſter, asif the part 
was burnt with Fire, 7 In thoſe places where there is much more 
Hear, there js more Venom in theſe Vipers. And though ſome 
are ſaid to live ſeveral days #fter they are bit by them, yet others 
die very ſuddenly upon their biting ; as the known Story of Cleo- 
patra teſtifies. And condemned Perſons were ſometimes put to 
death by Vipers ſet unto their Breaſts. 
ſo incertain and inequal are mens minds. 

7 In the ſame quarters were poſleflions of the » chief 
man of the Iſland, whoſe name was Publius, who recei- 


ved us and lodged us three days courteouſly. 

% This Publins is thought to have been Governour for the Ro- 
mans in this Iſland, Howſoever, he was a man of great Account 
and Eſtate, that could provide for ſo many as were in the Ship, 
and receive them into his own Houſe. 


Ss And it came to pals that the father of Publius lay 
Iickot a fever, and of a o bloody flux : to whom Paul 


m A ſtrange Extreme ; 


encred in, p and * prayed, and 4 laid his hands on him, 
© andhealed him. 


o A painfuland dangerous Difeaſe ; the torment in the bowels 
frequently cauſing a Fever, p Paul could do nothing of himſelf; 
and therefore begs of God the Recovery of Publius his Father. 
It is God only that kills and makes alive, 1 Sam. 2. 6. q This 
Impoſition of Hands was commonly uſed in miraculous Cures ; 
as Matth, 9. 18, Mark 6. 5, and is joined with Prayer, Match. 
19. 13. which it might be a Symbel of, Thus Publius was well 
payed for what he did for Paul and his Company, Relieving of 
the poorand diſtreſſed is frequently rewarded in this World, and 
not only in the World to come. And God now recommends the 
Goſpel and the Miniſtry of Paxl by this Miracle alſo : For none 
couid do ſuch things as theſe, unleſs God were with him. 


9 So when this was done, r others alſo w 
diſeaſes in the Iſland, came, and were healed: 

» The fame of this Cure, wrought ſo ſuddenly, perf:& 
only with the laying on of Paul's hands, could nor but £, xiP., 
and near ; eſpecially being done upon the Governour : TE by 
are uſually very careful about rheir bodily Health and W "Ig 
So that their Diſeaſes were bleſſed Occaſions to bring them: © 
knowledge of God in Chriſt, whom Paul preached. he 
might have periſhed eternally, if they had nor periſheq (or _y 
thus near unto periſhing) temporally. *_ 

io Who alſo s honoured us with many honoy:.. 
and when we departed, they laded «s with ſuch 
as were neceſſary. 

s They who were cured, rewarded or preſented the a oft 
and his Conan very liberally. And this was the effe& of ys 
inward Reſpe& and real Eſteem they had for them ; ang w, 6 
fruit of their Faith, wh 

11 And after three months we departed in a ſhip (f 
Alexandria, which had « wintered in the Ile, whyj; 


ſign was w Caſtor and Pollux. 

£ Theſe Three Months that St. Paul ſtaid at Malta, he ſpent 
like a true Labourer in the Lord's Vineyard, planting a Church 
that was famous for its ſtedfaſtneſs in the "Truth. « Ir was thei 
wont to lay up their Ships all the Winter-ſeaſon ; as we may ſee 
Chap. 27. 12. And to this day the Gallies ſeldom go out 0 
thoſe Seas in Winter, w Feigned to be the Sons of Jupiter, 1n4 
to have the ordering of Tempeſts, and the care of Marine; 
and were choſen for the Patrons of that Ship, by the Pagan Oy; 
ers of if. 

12 And landing at * Syracuſe, 
three days. 

x The chief City of Sicily, famous for Archimedes. » To fl 
probably ſome of their Wares, the Ship making a trading Voyage, 

13 And from thence we ſet a compaſs, and cane 
coz Rhegium : and aſter one day the ſouth-wind blew 
and we came the nextday to a Puteoli : 

z A City in the Kingdom of Naples, overagainſt Meſns in 
Sicily ; ſo called, becauſe that Sicily was believed to be thereabou; 
rent and plucked from the main Land, unto which they held jr q 
have been formerly joined, until by a Tempeſt it became 
Iſland. # Puteclt is a Sea-Town not far from Naples. 

14 Where we found b brethren, and were deſired 
to tarry with them ſeven days: And ſo we went toward 
c Rome. 

s Chriſtians, as ſome think ; for ſo they mutually called one 
another. Bur it is not ſo probable that any ſhould profeſs Chi. 
ſtianity ſo near unto Rome, and that it ſhould be no more known 
or believed in Rome. Others therefore think that the Apoſtl 
means Jews, whom he calls brethren (being, as himſelf, deſcen- 
ded from Abraham) : for ſo he calls the Fews he found at Rew, 
(Brethren, wer. 7.) who yet called the Chriſtians a Se& ; adding 
that it was every where ſpoken againſt, wer. 22, c Rome 
known to be the chief City in s1taly, and to have been the Em 
preſs of the World, and famous for the Church to whom St. Pal 
wrote his Epiſtle, known by its Inſcription unto them. 

15 And from thence, when the brethren heard of u, 
they came to meet us as far as 4 Appii-forum, and th: 
e Three taverns: Whom when Paul ſaw, he thanked 


God, f and took courage. | 

d A place about One and Fifty Miles, or Seventeen Leagus 
from Reme ; ſo called from Appins Claudins, who made a Wij 
from Rome thither, called from his Name, The Appian-way ; and 
had his Statue there ſet up; which is the Reaſon why it 1s called 
thus : For the Romans did call thoſe places Fors, where ſuch Sth 
tues were placed. (The concourſe to ſee thoſ2 Statues might 
bring them to become Markets). e As that was a place of 
ſort for the buying and ſelling of other Commodities, ſo this for 
the affording ,of neceſſary Proviſion. A little Town, hence 
called, about Three and Thirty Miles, or Eleven Leagues from 
Rome, So that ſome came a greater, ſome a leſſer way to 
with Paul, and ſhew their Reſpe& unto him. Theſe bretira 
are thought to have been converted by ſuch as at the Day of ?n 
zecoſt were preſent, when thoſe Miracles were wrought, C#4.? 


hich had 


"Fg 
things 


we tarried there ) 


ro. it being exprelly ſaid, that there were ſirangers from mt 
f God moving ſo many not to be aſhamed of his bonds. 

16 And when he came to Rome, the centurion de- 
livered the priſoners tothe g captain of che guard : Dil 
* Paul was ſuffered to dwell by b himſelf, with a ſoldier 4 


that kept him. » 
g The Prefefus Preterio being Commander in chicf mn , 
Soldiers, and unto whom the Priſoners of State were ps 
committed. þ God by this means giving Paul an opportunty 
to go abroad at his pleature, though chained ; as verſe 20: by 
he might preach the Goſpel ; and that was not bound, * ar 
2.9, Andnow God is with Paul, as he was with Foſeph, 11 


ſon, Gen, 39. 21. and procures him favour. 


17 And it came to pals, that after three days, - 
called ithe' ; chief-of the Jews together. An bas” 
they were come together, he ſaid unto them, _ y- 
Brethren, though 1 have committed nothing Ar 5 
people or cuſtoms of our fathers, yer * was I de ans 
priſoner from Jeruſalem into the hands of the Romany. 

i Paxl does this not only qut of an extraordinary Love ke 


XVI 


had a 


A mal WEED a . ; | _ : : 
1 -n —_— whole Oeconomy of the Goſpel is a doing good their Hearts at the hearins of God*s mud oments denounced aun? 
ar - 2 . 2 0. B -] - ” « as O P_ Mo s «3 
[wiem fr evil. So did on JOVIOUE, We: 1 the Author and Subjett of, them. . 
"hy ir. andſo muſt his o6"5 # Niiniſters do ; or they are not | 26 oayin?, * Go unto ths pore. and Gy þ flame, , - 
R MM 1 ot FE M 4 - or = F "1 - J " wt E: J ay OEEN® ob EE Oe "3 - ON hs ; "3 F 
o the like to GO ANY good at all : tor the World will hate them, 1 Jos. ing ye (hall hear, and thall not unde: Fand - and fool oy i ge 
they 3 13: ve ſhall fee, and nor perceir 1: 
- becy _ * 13 Who * wherrthey had & examined me, would FEI ney p- gr Re, - 
P,c-- _ þ » * *«TNET! 6 S7 -41C many *FOPHECICS CORC2INH7G diti. 4.1 
Fx-:4. haVC let ego, becauſe there was no cauſe of death IN | the Miſeriesand Calamities which for their Sins vcore to come rye Luke 51 
Ours; & 25 me. _ 9 | ON them, as allo concerning the Mefbah which was ro core bas Rem 
hings 6. & As Fefius did in the preſence of King Agrippa, Chap. 25, 25. did nor believe them or entertain them as they ought: fo chete £. 
«bo, chough they were both Unbelievers, yet juſtified Par ;| their Children (through the Righteous Judgment of God) info. 
poſtle :chnowJedging that he had not commitred any thing worthy of, rited their Fathers Sins, and ſhould be Heirs 3'fo of thei: prinifh- 
f that Bonds, much Jeſs of Death. Thus our Saviour was declared | ments. Thus we fee. that Scriprura Prophetica ſ[izpins implotur, 
L was 2 innocent by Pilate, Luke 23. 4. 14. and what was ſpoken and fulfilicd in tt Generation fo lons be. 
| 19 But when the Jews / ipake againſt #”, ] was'con:- | fore, was alſo in this ſo many lunared XY cars after, F 
. q p p « LN ” LS - OS SAN N .. S 2.1.44 A. —_— L = 
hip of 2” trained to appeal unto Clar, not that T had ought m to 27 For the c —_ Ol _—_— S waxed grofs, and 
F* - E 1 : Te p ] hk ar} a 21 ti] = BY BE f F 1\res th ave 
whoſe accuie my nation ot. | tnNen1r eais are dullo JEaring af jCT ELCS H NavVe t! e\ 
{ The Jews uſed all their Oratory and Intereſt againſt Paul, ciofed ; left they ſhould fez with ther eyes, and hea 
e ſpent both before Felix and Feſtus. : And had it been in Felix's Power | with therr ears, and underſtand with 1.2 heart, an 
Church (which after Paul's __ it was hot), he would have ſacrificed | ſhould be converted, and .', I thould heal them 
as their Paui to the malice © the Zews ; and by that means got their fa- c Though God did forſake his People (being firft forſiken of 
nay ſee your, whor he had fo incenſed againſt him. m Paul did not ſo them) and withdraw his gratuitous Afſifiance from them, ver i 
our 0 much want matter, as mind to accuſe the Fews. And he declares, | ; . 5c <2 a. Tas 
0n SO ; « >| 1s all juſtly charged upon then, rhey having by their Sins (aid 
ter, and that whatſoever he had ſuffered, his Intentions were not to ca-| yn Cod depart from Ss Eire nor the Rnowt dn cf 
fariners lumniare them, bur to vindicate himſelf. a A. _ . II ot a, ies 
: / , y ways, Job 21. 19. d They winked, as thoſe tliur were 10:71 
an Own, 20 For this cauſe theretore have I called for you, to| to fee; though they could nor bur fee the Truths Paut had 
lee you, and to {peak with yu : becauſe that for the » preached concerning the Mefliah; Prejudicate Opinions ond {C12 
there y hope of 1H ael I am bound with * this c chain. Hay hindering them trom coming unto the ackrowt:dgn.ync 
» See Chap. 23. 6. and 24. 2r. This Hope 1s either, 1. of the of them, *.” or pardon them ; for by guilr rhe Sou} 1s wounded, 
1 Tokel RefurreG&ion, as in the forementioned places ; and chap. 26. 6, 7, 28 Be it Known therefore unto yOu, that the e Jaiva- 
Voyng, ' Or, 2. the Mefliah, Chriſt is the Hope of 1/-ael, ſo they pretended | tion of Godis ſent * unto the f Gentiles, and chat rlicy «41, Þ.. 
1d cam? for many Ages, and him now Paul preached. o For though he | will hear it no 
4 blew, had his 1iberty to go abroad, yet he was chained with his Right} », $6, the Goſpel is called ; becauſe, 1. The finding of it ovt 5 T's 
' a i } y ” ; ; : pay 2 why, Ms ; Y > antes... : 
oy ry - ne Are anno on —_ him ; and could 2. The preparing of itby ſending his Son. 3. The revealing of 
Mena in nor POWIDTY "OE wn ned unwittingly LLom POT, : it. And, 4. Its efficacy is only of God. f Asby our $:viour's 
_— 21 And they faid unto him, We neither received p| Commiſſion, Marth. 28. 19, and Luke 24. 47. does apprar. 
held in ſetters out of ſudea, concerning thee, neither any ot | And Paul had by Experience found the Effe&ts of it ; as mar be 
is the brethren that came ſhewed or ſpake any harm of ſeen in allthis Book of his Travels; where we may find many of 
FRM = C_ were obedient unto the Word, which the Jews gain- 
ce. ay'd and bla 
> Cefired p The High Prieſt and the reſt of them that had perſecuted F IND had ſaid theſe words, the Jews 4d 
© toward Paul, did either deſpond of their Cauſe, when it ſhould come to| _ 2 WHED 2 INTER RICT WOIG?, UNC ENS oe 
be impartially heard ; or were ſupine and negligent in a matter parted, and had great g reaſoning among themſelves. 
called one which they pretended ſo highly to concern their Religion : Burt|, £ Some accuſing of Paul, others vindicating of him ; ſome 
Gs Chris ſel-ends, their preſent Eaſe and Reputation, were the main mat- believing, as wer. 24. others not believing : Our Saviour and his 
= Locund ters they contended for. Goſpeltoo, being for the riſing and falling of many. 
he Apoſt 22 But we deſire to hear of thee what thou thinkeſt ; | 30 And Paul dwelt two whole years in his own hircd 
1f, deſcen- for as concerning this q ſet, we know that y every houſe, +þ and received all thft came in unto him; 
1d at Rom, where it is ſpoken againſt. q : Of what Nation or Quality key were, Paul preached 
& , adding q Or, Herefte, for ſo they called the Chriſtian Religion, - Chap. | = —_ them upon the wo condition of Faith and Holi- 
© Rome 1 24.5, 14. r Ofall conditions of Men, Governours and People, = nd. = in that imitated God = _ - —_—_ ho refuſe none 
en the Em: nd in all Places, as Luke 2. 34. Chriſt is ſaid to be a ſign thar ©2** thus come unto him. And though Paz! might have had 
om St, Pau ſhall be ſpoken ageinf. . greater ſecurity from trouble by the *ews (if he would have de- 


LL. 

ard of 15 
s, and the 
ie thankel 


en Leagits 
nade a Wif 
way; 00 
y "ts called 
ere ſuch Wt 
ratues Nugit 
Jace of it 
;. ſo this 
yn, hence 1 
eagues fon 
way £0 Nl 
eſe brethie 
> Day of P1- 
aght, Chap. 1 
s from Roe. 
onds. 
neurion &- 
1h 4 {oldiKt « 


chief ove! the 
were uſually 


1s 1 deliveis 
he Romals 


ich 
te OvE whi 
ry L | 


he 


23 And when they had appointed him a day, there 
cme many to him into his s lodging; To whom he r 
expounded and teſtified 4 the kingdom of God, 2 per-| 
lwading them concerning Jeſus, * both out of the law 
of Moſes, and ext of the Yrophets x from morning cill 

evening. 

; The Houſe which he had hired, as werſe 16. and 3o. ft Paul 
expounded the Scriptures, and by them proved our Saviour to be 
the Meſſiah ; # and that the Kingdom of the Mefliah, which God 
had promiſed, and Moſes and the Prophets had foretold, was 
now come : w ufing iuch Proofs and Arguments as were Cco- 
gent enough to prove what he affertcd; and which alſo did 
taroughly perſwade or pre /a1l with ſeveral of them. x Thus 
Paul labour:d more abundancly, 1 Cor. 15. To. 

24 And y ſome * believed the things which were 
jpoken, and ſome believed not. 

5 Thus there are different Soils into which the Word 1s caſt, 
9s appears in the Parable of the Sower , Matth. 13. 19, 20, Oc. 
Thus Paul found by Experience what he ſays, 2 Theſ, 3. 2. That 
all men have not faith ; and the word preached doth not profit, unleſ; 
ii be mixed with faith in them that heard it, Heb. 4. 2. 

25 And when they agreed not z among themſelves, 
they departed, after that Paul had ſpoken « one word, 
Well fpake the holy Ghoſt by Efaias the prophet, unto 
Our fathers. 

z Thus Chriſt "came to ſet fire on the earth, Luke 12. 45. not 
that the Goſpel does this in its ſelf ; for it is the Goſpel of Peace, 
Eph. 6. 15. not only betwixt God and Man, but betwixt Man 
and Man ; and if its Precepts were obſerved, Love, Meekneſs, 
an! Goodneſs, wouJd banith all Harred, Pride and Contention 
out of the Hearts and Lives of Men; but this ariſes out of the 


The ACT £$ 


Fe had for that People, but alſo becavſe the Apoſtles were com- 
ded to go rather unto the loft ſheep of the houſe of Iſrael, Maith. 


Tares amongſt vs. @a Par! ſpake this eminent and remark ab! 


4 J 


| Word or Sentence, that they might (f pollible} be pricked ; 


liſted), yet a neceſſity was laid upon him, and a woe unto him if he did 
not preach the Goſpel ; as 1 Cor. g. 16. which may abundantly ex- 
cuſe and juſtifie him. 

3e Preaching # the kingdom of God, and teaching 
.thoſe & things which concernthe Lord Jeſus Chritt, with 
all confidence, ] no man forbidding him. 

; The Goſpel is ſo called ; as alſo Pazl preached that Kingd:1: 
of God which is to come atthe end of the World, which falls in 
with the Subje& he was ſo often upon, concerning the Reſurre- 
&tion ; which if Men did but beheve effectually, all the other 
ends of Preaching would be ealily obtained. & Chriſt's Precepts 
and Miracles, his Death and Reſurredtion. / God, who purs 
Bounds to the raging Sea, had ſtopped the Jews Malice, and bid- 
den it go no further ; and he who delivered Daniel! from the 
Lyons, had delivered Paul from Nero, and would have delivered 
him, had not his Death been more for the Glory of God, and the 
good of Paul himſelf, than his Life ; which at laſt he offered in 
Confirmation of the Truths which he had preach'd, -which he 
foreſaw, 2 Tim. 4. 6. and as Euſebins ſays, came to paſs according= 


— 
-_ 


This Book may be called, not only regs, bur J:cd)z ; not 
only the 4#s, but the Wonders of the Apoſtles (though the Holy 
Pen-man, and the Apoſtles meekly contented themielves with 
that Name, . by which at preſent it is called ; yet) what Wonders 
are contained in it; not only ſuch as were wrought by the Apo- 
ſtles, but for them, to deliver, preſerve, and encourage them : 
In ſo much as the attempt to filehce them, and to hinder the 
progreſs of the Goſpel preached by them, proved as vain as if 
Men had endeavoured to hinder the Sun trom ſhining, or the 
Wind from blowing. 


Now unto him, who is able to work ſo as none can hinder, be all 
Honour and Glory , Dominion and Power , for ever ana ever. 
Amen, 


orruption that is in Man, and from the evil one that ſows his | 


Vol. II 


gm, : —_— — ' 
4 IJ %.”. 
Chap. ANVIR. 


. i 
fi 4 'i . 
: [Ip | 'F' of 
N13. K8& & 
| "is %._ y 
l F &* 
. F: 4 " | 
75 $1 10s: 
| 5 f #1 \ 
'F 1 17 , ; 
1k : 
[ 6 Ne q 
$ : F 2 4 
L 


5, 
| Fd 


= 
Wo. 
| 


LOSSY 


——— 
only 
DES A 
FS 
FE K4 


' "F2E50RF'G 
AT IRE 


= 
= 4 © R_- 
» \- a.” -. 
3 TL 
om Ree : 
- - -__ 
_—_ 
a 
ry 
— 


——— 


ROMANS. 


arch 


io PII mn ui en — — 4 


mY 


T, ARGUMENT. 


_—— 
«__ 
© 2” 


H E Pen man of this Epiftle, viz. Paul, was ſo called (as ſome think) becauſe he was Iittle or low of Statur, - 

Others ſuppoſe he had this Name firſt given him upon the Converting of Sergius Paulus the Deputy ; of which 
ſee Ats 13. and Hierom. Com. in Ep. ad Philem. But ovhers are of Opinion, That his Name was not changed 4; al 
and that he had two Names, as all thiſe Jews had, who were Freemen of Rome, The Text in Acts 13. g. duh 7k 
this Opinion; there you read of Saul, wbo was alſo called Paul, (ſo John was Surnamed, or alſo called Mark, Ag, 
12. 12, 25.) And becauſe he was the Apoſtle of the Gentiles, and his Work lay moſtly amongſt them ;, he wa; cal; a 
lat altogether by his Skrname, or Roman Title. Fe : ; 
As tothe Ocder of it : All are agreed, That it was not 2written as it 1s placed in our Bibles : That the Epiſtles 4 th 
Theſſalonians, to the Corinthians, and other of his Epifthes, were written before this : And the Reaſon why it is lac 
before the other Epiſtles, is, Becauſe of the Dignity of the Romans, to whom it was directed; Rome being, ,; ,, 
time the T-nperial City : Or, Becauſe of the Prolixity and Largeneſs of it, this being one of the longe#t of all th 
Epittles : Or, Becauſe of the Excellency and Fulnels of it ? ſo Full and Excellent is this Epitle, that ſom hav 
called it the Marrow of Divinity. Chryſoſtom had ſuch an eſteem of it, that he cauſed it to be Read to him wit 
every Week, Melancthon called it the Confeflion of the Churches 3 be 3s re orted to have gone over it Ten (rum 
times in his ordinary Ledures. - My. Perkins adviſeth, in the Reading of the Scriptures to begin with the Goſpel o 
John, and this Epitle ro the Romans, as being the Keys of the New Teſtament. ; ; 

The SubjeCt-matter cf i ſeems to be much the (ame with the Epiſtle to the Galatians. The body of thi, Evitl 

(nct to ſpeak any thing of the Freface, or concluſion) is partly Do&rinal , and partly Praftical. I» the Dogijny 
part, the Apoſtle handles (and that purpoſely, and at large) that fundamental Article of @ ſinners Juſtification x 
the ſight of God: So that this Epittle (as one ſaith) is the proper Seat of that Dodtrine ; and from hence i: j; Prince 
pally to be learned, Here we are taught the way and manner of our Tuſtihcation before God, that we are TuRtifed 
by Faith, without the deeds of the Law, by a Righteouſneſs which is imputed to us, and not by any Riphtews! 
inherent in us This 1s proved in the four firſt Chapters by many irrefragable Arguments, and windicatcd (11 al 
Objections. nd then it is Amplified in the ſeven following Chapters. The Amplification is firſt from the gl; 
Effects, and ſweeteſt Privileges of Tutification by Faith, viz. Peace with God, which no Tribulation can bin 
m:errup:, Che 5. prin. Then there is Rejoycing with God, as reconciled m—_ Jeſus Chriſt the [c-0n4 Adin, 
who doth abandantly tranſcend the firſ® Adam, m many particulars, Ch. 5. ad tinem. Then there is Sandiificyich 
7m both the parts of it, as Mortification, and Death to Sm and V ivification, or Newneſs of Life, Ch. 6, per 
rotum. The next is Freedom from the Law, as the firſ® Husband now dead, Ch. 7. per totum. And i» | 
eig9:h Chapter, you have divers other Privileges cloſely couched, as Non-Condemnation, Adoption , th [n- 
dw-lling of the Spirit, the Co-operations of all things for Good, the Certainty of the Love of God, :g:þr 
ith the Triumph we have over all our Enemies upon that Account. Further this Do&trine of Juſtification is Am- 
plified, from the remote Cauſe of it; and that is Gods Predeſtination or Eternal Counſel. This is brouglt in 
obviate an Objeftien againſt this Dottrine, as not true, becauſe the Jewiſh Nation (Gods ancient People) received it nt, 
Thereyupen the Apoltle ſhews that Juſtification belonged not to the whole Nation of the Jews , but only t 4 
Ele amenyſt them ; the ret being rejefted of God till the Fulneſs of the Gentiles was come in ; and thn th 
Jews ſhcnl4 more generally Believe and be Converted. This you have at large in the 9, 10, 1t. Chap. The Ps 
Ctical pert of this Epiſtle follows, in which you have many uſeful Exhortations from the beginning of the 12 >, 
70 the 14 Ver. of the 15 Chap Theſe are either more general, or more particular, ſhewing Chriſtians how the 
ſhould behave themſelves with Reſpc&# ro the Church of Chriſt, and the Fellewſhip thererf 5, ewery one attending «gn 
rhe Calling and Minifiry wherem God hath piaced him, Ch. 12: with Reſpect to the Civil Society, and the Goren: 
ment which Ged had ſer over them in the World, yiclding all Subje&tion thereunto, Ch. 13. and with Reſpe&f to thir 
Brethren and Neighbours, exeyciſomg Chriſtian Charity rowards all ; avoiding Cenſoriouſueſs on the one bm 
and Offences on the other, ch. 14. 15. Theſe Duties he largely preſſeth, interweaving now and then many Ethical al 
Theological Arhori/ms, of which in their proper Place, ; 


CHAP. IL. alſo amongſt the Prophets > And we may ſay, with great Aftonilt 
ment, Is Sazl alſo amongſt the Apoſtles ? He that a little before 
Paul ſets forth his, Office, calling and Dofrine of the Perſon of had ſeen him doing what he is recorded to have done, A#: 
Chriſt, 1=——6, His Salutation : He commends their Faith : | 10, 11. would never have dream'd of any ſuch thing, c Eit:et 
Defireth to come to them, 7 — 15, That his Goſpel is the Power | from his Mothers Womb, in the purpoſe of Gad, vid wy f 
of God : This proved by Scripture : The true Dofrine of Juſtifica- | 'S- ſo Jeremiah of old, Jer. 1. 5. Or elle it way have reſpe0 
rion, 16, 17. Gods Wrath and Judgments evidence men to be | © 4s 13. 2. where the Holy Ghoſt, did aQually order te 
finners, and guilty, 18. The fins of the Gentiles manifeſt ; ſhould be ſeparated for the Work io which he had called him. The 
fach as ſuppreſſing their Light, and abuſing thiir knowledge of God | Greek Word in both places is the ſame. Or elſe it may 1&- 
unto Idolatry, 19 —— 23. For theſe Sins they were given over un- ſpect the more immediate Commiſſion he had from Chriſt him 
:0 a perverſe Senſe and abominable Luſfls, 29— 31, and wers | 1<1f, Afr 9. 15. and As 26, 16, 17, 18. Some think he alludes 
felf-coudenmed, 32. = to the name of Phariſce, which is from Separating: When he was 
| a Phariſce, he was ſeparated to the Law of God; and now being 
I PP a ſervant a of Jeſus Chriſt, * called þ to be | * Chriſtian, he was ſeparated to the Goſpel] of ey _ 
an Apoltle ſeparated c unto 4 the poſpel of to the Preaching and Publiſhing of it, e The Go ey _ 
God D go'p times called the Goſpel of God, as in this place ; and omerume 
__ 1.1. the Goſpel of Chriſt; ſo in the 16. wer. of this Chapter, it 
s A Servant of Jeſus Chriſt is a higher Title, than Monarch | ſaid to be the Goſpel of God, becauſe He is the Author of it; 
of the World. Several great Emperors ſti'd themſelves Chriſts | 'tis not a Humane Invention : And it is ſaid to be the Goſpel 0 
Y v5 wh He ſo calls PR 1%: peſen __ = his ren Chriſt, becauſe He is the Matter and Subjett of it. 
wich was common with him to all true riſtians; orellſe in Ig FEE ; bie nro-4 
reipe& of his Oiſice. Of old, they who were in great Offices, 2 (Which he had l promis d f before 4 bj h1s pro j 
were called the Servants of God, wid. ofb. x. 1. Nehem. 1. 6. phets 4 in the holy ſcriptures) 7. 
Pſal. 132. 10, Orelfc in reſpett of his ſingular and miraculous | f The meaning is not, that the Hiſtory of the Goſpel was Pr 
Converſion ; by reaſon of which, he thought himſelf ſo obliged | mis'd by the Prophers, but that Jefus Chriſt, with all his Benet 
to Chriſt, that he wholly addifted or devoted himſelf to his | (which is the dire& ſubje& of the Goſpel-Hiſtory and Revelation) 
Service, 6 Appointed to that High Office, by the immediate | was promis'd or fore-ſhewn by them. g This Word is added | 
Call of Chriſt himfc]F, wid, Gal, 1, 1. Tir. r, 3. The Hiſtory | prevent the imputation of Novelty, 9. 4. Let none object nf 
of this Cal) you have in At; g. 15, Two things are couch'd in | lay, the Goſpel is a new and "or IRA Do&rine ; for it Ws yo 
this Phraſe, «. T hat he did nor take this Honour to himlieif, but} mis'd or foretold of old by all the Prophets which have hoy 
Was thereunto appointed and calied of God. 2. That this Apo-i ſince the World began, wid. Luke 1. 70+ h By Prophets 
Notica! Dignity was not by any deſert of his but by Grace only, | may underſtand, not only thoſe that were commonly o_—_ 
__ the free Gizt of Him that calleth, It was formerly matter | with that Title; but all thoſe alſo whom God condelcend-d l 
0; Amuntion, and ſo it became a proverb in 1/rael, & Saul| converſe with, in a familiar manner, 1evcaling bis a” 


F MN SE &. an ad EEE ET Pa TE E Pe 


_ 
Sa” EH 


= 4"Y 
ED ORES 
x poems "9 


4. i 
» 4 
- oo 
4 
* 
; 
Y 
þ : 
if q % y 
LF 
F |. 
"! 43 
411 . 
| d 
La 
1 $61. 
$ $46 
: D 
5%} jF ? 
v4 \ py 
[= ' Wi 
; (F264 
4! | 1 
» , » 
1 iS, 
' , "n 
| i KY 

180 ls 
þ1*1 
© 4 [4 ; 
19 F 
At.S2: 1 
& £6 1s 
: $1: 

q \ 
1 Y f 

[| 7 
þ 
$I * *\ + þ 

T4 : ; 

£841 »&# © : 

FF *4 | 
Al i 

4 f $25 

Pi” Þ 7 - 1 

$3645, FSR 
, : 
F . 
4 a 
[ is 45 
| vg 
i We 
'S, q 
Wt : 
+ o 
F-20907 3.19 
: 4 
'*1 
«86 p 
! - 
© 
T2 + 
 6Þ1 *L9 
o* 74. 7 
"8; 7 77 
I 9408 
H1R 
473 {8 
1 T2 | 
Y : , . ' 

I 84" 1 
I + / ' i 
J "ut / 

18:7 } 

| " : at 

\#* 1 's 
? 5 
"oi 4 [#5 
[4 414 
4.321808 7 
[LS © oy / 
Ls 

1% Us 
> if "i 
| TIL STORY 

v '+ aff 
40 » 
w [ 

ilk 
1 © . . 
on " ww | 
i , . 

1 
Y it 
7 
ba 
if [ : 
ov bel 4" . 
F 4 Ne 
IF |: 
# [4 - 

"4 / 05 5 : 
ﬀf vie 7 ; 
% i 7 

& * - 

” : 6 4 

Gat 
if Shar; * «1 jt 
i 8 FAC 
8.27 
i oy 7 : 
Ss »'2 
wei %. #1 
4&1 * 
T7 7 wot 
| 0 ; 
i Te: $1 
t - e 
4 i a7 
Y br! | 
" 
v! T4 ny 
; [420% 

' . : mo 

{7 F; 
" 

{ t; c 

WH ' . 
ii 
1 6 vl 
. p4 : : 
4.4 l 

ay x4 " 

'L $8 F-4 

+ : 

Y.4 : 

of 
8 4 : 

1H + 
MET 5; gd 

7. y 

i 4 ® 

bo, Ky Fo l 

\ 4 
1 K 
{ . 
j 
{; = 11- 
S 
[2 P 1 

" 3<£ .. : 

© : 

| *© FE: 

KES. 

{9511 E''/ 

4 ' 

ESWIEF © 

191K} |: 

& ; q 
FE \ 1» 

oF 1 ; 
14. a" 

4 F 

y 14-8 5* # 

FT : 7 

iF 4 4 
1 
& . 
n + of C 
1 81S # 
AT, 
HY  F ; 

n i 5 
FF wit 4 
"4. 

3 LE 
[* n 

1 78 & 

t Fl 4 

. L ! : 

m > | 
6s. 19 

np i [4 
' : IF 

4 
's 'Þ4 
1 b 
ij | £1 

i! out 

f , + 
" 1. 'E. 
: , , 
Tas 1114} 
4 
| 2 . " ., "+ 

&i' 3 lt 

y ? : 
0 

Tp 4+ 5 
+. at 14 
_ + 2 

+0 | 2938; | 
"1 q % iN 
; 

*f 4 : 
1 : F ! 
. wy 17 
4\ od o 
- ! ? f 
k ' 
: if i 7 
= 3 [ 244 
7:1 
| bw £ > 

4 5 -) 

4 4 4 
i 

: 

"3 BF. 

E i [y 

1 
#30 oo 

j j 4 
'8 of |: 

: . . 
#4 l | 
«1% " .) f 

T7164 *% 

£3"; {J6EL 

{'y 
1.3 s, 
i 14 . 

{7 
ths Y 

ws 4 ; 
;, Wi : b 
: F427 . 

> 3:45 
- . 
4] p] 
— 
F - 
4. . ; 
oS. ” 
L « HH 
' : . 1 
1:4 
; . : 
b | 4 i 
/ ” 
1 
'T, 
[1 
+ 3 f 
{7 6&7 4 
oF 
MH IH 


$0 +> - 
& — 


—— 


emma” 


a bod 
Pl, w4 
: % hs nd 
* wa gd — a —- 
” g hh —__ 
eS .5"s RI -< nd _—_— 
———— dE DES ANG + 2 
> / 
«om A h_ 
0 = 


Chi A q P , 
; | p rem; that ſuch are called Prophets, wid. Gex. 20. 7. Pſa. ros; 
af To wit, of the Old Teſtament ; he hath reſpe& to the Ora- 


Wow: | i eM andPromiſes therein contained, concerning Chriſt and his 
Kingdom 3 chiefly to Gen. 3. 15. and 49. 8. 10. Dent. 18: 18. 1/a. 
6 and 7. 14- and 53. per rotum, and 63. 1, 2, 3, - Pſal. 40. per. 
mum, Þſal. 22. Pſal. 110. 1. and 16. 10. Dan. 9. 24, 25, 25. Micah 
> Zech. 9. 9. Mat. 3. 1. &c. he hereby intimates, That- there is 
— \ oreat Harmony and Conſent berwixt the Prophets and Apoſtles, 
the Bo&rine of the Old Teſtament and the New, wid, Luke- 24. 
John 12. 16, A#s 19. 43. Our Modern Tranſlators include 
44 Verſe ina Parenthells, _— O—_ = not. NE 
. » Concerning his Son Jeſus Chriſt & our Lord, * which 
tare "6. _ made ! of the ſeed of David according to the fleſh. 
J's | 7 This Phraſe either reſpe&s the Holy Scriptures, mentioned im- 
/ ” 28, 'rediarely before "in the ſecond Verſe ; the ſum and ſubſtance of 
at al, | them, is concerning the Meſhah, the Son of God: Or elle it re- 
favay ſne&s the Goſpel, that was ſpoken of in the firſt Verſe ; the 1e- 
, Ad; cond Verſe being only a Parenthelis, as was before hinted ; then 
alled « the meaning is, That the Apoſtle Pau! was ſeparated to the Goſpel 
of God, which only or mainly concerns.his Son Jeſus Chriſt. And 
| | this ſeems toſhew the Excellency of the Goſpe], that it doth not 
es to tie | rear of vulgar and ordinary matters, as of the Gods of the Gen- 
s placed | tiles, or the Aftions of Alexander, Ceſar, the Scipio's, or ſuch like 
at ther Heroes ; bur of the Son of God himſelf, 1 z. e. As he afterwards 
* al] " expreſſeth :t, according to the Fleih or his Humane Nature ; in 
; regard of his Divine Subliſtence, he was begotten and not made ; 
me hang in regard of his Manhood, he was made and not begotten. When 
m tit he ſays the Son of God was made, &c. it is undeniably imply'd, 
0 {evil That he did Exiſt before his Incarnation, and was the Son of God 
2 (pol before he was the Son of Man. This place proves clearly theſe two 
5a j Truths: 1. That in the Perſon of Jeſus Chriſt there are two Na- 
| tures. 2, That there is betwixt theſe a Communication of Pro- 
Enifl pertics ; here the Son of God is ſaid to be made of the Seed of 
Oring David : and elſewherethe Son of Man is ſaid to have come down 
ti0n © from Heaven, wid. John. 13. compare John 6. 62. Afs 20. 28. 
Wn 1 Cor. 2.8, 21 4. e. of the Virgin Mary, which was of David's 
h Privee Lineage and Poſterity z the Promiſe was expreſly, That the Meſhah 
Juſtifl ſhould be of the ad ag his Loins, oy” «7 Ke es _ 
Nteou'nel Iſs. 11. 1. Jer. 23. 5. Exek. 34. 24. Yea; this Promiſe was ſo ful- 
Ke. Iv known to the Jews, that when they ſpake of the Meſſiah, 
fron s Soo -cathad him the Son of Daw, ew! þ K 9% 22. 42. and 21. 9. 
Ty: Mer. 10. 47, 48, John 7, 42. Hence 'tis that the Evangeliſts, Mat 
Nnaer thy and Luke, are fo careful and induſtrious to prove, that the 
' Agam, Virgin Mary, and Joſeph to whom fhe was Eſponſed, did come of 
1hcation David's Line and Race. | ; 
. 6. per ' 4 And * declared ro be the Son of God » with power, 
d in tix | recording tothe {pirit of holinefs p, by the reſurrection 
the In- + from the dead 4q | 
, n Not made the Son of God, as he was ſaid before to be made 
Yegethe of the Seed of David, but declar'd or demonſtrated to be the Son of 
v0 As God o This refers either to the word declar'd, and then the mean- 
, n {0 ingis, He was arty a” miraculouſly — ro | ag 
ed 1; it, God, The Greek Word ordinarily ſignifies a Miracle in the New 
1 1 th T:fament ; or elſe it refers to the Ia Words; the Son of God ; and 
ben the then the Sence is, He was declar'd to be the powerful and omnipo- 
DT tent Son of God, of the ſame Power and Majeſty with the Father. 
The Pra } By the Spiritof Holineſs, ſome would underſtand the Third-Perſon 
» 12 (|, inthe Blejted Trinity, which 1s often call'd the Holy Spirit, .and 
how thy here the Spirit of Holineſs ; bur others, and they, more rightly, do 
ling men underſtand the Deity and Divine Nature of Chriſt ; this is call'd 
WF the Spirit, 3 Tim. 3.15. 2 Pct. 3. 18. and the Eternal Spirit, Heb. g. 
Govert- 14, 2nd here *tis called thz Spirit of Holineſs,or the moſt Holy Spi- 
F to their tit; and thar probably, becauſe of its Efe#s ; for thereby he San- 


Gihed his Naturai Body. and ſtil] SanQtihes his Myſtical Body, the 
Church, That this is the meaning, 1s Evident, by the Oppolition 
between the I'icſh and the Spirit: As according to the Fleſh, in the 
former Verſe, did ſignifie his Humane Nature : So according to the 
$i, in this Verſe. doth ſignitic his Divine Nature. See the like 
Amitheſis in 1 Tim. 3. 16. 1 Pet. 3.18, q Becaule it is ſaid, The 


ome hand, 
ical and 


- Aſtonil- RefurreQtion of the Dead, not from the Dead ; ſome would under. 
rtle befare ſtand the words of Lazarus, and others, who by the Power of Chriſt 
>, APV, were raiſed from the Dead; and others would underſtand the 
c Eitit words of thoſe who were raiſed with Chriſt, when he himſelf Aroſe, 
vid. Gal. 1, vid. Mat. 27, 53. Bur in Scripture. the ReſurreCtion of the Dead, 
ve reſpect 15 put for the Reſurre&ion from the Dead, id. 1 Cor. 15. 42. Heb. 
order he 6. 2. ind hereby is meant the ReturreCtion of Chriſt himſelf : He 
him, Thi Roſe again from the Dead, and thereby Declar'd or Manifeſted 
t may It timſelf to be the Son of God with Power, vid. 7ohn 2. 19. 21. and 
'hriſt him 10,18, and 5. 26. 1 Cor, 15 4. And though it be faid in Scrip- 
he alludes te, That the Father rais'd him from the Dead, wid. Aﬀs 2. 24. 
1en he was and 1.3 . 33 yet that doth nor hinder, but by his own Power he 
10w being Rid himſelf: Seeing the Father and He were One; and the Works 
. =_ & we Three Perſons in one and the ſame Eflence are undivided, 
lis a 


.n 5} by whomr f we have received grace and apoſtle- 
th 8p 5 |! for obedienceto the faith ; among all nations » for 
Is name w, 

r Or, of whom ; by whom, as Mediator ; or, of whom, as Author, 
indGiver. 5s Some make theſe two diſtin& Gifts; the ene Ccm- 
NN, which is Grace; the other Special, which is Apoſilethip : 
Ithers think that by an Hrndjadys, he means the Grace of Apoſtle- 
lip ; which he ſo calls, becauſe it was conferr'd upon him, not for 
My detert of his, but by the meer Favour, and free Grace of God, 
US b1S manner to call his Apoſtleſhip by the name or {tyle of Grace, 
ud. chap. 15.15. Gal. 2. 9. Eph. 3.2.8. t You have the Game 


ſometimes 
bapter, 10 15 
thor of 1t; 
. Goſpel of 


' his pi&- | 


el was pit 
his Bene 
R evelatiol 


is addedt0 briſe, Ch, 15, 26. and there 'tis render'd fer the Obidioncs of 
object | Faith, By Faith here ſome underiiand the Gotpel or Loctrine of 
it was ps ath, it hath this Sence, As 6. 7. Jure 3. &c. And then rhe 
1 have been Meaning is; God, of his meer Grace, hath given me this Gi:ce 
rophers 3 Wat] Might ring rhe Nations to bclieve, and work 1n Tan: fo 
ly Jignil *Met0 the Doctrine of the Goipel, Others urderitand 112 fie 
elccnded - Faith ; and then the meaning is, 1have received rnis U, 
5 LecI6's m nught bring the Nations to Believe, and fo to obey the + 
Cory *uYtore Obedience is joyn'd with Faith, becaute, by + <.i!. 


ROMANS 


| obey the Commands of God : and Faith it ſelf conſiſts in Obed;. 
ence, and is the great Command of the Goſpel. « According to 
the general Commiſſion, Mar. 28. 19. and a more ſpecial Commit- 


1 F' 
. Ch.45 , 


L 


ſion to this Apoſtle, wid. 4& 9. I5. G3l.2. 7, 8. 1 Tim. 2.7, and 
2 Tim, 1.11, w That the Nations might believe in his Name, fo 
ſome: Others ſuppoſe theſe Words are added ro declare the end 
of Paul's Preaching and Apoſtleſhip, which was to ſer forth rhe 
Glory and Praiſe of Chriſt, vid, 2 Th:$ 1. lt. 

6 Amongſt whom are ye alfo + the called of Jefis Chriſt y. 

x The Romans are in this Number, and a part of the Nations, to 
whom I have a Commiſſion. and for whom I have received the 
Grace of Apoſtleſhip: He adds this, to ſhew his Warrant for wri- 
ting to them ; he did it by vertve of his Othee ; as alſo to humble 
them ; for though they were Romans, and ſuch as bore the great- 
eſt ſway in the World ; yer they were formerly Pagans and Idola- 
ters. y Though ſuch were ſome of you, to wit, Heathen Idolaters - 
yet now you are Chriſtians, and the Czlled of Jeſus Chriſt; tall 
outwardly by his Word, and inwardly by his Spirit. By ffeQual 
Calling you are become his Diſciples and Followers. 

7 lo alithat be in Rome, z beloved of God, * called 
to be jaints a. Grace to you, and peace b from God our 
Father, and the Lord Jeſus Chrif :. 

z He doth not dire& this Epiſtle to all thar there inhabited, ag 
ro the Emperor and Senate, &c. but ro the Church, and all the 
Chriſtians there,as appears by the two following Phraſes. He Wrote 
not to thoſe only which were Romans by Narion, but to a!l rhe 
Faithful, whether Jews cr Gentiles, bond or free ; for they were 2] 
one, and alike in Chriſt. They are deceiv'd rhar think this Epiſtle, 
becauſe dire&ed to the Rewanr, was written in Latine, The Greck 
Tongue was well underftood in that City. Tuv-nal calls Rome a 
Greek City, becauſe the Inhabitants, as well Natives as Strangers, 
did, ſome of them, uſe, and moſt of them underſtand thar Lan 
guage. 4 Or, called Saints, though there mighr be Hypocrites a« 
mongſt them, yet they were denominated from the betrer parr. 
The 7ews of old were only accounted a Holy Nation or People ; and 
the Genzles common or unclean ; but now that difference is taken 
away ; Faith in Jeſus Chriſt, and effeQual Calling, makes the Ger. 
tiles Holy as well as the jews. The name [Sain:] doth not denore 
a Perfe&tion in Holineſs, but one that is devoted and conſecrated 
to God; who is Holy in Heart and Life, though he hath many 
imperte&ions. 6 Under theſe rwo words Grace and Peace, are coin- 
prehended all Spiritual and Temporal Bletfings Ir is an uſua! Sa- 
Jutation or BenediCion in the Epiſtles of this Apot'e, vid 1 Cer. 
7. 3. 2 Coy. 1.2. Gal. 3: - EM. 2. Phil. 1.2. Col 2.2. 2 7- ff 1.2, 
1 Tim, 1. 2. Tit. x. 4. Philemon 3. See the like in toc Fpiliies of 
Peter, 1, Per. 1. 2, 2 Pet. 1. 2. Seealfo, 2 John 3. Rev. 1.4. c Why 
1S there no mention made here of the Holy Ghoſt ? Anſwr Be- 
cauſe he is imply'd in his Gifts : Grace and Peace are the Fruits and 
Gifts of the Holy Spirit. In other Salutations the Ho!y Ghoſt is 
expreſs'd, wid, 2 Cor 13.14 And here, when the Father and Son 
are nam'd, he is plainly imply'd. 

8 Firlt 4+ Ichank my God through Jeſus Chriſt for you + ph;1. 4, 
all.that yourfaith is || ſpokenofthroughoutthewholeworld e. ij Or, Ccte- 

d Pirſt, Here is not a word of Order, for there follows no Se- brated. 
condly, &c. but it ſerves to ſhew, that here the Epiſtle begins ; 1 Cor. rr. 
for all before, was but a preface or Inſcription. 9. d. In the firſt 26. 
place. See the like 1 7, 2. 1, e Thatis, through many parts of 
It ; 'tis a figurative Speech: Seethe like John 12. 19. Orclſe, by 
the whole World, may be underſtood the Rowan Empire, which 
Rul'd at that time over a great part of the Known World. See rhe 
like Luke 2. 1. Beſides, there was a reſort to Rome from all Parts 
of the World ; and fo this Report might be diffus'd far and near 
The Faith of the Goſpel at Reme, made it more Famous, thin al 
its Victories and Triumphs. Oh! How is Rom? degenerated | W2 
may take up the Complaint concerning her, which we find, 7/4. 1. 

11, 12. 'The Romanift; urge this place ro prove Rome the Mother- 
Church ; but without Reaſon : The Church of Ty:ſalowca had as 
high an Eulogy, wid. 1 Theſſ. 1 8. | 

9 For * God is my witnefs f wham IT ſerve || with 
my ſpirir g in the goſpel of his Son; that * without cea- 
ſing þ+ T make mention of you always in my prayers. 

F In theſe words there is the Force, if not the Form of an Oath. 
See the like, 2 Cor. 1. 18, and 11. 21. Gal, r. 20. His greatLove 
and Care of them was a hidden Thing, and known oniy to God. 
To Him therefore he Appeals for the Truth thereof. Oiths in 
certain Caſes, are allowable under the New Teſtament, as well as 
the Old. g 3. e. Sincerely, or with my whole Hearr, vid. Epheſ. 6. 
6. 2 Tim. 1. 3. h. i.e. asoften as he prayed. This was a great in- 
dication of his hearty AﬀeCtion to them. | 
10 | Making requeſt ;{(it by any means now at length 


4-7 


Gs 
l Or, my 
ſpiret. 

* 3 Than 


3. 10. 


tChap.15. 


. g_— 


I might have a proſperous journey by the will of God) 23, 3-. 
&1| to come to you. Aon 
# This was one thing herequeſted of God, that what he had long - x 

deſir'd and defign'd, mighthappily (if it ſcem'd good in God's light) «© 
be at laſt accompliſht; thathe mighr come in Perſon ro them. *Lhus 
Defire of Paui to ſee the Romans, might be one caute of that Ap« 
peal, which he made to Rome,. vid. AG. 25. 10, 11, 12. & He adds 
this, becauſe; in publiſhing the Goſpel, he follow'd the Order which 
God, by his Spirit, preſcrib'd him, wid. A. 16. 7, 9, 10. 
11 tor 1 1ong, tv ice You, that *1 may imparcunto you * Ch, x5 
ſome ſpirirul g'fr, [to ths end vou may be eſtabliſhed mm; 29: 
1 He declares his end in defiring to ſce them ; it was not his own 
profit, bur their Edification. By ſome 1piritual Gift, he means 
17s one or other 0t thoſe Gifts of the Spurif, of which particular 
1n6wr en is mace 1 Cor, 12. 7, 8, 9, 10, (1, ». 4. d. I dont in- 
ren 70 ring any New Do&rine to you, but ro confirm and Eſts- 
21:1. you in thar which you have already Heard and Received, Eit>- + Or, fat 
iis Grace 1s that which all Chrittians ſtand in need of, vil 7 9s” 


G6. 2. » Tf. 5. 8, 13. 2 Theff. 2. 15, 16, 17. 


Roam, = | Or, in 

- {liat is, thatÞ may be f comforced together || with ,,, 
vu, by che * » mutual faich both oi you and meo. * Tit. 1.4. 
x* This 2 P<s. 1.1, 


* 1 Th:fs, 


| 7 | 
£ 2. 
[ j 5% Ts 
* Y wy : 
l $* 22 
$ 5 
vis [ $5 
436 4 l 
. 4 - L a 
1, LY 9 3. 
; uy 
1 It's. % 
: Fi : 
[Hi - 
$4 | 
4 : 
- E: "| 4 
$33 : 
= 7 
#5 k 
Bioet 
> 
554 3 285. 3+ 
7 4 4 
A 47 IT 
44733 
ty 
af F | 
PA 3. ” 
; | Fi $4 
, + it 1 6h 
7.56 a! 
» | : 
5 i 
- *Y Fo "F . i 
* - k o 
KK + is 
- » "BY + | 
HTS I 
| wo! 
: a ; 
4 T £7% 
, | \ | 7 ] i * ”- 
io 
© OH MY af I 
£ þ [ 1s 14+ V. 
4 >. © F { 
Fa x4 
F --7-15 / "i 
$ © OS. ©! 
Wt M3 Tay 
"fb &:} _ x1 
ipy ] "Rr * 
« : Ti 7h #3 
j £34 » 
BITE ws 13 
LS. Bi : 
P- b 
> 


<a» z 
- (8655:M A PE 
Y 4 FCA >. - Be SS 7 
LF TIF ores Tent: = 
. 4 K,-: 4 & S _ ry WTF a; + 
-_ 7 HH a. W - " od 


2 = : 


Po 


* Aa Dis. Hes G_—__ 
= LS. 2-4 
. 


— 
Sa" 


_— 


, 
4% : 
: "* 
£71 ® 
” 
. ; 
: A. © 
| 
; 
: : 
$ I? 
3 A 82 g 
4 : 
5, bs; 
3$7z 3 , - 
+ : : 4 
: 
> F : 8 
FIT9 4 
C35 7? 207 
SS. = C3. 
: : 
: t = 
o 
Gy 
F 
} by 
8 F 
: " 
r { 
ith 
'P. 
12 
T4 
: a 
: | 
IH 
E v'F 
: : o 
[3 " 
» 
» 
a 
4 ad +4 
199 24.5 
: # 
$f v 
{ 
: 


v- 
2 


a 


—_—_—_- 
þ 296 Lott > 


i 
__ y o 
yy = 4 
” —_ 
RET 
- 
” . 4 
_ -— Pp "Y , 
"AL 7 
© 
=y % 
Ar _ R 


RY 
& > 
= EO 


woe ——— ne 
- 
- 


— 


"4 20 : 
RD 
72 es os: 


nan} "a 
_ þ - 
% 5- BU yn do 
TIE ES <a SG 4. 
OS OREN = * 
*<C 


Sony 


- Set —_— M4 IT v = > 
" aw Wc -r= — i AE - » ©» EI — 
p * - <- £ n JS -4> i 5 = - = - _m——— 
--_ leo bt ? - _ e ——  — — px *7 - . Tx IVF; —__ _ & -_7 bs = _ , 
£ 2 - 26 WL Rh. en 2 Kao = Þonkes bY q - Y > : - . 4 : & j- _ _ 
Io vn. I = _ : = D 2 - ONE ” = 
— ay 0724 _- - _ ” © er geen ee, - = - = Is dS = = T7 x 
: : aka _ L £ - Ty = 3 —Y oo : : ONI— RE , 
- 8 aw —_— - " __ . b þ U 
. D -=; . "4 Pau. - FE, RS ” — - . Ae II» © 
WS C DA VIE = ce 4 ate C Poug 
: - Foxes oi ad ” : —_— - Mac 
> =. I ty en = ; 


pe 
nn, 


_- 


pon 


— 


rm 


»,- a Peart. 


ya nn OI, RS 


—_— 
= Banks 


Chap. I. 


Or. your 


#4 Tor.9. 
19. 


+ Pſal 4c. 
9 19. 
2Tim.1.8, 
|| x Cor. 1. 
18. & 1E. 
2, 


*Chy2r. 
+ Hab. 2.4. 
Gal. 3.11, 
Heb. 10. 


C 
35. 


n Th's isadded to qualifie what he had ſaid before, leſt he ſhould 
ſcm to Arrogate too much to himſelf, he tells them, he hop'd not 
only to comfort them. but to be comforted by them. The meaneſt 
of Chriit's Members may contribute ſome what to the Edifying even 
of an Anoftle. The Apoſtle John did hope to be quickened and 
comtorted by the Graces of a Woman and her Children, 2 jo#n 12. 
Great is the benefit of the Communion of Saints, o 3. e. By the 
Faith which you and F have in Jeſus Chriſt : Which he elſewhere 
calls the Common Fai:h, and the Faith of God's Ele; All true Com- 
fort ſprings from Faith, 

; Now I would not have you ignorant, p brethren, 
that oftentimes I purpoſed to come unto you, « but was let 
ticherto) q that I migtt have ſoine f: uit 7 {| among you 
alſo, even as among other Genre; 

p He prevents a Cavil ; they might ſay, If Par! hath ſuch a 
longing Detire to ſee us, Why doth he not come to us? To this 
he Anſwers, It was not for want of WiH or Aﬀe&tion; for he of- 
ten intended and atrempred it. q Either by Satan, as 1 The. 2. 18. 
or by the Holy Spirit otherwiſe diſpoſing 0t him, as As 16. 6,7. 
Bom. 15. 22, 23. Ir is poſſible that he might be hindred alſo by 
his own Infirmities, or by others Neceſſiriesand Entreaties, Afts 10. 
wit, and 15. 15. and 28.14. r i.e. Of my Miniftry and Calling, 
as the Apoſtle of the Uncircumciſion. He hoped the Goſpel he 
ſhould Preach among them, would have good Succels, and bring 
forth Fruit in them, s it had done in other Churches of the Gen- 
tiles. Vid. Col. 1.5. 


} % 
* 4a 


ROMAN Sx. 


14 * I ama debtor « both to the Greeks and Barba- 
rians, t both to the wiſe, and to the unwile s. 


WiC, 
s A5 being oblig'd, by vertue of my Calling, and as being en- 


truſted by God with Talents to that purpoſe. You are not beho]- 


jt is my bounden Duty. # #.e. Toall Nations which he divides in- 
to theſe two torts, Greeks and Barbarians, The 7ews he mentions nor, 
becauſe he was the DoQor of the Gentiles, u By theſe he under- 
ſtands paiticular Perſons among the Greeks and Barbarians ; tor 
there were among either of them,ſfome Wiſe,and ſome Unwiſe.The 
Goſpel is adapted to all forts of Perſons, whether Wiſe or Simple. 

is So, as much as in meis, I am ready to preach the 
goſpel to you that are at Rome allo . 

w 9. d. | have Preach'd it at Antioch, at Athens, at Epheſus, at Co- 
rimth, &c, and I am ready (if God permit) to preach it in the/ 
moſt ſplendid City of Rome likewiſe ; 1o the Reaſon is not in my 
ſelf, or in my own Will, why I have not cometo you all this while. 

16 For 7 lamnotajhamcd x of the golpel of Chriſt, 
for || it is the power of God unto ſaivation, y to every one 
that believeith; & tothe Jew firſt, 2 and allo tothe Greek. 

x Though Rome be the Head of the Empire, and theRomans bear 
the Name of Wiſe and Learned Perſons; and though the Goſpel] hath 
the ſhew of ſimplicity, and is fooliſhneſs to the Wiſe Men of this 
World ; yet I am not aſham'd to own and publiſh this Goſpel of 
Chriſt. I don't ſhrink back, and withdraw my ſelf as Men do, from 
thoſe Things whereof they are aſham'd. Neither indeed need 1, 
becauſe how mean ſoever it ſeems:to be to Carnal Eyes, yet it 1s 
the Power of God unto Salvation, &c. » Not the cfential Power of 
God, but the Organical Power. See the like, x Cor. 1. 18. The 
meaning is, it is a powerful means ordain'd of God tor this pur- 
poſe. Touching the Efficacy and Excellent Power of the Goipe], 
tor the Converlion and Salvation of the Souls of Men. vid. 1/9.53.1. 
L Cor, 4. 15. 2 Cor. 4. 7. 2 Cor. 10. 4, 5. Heb. q, 12. James 1. 21. 
z The Goſpel is offer d unto all, bur it profiteth unto Salvation on- 
Iv thoſe thar believe ; as a Medicine is only effectual to thoſe who 
reccive or apply it. a The Goſpel was firit to be publiſh'd to the 
Jews, and then to the Geniiles, whom he here calls Greeks, wid. 
Luke 24.47. AF. 1.%. This Order the Apoſtles accordingly kept 
and obſerv'd, As 13. 46. 

17 For * therein is the righteouſneſs of God b revealed 
c from faith to taith-d ; as it is written, f "The juſt ſhall 


live by faith e. 

6 It will give Light to this whole Epiſtle, to Explain what is 
here meant by the Righteouſneſs of God. Some do thereby underſtand 
the whole Dottrine of Salvation, and eternal Life, which is revealed 
in the Goſpel ; and they make it the ſme with the Faith of God, 
chap. 3.3. and with the truth of God, chap. 3.7. Others, by the 
Righteouſneſs of God do underſtand, That Righteouſneſs whereby 
a Man 1s juſtified, or ſtands Juſt and Righteous in the Sight of God : 
And *tis cajled the Righreouſnels of God, to diſtinguiſh it from our 
own Righteouſneſs, Chap. 10. 3. And becauſe it is Appointed, Ap- 
prov'd, and Accepted by him ; it being ſuch as he himſelf can 
find no fauit with; Furtuner, it is call'd the Righteoutneſs of God, 
becauſeit was perforni'd by him, whois God as well as Man, and im- 
pured unto us. Hence he is ſaid to be made Righteoſneſs unto us, and 
we are laid to be made the Righteouſneſs of God in him ; we having 
his Righteouſneis,as he had our Sins,viz.by Imputation. This is often 
call'd the Righteouſneſs of Faith, becauſe,by Faith it is apprehended 
and apply'd. And again it is calld the Law of Righteoultneſs, chap. 
9. 31. in Oppoſition to that Law of Righteouſneſs, whereby the 
unvelieving Zews ſought to be juſtified. c The Law of God diſco- 
vers no {uch way of juſtitying a Sinner ; not is it taught by Reaſon 
or Philoſophy : The Goſpel only makesa Revelation of it ; which 
occationed the Apoſtles glorying in ir. d This Apoſtle ſeems to 
delight in ſuch Repetitions, and there is an Elegancy in them;vie, 
ch. 6. 19. 2 Cor. 2, 16. 2 Cor. 3. 18. The wordsare variouſly inter- 
preted ; from the Faith of the Old Teſtament, to the Faith of the 
New :_ So that no Perton ever was or ſhall be Juſtified in any 0- 
ther way: Or, from a letter Faith to a greater ; not noting two 
Faiths, bur one and the ſame Faith increaſing to PerfeQtion. He 
laith, not trom Faith to Works, or from Works to Faith ; bur from 
Faith ro Faith, 2. e. only by Faith. The word (:0 be) muſt be un- 
dcrſtood, 9.4. The Golpel Reveals the Righteguineſs of God, ro 
be from Paith to Faith, Lhe begipning, the Continuance, the Ac- 
complithment of gyr ullification is wholly abloly'd by Faigh,e Some 


den to me for this Detire, as iF it were an Arbitrary Favour ; tor } 
| 


. 
, 
[1 


i Plagues and Judgments ſpring not out of the Duſt, proceed nj7 


| INg 3 and then 'tis a Reaſon why the Gentiles are 


refer theſe words (5y Faith) to the SubjeQ of this Py; )Ofition. + iy 
Juſt, and thus they render it ; the Juſt by Fai: ſh11 Weg, ite 
ſo read, the foregoing Propoſition 1s the better prog - Arg 
There is ſome difficulty to underſtand the fitnets of this T wap, 
to prove the Concluſion in hand : For 'tis Evident, Thar th. D,. 
pher Habakkyk, in whom theſe Words are found, doth he bo 
remporal Preſervation : And, What is that to Eternal Lite 3 2 A 
The Babylonian Captivity figuc'd out our Spiritual Bondage - 
S'n and Satan ; and Deliverance from that Calamity Kat Fan 
forth our Deliverance from Hell, to be procur'd by Chris. "wg 
pare Iſa. 40. 2, 3, 4- with Mat. 3. 3. Again, genera] ev 
applied to particular Caſes, are not thereby reſtrained to thor. In 
ticulirs, but ſtill retain the Generality of their Nature «;- 
19. 6. Again, one and the ſame Faith apprehends, ang oivec ©. 
Intereſt inall the Promiſes of God': And as by it we live}, the 
poral Dangers ; ſo by it we are freed from Eternal Deſtrygig, 
18 For f the wrath of God 1s revealed from he: 
ven h againſt all ungodlinefs, and unrighteouſnef, of mes 
; who || hold the truth in unrighteouſnels þ. 
f He proceeds to prove the principal Propoſition Jaid dow: 
the foregoing Verſe. The Cauſal Particle [for] implies as __ 
Men muſt be juſtified by the Righteouſneſs of God, becaut: the 
have no Righteouſneſs of their own to juſtifie «them ; the; ther 
ſelves are all unrighteous. This he proves both of the Gentiles in] 
Jews, He begins with the Gentiles, and proves it upon them "Mt 
this Verſe,to the ſeventeenth Verle of the ſecond Chapter ; and ther ha 
proves it upon the Jews alſo, from thence to rhe end of the ;);, 


eſtimon; 


Vis, Mat 


ken. 


Ma 


; Chapter. g *Tis revealed in the Word of Gol, or rather by 


Judgments which he inflicteth. + z. e. from God in Heaireg, 


originally from Second Cauſes,much leſs do they come by Chine: 
i The Abſtra& isput for the Concrete ; he means unrighteoy, 194 
ungodly Men ; but he chuſeth this way of ſpeaking, becauſz Gr; 
when he puniſheth, aims at rhe Sins of Men ; ind would ng w. 
nith their Perſons, but for their Sins. By Ungoalineſs, underf.ind 
Sins againſt the Firſt Table, which are mentioned, wer. 21 23. bh 
Unrighreouſneſs, fins againſt the Second, of which'there is mer, 
tion at large, from wer. 26. to the end of that Chapter. & By 7544 
underftand all that Light which is left in Man ſince the Fx, 
There are in all Men ſome common Notions of God, his Nature 1g} 
Will : Some commonPrinciples alſo of Equity and Charity towa; 
Men, which Nature it ſelf teacheth,and upon which the Conlciences 
of the Gentiles did Accuſe or Excuſe them. Theſe naturil Notion; 
concerning God and their Neighbour they did not obey and fo. 
low, but wickedly ſuppreſt them. They impriſoned the Tn! 
which they acknowledged, that they might Sin the more ſecurel;, 
The Metaphor is taken from Tyrants, who opprels the Innoczar, 
and Imprifon them : Sothe Genziles did by the Truth, which they 
had by their Nature ; they kept it in and under, 
19 Becauſe *chat which may be known of God /ism-*| 
nifeſt || in them 2, for * God hath ſhewed it unto them nr 
1 Or, that which is knowable of God, viz. by the Light of Nature, 
The Apoſtle, by a Prolepſis, prevents an ObjeQtion whic' ſome! 
might make in excuſe of the Genriles, How could they ſuffociteor 
ſuppretfs the Truth, ſeeing they wanted the Scripture, and were 
without the knowledge of it ? Tothis he Anſwers, That they weir 
not wholly without Knowledge, for That which might be knwn 
God, was manifeſt in them, and Revealed to'them. m 4. e, in thei! 


| Hearts and minds, vid. Chap. 2. 15. or 70 and among them; 3s + 


pears by many of their Learned Writers, who have left behinl 
them many clear Diſcourſes, and wiſe Eflays and Sayings about 
this Matter; though they themſelves did act contrary thereunto, 
n i.e. as before by the Light of Nature'in their Conſciences, or by 
the conſideration of the Creatures, as it follows in the next Vette 

20 For o * the inviſible things of him p from ths cre, 
tion of the world, are clearly ſeen, being under{tooddy, 
the things that are + made, even his eternal power and,; 
Godhead, || fo that they are without excuſe 7. il 

o Becauſe it might be further ObjeQed in behalf of the Gentiles ;7\ 
that the Notions of God imprinted in their Nature are ſo weak! 
that they may be well excus'd : Therefore the Apoſtle adds, Thats 
the certainty of them is further confirm'd by the Book ot the Cret- 
tures, which was Written before them in Capital Letters; 16 tl 
he that runs may read. p The Apoſtle tells us aftzrwards himlel, 
what he means by the inviſible things of God, wiz. his Being, inl 
his Attributes; particularly his Erernity and Aimighty Power; 
to which we might add his Wiſdom, Goodneſs, &: Thele, rhougi 
inviſible in themſelves, yet are diſcernable by his Works, and - 
ever ſince the Creation of the World. By what they fee pgs 
they may eaſily colle& or underſtand, that there 1s an Ecernal - 
Almighty Creator ; they may argue from the Effe&tsto the Caule. 
9 Some render it, that they may be without Excuſe ; but cps” 
rendred in our Tranſlation: The meaning is not, thit God oh 
them that Knowledge for this end and purpoſe, that ney 
be inexcuſeable ; for they. might catch even at that tor an _ " 
But the plain Sence is this, That God harh given all Mcn fs. 
means of Knowledge, as ſufficeth to leave them without Excule 5 
there can be no pretence of Ignorance. we 

21 Becaule » that when they knew God «, the) ou 
fied him not as God r, neither were thanktul a At = 
came vain in their imaginations w, and tieir foolith heai 
was darkned x. | 

y Either this muſt be refer'd to the words immediately foreg? 
incxculable ; yo 
cauſe, that when they knew God, they oJoritied him not as Go , L 
Or elſe it refers to wer. 18. and then'ris a Proof of ther ww 
ding the Truth in Unrighreouſnets, becauſe, &6. 5 They ha Lis 
tural Knowledge of God; it was taught chem as before,by the - 
of Nature, and by the Book of the Cicature. Though ths 8 px 
{ſufficient to ſave them ; yet it was ſuthcient to leave them Wl 


» . . Fa 4 "oY h;1 him 3 
Exculs, £ They didags Conceive of him, and Wert | Sa 


Chy 
10N, the 
Ve, end 
thereby 
ſtimon; 
the Pro. 
ak of a 
L FO 
oe unde; 
| thadgw 

: Com. 
Enteinces 
hole Þ,,. 
via, \ar 
| Lives th | 
C 1n fem. 
ICtion, 
om hez. 


of Men, 


| down 6 
as much, ©* 
aulc they 
hey them, 
rentiles an] 
Em, from 
ad then ha 
the 114 
ner by the 
| Hearn, 
oceed ng 
y Chance, 
weous 1nd 
cauſe God 
Id not py. 
inderit.nd 
1.23, By 
re 1S mens 
\ By Tut 
e the Fall 
Nature ind 
ty towards 
oniciences 
al Notions 
ey and fol. 
the Truth 
re ſecurely, 
Innoczar, 
which they 


d /i5ma-* | 
0 them 1 
of Nature, \ 
chict ſomeit 
Uufocite or 
, and were 
t they wer 
be known © 
e. 1n their 
"7m; 15 30s 
left behind 
FINgs about 
7 thereunto, 
nces, or by 
next Verk, 
| the crev, 
r{toodUy \ 
owe andy 
fl 
rhe Gentile; \ 
re ſo weiks! 
adds, Thith 
of the (:xet- 
ers; fothit 
cds himlelf, 
Being, ® 
ty Pow; 
ele, thougi 
ks, and thi 
ſee Created, 
Erernal and 
) the Cauſe. 
ut "tis better 
if God Gave 
they might 
an Excule; 
11 Men ſuch 
out Excule 5 


they glort 
;, bur *bb" 
z0lith heart! 


ately forego: 
culable ; be 
"tas God.&% 
cir with-bok 
ey had a 0 
by the Light 
| this was nd 
hem without 
2:1þip 109 

be (als 


3Þ, I. 


, God, into an image made F like to corruptible man, 


 £o0m thence "tis borrowed. 


became ill 
uy They did 


refer 
vidence, 
hath chie 


the Influence of the Stars, &c. w Or, Reaſonings. 


Iy 1t waAS a [ 
if Gods and thoſe either corporeal or incorporeal. 


{:cond or inferior Cauſes, as the Steicks. "This is the Vanity which 


the Apoſtle here ſpeaketh of. Note alſo that 1dels, the trame of 
are called Vanities, vid. Deut. 32.21. Jer. 10.15, A.14. 


idle Brains, 
- x By the Heart is meant the Mind, their very under- 
Rndings were darkned ; the natural Reaſon in them was obſcur'd : 
This was a juſt Judgment upon them for their abuſe of Know- 
ledge and Pride, of which in the next Verſe. 


22 Protetling themſelves to be wiſe, they became 


fools ». 
y Some think, that all along this Context the Apoſtle hath refe- 


rence to the Gnofticks, a ſort of Hereticks in the firlt Age (of which 
ſee Dr. Hammond ins Locam,) and that the meaning of the Words is 
this: That they aſſuming the Title of Gneſticks, of Knowing men, 
and of Men wiſer than others, have proved more Sottiſh than any. 
Others think the words refer to the Heathen Philoſophers, who 
though they were Learned and W iſe in ſecular and natural Things, 
yet they became Fools in Spiritual and Heavenly Matters ; though 
chey well underſtood the Creature, yet they err'd concerning the 
Creator. And as Fools delight in Toys, negleGing things of great 
Value; ſo they fet up Puppits and Idols of their own deviſing, in 
the room of rhe.true God ; which the Apoſtle gives ls in the next 
Verſe, as a Demonſtration of their Folly. Socrates, who was ac 
counted one of the Wiſeſt amongſt them, deſired his Friends, 
when he was about to Die, to Offer for him a Cock to E#ſculapins, 
which he had vow'd. 

22 And chang'd 2 the glory of the uncorruptible 


and robirds, and four-footed beaſts, and creeping things a. 
; 2 You have the ſame phraſe, Pſal. 106, 20. and Jer. 2. 11. and 
as The Apoſtle proceedeth from the 
more worthy, to the leſs worthy Creatures,that the groffnels of their 
livls:ry might the better appear; and theſe four are put for all 
other Kinds, T his groſs 1dolatry of the Heathen in Worſhipping ſuch 
Imiges as are here ſpoken of, was praQtiſed by the 1/raclites, wid. 
Exh, 8. 10, 11, And fo it is by the Romaniſts to this day : Ner 
doth it avail them to ſay, They do not Worſhip Images, but the 
True-God in or before thoſe Images ; for the ſame Plea was made 
by the 1dolaters of old. Symmachas ina learned Oration, wherein he 
crav'd of the Emperors Yalentinian and Theonoſius the Reſtitution 
of the Roman Gods, affirms, That they had reſpect only to One 
God; but they had divers ways to bring them to that God : They 


did not hold ſuch things as they Worſhipped to be God, but in them Þþ 


they ſaid they W orſhipped the True God. That Worſhip which is 
intended to God by an Image, is notthe Worſhip of God, but of 
the Image. Compare Pſal. 106. 15, 20. with Exod. 32. 4, 5. 
24 Wherefore þ God alſo gave them up c to unclean- 
nels, + through the Juſts of their own hearts, to diſho- 
#nour their own bodies between themſelves e. 
b Their impiety was the cauſe of what followed : This is repeated 
# agzin, that it may be the better obſerved ; The Contenipt of God 
indof Religion, is the cauſe of all Wickedneſs. c This Phraſe is 
thrice uſed in this Context, wiz. wer. 24, 26, 28. it ſeems to be taken 
out of Pſal. 81, 12, Some think, His giving them up, is only his 
vithdirawing his Grace from them, and permitting them toSin ; 
but there ſeems to be more in it than a bare SubſtraQtion or Per. 
milion, He did not only leavethem to themſelves, but in a judi- 
cial way He pur them into the harids of Satan, and of their own 
Luſts; as tis aid, Pſal. 69. 27. He added iniquzty to their iniquity, 
making the latter iniquity a puniſhment of the former. d Some 
Iead 1t in chemſelves, and ſome read it one amongſt another ; ſo the 
lame Word is rendred, Eph. 4. 32. Col. 3.13. The Apoſtle here 
ſpeiks more generally of all kind of Pollution and Uncleanneſs 
tt was committed by them, whether natural or unnatural. 
25 | Who changed the truth of God into a lye e, 
and worſhipped and ſerved the creature more than the 


Creator f, who is bleſſed for ever. Amen g. 

ez, e, The God of Truth, or the true God into an Ido], which is a 
Lye, which ſeems to be that which it is not ; or elſe by the Truth 
f Gid, underſtand thoſe true Sentiments and Notions that they had 
> Grd, and were taught them as before, by the Light of Nature, 
ndthe Book of the Creature ;/ theſe they changed into Lying 
Maginatzons and Conceits. f Or, beſides the Creator : Some un- 
LWQrſtand it comparatively, they Worſhipt one more than the other ; 
Chers exclufively, they Worthipt one and not the other . They 
Vere guilty of two great Errors, one was in their Minds, they 
Clanged the Truth of God into a Lye; the other in their Wills, 
oy ierved the Creature more than the Greator. g When the 
; mg of old made mention of the True God, they were wont to 
a d theſe words, Les hims be bleſſed for ever. 
26 For this cauſe þ God gave them up unto * vile af- 
tions ,, For even their women did change the natural 


lc into that which is againſt nature &, 


L A e. For their Idolatry and Uncleanneſs both, for now their 
viitry 18 aggravated by the Uncleanneſs accompanying it. i Gr, 


ROM 


176 Divine Excellencies and PerfeCtions, vid: Pſal. 29. 2. 
not own _ _ the __ and _ = all n 
ings they enjoyed, and return him thanks accordingly ; but 
were to / ute and Fortune, there own Prudence and TS 
is 

f Reſpett to the Conceprtions and Opinions that the Hea- 
then framed to themſelves of the Divine being. For though ſome 
denyed there was a God, and others doubted thereof; Yer general- 
acknowledged by them; yea ſome owned a multiplicity 
Others ac- 
knowledged but one God, as Plato, Ariſtotle, &c. but then they 
either denied lis Providence, as the Peripateticks or tyed Him to 


AN S. 


themſelves and their own Bodies, vid. 1 Cor. 6. 18. if they, as this 
Scripture tells us, thar commic Fornicaticn, diſhonour rheir own 

odies; then much more do they thar praQiſe the unnatural Un. 
cleanneſs hereafter mentioned. © & 5. e. 20131145 avdeiGorrad, to 
Clem, Alexandr. 4d prepeſteros & Sodomiticos concubitus ſeſe maribus pro« 
flituerunt, See Pareus: A filthy PraQtice not to be named. Eh. 


+ 3» 

27 Andlikewiſe alſo the men, leaving the natural uſe 
of the woman, burned in their luſt one towards another ; 
men with men working that which is + unſeemly /, and 
receiving in themſclves that recompence of their error 
which was meet m. 

] This was the Sin of the Sodomites of old, for which they were 
deſtroyed, Gen. 19. 5. wid. Levit. 18. 22. m How meet was it 
that they who had forſaken the Author of Nature, ſhould be given 
up, Not to keep the Order of Nature: That they who had chan- 
ged the Glory of God into the ſimilitude of Beaſts, ſhould be left 
to do thoſe things which Beaſts themſelves abhor'd. God only 
concurred as a Juſt Judge in Puniſhing foregoing with following 
Sins, vid. wer, 55, 

28 Andeven as they did not like to + retain God in 


mind, to do thoſe things which are not convenier: . 

7 Or, to have God in acknowledgment. The Apoſtle proceeds to ſhew 
the Analogy betwixt their Sin and their Puniſhment. The Evil he 
here taxeth, is much the ſame with that in ver. 21. Though they had 
ſome knowledge of God,yet they did not acknowledge him as God, 
by Glorifying him, and giving Thanks to him; it did not ſeem 
good to them ſo to do. » Or, an injudicious Mmd ; aMind void of 
Judgment. Tr is juſt and equa), that he, who in his Judgment dif. 
approves.of God, ſhould be left either to be of a Corrupt Juds. 
ment, or of none atall. The Word may be taken Paſſively, for a 
Mind diſapproved of God ; or a#ively, for a Mind which :ifip- 
proves of all Good. They were not given up to this reprobate Mind 
all at once, but by degrees. Firſt, they were given up to their 
own hearts Luſts, ver.- 24. Then, to vile Aﬀe@ions, v-r 26 And 
then Laſtly, ro a Mind void of Judgment; to fuch an evil Habir 
that they could do nothing but Evil. 

-> Being filled withall unrighteouſneſsp, fornication, 
wickedneſs 9, 'covetoulneſs, maliciouſneſs r, full of envy, 
mnurther, debate, deceit, malignity «, whit; erers 7, 

> Now follow the Sins againſt the Second Table, which reign'd 
amongſt the Gentiles, Amongſt which, Unrighteouſneſs is as the 
Fountain, from whence the reſt as Streams do flow. This is the 
Genus that comprehends all the Evils hereafter enumerated. Ir is 
nor to be ſuppoſed, that all the following Vices were found in every 
individual Perſon ; but the meaning 1s, that all were Guilty of 
ſome, and ſome were guilty of allof them. 9 In the Greek there is 
an Elegant Paranomaſia, moprela, mrneta. So there are two more 
in the following Verſes, 095125, goves, aovreru, douvrfsry;. The 
Deſign of the Apoſtle is, to fet down a particular Vice; therefore 
inſtead of Wickedneſs ſome read Troubleſomneſs, or a deſire to p1 5 
cure Trouble and Moleſtation to another. The Devil is called 
0 Tones, the troubleſome one. » Or, Miſchievouſneſs ; the better to 
diſtinguiſh it from Envy. s Or, Morefity and Churliſhnefs, taking 
all things in the worſer part. # Whiſperers ſpeak Evil privily of 0- 
thers, Backbiters openly. 

30 Backbiters, haters of God #, defpiteful w, proud, 
boaſters, inventers of evil things x, diſobedient co pa- 


rents y, ; 

# The original Word hath a paſſive Termination ; and therefore 
ſome read it, hated of God, But words Paſſive are ſometimes a&ive- 
ly taken, wid. 2 Per. 1. 3. And the Apoſtle here intendeth a Ca- 
talogue of the Gentilcs Sins, whereof this was one, vid. Pſal. 81. 15. 
w Or, Injurious. x They were not contented with old uſual Evils, 
but they invented new; whether we refer this to Evils of Pain, 
or Evil: of Sin, we may find examples thereof amongſt the Heathen. 
Phalaris propounded a Reward to him that could deviſe a new Tor- 
ment. And Sardanapalus offered Rewards to ſuch, as could find 
out new venereal Pleaſures. y Either natural or political. 


31 Without underſtanding z, covenant-breakers, with- 
out f natural affection 4, implacable 5, unmerciful, 


ſame. 4 This Evil alſoreigned amongſt the Gentiles, who facrifi- 
ced their very Children to their Idols, and otherwiſe Expoſed them 
to Ruine, wid. 2 Tim. 3. 3. 6 Or, Irreconcileable and Vindittive. 

32 Who knowing the judgment of God c, that they 
which commit ſuch things are worthy of death 4, not on- 


them e. ; 

c i, e. His juſt Law and Statute, -or his Juſtice in Pun ſhing Sin 4 
and Sinners. This the Gertiles knew by the Light of Nature, and 
by the Examples of God's Juſtice in the World, 4 The Barbarians 
of Meli:za judg'd Murther worthy of Death, 48. 38. 4, wid. A#, 
23. 29. and 26. 31. The Heathenalfo had ſome Knowledge of fu- 
ture and everlaſting Puniſhment, as appears by their Writings; and 
were perſwaded, that the Sins before-mentioned, and ſuch-like, 
did really deſerve it. e Or, Patronize and Applaud ſuch, wis, 
Pſal. 10.3. This is ſer laſt, as worſt of all. Ir is the higheſt De- 
ree of Wickedneſs : Such come neareſt the Devil, who take Plea- 
ure in Evil, becauſe at is Evil. 


CHAP. IL. 


ens of diſhonour, 5. e the moſt diſhonourable and ſhameful 
yoiong ; foras we are Exhorted, 1 Theff. 4. 4, 5. to poſleſs our 
ae els in Honour, that is, to with-hold our Body from Unclean- 
"3; lothcy thar gave up themſelves to Uncleanneſs, diſhonour 


Our condemning #thers, or God's goodneſs to us, do not leſſen, but aggra- 
. vate our fins; and future miſery; 1——5. The Righteous judgmens of 
God to come. 6—11. towards the Gentiles. 12 —16. and the Jews, 
who hoped to be juſtified by the kniwitdge of the Law, and _ ins 
Us mg 


Chap. I 


T Or, FA 
thineſs 


their knowledge », God gave them over to a ' reprobare + Or, t» 


have Gol 


in acknow.. 
ledagment. 


ll Or, A 
mind wid 
of Tunr. 
ment, 


T Or, UNz 
z Or, without Conſcience, ouy:ms or ovydngs, being much the ſociable. 


iy do the ſame, but have F * pleaſure in them that do + Or, _ 
ent wit 


them. 


* Hoſ.7:303 


"SIpO. 4h Ee = -Þ . 
—_ ad - _—_ ” ” wy © 
_ om . - ui» Ay al Pn _ = dee 
ET $i pc 2 _ > _— Ria _ g ” 
” - n __— 02 . - = "> 
a — - Pha; o . _—_ a"; 
4 _ > of F744 ”e THT . « : 4 
_ ———_ > w_ -, - 2%. a" Pry Vn ———_——_ _ - 
I "Tos a; - B Poo KEE ew 1 peg . 
p 4 ” Ls __——_— wy. » - o 
I * LH £2 s br -2 = " es — WY 
: m - + - X 5 <X «4 r = > 
- x 5 - . —— ws - - eo jp _ & ” 4 
® _ w_ = . Et. We 0 - * © 7 n ' 
ts ad = F - « 
A = : F : : 4 - =. . ——-———_— 0 k 
— —_ _ « - 3 - Fo» a2 _ —— So - . 5 C n 7 "os SS / 
n_ .* ” wo Twi 30 


- demon” - 


PO I ——_— 


am oi. 


, q 

iu iw T4... w—— + 
"* 

PETE : 


»- 


_ ee —————_ 
- -- _ = 
-_ 


a EE Po 


- =P - - 
Fo 
165 
— EE EES=-- = 


Chap. II: 


firaFing others in the ſame, which they themſelves kept not, 19.— 24. 
or by Circumciſion and other their Advantages. 25, —27, Who is a 
Right Jew, and what the true Circumciſion, 28, 


+ Or, £v« 1 | | + 9 ma thou art inexcuſeable, O man, + who- 


rx one that 
Judgeſf. 
*iSam.12 


+ Or, 


know. 


(| Or,accor- 
aing 10, 


® Fer. 17. 


we 


{oever thou art chat judgeſt a, * For wherein b 
chou judgeſt another thou condemneſt thy ſelf; tor thou 
' that judgeſt doeſt the ſame things. 

It js much Diſputed, to whom the Apoſtle direQs his Diſcourſe 
in the beginning of this Chapter. Some think, that having diſco- 
vered the Sins of the Gentiles in the former Chapter; he here uſeth 
a Tranſition, and turneth himſelf to the Jews, and lays open their 
more ſecret Wickedneſs and Hypocrifie. But the Particle | merefore}] 
in the front of the Chapter, doth ſeem to intimate, That this 1s 
inferred from what went before, and is a continuance of the ſame 
Argument. It is of the Genr:les then that he is ſtill Diſcourſing,and 
wer 17. he begins by name to deal with the Jew:. Some think, 

ſpeaks more particularly of ſuch as were Judges and Magiſtrates 
amongſt the Gentiles, who, though they made Laws to Judge and 
Puniſh others for ſuch and ſuch Crimes, did yet commit the ſame 
themſelves. Some think he intends more eſpecially, ſuch as were 
Philoſophers, and Men renowned for Vertue, as Socrates, Ariſtides, 
Fabritiu:, Cato, Seneca, &c. which Iaſt, as is ſaid, was well known 
to the Apoſtle. Theſe, in their Speeches and Writings, did cen- 
ſure the Evil manners of others, and yet were as bad themſelves. As 
Cato is aid to have uſed Extortion, proſtituted his Wife, and to 
have laid violent hands upon himielf; and yet he was affirm'd by 
Velleius, to be Homo virtwti fmillimus, a moſt virtuous Man. But the 
received Opinion is, Thatthe Apoſtle in general doth Tax all ſuch 
as cenſure, and find Fault with others, and yet are guilty of the 
ſame things themſelves. # q #. Thou art without all excuſe that 
dot Aﬀent and Subſcribe to the righteous Judgment of God, that 
rhey w ho do ſuch things as are mentioned in the forgoing Chapter, 
are worthy of Neath, and yetdoeſt the ſame thy ſel6: If aotopenly 

et &cretly and inwardly, thou art Guilty, of the ſame, or as great 
ins. Thou canſt make no Apology or Pretence, why the Sentence 
of Death and Condemnation, which 1s due to others, ſhould not 
likewiſe paſs upon thee. 6 z.e. Inthat very Thing, or by that 
very Law, whereby thou Cenſureſt and Condemneſt others, thou 
pronounceſt Scntence againſt thy felf ; thy own Mouth condemns 
thee in the Perſon of another, wid, Mat. 7. 3. ang 21,40, 41, 45. 
C011 8. 4, 9. 


according to truth, againlt them which commit ſuch 


things d. Bb | 

c We know aſſuredly, and it is evident, both from Scripture 
and Reaſon, that God's Judgment , both here and hereafter, is True 
and Upright, vid. 1 Sz. 16. 79. He judgeth Righteous Judgment ; 
He Judgeth of Perſons and Things, mot as they are in Appearance, 
bur as they are in Reality. 4 Thus indefinite manner of (peaking, 
includeth both thoſe that Judge others, and thoſe who, for the 
aforementioned Sins, are ſubjeCt to the Cenſures of others, 

3 And thinkeſt thou this, O man, that judgeſt them 
which do ſuch things, and doeſt the ſame, that chou ſhalt 


eſcape the judgment of God e? 

e When other Mens FaQs eſcape not thy Cenſure who art but 
«Man ; what Folly and Madnefſs 1s it to imagine, that thine own 
evil dee-!s ſhould eſcape the Judgment of God ? wid. 1 John 3. 20. 

4 Or deſpiſett f chou the riches g of his goodneſs and 
forbearance, and * long ſuffering 4, F not knowing that 


"the goodneſs of God leadeth thee to repentance e. 


Here he Taxeth ſuch as thought that God approved of their Per. 
ſons and Courſes, at leaſt He would not regard or puniſh their evil 
Adtions, becauſe he had hitherto forborn them, and heap'd up 
abundance of worldly Bleſſings upon theny, as He did upon the 
Rowans eſpecially, above other People. It is common for Men 
<o grow ſecure, and promiſe themſelves Impuniry, when God for. 
bears them, and gives themoutward Proſperity, vid. Pſal. 50, 21. 
andss. 19. Eccl. 8. 11. Hoſ. 12. 8. f The word ſignifies to think 
amiſs ; he deſpiſeth the Goodneſs of God, who thinks otherwiſe of 
it than he ſhould ; that it is extended ro him for other ends than it 
is; or, to deſpiſe the Goodneſs of God, is, to turn it- into wan- 
zonneſs. g i.e, The abundance of his Goodneſs, wid. Eph. 1. 7, 18, 
and 2.4, 5. and 3. $. Chap. g. 23. 4 God's long-Suffering isa 
farther degree of his Forbearance; the Scripture ſpeaks much of 
this Attribute of God, and of his abounding therein, Exod. 34. 6, 
Numb. 14.11, 18. Pſal. 86, 15. Mat. 23. 37. Chap. 9. 22. 1 7Tim.1. 
x5. 1 Per. 3. 29. # That is one great End of God's Goodneſs and 
forbearance, wid. Hof. 11. 4. 2 Pet. 3. 9. God's Goodneſs is 
abuſed, when tis notus'd and improv'd to this End, 


5 But || after thy bardneſs and impenitent heart, trea- 
ſureſt vp & unto thy ſelf wrath againſt the day of wrath, 
and revelation of the righteous judgment of God /. 

k This paſſage ſeems to reſpeQ Dent, 32. 34, 35. or Job 36. 13. 
You have a parallel place, James 5. 3. e meaning is thou pro- 
vokeſt more and more the wrath of God againſt thee; by heaping 
vp Sins, thou heapeſt up Judgments of God upon thy ſelf: Juſt as 
men add to their Treaſure of Wealth, ſo doeſt thou add to thy 
Treaſure of Puniſhment: 1 This is a Periphraſis of the Day of 
Judgment, or of the Laſt Day ; then will God viſit for thoſe Sins 
that here eſcape Puniſhment: Then the Juſtice and Equity of his 
Poeokings ihall appear, and all ſhall have reaſon to approve 
TErEOT, 


6 * Who will render to every man according to his 


19. Cha. 


14.12, 


m This proves what he had ſaid, That the Judgment jof God in 
that Day, will be according to Righteouſneſs, or moſt Righteous 
Judgment. Paralle] places you will find, Pſal.62. 12. Mar. 16. 27. 
« Gor. 5.10. Revel, 22,12, The Popiſts from hence infer the Merit 


ROMANS. 


2 Buc + we are ſure c that the judgment of God is | 


| 


Chap: 
of Crice 


alibi. Good wee 


Yorks 
Retributio 
) 


of Works: But the Reward to the Godly, is a Rewarg 
and not of Debt. The word 4748ya; imports not on] 
tribution, but a free Gift, as in Mar. 20, 8. &- 
are the Rule of his Proceeding, nor the Cauſe of his 
wid. Luc. 17. 10. 

7 To them who by patient continuance » 
ing, ſeek for glory and honour, and immorta] 
nal Lite p. 

What he had Jaid down in general, he amplifies more 
ly; n Or, Perſeverance in well- doing ; which implies P 
Mat. 10. 22. and 24. 13. Hb. 10, 36. o Or, Incorrnpton . Na 


in well do. 
ny 0, Uer. 


Particul;r. 
atience, vid, 


adds this, to ſhew, That the Glory and Honour he ſpe;t-c .c 
not ſuch as the Gentzles uſually Gake, who made mn oN 
the ſcope of their AQtions; bur it was Eternal in the amd. 
ſuch as never fades away. p z. e. God will render eternal pw 
ſuch: The word Render muſt be ſupplyed our of the former Veit: 
8 But unto them that are contentious 9 and * dg Rig” 


obey the truth», but obey unrighteouſneſs ;, indienation 4 
and wrath 7. : 
Or, that are of Contention : So they of the Cir iſt 
fuck as are Circumciſed, AF. 10. 45. Seq 2, 126 "ys. 
underſtand ſuch as are RefraQtary and felf-will'd : that, from T 
rit of Contradiftion, will not be perſwaded ; that ftrive and ki 

againſt the Righteouſneſs of God, from an Opinion of their ov 
righteouſneſs, Hoſ. 4.4. 7 See Chap. 1. 18. and the Note ther 
5 That are the Servants of Sin, and of Corruption. Chap. 6. j. 
2 Per. 2. 19. #t Theſe two differ only in Degree thereby unde. 
ſtand the Judgments of God upon the Wicked, whicharethe Ef 
of his Anger; the Cauſe is commonly pur for the Eff-&, | 

9 Tribulation and anguiſh « upon every foul of my 
that doth evil, of the Jew * firſt, and alſo + of ;\; # 
Gentile x. 


u The word Render is here again underſtood, He þa!! Ri, * 
Trioulation and Angaiſh. Some reter rhe former to the Puniſhmy | 
of Senſe, the latter tothe Puniſhment of Loſs; or the one to the vn, 
quenchable Fire, the other to the never-dying Warm: Ir ſeems; 
be a Rhetorical Exaggeration, wid. 1/ſal. 11. 6. Mar. 9. 43. 44, af 
46, w A double Hebraiſm ; Firf, the Soul is put for the Perf 
as Gen, 12. $5. and 14. 21. and 17. 14. and 36. 6. and 45. 4 
Secondly, Every Soul of Man, is put for the Soul of every Mz. ;; 
| before, Chap. 1. 18. all Unrighteouſneſs of Men, is put for the 
Unrighteouineſs of all Men ; the Soul of Man ſhall not be punt 
onely, but Chiefly. » The Jew is firſt plac'd in Order of Puniſh. 
ment, becauſe he better knew God's Will, and had more helps, wid, 
Mat. 11. 22, 24. Lu. 12. 47. 


10 But glory, honour, and peace y to every manthat 


-——_——_ good, to the Jew firſt, and alſo to the + Gen- 44 
eile 2. 

| What he called Immortality, wer. 5, He now calls Put; 
which word, according to the uſua] Acceptation of it, amongſt the 
Hebrews, is comprehenſive of all Good and Happineſs, both here 
and hereafter. 2 As the ungodly and unbelieving Jews, ſhall have 
the firſt place in puniſhment, ſo thoſe that Believe, and are Godly 
amongſt them, {hall have the firſt place in Reward ; thoughyet 
tor the Reaſon mentioned in the next Verſe, the Godly and 
Believing Gentiles ſhall ſhare with them therein. 

f1 For there is no reſpect of perſons with Goda, 

# This ſeems to be borrowed from 2 Chron. 1 9. 7. and Dx: 
10. 17. You have the ſame again, AF. 10, 34. vid. 70b 34. 19. 
Gal. 2.6. Epheſ. 6.9. 1 Pet. x. 17. vid. Gal. 3. 28. Obj. God os 
ved 7aceb, and hated Eſau, when they were yet Unborn, andhal 
done neither Good nor Evil? Anſw. This was not properly 
ReſpeTting of Perſons becauſe God did not this «s a Judge, but 
as an EleQtor. So the Apoſtle ſtates it, Rom. 9. 1, 12, 13 
God is Gracious ro whom He will be Graczous, and raay do what Be 
will with His own. 

12 For as many as have ſinned without law, ſhallal 
ſo periſh without lawb : and as many as have ſinnedin 
the law c, ſhall be judged by the law. 

6b By the Former, he meins the Gentiles, by the Lat 
the Jews, the like Diſtribution he makes, 2 Cor, 9. 21. #4 
Under the Law or againſt it. 


13 * (For not the hearers of the law are juſt beiore+ 
God, but the doers of the law ſhall be juſtified 4 : 
a This, and the rwo following Verſes, are included in a Paren- | 
theſis; and they ſerye to obviate an ObjeRion, againſt what vis: 
ſaid, wer. 12. 'TheFews might plead, that they were Superiour to 
the Gentiles, and ſhould be exempted or Privileg'd in Judgment, 
for as much as they knew and profeſt the Law of God, which the 
Gentiles did not? To this, he ſays, That to know and learn the Law 
was not ſufficient, unleſs in all things they yielded Obedicnceto !t 
which they —_— did nor could. The Scope of the Apoſtle, n 
nor ſimply roffew how Sinners are now juſtified in the Sight 
God ; byt to ſhew what is requiſite to Juſtification according t? 
the Terior of the Law; and that is to do all that is written there* 
in, and to continue fo to do. And if there be any Man that 
bring ſuch perfe& an@conſtant Obedience of his own Performing 
he ſhall be Juſtified by Ged; but in as much as no Man ner 
tural nor Regenerate, can ſo fulfil the Law; he muſt feck for J : + 
cation in ſome other way. The Text thus expounded, o - 
way militate with Chap 3. 30. and Gl. 3. 11, which at = 
ding it ſeems to do. And it further ſhews that the Jews are tn 
prehended under the general Curſe as well as the Genti/e!, rn 7 
bound to have recourte to the Righteoulneſs of God by Faith. 


14 For when the Gentiles which have not the _—_ 
do by nature f the things + contained in the law, c 
Pry not the law, are a law unto themſelves yg 3 - "Th 


Nap, | 


&n 
ks 
on, 


U)ar. 

Vig, 

He 
, Wig 
glory 
;, and 
ate to 
Verſe 
d not '2 
ation 3 


Dag 


A 


—_ 


n, for 
Wlous, 
| 3 IÞi« 
id kick 
Ir OWn 
s fliers, 
. 6. 12, 
under. 


> EfteGts 


— 


i Þop 
[? Render (or 
11{hmen: 
the uns 
ſermsto 
3. 44, &f, 
e Perſon, 
d 46. 26 
| Mea, a 
It for th; 
Je Puniiht 
f Puniſh. 
he]ps, wid, 


man that 
T Gen 4 


alls Peace; 
mongſt the 
, both here 
, ſhall have 
| are Godly 
though yet 
Godly and 


30d 4. 
7. and D#!. 
70b 34: 19. 
bj. God 16+ 
orn, _ 
t proper!y 
\ Judge, but 
il, 12, 13 
Jo what Be 


WW, {hall a. 
e {ined 


7 the Latte! 
9, 21. 61. f 


; juſt beiore 4 


[) 
. 


a4 
ed in a Paret- | 
inſt what WS? 
- Syperiour £0 
in Judgment, 
od, which the 
Jearn the LaW 
bedienceto 
the Apoſtle, 15 
:n the Sight® 
1 according O 
- written there* 
y Man that ci 
vn Performs 
{an neither N:- 
{eek for Juſt 
nded, doth 9 
hich at firſt 18% 
e Jews alc cont 
Gentiles, and 4 
4 by ajth. 
or the 1aW 5 
16 law, che\c 


veSZ - Jer 


op. Il 


—= 
>- 
LAY 

_ 


ww, which is, 7? love God above all, and our Neighbours as our 


* that to do, and what to Jeave undone ; or the external Ations 
which the Law preſcribes. s This ſeems to be a Covenant-Pro- 


" mile 


men n by Jeſus Chriſt according to my goſpel . 


ble in Judgment, vid. Chap. 4. 15. To this he ſays, That though 
chey bad not the Law written in Tables of Stone, as the Jews had, 
yet they had a Law written in their Hearts, which was a Copy or 
Counterpart of the other, and had in a manner the Effe&s of it ; 
&r thereby they were Inſtrutted to do Well, and debarr'd from 
1oing Evil, which are tne two Properties of all Laws. f Nature 
x oppos'd ro Scripture and ſpecial Revelation. By the Dire&ion 
of the La, and Light of Nature, they did many things, which 
the Law of Moſes Commanded, and forbore many things which it 
frbad. £ 7. & They have in themſelves ſach Principles of Rea- 
inn, and Rules of Equity, as are to them inſtead of a Law, preſcri- 
bing what they ought to Do and Avoid. 


is Which ſhew the work of the Jaw h written in their 
rearts 4. | their conſcience alfo bearing witneſs, and their 
+ thoughts || tho mean while & accuſing, or elſe excuſing 


one another 7. | 
L By the Work of the Law, Either underſtand the Sum of the 


fe ; Or the Office of the Law, which contiſts in dire&ting 


and Privilege, 7er. 31. 33. How then is it Predicated of 
the G nriles * Anjw. Jeremy ſpeaks there, of a ſnecial and ſuperna- 
nal Inſcription or Writing in the Heart by Grace ; and the Apo- 
2! here, of that which is Common and Natural. -4 Interchange- 
Iv, now one Way, anon another, 7 Not as though the Thoughts 
4d, at the ſame time, firive cogether about the ſame Fa& : Nor 
«it meant of divers Men, as if good Men were Excuſed, and bad 
Men Accuſed by their own Thoughts ; bur in the fame Perſons, 
trere were acculing or excuſing Thoughts and Contciences,as their 
Ations were evil or good. 


16 * In the day. mz when God ſhall judge the ſecrets of 


1m Theſe words may be referr'd to the 12. ver. and ſo they ex- 
ors the time when Jews and Gentiles ſhall be Judged. Though 
tre annex them to the words Immediately preceding. 9. d. Now 
the Conſeiences of Men do Teſtifie for or againſt chem, and their 
Thoughts accuſe or excuſe them ; butin the Day of Judgment they 
will do it more eſpecially. » So that the molt Secret $'ns ihal nG2 
cape the Notice and Cenſure of the Judge, vid. Ecc:. 12 14: 
; Cir. 4.5 0 #, e, The Goſpel which I Preach. So Tohn 12. 48. 
0:r Siviour calls his Word, his Diſciples Word : He calls it his 
Goſpel, not as the Authour, bur as the Publiſher of It ; it waSnot 
is in reſpe&t of Revelation, bur jn regard of Diſpenſation, Chap. 
z Cor. 9. 17. 2 Cor. 5. 18, 19. 2 Tim. 2. 8, As forthe 


td, 23d. wer. 28, and Rewvel. 2.9 


. 
, 

Tn 
' 
In 


tbe borrowed from 1/2. 45. wit. 
1 And knoweft 4:5 will, and F* approveſt the things 


nd full Knowledge of all the Secrets thereof. 

0 An Inſtructor of the foolith, a reacher of babes « : 
M1ch haſt the form of knowledge w, and of the truth in 
e Law, 

8 Such as have little or no Knowledge. w A Scheme or Syſtem 
It Notions ; a compendivus Model or Method, which is artifici- 
lly Compos'd ; ſuch as Tutors and Profefiors of Arts and Scien- 
5 do Read over again and again to their Pupils and Auditors. 

21 Thou therefore which ceacheſt another, teacheſt 
Mou nor thy ſelf 2 thou that preacheſt a man ſhould not 


©, doft thou ſteal y £ 

' ©4.d, Doſt notthou thy ſelf do what thou preſſeſt upon others ? 
0. Mat. 23.3. y The jews were Infamous of old for this Sin, 
mM 50, 18, Mat. 23. 14. 

22 Thou that 1ayeit a man ſhould not commit adulte- 
' %, doſt thou con mit adulrery ? thou that abhorreſt 


"=, doſt thou commit facrilege a ? 

{ Io this Sin alſo, the Fews were greatly addicted, wid. Pſal. 
Toy Jer. 5.8, @ Here he varies the Crime ; he does not ſ:y, 
f hoy conmit Idolatry, but Sacrilege. 'The Jews, after their 
ex of Captivity, kept themſelves free from Idolatry ; but 
<a they Were Guilry of a Sin that was near a Kintoit. Here 
My be Queried, What the Sacrilege was, that the Jews were 
»1y 0 7 Some think, their Covetouſneſsis here Taxed, which 
i kind of [dolatry. "The 7ews took thoſe things which were 


ROMANS 


« Here he preoccupates the Genti'es Plea : They might Obje&, 
thar having not the Law, they could not Tranſgreis, nor be culpa- 


F on 13. Mal. 24.8. 9, Thev Converted to their own 17 
oh fangs as were Dedicated to Gxd. Much to the fame purpoty 
15 their Opinion, that think it coniifted in robbing God of jiis 7! 


By the Imperial Law in the Cage, 1t is deciared Sucrijcoe ry 


from the Emperor any thing that is his; it ought ro be mich my: 
accounted Sacrilece to deal fo with Gd 


PE aai boil thi ) 


Some tink hor Salle 


lege lay in poliuting the Vorthip of Ge, and making his Communds 


G C 0D ! ! 4 - Te . . . —-4 Y » » 
ot no Effect, rarough raew corrupt Additions and Traditions. 
| . valet '$ 2, "WP 
23 i hou rat makett liy boalt of Jaw, through 
breaking the Law Giſhononreft than 107 6 2 
» Doft thou bring a Reproach upon Religion, and vive Occalion 
ro tne Gentiles to Blaſpheme his Name * ſy it follows 
words. 


! 
IG 


in the ncxc 


24 For the name of God is blafyhem'd anon» the Gen- 


tiles. through you c, as iti * written 

c Becauſe of your and your Fore-fathers Sins. 4 The Apoſtle 
doth not te!l them where it was Written ; he tuppoteth ther: -were 
not 1gnorant of it, wid. Fz& 36. 20, 23. 1/a. _y c. : 

25 For circumcition verily proficecty, it thou |! k22y 
the Law c: bur if thou be a breaker of the Lay, thy ci:- 
cumciſion is made oncircumcttion : 

The Jews might ObjeR, If rhe former Privileges availed nn to 
Righreouſnefs and Salvation ; yer Circumcition at lea might; tand 
them in ſome ſtead ? In Anſwer whereunto you have, Fri a Con- 
ceſton, Circumcition indeed is Profitable. 
thou keep the Law, which is INuſtrated by a large Anrithetis, wer. 
26, 27. 3. A DiftinQuion «: Circumcition 15 of two 90175, Outrrard 
and Litreral, Inward and Spiritual ; the Latter ftands 11 Corce, and 
hath Acceptation with God. wer. 28, 29. e If thou keep it per- 
tettly, to which Circumcition obligeth, Gal. 5. 3. or if thou wi 
thy urmoſt Care and Endeavour ſoto do. f 7.e. If otheriw ith thou 
Traoſgreſſeſt the Law, thy Circumciion avails thee nothino - jr 
gives thee no Privilege above the Uncircumcis'd. A wicked ip 
1s to God as an Ethiopian, Amos 9. 7, The Apoſtle corr.G4$ the 
Carnal Confidence and Iypocrilic of the Fews, who vilued then - 
ſelves upon the account of this outward Ceremony, and thous hr ir 
ſufficient ro be Circumcis'd in the Fleſh. Some think rhe Apoſtle 
h1#1 Reſpe6& in rheſe wordsrorhe Time of the Law, whilſt Circum- 
c.10N was an ordinary Sacrament of tte Covenant; then indeed jt 
was Profitable and Available ; bur now, inthe times of the Golpe] 
't iS Abrogitcd, wid, Gal. 5. 2, 5. ; 


25 Fictetoie nt the uncircumcifion g keep the || riph. 5 Oc oF 
«c? !! ; _ 


reouſnels of the Law þ, jhall not his uncircumcition be 
counted for circrmciſion. 

g #7. e. The Uncircumcis'd ; a figurative and frequent way of 
Speaking, wid. Rom. 3.30 andg4.9. þ Which none of them ever 
did ; but admit they cou!d, or elſe which ſome of them have done 
in ſincerity, though with manifold imperfe&ions ; ſuch as the two 
Centurions, one of which 1s mentioned in rhe Goſpel of Luke ; the 
other in the #5: If in this Sence the Uncircumciſed keep the Righ- 
teouſneſs of the Law, Shall they nor be all one in the Account of 
God, as if they were Circumcited ? wid. Rom. 4. 10. 

2; And {hall not uncircumcifian which is by nature z, 
if it fulfil tho law &, judge thee /, who by the letter and 
circumciſion » doeft || eranſgreſs the T.aw? 

# A Periphraſis of the G-atzles, who want Circumciſion, or are 
by Nature without it. & Here's another word, before it was K-ep, 
but now 'tis Fulfi/ rhe Law ; though the word be varied, yer the 
Sence 1s the ſame, wid. James 2. 8. 1 #. e. Rile up in Judgment 
againſt thee ; or elfe ſhall he not do it by his Example ? as in Mr: 
12.41, 42. The Men of Nimeveh,and rhe Queen of Sveba ſhail judge 
the Iſraelites ; The meaning is, the Obedient Genrile fall Condemn 
the Diſobedient Jew. m i. e. The outward litceral Circumciſion ; 
or by the Letter, underſtand the Law, wid. 2 Cor. 3.6, 5, The 
Sence 15, by means of the Lew and Circumciſion, and reſting in then: 
as Pledges of the Lowe of Gvd (lo v. 17.) they are the more ſecure 
and bold in Sinning againſt God : Ir is to them an Occaition of 
T ranſgrefſion. 

28 For * he 15 not a Jew » that is one {| outwardly », 


neither is that circumciſion p which is outward in the fleth : 3 


n A right or true Jew, which is Heir of the Promiſes made to the 
Fathers. o The word Only is to be underſtood , wid. 1 Cor. x. 17. 
þ The Right and True Circumciſion which God principally requires, 
and 1s available unto Salvation : That Circumciſion 15 not much to 
be accounted of, which 1s only the cutting off an out ward Skin. 

29 But he zx a Jew q which 1s one || * inwardly ; and 
* circumciſion zs that of the keart, in the ſpirit. and noc 
in the letter, * whoſe praiſe zs not of men but of God. 

gq He isa Right and True Jew, an 1jraelite indeed, that hath taken 
away the Fore-skin of his Heart, 7er 4. 4. that is cleanſed from all 
corrupt «fefions, and hath Jaid aſide all Superfluicy of Naughti- 
neſs ; that Worſhippeth God in the Spirit, Kejoyceth in Chriſt 7e- 


fur, and hath no Confidence in the Fleth. Such are rhe Circumci/- 


on and Jews indeed, wid, Pril. 3. 3. 


CHEAP IL 


The Jews Preregative, 1, 2, Man's Infidelity and Unrighteosſneſs do 
0: obſeruF God's Faithſulneſs and Rizhtcouſneſs : bur yer is our 
ſm. $—8. The Jews from the Old Teftamens proved Tranſgr: ſors of 
the Law : Therefore by it can no fleſh be juſtifi:d, 9 — 29. Therefore 
God hath revealed another manner of Juſtification in his word, 21, wig, 
of Grace by Faith in Jeſus Chrift: Who by his Bloed is our Prepitia. 
tion ; and in it God declareth his Righteouſneſs, 22—26, hereby Boaſt. 
ing is excluded : God hath an Equal Reſpe& to Jew and Centiles : 
And he in the ſame way juſtificth toth 27 -—30. by Faith the Law i; 


cred to Idols, and which, by the Law of God ſhould have 
Weſtroy d,and turn'd them to their private/Advantage. Others 


Dag their Sacrilege conlifted in with-holding from God, that 
i 3 
Vo! 


"Mx 


x: lhould have Conſecrared and Offercd up to Him, wid. | 


eſtabliſhed. 31. 


Hat advantage 2 then hath the Jew ? or what 
profit z5 there of circumcilion þ ? 
| $ CLF 4 


"Ve 4 wo 
* 2 Sam. 
f 35 

| Or. ao 


2: A Limitition, if 


Ainancecs. 


*Or,wh:ich 
3s of 1%» 
$1156, 

| Or, art 
a iranſ. 
grefſor ' of 
the Law, 


6, 7. 
[| Or,open- 
bz. 


[] Or , ſe- 
cre:ty. 

oY 4 -- > 
*ColofT. 2. 
It. 

” $LOG 4 
oP 

2 Cor. 10 
18. 

1 Theſ. 2. 
4s 


mo 

oP : _- ? 
<2; SA 2.x > % - +. »-& 
og ie PP >... 


© 4a Yr >;; P -- 
= 


" aa-& SA 
= =p. 
be Sor 
hy. et 
- » A 
_ e 


ws rg 
— 


* 
+ _ 
—— 


us B..f - , nc 
A 7 — _— 
-_— 
4 Py . a4 
- | rn InY 
——_ nn CIR _ 
oy _—_ 4 % - bd 
NED £40 PS. non 
PR A” bk / 
-” + ad A -_ A 
oY F . 
” 


4 þ 1 
bd Co 
43 TIX © 
F 
| 


ROMANS. Cha, 


| "tis found ſometimes with the Pen-Men of the Holy Scripture 
Ecel, 3. 19, 20, 271, 22. I Cor. 15. 32, The Apoſtle re11; —_ p 
thians, 1 Cor. 4.6. that ina Figure he Transterr'd ſome thj One 
himſelf, and to Apellos for their fakes, thar they mighr no+ 1788 to 
ted up; he counted ſuch Schemes and Figures as theſe tg be put. 
profitable and efficacious to the Reader. © moſt 
8 And not rather x as we be flanderouſly reported 
and as ſome affirm that we ſay. Let us do evil that ©, 
may come ; whoſe damnation is Juſt y. 500d 
x The placing of theſe Words makes them ſoungq harſh] 
conſequently cauſeth Obſcurity. Criticks make a great fic? and 


Cap. Ii. 


s An elegant Prolepſis or Anticipation of what might be Ob- 
jefted againlt the Apoſtles Aﬀertion in the foregoing Words. Tf 
the Fews (mighr ſome obje&) lie equally expoled to Condemnation 
with the G-atiles, then rhey have no Excellency above them. Or 
thus, It eternal Things do not COMMENT US to God (as 'tis affirm d, 
cap. 2. 28, 29.) but rhe Gentiles are brought into the Church with- 
out them ; then the Fews have no Prerogative above the Gentiles, 
though God hath owned them ſo Jong for his peculiar People 
b i.e Whatis the Uſe of it, or for what End wag it Inſtituted * 
Seeing the Uncircumciſed are brought in and Accepted, as being 


Circumciſcd notwithſtanding, and Clean 1n Heart. 


, Vid 


ws _ 
A ſt: Py 
= 2 & Þ- 


—— Es ets ame... A rn ” 
ur 2 — ct, 
: G - oo — 
a. FG; ” x. 
_ rn Do 


Ce CES, Go + 
— 


Ce HR _ — I 


bour 


RY 


2 Much cvery way c: || Chiefly d, becauſe * unto 
them were committed the Oracles of God e. 

c Fe Anſwers the before-mentioned Obje&ion, by a liberal and 
free Conc iiion. The Anſwer doth particularly relate to the firſt 
Member of the Objcdtion, though Comprehending the other. 
d his Word is not to be referr'd to the Order of Speech, as Rom. 
7. 3 tor he doth not beginany Diſcourſe here ; norto the number 
of Privileves and Advantages, for he names but One in all ; but 
to the Quality, and ſo the Excellency of this Privilege here ſpoken 
of. q d. Itis the chief of all. e Prophane Writers make this Word 
to ſignific the Anſwer that was given by che Daimons, Or Heathen 
gods ; and yet the Holy Ghoſt doth not diſdain to make uſe of this 
Word (as well as divers others) though abuſed ro Heatheniſh Super- 
ſition. The Sence is, To the Jews were Credited, or given in Cu- 
ſtody the Holy Scriprures, Containing all the Books of the Old Te- 
flament, in panticular the Legal Covenan? or Law of God given on Mount 
Sinai, which Stephen calls rhe lively Oracles, At.” 7. 38. more-eſpeci- 
al'y vet the Fundamental! Articles of Religion, and Deftrines of Grace, 
and Selvation by 1h» M:fias, called the Oracles of God, H-b. 5. 12. 
thovoh more hid, "cis true, in Types, Promiſes, and Predictions, 
2 For what * if fome did wor beiiever 5 * {hall their 
pob&ict make the faith of God 7 withor t effect ? 

f If ſome 6id remain in Infidelity, 48. 28. 24. if they would 
Giveno credit to thi: Oractr, and to the Promiſe of a Meſſiah, g 4, e. 
The Truthand Faithfulneſs of God, Pfal. $344. The whole Verſe is 
another Prolepſis : The imply'd ObjeCion 1s this, Thar the Fews are 
nothins the better for thelt: Oracles, or have no advantage by them, 
if by Unbelief they have rendred themſelves unworthy or incapable 
of benefit by them. The Anſwer to this is Anticjpared by pro- 


pounding another Queſtion ; Can rhe Infidelity of ſome, be any hin- 
drance of God's pertorming his Promiſe to others, ro his Choſen Ones ? 
The Interrogation is a Negarion, 9. 4. It cannot be as the follow - 
ing Words thew, wid. 2 Tim. 2.13. | : 
4 God torbid þ; Vea, tet * God be true z, but * eve- 
'Iy mn a liar þ, as ict; wiitten, That thou * mighteſt be 
and mighteſt overcome mz 


juſtificd / in thy fayings , 
when thou art judged ». 

þ The Negation that was cloſely Coucht in the former Verſe, is 
in this Expreſt by a Note of Indignation, and of the greateſt Dete- 
Nation. # Let him remain or appear Faithful to his Promiſes and 
Cemvenant ; or let him be Acknowledg'd to be ſo, according to the 


bh, 


frequent Teſtimonies of Scripture, vid. Namb, 23. 19. Tit, 1, 2. 
Heb. 6. 17,18. k Qr, although every Man ſhould be a Lyar ; or 
whartoever we ſay of 4 "a; who are all Mutable Creatures, who 
are liable ro Miſtakesia. their own Natures, and fo may eaſily De- 
ccive others, vid. Pſal. 116, 11. 1 That thou mighteſt be acknow- 
ledged 7Jult in thy Promiſes and Threatnings. in which Sence the Word 
is uled in divers Places, Mat. 11.19. Luk. 7. 29, 34. and 10. 29. 
-m That thou might} be Clear or Pure, fo 'tis in the Pſalm, "The 
Apoſtle Honours the Seventy, which was the common Tranſlation, 
and minds the Sence rather than the Words. He that is Clear, is 
like to cyercome in a juſt Judgment. n Or, when thou Judge; the 

\Srd may be taken Aftively or Paſhvely, #. e. When thou doſt 
Execute Judgment up0n an}, Or when any do preſume to Cenſure 
thee. 
35 Bur if our un:tighteouſneſls commend the righteouſ. 


neſs of God ov, what ſhall we ſay pf I: God unrighteous, 


that taketh vengeance 7 ? (I ſpeak asa man r.) 

o An Anticipation of another ObjeQion, which might be made 
vpon the preceding Words : That it the Faithfulneſs of God, in kee- 
puiglh's Promiſes, doth appear in and notwithſtanding the Unfairh- 
Julucjs of Men ; then we gatherthus much, That rhe Fidelity of God 
i5 rendred a great deal more Commendable by the Perfidioufneſs of 
Man, p Thus we Objctt; or, this will be the inconvenience. 
q 7. e. Then God is unjuſt in Puniſhing the Jews, or any other 
Wicked Men, for that which tends to his own Glory, and the Com- 
menditions of his Veracity, r This 1s the Language of Carnal 
Men, and ifuch Blaſphemy they ſpeak ; I recite the ObjeTion of 
jome Men, aul ſpeak after their Carnal manner. 


6 God torbid 5 : For then how jhall God judge the 


world : ? 

s He rejeQs the Cavil, with his uſual Note of Deteſtation, as not 
thinking it worthy of Anſwer. # 9.4. If God were in the leaſt 
Unrighteous, How could He Govern the World ar preſent, and Judge 
it at laſt in Righteouſneſs * which is affirmed, Pſal. g6. 13. andg8. g. 
Or, How could he be God azd Supream, if he were not Juſt by his 

» Nature and Eſſince, and his Will, the very Rule of Righteouſneſs, wid. 
Gen. 18, 25, Job 34.12. 

7 For itthe truth « of God hath more abounded through 
my lye unto his glory : why yet am 1 alſo judged as a 
ſinner >» ? 

« By Truth he means the Faithfulneſs and Veracity of God, as by 
Lye, the Perfidioufneſs and inconſtancy of Man (ut ſupra & alibi.) 
w 9. d. If more Glory accrews to the Name of God by my Wickeaneſs ; 
Vharreafon is there, that I ſhould be puniſhr, and proceeded a- 
gainlt as an Offender, who have occaſioned this further Glory ro God ? 
The Apcitle doth plainly Perſonate in this place a wicked ObjeFer, 
Gr he ſpeaks in the Name and Perſon of ſuch a One. This way of 
opeaking and Writing is very frequent among all Authors; and 


them, ſome including them in a Parentheſis ; Others 
there is a Tranſpoſitiou in them. They ſeem to be a Refurtat 
formerCavil, and muſt be Accommodated to that Sence 
if the Apoſtle ſhould have ſaid, If Sinners deſerve no Puniſh 
becauſe God reaps Glory to himſelf by their Sins; then thar js " 
Proverb or Saying, which is in ſome Mens Mouths and _ 
{elves are Slander'd with it, as if it were our Opinion and D Fs 
That we may do Evil, that Good may come of it, But this ta "> 
generally Exploded.; none dare to vouch it, and therefore i; a 
mer Cavil is of no Force. y #. e. Their Damnation ;; pes 
Teach ſuch DoQrine, and PraCtiſe accordingly ; who . dg = _ 
good may come of it. The Apoſtle doth not vouchſafero refy s 
abſurd Saying; but ſimply Condemns ir, and thoſe rh; — 
Praftice: Orelfe his meaning 1n theſe Words is this Tha rm 
Juſily deſerve Damnation who Calumniate the poPles ang Publiſh T 
the Goſpel, and raiſe falſe Reports and Slanders of the, . os 
Damnation is Fuſt who affirm we ſay or hold, Thor Evil m = 
done, that Good may come thereof. If b 

9 Whatchen ? are we || better :5an they 2? Noinni0 
wile 2 : for we have before f proved & both Jews ang 
Gentiles, that * they are all under ſin c, « 

z The Apoſtle here returns to the Argument that he had beer « a 
handling in the beginning of the Chapter, He brings in the Jo 
propounding a Queſtion. Seeing it was confeſt, that the Oran 
Goa were commutted tothem ; rhen it follow'd, that they excel!? 
the Gentiles, and ſtood upon better Ground than they. a He doh 
not contradiCt himſelf as ro what he had ſaid of the 5%; Prerog; 
tive, ver. 2. They did indeed excel the Gentiles as to ſome citer 
nal Benefits, of which you have a larger account, <,p. 9 a ; 
but nor upon the account of any Evangelical Rightcouſnef,, 
their own tuppoſed Merit. 6 Fiz. Separately and apart inthe fore, 
going Chapters :; And the ſame is now to be aſſerted of both % 
and Gentiles, conjun&ly and together. That notwithſtanding the 
Jews boaſted of their Law, and the Gentiles of their Philoſophy , 
yet as to the Evangelical Faith and Righteouſneſs, they were both in 
the ſame Caſe. c Under the Power of Sin, but chictly under the 
Guilr of Sin, wid. wer. 19. 

io Asit is * written 4, There is none righteous, no" 

not onee: q 

a viz. In ſeveral places of Scripture, which he quotes in the fol. 
lowing Verſes, giving us the Sence, though nor ſo ftriftly tying 
himbfelf to the Words - And this isa proper Proof to the Jewint 
leaſt, whom he had called a little before the Keepers of thcle Orarly, 
e The more general Proof with which he begins, 1s taken out of 
Pſal. 14. 1. and 53, 1, upon which places, ſee the Annotations, 

11 There is none chat underſtandeth f, there is non! 


that ſeeketh after God g. 

f A more particular Proof of the Corruption of the Soul, and th 
Faculties thereof ; and firſt of the Mind, taken our of the forecitel. 
Pſalms, which may be Compar'd with the Scriptures which ſpeit 
of the Ignorance and Blindneſs of the Mind, Deut. 32. 29. J0b 31.9, 
Iſs. 1. 3. Jer.4.22. and 10.14. g A Proof of the Corruption of the 
Will, which follows alſo in the forecited Pſalms. 


12 They are all gone out of the way h, they are tope- 
ther become unprofitable z, there is none that docth good, 


no not one þ&. 

þ Viz. Of Truth or Life, wid. Pſal. 14.3. and 36. 4. and 58; } 
This doth Tlluſtrate the former Charge. i Unuſeful, and (whichs | 
more) Nojſome, and fit only for the Dunghil, as the Word fign- 
fies ; this follows alſo in Pſal. 14. vid. Job 15. 16. « Theſant 
as ver, 10, though more exa&ly according to the words of tie 
Pſalm, where allo it is twice repeated, wid. Pſal. 14. 1,3. 

13 Their throat # an open ſepulchre /, with thel 
rongues they have uſed deceit m,, the poiſon of Alpes 5 
under their lips». 

1 He proceeds to inſtancein the Carruption of Man with reſpe&t0 
the Members of his Body ; and he mentions the Organ: of Speech n 
Four ſeveral Expreſſions, much to the ſame purpole : The Firlt is 
Allegorical, taken outof Pſal. 5. 9g. upon which ſee the A 
tions, m This Next doth plainly expreſs the Corrup7u0n of tht 
Tongue, becauſe of Lyes, Calummnies, Perjuries, Flatterits ; and s 
taken out of 7er. 9. 3, 4, 5. # The Third Expreſſion is Allegori 
as the firſt, taken our of Pal. 149. 3. Upon which ſce the Ann0« 
tations. . 


14 Whoſe mouth is full of curſing and bicternels 0. E 
o This laſt and very plain Expreſſion of the Corryprion of the Torgt, 
is taken out of Pſal. 10.7. vid. Notes there. 


15 Their feet are ſwift to thed blood 7. E 
p If we conſiderthis Member alſo, we may {cz the comp 
Man, witneſs that Teſtimony, Prov. x. 16. and Iſa. 59. 7- on 
which, vid. Annotations, 
16 Deſtruction and miſery are in their ways * | 
17 Andthe way of peace have ney not NOWN f , 
9 Both which Aſertions lie together, and follow 1n that, //a. * 


7,8 


affirmins 
- 9) 
10N to the 
Ir ls as 


15 Tlie! 


bay. hap: 11]. 


;9$ There is no fearof God before their eyes r. 


S, Vid, | , 
Corin, » This laſt Aſſertion gives us one true Cauſe of all the aforeſaid 
13s to Cvils ; taken out of Pſal. 36. 1. vid. Notes there. 
: put. 19 Now we know that whatſoever chings the Law 
"IF {aich, ir fairh ro them who are under the Law 5s, that eve- 
, y mouth may be ſtopped r, and all the world may be- 
"RR . come || guilty betore God «. 
500d 50 ; Another Anticipation of an ObjeCtionto this purpoſe. All theſe 
' , 7;fimonies (might the Jews ſay) do not concern Us; they concern 
y, and 4 the hupure and Gentile World only, unleſs Poſſibly ſome Prophane 
abour bi Wretches amongſt our ſelves alſo. Bur to this the Apoſtle ſays, 
ming #: know (which tome think hath the force of an Aﬀeveration) zhat 
Ntothe phat ſoever the Law of God, more-efpecially the Moſaical Law, or 


It is a; , more generally all that is contained in the Scripture, ſaith of the 


ſhmenr Wickedneſs and Defe&tion of Mankind, it faith to the Jews more 
4 800d articularly ro whom the Law was given, and who are under the 
WE our ConduRot it ; much the ſame with that Phraſe, Chap. 2. 12. wid. 
ottrine Chap. 6.15. 1 Cor. 9. 20. 5 3, e. Hindred from Boaſting, to which 
yINg 1s the Jews were ſo prone; or rather that Conſcience might ſo preſs 
The for. them, that they ſhould ſilently, or as it were Speechleſs, expe& 
uſt who their own Damnation, without being able to frame any Excuſe, vid. 
evil tha Pſal. 63. 11. Extk. 16. 63. Matih. 22, 12. u That Jews and Gentiles, 
ute this and all Mankind, as deprav'd, might be Obnoxious to the Judg- 
Put it in ment and Condemnztion of God, wi4. wer. 6. and John 3. 18. 
_— |; 20 Theretore w by the * deeds of the law x, there 
y = ; {hall no fleſh Y be juſtified in his ſght Z2 for by the law 
1 may . ;; the knowledge of fin 4. 

; w i. e. Seeing the Gentiles, by the Law of Nature, and the Jews, 
(0 in 101 0: by the Written Law, are thus ſubjeR& to the Judgment of God ; and 


{ceingno one isable ro Fulfil the Law, and fatisfie for the Breach of 
it : Therefore, &c. x He means the Moral Law, and not the Cere- 


WS and my 
[ . 
moxial Law only or chiefly ; even that Law that forbids Thefr and 


0 
had beens Adultery, as Ch. 2. aud Concupiſcence, 'as Ch. 7, And by which, 
| the Jew! as this Text fays, is the- Knowledge of Sin; to which, Gentzles as 
& Oraclersf well as Jews, are obliged ; and by which therefore they are Con- 
y excel demned., y A common Synecdoche, wid Gen. 6. 3. 12. & &libi. 


s He doth 
T Prerogie 
me Extets 


The ſame with no Man living, inthe Pſelmiſt; eſpecially being de- 
pray d with original Corruption, which is called Fiſh in Scripture. 
z Or, be ditcharg'd in the Cours of Heawva; the Phraſe is taken from 


Pp. 9. 4, 5; Pal. 143. 2. vid. Annotations there. s Leſt any ſhould think that 
wuſneſs, or the Law hereupon is uſeleſs, he goes on to ſhew its Uſe, burta quite 
in the fore. contrary one to What they intended. It Convinceth Us of our 
| both fea Guilt; and therefore is far from being our Righteouſneſs, Chap. 
anding the 7.7. 1 Cor. 15. 56. 

hiloſoply ; 2e But now 6 ® the righceouſneſs of God c without 


ere both in 


- mind ” thelaw 4 is manifelted e, being witneſſed by the Law, 


and the Prophets f : 

bq.d. Though Juſtification be not by the Lew, yet EY to be 
Obtained in another way, as follows. & wid. Ch. r. 17. 4 Inas 
much as the Law, preſſing Obedienceto be performed by Us in our 
own Perſons, ſeems plainly ggnorant of the Rightcouſnels of ano- 
ther imputed to us. e This Righteouſneſs nevertheleſs is Reveal'd 
plinly, now {ince the Coming of Chriſt, and in the Goſpel, as in 
C:.1,17. f Thar there may be no ſuſpicion of Novelty, wid. 
Jukn 5. 46, 47. The Teſtimonies he refers to are very numerous, 
uid Gen, 3. 15. and 15.6. and 22. 17,18. Iſa. 53. Jer. 31. 23, 
31. Dan. 9. 24, 25. See the ſame Argument us'd, Aﬀs 24. 14. 
and 26, 24, and 28. 23. . 

22 Evenche righccouſneſs of God which is by faith of 
ſelus Chriſt g, unto all, and upon all them that believe b, 
* For there is no difference 7. 
|, 2; He mentions the Righreonjneſs of God again, that he may further 
1, Explain it, by the Means or Inſtrument by which 1t is received, 

vi Faith. wid. Ch. 4. 11, 12. and 9. 30. Phil. 3. 9. Where there 


teOus, noft 
by) 
5 in the fol. 
110ly tying 
0 the Jews at 
hele Oratle. 
taken out of 
10tations, 


ere 15 non3 


Soul, and the 
the forecited 
which ſpeak 
29. Job 34% 
ruption Of the 


y are tofe reſeveral Expreſſions to the fame purpoſe, that this Righteouſneſs 
doeth pood, 5 without the Law indeed ; bur it is by the hand of that Faizh, by 
which we Believe in Feſws ; called therefore here, The Faith of Jeſus 

1. Chris, þ Whether they be Jews or Gentzles, if they Beluve, exclu- 

«4. 1G ork | ling the ſelf Juſticiarics amongſt the one, and the Philoſophers a- 
and (wich þ mongſt the other. #5 They are not Juſtified two ſeveral ways, wer.g. 


[s Word ſignt : 
2 The ſame, 
words of tht 


23 For * All have tinned &, and come ſhort of the glo- 
y of God /. 

t 9. 4 No wonder there is no difference, when both the one and 
the other have the Guilt of Adam's Tranſgreſſion imputed to them, 


— 


. 1, 3- , 
with thel 


f Aſpes - indiave original Corruption inherent in them, from whence pro- 
| OL « ceed very many a&ual Tranſgreſſions. 1 i. e. Of the glorious Image 
P_- of God, in which Man was at firſt Created; Or, of Communion 
with reſpe with God, in which the glory of a rational Creature doth conſiſt : 


ans of un Orrather, of the Erernal Glory, which they come ſhort of, as Men 
"EF: ay F —_ tit run a Race are weary, and fall ſhort of the Mark. 
c _ oil . 24 Being juſtified 2 treely by his grace =, through 
0rreand "ri © redemption that is in Jeſus Chriſt 9. 

" 7. e, Being in this Caſe, they can by no means be acquitted 
nd freed from the Accuſation, and Condemnation of the Law ; 
un the way and manner that follows. » He mentions the great 
| c moving Cauſe of Juſtification firſt (which doth comprehend alſo 
ceernens 0. 2 the principal Efficient) that it is without any Cauſe or Merit in us ; 
ion of the 1015" ind by the free Favour of God to undeſerving, ill deſerving Crea- 
ures, Eph. 1.6, 7. and 2. 8. Titus 3. 79, 0 The meritorious Cauſe 
5 cxpreſt, by a Metaphor taken from Military Proceedings, where 
-:prives taken in War, and under the Power of another, are Re- 
*&nd upon a valuable Price laid down, wid. Mas. 20. 28. Mark 


gries; ane. | 
on is Allegor'' 


h ſee the And 


the Corruption! 


59. 7.00 | 45. 1 Tin, 2,6. Heb.g. 12. 

25 Whom God hath # fet forth p to be a propitiation 9, 
ay's rough faith in his blood r, to declare his righteouſneſs « 
known F the || remiflion of ſins chat are paſt,through the forbea- 


x 4. 1 : 
wr in that, Ys. 'Nce of God : . 


of e e, God the Father hath propos'd this F ESUS, inthe Eter- 
; og and Covenant of Kedemption, Eph. 1.9. 1 Pet. x, 
Ui. Ih 


ROMANS: 


| os 21. Or, inthe Types and Shadows of che ONS Tubornac't; an] 
ath nowar laſt ſhown him openly to the Weorld q Or, 4:oxc- 


Chap. III. 


ment, 1 John 2. 2, He alludes ro the M:r:y-Szat ſprinkled witi 
Blood, which was Typical of this great Atonement ; and from 
whence God ſhew'd himſelf fo Propitions and Favourable to Sinnory, 
Levit. 16. 2. Numb. 7.89. » He goes on ro thew the inftrumenta] 
Cauſe of Juſtificarion, to wit, Faith, i. e. The cloſe Adherence, and 
moſt ſubmiſſive Dependance of the Sinner ; together with the pe- 
culiarity of the Objett of Faith, wiz the Blood. i.e. The Death and 
Sacrifice of Chrif ; in ContradiftinGtion ro his Dominion (with which 
yet on other Accounts Faith is ſo much concern'd) and in Oppoliti- 
on to the Blood of Beaſts, Slain and Sacrific'd. 5 7. c. For the 
ſhewing forth either of his Goodneſs and Mercy, vid. 1 Sam. 12, 
7, 8, 10. Pſal. 36.10. Orof his Fairhtulneſs in his Promiſes, and 
fulfilling all Types and Prophecies : Or elſe of his Vindi&ive *g- 
ſtice in the juſt Proceedings of God againſt Sin, which he hath Con- 
demned in his Son, though he juſtitie the Sinner. Or further ir 
may be underſtood of the Righteon neſs of Faich, of which, wr. 22. 
which is hereby ſhewn to be his ; and to Manitcft it [elf in the For. 


 giveneſs of Sins, and which is fo Declared as to be exhibited. £ He 


means, either the Sins committed before Juſtification, while God 
bore ſo patiently with the Sinner, and did not preſently rake the 
Forfeiture ; Or elſe the Sins Committed under rhe O!d T:#2menc, 
before the propos'd Propitiation was expos'd tothe World : Wh: 
God ſo indulg'd our Fathers, as to Pardon them upon the account 
of what was to come, wid. H:h.9. 15, 16, 17, 18. 

26 To declere ] [ay at this time his righteouſneſs » - 
that he might be juſt, and the juftiter of him which be. 
eveth in Jeſus. 

u He repeats the final Cauſe of Juſtification, viz. The makings the 
aforeſaid Declaration of the Rightcouſnefſs of Cod, in thc time oC 
the Goſpel, aud Ditpenfation and Miniſtry thereof, 2 Cor 6. >. 
which is rakenour of 1/2. 49.8. w i. e That no Wrong mike 
be done to the Eſſential Purity of his Nature, or ReCirude of his 
Will, nor yer to his immediate Juſtice, by which he cannot bur 
hate Sin, and abhor rhe Sinneras ſuch ; though in the mean time 
he gives a Diſcharge to him, that is of the Farch of Feſus (as *tis in 
the Original) Or of the Number of thoſe that Believe, and Caſt 
themſelves upon a Saviour. 7 

27 Where 4: boalting then x? Tr is excluded. Þ'y 
what law ? of works y ? Nay but by the law of faith z, 

x The Apoſtle doth, as it were, inſult over them. g. 4. Where 

is now the former Boaſting of the Jews, as if they were ſo much 
better than the Gentiles ; Or what is become of the ground of Boaji- 
ivg, tharthey, or either of them might think they had in the Law, 
or Philoſophy, or any Moral Pertormances * wid. Fer. 9 23, 24. 
3 It it be enquir'd upon what account this Boaſting is excluded 2 
We Anſwer plainly, It cannot be by that Law that Commands 
Works, as the Condition of Acceptance and Juſtification ; and tells 
us nothing by whom that Condicion ſhould be fulfilled ; rhe Law 
being become weak to us, for ſuch a purpoſe, by reaſon of Sin, 
Ch. 8.3. z i.e. The Goſpel-Law which requires Faith, by which 
the Righteouſneſs of Chriſt is impured to us, and Artained by us. 
And this 18 call'd a Law of Paich, as tome think, in Condeſcention to 
the Jews euſtom of Speaking, who are much delighred with the 
Name of the Law; aud fo tht he might not be ſuſpected of No- 
velty : Butar moſt, itis an Hebraiſm, denoting no more than the 
Dottrine or Preſcript of Faith. 

28 Theietore we conclude a * that a man is jufiifed by * AQ, x; 
faich without the deeds of the law b. TREE 

a Here is the Concluſion of the whole Matter, that he had been Chap. 
Diſcourſing of, from Ch. 1. 17. to this very place. When he ſays Gal.2. 26, 
we conclude, he means we have Reaſoir'd, or Argued well, as Logi- 
cians do ; Or this is the full Account that we have taken, and 
ſumm'd up after the manner of Ariwhameticians, b A Phraſe equiva- 
lent to that which is ſo much ſpoken againſt, that we are Juſtified 
by Faith only ; as if we ſhould fay, Thar God is to be Worſhipr, 
excluding Angels, Idols, Images, &c. it would bs as much as to 
ſay, God is to be Worſhipr only. 

29 [ he the Godot the Jews only? is Le not alſo of 
che Gentiles? Yes, of the Gentiles alfo c. 

c By anſwering his own propos'd Queſtions, he plainly ſhews us, 
That the Covenant of Grace, by which God is God of his Pcople, 
does not belong to the Jews only ; that they only ſhould have ſu- 
ſtification and Bliſs, but to the Gentzles alſo, according to the Pro- 
miſe, Gen. 17. 5. and 22. 18. Pſal. 2.8. Iſa. 11. to, 12. and ma- 
ny others ; which Promiſes are more-eſpecially to be accomplitkr. 
now the Wall of Partition is broken down, as Eph. 2. 13, 14. 

30 Seeing ir is ons God which ſhall juſtitie che circum- 


ciſhon by faich, and the uncircumcition through taith /. 

d That it may not be thought, that God is variable in the Attion 
of juſtifying Sinners ; but that it might be known, that he is One, 
7. e. Unchangeable, he ſhews, That both the Cireumcis'd Jews, and 
Uncircumcis d Gentiles, are Juſtified by the ſame God im Chrift, and by 
the ſame way and manner, viz. By and through F3i:h, with no 
more difference, than there is betwixt thefe two Phraſes, (&y Faith, 
and through Faith) which can't be diſtinguiſhed che one from the 
other. : : 

31 Do wethen make void the law through faith e ? 


God forbid 2 yea, we eſtabliſh che law f 

e Avery material Obje&ion is here to be Anticipaced and An- 
ſwered, viz. That by Z#abliſhing Juſtification by Faith alone, the 
Law isrendred uſeleſs, and the Obligation therero deftroy'd. f He- 
ving reje&ed this ObjeQion by his utual Nore of Abhorrency, he 
proceeds to ſhew, That nothing more Eſtabliſhe:b the Law, in as 
much as by Faith weattain a perte& Kighreoufneſ:, we are intereſted 
in the molt compleat Obedience of Chriſt to the Moral Law ; and 
that hereby every Type, Promiſe, and Prophecy is fulfill'd, vid. Mz. 
5.17. Luke 16, 179, And we our felvesallſo, being Enabled rhere- 
unto by a Goſpel-Spirir, have a more exatt Conformity to the Law, 


though we cannot reach to a Fulfilling of it, 
} 


Sit1iz CHA P. 


Do 


WED 
; ; 13SF"1% 
Bills 00% oo 
\ : > -> 
Ti:6 ue q 

0 \ 
KY $7 4 
Fo "7 "P 
(7-4 F: } | 
[H\HY 
; n 4 | 
v; HOTIE 
nk 
BY: 
an 319 


os 


=. arr” 
—— —— 


i. 


+ 
_ FROST A Bs, & SIds 
$3213 4 pt hag: To 
. ” W 


ſ 
It! 
F 
8 404! 
' f 
% [1 
| *' 4 
£ + 19 
"ns. 
: by 
. »F 
od F K 
1.5 
| ; FUL 
f ” FR 
| 
4 . 
is I 
[ a 
$7 : Hh 
; e " 
1 it 14 - 
FI 
s | i TY of | 
% © [68 
1 « 
i * : 
Fe | 
'S 45 
|| : 
| | n 
n £ 
{3 
.* nw 
{ 
n A 
ot i#-3% 
4 . if 
{bf 
14 -t 
' 
£ 1 4 
18 *+ : i 
1 +. Fj 
vi ' 
y ; 
( ' : 
: # 4 
\ +47 
; 
$11 
1 <1 
a 14} 
y 4 
4 3 r 4 
39 "TT 
2 Y iL 
4 Vo 
. o F j 
: F 
d H y 
= i || 
4 [0 kr | 
of 
> p 
"xy b 
we. 
F 3% 
: \ 
- "i 
: F ( ? 
$ " imte 7 
. +. 
: VT & , 
" +> 7 L « 
4 
: 
. bi 0 
: , 4 v 
} £ Z : 
v 3 % > 
$ Py ls 1 : 
: '* 0 
dy I'S 21 
, $ | I 
, : 
{F ' 
4 '$ 
4 + wy bb 
; p 
4 d 7 » 
> : 
FS bf 5g 
[91 < x: 
C ' 7 
3 o 
SS; 2 
»* LS 
+; L 
7) ; 
WT. 231 
1 '* 
$F : p 
v4 1 b: 
: i ” 
: 368 £ P 
y | 7% By 8 
A 6 
tF-A9 , 
þ a . 
' 2 1/4" 
b p z 
$ z 
. % : 
#1 \ 
by Ma 
£4 1 * 5] -; 
s p "I'Y 
6 ve : 
L L878 F 
'T SY «4. [4 
p o \ C - 
L Wy ! I 
" p "yt « . 
, : 
- : U 7 bh 
( SME} oy g 
. 7. £347 # 
: > 7 4 
#38 428 T, 5 
| ; +#{8 
: fy ii! } 14 
? Sls © : 
4 ot ;+ * 5 
, ny x 
: F | << 
: 174 
144 [ 
0 o 
4 + 4495 1 ” 
4 p 4 
* 48. 
nk ky 
; th (1 i3N 
+ 4 ” 4 . 
ul $ - Y : $ 
HT. # 
>? 1 4 "I<. 
\ | 2 
k 
EF y 
T1 "| : 
P12 1. 
17 
| : i Y l : 
" i ' 
$ = AT ; 
0 * 56g I 
: iy 
; » | 
A kf 
'T p 
n ; 
3-177 
LPL. | 
P +4 - 
. / F K: bs - 
: F =. 
; : , 
: p 
{ : ” 
TEE / 
T\ , | f +; 
1 ' ; r 
' 
[3 4 
{HYs 
I . q x 
+ ; ; 
: l 
Ff [4 be 
fs SP. : 
4 j » , 
; : 
= #1 , 
. F8*! 
, - 
7 : 1.7 
: iT : 
4 
4 : +81 
4 
"# c EF 
("$1.38 
. f8 8 
' 4 
: 
« | #1; i 
t 
i. ” 
1 "7 F4 : 
04: 412; BAM 
» 317 ' 
/ C K of - 
, $1 4 
" 'F Fr. 8 ; 
: £ 
1-0 41 
s 4 : 
; Te p 
1&4 T1 p , {% 
af j 
| 4 47 
F » of 
y : [ bl 
4d 1-8 
. 3” Y ” 
4 y : 
n te ” 
- : [1 - 
%. * 4 
TER 4 : ly. 
; | 1 
a} P 
j <a) 
: 
04 + ; 
+ , 7 
. 
: i : 
: : 
; * A-} dt 
'S4 , , 
** b4 _ 
; vat . 
1 
3: 'T # $ 
4 i, ” K: 
, 4B £ 
W055 y dz 
I EE 4:4 
xt 4 
y 0». : 
TT +; 
Lo 
< fq 
ip 2 
. 0. 1. 
! * : . + bl 
; {7 "IE & F 
4 wo 1 
© »_.£ . 
4 *% 4 
. » 34 Xt 
#1K #} F 
>. + 
- y 
2-7 4 Fs 
: " 3 F = 
j ; 
4 4 5 
. © | 
© $*%8 
þ b z 
$2 my, 
+ 5% - 
' 0: 1% : 
14F3®.. : : 
F TY : 5 . 
, ; Wii! 
.: 
v:4t 
: 4 
\ * £1} 
T IF: C 
T : \ A, F 
F 4 
4 'S + 
K + 
. 
">. ] 1 , 
M1 {tf 
: 
; - © n 
{ 2 : 
* 4:4 M55 
1045 .&* I 
0 , 
4* 0 
OS - 
7 ST. | ” 
: q 7” 4 
; "* EF #/ 
if 
- 39 4 2 
KH a 
, 
"I *7 
4 
/ F 14 
Z , > L221 
: « F 
1 3 :; 
4 1% t 
i Fl af 
& is : 
* ! y 
" | : 
: ; 
- 4K 
OY -4 
I 2 . 
5 40D : 
: Mk 
Th. 4 
"At >; 0 
£535 
*k 
5h F-4 


[ Or,boaſ- 
aig 
j| Or , c- 


w87r As God. 


*©h.21.6. 


ROMANS 


Qq HA ÞP. jIV. 


Abraham's F2::4 imputed to him for Righteouſneſs 1 5. David's tefti- 
10ny for the ſame, 6-— 8 Circumciſion a Seal of Righteouſneſs by Tairh ; 
and Abraham the Fatner of Belicuers ; and Heir of the World: and 
this Promiſe firm; 9—= 17. the Power and Prepertics of his Faith : 
by which Rinhtconſne ſs was imputed to him, 18.22, and fhall ve to 
ail who believe in God through Chriſt, 25,—25. 

Hat ſhall we ſay then that * Abraham our fa- 

ther,as pertaining to the fleſh 7. hath tound * 
The Apoſtle proceeds to prove his main Concluſion, Ch. 3. 28, 
which is, thar a Sinner is Juftified by Faith wirhout Works, from the 

Exampl<= of Abraham. He was a Man that had Faith and Works 

both ; ver he was Treflificd by Faith, and not by Works ; and who 

doubts, but the Children are Juſtified afrer the ſame manner thar 
their Father was : There is but one way of Juſtification ; this isthe 

Cornexion. @ Thefe words may either be referr'd to Father, and 

then they import no more, but that Abraham was their Farher aC- 

cording to the Fieh, Rom. 9. 5. Orelle they may be referrd to 
the following word Fomd. And then the Queſtion 15, W har hath 

Hlraham Ford, i ec. Gor or attain'd according to the Flyh, The 

Sence is, Whar hath he gotten by his Righreoutneſs, which ſtands 

in Werks, and are done jn the Fleſh * Abraham obtain'd not Righte- 

ouſneſ; by any Works Ceremonial or Moral : So the word Fleſh is 
taken, vid. Phil, 3.3, 4 when under the word Fleſh came Circumci- 


fron, our 0wn Uighreoutnels, which is by the Law, or whatſoever 


15 or may be oppos'd to that Righteoulſneis which is by the Faith of 
Cnrift, | : 

2 For if Abraham were juſtified by works, he hath 
avhereo? to! glory þb. but not | before God 5. 

þ He hath Cauſe or Marter of Glorying and Boaſting ; he hath ſome- 
thing tom whence he may take Occaſion of ſo doing. c Something 
mult be {uppiicd to fill up the Sence, z. e. He hath nothing whereof 
ro glory before Grd: The Argument of the Apoſtle mighr be thus 
forn'd : It ,braham had obtain'd Juſtification by Works, he ſthould 
have had fomewhar whercof he might glory before God ; bur he had 
noting whreef to glory before God : Theretore he was nor Juſtified 
ty Perks, God's way of juſtifying Sinners is ſuch, as ſhuts our 
all glorying nd Faſting, as he had before Jaid down, Ch. 3. 27. 

to what fanth the Scripture d7 Abraham believed 
Ced *-, and it wa- counted unto him for rightecuſneſs f: 

a The Scripture referr'd to, 1s in Gen. 15. 6. The Apoſilca little 
varies the Words; in Gerefts 'tis, He believed in God, bur here He 
believed God : Again in Geneſis "tis expreſt Attively; He imputed it 
ro him for Righteenſueſs ; but here Pajtively, It was imputed to him for 
Rightebuſneſs. The Anſwer 1s, "That the Apoſtle in both follow'd 
the Septuagint, which wasthen more in uſe than the Hebrew Text ; 
and both are capable of an eaſte Reconciliation, the Difference be- 
ing more in Sound than in Sence. e #.e. The Promiſes of God, 
that he wou!d be his Shield, arid exceeding great Reward, Gen. 15, 1. 
That he would give him an Heir of his Body, ver. 4 Thar he 
would multiply his Sced, wer. 5. whereby he underſtood not only 
tiis Fleſhly Seed, but alſo the Meſſiah, the Saviour of the World, 
which was to come of his Loins ; He took on him the Seed of Abra- 
ham, Heb 2. 16. and belides theſe Promiſes in Gen 15. He belie- 
ved that P:omife which was made him, Gen 12. 3. That in him and 
his Seed, ill Familics of the Earth ſhould be bleſſed, That in theſe 
Promiſes the Meſſiah is underſtood, 1s evident from Gal. 3. $. 16. 
and that Abraham had an Eye to him is evident, withour exception, 
from John $8, 56. f 1.e. He was Juſtified thereby. To have Faich 
imputed for Righteouſneſs, and to be Juſtified by Faith is the ſame 
thing. Faith is not our Righteouſneſs materially, but objeQively 
and organically, as it apprehends, and applies the Righteouſneſs of 
Chriſt, which 1s the Matter of our Juftificatiren. Our Adverſaries 
the Papiſts, oppoſe the Imputation of Chriſt's Righteouſneſs to us ; 
they Cavil at the very Word,and call it a Putative Righteouſneſs; and 
yet the Apoſtle victh the Word Ten times in this Chapter, and in 
the ſame Scnce that we take it. But how ſhall we Reconcile our 
Apoſtle with St. James about the manner of Abrahams Juſtificati- 
on : He ſays exprelly, James 2. 21. that Abraham our Father wag 
Juſtifica by Works, when he offered his Son Tſaac: and thence he in- 
ters, ver. 24. That By Works a man is juſtified, and not by Faith only. 
They are cafily Reconcil'd, foraſmuch as the One Ditcourſeth of 
the Cauſe of our Juſtification before God ; the Other of the Signs 
of Juſtification betore Men. The One ſpeaks of the Impuration 
of Righteouſneſs ; the Other of the Declaration of Righteouſneſs. 
The One ſpeaks of the Office of Faith, the other of the Quality 
of Faith, The One ſpeaks of the Juſtification of the Perſon, the 
Other of the Faith of that Perſon. The One ſpeaks of Abrahar, 
zo be Juſtifed ; the Other of Abrahom alrcady Juſtihied. 

4 Now * to him that woiketh pg, is the reward not 


1eckoned of prace, but of deht þ. 

[ic procecds to prove that 4brabam was not Juſtified by Works, 
but by Faith, +nd free Grace, and fo had no caute of Boefting. This 
he Illuſtrates by a Compariſon betwixt one tha: Worketh, and one 
that Werketh x,or, but belicucth. g i.e. To him that Worketh" with a 
deſign or intent to Obtain or Merir Juſtification by his Works. for 
lic he that Belicveth, allo Worketh;, only he is ſaid not ro Work, 
Secunarm quid, after a fort, to the end or intent that he might 
Merit by it. + 1 e peaks this by way of Suppoſition, in caſe he 
monld have FulfilPd the Condition of perfe& Obedience : And yer 
ro {peak properly, there is no Reward, as a due Debr from God ro 
kim that Worketh, Rom. 11. 35. only he ſpeaks afrer the manner of 
Men, ind uleth a Civil Maxim, taken from Human Afﬀeairs. 

5 Bur to him that worketh not z, hut believeth on him 
that juitificch theungodly &, his faith is counted for righ- 
eeoulſne is 7. 

; 2, e, To him that Worketh, not to the end or intent before-men- 
ticned, or with reſpe&t to Juſtification, but takes the other way to 
be Juſtificd ard Saved, and that is the way of Belteving. k That 


mikes him, who is wicked in himſelf, Juſt and Righteous in Chriſt, | other Sacraments; take for inſtance che Lords's S&pper: 


Chap 
or Juſtifies him that was ungodly, bur after Juſtification ; 
Godly. By ungodly, ſome would underſtand ſuch 1; ns made 
Perfection of Godlineſs as they may build the Hopes of Juſt;s that 
on upon ; becauſe the Propoſition is drawn from the In6- " 
Abraham, a Man not void of Godlineſs, 1. Not conſidereq © of 
ſelf as a Work, bur in relation to Chriſt, the Obje& of je. .._ 
an A& of Receiving and Applying him; as Eatins __— 
though it be the Meat that doth it. So, &c, ” "meth, 

6 Evenas David alſo deſcriberh 2 the || blefſednef; of 0 
the Man unto whom God imputeth righteouſneſs withg., li 
works. "i 

To the Example of 4braham taken from Moſes, he adjoing tl, 

: . : - the 
Teſtimony of David, that ſo he might more fully prove whic '* 
had Aferted, Ch. 3.21. Both the One and the other were of s, R 
Authority amonglit the Jews. m Here it may be ObjeQeg ps 
David no where ſays, That he is Bleſſed unto whom God —— 
Righteouſneſs without Works, 4. Though the Words be no Ke og 
Extant in David, yetthe Sence is, as appears in what follows 

7 Saying, Bleiled are they whole iniquities are torpi. 
ven », and whoſe ſins are covered. 

» This Teſtimony is taken out of Pjal. 32. 1. and it js we) - 
nough Accommodiated to the Occaſion ; for thoſe two, to ren; 5, 
and to impure Righteouſneſs are inſeparable. The one is put here Fa 
guratively forthe other : They miſtake, who take Occation from 
hence, to make Juſtification to confiſt only in Remiſſion of Sin . T\,. 
Text will not bear it. The Apoſtle's deſign is, not hereby to («. 
clare the full Nature of Juſtification, which he had done bety;e.. 
bur only to prove the Freedom of it from any Reſpe& to Wyrl; 
in the inſtance of this principal and eſſential part of it, Rem: 
7f Sin, and the Imputation of R:ighteouſneſs, differ, as the Cauſe, 3nd 
the Efe#. Remiſſiin of Sim, preſuppoleth Imputation of Rizhtegujy 
and he that hath his Sins remitted, harh Chriſt's Righ:1ouſusſ; fri jy. 
puted, that ſo they may be remitted and forgiven to 2 wners. 

3 Bleiled 5s the man to whom the Lord will not imputz 
fin 0. 

o The ſame thing is expreſt three ſeveral ways ; there are the, 
Things in Sin to be conlider'd. 1. There 1s an Offenice ag.inf Gy, 
whichis ſaid to be Forgiven. 2. There is a Filthineſs in Sin, which 
is ſaid to be Covered, 3. There is Guilt in it, which 15 Ci nor 4 
be imputed. 

9 Comth p this bleſſedneſs then upon the circumcijon 
4 only, or upon the uncircumciſion alſo 2? For we fay 7 tlat 
tairh was reckoned to Abraham for righteouſnets. 


0 


2, 2% 


Faith was reckoned to him for Righteouſneſs : Now there. 
ueſtion is, Whether this Bleſeaneſs of Juſtificationbelongs 

to the Circumcis'd only, or to the Uncircumcis'd allo. 
10 How was it then reckoned ? when he was 1n cir- 
cumciſion or in uncircumſion? Not in circumciſion, bur 


in uncircumciſion 5. 

s And if this be the Queſtion, the way to Reſolve it,is,To Con- 
ſider in what Circumſtances Abraham was, when his Faith wa; thu 
reckon'd to him for Righteouſneſs; it was a long time before he wis 
Circumcis'd, The Promiſe to which Abraham's Faith had reſpet}, 
was made to him Fourteen Years at leaſt, before his Circumci/mn: 
Compare Gen 15. 2. and 17. 24, 25. - Alſo, wid. Gen. 16. 16, It 
the Bleſſedneſs therefore of Juſtification, was not Annext to Cirum 
ciſion, the Gentiles are no leſs capable of it than the Jews, 


11 And * hereceived the ſign r of circumciſion, a fel 
of the righteouſneſs of the faich which /e had yet being 
uncircumciſed : that he might be the father « of «ll them 
that believe, though they be not circumciſed ; that rigfts- 


ouſneſs might be imputed to them allo. 
: Or, Circumciſion which is a Sign, T'wo things are here Affrm'l 
of Circumcifion : 1. That it wass Sign; Of what ? Of the Circmir 
ſion of the Heart, of original Sin and its Cure, 2. That 1t wis: 
Seal ; Of what? Of rhe Righteouſneſs of Faith; Of the meaning 0 
which ſee the Notes on «<<. 1. 179. This isa Periphraiis of the C0- 
venant of Grace, wherein Righteouſneſs is promis'd, and r1ade oe! 
to usin a way of believing : And this is not the only Place 
where the Righteouſneſs of Faith is put for the New Covenant, vid 
Rom. 10. 6. and the Notes there. Circumciſion is called a Seal, be 
cauſe it was a Confirmation of the Covenant of Grace, and the Righe 
reouſneſs therein promis'd. The common Uſe of a Seal amongſt Men 
is to Confirm and Ratifie a Matter, and make it more Fm 
Sure : Iris join'd often with an Earneſt, which is for the {ame £1 ; 
and purpoſe. The Corinthians Converſion is faid to be the as” x 
Paul's Apoſtleſhip, i. e. It was a Confirmation of it, and mave . 
more Evident that he was Sent of God. What the Apoſtle __ 
an Oath, that we may ſay of a Seal ; Ir is for Confirmation, a 
putting things out of Controverſie, When God made a HOON 
Abraham, He Confirm'd it with an Oath; and when he made -" 
venant with him, and with his Seed, He Confirm'd it by a Seal, = 
that was Circumciſion z; which he calls in Geneſis the Covenant of Vows 
and here the Seal thereof, And what is ſaid of Cirenmci/i9n, 7 = 
ſpoken of it barely as Circumciſion, but as a Sacrament ; and gone? 
= Nature and Uie of all Sacraments, both of the Old _ the 
New ; that they are Seals of the New Covenant. That _ = 
Apoſtle mentions here of Circumciſion, hath nothing Prope! _y 6 
culiar in it to Circumciſion as ſuch ; bur it may with equal bo FP; 
be apply'd to any other Sacrament : It belongs as wel tO © an” 
over, yea to Baptiſm, and the Lord's Supper, ® 8- In he. LS 
firſt calls Circumciſion a Sigy, ſo was the Paſſeuer, 1018 B30#)W _ - 
the Lord's Snpper. Again, he calls it 4 Seal of the Rigrrrbn tu 


; | © is each of 
Faith, or of the New Covenant, as before; and 10 15 ect tn 


SETTING 
Qu: 9. Go 


-\[ts rhe Cup the rein, the N:w Teft.omen? or Covenant, that is, It is a 


m:de | nd Confirmation thereof And what is here Aﬀthrm'd of Abra- 
$o4! NE » -ell of cl h 
that 1, may be Affirm d as well of the Eunuch, or the Faylor, or any 
cati. Capris Perſon ; he receiv'd the $:3nof Baptiſm, a Seal of the Righrte « 
Ce Of of Faith, and of Remiſſion of Sins, &c. u 4, e. That he might 
4 824/015 © oh be the Fath - e 
IN its '.-nownor declared to be the Fatherof ſuch; ſee che like Phraſe, 
nd 1; \;t £459 Though many of the Fathers did believe before Abra- 
keth, __ 'ver none of them are ſaid to be the Fathers of the Faithful, as 
Hams , 


: | ahem Was, becauſe God made to none of them the like Promilſe' 
5 of 0; concerning their Poſterity,as he did to Abramam.See the next Verſe. 


hout/x; |» AnJ the father of CirC1mcilion tothem who are nor 
" of the circumCcition only, but who allo walk in the ſteps 
ns the 1 that faith of our father Abraham 2, which be bad be- 
—_ ; in 1/7 uncircumciſed. Fe a 
Wes | ©, The former Verſe tells you he was the Facher of the Believing 
Sue Gmtiles, for the Covenane Was made with him tor all his Believing 
Wuteth «./ when he was Uncircumciſed, which ſhews, That Righteouſneſs 
s nerc | 2 and may be imputed to them alſo, without any outward Circum- 
S.- | Th, and then he is the Farther of the Believing 7ews ; . eſpecially 
lorgi. © 1 many of them, ws unto Circumci//on do add the Imitation of 
tis Faith. " Who (betides Circumciſion which they deriv'd from him) 
wells 7 alſo Tranſcribe his divine Copy, and follow his Example of 


mit Stn, | Fich and Obedience : That leave their Sins. as he did his Coun- 


\ere Fi, iy ; thar Believe all God's Promites, and adhere to him againſt 
n from | i} Temptarions to the CONtary. 
!; The 1: For the promiſe that he ſhould be the heir of the 
OY | world, !! 2yas not to Abraham x, or to his feed through 
Wort? y 1c law, but through che righteoutneſls of faith y. 
Remi « Some by the World do underſtand, the World of the Faithful, 
us 4 \0 Pclievers diſperſed over all the World: And ſo in Effe&t it 1s 
reouſncs he tame which he ſaid before, That 4braham ſhould be the Father of 
Grid in. |! that belive, whether of the Circumciſion or Uncircumciſion, O- 
| thers by the Forld, do underſtand the Land of Canaan ; under which 
moves | iſo, Lieaven was typically Promited and Comprehended, wid. 
Pulte | 45.4. 3. 3nd 11. 9, 109, 16. This by a Synecdoche, is put for all the 
E Fr/a ; and fo alſo Tabor and Hermon are put for the Eaft and We? 
es | of the whole Wor!ld, Pſal. 89. r2. This was promis'd to 4bra- 
nit Go, kim, and to his Seed, Gen 12. FT. and I5. 18. b s e. It was not 
[, ae | made to #braham, becauſe he had merited it by keeping the Law ; 
Ug N70 | lutbecauſe he hid believed God, and obtain'd the Righteouſneſs of 
| Fzich, In the whole Verſe is couch'd an Argument for Juſtificati- 
WM CIION | © 6; Faith without Works, which is the Apoſtle's drift; and it may 
ay 7 tial be thus fornt'd, if rhe Promiſe of Inheritance to Abraham and his 
{was to be Accompliſh'd not by Legal Obedience, but by the 
who ant Rightcouſncſs of Faith; then it follows, That We are Juſtified by 
e Circum- | 4h, and not by Works, but the Promiſe of Inheritance to Abra- 
a kan 1nd his Seed, was to be Accompliſh'd not by the Law, but 


by the Righteouſneſs of Faith. 
14 For * it they which are of the law & be heirs 4, 


fach is made void 5,and the promiſe made of none effect c. 
i.e If they that truſt to the Fulfilling of the Law, be Heirs of the 
?r.wiſ of God, and ſo the Inheritance come by Works ; then Faith 
ist0 n0 purpoſe, neither is there any Uſe of it, and ſo alſo the pro- 
niſes which are made to Believers are vain and ufeleſs. This is the 
Sim of this Fourteenth Verie, a more particular Explication follows, 
: Compare this with Gal. 3. 9, 10. There the Apoltle ſorts them that 
kek Righteouſneſs and Salvarion into two kinds. Firf, Some are of Faih, 
mnlthey are ſuch as ſeek Salvation in that way. Again,Others are of 
the Works of the Law, and they are luch as ſeek Salvation by means 
tkercof; Theſe Phraſes of the Law, and of the Works of the Law are all 
me, a 5.c, of the Promiſes of God ; of the Heavenly Reft,of which, as 
kefore,Canaan was a Type bi.e lf they which ſeek the Inheritance of rhe 
las, can by the Law obtain it, then there is no uſe of Faith: To 
vhitcend ſhould we by Fairh go out of our ſelves to ſeek Righteouſe 
1: and Salvation in Chriſt, if we could obtain it by the Legal Obe- 
tence, See the like, Gal 5.4, © #7. e. The Promiſe it ſelf, which 
1.5 made to Abraham, and his Seed, that alſo is ineffe&ual, and 
bovght ro nought ; no Man ſhall be Saved by it. For as much as 
be Law can bring no Man to the Obtaining of what is promis'd. 


feſt, Thar 
ow theres 
on belongs 


745 10 Cl- 
Hon, but 


1s, To Con- 
ith wat thu 
fore he was 
had reſpes, 
WL LA00L 
16, 16, | 
t to Circa 
W!, 


10n, a fed 
| pct being” 
jf ll chem 
that riphite- 


here Aﬀfirm'd 
the Circumr 
[ hat 1t wis3 
> Meaning ot 
is of the Co- 
nd r1ade Ovfl 
To only Place 
Covenant, 9%. 
ed 2 Seal, be- 
and the Rig 
amongſt Men 


15 Becauſe * the law worketh wrath 4 :-For where no 
AW ls, there ts NO rranſgrettion " 

a i.c, The Wrath of God: And this it doth not of its ſelf, bur 
$0.Cilionally 1n RefpeCt of our Diſobedience. Thisis a Confirma- 
Lon of what was ſaid in the foregoing Verlte : Thar the Inheritance 
5 not by rhe Law, and the Works thereof ; he proves it from the 
Lie and Work of the Law, tuch as it hath jn all Men 1ince the Fall ; 
t worketþ Prath : It is ſo far from entituling Men to the Promis'd 
b&ſing,thar it expoſeth Men to the Curſe and Wrath of God, Gal. 
3.19, 9. d. And that it worketh Wrath is Evident, becauſe it dil- 
wyers and occaſions Trarſzreſſions, betwixt which,and God's Wrath, 


a © . » S 7J * - M . 
"e1san inſeparable Conne&ion. e This Aﬀertion is ſimply True 


be the 5:4: © " things indifterent,as vere all Ceremonial Obſervat:ons before the 
r. and made It PIcquired them - for then before rhe Law it was no Sin to Omir 
Apoſtle {ays of ma Burt of things which are Evil in their own Nature,it muſt be 
Tation, andior 25s Reſpectively, and afrer a fort. That 1s, there was no 
de a Promijet = op Tr anſgreſſon before the Law was given, as afterwards. The 
he made 3 01S are, Becaule we are Naturally bent to do that which is for- 


J ! * . AE" A 
mus; and fo by the Prohibition of the Law, the Stubbornneſs 


wat 
—_ tM As alſo, Becauſe by the Law comes 


acyerians of 0h) 
cnmctf/i 


bn an's Heart is increaſed. 
©Clear Knowledge of Man's Duty, and ſo the Servant that knows 


on, 1$ no: «MF. I w_ Oe. Y . ds b 
') Maſter's W 11], and doth it not, is worthy of the more Stripes. 


- and ir Jhevs 


ft 
; , and I q« . 3” | . 
: Te pich rhe ” Therefore zt :s of taith, - that ir might be by grace ; 
” \ | "ON _—_— . 
— nd Pe- ucend the promile might be {ure to] all the ſeed, f not 


0th 


1 equal Realon, Ong which is of the Jaw, but to that alſo which is 
i UL Ie Ay ky [ . 8 
ell ro the 2 WO lath of Abraham, + who is the father of us 
1s Bap7iJm®: m - Ilere ; T | Z 
Reehr0t 3 WM: co New Arguments to Prove, That the Inheritance is 
fs ich of CE te Law, but of Faith, Ir is of Faith, that it might be by 
: Ou: $av19 *3 tor to be Juftified by Faith, and by Grace, are all one with 


_— 


ROMANS 


) | 

Chap. IV. 

the Apoſtle. Again, 'F [tut he Prom:/c mig te fare to all the Secd , 
whereas, if 1t were of the Law, it would be unture and uncertuirn, 
becauſe of Man's Weakaeſs, who is not able to perform it. f 46-3- 
ham's Seed is of two Sorts, One Sort is of the Law, to wit,. th- 
Jews. Another Sort is, of ſuch as walk in the Steps of Abraham's 
Faith, whether Jews or Gentiles, To all theſe the Promiſe m4 be 
ſure; which cannot be, it the Lawbe made the Condition or Mc:ns 
of the Inheritance. 

17 (As it 1s written, * I have mad thee a father of * Gen, ++ 
many nations) {' b-fore him whom he believed g,eve: God 5 
who quickneth che dead, and calleth thoſe thinos which ! - * 
be not as though they were þ : et Rl 

F4 2. e. In the Sight Or Eſteem of God He WiS nor the Father i IO 
of many N :tions by Carnal Generation in the ftchr of Men, but by RE lh 
Spiritual Cognation in the Sighr of God. Or, as it may be read, L424 © 
wiro God, after his Example ; and then rhe meining is, That God fo 
Honoured Abraham's Faith, that he made him a Father, in ome re- 
ſpeQts like himſelf : As God is an Univerſal Farber, nor 0f One, nc 
of all Nations, fo was Abraham. Again, As Cod 1s their Sp:rirua! 
Father, notby Carnal Generation, fo was Abraham allo. þ i. e. Abrge 
ham believed in him as Omnipotent. His Omniporency is deſcrit, d 
by two great Effe&ts of ir. The One ia makinv that to have a i2+. 
Ing again, which had ceas'd to be, as in the ReſwrreZion, The other, 
in cauſing that to be, which never was; or to make tl Thinss of 
Nothing, as in the Creariou : He exprefſerh this by calling Thinws, 
to intimate the great Facility of this Work to God. Hz: only ſpoke 
and it was done ; He commanded, and a!! was created. And is Jbrahay 
thus generally believed the Power of God, fo "tis likely he made 4 
particular Applicaticn of it to his own State art preſent ; as he be- 
lieved that God could raiſe the Dead, to that he could raile him 
Seed our of his own dead Body, and Serab's dead Womb. And :5$ 
he believed, Thar God could create Things our of nothing, to he 
could give him Secd that had none ; yea, and make the Geariles a 
People, that were not a People. 

+5 Who againſt hope believed in hope z, thathe || might | 
become the father of many nations ; according to that 
Which was {poken, So ſhall thy feed be &. 

Here the Apoſtle Digreſſeth a little from his principal Argument, 
and falls into a Commendation of Abrahams Fiith, i Abraham, 
when he had no natural or rational Grounds of Hope, either in Re- 
ipect of himſelf, or Sara his Wite, did yet Belteve and Hope he 
ſhould have a Son; and fo be a Root or Stock, from whence ma- 
ny Nations ſhould ſpring : And this Faith and Hope of his, was 
Grounded upon the Power and Faithtulncſs of God & So as the 
Stars of Heaven tor Multitude, which muſt be ſupply*d out of the 
Promiſe, in Gen. 15. 5. 

19 And being not weak in Faith, * he conſidered / not » Ge, ,8. 
his own body now dead, when he was about an hund:ed 1:. 


years old, neither yet the deadneſs of Sarahs womb. Heb. 17, 

I He regarded not the Impotency of his own Body, which was, as 11 12. 

it were dead, becaule of his Age, in reſpe& of any Delires or 
Powers of Generation. Ab»aham ſeveral Years after married Rec. 
rar, by whom he had divers Children, How then doth the Apoſtle 
ſay his body was now dead, or vnable for Generation : Some [iy thar 
the deadnets of Abraham's Body was only in his own Op:nton, 
Auguſtine hath two Anſwers. 1. That his Body was not dead timply, 
bur in reſpe& of Sarah, he might be able ro beget Children of a 
younger Womin. 2. His Body was revived, and he receiv*'d anew 
Generative Faculty of God, Another queſtion may be mov*d, and 
that i s, How the Apoſtte could fay,that Abraham conſidered not lis own 
Boa being dead : ſeeing we read Gen. #7. 37. that Avraham upon tie 
Promiſe of a Son, fell upon his Face and laughed, and ſaid in his 
Heart,Shall a Child be born unto him thar is an Hundred Y:ars Old,&c. 
Some anſwer, that Abraham at firſt doubred, bur afterwards he re. 
colle&ed himſelf, and got ayer that unbelief, his Faith overcame 
all difhculties: Others tay,*that he doubred nor ar all of the truth 
of God's Promiſe, bur was uncertain only how it ſhould be un- 
derſtood; wherher properly or figuratively, vid. Gen. 17.19. O- 
thers ſay, that theſe words of Abraham are not words of doubting, 
but enquiring ; they proceed from a deſire to be further inſtructed, 
how that thing ſhould be. Ir was a Queſtion like thar of the Vir- 
gin Mary's, How jball theſe things be * Auguſtine /azs, That Abra- 
hams Lawghter was not like Sarah's, Hers proceeded from Difſtruſt, 
His from Joy and Admiration. 

20 He || itaggerednot ar the promiſe of God through ; g; us: 
unbelief : but was ſtrong in faith, giving glory to God : eg or; che 
m Viz. in Gen. 15. 5. & 17. 16. » As all do that rely upon the word i; 
Power and Promiſe of God, letting to their Seals that he 1s True. renared, he 
2i And bcing fully perſwaded, that what he had pro- doubred 

miſed, * he was able alſo to perform 0. _ 

o He lookt upon God as one that was perfecQvly able ro do what Mat. 2+, 
ever he had promiſed, and as one that was moſt faithful and fure ne- \", - 
yer to fail in the performance ; collef&ting nothing elſe from the *** *2: 
difficulty and improbabiliry of the matter, bur rhar it was the fit- Re 
ter for an Almighty Power to eifect, LIM 


22 And therefore it was imputed to him for Righte- # James 
ouſnels p. <4 
p Yid.wv. z. By reaſon of bis Faith he was as ſufficiently diſpoſed rendred 
and qualified for the obtaining of the Promile,- as if he had had all MFaVErg. 
the Righteonſucſs required by the Law. *Pſal.115- 
23 Now it * was not written for his fake alone, that *\, C6: 

It was imputed to him: 19 6.11 


24 But for v3 alſo, to whom it ſhall be impnted, it we 
believe on bim that raiſed up Jeſus our Lord from the 

dead 79. | 
Here it may be enquired. If 4brah19; Fairh did juſtific him, 
and it was imputed to him for Righteoſn*ſs, what doth this concern 
us * The ApofMle anſwers. Ir awzs recorded of him for gr fikes, 
Vt 


Or, Lat 
2 jbould 


Oc v JMIC. 


ws Mam = 


+ % 
oP 
. 
- 
- 


—_— 
_- 
_—_ 
- 


hs , wo 
- -- = - w = D 
- __ . 
CO_—— —_ ws 6 - 
po _— I - < 
. - 7 PF 
Ton ay _ ——__ IN 
_— EE... ho . "Sm - w—__ —- 
_——— > EE " Aon e = - 
"gt > - 
hs 


Cites 2 a OR 


< 


 _—_— [9 rote hn” 


© 
Aa 
5,5 0G 


2 


a 


= et toc 
N -4 
s o 
1 


= 
—_ + ng 
—_ 
Ls "—_— 
- 


FE 
VP 
ww, 
_— 
wIEY "# , »- : 
I I 
** 


DMN TIF 
—_— 


- = 
> 2 
+. 
AB>.4 


CO wy No Ao au.” 
. * © 7 pp 
" Pg ">= 


= 
KS 


KA 


: , 
7 Þ, : 
i 
j TX 
1 1 E, F 
F 
1I; 1 "_ 
; ya +1 4 
403 : 23 
2" 
WOT 1-5 +. of 1463 
£ 'F) 7%; Fi 
50 £'H ” F 
j \ eh ! 2 
= © 
7 ; 
f 3* c 4 ts 
: : 
{7-64 B55 
: # : 
|S ' % 6 
$ F 
7” © \ 
+8. 3 CET. 
\ p I 
bt $58 1 2 
/ £, J 
p *6 ' 
"3 $' Y 
: 
F : 
Pp 
PS. 
: ©} \ 
> Ml : 
03 
. WAL 1 
, : 
; 
T2: , 
* 
EI-h-of 
2 , 
N34} , 
3 da 
| WIA 
a" fs: 
£ 
: y 't 
& 


— 


# 
- NE Shs 2. _ Wont, -— xy 
2 hn =Iet _—_ ” 25 - = TI I he 
- . - no, _ Mo — mrs SY ue" 4x - w—_ a A n 
nab 3 SS OE; Ez" N28 2 hk, 3 % I. a <. ISS — —— : P — gr - , - - _ 224 - a 
= gp > IV W- Zo hg S > - "a GS Day. 4, DO ER EO IRIS -S be yt; $4. Ferns, y . "= — n > -- _ 2 8 - -, 2h L 
D " 4 o_ - ” —_ > _— ” _ ” . VIC 4, — C * a 7 * P - _ > _— ”" - w 
4 S - ”- np % j kL —_ —_ _ . — ES he ” T "4 , => - ” "2=a2: W772 - _— 
- p LW k_— as! k% OY —_ = Y << : EZ eo = > U - — > C = = i Oe 4 - + ME, - 
” a I _ =—_— = CEE IR—< TI AS _ 5 _ T K "= f % P - RT DOE XN <a. 4 0 p 
- ——_ | * _ > _ _ v Q N So 0 —_— ®- - Open , : nn EA _——- - n_—_ » D q Wn Bt 23 v be - « ; —— I _ : ms — as 4 - - £ q 
EY -*:: pes Ie oe ge. , 2 © <a —Ope py + - ; on po == L rs: px a. Y: ——_— Re. g—————— 4b F444 Ro FI % th 0 — Eb —_— = =. = = : ” . y uo - 
= 2 . < at y 4 - 5s _ - + Pon: . F , . . y 4 IS. q Wy” y ” 26 0" — T— pd on CET ORs RA . i 3 ut RES a ” p 4 x . 
£20y bs. —_— bh _ —_ _ n: %. q Ty Y _ ne s _— — : IEEY S- \ 08 —— - mo - _— _ = Pe ..- - do 
on 12 ua = :  - WG ——— : a « ... , _, Y ” "ns ” - A & ">. — ee ths _ *_ >y d _ d — ” - - - « 
> r_ - _ —_— = Tu .. : - - =" = 2. Ro C. > 4 w _ ws _ -— — Y” ; —_ =. - - "a" "Y 4 = % a _ þ, = by - = — _ 
Y Ln m——_ « — = —— I. x oo I - . x Oh SOT. RET DO to —— — Lt , bh . Oo IU 9% * _ Su _— ws | 4 L- "a". ih — - 9 —_ 
8 = Pa ERS bh au ” IH : . I EEE M=—Y EIT - op - 4 w vt — —_ x Y ; L oO 5 , - p ___— . > - / Py - 
_—_ - - 4 . —— _ I'>< - Ye yo & 2": 50 4 . * ——A2p £ — -— = - Pl Ws : > <7 5 = OS —W.. —_— _— « 4 . 4 - p < : WEE 
- he > F' p . ws F ESE w—_ 0 — I C > _— [aa n - PSORPR , S 
7 0 = wk " .." Ww* Fe : . - OIL -_ J®. —crnn—er——_ —_ ; — £ ts - —_ £ PS Io. » [ ; b : _ ——. % s 
- _ : . x - b Pa wy . EDD < yr ME , —_ - = yn 3a. TE os 3-2 5 . < mT - q —_ —_ - — * P 
a : T2 — <=” " _ t——_ : - + < = ow” - : y + po = _ 
"Ws - - wie . ___-- PR. - = - z /8 ,4 _, ——_ - Py — : - _ } 
? ; Wy  _ —__ ——_— _— - "IO __—_— - I__ -- — —— _ — 
- © —_ S  _ mx _—_ ; - Yn < - _ Jn - - 
p b = p h p" 4 >T# : 
= Pe nu - _ " ye; 7 ry - 0 pe EET £ 
- - = l a 4. $0 : —_— - 
-_ © _ g m— m_—_— —_— A - 


—_ 


w— ". - 
PEI - 
VEE RT pins 6. 2 IE OY" IG: 


One or ns, Ore RR 
"=" CR _ 


Chap 


. V. ROM 


wid. Ch. 156.4. And to us thereſhall be the like imputation, if we 
believe in God, that raiſed up Jeſus our Lord from the dead. q This 
is a greater AC of Faichthan Abraham's was. And the nature of 
juſtifying Faith lies rather in Afﬀfiance, or in putting truſt in God 
through our Lord Jeſus Chriſt, than in aſſent or in giving credit to 
the Truth of his Promiſe. 2. Why-dorth the Apoſtle ſingle out 
this AQ of raiſing Chriſt from the dead ro deſcribe the Faith of 
Abraham by ? A. To maintain the proportion betwixt the Faith of 
Abrahaw, and the Faith of his Seed ; that as his reſpe&ed the Power 
of Ged, innaifing (2s it were) the dead, ſo in like fore ſhould 
ours. So ſome. But the Apoſtle ſpeaks, as if there were ſome 
ſpecial reaſon and ground for Confidence in God for Juſtification 
in this A& of railing Chriſt from the dead ; and indeed nothing is 
more fit to eſtabliſh our Faith in perſwaſion of our Juſtification 
than this; for when God raiſed up our Lord Jeſus Chrift, having 
looſed the pains of Death, he gave full Aſſurance, that his! Juſtice 
is fully ſatisfied for our Sins. Had not Chrift Jeſus our ſurety paid 
the utmoſt Farthing that was due for our Sins, he had ſtill continued 
in Priton, and under the Power of Death. Hence 'tis that the 
Apoſtle Peter tells us, 1 Pet. 1. 3, That God hath begotten us t0 # 
lively hope of the Heavenly Inheritance by the ReſurreFion of Chrift from 
the dead; there being no more effetual means to perſwade us of 
the Pardon of Sin, of Reconciliation with God, and of Accep- 


rance to eternal Life, than that Jeſus Chriſt our Surety and Spon- } 


ſor is riſen from the dead. 


| Or, Leave 
bad. 
* Heb.3 6. 


* Jam. 1.3. 
i} Or, work. 
1h our, 


| Or fry 
al. ed 


1] Oc,poxy- 
2d owr on. 


25 Who was delivered r for our offences 5s, and was 


raiſed a-ain for our juſtification er. 

» He ſaith Delivered rather than Crucified, to lead us by the hand 
to the firſt cauſe thereof, the determinate counſe] of the Bleſſed 
Trinity, id. AF. 2, 23. and 4. 27, 28. Rom. 8. 32. 7 5, e. for 
the expiating of them, 7ſa. 53. 10- # Not that his Danth had no 
hnd in our ;uſt:ficatior, vid Rom. 4. 24. but becauſe our Juſtificatis 
ox which was begun in his Death. was perfeQed in his ReſurreQi- 
on. Chriſt did meritorioufly work our Jufificst:on and Salvation b 
his Death and Paſſion, bur the Efficacy and PerfeQtion thereof wit 
reſpelt ro us, dependeth on his Reſurre&ion. By his Death he 
paid our Debt, in his Refurreftion he received our Acquittance, 
Iſa. 53 8. when he was diſcharged, we in him, and together 
with him received our diſcharge from the Guilt and Puniſhment of 
all our Sins. T his one Verſe isan Abridgement of the whole Goſpel. 


CHAP. V. 


The fruits of juſtification by faith ; peace with God, patience, hope, and 
aſſuranc: of Ged"s Love : this proved by the Teftimony of the Spirit, 
and the Drath of Chriſt for us when Enemies : ſuch a Love no men 
have fer one Another, 1 —8, This aſſures to us our Salvation : 
and producech preſent joy in thoſe, who bave received the Atone- 

' nent, 9—11. A parallel between Chrifl and Adam; by Adam's 
iranſgreſſion came Sin and Death upon all ; by Chriffs Obedience Righ- 
teouſneſs and Life Cometh upon many ; Condemnation by one ſin ; 
Juſtification from many Offencer, 12-—— 19. The End and Uſe of 
the Law. 2021, 

Herefore * being juſtified by faich a, we have 

peace with God b through our Lord Jelus Chriſt c. 
Hitherto of the cauſe and manner of our Juftificetion, now fol- 
low the Benefits and Effects. # As he had before afferted and 
proved particularly, in Chap. 3. 28. and 4. 24. 6 :. e. Wehave 
reconciliation with God, who before *were utter enemies ro him, 

C»/. 1.21, He is now become our Friend as he was Abraham's. 

c Who is the only Mediitor of Reconciliation. wid. 2 Cor. 5. 19. 

Ephcſ. 2. 14,15, 16, Col. x. 20, 1Tim.2,5. 

2 By whom alfo 4 we || have acceſs by faith, into 


this grace e wherein we ſtand f, and * rejoyce in hope of 


the glory of God g. 

d We have not only tReconciliation with God by Jeſus Chriſt, 
but alſo by Faith in him we are admitted to his Preſence, his 
"Grace and Favour. One may be reconciled to his Prince, and yet 
not be brought into his Preſence, Witneſs Abſalom, &c. wid. 
Eph. 2. 18. and 3. 12. 1 Per. 3. 18, e This Grace, 1s cither that 
whereof he ſpake, Ch. 3. 24. orelſe rather, it may be underſtood 
of that excellent ſtate of Reconciliation, Friendſhip and Favour 
with God, which God hath graciouſly beſtowed upon us. f Or, 
in which we fland or abide, not ſtirring afoot for any Temptation or 
Perſecution. A Metaphor from Soldiers keeping their Station in 
fight. A man may obtain his Prince's Favour, and loſe it again. 
Bur, &e. g In the Glory hoped for, a Hebraiſm. wid. Luke 10. 20. 
1 Per. 1. 8,9. even in that Glery which God hath promiſed, and 
conſiſts in the enjoyment of him. : 

3 And not only /o, but we glory in tribulations alſo 5, 


knowing : * that tribulation || worketh patience k. 

þ As old Soldiers do in their Scars of Honour, vid. Gal. 6. r7. 
2 Coy. 12. 9, 10, 11, Believers don't only glory in their tuture 
Happineſs, bur in their preſent Suffetings and AﬀiQions. Yet not 
ſo much in Aﬀii&ion it 1elf, as in the ifJue and fruitful Effe&s there. 
of, of which he ſpeaks in what follows. : Finding by Experiencee. 
k Not as if affliction of its ſelf and its own nature did this, for in 
many it hath « contrary Operation ; but God who is the Author 
and giver of Patience, Rom. 15. 3. doth make uſe of it for this 
purpoſe ; it is a means ſanQtified of God for the exerciſing, ob. 
taining, and increaſing thereof. 

4 And parience,|| experience /; and experience, hope mn: 

I viz, Of God's Suſtentation and Care of us, and of his Faith- 
fulneſsin fulfilling his Promiles, Iſa. 43. 2. Pſal. 91. 15. 2 Cor. 
I. 4, 5. as alſo of our own Sincerity, and Strength to endure and 
perievere, Mar. 13.21. #97 #. e. of the Glory ot God as before in 
V 2, or, hope of farther mercy and ſeaſonable deliverance. Be- 
Jievers find and feel that God hath delivered them, and doth deli- 


ver them, and in him they truſt and hope, that he will till deli- | 


ver them. 
5 And hope makethnot aſhamed », becauſe o the love 
of Godp is || ſhedabroad in our hearts 9, by the holy 


AN S. 


Ghoſt which is given unto ns r. 

7 It doth not diſappoint or deceive us. Fruſftr 
men with ſhame and confuſion, Fob 6. 19, 20, Th; 
ro be taken out of Pſal. 22.5. o This is either reng 
ſon of all that went before, therefore the juſtified 
Peace with God, acceſs to him by Faith, Hope of | 
Tribulation, e&#c. becauſe the love of God is ſhed Joy In 
Hearts; orelſe itis a reaſon of what immediately preceded . "—_ 
fore hope maketh not aſhamed, becauſe the Love of God gh - 
abroad, &'c. p Underſtand it either aQively of our Love tg Foe 
or rather paſſhvely of his Love ro us, (of which he ſpeaks od, 
and of the ſenſe thereof. 9 Is greatly manifeſted or abundant. by. 
red forth. A frequent Metaphor both in the Old and New Tp 
ment. wid. Iſa. 44. 3. Joel 2.8. Zech 12. 10. John 7.28. 47 ts A 
r Not excluding the Father and Son, it is the more proper wm 
of the Spirit, both to make us feel the Love of God, and to Poo 
Hearts with Love to God. _ 

6 For when we were yet || without ſtrength ;, 1;. 
due time : Chriſt died tor the ungodly «. "= 

s Utterly unable to help or redeem our ſelves. t Some re,4; i; 
according v0 the time, and refer this Claufe to the foregoing Wa” "+ 
making this to be the ſence, When we were weak in time paſt F. " 
in the time of the Law, before Grace appeared, then Chiift jg 
&c. Others rather refer it to the following Words, and ſo "es, 
Tranſlation carries it, that in due time, 4. e. in the fu!lmeſ; of ;;, 
as Gel. 4.4, or, in the time that was before decreed, and perf; ;; 
the Father. The Scripture every where ſpeaks of a certain Cer 
ſon or Hour aſſigned for the Death of Chriſt. vid. War, 1G .. 
John 8. 20. and 12. 27. and 17.1. ws #.e. for the ſake, or ing 
of ſuch as were Enemies to God (as v. 10) and fo could der. 
no ſuch favour from him. , 

7 For w ſcarcely for a righteous man will || one die: Jet 1g 
peradventure for a good man x fome would even dare tow 
die. 
_ w He amplifies the Love of Chriſt in dying for the ungodly vj 
ſhews that 1t is unparalleJI'd and without example. & By 1 5; 
an, you muſt underſtand one that is very kind and bounrifu], 
one that is very uſeful and profitable ; thar is a publick and cog. 
mon Good. Inſtances may be given of thoſe thar have facrifice 
their Lives for ſuch. Li4Ja ſtept berween the Murtherer and Kins 
Edwin his Maſter. Nich. Rib:ſche loſt his Lite to preſerve Prin: 
Maurice at the Seige of Piſa. 

8 But * Godcoummendeth y his love towards us, int!x-*| 


while we were yet ſinners, Chriſt died for us «. ; 

73 +. e. He declareth or confirmeth it, by this as a moſt cyt 
ſign, he makes it moſt conſpicuous or illuſtrious, wid. 5ebn 1, 16,1 
1 Fohn4.9,10. z i.e. Ina ſtate of Sin, and under the guilt ;n} 
power of Sin. Believers in fome ſence are fill Sinners, 1 706x 1,8, 
but their Sins being pardoned and ſubdued, they go'no longer un 
der that Denomination, Sinners in Scripture are ſaid to be thoſ: 
in whom fin dwells and reigns, vid. Johy 9g. 31. ſuch we were by 
Nature. Yea we were not only Sinners but Enemies to God, which 
farther commendeth the Love of Chriſt in dying for us: there is 
no greater Love amongſt-men, than when one layeth down hisLik 
for his Friends : but herein Chriſt's Love excell'd, that he gavehis 
Life for his Enemies. 


9 Much more then a being now juſtified by his bloods, 


we ſhall be ſaved from wrath through him c. 

s The Apoſtles arguing is cogent, for ':is more to juſtifie :ad 
reconcile Sinners, than to ſave them being juſtified ; Chriſtther- 
fore having done the former, he will much more do the [itt 
b i. e, By Faith in his Blood or Sufferings. « The Greek reads! 
with an Article from that Wrath, whereby is meant the Wrath 
come, or eternal Puniſhmenr. 

ito For it when we were enemies, * we were ſec0l-- 
ciled to God 4 by the death of his Son : much more beingy 
reconciled, we ſhall be ſaved by his life e. _— 

4 Put into a capacity of reconciliation, God being Þb! Chu) 
death made reconcilable, and alſo aQually reconcil'd wich 57 
Believe, through the Merits of the Death of Chriſt. e 7. 7. By tix 
Reſurre&ion to Life, Salvation is aſcribed to the Reſurrection i! 
Life of Chriſt, becauſe he thereby doth perfe& our Salvation, 2 
ever living to make Interceſſion for us, Heb. 7. 25. And becaulc by 0 
ReſurreCtion and Life, we ſhall be raiſed to erernal Life acthat Dy. 

12 Andnot only ſo f, but we alſo joy in God, chrough 


our Lord Jeſus Chriſt, by whom we have now receiv: 


the atonement p. ai 
f 9. d. We don't only rejoice in the hope of Glory, i : 
tribulation of which he had ſpoken, wv. 2, 3. (all that tell "A 
tween, being a Jong Parentheſis) but we rejoyce and glory Ga 
himſelf, who is become our God and merciful Father 1N ou 
Chriſt. g This is rendered as the reaſon why we {hould —_ 
in God through Jeſus Chriſt ; for by him God 3s atoned _ - 
ciled, fatisfaftion being made for our Sins in his Blood. be LU 
eicle now hath irs Emphaſis, to ſhew the privilege of thoſe 
live in theſe times of the Goſpel. 0 
12 Wherefore þ, as * by one man # fin & entered — 
the world }, and * death by fin », and fo death pain, 
upon all men, {| for that all have ſinned o. 
þ From this Verſe to the end of the Chaprter,t -hich & 
large Compariſon between the firſt and ſecond Azam, "Oc 
joins to what he had ſaid by the caulal Particle ereſore, what 
ing Things are as I have already faid, it 15 Evident, © ae 
was loſt by Adam, is Reſtored by Chriſt, This Vere 0 | 
be Lame and Imperfe& ; the Reddition 1s waning == Yyinll 
pariſon: For unto this (4s by one Man fn entered A 0 
there ſhould be added, So by Chriff, &c. But the Reddition, 


. nd 
; :* ſuſpended, by reaton of 3/7 
ſecond part of the Compariſon, is ſuipen hs, - here the Apot | 


aye 


he Apoſtle makes 


Parentheſis intervening to the 18, and 19, v 


erfixt by 
tain Fe... 

"6. 4, 
r 1nfkc2d 
_ Ceferre 


die: yet1g 
Care to w 


odly and 
By a gud 
\tiful, or 
and com- 
{acrificed 
and king 
ve Prince 


, Intia*] 


oft certiin*, 
John 1,16, " 

guilt ind 
1 7061.8, 
longer Ut- 
$0 be thok 
ve were b 
God,waich 
as: there is 
"wn his Li 
: he gave bus 


15 blood b 


juſtifie :nd 
Chriſt there 
) the latte!, 
>reek reads If 
T= Wrath t 


ere Tecol + 
Nore being! 


+ by Chris 
"4 when 35 
1,0. By the 
1rrection 1 
Salvation, # 
ecaale by 
fe acthat Dy 
xd, chrouf 


JW receive 


31ory, and 
nar fell ng 

Jory 12 : 
6 fr Jew 
hould 1£)0YE 
n ed Or rec0n- 
od. Thep* 
of thole who 


entered in| 
each paſſed") 


poſtle makes' 


. - 4 JO" 
ealon oft 4 
hers the _ 


p. V- 


q ; 


i x 


oth parts of the Compariſon. # wiz, Adam, Obj. Eves 
ho tes J jy 6. ba. He is got ſhewing the Order how 
- firſt entered into the World, but how it was propagated to man- 
= Therefore he mentions the Man, becauſe he is the head 
— Woman, and the Covenant was made with him : Or, Man 
may be uſed colleCively, both for Man and Woman ; as when God 
faid, Let 15 make Man, &c. & Ir is to be underſtood of our firſt 
warents aQtual fin, in cating the forbidden Fruit ; this alone was 
* Shar affe&ed their Poſterity, and made them Sinners, wv. 19 
| Unlerſtand the Inhabitants of the World ; the thing containing 
by an uſual Metonymy is put for the thing contained. m As the due 
reward thereof. Dearth here may be taken in its full latitude for 
remporal, ſpiritua), and eternal Death. = Seized upon all of all 
ſorts, Infants as well as others. o Others .read it thus ; in which 
all have ſinned, 3. e. 1n which one man, and ſo it isa full proof that 
41am was a publick Perſon, and that in him al! his poſterity finned and 
fat, He was our Repreſentative, and we were all in him, as a 
Town or Country in a Parliament-Man, and although we choſe him 
not, yet God choſe for us. The words :& © are rendred #n which 
in other places, and the prepolition «£7 1s put for ey. vid, Mark 2. 
4, Heb. 9. 10. and if our Tranſlation be retained, it is much to 
the ſame ſence ; for if fuch die as never committed any aCtual ſin 
chemſelves (as Infanrs do) then it will follow thar they ſinned in 
this one man, in whole Loins they were ; as Levi is ſaid to have 
paid Tithes in Abraham's loins, Heb. 7. g. 
13 For until the Law ſin was in the world : p but * 


fn is not imputed when there is no T aw 9. 

p 9. 4. Ir appears that all have ſinned, becauſe fin was always 
in the world, not only after the Law was given by Meje:, bur allo 
before, even from the beginning of the World till that time. 

_d. Ir appears there was a Law, before the Law of Moſes, for 
if there had been no Law all that while, then fin would net have 
been impured ro men, ſo as to make them liable to puniſhment or 
death ; but ſin was imputed or charged upon men before the Law 
of Moſes, and death paſt upon all; therefore there muſt be a Law 
by the tranſgrefſion of which men were ſinners before that time : 
and that was either the Law of Nature, or the poſitive Law which 
God gave to Adam, the tranſgrefſion whereot is imputed to all, 
as we ſhall ſee, v. 19. - Some think the Apoſtle doth here obviate 
a Cavil. 9. d. Ler no man think that fin began to have its be- 
ing together with the Law, for ttere was fin before there wasany 
written Law to forbid it. The ſame a&s that were forbidden at- 
rerwards by the Law, were before committed, and were really ſ1n- 
ful in the ſight of God, But fin was not ſo well known, nor fo 
fri&ly charged upon the finner as, it 1s fince the Law was given 
It was not imputed comparatively, though abſolutely it was, as ma 
zppear by many Inſtances, asthe drowning of the World, the de- 
ſtruction of Sodom, Oc. 


14 Nevertheleſs death reigned from Adam to Moſes, 
reven over them that had nor ſinned after the fimilitude 
of Adams tranſereflions s, * who is the figure of him that 


Was FO COMe fr. : 

; He proceeds to prove his aſſertion in the foregoing Verſe, 
that fin was in the World before the Law ; becauſe death, which 
isthe wages of ſin, did reign and-had power over all mankind from 
Ham to Moſes, which was about 2500 Years. 5 i. e. Over very 
Infants, that had nor aQtually finned as Adam did. But though In- 
fints did not fin like Adam, yetthey ſinned in Adam. The guilt of 
his fin was imputed to them, elſe death could have had no power 
ove: them.” Infants (as one faith) are not altogether Innocents, 
the very firſt Sheer or Blanket wherewith they are covered 1s wo- 
ven of fin and ſhame, of blood and filth, Ezek. 16. 4,6. * Of 
his Offspring (fo ſome) which came of him in after times, his 
Poſteriry (as before) was repreſented in his Perſon : Bur others 
better expound it of Chriſt, who is the fecond Adam; and of 
whom Adam was a Figure or Type, not in reſpeC& of ſuch things 
is were perſonal to either of them, bur of that which by them 
redounded to others. The firſt {dam was the ww of mans 
Natural and Earthly Being :* The ſecond Adam of his Spiritual 
and Heavenly. By the firſt Sin and Death came into the World, 
by the ſecond Righteouſneſs and Lite, 


15 Butnot astheoffence, fo alſo zs the free gift y. For 

it through the offence of one many be [| dead ; much 
more the graceof God, and the gitt by grace, which is 
by ene man, , Jeſus Chriſt hath abounded unto many w. 

# 9. d, But yet the reſemblance betwixt the firſt and. ſecond 4- 
dam, is not ſo exat as to admit of no difference ; differences 
there be, but they are to great advantage on Chriſt's part. e. g. 
Compare Adam's Sin and Chriſt's Obedience in reſpett of their 

ficacy and Vertue, and you will find a great difference. w The 
Obedicnce of Chriſt (which is the produQt of his Grace and Fa- 
vour) is much more powerfulto Juſtification and Salvation, than 
the ſin of Adam was to Condemnation. If the tranſgreflion of 
meer Min was able to pull down Death and Wrath _ all his 
natural Seed, then the obedience of One which is God as well as 
man, will much more abundantly availto procure pardon and life 
for all his Spiritual Seed. He doth nor give the preheminence un- 
tothe Grace of Chriſt in reſpe& of the number, but of the more 
powerful Efficacy and Verrtue. 


216 And not as it as by one that ſinned, /o #s the gift : 
or the judgment was by one to condemnation: but the 
tree pife is of many offences to juſtification x. 

* 9.4, Asthere is a difference between Adam and Chriſt 1n re- 
ſpe of their perſons, ſo alſo in reſpect of their As, and the 
extent thereof ; for one fin of Adam did condemn us, the miſe 
Clicf aroſe from one offence ; but the free gift and grace of Chriſt 
Goth abſolve us not only from that one fault, but from all other 
Faults and Offences. It reacheth to the pardon not only of Origi# 
nil Sin, but of all other perſonal and actual ſins. 

! 17 Forif || by one mans offence,death reigned by one ; 


Mic more they which receive abundance of grace, and 


ROMANS. 


— 


of the gift of righteouſneſs, tha!l reign in life by one, 
Jeſus Chriſt »y. 

3 Here he ſhews the difference in reſpeCt of the Effets and Con. 
ſequents of their As. If by means.of ove man and his one of- 
fence death had power over al] mankind, then much more tha!l rh. 
grace and gitt of Righreouſneſs, which is by Jeſus Chriſt alene, 
obtain erernal life tor all that have received abundanr Grace and 
Mercy from him. 


18 Therefore > a5 || by the offence of one j:dgment 4 
came upon all 5 men tocondemnation : even ſo by the 
righteouſneſs of one, he free pift c came upon all men 4 
unto juſtification of lite. 


z Here, after a long Parentheſis, the Apoſtle returns to 
what he had begun to ſay, in v. 12. and now he makes rhe Com- 
pariſon full in both members, which there by reaſon of interve- 
ning matter was left imperfeCt as I before hinted. 2 Guilt which 
expolcth to judgment. 6 Allthe Poſterity or natural Seed of the 
hrit Adam. c Thar which all along he calls the Free-Gife, ſeems to 
be the benefir that Believers have by Ckriſt's Obedience 4 Nor 21 
univerſally, Burt all Sorts of men indifferently, Gentiles as well as 
Jews : Or, all that are his Spiritual Seed : Or, 41 men here 1, pur 
for many men : See elſewhere. v:4. Luke 6. 26. 4%. 22.15, Ma- 
ny 15 ſometimes pur for Alf. Dan. 12, 2. and again All for any; 
and indeed theſe two words, All and Many ſeem to be uted reci- 
procally by this context ix particular v. 15, and 19. 

19 Foras by one manse diſobedience many f were made ſinners g: 


io by the obedicnce of one, f ſhall many be made Righteous. 

e 4.6 Adann's, {te hc Noics UN ver. 12. J t.c. alu, as Uetore, many i» Acre vppoled 
to one ora few ; the meaning is, Though Adam was bur one, yer he infected many 
vthers, his fin rfted nor in his own perſon. g Brought into a State of fin. This is 
more than when all the Werld were {aid to fin in him, The word is uted to fignifie great 
and heinous fuuners, The Apoſtie here informs us of that which all Philotophy was 
ignoranc of ; viz, rhe Imputation of Adam's fin, and our natural Pollucior flowing 
trom it. Yea, this was more than the naked Hiſtory of mans fall by A6:/cs did ditco» 
ver: There indecd we ee the caule of death, how thar came upon all mankind : bur 
that Adams fin was accounted to us, rhat by his diſobedience we are invuived in 
Sin and Miſery, that is noc clcaily revealed in the Buoks of Moſes. We are beholding 
ro the Goſpel, and particularly ro this Text and Context, for the more full ditcovery 
hereof. F s. e. Of Chriſt. He leaves our the word, Man, either for brevities take 
or becauſe Chriſt was rot a meer man as Adem was. Here the Apofile concludes che 
Collation he had made berween Adam and Chriſt, whom he had all along repretenccd 
as IWO publick Pcrſons, or as two common Roots or Fountains, tht one of Sin and 
Deeth, the other of Righteouſneſs and Life. Ard indeed there are throughour rhe 
Tontext (as ons obſerves) ſeveral Texrual and Grammarical Obſcurities, as allo redun- 
dant ard defcive expreſſions which are not unutual with this Apoſtle, whoſe marrer 
runneth trom him like a torrent and cannot be fo well bounded by words. Anvthcr 
:aich upon the conſideration of rhe difficulties in this Contexi, we do not nzed Tuz/ews 
his twine of thread, bur the Holy Ghoft, and that Light by which this Epiſtle was 
vrought ro guide us into the underſtanding of ir. 

29 Moreover 2, * the law {| entred that the offence might bound þ : 


But where ſin abounded, grace did much more abound z. 


Las 


fore that time fin was in the world,ic was that the offence might ahound. 6 Eicher trialy 
the offence of that one man, or rarher largely, the offence of every man, The pac- 
ricle zya (rendred that) is to be taken either Cauſally, and ſo it is incerprered by Gat. 
3. 19. Where it is ſaid, The Law was added becauſe of Tranſgreſſion ; that thereby the 
guilt and puniſhment of Sin being more fully diſcovered, the riches of God's free grace 
and mercy might be the more admired ; or elſe Eventually; ic fo falls our by accident 
or by reafon ot mans corruption, that fin is thereby increated or augmenred. © The Law 
is Holy, Juft, and Good (as hereafter) how then doth that increaſe fin? Either as ic 
irritates the Sinner, ch. 3. 20. and 7, 8. 11, or makes manifeſt the fin, <, 7, 9. 213» 
thereby fin is known to be as indeed ir is our of meaſure tinful. # This is added by 
way of Corre&tion to mitigate the former affertion, and ir lays down a iccond end of 
giving the Law ; the former was the encreaſe and manifeſtation of i:n; rhe latcer is 
the abounding or fuperabounding of God's grace. There is this difference to be obſer- 
ved ; thar the firſt end is Univerſal, for in ail men, both good and bad, rhe Law work- 
eth the encreale and knowledge of fin; bur the ocher is Particular and Pecutiar to the 
Ele& ; ro them only the grace of God is ſuperabundant after thac they have abounded 
in fin, and by how much the greater is their guilt, by fo much the greater is the ocace of 
God in the free forgiveneſs thereof. ® 

21 That as ſin hath reigned þ unto death, even ſo might OriCe 
reign through righteouſneſs / auto eternal life by Jeſus Chriit our 
Lord m3. 

k Bcfore he aſcribed Dominion and Reign to Dearth, now to Sinners; the reaſon is 
evident, becauſe death indeed reignerh by fin. Before alſo he had made the compariſon 
berwixt Adam and Chriſt, here "cis betwixt fin and grace, the power of one and of 
the other. The ſum is, thar as Sin hath prevailed over all mankind to bring dearh upon 
man, not only a temporal, but erernal death, 1o the grace of Chriſt prevails, and 
becomes effectual ro confer upon us eternal Life. ! i, e. Impured or imparted. > See 


how ſweetly the end anſwers the beginning of this Chapter, and how Jetus Chriſt is 
both the Aurhor and Finiſher of all. 


CRP. VL 
San#ification by Faith in his Death and ReſurreFion, and our Baptiſm 
inio his Death, axd likeneſs ty him in his ReſurreFion, 1-8. as Chriſt 
died once for Sin, and always livech with God : S0 we when we Be- 
lieve die to fin, that from hencefor:h we may live to God : and reign 
over Sin 9-—13, and to this thegrace of God and Liberty in which 
we ſtand muſt move us. 14—20. the wages of Sin, Shame, and Death, 
the End of Holinejs Eternal Life through Chrift, 21.— 23. 
1 Vf T7 Hat | thall we fay then ? Shall we continue in fin 
that grace may abound a ? 
as Another anticipation ; this Epiſtle abounds therewith. The 
Apoſtle here prevents an Obje&ion which might be occaſicned tia 
ther by the foregoing Doftrine in general, concerning Juſtification 
by the Free Grace of God, and by a Righteouſneſs imputed to us? or by 
what he had ſaid more particularly in the cloſe of the foregoing 
Chapter, That where S:m abounded, Grace did much more abound. 
Some might hence infer, That there was no need then of inherent 
Righteouſneſs, that Perſons might abide and abound in Si, that ſo 
Grace might be the more exalted in the Forgiveneſs thereof. The 
Apoſtle ; ude ſpeaks, Jude 4. of ſome that made this 111 Improve. 
ment of the Grace of God. Thoſe that draw ſuch Inferences from 
the Premiſſes, they pur a falſe Conſtru&ion upon the Apoſtles Do. 
Qrine, and a Paralogiſm or Fallacy upon themſelves. "They make 
the Apoſtles words more generalthan he meant or intended them : 
For the abounding of Sin, is not the occalion of the abounding of Grace 
in all, but only in ſome, even in thoſe who Confeſs and Forſake 
their Sins. And they apply that to the time zo come, which the 
Apoſtle only uttered of the time paſt. The abounding of Sn, in 
Men before their Converſion and Calling, doth commend, and ex- 
alt the abundant Grace of God, in the Forgiveneſs thereof ; bur nor 
ſo, if Sin abound in them after they are Converted and Called. Hz 
propounds this Objefion by way of Interrogation, partly to ſkew 
his 


'$ hap. 


£ Here he ſhzws the reaſon why the Law was given, although (as'cis in v. 13.) be- ; 


VI. 


l|Or,cy exi 


off enc2. 


I5. 
j Or, it 
came in = 
Tween. 


if Oc, what 
ds we ſay 
then. 


am 
——_—_— 
co 


_— 
my no 
xe 
Py 
-- 
= Wy 
ns —_— 
- — 


. _ Y 
— 


. CY 
p 
Lo ”Y R_ 1 an i, es - caRey. * ; b 
AL IIS Tt. 
& _— DOT ol 


> _- 
—— 
- - urns = trill, 
fo >. k, p) = , 
"br 
”* 
DX" YL: 


: 
2 . 
"%; _—_ Ss -<v%. < 
- _ 


% 
>. Ci 
- 

_y 


PER CEA 


$ 
'S 1. 
F 
| Ja 
i : 
: 
F 
j 
o % 
. 
© & 
4 
{ 
. 
: 
f 
> 
4 
U : 
, £ 
4 4 
= 
" ? z 
3 
ah "78 
' : « 1Þ-Þ 
LEN 44 T .* 
[ T8 1! 
| s 
l ? 
i * a 
»., : 
# | VP.1 \ 
vs . 
" , 
. 
f 3-811 
. $$. : 
5 : 
: : 
y y- 
BY t 
M$ + It / 
Lat 123 
T3: us 
1&1 1 ! 
$7 7 ' 
i , 
$1 $1.4 
4 
$7 : 
; OS 
Lat! 1 
, : , q 
1 
» j ” * 
$ \ 
x $8 
: : 
#.-# 2 
% 2 | 
14 
i 
3 * 3. Bi 
” } : 
T r 
A % " Fr 
ha * b by 
T4uS. a 
L 4 
4 : 
13s + : 
o % ” 
mf . 
TH 2 + 
2 £ 
1 3 ++ 
4 81% 
HY hs 
S117 I. a 
I T o ” 
i} % 
[1 1. 4 . 
Fe , 
on be, 
: 4 : 
* = þ 
4 i 
| [; 
'# > 
| R 
| F Su 
Pl 4 
1 
a + . 
[ | # t 
Fe, > $? 
4 4 
s.3 
i- 1 
4 £ 
# ay +. . 
' 4) 
1 f 
- 4 It 
;- 2 
oF 
{31 ; 
"T% 'Y 
A Fr 
| f f 
| : 
'* bo it, 
+ 4% he 4 
4 ts , 
KEE - ; 
ef 1 
/ 
. 1H 
*r "Th 
4t! | F1 
; F ul 1.4" 
: 9 48% ys 7 
& '| 1 
» FH: 
os T3 
: F 
4 y 
£ i Ko 
" "F. j f 
. £ o - 
{ 5 at | 
+} , 5 
T3 TOO TD. 
+ v ons « * 
"A © 
4 m" $5 i 
MN; Fr P Z 
; "N. 
$5 Y &f 
4; I . 
1 E 
3 
4 + : 
EI. ey 
} } 
' 94, 
4 er 
v4: 
* TY 
$ Is 
" t : 
1 < , 
4 #7 
[ 4 7 
1.5 L 
19+ 13 5 
{+7 4 y ; 
# y. J , 1 
43:11 
| 
' : © 
: © 7 
[as mat 
| 1 4 
FI [1 T 
bi | 
3 . 
zit - be 
þ F [ 
: £ 7.18 J * 
\ t 
* 4 
- : 
. ; s-/ 
= AE 
TAS 
= I 
k 1 
»* { / 
% " . 
,: 
'S t 
£ 14-7 o 
'T 
| ' 
it 
" is 
RAS: 
4 d ” 
£2 M7 #.: 
| £3 10 48: 5 
8 TE "7 
1 g 9 
1.75 af we 47 
1 , t'5 
8; dy . 
4 ht bf, J 
I &C f 
+. Ty 
4+ . 
Wo 
f 1 
| $T. 'N-- 
C1Y 
\ | þ by, 
{ 
+ 1 
* : Kt 
0 wh, 
mn 
- ($/ 
8 
P 1 WE, 
£ © t 
i . ” 
, 4 
pF) i p- . 
ol : ' ; 
$138. 34% 
] þ # 
v5 « F 
PIES 2 
41 « 
ot ” Cl 
$4 
4 
. 
3F : 6 
, bs 
©; 11 
. o* ii ; 
*. + 7 3 
Y >s it as 
\ { ay 
1.4 3. 1 '4 
"4 = : 
vY , 1% 
ſ [4 FP y1hil 4 
*F 1 bx -? 
1 3. 
Fx © T7» 
. : | - 1 
k, * 
£ = 4 
* - - 
: p 
. 15 [ Drs 
? J 4 +. x 3 
1 o Ly N 
: 47% 
' x: 
« 
4 TO 
: p4 s 
A : 
3 4 . 
Fx j 
; t % 
' 1% L 
| $9.55 Z 
bod? nh 


= 
- =o 


wy <1 \g - 
POS 
Fro L 


Spy 
| 46 o 
FER 


————_— wo 
= + "a6 od =; 


Ke... 


Ins = = IS Sn 


+ = 


_—_— . 4 
Hd AT - way v 
INS SEO IT DS ASE 


— 


ogg gr or Ir I 


EV; 
"a" 
<-> 


Wh; 12a » 
Wy bis diſlike, that his Doarine ſhould be ſo perverted ; and partly to 
Fi: few his own Sence, that he was far from ſuch a thought. 
> Cod foihid 6: How c ſhall we that ate dead to {in d, 
l've any longer therein e. | 
5 Be it not, or, far be it ; he reje&s any ſuch Inference or Con- 
ſequence, as unworthy of an Anſwer. 9.4. Away with all ſuch 
Dodrines as under pretence of advancing Grace, do promote 5, 
or obtruR a Godly Life, This Phraſe is frequent with the Apoſtle, 
when he is ſpeaking of any abſurdity, wid. chap. 3. 4,6, 31. © By 
this Particle How, he ſhews the Impotlibility, or the Incongruity of 
the thing. via. Mat. 5. 28. Gal. 4. 9. The following Argument iS 
very cont incing, and may be thus form'd. They whole Property 
ir is to be dead ro ſin, can't any longer live therem, but the juſtiped vy 
Faith, are neal to ſin: d They are ſaid to be dead to ſew, who don't 
1;- under the Power and Dominion of it ; who Mortitte Sin, and 
ſuffer it (ſo far as they can) to have no Life or Power 1n it. £e Fall 
into it they may, bur live and lie in it they can't. Tis not falling 
into the Warer that Prowns a Man, bur "ris his Iying in it ; 1o is 
not falling into Sin that Damns a Man, but it is his {wing 11 18, 
i Or, are. 3 Know ye not f, that lo many of us as {| WEre baptized 
*  * 5nto Jeſus Chriſt 5, were baptized into his death 4 ? 

f 9. d. This is a Truth which you ought not to be ignorant of ; 
and which Confirms whatI ſay. g To be Baptiz'd into Corift, 15 Cl- 
ther to be Bapriz'd in the Name of Chriſt, vid. AF. 10. 48. and 19. 5. 
Orelſc ir is to be Incorporated, Ingraffed, or Planted inzo Chriſt ; and 
ſo to be made Members of his Myſtical Beay by Baptiſm. h To be 
Baptized into the death of Chrif, is to bave F ellowſhip with Him 1n 
his death, or to have the Efficacy of his death Sealed UP TO Us; and 
that is the bleſſed Privilege of as many as are Baprizen, 'Or Planted 
into Chriſt ; They are not only Partakers of the Merit of his death 
for Juſtification, bur of the Efficacy of his death for | lortihcation. 
See a Parallel place. Gal. 3. 27. ; : 

4 Thrcio-e 7 we are buried with him & by baptiſm / 
into death, that * like as Chriſt was raifed up from the 
dead » by the glory of the Father », * even ſo we alſo 
Phil.z 1c, ſhould walk in newneſs of lite « | 
I. 7 9.4. Becauſe we are thus DeadwithChriſt therefore,&-c.k i.e. Wehave 
* Eph. 4. Communion with Him in hrs burial alto, which repreſents a farther 

degree of the Deſtruttion of tin, by putting it (as it were) out of 
our ſight, Gen. 23- 4. 1! Some think he alludes here to the man- 
.ner of baptizing in thoſe warm Eaſtern Countries, which was to 
Plung or Dip the Party baptized under Water. Others think, with 
oreater Reaſon, that this Phraſe-is uſed tro ſignifie that Union and 
Communion which believers have with Chriſt in his death and 6urzal, 
which is ſignified by pouring Water on a Perſon (like Earth or 
Duſt on a dead Body,) and not as by Dipping him under Water. 
* See the like Phraſe, Col. 2.12. Baptiſm doth not only repreſent 
our Mortification and Dcath to ſin, but our Progreſs and Perle- 
verance in Mortification ; Burial implies a continuing under Death, 
ſo is Mortification a continual dying unto fin, m Look as after the 
death and burial of Chrift, there follow'd his Reſurredion ; fo it mult 
be with us: We muſt have Communion with, and Conformity to 
the Lerd Jeſus Chriſt in kis Reſurrefion, as well as his Death ; both 


"2. $. 


T1. 


bl 


theſe are Repreſented and Sealed to us by the Sacrament of baptiſm. ; 


» i.e. By the Power of the Father, which is call'd, Col. r. 11. His 
g/orious Power, God 1s ſaid elſewhere to have raiſed him by his 
Pow:r, wid. 1 Cor. 6. 14 and in 2 Cor. 13. 4. He 1s ſaid ro Live 
by the Power of God. Some read it thus, He was Raiſed from the 
Drad , to the Glory of the Father, The Prepoſition dz, is ſome- 
times rendered to, wid. 1 Pet. 1.3. 0 4. e. Live a new Life, being 
acted by new Principles, a!ming at new Ends, and bringing forth 
new Fruits of Holineſs, vid. chap. 7. 6. 

5 For it we have been planted » together in the like- 
nel; of his death, we ſhall be alſo i rhe likeneſs of his 
reſurrection 9. 

2 He Proſecutes what he had before Propounded, and Tlluſtrates 
it by an apt Similitude, which is taken from Graffing or Planting. 
He takes 1t for granted, That Believers are Planted together in the 
likeneſs of Chriſt's death, i e. Are made Conformable to Him in his 
Death, wid. Phil. 3. 10. Chriſt Died, and Believers Die ; the One 
a Natural, the Other a Spiritual Dearh. The One by way 
of Expiation, Suffering, and Satisfying for the Sins of Others; 
the Other by way of Mortification, Killing, and Crucifying their own 
Sins. 9 Inthe Original, the Sentence is Elliptical and Imperfe& : 
The Words running thus, We ſball be of his Rejurrefion; our Tranſ. 
lation therefore fills up the Sence with a word borrowed from the 
preceding Clauſe, See the like, John 5.36. 7 have a greater WFit- 
neſs than of John, 3. e. Than that witneſs of John. The Sence of 
the whole is this, That Belzevers are not only dead, but riſen witch 
Chr:#, Col.z. 1. They partake of ſuch a Reſurre#;on as reſembles 
His; As Chiiſt Aroſe from the Dead to a New Life, ſo we Riſe 
fiom Dead Works, to walk in Newneſs of Life, ver. 4. Moreover, 
they are raiſed and quickned by a Power and Vertue that flows 
from Chriſt and Fi; Reſwrre#ion : This isthat Yertue which the Apo. 
{ftle Paul fo earneſtly defired to be made a Partaker of, Phil. ;. ro. 
The Graft revives with the Stock in the Spring, and that by a Ver- 
rue which it receives from the Srock; So as a Believer is rais'd to 
Newneſs of Life, by a Vertue flowing from Chriſt into whom he is 
Engrafted. 2. Why Goth he ſay Believers ſhall be Planted, &c. 
Are they not io already. upon their believing in Chr:ſt ? 4. The 
Apoſtle rather chuſerh to ſpeak in the Furure, than in the Preſent 
Tenſe : Rather we ſhall be, than we arc, or kave been, becauſe the 
Work is only begun ; itdaily increaſeth more and more, until it 
comes to a full PerfeQtion in Heaven. 

'6 Knowing this, that our * old man r is || crucified 
with biz s, that the body of fin t might be deſtroyed «, 
that henceforth we ſhould not ſerve ſin w. * 


r By the old man is meant, That corrupt and polluted Nature 
which we derive from Adam the firſt Man, wid. Epheſ. 4.22.Col.3. 9, 
19. The O!dand New Man are Oppoſites ; as then the New Man is 


"Gal. 2. 
20. C5. 
24. & 6. 
4. 

- 1 Or, was 
crucified, 


the Image of Gearepauzed in us ; fo the Old Man is a deprayation of 


ROMAN S. 


Chap.) 


that Image of God, and an univerſal Pollution cf the whols \ 

s By Vertue of our Union with him, and by means of his ay. 
and Crucifixion, wid. Gal. 2. 20. t The Body of Sin is the ye _ 
thathe call'd before the Old Man. The Corrupt Nature is " "e. 
called the Body, chap.8. 13. Sometimes a Body of Death, pgs. 
24. and here the Body of Sin. "Tis indeed a meer maſ; and tun.” YL 
Sin; it is not one Sin, but al Sin Seminally. *Tig with Ref,.? 0 
this Body of Sin, that particular Luſts and Corruption; Re, Nc. 
Members, Col. 3. 5. # Weakened more and more, ti!] zi 
deſtroyed. w As we did before Regeneration ; and 15 they py 
do, who voluntarily commit it, Johm 8. 34, They gg ns. = 
aft Sin, bur are aQed by it, having as many Lords as Luſt mo 
3. Sec more of this wer. 16. ns 

7 For he that is dead is * | freed from fin 

s: He that is dead. i. e. To Sin, is freed fromit, nor on! " inx es 
ſpe& of the Guilt thereof, which ſence the margina] "re 14 
word ſeems to reſpe(t, bur aiſo ia regard of th: ſic; On. 
This agrees beſt with the Context ; Look as He chat jr deg; j was 
and diſcharg'd from the Authority of thoſe who had Domin;. ws 
ver him in his Life time; So it is with thoſe thar are a:ag wy". 
There 1s a Parallel Place, 1 Pe. 4. 1. Wa 

8 Now * it we be dcad with Chriſt, we belje 
we ſhall alſo iive with bim y. 

» 7.e. Tf we have Fellowſhip with Chriſt in his Death, we hay ; 
reaſon to believe we ſhall have Fe:ilowſhip with him al _ 
Reſurre&ion and Life, wid. wer. 5, Though Everlaſting be ng = 
cluded, yet a Spiritual Life 1s principally utended ; we ſhalt, 
live with Chriſt, as no more to return to dead works, The nc : 
words ſhew this to be the Sence. " 

9 Knowing z * that Chriit being raiſed from the dead «1, 
dyeta no more ; death hach no mor? dominion gy; i. 
him, 

z 9. 4. Of this you know you have an Example or Copy 
Chriſt himſelf; He fo Roſe again, as never more to cone yn 
the Power of Death. 

10 For in that he died, he diedinnto fin once 2; bu: jy 
that * he liveth, he livecth unto God 5. Tt 

a For as when he ated to Sin, i. e. Totake away fin, he 0s if 
but once. wid. Heb. 9.28. and 10. 10,14. 6 Bur when he ;06 
again from the dead, ke liveth with God tor ever an immoitil 64. 
lefs Life. By this Phraſe is expreſt that eternal and indiiloly;!- 
Union, which the Son hath with the Father. 

11 Likewiſec reckon ye aiſo your telves to be dead in. 
deed unto fin, but alive unto God || carough Jeſus Chriſt -0 
our ] ord . _ 

c Soweinlike manner muſt make account, that by vertye oft; ® 
Death, we are dead to Sin, and by vertue of his Reſurre&ion ;1; 
alive to God, and ſo alive as never to reſume our former courſes, gr 
return again to our former fins. d Or, in 7eſus Chriſt ow Lord, i. s, 
after the Similitude of Jefus Chriſt, who ſo /:wes as to die no more, 
Or elſe this Phraſe imports, thar Jeſus Chriſt is the roo: of our 
Spiritual Life ; even as the Cion lives in the Stock, ſo Believers are 
alive unto God in Jeſus Chriſt, receiving from him thit vertye 
whereby their ſpiritual Life is begun, maintained and perfeFted, 

'12 Let nor fin therefoie e reign f in your mort! 
body g, that you ſhould obey it in che lutts there. 
of h. 

e 9. d. Seeing this 1s the caſe, that you are dead ro Sin, baptiz:d 
into Chriſt, are planted together into the : likeneſs of his Death, 
&c. Therefore the rather hearkenro, and obey the following ex- 
hortation. By Sin he means the Sin or Corruption of our Nature, 
the ſame that before he called the Old Man, and the Boa) of Sin, 
There are remainders thereof in the Regenerate, in them 'tis moi- 
tified, but not eradicated. Therefore to them this Exhortation is 
not unneceſſary. f He doth norſfay, Let it not be or ceſide, but! 
it not reign or preſide ; let it not bear ſway or have: dominion in 
you ; let it not have the upper hand of the motions of the Spirit 
of God. g The Body (called here a moral or frail body) isput by 
a Synecdoche for the whole Man ; and he the rather makes men- 
tion of the Body, becauſe the parts and members thereof are the 
uſual Inſtruments of Sin. Therefore it follows in the next Verſe, 


a 


3 
3 . 


VE that *,7 


hor 
z; He fitly compares our bodily members to Tools that Artiice!s '? 


work, or Weapons that Soldiers fight withal; for as thole, 10 
theſe may be uſed well or ill, e. g. with the hand one man giveti 
an alms, another ſtealeth ; withthe tongue one man blelſeth, an0- 
ther curſeth, By members here we are not only to underſtand the 
parts of the Body, as the Hands, Eyes, Ears, &«c. but allo the 
Faculties of the Soul; as the Underſtanding, Will, Atte&100s,0% 
Theſe bear ſome proportion to the bodily members, as the Under- 
ſtanding to the Eye, &c. - All of them muſt be employed by us, #5 
Weapons to fight, not under the command of Satan for S$1n, but 
under the command of God for Righteouſneſs. & Theſe words 
contain a reaſon why we ſhould nor ſerve Sin and Satin, but be- 
queath and dedicate our ſelves to the ſervice of God becaule "= 
are indued with a Spiritual Life, after a Spiritual Death ; or HECa ; 
we have received ſo great a benefit as to be raiſed in Chriſt won 
the death and power of lin, 

For 


| Fl 


>h f 
ey aÞ, \ 
? Man 
Det! 
y lime 
Umes 
hap, », 
Mp of 
ped tg 
Calleg 
ſt it he 
yy ſtill 
Jt only 
Tz” 
}. 
*(: 
y in-re. ſal; 
Of the f (ri 
of It fed. 
ts freed, 
Ton 0. 


; 


0 Sn, 


VE that * 17 
«Il, 
we have 
0 in his 
NOT &x. 
| {hall ih 
IT Next 


e dead, * x 
} ivy 
[1 OVer 12. 


O 0 
ODy in 
e under 


Con iro 
Mules, or 
Lord, i, e, 
no more, 
7: of our 
levers are 
3t Vertue 
rteCed. 
THONE [ 


1 
S Tlg!he 


baptized 

1s Death, 

WING Che 

xr Nature, 

Jay of Sin, 

1 'L15 M01» 

)rtation 1$ 
de, butt 
Ninion in 
the Sptrit 
 isput by 
\kes men- 
}f are the 
ext Verſe, 
T hat you 
of the Its 
d and un- 
zdy alone, 
xecaule all 
d throug!? 


0 


14 your — 
CH your Tir 


0M ti8 46; 


Artificers 
thole, jo | 
1an giveti 
ſeth, an0- 
{ſtand the 
r allo the 
ions, 
1C Under- 
4 by us, #S 
r $1n, but 
eſc words 
2, but be- 
ecauſe we 
or becaule 
hiſt 20M 


"97 
14 LO! 


ap. YI. 


16 Know ye not p, that * tro whom ye yield your 
y } 


't turns the,heart and life of the Hearer into its own nature, as 


| JC rs now aſhamed? for the end of thoſe things 3s 
cath a, 


ROM 


[4 For ſin ſhall not have dominion over you /: for 


-o are not under the law, but under grace ». 
1 inthe 12. v. 1t was an Exhortation, but in thisit 1s a Promiſe 
vat tin {hall not re1gn 1N and over us. Rebel it may, but Reign 
+ ſhall not in the regenerate. It hath loſt its abſolute and uncon- 
ecouled poWere It fares with ſin in ſuch as with thoſe beaſts in 
man. 7. 12. who though their lives were prolonged for a Seaſon, 
;-4 their dominion taken away. It is an encouragement to fight, 
Chen we areſureof Victory. m He adds this as a reaſon of what 
\- had afſerted and promiſed, You are not under a Legal, but 
Goſpel Diſpentation ; ſo ſome expound the words. Grace is often 
put for the Goſpel, or you are not under the Old, but the New Co- 
"nant. The Law and Grace thus differ ; the one condemns the 
6inner, the other abſolves him ; the one requires perfe&, the other 
\ccepts ſincere Obedience: the one preſcribes what we muſt do, 
the other aſſiſts us in the doing of our duty : This laſt ſeems to be 
the genuine ſenſe. 9g. d. you may be ſure ſin ſhall have no domini- 
1» over you, for you are not under the Law, which forbids ſin, but 
vives no power againft it, . or which requires obedience, and gives 
-o ſtrength to perform it (like Egyptian Taskmaſters which required 
Bricks, but gave no Straw,) but under the Goſpel or Covenant of 
Grace, where lin is not only forbidden, but the ſinner is enabled to 
nft and overcome it. ©. But whit ſhall be ſaid of the Godly in 
the rimes of the Law ; were not they under Grace ? 4. They were, 
44. 15. 11. H*b. 4. 2. Bur not in the ſame degree. The Godly 
kid help and aſſiſtance under the Law, but they had it nor by the 
Lw, How Believers are ſaid not to be under the Law. wid. 
(2p, 7. 4+ 

15, What then* » ſhall we fin, * becauſe we are not 
:nder the law, but under grace 2 God forbid 0. 

s Doth it follow from hence that we are lawleſs, and may live 
x5 we lit? 09. d. No by no means, the premiſles afford no ſuch 
Concluſion ; though we are not under the curſe and rigour of the 
Law, yet we are under its dire&ions and diſcipline: The Goſpel 
:llows of ſin no more than the Law. The Apottle is careful both 
tre and elſewhere, to prevent licenciouſneſs, or the abuſe of 
Chriſtian Liberty. vid. Gal. 5. 13. 1 Pet. 2. 16. wid. v. 1, and the 
notes there, 


ſelves ſervants to obey, his ſervants ye are to whom 
ye obey ; Whether of {in unto death, or of obedience 
into Righreouſmeſs q 2? 

2 He refutesthe atorementioned cavil,, by a common Axiom , 
threvery one knows and apprehends. q Which will be rewarded 
with ct.1nal lite. But why doth he not ſay of obedience unto life ? 
thin the Autitheſis had been more plain and full. Becauſe though 
l., the cauſe of dearh, yet obedience is not the cauſe of life (as 
. ::,) Lut only the way to 1t, 

17 But God be thanked, that ye were the Servants 
of fn r 5 but ye have obeyed from the heart that F form 


of doctrine which was delivered you s. 

79 4d. But as for you, God be thanked, that though once you 
vere the Servants of ſin, viz. when you were ignorant and unre- 
rnerate, yet now you are freed from that bondage, and ſet at 
liberty from the power and dominion of ſin, s This Phraſe ex- 
pref:th the efficacy of Divine Do&rine in the hearts of Believers ; 
i changeth and faſhioneth their hearts according to its likeneſs, 
: Cor. 3. 18, Hence in James 1. 21. 'tis called an ingraffed word ; 


the tock doth the Cion that is ingraffed into ir. The Doctrine of 
tie Goſpel is the Mould, and the hearer is the metal, which 
when "tis melted and caſt into the Mould receives its form and 
houre, | x 

18 * Peing then mad- free fromſin * ye became the 


ſervants of rizhteouſneſs. 

ti, e, The ſervitude of fin, Having received a manumiſſion from 
that hard and evil Maſter, you have given up your ſelves to a bet- 
kr and more ingenugus !ervice. 

19 I ſpeak alle the manner of men, becauſe of 
the infirmicy of your fleſh « : For as 2» ye have yeilded 
tour members ſervants to uncleannels x and to iniquity 
into iniquity y 3 even ſo now yield your members 
rvants to righteouſneſs, unto holineſs. 

v9. d, T accommodate my ſelf to your capacity, becauſe of the 
weakneſs of your underſtand in ſpiritual things; therefore IT 
uſe this familiar ſimilitude of ſervice and freedom, that by theſe 
{cular and civil things you might the better underſtand ſuch as are 
ipuritual, wid. John 3. 12. w 4. d. The great thing that I 
G&lirc of you (and 'tis moſt reaſonable) is this, that you would be 
5 ſedulous and careful now to obey God,as you have formerly been 
t0 obey and ſerve fin ; to do good as you have been to do evil, 
« To fleſhly luſts which defile you. 7 5. e. Adding one fin toan- 
her, oc elſe by the former you may underſtand original, by the 
litter acual fin. He uſerh three words about the ſervice of Sin, 
and but two about the ſervice of God; wicked men take great 
pains tor Hell. Oh that we would take the ſame for Heaven. 

20 For when ye were the ſervants of fin, ye were 
lee + trom righteouſneſs &. 

2, 9. 4, When you ſerved ſin, you knew that God and Righte- 
oulnels had no whit of your ſervice, why then ſhould Sz have any 
0! your ſervice now when ye have delivered up your ſelves to 

ighteouſneſs or Godlinels, to be the obſervant followers thereof ? 
Why ſhould not ye now abſtain as ſtriftly from all Sin, as then ye 
Ud from all good. 


21 Whac fruit had ye then in thoſe things, whereof 


49. 4. And this will be much more equal and reaſonable, if you 


AN S. 


conſider, theſe three things » 
the remembrance of them. 


true or no, I appeal to your felves. 


the end everlaſting life b 


perceive a difference. For, 


then, 2. At your death you ſhall have evrlafing Life, 


Lord. 


Servants) is eternal Life, through Jeſus - Chri(t our Lord. 
word properly ſignifies /7&uals. 


Vice: afterward they gave them Moone 


4 


ſoever. 


bur that ir is the gracious or free Gift of God. 


Works. 
GH aPM. VI. 


but unto God, 1 


: 13. He 
Spirit, and groaneth under it, 14 
for deliverance already obtained, — 25. 


over a man 6b, as long as he liveth ? 


Law, becauſe that was dead to them, and they ro ir. 


ed to either, for both ate ſubje& to the aforementioned Law. 


husband e. 


Mat. 5. 32. 
marriage. 


her husband be dead , ſhe is free from that law fo thac 
ſhe is no adultreſs, though the be married to 2nother 
man, 


the dead, that we ſhould * bring forth fruit unto 


God h. 

f i.e. Ye are taken off from all hopes of Juſtification by ir, 
and from your confidence in obedience to it. Ga/. 2. 19. The Op- 
poſition ſeems to require that he ſhould have ſaid The Law is dead 
70 us, Burt theſe two Phraſes are much the ſame. 2. What Law 
doth he mean? 4. Not only the Ceremonial, but the Moral Law, 
for in that he inſtanceth,' v. 7. The moral Law is in force ſtill. Chri/t 
came to confirm , and not to deſtroy it : Bur Believers are freed 
from the malediQion, from the rigid exation, and from the 
irritation thereof. Of this laſt he ſpeaks, v. 8, 9. and fromir 
we are freed but in part. g #. e. By the Sacrifice of Chriſts Body 
Law, an the 


Val.-1L, 


| upon the Croſs ; thereby he — us from the 


tre ſente 


þ q. d. But now on the contrary being ſet at liberty from the ſer 
vice of Sin, and admitted to be the Servants of God, you plainly 
r. In your life time you increaſe in 
Grace and Holineſs; and that is no tmall fruit or Advantage. And 


c 9. d. Now therefore compare the Wages of both theſe ſervices 
together, and you ſhall eaſily fee which Matter 1s beſt to ſerve and 
obey ; the Wages that fin will pay you, in the end, 1s Death; bur ,'Qq, 
the reward that God will freely beilow upon you, (if you be his ,,,..:. 
d The aud fre: 
The Romans of old paid their ,-> ' 
Souldiers with Provition and Vituals in recompence ot their ler- ** 

y, bur i!] the old rerm was 


No Law hath power over us any longer than we live: but a Wife is fre? 
from the Dominion of her dead Husbarnd: We are dead to the Law ; 
Married to Chriſt, that we might not bring forth fruit unto Death, 
6. Tet is not the Law Sin; but it diſcovers 
Sin which elje appeareth not : And 1s holy, juſt and gaod, and ordain- 
ed unto Life: but through our Corruption worketh Sin and Death, 
deſcribeth the Combate between the Fleſh and 
24. Giveth thanks to God 


I Now ye not brethren, (for I ſpeak to them that 
know the law ) how that thelaw ahath dominion 


The Apoſtle having ſhewed in the former Chapter how Believers 
are freed trom the Dominion of Sin, he proceeds in this Chapter, 
to declare, that they are free alſo from the Yoak of the Mofaical 
This he il- 
luſtrates, and proceeds by the familiar Allegory of a Husband and 
his Wife : Look as a Wife is free from her Husband when he is dad 
and may then marry another, and be no Adultreſs; So Believers 
are dead to the Law, and are free to be Married to another, even 
to Chriſt, that is raiſed from the dead, that upon their happy 
Marriage, they may bring forth fruit unto God. @ By the Law 
here he means the Law of Wedlock, or the Law of Moſes about 
that matter, as appears by the inſtance given in the next verſe, 
b the word Man here is common to both Sexes, and may be apply- 


2 For c the woman which hath an husband, is bound 
by the law to her husband 4 ſo long as he liveth 2 but if 
the husband be dead, - ſhe is looſed from the Law cf her 


c He here exemplifies and illuftrates the foregoing aſſertion, 
d See a parallel place, 1 Cor. 7. 39. This is the general rule, yet 
there is an exception in the caſe of Fornication or Defertion. wid. 
1 Cor. 7. 15. e From the obligation of the Law of 


3 Sothen if while her husband liveth, ſhe be married 
to another man, ſhe ſhall be called an adultrefs: bur if 


3 
3. How death, ye erernal doarh ind 
damnation (unleſs pardoning Grace and mercy prevents it,) wi; 
be the certain conclution of them ; and whether rheſe rhings ar: 


22 But new being made free from fin, and become? 
ſervants to God, ye have your fruit unto holineſs, a:id 


Cl p. 


15. 


retained, and now it 1s uſed to fignitic any reward or ſtipend what- 
e By death here we muſt underſtand not only temporal, 
bur alſo and more eſpecially, eternal dearh, as appears by the oppo- 
fition it hath to eternal Life : This 1s the juſt and rrue hire of S:. 
f He doth not ſay that eternal life is the Wages of Righteouſneſs, 
He varies the Phraſe 
on purpoſe, to ſhew, that we attain not eternal Lite by our own 
merits, our own works or worthineſs, but by the Gf? vr Grace of 
God ; for which cauſe he alto addeth, through Jeſus Chriſt our Lord. vid. 
Aug. lib. de gratia & libers arvitrio, c. 9. Let the Papifts (it rhey 
can) reconcile this Text to their diſtinQtion of Mortal and Ven:ul 
Sins, and to their Doctrine of the meritoriouſieſs of good 


® Gals. 


22. 


| Chap. Vil 


How lictle fruit and farifa bt: 5n 
your former Sins have aForded you in the very tme of commits: 
them. 2. How nothing bur thame and forrow doth follow uno 


23 Forc * the waygcs dof fin is death e: but the * Cen 2. 
| gife of God f 25 eternal life, through Jelus Chiilt our '* 


= 
% 


gY IC: 155 


3 


2. 
Jarn.-4, 


4 Wherefore my brethren, ye alſo are become * * Cha.s.2. 
dead tothe law f by thebody of Chriſt g; that ye ſhould Gal 5.18. 


be || married to another, evey to him that is raiſed from || Or, #4! 
you may be 


to another. 


— 


"t 
I =. 
- 
-—» 26-= 


Toit are theta eget a” og ol ltr 


h antes FE 7 
vw FIDIOT S 


w- —_— 


nn HT TITS as 2" 01 
o PR 4445. wh _ 
y ; ws 
T Fd, a; ne at 
© "na ——_ - _m_— ———— Lok? 


© 4 


=O 3 TTY 
ys "tf 3 tf 
MW. 1#, 
Sh & 1 
v8" 
{ $1 14 
49 [ 
Rh 
PH 
Ms RTE. 

4 

EY 

Þ ; £ + 


Chap. VII. ROMANS. 


1 
Ch \ 
al), | 


at 


£75; 
i er Rd org A Eno. 
= : oF 3 "$0256 '* Vn Wit; ny noo . 
mui — Ca - "_ 
. 6 


C 


y 
: 
x 
1 
, 4 
N 
F 
* 
- 
T'> 
4 
; 
% 
[ 
: by 
, 
| 
4 - 
' 
: 
Ts 
) 
: 
: + 
, 
K T6 
. : © q 
bl 7 : 
by 
74 
. y” 
b] FT, 
4 
s . 
*. 
4 1 
> % 4&5 
; b& 
CET 
t 
z t 
iY 


——— 

gn RH 

NE - 
—_ 


= AG. 
A a. 3 
Bao, 


a+ 


o- « 

* _ nd LY « 
_—_— . 2 
0s <A ge 


ſence before-mentioned. þ 7. e, Fruits of Holineſs and good 
Works, to the Glory and Praiie of God. : 

5 Eor i wien we were inthe fleſh &, the T motions 
of fins which were by the law /, did work 1n our mem- 
bers: to bring forth fruit unto death ». 

i n 4. For bringing forth of which Fruit unto God, we have now 
better helps than formerly we had; or we are in much better Cir- 
cumſtince than formerly we were: And fo he proceeds to thew 
how our preſent State doth differ from the former. + 7. e. In 
our Carnal Fleſhly State, before we were Regenerated, or under 
the Carnal Paxdzgogy of the Law ; for in the next Verle he ſpeaks 
of our being nw delivered from the Law. | i. e The corrupt Inclinati- 
ons to Sin, which are drawn forth by the Law, as ill Vapours are 
12:{ed our of a Dunghil by the Sun, or which are irritated by the 
L.1w ; of which by and by. m wid. c. 6. 13,16. % 2. e. Such 111 
Fruit as ends in Death, c. 6. 21. 

& Bui now o we are delive:ed from the law p, [| that 
bing dead.wherein we were held gz that we ſhould ſerve 
in * newneſs of {piritz,and not z» the oldneſsof theletter -. 

0 3. e. Being brought out of our Feſhly State. p See the Notes 
on-wer. 4. q4 The Relative is not in the Greek Text,bur it 15 welliup- 
plied to 31] up the Sence. The Antecedent mult be eirher Sin or the 
Law ; by both of theſe we were held or detained whilft Unregene- 
rate : But now neither of theſe have any power to hold us with. 
Some read it, Ye being dead, the Old Man of which he j pake in the 
foregoing Chapter. » z. e. That we ſhould ſerve God or Jetus Chriit 
our New Hu:band in true Holineſs, which is wrought in us by the 
renewins of the Spirir; or ſerve him in a new Spiritual manner. 
5 i.e. Not in an outward and ceremonial manner, according to the 
Letter of the Law; which Service or way of Worſhip, 1s now Anti- 
quatcd, and grown out of date, The word Olanes in{inuates the 
aboliting theroot,, becauſe of infuthciency, Heb. 8. 13. _ 

0 


- G1.ic that we fay then 2 Is the law im? 
ford; Nay. If had notknown fin, but by the Law « : 
fo; | bad not known | luſt 2», except the law had faid, 

-* Thcu fſhait noticover wx. 

{ Here is another Anticipation of an Obje&ion, which might 
ail: tom what the Apoſtle had ſaid, wer. 5. that Siz was power- 
ful in us by rhe Law, Some might Objc& and ſay, That the Law 
« then was $in. 7. ec. That it was the casſ{c of jt, and a fa&for for 
ic. To this he Anſwers, by his uſual Note of Dcteſtation, 
Gd ſerbid. u 7, e. I had nt known it ſo clearly and eijtecually ; 
ſo as to humble and drive me to Chriſt. For otherwiſe , Nature 
it {elf reacherh a difference of good and evil in many things. 
He adds this as a Reaſon why the Law cannot be the cauſe of Sin, 
becauſe it diſcovers and reproves Sin; it dete&s and damns 1t ; 
and that it fo doth, he proves from his own Experience. w 7z.e. 
1 had not kyown it to be Sin. By Left here ſome underſtand, that 
concupiſcence, whichthe Schoolmen call unform'd concupsſcence, which 
hath not the conſent of the Will: For the concupiſcence to which 
we Conſent, the Heathens themſelves know to be Sinful; but 
that which hath not the Conſent of the Will, or the firſt motions 
zo Sin, they held to be no Sin, asneith-r did the Phariſees, amongſt 
whom Par lived ; nor do the Papiſts to this very day. Some by 
Luft do underſtand original Sin, which is the Fountain from whence 
all particular Les do How ; the hot Furnace from which all ſinf-4 
Moons, as fo many Sparks, do continually Ariſe : This is called 
Luft likewiſe, in Jam. 1. 14. and this is forbidden in every Com- 
mandment ; for where any Sin is prohibited, there the Root alſo is 
prohibired ; bur more particularly it is forbidden in the Tenth Com- 
manameant, x Some underſtand the Law in general ; but the Arti- 
cle ue'd in the Greek ſeems to reſtrain it to a particular Precepr, Be- 
ſides, they are the very words of the Tenth Commanamen:. Bur, 
Why doth he not mention the ObjeRQs thar are ſpecified in that 
Commanament ; as Thy Neighbours Houſe, Wife, &c? The Anſwer is, 
That that was not Material ; for the Apoſtle ſpeaking of inward 
Concupiſcence, which without the Law is latent and undiſcovered ; 
It was enough to name the ſu it ſelf, ſeeing the Objetts abour which 
it is Converſant arc of all forts, and can hardly be numbred. 

S ut * fin ytaking || occation by the commandment z, 
wrought inme all manner of concupiſcence a, for * with 
out the jaw fin b was dead c 

x z. e. The Corruption of our Nature, the depraved Bent and 
Biaſs of the Seal, called before Luft, z i.e. Being ſtirr'd up or 
drawn forth by the Prohibition of the Law, The Law did not 
prop.rly give occafion, but ſm took it. The Law (as before) is not 
the cauſ- of fn, tho' by accident ir 1s the occaſion of it. In a 
Drop. it is notthe Drink that is to be blamed for increaſing the Diſ- 
ene, bur the 11] habit of Body. Such is the depravedneſs of Man's 
Niue, that the things which are Forbidden, are the more deſired : 
The more the Law would dam up the Torrent of ſinful Luffs, the 
higher do they ſwell. The Law was given to reſtrain fin, but through 
Gur Corrupz:on it falls out contrarily. The Law inhibiting ſin, and not 
g1ving Power to avoid it, Our impetuous Lufts take occaſion or ad- 
_ vantage from thence the more eager]y to purſue it. # 2. e. Inordi- 
nate Afectrons, and Inclinations of all forts. b i. e. Without the 
knowlenge of rhe Law. cz. e, Comparatively aead. Sinhath not 
/o much Power, cither to Territie the Conſcience, or to ſtir up inor- 
dipat- 4fefions ; it is like a fleepy Lyon that ſtirs not. 

9 For 1 was alive without the Jaw once 4 ; but when 
the commandment came e, finreviv'd f, and] died 7. 

a 75 d. Take me if you pleaſe for an Inſtance. Before I knew 
the Lew aright, and underſtood the divine and ſpiritual Meaning 
ot it; or whiltthe Law ſtood afar off, and was not brought home 
to my Conſcience; I was alive, that is, in my own Conceit. I 
chought my ſelf in as good condition as any Man living. My Con- 
ference never gave me any Trouble. So it was with me ONCe, or 
heretofore, when I was a Phariſee, or in an unregencrate State, 
e 7, e. When it came nearer to my Conſcience : when I came to know 
and underſtand the Spiritual meaning and extent of it, that it 
condemned ſinful Lufts, Afe&ions, and Inclinations, fi. 6, Its Sin- 


Sinfulneſs and Guilt appear'd ; and T had alively Senſe 
printed upon my Sou! : Or my Corruptions began to gather H.. 
and ſeenr'd, as 1t were,. to receive new Vigor and Life. * 
my own Opinion and Feeling. I felt my Conſcience dead! 
ed. I was convinced I was in a State of Death anq » 
I loſt the Confidence I formerly had of my Good Efare. 
10 And the commandment * which was v7 
life I found ro be unto death þ. 

hq. . So it came to pals, that the Commandment which 
asin'd to be a Rule of Zife; and if I could have kept it, a ys,y. c 
Life alſo. chap. 10. 5. Gal. 3. 12, I found it to be to me (ron I 
my Corruption and Tranſgreſſion) an occaſion of Degth - Mes, 
me over to Puniſhment, and ſo by Accident it tendeth t- Fs + 
Some by Life and Death, here do underſtand Peace and Percy; By 
of Spirit. i 

11 For ſintaking occaſion; by the commandment q 
ceived me &, and by it flew me /. 

7 See the Notes on wer. 8. & 5.e. Seduced and drew mc aſd. 
Heb, 3. 13. James 1. 14. Li, e. Tt drove me into Defpai, £ 
delivered me over to Death and Damnation, and made me Oh; 
ous thereunto. 

12 Wherefore mz * the law # is holy, and the 
mandment o holv, and juſt, and good ». - | 

» And ſo the ObjeGQion wer. 7. was a groundlefſs Objc&ign.; 1 4 
though the Law were the occaſion of Sin, or verc made advintio. 
of by Sin, as ver. 8. yet it was not th: Cauſe of ir, chit on 1 
hands is acknowledg'd to be Holy, &c. » The 7.aw iy all ti; 
Branches of it. - o Particularly the Preceptive part of the Law, ;x 
every particular Precept. p The three Epithers here given the 135 
of God, may be thus diſtinguiſhed : "Tis Holy in reſpeG of the (.. 
remonaal Part ; 'tis Juf? in reſpe&t of the Judicial Part; and G; 
in reſpe& of the Moral Part of it. Or elſe the Law is Holy, ;;- 
teacheth usour Duty unto God : Juſt, as it ſheweth us our Ducr ty 
our Neighbour : Good, in regard of the Effect and End ; as it wii, 
Gooaneſs in the Obſerver thercof, and is Conducive to lis rempoy 
and eternal Good. : TEs 

12 Was then that which 1s good, made Each uny 
me? God forbid q. Pur fin that it mignc appear li, 
workinz death in me, by that which is good, » ; that ſy 
by the commandment might become exceeding infuls. 

q Another Anticipation. The Apoſtle denics, that thu p; 
Law was in its own nature deadly, or the cauſe of Death to hin; 
the Fault was not in the Law, but in his own dcpraved Nay, 
But the plain Caſc is this that follows. r "That Si», that ſo jt mjgh; 
appearevery way like it felf, wrought Dearh it him by occ:liong 
that Law, which yet in its ſelf is Holy, Juſt, and Good, ; $9; 
hereupon Sin,which in the time of his Ignorance and Unregenericy, 
ſeem'd not worthy of any Notice, appear'd to be exceeding F:/ ant 
Sinful. Sin is ſo Evil, that he can't call it by a worſe Name chin 
its own. Hierom thinketh, That the Apoſtle h-re commits Sole 
ciſm by joyning an Adjefive of the Maſculine Gender, with 
Subſtantive of the Feminine ; But Beza and Eraſmus have obſerved, 
Thar this 1s uſual in the Attick DialeF, See the like, cha), 1, 5, 
Some read Sinner for Sinjsl, and make the Apoſtle to ſpeik of Sin 
as of a certain Perſon; and therefore all along, the Contcxr, $ 
is ſaid to Work, to be Dead, to Revive, to Deceive, to Kill, &: 
which is properly attributed to Perſons, and not to things. 

14 For we know that the law is Spiritual 7: but Iam 
carnal «, fold under fin ». 

t He goes onto clear the Law and excuſe it, giving it another 
Commendation, that it is Spiritual. 7. e. It requires ſuch Obedi 
ence as is not only outward, but Inward and Spiritual: It forbids 
Spiritual as well as Fleſbly Sins. Read Chriſt's Expoſition of it, i 
the fifth of St. Matthew, u 3, e. In Part, becauſe of the Remainder 
of Siz, and of the Fleſh, that are ſtill in me ; in reſpeC& of which, 
thoſe who are Regenerated are faid to be Carnal, Compr: 
1 Cor, 1.2, with 1 Cor. 3. 1. w He did not AQtively fell himllt 
to /in, or to commit fs, which is __ Ahab. 1 King. 21. 
25. and of the Idolatrous 1/-aelites 2 Wing. gg 7. 17. He was 18! 
Sins Servant or Slave ; but many-times he was Sins captive agzun 
his Will, vid. wer. 23. Againſt his Wil and Conſent, he wis fl 
ſubje& to the violent Luſts and Aſſaults of Sin; and nocable wholy 
to free himſelf: Though he always made ſtout Reſiſtance, 5 
many times he was overcome. Hirherto the Apoſcle hath (pox: 
of the Power of the Law and Sin, in unregenerate Perlans ; evenss 
he himſelf had Experienced, whilſt he was yet in ſuch a 5 
But now he cometh to ſpeak of himſelf, as he then was; endro 
declare what Power the Remainders of Sinful Fleſh had till in hin 
though Regenerated; and in part Renewed. That the follovils 
part of this Chapter is to be Apply'd to a Regenerate Fer 
is evident, Becauſe the Apoſtle (tpeaking of himſc/t in ts 
former Verſes) uſeth the Prerer Perfett Tenſe, or ſpeaketh of tht 
which was Paſt; but here he changeth the Tenſe and ſpeaketi: 
the Preſent Time. From the ſeventh werſe to the fourteen's, he tl 
us how it had been with him formerly ; and then from th. owe 
reenth verſe to the end, he relates how it was with him now ; I " 
ſo and ſo, 7amthus and thus. The changing of the Ten? and » 
doth plainly argue a Change in the Perſon. They chat Jiſt ro . 
farther ſatisfied in this Poinr, may find it fully Diſcuſſed in out 
own Language, by Mr. Anthony Burgeſs, in his Excelient DIR 
of Original Sin, Part. 4. c. 3, and by Dr. Wille, in his Hexap'®, |. 
Locum ; and they that underſtand the Latine Tongue, may i R 
Argued pro and con, in Synopſ. Critic, &c. and by 4% 
Rerrattat, co. 23.1ib. 5. contra Julian, c. 11. fa 

i5 For that which 1 do x, .[ | allow not Fr © 
what I would, that do I not; but what } hate, 
do I 2, 

x i. e. What I do contrary to the Command 
Greek "tis I Know not. q. d. Nany times I am | 
taken, not knowing or conlidering what 1 av: ar 
1 know nor, his meaning is (as our Tranſition renders it 


thereof in, 
$1.e Tn 
/ WOung.. 
amng: i; 


me «1, 


) 


\, 


>] 
w 


» Or 


10X(s 


« 


rh14 


of God. 36 ta 
urpriz'd and 0” 
Or when 81)? 
) 1 49 

UL 


Ian V haps VII. 


f in. or approve me. So the word 1s uſed, Mat. 7. 23. & alib-, q. a. 
Head Even now 1A MY Converted and Regenerate Stare, I am many times 
i greatly Divided, and feel a Strife or Combate in my ſelf; ſo that 
ound. the good 1 world do upon the \/9;ioms of Gods Spirit in me, 1 do not; 
18:i;y and the Evil that 1 hate, and am utterly averſe to ſo faras 1 am 


ed 0 © [« 
v 


* 
\ 


NAS ore Etgh 


eans of 11 1 


rough 16 If then { do that which T would not, I conſeor 
Death unto the law that zt is good a. | 
wbatin 2 This very thing 1s an Argument, that the Law is ſuch as I 
| have before Alſerted, wer. 12, 14 This ſhews my Conſent to the 
vt do. Holineſs and Goodneſs of the Law : I Vote with it, and for it, 
: 5 the only Rule of Right, or Righteouſneſs. 
wo” 17 Now then, it is no {| more | that do it b, but fin 
Dain, & thar dwelleth in me c. 
Dbnoxs b 7. e. It 1s not I as Spiritual or regewed, tis not my whole 
ſelf, bur *ris Sin that dwelleth in me. «© That inhabits in me as a 
> CON troubleſome Inmare, that I can't get rid of; that will not our, fo 
| Jong as the Houſe ſtands; as the fretting Leproſy in the Walls of a 
SPS... Houſe would nor out, till the Houſe it ſelf were Demoliſhed, Ir 
/i4 is ſuch an Inhabitant, as 1s never from Home; it is not in us as a 
git. Stranger for a Seaſon, but it makes its conſtant . 4bode with us. 
"x i, 15 For I know, that ”.in me, chat 4s, mn my Beth cf 
Law, an! 1. dwclleth no || good thing e: for to will is || preſent with 
\ the Liz {9 me f, but how ro periorm that which is good, T find 
pry " not g- 
wy ” : d ji, e. In my Fleſhly Part, or my Nature in and of its {e]f. 
RE e No Goodneis at all, or no ſpiritual G»od. f i, e. Ican ſo long 
: Duty " 5 and ſo far as I follow the Motions of Goas Spirit, Will that which i; 
<A good ; but how to perform the good, that T would, 1 find no Power or 
tempor.) Might, at leaſt ro perform it in that manner that I deſire. g The 
a meaning is not that he never did the Good he deſired ; but it often 


pear lin, 
. 


; tat (in 


{infuls. which I wou'd not, that I do. 
t the His 20 Now it 1 do thar I wonid not, it is no more I] 
— hum; that do ie, but ſin that dwelleth in me h. 
\ IS h Theſe two Verſes are a Repetition of what he had ſaid, wer, 
THEE 15,17. Every New Man is two Men; There is in him an 1, and an 1. 
—_— The Apoſtle in his unregenerated State, eould make no ſuch Di 

begs” ie Apoſtle in his unregenerated State, eould make no ſuch Di- 


regenericy, 
ng Fu! and 
Name chan 
Mits a Sol 
der, with 1 
re obſerved, 
chad. 1. 2. 
{ oh 

ſpeik Ot Vit, 
Yonrext, Sh, 

I 6p 
,t0 Ki, Wes 


' . : det >: A 
ns. Powerful and Imperious, in its Commands and DiQtates, thar we 
- but lam be much ado, the beſt of us, to reliſt it, and ſhake off its Yoke. 


ng it anothe! 
ſuch Obed- 
il: It forbids 
ion of it, 10 
e Remainder 
e& of which, 
/, Comp: 
ly ſell himſelt 
King. 21. 

He was 10! 
captive agan 
t, he was It 
oc able wholly 
Teſiſtance, Jt 
le hath ſpokal 
r{ans ; Evens 
n ſuch 2 $4. 
n was; andl0 


\ad till in hin 


Regenerated, that I do. See a parallel Place, Gal. 5. 17. z He 
Joth not {peak here ſo much of outward Actions, as of inward 
Motions and fe ions ; He doth not ſpeak of groſs Sins, as Drunken- 
neſs, Uncieanneſs, &c. bur of ſuch Inftirmities, as flow from the 
ollured Nature; and fiom which we can never be throughly 
Cleanſed in this Life. 


ſo tell out ; he begin many good zhings, but he could not go thorough 
ſtitch with them. 
19 For the good that I would, I do not : but the evi; 


ſin&tion as now he doth, 

21 1 tind then a law z, that when I would do good 
evilis preſent with me &. 

i This Verſe hath greatly vexed Fnterpreters. The Apoſtle ſpeak- 
ng ſimply and abſtratedly of a Law; The Queſtion is, What 
Law he meas © Some take the word unproperly, for a Decree or Con- 
ation, which was impoſed upon him, and rowhich he was neceſfari- 
Iv ſubje& ; -that when he would do good, evil ſhould be preſent with 
iz, Others by Law, here do underſtand the Law of Sin; of which 
be ſpeiks afterwards, wer. 23. 25, Sin 1s like a Law, and fo 


9 8. I find by ſad experience ſuch a forcible Power in Sin. That 
vin 1 would do goed, I am hindred, and can't do it fo freely and 
fully as I deſire. Others by Law, bere do underſtand the Law of 
Gd: And thoſe that io underſtand it, have given no lefs, than 
Eiz7e Interpretations to make the Grammatical Connexion ; the 
b:[t is of thoſe that ſay the Prepolition 2], is underſtood, a fre- 
quent E!lzp/is in the Greek Tongue (vid James 1. 25.) and then the 
vence 1s this ; I find that when according to the Law or Command 
if Grd, I would do goed, <wvil 15 preſent with me. k Another Pc11- 
piralis of Original 8&7, of waich there are many in this Chapter. 
Juſt now jr was the Sin that dwelleth inns, and here it is the Evil 
| flat is preſent with us: Ir inheres and adheres, or hangs upon us 
continually, Ir iS Aajacent, ſo the Greet Word ſignihes, and al- 
Ways at hand ; we carry it about with us at all times, and into all 
Places whitherſoever we go, it follows us; or as itis here, in our 
doing of Good it is a very great Impediment to us. 
22 For || 1 delight 1n the law of God! after * the in- 
Ward man m. | 
{ This ſhews yer more expreſly that the Apoſtle ſpeaketh in the 
' Perſon of a Regenerate May, or of himſelf as Regenerazte, Cer- 
| fanly to delight in the Law of God is an inſeparable property of 
uch 2 one, vid. Pſal. 1.2. and 119. 77, 111. m7 7, e. "The New 
dan or Regenerate Part within me: This is called the Hidden Mar 


7 ihe Heart, wid, Chzp. 2. 29. 2 Cer. 4.15, 1 Pet. 3.4. 


mm NOW 3 «tothe law of jin p. which is in my members. 


1e Tenſe and TW 
ev that Jiſt 10 
Diſcuſied in out 
client Piſcou# 
1 his Hexap'Þ 
gue, may wy : 
by Ang. 4: 


the 


Ommangi 


membcy . : . 
"pate and the L aw in he mind, 1s the ſame that is called 
prit, Gal, 5. 175. Theſe two Laws and Principles are in a 


w not}: for Oo perſons, and are dire&ly contrary to one another : hence 
] hate wo -- dreſy 5 Continual warring and combating betwixt them, as is ex- 
of Ci . 
If , 5.0 11 both theſe places, as alſo in James 4. t. 


m Draving and hurrying me to the commiſſion of S1 

Not 071+? will and conſent. He purſues the metaphor, the Feſh 
t only War in 

"MM tuccels 
0]. I]. 


lo 
f God. ) In t% 
2d. ans 6” 
” 1 


'Or whe" 2 F 
"IS. *11F 
enders 8) 19% 


m 23 Put I {co another iaw = in my members, warring 
> init the law of my mind, and bringing me into captivi- 


8 1 6. A Law quite different from the Law of God mentioned in 
" :0regoing Verſe. By the Law in the \!embers underſtand na- 
Wal Corruption, which like a Law Commandeth and Inclineth by 
"Murewards and puniſhments ; and by the Law in :he mind un- 
ſtand a principle of Grace, which isa Law as well as the other, 
ng and inclining to that which is good, The Law in the 


57 6 $2. 88; 


Fleſh 


Il re- 


Wo. ou 


ROMANS. 


- 


in the room of the relative, ſee Gen. 9. 16 and alibi, The Law in 
the members, and the Law of Sm 1n the members, 1s the ſame. 

24 O Wretched man that } an 7, who taail deliver me r 
from |! the bodv of this death « ? 

7 The word ignifies one wearied out with continual combares. 4.4; of 
r It is not the voice of one detponding or doubting, but of one 42h. 
breathing and panting 1frer dejiver:nce ; the like patherical ex- 
clamations are frequent. wid. Pſai. 55. 6, Ons calls this verſe, 
Gemitus Sanfiorum, the Groan of the Goalzy, 5 Or, from this Body of 
Deazh, or by an Aebraiſm, from this dead Body, this carcaſe of 
Sin to which I am inſeparably taſtned,as noyſome every whitto my 
Soul as a dead carcaſs to my S-2ſc:. This is another circumlocuti- 
on or denomination of Original 3x. chav. 6. 6- "tis called the Padv 
of Sin, and here the Boaz of death : it tends and binds over to death. 

25 I thank God?z thiouzh joins Chritt our Lord - So 
then, with the mind 1 my fe! ferve the Law of Gd ; 
but with the fleſh. the Jaw cf tin ww. | 

£ Who hath already d-livered me from-the ſlavery and dominion 
of Sin ſo that though it war agazaft me, I fill refit it, and by 
the firengrh of Ch:ifi, do frequently overcome it. 1 Cr. 15, - <5 
A This is the concluiion the :Apoltle maketh of this -XPeriment 4 
diſcourſe. w. 9. 4. So far as I am renewcd, I yield Obedience to 
the Law of Gd; and fo fir as } :m unregenzrate, T obey hs 
dictares and Suggeſtions of the [aw of Sim. Objeff. No ——— 
ſerve two contiary Maſters, A. Th: Apoſtle did nor ferve theih 
two in the ſame part, or the fame rerewed facuiry ; nor did ke do 
it at the fame time ordinwily ; and {or the mot part he ſerved rhe 
Law of Ged, though ſome times through che power of Temptation 
and indwelling corruption, he wis enforced acainſt his (#47 ©: 
ſerve the Law of Sin, b 


CRAP. VIE. 


The Apoſtle's Inference ; th:r2 ir no Condemnation to thoſe who avs 1+; 
Chriſt : and who live according to the Spirit : being delivered from 
ſin, and Death, cndued with a principle of Life: united to C:yiP : 
and Sons of God: of ers ihe Spirit brareth wi*rncſs, 136, Toint- 
heirs with Chriſt to Suffer with him : but alſo to be g'orifid with him : 


}£ which glorious delivirance the whole Creation lovneth for, and thiy 


themſelvcs harve the hops therenf: and hope ts of things not preſent, 
but with patience to be waited for 19,—25. The Aſitancs of the 
Holy Ghoſt in Prayer, £6, 27. Tine End of Belicwers and 2! the moans 
thereto decreed by God, 23—;o Our Glerying in God througy Chriſt x 
through whom we jhall overcome all things. 31— 39. 


Here is therefore now a no condemnation 6 to them 
which are in Chriſt Jeſus c, who {| walk not aker || Or, 7? 


the Fleſh, bur after the Spi:ir d. _ #: 
a Seeing things are ſo as I have ſaid; ſince Believers do nat aJ- © yy ; 
low themſelves in Sin, chap. 7. 15. and are in part dclivered £9”: 


from it, as v. 25. therefore it foilows 1s 'tis here. 6 Or, no one 
Condemnation, He doth nor fay there is 10 matter of Cond-1923tton, 

or nothing damnablein them that are in Chtit there's enough and 
enough of that; buthe ſivs, there is no attua! Cond wmanation. rofuct 

vid, Fohu 3. 18. and 5. 24 There isa Meichs in the words, mcre 

1s underſtood than is expreſt; he means, rhar Juſtiticatien and 
eternal Salvation is the portion of ſuch. The poſitive is includes! 

in the negative; it is Gods Cord-mnarion only from which ſuc 5 

are in Chriſtare exempted ; they are neverthelels condemned. and 
cenſured by men, and ſometimes by th-ir own Conſciences roo. 

c So we fill it up, butin the Original "cis only ro tim in Ch4rif 
Jeſus. The Phrate imports, that there is a Myſtical and Spiritual 
Union betwixr Chriſt and Believers. This is fomeruncs exvretied 

by Chriſts being inthem, Y-»ſe 10 _ 2 Cor. 13. 5, Col. 1. 17. and 

here by their being in Chriſt, See 1 Cor. 1,30 1 john «&, 20; 
Chriſt is in Believers by his Spirit, and Believers are in Chriſt by 
Faith. 4 This Clauſe deſcribes th: Perſons who are united to Chriſt, 

or who are exempted from Cerd:mna: on. 'I hey are ſuch as walk nor, 

&c. By Fleſh underſtand the corrupt nature that is in man. wid. 

chap. 7. 18, 25. John 3. 6. Gal. 5. 17. to walk after it, is to be 

led and guided by the motions of it That is, it is not their Prin- 

ciple and Guide, there is another Nature or Principlc in them by 
which they are guided and aGted; and what that is, the nezr 
words tel] you. By the Spirir ſome underſtand the Perſon of the 
Spirit, others the Grace of the Spirit, the New or Divine Nature 

(as it is called) which is implanted in the Soul, in th: work of Re- 
generation: This is called the Spirit. Mar. 26. 41. John 3.6. Gal. 5. 17. 

To walk after the Spirir, is to be led and guided by the counſels 

and motions thereof. Ir is to regulate and order the whole con- 
verſation according to the rule of the New Creature, or according 

to the line and ſquire of God's Word and Spirit. You have 

the ſame Phraſe, Gal. 5.16. 25. To walk aftcr the Spiric, is not 

only now and then to have ſome good Motions,or ro do ſome good 
aCtions, but 'ris to perſevere and go forward therein ; walking is a 
continued and progreflive motion. The connexion of theſe two 
ſhews that Negative Holineſs is not enough ; we muſt not only 
abſtain from evil, but do good. 

2 For * the law of the Spirit of lite e in Chriſt Je- « John 8 
ſus f, hath made me free from the law of lin g and 35. 
death þ, Chap 6. 
e Some underſtand hereby the DoQrine of the Goſpel, which is 15- 22 
called rhe Law of the Spiris of Life, becauſe it is the Miniſtry Gal. 5. 1. 
of the Spirit and of Life. Others underſtand the Efficacy and 
Power of that Grace and Holineſs, wherewith rhe living and quick- 

ning Spirit of God hath filled the Human ature of Chritt. Orhers 
rather underſtand theSpirit as regenerating and workingtheNew and 
Heavenly Life in the Soul, with great Power and Ethcazy, f. 4. e 
Whith was poured out upon him, and doth till relide in him af- 


doth 


tke regenerate, but many times 1t overcomes and 
vid. wer, 15.p.4.c, ro its ſelf, The antecedent is pur 


ter a very eminent manner, vid. ja, Ir. 2. Luke 4. 1, or, in Chriſt 
Jeſus, is as much as by Chriſt jeſus; "tis he that gives and conveys 
this Spirit, how, when and tro whom he pleaſerh, g By /# here 
TEE 2 he 


Chap. VIIT 


ii Or, £555 


0% 


FT 
( \Þ 
SOT! - 
: 
\ Fi 
n ; j 
? 412 "4 


Chap. VIII. 
he aims chiefly at Orignal $/n.; he doth not ſay, that thoſe who 
are in Chriſt are ſimply and abiojutely delivered from Sin, but 
from the Law of Sin; i.e. the Power, Dominion, and Tyranny 
thereof + i. e. From $: that is deadly, or of a deadly Nature, 
asthe Spirit of Life is the living Spirit ; ſo Sin end Death is no 
more, {ay ſome, than deadly Sin. Others take death to be diſtint 
from Sin, and think he ſpeaks of a double deliverance : And then 
by Dear, they underſtand eternal or the ſecond dearth ; wid. Rev. 
20. 6, Theſcnceof the whole is this: That the mighty power 
of the renewing and quickening ſpirit, did free the Apoſtle, and 
doth free all Believers from the command and rule of Sin, ſo*that 
ir doth not reign over them, as formerly it did ; and being thus 
freed from the power of*$in, they are alſo freed from the power 
of Death and eternal Condemnation. So it ſeems as a proof of the tore- 
going propolition, That there is no Condemmation to rhem, QC. 

3 tor what the law || could not do 7 |, in chat 1t was 
weak through the fleſh k, God ſending his own Son /, in 
the likeneſs of ſinful fleſh 7, and {| forſin », condemned 


lin in the fleſho; | 2 
In this Verſe isa farther proof of the main propoſition in wv. 1. 
There are two things in fin that may indanger us as to Condemnation, 
the Power and Guilt of it. As to the freeing us trom the former, 
viz. The power of ſin, of that he had ſpoken in the foregoing 
verſe ; as to taking. away the Guilt of Sn, of that he ſpeaks in 
this verſe. # Bythe Law here he means the moral Law, the Righ- 
reouſneſs whereof is to be fulfill'd in us, v. 4 What is it the 
Law cannot do? there are ſeveral anſwers : bur this is principally 
' meant, ir cannot juſtific us before God, It can condemn us, but 
it cannot exempt us from Condemnation, vid. As 13. 38, 39. 
Gal. 3.21. Hb. 7.18. & By Fleſh, as before, we muſt underſtand 
the corrupt Nature ; that 1s, every man ſince the Fall. This is 
chat which puts a weakneſs and inability upon the Law. The um- 
pctency of the Law 1s not from its ſelf, bur from the condition 
of the Subjc& with whom ir hath to do. The Law is weak to 
us, becauſe we are weak to it: The Sun cannot give light to a 
blind eye, not from any 1mporency in its ſelf, bur meerly from 
the incopaciry of the ſubjeCt it thines upon. / To juſtificand ſave 
fil'en Man, was impoſſible for the Law to do ; therefore God 
will tind out another way, that thall do it effettually. What his 
own Law cannot do, his own Sox can; and therefore him he will 
ſend. m 7. e. Such fleſh as fin hath made ir now to be, ſubject to 
many infirmities and weaknetles. Fleſh in this clauſe carries quite 
another ſence, than it didin the firſt verſe ; and in the former part 
of this verſe, than it doth in the following verſe ; there it is taken 
orally for the corrupt Nature of Man, here phyſically for the hu- 
mane Nature of Chriſt. The word likeneſs is to be linked, not 
with Fleſh, but with ſinful Fleſh ; he had true and real Fleſh, but 
ke had only the appearance and likeneſs of ſinful Fleſh, wid. 2 Cor. 
5.21. & 4.15. Hb. 7. 26. 1 Pet. 1. 19, n Either this clauſe is 
to be joined ro what goes before, and then the ſenſe is, That God 
ſent his Son in the likeneſs of ſinful Fleſh, that he might take 'a« 
way Sin, Orellfeit is joined to what follows, and then there is 
an ellipſis in it; Something 1s cur off, or left out, which muſt be 
underſtood. The margent of our Common Bibles inſert the 
word Sacrifice, q d by a Sacrifice for fin, or by a Sin offering he 
conde' ned Sin, &c. This eiliplis 1s uſual in Scripture, Iſa. 53. 10. 
When thou ſhalt make his Soul jim ; thatis, (as our Tranſlation renders 
it) an Offering for Sin, Fzck. 45. 19. The Prieſt ſhall take of the 
Blood of the Sin, we read it of the Sin offering. See the like in 
. Hoſ. 4 8. 2 Cor. 5. 21, Heb. 109.6. o The Syriack reads it, in his 
Fl:ſh. The meaning is, That God ſeverely puniſhed Sin, and in- 
flicied the curſe and penalty of it that was due to us, in and upon 
the perſon of his own Son. God Jaid on him the iniquities ot us 
all, and he bore them in his body upon a Tree ; wid. Gal. 13. 
3 Pet. 2, 24. 
4 hat therighceouſneſs of the law might be fulfilled 
in usp, who walk not alter the fleſh, bur after the ſpi- 


Tit 9. 

bent is another end of Gods ſending his Son as before ; it 
was that he might perfe&ly fultl the Righteouſneſs of the Law in 
or for us, which for us our ſelves to do in our own Perſons was 
utterly impoſſible. And yet upon which (as being imputed unto 
them, and accepted of God on our behalf) we ſhall be accounted 
Juſt and Righteous, as if we had done it ourſelves. Chriſt's being 
2 Sacrifice for Sin was not ſufficient to anſwer all the ends and de: 
mands of the Law ; there muſt be doing of what it commanded, 
as well as ſuffering of what it threatned : Therefore Chriſt was 
lent for both, and both were accompliſhed by him ; and what ke 
did and ſuffered is accounted unto us as if we had done and ſuffe- 
red it. This is the imputed Righteouſneſs which was ſo often 
ſpoken of Chap. 4. and 1n reference to this he is ſaid to be made 
Righteouſneſs for us, 1 Cor. 1, 30. and we are ſaid to be the Righ- 
reouſheis of God in him, chap. 5. 19. 2 Cor. 5. 21. 9 This was 
the deſcription before of thoſe that had Union with Chriſt, and 
exemption from Condemnation ; and *tis again ſet down as the de- 
icription of thoſe who partake of the Righreouſneſs of Chriſt in 
this way of impurtation; and *tis added here again, to ſtave off 
all others from laying claim ro this Grace. None but holy walkers 
can warrantably apply Chriſt's fulfilling or fatisfying the Law to 
themſelves. Becauſe Chriſt hath fulfilled the righteouſneſs of the 
Law for us, none may infer there is nothing for us to do ; we may 
live as we liſt : for though Chriſt hath fulfilled the Law in all re- 
ipes, yer all thoſe for whom he hath ſo done, or have benefir 
thereby, are, and muſt be, ſuch as walk not after the fleth, but after 
the Spirit ; for the opening of which terms, wid. w. 1. 


5 For® they that are after the fleſh » do mind the 
things of the fleſhs : bur they that arc after the Spiric 7, 
the things of the Spirit « 

y i.e, That are carnal and unregenerare perſons, in a meer 
natural eſtare. s Either ſuch things as are abiolureJy evi}, and 
are called, The Iuſtz of the Fleſh, Gal. 5. 19, 20, 21, or clic ſuch 


|| Or, was 
impoſſible 
for the law 
50 as, 

jt Or, be- 
cauſe, 

{| Or, by a 
ſecrifice 
for ſm.s 


*, Cor. 2. 
14. 


ROMANS. 


| 


Cha 

L220 p. VI 
things as are occaſionally evil, as Riches, Honours, Plea 

Theſe are alſo called the things ef the Fleſh, and are ſuch "9, Or, 
perſons mind, z,e. They favour, affe&, and rake delight 0 Cary] 

; 3. e, Thatare ſpiritual and regenerate, in whom the irc go. 
i.e. They mindSpiritual and Heavenly things, they reliſh 
moſt of all; wid. Pſal. 4.7. and 73. 25. ; when 

6 For * to be  carnally minded 7s death », by; to 
+ ſpiritually minded x, i life and peace y. 

In this verſe we have an account of the different 
thar are carnal and ſpiritual, as in the former we had 
of their different carriage and diſpoſition. w 7. e, To be hae ind 
temper before deſcribed, wv. 5. tro mind and affe& the things $ : h 
Fleſh, doth cauſe death, or will end in it; the ſecond Or ete » the 
death is chiefly intended. x #. e. To mind and favour the _ $04 
of the Spirit, to find a ſweetneſs and excellency therein, ſo wy, tC 
the bent and inclination of the mind ſhall be theretg. ys nin 
the way to Eternal Life hereafter, and to a ſound peace bh "bly ref 
119. 165. Prov. 3. 17. Gal, 6. 16. "PI 

7 becauſe & the carnal mind js enmity a againſt Gyg: 
for ir is not ſubject i&,the law of God, neither indeed 
can be 5. ; 

z q. 4, Neither can the carnal man look for any better ify. 
Becauſe a carual mind is enmity againſt God, a He doth not ſay 2 
is an, Enemy, but in the abſtraf, it 1s exmiry, which heighteng ing 
intends the ſence; an enemy may be reconciled; as Eſau was tg 
Facob ; but Enmity cannot be reconciled, as black may be mag: 
white, but blackneſs cannot. 6b This isrendered as reaſon of the 
forgoing affertion, and it is taken from the property of em 
Thoſe that are at enmity, croſs each others wills, and won't ſybm;: 
ro one another: And the carnal mind is rebellious in the hizhel 
degree againſt the will of God, unleſs it be changed and renee. 
it 15 impoſſible ir ſhould be otherwiſe. There is init a moral in. 
potency to obedience, wid. John 8. 43. 1 Cor. 2. 14. 

8 00 then c chey that are in che fleſh 4 cannot ple 
God e. 

c This Verſe is a conſeQtary, or it follows from that which wen, 
before. d Not they whichare maxried, as a Pope once expounde 
it. The next verſe refells ſuch an abturd conception , bur they 
that are carnal and unregenerate, the ſame with thoſe, who in 
wer. 5. are {aid to be atrer the Fleſh, e Neither they, nor any. 
thing they do, is pleaſing unto him : their beſt works are dei]. 
works, and filken fins (as one expreſſeth it) It muſt be undz. 
ſtood with this limitation, fo long as they continue in ſuch ae 
vid. Pſal. 54. 5. Heb. 11. 6. | 

. 9 But ye f are nor in the fleſh, bur in the ſhicity, 
it 4 ſobe that * the Spirit of God dwell in you i. Noy'! 
- any man have not the* Spiric of Chriſt, he is none? 
1s KR, | 


f Here he applics what he had laid down more generally tothe j 
believing Romans in particular, g. i. e. Not after the Fi, but | 
after the Spirit (as in. wv. 5.) or not carnally, but Spiritualy mmiu, | 
þ The Conjunttion here is cauſal not conditional ; it may be rendred, 
ſeeing that, or forarmuch as ; wid. wv. 17. & 3. 2 Thi. 2.6. 
# The Spirit of God dwells in the regenerate, not only by the immen- 
ſity of his preſence, ſo he is every where and in all things: bur 
by the preſence and efficacy of his Grace ; The indwelling of the 
Sp:rit in Believers, denotes two things. 1. His ruling in them; 
where a man dwells as Lord, there he doth command and bei 
rule. ' 2. His abiding in them, and that for ever; hn 14; 16. 
k If he hath nor rhe ſame Spiric which in the foregoing verle is 
called, rhe Spirit of God; Ir is called, the Spirit of Chriſt ; beciuk 
it proceeds from him, and is procured by him; John 14. 26. and 
16. 7. Gal. 4. 6. When he 1aith ſuch a one 5s none of Chriſt; 
he means, that he doth nor peculiar'y belong to Chriſt, he hit 
no ſpecial intereſt in him, is no true Member of him. As a Mer- 
chant ſers his Seal upon his Goods, ſo doth Chriſt his Spirit upon 
his followers, Eph. 1. 13. 

10 And it Chriſt /bein you, the body » -« dead bv 
cauſe of ſin; but the Spirit is life », becauſe of rights 
ouſneſs 0s 

1 Before, he ſaid the Spirit of God and Chriſt dwelt in then; 
here Chriſt himſelf. Chrift 4wells in Believers by his Spirit. m 5f 
body ſome underſtand the corrupt and unregenerared yart in the god- 
ly, asif that wereas good as dead in them. But cthers take the 
word in its proper ſignification, and think neg more 15 meant 
thereby than that the Bodies even of Believers, are mortal Boaiz!, 
ſo they are called in the next verſe. They are ſubje& ro death 
the bodies of other men. n Some by Spire here do underſtand the 
Spirit of God. and he is life; that is, he will quicken and raile UP 
your bodzes again to an immortal life. Others by $piris do under- 
ſtand the Souls, yet not ſimply and abſolutely conſidered, but 3s 
renewed by Grace; that is life, or that doth live : 1t lives alife of 
Grace here, and it ſhall live a life of Glory hereafter. 0 By Righ 
teowſneſs, here underſtand, either imputed Righteouſne/s , whicl 
gives us a right and title to Salvation ; or inherent Reghrevune. 
which is a neceflary condition required in every Perſon, that ſha 
indeed be ſaved. The ſumm is, if you be Chriſtians indeed, tbo 
your bodies die, yet your Souls ſhall live, and that for ever; *" 
your dead Bodie: ſhall nor finally periſh, bur ſhall certainly be ra 
ted again; ſo it follows in the next verſe. 

11 bur if the ſpirit of him that raiſed up Jeſus from, 
the dead p dwell in you *; he that raiſed up Chrilt {rom 
the dead, ſhall alſo quicken your mortal bodies 4"; by, 
his ſpiri: that dwelleth in yon r, 

Þ A Periphraſis of God the Father. 1 
2. 19. and 10. 18, and yet the Father is |: 
from the dead; wid. notes on chap. 1. 4. 9 Raiſe tht o 
Srate of Mortality, and all the atrendants to a glorious 1 
life. r 9. d. If you are ſanRified by the Spirir, you ul 
raiſed up by the Spirit alſo, as Chriſt was. The wicked 310 


be *Cl, 
6 


U, 
end of thoſe Gil, 
a deſcription fr 


= 


The $on raiſed himſelf, Tot, 


id here to raiſe DM 


them trom*1! 


jo. VIL 


5, Or. eculiar manner ; they hall be raiſed, as by the AlmightyPower of 
_ Fd, ſo by vertue. of their Union with Chriſt as his Members, 
Iwet and by vertue of theirrelation to the Spirit as his Temples. They 
Wain only Pall partake of a Reſurrefion that is deſirable and beneficial 
" to them. Therefore 'tis caJled Emphartically the Reſurrc#ion of rhe 
when Juſt, Luke 14. 14: and theſe two are joined together, as belong- 
"A ing one to the other ; the Children of God, and the Children of 
>. the ReſurreQtion, Luke 20. 36. 
Y 12 Theretore s brethren, we are debtors, not to the 
X "ts min feſh. to live after the fleſh 7. | 
+ of the Pl This ative particle ſends us to the things before delivered, 
ererny) 4 a. 4 Seeing we are not 1n the Fleſh, bur have the Spirit of God 
things 93 dwelling 18 us ; not only ſanQtifying and enhvening our Souls for 
das tha iG the prelent, but raiſing and quickening our Bodies for time to 
) tight come, therefore we are not Debtors, &c. £. i.e. We are not Debtors 
re, "pſy Nth ;0 Sin, or the corrupt and ſinful narure that is in us. We owe it 
Ts no ſervice, there 1s nothing due to it from Believers, bur blows, 
t God: and the blew eye that the Apoſtle gave it. The Aatithefis is 
"Wap omitted, bur it 15 neceſſarily imptyed and underſtood ; and thar is, 
undeed That we are debtors to the Spirit to live and walk after ic. 
B+ 13 For if ye live atter the fleth, ye ſhall die «: but if 
ws ons , Jo chrough the Spiric w*, do mortifie x the deeds of the 
wen ad body 1, Ye ſhall live z. | 
as 5. uoviz, Erernally, and never partake of the glorious ReſurreQion 
be made before ſpoken of. The Godly themſelves need this caution ; they 
on of the muſt not think that becauſe they are cletted and juſtified, ec. 
)f enmity, thar therefore they may do and live as they Jiſt. w. i. e. By the 
't (ubmir grace and aſſiſtance of the Spirit. x. 4. e. Kill and put to death. 
: hiphet 'Tis not enough to forbear the attings of Sin, bur we muſt kill 
renewed- znd .crucife it. Sin may be left. upon many conſiderations, and 
moral im: yet not mortified., y Evil deeds are called the. deeds of the Boay, 


becauſe the body is ſo inſtrumental in the doing thereof. There 
are ſome, that by body here do underſtand the corrupt nature , 
the ſame that before in many places he calls the fleſh : This was 
called, chap. 6.6, The body of 3in, and here 'tis called rhe body. 


t pleas 


hich wens 


z viz. Erernally. Sce a parallel place, chap. 6. 22. Gal. 6. 8. 
Xpounded + ” 
ys vid, v. 6. _ Ied 3 b — 
- wht ; 14 For a” as many as arele y t 1e Spirit of God, 
' nor ap. . they are the Sons of God. 
s are ded. 4 This proves the latter part of the foregoing verſe; Such as by 
be under. the Spirir do morrtifie Sin, ſhall live ; for they are the Sons of 
ucha ue, God ; and that appears, becauſe they ate led by the Spirit of God. 
b Hz doth nor ſay, as many as live by the Spirit, bur as are Jed by 
: ſpirit the Spirit ; to ſhew (fays one) that the Spirit muſt be the guide 
: Now! and ruler of our Life, as the Piiot 1s of the Ship, and as a Rider 


isof his Horſe. The Phrate is borrowed (ſays another) either 
from thoſe which, -are guided and direfted as a blind man in his 
wy; or from thoſe, who wanting ſtrength of their own, are 
born and carryed of others: ſo we are both ways led by the 
Spirit; for we can neither fee our way, unleſs the Spirit directs 
vs; nor have we ſtrength to wa'k in it, unleſs the Spirit aſſiſt and 
daw us along. The Spirit leads and draws us irreſiſtibly and ne. 
c{ſarily, and yet nor violently or againſt, our wills; though we 
were unwilling before, yet we are made willing afterwards ; ſo 
villing that we deſire and pray to beled by the Spirit; wid. and 
15. 5. Pſal. 143. 10. Cant. 1. 4. . 

15 For c” xe have nor received the ſpirit of bon- 
Cage d again to fear ; but ye have received the * ſpirir of 
4% ption e. Whereby we cry *, Abba. Father f. 

c This verſe proves the former, that we are led by the Spirit of 
F Gd, and are his Children, and that by an effect of the Spirit in 
them, which is to enable them to call God Farher, 4 He doth not 
tere ſpeak of two diſtin& Spirits, but one and the ſame Spirit of 
bod in different perſons ; and at different times, 1s both the Spi- 
rit of Boyuaage, and the *prrit of Adoption. The Spirit of Bondage 
kems to reſpe& either that ſtate of ſervicude, which the People of 
God were under in the time of the Ceremonial Law ; wid. Gal. 4, 
3, 9. Orit reſpe&s the Publiſhing of the Moral Law upon Mount 
Sinai, which was with horror-and fear. Comp, Exod. 19. 16. with 
B. 12. 18, 19, 20, 21. vid. Gal. 4 24. or elſe it reſpe&s that 
torrour and flaviſh fear, which the Spirit of God doth work in 
mens hearts and conſciences, by the Miniſtry of the Law ; when he 
Opens the Eyes of men to tee they are' in Bondage and Slavery to 
\ and Saray, and that they are ſubje& and obnoxious to the 
Wrath and Vengeance of God ; this is many times preparatory and 
ntrodutory ro their convertion ; but when they are regenerated 
ley are delivered from it; vid, Luke 1. 74. Heb. 2. 15. 1 John 
4.18. ObjeF. Many of Gods Children are tull of doubts and fears. 
dnſv. Theſe are nor always from the ſuggeſtions of Goa! Spirit, 
uthemiſgivings of their own Spirits. Some diſtinguiſh between 
tie Spirit of Bondage and Deſertion; the Children of God are deli- 
Ifred from the former, but exercifed with the latter. e The Spz- 
"it of God is called the Spirit of Adoption, both becauſe he works 
nd effes it in us, and becauſe he teſtifies and ailures it to us. He 
| might have ſaid, the Spirir of Liberty. The antitheſis required it ; 
ſon, that ſpall bur he ſaid as much, when he calls him the Sp:rir of Aaoprion, for 
ns indeed, 019 Ciildren are free. f Or, by whom we cry, Acceptable prayer 1s 
for ever; Trought in us by the Speric ; wv. 26. Abba is an Hebrew Or Syriack 
ertainly ber word, ſignifying Father; why then is the word Father added in 

i: Greek? To fignifie, that God is rhe Father both of Jews and 
p Jeſus from, _ chap. 3. 29. and 10 12 or to ſhew the double Paternity 
Chriſt f-oM mt 1s in God, he is the Father of all Men by Creation, of Belie- 

Ties 4 by: 7 only by Grace and Regeneration : Or, rather to denote the im- 

2QIKES 4 > * iPortunity ind earneftneſs which ought to be in Prayer, and fo it 
\ WK > << with the former word cory:ng. Ingeminations Carry an ear- 

1 himſelf, oy - neſs with them. There are two places more where theſe two 

re 10 rail? = VOids are repeated or uſed together, Mark 14 36. Gal. 4: 6. 

_ 15 * The Spirit | ic ft.i bearecth witziels g with our 

_ Pt, that we ae the chi.d en of God, 

£ The Spirit of Adoption doth not only excite us tocall upon God 


5 noneof?; 


rally to the , 
"e Fleſh, but It 
aly mimnda, 1; 
be rendred, 
- Theſ.. 2. 6. 
he immen- 
ings: but 
ling of the 
ng in them; 
nd and beir 
7ohn 14; 16. 
ing verſe 
iſt; becaule 
14. 26. and 
ze of Chriſt; 
riſt, he hath 
As a NMer- 
; Spirit upon 


5 dead bt 
_ of rights 


» 


/ 


elt in thin; 
Spirit, m 3 
rt in the god- 
jers fake the 
10TcC 15 mean! 
107tal Bogte! , 
& to death iS 
:nderſtand the 
| and raile PP 
i748 do under 


r. 0 By Righe 
fuſs, wi 
t R1ghteouſmeſ! 


rt, you . al] 
- LE, 4a 
vicked aliol n 


ROMANS. 


be raiſed at the laſt day, but the Righteous ſhall be raiſed after a 


as our Father, bur it doth aſcertain 2nd 2fTure us (-5 before) that 
we are Hes Children, And this it doth no: by an outward voice. 
as God the Father tg Jeſus Coriſt; nor by an Angel, as to Danicl 
and rhe Firgm Mary; but by an inward and fecrer ſuggeſtion, 
whereby he raifeth our hearts to this nerſwalion, that Gad is our 
Fat her and we are his Children. This is not the Teſtimony of t::< 
Graces and Operations of the Spiric bur of the Spirit it ſelf Con- 
celve 1t thus » A mans own Spirit doth witneſs to him his Adop- 
tion ; he finds in himſelf upon diligent {earch and exainination 
the manifeſt ſigns and tokens thereof : Bur this Teſtimony of its 
ſelf 1S weak, and Satan hath IMLANLY Ways and wiles to invalidate it . 
therefore for more ailurance ir is confirmed by another and grearer 
teſtimony, and thar is of the Spirit hin.ſelf; He witnetict! with 
our Spirits, and ſealsit up unto us He firſt works Grace in our 
Hearrs, and then witnetiſerh ro it This Teſtimony is not alike 
In all Believers, nor in any one of them ar all times; ir is bercer els 
than expreſſed. He witneſſerh to our Spirit (to fome reid it) by a 
diſtin& and immediate teſtimony, az4 witn ſer with our Spirits 
(fo the word properly ſignifies) by a conjun&ive and concurreat 
teſtimony. 


17 And it children, then heirs þ, keirs of Gud and x 


joynt-heir; with Chriſt ; *, it fo he that we futfer with Fm» 
> > Ve 93 $4.5, =AgGgoarlhoapr / ba 
him k that we mav he allo glorifhd coperher / 2 Tim > 


þ There is a parallel Text in Gal 4. - 'ris no: fo with the Chil 15. 12 
dren of Earthly Princes ; vid. 2 Chron. 21. 3. + Or Coburs wrb © 
Chrift he is our Elder Brother and is not alhamed to call us 3-: 
thren ; the inheritance is his by Nature, ours by Grace. & : he 
Croſs of Chriſt is the condition of our Heavenly inherirance. Tac 
pronoun him, 1s not inthe Original, bur firly ſupplved in our T1.n- 
{lation : ſuffering with hm, is much the fame with ſufirmg fr bm. 
Suffering Bel:evers do but picdge Chriſt in the Cup thar oe be lin 
to them. 1 Or, Glorified with him, not with equal Glory, burac. 
cording to our proportion ; he was glorified in this way, Luke :4. 
26. and fo muſt we. Thrice things are implyed in our being Glori- 
fre! r.gether, 1 Confornaty, we ſhall in ſome meaſure be like him 
in Glory, wid. John 17. 22. Phil. 3. 21. 2. Concomitancy, we {all 
be preſent with him in Glory, Tobn 17. 24. 1 Thefſ' 4. 17. 3. Cons 
veyance, our Glory will be from him ; his Glory will refleCt oa us, 
and we ſhall jhine in his Beams. 


18 For 1 reckon #9, that the * ſufferings of 1.15 vre- 


{; © / - m = " hy 2 Cor. 
ent || time, are not worthy 10 veccrmnard Witch the $g10- 4. 17. 
ry which ſhall he revealed in us ». 1 Per. r. 


mM. 1. e. | make account; I certainly conclude ; wid. chap 3. 28. 6, 7. 

The word is borrowed either from Arichmericians, win by cating & 4. 13, 
their Accounts do find the true and rotal Summ : Or from « 9g:c;- 1 Or, ſeas 
ans, who by conſidering the Premiſes do draw the Crnewuſior. /53, 
n The word properly ignifieth rhar pars of the Balance wh:ch go- 
etch aoun: q. a. It the ſufferings of this life be werghed with the 
Glory to come, they will be light in compariſon. Theſe words, zo 
be compared, are ſupplyed in our Tranſlation to make up the 
ſenſe. 0s Itis revealed to us, and it ſha!l be revealed in us. This 
Text is a confuration of the Popiſh Doctrine of Merit and humane 
Satisfation, 

:9 For the earneſt expectation of the creature p wait- * x Jokn 
etha for * the manifeſtation of the ſons of Ged r 3. 2. 

The Apoſtle Peter ſpeaking of the Epiſtles of our Apoltle, in 

2 Pet. 3. 16. he ſaith, That there are ſom: things in them bars to be 
wnderſiood, and ſome think by refleQting upon ſome particular pal- 
ſages in thar Chapter, he doth more eſpectally retpett this Contexr, 
There is indeed a great deal of obſcurity in it. p This word is 
four times uſed 1in this and the three tollowing verics, on!y ia 
the 22. werſe, 'tis rendred Creation; that is rhe ſubje& of wich 
all thar. followeth 1s predicated One main queſtion rhercfore is 
this, What Creature the Apoſile here ſpeaks of? Divers anſweis 
are or may be given, I will fix upon two only. 1 By the Crea- 
ture or the Creation (and wv, 22. the whole Creation or every Creature) 
is. meant all mankind, both Jews and Gentiles, and eſpecially rhe 
latter; wid. Mar. 16. 15. there Chriſt gives it in Commiſſion 
to preach the Goſpel to every Creature; *tis the fame word. 
And in 1 Per. 2. 13. They are commanded ro ſubmit themſelves ro 
every Ordinance of Mau In the Original it is to every human crea- 
rare, the ſame word whi®h is in the Texr before us ; he means the 
Gentile or Heathen Magiſirates in Authority over them In the Scrip- 
ture the Gentiles are fometimes called the Weria chap. 11, 12. 15. 
and ſometimes the Cres:ure or the Creation. 2. By the Creature 1s 
meant the whole World with all the Creatures therein, or the whole 
frame and Body of the Creat:on. The Crcarure in this ſenſe by a 
Proſopeopezia is here ſpoken of as a rational Perſon ; it 1s uſual with 
the Spirit of God in Scripture, to faſten upon unreaſonable Crea- 
tures, ſuch expreſſions as are proper only to thoſe that are reafon- 
able ; vid. Pſal. 96. 11, 12. Hab 2. 11. James 5. 4. So here the 
Creature (in this ſenſe) is ſaid to expe, wair, &c., 9g The expe- 
Qation of the Crearure expe&eth : An Hrbrew Plecnatm : Ir ex- 
peCeth with the head lift up or ſtretched our, Phz/. 1. 20. r. 2. e 
The time when the Sons of God fball be manifeſted, The :rabick In- 
terpreter puts the Word Glory into the Text, and reads rke word 
thus, The earneſt expetiation of the creature waitc:h for the manif*- 
fation of the glory of the ſons of God; Their Glory for tne preſent is 
hidden, bur it ſhall be diſcovered and manifeſted, 2 Cor. 3. 18. 
'The creature in the ſenſe of the word (as above) waiteth for this, 
becauſe then it ſhall be reſtored to its primitive liberty and luſtre, 
at thar time there will be a Reftirurtion of all things, #6: 3. 21. 
Burt thoſe who underſtand the creature in the firſt ſenſe, do put a 
quire!different interpretation, upon this laſt claute; and that is, 
that the Gentile world are now earneſtly expeRing and waiting to 
fee what the Jews will do, whether they will diſcover themſelves 
to be the Sons of God, or nor, by their receiving or rejecting 
Chriſt. . ; 

20 For the creature was made ſubje& to vanity, not 


willingly s, butby ccaſon of him who hath ſubjected 14e 


ame 1n hope 7. 
/ P s If 


Chap. VIIL 


re 


Rac, > 0%; eo 5 
« # 24.7 PR 


| ats- © A 
OP Wn 1. 


Chap. VII. 


"= d4 ” S b . . -» bi 1 EN 4 6 Py | % \f7 or; I . ? wy, 4 _— 4 
s I: TNCle VG  FY I MEETS IHE! d&3rd VL TlisC vrTLih LiG, aill ail Liiw CVE; = 
* p 


mer; Therein contmincd, then rrey inew the cr-atures Drojent condition, 
it is tuLject to vanicy, and rhar fir} in regard of its inſufficiency, 
it vViing fhort of that for which it was firit created and ordained ; 
tion a thing 15 Gd to be vain, when it doth not anſwer or reach 
irs proper end: Or in refpe&t of its rranſrorineſs and uncertainty, 
of whici or.S. 38 Hb. 14 x6; 12. 1 Joha 2 17. The 

x7 verſe rollgnus, if 1s lubjett to the Bondage of Corruption as weilas 

anity. Now rais maſt needs be an unwilling ſub;ection, there- 
fore "tis here £11d irs not ſubject willingly, 7. e. Of its own ac- 
cor:, or of irs proper Inftind& and Inclination; what the will 1s 


ROMANS. 


Miſery, this phraſe is uſed 1n other places ; vid. Luke ,, 
4. 39. But why of our Bady, and not of our Soxl: ? Becaus 
Souls would be in atual poſſeſſion of the inherirance 1,.c.* 
day, or becauſe the milcrics and troubles of this lif- are 
to the whole man by the body, ſo thar the Redemp:ion 
is in effe& the Redemption of the whole man. 

24 For we are ſaved by hope : but * hope that 's {oo 
is not hope ; for what a man feeth, why doch hi 1 

n b I, 

hope for c ? "þ 


c Though we certainly believe there is ſuch a Redemprign 
Vt or 


their 
c Ur 
viOre this 
cOnvereg 
of the Bag 


Salvarion belonging to us, according to the promiſe of (;oq , 
for the preſent we have no poſſeſſion of it ; all the # an 
have at preſent 1s in hope ; which according to the naryre of :. 
is of things not yet enjoyed, tor viſion or poſſefiion purg 1 ... 
ro hope; no man hopeth tor what he ſceth and enjoycth Ke 
25 Bur i} we hope tor that we lee nor, ches 
v-1th patience wait lor it 4. 
ag. ad If we indeed hope for Redemption and Salvation Witch, 
out of ſ11ghr, then it 15 meet that we do with patience diget 511 
| bear all our preſent Evils nd Sufferings; truc hope is xa. 
nied always with a patient waiting tor the things hoped &:. 
Therefore you read of the patience of hope, 1 To'fſ. 1. 3. vid, ti 
' 6. 12. and 1o. 36. | 
25 Tikewi'ie e the Spirit allo [ helpeth Our infire;; 0; 
ties /: For we * know not what we ſhould pray f; .." 
A " Je. ORE EY » : "0 fy 
we ought g : bur the Spiric i| it jeif maketh incerceyig 
tor us 4, with g:--anings which cannot he uttered / t, 
e This referreth us, Either to the Work of the Spirit, before ny. Jan 
ted, wver, 11. He quickneth, and he likewiſe he:p:th: Orr), i (; 
to Hope, in the foregoing werſe, Hope kh:ipctih to Patience, { aj, (mp 
the Spirit, f The Word imports ſuch #c/p, as when another gr; 


> rhitare rational, the Inclination is in theſe things tht are 
how comes it then into this condition ? The next clauic 


: : Salvation Ko 
-iig us. if 1s by ren Pnot him who hath ſubjected the lime 1n Hope. * ; 
{God tor the Sin of Man hath cu: the Creatrre, and juvj-G- 
vaitiry and cqr;uption; vid. GW, 3, 17 and 4+ 12, Lev. 
Aud thFagh he {:>th done this, yer there 1s ground. 
to expect on hope raatthe Creature thatl rerurn again to 1ts tOl- 
mYr eftate whoroin it was created ; that it thall be de cered and 
lod ano a berter condition, as inthe noxe verſe Thoſe that 
the Creature underſtand the Grmrrle Yori, give a different 1n- 
ro proetiuton of thije words; they fiy thir the Genrites are made 
ul; | To Idolatry or a vain ſuperftitious Wors | 
Vanities Ads i4.15 ) or to a milerable 
; A {4chins notes) {> tac import of the word 
ch of their own accord, or by their 
nower 21d mulice of Saran, to whom 
ey are JB Sivenieo 07 wot he rules in their hearts, Carries 
het Captii | wUD;utrs Chem to all villany and milery. 
And it 15 reaſons -e of theſe poor Heathens, rhart they 
are wi'ins ie. ft forme and a confiderable number 
of them) fo and iJavery, as it is faid, wv. 
[ 


FA. + y > S ; + E-y.9 = | 3 WE + ROW. _ Fs 
22, 2 Bur if ko taut rhus ſubjects them be che Devil, how 1s he 


' 
CO wwe 


DEBOA | ©: = SP ITS 
TEFE1 4 | F11:$ V-AIHL Y 


| 


+ 


gy - 


: 4; 
. : - ” 
ks © - 
: '.* 
"TY: = 
\ : 
$ 
+ 
& 1\4 
| ' 
1%. 4 
& > 4 
; FY } 
4 . : 
f ! 7 
: 
FP: | 
if Þ 38 
a4! 3 
\ 
5 4 
4 yt! 
"yt 1%; 
o by th 
n 'F 


_ T . om 
pt D——_ . 
" "W7I>+* Ie . : X 
_—— Ee ED BS 


_ 


# f} P,CUCe 


WY CYEZUYC. 


| Or, is 
pains of 


Child. 


birth. 


> 7" - 
4 - \ 


ſag} to do whis 11 hope 4. Theie words zz hop: belong to the 

end of the farmer Verie; all rhe re of this verſe being read on 
i a 3 ? a gh 
Ihe Creature attends the manite- 

5te:n while it 1s ſubje& to 


. : - a ” W,/* f 
HICIUCE:! 1. a Parentragf, 9 A. 


ſtatins 65 the Sons of Geoll in Hope. 
Vaniry, Fc. 
ef - KR 2 : p / __ 

2: {Uecouſe che Ereature it F213 alio jha'l be del g 
Irom the bondage of corruprion, into the 21011905 liberty 
Of ihe children or God x. 

u If this verſe be underftond of the Heavens, and the Earth, 
and the things therein, the MEANING IS, that the Creatures in their 
kind, and according ito their capacity, thall be partakers of that 
i:berty and freedom. which in the Children of God js accompa- 
nicd with un{pcakoble Glory; they fſhail not partzke with the 
Saints in Glory, turof rhat Liberty which in the Saints hath great 
G'ory atrending it, and frpeauded to it. The Crenture ar the 
diy of judgment 1}.'1 be £*ored (as before) to that condition 
of liburty whichitl din its firſt Creation; As when ir was made 
art ficit, it was free from ali vanity, Bondage and. Corruption, fo 
ir ſhall be agaiz ar the rime of the general ReſurreCtion ; vid, 
- &: 3. 19 21, 2 Pet, 3. 13. Thoſe th:rby the Creation, would 
vnderſtand the Genzile World, vive the ſenſe of this verſe thus. 
That the very Licathensalfo £4] by the Coſpe] and Grace of Chriſt 
be reicued trom thoſe courles of Sin and Coriuption, ro which 
they have been long enfiaved, 1iro thar gJor ous condition not only 
of free-men, redeemed by Ciriit out of their bondage to Sin and 
Seaton, bur even of the Sons of God, ro have right to his favour, 
and tnat ncyer fading 1Ancritance. 

22 Þ& we know that the || whole creation groaneth, 
and rrava :2:n inf} pain together until now 

w If here again'the Heavens and the Earth, with what 1s there- 
in, be underticod, tien the Apoſtle farther enlargeth upon taeir 
preſent fiate and condition ; be=tore they waited and expected de- 
JIVETaNCE, NOW THEY $102 and t12vail in pain They allo are Me- 
taphorical Exprefiions; cne is tiakea from a Man, who hath upon 
him a heavy burthen; another from a Woman that 1s near her 
delvery, and thi: they do untii now; 4 e. From the Fall of 4dam 
to th:s preſent day, I hey thar underſtand the words of the Gen- 
te World, thus interpret them: We the Apoſtles and Miniſters 
cf jcius Chriſt, do fnd by experience, thar, the Gerriles are very 
foi ward to receive the Golpel when they, hear ir, whilſt the Jews 
ceneratly rejcEt it. The Gentile World 1s as it were in pangs of 
rravail, ever jince Chriſts time till now, ready to bring forth Sons 
and Deughters ro God. 


3 , 0 ik . & FS. 

2: \nd not only ity x, but our ſelves alſo, which 

- ' - Þ F < : ns . . I» _ q 5 : A ey 
kave the fi: it fruits of the Spirit 5 *, even we our {elves 
Rep Yr 4 _ 7 = P94 bao ” & ? p 
© OaN WININ OUT ICIVES Þ, WAITING for the acQoPrion 4, fo 

2 it the regQempron of our Þcdy 5. 

- The Apoilte has atterired and concluded, wv. 18. Thar there 
i3a future &lory to Le revealed hereafter in the Saints, ſuch as in- 
finely tra: ſcendeth their ſufferings now; and this he had con- 
tired from the earneſt expectation of the Creature (the Pronoun 
thy iS not in the Original) and now he farther contirms it from 


the expettation which is in Believers themſelves. » Hereby he: | 


means ther Rightcouſnets, Joy and Peace, which Believers have in 
this Life; theſe are the PFrurts of he Spirit, and called firſt Fruits 
in recard of their order, and in regard of their quantity, they 
arc but a handiu] in compariſon of the whole; little in regard of 
the Ffulnefs which they ſnall have in Heaven; and in regard allo of 
their f2r:fce:ion, the Grace and Comforts of the Spirit of God 
in this Liicare pledges to us of rkat abundance and fulneſs of Joy, 
which we ſhall parrzke of in the J;te to come; as tne firſt Fruws 
of the Jews were an Evidence to them of the enſuing crop. 2 4- 
»org our ſclyes (lay lome) but it 1s better read in our Tranſlation, 
within our ſelves, Tt expreſictn the manner of the Saints groaning 
under /*; and aff:&ion ; it is inward, and from the Heart. s Now 


we arc the Sons of God, Why then ſhould we wair for what we ; 


have aleady* 4 ſw. We have the right, bur nor the full polleiſion 
. . ' . nd . . . . . 

ot our Inheritance ; the Apoſtle himitelf explains his meaning in 

the next words. 6.4, e. Our perſe&t deliverance from Sin and 


greater Strength ſteps in, and ſuſtains rhe Burthen that lizs 9 
heavy upon our Shoulders; or it 1s borrowed from Nurſes, thy 
ne!p their little Children that are unable to go, upholding them by 
their Hands or Sleeves. g One way whereby the Spirir hls; y; 
is, by teaching us to Pray, Prayer doth greatly Relieve us unde; 
the Crots, and isa great Refuge in Trouble. Burt we knowing not 


| ſapplication. 


> zogether with God. Some read the words thus, G24 c0-0p17# 


; how to Pray as we ought, either in regard of Matrer or Manner, 
: herein therefore the $Spir:z aids or helps us, as it followeth : By 


how is it ſaid, W: know not what to pray for, when we have th; 

| Lords Prayer, which contains a perfect Rule and Summary of i 
things meer to be prayed for? Though the Loyas ! rayer be a Rul 
in general, yet we may be to ſeek in Particulars. Gods own Chil. 
dren many times ask they know not what; wid, Fob 6. 8. Jmh 
4. 3. Mark 15, 38. and 2 Cor. 12.8. +þ There is a Twofold [n. 
rerceſhon, one of Chriſt; of which we read, wer. 34, The other 
of the Sprrit, of which this place ſpeaks. How doth the $jri 
make interceſſion for us? nſw. By making Interceſſion in w, orby 
helping us to pray. The Spirit is called, Zech. 12. 10, the Spirit of 
"Tis by him, wer. 15. that we cry -bba Inther; he 
Crys fo in our Hearts, Gal. 4. 6. God hath (ent forth the Spiri: if 
his ſau in your hearts, crying Abba Father. The Spirit of ou Fxtiar 
ſpeaketh in ns, Mat. 10. 20, He ſuggeſteth ro us what we ſhould 
pray for ; he khelperh vis to ſuitable Difpoſitions, and many times 
to ſuirable Expreſſions in Prayer ; wid. Eph. 6. 18. jute wo, 
i With inward /izhs and groans. which can't be expreſt by word, 
There may be Praycr, where there 1s no Speech or vocal Expieſi- 
on. A Man may cry, and that mightily to God, when he uttercth 
nevera word ; wid. Exod. 14. 15, 1 Sam, 1.13. 


terceſlion for the ſainrs || according to rhe 1:!] of Godm, 


after the manner of Men. 
' guire into any thing, but becauſe amongſt Men Xnowleage comes 
| by ſearching ; theretore by way of Reſemblance, this is attributed 
to God, though that which is intended by ir, is only this, That 
God knoweth the heart, Jer. 17. 10. -&s 1. 24, | Both wit 
the Knowledge of Apprehenſion and Approbation. m Our raj 
ſhall be ſure to ſpeed, if they are of this fort, 1 John 5. 14, 15; 
Praying according to the Will of God, reſpe&s, 1. The Marte-0! 
our Prayers. 2. The Manner of our Praying. 3. The Endthetr- 
of, James 4. 3. 


28 And we know » that all things o work together ! 
for good q, to them that love God, to them who are the 
called according to hs purpoſe r, 

» Another Argument to comfort us under the Croſs, fromthe 
| benefits of it, We know that all things, &c. It is not matter 0 
gueſs only and conjeQure, bur of certainty and aflurance. How 
is this known ? 1, By the teſtimony of God; the Scripture tells 
us as much, Iſai. 3. 10. Pal. 128. 1, 2. 2, By our own ExpeTr 
ence: Weare afſured of it, by the event and eifeCts of all 59" 
j; both upon our ſelves and others. o Even ſi it felt; becauic tro 
their ralls, Gods Children Ariſe more humble and careful. 
fictions are chiefly intended; the worſt and croileſt Providences; 
thoſe things that are Evil in themſelves, they work for good tO Uk 
| Children of God. p Here is their Operation, and their Co-ope- 
ration: Firſt, They work together with God. W hat the Apolt 
iays of himſelf and others in the Miniſtry, 2 Cor. 6 1: that mY 
- be ſaid of other things, eſpecially of Afﬀiittions; they are m—_ 
ro good, Again, They work together with us ; vie our 1elves "_ 
| concur, and be ative herein; we muſt Labour and Endevour | 
get good out of every Providence ; once more, they work p74 
- amongſt themſelves, or one with another : Take tis Or a þ 
vidence fingly, or by it ſelf, and you ſhall not ſ-e the geo73t 50 
but take it in its Conjun&ion and Connexion wit! orhz15 
then you may perceive it, One exemplihes ir thus. 3518 M4 
| Phylick; if you take ſuch and !uch Simples atone, they m9 ut 
{on rather than Cure; but then rake them in the Compoiitich: !, 


w i 


. 
$ 
« 
app 
Li 0: 


Por” 


27 And * he that fearcheth the hearts &, knoweh, 
what zs the mind of the fpirit/, || becauſe he maketh in- 


anv 


k This Phraſe is a Periphraſis of God, and is ſpoken of Hin|\ 
God doth not properly ſearch or a-% 


Te 37 O 
hap. eo. V1: ROM 


made up by the DireHion of a skilful Phyſician ; and fo 


27 are 


p Eph -h2y prove an excellent Medicize. q Sometimes for temporal Good, 
t their [07 ©. 20; always for ſpiritual and eternal Good, which is beſt of 
re this Mn 2 


| 7 All Occurrences of Providence ſhall ſerve to bring them 

NYer al z $358 

_ 4 | -_.,rerto God here, and to Heaven hereafter. r Theſe words are 
*c Bugy New the ground and reaſon of God's Calling us; which 


added to ſhew . _ 
| -cnothing elfe, but his own purpoſe and good pleaſure ; "tis not ac- 


iS fag « cording to our worthineſs, but his purpoſe. vid 2 Tim. 1. 9. 
he yer « 20 s For whom he did toreknow t, he alſo did prede- 
WE - tinate * 70 ve conformed to the image of his Son #, 
tion or * thar he mighe be the firſt-born among many bre- 
:0d Ve» ; q,7 ! 
le ED - ten 7 , 4 : 
109 we ; Having let fall a Word in the former Verſe, concerning the 
re of p 6, purpoſe of God; he thinks good, in what follows, to purſue that 
at en Subje&, and a little to enlarge upon it. # i.e. With a knowledge of 
; probation ; for otherwiſe, he foreknew all Perſons and Things : 
do wo Or, whom he did forcknow for his own, John 10. 14, 27. Chap. 17. 


. 2 Tim. 2.19. This forekzowledge of God, is the ground of our 


Fledion, vid. 1 Pet. 1.2. u Whom he was pleas'd to approve of, 


gel 50} nd ro pitch his free Love and Favour upon, he ſevered from the 
Ccomp;. common lump and maſs of Mankind, and did appoint them ro be 
ped for. conformed to the Image of hits Son, i. e, To be conformed to him in Ho- 
Vid. I. lines, and Sufferings here, and in Glory hereafter, wid. 1 Cor. 15. 

; 2 Cor. 3.18. Epheſ. 1. 4, 5, 6. Phil. 3.20, 21. 1 John 3. 2. 
infirr.; 0; w This is the Lirutation of the forementioned Conformity ; rhough 
-— £0 there be a likenels in us unto Chriſt, yet there is not an Equality : 
W107 a, He fill retaineth the Dignity of the F:rſt-born, and hath a double, 


vcaa far greater Portion ; He is Head and Ruler of all the Family 
in Heaven, and 1n Earth, P/al. 45. 7, 8. 

zo Moreover, whom he did predeſtinate, them he al- 
focalled : and whom he called, them he alſo juſtified : 
and whom he juſt:hed, them he alfo * glorificd x. 
| & He hathalready given them the Beginning and Pledge thereof 
in Gracez and will in due time bring them to the Polleſſion of 
| ercrnal Life and Glory. Some, under this term of Glorification, 
| would have San#ification included ; becauſe, otherwiſe they think 
there is a great defeC&t in this Chain of Salvation here ſet down by 
the Apoſtle ; of which San#ifcation is one ſpecial Link ; but this 
is rather to be couched and included in effeRual Calling; which 1s 


ICCltton * 
efore no. Ji 
): raticr, 0; 
e, fo alp/\ 
nother g5s, 
t ies too 
rſes, thi 
> them by 
it bely; w, 
us under 
WING not 


"ou E the Third Link, and already ſpoken of, 

hin 31 Whar jhall we then fay to theſe things z ? * If God 

ary of al | le for us 2, Who c292 beagainit us a ? 

be 2 Rule 1; Some refer this Queſtion to what is ſaid in the Verſes immedi- 
own Chil ly preceding ; Others, to what he had ſaid, v. 28. and Others go 

8. Jngh ligher, and refer it to all that he ſaid before. Some by theſe things 

oft underſtand 4ffiifions and Sufferings ; more-eſpecially, What we ſay 
The other n:kfe ? or what nced we be diſheartned by rheſe ? For if God, &C. 
the Spirit  i,e, Seeing Ged is for us, 'tis a note of Certainty, not of Am- 


biguity, wid. v. 9. He takes it for granted, as that which cannot 
be denied, wid, Pſal; 46. 7, 11. and 118.6, 7. @ z.e. None can; 
nie can be againſt us ſucceſsfully ; none can be againſt us ſafely ; 
Such will harm themſelves more than us, vid. Pſal. 56. 4. Maximzli- 
athe Emperor ſo admired this Sentence, that he cauſed it to be 

Written over the Table where he uſed ro Dine and Sup ; that ha- 
 vingit often 1n- his Eye, he might have it alſo in his Mind. 

22 * He thatipared not his own Son 6b, bur * delivered 
himup c for usall 4, how ſhall ke not with him alſo free- 
yeive us all things e ? 

bþ This Phrafe, Either ſhews the Bounty of God, that he did not 
vith-hold Chriſt ; Or the ſeverity of God, that he did not Favour, 
but Afi& and Puniſh him, 1ja. 53.4, 5, 11. &c vid. AF, 2, 23. 
This doth not excuſe Judas, no nor Pilace and the Jews, though 
they executed God's purpeſe, yer they ated their own Malice and 
Wickedneſs. d This plainly refers ro ſuch Perſons as he had be. 
fore mentioned ; ſuch as God foreknew, predeſtinated, called, &c. 
which is not all Men in general, but a ſet number of Perſons in 
particular; it is an Expreflion both of Latitude and Reſtridtion ; | 
of Latitude, in the word all; of Reſtriction, in the word us. 
eq.4, Without queſtion [He will; Ir may be confidently inferred 
and concluded, He that hath given the Greater, will not ſtick to 
give the Leſs. Chriſt is more than all the World, or than all o- 
ter Gifts and Bleſſings whatſoever. : 

?3 Who ſhall lay any thing to the charge of God's 
cet /? *® It is God that juſtifierh. 

/ Who can implead ſuch, or pur inany Accuſation againſt them ? 
There is nothing to Accuſe them of, they are juſtified ; and there 
5none to Accule them ; It is God thats hath juſitfied them ; the Su- 
pream Judge hath abſolved them. This ſeems to be taken out of 
Yaiah po. 8, 9, They were Chriſt's Words there, and ſpoken of 
ods jutifying him ; they are every Believers Words here, and in- 
tnded of Goo”s juſtifying them. Here ſeems to be two Reaſons of 


1 ut, Or by 
ie Spirit of 
Father ; he 
the Spiric of 
F our Faticr 
we ſhould 
many times 
Jude 20, 
| by words, 
al Expieſls 
he urrereth 


knoweth, 
naketh 1n- 
of God nm 
ken of Him) 
ſearch or 00 
pledge comes 
i$ attributed 
chis, Thut 
' Both witli 
; Qur Praje"; 
1 5. 14 [3 
he Matte- 0! 
1C End thetts 


together ? 
cho are tis 


-oſs, from the 
Ot Matrer 0t 
rance. Ho 


criprure tells tixir Indemnity ; One 1s imply'd. 2z. e. God's elefing them : "The 
own Expert Other expreſt, 4. e. God's juſtifying and acquitting of them, 

of eh .34 * Who 1s he that condemneth g 2? lt is Chriſt that 
— n = ?, Yea rather that is riſen again z, * who is even at 
Providence i right hand of God, * who alſo maketh interceſſion 


Ts, 
8 f\snone can Accuſe the Ele# of God, ſo much leſs can any Con- 
-5wh them, wid, ver. 1. þ And 'tis he that is the Judge, and 
_ ws them, if _ be condemned. His Death frees them 
uf RE ene, thereby he hath made a ſufficient Aron?ment 
"wars =_ for all their Sins: And that which hath long ago 
— bs leaven for the Sins of all the Ele#, may very well 
ich OY the Heart and ( onſcience of a Believing ſinner here on 
' Jucha One may throw down the Gauntlet, as the Apoite 


oth + 
ny _ Cullenge all the World. Let Conſcience, carnal Reaſon, 
3 -J m, £ 


(or good £0 UN 
their Co-Op 
rt the Apor® 
1, that 
ey are warker 
c0-0perares ® 
ar ſelves MV 
Endeavour iO 
y work cogent 
1S Or tl1at Pro- 
e geod it 60 


2 Y ufſicient , and Dewils bring forth all they can, it wont be 
1 otheis; wICIENt tO Conde 07 + J 1/4 
h ot Bo barsfoBes mnation ; and that becauſe of Chriſt's Death and 


aS18 or ; The ReſurreCtion of Chriſt hath a ſpecial Influence 
hey may i". fication ; and therefore the Apoſtle puts a rather up- 


Don Our uſt 
F 113240 "Y Z 
Dm poBiciete 


IEEE EA 


! 

ll [ 
| 

J ' 


A NS. 


| 


bo 

roo 

= %s 
_ 
wc 

. 

a___ 

4 

Þ mon 
gamny 

gy 


IF. &. 


on 1t, and that Comparative'y to the Death of Chrif, wid. « 
25. and the Notes there. k Faith finds matter of Triumph, noc 
only from Chriſt's Death and Refurre&ion, but from his Sefiign 
at the Right Hind of God, and Interccffion for us. 

35 Whol! jhail feparare vs trem the love of Chit ;z: : 
ſhall tribulation »? or diſtrets 0? or perſecution p? ©: 
famine? or nakedneſs? or peri! «7 or {word » ? 

I He continues his Triumph : He doth not ſay what, but wh 
though he inſtanceth in Things, and not in Perſons ; yet if 1s ex- 
preſt Perſonally, becauſe that theſe things do commonly do us hui 
in the improvement of Perſons, whether of Satarror Wicked Men, 
whoare Inſtrumental thereunto. +: Underſtand it either Attire. 
Iy, from our Love ' of him ; or Paſtivelv, from his Love of Us ; 
the Latter ſeems to be chiefly intended, Who ſhall ſeparate us from: 
the Love of Chriſt > or from the Senſe and Manifeſtation rhereot, 
» He makes an Enumeration of particular Evils; of ſeven in num- 
ber ; and he begins with the Leſler, and riieth to the Greater ; 
placing them in order, not caſually, butby Choice. Th-: word 7-:- 
bulation, ſignifies any thing that preſfieth or pinchethaus. o The 
word Properly ſignifies, f?rai:neſs of Place, and is transferred from the 
Body to the Mind, to point out the Anguiſh or Perplexiry thereof. 
p The word Prop-rly tignificth, a Driving from place 79 place ; 
Baniſhment is implicd therein, if not chiefly intended, vid. Mar. ro, 
23. 9q Any dangeror hazard of Life in any kind whattocver, v4. 
2 Cor, 11. 26. r This is pur Figuratively, for death it {e!f, cipe- 
cially violent death. 

26 As it is written s, For thy*{ake r- we are killed « 
all the day long ; we are accounted as theep tor tr: 
ſlaughter. | 

s He cites this Teſtimony, to prove, That none of the foremer- Wo. 
tioned Evils; no, nor Dearh it lelt can ſeparate Beſicyers From tte 46 
Love of Chriſt : Tis taken out of Pſal 44. 22. The Argument | 


'®: 
4 : - 
1 «& . 
3! x 
”— , ! f 
Gat'; THETE= 43 


-» 
wg 


” bw 
gt Her 


x 


ſeems to be this, The Saints of Old have endured ail rrinney « 
Sufferings, and yet were not Separated from the Love of : 
fore ſuch Sufferings cannot ſeparate them now. # Nor for our 11:5 
ſake, bur for Chriſt's, or for Righteoviſneſs fake, Mar. 5. 10. and "6 SY 
10, 18. 39. 1 Pc. 3.14, u How could they fay this* Killing ralces Wy" 
away all Complainiag, and makes the Parties jo dealt with, 
pable of faying, how it 1s with them. This Expreition Notes 


e 
wg 


"x": 


— _ 
_— 
"_ 


re WP" 4 2 ABT” 4: 


L120 Latte” 


the danger and de{peratencſs of rhketr Condition : "Its utual in ; Wi] 
Scripture to ſet toith an eminent Cinger, under the notion of YA 
Death, wid. 1 Cor. 15. 31. 2 Cr. 1. 10. and 4 11, w 7. e, Cot. balls 
tinually without ceaiing, vid. 2/.:/. 38.6, 12. and 71. 24. 24 57 q; "ay 
I4. Prov. 23. 17. chap 10.21. x z. e, We are deſfiencd for ji2c. 1 £.. 
ſtruction. Our Enemies make account they can dei!troy us, 25 Wim 

do Sheep, that they have by them in the Slaughter. houte. Thy fy 1-6 466d 


reckon they have us az Command, and can cur us of vhen they 
lift. Or rather thus, They make noreckoning of our {2eftruftion ; 
they makeno more of killing Us, than 3utchers do of kil.ing Sh2p : 
Our Death is very cheap intheir account, P/a!. 44. 11, 12. tlere 
let me inſert a Tragical Story of the Chriſtians of Cali that 
ſuffered Perſecution, 4nno 1560. They were all ſhurup in' one 
Houſe together, as in a Sheeptold : An Executioner comes in, and 9 
among them takes one, and blind-folds him with a MutHcr abour 
his Eyes, and 1o leadeth him forth to a larger Plice, where he 
Commandeti him to Kneel down ; which being done, he currerh 
his Throat, and fo leaveth him half Dead; and taking his Butchers 
Knife and Muffler, all of gore Blood, he cometh again to the reſt, 
and ſo leading them one after another, he Difpatcheth them to the 
number of Eighty Eight, no otherwiſe than a Butcher doth his 
Sheep. Fox his 42. & Monnm, 


37 ||* Nay in all theſe thing: y, we are more than || 2, 


conquerors z., through him that loved us 4. ys 
yi. e In Tribulation, Diftreſs, &c. as before, v. 35. z. Or we $7, , 


Do 
F.Q 
On 


T 
1 43-4 3 4 
overcome. We Congrer, when we our telves are conquered; We 4-8 
co:quer by thoſe, which are wont to conquer others ; we bear our TOE 20 
Enemies with their own Weapons, The meaning ſeems to be rhis, _ : 
\ C 2, 


The Devil aims in all the Sufferings of God's Children, to Draw 
them off from Chriſt, to make them Murmur, Deſpair, &c. But in 
this he is defeated, and diſappointed ; for God Infpires his Chil- 
dren with ſuch a Generous and Noble Spir:r, that Sufferings abate 
not their Zeal and Patience, bur rather increaſe it. We Chriſtians 
laugh at your Cruelty, and grow the more reſolute, ſaid one of Julian's 
Nobles to him . @ A ſhort Deſcription of Chriſt together with a 
Reaſon of a Chriſtians Succeſs. ' he conqueſt he hath over Sin and 
over Sufferings alſo, isnot from himielf, or his own Strength, bur 
from Chriſt, &c. wid. chap. 7. 24, 25. 1 Cor. i5. 57. 2 Cor. 2. I4, 
2 Tm,4.17. 


38 For I am perſwaded b; that neither death, nor 
lifec, nor angels 4, nor * principalities, nor powers e, nor * Eph. 2. 
things preſent, nor things to come f, 21. and 6, 

b Or, 1 am fully aſſured, not by any iſpecial Revelation, but by 
the ſame Spirit of Faith, which is common to all B:{:evers, 2 Cor. 
4-13. C£#.e. Neither fear of d-ath, nor hope of life, d The 
Evil Angels; forthe Good Angels would not attempt theScparating 
us from the lowe of Chriſt. There are ſome, that think rhe Good 
Angels to be alſo here intended ; and they underſtand it by way 
of Suppoſition. 9 4. If they ſhould endeavour ſuch a thins, they 
would never Effee&t it ; and thus they make . the Apoſtle here to 
Argue, as he doth in another Place, Gal. 1.8. e Some would 
have the Evil Angels to be here intended, and the Good Angels in 
what went before ; in Col. 2. 15 they are thus termed : But others, | 
by Principalities and Powers, do rather underſtand Perfecuting | 
Princes, and Potentates. fz. e. The Evils and Pretſures thar arc In 
upon us now or that ſhall be upon us hereafter. He makes no men« | 
tion of the things paſt, for they are overcome already. ; 

39 Nor height, nordepcth g, nor any other creature 5, Si 
ſhall be able to ſeparate us from the love of God which REt 
is in Chriſt Jeſus our Lo:d z. Th bd 


I 2. 
Col i, 16. 
'$ x: 


Aa 


F = $x3-4s 
, kd pry dp - _ 
_—— OC IES: 
dr ou rs ES hs CAE > a 
pl - : * o " 
_ - ” 4 


ROMANS. 


* © Neither the Feigh:h of honour, ahd worldly Advance- 
micnt nor the d-p25 of Ditſgrace, and worldly Abaſement. , Some 
the beirbih and depth for a compreheniive Expreſſion, which the 
Scripture uſeth when he takes in 41/, and leaves nothing out. 
þ This is added to the reſt, as an ec. at the end of a Sentence, 
and to ſupply whatever our Fancies might, in this caſe frame ro 
themſelves. Or the Apoſtle here makes an end of his Induttion ; 
and becauſe it had been endleſs to reckon up all the Creatures, 
he cloſeth in this manner; 1f there be any other creature. i Which 
he bears to us, as Members of Chriff, and are by Faith United to 
Him, vid. v. 35. and notes thre. 


TH A-P.j| Pc. 


The Ap:Riles Sorrow for the Jews: thiir privileges, 1—5. God's 
promiſe flands good notwithſtanding the rejefion of the Jews, being 
made to @ Spiritual Seed: nut to the Children of the flcſh but of the 
promiſe : this proved in Iſaac, and Jacob: Elau, bring rejeftea, 
6 —— 13. God windicated herein: by his words ro Moles, and 
the Example ef Pharaoh, and Similitude of a poter, 14-—— 21. 
for the manifeſtation of his "nſtice and power on the reprobatcs , and 
mercy on the Ele : both Jews and Gentiles, 22— 21, of the calling 
of the Gentiles and vejeRion of the Jews the Scriptures foretold, 
25-— 29, the Reaſon why the Gentiles obtained Righteouſneſs by the 
Meſſiah and the Tews were eſtranged from it ; ſhewn ous of the 
Propicts, 39 — 33- 


C 


- 


Say the truh in Chriſt a, T Tye not b, my conlci- 
ence allo bearing me Wicneſs c in the holy 

Cor 1. Ghott -/, 
nd 11, The Avnoſtic bing about to Treat of rhe RejeCtion of the Jews, 
: and the Calling of rhe Genrzles: Before he enters upon it, he pre- 
3al. x. 50, mifſeth a Preface to prepare the Minds of the Jews, to a patient 
'1. 8. Revding or Hearing the fame : And in this Preface, he ſolemnly 
1M.2.7 Protefieth his Love to his Nation, and his hearty Grief for their 
Rejection, that fo ir mightthe better appear, thot theſe things were 
not Written out of any Spleen or Malice, but out of Conſcience 
towards God and the Truth. a Or, +4 Chrift : So the word (in) is 
taken, Mar. 5.34, 35.36. This 3s the Form of an Oath, which the 
Scripture elſewhere uſeth in matters of Importance, wid Gen, 22. 
16. Dan. 12. 7. and Epheſ. 4. 17. b This is added for Confirmation, 
Or to gain the greater Credit ro what he ſaid or ſwore. It was the 
manner of the Hebrews to an Affirmative, to add a Negative, vid, 
1 Sam.3 18 John 1.20, c As being torthis purpole placed in Man by 
God, and js inſtead of a thoxſand 1. itne ſs. d 1. e. In the preſence of 
the Holy Ghoſt, who .s Privy to what I fay, and who isa Witneſs alſo 
to the Trurh thereof; Or, as ſome, by the Guidance of the Hoiy Ghoſt 

who cannot Lye. 

*Chap. 109. 2 * That have great heavineſs and continual ſorrow 


"4 in mv hearte. 

e His grirf for his Nation and People he expreſſeth, 1. By the 
greatneſs of 1t; it was ſuch as a Woman hath in Travail; 1o the 
Vord imports. 2. By the continuance of it; It was continual, or 
without intermiſſion. 3. By the ſear of it; Ir was in his Heart, 
and nct outward in his Face. The Cauſe he doth not here ſer 
down, but it is eafily gathered from what follows, viz. The 
Obilinicy ind infidelity , together with the RejeCtion of the Jews. 
{ Or, an _ 3 Forl could withthac my felt were || accurled from 
Auathema. Chriſt f, for my brethren, my kinſmen according to the 

Or , 3: pa» fleſh o. "i 
rated. f Or Separated from Chrift, Thus Verſe hath greatly vexed Inter- 
preters. Some read it, 1 «id wiſh my ſelf accurſed from Chriſt, q. d. 
Before my Converſion, I was willing to be accurſed from Chriſt, to 
be a violent Perſecutor of the Chriſtians; and ſo to be held of them 
as accurſed for my Brethrens ſake. The vulgar Latine, and many 
Romaniſts thus render the word yu 50uny in the Text : Bur the gene- 
rality of interpreters Read it as we do; not Indicatively , 
but Potentially ; and they make an Ellipſis in the words (tvygpnr 
pro nugoipry ay) the hike is frequent, wid. AF, 25. 22, 1 Cor. 2. 8. 
2 Cor. 11. 1- But then ſtill the difficulty is, How and in what 
Sence the Apoſtle wiſht himſelf accurſed or ſeparated from Chriſt. 
The received Opinion 1s, That out of Zeal to the Glory of God, 
and Love to his Brethren he was willing to be damned, that they 
all might be ſaved. Many of the Ancients did thus Expound this 
place, Chriſt became a curſe for us; And what Marvel is it (ſays one) 
if the Lord would be made a curſe for the Servants, that a 
Servant fheuld be willing to become au Anathema for the Brethren. 
He doth not wijl; (ſays another) for h:s brethrens ſake, to be Separated 
from the love and grace of Chriſt, bur from the comforts of Chriſt, 
ard the future happineſs that we have by him : He is content to loſe his 
part in the heavven!y Glory, if that might promote the Glory of Chriſt, 
which would be more 1!luſtratca by the ſaving a whole Nation, than a 
prrticular Perſon, q. d. If this might be the Fruit of it, if it would 
rend to this eni, I could methinks be content to part with all my hopes in 
Chriſt, even my eternal Happineſs, upon condition my Brethren might be 
Partakers thereof, ſo Paſſimate, and abundant Love have 1 to and for 
them. This expolition 1s not Satisfatory. Therefore ſome think, 
the Apoſtle here ſpeaks of being 8ccurſt only for a Seaſon, or of be. 
ing an Anathema 1n this World, An Anathema ſometimes ſignifieth 
Corporal Death and Deſtruction; of old, in times of common 
C:lamity, they were wont to Sacrifice Men to their 1dols, and in- 
ternal Gods, tor the pacifying of their Anger : Such a Sacrifice 
they called 4na:hema, which is a word here uſed, q. d. - For my 
Brethrens ſake, that ſo they might be ſaved, I could be content to be 
ext off, to be made a Sacrifice, to Die the worſt of Deaths, But if 
this be admitted, How then is that Clauſe to be underſtood (from 
Chrift: ) Tis notT could wiſh my ſelf an Anathems, but an Anathe- 
ma from Chriſt; to this, they Anſwer that favour this Interpretati- 
on; that inſlead of from Chriſt, you may read 5y Chriſt. q. d. 
I could be content to be cut of or deſtroyed by Chriſt, that my Brethren 
might be ſaved, This Sence of the words {uits well with the Zeal 
and Kindneſs of ſes to his Brethrey, Exod. 32. 32. rather than 


t» O 
"Ws 
_ 


bw A, £27 
ww a) 


| Þ] 
he =) 5 
L_ — 


| 


Ne;'s 

his With _ 

8 tO be Sere. 
I The Sake ex 
Ys Heſychin) 
22, If A 


» May hz 
Poſte 
aying 

ving 
ijitan 


g So the Jews were by natural Deſcent, wid. Gen. 29, 14, | 
4 * Who are lſraelites bh; to whom peru} the «| 
adoption : and the glory k, and the || covenants !, yy 
the * giving of the law »,, and the ſervice of Godn, yy 10) 
* the promiles 0; — 
In this and the following Verſe, he rehearſeth the privilce.; i 
and Advantages the Jews had from God. above all other Nativy, 
of the Earth; and this he doth ro ſhew, that he had good Re: C 
to make ſuch a Wiſh as in the foregoing Verſe: As aMo, that why 
he ſhould declare conc.rning rhe Jews and their Eje#ton, did 1; 
proceed from any diſreſpe& or diſeſteem of them. þ 5. e, The 9: 
ſpring of that Holy Patriarch 1ſrazl ; *'This was the Jews firſt Titles: 
Honour; that they deſcended from him who by God himzf x; 
ſir-named Ijrael, or a Prince that had Power with God, and prevail; 
Gen. 32.28. i Adeption is not here to be underſtood as befi;: 
in chap .8. 15. or asin Eph. i. 5. (& alibi.) But thereby wen 
underſtand the peculiar Privilege of the Seed of Jacob; that th: 
of 211 the Nations of the Earth, were pitch'd upon to be nexty 
Related to God, to be his Children (as they are called) and i; 
Firſt- born, vid. Exod 4. 22. Deut. 14. ti. Fer. 31.9, 20, Mat 1; 
26, k The Ark and the Temple; ſo called, becauſe in them Go 
did manifeſt his Glorious Preſence, 1 Sam. 4. 21, 22. Pſal. 26, 
and 78. 61, 4 Someunderſtand by Covenants, the Tables of i 
Law, vid. Heb. 9. 4. Others rather underſtand the Coven: 
made with 4brahem, Gen. 15. 8. and 17. 2. 7. and with th 
Jewiſh Nation, Exod. 24. 7, 8. and 34. 27, &Cc. Circumciſin 1. 
ſo may be intended, for that is called God's Covenant , Gen. 17. 12, 
mm The Judicial, Ceremonial, but eſpecially the Moral Law. This i 
ſpoken of as a great Privilege, Deut. 4. 8, 32. It may refer boti 
to the Law its ſelf, and to the Circumſtances alſo, with which tt: 
Law was given. » Thetrue manner of Wotſhipping God, which 
was a great Privilege : Other Nations knew there was a God, al 
that He muſt be Worſhipped, but they knew not how ; and ſotkey 
ran 1nto Szperſt:tion and Idolatry. o Of this Life, and that ro cone. 
Particularly of the Meſſiah, and of the Benefits and Bleflingshj 
Him. Theſe are found in Moſes and the Prophets, and were entil- 
ed upon the Jews, and their Children, 4#. 2. 39. Eph. 2.12. til 
God at laſt Cut off the Entai]. 
Whoſe are the fathers p, and * of whom as concz: 
ning the fleſh Chriſt came q, * who is over all, God bk: 
ſed for ever. r Amen. [ 
p Who are Lineally deſcended of the Holy Patriarchs, Aran, 
Iſaac, and Jacob, with other Holy Fathers and Prophers, and «& 
the ſame Blood. This was alſo a great Privilege of which tix 
Jews boaſted. q Or, out of whom, underſtand the People c ti 
Jews, not the Fathers. The meaning is, Chrif/ took his hun! 


' Nature of their Stock. 'Tis the great Honour of Mankind, thit 


Chriſt took not the nature of Angels, but of Man ; and 'tis2 
great Honour to the Nation of the Jews, that he took the Feed ot 
Abraham their Father. r This is the fulleſt place to expreſs tie 
Natures that ate in the Perſon of our Redeemer the Lord 7s 
Chrift ; He was God as well as Man: Yea, this is the Title! 
which the One and Supream God, was known amonglt tr 
Jews. 

6 | * Not as thoughthe word of God hath taken 00%} 
effect. For they * are not all Irael, which are of {rael 

s An ObjeQion is here obviated : The Jews might obje - 
ſay, If they were ca# off and rejefed, then God is unfaithful, = 
all his Promiſes made to Abraham, Iſaac, and Fecob, and their Se. 0, 
are ineffetual., To this he Anſwers by a Diſtinction of 1jr adit 
Some are Iſraelizes only in reſpe&t of their Carnal Generati00 Ars 
Othcrs again are true {ſjraelites, Children of the Promiſe, and of - 
Faith of Abraham, vid. Chap. 2.28, 29. Now the Promaſe: of Y. 
were made to the true 1ſaeliter, and in all ſuch it is Ef 
And under the Name of 1f-ae!;'or true 1/> aelites, all thoſe are co. 
prehended, who imitate the Faith of Abraham, and walk 10 n 
Steps, whether they deſcend from him by flcthly Generation ©: 
not : This he farther Aferts in the following V<ric. t 

7 * Neither becauſe they are tie iced of Abrar hi 
are they all children : but * in Iſaac fhali thy iced be 
ledr: 

: He had before made a difference of {ſra*/ite, 
makes a difference of the S:ea of Abraham, This Wis 


and nov be 


* wvvelT all 


anhv 


N be It. 
liificn 
an -n;. 
( Church 
© be ad. 
|; and 
Js being 
May b; 
Apoſtle 
' haying 
Chriflian 
titly ex. 
deprive 
might be 
'cimiti;e 
ded With 
he Fleſh, 
of Men. 
[mprove. 
ar he WS 
. in Lc) 
bo 
reth tha «; 
$7, and 6, 
/ », 20d 0; 


M:1 


privilees i 
r Nations > 
\d Reaſon © 
that why © 
3, did not 
The 0% 
ſt Tirleof 
himſelf w:s 
| prevaile, 
as befor, 
y wenu! 
that the, 
be neitly 
d) and tis 
 Mat.1;, 
them Col 
Pſal. 26.3, 
ables of in 
: Covenint 
| with the 
UMGH 208 Us 
IEN, 17. 1%, 
p. This 15 
refer boti, 
1 which the 
God, which 
54a God, and 
and ſothey 
hat ro come, 
Bleflings bj 
were Ent 
þ, 2, 12, Wu 


as COnce 


God bk: 


j 
15, Ajrahon, | 
hers, and & 
f which tit 
-ople cf tis 
ok his hunat 
{ankind, thi 
1 ; and ts2 
: the Seed 0: 
x prels the 191 
he Lord 7: 
- the Title" 
amongſt the 


| taken 80% 
e of {rael 


ht objeR 20} 
and 


of Abraban 
teed be &® 


and n0V i 


— oh 1 
11s CveTl * 
, anv 


1p. IX. 


anon'nt 


a7 


C14 n of the promiſe ; for 1f£ Was faid ro Sarah, Gen. 21. 12. 
That che promiſed jeed ſhould be coniinvd ro 7ar0s Line; of his 
= and ail the true jeed of Abratam, 


OM ſhould the Meſſiah come , : ; a7 
who ae born after {2 manner 0 1/49, by tae Word and Promi/e 
© God. And as Iſhmael, tnoug- API 9.37% 5 Natural feed, was caſt 
7. and therein was a Type of thots, who are born only accor- 
ding, ro the Bleſh: So 1/27 35 a Type Of 4hr559w's ſpiritual ſeed, 

- oi Nature, but by vertue of rhe 


lo are born, NOT Of the Power © 
Promije of Ged. FIRE 3 = 

& That is, They which are rhe chiidren of the fleſh, 
cheig are not the CANJTEN of God : but the children ot 
the promiſe are counted tor the leed 7, 

« 4 d. Thar] may ſpeak more plainly, all thoſe that are the 
Ch:liren of Abraham according to the Fleih, are not therefore the 
Japted Children of Goa, 1t 15 Not their Blood, but their Faith 
8 make them ſuch, There are ſoin2 of .4braham's ſeed that are 
{2e&ted from the reſt, ro whom tae Promiſe was made; who are 
therefore called C5:!Frcn of rhe Promiſe: And of this tort are all 
they, who are born after the Spirit, (as Iſaac is laid to be, Gal. 4. 
1) whether Jews or Gentites. The {ente of this Verte 15 ſully ex- 
pieſt, Ga. 3.8, 14- and 3. 29. vid. Gal. 4.. 28. WE 
9 For this x the word of promiſe, Ar thistime will I 


A 


' come, and Sarah ſhall have a ſon w, 


» The Birth ot 1/aa#c waza Thing extraordinary; for which nei- 
ther Abraham nor Sarah had any ground to hope, but only that Pro. 
11e made, Gen. 18. 10. in theſe words, 4+ this zime, or according 
74 this time, Z. e. The Time of bearing Children afcer Conception, 7 
will come, and Sarah ſhall have a ſon, 1. e. 1 will manifeſt my Power, in 
fulfilling my Promiſe of giving thee a Son. By which 'tis clear, that 
the Birth of 1/aac was an Eff of God's Promiſe, and nothing elſe. 
G that they to whom the Promſe belongs (whoſoever they be) they 
are the Seed of Abraham, and upon the Obedience of Fairh, ſhall be 
accepted for the Children of God, The Apoſtle Peter tells Women 
(yhether Jews or Gentiles it matters not) that by well-doing, they 
b-come the Daughters of Sarah. 

io And not only thzs x, but when * Rebecca alſo had 


conceived by one, ever by our father Iſaac y. 

x Some read it, and not only ſhe (The Particle 73:5 1s not 1n the 
Greek) y This Inſtance is added, becaule there might be ſome 
Objetion againſt the former ; as1f there were ſome reaton why God 
choſe Iſaac, and refuſed Iſhmael. Iſaac was born of a Free-woman, 
and when Abraham was circumciſed; but 1ſhmael was born of a 
Pond-woman, and when Abraham was uncircumciſed : beſides, T/b- 
1! no ſooner came to Years, but he ſhewed fome tokens of Per- 
verſenets, and of a wicked Spirir, Therefore, in this, and the 
Three following Verles, he doth give another, which was beyand 
i!| Exception ; and that is in Eſau and Faced, betwixt whom there 
ws no Dilparity, Either in Birth or in Works: They had both one 
1nd the ſame Nother ; R-becca Conceived with them at one and the 
fimetime; ard that by no other Perſon, than ow» Father Iſaac ; 
and yer the one of the: is Choſen, and the other Refuſed. This 
now was an utdeniable Proof, thar the Promiſe belongs not to all 
the Children of Azraham, or of Iſaac according to the Fleſh : All 
the $:c4 of neither are the Children of the promiſe. 

ir (For > the children being not yet born, neither 
havingdone any good or evil a, that the purpoſe of God 5 
according to election might ſtand c, notof works d, but 


of him that calleth) e, 

z. 9.4. As there was nothing in the Birth of thoſe Twins, fo 
neither in their Works, that occationed the Difttrence that God 
mde betwixt them ; For when God ſpake of what ſhould happen 
to them, they were Unborn, and haa done neither Good nor Evil. 
a le means, Aﬀfual good or evil; ſuch as might Difference them 
one from another. As for Original Sin, they were both alike tain- 
ted therewith, 6 This Purpoie of God is to be underſtood about 
Reprobation, or (if you will) Rejefion, or Preterition, as well as a- 
bout ElecFion, c Be firm or ſtable. & Either done or foreſeen, 
? 1, e, Of the good Pleaſure and vndeſerved Favour of God, who at- 
ſo ef:Qually Calleth thoſe that He hath Ele&ed, as chap. 8. 3o. See 
a Parallel place, 2 7im. 1. 9. 

12 Ic was ſaid unto her, The || elder ſhall ſerve the [| 


younger f. 


f This Verſe is to be Read with the Tenth, the whole Eleventh 
Vaſe being a Parencheſis. Then when She relorted to the Lord for 
Counſe), about the ſtruggling of the Children in her Womb; it was 
fold her, or revealed to her of God, that The Elder ſhould ſerve the 
Towger Of the Senſe of which words, tee Anno. on Gen. 25. 23, 
where they are Recorded. 

1; As 1itis written, Jac1b 
have | hated g. 

£ The foregoing Oracle is expounded by another tilken out of 
Naiachi 1. 2, 3. fee the Aunt. there. Becauie the foregoing paſ- 
Lge of Eſar, his ſerving Jacob, doth not ſeem fo full and clear to 
betoken the EleCtion of Faceb, and the RejeCtion of Eſar in the 
Purpoſe of God ; therefore the Apoſtle brings this place ro explain 
the former ; and proves that the ſervice or ſubjeCtion of Eſa: to 
Jah, was accompanied with God's Eternal and undelerved love 
o the one, and his juſt and righteons barred of the other. There 
are ſome, that by Eſau and Facob, do underſtand their Poſterity,, 
and noy their Perſons ; that fay, the Love and Hatred of God, in 
the forecited Text, doth only or chiefly refpeCt Temporal things ; 
God loved Jacob, i. e. He gave him the Land of Promiſe; but ha- 
'N Ejau, i e. He gave him a Dry and Barren Country, and made 
berg oontain waſte ; That by God's hating Ejau, 1s only meant he 
"Hg im Iefs than Facob, &c. Such ſhould conſider, That the 

cope of the Apoltle 15 to Aw, That fome are the Children of 

God, and of the Promiſe, and nor others; and th:y muſt not mak: 

M Cite ine" out of the 0! Tf amen: impertinently, Much 

/01. It. 


Fa 


nave I loved, but Eſau 


he Mouths of the Jews, We are Abraham's ſeed, John 8. 
1 yr. ; , wy | 7 'Þ -_ 
nat here he reils them, That all Ara427's ſeed were. not the 


[ 


thr writes a Commentary, muſt not ume 
Controverſie. 
[4 What ſhall we ſay then? * 7: ;e untifhieonts * 
: neſs with God? Gol forbid 5, 
2 Another Anticipation of an Gh;-tion. Swe mike Obich 
and fay, if God Elect fome, and R-j-Q& other:, how cars being the 
ſame, or their Perſons being in themitlvis equal and al.ke; thi 
1s Unjuſt and Partial : To rhis be Anſwers, r. Move gener Nv, witl 


2 


þ See ver. 15. and the Notes there. 


} 


ROMANS | | (han 


{ 1s Written pro and co pon this Argiment Riu T remember, Þ 


his repeated Note of Dereſtition, God forbid ; ne gpringh Tt 


reads it God forgive: Noting thereby, the hinguinels of fick x 


by 


thought ; and then he anſwers this Cavil mo 
ing, r. That God is not unjult in Ef foins, vor, 
2. That he is not unjuſt in RejeFrng others, wer. 17 


”- i * 
« )}3 = #4 


15 For he faith to Mofes, | v!li tave wercy on whom 
I will have mercy, and I will have compaiſin on wkem 


[ will have compaſlion 7. 

# q 4. God is not chargeable with any injuſtic2 in Elec:ins 
and not others; for this is an AE of meer mercy and compa/;;ur. and 
that can be no violation of Juſtice. To prove rhis, be cites a Tit. 
mony out of Exod. 33. 19. vid. locum, Fire bs tells Moos, I'iian 
the good Pleaſure of his #4 was the only Rule of all bis favoura- 
ble and merciful Dealings with the Children of Men. The 1 
thing is intended and expreticd in Two ſeveral Phiates : An 


16 So then zt zs not of him that willeth, nor of him 
that runneth, but of God that ſheweth mercy 4 

k q. d. God's EleRion 1s not of Faced's, oc of any ather Mans »,7- 
ling or running, z.e. Tt is not from his good Dziires or Deed«, his 
good Inclinations or ACttions, or from the fore-figh: thereor; bur 
it 15 of God's meer mercy and zood pleaſure. This Text wennus 72 
{agizniſm under the fifth Rib. Nec votenti, nec wolanti, was ©; 
Motto of a Noble Perſonage. 

17 For the ſcripture faith unto Pharaoh 7, Even for 


os I TYPED 5 i 7 
it. wo [$A 3 4 -U45% ” a4 .\ L_ 


this ſame purpoſe have I {| raiſed thee up mz, that Imight j; Or, »45jcd 


ſhew my power in thee », and thatiny name might be :/#2. 


declared throughout all the earth. 


1 This Verſe ſh-ws, That God is not unjuſt in R-je#i2g others of 


equal condition with che EleF : For the Proof of which, he cites 
a Teſtimony out of Exod.g. 16, This Verſe muſt be joyned with 
the 14. God forbid, for the Scripture faith, Z7 e. God foirh in the 
Scripture. 2 z.e. 1 have created or promoted thee to be King im E-. 
£ypt. Or, (as ſome) 7 have raiſed or ſtirred thee vp ta optreſs my 
People: Or, 1 have hardened thee, as it follows in the nezxr Verie, 
and given thee up to thy own rebellious and obtinate Mind, 2: 9.4, I 
have done what I have done for rhis very end, that the whole 
World may ring of my Power and Glory. And this ſhevrs, that ic 
15 not unjuſt in God to reje# Sinners of the Children of Men, be- 
cauſe thereby he farthers his own G ory. For this end a!! things 
are made, and all things are accordingly ordered and dilpoizd, 
Prov. 16. 4. 


18 { Therefore o hath he mercy on whom he will jj Or, { chez 


have mercy p, and whom he will, he hardeneth 4. 

o This Verſe is a ſhort Repetition of the foregoing Argument, 
q i. e. In a judicul way, 
Belides natural hardneſs, which is in all men, and is tleretirary ro 
them; and habitual hardneſs, which is contrafted by a Cuſtoin in 


Sin; asa Path is hardened by the continual trampling of Patkn- 


ers; there is judicial or judiciary harazeſs, which is inflicted by 
God as a Puniſhment. Men harden their own Hearts ſintully (fo 
"tis thtice ſaid of Pharaeh in Exodws, That He hardened his own 
heart, Exod. 8. 15. and 9. 34.) and then God hardens ther hearts 
judicially ; fo 'tis eften {aid of God in Exadws, That He hardened 
Pharaohs heart, Exod. 7.13. and 9.12. and 10. 1, 20, 37. and 
14. 8. Godis not ſaid properly to harden the hearts of men, 5. e. 
He doth nor make their ſoft hearts hard, nor doth he put hard- 
neſs 190 the hearts of Men (as our Adverſaries (landeroutly report 
ut to afticm) nor doth he barely permit or ſuffer them to be har- 
aenzd; (which 15 the Opinion of the Pap:s about this matter ; ) 
but two ways may He be ſaid to harden ſinners. 1, By forſaking 
them, and not foitning their Hearts : As darkneſs fallows upon the 
$45 with-drawing of his /zg42 ; fo doth hardneſs upon Goa”s with- 
ho{ding bis ſoftning Influence. 2. By punifhing them ; He inflias 
farther hardne/s, as a puniſhment of former hardreſs ; and this he 
infuleth not; but it is cAle&ed, Either, 1. By Stan, to whom haz. 
dened Sinners ave delivered up: Or, 2, By themſelves, they being 
given over to their own Learrs Luſts, Or, 3, By God's word and 
works, which acctuentally bardeu the bearts of Men, as might be 
ſhewn. 

19 Thou wilt fay then untome, Why doth he ves 
find fault ? For who hath refified his will - ? 

» Here he obviates a Third ObjeQion or Cavil. The Tir? was, 
That God is «faithful, wer. 6. The Second, That God is anju5, 
ver. 14, Now the Third is, That God is ſever? and cruel, Some 
might obje& and fay, Tf God, in thoſe Courſes which Hz rakesviich 
Men and Sinners, doth follow only his own will and pl-u/we, and all 
things are Jon? thereafrer, why then doth he complain ot S12ners, 
and find Fault with them ? Ir ſeems it is hisw7l] ro reject them; and, 


who hath Refifted, or can make Refiſtance thereunto * tr feerms to ,, 
I, 13 397 is 
+ $1 
Fu” > 0 


be a common Saying amongll the Hebrews, That wane can 3th; 
Goa, wid. 2 Ciren, :0. 6. (& alis:.) 
20 5 Nay but, O man, who art thou that replieſt jj 


7 
F 


againſt God 2? * Shall the thing formed, fay to himthar 4b God. 


formed 7, Wiy haſt rhou made me thus 4 ? 
iUanu; 


— 
j «- # 3 
an Py Ef 
4 þ b 


5 Hers 


”m— 

r, io Gol 
Lys of . 
O 

. v. 4m i 
EEE) anjci- af 


eft 4241N, Or 


> bh, 7" 
5 6b [SONS 4 


= <4 : 
— a - 
wu NG. 
fr IR 
— 


On. <= 
_———_— 


— 


= 
—— —— 5 


= - 
” ", 2 
Herr ahi 
p oJ 


- — 
- 
"_ 
%. = 


ITPE5 CE 


2 eg n-4 


PE - ny 
#- 
Eg 


LE - 
4 > 


. A 7 
4 As. ww p 
zY 4A REIT, 11.077; 2” ad Tre” 27 


* it © 
4-234, £ 


Fs 4, mt 
————_— . 


= / 
Ds ——— —  _ 


— I 22 * 


RE 4 


® Ter. 19. 6. 


* _ _ - _ 37 
z Iim.2. {ime tumy to make * one veilel unto honour, and ano- 


£22. 
| Or, 3::1e 
*p. 


* | Pet.2.10, 


= D4 


lows the Anfver to this Cavil ; which 1s either Perſo-; 


s Befe 
nal ro the Caviller in this, and the nexr Verſe, or real to the Cavil 
in the two follevwing Verſes. *© The Apoſtle ſeems to ſpeak theſe 
words with ome warmth, as 1f his Spirit and: Zeal was flirred at 
the fryomils of ihe Caviller, g d. Doſt thou conſider what thou art * 


Tino art but a Nan, apicce of living Clay, a little breathing 
Dutt, a contemptible Werm in comparijun; and dareſt thou to 
word it with G34, to diſpute with thy Maker; to queſtion or call 
His to an account? You may argue Matters with your fellow Crea- 
tares, bur not with your Creator. See 1/2. 45. 9, io. from whence 
thi: ſeems to bs borrowed, wid. fob go. 2. « 9. d. Shall the Hood 
guarre! with rhe Carpenter, the 1roz with the Swirh ; or as'tis In the 
nx Veorie, the Clay with the Potter. 

21 Hath northe * potter power over the clay, of the 


A 


ticr unto diſhonour woe 

» He argucth the Leſs to the Greater, That 1f a Potrer 
hath power over his Clay, tO form It as he pleaſeth, then God hath 
much more power over his Creatures, to form them, or o:der them 
as He liiteth. God's Azthoriry over his Creature, 15 greater than that 
of a Potter over his Clay. The Po:ter mauve not tus Clay, but both 
Clay and Potter are made by God. Here is ſomething implyed, that 
as there is no difference in the matter or Iump out of which the Po#- 

>> frameth Civerfity of 7/5; Jo there is no diff:rence in Man- 
kind; all Men are alike by Nature, and in the ſame corrup? /tate; 
both thoſe who are Ele#cd, and thoſe who are RejeZea, tizat are 
made wv: of mercy, or v-/ſits of wrath. And here js this ex- 
preſſed, That as the Potrer maketh weſſils of konour or dijhonour, of 
noblzr or viler uſz, out of the ſame lump, as he liſteth ; and 1s not 
bound to give a Reaton of his fo doing to his Pers ; lo God may 
chaſe tome, and rcj-9 others, and give no account thereof unto his 
Creatures. The Portcr tukes nothing from the C/ay, of what Form 
ſozver h2 makes it; and the Creator doth no Wrong to the Crea- 
ture, however he doth diſpoſe of it. 

22 /Vhat if God, willing to ſhew bz wrath, and to 
make his power known, endured with much long-lutter- 
122 the veſlels of wrath | fitted to deſtruction x ? 

Un this. and in the next Verſe, 1s a real Anſwer to the Cavil, in 
v.19. The Apoſtie having ſpoken before of God's ablolute Right 
and Prwer over his Creatures to diſpoſe of them at his Pleaſure, as 
the Porter doth his Clay, left any ſhou'd tax God with Tyranny and 
Partiality towards his Creatures, He ſubjoyneth the Reatons of his 
difletent proceeding; with the one, and with the other. 9.4. What 
hiſt thou to anſwer or obj=& againſt God, 1f he take a ſevere Courte 
with ſome? Seeing, 1. He thereby manifeſteth his great aiſp!ica- 
fare againt Sin, and his Power to take Vengeance of Sinners: Sec- 
ing, 2. He bears Jong with then 1n their Sins; exerciſcth great Pa- 
tience towards them, in the mid of their Provocations; giving 
them ſpace to Repent, if they can or will : And ſeeing, 3. They 
are YeſJels of Wrath, fitted to deſtruction : Partly by themfelves, and 
their own ſenſual Courles; partly by Goa'”s Righteos Fudgment, who 
gives them up thereunto. : 

23 And that he might make known the riches of his 


plory on thevelſcls of mercy, which he had atore pre- 
pared unto glory y. : 

Y 9 d, Again, on the other ſide, What haſt thou to ſay, if he 
Proceed more Mercifully with others? Szeing, r. Hz thereby ma- 
niteſteth the Riches of his Glory, or his glorious Grace ; And ſeeing, 


LON? 


2. e. He had done it by Ejection from Erermry, and by Regenerari- ; 
on and SanQification of the Spirit in time. He ſpeaks here of two 
ſorts of F*ſi!: : ſome of wrath, and ſome of mercy, as he had before 
ſpoken of 7/5 of honour, and of diſhowour ; Concerning the latter, 
he ſpeaks paſſively, That they are firr-d ro deſtrufion, 
Concerning the farmer, he ſpeaks Adtively, That God hath prepa- 
red them unto Glory. 

2.4 Even us whom he hath called, not of the Jewson- |, 


ly, but alſo of the Gentiles &. 

z Hitherto he hath been ſhewing, That the Promiſe was never 
made or meant to the Carnal Seed of 45raham, This Argument 
he began wer. 6, 7. and he continues it (uling ſeveral Apoſtrophes 
and Amplifications, which were to his parpoſe) till he comes to 


A(raham, and the Children of the Promiſe; even the called of God of 
all Nations, whether Jews or Gentiles, And he takes occaſion ro ta!l 
into it, by ſpeaking of lome in the foregoing Verſe, that were Ye/- 
fels of mercy afore prepared unto glory : Now here in this Verſe, he 
tells you who thete are (and to be lure they are the Perſons he is en- 
quiring after, wiz. The ſpiritual ſeed of Abraham, and the Ch/ldren 
of the Promiſe) He ſays, They are ſuch as God called, 7. ce. Eff:&tually 
called, not of the Fews only, but of 3he Gentiles aljo ; and that this is fo, 
he farther proves in the following Verſe. 

25 As he laith alſo in Ofee, *I will call them my 
people, which werenot my people ; and her, Beloved, 
which was not beloved 

a Ire the Anoftle proves, That the Gentiles were children of 
the prom:ſe, or that the promiſe belonged to them, as well as to rhe 
Jews: And becauſe the F:ws could not endure to hear of this, he 
Cites ewo Teſtimonies out of Hoſea, to convince them : One 15 in 
this Verf?, and it is taken out of Hoſea 2. 23, The other 1s 1n the 
following Verſe. 

26 And it ſhall come to paſs, :5a7 in the place where 
:t was {aid unto them, Ye are not my people; there 
nev be calied, The children of che living God 5. 

6 This Teſtimeny is taken out of Hoſea tr. zo. And *tis as if he 


A 


2 
32 © 
C4 4 


has ſid, This that I affirm concerning the Converſion and cal- 
ting of the Gentiles, is Nothing elſe bur what rhe Propher Hoſea 


long 20 did Preach to onr Fathers, Some think, theſe places in 17 
Zjor 1 igcak primarily of the Jews, and but ſecondarily, or by 


CUMESUEACE OE the Genrifer, Uihzrs Elink, that they ſpear Chieily 


righreouſhefs : becauſe a ſhort work will the Lorg make.” 
COrgt 


The Apoſtle in this, and in the other Citations follows the 
which was a received Trantlacion, and had been in Tequeſt abs... 
Three hundred Years, though in this and in other Places it is = 
different from the H:brew Text ; That which God is {aid tg fi 
and cz ſhore, i his work; the Greek is Aog9s, which font = 
word, or the Account, as fome read it. 6 
Reaſon, why a remnant only ſhould be ſaved ; becanit God would 
ſhorten the Account, or (as we read it) make a ſhors wo;; in th, 
Fewiſh Worid. He would bring a ſudden deſtruction upon F wa 
people. Sennacherib, and the Afjrians, or Titus Veſpaſian and = 
Romans, ſhall make a compleat and ſpeedy Conqueſt of them , "I 
of them hall remain, the greater part being involved, Tres 
Infidelity, then in DeſtruCtion. . 
a Type of Goa"'s EleF among 
Faith 1n Jeſus Chriſt, 


ſabboth + had left us a ſeed i, we had been as * Sodom; +1; 
and been made like unto Gomorrha k. , 


Creatures are, which executs his 7411 as Souldiers the Wil! of theix 
Commander. 
by a Remnaxt -; a ſmall number. Theſe were left as a little $:27 our 
of a great heap of Corn ; that which 1s choſen, and left for ſrg, j; 
little in compariſon of the whole Crop, & 5z. e. Utterly waſkdand 
deſtroyed; as they were, Jer. 50. go. 


which followed not after righteauſneſs w7, have attained 
to righte2uſneſs, even the righteouſneſs which is of 
faith 2. 


leFion of ſome, and the R-je#ton of others ; as alſo about thecallin; 
of the Gentzler, and rhe caſting off the Jews. 1m That never mind 
or regarded it : 
They were full of all Unrighteouſneſs, chap. 1. 18. to the end, 
Epy. 2, 2,3, nViz, Goſpel Righteouſneſs, or the Righteouſneſs of Cir}, 
which 1s received by true Faith. 


ceouſnets o, hath not attained to the law of rightzouF 81 
2. They are /:/els of Mercy, which he had afore prepsred unto Glory, | nels p, 


Law of God, regarding and obſerving the outward Precepts and 

Ceremonies thereof, s 

| which the Law requires, which God will accept; and which sto 

vid. VEr. 2.2, - attained, not by works, but by faith, as ic follows in the next 
crle. 


ſtumbled at thar ſtumbiing-ftone 5. 


they, who followed after the Law of Righteouſneſs, ſhould not 9:tain 
it, rather than other; becauſe they ſought it not aright ; they [01517 
theie words; and here he tells you plainly, who are the true /ce of | it not in a way of Beheving, but of Working : wo 2re oP 

poſed in the buſineſs of 7uftification, as before at Jarge, 10. £922. 3. 
and 4. 7.3. e. As if they could have attained Righteorſt 25 OT je 
' t:fication in that way, which was 1mpoſſible to do. 5. 2. 2. The trve 
i Miah q d. So far were they from ſeeking Righteorſnejs by Corift, 
; thar on the contraty they took Offence at him, co their own de- 
{ ftruftion, Mar. 6. 3. 1Cor.1.23- They thought it impoſiible that 
he fhould give them a Righteouſneſs better than their own. Rp 
happened ro them accerding to the Prophecy that went before them: 
So it followeth 


bling ſtone «, and rock of offence, and * whoſoever bes b 
lieverh on him, ſhall not be || aſhamed 2». 


a Corner Stone, Fed and Precious; 
a ſtumbling ſtone, 
that belicveth; the Apoſtle, Whoſoever believerh ; 
the ſame. ; 
The Propher faith, Hs that belieweth ſh+!! not make haf? A "11 at 
poſtle, Hz ſhall 207 be aſhamed, He (1;4t 15 Raſh and Hal:y WE 
laſt be aſhamed and confounded, 


A N 8 
| ny 
of the Gentzles : Thoſe terms (3:0? beloved, and mt 1 prodl;\ hr £2 
in Scripture moſtly uſed of them. pee) Ning 

27 Eſaias alſocryerh c concerning Iſrael, Thaw... 
Number of the children of lira<l be as the fand-5% 
ſea d, * a remnant ſhall be faved e. """ "i 

In this, and the rwo next Verſes, he proves, that jc w1c cf... 0 
of old, by Eſaias the Prophet, That God ſhould paſs by the ,.0E 
part of the Jews, and ſave only @ remnant, : 


w__0 
IE Orwpls 
- 0 <3tch} 
Or 4 few of xt 


c Hereby is noted the Propher's Zeal, or his opennef: ang Pi 
The teſtimony recorded, is found in T/a. 10. 22, »9, ens. 
Et + Nun. 


ber or muiticude, for fo the promiſe was to {rao G z 


Py 
S j * 
+ | 


and 32. 12. e Iſaiah faith, Shall return, 3. e. From the Canis 


or from Sin (as 'tis 1/3. 10.21.) This ſhews, none can þ.. -_ 
but they which Return and Repenr. > Javze 
28 For he will lini{h [| che work, and cut ;; ſhort in 

: | 


upon the earth /. 
f This Verſe is alto found in that forecired place, Ja. 1g ,. .. 


Seve ut 
Very 


TIS VS bis 
I'his 15 bronghe jo a5 2 


The Apoſtle makes thoſe few ty he 
that People, that ſhould be [;, 


ven t 


29 And as Eſaias ſaid before g, * Except the Lerg tt, 


cc 


g ln 1ſz. 1.9. h Or of Hos: The Mighty God, whoſe p12 11 


i He means by 2 See, the ſame that he meant bGre 


30 What ſhall we ſay then /? That the Gentile; 


Z{ This 1s the Concluſion of the Apoſtles Diſcourſe about the 5. 


Inſtead of tfoliowing atcer it, they fled from it, 


31 Butiſrael * which followed after the law ef righ- +4 


0 z, e, The unbelieving Jews, who paid great Reverence to the 


Þ They - >me ſhort of that Righteosſs:; 


22 Wherefore q? Becauſe rhey ſought it not vy faith, 
ut as it were by the works of the law r: Fer * they'l 


Here is the Reaſon of the foregoing ſeeming Paradox. ; why 


Theſe two ar? 0P- 


TI $ . . —_ 
33 Asiris written z, * Behold I lay in Sion a flu," 


| 
t wiz. in 1/3. 8.14, and 28. 16. to which Prophecy alſo, eh? 
poſtl» Peter refers, in 1 Pet. 2.6, 7, 8. u Jeſus Chriſe 1s prop*t'y 
but accidentally and eventuasy 
w Or, confounded, Iſaiah faith, He 
which is mucll 


U . ſ 

. - - S 4 - Ve Jl, 

An idefin're P: »poſition 15 ©0 £4. alent to an Ti ay 
J . 


Luke 2. 34 


C14AP. L. 


| : 7 Hl not ionerat 
2 Fews 7! PR +hew Fol: mw aldiged to the: Low, an 4 £ - 7 / 
of the enlof the Lav. anithe R 'gEteouſne :} 


wy IP £ 4% 

{s of Faith 19 07 057 f 

. . = : y "'W, of pot j "W+5 21jt 

and believed jor Salvation 1 13. And iv tf 60 h 50 


1 


Ce 211016" 


hap. X. 


ROMANS 


Gentiles; who to thus end muſt have the Goſpel preached to them: | doth ſpeak (chough very obſcurely) of the Ries eoonſmefo of Facet: 
MX rhis foretoi'd by the Prophets and i faimif?, 12 21, yea, the toregoing words in that 7::r3centh Chapter G* Deut. 49 be- 
Its long to the times of the Goſpel. Some of the Jew. 5 Rabbios trive 
i the ; TN Rethren, a my. hearrs defire and prayer to God _— That Moſes in that Chapter, eſpecially ras beginmng of ir, 
* (, I for Ilracl is, that chey might be ſaved 5. = NN wm Gays Ot mm Mezah. He Ipezks there of the 
mers; Wild 8 F £ - 5 aell ? rive Tien TA ik ON " 4 
wee z The Apottle begins this Chapter with another Prolepſis or ces of ona which pres, - Nations, - and pee ay ge ik 
"En hecorical Inſinuation ; profeſting his unſigned Love of his Narti- : Haven, WUCH cielly happened co them a little after ri 
ot | Rhecor! > R Aſcenſion of Chriſt, ard will abide upon them till their Cop. ; 
Ley 4 þ fy defere Of their $4217 1:16 a AS bet Ee (e ) , - «131 aUDIGE UpONn CLLem THI Coe Co vi.i.iion 
- en, and his Peart) at I A{V1: wed 7 » by OI *& (of which ſee the It. crap of this Er t'e ) nd th "20 11 P 
LE {" now again I declare openly (O ye Chriſtian Fews my Brethren) Sloee- them 205m ro th ont N 1G 1h! Ren 
NU war whatever the generality of the Jews do think of me, as if I wants... — of rom-Je, tO tet Jeruaei7 WAS 15 
2, 18 4 'erethzir E '- vet there is X 2 paſſ; from above, rhe rrue Church of Jeſus Chr; then He wiil Circam< 
Wes hated thetlt» OF WEFETBCIT TREMY'; FETTNETE 18 NONE MOTE Pagan | ce eheie Heares, and HS - Seed barrle tad wed 
"oy iy and tenderly Aﬀected ro them, than I am : and from hence it is, Cs ud Ws" = 2 b xn tO 10VeTHe Lord 075 
Javes that I do fo heartily defire and pray to God for all that People, that oats + = - Fg - _ git #1 , then will the Lord rejoyce 
_ : . . Dy y . & U IC Wu, S ETOVY ce ey i hem Parhore 
ch2y might be ſaved. 6 That they may obtain Eternal! Salvation, drag = — 3 - - re] y<ed over ther Fathers ; 
. SD | - 4 pa Acc 4 17 *- . AX | He _ Y , 3 3 F: 
Otin;s and eſcape that Deluge of Wrath and Deſtruction that hangs over IE 9? VI TIN, Nc Lew s Cal hall-be 
make "a Heads written 1n their hearts; It {halt wor be lidden, or atir oft, bt nic 
co may : them, in their Mouths, and in their Hearrs. Theis che Ani 
ord * that they 7 F- : F C carts. Iiv'is the Apuitic 
22924, - of God, 4 but not according to knowledge e. Truſted. » 5. e. Think not anxioutly a ſpon {ingly within thy 
eventy, bag: 64-6 I muſt teſtify this cf them, or of many of them, 4 That j ſelf. o 5. e To lezrn the Bill of God there conce: mus c 7 Mal 
k about i they have a fervent deſire to maintain the Law of God, with all the | ouſneſs and Salvation; and then Teich it to us : or, to tos if there 
15 very in 0. Moſaical Rites and Ceremmxzes, as thinking thereby ro promote the | be any admifſion or room for fuch as I am there, ans co car py ma 
d finiſh EZ Glory of God, e 2. e, true and right kuowledge, Though it be a warm, | thither. F This is in eff=& ro deny, That Chriſt has air:ady - ail 
Ns tis vet 1t 1s a blind Zeal, They know. not the 1: of God, or what | down from Heaven to Reveal it ro us; and thit He mu. now 
. / - pu hl » . bf 2 - : SUL 2 \ 
» 5 that Righteouineſs is which he will accept. They know not tor | come to do it : Orelfe, that is as much as to deny, That Cri hh 
would whatend the L2w and Wir ſhip of God under the OW Teſtament was | already Deſcended from Heaven, to procure and pu: chaiſe S:/va; ir 
"IN the Iaftitured. They knew not that Chiiſt, in, and by whom, that | for us; and thar he muſt come down again for that purpoſe. It were 
. Pa 1 . - - E > x we 
on that Law is fulfilled. | {0 Geny the Aſcenſion of Chriſt into Heaven ; for he is gone th:ther, 


and the 
#- Few 
firſt in 
ew to be 
ſaved |) 


odoma,* Il 


Bot all 
| of their 
nt before 
$229 Out 
T ſeed, 5 
alted and 


Jentiles 
tained 
h is of 


ut the 5 
he calling 
r Minded 
| from 1, 
the end, 
; of Can, 


of righ-*< 
5htzour &1 


ce to the 
ecepts and 
rp hreeuſne/s 
vhich 500 
\ the next 


bY faith, 
x * they'C 


Jo% ; why 

not attain 

they fought 

wo arts OP 
ir. Chap. 3. 
ſ 23s ON Jt 
2. The true 
5 by Chrifh 
ir own de- 
zoljible that 
wn. Tis 
fore them: 


n a ſfun-* 


never bo - 


} eventually 
þ faith, if 
ich 15 MU! 
l Univerll. 
. The A 


ty will at 


Fo 


« jorngv 4 
} > - S : a 


k Þ,> coul:) 
6 FORD 
th I-W” 


Ce 1101+ 


f 
HE * 


and going about to eſtabliſh cheir 6wn righteouſhels g, 
have not ſubmitted themſelves + to the righteoulnels of 
God, 


{ Here he ſhews more particularly what Knowledge the Fews want- 


2 For they being ignorant of God's righteouſneſs f, | 


nOt,as a private, but asa publick Perton; He is gone chich«+ 45 0: £ 
Head, ani thither He will bring all his Members; he is the as 
our forerunner, as one that 15 gone before to prepare a place tor us, 
For Chriſtians to diſtruſt their going to Heaven, is to doubt Whe- 
ther Chriſ? be in Heaven, he had never gone thither if he had not 
perfeted our Redemption, and Salvation here. 


ed. They knew not the Righteouſueſs of God (of which ſee Chap.1.17. 
with the Notes there) This was abundantly manifeſted, being wir- 
meſa by the Law and the Prophets, chap. 3. 21. and a thing very 
needful to be known, as being that wherein man's Happineſs con- 
Gted ; but they were ignorant of it. g Their perſonal and inhe- 
rent Righteorſneſs, a home-made-Righteouſneſs, which is of taeir own 
ſpinning ; this they deſigned to ſet up in the room of God's Righte- 


7 Or, Who ſhali deſcend into the deep? 4 that is, to 
bring up Chriſt again from the dead 

9 By the Deep, here underſtand) Hell, wid. Luk $8. 31. Roy. 20, 
1,3- andy, x. q d. Don't enquire diſtruſtfully, and deſpairingly, 
whether thou ihalc go to He!/, or who ſhall go thither to fee 3nd 
bring this word, it ſuch as thou are there. r This were in efe& 


ouſneſs. þ This notes the Pride that accompanyed their Ignorance, 
and that is in the hearts of men by Nature. They won't go abroad ; 


for thar, which they think, they have or may have at home: Tuaey | 


won't be beholding to another for thar which they ſuppoſe they have | 
in themſelves. They have R-g4t-0:/n;/s enough of their own work- | 
ing; and therefore they reject and withdraw themlzlves from thar | 
which 1s of God's appointing. : | 

4 For ;Chritt the end of the law for righteoulnels, 
to every one thar believeth. 

i He proves, That the 7:ws were ignorant of the Righteouſneſs ' 
God, becauſe they were ignorant of Chriſt, the true end of the 
law, k q.d. The Law was given for this ead, that Sinners be- 
ing thereby brought to the knowlecge of their Sins, and their 
Loſt and damn*d Eſtate, by reiſon thereof, ſhould fly to Chriſt, 
md his Rightcouſneſs for Refuge. wid. Gal 3. 19. 24. Orelſe, Chriſt 
is the end of the Law, ie. the Perfection and Conſummarion |; 
thereof, The Word 1s taken in this fence, 1 Tim. 1.5. He per-| 
f:&cd the Ceremonial Law, as being the ſubſtance whereof all the ' 
Ceremonies of the Law were ſhadows; they all referred ro him as 
their ſcope and end. He perfeRed aiſo the 1oral Law, partly by his | 
Ative Obedience, fuifilling all the righreonſmeſs thereof, partly by his 
Paſive Obedience, bearing the Curſe, and puniſhment of the Law, 
which was due to us. Whatever the Laws. required that- we | 
ſhould do or ſuffer, he hath perfe&ed ir on our behalf, wid. Chap. 
8. 4. | 

5 For Moſes deſcribeth the righteouſneſs which is of 
1: tnelaw, * That the man which doth choſe chings ſhall 
1, live| by them /. 

| In this and the following Verſes, he ſhews the great difference 
that is between the Righteonſne/: of the Law, and the Righteouſneſs of 
Fith ; and this diffcrence 15 taught us in the books ot Moſes him- 
{If As for the Righteonjneſs of the Law, that is plainly deſcribed by 
Miſes, Lewit.18. 5. And it tells us expreſly, Thar the Man, who | 
doth perionally, perfectly, and conantly obſerve, and do what- | 
loever the Law requires, ſhall be rewarded with Eternal Life, wzd, | 
chap. 2. 13+ and Notes there : And on the contrary it implies thus 
much, That whoſo fails, or falls ſhort, ſhall incur Death and Dam- 
ration This alfo it declares in other places, Deuz. 27. 26. Gal. 3. 
19. This is a hard ſaying; who can hear it? Ir ſhuts us all our of 

eaven, 1t turns us into Hell, it lays upon us impotiible Conditions. 
- us hearken therefore to the Righteouſneſs of Frith; Of which in 

1 next. 

6 But the righteouſneſs which is of faith ſpeaketh on 
this wiſe 22, Say not in thine heart », who ſhall atcend 
nto heaven 0? that is, to bring Chriſt down from 4- 
bove p? 

mBy a proſopopzia (a frequent Figure in Scripture) he puts the 
Perion of a reaſonable Creature upon the Righteouſne(s of Faith, and 
bringeth it 1n ſpeaking and declaring it 1718, a: followtrh; or elle the 
meaning 1s, That the Scripture, or A:/es /peaketþ thas of the Righ- 
femſneſs of Faith. Theſe words are taken out of Dent 39. #2, 23 
pu: queſtion 1s, Whether Pau! doth properly ajledge this place in 
diref] oy” —_ allude toit; fome thuk the Lutrer, Thar Moſes 
On y peaks of the Law, and cat tie Apoitie, by an Alluſton, 
ri. Pa of Accommodation, appites 1t unto Faity; Hcnce 'tis 
kn > Fan oth not cite the very words of Moſes, bur alters 21d adds 
—_ as beſt ſerved his Purpoſe. Bur others think, Thar this 
enly nM mw the force of St. Paul', Argument, if he thowd 
ho SO e unto this Teſtimony of Moſes, and nor contirm that which 

ended by the ſame, Therefore their Opinion is, That theſe 


Ld 


to fruſtrate, and make void the 42:15 of Chriſt ; "tis as much as to 
ſay. He never died for us, or he muſt commagain and tuffer, and ſhed 
his Blood for the Remiſſion of our Sins, We 4:e4 to deliver us fron 
Death and Damnation; He endured the wrath ot God, thar we 
may eſcape it. The ſence of the whole is this, That the Do&rine of 
Juſtification by Faith, doth not propoſe ſuch d'ficult and impoſſible 
Terms, as the Doctrine of uſt: fication by Works. The R:gnteou- 
neſs of the Law, that ſpeaks terror, and puts us Info a continual ter 
of Hed, and defpair of Heaven ; but the Righteouſneſs of Faith, that 
ſpeaks Comfort, and forbids all amazing fear and troubles abour 
our Salvation or Damnation. 

8 Buc what caich it 5? The word is nigh thee z, ever: 
in thy mouth, and in thy heart: Thar is che word of 
faith which we preach . 

s z7.e What ſaith the Text in Dexz. 3o. 14, Or what ſlith the 
Rightcouſneſs of Faith * what 1s its Stile and Language 2 In the //xth 
and jeventh Vertcs he did but tel] ns what it faid not; bur here 
he tells us what it ſaith, 7 #7. e. The matter required of thee, in or- 
der to Life and Salvation, He ſeems in theſe words to Declare the 
readineſs and ealinels of the way of Salvariun, as taught us in the 
Goſpel, and by the Righteouſneſs of Fairh, God requires no hud 
thing of us; To Croſs the Seas ; ro Climb the Mountains; to take 
long and painti:] Journeys, fO find iC out. The v ay ot Salvarion 
under the Goſpel hath bur a ſhort cuz; 1t requires not fo much the 
labour of the hand, as the conteſfion of rhe wourh, and the belief of 
the heart; or, the word that teacherh ir, is ar band, it is as if ir 
were in thy mouth and heart. A proverbiil ſpeech (as fome think) 
ro ſhew the readinet5 of it. # By the word of Faich, he means the 
Goſpel, and the Defrine of it : and the Goſpel is to called, either 
effeFively, becauſe it works Faith; or ovjetively, becauſe it is the 
proper Object of it. 

9 That * if chou ſhale confeſs with thy mouth the 
Lord Jeſus, and fſhalr believe in thine heart thar 
God hath raiſed him from the dead, thou ſhalc be fa- 
ved w. | 

w 9. 4. There are but theſe two things which the Gu/pe! princi- 
pally requires in order to our Salvation, The one is, the Confeſſion 
of Chrift with our mouths, and that in fpight of all Perſecution ant 
Danger, to own Him for our Lord, and tor our eſis; and to de- 


| Clarz, that we are and will be ruled and faved by him, and by him 


only, The oclier is to believe in our hearcs, That God hath raiſed 
him from the Dead. This Article of the Reſurre&ion of Chriſt, 
preſuppoleth a}] the reſt, and faſtnerh together, as by a Link, all the 
Antecedents and Confequents of it ; his 4ſcenſion, Seſſion at the 
right hand of God, and Interceſim, which toliowed after. This Ar- 
ticle therefore, by a Figure, is put for all the ref ; and this is 
mentioned, becauſe the dearh and paſiin of Chriff hid availed us 
nothing, unlels He had rifea :22in; for thereby be obtained a per- 
fect Victory over Sin, Death, and Damnation, for ali the Ele&, This 
is the principal Ground ot our 7/7/fcation, as hath been !4id, chap 4. 
ulc. | 
To For with the heart man » belic-2th unto r ohre- 


ouſneſs ;, with the mouth confeilion is made unty (al- 
vation 2. 

x Ia the former Verſe, Cfeffion was fer firſt in this believing. 
Faith indeed goes betore Confeſſion. I believed, Yays the Pſalmif : 
and the Apoſtie after him, 2/er-fore T pak: : Yer our Faith is difo 
cerned, Flats TyſtiFeation. 


2nd known by our Cx:fe om. 7 1 e. 


Ford: q \ » TY . FT. ; 
" are _y cited ; and, That Ateſe7 himſelf, in thar place; 
/ol, IE : 


This Phrate may bu Expounded by CEzp.4 5. or 9. 30. 2 Our 
Adverfarizs the Papiſts, make great Ule of this Text to prove 
that good 777k, as Confer, Ge. ars the cault of Salvation. 
\” 'iluua 23 WW aergae 


, Mar. ; O,<3 2 


——— 
. 


_ 
eee 4 0 - 
ce. es FS 


_ 24 
4 b 2 $ 
= 

bh, VR 

T: $. & 
43. i. K% 

; 

14 h 


METS REs 
$7} 3 F- 

I 606481. 
' $8168 0095 
"PE bl F 
' 34 * | 
= 07 Y : k 
b 7 4 , " 
of Us 3 4 C 

: YEAST. 
1 [3 "77" 
; * F- 
«#6 eg... 
+ v => » We 


: 
z 
. 
*. 
b . : 
: # 
” }4 P'*: 
, b S$+ 1; 
FT 'T" 
 >2- "UE 
" q \ Fs J n 
i 13 
\ * *Ls 
(4 [Hy 
. . [ 
a 
TE. Ts. 
; > 9b 
q þ4 L734 
: , # 
F : 
. 'E v7 
. : 
: 
- 4 3 ; : 
F 31! 
** 0 
et * 1% 
* 36. L 7; 
£7 , \ 4 i; 
4 "tt 77 
* 324 t Ul 
'y E441 , 
F ''* * 'T 
j \ {Bs <> 
| it (4% 
x 4 ” 
71 4 
"T8 2) 
fe 1 


+ 


A . a 


wk. 
Ms. ag 
> 


Chap. » it The 


* Chap 3.22. 
Chap. 3.29. Cl 


Vhereas conf//n 1s required here, not as the Cauſe. but as the | 
Means thereor, The Apoltle makes Fzith here, ro be the Cauſe, 
as well of Szluation, as Juſtification ; becauſe confe/jion of the wourh, 
to which Salvation 15 here aſcribed, 1s it 1elf an Efte&, or Fruit © 
{ith : and fo according to that known Rule in Logick, The cauſe of 
the cauſe, is the cauſe of that which is cauſed thereby. 

1r For che icripture ſaith a, * Whoſoever believerth 


on him ſhall nor be aſhamed. 

a The ſaving Effect of faith and confeſſion, ſpoken of immediate- 
Iy belore, is here proved by Scripture. Either he refers ro 1/a. 
a8. 16. or P/al 25. 3. Or elle he means, Thar this is the general 
DoRrine of the Scripture. See notes on chap. 9. 33- 

12 For * there is no difference between the Jew and 


he Greek b: for the ſame Lord over all c, * is rich unto 


1 Tim. 2 5. all 4 that call upon him e, : ; 
* Eph. 1.7. 6 He gives a Reaſon for that univerſal Term ( whoſoever) which 


& 2. 4, 7- 


* Joh 12.38. 
4 Gr. our 


he-ring. 


#13. 


1 Or,preach= * , He here preventeth a Cavil of the Jews. Thus they might _ 


he had added in the precedent Verſe, and is not found in 1ſatah, as 
was noted before in chap. 33. c Theſe words are a Reaſon why 
there is no difference now betwixt Jew and Greek. This Title 15 to 
be referred more eſpecia!ly to Feſw Chriſt, who was called Lord, ver. 
9. and is called, Lord of aZ, 44.10.36. He 1s Head of althe Elet mn all 
Nations of the World. & 7. e. Is Bountiful urro All. So that the Jews 
need not envy the calling or coming of the Gerz:les. They have never 
the leſs themſelves; the Lora hath an inexhauſtible Store of Grace 
and M:rcy. The Fezntain is above our Thirſt. e Not to All hand 
over Head, but to ſuch as call upon Him in Faith. 


I; For f whoſoever & ſhall caliupon the name of the | 


Lord, ſhall be faved -. : : 

f That the Lord is rich unto al! that ca/l upon him, is Confirmed 
here by a Teſtimony our of Fol 2. 32. which is alſo cited by Sr. 
Peter, AF. 2,21. The Apoſtles Argument may be thus formed : 
If whoſoever calls on the Name of the Lord ſhall be ſaved ; then the 
Lord is rich to all that call upon him; for no Riches are comparable 
to Salvation ; but the Former is true, therefore the Latter. g Whe- 
ther Jew or Gentile, h i.e. On him whoſe Name is the Lord. Jeſus 
Chriſt is principally meant, as appears by many Paſlages in the Pro- 
phet. Compare this with 1 Cor. x. 2. 

14 i How then ſhall they call on him in whom they 
- have nor believed &? and how ſhall they believe in him 
of whom they have got heard /? and how ſhall they 


hear without a preacher ? 

# The Connexion of this Verſe, and the following Verſes of this 
Chapter. is very obſcure. Some conne@ theſe Words with the 12 
werſe; there he ſaid, There is no difference between Jew and Greek, &Cc. 


f | thereunto? To this he anſwers, That it need not ſeen, g;,.... 


_ _ | 

41 4 N J UP 

o .Q? i, þ\ 
_ ug = 4 

ſon, If the Apoſtles and Preachers of the Gofpzi, are. fon wich ©. 

great Authority from God, and bring ſuch a welcome 4.9... 

how comes it to pals, that ſo few Receive it, and yield Qb2c;.2.: 


a 


\f } <q 


becauſe it was foretold Jong ago by the Prophet, Iſaiah 54 1G! 
is not to be underſtood, as if this was the Cauſe of thei; Unbelicr 
becauſe 1/a:ah ſaid thus; The Particie ( For ) doth not {hey nk 
Cauſe, but the Conſequence : It was not becauſe the Pyggh,, G. 
faid, that they did nor believe ; bur becauſe they believeg ng; the 
Prophet ſo foretold. p This is added by the Seventy for Explanati. 
on. q #. e. Very few, none in Compariſon. Compare this \y;.1, 
John 3. 32. ic 

17 So then, faith cometh by hearing r, and hearing by 


the word of God s. 

ry This is the Concluſion of the former Gradation, v.r , He ſpeak. 
eth here of the ordinary Means whereby Faith is wrought ; n,- 
Gonfining or Limiting the Spirit of God, who Worketh, oro uy 
Work, by extraordinary Means; yea, without any Means at aj 
See the Notes on wer. l4. FS By the Command of God. qg.a The 
Goſpel could not be lawfully Preached to them, for them to He. 
it, but by God's command; and therefore the Apoſtles and Others "a 
— the Goſpel to the Genriles, had good Authority for what 
they did. 

18 But I ſay, Have they not heard? Yesverily, their 
ſound wentingo all the earch, and their words unto the 


ends of the world 7. : 

: He anſwers an Objefion, that ſome one might make in behyje 
of the Jews, to excuſe them that they could not Belzeve, berwpe 
they had not Heard ;* and Faith, as in the foregoing Verſe, ws; 
by hearing. To this he anſwers, Thar the Goſpel was publiſneg to 
the whole World; therefore the Fews muſt needs have heard jr 
That the Goſpel had been preached all the World over, he proyes 
by a Teſtimony taken our of P/alm 19.4. g. d. David tells yoy 
That all have heard, or might hear ; for the Sound of the Goſdel is 
gone out into all the earth, Obj. But David ſpeaks of the work; of 
God; as the Heavens, the Firmament, &c. A. Some think the 
Apoſtle only alludes to this place in the 19 P/a/m, and doth ng 
alledge ir. Ochers think, That the P/almi/t doth Literally ang 
Hiſtorically ſpeak of the Heavens, &c. and Prophetically of the 
Apoſtles, and Preachers ot the Goſpe). By all che earth, in this 
Verſe, you may underſtand the greateſt Part of it ; and by :þe eng; 
of the world, the remote Parts thereof. 

19 Bur I ſay, || Did not Ifrael know « ? Firſt, Moſes | 0, 
ſaith , I will provoke you to Jealouſie by them that mt 1 
are no people, and by a fooliſh nation I will ance; 


And this he proves, becauſe the Means to attain Salvation by the 
true Invocation of God, hath been made common ro All; and 
conſequently Faith; and ſo from time to time, the hearing and 
preaching the Word of God, according as the one is occaſioned by the 
other. Others make this the Coherence, ſeeing the Righteouſneſs of 
Faith is the only true Righteouſneſs, and doth, in common, - by the 
Promiſe of Goa, belong to Jew and GentiYe (as hath been ſaid) It was 
therefore neceſſary, that ſome muſt be ſent of God to both People, 
which 15 the ordinary way and means to beger Faith, and to bring 
Men to Chriſ?. Bis way of Arguing is ſuch, as Logic:ians call Sorites, 
Rhetoricians a Gradation; and *tis very Forcible and Demonſtrative. 
g 4. God hath, by his Prophets, promiſed Salvation indifferently 
to Jew and Gentile. But without calling oh Him, there is no Salva- 
z7:0u; and withour Faith, there is no Prayer; and withour Hearing, 
there 15 no Faith; and without a Preacher, there is no Hearing ; 
and without ſolemn Miſſion, there can be no Preacher. His manner 
of ſpeaking all along, is by way of Interrogation, which is the 
more Convincing; becauſe it carries in it, a kind of an Appeal to 
the Perſons ſpoken to. Every Interrogation is Equivalent to a Ne- 
vation. k There 15 no Foundation then for the Popiſh Do&rine of 
invocating Saints and Argels. 1 Amongſt the Elet# of God there 
may be ſome that are bora Dea*; and in theſe, God doth ſupply 
the want of outward Means, in an extraordinary way : But ordi- 
narily, Hearing 1s as necellary to Fairh , as Faith is to Prayer, or 
Prayer to Salvation. 

15 And how ſhall they preach, except they be ſent m-? 
as it is written, * How beautiful are the feer of then) z 
that preach che goſpel of peace, and bring glad ridings 


of good things. 

» Viz, Immediately by God or Chriſ?, or the Prophets, and the 
Apoſtles, wid. Gal. 1. 1. Or mediately by Men, z. e. By ſuch as 
have Authority gom Chr:/# to Separate and Ordain Others to this 
Work; without this orderly Mifſion or Ordination, How can they 
PP#ach, faith the Apoſtle ? 7. e. How can they do it Duely or 
Profitably, or in the Name, and by the Authority of Chriſt * For 
otherwiſe, there were, and ſtill are, thoſe that Run before they 
are ſent, Jer. 23.21. 2 Their Arrival or Approach. The Perſons 
of ſuch are meant, though their Feet be named, becauſe they car- 
ried them up and down to do this Ford. The Scripture reterred 
ro, is found in 1/2. 52. 7. The Apoſtle here leaveth rhe Sepruagint, 
and followeth the Hebrew Text: Yet he doth not Cite the Place 
in all Points as the Prophet hath it. He leaveth out ſome words, 
as (upon the Mountains) which had reſpe& to the Situation of Feruſa- 
lem ; 2nd he changeth the Number, turning the Singular into the 
Plural. Obj. But the Text in 1ſaiah ſpeaks of ſuch a Meſſenger as 
was ſent fro publiſh the Deliverance of the Jews from the Bondage 
of the 4//yrians. 4. Though that be granted, it 1s applyed and 
accommodated aptly enough to the Preaching of Peace and Salvua- 
tion by Chriſt; becauſe that Deliverance (as all other Temporal 
--: +a had its Foundation in the Redemption purchaſed by 

ii, 

16 Bur they have not all obeyed the Goſpel » 
For Eſfaias faith, * Lord ho bath beli : 
k rad p, Wno nath believed four || Re- 

ort q 


NU X, 
4 Here he proves by three Teſtimonies out of the Old T:famn:, 
That the 7ews mult needs have heard the found of the Giſpel, toge- 
ther with the Gentiles; only they Reje&ed it, when the other Em- 
braced it. And fo he layeth the ground of what he was purpoled 
to handle in the following Chapter, concerning the receiving of the 
Gentiles, and the caſting of, and after calling of the Fews. « Hee 
ſomething muſt be ſupplied to make up the Sence ; either Gu, or 
the Goſpe/, or the Righteouſneſs of Fairh, or the conver(icn of the 
Gentiles : w The 1/rael:res could not well pretend Ignorance, Con- 
ſidering what Moſes and 1ſaizah had ſzid, in whom, or in whoſe 
Writings they were Converſant, wzz. in Deue. 33.21. Still he follows 
the Tranſlation of the Seventy. x Here God threateneth the 7:w:, 
That He wouJd puniſh chem with jealouſfe and anger, by prefering 
the Gentiles before them; ar the ſight whereof their Hearts ſhould 
be ſore vexed; - to bzhold all their Privileges raken from them, 
and given to a People whom they accounted moſt Vile and D:{pt- 
cable; ro be no People in regard of them; to be Dogs and Beaſts 
rather than Man, wid. A#s 13.45. Read the cited place in Deuter. 
apd you will find that God ſpeaks of this, as a fit Puniſhment up- 
on the Fews for their 1dolatry : They had choſen to themſel es ſuch 
as were no gods; and therefore, to requite them, God wo-!1d take 
to Him ſuch as were no Peaple : They had choſen to them{clves (4 
it were) another Hwband ; and God, to be even with th:m, had 
choſen another :fe. 

2 o Bur. Eſaias is very bold y, and faith z, I was 


found [| of them that ſought me not 4, I was {|| made [ 


manifeſt unto chem rhar asked nor after me 5. 

y 7. e. He ſpeaks more boldly concerning the calling of the |, 
Gentiles, and the caſting off the Jews. He uſed a hcly ceedom, ® 
though it coſt him dear. Hierome faith, he was fawn aſunder, with 
a wooden Saw. This is a commendable property in a Preacher, 
vid. AF. 4.13. and 28.31. 2 viz.in Eſay 65. x. The Apoſtle in 
this Citation differs in ſome words, both from the H:brew Text, + 
and the L X X. as may appear to him that will compre them t0- 
oerher. a Compare this with ch. 9. 30. nd i {6 | Totes here, 

6 Compare this with £ph. 2. 2. the adveritage 4,4 advencement of 

the Gentiles was altogether of jrce Gree, and an cet 69 3 

free Ele#ion. : L 
21 Bur to Iſrael he faith c, All day lang « 1 have 


als 


ſtretched forth my hands e unto a diſc. cdient an gas 
ſaying people f. Ss 

c wiz. inl/a.65, 2. In the former verſe there 1s 2 coni0130!y 
Prophecy foretelling the vocation of ignorant and proph'1e got 
tiles; and in this, there 1s a menacing Prophecy, threat; ing t- 
rejeFing of the rebellious and Fubborn Jews. d From th _—_ 
their firſt calling to their diſſipation. e As a Father h0-u. -077 
his Arms to receive a rebellious Son, Compar: 1s wit a : p: £ 
37. f The Prophet 1/2iaþ hath but one word R:9«/{ious, 308 Wh: 
Apoſtle renders it, by theſe two words diſebedient and $479) "- 
They were diſobedient in heart, and gainſoying with thei: Te 
contrary to theſe two gracious qualificatic.:5 mentioned, 9, i 
Belief in the heart, and the confeſſion of the mouth. Compare ':- 
with 4G, 7. 51, 52. and 13-45. and 19. 9. 


he! 0s 


Is you, 
70/pel is 
PO ks of 
ink the 
oth not 
Ily and 
of the 
in this 
the ends 


, Moſes | 0, 
-m that mat | 


I. RT 
« KNGKN 
 anrer V 


eftament, 
jel, toge- 
her Em- 
purpoled 
ng of the 
s Here 
r God, 0r 
1 of the 
Ce, Con- 
in whoſe 
12 follows 
the 7:W5, 
preferring 
-rs ſhould 
om them, 
nd Deſpt- 
and Beaſts 
in Dester. 
1ment up" 
ſc]&5 ſuch 
v0'11d take 
mielves (4 
1-Ms had 


RN I was 
!| made 0, 
%n 


nder, wit 

3 Preacher, 

Apoſtle iN 

-brew Text, +» 

2 them t0- 

ts there: 

1Ccment 0 
cOAN'& 

Q gi u% > 

{ | have 


P nts 
gnG got? 


con{012:07y 
ooh ne 07% 
reat; ng the 
th me 0 
Corti 


ho.u - 


at 
th Matt.*3: 
nd the: o 


0145, 4 
] , layin? 
gainjejto, 
ei; Tongs 
d, 9%. 9; x6 
ZomMpare "++ 


h '1. Xi Pp X1. 


al, 


a ® 


55 


bum 
N 


mn 
WArges 


CHALK 


The ROMANS. 


The Jews not wholly rejeffed : Thu he proveth by bis own Example, 


Goas Eleftion, and the Example of the times of Elias, 1-——:5+ 
Sore ſaved by Grace, the others periſh by therr own hardneſs : 
Thus foretold, 6— -10. Their fall is the riches of the Genriles, 


much more will their fulneſs be ſo. This ſhould provoke the Jews 
;o a like Faith, and make the Gentiles nor to inſult, bat zo fear A 


lhe Judgment, 11 


—22. The Jews on the fulneſs of the 


Gentiles ſhall be converied. God is able. They are the Natural 
Branches. This us foretold. They are Elefed and Beloved of God 


who is unchangeable. Goa's dealing with the Gentiles is an Example 
31. Al left under Sin that they 


and Proof of this, 23 —— 


may be objetts of Mercy, 32. The Concluſion of this Diſcourſe is to 


adore the Wiſdom, Knowleage, Juſtice and Sovereignty of Goa), 


g——_—_— 


I | Say then * hath God caſt away his people 4 7 God 


torbid, for * I alſo am an liraelite 4, ofthe ſeed of 
Cor. 11. Abraham, of the tribe of Benjamin c. 


3 The Apoſtle having ſhewn in the end of the foregoing Chap- 
ter, Thar the Jews were for their Obſtinacy rejefFed, and the 
Gentiles called ; he here prevents or anſwers an Obje&tion. Some 
might be ready to ſay, If this be ſo, then God hath caſh away 
his Covenant-Peop:e, which he hath promiſed not to do; wad. 
Pſal. 94. 14- To this he anſwers ; firſt, by this accuſtomed form 
ofdenyal ; God forbid : And then he proceeds to ſhew, : That 
the reje#ion of the Fews was neither total nor final. That1t was 
not toral, he proves firſt, by a particular Inſtance in the fojlow- 
iag words. 4 7.e. Fama Few by deſcent, of the ſeed of Abraham 
according to the fleſh, and yetam not caſt off by God. c Some think 
this is added, to intimate, that he was born of an honourable 
Tribe, out of which King Saul ſprang, 1 Sam. 9g. t. and Heſter 
the Queen, Hef. 2. 5. Others think, this is added for a con- 
trary Reaſon ; left his calling ſhould be aſcribed to the Dignity of 
his Tribe, he ſays, He was of Benjamin, the laſt and leaſt of all 
the Tribes. And others rather think , that this particular recital of 
his Genealogy, is only to ſhew, that he was a Few by Nature and 
Nation, and not a Proſe]yte Converted to the Faith, wid. Phil. 


3. 5* 

2 God hath not:caſt away his people whom he fore- 
knewd. f| Wor ye not what the ſcripture faith [| of 
Elias e? how he || maketh interceſſion to God againſt 
Ifrael f, ſaying, 


1 Here he makes a farther Anſwer to the forementioned Ob- 
jection, by way of DiſtinQtion; he diſtinguiſheth the people of 
Gid, into ſuch as are foreknown, and ſuch as are not foreknown : 
And as for the former of theſe, he fays, They are not rejefed 
of God. By ſuch as are foreknown of God , he means thole that 
are ElefFed and Predeſtinated to Eternal Life, chap. 8. 29. A 
foreknowledge with approbation, 1s implyed and intended, John 
10. 14. 2 Tim. 2. 19, eHere'sa third Anſwer to the ObjeQion in 
the tr. v. and *tis taken from an Inftance in Elias, which the Jews 
were well acquaintzd with. He cites or brings a book-caſe for it. 
And he the rather brings this Inſtance, left the Fews ſhould accuſe 
him of Inſolency ; for that he had ſpoken before only of himſelf; 
and therefore he gives them to underſtand, that there were many 
other believing 1ſraelites, as well as himſelf; though poſſibly they 
were unknown to them. You know (faith he) what the Scripture 
faith of Elias, 1 Kings 19. fi. e. Againſt the Tey Tribes, who 
were generally revolted from God, and fallen to 1dolatry : Againſt 
thoſe he complained, or thoſe he impeached, ripping up their Im- 
picties, as in the following words. 


3 Lord, they have killed thy prophets g, and dig- 
ged down thine altars b, and I amletr alone z, and they 
kek my || life. 


gVid 1 Kin. 19. x0, 14. h Theſe were not the Altars of the 
high places, for they are commended that caſt them down ; nor the 
Altars in the Temple at Jeruſalem, for they were out of the reach 
of the Ter Tribes, againſt whom Elias complains: Bur ſuch Altars 
(ſay ſome) as the Godly of the Tex 7-ibes did build to ſerve God 
with, when they were not permitted to goup to Jeruſalem; in 
which caſe, the building of private 4!:ars (as ſome learned Jews 
have affirmed) was allowed. Or elſe by Alrars, you may under- 
ſtand ſuch Altars, as Elias himſelf, by the ſpecial Commandment 
of God, had ereFed. Others, by digging down Gods Altars, do 
underſtand their corrupting, and deſtroying the 2rue Worſhip of God, 
and the Words are to be taken Synecdochically or Mc<ronymical- 
ly; the ſign being put for the thing ſignified. 7 So it was for 
ought he knew ; for few, if any, did publickiy own the true Wor- 
Pip of God : So generally was thedefeCtion of the Tex Tribes in thoſe 

ays. 


4 But what ſaith theanſwer of God & unto him? I 
hare reſerved to my ſelf / ſeven thouſand men m, who 
have not bowed the knee to [| the image of Baal n. 


'* The word properly ſignifieth the Oracle, or Auſwer of God 
Siven in the Tabernacle from the Mercy-ſeat; bur it 1s generally 
taken for any Divine Anſwer or Direction received from God ; 
vid, Mat. 2.12. Heb 11.7. wherethe ſame Word is uſed. The 
Apoſtle doth not repeat the whole anſwer of God, as it is recorded 
in 1 Kings 19.15, 16, 17, 18. but fo mich only as was pertinen? 
o als purpoſe, / He faith nor, they hive reſerved themſe]ves, 
_ I have reſerved them. q. d. Of my own Free-grace I have kept 
*m from Idolatry and Apeſtacy. m A certais number for an un- 


| Certain. There were doubtleſs Women among them ; bur they 
are noted by the more worthy Sex. = The word maze, 1s not in 
the greek; but the Article being of the Fomin:ne gender it was n<c<l(- 
larily-underſtood. 


5 * Even ſo then at this preſenc time alſo, {| there isa 
remnant accoruing to the election of grace 0. 

09. d. As1t was in the times of El:2s, fo it is now ; chere 25 4 
remnant of the Jews which God hath graciouſly elefe4; rh: c- 
fore their reje#/0n is not total; which was the thins to be proved. 
Though thoſe that believe are few, in reſpe& ot cho:e that belizve 
not ; as 4 remnant 15 but little, in reſpe&t of the whole piece ; yer 
there are many thouſands of them, as 7ames ſaid to Paul, As 21. 
-_ Thou ſeeſt brother, how many thouſand Fews there are which 

el:eve. 


6 And * if by grace, then zs it no more of works: 
otherwiſe grace is no more grace. But if it be of works, 
then it is no More grace : otherwite work is no more 
work p. 


2 This Verſe depends upon the former ; and though it doth 
nor ſeem to appertain to the Argument the Apoſtle had in hand , 
yet by the direction of the Spirit, he takes the little occ.fion 
that 15 offered, to ſhew, That elefion and wocarion is only by 
grace, and not by works; this he had ſpoken to before, chop. 4: 
4$,5- andg. 11. Buthe toucheth upon it again; and here ke 
delivers a truth, which the Jews of Old, either could not, or 
would not underſtand, z. e. That there is no mixing of the Merit 
of good works, and the freegrace of God ; bur one of theſe doth 
exclude and deſtroy the Nature of the other; For it ele&;or 
and caling were both of grace and works ( as fome that call them- 
ſelves Chriſtians, as well as the Jews atfirm) then grace is no grace 
and works are no works: For whatloever proceedeth uf grace, thar 
cometh freely, and not of Debt; bur what cometh by merit of wor, 
that cometh by Debr; but now Debt and no Debr, or that which 
IS oe and by Deſert, are quite contrary things, Therefore to 
ſay, That Men are eleFel and calcd, partly of grace, and partly of 
the merit of foreſeen works, that were to put things together thar 
cannot agree, to make Debt no D-br, Merit; no Meric, works 
OW grace nograc?; and fo to atfirm and deny oneand the ſame 
thing. 


7 What theng ? Iſrael hathnot obtained that which 
he ſeekerh forr; burthe election 5 hath obtained ir, 
and the reſt were {| blinded t ; 


The Body of the Zewith Nation, fecking righteouſneſs and 1:f; by 
the.works of the law, have not obtained it , or they have not hic the 
Mark ; they aimed ar it, but they ſhot wide; they took a great 
deal of pains to little or no purpoſe, vid. chap. g. 31. 5i e The 


the Circuinciſed. # 7. e. Thoſe who are not Eletted, they are lefe 
by Gods juſt Judgment to their own Ignorance and Obdurateneſ; : 
As alſoto Satan, who doth increaſe itin them, 2 Cor.4.4 The 
Antithefis requires, that he ſhould have ſaid, The ref have not 
obtained ; but he ſpeaks this of purpoſe to ſhew the caule of their 
not obtaining, z.e. Their own 6/inaneſs of mind, and baraneſs of 
heart. 


8 According as it is Written «, God hath given them 
the ſpirit || of ſlumber 2», * eyes char chey ſhould nor ſee, 
and cars that they ſhouid not hear, unto this day «, 

u Viz. In 1ſa.6.9. and 29.10. w The word fienifieth ſuch 


mous Beaſts, out of which they hardly or never awake. xq, d. 
So it was of old, and fo ir isſtill. Or elſe theſe words { the 
former being included in a Parentheſis ) may be joyned with the 
laſt words of the foregoing Verſe ; thus, The ref are blinded unzq this 
aay. 

9 And David faith y, Let their table be made a ſnare, 
and a trap, and a ftumbling block, and a recompence 


—— 
——_— 


unto them z, 

3 Viz. In Pſa. 69. 22, 23. The Apoſtle tyerh not himſelf to 
the very words of the Pſalmiſt, bur being guided by the ſame 
Spirit by which David wrote, he adds and alters ſome words. 
without diminiſhing the Senſe. z Some take theſe words for a 
Prayer; others a Prophecy. David in the Perſon of Chriſt ( of 
whom he wasa Type ) doth complain and prophecy of the ex- 
tream Injuries and Opprefſions wherewith the Fews ( his own 
people ) ſhould vex him ; as that they ſhould give him gal for 
mcat, and in his Thirſt, give him vinegar to drink, wer. 21. There- 
fore by way of Imprecation, he Praycth down the wrarh of God 


upon them : P-rcicularly he prophefies or prays, that all their 
moſt plzatant things might be turned. co their Deſtru&tion ; | thar 
their Underſtandings might be darkened, fo as they ſhall ' dif- 
cern nothing of Heaveniy thingS; that they mighr ſavour no+ 
thing but Eorthly things, and be unable to life up Heads and 
Hearts to God, and ro his Golpel. Now D +774 having, by a 
Spirit of Prophecy, prayed down ſuch Miſeries upon the 7ews, 
they muſt be fulfilled ; therefore the general #1nb-/ief and bard- 
neſs of heart that 1s amonglt chat People, 15 not 0 be wondered 
at. 

10 Let their eyes be darkened, that they may n.I% 
lee, and bow down their back alwav. 

11 I fay chen a, Have they .ſtumoie.!, charthev thould 
fall ? God forbid5: but rather thrulch rhe © fall fal- 
| vation is come Unto the Genti.2s c, for to pr okethem 

to Ka'oulis &, 


a Hitec 


Chap. XI. 


Ele&; the Abſtraft for the Concrete; 1o before, Circumciſion for - 


a dead /zep, asthole have, who are prickt or ſtung with veno- 52. 


FRY 
* Ch. Q. 27 - 
' Oe, there 


F 
hath been. 


254 4548, hes. 


* Sce 


| 
þ 
F 
: *8 
Dc:ur, 9. 4. | 


A 
I 


5 -—— 


2 Snape 


d - -4 
: | | . 7 e 
k - , ' 
4 : & | 
" FI . 
: 
1% 4 
JA 4: $$. 4:1 
+ T5 8 | 
. Ig 44 4 
Fl, , 1 + 
I 3 » 
4 " 5 
: : 4 3 
: \ +145 4 
. - : 
4 Þ;? Ml 
, 7 p 
: fF y 
3 437 I * 
5 4x 
: E Fl 
LAST 
11S 
52 8,'}' 4 
: SH 
: : . 
: {% 
n bk &- 
7 wu 4 
: ;, 4 
e 1, #4 bor 
Z oF 
T | 7 " q 
" » 1 
A _ - 4 
$24 _ 
: A : : 
' 
K J 
- . . 
ts - 
5 
3. 
i : if ab 
, v F 's 
» +2 j ” *; - 
bs : 41 
»:N F : 
3.8 : 
*:E3 1 
. Li - 
2 # "1 
08 
'F- (od 
, o 
".77 
4 d. q! . 
2 
: A 
\! f 4 
, i I : 
: : 
' 
Ls 
1] : : 
% 
A FF 
«& +; 
: 0 
F ls . 
: je 4 
3 
Z 
4 
& 4% 
: 
m ” 
: 
. 
LAS | k 
K" 
*.f 
: 
, 


4 


24% 


CR ET anEd 


| Or, kax- LEY. | Ti 


q 9. 4. My Diſcourſe comes to this, or thisis the ſum of it. » 7, e. dened. 


I Or, 7f- | 
morſe. 1 BY 
* Ezek.12.2, be 
o $47 
Nat. 13. 1 /p 'SF:| 
«3% 19 
;# ! - 
in 8 
LE. 
af | th Fs, f 
1.008 17 0; 
$:1 6.3% 


19 4 
; 
LL - 
% 
Q 
F:] o 
4 _ 
© Aa : 
\ : 
;: £ 
(i 
: 0 : y 
by 
$4 4 p 
1.6 ad a - 
þ :, 
. 
5 . 
n « : 
oY 
us"; 
\ : 
" + £0 
j- 
' . 
: *+ 
ir, 
{ 
jg 
; 3.4 
= 7.4: 
' i 1 
= k : 
z 1348 
" 4 
2 
ct | yi 
: 
kt ; 
6 : F 4 G 
x » +16.) 
*- 1 
#Y 
x 4] : 
'. K'2 FT 
» [47 
1 we hav] 
AT. 47 on 9 
| % { 
dots 3 - 
GY 5 
">; 18. « , 
l 'F ; 
"et # : 
_ " Y $1 
oF: J 4 +] 
bat P 
: 
3 4 
i? 
: j 
p- - +" 
F et |! 
# 'S | 
1 —_ .. 
4 [4 
= + þ 4 
/ , : 
' 7 
F018: , p 
Þ 2359+ | 
« n / 
3 [ : 4 
CL +3.76 's; 
07 $4 
. + | 4 
- ” : 
& ; | þ 
re L 
$415 '” 
| $ : Hl 
\ . » 
[ _ 
? : * #. .£ 
. 1 = 
: p id; 
"8 |- F 
: 
4. i 
: 8 
» 
& þ 
7.77 = 
3 : 
»*: | " 
act j ; 
p : 
"1 
WW , l 
» ” # 
; { 
; . 
q $1 | 4 
4 I 
3 
” [4 . 
? = 
; 7 ty 4 
: 'Þ 
+4 
& & 
ty OS | 
£$: v OS! 
: 
* #4 2 
[2 $4 
"Y Ph 
| +4 $09 
ah - 
+ ' 
h . © 
: - [ 
3 r 
4 $ 
A Sf 
: Ul I'S 
£ o q 
Y & s : 
4 4 
; 4 
| Þ [a 4 
*T F 
et 
þ4 7 
: n 
1 - 
[ 
, . . . 
: . « - 
b - 
i =} 4 
Uu-” ; 4 - 
. TS. 2 
; o St 
is 
b "ud 7 nr. 
5 i 
+ : . 2 'T 
þ 1 i 
#7 
1 - 
F { 
1” 6 , 
*P7E. 
p - i} 5 . 
* {34 > e 
3, #4 65 U Sp 
k», © 
” % A 
© E.45 7 Rt) 
rf | =o © 
" : : q 
4 . ” 
$3 F5 
» & 2 {8 
f 4 þ 
IF © 1% 
»: h 
#7 1 
£4 
© N 
x f 
< z 
" } 
_ We 7 
bed 3 Md 
4 : z, * : 
F131; <5 HIEE 
* , » $ 
M1 9 j 
P 6 ey ' 
13h 5 
. : ' FIR : 
1 a 
? q 
: Gy ALF 
5) \ 
" 3 3+. at 
\FUT ” 
4 "7 v4 
, z a 
4 
X s i} 5 f 
#7 4 : 
. i 
| 4-3 &- + | 
., c % . 
* FLEE 
14+ : 
$ "2 i 
- 4 ; n 
T z 
. jf : 
4 4 £70 " 
{.:] = # s 
: . - 
i ESTE : 
4 : v 
. . p 4 
. ze : 4x . 
4 ly +© - % 
© 2: j* : 
+ 4.5 
4 3 
"y p 
LT + '* 
= . , 
; F p, - 
o . 
"= #2 
o * 4s 1E- 
4 + 3 
Y * 
++} k 
: k 
| 4 
KA 4 T7; 
F 3s = 
# 1 ” 
: 7 
g 4 j- 
”-W  t- 
,: 
ud $, 


was > "Y 
2 
me 04d 


2 = « 7} £ % [7 
k. * tte Ss i S# 
& . 


Or, the d-- 
Cay, OT. l3\s, 


YT 


F 


 Hirhorro he hath ſhewed, that the rejeQion of the Jews is not \ 
' Now he comes tf rove that it is not fred; that betore the 
they | (ha) generally called and converted, 
wth the Gctzes that believe, ſhall make one 

73 n ner one ji be rd the Lord Feſrs Criſt. And 

ng of this, divers Arguiments a= brought by the Apo- 

1 alone Blainly handles this {-crer) on which he in{iterh 

F : ; Z:ws, a+ allo for the Ad- 

b {Hers 1s another 

ation, The Jews might ſay, if the cile be 

ty Prophets Iſaiah and David, hive foretold 

t1r:5/-130, then weare in a hopeleis condition, 

To. inis Le anſwers, Thar they have not fo 

25 that they ſhou'd finally Za, fo as never to rue again : 

't {jc me to affim any fuch thing : God hath re- 

? the contrary to me, that he will one Gay call the Zews again, 
fore them ro his frrour, £9. 4, Our vithe fore-mentioned 
_ th=re ariſerh this good, thac the Gotjp2I-{ being rejeQed by 
ews ) is Preached to the G-atzles, and they are thereby called 
brought to Salvation, wid. #5 13. 42,46. Becaule now at 
ft a few Jews only, and a multitude of Gentiles are converted, 


. 


ir hath fo fallen our, - that the Ceremonial Law is rhe more eaſily 
cbrogzred, and the Doctrine of the Goſpel, and the Grace of 
End is the becrer eftabliſhed. az. e. The Fews who embrace not 
the Golp:l; 4 4 This Grace that God hath beſtowed upon the 
Gentile, he will make uſe of 1n his appointed time, as a prick of 
holy Feiloiutie ft the Fews; he will by Means thereof, ſtir them up 
ro i holy Tn gn non and Emulation, to fee thenifelves fo fur out- 


ROMANS. Chap.) 


16 | For » iſthe firſt-froit o be holy, the jump «7,11 
holy p: and if the root be holy, fo are the branch; 

» Here is another Argument to prove the Jews are no: "Rs 
RejefFed, becauſe of the Covenant made with their Pach,,; 
o Some make a difference between the frf# Fruit, and the p,,. 
in the latter part of the verſe. By the frft Fraiz, they gy...” 
ſtand the Apoſtles, and other godly Fews that were ar firſt .,, 
verted to the Chriſtian Faith; and by the Roor, they ungerts... 
Abraham and the Patriarchs.. Others take them for the jm. 


= 


) - 


} 


and underſtand Abraham, Iſaac, and Jaceb, with the reſt (541! 
Patriarchs, to be both the firſt Fruir, and the Rog: d By t., : 
and Brauches, he means, the people of the Fews thar Q4-4,.1.7 
of theſe holy Patriarchs, and ſprung from them, as 6-4;;,/+; ": 
a Root, The great Queſtion is, In what ſenſe they are {;4 ;, 
holy ? Or of what holineſs doth he ſpeak ? Ir is not mean: gs; 
herent, bur of federal, or Covenant KRolineſs; All in an ourg;,. 
and viſibl2 Covenant with God, w:re called hily, y;4 þ,., 
19. 6. Dan. 8. 24. many common things are called holy iq $,,; . 
ture, becauſe Dedicated to God, and to his Service ; yea, _ 
ſatem, though a place of great wickedneſs, 1s called a Holy (;,, 
Mat. 27. 53. In ſuch a ſenſe as this, the Jews are {1i!] 1 þi. 
People; they have an hereditary kind of D-dication to Gy" 
they have a federal holineſs and relation to God, as being fy g.. 
ſeparated to him in the Loyys of their Progenitors ; thig a 
never be wholly forfeited, as being granted to all the Pofterity 
the Holy Patriarchs : Therefore they are called, The ch:!g>:1 of ;1. 
covenant, which God made with their Fathers, Afts 2. 39, wid. ys. 


3. 25. So then God will reme- uber, in hi5 own Time, his Coy 


\ Ss 


fiript by thoie whoin they contemned, and thereupon to embrace 
the Cote, and become the People of God again. Thus as God 
hath ordered. That the coftivo away of tre Jews, ſhauid be an ocea- 
fron of tho calling of the Gentiles : 10 again on the other hand, the 
C4iling of the Geuriles nll be an occalion of the reſtoring of the 


s v3 » 
L 1s - 


12 Now if the fall of them be the riches of the world, 
and che || diminiſhing of chem the riches of the Gemges e, 
how much more thuar fu:lnels f ? 
Arother Anticipation. The Apoſtle having ſhewed, That the 
{ins awry of the Jews, Was an occalion of the coming in of the Gen- 

'5, IT mich be Obje&ed, That the Converſion of the Jews might 

1-.1xif: be an occalion of the falling away of the Gentiles. To this 

he an{wers Negztively, and confirms his Anfwer by an Argument 
{-om the lefs to the greater ; that if their Fall and Diminuton 
w-re the riches of the Genz:/es, their Calling again would be fo 
much more; 9.4. If God hath made ule of the Fall and Rejedion 
&f the Jews, for an occaſion of pouring out the riches or abundance 
of his grace upon the Nations, and the number of bejteving Jews, 
being 10 very 1mJl (which 15 meant by their diminithing ) hath 
occationed the Corver//ou of ſuch a multitude of Gentzles, then 
how much more will their tulnefs have the effe&t? Fz.e. Their 
oeneral Converlion , th? coming in of the ews , fſha!l ſo fill the 
World with Wonder, and ite Goſpel with Luſtre, that a much 
firther accc{iion wall be made even to the number of the believing 
Gent les. 

1: For I ſpeak to you Gentiles, in as much as I am 
th: apoltle ct the Gentiles, I magnihe mine cflice g, 


bY 


£ 


-:k to you of bzing rich in rhe Faith above the Jews, be. 
-nye atpZcial intereſt in you, 7 as muck as 1 am ap- 
to be rhe Apojile of the Gentiles, and am ſent chiefly unto 

'f chap. 15.16. 4159. 15. and 13. 2, and 22. 21. and 26. 
E. 4; :6Jand 2. 7. Eph. 2.8. 2 Zim 1,11, And therefore 
; letting forth your Privileges and Bleſſings, 1 magnifie mine 


: \ 4 
ch 11: 


14IſLy any means I may provoke to emulation 


them Wii are my fleſh, and might ſave ſome of 
them -. 

9.4. AndJI thus extol Gods Favour and Mercy to you, that it 
may bea means ( 1t God pleate ) to provoke rhe Jews, that are * 
0.97: jb are bicwd, t0 a holy cnlarionor jealayfe, ( wid. v. 11.) when 
they thail tee the Gentiles pollets what was promited tothem. L. How 
doth he tay, That be may lave fome of them ! is not God the Author 
ef Sizlvatioa 2 4. Yes : bur he hath given his Miniſters to be Inſtry- 
ments therein, and called them, Feiow workers with himſelf, 2 Cor. 
6. 1. vid. 1 Tim. 4. 16. : 

1% + Vor if tis caſting away of them be the recon: 
cilinz of the worid & ; whar ſha// the receiving of ther 
be !, but lite from the dead mm? 

; This verſe contains an Argument to prove the Ca/ling of che Fews ; 
Nora new one, bur that repeated which you had before v. 12. the 
ſubſtance is the Tame, only the terms ditfer : "There he ſpake of the 
Fall and diminiſhing of the Jews, here of their caſting away ; there 
it was the riches, here it is the reconciling of the World; q 4. If the 
rejetion of the Jews brought great profit to the Genz:/es, their re- 
cc2>1ion and reſtauration will bring abundantly more. & z. e. An 
occalion of Preaching the Goſpel tothe Genzziles, by means of which, 
they were recenciled 75 God, The Goſpel is the Miniſtry of Recon- 
cii;:tion, 2 Cor. 5.18, 19, 20. Into the favour of God and the 
boiom of the Church, 22 A proverbial ſpeech, to ſignifie a great 
chanse for the bertzr. The Converſion of that People and Nation 
xl! firengthen the things that are languiſhing, and like to die 
in the Clhnitian Church It will confirm the Faith of the Gentiles, 

reconcile all their differences in Religion, and occaſion a more 
horow Itetormation amongſt them : there will be a much more 


py anc Nourilhing Eftzte of the Church, even ſuch as ſhall be in 


. 
i 
i 
} 
LH 


wi cad of the VYorld, at the Reſurrei7/on of the Dead, 


nant with the Jews, the Poltcrity of Abraham, &c. who are bel, 
' for their Fathers ſake, ver. 23. Ther<tore, in the mean time, th:y 
| ſhould not look on themſelves with Deſperation ; nor ſhould the 
' Gentiles look on them with Diſdain; as it follows in the ne 
words. 


17 || And q if * ſome of the branches r be broken \ 
and thou s beinga [| wiia olive 1rec #, were graited in |+:.. 
amongſt them «, and with them partakeſt of the reg!0; 
and fatneſs of the olive tree 2, lite 


g.In this, and fome following Verſes, the Apoſtle digreſſah aj 
little, and takes occaſion to prevent the Inſulting of the Genzi/s; gps © 
the Jews; as allo to perlwade them to take Warning by their Fx. 
ample. » The wunbelreving Jews. 5s A believing Gentile : "Thoyoh 
he ſpeaks as to a part:cular perſon yer he means the wholebody of 
the believing Gentiles, t ACron taken from a wild Olive tre; }, x 
From the heathenith and unbelieving World. « The believing *m, 
Some read, fer them, cr in the place of the branches that are braþy 
oF. w By the - Root he means Abra/ham, &C. as before : By thi 
| Olive tree, he means the Church of Chriſt ; by the Row, or ſap 
| of the Root, and by the Farneſs of the Olive tree, he means, all the 
; Promiſes and Privileges, the Graces and Ordinances, the Spin] 
leflings and Benefirs, which belonged to Abraham and his Seed, or 
tothe rue Church of God. 


18 Boaſt not againſt the branches x : But ifthoy 
boaſt, thou beareſt not the roor, but the ron: thee j, 


x z.e, Againſt the Jews, who, becauſe of their unhlicf, we 
broken off, as if by Natare thou wert better than they, or more 
worthy of that Grace which is beſtowed ou thee. The word 
ſignifies, Throw not up t&y Neck, don't carry thy ſelf Scom- 
fully and Intulcingly. y 9. 4. If any will needs be to Infolent, 
let them know and corilzaer, That as the Root is not b<holding 
to the branches , but the branches to the Reo: ; fo the good things 
that the Gernzziles have, they received from the Fews, and not the 
Jews from them: The Genrt:/e Church is incorporar:d into the 
Jewiſh, and not the Jew:fh into the Gentile. Or eitc the meaning 
15, Deſpite not the Jews, for they are the narural branch:; of the 
Root that bears them. If thou inſuiteſt over the Branche:, thou 
doſt in a manner lite up thy felt againſt the Roo, that once 
bore them, and now bears thee; even Abraham, who 1s the Father 
of all them that believe. Abraham is not the Roor, fſimp!y 2nd ab- 
ſolurely, but Relatively, or by way of relation to his [ olte-1ry and 
Of--ſpring. 

19 Thou wilt ſay then, The branches were broken 
oft, that I mighr be gratfed in. 

20 Well; becauſe of unb:lief they were broxen 
off z, and rhou [| {tandeſt by faith a. Be not kigh mind- | 
ed, * but fear b. _ 


z Here he brings in the Gentiles, alledging a Reaion for the ,, 
inſulting over the Jews ; becauſe the Jews were broker 07, chat 7 
they might give place, or make way for them; and th? 5 pjj 
werthy do always give p'ace to tht: more worthy. To this he An- 
ſwers, Firſt, by way of Concetlion : Well ( /aith he ) it 1576, 
and I do not deny it, That the Jews were broken of, chat the 
Gentiles might be graffed in: But then he further adds, by WY 0* 
Corre&ion or Negation ; That the Worthineſs of the 0G#7%e 
was not the cauſe why the Jews were broken off ; but it Was be- 
cauſe of their own Unbelief; they would not accept of Chrilt, 
John rt. 11. They went about to eſtabliſh their own righteonjnes, 
and would nor ſubmit themſeltes tro the rightcouſneſs of God, 3s UV 
in chap. 10. 3. Therefore jf you Gentiles ſhall reaton after © 
manner, you plainly put a Fallacy upon your ſelves, and _ 
that for a Cauſe which is none : You don't diſtinguith betw=*" 
the cauſe and the evexr; it fell out indeed, That the 7ow: bc18 
caſt off, rhe Gentiles were received in, bur this was nor the caule 
of that. a 9.4. Neither is thy Worthinels th: caulc of thy 
preſznt ſtanding in the room of che Jews; OT Ol having ny _ 


CO 


| tion in the Church of Chriſt ; bar jc is thy 6c//cving 17 17 07, 
whom the Jews rejeffed. By Fxirh thou waſt fiſt £1g707 on) 7h 


. XI. 


ROMAN S. 


\y 

mn pap I, 
Ws -- Gill continueſt in the $000 Olive: 7rce. b q. d. Be adviſed, and Clauſe, which I ſubmit to Conſideration : By the Gen: ies, hers 

$ alt, take heed of being ſelt-concenedand ſecure ; if thou fa) intotheir| you may underſtand the Romans, or the Roman Money aid 
| fine, thou mayelt expect the ſame fate. Therefore ſtand in awe, | Power ( wid. 475 4.27, and 21. 11.) And by the cor7i7g 52 © 

yy ad fia not : Thou art ſubje& ro Unbelief and Apoſtacy, as well as their fulneſs, may be underſtood, the fol! time of their reign ans 
__ to continuance ; attcr which their ruine follows. And io here 25 fore - 

"= 21 For if God ſpared not the natural branches, zake _ Har wary of th "HW ne: Jove, | which will be- farm tou 

Ind leſt he alſo ſpare not tlice c. 2 CONrrOn 0 a the Rowes Therarchy. Ya 

ung: heed 1CIFAC AND 1] p yo : : RE Whether this doth not avrce with the Preg:efio of ov: 5 1yiet 
| co: This Verſe is a Reaſon of the forementioned Admonition.| ,,,, ,. 77 
erf5 ; TW If God proceeded with Oe leverity againſt his An- 26 And {o a!l Iſrael ſha!l be ſaved h : 25 it 2 wv 
2 1ame, Gieat Pcople the Jews, you Gentiles may 1n Reaton expett as great -n 7. * There 1 pon : od | |; 
of ts C-rerity, it you take not heed co your felves, and to your ſtand - CON 0s There {ha Come Our of Sion the deiiveter. and * ey 
y Lins _ 02 ſhall curn away ungodlinefs trom Jacob. OEe TENG 
'cende] 22 chold therefore the onednefs, ang {cverity of h Here isa Third and chief part of the afore-mentioned 27-72 END os = 
- wn God : 08 them which fell, ſeverity ; bur rowards thee, --y mo —_ 00 _ ſaved. mY « peta "Sees Ol 
a tO 02 OY BE > ———C——— . FF OS _ c 1e WO; Uni : WOU, CONULINg of Jews and Gez- 

t Of in. Or, 15. 000nels, bp chou PT IO s bus $2oodnels : Ochei tiles ; fo that word 3s ulzd, G-:/. 6 '6. & abi, Vor tacn, 
Witwa;d | WIis thou alfe thalc be CUt off wy = what he ſpake would have been no Myer y at all, Lug by Iract fore 

l. Exe : 1614. 7 In this Vert?, he farther perſwades the Gentiles to Humility ( as in the precedent Verſe } you mutt underftand, the Nation and 
n Sctip- & 15. 2 and Godly Fear; and ſuggetterh ſeveral Reaſons tor it. Thc | People of the Jews. And by all Iracl is pot meant every indi- 
A, Jerg- Firft is taken from the Example of Gods ſeverizy to the Jews, | vidual 1ſrae!ice, but many, or ( it may be) the orcateft part of 

1y City they falling into Apoftacy and Unbeltet, are generally cut of, and | them. '$> all is to be taken in Scripture, vid. Jobz 5. 45. 17m, 

| a ho); calf away. A Second Reaſon is taken from the free grace, and un-| 2,6, & glisze. Look as when he fpzaks of the Conve:fion of the 
) God deſerved goodneſs of God to the poor Gentiles, who were mercituily Gentiles, and the coming in of their fulneſs, there are many ( too 

fore lanted or grafed inth2 room ofthe Jews. A Third Realon 1s taken | many of them ) ſtill Unconverted ; to notwithſtanding the gene- 

his ca trom the condition of their preſent ſtanding, which is, if they con- ral calling of ths Fews, a great many of them may remain uvncat- 

Nterity of tinue in his Goodneſs 5 fs. & If they continue 1n that ſtate wherein led. z The Apoſtle had this by Revelation, but be DrOVes it ate 

ron of the his Goodneſs hath ſet them. Some think, the Caule 15 here put {o by Scripture, All are not agreed from whence theſe Teil. 


- 1 
< , 


AT 
Wit s 


3. AG) 
11S Cove. 
'E belgycs 
me, they 
ould the 

the next 


zken off, 0. 
ited in | + | 
the reot\ 0: 


011221 


* 
[ 


. 
Al0, 


7 a 


\_ : 7 
ligreſleth a tm 
entilis oor 

y their Ex- 

: "Though 
ole body of 
EPE2; 6. 6 
IevVINg evi, 

at are brokeu 

': by t& 
Root, or ſap 
ns, all the 
he Spuituil 
Fo Seed, 0t 


ut ifthou 
rnee j, 
nbclief, we 
y, Or more 
The word 
ſeli Scorns 
fo Infolznt, 
bcholding 
good things 
and not the 
d into ts 
the meaning 
-anch: of the 
anche, thou 
chat one? 
is the Father 
np!y and ab- 


"iy, ROE 
[ olte:1ty ana 


ere broken 


Tre broken 
0 


o this he An 
he ) 18 15 rrue, 
off, that tae 
s, by way ot 
C the Genfiiee 
ue 1t Was be- 
pt of Chril 
; righteoni? 
of God, 3S 
aton afrer th15 
Ives, and tas 
1guith berween 
the Jews bewg 
45 nor the cavlF 
cauſe of thy 
1aving ny 
. be re 


, Wc 
nh 
- { 


"0 > 
FP 


* which be the [| natural branches, be grafted into their 
own olive-trce f ? 


for the EF:& ; the goodneſs of God for faith, which was wrought 
in them by the geodneſs or grace of God, The Antithefis, in the 
nzxt Verſe, ſhews this to be the Senſe : For there he ſpeaks of the 
7:ws not continuing or abiding ſtill in Unbelief, A Fourth Reaſon 
*« from the danger that would follow, If through pride and ſecurity 
chey ſhould fall and miſcarry, they would be cx of asthe Jews, the 
natural Branches are. Some oblerve the change of the Word, The 
7s are ſaid ro be broken off, but the Gentiles would be cur off 3 they 
would as it were be ſtock'd up by the Roozs; but that feems too 
critical and curious, 

23 And they alſo, if they abide not ſtil] in unbelief, 
ſhall ve gratied in : For God is able® to gratt chem in 
2%aN e, 

- Here he adds another Argument to repreſs the Arrogance and 
in aiting of the Gentiles ; and 'tis token from the hope ot the Jews 
r:{tzurarion. Though tor the prefent, they ſeem ro be in a de- 
ſperate and forlorn condition. yet the reſtoring and re-2agratting of 
the: 1to the Caurch, is not impoſſible. The great Obſtacle is 
their Unelief, which God ts able to remove. The ſame God 
that rejefed them, is able to reſfore to them. To him all things 
are poſſible: He can canfe dead and dry Bones to live. An Argu- 
ment from the Power of God ( and that in the very words of this 
Text) is frequently made uſe of in Scripture, to excite 49pe and 
aſſurance, chap. 4. 21. and 14. 4. 2 Cor. 9. 8, 2 Tim. 1.12. Hes. 
2, 18. and 11. 19. | 

24 For if thou wert [| cut out of the olive tree which 
is wild by nature, and wert grafted contrary to nature 
into a good olive-:tree; how much more ſhall theſe 


monies are taken ; the former is tound { with fome little variation) 
in 1/a. 59. 20. As for the Jatter, ſome think it is taken trom 
Jer, 31. 33. Others think that he joyneth two places in 1[aia+ 
together (as he did before, wer. 8.) and the Juſt words are taken 
out of iſa. 27.9. The Seventy have the very words uſed by the 
Apoſile. Theſe Prophecies and Promiſes, though they were in 
part fa!filed when Chriſt came in the Fleſh (vid. 4%s 3: 26) yet 
there will be a more full and compleat Accompliſhment thereof 
-— Jewiſh Nation and Pcopile, towards the end of the 
Orid. 


27 For this ;s my covenant unto them, when I ſhall 
take away their ſins. 


28 As concerning the Goſpel, :h:y are enemies for 
your ſake; bur as touching the election, they are be- 
loved for the fathers ſake &. 


k Here an Obje&ion 1s obviated; the Genriles might objeR and 
ſay, The 7ews can never return and be faved; foralmuch as they 
have rejeFed the Goſpel, and are therefore hated of God. To 
this he Anſwers by way of Concetlion, that it vas true indeed, They 
had rejefed the Goſpe), and for this they were rejefcd and hated of 
God ; bur this hapned well to the Genziles, and was to their advan- 
tage ; for the Jews refuſal of the Goſpel, brought it fooner to them 
( wid. wer. 11.) Orelſe the meaning is, They are Enemies of God, 
and of his Goſpel; and the rather reje# it, becauſe you Genrzle: 
embrace it : "They think the worle of the Golpel, becaute you be- 
liev? and profeſs it. Then he adds by way of CorreCtion, That 
they were nor yet in-ſuch deſperate Circumſtances; but inregard 
of E!:#ion, they are beloved for the Fai hers ſakes. By Elefion, he 
means, Either Gods chcoling ther to Eternal Lite : Oc rather, 


f Be here ſhews the probability, as well as poſſibility of the 
fews Converſion ; becauſe God hath done that which. is more 
untkely. 9. d, If the Gentiles, which were a kind of wild Olive 
branches, were graffcd into a good Olive tree, the Church of God, 
which 1s contrary to Nature, ſeeing Men ule to graff a good 
Cion into a wild ſtock ( as an Apple into a Crab) and not a wild 
Cion 1ntoa good Stock ; how much more” ſhall the Jews, which 
are the natural branches ; yea, branches of that Olive-tree into 
which the Gentiles are now engraffed ; be grafſed into their own 
Olive.tree, to which formerly they did belong : According to the 
cuſtom of graffing, which was common amongſt them, ro graf 
One 7ree upon another of the ſame kind ; and grounded on Lev. 
19. 19. 

25 For I would not, brethren, that ye ſhould be 
!gnorant of this myſtery leſt ye ſhould be wiſe in your 
own conceits that {|blindneſs in part is hapned to iſrael 
until the fulneſs of the Gentiles be comein g, 


g Here he ſhews there 15, not only a Poſſibility and Probabili- 
ty, buta Certainty of the Jews converſion and callizg. This he 
calleth a Myſtery, or a Secret; though it was vevzaled in the 
Scripture { as you wil hear )yct it was not underſtood ; nay, the 
manner, the number, and the time of their Converfion 15 hill 
concealed and hid from us. The cailinz of the Genriles- was a 
Myſtery, and a great Secrer, vid. Epheſ. 3.3. And lo 1s the cal- 
ling and reſt zuraz:ou of the Jews. There are three particulars of 
this Myfery, which he makes known to the Gentiles, ( and he 
doth it the rather, leſt they ſhould ſwell with a high conceit of 
themſelves, and proud!y deſpiſe the Jews ): Two of them are 
n this Verſe; and the fr is, Thar blindneſs is hapned to 1ſrael, 
In part only, z. e. They were not all blinded or hardened; or 
this 3indze(s ſhould not laſt always, but fora time. The Jatter 
denſe agrees beſt with the word Myſtery; for it was no ſecret 
that ſome of the Jews believed; this was told them before, © wer. 
2.5, 7. Secondly. Another part of this Myſtery was, . That this 
blindne|s of the Jews ſhould continue till the fulneſs of the Gen- 
Files camein. By ſneſs here, ( as in ver. 12.) underſtand a 


lis chooſing that Nation and Pcople, above all other Nations and 

People of the Wor!d, to be his peculiar People ; wid. Deut. 7.6. 

Pjal. 135. 4. Afﬀs 13.46.- And by Gods love tothem, he mcans, 

his love of good 1Wi4, which he had to that People ſtill, for their 

Fathers ſakes: Not becaulc of the Merit of their Fathers, but becaule 

of the Covenant made with their Ft hers ; becauſe tiey are defended 

of thoſe Fathers to whom God had promited, That he would be 

their God, and the God of their Seed afrer them : Aye, and of their 

Seeds Seed forever ; which Promilcs of God, the infidelity of many 

of them, can't wholly fruſtrare. 

29 For the giits and calling of God are * without re- « 1c. ,-, 
pentance /. 19. : 
I Theſe words conſidered ſimply and abfrateily, afford this 

Truth, Thar the ſpecial Giirs of God, his Election, ſuſtification, 
Adoption, and in particular efteCual Calling, are irrevocable, God 

never repents of giving, nor weot receiving taein. * Tis otherwiſe 

with common Gifts and Graces, 1 Sam. 15.11. Butif you conſider 

theſe words relatively, as you reſvect what went before, The Senſe 

ſeemsto be this, That rhe gifts and calling of God, whereby he v7as 

pleated to adopt the Poſterity of d4braham, and toengage himfelt by 

Covenant to them, are inviolatle, and are {uch as thali never be re- 

verled or repented of. 

3o For as ye in times paſt || have not believed God, j; qe, ©.- 
yet have now obtained mercy through their unbelief. merl» were 
21 Even fo have theic alſo now | nor believed, that d:/o5edzer:s, 
through your mercy they alio may obtain mercy mm. . 194.79? 
m This is the laſt Argument, to prove the conver/zon and caling i 

of the Jews, which 1s turther confirm'd, wv. 32. The Argumenc 

is taken from the Jike dealing of God with the Genriles; after a 

long time of infidelity he received them to Mercy ; therefore 

he will alſo at laſt receive the Jews, He argues from the lefs to 

the greater; If th: infidelity of the Fows was th= occalion of 

mercy to the Gentiles, much more ſhail the ercy ſnewed to the 

Gentiles be an occaſion of thawing mercy to the Zewr 5 g. d. 

There is more force in that which 1s good, to produce a good 

Eff:&, than char which 1s evil, ro havea good Event? There: 

fore if the Unbelicf of the Jews had to good an Event as to 


THE 4 $5 


occaſion the Converiton of che Gentiles: Vh 


W , ©*,3 i Þ Sa kbates 
'MMA1Y We NOT iiliite, 
- 


g*at numb:r or multitude of the Gentiles; greater, by far, than 
4s 1 the Apoſtles days, There is another Expolttioa of this 


\ 1-Srt1 ”\ 
Con —_ LS” 
- 

a Wa 

4 


_ That the (472g of riie Genriles will conliubuce co hs 


i th KG tate i Cite RR 2M" 


Corb rnegnk 
ws. as. Ko 
TORT he, 
—__— SES; a 


- 2 


n 


- _ 
Pn — 
a9 9 > 9p 
oy 4" 

ch 3S 

: T 

m_ 

Ges 
who 


a” 


; 
; 
>» 

: 

y 7 3 : 

| Hh 
4- i 

3 


A « - Joy 
"23 5 wAAaowfrrs. 
. $2 -£”” 'x ae 
: y—_ -e-_ + f - 
a 
Wd 4+ PA —_— 


- = —_— 
*x FS. 5 +73 
AER —_ - - 
_ _— 2 : 
Oper SA 
_ —s -» qt 
"—: Ego 
4 7 —_y__ 
r s _ I. 
RA - 
- es es bo 4 m 


I 


&. 
A——_ + —— 
wAS 822 
I "e 
* 


=. 4.4 De pakes 
—A—_— * 


—_ 
oe 


= *x 
eg are rs ea toe -_ 2 4 v 


Log oy 
- 
_—— - a- YV PEAR ® —_— -—-— _ = 
YJY 4 A 
As Goes, - eye = AR oor - fe 
” "= v ” po > "_— _ 
—— = - 6. boar , "_— 
— - 4 ; - w—_ p A 
- I. """z . — - 
bh. / 17 WE « ay we _— 3... £Afiio3>.; edn en - 
> ” E . _— £ — __ _ = 
= XA . c 
_—_—— J - + "WP 7 —_—  — o_ " m_ 
F Os === —_ y - l . — ——_—_ 
— 0. IermneG | _ : . "Mrs 3. 4 


- RES. 


:1aP. 


_ P 
- in 
P. Þ RE 6. 
WY. T 
102 Þ| is To 
i Or. 79 #9 
7 


E » *,*JF ON 
” » v7 4p wr tov 


* ſer. 23.33, 


XI. R 0 M1 


of the Tews ? ( wid wer. V1. 14. ) win the Jews ſhall ſee the Gen- 
*iles Miercy,s. ec. Goas Mercy tothem: How the whole Worldflouriſh- 
eth vader the Proteſſion of Chriſtianity; how the Meizs 1s in vain 
expected by them ; how their Navoen 15 diſperſed, &c. then they 
{ha'l at laſt come jn and cleave to Chrif#, and be mercitully received 
by tim. : 

22 For* Gud hath {| concluded them all in unbeitet, 
tiathe might have mercy upon all z, 

z 9.4. God hoils, in juit Judgment, ſhut up both Jews? and Gen- 
?z/e:, equaily and tuccellively, in woeclef, as in a Priſon, that 10 1N 
hi: own tine, hz might fulfil the Couniel of his 77, in ſhewing un» 

Unto both Jews and Gentiles : Firſt 
Fews and 
whether 


this Tex 

220 O* thedepth of the riches both of the wiſdom 
and knowledze of God p ! * how unſcarchable are his 
judgments, and his ways || paſt finding out q! 

0 In this and the following Verſes, i5 the Conclution of all that 
þ2 had delivered ; eſpecially in this, and the two preceding Chaprers. 
He had ſpoken of many profound Myſteries; and anſwered many 
critical Queſtions ? And here he makes a Pauſe, and falls into an 
Admiration of God, his abundant M:ſzom and Knowledge. He ſeems 
here to he like a Man that wades into the Waters, tu1ll he begins to 
feel no bottom, and then he cryes out, O the depth! and goes no 
farther. p i. e. The unmeaſurable, unconceivableabundance of his 
I: ſaom and Knowledge. Some diſtinguiſh theſe Two ; others take 
them for the tame, wig. Col, 2.3. 9 Some diſtinguiſh berwixt the 
judements and zap of God: By the former, Underſtanding his 
Decrees 2nd Purpoſes concerning Nazt0zs or Perſons : By the lat- 
ter, The Methods of his Providence in his dealings with them : 
Others think the ſame thing is meant, by an Ingemination which 1s 
familiar amongſt the Hebrews. He ſays, of Gods judgments, That 
they are unſcarchable ; therefore not to be complaincd of, cenſured, 
or to be narrowly pryed into; and of 4x ways, that they are paſt 
finding out ; theſame in ſenſe with unſearchable : *Tis a Metaphor 
from Hounds, who haveno Footſtep or Scent of the Game which 
they purſue : Nor can Men trace the Zord, or find out the reaſon 
ofhis doings; as none can Line out the Way of a Ship in the 
Sea, oran Eagle in the Air, &'c. Some reſtrain the ſenſe to the 
ways of God in dilpoling and ordering the EleFion and RejeFion of 
M:n. 

34 For * who hath known the mind of the Lord or * 


1 Cor. 2. 16. who hath been his counſellor 7. 


® Job 36.22. 


X | Cor. 5.6. 


Col. 4g. 16. 
|, Gr.to ham. 


j O-, [ ex- 
hort you. 

* Cha. s, 
1, 16. 

| Or, ell 
P'evjirg. 


7 i,e. Who knoweth what God is about to do, or who hath 
given his Advice about the doing of ir ? This 1s taken out of 7, 
40. 13, 14. . e 

35 Or who hath firſt given to him, and it ſhall be re- 
compered to him again sf —# 

s 9. d, If any Mai hath obliged God, by anything he hath done 
for him, 1: ſhall have an ample Reward ; Alluding (as fome think) 
ro 705 41. 11, But fecing thiscannot be, and that God is indebted 
unto none, therefore t 1e Salvation of a// is of meer grace and mercy; 
and there 1s no cauſe of complaining, if he deal more bountitfully 
with ſome than with others. : 

26 For * of him, and through him, and to him are 
all things 7: || To whom be glory for ever. Amen «. 

? i.e. All things are of him, asthe efficient Cauſe ; throagh him, 
as the diſpoſing Cauſe ; to him as the final Cauſe. They are of him, 
without any other Motive ; through him, withour any aſliſtance ; 
and :o him, without any other end; z. e. For his ſake alone. 
# An uſual Doxology in Scripture, vid. Gal. r. 5. 2 Tim. 4. 18, Heb. 
13.21. I Pe. 5,11, ; 


CHAP. XII. 


Exhortations te an Holy Life ; to offer up our ſelves to God, and not be 
like unto the World, not tobe-proud of any Office or gift, but to uſe the 
Jame to edification, 1 6: Miniſters and Deacons, 7,8. To Bro- 
therly Love fervent Zeal, Hope, Patience, Prayer, 9—12. To com-| 
muncate ; to Meekneſs, Compaſſion, 13=--15, Unity, Humility, for-| 
bearance, peaceableneſs, not to be revengeful, but love our Enemies, 
and do them good : Amitive hereto, 16 21, 


I a | i B-ſcech you therefore, brethren, by the mer- 

cies of God b, that ye * preſent c your bodies 
d a living facritice e, holy , || acceptable untoGod g, 
2w:irh is your rec. ſonable ſervices. 

a Hitherto the Apoſtle hath difcourled of matters of Faith ; 
in this, and the following Chapters, he ſets down precepts of 
Holy Life. He uſeth the word in the plural number, ro amplifie 
and let forth rhe manifold Mercies of God, in Ele&ion, Juſtifica- 
rion, Adoption, ©c. q. d. Seeing you Gentzles have received fo 
many, and fo great Mercies from God ; ſeeing he hath preferred 
you before his Ancient People the Fews, and hath choſen and called 
you, when he hath rejeQted them; as you value theſe Merctes, 
ler the conſideration of them engage you to all manner of Hol;- 
ze\s and New Obedience. c That you give, dedicate and offer up, 
as Spiritual Prieſts. d Your ſelves, or your whole man, a-part 
13 put for the whole; the body is named, becauſe it is the Souls 
Inſtrument in the ſervice of God. e The Sacrifices of Old were 
preſented alive to God, and their Blood was ſhed at the Feet of the 


.. 7 

A IN 
was not to be ſacrificed: Nay, it was not fo mvc}; 5 x 
Excd. 22. 31. Levit. 22. 8. Conformable hereyc Cod wt 
, p "OE. , : : + (Log ww] 
have us Of er up our ſelves a living Sacrifice LEE Woo A, wn 
quickened and alive to God, and not acad in Sins ng T_- 
# As the Sacrifices under the Law were to be vitho- 770 
defer, Exod. 12. «. Levit. I. 10. Deus. i, 7. —_ 26 


(f] h- ett n. 


Law, 

Eph. 5.2. 

4. 18. Heb. 13. 16. hþ Or, 
thing 1s more Reaſonable, 
felves to God in this manner. Some think this is adde«, 
a difference between the Sacrifice here 1eGuired, 
Jews, which was of unreaſonable Beaſts. Others, by ,.,. - 
ſervice, underſtand þ:iritnal ſervice, and expound this place hy 
1 Pet. 2.5. where you read of Spiritual Sacrifice s acceptabl 4 
God by Jeſu Chriſt, Others think, That by reaſonat!:, you t 
underitand ſuch ſervice as is according tothe Mord of God > "ad - 


which s agreeable t9 1,1... 
than that you ſhou!d {P,, 


C: Ofs 
% 


, 


fuits beſt with the Greek Phrate in the Text, Aozexh aareciy, Th 
ſame word is uſed 1 Pet.2.2 and there tis rendred the Milk oe 
the Word; and not reaſonable Milk. And fo the Service o; Warlbiq 
here ſpoken of, is oppos'd to that Will-worſhip, of which you readin 
Col. 2. 23. 

2 And * be not conformed to this|| world ; : þy; he 4 


ye | * transformed by rhe renewing of your mind}, tha by 
ye may * prove what zsthat good, and acceprable, ang he 
perfect will of God /. , (& 


; Do not faſhion or accommodate your ſelves to the Corrupt Prin. 
ciples, Cuſtoms or Courſes of Worldly and Wicked Men, 1rq #4, 
what they are, you will find in chap. 13 13. Eph. 5. 18, 19, & Por Wet 
4- 3- You have fomewhar the like Counſel, Exod, 23;2, | p, thi 
7.14. kq.d. Be you Regenerated and changed in your Wh. 'tyt 
Man; beginning at the Mind, by which the Spirit sf Ged work; Cal, 
upon the inferior Faculties of the Soul, vid. Eph. 4.23. By pro. & 3 
ving, underſtand diſcern:ng ; By the Will of God, his revealed 13,1* 11 
in his Word ; andlo it beit accords with the reaſonable ſervice ſpo- 43 
ken of, wer. 1. and with the ſcope of the Texc it ſelf; which 
is, to exhort vnto helin:ſs and obedience which is according tg 
the Rule of the Word, He annexeth Three AdjunFs to the Wilos 
Ward of God : It « goad; revealed only for our Benefit, Jtj; ,,. 
ceprable, z.e. By Obedience thereunto we ſhall be accepted, [: 
is PerfeF, and the obſervance thereof will make us ſo too, 4 Ty, 
3-17. There are diffzcent Readings of theſe words, but 111 
to the ſame Senſe. Some thus, That you may prove the Willi 
Goa; which ro do is good, acceptable and perfe#. Others thy; 
That you may prove what the Will of God #s ; and what i god, Actept 
able and perfet. . 

3 2 For I ſay », * through the gracegiven untomey, *10 


to every man that is among you p,* not to.think of bin. *It 
ſelf more highly than heoughc to think q ; bur to think fx 


1 s 


toberly 7, according * as God hath dealt to every many; 


the meaſure of faith s. ln 
2» Before he exhorted to a Holy Life in general, now he comes to * 1 
more particular Exhortations. = z, e: I enjoyn and command, vid, q, 1 
Gal. 5.16, I do not only beſeechyou, as wer. 1. but Ialſorequue 
you as one that hath Authority. o See on chap. 1.5. p More parti- 
cularly ro him that hath any particular Gift or Office inthe Church, 
9 i.e, Not to bedrunk with a proud and overweening Conccit of 
himſelf ; his own W:ſaom, Ability, &c. r Or, Medcſily, let him 
contain himſelf within Bonnds, and not take upon him what doth 
not belong to him; let him not contemn others, and pretend to 
more than he hath. There is an elegant Paranomaſia in the Grz&, 
which our Language cannot reach. 5s Faith here is putsfor the Kuw. 
ledge of God and Chriſt, and all other ſpiritual gifts and graces beltow- 
ed upon the Fairhtul ; Theſe are called Faith, becauſe they are 
given with F4ith, and exerciſed by Faith; of theſe, God deals to 
every Man his meaſure or Portion : Not a4 gifts to one, nor the 
ſame g7/7 to every one in the ſame meaſure or proportion, via. wr, 
6. and Eph. 4. 7. 


4 For * as we have many members in one body, atid* 
all members have not the ſame office ; !, 

5 So * we being many, areone body in Chriſt, and} 
every one members one of another z: 


t Theſe Verſes are a Reaſon againſt Arrogancy. Al] Chri.tians 
are members of oxe and the ſame Body; therefore they ſhovid not 
pride themſelves in their g:frs, bur employ them for the Common 
Good. Ir is with the Church, the Myſtical body of Chriſ}, as with 


' a natural body that hath many embers, and all theſe have nt the 
' ſame Office, orthe ſame Attion or Operation ( as the word fignt- 
fieth), The Eye hath one Offce, the Ear another, the Hand 2 
| third, &*c. So the Church of Chrijt, though one body in him who 
is the Head, hath many Members; many in regard oftheir Perfons, 
and many in regard of their Ofizes, which are various and divers; 
and which is more, The members are every. one members One 01 anv- 
ther; z. e. They are joynt and fellow members ; as they have a com 
mon Relation to the ſame Head, ſo a mutual Relation to one an0- 
thers. Therefore Chriſtians, eſpecially Church-OFcers, thould not 
conremn one another, or intrude upon the Office of each otner 5 
but all ſhould uſe their gifts to the good and edification 0 & 


thers. 

6 * Having then gifts, differing according to yo 
grace that isgiven to us », whether * propheſy, /# 
propheſy w according to the proportion of faith x: + 


; | _ 
u Or ſeeing we have different gifts and offices, according 4%} 


the grace of God hath beſtowed them upon us let us _—— 
Is «1 


Aitar:* A Palit thatdyed of irs 1elf, or was torn by wild Beaſts, | 


2 YOur 
'0 thew 
t of the 
aſonabl; 
Wiceh 
dtable rg 
'Ou muſt 
and this 
2. The 
> Milk of 
* Worlhi6 
1 readin 


| k, that | OF 
ie, and ae 
[7 
upt Prin. in 
2N; and ®%/1 
J, 1 Per, Mita 
2, 1 Pee Pl 
ur Whole thh 
Fd workers WO 
I By pro © 13 
valed 174511 
rice ſpo- 43 
3 which 
xding to 
ie Wil or 
. Itis ac. 
epted. It 
0, 2 Tm, 
 » but all 
the Wil of 
thers thus, 
104, Accepte 


ntome o, *1( 
Wk of bim- k. 
coll think [G- 
VEry Man wi 
ſoon 
he comes to * 10 
mand, vid. 9,1 
ſo requue 
More parti- 
the Church, 
5 Conczit of 
fly, lr him 
a what doth 
d pretend to 
n the Greek, 
or the Knows 
»aces bellows 
aſe they are 
God deals to 
5ne, nor the 
NN, via. 4h, 


body, ad *1 
h 


aciff, and5 
ly, 
A1] Chri:tians 
ey ſhouid not 
the Common 
rift, as wit 
have net zl 
ie word figit- 
the Hand 1 
'y in him who 
their Perfons, 
15 and divers 
#5 one OL anv- 
ey have a COM" 
n to oneanc* 
s, thoulc not 
of each Ont 3 
-ation 0 & 


ing £0 the' 
zheſy 7 tet 85 ] 
ith X* *# 

according ®1 


: thei, 
arigi,0 


> 5 kv ; ki , 
10), A] p. Xit. 
| 4hould 


omet . ' 
and 10 Words in the foregoing Verſe, .Let ws be one anothers Mem. | Union and Con 


ropheſying, Teaching, Exhorting, &c. Others think; ir|5- £p%. 5. 31.) 1 ! 
- 10 Be, * kindly affeQioned one to another 5 ;* Heb. 13. 

Any brotherſy love, in honour preferring one ano=- 

ther &. h 


? " & . , 
S-5 
SA . 
. #7 
* 
b. 


hs hath, ſeeing all:is of Grace. 


thelf a1@ not : $& . : 
38s ''o fill up the Sence. There +15 an Ellipſis in the Words; 
Ny 


hing mult be inſerted. Some make the Supply from 


the laſt 


n P 
af ro be ſupplied our of wer. 3. q. 4, Whether we have Pro- 


> Jet us be wiſe unto ſobricty in Propheſying ; and o in all the l 
fy chat follow : In all the ſeveral gifrs and offices, he ſheweth 
4 v4 they ſhould behave themſelves. The Greek Seholiaſts: will 
ne ſupply'd in them all (let ws perſevere.) By: Propheſying, in 
this place, YOU 
had 10 
tr, witl 
gs joyned, 
things, 9/4. 


1 a wonderful Dexterity in applying the ſame ; to which 


AN. 


Underſtanding d:vine Myſteries, .and O!d-Teſftament Prophe-| Young : So much the Word here uſed imports. 
Expounded by Phi/. 2. 3. It is exemplified in Abraham, Gen. 1}. 

ſometimes the Revelation of Secret, and Future| 9. Moſt defire Preference and ' Honour before others, which 0 
AE. 11.27. and 21.9. x 7.e. They that have this |contrary to the good Counſel in this Text. Some read ir prevent 


D 


Do not only avoid it, but hare it, and that as Hell 


_ Chap. XIE. 


qo ohie This: 'is added to prevent Pride and Envy : None| Word, -and in Tongue only bat in Deed, and in Truth, 2 70h: 
AE 'be iprond "of that he hath himſelf, or envy what ano- 3. 18.. g | 
w Theſe words, Let ws Pro- | (elf. The 


if 


he ſimple Yerb imports extream Deteſtation, and 'ris ag+ 
in the Text ; bur they are put in by our Tranſla- | gravated by the Compoſition (wid. Pſal. 119. 104. Amos 5. 15.) 

h Be glued ro it. (So the Word fignifieth.) Things that are Glued 
rogether, are hardly diff joined ; the fame Word is uſed of the 
junftion between Man and Wife, (vid. Mac. 19. 


I. 
1 Per. 2. 
I7. 


Fl Chriſtians onght to have ſuch Aﬀe:Qion one to another, as || Or, 


may underſtand an extraordinary Gift, that ſome| Parents have to their Children ; and as all Creatures have to their love of the 
& This Clauſe is brerhron. 


cifh of Propheſying, muſt exerciſe it according to the meaſure of | one another ; Don't carry til] others honour you, but do you go be. 


Krowleage) m 


e, ink : 
Siem Faith, and ſee that they regulate themſelves according 


ch:reunro. Some think, he calls the Holy Scripture in general, 
in Analogy or Proportion of faith'; by. theſe, the falſe Pro- 
hers of Old, were diſcerned, if they delivered any thing con- 
trary thereunto (Deut. 13. x. &c.) Othepsthiok, he ſpeaks of cer- | 
in Principles, or Heads of Chriſtian Religion (v1. Hes. 6. 1.) 
om which the Prophers and others, were not to ſwerve ;. Yea, 
ome thinks, he aimes at the Symbol. and Creed, called the 


Apoſtles 3 which, froin the Beginning, was called the Analogy of 


the Duries of thy particu 
that reſpe&s the glory 


- 


heavenly myſterics, that God hath given rhem : Or |fore them in this Expreilion of broth:rly Love, and be Examples 
heir Propheſying, they muſt have regard to the Articles of |to them. | : 
I1 || Not flothful in buſineſs / : || fervent in ſpirit #:;"! Or, i 
ſerving the Lord » : | a 


itl:g.mcebs 
net 1thful. 


! This Clauſe may be Expounded by Eccleſ. 9. 10. 4.4, In all || Or ſcct;;- 


lar, and gzneral Calling ; in every thing 
of God, thane own, or Neighbours Good ; 
take heed of Slorhfulneſs. wid. Mat. 25. 26. Heb. 6. 12. m This 
is added to the Former,.as the Cure of ir. 
will drive away Sloth. This Spiritual W 
mended ro us in Scripture, vid. Gal. 4. 18. Rev. 3. 19. See Ex. 


1g bg. 


Zeal and Fervency 
armth 15 often recom- 


Fain. amples of it in Pſal. 6 
So TIL REIT” 7 ples © . 69. 9. John 2.17. and 4. 34. A#.18. 25. 
7 Or miniſtry ”, let us wait ON our miniſtr ing 45 OT |» 5. e. Diligently performing all things that are required to his 


e that teacheth, on teaching 4. 241K 
} Under this Word, are comprehended, all ordinary Eccleſi- 
ical FunCtions, which afterwards he divided into two Sorts : 
he Firſt relating to the Word ;' The Second to other pious Works. 


12 * Rejoycing in hope 0; patient in tribulation 


; Theſe Words (Ler s wait) are not in the Text, bur fitly ſup- | Continuing inſtant.in prayer p. | 


led. 4 4- Let all that be called to rhe office of the Miniſtry, |' 


if thoſe, that 2niniſter and-labour in the Word and Do#rine : Some| 1 
link, they are diſtin& Offices 3 (vid. Eph. 4. 11.) and that in 


ud the Office of Teachers, and-chiefly exerciſed themſelves in In- 

Ring their Hearers in the Principles of Religion ; in laying 
wn ſound Do&rine, and Confuting of Errors ; Others had the 
£ of Paſtors, and attended chiefly ro Exhortation and Admo- 


ereofT, Others think, that they are diſtin& gifts, bur not di- 

roffces ; ſome have a gift to Teach, that have none to Exhort and 
Carre. The Apoſtle, wer. 6. calls them differing gifts ; ſome. 
mestheſe T'wo are found in the ſame Perſons, and they are excel- 
my Gifted, both for Teaching and Exhorting. 


$ Or.. he that exhorteth, on exhortation 5 : he[' 


that | giveth, Jet 4im2 do it | with ſimplicity c ; he that|curſe not :. 


Ieth d, with diligence 3 he that ſheweth mercy, * with 


eerfulneſs e. a 5 I 
See the Notes on the foregoing Verſe. « 7. e. He thathath 
ifice of Colle&ting and Diſtributing the Chu ch-4lmes (which 
ws the Deacons Work or Charge, A#. 6. 1. &c.) Let him dif- 
urge it with ſimplicity, or with ſingleneſs of. Heart. 
prd is rendred, Eph. 6. 5.) Let him do ir faithfully and Impar- 
ally, and without Favour or Aﬀe&ion. d Or he that is a Pre- 
lent, and ſer over others. There is a grear difference amongſt } 
ſors, who is meant. by this Ruler. Ir is not meant of State-|* 
ulers (of them he Treats in the next Chapter) bur of Church- 
ers. Some underſtand, all Church-Officers in general. Others 
ink, ſuch are meant, as were nor properly Paſtors and Teachers, 


te primeove Church, where they had variety of Minifters ; ſome given. to hoſpitality r 


in Things uſeful, as well as nec 


r1, and 23. 3. 
of the Spirir, 


0 2.e. In hope of Deliverance here in due time, and of eterna] 
le diligent 1n If, and attend to It, vid. AF. 20. 28. 1 Per. 5. 2.| Salvation hereafter, ſee on chap. 5.2. p1 
Tuebing, in the latter end of this Verſe; and Ezhorting, in the | the Duty. A Metaphor from Hounds, 
evinning of the next, are mentioned, as the T'wo great Works | till they have got it. wid, Luk, 18 


Thel. 5. 17. : 


Service and Honour, wid. Pſal. 2.11, Eph. 6. 7. Some Copies read 
it, Serving the times, in ſuch a Senc 


e, 4S1t 1S 1n Eph, 5.16. and 
ol. 4. 5. WE; - » | 


:* Phil. 4. 
4» 


þ Be inſtant and conſtant in 
that give not over the Game 
+ I, Eph. 6. 18. Col. 4.2 


13 * || Diſtributing to the || neceſlicy q of ſaints z* r Cor. 


9 The word ſignifieth Uſes. 


. To. Heb, 13.16. 


I4 * Bleſs them which perſecute you s : bleſs and 


s 7, e, Pray for them, and wiſh well to them. | This is bor- 


rowed from Mat. 5. 44. and Luk. 6.28. See the like in 1 Per. 3. g. 
this ho pr to us by the Example of Chriſt himſelf, 7ſa. 53. 
I2. ZUR, 23. 34+ 
and the Primitive Chriſtians, 1 Cor. 4. 12. t His doubling the Ex- 
(So the hortation, ſhews the difficulty of the Duty ; "tis Contrary to cor- 

rupt Nature, and it denotes the Conſtancy of it ; we muſt Perſe- 
vere therein. When he ſaith, curſe not, he means wiſh no evil to 
your Enemies. Obj. The Prophers and Apoſtles went contrary to 
1s, Vid. 2 King. 2. 24. Pſal. 69. 22, 23. AF. 8. 20. and 13. 10, 


1 Pet. 2. 23. Of Stephen, 484. 7. 6o. Of Paul, 


_ 4. Theſe did it by a ſpecial vocation and inſtin& 


I5 Rejoyce with them that rejoyee, and weep with 


t together with ther had the over-ſight of the Church, ro|them that weep «. 


pl the ſame ; ro regulate Miſdemeanors, to pacify Differences, 


# 7, e. Be touched with your Neighbours good or evil, as if it 


Uminiſter Diſcipline in Admonition, and Cenſures : Theſe| were your own. The Reaſon of this Sympathy or Fellow:-feeling, 


y call Seniors or Elders, or the Cenfors of Manners ; and are} is 
e ſame the Apoſtle calls Governments or Governors, 1 Cor. 12. 
vid. 1 Tim. 5. 17: 


rendred by the Apoſtle, 1 Cor. 12. 26, 27. Becauſe we are Mems- 


bers one of another, therefore, if one Member ſuffer, all the Members 
e Some underſtand this generally of all| ſuffer with is ; and if one Member be honoured, all che Members rejoyce 


fians, that they ſhould be Charitable, and that with Cheer. | wich ir. Examples hereof we have in Luk. 1. 58. 2 Cor. 11. 29. 
neſs. Bur the Apoſtle is yet ſpeaking of the ſpecial Offices of | vid. Heb. 13. 3. 


& Church ; It cannot be meant of Deacons, for as much as he had 


16 Be, of the ſame mind one towards another w {| *; 


e eighth and 
» Or (as the 
Word may be rendred) Purſue hoſpitality ; bunt after it, as Abra« 
ham, and Lo: did, Ger. 18. 1, 2..and 19, 1, 2. Concerning this Duty 
of accommodating ſtrangers (which is here meant by hoſpit aliry) 
vid. Deat, 10.18, 19. 1/s. 58. 7. 1 Tim. 3. 2. Tit. 1. 8, Hb. 13. 2. 
I Pet. 4.9. 


I6. 1. 


The Saints muſt be Succoured || Or, com- 
a, , as eſlary. This Apoſtle, in his Se. 79%7ca7- 
cond Epiſtle to the Corinthians, ſpends two whole Chapters about? 


icon; preſſing Points of PraQtice, and making Application jew? ar __ pa gn tage 22 poor Saints (viz, th 


ng. 


* Mar. -. 
4+: 


|| Or, no: 


ken of them before in this very Verſe. Such therefore may be] Mind not high things, but {| condeſcend to men of low minding. 


nded, as had the Care aſſigned them, of the Sick and 7Trapetent, 

riſers and Strangers, &c. 1 Tim. 5. 9. The ſame, it may 

; that he calleth Helps, in 1 Cor. 12. 28. This Charge he di. 

zh them ro diſcharge with Cheerfulneſs; without being wear 

that troubleſome Work, or being ſowre and froward tothoſe 
had to do with. 


as 


_—_ Be * not wiſe in your own conceits Z.. ©, :; 
w This | 


Exhortation reſpe&s not ſo much Unity in Judgment 
in AﬀeQtion. 9. d. Bear the ſame good reſpett to others, as v- 


thers bear to thee ; let there be a mutual Agreement in your De- 
ſires, and good wiſbs one for another. wid. Chap. 15. 3. Phil. 2. 
2,1, i Pet. 3.8. x s.e. Things above your Capacities. and Cal-? "Ip 


Fo : v-7 bo Se.” K ; 
9 * Let love be without diflimulation f. l! Abhor lings. Take heed of ambitious Aſpirings : Remember what 9a- 


K . 6 4 w y .*” . 
Rn Which is evil 2g, || cleave to that which is |i4 ſaid {one every: way above you) in Pſzl. 131. 1. 


- 


3 The word 


dd þ, | | | (Low) only is in the Greek ; The other Words are put in by our 
The former Exhortations reſpe& Church-Officers in parti- | Tranſlators and it may be referred, Either to Things, and fo it 
t; thoſe that follow, concern all Chriſtians in general. He Anſwers to, high things, 1 the foregoing Clauſe : Or ic may be 


pls With Love, becauſe that is a radical Grace ; other Graces ,| referred to Perſons, according to our Tranſlation; and then the 


"gracious Aﬀtions do ſpring from it, and muſt be accompanied 


our Neighbour : The latter ſeems chiefly to be intended. | taken from Prov. 3. 7. vid, v. 3. _ : 
.I7 Recompence to no man evil for evil 4. 


&reat requiſite in Love, is this, That it be without diſſimulation, 


- 


ſence is; 'Thatwe, Thould not deſpiſe our poor brethren, bur ſtoop 
"It. By Love here, you may underſtand the Love of God, |to the. loweſt offices; of Chriſtian kindneſs. z This ſeems to b 


Provide, 


(8 the word is) without Hypocriſy. 5. e. That it be fincere things honeſt in the ſight of Men 5. 


_ (2 Cor. 6,6. 1 Pet. 1, 22.) It muſt not be " 


s Our Saviour teacherti the ſame DoKtcine in othex Words. 
| X xxx] Mar, 


jj Or, be 
contented 
with mean 
things. 
*Jer. 45. 


2I, 


».4 
- - 
> 


S—_— 


nub ng  "Yy 
an——_> 


tt 
= oo _ I 
Is. 


— 
CE 
nn OS 


d mg. 


4 
—_— 
- 


TR 


rp rem 
: 


tare It ret o ogen4aht Re 


=; pr _— 


- a ts 


+-=- 


-— 
- 20 ama, 
+ e 


— 


= q 
a ">. _— —_— 
0 oe GE o- " -_ 
_ p l q _ 
PR_ _ vc wt 
_—_ - 4 - 
A . = 
4 a 
«+ 48-1 01007 he 4 NN — 
tug $6. he IR Oy * » 
LY 3% gmws be. 
9x 5 Eo . 
+: ——- 
- 
—a__ 2 


#4258 
W..- 
& E224 
of eh 
M L 8T' 2 
:4 Fi "hl 
"Oen | = 


! %s F 'y 


Chap. XII ROMANS Uuyy 
| | ans were freed from SubjeSion to the powers that were gy, "i 
he ſeaſonably inſiſts upon the Do&rine and Dury of: _ em; 
Revence inthe three Jaft Verſes of this Chapter : Revenge is fo Authority ; which tpoint, 1s more fully handled in this Co 
5 11/0:4, that Men are very hardly diſlwaded fromir. than in any ether places beſides, 5 7, e. Every Perſon : In the ef 
before God, ſo | verſe of the foregoing Chaptey the body was pur for the . irſt 

| Man; here the Soul ; and when he fays every Perſe i © Whole 

that Eccletiaſtical Perſons are not exempred. c He he wh Pin, 

Obedient, but be SubjeF ; which i«a general word { as fo if, be 

noted ) comprehending all other Duties and Services ae Nan 


Mat. 59, 40.%vi6 Paralle) placeSin Prov. 20.22. T1 Theſſ. 5. I5-: 
'r Pet. 3. 9. See more againſt retajiaring Injuries, and private 
tweet to 77) anc : 
5 q. a4. Look carctully, as to your Conſcience , 
*0 vour Honovr and Reputation with Men. Let all your Words. 
and A&ions be juſtifyable , and unexceptionable , chat evil men 
may have 30 occaſion to reproach you as ev! acers. See a parallel 
' 2 ab Þ : 6 . - 
Place, 2 Car 5, 23- See allo Piil. 4.8. 1 P-2.3. 16. — . | j-Qion muſt be limited only to lawful things; other 2b 
13 If it be poflible , as much as lyeth in you, liveſhnuh anfoc. 25 they did. AF. 4-19. Or as Poljcargy ail, 
peaceably with ail men c, | he _ required to blaſpheme Chriſt, and ſwear by the —_— 
: The duty to which he exhorts in this Verſe, is a peaceable _”— by ng pes ured , —_ ſaid , We are taaghn 1 
and quict Behaviour toward: all Men, =s well Infidels as Chriſti- oe __ " | OT gp rg as is ng; Contr as 
dns: thoſe $ho are bad” & well xs thoſe who are Good. They"? oe Region. & inouph ts pens Df Mnge, be means Park 


And to the diſcharge ons. 


n—— _” RO =——_— 
7 - A 
. ————_ =. 
: : ma_—_ 
btn apaty 99 ata 


o__ 
—_— 

* +— a 
—— 


ST > 
Ee 
um 
— v—_ 


| and he caiis them Rolers in the third Verſe, whom h ; 
Ike Exhortation we have, Heb. 12. 14, . he ago ETD » V e calls Py 
t rhis D he annexeth a double Limitation ; rſt, Tf :t be in this firit verſe. See in Lib, 12.1 me Chriſt rells his Diſc; ky 
CONE Oy They ſhould be brought before Maziſtrat Pl Prey 
Poifible ; Secondly, much as lyeth in yon. ©7- d. It may ſo fall our , c y wo q? _ i h oy _ an Power; ; tis the 
Kays i are of ſuch froward and unpeaceable Tempers , ame word, and 'tis plain , he means Per ons 1n Power, Chr; 
pad mares wo . ſtome notes, That he rather ſpeaks of our Subject; 
that 3t is impofſible to hve peaceas!y with them , or by them: Or b oe? -P b 8 Art Jection to pour; 
ſuch cond tions of pcace, may be offered, as are not lawful for you wane. NN NMNAETY wo" e, that howloever their Power by 
to accept : it will not and with the truth and glory of Goa, and C —_ gg _ —_ - IT, and obeyeq. He 
with a good Conſcicnce ; to Agree with them. Bur however, do - ci s of powers in the plurat number, becaule there are diver 
your patt, let there beno default 1n you, why you ſhould nor live | Fes and kinds thereof, as Monarchy, Ariſtocracy, Demicracy, Y,, 
+41 Lien wharkevd X der which foever of theſe we live, we muſt be ſubje& thereunt, 
in peace with al! me | : p ; | FPG” By Higher powers, he means, the ſupreame Powers (10 the wo 4 
I9 Dearly beloved d, avenge not your Ic 8 Co 1S rendred. 1 Per. 2.13.) To them, and to thoſe that are Ay 
rather give place unto wrath f ; For it is written g, Ven- thoriz'd by them , we muſt ſubmir, for that is all one, if 
gCeance #& mine ; I will repay it, faith the Lord. _ ir to nes Fo oy ng : "0g vw 2. There are one 
d He uſeth this friendly Ct mpeljation , the better to perſwade ag Pun Hock in he wh ap 5 &, 
to the ſollowing Dury , which is ſo hard to Fleſh and Blood. Xt wh foregoing aniten ny) Th jet which hath c wy. 
” You had Ws -—-—obmagy] my this Av I hymen, iits Author, is to be acknowledged, and ſubmitted to: hu - 
The proneneis or COrgpt Nature, tO Pi 4 T5, . 4 1 * Ut 
he 4 enews his Exhortation , and enlargeth uponit. This ſeems giftracy ms INE > ge Þ-. OR not here of 
ro be borrowed from Levir. 19.18. f z.e. Say ſome, your own p b Feb ga; CF z Manift r Ot getting intg 
Mah. a d. Be not angry, or ſuffer not your Anger to hurry oy "ok p ets. 4. H Sek _ ag and Authority, 
yeu oO Revenge ; give way 2 little, and walk aſide as Ahaſuerus p ror mg hon mo Spin eraiiring, - he aps 
6id, when his 145 arh kindled againſt Haman. Others refer it to : etreſted = altoated by Prov. 8. 15 _ ; T "ER 
the [#7ath of thoſe who wrong us ; decline their Wrarh as David] f This Paſſage is an be mplifi dion of Oe a Jum 1g, 
did Savls ; put up Wrengs and Jnjurics : Bur it is better referred toſ, kr 3. ad EROS Laramrerte b = Eraſ- 
the Wrath of God, which they ſeem to prevent who ſeek Revenge. Bougrgr wine wy hey <f ent C preter, by way ot Explz 
CBE india and right you, to -overre you. of nation ; but it is found in all antient Copies ; therefore, that cop. 
thad $2097: 1roirelidaatry In 4/5, 4ang ge you Oleeic of his is without Foundation, The Emphaſy of this Sen 
your /dverſaries; commit your Cauſe to him , and don't take his tetice, ſeems to Jyein the word Ordeined : Power and civil ; 
Work out of his hand. This Sence agrees well with what follows. |, 9. G y from God Il other th; nd CIVLI Als 
CSI rok Cond ao; wall Pal, ge. 1. Nob | OY OE WO ASE, 68 aul onyer thing2ure ; banich 
Om > i LeSRCA EO Fang Ortained by Him. This Word ( as one obſerves ) impljeth Two 
THI . | |: FG , _ [things ; Invention, and Ratification. God invented and deviſed this 
20 Therefore if thine enemy hunger, feed him; if] Order, chat ſome ſhould Rule , and others Obey ; and he main 
he thirſt, give him drink 5: for in ſo-doing thou ſhalt |taineth and upholderh ir. 


heap coals of Fire on his head 7. 2 Whoſoever therefore reſiſteth the power, refiſteth 


* a” 


-—— 


hy Y Soom” 7 - ”-  —. % 

- Ie rig: 00Y Oar Rn ag” Io _ yen 
mater by 3 — ——_—___——_— 

*; EI "x4 - , . 

- - 454] a = ou 
n 5 "Y 
- _ 
a4; ». —- - - 


"I ”" Sigen>—<bat 
= ——_—- wS—w— _ 
- -- rpm” - 
= _ ——-> FS _ 
Eo - 
"_ : hb i Mt 
an 4 . 
*-- ”® c FOG . 
- *. : 
- X La 


þ 9. d. Inſtead of rendring Evi! for Evil to thine Adverſary,|the ordinance of God g : and they that reſiſt, ſhallte- 


do him Good for Evil. wid. following verſe. 7 #. e. Either make] ceiye to themſelves || damnation b. 


him relent, or bring down the greater Vengeance from God upon ; 
him, This is taken out of Prov. 25. 21, 22. See the Notes| £ Theſe Words are, Either an Argument to enforce the Sub- 


there. po enjoyned in go S-00 oh part of = Srngaing Verſe, 9.4, 
© Ie ou may not rei; therefore, you nw ſubjeF . Orelle. the 
21 Be not overcome of evil, but overcome evil with] 00 7 wed: Do evi nt ffs, * «4 Tok yu 
good k. Civil Power 5s of Ged, and of his Oraination ; therefore it mult 
& This Verſeis a divine Aphoriſme : therein the Apoſtle An. | not be re/ifted or oppoſed: To reſiſt Authority , isto wage War 
ticipates an obje&tion. Some might be ready roſay, if we ſhould againſt God himſelf. hþ The Word properly fignifieth Judgnmt, 
tollow rhis Advice we ſhould be counted Cowards and Daſtards, and it 18 applyed in Scripture , Either to humane and temponl 
@©c. To this he Anſwers, That 'tis the ready way to be Trium- [Puniſhment, as Luk. 23.40. 1 Cor. 6, 7. 1 Pet. 4. 17. Orcl 
phers and Conquerors. By ev:!, here, he means, the wrongs and |fo divine and eternal Puniſhment , as Luk. 20. 47, H:#.6.2, 
*niurics of men ; and to be overcome of evil, is to be mov'd and pro-|2 Per, 2, 3* Accordingly it may be underſtood of eternal Punilt 
roked thereby to Impatience or Malice. When 'tis thus wich a | ment, Thar the Reſifter of Authority, ſhall receive from God ; ort 
Man, be is overceme, or conquered : in revenge of injuries , he is a | e£mporal Puniſhment, that he ſhall receive from the Magiſtrate, 
CENT $I Nat: Videry indeed; Ties 21.9.2 Oe NS G2 2t 2 terror £0 good works HY 
eEFcome Evid Wi , tn: : IS a "Is 3 . | 
the way nor to be even wich him that wrorgs us, but to be Above _ evil 4. Wilt thou then not be afraid of ths hee 
him. Thus David overcame $az/, and El:jhe the bands of Syria. Do that which is good , and thou ſhalt havs prileo 
This is the way to overcome our ſelves, and our Adverfaries roo ;| the ſame &, 
Our telves, in denying our Jluſts that egge uson to Revenge; our ' A F ed 
Adverſatiics , in = wh, ht them to Aru and ickncetedey their hi #- Ahis Vaueb 09g pq  Hom— A— h 
miſcarriages: ighr Powers, and 'tis taken from the Benefit thereof, or ito 
the end of Magiſtracy , which is for the Puniſhment of Fvil, al 
| the encouragement of goed works, wid. 1 Pet. 2,14. When 
CHAP. XII. ſayes, That Rulers are not @ terror to good works, he merns, Thi 
are not ſo ordinarily ; or they were not Oraaine/ foi o_ end 
ougar 
Our Duty to Masiſt-ates : and the Grounds thereof , 1 ——9. the "oy qptrvagy » _ = by ( -4ug pd Free * being 
Commands of the Second Table rehearſed Love the fulfilling of them Puniſhed by the Magiſtrate ? Do Sk ck is Good, and tho 
ay GeeD. b2ir. Night of Ievorance being paſſed away, axd they} 51414 not only be free from Fear, but ſure of Praiſe and Reward 
Enjoying Goſpel Light , they muſt caſt off the deeds of darkneſs, drun- wid, Prov. 1 and 16. 1 By Good, he means, not chat 
k neſs, whoredi9m, hatred, ftrife, Envy : and put en the Lord Feſus Ns 0. OI By Sr, Live honeſtly 
Chi abll the drmeur of Lb. 11.1 which is ſo Theologically , bur Morally. 9. 4. Lt % 
4 | ome bo; ae hurt no Man in Wrd or Deed, give to every Man his Due, & 
This is good in the ſight of all Men ; of Heathens themſelves: 


TITLE. Et every ſoul be * 6 ſubje& c unto the || higher] , por he is the Miniſter of God to thee for good / 


Rs i [Tor __ is no power but] g1rif thou do that which is evil, be afraid ; for Þe 
+ of Gode: the powers that be , are || ordained {| off «1h not the ſword in vain m: for he is the minilter © 


i} Or, th: God f. : God, a revengerto execute || wrath upon him chat dott! 
- S45 M a The former Chapt-y 1s called by ſome, Saint Paz!'s Ethicks,| ayil gy. 

Jeb. 19. and this his Puliticks : He having faid, in the Jatter end of the 
- O foregoing Chapter , That Chriſtans muſt not avenge themſelves ,| 1. q. 4. That is the end of his Office; and for this Reaken 
A &- but refer all ro God, who ſays, That wengrance ts his, and he will hath inveſted him with his Authority. The Scriprure ws 
7 ""M $aca but Some might infer from hence, That it was not lawful | the ſame Title to him that Preachzrh the Word , and t0 q' 2 
io 7 for Magiſtrates to Right rhe wronged ; and avenge them of their! Beareth rhe Sword ; both are God's Miniſters, and there - 

” Adverſaries ; or for Chriſtians ro make uſe of rhem co ſuch a| common End of their Miniſtry , waich is the Good an ro 
purpoſe ; Therefore, to ſer us right in this matter , he falls into| of Mankind. m This is the Reaſon why he that Tranſgre, 
the tollowing Diſcourſe, Ochers think, That the Apoſtle having | the Mora! Law of God, or the wholeſome Laws of the Land w 
ipoken tn feveral places concerning Chriſtians Liberty, left whar| he lives, ſhould be afraid of the Magiſtrate > becauſe He _—— 
be had faid ſhould be miſconſtrued, as if he meant , that Chriſti- | the Sword in vain, The Sword is figuratively put for —_— 


-Otext, 
the frſ 

* Whole 

$ Plan, 

t lay, be 
me have 
[his Sub. 
viſe ; We 
id, when 
ortunegf 
taarht t 
0; conty 
Perſons. 
ls Pie, 
Diſciples, 
5; isthe 
[, Chryl, 
to Piper; 
Power bs 
eyed. He 
ar? diverſs 
cracy; Va. 
thereuntg, 
0 the word 
at are Ay. 
C, 4s if wa 
e are Other 
laſters, &, 
15 a Reaſon 
th God for 
O : bur Me. 
L not here of 
petting into 
| Authority ; 
, and heap: 
This Clauſe 
2. Join 19, 
rmer. Era. 
way of Expla 
Ire, that con» 
of this Sens 
and civilAt 
re ; butitis 
nplyeth Two 
d deviſed this 
and he mains 


er, refiſteth 
fiſt, ſhall re: 


nforce the Sub- 
: Verſe, 9.4. 
 Orelſe. they 
{, Seeing the 
erefore it mult 
to wage War 
ifierh Juagmnt, 
e and tem 
4. 17. Orelk 
41) Heb, 6.2 
eternal Puniſte 
from God ; or 
e Magiſtrate. 


works, butto 
of thi: power? 
haves pl uſo 


Subje&iontot! 
thereof, or fron 
1ent of Fvil, 
When 
14 \ 
Ne mecns, Thi) 
1ed for that end 
ſtand they ouger 
om fear of deins 
aiſe and Rewadl 
y Live honeſtly 
[an his Dut » © 
chemſclves- 


hee for good | 
z ; for he 

the miniſter C 
him that dotti 


or this ho 
ripeure aP 
” and ro him 
and there 15 
00d and en 
hat Tranſg* 
of the Lav whe 
Lecauſe He __ 
put for _—_— 


OMANS Chap. X1Iy 


OA £ He alludes to the Cuſtom of Princes, who hadcertain nor expreſſed in the Decalogue. All Commandments reſpeting ous 
- -73 going before them, bearing the Enfigns of their Authority. Nerghbour , are fumm'd up in this One ; Thou ſhalt Love thy Nerghe 
of The Magiſtrate Lek not his Authority for nothing, or for bour ns thy ſelf, vid. Mar. 22. 39. Gal. 5. 14. 1 Tin. 1. 5. 


10 Love worketh no ill to his Neighbour : there- 


* J v L =” 
Fn efore) ſhould be «ſaid of the Magiltrare : Or, rather, the wr” og the wary the law © "Mar. 2: 
-” - Reſon in other and plainer words, becauſe heis God's Offi- | = + erle 15 an Argument to prove what was propeied, 42. ver. * 
— Execute Mra:b upon him that doth Evil ; He is in God's | J*7: 8. It may bo chus formed, Thar which worketh no ill, or 
cer wud Earth, and doch the Work which primarily belongeth doth no hurt to our Neighbour, fulfilleth the Lew : Bur Love wors- 
_— wid. chap 12. 19. By Wrath, here underſtand Puniſh- eth no ill to his Neighbonr; Ergo. That this is the property of Lovs, 
m_ (ſo-in Luke 21. 23. chap. 2. 8.) The word Execute, is not in wide 1 Cor. 13.5. When he faith, Love doth no hurt, this 1s 112 - 
meTexr bur aptly eriongh ſupptied by our Tranflators. ply'd, That ir doth good ro bis Neighbour. Where only Negative: 
the ng | ; are mentioned, the Affirmative alſo is included ; and the N:g 87:2 
s Wheictore ye muſt needs be fubje&, not only for| is only ſer down in this place, that it may the better correſpond 
wrath, but aſe for contciages a . Ee with the foregoing Verſe. 
4. Secing things are ſo asT have ſaid ; That Magiſtcacy is $0 e TIE. T | TI 
f Cod, thit 7 is his Ordinance, that it 1s for Kg aa” fo” hi 4 And that Gy — _- 1" D, that now zf ml! ; 
Mankind, and that it is Armed with the Sword ; Therefore, igh || time to awake out of Heep © : tor now « {| our : Or, 2c 
there is a necellity of SubjeCtion, and thar for a donble Reaſon. Salvation nearer than when we believed 4, hour 10 ©: 


firſt, From far of Wrath, or Puniſhment from the Magiſtrate. a Or, Moreover; the Speech is Ellip:: ca}; ſometbing muſt hen 
Sicondly, Ad more eſpecially from the obligation 'of Conf. ience, underſtood, as (! jay, or, add) q.d. Unto this Exhortation to wats 24 
b:cauſe God hath ſo Commanded ; and to Erre in this Particular, |Chrjſtian Love, 1 further add what followeth. 5 7. e. Contider- © © 


. 14 {01 wW C 1 y þ "g-" d ; - . . , Healer 35+ 
i; co offend God, and ro wornd our own Confciences, wid. 1 Sam. ing itis a Time of great Trya), or Time of Goſo«l-light, c #, e.9 Þ 
24. 5+ Ecelej.'8. 2. and 1 Per, 2. 13. 


| To ſhake off Slothfulnefs, Security, and all former Sinful Courtes, 
6 For, tor (his cauſe p pay you tribute q alſo : for |See thelike, t Cor. 15, 34. Eph. 5. 14, 1 The. 5.6, 7,8. qd. 
they are Gods miniſters, attending continually upon this Conſider, now itis the hour or feaſon to Awake or Rite up, tolay 
hing r alide our Ny/gh:-Cloaths; as ir 15 in the following Verſe. d Or, 
yery t on = bo Teftimony of that Subeftioavimuain Salvation is nearer tO us, than wh.n we firſt began to Belicye, 
1,0. 0 ; - » k : u WE > 
w Magiftracy, you pay Tribute, q The Word is Plural in Ho Ori- pn one —_— Eg _ _ 
inal, and thereby iSinrended al] Taxes and Burthens, which are wn wr Ch wh Ages oy ot wh" a  Theks: 
tally and cuſlomarily impoſed. 7 This is a Reaſon why Tribwce | ered *by the DeſtruBtion of the Jewr, thrir Perſecmrors, This 
ſhould be paid to Rulers; becauſe it is for the Support of their Me fi 6 Id by Ch:ift, and Ok fd b «rt TIO as 
Authority, and a dune Recompence for their great Care and In- =_— A 2 "of h P FA roam 0. Sr Mir 
auſtry. When the ſays, they atrend continually upon this very | _ _— og _ Na 1 _—_— , wy one the = ;* he 
thing : The meaning is not, they atrend always upon the recei- ys ems = ; rows Pa Q Bette - ogy "aiggn 2h 7 bo 
ving of Tribute ; but it is to be underſtood of the Duty of Ma. lays, org — = wen they Fo = © In w = - emis $, 
iftrates, which is, to be continzally promoting the goed and wel- yo hewanggy-way ES os Ce cork eons hr: r p I OP 
jc of their SubjeAs; to encourage the Good, and puniſh the Evil my The p "ay h ” —_ ws —_ he Ws 
Doer, which is rhe very thing he had been before ſpeaking of. ef nr" Second , oma oor the word.  Therfore 
ET peaking ot. fit ſhould be with them, as with choſe that Run in a Race ; the 
7 Render therefore to all their dues s : tribute to whom j--7e7 they come to the Goal, the faſter they Run, leſt others 


vibute de, cuſtom to whom cuſtom, fear to whom |9u1d get before them. 


far, honour to whom honour ?. 12 The night is far ſpent, the day is at hand c: *let*® Cel 2 £. 
; This Verſe Concludes his Discourſe about the civil Powers. [us therefore caſt off the works of darkneſs f, and let 
When he faith, Render ro all their Dues ; he doth not mean all} jc he f lizh 
| "drag pur on the armour of light g. 

Men, bur all Magiſtrates, whatever they be for Quality, either ET EN 
good or bad ; 'or whatever they be for Degree, either ſupream or |, © Some, by Night and Day, do underſtand the night of Jewiſh 
wee, Render to th.m thtir Duts. i.e, Whatever of right Perſecution, and the 4ay of Deliverance and Sa]vation. vid, Heb. 
belongs co them, vid. Mat. 22. 21. #t There are Two things | 1; 25: Others, by N:gh:, underſtand the 15-72 of Ignorance 
tht more eſpecially belong to Rulcrs, and are due from thoſe that | and Infidelity ; This he ſays 25 far ſpent, or for the greateſt part 
weunder them. The one is M#intcnance ; The other is Reverence. |*, 15 paſt and gone : Drkn:ſ5 is not perfeltly done away in this 
The Firſt is expreſt here by Tribute and Cuſtom ; if theſe two Life among Believers themſclves, 1 Cor. 13. 9, 10. By, Day 
difer, then the Former is a Tax laid upon the Subſtance ; the they underſtand the :ime of Goſpel-Ligh: and Seving-Kniwledge : 
Later upon the Perſon. The Secend by Fear and Honour ; Fear |92 inthe next Verſe, and in 1 Th:/: 5. 5. This he ſays is ac 
totes inward, and Honour outward Reverence and Reſpe&. Fear hand, or is come nigh ; it was Dawning upon the World, and 
s the Magiſtrates due, by reaſon of his Authority; Honour by rea- would Shine brighrer and brighter, till ir were perfe& Dzy. 
ſon6f his Dignity. f i.e. All our former Sins, which are called Works of 4arkn:ſs, 

$0 h; here, and in Eph. 5. 11. They are fo called, becauſe they are 

we no man any thing «, but to love one a- | uſually Committed by thoſe that are in Ignorance and Darkneſs ; 

nther 2 3 for * he that loveth another, hath || fulfilled | and becauſe ſome Sins, ſuch as he ſpeaks of in the next Verſe, 

the law x. were wont to be Commitred in the darkneſs of the Night, Men 

Heving Treated of ſpecial Duties belonging to Superiours, he | being aſhamed of chem in the Day rimz, vid. Job 24. 15. 1 Theſſ: 

on comes to that which is more general, and belongs ro All. | 5: 7- Theſe he Exhorts the believing Romans to caſt of'; The 

(Neither your Superiours, nor your Equals, and Inferiours ; | Word implieth, haſt and hatred, 1/4. 30. 22. and 31. 7. g 5. ce. 

mu and pay to every Perſon what'is Due to him, let his Rank | All Chriſtian Graces, which are bright and ſt:ning in the Eyes of 

ad Qualiry be it whatir will. wq. d. Only there is one Debt che World, Mat. 5. 16. and which will be as ſo much Chriſti; 

that you can never fully Diſcharge ; that you muſt be ever paying, | Hrmmour, to Defend us againſt Sin, and all the Afſaults of $«- 

jet ever owing, and that is Love. x This is a Reaſon why we | (an. | : 

bould Love one another, and be {till paying that Debc ; and it isra-| 13 * Let us walk || honeſtly as in the day 5 ; not in *Phil.z ©. 
ken from the Excellency of Love : He that lbves another (i. e. He] rioting and drunkenneſs *, not in || chambering and * Thel.4. 
that doth ic 1n Deed and In Truth) hath fulfilled rhe Law 5 He wantonnels * not in {trife and env '1n FR 2. 

Means, the Second Table of the Law, as the next Verſe ſheweth. h ; beh F  24,, Br || Or, 220- 
RH: hath dons what is required therein. 9 4, Let us behave our ſelves decently, and with a holy ,;,21,, 
| - . ſhamefacedneſs, as becomes thoſe ro whom the Grace ef God, and RRP 

9 For this, * Thou ſhalt not commir adultery, Thou| the glorious Light of the Goſpe!. hath appeared. This honeſt walking + . on 
ſhalt not kill, Thou {hat not ſteal, Thou ſhalt notbear is exprefled by three Adverbs in Tit. 2.12. 7. c. Soherly, Rightes gg 
Ile witneſs, Thou ſhalt not covet ; and if there be ouſly, Godly. F He enumerates divers Vices which are Contrary jj Or, 5; 
any other commandment, ts briefly comprehen ded ro this honeft walking, and he ſets them down by pairs : He makes ,,, 


1cleaume's 
this laying, namely, * Thou ſhalc love thy neighbour which he means intemperance,or excel; inEaring and Drinting. vid, velo- 


».9 
4 
-» 

V3zv' 54 


three pairs of them. The Firſt, is Rioting and Drunkenn:ſe; by ,,! flthi- 


d thy ſelf 9. Luke 21. 34+ The Second is Chambering and Wantomicſs ; by which «* 7 _ 
7 un Verſe proves, That Love is the fulfilling of the Law, — —_ 2H . Wy 4 -Y . =p ap I angs, 14: 
"rag Py er ory _—P— 1 Per. 4. 3- The Third i. iS Serif and Fu ah Athele 
al the Jewr made that Commandmene x pare of the þ-t Table ; | June god ber ens CO ons coo: 
igher Powers and Superiour; under which Parents _ compre-| 29» 39: he famous St. Auguſt _—— that he was Con- 
knded, ſo others : It may be, he would only mention the Ne- | verted by Reading, and pondering this Texc. : 
"ve Preceprs, as beirig moſt contrary - ro Love. Bur, whyl 14 Bur put ye on the Lord Jelus Chriſt &, and *«* Gai. 5 
th be mention the ſeventh Commanament before the fixth ? Be- make not proviſion for the fleſh, oo fulfil the luſts 16. ; 
uſe of the commonneſs of Adultery amongſt the Remans ; ſo| thereof I. | 1 Per. 2: 
ot coats of che Odiouſneſsof it ; ſo Ochers. Hence, Adul-F k He Exhorted, wv. 12. To put on th: Armour of Light, now to 11 
bly Fe _— amongh the Jongg to the Fleſh, Gol. 5. 19.| pur on _ Chriſt : This is neceſſary, for though Grace may help 
es, *  NIEPE . (09 y RY n Exodus, rehearſeth the | to defend, Ter it is Chriſt und his Righteouſneſs only that can cover us 
 ſun'd 0 5 In this we 1h MN rder. The tenth Commandment | (as a garment doth our nakedneſs) In the fght of God. To put on 
, On? A kan wora, "op mo 70 covet ; It ſeems then, it] Chriſt, is to receive him and reft upon him by Faith; as alſo to 
vide it _ _ , _ —_ E inion 15 ridiculous, who | profeſs and imitate him. You have the ſame Phraſe, Gal. 3. 27, 
ment ? þ _ nkudies bo, Naga be any other Com- | / By Fl:ſþ, here ſome underſtand the corrups Nature : Others the 
king A of means a Commanament 0 the ſame nature, re- Body, Wheri he ſays, Make ns proviſion for the Fleſh; he doth not 
s 0 Pay what we owe one to #nother. Ergo. To honuur mean, That they ſbould not provide things neveſſary for the Body ; 


a , "aa , 
"ent< ; or he means, any other .in the Scripture, though this is allowed Eph. 5. 29. I Tims 5. 23, We areno where cam- 
[XxXX 2 manded 


Vol. I. 


muahnen 'y p 


> pu __ 
- = 
a - 

: - 


Chap 


'c:re, cater, or make.projeQts for the Fleſh, to fulfil its inordinacies 


? 1 Cor. 
2.9. & 9. 
- Me 

kOr, re- 
Core 70 
Youu, 


| O;, 70: 


qreaging of 
thoughts, 


* Col. 2. 
I6. 


ROM 


Ul 


XT F 
. "£ \ © 
Mandel to negleCt 6: macetate our Bodies ; but he means, that we 
Mould nor gratifie it in its ſimſu! Luſts or Luſtings ; vid. 1 Cor. 9, 
27. Suſtzin ir we may, but pamper it we'may not; we muſt nor 
and Cravings. 


C HIA'P. XIV. 


]/- Drive of the Strong and of the Weak toworas each other ; with 
r-/pct to Ciwiſtion Liberty, and the differmmce of Meats and Days. 
Both mnſt aim to ſerve God and our Lord, whoſe Glory we are to pro- 
ore borh in Life and Death, 1 8. For which End and Reaſon 
e Died, and Roje again, 9. And we muſt be judged by him, 1012. 
We muſs no! therefore offend, grieve and deſtroy h'm for whom Chriſt 
Sica, 13-—15. wherein the Kingaom of God conſiſts, 16—19. In 

o cr things we muſt mot offend the weak ; nor our ſclucs af with a 


/ 


azetH/t 
| FF Im that is * weak in the faith «|| receive you 6, 
K bat not to | doubtful diſputations c, 


In this Chaprer and part of the next, the Apoſtle treats of ſome 
Jeffr matters of Religion, about which there were great Conten- 
tionsin the C:unch of Rome. Some of the Jews, though they em- 
braced the Gofpr1, did Nlifly adhere ſtill ro the Moſaical Ceremonies ; 
and though a difference in Meats and Dayes ſhould be Conſciten- 
Tiouſly obſerved; yet they were ready to cenſure thoſe that were 
contiary minded, as profane Perſons and Contemners of the Law 
of Goa. . On che other ſide, the believing Gentiles, being better 
inſtructed about their Chriſtian Liberty, when they faw the Jews 
inſiſting uponſuch things as theſe, that had never any real yood- 
nc in them, and were now abrogated by Chriſt; 'they were 
Teady to deſpiſe them as Ignorant and Superſtirious, and ro deny 
Communion with them. The Apoſtle therefore doth ſeaſonably 
endeavour £o a: bitrate this matter, and make peace amongſt them. 
a That is wavering and unſettled" in ſome leſſer points of Faith, 
particularly in the Do&rine "of Chriſtian Liberty, and freedom from 
the Ccrcmonial Law: He means the ſcrupulous and erroneous J«- 
azizer, though yet in proportion, it may be applied to other ſcru- 
pulous and doubring Chr:ſtians. b- Or receive him to you, take 
him into your boſoms, admir him ro Communion with you, bear 
with his weakneſs, better inſtru& him wirh The Spirit of Meekneſs, 
wid. chap. 15.1. Phil. 3.15, 16. Bucer received all, though dit- 
fering from him in ſome Opinions, in whom he found, aliquid 
Chriſti, ary thing of Chriſt. c q. d. Don'tentertain him with dif- 
putes and vain janglings, which will not edifie, but perplex and 
prejudice him. Don't make him Queſtion-Sick, as 'tis in 1 772. 
6. 4. This paſlage may be expounded by Tir. 3.9. The Margi. 
nal reading would make this to be the ſenſe, That a Scrupulory 
Chriſtian ſhould be received unto Communion ; yet not ſoas to 
encourage him to judge and condemn the thoughts of thoſe that 
differ from him. 

2 For one believeth that he may eat all things 4, ano. 
ther, who 1s weak, eateth herbs e. 


d i.c. One that is informed arighc of his Chriſtian Liberty, is 
fully perſwaded, and that upon good grounds, that he may eat 
any thing that is wholſome, though forbidden by the Ceremonial 
Law ; that there is now no diffcrence of clean and unclean Meats; 
wid. Mat. 15.11. Ads 10. 12,13, 14, 15. & 7. e. He that (as be- 
fare) i5 wcak 1m Faith, and not ſo well informed, ſuch a one for 
fear of offending God by eating any thing that 1s forbidden, wil] 
rather content himſelf with the meaneſt diet. The meaning is 
nor, as if any 1n thoſe times, thought it lawful only to eat herbs, 
and fo 2bſtained alrogether from other meats ; bur they would ra- 
ther fativfic themſelves with Herbs, and other Fruits of the Earth, 
in which the Law of Moſes made no difference, than eat mears that i 
vere forbidden, or nct cleanſed from blood, or offered to Idols, 
Ec. wid. Dan. 1. 8. 

3 * Let not him that eateth, || deſpiſe him that eateth 


not f; and let nothim which eateth not, judge him that 


ng Conſcicnce, 2323. 


E 


L Or, frat exceth : for God hath received him gp. 


045, 
S 


F +. ce. Lit: not bim that makes uſe of his Liberty in eating any 
thing indifcrently, vilifke or contemn him that is of a contrary 
rind, as ore that 15 ignorant and over fcrupulous ; and lr zor bin 
car forvears fuch meats as were of od forbidden, judge and con- 
demn him that is contrary minded,as profane andover venturous ; 
nowrithfranding fach little difference, i 99inio, let one Chriſtian 
love ans co mumicate with another. g It ts diſpured, whether chis 
be mcantuf the weakor ftrong Chriſtian, the word judging, which 
mm<diarcly goes before, and follows after, carries it rather for 
the !atcer. Nur fome think ir is meant of both. He thar eareth, | 
and he chat caceth nor, is received by God inco his Church and 
Farily, and indifecently accepeed with him, upon another and 
3 latger account. : 

4 Who ait hou that judgeſt another inans ſervant ? 


To his ewn maſter he ftanderh or falleth 4 : Yea he ſhall 


be holden up : For God is able co make him ſtand z. 

þ A ſharp reprehention of the forementioncd evil You have 
the like, 72s 4- i2. 9.d This Phraſe is cepugnant not only 
& che Lair of God bur tothe very Lew of Nature, chatcells us, 
ahac ae Ela rout 26t condemns the Seruent of awether, over whom 
br bats me r1giit or pruer, mich leſs ay arty Mars couder bio that 
is rhe I aris Servernt: Every Chriflizn hath Chriſt alone for his 
own, or his proper AMafer ; and it is bis Judgment by which he 
mutt abide ; ic is os him thar he Nanderh or falleth, that he 
dark. welt oc il £ 4. & Ff (as dion thinkeft} he be fallen or 
f3lng, he ral be upheld and ſupported : Far Ged & able, &c. 
Bur fare doch chis follow, becauſe God can make him Band, 


Tha 


Diviniz 


1NS. 


therefore he ſhall be holden up ? Z. It is a Rule in 
in all God's Promiſes, his Power 1s joyned with his yj1 . Jotha 
where the latter is once revealed, there 1s no queſtion of he 9 thar 
Now of the word of God in this matter, there was no FR ng 
he had ſaid, v.73. That God had received him, You hag Fg 
way of Arguing, chap. 11. 23. where the Apoſtle Proves yg Uike 
ling of the Jews, by an Argument taken from the power of A 
becauſe he is able to graft them in again ; wid. th _—_—_ = 
10. 23. &, 


5 One man eſteemeth one day above in 
another eſteemmeth every day alike k. Tet & 
be [| fully-periwaded in his own mind /. 


k There were differences in the Church of Ro, about th, 
obſervation of Days, as well as the choice of Mears ; and in thi. 
he endeavours an Accommodation as well as in the other. Tj. 
converted Jew was of opinion, that the Feſtival days aPpointey 
in Moſes Law, were holier than other days, and thar they thoul 
ſtill Be obſerved ; wid. Gal. 4. Io. Col. 2. 16. On the 1, 
ſide, the believing Gentile was of opinion, that the diffcrencs k 
days under the Old Teſtament was now ceaſed, and þ; (the Ts. 
ſayes) eſteemed or approved of all days. The word (2lijs) i, wo 
in the Original, but it is aptly ſupplied by our Tranilaows; 
1 i.e. Ler every man be fatisfied, as ro the grounds of hi. _ 
ice; let him a& by his own, an not another Mans Judem:q 
and Conſcience : Let him be ſo fully aſſured in hs own wg of 
the lawfulneſs of what he doth, as to find no doubting ocſcn. 
pulous heſitations in the doing of it ; ler him be abletoſy , 
the Apoſtle himſe)f doth, v. 14. Thereafon of this Count|y,y 
have, wv. 23. He that doth what be thinks is a ſin, is un four 
againſt God, whether it be a ſin or no. And yet a man may tin i 

that, wherein he is fully perſwaded he finneth nor. A fy! : 

ſwaftion muſt be had, bur it is not ſufficient, co make an As 
good or lawful. 

6 He that ||regardeth the day, regardeth it uny tie 
Lord ; and he that regarderh not the day, to the 1g), 
he doth not regard it mm. Fe that eateth, exteth tothe 
Lord, for * he giveth God thanks » ; and hethuey,' 
eth not, to the Lord he eateth not, and piycth God 
thanks o. 


- In this Verſe, you have a Reaſon why Chriſtians ſhould noe 
cenſure one another, upon an account of different Opinionsad 
Practices, becauſe they have all the ſame End and Scope, which 
is the pleaſing and glerifying of God. Ir 1s with reg tohin 
that they ear, or eat net ; that they obſerve thoſe Feliny! Ds, 
or obſerve them 1: ; and ſo far they are on both ſides tobecom. 
mended ; for that indeed ſhould be our end in all our Adions, to 
glorifie and pleafe the Lord, wid. 1 Cor. 10. 31. Col.;,1, ni 
He is thankfu! unto God, for the bountiful and free Uſe of his 
Creatnres. Some would ground thar laudable pradiceof giving 
Thanks at Meals, upon this Texr, but it hath a clearer Warranc 
from Mat. 14. 19. and 15.36. and 26. 26. A# 27.1;. 8Be- 
cauſe he hath Meat enongh beſides, which: he is not forbidden, 
I Cor. io. 28. 

7 For * none of us liveth to himſelf, and no man 
dyeth to himſelf, 

8 For whether we live, we live unto the Locd ; and 
whether we dye, we dye unto the Lord p, whether ue 
tive therefore, or dye, we are the Lords q. 

p Here he proves what he had before aſſerted, That Chriftizs 
have regard to God and his Glory, in their particular Attions; 
and that from their general End and Deſign, which 1s to devore 
themſelves, and their whole Life and Dearh to God. He tellstam 
firſt in the Negative, that none of ws; #5. e. That nos of vu; Cir 
fttans and Believers, do live or aye to our ſelves; we ere notour 
own Lords, nor at our own diſpoſal : And then in the 4fras- 
tive, he hews, That we live er aye to the Lord; we ſpradoc 
Lives in his Service, and part with them at his Appoirement, 
His Glory is the hit? at which we aim, living or dying : Heis 
che Center, in which all the Lines in the whole Circumference 
of our Lives do meet, 2 Cor. 5. 9. Phil. 1. 21, q Thiswals 
ference from what he had faid before: 9. 4. Ar a!l rime, anda 
all eftatcs, whether of health or ficknels, abundance or poutr!}, 48 
or death, we are the Lerds Propriety, and ar his diſpor ; he hui 
an abſolute Dominion over us, living or dying ; in this world, & 
in the next. 
9g For * to this end Chriſt both dyed, and roſs, 
and revived 5, that he might be! Lord both of the dead 
and living rt. "x 
r q. d. This is the Fruit that accrues to Chriſt, by his De 
and ReſurreFion, that he might, &c. s The Vulgar Lei lezxes 
our this Word. Chryſotome ieft out the former word, He #4; 
Ambroſe inverts the order of the words, and reads them tus, 3 
this end he lived and died, and roſe again. Some think, the 9127 
Tenſe is here put for the Preſent-Tenſe, He revived; &- He £ut 
lives, to intercede for us, and to exerciſe Dominion 6v£* 57 
Others ckink, That Chriſts reviving here doth denote, thaes? 
fate of Life, which he had akier bis Reſurre&ion. ? Or — 
may Govern and Lord it (ive we:d7y) over all his, whether -” 
or alive, That he might obtain Downer, or rather the Exerc 
of his Deminion over them. As God, he hath an Univerſs)9* 
evios over all ; but as Mediater, he hath more ſpecial _—_— ' 
all the Father gave to him: This Drminiox he purchaſed z © 
Death, and he fad the full exerciſe of 1t, when he 19/24 
Mat. 28, 18. Phil, 2.9, 10. 


10 Bur why doſt thou judge thy brother? &* 3 


Other | J 


-| 


t 

ey man: 
V4 
aa 
| ( 


37 


&y 
&, 


| 


k 


7 y f : 
ay. obo. $1) - —_ 
| L Pi Pe fot « # n0ht thy brothor - for we thall all { {tand cherefore they miglic ants word uſe tueir Liberty, :51 Car i Ys 
TY, that pres WF" © Chriit ; thing that was before them. To this rhe Apollle aniwers, bt: 
fothy * ;\>fOTe UNC jadgmNnt-cat Ol TK #, by way of Conc«ſlion, he grancs whar they tay is tzve, and tel 
former: - [{e go02sS ON tO perſwade them ro a Mutual Forbearance, to them, That for bis own part he knew it full well. and was him- 
dt; for ERIE tm trom Condemning or Contemning one another, about |{c:]f aſſured of it; and thar he had this Affurance from the Zo 4 
the like | eng" Ha ie ſuggeſts Two Arguments againſt it 10 this Teſus ; i. e. Thar he was infiucted rheein by {tis Word and 
the Cal. PR One ( winch 1s more 1m ved) is taken from the relation |Spirir. c. 7. e. Thatno Mear was wicleas: ii if is; t; ir was nor 7 
ot God, oy bore ne to anoher 1 they wire Brezriren, not by Natural Ge-[jn its own Nature, vid. Ger. 1. 31. and 9: 3, Soins Creatures 
*1. He, TIRE bur by Regeneration anu Adoption : They had the ſame might be unwholtome, but none were in themicives - wil as, 
_ on God, Fhe S:cond Argument 1s more plainly expreſicd ; To the Fews they were not wickean by Nature, bur by -a poiitve 
"thier 1+10, and is raken {rom the conſideration of the Day of Jadgment, when all Law , which Law WasS now antiquated 2nd our of do9:'s, o : : 
ry Man tf bail fland Lefore Corifts indement ſ. at, vid. 2 Cor. 5. 10, All, toth the Col. 2.16;17. 17:m.4. 3, 4. d This he addy by way ot Reſtri. 
a * 4: 20d the Weak : And then he will determine who hath done |&tion, That though no Mear was wiclcon in its Jelf, yer it was ſo 
For Well or Hil. In the mean while, Who art thou thar dareſt to ulurp |ro him that thought ir to be wnclean. If a Man fhill believe 
about the, ; kis Placz or Oihce ? The I[zterrogation hath the force of a ſtrong [that there is yer a difference 1n Meats, thzt tome are (HI wiclenr ;; 
nd ta this; Jenyal:; a d, Ilave youno more Grace, Charity or Ili/aom , than jand thar by Verrtue of Gods Prohibition, ir would be Evil in 
her, The! 4 - him to ear ſuch Meats, becauſe he therein As againſt his Con- 
appointed * ſcience, and doth that which he himſclf thinks to be a in , wid. 
hey ſhould 11 For it is written, As I hve, faith the Lord, every |ver. 23. 
Sen knee ſhall bow to me, and every tongue {hall conteſs to EIT —© OT HE : 
(e7u WY God >: $ y brother be grieved wich 17 meat, now} Oc, 4 
Rye his Verſe proves what was before aſſerted, That a!! muſs a" hve none Cy s.  Deltrop noe him WE op 2 
_—_— o This Verſe p 1-52. The Proof is from 1/2. 45. "By meat, tor whom Chriſt died f. A 
tOUrs, ſtand before the Judgment of Chriſt, 1 Proo ſa. 4 + Gr. ac- 
Of his pre. 23. The Propher ſpeaks only of Gods ſwearing ; the Apoſtle ſets] es To this Verſe you have two Reaſons to induce the Strong crilzs 75 
5 Judgmca down the Form of his Oath ; which Form is frequently ment10n* [nor to offend the Weak : Firſt it is contrary to Charity ; to ch aric: 
" wn, & el in Scripture, via. Numb. 14.21, 28. Jer. 22. 24. EzeR. 5. TH. oricue & Brother upon the ſcore of meats , is to waik uncharitably ; : 
Ing Oriccts and 14. 16, 18. and 20. 3. And inſtead of, every Tougue ſhall Swear ; |*tis a violation of the Royal Law of Love, which 1s againſt the 
leroſiy a5 the Apoſtle , following the Seventy , faith , Every Tongue ſhall con- | grieving or offnding others, 1 Cor. 13. 4. Two wayes me weak 
Counſel yoy 6; and we are told , Philip. 2. 11. what 1t thall confeſs , viz. | Chriſtians #rieved , whit ccins do unſcaſonably uſe their Liber- 
5 An Ofenier That Feſivs Chriſt is Lord, That which is generally ſpoken of Jeho- ty. 1. They think ſuch do off:nd God in eariz7 that which he 
Te MAy lin 1g cab, being here in a peculiar manner applyed to Chriſt , 1t evi- [hath forbidden ; and rhis is matter of gri-f to thoie tha fear 
A fullpe teatly ſheweth , Thar he 1s ſupream Judge , and ſovereign Lord , God, to ſee others tranigrefs his Laws. 2. They may be draw 


Fean Ati unco whom all Knees muſt bow in token of SubjeCtion 3 and be- 
fore whoſe Tribunal, all Perſons, will they, or will they nor , 


zt unto the|, nuſt appear. 


© the Lord! ; | 
areth tothe 12 So then * every ons of us ſhall give account of him- 
he that ext. * kifto God: x. 


giveth God x Here you have the end of onr ſtanding before the Judgment. ſeat 
fCirift, which is to give an account, wid. Mat. 12. 36. 1 Pet. 4. 
5, He faich. Every one of wu ſhall give an account: , whether he 


ans ſhould not be great or ſmall, ſtrong or weak ; and that he ſha! give an an- 


Opinionsad cart of himſelf; 3.e., Of his own Attions, and not anothers. He 
Scope, which ball give an account of himſelf, in his Natural Capacity, as a 
regard to him, Man ; and in his Capaciry, as a rich or great Man; and in his 
Feſtival Days, Religious Capacity, as one that hath enjoyed ſuch Education ; 
des tobe come ſuch means of Grace, &c. 0Obj. Paſtors muſt give an account for 
ur Adzins, to heir Flock, Heb. 13. 17. Avſ. Paſtors ſhall giv? an account of their 
 J- I]. &6 Neplo:nce, and want of Care, whereby they ſuffered their Sheep or 
free Uſe of tis lock to miſcarry ; but every particular Sheep allo ſhall give an account 
Rice of giving if 1150wn perſonal Wandrings. 
learer Warranc 
Gd 1; Let us not therefore judge one another any more y : 
not i" WE: judge this rather &, thac * no man put a ſtumbling, 
” c L 
—— lan occaſion to fall in his brothers way a, 
) 9.d. Seeing all muſt be judged by Chriſt , I:t us no more judge One 
R tt, but mend this Fault for time ro come. z Hitherto his 
e Lord ; and 


maſe] was more general, reſpeCting both the Strong and the Weak. 


, Whether we rehe begins in a more particular manner, to apply himſelf ro the 


RO A > S$ 


by their Example to do the like againſt their own Light and 
Conſcience ; and this afterwards cauſeth grief and trouble ; their 
Conſciences hereby are galled and wounded, 1 Cor. 8. 12. f This 
is the Second Reaſon why Chriſtians ſhould nor ule their Liberry 
re the offznce of others, It may occaſion their Ruine and De 
ſtruſtion. 9g. d. Hereby, as much as in you lies, you rake a 
courſe to Deſtroy rhew for whom Chriſt dyed. You will alienate 
and eſtrange them from the Chriſtian Religion, or you will araw 
chem into Sin, and induce them (as betore ) to at&t againſt rheic 
Conſciences , and fo hazard their Salvation- See a Parallel Place, 
r Cor. 8. 11, Here a Queſtion may ariſe, Wherher any can periſh 
for whom Chriſt dyed ? The Anſwer is They cannot ; and for this , 
the Scripture is expreſs in John 10. 28. See alſo Mar. 24. 24. 
John 6. 39. 1 Pet. I. 5. © How then 1s this Text ro be unde: 
ſtood ? The Apoſtle doth not ſpeak of thoſe for whim Chri? in. 
deed did dye , bur of ſuch, as in the judgmeart of Charicy are 
held ro he of that Number. We mult account all thoſe who 
confeſs the F3::7 of Chriſt, for ſuch as bs hath Redeemed by hig 
death. 


Gd 


16 Let not then your good be evil ſpoken of g. 


g Here 1s another Argument agaiaſt Offences; Ir will caufe our 
good tro be blaſphemed , or wil ſpoken of, Some by God here, 
would underſtand the Chriftian Faich, or the Goſp:1 in general : 
Bur others do rather underſtand it of our Chriſtian L berry in par« 
ticular. 9g. d. Give none occaſion for this grear Priviledge of your 
Chriſt:an Liberty to be traduced ; uſe it fo, as thar neither the wezk 
Chriſtian , nor the Infidel, may reproach or accuis you as Licens. 


me ſtrong and knowing Chriſtians; Counſelling them to take heed, | 
t by the abuſe of theic Chriſtian Liberty, they ſhould bz an 
fence to them that were weak, and more Ignorant. He entereth 
Ion this with an Elegant Tranſition , making uſe of the ſame 
ord in a different Senſe ; for he doth nor ſp:zak Contraries , 
ben he ayes, judge nor, but judge ; for the word in the forme) 
art of the Verſe, ſignifies, to condcran and cenſure; bur here in 
be following part, to deliberate or conſider 3; q. d. Inſtead of judg- 
g Others ler us look upon this a Rule for our fzlves, and our 
mn Deportment, that we put no ſtumbling block, &c. a.9.d. Take 
Ieed of offending your Brethren 1 any kind ; do not, by an un- 
F:onable Uſe of your Liberty , either drive them from their 
Liriſtian Profeſſion, or provoke them to imirare you, and ſo to 
In againſt their Conſciences. You have a Parallel Text, 1 Cor. 
9. There he ſpeaks only of a ſtumbling block ; here he . adds 
noccaſion of Falling, cor as 'tis in the Original, a Scanaal. Though 
e two words do differ in their Erymologies, yet they have one 
al the ſame Signification. The latter word , as Stephanrs ob- 
ans, is peculiar to Holy Scripture; and feldom , if ever, uſed 
ay common Author. Ir fignitierh properly, the Bridge in a 
9, which, by its falling down, catcheth a Creature 1n a ſnare, 
lo occalions its Ruine ; and from thence it is uſed to de. 
Mr ny thing which is an occation to others of fiumbling or 
3; any thing whereby we ſo cftend another, as that he is 
nored from Good ; drawn into or confirmed in Evil. Scandal 
Oftence is either Paſſive or Ave: Paſſive Scandal 1s, when 


That Chriſtians 
cular Adtions; 
hich 1s to devote 
' Hetellstam 
it 00s 6f 647 Corte 
- we 2re 407 ole 
n in the Afras 
{; we ſp:ador 
is A.ppoirtaell 
r OL dying : Hz 
le Circumfecene 
q This 5b 
a'l time, and 0 
nee or pouerl}, 8 
diſpo! ; bs 


in this wor, 


d, and role f, 
th of the dead 


briſt, by tus Neath 


, think, the *7 E ny 1s Good , 1s by reaſon of Mans Corruprion , an occa- 
ied; 6 BEG Is falling to him. So Chriſt himſelf, and his Do&rine, was 
4 inj0n over WG | Sandal to the Tews; wid, I Cor. 1. 23. 1 Pet. 2.8. Adive Scan- 
my chats *15, when any thing is done or ſaid, which gives occaſion of Off:nce 
-— £ Or C* Others, when it is an occalion of Grief, or of Sin to them, wer. 15. 
_ whether & g This Occaſion may be Admiaiſtred, Either by Evil Counſel, 
rather the Ex + 23. Rev.2. 14. Or by Evil Example, Iſa. 9. 16. Mar. 15. 
an Univerſal 9 4 r by the abuſe of Chriſtiaa Liberry in things indifferent, 
xecial Dowin:% : 8 9. 


e purchaſed Z ” 


4 I know, and am perſwaded by the Lord Jeſus b, 
 tYere is *nothing + unclean of it ſelf c: but * to 


M that eſteemech; any thing to be unclean, to him 3zt zs 


. 1 
rother : of - z 
veal} d 


LEw 


'C] or * . o . . . 

6 he obviates an Obje&ion. Some might ſay they were 
ng io bs i " . . . 

uy perſwaded,, That no Mcat was unclean in its elf 3 and 


tious or Contentious, wid. 1 Cor. 10. 29, 39. 


17 For the kingdom of God is not meat and drink 5, 


but righteouſneſs, and peace, and joy # in the Holy 
Ghoſt &. 


bh This Verſe contains a New Argument to perſwade Chriſti- 
ans, not to ftrive about. meats, or ſuch like things; and thar is, 
That the Kingdom of God doth not conliſt in theſe , but in weigh- 
tier matters, By the Kingdom of Goz , you may underſtand the 
Goſpel or true Religion and Godlineſs; that Kingaom which God 
ereCts in the hearts of Men, Luke 17. 21. 1 Cor. 4. 20. When 
he faith, The Kingdom of God ts not meat and arink; he means, 
That it doth nor ſtand or conſiſt therein. M-at and Drink are 
put by a Synecdoche for all things of an indifferent or middle 
Nature ; ſuch things, as the Apoſtle elſ:where fayes, Comment 
115 m0: to God, 1 Cor. 8. 8. They are no part of his Worſhip and 
Service : The Kingdom of God or Godlin:{s is not promoted , either 
by- the uſe or the forbearance thereof, wid. Gal. 5. 6. 1 Tim 4, 8. 
; Here he tells you poſitively wherein the Kingdom of God con- 
liſterh, not in outward Obſervarions, but in inward Graces , and 
gracious Diſpoſitionas. He doth not reckon up all, but contents 
himſelf with theiz three, Righteouſnrſs, Peace and Joy, By Rig- 
tcouſneſs ſome underſtand char which is impured, of which you 
read, chap. 4 Others rath:zr, That wich 1s implanted and in. 
herent ; it 1s the ſame with Helin-ſs, both the Habit of it in rhe 
Heart, and the exerciſe of it in the Life. By Peace, fome think 
he means Peace wich God, or Peac? of Conſci-mee + Ochers , thar 
he rather means, Peace with Men: Or if you will, peaccalteuc}; 
or Chriſtian Concord and Unity, This ſuits belt with wit follows, 
vcr. 19. and ir is ofren commended to us in Scripture. By Joy, 
may be underſtood, thar ſpiritual comſart which arileth from a 
preſent Feeling of the Favorr of God , or from a well-oround-d 
Hope of fucure $ziv3:ion. As alſo, the Comfort and D-lighr whicly 
Chriſtians take ia the good and welfare of each other. FH: rlar 
loverh his Brother, 7cjoycerb in his Welfare, 1 Coy. 13. 6, and thwcres 
fore will not offcx4, or occalion him to ji. & This 1s add, ro 
ſhew the efficienc Cauſe of theſe Graces, which is the 8-7 of 
God; and to diltinguith this Righteoufncſs, Prace, avd Tor, from thar 
which is meerly Civil and Carnal. 


18 For he that in theſe things ferveth Chrilt, 35 ac- 
ceptable ro God, and approved of imen /, 
SSoyy] 1 Tkis 


4 
i 
| bz i 
\W | : 
| 4Þ 
1 
| 
[: | 
Wt 
li F 
A 
\ . 
F 
LY 
F 4 
{4 | 
| 
1. 
ts ? 
-4 
{+4 
; FT" 
: 
$4 | 


Phap, XV MAN 
Chap, NY, (R (0; Dl A 1 3, | Chap, Y 
! This proves theforegoing Aﬀertion, That the Kingdom of God con- the ſtronger and more Knowing Chiiſtian ; the fnf is, he : 

fiſteth in »ighteouſueſs, peace, and joy, becauſe he that ſirverh Chrift in happy man, rhat when he knowerh a thing to be lawful, he hs 
and by theſs things, is accepted of God, and approv d of mex ; this can't io manage the prattice of it , that he hath therein ng de... 
be affirmed of meat and drink, &c, When he ſayes, That the accuſe or condemn himſelf: Or elfe, that doth nor inwardly «.. 
Serving of Chriſt in theſs things, is approved of Men, he means, ſuch demn himſelf , for doing that againſt his Conſcience, whe 
asare Godly, and of ſound Judgment ; for of others they are ofcen [openly alloweth or prattiſcth : Such a one is happy in thi 12 
hated and reviled for the exerciſe of theſe very Graces : And yet |{pe& , becauſe he is free from thoſe terrors that rormene __ 
rightcouſneſs and peaceablen;ſs, have oftentimes their Praiſe from the who aQ againſt their Conſciences. Cle 
Wicked themſelves, wid. 1 Sam. 2. 26. Prov. 3. 4. Luke 2. $2. 
As 2. 47- 


- "—_- v - 
a 4 - = Tb £4 = w 6 CT 
- wy OR - ——_ . 
x == % 
Cee ee Ee CE EEE Ons 
_ _ IIs Ee ev reg . 


23 And he that [| doubteth, is damned if he eat, þ 
; . , {cauſe he eaterh not of || faith 7: for * whatſoever ;; Mes 
19 Let us therefore follow after the things WhICN |Faich is fins. Ot of 
oh ; I ealiec 

make for peace, and things wherewith one may : In this Verſe is another Aphoriſme reſpeQting eſyec;, 


another 2. : : . , {weaker Chriſtian. He that doubteth of the lawfulneſ; f ew 
This Verſe is the Application of the foregoing Diſcourſe, in which | her hey he may or may not eat it, is damned if he et, (|, hel vin 
you have an Exhortation to the praQice of two great Duties. The Conſcience condemns him, or he makes himſelf liable tg Dir 
one is peace, Or peaceableneſs ; the other. is mutans! Edification. He had tion, becauſe he eateth not of Faith. The word (eaterh > ; 
perſwaded before to peace with all Men, chop. 12. 18. And here {in the Original, bur it is aptly inſerted by our Tranſlators Te 
he ſpeaks more eſpecially of Peace and Concord amongſt Brethren ; | a man doth doubtingly, he doth finfully : He ſheweth 2 vicky 
wid. 2 Cor. 13- 11. Eph. 4. 3. Col. 3. 15. 1 The/ſ. 5. 13, Heby, 12. heart that 1s not afraid of Sin, but in great readineſs to com a 
14. This Peace is - very neceſlary , and Chriſtians ſhould endea- [ir. s This is a corfirmation of the foregoing atlertion, "xrk. 
vour all things thar will promote it , and avoid all things that ſhere is meant knowl:dge or full perſwalion, as v. 22. 4.4 WW Ga 
will obſtru& ir. And they muſt nor only live pcaceab!y , but 9r6- jever a man doth with a wavering mind , withour being 0 "I 
f:ably one with another, They ſhould build one anvher up in Gra- [ded that it is pleafing to God, and warranted by ts Wes fs 
ce and Knowledge. ſinneth in' the doing of it. Though we may not nouriſh dou 
and ſcruples, yer we muſt not att againſt them; an erring ( ; 
* Ma:.ts, 29 For meat deſtroy not the work of God ». * All;ſcience binds us to a& nothing contrary to ir. He fins char dot 
buy things indeed are pure; but #t is evil for that man who {any thing agaiaſt it , though the fa& or thing done thould no; 
| > be ſinful. Nature it ſelf teacheth as much. Thar ji;  ;...* 
Ags 10. eateth with offence 0. ſaying of Cicero, Quod dubitas, equum ſit an ini 2 om 
L5.VET 14. Here you have a farther Argument againſt Scandals. 9. 4. For is. ord mia. Jem, ne feceris, j 
» Here you ha : thou doubteſt whether a thing be lawful or nit lawful, thyy foal me 5 
ſo inconliderable a matter , as eating 2 little Acar, or for the uſe {,,. via wn s, E ad. 
of an indifferent thing, Ds nor deſtroy the work of God. By the ; 
work of Gea', ſome underſtand the Sou! of a _ m_ _ 
G ar work by way of Eminency : 1t was one of rhe chifeſt works - 
of the 5 00e+ : bd made, = were, with the Conſultation of CHAP. XV. 
the whole Trinity, the Image of God, afcer a ſort, was Engraven 
therein ; and if this be the Senſe, t'is a Repetition of the Ar- !7The Strong are exhorted to bear with the Weak , from th, ry, , 
gument in 47.15. Bur by the Work of G4 in this place, other | © of Chrift; which he coufirmeth out of the Scriptures which Kits 
things may be underſtood , Ex. gr. The Unity and Peace, which written for our comfort, 1—— 4 He prayeth for them , and yl. 
God worketh amongſt Believers of different Perſwaſtions in in-| reth them, 5 7. Chrift ſerved the Jew, and alſo the Gentile 
different things: Or elſe the work of Grace , or Faith, which God, as us proved by the Scriptures, $—12, His wiſh for hes, ot 
hath wrought by his Mighty Power in the Hearts of Men , wa, | hapes of them, 13, 14. His Miniſtry, Gods Bleſong with hin, 


() 


(7 


_ 
) tte ;; 


Fm 6. 29. 1 Theſſ. 1. 3. The work of God in either of theſe | and his faithfulneſs in it, 15 —21. He muſt go u 16 Jcrufalem 
Senſ:s, may be diſturbed or hindred by the abuſe of Chriſtian | #0 carry thither the Alms of the Churches of Macedonia ani 4. 
Liberty ; and he that ſcandalizeth his Brother, goes about, as Chaia; He would then ſee them in his Journey to Spain, 1219 
much as in him lyeth, to diſſolve and demoliſh that which hath | Hs requeſterh rheir Prayers for him aud his Miniſtry; ani wike 
God alone for its Aurlor and Worker. o Here you have a Conceſ. | thern all Good from God, 30 33- 

ſion and an Exception ; He granteth , Thar all things are pure 


Ry I ir ow t d. v. 14. | 
and clean, « e in themſelves, or in their own Nature, wid. v. 14 l V E then «that are ſtrong b, ought c to bear 


1 Cer. 6. 12. Tit. 1. 15. But then he addeth, That rr is Evil for, p _ 
or to, that man that eateth with offence, or that offends another the infirmities of the weak d, and not to 
with his eating ; It is not Evil ſimply in it ſelf, but accidentally, pleaſe our ſelves e. 


| fS I. ; k 
1y reaſon of Scanda « This Particle ſheweth, that what followeth is infcrred fon 


. | T - what went before. b By the firong , he means thoſe who har 
21 7: good neither to eat fleſh, nor to drink wine, attained to a good meaſure of knowledge and underſtanding, 


nor any ching p whereby thy brother ſtumbleth, or is offen- that are inſtrufted in the Chriſtian Faith, and particularly iu the 
ded, or 1s made weak 9, Doftrine of Chriſtian Liberty. He purteth himſelf in the nun- 


p The Apoſtle proceedeth to enlarge his DoQrine tonching _ Re Bughngd Glowing , _ wr Sane — 


this particular, beyond the Controveriie that occaſioned this his bonnd both” b 
, y the Law of God and Nature, d By th wi, 
Diſcourſe ; for he ſhewcth , that to avoid the ſcandal or offence he means thoſe who are weak in Faich and Knowledge, cy. 


of our Brethren, we are to abſtain, not only from things prohi- : _ . 
4 _ , 4 A. 14. 1. By their Infirmities, he means their Ignorance Frownd: 


bited by the Law, but alſo from things thar are not prohibited : . - 
dy + as from Fleſh or Win: , or ny indifferent thing what- neſs , Cenſoriouſnels , Oc. He doth not ſpeak of Hereſies al 
foever. Theſe words ( any thing ) are not in the Original , but manifeſt Enormiries 5 bur of ſuch Errors _ Dodtrine and Life 
they are underſtood, and well ſupplyed in our Tranſlation. Thus wry ng, oy In oageey _— L - b 
DHA . . : V r: o , . R aninpg zz, ” 
to dn, he faves is good, as the contrary in the foregoing Verſe muſt bear witch them, as we do with Children or ſick Perfonsi 


was ſaid to be evi/; it is good in regard of Gol, to whom it 1s . , 
acceptable and pleaſing ; in regard of our Brethren, to whom cheir waywardneſs : Though nt be a —_— burthento us, ay 
[EET FINNE 5 268 ſu Fegors'© 1 muſt bear it; we muſt not impatiently Contradi& them, butpn 


It is profitable and advantageous, the poſitive ( it may be) 1s put dently inſtru& them, Exod. 23.5. 1 Cor. 9.22. Gal. 6. 2. e. q.d. ve 


for the comparative, 2? i good, for, it is bettcr: ſo Mat. 18. 8, 9. + a h jeaſe in indi hi 1ro aff 
9 Some diſtinguiſh theſe three words, ftumblcd, off: nded, made weak ; | WEN not to do what we pleale 1n 1ndiJterent things, andt 
| according to our own Sentiments without any regard to others; Wt 


making the firſt to be the greater, and che Jaſt che leſler injury : ſhould leaf ſolves 3 : A 

Ochers will have che firſt ro be the leſſer, and the laſt the greater 1a- | 32% = pleaſe our ſelves in 2 proud refleQing her | 

jury. Bur there are thoſe that think, they all three do ſignifie | K2owledge , and in contemning of others becauſe of their lg 
rance : We ſhould not ſtand upon the terms of our liberty 46 


the ſame thing; and the $Syriack Interpreter doth render them all | | 
by one word, wiz. is Monde: and the —_ thing may be expreſt ps bur rather for the ſake of others, depart 3 little fo 
our own right, 


by divers words, to infinuate the great Care we ſhould take, that 
we do not put a ſtumbling block (as "tis wer. 13.) or an occaſion of RR 
falling inte our Brothers way. The Apoſtle ſeems to praQtice what he 2 2 Let every one of us pleaſe bs neighbour for by got 
here preſcribeth in 1 Coy. 8. 13. to edification Fe 


Se, al 
| : ith ? have 1 |  f Having ſaid, we muſt nor pleaſe out ſelves , he immeditts 
| Or,bave 22 Haſt thou faith ? have it to thy ſelf || before Godr ubjoines, = HR abs acbers, vis, Every one his Seghts 


:: by cby Happy # he that condemaeth || not himlelt in that thing |þ. means, that we ſhould Condeſcend and accommodate % 
Fr 'P which he alloweth -. ſelves to others, and give them ſatisfaQion in all things; * * 
hs _ S” r Some read the firſt Clauſe without an interrogation : Thou ſo far as may tend to their Good and Edification. he 
TH {lf in haſt Faith, either way the ſcnſe is the ſame. The Apoſtle here | like paſlage » chap. 14. 19. The Apoſtle exhorts the ba ou 
:/127 hich IMticipates an Objection, the ſtronger Chriſtian might be ready | fo 2 prattice ſomewhat like this, 1 Cor. 10, 24. and he 3 The 
he appro. ® fay , as it's in the 14 werſe, I know, and am perſwaded by the the way by his own example . 1 Cor. 9. 10. and 10. 33: ry 
wieet,  Lard Jeſus, that nothing is unclean of its ſiif. T firmly believe, [15 2 pleaſing of men which is ſnfull, and there 1s 2 pleali G 
—_ thar now under the Goſpel all meats are lawful, and that I have | Men which is lawful ; and thar is, when it is limited, 45 
liberty ro uſe or eat what I pleaſe; and is it nortfit that my pra- Text. | ; 
tice thould be agreable 80 my B:licf : That I ſhould a& accor-| 3 For even Chriſt pleaſed not himſelf g ; but *5” 
c:ng to my Judgment ? To this he anſwereth, That if a man | writtenz, The reproaches of them that reproached m6" 
hith fuch a Faith or perſwaſion, he ſhould not unſeaſonably dif. apon me 
cover it to the offence of his Brother, but rather conceal it. He P : 
dorh not ſpeak of Faith in the Fundamentals of Religion, this | & He backs his Exhortation in the firſt Verſe , with 2 Ar 
nuſt be profeſſed and acknowledged, Jet who will be offended ; | ment taken from the practice of our Lord himſelf who 15 
butt of Faith in indifferent things (which are the ſubjeC matter | perfe& patrern, and hath left us an Example that v* " 
he 35 treating of.) Qur belief or perſwaſion therein is not to be | follow his ſteps ; wid. John 13. 15, 34. 1 Pet. 2, 21: r Job 
unfeafonably uttered or declared, fo as to occaſion ſcandal or con- | 7. and 4- 17. By Chriſt his not- pleating himſelf, js meant | 
rentien. 5 An Excellent Aphoriſme reſps&ing all, eſpecially | not indulging or ſparing himſelf ; he did not ſeek his oW 
nor to ſatisfie the inclination of the Humane Nature, * bur 


Nap, X £0. XV- 


he 5 1 
he doth 
eaſon tg 
dly Con. 
YNich he 
this re. 
nt thels 


eat, bo. 
> Not of. q 
Hh 


cally the'.. 
amy mea: wo 
his Own my 
0 Dinny.! 
h) is not " 
Irs, What,,, 
a Wickes q 
to commit, 
By 7ai:; 
4. Why. 
ng perf. 
W ord : he 
riſh doubrs 
rring Con. 
ns that doth 
| ſhould no: 
S @& known 
2 fettris a 
ſhalt ws 6 


the Exam! 
s which wes 
» , and txhur- 
the Gentile 
r them, ant 
Mg with him, 
to Jcruſalem 
Jonia and A. 
In, 22—=19, 
and wiſhe;h 


1t c to ber 
and not to 


inferred from 
hoſe who have 
underſtanding , 
icularly in the 
f in the num- 
poſe himſelf an 
re obliged and 
d By the wat, 
nowledge, cup. 
Yrance Froward- 
of Hereſies and 
trine and Like, 
tity ; when bs 
ng ir, thit Ve 
ſick Perſons 
ntous, yet W 
t them, butprt 
6. 2. 6.4.6, ve 
kings, andto 4 
rd to others; #8 
upon our Wl 
e of their Ig" 
F our liberty 19 
part 2 littk fro 


Jur for 1 got 


he immediate! 
oo Neightw 
.ccommodats 7 
if chings; 3.7 
tion. You 
rs the Corinthil 
nd he leads thet 
Q., , 
: i , pleſng 
;mited * mY 


p35 but has! 
roached rhes 


| inficmicies of the weak, and not to pleaſe our {clves. 


| olace, 1» Written for our Learning and Inſtrution, We are 


ret pain, 


and not his own. + Here is an Ellipfts, ſomething muſt 
ed ro fill up the ſenſe : Either the meaning is, he pleaſ- 
*: nur himſelf, but others ; or he pleaſed not himſelf, but bore 
\.r infirmities and reproaches : Or elſe he pleaſed nor himſelf, 
but if happened to him : Oc he ſo carried himſelf that It might 
ne rruly appiied ro him, which 1s written, Oc. i Viz. in Pſal. 
69. 9. | That Divi uttered theſe words in the Perſon of Chriſt . 
(7 as 2 Type of him, may appear from John 2. 17. Interpreters 
re divided abour accommodating this Teſtimony, to the occaſi- 
in for which it is brought. Either the meaning 1s, that Chriſt 
iid willingly expoſe himſelf tO all the reproaches and contume- 
of Mzn, in obedience to Ins Father's Will - Or elſe, that he 
hid the fame concernments with God the Father ; fo thar whar 
bet] God, d1d alio befall him : He was as tender of rhe Farhers 
Honour a> of his own : Or elſe that the Sins of Men, which are 
he chiags that caft reproach upon God, were taken by Chriſt up- 
on himicif, and he bore them in his Body upon a Tree. Seeing 
hen tbac Chriſt hath done ſo much for onr fakes, and hath nor 
fought his Own eaſe and benefit, we ought alſo ro ſeek the good of 
ethers, anc to deny our ſelves, vid. Phil. 2. 6,7, 8. ; 

4 For whatfoever things were written aforetime, 
were written for our learning k; that we through pa- 
j2nce and comfort of the ſcriptures might have hope 7. 

i Luſt any thould think, that the Teſtimony before alledged, 
-oncerneth on'y David or Criſt, he ſheweth that it belongeth al. 
\ unto us; that we may learn by their Example to bear the 
Yea he 
takes occaſion from hence to inform us of the general uſe of 
the Scriptures, that whatſoever is written in this or any othe! 


3 X Cs, » 
ISIS ING 


Ne (upp'1 


concerned nor only 1n all the precepts, bur in all promiſes, Heb, 
13. 5. MENaces, Ats 13. 4o, 41. rewards, chap. 4. 24. andpu- 

niſhments, 3 Coy. 10. 11. therein mentioned and declared; and 

though rhis paſſage 1s more eſpecially to be underſtood of the 

Scriptures of Old Teſtament,yer itis true alſo of the Scriptures of 
the New Teſtament, they being wiitten by the ſame Spi- 

cit, are profitable for the ſome ends; wid. 2 Tim. 3. 16. 

! le proceeds to ſhew more particularly the uſe and benefit of 
the Holy Scripture, which 1s ro confirm our hope and aſſurance 

bf eternal Life, wid. 1 John 5. 13. He faith the patience and 

mfr; of the Scriptures, becauſe they are both wrought in us by 
means thereof ; wid. Rev. 3.10, We are armed with Patience, 
ac fvrniſhed with Conſolations from the Examples and Promi. 
ſs contained therein. It may be the hope he here ſpeaks of 15s 
tobe underſtood mot only of eternal life, but of ſalvation and de. 
hverance in this life ; q. 4. One principal uſe of the Scriptures is 
this, That by the examples we find there of the patience of holy 

Men, and of Gods relieving and comforting them in their diſtrel- 
ſs, we might be confident that God will relieve and comfort us 
aſoin due time. 


5 * Now the God of patience and conſolation », 
zrant you to be {| like-minded one towards another », 


| according to Chriſt Jeſus 0. | 
m He 1s called, The God cf all Grace, 1 Pet. 5. 10. TheGod of 
Bae, v.13. The Gia of Peace, wv. 33- The God of Love and Peace, 
:Cir, 13. 11, and here, The God of Patience and Gonſolation, The 
meaning 15, he is the Author and Worker thereof.; you read; 
In the former verſe, of the Patience and Comfort of the Scrip- 
tures; and here he ſheweth that the Scriptures don't work theſe 
of themſelves, but God doth ir in and by them. » This is that 
to which he had exhorted them, chap. 12. 16. See the like 1 Cor. 
I 10. 2 Cur. 13. 11. Eph. 4. 3- Phil. 2.2. Gol is the Author 
of Patience and Conlvlation, ſo of Peace and Concord ; the 
Grace of Unity and Charity 15 his Gift ; he maketh Men of one 
mind and of one heart, and for this he ſhould be enquired of by 
bis Saints and People to do it for them. 0 7. e. According to his 
Volttine, Command or Example. 
6 That you may with one mind 2nd one mouth glo- 
Ie God, p, eventhe Father of our Lord Jeſus Chriſt q. 
29.4. 1 farther pray, that you may not only be like minded 
oetowards anorher, but char you may with one mouth glorific God , 
bat whether you be Gentiles or Jews, ſtrong or weak in the Faith 
Jou may agree and be unanimous in his Worſhip and Service , 
mat not Only with one mind, bnt withone mouth; or as if you had 
but one month, you may pray unto God and praiſe him . 
Khar 1s, one way of glorifying God, Pſal. 50. 23. and it ſeems 
lo be chiefly intended in this place. See As 4. 23. what ac- 
rd and unaminity there was among the Primitive Chriſtians. 
f An uſual Paraphraſis of God in the New Teſtament, v4. 2 Coy. 
3 and 11, 31, Eph. 1. 3. Col. 1.3. 1 Pet. 1.3. God is the 
Uher of Chriſt, firſt as he is the Son of God, fo he begar him 
Jn eternal and ineffable Generation, John 3. 16. 1 John 4, 9. 
nd, AS he is a Man, ſo he created him, Luke 1. 35, Thirdly, 
\ he is Mediator, ſo he appointed him to, and qualified him 
_ Office, ſal. 40. 8. John 20. 17. This compellation of 
0 Includes all our comfort and happineſs ; for ke is our Father 
Joon he is the Father of Jeſus Chriſt. Ir is added here 
py of Limitation, ro diſtinguiſh the true God from the falſe 
, py the Earth, and by way of explication, to ſhew how God 
* © Uloritied and Worſhiped under the Goſpel, wiz. As che 
"ard Fari of our Lord Jeſus Chriſt, 


7 Wherefore receive ye one another r, as Chriſt al- 
"[eveq us 5, to the glory of God 7. 

; Fid. chap. 14, 1, 3. He ends this Diſcourſe with the ſame 
MS !n which he began it. Before, the ſtrong only were charged 


ind 'the 6eſtruftion of its ſelf, He took ſuch a 
4-411 along as ſufficiently demonſtrated, that he reſpe&ed our 


ROMAN S. CAD. 


hor receive the weak, but i:6 borh are ch ged afike; rhe fi;rone 
muſt receive the weak, and the weak the {trong ; they mult all 
have communion one with another, continuing in b:orherty 
love, accounting one another for Brethren, exercifting murua! 
forbearance and Iong-ſuffering. s 7. ce. After the Oye: 6 of 


Chriſt, who beareth with the infirmities cf his followers, pu'ting 
ns difference betwixt Jew: and Gentiles The Particle a noteth 
quahty, nor equality; there 1s no proportion betwixr the inf;- 
nite Love of Chriſt, and the ſcanty Charity of Man. See the 
like Mat. 5. a8. Eph. 5. 2. t Some join this with rhe former 
clauſe, thar we ſhould rcceive one another to the zlry f/ G14. God 
is glorrfied by that brotherly love and concord thar is amonghit his 
People: Others join ir with the latter clauſe, Ta: Chrift Latt 
> . J 
received us to tho Glory of God, 1. e. To make us partabors ef the glory 
of God, or to acclare and manif. ſt th? gliry of Gans rrycs, Fog® We 
06s and mercy to the Gentiles, as he ſhewerk ia re following 
erſes. 


hrm the promiſes madeto the fathers 7. 

« He explains himſelf, and declares more at Jarge how Chriſt 
received both Jews and Gentiles, thereby ro admoniſh them to re- 
ceive one another. As for the Jews, whom he calls here rhe 
errcumcſicn, vid. chap. y. Jo. and 4. 9, 18. he faith, Chriſt bee 
came 'a Miniſter unto them, vid. Mat. 20. 28. H: ex:irciſ-d his M:. 
niſtry in the aays of th! Fliſh amongſt rhem only, 4at. 15. 24. 
He went indeed now and then into the Coafts of Samzia to make 
way for the calling of the Gentiles, bur his chief abode was in 
Fewry. x Or becaule of the Truth of GoJ, that his trurh or 
faichfulneſs mighr not fail. ) 7. e. The promiſes of rhe Mcfizh 
made firſt to Adam, then to Abraham and to David, that the 
Mcfjiah thould come of their Loins; that in cheir Secd all the Na. 
rions of the Earth ſhould be bleſſed. 


9 And that the Gentiles might glorifie God & for bs 
mercy, as it 1s written a, For this cauſe I will confefs 
torhee among the Gentiles, and ſing unto thy name. 

z Here he proves the ſecond pt, rhat Chriſt harh alſo recei- 
ved the Gentiles, There is a plain Ellipfis in the words, This is 
underſtood that there were promiſes made of or to the Gentiles 

and Chriſt came ro confirm them alſo. The ſum of rheſ: pro. 
miſes was this, that the Gentiles ſhould glorifie God for his mercy, 
Some have obſerved how the truth of God is ſpoken of in the 
oregoing Verſe with reſpe& to the Jews, and the mercy of God 
with reſpect to the G:ntiles; not that the one was without the 
other ; for the Salvation of the Jews, as It was of Truth, fo of 
Mercy alſo, Mich. 7. 20. and the Vocation of the G-ntiles, as it 
was of Mercy, fo alſo of Truth; for there were many pronffſes 
of God concerning that matrer, but mercy is predicated of rhe 
Gentiles, becauſe that attribute of God appeared more eminently 
in their Converſion and Calling. You had th? like diſtribution 
and difference in. chap. 4. 25. and 10. 10. 4 Becauſe the Jew: 
were hardly perſwaded of the Mercy of God to the G:ntiles 

therefore he proves it by divers Scripture-Teſtimonies. This 
firſt is taken out of Pſal. 18. 49. See the Notes there. David 
ſpeaks this in the Perſon of Chit In the Palm it is, 7 will give 
'hants unto thee : But here, according to the LXX, 1 w;! confeſs to 
thee, or celebrate thee among the Gentiles. They then ace received 


ro Mercy, foraſmuch asir was foretold, they ſhou'd celebrate vr 
praiſe God ſor his Mercy. EY ROS COIEG: 


10 And again, he faith, Rejoice ye Gentiles with his 
people 5b. 

6 This is taken out of Deur. 32. 43, Here it is evidently im- 
plyed, that the Gentiles ſhould become the People of God, and 
join with the Jews 1n his Worſhip and Service, and rejoice in the 
ſenſe of his Goodneſs and Mercy to them. The partition wall is 


now taken away, and they both became on? Sh-epfold unger one 
Shepherd, 


Ir And again, Praiſe the Lord all ye Gentiles, and 
aud him all ye people c. | 
c This is found in Pſal. 117. 1. There the Geaziles are willed 
to praiſe Ged, which they could not do unleſs they knew him a- 
right, and hath obtained mercy from him. 


12 And again Efaias ſaith 4, There ſhall be a root 
of Jeſſe, and he that ſhall riſeto reign over the Gentiles, 
in him ſhall the Gentiles || truſt. 

a Viz. in Iſa. 11. 10. See the Notes there. This is 2 plain 
Prophecie of the Converſion of the Gentiles ; their being received 
ro Mercy, is implied in the former Teſtimonies, bur here it is 
expreſſed. The Son of David (the Saviour) jhall riſ: and ſpring 
out of Jeile has Root, and Reign over the Gentiles by his Word and 
Spir:t, He ſhall gather them by the Preaching of his Croſs, as by an 
enſign, and they, as it is in the Prophet, hall ſeek :o him; or as 
it 1s here, ſhall truſt or hope in him. The Apoſtle, as he is wonr, 
doth follow the LXX, which makes ſome little variation from 
the Hebrew Text ; but it is rather in ſound than in ſenſe. You 
have other Prophecies and Promiſes of the Gentiles Mercy, as 
Ija. 42. 1, 6. and 49. 22. and 54. 3. and 60. 3, 5. Bur the 
Apoſtle thought, that theſe he had mentioned were ſufficient foc 
his purpoſe. | | | : 
13 Now e the God of hope f fill you with all joy 
and peace in believing g, that ye may abound in hope 
chrough the power of the Holy Ghoſt 5. ; 
e He finiſheth here tus long Diſcourſe about Brorherly love and 
concord with a ſhortand pitby Prayer, f Having faid before that 
the Gentiles ſhould hope in God, he takes occaſion from hence ro 
ſtile him, The Grd of Hope, He is fo, both Objefive, as being 
{Yyyy 2] the 


| 


j 


- 


8 Now I ſay «, that * Jeſus Chriſt was a miniſter * 485 3. 
of the circumcifion w for the truth of God x, to con. *©- ** 


TU. 


| Or, hore. 


LA Tar 


R 0 M A NS. 
” 9.4. I dare not ſpeak of more than 15 true, gr of , 
that was nut really done by me : Or, elſe the gin. 
dare not ſpeal: of any thing that I have done of = Is 4, 
acknowledge, that what ever good hath come to» the! Elf, 126 
by my means, it was wrought by Chriſt whoſe Infir Genti}, 
have only been, wid. 1 Cor. 3. 5. s Some join theſe wn 
obedience of the Genziles, by the preaching of the Gy oy 
were made obedient in word and deed. Bur they are ber:« thy 
ed with the former words, Chriſt wrought in and » 4, Pw 
ſtle Paul, both by word and deed. By word is underſiogg Thug 
lick preaching and private inſtruction ; and by ated Sub. 


4 TV { I? \ 
Cha D. XV. | Chay 

| 'the only Objet of our hope, wid. Pſal. 146. 5. Jer. 17.7. 1 Tim. 
'6. 17. and Effe#:ive, a; being the only author of it, 1 Pet. T. 3- 
i.e. With much cinward.:Joy end Peace, which rifethin the 
*Heart through a lively Faith in Chriſt ; or elſe, with all comtort 
'and concord in the Chriſtian Faith. In this he prays they may 
#tomd: inſtead of theſe contentions that had been amongſt them, 
he delfres they may be filled with thoſe things, wherein he told 
them, c{ap. I4. 17, The Kingdom of God conſiſted. hb He doth 
*not ſay, that you may have hope. bur that you may abound 
therein, that you may arrive to a Plerophoty or _ _ 
'of hope, as 'it is in Heb. 6. 11. Such hope as may be like an ] N 
Rncker _ the Soul, by keep it ſafe and ork in the midſt of | ample of his good Works, or Godly Life : Or elf by Fa", 
Storms and Tempeſts. This hope is wrought in us by no leſs | may underſtand the Miracles that he wrought, and the La 
power and virtue than that of the Holy Ghoſt, See before. _ Travel chat he underwent; of which in the folloxins 
| VETIC. 9 
14 And * I my ſelf alſo am perſwaded of you, my OY 
redtiren, that ye alſo are full ot goodnefs, filled with 1 _—_ bus. 7 Bram _ -4y my 
all knowledge, able to admonith one another 7. Pe IE Ip111 1 #; fo that from 
My and round about unto Hlyricum w, I have | 


y. 
ny Ung *(%, 
Ic 5 


2 
'Z 


', by the 
Jerulaem 
fully Preach. 


2. 
Joh. 2. 


Concluſion of this excellent E- 


Or, in 


Dart. 
+ 


© 1 Ii 
2© 7. 
Or, cha 
there migit 
be an off cr» 
:rg of the 
Gentiles 
acceptable 


- 


; Here begins the Epilogue or | 
miſtie, wherein the Apoſtle makes an Apology. Firſt, For Ins. 
manner of writing to them, andcthen for his not coming to then | 
himizlf. His firft Apology is uſhered in with a ſingular commens- 
dation of the Chriſtians at Rome; he began wirh their commenda- 


tion, chop 1.8. and he ends with the ſame. There are three' 
things which he commends them for. The Firſt 1s their Goodneſs ; 
thus it isnumbred amongſt the Fruits of the Spirit, Gal. 5. 22.| 


Ic may be taken more Jargely, and ſoit comprehends all Grace 
and Virtus; or ele more tri&ly, andſo it is put for Kindnefs, 


Gentleneſs *and Charity in forbearing and forgiving oo by them in the Gentiles, The word, J, 
| Virtue is twice uſed in this verſe ; it is firſt ap 
| 


The Second is all Knowledge. 4. 6. in things neceſſary, or in mat- 
ters relating-to Chriſtian Liberty : or by 21 knowledge, he means 
a large meaſure and proportion of it. The Thirtl is, Ability 0 
aamcniſh one another, to inform others in things, about which 
they were ignorant ; or to reprehend ethers for things, about 
which they were negligent. Though there were many weak 
and ignorant Perſons among them ;' yer there were others, of 
whom he was perſwaded and fully aflured they were thus qua- 
ttfied. Yid. 1 Gor. 1. 5. | 

15 Nevertheleſs, brethren, I have written the more 
boldiy unto you, || in ſome fort, as pucting you in 
mind, becaule of the grace that is given to me of 


God &. 

k 9. d. Though { am thus perſwaded of you, or of many of 

you; yer I thought good to Write to you in ſome fort, -or 1n part, 
or a little the wore boldly and freely, That T may ſtir you up to 
the Practice of that which you know already, wid. > Pet. 1* 12, 
13. and 3. 1. This he ifpeaks to allay the ſharpneſs of his former 
Reprehesſfions ; and that what he had :tren, might be the berter 
Digeſted ; for all Men more eaſily endure to be noted of Neglt- 
gence, than of all Malice or Ignorance. And farther he rells 
them, he could do no leſs, Becauſe of the Grace that was given kim 
of God. 7. e. Becauſe of his Apoſtolick Qfhce and Authority, 
wid. chap. 1. 5. and 12. 3. 
16 * That 7 I ſhould be the miniſter of Jeſus Chriſt 
to the Gentiles 2, miniftring the Goſpel of God », that 
the || * offering up of the Gentiles might be accepta- 
ble o, being landified by the holy Ghoſt p. 

{ He proceeds to ſpeak more particularly of his Offce and 
Calling, which he had mentioned more generally in theforego- 
ing Words. 1 See the Notes on chap. 11. 13. See alfo Gal. 2, 7, 


Or, Sacri- 8. 2 T.m, 1. 11. = 7.4. . Preaching of it; Some read it Con- 


fecing, 
* Phil. 2. 


17, 


| Or. t6- 
warn; ths 
E7:A;ece 
&* ihe 

C:2ntiles 


ſecrating er Working in the holy Service of the Goſpel of God. 
It 3s an Allufion to the work or office of the Priefts under the Law. 
The Jews and Gentiles, they both boafted of their Priefthood and 


Sacrifices : The Apoftle therefore ſheweth, That his Miniſtry was | 


far more Excellent, being nor occupied in Sacrificing of Beaſts, 
but in Offering up Living Men to be an holy Sacrifice to God. 
o Some underſtand it .z7;vely, that the Gentiles might Offer up 
themſelves, as it 1s in chap. 12. 1. or that they might Offer 
up acceptable Sacrifices to God, according to Mel. r. 11. But 
IT 15 better underitood payiuely, that the Apoſtle converting 
them by his Miniſtry mighr preſent or offer them to God, as an 
acceptable oblation. Yie. ja. 66. 20, p Not by any Prieſt on 
Earth, bur even_by the Holy Ghoſt himſelf; as the Oblations of 
old had their external and legal Purifyings ; ſo this Oblation | 
15 purified or ſanttifed by the Holy Ghoſt. 

17 I have therefore whereof I may glory through 
Jelus Chriſt, in thoſe things which pertain to God 9: 

q 94.4. Having received this grace of Apoſtleſhip, and bav- 
ng had great fucceſs in my Labours, multitudes being converted 
by my Miniſtry, T have whereof to Glory, or I have matter 
of Glorying and Rejoycing. Bur then he adds, that this Glory-! 
ing of his, was not in himſelf, but in and through Jeſs Chrif, 
by whoſe grace he did what he did, wid. 1 Cor. 15. 10. 
alſo, that ir was not in any thing that concerned himſelf, but 
In things pertaining to God, which concerned his Worſhip and, 
Service, and wherein his Miniſtry conſiſted. In the foregoin 
verſe he deſcribed his Apoſtleſhip interms, that were borrowe 
from the Levitical Prieſthood ; and here continuing the ſame me- 
taphor, he calleth rhe execution of his Fun&ion, a performing 
of things pertaining to God, which is that for which the Prieſts 
of old were ordained, Heb. 5. r. : 


18 For T will not dare to ſpeak of any of thoſe 
things , which Chriſt hath not wrought by me, | 


ed the Goſpel of Chriſt x. 
't Or by the power of /igns and wonders, which ſerved 
firm my Commiſſion from God, and the truth of what [ 
ed, and ſo helped forward the Obedienice and C 
the Gentiles, wid. 1 Cer. 12.12. If there be 
twixt Signs and Wonders, 'tis only. gradual. T fing them 
£2a conjoined in Scripture, Mat. 24. 24. John 4. af. 4g 6 
43- and 5, 12. and 7. 36. and 14. 3. « Which bleſſeg 
Words, Deeds and Miracles of the Apoftle, and wro 


any differencehs, 


» 
ths 
wrought «gy, 
vvapus Power Or 
Plied to Signs and 
the Spirit of Gay 
Efficacy. w Thi; 


Wonders, roſhew their Efficacy ; and then to 
to fhew that he was the efficient cauſe of that 
thewerh the pains and travelof the Apoſtle, to bring the c 
tiles to the obedience of Faith. I!yricum 'is ſaid to be jn to 
moſt parts of Greece, bordering upon the Sea, which i; tans 
on called 1tyricum Mare. Irs thought to be the Country = 
called Sclawvonia, and that is diſtant from Fernſalem abou 350, 
German Miles, which makes above a thouſand Engliſh Miles: - 
it ſeems he did not travel in a dire and ficaight line, by bh 
about, or in a circle, as the word imports, tetching a circyi 
| Some Writers have given us out of the 4s, a particnjar Hiftry 
'of his peregrination from Damaſcus, where he began his Miniſtry; 

went to Arabis, and afcer three years returned to Dane, 
and from thence to Feruſalcm ; from Jeruſalem he wentt Coſures 
and ſo ro Tarſus; from Tarſus, Barnabas brought him to 6714 
and from thence to Jer»ſalom to carry relief to the 7p; : From 

Feruſalem they returned to Antioch; from Antiveh he and Parnabas 
went to Seleucia, then to Cyprus, and to ſome Citiesof Pamphilia 
and To to another Antioch in Pifidia : From thence to lyramia, 
and then returned to »tioch, from thence they had been recom: 
mended by the Church. From Antioch they were ſentto Jeruſas 
lem about the queſtion of the Circumciſion, and returned to 
rioch with the Apoſtles Decree. From thence he went through 
Syria and Cilicis viſiting the Churches. Then he went through 
Phrygia, Galatia and Myjia, then to Troas, where by a Viſion he 
was called unto Macedonia, and fo came into the partsof Euripe : 
Firſt ro Phillippi in Macedonia, then to Theſſaloxica ; from thence 
to Athens, and then to Corinth ; from thence to Eplcſu: and 20 
ing to Viſit the Churches of Galatis and Phrygia, returned to 
Epheſus : From Epheſus he went again to Macedonia, fromthence 
to Trogs and Miletws; and thence by Tyrw and Csſaris, and = 
Cities, he came ro Fernſalem, where he was taken agd putin 
bonds. Thus you have an account of the Apoſtles Travels which 
he abridgeth here, when he ſays, That it was from Jeruſalem rand 
\about unto Nyricum. x 7. e. 7 have filled all theſe Countries with th 
Goſpel of Chriſt, The word ſignifierh to fulfill, vid. Cd. 4. 8, 
This hecalleth the finiſhing his Miniftry, 48s 20. 24. 


20 Yea, fo have || I ſtrived to preach the Goſpe, 
not where Chriſt was named, left I ſhould build upon 
another mans foundation. 

21 But, asit is written, To whom he was not ſpo 
ken of, they ſhall ſee : and they that have not head, 
ſhall underſtand j. 

3 He gives a reaſon why he choſe to preach the Goſpel inthel 
places, becauſe Chriſt had not been named or Preached herebs 
fore; this he ſaith was his Ambition, and a thing that hegreib 
Iy covered ; he was unwilling to build upon another mans Fow- 
dation, to put his ſickle into anothers harveſt, to derive the Glory 
to himſelf, which would be due to others, 2 Cor. 10. 15. 16. 
Again, another reaſon why he Preached the Goſpel where Clrilt 
had not been named, was this, that ſo by him, a5an Apolile 0 
Chriſt, and in his Miniſtry, that Scripture might be fulfilled, 
which you have in 1/a. 52. 15, To whom he was nit ſt, they 
fhall ſee, &c. See the Notes there. 


22 For which cauſe alſo * I have been || much b 


dred from coming to you &. 
z Hitherto he hath excuſed his manner of Writing, n0w | 

makes an Apology for his not coming unto them. They at 8 
might be ready to ſay, if he hath travelled into ſo _ 
Countrys, Why could he not all this while giveus a vu? ® 
this he anſwers, it was not from any want of reſpett or $90 
will to them, but for another cauſe which he had a1ready f d” 
ed, and that was, the Preaching of Chriſt where he » , 
been named ; for this cauſe, he ſays, he had been much hindr: 

he looked upon that to be the more neceſſary work; the py 
of Churches is more than the watering of them. He to!dt 


* to make the Gentiles obedient r by word and 
deed -, " 


chap. 1. 13. of his being hindered from coming co them, iM 
now he acquaints them more particularly with the reaſon Fl 


fo con. 
Preach. 


OnVerſion of 


Tin 
fl 


lays ap 


7 Wing *(, 
Bis, Ir 
' (elf, 124 
Genti!s; 
IMent ] 
ls tothe 
pe they 
ter Join. 
the Apo. 
 bispus. 

) the 56 

{ deed Ye 

- Labou; 
ollowing 


) by the 
Tulalem, 7 
' Preach. 
I's) 
ed ko cn. 
J Preach | 
Verſion of 
Ferencebe. 
d them, 
8, 48. 1, 
bleſſed the 
ght effeQy. 
Power or 
0 Signs and 
r1t of Gal, 
Y. ® This 
T the Gen. 
de 1n theye, 
11s thereup, 
outry now. 
about 350, 
b Miles; yet 
e, butrownd 
19 a Circuit, 
ular Hiſtory 
his Miniſtry; 
| to Damaſcus 
ntto Caſares, 
Im to Artinch, 
 Tew: : From 
> and Barnabas 
of Pamyhilis, 
ee {0 Lycamis, 
d been recom» 
ſentto Jeruſse 
eturned to Ate 
went through 
went through 
by a Viſion be 
arts of Eurie : 
» from thence 
pheſus : and go- 
7a, returned to 
;8, from _ 
ſarin, and other 
cen and putin 
+5 Travels which 
; Jeruſalem rand 
Countries with the 


wid. Cd. 4b, 
, 24+ 

h the Goſpe, 
1d build upon 


> was not (po. 
ave not head, 


he Goſpel inthe 
Preached here dt 
ing that hegre" 
other mans FOu- 
o derive the Glory 
Cor. 10. 15. 19: 
ofpel where Chil 

an Apoſtle 0 


as wt ſpokes of, tley 


en | much hy 


mmang £0 


| &ould ſee them then, he was not aſſured of ir, he. had no 
'+velation from God concerning it, he could make no abſolute pro- 


* 
ys yr 
4s o / 
- 
» 


.; But now having no more place in theſe || parts 
1*having a great deſire theſe many years to come un- 
pltoyou#z 


at 


| Having given thereaſon why he came not to them hirherto, 
- th: following words be aſſures them, he would do it hereatrer- 
A 4 here he fairh, He wasthe more efxclined fo to do. Firſt, Be- 
—_ he had no tmoreplace ih thoſeparts. 7.e. As before in thoſe 
poet where Chrift had not been named, or his Goſpel Preach't, 
he had no new Churches there to found , and he had or- 
4:incd Elders in every Ciry to build upon his Foundation. The 
The word rendred parrs. ſignifies Climates. 7. e, Places which 
1y on divers Elevations ofthe Pole. And then Secondly, Becauſe he 
12d long longed fo to do, he had deſired it for many years. chap. 


1, 10, T1. 1; | : ; 
:4 Whenſoever I take thy Journey into Spain, I 


will come to you : For I truittro ſee you in my journey 6, | 
and ro be brought on my way thitherward by you c, 
"fr 1 be ſomewhar filled + with your company d. 


; Here he ſers down the time when he would viſit them. 5. e. 
When h2 took his Journey into Spaiy. He faith, he truſted he 


miſe, See ver. 28. c i.e, By ſomeof you'; this he did promiſe 
tinſclf from them, and indeed it was uſually done by the Chur- 


ches he viſited. wit AF. 17.15. not that he affe&ed any train! 


ar pomp, but it was done for his guidance and ſafety, as he tra- 
yell:d through naknown and dangerous ways. 4 This he adds, 
kf they ſhould think he meant to make no ſtay with them, he 
ves them to underſtand thar he did not intend to leave them, till 


they were mutually filled and ſatisfied with one anothers company : 
20d ſociety. 


25 But now * 1 go nfo Jeruſalem to miniſter unto 
the Saints e. 


: Some night be ready .to ſay, if Paul hath no more place in 
thoſe parts where he is, and hath ſuch a longing deſire to ſee us, why 
then dorh he not preſently come to us ? To this he anſwers, that 
for the preſent he could notcome, becauſe he had a Weighty affair 
vpon his hand, which was to go up to Feruſalem to Miniſter to the 
Gints. 7. e. To carry thither certain ColleQions and Contribu-: 
tions from che Genrile Churches for their relief. He uſeth a _ 
tile of the preſent tenſe in the Original, to ſhew that this 
work is now in hand, and it would not ſtay or hold him long. 
Though indeed his work was topreach the Goſpel, and not to ſerve 
Tables, yet it ſeems likely that the Churches of the Gentiles., who 
weremoved by him to this Contribution, had committed the ſame 
tohiscare. 2 Cor, 8. 4. 


26 For * it hath pleaſed them of Macedonia and 
chaia, to make a certain || contribution for the || poor 
fins which are at. Jeruſalem f. = 

{Fer the underſtanding of theſe words, you need only to read 
(Gr. 8.1, and 9 2. When he faith, it harh pleaſed them, it is 
nplyed,that it was not extorted or ſqueez'd our of them ; but that 


t proce-ded from a ready and willing mind , and that they 
bakdelight rherein. The ward here rendred Contribution, properly 


ROMANS 
Le concealed befoze. The word (m mz) rendred -much, Gg- 


-Ferh 9997) 3 and ic implics that he wasmany times hinfred, and 
many wayes 3 but this was the chief. 


[went this Journzy into $2417. The purpoſes of men are red and 
over-ruled by the Providence of God. Prov. 16, 9. | 


29 And I am ſurethat when I come unto you, I (all 


come in the fulneſs of the blefling of the Goſpel cf 
Chriſt 22. | | 


”m i.e. As ſome expound it, 7 ſball fnd you furniſhed ws" all 
Spiricual and Goſpel Bleſjings : This ſence agrees with wer. 14. Buc 
others ratherthink, that heſpeaks of what he ſhould bring with 
him, and not of what he ſhould find there; Therefore it may 
berrer: be. expounded by cap. 1, I1, 12. [He atlires himſelf he 
ſhould impart unto them m'1ch Knowledge, Grace and Comforr - 
that he ſhould enrich, and fill chem with all the Bl-ſ7ags of the 
Goſpel of Chriſt. | 


o Now »” TIhbeſeech you, brethren, for the Lord 
Teſts Chrifts ſake o, and for the love of the Spirit p, ** 
that ye ſtrive together with me in your prayers to Gog 11. 
for me 94. 


» In the Concluſion, he commends himſelf to their Prayers. 
This is uſual with him, in his ocher Epiſtles, vid. Eph. 6. 18. Col. 

4. 3- 2 Theſ. 3.1. Heb. 13. 18. 0 9.4. If not for my fake, yer 

for 4:5 ſake, whois moſt dear to you. p 9.4. If you lovs te Spirit 

of Ged : Or rather if the Grace of Love be wrought in you by the 

Spirit, ſhew it in this thing. This patherical way of {peaking is 
frequent with this Apoſtle, vid. Chop. 12.1. Phil. 2.1. 9 That 

you ffrive, as thoſe that be in an Agony ; It is a Military word : 

He befpeaks their earneſt and importunate Prayers in his behalf. 

Jacob prayed after rhis manner, ſo did Elijah and Epaphras, Col.g.1 

He Prayed himſelf, and he defired them to joyn with him, and 

help him ; as Aaron and Hur helped Moſes. | 

3x That | may be delivered from them that {| do not | Or, arc 
believe in Judea, and that my ſervice which 7 have for diſcvedient. 
Jeruſalem, may be accepted of the /ainrs 7. 

r Here are two things more particularly, which he deſireth 

them to Beg of God in his behalf. Firſt, That he may be delivered 

from them that did nat believe ; Or were diſebedient, and refraQory 

in Judes, He knew the Jews were incenſed againſt him; thar 
Troubles did abide him, or wait for him in Jud:a, whither he 

was going, vid. AF. 20. 23. And it happened accordingly, for 

the Jews went abour to kill him, AZ. 21.31. Therefore "tis that 

he deſires their Prayers, That he might be delivered from them, wid. 

2 Theſ. 3.2. Secondly, That the Almes he brought the Poor Sainrs 

at Jeruſalem, might be taken by them in good part: Thar they 

might be reconciled, both to the Gentile Churches thar ſen ir, 

and to him that brought it. Ir derradts greatly from a Gift, 

when it comes, either from one, or by one ; againſt whom we are 
prejudic'd, : 
32 X That I may come unto you wich joy * by the * A&.18. 
will of God 5s, and may with you be refreſhed 7. 21, 


5 q.4, This would be a means to make me come unto you 
with the more comfort if God will, or if God grant it ro our 


Prayers. This condition (if God will) he had before inſerted Up 


on this very occafion, cp. 1. 10. See the like 1 Cor. 4. 19. Fames 


4- 13,15. This he did to free himſelf from the ſuſpicion of in- 
conſtancy, in caſe it ſhould fall out otherwiſe : as alſo to ſhew, 


That always, and in all things he referred himſelf to the good 
Pleaſure and P | 


rovidence of God. # i.e. Wirh your Company and 
Converſe. This hath the ſame ſence with chap, 2. 12. See the 


ſnificth Communication, which implyeth a murual exchange, ot | 
rtercourſe between the givers and the receivers ; the one Contri- 
bring Alms, the other Prayers and Interceſkens to God. He | 
heaks elſewhere of Cummunicating, concerning Giving and Res | 
uving, Phil, 4. 15. 


27 It hath pleaſed them verily g, and their debters 


Notes there. 


33 Now the * God of peace « be with you all 27, * ; co. 
Amen 5. 14.33 


« This is a frequent Title of God in Scripture, he is called the 


i God of Peace, chap. 16. 20. 2 Cer. 13.11. Phil.4.g. 1 Theſ. 5. 23. 


2 The. 3.16. Heb.13.20. Here it fits his great Argument, which 


they are 6, For * if the Gentiles have been made parta- ; was to perſwade the Believing Romans to be at peace amongſt 
Ilers of their ſpiricual things, * their duty is alſo, to themſelves, and nor to contend abour indifferent things. w Three 


niniſter to them in carnal things 2. 


| 7 He makes this repetition, -as to commend the Grecians, fo 
Wn to admoniſh the Remans to the like benevolence. þ 7. e. 
he Gemtiles are Debtors to the Jewes 3 though what they ſent 
Mm was a Gift, yet it was alſo a Debt, it was due by the Law of 
mwrity, chap. 13. 8. and by the Law of Gratitude and Equity, 
tey had received from them, and they were obliged in ſome 
it to make returnes to them. # By the Spiritual things of the 
Jever, of which the Genz:les were made partakers, you may under- 
and all thoſe things of which mention 1s made, chap. 5 
More particularly , the Goſpel with the Miniſtry, and Ordi- 
ces thereof : The Goſpel was firſt Preached to the ewes, 
nd from Jeruſalem it was ſpread abroad among the Gentiles, wid. 


#e 24.47. 47 1.4, 8. By the carnalthings of the Gentiles, you 

My underſtand their Gold and Silver, with all things needful 
T the ſuſtentation of the body : you have a parallel place in 
lGr.g.7, 


. 28 When therefore 1 have performed this, and have 


ad to them this fruit 4, I will come by you into 
Pain /, 


t i.e. After that T have diſpatched this buſineſs, and ſafely 
lelivered the Almes of the Greek Churches to the Fewes, wherewith 
(Mintruſted ; Tt is put into my hands as a Treaſure ſealed in a 
(2 Or cheſt, that ir may not be diminiſhed or imbezeled ; He 
R callsit Fruit, becauſe it proceeded from their Faith and Love, 
"0 Vecauſe it would abound to their account, Phil. 4. .17. it 
ould benefit them that reccived it, but much more them that 
Pelt. 1i,e. I will take you, or your City in my way thither, he 
Mid them as much before. ver. 24. . This he really intended, but 

T >" concluded, that he was prevented ; that he never 

0 . - 


Times in this Chapter doth che Apoſtle life up a Prayer for the Be- 
 lieving Romans. wid. 5. 13, And this is more comprehenſive than 


the other two. If God be with. us, no good thing can be wanting 
to us. Gods preſence 1s inclulive of all good, and excluſive of all 
evil. x wid. chap. 16. ult. 


C H A P. XVL 


Paul's Recommgndations and Salutations, 1————16. his 8amoition 
againft the Authors of diſcord and offence : a mativve thereto and pro 
miſe, 17—20. he Salutes them in the Name of the Brethren with 


him, 21-—23. he Bleſſeth them ; and praiſeth God for the Revelation 
of his Goſpel. 24 — 27, 


Commend unto you « Phebe 5 our ſiſter c, which 
is 2 || ſervant of the Church which is at Cenchrea 4 | Or, 5« 


a This Chapter is in the nature of a Poſt-ſcript. The Apoſtle that Min 
begins it with the Recommendation of a certain Woman , to 7/75 **- 
them. 6b She went upon ſome occaſion to Rome and by her (as 
ſome have ſuppoſed) this Epiſtle was ſent to the Church there, 

The Poets call'd the Moon Phebe, as they did the Sun Phebu. 
This name is likely to have been impoſed by her Parents, being 
Gentiles. c r.e. Jn Chriſt, and by the Profeſſion of the ſame 
Faith. wid. Jam. 2. 15. 4 A Port or Haven belonging to 


Corinth, on the Eaſt ſide towards Aſia : There was another on the 
W-ft fide towards Italy, called Lechea: By reaſon of this doub'e 
Haven, . Cerinth was called by the Poets,  Bimaris. Here Paul 
paid a vow, which he, had made, 45. 18. 18. Hrre alſo he 
Preached and Converted many ; amongſt whom, this Phebe (as 


is probable) was one, When he faith, She was /ervant of the 
Church. 


Chap. XVI 


2 Cor. -- 


* 2 PIPES M4 
APR aa, BESET 


* Pn" aa s 
>" ay 
2 LE 
PT - 


Chap. XVI. 


*, 2 That ye receive her in the Lord e, * as becometh 


$5 off / 0 
jUIr,foliocw 


labogrers. Tetus k: 


Jedge of Widows, of whom he ſpeaketh, 1 7im.5. 9. But the 
ſud th: Church, 4n Rarbouring and ſaccouring the Saints that 
vere diiven our of their Country ; yea, as appears by the next 
Verſe, ſhe was #2 ſnccourer of the Aniſtcrs of the Goſpel, and of 
the 7's himſelf : We read Luk. 8. 3. of ſome that Miniſtred 
rato 36s Lord of theiv (ubtance ; therethz ſame word is uſed. And 
this Pl 5c 1c<ms to have been imployed in the ſame Works; ſhe 
min; 1.d unto. Paulas Oneſiphrius dad, 2 Tim. 1. $8. There the ſame 
word is ulcd again. 


” 


ſaints f, and that ye aflilt her in whatſoever buſineſs ſhe 
Hath need of you g: For ſhe hath been a fſuccourer of 
mcny, and of my ſe!f alſo þ. | 

: c 7.e. In the Lords Name, or for the Lords ſake, vid. Mat. 18. 5. 
Or elle "ris, as if he had faid, Receive Þer Chriltianly, 7 As it1s 
Er that S:ints ſhould be received,or as it is fir for them,who Profeſs 
them(ſclves to be Sant, to receive one another. g That you ſtand 
by 4c, 1nd afford hr your Counſel, or any other affiſltance, She 


might have ſome buiinels in the E mperow 's Court, by reaſon of] cjpjes which are mentioned, Luk. 10. 1. Others that hs 


Frail, Oppretlion, or ſome unjuſt Vexations ; 8and rhere 
mig'1t be thoſe amongſt them , that cond ſtand her in ſome 
tex. Theire were Chriſtians of Ceſars Houfhold , Phil. 4. 22. 
þ The word tignifieth a Patron ſs. She had been Hoſpitable to 
any, and in particular, to the poſile himſelf. This ſheweth, 
She was a Woman of ſome Account ; it was but equal, that the 
Saints at Rome thould afift her, who had been Aſiftant unto fo many 
others. 


3 Greer Priſcilla and Aquiliaz, my || helpersin Chriſt 


; In the next place, he Saluteth ſeveral perſons by Name; 
the firſt are Priſcilla and #quila. Sometimes ſhe is called Priſca, 
2 7m. 4 19. And by a Diminutive Priſcila. This was uſua] 
amonglt the Romans. SO Livis was called Livila, Tullia, Tulliola, 
Petra Puroeila, &c., The Wife is named before her Huſband, ſo 
the is, 4X. 18. 18. 2 Tim. 4. 19. Some think ſhe was frft Called; 
others that ſhe was moſt Renowned for her Zeal and Charity. We 
need nor to be curious in our Enquiry after the Reaſon.; we 
find in other places Aquila is ſet before Priſcilla, AF. 18, 2, 26. 
I Cor. 16. 19. Hence it may appear how weakly the Papiſts 
Argu: for Petcr's primacy, becauſe he was placed firſt on the Cara. 
Jogue- of the Apoſtles ; for by the ſame Argument, the Wife 


ſhould be prefered before her Huſband. This Aquila was a Few of ported, He was the firſt Biſhop of Conſtancineple ; Be was doute 


Pontus, and by Occupation a Tent-maker : With him the Apo. 
{tle Paul abode, ard wrought at Corinth, AF. 18. 2,3. Though 
Clandius the Empcrour had commanded the Jewes to depart from 
Rowe, yer now it ſeems they were returned thither again; 
poſſibly, becauſe Claudius was dead, or becauſe that ſevere EdiQ 
was relaxed. k In propagating the Goſpel in their Place and Cal. 
ling, and as they had Opportunity. Though they Preached not 
publick!y , yer they furthercd the Goſpel many ways privately. 
wid. Ac.18. 20. 


ROMANS 


'Ghnrcb, it is not meant, Ske was a Diaconels, or one of the Col-[ Corinth, or .Antioch, oc in ſome other places, where ſhe hag 
M My. 


| Or, /o:1. 


I Or,bzve necks {:; unto whom not only I give thanks, but alſo 
pi 4790 2 the Churches of the Gentiles m2. 


their necke. 


4 Who have for my || life laid down || their own 


1 i. e. They hazarded their own Livesto fave mine, The Scrip- 
ture ſpeaks of this, as the duty of Chriſtians, 1 702. 3. 16. Herefers 
(it may be) to that Uproar that was at Corinth; of which, ſee 
Af. 18.12. Or thatin Aſa; of which, ſee 45. 19. 23. m Be- 
cauſe he was the Apoſtle of the Gentiles, and his Preſervation re- 
dounded to the benefit of them all. 


5 Likewile greet the Church that is in their houſe " 
Salute my well-beloved Epenetus 9, who 15 the firlt- 
fruits of Achaia unto Chrilt p. 


» The word Greet is ſupplyed to fill up the Sence. 2. d. De- 
clare my good Willto them, and Deſires of therr weltare. You 
have the ſame Salutations, 1 Cor. 16. 19. And the like in Col. 4.15 
Phil:m. 2. By the Church in their houſe, is generally underſtood, 
their Family or Houſho/d 3 which he calls a. Church, becauſe of the 
Godly Order and Religious Worſhip that was exerciſed amongſt 
them. May 49uila and Priſcilla bea pattern unto other Houle. 
keepers; may the families of Chriſtians be every where as little 
Ehurch:s. The Houſe of Gecrge, Prince of 4nhalt,for the good and 
Godly Order therein obſerved, was ſaid to be, as well a Church as 
a Court. There are ſome that think, That by the Church in their 
Houſe, is meant theChriſtians that were wont to aſſemble there 
for Solemn Worſhip; bur this is not likely, becauſe of the parti- 
cular Salutations ot ſo many in the following Verſes. o Epenetus 
in the Gr:c>& Tongue, is Laudable and Praiſe worthy ; ſo was this 
Perſon, both in name and in deed. p The ſame is affirmed of 
the houſe of S:ephanus, 1 Cor. 16. 15. The meaning may be this. 
Eprnetys wasthe firſt Perfon, and Stephanus his Family, was the firſt 
Family that embrac't the Faith of Chriſt, in the Region of Achaia. 
Tais is a ſingular Commendation ; Gods foul delires ſuch firſt-ripe 

Fruits. Micah. 7.1. | 


6 Greet Mary q, who beſtowed much labour on 


US 7 that ſhe hath /aboured much in the Lord ; noting ſome ſpecial Lab 
y This was a common Name, but the Perſon here meant was of | or Service for which ſhe is here Commended. 


ſpecial note. Jgnatizs highly commends one of this Name, giving 
her an ample CharaCQter for Wiſdom, and Godlineſs. -» This.1s 
the Commendation the Apoſtle gives of this Woman : it is to be 
underſtuwod of her Labour and Service in providing Food , and 


other Neceflaries for the Entertainment of the Faithful ; eſpeci-|21. # A choice Chriſtian, one eminent for gifts, Coal 
ally, the Preachers of the Goſpel : which he / acknowledgeth as 2 Joh. 1. You read of an Ele& Lady : He is ſuppoſed not *9 * 
done to himſc1f, though he had not been at Rome, becauſe of the| here of Erernal Eleftion. o His Mother by Nature, mine b . 
f&ion: She hath tendred me as a Mother her Son. | y' ſ 


mother and mine 0. 


fired unto the Apoſtle Pax! himſelf, 

7 Salute Andronicus || and Junia « my kinſiner ; 
my fellow priſoners, who are of note amogs m. 1" 
ſtles w, who alſo were in Chriſt before me x. 
s It may be rendred Junias. Some think, This Tun; 
Woman, and the Wife of Andronicus ; Others take then Ys, 
for men. t So he calls them, Either becauſe they _— 
c9.3. Or becauſe they were of the ſame Tribe : or hetw Jen, 
were more nearly Related to him, by Conſanguiniry ang rr 
v. i.e. "They had been Impriſoned for the Goſpel, as wei) vu 
The Apoſtle had been often in priſon himſelf,. 2 Cor. ;1 , mT. 
read A. 16. 23. of his being impriſon:d at Philippis, and 7 * 
be ) theſe two were his fc/low priſoners ; for we read of wy 
priſoners there , beſides Paul and Silas. wv. 15.26, w.; , a 
were well known to the Apoſtles, and were in good Eſteem .) 
them : Not only the Twelve, together with Paul and þ,, 7 
but other Teachers are ſometimes called Apoſtles or Meſlenge. 
vid. 2 Cor. 8. 23. Phil 2, 25. Some have thought FS ts 
Andronicus and Juxia, were of the number of the Sever; Di 
of the one hundred and Twenty, which are mentioneg > 
15. Orof thoſe that were Converted by the fiſt Preaching « 
Peter, and the reſt, 4F. 2.41. and 4.4. By whar follows - " 
peareth they were of conſiderable ſtanding in Chriltian? 
x There aret/ee things for which he commends theſe Two 2. 
ſons: TheFirſt is, their Sufferings for Chriſt ; A $:<3 j; th 
Fame among the Apoſtles; and the Third is, their Forwarder 
in Converſion. This was Mnaſon's Commendation, 43, 1,1; 
When he ſaith, They were in Chriſt, he intimates the Vertue ai 
_ of Fairh, to incorporate us into Chriſt, as bran; hy, Into 4 
| VINE; 


8 Greet Amplias y my beloved in the ord z, 

3 Some Tranſlations call bim 4Ampliartys ; it is a Roman Name 
z This is added to ſhewthat hedid nor love him for his riches; 
or any outward reſpe&, but for the Lords fake ; for the 554, x 
Chriſt, which appeared in him. PR 

9 Salute Urban @ our ||helper in Chriſt 5, and 5; 
chys my beloved c. | 
# Thisallo is a Roman Name ; it was coveted afterward; hy 
many Biſhops of Rome. b The ſame that was faid of xl; a 
Priſcilla. v. 3. Poſſibly he might be one of their Teachers, c Thi 
15a Greek name, which ſignifieth an ear of c:rn. Some have re. 


leſsa Perſon eminent in grace and gifts, or elſe the Apoſtle would 
never have Dignified him with this additional Commcadztion, tha 
he was beloved of him, or dear to him. 


19 Salute Apelles 4 approved in Chriſt « $41y- 


them which are of Ariſtobulus || houſhold f, 


4 Origen ſuppoſeth this Appe!les to be 4polls, of whom you real 
AZ. 18. 24. Andin other places. Epiphanius ſaith, Hewas Teacher 
in the Churches of :Smyrna before Polyzarpus. e One who hath 
ſhewed himſzIf a faithful and ſincere Chriſtian ; who hath given 
many proofs of his Sincerity, Zeal, and Conſtancy, Thisis high 
Encomium ; to be in Chriſt is much, to be approved in Clift i 
more : Tryed Gold is moſt precious. In a time of Tryal, toitand 
faſt, and hold his own, is a Chriſtian's greateſt praiſe. The wad 
Houſhold, is not in the Greek, bur is added to fill up theſence; you 
have the like in the next Verſe, and in 1 Cor. 1.11. Arif hin. 
ſelf is not Saluted ; Either he was dead, Or as yet unconvertedto 
the faich of Chriſt : But it ſeems there were ſeveral Chriſtians, inor 
belonging to his Family, whom the Apoſtle here Salutes, See the 
next Verſe, we | 


11 Salute Herodian my kinſman g. Greet them tha 
be of the || houſhold of Narciſſus 4, which are in the 


Lord z, 

g vid. v. 7. h This Narciſſus IS reported by $wetonisis, to hae 
been 1n great favour with Claudius the Emperour, and to haves. 
bounded in Wealth; ſo that he was worth 7:n Millios. He w 
2 wicked Man himſelf, yer ir ſeems he had divers good Chriſtin; 
in his Family. So weread, that there were Saints ir. Neri's Houle 
or Court, Phil. 4. 22. Towhat a degree of Wikedne's are they Ar- 
rived, who will not ſuffer a Religious Perſon to dwell in their 
Houſes! This ſhews, That good Chriſtians may ſerve wicked 
Maſters with a good Conſcience. 7; This may be added, becuk 
that all in Narciſis his Family were not Chriſtians, or Members 
of the Church of Chriſt. 


12 Salute Tryphena and Tryphoſa, who labour in 
the Lord &. Salute the beloved Perfis, which laboured 


much in the Lord /. 

k He Salutes ſeveral Women, as well as Men : You read before 
of Priſcilla, v. 3. Of Mary, v.6. And now he adds three more 1 
this Verſe. Heſaith of the Two Firſt, that they Labouredin the 
Lord, i.e. In the ſervice of Chriſt, and his Church, accoraing i9 
their Place and Power, See the Notes on wv. 6. 1 He giv*i w 
Woman a higher Commendation, Calling her the beloved Perſir, 14 
v. 8. He ſaith of the other two, That they Laboured ; but of th15 


13 Salute Rufus »- choſen in the Lord », and 


read, Mar. !5 


» The ſame (it may be) of whom you may 
and gr act 


con-municn of Saints, Some think this Woman dwel'c before at 


I4 alute 


ng the Apo. 2 


up. 49, XVi. 


n,! and 0 
C Apo. be 


ma Was, 
lem both 
Vere Jew, 
auſe they 
d Affniry 
ell a5 he - 
«23, Wo 
d (it may 
id of other 
5. & They 
teem With 
Barnaby, 
Metlenger, 
theſe to, 
evenry Di. 
q they Wers 
Mned 48.1 
"reaching of 
lows, it Up. 
Chriſtianity, 
e Two Per. 
cad 1s, their 
 forwardneG 
, 7,21. 16, 
e Vertue and 
nch24 100 1 


Id z, 

Riman Name, 
Ir his riches: 
Ir the grace of 


j 


afrerwards by | 
of /qails and 
achers, « This 
Some have re. 
Je was doubt. 
Apoſtle would 
mcadation, that 


ft e Salute | 


;hom you read, 
He was Teacher 
Oae who hath 
vho hath given 
. Thisisa high 
ved in Chrift is 
"Tryal, to itand 
aiſe, The word 
> the ſence; you 
. Arifubulw bim- 
t unconverted to 
Chriſtians, inor 
Salutes, See the 


reet them that 
ch are 1n the 


*yotonivs, 00 hae 
, and to hwvet- 


Villions, Hews i 


; good Chriſtuns 
its ir, Neri's Houle 
Ine(s are they At- 
ro dwell in theit 


nay ſerve wicked 
« added, becauk 
ans, or Members 


who labour 1 
which laboured 


You read befors 
dds three more 

Labouredia tit 
urch;, accoraing 1 

1 He gives 00 
\ beloved Perſis Pi 
oured ; but of tl 
ame ſpecial LW 


ord ”, and fi 


ay read, Mr- 
's, and gract” 


churches of Chriſt ſalute you #. 


| Love and Concord. 9. 4. 


1.4 Salute Aſyneritus , Phi | 
Hermes, and the brethren which are with them p. 

pi.e The Chriſtians that are their Domeſticks, or that dwell with 
theM. : 

\« Salute Phitologus, and Julia 4, Nereus, and his 
(ter, and Olympas 7, and a!l the ſaints which are with 
} 5 « Lo 
them 5 

., Probably tue Wife of Phildlogm. » This is thought to be 
Pa. Name of a Man, rather than of a Woman. s That are 1n 


ſeveral Families ; wid. wer. 14. There were doubrleſs many 


their _ | ; 
more Chiiſtians in rhe Church of Rowe ; but either they were of no 


ROMANS 


Phlegon, Hermas, Patrobas. whom they would enſnare, (ſo much the word t#a:;!4 hero 


'Chap. XVI 


FAY 


uſed imports) and by this means they impoſe upon the ſimple; 
;.e, The over-credu!ous and unwary, who did not miſtruſt ay 
deceit or hurt, the word here rendred ( jimple } property 


ſignifies ſuch as are not evi!, or that are incaurclous and nc + 
ſuſpicious. 


"eat Note, or elſe not known to the Apoſtle : And indeed it is 
_ of Admiration, that he, who was never at Rome, ſhould 


now the Name, and proper Characters of ſo many there. And' 


becauſe he {enderh Saluraticus to ſo many Brethren at Rene, and 
makes NO MENTION of Peter , it may be rationally inferred, That 
P.r.r was nor there ar the Writing ot this EpiſHe. It is queſtionable, 
Whether ever he were there at all ; but 't1s without queſtion, that 


he 


came nor thither in the beginning of Clandivs his Reign, and in 
the fo-ty ft: h year ef our Lord, as the Romaniſts Report ; nor was. 


| 19 For your obzdience is come abroad unto all men; 

I am glad therefore on your behalf 5 : but yer 1 would 

have you * wiſe unto that which is good, and {| ſimple * 1 Cor- 

concerning evil c, . T4. 20. 
M E: © Or harm 

b 9. d, As for you, your ready embracing of the Goſpel and j.'-_ 

Conformity thereunto, 15 generally raken notice of by all that * 

mind ſuch things ; ſee the like, chap. 1.8. 17he/. 1. 8, 71 rea 

joice to hear of your ſounducſs and reachablencls : 1 as uit therefore 

ſpeak this to. accuſe, bat to caution you. £ q. d. Take heed thar 

you be not cheated by Seducers, that they do not abuſ: your tra. 

Ctableneſs to, draw you into. Ercors. , He e©xhorts them to JOY 11 


prudence with ſimplicity ; to be ſo Parmleſs and fimple as not 


ro invent falſe DoE&trine, and yet to be ſo wife and $kilful as to 
Be able ro diſcern Truth from- Falſhood ; to be fo innocent as 
nor to deceive, and ſo prudent as not to be dcceived ; wid. Mare 


he Bithop there for the ſpace of Five and twenty years, as they ro: 16. He prays for the Philippians, rhat- they may have this 


aificm. 


16 Salute one another with an holy kiſs 7, The 


; From Greeting them hiniſclf, he proceeds to Exhort them to 
Creer or Salute *%ne another. This he adviſerh them to do, with an 
july kiſs; you have the fame Exhortation, 1 Cor. 16. 20. 2 Cor. 
33. 12, 1 Thef, 5. 26. Thiis the Apoſtle Percy calls a Kiſs of 
Charity, 1 Pct. 5. 14» MRifſmg 1s accounted a great Symbol oft 
You have been much troubled with' 
Diiſentions about Meats and: Days, &c. Therefore I befeech you, | 
char forgetting all former Offences, ybu would manifeſt for the; 
vture all ſigns of Love to, and Peace with one another. Kiſſing 
was an o'd Cuſtom amongſt the Hebrews ; we find it uſed by tae 
Patriarchs, Gen. 27. 26. and 29. 11, It is ſtil! retained more or 
kf in all Countries. The Primitive Chriſtians did uſe it in their 
Aſemblies ; ſo 7:rtulian teſtifieth, Lib. Deg. and they did it eſpe- 
cially in 1eceiving the Euchariſt. So Chryſoſtom witneſlerh, Hom. 77. 
Ia Joh» 16. We ds well, ſaith he, to kiſs in the myſteries that we 
my become one, This Cuſtom for good reaſons is laid down , 
md the Rowaniſts, in room of it, keep up a fooliſh and fu- 
perſtitious Ceremony, which 1s to kiſs the Pax 1n the Maſs. 
\ He ſends beſides his 6wn, the Salutations of others ; alſo to 


the Chriſtians at Rome, and that firſt of whole Churches ; and; 


by and by of particular Perſons, wv. 21. 22. 23. By Churches 
here, he principally means, The Churches in Greece, where he 
then was, of whoſe good AﬀeCtion to the Chriſtian Romans, he was 
well aflured, 


19 Now I] beſeech you brethren, mark them which 
eule diviſions and offences w, || contrary to the do- 
tine which ye have learned x, and || avoid them y. 


| »He ſhuts up the Epiſtle with a Seaſonable Admonition, which 


he x:ſerved to the laſt, that it might be the berter remembred : It 
is to beware of thoſe that cauſe diviſions and offences : By the 
former, ſome underſtand thoſe that corrupt the Dottrine. of the 


; diſcretion, P/zl., 1, 9, Io. and exhoits rhe Theſilomians thereunto, 


I Th:j]. 5. 21. 


20 And 4 the God of pcace e ſhall |} * bruiſe f Satan jOr,vread 
under your feet ſhortly. The grace ot our Loid Jelus * Gen. 3. 
Chriſt 5e with you 4. Amen. r5. 


dq. d, And to encourage you to be watchful, I dare promiſe 
you ſhall be ſucceſsful. e So he is called, cp. 15. 33. f The 
word figniftes to bruiſe by treading, : it imports the Conquelt thac 
the Lord gives his People over Satan and all his wick=d Inftrumencs 
rhat divide, ſeduce, or oppreſs his People ; the prowitse is, that they 
ſha overcome him and them; they ſhall deal by Satan aad his Agents, 
as Joſhua and his Captains did by thoſe five Kiags, Joſh. 10. 24. wid. 
Rev. 22. 11, This promiſe plainly bears upon the firſt grand pro. 
miſe in Gen. 3. 15. Thar Jeſus Chriſt, :4e Secd of rhe Woman, fhuld 
bruiſe the head of the Serpent : For it is by veitucof his bruiling the 
head of Satan, that he is ſubdued and brought 1134 -r our feet. The 


Seed of the Woman in their own pertons, as well as in their repre- 


ſentative, ſhall bruiſe the Serpents head. g Or ſuddenly, The:zg!h now 
he rage, yet ere long he ſhall be chrown down, Some retcr is ro 
the day of Judgment, others to the time ot” Conftantine, who over. 
threw Idolatry ; and that it is not enly « Promiſe, but a Prophelie 
alſo of the Cenverſion of the Rowan Empire. There are that think 
that the Apoſtle doth comfort here the believing Romans, by telling 
them, that the difſentions raiſed amongſt them by means of Satan; 
malice and ſubtilty, ſhould be ſhortly quenched and reconciled ; 
and that ir was eff2&ed partly by this Epiſtle, and partly by the 
Apoſtles Iabours airerwards amongſt them + As he beganthis E. 
piſtle with wiſhing them Grace and Peace, ſo he ends it. He had 
ſaid, chap. 15. 33. Tie God of Peace be with you. And here heath, 
The Grace of our [ord Jeſus Chriſt be with yzu. He was once and 2- 
gain ſhutting up his Epiſtle, but having more room and time, he 
makes ſome ſhort Additions and Supplements, as'tis uſual with choſe 
that write Epiſtles. This Salutation he was wont in the end of e- 
very Epiſtle to write with his own hand, 2 The. 3. 17. Ir is re- 
peated wer. 24. Hereby he intimates the necellicy ot rhe Grace of 
C/rift, therefore he prayeth for it agaia and again. Sce the Notes 


Church : By the latter thoſe that violate the Diſcipline thereof : 
Others refer Diviſions to Faith, and Offences to Manners. There 
ae that like neither of theſe diſtinftions, but think he only cauti- 
ons them againſt Church-dividers ; and mentions Scandal or Of- 
fences as the eff:& or fruit of Church-diviltions. He ſeems to aim 
nore eſpecially at thoſe, who together with the Chriſtian Faith, 
did obrrude upon Believers, the Ceremonies of the Law, as ne- 
ſary to Salvation ; of theſe he ofren complains as enemies to 
the Goſpe] and Ciofs of Chriſt; wid. Gal. 1. 7. Phil. 3. 2, 18, 
19. Tit. 1. 10. x 7. c. That you have learned from thoie that 
fiſt taughr you and converted you to Chriſt q 4. You have 
been inftru&ed in the true Do&rine of Chriſt; and there are 
ſame that would innovate and tcach another Dottrine, that 
broach Opinions that are contrary ; or at leaſt, beiides that Do-! 
Arine which is Pure and Apoſtolical, and fo make Diviſions and | 
Faftions amongſt you : Of 1uch as thole he ſpeaks what follows. 
) Here are two Precepts with re{pe& to Innovators and Church-Di. 
viders. The ft is, That they jhould be marked. The word ſignifies 
ſuch a mark:ng, as a Watchman uſcth that ſtandeth on a Tower 
to deſery Enemies; he marketh diligently all comers, and giveth 
notice accordingly, for the ſafery of the place. The ſecond is, That 
they ſhould be avoided or declined ; the like counſel is given, 2 Thef, 
3.6, 14, 1 Tim. 6. 3, 4, 5- 2 Tim. 3. 5- Tit. 3. 10. 2 John 10. 
Theſum is, the Church ſhould Excommunicate them, and all ſound 
Chriſtians ſhould turn away from them, and ſhun their Society, 
that they may be aſhamed. 


18 For they that are ſuch, ſerve not our Lord Jeſus 
briſt, but their own belly  ; and by good words and 
fair ſpeeches deceive the hearts of the ſimple 4. 


| {In this verſe you have a reaſon of the foregoing admionicion, 
together with a deſcription of the S:ducers, whom they ſhould mark 
ind avoid. He ſays, They are ſuch as ſerve not the Lord Feſus Chriſt, 
but their own belly, i. e. They ſerve theraſelves rather than Chriſt. 
Though they pretend to be rhe Servants of Yeſus Chriſt, and give 


WT th:mielves our for his Miniſters, yet they aim at nothing but their 


Wn commodity and advantage. A further account you have of 
ſuch perſons in Phil. 3. 19. 17Tim.6.5. Tit. 1.11. 2 Pet. 2.3. 
#9. 4 AsSatan inſinuated into Eve, by pretending he wiſhed her 


{food ; ſo theſe Seducers pretend they aim at nothing, but the good 


Jaſon 7, and Soſipater » my kinſmen ſalute you. 


ON caps I. 7. 


21 * Timotheus my work fellow 3, and Lucius &, and , PPEeD 


: As before he ſaluted divers perſons himſelf, ſo mow he ſcndeth 
the Salutation of others to the Church of Roms. This he doth to 
ſhew the mutual amity and Jove that is and onghr to be betwixr 
Chriſtians, though they are divided in reſpe& of place; yer not in 
reſpect of afte&ion and good will. Hz begins with 7imzr:hors or 
Timothy, whom he calls, his work-fellow or Felow-helper ; viz. in preact:. 


ing and propagating the Goſpcl of Chriſt, This thews the humility of 
the Apoſtle, that he dignities ſo young a man with this title. This 
is he to whom he wrote aftewards rwo Epiftles ; you may read mor? 
of him, As 26. & alibi. k Origen and ſome others are of opi- 
nion that this was Luke the Evangeliſt; who was the inſ-parab'e 
Companion of the Apoſtle P2u!, and was with him about this ve- 
ry time, as appears by As 20. 5. and here he is called Lnci:4 ac. 
cording to the Roman inflefttion. Others think that this was L#:t-:5 of 
Cyrene of whom you read A#s 13. 1. | This was Pau!” Hoſt ar T:e/ſa- 
lonica, As 17. 5, 7. the ſameas ſome think that is called Secrnd us, 
Aﬀs 20, 4. the one being his Hebrew, the orter his Roma name. 
-m The ſame that is called Soparer of Berea, As 29, 4. nid. 
wer. 7. 


22 I Tertius o, who wrote this epiſtle, ſalute you, in 
the Lord p. 


o This was the Apoſtles Scribe or Amanuenſis, who wrote this Epif1-, 
either from his Mouth, or from his Papers : He pur in rhis Selu- 
tation by the Apoſtles Licenſe, þ 3. e. 1 wiſh you ſafely from the 
Lord, 


23 Gaius q mine hoſte, and of che whole church r, ſa- 
luteth you. Eraſtus the chamberlain of the cicy ; ſalucett: 
you, and Quartus z a brother. 


q We read of more than one that bore this name : There 
was Gains of Macedonia, of whom you read 4#r 19. 29. there 
was Gaius of Derbe of whom you read A#s 20. 4. he i5 molt 
likely the perſon here meant. There was one of this name whom 


ind benefir of thoſe with whom they have ro do; with ſmoorh and 


Utering words, they praiſe both the perſons and doingsof thoſe 


Paul baptized at Corinth, 1 Cor. 1. 14. and there was another 


Gairs, to whom St, John wrote his thitd Epiſtle ; whether any 


ot 


Tap. XVI ROMANS. 


of thoſe were the ſame, or whether they were all different perſons is of the whole DoArine of the Gopel, concttiing the Trig, 
wncertain. 7 7. e. He entertained the Apoſtle, and all Chriſtian] /7carna7207 of _—_ Son of God, &C. - 'Y 
Strangers that paſſed thar way. That Ga!#s to whom the Apoſtle 26 x But * now is made maniie{t, and by the f... 
24 wrote. is commended for the like hoſpitality, 3 John 5. 6. _ tures of the prophets according to to the commandme.. 
as rb or Steward of the City ; one that had the management ®*| of the everlaſting God, * made known to Whine, ” 2 
the Cities ſtock or publick Treaſure. The City was Corinth from the * ohedivacs nt faith.) SONS tos | 
whence the Apoſtle wrote this Epiſtle. There Era#as is ſaid to 4- « Which ada MF F c : 
bide, 2 Tim. 4. 20. Poſſible to attend upon his Office. Yer we _ T:ftam »- CINE 0 oy E == > made known vader that” 
find 4s 19. 22. that he was one of them that Miniſtred to the A- mo. on CES _— Fo O = ent lignt and revelatic," * 
poltle, and was fent by him hither and rthither, as he had occaſion, Rags © IAnen c Der: «va; c e revel.zrion OL his m: 0, 
which would not well conſiſt with his being Chamberlain or Steward — OR 9 ok ” ave40524E Is Sw Wea whereby. 36 wp 
of ſo preat a City. Therefore ſome are of Opinion, that he 15 ſo _ Ne nd ow , ae — ke. vid. 48; 1.4; 
called, becauſe thar had been his Office in time paſt. So Abigail 18 won . che” and 2 4 os W me Atutrority by which Mrs 
called the Wife of Nabal, 2 Sam. 3. 3. becenſe the formerly ſtood 7 on _ the — of = ever ns God. (3.) The perſen; ; 
in that relation to him. r This is no word of Number, but 1t. was Gs 77 Was __—_ > ay Tl af Gent: es, or the Iahabirant of 21! 
his Name : We had Tertins in the foregoing Verſe ; and we read at ions. (4) The end for which it was mad: known, Viz. Tor 41 
wy | w_ 08 wi "0 ovediznce of Faith, \. e. That ir may be belizv'd and obe SH 
of Scomius, Afs 20. 4.” Hiſtories alſo ſpeak of the Name oft Quintts np. #5 yd; ;; 
and Sextus, &c. _ -- ib 
4 27 To God only wile x, be glory thro = 
2.4 * The grace of our Lord Jeſus Chriſt 5e with you "To Mi ; phacs--. S » 92 gLOory ugh Jeſus Cl;i3 
all, Amen. c Mich vou had wer. 20; only}, 2* Second Attribute in the deſcription of God, i þ: wiſh, 
7 Theſe words are the very oo b a oy a | 5 9 wy He is ſaid to be wiſe, and only wiſe. See the like 1 7;n. , 
the word (42) is added : Some have thoughr, thar the former was|,,, 1. G. pe 5. Td to be only crue, John 17. + _— 
written with the hand of Terti:zs, the Scribe or Notary, and this|'4. , 0 be 
, 3 He to be like « loving and| O50 Perentate, 1 Tim. 6. 15. And only 7 have Immy:;;... 
wich the Apoſtles own wo Ching _— * _ wa" oo '| 7 Tim. 6- 16. And this doth not. exclude che 1/:/don if t;, 5. 
tender Father, who bids his Children _ _ Os and of the -huly Spirit, bur the wiſdom of the Creatures | He & Fir 
and being loath to leave them, returns a fecon and a third ft be only with, becaalt none # ar wiſe as he; and all the ws 
co diſcourſe with them. f of others is from him : The wiſdom of Men and Angels is bur 
25 Now * to him that is of power to ſtabliſh you ac-|? "2 from -w ws his See os bf enſaf ts andy 2, becauſ 
4 . . 1s originally wiſe ; his wiſdom is of himſelf ; yea, his wiſh ; 
cording to my goſpel, and the preaching of Jeſus Chriſt himſcif. y Here he aſcribes eternal Glory to God. You hal the 
{according to the revelation of the myſtery, which was|fame before, chap. 11. 36. Oaly here is added, through 7:ſus Cri}. 
kept ſecret ſince the world began w. : to ſhew, That our, praiſe and thankſgiving, is accepted of (yg 
w He concludes All with an excellent Doxology ; wherein f-f|through him, wid. cap. 1. 7. Eph. 3. 20, 21. x This word i 
he deſcribes Grd, and then he aſcribes eternal Glory to him.| ſix times uſed in this Epiſtle, cap. 1. 25. & 9. 5. & 11, 6, 
He deſcribes him by ewo of his Attributes or PerfeCtions ; the firſt| 15. 33. & 16. 26, 27. Ir is an Hebrew word, bur retain'd in 2} 
is bis Power, Il: is able to eftabliſh you, 1. e. In Grace, and in Truth ;| Languages. It cannot be Tranſlated withour loſing much of - 
ro keep you from falling into ſin and into errour : The Scripture of- Weight. It may be taken three ways, 1. Asa Name, and ( iris 
ten attributes our Eſtabliſhment unto God; vid. 1 Thef. 3. 13. 4 name of Chriſt, Rev. 3. 14. 2, AsSan Adverb, fo itis uſ:d in the 
2 Ti:f, 2.17. and 3. 3. 1 Per. 5. 10 Our own weakneſs and jbeginning of Speech, and ſignifies werily : or in the end of Speec), 
<xi's Power is ſuch, that unleſs God did eftabliſh us, we ſha!ljand ſo it notes Afent: Therefore it was uſed of old b vs 
d fall, wid 4 the Notes there. Our not only at Prayer, b Il che ry etch 
ſoon totter and fall, wid. cap. 14. 4. and the Notes there. Our jnot only at Prayer, but at all the Sermons and Expoſitions of their 
E?.iilifhmet is further amwplif'd by the inſtrumental Cauſe there- Rab5ins, to teſtifie that they aſſented and agreed to all thar they 
or, which is rhe Goſpel. Touching which, ſeveral things are here taughr, wid. 1 Cor. 14. 16. 3. As a Yerb, and fo it is asmuch a, 
t> be noted. Firſt, He calls it his Gefpe!, becauſe he was the Jo be it, having the nature of a Prayer : Hence Jeremia! ſaid, men, 
Preacher and Publiſher thereof, wid. cap, 2. 16. and the Notes to the prophecy of Hananiah; tho falſe, concerning the ſudden re. 
there. Sccondly, He calls it the Preaching of Jeſus Chriſt, which turn from the Babyloniſh captivity, to ſhew how earneſtly he defredic 
may be taken Actively, for the preaching of our Lord himſelf : ſo might be ſo, Jer. 28. 6. 
he Do&rine of Salvation is call'd, 7'z word rhat was ſpoken by , ; 
Bo Lerd, Hb. 2. 3. vid. Mat. 4. 23, and 9. 35. Or rather paſ- Y Written to the Romans from Corinthus, and ſet by 
ſively, for the Ge pt! which ws pr:ached Concerning Jeſus Chriſt, vid. Phebe ſer vant of the Church ac Cenchrea. 
£5. 1. 3- and the Notes there. 7hiraly, He calls it s myſtery {| This was not added by the Apoſtle Pal, nor by 7:rti his 
CI TOS hr pt # cres ſince the world began, but now is man? manijeht : Amanucnſis ; but by a latrer and unknown hand ; yet there 15notluing 
+» parallel places, 1 Cor. 2. 7. Eph. 3.9, Col. 1, 26, Some re- in the Epilltle it felf, nor in any Antient oc Modeto Writs, chai 
f:2in this /o the calling of the Grniles, but it is better underſtood may induce us to queſtion the verity thereof, 


— - 


——_— 
_, Fe 
Fa 


>” < Df by yo 
ASA oo depth. 
_ _ 


\Z<S Ip 2 5. 
. n= na—_= 


6h . 
< = —— 
"—_— pPR__—_ 
—_— Þ. 


TIEIS-> —_— — — 


—— Em re is A ns TEE — — 


wild, ; 4 : 7 © 


mortals, 


OY 
f the Sr, 


ls ſud t ; 

be vifim The ARGUMENT. 

es 18 bur : 

{-, becauſ: 

wiltm i; Orinth (the Inhabitants of which are called Corinthians) was an eminent City of Achaia, that Achaia which :: 
I had tie now called Morea, and was ſituated in an Iſthmus, or neck of Land, betwixt rhe Fgean anl lonian Ser, {o was 
re | cery convenient for Merchandiſe, and by Merchandiſe came to great Riches, which gave them gres! tempt i ions to luxury, 
is word is ankenneſF, whoredom, &c. They were very infamous fer the Iatter, as we read in Writers, and prowa to rhat eraput- 
It. 36. & lence, that they made the increaſe of Whores a part of their Prayers to their Idols, and made the bringing of Whores in. 
aind In al t the City @ part of their Vows. Lais was an Harlot among jt them, very famons in Civil Hijtory, And as Pride 
_—_— \ully attendeth. Wealth, ſo they alſo were a People wery proud and puffed up. They were alſy anciently famou: for Pagan 
petoke juarning, and had amongſt them Stoicks and Epicureans, who laughed at the Relurretion of the Body, ond looked 
| of Speech, 4m Inceſt, Adultery, and Fornication, as very wenial things, if at all unlawful, We re;d of Paul's fr(f coming 

I ” 


y the %;, 


ther from Athens, Acts 18 1, where v. 11. He continued eighteen months, there he Converted Cirifpus, v. 5. 
"ns of thiic 


;n4 Soſthenes, and many believed and were baptized : Paul went from thence to Epheſus, v. 18, 19, To rhe Church 


n _ tu planted ar Corinth, Paul writeth this Epiltle, at what tims 1s nt certain z bat he is thought to have writ it from 
b ſaid, Amen, Epheſus, whither he came, Aﬀts 1 9. 1. the ſecond time, and as appears from v. 10. was going and coming to and from 
e ſudden re. thar City between two and three Years, The occaſion of his writing this Ep;jHle will appear 16 any who conſideringly reads 
ts defied it i, he had- heard from ſome who were of the houſe of Chloe, chap. 1. 11. of factions axd contentions that were a- 

mop} them, and bad heard it reported, that they ſuffered an inxeſtuous perſon ro abide in their Communion, Chaps 5. 1. 
and ſent by Tie) had alſo wrote to bins for his reſolution in ſeveral Caſes and Queſtions about Marriages, Divorce, &c. he had 
4 all) heard of ſeveral diſorders amongſt them relating to their Communion in the Lord's Supper, and of [ome among j} them 
by _ win denied the Reſurreftion. For the allaying of theſe Heats, and quieting their Diviſions, and for the diretion of them ins 
2x 15 NOUN 


;:2 Cafes about which they wrote to him, and the ſetting them right in the Dotrine of the Reſurrection, and direfting 


A chat : : had f 6 _ . . . , ” . 
WW rater, AG tim in the true and profitable uſe of their Gifts, and in the right Celebration of the Lords Supper, and the quickening the 


wrciſe of their Charity, he writes this Epiſte, which is ſappoſed to be placed inour Bibles next to the Epiltle to the Ro- 
mans (1hough. plainly written in order of time before ) becauſethat as that Epiſtle moje fully diſcourſeth the Dettrine of Juſtifica 


4G 


lon; 9 thes moſt fully reſolves queſtions concerning Church-Order 2nd Government. 1: is a B:ok of Holy Writ con- 
wrnicg the Divine Authority, of which there was never any doubt, nor hath any portion of Holz Writ (for the quantity of 
it) a greater Variety of matrer, nor more of thoſe J;Tvonle { things hard to be underſtood | which St. Peter in his 2 Epitttc 


1.16, rels us are in this Apoſtles Epiſtles, the difficulty of which much ariſeth from our ignorance of ſoras Rices, uſed tn the 
Pricizive Church, but long ſince diſuſed, and the uſages of that Conntry different from ours. 


CRAP: 6 


Ie Apoſllc's Salutation and Thank(giving for God's Grace and Chriſt's 
[n:tctuiniſs, 19. He urndcrſtanding their Diviſions, reproves them, 
lo— 12. Baptiſm in the On: Name of Chriſt, a motive to Uni- 
it, 13———16. God, by the Preaching of the Croſs, confounds the 
Wim of the Wiſe, 17-——25. and calls mt many of the Wiſe, 
Mizoy, and Noble, but the weak and fooliſh, and Men of no Account, 

Wm28. The Reajon hereof, 29—3t. 
Anno- Aul called ro be an Apoſtle of Jeſus Chriſt, 2 
through the will of God, þ and Soſthenes 

cir brother c. 

by Our common cuſtom is to ſubſcribe ovr Name to the bottom 
"t our Lette1s, it ſeems by the Apoſtolical Epiſtles, that their fa- 
Won was oherwile; he elſewhere tellecth us, That it was hismark 
2p E4fle, which makes ſome doubr, whether that to the He- 
"7: was wrote by him ; but others think it 1s there concealed, 
fr tne particular ſpight the Jews had to him. He had the name 
3% as well as ®anl, as weread, As Ch. 7. 58. & 9. 1. whe- 
12 had two Names (as many of the Jews had) or Sal was the 
Name by which he was called before his Conv: rfon, and Paul his 
MMeaterhg was Converred,or on the accourlt of his being a Ci- 
A mot Rez (for Parlis a Roman Name) 1s not worth our dif. 
Mating, He was a Man of Tarſ#s in Cilicia, by his Nation a Tew, 
i oy Father and Mother, an Hebrew of the Heorews , of the Tribe 
213977, a Phariſce, bred up at the feer of Gamzliel, one of 
n 8reat DoCtors ; he was allo a Citizen of Rowe, as himi2If 
—__ AS 22.3, 27. & 21 39. Phil. 3. 5. By his Trade a 
99K”, AAFs 18, 3- a great Zealet for the Fewijh Crromonies and 
nd upon that ſcore a great Perſecutor, conſ:nting to thc 
/ *':2:en, and breathing our threatnings againit Chriſtians. 


Mer 
A 


3 
5 

' 
Pt 


6-3:7 | 


3 L ; 
 » Prraculous Converſion we read, 4: 9g. as alſo of his be- 
(0 to be an Apoftle, not one of thoſe firſt ſent our by 
ly, t 


Gur For called; he gives King Agrippa a full account of 


his calling, 47s 26. from wv. 12. to 19. 6 Soas he was an 
poſtle by the will of God, God's ſpecial Revelation from Heaven. : 
He did not thruft himſelf iato the imploymenr, but was ſ:nt 0: 
God in an extraordinary manner, not oaly mediately as (as all 
Miniſters are) but by an immediate Call and Miſtion. c I che 
Salutation prefixed to this Epiſtle, he join=th Sftheres, whom he 
calls his Brother. Of this Softhen's we read, At#s 18. 17, he was 
a chief Ruler of the Synagogue, but converted to Chriftim::y, Pal 
diſdainerh not to call him his Brother, 


2 Unto the Church of God which 1s in Coriatl: : 
4 to them that are ſanctified in Chriſt Jeſus * called 79 be * Fudge ; 
Saints : e with all that in every place * call upon the *Rom. :.7. 
Name of Jeſus Chriſt our Lord, both theirs and ours f, 2 Tim. 1 
d Unto thoſe in Corinth, who having received the Doctrine of 9+ __. 
the Goſpel, and owned Jeſus Chriſt as their Saviour, were united * * 1M 
in one Eccleſiaſtical body for the worſhip of God, and communi- 2: ** , 
on one with another. Corinth was a famous City in Acai, (which 
Achaiah was joined to Greece by a neck of Land betwixt the Z7ca2 
and Tonian Sea) it grew the moſt fzmous Mart of all Greece, Paul 
came thither from Athens; 44s 18. 1. Criſpus the chief Ruler of 
the Synagogue there believed, up9a Pay! spreaching, fo did many 
Corinthians,and were baptized, v. 9. he ſtayed there eighteen Months, 
wv. 11. there Soſthenes {mentioned v. 1. was Convertel)from thence 
Paul went to Epheſus, v 19. Theſe Believers were thol- here Cai- 
led the Church of Cod in Corinth to whom he writ?s tl.is £p le (as It 
ſhould ſeem from ch. 16. 8.) from Eph-ſus, where Paul ſtiid three 
Years, A#s 20. 31. e The Members of this Churcl/the Apoſtle cal- 
leth ſuch as are [antified in Criſt Feſus called to be Saints : whe: 1er 
by the term the Apoſtle meancth only ſuch as by the p::1ching 
of the Goſpel, are Teparared from the Heathensat Corinth, aud pro- 
felled Faith in Chriſt (as 4#&s 15. 9. the Apoltle [aich, the Gy: 7cs 
hearts were purifi-d by faith.) Or fachin Cor:1th as were really 
regenerated, and had their hearts renewed and changed, is nor e{1-: 
to determine, both of them are Saints by caling,the farmer are called 


[Z222z] eter turd 


"RY : 

(| 

# . 
ſ 

i 

}. 
Th 


Chap. T ECORINTHIANS. 


extent; by themifaching of the Golpel, the other 7nrernaly and | confirm your habits of Grace unto the end, approyin 
Ea; LV. the operation of the Sp3ril ot Grace. It IS molt pro- the finiſher of your Faith _—_ being not wanting In YOur Guy 
hable, ta. St, Pay intended iis Evift: for the whole body of and endeavour.) 7 mw mou 1er you ſhall not tall, or at leaſt nc 
thoſe that profeſſed the Chriſtian Religion in Corint/, though 1n rorally and fns!ly, but fo as you ſhall riſe again, anq appear int). 
writing of it he kad a more fpecial reſpect to thoſe who were day of = Fg Jeſus jen RE ſo as te will accept you. 

crate af fot nn Coift by the venrwing of the Hol: Ghoſt. f Net | as If Fo nn linnec againf. him, FO 

Goth Pavl any 36pet thoſe tt hvediin Cort, out he direts| 9 God is Jaichful Ss, by whom Je were Cz\led bn * 
his .Epiltte to all tnoſe who 10 any place of Achaia called upon | the fellowſhip of his Son Jeſus Chriſt our "Per 4 Wor 


the T2me of Jeſus Chrift, whom he calleth coir Lora, and ow | 7, pajrþfulneſs is the ſame with Yeracrty or T1; 


Ciuy 


2 Uimmſeic 


ind: which Is an eminent placero prove the Divine Narrnre of' word. which renders a perſon fit to be credited. I; & 
Cuff ; heis net only called ow £574, our common Lord, bur he Attribute of God. Chap. 10. 13. 1 Thef. 5. 24, This; * $reat 
c mage the ebjet of iroxatio: end Divine Worſhip : and It! promiſes of God for the perſeverance of Believers (of whin ® 
rezcherh us, that none bur foch ascall upon the Name of Jeſus} a,e many to be found in holy Writ. * But theſe wa _ there 
Chiiſtour Lord, are fit't1arrer for a Goſpe!-Church ; which bot | cern not all, bnt ſuch only whom God hath cholen o1 OY 
exclates tuch as deny che Godhezd of Chriſt, and ſuch as hve| worlg, calling them to a communion with Chriſt, ws Of the 
without God in the world, without performance of Religious ho-| (qrily ſuppoſeth union with him. So as here is another _ In 
mage, to God the Father and the Lord Jeſus Chrift, and owning | rg confirm them, that God would keep them to the _—— 
Ki 25 their Lord. : | they ſhould be blameleſs in the day of Chriſt. : Becauf: Gol tes 
> * Grace be unto you, g and peace from God our |called them into that ſtate of Grace, wherein they were, 4. 
Father, and ro the I ord Jeſus Ch:iſt þ. w would not Teave his worF in them imperfe&, ae had called the, 
2 Fs is the; common Salatation in all Pac”s Epiſtles, only 1n [1Nto the felowſh:p of 7+ſus Gorift, (See I Joh. 1. 2.) ito a ſtate; 
OED; Two, Merry is 81f6 added : Grace figrifies free love. h Peace friendſhip with Chriſt, and into Oe of union with him, into 
henley either * comeiliarion with God, or brothorly love and unity ſuch by ſtate, as he "_— daily by his Spirit be communicatize 
exch with other, (fe2 rhe Notes on Rom. r.7,) The Apoſtle | the bleſſed —_ his Grace unto them in. : 
wiſhes thera {pirityal bleflings, and the greareſt ſpiritual bleſſings, } 10 Now I be cech you, brethren, by the Name. 
Grarc and Prace, 2nd that noctrom, and with men, but fromiGod| our Lord Jeſus Chriſt « *, that ye all ſpeak the figs | 
- the jarner, anc theLord Jeſus Chriſt. thing W, and that there be no + diviſions amongſt you: 
* + * Irhank my God always on yorr behalf, for the\p. 71,7 ye 'be perfeftly x joined together inthe ſme; 
race of God which is given you by Jeſus Chriſt z. mind, and in the ſame judgment y. en 
- Left his former Salutation ſhould be miſapprehended by them, « By the name of our Lord Teſus Chr: is as much as 65 c:o1p | fi 
zs Fonifying, that be thoi:ght they were without grace, he here |,,, Authority of Chriſt, for this is his will, or by the As — 
learerh his meaning by bleſſing God for that Grace, which they |, 1.” 74,9 C8; who hath © often recon = 8 a 
trad received ; butno man hath ſo much grace, bur he 15s fill ea-| c.ou'prace with, and brotherly love, one towards another. _ 
wPabiect more, and ftands in need of further influences : 'Chere-]: 1... of DoQrine you all ſpeak the ſame thing (forts lat 
zare as he here bleſſerh God for the grace of God, which they by | jj. .Þ 1, other ſenſe.) + And that you neither be divided inf 
teſus Chriſt received ; {6 he before prayed for Grace and Peace| ,,,.. opinions, nor yetin aftettion, that there may ben its, 
For them, 779m Coz the Father, ans From the Lord Jeſtis Chriſt. amongſt you. y Which is alſo further evidenced by,thelat Plz 
(Corifi is borh the Author and Finiſher of our Faich, he giverh being joined together in the ſame 1nd and in the ſame 5121. 
Hbatit -e w:# and 70d. The beginnings, increaſes and fniſhings| a 7.0 in aff:Gicn is the neceTary and indiſpenſeble _—_ 
of Grace are all from him ; Grace is indeed from God the Father, | y 7 t411e are the Diſciples of Chriſt, and ſuch a duty as notng 
but by 7eſu: Chrif?; it floweth from him who 1s Zove, but it 1s ly concerns Chriſtians. of the ſame Nation, with relation 4 
chrovgh his Me2-beloved. No-man hath the love of God, but by | {. 14er bur alſo Chriſtians-of al Nations, and may be ating] 
"2 M 


and through Jeſus Chriſt. . , þ1f by our luſts we do not hinderit. An union in opinion, as to 
5 That io every thing k ye are enriched by him *, |the fundamental Truths of Religion is (though not ſoealie) yer 
1 all utterance }, and 72 all knowledge we. , what the Church of God hath in a great meaiure arrive? ar. Fur 
* & In every Grace and in every god c:jc, {for he 15 manifeſtly for an unton-in every particular prepoſition of trutk; isnora thing 
peaking of ſpiritual things) ſo as this general Particie muſt not } to be expetted, though we all areto labour for it. God hath ne... 
Þe extendee to the things of this life, but reſtrained either to | ther given unto all the ſame means ; nor the ſame natural caps 
iviritual gift. or ſpiritual ſarFifping habits. Thus Eph. 1. 7. we | CES. . "ME; 
ad of the richer of Grace end of the riches of Chriſt, Epi. 3. 8. 11 For it hath been declared rrto me of Jou, mj's 
voz 35 the Actaphor improper, whether we conſider Riches a5 | brethren, by them hich are of the houſe of Cloe , thats. 
irgnitying plenty or ahumiance, or that which accommodateth a | there are contentions am&rg you a. lb 
nan in this life, and 1s titted to mens wants, to.give them a ſup- = AR Irs E * 
n__— 6 ; os Fc "4; z The Apoſtlz'cometh to ſhew one Reaſon, as why he wrote to4 
ply. / The word may be tran{lated in cvery 7/ing or 1 al. (reech ;,} han iO a whos las di Goh : ba Chuan 
Hut the firſt having been ſaid before, it ſeems more proper here| © 2? 7, y in the preceding verſe heſo zealoully prel «(unity 
Ty ay þ az; 0 ane upon them, becauſe of an information he had reccived from ſom 
rorranjlate 3t, in all word or {prcch, or in all utterance, (as we tran(- af rhe funtioat tie: ths ind wake, oh th 
\are it} if it be taken in the firſt ſenſe, the Goſpel is by it under- | nol Pr or py mh able, that iN VEIN 
” O11" none ray = name of a perſon head of a family in Corinth, rhan of a C:tror Tos, 
tood, the DoGrine of the Golpel preached amongſt them by Whos hate dna "3 q ee vl eall 
Px! and Aveo, who preached among the Gentiles the riches of ; N "I iy : ws OE OLE VErLes We: " _ 
Ghri?, Eob.3, 8. If weinterpret it utterance, which our Tranſla- |, 1 NOW Us ay, * that every one ol you faith, 
cors prefer. it Ngnifies a 7:1ity to utter that knowledge which þ ] am of Paul, and I of Apollos, and 1 ol * Cephas, 
God hath given us to the glory of Gel, andthe good of ethers, | and I 91 Chrft c. 
Either 1n Prazcy or ſpiritual diſcourſes. 2 Some by knowleatze| 6b Every one here ſignifieth no more than many of you, or {: 
here underſtand the gifr of Propiccy ; but 1t more properly ſig-| veral of you : fo cap. 14: 26. trom whence, thoſe that thinl. they 
nifics the ability God had given them to comprehend in their | have ſuch a mighty argument from Het. 2, 9g. where isthe ſam: 
underſtanding the Myſteriesof the Goſpel, the great and deep! Particle to prove Chriſt's dying for all indiviauals, may ur.deceive 
chings of Gol. : The Apoſtle bleſieth God both for the illumina- | themſelves, and find thar rhey heve need of better argvment*t 
2:00-of ther- minds by -che Miniftry of the Goſpe), ſo as rhey | prove their aſſertion, c We may from hence obferye, tat the al 
Fnew the things of God, and alſo for the ability which God had | viſions amongſt the Corimtnians were not matters of Fzith, but 
Sen thera to Com:Nunicate this their knowledge to others, occaiioned from rheir having MENs perſons in adoration. This Vat 
6s Even as the teſtimony ot 'Chriſt was conſirmed in ' probably cauſed either from God's making ef P.u/rheinftrumenc! 
yOu 2, [ {ome of cheir converſion, Apolos the inſtrument of others convers 
" 2 By which knowledge and utterance the Toftimory of Chriſt, that fon, and Peer the inſtrument of others, or elſe fromtae Citerence 
3s, the Goſpcl, which containeth both the T:fimouy which Chrift of their gifts. Of this Apollor weread Aﬀs 18. 24. ls \.a52 Je 
tad given of himſelf, and which the Apoſtles had given concern- ' 0} 4{*#auaria, who (25 may be ſeenthere v. 28.) mightily comms 
ing Chri?, (the Goſpel is called the Teſtimony of God, Ch. 2. 1, 7 7:97, and rhar publickly, and probably was aSuſcful —_— 
2 7im. 1. 8. others underſtand'the 3775 of rhe Spirit, for the Spirit rinthious. One Miniſterof Chriſt may be juſtly preferrecto = 
is one of the Witneſſes upon Earth, 1 Jeb. 5.8.) confirmed i © We ought to honour thoſe moſt whom God moſt honoureth, 
550 by the miraculous operations wrought by the Apoltles, (as ber by a more plentiful giving out of his Spirit, or _ 
ſome think) but the way of confirmation here ſpoken of by the plentiful ſucceſs upon their labours ; but we ought not 10 p j- 
Apoſtle, ſeemeth rather to be underſtood of their knowledge and | *PPrOPriate any Miniſters to ourſelves, as for them wag 
ztterance. The Goſpel and the Do&rine of it, and the Miſſion | ©'<r5- Weare not bound to makeevery Miniſter our Paſtor, m_ 
of the holy Spirit, were confirmed to them and to the World, by are boundto have a juſt reſpett for every Miniſter, who byes ] 
the krowledge which God had given the Apoſtles, and theſe Corin- Qtrine and holy life anfwererh his Profeſſion and holy Calling: F 
7hians, of the great things of God, and their ability to PO I3 Is Chriſt divided? was Paul crucificd tor you: ©: 
nicate this knowledge unto ethers, for the 16nour of God, and | were ye baptized in thename of Paul ? 4. ; 
_ the good of others. CI ; * d How came theſeFarties ? there is but one Chrif, bu: 0n% tis 
*Phil. 3- #5 So that ye come behind in no eilt ; 0 * Wailing | was crucified for you, butone inte whoſe Name,intoa Faithin wh 
2Ge for the {| coming of the Lord Jeſus Chriſt p. and a Profeflion of Whom you were baptized. Perc bagriaoe 
Tir. 2.13, , Nor that every one of them was filled with all the gifts of | 12*0 the Nameof Chriſt, ſo did T, T didnor ft cho! who nj 
7 Gr. "<**rhe bletled Spirit ; bur one excelled in one gift, another excelled tized under any Banner of my own, but under Chrift 5Bannef. 45» 
EEO in another, astne Apoſtle expounds himſelf, Chap. 12. 7, 8. nei- head is but one, and the body ought not to be divided. — 
ther doth the Apoſtle ailert them perfett in their gifts, bur ſaith 14. I thank God that 1 baptized none of you, * 
that he came behind hard, or were defeCtive in no gifr. p Bur| Criſpus and * Gaius e. : 
were all waiting for the jecond coming of the Lord Jeſus Chriſt | e Concerning the Apoſtles baptizing Cr:/pns vie read, 4) » 
to judgment, of which he mindeth them, to incourage them to| he was the Rulcr of the Synagogue of the Jews : Why Pa. chan! 
go on as they had began. God that he baptized not many, herte!ls us, ». 159 | ,. _ 
*1 Tx. $ * Who ſhall alſo confirm you unto the end 9 *, ther] 15 Leſt any ſhould ſay, that I had baptized 12 
3-.32- ge may beblamelels in the day of our Lord Jefis Chriſt r. | own name .*. | 
| Col.r.: q W hich Lord Jeſus Chriſt (mentioned immediately before) or _.-. Becauſe by that Providence of Gol it fo fe?! out, chat "_ 
l Treld'5 - which God,w/o 7: faithful, mentioned ynmcdiately after, v. 9. ſhall few of them could preend any ſuck thing,es that he had baptized 
: any in bisown name, | 


7 


; 
4 
, \ 
> i k a . 
' | #1 > 
: [1 4 $ 
$ : 4 [ 
: [F 
LS ly : 
is 3 *% 
5% 
p 1 [7 
$4 : 
D F814 : 
, PS 0 
2 ITER | 
- s . 
M71 
*" $ 
: x7 
i T3 » © 
Y. 7 y v7 
13875 
\ ft 4 
ry 
+ 2407? | is 
: - 1 p p 
S £ - | of 
WV. | 
"S \ LU 'f Mo. f 
iN: my i: 
"3h fs, £2 : 
1H EE 
»! p ; 
: ' . : 
\, = 
4 
: " 
1 :. 
A i , TY 'E . 
© 'v\ Ras > 
* 1 1+ i "S $7 
s * ns 
: : } io 2 
TH : þ 
£'h : 75> 
3+ 3s ' 
J is. i j 
'S/ : [= 3 
. of : * 
' 
R , . h : 
47 + 
HIP EK *-4 
[5 
, o 6; } ” 
bY 4 8 < 
ol , < . 
£3 'T; 
0 ? o 
S181 , 
x : ; z . 
TY 4 {4 a. 
oS* A G 
4 : 
Tt + $13} 
ET S; I 
: TY 
w : 4 
" [ / . : 
: « #4 ! 
4 be : 
F*1 {6 a 
| . ”- [ 2 | 
HE * 445 
ff) ; 4 { [00 
L 0 . 
4 : P, 
> C 4 
- 4 ( " 
- *3F: f 
on 4 . 
1.4 #15} ; is 
>. 
6 T is 
F b £8P 4 3 70 
4 { 
:, . x 71 4; " 
. 5 \ LT + 
' j 584 4! i 
215+ ! - 
\ 4 $ 
. 4 ah.'s 5 
; "JAE Kot. 4 
a b; . 
3 LE 
« * " 
3 F | 
: 611 *I 1 $ 
o It Z if I 
p 1 : 4 | 
>» 8% by 
dry 
'# St a7 [ 
p q Fi $3 
: af i 
EL : - * 37 
' . - + 
: - 
: 4 CET © I 
&$ * 224 t- 
*%%. 2 4 
: p 7 4 
; F " £ S + 
: 4; 
T ” 3 
*e by . 7 +4 3, 4 
; 4X 
: : £ 
; : 1 4. 
f os +45 3”% 
; a 5H x "A 
£ 1 : . 
Tz 37 þ y 4 
« ; * Ly 
| $913 ; 
| 3 
F 4 - 2 . - 
: 0 
RK. b i 
. 11% \ 
. © » rx 
. - ' v 7 
. / Py 
| 11 
" & : 
: G i . $ 4 
: : 
is 5 ; 
2 : 
o 4 1 
F 3 ® I 4 C 
iP 1 j? 
« [3+ Ba 15 
*7 { + $* & 
: 4. : ; 
: . 
ſy ? 
+ 
. « 
4 P 'n po 
- 1 
; y þ , : 
g 1.3 
"7 4,8F | 
: b : 4 it: 
t4 q 
k '4E) . 
= , 1 » o 
C24 {6 2J F 
by Ti | : 
E 4.4 \ . 
»”% # 
? 
F- 2 hR 
* F : : 
. {4% : 
: o 
> " * 
" >, - 6 $05 
i % hn? 
b 4 - 
” df . 
, } 7 ? 
T 3 : w 11 
2 : 
+ WW AW" 
"$4 4 27446 C 
7% "1 ” 1 3 
'F : o_ $ by 
[+4 | ITE 
*— 4 I58F) L 
% L . 
Fo £ a 
M : Hs 
fy s by 4 
? AF - U ad. 
vo *-2 8.403. 5 
7 UH I 1 oY 
IN . 
44 : L . F 
4 4 £ o +4 
T 7 : 
bo RU 
P.. ihe by = 
1:3. f1 ; TRO4SS2) 
4 08 VI X23 5 
t. ES B*: ; 5 
F : 
1 R "+#. $F: 
F / | , 
'* 8! þ * 
y 2 + : 
4 . 42, 2 *K. : 
* | } 
y TE 4 
+ +18 
4 : 
Z 
, £3 © [ 
4 + it! . +3 
* : 
a #: | + 
$1 7 jd 
IS b- q £- 
4 } q 
5 ? x } 
- S015 
: u . 
= % IF 1 * s 
: : 
[y :% , gn 7! 
*$- od F Fi 4 
+4 ©} b 
. 5 ' 
Fl ;% 
4 i X87 $44 j : 
y 444 3% q * 4» 
N 13.84 ry 
n | CF 9b : : 
[ - t % 
81 +i® 13 4 
' F 
3.94; ' 
= E 1 
£1 ; p : 
"8 a , 
o : ” 
| { £1 
: 4 234 f 
4 IE? 
, I + 7 ', 
| FE} 
: 3 £ 3] 
we p ; 
i 
: | 4 q 
: 
% 4 
. 
: + nz! 
x Y , 4 
" ET 4 : 
# bs - 
n g : 
> - T 
: 2 a a; 
2h..t 4 300 
yy E ba : . : 
y 4 
F'; 
4y | 0 
[F; NH iS - 
'F 4 c . 1 
24 - . o 
\ þ! 
f i FHP 
. #1 : Pig 
T5 .] In * jt 
">. » Bt: 
Fri $&”, 
x . 
1% - 4 bi 
1 4 * 
& LP 4 £*3 
+ ; py 1.7 * 
v5 5 "Ra 
WJ od 
; : 
$i ?F 
IF ? $597 4 
: Sa , 
"* : _ : 
1 I... BjaSY 
o : 1% 
, » , - K bl 
+- #2 6% 
= >; » * 3s e 
- +] 
0.383.080 : 
ol +19 * 25 
: . ? 
Y 4 i LEE 
- 4 þ i $*} : 
0 3 $i / | - 
: ; 
4 f : E1 - 
ME 1 
t , 
$7% : * 
, . 
F ! 


a rn 


"—_—Y EP OT, coz = = n= — - 


» _ 
”— 
_— 


Le the 


# 


uyis 


the ſame. 
ngit yourh 
| the {2ma« þ 
; Cu 
J Cori, by 
'e Which jug 
"mended to 
. w Thx 
Yrit is CaPas 
ded in (:3:;. 
e 00 aiviſn; 
laitPtrife 
12 *nxpmen;, 
duty of al 
V 45 NOtons 
ation one t2 
be attained, 
1N1ON, 25 te 
ſoealie) yer 
ved at. But 
Snota thing. 
0d hath new 
atural- Capt 


| you, my's 
.loe &, thats. 


j he wrote tot 
preſſed unity 
ed trom ſom? 
t Clo: vas the 
a C:tyor Tow®. 
{|| tell vs. 
you faith, 


if * Cophas 


ff you, or {:- 
1at thinl. they 
-re 15the fam! 
nay ur. Jece1i? 
argyment* t2 
ve Loatthe ol 
of Faith, bu: 
on, Thiswit 
> in ſeruments! 
others conver 
the Cifrerentt 
he wasa Jes 
he y con vV!hcth 
fu tothebs. 
eferred to anc 
ot honouretli, 
, or by amIT* 
t not ſo far t9 
m todefpiſe 0 
Paſtor, but VE 
cho by his Do» 
y Calling: 
tor your & 


}/ bu: on? that 
raith in who 
y baptized you 
» whom [bay 


"Banner. 15% 
2d. 
of you» bu 


read, 47 nn 
w I hank 
'ty Pau. t 


ptized 182 1) 


+ 1794 
our, chat CR ol 


| A h-51zcd8 
1 hac. ba; ; 


Fi i 


Jap. If 


6 And I baptized alfo the houſhold of Stepha- 
nas f: beſides, I know not whether I baptized any 


: 


16 
< 


IL COREFN 


THIANS. 


they count fooliſhneſs) as the ſacred means by which he wonld 
bring all choſe that give credie to the revelation of it, andreczive 
Chriſt held forth in it, ro erernal-Life and Salvation, 


other o . - . p 

He corre&eth himle)f, remembring thar he alſo baptized the ( oa Surg = Jews require a ſign, and the Greeks * Matra 8, 
Louſhold of Stephanas-, which Chap. 16. 15, 17. he calleth the ff? eek after wiſdom fo | | 7 
mits of Achnie, A family that had ediiFed th:mſelves to the minfiry | s The Jews were not without ſome true Divine Revelation, and 


of the Sgints, 


M 


more in other parts of the World, where he had been travelling. 


 nreach the Goſpel 
leſt the croſs © 
effect þ *. 

g Baptiſm was not 
whic 


bapt! 
m_ his rincipal work, Its very probable others ( begdes 
ig les) baptized. It is hard'to conveive how three thou- | 


ſhou | 
= all, #s 2. 41. 'þ The Apoſtle gots on, ceiling ushow he 


preached the Goſpel, and thereby inſtrufing all faithful Mini- 
fers how they ought to preach. * Not with wiſdom of words , or 
ſeech. Wiſdom of words muſt fignifie eirher what we call Re- 
trick or Logick, delivering the Myſteries of the Goſpel in lofry , 
unable expreſſions, or going abour to evidence them from rational 


Chriſt, Divine Faith being nothing elſe bur the Soul's aſſent ra 
the Divine Revelation, becauſe iris ſuch, is notfurthered, but hin- 
dred, by the arguing the obje&of it from Principles of Reaſon, and 
the colouring of it with high-flown words and trim phraſes. There 


God unto men: but we muſt take heed , that we do not diminiſh 
the Authority of God's revealed will, either by puerile louriſhings 
of words, or philoſophical argumentation. 


13 For the preaching of the Croſs is * to them that 
*xvriſh, fooliſhneſs 5 + | but unto us which are ſaved , it is 
,,* thepower of God. WO 

i Iknow (ſaith the Apoſt!e) thar plain diſcourſes abour a Chriſt 
erucified, are to ſome perſons fooliſh things, and accounted cant- 
ing; but to whom are they ſo? To: thoſe, who, if they be not 
ſome that ſhall periſh eternally, yet are ſome of thoſe who at pre- 
fentare in a periſhing eſtate ; theſe indeed count Sermons of Chriſt 
filly, fooliſh things, . & Butto thoſe who ſhall beerernally ſaved, 
ol are at preſent in the true road to eternal, life and ſalvation, ir 
is, (that 15, the preaching of che Goſpel is) that inſtitution of 
God, by which be ſhewerh his power in che ſalvation of thoſe who 
all be ſaved. The Apoſtle faith the ſame, Rom. 1. 16. 


thewife, and will bring * to nothing the underſtanding 
of the prudent /, 


| What Jſaiab ſaid of the wiſe men among the Jews in his time» 
8 pplicable to rhe wiſe.men among the-Heathen, God will deſtroy 
the wiſdom, and make their underſtanding appear to be no better 
than feoliſbneſe. So as iris not at all to be admired , if the Phi. 
klophers of this World countthe Goſpel, and rhe preaching of ir 
kolfhnefs ; the taking away the Wiſdom and Underſtanding of 
ten worldly wiſe, is bur an ordinary diſpenſation of God's pro. 
Wence, no morethan God threatned to do in 1/aiah's time to the 
a of that generation. 


20 Where & the wiſe? where 7s theScribe ? 2 where 
' the diſputer of this world? »* Hath not God made 
boliſh the wiſdom. of :bi5 world 2. 9. 


n He alladeth again to that 1ſa 33. 18. Whert is the Scribe? 
Ore is the Receiver 2 . Where are the wiſe-mn amongſt the Hea- 
tens? Where are-the Scribes ? The learned men in the Law a- 
nongſt the Jews. » Where are thoſe amongſt Jews or Gen les 

tarethe great inquirers into the reaſons and natures of things, 
nd mansgedebates and diſputes about them? They underftand 
Wihing of the Myſteries of the Goſpel , or the way of Salvarion, 
Mich God holds out ro the World in and through Jeſus Chriſt : 
0, where are thy? What have they done by all their Philoſo. 
My and moral Dofrine, as to the turning of men from-ſin unto 

l, from ways of Fniquity unto ways of righteouſneſs, in com- 
Mſn of what we the Miniſters of Chriſt have done by preaching 
tie Dorine of the Goſpe!, and the Croſs ' of Chriſt? » Do not 
Mfe how God: hath fooled the wiſdom of the World « making 
It appear vain and contemprible and of no uſe, as to the fa. 
fag of mens Souls, making choice of 'none of their Doors and 
Fiat Rabbier , to carry that DoQrine: abroad in the World; and 
"icing men, that without Faith in Chriſt, all chat can be 

ed from them will be of no avail tothe Soul. - 

21 * For after that, in the wiſdom of God p,. the 
Wrid by wiſdom knew not God 9, it pteaſed God 
_ fooliſhneſs of preaching, to fave them that 
lj ve r, ſ 

2 ome here by the wiſdom of God underſtand Jeſus Chrift, and 
UK the ſenſe thus, When he who'is the wiſdom of God came 


f * He did not remember, that he had baprized any 
ore at Corinth, though it is very probable, he had/baptized many 


For Chriſt ſent me not to baptize, but to 
, not * with wiſdom of || words , 
Chriſt ſhould. be made of none 


his principal work, not the main buſineſs for 
h Paul was ſent, ir was his work, otherwiſe he would nor 
zed Criſpus or Gaius, or the houſe of $!-$hanas, but preach- 


1d in a day be added to the Church), if Pcrcr had baptized 


onſtrations'and arguments. This was the way ( ligfaith ) ro| 
bo taken away all Authority from the Do&rine of the Croſs of 


is a decent expreſſion to be uſed in the communicatiag the Will of | 


15 For it is written, * I will deſtroy the wiſdom of 


owned the. true God, and only delired ſome miraculous operati- 
on from Chriſt, Mar. 12. 38. 7obn 4. 48. to confirm them rhac 
Chriſt was ſent from God, without ſigns and wonders they would 
uot believe ; giving no credit at all to the words of Ch:iſt: and 
the Greeks ( by: whom the. Apoſtle underftinds the Gentiles 
eſpecially rhe more learned parr of them ( for Greece was ar this 
cime very famous for humane Literature ) they ſought afrer the 
demonſtration of all things from natural cauſes, and rational argue. 
ments, and deſpiſed every thing which could not { be made out 
untothem. 


23 But we preach Chriſt crucitied s , * unto the... 
Jews a ſtumbling-block «, and unto the Greeks g: 
fooliſhneſs w. Joh. 6.66 
£ We that are the Miniſters of Chriſt come and preach to them 5G. 

that there was one hang'd upon a Croſs at 7eruſalem , who is the Chap. 2, 
Saviour of the World, and was not cur off for his own ſins, but 1+. 

or the fins of his people. u The Jews are ſtumbled ar this 
looking for a Meſſiah , that ſhould be a great temporal Prince 
and belides, accounting it an ignominious thing to believe in ones 
as their Saviour, whom they had cauſed to be crucifidd. w And 
the Greeks, the moſt Jearned among the Gentiles , look upon ir 
as 2 fooliſh idle ſtory ; that one who was, and is God blelled for 
ever, ſhould be crucified. 


24 But unto them that are called, x both Jews and | 
Greeks, Chriſt * the power of God, and * the wiſdom * Rom: :. 
of God y + 1 R—_ 
x Bleſſed be God Chriſt isnot to all the Jews 2 ſtumbling-block, & Mop 
nor to all the Greeks is he fooliſhneſs ; for ro fo many of them 
as are called ( not by the exrernai call of th? Goſpel bur only, by 
the internal c-1!, and «ff (tual operation of the Spiric ) ler them 
be of one Nation or another. To their Country men 7ews or Pagans. 
Chriſt is lo far from being a ſtumbling-block , and rhe Do&trine 
of Chciſt 1s fo far from being fooliſhneſs , that Chriſt and the 
DoErine of the Gopel appear to them , the Power'f Gia, and 
the Wiſaom of God. 
25 Becauſe the fooliſhneſs of God is wifer then 
mens: and the weakneſs of God is ſtronger then 
men 4. 
z The leaſt things that are the produQs.of the Wiſdom of 
| God , or the conrrivance of God for man's ſalvation, which the 
| finfu] and filly World cal's foolifhn:ſ5, are infinirely more wiſe , 
and have more wiſtom in them, than the wiſcſt imaginations, 
counſels, and contrivances of men. a And thoſe things and means 
which God hath inſtituted in order to an end, have in them 
more virtue, power , ard efficacy in order to the production of 
God's intended effe&s, than any ſuch means as app-ar to mens 
eyes of reaſon, to have the greateſt ſtrength, virtue, and efficacy. 
| Whence we tnay obſerve, that the efficacy of preaching for the 
changing and converting Souls, dependeth upoa the efficacy of 
God working in and by that holy Inſtirution, which uſually at. 
tendeth the Miniſtry of thoſe who are not only called, and ſenr 
out by men, but by God, being ficted for their work, and faich- 
tully diſcharging of it. | 
26 For ye ſee yourcalling, brethren, how that * not « 7,1, . 
many wite men after the fleſh, not many mighty, not 48. 
many noble are called b. 
6 To prove that this is the method of Divine Providence , ro 
make uſe of ſeemingly infirm and weak means to produce his 
great effe&s, you need not look further than your ſelves, look up- 
on the whale body of your Church at Corinth ; it is not made 
up of many that havea reputation for the wiſe-men, or the Noble 
men of your City : ſome indeed were ſuch, Criſpus the Ruler of 
the S17.2g0gue was converted, and Softhenes : but the generality were 
men of very ordinary repute. 
27 But * God hath choſen the fooliſh things of the + Fam, 2.5. 
world to confound the wiſe c : and God hath choſen the 
weak things ofthe world, to centound the things which 
are mighty &d. LE 
c God hath even amongſt you choſen perſons that are in the 
account of the world as fooliſh chings, to pur the wiſe ro ſhame, 
d Perſons of weak efteem to confound choſe that are mighty in the 
repute of the World, I | 
28 And baſe things of the world, and things 
which are deſpiſed , hath God choſen : yea,, and 
things which are not, to bring to nought things that 
are Ce. ; 
7 Things that arenot in the world's account, to bring tonought 
things thar are in bigh eſtecm. 
29 * That no fleſh ſhould glory in his pre-*Rom.;, 
ſence f. | of 


| 


pl 


"Preached to the World. Others underſtand the Goſpel, which 
walled, o. 2L. & cp. 2.7. bur I take the wiſdmef Godin 
WTextto ſignifi rhe wiſe adminiſtrations of Divine Providence 
"Me Governmerit of the World to bis wiſe ends. The unregene- 
Patt of the World would not come to a knowledge of, and an 
Wiltance with God, in that way whereby he choſe to re- 
himſelf in and'thifough Jeſus Chriſt, as ro which they were 
MY their own reaſonings and knowledge and apprehended 
fl 


Ings, and capacity to comprehend them. » Ir pleaſed God 


f And God doth this in infinite Wiſdom, conſulting his own Eph. 2. 9, 
Honour and Glory, that none might ſay, that God harh choſen 
them, becauſe they were nobler born, or in higher repute or e- 


ſteem in the worid' than others, bur that the freeneſs of Divine 
Grace might be ſeen in all God's Ags of Grace. 


39 Bur of -him are ye in Chriſt Jeſus g,,* whoof«,, .. 


Godis made unto us wikdom 4, and righteouſnefs 7, and's; s. 
ſanQification &, and redemption 


L. Joh, 17. 


'g Ofhis Grace ye are implanred intoChriſt, and believe in fiim 59. 


Ute the grear Ordinance of preaching the Goſpe), ( which 


You are of him , not by Creation only , as 2Jl Cieatures are , 


71417 3 bur 


Chap. 7. 


< =—O_ _— o 
— : ry 
—_— ——— = — x Ie — — 
he 
, = 
dy T 


Chap. IT. 


* Jer. 9 
23, 24- 
2 Cor. 
17. 


; (; al. 6. 


4&- 


21 That, according as it is written, * He that glo- 


TO. 


IL CORIN 


but-by Redemption and Regenetation,which isin Chriſt Jeſus, who 
of God is made unto us, þ 1/:iſdem : the principal mean by which 
we come to the Knowledge of God, and an acquaintance with 
his Will; for he is rhe Image of the inviſible God, Col. 1.15. Thc 
brightneſs of his Fathcr's Glory , and the expreſs Image of þ1s Perſon, 
Heb. 1, 3. God hath ſhined into onr hearts , to give the light of 
the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Feſus Chriſt 2 Cor. 4. 6 
So that he who hath ſcen him , hath ſeen the Father , Joh. 14- 9- 
HH the trcaſurcs of wiſdom and knowledge are hid in him, Col. 2. 3+ 
And 0 man knowet,» the Father , ſave the Sm , and he to whomſoever 
the Son will reveal him , Matrh. 11. 27. Thus rhough God de- 
ſtroyed the Wiſdom of the Wiſe , yet the Corinthians were not 
without Wiſdom ; for God had made Chriſt ro them Wiſdom both 
can':{ly, being the Author of Wiſdom to them ; and objeFively 
their Wiſdom lay in their Knowledge of him, and in a Fellow- 
ſhip and Communion with him. And / whereas they wanted a 
righteouſneſs in which they might ſtand before God juſtified and 
accepted, God had alſo made Chriſt to them Righteonſucſs . Send- 
ing t4s own Son in the likeneſs of ſinf i! feeſb , and for ſin, ana condemning 
fn im the ficſh, that the righteoubeſs of the Law might be fulfilled in 
25. k And Saittification alſo, Believers being renewed and ſanQai- 
fied by his Spirit. ! And he is alſo made Redempr7on : where, by Re- 
dcmption is meant the Redemption of the boay mentioned, Rom. 8. 23. 
So as Redemption here ſignifies the ſame with ReſurrciFion of the body. 
Chriſt is the ReſurreF#ion and the 1ife, Joh. 11. 25. 


rieth, let him glory inthe Lord mn. 


» God doth this, or hath done this, for this end, that man ſhould 
have nothing to glory in, neither Wiſdom nor Righteouſneſs, nor 
SanRification, nor Redemption ; but ſhould glory in the Lord, ac- 
knowledging that whatſoever Wiſdom, Righteouſneſs, or Holineſs 
he hath, it is all from God in and through the Lord Jeſus Chriſt. 


CHAP. IE. 


The Go'pe! [or forth net with humane Eloquence , but in Simplicity and 
Spiritus! Power, T1 —S- Heavenly Wiſdom revealed herein by the 
Spiris above humane Sence and Wiſdom. 6 12. which canuit be 
urtered with Man's Wards, ner judged and At cerned by the Natural 
A7an. 13 ——-16. 


ſ N D I, brethren, when came unto you, came 
nor with excellency of ſpeech, or of wiſdom, « 
declaring unto you the teſtimony of God. 


a It ſhould ſeem by the Apoſtles ſo often declaring againſt that 
Vanity, that even that Age much admireda Stile, and Miniſters 
in ſacred things delivering their Minds, not in a meer decent, but 
ina lofty high-flown Phraſe,and that they vilified St. Pau?, becauſe 
his Phraſe did not fo tickle their Ears. The Apoſtle had declared 
againſt this, Chap. 1. 17. there he called it the Miſaom of Words ; 
here he calls it, an excellency of ſaeech, v.4. the mricing words of 
man's wiſaom: Chap. 4. 19. the words of them that are puffed up ; 


THIANS. Chy 


connate riatural Principles. Now faith Pay! , 
neither of theſe —_— neither ſtudied oder an _ we: 
Phraſes nor did I make it my work to demonſtrate Gof, and 
fition; to you from Principles of natural Reaſon. Obje& In rope 
chen Miniſters to uſe ſuch Words ? 'Aſw. A learned Pg, in Be 
ter ſaith, That at that time it was the Will of God, that Fe Wri, 
ſhould uſe plain Speech , but it us otherwiſe now, the uſtn "=" 
ftudioufly compoſed and ordered , being now th: ordinary w; - of Wark 
others. 7. But after this rate any thing ofthe Will of Goo! 9c 
evaded ; it is but ſaying, thatit was tlie Will of Got ind- y , 
bur nor now. But 2 The thing is falſe. It was then _ wy, 
now the ordinary way of perſwading to uſe Rhetoricha] ns p 
Rational demonſtrations. 3. Although now this be the « yo wh 
Method of perſwading Men of Learning and Capzcities __— 
generality of people it isnot ſo. 4. The Apoſtles Reaſon : Mrs 
now as much as ever. It is the way to make Chriſtian Fai = 
in the Wiſdom of Mex, not in the Power of God. Obje& land 
then Minifters to uſe m ſtudy, but talk whatever comes at the; - oi 
end, and to uſe ne Reaſon to prove what they ſay,? Anſw. By no oo 
1. Iris one thing to fudy Matter, another 'thing to ftud mo 
2. Nay, itis one thing to ſtudy a decency in Words, another ft 
dy a gawdry of Phraſe. It is an old and true ſaying, Y:»;, ; a 
tur res, Words will follow Matter, if the Preacher be but of __ 
ry Parts. In the ſtudy of Words we have bur two thin __ 
tend : 1. That we ſpeak intelligibly , fo as all the People oh 
underſtand. 2. That, we ſpeak gravely and decently ; all = Fu 
dy of Words and Phraſesin a Divine is but folly and vanity 'W 
ought ro uſe our Reaſon in our preaching, but Reaſon wodkie « 
Ways. 1, Either making concluſions from natural and philof % 
Principles : or, 2. From ſcriptural Principles. We ought to wn 
to conclude as ſtrongly as we can what we ſay from Prixciz!;; 
Revelation, comparing ſpiritual things with ſpiritual, bur no " : 
all n#:#ral and philoſophical Principles ; for ſo we ſhall conclude Th 
1s no Trinity in the Unity of the Divine Being, becauſe accordin G 
natural Principles , Three cannot be One, nor One Three, and _ 
the Reſurreion, becauſe there can be no regreſs froma privacing 
an habit, &c. 4. Again, Ir is one thing to ule our natura] Rev 
ſon, ex abundant i, as an auxiliary help to illuſtrate and confirm 
whar is firſt confirmed by Divine Revelation: another thing tg 
ule jt asa Foundation upon which we build a ſpiritual Concluion 
or as the main proofof it. Paul's preaching was in words inte 
I:gible to his Hearers, and decent enough,and with reaſon enough 
bur not concluding upon natural Principles,nor making any proof 
of that Nature the Foundation upon which he built his Goſpel 
concluſions. e But in demonſtration of the Spirit. By which _ 
and ſome others, underſtand Miracles, by which the Doftrine of 
| the Goſpel was at firſt confirmed ; but Yorſtius and many other 
better underſtand by it the Holy Ghoft's powerful and inward per. 
Iwaſion of Mens Minds, ofthe Truth of what was preached by 
Paul. All Miniſters preaching makes Propoſitions ofGoſpeltruth 
appear no more than probable, the Spirit only demonſtrates then 
working in Souls ſucha perſwaſton and confirmation ofthe Tarh 
of them, as the Soul can no longer deny or diſpute, or withſtml 
the convittion of them. f And with power. By this term alſo ſome 


puffed up with Conceits of their own Parts and Abilities. S. Pal 
declares, that this was not his way of preaching: He came to de- 
clare to them the Goſpel, which he calleth the Tef:2n0ny of God : 
this needed no fine words, and excellent Phraſe , and Language 
to ſet it forth. 


you, * fave Jeſus Chriſt, and him crucified 6. 


4 ] did not value my ſelf upon any piece of Knowledge had at- 
rained, ſaving only that of Chriſt, and him crucified; or, I deter- 
mined with my ſelf to carry my ſelf amongſt you, as if I knew no- 
thing of Arts , or Sciences, or Languages , but only Chriſt aad 
him crucified : Not to make any thing elſe the SubjeQ of my pub- 
lick diſcourſes. I was acquainted withthe Jewiſh Law, Rites, and 
Traditions, with the Heathen Poets and Philoſophers, I trou- 
bled you with none of theſe in my Pulpit-Diſcourſes: my whole 
buſineſs was to open to you the Myſteries of the Goſpel, and to 


underſtand the power of working Miracles ; but it is much better by 
othersinterpreted of that Authority, which the Word of Gol preach. 
ed by Paul had, and preached by faithful Miniſters ſtill hath, upon 
the Souls and Conſciencesof thoſe that hear ir. As it is faid, Mart, 
7. 29. Chriſt taught them as one that had Authority. Andit is ſaid 
of Stephen, As 6. 10. They were net able to re{ift the wiſdm and th 


2 For I determined not to know any thing among |/p;-ir y which he ſpake. So the Goſpel preached by Pan! came to 


people, 1 Theſſ. 1. 5. Not iu word only, but alſo in power, and th 
Holy Ghoſt, and in much afſurance: and was quick, and powerful, and 
ſharper than any two-edged ſword, piercing to the dividing aſuntersf 
foul and ſpirit, and of the joints and marrow , and it a diſum 
of the thoughts, and intents of the heart , Heb. 4. 12. Andthus ew 
ry faithful Miniſter , with whoſe labours God goeth along inthe 
converſion of Souls, yet preacheth in the demonſtration of the Spit, 
and with Power, Nor indeed can thoſe Miracles, by which Cri 
and his Apoſtles confirmed the truth of the De&rine of the Golpe, 
rhough they were a mighty proof, be inany propriety of Spreci, 


bringyoutoa Knowledgeofandan Acquaintance with Jeſus Chriſt; called a Demenſtration, which properly is a proof in which tht 


'$ this was my end, and the means I uſed were proportionable to it. 
18, 3 And*1 was with you * in weakneb, and in fear , 


: Cor. and in muchtrembling. 


« Either in a weakneſs of Stile; I uſed a plain, low, intelligible 


& Ig 5.9. Stile, ſtudying rather to be anderſtoed by all, than admired by 
Gal.4. 13. any. Or,in weakneſs of ſtate , in a mean and low Condition ; for 


we read, As 18. 3. that he wrought with bis Hands at Cori»th. 
So Atts 20. 34. Or it may bein 4 weak ſtare of Body ; or it may 
be he means humbleneſs of Mind and Modeſty, which to worldly 
Eyes look like a weakneſs of Mind : ard in much fear and trembling , 
either withreſpe& to the Jews, and the danger he was ex ſed ro 
from them, or with reſpeCt to the greatneſs of his work , leſt chey 
ſhould refuſe the Grace of the Goſpel, by him brought and offered 
to them, ſo as ( faith he) you might ſee that all the work was 
God's, I but apoor Inſtrmment , contemptible with reſpeU to m 
outward quality, appearing poor and mean in my Phraſe and Stile, 
and whole behaviour amongſt you. 


'2Pet.1. 4 And my ſpeech and my preaching d was not * with. : 
[| incicing words of man's wiſdom .*. , but in demonſtra- | 5 That your faith ſhould not -þ ſtand in the wildo 


*7- tion of the Spirit e, and with power f. 


16. 


4 Either here Pas ſpeech and preaching ſignifieth the ſame thing | £ Faith properly ſignifieth our aſſent to a ching £ 


( expreſſed by two words ) or elle ſpeech referreth to his more pri- 
vate conferences anddiſcourſes with them, and preaching ſignifi- 
eth the more publick a&s of his Miniſtry, neither of them was, 


Mind fully acquieſceth, ſo that ir no longer denieth, or diſputett 
the thing ſo proved, bur gives a ficm and full aſſent co ir: The Mi 
racles wrought by Chriſt himſelf never had that effe& : the Pharts 
ſees and the generality of the Jews believed not chat Chriſt wastle 
true Meſſiah and the Semnof God, notwithſtanding his Miracles. Nc 
thing but the inward powerful impreſſionof the Spirit of Godpet 
ſwading the heart of the truth of Goſpel-Principles, can poſſv) 
, amount to a demonſtration, bringing the Minds of Men, chough ne 
ver ſo judicious and prepared, to a certainty of the thing 1evea 
ed, and a reſt, ſoas it can no longer deny, reſiſt, diſpute or col 
tradift it. With this Pou/'s preaching was attended, nor to cv* 
Individual perſon to whom he preached, but to many, even as m1 
ny as ſhould be ſaved: He delivered the Dorine of the Golps 
freely, plainly, and boldly ; not reſting upon the torce of his R 
torick and perſwaſive Words, nor yet to che natural force of 


Y , reaſoning and argumentation ; but leaving the demonſtration, 


evidencing of the truth of what he ſaid to the powerful inter 
\ impreſſion and perſwaſion of the holy and bleſſed Spirit of G0 
who worketh powerfully. 


|of men, but * in the power of God g. W 

hat 18 toid 
and becauſe it is told us. If the Revelation be from Man, : 
no more than a humane Faith. If it be from God, and we belit 
the thing, becauſe God hath revealed it to us, this 15 3 Devine if 


-. with the perſwafive or mticing Words of Man's Wiſdom. What | So as indeed it is impoſlible that a Divine Faith ſhould reſt 1n 
theſe p:r[waſive words of Man's Wiſdom are, will quickly appear Wiſdom of Men. If we could make Goſpel Propoſitions o_ 


to any that conliders there are bur two humane Arts that pretend 


f Realor 


che outward Senſes, or evident to ſuch Principles 0 wy 
make 1 


to any thing of perſwading, Rhetorick and Logick, ot the Art of | are connatural to us, or upon ſuch Concluſions, 85 We : 
Reaſoning. Rhetorick perſwadeth more weakly, working more up- | on ſuch Principles, yet no aſſent of this Nature cou 4 be 
on the affections than upon the underſtanding and judgment. Lo. | which is an affent given to a Divine Revelation, purely Y*: 


zick, or the Art of Reaſoning more ſtrongly, working upon the 


1nderitanding and judgment, and teaching Men to ccnclude from 


. i 
of ſuch Revelation. An afeze other ways giveit may F - " 
Demonſtration, or rational Demonſtration, or Knowledge © 


ef & = FF 7 RR CO IF; 


> 
=. 


Chap 


thing wys 
ordsang 
pel Pripe. 
Ouzhr we 
1h" Wii. 
5 Miſty; 
of Wir 
0 Þ!7/waye 
d May by 
dzed then 
IS muck ag 
araſes 104 
e ordinary 
yet for the 
V. 4. holds 
Faich and 
Q. Ougir 
er Tow, 
' NO Meang, 
udy Wark, 
ther to ſhy, 
©ba ſequa. 
t of ording, 
hings tot, 
eople may 
11 otherſty. 
uty. 3, Wa 
works twg 
lt to ſtudy 
Principle; of 
ur not fron 
clude, Thr 
ccording tg 
 andagunk 
\ pravatimtg 
latural Rex 
nd confirm 
her thing to 
| Conclulion, 
words intel. 
ſon enough, 
If any proofy 
his Goſpel 
hich Gratiw, 
 DoQtrine of 
many others 
| inward per. 
preached by 
Goſpel-truth 
ſtrates them, 
| ofthe Truth 
or withſtand 
rm allo ſome 
ich better by 
fGod preach- 
11] hath, upon 
1s faid, Matt, 
And it is fail 
wiſdom and the 
Pan came to 
ower, and tit 
| powerful, and 
ding aſunder of 
114 diſceme 
Andthus ew 
h along inthe 
;0n of the Spivit, 
y which Chiil 
» of the Goſpel, 
ety of Speech, 
' 1n which the 
1, or diſpute) 
co it: The Mi 
& : the Pharts 
Chriſt wasthe 
Miracles. Nc 
icit of Godpet 
'S, Can poill l 
len, though 06 
he thing 16ve1 
diſpute or col 
ed, not to £ve 
ny, even as 
c " the Goſpt 
orce of his RA 
ural force of 
nonſtration,? 
werful inter 
| Spirit of 6x 


n the wilde 


; that 3s rold1 
from Man, " 
| and we beli 
js a Divine F# 
nould reſt 11 
1t10nNS CV! 
= of Realo 

as we make * 

could be ff 
, purely þeca 
2 may be ſen 
nowledge 


up. IL. LCORINTUHIANS. 


but Divine Faith it cannot be, that mult be bottomed in the | vident 7007 of the Diery of the holy Spirir, his ſexrehiiny the deer 


i6 
9the world, unto our glory 2, 


6, | We preach the Goſpe}, where the +iz/htcouſneſs in which alone . oth > I a Rar 
I men can another day appear, and be accepted before God, is re- | Words which matis v :idom teacheth, out which tity : 


vealed from Faith to Faith. Itis indecd a ſacred Secret, a Myſtery to Holy Gholt teacherth x , comparing ſpiritua! ebinoc* 


Il 


! 
J) 


«nt: 9 for the Spirit ſearcheth all things, yea the deep 
ngs of God r. ſtanding upon a Divine Revelation. 6 For men of wit and r7e2!un 


01: 


=_ 


. Py 7 a - "n ” y ' ; Fe 
of che Goſpel then this, wiz. to call men to believe, and ſo | they {hall acknowledge, comprehend, and believe them, 


niſters » © 4 — 
ro endeavour char cheyr Faith may not ſtand in the Wiſilom of Mcn Ir For what man knowerh the thino of 
- . LAh'-' o 444 5,5 


(cothing but an how4:z Fairh can do ſo.) This will ſhew every|* ſave the | ” 
conſcientious Miniſter the vanity of not proving whar he ſaith! 
&om holy Writ: All other preaching is bur either di# ating, as if| 
men were to believe what the Preacher ſaich upon his authority 
of philophizing, ating the parc of 2 Philoſopher or Orator at 4ther;, 


the things of God knoweth no h24N, but the Sor; 
God fo 7 { 


wie. & +8 


not the part of a Minilter of the Goſpel. | and Counſels, and Meaning, fave only his on Soul that i. iff 

6 Howbeit we ſpeak wiſdom amongſt them char} 17 put ; = hots to CG of find, unil Gol by $i: 56in 

£ ' : * £h% warty [It hath revealed them to Men, none ©wnowen them bus rhe bytg 

are pertect, 2 N hop wor: the wiſdom. of this world »' Spirit of God. Iris true, as it :: with Man, _ To * 20 
nor of che Princes of this world, that come to Tongue diſcovered his Mind to others, they now it fg, FR 


; . | » 1dT. 25 © 
nought þ, | hatl: io delivered it ; but there is no Man th:: 41-7 ores val be 

þ Leſt what the Apoſtle had ſeemed ro ſpeak before in defama-! Caoughts and Counſels : So God having in bis Word revpiated his 
tion of wiſdom, ſhould refle&t upon the Golpel, and give ſome Will, {o far as he hath plainly revealed ic, vi: 1 may know it « 
P-ople occafion to juſtifie againſt ir their impious charge of folly ; | bur there are deep things of God, Myitcties in Scripicr2, which 
the Apoſtle bere tomething corretts himſe!f; affirming, that hejtill the Spirit of God hath revealed ro Men, they kt, Not, nor 
:nd thereſt of the Apoſties tpake W:/zom, and what would be fo! underitand ; for none knowerh chemoriginally, but the S-iric of 


judged by ſuch as were p-rfe& ; not abſolutely (for ſo there is no man ; God, who1s himſelf God, and ſearcheth rhe d:cp things of G a 
perie&) but compara»iv. ly, tihar is, perſons who have their ſenſes 12 Now we have received \ not the iniric at tho 


, | > 7 4 1d { . '/ i. o . : | | p* - 4 y ow 2 
exerciſed t0 dijce n betwixt God and Evi , Heb F. I4. OTC ſuch aS are | Worid u, hut *K the Spirit which is. of Gor, et W2* Po. 


of 2 truz found Judgment, ail are able to diſcern what is :rue wi/: 'mi : —_ 2 

. . * J . ; by"; . F | * Ss | c * 4>£, p 1,34 % __ FR -_ 
4m. To ſuch (faith the Apoiltic) we ſperk wiſdmn, and it needs | - «how the things that are tree. Si Ul £0. 350, 
muſt be ſo ; for witdom being an habir direting men to uſe the | 924 W, 
beſt means in order to the beit end, the Salvation of mens ſouls, | # By the Spiric of the World fomeunderfland tac Devil, rlizt ol! 


being the be? end,that DoQrin? which direQsthebeſt means in order ,vP1'1t which 15ia the World, and rulech thoie thas a0 5nild ly 
. _ A , . - NT j ng : 4 

to it, mull n=celſarity be wifdom, and rhe pureſt and higheſt wif, c4inat men; others underſtand a mecr humane Spike, by witli! 

dom. þ Bur faith he, nor what the Philoſophers — _ cunnin | INC und-rſtand and comprenend meer worldly rings. Tits {JI 9 


Men, or Polititians of the world count wiſdom ; for all their wif. | certain], 15, we have not a meer word!y fnitruction ind weon ing, 
dom is ofno fignificancy ar all, inorder ro the beſt end, the ſa!va- ! WE 2re not taught and inſtruſted & om the xorld (fs ce Spir.0 15 
tion of mens fouls, and it will all vaniſh, and come to nothing ac P24! for the effects of the Spirit of the worid.- w Bot wearr cx 
If. | and inſtructed by the holy Spirit, by whom we are raughr, +:; 
[ . . . ” o | / = af 4 }r & 1e - N20 r id dE t1.3 it chore Frop 
een the hidden i/dom, * which God ordained before 2 wPeries, or Divine Beeefite, both what God hack dons: for 
us, and what God hath wrought in us. 
i3 * Which things alſo we fpeak, not in < 


} pw CY 


many Men, bur it is the Wiſdom of Goa, a doftrine direQing the | with ſpiritual 7. vs 
beſt means tothe beſt end of man. »: It 1s hidden wiſdom, it was 
ordained of God before the world for our glory ; the way of ſalva« | 
tion for man, which he had from all Ecernity ordained and de-| 
creed, but it lay hidden in the ſecret Counſels of God, till the lat- 
ter Ages of the World, when it pleaſed God co ſend forth his Son 
inoche World ro publiſh ir, and after him to appoiat us to be the 


x Reaſon and a!l prattice direQzth me ro ſpeak and «rice c£ 
Subjects in a Stile and Phra\: ficred to the matrer abour « {1-2 
they write or diſcourſe. Our SubjcRs, faith th: Apotle, were 
| ſublime ſpiritua! SubjeQs ; therefore 1 dis not difcourte thvn like 
an Orator, with an exc:Yency of jpcecs or w:. (nom (25 v. 1.3 or wich 
crea Publers of RE To ns 

x : C . CU 771472 5 WH FERN) OVALE! > Q « 4IT2 
| 8 * Which none of the Princes of this world|j.,.) bur with words which the toty Gnof hart caught us e.che 
knew » : for * had they known #, they would not | in holy Writ, or by its impreffions upon our minds, where the 
have crucified the Lord of glory 0. are firſt formed, » Fitting ſpiricual things to ſpirirual perions 

» Which Divine Wiſdom neither Cajaphas, nor Ponrius Pilate, | who are able tou:derſtand them ; or firing 2 ſpiritual lapguige £5 
*nor any conliderable number of the Rulers of this Age, whether a. ſniritual nacter, ſpeaking the Qrac!cs of God 25 ra Oracle of Gd, 
mongſt the Jews, or amongſt the Heathens, underſtood, though | 1 P::. 4. 11. not declaming ite an Orator, nor arguing 7 


mn 
- 
= 
. 


they heard ofit. o For if they hadſo known it, as to have believed , | p/-:c31y like an Athonian Philyfopher, but uſing a fami'iir, £34is, 


and been perſwaded of .it, they would never have nailed to the | ſpiritual Stile, giving yoa the naked Truths of God withour any 

Croſs that Perſon, who was the Head and Fountain of it, and the | paint or gawdry of Phraſe. 

as n _—_ a pro gear ern > —_ [4+ Butthe natural man & receivett not the thin 
e Was God vieſſea for ever, and allo as Mca: ator, being tic Author Snirit p hev arc footitinefk omats hi, wy 

of Glory to thoſe who believe. Nor would this Ignorance at all the Spizit of God a, for they are loolilunet> © ra dir 

excuſe their crucifying of Chriſt, becauſe it was not invincible, they | ** 

ad means ſufficient by which they might have come to che know- diſcerned c. 

ledge of him, and have underſtood what he was, ſo as their Igno-| + There are great diſputes here, who 15 meant by the yaruna! 

nance was affeQted and voluntary. man, Nuts trIwn&. Some tiunk that "y the 14:45 1.3% here 
9 But as it is written, eye hath not ſeen, nor ear |is meant the carns/ m8! : thus 1 Cor. 15. 44. thy nitardl body is ope 


heard, neither have entred into the heart of man, Paſs of ele Wk _ DONG fn Nr i 1 popes 
. . * , man vw - It- 4 1PIr:it, .S Ms 
- ings which God hath prep aced for them that eſſential parts, hath conſtantly his denomination from oae ot then, 
oe nm p. and all menia the world are either c na! or ſpiritual, and that che 
? The place where thisis written is by all agreed to be 7/a. 64. | Greek word 4-74 ſignifies that ſoul and life which is common to 
4 where the words are, For ſince the b-ginning of the world Men| all men, from whence all common morions and aff:&ions are, and 
have mt beard, nor perceived by the car, neither bath the eye ſeen, O | isoppoſed to the holy Spirit, which dwells in the the Souls of 
Gu, befides thee, what he hath prepared for him that waiterb for him. | them that are ſanQified, by which they are led and guided, >< 
[tis ſo uſual with the Penmen of holy Writ, ro quote the ſenſe of | Thus, fay they, the natural man isone who is a ſervant to his Juſt 
Texts in the Old Teftamear,not tying themſelves co Letters and | and corruptions, under the perfe& government of his Sou!, conti-. 
Yyllabes, that it is mightily vain for any toobje&t againſt chisquo- | dered meerly as natural, all whoſe motionsin that eſtate of tin an 
ation, as no where written in the Old Teſtament, but taken out |corcuption are inordinats. Others think that the Apottie hers 
of ſome Apocryphal Writings, The ſence of what is written 1ſa. 64. |ſpeaks of ſuch as are weak in ths Faith, licile ones, Babes its 
4 1splainly the ſame with what he ſpeaketh in this place; the grea- |Chriſt, who had need of milk, nor of frong meat, and are 13 
teſt difference is,the Apoſtle ſaith, Thoſe that love him, che Prophet, | tural men in compariſon of thoſe more {piritua! al perte&t. tn 
Thſe that wait for him (which is the certain produtt and effett of | this ſenfo indeed the Apoſtle, Chap. 3. v. 4. calle them carins] 
ove.) The whole 64. Chap. of 1/aiah, and ſome Chapters follow- | But there isnothing more plain, than that the Apoitic under che 
ng treat concerning Chriſt, ſo doth this Text. Chriſt and his be-| notion of 4v1ard; aver & (which we tranſlate n3tun al man} here, 
Wit; are to beunderſtood here, by the things that God bath prepared underſtands nor all ſuch 25S were not perf and ip ritual, {UC co 
them that love him : which are ſet out as things not obvious ro ſenſe | whom God had not by his Spirit revealed 52 45cp things of Gua, 
ot to be comprehended by reaſon. It could never have entred 1nto | y. 10, ſuch as had only received thz ſ5:ri7 of ihe world, not the 
the heart ofmen to conceive, that God ſhould give his only be- | 59;x;+ of God, by which alone men come to &ow :he 1imgs that art 
gotten Son out of his own boſom, to take upon him our nature, freely given them of God, as v. 12. All theiz, caough fome ot 
and to die upon the Croſs; or that Chriſt ſhould fo far humble | them are much better than others, having their minds more culti- 
lf, and become obedient unto death. vated and adorned with worldly knowiedge and wiſlom, ye. do 
10 But * God hath revealed the to us by his Spi- not in their hearts (rhough they may with cheir ears) receiv, 
that is, believe, embrace, and clote with or a ;prove of {pirtctrs) 
and Divine Myſteries,ſuch DoQtrines as are purely marters 25 #21thh 


9 Godby his Spirit hath opened our underftandings to under- | count them all fooliſhneſs, being neicher demonſtrable by tent= no; 
ſtand the holy Scriptures, the Types, and Prophecies of Chriſt, | natural reaſon. c Neither canany man, no otherwiſe caught and 
and what the holy Prophers have ſpoken of him both as tc his|inftru&ted, ſfocomp:ehend them, as to give a firm and fixed ajleny 
terſon and Offices. » For the holy Spirit being the chird Perfon | ro them, or in heart approve them, becaut- rhey are oy to by 
the bleſſed Trinity, and ſo equal with the Father and rhe Son, | ſeen and diſcerned in a {piritual light, the holy Spirit 0% God; 
archeth the deep things of God, and fois able ro reveal to us all | which is the Spirit of wiſdom and r2ve!rtion in the knowledge of 
the Counſels of God, whatſoever God would have men to under- | C4 :f. Eph. 1.17, 18. Inlightzing their wer Ranvings, (7.3 they %ia) 
ind concerning the Lord Jeſus Chriſt. $o as this Vext is an &- ' know the hope of [1s calling, and what 1s the viewer 31 the gory of * 


kl 
. 
WIPY 2 « 


\vy of God. Nor ought any thing more to be the care of the Mi- |thing: of God, 1nd being a'on2ablz to reveal them 1tnco Men, to 2: 


Ipiric ot a man that is in him ? $£ ever t6 


neither can he know ther, becaule thixy are pi: iwally jy 


Chap. I3. 


” * 
-- 
—_ - Fa he. 
a_—y - 


—_ Ps 4 - 
ny fy gg ee IR At FI ro mage 
_ - S '*-0 . _ ya. "4 = a a» . _- 
_— —. Y be e®: I 
, Ablngtis) $4... 494 "4 


- 


_—_ 
ar—_—_——_—_— 


a 7 na re 


2 
- —- nmr 
ST DE Sat Loh 
kx / v+ 
& — 
_ , 


_— ——_—— — road 


_— w _ 
Ka - — 
- om I - & Sunil 
: —_— 
20) $2 So Pas 
- - S—— 
SE ING 


- 
- Th 

IT 
ICC 


Chap. III. 


*Prov.28. 15 * Buthe hat 1s ſpiritual d, || judgeth all chings e yet 


T, 


Lia 40.13. 


1 The 
21. 


- and is by him ſpecially and ſavingly inlightned. e Diſcerneth or 
 V!, as 


ſerrnerh. 


| Or, 4- Chittian hath any ſuch perfe& judgment or power of diſcerning, 


ern. d, 


”. Jer. 23. 


18. 


7 Thy ſhall. Chriſt h. 


s Fa. 
Hb. Sor 


i213. 


s P:r.2.2, DOW arc ye able f. 


$* 9781, 11 the former verſe mivuulires to Sunrses. 


inh:ritance in the Onints, and what is the exceeding greatneſs of his 
porwr ro them 7557 belicve, according t6 the working of ns mighty 
pp.r, ce. Thus the Apoſtle gives a reaſon of what he had ſaid, 


4 


w. 9. That noncof the Princes of the wirld knew the wiſdom of God. 


a UV» 


he himſelf is | iucged of no man f. 

d Ki? that is [pirzz1s!, in this_verle, 1s oppoſed to the HAturas 
, So that by ſpiri- 
tual here is underſtood, he thar is taught by the Spirit of God, 


* ;judgeth all rbings,, that is, of this Nature, the myſteries of God, 
which concern manseternal life and ſalvation ; not that every good 


but according to the meaſure of illumination which he hath re- 
ceived. f Tet he himſclf :5 judged of no man, 1t may as well be 
tranſlated of nothing, and thete:m indged might as well have been 
tranſlated examined, or ſearchca, as itis in AZ: 4. 9. and 12. 19. 
and 17. 11. ani 24.8. or cortermncd, The witdom that is of God 
35 not to be ſubjected to the wiſdom of men, nor to be judged of 
any man, butonly the ſpiritual man. The truth, which the ſpiri- 
ual mar: owneth and profeſierh, dependeth only upon God and 
his Word, and is 55: ſubjected to the authority and judgment of 
men, nor the dift:cesof humane reaſon: So asthe ſpiritual man ſo 
far forth as he '- jviritual,is neither judged by any man, or by any 
thing. There z:e ſome that by be himſelf underſtand the Spirit of 
God, he indeed #« judged of no man, nor any :hing ; butthatſeemeth 
a much more {rained ſenſe. : 

16 * For who hath known the mind of the Lord, 
that he + may inſtru& him? g But we have the mind of 


g This Phraſe is taken out of 7/s. 40. 13. 2nd wasquoted by 
our Apoſtle before, Rom. v1. 34. the ſenſe of it as here uſed, 
is, for what natural man that never was taught and inlightned 
by the Spirit of God, could ever know tke {ccrer Counſels of 
God, and the Divine Myſteries of msn's Salvation. Nor can any 
inſtru& him what :odo. Ir is by ſome obſerved, that ovuſubnry. 
ſignifies by arguments to bring one over to be of his mind, which 
js a kind of ivftruQtion. + (But faith the Apoſtle) we who have 
che Spirit of God givento us, dwel'ing and working in us, and in- 
Airu&ing us, we have the mind of Cirift ; for che Spirit of Chriſt, 
which is our Teacher, knoweth lis mind, and bath revealed it 
Uuiito Us, 


CHAP HJ 


Mitk fit for Children : Strife and Diviſion, a# Argument of a fleſhly 
Mind. 1--4. Mniſters arc nothing of themſelves but fellow workers 
with God, 5—9. Chriſt is the Foundation en whom they ſhould build, 
wat Nay, &c. but Gold, &c. and feel! be vewara:d atcording- 
ly. 10--15. The Corinthians were rhe Temvle of God, which muſt 
not be vielated by Diviſions. 16, 17. The Wiſas7 of Men Foolifhneſs 
before Gid, 18—20. The uſe href 21—23. 


I Nd, I brethren, could not ipeak unto you as un- 
to ſpiricual a, but as unto Carnal 5, ever as unto 
babes in Chrift c. 
, a4 The Apoltle plainly returneth in this Chapter to reprove them 
Por their diviſion; and fa#/on;, for which he had began to reprove 
them, Chap. 1. v. 11. and (as ſome think) herehe anticipaterh an 
objeQtion, which they might have made againſt him, againſt his 
reproving and judging of them, whe-n as ho that is ſpiritual (as he | 
had now ſaid) 75 judged of m0 man, I ( faith he) brethren, could 
not ſpeak unto you as ſpiritual, that is, as to Chriſtians, who had 
made any great proficiency in the ways of God, and h11 arrived to 
any juſt degrees of Spiritual perfeGion. 6 But as unto coral, that 
1s, perſons, who though you are not under the tui! condu& and 
government of your fiſh and /:nſi:rve apprtite, yer are far trom be. 
ing perfe&t, either in Faith or Holineſs ; in Chriff indeed but not +$ 
grown men, but as babes, as the Apoſt'e fully explainerh chis 
term. Hcb. 5.12.13. Such 2s had need betaugh: again, which are 
the firſt principles of the Oracles of God, and have ned of milk, and not 
of ſtrong meat ; for every one that uſ:th milk, is unskilfull in the word of 
righteouſneſs, for he is a babe. 
2 1] have fed you * with milk, and not with meat 4d: 


hicherto ye were not able ro bear it e, neither yet 


—_— wt. 


a Miik ſignifies what the Apoſtle ro the Hebreews calls the #-/? 


principles of the Oracles of Ged, and fo is oppoſed ro ſublime ſpiri- | gives the increaſe, which arguesthe neceflity of ſpecial Grait boek 
rua] Do&rineshere ſet out under the notion of ar, called ſtrong | to Converſiom and Ed:fication, ſuperadded to the beſt preachingol bis 
As young Childrens | Miniſters. Though*Parl himſelfby preaching plants, and vie 
watereth, yet God muſt make the ſoul to increaſe with the increaſe 
ritual Myfteries fit for new Converts, until they have ſenſes exec. | of God. Hence the Apoſtle argueth their unreaſonablenels, 11 + 
cited tO diſcern good and evil ; and therefore the Apoſtle gives | doring one Miniſter, and magnifying him above another, 
this as a reaſon, why he had nor commanicared the deep things of | indeed neither rhe one nor the other had any principal eftenncy 
God to them, becauſe e as yet they had nor been ableto bear the | in the produttion of the bleſſed effe&, but a meer inftcomentaleas 
| It ſhould ſeem rhat |ſation, the effe& of which depended upon the ſole bleſſing of (9d, 
there were many in the Church of Corinth, who though they were [in compariſon with whom in this working, neither the one, 
true Ciriſizans, yet were not grown and judicious Chriſtians, but |the other Miniſter, was any thing. 


»7:a7, Heb... 14. fit for theſe of full age. 
ftomachs will not endure ſtrong meat, ſo neither are {ſublime ſp. 
notion of them ; nor indeed wire? hey yer able. 


pet / "i imperfections, as indeed it will further appear ir this 
: piite. 


LCORINTHIANS. 


of the Goſpel, that for his ſake they vilified and deſpiſeq alon : 


one: » and every man ſhall *receive his own eva, 


Chap 


4 For while one ſaith, * I ath of Paul, and another + 
I 2 of Apollos, are ye not carnal ? ;. "i 
; Not that Chriſtians in ſo large a City as Corinth, tighe was 
chemſzlves under ſeveral Paſtors, or as ro themſelye; Neeſer 
before another, either in reſpc@ of the more emijien; gifts of one 
beſtowed upon ene (as doubtleſs Paul was preferable tg , Gol 

or in reſpe of the moreſultableneſs of ane Man's gifts # to j 
capacities than another : but their adherence fo to one Tg 


ly, 


kr 
thar were alſo true and faithful ſervants of God in the work of i 
Goſpel, this was their ſin, and ſpake them to have VICious an( aq 
rupt affeQtions, and to walk more like Men than like $ajng, os 
having a true notion of the Miniſters of Chriſt, no: behwin 
themſelves towards them asthey ought to do, "g 
5 Who then & Paul? and who is Apollos: by yy. 
niſters by whom ye believed, even asthe Lord Gave tg 
every man |. 
þ Neither Paul rior yet Aþollo, ate Authors of Faith to You, by 
only infiruments. It is the Lord that giveth co every man q now, 
to believe: ot elfe that latter Phraſe, as the Lord hath gives eve 
»an, may be underſtood of Miniſters, whoſe abilities to the wor 
of the Miniſtry and ſucceſs in ir, both depend upon God, Ty, 
ſenſe of the word is this, then God giveth unto his Miniftzs y, 
riety of gifts, and different ſucceſs ; bur yer neirher the ne nor 
the other of then are more than the ſervants of Chriſt in their 
niſtry, perſons whom God maketh uſe of ro call upon, and ty 
prevail with men, to give credit to the DoQtrine of the Goſpel, 
_ to rexelve and acceptof Chriſt, The work is the Lord'y, ng 
tacirs, 

6 I have plantefl, Apollos watered: but God pyy 
the increaſe /, | 

! God honoured nie firſt to preach the Goſpel amonghyvy 
Afs 18, &c. and bleſſed my preaching to convert you unto (yi 
then I left you, Apollos ſtaid behind, and he watered what | hy 
planted, daily preaching amongſt you. See 45; 18, 24,zg vg 
he further was a means to build you up in Faith and Holinef,, by 
God increaſcd, or gave the increaſe, God gave the power by which 
you brought forth any frair. The ſimilitude is drawa from pp. 
ters, whether Husbandmen, or Gardiners, they plant, they way 
but the growing, the budding, the bringing forth flowers or ful 
by the plant, doth much more depend upon the foil in which {4 
ſtands; the influence of Heaven upon it, by the beams ofthe Fy, 
and thedrops of the dew and rain, and the internal virtue which 
the God of Nature hath created in the plant, than upon the hand 
of him that planteth, or him who uſeth his watering-pot towyyr 
ir. So it is with Souls, one Miniſter is uſed for Conver{a, the 
ficſt changing of ſouls; another is uſed for E4:fcatien, or funher 
building up of Souls ; but both Converſion and Ed:fication art infi 
tely more from the new hears and new natare, which God givtthy 
Soul, and from the influence of the Sun of Righteouſnels by the 
Spiritof Grace, working in and upon the Sou], than from any Mk 
niſter who is but God's inſtrument in thoſe works. 
7 So then, neither is he that planterh any thing, 
neither he that watereth { but God chat giveth the 
increaſe *.* 
*.* Sothat, look as it is in eafthly plantations, God hath the 
greateſt influence upon the growth and fruitfulneſs of the plantand 
the Husbandman or Gardiner is nothing in compariſon with Gl, 
* ho hath given to the plant planted irs life and nature, by whih 
it ſhooreth up, buddeth, and bringeth forth fruir, and makethhit 
Sun to ſhine, and his rain to fall upon it: So it is in the ſpiriral 
plantation, God is the principal efficient Cauſe, we are littl:inft 
mental cauſes in God's hand ; nothing in campariſon with Gel, 
(I have planted, Apollo; hath watered) bur if we ſee a foul change, 
or grow, and make any ſpiritual proficiency, we muſt ſay, N# # 
0 9, O Lord, not unto ws, but unto thy name be given the gimy, 
hath done the main work; we have not dene any thing in con» 
pariſon with him. Theſe words do no more tend to vilifiethe 
Miniſtry of the Goſpel, or make ic uſeleſs, than raking then in 
their native ſenſe, as they reſpe& earthly planrations, they 
prove, that there isno need ofthe Husbatdman's or Gardiner'shund 
eo plant or to water plants, becauſe all chat he doth of that ngur 
is t9 no purpoſe, unleſs God firſt gives to the plant its proper te 
tre and virrue, and then followeth the planration wirh the inf f 
ence of the Sun, dew, and rain. Butyer it isobſervable, thatthe 
Apoſtle doth nor ſay, The man himſelf gives the increafe, fron 
g2o0d uſe of the power that is natural in his own will, bt 


An -p => — __ we 


$ Now he that planteth, and he chat watereth af 


' 3 y . * a « G n 
. _ ; ion —— wo bs n ___ Sper wes there Ins 4- [according to his own labour n, LY 
oy FA J 5 b 7 f n rue, an | WON, are yet yy The Miniſters of Chriſt, though one be uſed in ara. * 
) : 12. HOT Carnal, and wa k 45S MEN h? another in watering, one in laying the foundation, and and » 
MM ' /4= £ Not wholly carnal, bur 11 2 great meaſure ſo,not having your |building thereupon, yet are one ; one in their office and work,one 
N - WR luſts and corrupt affeCtions entirely ſubdued rothe Will of God, nor /their Miniſtry, being all Servants to Chriſt whois on? 3 all 1erv 0 
20 be ſo much ſubdued, as ſome other Chriſtians have, and you oughe | one and the ſame Lord, all doing the ſame buſins6, aw 449 
-% 2% v have. + as an evidence of this he mindeth them of the exvyings, | ſame end, and with all their might labouring rowards It ore; 
rites and contentiens that were amongſt them, Strife and envyings | therefore as they ought not to divide into Parties and Factions, 'B7 
are, Cal. 5. 19. reckoned amongſt the works of the fleſh, they are | you ought not for their ſakes ro be ſo divided. # Yer they 2 Bl. . 
al oppoſite to love, in which the perfe&ion of a Chriſtian lyeth, | notſo one, bur that one may labour more rhea anothet, gn - uns 


he told us before what ſtrifes and canteations he meant, and tells | honoured by God with more ſucceſs than another, and —"— 


u51t again in the next verſc, 


hap, 


Other, *& 
ly, 
110? Py? 
*'f Ohe 
vt Gol 
Pol gx) 
0 their 
Minit 
lothey, 
& of his 
and cor, 
ns, not 
lying 


Jute mi. 
BaV6 to 


you, by 
a Power 
£6 Cv 
the Work 
ol, The 
niſters 9, 
& ON Nick 
\ their Mi, 
n, and ". 
ie Goſpel 
vOrd's, gt 


30d pane 


mona you 

into Chriſt, 

that ] had, 

« 24z 25,9. 

oline(s, byt 

er by which 

a from plate 
» they watte 
wers or {uit 
in Which it 
; of the Fun, 
irtue which 
on the hand 
p9t tO water 
erjjin, or the 
#4, Ot further 
N att Infigi« 
God giveth 
wſnels by the 
0: any Me 


any thingy 
giveth the 


God hath the 
* the plantand 
{on with ond, 
ure, dy wh 
ind makethVit 
a the ſpirital 
re littk inf 
fon. with God, 


' foul change, 
iſt lay, Nt 


the giwy, 


-hing in cM» 
g 
4 to viliferdt 


aking then) | 
11S, They \ 


Gardiner'shud 
of that nur 
- its proper it 
with rhe influ 
rvable, thatth 


crenle, from 
will, but 
5 ad Gat 


preaching! bis 


in plantings 
and anorhdt fy 
and work,onel 
one; all ferv'n 
copolng 
Ras Re 


bl 


owards t3 
and F 


» Yer rhe} ae 
another, a 
Cr, and 07 


| ations, 


l « 


"hall 


ko entice & IOW, DrOpRtioned, te tis Tabour :; ti2 Apoſtle 
Wo rot, acc079ing © The luccels of Eis labour {that 45 not in þ1 
pa -: bat aver 414g 55.095 {abour. 
IT. FENAE ”— IF RE a el 0 wn JO - A 
i js Eno: * we Te anUuURTSL O:,0Her with (zOU 0 ye are 


2G - > Bu p 
0 - kno compared with God we are nothing, yet our ſtation 


\ fearion, God works 25 the principal .effictent Cauſe, we 
ob with God a5 God's inſtruments; God worketh one hater oy 
6 infuence pon the heart, weanother way, by publicatt- 
Goſpel in pecples Ears, but the ſcope and end of the 


to 
” 


IDES 
"hs © [4 
4 &) 
ON 0! (13E 


io. 1G 0, end they arc here ſaid to work with him. Fence he 
| hot be had before ſaid, thar they thould be rewanded, 
11 » Zh "I. A I n G i arable fon f- o es TL 26 Þ- » - 

r- mil not tufler choſz (Ly hn work WIR im, to be withour their ICT Iofs £* but he himlelf {hall be {>7e . 
: all workers to-! 
%  % w = Ln , 11 [- TSS Fas I | ® b . _ 
> Yer dc not think your ſelves our husban 
thus God's People, 7/2. GT. 3. 
thus the Church 
| 75, Still the Apoſtle minds 
they were God's, not their miniſters ; it was God 
© whom they were beholden for their converſion, fer their edifica- 


[ 


:t.« Rn: Jer every man take heed how he 
thereupon #. 


= 


LCORE 


N 


"4 

t Ut 
. n= # ? 
1c 70 C4201 
\\ 
-— 


l.ec {C0 eh 


« the favie. The Lord 2s ſaid to work with his Miniſters 


Ly 
wth 
aA1i-&f 0 
ein}! 


i: xx alto thatthey were Cue, for they 2 
COTA! » ; y : 
6 Ws 
or Wath WONG. ; 
ws Pat. WERE "Ne 
? for row are God's husbanury : 
G 2 7 =_ , .J yy ” "3" 
ninuting of cre T0974. oF God 5 0U! 7917 * 
4 - - - ve 4 < 
+. flgule of God, I 771. 3» 


\ 
p Pot, 
"> CALC\a +7" - 


tient, eaat 


. * . [1 
en £43 
SLE {_s. ti & FOG 
RE 
. 


n 
£102, LY . . A : 
-» * According to the grace of God which is g1- 

] 


-'ven wto 127, as a Wile maſter-builder I have laid 


« che foundation 5, and another buildeth thereon. / 
Duiidein 


kere ſignifies either the abiliry which God had given 
er. 10 preach the Goſpel, or the Apoſtolical. Ofic:, to which 
Cod had called hirr ; he maketh both to proceed trom God, and 
© be the effects of his free love and favour to him. _ - Accoroing 
8 <S 0 _ * oY N © 

(- this he {#ith, Look as a wiſe Mafter-buil'ter firſt layerh the toun- 
ition, then buildeth upon the foundation which he bath laid. 
$, he being the rſt whom God pleaſed to imploy 1n this his 
wark at Cerincl, had laid the foundaricn, that is, had firſt preach- 
ed the Goſpel in this famous City : thus the firſt preaching of the 
Goſpel is called, a Jaying the foundation, Rom. 15. 20. Heb. 6. 1, 
+ Afrerward Apcllos and other Miniſters further carried on that 
work of preaching the Goſpel amongſt rhem. «= But (faith he) 
whoever cometh to preach after me, had need rake heed what 
he buildeth ; for, Cal, 3.6. Though we or an Angcl from heaven 
each any ather Goſpel unto you, ten tat which we have preached unt9 


Du a "ha c 
Jet 2112 PC RCCMY A, 


Y 
v \G « , 


Yor 


w Ci in this Text doth not ſignifie a meer natural power, but 
rightful power 3 no man by any juſt right or authority can lay 
. anv other Foundation, can preach any other Dofrine of Salvation, 
"tha that which T have already preached, which is the Doctrine 
of Salvation by Jeſus Thrift Neither is there ſalu3tion in any other ; 
fr there 15 m0 other Name unter heaven given amongſt men whereby we 
wu b: (awed, ACS 4. 12. | | 

12 Now if any man build upon this joundation, gold, 
ſler, precious ſtones, wood, hay. ſtubble x. 

« The Apoſtle is diſcourſing met ap/orically; he had compared the 
Church of Corz77{ ro a building, v. 9. and called chem there God's 
7 ; they were buile upon the Dottrine of the Goſpel, the 
Difr nc of the Apr/iies and Frophete, who had preached Chriſt to 
them, this was the foundation; ani has td vs, that none, by any 
 pretence of righr, could Jay any other foundation, But there was 
tobe a ſuperſtructure vpon this foundation, which might be of | 
raious materials, he names fix ; three very good and excel. | 
lent, gold, ſilver, and precions toms ; three others vile and invalu2-«! 
ble, wed, 4-ry, [lubble, By theſe he either means good or $47 wirk-, | 
or rather ood or 64d Doffrinss, Good Doffrine 1S !ignified by the! 
felt, fro, and nrecious [ones mentioned : Bad Doctrins by the word, 
/a;, and Pubble mentioned : by which. may be underſtood various 
degrees of bad DoEtrine, as ſome DoQrines are more pernicious 
ind damnable than others, though the other alſo be falſe, unprofi- 
table, trivial, and of 10 ſignilicancy to the good of Souls, but bad, 
«they are unprofitable, 

13 *Every man's work ſhall be made manifeſt z: for 
tis day ſhall declare it 2, becauſe * it + ſhall be re- 
raed by fire, and the fire ſhall ery every man's work 
of what fort it 15 4s EY D 

7 Now, faith he, there will come a time v.aen every man's, 
that 1s, every Teacher's work or DoQrine, fba/! be made manifiſt. 
ASthe metal is brought to the touch-ſtone to be tryed, whether it 
bez0/4 or {[:7, or ſome baſer metal; ſo there will come a time, 
then all Do&rines ſhall be tryed and made manifeſt, whether. 
try be of God or no. +» What day ſhall declare it 1s not fo. 
adily agreed by Interpreters. Some by a 4ay here underſtand a 
Og time, in proceſs of time it ſhall be declared, as indeed erro- 
ME! Difries have not ufed to obtain or prevaii.long. Dagon 
falls before the Ark. Others underſtand ir of a day of adverſity and 
"eat of:::;0n, the day of Gods vengeance ; and indeed thus it is 
Oren jeen, a falſe Faith or a Lye believed, will not carry a man 
tough the difficulties which he meeterh with in an evil day. The 
'Whs of the Goſpel are of that narure, that they will give a Soul 


"of 


ig 


CT FF 7 4 by 
2.441 1. A MS 
w7zh, or the fie of aftitien and edverſity, $07 the fire of the 
5 laſt Judgmenr, but the truth cf the Goſpel ſhining forrh in tl;c 

World, and burning up the droſs and fubble of corrupt falle Do- 
_ that ſhall bring all the Do&rine which mea teach, to the 
tryai. | 

3. <q . . [2 1 
14. If any fats work abide which he hatk built 
thereupon, he ſhall receive a reward b. . 

6 Tf any Preacher keep thee Foundarion, and the Doftrine wi:ich 
ne hath built upon the true foundation, prove confonant to the 
will of Chriſt, God witireward him for his labour. He ſhall hear 
, the voice ſaying, Wel! done, ford and taiilful ſeruant, entey thor int 
thy maſler's jop. : | 

15 If any man's work ſhall be burnt, he ſhall faf. 
yet fo, as 


A avuU +» 
by fire &. 

c Bur if his work 4 not abias, if he ſhall appear upen the 
more clear and b:ight ſhining our ef the truth of the Gotpel, that 
though he hath held the foundation right, yer he kath buile upon 
it wood, hay, and' flubble, mixed fables and idle forics, and cor. 
rupt Dottrine with the DoGtrine of the Goſpel, he ſhall fuller !:", 
9y zt, ether by the affli&ing hand of God, or by a loſs of his re. 
purarion, or ſome other way. & Burt yet God wiil not caft off 
Soul tor every ſuch errour , if he keeps to the main fonndarion. 
}-ſus Chriſt. He fhal! be ſaved, though it be as by fir:, that i5 
with difficulty, which certainly isa more natural (enſ2 of this J exe, 
than thoſe give, who interpret 7s bz fre, of the fire of hc Goſpel. 
or the fire of Purgatory, of which the Papiſts underſtznd it For, 
11. Ir 1s, and always hath been a prov:rb:al form of ſpeech to 
expreſs a thing obtained by difficulty, we ſay, 7: {5 got out of rþ2 
fire, &c. 2. Fer the fire of Purgatory, it 15a tiction and meer ima- 
ginary thing, and of no further ſignificancy, than co make rhe 
Popes Chimney ſmozk. 3 That prerended fire only pargeth Ve- 
nial f1ns : rhis fire tryeth every man's work, che gold as well as 
the ſtubble. 


1 


and 794 the Spirit of God dwelleth in you 2 e. 
particular Members of ir, Gods building ; after this he haG inlarged 20 


perſtruQture upon that foundation ; now be retarns again to ſpeak 
of the whol2 Church, whom he here callcth the T:mple of God, with 
j@ manifeſt alluſion to that noble and ſplendid Houſe which $!c- 
0n firſt builded, and was atterwards rebuilded by Zorobabel, Exrga, 


bY Sd - 


"x Forother foundation can norman lay, then * thatjand Nehemiah at Feruſulzm;, as the publick place” for. the Jewiſh 
K -; Gr _—_ 
*1ad, * which is Jeſus Chriſt 2». 


(Church to meet into worſhip God according to the preſcript of 
the Zewitical Law, in which houſe God was feid to dxz!!, becauſe 
there he mer his people, and bleffed rherr, and thire he cave 
an{wersto them from the Mercy-ſeat: He cails them the Temple of 
God, becauſe they were 64/t, that is, effe&valiy called for this very 
end, thatthey might be 70 the pratje of the glory of his grace, wher:in 
hs hath mane 15 acceptes. in the beloved, Eb. 1. 6.. And asthe Apoſtle 
Peter further expoundeth this Text, 1 Pc:. 2.5. The p:0372 of God 
are a (prritual houſe, an holy pricſtivood, to offer up ſciritual ſacrifices 
a:c:ptable to God by Jeſus Chriſt, And Ged hy bis Spiric dwelt is 
*7em, both by his perſon, and by his gitts an4 graces, which is 
a far more .noble dwelling in them, than rh2 dwelling of God 
was in the Jewiſh Temple. From this Texr may be terch'd an 
evident proof of the Divine Nature of the third Ferfon in the 
bleſſed Trinity ; for he is not only cull'd here the Spiric of God 
”_ he 15 ſaid to dw-!! 2 ce Saints : which dwelling of God in his 
people, 15 that very thing which maketh ther the Temple of Ged , 
and thoſe who are here called, The Templ? of God, are, Chap, 6. 19 
called, The Temple of the Holy Ghoſt. | 


17 It any man | detile the temple of God, him ſhall!) Cr, -- 


God deſtroy f: for the temple of God is holy g, which "97 
temple 72 are. | ey 

/ The word which we tranſlate df! and :/iroy (for the Greek 
word 1s the ſame for both) ſignifieth to v/e/ato, corrrp?, | 
Our Tranſlators generally render ir cor-p7, Char. 15, 33. 2 Cor. 7. 
2. & 11. 3. Ep. 4.2. Jrde 10. Rev. 19. 2. The people of God 
which are here called 72 T:-mple of God are defiled, eirher by un- 
bibing falſe DoQrine, or being temprel ro any looſenels of lite 


[9a converſation. Now (faith che Apoſtle) if any oae goeth a- 


bour to do this, which all Preachers do, who tzach any falſe Do- 
ftrine, or any Principles that lead ro a liberty for che fle{hk, or 
lead an 11] and ſcandalous lite, God thall deſtroy thoſe men. g For 
as the Temple of God cf old was a. place buildel and ſer apart for 
holy uſes, and therefore not without grear p:ril to be abuſed and 
profaned: fo thoſe that are the people of God, are by God called 
and fet apart in a more immediate eminent manner for the hogour 
and glory of God, and therefore canno* be debauchel or detiie1 
by any as inſtruments in that a&ion, wichout exceeding great 
peril and hazard to them that endeavour and attempt any ſuch 
thing. 


mong yon feemeth to be wie in this world 2, let him -. 
become a fool, that he may be wiſe #, 1% 
© There are ſome that with their Z/oquence, ani flouriſhes of 
words, or with their Philoſophical notions and reatonings (vhich, 
Col. 2. 8. .the Apoſtle calls v4:2 deceit) or with their Traaltioy; atf 
ter the rediments of the Wa: id{as the Apottlc addeth in thar place) 


23? 
j | 


5 deed often called the day of the Lord, Chap. 1. S. 


© Mt in the day of Judgment. The ſame thing 1s alſo to 


would cheat and deceive ycur Souls, under a pretence ct making 
you wounderfully wile - the Wifdom of the World is Foolithnets 
with God. # If any of you feemeth unto others, or f{e2merh unro 
himſelf, that is, thinketh that he is endued wich what the World 
calleth Wiſdom. + If ever he would be truly wite, v:i1te vnto 
God,zrd to etern:l Life 2nd Salvation, let him be contented by the 
wiſe men and Philoſophers of this World ro be loot vron as a too), 

ery Eetons Of Qpini- 

! 


4 
cns of his, which hz teth fabten pp hon be co dig of big rue] 


| 


Wat. 


Chap. TIF. 


16 Know ye not that * ye are the temple of God ? * « Cor. 
16. 15. 
e The Apoſtle, v. 9. had called the Church of Corintf, and the EPN- 
22. 


in & diſcourſe concerning the builders, and the foundation and ſy. eb. 


- 
& » 


18 *Letno man deceive himſelf : 5 if any man x « p,... -: 


b 
* 


of the Apoſtles argumi'ni from h.nce, wiy they ſhould rat glory in men. 


Tit. 8.7. 
| Pet. 4. God b, 


Reafnand Philoſophical Principles, which agree not with the Di- 

vine Povelation, that io he may be truly and ſpiritually wiſe ; tru- 

I muderftanding, favouring and believing what God hath 1n his 

| revealed, and is atone? able to make the man of God wiſe to 

10n, tizourhly Firaiſked unto every good work. 

'or the wiidom of this world is foolithneſs with 

d 7: for ir 55 written, Ee taketh the wiſe in their 
v1 craitinefs 72. | 

God acconnreth that folly, which the World calleth wiſdom, 

and indeed it is fo (for God cannot err, nor be miſtaken 1n his 


ers of the Goſpel, they are but Miniffers, that is, gw... 

the honour, that is proper to their Maſter, for rs [1 a 
ency in the converſion and building up. of Souls, bo ffict. 
to them. They are Miniſters of Chrift, fo have their ca og 
tionto him, and only a ſecondary relation to the Church ws, = 
they are Miniſters; they are Miniſters of Chriſt, and in _ ic! 
nitration can only execute what are originally hi; co-- Mt. 
though thoſe commands of Chriſt may alſo be enforced Paigns 
Miniſters of the Goſpel, nor of the Law, upon wclins 1. Men, 
mary obligation to preach Chriſt and his Goſpel unto —_ 


*udgm:nr.) The Ph:loſophers and wife men of the Worid iy porter 
thavpineſs of man as their end, which indeed 1s the true end which | 
a!l men aim ar and do propound to themſelves, true wiſdom dt- 

-e&tcth the beſt means in order to the beſt end. Whatſoever di- : 
-2&2th not to the beſt end, or to whar is not the beſt mean n | 
order to that end, is not wiſdom, but real folly ; wordly wiſdom | 


- . L . 0 Ml 
\cither direterth to the beſt end, for it looks at no further wed 5. 16. The Myſtcrie of Chriſt, here, and Fph. 3.4, The 
0] 


pincſs than that of this life, nor yet to the be/? means, and there- 
tore is truly what God accounts it, fool:ihnels. m And ro ice the 
wile and learned men of the world thus ©» both in their judg- 
ment and practice, is r.0 wonder at all; for God is ſet out of 
old by El'p+#2z, as one that takoth the wiſe in their own craftineſs, 
tTob 5. 13. ; 

29 And again, The Lord knoweth the thoughts of 
the wiſe, that they are vain *. 

-.* And again it wasſaid by the Plalmiſt, Pſal. gg. 11. That the 
Lord bnoweth that the thoughts of man are vanity: man's counſels, 
imaginations, re :ſonings,they are all vanity ; they propoſeto them- 
ſ-Ives ends which they cannot attain, and purſue them by means 
art are inziFcacious with reference to their ends. 

2: Therefore let no man 8lory in men ”: for all 
things are yours 9 

» Szeins therefore that Chriſt is but one, his Miniſters but one, 
and nomore than Miniſters, by whom you believed, v. 5. and the 
p:incipal efficiency ofany ſaving work begun,or carried on in your 
Souls 70 any degree of perfeQtion, is from God and the Miniſters 
work in that efte& nothing, compared with his, ſeeing you are 
God's husbandry, God's building, not meerly man's, and the 7:m- 
pie of Goa, nor mens Temple ; leave your glorying in men, and 
ſaying, I am of Pax!, or I amof Ap9//os, glory only in this, that 
you are Chrit'©: beſides, o why do you glory in a particular Mi- 
niſter when all is yours, asif two joynt heirs in an Eſtate ſhould 
&! ry in this or that particular houſe or incloſure, when the whole 
Eftate is joynrly theirs, all theirs. 

22 Whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or the 
world, or life, or death, or things preſent, or things to 
come, all are yours. ; 

23 And *ye are Chrilt's, and Ghriſt x God's p. 

p Here are in theſe two verſes three things aſſerted : 1 72 
B. lievers Title to all things, 2. The ſpecialty of their Title. 3. The force 


He had faid before, 4! :hings are yours, which he repeats again, 
V. 22. They have a right and title to all things, and all things 
are fer their good, uſe, and advantage. Amongſt theſe he fiſt 


; God hath committed his Word and Sacram:n's to diſh: 


k - | .» 
i Call:mg of the Gentiles, Eph. 3. 44 The R-ſurref#/om from 5; 


6 They are alſo Stewards of the Myſteries of God, ſych tg whorg 
| on | : "IFP>ICC. Out un, 

to his Church. The word Myſtery ſignifies any thing that is (; ay 
but more ſpecially it fignifierh a Divin? Secret, repretenred h; -_ 
and figures; or a Religions Secret, not obvious ro every Wal 
city or underſtanding. Thus we read of the 1, fr:-; Fr 
Kingdom of Heaven, Matt. 13 11. The Myſter;; of Gid'in: { Thos 
q ' it 


Fe*fy 
3 uy 8 » 


f Goa, Col. 2.2. The Incarnation of Chri?, 1 Tim, 3, 1G Ti. 


r Cor. 15. 21, Chriſt's myſtical Union and Communion wi:; has W 
Eph. 5. 32. The ſublime Counſcls of God, 1 Cor. 13,2, ave al} (6 
led MyRſteries. Miniſters are the Stewards of rhe myſterigy; ph, 
&rines and Inſtitutions of Chriſt, which we uſually comn-ov.." 
, Mi Preacng 

under the terms of the Word ani Sacraments. 
2 Moreover, it is required of ſtewards, that a n; 


tound faichful c. 

c It is required of all Servants, but eſpecially of chief Sery 
ſuch as Stewards are, who are intruſted with their Mafters-goog; 
to be diſpenſed our ro others. The. faichfuineſs of a Steward j, 
diſpenſing out his Maſters goods, lies in his giving them oy: ., 
cording to his Maſters order,giving to every one their portion, rv" 
detaining any thing from others, which it is his Maſters willthz, 
ſhould have. ( As Pax] gloried, 47s 20. 20, 27. Thar he h;3 
kept back from the Epheſians nothing that was profitable for, my bg. 
ned to declare to them all the connſel of God, nit giving holy this 11 
aogs, or caſting pearls before [win?, contrary to Chriſt's direGign 
Matt. 7.6. 

3 But with me it is a very ſmall thing, that I ſhqg 
be judged of you, or of man's [judment : d yea, ] juz; 
not my own elf e. 
 d@ Thoſe who ſaid, 1 am of Apollos, and 7 am of Cephas, Gd x 
leaſt tacicly judge Parl, and preferr 4pollos and Cep/-ar before him: 
and it is probable, and will appear alſo from other parts of thoſ: 
Epiſtles, that they paſled very indecent cenſures concernins ?3:: 
he therefore tells them, that he valued very little what they 0: 
any other men faid of him. In the Greek it is of man'; dzy; butir 
is generally thought, that our Tranſlators have giveq us the true 
ſenſe, in tranſlating it man's judgmcnr, day being pur for judgment 
as Jer. 17.16, where woeful! day ſignifies woeful judgment, Sothe 
dy of the Lord in Scripture often ſignifieth the Lord's judgment: 
the reaſon of that form of ſpeech ſeems to be, becauſe perſonscited 
to a Court of Judgment uſe to be cited ro appear on a certain day, 
e Yea faith the Apoſtle, I pronounce no Sentence for my (:f ] 
leave my ſelf ro the Judgment of God. I may be deceived in my 


an he 


ants, 


reckons A7inifters, Every one ofthem might lay a claim to Pasl, 
to 4»0/los, to Peter; for they were all Servants of Chriſt for the 
viz: of his Chnzch, a part of which they were ;z then he goes on, 
and ſaith, :e world, that is, the things of the world are theirs, 
that is, whatſoever portion of them the Providence of God order- 
ly diſpoſed to them, they hi1 a true title to ir, and it was for 
their uſz and advan-age ; fo were the livesand deaths of God's Mi- 
niſters, their own live: and deaths, all things preſent, and all things 
that were to come, they were all theirs by a juſt ritle : if the 
Providence of Gd gave them to them in an orderly way, they 
migi;t comfortably uſe them. Thev themſelves were Chriſt's, they | 
were not of Paz/, nor of Ypo/los, nor of Peter, He that had the 

Bride was the Bridegrnom, theſe Miniſters were but the friends of 
che Bridegroom: and Ch-//? 7s Gag's, the Son of God by an eter- 

nal Generation, the ſervant of God as man, and born under the 

Law, fo yielding obedience to his Father, the M-fiah or anoint- 

ed, and fn: of God as Mediator, All things are Gods, by God 

given to Chriſt, by Chriſt given to, and ſanCified for you ; that 

makes the Believers ſp:cial rirls ro all things, The men of the world 

derive their title to what they have from God alone as Creator ; 
they derive not from Chriſt, as being ingrafred and implanted into 
bm. Hencethe Apoſtle rightly concludes their vanity, in glory- 
1ng 1n their Relation to this or that ſpecial Apoſtle or Miniſter ; 
when as they had a true and juſt right to the Jabours of all Mi- 
niſters, and ought ro look upon all faithful Miniſters , as God's 
gifts to his whole Church, and for the advantage and benefic of 
ail. Yer this hindereth not, but that people ought to have their 
particular Paſtor: and Teachers, ro whom they oughr ordinarily to 
attend intheir Miniſtry ; bur they oughr not to have their perſons 
in fuch admiration, as for them to deſpiſe or ſlight any other 
faichful Miniſters; nor to make Parties and Fa&tions in the Church 


of God. 

FE 4, »s [Law e x £ 3 p 

&limiſiers what" they are and ſhould be. 1, 2. the Fudgment of Men not 
much to be regarded, but what of God. 3—5. Miniſters and all Belie- 

#3 7. _y Pe! _ , . 
Vers enuft rave a modeſt Opinion of themſelves: For God's Gifts alone 
Make obs deans bi ant bick 7 ; 
make rhe aiffer:nce. 6, 7. The Corinthians high in their own Eſteem. 
CE 71 ES R 

8, TOE AN/ites, pectacles to the World, Augels, and, Men. 9—14. He 
was tir Syiritual Father in Chriſt ; Whom they ought to follow : he ſent 
Trmathy to \jzrm, and would come himſcf. 1 5—19g. Wherein the 
Kingdom: of Ghe conſiſts. 20. 


judgment concerning my ſelf, and therefore I wili affirm nothing 
as to my ſelf. 

4 For I know nothing by my ſelf, * yet aml not. 
hereby juſtified f: but he that judgeth me, is they, 
Lord g. | ' 

f Nothing amiſs, nothing that 4s evil ; yet this muſt not be Rt 
interpreted univerſally, as if St. Pau! knew nothing that was evil: 
and ſinful by himſelf: himſelf, Row. 7. tells us the contrary; 
but it muſt be underſtood with reſpe& to his diſcharge of his 
miniſterial Office. I do not know any thing wherein I have wil. 
fully failed in the diſcharge of my Miniſtry, yer even asto that 
durſt not ſtand upon my own Righteouſneſs and juſtification before 
God ; I may haveſinned ignorantly, or have forgotten ſom? things 
wherein .I did offend. g God knoweth more of me than I know 
of my ſelf, and it is he that judgeth, and muſt judge me. Though 
in this Text Pau! doth nor ſpeak of his whole life and cowerſation, 
but only of his converſition with reſp2& ro his Miriſtry ; ye! 
the concluſion from hence, That no man can be juſtified from 
his own works, 1s good: for if a man cannot be juſtified from his 
conſcience, not rebuking him for his errours in one part of |: 
converſation, he cannot be juſtified from his conſcience not rebu- 
king him for his whole converſation. For he that keepeth tie 
whole Law, if he offendeth bur in one point, muſt be guilry of all, 
becauſe the law curſeth him who continueth not in every paint 0 
the Law to do it. : 

5 Therelore * judge nothing before the time, until 
the Lord come h, who both will bring to light the hid- 
den things of darknefs, i and will make maniteſt che coun- 
ſels of the hearts &, and then ſhall every man bs 
* praiſe of God /. 

h Seeing that the judgment of ſecret things belongs to God, 
judge nothing before the. time which God hath fer to judge all 
things. The works of the fleſh are manif:ft, and men may judge 
of them ; but for ſecret things, of which it is impotlible that thoſe 
who do not know the hearts of men, ſhould make up 2 jucg" 
ment, do not judge of them before the time þ When God v1 
certainly come to judge all men. 7 Ifmen cloak the hidden things 
of darkneſs with the cover of hypocritie and fair pretences, they 
willat that day be moſt certainly uncovered,and the ſecret choughts 
counſels, and imaginationsof mens hearts ſhall ina that day Þ* - ' 
manifeſt, 7 And then thoſe that have done well, every of tif 


EF a main fo acccunt of us as *the miniſters of 


f. ; F bo . . 
s Tie Apoſtle here gives us the right notion of the Preach- 


Chriſt, a and * flewards of the myſteries of ſhall have praiſe of God ; as on the contrary, (which 15 under 


ſtood, though not here expreſſed) thoſe that are hypocrnns, 
whoſe hearts have beenfall of evil thoughts and counſis, ſhal 
God be put to ſhame, and expoſed to contemp*. 


5 And 


7 


2p We 


tx 
effict. 
th no 
/ rela. 
which 
Vat mi. 
mane 


Jo 
ail cak 
10u5 Ny. 


DPrennd 
Man he 


| Servant, 
2r$'goods, 
teward in 
N Out ac. . 
Orti9n, not 
S will thay 
af he had 
WW. my Pray. 
'f lame 


$ direttion 


I fhowg 
a, I judpz\ 
phas, Und at 
befors him; 
Its of thoſe? 
rning Pau: 
hat they or 
; day; butit 
us the true 
for judpmin, 
ent, y0th? 
$ judgment: 
perſonscited 
certain day, 
r my (elf, 1 
erved in my 
lirm nothing 


y am 1 not « 
me, 15 tte 1; 
I 

muſt not be Ro 

that was evil? 
he contrary ; 
charge of his 
1 | have wile 
en as to that 
fication before 
n ſome things 
e than ] know 
me. Though 
4 converſation, 
Mir:iſtry ; y* 
juſtified from 

tified from iis 
3e part of lits 
ence not rebil 
it keepeth tft 
be guilry of all, 
every pan G 


je tim, until | 
jghe the ud 
feſt the COun- 
ry man bY 


belongs to Got, 
ſer to juage 3 
men may Judge 
ofible rhat thoſe 
jake up 2 JÞcs: 
| When God vV 
he hidden th10g8 
pretences , they 
e ſecret thoughts 
hat day bz M7 
every of tle 
which 1s under 
hypocrites, 3 
ounſcls, ſhall 


5 Ar 


IV. IL CORITN 
; And theſe things, brethren, I have in a figure 
«-ansſerred © MY ſelf, and 79 Apollos for your lakes : 
1 that you might learn In Us 20t to think of wen above 
tar which 15 Written, 7 that none of you be puffed 
- for one againſt another o. 
gh py theſe words the Apoſtle lets us know, that though he had 


re Chap. 1. 12: that ſome of them ſaid, We are of Pazl, and 
100 nr f Artollo; yet the f ! and of Il 
oh.s We are Or poo; Y names Or Pay and Or Apoyo 


THIANS 

z Our ſtate in the world is low and mean ; though you ke full 
we are hungry and thirſty ; though you be richly clothed, yer w< 
are next to be naked, clothed with raggs ; though you be hugs 4 
and embraced by the men of the world, yet we are bu#fted ; thouat 
you have rich and famous houſes, yet we have no cer:aia dwe!lin:r 
place. Thusir bath been with us from the beginning of our pry. 
feſſion of Chriſt, and thus it is with us at this day (faith the 
Apoſtle) from whence he gives theſe Corinthians and their falls 
Teachers a juſt reaſon to ſuſpe& themſelves, whether they- were 


pa wr uſed to repreſent other of their Teachers; which were | true and lincere Proteſlors, yea or no, and to conſider how it cam- 


ve . 1 , 
te Heads of thoſe Faftions which were amongſt them. In very 


to paſs, that their lot in the world was fo different from the to: 


12d they were none of them thar faid, We are of Paul! or of | of thoſe whom the Lord had dignified with the Title and Offic- 


13 (for rhoſe that were the Diſciples of Par! and Appolls were 
"er raught) bur they had other Teachers amongſt them as to 
whom they made FaQions, whom Paul had a mind to reprove, 
with their Foliowers ; and to avoid all oarum, that both they and 
tm, hs makes uſe of his own name, and that of pollo's, and 
Ceaketh co the Hearers of theſe Teachers, as if they were his 
4.2 and Apollo's Diſciples. 1 hat thoſe whom the reproof and 
\monition concerned properly, might be reproved under the re- 
oof of others. » And that (as the Apoſtle ſaith) all the Church 
F Corinth, as well Miniſters as people, might learn to have hum. 
ble opinions and thoughts of themſelves, nor ro think of them. 
{:lves above what, by the rules of God's Word, written in the 
014 Teſtament, they ought to think; or above what he had be- 
fore writren 'n this Epiſtle, or to the Romans, Chap. 12. and 13. 
\ And none of them, whether Miniſters or private Chriſtians, 
niche be puffed up. The word ſignifieth to be ſwell'd or blown 
10 asa bladder or a pair of bellows, which is extended with wind : 
ris uſed "in this Chap. v. 18, 19. &8. 1. Col. 2.18. 

7 For who || maketh thee to differ from another ? 
/ and * what halt rhou that chou didft not receive ? 
1 now if chou didlt receive it, why doſt thou glory as 
'*? thou hadſt not received zt ? r, 

Ir is apparent that Pride was the reigning ſin of many in 
his Church of Corinth : Pride, 7 by reaſon of thoſe parts and gifts 
wherein they excelled, whether they were natural or acquired 
habits, or common gifts of the Spirit, which were infuſed; to a- 
hate this tumor, the Apoſtle minds them to conſider, whence they 
12d theſe gifts from whence they took occaſion fo to exalt and 
prefer themſelves. 4 Whether they were the Authorsof them to 
themſelves, or did receive them from God. + Ir became none 
of them to glory in what they had received from another, and 
were beholden to another for. Whartthe Apoſtle here ſpeaketh 
concerning natural or ſpiritual abilities, is applicable to all good 
things; and the conſideration here prompted, is a potent conlide- 
rtion to abate the pride and ſwelling of a man's heart upon any 
accounr whatſoever ; for there is nothing wherein a man dif. 
{xeth, or is diſtinguiſhed from another, or wherein he excelleth 
another, but it is given him from God, be it riches, honour, naty- 
al or ſoiritual gifts and abilities, they are all received from the 
oift of God, who gives man a power 70 get wealth, Deut. 8. 18, 
Win puttcth down one, and ſetteth up another, Pſal. 75.6. And as the 
Aroſtle faith in this Epiſtle, Chap. 12, 7. gives the manifeftatim 


of his Apoſtles. The condition of the moſt faithful and able M:;. 
niiters, and the moſt ſincere Chriſtians that have been in che wor! ; 
ath always been a mean and afflicted ſtate and condition. | 


labour with our hands, that we might not be butthenſome to the 9 


chough (as he ſaich) Chap. 9. 4. they had a power to eat a4 © 
drink, that is, a right to have demanded meatand drinkof them, 
and might have forbore working, v. 6. For wi geeth a warfare a; 
his own charge? Whence we may obſerve that though the Miniſters 
of Chriſt ought to be maintained by the Churches to which they 
relate, and they ſin, if they negle& it; yer where this either ls 
not done through mens ſinful negle& of them, or cannot be done 
through the poverty of the Members of ſuch Churches, ic is law - 
ful for themto labour with their hands. 5 Weare reviled and ſpo- 
ken ill of, but we do not revile others, bur ſpeak well of them, 
and wiſh well to them. c Though we be hunted and purſued to 
the endangering of our lives and liberties, yet we do make no re. 
ſiſtance, bur patiently ſuffer it. By this the Apoſtle ſheweth them 
the duty of Chriſtians, as well as their lot and portion in this ite, 
and alſo tacitly refle&eth on them and their Teachers, who were 
ſome of thoſe that thus reviled the Apoſtles; and though they 
did nor, it may be, ſmite them with their hands, yerthey perſeca- 
ted chem with their rongues, and leaves it to rheir confiderarion, 
whether the Apoſtles or they lived more up tothe Rule of Chi. 
ſtianity given by Chriſt, Marr. 5. 39, 40, 41. 


as the filth of the world, ard are the off {couring of*+ 

all things to this day f. 

d We are 6/aſph:med, Gr, that is, ſpoken evil of, which is th2 
ſame with defamed in our language, men ſpeak all mannec of * 
'evil of us to take away our reputation : but e we iatreat God for ** 
them. The word ſignitizrh to exhorr, intreat, comfort, we exercilc 
'Our ſelves in all pious and charitable offices toward them, who 
'are moſt uncharitable towards us. f Here aretwo words uſed, 

' which ſignifie the moſt vile, abje&, contemptible things in the 

' world, excrements, ſweepings of houſes. The Apoſtle by theſe 

| two words ſignifies, thar no perſons could bz more baſe, viſe, and 

' contemptible than they were, nothing more deſpiſed, or in lefs e- 

| ſteem : He ſpeaketh not this as complaining or in any diſcontent 

'at what he ſaw was the will of God concerning them ; but to 


of the Spirit to every one to profit withal, To one by the Spirit the | ſhew them the difference betwixt the Apoſtles, and them, and 


wodef wiſdom, to another the word of knowledge, to another faith, 
toanother 5he gift of healing, &c. all by the ſame Spirit. 

8 Now ye are full, now * ye are rich, s ye have 
reigned as Kings without us, # and I would to God ye 
dd reign, that we alſo might reign with you «. 

:You that are the Teachers at Corinth, or you that are the 
Mcmbers of the Church there, think your ſelves full of knowledge! 
and wiſdom, ſo as you ſtand in need of no further learning or | 
nftrudtion .c Ye think now you have got a Kingdom, and are ar. 
rived at the top of felicity : and, « I am fo far from envying 
you, that I wiſh it were ſo, and we might have a ſhare with 
you, The Apoſtle ſpeaketh this 1ronicaly, not that he indeed 
thought they were ſo, but reflefting upon their vain and too good 
[1 opinion of themſelves. 
| 9 For I think that God hath ſet forth || us the apo- 
lleslaſt * : as it were appointed to death w. For 

we are made a + ſpectacle unto the world, and co 
anpels,and to men x. 

w The lot of us who are the Apoſtles of Chriſt is not ſo exter- 
tally happy, but a lot of poverty and miſery, as if we were the 

Forit of men, men appointed to death. x To be a meer ſight or 
gaing-ſtock to the world, Angels or men. Some think that the 

poſtle here hath a reference to the barbarous praQtice of the 
mens, who firſt expoſed and carried about for a ſight thoſe per- 

nsthat were condemned to fight with wild beaſts, rhat by them 
ty might be torn in pieces. You are happy men, ſaith the Apo- 
ie, if you can own Chriſt, and profeſs Chriſtianity, and yer be 

A ſuch credit and favour with the world, ſo full, and fo rich, 

nd fo like Princes; we are thoſe whom God hath honoured to 

tis Apoſtles and the firſt Miniſters of the Goſpel, our lot and 
non 15 far otherwiſe. 

19 * We are fools for Chriſt's ſake, but ye are wiſe 

Uiriſt, * We are weak, but ye rc ſtrong : ye are 

Murable, but we are deſpiſed y. 


1 We are accounted fools for Chriſt's ſake by the wiſe men of 


their Teachers, and poſſibly refletting upon them, as being in 
ſome degree guilty of this ſcorn and contempt of rhem, or at leaſt 
more than they ought, negleCing them under theſe mean and af. 
flictive circumſtances. 


14 I write not theſe things to ſhame you, but * as" " Thell 
: *. 35. 


my beloved fons I warn you g. 

g I tell. you notof this to make you bluſh, as having had any 
hand in theſe indignities which are pur upon us, nor yet to ſha»? 
you (though potlibly you have reaſon to be aſhamed, eirher for your 
negle& of us,or for your adding to our affliction) I look upon you 
as my ſons, and ſons whom I love : I only write co warn you both 
of your duty, to have ſome reſpet for us, and of your ſin, if you 
have negleQed us beyond what was your duty to have done. 


I5 For though you have ten thouſand inſtrudters in 


Jeſus I have begotten you through the goſpel 7. IT, 


þ The great leſſon of this Text is, That people ought to have a G3): 4+ 19 
tender reſpe& for thoſe Miniſters whom God hath honoured with * 241: 


their firſt Converſion,and bringing them home ro Chritt. God may ; 


carry on his work in their ſouls to perfe&ion ; bur he maketh uſe 
of ſome particular Miniſter at firſt to convince them, and be an 
inſtrument in the changing of their hearts; ſuch a one chey ough: 
to have a great value for, they are their ſpiritual Fathers in a p:0- 
per ſenſe. 7 For, faith the Apoſtle, 7: Chrif# 7:jus I have begr-ter: 
you through the Goſpel : where we have Regenzration (as it ignthetl 
a new ſtate) ſetour in its cauſes. The principal ethcient Cault is 
Chriſt Feſus : the inſtrumental cauſe is the Miniſt:y of the Goſpel : the 
mean is the DoFrinz of the Goſpel, or the preaching of the Goſps]. 
In Chriſt Jeſus ſignifieth here by the grace of Chriſt Jeſus, thote 
who are born again, are not born of feſh or of 402d, bur of the 
willof God, Joh. 1. 13- and by the influence of Chriſt upon thei. 
hearts, though God makes uſe of the Miniſter of the Goſpel as 
his inſtrument, and the Miniſter makes uſe of the 1rd and tiz 
preaching of the Goſpel, as the ſacred mean which God hath ap- 
pointed to that end, 1 Pet. 1. 23. All theſe cauſes unite and cor:- 


* world, and we are willing to be ſo accounted, but you think | cyr in the work of Regeneration. 


it ſelves wiſe, and yet in Chriſt. We are weak in the opinion 
Mn, we ſuffer evil, and do not r2ſiſt ; but you account your 
\%, and are by the world accounted ſtrong ; you are accounted 
| and honourable, but we are deſpiſed and contemprible. 

I * Even unto this preſent hour we both hunger 
thirſt, and are naked, and * are buffeted, and have 
Kan dwelling place &. 


k T might as a Father command you, but I beſcech you be ze 
followers of me in preſerving the unity, and promoving the hol:. 
neſs of the Church : Chap. 11. 1. he expounds tis, Be ye fol/ow- 
ers of me, as I am of Chriſt. Holineſs of lite and converſation is ne- 
ceflary to a tzus Miniſter of Chriſt ; for their peopl: 0:1ght not on - 


L 


{Aaaaa] 17 


Chap. IV. 


| id y and] I2 * And labour, working, with our hands, : a Beino * AQs 12 
heir t-2rers might take no offence at his free reproving of reviled, we bleſs ; b being perſecuted, we {iffter it c, we | = 
a We do not only labour in the Word and Do&rine, but we * T9 2. 


. . . . A ! F E — 
Church, our hands miniſtring to our neceſſities, 4#:; 20. 34. 2 Ti ] 2, 


13 * Being delamed 4, we intreat e : * We are made * Mat 
KOM, 12. 


It. 
” Lu. + 


Chriſt, yet have ye not many fathers 5 : for * in Chriſt * AQs 18. 


I 
make uſe of a multitude of miniſters to inſtruct Chriſtians, ang Jam 1-16 


16 Wherefore |1 beſeech you *, be ye followers of* 2 Tir 
me k, 3-9 


#42 2 


o 
Chap. V. | CORINTHIANS. = 
. . . *M4 
Iv to be their Hearers, but their Follower, they are enſamples 'o the perſon with ſome near relation, as a mot/cr, a ſiſter : in ſtr] 

Fiek 1 Per. 5. 3- and ought to be examples of Believers 1n word, | 198 = fin here tories on was Inceſt ; bur the Scciprare je 

Gn corver/22ion, in charity, in ſpirit, in faith, in purity, 3 Tim. 4. 12.| WOT comprehends all ſpccies of unlawful Mixtures. & This fin b. 

In all things ſhewing themſclues patterns of good works , in doFrine ſhew- po ee 299 by Taying, —_— Geariles by the light of Nature gip 
ing incorruptneſs, gravity, ſmeerity, &c. Tit. 2. 7. Thoſe who teach wt c = eclined ſuc —_ abomination ; by whomis not ty be 
4}, and five it), are no good Miniſters of Chriſt, they cannot = + = _ more —_— part, butthe more civilizeg ator 
lay unto people, Be ze followers of Me. x = . _ _ _ nt - 10 phe were. c By having bu Þ; 
3, For ths cauſe have I ene unto you Timothens | rs ws in this plceis no co be unterſod, che mai 
£1 a * who 15 my beloved ſon; and fairhful in the Lord », wife, as his wife, while his father was yet alive (42 cs faber 
2. wins the bring you into remembrance of my WAays| cious Interpreters think) becauſe hardly any Nation would > 
Ve 


which be in Chrilt », as I teach every where in eve-| endured a ſon openly ro have married the widow of his fy 
And in 2 Cor. 7. 12. there is mention made not only of "a: * 
at 


ry church 0. rh Songs eee: 
—_ ; d ſuffered the wrong ; whi 
! This Timeby, Paul found at Lyra, 7s 16.:1. His Father| TOM" me, OT Ty IO 0 8 3 Which latter m 
was a Greck, bis Mother a Teweſs, - (hu Paul circumciſed him ; — -— himielf, ſo as there was both Inceſt and Whore 
her name was Eunice, the Daughter of Lo, 2 Tim. 1. 5. Paultook 1n TS Tat. 
2 And ye are puffed up 4, and have not rather 


him along with him in his Travels,he was ordained by the impolt- 
tion of the hands of the Presbytery, 1 Tim. 4. 14. 2 7im. 1, 6. mourned, that he that hath done this deed, might he 


» Paul calls him his beloved 4; omar noma Py _ -_ Gs taken away from you e. 
al Son, or becauſe he was im 1nitru in the Goſpel : he q : 
calls him his ewn Son in the Geith, 1 Tim. 1. 2. Faithful in the Lord, Ps. _ Sas ſo — od | =—w acoenl amen and gifts, and 
becauſe he was {zithful in the work of the Lord, in the Buſineſs|, - re # erate cn = racer Miniſters, and 
of the Miniſtry. » He (faith the Apoſtle) hall bring; ro your remems| (pn os = *i rye AR oy => intereſt of th, 
brance my wajs in the Lord, he ſhall acquaint you both what Do-|(4;. Gan rar, ob ongoing th of Ch ” cuure to deal with 
Erine I have preached, and what courſe of life I have lived. | Tp; cu _ hos reaſon of thei rilt ought to have done, 
o How I have preached ro every Church, what rules I have g1- rejoicing dchelaniey, hs had acer the Coſt) Farm an 
4r ngts phony. had wh Church, and how I have walked elchentoocagncl ms which the "Pool yp h_—_ 
. triumphed in this inceſtuous perſon, being one of thei: 'T...; 
13 Now ſome are puffed up, as though-I would not| (which can. hardly be awe, ) ” They onghe mh. Tcke 
come unto You p- mourned, keeping times of Faſting and Prayer on the behalf o 
p I hear that ſome of your Teachers, and ſome of your Mem. this ſcandalous Member amongſt them, thar his fin might / 
bers, are ſo conceited of themſelves, that they would perſuade ' his due ſenſe of it, and repentance for it) have been forgiven [f by 
you, that I durſt nor ſee their faces, or come to diſcourſe with | and the blot upon their Church, by their having ſuch + pa 
them face ro face, and therefore would not come unto you. their fellowſhip, mighr be waſhed out,and by his being caſt ow of 
19 * But I will come to you ſhortly "Sus if the Lord theirfellowſhip and communion. It was no time for them to plo. 
Sq 'will, and will know, not the ſpeech of them chat are [7 2 their gifts, and be puffed up with the parts of thiir 7:ae, 
* Atts 18. puffed up, but the power r. Me = —_ when they _ _ ——— jar them by zpurid 
27, g Paul intended in his journey to Rome to paſsthrough Maceds- —_ ag a = fun - reat deal more 
Rom. 15. nia and Achaia,but he knew that God could hinder him, and there- q : P j BOY Ng. 
32. fore he adds, if God will; neither did Pax! go to them ſoſoon as '3 For I verily as abſent in body » but preſent Ins 
Jam.4.15. he intended; bur had time before he went ro write another Epi- |Ipirit f, have || judged- already, as though I wer 
{He, as we ſhall afterwards find. All Chriſtians are bound when | prefent concerning him that hath fo done ti 
they promiſe or reſolve upon any journeys, to underſtand, If Got | qe n 
will, and to have in their thoughts the power of God co hinder | - f Th oak L be abſ; bodil c " 
them, and to ſpeak with ſubmiſſion to his pleaſure who counteth A" \ r Yi þ = as to meh oauy 9" ence, yet God having 
their ſteps, and telleth their wandrings, and ordereth their ſteps, i, Þ TT IO y prepoam _ - - _ his Church 
though they be not ſtritly bound at all times to uſe thisform of you = Ren Rong os ok _ OE Ch wy = for 
ſpeech. » And when I come, Then I ſhall underſtand theſe Teach- O41, 1G Lhich God hath repoſed in me. 1 d dns, 


£xs of yours, who ſo vilifie me, I ſhall not regard ſo much their ',_- = , 
J , , 8 mine, and have determined as much as if I were preſent amongſd 


are ſp 


—_ -1 ; hat there 1 THEUs 
ſine wordsand Philoſophical reaſonings, as what there is of ſpiritu you, what ought to be done by you concerning this perſon ſp 


a! life and power in them, either in their DoQrine or life, how . 
_— 7 , h . notoriouſly ſcandalous, 


conducive it is to the ends of the Goſpel, and how conſonant to | : 
the truth of rhe Goſpel, what good they do amongſt you, what! #4 In the Name of our Lord Jeſus Chriſt b, when 


manner of lives they ive: theſcare the things that my eyes ſhall ye are gathered together, and my ſpirit z, with * the 
be upon, and which I ſhall regard. : power of our Lord Jeſus Chriſt &. 

* Chap. 2. 20 For * the kingdom of God z not 1n word, but h Either, having ſolemnly called uponthe Name of the Lordſeſus 
7) NOWEer 7, Chriſt for his council and dire&ion, or bleſling your ation, thatit 


4+ p 

7 Thell. «The Kiagdom of God in the Church, or the Kingdom of God may be of ſpiritual advantage to the party concerned, or accord. 

2 I in the particular Soul. God hathnot ſent his Miniſters to ſubdue 17g to the-command of Chriſt, or by his Authority, or forhisglo. 
Souls to himſelf by fineflprid words and phraſes, but by a lively TY- It may be referred either to what went before, I have judged 
preachingthe Goſpel, whiles his power attends their plain preach- or determined by the Authority of Chriſt ; or fo what followsaf. 
ing, and the power and efficacy of the Preacher's Dofrine ap- ter : 7 When you ace gathered together oy the Authoriry, or «- 
peareth in their holy life and converſation, ſo as their people can- cording to the Inſtitution of Jeſus Chrilt, and my ſpirit with, 
not fay to them, Phy/ician heal thy ſelf, as to thoſe ſpiritual diſeaſes You having my judgment in the caſe, k and the Power and Authori 
which thou wouldſtcure us of. So the Kingdom of God in parti- fy of Chriſt committed ro me and to you as a Church of Chriſt 
_ _ _ 4g ye in _ bur rs _ "_ the' 5 To deliver ſuch a one unto Satan / for the deſtry 
word of God hath upon mens hearts, in ſubduing their luſfts and ,@; ' -— . ' 
corruptions,and bringing their hearts into a ſabje&tion to his Will, ction of the fleſh, that the ſpirit may be faredin 

day of the Lord Jeſus m. 


> Cor 21 What will ye? * ſhall I come unto you with a | 
2 COT. | I What this delivering to Satan is (of which alſo we read, 17in. 


10. 2. & Tod, or in love, and #» the ſpirit of meekneis ? 7. - 
13. 10, : Which will ye rather chuſc ow I ſhould come unto you as! *: 29) is ſomething doubred by Interpreters. Thar nn 
2 father cometh to his child under ſome guilt for which he muſt: derſtood Excommunicetien, or caſting out of thc _— 
puniſh and corre& him, or as a father cometh to his chiid that | *2e Church, can hardly be doubred by any that confi = ohe 
hath done nothing provoking his diſpleaſure, in love and meekly ? = Apoſtle ſpeaketh of an Attion which migh: mer Wh 
I am not willing to come to you to correQ and punith any of you ' ave been done by the Church of Gorinth m_ 4. = h 
by Eccleſiaſtical cenfures which area rod which Chriſt hath be. ther, and for the not d oing of whichche Apoſtle : "the nd 
truſted to me;lI had rather come in love and meeknc(s, that we 2. That the end of the ation was, v. 2. takin 5 —_ ym 
might mutually rejoice in each others ſociety. lous perſon from amongſt them, v. 7. Purging ou: ren 
that they might become @ new lump. 3. It was a puniſhment infiGia1 
CHAP. V. any. Thoſe therefore who interpret the phraſe of an extramuin 
| | Power given the Apoſtles or Primitive Churches, miraculoully | 
The Corinthians had more Cauſe to humble than to lift up themſelves,| give up the ſcandalous perſon to the power of the Devil to 
becauſe of the defe s in their Church : and firſt, their ſuffering in- | afflicted, tormented, or vexed by him (though nor unto oath 
ceft among them; and exhorts them to caſt ous the inceſtuous Perſen, [ſeem not to have conſidered, that the Apoltle would not hai 
and deliver him over to Satan I--=-5. as the old leaven was to be | blamed the Church of Corinth for not working a Miracle, andtni 
purged out, 6---=8. who are the Objefts of this diſcipline; and what | we no where read of any ſuch Power committed to any Churcho 
our anty towards others without. g=oo=I 3 Chriſt, and one would in reaſon think, that povſons _ _ 
T2; ; - ..,*.. \cumſtances ſhould rather be piticd and helped, than 
1 F T' 4s commonly + 2-004" wr there xs fornication | pr es # econ ts 4 Why the apo 
2 among you, and ſuch fornication as 1s not 10|<,,.eferh gxcommunicatios under the notion of being delve 
*[ey. 18 Much 25 nained among the Gentiles 5, * that one|$arav. Some have thought that the reaſon is, becauſe God wa 
8s  "iuld have his fathers wife c. pleaſed to ratifie the juſt Cenſures of his Church ; cnn 
» The Apoſtle here giveth a reaſon of the Queſtion which he| perſons as were caſt our of it iato the hands of Saran 0 _ 
propoundcd in the former Chapter, Whether they would be wil. | and tormented by him, and that this might be in gn 
ling that when hecame to them, he ſhould come unto them with a | caſes, none candeny, bur that this was an ordinary & b trerP « 
rod? Lecofe ſuch horrid wickedneſs was committed amongſt | Providence as to all excommunicated perſons, wants roba 
them, as he being an Apoſtle ro whom Chrift had intruſted the |than any have yer ſhewed us. Ir appears to me 8 more P 


. . * . « . ; $ 
Government of his Church) could nor paſs over without core&ion ; |account of this phraſe which others have given Us, wil —_ n 
heinftanceth here in one, which he calleth Fornication ; by which | Stan 1s call d the God of F:t 


of the Wirld, and the Prince © axed 
word is often in Scripture to be underſtood, all ſpecies of wnclean- World is taken in oppoſition to the Church of Ik I 1a bed 
w:{s, though in ſhj& ſpeaking we by fornica/ion underſtand the un- ing to Satan, is no nore than our Saviours If he neg, 
eleanfot a perſon married, and by Inceſt the uncleannefs of a th; Church, ti? lim be #0 thee as an Wenthen 994% all 


Deut. 2:5, 
aT&. 


' a Ph {;6410 
ED Qal 


Uh, 1, V. 


peak. 
by this 
$ fin he 
Ire di. 
N 0 be 
| partof 
Pg Fa. 
J1Ng kis 
| father 
1 Judi. 
Wd harg 
IS father, 
© oe tha; 
fter my 
Yoke 


| Tather 
Weht be 


and are 
ſers, and 
relt of the 

) deal with 
have dong, 
» than any 
I hadopen, 
d ſhut, or 
ir Teachers 
Ver to have 
ie behalf of 
wight (upon 
rgiwen him, 
CH 2 Ons in 
Caſt out of 
them to gle. 
heir Teachers 
\ by apurcid 
at deal more 


preſent ins 
h 1 were, 
done this 

ta 


t God having 
r his Church 
h I have for 
| in diſcharge 
7 | do deter. 
eſent amongſ) 
this perſon (0 


iſt b, when 
, With *the 


the LordJeſus 
aCtion, thatit 
ned, or accord. 
7, or for hisglo- 
I have judged 
vhat followsab- 
uthority, 0r iG+ 
y ſpirit with J 
er and Authott 


ch of Chriſt, 
or the deſi 
» ſaved in the 


3 We read, 17in, 
hat by it 151000 
» Communion 0% 
onfidereth, That 
be, and ought 
x they met (0p! 
e blamerh then 
away the {can 
ou; the old lean 
;ſhment infis 
an extract 
miraculouny & 
the Devil (0 | 
, not unto daat 
- would not bu 
Miracle,andtht 
to any Churcho 
$under ſuch ci 
1, than fun 
Why the 4 
being 44 viredl 
cauſe God 93) 


telling 5, 
4 the War 4 
rod ; fo a5 dV 
he neglif job 
n and 8 Pubs 


Qal 


| this phraſe 9% 


LCORIN 


Oaly for the further terror of it, the Apoſtle expreſſeth "7 by 


. ſh 
dreadful a 119g 


« from the 0rdin2ry means of Grace and Salvation, and expoſed 
our from 


to the 


fri e Communion ofit, The end of Excommun;cation 1s not for 
*e deſtry&i0N of the perſon of him who is caſt our, but for the 
— his fleſh, that is, his Juſts, which are often in Scrip- 
tare calied fleſh ; or the maceration and affliction of his body 
through griefand ſorrow ; for a derermination of his fleſhly Being 
cannot be here underſtood by the deſtruftion of bis fleſh, for that 1s 
Excommunication, and thoſe who interpret the delive- 


d:ſiruion of 


effect of : : : 
a re Saran, Of an extraordinary puniſhment, which the Apoſtle 


& Church in rhe 


| 2 nor 
to rerminaty, , 


alleets and 
than this Text dhor. 


know, that is to be done by the Church, when gathered #ogether, 
chough the Elders of the Church may pur rhe Church upon 1t, and 
decree it, yer the conſent and approbation of che whole Church 
muſt be to it 3 and indeed it 1s vain for the - Officers of a 
Church ro caſt any out of a Communion, when the Members 
of thr Communion will yer have Communion with him, or 
them ſo caſt out. Ir alſo Jets us know , that ir 1s a Cenſure 
which menare not ſhut of the fellowſhip of men as men, but 
Men as Chriſtians, as a Church of Chriſt 1a fuch religious 
\tions and duties as concern them, conſidered as ſuch a body. 
Exmmunication doth not make it unlawful for perſons to buy 
and ſell with the perſons excommunicated, but to ear. and drink 
atthe Lord's Table with them, or have Communion with them in 
afts proper to 2 Church as the Church of Chriſt. The excommu- 
ricared perſon is in ſomething a better condition than a Heathen; 


by 
of 


for he is not to be counted as an enzmy, but admoniſh:d as a brother, 
2Theff: 3. 15. Fleathens alſo may hear the Word, he is only to be 
avoided in a&ts of Church-fellowſhip : and as to intimate Communion, 
though it be not religious, as appearech from this Chapter, v. 11. 
andfrom 2 Th:f 3. 14. Further, we are taught from hence, thar 
zone ought to be excommunicated but for notorious ſcandalous ſins 
x without a ſolemn invocation on the Name of Chriſt, inquiring 
his will in the caſe. We are further taught, That the perſon thar 
isduly excommunicated, is in a miſerable ſtate, he 1s delivered up 
co Satan, caſt ont of God's ſpecial prote&tion, which 1s peculiar ro 
kisChurch, and oftentimes expoſed to formidable temptations, Fi. 
rally, we are from this Text inſtru&ted, That Excommunication 
oupht to be ſo adminiſtred, as may beſt tend to the ſaving of the Sou) 
fhiothat falls under that Cenſure : mensend in Excommunications 
hould not bethe ruine of perſons in their healthsor eſtates, only the 
tunblingof them, and bringing them to a ſenſe of their ſias, and a 
ue repentance ; and all means in order to that end ſhould be uſed 
en toſuch as are caſt out of any Church, ſuch are repeated ad- 
jonitions, the Prayers of the Church for them, &. 
6 * Your glorying « not good *.* : Know ye not that 
alittle leaven leaveneth the whole lump 2? =, 
'' You boaſt and glory, becauſe you have men of parts amongſt 
0,perons whom the world count wiſe; your glorying is not good; 
tar do you glory for, when you have ſuch a ſcandalous perſon a- 
neſt you, and take no careto caſt him out? » Can you be ignorant, 
Rat as a Jirtle leaven taken into the midſt of che meal, and there 
ht, preſently ſowereth the whole maſs, and leavenerh the whole 
Imp: So one notorious ſcandalous ſinner, detained in the boſom 
12 Church, caſts a blot upon the whole Church. 
7 Purge out therefore the old leaven o, that you may 
2 2 new lump p, as ye are unleavened 9. For ever 
Chriſt our paſſeover || is ſacrificed for us 7. 
+ If the Article 7lw in this place be Emphatical ( as ſome 
in) it ought to have been tranſlated this old leaven, that is, the 
ftuous perſon, whoſe Communion with you influences your 
ole Communion, ' which is defiled by it, through your Churches 
left of their dury with reference tro him. Jf the Article be 
tobe taken Emphatically, theſe words may be underſtood as ſpo- 
to every individual Member of this Church, and is no more 
in put off the old 91an ; the luſt: and corruptions of our hearts, as 
ll falſe Do&rine, being compared to leaven, which influence 
t whole man, as leaven doth the whole maſs of meal. The 
( ſeemeth to be moſt proper to this place, if we conſider 
Ut went before, and thar the Apoſtle is ſpeaking to the whole 
rch, and had been before ſpeaking of an A to be done by 
m, not ſingly, but when they ſhould be gathered together in a 
a1 aſſembly, theſe he commands to purge out the old leaven, 
1, this inceſiuous perſon, p that they might be truly a Chri- 
n Church, reformed from ſuch things as no way agreed with 
Doftrine and profeſſion of the Goſpe). - q As you are or ſhould 
Unleavened, like the Jews, who at the Paſſover kept the Feaſt 
lleavened bread, when for ſeven days together they might have 
avened bread in any of their houſes, Levir. 23.6. r For tho' 
beaſt of the Jewiſh Paſſover be ceaſed, and you be tyed tonone 
ſe Levitical obſervations, yet you are under as high an obli-/ 
«n; for Chriſt, wh is the true Paſchal Lamb, is {lain or ſacri- 
el for us, and your old man ſhould be crucified with him, and 
09 longer ſerve ſin. | 


crefore * let us keep the || feaſt 5s, not with 
l leaven, neither with the leaven of malice and' 
ciedne6, but with the unleavened bread of ſince- 
and truth *. 


delivering tp to $4: an, thereby letting us know, how 
18 ic is to be our of God's ſpecial procetion, and ſhur 


recprations of our grand Adverſary, the Devil, whichis 
he fare of all thoſe who are out of the Church, eicher having ne- 
— een Members of it, or according to the rules of Chriſt caſt out 


Primitive Times had a power to inflict, make it 
in the death, but in the torments only of the 
the Apoſtle mention2th this puniſh- 
ment a5 a Means tO the eternal Salvation of this perſon's Soul in the 
day of Chrift. There isno Text in Scripture which more clearly 
opzns the Ordinance and nature of Excommunication, 
As to thoſe who areto infliftit, it lets us| ,,; 


| fore pur away from among your ſelves that wicked p2s- x. 


THIANS. Chap. V. | n4 9: 


bread for ſeven days. As the Paſſer prefigured Chriſt, who is | 
[os Paſchal Lamb,whoſe fleſh we eat, —_ whoſ: blood _ hrinkby T 34 
believing, and Sacramentally in the Lord's Supper ; fo the Jewiſh ' 
ſubſequent Feaſt of Unleavened bread prefigured all the days of a 3th 
Chriſtians Life, which are to be ſpeat, £ not with the old 1:20; | i \ 
my the leawen of malice and wicksaneſs, but with the unleavened breas If | 
of ſincerity and truth : which may be either underſtood of thoſe i | 
eviland good habirs which they fignifie, and let us to know the ih 9 
duty of every particular Chriſtian, to take heed 
wickedneſs, or elſe (which ſeemeth moſt proper to this place) the f 
abſtra& is put for the concrete, malice and wickednsſ; for wicked and 
malicious men, and ſincerity and truth for perſons that are true and ) 
lincere. So that we are from hence taughr, borh the dury of eve- 4 
ry particular Chriſtian, conſidering that Chriſt hath died as a Sa- 
$|crifice for his lin, to live up to the rule which he hath given us ; 
abhorring malice and all wickedneſs, and afting truth and fince- F 
rity, and alſo the duty of every true Church of Chriſt, to keep _f 
cheir Communion pure from the ſociety of wicked and malicious "RY 
men, and made up of men of truth and ſincerity. The latter ſce- WP 4 
meth to be principally intended. | 
9 I wrote unto you in an epiltle *, not to company * 2 Cor.s, 
with fornicators «. . 
# It ſhould ſeem that Pax! had wrote ſo in ſome former Epiſtle ©? b.5.11. 
which he had directed tothis Church, which is loſt ; for we muſt ? ; 
think that Pau! wrote more Epiſtles to the ſeveral Churches, than 3: 7+: 
thoſe lefr us upon Record in hoÞpWric (yer fo, as not to under-. See ver. 2. : 
mine the perfeC&tion of the Holy Scriptures, )By Fornicators are meant 7* f 
any ſorts of unclean perſons known rothem; and the keeping com- : 
pany with them, whichthe Apoſtle had prohibited to the Corinthians, 
was not a meer fellowſhip with them in their works of darkneſs, 
but any intimacy of communion with any ſuch perſons. 
10 Yet not altogether with the fornicators of this 
world w, or with the covetous, or extortioners, of 


with idolators x: for then muſt ye needs go our of 
the world y. | 


w I did not intend that admonition as to ſach perſons as were 
no Chriſtians, no members of the Church. (So this rerm world is 
uſed, Joh. 15.19. & 17.14. and fo it is to be interpreted here) 
x he extendeth this admonition to other ſcandalous ſinners, ſuch as Lp 
coverous perſons, by which he underſtandeth ſuch as by any open 

and ſcandalous atts diſcover their too great love of money, whe. Wei. 
ther by oppreſſion,or by cheating and defrauding,o&c.or Exrortioners, 
ſuch as exa&t more than their due;or with. /dolaters by which he un« 

derſtanderh ſuch as worſhipped Jmeges, and under theſe ſew ſpecies 

of ſcandalous ſinners here mentioned, the Apoſtle underſtands al] 

others alike ſcandalous. » For (faith he) you could have no com. 

merce not trading with men in the world, if you might keep L; 
no company with ſuch as theſe. Which is true at this day, | 
when the world is much more Chriſtianized, than it was at that 

time. 

1: But now I have written unto you, not to kee 

company *. it any man that is called a brother be a for- * Mar. :8. 
nicator, or covetous, or an idolater, or a railer, or a 17. 
drunkard, or an extortioner, with fuch a one no not Rom 16: 
oO cat SL, of PRE 
z Of late there have been ſome diſputes what eating is here *9® RY "HF 
intended, whether at the Lord's Table, or at our common Tables. In. ' why” 
timacy of communion,is that which undoubtedly is here ſignified 

by Eating ; and the Apoſtles meaning is, that the Member of this 

Church ſhould forbear any unneceſlary fellowſhip and communion 

with any perſonthat went under the name of Chriftians, and yer 

indulged themſelves in any notorious and ſcandalous courſes of | 
life ; of which he reckoneth up ſeveral forts. 1. Unclean perſons A 5k 
noted for any kind of uncleanneſs. 2 Covetows perſons, by which he 

underſtands all ſuch as our of their too great love of money, either 

ſcandalonſly ſought to add to their heap, or to detain what was F: 
others juſt due. 3. dolaters, by which heunderſtands ſuch as our | $f 
of fear, or to gain favour with the Heathen amongſt whom they | 
lived, would frequent and perform Divine Worſhip in the Idols 

Temple. 4 Railers, ſuch as uſed their tongues intemperately and 

ſcandalouſly to the prejudice of others reputation: 5. Drunkaras, 

under which notion he comprehends all ſuch as drank hot liquors F 
intemperately, whether they had ſuch an effe& upon chem, as to I. 
deprive them of the uſe of their reaſon orno. ' 6. Extortioners, wiz. | 
ſuch as being in any place exatted more than was their due of | 
thoſe that were under their power. But yet by this interpretation | 

che argument is not loſt againſt Eating with ſuch at the Table of | 4 
the Lord, which is no mere neceſſary Communion with them, $510 
than civil Eating i ; for neither hath God ſpread that Table for | bi 
any ſuch, neither ought any Church to endure any ſuch perſons in 

its Communion : nor are any Chriſtians bound for ever to abide 

in the Communion of that Church, which ſhall wilfully negle& the 

purging out of ſuch old leaven. ' Admitring this precept prohibi- irik 
tive of a civil intimacy with ſcandalous perſons,though they be cal- 

led Brethren, it holds 4 for:iori, as a ſtrongerargument againſt Re. 

ligious Communion with ſuch in Ordinances, to whichapparently 

they have no proximate right. 

12 For what have 1 todo tojudge * them alſs that are* ynzt. 4. 

without ? 2 donot ye judge thoſe that are within? 6 17. | 

4 My Jurifdition extendeth not to Heathens,God hath berruſted Col. 4. 4. - 134 

to me not the Government of the World, but rhe Government of 1 Thi. 
his Church. 6 Nor would I have you concern your felves further, 4- 12. _ 
than in judging your own Members, thoſe that are within the pale 1 T 111. x F 
of your Church, and who by a voluntary joyning with you bave 7: | 
given you 2 power over them. 


13 But them that are without, God judgeth c * There: « 1p... 


of any malice cr 


ET ade. 


yy, * 
\ 

. >> 
_ 


ſon dl - SS. 


4 lre is 2 manifeſt alluſion to the Feaſt of the Jewiſh Paſſover, 
#3 immediately followed with the Feaſt of Unteavened 


21,27, 5+ th 
c For Heathens that live brutyh and fand:fous lives. God 3+ | THOoes 
Axzaaa 2] will - 


* - 
4 "% gr 974 _— as _ 
"I. ZI ants Ip Pater — <— 
— —qght _ DIES — = 
4 = Pas as »P 4 


WL 


wats 
ons <—_ _ 
my mmm theater Dera eros >a 
ap mb "C2 10,2005 c—_ 4 wh - ——_ = 
= 6% _ 
ow «<L oof NG s 
F "vw . 
_ 


Chap. VI. 


L CORINTHIANS 
will judge them, the Church hath nothing to Jo with them, they |vils, whom the Saints ſhall judgeat the lat g, 
never gave up themſelves to them, and are only under the Juſtice Y, 2 


Cha 


the Judge of the whole Earth in the Sentence, wi71* "8 Vich 


of God in the adminiſtrations of his Providence. 4 Do you there-| give againſt the evil Angels, confining them to the Wow Ul then 


fore what belongs to you todo. Thisinceſtuous perſons beſides his| who while this World laſteth, have a greater liberr 
ſubj<&ion to God's Judgment, who is the Judge of all, whether Air, to rove abroad in the Air, and to work wigha Ws Prince of thy 
wichin or without the Church, is ſubje&ed alſo ro your Judica- |dren of diſobedience. Others underſtand the judgi 
ture. Therefore uſe that power which God hath given you, and mentioned, of the ſpoiling of the Devils of the Ky 
put away from amongſt you that evil perſon. The concluſion | exerciſe in the World, (in the places where the Go 
ofthis diſcourſe helps us clearly to underſtand thoſe former pre- | prevailed) by lying Oracles, wt 

cepts, v. 7. Purge out the old leaven, and wv. 8. Let us keep the Feaſt | the worſhipping of Devils ; in which ſenſe Chriſt faid 

not with the old leawven, that they are not ſo properly to be interpre-| Prince of chzs world be caſt out, Joh. 12.31. e From hen at 
ted of particular Chriſtians purging out their luſts and corrup- ſtle argues the competency of their Brethren to judge = tne Apo. 
tions, (theugh- that be every good Chriſtians duty) as of every |rermine thoſe little matters which were in difference het and toge. 
Chriſtian Churches duty to purge themſelves of flagirious and | being bur things concerning this life, and of far lef ; 


{ſcandalous perſons. 


= 


CHAP. VI. 


More Sins of the Corinthians : going to Love with Brethren : before this life f, ſetthem to judge who are leaſt elteemeg ; 
unbelievers : Saints ſhall judge Angels and Men, how much more the Church g. & in 
wordly Matters : 1—— 6. Being defeFive in Love, Forbearance, and F That is, if you have any cauſe of ſuing, or 
Fuſtice ; and yet the Unrighteous, &Cc. ſhall not inherit the Kingdom | nother for things thar pertain to his life, be ; th 
of Heaven. Such they had been, but were mot ſo now. 7J—11. Am-|they will, g rather commit the umpirage and determ: 
ther of their Sins, Scandal. 12. alſo Fornication : che Body i for | ſuch little differences to the meaneſt Members of "_ 
the Lord : ſhall be raiſed, is a Member of Chr ift . muſt ror there- go to contend before Pagans and Infidels : or do 61 imp! 
fore be joined to an Hark. 13——17. Fornication 1s a Sin. againſt | Teachers about them, who have higher work to be _ o Your 
the Body : whith #s the Temyl## of the Holy Ghoſt : not our own : | hyt amploy thoſe who are of a lower order in the G mM 
kus bought with a Price: with our Bodies and Spirits we muſt glo-| whoſe buſineſs and concerns lie in ſecular Affairs. utch, 


2 afre God 18 ——20. 


I Are any of you having a matter againſt another, |a wiſe man among you? not one that ſhall be 
D go to law before the unjuſt, and not before judge between his brethren. Wl 


the Saints ? 4. 


2 The Apoſtle having already ſharply refle&ted upon this Church meaneſt perſons among you to arbitrate and determine al! matter 


(tomleſ; P; t 


y 1n the (hj 
"7 of Angel; h.... 
ngdom = ler 


ſoel þ they 
ſeducing men to Nola = 


ſhall x; 
he A ks 


Wixt them 


h . - . conſe [of : 
- a the judging of the World and the Evil Angels ar wer 


4 If then ye have judgment of things 


impleading on : 
ey of wha me? 
natio 

our Church. | 


a; 
and 


5 Iipeak to your ſhame. 41s ic fo, that there; rot 


þ I do nor ſpeak this, as if I would have you make choice gr the 


for their Pride, and Contentions, and Diviſiens (which were branches wy" be in difference betwixt you ; but ic would be a kane 
u. 


from that root) and for their vilifying him who was their ſpiri- 
eual Father, and magnifying their Inſtrutors above him, as alſo for 
their looſeneſs in their Church-diſcipline ; he cometh inthis Chap- | 
ter toanother thing, viz. their going to Law before Pagan Judges ; 
for ſuch was the miſery of thoſe times, that they had no other ; 
(though ſome think that they might have had, the pagan perſecu- 
tions being as yet not begun.) The Apoſtle ſpeaks of this as a thing 
which he wondered that they durſt be guilty of, that they ſhould 
bs no more tender of the glory of God in the reputation of the 
Chriſtian Religion, and ſhould nor rather chuſe Arbitrators amongſt 
the Members of their Church, to hear and determine ſuch diffe- 
rences as aroſe amongſt them, than give Pagans an occaſion to re- 
proach the Chriſtian Religion for the contentions and feuds of 
Chriſtians, The reputation of the Goſpel and the Profeſſors of ir, 
being the thing for which Pau! was here concerned, and upon the 
account of which he thus ſpeaketh , it becometh Chriſtians yer to 
conſider, whether what he faith concerneth not them, where ej. 
ther the Judges or the generality of the Auditors in ſuch Judg. 
ments, may probably reproach Religion, or that way of God which 


before che unbelievers 7. 


you can judge wiſe enough to determine differences berwixe you 

about things of this life, without bringing one another intoPy 

Courts, to the reproach and ſcandal of che Religion which you 

profeſs, make uſe of any , yea , the meaneſt Chriſtians in fyh 

Judgments, rather than Infidels and Unbelievers, who will mu 

_ your differences, to the reproaching of che holy Name 
od. 


becauſe ye go to law one with another & : * why do je 
not rather take wrong / ? why do ye not rather ſift 
you ſelves to be defrauded ? m7. 


Laws,and Courts, and Methods of Judicature.; for even the Lin 
of men are good, if they be lawfully uſed : and the word hereuſs 


6s But brother goeth to law with brother, and thy 


7 If amongſt you all there could not be found one man whon 


$1 


7 Now therefore there is utterly a fault among you, 


& Not thart it is ſimply unlawful for men to make uſe of humane 


they own, for their trivial and uncharitable contentions. 


2 Do ye not know that the Saints ſhall judge the 
world þ? And if the world ſhall be judged by you, are 


ye unworthy to judgethe ſmalleſt matters ? c. 


b If indeed the Corinthians had had no other competent Judges, 
they. bad been to have been excuſed, in making uſe of Infidel Jud- 
ges ; but (faith the Apoſtle) you have other perſons competent 
enough, whom you may (by your ſubmiſſion to them) make Jud- 
ges ; for you know that the Saint ſhall judge the world. In the ſame 
ſenſe (as ſome think) as Chriſt ſaich the Ninevites and the Queen 
6 the South ſhould riſe up in judgment againſt the Jews, and con- 

emn them ; bur certainly there is ſomething more than that in 
it, when the Apoſtle ſaid, The Saints ſbeuld judge the world, he inten- 
ded te ſay ſomething of them, which was not common to ſome 
Heathens with them. Others therefore think, that the Saints in 
che day of Judgment ſhall judge the World, approving the Sen. 


rence of Chriſt pronounced againſt the World, and as being 
Aſſſlors with Chriſt, which indeed is whar Chriſt ſaid of the A. 
poſtles, Mat?. 19. 28. Luke 22. 30. Others think, that the Phraſe 
only ſfignifieth a great honour and dignity, to which the Saints 
ſhall be advanced. A Iate learned and very Critical Author hath 
another notion of the Saints judging the world here ſpoken of, in- 
terpreting it of a time when the ſecular Judgment of the World 
ſhould be given to the Saints, which was propheſied by Danzel, 
Chap. 7- 18, 27. and therefore might be know by them. If this be 
the ſenſe, it is either a Prophecy of God's giving the Government 
of the Word into the hands of Chriſtians (which fell out after 
this in Conftantine's time) or elſe it ſignifies ſuch a time towards 
the end of the World, as thoſe that expe& a ffrh Monarchy ſpeak 
of when thoſe that are true Saints, in the ſtricteſt ſenſe, ſhall have 
the Government of the World ; which ſeemeth not probable, con- 
fidering what the Scripture ſpeaks of perſecutions, and wars, and 
diſorders, rather increaſing, than abating towards the End of the 
World. The Apoſtle therefore here ſeemerh rather to ſpeak of the 
Saints judging the World in the laſt day, approving the Sen- 
tence of Chriſt the Judge of the quick and the dead; or elſe 
to propheſie of that time, when Chriſtianity ſhould fo far ob- 
tain in the World, that the Government either of the whole 
World, or of great part of it, ſhould Be in the hands of Chri- 
ftians. ce From whence the Apoſtle ſtrongly concludeth the com- 
perency of Chriſtians to arbitrate and determine little matters of 
difference amongſt Chriſtians in their commerce and civil dealings 
one with another. : 

3 Know ye not that we ſhall judge Angels 4? how 


much mors things that pertain to this life ? e. 

a4 That the Saints ſhall judge Angels, is here fo plainly aſſerted, 
as a thing within their knowledge, that none can doubt it, bur 
how, or when, or what Angels, 1s not ſo eaſily determined. The 
b:R Interpreters underſtand it of che 6vil Angels, that is, the Da« 


G 


by the Apoſtle is 5TInua, which fſignifieth rather an inp 
or weakneſs of mind and affeftions, a defe& or diminution fron 
perfeQtion, than any ſcandalous ſin. Going to Law withbrethre 
(though lawful in it ſelf) may be made unlawful by circumftanc 
I. When it is before Judges that are Unbelievers; ſo as mensgoin 
to law before them, tends to the reproach of Religion; the credi 
and reputation of the Goſpel ought to be dearer to us than any li 
tle ſecular concern. 'This was the caſein this place. 2 Wheni 
is for little matters, ſuch as a Coat or a Cloak. It is agamt ti 
Law of Charity to do another a great Wrong to recover to ou 
ſelves a little thatis ourrighrt. 3. When we cannot do it withar 
wrath, anger, impatience, covetouſneſs, or deſire of revenge. It | 
thing poſſible to go to law without ſin, but what very fewd 
through that corruption which cleaveth to corrupt Nature. !It 
therefore far more becoming conſcientious Chriſtians totakea hit 
wrong, m2 and to ſufferthemſelves to be cheated of their gt 


g— = fs .-. 


eſpecially under ſuch circumſtances, where the credit of the @ f 
pel and Religion muſt loſe more than they can get. And to 
therwiſe ſpeaks 1711u@, a defe& or imperfe&ion in Chuiſtians, a a 
is not without its guilt. If by their contentiouſneſs, they do n | 
ſhew themſelvesſo bad, as ſome would make them, who hold l 
contendings at Law amongſt Chriſtians 'unlawful, yet hey dot e 
ſhew themſelves ſo good asthe Rule of Chriſtianity requirerh tit £ 
to be, Matt. 5. 39,40. Luke 6. 29. Rom. 12.19. * 
8 Nay, you do wrong and defraud, and that j iy 
brethren ». * : Tit 
» The Apoſtleriſeth higher in his charge againſt them, hs If 
before only charged them for want of ſelf-denia], that they 03 9h 
not bear or-ſuffer wrong ; he now chargerh them for doing v0. 
and defrauding, and that not Heathens, (which yet had been 0 


enough) bur Chriſtians that were their brethren, whom ws | 
the higheſt obligations upon them imaginable ro love, 2 
good ro. And indeed this charge followerh dire&ly upon 
ther : For as in war, one Army always are murderers, 0! gy 
ofthe blood which they ſpill ; fo in ſuing at Law (which is 
vil War betwixt the two Parties) cither the one or the _—_ : 
ſuing muſt do wrong, either putting his brother to mw - 
expence, to recover of him what isnot his right, or chat - 
withold from him what is truly and indeed his right, 6 
which is indeed a doing of wrong or defrauding. 1 not 
o Know yenot * that the ' unrighteous ſha Fo | 
herit the kingdom of God o ? Be not deceivec 4d 
ther fornicators q, nor idolaters 7, | NOT _ | 
nor effeminate perſons *, nor abuſes of chemleive 


mankind #s, ie King 
o That by the Kingdom of God is here meant * £ hefs 
of Glory, the happineſs of another life, is plain, becau po f 
eth in the Future teaſe 4 this Kingdom, be fairh, the wp 


ay, 


P with 
Wl then 
eſs Pit, 
ce: of thy 
ie Chil, 
rel; here 
\at the 
ath ngt 
ry, and 
4 ſball the 
the Apo. 
nd to de. 
Ixt them, 
"ſequence 
at the la 


ning to 
emed in 


Jing one 
hat nature 
nination of 
-bucch tha - 
mploy your 
ployed in; 
zhucch, and 


here is not 


be able to 


choice of the 
© all matte 
d be a ſhang 


er, and that 


ne man whon 
5 berwixt you 
ther intoPagan 
710) Which you 
iſtians in ſuch 
who will guk 


holy Named 


* among you, 
* why do je 
t rather ſufk 


ke uſe of humane 
or even the Law 
he word here ultt 
cher an impit 
diminution fron 
2w with brethret 
by circurſtanc 
» ſo as mensgoui 
1igion; the credl 
ro us than any | 
Jlace. 2 When 
" It is againſt t 
to recover to Wl 
nnot do It Witldl 
£ revenge. It Þ 
*whar very few'd 
cupt Nature- qi 
Riansto take a it 
red of their 118" 
» credit of the 6 
et. Andt0 


5s ſhall 00 


«© deceived Þ © 
or aduitere! 


f chemſelv65 " 


JP. VI. 


ir ſignifies he*© the 


I CORINTHIA4ANG 
"chat 35, thoſe who ſo live and die, ſhall not inherit. If we take 


m Unrighteous here to be a generical term, the Species or 
_— che principal - 0m of which are afrerwards enumerated, |to fin againſt God any way. 
Pl 


me with notoriouſly wicked men. But if 
we take 1t tO ſignifie perſons guilty of afts of injuſtice towards 


even of Jawful things, as to be brought under the power of them 
which men are, when they become potent temprations to them, 


- 


ane be ore ds HE but God ſhall deſtroy both it and them 3. Now thebo- 
or others, 1t ca re underſtood as a . ——_ = | 

ow ger to-all whoſe Species of Sinners after enumerated ; ” ck _ b = + bur for the Lord k, and the 
or f [dolater5 cannot properly be called Unrighteous, but Ungod- Ora ior t - 0 Yor : ; 

4 Men. p BY nor deceived ( faith the Apoſtle) either by any falſe # The beginning of this verſe ſeemeth to give a great lighrto 
Sachers, or by the many il examplesof fuch ſinners that you our true underſtanding of the former verſe, and maketh if very 


daily bave, nor by Magiſtrates connivence at theſe ſins. q Neither probable, that the Apoſtle ſpake with reference to the free uſe © 
fach as being ſingle perſons commit uncleanneſs with others (for Thos and drinks, when he faid, - A!! 2ings are lawful for me. 
here the Apoſtle diſtinguiſherh theſe ſinners from Adulterers, whom ough God hath ordained mears forthe filling of the belly, an 
ke mencioneth afrerward.) » Nor ſuch as either worſhip.the Crea- 


ath made the belly for the receiving, and meats for rhenouriſh. 


eure inſtead of God, or worſhip the true God before Images. | P<nt of rhe body, ſoas the uſe of meats anddrinks is lawful; yet 


;Nor fuch as being married perſons break their Marriage-cove- 


when we ſee that the free uſe of them proverh inexpedient, as 


ar, and commir uncleanneſs with ſuch as are not their yoke-fel- | 20 much pampering the body, and d iſpoſing it to wantonneſs, ſo 

ot ; Nor perſons that give up themſelves to laſciviouſneſs, far as they do fo, they are to be avoided. : Others make the con. 

eurde Tec continually in luſt. « Nor ſuch as areguilty of the ſin of — thus, all your conteſtsare but for thingswhich concera ths 
D 


Seder, a fin nor to be named amongſt Chriſtians or men. 


elly, for mears and drinks, for periſhing things : now in things 


;0 Nor thieves 2, nor covetous x, nor drunkards y, of this nature, all things that are Jawful are not expedient, O- 


nor revilers 2, nor extortiogers 4, ſhall inherit the 


kingdom of God. 


thers ſay, That the Apoſtle here anſwereth or obviateth-whar the 
N:colaitans or the Epicureans held, Thar all ſorts of meats and drinks 


[were lawful, yea, fornication it ſelf. The Apoſtle grants the firſt, 

» Nor ſuch as take away the goods of their Neighbours clan- | bur denieth the ſecond, there being not a ey of reaſon for the 
dſtinely, or by violence, without their conſent or any juſt au- | lawfulneſs of meats, and drinks, arid of fornication. # He tells 
chority. x Nor perſons who diſcover themſelves exceflively to X | 


Jove money, by their endeavours to get it into their hands any | the fomach and belly, for 
way, by oppreſſion, cheating, or defrauding others. »y Nor per- 


them, God had ordained meatsfor the belly of man, and had created 


the reception of mears for the nouriſh- 


ment of man's body, and the preſervation of his life; yer th 
f6ns that make drinking their buſineſs, and uſe it exceſſively, Ys AE te; yet tney 


without regard to the Law and Rules of Temperance and Sobrie- 


ought to uſe them lawfully, and to conlider expedience in th2 ui 


: : orie- | of them, and nor too eagerly to contend for them, for God ſhill 
ty. z Nor perſons that uſe their rongues intemperately, railing] deſtroy both the belly, and the uſe of mears as to the belly. In rhe 
2; others, and reviling them with reproachful and opprobrious| Reſurre&ion,as men ſhall not marry, nor givein matriage, ſothey 
names. « Nor any ſuch as by violence wring our of peoples hands| ſhall hunger and thirſt no more. & But God had nor created the 
what is cot their due, None of theſe not repenting of theſe ſin. body of a man for fornication, but for himſelf, thar men by, and 
al courſes, and turning from them into a contrary courſe of lite, 


ſhall ever come in Heaven. 


with it, might glorifie his Name, by doing his Will. / And the 


Lord is for the body, as the head of it, toguide and dire& the 
\ 11 And ſuch were * ſome of you 5: but ye are 


' waſhed, but ye are ſanRified.c, but ye are * juſtified in 
-the Name of the Lord Jeſus, and by the Spirit of our 


" God d. 


þIn the two Iaſt verſes the Apoſtle had pronounced: a terrible 
th eſpecially to the Corin:hians, who having been heathens from whoſe ReſurreQion the Apoſtle, C 
lately, had wallowed in a grear deal of this guil:; he therefore! 


uſe of the ſeveral members of it ; and as the Savioar of it, to raiſe 
it upatthe laſt day, ashe further declarerh in the next words. 


wil allo raiſe us up by his own power ». 


” Almighty Power. 
here, that chey might be humbled ; and havelow thoughts of them. ; . 
fees, and hoy puffed up (as he had before charged chem) mind-|, 15 how ye not that * your bodies are the mem- Chap, 


«h them, that ſome of them had been guilty of ſome of theſe 


-» The Lord Jeſus Chriſt as the firſt-fruits of thoſe thar ſleep, } 


Fs 5 
hap. 15. largely proverh * Cot. 4. 
our reſurrefion, = that God will raiſe up his Saints by his own 14 


bers of Chriſt o? Shall I then take the members of g*, "7: 


Chap. VL 


bl 
, 


13 * Meats for the belly, and the belly for meats þ -* Mat. 15; 


l7. 
Om 14» 
| & 2 


Col. 2, 22, 


23. 


Verſe 19, 


£20. 


1 Thefl. 


LL, 3- 


14 And* God hath both raiſed up the Lord », and * Rom. 6. 


6,8. K8. 


ecormous ſins, ſome of them of one, or ſome of them, and others| Chriſt, and make them the members of an harlor p ? __ 4 
of othec of them. c But that they might not deſpair in their | Ggq forbid. She 
refleions upon that guilr, he tells them, 7hey were waſhed, not . & 5. 


only wich the Baptiſm of water, but with the Baptiſm of the blood o Chriſt is united to the perſon of the Believer, and he is 


f Chriſt, and with the Baptiſm of the Holy Ghoſt, born agzin of WWa- 


the Head of the Church, which is the myſtical Body; ſo that the 


bodies of Believers are in a ſenſe the Members of Chriſt and 
ter and of the Spirit, John 3. 5. yea, and not only waſb:d, bur rh 
kd” Bled with new, ſpiritual habits, through the renewing ſhould be. uſed by usas the Members of Chrift, which we ſhould 


of the Holy G/oſt. d Having obtained a true righteouſneſs, in which 


not rend from him : but p hethat doth commit fornication, rends 


: his body from Chriſt, and maketh ic the member of an Harlor - 
they might ſtand and appear before God, even the Righteouſneſs : RR , 
of Cnil reckoned unto them for righteouſneſs; j«fti:d through for asthe man and wife are one fleſh by Divine ordination, Gen, 2 


the Merits of the Lord Jeſus Chriſt, and ſan#ified through the 


24. {0 the Fornicator and the Harlor are one fleſh by an impure 


Spirit of Holineſs. So that the waſhing firſt mentioned in this Ir 


verſe, ſeemerh to be a generical term, comprehending both 7uſt:. 
ſation, remiſſion of ſin, and deliverance from the gui!t of it, and 
alſo Regeneration and San#ification, which is the proper effe& of | ONE fleſh q. 
the Spirit of Grace, creating in the Soul new habits and difpoſiti- 
ons, by which iris inabled and inclined, as to die unto lin, fo to 
live unto God. This the Apoſtle doth nor ſay, of them all, (for 
it is very probable there were in this Church ſome Hypoccites(but 


of ſome of them. 


q The Conjunction of the husband and wife mentioned, Ger. 2, 
24. and the conjunction of the Fornicator and the Harlor, differ 
not as to the ſpecies of the act, only as to the morality of it ; 
the former isan honeſt and lawful act, the other a diſhoneſt and 
filthy act. So that he that is wickedly joined to an harlot makerh 


- . himſelf one fleſh with her wich whom he commicerh that folly 

-_ All things are Led — ho © Y = - and Jewdneſs, and he muſt needs by it ſeparare his body from irs 
wings = v4 | mX rs f : h eyes. Fogo aw of Memberſhip with Chriſt, whoſe Holineſs will admit no.ſuch Union. }. 
or me, but 1 Will nor DE Drougnt Under tne Power 


an 


e , he words of this Text are not ſo difficult in themſelves as 
t is to make out the connexion they have with, and the depen- 


ſpirit 7, 


| Deut. 16. 20. To him thou ſhalt cleave, He that hath attainedto 
dence they have upon what went before, and what followeth af-| thar myſtical Union, which is berwixt Chriſt and every one that is 
ter, Some thinking that they refer unto what the Apoſtle had ſaid | a true Believer, is nor eſſentially, bur ſpiritually and myſtically 
before about their going to Law before Infidels in the ſeven firſt | one Spiric,- with Chriſt, 1 Cor, 6, 7. He is united by the Spirit to 
verſes, leſt any ſhould ſay, Is it not then lawful for men to ſue| Chriſt, and isone with him by Faith, whence folows his beingone 
it Lay for their juſt dues and rights? The Apoſtle anſwers, Ad-| with Chriſt in Love; Chriſt and he have one Will, &$c. and he is 
Lutit be, yet Chriſtians ought not only to conſider what is ſtri&t- 


lawful and juſt, but they ought to conſider circumſtances; for 


ruled and governed by Chriſt : therefore you muſt take heed whar 


- : TTILERS you do in making your bodies the members of Harlots, which 
Wiequid non expedit, in quantum nom expedit mon licer, is an old|they cannotbe, and che Members of Chriſt alſo. 
ad good Rule; An ation that is in it ſelf lawful, may be by 


ccumſtances made ſinful and unlawful ; and that was the caſe as 


18 Flee fornication : Every fin that a man doth, 


v the Chriſtians going to law before Infidels. Bur others, and | without the body To but he that committeth fornt- 
thoſe the moſt, think that the Apoſtle here begins a new head of |Cation, ſinneth againſt his own body 7. os 

courſe to diſſuade from the ſin of fornication, and from an in-| 5 The Apoſtle cometh to a new Argument, by which he pref. 
temperate uſe of 2eat and drink, as being provocativeof luſt, and |ſeth them to flee the ſinof Uncleanneſs. Ir is obſerved by ſome, 
dipolng them to that fin. Now leaſt they ſhould ſay, Is ir not [that this fin is peculiarly to be dealt with,not ſo much by reſiſting 
Wful then to eat and to drink liberally, muſt weeat and drjnk |it, and pondering arguments againſt it, as by flying from it, a- 
vt bare neceſſity ? He anſwereth, All things are lawful for me, voiding all occaſions of it, and not ſuffering our thoughts to feed 


ut is, all things which are not forbidden by the Law of God 


upon it ; but the Apoſtles Argument is,becauſe other ſins are with- 


My beuſed, may be done. under fair circumſtances; but circum. | ow# the body, that is, the body hath not ſach a blcmifr and note or 


ances may alter the caſe, all things may nor be expedient to be 


mark of infamy laid upon it by any other fin as by this: indrunk. 


nn, or done by all perſons, or at alltimes. The Corinthians might enneſs the /:quo?, in gluttony the near ; in other ſins, fomerhing 


y conclude too much from what he had told them, that they 


without a man's ſelf is that which is abuſed, bur the body is ſelf 


"re voſhcd, juſtified and ſan#ifird, viz. that now all things were | is the thing which is abuſed in this filthy ſin. # So he that is guil- 

Ju to them, at leaſt all chings not fimply and abſolutely con-}ty of it, ſinneth not only againſt his wife, with whom he is one 
Med in the Word of God ; the Apoſtle correteth their miſtake fleſh, bur againſt his body, which he abuſerh in this vile and finful 
bf telling them they were to have a regard to exped:ence and, att, and upon which he imprints a mark of infamy and diſgrace, 
it profit of others, the negle& of which might make things} a blot not to be waſhed out bur with the blood of Chriſt. So as 
bat were in themſelves lawful, ro becomeunlawful. g Beſides, | though by other ſins men may fin againſt their own bodies, yet by 
” - muſt take heed, that they 4d not male ſach an uſe, | no {in fo emiaently as by this fin. Other fins have their fear in 

ol. II. 


| 6 


30. 


16 What, know ye not that he which is joined to * Mar. rg. 
ati harlot, is one body 2? For * two, faith he, ſhall bes. 


Eph.'5.31. 


17 But he that is joined unto the Lotd, * is one * Job. 17. 


21, 22,23. 


7 This phraſe jorwed to the Lord, is thought to be taken out of Eph. 4. 4- 


$. JO. 


" 


Tc 
TT Agr 9 " - 
» - Se Y 
i 
t « 


Wt 44> bins: Mgr 
” _ —— 
T” ”w bs _e+ 


Chap. VIE. 


" 


* - (or. 6. 
16 


"Top. ©. 


Heb.g. 12, 


e :ind and Soul,the body, and commonly ſome particularmem- 
ber of the body, is but the ſervant of the ſoul. in the execution 
and committing of them. Luſt, though indeed ir ariſeth from rhe 
heart, yer it is committed more in the body, than any other fin 1s. 

19 What, * know ye not that your body is the tem- 
ple of the holy Ghoſt which s in you #, which ye 
have of God, and ye are not your own ? - | 

r The Apoſtle. Chap. 3. 16. had called the Chuch of Corinth, 
the 7:1ple of God, and there made uſe of it, to difuade them from 
iffentionsand divifions,becauſe by them they defiled and deſtroyed 
rhe Temple of God ; here he calls the Members of that Church, 
the Temple of the Ho'y Ghoſt, which ſtrongly proveth the Holy Ghoſt 
to be God. He makes uſe of it here 25 an Argumeat to diſuade 
them from the fin of fernication. God's Temple was builded for 
his habitation upon Earth, the place which he choſe molt to 
manifeſt himſclf in to his people, and for a place wherein his peo- 
Die were to pay him that external Homage and Worſhip, which 
ke required of them under the Law, Soasthe Apoſtlecalling them | 
the Temple of the Holy Ghoſt, both minded chem of the favour 
God had: beſtowed on them, and alſo of thar homage and dury, 
which they with their bodies were to pay unto God: the latter they 
could nor perform, nor hope for the former , while they lived in 
the proQice of a linſo contrary to the Willof God. w Beſides, 
he mindeth them, rhat their bodies were nor their own, they had 
them of God: they had them from God by Creation,and they were 
upheld by the daily working of his Providence in their upholding 
and pretervation; God hark not given them their bodies for this 
uſe, the body was not fer fornication 8s he had rold them, wv. 13. 
So as in abulivg their bodies, they abuſed what was not their own, 
nor in their own power to uſe, as they liſted to uſe rhem ; bur to 
be uied only for thoſe ends, and in that manner, that he who had 
given them, had preſcribed and direQed, and in theſe abuſes there 
was a kind of Sacriledge. As God of old charged the Jews, 
Exch. 16.17, 18, 19, 20. thatthey had taken the Jewels of his go/d 
and bis filver, to make Tmages, and commir ſpiritual Whoredom 


LL CORINTHIANS. 


T7 
Rg-b7 - BS, 
mine that in this caſe, it wasevery man's duty to marry, ar, 
very woman's likewiſe; the reaſon of which mug þ« bec 
God had ordained martiage as a means to bridle men __ : 
ſtrain them from extravagant luſts. [Hz:s own wife] [þ; wg 
Land] a clear place againſt Polygamy. 

3 * Let the husband render unto the wiſe dye be. s 
nevolence 4 : and likewiſe alſo the wife unto PA. 


husband e. 
4 The word tranſlated due benevolence, ſignifieth, due gud wi} 
kinaneſs, but from wv. 5. it appeareth what the Apoſtle meaneth. 
Moſes, Exod. 21. 10. calleth it the duty of marriage, both of them 
uling a modeſt term in exprefling the conjugal a&, as we that 
obſerve the ſcripture always doing, when there is occaſion to me 
tion what men of prophane hearts are ready to make a ſcof - 
2 The Apoſtle makerh chis the mutual Juty both of hugband and 
wife under due circumſtances, therefore uſerh the. worg render 
which implieth the thing required to be an a& of juſtice, 

4 The wite hath not power of her own body, by 
the husband ; likewiſe alſo the husband hath not power 


over his own body, but the wite f. 

f He gives the reaſon of it, becauſe marriage takes away from 
each married perſon the power over his or her own body, and 
giveth irtto their correlate. The Apoſtle ſeemeth hereto anſwer 
a queſtion propounded to him by jſome Members of this Churc),. 
Wherher, though they were married, the husband and wifemight 
nor forbear each other's bed, and make uſe of their ſociety exch 
with other meerly for helps in other things, ſuch as gerting 47 
Eſtate, looking after the affairs of a Family, &c. which the 
Apoſtle doth by no means judge adviſable, 

5 * Defrand not one another g, except it be wit ., 
conſent + for a time, that ye may give your ſelves {7 
taſting and prayer 7, and come together again k, th, 
Satan tempt you not for your incontinency /. 

£ That is, withold not your ſelves one from another, which he 


P own uf. 


with them, and they had raken his at, his fine flour, his oy, 
and inccnſe to [et before them, GCC. 4 p 

20 * For ye are bought with a price  : therefore 

'orifie God in your body, and in your ſpirit, which 

are God's y. 

x What price this 1s thats here mentioned, Peter tells us both 
Negatively and Poſitively, 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19. Foraſmuch as ye know 
that you were redeemed, not with corruptible things, as filver and gold, 
from your vain converſation received by tradition from your fathers : But 
with the frecious blocd of Chriſt, as of a lamb, without blemiſh and 
r:chout ſpot. So he argueth with them againſt this ſin from their 
Redemption, it being ſuitable ro reaſon, that thoſe who are redeem. 
<d our of any flavery or captivity, ſhould bethe ſervantsof him 
who redeemerth them, not of thoſe Tyrants from whom they are 
redeerned ; fuch are our Juſts andcorruptions, from which we are | 
redeemed,as well as ſrom that curſe and wrath, which is the con. 
ſequent of them. 7 Therefore (ſaith the Apoſtle) you who are 
redeemed with a price, and with ſuch a price are bound ro gle. 
»ife God as by ſpeaking well of his Name, ſo by obeying his Will, 
Mat. 5. 16. And this you are bound to do, not with your bodies 
or ſpirits only, but in or with your bodies and ſpirits alſo, that is, 
with your whole man ; for both of them are God's, by a mani- 
40/d right, not that of Creation and Providence only, bur that of 
Redemption alſo: with which exhortation the Apoſtle finiſherh 
this diſcourſe, and cometh to give them an anſwer to ſome queſti- 
ons about which they had wrote unto him. . 


rightly calls defrauding one another, becauſe he had before q.. 
Clared it a debt ; and further declared, that neither the hughy,q 
nor the wife had a power over their own bodies, but the pow. 
er of either of their bodies was in their correlate. + He add;,;y. 
cept it be with conſent, mutual conſeat, and then it is indeed ng 
defrauding. i And for a time, for a religious end, that they mis; 
give themſe]ves ro Faſting and Prayer, not that this abſtinence is 
neceſſary to us by any Divine precept, to prepare us for ſol 
Prayer, (for ſuch only is here ſpoken of) for rhen the Apoſtle 
would not have made conſent neceflary in this caſe, buttheſews 
were commanded it, Exod. 19. 15. as a Preparation totheir hezr. 
ing of the Law,and it was a piece of the legal purification,asappexr. 
eth from 1 Sam. 21. 4. as to which Chriſtians were at liberty, and 
might obſerve or nor obſerve it, as they agreed. 1 Then he re 
quires, that they ſhould return to their former courſe, not de. 
frauding one another, leſt the Devil obſerving their abſtinence, 
ſhould rempr them to unlawful mixtures, ſeeing their inability to 
contain themſcls within the bounds of temperance and chaſtity, 

6 But I ſpeak this by permiſſion, andnotof cwn- 


mandment. 2. 

- Some refer theſe words to all that had gone beforeinthis 
Chapter ; but the beſt Interpreters rather refer them to what went 
immediately befors in the preceding verſe, declaring, that he hal 
no expreſs command from Ged, as to thoſe things of abſtaining 
for a time for Faſtiug avd Prayer, and then coming together axaix, 
but he ſpake what he judged equitable and reaſonable ; but az to 


CHAP. VIL 
The Apoſfille anſwereth a Queſtion they had ſent him : whether it be good 
to marry? better mt © unleſs to avoid fornication : the Duty of Mar- 
ried Perions toeach other : and they muſt not part : no not Believers 
om Unbelievers : unlcſs th:'ſe require tt : then are Believers no 
longer obliged : Reaſous and motives to this Duty. I=—16. Every. 
one miſt be content with hs Eſtate” 17 —— 24. 1t is better not mar. 
73 : but to marry 3s no Sin. 25—28, How marriage and all other 
things of this world muſt be uſed. 29--=-31. The preference of a ſmgle 
to a marricd Eſtate; yet this no ſin, 32-»--38. The Marriage Band 
tif Death 39. 
x Ow concerning the things whereof ye wrote 
_unto me 4, 1t 7s good for a man not to touch 


a woman 6, 

@ It ſeemeth, that though this Church was very much corcupted, 
yet ſome of them retained a reverence for this great Apoſtle, and 
had wrote oneor more Letters to him about ſome points, to which 
he returneth anſwer. 6 Ir ſeemeth that one thing they had wrote 
to him about, was about Marriage, not about the lawfulneſs of 
marrying(that Do&rine of Devils was not broached ſo early in the 
World) but concerning the adviſableneſs of marriage, and mens 
uſe of their wives in that afflicted ſtate of rhe Church. 4 The A- 
_ anſwereth, That it is good for a man mot totouch a woman. When 

e ſaith, it is good, he means only more convenient or better, with 
reſpe& to the Troubled ſtate of the Church, or that perſons might 
be more at liberty for the ſervice of God and the duties of Reli- 
gion, Upon theſe accounts it were more convenient for a man 
not to marry (for that he meaneth by fouching a woman.) 

2 Nevertheleſs 7 avoid fornication, let every man 
have his own wife, and let every woman have herown 


husband c. 

c In the Greek it 1s, becauſe of fornications ; the ſence of which 
can be no other than this which our Tranſlators give. The word 
iS in the Plural! number, to ſignifie that that which he meaneth 
by thisterm, 1s all ſorts of impurities and uncleanneſles, which are 
the produQts of the luſts of the fleſh. Theſe are fins of that na- 
ture and ſpecies, that if we cannot chuſe what in reſpe& of ſome 
circumſtances would be more convenient, we muſt baulk it, rather 
than run into ſuch a guilt. The Apoſtle doth therefore deter. 


particular perſons, they ought ro judge and govern themſelyes 
according to their particular circumſtances. 
7 For *1 would thar all men was even as I am ny'! 


ſelf 2 : but * every man hath his proper gift of God? 
one after.this manner, and another after that 0. 

» I would, in this place can ſignifie no more, than I could wid 
or deſire (if it were the will of God) that all Chriſtians had the 
gift of continency, which God (bleſſed be his Name) hath g\ 
ven me : that this is meant, 1s plain by the next words, and ». , 
it 15 apparent, that Pau! did not will this abſoJurely ; for that had 
been to have willed the diffolution of the World, as well as the 
Church, within the compaſs of that Age. o Bur, faith the A- 
poſtle, every one hath not the gift of continency, one hathit, 
another hath it not, which is the ſame thing which our Saviour 
ſaid in reply to his Diſciples, ſaying, 1f ths caſe of the manteþ 
with his wife, it is not good to. marry, Mat. 19. io. All men cams 
receive this ſaying, ſave they ro whom it i; given. 


8 I fay therefore to the unmarried and widows, i 


is good for them if they abide even as I p. 

2 By the unmarried and widows, it is apparent that Pai 
means Virgins that werenever married, and ſuch as having be! 
once married, had loſt their husbands ; though the firſt word intie 
Greek had been ſignificative enough of perſons in both theſe ſiatss, 
yetthe Apoſtle's uſing of two words, makes it paſt diſpute, when 
he ſairh, 1t is good for ſuch to be as he was ; his meanings, that 
it was better with reſpe& to the preſent circumſtances 0 
Chriſtians, or i: was convenient, in which notion good is offi 
taken, not for what is abſolutely good, and indeed thenatur'© 
all good lieth in the conveniency or ſuitableneſs of the thing 
called to us; and though in the Divine precepts there is 892)" 
ſuch a ſuirableneſs, ſo as they muſt be always good, puny 
ther things, which God hath left to our liberty (fach as in tl 
of marriage) a thing may be good or evil, as the circumſtance 
ſeveral perſons, yea, of the ſame perſon may vary. St. Pau! po 
dereth only the circumſtances of the World common to all r 
ſtians, and upon them determines this goodneſs, ſuppolins 
circumſtances of the particular perſon nor to rule otherwiſe. : 
not ſaying, It 5s good for them not to marry, but to be as he w%, 


. . a T vel 
hath bred a queſtion of no great import to be determined, p 


VIE" 


uſe 
Ie. 
2M 


be-* [Ps 
the 7. 


it or 
jeth ; 
them 
> ſhall 
Men. 
ﬀ at, 
1d and 
render 


£ but 
DaWer 


y from 
ly, and 
 anlwer 
2hurch : 
femight 
ty each 
ting an 
hich the 


be with 41, 


- 
Elves to 16, 
1 &, that 


which he 
before de. 
e husband 
t the pow. 
le adds,ex. 
indeed no 
they might 
pſtinence is 
; for ſolemn 
the Apoſtle 
but the Jews 
0 their hear- 
IN,a5appeat- 
liberty, and 
Then he re. 
urſe, not de. 
ir abſtinence, 
r inability to 
1d chaſtiy, | 
z0t of Come 


 beforennthis 
to what went 
g, that he ha 
; of abſtaining 
' $oget her again, 
ble ; but as to 
ern themſelves 


as I am my! 
oft ol Got, 


a 6. 

an I could wih 
riſtians had tht 
Name) hath g» 
vords, and v. 9. 
ly ; for that hal 
1, as well as the 
ar, Caich the A+ 
CY, one hath , 
hich our Savor 
2 of the mall Uo, 
oO. All men cam 


it 


d widows, k 


arent that Pa 
$ having 

firſt word intit 

both theſe 15 


Paul W 


Mark. 1- 


0. : - A 
_ * if chey cannot contain, let them marry 9: for made a grear difference in the notions of Inter 
', ILoter tO MAITY then to burn 7, Ret 346 bo he both 
py w_ G Paul's ſaying, It is goed, &c. did not ſignifie it is the 1ev1Ng WITe bY ing and. Some th 
Will of God, Or (as the Papiſts would have it) ir is my counſel in 
1 bl 


VII CORINTHIANS. Chap. VIL 


a5 ever marriedor no, in the determination of which the 
» jbut itis not worth ſpending out time a- 
FIR ould nor agree 4 þ — n ke . : p 
Anti '" idering that all agree, he wasat this time unmarried, | infuſed m_ - grace ; for neither 
res 4 a1l he doth here mean: if St Paul wasnever married, we are ſanQified by the believing 
WaAaIc 


gbicD 16 vas ; for WE read of his 1#:fe's Mother ſick of a F:aver, thus ſanCtified by rhe belizving husband. Nor are either of them, 
jure . 


ſeemeth to have different ſenſe from whar ic 
Writ; for it can neither ſignifie the ſanttific 


uſually harh in holy 
c ation of rhe perton by 
is the unbelieving husband thus 
wife, neither is the unbelieving wif: 


thus ſer apart for the ſervice of God by any legal Rires, which hath 


interpreters, how the un- 
y the believing wife, or the unbe. 


ink ir ſignifies no 
more than prepared for God, as ſanRQified ſignifies, Iſa, wn > Oe 


believing husband 1s ſanEtificd b 


. . chers think th e ſan#ified by a mo 1 d . - 
Jer to your further perfettion, 1s plain by his precept for them | ron. Gy 0% Je rat aenominarion, 1 rather 
Ot 


to-marty 


if they could not contain; and this likewiſe lets us ſee 


think it ſignifies brought into ſuch a ſtate, that the Believer, wichour 


: AA offence to the Law of God, may continue in a married eflate wi ; 
hat ſecond Marriages are notonly lawfull,bur may be an-incumbent ff. Go, ft ith ſuch 
t 


duty, chat is, if they who are concerned as tothem, cannot con- 
uy 


@ yoke-fellow ; and the Nate of marriage in a holy ſtate, notwich- 


Qt di di b h fe r "I . - 
zint hemſelves within the bounds and rule of Chaſtity, which muſt anding the diſparity with reference to Religion, 4 Otherwiſe 


he ſaith, the children begotten and born ofſuch Parents would be 


* gps” unclean, 1n the ſame ſtate that the children of Pagan Parents are 
; This 1 contradifted by the realon given by the Apoſtle, derer- | without the Ch arch: ode went, ne made pens 
nining that Marriage Was much more eligible than burning, which | miſe. In one ſenſs all children are unclean, 7. e. children of wrath 
rerm ſignifies the inward fervor and eager inclinations of the mind, k 


not the As only of the outward man. 


born in fin, and brought forth in iniquity ; bur all are nar in this 


: ſenſe unclean, ſome are within the Covenant of Grace, within the 
10 And unto the married I command, yer not I 


Church, capable of Baptiſm. e Theſe are thoſe that are called 


bar the Lord * Let not the wife depart from her | holy not as inwagdly renewed and fanQtified, but relatively, in the 
> hu;band 5 


lame ſenſe that all the Jewiſh Nation are called an holy people ; and 


; The Apoſtle had ſpoke to the married before, but in another poſſibly. this may give us a furtherlight ro underſtand the term 


EEE TO - : H:fed, in the former part of the verſe, The unbeliev 
J returneth in his diſcourſe to them again, ſpeaking to | /*7**/**®, - P "a G 
__— which it ſhould ſeem they had put ro him; whar it _ Fy - wn wor ye by Tt believing wife, 

[net plainly exprefſed, but it may caſily be gathered from wite ſo far ſanCtified by the believing husband, that as they may 


'2. 13. as alſo from the Apoſtles determination in this verſe: ir lawfully continue in their married relation, and live rogether as 
LI y *P* 


ing hufſ- 
and the unbelieving 


A d wife, ſothe iffue comming from them both ſhall be by 
ther it was lawful for the hushand or the wife to depart eng Sogn 2 —— : Px 
nee er her husband, unleſs it were in the cafe of Adultery ; God counted in Covenant with him, and have a right to Baptiſm, 


&rthough here be nothing ſpoken as to char caſe, yer ir plainly 


which is one of the Seals of that Covenant, as well as thoſe children 


. both whoſe Parents are Believers. 

red, as determined before by our Saviour ; buras the - — . 
1a. — Heathens amongſt whom theſe Corinthians lived, had] 15 But if the unbelieving depart, let him depart f. A 
Plans much roo mean thoughts about the Marriage-bond,| brother or a ſilter is not under bondage in ſuch c. 


i erg :; 
indulging themſelves in a liberry to break ir for every flight cauſe, but God hath called us || to peace þ. | 
.nd it ſhould ſeem by wv. 12, 13. it was judged by them a ſuffici- 

ent cauſe, if one of them were not converted to the faith of Chriſt. 


Or. in 
f If the unbelieving husband, or the unbelieving wife will leave - Wha 


his or her correlate, that is, ſo leave them, as to return no more 
Now inthis-caſe, ſairhthe Apoſtle,! command, and what I tell you] £9 liveas an huebend, or a5 2 with withher & bao aenpings nog 
the Willof God, it is not I alone who command it, but you are p 


10 look upon it as the Will of God, concerning you, though re- 


let him depart. Such a perſon hath broken the band of marriage, 


cc 'and in ſuch caſes Chriſtians are not under bondage, they are. not 
vealed ro you by me that am the Miniſter of God to you. 5 Le? ryed by Law to fetch them again, nor by the Laws of God to keep 
mt the wife depart from her hushand : ſhe may be divorced from her] themſelves unmarried for their perverſeneſs. But it may be ob. 
bncband in caſe of fornication, but ler her not for any other cauſe 


makea voluntary ſeceſſion. 


11 Butand if ſhe depart ?, ler her remain unmarried s, 
or be reconciled to her husband w: and let not the hus- 


band put away h# wile x. 


Tranſlators came to tranſlate 0&5, which is mani- ; png 
LE Oreſ Paſhor [if ſhe d:par:] I cannor tell. Ir ſignifieth if ſhe of marriage, fruſtcating it asto the ends for which God 
be departed, and ſo is as weil ſigaificative of a being parted from 


jected, Thatnothing but Adultery by the Divine Law breaketh that 
bond. Anſw. That is denied. Nothing bur Adultery is a juſtifiable 
cauſe of divorce. No man may pur away his wife, nor any wife 
put away her husband bur for Adultery. Burt the husbands volun. 
| rary leaving his wife, or the wife's voluntary leaving her husband, 

with a reſohhcion to return nomoreto them, breaks alſo the bond 


hath ap- 
g again the patry 


pointed it, and afrer all due means uſed, to brin 


ad wr . departing to their duty, doth certainly free the correlate. So that 
her husband by a judicial att of D —_— —_— although noching can juſtific repudiation or putting away a wife 
4 T0 i=" Thew Sh - vo nga a well of a. | 2r an husband, and marrying another, bur rhe adultery of the per. 
forany trivial cauſe. of - , 

lea Divorce, not according tothe true meaning of the Divine ſon ſodivorced and repudiared, yet the departure either of huſ: 


w, asconcerning a voluntary ſeceflion: in which caſe the Apo- 


band and wife without the other's conſent for a long time, and re. 


: fuſal to return after all due means uſed, eſp:cially if che parry fo 
, — oo = _ ——_—_ aw __ _ 1 "I going away,doth it out of an hatred and abomination of the other's 
as _ _—_ = Es of Nos Dromner- dndtnd in tn Religion, will juſtific theperſon fo deſerted after due waiting and 
_ ms committed adukery, if the merridilrwagati uſe of means to reduce him or her to their duty, wholly to caſt off 


our Saviour hath determined, Matt. 5. 32, & 19. 9. w But he 


the perſon deſerting, for no Chriſtian in ſuch caſe by God's Law is 


ves her a liberty to be reconciled to her husband. In caſe that a under bondage. þ For God hath called Chriſtians unto peace, and 


oman put'away by her husband, became another man's wife, by 
Law, Deut. 24. 4. ſhe might not (though that latter husband 


in his ordinance of marriage aimed at the quiet and peace of his peo- 
ple in their ſervice ofhim in their families and relations; and there. 


fore as Chriſtians ought not to diſturb the peace of their own con- 
ied) return to her former husband ; but in caſe ſhe remained un- ſob mpetionts-axp—e chat. h . 
arred, the might be reconciled to him. x The Apoſtle giveth ences, turning away their relations, tho they be Uabelievers, 


be ſame preceprt concerning husbands. 


yer neither ars they bound, if ſuch will leave them, to court their 


own continual trouble and diſturbance. | 
12 But tothe reſt ſpeak 1, not the Lord y, If any bro-| 15 For what knoweſt thou, O wife, whether thon 
her hath a wife that believeth not z, and ſhe be M 


d to dwell with him 4, let him not put her away 


ſhalt * ſave :hy husband? or how knoweſt thou, O man, * x Per.3- 


whether thou ſhalt ſave hy wife 2 ; I. 
 Eitheras to the other part of your Epiſtle, or as to the caſes of 4 


de reſt mentioned in your Epiſtle,I ſhall give you my advice ſo far 
[am inſtruted by the holy Spirit of God, thoughour Lord Je- 


; The Apoſtle having before determined: the lawfulneſs of a 
Chriſtian husbands or wifes abiding in a ſtate of marriage with a 


het : : wife or husband that was an Infidel, if ſhe or he were willing to a« 
s Chriſt hath ſer no certain rule concerning them. z That be-|hjde with the Believer ; now argues the great advantage which 
mt, both in this and v. 13. ſignifieth, that hath not em- might be from ir ; for the glory of God, and the good of the Soul 
cedthe Chriſtian Faith, bur ſtill remaineth a Pagan. s If there of ſuch hnsband or wite : har knoweft rhiu, O wife (faith he.) Ic is 
no other matrer of difference betwixt ſuch perſons, ſave only In | not certain, that God will ſo far bleſs thy converſe with thy huſe 
ter of Religion, 6 Jet bim nor forthat put her away. If a Chri-| and or wife, asthar thou ſhalc, by hy inſtru&ion, admonition, or 
== or woman had their choice to make, it were unlawful for example, be an occaſion or inſtrument co bring them to Chriſt ; but 
terof them to make choice of a Pagan for their yoke fellow: | it is neither impoſlible nor improbable, and their willingneſs (not- 
tifaſter marriage either the husband or the wife embraceth the withſtanding their difference from thee in Religion, ) yet to abide 
nſtian Faith, the other correlate till abiding a Pagan, their [wich thee,may give thee ſome hopes that they will hearken to thee. 
ference in Religion is not a ſufficient ground fora ſeparation : 


femerh to be the Apoſtles meaning. The Caſe ſeemeth a lit- 


They are often (in the language of holy Writ) faid, to ſave other:, 


| who are inſtrumental to bring them ro Chriſt. C/.'g. 22. 1 Tim. 4. 
ff:rent in the opinion of ſome Divines, when the 7dolater or 5 g - 


latreſs biaſphemerh God and the true Religion, and is continually 


16. Jam. 5.20, We ought to bear with many inconveniencies ro 


181 [ our ſelves where, our bearing with them may any way promote 
Ig the correlateto Apoſtaſie: bur ir is hard to determine a- |the glory of God, or the good of Souls. 
uſttheplain precept of ſo great an Apoſtle, eſpecially conſide. 


Ig the reaſon by which he backeth his precepr. 


17 But as God hath diſtributed to every man, as the 


h k e fo let him walk ; And fc 
13 And the woman which hath an husband that wi Do _ mend; ; . 107 rcadie T8 FO 
"th not, and if he be pleaſed ro dwell with her, let 


not leave him. 


k Calling in this place ſigiifierhi that tation and courſe or life, 
wherein by the Providence of God any man 1sſer. Some think that 


ig For the unbelieving husband is ſanRified c by the | this precept hath a ſpecial reference to what went before, as ifrhe 


lk, and the unbelieving wite is ſanctified by the hus: 


ſenſe were this, if God by his Providence hath ſo order'd it, that 


s hy wifes or thy husband's heart bei in 
; Elſe were your children unclean d, but now they thy hearr be changed, thy wifes or thy husband's heart being no 


ly e. | 


yet changed; bur heor ſhe remaining Pagans, yet ler not this cauſe 


any ſeparation berwixr you, bur, unleſs the Unbeliever will depart, 
Seniiif1ng in holy Writing generally ſignifieth the ſeparation, 


"Ung of a perſon or thing from a common, to, and fi 


or | offices each to other. But the following verſes where the Apoſtle, 
} uſe, whether it be by ſome external Rites and Ceremonies, 


I Ur infuſing of ſome inward ſpiritual habits. In this place it 


live yet as man and wife together, mutually performing conjugal 


v. 21+ ſpeaks of Caling being a ſervant, ſhew thisinterpretation to 
be too narrow; Theſenſe of che Text is : That the Profeſſion of 


Chriftia» 


— ——o—_ o—o_—_ 


TIS 
" $8 a 
6 £ 
| - 


40 = Oo pet - EET 
_ Þ 
. > - . ws - 


TLEORINTHIASHNS. Chap. y 


| s In whatſoever ftate ot condition, whether he be «,...; 
unmarried, whether he be a maſter or a ſervant, whethe w t&d or 
before circumciſed or uncircumciſed, let him not think (4 © Were 
ty obligeth him to alter it, he may abide in ir, only h iſtiani. 
bide in it with God, as one who remembres God's E Sy mult «, 
him, and ſeeth him, and that he is bound to approve hin. 0 
itunto God, and to keep a good conſcience towards = [1 
one that is a Member of the Church of God und:r th on a5 
of 1t. e Lig 
25 Now concerning virgins , I have no commang 


Chap. VII. 


Chriſtianity is conſiſtent with any honeſt calling or courſe of life, 
= Te" 4 will of God that Chyiſtians ſhould nor pretend their 
profeſſion of Religion, ro excuſe them from the duties of any rela- 
tion wherein they are ſer. This is an univerſal Rule, / and con- 
cerned not the '- fant of Corinth only, but all other Churches of 
Chriſt, being an Apoſtolical Conſtitution. | ; 

18 Is any man called being circumciſed? let him not 


become uncircumciſed : Is any called inuncircumciſion? 


tet him not become circumciſed m:. 


Is any one who was a native Jew, and ſocircumciſed accord- : ; 
20g to the jeviſh Law converted (while he is in that ſtate) to the| MENT of the Lord x: yet I give my judgment h 


Faith of Chriſt, let him not affe& the ſtate of him, that having| ONE har hath obtained mercy of the Lord (0 be 
been formerly a Gentile, was never circumciſed. On the other ſide,| faithful z. | : 
is any, being anative Gentile, and ſo not circumciſed, converted| w He had before ſpoken to married Perſons and Widows 
ro Chriſtianity, let not him affef the ſtate of one converted from | he comes to ſpeak concerning Virgins ; and though he __ 
Judaiſm, who was circumciſed. This 15 doubtleſs the ſenſe of the | only the female Sex, yet the following words ſhew thar his _— 
verſe, not (as ſome would haveit) ler him not endeavour by art to | extended to both. x As to them he faith, he had no ſpeciul q; 
make himſelf uncircumciſed, which was the wicked prattice of | re&ion from Chriſt, none that would ſuit the caſe of every Virs; # 
ſome (for a better compliance with the Gentiles) of whom we read | y but yet he would give his advice, what ſ:emed to him ory 
z And he would have them look upon him asone that himſelf, | 
received mercy from the Lord, and as he deſired to be fairhgy : 
the diſcharge of histruſt, ſo might and ought to have cregje 61... 
him in what he ſaid. In which ſenſe we read in ſcripture ofa in 
ful Saying, a faithful Creator, a faithful Man, &c. ; 


A 


eau we - gas y 
— —_— 


, = 
My”. AIAE a 


—F* - "* FR 
= _ 4 —————» i ——TO— 
— wad - . 

_ « 


1 Maccab. 1. 17. ; : F * 
I9 * Circumciſion is nothing, and uncircumciſion 


is nothing », but the keeping the commandments of 
God o. 


Ci ion was an Ordinance of God,a ſign of God's Cove- | ""_ 
La ens to Salvation in its time, as the fulfilling of any 26 I ſuppoſe therefore that this is good 2 for tha 
precept ofthe Law contained in Ordinances : and Uncircumciſion| preſent {| diſtreſs b, 7 ſay that ic z good for a n a4 
alſo was ſomething ; for by the Law relating to that Ordinance,the {c an' ( 


| | 0 to be. i 
uncircumciſed male is derermined to have broken God's Cevenant, | Good here fionifieth corvenient (as before) if o i 
and dctermined to a cutting off, Ger. 17. Io, 11,12,13, 14. 0But gn ( ) if other circum, 


| ſtances of particular perſons make it not ſinful: or berre yy; 
: : Ith re, 
in the preſent ſtate of cho (aged, np rd ſpe& 6 to the preſent diſtreſsof neceſlity, by which, withour HS 
momentin the buſineſs O 5 dag RIGS T  Ps: IoF but Fai , ,, 3 , the Apoſtle meaneth, not the common neceſſities of all men w 
ther circumciſion aguaileth any thing, nor uncircumciſion, but Faith whic are born once todie, (which isthe more eaſi? the fewer relations = 
wor keth by love. have to part from) nor yet of family-rroubles- and c 
k Dn : | family- oncerng, 
29 Let every man abide in the ſame calling where: | there isnone who hath a family in this world to losk h—_—_ 
in he was called p. have trouble in the fleſh ; but the continual troub! 


_ . R 1 > 1C$ with the 
p Let every man abide in the ſame ſtate and condition of life in |the Church of God was diſquieted,as the Ark upnn the mi " 
which he was when he was firſt converted tothe Faith of Chriſt, - 


the more ſpecial troubles of the Primitive Church; for though cheir 
thar is, ſuppoſing that he was in an honeſt courſe of life (for we read] great Perſecutions from the Heathen were not poſſibly at thy 
thar the Conjurers in the ,4#s burnt their books, and unlawful | time begun,yet Chrift had foretold them,and the Apoſtles hadthen 
courſesof life muſt not be adhered to after men have once given up 


in a very near proſpe&t (Paul is thought to have died the 12124 gr 
their namesto Chriſt.) The Apoſt'c's deſign is only to ſhew, thar | eleventh year of Nero.) For this preſent neceſſity or diſtref, th. 
the Profefſion of Chriſtianity maketh no ſtate of life unlawful, which | Apoſtle gives his opinion, That it was convenient and better for thoſ 
was before that profeſſion lawful, nor diſchargeth any from ſuch as; that could honeſtly abſtain from marriage, to keep themlclys, ;n 


were before the duries | 20 eh in _ circumſtances and; their ſingle and unmarried condition. 

relations. Thev too far ſtrain this Text who interpret it unto an © 5 

obligation upon all men,not to alter that particular way and courſe | i! "oy Poe oy a wite 7 ok not to be 
of life andtrading, to which they were educated,and in which they OOIEA. rt thou looked irom a wile ? ſeek not 2 
formerly have been ingaged. Though ſuch a thing be of too great wife c. : 

moment and conſcquence for any to do without juſt advice and de. c Art thou bound by marriage, or bound by contra do not oſs 
liberation, yet the world is a mutablething,and trades and particu. | any ſinful ways to be looſed from thar bond, either by divorce 0 
ler courſes of life wear out, and what will now bring in adue liveli- | by a voluntary departure : ifthe Unbeliever will depart, he or 
hood, poſſibly ſeven years hence will not furniſh any with bread, | ſhe may, you are not oblig'd to court their ſtay, bur do not you 
2nd 'tis unreaſonable inſuch a caſe to think, that the Rule of Chri. | put him or her away. Are you free from a wife, either ayer 
{tian profeſſion ryes up a manunder the changes of Providence to | unmarried, or by the hand of God ſeparated; in caſe you can 
ſuch a particular courſe of life, as he cannot 1n it, in the ſweat of | without ſin, abſtain. If your circumſtances be ſuch, as they 
his face eat his bread. do not oblige you to marriage, do nor ſeck a wife. The 


21 Art thou called being a ſervant q ? care not| times are like to be full of trouble and difficulty. Our Maſter 


foe ie Ah 3- rho mayſt be made free, uſe it ra- — Wo to them that are with child, and give ſutk in thiſe das 
| | atk, 24. 19. 
ther 7. 


9 If whiles thou art a ſervant to another in any honeſt imploy. 28 But and ifthou marry, thou haſt not ſinned, and 


ment, thou artconverted to the Chriſtian Religion, let itnot trou- | if a virgin marry, ſhe hath not ſinned : Neverthelek, 
ble thee, matter it not. A man may be the ſervantof Chriſt, and} ſuch ſhall have trouble in the fleſh 4: but 1 ſpare 


yet a ſervant to menin any _ — qr Hangs if thou you. 
nayſt be made free by the favour of thy Friends with the conſent of . TY wet 
thy Maſter, uſe it rather, thatis, (ſay ſome) rather chuſc to be a ——— _ ing og -n Ka .d "_- "os p- 
fervant ſtill (which indeedin eprom _ tho _ of a good| [poſe that are married in any time, will find troubles about the 
om_—_ _ = .- Fa a _ Maſter 0900p rig bet. things of this life, and thoſe that marry in ſuch times 2s theſe are 
ues ents 1. h ory Mak ” Fel:* libe "ny" ut It} nd you arelike further to ſee, will meet with more than 0rdinte 
is more probable the ſenſe 1s, Make uleot ti.y liberty rather:tor cer=| ,,, (-oubles of this nature, I only would ſpare you, and have you 
* Toh. 8. as * _ cs wa Is © nanny at more advantage for the keep your ſelves as Gan as you can ; or 7 a any further 
6 ervice of God than he that 15 alervant. diſe f 211 4 h 
3 22 For he that is called inthe Lord, being a ſervant *, ; "va nature, not willing to torment you before tie 


Rom. 6. _ 4  heso ai þ . 
is the + Lord's freeman : likewiſe alſo he that is called 29 But *this I ſay, brethren e, The time *s ſhort f 


I8, 22. 
+ Gr.made being free, is * Chriſt's ſervant s. . . | 
free 4, 041 1 Bifw rr nh by þ os eta - remaineth,that both they that have wives, be as though 
Chap. as to his ſpiritual liberty : a ſervant and a free-man conſidered | "EY had none &e | 

9. 21, with reference to Chriſt, are both one ; a ſervant may be as near| * He had before ſpoken to what concerned ſome, now he comess 
Gal.5. 13. the Kingdom of Heaven as a free man,and let a man be in never ſo | 2 what concernethall. f The :ime (fairh he) is /þort, furled up; 
Eph. 6. 6G. good a ſtate of civil liberty, yet ifhe be a Chriſtian, he is Qill a like Sails, when the Mariner comes near his Port. He either 
1 Per. 2. ſervant of Chriſt, and bound in all things to obey him. As to the | Peaneth the time ofthis Life, or the time of che World's Dus 
16. n:w max, there 1s neither bond nor free, bat Chriſt is all and in all. tion ; we often find the Apoſtles ſpeaking of their times asthe ll 
times (and in theſe ſenſes all are concerned.) Or the time oftac 

Churches reſt and tranquility, which they had hitherto enjoied 


23 * Ye are bought wigh a price, be not ye the ſer- 
in a far more perfe& degree, than they enjoyed them ſoon alt 


_ vantsof menz. 


TB if they ſerved them, as the ſervants of Chriſt, doing the will of 


:- What price we are bought with, we heard Chap. 6. 20. the A. 
poſtle there preſfled it upon us as our duty to glorifie God with our 
bodies and our ſpirits : here he prefſeth upon us another duty, wiz. 
Upon that conſideration not to be the ſervants of Men: by which ſome 
think he forbiddeth the ſelling themſelves as f1laves to Infidels ; o- 
thers think that he only forbiddeth eye ſervice, as the Apoſtle calls 
it, Eph. 6 6. while inthe mean time they might be the ſervants of 


Gothfrom the heart, with goed will doing ſervice as to the Lord, not to 
Men. Bur the moſt probable interpretation is, Be not ſervants to 
the Iuſts of men, wherein you cannot ſerve men, and in the ſame 
actions alſo ſerve God, and be obedient to his Will : you may be 
the ſervants of men, but be not ſervants of men in ſuch ations 
wherein to ſerve them, you muſt diſobey God. | 

24 BrethrenJet every man wherein he is called, there- 


this, when ten Perſecutions followed immediately one upon it: 
neck of another. g Therefore (faith the Apoſtle) ir is the co 
cernment of all Chriſtians, not to indulge themſelves roo much in 
the pleaſures and contentments of this life ; but if ye be married 
or ſhall marry, you will be concerned to keep your hearts as /09 
from the contentment and fatisfa&tion men uſe to take in thell 
wives, as if you had no wives at all. : 
39 And they that weep, as though they wept not r 
and they that rejoyce, as though they rejoyc®? 
not ;: and they that buy, as though they pollzIkd 
not &. | 
h This conſideration alſo ſhould weigh with thoſe who 11?! 


0 . . py . Lig 
more afflifted portion in this life, and are mourners for the 
of their near relations ; they have but loſt what they cou's "7 


in abide with God «, 


| long have kept,and for the time they kept them, muſt hay* £010!* 


thi 


$ 


hap, \ 


Tried or 
he Were 
hriſtiani. 
muſt a. 
1s Upoa 
ſelf [1 
him = 
he Lg 


nmang. 
Mt 7, as 
| to be 


oOWsS, now 
mentions 
IS advice 
ſpecial 4j. 
ry Virgin, 
him bel, 
himſelfhz4 
faithful in 
redit given 
e Ol a faith. 


z for the 
t a mani( 
(| 
her circum, 
er With re. 
Ichout doube 
11 men ther 
relations Wa 
-Oncerns, for 
after,but will 
With which 
2 Waters, and 
though their 
ibly at that 
tles had them 
1 the tenth or 
r diſtreſs, the 
better for thoſe 
themſelves in 


* not to he 
ſeek not 2 


raQ,do not uſe 
by divorce or 
depart, he or 
ut do not you 
, Either a5Yet 
caſe you can 
ſuch, as they 
a wife. The 
. OurNaſter 
in thoſe dajr 


: ſinned, and 
Neverthelel, 
but 1 ſpare 


udged marriage 
F any Sex; but 
1bles about the 
es 25 theſe are, 
re than 0rdin 
and have yo! 
you any furtiet 
you before tie 


me #5 ſhot 
5b as though} 


>, now he cots! 
ſhort, furled ups 
ort. He eittr 

World's Dutt 
times as the [al 

the time oftac 
\icherto enjo#dl 
hem ſoon aki 
ly one upon 0: 
e) it is the cole 
7es too much 
fye be married, 
r hearts as 100 
ro fake in chef 


| not ht 
y wept 1 


hey rejoyes 


they polſziſd 


hoſe who hare : 
ners for che oi 
> they could 0: 
1ſt hays £010! 

chic 


them probably with a great deal of ſorrow and bitterneſs. 2 And | 
fo for any of thoſe who rejoyced in any wordly enjoyments, rhe 
ſhortneſs of the 117-E they are hke to have them ro rejoyce In, 
jhould admoniſh them to govern ind :mcderate their jcy, for it 


55 like to be but like che crackling of thorns under a pot. k And 
"hoſe that have jib:ral poll: ihons of good things in this life, rhey 
ould look upon them as none of theirs, and uſe them as not like 


ro be their pollefiions long. 


-r And they that uſe this world, as not abuſing it /: 

0. For * the faſhion ol this world patl=th away . 
uf / While you have any thing of tis world's goods you may uſe 
+. them, yea, You muſt uſe them, without them you cannot live in 
the wor'd ; butth- conſtderation how lictle che time 1s you are 
like co have them tO ute, ſhould govern you in the ule of chem, fo 
as yOu ought to rake heed you do not uſe them to any other pur- 
ſe, or for any orher end, than that for which God oath appoin- 
red and given them to you. For this world.is like a Stage or 
Theatre where arc diverſiries of Scener, and the preſent Scene abt- 
d:th but for a lirtle rime, chen paſſeth and another Scene or Fi- 
are of things appeareth : thote who appear this day in the form 
of Princes and Nobles, to moriow appear as Beggers and Perions 
of a low Eſtate and Degree. 

32 But I] would have you without carefulneſs 7. * He 
that is unmarried, careth for the chings that belong to 
he Lord, how h2 may pleaſe the T ord 0. 

1 The teaſon why I have adviſed (during the preſent diftreſſed 
eſtzte ofthe Chu ch) a ting!e rather than a maricd lite, for thoſe 
to whom God hath given rhe gift of continency, is, that thoſe who 
are Chriſtians might live as free from ſuch cares as. divide and- di- 
fr:& men and womens minds, as they poflibly can. 0 The fin- 
gle perſon thar hath a ſpirirual hearr diſpoſed ro pious perfor. 
mances, being free from other diſtractions and cares, cauſed by 
wordly occations, will ſpznd all his thoughts about his duty to- 
ward God. and how to pleaſe him. 

23 But he that 15 married, careth for the things that 
xe of the world, how he may pieale 5s wite p. 

Bur he that is married, hath other things which he muſt take 
care about ; for beſides thar he 1s obliged co provides for his fa. 
mile, husbands and wives are under ſome obligationsto pleaſe each 
aber by divertifements, which though not 1n themſelves finful, 
«rake uptiin?, which thoſe free from ſuch relations, may ſpend 
more religioutly. : 

44 There is a difference allo between a wife and a 
virgin q: The unmarried woman careth for the things 
ofthe Lord, that ſhe may be holy both in body and in 
fpiric : but ſhe that is married, careth for the things of 
the world, how ſhe may pleaſe her husband y. 

q There is the ſame difference betwixt a married woman and a 
fngle woman, as there is betwixt a married man and a fingle man. 
» If a woman be unmarried, and be pioutly diſpoſed, ſhe hath lei- 
ſure and opportunity enough to mind the things of God ; bur if 
ſhe be marricd, ſhe will then be obliged to arrend ſecular affairs, 
to take care for her family, and ro plzaſe her hushand. Tr is the 
ſame thing that was before ſaid of the man. The ſenſe is, That a 
conjugalrelation draws along with it many diverſions, from which 
a fingle life 15 tree. ; 

35 And this I ſpeak for your own profit 5, not that 1 
may caſt a ſnare upon you ?, but for that which is come- 


1M. 


THI 4M Chap. VIL 


s There is a general and a particular uncomelineſs, ſome things 
areuncomely with refpeCt to a!l perſons, of ſuch things the AP9- 
ſtle doth not here "ſpeak ; but of a particular uncomelineſs with 
reſpeCt ro the circumſtances of particular perſons. Neither doth 
wncomely here ſignifie a meer indecency and unhandſomnefs, but 
ſuch a behaviour as ſuiteth not the general Rules of the Goſpel 
which judgment is to be ruled by the circumftar:ces of perſons, 2s 
they more or leſs deſire marriage, y if ſhe be of raarriageable years, 
or rather if ſhe beginneth to grow od, z and he deſirous of mar. 
riage, ſo asthe Parent ſeeth reaſon to fear, that if he gives not her 
1n marriage, ſhe will diſpoſe of her ſ-1f withour asking her fathers 
advice or leave, and be expoſcd poſſibly ro worſe temprations : 
which two things ſeem to interpret that term, if need {5 reau;re. 
a In fuch a caſe as this a Chriitian Parent ſhallnor lin,if hediſpoſerh 
her in marriage ; let her marry to {ich a perſon as ſhe loveth and 
her Parent ſeerh proper for her. He lpealcs in the Plura! Number 
becauſe marriage 1s betwixt two perſons. The reatonofthisdererm. 
nation 1s, becauſe the Apoſtle in his former diſcourie had no wher « 
condemned a married eſtate during th: preſent diſtreſs of things, a5 
liatul or unlawful, but only as inexpedient, or not {© exnedient as 
a fingle life during the preſent diſtieſ.. He had beforedetermineg 
V. 9. That i; was better to matry than to burn. Now no inexpediency 
of athing can balance whar is plainly finful. If therefore the caſe 
be luch, that a man or woman muſt marry, or fin, though mar- 
riage brings with jt more care and trouble, yet it is to be prefer- 
red before plain finning. 

37 Nevertheleſs, he that ſtindeth ſtedfalt in his 
eart 5, having no neceflity c, but hach power over his 
own will 4, and hath fo decreed in his heart chat hs 
will keep his virgin e, doth well f. 


6 If a man be reſo!ved to keey his diughter a Virgin, not uncer-. 
can 1n his own mind, and wavering what he ſhou'd do upon a 
juſt contideration of circumſtances, c and dorh nor ſee a neceflity to 
diſpoſe of her, either tor the avoiding ſome tia againſt God, or for 
the better providing for bim{c}fand rhe reſt of his family.” & bat 
hath a perfeCt freedom in his own will, ſo that his wi'l 'be not 
contraditted by his daughter's tondnefs of a married life : For in 
luch a caſe the father, though he would willingly not diſpoſe of 
his davghrer in marriage, yet ought to be over-1 ujed by che will of 
his daughter, and fo hath not a power ovcr his own wiil, bein 

torced by the rules of Religion, to take care of the ſyul and ſpi- 
ritual welfare of his chi!d ; for though the Parent hath a great 
power over his child, and ought to conſent tothe marriage of his 

Child, yer he hath no ſuch power, as wholly ro hinder them from 
marriage. e It he be fully refolved upona due conſideration of all 
circumitances, and the Virgin bz ſatisfied, and yields up h=r ſelf in 
the caſe to her father's pleaſure, f in ſuch a cal= ifthe father doth 
not put her upon marriage, but reſolves to keep her unmarried, þ- 
doth well, that is, not only he ſhall not ſin againſt God, bur he doth, 
chat which is more eligible, confidering rhe preſent circcumſtinces 
of things, and better tharv if he did find out an hasband for her 
and give her ro him (as it isexpounded in the next verſ:.) ; 
38 oo then, he that givech her in marriage, doth 
well g : but he that giveth her not in marriage doch 
etter 4. 

g Theres no general rule for a!l parents in this caſe, where rhe 
uty or fin of parents may ariſc from their, or their childrens dif. 
ferent circumſtances. Bur ſuppoſing thar a parent having duly 
weighed all circumſtances, be fully re/olved, and he findsrhe childs 
will concurring, thar ihe can forbear, and is willing to do in che 


ys, and that you may attend upon the Lord without | 
dltcaQtion 9. 


: For your advantage both as to your converſe in the world, and 
alþ for your religious converſation, and the performance of thoſ 
duties which you owe unto God ; forthoſe that are married, mf} 
meer with more troubles and cares in thislite, and cannor have fo 
much time and leiſure for religious duties, as others have that are 
net intangled in the domeſtick cares of a family. * Yer I would 
wt bring you under a ſnare, impokng what God hath not impo- 
kd; and obliging you where God hath not obliged you. « The 
Ford here is e141 461, It ſtriftly ſigniſies 2 thing of a good figure, 
and is tranſlated in Scripture honourable, Mark 15. 4.3. Acts 13. 50. 
&17.11, where it ſignifies what is of a fair and good repute in the 
efeofthe world, which is alſo the ſenſe of it, Chap. 12.24. where 
veread of the comely parts of mans body ; but in this place the 
vord ſignifies moſt largely the ſame with profitable and convenient. 

or marriage is a ſtate which neither 15 in it {elf indecent, nor ever 
Was ſo reputed in the "World by any Nation, and the Scripture 
telus, that Marriage 1s honow able amongſt al. The word therefore 
here is of the ſame ſignificancy with avugeerr, which in rhe begin- 
lng of the verſe is tranſlated profitable, and Chap. 6. 12. is tranfla- 
ted expedient, w The phraſe in the Greek is very difhicult to be 
tranſlated properly into our Engliſh Language, word for word it 
E, Th ft well to the Lord without diſtraction; our Tranflators render 
Th ſerve the Lord, We have ſome thing like it in our language, 
"en we expreſs our diligent attendance to a thing, under the no- 

; of fit- ing cloſe roa buſmeſs, which 1s oppoſed co ſuch an atten- 
aceto buſineſs, as we give when we have many avocations and 
ngs away, fo as we cannot fit cloſe to 1r. The Apoſtle faith, 
That this was the end of his adviſing thoſe who could contain, not 
marry under that ſtate of things in the World referring to the 
urch, that they might with more eaſe and conveniency attend 
Nthe preat concerns of their Souls, without thoſe diſtra&ting and 
Widing thoughts, which rhey muſt have who were intangled 
th domeſtick buſineſs and relations. : 

36 But if any man think thath he behaveth himſelf 

Omely x towards his virgin, it ſhe paileth the flower 


rage y, and need ſo require z, let him do What he 


caſe what her parent delires ; in ſuch a cafe asthis,if the parent dil. 
poſes her in marriage, I cannot fay hefinneth, bur he doth what he 
may do; h Bur with referenc2to tle preſent ſtate of things in the 
Church and in the World, and with reference to the, youhg wo. 
man's liberty for the ſervice of God, he doth berter, if he doth nor 
ſo diſofe her. The thing is in it {elf indifferent, and Chriſtians 
muſt be in it ruled, and inclinzd one way or other from cir- 
cumſtances. 


39 * The wite is bound by the Jaw as long as her * Rom. -, 
husband liveth : but if her husband be dead, ſhe is at 2- 
liberty to be married to whom ſhe wiil ; only in the 
Lord &. 

/ The Apoſtle all along this Chapter hath been ſpeaking to 
ſeveral caſes, which the Church of Corinth hai pur to him con- 
cerning marriage : ſome thar concerned pertons already married ; 
others that concerned ſuch as were ſingle, having been NEVEr mars. 
ried, he ſhutterh up his diſcourſe with advice, which relateth co ſuch 
as had loſt their hasbands, with refcrence ro ſecond marriages. As 
to this he determinerh, Thar no woman might marry apain while 
her fir husband lived, that is, unlefs that her husband be le. 
gally divorced from her for Adultery, or unleis her husband, be- 
ing an Heathen, had voluntarily deterted her : but if her hushand 
were dead, ſhe might marry ro whom ſhe would; & yet ſhe was 
not at ſuch liberty, as that the might marry an Unbeliever. Un- 
believers are either Heathens, or Chriſtians in name, fuch as are 
Idolaters, or profane perſons, or Hereticks, who hold ſuch Tenents 
as are inconſiſtent with any true Faith in Jcſus Chriſt ; this phraſe 
only in the Lord, ſeemeth ro oblige godly women, not only ro avoid 
marrying with Heathens, but with nominal Chriſtians, thar is ſuch 
who, although they have been baptized, and own Chriſt wita 
their tongues, yer hold ſuch damnable Opinions, or live ſuch pro- 
fane lives, or worſhip God in ſuch an Idolatrous manner, as is in- 
conſiltent with any true Faith in Chriſt. 'The reaton of the precepr 
holds as well to the Jatter, as to the former. : 

40 But ſhe is happier if ſhe fo abide, aicer ny judg- « , The 
ment /: And * I think alſo that I have the Spiric of ,, g. 


God m. 


ll, he finneth not : let them maTrlY -. 


{ Bbbbbj 


{ Bus 


— — 


Eme — — n. 


nn A 


———_—_—_ 


Chap, VIII. LCORINTHIANS. Chap, yy; 


} Bur if other circumſtances concur, that a widow can abide] Þ There are many whom Heathens caii Geds, ard whony Go) 
wirhout marriage without waxing wanton, and running intotem- himſelt calleth Gods : The Angels that are in Heaven are cali 
otation, and {© as ro mmige her outward concerns, withour the God's Hoſt, Gen. 22. 2. The Heavenly Hoſt, Luke 2, 3. The $a, 

ip of an hucband; my opinions is, Thar ſhe is more happy if the | of God, 7ob r. 6. & 2.1, —_—_— alſo called Gods, => 
kecp her [If a widow,” 2nd doth nor marry again ; not happy, be- 82.6. becauſe God had committed a great part of his Power Late 
cauſe more holy, or in a fairer 10ad ro the Kingdom of Heaven, but chem. Thus there are many Gods and many Lords, 
pon the Two ACCOUNTS before mentioned ; more happy, becaule 6 But * to us there is but one God 7, the F 
2 # fi FR fs gr and 14s 01 6p ENT yy” of * whom are all things k. and we [tn him : 
Tz=e and at hb<rty to mind heavenly things. m » Tante K 1 4 
eki-k ] know as ck of the mind if "y holy Spirit of God, as one Lord Jeſus Chrilt, * by whom are al] tl 
eicherthote who reach you otherwiſe, or who may have opinions and we by him m. it 
Ceatlary {ſO mine inthiscale. ; Whatever the Idolatrous Heathens rhink or believe to us(wh Ron 
are Chriftians) there is bur one who 15 rruly and eflentially cf 36 
CHAP. VII. (though indeed there be more than one Perſon in the $5 %, 0 
Another Q:1cftion an{wered concerning the eating of things offered ro Talols : k The Father, who 1s the Foundation of the Deity, communica? / bln 
It is no: enough rhyt we know that the Ido! is nothing : and that we his Divine Nature ro rhe other £wo Perſons, and of whom ate "I, 
have but 010 God and one Lord. 1—6. For ev-ry one hath not this know-| things. Iris a term which ſignifierh che p.imary Cauſe and A 't, 
ledre, but many would eat with an Evil Conſcience and periſh. 7 —11.] thor ofall things: weſubliſt ig him, according to that of the ry 
thus to off -nd a Brother for meat 15 a Sm againſt Chriſt, 12,13. poſtie, In him we vive and move and have our being, and We are Pl! 
* Ads 16.1 %, TOw * as touching things offered to. idols a, we ONT Lan, ( yu pbraſe may alſy jet 
[ A * |. 6 - , 3 wc all ;h. 
= BH ' know that we all have >. 0 Mg h, Know He is che {econd Perſon in the holy Triaicy, Ir is che obſer," 
= + "dee puffech up c: but Charity eameth -. of a learned Author, Thar rhough the Name of God be often given 
© Mahan, a The Apoſtle proceedeth to a new Argument, about which the to Chrilt, yer no where by Poul PR he makerk mention of (9g 
74-14,22. Corintbinus had wrote to him, viz. about the eating of meat offe-, _y Father, from whence anenoingcs, 'T bac che rerm of Lord given 
Ped to Idols. Ofthis mear offered to Idols we have this Account to Chriſt, ſignitieth his preheminence above all things (the Father 
given us. Feaſtsupon Sacrifices were yery uſual amongſt the Hea- excepred) according to what ue Apoſtle ſpeaks Chap. x, 27. By 
thens ; thy firſt offered oxen, ſheep, or other cartle to the Idols, | this Chriſt, fairh the Apoltle, all things are, Joh. i. 3, 47 Pang 
Then the Prieft offered a part, burning 1t upon the Idol's Altar ; | were made by kim, and without hum was nothing mad: that was mak; 
other part they reſtored to the offerers, or rook it to themſelves, the | yet the diffrence of the phraſe 13 oblervable to denare to us the dr, 
der of working in the holy Trinity. - All things are of che Father | 


P:icft made a Feaſt in the Idols Temple of their parts,'and invi. | de: x) 
$2 fiends td ic. The offerers either ſo feafted with the part reſtor- |? Sor. » And we (faith the Apoſtle) arc by the Son creat, 


e&d ro them, in the Idols Teinple ; or carried it home, and there |reaecm.d, &c. 


Lo dobate ok ith i carried it into the marker ; ES . 
feaſted their Neizhbours with it, or elſc carr | 7 Howbeit, there is not in every man that Maw; 


| ſold it (as other meat) in the ſhambles. The Queftion was : ; | 
Whecherie © lawful for Chriſtians, being invited to theſe Feats/ledpe #: For ſome * with conſcience of the idgl'( 


by thoſe amongſt whom they lived, to go to them, and to eat of| unto this hour, eat it is as a thing offered unt mn” 
ach mear, whether it were in the Idols Cemple, or at the Pagans| jqg| o, and their conſcience being weak, is * @& 
Houſes, or ifany ſuch meat were bought in the ſhambles, wherher filed p. | «| 


they mighreat of thar. Some amongſt the Chriſtians at Corinth 
thought any of theſe were lawful, becauſe they knew an 1d! was| » Though ſome of you know that there 15 but one living an 
nothihg but a block or piece of wood or ſtone, and ſo could not de. | true God, and that an Ido] 1s nothing in the world and mer X 
file any thing. The Apoſtle tells them, that he knew, 6 that ve. | neither ſanCtified nor pol:uted, by being fer before it ; yer every 


ry manv of them had good degrees of knowledge, and every one un- | one doth not know ſo much : and though the Goſpel hath been; 
derſtood that an Idol was nothing: but yet he warneth them to take long time preached amongſt them, yer to this day they may hare 
heed they were not puffed up wich their knowledge, that is, ſwel. ſome ſuperſtitious opinion of the Idol, p and then their Conſcience 
led in ſuch a confident opinion of ir, that they thought they could | will be defiled or pollured. Ir 1s much the ſame caſe at this day ag 
not be miſtaken, and be betrayed by their conceit of ir, to do thar | fo the buſineſs of Image-worſhip, or veneration of Images, anda. 
which is ſinful ; for d Charity edifjeth. Charity ſignifieth either | vocation of Saints amongſt the Ppilts. The wiſeſt and moſt know. 
love to God, © love to our Neighbour ; here the latter ſcemerh to be | ing of them will declaim againſt giving Divine Adoration to the 
intended, and the ſenſe this, That they were nor only concerned | Image, or to the Saint, and tell us, that they worſhip the true and 


bens o , 
_ 
= Yd _ - fs pod 
Or PIO rome nts — _— Ar au_—_— 
EG OT — 


= go gr 
- 


in the good of their own Souls, but of their Neighbours alſo, and j living God upon the ſight of the Image only, and makeuſe of the 
ro do that which might tend to their profit and edification, not | name of the Saint only to deſire him or her to pray to God for 


td rheir raindand deftruttic. them. Now not to meddle with that Queſtion, whether in ons 
*Gil6z3. 2 And * if any man think that he knoweth any Ms. —_ ence Bpeny —_ NON Gn Ing 
: a pv : r Ive OT INC1 IhIp, < any Mediator by 
{ Tira. 6,thing, he knoweth nothing yer as he ought to Chiiſt, yer the things are wlawfu! upon the ſame —G that te 
” know e. : ; Apoſtle here determines it unlawful for ſtronger Chriſtians to 
e Let irbe in this or any other matter, if any man be proud of | 6.9 16.1 offered to Idols, though they knew 'and profeſſed, tht 
his knowledge and be conceited thar he knoweth enough,and need- an Idol was nothing; for all people that come 1o to worſhip hav 
eth none to infliutt him, he may indeed have a notion of thing:,| no char knowledge. There are, without doubr mutticudesof im. 
bur it willdo him 20 good. A Man ought to uſehis knowledge for ple people amongſt the Papifts, that plainly in this kind of Vent. 
the g'ory of God, and the edification of others. Let a man have | atjoq and Adoration venerate and adore the Crcarure, and ſo 
never ſo Jarge a notion of things, if he be not humble, if he ulcth | (he; confeiences are defiled by Idolatry , becauſe they hue 
not his knowledge to the honour of God, and the advantage of o- |, g,ch knowledge as others have, ſuppoſing chat what thoſe 
chers, he knoweth nothing as he ought to know it. Knowledge | orhers did, were lawful as to their praCtice, -which indeed it is 
15 a Talent notto be laid up in a Napkin. not; : 
423 0g if any man love God, the fame is known of 3 But meat commendeth us not to God : for neither 
f It is of much more a\lvantage to a Soul to be known of God, if we eat, (| are we the better ; neither if we cat nd 
that is, owned, acknowledged and approved, than to comprehend [| are we the worle 9. | 
much of the things of God in its norion. A man may know much| 4 The Apoſtle here ſpeakerh .in the perſon either of rhoſ 
of God, and yer be one to whom God will one Day ſay, Depart | Teachers amongſt them, or thoſe more private perſons amorgl 
from me, I know you not, you workers of Iniquity : bur if any |them, who made no difficulty of exting mear cffered ro dels; 
monlove Ged, that man is beloved of God, and ſhall be owned and | they obje&ed, that meat, or the eating of meat, wv as not the chin 
acknowledged by him. In this ſenſe know 1s taken in a mulcitude | which commended any man to God, they were not the betterif 
of Scriptures, Joh. 17. 3- our Tranſlators render this word aJow, they dideat, or the worſe if they did not ear. The Apoſtle him- 
Rom. 7,15. | {elf had aflerted this, Rom. 14.17, That the kingdom of God wi 


4. As concerning therefore the eating of thoſe things not meat or arink, but righteosſneſs, and peace, and joy in the By 


that are offered in ſacrifice to idols g, we know that an | ®YF- | | 
* Ia, 41. idol is * nothing in che World 4, and that there 3s none] 9 But * take heed, leſt by any means this || liberty 
24. other God but one z. [of yours become * a ſtumbling"block to them chat art 
Cli.io.19. » Meat which is part of me. cor wage gym w_ _ offered | weak 7. | 
to an Ido], whether it be to betaten in the Ido! Temple, or in af The word :Zuwa is here well tranſla iberty, though it all 
private houſe. & We know that an Image or an Idol, the repre. | qonifieth Right, DT IR Ley, ” Fife ; 
ſenrarion ofſame other thing, chough in reſpe&t of cho warcer ic be ſuppoſed, than a real liberty or right; for we ſhall ſee in the next 
ſomething, either wood, ſtone, or earth, and in reſpett of form _ | verſe, that the Apoſtle is here ſpeaking of their eating in the Ido 
be ſomething, yet it is nothing formally, or repreſentatively. Ir is} Tangle, WA Os. 16. as. te deverminerk to þe an. heriegil 
ſer up torepreſent to us a Deity, there is nothing of a Divine Ne en abs Pare apphe "Re Funs R_— 
cure, or the repreſentation of a Divine Nature in 1t. Ir is nothing poſtle therefore Goneth bans only to ſuppoſe (as they pretond- 
of what the poor bling Heathen take it to be, and therefore In the ed) that in their eatin g ſimply io the Idols Temple they 1id not 
Hebrew it harh its name from a word 7 that ignifieth no. | 5, becauſe by eating, men Oh made the worle: yet as welhal 
thing Jib T3. 14. Zach. 11. 17. Or it 1s nothing that can either ſee afterwards, he declareth their a&ion was not free from guilt] 
ſanfifie, or polture any meat that is ſer before it. / And we know asit was a violation of that brotherly love which they were oÞlif 
thar there is none other God but one : the Apoſtle may be concei. ro ſhew to-cheir nalobbou y 
ved to have ſpoken theſe words as from himſelf, granting what bis S wo | 
thoſeſaid, who took themſelves to be mn of knowledge. Or elſe in 10 For if any man ſee thee, which haſt knowledg?, 
the language of thoſe who thus ſpake, repeating their words. {ir at meat in the Idols temple, ſhall not the conlciene® 


IF For though there be that are called gods, whether |of him which is weak -#- be emboldened to cat cho 
in heaven or in earth, as there be gods many, and lords |things which are offered unto idols 2 «. 
many s. y b 

i oof 


2 VN? 


G9 
alicd 
* Yon 
Pla! 
© Unto 


Uter, | 
> oo 
! 0h 
nos LY y 
os, 
us(whoon 
ly God, 
Deity.) W 
nucating,5 
| are a} 
and Ay.,} 
f rhe A. 
are forth 
y alſo hell 


as thing, | 


, VITL. 


- her were really weak in their knowledge, or at leaſt they 
_— upon as ſuch, For (faith he) if any ſee thee, who, 
they think,haſt knowledge , or who boaſtelt of thy knowledge, ſit 

© meat in the Idols Temple, will nothe by it be incouraged todo 
the fame, though pofſibly he judgeth it 1s not lawful ? The word 
eranflated :mboldened, 1s the ſame which 1s elſewhere often in the 
New Teſtament tranſlated edified ; it Metaphorically ſignifies ro 
make a progreſs or proficiency either in good or evil, (though this 
te che only Text in the New Teſtament where it is taken inan 
{ſenſe ) This the Apoſtle derermines ſinful ; which lers us 
know the obligation chat lieth upon every good Chriſtian not to 
\ſe kis liberty to the prejudice of others Souls, by doing any a&i- 
ons which we may do or Jet alone, which done by us, may pro- 
bably become 2 ſaare to them. 


[x And * through thy knowledge 7 ſhall the weak 
brother periſh « for whomChriſt died 2». 


+ Through thy knowledge in this place is by occaſion of thy knowleage. 


ſervation, + God hath not given people knowledge that they thereby ſhould 


cen Given 
In of God 
Lerd given 
the Father 
j» 27, By 
AJ Pings 
"As mad; : 
us the dr. 
Father by 
on created, 


| unto an? 
I @; 


living and 
and meat is 

; Yet every 
hath beenx 
ey may have 

r conſcience 
at this day as 
ages, and [n. 
d moſt know. 
Yration to the 
p the true and 
ake uſe of the 
7 to Gol for 
1erher in out 
ture before vs 
Mediator but 
-ounr that the 
\ Chriſtians to 
profeſſed, that 

worſhip have 
'tirudes of fims 
-ind of Vent« 
carure, 2nd ſo 
ſe they have 
at what thoſe 
ch indeed its 


« for neither 
we Cat nd, 


either of rhoſe 
zerſons amor 

{f:red ro Idels; 
; as not the chink 
jot the betterif 
he Apoſtle hits 
odom of God wi 
4 joy in the Bi 


; this [| libert 
hem that als 


,, though it al 
er to ſigni 8 
ſee 1n tbe next 
ing in the 190 
be an having ® 
lawful; the Ax 
the preten p 
l hs did not 
rec fr om guilt, 
ey were obilg 


knowledge, 
he con{ciencs 
to eat £00 


; Herb 


he a means tO harm and to deſtroy, but to do good, and fave 
"hers ; it is a moſt abſurd thing for any to uſe their knowledge 
therefore to the deſtruQtion of others. « By periſhing is here meant, 
being led into ſia, by afting contrary to the judgment of his own 
conſcience ; for ( as the Apoſtle ſaith elſewhere ) He that doubr- 
his damned if he eateth , for whatſoever 1s not of faith, that is, 
Jone out of a firm perſwaſion in theparty doing, that it 1s lawful, 
fn. » Though he be weak, yer if he be a true Believer, Chriſt 
tied for him,and there can be nothing more contrary to the duty of 
1 charitable Chriſtian, than to be a means to damn him whom Chriſt 
came down from Heaven, and died for, that he might ſave him. 


12 But when ye ſin ſo againſt the brethren x, 
nd wound their weak conſcience », ye lin againſt 
Chriſt 2. 


« Sin is properly againſt God, for it is a breach of the Divine 
Law ; but the violations of that part of the Divine Lawywhich con- 
ceneth our duty to our Neighbour, are called fins againſt our 
Brethren, that is, fins againſt God, in matters which concern our 
duty towards our Brethren. y Thegiving the weak judgments of 
others, by your examples, an occaſion of fin, by venturing upon 
tions which they think ſinful ; is that which 1s here called a 
ating , or a wounding their weak conſciences. becauſe it is indeed 
nn hurting and defiling ofthem. z This the Apoſtle determinerh 
tobe a ſnning againſt Chriſt, both againſt the Law of Chriſt, con- 
c:ming loving one another, and againſt the love of Chrilt, who 
in dying for the weakeſt Believers , hath ſhewed the higheſt degree 
of love imaginable ro them, whom they are very far from follow- 
ing, who willnot abate themſelves a ſmall matter of liberty, where 
the uſe of it this or that way may very probably be an occaſion of 
ſn, and ruine to their brethrens Souls. 


13 Wherefore * if meat make my brother to offend a, 
Iwill eat no fleſh while the world ſtandeth, left I make 
ny brother to offend 5. 


« Suppoſe therefore it were lawful for me to eat fleſh offered 
to Idols, yet if T cannot do ir bur I ſhall make my brother ſin,” I 
mill forbear. Others underſtand it more generally, not of the 
meit before mentioned, but of all #:/þ, I will rather live upon bread 
adberts : by which expreſſion the Apoſtle doth not ſuppoſe, that 
there can ever be ſuch acaſe when there ſhall be any ſuch need , 
but only deciares how much a good Chriſtian ſhould do, to pre- 
rent þis brother's ſinning againſt God. 5 Thoſe expreſſions, Marr, 
5. 29. of plucking out the right cye, and cutting off the right hand , 
ae much of the ſame nature ; both thoſe phraſes and this phraſe 
lignifie only, that we ought to do any thing, and to deny our ſelves 
in any thing, rather than our ſelves to ſin, or be wilful occaſions 
to others of fin. From this diſcourſe of the Apoſtleir 1s very plain, 
but it is the dury of Chriſtians in any matters where they are 
by the Law of God at liberty , whether they will do a thing or 
Þ, to take that part, which they ſee will give leaſt occaſion of 
in unto their brethren, and to avoid that part, which if they 

ll rake, they ſee they ſhall by taking it give occaſion to others 


L CORINTHIANS 


Here the Apoſtle ſheweth how they ſinned in eating meat in 
he Idols Temple, which had been before offered to the Ido), ad- 
| "ring the ching in it ſelf lawful (which indeed it was not) w7z. 
identally , by laying |. block before their brethren, 


1s certain, that the Corinthians were at a perfe& liberty, and had 
no Supertors that commanded them ſoro eat ( bad the thing bzen 
in it ſelf lawful) neither were they under any neceſſity, either to 
eat that meat, or to ſtarve themſelves or families. They had other 
fleſh beſides rhar to eat. In this caſe the Duty of Chriſtians is 
' plainly determined by the Apoſtle. 


CHAP. IX. 


The Signs of an Apoſtle. 1. they were the Seals of his Off-e. 2. his Ex- 
ample might teach them the right uſe of indifferent things 1—=5, He 
might expetft his maintenance from them : this proved by theſs whe 
ſerve in War : who plant a Vineyard: and fecd a Foc: of an Oz 
that threſheth : of @ Sower : of them that ſerrye the T-mple : and 
th:s our Lord ordained. 1=—=—=14. he might therefore require it , but 
of his own. accord forbear it : not judging it for Eaifi:ation among 

' them: inwhich Caſe it would be an Abuſe of his power : which us de- 
ſigned to gain both Jew and Gentile, and help the weak : for the Go < 
Jpel's ſake. 16——23. Sobriety and diligent Progreſs in Goalineſs ne- 
ceſſary unto all, both Miniſter and People. 24 —— 27. 


not you my work in the Lord? &, 


In the greater part of this Chapter, the Apoſtle proceedeth in his for 
mer diſcourſe , not ſpeaking particularly to the caſe of eating mea- 
offered to Idols, but to the general point, viz. That it is our duty tt 
abate of our liberty , when we ſee we cannot ſe it without harm tio 

0: hey Chriſtians. And here he propoſeth to them his own example, wha 

had reſtrained himſelf in three things, to two of which he had a liver:y, 

and yer avoided it, and that not to prevent their ſming , but on.y 
their ſuffering , and that too only by 6ting by him owver-burthened ; 

1 as to cating and drinking. 2 Abſtaining from marriage, by which 

h: might have been more chargeableto them. 3. requiring maintc= 

mance of them for his labour amongſt them. As to both which he dc- 

clares he had from God's Law a liverty, but had forborn touſe that part 
from which the Church in that ſtate might be prejudiced. 

s Some that are puffed up or ſeduced, will, it may be, deny 
thatIam an Apoſtle , a Preacher ofthe Goſpel of the greateſt emi. 
nency , immediately fent out by Chriſt to preach his Goſpel , 
bur will any of you deny ic? 6b Have not I the ſame liberty that 
any of you have-in things wherein the Law of God hath no more 
determined me than you? What Charter of liberty hath God gi- 
ven to any of you more than he hath to me? c Have I not ſcen 
Jeſus Chriſt > 4#s 10. 41. Did not I ſee Chrift in my going to 
Damaſcus ? Afi9g.5. And when I was in my extalie ? 4&; 22. 
13,14. When TI was wrapt into the third Heavens? 2 Cor. 12.1, 
2. In priſon? 4#s 23. 11. He was the only Apoſtle we read 
of, who ſaw Chriſt after his Aſcenſion. & If others willnot lock 
upon me as an Apoſtle, God having wrought nothing upon their 
Souls by my Miniſtry, yet you whoſe Faith is my work, though 
inthe Lord, as the principal efficient Cauſe, yet by me as God's 
inſtrument, cannot deny me to be ſo; if my having ſeen Jeſus 
Chriſt, and being immediately ſent out by him , be not enough to 
prove me ſo to you, yer the effteQs of my Miniſtry upon you 
puts it paſt your denial. 


in the Lord f. 


e Hehadw.1. told them they were his work in the Lord, from 
whence he concludes here, That he was an Apoſtle, that is, one 
ſent of Chriſt tothem for the good of their Souls, whatever he 
was to others. f You, ſaith he, asto your ſelves at leaſt are the 
Seal of my Apoſtolical Office; it hath a confirmation in you by 
the effeQ, as the writing is confirmed by the ſeal. For how can 
you think, that the bletiing of the Lord ſhould go along with my 
preaching, to turn you from Pagan Idolatry, and your lewd cour. 
ſ6s of life ro the true Chriſtian Religion, and to an holy life and 
converſation, if God had not ſent me. There is no ſuch Argument 
to prove a Miniſter ſent of Chriſt, as the ſucceſs of his Miniſtry in 
the converſion ofSouls unto God. Ir is True, we cannot conclude, 
That a Miniſter is no true Miniſter, if he be able ro produce no 
ſuch ſeals of his calling. For the ſpiritual ſeed may for a time 
lie under the clods, and changes may be wrought in hearts, which 
are not publiſhed to the world : and even 1/s:ah may be ſent to 


pln, though they be rhemſelves never ſo well ſatisfied as to the 
wfulneſs of their ation (provided the aCtion be only lawful, not 
Keeſſary, and what by the Law of God they are bound rodo, or 
daroid.) But here two grave Queſtions ariſe : 1 Wh:ther the com- 
i of Superiors doth not here alter the caſe? Admit a thing be in 

t elf by usjudged lawful, what by God's Law we may do, or let 
Me;and our Superiours command us to do,or to avoid chat thing : 
onthe other ſide ſee, that if we do ir, or avoid it, we ſhall 
probably be occaſion to make our brethren ſin, who doubt 
fthe lawfulneſs of the thing, The Queſtion is, What is to be 
Me in this caſe > That the Law of God commanding love to 
t brethren, equally concerneth high and low, is out of doubr , 
that no Superior ought more to command any to do, whar ir 


make the hzarrs of people far. But where thoſe ſeals can be produced, 
It is a moſt certain ſign, that the Miniſter is a true Miniſter, thar is, 
one ſent of God ; for he could be no inſtrument to do fuch works, 
if God were not with him : and if God had nor ſent him, he would 
not be with him ſo bleſſing his Miniſtry ; yerit is poſlible the Man 
may have his perſonal errours: For though ſome men doubr, 
whether an inſtance can be given of one openly and feandalouſly 
wicked, whom God ever honoured to be his inſtrument to convert 
Souls, yet it would be raſhly affirmed by any to ſay, that Fudas 
( though a ſon of perdition, but not ſcandalous till the laſt) was 
an inſtrymenr to convert none. ; 
3 Mine anſwer to them that examine me is this pg. 

Z Theſe words may beunderſtood in a double reference: eicher 


dent, he cannot do without making his brother to offend , | what went before ; then the ſenſe 15 this; To thoſe chat exa- 
the inferiour oughr to do it: bur the queſtion is, Whar is the| Mine me about my Apoſtleſhip, this is my anfwer, Thar 1 have 


Merors duty if commanded. A ſecond queſtion 1s, Suppoſe that 


ſeen the Lord', That yeu are my work in the Lord , and the Seal of 


ſach do whas 1 iudze 1 may lawfully| 7} miniſtry. Or with reference to the words that follow, then 
ps OT hp, by ans pee to args the ſenſe isthis : If any man examineme, how I my ſelf praQtiſz 


| tle command of men 1 am obliged to do it, or to ruine my ſelf and 
Ml? What is my duty in this caſe ? In both theſe caſes there 
Sto be a Colliſion of Precepts. In the firſt caſe the Precept 
wving our Neighbours, ſeems to daſh againſt the many Precepts 
Oezing Superiors. In the other Caſe, it ſeems to daſh againft 
ecept for providing for our ſelves and families; ſo as the 
Aon 15, Which Precepts lay here the greateſt obligation, 
ere both cannor be obeyed ? But we leave theſe queſtions ro 
its, The determination of what is the Will of God in ei- 


che Dorine which I preach to others, and determine my ſelf as 
to my liberty for the good and profir of others? I givethem the 
following anſwer. ; 

4 * Have we not power to eat andto drink? 4. 


h Could I not eat and drink of ſuch things off-red to Idols as -_ 


2 Theff.3. 


kere ſhortly expreſs'd, and more fully opened afterward, yet the 9: 


well as you ? Have notI as great a knowledge, and as much liber, 
ty ? Yer you ſee forbear. Burt the generality of Iaterpreters ra- 
ther incline rointerprer it by what followeth ; Then, cthough ir be 


frof them, will require a great many more words , than whar 
| 117 ber Ant ations with,eſpecially conſidering that neither | 
014, 


ſenſe is : Have not I power to ask a maintenance of vou, by which 
I ſhould be inabled to eat and drink. 
{B bbbb2] 5. Have 


2 If I be not an apoſtle unto others, yet doubtleſs, 
I am co you e: for the * ſeal of my apoſtleſhip are ye **- 


Chap. IX 


| of them properly falls into the explication of this Text, where it 


I A M I not an Apoſtle? 4, am I not free? 5,*Ch.15.8. 
| * havenotl1 ſeen Jeſus Chriſt our Locd ? c, * are © 4 £5 


aiIT. 


« 3<© 


— = 


Py 5 ” apy 
- Ix: 


« 2m - S © a. - C e - - 
. US, 220k * CP —_ a : 8 > _— —" ws 
-_. h . . ES _ = L . 2 
by ERAS - 4 - . C5 P _ _ 
_ : Y - -- 6 - . "LP - —_ 

"IR — rod ox 2 - 2s = ry 22> <9 
>a 1 wa 8 mpegs S : En, — 4 wn,» Sampras 

: "nn 4 : - 

- HA L . 


_ 
— = 
—— _— _— 
> — ha. 
OO Ee a NE 
Ry 
nu mt 


£ _—_—_ ky 
OS - "6 7-7 
SI te. LL _ . . 
—— 


Chap. IX. 


ſ/ 
Or, W6- 


may, 


” Mar 6.3 


Luk.c.ic. * and Cephas? &. | 


. 7; Thoſe that by thoſe terms, &ſ:>.2Y9 quyatry underſtand , no 
. (as we tranſlate it) a ſiſter, a wife, but a woman , that ſhould out 


Gal. 1.19 
* Matt $ 


I 4. 


” =Cor.1o. 


4. 
"CD, 3-6, 


6,8. 


Pe > , : 
' PEL. 5.2. that Age, was ſo in a more eminent manner, as the oppoſition 


*r Tim.s5. 


38. 


- rreadeth our the. corn q: Doth God take care for 


. eateth not of the milk of theflock ? 0. 


ELZLOUORIN 


5 Have we not power to lead about a ſiſter, a (| wife | 
as well asother apoſtles, and as* the brethren of the Lord, 


of her eſtate have contributed to the Apoſtles maintenance (as Jo- 
anna the wife of Chiz.a, Hered's Steward, and Suſama, and many o- 
thers followed Chriſt, miniſtering to him of their ſubſtance, Luke 8. 3.) 
ſeem not to conſider: 1, That ſuch women would have been no 
burden, but an he!p to the Church ( which is quite contrary to 
the Apoſtles fenſz ) 2. That the term /eading about , imports a 
conjugal relation to the woman. 3. That if this had been 
the ſenſe, it had been enough to have ſaid; to [cad abour a woman, 
he ſhould not need. have faid, a {ter, a woman. 4. That ſuch 
I-ading about a woman , not their wife, had been ſcandalous. 
5. Thar the very phraſe,a /ifcr, a wif-,anſwersthe phraſe, 4s 23.1. 
Arn, brcthren, which ſignifies no more than, O ye Chriſtian Men, as a 
ſifter, a wife ſignifies here a Chriſt:;an Wife. 6. That we no where 
ead, that Percr, James, John, Judas, (here called the Brethren of 
our Lord) or any ofthe other Apoſtles, ever in their Travels car- 
ried about with them any ſuch rich Matrons, nor their wives, who 
( as thoſe, Lnke 8. 3.) miniſtred to them of their ſubſtance. Our 
Interpreters bave therefore juſtly tranſlated it, a ſiſter, a wife ; and 
the ſenſe is, Have I not power to marry ? Yet the phraſe teaches 
us two things: 1. That Chriſtians have no power, that is, no 
lawful power to marry ſuch asare no Chriſtians, their wives muſt 
be their Siſters alſo in Chriſt. 2. That husbanas and wives ought 
to be undivided companions one to another. k He inſtancerh in 
ſeveral Apoſtles that were married, Peter ( called Cephas) Fames , 
on and Trudas, the Sor of Alphens, Chriſt's kinſfman. Whence 
we may obſerve, That Miniſters may lawfully marry, no Law of 
God hath reſtrained them more than others : The Popiſh DoEtrine 
forbidding to marry, is by the Apoſtle determined to be a Dottrine 


of Devils. 
6 OrT only, and Barnabas, * have not we power to 


forbear working ? /. 

! Are T and Barnabas the alone Apoſtles, who are obliged for our 
livelihood to work with our hands? As Paul did, 48s 18.3. ma- 
King Tits, We certainly, as well as the reft of the Apoſtles, if 
we would run- out to the utmoſt end of the line of our liberty in 
things, without having any regard to thecircumſtances of our bre- 
thren, might forbear working ' with our hands, and expect thar 
thoſe amongſt whom we labour, ſhould maintain us. 


7 Who * goeth a warfare at any time at his own 
charges m2 ? who * planteth a vineyard, and eateth not 
of the fruit thereof » ? or who * teedeth a flock , and 


» The work ofthe Miniſtry is a warfare, -the Miniſters work in 


which thoſe firſt Miniſters of the Goſpel , both from the Jewsand 
from the Heathens, was greater than what Miniſters have in latter 
Apes met with. Now, faith the Apoſtle, none that liſts an Army, 
expe&sthat his Soldiers ſhould maintain themſelves withour any 
pay. » It is like the planting ofa Yineyard. The Church in Scripture 
3s called a"Vineyard, ſz. 5. 1, 2. The plants are the Lord's, but 
he uſeth Minifters hands in the planting of them : none planteth a 
Vineyard, but in expeCtation of ſome fruit ; none employeth ſer- 
vants to plant a Vineyard but he reſolveth to uphold them with 
food and raiment, while they are in his work, o The Church is 
compared to aflock (ſaith the Apoſtle) no man feeds a flock either 


THIANS. Chip, 


s Not that the ' Law, Dexzt. 25.4. did primar: 

Will for the maintenance of Miniſters, for aadoubeotte on Gol 
marily oblige them according to the lertec of ir, nor K+. Opel 
ly and unmercifully with the beaſt they made ufc of "Ag en 
they took them off from getting their food, by het irs thae 
to tread out corn for them ; ſo while they did it, they h = "P 
ſtarve them; bur give them leave moderately to eat of _ 
(faith the Apoſtle ) rhe reaſon of ic doth much more oblige wr 
reſpe& to men, eſpecially ſuch means are employed in a M: col 
for your Souls. : That as he who ploweth for another —_—_ 
hope to get bread for himſelf, from the wages for which be 
nanteth, # And ſo alſo doth the threſher threſh in hope ; "Is 
that are the Lord's Plow-men, working together with himſchooss 
in a far inferiour degree of cauſation ) in the plowing up "Is. 
low grounds of mens hearts, and ſowing the ſe2d of righre ; 
neſs in mens Souls and the Lord's Threſhers, by our Foes 
hortations, arguments, 2c. beating the fruicsof good works tg he 
glory of God, out of thoſe amongſt whom we labour might Fr 
labour in ſome hope of a livelihood for-our ſelves A while Fx 
doing the Lord's work and his peoples. 


"-= It we hare ſown unto you ſpiritual things 
z it a great thing if we ſhould reap your cany | 
things ? 2, oh 


w By ſpiritual things the Apoſtle meaneth the Do&rine and$ ; 
craments of the Goſpe], which are called ſpiritual thins; b—_ 
they come from Heaven, they affe& che ſoul and | Pirir of a ag 
they tend to make men ſpiritual, they prepare the Soul for Ha. 
ven. By carnal things he means things which only ſeryeour "= 
dies, which are our carnal fleſhly part. From the inequality of theſe 
things , and the excellency of the former above the latter, the A 
poſtle argueth the reaſonableneſs of Miniſters maintenance ou 
their people, they giving them quidpro quo, a juſt compenſation 
tor ſuch allowance, yea what was of much more value ; for there 
1s a great diſproportion between things ſpizirual and thinscz.. 
nal, the former much exceeding the latter, fo as che Minitter gf 
the Goſpel had the odds of them, giving people thingsof amuch 
greater ant more excellent value, for things of a much leſſer and 
infertour value. 


12 It others be partakers of 7h power over you, 4r!, 
not we rather x? * Nevertheleſs, we have notuſedths, 
power: but ſufferall things, * leſt we ſhould hinder the 
goſpel of Chriſt y. | 


x Thoſe falſe Apoſtles or Teachers, which were amongſt the* 
Corinthians, did (as it ſeemeth) exerciſe this power; thit is, re 
quired maintenance of the people ; ſaith the Apoſtle, Are not we 
by the ſame right poſſeſſed of ſuch a power ? Might not we a; 
reaſonably expe& ſuch a maintenance ? 05je#. But might not they 
have ſaid, No, you are not, they are conſtantly reſidingamongſ 
us, and inſtrufting us ? &c. Anſw, This arguing of the Apolle 
lets us know, that the Primitive Churches were not only obliged 
to maintain their own Paſtors, but» thoſe alſo who were general 
Officers to the Church, and by the appointment of God werenot 
to fix and abide in any one place, bur had the care of allthe 
Churches upon them. And it may alſo teach us, that though Chrje 
ſtians be in the firſt place obliged to take care of their own P4- 
ſtors, yet they are not to limit their charity to them, but alſo 
to take what care their ability will allow them of others, whoſe 
labouts have at any time been uſeful to them, or may be uſcful 
to any other part of the Church of God, y Yet, faith the Apo- 
{tle, though we have this power or liberty, neither I nor Bans 


We ares 


perſonally or by his ſervants, but he eateth, or alloweth his ſer- 
vants to eat of the milk of the flock. By theſe three Inſtances 
commonly known amongſt men, the Apoſtle ſheweth the reaſona- 
Hleneſs, that the Miniſters of the Goſpel ſhould be maintained from 
the people, to whom they are Miniſters. 


8 Say I theſe things as a man ? or faith not the Law 
the ſame allo ? p. 


>» That is, I do not ſpeak this only rationally, or by a fallible 
Spirit, nor do I build this affertion alone upon inftances known and 
familiar amongſt men. As this is highly reaſonable and conform 
to what the very light of Nature ſheweth, and the Law of Na. 
rure obligeth men to in other caſes where men take others off their 
own work, to attend theirs ; ſo it is according to the Will of God, 
which is the higheſt reaſon. 


9 * For it is written in the Law of Moſes , 
Thou {halt not muzzle- the mouth of the ox that 


OXen? 7. 

g Art being notſo improved formerly as now , nor inall places 
as in ſome places, they were wont antiently both in the land of 
Yuica, and tince in Grece, and (as is ſaid at this day in ſome 
places of Trance , to tread out their Corn by the Feer of Oxen : 
and by the Law of Moſcs, Deut. 25. 4. it ſhould ſeem that ſome 
too covetous perſons would muzzle the mouths of their Oxen , 
that while they crod out the Corn, they might eat none of it, 
which Ged looking upon as an at of cruelty or unmercifulneſs , 


ſorbad his ancient people the Jews. r» Now , faith the Apoſtle, have I written theſe things , that it ſhould be lo " 
unto me: for * it were better for me to die, then t 
an andbeaſt ; hetakes care , asour Saviour elſewhere teaches us, | Wy Man ſhould make my glor ying void c. 


1th God taks care for ox? that is, more for Oxen than for Mini- 
ters or Men ? For God doth take care for Oxen, he preſerveth beth 


for the ſparrows , for the fow!s of the air, for the graſs of the field. , 


and thereſore for Oxc, which are a degree of creatures more no. | 4 liberty to demand a maintenance of thoſe to whom | prexci 
be: but by the ſame reaſon we muſt conclude, That he taketh a | Goſpel, yet T have done neither. c Nor do I now wittf if 
vreater care ſor men , eſpecially ſuch as he employeth in his more | purpoſe, that I would now impoſe a burden upon you'to 
| a maintenance. I knowT am calumniated by ſome,as if by + J 
10 Or ſaith he it altogether for our ſakes? For our |ing the Goſpel , I' only ſought my own profit and _— 
; have gloried in the contrary, 4Fs 20. 33- v V. : 8. of _ ; 
. and I look uponir as my great honour, that I can preac? 
ſhould plow in hope 7, and he that threſbeth in hope , ſpel freely, guy Thad A a die by ſtarving, than loſe this 2d 


tage of glorying.” And if I fot your profit, and for the 


immediate fervice. 


takes no doubt s 7445 is written, that * he that ploweth, 


/hould be partaker of his hope . 


bas have made uſe of it, but ſuffer all thoſe evils that come upon 
our not uſing it, hanger, thirſt, 1abour, leſt we ſhould hinderths 
progreſs of the Goſpel, while ſome might for the charge declin 
hearing us, or others might charge us with covetouſneſs, &e. 
I3 Do ye not know, that they which miniſter : 
bout holy things | live of rhe things of the temple 
and they which wait at the altar, are partakers with ti 
aitar ? &, 
z You may underſtand what is the mind and will of Godun 


der the New Teſtament, by refle&ing upon what appeareti t, 
you, to have been his mind and will under the Old Teſtament Vi 
God had a Miniſtry under the Old Teſtament , the Trite sf L 1t 
was it ; and God there ordained and appointed a livelihood i Pr: 
them, Numb. 18. 22. Deut, 13, 9. & 18. 1. ſo as thy ne, 
ed not ( as other men) to labour with their hands to get brt bh 
to Ear. Wo! 
14 Even fo * hath the Lord ordained «,' th | 
they which preach the goſpel , ſhould live of Ip 
goſpel. Wie 
a God's Will is the ſame under the New Teſtament thatit 8 of 
under the Old ; it isnot as to the people a matter of liberty, lo b i 
men may chuſe whether they will maintain their Miniſters or 0 J 
there is an Ordinance of God in the caſe : Ic is the Willof 0 - 


that thoſe who are taken off from worldly imployments,and ſpe 
cheir time in the ſtudy and preaching of the Goſpel, ſhould ha! 
livelihood from their labour. 


15 But * have uſed none of theſe chings 5. Net 


+-.þ Though I have ſuch a liberty ro marry as well as others 


Chap, 


1p. IX. 


L CORINTHIA4AMS 


Chap. IX; ; 


: of the Goſpel, abate of my liberty, ſhould not you abate of | it ſelf ſeparately from ſuch circumſtances, the Miniſter may law- 
_ __ to keep your weak brethrenfrom deſtroying their Souls by | fully enough require and expett ſuch maintenance. k Thar ( faith 
cal Wane finning againſt God? SE => Apoſtle) I abuſe nor my power in the Goſpel. Some think. 
It that 16 For though I preach the goſpel, I have nothing - at the word here tranſlated abyſs might b:rter have been rra::.. 
them to glory of d: * fer necelſlity is Jaid upon me, yea, wo _ ue, a5 1t fignified Chap. 7. 31. But it generally ſignifies a5/-, 
could IH. -fTrreach not the pofpele O as there isno reaſon to vary from the common uſage of it, accor. 
_ js unto MC, il 1Þ 5 ks ding to which it teaches us this remarkable Leflon, that fo to uf: 
- But 3 Though I do preach the Goſpel], yer I have noreaſon at all to liberty which God hath left us asto a&ijons. as that by our uſe af 
FF: With glory 3 all char I have to glory 1D, is, that I have preached is free- it the Glory of God, or the good of others is hindred, 1s to abaſ- 
: iniſt: Tv (which your falſe Apoſtles an Teachers do not) tor the preach- it, that is, not to uſe it to that true end fr which God hath b- 
—_ in :1g of the Goſpel, conſidered without that circumſtance, I have |,,1geq 1c with ir. For this is certain, that God hath bercuſted n- 
: RT no Inpers od lap "op Fray Fora - __ - _ wa no power or liberty to be uſedto the prejudice of his Glory, 
, e » © . . -*: pagginys0 eat 
m(though pw penalties and woes, 1t I do nor do that ; there 1s therefore — —_— — AN try w_—_ {ptct- 
1Þ the fa. nothanks I can claim upon that account ; all that I can glory in, any thing, is indeed an ahh _ & of our liberty in 
righreouſ. 5: that I do it without charge to thoſe ro whom I preach it. Some Ih Honoh. 1 hs F 1 7 
abours «x. make 2 doubt, whether there lieth the ſame neceſſiry upon Mini- 9 Or tnOough-1 DE ITee Irom _ mort © Fee have I 
orks.co the ters now to preach the Goſpel, and they be liable to the ſame dan- made my felf ſervant unto all, that I might gain ” Mart 
might uſp vers and penalties, if rhey do it not. I ſee no reaſonat all to doubt the more m. WEL 18. 15. 
ie we are i: for what neceſlity lay upon Paul, or any of the Apoſtles, but | 1 The word men is not in the Greek, but is ſupplied by our in. > F=t-3-v 
a neceſſiry of Precepr, that 1s, they were obliged to obey the Com- | terprerers. Some make things the Subſtantive, and reſtrain it to | 
| thinps,, mand of God in the caſe, and liable to ſuch penalties in caſe of ne- |the things of the Ceremonial Law ; it may be underſtood bath of 
Ir Carnal | [:&, as men are ſubject to, that obey not the Command of God, | men and things ; he was born no man's ſervant, nor by God's Law 
7, in fulfilling the duties of their Relations ? Theſame neceſlity, the | made a ſervant ro any mens humours, and as free, as to many o- 
Gl ſame danger is yet incumbent upon every Miniſter, or elſe we may | ther things, as he wastohave take maintenance of the Chucches,for 


rine and$z, 
165, becauſe 
ir of a man, 
ul for He. 
erveour bo. 
1liry of theſe 
tter, the A. 
enance from 
ompenſation 
e ; for there 
d thingscar- 


e Minilter of tion of the Goſpel, bur ſo was nor preaching ; if it had, Timothy 
gs of amuch and Titus would have had no ſuch charge as to that work. Ir is 
ch lefer and true, Miniſters are not bound to preach in others houſes without 


their leave 3 therefore we read very little of the Apoſtles preaching 

er you, 4, inthe Temple and Synagegues, nor without the leave of the Jews. But 
; 

not uſedths , 

| hinder the y 


Tirannus, and in his own hired houſe at Rowe, As 28. 3o, 31. For 
the circumſtance of Numbers, to which they are bound to preach, 
the holy Scripture hath no where determined, and Miniſters are 


e amongſt the 
7; that 15, It+ 
le, Are not we 
oht not we 45 


but preach they muſt if they be ca/ed of Goa, he hath ſent them to 
it, fitted them for the work, and they have taken it upon them, 
and wo will be to every Miniſter, ſo called and ſent of God, if he 
dothnot fulfil his-Miniſtry, as he hath opportunity ; and wiſdom, 


might wy coſidering circumſtances, guideth him, ia order to.the end which 
of £ Apo he is to aim at, and to att for. 


ot only obliged 17 ForifI do this thing willingly, I have a reward f:: 


10 were general 
f God were not 
care of allthe 
at though Chrje 
f their own Pa 
them , but alſo 
F others, whoſe 
Ir may be uſeful 

CGaith the Apo- 
1er I nor Ban 

that come upol 
hould hinderths 
e charge declins 
zuſneſs, &c. 


+ minilter 
f the temple 


mitted to me g. 

f1fI who have a liberty to take a maintenance for my labour 
in the Goſpel, yet notwithſtanding preach it freely, out of a free 
and chearful mind, defirous to promote the honour and glory of 
Chriſt, I then may expe& a reward : g bur if I only preach the 
Goſps), becauſe there 1s a neceſſity laid upon me, all that can be 
ſd of me, is, that there is ſuch a diſpenſation committed to me. 
The ſtrength of the Apoſtle's Argument ſeems to lie here, Thatno 
man can reaſonably expe& thanks, or any extraordinary reward for 
doing what he is obliged by his Superiors command under a great 
penalty to do. The Apoſtle was obliged by ſuch a Precepr, and 
under ſuch penalties to preach the Goſpel ; therefore he deſired 
not only to do ir, but to do it willingly and readily, a greater teſti. 
mony of which could not be,thanfor him to do ir, without defiring 
orexpeting any reward for his pains, but what God of his free 


-akers with the Grace ſhould give him ; this madethis matter of glorying to him, 
which hedefired might not bein vain. So that though the word 

{7 here isrruly tranſlated willingly, and oppeſed to «xy, which 

| will of God 4s truly tranſlated unw2!/ingly, yer it ſeems to comprehend wirkour 
;hat appearet tharge, and taking nothing for his pains, as a demonſtration of his 
O1d Teftantn BW villngneſs to, and chearful performance of his work, which being 
the Tribe of 1! athing as to which God had laid him under no neceſſity by any 


Precept, was matter of glorying to him againſt the falſe Apoſtles, 
who did otherwiſe, and alſo a ground for him to expett a greater 
reward from God, than thoſe who, though they did the ſame 
vork, yer did it not from the like free and chearful ſpirit. 

19 What is my reward then +? Verily, that when 
Iprexch the goſpel, I may make the goſpel of Chriſt 
Without charge z, that I abuſe not my power in the 


d a livelihood 
ſo as they neu 
ands to get bir 


ined 4, * th 
1d live of! 


Lament thatit® poſ | þ 
er of liberty," gh ; . "6 af 

Miniſters or Vhat then is the ground of my expeCtation of a greater re- 
"i Will of Go vard ? Or wherein is the glorying[ before mentioned ? Not in the 
the i Pertormance of the work ; for as to that I am under a neceſſity to 
; be houl 1 hay tr, 2nd under a penalty, if InegleC it : # but 1t liech here, rhar 
ſpe}, When [ preach the Goſpel], I do it freely, and make it without 


Marge; a thing, which as to the ſubſtance of the work, he was 
at by any Law of God bound to do ; yet was not this in Paul a 
Work of Supererogation ; for circumſtances might ſo rule, and 
(doubtleſs Pan apprehended they did fo) chat it might be his duty 
todo, Forthough the Miniſter may lawfully take maintenance 
om the people, where be cannot ſupport himſelf without their 
Ulſtance; yer if rhe caſe be ſuch, that he can ſubſiſt without ir, 
and the people be ſo poor, that they are not able to give it, or 
l he eeth ir. will hinder the Goſpel, keeping many from coming 
Fithin the found of what muſt be chargeable to them, and open 
We mouths.of Enemies ; it is matter of duty to him , under ſuch 
Ora topreach freely, Though conſidering the thing in 


nos þ, Net 
ep be ſo d0 
o die, then 


Co 
well as others, 
whom I pre®® 
now write f0f 
on you fo 72 
ome,as if by pr 
. and advantafh 
8. of this Chal 
can reach che 
han loſe tals *7 
and for ths * 


Paul, 48s 19. 9. judged himſelf bound to preach in the School of 


fr to beguided by their own prudence according to circumſtances; 


butif againſt my will, * adiſpenſation of the goſpel is com. | 


Gy, Thar the Precepts commanding Miniſters to preach, concer- | the pains he beſtowed amongſt them. » Yet (ſaith he) oblery2 
ned che ApoſtJes only, or that there is now no ſuch Order of Men | my praQtice ; that I might gain men to Chriſt (fo the Apoſtle ſe. 
as Miniſters (both which are indeed ſaid by Socinians.) If there be | veral times calleth coverting Souls, bringing them in love with 
ſuch an Ordinance of God as the Miniſtry, Miniſters are under |the Goſpel, and into a road thatmay briag them to Heaven, which 
the Precepts given to Miniſters, oneof which is to preach; if they | we ought to account the greateſt gain in the world; as it appeareth 
be under the ſame Precepts, there is the ſame necetiity upon them from Dan. 12. 3.) Ihave become, or made my ſ-1f, the ferwant of 
of obeying them, that was upon Paul, and they are, in caſe of dif: ['2/ ; nor the Servant of their luſtsand corruptions (taat 1s the way 
obedience, ſubje&ed to the ſame Woes and Penalties. Indeedevery | to loſe Mens Souls, and deſtroy them, nor to gain them ) bur 2 
Miniſter is not bound to go up and down theWorld to preach, his| Servant to their weakneſſes and infirmities ſo far, as they were nor 
relation is toa particular flock ; that travelling to carry the Goſpel | ſinful : I have denied my ſelf in my liberty, and determined my 
about the World, was peculiar to the Apoſtles for the firſt planta- 


ſelf ro thar part in my ations, which I ſaw would moſt oblige; 
profit, and indear them to me, and to bring them more in love 
with the Goſpel. 
29 And * unto the Jews I became as a Jew o, that + AS 18 

I might gain the Jews : to them that are under the; * © 
Law, as under the Law, that I might gain them that 
are under the Law p. 

0 The Ceremonial Law died with Chriſt, £4. 2. 15, 16. where. 
fore Chriſtians were not obliged to the performance and obſcryati- 
on of it after thedeath of Chriſt ; bur ic pleaſed God for a time to 
indulge the Jews the obſervance of thoſe Rites, until they could 
Clearly ſee, and be fully perſuaded of their liberty from ir, with 
which Chrift hath made them free, and it was ſome good time be. 
fore all thoſe, who from Judaiſm-had turned co Chriſtianity, could 
be this perſuaded, as we may learn from Gal: 4. 21. they deſired to 
be under the Law. Toſuch (faith the Apoſtle) 1 became as a Jew. 
that is, I obſerved ſome Rites, which the Ceremonial Law (pecu- 
{liar to the Jews) required ; an inſtance of which we have 4s 21. | 
| 23, 24. where we find Paul purifying himſelf (according to the Rites = 
'ofthe Ceremonial Law) with four men which had a vom upon the; 
[/p The Jews before Chriſt's death were undec the Law ; - ma- 
[oY of them, though converted to the Chriſtian Religion afrer the 
[death of Chriſt, apprehended themſelves under the Law, nor as 
'yet ſeeing the liberty with which Chriſt had made them free ; 
' (faith the Apoſtle) I knowing the Will of God, that for a time the 
Jews ſhould be indulged as to their weakneſs, became as one of 
them under the Law ; that 1 might gain them, that is, reconcilz 
them to the Chriſtian Religion, and in ſome meaſure prepare them 
for receiving ths Goſpel. We have an inſtance of this in Pau!'s 
'PraQtice, A#s 16. 3. where he circumciſed Timothy, becauſe his 
| mother was a Jew, that he might not irritate the Jews in thoſe 
quarters, not eſtrange them from the DoQrine of the Goſpel. In 
all this Pau! did nothing that was ſinful, but only determined him- 
ſelf as to the liberty which God hadgiven him, when he might do 
or forbear, either doing or forbearing to do, as he ſaw the one or 
the other, made moſt for the honour and Glory of God in the win- 
ning of Souls. 
21 * To them that are without Law, as without 


Law q, ( * being not without Law to, God, but EE 


der the Law to Chriſt) that I might gain them that 


are without Law r. 

q It is manifeſt by the oppoſition of :hoſe that are without Law 
mentioned in this verſe, to :hoſe under the Law, mentioned in the 
former verſe, that as by the latter the Jews are underſtood, ſo by 
the former the Gentiles are to be underſtood, who were under-no 
obligation to the obſervance either of the Ceremonial, or Judicial 
Law, given to the Jews ; the one to guide that Nation in the mar. 
ters of Worſhip till Chriſt ſhould come ; the other to- guide them 
in matters of Civil Juſtice, as well as in Criminal Cauſes as mat 
tersof Plea and Treſpaſs ; ſo that the term vows here ſignifieth 
differently from what ir ſignifieth in many other Scriptures: where 
ic ſignifieth men that live as they liſt, without any regard to any 
Laws of (God or men, as Mark. 15. 28. Luke 22. 37. A#52. 23. 
2 Theſſ. 2.8. 1 Tim, 19, &c. r This the Apoſtle makes appear 
by the next words, where he tellsus, he was not withw: Law 79 
God, but under the Law to Chriſt ; though to the Gentiles he behaved 
himſelf, as he himſelf had been a Genzile, that is, forbeacing the 
obſervances of the Levitical Law, to which the Gentiles had never 
any obligation at all, yer he did not behave himſelf as one that had 
no regard to the Law of God, that was yet in force and obligatory, 
bur acknowledged himſelf to be under that, though a Servant of 
Chriſt's : ſo that he abared nothing of his neceſſary duty, only de- 
nied himſelf in ſome things as to which the Law of God had left 
him a liberty, both to the Jews and Gentiles, propounding to 
himſelf the ſame end as to both, that 1s, the gaining of their Souls 
to Chriſt. 
| | 22 * To 


_——— 


><; 
eee ere———— rr HR 
- - F 


- IS - 
— ws 


—_ — 


Ee 


— I" 4 
© — 


Chap. LX. 


"Rom. 


I 
29. 
33- 


I4. 
Ch. 7. 16. 


*Gal.5. 7. 
Phil.3.14. 


2 Tim. 4. 
Heb. BY 


5 oain the weak 5: I * am made all things to all men, 
2 Cor. 11. * that I might by all means fave ſome 2. 


*"Ch. 10. had nor ſuch a firm perſwaſion of the lawfulneſs of ſome things 
(ſuppoſe Circumcilion,Purifyings required by the Law of Mo/:s SC.) 
*Rom.11. 1 became as weak, that is, I yielded to them, and the things being 


ECORIN 


22 * To the weak became I as weak, that I might 


s To thoſe that I obſerved weak in knowledge and Faith, who 


to me matters of liberty, which I knew I might do, oc notdo, and 
be no tranſgreſſor of God's Law, they not being able to comply 
with me, I complied with them, abating my liberty to gratifie 
their Conſciences, though I knew that it was weakneſs in them, 
yet I indulged it, and made my more knowledge ſerve them in 
their weakneſs, ſo that I might not loſe them. * Thus, that i 
might be an inſtrument in any degree to ſave them, according to 
the various perſwaſions of ſeveral Chriſtians, I behav'd my ſelf 
towardsthem ; doing nothing to gratifie them, by doing of which 
T knew, orhadthe leaſt jealouſic I ſhould offend God ; bur not re- 
fuſing any thing, either as to doing or forbearing which by the 
Law of God I faw I might do or forbear) where I ſaw the leaſt 
hopes, by ſuch doing or forbearing, rodo the Souls of thoſe good, 
in orderto their eternal Salvation, with whom I was,and for whoſe 
ſake Iſodid, or forbore any thing, O the humility and charity 
of this great Apoſtle! Whatan Example hath he ſer to all ! ( for 
nonecan pretendto a greater Superiority over Men, as to ſpiritual 
things, than heunqueſtionably had,) 

23 And this 1 do for the goſpe!'s fake s, that 1 might 


be partaker thereof with you w. _ bi 

x Pau! hadtwogreat ends, with he aimed at, in this denialof 
himſelf in theſe points of liberty ; the one was the doing good to 
theSouls both of Jews and Gentiles, this he had before inſtan- 
cedin : the other was the glory of God, which is that which he here. 
meaneth by this phraſe, for the Goſpel's ſake, which he before CX- 
pounded, v. 12. leſt we would hinder the Goſpel of Chriſt. By Paul's 
tenacious adhering to one parz in 2 thing wherein he had liberty, 
2he Goſpel, that is, the progreſsor ſucceſs of the Goſpel, might have 
been hindred, both by the reproaches of Enemies, and alſo by the al- 
lienation and eſtrangement of the hearts of weaker Chriſtians, or 
laying ſtumbling-blocks before them, at which they might fall, 
being imbo!dened by the examples of their Guides, to do what 
(though lawful in it ſelf) yer they judged unlawful. w I did it 
(ſaith he) that IT might bring you into the fellowſhip of the Goſpel ; 
[ had rather fo interpret it, than of the reward of the Goſpel (as 
it pleaſeth ſome.) The humility of the great Apoſtle is very re- 
markable ; he diſdainerh nor to be ovywiror©:, a partaker in the 
Goſpel with the meaneſt Members of the Church ; he is nor 
aſhamed to call thoſe Brethren whom his Lord and Maſter is not 
aſhamed foto call. 

24 Know ye not that they which run 1n a race, run 


all, but one receiveth the prize x ? 50 run that ye may 
obtain y. | CY 

* The Apoſtle prefſerh all hisformer diſcourſe by minding them 
of thedifficulcy of getting to Heaven, and of the obligation that 
lay upon them to be the firſt in the ſpiritual Race. To this pur- 
poſe he ferchesa ſimilitude from whar they ſaw daily in the pra. 
Aice of thoſe who frequented thoſe Games by which the Romans 
and Corinthians were wont to divert themſelves. They had ſeveral, 
known by the Names of the Olympian, Pythian, Nemean, and 1h. 
mian Games, the latter of which were moſt proper to Greece. At 
theſe Games there were ſeveral that ran Races, either on foot, or 
on horſe-back ; and ſeveral that wreſtled, the Reward was a Crown 
or Garland : and for thoſe that ran, we read that the Crown or 
Garland was hung upat the end of the Race, and thoſe who run- 
ning.on foot or on horſe-back, could firſt lay hold upon it, and 
take it down, had it, ſo as though many ran, yet bur one had the 
Crown: So, hefaith, it is as to getting to Heaven ; men might 
think it was a light matter, butthey who would have the Crown of 
Glory muſt runforit, andit was a work required ſo much ſtriving 
2nd labour, that not many would have that Crown ; which 1s the 
fame with that which our Saviour ſaith, Luke 13.24. For many 
ſhalt ſeek to enter in, and fhall not enter. 2 Tim. 2.5. If # man 


 frivve for maſteries he ts not crowned, except he ſtrive lawfully. y Thece- 


fore (faith the Apoſtle} make it your buſineſs ſo zo run ; that you 
may obtain, not only to do things in themſelves lawful or 
500d, but which are ſo cloathed with all their circumſtances, 
and in the beſt manner for the glory of God, and the good of 
others. 

25 And every man that * ſtriveth for the maſtery z, 
is temperate in all things 2: Now they 4s zt to ob. 
tain a corruptible crown, but we an * incorrupti- 


*ble b. 


z This is not all that is required ef men that would go to Hea- 


- ven, that they do not make an ill uſe of their liberty, uſing it to 
"the diſhonour of God, or to the Prejudice of others; but look as 
' it is with Wreſtlers in thoſe Games, in praQtice amongſt you, they 
are tcmporate in all things, in theſe uſe ofmeats and drinks, or any 


' pleaſures, (though in themſelves lawful) they will ſo uſe them, as 


may beſt ſerve their end, the upholding the ſtrength of cheir body 


' for the motion they are to uſe, not clogging themſelves with 
* them, or ſouſing them, that they ſhall indiſpoſe them to, or hin- 


" that fadth not away, referued in heaven fir ,as the Apoſtleſ; A 


der them in their motion. a We that are Chriſtians, and ſtri- 
ving for Heaven, ſhould alſo do the like, ſo behaving our ſelves in 
theuſe of meats, drinks, apparel, pleaſures, as the things ſo uſed 
by us, may ſerve us in our buſineſs for Heaven, and be no clog or 
hindrance to us. 6 And we have reaſon ſo to do, or we ſhall be 
ſhamed by thoſe Gameſtres; for they in that manner deny, re. 
ſtrain, and govern themſelves to ger a Crown, which when they 
have, isa pitiful, corruptible, periſhing thing ; we do it for a 
Crown that is incorruptible; An mheritance incorruptible, and undefiled, 


1 Pet. 1. 4- 


THIANS. 
26 I therefore ſo run, not as uncectainly; {; fo 
* 10 fight 


I, not as one that beateth the air «c 


© The Apoſtle propoſeth his own example. As it 
in Country-work, he that only bids his Servaars do wor 
net his own hand to it, or at leaft doth not attend a 
them in their work, hath little done: $9 ir is as Obſervable;., c. 
ritual work, that a Miniſter ofthe Golpel, who only 6 6 ; - 
pit diQtates duty to others, but out of ic, doth nothiag = Tl. 
ſelf, ſe]Jdom doth any good by his preaching. People nor i Hin, 
ly inclined to any ſpiritual duty have the 01d Prov:rb " 0 
care thy ſelf, at their tongues end, and are hard to bell ns 
Teacher, who doth not in ſome meaſure live up to kis ny _ 
Etrine. Therefore, faith the Apoſtle, 7 rim, Tamin the _ 
with you, andrunning to tke ſame mark and for the ſame = 
give you no other council than I my ſelf rake, I endeavous "gk 
live, ſo inallthings to behave my ſelf, as I may nor bz at ho » 
tainte whether I pleaſe God by my ations, or ſhall Fetto  wene 
yeaor no, Iam a Fellow-Soldicr with you, fighting apainſ (. 


is obſcryeg 
k, and Puryg 
ad overlngk 


I make it my great buſineſs not ſo to fight, ſo to reſt lin, a5if] 


did beat the air, that is, get no more fruir, profit, or 

by it, than if I threw ſtones againſt the wind, or with ant 
beat the air. Ir isnot every running, or every fighting, that wil 
bring a man to Heaven, it muſt be a cunning with al] our mi 
and continuing our motion till wecome to the end of ouc 5, 6 
a fighting with all ouc might, and thar againſt all ſin. M 


27 But I keep under my body, and 


away e. 

4 Here the Apoſtle informs us how he ran, that he might ng 
run uncertainly ; how he fought, fo as he might not be th. 
beating the air: 1 (faith he) keep under my body, and bring it in 
ſubjefion., By Body here, we muſt not underſtand only the A ; 
ſtles flefhly part (which we uſually call our body,).no not only 
more groſs and filtly affeQions and Juſts (as ſome of the Schoy] 
men have thought) bur what the Apoſtle elſewhere called rhe ai 
Man, under which notion cometh the finfal] inclinations gf Our 
W11ll, and corrupt diQtates ofReaſon, as it is in Man fince the B41 
All this, as ic cometh under the notion of the fleſh in many other 
places of Scripture, and of our members which are npox the cath 
Col. 3. 5. So ir cometh here under the notion of the beay ; andin. 
deed is that which our Apoſtle calleth, The body of death, Rom. 1, 


24. This wasthe objet of the Apoſile's Attion. The object 4. 
bout which he was exerciſed. For his .4ion, or exerciſe 2. 
bout this obje&, is expreſſed by two words, iaww7Jale ant Inc 
9G, the former word (as ſome think) is borrowed from the 
PraQtice of thoſe that fought in the afore-mentioned Games, who 


knock'd and beat one another till they were black and blue, and 
forced to yield themſelves conquered. The ſecond word fignificth 
to make one a Servant, to bring one under command, fo as hewill 
do what another would have him do. By theſe two Words the 
Apoſtle exprefleth, that Morrification, which he declareth himſelf 
to havelived inthe praQtice of, that he might not in his Race for 
Heaven run incertainly, nor in his ſpiritual fight loſe his labour, 
and reap no more profit, than ons ſhould reap that ſpends his time 
in beating the air, Their ſenſe who think that this duty of Pau 
was diſcharged by aQs ofmeer external diſcipline, ſuch as faſting, 
wearing ſackcloth, beating themſelves, &c. is much too ſhort; 
theſe things reach not to the mind of man, his corrupt afteions 
and luſts which give life to the extravagancy of the bodily mem- 
bers, though indeed they may ſome of them be good meansinor- 


der to the greater work Pau/s meaning was, that he made it his 


work to deny his ſenſitive appetite ſuch gratifyings as it would | 


have, and to reſiſt the extravagant motions of his will, yet, of 
his own corrupt reaſon, fo far as they were in any thing contrary 
to the holy Will of God; though in order to this, he allo uſed 
Faſting and Prayer, and ſuch a&s of external Diſcipline, as his 
wiſdom taught him, were any way proper to this end : And this 
he tells us that hedid, ft while hy preached to others, he himſelf ſold 
be # caſi-away. From whence we may obſerve, That Pau/ thougit | 
ſuch a thing poflible, that one who all his life had been preacting 
to-others, to bring them ro heaven, might himſe}f be chrown into 
Hell at laſt ; and if it had not, our Saviour would never have toll 
us, That he would at the laſt day ſay -to ſome, Depart from m!, | 
know you not, you workers of 1niquity, who for their admittance had 
pleaded, We have propheſied- in thy Name. Nor muſt we queſtion 
but Fu4ze whom our Saviour calls a Sox of Perdition, was a loſt man 
as to eternity, though it be certain, that he as well as the other 
Apoſtles, was a Preacher ofthe Goſpel : yea, fo far is thus from 
being impoſſible, that ir was the the opinion of Chryſoftom, Tit 
few Miniſters would be ſaved. We may alſo further obſerve, Thit 
ſach Miniſters as indulge their body, giving themſelves liberties 
either more externally in meats, drinks, apparel, pleaſures; 0 
more internally, indulging themſelves in ſinful ſpeculations, M# 
tions, affeQions, inclinations, take a quite contrary road to Het 
ven than Paul took ; and think they have a great deal mor? libets 
ty ta the fleſh than $. Pau! thought he had, or then he durk uſe, 


CHAP. X. 


The Tews Sacraments had the ſame ſenſe with ours : and were Tip! tour 
of. 1—5. as alſo their Puniſhments for Idolatry, Fornication, Tem 
ing Chrift, and murmuring againſt him, a warning, univ s, 
motive to watchfulneſs. 6—12. God's Faith fulnsſs under our Temps 
trons. 13. He exharts them to flee from Idolatry. Trey who have Come 
munon with Chriſt at his Table, ought not ts have ſuch with = # 
ther Feaſts, Whereby we provoke God's Jealonſie and offend _ 
14—24. But they might eat of whatſoever was publickly fog # 
brought in at # Common Feaſt,” and Notice given them. 25—14- 4 
neral Exhortation, to do a8 things for the Glory of God and the Edifice 


tion of our Neighbour, 2 1—}}q. 


Chap, 


$-- * bring ies} 
into ſubje&ion 4 : leſt that by any means, __ 
have preached to others, I my ſelf ſhould be x call" 

ii 


5 2, — 009 


Chay, 
lo lighe 


obſcryeg 
» and Pury 
 Cverlogk 
blein ſpi. 
the Pw). 
Of it hin. 
T natura}. 
» Phyſician 
lieve that 
Own Ds. 
ſame race 
ae prize, [ 
'our {9 tO 
at Uncer. 
to Heaven 
gaink lin; | 
(in, as if] 
advantage 
h a ſtaff 04d 
7, that will 
out might, 
| Our Race; 


* bring it+} 

) when [y, 

be a call. | 
l 


e might not 
be like one 
bring it int 
ly the Apo. 
not only our 
the School. 
:alled rhe ly 
t10ns of our 
ince the Fall. 
1 many other 
p02 the earth, 
body ; andin« 
zath, Rom. 1, 
"he objeCt 4 
IT exerciſe 4+ 
IC and J:\te 
wed from the 
| Games, who 
and blue, and 
yord (ignificth 
1, fo as hewill 
:0 Words the 
-Jarech himfelf 
+ his Race for 
ofc his labour, 
zends his time 
s duty of Pall 
ach as faſting, 
ach too ſhort; 
rupt affe8cons 
e bodily mem- 
od means1n0r- 
he made it his 
's as it would | 
is will, yet, of 
thing contrary 
$, ; alſo uſel 
ſcipline, as his 
end: And t 
he himſelf ſult 
at Paul thou 
been preaching 
"be thrown into 
never have t0 
part from me, | 
admittance 1 
1} we que 101 
was a loſt man 
11 as the other 
ar is this fro 
Chryſoftom, Tit 
er obſerve, 1! 
ſelves libert!s, 
1, pleaſures; 0 
eevana, _ 
road to rid 
re more libet- 
An he durk uſe, 


{ were TyÞts there 
nication, Tem 
ing, unto , 
under 07 Temp" 
ey whohave 0m 
"<< with 1d # 
and offend other 
J publickly ſola # 


Gt 
n.25—24 A 
d and the Edific 


Moreov 


p.X 


, Oreover, bretheren, I would not that ye ſhould 


LCORINTHIANS 


Chap. Y. 


be ignorant, how that all our fathers were 
9-* under the cioud 4, and * all paſſed through me 


lea 9. 


s The Apoitle ſaw that many in this Church of Corinth were 
puſfed up with cher knowhkage, and ocher gitts and great pri- 
4 viledges with which Ged had bieticd chem ; as allo with the Oh {rd Mtg om 
" nion of their being a Goſpel-Church, and ſome of the fri fruits Fran reſpet "op 
' of the Gentiles unto Chiiit, and might therefors think, that 
they needed nor to be pref]:d to ſuch degrees of ſtriQaeſs and | 
* warchfulnels LG beat _ — = _ _ —"— 
; 7211 prelump' ion, the OItle Qere Icts betore them the ex : : al 
coor the Charch of the jos , when he tells rh-m, he would Bread in the Lord's Supper is the Body of Chr:/% 
me nave them , = ——_ 15, ” would _ _ ow | 

ember, he would have them well acquainted with, and to , < 
DG this, That all the Jews in Moſes his time, whom he —_— og be underſtood the water that God made 

Ils their Fathers, not according tothe fleſh, (or the Corinthians | ck, 15 evident; bur 

cails ei ' 


were not deſcended from J<ws) but with reſpett to the Covenant 


and their cefation they ſtood unto God, as they were the.only peo. | 


Re. And d'd all drink the ſame * ſpiritual drink e : for © Pſl. 75. 
tney drank nf that ipiritual Rock that || followed them, 75 Se *- 
and that Rock was Chriſt he DS | tut 
e And all the Jews, as wel) tt; that periſhed in the Wil- h 
derneſs, as the (> that were preſerved co $9 info Cauaan,they drank + 
of the water which came our of the Rock, of which we read, | 
rw bs waich water was ſpiritual drinkin the 
| tre Mena was ſpiritual meat, beins miracu- 
lo: ſly produced, and being a fignre of Chriſt. For faith the 
_ Apoſtie, That Rock was Chriſt, that is, thar Rock id i19nifie or 
{prefigure Chriſt. The Rock was Chri\t in the faine ſenſe that the FS! 


, That is a ſign which (8) 
Here ariſerh a queſti- 
Rock followed them? Thar by 
_ - to flow out 
though we read of Water twice q 
; ferched our of the Rock upon Moſes ſmiting of it, once ar Rephi. n 
'4:m, before they came ſo far as Mount $1231, Excd. 17. 6. ano- : 


by Divine Intitution did ſignifie Chriſt. 
on in what ſenſe it is ſaid, Tha: ths 


» 


. i'r I " 4 , . 
je God had on earth; theſe, he faith, were al of thew(rthe whole | her time a Cadiſh, Num. 20. 7, 8. yet do we no where read hn 


Camp of 7ſrae!) under very great privile@ges, of which he rec- 

th divers, they were under the condutt of the Cloud, Exod. ; ; 
ag"? b And they all obrained the favour of God fo far for | cos New Teftamene relating to the Hiſtory of the Old T'sſtz- 
them, as to divide the Red Sea, fo as they paſſed through it up- | , with fome 


2 And were all baptized unto Moſes in the cloud, 


and inthe ſea c. 


There are two great difficulties in this verſe: r. What is 
ms by Moſes. 2. How, and why the Jſraelites are ſaid to be bap- 
rized iro Mofes. Some underſtand by 2oſes the perſon of Mo. 
{s : others, the Law or DoQtrine of Meſ-s. Thoſe who by Moſes 


underftand the perfon of Moſes, are divided in their opinions 
Whether the Prepoſition 


forether, when they were under the condutt of the Cioud, and 


when they paſſed through the Red Sea, Others judge it betrer 
trapſlatcd. into Moſes, that is, either Moſes going before them : Or, 
2 as Meſes was a Type of Chriſt, Gal. 3 19. Some would have [ks 
the Particle here toſignifie together with, even unto Moſes, Moſes him. | 1354008, until the 1ſ-aelires came in Cancan : 


{if nor being excepted from that Baprifm 1n the Cloud and inthe 


Sea. Others by Moſes hereunderſtand the Doctrine and Law of 


Miſes : thus the term Moſes is uſed, Luke 16. 29. Aﬀs 15. 21. 
Fo they ſay, that ro be baprized into Moſes, 1s to believe Moſes ſo 
fir, as to follow his condutt through the Sea, and under rhe 
Cloud. 2- The ſecond difficulty is rorefolve what 15 meant by 


being baptized : the word ſignifieth in the common acception of 


it, a being waſhed; in the Eccleſiaſtical acception, it ſignifies an 
holy Inftiturion of the New Teſtament, according ro which Chri. 
flians are initiated into the Church of God, by waſhing them 
the Name of the Father, Sen, and Holy Ghoſt. Now how could the 
Jews be faid either ro be waſhed (that is, baptized) either in 
Mis, or by Moſes, or with Moſes, or into Moſes? Whenas the 
Hiſtory of che Old Teſtament telis us, That both Moſes and all 
the Jrae/ites went through the Sea on dry Ground, and we do 
not read, thar the Cloud under the condutt of which the 1/-aelites 
purnied, ever poured down any water with which the Jews, or 
Moſes their Leader, could be gaſhed, 4»ſw. Some think, that the 
Cloud which paſſing over the 1ſraclites , was ajl darkneſs to their 
Enemies, yet poured down water for the retreſhing of the J/-ae. 
lt, as jt patied over their heads, and thar this 1s hinted ro us by 
the Pſalmift,. Pſal. 68. 7, 8. g. Others think, thar the Apoſtle 
7plicch the term of Bapriſm to a Priviledge, of which, the old 
raclites had as much: reaſon to glory, as the Corinthians had of 
thrir Bepriſm, properly ſo called. Others fay, that the 1ſraelires 
walking under the Cloud and through the Sea, which was dark- 
neſs and deſtru&ion to their Adverſaries, was a figure of Baptiſm, 
theSeal of the New Teſtament, by which Chriſt's Vi&ory over 


which tignifieth divers things, were 
herter tranflared by, or znto, or unto, or zogether with. Some think 
ir were better tranflared Ly, and thus all the Jews were baptizcd 
by Moſes un the Cloud and in the Sea, that is, by hs Minittry, and 
thus this very- particle is tranſlated, 4s 7. 53. & 19. 3. Some 
think it vere better tranſlated in Meſ-s, that is, Moſes going be. 


'the Hiſtory of 


| the Jewiſh journeyings to Canaan, that the Rock \'% 
followed them. Burt this is not the only thing that we read in | 
| circumſtances which we do nor find recorded 
; here ; Ir is enough that it is plainly afferred here, and irmuſt bs 
aflerered here, and ir muſt be pretumed, or how can we imagine, 

that the Jj>-2elitcs were {upplicd with water for forty years roge- 1 
ther ? Whereas ſome object, Thar if the water, which came out ; 
of the Rock ar Rephidim, had followed them, there would have 

been no need of Muſs ſtriking the Rock ar Kad'jb : Itis anfver- 

ed, That God, to try them, probably cauſgd the warer to ſtop. 

For the Analogy becwixt the Reck and Chriſt, Divines makes4r to 

lie in theſe particulars. 1. That Ciriſt i5 the firm and unmove- 

able Fouzaaticu of his Church, called therefore a Stonr, a fried Stone 

Iſa. 28. 16. Rom. 9. 33- 1 Pce. 2.6.2. As this Rock font our 

no water for the refreſhment of the 7 razlites, till Moſes had ſtruck 

It: So allthe benefir we have from Chriſt as Me 


from him as ſmitr f God, and d ns ou | 
| maittcn 0 oa, an Fea. 5 , F; 
Rock Bos ion affiifted. 3. As the warerof the ; 


for cleanſing, and upholding life in fatisfyi 

thirſt : $0 the Blood of Chriſt *s aſcfe] to the hr bork for 0 
waſhing from the guile of fin, and rhe upholding ſpiritual 
life in a Soul. 4 As the Rock that followed the I{raelites, af. : 
forded water not only to that generation that were alive and pre- "n 
ſent when the Rock was imirren, but to all che ſuecceding gene- 

So the Blood of Chriſt 
15 not uſeful only to his people in thisor that place or Age, bur 


co all that ſhall believe in him, and that till they ſhall comeinto 
the heavenly Canaan, 


, 


5 Bue with many of them God was not well 


pleaſed g : tor they were overthrown in the wilder- | | | 
neſs h. 


& Theſe many were no leſs than that wholegeneration, which F 
were at that time twenty years old and upward, according to the 
threatning, Numb. 14.258, 29. of the accompliſhment of which 
we read, Numb. 26. 64, 65. h as an inſtance of God's being dit- 48h 
pleaſed with them, he giverh their falling in the Wilderneſs. Ic Ts 
is very politble, that many of theſe were the objeCtsof God's e- | 
ternal and ſpecial love, and eternally ſaved, notwithſtanding their 
Joining with worſer men, in their rebellion and murmuring ; but 
chat fignal judgment of God upon them, was enough to prove, 
that their being baptized into Moſes , in the Cloud, and in the 
Sea, and being made partakers of thoſe great priviledges of eating 
ſpiritual mear, and drinking ſpiritual drink, rtypifying Chriſt, "F-4 
d1d nor ſer them our of the danger of God's judgments, which is 
the uſe the Apoſtle maketh of ir. 


6 Now theſe things were our || examples z, to the || Ge. » & 
end that we ſhould not luſt after evil things &, * as they f;wes or 
allo luſted 7. 


7 Our Types or Patterns (as the Greek word ſignifies) we may, 196. 14. 


; by God's diſpenſations to them, ] 'har God will b T | 34: of 

- 7 qua Enemies G PRES to my —_— thar —_— _ - they —_— patterns to us, of - — 1Apantran Meine foirirual $44 

lk maketh uſe of this term baptized. thers more probably j_- 1 Go oh h / 
think, thar the Apoſtle uſeth this term, in regardof the great A- 1-66u edges, ſo they are alſo examples or patterns to thew us 


aogy betwixt Baptiſm (as it was then uſed) the perſons going ' 


k ; raC&tices, as broughr the vengeance of them ; 
#1. into the waters,and being dipped inthem; and the 7ſraelires \ P x , ringatrre; Arm 


foing down into the Sea, the great receptacle of Water; though | 
the Waters at that time were gathered on heaps on either fide of | 
m; yer they ſeemed buried in the Waters, as perſons in that Age | 
WTrewhen they were baptized, 1Cor. 10. 2. And laſtly,others with | 
tleſs Probability think that the 7/relires are ſaid to be baptized | 
the Sea, becauſe the Waves beating and daſhing, (| prinkled Wa. 
& on them as they patled through ; and ro be baptized in the 
Od becauſe of its ſhowering down rain on them, according to 
Blat is quoted out of the Pſ/almift. A like expreſſion we have, 
"0. 4. 33. where Nebuchadnezzar 18 ſaid to be wet with the dew 
f Heaven ; LXX. read ans 7's deg re $%olgn, from which Bamniu 
dived : the dew wets things by a ſort of aſperſion, 


3 And did all eat the fame * ſpiritual meat 4. 


Thoſe of the Jews that periſhed in the Wilderneſs, did all 
Athe ſame Manna which Calch and Joſbuah eat of, who went into 
"aan. Or thoſe Jews that ſo periſhed in the Wilderneſs did eat 
ſame ſpirits! meat that we do, they in the pe, wein the 
Mite. Manna is called ſpiritual meat : 1. Becauſe it was bread 
me down from Heaven, the habitation of ſpiritual Beings, 

- 6. 31. 2. It was miraculouſly produced. 3. Becaule it was 
Ngels food given out by their Miniſtry. 4. But principally, be- 
ul: it ſignified Chriſt, who was the true Bread from Heaven, 
W, 6 «'* 


what we may expe& from God, & and to deterr us from ſuch 


_—_—_— — 


was their ſinful luſtings or delirings of things which God had 
forbidden, 1 as they did the Fleſh-pots, and Onions, and Gar. 
lick of Egypr, and to return thither again, Numb. 11. 4, 33- 
Chap. 14. 2, 3, 4. 


7 Neither be ye idolaters, as were ſome of them m3 | 
as 1t 1s written, * The people fate down to eat and "i | 
drink, and roſe up to play . 12 


» The people of 1ſ-a2! being fir& inticed to whoredom with 
the Daughters of Moab, were after that, Num. 25. 2. invited 
to the Sacrifices of their Gods, and did eat, and bowed down to th:ir 
Gods ; ſo, either worſhipped the Creature inſtead of the Creator, 
or worſhipped the Crearor in and by the Creature. » Thus ic 
is, written -in Exod. 32. 6. (which Hiſtory mentioneth another 
Idolatry chey were guilty of in worſhipping the golden Calf ) 
They were wont to have Feaſts after their Sacrifices, and paſt- 
times and diverſions after ſuch Feaſts; and particularly we are 
told in the Hiftory concerning the golden Calf, that they danced | 
before it. $ rephen, Atts 7. 41. ſaith, They rejoiced in the work of | Wy 
their hands. 


— 


8 Neither let us commit fornication, * as ſome of. pj A is 
them committed, and fell in one day thiee and twenty 10s. 29. | 8 FR 
thouſand 9, ff 


4 The »$ PEE 
; 


Lhap. X. 


» - ' 
Numb. 


I. 


3 /+ 


TCORIN 


o The tory to which this verſe relates is, thar, Numb. 25. 1,9: 
when Baalzm couid not curſe the Iſraclites, he adviled the de- 
buching 07 rhem by t. C Vvabitiſh women, firk inticwg chem tO 
Fornication and Avuitery, then to Idolatry : and they were 1N 
riced, wich caulcd a piague amongtt them, waich deſtroyed a: 
mo. (12-11 £91 9720 day, oree and PEN) rhenſaud (faith _ Apo e) 
Mos Faith, that there died forr 378 twenty r1onſ.12. ; chere —_ : 
ny g& is tor the clearing of rhat teemwg contrrdiecion : m_ 
ſy, thac Meſes mcentioner1 not ove aay, there might in all die 
22608, but nor all the ſame a3, nor poſſibly by the ſame death» 
Bur nochiv gy 1s in Scriprure more ordinary, than fo ſpcak of _— 
or perlons in round numbers, though ſomerhing over or UNdcr 3 
{nd alſo ro ſpeak according to the common reckoning of Peop:e, 
«ho alio may talk variouſly. Some might report 23, 10Mme 
24000 : or petltibly Pay choſe ro mention the openers 
than the gr-atecr 10nd number. Che tknle of aloſes mage be 
about 24000, or near up to that number, all of which pony 
had not becn guilty of Adultery 07 Fornication. Paul _—_ 
there dicd 2300. If there did dic 24000, there muſt necds 
die 23000. 
©) Neither 
them ailvo tempted, 


let us tempt > Chriſt q, as * ſome of 
and * were deſtroyed of fer- 


- pents 7. 


> To tempt in the gen-ral notion of the term, ſignifies to m 
a iryal; applied unto God It ligniiizth co make a tryalof God, 
eirher with reference to bs power, Pal. 7.8, 9, 10. or to 
his truth and goodnets; nor fo be fatistied with God's word, but 
to challenoz him to a fenſibie demonſtration, 15 ro tempt God : 
Or elfe 1342102 may fignitie more generally, to provoke God ; for 
indeed all no:orious finning againſt God is a terapring of God, not 
be 'jeving the wrath of God, which he bath revealed in his Word 
againſt lin, till men feel at. 9 The term Chriſt here 1s very re- 
markable to prove Ciuilt's Divine Nature and Exiſtence betore he 
was incarnate ; for the fame perſon who 1s here called Chriſt, 15 
called God, P/zl. 1c6. 14. and Jervah alſo. in the ſame Pſalm ; 
"neither could they have tempred Chriſt at thar time, if ar that 
tire he had not been exiſtent. r By Serpents he meanerh the fiery 
Serpents, we have the Hiſtory, N15. 21. 6, 7. 

10 Neither murmur ye, as ſome of them alfo 
murmured s ,-*and * were: deltroyed of the deſtroy- 
er ?. ppl 

s Mermuring ſignifies the ſpeaking 
of diflike, impatiznce, or difionrent. Ir wasa fin the Jews were 
very much guilty of, as may be read Exod. 16. 7, 8. Numb. 14. 
27. chap. 16. 11. Exod. 15. 24. and 17. 3. Numb. 16. 41. The 
Apoſtle may either referc to all cheir murmurings, when he 
ſaith, 8 they we:e (as the puniſhment of their lin) deſtroyed of 
the d:ſtroyer, or tothar more univerſal murmuring upon the ill re- 
port the Spies brought up of the Land of Conaon, of which we 
read Numb. 14. 


11 Now all theſe theſe things happened to them for 
| enfamples « : and: they * are written for our admo- 
nikon w, * upon whom the cnds of the world are 
come x.: 


« A!! theſe diſpenſations of Divine Providence in therevelations 
of Divins wrath againſt ſeveral tor:s of (inners, happened to the 
Jews, which were God's firit and antient people, and enjoyed 
tioſe great priviiedges, which were b:fore mentioned, not only 
a5 juſt puniſhments upon them for their ſins, but as Examples or 
7;ps, to {zt the tucceeding World know what they ſhould find God 
ruward ſuch kind of ſinners, w and God in his wile Providence 
hath ordered the Record of them in holy Writ, that others who 
ſhould live afterward, mighr read, and hear, and fear, and take 
warning, andbeware of ſuch wicked aCtions, as pulled down ſuch 
Vengeance upen a pcop'e, than which nonecan plead toa near- 
er re'ation to Gcd, or the zeceiving of greater favours and privi- 
ledpes from him. x The Apoſtes ordinarily 1a their Epiſtles 
ſpeak of the World, asn vh to an endintheir Age, though it hath 
tince continued mote than 1600 years; which would incline one 
to think, that they thought it would have beeca atan end before 
this time, but had no ſuch Revelation from God. So true is that 
of our Szviour, That of that day a:d hour knoweth no man; and it 
ſhould teach us to beware of too particular determinations in the 
caſe, which the Apoſtles did not make, though they ſpake of theirs 
as the laſt rimes, and themſelves as ſuch upon whom the ends of 
the World were come. 


12 Wherefore * let him that thinketh that he ſtand: 
eth y, take heed leſt hc fall <. 


7 Either in a right and ſound judgment and opinion of things, 
or in a ſtate of Favour with God, or confirmed 1n an holy courſe 
of Lite and converſation. Srtandeth in Grace, Rom. 5. 2. A man 
may ſtand in theſethings, and he may bur think thar he ſtand- 
eth : be it as it will, he 15 concerned z to take heed leſt he fall, 
he may but think he ſtandeth, and if fo, he will fall; he 
may really ftand in a right judgment and opinion of things, and 
be a Member of the Church of Chriſt, and yet may fall into er. 
rours and ſome looſe prattices, ſo as to bring down Divine Ven- 
geance upon himſelf; he may have God's favour fo far as con- 
cerns external priviledges, and yer periſh, as many of the Jews 
did in the inſtances before mentioned ; nay, he may really ſtand 
in a ſtate of Juſtification and Regeneration, and yet may fall; 
though not 70:aly and finally, yet toully, ſo as to loſe his peace, 
and bring God's ſevere judgments upon him ; therefore he that 
Thir.keth char he ſtandeth, whether his apprehenſions be falſe or 
trur, had necd uſe all means and cautionthat he may not fall ; 
a::d that becauſe, if he keepeth his ſtanding, it muſt be by the 


againſt a perſen or 1hing out ing of all fins inits kind the greateſt rranſgreſſion 


THIANS. Chi 
13 There hath no temptation «a taken You, * þ; 
what is || common to man 6, but * God j; (4... 
* who will not ſuffer you to be tempted aboye Os 
ve are able c ; bur will with the eemptation UW b, 
* make a way to eſcape, that ye may be able "2h 

bear ir . x 0; 
a Temptation (as hath been ſaid before) ſignifieh in n Pop 
neral norion of it no more than Tryal, and is often, ſ@ uſe j j ++ 
Wrir. Now in regard we are tryed either by :Mi&;-y; — vly "fer 
or by motions made to us, either from God, or our —_ wall 
or the Devi), or Men of the World. T:wmprarians in eas a, 
rimes {ignifie Afiic#ien, as Jam. 1.2. 1 Pet. 2, 6, Somtimes w.” 
ons mance to us by ; God, Gen. 22. 2. both which ſotts of ns 
are good in themſelves. Sometimes the rerm Gall. 
made by the laſt and unrenewed part of our own Souls a>. 
che Devil, or by ſinful men in the World; theſe are ful by 
tations, and what we moſt ordinarily call by that name. What, 
the Apoſtle here means all or ſome of theſe, cannot EY 
be determined; whar he faith ts true of all, and therefore rw, 
the ſafeſt interpretation of the term in this place, though h h y 
not been before ſpeaking indeed of afflictive Temprations. : 
had before affrighred them with minding them of the poſſibilje 2 
cheir falling, rhough they did ſtand, or thought they ſtood J of 
cautioned them to take heed : Here he comforteth them by _ 
ing them, b that no tempration had befallen them, bur whar _ _ 
cident and common to men, e/yJeomrG> and they could _ 
pect to be freed from the common Fate of Mankind : «the h 
minds them, char that God who had promiſed ſtrength al 
fiitance to his people, Matt. 7. 11. Luke 11, 13. 2 Cy. : 
1 Theſſ, 5. 4. 2 Thefſ. 3.3, was one that would be as good _ < 
word, being taithful, and would not ſuffer them to betem Wo 
bove their ſtrength, and ability co oppoſe and reſiſt : py p 
would make a way to eſcape, both the evil ofthe tempration 5 
ir ſhould not over-bear them to a total ruine of cheir Soul; = 
likewiſe the burdenſome and affliftire evil, that ic ſhould no: " 
cinually lie upon them, provided they uſcd their juſt endear, 
and (as he had ſaid before) took þzed leſt they fell. "* 
14 Wherefore, my dearly beloved, * flee fro 
latry e. 


e The Apoſtle would have them avoid all ſin, but 
eſpecially, keeping ar rhe utmoſt diſtance imaginable 


M ido., 


Lolatry max; 
from chat be. 
! ſins inirs kind «ion: uponiig 
account it 1s often in Scripture compared to Whoredom. Thouoh 

we ought to be afraid of, and to decline all (in; yet as God bath 

revealed his wrath againſt any particular fin more than other 6 
\ every good Chriſtian is obliged more to deteſt and abhocthy fa 

How the Corin:5ians were concernedin this caution, we ſhallrgy 
afrerwards v. 20. For though 14o/atry be properly where the failye 
151n the ultimate or mediate obje& of our Worſhip, or the me. 
um 1n and by which we worſhip the Creator ; yet there are many 
other ways by which we may be partakers of the Sins of other; 
and this fin of Idolatry in particular : and 1dol-try being a finof 
che greateſt magnitude, from which they were bound to keep the 
furtheſt diſtance, they were bound to rake heed of being partt 
kers of other mens fins of this kind. 


15 I ſpeak as to wiſe men : judge ye what ſay f 
f As to the preſent caſe, you are perſons rhat underſtandthe 
Principles of Chriſtian Religion, I will make you judgesiatiis 
Cale. * 

16 * The cup of bleſſing which we bleſs g, 5 it 
not the communion of the blood of Chriſt ! The 


bread which we break, is it not the communion of the 
body of Chrift 2 5, 

g It 15 0n all hands agreed, That the Apoſtle is here ſpeaking 
of Believers communicating in the Sacrament of the Lord's Sup 
per ; by the Crp of blefſizz, he meaneth the Cup there which be 
{o calleth, becauie we in the raking of it bleſs the Lord, whogait 
his Son to dis for us, and Chriſt for that great love which he ſhew- 
ed in dying for us. We are faid to ſs ir, becauſe we by folem 
Prayer in the Conſecration of it, ſet it apart for that ſacred uk, 
and beg of God to bleſs it tro us. þ This Cup (fairh the Apoltk) 
1s the Communion of rhe blood of Chriſt. The Cup is put For the Wine 
in the Cup (which js very ordinary) the Cp or 1 of Bl:n 
ynageth that Cup of Wine to which the bleſſing is aded, ot 
with waich in that holy Inſticucion we thankfully rememberthe 
Death of Chriſt, and bleſs his *Name for thar great mercy, and 
the Wine or Cup of Bleſſing , alſo here ſignifieth our Religiow 
AQion in drinking of that Cup of Wine fo bleſſed, This, fait 
he, is the Communion of the bleod of Chriſt, that is, it is an Adi 
whereby and wherein Chriſt communicates himſe!f and his Grate 
ro us, and wecommunicate our ſouls to him ; ſotht Chriſtaadb: 
lievers in thar Adtion havea mutual Communion one with another 
; And as it 15 witch the one Element in that holy Sacrament, ſo1t 
alſo with the other. The Bread which the Miniſter breakerh ( 
cording to the Inſtitution and Example of Chriſt) for the Churci 
to make uſe of inthe Celebration of the Lord's Supper, that's 
their Altion in eating of that Bread ſo broken, anddividedamong 
them, 1s the Communion of the Body of Chriſt : an AXtion wit ; 
in Chriſtians have a Fellowſhip and Communion with Chriſt. 
17 For * we being many, are one bread and one 


dy & : for we are all partakers of that one bread /. 

k Believers, though many, yet are one Body, anddeclaretie 
ſelves -ro beone Body myſtical, by their fellowſhip rogether in th 
Ocdinance of the Lord's Supper; as the Bread they there et! 
one Bread, though it be made up of many grains of Corn, wie 
come into the compoſition of that Loaf or piece of Bread whica 
fo broken, diſtributed, and eaten; and the Wine they drink 1501 


| 


uſe of due means, which God hath appointed in order to that end, 
though he be alſo kept by the power of G:d unto ſalvation, 1 Pet, 
I. 5. 


Cup, one Body of Wine, though ir be made up of many pi 
Jane 4 Grapes. ! And they declare themſelves to be on? Bo 
by their joyat partaking of chat one Bread, 


Some have vo hend 


otCity 


J H ; 
LCORINTHIFA MS 
ment to prove the unlawfulneſs of comniunicating Jus applied unto God 
s ſinners at.the Lords Table, becauſe we declare |< ' 
Body with thoſe thar communicate : but whether juſt diſpleaſure at the 
d) be cogent enough, I doubt ; for ove Body | 15 due to him alone. I 
10 more than one Church, and that not inviſible, but } ger againſt thoſe who 
$3 as we only declare our ſelves to be fellow-members of ſhip of God bein 
» Church with thoſe with whom we partake in that Or- | ſaid he wil! no: give to another 
and the viſible Church may conſiſt of perſons that are $4- 8. Hence Divines obſer 
| with the good. So as, though undoubtedly ſcanda- | God 1n the ſecond Commandment, w 
<d perſons ought to be excluded from the holy Table, | ternal Werſhip of God, to deter men from the v 
Unbeliever hath a right to it : yet 1t may reaſonably 
d, whether thoſe that partake. with Unbelievers, do|1a many other Texts; it fignifieth. r 
ſelvesto be Unbelievers ; they only own themſelves | thing that he is very tender of, andt 


ceſs, or vehemence, as 


, nor B's praiſe ts graven imazes, If2, 
ve, Thar jealouſte is attribured to 
naich concerns the more ex. 
itolation of ir, 
| 20.& 5 9. &6. 15. and 
at the Worſhip of Gol is a 
hat his will is ro endure nc 


Exod. 20. 5. YO Exod. 34. 14. Deur. q. 


of that Church, wherein there are ſome Unbehievers. But Creature to ſhare with him ia ir, and thar his wrarh {hall flame 
of the Apoſtle is from hence to argue, That by a parity | againſt rhar man, that offers to make any Crea 


hoſe that communicated with an idolatrous Afembly |» 
fices, declared themſelves by that a&ion to be one |1e1s he could fancy himſelf to be ſtronger than God; for 
Body with thofe TdoJaters. ] 
19 Rchold Ifrael after the fleſh 2 : * are not they againſt him. Thus the Apoſt 
iich ear of the ſacrifices, partakers of the alrar ? ”. 

1 I-ael after the fleſh, was the whole ſeed of Jacob, the whole 
of the Jewiſh Church ; for Believers only were 1ſra-lires atter 


ar ture {uch a ſharer. 
w 50 that it is nor ſafe for any to do any thing of thar nature, wn 
, » 4 cs — 


doth ir, muſt expeCt che power and ſtrengrh of God co be ——_—_ 

le hath perſwaded rhem' from eating 
meat ſacrificed ro Idols in the Idols Temple, from thz impiety of 
It, it being a Species of 1dolatry,againſt which God hath fignally re- 
vealed his wrath : he returns in the tollowing verſes ro an Ar. 


9. 6. called the 1ſ-ael of God, Gal. 6. 16. » If in the |* et by which he had before dillwaded ic, Chap. 8. as ic was 


Jewiſh Church mw —_ ate - = _ of eg _— 
non Gods Altar, did they nor by that at imanifeſt, that rhey SR - 
ww Members of the Jewiſh Church, and owned that God, to| _ 23 * All things are lawſul tor me x, but all (| 
hom thoſe Sacrifices were offered, and that way of Worſhip by | 41 not expedient : all things are lawſul for me, b 
which God was fo worſhipped. By the ſame reaſon theſe Cerinrh;- things edifie nor Yo 
11; earing of the flcſh of thoſe Beaſts in the Idols Temple, which 
1:4 been offered unto Idols, did by that a& declaretheir owning 
«f the Idol, and that idolatrous Worſhip which had been there per- 
famed, and were really partakers of the idolatrous Altar. 

i9 What fay I chen? * that the idol is any thing, or|char to ear mear offered to Idolsin the Idols Temple, was 
that which is ſacrificed to 1dols 1s any thing ? 0. | 

1 1 do not by this contradi& what before ſaid, nor now affirm, _= (as that univerſal Particle muſt be 
that an Idol is any thing, or the Sacrifices offered to it any thing. | titude of Scriptures.) $0 as the ſenſe is, 


againſt Charity, and the dut 


y of Love, ia which they were indebr. 
ed to their Brethren. : 


x All things here muſt neceſſarily ſignifie 1:any chin 
4 ; ft n F: 7, 27, Or at leaſt 
(as ſome think) all thoſe things Þ haveipoken of, to eat mear offerca 
to Idols, &c. But if we interpret it in the latter ſenſe, it is nor 


true without limitations; for the A poltle had but now determined, 


ro have 
interpret a2 by 
interpreted in a great 
There are many things 


Communion with Devils. I had rather therefore 


An Idol hath nothing in it of a Deity, nor can it either ſandifie, that are lawful which are nor expedient, that is, conſidered in them- 


or pollute any Thing that 15 ſet before it; the errour is in your 


{c]ves under due circumſtances, they are lawful, but contidered in 


ation, as you communicate with ſuch as are Idolaters ; it is your _ on luch circumſtances , are not 15, becauſe they are not for 
own ation that polluterh you, not the Idol, nor yet the meat ſer j £2 profit, or good, but the hurt and diladvantage of others. Thos 


the Apoſtle himſc]f expounds it in the latrer clauſe of the verſe, 


A , . here he ſaich, they ed7f2 nor, that is, tl d OM 
t I ay, that the things which the Gentiles ſa-| 7 Apr Con Bran —ats cron 
Lip iq tak a devil, ind not” ca Ss Rk Goſpel, ur the Fai:h and Holineſs of particular Chriſtians. 
2 q 


ind I would not that ye ſhould have fellowſhip with} 


anothers wealth z. 


\ lr is thed f 7 tho i TR : 
HeathensSmight not intentionally offer Sacrifices to Devils, is the duty of every one who is a Diſciple of Chriſt, notÞ 


(ſuch a thing can hardly be ſuppoſed of men) but a&ually, | 
eftred their Sacrifices to Devils; for they were Devils, that 15, e- 
vil Angels, which deluded the poor Heathen, and gave Anſwers 
fom the Images and Statues which they worſhipped, believing 
the true God to be in them, which Anſwers they accounted for 


they 


; meerly. to look at his own pleaſure, or profit, but the profit and 
advantage of others, Chap. 13. 5. Charity ſecketh not hey own (faith 
the Apoſtle) that is, it feeketh not its own with the prejudice of 
another; fo as admir, that in this pratice there were nothing 
looked like Idolatry and impiety towards God, yer Charity or Laye 


. ro you th here d t Ou. 
Oracles. Beſides, the Apoſtle ſaith, they ſacrificed ro Devils, be- your Rrethren ought to deter you 


cauſe in Gods eſteem it wasfo, though not in their intention; God 


25 Whatloever is fold in the ſhambles, that eat a, 


juigeth of mens a&ts of Worſhip and Homage pretendedly done asking no queſtion for conſcience ſake 5. : : 
unto him, not according to their intention, bur according to the | # It 15 poſſible that Butchers, beforerhey brought their meat in. 
truth and reality of the thing. Now really the Heathen in their to the marker, might offer ſome part of it to the Idol; or it is pol. 
crifices paid an Homage to Devils, though ſuch a thing was far ible that the Prieſts, who had a ſhare in the beaſtsoffered to Idols, 
com their intention ; and this deſerves the conſideration, both of| 0r the people thar had offered ſuch beaſts, who alſo had a ſhare re. 
the P2p;ſts, who worſhip Images, and allo of thoſe Proteſtanr:(if any _— chem, might out of coverouſneſs come and bring irto be 
ich be) who would excuſe the Papiſts in their Idolatries from their} {o]d inthe marker. The Apoſtle diretteth the Corinthians in ſuch 
icnties, The Nature of Idolatry doth not lie in mensintending Caſes to make no ſcruple, bur co cat of ir, it it were commonly 
0norſhip the Creature inſtead of the Creator (there were hard-| fold in the ſhambles, which argued, that rhe thing in it ſelf, con- 
h ever any ſuch Idolaters in the World) bur in their aQual do- ſidered nakedly, was not ſinful; 5 bur yet he would have them in 
ag of the thing ; and except they can find a dire&t Rule in holy that caſe ask no queſtions whence it came? Or whether ir had nor 
it ordering the Adoration of the Creator in the Creature, or been off:red to an Idol? for the ſake of othec m2ns conſciences, 


fore the Creature, it is much to be feared, that in the laſt day 


leſt ſomecthers ſtanding by, ſhould rake notice, that they bought 


o will-judge their Homage performed to the Creature, not to and ate ſuch meat. Or their own Conſcig4ces, leſt though thething 
in. 4 Now, faith the Apoſtle, you had need take heed that by |? '* {elf, ſo ſeparated from a ſacred ule, and rerurned to its com- 
kisa10n, you provenot your ſelves to have fellowſhip with De- |0N uſe; might be lawfully eaten, yet their conſciences ſhould 


s Inſtead of Chriſt and the true and living God. 
21 * Ye cannot drink the cup of the Lord 7, and 


afterwards refle& upon them for the doing of ir. 


le * cup of devils 5 : ye cannot be partakers of the thereof c. 


'rds table, and of the table of devils z. | 

r We may either take the phraſe as ſignifying all religious Com- 
ion under one great a& of Religion, or as particularly ſignt- 
"ng, having a Communion with Chriſt in the Ordinance of the 


ads Supper, which is called the Cup of :he Lerd,either becauſe ſuch malign influence upon any thing, you may pollute your 


Fully rememberti: Yo bath inftitured and appointed the drinking of it; or becauſe 


is done for the honour, glory, and remembrance of our Lord 


ſelves by your aQtion, caring it in the Idols Temple, atan Idola- 
ters Feaſt immediately upon his Sacrifice, but the Idol ir ſelf is no 


bit to remember his death antil be come (as the Apoſtle ſpeaketh, operative thing, nor can cauſe an ill quality in the meat ; letthe 


p. 11.)This the Apoſtle tells them they could not drink of, that 
wtrightly, and with a good conſcience ; or not realy, no man 


meat beonce returned ro its common uſe (the Idolaters ſacred My. 
ſeries being over) it is the Lords, what he hath appointed for the 


ay a - - 74, {uſe of Man. In the Idols Temple they teok the meat out of the 

ry, ——_—— rr err gp oy Devils hand ; that was indeed unlawful : butif it wereonce re- 

ny he Tall ofthe Ld and te Table of Dewi, So can ned 40 fes common ule, nd od in the marker, they cok 

t ſee how either an idolatrons Church can be a trne Church, or an GUT OX COATS 7 ron x = , yp : 

later a true Chriſtian, unleſs we wHl aſſert, That a Body of peo- _ re good, and nt to be refuſed, if they be received with thanſyiving, 
? ; : *,|4 L1MN. 4.4 | 

t R X 
My be a true Church, that can have no = . 27 If an y of them which believe not, bid you to 4 


wn with" Chriſt. Idvlatry doubtleſs both divides the Soul feaſt d, and ye be diſpoſed to go, * whatſoever is ſet 


n may be a true Chriſtian, and y 


Chriſt, as he is the Head of a Believer, and as he is the Head 


before you eat *.*, asking no queltions for conlcience 


the Church. To call any Body of Idolaters a true Church, ei-| fr. 


Morally, or Metaphyſically, is to ſay to thoſe Ammi, you are 
Urds people, to whom God hath ſaid 'Loammi. Let them be: 
t they will, the name of a Church belongeth not to them, if 
poſtle affirmeth) they can have no Communion with 


read and on? 


2 Do we * provoke the Lord to jealouſie « ? Are 


| [0Nger than he? w. 
ne hey drink 15% 


4 The Apoſtle puts another caſe, in which they might lawfully 
enough eat of meat offered to. an Idol; chat wasin cafe any of 
their Neighbours that were Heathens, invired them to dinner or 
ſupper in a private houſe (ſome add, or in the Idols Temple, it ic 
were a Feaſt of friendſhip, not a Feaſt upon a Sacrifice, bur I 
doubt that; and alſo whether in the Idol-Temples there were-any 
-| Feaſts bur-tpon Sacrifices)*.* he derermineth it lawful tor them to 


alouſie is a violent paſſion in a Man, not bearing a Compa-| go and eat wharſoever was fer before chem ;bur in this caſe he 


- up of many PCr 2 Rival as to a thing or perſon which he lovethy. It is in holy 


would alſo have them a5k no queſtions for conſcicme ſake. 
fCcccc}j 28 Bur 


Chap. X:; 


, not to ſignifie any ſuch extravagancy, ex- 
attenderh that paſſion in men, but only his 
giving that Homage to any Creatur2 which 
£15 moſt applied to God, to expreſs his an- 
give Divine Homage to Idols. The Wor-. 
g 2 great piece of his glory, which he hath 


Ungs* C 
ut all 12, 


24 * Lec no man ſeek his own, but every man * Rom. 16. 


26 * For the earth is the Lords, and the fulneſs * Exog: 


£ This ſentence is taken out of P/a/. 24. 1. The Earth is Gods, Deut. 10. 
or the Lord Chriſts, who hath ſanQified all things for the uſe of 14. | 
man, and all the variety of creatures that are in it are ſandified Pal. 50. 
by kim. An Idol cannot pollute any kind of meat? it hath no 1:2. 


- 
A 


—— — —  ——— 


_ | 
oy 2. —_ 


' 


_— 


LCORINTHIANS. Chun 
ES . they were either Fews, or Gentiles ( chat 15 Heathens) 4 
. 2 " 4 + 
28 Butif any ſay unto you, Thus is offered in fa of Coil (thas is; Chridinns) it was always an har rpg 
© 1. Critic unto idols, cat not e for * his ſake that ſhewed it, thing impoſſible, for Chriſtians to carry themſclyes ſo ” _ 
94% 4 for cofciznce fake ©.* 2 For * the earth is the Lords, | anger choſe that were no Chriſtians; bur it was noe impoſſib1 a 
them ſo to behave themſelves, as not to be to them atly ;uſt oe 
Verte x © The mear being out of the Jdols Temple, and returned tro a mo hoy — = _ ns Chriſtians to diece 
common vie, there could be no impiety in eating 1f, no commy- wow ww Is. 5 5" OP Q: urchof God, and were 
non with Devils, and partaking of the Table of Devils, in and by | with them Members 0 _ _OY my Body, of which Chr 
ſuch an Action; but yet there might be a breach of Charity 10 the |1s che Head. This 15 econ rule by which weare to ad in 
ation, that is. in caſe one were there preſent, who knew that 1t che uſe of our Chriſtian liberty. 
bad be-n forfizres to the Idol, and declared his offence, by _— 33 Even as * I pleaſe ail men in all things © nov« 
The: { nan that was about to eat that that _ 12 "= ſeeking mine own profit, but the profit of man 
fred;in that caſe the Apoſtle commandeth Chriſtians .*. 7? 70 ear, ns. Nw” ae }, 
ard that partly for bis ſake that ſhewed it, leſt they ſhould lay a Ml migt C . & 12VE a « : Ch 
fiumbling-b'eck before him, and by their example imbolden him| 0 Thar is, in all things wherein the Law of God hath Jefems a} 
that ſhew:Cit to do theliks, though he doubted the lawfulneſs ot|a liberty; for Pau! pleaſed no man, ether In omiſſion of a 
it; ard likewiſe for conſcience fake, that is, fortheir own con- ching which God had commanded him to co ; y nor ſeeking wy 
ſcience take, which through weakneſs might afterward trouble own advantage, either the ſatisfaCtion of my own mind, or hy. 
them forir, though withour juſt canſe, f He gives them pride a7 em OR Re ventage of others, eſpecial] 
ſor for it, B-canſe rhe carth is the Lords, and the fulneſs thercef, chat [10 matters that may any way affedt them asto their eternal Salva, 
is, becauſe there was orher meat enough toeat. This paſſage ta- |T10N. Thus Paul, like a good Shepherd, goeth our before the 
ken our of the P/almift had a ſomething different application, v. ſhcep, and leadeth them, as every True Miniſter thould behinfx 
26. there the Apoſtl- uſrd it to juſtific the lawfulbn;ſs of rheir cat- jan example to che flock of Chriſt. And this is a third Ruletoh, 
irg ſuch mear, returned again to a common uſe, an{ expoſed to obſerved by Chriſtians, as to the uſe of the liberty which bobs 
tals in the ſhambles: here he uſeth it to diflwade them from Law hath left chem as to any particular aCtions, notwithſtandir 
eating, if any er them know it had been offzred to the T-|thar liberty, yer they ought to have reſpett ro the ſpiritual god 
gol. | and Salvation of others, and to do that part which their judg, 
20 Conſience, I fiy, not thine own, but of the|menrs inform them, will be, as, leaſt tothe ſpiritual damage yy 
"hs - for * why is my liberty judged by anozher detriment, {6 moſt to the ſpiritual good and-profit of the Souls 
Otel g 5 OT 1y y lwerty JUS | others with whom they converſe. 
mans conſcience 2? #. 4 2M 
g By rcaton of what we had, v. 28. (where the Apoſtle forbad | CHAP. XI. 
eating theſe meats, in caſe any of the Feaſt rod them they had | 
been offered to Idols, both for his ſaks that told him fo, and alſo for | He exhnrts them to follow him, praiſes them that they kept his Inſtituting, 
comſrience [+ke) it is moſt reaſonable ro interpret thoſe words, met 1----2. Chriſt the Head of evcry Man, ani the My Call 
;k:ne own 1n this verſe, not thine own only, ' there being frequent I. Woman, threfore a Man muſt m0! pray or propht ſy Wt!) 1:5 Hi 
ſtances in Scripture, where the Negarive Particle muſt beſo re-| covered ; nv a Woman be in an Aſ-mbiy with hoy tiad ung, 
rained, as Jeb. 4. 42. and 6. 27, 38. k For why ſhould my prac-| ed, 2--- 15 He rcproves them for contentions in th; Chuch 
tice in a thing wherein I have a liberty, be cenſured or con-| 16.---19. ' aiſo for the Irreverence at the Lord's Supper, 20% 
demned by th= conſcience of another; he being p-rfwaded, that] Jts Inſtitution, our previous examination, its abuſe puniſhed in th 
what I do and judge, that I have a liberty ro do, and may do| Corinthians, 23-34. : 
lawfully, 15 done by me fintully, and I by him accounted a tranſ- : 
gEreilor for it; fo as, though I do a thing that is honeſt, yer it 15|* E ye followers of me, even as I alſo aw of 
not honeſt in the fight of all men, or of good report; whereas Chriſt 4. | if 
Chriſtians are obliged, "Rom. 12. 17. to proviae things bon«ſt in the a- Interpreters judge, that thefe words do properly belongtotkeli 
frgh: of OT In his oFn hight mccrly, and to do thole rhings foregoing Chapter, in rhe laſt verſe of which he had expound! 
that are liwvel; and of god r:port Piil. 3. 8. ; his own example to them; but whether they be applied torkur? 
| 30 For it I by [! g12Cce be a partaker 5s, why am TI | hapteror this, is not much material. They teach us, Thathe 3 
| Or. evil ſpoken of, for rhar * for which I gave thanks? &. Examples of the Apoſtles are part of our Rule yet themoddſof 
(gt. { It I by the goodneſs of God, whoſe the Earth is, and the fulneſs | the Apoſtle is remarkable, who requires of his people no furtherty 


3 ++ 


| ul 24.1. 3nd the tines thereot F. 


that I, 


fn 
kde thereof; or by rhe Graceof Knowl:dge, by which God hath given |follow him, than as he followed Chriſt : nor indeedoughtanymn 

i 11M. metounduſtandihat] may do thar, as to which others Teſs know- co requiremore of thoſe that are under hischarge, thantofolg 
-: 32 + ing ſtumble, can ear ſuch meat (out of rhe Idols Temple) as part |him fo far forthas he imitates the Lord Jeſus Chriſt. 


of it hath beencffered ro the Idol ; or with Thankſgiving partake of 2 Now I praiſe you, brethren. that you remember 
| 5 3 


ſuch meat (for fo ve: fignifes 6. 32. Chap. 17.9.) k Why amT|.__- —_ 
Eaſph med, or evilly ſpoken of, for that which I can give God me in all things b, and keep the [| ordinances, as Ide | 


chanks? That is, T ought not to canſe another to ſpeak evil of livered ther to you. 
me for uſing of meat, but tather than run that danger, to abſtain | & That you remember my Doftrine, the Precepts 2nd Inſirudti. 
from ſuch meat which T could otherwiſe ear of, and give God | ons. that I gave you,. c and keep the Ordinances (fo we tranſlate it) 
thanks : For in ſo doing I ſhould nor abuſe my hberty, and in-|the Greek word is mzwgod6765. The word ſignificrh anything that 
fitad of giving God thanks, I ſhould grievouſly offend God, nor | 15 dottrinally delivered, or taught men, whether ir concerns Faith, 
at-all conſulting his Glory. , _— - wr ye rhat in this Texr it doth not {ignific 
RA EL Te... . what the Apoſtle had delivered to them with reſpet to Faith, or 
51 x \\ _ therefore ye eat or dr — or whatlo. their moral Converſation, but with reſpe& to matters of Ocdey 
ever ye do, do a | to the glor y of God /- becauſe ſuch is the next inſtance which the Apoſtle mentioneth, 
{ The Apoſtle in theſe three Jaſt verſes, Jayeth down thr ee | about Praying or Propheſyinz with the head covered, or mcovirtd; and 
Rules, ro dize& Chriſtians how to uſe their liberty asto things undoubtedly any Preceprs of that nature from one guided by u 
that are of an indiffcrentnarture, neither 1a themſelves commanded | infallible Spirit ought co be obſerved : The Apoſtle doth not com 
nor forbidden inthe Word of God. His firſt Rule is in this verſe, mand them to keep any Traditions, which others ſhould, to the 
To do what ſocruer we dots the glory of God. This is a general Rule, not|end of the World, deliver to chem; he only fraiſeth chemfr 
to be reſtrained to the cating of meat offered toIdols, of which keeping thoſe which he had delivered, There is a great Queſliat 
the former diſcourſe had been. Ir 15 a genera] Rule, not applicable] herwixc us and the Papiſts, abour the obligation chat licth up 
alone rocating and drinking, bur to all other humane aQtions. The{ Chriſtians to obſerve unwritten Traditions , that is, fuch Riterand 
zeaſonableneſs of this Rule appeareth from our conſideration, That Obſervances as they tell us were Apoſtolical, and the Tradit:ons df 
the Glory of 'God was the end of our Creation, Prov. 16. 4. Thejche Primitive Church, though they can thew us no Scriprure fr 
Lord hath made a things for himfelf : and indeed 1t-is impoſitble It them ; but no Chriſtian diſputes his obligaticn to keep Avoid 
ſhould be otherwifc ; for whereas every reaſonable Agent both |7-ad;rions 2 Only we-are at a loſs to know how to provethole Tk 
propoundsto himſelf tome end of his aCtions, and the beſt end he| yrrinos Apoſtolica/, of which we find nothing in the Writings of ti 
can imagine, it is impoſſible but thar Godalſo in crearing man, Apoſtles; it is praiſe-worthy to keep Apoſtalical Traditions ; batt 
ſhould propound to himſelf ſome End, agd there being no berter others, -or ſuch asdonot appear to us to be ſo, it is bura work 

end than his own Glory, he could propqund no other unto himſelf. Supererogation : Where hath God required any ſuch thing 

The Glory of God being the end which he propounded to himſelf peoples hands ? 

In creating man, 1t muſt needs follow, thar that mult be the chief] - | head 0 

and greateſt «nd which any man can propound to himſelf in his| 3 But 1 would have you know, that the hea 
ations. God is then glorified by us, when by our. means, or by [every man * is Chriſt 4; and the head of the #0 
occaſion of us, he is well ſpoken of in the World, or by ouro-| man: &. the man e; and * the head of Chrilt 

bedience to his Will : This our Saviour hath raughtus, Joh. 17. 4, God f. : 
EC I in any of his aQtions hath a liberty from this Rule, d The abnſe which the Apoſtle is refle&ing upon in the 70 
. gh a man, as tomany things, nath a liberty tomarry, followin the 4 | noboloins with their 11M 
: "gs : g verles, 1s Womens Prayiug or Propheſying itn 7 

or not to marry,” toeatmeats, or not to eat them, ro wear chis ap-|,, againſt which the Apoſtle ſtrongly argueth. His 
pare), or not to wear it; yet heis not evenin ſuch things as theſe mui fornerh co be this, Thar 6 96s ay w_ I: o:0us Services0up 
1 at liberty, but he ought ro look about, and to conſider circum- to behave hier ſelf "arſon 5 C oe: vo husband, anda 

ſtances, which” will be moſt for the honour of God, the credit of cotdinoly i By: ro vor _ Pra mn hs viſe &cuſton 
the Goſpel, and reputation of Religion. And the judgment of mr 5 | Sw Sreges Fey ds 199 OY oe .- ole hetells1 

this is to be made from circumſtances, the difference of which |; -.-: RE EE Er Eeriſh dered 

: | : # | ſe, That the head of every man is Chriſe.Chriſt,contdere 
may make that unlawful, which otherwiſe would be lawful, and |? , metre i 7 ox a6 ny 4d womt 

: ; . , God according to his Diyine Nature, is Head of all men anc v” 

that Jaw tul, which under other circumſtances would be unlawful. tos heWe1g. but the Text ſeemeth rather to ſpeak of Chr 

- Rom FY 32 Give none offence, neither [C0] the Jews, NOT tO Me di ator: {o the Apoſtle rells us, Eph. F. 23: He Is che Had 


T3. the - Gentiles -2, nor to the Church of God » : Church ; aud the New Teſtament often ſpeaks of Chriſt in tit! 
2 Cor.6.3, » We ufe to ſay, that menare offended when they are grieved tion, and of Believers as his Members : in thisſenſe by ev) 'F 
+ Gr. or angred ; but theſe offences are not. here meant (as appears by| we muſt underſtand no more than every Chriſtian, every nf 
Grecks, the Greek Phraſe, *Amgcoucru 1ev:3%) bur give no occaſion of ſin or | f the Church. e The man is called the Head of the wom@?,* 
ſtumbling. This care he commands us, with reference ro all men ;| cauſe by GodsOrdinance: he is to rule over her,Gen-3- 16. he A 
for at that timeall the World fell under one of theſe denominations, an excellency aboye the woman, and a power ove: br: / G 


SIGCSE W - 
> | _ 6; >< 
”Y + 
b, 


"Oz 
_ 


y 
| 
# 
. 
$4 
7 4 
j 
1 17TY 
"* 
be) _. 
1 uh 
"+ 4, | 
" 
Leaf L 
: f | 
; 1 
MILE +2 
7 +. & 
E*7 21 ; IF 
5 FP ? 
| as; : 
o ,.# "5 
3+ x; »þ* 
45 ” 
” TT SR '% 
'T] 'F ix 
on, 44 © 
W oo (0: 
: 3.45 
{ % 4 
+ >? . 
1 '4 | 
" + 
- * F 
@ Far pt F " 
ob i 
w i 
. Nt 4: 
1 , 
+ PR # 
. V "2 
$ 4 oo 4 
AX : 
FR.$.457 i . 
* 4 3 Bs 
. P +? 6 
$17 "= 
5,7 8 : 
: C $1 
34 871% 
> 
\ ; 
#41877 
EY 4; « 
Ye 9:8 
, . » 
4:7 
” 42 i $4 
" 3, My % by 
4 bs i 
\ 'F*F 
5:44 1: l 
- i P p- 
38) 251 & 1 
MM 2 4 Y 7? 
4 Fe 4 
! 3of 
' { 
b : + 3s 
\ ; 
6 2 nr b 
7; * Fi. © 
Fm 0-4 3 } 
2” WENT 
P73 5 4 M4 
: . 
4 2:9 
4 : : 
Hr, 193 1 
LE T5 
| F T1. 
x 19 CY 
' (Ne, 
- ! . 
iT . 
. kE 
F } 
TF- # 'i 
4a : » 
bk, 
CY [1 
[3 4 Txt 
C 0 ; oF 
#*,  THF<! 
it + 
Ls i * 
n HG 
i : 
g = 
ub | :, 
£ ff F 
. Lv 
3c, 
- 
# 3? 
4%; 
LA 
: 
L | 
þ, 480 ; 
136 
£1.48; 
b 
: 
Fc wo 
F y £4 
P43! 
» "5 
s #1 £% 
j 
” 
pe 
: 


” a On” 
ara > 

os 0 "IR 
=o 


— 
> CO . = 
-. WISE 


hay, 


ig Xl. L CORINTHIANS. Chap. XI. 


F God is the Head of Chriſt, not in refpeR of his Eſſence and|head »2 ; f . X | 
* Chuck FR Nature, but in ref] pe& othis Office as Mediator : as the man| yer », EIT that 1s even all one as if ſhe were tha- 
if nt © * rhe Head of che woman , nor 1n reſpeCt of a different and more | 
IS Gt to excellent Eſſence and Nature (for they are both of the ſame Nature) h Thuogh the woman, 1 Tim. 2. 12, beforbidden to reach, and 
Nible for but in reſpe& of office and place, as God hath ſet him over the wo. | <omMmanded 7 be in ſilence ; yet that Text muſt be underſtood of 
uſt occa. in. Nor indeed couid thoſe who deny the Divine Nature of ordinary women, and in ordinary caſes,not concerning ſuch as pro- 
give of, Chriſt,cafily have brought a Text more againſt their own aſſertion, pheſied from an extraordinary impulſe or motion of the Spirit. We 
and were than this, which rather proverh, that God the Father and the Lord read of Women P rophereſſes both in the Old and New Teſtameac 
ch Chiif Jeſus Chriſt are equa] in Nature and Eflznce, than different ; for ſuch was Huldab in Foftab's time, and Amns,of whom we read Luk: 2. 
toadt in | the Head 1s not of a different, but the ſame Nature and EC. | 36- and we read that Philip had four aaughters that did prophe ſie , 
fence with the Members. Nor dorh Chriſt's ſubjz&ion to his Fa- Ats 21.9. 1 The uncovered head here ( as before) muſt fienifie 
at all arguen inequality, or difference from him in Nature | covered with ſome artificial covering, ſuch as our Quoifs "Hats 
3» 0 not? ther re than the ſubjeCtion of Subje&s i 16 | Hoods, or Yeils, &c. or with her : c T 
) If 4 Eſſence,more Tan r J n J ro a Prince argue _P , own hair, not hanging looſe, but 
ny, that i; - y ſoch thing. The Apoſtle then determines this to be the Order artificially uſed ſo, asto be a covering. m. Diſhonoureth either her 
which God hath ſer. God is the Head of Chriſt , Chriſt is the Head husband, who is her Political or Oeconomica! head, for by that habir 
th lefrme'%, of his Church, and every one that is a Member ofit ; and Man is the behaveth her ſelf as if ſhe were nor one in ſubje&tion,and ſeem. 
on of any the Head of the Wiran, he to whom the womanought to be ſub. eth touſurp an undue authority over the man ; or her natural head , 
ecking my -.+, as the Church is ſubjeCt to Chriſt, and Chriſt is ſubje& xo his | © being in thoſe places accounted an immodeſt thing for a woman 
nd, or hy. | Faker, and from hence he argueth as followeth. |to appear in publick uncovered. Ir is obſerved of Rebeceah, when 
eſpecially : ; : ; ſhe met 1ſaac, Gen. 24. 65. She rock a wal, and covered her ſelf. 
ena] Sales, 4 Every man praying or propheſying g having hz |» For, ſaith the Apoſtle, your ſelves would judge it an uncomely 
before the head covered 5, diſhonoureth his head 7. thing for a womap to be ſhaven ; now to pray or propheſie with 
| be hinf:X ant a the head uncovered, is all one. This laſt clauſe will incline us to 
| Ruletohe By every Ly pr 4 x wm ome ( yy whom the | think, that by the uncovered head in this verſe, is not only to be un. 
which Gol Tearned Beza) un _ an = - y he that mini reth in prayer, or derſtood uncovered with ſome other covering befides her hair, bur 
ithſtanding in opening and PP _ b e gr a Fes from 2 previous | with her hair diſhevelled, hanging looſe at its length, for elſe it is 
iritual goed meditation and udy 0 46 oo wy the extraordinary Revela- | not all one to have the head uncovered with an hat , or hood, or 
; rheir judg, ron of the holy Sar » WiiICa Tt Pe ad in thoſe Pr 1mitive Times , | quoif, and to be ſhaven ; for the Apoſtle afterward, v. 15. ſaith 
damage al but alſo all choie rhar mn preſent ar thoſe ations : The reaſon | her hair 1s given to h:r for a covering or a weil : So that poſlibly thar 
the Souls hey give, 15, Becauſe the Reaſon given by the Apoſtle for his aſſer- j which the Apoſtle here refle&erh upon, womens coming into che 
; tion, is ſuch as is common to the people, as well as to him that mi. |publick Aſſemblies with their haic hanging looſly down, and nor 
niftrech : and rhe Woman was forbidden to ſpeak in the Church , | decently wound up fo, as to make a covering for her head; which 
i Tim. 2. 12. Bur our learned Biſhop Hal! aſſures us, he cannot | we are told, was the prattice of thoſe beaſtly ſhe-Prieſts of Bacchus, 
agree with thoſe of this mind. And indeed it is an unreaſonable | who, like frantick perſons, performed thoſe pretendedly religious 
is Inflituim, jotexpretation 3 for though thoſe who join with others in Prayer , | Rites with their hair ſo hanging looſe, and were called Menades 
i ar may be ſaid to pray, YE. thoſe that hear dne preaching or expounding becauſe they behaved th:mſelves more like mad perſons, than ſuca 
vith bis tad Seripture , Can 1N AO Propriety of ſpeech be ſaid to propheſic. Nor | as werg in the a&ual uſe of their reaſon : ſomething like which, ic 
ad 5; any ſuch uſage of the term to be parallePd, neither are the rea- | is moſt probable, ſome women in the Chriſtian Church at Corinch af. 
;- the Goth ſons they bring, cogent ; for chough the reaſon of the Precept may | feed, againſt which the Apoſtle here argueth. 


pry, 20-1 


puniſhed iu the 


allo am of'f 
if 
ly belongtotheb! 
had expound&tl 
applied to that? 
h us, Thatthe 3- 
t the modeſty of 
ple no furtherto 
doughtanyman 
>, thanto follow 
iſt. 


70u remember 
aces c, a5 Ide 


pts and Inſtrult 

o we iranſlate it) 
ch any thing that 
ir concerns Faith, 

t doth not {ignific 
ſpedt to Faith, or 
matters of Order 
Doſtle mentioneth, 

\ Or uncovired; and 
zne guided by a0 
»{tle doth not com 
hers ſhould, to lt 
7 praiſeth chem fr 
is a great Queltiot 
0m that lieth upol 
at is, {uch R400 
| the Traditions 
us5 no Scriptury 1 

\ to keep 421i 
to provethoſe 7% 
he Writings of tit 
] Tradicaons ; buriaq 
), It 1s buta work 


1 any ſuch thing 


hat the head 
head of the W 
d of Chrilt 


c a1l men and. Worm 
* ro ſpeakof Crt 
He isthe Head 0 | 
of Chriſt 10 raatl 
ro ſenſe by £99) 7; 
{t1an, every 
fn of che woman, | 
er,Gen-3: 16. 7A 
er gv cr her. G 


concern the People 'as well as the Miniſter, yet it doth not follow , 6 For if th | 
that the Rule or Precept muſt neceſſarily do fo too. And although or 1t the woman be not covered, let her alfobe 
the woman be forbidden to teach in ordinary caſes, yet it did not ſhorn 0 : but if it be * a ſhame for a woman to be ſthorn* Num. 5. 
cncorathole who on olemygour png RY _—_— or ſhaven, let her be covered. 13, 
nengry Iv er ; 4 - es Dr. cap a nt o Nature it ſelf teacheth, that it is a ſhameful ſight to ſee a wo- 
Seehead as 1S1n uſe in the Country wherein he liveth. Ir is _ man revealing the Mindand Will of God by an extraordinary pre 
be underſtood of thenatural covering of the head which is _ tended Revelation, in ſo indecent a manner, as with her hair all 
hut, nor yetof any other covering which is neceſſary for the wind: hanging down - > her hair be eicher ſhaven off, or at leaſt cut af. 
ſervation of life and health, bur ſuch covering as he might ſpare, Mcts 6 ret np Hg me he ip nie 1t up artificially, 
andis ornamental occoryog by _ wy Country. her; for though a at aa hg | mn _—_ der 90g 
CONST Ack - Arnapgr: he Church the rm yon pulſe, be not under the common Law ofwomen not ſpeaking in the 
Chit, which is ſubj-& ro him, whiles by cove Br « his head, he de publick Aſſembly, bur keeping ſilence, yet ſhe is under the Law of 
hires a ſabjeRtion in eminifireticon. Or he diflencura tics Nature to dono ſuch grave and ſolemn a&ions in ſuch a rude man- 
hud (fo 6. any interpretit) to wo bo betrayerh his ſu perro ray ner, that from the light of Nature, or the common account of all 
leſeneth himſelf as to that power _ dignity which -o d 1 Jo that live in thar place, ſhe ſhould be judged to be irreverent, and 
chathed him with, by uſing a poſture which is a token of wes brutiſh in her religious a&ion. From this Text a Queſtion hath 
rity and ſubje&ion. Interpreters rightly agree, that this and the yy: a ſtarted , Whether Chriſtien women may lawfully go without any 
lovingverſesisr0 be interpreted from the cultomsof Countries ge how ſacks queſtioncan havcany bottom in this Dog” hiker 
hn —_ in Divine Miniſtrations, to 1ook man a "Y og ws nee EY habiring chemlelves 
in el wh aero reren th L010 Jl Chi bkuving [099 evo od ad raid and FL mike pr) 
_ wc 10 authority and grvitye _ D—_ his Am- [ye now have no gre Proton - ey, ew w_—_ ns] 
das, which deze ger ve be judged from he comm {pur the lawfulnſf womens going wthour ay ct cone 
= nn requires of nn : mg = » 1s Authority and _—— m / _ Fo - — ++ => 7 hanger Faimos _ i” 
7 » ag £ © 
Lhe Ot vers "us the Jewiſh Prieſts _ —— God having givento the woman her hair fax a covering and an ro 
ſhip of God to veil their heads ; fo that Chriſtian Miniſters drhns can. ns ornate cn. be ſimply unlawful; accidentally 
a popieing wth re heals covered, Fara, wh 107 the Ecunneso priſe hor ha that Þ dr 
ereafon, of the Apoltles ailertion. e Heathens allo , Ns ; — , T Cif- 
both Romans and Grecians, were wont to miniſter in their Sacred Mom" — of P = cg ES the MM os ſo dreſſing 
bin Ao _ —_ covered. Some ay this was the reaſon, |, 16 ro or ſhaven, it alſo Ts er it rage" , k have 
: £ , i, , a er 
lin She he that's Cs Ggk — ops bs to be uncovered, either with her hair, or ſome artificial coveri k " 
EEE EE Les in Cotuk: the or os which Jatter ſeemeth.rather to be meant in this place, becauſe Di- 
pu of: Authority. oo bs Soy the dtelwvos Carmtl ove k | g_ think, that the face is that parr of the head, which the Apo. 
otheir Superiors covered, and ſo are covered alſoin their religious _ wi german mow - _—— _ their Religious actions, 
omances, The cuſtom with us in theſe Weſters Parts is quite 20t covered with the hair, but with a veil, &c. 
derwiſe ; the uncovering ofthe head is a ſign or token of ſub. | For a man 1 - 
wm: Hence Miniſters pray and preach with their heads unco- "WT foraſmuch — _ nk. 
tre, todenote their ſubjeEtion to God and Chriſt : bur yer this], Go, og e 15 tne image and glory , 
om 15not uniform ; for in Frauce the Reformed Miniſters preach _ odr:; bur the woman is the glor y ol the Gen. 1. 
ith their heads covered ; as they pray uncovered to expreſs their | {MAN 5. | 26, 27. 


erence and ſubjeQion to God, ſo they preach covered, as repre- : hed EPs. 
* ; ) # 7 Covering the head, being in theſe Countries a tok [a= 
Arp > raven , _ ip agar, derive , and|&ion, a man oughr to uphold the power, © <p ae yp 
hes ris 1917 wo duty of Miniſters pans "— DROeNY; wich which God hath inveſted him, and nor ro cover his 
| = , oſt her than ir is naturaNy covered with hai arſe 
8, to uſepoſtures and habits that arenot naturally, nor according hat Mawes." _ ich hair, r becauſe he 
| , . ath a peculiar cauſe of glorying in God, as he to wh 
- rrp, m_ place where gp. live, m— and irreve- |j, ſabjeQ,and therefore —_ . no habitsor poſtures avg him- 
ney (which « op 07% Ic 15 __ hon: ET ” parka of de- |c1f in ſubjeQion to others : Or becauſe God glorieth in him, as a 
cannnot by any be created, but ariſcth either from |qoft excellent piece of his workmanſhip. .God is repreſented in 


we, or Cuſtom, and Preſcription) which chis Text of the A : , 
E muketh to be the duty of all Chriſtians; though as to the ow man.. Pod? uote ro call that ones gley wherein he glorieth, 2 Cer 


*y , 1 _ ; Og 0 I. 12, 14. I Theſſ, 2. 20. SO David calleth God his Glor 
F ry pneany as ye I an emialtring an wg things | p,ov. 17. 6. Solomon tells us, that the Glory of >9" ans Ge. 6 Mey 
ews and —mt ig , a the th RINSE e he a: or poſture uſcd | ,eyrs. So as the Apoſtle here uſeth a double Aegument for the man's 
ity over the —_ Dato W hall by J b —_ and ſupe. c30T covering of his head. 7. Becauſe the man is immediarely ſub. 
"* agade _ " - Nw _ bet an oo 0 [vary gan 6 je& roGod, and therefore ought not by any habirs, or civil Rircs 
$ the Head of the Chur b Th i V 1h. he wy h J hes 0 | to ſhew his natural ſubjeftion to men thar arenot by Nature his Su- 
fe dat ou ie aro cring " the hea ing} periorg (for we muſt not think, thatthe Apoſtle by this Argamenr 
with us of ſub; -oobe 1gN OL LUperIOrity ang Preneminence, As It 1 fgrbjddeth ſubje&ion to Natura), Oeconomical, or Political Supe- 
, jeffion.. | _ '2, Becauſe wo gry in man ; s But the woman is 1h: 
ut _ | glory of the man, created for the honour of the man, and + 
with 6? Sow open that my Ay or pr opheſi help and affiſtance,and originally made.our of man, fo as err 
ol.IT ad Uncovered s, l onoureth her glory of her, as 4dam did of Eve, Gen. 2.23, This is nw bone of 


[Ceece a]: 


Deut 22.5. 


my 
- 


Fl 


S_s $ FR 
yg 
EY © IT 2s EE 
on I. 
nay mn 
2 42 = - "I 


454 


= ſl 

”. > w_ ns ” 
— Ir gntgs 
EEE” 

iz 


GS 
= 


- LN” 
m——__ 


ia 
jo CL EEE 
_ =:=—qg6 


Lhap. Xl 


and f ſhofmy fleſh. The glory of God ought to be re-| 


LI That bs. ©, 
a covering, ON 
in ſiznthat w By tower on her 
ſhe #5 under a COVETINS ON her head, 
the power husband : the thing ſignified is here put for the ſign, ast 


of ber h»/= often pur for the thing ſignified. Thus the 


band. 


TCORIN 


Ry VM: . 


wal d, and uncovercd, manifeſted to all : the glory of the man 


«> 


oo!.t ro behidden and concealed. 
$ For the man is notof the woman ; but the woman 


of che man 7. 

: E-rethe Apolt'e openeth or proveth what he had before ſaid 
oO: the woma,.,y bring the glory if the man, the woman was made 
of tie man; the man was not made of a rib raken our of che wo- 
1:20, bur the woman was made of a rib raken our of the man: we 
have the Hiſtory Gen, 2. 21, and from hence che Apoſtle argueth 
br {uvjcction to the man. 

9 Neither was the man created for the woman ; but 
the woman tor the man #=. 

# We have rhis expounded, Gez. 2. 18. where God ſaid, It is nor 
£vact tnat teal ſhould be alone , I will make him an help mect for him. 
God J1d not tft creare the woman,an 
for hcr ; buc hic firft made the man, 
might be a meet help for him, Now 
whoſoever or wharſvever is made for another pe! 
leſs excelent than rhar perſon or t 
Fur the man, ſignifies to ſerve and help rhe man, 

10 For this cauſe ought the woman to have || power 
+ herd wp, becauſe of the angels x. 


7h: Ark of God's jtrcngth, Pal. 132+ 8 is it ſelf called his Strength , 
1 Chruu, 16.11, But others here by Head, do not underſtand the 
womans natural head, but her husband, or the man who 1s the poll- 
tical head ofthe weman; and by having power on him, u 
her excrclling oi 

head, and think this Text w=l) expounded by 1 Tim. 2. 12- where' 
che Apoſtle forbidderh the woman to uſurp authority over the man. 
He addeth another Reaſon, x Becauſe of the Angels. By Angels 
hore, forne un 


cieated man and w 
woman. Crhers under{tand thoſe Meſſengers which the man ſent 
jomerimes, by whom the woman was berrothed (bur this was a cu- 
itom only in uiz 
ſand the Miniſters and Officers of the Church, who are ſometimes 


in holy Writ callzd 2ge!s. Ochers underſtand the ev?! Angels,who 
watch to tale advantage to tempt men from objetts appearing beau. 


ha:diy have ſpoken of Devils under the notion of Angels, eſpecially 
ſpeaking to deter perſons rom 
the good Angels whoare Miniſtring Spirits for the good of God's 
Ele&, at all rimes have a ſpecial miniſtration, or at leaſt are more 


oo «cY 
particularly p 
{k1p, obfervu | 
which ought toawe all perſons, attending thoſe Services, from any 
indecent and unworthy behaviour. 

11 Neveithele , neither is the man without the 
woman, neither the woman without the man in the 


Lord y. 

y Left the man vpon the Apoſtle's diſcourſe of his preheminence 
and dignity over the woman, thould wax proud and infotenr, and 
carry himſelf roo imperioufly , the Apoſtle adderh this, That they 
both land in need of each others help, fo as neither of rhem could 
well be withour the other, either as ro matters that concern God , 
or rhar concern the World : the Lord fo ordering and diſpoling ir, 
thar they 
is, They are <qua)} in the Lord as to a ſtate of Grace, in Chriſt 
there is weithcr male, nor female; though there be a difference be- 
twixta man and a woman in other things, and the man hath the 
priority and ſuperiority, yet when we come to conſider them,as to 
their ſpicitgal ſtate, and in their ſpiritual reference , there 1s no 
difference- 

12 For as the woman z of the man, even fo zs 
the man alſo by the woman 2: but all things of 


THIANS. 7 

| Chyp, 
toexaminea thing by their own Reaſon, and : 
Ctates of char, co give Sentence for or ———— : to the dj, 
thing as to which he would have them judge within X = 


e 
and accordingly pronounce Sentence, was, whether hemſelye, 


. * - | 

cent thing for women to pray to God with their hair al rac : 
ang1ns 

Dd 


looſe about their ſhoulders, or without 7 
| an : 
their head and face. ; 1 cOVering fo, 17. | 
' 14 Doth not even nature it ſelf teach YOU, thar j# h 
man have long hair, it is a ſhame unto him by It 2 2 ef 


c He tells them, that they could not judge thi d 

A — ju eth . 

ly ; for Nature ir ſelf taught them, that _ - "St F248 Come 2 2+ Jy 
anty te 


wear long hair. By Nacure here, ſome underſtand the 7, 
ture,according to which it would have an intrinſick evitin It, wh 
W ich 


w of Ni . 


IC 1s plain, it hath nor; for then neither muſt ch : 
uſcd it, (as they did) neither would ir be kt 6 nave 
| mens health or life. Others underſtand by Nature the Mgr 


God a. 

z The man hath a priority to the woman, being firſt created, and 
2 ſuperiority over her upon that account,” the being made for him, 
not he for her, this is indeed the mansadvantage ; but on che other 
ſide,fince the Creation ofthe firſt Man, all men are by rhe woman, 
who conceives them in her womb,ſuckles them at her breaſts,is con- 
cerned in their education while children , and dandled upon her 


4d then make man a meet help, f/0ns, but neither is this true ; for in many Nati of Na. Fg 
and then the woman, that ſhe | at the utmoſt length. Ochers underſtand Homer gg Year hair pit 
it is a Rule in Reaſon, Thar and judgment of that natural Reaſon which ſince wah light ble 
r perſon or thing, 1s man. But this muſt be the ſame in all men, and we hoy aki rho 
king for which the other 1s made, men donot judge this ſhameful. Others therefore Ne that all to | 
; underſtand a common Cuſtom, which (as they hy) a—_ ler bec: 
were a ſecond Nature, ſo the term is taken, Rom. 11. » " mk, 
cannot ſo lignifie here ; for there neicher is, nor ever Was Fry 8 __ 
univerſal cuſtom in any place, that none in it wore lons uch an ape 
122d is here to be underſtood (as fome think) thers by Nature here underſtand Naturs! inclination. but ns del 
in ſign that ſhe is under the power of her | this be the ſenſe; for there is in ſome men, as well pp ce " 2 
he ſign 1s |nagural propenſion and inclination to wear their hai —_— e pl 
ich is called ,;length ar at exceſſ;y Placi 
Ark, which is called lengths, Orhers here by Nature underſtand the Difirews ;c ., 
Sex, as they take this word to be uſed, Row. 1. 26, the diſt; 4 thy 0” 
of the Sexes teacheth us this, and this ſeemerh to he = w oy 
probableſenſe of this Text. The Apoſtle arguing that — ha 
nderſtand |and female Sex, are artificially diſtinguiſhed by garments, 4.1. ing tb 
ing ofher power in him, teſtifying it, by covering her | was the Will of God they ſhould be fo, fo they ſhould al ” , —_ 
wg. vm by the —_ of their hair: and it was no le; oa = 
or a man to we 1 ic 11 | 
like a woman. ENG We woman, than $0 Wear geran ſupple 
{erſand God himſelf, who by the Miniſtry of Angels . OC cabs 
RT ilkirordes, 203 por chis Lew ypon the|, I 5 Bur if a woman have long hair, it is glory, manne1 
o her: for her hair is given her for a | i cauſe h 
ing d. corer. the rem 
among the Jews.) Qthers here by Angels under-| 4 But he faith, if s woman hath long hair, it is glory te be | won 
Long hair is comely for the woman, and accounted to by fors Thar th 
wg omactes God hath given her her hair for « cover. Lord's 
Ing. ere have been Books written about 10n 
tiful.ro unchait thoughts, 2c. Bur the moſt and beſt Interpreters |lawfulneſs of mens wearing CO HO In ove 
underſtand here by Angels, the good Angels ; for the Apoſtle would !lengths of mens hair, the ſubſtance of which were wy hungry v 
: [tranſcribe here. That which in theſe verſes ſeemeth to be na the Lord 
aQtions ; and ſo it teackerh us, That | mended to us, as the Will of God, in this matter, is: 1. Tha Church h 
| men and women ſhould fo order their hair, asby it to preſerverhs drinking. 
aſpen ns SE diſtinCtion of Sexes. 2. That men ſhould not wear their hair after flom in G 
cent inthe Afſemblies ofpeople for Religious Wor-{ the manner of women, either diſhevelled 5 F . 
\ _ ; iſhevelled, or curled, and tricked ome thin 
1 the perſons, carriage, and demeanour the ſenſe of | up about cheir heads, which ſpeaks too much of an unmanly and for their 1 
effeminate temper, much more was what became not Chriſtian, bada libe 
And if this be forbidden men, as to the uſe of their own hair, theirs,and 
they ſtand concerned to conſider whether ic be lawful forthem atwhich b 
thus to wear and adorn themſelves with the hair of other men and red away 
women. | Way,and h 
16 But * if any man ſeem to be contentious e, we, =," ' 
» , . ] 
_ no ſuch cuſtom f, * neither the churches d called Je 
8. : was that w| 
© Ifany man hath a mind to quarrel our of a love to ſhew hi cauſe they | 
wic in diſcourſing what may be ſaid on the other fide, oc outof: be firſt ace 
x deſire tohold up a Party, and contradit&t us, f, we have no fuch Lord's Supp 
ſhculd be nmcual helpsone to another. Or elſe the ſenſe| cuſtom of womens praying, or propheſying wirh their headsws f the adminif 
covered,or mens praying, or propheſying with their headscovered, ff bring j 
Or we have no ſuch cuſtom of contending for theſe lirtle frivoon ori we al 
rhings. g neither any ofthe Churches of God ; And good Chr. nſtirurion, 
ſtians, in their pratices, ought, in things of this nature, to ha which Can be 
an eyeand regard to the cuſtom of their own Church, and a!ſo of 7 rms; 
other Chriſtian Churches. Thus the Apoſtle cloſeth thisdiſcourt, er that T's 
and- proceedeth in the next vetſes to tax other abuſes which wee Y ations. Tn 
crept into this famous Church. [UCe of his 
17 Now in this that I declare unto you, | praik yo 21 For 
not +, that you come together, not for the better, ut om ſuppe: 
for the worle z, rmnken «, 
h I come now to another thing of greater conſequence , 308. ? There Wh 
which I muſt much blame you ; I am fo far from being able ry VZ, 
commend or approve of what you do, that I muſt forit ſmartlyr LR; hada r 
fle& upon you. ; That when you meet in your Church-Aſſembio  Wp The 
for the performance of your religious Duries, to pray, preach, i ff) _—_ 


knees ; the man therefore hath no'Teaſon co deſpiſe, and roo much 
to trample upon the woman : 4 and all theſe things are of God , 
by the wiſe orderingand diſpoſing of God ; ſo as neither hath the 
man, by reaſon ofhis Pretogative, in being firſt created, and the 
end for which the woman was created, any cauſe to inſult and tri- 
umph over the woman : neither hath rhe woman any cauſe,by rea- 
ſon of her Prerogarive, that the an is by her,any cauſe to triumph 
over the man, but both of them ought to look upon themſelves as 
having their Prerogatives from God, andin the uſe of them to be- 
have themſelves according to the Willof God, behaving themſelves 
in theirreſpeCive ſtations, as ir is the Will of God they ſhould be. 
have themiclves, the woman being ſubjeC& to the man, and teſtify. 
ing ſuch ſubjeCtion by all the ſigns of it,and the man carrying him- 
ſelf rowards the woman, as he who is the image and glory of God. 


13 Judge in your ſeJves; Is ic comely that a wo- 
man pray unto God uncovered ? 6. 
b No man is truly and thorowly convinced of an error, till he 


be convitted by by his own Conſcience. It is therefore very uſual in 
holy Wrir, for God by his ſacred Penmen, to make Appeals unto 
mensown Conſciences, and put them to judge within themſelves, 


or receive the holy Sacrament,you ſo meer and behave your ln hal Supper be 


as your meeting tends to the increaſe of your ſin, rather than CO 
the increaſe of your Grace, and the promoting the work or Was they fo 
in your ſelves , andthe Souls of others. one, wore? 
13 For firſt of all when ye come together * in ti ApIEs No 
church, IT hear that there be || diviſions amonglt jo! af Sou, 
/ CT: 2 


and I partly believe it &. 7, had no 
Ee richer part « 


A . Io bly ; for 
In the Church here muſt ſignifie the Religious Aſem®!) "ed on ofthe we 


this time there was no Temples builded for Chriſtians, cauſe t 
mer in private houſes, as the iniquity of thoſe rimes we d wh. e wo 
yerother think the place is here meant where the Church ws - : a is 
ro meet, and ſay, Thar the Chriſtians had a certain ſtated p14 by oe rend 
though in a private houſe, where they uſed romeert. BU 67 ho as u 
very probable, that they ſhould in the midſt ofsHeathens bh Fu ſuffe 
quiet and ſecure to meet either conſtantly, or ordinarily 10 a0 , Tab] 
certain and ſtated place, ſo denominated. Whar Schiſms, 7, 2 What, 


ſions the Apoſtle meaneth, he expounderh in the following) 
heir 06h, 
ji 


either they quarcel'd about meats, or drinks , or 


io. Xl. LCORIN 

wy down, or the time when they ſhould begin, or did not ſtay 
cill chey were all mer. 

i9 For there muſt be / alſo || hereſies » amongſt 


$. YOU, 
F on” amongſt you ». | 
17. Tris not ſimply and abſolutely neceſfiry, thatthere ſhould be ſuch 
dividoas amongſt you ( they are cauſed from the free a&s of mens 
$8. corrupt wi!ls) bur yet theſe things do nor fall our by chance, bur 
* 2. chrough rhe Providence of God, who hath ſoimmutably ordered and 
decreed, to ſuffer Satan ro ſhew his malice, and men to diſcover the 
n 2-juſts and corruprions of their own hearts. 2 Though Heyeſie be a 
term, that by Ecclcliaſtical uſage is reſtrained to ſignified perverſe 
Jcut- Opinions in matter of Doctrine, as to which men are ſtubborn and 
renacious;z yer itis manif<ſt, that che word is not natively ſo to be 
reſtrained, neither can ir reaſonably he here ſo interpreted, bur tig- 
nifies the ſame thing with $Schiſms and Drviſions before mentioned : 
For though (as will appear fiom Chap. 15. there were corrupt O- 
pinions amongſt them in matrers of Doctrine, yet it is unreaſona- 
bleco underſtand the Apoſtle here, as ſpeaking with reference to 
chem, theſe words being brought asa reaſon why he was inclined 
co believe that there were ſuch Schiſms or Diviſions amongſt them, 
becauſe there muſt be Hereſies. » God hath his wiſe end in ſuffe- 
ring breaches and diviſions, that ſuch as are true and ſincere Chri- 
ſtians, oppoſing themſelves to ſuch violations of Charity, might 
appear to you to betrue and ſincere, and to have the Love of God 
dwelling, working, and prevalling in them. 


29 When ye come together therefor2 into one 
je place 0, this is || not to eat che Lords ſupper p. 


#. « The Gre:k words do not neceffarily ſignifie into one place, 
they may as well be tranſlated for che ſame thing, and poſſibly that 
were the better tranſlation of them in this place, diviſions appear- 
ing the worl: amongſt perſons that meet as oneand the fame Body, 
and foc one and the ſame grave aGion, and that ſuch an aCttion, as 
declared chem one Body, and laid upon them the higheſt obliga- 
tion to brotherly love tmaginable, p Some words muſt be here 
ſupplied ro compleat the ſenle. 7hzs is not zoeat, that is, as you Jo 
it, is indeed not to do it ; to eat the Lord's Supper in an unlawful 
manner, 1s not to eatit. It 1s called the Lord's Supper, either be. 
cauſe he ordained and inſtituted it, or becauſe it was inſtituted for 
the remembrance of his Death, wv. 26. Luke 22.19. Some think that 
the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper is here meant,and fo one would 
- think, by comparing what 15 here with wer. 23, 24. Others ſay, 


{ 


2C. 


* that they which are approved may. be made 


THIANS. 


Chap. XI. 


2 I | . : - - 
17: or defpile ye the Church of God, and * ſhame Jam: 5 


__ that have not ua What ſhall I fay to you 21,07, _ 
inal] I praiſe you in this? I praiſe you not. Jew = 
: Hence evidently appears, that theſe Lovesfeaſts we of 8 


re kept in 


the place where the A ip of God 


for the Apoſtle would 
kept 1n their Private 


flembly mer for the publick Worth 
_ _ ng gy would continue them ) 
oules: and he doth not only blame the & 
of theſe Feaſts bur the Feaſts themſelves as kept 2 the _ R—_ 
the Church met; or as having in them any prerence to any thing of 
Religion: meer they might friendly to ear and to drink buttheir pri 
vate houſes were the fitteſt placesſfor that. « Or do you defviſo 
the place (as ſome think) where the Church of God meeteth w_ 
the people mer in thar place, by carrying your ſelves ſo diſorderly 
in fuch a grave Afſembly ; or the poorer part of the Church _ 
tho' poorer, are a part of the Church, redeemed by che Blood of 
Chriſt : the next words would incline us to think thar the ſenſe ; 
for it followeth, and ſhame them that lavc not, that have not ER tes 
to contribure to ſuch Feaſts, and fo are forced to go away withour 
any due refreſhmear. 
23 For * I have received of the Lord that which « 
alſo I delivered unto you , That the Lord Jeſus the 
{ame night in which he was betrayed, took bread ». 

w About theſe Love-f-aſts preceding the Lords Supper, I {ave 
received nothing from the Lord, you have taken the praQtic= up 
from the Jews or Heathens: Ido not know that it is unlawful tor 
youcivilly to feaſt, andeat and drink in your private houſes : bur 
cocome to makeſuch Feaſts immediately before you religioully ear 
and drink at the Lords Table, I have recieved no order from the 
Lord, for any ſuch PraCtice.I have told you what I receiv'd from the 
Lord, which isno more than, That the Lord, &c, x See this in 
the Evangeliſts, Marth. 26.26. Mark 14. 22. Luke 19. where 
all theſe words are opened. Some think that Paul received this 
from the Lord by immediate Revelation (as it is thought Moſes re. 
ceived the Hiſtory we have in Gen:{i; and part of Exodus, which re. 
lates to a time before he was born, or arrived at mans eſtate.) O. 
thers think that he received it from :S. Luke's Writings (for the 
words are quoted according to his Goſyel.) Others think he re. 
ceived it from ſome other of the Apoſtles : certain it is, that he did 
receive itfrom the Lord, how, is uncertain. 


24 And when he had given thanks, he brake it, and 
ſaid, Take, ear, this is my body which is broken for 


Chap 


T3. 


22, 


7} 


Or, /or 


VPEMIC ia 
br ance. 


That the Love-feaſt is here intended, which ordinarily preceded the| 
Lord's Supper ; the reaſon they give, is, Becauſe the abuſes here | 
mentioned, viz. not ſtaying one for another till the whole Church 
were met, one eating plentifully, another ſparingly, ſome being 
hungry whiles others had ate and drank enough, could not be ar 
the Lord's Supper, where the Miniſter beginneth not tillthe whole 
Church be aflembled, and where there 1s no ſuch liberaleating and 
driking. To this purpoſe we are cold, That by an ancient cu- 
ſom in Greece ( within which Corinth was ) the rich men offered 
ſome things to their Idols (which afcer thar ation the poor had 
for their relief) and made Feaſts in the Idols Temples, of which all 
had a liberty to ear, That the Chriſtians imitated this praCtice of 
theirs,and the rich amongſt them upon the Lords Days made Feaſts, 
atwhich both poor and rich Chriſtians might be, and the poor car. 
ried away what was Jefr. But this Church growing corrupt every 
way,and having got Tcachers to thzir humours, they at theſe Feaſts 
negleed the puor, inviring only the rich to them, and alſo ex- 
ceeding in their proviſion for their rich Gueſts. Theſe Feaſts were 
called Feaſts of Love, or Love-feaſts, either becauſe, 1, Loveto God 
was that which (pretendedly art leaſt) cauſed them. 2. Or be- 
cauſe they were repreſentations of our Lord's Jaſt Supper, in which 
befirſt ace che Paſchal Lamb, thzn inſtitured whar we call the 
Lord's Supper ; or becauſe they immediately preceded or followed 
the adminiſtration of the Lord's Supper, from whence the Love- 


- _ /-} b:iog immediately before cr afcer it, had alſo the ſame name. 
he But if we allow this, we muſt make the Love-feaits alſo Chriſt's 
GG; Inſtitution, and inſtitured in remembrance of him, neither of} 


which can be proved. The meaning muſt be, you cannot rightly 
communicate at the Lord's Table, when immediately before or | 
after that Table ar your Love-feaft, you are guilty of ſuch diſorder-, 
ly aQions. In the mean time ,only whar Chriſt inſtituted for remem. | 
brance ofhis Death, is what the Apoſtle calls, The Lord's Supper. | 


21 For in cating, every one taketh before other his 
own ſupper q, and one is hungry 7, and another is 
irunken £5, 


9 There was at this time in moſt of the Chriſtian Church a Jew. | 
bÞ Party, viz. ſuch as were converted from Judaiſm to Chriſtiani- ! 
y,and had a tang of the old Cask,being too tenacious of ſome Jew. 
Ld Rites, Theſe looked upon the Lord's Supper as an appurtenance| 
the Paſſeover, immediately after which we know that Chriſt | 
it firſt inſtituted his Supper. As therefore Chriſt did eat the Paſe, 

| Supper before the Lord's Supper ; ſo they inimiration of him, | 
wugh they forbare the Paſchal Lam Supp« 
Kit OWn to precede the Lord's Supper, and having provided itar 
ome, would bring it to the place where the Church was to meer, 


50 thi and their poor Brethren contributing nothing to the charge of 
| ol ut Supper, they would not ſtay for them, bur took this their 
a "n Supper : So it came to paſs, that the poor Chriſtians were 


gry, had none or very little ſhare in their Feaſt, 5s whilesothers 
richer part ofthe Church, had too much ; for I rake our Tran- 
ation of * i word ys8%e tobe very bard and uncharitable. Hard, 
Xauſe the word doth not neceſlarily ſo ſignifie, or drinking be- 
md what is ſtriftly neceſſary, and our Tranflators themſelves, 
2.10. render it wel drunk. Uncharitable, becauſe it certainly 
ut be very uncharitably preſumed of this Church of Corinth, that 
ſhould ſuffer perſons, at that time aQually drunk, to come to 
Lord's Table. 


22 What, have ye not houſes to eat and to drink 


| juſtly accounted an abuſe of the King himſclf, whoſe Seal and 


b, yet would have a Supperof ly underſtands what Chriſt is, 


Church, and how, and by whom? Whether good Chriſtians may 


you : this do in {| remembrance of me y. 
Y Theſe words we alſo met with, Luke 22. 19, 20. and in the 
other Evangeliſts narration of the Inſticution of the Supper. (See 
the Explication of them in the Notes on thoſe Texts.) 
25 After the ſame manner alſo he rok the cup when 
he had ſupped, ſaying, This cup is the new Teſtament 
in my blood : this do ye, as oft as you drink it, in re- 
membrance of me. 
26 Foras ofc as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup, 
|| ye do ſhew the Lords death * till ye come =. 


a - A li Or, hew 
z From hence it appears, that the Bread and wine is not (as P.:- 


O. 


piſts ſay) tranſubſtantiated or turned into the very ſubſtance, of the * Joh. 14, 


tlejh and blond of Chriſt, when che Communicanrs eat it and drink 3. 

it, Iris (till the fame Bread and Cupir was. The end of che In. Afts x1” 
ſtiturion is bunt to commemorate Chriſts Death, and upon that ac- 

count the waiting upon God in this Ordinance, will be a ſtanding 

duty incumbent upon Chrittians, until Chriſt ſhall come ro Judg- 

ment. Some think, jh-w ye, is a betrer Tranſlation of the Verb 

than (as we rranſlate ir ) ze do jhew ; wherefore ſo behave your ſelves 

at this Ordinance, as thoſe who know whar they have to doin 

it, that 1s, to ſhew forth the Death of the Lord Jeſus Chriſt. 

27 * Wherefore whoſoever ſhall eat this bread, and*Num. + 
drink 12s cup of the Lord unworthily a, ſhall be guilty 19: 13- 
of the body and blood of the Lord 5, ge wh 

Divines agree, that theunworthinels here ſpoken of, reſpe&eth ''27 'T - 
not the perſon of the Receiver ſo much as the manner of the Re. ; 
ceiving; in whichſenſe, a perſon that is worthy, may receive this - 
Ordinance unworthily : *tis variouſly expounded, without due * ** 
Religion and Reverence, without Faith and Love, without propoſing 
a right End inthe AGion, under rhe guilr of any known fin nor re. 
pented of, &c. 6 ſhall incur the guilr of the prophanation of this 
ſacred Inſtitution ; for an abuſe offered to a ſign, reacherh ro that 
of which it isa ſign. Astheabuſe of a King's Seal, or Pi&ure,is 


PiQure it is. Some carry it higher, he ſhall be puniſhed, as if he 
had crucified Chri'ſt,the profanation of Chrifts Ordinance refleQing 
upon Chriſt himlelf. 

28 But * let a man examine himſelf, and fo let him. _ Co 
eat of that bread, and drink of that cup c. : 


« Heis toexamine himſelf abour his Kzowl:dge, whether he righr- 
what the nature of the Sacrament is, 
whathe doth in that ſacred Aion; about his Faith, Love, Repent ance, 
new obedience, whether he be ſuch a one, as God hath prepared thar 
holy Table for ; it is the childrens bread, and not for dogs,a Table 
Chriſt harh ſpread for his Friends, not for his Enemies. And ſo lr 
him eat, &c. having ſo examined himſelf, not otherwiſe. Whence 
it appears, thar neicher children 1 age, nor underſtanding, nor 
perſons not inthe uſe of their Reaſon, nor Unhelievers, nor per- 
ſonsunder the guilr of {is not repented of, hav:: any right to che 
Lords Supper : accordingly was the prafice of all the Primitive 
Churches,and 211 rightly Reformed Churches. Whether they oughr, 
if they will preſume co come, be kepr away by the Officers of the 


I3. 5. 
Gal.6--, 


communicate with ſuch ar the holy Table? And afcer what pre- 
vious Duty performed ? are queſtions that belong not to this Text. 
29 For he that eateth and drinketh unworthily , 
eateth 


8 43 


'TY 
: [ 
{© of : 
fk x v 
34 : {2 WH 
"4 | s 
' 1 4 þ- Y | . 
Nj {4 [3 BED } . 2 
"BE 5 id 
6 HH » £ ry P.”Y . 
HI | F T3x > f) 
$1 p . DB 7 T4 x £ 
. #* F r S 7 . wy 
'& (-»8 (F? , . x FJ CS 2 4 
4 q =o 
ab © $5P 1+ 
: l ; : 
C 


oY => 
Or idnenret and dinkth 5 damnation to himſelf & not dilcer- 
i - - : K E , | _ 
_ ning th. Lords body f. | - 
7 bn thu he betore mentioned, either having no rcxote 72/7, 
or no pref 42 rr to pattake in that Ordinance, being an Unbelic- 


- or a retbÞ<d einoly, cr Ignorant perſon ; orirrevereatly and 
irrelieig. ti. «He eateti and drinketh Kiud damnation, or j1.1g- 
Ts - ir is no matter which we tran{late it; forif he dringeti 
Gods judgments upon him in this life, they will ead 1n eternal 
Jam ancion, without a timely repentance, bur 1t 1s 79 himſeif, not 
to him rac is arthe ſame Table with him, unleſs he hath been 


_= *1.* . s + lierh her 
ovity of tome neglett of hisduty to him: f And his guiltliera here, 


THISHNSE Chap 


the favour of God in enriching them with them, as he Gd ©! 
1. 5. or yetin the due and rigt uſe of them, as Gnd Cory 
have glory from their good uſe of them ; or of the era 
they had ran into, or might further run into the i1] uſe ofchen 
2 Ye know * that ye were Gentiles 6, carriaq ... 
unto theſe dumb idols c, even as ye were led 4 
b So they were ſtill in reſpe& of their Birch and Country . 
he ſpeaketh with refer2ace to their Religion and Way of W _ 
c Carried away by your [Jok-prieft, and, by the examples = . 
Friendsand Nzighbours to 7do/s, which, though they (ce 


to ſpeak, and to tel] you of thingsro come, yer indeed hays, J% 


tithe doih nor gdifcern and diſtinguiſh berwixt ordinary and 


. . p = Cools 
common Y14ad, and thar Bread which 1s the repreſentation of rae ,, 
Lords Boy, but uſerh rhe one as caricfly, and WIL as little pre- | b{e Creatures, bur you were blindly led by the diQates of 


raration and regard to what he doth, as he uterh che other. 
ty p v* 74 > + '® j 

20 For this cauſe many are weak and lickly amongſt 
you, and many {ep g. 

2 You, it may be, are not aware of it, but look upon other cau- 
fs, why fo many amonglt you arc lit, and weak, and dic _— 
worely ; bur i as the Apoſtle of Jeius Cirrift (and ſo know the Mind 
and Will o: God) attvrieyon, that this your irreverent and irrelt- 
gious profanaiion of this holy Ordinance, 15 one great cauie of 10 
many among you bzing lick, and weak, and dying in uarip? age. 
Some think that the word /7-:p argues that they we 
cnt Chiiltians that fo died (tor the death of wick 
ly called {L-eping any where ia holy Writ) to let usknow, that 


and ſpeak not ; (only rhe Devii ſpeaks from them.) 4 yy 


- hers; 
'0u ated not under the condutt of Reaſon, not as became pa.e. * 


reaſong. 


or by the examples of others. This the Apoſtle purs them rs 


of, to let them know, thar all thoſe excellenc Gifts with which th 
were now endued, as he had told them, Chap. 1. 5,6, they had ; 
ceived from God ſince their Converſion to Chriſtianity, ang ho 
rhe Spirit of Chritt ; for before their Converſion they were lt 
| brure beaſts, knowing nothing, but led by others. _ 
3 Wheretore I give you to underſtand, * tharnomm 
ſpeaking by the Spirit of God,calleth Jeſus || accurſcg +. 
'and 727 no man can fay, that Jeſus is the Loid, but by 
) 


godly, peni- | che holy Ghoſt f. 


men 1s hard- | 


} The Apoftle proveth that they had received their piricual Git; 
| from the holy Spirit of God, becauſe when they had nor receive] 


even good pzuple, who yet may te faved, may b.ing judgments in | this Spirit, they blaſphemed rhe Chriſtian Religion, and called 
this life upon themlcives, as by the profanation of Gods Name im | Ch: iſt ac:urſ:d ; which could not be done by any that ſpake by the 


other Ordinances, fo more eſpecially by their profanation of it in 
this Ordinance of the Supper. 
* Pfat.;z. 31 For * ifwe wou'd judge our ſelves, we ſhould not 
£ bs judged ». 
þ This word judzc in Scripture ſignifies all parts of judgment, 
eccamining, accuſing, condomn/ug, XC. here it ſigaiftes accn/iag our 
Ives, cond-mmng our ſelves, diſcruminating our 1cives bY th- res 
newings of Faich and Repentance, from Unbeltevers, 1+ p-incent 
and profane perfous ; it we would thus judg? ont ics, God 
would not accu'e or cond:mn us. 
22 Bur when we are judged 7, we arc cuaftened of 
the Lord £, that we {houid not be comdemned wita the 


world /. 

i Leftrhev ſhould be terrified at what he ſaid, and look upon their 
2fflictions as indications of Gods diſpleaſure againſt them to that 
d:gree,thar he would not look any more upon them as his Children; 
hecells them, that when Gods people are afflifted wirh the evils of 
this life, fickne(s, cc. God doth deal withtaem ſo much asa Judge, 
as k a Father who chaſteneth the child whom he loveth, and 
ſconrgeth whom he recciveth, Hcb. 12. 6,7, 8. {1 And doth it for 
2 good end, to prevent the eternal condemaation of the Soul with 
the impenitent tianers of the World, giving us our HzI}1n this lite, 
that we may <lcape 1t 1n the Jitz to come. 

23 Wheretore, my brethren, when ye come together 
to ext, tarry one tor another 2, : 

m The Apo?Hle conciudes this difco';rie with an exhortation to 
them, for the time tv com to rake heca of theſe irreligious and ir« 
reverend behaviours, with relation to the Lords Supper. That they 
ſhould not take the Sacrament before the whole Citurch were met 
roverher, the rich ſhould ſtay for the poor, and not receive it in 
Parties, bur as ene Bop, car that on? Bread, 

34 And if any man hunger, let him eat at home », 

that ye come not together to || condemnation 9. And 
we” © the relt will 1 {:t in order when 1 come p. 

n And if any one hungred, they frould not make the place, 
where they met together tor the folema Worſhip of God, a place 
for eating and drinking at Feaſts, but eat at home, o leſt by theſe 
diſorderly and irceverend actions, they incurred the diſpleaſure of 
God, and brought down the judgment of God upon. rhemliclves. 
p Laſtly, he minds them, that it there were any other things of 
this nature, which he had not ſpoken to, he did defigi fuddenly ro 
come to them, and rhen he would ict them 1a order, by giving 
them Rules about them. 


CHAP. Xl. 


Spicit of God ; for there being but one God, and rhe holy Soirie 
being one of the three Perſons in the Divine Being, and Jeſus Chr 
another, and the eternal Son of God, ir could nor be but he that 
called Chriſt accurſed, as the Jews and the Heathen 4; md 
blaſpheme God, which none could do by the influence of rhat jyj 
Spirit, who was one of the Perſons in the bleſſed Trinity ; ang E 
by chisthe Apoſtle lets them know, that they were now ated bo 
another Spirit, than they were in thcir Gentile ſtate ; ſo he yjþ 
lers them know, that thoſe Heathens, amongſt whom they lived 
were not ated by the Spirit of God, bur by the evil Spicic. 7, 
the other ſide, he ſaith, That no man could ſay, that ſelus i; tt. 
Lord, bur by the Spirir. There is a double ſaying, thar Jef; j; 
the Lord ; x When men only ſay it with their lips, but dongt he, 
lieve 1t intheir hearts, are not affefted with whar they ſay, nor ds 
pay theic Homage of Faith and obedience to him, which ſhould 
cocreſpoad with ſuch a Profeſſion : thus men ſay Chrift is the 
Lord, who preach him, or diſcourſe of him as men, though the 

do not in heart believe 1a him, receive or embrace him, or live up 
to the holy rules of life which he hath given ; rhus 7#a'25,Crinp)u; 

and others, ſaid Chriſt was the Lord ; this they could not do bur 
by the Holy Ghoſt, that is, the Gifts of the Holy Ghoſt, which are 
common, which thoſe might have who were never renewed þ 

the Holy Ghoſt. So theſe Corinthians generally going thusfar yer. 
bally to acknowledge Chriſt the Lord, ir was an Argument they 
had thus far been influenced by the Holy Ghoſt, 2 Thereisa fe 
rious and ſaving ſaying, That Feſus Chriſt is the Lord, when men do 
nor only wich their lips ſpeak theſe words, and orher words to the 
ſame ſenſe, bur heartily acknowledge him, believe in him, love him, 
and obey him, and call upon him, profeſſing him as thy ougitto 
do, and fo as may be of advantage ro them ro Life and Salvation, 
No man now doth this bat by the Holy Ghoſt renewing and ſankti 
tying him, and bleſſing him with, and helping him in che exerciſe 
of ſuch habits. We ſhall obſerve in holy Wric, that ſome Verbs 
(1gnitie not the ation only, bur the ation with its due quality, 
| Thus h:aring ſometimes ſignifieth to hear fo, as withal to believe, 
Cs/l/ng upon the Name of the Lord, Row. 10. 13. figaifietha cal- 
ling arighr. Confeſſion, 1 Joh. 4, 15. ſignifies a confcſling with Faith 
and Love: Sorhe Verb ſay in this Text may fignifie ſuch a ſaying 
or ſpeaking, as is attended with Faith, Love, and 1a: Obcatemce. 


Spirit g. 

_ & Gifts ſignifieth the ſamething with Habirs, or powers or abi 
ities ro ations. Our aCions being either N2:wa/,as eating, ink 
10g, ſleeping, &c. or Moral, or Spiritval. Theſe powers are either, 
Natural, which are in an ordinary courſe of Providenc bred with 
us, as the infant hath a power to eat, drink, fleep, cry, &«. or 
Acquired, and that by imitation, or humane learning, as the Ciull 
gets an habir of ſpeaking, or a power to write, under{tand Langu# 
g25, Arts, and Sciences. Or ivfuſ-d, and thoſe are either mer!) + 


2d aways 


Your 


Ve Mouths 


3) 
|| 0: 


] 
tit 
s 


4 Now * there are diverſities of gifts, bur the "lame 
l 


&f ſpiritual gifts, they had been Gentiles, and one ſpirit wrought in | fnſed, as Faith, Love, and all habits truly ſpiritual are, and there 
them divers gifts, viz. giving all for the common uſe and profit of fore called Graces, or ſpiritual Gifts of the higheſt nature ; or eli 
the whole Churcl, which is the Boay, 1 I3. even 45 inana- ſuch as obtained by the uſe of means on our parts, but yet not 
tural Beay there are many Mcmbers, but none uſeleſs or to be deſpiſcd, ' without the influence of the holy Spirit of God; ſuck are abi, 
but all t-nd te the mutual decency , ſervice and ſuccour of the ſame \to pray, preach,&c. There are fome common powers thac 15, ſuch 
Bey , which ſuffers or rejoices with every Member , 14——26. $9 | as thole might have, who ſhould never be ſaved, which migir 
were they the Boa; of Chriſt for which God gave differmt Gifts and meerly infuſcd, and were extraordinary in thoſe firſt Times 0! tit 
alſo Miniſteries, but yer every one muſt ſeck after the beſt Gifts ; Goſpel; ſuch as the Gift of Tongues, Prophecy, Healing, &c. Thite 
2] —}T | powers, eſpecially ſuch as are not natural and common to allin a 

; ordinary courſe of Providence, nor acquired meerly by imitxud, 


] | or ſtudy, or the teaching of others, bur infuſed either in whole, ot 


X OW concerning ſpiritual gifrs, brethren 1 
N Wd gf 8 * [in part, are thoſe which the Apoſtle here calleth Gifts: and he 


would not have you ignorant 4: bo | thoſ Gifts : and | 
) 5 | faith, there is a diverſity of them ; there was the Gifr of Pros, 


a The word G:frs is not in the Greek, but ſupplied by our In- | of Healing, of Togucs, &c. bur he tells them, this diverlity 0! vii 
rerpreters. In the Greek is no more than concerning ſpirituals, | lowed all from one and the ſame Spirir, the Spiric was not diveds 
which 1s dad es 997 wa __ or is mas, though his influences were divers. 

Opcrations, and Gifts, of all which heafterward treateth ſomethin % | ; ts 
but moſtly concerning Gifts, which are chiefly ſpoken of in = 6 * And there are differences of ad:niniltrations or 
Chapter z and our Tranſlators agree with the beſt Interpreters, in |the ſame Lord 5. ; 

ſupplying the Text with the word Gif:s. This Church eminently h There are divers Offices of Miniſtries in the Church of (Et 
abounded in theſe abilities to ſpiricual a&ions given them of God |one miniſtreth in the Office of Elder, another in che Office of 1 
(ior ſpiritual Gifts ſignifies nothing elſe) and as they abounded in | Deacon, one in one ſervice of the Church, another inanorier #7 
them, ſo they erred much in the abuſe or ill uſe of them, as we | vice, butthere is but one Lord to whom they miniſter ; £5 al 
thall afrerward read in this Chapter : Therefore the Apoſtle tells |ſerve the great Lord of the Church, Jeſus Chriſt, chough in 01/55 
them, that as to them, he would not have them iguorans, either of  Ocders, and places of Miniſtration. 4 


xo 


oh, 


ty, 
I | hf 


| 


20 


F\ 


for bus 0 
$ Fi 
dom #2 
Spirit 7 
m T he 
enumerat 
ceaied, if 
by the t 
W.\tom Inc 
an abulit! 
br knw: 
others, a 
moſt prob 
| by Wiſd 
ces of aCt1 
where © 
whether b 
henc thing 
the :Qval | 
of the Pai] 
ture contt: 
nally, witt 
9 To 
the gifts c 
oTo anc 
Geftood rh; 
ing of ſuc] 
muſt there! 
fron that Ge 
knowledge 
nels 19 the « 
7, of hea! 
ordinary rat 
| 1» Io 
ther propl 
another *. 
terpretatio 
q To ano 
theinfli&in 
Mother Prop 
the Will of « 
@ opening tr] 
biſcerning of $ 
tity'and cred; 
__ men { 
Ward though 
truth and Fr 
? To another 
With men in © 
another the I 
- - abilir 
a 
OY 


'11 But 
opirit, *® g 
will , 
od Though 
Feral powers a 
| Git c all 
«& lame hol 
We Church, F 
I2 Fora 
nd all the 
Ne body : 


1p. XIE. 


LCORINTHIT 4X 


- 


yÞ 


—x} _.—- 
Cat > L % 
- 


= And chare are alveriites of operations, but it iS LOO wh __—_ + NE Pe 

i X ' y 43'l z+ }l; 9 & Wah, Y Neg DOUY 15 D one: foir is im ihe fo 'Y 

the lame God, which worketh ail tn _ : Body, the Church, which is that myſtical Bol of which Gheih 5 
5 Operat Oe and Mcnifrations both coiff-r from” G:frs, as As | the Head. _ The Members cf rhe Chu: ch may hem :1y, 2nd there 
frem Ha? ** * and Pow-rr, by which Men performed holy Offices in | Hay be in ſeveral Members of the Church a dive firs of G 5, of 
the CharcÞ, 9! wrought Miracles, arecalled Gif:s. The A&sor ex- Mzin:ftrations and Op.r3:7m;, yet the Clhitro!, is bye one yer Chrit 
exciſe of rh=ie Pow ers are cates Miniſlr ations and Oper ations. Theſe | and the Church make hi * bae mylticai Boy of which he is the 
lcter Gitter Oe from another, as the former [1gnift: ſtanding 2nd Head, and they are the Members: WF: +rafore rice thu Mera 
coarinving Acts 11 the Church ; Operations, <i:o, e's, rather [1g- | bers; having ſeveral gifrs, or levers! offices,or tcvora) eowereand 
ities Wet CH. OS eF-&r, ſuch yy heal:g the fick, withour the app1-; OPETaFIONs, had 0 reaton tor (heir Q11-t2002 (5 (ichy Fits or 
cation of orauimary means, [peaking W1Tj) AIUETS Tonguss, QC. The, POWers Or offices co enNVY ONz 2:10Tiier, Or tf: 4 iPi4c *ICh Ott, Or 


Apoſtle re:ils 
ar} 4 GLverir: 
which Men exerctieo or Po h | e perfor 
mace of them : Yo tacre Were diveriitiesof VU perations, by Winch 
Mea uſes thoſe extraordinary G:7?s or Powers, which God gave 
fore in The 
heved not. 
a all, ehough all , 
- Bat the manifeſtation ot che Spirit & is given to j 
eery man'to profit withal 5. 
k He here cailerh Gifts, the manifcRation of the SHirit, partly to | 
ke them kno, chac theſe Powers flowe trom the aoly Spirit ap- | 
tly, they having no ſuch powers while they were H-athens, | 
ind carried after dumb Idols, as rhey were led ; and vartly co let | 
all know, that theſe pits and powers vers evident provis boch of 
Chrifts Atcen!t0n , and of the Promiſe of toe Father, and of Chriſt 
in {gding the holy Spirit, | F5 4.1. and 16, 7,8, Eph. g. 8. / Chefe 
oifes he tells them were given tO every on? where cvry ſigniteth 
for che fame gifts or powers were not given to al!, but to 
hom they were given, they were given not to puff them 
ive them marter to boaſt of, but to do good witha! to 
E Chriſt. No Man hath any power or gift given him 
for his own hurt, or the hurt of others, bur only 
J, and the good of others. 


F 
®; 
CTC CL 


v of A&« in the conſtant Servi 


did not do, or could not do the t2me things. 


vac? 08 5 
thoſe £2 W 

org 
tae Church 0 
of God, either 
for bis own. £00 

$ For to one is given by the Spiit, the word of wil-, 
Jom #2 to another the word of knowledge by the ſame 
Spirit Ra. 

m There are different apprehenſions35 to the particular Gt; here 
enumerated, and it is no wonder theſe extraordinary Gifts being 
cexſed, if we be now at a loſs to determine what 1s to be underſtood 
by the terms whereby they are expreſled. Some by the word of 
W./tom hereunderſtand a faculry to deliver grave Sentences: others, 
mm at:ility to open the deep Myſteries of Religion - others, a /nzu- 


them, That as there was a diverſity of G $4 or Powers, | 2lory over One aianorher - fo; thous Were b1;* c 


th: Church, by | the tame Head, thougi they had iro: 
reifed thote Gifrs or Powers they 111d ita the perfur- { r1E5, Offices, an 


6: planration of tae Church, for the ſake of ſuc as be- : 20dy, 


drink ir 


[as t 

[ ” " , 

| but one Element of Water. 
T4 7 I} 7 ke Ear cath _ - . * ,v » 

| been a! mad® to drink ints one 991777, which ſome interpret, as it 1f£ 


| 


In n:w/cfge of ſpiritual things, joined with a great authority, &c. 
others, an ability to explain rhe deep Wiſdom of God. Bur it is 


eye, 1 am 


) moſt probb'e,that he meaneth by it what we ordinarily underſtand 
! by Wiſdom, viz. 2 faculty from a good j udgment of the circumſtan- 
. os of actions, to do them at the beſt rime, and in the beſt manner 
wherein they may be ſerviceable totheirends. Tr is as uncertain, 
, whether by the word of Know!cage he meanerh a CapiClty to compre- 
f bene things in our knowledge, or to communicate it to others, or 
: theaftva]l communication ot it by preaching, which was the work 
\o of the Paſtors and Teachers, or the Prophertical knowledge of fu- 
R ture contingencies, or an ability to ſpeak of ſpiritual things Do&ri- 
" nally, without any great faculty of applying them. 

n, 9 To another faith by the fame Spirit o: to another 
- the gifts of healing by the fame Spirit p. 

Fo oTo another, he faith, 15 given Fairn, By which cannot be un- 
* deftood rhat Fazrb which 1s common to all Chriſtians, for he is ſpeak- 
M ing of ſuch gitrs as were given ro ſome Chriſtians, not to all; he 
a muſt therefore mean, cither a Fait!> of Miracles, that is, a perſwa- 
o fon that God would work a Mirac'e1n this or that caſe, or a great | 
ls nels in the diſcharge of their Office. p To another :4e g:ft of HR: al. 
WE ing, of healing diſeaſes miraculouſly, withour the application of 
mn ordinary rational Medicines. 

19 To another the working of miracles 9, to ano- 
me ther prophecy 7, to another dilcerning of ſpirits s, to 
"1: WW another * divers kinds of tongues #, to another the in- 
wit WA terpretation of tongues #. 

c, 0 7 To another the working of Miracles of other forts, ſuch as 
Chuld theinfliting puniſhments on fioners, caſting out Devils,&c. r To 
N91 another Prophecy, which in the general fignifieth the Revelation of 
ply th the Will of God, whether by the forerclling future contingencies, 
thect « opening the Scriptures by preaching or teaching. 5 To another 
c el viſcerning of Spirits, A power wherein God, for the farther autho- 
t n0t nty'and credit of his Goſpel in the primitive Times,communicated 
bilitizt tolome men ſomething of his own Prerogative to diſcern mens in- 
\(ucb ward thoughts and hearts, and to make up a judgment of their 
phe be truth and lincerity, or contrariwiſe of their falſhood and hypocriſie. 
ot tis t To another divers kina's of Tongues, that 1s, a power 0 diſcourſe 
Thiie with men in their ſeveral Languages, as we read in A#s 2.8, u To 
lin a another the Interpretation of Tongues. Tis 1s made a diverſe gift 
[catioh, from an ability to ſpeak with divers Tongues, poſſibly ſome of thoſe 
- h - ipake with divers Tongues could not interpret what they 
and is Ud, 

1" BY. 2: But all chefſe worketh chat one and the ſfell-ſame 
Iived 1 "I * dividing to every one feverally, * as he 

vob Wi W, | 

* » Though the Spirit of God be but one, from whom theſe ſe- 
5 0: Feral powers and abilities flow ; yet hedothnor give allthis vzriery 

gifts to all Chriſtians, but oneto this man, another to another,as 
of a —_ holy Spirit pleaſeth for the glory of God, or the good of 
1:e of 1 & Uhurch. | | | 
he - 12 Foras* the body is one, and hath many members, 
c3:} * WP"d all the members of that one body, being many, are 
n 01v45 , 


knowledge in the matters of Fairh, or a great confidence and bold. ' or their power to work Miracles, would not own themtelves Mem- 
| bers of the Church at Corinth becauſe they were in thoſe low, and 


- ! 
$ --# IS 
but gne Podv and hd all 
hey Ml C2 Jenny Sparc divers abit. 
d powers for ſeveral Qpera:1-n: 

£2 


| oaptized into one * p.... 
* Whetier 22 we Tews OT HF Gentiles, whetior 5 
and * have be 


13 For * by one Spirit we are a 


- 

” 
1 
s 


ca +y 


Wwih & 


< 


EXLY 
made to © &3 


f 
_ 


to ONE SPITIL T., 


- 


» The Apoſite proveth the Onenef of che Church, as the Boe; ,* 


- &# p - * * "g 6 DP 19 
of Chriſt, from the ſame Sacraments of the New Teftamentinſtity- 1 Þ 7 
ced for all Chriſtians, and wherein they joint'y partake. He (ich. toh. < 
| We are ba2tized into one Body, by which he muſt mean the univ-riul gy 


Church, for Chrift is the Head of that; particu'ar Churches are 
bur parts of that Church, of which Chriſt is the Head. Let men bs 


+ af ws | 5 OR. LY b 
iot what Nation they will, wizecher Jews or Gentiles, turning to 


the Ciriſtian Religion, and of what condition they will, when they 
are baptized, they are by it made Members of that one Bod; of 
which Chritt is rhe Head ; rhough for the more convenient adm:- 
nitration of, and participation in the Ordinances, they a=: divided 
into {mallerSocjeries, whichalſo have the denominationof Churcii2e, 

ne ſmaileſt d:op of water may be called water, though there be 
And, faith the Apoltle, We 19 


» 
I 


were, we have all drank of one Spuric, that is, been made partakers 
of one Spirit, whoſe benefits 2ce ſomerimes ſer out uuder the 19. 
.10n of water, /iviag water, Joh. g. tg. and 7, 38, 39. and fo in the 
Old Teſtament, 1fs. 12. 3. Ezeb. 47. But many athers rath:c 
chuſe to interpret drinking in this place, of arinen7 xt the Table 
of the Lord, partaking of that who! Aion beiag ſer our here by 
one particular aCt there performed. This 15s probaole, conſidering 
that the Apoſtle, in the former part oi the verſe, had b-en Teak: 
of the other Sacrament of the Goſpel, and that he ſpeaking * r! 
Lords Supper, Chap. 10. 17. had uſftd this expreſſion, Fo» we 52.1: 
many, are one bread ani one boay. 


14 For the body is not one member, but many «. 

a As the natural Body is Totum integrale, a Whole confilting 
of many members ; fo the Body ſpiricual, the myſtical 3o'!, of 
Chriſt is not made up of one ſingle Member, but of many Mem. 
bers, 

15 If the foot ſhall ſay, 
I am not of che body : is 
dy ? 
i6 And 


Becauſe I am not the han4 
it theratore not of the bo- 


if the ear ſhall ſay, Becauſe IT am not the 
0t of the body : is 1t therefore not of the 
body £ v. 

b It ſhould feem by theft expreſſions, that one great cauſe of 
choſe diviſions, which the Apoſtle had charged the Church of Co. 
rinth with, was their diftcrence in Gifts, Min:ſ?rations, and Orcy 3. 
tions ; Which was © that degree, that eicher thoſe who were high=r 
in Gifts and Miniſtrations, and more famous for their miracu'o!15 
Operations, defpited and vilified thoſe that were inf=1ior to them ; 


or theſe who were lower in Giits,or in their ſtations in che Church : 


inferiour orders and degrees. The Apoltle argueth rhe vnreaſo14te. 
nfs of this, by a furcher comparing of thenarural with the fpiricual 
myſtical Body, the Church, and ſhewerh, it was altogether as un- 
reaſonable, for men to diſclaim tie Church, and their relation to ir, 
becauſe they had not themoſt eminent gifts, or werenot 1a the moſt 
eminent places and Offices; as tor the foor to ſay,It was not of the 
body, becauſeit was not the hand ; or for the ear to ſay, Ie was not 
of the body, becauſe it was not the eye 

17 If che whole body were an eye, where were the 
hearing ? If the whole body were hearing, where cre 
the ſmelling ? c. 

c There are ſeveral a&tionsto be performed by the body of a man, 
either for the ſupport and che upholding of it in life, or for the 
accommodaring of it while it lives? Seeing, Hearing, and Sm-llins 
(which are the three aCtions here mentioned) are not indeed nece!l- 
ſary for the upholding of life, bur they are highly uſetul for a mans 
better being, and the accommodation of bodily life ; therefore there 
is need of a variety of bodily members, Organs, or Inſtruments of 
Hearing, as well as of Sigit, and O:gans of Smelling, as w2!l as 
Hearing ; the wiſe God hath creared no member of mans body in 
vain, each one hath its uſe in order to the being or well-being ot 
the body: So it is in the Church of God. as the Apoltle, v. 26. 
argueth ; bur he goeth yet further on firſt in his compariſon of the 
natural, and myſtical B dy. ; 

18 But now hath God fet the members every one oi 
them in the body, as it hath pleaſed him 4. 

4 The infinitely wiſe God, who hath made the body of man, and 
ordered all the members of the body for ſeveral us and otfices, ci- 
ther for the upholding, or accommodating the lite of man, hath 
likewiſe appointed the order in the body, in which every member 
ſhall and ; that the head ſhould be uppermoſt tor the berter gui- 
dance of the whole body ; the feet lowermoſt to tread upon rhe 


Ne body : fo alſo « Chrilt . 
6 And 


earth, and to bear the weight of the whole boy : and nogce muſt 


repine at the Wiſdom of God, which hath not only created mans 
; | _ 


BOUY. 


rady (een GhLing of avaicty of members) but alſo appointed every 


_ ti< ſervice of the whole body, do notmak? 


|| Or, put 


M 
”- 
-4 


Or, a:v!. 


fron, 


"Rom. 12. 


r 


Eph. 1.23. 


G4 12. Body of Chriſt : o Conſidering you particularly as individual Be. | 


&5.23,30. 


Col. 1. 24. 


* Eph. 2 


0. 
* Ro. 12 
8. 
1 Tim. 5. 
T7 


mater its pace, and there ſerteth ir,thar it cannot ſhift its ſtation 
21 office. = 
:» And if they were all one member, where ere the 
hody? e | 

- The body is a Whole conſiſting ofmany members,it could not 
©':eretore be a body, if there were but only one member. Or} 
uw could a body perform the ſeveral ations neceflary either 
7 the being, or the well-being of it, if it conſiſted but of one 
n:ember* 

20 But now are they many members, yet but one 


body f. 
7 The multiplicity of members,having ſeveral uſes and offices for 


a multiplicity of bodies, 
the body is ſtill but one. 

21 And the eye cannot fay unto the hand, I __ 
no need of thee : nor again the head to the feet, 
have no need of you g. 

o He names two of the moſt noble and uſeful members of the bo- 
dy, the Head and the Ec, which yet cannor tell the hands or the 
teer, they have no ne<d of them : the wiſe God having created no- 
thing in vain.but made every member in the body of a man for uſe, 
a5 to the whole, ſo tothe ſeveral parts of the body, the hand is uic- 
ful ro the eye, and the feer are of uſe ro the head. | The applicati- 
on of this fimilirude, which the Apoſtle fo much inlargerh upon, 
we ſhall have v. 26, 27, &c. 

22 Nay, much more thoſe members of the body, 
which ſeem to he more feeble, are neceſſary -. 


h By feeble the Apoſtle here doth not only mean moſ? weak, but 
which ſeem to us moſt abje and contemptible, in which ſenſe the 
word is uſed, 2 Cor. 12. 10. ſuchare the belly and the entratls ; the 
Eye alſo is a feeble member, &e. yer theſe parts are moſt neceflary 
for the uſe of the body, being ſuch without the uſe of which the bo- 
dy cannot Jive. 

23 And thoſe members of the body, which we think 
to be lefs honourable ; upon theſe we || beſtow more a- 
bundant honour, and our uncomely parts have more a- 
bundant comelineſls 7, 

; All know what thoſe parts of the body are, which are common. 
Iy judged «ſs honourable and lefs comely ; upon theſe we beſtow 
more abundant honour and comelineſs, by hiding them and cover- 
ing them, that they are not, as the hands and face and head (which 
we efteem more honourable partsof rhe body) expoſed co the pub- 
lick view of thoſe with whora we converſe. 

24 Tor our comely parts have- no need: but God 
hath tempered the body together, having given more 
abundant honour to that part which lacked &. _ 

: God hath in the Wiſdom of his Providence fo ordered it, that 
as we have ſome partsof our body, which ate judged uncomely,and 
not for thoſe noble uſcs that others are ; ſo we have other parts 
that are, for uſe, more noble, yet in common repute more 1gnoble, 
and vuncomely : and the ſame wiſe God hath ſo builded the body of, 
Man.as of both theſz ro make a temperament, fo as they allconcyr in 
the compoſition of the ſame body, and more abundant honour in 
covering and cloathing them,-is given to thoſe parts, that in rhe 
judgment of men, ſeemed moſt to Jack honour, that their uncome. 
line{s might by ſome artificial means be taken away. * 

25 "That there ſhould be no || ſchiſm in the body, 
but tha: the members ſhould have the ſame care one for 


another /. 

[ By Schiſm is here meant diviſion, and that alſo muſt be ex- 
pounded figuratively, and jt is expounded in the next words, that 
the members {honld take the ſame care one for another. Thar 
though the members differ in honour and office, yet they might 
mutually take care for each other, as if they were all in an equal de- 
gree of honour. 

26 And whether one member ſuffer, all the mem- 
bers ſuffer with it, or one member be honoured, all 


the members rejoice with it 4. 

7 From this union in the body natural of all the members pro. 
ceedeth a natural Sympathy, that if one member fuffereth, all are 
afflicted, and ready to contribute to the relief and help each of 
other; and likewiſe the honour that 1s refleed on the body, is 
refic&ed on all the parts, and all rejoice in the good that aeQeth 
any one ſingle member. 


togiveRulesot Order, and dire& in matters of Governmen: 
particular Churches had a power of Government withinth, 
(otherwiſe the Apoſtle would not have blamed this Church, & 

caſting out the inceſtuous perſon. q Prophets ſignifies ner hr 
I have before noted) that revealed the Mind and 
People, whether it were by an extraordinary impulſe ang 
tion,or in an ordinary courſe of Teaching ; whether the 
things to come, or opened the Mind and Will of G 
revealed. But in this Text, and in Eph. 4. 11. 
!1gnifie; either ſuch as from the Spirit of God, forerold fury:- 
tingencies (ſuch was Agabus, of whom we read in the Afr; 
Apoſ?les, and others in the Primitive Church) or elle ſuch a; 
prered Scripture by extraordinary and immediate 
think, chat Prophets ſignifie the ordinary Paſtors 
they ſeem rather to be comprehended under the next Te 
Teachers ; unleſs we had better grounds, 
guiſh betwixt Paſtors and Teachers, making the work of the 
cher to ſp:ak by way of DoCtrine and Exphlication, and th 
the Paſtor co ſpeak praftically. » Thirdly, Teachers ; 
theſe underſtand Governours of Schools ; 
whoſe work was only roexpound the Scriptures, or the Myſterj 
Salvation, but the Apoſtle in this Enumeration 


geſt we 


E-Z13D 1 WT HITANS 
7. (, 8, R / 1 J - 
eth here only three of thoſe there mentioned, y;+ 
prets, Teachers, He reckon:th up there Evangeliſt; 
not here mention. He here firſt mentioneth Apofiles, by who 
meaneth thoſe Servants of God who were ſent our by Chrif = 
C 


00 upon whom 


CHA P. XIE 


ſounding braſs, or a tinkling cymbal c. 


Chap. vj 


Prophets {te 


* AdoR(Þ. 
Fas ozier, Pra 
, whom he dot 


Craments, by 
hough 
emfelye 


eS perſons 

Will of Gon 
Revelz. 
y revealeg 
od already 


M ta 
con. 


L 
0 the 
lſiker, 


Revelation, Some 


of Churches . 


but 


rm of 
than we have, tod 


iſtin. 


Tex. 


e Work of 
Some þ 
others, ſuch Miniſters 


oof 


(which is the 1g. 


which by 


w Who the Apoſtle me; 


have in Scripture) nor mentioning Paſtcrs ; it ſeemeth ty 
me thar he means the fixed and ordinary Miniſters of 
the Elders, whom the Apoſtles left in every City, 
Minittry had received the Goſpel. 5 After that ſuch as he impoy, 
ered to work miraculous Operations, and thoſe of more remarkably 
nature ; for otherwiſe the Healings next mentioned, come unjer 
that notion alſo. #* Then ſuch perſons as he gave power to in 10 
extraordinary way to heal the fick. 
Helps, and w by Governments, is very hard to determine. Certain jr 
is, that he doth not mean the Civil Magiſtrates; for thetime wang 
yer come for Kings to be nurfng Fathers, and Qurens nurſmg Make: 
to the Goſpel-Church. But whether he meanerh D-acon;, or yr; 
dows, elſewhere mentioned, as helpful in the caſe of the Poor, 0; 
ſome that aliſted the Paſtors in the Government of the Church or 
ſome that were extraordinary helps to the Apoſtles ia the fch 
Plantation of the Church, is very haid ro determine, « Such as 
ſpake with divers Tongues, that faculcy being a gift, aswz heard 
before, not given to all, but to ſome in the Primitive Church, The 
Apoſtle, by this Enumeration, ſhewerh what he meant by thoſe dj. 
vergries of Gifts, differencesof Adminiſtrations, and diverſitizs of 
Operations, of which he ſpake in v. 4, 5, 6. 
29 Are all apoſtles? are all prophets ? are all teachsj 
ers ? are all workers of || miracles ? | 
39 Have all the gifts of healing ? do a 
congues ? do all interpret? y. 
y Thar is, all are nor, nor can be, any more than a!l the body 
Can be an Ear, or an Eye, or an Hand, or a Foot : you cannotex- 
peCt that in a governed Body, all ſhould be Governours ; and you 
lee by experience, thar all cannot work Miracles, Propheſie, ſpeak 
with Tongues, or heal thoſe that are Sick. 


31 But * covet earneſtly the beſt gifts » : And yz! 
ſhew 1 unto you a more excellent way -.” 


z The word may be tranſlated Indicatively, Ye do covet 74+ beſt | 
gifts; or as we tranſlate it Imperatively, Cove: ye ; I would have 
you be covetous to excelin the beſt gifts, that is, choſe which will 
make you moſt uſeful and profitable to the Church of God, *.” But 
yet (faith he) gitrs are not the beſt things, the habits of ſaving 
Grace are much more valuable than Gifrs ; Love to God and your 
Neighbour, ought to be by you preferred before Gifts: To adi 
courſe of which love, the Apoſtle thus ſhorcly patleth, 


Churches, 


their 


as by 


h fon 
Il ſpeak with 


*( 


All Gifts, hw cxcellent fecver, nothing worth without Charity. 1 —}- 
Its GCharafer and Excellencies. q—7. Newer faileth, and u thera 
preferred before Hope and Faith, 8—13, 


amy I ſpeak with the tongues of men and of 
angels z, and have not charity 6, I at become 


# The Apoſtle had promiſed in the cloſe of the former Chapter, 


to ſhew them a more excellent thing than Gifts, or a more excellent 


27 Now * ye are the body of Chriſt », and mem- [courſe than thar they ſo horly purſuing, in their emulation of the 
he now cometh ro ſhew rhem that way, that courſe: 


bers in particular o. 
» Conſidering you in the whole, as a Church, fo you are the 


lievers, ſo you are Members of Chriſt. Some think 4 wiess ſig- 


beſt Gifts ; 


nifies i7 parr, intending that true Believers amongſt them were 
Members of Chriſt, but not others. The Apoſtle in theſe words 
beginneth to apply to them what he had before diſcourſed concern- 
ng the Body natural, and the parts thereof; you are the myſtica] 
Body of Chriſt, which hath a great Analogy with that natural Bo. 
dy which you carry about with you. | 

28 And God hath fet ſome in the Church, firſt 
apoſtles p, * ſecondarily prophets 9, thirdly teachers 7, 
after that miracles s, then gifts of healing *, helps «, 
* governments , {| diverſities of tongues x. 

f The Apoſtle, Ev. 4. 11. ſeemeth to make a different enume- 
ration ; there he ſaith, And he gave ſome Apoſtles, and ſome Prophets, 
nd ſeme_ Evangelifis, and ſome Paſtor; ana Teachers, He mention- 


ſome way amongſt them, ra communicate the 


each to other. 
men ſay, it is by way of Impreſſion ; 
nicates bis Mind ſometimes tohis people, making fec 
of his Will upon their Minds and Underſtandings ; 


How this is we cannot tell : fo 


the N 


the way was that of Love, the courſe was the ſtudy and purſuing 
methods how to ſhew their Love to God, and to one another ; for 
(faith the Apoſtle) though 7 ſpeak, that is, if I could ſpeak, or ad- 
mit I did ſpeak, with the Tongues uſed in all 
World, and with the Tongues of Angels ; by wh 
the beſt and moſt excellent ways of expreſſing our ſelves. 
have no tongues, nor make any articulate audible ſounds by w 
they underſtand one another ; bur yet there 
or intercourſe among Angels, which could 


ations of the 
ich ſomeunderſtand 
Angels 


hich 


is Certainly a Society 
not be upheld without 


ir minds and wills 
me of the School- 


that way God indeed comm 
ret imprefiions 
but whether, 


Angels can do the like, or what their way is of communicatiny 


their minds each to other, is a great Secret, and we oug 
willingly ignorant of what God hath not. pleaſed in any 


d we ought to be 
part 0? 
ot. 


1p. 


tus re 
2:0Pe 
- th 
cating 
25. th 
Subſta 
and th 


the Ape 
the hear 
many af 
thoſe wh 


2 Ar 
'and uni 
and che 


move DN 
thing g. 
d It ha 
eth anext 
mitive T 
either as t 
come tO Pp 
of the M 
e Though 
any notior 
ther Divi 
that whic; 
he meant, 
would vp: 
trary to © 
of our $av 
true Love ! 
ble to Salv: 
nothing, b 
Salvation. 
3 And 
poor 6, 
and have 
bThe A 
bits, toa&t 
e a preat 
ryice t9 G 
nd thar n« 
that way, 
te Cauſe of 
pof his 
Veath, bury, 
by (elf ro t 
d Princip 
teſe ations 
O me, as to 
e may ob 
wunty towa! 
Reritorious a 
bot of ſavin 
r 20d in cl 
Woot and Pr 
gs, are { 
WY proceed 
obey and rc 
le Roots and 
d acceptabl, 
With refere 


4 * Char 
_ not 

ed up p, 
[Leſt a C 
We you difcc 
poltle here gi 
Charity he « 


p 


beſt | 
have 
will 
* But 
ving 


hapter, 
xcellent 
of the 
ourle : 
cſaing 
er; for 
or ad- 
; of the 
lecſtand 
Argels 
y which 
SOCIEtYy 
yithout 
d wills 
Scheol- 
ommul 
\re(ſions 


hecher. 
icacing 
ht to be 
part 0; 
ot. 


NIE 


oper ro this place, where the Tongues of Angels unqueſtionably ſig- 
£ the beſt and molt excefſent waysot expreſſing and communi-| 2 boaſting, and ating r 


cating our (-Ives to others, as Manna 15S Called Angels food, Pſal. 78 


LCORINTHIANG 


tis reveated Will, td tell us- Neither do I judge it a queſtion is no true root of Love tg God or to his Neighbour in his heart. 


s He doth not prefer himſelf before others, ambitiouſly glorying 


1 ; aſhly to promote his own el d 
ſatfsfiz his own intemperate r Fwdlon luſts. p He ner paikel 


hat is, the moit excellent food ; for Angels being Spiritual UP» proudly lifting up himſelf above others i i 
25 ances, need no food, have no mouths to eat, nor bellies to fill; high conceits of himſelf. , and ſwelling with 


, ; S 
and this the Apoltle meaneth, 7 hough I could expreſs my ſelf, or 
communicate my mind to others in the moſt excelleat way, or in 


che greateſt variery of exprefſion, Yer if I have not (Za, 
which we cran{[:ite Charity, bur poſſibly might be better tranſlated 
Love, becauſe we uſually by Chariry (in common ſpeech) under- 

d that indication of brotherly Love, which is 1n a&ts of boun- 
ty, feet the hungry, cloathing th: naked, giving to thoſe thar are in 
want, which 1t 15 poſſible that men may do out of meer humanity, 


cr 2 ſuperſtitious opinicn of meriting thereby, withour any true Profit. or advantage only ; 


root of Love £0 our N-ighbours; which 1s never true, if jitdoth 
not grow out of a Love to God. 


brofs, &c. that 1s, I only make a noile, but it will conduce no- 
thing co my Salvation, it will be of no uſe to me : Bur if I have 
this true root of Love, then 1t will be of avail to me. And thus 
the Apoſtle proveth, that the habir of Love to God and man in 
che heart 1s tar more excellent chan the gifr of Tongues, which 
many of the Corinth:ans had, or covered, or boaſted in, deſpifing 
thoſe who bad ic nor. 


cIf I want Love (faith the A-|# Such a man is nor eaſy provoked ; he is not with 
ofile) a true root of love ro men, flowing from a true Love to| but he is not governed by his paſſions, and over. 
God, and out of obedience to his Precept, I am bur as ſounding fl 


evil z, 


7 He doth not behave himſelf rowards any in a e 
unbeſceming manner, and will do nothing Seer =. 
which in the opinion of men ſhall be a filthy or indecent a&tion. 
r He doth nor ſcek what is his own, that is, whar is his own 
: he hath aneye to the good, and advan. 
tage of his brother, as well as his own profit and advanrage, 


our his paſſions, 


ruled by the 
y out extravagantly againſt his brother upon every behr bor ye 


vial occaſion; he knows how to bear injuries, and is willi 

_ fo bear letler wrongs, loſſes and dy than to R_ 
' =, 1n revenge of himſelf, or to che more remarkable prejudice 
- 1s Neighbour. : He thinketh »o evi, that is, »o miſchief, no. 
- ung chat may be hurtful and prejudicial to his neighbour. Or 
c - he doth nor rathly ſuſpe&t his neighbour for doing evil,(which 
poſibly may be the better Interpretation) ; and ſo ir teacherh us, 


» And though I have the gift of * prophecy d, That lightly to to take up evil Reports of our Neighbours, is a 


nd underſtand all myſteries, and all knowledge e, 


and though I have all faith, * fo that 1 could re- 


thi 


eh anextraordinary power or faculty, by which men in thoſe Pri- 
mitive Times were enabled to reveal che Mind and Will of God, 


come to paſs in the World, or by further explicationor application 
of the Mind and Will of God already revealed in Holy Writ. 
eThough, faith rhe Apoſtle, I had a vaſt knowledge, and could in 
any notion comprehend the moſt ſublime and hidden things, whe- 
ther Divine or Humane : f And chough I had all Faith (except 
chat which is ſaving and juftifying) : he further opens what Faith 
he meant, viz. Faith of Miracles, a firm perſuaſion, that God 
would upon my Prayer work things beyond the power, and con- 
trary to the courſe of Nature, (the Apoſtle alludeth to the words 
of our Saviour, Matt. 17. 20.) yet, ſaith he, if I have nor Love,that 
eve Love to God and men, by which that Faith, which is profita- 
bleto Salvation, workerh and ſheweth ir ſelf: g it will all ſignifi 
nothing, be of no profit nor avail unto me inorder to my eternal 
Sation. I may periſh for ever notwithſtanding ſuch Gifts. 


3 And though I beſtow all my goods to feed the 
poor &, and chough I give my body to be burned z, 
and have not charity, ic profiteth me nothing &. 

b The Apoſtle proceedeth from common gifts, powers, and ha- 
birs, toa&tions, and inſtanceth in two ; the firſt of which might 
e a great ſervice to men; the latter, an appearance of a great 
rice to God. Though, faith he, T feed the poor with my goods, 
id that not ſparingly, bur liberally, ſo as I ſpend all my Eſtate 
that way, and make my ſelf as pooras they. # Though I die in 
be Cauſe of Chriſt, for the Teſtimony of his Goſpel, or for own- 


death, burning, and be not dragged to the ſtake, bur freely give up 
&y (elf ro thar cruel kind of death. &+ Yet if I have not a Root 
| Principle Love to God in my heart, that carrieth meout to 
eſe ations, and theſe ſufferings, they all will ſignifte nothing 
e may obſerve, That, 1. 


jounty towards men, (which we uſually call good Works) are not 
Reritorious at the hand of God, and may be ſeparated from a true 


obey and to pleaſe him in what we do. 
it Roots and Principles of all thoſe works which are truly good, 


vith reference to oureternal happineſs. 


lſed up p. 


we you diſcourſe of ? Or how ſhall we know if we have ir? The 


move mountains f, and have not charity, I am no-ÞY** «fore thar be evide 


n? f. 
= Pu been before ſhewed, that the G:#t of Prophecy ſignifi- 


ether as to future contingencies,or things which ſhould afterwards] rejoyceth in all ecuth, 


[Leſt the Corinthians ſhould ſay to the Apoſtle, What is this 


poſtle here gives thirteen notes of a charitable perſon. By Love 
Charity he either meaneth a_ charitable perſon, a Soul poſleſſed 
that love, which he had been commending : Or if we take the 
m plainly, to ſignifie the habit it ſelf; the meaning 15,1t 15 an 
bit or power in the Soul, enabling and inclining it to do theſe 
ag: To ſuffer long, not to betoo quick and teachy with bre- 
en that may offend or diſpleaſe us; the charitable man will 
thhold and reſtrain his wrath, not be raſh in the expreſſions of 
and haſty to revenge. » And :s kind, it diſpoſeth a man to 
lire todeſerve well of all, and to do good to all as he hath OC- 
on and opportunity ; ſo as it is impoſſiblethere ſhould be in 
a1 any thing more oppoſite to this Grace, than a curriſh, chur- 
temper, with a ſtudy and deſire todo others miſchief. » Tho' 
titable perſon ſeeth othersin an higher and more proſperous 
dition than himſelf, yet it doth nor trouble him, bur heis 
lat yo preferment, good, and proſperity of _ —— 

It fareth with himſelf. Every envious man, that 15d1ipleal- , 
ndangry at others faring mg an uncharitable man, there | {hall I know, even as I am alſo known 5. 


violation of Charity ; for the man that hath a 7 
. rrue Jove to h 
_— though he may believeevilof his brother, and change 
im with evil, when ic evidently appearsto him that he is guilty ; 


cop fachhingeof hin nor fulpeth, 205mg 


the truth wy. 
u He doth not rejoyce in the ſinful falls of others. 


nocency and righreouſneſs. 


all — endureth all things z, 

x The charitable man beareth all injuries wi i 

believeth all things that are good of Th ER far is he po 
being credulous to his prejudice, z He endurerh all things tha a 
good man ought to endure, thatis, any evils done to himſelf. In 
the ſame ſenſe Solomon ſaith, Prov. 10, 12. Love covereth all ſins. 

8 Charity never faileth 4 : but whether there be 
propheſies, they ſhall fail ; whether :here be tongues 
they ſhall ceaſe 5 ; whether rhere be knowledge, it (hall 
vaniſh away c, 


a The Apoſtle, from another Argument, commendeth the Gras 
of Love, wiz. its never failing, it ſhall go with us into another 
World, and have its uſe and exerciſe there ; þ where there will be 
no propheſying, no ſpeaking with divers Tongues, bur there the 
Saints ſhall love God. And this makethir evident, that by Cha- 
rity or Love (before mentioned) the Apoſtle doth not ſingly mean 
bounty or beneficence to thoſe thar itand in need of thole good 
things of this Life, in which we can help them. c By Knowledge 
here, ſome underſtand rhe communicating of knowledge to the 
Church by preaching : others, the means we now have by medita- 


gof his Ways, and that by the ſharpeſt and moſt cruel ſort of ting in, and ſtudy of che Scriptures: others berter, of the im- 


perfe& degrees of our knowledge, or the way of our procuring 
it; the following verſes would incline us tointerpret it of the for- 
mer, though it be true alſo of the latter. 


9 For we know in part 4, and we propheſie in 


Þ me, as to my eternal Salyation and Happineſs. From whence| Part e. 
The highelt aQs of beneficence or 


d It was truly faid, as to things humane, That the greateſt 
part of thoſz things that we know, is the leaſt part of thoſe 
things which we are ignorant of. A great meaſure of Divine 


dr of ſaving Grace in the Soul. 2. Thar che greateſt ſufferings| things is alſo unknown to us, and the knowledge of them reſerved 
ir 20d in the Cauſe of Religion, may be ſeparated from a true| for the Reſurre&ion and Day of Judgment, John 14. 20. e Nor 
loot and Principle of ſaving Grace. 3. That no aQtions, no ſuf- | can the communication of our kaowledge of thar, be larger than 
ings, are ſufficienc to entitle any foul ro Heaven, further than | what we by prophecy communicate, we having our ſelves but a 
key proceed from a Principle of true Love to God, and a defire | ſhort and imperte&t communication of Divine things, we can 
Faith and Love muſt be | communicate but an imperfe& degree of knowledge to others. 


10 But when that which 1s perfect 15 come, then 


id 2cceptableto God, and which will be of any profit or avail to| that which is in part ſhall be done away fi 


f But when we come to Heaven, we ſhall be in ſuch a ſtate, as 


* Chari fereth lone 1, and is kind mz: charity | 29thing ſhall or can be added ro us; then our partial and imper- 
kn —_— _ » Sa ev nor i = fe&t knowledge ſhall be ſwallowed up in a knowledge perfe& and 


complear. 


11 When I was a child, I ſpake as a child, I under- 


became a man, I put away childiſh things g. 

2 The Apoſtle compareth the ſtate of Believers in this life, 
compared with their ſtatein another life, to the ſtate of a child, 
compared with that of a man. Look as one, when he is achild, 
knoweth things imperfe&ly, and diſcourſeth of them in the ſtile, 
and according to the knowledge of a child; But when he isgrown 
up, he diſcourſeth of them at another rate, according tothe de- 
greeof knowledge which he hath acquired by Inſtruction of 0+ 
thers, or his own Experience and Obſervation, So it is with all 
of us, in this life we, like children, have a poor, low, imperfe& 
; knowledge of ſpiritual things, and accordingly difcourſe of rhem : 
Bur when we come to Heaven, we ſhall know them, and diſcourſe 
of them in a more perfe& manner. 


DNdddd 


5 Doth not behave it ſelf unſeemly q, * ſeeketh * 


1| 20 her own 7, js not eaſily provoked 5, thinketh no 19: 24- 
Phil. 2-4» 


6 * Rejoyceth not in iniquity #, but * rejoyceth in* 


[2 For * now we ſee through a glaſs - darkly, but 
then * face to face : now I know in part, but then® 


b The 


Chap. XIII- 


Chap. 


P(al. 16. 


3 
Et 0 w But he Rom. 1. 
| ana the Iuccels and proſperity of truch in 32 
the World, or in the manifeſtation of any perſon's ruth, or in» *Jon 


7 Beareth all things x, believeth all things z, hopeth 0: wich 


the truth. 


ſtood as a child, I || thought as a child : but when I g,, -:- 
loned, 


*2 Cor. 5 
18.& 5.7. 


s:dat-., 


1Jvn 3-5 


hil 3.12. 


F (xr. ins 


— ——— — 


(Chip, 12. 


FF 


*Num.11. 


25, 29, 


+ Or, 


hrcar: G h, 


' ſpeaketh myſteries g 


Chap. IV. CTCORINTATAENS 


L. 
1t2ene 


' The Apof'e purſues bis former 7 , comparing the 1m* 
ror ſtare of Believers, as toknow!edge in this life, with what 
Nite in the life char is ro come. In this life ir 1s as 1n a Look- 
inn-glsfr, (where we only fre the Tmages and imperfeQ Repre- 
Inraticns of things) and. darkly, in a riddle; it 1s but a lircle 
nowledce that we have, and what we have we g-r with a great 
&-11 of dificulry ; but in Heaven we ſhall have juch knowledge 
2x two men have,. who ſee one another face to face, and ſhall 
know Cod fully, in ſome fort, though not in the ſame degree of 
the fulach and perfeRions wherein God knoweth us. 


23 And now abideth faith, hope, charity, thete| 


three : bur the greateſt of theſ2 7 chainty 7. | 


and Love, by which we delight our je!ves in God, and ſhew obe- 
dience to the Will of God, Bur of ail theſe, Love 1s the greateſt, 


Chip 


3 But he that propheſieth, ſpeaketh un 


T H AP. XIV. 

Proph'cy is commrnaed an? preferred befare ſpoaking with Tongs 1—-6. 
Proved by o Cormpariſes drawn fron 4 Pipe, Harp, and Trumpet : 
Th: one is as @ Barlarian, the other edifieth. JT ———13- We muſt 

Spirit, and alſ» with Underſtanding, for elſe others cannst 

ſay Ann 10 it 5 07 ae thy edified. 14 —-- 17. The ApoBtle's Exe 

aunbls to be imitate. 18 — 2D. The nc of firange Tongues : How 

irza8 [1 without Intorpretatien < 4 me Excelioncy of Proph:cy. 21 — 28. 

Prophecy.mg muſt by by turns : andthe Prophets j edge thercof. 2933: 

1 3e0 muſt be [ileu; 411 the Church 34, 35. Theſe hi: Ordinance 5 aye 

*he Commandments of Coriſt : And ail things muſt be aone 14 Order. 


2 7 em, 


; Ba 
Loeb od 4 & 1/ 
Fa ') L# 14 tt: " 


x} : Ollow after charity a, and * deſire ſpiritual gifts, 
& * hut rather that ye may propheſie 5. 
2 That Love to God and your Brethren, concerning which I 
kave been ſpeaking ſo much, as preferrable to a!] common gitts, 
follow that with your utmoſt diligence, as the Perſecutors follow 
vou ; (for itis the ſame word that is ordinarily uſed to ſignifie the 
viotenr profecution of Perſecutors, though it be applied alſo to 
things which we ought eagerly to fol'ow, Rom. 9. 31. and 14. 19) 
þ Burt rather, or principally, that you may be able to reveal the 
Mind and Will of God unto others. Some think by fore-relling 
things to come; but that is not very probable, fuch an ability of 
prophetying being given but to few under the New Teſtament : 
it is therefore more probable, that he ſpeaketh of an ability ro o- 
p<n the Scriptures, either by immediate Revelation (asro which 
they could uſe no means buc Prayer andan holy Life) or by ordi- 
nary Meditation, and ſtudy of Scriptures. For though the for- 
mcr Species of Propheſying, by Prediction of future things, when 
th: truth of ir was juſtified by ſuch Prophecies accompliſhment, 
was of great uſe to confirm the DoQtrine of the Goſpel; yet the 
latter was of greater and more general uſe for the good of others, 
which makesth: Apoſtle put them upon che coveting, and earneſt 
detire of that facuiry or ability, becauſe, of all others, it made 
them moſt eminently and generally uſeful ro others, as well thoſe 
within the Church, as thoſe without ; and thus the Apoſtle ex-+ 
poundeth himfſelt; v. 3. | | 

2 For he that * fpeaketh in an «&zown tongues c,, 
ſpeakecth not unto men 4, but unto God e: for no 
man + underſtandeth bi f, howbeit in the fpirit he 


g. 

e By a Tongs (for unknown 15 not inthe Greet, but neceſlarily 
added by our Tranſlators, for he ſpeaketh of fuch a Language) he 
meaneth a Language not known to all, or ar leaſt not to the moſt 
of them that hear him. Ir may be asked, what unknown Lan- 
guage the Apoſtle here meaneth ? Shall we thinkthat any Paſtors 
or Teachers in the Church of Corinth were ſo vain, asto preach in 
the Arabick, Sc3thian, or Parthian Languagetoa people who under. 
ftood only the Gr-e&? Our learned Lizhtfoor thinks this not pra- 
bable, and that if any had beenſo vain for oftentation, the Apoe 
ſtie would rather have chid them for ſuffering ſuch an abuſe, and 
have forbidden ſuch fturcher pra&ice; than have given dire&ion, 
that if any ſo ſpake, he ſhould interpret, as he doth v. 5. He ra- 
ther thinks therefore, that the Apoſtle meaneth the H:brew Tongue; 
the uſe of which, though it was by this time much loſt through 
the Jews mixture with other Nations, yet was reſtored in a great 
meaſure to the Guides of Churches, for their better underſtand. 
ing the Scriptures of the O1d Teſtament; and continued amongſt 
the Jews in their reading of the Law in the Synagogues. Now 
there being many Jews in this Church, and the Service of God 
being ordinarily in the Jewiſh Synagogues performed in that 


Language, it is very probable, that ſome of theſe Jews that were 
Chriſtianized, (to ſhew their skill) might, when they ſpake to the | 
whole Church of Corizth, uſe to ſpeak in Hebrew, though few or 
none underſtood that Language. The Apoſtle ſaith, he that did 
ſo,d ſpake not to mien, that is, not to thoſe men who did not under. 
ſand that. Language, not to the generality of his Hearers, though 
poſſibly here and there ſome might underſtand him, « but unto 
God, who being the Author of all Languages, muſt neceffarily 


know the ſignificancy of all wordsin them : f For (hefaith) ſcarce | 1. whar to do. the Trumpet muſt not only ſound, but ſound in- 


any man underſtood him. g Howbeit he may ſpeak myſterious 
things to himſelf, and to the underſtanding of his own Soul and | 
Spirit. Others rhinkthat it was poſſible, that ſome who name nem 
being but the inſtruments of the holy Spirit, might not them. | 
{elves underftand all which they.ſaid ; but thatis hardly — 


1p. X 


R , ; , to 
edification z, and exhortation &, and comers. At R_en 

h That is, to the underſtanding of men, and for the , ages 
profic of men. # To Edification, for their increaſe in þ ond and z D 
and all habits of Grace. k And Exhortation, to quicks NOWledps that h 
exerciſe and praCtice of ſuch duties, as God hath, in be ter In yet nc 
required of th?m. 7 And for the relief of them under n Word, ned; | 
dens, to ſupport and uphold their troubled or wounded 6. ledge 
Theſe expreflions make ir probable, that the Apoſtle b bPirit | che th 
in this Texr, underſtands miniſterial Preacing ; which ! Protieg Lang! 
perly tends to Edificarion, Exhortation, and Comfart th . many 
telling of things to come. ; We fors _ 

4 He that ſpeaketh in an unknown tongue, if _ th 
himfelf 22; but he that propheſieth edifice} op are lea 
Church ». : the they k 

» Knowledge or underſtanding of the thing as to t 
ſp:aketh, 1s neceſſary to the improvement of Pl _ _ dreadt 
a means to promote Faith and Love ; for how Aral what ”_ I0 
inthe leaſt promote, either my Faith in God or Chuift nl in the 
to him, if I underſtand nor what they fay ? Roy. ro % _ x 

s ip - 
'hz thar ſpeaketh in an unknown Tongue, may (i SRP, -T 
| what he ſays) have his own heart afex&ed wt wary melt Speech 
'it is not poſſible lre ſhould affe& another. » Bur hethar preach t founde 
In an intelligible Language and ſtiJe to all that hear him. ha = ther. 
(what in him iieth ro edifie all thoſe rhat hear him. Sas {0 as nt 

5 I would that ye all ſpake with tongues o, hy re | ge 
ther that ye propheſied : for greater 7s he that prophe , 
fieth, then he that ſpeaketh with tongues , excert Iſhall 

|he interpret p, that the Church may receive edifj- ſheake 
INg 4. 

o I would in this place ſignifiesno more than either 7 y/4pin ht 
or IT could be content that you could a!l ſpeak with Tarn # ary « 
God pleaſed. Ir ſhould ſeem by this ſpeech of the Apoſtles thi _e _ 
this ſpeaking in unknown Tongues, was that extraordinary (if og on 
which, above all others, this Church, or the ſeveral Members of is - þ wh 
were proud and ambitious of, S. Par! rells them, thatif Gol e har | 
pleaſed, he wiſhed rhey could do ir. p But of the two, he rather s. I 
wiſhed them all a power to open and apply the holy Scripture; « ritual 
mens underſtandings and conſcience. He addeth thereafon, he. theChi 
cauſe it was a more honourable gift and work, and made themtry 
ly greater. But he adds, Except he interpret, for then he propheſ, e Th 
ed alſo. q That, faith he, the Church, that is, thoſe that heard hin very am 
propheſying, might be edified. Whence we learn, 1. That ſi, Tranſla 
tual growth, and proficiency in Divine knowledge and havitr of Graz 4 ob 
ought ro be the great end of all Preachers ; and whoſo doth nor the Lic 
propound this as hisend, abuſeth his Office, andrrilles in a Py. of thoſe 
pit.. 2. That whoſo maketh this his end, will make it his buſingh them, , 
ro the beſt of his skill, ro uſe ſuch a language; ſtile, and method edifying 
as the generality of his Hearers may beſt underſtand; for with. | I nt! 
out their underſtanding, there can be no edifying. And this l:ts a wry 
us ſee the vanity of uſing much Latine, or Greek, or a lofty flile _ x 
or a Critick Method, not obvious to poor people in popular Ser. 4 Brea 
mons, where the people underſtand not thoſe languages; or Phi. Cnarge 0 
lolophical ratiocinations, before a plain people that underltand 13 \ 
none of theſe things, Such preaching is neither juſtifiable by Rea- tongue 
ſon, nor by the praCtice either of Chriſt, or his Apoſtles. : 

6 Now, brethren, it I come unto you ſpeaking ae 6s 
with tongues, what ſhall I profit you r, except I hall po wag 
ſpeakto you, either by * revelation s, or by knowledge, ſpeak, a 
or by prophecy «, or by dodrine ? w. Languag 

ry God hath given me an ability to ſpeak with Tongues; ſupp!ſ Let him | 
I ſhould come to you ſpeaking in the Arabian, Scyrhian, or Paritiat Ithink t] 
[anzuage, what good would it do you ? How ſhouid it any way ptt nughr ſo1 
fir you ? 5s except I ſhould ſpeak to you, either by Revelation, &, ſo bad x 
Some make theſe four things diſtin& each from other ; other might be 
think, that they all ſignifie no more, thn rhe interpreting mete terprer, 
tioned in the former verſe. Thoſe who dittiaguiſh them, fi, mility ery 
By Revelation is meant the Explication of the Types and Figuresof his place 
the O!d Teſtament, or ſome ſuch Revelation as John had in Part, Ing the w 
or the expounding the Myſteries of the Goſpel. 7 By Knowlidg Pening an 
they underſtand the knowledge of Hiſtory, or any other ordinary Uſtin& gl 
knowledge. « By Prophecy, the Explication of the difficult Ter Vould ope 
of Scripture. w By De#rine, catechiſtical or pratical Dorn 14 Fi 
But theſe are all but uncertain gueſſes ; rhe ſenſe is plainly no mor, prayerh 
than if I ſhould come ſpeaking with unknown Tongues, and n0 ) 

way by interpretation make what I fay intelligible unto you. 7 From 
7 And even' things without life giving found, wit lawfulneſ; 
ther pipe, or harp, except they give a diſtin&ion 10 Lean 
che | ſounds, how ſhall ic be known what is piped, « bebe win 
harped ? x. | pR- tered, buy 

x In the Sounds which are artificially made by the uſcot Wind Machins. } 
Muſick, or other Muſick, nothing could be underſtood, if Arthal and Tryrt 
not alſo deviſed a diſtinction in the Sounds ; that one Sound hou an end nej 
ſignifie one thing, another Sound ſhould fignifie another.th1ing: by ow IS it 
unleſs the Voice of the Teacher be ſignificant to, and underſt knw ty 
by the perſon inſtruQed or taught, the Sound is of n9 uſe at all IS here ſai 
$ For if the trumpet give an uncertain ſound, who —o My 1 
{hall prepare himſelf to the batcel ? y. I ys M) 

» The Trumpet is made uſe of in Battels, and that variouſly; "" hg thy 
is uſedto give Soldiers notice to march on againſt che Enemy, ©, >Canr 
alſo to ſound a Retreat : If there were not a diſtindtion inane I5 W| 
ſound, and in the other, how ſhould the Soldier know when tos and] wii 
forward, and when to come back by the ſound of it. 197 ru fng with 
telligibly to thoſe that hear it, which it could not, if there "mY anding 
no diſtin&tion in the ſound. " as What 

9 So likewiſe you, except ye utter by the tong le Spirit, t 

ds eaſie to be | underſtood, how ſhall it "WF it of God 
words ealie to be || underitood, now MY fention of 


XIV. 


hat is ſpoken? for ye ſhall ſpeak into the 


f * 


known W 
ail %. | : ; 
« By 26210 Fogauey Is meant words which ſignifie well to thoſe 
that hear them ; for words may belignificant enough in.themſelves, 


* nothing at all ſignificant ro them that hear thzm,being unlear- 
4: fuch ſounds of words can contribure nothing to peoples know- 
” but are fo much loſt labour. This is a Text that deſerverh 
oughts of thoſe who affeEt in preaching ; 1f nor the uſe of 
Languages, yet the uſe of a $7z/e, or Method, which 15 not one of 
many of thoſe who hear them, underſtand. It js all one to ſpeak 1n 
in unknown Tongue, as in a ſtile, or method that people do not 
underſtand ; and truly, ſuch are the generality of Miniſters Hear- 
that words moſt lignificant in themſelves, and to learned Ears, 
feaſt ſignificant torhem, being hardeſt to be underſtood : ſoas 
zorhing of what they ſay, and the Miniſter doth bur , 
beat the air ( which is a 


d] 
ne 
ledge 
the th 


ers, 
are 
they know 1 
a5 fo the far greater number of people, 
Jreadful meditation. ) 

70 There are, it may be, ſo many kinds of voices 
1 the world, and none of them # without fignificati- 
ON #4. 

+ The whole Earth was originally of one Language and of one 


Creech, Ger. 11, 1. But upon the building of Babel. wv. 7. God con- 
funded rheir Languages, fo as they did not underſtand one ano- 


th ther. They being ſcatrered abroad , had different Languages ; 

th & 2s now there are in the World many Languages, and the words 
every Language are ſignificant to thoſe that underſtand that 

4 Language. 

6 11 Therefore if I know not the meaning of the voice, 

pe Iſhall be to him that ſpeaketh a-barbarian, and he that 

y- ſpeaketh ſha/l be a barbarian unto me. 

þ But if a man doth not underſtand the Language , the words 
jþ, are not ſignificant unto him, I ſhall neither underſtand him , nor 
if will he underſtand me ; for a Barbarian cannot underſtand one of 
at another Nation, till he hath learned the Language of that Nati- 
fe on : nor can a man of another Nation underſtand a Barbarian, till 


he hath learned his Language. 


0 12 Even fo ye, foraſmuch.as ye are zealousof -þ ſpi- 
n- "ritual gifts c, ſeek that ye may excel to the edifying of 
he. theChurch &. 

py c This proves that the Members of the Church of Corinth were 
a very ambiriovs of ſpiritual gifts. The Particle #7, which our 
i Tranſlation here renders 0, plainly ſignifies therefore in this place. 
Th In the Greek it is becauſe, or foraſmuch as ye are zealous of Spirits, 
bas the Efficient is pur for the Efte& , the Spirit which is the Author 
w_. of thoſe gifts for the gifts themſelves. a Seek that ye may excel] in 
ul. them, and hat will be, if you moſt defire thoſe which tend to the 
of edifying the Church, and uſe thoſe with which God hath bleſſed 
od, you inthe beſt order and manner for that end. From whence 1t 15 
th. ' obſervable, That the improvement of the people, to whom we 
It preach in the knowledge of God, and in Faith and Obedience, is 
= the great end which we ought to propoſe to our ſelves in the dif- 
a charge of our Office, and in che uſe of our Gifts. 

us : : ; 

and 13 Wherefore let him that ſpeaketh in an an&nown 
On tongue, pray that he may interpret e. 


e To interpret here ſignifies no more, than to render that intell;- 
gible to people, which he firſt uttereth in an unknown Tongue. 
Bur what need he pray for that ? Hath not every man, that can 
Ipeak, a power to ſpeak his native Language as well asa Foreign 
Language? Some ſay therefore, that ivz in this place ſignifies alſo, 


IL CORINTH#HT4 Mi 
[the greateſt devotion and fervour of afft&ions. þ But E will fo 


pray, that my ſelf and others may underſtand what I ſy, I will 
neither ſo pray, that my {elf ſhall not underſand whar I ſay, ner 


Chap. XIV. 


yet fo, that others ſhall not underſtand me. Und:rftrnding is here 
taken in a Paſſive ſenſe, though the Adive ſenſe of rhe term be 
not to be excluded. 7 The ſame thing he alſo faith of Singing , 
to Jet us know, That all ourreligious Acts in publick Aflzmblics 
ought to be ſo performed, that others may be benefitted by chem : 
which they cannot be, if they do not underſtand what we ſay, 
whether it be in preaching, prayine, or frging. 


16 Elſe, when thou ſhalt bleſs with the ſpirit &, how 
ſhall he that occupieth the room of the unlearned - ay 


Amen to thy giving thanks /, ſeeing he underſtandeth 
not what thou fayeſt? *.* 


k Bleſſing 1sexpound<d in the latter part of the verſe, 7ivinz of 
thauks to God, which is either in Prayer, ( for Thankſgiving is a 
part of Prayer ) or /n ſinging of Pſalms. Bl-fling with the Spirit ei- 
ther ſignifieth giving of thanks with the inward man, or giv:nz of 
!hanks in an unknown Tongue, by the extraordinary influence of 
the Spirit of God. / Ir is plain from hence, 1. Thar the Teachers 
had in the Apoſtolical Churches diſtin& places and ſeats from the 
common Hearers, for their better conveniency in ſpeaking, that 
they might ſo ſpeak, as all might hear, underſtand, and be profic- 
ed. 2, That in thoſe Churches there was one only who uſed to 
ſpeak audibly, and the work of the others was only from a devour 
heart toſay Ames, wiſhing or praying, that Ged would do whar it 
the name of al!, he th t miniſtred , had asked of Gol for them, 
So 1 Chron. 16. 36. Nehem. 5.13.& 8.6. Pal. 106. 48. Pe<o- 
ple ought not ro ſay Amen to any thing, but ro underſtand rhar 
Petition, or thoſe petitions to which in the Worſhip of God, rhey 
added their Amen, which word made the Petitions theirs, being 2 
Particle of w:jh:ing, as well as affirming. | 


17 For thou verily giveſt thanks well : but the other 
is not edified 2. 

m Otherwiſe, fajrh the Apoſtle, it is poſſible, that 1hit may? 
give thanks well ; but others get no good by it, nor can make auy 
good and ſpiritual improvement of it. | 

18 Ithank my God ,. I ſpeak withtongues more tlicn 
you all z. 

7 Our Saviour, 1n the Parable of the good Shepherd, gives us | 
chis as his Chara&ter, Thar the jhoazp hear his woice, and follow him ; | if 
and we ſhall obſerve this great Apoſtle every where propounding 
himſelffor imitation tothem. They are bad Shepherds aver Gods 
Fleck, that muſt only be heard, bur not followed. The Apoſiie 
lets them know , That God had not left him without the gift of 
ſpeaking with divers Tongues; nay, he had it in a more eminenr 
manner than they all, pur chem all cogether, chey could nor ſpeak 
with ſo many Tongues as he did. 


I9 Yet inthe Church I had rather ſpeak five words 
with my underſtanding, that by »2y voice I might teach 
others allo, then ten thouſand words in an unkvwn 
tongue 0. 

0 Yethe had ſogreat a regard to the end of his Miniſtry, reach. 
ing others, and communicating Divine knowledgs ro them,rhar he 
had rather ſpeak a lictle tending tothat end, than never fo much in 
2 Language, whichthoſe tro whom he tpake, did notunder{tand. 

29 Brethren, * be not children in underſtanding ; 
howbeirt in malice * be ye children: but in underſtand 
ing be -þ men 9. Marr. 1. 


p In underſtanding the differences of gifts, and which are more 25+ & 18. 


* 4 
* 


Ly 
3. PRLegi 
Aa 


yi Let him pray, and alfo interpret ; but this ſeemerh hard : nor can 
ke Ithink thoſe that had a f:culty to ſpeak in an unknown Tongue , 
pt mghr ſome of them not themſelves underſtand what they ſaid, and 
& ſo had need tro pray that they might interprer : But they 
hers might be puft up with their gift, and think it beneath them to in- 
Nets terpret, and then they had need to pray, that they might have hu- 
ſay, milty enough to interpret. Others think, that by 7nterpreting in 
es of tis place, is meant ſomething more than bare tranſlating, or turn- 
1, ng the words into the common Language of the place, /z. the 0- 
lug pening and applying of the Scriptures, an ability to which wasa 
narſ Ciſtin& gift; which they who would have, had need pray,that God 
ſexs Vould open their eyes to underſtand the Myſteries of his Law. 

rine 


14 For if I pray in an u&uown, tongue , my ſpirit 
Prayeth, but my underſtanding is unfruitful f. 


7 From this and the former verſe the Papiſts would juſtifie the 
lawfulneſs of their Latin Service, which none or few of the common 
People underſtand ; and they ſeem to have a little advantage from 
the Opinion of ſome of the Ancients, That ſome of thoſe who 
Pake with Ton 


tered, but the ſpirit of God only made uſe of their Tongues as 


=_ Machins. Bur theſe are apprehenſions beneath the Spirit of Light 
t 7 and Truth, thatir ſhould make uſe of rhe Tongue of a man for 
ar an end neither profitable to the man himſelf, nor others, Belides, 
Fe - IS it then true which we had, wv, 4. That he who ſpake in an 
: oma tongue, edifieth himſelf? Nay , how canit be true , which 
\ 8 ere ſaid, That ſuch a mans Spirit prayeth ? Nor 1s it here 
wo ” » My Underſtanding s dark or blind, but unfruitful ; that is, 

ugh my ſelf underſtand, yet my knowledge bringeth forth no 
1; ult to the advantage or good of others. My Spiris prayeth, but 
and Tuers cannot pray with me. 


I5 What is it then? I will pray with the fpirit g» 
-y will pray with the underſtanding alſo þ : * I will 
ng with the Spiric , and I will ſing with the under- 
anding alfo 3. 
4s What isto be done then? 7 wil (ſaith the Apoſtle) pray with 
'e Spirit, that is, either uſe the extraordinary influences of the Spi- 
on of God upon me: or with my own Spirit, with the inward at- 
ation of my thoughts , and the urmoſt intention of my mind, and 


gues, did not themſelves underſtand what they ut. | 


excellent, or of the righruſe of gitrs. 4 You are commanded in. 3: 

deed in ſomething to be like little children, Matt. 18. 3. but ir is Rom. 15, 
not to be unaerſtood with relation to knowledge and underitand- 19: 

ing, but with reference to innocence, and malice which is oppolite ' Clap. 2. 
coir; ye ought to ſtudy ro be men in underſtanding, though with 9- 

reſpe& to innocence , ye ought to be as little culdren. 


21 In the Law it 1s written r, With mz of other... 
tongues and other lips, will I ſpeak to this people : and *_* 
yet for all that they will not hear m2, faith the 
Lord 7. 


» By the Law here is meant the Old T<ftzment, as in many 1. 
ther Texts, Joh. 10. 34. and 15. 25.) fo called (as fone rhink)in 
in oppoſition to the words of the Scribes, The words following ar 
quoted out of 1/a. 28. 11, 12. For with ſinumering 1s and nigh: 
be ref 


1.3 424 
SS T4 
[ 


A 
* 
-2 


7 » 
+ 7, 
& ec. 


a fir); 
ww + % 


! 


1% 


ſenſe, asif che Propher complained, That the people were to mn 
that 


(14D. &IV. 


rar they regarded no more God ſpeaking to them , than they 
would ave regarde:) one chattering with a ſtrange Tongue. An 
tliey think, the Apoltle checks them for being ſoambirtious of ſpeak- 
21.8 with {range Tovgues, Whenas their ſo being ſpoken to, was by 
the Prophet threarned as a judgment upon them. 5 Aad yet they 
will nor hear 22e, nor hearken to, and obey me. 


22 Wherefore tongues are for a ſign, not to them 
that believe, but to them that believe not « : but pro- 
Phecy ſerverh not for them that believe not, bur for 
hom that believe w. 

4 IiWherefare Fonguss are for a ſign, &c. that is, an eminent produC&t 
>f Div ine Providence tor the confirmation of the Truth of the Do- 
{ine of the Goſpel ; lignifying, that the DNoCtrine which was ſo 
eclivered in every Nation's Language, muſt be from Heaven, from 
whence the firſt Miniſters muſt have their power fo to ſpeak ; yet 
duubtleſs, rhey were not only for a ſign, being alſo a means , by 
which the knowledge of the Goſpel was conveyed unto thoſe who 
could not have underſtood what the Apoſtles and firſt Miniſters of 
the Goſpel ſzid, had they not ſpoken to them in the Language of 
the Hearers. w When be ſaith, Propheſying ſerverh no? for chem that 
believe net , the meaning 1s, not only for them that b-lieve nor : for 
propheſying is certainly of uſe for them that believe nor, for their 
converſion, as well as for them that bzlieve far their edification. 


* Chap.12 
8,9, 10, 


23 If therefore the whole church be come together 


into one place X, and all ſpeak with tONgUESY, and 
there come in thoſe that are unlearned, or unbelievers z, 


will they not ſhy ye are mad? a... 

x The phraſe ſignifieth to one place, or for one and the ſame work ; 
the fir ſeemeth ro be meant here by what followeth. » Some think 
thatthe Apoſtle here, by al! ſpraking with Tongues, underſtands all, 
or many of them. confuſedly talking together ; and indeed thar is 
an ertour we ſhall find the Apoſtle afterward refle&ting upon them 
for ; but here I do not think it is intended, but only many ofthem, 
one after another, becauſe of what the Apoſtle ſpeaketh of Prophe. 
fring, v. 24. For if a! propheſied in that ſenſe, ealking atthe ſame 
Lime together confuſediy, and an Unbeltever came in and heard, 
they would alſo, inſtead of bring convinced, fay they were mad. 
= Onz that is an Peathen, or that did not underſtand the Lan- 
guage you diſcouried 10,9 wou!d he not fay you were men that had 
loſt the uſe of your Rea'on, to ta)k to men in a Language you your 
ſclves knew they underſtcod nothing of ? 

24 But if all prophelie 5, and there come in one that 

elieverh not, or oe unlearned, he 1s convinced of allc, 
hs is judged of al 4. 

þ ,!l here certaialy is not to be underſtood of every one in the 
Ailembly, for all were not Prophets, Chap. 12. 29. nor could the 
ſpeaking of a great number be judged orderly by the Light of Na- 
tie : ir here muſt ſignifie any, one, or more, ſucceſſively, inter- 
pret or apply the holy Scriprures. c The Heathens will ſee an or- 
der in this, and will ſtand {till to hear and be convinced. d Seeing 
thcir wicked life, and falſe Religion judged , and condemned by 
all thoſe that ſo propbehie. | 

25 And thus are the ſecrets of his heart made ma- 

*If. 45. nifelt e, and fo falling down on 4 face, he will 
worſhip God f, and report * that God is in you of a 


truth g. 

e Godeither, by an extraordinary Providence diſcovering to him 
thar propheſierh, the ſecrets of iuch a ſinner's heart, and cauſing 
him thar prophetierh to make chem manifeſt ; or by a moreordina- 
ry Providence (often experienced at this day) direQting the Preach- 
er to ſuch Subje&ts, and Diſcourſes, as he that cometh to hear ſhall 
think direQed to himſelf, and confeſs that he is the man. f And be 
convinced of his errovurs, and converted, and turn to Chriſtian Re. 
ligion, and report thar God indeed is amongſt you. So as Pro- 
pheſying will have theſe two great advantages of ſpeaking with 
Tongues, God will be more glorified, and the Souls of others will 
be more profited, which makes the gift of Propheſying much pre. 
ferable to the gift of Tongues. 


25 How is it then, brethren? When ye come toge- 
ther, every one of you hath a pſalm , * hath a doctrine, 


Verſ.6. hath a tongue, hath a revelation, hath an interpretati- 


on 4: Let all things be done to edilying z. 


þ By what followeth in the two next verſes, one would think 
that ſome of them, in their Church-meetings, were ſoabſurd,as be. 
iog endued with ſeveral gifts, they would be uſing them altoge- 
ther; one finging, another preaching, a third ſpeaking with 
Tongues, &c. Bur this is ſo apparent a confuſion, that one muſt | 
be very uncharicable to this famous Church, to preſume that they 
ſhould be fo abſurd. Others therefore rather think, that thoſe en- 
dued with ſeveral gifts, (of which he reckoneth five under which 
he comprehendeth all others ) were every one contending for his 
courſe to exerciſe his gift ; one for ſpending thetime in ſinging the 
Pſalm he had made another for ſpending the time in hearing his 
dotrinal diſcourſe; athird for the ſpending it in hearing him dif- 
courſe in an unknown Tongue; a fourth for the ſpending it in 
heaiing bis Revelation; a fifth for theſpending it in hearing his 
Interpretation, or atleaſt deſiring the time might be protradted , 
until they had been all lucceſlively heard. 
other diforders,the Apoſtle giveth ſeveral Rules. "The firſt is, Thar 
all things ſhould beſo done, as might rend beſt ro promote in men 
Faith and Holineſs; that 1s,Jand ought to be,the main and chief end 
of thoſe who any way miniſter in Sacred things. 


27 Ifany man fpeak in an unknown tongue , tet it be 
by wo, or at the moſt by three, and that by courſe, 
and let one interpret &. 


+ Concerning the uſe of their giſtof Tongues, he direQeth three 
things : 1. That every one that had it, ſhould not be ambitious to 


i Toprevent this and 


LCORINTHIANS. 


Chap 


ſhew it at all times, but two or three at moſt at a time £. 


d | they ſhould do it by courſe, not together, confufeg]y © hat 


without one to interpret, that people might unde;q.... 3 Nt 
though theſe were extraordinary gifts, homes —_ = For 
ordinary influence of the Spirit of God ; yer they were ide than 
bits, nor coming upon them at ſome certain times, by ne ng ha, 
for then they would not have been under kumane Governme tk; 
is apparent this gift of Tongues was, elſe Pas! could w_— 
governed himſelf in the uſe of it, as he lets us know "7 lo 
19. td, «, 

21 But it there be no interpreter, let him keep 
lence in the Church /, and let him ſpeak to himſe! Pi 


to God . l and 


! If he had a mind «o uſe this gifr, he may uſe irto Gyy 1 
underſtands all Languages by himſelf; - but let him kee ſi w 
in the Aſſembly of Chriſtians, where he is nor underſtor] wo 


29 Let the Prophets ſpeak two or three, and er th 
others judge m. ; 


# That is, two or three ſucceſſively, the one beginnj | 
when the others have done, and two or three of the nr 
Ailcmbly; and if there be more preſent, let them ſit nit 
Judge of the truh of what he faith. mM 


30 If any thing be revealed to another that Cittech by 
let the firſt hold his peace. o. !, 


0 There were two Modes or forts of Prophecies ; the one ordi 
ry, when the Teachers came to thoſe Aſſemblies furniſheg Kith, | 
Revelation, from ſome previous impreſſion of God upon hin - 
bling him to give the ſenſe of ſome Scripture , or to open fon: 
Divine Truth ; not as we uſe, but by ſome influence of the ho 
Spirit upon him, withour the uſe of ſuch means as we uſe Ti 
other was, by ſome preſeat affatus or impreſſion: the Apoſtle foe 
not to ſpeak of the latter, or ifof both, he plainly lets them "ny 
that even ſuch a one was under the Government of natur;] Order 
and obliged to donothing confutedly and tumultuouſly but m; " 
without any offence to God, ſtay until the other ha( faiſtel 
Diſcourſe. : 


3: Forye may all propheſie one by one, that all 
learn, and all may be comforted p. "7 


e Ye may notall propheſie in the ſame day, *or hour, or momere 
of time, but orderly and ſucceſlively ; ye may all prophieliztheend 
of it being for the inſtcu&ion and conſolation of all , which mz 


mind you ſo to govern your ſelves in the exerciſe of that gif, x 
not to loſe*your end, but all may learn , and may be comforted, 
Which lets us know, that though their receiving the gift of Pro. 
phecy obliged them to an exercile of it, yer ir did not oblige them 
co an exerciſe of it, in or at this or that particular time, 


32 And the ſpirits of the prophets are ſabje& to the 
prophets 9. 


By the Spirits of the Prophets, the Apoſtle either meaneth their 
ſpiritual Gifts, asto the uſe and exerciſe of them, and the aQionsto 
be done by them or the aCtions themſelves, or interpretationspre. 
tendedly done and given, by the exerciſe of thoſe Gifts, theirs. 
ctrines: Or thirdly, That Inſtin&, or peru, by which they pre. 
tend themſelves tobe moved to propheſie, theſe (he faith) are ſub. 
jet to the Prophets themſelves, 1o as they may themlelves govern 
their Gifts, or (which moſt think is the rather here intended) they 
are ſubje& to the judgment and cenſure of others that are endued 
with the ſame Gitt. But here ariſeth a difficulty, how the Gifts of 
the holy Spirit,flowing immediately from the Spirir,ſhould be ſub. 
jetto any humane judgment orcenſure ; This indeed they coull 
not be, if the Divine Revelation to this or that man were full and 
perfe&, and ran as clearly in the ſtream always, as it was inthe 
tountain. But God giveth his Spirit to us but by meaſure, andin 
the exerciſe of our gitts there is always aliauid human ſomethingot 
our own, and this maketh them ſubje& ro the Prophets. wiz. whether 
what they pretended to havefrom the Spirit of God, were indeed 
from it yea or no? Prophets were obliged toprophelie, Rom. 12.6. 
bur according to the Analogy of Faith, Now whether they did ſoor 
no, might be judged by other Prophers, according *o that Rul 
Others think this Text is to be interpreted reſtrainely. viz. 4s 
co this thing in this matter of plain, natural order, commanding, 
whiles one ſpeaks, all the reſt to hold their peace. 


peace, * asin all churches of the Saints r. 


this, That nothing, which is confuſion, can be from God, Nov 
for two or three to ſpeak together in a publick Aiſembly, iscon- 
fuſion and a breach of order, of which God cannot be the Author: 
therefore in ſuchathing as thar, the Spirits of the Prophets muſt be 
ſubje& to other Prophets; and there isa general Rule which cot- 
cerneth not only the Church of Corinth, bur all Churches. 


34 Let your women keep ſilence in the churches for 


Law 5. 


tainly , if the Spirit of Prophecy came upon a Woman e = 
Church, ſhe might ſpeak. 41s, who wasa Propheteſs, in the _ 
ple, gave thanks tothe Lord , and ſpake of him to all them that = 
for Redemption in Iſrael: and I cannot tell how Philip's uy 0 
propheſied, ifthey did not ſpeak in the preſence of many: - X 
9. The reaſon, that is given, why women ſhould keep —_ ” 
becauſe they are commanded to be in obedience. This AP 


ſpeaketh much the ſame thing, 1 Tim, 2. 11, 12. becauſs it hos 
like an uſurping authority over the man ; which indee - A _ 
ithad been the ordinary praRtice of women to ſpeak un tne hljet 


33 For God is not the author of || confuſion, but 0, 


LL! 

r Here he ſheweth the Principle upon which he ſaid, That thequi 
Spirits of the Prophets are ſubje& to the Prophets: what any Fro-i( 
phets ſpeak is not ſo certain, or at leaſt no more certain, chan x1, 


it is not permitted unto them to ſpeak ; but * they art* 
commanded to be under obedience: as allo faith os 


5 This Rule muſt be reſtrained to ordinary Propheſying!: For Gy 


Ca" 


oft 
We 
OP 
ſl g 
of t 
1n 
Gol] 
The 
fore 
then 
Chu: 


9 


Io ; 
"tual 
£ untc 


w 
ſpired 
Will 
know 
Wit 


of Jul 


forbi 


zT 
thar h: 
ſpirity 
vift of 


Conſt; 
CO Ni! 
knings 
ON«) 4 
of Nat 
WOne 1 
ble, 7 
Yet he 
bath $4 
Cate 0) 
R-ator 
ulelel; 
they if 
Vir, 0 


KV 7 
WL (2 a 0 


crimes ſpeak upon an extiaordinuy impulle or imprefiion. The Law 


co which the Apoſtle hue reters, is thought to be that, Ger. 3. 16 
where the woman 15 commanded to be tubje& ro her Husband, ind it 
is faid, that he (bovd » wle over ber : yer thar Law did neither reltrain 
Miriam trom prophetying, Exod. 15. 20. nor yet Huldah, to eo 
40/144 himielt fenr. 2 Chron. 34.22. 
| | - : , £1 y * ' pH £F® 
ſhe awels in the College ; but ferring aſide that extraordinary calc Oi 4 
jpecial C755, it was doubriety ualawtul tor a Woman to {peak 
inthe Church, 


their husbands at home : tor itis a ſhane for women to 
ſpeak 12 the church r. 

: This muſt be underſtood of ſpeaking to the Congregation, for 
che inſtructing them, or ſpeaking 1a th» Congregation to the Mint- 
ſtcr, or any of the People, tor her own inſtruttion. 
might doubtlels tay Amen to the publick Prayers, and allo fing with 
the Congregation to the honour and glory oft God. Bur tor her to 
jpeak-in an ordinary courle of Prophecy, to inſtruct People, or to 
call aloud to the Miniſter, or any Members in the Aﬀembly of the 


ſhe is forbidden. 

26 What? came the word of God out from you ? or 
came it unto you only f @«, 

y Theſe words lock like a ſmart refleftion vpon divers Members 


World belides; and the Apoſtle might foreſee, that our of the high 
opinion they had of themielves, they would much contemn and 
fl ght his directions. He therefore asks them, what they thought 
of themſelves? Whether they thought themielvesthe only Churches 
in the World, or were the frit that believed 1n Chriſt * fo that the 


of waom it 1s alto faid, T2) | 


6 And it they will learn any thing, let them as!.. 


For the woman | 


Church, to be latisfied in any thing wherein the was 1n doubr, thus | 


y 1 as , Ie 
T7 / ION 293 91,0549 6 f 4 SNYAS « ll ACS 
ACAX A} £ L568 Sa 7s P14 ; £80-Y EVA43 EV jo achy of Wa} | $53 YAN 7 . 
o - 44. St F , R : 2 , 
Epicureans werld 62 in the Ripht, 20 30, Bilowors of | 
k % _ »* * — - + ww - - 
5 #1+- i. P , ; - - 
W2t.,9 £ He [ame Boacce®. bt V1: af, {5 4 , CJ , 
, / þ y 3 1 , y , : >. FC, > p 
/ T.7 1,7 i? b » . 
P wy ; p - . i” © 
J: 6 tl 4 $84 7 v wv "w [ J&-N- is ft , 'y ; > Mg ' a. Peg T i 
j 5 Y » a 46 
— 3 "_— . / X _ . 
Ve £ a6 s az 6, dC _ f La F " "*p F $ * | Ka * 7 { 0-5, —_ ” / 
} _ y b 
2137 T1 ”/ pF - { 
[ » F 2 
- * «+ Ira; , . ny - 
| (fs A/C MELEE IS IU / 
, E halo”. * W 39; Y +68 
4% - 
*09 6035 i + Z E _— 
c/ 


' 
—- Lg y F© *, - ID. - 4 = 
| /FO; LOVE, brethren, FX: C wu rg HPTR *” *% + *+ » 70 f | 
"4 5p | FEEL T5687 
wo 


of this Church of Corinth, who thought themicives wiler than all the | ctojx {; 


Goſpel wear out for them, and they might give Law to all Churches? 
There were Churches at Ferauſalem, and it {everal other places, be- 
fore there was any Church at Corinth, 1o as the Gotpel came unto 
them from other Churchrs, and did not vo out trom them to other 
Churches. 

37 *If any manthink himſelt to bea prophet, or ſpiri- 
© tual, lethim acknowledge that the things that I write 
; unto you, are the commancaments of the Lord 2», 

w If there be anv amongſt you who hath a concer, that he is in- 
fired by Ged, and from thatynfpiration underſtandeth the Mina and 
Will of God, lie muſt acknowledge, that T allo ara an ApofHe, and 
know the Mind and Will of God as wzl as he ; and being to, that 
what T tell you, is the Commandment of the Lord. 

25 Bur if any man be ignorant, let him be jgno- 
ſanc þ of 

x If any one will pretend 1gnorance in this, he is wilfully igno- 
rant ; for my own part I will concern my leifno turther abour him, 
but leave my 1eif and him alſo to the Judgment of Cod, Let him 6- | 
zevorans. In fome Copies 1t 1s, He jba#l nor be known. In the Day | 

of [Judgment Chr:it ſhall foy unto him, Depart from me, 1 know yo! | 
| 
[ 


not. 

29 Wherefore, brethren, covet to propheſie, and 
forbid not to ſpeak with tongues y. | 
5 The Apoſtle concludeth his Diſcourfe, ſummarily repeating all 
thar he before had ſaid. He had, wer. 2. incouraged their d*{ire of 
ſpiritual gifts ; all along the Chapter he hath been magnifying rhe 
gift of Prophecy above the gitr of Tongues, as being of much more 
veneral uſe, and more for the profit of others ; bur he minds them 
here, that he did not forbid thute ro whom God had given the gitt 
of Tongues, to make ulc of itat due tunes, and in a due manner and 

order. | 
40 Let all things be done decently, and in or- 
aer 2. | 
z Hz forbad them not to fpeak with Tongues, provided they did 
it decently and orderly, as all other things ought to be done tn fo 
grave an Aſſembly. as that of the Church, and 1n fo grave an Agi-) 
01, as the Worſhip of God. For Imam 70 propheſie in the publick | 
Aſtmblies, was an undeceat thing, wer, 35- he had ſaid, that it wes: 
2 ſhame, -For many of them to ſpeak together, contuledly, making} 
a noiſe, that was 4:/orderly ; nor did this decency or indecency, 0t-j 
der or diſorder, arite from obeying or dilobeying the Apoſtoiicat| 
Conſtitution, but from the Law of God, the Light of Nature, tlic] 
common utage of al! th? Churches of Chriftians, as wer. 33. All 
tnings ought fo to be done(cſpectally inReligious Alſemblies and Acti- 
075) as they may not be zudged by the Law of God, or the Light! 
of Native, or the common Cuſtom of other Churches, ro bel 
Cone indecently or confuledly, without order. Ir 3s very obferva-! 
bie, That though the Apoſtle, in theſe things, bati given Rules, 
Yet he hath deter mined nothing ſhametul or uncomely, but what he 
bath made to appear fo, either trom the Divine Law ( as in the 
cite of the womans pgrophelying, wer. 34.) or from Nature and 
R-alon ( as in the cale of many ſpeaking at the ſame time) it being 
vielels ro the end, which was teaching and inſtrufting thoſe ro whom 
they ſpake, and what Unbe)tevers would count theette& of madnels, 


CHAP. XV 


43 S$ 4 _, F T7 . "_g P I = . Pp 
Jrat the Dead ſhall riſe, proved again? ſome among the Corinthians, 
JremClriSis Reſurrettion, which tg teſti fie and Evidence was the 
Jrumm of T1328 Ge/p: / aud the work of 471 Apoſile, 1 ——-11. And 


Wh 
nt ks 


| | 


\Ot 
reft, that the Lord was rifen, and hl wppencd vine 3m, Late 
24.34. (ft Simen Peter be there meant.) His appearance to the 
whole number ot the Diſciples we have recoraed, 70.3. 20. 19. 
they are called Twelve ( though Tadis Wis now dead, 11d Trom:s 
at that time was not there) becatile ewolre was the numb; rat ho 
had appointed the Colleogs ot Apoltles 0 contilt ot; (9 Ser 42.117 
the Child»en of Jacob faid, They were rwelve Brethren, though they 
thoughr ar char cime, that Je/zpo ( who made the twelitn ) was 
dead. This is much more probably the ienfe, thin the tancy cf 
ſome, that Aarrgigs, who was afterward chlolen to fry py the tug 
of Judas, bcing at that tine 2 Diſciple, night at that time be wich 
them : for admit he were, yet 7.9925, vie are fure, Was at tus ms 
abſenr. 

6 After that he was ſeen of above five hundred 
brethren at once £: of whom che greater parc roman 
unto this preſent, but ſome arc fallen alieep -, 

& Of this appearance to above five hundred B:orhrer at once the 
Goſpels ſay nothing ; but 17 is probably chovghe ro ba unveritoon 
of that great Meeting of the Ditciples 1a ©72  wane our Savin 
our promiled to mect them, da77. 26. 3+. and 28. 7. atter his Re- 
ſurrection. { Where ever it was, the Apoitie ioth, Taat thi 


= > 8 : | uy 
oreater part of them were yer in a capuciry ro give a living Leitte 


o Croriſt be not yiſen, then was their preaching falje, and the Co- 
UN's Fill vain, and they were yt in; their Sins, and the dead | 
mn of, are perijizd, and Bilievers are of all Mew moſt miſcrsble, 
2——-19., C iro af if 12 Yiſe ; aud as by one! 
P41 Carne Dean; ju by one Minn cwae the ReſurreFion * Death is| 
"hs 1/4 Ee) whict) Cihritt 1h: #169) t ''s was Biggin jor the | 

4 / . J* #- | L £76 " 3 3.384 ” jui » 110 | 


Vol. $2 i 


” y ; F f, -/$ f Fi » , . 
oY rifi 1.15 F192 j2' £ 4 1 [3.78 W:3d Fije 


FL 


' mony to the Refuirechion of Chit, thovgit ico of Rem. v6 


_ 


dead. 
nd aftcr that he was ſeen of ſ2m9s, eng 
4A } % A 
che A poliles FW PP 
Is : P 4 «* . » y . , ! . "Is bn 
» I's Scripture reins noting in the Flilkcy gf tas Golper 


P | M ”- 

- " => a 

0 "WES. ab 
"T. . F « j [1 

y '} > MN #1 | , Wo. 


—_ 


Ca 
/ 
/ 


, Ks —_— 
- . v , L v5 > , | a7 w - 6 7 ” ; « ob - 4 z 
ability, becaute when they came to Forujalem, tiny fold the ven 3 


'IxE 


OR TNIH 23 Wo @ EE OS 
C U 1 1V 1 / FP 223 % COOnÞ, 11905. «\. V » 


blies of che Church , but not jo, if ſome particular women fome- | 


F ES : 1 wy 
S \} '1 2 I0q Ca ww oc < =o 1371 is a Ly vg } V 4 4} þ ' ty 
, 1 7 [1 " af © &- ok : L x 
ISLET * PL, >0V7 ov*+ - 4 , . 1:7 
{URVE TEUCOIVEU 0D, and WIS Ci} Ve y 
Ll L ne poi te, tOWeTds FOG CONcCiult ir cf E11%, com2s to 
C4 23% 4 i + F » waned £ . ”" WY - 2489 » . i = . . ” % . 
' Le rAOVe. Tie ( $3716 1.2 N5 IQUT AN CLTOT ii1 Tie 1 3<ctitlie CI the jiot or 
3 EW 3 + © 2 OR NO | 1 
TCCLLON TON tis Dead s aft ETYOT, THOUCH *2 M-MNioncd, Ver of 133 
L —_— » Y —_ P " - 4 » ', 1 -* ( x 5 fond : } : 54 
| tae molt (71077) SH3TONS. The Keturrect, 1:3 {6 2 bu oY gi} is 12 Days 
4 x 009 oY Ee 45 pe " 20P WR. Y pps: "7 - wſ- 
15 an Article of Faith ; to the jirm b{lict of which, Pm foaaketh 
| NOT {utticient!y. and therefore ic Vas denied by monty mr 
; "PRE 5: 11: ' I 5 * } pre : 
and woruly Wije-men, 47 17. 18. Ir fhouid feor, rhon ths 
% : 4 - . 2 5 , . ' ! o - -n __ n 
th: Chr: It of Corinth had fucked in fore of th- r No 
L Ls ty . 'Þ . . ho hs va» - "'p - * "Y [ { 2 
AP itie theretore 113 T42:% Can Er j-Ictetn NiMicit fo 1:1 n 
Ws £ LF PS » ta . "- . F : h F%, £ 
| Article of the Chriſtian Farch. Io $5:1H YUTDOLC tz © £4 : 
| ») * þ4 0 1 Ln 'P : . | , - . p_mg ' 65 
| TEM, thar Tat hich he declared UNTO UNCNyY, WAS rac TELAC iS 
that [ 1Ct "4 a TICS 5d (ot; al j . af | OR i3 » i -5, þ: » 4 + 
© }C I tJEL [1 '1CT T2OIPE1, vw N1CH 'T% i111 UciOTZE d (mo py} $1 } 4 CEE 
De, WE: © 07 OT. ; MF "ns $ E.-3- EY : 
6 and which they kad heard, and belicvel, and enib{ ined as th 
Truth of God, an c wherein the grcerelt part ver Pons f 
aps I... GA OOO 2”, SSA 1 1 _- 
»Lmcr a TG.S0101, CHOU iOMC Ci CLIN had DEEN itCaAULCLU all l 
warped. 
* ” v2 i C Fn A . X R 
2 *By which alto re are ſaved d it vell keep ir nz ; 
A p 4+ | [DEIFESL 4 | . ag” : ER ; x , ' 
mcry 1 i $: e I {4 C4Cheda UINNCO you '3 U1N;Qv158 \ s $| = , : ” 
i coer as; - POO. (5 . - ' F; 
believed In Vai; 
I AY OT FL I, OO ECL - 
a By the DOCNUETVINI, TECEIVIN 7 ef which Do ins \ £6.19 cs: P 
n the way to Silvation (25 It 1+: ſaid, Jo 0, 18 #5: 
on 2m i5 707 Condemned, and ver. 36. te 4114 cuoriolliic7 F 
{!, | he ISR, ity ; , ] } F ry - "2 "i ; ? 
111423 DC ECCHNt!'Y lavead } Ee DUT NOT VN Fe PET VELC 5 + It 0h 
X &; | ho X - X A449 > k : K « i Þ p- 
!S7 Sainnc o\ out , Ng £1 WH, 27% J V i IT 15 WY: 'TYL-: \v aicti | h 2 Lat . d : 
unco yOu } 424 [141 YOU JliU.:T uy), ON OUT DgCIC: 102 WH: 1:3! 4 7 
thing, but be in vain 10 Your Sul; 
_ A * Es , ' TAL EN Et - 4.1 4 od y is 
2 For [| * delivereil uit you iirft of aff that which ©, 
E: 8 wy ' ; "W = Ty Pet ] P j £ » - n ft < = x 
I alſo TCCEC! y CU, how 2; v (Cilriit (LC Ly! Qi! iis 4 5 da" % -- | 
'f - = chan 
Corving to the SCLIPEures 7, z* 
, = | b ' _ . £ ? PEG a , 8 ; : 2 
a ForT, mn my preaching, Ceiivercd 1t to yvou 25 one of tlie or 
”—_ Arrroioec of cho Ch ne Exh wth; : : L [ F 
cipal Articies Ot fic Clu aitiut t 4313 Wiiich [ r.Cctved, ee: lfron 
Y Re . 3 - - ho - - Y Is | I ' 4 ” 
Chit by Revelarion ( as he Iii, Gat 8, 33 ) or from Auvr9hen: 3: as 
2 Y +» y . [ 5 » J - 
Acts 9g. how :.:t Chriſt ded for ou fins, Rom. q 28. thit is. thay tie 
* _ . bd I - . ” - Ry 
mightliatisfe the Divine Jultice for oar fins, and meke 2n aro 
ment tor us, And this 1s accorlins to the Scriptures of the Q.4 
i = -. 
Teitament, where it was foretold, 1/a. 53. 5, 6. Ho was wornded fin 
our franlarelſions, and bruilcd fo our n:iquiries, and Dan. 9.-36..  thit 
FOY 4-6 ") i © 2 "PEP DIRT 2087 i by 
the M-//:as fhouid ve cnt off, 044 nor for :1:jelt. 
k i ”.7\ Ry ' ! « = F® G S.. 1 
4 And that he was buried and that he ro% ag1in the 
y.* __ z* ' "KOF. : 
 * 17"; P v 1 \ __ T P % 4% *g* ors » ;, 
49 19! d day UCTCOIT GING [0 LII& OCripiuCs ks 293. © Js 1 
P 7 ! ! I ! bo _ ? . F ” . z ” 
þ Not the Death: only, bur the Burial of Chrif, and his Petnr- Hol. 6. 2. 
. ,  %h P_—_— Þ 0 % } o - 'S _ Tc : 
rect:0n agati trom the Lead, were (rhough moredark!,) revealed in 
f, n Yd a1 ;3r 1*.>C ft "Y 0 8 5! 1 ". 1 * Lg *f 1% y _—_ | «Ml 
THHS.: criptu &% C) 816 (Y [} 1 CHLUMICNT, IO is and {tle Etro WWC)LLA 
n = | q _ = "wy Bt a ? 2208. Io . j * , [ Sg -1 
of thei I ypes of this; David Prophefied, that Go world nat toave 
ﬀ - Po v . | b . » . / f . 1 - y 1 
HIS Soul 277 Het], WV 0i 1 4 / M18 209 } 7 2 0 lee COFrFiND: :: tt, Vi I 10 
1! p ” * +44 1 " - EV] = F Eo : 
lO. WW hich Pot) 2Pplicth (0) Qill { SHCEF oo bp | ail Ci 17 [ 3 3 © 
So that the Doctrine of rhe Nic { oHament it theſe things agreeti 
. ' "Ih | - " ' \T qy 0 . . = * ' 
with the Doctrine of the Ol ; with this only difference, © that the 
! 2} Js y * *\ * £ ' x I -  %. . 
Old Feſtiment contained the New Torment in 2 MyRt-ry, ind 
' \ Se. + —_ ', © $5 fc OI wy Ay: Wot | 
Tine New ! cltament Wia5> ULic (Id } it IN3<!)T INOTCE TTIIGE HiN6L Bi3 T1% 
revealed, 
> A J Py [ bp WI "IR 1 Nu - a - = PR » [| OR 5 y Z 
5 * Nu that he was ſeen of CEnNnus, TUuCE G IG & | 
F _ - R 
tWCIVE YZ. Id 
i . 
1 $a T1: —_— fr ef. **% mw * VIE 0 
; We read not 1n the EFliſtory of the GoÞ2!! of Ciiſt's ap (ES. "BS 
Ye 1927703 nreo D -# 8 r | N | A 11*.-pa ; > ob - | "I 17" *1vrry {1 -w th F 1 
wGhk ba, uno LL bob? tbN IN E vv Ere ONE 'S11 'B9 $9268 a9, » $183838 443! it "$o . 
y ? . _- « * . . " » a7 1 "7 
| appeared, as they were going to Emma; for which there 4s thts SIS 0:55 
[| ' 1 if 


TI ores - 


4 


- 60» 


F$51.-2.13- 
Lamm 1.13. 


* Eph.3.7,8. 


* + Cor. 11. 
> © 12.97. 
[viatt. 10, 


X 


ys 1 
2 Cor. 3 
Þ 


4 LI CORIN 


bot we read of two appearan- 


*-:p8 to 7ames, 
viici the Apoſt;e had before 


6A jo. {les bulides thelg;, 

» * AnJlatof allhe wes ſeen of me allo x, || as of 
1.12 HOI OUT of GUE THANE Co 
3+ Lat of 21; 11:8 APR O: 11 may be Taft of ai! perſons ; for af- 
rer Sbep mon we read of none but ls; Paul. who law Ciuilt. Stepien 4s 
they wer: Noning him, cryed our, AGs 7, Behold, Tjce the Hen- 
went op-n2d, nn. the Sor of man ſtanding on the rignt hand of Goa. As 
9 4. Ve read of Paul's hearing a Voice irom him, and no doubr bur 
he aad a bodily fight of him ; tor he here reckeaeth himiclt amongſt 
thoſ that were Eye-witnelics. Nor 3s it any objection againit it, 
that b- was ſtruck blind, for that was after his fight of Chiilt, not 
b-tore. o Lie calls hinzfelf ax dbortive, or one 4ru out of due time, 
cither becauſe hewas added ro the number of the Twelve; or 1n re- 
ipett ro bis new Birth, he being converted (as he tells us afterward) 
ater that he had bcen a Pcriecuror of the Church of Chriſt, after 
the deicending of the Holy Ghoſt; or it may be,becauſe his Convertion 
was tudden, Ike the abortive birth of a woman. 

9 For I am the leaſt of all the apoſtles, that am not 

* ef 

meer to be called an apoſtle, becauſe I * perſecuted the 
church of Gcd p. : 

p The leaſt not in dignity, or gifts, or labours, (ke tells us, that 
he h:d Jaboured more than all, he had made the Goſpel to abound 
from Jeruſalem to 1/37:cum ; he hath in this Epiſtle Jet us know, that 
he ſpake with Tongues more than they all ;) bur deterving the leaſt 
eſteem, (as he afterward expoundeth himſelf) tellingus, Thar he 
was not worthy of the Name of an Apoſtle. He guves the reaſon, 
Becauſe he had beiore been a Perſecutor of the Church ot God, the 
kiftory of which we have 4359. 1,2,5: 

Jut * by the grace of God I am wharI amg: 

10 Bir * by the grace of God IT am whatl amg: 
and his grace which was veſted upon me, was not 
in vain” : * but 1 laboured more abundantly than 


theyalls, yet * not I, but the grace of God which was 
with mc :. 

g By the fice Jove and goodneſs of God, IT that was before a Blaſ- 
phemer, and a Perſecutor, and injurious, have obtained mercy, and 
though ic was impoſſible for me any more-to requite and an{wer, 
than at iift to merit thar Love, yet his Grace jn me hath produced 
ſome trvir, and hath not been wholly in vain. For in the diſcharge 
ct my Minitery, as an Apoſtle, I have abundantly laboured, though 
not more than all the reſt of the Apoſtles taken rogether, yet more 
thin zny one of them all, who were my bellow-Apoſtles : what 
the! labours were, he told us Rom. 15. 19. and more fully 2 Cor, 6. 
4, $+ 6.7. 5 Bur leſt he ſhould be thought to arrogate any thing to 
himſicif. and rhe power or good uſe of his own will, he addeth, yer 
not 1, but the Grace of Goa in me. Grace ſeemeth, in the latter part 
of the verſz, ro be taken in ſomething a diff-rent ſenfe from what 
ir was in the fo:mer part : here it ſignifies the free love and favour 
of God (though it may alſo there be underſtood of thoſe gracious 
heobirs, which were the e:&s of that free Love and Mercy ) here it 
p!:inly ſignifies thoſe gracious habits, which were infuſed into Paul, 
together with the gracious influences of the holy Spirit, by which he 
was inabled to reduce thoſe habirs into acts Par! had fomething 
in the Afts he had done conſidered as a man, bur yer fo littie, asin 
theſe ipiritual Acts he denieth his own ethc:ency, and attri1burteth all 
to Divine Grace, either exciting him 10 h's attions, or preventing, 
or working in and with him, and aflifting ly1c:, ano giving bim all 


T) Vs. 


tht fuccels he had had. 


11 Therefore whether z 2vcre I or thev n, ſo we 
preach, and lo ye believed ww. 

u Whether I or any other of the Apoſtles preached amongſt you. 
w This was on2 great point that we preached amongſt you, That 
Chriſt was rifen again trom the dead. This we heid forth to you 
as thz obje& of yuur Faith, this you received and cloſed with as 
the objc& of your Faith ; we did nor only preach to you, That 
Chriſt azcd for our ſins, but that he rojo again for our Fuſtification. 
Neither was your Faith objeQed only 1n Chriſt, as one that was cru- 
citied, and had dyed, but asone thar was riſen from the dead. Thus 
Peter preached , Ads 2. 31. & 3-15. & 4. 20, & 5. 30. and Stephen, 
Fs 7. and Peter, Ads 19.40. and Parnl, A7s 13. 37. and fo all the 
Apoſtles 

12 Now if Chriſt be preactied that he roſe from the 


dead, how iay ſome among you, thar there15no reſur- 


reQion of the dead x ? 

x The Apoſtle having laid a good Foundation, proving the Re. 
ſurre&ion of Chriſt by a plentiful Teſtimony of thote who ifaw him 
after thar he was rien from the dead ; and minded them, That this 
was the DotGtrine of the Goſpel, which both they and all the reſt of 
the Apoſtics, had with one confent preached to them ; he comes to 
bui!d upon 1t, and from this, as a main Argument to prove, That 
there muſt needs be a Refſurre&ion from the dead ; and beginneth 
with a :efle&tion upon ſome in that Church who denicd it: Who 
thoſe were, we are not told; ſome think they were Hymenzwus and 
Philetus mentioned 2 Tim. 2. 17, 18. who held. that the RefurreCti- 
on was paſt ; others think, he refletts on Ccrinthw, who was one of 
the Leaders of thoſe Hereticks we read of, who after $imon Magry de- 
nied the ReſurreCtion ; othersthink, they were ſome of the Sadduces, 
of whom we read in the 4s, thar they denied the ReſurreZ0n, or 
fome of the Phariſees, who denied the Reſurre&#on of Chriſtians, look- 
ing on them as Apoſtazes ; others think, they were ſome who had 
been tinctured at leaſt with the Dottrine of the Pagan Philoſophers. 
We cannot certainly determine who, bur certain it is, ſome there 
were ; and the Apoſtle argues them in this thing to aflert abſurdly, 
vpon this Suppolition, Thar Chriſt wasriſen. 

12 Puritthere be no reſurrection of thedead, then is 
nor Chriſt riſen y. 
3 If (iaith the Apoſtle) there be no ReſurreFion of the dean, theu 


Cai {7 35 07 rifcs, Burt lome evil poſſibly tay, How doth this follow - ! 


' as he (aith, v. 20. 15 the firs fruts of them that /tep, 


THINS 


Suppoſe it true, thar Chriſt be r:{en, how doth it follow +1 


d-ad ſhall rife © The force of it lieth in ſeveral thins; 1. Chrif 
© © Ti 


: "ny h : : the exemni,... 
cauſe of our Reſurrection. 2, If we confider Chriſt as the Hi ; 
unreaſonable, thar the Head ſhould be riſen from the 9d<39 wn 5 
Members yet held of Death, when 1t 1s the Office of the Ho; WL 


communicate ſenſe, life, and motion to the Members. Bg3n was 
_ i . * } *ha 

Argument 1s ſtrong from the contideration of the End « 2 
: urn 


Returrettion, which was to thew his ViQtory over Dearth 4... " 
dead might hear his Voice and live, and that he mich þ« ;;,, -; 
Fg T w» 6/5 /s07s 
of the quick and the dead, CE which he could not have been. 5c «2. 
dead d1d not riſe ) Now though it be true, that Chriſt; Head-fhiv... 


his Church, and the Apoſtles Argument from thence will OE ns 


Believers isthz main thing the Apoſtle | here proveth, having cc. 
where abundantly proved the general ReſurreQion) the conſiqe.... 
on here of Chriſt being raiſed, chat he mighe be the Judge bg; 
the quick and of the dead, will prove the ReſurceQion of the x; 
ed, as well as of Believers. 

14 And if Chriſt benot riſen, then is our preachin- 
vain 2, and your faith is alſo vain a. , 

z Now (faith the Apoſtle) if Chriſt be not raiſed, in what a cc, 
are you ? And wealſo, who have preached his ReturreQion to you? 
Our preaching is vain and falſe, » and your Faith is ſo alfo, fo; 
obje&t of it faileth, which is a Chriſt riſen from the dead. J 

15 Yea, and we are found tale witnetles of God, be. 
caule we have teſtified of God, that he raiſed up Chrig 
whom he raifed not up, if ſo be thar the dead riſe nc 

16 For if the dead riſe nor, "then is not Chriſt ri, 


ed 6b. 

b There is nothing in theſe two verſes, but what the Apcſilc hg 
before ſaid, viz, Thar if Chriſt were not riſen, the Apoſtles preaching 
and the Corinthians believing were both of them vain and taiſe On. 
ly what the Apoſtle, in the former verſe, called Preaching, he he 
.calleth Wizneſing, We are (faith he ) falſe witneſſes of God, Ty hz 
falſe Witneſſes tor men, or 1n the name of men, is #vainſt the 
ninth Commandment, and a fin of no ordinary magnitude; butt 
be a falſe Witneſs of God, is a much higher fin. This Title of 9; 
zeſſes was at firſt given to the Apoſtles by Chriſt, As :. 8. the. 
wards often (eſpecially in the 45) applied ro them, A 1. 14% 
2. 32, & 4. 33.& 5. 32. & 10. 39, 41. Particularly Paul applizth 


it to himſclf, 4s 22. 15. & 26.16. Itis true, the Apoſtles, yg 
either ſaw Chriſt while he was on Earth after his ReſurreRion, c in 
Heaven, as Paul did, Ads g. were in the ſtrifteſt ſenſe Eye-witn, - 
but yet in a Jarger ſenſe this notion agreeth to all Miniſters, who 
reſtifie, upon the hearing of the Ears, and upon reading the Scriptures 
the ſame thing which the Apoſtles reſtified, though not upon the ime 
Evidence. Now to affirm a thing, as from God, for truth, which 
is in it{elf falſe, is a very high tranſgrefſion : which (faith the Ano- 
ſtle ) we muſt be guilty of, if Chriſt be not raiſed ; and if the ded 
riſe not, then Chriſt is not raiſed. 


17 Andif Chriſt be not raiſed, your faith z vain, je 


are yet In your fins c. 

c That 1s ye are yet in your eſtate of Nature, under the guiltand 
condemning power of your fins, which are not yet pardoned to 
you ; for no fins are remitted, but upon believing in th: Lord e- 
ſus Chriſt, which none can do, if Chriſt be nor riſen from the dud; 
tor by that he was declared to be the Son of Goa with power : his Det 
declared him to be truly Man, it was his Reſurrection that munife» 
ſted him to be truly God, God over all bleſkd for eyer ; andiothe 
proper objeU of peoples Faith. 

15 Then they alſo who are fallen aſleep in Chril, ar 
perithed 7. 


a Some think that the term i» Chriff in this Text, is of the ſame 
fignificancy with for the jake of Chriſt, which would reſtrain u to 
Martyrs; butI know no realon for that, becauſe what is (uid, 1s 
true of all ; for it is plain, fiom what was ſaid before, that if Chrilt 
be not riten from the dead, all that die muſt die in their fins, there 
being no obje& for their Faith ro work or lay hold upon. The 
door of Salvation remaineth as faſt ſhur as ever, fo as thole whom 
they looked upon as being aſleep in Chriſt, muſt neceſlarily perilh, 


if Chriſt be not riſen; there 1s no Freerynner centred into the Heavens 
for us. 
19 If in this life onely we have hope in Chriſt, we 


are of all men moſt miſerable e. 

e The Apoſtle here argueth the Reſurre#ion of Believers from ? 
new Head. Ir is not reaſonable for any to imagine, that thoſe who 
believe in Jeſus Chriſt, ſhould of all others be the moſt miſerable; 
but this they muſt be, if there be on Reſurre&ion from the dead 
He enlargeth upon this Head of Argument further, wv. zo, 31: ** 
reaſon of it is, becavſe ir muſt then follow, That they cou!d 2 
no hope in Chriſt beyond this lite ; and the condition of the 42% 
files, and the generality of Chriſtians, ar leaſt in thoſe fit 4 
furious Times, was a moſt afflited fate and condition. The Ap0” 
{tle was in Jeopardy every hour, wv. 3o. he dyed daily, % J1. Ii 
any lay, How doth this follow ? for their Souls might be in Glors, 
though their bodies once dead, were not raiſed ? It is anſwer* 
1. That it ſtill muſt hold as to their bodily, fleſhly part: 2; + 
thoſe who denied the Reſurrection of the Body, denied alſo che Im- 
mortality of the Sou], 3. That Paul ſpeaketh upon the ſuppolition 
of the Divine Ordination ; God having ſo ordered ir, that the Dezt 
of Chriſt, without his Refurre&ion, thould be of no avall £0 V5 go 
ſave either Soul or body ; and that our Souls and Bodies ſhou!d 00: 
be ſeparately, bur jointly glorified upon their re-un0n 1N the Ba. 
of the World: 1 Pet. 1.3. we are ſaid to be begoiten ro 8 1196) 
hope by the ReſurreFion of Feſus Chriſt from the dead. 


pl 
20 Bur row * is Chriſt riſen from the dead, and be 


come * che biit-truits of them that ſleep /, 


[and Y 
The” 


Cha ow.0} 


the ReſurreCtion of the wicked, yer (beſides that the RelurreGon wc 
tl0N cf 


£3 
-x,* 
—_ 


ject 
this 
font 
£107, 
To 11 
his R 
him, 
alive 
ve ra 
doth 
Beltzr 
ut t 
pearet 


fruits 
ing /, 
k In 
any the 
r2&ion 
{rraves, 
Order, 
Dead, | 
ther, 1 
was, T 
tirſt fro 
are Men 
but not 
24 ] 
livered 
when 
1nd pc 
m Th 
meer wy 
the End | 
Words tc 
Chrift w 
ther. an 
then dei; 
ther, yer 
That of it 
5 his 2o; 
'ngs toge 
vas Div; 
mediator 
M142 of 
Mather ; 
Droverh x 
0.7 miIte; 
Ct reign 
\gnificth 
15 med: 
ne CY. 


L 48 


A ET A roy nh 248% 
Ji kibet 4 bo 2 nb end welds 
a 


XV 
111). — 
; # The Apoſtle ieturnotin to tis | 
\ -incerning the Reſurrection of C! 
C m_ 


for it will be hard to prove, T at any benent of Chrifts Death or Re- 
{rreCtion after ti1is its, belongs to wicked men; nor 1510 ulual tor 
the Penmen of Holy Writ, to expres the Dexta of Untelievers un- 
12, Chriſt 15 called the 
(t 15 ra- 
Mon of wicked 
od's Providence, in order to the mant- 


der the oentie notion of 1 fl--p and Col. 1. 


E. 3 ,/ 4 » / y 3 : STy a Q 7 A s L ' 1s 
r:igft-born jrom he Dean, . as he ;5 the Head of : 2e Crarcy, 
& * A A 

- > ba. os Pere ce rh 6h TH 0 pe ER NWN 09 Ry 
ther {16 ken WIL Z eterciice T0; Pole VETrS 5 the RELIUTTEeLC 
- , CRET) ? q 5 1 EI - 
men, Qow3mn,. TACUCI tion \r e| 
* £ L MA, 


feſtution 07 114 {1 Nice in the jaft Judgment, than from rhe NM da 
' of Cinrift. © Par ers 35 a Queſtion ariſeth, How Chrilt i5 faid'ro be 
Ve 


4: 
whenas we read of: divers 1 


che bir ft-livirs of thofe that ſleep, 
Cepinture that wore raticd from the Dead before Chiift was fo rat- 


Gd ? ip, 1. Chih was thefirſt that roſeagain by his own Power 
and Vertue. 2. Hu wi the fiift who roſe again, and died no more. 
Sol 
4 


15 Ears let Mo ro re) af ns abs 
ie Was £3: NITET 161 Te Peat ON Dignity. 


{\'*o7), 
21 For * ſince by man came death g, * by man came 
30 the reſurretion of the dead h. | 

; Since by one man, v:2. Adam (who is alſo ſtiled the $92 of God, 
" Lake 3. 38, becauſ? he had neither Father nor Mother ) caine man's 
{ubjection to mortality, [icknefles, and death here, and eternal death 
ndrviſery in another World; it pleaſed God that by one, who though 
12 was the Erernal only begotten Son of God, yet was alſo made 
Mſn, and was fleſh of our fleſh. + The RefurreCtion of thoſe that 
re believers, and afleepin Chriſt, ſhould come, Hc5. 2. 14. 

22 For as in Adam all die, even fo in Chriſt ſhall a! 
> made alive z. 

i As in the fiſt Adam, all men that were in him, became ſub - 
j2& both to Zemporal death, and all the afflictions and nuſcries of 


mnners of natural death, or attendants upon it; and allo ro that 


G in Chrift, thar 3s, through the Merits of tis Death, and through 
his Refurr-ion, all that ate in him, being choſen in him, given ro 


-ion | deſtroyed ; and there 15 no other way to dethroy Death, but by ch 


4. He was the Firlt. fruits ! 


this Life, which are ſo many little deaths, Roz. 8. 36. and fore- | 


ternal acarh which is the conſequent of the guilt of fin, Rom. 6.23. | 


and all his Inftrumenrs : this ke proverth & om 1h.o vor bs of the Plct- 
miſt. Pfal. "lo. 2. ihe termwunti/ doth not fone the det-rminati 
on of Chris Kingdom then though his m+Ji:-ory Kingdom 0:1 
Earth will then be derermined, Fic hill Gi reign, burnor as row 
inthe midſt of his Enemies, ard in the ex-r5! 
the Conqueſt and ſubguing of r!;ea. 
-e p L ; - 

26 * The laſt enemy rar 

death q 


gf Death be an Enzmy ( as we uſuilly jute) that alfo mit be 


& | 


1 Kingdom 17 


$olilsw 


13ſt Lo M{aDnanyo 
4aa1ll Cs kewl L 4 > yt 


Q 


$% 'P; 


cauſing of a RefurreQtion from the Dead. So that the Apoilie —— 
vech the RefurreQtion from the neceilicy of Chritt's reigning, unr-! 
| all his Enemies b2 deſtroy2d, of which Dearth js one : yy for it keeps 
the Bodies of rhe M=:mberz of Chriſt tom their Union with thet; 
Souls, and with Chriſt, who 15 the Head oiſthe whole Bcliever, rh: 
Body as well as the Soul, 

27 * For he hath pur all ch:ngs under his feet r ; But 
when he ſaith all things are put under 4:7, 7 :s mani- 
teſt that he is excepred, which did put all chinss under 
him s. 

r The Apoſtle referrerh to P/al. 8. 6.-whzre the P(almift xdoreth 
God for the Privileges given man in his Creation; amongſt which 
; this 15 one, That God hath par aJlthings under his feer ; the Pſalmiſ# 

afterwards expounds that univerſal Particle, zr. 7, 8. by Ml Sheep 
and Oxen. yea and ths Beaſ? of the Field, the Fowls of the Air, and ths 
Fi ſhes of the Sea Bur that that Pſalm, or ſome paſlages at leaſt, in ir, 
| are to be underſtood of Chriſt, appeareth from Heb. 2.6, 7, 8. where 
the Penman applieth itto him, as doth the Apoſilehete; under who's: 
freer all things are pur in a much larger ſents, and therefore the Ap5- 
| {He expounds the Aihrmative, H:b. 2.8. by a Negative, He Ucf+ 1:2 
thing that u not put under him. Lat lit men of perverſe mind; 
ſhould conclude, Tharthen the Father alio is pit wider Chrift, tlic 
Apoſtle add-th ; That - when he fauk, He 44ch proc af things ws! v 


his Feet, the Father himf-3t, who 15 the Perton that pur all cthins: v 


SS '4 


_— 


—_ ——— 


| der him, 15 not to be included. 
25 And when all chings ſhall be {ubdued unto him, 
* then ſhall tne Son alio himſelt be ſabje& unco him 


him, and by Faith implanted into him, are not only tpiritually made 


Ye railed from the Dead unto Eternal Lite. 
doth not prove the general Reſurre&ion ( being only intended of 
RBelizvers, that are Members of Chriſt ) yer it doth not oppote it. 
Pur thar the a here mentioned js no more than a/! Believers, ap 
peareth not only from the term in Chriſt in this verſe, bur from the 
whole following Diſcourſe ; which is only concerning the Reſur- 
reFion of Believers to life, not that of the wicked to eternal con- 
lemnarion. 

22 But every man in his own order, Chriſt *the firſt: 
fruits &, afterward they that are Chriſts, at his com- 
ing /, | 

k In his own order, either with refpe&@ to T:me, or Dignity, leſt 
any ſhould ſay, It Chriſt's Reſurre&ion be the cauſe of the Reſur- 


::&ion of Believers, then why did not all the Saints that were in the 
(raves, rife with Chriſt ? The Apoſtle ſaith, God had appointed an 


thar put all things under him, that God may be al! 


alive (bing pated from Death ro Lite, 1 Job 3. 14. ) but ſhall | IN all &, 
But though this Text j 


£ The Sons SubjeRion to Þ's Father, which is mentioned in thi; 
place, doth no where prove his in-quality of Eliznce, or Power with 
his Father; it only lignifterh whac waz ſpoken betore, tha Chriit 
ſhouid deliver up his Mediatory Kingdom to his Father ; to mani- 


dons in the Name of bis Father, and by his Power and Authority ; 
and that as he was Man, he was tubject co his Father. Suppolz (taith 
Pares) aKing ſhould have on? only yon, whom he thoujd take into 
a Partnerſhip with him in his Maje/fzand Kingdom ; but yet io, that 
the King thould {till have the Prebeminence of a Father, the Son 
only thz Dignity ofa Sen 1n fuch Power and Authority, after which 
this King having ſome vubjezctts rilen up in Rebellion againſt him, 
ſhould ſend his Son with Armies and Authority againſt them, he 
ſhould diſpatch the work, and ar his return yield up his: Commiſſion 
ro his Father, ver fl reraining the ſame Nature ke had, and Au- 
thority with which his Father had beforecloathed him, as a Partner 


| Urder, and this Order was, that they that were Dead, or ſhould be | in the Kingdom and Government with him. #« Thar God ( faith 
Dead, before Chriſt's tecond Coming, ſhould not prevent one ano- | the Apoſtle ) may be as 72 3l : inſtead of all chings which the Hearr 
ther, 1 Theſſ. 4. 15. &c. Beſides, the Order which God had ter, | of Man can with. or thur God my y exerciſe a full and perfe& Em- 
; * was, That Chriſt ſhould be the Firſft-Fraits of this Harveſt, rifing | pire and Government over all thinzz>; That the incomprehenſible 
| iſt from the Dead, ſo as to Di: no more. 7 Then Believers, thar | Giory of God may #1:1 ali the Eli. But is not God in this World 
| | are Mcmbers of Chriſt by Faith implanted into him, ſhould alſo riſe, | a!l in all * .4:/w. H-:5 ; bur, n. He doth not fo appear ruling in the 
; WW vt not before his ſecond Coming. midſt of his Enemies here, 2. The Government will be alrer'd ; 
, WI 7i-n coed this end, when be ſhall bavede- | En Redlny Kingdom hull chenceas, and noching 
, p _ _ IS 1 atCT, ih 1 [V4 ) (I $241 © [8] : 
Y livered up the kingdom 0 God, even the Father i ſhall appear but the eljential Kingdom of God ; the Power by wry 
when he ſhall have pur down all rule, and authoritv, the lather, the Son, and the Holy Ghoſt (three Perſons though bur 
a 1nd Dower 9. | one God | thall govern «nd re all things, when all this ſublunary 
x 70 ha End - - the vey hs _ ——_— wn oo World ſha!l ceate 
| } meet with 1n this Lite, or the End of all our Preaching and NMintttry, 7 7 <P 4 : b ES 
i > the Fnd of the World, or the Endof Man, or: rather ( as the mn 29 Elle w hat ha! the) 09 which are baptized for 
Ye | words ſeem ro interpret ir ) the End of that mediatory Kingdom of i thC dead If rhe dead. riſe not at all, why are they then 
_ | Cirif which he now adminiſtrech by the appointment of his Fa- baptized for the dead 7 w. 
h, _ 2nd 12] manage ro the End of the World. » Chriſt thall | | 4 ery gificntt Fexr . and variouſly expound2d, The terms 
ens yan 7 Sp yh Ee _S pb? ; Bapette NG Bapt ib: Ignite _ more in *he:r original and native fig- 
Thar of it there hail be no end ) Chriſt's eſſential Kingdom, which | 207: RA 4 pn4 FO ”—_ of any 
= aa: wy © , ' Cups 1n uſe amongfr the Jews, 1s in the Gre:!, lhe Bapii/ms 05 
We | 35his Dominion which he hath, and exerciſeth over all created Be- Pors and Cuns : bur the moſt uſual accepration of it in Scripture, is 
| ngs together with his Facher, and the holy Spirit ( all being dur! . rhe es >. the Gnas af ons Fes. lice a. 
7 2 "ne Divine Eijence } that thall hold and abide tor ever : bur his cred »Qion by which one is waſh-d ccording't > the Infirurion of 
cho medictory Kingdom, by which he rulcth Over his Church in the (4:0 7, he Name of the Father, the Sin, and the Holy Ghoſt. Ut 
ble; ns ot his Enemies, that ſh1il ceaſe, and be Cehvered up unto the ,;.. iſo Metzphorically uted by our Saviour in the Goſpe's, Mar: 
ed. "ather : So that Chriſt's delivering up the Kingdom to his Father, ! __ 22.23. Mirk tc. 39. Luke 12, 50. to tignitie a $ £-5:no for ths 
he roveth no. inferiority of Chriſt ro his Father, more than his Fathers | gar Che. Fo SGS chas Sd eatuatalte* on fn 
joe | keyg, that medurory Kingdom to bim can prove hiy Fatiers the Action of the Hely Ghoſt in cleanting and renewing our Hearts, 
Agg® vi Te Snng, or infcriority to him, whichar certainly doth not It | Mats 11. 12. Job c, The Jaſt atuge of rhe Ms, is by no 
and 'gnifieth only the ceating of that Diſpenſation, or Chriſt's exerciſe of - ,”_ "MP ries. The Queſtion 15 Whether the Apoſtle 
\po- as mevtatory Kingdom on Earth, in the Rule and Government 0 j pound only, Why are Men waſhed far Shs Bats O:: why 
bo ah wie _ | pd — _ OE COD | , Then are Men Baprized 16:1giontly for the Dead? Or why ars ” DB apc i- 
1077 | + ns OO TSONOTITY ON DOGS AG TC ET OE AO EI ceaſe, \ 4 with Blod for the Dead 2 For the Pap;fh Notion, That Bapritm 
red ; nd 311 the miniſtration of good Angels, and power of Evil Angels; here fienities any Religzons Ationr, as Faſlings, and Prajers, and Pe- 
Thu: > fall all Miniftrations and Governments in che Church Militant | geucey Hou rhofe that axcin Pargorary, there is no (ach ufage of th 
: Im- a how Earth, and all thoſe that are the Enemies of the Church ſhall rerm in Scripturs ; po heath 308 Scripture ir tignifies ſoanceienad 
(11107 * *ubdued and brought under. $Szfrinos fr te Hand, of other; 15 in Ai2ff. 29. 22, 2} » Mart 
Joo! ze E he 1ſt io - i] he ] o nach 1] R $) gi MELTS < —_ y © : Hog : Pg v7” op as Ly 
Jeati | t + OF US MUIT TEIZN,, UNnti 24003 PUT All. ENEMICS | ,g 39. yet it no whete ſgnmtes Penances, or fitcu So{rerin ge 25 
"= ” } cer his feer Men impoſe upon ti:mielves for the D-2q Nor doth Paz; It:is 
— nf Wy hath fo decreed ( and vehat he bath fat muſt come to | lay, To what Pan pO: " = ONEETRs _ I mou way are ey 
a 5 that Chriſt ſhould, as Mediator, exerciſe a Kingdom and Go- | Baptized tor the Dead ? 1. Thole chat rok rhererm here fignines 
lrg) *nment in the World, until he hath ſubdued all the Enemies of | waſhing, whar ſha they co, w/e ave 7 £2 for ties Dead ? tell ws, 


hs Hh E a Pp J \ 1 » V < F 4 
 LOIpel and People ; all tho\z who have faid, He fba#l not rule 
SYep p51 - . F 1? _ : . , . ' . 
'2om ;, the whoie World that Jieth: in wickednehs, the Devil, 
my S008. TE: 


. o { Sk RET hy a "7 , 2» af 7% 3'* + i - p -} \ + 
| That it being a Cutom in naps Colmes, TOr N2tncly and CIeUNT) = 
} . 1 TY ? I 3 rp — CL ers —- » 'Y 3 - & .” 
neſe. ro waſh Dead Podies, the oriminve Carytens uleg that Cere- 

SEE, I4A> _—$ - £ 

| %- 21S: ——_ 

[1 j 18 i & G 6 me þ 
5 


feſting, that wharſcever he bad doacin the Otfice of Micdiator, was 


& »v/7 = 
RM 
”* Ch $i» < 
$5. C11 


—_ =_ , - _ _ —_ _ . _ —_ 
' / / od L. { A {1 4 g "ka 3 4 "2 Fs 
{ ſl I £4 4 j ; C1 1 \ I, of 41), V e- 
L 
to diſcourſe | 
uit, who is by him called the 
Fit. fruits of them tar eep; T:0t of all thar hall :ife (as ſome think) 


—_— Ow - 


= a = 
= + A - —- —_ 
ome ere a > - 


Y Dome, 1e.E3 fer the rib of Gar, EX BOuU ided by tne next word 
co inthe Promits, Thit tuch a cuſtom was 1n ule amongſt 
Chia, is plain from AF: 9. 37, bur that they uled it as 4 Re- | that Pau!, who was a Fiee-man of Row, ſhould he exnoll.! 
| ? ' '- | They trem therefore betrer to underſtand it, who inferno... 


(4 o - .”* Mtg | 17) l, 4 RN ati, 34. + , *2? v6 ' 
1: =:o7 (ite, Cr Þ Ricmony CL tizerr] 4itil 1} Titc INELUIFECLION SPE 
4» , SE C Ml Lai. £ Her za nm In (| | Texr I, 
NOS fART DNS, TNAt OY VIPSERERT IN (NG ext, [ 
"3 "Y ; 4 X R OY = þ4 SY "TYCF JE y 9 2 og 
C7 ,,9emk Of [4 ir t4fmm "To S]- Lie {tu it, BSE US Ore tan 071 ac 
by, 1! 
NY 
0 ; "EDX ; : : i Zo, MOOT ho a hs 
ths Chirch, ro Lec cm tor 1ome time Unde! Carcchilm, in Wick 


z 4 70 y' ' 
i843 Lhiw yp How 
z ' 1 bd 


carl 2h; baptized them; or if they dicd tuddenly, 


(Ji Val p 
b6ipoaze; F 4 
533 in! Metuirction of ſuch 2x prion ro Eternal lite. Now adm 
ttt Wee an errour of pratiice 1n them, as to this Ordinance ; ye 
any Juch thing were in proctice in this Church, the Argument 0 
tn Apoliic was good againſt them. Br | thin 
dz made appear fo us, x [147 there Was {uch an early corruption 11 
this Church 7 Others fay, That tome believing the Refurrection 


would upon their dearh-beds be baptized, in teitnpony of it, from 
| Others fav. To be baviized 


. 
+437 


v. hence they had the Name,ct C/zzicr. . 
| be baptized wien they were dying 
and 1o as $069 as dead. Air. Calvin chuicth this tenſe; 
Oucttion is, Whether the Greek Phraſe Vap rexywy will bear it 


D FR ” . o 4 ! 
for Fic  A:ar, UWgnieia (0 


tize perlons cd 
Bite: of the Reiuriecion. 


Prayers over dzad Bodies at tas Gave, 
but that there was any ſich cuſtom ſoancieat as the Apoſtics times, 


C 
_ 


I very much doubt. Licre are yet Wo Other lenſes given of this 


. be ' » af ba 5 EG Ia” Ls A ! "54 _; ? . 
Giflicult Phralc, wither of which feemeth to me much more probable 


than any of thile. - 160 
ore We 53: icoparay every hour £ V/hich incl:neth many good Interpre- 
ter5 T0 think, that the Bapritra here mentioned 1s, Char Baptiſm with 
Blozd mentioned by our Saviour, Mare. 20. 22,23. and 1o the ſenſe 
15 no more, than it there be no Relurrection of the dead, why do 
we dic daily ? Why ore wekilled all the day long ? For we do that 
Th hop- of a bg Reſurrection. The only Objections againſt this 
arc, 21, That none but Chrilt himſelf uterh the word 1n this lente, 
(which ſcemerh a light exception. ) «. That UTS? VEHGHy 1s hardly 
c:pable of thar fente ; but yer our Learr::d Dr.- L:ghrfoot brings ap- 
railels of ſuch an uſage of the Piepoſition our of the LXX. Others 


obſerve, that the Apoſtle, 1n this whole Chapter, 1s diſcourſing of 


the ReſurreFion of Believers unto life, and they are ſuch dead alone, 
that he here ſpeaketh of, for whom he taith any were baptized. Now 
ir 15 Plain from Scripture, that Baptiſm is a Seal of the RelurreQton, 
mifying to Believers, that they ſhould be made partakers of the 
1eathand Refurre&ion of Chrilt, ( the RefurreQion being ſtrongly 
proved from God's Covenant, of which Baptitm is a Seal, Zzke 29. 
37, 38. } and being fo, it confirmed the Covenant, not only ro the 
perſons baptized, but to the whole Church, as well the Triumphanr 
as the Mil:rant part ofit ; as well with reference to thole of it that 
were dead, as thoſe that were living. So rhat fo often as Baptiſm 
was adminiftred in the Church, fo ofren God repeated the Covenant 
made to his whole Church, that he was the God of Eclievers and 
of their Seed : So that all who to this day are baptized, are baptized 
tor the dead, that is, tor the confirmation of Gods Covenant to his 
whole Church, as well that part of it which 15 dead, as that part 


which is yer alive; and 1t teſtifieth, that thoſe that {l-ep in Chriſt | 


{ilthoveh dead) yet live in the promile of the Refurrection, becauſe 
God is their God, and he 15 not the God of the dead, bur of the 
:ving, as our Saviour ſpeaketh in Luke 20. 38. In this variety a- 
mong?t Learned men about the true tente of this place, I ſhall lzave 
rhe Keader to ht own judgment ; although tro me the two lait ſeem 
to bs moſt probabl:. 


30 And why ſtand we 16 jeopardy every hour ?- x. 

2 We are the veri:t Fools in Nature, if there be no RetuwreGion | 
ot Believers unto Lite ; tor it 6+ in the firm belict and hopes of thar, | 
that we arc in danger of our hives, and all that we have, every hour | 
Ci Oui 11Ve*, 
oratellt by 7 92 P I RIS] $244 Mer 
proteit by || your tejaycing  Waici I have in ; 
i Jeſus Our Lord, * 1 dic daily z. 

+ What is meant here by our rejapeing which I ave, 15fomething | 
Cuubred ; fome underſtanding 1t of the Apoſtles rejoycing in them | 
a5 Believers, whom he had been an Inftrument co convert, and bring | 
bome to Chriſt : others of their rejopcing im hims (which ſeems not | 
probable, many of them ſo much deſpiling and vilitving him, ) o- | 
thers underſtand ir, of their glorying againſt him, and-rrinmphing 
over him, and thar this was one of his {fuſfftrings which he inſtanceth | 
in, which he underwent in hope of a Reſurrection. The words-are ; 
not an Oath, (tor here God 15 not called to witnels } they are only | 
an A'trſtarion. AS the Prophets ſometimes call Heaven and Earth | 
ro witne!s, fo here he calls their Rejoycing to witneſs ; and this re- 
joycing icems to bethe joy of thoſe who amongſt them truly rejoyced 
in Jeius Chriſt, ſor which alſo he rejoyced daily, they being the Seal 
ct bis Apoſticthip. Tha: which hetolemnly athrms, 15s, Thar he d:- 


c 


Chrit 


Da —— 


? "is +W.- . - 1 1 . | _ 

toat he elfewhere ſaith, he wasin Deaths often,and that they were killed ' body as it pleaſeth him, and a {everal body, according 00 
, y f >» * — O . d ? - x Ss. ſ 

all tho aay log ; fuitering tich afiliftions as were near a kin to death, | cn. grain ; yet none will deny, bur iris the feed {own 5: 


and led on to death, as thetr end, 
' 
- C {1 ye £ 4 3 pu C +48 £2 | "Xe ” 27> C- - | 
Iz [i 1! atrer the INANNSEE Oi Mmgn [| NaVCc fought with 

1 3 % y - «x b FO r s , I. 
Pheius, what advantageth it me, 

i Vie not, * Let us eatand drink, tor to 


* 7 4 M84 7 
WC 21}il Qie "of 


ja: Ge 1 Sd 
he: its art Int 
, 
4 


2,2 hr Pan*t-s 1&5 : . oe» 
»eI1C CIV” OL 1T1014% 4 


| UNC SEE EYTERL L24C ANC tndeuci.. 


= | conflict with men, who in their conditions and manner +, 


Yoon Me Whereas they were wont in the Primitive | mentivned 4s 19. 
C » _ 5 = % £ ED B. [ RO £ _ "WE * - FR _— 1” go OY Pa 
{> tore they admitted perſons into a full Communion with | witch the Scripture giveth us no large account, 


» Caliod Catchment ; if fuch t}1] flick, ana in danger 
tcy 

. . . . © Se "Wc I. "g _ | . Rags NO Me . I 3. X <4 » 2 
1224 ibme other for them, in teſtimony of thew hope of the ; uſe ro fight ; ſome have 'ocher norions of If : the ſens 


Bnt how ihillany tuch thing 


1-15 tcil us of a cullon: in ute in the Prumicve Caurch, to bap- 

[ns over the Graves of the Martyrs, as a teſtimony of their 
That chere was anciently ſuch a cuſtom, 
i} doubt not; Ard | believe that the cuſtora with us in reading of 
doth much more probably 
derive from this ancient ulage than the Paputts praying tor the dead ; 


To the firſt we are led by the next verte, Or why 


Zz (Cog Pay Ing , renin te fla Arnll,; I | B.A Pa (s. | . _ . "INE I 1054 
werning tits Fight of the Apoſtiz with Pcaſts at Ephoſes, | ang excellency, in reipcCt of the qualities of 17: 


F* 4: EAT. 
£ H [ « 1 4 \ Js 


Cha 


\ 8 ' 8: >a tim ay hoo ohot oC et Do lk om for bold ts + FW Fs Sj k 
04 F 2.0:7:0S Rie 3534 K<. 8/3300: Oz Nc Bite OF The | Feaſts, ang WEENGW FilaT 112 thote FLOUNfr:2 inch 1 Ii; ) Ne» 
TS . 6 'N © > Ee Ot Stow f23otmndteo to £5 0 = | Hr > A E v8 - JO 1 K * 4 pended | 4 
»- Aa TRUPUSHR it Uo UTE, Viiiyty,;?\ STACY I2y VUTE2 1h TO | Nh ule, tO DIIng OUT | ta]etactors to gn with wild Beaits, By; 


"We" ”_ . . m py oy 43}, 18 \i > 
read in the 275 of notuch dealings with Pal, fo that beiye + as, 
ment rather {or their flaves and vileſt men, ir can ha-d1v "ug _ Res 


- 


FT 
\ (TH * 


es 2 pi 
Prez 1 £1 
- * beaſts ; and thar he doth not ſpeak here of his ſen{R2 with >, 
but ſome other conflict he þig . 

but Th IMG SS 
; | generally and obſcurely mentioned in the next Epiſtle, ©: 1) 
tor this Epiſtle was wrote afrer his conteſt with 2... 
that Plate, after ze manner of Mc, fume think he men; ls 

» Na 
© | plainly this, It T have foughe with beaflly men ar £2; "1 'Y 
manner that men fight with beaſts, expoling my body t9 (4... 
£j and fury; whar prefit 5 1t to m2, if the dead rife nor 2 j hyp. * 
p:ſed my ſelf ro their fury our of an hope for a joyful Rye 
1;0n; bur if there thall bz no 1nch Reſurreon, the £9;-.... 
, | reſolve to ſtick at nothing, nor tw deny themſelves in any 5.5. by 
ſarisfattion from meat and drink, have the b=ſt of it; att es 3 
then beſt ſing their Song. Ler mw ear and drink, for we have how. 


, | little rime ro eat and to drink in; we know that we th) F Ee 


but the ; there will be anend of us. 


23 Be not deceived: evil communications 
900d Manners 4. 


a Do not ſuffer your ſelves to be abuſed with evil and coin; 1; 
/ courſes of thoſe Philoſophers amongſt whom you converli;, wh; 
gue from innate Principles of Reajon againſt Articles of þjjh 
though you may judge, that they talk but tor dilcourte ſale, val, 
communication or ditcourſe is naught, and will influence meg; 
things of piatice, and debavch men in their Morals, Ir 154 V;\ 
or Saying taken out. of, or at leaſt found in, one of the PaginP;.., 
bur containing in it much truth. 


Way > 9. 
SULTUDL 


have not the knowledge of God c : * I ſpeak his to yo, 
ſhame #4. 

bSin is in Scripture compared to /zep, Kow. 13. 11. £2; ; 1, 
and that very properly ; for as the natural Senles are boung uy 17 
natural ſleep, to the Sinners Spiritual Senſes are locked up, (6 tr 
he doth nor excrciſe them to diſcern betwixr good and evil; wn} 1; 
he that is atleep, is void of all care and fear, 1s ſecure, fo th: jr. 
ner 1s ſecure and void of tear, And Repentince 1s 1ct our vn; 
the notion of awakirg ; we are notonly concerned to cich- 11 h 
to do good ; not only io awake from Sin,but to Rigteouſr cthi 1 
to an holy life and converlation, that is it which 15 here call-} R+7). 
reoulnels, all ſpiritual reftitude being to be judged from th: % 1}; 
conformity to the Divine Itule ; hence fin is called a crooked vv, 
becauſe it will not agree with the Rule of Gol's Word «Fo: fone 
amongſt you have not a due and faving Knowledge of Cod, oats), 
apprehenſion of the things of God, & though it be a ſhame for th. 
that have it not,contidering the hghi and means of knowledge nine 
vou have had by my Miniſtry, and the Miniſtry of otlucrs vio have 
been an.ongt you. 


24 Awake to righteouſneſs, and {in not 6 : for fin 


Ly 


kedup? and with what body dothey come? e. 

2 Some of your vain Pllolophers, who are reſolved to $1252 
dit to nothing upon the account of a bare Divine Revelation.un's'» 
they can give a further rativaal account of it in the ctrcuntunce, 
wall be ready to obj-& and ſay, How is it poſſible, that wo? very 
bodics which are putretied, and turned into duſt, and that a.f, 1" 
may be, ſcattered to the four Winds, ſhould be raited up i 2nd; 
the fame bodies ſhall not again riſe, what kind of bodrs hulltos 


= 


- 
o 


| B:lizvers have in the Refurre&ion ? Shall they be bodis thi v Wl 


6. » #3 2 Y 
need mear, and drink, and cloaths, as our preſent byd:sco | Oy 
what other bodies ſhall they be 2 


36 Thou fool f, * that which thou ſowe!t 15 0% */: 
quickned, except it dieg. 

7 He faith nor thom fool in anger, (which is that uſing of this tern 
witich our Saviour, Matt, 5. 22. faith, brings a man unuer rhe guts 
of Hell tire) bur in the way ofa grave and authoritative r{prool ; Ga" 
ling thein Fools for their wanr of a due underſtanding 0 te 0205 
and ways of God. 2 He I:rs them know, that they wigt 2: ell 
a:k, how the grain of Wheat, which they ordinarily fowed 8 ts! 
hi:1d, did tife again * For tht grain allo rotteth under {06 cies © 
the earth, under which ir is buried, before it again rileth. 

27 And that which thou ſoweſt, thou ſoweſt not that 
body that ſhall be, bur bare grain, it may chance ol 
wheat, or ſome other gram h. 

b And when it again riſeth, or ſhooteth up, it is no! bars grail, 
without either tak or ear, (which was the body by them 10. ) 

, . o . A f 18 *N\( 

25 Bur God giverh ic a body asir pleaſeth him, # d 
to every ſeed its own body 2. 

; But God giveth to every grain, or kind of ſeed, iu 


£8 
ch 24 Ki ON 
che natul® 


2 ! PTE an" 
LIC! CC v1 


. By "yy = EE hk, ax £Eſhes. 
it che of fleſh of men, another fleſh of bea!ts, anocuer 0: 
Morrow and another ot birds þ, 


- 


k Fleſh is a kind of body , but it 1- of ration degr MER 
ons 1:C24L 0? 


*, 
« faoy: © 38... 
F FR - 


f 


i \+ e | . —_—_— K ts + C [y..aft2 © 470 Y! aig 
vngat with | gf 4 differing excellency from the B24 of 54155 5 17d Cc 0:2 


4wi» 


thy. 
M4 


af. 


25 But fome man will ſay, * How are the Gel ra *[r: 


ha 


? It 
Llteld 
'3::Ve D 
12 eatir 
pIWers, 
197 as fe 
contradi 

uT;H, 20 
REew QU. 
Pris, | 
inhcmit; 
Oc hear, 
bee, act 
ute the 
©OmMmanc 


9 mRiruti 

45A 
Made a 
eng S 


[ 
WP # 


he 


A 


SY Ws M , 
eWilF{s ei 


wing \u 
Yeath of 

4.* 
Witch he 
Was born 
Was the {; 
('} el, 
\Brnf? 4 
Tf ) I; 
Ly ou 


C77 Ti 
br .1h e< 


= 


k 


»& v4 
| PP þ. 4 V o 


CORT! 


as! 


jce in natural Qualitice detivixt the 
ol 5 =) tn: 7y 1306 "ye 3 )185, they are > all fl=th; 


of 
C 3 \ 


r POre 41 Subſt: 'NCE5 of Beaſts. 


as 7 Fiſhes, and jirds ve | bY 
O13 EAinfKon be Wis. £ jt 11Q Eb a but acce 2rdins to our 
i - $a wa a ll Ss 

{0m or PLopriety Ot ipcalins ; we read of the fleſh of tith, Levit. 


Ii. i©, TO 


40 There are alſo ce'eſtial bndies /, and bodies ter 


the glory of the ce.eſtial;z one, and tlie 


: ! 
*FIG (tr: : £ «AY FAHEY ATT ad 
iC 26 ai + Cas ts I. 4awtL 4-8 


'trial i - By 


FRIES 9, a tc 
our), 3k Llis To 


' Such arz the Sun, the Nonon;, and the Stars. Men, 
N-.ii}s, Bt , Fiſhes, it Elem: Ston2s, ©. rn Nov \berwixe 
cheie two S, pecles of Boclies, 1n re ſoe& of Qualities, there 15 4 very 
$1634 Qifference; thi gory of the heavenly Boaies nels greater 
Mh.n the « glory of the cathly Budics ther are co:npound:d of the | 


Flements. 


another glory of the 


41 There is one glory cf the ſun, 
or one fter ditler- 


110013, and another glory of the itars: | 
2:14 from anothcr itar in glory 0. 


, tha1e 15 a great deal of difference 
> ip Þ to thc Qualiines ; one of then 15 ;n glory, much d: ”_ 
1139 FLOM another, the glory of the Moon 1s not Itke the glory of i: 

"1:2, an] the glory ot a Star is much bencath rhe glory both of the 
yu and of the Moon; vea, cue Star 15 more glorious than a 
nN cher, yet they are all Bodies, though of diff-rent Species and 


(2am ic. 


\ mong? the Cleft. 


4 z 


-- 


. _4t:* So alfo zs the refurreftion of the dead 4 * ©2630] 
*e ſown in Corruption, it iSraiſed in incorruption 


p That is, fo ſhall it be, as to rhe Bodies of the Saints, in the 
:furrection. The tame bodies of the Saints ſhall riſe, though with 
qua}lties, and in a condition much different from what they were 
when they fell, as the fame grain of Wheat ſhooreth up, though 
zith another body ; and as there is a difference berwixr Celeſtial and 
Ter:eftrial Bodies, and betwixt Celeſtial Bodies themiclves : fo there 
will b: a diffzrence berwixt the bodies of rhe Saints, now thar they 
are only of the Earth earthly, from what they ſhall be in the —_ 
rection; which dilicrence he oPÞe neth in {evera] particulars. 4 /t 7 
ſown, that 3 iS, it dicth, and js buricd in tuch a ſtare, that iris fubj: Q 
£9 outrefaCtion ; but when it ſhall be again raifed from the bd i 
ſhall be ſubject fo ne P! itrefaCtion Or corruption : So wer. 52 
Pad ſhall oe raijed 1 


Bay 
4 1)C 


10 apr ible. 


43 It is fown in difſhonour, it is raiſedin glory r : It is 
ſown in weakneſs, It 1s ralledin power s. 


» There 1s nothing more uncomely, unlovely, and loathfom than 
a Dead Bedy ; ; bur it will not be fo when it thall be raiſed again, 
then jr thail be a bearztiful, comely body. We thall rite in a full and 
2 (as is generally though hr) and without thofe defe&ts and 
&formiries, which may here make our Bodies appear unlovely. 
Danie!, Chap. 15. 2. fays, The righteous ſhail ji ne as the Stars : Chriſt 
trim, Thc foal joine lire che Sun: the Apoſtle faith, Phil. 3.21, 
Pe foal ue mage lire wnito his glorious Borry, Threz things make the 
Body beaurital, a pertection of parts, che well putting them roge- 
tier, _ proport :oNINg them on2 to another , and a well rempered 

22ry Spirit; all thets will concur in the Bodies of Saints 1n the 
Re urrection. The Sho olmen taantes: That much of the beauty 
vi the Saints Budies tn the ReturreCtion, will flow trom their perfect 
lighr of God, and the reiiextion of - God upon them. s When ir 
C15 a frat} weak Body, able to re{ft injuries, bur it 
hall rife ; Bou\,, with Juick & fenles, and ſubjeS& 1 to ND more 


&; 
D. riect age 


Uictii, 
| ' 
4 36 O5g 


Weakneltes. 


44 it is ſown a natural body 7, itis raiſed a ſpiritual 
body uw. Lhere isa natural body, and tners is a fpiri- 
rual body. 


? Such a body as all Jiving Creatures have by Nature, which A 
pachd by the aCtions of the Soul that quickeneth it, both the Yege- 
!ative pow ers, by which 1it15 nourtthed by the ute of meat and drink, 
the eating, CONCOCTINg, and digeſting ir, &c. and the tunfirive 
powers, Oc. rm Bit it {hall be raiſe d a ſpiritual Body, Spiritual, 
192 as to the ſubſtance of it ( for in that 1cnſe a ſþ;r:5ual Boay is a 
contradiQtion ; ) but in relpeR of the qualities an C0: «TION ot it, 
\irtt, 22. JO. " 20- 35, 36. Bodies, which, 1n reſpect of many 
new qualities they hill have, ſhall be more like Anzels and other 
iris, than Human Bodi2s. Beautiful, incorruptibie, free trom 
uſicmities, not 1ubj<&t to hunger, or thirſt, or injuries, trom cold 
oc hear, @*c. not uſing meat, drink, cloaths, Phyſick, or marriage : 
tree, ative, and nimble as Spirits, 1 Theſſi4. 17. Spiritual, be- 
<ufe they ſhall perfeAly obey the Soul made perfect, and be by it 
*ommanded to ſpiritual actions only : of ſub:ile, ſpiricual ri fined 
Conſtitutions. 


45 And fo it is written : The firſt man Adam was 
made a living ſoul y, the * laſt Adam was made aquick- 
<1:Ng SPITIE x, 


»7 he firſt part 1 iS written in Gen. 2. 7. God breathed into Man®s 
Noſirils the breath of L.fe, aud fo he became a living Sor! ; that 15,. 2 
living ſubſtance, Jiving an animal, natural life, by vertue ef that 
breath of life which God breathed into him. + The kf ae 29, by 

vhich he meaneth Chriſt, who in time was after the firſt 44am and 
was born in the laſt days, an 1d was the Jaſt common Head (as Atam 


—_ liſt, with wo Ot natural and carna) P: 04 Jar ;On, lo 

New t5 the Iaft qa Y FI 6 ! £26 Fo y of (race and tp: ricna) Regs je - 
Talon ) lie WaS Im TRE R118 Svar:e. Ee Wi, 27 140 {o. nor when 
** WIS CONceived and | born, tor he had a Body fubijeGt io the fame 


| : Of her fleth, 
h er. 


x 
; 
} 


[1 


4 rec}; IO _y” 


g { Sl: / F f 1 \ 'v n : C: ! 4 [SI 


natural enfirmit ics that our - but eo5n ms .Uſurrid7t in 372 Ko 
| acad, Wien, tis? 39h he hag th: Bree? in th 1Eidt Offi 5: 

of if, yet it 15 Qt red in qualities, ad os mach mate t ' 
with vw hich Body ® alcend.d up into Hoaven, ooat | 
Power as to quic!ken Sou' with 2 ſpiricac] life, fo alto to 016 
our mortal Lodizs at his We Comine whenke fi! tain che - 

out of their Graves, | 

45 Howbeit that 25 not fir ft which js fpirrna), bi 


Cod in his Prov | 
Difpenſations -w-1Y fo A IS 4$ *( tity Prev nic me 2 
we have fir} natural Lodi. h 5 


natural Adaam: ; 
more perfect { 
i Jatin® Unto us, 
we grow up and Dye with fuch, "ifs 
others, In reſpett of excellenter qualittcs and endywimnunts. 


+\. STI hk rin: 


117 2A 2% 
UT Len 


47 Tne firſt man zs of the earth, earthy : the ſecond 


2N :s the Lord © from heaven <. 


z Adm, who was the tuft Man, was of th- 2 arth, Cer, 2. 5 
; and was of an earthy conftirutioa, hike unto the Earth 
hich he was tormed ; but Chrift had anocher Orig10al: For thong 
; his Body was formed in the Wombof the Virgin, and he vas ile!h 

yer ihe concetved by the Holy Ghoſt overſhadowi 
and Chr iſt had an eternal Generaton { as to us Diyine Natur: 
{rom his Father. 


45 As is the ex 
earthy : and as; the Warenty, tuch arc 
21e heavenly 

a Such a Body 25 41am ld ( which was earthy) ſuc! att © = ol 
of Aidan have; and {i ug 1a Body as Chriſt now hath fin: © btz > Re 
ol 14 at "eniy Body) fur bt a Body alfo tha 


who are heavenly, Fs we el rhe Returrettion. 


C 


49 om as we have bora tlie im24ge of the ex 
thy, > ſhall alfe. bear the imave of the heaven 


ly 6. 


® ' 
b And as Believers, being the natural Sons of che firſt 41zm have 


born his Image, had ſuch Bodies as he had, while th wy lived hers 
ſo they ſhall alſo in the Reſurrz&ion bear the Imag 2 of the h-aven]y, 
the Image of Chriſt ; char is, have ſuch Bodies as was Car ilts Body, 
atter that [12 was mo riten from the Dead. 


Fo Nowthis I ſay, brethren, that * ficth and 
cannor inherit the kingdom of God ©, neither doth cor. 
ruption inherit incorruption 4, 


lignifi2 Sin, the unrenewed MN;- 
ture { as fome would have it) but er Boizs, in their- pre- 
ſent naruraj, corruptible, f:a:l, mortal ſtare; to the term figni- 
lizs, Epi. 6. 12. Heb.2. 14. Ih and Blood ſhall inherit the King- 
dom ot God (clfc our Bodies could not Te g!oritied) but onr Bud, 

as In its prelc nt ſtate, till changed and | altered as to qualities, ij} 
ir be made a f{piritual Body, thall not inherit the Kingdom of 
God. 4 The latter words give a reaton, why Fleſh and Blood 
Canot Knerit the Kingdom of God: Decaule it 15 Corruption, - thar 
15 en <> 7o- natural corruprion and putretaction, and the heaven. 
ſtate of incorruption ; the Bodies of Believers there- 


c Fleſh and Blood do not here 


4 
fore mu aſt bz raiſed up in that ſtate of incorruption, meatio:e 
_ before they can be capable - of 1nheriting the Kingdom v2; 
fo) 


51 Behold, I ſhew you a myftery e : 
<&p f, but we ſhall all be changed 9 

2 They might obje&, How can this be * There will be many 
Sanrs alive in the Wo: ld arthe dry, when Chriſt fi:4!ll come to judge 
the World ; they will have ___ Bodies, fuch as they ---re born 


. ith, and & grew up with in the World unti] thx: cime(faith the Anc- 
{tle) I now tell you a Lecret Oi Ying Wotor ſo te term- Mz fory! pf arificths. 


25.and 16. 25. and in m3 wy o-ker Texts. ) f We tha! no: 


Rom. 2 7 


all ileep any long ſleep : Some thi, - all thaj) die, bur {ome for a 
very inort time, "and then they fall revive. 7 Buc we ihuil 27 6 
changed. exher dying for a time, or " {ome other work of Cod 
our natural corruptible Bodies fall be rurne into tpreieual Rodies 
not capable ofcorruption, 

52 In a moment, in tis ewinkling of an ev2, at 

- "T4 Barns Yo 

the laſt trump: For the trumpet ſhali ſound, and the 


dead fhall be raifed incorrt »tible, and we {hall te 


changed þ. 


IN a moment - either a7 
which ſhall þc as <#: 


þ This Change vill be on the ſudden, 
on the Will and Con:mand of Chri {t, 
ro call exlons our of heir Graves, as a Trumpet 7+ [2 Ca |} Per- 
, upon a Sound mad? 2 und 
of 4 Aer: as 1f was Pe the giVIng of the Law LPONA 5 S$FE+ 
te 19. 16. Ve read of this It Trump. Mats. 24. 3! 1 he” 

. 46. There hall ( faich the Apoſtle ) be ſuch a Sound made , and 
cgi the making of 1T, the Suars that are DJ, fh dy be rated 
our of their Graves ; :- NOT W ith 1Uuch Bod Carrind thither 


T_ 


. 
j1 '”.2 6 ) t 
1% ITE 013 


TI QI they 


( which were corruptible ) but with fuch Bodies as | hall be no 
| more {ub i {} oo corrumtion : and thoſe who x3 there thy bs 
+ > J w 4 . V 
! 
7 - 


| that which 1 IK) natural, and aticrworus fiat FP; C11 25 5.47% 
_ cual y. 

[ 

} Chriſt, toc ſpiritual a em, "25 not fit 153 oder Or i 

| . 


matey 


* We ſhall not, 


[| 


blood + : +. 


3} VI 


op 


94 


Chap. XV, SIEORIN 


alive, ſhall one way or ztother be changed, and be alſo put into an 
\ 


incorruptible ſtate. 


ana Love, 13-—-15. &:;vers Salutarions, 16————2xt. he denouncerh 
a C:rje tv ail who ao wor tauly love Chris, «wiſfheti them the Grace 


& God. ana promifes: t2:m his Love, :2 24. time when I ſhall fhay longer with you. Bat all hls mer gt C2vje: 
ie | ES | A x derftood with ſubmiſſion ro God's Will, who can Dnder, a | 

EAALo by, Ow concerning * rhe collection for the Saints «, as der my journies, and determine my purpoſes as be piealsts a" Ts Lg 
> C0:.9.,2, LN Thave given order to che churches of Galatia, | reaches us, when we declare our refolutons 0 g9 0 7hÞ 9700 * Char; 
| even io do ye 5. place, to add, If God will; 5nd our Apoſtle oblervern at ont five borh 
- | Rom 1. 10. EE this ris 
# Th- buſineſs of relieving the poo Members ef the Church is} $8 Bur I will carry at Epheſus until Pencecont 8: judgment 
in:0al Dnty, a $23:5ihe with which God is wel p/ea/ed ; our Faith « Fe $ ers, S 


- «- - . 
The Apoſtiz, IM lever! Epiſtles, Was Cos 


maſt work by this Love. 
\ ſollicirous aboutthis : he menticaneth it Rem, 15. 25, 


Fin, 


Gal. 2. 


ſhall have no time to ſtay iong with you , 


well as in this Epiſtle. Beſides, that our Saviour he Moe. t 
53 For this corruptible muſt pur on incorruption, he the ſtare of wor _—_— ee be _ that they thoy'd by. 
* Al PICS ./ = - 1l "7. /L m - _ i! 7 tne poor always wit 1t Im. 7,4 #3, C25 I 28 ; h1g Prophetic 
3+4+* and this mortal z7#/7 Put on IMMCT.ALV 2. of a Famine, which ( tome think ) rage at this em , = i þ "So | 
. IM : the perſecution ar Jeruſalem had ſcattered the Brethren 1c, 
/ a leorews [3 : nr 0 rr ! : a y - D k 6 n dotou] an 
. þ God hath ud 6 "= [ ; g ke LEES ay - © deg _ being our of their Country and imployments, they cou,d nor wh 
Þ a4 an gfeÞ x wy opt "© 1. ae + +: ongoing my be ar a lofs for a livelihood, and ſo need the charitable copy, 1 
iy = oth 4 ; 6% - 29s t 9 ET k _ hate ps of other Churches under better circumſtances, as they ny ra t 
+ 4 aol wan "444 p61" 4; Re $i aobard: go of Fm wt of | 5imein Greece, The Churches of Galatia and AMacozy,; x, jt Iva F 
— ag wa, | ciIvre It CINn enter into the 13g : very liberal this way ; and the Apoſtle, by their Exainpl. at. 
425 ; the Churches both at Rome and Corinth, Rom. (5, 46, « c,, NY 
| . 6 As tothishe had (as he ſaith) given orders ro rhe Chun}, js oo FT, n 
54 Sn when this corTUPtibie ſhall have put 07 it- | :2a, which, it iSthought, he didin his journey thinugh Gala;ip _ py 
corruption, and this mortal ſhall have puc on im- ; FRO and he ordereth the Church at Corint/ to foliow thy; (4, py 
mortality, then thall be brought ro paſs the fay- i hich followeth. cc 
ing that is written, Death is ſwallowed up in Vi- | : fl 
ys & ; P | 2 * Upon the firſt day of the week c, It es, ..; of 
: - » Ph wi Av C 
L 'one of you lay by him in ſtore, as G4 h th IQ- oy F 
- . os $ . . 4 SOR V- 0.1 1 
& That is, in 2ncternal and continuing Vitory ; the Sazars ſhall 'ſpered him, that there be no gatherings when ] wi 
die no more. The quotation which the Apoſtle bringeth, 15 out of | come 4d. by 
thoſe rwo Texts, 2/2. 25.8. Ho. 13. 14. which two Texts the Apo- Jo: 
le faith. at that day w;Jl have a more fujil, perfeQ, and eminent c From hence both divers of the Ancients, and very _ -h1 
accompliſhment, than ever they beiore had. late Divines, argue for the change of the Sabbath from rhe {.y.. ./ A 
f Cas day of the week to the firſt. It 15 plain irom hence, thar the (4, Ap 
* Hoſ. 13 56 O death where z: thy {ting / : Ollgrave, where ſpel-Churches were wont to affemble upon that day, ( nor dy tha 
L” & Sie Hitars 2 we read in Scripture of any Aſſembly of Chriſtians tor religious oth! 
i Or, O He! 7 7 Worſhip on any other day.) On this day the Apoſtle order; (y, Ar 
| The Apoſtle, in the contemplation of this bleſſed day,triumph- lections for the poor Saints to be made, accordingly as God hid the 
eth over D-vrh ; in a Metaphorical Phraſe, Where z thy fig 2 What proſpered any in their imployments ; he direQerh thar they ſhould 
hoe canſt thou now do unto Believers, more than a Walp, or | every one lay by him ſomething, not doing what he did wi | 
Hornet, or Bce, that bath loſt its ſting 2 2 O Grave, or O He!! (the | 30Y oſtentation , but having It ready when It thould be called for: I. you 
ſme word ſignifieth both) where now is thy Viftory ? The Conque- this he calls a Treaſuring, (foir is in the Greek) monies 1; Lo! 
rour of all fleſh is now conquered, the $por'er of all men is tpoilzd ; | by for charitable uſcs are Treaſures , both with reſpeCt to thoſs 
it had got a Victory, but now, O Death, waere 1s thy Vittory * for whom they are laid up, and alfo for our ſelves; for he thy 
) giveth to the poor, Jayeth up tor himſelf Treatures in Heaven, B bs 
, . : « d He would have no gatherings when he came; either to avoidths ” 
* Rom. 5 Fo The ſting of death 7s fin , andthe * ftrengrh of | ſcandal of his being chargeable ro them, or that he would hay: 1g why 
13. &7.5. {in ;« the Law o. delay ; bur when he came, it might be in a readinefs co be prefer; T 
13. | Iy {ent away. | C - 
» If it were not for fin, death cou!.\ have no power ever man ; = 
ii IS that aho1 _ do a by power = + pes —_ m—_— 3 And * when I come, whomſoever you ſhall aþs * : on 
ihe wares of fin is deat Rom.6. 23. o And withour the Law there Fn i i : l 
er 2 _ oh | ro 0487 rs, them will I fend 1016, 1 ſ 
cold be no tranigreſfion. [he Law is to far from taking away the Pong Fu letter \, _ ” bring my ſter 
cuilt of fin, that through the corruption of our Natures, ſtrongly | ! Ul erality to Jeruſalem e. V4 { am. 
aclining us to what is forbidden, it addeth ſtrength to fin; Six ( as EE. PE 
the Apoſtle ſaith, Rom. 7. 8.) taking occaſion by the commandment, and | * The word here tranſlated Liberality, 1s the fame which lignifith I 
working in 4 all manner of concupiſcence, Grace ; their Charity is called by that Name, either becauſc ic lowed him | 
from their Fee Love towards their poor Brethren, (though liring at {loo 
*; 10h... $7 But thanks be to God, which giveth us * the vi. | 2 8r*at diſtance from them ; ) or becauſe their fenle of th ine 
wall obs > Kr h our Lord Jeſus Chriſt Love and Grace of God to them, was that which movedthzm 2 »E 
OrY, CArougHh our P- that charitable aCt, 2 Cor. 8. 9. upon 
2 Victory over $1 7 both through th the rel 
» The Viftory over Sin andover Death, we have gh the _ BO” h 
Death 2nd the Refurre&ion of our Lord Jeſus Chriſt; who by his 4 And if it be meet that I goalſo, they ſhall gowith have 
Death both delivered us trom the guilt of ſin, and alſo from the | ME 5 ipel 36 
power offin; and who through death deſtroyed him who had the _ : | 
power of deaih, even the Devil. f To incourage them to the freer and more liberal Conrribwion, Mea 
he prot f.-h -hein himſelf to go along with thote that carried ic, (if 
F i , J oa 4 t1 it 1 I2 
58 Therefore, my beloved brethren, be ye ſtedfaſt, iv rut meet ) Jeſire 
unmoveable, always abounding in the work of the ' w'1 will come unto you when * | {hall paſs *A but h 
oT or as much as ye know chat your I; 1s BG . . wy 
Lord q, fo a ak hat your labour is not , Macedonia : For 1 do paſs through Mace: ?' bur h 
in vain inthe Lord 7. dn; 
7 The Apoille concludeth his Diſcourſe, proving the R rf , 1 a Op 
on of the Body from the dead, founding upon it an «x. M's OT 29d = _ | noma —_ 1. 16 *e - 
Holineſs; which is here called :he work of the Lord bu 47 6-1, 7 10:96 ate ary Pr le Br, ER 
- — nk, that. he ſpeaketh there of another jour- them ; 
made up of works done by us at the command of Chril!. a., a oe: Tas be did os ae 
a dire&treſpc&t to his Glory in obedience to his Will. He wind. CO IT + i La; 
WT TIY '2canſe we read, 47s 19, that he went into 27, 28, 
them not only to do theſe things, but to do them fedf2i1y ; nor by | LEY ada | 
. . | SF "+6 _ ...-*#1e a conſiderable time; during which, minated 
fits, but never turning alide from them either one way or 2nother ; | 5 ' did > ww wiſe the Cnc & orfiwad 
and wmo able, fo as no temprations either from dangers, or re- | * = vn aches | Rd 
wards, or tale Te:chers, thould thake their Paith, as to the prin- ; 77%”: ws © 
ciples, that lad unto [nach an holy lite ; this eſpecially ofthe Refur- ; : ia ba 
reGion from the dead, r &ecan!e rhey knew, that through the 6 Ana ay be that I will abide, yea, and Winter Pa ys 
Grace of God, and the Merits of Cuarift, tuch works as theie thou!d | with you, !:4 vou may bring me on my journey whi- hears. J 
not wait their reward; tor though the work of God be WISS TO ! therſoever | oc FL | 
I. ſelf, and Chr tins ſhould no! {erve God meert; for Wages, yet oeve S FI 13 y 
tis lawful tor them Vas tor Moſes) to have an eve to the Recom- : , : £ > it 
encz of Peward ; ant a greater reward than this of rhe Reſtwrreftz- ! 2 He did ſtay a Macedonia three mouths, ny _—_ Wen : | 
COT TEERECSCCTET 1 har fin a flare err 5 believed ſome thinys hindered him , that he did not ' - : 
wb + Uhaelacty jon _—_ (hirpal © tnorable fore Ws _ | at Corinzch. Tr was the cuſtom for ſome Members of the ag * War, 
'h LE ; | E ONE { Churches, to accompany the Apoſtles ſome part of _ _ I&p ; a 
; when they went from them to any other places, i 7G : notion Ne 
"IJ 7% ' 17. 15, & 20. 38. in token of their kindneſs and eIpet © on 
MAP Svy BEAT. 3 2 diligen 
4 n 4 * od. > » TEM. T4 tem , 
;-- EE ; | hel Holineſs, 
L OX HE) from Wake 3 Cot2c71v77 Zor * ge pour Bret rea at Je- 7 For } will not ſve you now by the way, dy in t 
".(alews, by fre Erampiy of the Chrrches of Galatia, how it might truſt to carry a while with you, * if che Lord per- *4 Doftrine 
be dence, and by whom be ſent, 1 -Q, Commendeth to them Ti-| - . . ; al the Wyo 
rm8thy, 1C>——12. 2 gineral Exhnriation to ſtedfaltneſs in Faith MIL 7. Ci elves like 


chen I |: 


throw do 
ide bece 


into Macenina, 10t 


i T will not fee you in my paſſage ] 
and j nope 19 9911 


A 
file A ſt 

. 1 di! I 
Ru? - Fl 7 
* gp 


\\ 


A 
Þ! 


{ you without fear »: for * he worketh the work of the 


Cc 


r2 


' them, whom he there calleth his beloved Son , 


WVI 
i , 
; {12 atcered this refoſution afrerward ; for, AF: 20. 16. he 
1efled , of 17 were poſſivle, to ger 79 Forulalem by Pentecor. Pen- 
oft was a Jewilh Feaſt, and not named here as a Feaſt then 
-lebrared by Chriſtians, but as a known period of time ; for 
: Jews computing time from their Feſtivals, Chriſtians who 
j zmonglt them , and hal fome of them beea converced 
. their Religion, computed allo their crime from the Jewiſh 


I, 
7;10 
1ivec 
d1(2) 
OE - 
14 S459 


þ 
& * 


2 * For a great door and eftecual is openet to me /, 


and there are many adverſaries »z. 


; For God hath opened to me at Ephe/w a great opportunity 
:0 preach the Goſpel, which I have reaton to hope will allo be 
+F-&ual for the Converſion of many Souls. Whart this door 


I CORINTH amt 


(ha 


me #4, C A -Y —_ © Ks a 
Z=-t:in9g ani SEC C340 { 
—_ 


| cherefore again recommends to them 
this habir. 


15 I befeech you, brethren, ys know the how 
f 


; x 
' of Stephanas, that ic is * che firſt-truits of Achaia | 
and rchac they have adit themiclves to the ni 


ſtery of the Saints & ; 


» Ofthis Stephanas we read b=fore Clan, r. 16 is 
was one of thoſe few bamilics which Zu! baptized * tin 
led the Firſt frairs of Achaia, becauſe (1, it ſhould feem ) hi was Age 1 
of the firſt of a!l choſe who in; th: Country received the Goſoe). 
z He further faich of him, That he hi giyen up himtclf ro ct - 
Miniſtery of the Saints, either in preaching the Gotpe] 
1s more probablz) in the proper impluymunt ofa Deacon, in reheving 


Fe ; 
Ll JT; + 


of hope was, whether God had Jet him know there were many 
$onls in that place prepared for receiving the Goſpel ; or that 
{me eminent perſons for Authority or Learning, whom many 
were like to follow, were there already converted ; or that he 
Jcoked upon that famous City as like to be a place where many 
miohr be converted, 1s not rold us. » And ( faith the Apoſtle) 
-hcre are many Alverſaries, ( as it will appear to thoſe that read 
43s 19. &: 20. ) therefore there was need of the preſence of the 
Apoſtle himſelf, whoſe Authority might becter ſtop their mouths, 
than the more inferior Paſtors could. What would have affrighted 
others from going or ſtaying there, this great Apoſtle mentions asan 
Argument to cauſe him to make haſte ro go thither, and to tarry 
there for ſome rime. 


10 Now if Timotheus come, ſee that he may be with 


/ 


Lord, as 1 alſo do c. 


1 He had told them, Chap. 4. 17. That he had ſent T:m0rhy unto 
and faithful in the 
Lord. Here he beſpeaketh his welcome and lecurity. it 15 pro- 
hable he had it in Commiſſion from . Paul to vilie divers other 
Churches in his journey to them ; and therefore he fpeakerh ofhis 
coming as uncertain, but chargeth them , that if he did come, they 
would take care of him, thar he might not be expoſed to danger 
0: trouble from any Party amongſt them. o For (faith he) he is a Mini- 
ter of the Goſpel, and ingaged in the ſame work of the Lord that 


{ am. 


11 Let no man therefore deſpiſe himp : but conduct 
him forth in peace, that he may come unto me q ;3 for 
1look for him with the brethren 7. 


» Either, becauſe he 1s a very young man, 1 7i7.4. 12,13- or 
upon any other account. 9 But when he cometh away, ſhew him 
the reſpe& you uſe to ſhew me, condutt him in his way. » For l 
have need of his help here, in carrying on the buſineſs of the Go- 
ſpel ; and therefore 1 w:th the Brethren here expeXt him ; orl expect 
him with the re{t ot rhe Brethren. who are in like manner imployed 
abroad in carrying about the Goſpel. 


12 As touching cr brother Apollos, I greatly 
defired him to come unto you with the brethren, 
but his will was not at all to come at this time: 
but he will. come when he ſhall have a convenient 


time 5. 


s Apolos ( as may be ſeen 47s 18. 27.) was known to them, and 
had been a Preacher amongſt them, and was grateful to many of 
them ; he was an eloquent man; mighty in the Scriptures, inſurufFed 
in the way of the Lord, and ferwent in the Spirit, As 18. 24, 25, 26, 
27, 23, He was one oft hoſe from whom ſome of this Church deno- 
minated themſelves, Chap. 3. 4- For thele reafons Paul would have 
perfwaded him to go and viſit this Church ( which fome think | 
that he had left, becauſe of thoſe contentions and diviſions, which 
were amongſt them ) but he had no mind ro go at that time ; 
though it is ſaid, that he afterwards did return again to them, when 
m_ by his Epiſtle, had quieted thole diviſions, and allayed their 

eats, 


13 Watch ye, ſtand faſt in the faith s, quit you like 
Wen: be ſtrong w. 


: Watching, in its uſual acception, ſignifieth a forbearing of 
fizep; and that in order to ſome End. Sin is fer out under the 
notion of $leep, Eph. 5. 14. ſo that ſpiritual watching tignifies 
2 diligent abſtaining from ſin, and from whatſoever may be to 
wa temptation to ſin againſt God, in order to the perteQing of 
Holineſs, and the obtaining life and immortality. » Be flea- 
dy in the profeſſion of the Truth , and holding cloſe to the 
£29 rine of Faith. w You are as Souldiers fighting againſt 
ne World, the Fleſh, and the Devil; do not behave your 
elves like children, whom the leaſt oppoſition wiil terrifie and 
tnrow down; but like men, with a ſpiritual courage and forti- 
inde becoming ſuch who have fo good a Captain, and ſo good a 
21ie; 


as Chai ity { as hath been before difcourſzd ) is a term comprehen= | 
NY both ot Love ro Goa, and fo ow N:izhbour ; the failure of 
25 IN their diviſions and contentions «39 ſatisfying their own 
Jicgments and humors, without regir* to 11s Conſciences of 0- 


urs, and having no regard ro rhe Prot Of © Hers, 1s that which 


14 Let all your things be done with charity -. 


UT {which 
luch amonglt the Saints { whether of that, ur other Cirirches ) tha; 
Were 3n Walt, 


16 * That ye ſubmir your felves 
to every one that helperh with ws, 


eth 2. 
a He adviſcth'rhem to reverence kim, and ali ſuch as were ho1927; 


and labourers of that nature, and wiought with the Apcokizs ir the 
work of the Goſpel. 


17 I amglad ofthe coming of Stephanas, Foriunius, 
and Achaicus : for that which was lacking on you 


part, they have ſupplied. 


18 For they have refreſhed my ſpirit and 


Yours: 
fore * acknowledge ye rliem that are ſuch 5. 


Parl ar this time (as moſt think) at Fpbi[is, to acquaint him with the 
ſtate of their Churches ; the men ſup2licd the want'of that whole 
Churches coming, or they mac: a report to the "Anoſt'e of th- 
Corinthians more tully than they had done in their Letters. He adds, 
that they had refreſbed his Spirit, nor with bringing him any money. 
( for the Apoſtle hath cold us, Chap. 9. 15. that he gloricd in 
this, That he had preached the Goſpe] to them ficely, wihourt be- 
ing any charge to them ) but by cheic vitic, and tlis Conference 
that he had had with them abour the ſtare of that Church. The Apo- 
fe addeth, Thatthey had refiethed their Spirics alfo ; intimaring, 
that their joy was his, and thar what was a refrething to 141m, 
ought allo to be fo to them : he therefore recommenderh theſe 
men, and ſuch as they vere, © be reverenced and retpetted by 
this Churcli, 


19 The churches of Afia ſalute you c : Aquila and 
Priſcilla ſalutes you much in che Lord 4, with the church 
chat is in their houſe ec. 


c He meaneth the Yefler 4fz, in vihich was Epliſus ? from 
whence it 15 more probable, (according to the 4rabict and Syriack 
Opinion) that this Epiſtle was written, chan from Phili>pt, /ac 
cording to the Copy followed by our Tranſlators) And that 
which further adds to that probability, is, That 4 the Apa- 
ſtle mentioneth the Salutations of Aquils ani Priſci/a, as per. 
ſons that were art that time with him; now that they lived ar 
Epheſus, or at leaſt went thither with Paul, and tarried there , 
appeareth from A#s 13. 19. Their ſaluting the Church of Corinch 
in the Lord, ſignifies their wiſhing them all ſpirituzT blefſings 
in, and from Chriſt. e But what is meant by the Church 71 
their houſe, which joyned with Par in this Salutation, is nor fo 
plain: we read the like Co!. 4..15. of the Church in Nymphas 
his houſe ; and in P:3:{emen's houſe, wv. 2. and the ſame again 
of this of Aqz:/a and Priſcils, Rom. 16. 5. Some think that it 
fgnifieth no more, than that their whole Families had received 
the Chriſtian Faith. Others think, that divers other Chriſtians 
ſojourned with them ; others, that the Church was wont to 
meet in fome room in tkeir houſe : bur the Jaſt is not probable, 
either that in thofe times the Church kepr their Meetings in any one 
Nated place, or thar Chriſtians then had ſuch ſpacious houſes 
as could afford a room large eavugh for the whole Church to meer 
1. 


20 All the brethren greet you : Greet you one ano- 
ther with an holy kits f. 


f This proveth no more, than that, 25 ir is ire naſe with us, to 
falute one another with a kils when we meet, to it was in ule 
in thole Times and Countries co do the like, in tokzn of Love 
and Friendſhip. Ir is called the Kits of Love, 1 Per.'s. 1g. T' 
Apoſtle requireth , that in theſe Saturation; they ſhould have 
chaſt and holy thoughrs. This feemerh to be al! meant by the 
Holy Kiſs, mentioned Koz. 16. 16. 2 Cor, 13. 82. 1 Thef 5.26. and 
here. 


F 51..- 
4 IQ 


hand 2. 


Fp* O ” 4 - | | » T Sar ICT TT. = Wa , ji > 
g Thee words are judged to figniize ro U5, that raough the 
my _ . 1 - \ hy . "Þ NR _ . Ro g X Fn pe - 4 - veg o@ 
forme: px:t of the Epittle was writcen our of Paul's Copy by tom? 
3 I 1 = - ? . | Th we « - ez. 
others ; yet the three lf wories wore wrote by bim with his own. 


hand. 


ha { ad} . . = . © 
"Mr Apoſtle, in this Epiltle, had cnc: an again Llamed in the 


"Rr, ct this Church 53 in the conclulion of his Fpiftle, he 


. [4 - 
ivSHCC Ca - 


21 * The falutation of ms Paul with my own , 


6 Tr ſhould ſeem that this Church had ſent theſe three Perſons +1 © 


D. A. \ 1. 


LCORINTHEESS Cha, viſt! 


23 * The grace of our Lord Jeſus Chriſt }, 6s 


= 
2 Itany man love not the Lord Jeſus Chriſt 5, let 
him 6e Anathema, Maran-atha 7. you k. 
Love is an affeQtion of the heart, but diſcernible by overt] , , _ " hs _ —_— ___ 5 you With al! ſy 
as ; the meaning is, If any man, by any notorious ats, de- ual Bleſſings ; thus is the APonttes Or inary Salutation, Row, 15, ., 
clareth that he loveth notthe Lord Jeſus, whether he be an Hypocrite 24 My love be with you all in Chrif 1: 
|, bur living in a contempt of, and diſ-} Amen 7. nn My /\ 


owning the Name of Chri 
ob<dience to his Commandments, Or an Apoſtate, who ſheweth his 
f danger and 1 As 1 love you, ſo 1 deſire to be again beloved of you in (!;-;0 


want of love to Chriſt, by denying him in an hour of da 
perſecution ; Or an Open Enemy and Perlecutor of Chriſt and his ſincerely. Or I love you 211 in Chriſt, and for Chiits ſake | 
Golpe]. # Let him be —oveT iet him be looked pon aSa —_ wiſh that my Love may abide in, and with you. ras 
} b | . / ving . : 
ble and abominable perion Some tell us, That oh inſt GS « The firſt Epiſtle ro the Corinthians was Written 
from Philippi by Stephanas, and Fortunatus, :n4 
z Sl 


three Excommunications, this word ſignifieth the 
by which the perſon was given up £0 che Judgment and vengeance ; 
Achaicus, and Timotheus. 
rure; and (as was ſaid bef4;s);. 


of God : Burt others ſay, there ic no ſuch rerm to be found among} 
them, and that the term Maran-atha ſignifies 10 MOre than , The 
Theſe words are no part of Scrip 
able,chat this Epiſtle was wrote from Ep5e(4 thy 
gh it might be ſent by theſe, or Coins of her. 


Y 
[] 


Lord is come. Let the Jews and other vain perſons ſay what they| 
will, the Lord is come ; and f any love him not, 1et him be looked | is much more prob 
from Phil:;ppi, thou 


vn as a deteſtable perton. 
4 men named. 


C7 
cedonI 
uproar 
Epiſtle 
promiſe 
ty bs 
for , 
gv01As. 
repent 
a he e. 
C077 "li, 
EN 7 exl.r 
thur ! 
wenr 
him: [ 
fuch, 
Eyiſtl 
though 
| gener 
| Partly 
] fnd Ci 
Exho 


Tit uſ 


£10; 


the Þ 

——o—_ BD ———_—_—__ ro ——_—_—_— 6 _— Doo REIT I = © —_— Ms 

ws wet Gr—_ _—_ —— po ——_— . w mans VR 
| of ( 

Lod 

Ort] 


weir 
but 
fait 


ot ( 


Pap. L 
y hap 


 ANNOT 


O N 


A TFO-N 


THE 


Second Epiſtle to the Cozinthians. 


The ARG 


— —— 


UMEN TT. 


Oncerning the Sacred Penman as well of this, as the former Epiſtle, and the Church to whom this, as well as that 


Epiſtle ws ſent, enough hath been ſaid before. 
c«donia. (probably at Philippi, which was the firſt City of 
wproar that i>cmetiius had made at Epheſus, of which we 


It uu plain, that the Apoſtle, when he wrote it, was in Ma- 


Macedonia, Atts 16. 12. whither Paul went, after the 
read Aﬀts 20.) The Occalion of his writing this ſecond 


Epiſtle, ſeemerh to be, partly the falſe Teachers aſperſing him 3 1. As an inconſtant man, becauſe he had - 


promiſed to come 1 perſonto Corinth, and was zot yet come 


i)» bit the tron: 


» the reaſon of which he ſheweth Chap. 1, was not Levi- 


bles he met with in Aſia, and hts deſire to hear they had firſt reformed the abuſes he had taxed them 
2 As an imperious man, becauſe of the inceftous perſon againſt whom he had wrote z which Charge he 


avoids, by ſhewing the neceſſity of bu writing in that manner, and giving new Orders for the reſtoring him, upon the 


repent ance be had ſhewed. 
a he expreſſeth it. 


3. As a proud ard vain-glorious man. 
The further Occaſions of his wruing were, To commend them for their kind reception of, and 


4. As acontempt.ble perſon baſe in his perſon, 


con vliance with the Precepts and Admonitions of his former Fpiſtle, and their kind x:ception of Titus: As alſo to 
exl,urt. them fo a liberal Contribution eo the neceſſities of the Saints in Judea, 10 which they had ſhewed 
ther torwardneſs a year before and his hearing that there was yet a Party amongſt them bad enough, that 


went 9N In vilitying him aud his Authority, as well 


as 11 Other ſinful courſes, againit whom he wvindicaterth 


bimſelf, 1 -gnifying hu Office, aſſuring them he was about to come to Corinth; mher they (hould find him preſent 


frch, as being abſent he had by bis Letters declared himſelf, 


if they were not reformed. The ſubſtance therefere of this 


Epiſtle 15 partly Apologetical or Excuſatory, where he excuſeth hynſelf for his not coming to Corinth ſo ſon s he 
thucht, and for his ſo ſevere writing as to the inceſtows perſmm : Partly Hortatory, where he perſwadeth them mure 
generally to walk worthy of the Goſpel, more ſpecially, Chap. 8.9, to a liberal Contribution to the Saints. 
| Partly Minatory or Threatniug, where he threatneth Severity againſt thoſe whom, when he came amoneft them, he ſhould 
fnd contumacious and impenuent Offenders, He concludes the Epiſtle ( as uſually) with a Szlutation of them, pious 


Exhortations to them, and a Prayer for them. 


” 
4 * 


CHAP, 
The uſual Superſcription, 1, — 3. The Apoſtle encourages them againſt 
tro:bles, by the © omfo' ts and deliverances God had given him, asin all 


his Aﬀiitions, ſo par ticularly in his | .te danger in Aſia, through ther | 


P: ayers, 4 11. His boaſting towwds them, 12, - 14. Aid ſin- 
cer? intentions to come to th:m: Our obligations to Truth in our Words, 
I;.—-—20. Ard if he delayed his coning it was that he might ſpare 
WF 12, — 24 


Aul an apoſtle of Jeſus Chriſt by the will of 
God a, and Timothy oexr brother, unto the 
church of God, which is at Corinth, with all 
the Saints which are tn all Achata b. 

a The Will of God here doth nor fignifie the bare permiſſion, 
but the Calling and P:ecepr of God he was called ro be an A- 
poſtle, Rom. r 1. 1 Epilt. 1. 1, ) making him a Miniſter and a 
Witneſs, As 26 16. b His joyning of Timothy with him... ſhew- 
eh both the great humiitty ot the Apoſtle, and his defire ro 
give him a repur.tion in the Churches, though he was a very 
young Man. The Epiltle 1+ not direed only ro the Church of 
God, which was at Corinth the Mitropol's of Pelopo: neſus ) but 
allo to all thoſe Chriſtians which lived in Achaia : by which 
name probably he doch nor underſtand all Grecis, (though char 
anclently had that name from one Achens thar was King there, 
from whom the Grecians had the name of Acivi) bur char Re- 


gon of P:{oporneſus, which lay in a neck of Land berween the | 


Fein and Tonizn Sea, which obtaincd that name in a more 
Ipectal and reſtrained ſenſe. 
2 * Grace be to ycu and peace from God our Fa- 


ther, and from the Lord Jeſas Chritt, c. 
© This was the Apoſtles common Salucation, Rom. 1. 79. See 
te Notes on the former Epiſtle, Chap. 1. 3- where it is obſerva- 
1, Thar nor the Father only, bur the Lord Jeſus Chriſt, is in- 
"Gxed, and made the Author of Grace (which is the free Love 
N Cod) and of Peace, which fignifiech either reconciliation with 
VI upon the free pardon of cur fin, or union with men, and 
uCherly love amongſt themſelves. The Heachens uſed to begin 
wKIr Epiſtles with wiſhing one another health and proſperity: 
"ur the Apoſtle hath ſhewn us a more Chriſtian way, and more 
td to the Faith of Chriſtians, who believe the love and Favour 
Ul God, the preatcſt and moſt deſirable bleſlings. 
L 3 * Biuicd be God, even the Father of our Lord 
L Jeſus Ctriſt, the Father of mercies, and the God of 
* a] comforts d, 
1 It,is ari uſual Form of Thankſgiving, Rom. t. 24. &9. 5. 
8 Mm uſe with a;, fig:itying our fincere and hearty defire thac 
= we our telves might be inavled, and others by our Exam: 
PI'S, mighr he quickened ro ſpeik wel of God, and to priſe 
5 Blame, This God ts called the Fat'? of 047 Lord Felus Chrilt; 
Yol, Il, | | 


| , 


It 


+» 
a 


77 
Ti.'-P 
44k> 


that 15, by Eterzal Genezyation; He is alſo called the Fat'er of 
' Mercies, becauſe he is the Fountain of all thir good wiiich tlow- 
eth to poor Creatures, And upon the ſame accounc he 1s alio called 
the God of all Comforts, 

4 Who comtorteth us in all our tribulation e, that 
we may be able to comiort them which are in any 
trouble, by the comfort wherewith we our ſelves are 


comforted of God f. 

e Us, who are the Miniſters of the Goſpel, (as ir may ap- 
pear by what falloweth) tor the Apoſtle fairh, That God dorh 
Ir, that Miniſters mighr, from che Comforts vherew'th God hid 
comforted them, te able ro comfort his people when they are 
under any trouble, either of body or mind, by the fime Me- 
thods and Arguments, which che holy Spirtrc had wed and 
brought to their minds under trouble to relieve any «ft them, 
Two things are obſervable from this verſe: 1. Thar the Apo= 
ſtle artribureth all the ſupport, relief, aud com'orr, which he 
had under ary tribulation, to God, as the Fourtain and Author 
of all Mercy 3 for though poſſibly our comfor:s may be cauſed 
from the application of iome promiſes in ko!y Wrir, cirher c1l- 
led ro our minds by the a& of our own minds, or brought to 
our remembrance by ſome dthers, yer it 15 God who mutt make 
thoſe Plaiſters to ſtick, and to become healing and fſanacive to 
our Souls : So that he is che principal cthcienc Cauſe, though 
rhe Scriptures, or men, may be inftrumental Cauſes, 2. Thar 
the Gitcs, Graces, and Mercies that God beftowerh upon his Mt- 
; Niſters, are beſtowed upon them, nor meerly for their own ule, 
' bur for che uſe and goo. of othes; to Inavle rhiem to be (er- 
viceable in doing good co others Souls, 


2, ſo our conſolation alſo abonndeth by Chritt b, 

g He calleth his, and the other Apoftles ſufferings, the ©:fey- 
ings of Chriſt , either becauſe they were iufferings for Chriſt, 
thac is, for doing the work which Chriit had given them ro do : 
Or his and their perſon] ſufferings as Members of that B:dy, 
of which Chriſt is the Head, Chritt callech S2/s periecuring 
the Sair.ts, a perfecuting of himſelf, As 9.4 Thus we read 
of Pals filling up that which 75 behind of the Suffirings of Chriſt, 
Col. 1. 24+ þ Bur, faith che Apoſtle, blefſ.d vs Goa, as we have 
many. ſufterings for Chriſt, ſo alio we have many contoelactons 
by Chriſt. Chriſt, as God, 15 the efficienc Caute .of the Saints 
conſolation 3 as Mediator, dying tor us, he 1s the mericorious 
Cauſe; ani ic is by his Spirit (who is cal ed the Contorter } 
thar they are applied tO vs. : 

6 And wticther we be afflicted, ze s for your con- 


Et Eeeec } s Our 


ſolation and ſalvation s, which is || etfectual in the en- ! 
during of the fame ſuſferings which we alfo ſuffer 
k.; or whether we be camtorted, tz i for your conlo- 
lation and f2lyation ld. 


5 For * as the ſutterings of Chrilt abound in us * Chap, 
4+ 10s 


* Chap. As 


1 


Chap: I. IL CORINTHIANS. on 


; Our ſufferings tend to y0w Conſolation and Salvation, your God depends not upon their order, ſtation, and repute in 
Souls being upheld and ſupporred by the fight of our boldneſs, | World. w By the Gift here, he means che deliverance | he 
| and courage, and confidence 1n our ſufferings: Thus Phil. I. 13, mencioned ; which he calls a Gift, ro denote, nor on] jog: 
{l. j 14. My Bonds in Chriſt are manifeſt in all the palace, and in all principal Efficiency in ir, bur his free beſtowing of itz thi Gods 
#1110 other places. And many of the brethrer wn the Lord waxing confident by | ( he faith ) 15 beſtowed by the means of many, becauſe _- Gift 
"1 R0PR my bonas, are rrach more bold to ſpeak the word without ſear. And | upon the Interceſlion or Prayers of many. God dorh = ined 
HR TENN his ſufferings alſo were tor their Salvation as rhey encouraged | beſtow mercies upon particular perſons at the intercefiion of _ 
| chem to ſuffer alſo 3 and, ſj we ſ«ffer with bim, we ſhall reign with | others on their behalf, that he may nor only have the raiſe 
him, and 0:r light and momentany affiiftions ſhall work for 115 a far more thoſe perſons upon whom he lo beſtowetrh the mercy, by; fo ba Or, 97 
exceeding and eternal weight of glory. & And (fairh the Apoſtle) who have been ſo praying. The Apoſtle hereby hinter, = Es kites 
| 06k, | our ſufferirg hith had a good effe&t amongſt you, while you, with | That we ought no more to forget to give thanks jor ot! ,-Y 
\ÞÞ * WNT Faith and Patience, endure ſufferings of the ſame ſort which we for whom God hath heard us, than to pray for them —_ 
Pu TH endure and ſuffer. ! And if we be ſupported, upheld, and com- diſtreſs, <8 n 
* 0.12 ARA ove under our ſufferings, the urn > of _ en. 1 3 For our rejoycing 1s this, the teſtimony of _ 
Will! BY 1 eth ro you, as you are incouraged to lIuitcr or a conſcience at in ſmnlici 
WER 1 its r_ of Chriſt, from ſceing how God ſupporteth us under a he fſbly —_— _ mY = 
8M 1; our ſufterings, ; "———_ 0 
1 3 01 00h 7 And our hope of you i ſtedfaſt m, knowing that as God, we have had our converſation in the wor! z, 
LN i | you are partakers of the ſufferings, ſo ſhall ye be alſo | 20d _— Ly nam 4. | 
[# oh THO of the contolarion ». ae not their Pra Some = oY —_ wy ;X ſau 
ff W m We have a ſtedfaſt hope of you, that as you have endured joy and aviefation? * <P; anne Frank Gs , 'M, co his { 
\ NAUK fufterings tor Chriſt and his Goipel, {0 you will ſti] endure them, | .*;- 1.6 1.4 carried himſelf deceirfully or craftily og ! 
\ wot as we have done. » And, we know, that as you are partakers of | 1.1. © bit had lived in the World in all { >, Jt he had n 
"my affer nos of :7 and his Gcſpel, ſo you ſhall alſo ſhare in | ,; ys 6 3 TIE 00 PORN hl Ges 
wt the Suffer 'ngs oi Chriſt aud his Gelpel, 'o 5 | rity of God, ( io the Greek is.) Simplicity is oppoſed to 44, . 
AY thoſe Divine conſolations that thole fee] who endure ſuch ſuf- | - fs, where there is a compoſition in a man, Fs I 
fering<, Lc rruth and faiſhood, fairneſs in ſpeech and falſhood in heart = h 
S For we would not, brethren, have you ignorant | gg, sjzc-jity is cppoſed ro Hypocriſie. It is faid to be of Gil - 
* x Cor, of * our trouble which came to us 1N _ gy + mn becauſe ws y the m_ o —_, _ — it, aPprover, , 
te. 22, , : ut of meaſure, above ſtrength, inſo- | 1t, worxeth 1t, and dilpoſerh rhe Nearr of Man to jt, » This; 
4 wie _ q * Aired even of life p. 5 oppoſed to f/ſhly Wiſdom, which prompterth a Man ro (eck Ni is P 
mucn roar we aczpe A bes | <24s any way, good or bad, x Bur (faith the Apoſtle) we jy al 
0 We are at a great loſs ro determine what theſe trouvles [41 i Verfacion in the World, not by the puidance S, c 
were in 4/2, of which the Apoſtle deth here ſpeak. We read | 4 corrupt Habit or Principle, -h by the Grace of Gol a) W 
of ſeveral troubles Pay! mer with in Afia ; 1© was there he was love and fear of God dwelling in us 3 or, we have done i", the 
in danzer through the tumult raiſed by Demetrius, A8s 19. 23. | « our ſelyes, but by the guidance and aſſiſtance of Divine So an 
Ic was there ( at Epheſs ) where be ſought with beaſts aſter the | helping us ſo to live, and to have our converſation in the Wor ” 
manner of Men (2s he tc1d us in the tormer Epiſtle.) Whoſo read- | 4 a eſpecially you arc our Wirneſſes. of this _— ſa 
eth Chap, 19 & 20. of the Afs, will find the Jargeſt account we; vreached the Goſpel freely, ſo as we —_—_ Y ſel 
have in Scriprure of the troubles Pal mer with in Afia, Bur | ir co ; MaJe wh 
this Epiſtle is thought ro have bcen written at a time that will | af ined ow” he chi Can 
not agree to the time of thoſe troubles; therefore they are 13 For we write not other things unto YOu, then for 
thought to hrye been ſome troubles of which we have mention whar you read, or acknowledg, and I truſt you ſl ſub, 
no where elſe in holy Writ. p Wharloever they were, this Text | acknowled g even to the end b. 1,1 
rells us they were very great, and above his natural ſtrength to | þ x qg nor tell you ſtories 3 | the things which I wire, a4 15 
have born; ſowe think, above the ſtrength of ordivary Chri- | whjch you read, either in my Epiſties to you, or to other Churcie PM 
ſtians, inſfomuch ihar it rhe Apoſtle had nor found the more | of Chriſt, are what you know, muſt own and acknowledy oe ed) 
chan ordinary afliſtances of the Spirit-of God, he could not | truth ; and I hope you ſhall acknowledg them to be ſoro theend (fat 
have ſtood under them, Z © both of my life and yours. of 
} Or, ax 9 But we had the || ſentence of death in our ſelves | '14 Asalſo you have acknowledged us in part, thats bs +: 
pork q, that we ſhould * not truſt in our ſelves, but in God, | # ye are your rejoicing, even as * ye alſo «: ours 1: the { 
4 Jer. 17. hich raileth the dead ». . [inthe day of the Lord Jeſus c. p. hiter 
Se 7. q We verily thought we ſhould have becn killed, (and ſoit| , xy part, may either refer to perſons, or things ; jar of 1K and | 
is expounded by the laſt words of the former verſe) we deſpair- | you have fo owned and acknowledged us , though others  ! 2 
ed even of Life 7 And this God did to teach us, That we ſhould, | you paye abuſed us. Or you have in part, or at owe tins, on In h 
when we arc in dangers, Took above the creature, and have | ed us, that you had caufe to bleſs God for us, and torejojce ſoy 
no confidence in crcated mcans, but only look up to him, who | that God ever ſent us to preach the Goſpel amongſt you, And "Dow 
raiſeth from the dead. As Abraham offered up Jaac, Heb. 11.17 | as ſome have owned us as their joy, or all of you have at ſometimes Meſs 
18, 19. Accounting that -God was able to raiſe him from the dead. | acknowledged us.as ſuch; ſo you are alſo our rejoycing 3 Ke jj _— 
Abraham had a promiſe to bottom ſuch a Faith upon 3 God had | that God hath made our labour ſucceſsful ro your Souls, a | ſo Ge 
told him, That in J/zac his ſeed ſhould be calied ; So had Pail, | rruſt in the day when the Lord Jeſus ſhall come to judg the World, alway 
God hav.ng revealc 10 bi, —<— _ had a arte _ tor you ſhall be more our rejoycing, and |: 
him to do So have not all Chrifttans, we do nor knayy Our . "A - : + Ro = 
courſes, nor what work God hath in his Ecernal Counlels laid 5 _ in this confidence _ m_— Fn The th BR 
out for us, and therefore cannot be confident of deliverances to you before, that you might have a * lecon 1* NO The Þ 
in this life by the Almighty Power of God , but yet we, under nefit d. : NF Sy 
our greateſt cryals, may iruſt in God, who will certainly raiſe! & Being confident that my preſence with you, would be mat- rb 
us trom the dead 3 (ot which Faith we have an inſtance of ne ter of rejoycing both co you, and allo ro me, I purpoledto come . ] 
Chap. 19. 25, 26, 27.) However for our comfort in our diſtref- | unto you before I went inco Macedonia, viſiting you ſhorly in my . 
ſes we niay ob{crve,” that God, in his great deliverances of his | journey thicher, thac ſo you mighr have a ſecond longer \Iſit n and] 
people, uicth ro ſuffer them firſt 1o Le brought to the greateſt | kindneſs ro you. We find, Ads 16. 9. that Pas received his EY 
extremities; that in the Mount of the Lord ir may be ſeen, and | firſt Call into Macedonia in a Viſion z we read agiin 91 0s pal- | Cned b 
char they may learn to know thar their Salvations are from him; | ſing through Macedonia to go to Feryſalem: The Apollic leemeth t0 = , 
Hen N 


more jrom his Almighty Power, than from the virtue of any | ſpeak here of the latter. : | OY 
means they can uſe, (though yer it be our duty to uſe what I6 And to pats by you into Macedonia, and *t0* 1 Spirit c 


EW Bn = 90m + meron =) —_ 4 | come again out of Macedonia unto you, and of you "i — 
PRs < | 50 : pag 4 T OY —_— b ar hs wy to be brought on my way toward Judea c. OD? s God he 
: CUVEr ; IN WHOM We trull that NE WIL yet CE- | Þ, He had purpoſed to take Corinth in his way unt3 #2/299m%, them ax 
liver ws e. and after he had finiſhed his buſineſs in Macedonia, his reſolutions God aj 

s So great a dtath, in this Text ſignifies no more than ſo | were to have come back to Corinth, and to ſtay with chem 1oMe " Chril 
grear a tryal of affliction; as he elſewhere faith, he was 3x | time, hoping to have ſome of their company, ſome part 01 the Cauſe 0 


deaths often, that is, in dangers of death. t Nor ( faith the | way toward Fudea : But it ſeems, though he thus parpoled, yer ow my 


Apoſile ) were we only at thar rime in danger of our lives, nor | God had otherwiſe ordered his motions. : 
had we only, at that rime, an experience of Gods Power, Good- 17 When 1 therefore was thus minded, did I uſe -/intin 
neſs, and faichfulneſs in our deliverance ; but we are in jeopaTr- | ;- . o I pur- biting, 
dy every hour, and experience the Power of God in our deli- lightneſs f?! E Or the things that I purp oo | h 22 \ 
verarice yet every day. And it being tor the advantage of the poſe according to the fleſh g, that wil þ Erneſt 
Church ct Chriſt that our lives ſhould be prolonged, ( though | ſhould be Yea, yea, and Nay, nay ? h. lo 4 T 
we defire rather to be diffolved, and ro te with Chriſt) we are f Though the Apoſtle doth not in ſo many words tell ” ns : affixes ic 
confident that he will yer deliver. Former «experiences of Gods | yer jr is apparent from this verſe, Thar ſome of the oo yo the W:.. 
goodnefs in delivering us out of troubles, ought ro increaſe our | had taken occaſion from his nor coming ar this rime to Corntn, _ both Po 
Faich, and eget a confidence in us, that God will yer deliver us, | charge him wich levity- and inconſtancy, as it his words Were go rene, = 
"® (1t it may be for his own Glory, and our good. ) to be regarded, Ir is very obſervable, how little n__ Bs re- God Bu, 
p om.13. 11 You alſo * helping together by prayer for us #, | of the World will rake advantage from, to de 0 —_ orhers kers of th 
Phil. 1.15, Dar * for the gift beſtowed upon us by the means of ma- Ar - thy _—_— .-:-aggh _— ſuch a rime and moſt inte 
Philem.* ny perſons, thanks may be given by many oi our be- Maes failed, without the reproach of Ao in the word : = | 22 uo 
* C1 half w. |  _ | would haye been fo charitable ro them, as to he and Piricual 1 
_—HP-4+ » Faith ought nor to hinder Prayer; nor doth Gods princi- | by ſaying, They ſpake according ro their preſent _ od: buf Eirſt-frut 
a pal Efficiency, as to any Mercy or Deliverance beſtowed upon us, | reſolutions 3 but they were hindred by the qo amd it- WW Harvep 
give a Superſedeas ro us as to the uſe of any means, whether | if Paz fails they will inrerpret ir co be from the gh + ont, thoſe wha 


Natural or Spritual, by which the Mercy may be obtained. | conſtancy of his mind. So charitable is che World 
Nor are the Prayers of the meancft Sainrs uſeleſs for the great- | uncharicable to thoſe who are nor of che World, but ; 
cft, or beneath their defires; men and womens favour With | out of the World. From this imparation the Ap 


file clearatÞ 
himſelf. 


hap. L 


0: 2 ; 
17. w3s nor Yea, and Nav 7. 


IT» 


IL CORIN 


himſelf, denving that he vſed lig' tneſs, and thar is nor coming 

oceeded from any levicy ar 11 conſtr: F. ct mn, for he ol y 
did purpoſe ro ave come &@ O did (1aith he) I purpole airer | 
che manner of carn; men, who make 10 CONMCIENE of rh br word? 
who promile and deny bor ina rea h? Þ Shouid there bc - me 
tuck a Spirir, at to ſpea« « thing with mv 'tþ which my heart © h ' 
nor 2g7cc ro? Tins lets us know, chat T14th lid StEATINETS are chings | 
which do Fighly commend e1cher a M-nTHer, Or A Chiiftianz; bur 
eſpecially Lim who 15 a Minitter of che Goipel. 

|S Bur 4s God uv tru, f vur word toward you 


0 


-—— 


; As God is true to his ''romiſes, ſo he hath taught me to be | 
eruc eo mine, Some make thele words nor to be meerly cdcclara- 
tive of the Truth ot God, but a kind of an Oath, cor calliny the ; 
God of Truth co witneſs, th:r his Word towards thems by which © 
{me underſtand the Goipel, or the Word which he had prea: hed 
amoneft chem, (.nd of thar indeed he ſpeakerh in che next verie) 
yur come it tech tuch efs ſtrained, io Interpret Pauls Word: in * 
this vefſe of thar word ot promiſe oft which he i ad betore (poken 3 
the promiſe wh:ch he owned before char he had m:ce chem of his 
coming to rhem, Th t word, he f-1tth, was not Zea, and nay, that 
is, be did not make ir with a quite contrary inrentron 3 bur when 
he promiſed, he fai:hfuily intended co nave juſtibe.! his word, and 
indeed to hive come; but the Providence ot God, to which all 
men are ſu ;jeted, had otherwile ordered him and diſpoſed of him, 
which was the cauſe why he had nor yet been as good as his, 
It is very obterva»ie, how careful this great Apoſtle was to clear 
himſelf from any nnputacions of levity and falſhood z and ir ſhould 
reach us to he caretvl co maintain our reputation in the World, for 
ruth and ſtcadin?(s, ; L 

19 kor the Son of God, Jeſus Chriſt, who was 
preached among you by us, even by me, and Sllyanus, 
and Timutheus b, was not Yea, and Nay, but in him 


was Yea l. 

þ The Apoſtle here giveth a reaſon, why he had made Ty:t/; 
and Sincerity fo much his hufinefs (which reaſon obligerh us 
alio, who .ire :s much hound :s he, ro ſtuc'y a conformity ro Chriſt 
faith he, The Son of Go who w.1s preached among yo!s char 15, Chriſt 
Jeſus ; (who hugh (as ſome obſerve) is in theſe Epiſtles no 
where caiicd God, | uc Lord) is here called the Son of God; which 
Can be unde. ſtood iti no other ſenſe, than by Ecern:l generacion; 
for thoſe who a e only rhe Sons of God by 4d9ption, are not the 
ſubjzers of Miniſters pre.ching. We read of this Silvans, 1 Treſſ. 
1.1. 1 Pet. g.12. Some think that he was the ſave perſon who 
is cal ed Silas, Adts 15, 19. Of Timothy we have he. rd before, 
They were borh Miniſters, who (as well as Apollos hetore mention 
ed) had lahoured in the Goſpel amongſt rhe CorintMans, Now | 
(faich che Apoſtle } char Chriſt whom both T, and other Minifters 
of the Guſpe!, have preached to you, 15 not uncerta'n ard 1n- 
conſt. nr, on: thing at one time, and in one place, another thing 
at another time, ind in another -place. 4 He was only one and 
the ſame 3 his Dorine w.s always certain and uniform, and con- 
| ſiſtent \ich itſelf 3 and our converſation ought to be ſuirable ro him 
and his D-&rine. 

20 For all the promiſes of God in him are Yea, and 
in him Amen. nnto the glory of God by us m2. 

i, As Chriſt w:s y*4, and all his Doarine cerrain and uni- 
form, fo all the Promiſes of God are y?4z the Promiſes of the 
M:ſaþ have their y-2 and 421 in him; all the Promiſes of Grace, 
wharivever is promited to Believers, ſhall be verified by him, that 
ſo God may be glorified, and have from meti the honour of being 
always eteemed a true and fairhful God, one that cannor fail 
and faiſifie his- word, Bur how are the Promiſes oi God y2a and 
Amen in Chriſt by vs? Aiſw. As the Miniſters of the Goſpel are 
the Miniſte-s of Chriſt for tle cxplication and applicacion of them. 
The Pron.ifcs are from the Father, through Chriſt as rhe meriro- 
rious Cauſe, and 1nicrnally applied by the holy Spirit, while they 
are mote Exe; nal y applicd by che Miniſters of the Golpel. 

21 Now he which itab.iſheth us with you in Chriſt, 


and hath anointed us, is God n. 

» The 4nointing here mentioned, is donbtleſs the ſaine menti- 
cned by $. 7ohn. 1 Job. 2, 0, 27. by which is underſtood the 
holy Spirit: ſo as Gods anointing his people ſignifies his giving 
them his holy Spirit ro dwell an41 io work in them 3 which holy 
Spirir d.ffuterh ir. 1£]1f(chroughour rhe whole Soul of the Believer, 
{as the Oy! o: old poured our upon the heads of the Kings, High- 
Pri-ſts, and Prophets. Believers are ſaid to be anointed, becauſe 
God hath »y his Spirir given ro them, declared, Thar he hath ſer 
them apart to he Kings, and Prieſts; a Royal Prieſthood, The lame 
God alſo eftabliſheth their Souls both in Faith, and Love: and all 
?! Chriſt; in him as our Head, and through him 25s the mericortous 
Cauſe of all char Grace wherein we ſtand. Ir is obſervable, That 
how much ſoever vain man may aſcribe to the power of mans 
Will, yer the bleſſed Apoſtle aaribureth all ro God 3 both our 
i0i2ting, the firſt infuſion of gracious habits, and aiſo our Eſtah- 
ring, It is Grace by which we ftand. 

i, 22 Who® hath alſo ſealed us o, and | given us the 


} Eirneſt of the Spirit in our hearts p. 
9 The uſe of a Seal is for confirmation of the thing to which it is 

* atixed; the effe of ic is the making rhe impreſſion of ir ſelf upon 
the Wax : ſoas ſealing us, both in this ard other Texts, ſignities 
both the confirmation of the Love of 'God to our Souls, and alſothe 
renewing and SanRificarion of our Natures, imprinting the Image of 
God upon our Souls, making us (as the apoltie Peter faith) parta- 
#15 of the Divine Nature z bur ihe firſt ſeemerh probably ro be 
moſt intended here. p We hive the ſame exprefſion Chap. 5. 
5 Ejh.1, 14. We read of the Firſt-fruits of the Spirit, Rom. 8. 
23- The giving unto Believers the holy Sprir, and thoſe ſaving 
[piricual habics, which are his. eft:&s in the Soul, are borh the 
Firſt-fruts, and an Earncſt 3 for as the Firſt-fruits allured rhe 
_ and the Enneſt 13 a ſure pledge , of che bargain, , when 
1018 who = irare honeſt and taichfal; fo rhe ſanRitying habics, 

Vol, 11. 


- -— 


THIANS. Chap. Il. 


wroughr in the Soul by the Spiric of Holineſs, are a certain p'edg 
ot trac Giury «hich ſhal! be che portion of Believers, 
pw Bos IVE 4 mA tr 3” ; [ i © py - 
. 25 Mureover, * 1 call God to record upon my * Rom, x, 
213 Is -j- oey «x7 X ” FIR , Fed 
oul, Chat [ to fpare you I came not as YET UNC 
Corinth g T 1 Cor.4. 
q Here is a perfe&t ferm of an Oath, which is nothing eli, © 
bur a ſoc; calling of God 12 witneſs the rruth of har we ſpeak © <P: 
whether pr. mitiug, or aſſerting. Thoſe words, uf9* 1+ $04! alſo - 
h ve the torce of an imrecation ; bur ie 15 In a very {eric us thing «© I'5- 
the Apoſtle was deep y charged with /e37ty for nor making good ** 
h1s pr: m'te 17: ceming, and becauic he reaſonably preſumed, thar 
icme cm: ngit rhem v.ould te cifficulr ro believe the true cauſe, to 


- g#'n credit with them, he takes a volumiary Oath, which in 


weighty matrcrs is lawtu!, (chough ſometimes it be done not hefore 


' a Mapiſtrare ) The thing he thus arreſts, is, Thar he hithert» 


had iorbo. n to come our of kin.'nefs ro themz to {re them (as he 
Fhraferh ir) which may <tcher be un[!erftood of choir purſes, (for 
he could nor have gone without ſome charge to them, though 


, he rook ro ſtanding Salary from them' fur preaching: or ( a: others 
; potlibly judge berrer) to ſpare their perſons ; for if he had come be- 


tore they had reformed thoſe abuſes that were amongſt thei, he 
muſt (az he before ſpake) have come unto chem with a 794. 
'24 Not for * that we have dominion over your s , cy. 
faith 7, but are helpers of your joy 5: for + by faith +. 5. 
ye ſtand z. 1 Per. 5.35 
7 Nor ( ſay ſome ) that we pretend or boaſt of any domini-n FRomt. 17, 
over you, becauſe of your Faith, as if upon that account we 2% 
would be chargeable, and exa& mcnies of you : Bur their Incer- 
pretailon 15 berrer, who think that by theſe words the Apoſtle 
removes from himſelf, and much more from all inferior Miniſters, 
any power of impoſing upon people to believe any thing bur 
What God had in his Word revealed as the obje& of Faich He 
had inthe verſe before uſed the Phraſe (pare you, which he thoughr 
might ſound harth in their ears, and give ſome occaſion ro carp at 
tumas if he deſigned ſome Lordly power over them : No, (faith 
the Apoſtle) though I ſpeak of ſparing you, I intend no exerciſe of 
Lordly power, 5 bur only to promore your joy, by removing cho/e 
things which hinder your true rejzcycing. Your preſent glory ing 
15 not good, while theſe diforders, contrary to the Will of God, 
are 2mongſt yen, and you are fuif of contentions and diviſions 
which hinder your comfortable ſociety and communion rogether, 
as one Body, ft The m<cſt of you ſtand #1 the Faith, (fo fone in- 
rerpret the latter part of the verſe ) I ſhould rath:r m:ke this 
the ſenſe, By Faith you muſt ſtand 3 if you err-in matrers of Faith 
(as ſome of this Church had done in the buſineis of the Reſur- 
reQion, as the Apoſtle rold us in the 15 Chaprer of the firſt 
Epiſtſe) you fll; you no longer ffurd, than you keep the 
Faith pureand incorrupt. For, becauie of their Errors. as to the 
RelvreeRion, IT cannot tell how ro make the Apoſtles ſenſe to be 
what ſome Learned men make it ro bear, Thar he had noching 
ro blame in them in matters of Faith, bur only in ſome things 
referring to 0r4+r 3 and therefore they need not toſulpett his execcile 
of any dominion over their Faith. 
| SF I 
The Reaſon why he came not to them repeated, 1, —— 3. What he before 
wrote coucermng the inceſtuos: perion, was done with tears and tiwough 
loze to them : and now requirith them to forgive and comfort him leſf 
by grief be ſhnuld fel! into deſpair, 4, —— -- 11. Bleſſtth God for 
his ſucceſs in the Goſpel: and declares that his pre :ching was allo an 
acceptable ſavour in them that periſh: he being upright is bats 
I2, 17. 
1 {3 Ur 1 determined this with my ſelf, that I would 


not come again to yon in heavineſs 2. 

a One reaſon why 1 pur off my formerly intended journey to 
you, was, thar I might give you time to repent, and reform 
thoſe diſorders that were amcngſt you, that my coming co you 
might neither cauſe heavineſs in you, ſeeing me come with a rod, 
to chide and reprove you ; nor yer in my ſelf, who do not delight 
in cenſures and chidings, bur muft mv (elf have been fad ro have 
ſeen ſuch errors and diſorders amongſt you, as I maſt by my pa- 
rernal and Apoftolical Authoricy have corre&ed, 

2 For if | make you ſorry, who is he then that 
maketh me glad, but the ſame that is made forry by 
me ? 6. 

b When IT am there, T have no refreſhment, or joy 1n that part 
of the Cicizens who are Pagans, all my joy is in char part which 
are Chriftians, and conſtirure che Church of G2d in thar City ; 
So as E could have had no pleaſure or joy in my velng there, 1t I 
had had nothing bur eccafion of ſadneſs and heavinets from you, 1h - 
whom was all my expectation of any joy or cetreſhing. 

3 And 1 wrote this ſame unto you, Icſt when I came. , Cha 
[ * ſhould have ſorrow from them of whom | ought to , -'t* 
rejoice, | having confidence in you all, that my joy is + Chay.c, 
the joy of you all c. ; jo 22, 

c This hath been the cauſe of my writing this ſecond Epiſtle to Gl. 5. 19? 
you, before I my ſelf came in perſon, thar you might have a 
time more fully and perfe&ly to reform. (uch things as are amits 
amoneſt you, and I have fermerly given you notice of ; left when 


I come, inſtead of rejoycing in you, as I ought to do, or having 


any juſt occaſion (0 to do, I might meer with what would give me 
nothing but trouble and ſadneſs 3 which would not only be grievous 
to me, but would be contrary to your dury, for I cughr to rejoyce 
in you, and you ought 1o co behave your ſelyes, that I may have 
cauſe to rejoyce in you. And I haye confidence in the moft of you, 
or in all you who are ſincere, that you would all be glad co ſee me 
glad and chearful, rejoycing in my foctety with you. | 

4 For out of much affliction and anguiſh of heart, 
[ wrote unto you with many tears, not that ye ſhould 
be grieved, but that ye might know the love which k 


have more abundantly unto you 4. 


{ Eccce 2, 4 Every 


%* 


Chap 


- IL. 


4 Every man that deriveth fr le part 
of the Divine Narure, that like as God doth not grieve willingly, nor 


willingly aMiR the children of Men, ſo neither will he; bur if by | That the Apoſile had intelligence, rhat this perſon 
ET : in him, he be under :n obli- ! dant ſorrow 3 otherwiſe he would not nes <<prefled 2b 


_ reaſon of his office or truſt repoſed 1 


| him, and comfort him, leſt perhaps ſuch a one ſhould 


parion ſomerimes to ima 
for their Errors, yet he will ſo do it, as one that hath no pleaſure 


and celivhr in ir. Thus the good Judge weeperh, or ar leaſt 
ſhewerh ſorrow and compaſſion, when he giverh Senrence againſt 
MalefaRors. So (-aith this great Apoſtle) tro whom God had 
committed a care over all the Chriſttan Churches, he ſaw a ne- 
ceſſi:y of reproving this Chureh that was at Corinth for enduring 
the inceſtuous perſon 1n their Communion, and nor caſting him out 3 
for their Errors a'out the Reſurreftion, for their Diviſions, Schiſms, 
and Contentions, &c. bur he profefſeth, rhart he did this with many 
tears; and thoſe ner ſhed 1n hypocriſie, bur forced from the an- 
wiſh and affliction of his heart 3 that he had nothing leſs in his 
deſign, than to pur them ro any exceflive grief or trouble, bur 
whac he wrote was out of a Principle of Love and good Will, 
both to the weltare of their whole Church, and to the good of the 
p:r:icular Souls of thoſe that were the Members of chat Church. 
Miniſters or others do no good by their cenſures or reproofs, If 
they do nor ſo diſpenſe them, as people may fee that whac they 

do, orlay, is our of their abundanclove to their Souls, 
5 But ifany hath cauſed grieghe harh not grieved me, 


bur in parte : that I may not overcharge you all f. 

e The Particle [ if ] d-th nor here ſignifie any doubting or un- 
certainty (tor the Inceſtuous perſon, of whom the Apoſtle here, 
and in the following verſes, ſpeaks, had certainly ciuſed griet 
both to the Apoſtle, and alſo ro the Church whereot he was a 
Member, } ir is as much as althozgh; or the Apoſtle ſpeaketh in 
this torm, becauſe by his repentance his grief was much allayed, 
Bur how doth the Apoſtle 1az, That he had grieved him but 3n part. 
Some think he fſaich ſo, becauſe the Apoſtle*s griet for his ſin, 
was now turned into joy by his repentance: Others think, that 
thoſe words, in part, fignifie that ir was nor the whole Church 
that had grieved him, bur only a part of it, viz, thi: inceſtuous 
perſon, and thole who rook part with him. Ochers ſay, the Apo- 
{tle ſaith, is part, to ler us know, that It w.is not a grief ro him, 
ogy, but to ihem :Jio. Th- laſt would bid very fair tor the ſenſe 
of che place it the apoſtic had nor in his firſt Epiſtle, Chap. 5+ 2: 
ſaid, T».t ibey were puffid up, and had not mourned 3 ſo as I judge 
the ſecond mo;e like to be the lenſe of the &4poſtie, viz Thar It was 
no: the whole Church that had grieve him, bur a part of 1t olt- 
Iy : an:i therefore the next words are added, f That I may nt over- 
charge you all, thar is, that ! might nor load you all with chat 1m- 
Puratiun, as if you were all involved in it. 

6 Siffiijent to ſuch a Man zs this * puniſhment g 
whis' wa mflited of many b. 

2 This verſe makech it clear, that by any, v. 5. he meaneth 
the inceſtuous perion. mencioned in the firſt Epiſtle, Chap. s. 
whom he had ordered to be caſt our, and delivered to Satan; 
which (as appearerh trom this verſe) they had done, which is the 
puniſhment mem ioned in chis verie. They who think that the 
puniſhment here mentioned was not Excommunication, but another 
being delivered to Satan, and vexed by bim: x Beg a grave Queſtion, 
2iz. Whctl er del ceving to Satan zu this place ſignifieth any more, than 
a caſting of the perſon out of Chriſts Kingdom on earth (which is his 
Church) and making him one of the World again, of which Satan is the 
God. 2 They leem not to confider, That if this Church had deli- 
wered him to S.itan, they could have done no more : So as the Apoſtle 
wouid nc have ſaid, ſufficieit 3s this puniſhment, when ir was the 
greareſt thar they could 1nfli&, Sore obje&t, Thar it 15 nor p:0- 
bable that che Apoſtle (had he been caſt out of the Communion 
of the Chu-h for ſo notorious a crime) would have given order 
for hi: being reſtored in ſo ſhort a time, as was thar berwixt his 
writing the fiſt, and this his ſecond Epiſtle. x. Some think, that 
he wa: as yet only under a ſuſpention, and che Church had nor pro- 
cceded to Excommunication : this Opinion is favoured by the 
G:ceb word kere uſed, which is 6hmpa, the gentleſt of all the 
words in uſe in that Language to expreſs puniſhment by, 2. 
Though in the times tollowing rhe Apoſtles, a longer rime was 
ſer aiter Excommunication, for teſtifying the repentance of Sin- 
ners roto: 1oufly ſcandalous, before rhe Church did again admit 
then into ter Fellowſhip; yer that jr was ſo 1n the Apoſtles, 
time, is more than appears. Pcfhbly ir might be fo ordered af- 
terwards, when, as the Church multiplied, ſo ſin more abounded ; 
and they might from many experiences of relapſes, be quickened 
to make ſuch Orders, 3. The Gitt of diſcerning Spirits was more 
uſua! in the Apoſtles times than afterward 3 fo that though in 


fo lowing times, when the Apoſtles were dead, and the extraordi- 


nary Gifr of difcern'ing Spirits was failed or abated, the Church 
bcing not ab'e any other way to judge of the truth of Sinners 
repentance chan from their changed lite and converſation, which 
a:ked time, might fer a lonper time for ſuch Penitents : yer there 
might nor be the ſame reaſon for the Apoſtles doing it. 


irthicied, is a little diſputed 3 whether the Presbytery, or the Com- 


m1mity? Their Opinion ſeemeth (to me) beſt, who think that the | 


Othcers of the Church of Corinth heard and judged of matter of 
Fac, and reprrted it ro the Community 3 bur he was not caſt | 
our without the conſent ard approbation of the Community, 


7 So that contrariwiſe, ye ozght rather to forgive 


be {wallowed up with overmuch ſorrow k. 

z Forgiveneſs in this piace doth not fignifie the taking qway, 
or remirring of the guilr of fin, (that is Gods work, nor mans) 
but remitcing of the puniſhneut, And this maketh that probable, 
Thar they had not as yer proceeded with this perſon ro Excom- 
qe ogpE only kept him (like a ſuſpe&ed Leper, without the 

amp) out of Communion with the Church: Or if they had 


IL CORINTHIANS. 


om God, is in this made parcaker ſ*oring hin again to a full Communion with them; vLich ; 
1h is 


ſpeak ſmartly, or to chaſtiſe and puniſh others ; 


— 


- | Apoſtle) We are not ignorant of his devices, vonwuart 
: . 4 Not- ; 
withſtanding any thing that appears, there might be the diſtance | 
of 2 year or two betwixt Pals Writing theſe two Epiſtles. bh Who 
rheſe #21y were, by whom the Apoſile ſaith this puniſhment was 


' we muſt have an Eye about us, and benear 


aQually caſt him out, forgiving here can ſignifie nothing, bur mY 


Cha 


allo 
nce 
un 


; the comforting which 1s here mentioned. & Ir is p/ajn from h 
c 

3 
his being drowned in his own tears. Though a ro 
, at this day, is fad enough, who are regularly caſt our of t : luch, 
' Munion of any true Church of Chriſt, tor crimes which A 
tuch a puniſhment ; yer we muſt imagine jt much (adder Rk, 
Churches are multiplied, whole Cities and Nations are ney 
zed; and though a perſon be caſt our of a Church, yer my 
raken notice of, bur he may yer have converſe with a lo 
ans, &c, but there, the greater part of the City being Hey 
and che whole Countries of Achaia and Greece (conriguqus wh Th 
he had the leaſt ſenſe of Religion) could nor bur be deeyly affiie.. 
ro be 1n ſuch a caſe as none bur Heathens and projeſzq eu 
ers would keep him company, or have any intimacy with him ”" 


8 Wherefore I beſeech you, that ye would Con- 


firm your love towards him /. 

{ Thar you ſhould reſtore him ro Communion with you i 
your Church-Afſemblics, and rake him into the boſom gf Sh. 
Church again, and be ( as hefore ) friendly rowards him M 
word which we tranſlate confirm, 1S zuewoazs which finifierh w 
thoritatively to eſtabliſh or confirm. Some obſerve, Thi ra 
Apoſtle (peaks ro them as Judges to gain their good opinion 
and make them more pliable, whereas he might authoricatzet 
have abſolved him, Ir 1s hard to ſay, what Authority the 4g, 
had or had nor, ro excommunicate 3 bur we want a Precedenr - 
holy Writ of the Apoſtles, or any of them, exerciſing fach + 
Power, as being abſent; and ſo in no capacity to hear the Proof 
ot any Fact againſt ſcanda'ous perſons. Paz, 1 Cor, s, Write 
to the Church of Corinth to do it, and doth only himſ.1t commany 
them to do their dury; and he:e ag.in he writcth co them ty fg. 
give him and reſtore him. There being no mention, «ither jn 
the former Epiſtle, or here, of any Command thac the in;;,y,, 
perſon ſhould pur aw.y his Wite taken unliwtuily, or that he gig 
any ſuch thing in teftification ot h's Repenrance, make it ye 
probable, thar his crime was not uſing his Fachers Wite, as his Wiie 
but as his Harlotz had it been ccherwile, we ſhou'd very p:0%9ly 
have read of ſomething in the one or the other pl:ce, lipnilying 
\uch a Command of the Apoſtle, or the thing done by him, 


9 Fcr to this end alſo did I] write, that I mizhr 
know the proof of you, whether ye be obedient in l 
things m. 

m As for other ends, fo for this alſo I wrote my former Fyj. 
ſtle ro you, and I now write this ſecond Epiſtle ro you, alſo, tha 
I might have an experiment of you, wht regard you would 
_ to that Apoſtolical Authority wherewtth God hath inxf 
ed me, 


10 To whom ye forgive any thing, I forgire al. 


.#n The word fo often repeated in this Verſe, and tranſlated jr. 
give, is yeeiCounr, which ſiguifies to give, or gratifie, or da 
kindneſs, as well as to forgive. So as it needeth nor alwaystobe 
Interprered of any judicial a& of Abſo/ution. If you ſee reaſon ty 
remic any thing of the puniſhment inflited upon the inceſſuous 
perſon, I am ſatisfied with what you do, I ſhall take nocffnceat 
you for it. It I have ſhewed any tavour ro any perſon amonyſt zou 


; That hath fallen under my reproof and chaſtiſemenr, ir hath been 


for your ſake, for the good and advantage of your Church, or up- 


| on their motion and interceflion ; and I have done it fincerely 1n 


the ſighr of Chriſt (the Greek is, in the face of Chriſt.) 
11 Leſt Satan ſhould get an advantage of us»: for 


we are not ignorant of his devices p. : 
0 As I have done it in kindneſs to you, . ſo I have alſo done 1t 
for the advantage both of chat perſon, who is ſo forgiven, and of 
your whole Church, which is concerned in the welfare, 0 miſcar- 
riage of every irdividuai Member. Leſt Satan ſhould git :9uariag! 
of us 5 The Greek is, That we be not overcome by Satan : n14wTHY 
properly ſignifies to ger gain, or to gain a Supectority, t0 8ft the 
upper hand, The advantage Satan was like to get by rhezr con- 
tinuing ſeverity to this offender, was .cicher by his 0zer-10 0019) 
or by the hardning of his Heart, fo as he ſeeing no provability t0 
be reſt.red again ro his Communion of the Church, ſhould be 
exp.ſed, either to temprations ro ſome deſperate courſes (which 
are often the effets of minds full of ſorrow and diſcorcent) or 
elſe to courſes of Idolatry, or looſneſs in giving up himielt c the 
Devils Kingdom in the Worl.i, becauſe he could not be admirred in- 
to the Church, which is the Kingdom of Chriſt. Wt res 
11S £1307 
and counſels, how he continually walketh abour both like a 704/- 
ing Lion, ſeebing whom he may devour ; and like an old $17" leck- 
ing whom and how he may deceive, This lets us know, vith how 
much Prudence, thoſe who are truſted with the Souls 0! orhers ? 
ought ro manage their Reproofs, or ſevere dealings with 0! rs 
the end of all theſe is the amendment and reformation of 1% 
perſons, not their ſpiritual ruine and deſtru&ion : and all Re9"99" 
and Cenſires muſt be given, - and made, and managed wit! Fe 
rence to that end. We have nor only the concern of Gods _ 
(which is the main) to be looked ar, but the good allo of their Sou 5, 
whom we ſo reprove, cenſure, or alienate our ſelves _ _ 
indeed, without conſulring this, we cannot conſul G9ds 010ry5 
who hath told us, Thar he de/ireth not the death of 4 but Fes 
ther that he ſhould tury from his wickedneſs, and 13 © and there = 
h us to the Devil, a5 we") 
as above us to God 3 and prudenrly judg how ſuch affliciive an pms 
ations may be ſo done by us, thar in che mean ime $ap4s Y 
advantage, and we loſe the Souls of thoſe with whom we 0 ; 
inſt "67" ay Y . d rincipal Eni 
ead of gaining them to God; which is the main and P Tim, I. 20. 
we ought in all choſe aQions to aim ar, 1 Cor. 4+51 9! TY 


P. 1] 


briſti. 


ing Heathens ; one caſt out of the Communion of the Chun be. 


ſo: for if I forgave any thing, to whom [I forgare | 
'zt, for your ſakes forgave T ir, * in the perſon of*6, 


"7h 


Chriſt », tt, 


, 
- 


12 Fur- : 


30: 


ARs. 


1 COT 
AP 


| 


ARs. 16, 


{6s 


hap 


. II, 


12 Furthermore, * when I came to Troas to preach 
Chriſts goſpel, and F a door was opened upon me of 
the Lord 9, 


Il CORINTHIANS 


| 


This Tr0as was either the City, or the whole Country called | 
T10y or 1{ium, or the leſſer Phrygia. We read of Pails going thi- | 


cher by Sea from Philipp, Adts 20.6,7, and of his having been 
there, 2 Tim. 4. 13. He tells us, Thar the buſineſs why he went 
thither, was co preach che» Goſpel ; for 1t was nor the Apoſtles bu- 
fineſs ro ſtay, as fixed Miniſtcrs, in any one place, bur to carry 


' the Goſpel up and down the Wor'd to ſeveral places; which they 


did by virtue of their general Commiſſion to Go, preach and 
baptize all Nations; though ſomerimes they had a more ſpecial 
Call and Commiſſion, as Pau! had to go into Macedonia, The door 
ozened, either ſigmfieth the free Jibercy he had there to preach, 
or the great ſucceis wh:ch God gaye him in his work; which he 
clſewhere caileth an Effe&ual door, 


13 I had no rcit in my Spirit, becauſe I found not 
Titus my brother ; but taking my leave of them, 1 


went from thence into Macedonia r. 
7 He relis us, That when he came there, he waz much trou- 
bled, becauſe he did nor find his Brother Tit44, where the humili- 


ry of th's grear apoſtle is confiderabe, in that he gdiſdained not ro 


call Titus (a perſon rhough a Miniſter, yer much interjour to him 
s an Apoſtle ) Brother, Several reaſons are given of Pazxls rrou- 
le, Thur which 1s moſt probable, is, That he did expe& ar 
Troas tro have mer wich Tits come from Corinth, trom whom he 
might more pertectly have underſtood the affairs of thar Church : 
not finding kim there, he tells us he went forward inco Macedonia ; 
whither, aicer che uproar ar Eyheſus, he deſigned to go, ( as we 
read Afﬀs 20 1.) buc went firſt into Greece, and ſtayed there 
three months, intending to come ro Macedonia in his return, v. 3. 


14 NOW thaiik> ve unto God, which always cauſeth 
us to triuwph in Chrilt s, and maketh manifeſt the 


favour of tj- knowledge by us in every place t. 

s The Tranſlation of the Greek here, is not certain: For to 
tranflace it word for word, 1t 1s, But thanks be to God always, tri- 
ymphing 1s in Chriſt : which makes 1c uncercain, whether there be 
not a dete& of a Prepoſirion upon the ſupply of which, ic would 
be, Who tYi«mpheth oter 115 in Chriſt ; having tubdued our hearts to the 
Kingdom and O'xdience of Chriſt, Bur the moſt Interpreters ra- 
ther agree with our Trarflators, and rhink the ſenſe of the Apo- 
ſile is, Wh» mo bet us to triumph. In the Hebrew there is a Con- 
jugati,n where the Afive Virb fignifieth to make another to do 4\ 
thing; and there are ſeveral inſtances broughe by Learned men out 
of the Septragint, where the Adive Verb in the Greek alſo hath thar 
ſenie ; th.t which cometh neareft 1c in the Original in holy Writ, 
is, That, Rom. 8. 25. where the Spirit 1s ſaid ro makes int2rceſſion 
for 1», bccauſe ic cauſerh us to make interceſſhon. According to 
this, the ſenſe is, Blefſed he God, who, though we meet wirh 
many Enemies, yer through Chriſt he maketh us more than Con- 

uercurs, Rom. 8. 37. fo that we are not overcome by any of 
them, bur on che contrary we rriumph over them as conquered 
by us. + and this by maniteſting by us in every place the ſavoyr 
of the Knowledg of Chriſt; that 15, of che Goſpel. He calleth ir 
a Savour, eicher with alluſion ro that ſweer perfumed Oyncment, 
with which the High-Prieſt, under the Law, was anointed, Exod, 
30. 23. Pſal. 133..2, or with reference to the Incenſe uſed alſo 
under the Liw; or with relation to Solomons exprefiion, Cant. x. 
where we read of che Savouy of Chrijts good Ointments, and that 
his Name is as an Oy'tment poured forth, By the Savour of the 
Know:edg of Chriſt here mentioned, the Apoſtle plainly mean- 
ch the Reputation or good report thar the Goſpel had in every place : 
ſee Hoſe 14. 7» 


15 For we are unto God a ſweet ſavour of Chriſt ® in 


them that are ſaved, and in them thar periſh =. 

u For the God whom we ſerve, doth not judge of us, nor will 
reward us according to our ſucceſs, bur according to our faithful- 
neſs and diligence in his work. We give unto all a good favour 
by our DoErine 3 and our labours are a ſweet favour in the noſtrils 
of God, whacever cffc&s they haye upon Souls, God acceprerh 
of our labours as to good men, ro whom we are Inſtruments of 


| bellies, and rurn che Church inro 


2? uv a3” POR. 797 ——y on 4 Af 0 5 p - 
/ are many St YZTARASY ON TES, ve Trantzice Its OOr; 4)f the Word . the 
Greeb word fin 


; 1,nifies, To ſell wine or vidtaals for money z and becauſe 
luch kind of people make no conſcience t:3 deceive, chear, and 
dca. fr2udu'ently with their Cuſtomers, ic is ſometimes vi ro 
ignifie corrupting Or deriving. We are nor (faith the Apoſtle) of 
che number of choſe who in preaching mee:rt; ſerve their own 
RS © aa Cl a Tavern or Victualinz-houſe, 
ar am Ot the Brine Q Tr : ents while ca 4 
Pulpit, be gait, aid —_— —_ s oy + _ I __ 
FI nax'ng 09 Conicience, either whar rhe: 

ſpeak, or how they ſpeak; Eur we ſpeak by Authority from Chriit, 
and in Chriſts Name ; cloaih:4 wich his Authority, end as his 
Ambaſſadors, and {0 dare not lay any thing unco people, and de- 
liver to his people what he never gave us anv Commiſtion to ſpeak, 
nor yer ſpcak whatever come'h ar our tongues end; but we re- 
member, that we are in the tiphr of God, and ſpeak as from God 
of God , and that nor fraudulently, bur ſincerely ; fincerely aim- 
ivg at the Glory of God in hat we do, and the Salvation of the 
Souls of them ro whom we ſpeak. This is a great work, firſt 
ro conſulr the Mind and Will oft God, ani find ic our by ſtudy and 
medita:ion 3 then faithfully ro communicace ic unto peop'e, with- 
out any vain or corrupt mixtures (which do but adulerate the 
Word preached) then to apply ic to the Conſciences of thoſe thacr 
hear us. Who zs ſufficient for theſe things? that 1s, ro diſcharge the 
Othce of the Minittry, in the preaching of rhe Goſpel, as men 


ouzhcto preach ir. 
RAP. NI 


' The Corinthians a (ufficient Commendation of his Miniſtry and proof of 


God's power therewith. 1, -— g. The Miniſtry of Moſes was, 6j 
a killing Letter imprinted in Tables of Stone, and of Condemnation, 
and abideth not : the Miniſtry of the Apoſtles is, of the Spinit of Liſe 
and of Righteouſneſs, and avideth always, 6, —-— 12. the veil on 
Mojes's Face and in reading of the Liw, ſo that the Jews under- 
ſtood not the ena thereof : this removed from thoſe who are converted to 
God, 13, 16. the Mir:ſtry of the New Teſtamint us clear and 
a powerful means of the Spirit for our Renovation, 17, 18. 


5 
= Erernzl Life and Salvation; and though ochers ceſpiſe' the Gol. 
n- pel, and retuſe the ſweer ſound of jr, yet as to chem alſo we are a 
i, ſveer ſavcur in the noſtrils of God : Though Iſrael be not ſaved 
* ( faich the Pcopher ) yet IT ſhall be glorified, Ir 1s not for any neg- 
be le& in us, as to our duty, if any periſh, bur from their own 
ich wiltulneſs and preverſeneſs, 

bo 16 * To the one we are the favour of death unto 
ins death; and to the other the ſavour of life unto life 
the $7.3.” - And who is ſufficient for theſe things ? «. 

ghts w As fweet Smells, which are to ſome pleaſant and comforta- 
0.41» ble, are ro others pernicious and deadly; fo ir is with the ſweer 
ek favour of the Goſpel. The Report which we in all places make 
10W of Chriſt, ro ſome, through their unbelief and hardneſs of heart 
155 and fondneſs of their luſts, proveth but the ſavour of 4zath unto 
at} death; hardening their hearts to their Eternal ruine and deſtruQi- 
uch on; but co ſuch, who being ordained to Erernal Life, believe our 
roofs report, and embrace the Goſpel, and live up to the Precepts and 
cfe- Rule of ir, our preaching proves a means of ſpiritual and of Eter- 
jory nal Life, to which that leadeth. + And O how great a work 1s 
Juls, this? What man? What Angel is ſufficient for ic? Ir is a mighty 
and work to preach the Goſpel as we ought to preach it, 

wg. t 17 For we are not as many, * which | corrupt the 
efore 1; Word of God 3 but as of ſincerity, but as of God, in 
well 4» the ſight of God, ſpeak we * in Chriſt y. _ - 
harſh ) Leſt.the falſe Apoſtles and Teachers in this Church ſhould 
er ND if, fight this Exclamation of the Apoſtle; ahd the pretended diff- 
deal, Culty he made of che Miniſterial work; the Apoſtle adds thefe 
End Words, I confefs (faich he ) it is no very difficulc thirig to ſpeak of 
or riſt; and pretend ro preach and do as much as 3 do 3 bur chert 


commendation to you, or Yerters of commendation from 
you? 6. 

4 The Apoſtle, in the former Epiſtle, had ſpoken much in the 
vindication of himſelf aad of his Offize; he ſecth reaſon to return 
again ro ſomething of the like Diſcourſe, being provoked by the ma- 
ny 1mpurtations which the falſe Apoſt'es and Teachers in this Church, 
had laid upon him : therefore he (aith, Do we begin 29.754 2 Or elſe 
theſe words may have a ſpecial reference to the laſt yerſe of the for- 
mer Chapter 3 where he had commended himſelf, as being none of 
thoſe who corrupted the Word of God, but had preached-as of God, and 
in the ſight of God, b No (faith the Apoſtle) thouth fome others 
ſtand in need of commendatory Letters, and are very careful to 
procure them, (by which others he very probably means the falſe 
Apoſt'es and Teachers, which were Pauls grear Enemies) yer L 
truſt I need nor any Letters commendarory to recommend me t9 
you, any more than Leters of recommendacion from you to com- 
mend me unto any other Chu-ches of Chriſt. 

2 * Ye are our epiſtle written in our hearts, known 
and read of all men c. 

c Your Chriſtianity, and embracing of the Goſpel of Chr ſt, 
your Faich and Holineſs, are inſtead of an Eji/tl: ro me, to ler 
the World know, both with whar Blefling of God, and ſucceſs up- 
on my labours, I have preached the Goſpel; And you are ſuch 
an Epiſtle as I do nor carry about in my pockets, or lay up in my 
Cloſer, bur it is written in my hearr, where I carry continually 
boch a thankful and honourable remembrance of you, Nor are 
you only taken notice of by me as a tamous Church, to the plant- 
1ng and watering of which God harh blefſed my labours, and the 
labours of other Miniſters ; bur (as he ſaich to the Romans, Chap, 
1. 8. Tour faith is ſpoken of throughout all th? world) to he faith here, 
Tou are ow Epiſtle, known and read of all mn; that is, all Chriſtians 
take notice of you as a Church ro which God hack pircicular!y 
bleſſed my Miniſtry 3 fo as I need no other recommend rion, chan 
what L have trom your receiving, and the proficiency you have 
made 1n the Goſpel. Nothing ſo cummends a Miniſter, as the pro- 
ficiency of his people. 

3 Foraſmuch as ye are manifeſtly dec]zred to be the 
Epiſtle of Chriſt miniſtred by us 4, written not with 
ink, but with the Spirit of the living God, f not in 
tables of ſtone, but in * fleſply tables of the heart e. 

4 He had told them before, That they were his EpiF#le, his 
Epiſile recommendatoryz the change which God had wiought in 
their hearts did more recommend him, than all the Epiſtles in 
the World could z bur here he tells them, Thar they were rhe 
Epiſtle of Chriſt, it was Chriſt thac wrote his Law in cheir hears, 
(which Wricing was that which commended the Apoſtle) who 
himſelf had but a Miniſtration in the work, nor was it a Writing 
with Ink, bur the imprefiion of the Spiric ot the living God, z An 
Epiſtle, nor wrote in T ables of Stone, bur in the fle'bly Tables of the 
heart : he alluderh to the writing of the Law, which was wricten 
in Tables of Stone, Exod. 31. 18. and 32.16. and allo to the Pro- 
miſes, Exech. 11. 19. & 36. 26. That work of Grace in the hearts 
of theſe Corinthians, which recommended the Apoſtle, was wrought 
by Chriſt ; and the Apoſtles were bur Miniſters in the working ot 
it; it wasa work more admirable than the writing of the Law in 
Tables of ftone, and this work (he faich) was manifeſtly declared, 


4 And ſuch truſt have we through Criſt to God- 
ward f. | | | 
 f We are not infallible in the caſe; bur T tell you what con- 
fidence we have, hoping in God concerning you, through the Merits 
of Jeſus Chriſt, 


5 # Not that we are ſufficient of our ſelves to think 
any thing as of our ſelyes ; but * our ſufficiency is of 


God 2: 


* xCor. t 


2, 3 


Chap. THE. 


I 7 [)? we begin again to commend our ſelves F Chap. s. 


a? or need we, as ſome others, Epiſtles of 2 - _ 
93 60> 


FT Chap.2: 
16, 
* Phil f2. 


e I 13: 


- 
—_— 


Chap 


* Chap. s. 
18 
F Jer. 37. 


3T. 
Marr. 25. 


eFIeut. 10, 
CL, Tc, 


_ calſed, The S/ivit : here he calleth the Miziſtration of the Law, the 


 H hach (fa'th tlie Apoſtle, nor fond, bur made vs ſuffirient, 


Wit 


work a change in the hearrs of men; we are ſo far from 

; nn grep we have no eficienc] ſo much as to think one good thought 
which is the loweſt lnmane a.) Though the ſubje&t upon 
wich rhe Apoſtle is here diſcourfing, be a ſufficiency ro work a 
work of Grace in the hearrs of men; yer here is a ſtrong proot 
to prove the impotency of mans Will unto any. thing that is truly 
and ſpiritually good: For though the Apoſtle declares here his 
own and all other Miniſters inſufficiency ro the change of any mans 
hearr, yet he proveth ir by an Argument concluding from the 
lefſer to the greater ; for 1t they be nor ſufficient of themſelves, 
and as of themie'ycs,” ro think any thing which 1s truly and ſpirt- 
rually- good, rhey are rhen much leſs ſufficient for ſo great a work 
25 the Converſion of Souls. Nor doth thar term ['as of our ſelves] 


any thing alter the marter 3. tor if we can think good thoughts, | 


in any ſenſe, as of on ſelves, It is nor of Goa, in the ſenſe which 
the apoſtle 1s | eh of z Who is & here ſpeaking of God, 
as the God of Narure, ( from whom indeed we derive our poiyer 
of thinking) bur as the God of Grace, from whom we dertve our 
power of thinking holy thoughts, and ſuch as are truly and ſpirj- 
cually good. The Apoſtle derermineth all our ſufficiency to ſpiri- 
tually good aQions, to be from God ; our ſufficiency to the loweſt, 
(«hich is t:inhing good thoughts] as well as to thoſe of the higheſt 
ſort, am-ngſt which muft thoſe a&ions be accounted, by which 
men are made workers together with God, in the bringing of 
Souls our of darkneſs into marvellons light; opening their eyes, turn- 
3ng them from da neſs to light, and from the power of Satan unto God, 
Afﬀs 26.18. Our ſufficiency to think any thoughts, or to do any 
natural or moral a&ions, 1s from God, as he is the G2d of N:ture; 
bur it appeareth from all the preceding Diſcourſe, That our Apo- 
file is here ſpeaking of rhat Sufficiency which floweth from God 
through the Mediation of Chriſt; our power of thinking flowerh 
from the Providence of God towards all men; And if that had 
been al which che -p>ſtle had meanr in ſaying, Our ſufficiency is 
Jrom God, it had been no more than what rhey might have learned 
from che Heathen Philot-phers, who would have acknowledged, 
Thar all mens ſuffictency to natural aRions is from the Divine Be- 
Ing, or the firſt Moyer. 

6 Who alſo hath made us able * minifters of the 
+ new Teſtament h, not * of the letter z, but of the 
Spirick: for the letter killeth /, bat the Spirit || giv- 
eth life m. 

þ This verle plainly openeth what he had ſaid before, and lets 
us know what S»fſi-ienty of God that was, of which he here ſpake, 
we 
were m-t betore, and through the creating Power and Providence 
of God we had an ability ro think and to ſpeak 3 bur God hath 
male 1s ſuffs tent, ty a ſupervening a& and influence of his Grice. 
wo oe Min.ſters of the New Teſtament, thar is, of the Goſpel ; which 
being the new Revelation of the Divine Will, and confirmed by the 
Deach of Chriſt, 1s called New Teſtament, 3 By the Letter here, 
the 4poſtle underneath rhe Law; or the Law 1s called the Letter, 
Rom 2. 27. and 7,6. Who by the letter and circumciſion doſt tranſgreſs 
the Law, thir is, while thou. by ſome external aRs profeſleſt a 
ſul;;-&ion ro the Law (particularly by Circumciſion) in a multt- 
tude of other actions, (which are more valuable in the fight of 
God, thin tno'e external as) thou tranſgreſſeſt the Law. | The | 
Law, in oppofſirion to the Goſpel, is called the Letter, ſometimes a 
arad Litter vic-vſe 1t was only a Revelation of the Will of God 
concerning mans Duty, no Revelation of Gods Grace, either in 
pirdoning men their omiffions of Duty, and doing a&s contrary 


I. CORINT HI ANS. 


ps 1 would not have you think, thar we judge our ſelves ſuf- | behold Moſes for the Glory of his conntenatiee : Of | this TY 


Chap, 


34- 29, 30. When Aaron and all the Children of Th ael ſaw Point 
10S, Ora 


hold the san of his face ſhone, and they were afraid to ny 

ſo as It was glorious to be bur a Miniſter _ Law, tim, 

the Revelation of the Will of God, as to mans Duty; Wh; bs of 

. (faith the Apoſtle?) was to be done away; Moſes his face did lor 

| ways ſo ſhine, neither was the glory of his Miniſtracion R_—_ 

always, burto-ceaſe by the coming in of the New Covenan, 4 

{ $5 How ſhall not the miniſtration of the Spirit þ 
rather glorious? p. | : 
þ How ſhall not that Miniſtration, which is more ſpiritua] 

| the effedts of which are much more ſpiritual, be accounted in 

; more glorious ? Thus the Apoſtle doth not only magnifie the Go 


- 


; abOVe the Law, bur he alſo magnifieth his Office in the Mini} 


of the Geſpel; which Miniſtracion he reaſonably concludeth 4 


more glorious Miniſtration than that which Moſes had, in W 
Jews ſo much gloried, 6 hom the 


9 For it the miniſtration of condemnation be lor 


exceed inplory q. 

9 What the Apoſt'e before called the XMiniſtration of Death, he 
here calleth the Miniſtration of Condemnation; and therein fIVES us 
reaſon, why he called ir the Miniſifation of Death, becayſe i; 
led unro Eternal Death, as fhewinng men fin, ſo accuſing and cop, 
demning men for ſinful a&s. If it picaſed God (faith the APoſte ) 
ro make thac Miniſtration glorions, that the Miniſter of the Lay 
( Moſes) appeared {o glorious in the eyes of Aron and of the Pegs 
ple 3 the Miniſtratton of Righteouſneſs (by which he means the Gol. 
pel) muſt needs be more cxceedingly glorious. He tells us, Riv, 
I. 16, 19. That he was not aſhamed of the Goſpel — For they; the 
Righteouſneſs of God is revealed from faith to faith ; that is, the Righ. 
reouſneſs wherein a Soul muſt ſtand and appear Yighteors defore 
God. The Minifration of Righteouſneſs ſigniftecn the Miniſtrationgf 
thar Gcſpel, thar Do&rine which revealeth Rizhteouſusſs, Riphre. 
Ouſneſs is here oppoſed to Condemnation ; and heretore fipnifieth 
that which is oppoied ro it, viz 7uſtification, For God doth ny 
lo freely remit fins, but that he dec..res his Righteouſneſs in the 
remiſſion of them ; and will ſhew himſelf juſt, whiles he ſhexer; 
himſelf the Fuſtifier of hem that believes in Jeſus, Rom. 3, 26, Ang 
irom hence ir appearerh, Thar the Goſpel 15 cailed the Minif;g;; 
of Righteouſneſs, becauſe he that miniſtrech in it, exhiviteth the 
Righreouſheis of Chriſt co be reckoned to the Soul, as that where) 
1c muit be juſtified , for God could nor otherwiſe declare his Righ 
teouineſs in the remiſſion of fins, nor ſhew himſelf juſt in juſtif; 
the ungodly. This Miviſtrarion (he ſairh) muſt needs be morey\, 
rious in che eyes of Men, than the Miniſtration of the Lay; jg 
that Miniſtraticn afforded nothing but terrour and death, this aff. 
cth relief; and comfort, and lite, 


i For even chat which was made glorious,had nogh- 


ry 1n this reſpect, by reaſon of the glory that excellethy, 

7 The Law had in ir ſomething of intrinfick Glory and Eire! 
lency, as it was the Revelation of the Will of God tO, and concern. 
ing, his Creatures; there was an inſeperable Glory atrending ir 
upon thar accounr: And ir was made glorious in tlie Miniſtraio 
ot It 3 as it pleaſed God thar the giving of it ſhould be arended 
with Thunder and Liphcning, Fire and Smoak, and an Earthquake, 
and a Voice like to the Sound of a Trumpet, (as we read Exii, 19, 
16, 17, 18.) this was an accidental and advenricious Glory,-and 
made thar which was glorious in it ſelf, glorious alſo in thee of 
the People thar ſaw and heard theſe things. But yer (ach the 
Apoſtie ) if we compare it with the glory of the Goſpel, it hadcom- 


£5 Dury, or afſiſting men to the performance of their Duty. + As 
the Goji pel 1s a lo c:lled the Spirit, both in oppoſition to the carnal 
Ordinances ot the Law, and becauſe Chriſt is the Matter, Subjeds, 
and Argi4Mnt of 1c; and chiefly becauſe, char the preaching of ir is 
fo fir ar:euiled by the Spirit of Grace, that where Men do not turn ; 


their ears iron the hearirg of it, nor ſhut cheir eyes againſt the | 


light of it, nor haren their hearts againſt the P:eceprs and Rule | 
of 1, It becomes (through the free Grace of God) effeRual ro | 
change their heart-, and co turn them from the power of Satan unto 

G24; nd to make chem truly ſpiritual and holy. 1 For the Lerter, | 
(har 1s, che Law) 64il/:th; the Law ſhewerh men their Duty, ac- i 
cuicih, condemneth, and denounceth the Wrath of God againſt 
men, for not doing their Durv, Hut gives no ſtrength for the do- 
zng of it, # But the goſpel giveth life: The Goſpel, in the letter 
of it, ſhewe'h he way roLitez and the Goſpel in the hand of the 
S71vit, or with :h- Spi-it, working together with ir, (the holy Spi- 
ric uſing it as 115 I oſtrument) giveth Life; both that Life which is 
ſpiricual, and chat which is Eternal, asit prepareth rhe Soul for Life 
and Immo. caliry, 


7 Forit the miniſtration of death + written, and 
ingraven In ſtones, was glorious #, ſo that the children 
of Iſrael : ould not ſtedfaitly behold the face of Moſes 
for the glury of his countenance, which glory was to 
be done away o ; 

» The Apoſtle is manifeſtly comparing the Miniſtry of the Goſ- 
pel with the Miniſtry of che Law, and ſhewing the Excellency of 
the former above rhe latter. Tn the former verſe he had called 
the Law, the Letter; and the Goſpe!, in oppoſition to ir, he had 


i 


( 


Miriſtration of Deat"z becauſe ir only ſhewed man his Duty, or 
things ro he done, bur gave no ſtcength or help, by which he 
fhou'd do them ; only curſing man, but ſhewing him no way by 
which he might eſcape that Curſe : So ir did kill men, and led 
them to eternal Death and Condemnation, without ſhewing them 
any means of Lite and Salyation, He alſo depreſleth the Law 
m compariion with the Goſpel, as being only written and in- 
graven upon Stones : whereas (as he had {aid before,) The Goſ- 
P<1 15 writren in thetleſhly Tables of mens hearts. Yer (faith he) 
te Miniſtration of tie Law (which was indeed but the Minſtration 
of Death ) was glorious: There was a great deal of tbe Glory 


% 


and Majeſty of God attending the giving ot the Law, {of which we 


pararively no glory ; ſo much dorh that excel. For though the 
Law w..s the Revelation of the Divine Will, as well as the Gojel, 
yer the L:w was the Revelation of the Divine Will bur as to!) 
and Wrzth in caſe cf the non-performance of thai Duty : bucthe 
Goſpel is the Revelation of the Divine Will, as to Gracc and [#79 
as to Remiſſion of Sin, and Eternal Life, And alrhough che Goipel 
came not 11a the World as the Law, with Thunder, and Light- 
ning, and Earchquakes; yet that was uſhered in by Angtls, foretels 
ling che Birth ond Office of Fon the Baptiſt, and of Chrif; by the 
great fign ot a Virgins conceiving and bringing torth a Son; by a 
Voice trom Heaven proclaiming Chriſt the Fathers 2" begotte 
Son, in whom he was well p/ea''d. Bur that which the Apoſ'le doth 
here principal'y intend, is the « xceeding Excellency of it, i. regard 
of irs further Uſetuineſs and comtcrtable Nature. 


11 For if that which was done away, was 2lorious 


much more that which remaineth :s ploriouss =» 
s The Apoſtle, by another Argument, proveth the 7/i/{122108 
of the Goſpel to be much more glorious than che Mini(t «tio! of the 
Law, becauſe it is more durable and abiding. The ſtrength of the 
Argument dependerh upon this Principle, That any 440i 800% #5 
more excellent aud glovious, than that which is but tranſto'1, an Jor e 
tine, The Miniſtration of the Liw is done away; che 1aV = 
rained in Ordinances, is ir ſelf done away ; and therefore —_— 
niſtrarion of ir muſt needs ceaſe. There are now no Prie/is a - 
vites, no worldly Sanftyary, nor any Miniſtrations in it, 0! _—_ 
ir. But our Saviour hath told us, Thar the Goſpel ſhall he x 1. 
ed to the end of the World 3 So as that Miniſtration mult _ 4 
ing to all Principles of Reaſon) be more glorious, a5 #1 
eternal is more glorious than that which is fluid and vanifhins: 


. 
12 Seeing then that we have ſuch hope | WE uſe great mo 
expeRarion lt 


'] plainneſs of ſpeech 2. 

rt Hope here ſignifiech nothing but a confident, certaiN Cal] 
of ſomething thar is heregfrer ro come to paſs, Th Ve 
referrethto ſomerhing which went before z the ſenſe 15) 
in a cettain confident expe&ation, that our Miniſtration _ - 
pel ſhall nor ceaſe, as the Miniſtration of the Law hath do Why 
that the DoQrine of the Goſpel brings in not a remporary> ante”; 
everlaſting Rigbteoz/neſs ; that there ſhall never be #1 = God, 
neſs reyeaicd, wherein any Soul can ſtand righteous. - ts faith; 
bur that which is revealed in the Goſpel to be jr0 fatn io. 


read Exod, 1g.) o $0 that the Children of Trael could not ſtedfaſtly | 


Goſpel with a 


i ; ic 
we are vel;her aſhamed, nor atraid to preach freedom 


inuch more doth the miniſtration * of rightevuſneg *fmy 
, 


[l 


Ron, 


Lnap. 


reat Fri! 

19. 

arion || 0, 

(cb) 1/6 
being 
> Gol- 
and 
zut an 
reoul- 
God, 
ſal £D 5 
ith all 
eedon 


Is 6,10, 
=” #4 


1, 


25.9, 


III. 


freedom and boldneſs: We do nor, as Moſes, cover our ſelves 
with a Veil when we preach the Goſpel ro people, bur we ſpeak 
whar God hath given to .us in Commiſſion to ſpeak, unconcernedly 
4s to any terrours or affrightmenrs from men: we know, that 
reat is the Truth which we preach ; and that it ſhall prevail and 
out-live all che rage and madneſs of the Enemies of it; þ 

13 And not as Moſes, which pur a veil over his face, 


that the Children of 1ſrac] could not ſtedfaſtly look 


jon 1% * ro the end of that which is aboliſhed #. 


we have the Hiſtory, ro which this paſſage of the Apoſile 
rclaterh, in Exod. 34. 33, 35. where we read, that when Mojes had 
done (peaking, be put 4 veil on his face, The Apoſtle here elegantly 
rurns that paſſage into an A//egory, and opens to us a Myſtery hidden 
under that- piece of Hiſtory, Thar ſhining of Moſes his Face in a 
Type, prefigured the ſhining of him who was tq be the Light of rhe 
World ; as he was from Eternity the brightneſs of his Father's Glory. 
Moſes covering himſelf with a Veil, ſignifies God's hiding the Myſtery 
of Chriſt from Ages. Moſes did not put a Veil on his Face tor 
that end, that the Children of JFael might not look upon him ; bur 
this was the Event of it, which alſo prefigured the blinding of the 
7ews ; they firſt ſhut their eyes, and would not ſee, then God ju- 
dicially ſealed their eyes, that they ſhould nor ſee, that Chriſt was 
the End of the Law for Righteouſneſs, the true Meſſiah, and the Me- 
diaror berwixt God and Man; they could nor (as the Apoſtle ex- 
prefſeth ir) ſee to the End of that which was to be aboliſhed; tothe end 
of the Legal Diſpenſarion, ro the End of all the Types of Chriſt 
which were in the Levitical Law. Now ( faith the Apoſtle ) we 
do not do ſo, but make ir our buſineſs ro preach the Goſpel with 
as much openneſs, and plainneſs, and freedom as 1s imaginable, The 
whole Hiſtory of the Goſpel juſtifieth what rhis Text affirmeth con- 
cerning the Jews 3 that they could not ſee, that Chriſt, by his com- 
ing, had put an end to the Law, and the Righteouſneſs thereof. 
Wefind upon all occafions how much the Phariſees, and thoſe who 
adhered to that Sect, ſtuck in the Law, to the hindrance of their 
receiving of, or believing in the Lord Jeſus Chriſt. 

14 But * their minds were blinded w. For until 
this day remaineth the ſame veil untaken away x, in 
the reading of the old Teſtament y: which veil is done 
away In Chriſt =. 

w Here the Apoſtle expoundeth what he meant before by the 
myſtical Veil, wiz, the blinding of the Eyes of the Jews; of which we | 
read ofren in the new Teftament, Matt. 13. 14. Mark 4+ 12. Luke 8. 
10. Job. 12. 4s. Afts 28. 26. Rom.11. 8. (See the Notes upon all 
thoſe Texts.) x And (faith the Apcſtle) ro this day the Veil re- 
maineth not taken away 3 that Veil, which was ſignified by the V+1/ 
with which Moſes covered his Face. y In the reading of the Old Teſta- 
ment, is, when the Old Teſtament is read: ſome part of which was 
wont to be read in the Synagogues every Sabbach-day. Bur we 
ſhall meer with this in the next Verſe more fully. xz Bur (ſatth he) 
this Veil 7s taken awey in Chriſt, Tr is really taken away upon the 
coming of Chriſt ; that is, the Veil, that covered the face of Chriſt, 
is now truly raken away upon his coming z the Types are fulfilled 
in him, as their Complement and Anti:ype 3 the Prophecies are ful- 
filled in him, as he whom they concerned, and of whom the Pro- 
phets ſpake. Bur the Veil, thar is drawn over mens kearrs, is nor 
taken away, till they come to receive Jeſus Chriſt, as the End of 
the Law for Righteouſneſs, to cloſe with him, and to believe in 
him. God hath raken the Veil off from Chriſt, by ſending him per- 
ſonally to fulfil all Righteouſneſs 3 bur Chriſt proficeth nothing par- 
ticular Souls, until they come to believe in him, then ir is taken a- 
way from their Souls, and not before, Which was the reaſon thar 
Ir remained ſtil] upon the Jews, amongſt whom he came, as among 
his own, bur they received him nor. 

I5 But even unto this day, when Moſes is read, the 
yell is upon their heart a. : 

a The Veil, myſtically ſignified by the Veil upon Moſes his face, 
which hindreth them from ſeeing or diſcerning che Meſſiah to be 
come. But why doth he ſay, Whez Moſes, that is, the Books of 
Moſes, or rather of the Old Tefiament, are read? Poſlibly he there- 
by hinteth, that ir was their duty, when in the Synagogues they 
heard the Chapters of the Old Teſtament read, which contain the 
Types and Prophecies of Chriſt, they ought to have looked through 
thoſe veils, and have conſidered Chriſt as the End of thoſe things 3 
lo the Law, as a Schoolmaſter, ſhould have led them ro Chriſt: bur 
1t was quire otherwiſe When they heard thoſe porrions of the 
Old Teſtament read, through the Veil xpon their bearts, they could 
nor ſee through the Veil of thoſe Types, Prophecies, and ritual 
Performances, but reſted in them as things, in the performance of 
which they placed their Righteouſneſs, Or, if they betore had ſome 
little convi&ions upon their ſpirits, yer when they again came in- 
to the Synagogues, and heard the Law read, the Veil again appear- 
ed over their hearrs, ſo as they could nor ſee Chriſt, 


16 Nevertheleſs, * when it ſhall turn unto the 


Lord, * the veil ſhall be taken away 6b. 

b When it ſhall turn, may be underſtood of the whole, or of the 
gereraliry (ar leaſt) of the Jews, when they ſhall be converted to 
the Faith of Chriſt; Or when any particular perſon ſhall be con- 
verted ro Chriſt : Then the Veil fall be taken away; not the Vell 
with which God covered and veiled the Myſteries of the Goſpel, 
(that was already taken away upon Chriſt's coming in the fleſh) buc 
the Veil of blindneſs, which they had drawn over their own Souls. 
Though the light of che Goſpel ſhineth clearly, and Chriſt be un- 
veiled, yer until men, by a true Faith, receive Chriſt, and turn 
rom ſinful courſes, to the obedience of the Goſpel, ' they ſee lictle 
or nothing of Chriſt, The taking away of this Veil, and the tyrs- 
"ng to the Lord, are things done in Souls at the ſame time; trhere- 
ore nothing is co be coneluded here, from the Apoſtle's naming 


ce reinoral of rhe impediment, after che effe&t of which thar is a 
auſe, 


17 Now the Lord is that Spirit c, and where the 
Plrit of the Lord # there is liberty d. 
© The Lord Chriſt was a Man, but not a meer Man 3 but ore who 


Il CORINTHIANS. 


Chap. 
| had the Divine Nature perſonally uniced to his humane Nature; 
which 1s cal'ed the Spirit, Mzrh 2.8. Bur ſome think, that the Ar- 
ricle here, is not meerly Prepoſitive, but Emphatical, and fo refer- 
reth to 2. 6. where the Goſpel (the ſubſtance of which is Chriſt) 
was called the Spirit. _ So ic 15 judged by ſome, thar che Apoſtle pre- 
venteth a Queſtion which ſome might have propcunded, tjz. how 
the V2! ſhould be taken away >y mens turning unto the Lord ? 
Saith the Apoſiie, The Lord is a Spiric, cr he 1s that Spirir men- 
rioned, y, 18. He '£ a Spirit, and he gives our of the Spirit unco 
his People, the Spiric of Ho.inzis and SinRification, 4 And where 
the Spirir of the Lord 1s, (char holy {arQifying Spiric, which is of- 
ren called the Spiric ot Chriſt ) there is 1i5»»ty; (for our Saviour 
told the Jews, fob. 8. 36. I} the Sor mzke you jree, then (hall you be 
free indeed.) Aliberty trom the yoke of rhe Law, from Sin, Death, 
Hell; but the liberty which ſeemeth here to be chietly inrended, 
is a liberty from thar blindneſs and hardneſs which is upon meus 
hearts, until they have received the holy Spiric. 

18 But we all with open face behclding * as in a 
glaſs * the glory of the Lord e, 7 are changed into 
the ſame image from glory to glory f, even as || by 
the Spirit of the Lord g. 

e Some by | we ] here underſtand all Believers; others think it 
1$ better underſtood of Miniſters: but the univerſal particle ll, 
rather guideth us to interpret it of the whole bcdy of Believers, of 
whom the Apoſtle ſaith, Thar chey all behold the glory of God with 
open face, thar is, nor under thoſe dack Types, Shadows and Pro- 
phecies, thar he was of old revealed under, bur as in a Looking- 
glaſs, which repreſents the face as at hand; nor as in a PeripeRive 
which ſheweth things afar off. f We behold him in the gals of 
the Goſpel, fully opened and preached ;. and chis fight of Chriſt in 
the Goſpel, 1s nor a meer uleleſs fighr, bur ſuch a fight as changerh 
the Soul into the image and likeneſs of Chriſt, from glory ro glory, 
carrying on the Souls of Believers from one degree of Grace to an- 
other z or making ſuch a glorious change in the heart, as ſhall 
not be blotred our uncil a Soul comech intro thoſe poſſeſſions of 
Glory which God hath prepared for his People. g And all this 
is done by the Spirit of the Lord, working with the Word of God 
inthe mouths of his Miniſers; bur fo, as the Spiric hath che prin- 
cipal agency and efficiency in the wort: 


GHAP. Iv. 


His ſmcerity aud diligence in this Miniſtry, 1, 2. From whom the Goſpel 
# bid : by whom and by what power it is known, 3—1. This power 
ſeen in the Apoſtles. Their overcoming Aﬀiftions, 8 12. Their enco:= 
ragement under them, from the example of David: The 6/eſſ*d Re- 
ſurreftion: God's providence in them and their End : The renewing of 
the inward man; and the greatneſs of the eternal Glory, 13— 18. 


I "nn ſeeing we have this miniſtry, * as we * 1 Cor.5. 


have received mercy, we faint not a : 

a Ic is the opinion of Beza, Thar the Traducers of this great 
Apoſtle rook advantage from his great Tryals and afflitions, by 
reaſon of them, to conclude him no ſuch man as he was by ſome re- 
preſented; and that the Apoſtle upon that rakes advantage to 
magnifie his Office. God (faith he) having intrufted us with ſo 
glorious a Miniſtration, as I have proved thar of che Goſpel to be, 
accordingto the meaſure and proportion of Gifts and Graces which 
God hath beſtowed upon us, or by reaſon of thar infinire Grace 
and Mercy which God hath ſheved us, in calling us to ſo honou- 
rable a Station and Office, though we meer with many Adverſaries, 
many affligions, many difficulcies, yer we bear up and fink notun- 
derthem, nor faint in our ſpirits becauſe of chem. 


ſhoneſty b, not walking in craftineſs c, * not handling 
the word of God deceitfully d, but * by manifeſtation 
of the truth, * commending our ſelves ro every man?s 
conſcience in the ſight of God e. | 

b Though we be expoſed ro many ſorrows and ſufferings, it is 


nor for any diſhoneſt or unwarrancable behaviour amongſt men; * Chap. 5+ 


nay, we have not only declined openly diſhoneſt ations, bur any 


ſecret or hidden diſhoneſt behaviour, * Poſlibly he refleteth upon * Chap. 6. 


choſe, whether Teachers, or orhers in this Church, who though 
| they behaved themſelves very ſpeciouſly in their more external 
| converſation, yer it was a ſhame ro ſpeak whar things were done 
; of them in ſecret, We (faith the Apoſtle) have renounced all ſe- 
cret, diſhoneſt, ſhameful aRions. «c It hath not been our defign co 
carry our ſelves crattily, ro cheat people with a fair outſide and ex- 
rernal demeanour. d Nor in our Miniftry haye we cheated and 
deceived people, inſtead of inſt-ufing them in the Truth 3 crying, 
Peace, Peace, when God hath ſaid, there is no peace to the wicked, 
and rempering our diſcourſes to all mens humours, nor ſpeaking 
right things, but ſmooth things. e Our buſineſs in the courſe of our 
Miniſtry, hath been ro commend our ſelves to every man's Conſct- 
_—_ as in the ſight of God, by manifcſting ro chem the Truth of 
God. 


3 But if our goſpel be hid, * it is hid to them that 
are loſt f. 


mentality in the promoting and publiſhing of ir. His meaning is, 
if the Do&rine of the Goſpel, which I am an inſtrument to preach, be 
hidden, ſo as there yer be any Souls that do nor underſtand, receive 
and believe ir, the fault is not in the Word we preach, nor yer in 
our preaching of ir (which hath been in all fimplicicy and. plain- 
neſs, without craftineſs or deceit) bur in themſelves, who fayour and 
indulge their luſts co that degree, as that they deſerve to be loſt, 
or are at preſent in their fintuL ſtate ; in which ſenſe all men are in 
the Parables compared to 7oſt Sheep, or loft Goats; and Chriſt is 
ſaid to have come to ſeek, and to ſave thoſe that are loſs, Men, mad 
upon their laſts, may nor underſtand the Doctrine of the Goſpel 
which we preach, bur orhers underſtand and believe it. I had ra- 
ther underſtand the rerm loft in this ſenſe, than as expreſſing Re- 
probatesz for it ſcemeth ſomething harſh ro make this Phraſe co 


ſ1gnifre 


f The Apoſtle calls the Goſpel, bis Goſpel; becauſe of his inſtru- : 


IV. 


” x Cot. 
I3. 12. 

* Chap. 4: 
4,6 1Tim, 
I, 1. 

* x Cor. 
IS. 49» 
Col. 3 10, 
Or, of the 
Lord the 
Spirit, 


23s 


2 But have renounced the hidden things * of - di- * Rom. :, 


I6., 


fGr. ſhame, 
* Chap. 2. 


7.” 


1 Thell. 2. 


3» 5 


It. 


4» 


+ 1Cor. 1: 
18, 


Chap. 2. 


it « 
$1 
; #41 
[| 
+ v 
To 
the 
l + 
x 
" 
. -4 
- " ' E 
c 
wi "Thw)- 
, : # 


T6 86 


Fr 

x £4 

#2 BEG v * 
*l. Wat, 


—_ > 


c—_—— 


OO 


Chap. IV. 
ſonifie, that God had no more-in Cointh at this time thar Lelung- 
&d ro the E'e&ion of Grace, than thole thet were already convert- 
ed; or that all thoſe that were at this time Hypocrires in this fa- 
mous Church, were ſuch-25 periſhed eternally, Yer the werds 
of the next Verſe ſeem rather ro fayour their notion, who by lo? 
here underſtand Reprobares, 

4 In whom the * god of this world g * hath blind- 
ts ed the eyes of thcſ2 that believe not b, leſt the light of 
ne "_ the * glorious goſpel of Chriſt, * who is the image of 
* Toll 12 ' God, ſhould ſhine unto them z. 

- 4 ! " . y * ' 

45. £ Thourh ſome, by the God of this World, underſtand the true 
and 14 9. and living God, the Lord of Heaven and Earth; yer the Notion 
Phil. 2.5, of the moſt Interpreters, Thar it is the Detil, who 1s here called 
Col. 1. 15. the God of this World, becauſe he rulcth over the greateſt part of 
YHeb. 1. 3, the World, and they are his ſervants an | ſlaves, 1s moſt conſonant 
ro Scripture: For though we no where clſc find him cal'ed the God 
of this World z yer our Saviour twice calls him the Prince of this 
World, Joh. 12.31. and 14.30. And our Apoſtle, Ep». 2. 2. calls 
him the Prince of the Power of the Air. b Tie efte&alſo doth more pro- 

rly belong to the Devil, than unto God, who no otherwiſe blindech 
the eyes ot them, than either prrmiſſively,by ſuffering them to ſhut their 


own eyes, Or fudicially. The Apoſtle declares, Thar choſe who are | 


ſo blinded, are ſuch perſons as believe not. i He furcher declireth che 
End ofthe Deyils Agency in blinding mens eyes with errours, malice, 
and prejudice, Teſt rhe light of the glorious Gotpel of Chriſt, who 
is the image of God, the expreſs image of his Perſon (conſidered as to 
his Divine Nature) {p01 ſhine unto then, char is, into their hearts. 
5 For we preach rot our ſclvesk, bur Chriſt Jeſus 
£Ch.1.24, the Lord!, and * our ſelves your ſervants for Jeſus 
ſake m. 
hb For a man to preach himſeif, is ro preach the devices and ima- 
girations of his own heart inſtead of the revealed Will of God: 
ro make his diſcourſes the evomitions of his own lufts and paſſions 3 
orto make himſelt che End of his Preaching, preaching meerly for 
filghy lucre ſake, or to ſupp!y himſelf with bread, or tor the cften- 
tation Of his uwn Wir, and Learning, an:! Parts, / Bur we preach 
Jeſus Chriſt the Lord, we preach what he hath commanced us to 
preach, and he 15 the Suje& of our Diſcourſes 3 we either preach 
what Chriſt is, or declare in our preachirf whar he hath dune and 
ſuffered ior Sinners, or what he hath commanded us to do in crder 
eo our and your otaining of Lite and Salvation throngh him. = 
And in our preaching, though in the firſt place we are Chriſts 
Sc. vants, whe hach commanded us to go and preach, and who is 
the ſujet matter of our Preaching, and whoſe Honour and Glory 
15 the End of all our Preaching ; yet we are alſo your Servants: really 
fo, not in rhat we ferye your Juſts and humours, and ſpeak ſmooth 
things, ſuch as may be pleafing ro your humours; but for 7eſts 
ſake, becauſe in revealing the Will of God to you, and in publiſh- 
ing the Grice of the Golpel to you, we do you the higheſt ſervice 
we can in your eternal ccncerns, 
6 For God who command<cd the light to ſhine out 
+ Gr. # he of darkneſs”, | hath * ſhined in our hearts, to give the 
woorath. light of the knowledg of the glory of God 0, in the 
, 2 ite T* face of Jeſus Chriſt p. 
4 z The Holy Ghoſt in the New Teſtament often compareth the 
works of the new Creation by Jeſus Chriſt, to the work of God in 
the o/d Creation; intimating ro ut, that the latrer is as great a 
work of Prozidence and Divine Power, as the former : Eph. 4. 24. The 
mw man aſter God 15 ſaid to be creatid in Righteouſneſs and true Holl- 
neſs. For as that'is a Creation, which is the making of ſomething 
out of Nothing, (as God created the Heavens and the Earth : ) ſo 
the produRtion ot one thing out of another which hath no fitneſs 
or aptiude toreceive ſucha Form, is allo a true Creation, and re- 
quireth an Almighty Power, God mad? light to ſhine ont of darkneſs, 
G#n. 1.2,3. 0 So (ith the Apoſtle) he h:th made Chriſt (who 
15 the Light ot the World) to ſhine inco our hearrs; to give us 
the true Knowledg of God, and of his Glory (the Glory of his 
Grace.) p In the face of Jeſus Chriſt, that 15, by which we artcain the 
clear and certain Knowledg of God (as a man is diſtinaly known by, 


or from his face) God is clearly and diſtinaly known only in, and 
by Chriſt. 


7 But we have this treaſure in * earthen veſſels g, 

*Ch.s. 1. * that the excellency of the po er may be of God, and 

* 1 Core2. not of us r. 

5. q By the Treaſure here mentioned, the Apoſtle meanerh either his 
Miniftration, or Apoſtolical Office, which he before had proved glori- 
ous, more glorious than that of the Law : Or elſe, that Light of 
the Knowledg of the Glory of God, which (as he had before ſaid) 
God had made to ſhine into their hearts in rhe face of Jeſus Chriſt, 
This Treaſure (faith he) we, even we that are the Apoſtles of the 
Lord, have in our Souls ; which are cloathed with bodies, and theſe 
nor m:de of Iron, or Stone, or any other matter not capable of 
Impreſſions of violence, but made ot Earth, like earthen ports or 
ſhells, that eaſily receive impreſſions of violence, and are preſently 
broken 1n pieces: r That the World may ſee, that whatſoever po- 
werful effects are wrought by us, they are the work of the excel- 
lent Power of God 3 nor done by us, but by him; that he, not we, 
might have all the glory. 


8 We are troubled on every ſide 5, yet not diſtref., 
j| Or,r0t at- Ted # 3; we are perplexed «, but not || in deſpair w : 


together 5s Weare many ways, indeed every way afflied, afflited with 

without all ſores of affliions; 7 bur yer we are nor like perſons cooped up 

help or into a ſtrait place, fo as they are not able to turn them, nor know 

MEANS, which way to move (> the word fignifies.) - # We are perplexed,the 
word fignifies doubting, uncertain what ſhall become of us, or how 
God will difpoſe of us, fu!l of anxious troubleſome thoughts abour 
whar ſhall be our lor in rhe Worle ; but w yer not deſpairing of the 
help, preſence, ſspport and aſiſtance of God. 

y 37- 9 Perſecuted x, but not forſaken y; * caſt down 


Z, but not deſtroyed 4 


IL CORINTHIANS. 


| x Violently furſued and proſecuted by ſuch as are the - 
of the Goſpel, and Enemies to our Lord Jeſus, becauſe 
feſtion of him, and preaching his Goſpel ; bur yer” y yo for 
God, nor wholly of men; God, by the inward irfluences of Ve ” 5 
Spirir, ſupporting, upholding, and comforting us; ang bY oly 
his Proidenze, raiſing us up teme friends that flick by us. ®,Þ 
down, either in our own thoughts, (as it is the nature gf B. 
troubles and afflitions ro fink mens thoughts) or c:{t down ar 
violence of men thrown to the earth, a bur yer we live, ang 3 ve 
the mighty Power of God preſerved, that we are rot utterly 
iiroyed, "ey 
10 Always bearing about in the body the * q 


Uverſaries 
| our pro. 


made manifeſt in our body c. 


in his Mina and Soul, whiles he fetches ſirength frem it to 


with him, that the body of ſin might, be deſtroyed, that henceforth he m 

not ſerve ſn, v., 6 He alſo bearcth abouc with him the dying of - 
Lord Jejus in hs body, either in a repreſentation, whiles in his OM 
rings he is made conformable ro the Death of Chriſt, Phil, = 
or 1n his own real ſufferings; which he calleth the ayirg of thi Lng 


pathizerh with veltevers therein, he being afflied in all their 3& 
&ions; yea, and Chriſt (as the Apoſtle exprefſerh ir, Phil, I. 20, 4 
mgnified in their body, by death, as well as by life, This the Apoſtle 


tells u- he d'd, c Th t the life of Chriſt :llo might be mage manijeſt in 


hu body. By the rf of Chriſt muſt here be underſtood, either the 
Reſurrefian of Chrift, and that life which he now liveth in Heaven 
with his Father ; or that quickning Power of the Spirir of Chriſt, 
which then mightily ſhewerh it (clf in Believers when they are not 
overwhelmed by the w ters of affligion, nor conquered hy their 
ſufferings; bur in, and over al', are more th:n Conquerors 
chrough that mighty Power of Ch: iſt which ſhewerh forth ir {lf 
in them. Or (as tome think) thar lively Virtue and Poner of 
Chriſt, which ſhewed it ſelf in the efficacy of the Apoſt!es Miniſtry, 
by which ſo many thouſands of Sr uls were brought in ro Chriſt, which 
was not the <ffet of their oun virtue, but of the Life of Chriſt 
manifeſted in their Body. Butthe Apoſtie having betore ſpokengf 
his Sufferings, ir ſeems beſt interpreted of thar living Power Put 
forth by Chriſt in upholding the earthly veſſels of his Apoſtles, 
notwithſtanding all the knocks they mer with, to carry about tha 
Heavenly Treaſure with which God had betruſted them, 


be made manifeſt in our mortal fleſh e. 


neſs : For we are always delivered unto death, that is, under cx. 
nual threats and dangers of death, ſo that we have always the (en. 
rence of death in cur ſelves; for Feſivs his ſabe, for our ovning, 
preaching, and profeſſing Chriſt, and rhe Do8Rrin of his Golpel, 
We are not delivered to death for evi! doing, nor meerly as inng- 
cent Perſqns, bur for well doing; and that in the nobleſt ſenl 
for obeying the Commands, and for publiſhing the Goſpel of Chiilt, 
e And the infinitely wiſe Providence of God permitreth this, that 
he might make manifeſt in our mortal fleſh, rar Chriſt js riſen 
from the dead, and liveth for ever making incerceſſion for us, and 
as 2 living Head, giveth neceſſary influences of ſtrength, ſupport, 
and comfort, as to all choſe who are h!s Members, fo more paricu- 
larly ro us, who are ſome of the principal Members of that myſtical 
Body of which he is the Head. So th:t our Suffcrings are (o far 
trom being an evidence againſt the truth of our Doctrin and of out 
Miniſtration, that they are rather an evidence of the truth of both; 
as teſtifying, that he whom we preach, h.viugdicd tor ourfin, 1 
alo rilen tor our Juſtification, and exalted at the right had of 
God ; from whence he diſpenſeth his ſpiricual influences, as © the 
Souls of all his People, ſoto our Souls in particular, by whuchwe are 
inabled, witchour fainting, ro ſuffer ſuch things with boldyels, cou- 
rage, and patience. 


OU F. 

g f Ka ſee the difference betwixt us and you; either thereal 
difference, or the farfied difference, We are killed all the day 1018s 
in deaths often, delivered to death always 3 you are rich, and full, and 
want nothing. © g Life, thar is, ſecuriry, happineſs, and proſperity 
attends you. Or the fanſied difference 5 you bleſs your ſelvcs that 
you are nor in ſo much jeopardy as we are, and ſome of you areret 
dy to curſe us, becauſe Vipers ſtick ro our hands, and we are 1M CoN- 
tinually renewed and repeared troubles. Very good [nierpreters 
think theſe words a ſmart Ironical expreſſion, by which the Apoſtle 
refle&eth upon a Parcy in this Church, who from hits ſufferings 
concluded againſt the Truth of his DoRrin, or his favour with G06: 
and for themſelves, becauſe of their immunity and treedom ifom 
ſuch ſufferings. Others think rhe ſenſe this, Our deaty #5 J0w liſe 3 
Our ſufferings are your ſpiricual advantage. 


13 We having the ſame ſpirit of faith h, according 
aSit is written, 1 believed, and therefore have | 1p0- 


ken ; we alſobelieve, and thcrefore ſpeak. ny 
h The ſame Spirit of Faith fignifieth the ſame Faith, OT 1/Us- 
proceeding from the ſame Spirit 3 thus, the Spirit of 91/40 3 4-8 
derſtanding, che Spirit of Counſel and Might, the Spi'!! of _ - , 
and of the Fear of the Lord, fignifieth Wiſdom, Underandine, nt 
Might, Knowledg, &c. Tis a Queſtion, whom the apont hs 
neth when he ſaich, We having the ſame Faith? Some 11 ” he 
meaneththe Saints under the O!d Teſtament, whoſe Faith 3 ju 
ſame with the Faith of Believers under rhe New Teſtament a 
that which guideth rhem to that Interpretation, 15 ht * = 
following quotation out of P/al. 116. 10. Bur the ſcope © L * Hy 
ration ſeemerh rohe, to prove that all good men will {peak a 


( Moves xc, that 
belieye ; they therefore ſeem beiter ro interprer the Tex 'make 


Ghap, 1y 


the Lord Jeſus b, * that the life alſo of Jeſus mia pl I 


17, 
b A Chriſtian bearerh abour with him the dying of oxy Ly, Fly 2? 


- . > . o 0 . f It, 
his heart unto fin; teing wierd with Coriſt into death, ang _ the,, 


into the likeneſs of his death, Rom. 6. 5. having his old mar crucifeg 1% 


Jeſs, becaule chey were for Chriſts ſake, and becauſe Chriſt | a 


11 For we which live, * are alway delivered unto 'p; 
death for Jeſus ſake 4, that the life alſo of Jetus might ,,, * 


Romd,4 
4 We, who are yer alive, as having breath ſtill in our bodies in 1 cn 
another ſenſe do not live, viz, as Life ſignifies proſperity and ij. 31 4, 


12 So then * death worketh in us f, bur life in*chp 
135 


4 


' lis 
nf, 


7 . 
Tin, 


haj 


the ( 


| Rom. 8. 


F 
, 


ap 


I 1: 6, 


J110F 2, 


. V. 


make this the ſenſe of ir, Though God, in the Wiſdom of his Pro- 
vidence, hath aſligned us in this World a different lot from you, 
thar you cre full, we empty 3 you tn proſperity, we In adverſity 3 
yer we are partakers of the ſam? Faith with you, and are aged 
from the ſane Spirir that you are: and as Darid's Spirir guided him 
co 2 profeſſion of his Faich, and a ſpeaking whar he believed, fo we 
alſo ſpeak, and muſt ſpeak according ro what we believe, And this 
is manifeſtly the ſenſe of the Words, if we conſider what followeth 
in the next Verſe, : 
14 Knowing that * he which raiſed vp the Lord 


Teſus, ſhall raiſe up us alſo by Jeſus, and ſhall preſent 


Cor. + 745 with yOu 5. 


; Knowing that God the Father, who raiſed up the Lord Jeſus 
from the dead as the Firſt-truirs of them thar ſleep ; ſhall likewiſe, 
by the virtue of his Reſurre&ion, and by a Power flowing from him 
as now alive, and fitting at the right hand of God, quicken our 
mortal bodjes 3 that both our Souls and Bodies may be preſented 
wich you to be both eternally glorified ; this maketh us that we 
do nor fear death, bur are unconcerned, alrhough by wicked men 
we every day be delivered to ir, and brought within the danger 
and fighr of ir. Still the Reſurrefion of Chriſt 1s made the Foundation 
of our Reſurre&ion, and a firm ground for our Faith of it, And we 
are from this Text confirmed in the truth of chis, Thar alchough 
the lor of Gods people in this life be very difterent, (ſome are poor, 
{ome rich, ſome in proſperity, ſome in adverſity, and incompaſled 
with ſorrows and afflictions) yer if they have all the ſame Faith, 
they ſiall all meer in the Reſurre&ion, and ſhall by Chriſt, be all 
preſented unto God as perſons redeemed by him, and waſhed with his 
Blood, and who ſhall be glorified rogerher. 


15 For *all things are tor your ſake k, that the 


L1.24 * abundant grace might through the thankſgiving of 


many, redound to the glory of God!7. 
kþ All rhings that Chriſt hath done and ſuffered ; his Death, and 


7 I 5s Reſurre&ion from the dead : and all things thar I have done or 


|; 9. 


* Chip 


| $16, 
410, 


þ 54+ 


Y 


kn. 8, 


J 0, 


49% x 
I, 


ſuffered, all are for your ſakes. Thar the greater henefic ic be 
which you receive from God, the greater praiſe, honour, and glo- 
ry might redound to him by the Thanbſgiving of many, for God can 
be no otherwiſe glorified by us, than by the predicaring of his Mercy 
and Goodneſs, and the praiſing of him for the mercies which we re- 
ceive from him. The more God doth good unto, the more honour, 
praiſe, and glory redoundeth to his Name, 

16 For which cauſe we faint not , but though our 
outward man periſh », yet * the inward man is renew- 
ed day by day 0. 

# Becauſe of this double advantage which accrueth from our 
ſufferings, wiz, The furthering of the good of your Souls, and the 
promoring the glory of God from the thankſgivings of many 3 though 
we ſuffer many harſh and bitrer things, yer we do nor faint nor 
fink under the burden of our Trials ; but though as to our outward 
man, we are every day dying perſons, daily decaying as to the 
ſtrength, and vigour, aud proſperiry of our outward man, yet the 
ſirengih and comforr of our Souls and Spirtts reneweth day by day ; 
we are every day fironger and ſtronger as to the managing of our 
ſpiritual fight, and every day more cheered and comforted in our ho- 
ly courſe, 


17 For * our light affliction, which is but for a mo- 
ment, worketh for us a far more exceeding and eternal 
weight of glory p. | 

p The Apoſtle in theſe words wonderfully lefſeneth his own, and 
the reſt of the Apoſtles, and all other Chriſtians ſufferings for the 
Goſpel: He callerch them Light, nor that they were ſo in themſelves, 


IL CORINT HIANS. 


but with reſpe& to char weight of Glory which he mentioneth in the 
latter part of the Verſe ; He calleth them momentary, but for a mo- 
mnt, with reference to that Eternity, which is mentioned, 
zffli&ions are light, the glory will be a w«2ght 3 the affliions are bur 
for a 0ment, the glory ſhall be eternal. ' And (faith the Apoſtle) 
our Aiiftion worketh for us this glory. The glory will not only be a 
conſequent of theſe afflitions, but theſe afflictions will be a means of 
It, a furtherance of our Salvation, and may be ſaid ro work this glory 
for us, by working us for ir, promoting our mortification and ſanRi- 
hcation, {to which ir is promiſed, Mat. 5.8 ) and ſo making us meer 
for it, and Subje&s capable of ir, 


18 While we look not at the things which are ſeen, 
but at the things which are not ſeen q: for the things 
which are ſeen, are temporal r 3 bur the things which 


are not ſeen, are eternal 5. 

q Two things ſupport the Spirits of Chriſtians under Trials : The 
ryeing of him who is inviſible 3, this ſupporred Moſes, Heb. 11.27. He 
endured, as ſeeing him who is inviſible, 2, The feeing by the Eye of 
Faith the things which ave inviſevle 3 the things which God hath pre- 
pared in another World for thoſe that love him 3 the things which 
Eye bath not ſeen, nor hath it entred into the heart of man to conceive, 
7 For (faith the Apoſtle) the things which are ſeen, which fall under 
the ſenſes of men, they are but temporal, and of a remporary du- 
rarion, 5 Bur the inviſible things, (rhe eternal and exceeding weight 
of glory) whichare before mentioned, they are of an eternal durati- 
073 and therefore much ro be preferred before thoſe things which 
endure but for a moment. 


CHAP. V. 


Hts aſſurance of, and deſires aſter Immortal Glory, 1=—2, and expeftance 
of the ſuture Fudgment: Wherefore be laboureth to keep a good Con- 
ſeimce, I-—11, Zotthat he may herein boaſt of himſelf; but that he 
may live to his Lord, 12—16, and as 4 new Creature, 16—18, and 
oy Miniſtry of Reconciliation to Reconcile others alſo in Chriſt to God, 
— 21. 
Or we know, that if * our earthly houſe of this 
tabernacle were diſſolved «, we bave a building 


of God b, an houſe not made with hands c, eternal in 
the heavens d. 
Vol. II, 


ſen; in this verſe he openerh kimſelf, and ſhewerh whar thoſe un- 
ſeen things are: W: (faith he) know, we have a certain perſwaiion we 
doubt nor of jr, bur that if our body werediflolved, &5. This bo- 
dy he calleth an Earthly koaſe, either becauſe it is made of the duft 
of rhe earth, into which jr muſt azain be reſolved; or becouſe jr 
1s only the haticarion of the Soul ſo jong as tte Soul 15 on this fide of 
Heaven z and therefore he callech ic alſo, the Eartiiiy ho:fe of this 
Tabernacle, A Taternicle 1+ a moving Houſe or Booth builded np 
tor a time 3 This Tabernacle (fairh the Apoſtle) muſt be pulled 
down, and taken inpleces ; and we are certain, thart if it be diff3l- 
ved, b vehavea b:41ding of God ; cither a bleſſed, eternal Manſion. 
(zccording co thar of our Saviour, oh. 14. 2. In ny Fathers kouſe 
there are many manſions} or elſe, God wili give us a ſpiritual, glorious, 
1ncorruptible Body, &« Not an Houſe made with hand*, nor an houſe 
that ſhail be diſſolved and any more pulled do.vn, bur which ſhall be 
4 Eternal in the Heavens 3, \nfuch a ſtate, as that it ſhall be incorcup- 
tible, and no more ſubject ro any corruption or decay, 


Chap. 


4 The Apcſtie had before (aid, thar he looked at the things nct 


2 For inthis * we groan earneitly, deliring to be clo- * Rom. 3. 


thed upon with our houſe which is from heaven e. 

e Weare fo confident of ſuch a bleſſed ſtare, rhar we paſſionarely 
deſire tobe inveſted into ir. And this Groaning is allo an Evidence 
of it, for the defice of Grace ſhall nor be made fruſtrace. Defirous 
that our morta!ity may pur on immortality, and our corruption may 
pur on incorruption. It 1s againſt che Nature of man to defire 
dearh, which is the ſtripping or uncloathing the Soul of fleſh 3 buc 
nor to defire thar the garmenr of immortalicy may be pur upon mor- 
raliry, ( which is that our houſe from Heaven, which is mentioned 
Inv. I, 


naked f. 


f Some make the C!othizg here ſpoken of, different from the 
Clothing before mentioned, And make this Verſe reftritive of 
whar che Apoſtle had before ſaid, of the certainry which ſome have 
of being clothed upon with a glorious Body. 7 ſo be (faith the A- 


garmenc of Chrift's Righreouſneſs; for concerning choſe that do 
nor die in the Lord, that do not watch, and keep their garments, ir 
IS ſaid Rev. 15, 15. They ſhall walk naked, and men ſhall ſee their ſhane. 
Bur conſidering the clothing before mentioned was ncr this clo« 
ching, bur the ſuperinducing of an immortal, incorruprible, glori- 
ous ſtate of Body, upon our Mortal, corruptible Stare ; ſome judi- 
clous Interepreters think, that the c{o:hing here mentioned, is che 
clothing of the Soul with the Body. Ir is probable, that the Apo- 
ſtles apprehended Chriſts ſecond Coming much nearer than i: hath 
proved ; thetime of ir not beivg revealed torhem. Therefore he faich 
1 Theſſ. 4. 15. We that are alive (ſuppoſing thar generation mighc 
live) to Chriſts ſecond Coming : and 1 Cor. 15. $1. We ſhall not all ſleep, 
but we ſhall all be changed. This ſome think (and that nor imp:0954- 
bly) 1s the cauſe of this paſſage; rhe ſenſe of which chey judge ro 
be this: If ſo be thar we be, ar the ReſurreRion, found in the fleſh, 
clothed ſti]l with our bodies, and ſhall not be found zated, thar is, 
{tript of our fliſk, and dead before thar time, 


4 For we that are 1n ths tabernacle, do groan, be- 
ing burdened g, not for that we would be unclothed h, 


bur clothed upon, that mortality might be ſwallow- 
ed up of life z. 

g By Taberncle he meaneth (as he had before expoanded it} 
the earchly houſe of our body. Do groan, both wich a groaning of 
grief, and alſo of deſire, Being burdened, either wich the body of fle(þ, 
or with $3n (the vody of death) Ron. 7. 24. or with the load of 
Trials and Aﬀizetions, h Not that we would be unclothsd, that 1s iz, 
be unclothed of our fleſh, ( Nature abhorreth death, and flyerh 
from ir) bur clothed upon; which is expounded 1 Cor. 15. 33. Okr 


The j £0rruptivle having put on jncorruption, and our mortal baving pit on im- 


mortality, And this confirmerh whar was obſerved before, char the 
Apoſtles had ſome perſwafion, (though nor from any Divine Reve- 
lation of that hour) rhat che Reſurre&tion, and Day of Judgment, 
would be before the determinacion of that Age and Generation , 
thac ſo we might come into the poſſeſſions of Erernal Life, (for 
rhat tbe Apoſtle meanerh by mortality being ſwallowe! up of life.) 
Death 1s nor deſirable for irs own ſake, bur upon the account of 
chat immortal life-into which ic leadech the Souls of Bellevery 3 
nor (a5 was ſaid before) dorh the Apoſtle here diced!y defire death, 
which 1s that which in this Verſe he callerh «nclotting) bur rather 
the change. mentioned 1 Cor. 15, 52. which he here callech a clo- 
thing up01, Þ 


5 Now*he that hath wrought us for the ſelf ſame * 1.29. 


thing 1s God k, who hath alſo given unto us the ear- 
neſt of the Spirit /. | 

k The ſelf ſame thing is the life, the Eternal Life, mentioned in the 
former Verſe; the houſe in the Heavens, not made with hands, Tr. 2, 
God hath wrought us for ir, (as ſome imerpret the Text) in Crea- 
tion, and by his Providence, torming our bodies in the Womdb : bur 
ir is nuch berter interpreted by others concerning Regeneration 3 
for in the firſt birch (withour reſpz& to the Decree of EleRion ) 
God hath no more wrought us for it, than the worft of men, The 
Apoſtle therefore is, doubtleſs, ro be underſtood, as ſpeaking con- 
cerning the work of Grace, which is here attribured ro God 3 we 
have not wrought our ſelves into or up to any firneſs or atty groun- 
ed expeRation of the fucure bleſſed and glorious eftate ; buc it is 
God who hath prepared us for it, and wrought ſuch a lively hope 
of itin us. / And hath alſo given us his holy Spirit as the Pledge and 
Earneſt of ic : (Concerning this, ſee 2 Cor. 1. 21. ) he hath given us 
his Spirit to dwell and to work in us, and to affure us of what we 
ſpeak of, wiz. The houſe in the Heavens, the building of God that is 
net made with hands, The Spirir of Grace given to che people of 
God, working and dwelling in them, is a certain pledge of that 
Glory and Lite Eternal which he hath prepared for chem. | 

6 Therefore we are always contident, knowing that 
whilſt we are at home in the body, we are abſent from 


the Lord mm, 


Fffii n Wc 


poſtle) we be not ſound naked, bur clothed, 3. e. with the Wedding- - 


3 It ſo be that * being clothed, we ſhall not be found *Rev. 5; 
I8. 


-7 
Eph.2.19- 


[ 
i 
gy $1 
4: 
4 0 gs 
th 
4 + 
rl 
Tr 
$+ 
; on 
; 18 he-9h 
z1F ? "Wk J 
of | 
"4 « 
| 
kf i! 
: 
ki 
\ 
[i 
4 
o i 
pd 
th Josl$; 


Chap. 


of this Glory, and the ſwallowing up of Mortality in Life: For we 
know, thar while we are in our earthly home, (which js our body) 
we are furtheſt off from that which is our true home (which 1s 
Heaven) from the viſion and fruition of God ; for Believers are 
bur ſtrangers and pilgrims on the earth, deſiring a better country, that 75, 
an heavenly, Heb. 11. 16. 


* Rom. 8. 
23, 24, 


x Cor, $4. any evidence of ſenſe, but by Faith, {which is deſcribed by the Apo- 
ſtle, Hb. 11. 1. to be the ſubſtance of things hoped for, 
things not ſeen.) We ſee nothing here by the eye of ſenſe bur mor- 
rality,” corruption and miſery z but by Faith we ſee another more 
excellent and glorious ſtare, and we order our life according roour 
Faith, -and ſight of things thar are inviſible : Or Sight here may be 
taken more ſtriQly for the beatifick Viſion p:epared in Heaven for 
the Saints. 


T2, 


> Phil. 1. 


25s be abſent from the body, and to be preſent with rhe 
Lord o, 


willing to be our of this body thar we may have the glorious pre- 
ſence and enjoyment of God to all Eternity. 


f| Or, we en« 
ae 4701), 


aſſurance and confidence, 
Will of God, and Paſlively ſubmicting ro the Will of God in all 


afMiiRive-Providences; that while:we. are inthe body, and abſent 
from the Lord, we may be accepted of him; as we kriow we ſhall 
be, when we ſhall be preſent with him, in another ſenfe than we 

tiow arc, : 
+ Rom.12- © 10 For * we muſt all appear before the judgment 
Bo ſeat of Chriſt 4, *rhat every one may receive the things 
Rom. 2. ne .in his. body, according to that he hath done, 


whether ir be good or bad r, : 

q The Apoſtle declareth, cicher the ground of his confidence, 
Col. 3. 24, Or (rather) rhe reaſon of his, and other Believers labour ſoto be- 
25. | have themſelves, as that, both in life and death, they might be 

accepted of God; that was, his knowledge and firm belief of the 
12, laſt eddy Ir is called the Fudgment-ſeat of Chriſt, becauſe he 
ic is whom God hath appointed to be the Joaee both of the quick , 
and the dead, Afts 10. 42. The word tranſlate 
which ſignifieth to be made maniſeſt, and ſo fignifierh nor only to 
appear bur to be inquired into, ſearched andexamined, and narrow- 
ly fifred, and this lets us know, that thoſe Texts which ſpeak of Be- 
Hevers not being judged, or not coming into Judgment, muſt nor 
be underſtood of the "pry i of Inquiry 3 
that Judgmenr) bur of the Fudgment of Condemnation. 
us alſo know the vanity of their Opinion, who think that Pagans 
ſhall nor riſe again in the laſt Day. 
is declared, that every man may receive according to what he hath gone 
in bis body ; that is, according to the thoughts he hath thoughr, rhe 
words that he hath ſpoken, the a&ions which he hath done, during 
thetime that his Soul dwelt upon the Earth in his body ; whether 
the things «hich he did in thar Stare were good, and ſuch things 
as God required; or ſin\ul, and contrary to the Revealed Will of 
God. What this Receiving means, we are told Matt. 25. 46. Theſe 
ſhall go away into everlaſting puniſhment, but the Righttous into life 
eternal, Hence we read Foh. 5. 29. of a Reſurreftion of Life, and a 
Reſurretiion of Damnation, 


6. 
Oal. 6. 7. 
Eph. 6.8. 


Rev. 22, 


* Job 31. 
23s 

Jude 23. 
* Ch, 4« 
2+ 


* Chap. 3. 


7. #, but give you occaſion to * glory on our behalf, that 
Chap. I. you may have ſomewhat to anſwer them which glory 


4M >; the F 10 appearance, and not in heart w. 

# TI do nor ſpeak this ro commend my ſelf unto you. He had be- 
fore declared, that he truſted that he was made mamifeſt to their Con- 
oy and ſo needed not further to commend himſelf. Bur (faith 
1e 
the Apoſile of Chriſt unto you, or to defend me againſt rhe ſcan- 
dals and reproaches of choſe that reproach me, when themſelyes 
have no true inward cauſe of glorying, though chey have in our- 
po appearance, in reſpe& of their riches, wit, wiſdom, or the 

1 © 


face. 


* Ch. 11, 


1) 1 17-God x: or whether we be ſober, it is for your cauſe y., 
x Ir ſhould ſeem, that ſome amongſt the Corinthians, amongſt 

other reproaches, had reproached Payl for a mad man; either ta- 

k ng advantage of the warmth and ſeryour of his Spirit, or of thoſe 

Extaſits in which he ſometimes was; or © 

- could nor apprehend and underſtand : as the Roman Governour, in 
the Atts, told him, much learning had made him mad. 
rells chem, That if indeed he was befides himſe!finany of their o- 


and 12, 6, 
II. 


abſent, we may be accepted of him p. 


we perſwade men 5; but * we are made manifeſt un- 
to God, and I trult alſo, are made manifeſt in your 


conſriences te. 

s We believing and being fully perſwaded, that there ſhall be 
ſuch a great and terrible day of the Lord, when there ſhall be ſuch 
a narrow inquiry and ſearch into wharſoever men have thought, 
ſpoke, or done in the fleſh; we perſwade men to believe in the Lord 
Jeſus Chriſt, to walk according to the Rule of rhe Goſpel, ro be 
charitable towards us, and nor to cenſure, or judge us, Or uſe a- 
gainſt us hard ſpeeches, 
weil of us, yet the ſincerity of cur hearts and ways is made manifeſt 
unto God ; he knoweth what we are, and how we have behaved 
our ſelves: And I truſt we have ſo bchaved our ſelves, that we are 
not only made manifeſt unto God, bur we are manifeſt unto your 
Conſciencesz ſo as your Conſciences will bear us a teſtimony, how 
we have tehaved our ſelves amongſt you. 


V. 


» We are always full of courage and comforr, being confidert 


7 For * we walk by faith, not by ſight -. 
n Thar is, we live, and order our converſations, not by ſet, Or 


the evidence of 


$ We are confident, 1 ſay, and * willing rather to 


o We are confident of ſuch a bleſſed ſtate, and this makes us 


9 Wherefore we || labour, that whether preſent or . 


Having ſuch an ho ea, not ſuch an hope only, bur ſuch an 
4 : my 2 labour, both ARively, doing the 


Appta!,, is repartewort 


for all ſhall come into 
And ir lets 


7 The end of this Judgment 


11 Knowing therefore the * terror of the Lord, 


t If any will not be perſwaded to think 


12 For * commend not our ſelves again unto yovu, 


w I ſpeak it only to give you occaſion to glory, ro glory in meas 


13 For * whether we be beſides our ſelves, t zs to 


his ſpeaking which they 
The Apoſtle 


IL CORINTHIANS. 


pinion, it was wrto God, that is, for the konow and 
3 'Or if he was ſober, ir was for their ſake; in what GE God, 
was, it was either for ſervice to God, cr them. overhe 

14 For the love of Chriſt conſtraineth ns ' 
we thus judge a, that * if one died for all, 
all dead 6. 

{ The Lore of Chriſt ſignifieth either that love toward 

of men which was in Chriſt before the Foundation of =Y 
for even then (as Solemn tellech us) Prov. 8. 31. he wat R:; 
in the habitable parts of the earth, and bis delight was with Fe 
men; which Love ſhewed it ſelf in time, in his coming ang ; 


becauſe 


Sons 
orld; 
0)cing 


um. 


ing our Natures, and dying upon the Croſs for us ; 7, , 
Greater love hath no man than this, that a man lay down his fe 7 -” 
friends. Or elſeir fignifieth that habit of Love ro Chriſt, which i bs 
every Believer; for it 15 true of either of theſe, thar they _- , 
2 Believer's Soul. a Becauſe (ſaith the Apoftle) we thus _ 
or reaſon, Thats if one died for al —— Al! here is Interpreted acc ws 
ing to the various notions of men about the extent of the = 
of Chriſt, Some by the rerm underſtanding all individuals, ome 
the E!:, or all thole that ſhould believe in Chriſt ; others ſomes! 
all Nations, Jews or Gentiles. Be it as it will, that point is » 
to be determined by this Univerſal Particle, which is as olics þ 
Scripture uſed in a reſtcained ſenſe, as in a more gener] feake 
b The Apoſtle here concludeth, That if one died for all, thy 11 
were dead; which is to be underſtood of a ſpiritual death, as £9 
2,1. And the Apoſtle's Argument dependeth upon this, That 
all, for whom Chriſt died, had not been dead in fin, there 1 
had been no need of his dying for ro expiate their ſin, ang t, <. 
deem them from the guilr and power of it 3 bur be they wha 44, 
would, for whom Chriſt died, whether all Individuals, of aj the 
Ele& only, his dying for them was a maniteft Evidence that they 
were dead, ; 


him which died for them, and roſe again c. 


end of their life, and live to ſerve themſelves, and gratifie their 
own corrupt inclinations z bur might make the ſervice of Chi 
the honour and glory of him who died for them, and alſo roſes. 
gain from the dead, the end of their lives ; arguing the reaſonibe, 
neſs of an holy and Chriſtian life, from the Love and End of Crit, 
in ayes for them z acoording to that, Rom, 14. 7, 8. For no of 
lzveth to himſelf, and no man dieth to bimſelf 5 for whether we live, ; 
live unto the Lord, and whether we die, we die unto the Lord : with; 
therefore we live, or die, we are the Lord's. This 1s one way by which 
a Believer fetcheth ſtrength from the death of Chriſt to die un 
ſin, and from his reſurre&ion to live unto newneſs of Life; je 
concluding, if Chriſt died, and roſe again for him, that theahe 
was once dead in treſpaſſes and fins; and therefore he judgeth hin. 
ſelf obliged, now that he is made ſpiritually alive, not to lieto 
himſelf, to ſerve his own profit, honour, reputation luſts or iſ. 
ons,” but to live in obedience to him, and to the honour and glory 
of him who died to redeem him from the guilt and power of fn 
and roſe again to quicken him to newneſs of Life and converſation 
co the honour and glory of his Redcemer. 


ordinarily ſignificth ro approve and acknowledge ; and (© it (ynifes 
here. We oy that js, we regard, we acknowledge no man in 
the diſcharge of our Officez we regard no man, with reſpettoary 
excernal fleſhly conſideration, Under which notion he conpre- 
hends all things nor ſpirjcual, whecher carnal relations, riches, &c, 
e Nay, tho we have known Chrift after the fleſh 3 not from any ghtol 
him (for we read not that Paw at any time ſaw Chriſt but 48s 9. 
when he ſaw him, not according to the fleſh, bur as exalted at the 
right hand of God) bur by the hearing of the car Pax/ hadknovn 
Chriſt, as one thar had lived in the fleſh, and who had converſed vith 
with men for avove thirty years; Yer (faith he) we know him no 
more, we ſhall neither ſee, nor hear him any more in the fleſh; wc 
now only know him as he hath a glorious Bogy with which he fitterh 
at the right hand of God. 


17 Therefore if any man * be in Chrilt, 


all things are become new f. 


tare 
the Soul by no other power, than the power of God. We — : 
ſame expreſſion Gal. 6. 15, The Elpfis of the Verb makes ome 
cranſlate it, [Let] him be @ new Creatwe, ſupplying ia iO = 
Bur the next words ſhew us, thar the Apoſtic ou ing of wat 
is paſt, 01d things are paſſed away, old AﬀeCtions, Paſſons, Noun: 
He hath the ſame Soul, bur new qualities, new apprehenſions In 
his Underſtanding, new inclinations 1n his Will and Afﬀections, - » 
thoughts, counſels and deſigns. The Predicate ſhewerh, ch4t = 
term, be in Chriſt, cannot be underſtood of thoſe thar a'c only _ 
Church, and turned from Paganiſn tothe Chriſtian Faith3 ( tor 90 
are many ſuch in the World, in whom there is no new Creation, 
and who have in them nothing of this new Creature.) 


18 Andall things are of God g,* who hath cc 


the miniſtry of reconciliation z. a 
g This change, which is wrought in our Hearts, no . 


felves, but wrought in us by the great and mighty Þ* 
fo Fob, I, 13. Which were born 106 of blood, yor of che Will of the ſh 


Chap 


fons of 


then w 
ere + Ren 
Cf 


15 And that he died for all, * that they which live, x3 
ſhould not henceforth live unto themſelves, but un i." 
c And he died for a)l thoſe for whom he died, not only toredeen the 
them from the guilt of ſin, bur alſo from their vain conurſating; 19. 1% 
that they which live by his Grace, might not make themſelye; the 4: 


16 * Wheretore henceforth know we no man after zy,,, 
the fleſh dz yea, though we have known Chrilt fie ,, 
the fieſh,yet now henceforth know we him no mores, [o.1; 
a Words of ſenſe in Scripture ordinarily ſignifie more than the 14: 
a& of thar ſenſe which they expreſs ; particularly chis term Ky, Gal. $.6 


| he i 2 * Rot 


new creature : * old things ate paſſed away, behold, 7% 
' X hin 2 
f If any man be in Chriſt, is as much as, if any man be implanted « 1{a,4 
or ingrafted into Chriſt, by Faith united ro him, he is a New (7? 13, 1} 

The Greeh is, a New Creation.) A Phraſe, which argueth the 5, 17 
greateſt change imaginable, and ſuch a one as can be wrovs os Rev, 21 


Jed * 16 
onciled 


(1 


us unto himſelf by Jeſus Chriſt þ, and hath given Þ 1 " 


1a 


i 


his ri; 
T ghte: 
God 
him, 

rent it 
was a 
him, 


Workers, 
Of his S] 
there ls q 
Y the ] 
With Chri 
Workets 
bnd tha: 
and "ts j 
N'hee, th 
"hich thi 


V 


| OM. 2+ 


(0, 12, 
Joh, Iz T7 
I+ L 1. 
Gal, IN , | 


of _ ._&..a 


a * Ro 


ws, 
fo, 

hins Ot 
d *[/a, 
4 18, 1} 
If gg, I 
IN Rey, 2! 


F> 


14 7, VI. 


* Chriſts ſtead, Be ye reconciled to God 7. 


IN\Y7E then, a; * workers together with him a,beſcech 


ILCORINT HI ANS. 


Chap. 


wor of the Will of man, but of God; of God, as the principal effici-| And this was Pa4/s, and ſhould be every godly Miniſter's work, 


cnt Cauſe, bY a ; 
11 1.1y, and by the Spirit of Chriſt, azally, hath reconciled us unto 


himfelf; of Enemies hath made us Friends. 7 Ard hath giv us 
the Miniſtry of Reconiilietion, hath berruſted us with rhe Preaching | 


of the Goſpel: Ir is God thar hath reconciled us ; ir is Chriſt by 
whom we are reconciled, his Blood is the Price ot our Reconcilia- 
rion : Bur he committed ro his Apoſtles, and ſo ro the ſucceſſive Mi- 
niſters-of the Goſpel, the XMiniſtry of Reconciliation, that 15, the Mi- 
niſtry of che Goſpel, by which this Reconciliatian is publiſhed ro 
ſuch as are as yer Enemies ro God. They have bur a Mim(tration in it 3 
God hath appointed them to publifh and to declare 1r, and to intrear 
men to be reconciled unto him. | : 

19 To wit, * that God was in Chriſt reconciling 


the World to himſelf k, not imputing their treſpalles 


þ Who, by the Blood of his Son Jeſus Chriſt, merito-, 


unto them 7, and hath -- committed unto us the word 


of reconciliation m2. 

þ By World here, ſome would underſtand al! Mankind, and by Re- 
conciling, no more than making God reconcileable 3 bur this proceed- 
ch from an over-fondneſs of their Principle of Chyiſts dying for all, 
aud every man. For as it is maniteſt from a multitude of Scrip- 
tures, that World is many times taken in a much more limited and 
reſtrained ſenſe ; ſo there is nothing here thar guides us co inter- 
pret 1: in ſuch a larirude; nay, that which followerh, doth manifeſt- 
ly ſo reftrainit ; for God was not in Chriſt, reconciling the World to him- 
{{lf, that is, every man and woman in the World, ſo as not to im- 
pute their ſms ro them, ! This the Apoſtle here afhrmeth 3 which 
makes it manifeft, chat by World here 1s meant many, ſome of all 
ſorts, as well Gentiles as Jews; even ſo many as he pleaſerh not ro 
impure their ſins unro. » Now (faith the Apoſtle) the diſpenſing 
and publiſhing that Word, by which this Reconciliation 15 made 
known to the Children of men, God hath commitred to us 3; to us 
thar are Apoſtles, and ſo ro the Miniſters of the Goſpel char ſhall 
ſucceed us in the Work of the Miniſtry. This mightily commend- 
eththe Goſpel, and the preaching of ir, thacir1s che word by which, 
as a-mean+, Souls are reconciled unto God, 


20 Now then we are * amballadors for Chriſt, as 
though God did beſeech you by us : we pray you In 


not with roughneſs, bur with all mildneſs and gentleneſs, ro beſeech ' 
thole to whom thcy preach the Goſpel, that chey would believe and 
embrace It, and live up to the Holy Rules of ir ; without which (as 
co their Souls benefic) all the kindneſs of God, in affording then 
the Goſpel and means of Grace, is in vain and loſt ; (chough 
God yer hath his End, and his Miniſters ſhall be a ſweet ſavour to God 
as well with reference to them that periſh, as thoſe who ſha! be 
ſaved.) For the effeQual Grace of God in the hearr, char cannot 
be reccived in vain; nor is thar here ſpoken of. ; 

2 For he faith, I have heard thee in a time accepted 

. . 9 
and 1n the day of ſalvation have I ſuccourcd thees : 
behold, now # the acceptcd time, behold, now #5 the 
day of ſalvation d. 

c The words here quoted, are taken our of the Prophet [uah, 
49+ 8. accordivg ro the Septuagint's Tranſlation. Though ſome 
think, chat the Apoſtle here doth bur accommodate to the Spiri- 
rual Salvation brought 1n by Chriſt, a temporal Salvation menctoned, 
and primarily intended ; yer the moſt and beſt Interpreters rather 
Judg, that «hole Chapter in Jaiah to refer to Chriſt, and that the 
Salvation there mentioned, is to be underftood of the Spiritual Sal. 
vation of the Goſpel 3 of which allo che Apoſtle ſpeaketh here, 
and maketh theſe words (as in the Propher) the words of God the 
Farher to Chriſt his Son, reſtifying both his Aſſiſtance of him in 
the accom pliſhmenr of rhe work of mans redempriob, and hisaccep- 
rance of him; According to which ſenſe, the Accepted time is the 
ſame with what the Apoſtle calls, The fulneſs of time (though ir may 
alſo be ſo called in the ſame ſenſe rhar the Apoſtle calleth the Go- 
ſpel a ſaithful Saying, worthy of all acceptation, 1 Tim. 1. 15.) in which 
ſenſe che Goſpel-rime was propheſied of as an acceptable time, Ge, 
49. 10. Haggai 1.8, d Now 1s that accepted, or acceptable time, now 
15 that day of ſalvation ſpoken of by the Propher ; therefore you 
are concerned to receivethis Grace of rhe Goſpel, and co live up to 
the Rule of 1t, 


3 Giving no offence in any thing e, that the Mini- 
ſtry be not blamed F. 


To give n0 offence ſignifies to avoid all ations which may be 


z The Apoſtle here giverh us a true Notion, not only of Apo- 
ſtles, which were che firſt and principal Miniſters of the Goſpel, 
buc of all orher Minifters ; reaching us  whar all Miniſters ſhould 
be, and what all true Miniſters of che Goſpel are. They are 4m- 
baſſadors for Chriſt ; there is by Nature an enmity betwixt the Crea- 
ture and God ; he naturally haterh God, and God is angry with 
him. Thoſe that were ſometimes alienated, and Enemies in their minds 
by wicked works, Chriſt hath reconciled in the body of his fleſh through 
atath, Col. 1. 21, 22. He hath purchaſed a 72conciliation for them, 
Bur yet, till they have received Chriſt as their Lord and Saviour, 
they are not actually recoyered to God by him. God does by men, as 
great Princes do by ſuch as they are ar Enmity with; he ſends his 
Miniſters to them who are his Ambaſſadors ; and as all Anivalla- 
dors repreſent the Perſon ot him whoſe Ambaſladors they are, and 
ipeak in his nzme, and as in his ſtead, perſwading to peace ; ſo theſe 
ſpeak as in Chriſt's name, and in God's ſtead; their buſineſs 1s to 
beech men to be reconciled unto God, to lay down their Arms, and 
t0accepr of the terms of the Goſpel for peace and reconciliation, 

21 For * he hath made him #0 be lin for us, who knew 
no ſin o, that we might be made the * righteouſneſs of 
God in him p. 

o Chriſt knew no ſin, as he was guilty of no fin 3 which of you 
(faith he Foh. 8. 46.) convinceth me of fn? 1 Per. 2. 21, 22, 24. H? 
ad ns fin, nor was guile ſoind in nis mouth, Bur God made him to be 
ſn for us 3 He was numbred amongſt the tranſereſſours, Iſa. 53, 6. 12, Our 
ſins were reckoned ro him; ſo as though perſonally he was no ſin- 
ner, yet by impurarion he waz, and God dealr with him as ſuch : 
Or he was mide a Sacrifice tor our fins, a Sin-offering ; ſo anſwering 
the Type. in the Law, Lev. 4 3+ 25. 29. & 5. 6. $7.2. fp Tharſo 
his righteouſneſs might be impured ro vs, and we might be made 
righteous with ſuch a righteouſneſs as thoſe Souls muſt have whom 
God will accept, As Chriſt was not made fin by any fin inherent in 
him, ſo neither are we made righteous by any righteouſneſs inhe- 
rent in us, bur by the righteouſneſs of Chriſt impured to us, as he 
was a Sinner by the fins of his people reckoned and impured unto 


him, 
CHAR VE 


An Exhortation not to Receive in vain the Grace miniſtred by the 4m- 
baſſadors of Chriſt and himſelf as ſnch : This urged by his Integrity of 
Life, ſufferings, 1 —10. Hts great Inclination to them, requiring the 
Jame of them towards him, 11———13, He admoniſheth them not to 
ve yohed with unbelievers, nor hate Communion with Idols, being them- 
(tlves God's Temple 3 and God their Father, and they his Children, 
Ij ——- 18, 


YV youallo *, that ye receive not the grace of 
' Godin vain b. 
: Miniſters of che Goſpel are fellow-workers rogerher with Chriſt 3 
though bur as Inſtruments, ſerving him as che Principal Agent, 
and efficient cauſe : He trod the Wine-preſs of his Fathers wrath 
40ne, and had no Partner in the Purchaſe of mans ſalvation z bur 
che application of the purchaſed ſalvation, he admits of Fellow- 
Workers, Though the internal work be his alone, and the eftefs 
of his SPirit upon che Souls of thoſe whoſe hearts are changed ; yer 
mere is a Miniſtecial part, which lyeth in Exvortation and Argument, 
} the Ear conveyed to the Soul ; thus Minitters work together | 
Wh Chriſt, And withouc him they can do nothing : They are 
Workers, but they muſt have Chrift work with them, or chey will 
nd thzr they labour in vain, 6 Grace fgnifieth any free Gift 3 
and "tis in che New Teſtament variouſly applicd ; bur here ir fhg- 
Niftet, the Doftrin of the Goſpel held forth in the Preaching of ic 


"hich theſe Corinthizzns had received with the Ears of their Bodies, ys {me thiok) the habic or exerciſe of any particu ar virtue, 


Vot..- It 


occaſion of ſpirirual ſtumbling unto others, 7. e. ro makechem to ſin 
againſt God, or eftrange rheir hearts from Chriſt and the own- 
ing and profeſſion of his Goſpel, Theſe words may be underſtood 
as a general Precepr givca to all Chriſtians ; So ir agreeth with, 
I Cor. 10. 3o, 32. or (which the following Verſes ſeem moſt to fa- 
vour) as referring to himſelf and Timothy, and other Miniſters of 
the Goſpel ; like rrue Paſtors of the Church of Chriſt, going our 
before the Flock, and ſhewing in their example what chey oughr 
to be. f The Miniſtry here may either ſignifie the Office of the Mi- 
niſiry, or the Subject of ir, the Goſpel, which Ch. g. 18. is called the 
Miniſtry of Reconciliation ; not only che Office of che Miniſtry, bur 
the Goſpel ir ſelf, ſuffereth by the ſcandalous converſation of Mini- 
ſters and private Chriſtians 3 ignorant Perſons being noc able, or 
not willing co diſtinguiſh berwixt che faulrs of perſons, and the 
faulrs of a Docrin or Office, 


4 But in all things Þ approving our ſelves * as the + ;,, com. 


Miniſters of God g, in much patience h, in afflictions 2. mending, 


in neceſſities k, in diſtreſles /. | 


Chap. 4. 2. 


Zz Minifters of the Goſpel are in the firſt p!ace to be conſidered * 1Cor, 
as the Minfters of God z ſecondarily as Minifters and Servants of 4+ 1+ 


the Church; which rhey ought to ſerve fo far, as in ſerving it they 
do obey Chriſt, None can approve, or. commend chemſelves for 
Miniſters of God that live a ſcandalous life : 
them to lay ſtumbling blocks in, bur to remove them our of the 
way of men. h Patzince ſignifies an enduring of Evils, quierly and 
cheerfully at the command of God ; or when wwe (ee it 1s the will 
of God, we ſhould pariently ſubmir to pur our necks into che hea- 
vieſt Yokes, The Apoſtles goes on reckoning up ſeveral Species of 
thoſe Evils: 3 Aﬀlidion is a general term fignitying any Evils that 
wear our our Bodies. & Neceſſities ſignifie any body wants of tood, 
or raiment, or whatever 1s for the uſe of mans lite.  Diſheſſes 
ſignifie properly a man's being ſtrairned or thruſt up in a place, (o 
as that-he knoweth nor how to ſteer himſelf; and, Meraphorically, 
a _ of counſel, not knowing what to do, or which way to turn 
himſelf, 


God hath not ſent - 


5 la ſtripes mm, in impriſonments», in ;| camults 0, 9, i, 


in labours p, in watchings q, in faſtings r. 


and ter. 24. that of the Fews he five times recerved forty ſtripes ſave 
oxe: Weread of his many ſtripes, 25. nOt che impriſonment of him, 
and Silas As 16.(which was not the only time before the wriring of 
this Eviſtle, as appeareth by this Verſe. ). 0 T:ults, or Seditions 
raiſed by the Jews and the Heathens 3 we have a Record of one at 
Epheſus, Afts 19. cauſed by Demetri::s: Orhers,by Tumulcs here,under- 
ſtand unfixed and uncertain habirations, coffings ro and fro, (o, as 
they could be quier inno place ; bur the former ſcemerh rather the 
ſenſe of the Word, as Lyb? 21. 9. 1 Cor. 14. 33.. p Labogrs, he ei- 
ther means labours with his hands, (which Paul was ſomerimes pur 
tO, as As 18. 1,2, 3 & 20. 34-) cr rravels, and journies. The 
word is a general word, ſignificative of any pains thac men take, 
q Religious watching, Chap. 11. 27., 7 In faſtings, as aQts of Dilcipline, 
by which he kept under his body, and brought it under ſubjetiion; (as he 
old us, 1 Cor, g. 27.) 

6 By pureneſs, 5 by knowledg t, by long ſuffering 
4, by kindneſs w, by the holy Ghoſt x, by love unterg- 
ned y. E 

s As the Apoſtle in the former words had declared rhe patience 
of his converſation in the enduring of the affiitions of the Goſpel, 
ſo in this Verſe he declares the more internal Holineſs of ict, undet 
the general Notion of purenzſs  ſhewed in his knowledge, faith, gentle- 
neſs, kindneſs or goodne!s towards all men. The word tranſlaced parene(s 
ſignifterh racher the univerſal reficude of his heart and ways, than 


CFrfff 2 } t 1, 


roflir gs 
m1 The Apoſtle Chap. 11.23. tells us he was in ſtripes abov2 meaſure, to and fro, 


Bat : 
i 
44 
* 0 4 
vi... 
4 
z 
2 | 
; 2 
; wy? c 
$!.: {1 \& 
21 * 
y 
4 L 
af i! 
(- | 
þi 
i 
a7 
#4 
ti; 
hn 5# 
. 4. *% 
W. ; 
PATIL 


Chap. VI. 


ricual chings; if it deth nor here fignifie Faith, which 1s a Super- 
{tri Qure on this Forndation, and thar habit which hath a ſpecial 
influence upon prifying the reart, As 15. 9. Without knowledge 
there can be no purity, - Prov. 19. 2. « By long-ſuffering, the Apo- 
file means, nor being eafily pr voked by ſuch as ha! offended him, 
or done him wrong, w The word tranſlated Kina!/\s, fhgniftes 
generally anv goudneſs by which a man may ſhew himlelt eicher 
ſweer and pleaſant, or uſeful and profitable unto his Neighbour. 
x Thus the Apoſtle ſheweth how he behaved himſelt 3 bur 
net through his own ſtrength, bur through che intluence and afſ1- 


ſtance of the Holy Ghoſt. y The Love unſeigned here mentioned, |' 


is a general rerm ſignifying thar habit ot Grace wrought 1n his 
Soul bv the holy Spirit of God, which was the Principle of rhe 
long-ſuffering and kindneſs beſore mentioned. 

* x Cor,2. 7 By the word of truth .*., by * the power of God 


44 z by the * armour of righteouſnels, on the right 
ry hand, and on the Jefrt a. ENTS 

"I *. Living up to, and keeping cur eye upon the Word of God, 
_—— which 1s el Word of Truch "This ſcemerh to be the ſenſe rather 


a. than ſpeaking truth to, every one, (as ſome have thought.) x By 
* the efficacious working of the Spirit of God upon our hearts, 1n- 
7, abling us to live up to the Do&rin we preach. Some under- 
ſtand here, by the Power of God, that extraordinary Power of 
working Miacles which God gave the Apoſtles; Others, the 
Goſpel, which the Apoſtle call the Power of God to Salvation, Rom. 
x. 16. Jr may be underſtood of the firſt and the laſt joyned rogerher 3 
for che Goſpel if no otherwiſe the Power of God to Salyacion, than 
as it is attended, ro rhe Souls of th:ſe ro whom 1t 15 ſo made -pow- 
erful, with che inward, powerful, efficacious working of the ho- 
ly Spirit. 4 By the Armour of Righteouſneſs, he means a good Con- 
ſcience, (which cannot be without an univerſal re&irude, or up- 


rightneſs of life ) which is a defence againſt all Temprarions, ei- 


ther frm proiperity, or frm adverfiry. In which ſenſe thac of 


Solomon is true, He that walketh uprightly, walketh ſafely, Prov. 10. 9. ; 


I. CORINT HIANS. 


: Ir, or by, Knowledge; a right underſianding and notion of ſpi- | born, and upon all occaſions ſhewed ro you ; and alf for that 


4 of my 
It being 
Fathers 
duty to 


{ Fa:htulneſs which IT have ſhewed in diſcharging the dut 
| relation to you, For I ſpeak as a Father unto Chi!dren 

bur reaſonable, that Children ſhould recompence to their 
their Love tothem; and'be as exa& and faithful in theg 
their Parents, as their Parents are intheir duty towards them, 


with darkneſs q? 


Communion in Marriages. 
of more general ſignificancy than to be limited by 


tive of all unneceſſary communion and intimare fellowſh 


and Converſations, declare themſelves to be Unbelievers: 
why we ſhould expound 75215 of Infidels meerly, I canner te 


——— 


ouſly ſcandalous Chriſtian. 


——Y 


eating with them at Idol feaſts, or at the Lords Table, ( as Cha), 
maintaining z7timate Communion with them, &c. 


—_— 


| neſs, they were Light, ſuch perſons were Darkneſs, thar is, full 0 the 
; darknels of fin andl ignorance, In the mean time this Precepr ought 
| Nor to be exten.ied ro a coral avoiding of Commerce with, © he. 


| Ing in the Company 0, either Heathens, or ſcandalous Perſons ; 


and David prayeth, Pſal. 25. 21. Let integrity and uprightneſs pre- j for as to that, th: ſame Apoſtle ha1 before derermired jt lawful 


ſerve me. ; 
8 By honour, and diſhonour b, by evil report, and 
200d report ec, as deceivers, and yet true 4: 

5 We deparc nor from our incegrity, whether we be honoured 
or diſhonoured. c Well or evilly reporrec,of, This hath from the 
beginning een the lot of all the faithiul Miniſters of Chriſt ; ſome 
have given them honour, others have caſt reproach upon them, 
ſome have giyen a good report of them; ſome an evil report. 4 Some | 
have repreienced chem as [mpoitors, and ſuch as deceived the peo- 
pie; others have ſpoken of chem as true men : their bufineſs is 
ro go through zood report and bad report, honour and diſhonour 
ſtill holding faſt cheic incegricy. 

9 AS u. known d, and * yet well known e : as * dy- 
ing, and behold we live f: as chaſtened, and not 


killed g. 

4 Dealt with by Jews and Heathens, 2s perſons wholly unknown 
ro them, though we be (vtficienc.y known. # Or being ſuch whom 
the World kiuwe.h nor, as to our ſtate towards God, and intereſt 
in him, though it knows us well enough as to our other circum- 
ſtances. { S- hunred and peri-curcd, as thar we appear every day 
dying; yer ſuch hath been the Power of Gods Providence, thar 
we yer live: And g chough our Heavenly Father chaſteneth us, yer 


* Cl. 4- 2 
+ Ch. 4. 


I Efiſt. 5. 11. whatever Communion wich ſuch Perſons i; ei-her 


neceſſary from the Law of God, cr Nature; or for the ſupport and 
upholding of humane Liſea d Sociery, is lawful even with ſuch Per. 
ſons ; bur all other is unlawful, 


15 And what concord hath Chriſt with Beljzly} 


we are not utterly conſumed ; the Apoſtle alluderh ro thar, Pſal. 


118. 18. The Lord bath chaſtensd me ſore, but he hath not given me over 1 


to death. 

19 As ſorrowful, yet always rejoicing þ : as poor, 
yee making many richz: as having nothing, and yer 
poſſeſſing all things k. EE 

h Appearing to others as perſons drowned in griefs and ſor- 
rows, yer we are always rejoicing in God, (Heb. 3. 17, 18.) and 
in the Teſtimony of a good Conſcience, Chap. 1. 12. 3 In out- 


ward appearance poor, having no abundance of the good things 
of this lifez yet making many rich in Knowledge and Grace : God 
by us diſpenſing to them the Riches of his Grace. þ As having 
nothing, no Houſes, no Lands, no Silver or Gold, As 3.6. yer 
being as well ſatisfied and contented, as if all things were ours ; 
as well farisfied with that little which we have, as the men of the 
World are with their abundauce; poſleſling all things in Chriſt, 
though having little In the Creature. 


11 O ye Corinthians, our mouth 1s open unto you, 


* Chap. 7. * our heart is enlarged [. 

2, 3» { Our mouth is open to ſpeak freely to you, and ro communi- 
cate tO you the whole Will and Counſel of God ; our heart is in- 
larged both by ti:e Love thar I have towards you, and by the re- 
joicing thar I have in you. This inlargement of my heart is that 
which openeth my lips, and makes me ſpeak freely to you, both 
20s Wed you of your Errcrs, and in exhorting you ro your 

utY. 


12 Yeare not ſtraitned in us mm, but ye are ſtraitned 


In your own bowels 7. 

»; If you cannot mutually rejoyce in me, and what I write ; or 
if you do not repay me the like affe&ion, the fault is nor in me ; 
t havedone my duty, and that roo from a true Principle of Love 
ro you, 7 Bur It is through miſtakes and miſapprehenfions in 
your {e:ves, your not arighr conceiving of me in the diſcharge of 
my Apoſtolica! Office. Or, the cauſe of your trouble and ſorrow 
1s from your ſeives, upon your ſuffering the inceſtuous Perſon, and 
other ſcandalous Pe:ſons, to abide in your Communion ; which 
was an Error I could not bur take notice of according to that Apo» 
ſtolical Auchoricy which God hath committed to me. 


13 Now for a recompence in the ſame, (* I ſpeak as 
unto my children) be ye alſo enlarged o. 


_ © Be je alſo inlarged, both in Love to me, and alſo in Obedierce , 
It 15 but a Juſt recompence for thar great affeRion which I have 


* 1 Cor. 
4-14. 


or what part hath he that believeth with » 
Infidel s? 

r By Belial in this Text, very cood Interpreters underſtn] the 
Deel; judging that the Apoſtle here oppoſeth Chriſt, who is the 
Head of Believers and of the Church, to him who is tie Ha 
of all Vnbirvers and the God of the World. The term i; uſed 
only in this place in the New Teſtament, bur very Oren in the 
Old Teſtament, to expreſs men notoriouſly wicked and (:ndz 
lous, Det, 13. 13. Fudg. 19. 22, x Sam. 1. 16. & 2. I. £24 
I7. 22, 15.7, 2 Chrot. 13. 59. The Hebyrews themes te 
not agreed in the Erymology of it; Pſal. 101. 3. a wicked thing is 
called a thing of B-lial (as may be ſeen in the Margents of ou Bj. 
bles ) ſo as the Argument is drawn from our duty of Cotio:miry 
to our Head 5 Chriit hath no fell>wſhip with the Devil, therefore 
we ought to have no unneceſſary communion with ſuch who na- 
niteſt themſelves to be of their Father the Devil, by their doing 
his works 3 nor hach Chriſt any Communion with the Sons of #- 
tial, s What part or portion, chat is, whar ſociety or conmu- 
non hath a Beljeyer with one that believeth nor ? What hath he 
tro. do with him? Ir was an uſual Phraſe amongſt the Jens, Jn, 
22.25. 27. Scme by this part underſtand, whar portion in the 
life to come 3 in which ſenle it teacherh us, that we ſhould main- 
tan Intimate and ele&ive Communion in this Life only with ſuch, 
as we would gladiy have our portien with -in anorher fe, But 
the moſt judicious Interpreters think this is not incnded in 
this place, 


16 And what agreement hath the temple of God 


with Idols: ? For ye * are the temple of the [living + yg 


God #, as God hath ſaid, I will dwell in them, and 
walk in them, and I will be their God, and they ſ1allbe 
my people w. 

t This particular inſtance giveth ſome Expoſirors occaſions , 
interpret wer. 14. of Communion with Idolaters in ſuch As 0 
Religion as are proper to ihem; bur nothing hinders bur that that 
Precept may be interpreted more generally, though the apoſtic 
gives this as one particular inſtance, wherein he would have them 
avoid Communion with Unl\elievers. « The Argument 15 dra 
from what the Apoſtle had before aſſerted, 1 Cor, 3. 16. & 6. 19+ 
their being the Temples of the Holy Ghoſt which he proveth _= 
Lev. 26. 12, Exnehb. 37. 26, 279. w Not that what the Apo . 
meaneth here, is the literal meaning of LZevit. 26. 11, 12: m—_ 
maniteft, rhat God by Moſes there is ſpeaking nor of Gods erent 
ling in the perſons of Believers, or in his Church, but 0 = 
gracious preſence and manifeſtation of himſelt to his Feopee wa ho 
Tabernacle ere&ed by his order, Some therefore think, 9 
place here alluded to, rhough not quoted varbatiys, 15, on M la 
26. which is a promiſe reſpeRing the Kingdom of Chr! oY 
God promiſeth ro make a Covenant of Peace with his PcoP _w_ 4 
faith, I will place them, and multiply them, and will jt —_ how 
the midſt of them for evermore : © my Tabernacle alſo (hail 09 Py 3; 
yea, T will be their God, and they ſhall be my Peopit. The _ Tex: 
they are here quored, are intircly ro be found 1 09 - 1 there 
of Holy Writ; it is ſufficient that they are t0 be e's dwel- 
in parts. Nor doth this Text ſo properly ſpeak Of 0 
ling in particular Believers, as of his dwelling in the __ Fo 
his People 3 therefore though he ſpeaks of —_ je — y, 
Temple 15s in the Singular Number, Theſe 7.27) Arc be hach Com- 
the Church in which God dwelleth, and with which 1c Me Kt 
munion, which is expreſſed by walking iy on endleſticls 
welation, he is ſaid ro walh is the maſt of the Golden CAN 


Chap 


14 * Be ye not unequally yoked together with Un- + 
believers p : For * what fellowſhip hath righteouſneſs z * 
with unrighteouſneſs ? and what communion hath ligh: * 125 

©” "oo 


2; 
- Þ They roo much reſtrain the ſenſe of this general Precept, wh t king 
either limir jt tro Religious Communion with Idolaters, or Ai Givy 18. 2, 
The Precept is delivered in a term © 
: 21, 
theſe ; ( though both of them queſtionleſs be compretenkegs :) 
{4 vo erSeCuyer]es, do nor become ſuch as in the ſame yok 
draw another way, Ir is a Metaphor drawn from Horſes or ” wn 
which ſhould draw together, being in the ſame yoke, neither Nang 
ing ſtill, nor yer holding back. Ir is a general Precept, prohibj. 


, . __ - f with 
ſuch as either in matcers of Faith, or Worſhip, or in their Live; 


( for 


eſpecially conſidering that the Apoſtle, 1 Cor. 5. 9, 11, feems to 
allow a furth-r communion with an Heathen, than with a Notort, 
So as this Precept may reaſonally he 
mterprered. by thoſe in the former Epiſtle of marying with fc, 
| q The reaſon he 
; giveth, is, becauſe they could have no comfortable COMMmunion 
| with ſuch; chey were Righteo:jneſs, thoſe perſons were Umigitng. 


(. 37- 
where 
, and 
nary 1 
1 tne 
ds, #5 
. Tex: 
| chere 
dwel- 
hes of 
t, yer 
[ body » 
4 Com- 
he R#- 
[eſticks- 

NoC 


| 71 
haps Vi. 


wap is the term {ivirg vainly added to God ;, for beſides thar, he is 
uſually fo called, a+ icing Ever living, and the Founrain 91 at! Life 
ir 2ko fhewerl; the oppoſirion berwixe him and [dols, which are 
dead thinzs: 4nd ieorerore God could have no more communion 
with Idols, thai t26 {i:ing can have wich rhe dead 3 nor could they 
have COMmunio!: with che living God, and dead Idols. Nor could 
chey be che People ot the living God, and the People or Wor- 
ſhipers of dead Idols fo as thole that were Idolaters, muſt loſe rhe 
advancage of that Covenant wherein God had ſaid, I will oe you; 
God, and you (hall be my People, 

17 * Wheretore come out from among them, and 


jr. 15 be ye ſeperate, ſaith the Lord, and rouch not the un- 


clean thinz, and 1 will receive you x, 

x The Apoſtle here quoteth words our of the Old Teſtament, 
no where ro ke found there ſyllabically wirhout variation 3 bur 
keeping to the ſenſe of them, (which is a thing very uſual with rhe 
Permen of the New Teſtament.) The firſt quotation ſeemerh ro 
be raken from Jz. 52. 11. Depart ye, depart ye, 80 ye 0:t from thence, 
zouch no unclean thing, g0 ye out of the midſt of her, be ye clean that bear 
the Veſſels of the Lord. Interpreters are not agreed, as to che Term 
from whence the Propher rhere admoniſhed tbe Jews to depart : 
$ome make it to be their former finful courſes; others make it to 
be che Kingdom of the Devil and Antichriſt, others make ir ro be 
literal Babylon 3 the Prophet foreſeeing, that when the ou ſhould 
have a liberty given them to leave Babylon, (which happen'd in 
time of Cyr: the Perſian Monarch) ſome of them (now as jr were 
incorporated with the Chaldeans ) would linger and find a difficulty 
x0 pluck up their ſtakes in Babylon, rhough it were 1n order to 
their recurn to eryſalem, hererofore the joy and praiſe of the 
whole Earth. Whatever was the Propher's meaning, certain It 
is, the Apoſtolical Precept cannor be interpreted of a leaving /ite- 
ral Babylon, tor neither rhe Chriſtian Jews, or Gentiles, were at 
this time there;z It muſt therefore be underſtood of a myſtical Ba- 


' ly!on, And the ſenſe muſt be this, Come out, and be ye ſeperate 


from thoſe with whom your Souls will be in as much danger as the 
Jews were in che literal Babylon. But wherher by theſe are to 
be underſtood 1dolaters only, or all notorious ſcandalons Livers, 
is the Queſtion, The true determination of which, I conceive, de- 

endeth upon the ſenſe of thoſe words, Come ye out, Be ye ſeperate, 
Which wo: ds I think are not fully interpreted by rhoſe that follow, 
Touch not the unclean thing; for, doubtleſs the tormer words are a 
Precepr conceining the means to be uſed in order to that as an 
end 3 it being an jard thing to touch pirch, and nor to be defiled 
therewith. On the other fide, rhey interprer it too rigi-lly, who 
make 1t to be a prohibition of all Commerce, or company with 
ſuch perſons 3 for this is contrary to the Apoſtolical DoRrine in his 
former Epiſt.e ro this Church, where he had allowed, Chap. 5s. a 
civil Commerce and Traffick with the worſt of men; and Chap, 7. 
had forbidden the ſeperation of Chriſti :ns and Heathens, once join- 
ed in Marriage, unleſs the Unbeliever firſt departed. The Texr 
theretore mult be underſtood only of Eleftive and unneceſſary intimate 
Communion 3 and 1s much the ſame with char, v. 14. be ye not unzqually 
yoaked with Unbiievers. So as that ir doth by no means juſtifie the 
withdrawing of all civil and religious Communion from thoſe 
whole juugments or practice in all things we cannot approve; it 
only juſtityeth our withdrawing our communion f:om Idolaters, and 
from notorious 1candalous Sinners in ſuch duties and actions, or in 
ſuch degrees, as we are under no obligation to have fellowſhip and 
communion with them in, and our torbearing ro touch their ux- 
clean things 1n thar fellowſhip and communion, which we are allowed 
with chem having no felio« ſhip with them in rheir unfruirful works of 
darknels, bur rep:oving them, even while in civil things, and ſome 
religious ations, we have ſome fellowſhip withchem. 


18 And * will bea Father unto you, and ye ſhall be 


x my ſons and daughters, ſaith the Lord Almighty y. 


7 The latter words, which are a promiſe of God's reception ot 
them who for his ſake withdraw from a ſinful Communion with 
Idolaters and ſcandalous perſons, are taken out of Fer. 31. 1, 9. 
and teach us this, That none can reaſonably expeR that God ſhould 
fulfil his Covenant with them, who make no conſcience ot tulfilling 
their part inir with him; nor claim the benefirs of a Father, who 
pertorm not the daties of his Children: bur on the contrary, 
thoſe whoare conſcientious in the diſcharge of their duries of filial 
obedience, may expe& from him both the kindneſs and the pro- 
retion of a Father, (which is the more valuable becauſe he 1s the 
Loyd God Almighty, who wants no power to prote& them, or ſo to 
Intluence them, as to make chem in all chings happy, as the Children 
of fo great a Father. ) 


CHAP, VII. 


Thiſe Promiſes a motive to Sar ftification, 1, His Inttgrity and Afﬀection 
to them in the midſt of all Tribulations: He aſſures himſelf alſo of 
theirs towards him, 1—5, confirmed to them by the report Titus gave 
of their godly ſorrow, with its fruits which his ſormer Epiſtle had 
wrought in them, 6 — 12. and of their loving kinaneſs and oveatence to 
Titus, arſwerable to his former boaſting s of them, 13—16. 


h,z, * 1 Aving therefore theſe Promiſes a (dearly be- 


; loved) let us cleanſe our ſelves from all fil- 
thineſs of the fleſh and ſpirit b, perfeCting holineſs in 
the fear of God c. 

4 Theſe promiſes 3 e. Of God's dwelling in vs, and walking with 
5, of God's being our Father, and making and owning us as his 
Sons ; which promiſes are made to true Penitents that will rouch 
no unclean thing. b Let us through the aſſiſtance of Divine Grace, 
endeavour to cleanſe our ſelves, or keep our ſelves clean, nor only 
from fleſhly filchineſs, (ſuch as are fins of intemperance, drunkenneſs, 
uncleanneſs) bur alſo from ſpiricual filchineſs, (extravagant paſſions, 
corrupt afte&ions, pride, envy, raſh anger, Idolatry, conrencion,divi- 
10n.) c And thar, becauſe weare nor only obliged to Holineſs, but to 
Perfet Holineſs, in or through the fear of the Lord; awing our 


hearts, leſt we ſhould prophane the Temple of the Lord, or bes | 
' tion which he brought me. 


we Our ſelves as unduriful Sons to ſo gcod a Father. So far are 


God's promiſes, and our betief of them, o: affiance in God for the | 


IL CORINT HIANS. 


Chap. 


ah 4 . Ny - 
tulfiiting of rhem, from hindring us in” the prafiice and excrete of 
Huy inels, thatthere can he no more poren: motive to periovade the 


perfection of Holtxis; and thac not cnly from the argumen o. Di- 
; v. ne Love conrrained in the promiſes, bur from ihe coniideraticn of 


the pcrions ro whom, and the condittons upon which, the promiſes 


' are Made, 


2 Receive us 4, We have wronged no man e, we 
have corrupted no man f, * we have defrauded no 
man g. "A 

4 Let us have room in your hearts and eſteem, or (more pene- 
rally) accept us, as you ought to rece've and accepr the Miniſters 
of Chriſt, As our heart is inlarged rowards you, fo ler your 
nearts be inlarged rowards us; we have done nothing to alienate 
your hearts from us. We have done no harm to any of you, we 
have not been like Sheepherds that meerly rake the fleece, and car 
the tleſh of the Flockz Ads 20.33. TI have coletel ny mans ſilver or 
gold, or apparel, f We have corrupted none by any falſe Do&rin, 
or by tlatrering Speeches, or by Bribes or Gifts, g We have 
cheared or deiruuded no min. By which Vindication of or Apology, 
for himſelf and his Fellow-labourers, it is not improvably jndged, 
that the Apoſile refle&erh upon thoſe falſe Apoſtles and Teachers 
that were crept into this Church, who h:d wronged hiin, corrupt- 
ed them, and been too bufie in other ways to pick their Pockets, 
Nothing becomecth more a Miniſter of the Goſpel than innocency 
and righteouſneſs, nothing more commends him unto his People : 
For though they are eaſily perſwaded, that an innocent and juf? 
muſt be a pious man, yer they are difficuiry perſwaded, (and 
there is no reaſon for ic) that an unjuſt or miſchievous man can be 
lo, Men are ſo mad on their luſts, rhar oft times Teachers who 
will favour them in them, rhough never ſo unjuſt and unrighre- 
ous 1n their a&ings, ſhall find more favour with them, than the 
moſt righteous perion, that will nor ſpare them as to their Her0- 
dais, Bur he who will entertain the leaſt hopes ro bring men off 
trom their luſts and finiul practices, 15 concerned above all men to 
be innocent and righteous, | 

3 1 ſpeak not this to condemn you: for * ] have 
ſaid betore, that you are in our hearts to die and live 
with you h, | 

> The Apoſtle deals very tenderly with this Church, which was 
(as he knew very well) fyll of many couchy Members, who upon 
all occaſions were ready to refle& upon him, and to take occ.ſion 
from any expreſſions of his Lerters as well as other thin:s, to 
thac purpoſe 3 to obviate whoſe whiſpetings, the Apoſtle rells 
them, that he did not ſpeak rhis to refle& upon, or expoſe them, 
as 1t they had wronged, or defrauced him: For the love which he 
bare tro them was ſuch, as would admit of no ſuch thing ; he ſo lo- 
ved them, as that hecould live and dye with them. 


4 Great is my boldneſs of ſpeech towards you 5, 
great zs my glorying of you k, * I am filled with com- 


fort, /I amexceeding joyful in all our tribulation z-. 

z Becauſe I fo dearly love you, there I ſpeak ſo boldly and 
freely co yop, (as men uſe to ſpeak moſt freely ro thoſe whom 
they moſt love.) & [ bo.ſt of your obedience to others, and there- 
fore would be far from expoſing you. / And this I do nor teign- 
edly, for I amfilled with comtorr on your behalt ; (a furcher ac- 
count of this he giveth us afterward.) » Yea, (ſaith he) che re- 
port I have received of your carriage and behaviour upon your 
receipt of my former Epiſtle, hath filled me with a joy that b:lancerh 
all the atfic&ion and tribulation that I meer wich tor the Goſpel. $9 
good News to 4 taithful Miniſter, 1s the repent:nce and retorma- 
tion of any Member or Members that belong to his Flock 3 whereas 
the hireling or falſe ceacher,is not much concerned whether the Soul 
of his People do well or il}, 


5 For * when we were come into Macedonia, our 
fleſh had no reſt », but we were troubled on every 
ſide 0, * withont were fightings p, within were fears q. 

z Of this motion of the Apoſtle's into Macedonia, what he did 
and ſuffered there, we have a ſhort account, Ac's 20. He ſaith, 
His fleſh had no reſt, he mer with incefſane Storms of perſecutions 
0 and was troubled both by Jews and Gentiles in all places where he 
came. þ By perſons that were withour the Chrittian Church ; 


VI. 


* Ch, 12, 
17. 


* Chap, & 
I!, 12. 


* [hil. 2. 
I7. 
Col. 1. 24+ 


* Chap. 2. 
I3- 
+Deut. 32, 
25. 


ſuch wecethe generality of the Jews and Gentiles ; q and by falſe 


Brethren within, or with his own fears leſt choſe violent dealings 
ſhould be remprations ro Chriſtians, being yer render and yourg in 
the Faith, to relapſe and apoſtarize. 


6 Neverthcleſs, * God rhat comfortcth thole that « cyyp; ,. 
are caſt down 7, comforted us by the coming of 4. 


Titus 5. 

1 It's obſervable how careful the Apoſtle is to aſcribe all the ſup- 
ports and reliefs of his Spirit unto God. Nor is this Notion, or 
name of God unuſeful to any that fear him, who through any ca- 
ſualties or contingences of this li'e ſhal] happen ro be caſt an, 
Ic advantageth our Faith in Prayer, in any luch ftralcs ro conſider 
God as having taken to himſelf che name of him that comfortets 
thoſe that are caſ> down. 5 It is only the coming of Tits his Fel- 
low labourer and one dear to him, that he mentioneth in this Verſe, 
is the means of his ſupport and relicf; yer he enticuleth God co 
his comfort under his' deje&tion. God comforterh his people va- 
riouſly, ſometimes by his good word, fomerimes by his providence, 
be what will the [nſtrumencal cauſe, God is the principal Effici- 
ent, 


7 And not by his coming only, but by the conſola- 
tion wherewith he was comforted in you tz, when he 
told us your carneſt deſire «, your mourning w, your 
fervent mind towards me, ſo that b rejoiced the 


more x. : ; 
t I was glad to ſee Titus, bur that was the leaſt of that conlolz- 
You had before'much comforted and 
rejoiced him; and he being come to me,- made me a parcaker wo 
Ws 


m4” 


I's conſolacion, upon his bcholding or bing a Wirneſs ro « your ear- 
neſt defire, ro give me ſarisfa&tion in the things abour which I wrote 
tg you. iv Ta mourning, eicher tor thoſe ſcandals amongſt you, of 
& hich I have given \ou noricez or for my afflited ſtate and con- 
dirion; or for the offerce you had given me, which cauſed me ro 
wrire that ſharp Lercer to you. X Your earneſt defire ro give me 
farisfation, and yield o:edience ro my admonirions,. or to maltt- 
tain and defend my honour and reputation againſt ſuch as had 1m- 
peached and wounded ir. Theſe things much augmented my reJoy- 
cing in, and over you. Noching ſo much rejoycerh the heart of a 
conicientious, fairhful Miniſter of Chriſt, as ro ſee his peoples 
obedience to the Poftrin of the Goſpel which he is an inſtrument to 
communicate to them, : 
$ For though I made you ſorry with a letter y, I do 
# Chi. 2. 4- not repent *, though 1 did repent=z: For I perceive 
that the ſame Epiſtle made you ſorry, though # were 
but for a ſeaſon 4. | : 
y The Apoſtle doubtleſs meaneth the fornier Epiſtle ro this 
Church. + As to which, he ſaith, tharalrhough he was ſomerimes 
troubled, becauſe (probable) he underſtood, rhar ſome truly pious 
perſons in this Church were troubled ar it, as thinking themſelves 
intended in che reprehenfions 6f it; for which effe& or miſtake, 
(he faith) he was once ſorry, being troubled char he ſhould do any 
thing to grieve them whom he ſo affe&tionarely loved, yer now 
he tells them he was nor ſorry, a And their ſorrow was bur a 
temporary ſorrow; until rhey could reform thoſe abules, which 
they were made ſenſible of by thar Epiſtle, and give the Apoſtle 
that wrote it juſt ſarisfa&ion. 
9 Now, I rejoyce not that you were mace ſorry; 
but that ye ſorrowed to repentance 6 : For ye were 
|| Or, accor- Made forry || afrer a godly manner c, that ye might 
ding toGod. receive damage by us in nothing. d. | | 
b The Apoſtle rakes all advaritages to infinuate himſelf into the 
good opinion and affe&ions of the Members of this famous Church, 
and to obviate any miſrepreſentations of him co them from choſe 
falſe Teachers that were crept in amongſt them. Left they ſhould 
rake ſome advan:age from his ſaying, thar he repenred nor 
that he had made them ſorry ; he here openeth himſelf, and tells 
them, he did nor rejoice in their ſorrow, bur in the bleſſed product 
and cffet of ir, which was their Reforination of thoſe abules and 
Errors which he had reproved them tor 3 the effe& of which reproot 
was this their ſorrow for a litcle ſeaſon. c And that they were 
made ſorry after a godly maxner 3 they did bur ſow in tears, they reap- 
ed in joy : they had a wer Seed-time, bur a fair Harveſt, They ſor- 
rowed with a ſorrow according to God 3 the cauſe of their ſorrow was 
their ſin, the root of it a love ro God, the manner of ic ſuch as was 
agreeable to the Will of God. & The wiſe God fo governing things 


by his Providence, that noching which the Apoſtle ſpake or write, 


ſhou!d prove detrimental, but rather advanrageous to this Church, 
which he ſo loved. 

Io bor godly ſorrow e worketh repentance to fal- 
vation, not to be repented of 7: but the ſorrow of the 


world worketh death g. 

e Thar ſorrow, which is according to God, either commanded by 
him, (as ſorrow for our own or others ſins, or for the Judgments 
of God as they are the indications of God's wrath and diſpleaſure 
for fm3) or which he, as the God of Grace, workerh in the Soul, 
rouching the heart by the Finger of his Spirir, Zyph. 12. 10. Or 
whoſe end 15 the Glory of God, in the reformation of the Perſon 
ſorrowing, by an hatred and deteſtarior, of fin, and an hearty turn- 
ing fromir. f Worketh repentance : it is not repentance, bur it pro- 
ducerh that change of heart and life, which is repentance , and ſhall 
not be imperfe&, bur perfet, which ſhall iſſue 1n the ſalvation of 
rhe ſoul; and neither will ever he repented of. Never did 
any when he came todie repent of true repentance 53 nor 1s it poſ- 
ſible that reaſonable ſouls ſhould repent of what iffuerh in their 
erernal ſalvation. # Bur all ſorrow except this, 15 bur the ſorrow 
** the Worid;, che effe& of which is ofr-rimes Natural death 5 While 
men bow down under their burdens,and chrough impartenceweſtroy 
rhemſelve*, or at leaſt co fix their rhoughrs upon 14d ovjects, and 
ſo afflit chemſelves with them that they bring chemſelves into diſ- 

_ eaſes rending to death. Ir alſo worketh Spiritual death 5 is it in- 
diſpoſerh men for their Dury : (as jt was in the caſe of Elijah ' and 
1s a temptation to them to be angry againſt God (as in the caſe of 
7ouah) rofrer, murmur and repine againſt God's Providence, and 
by this means it ailo worketh towards Eternal dezth, which is the 
wages belonging to ſin, 

r1 For behold, this fclf ſame thing that ye ſor;owed 
after a godly tort,whit carefulneſs it wrought in you þ, 
yea what clearing of your ſelves s ? yea what in:dignati- 
on k? yea what fear 1? yea what vehement deſire m? yea 
nh zeal n? yea nhat revenge o ? In all things ye have 
approved your ſelves to be clear in this matter. 

h The Apoſtie having ſhewed the miſchievous effedts of worldly 
ſorrow, all which he comprehended under the word Death ; here ſhew- 
eth che bleſſed cffeRs of that ſorrow, which 75 according to God. The 
firſt he mentioneth 1s great careſulneſs, both ro make our peace with 
God tor cur former violations of his Law, (uſing all means he hath 
preſcribed and diredted thereunto z) and allo to preſerve our peace, 
by avoiding the like breaches for the time ro come. # The Corin- 
thizns ſorrow might work in ſome of them a clearing,or purging them- 


Chap. VII. I. CORINTHIANS. Chi 


| ro pleaſe him. o Whar ads of Diſcipline, Faſting, denyin 


ſelves in ſome lawful things wherein you may have offcnq 5 9 
» Ort \e 


too tree uſe of which may have been to you cccafiors cf Offend 
ding, 


p By theſe As, tho ſome of you have been to he blamed, x 
Body of you have ſhewed your ſelves clear of this matter Yet the 
all of you have been formerly.roo guilty of ſome things 1 ha, or th 
ged you with, yer you have cleared your ſelves both to ny Chay. 
1mpureth no ſin to him char confeſlerh his ſin, and forſaketh i; (wh; 
ro me who am abundantly (atisfied with your declared forrow, / 

cance and reformacion, »TeDen, 


12 Wherefore though I wrote unto you, I 4i4;; ” 
for his cauſe that had done the wrong q, nor for his 
cauſe that had ſuffered wrong r, but thar our care for 


you in the ſight of God might appear to you s. 

q For the cauſe of him thar had abuſed his Fathers Wife, , 
our of any particular hatred or ill will I had to him, » nor for þ 
ſake of him whoſe Wife was ſo abuſed; nor for my own fake br 
had been ſo abuſed, and ſuffered wrong by youz 5 bur Only our of 
a love to your Souls, and a care I had for you, that in all thing 
you might approve'Four ſelves unto Gotl, Or poflibly this hg 
15 more generally to be interprered, without reſpe& either to the 
inceſtuous perſon in particular, or to his Father, and the ſenſe of 
the Verſe no more than this, Though in my former Epiſtle | 
wrote fomething ſharply ro you, yer I did ir not in any Paſſion 
nor was I drawn aſide by any prejudice or hatred of any pe;. 
ſon, nor out ofany parrial affetion ro any, as toany thing for whjc 
I blamed you ; burout of that general love and affe&ion which I have 
to you all, which producerth in mea care of, and a ſollicitude for yg, 
char you might do no evil, which care 1 was willing ſhould appey 
to you, 

13 Therefore we were comforted in your comforts; 
yea, and excecdingly the more joyed we for the joy 


Titus, becauſe his ſpirit was refreſhed by you all ,. 

£ The comfort which your Letters brought us, arid fo came fg 
you; or the comfort which you received upon your reformaigh 
of thoſe things which were amiſs amongſt you. 4 And wealſy Joyed 
for the joy that Tits conceived upon his underſtanding of your x. 
fairs, and your ready obedience to the Epiſtle which I wrote 
you, Such is the union berwixt the true Members of Chriſt, thy 
they are comforted with one anorhers comforts, and afflicted withgs 
anothers ſorrows and griefs, : | 

14 For if [ have boaſted anything to him of youl un 
not aſhamed : but as we ſpake all things to you la truth, 
even fo our boaſting which 7 made before Titus is found 
a truth w. 
 w The Apoſtle here mulriplieth expreſſions to ſweeten the (:. 
rinthians, by all manner of ways declaring his value for, and affetiinn 
towards them. Ir appearerh by this, that the Apoſtle had ar fone. 
rime before ſpoken ſomething to Titus, in commendation of this 
Church of Corinth, which he here calleth a Boaſting of them; envy 
again boaſted that he had ſaid nothing bur the cruth, which 7ity 
had experienced and reported to him, 


I5 And his þ inward affection is more abundant ts-46, 


wards you, whilſt he remembreth the obedience of you! 


all, how with fear and trembling you received him x, 

x By your obedience to my admonitions and exhortations, you 
have nor only obliged me in a debt of Love to you, bur Titz5all, 
who joyfully remembers, with what ſear and trembling J= receired 
him, leſt he ſhould find any thing amongſt you char ſhould grieve 
and offend him, 


16 I rejoice therefore that I have * confidence * 
in you in all things y. 


y Thar I can write and ſpeak to you with confidence, tha you 


will hearken to my admonitions and exhocrarions, and that I can Siem, 


confidently boaſt and glory concerning you. 
CGHAP VII. 

He ſtirreth them to a liberal cbntribution for the pocy Saints at Jerula 
lem; by the example of the Macedonians 3 their former forward't!s 
The Example of Chriſt, 1, g. This they had begun a year ago 3 4% 
need not be to their own diſtreſs z but out of their abundance to ſupply 0119 
wants, as was dont in the gathering of Manna, 10, . Ig, C0» 
mends Ticus and thoſe other Brethren who were purpoſely com? to 7 
for this buſineſs, 16, —- 24+ 

1 \JOreover,brethren,we do you to wit ofthe grace of 


God beſtowed on the churches of Macedonia 4+ 
4 The Apoſtle in this Chapter proceedeth ro a new Argument, 
uz. The preſſmg of this Church to atts of Charity. This is chat whichhe 
here calleth the Grace of God beſtowed on the Churches of Macedon, 
pucting the Cauſe for the Effe&, Bounty or liberality to the poor 
Saints and Members of Chrift (as ſuch) flowing from that habit 0 
Love by which men are taught of God to love one anorher; 107 
though 'men, from a natural Goodneſs, or habirs of moral Virtues 
may relieve men as men, compaſſionating perſons in mileiy5 9. 
none from any ſuch Principle, do good to any Members of thc ng 
hold of Faith, as ſuch 3 ſuch rather feel from chem the effe&s 
their hatred, in raking what is their own from them. 
| ? the abun- 


2 How: that in a great trial of afflictions # od 
dance of their joy c, and their deep poverty 2bounce 


unto the riches of their liberality, ; SS 
b How great the afflitions of the Churches in Macedonia Were, 


ſelves of that guilt which other Members of thar Church had incurred, 

But there 1s an:ther clearing of our ſelves which true repentance | 
worketh, not by denying the Fat, but by confeſling ir with taking | 
{hame to our {elves 3 which, though it be not a clearing of a perſon | 
from the fa#, yer through Divine Grace, joined with a reformation, ir | 
is a clearing him from che gilt thereof. þ Whar a diſpleaſure againſt | 
your ſelves for your Folijes /! what ſear / nor ſo much of the wrath of | 
God,:sIcft you ſhould again fall into the like remprarions,and be over- 
come by them. m What vehement defire / what hearty Prayers ro God 
thar tor the time ro come you might be kepr from the like remp- 
tations: z yea, what warmth and great degrees of all ſanRified af- 
tectonz! love to God, hatred af fin, fear of offending God, deſire 


both from the Jews and Pagans, may be read in Cha?- 15, and 9 
the 4s. AfﬀiRions are called Trials, becauſe under _— 
maketh a trial of our Faith, Patience, and Conftancy3 and the ol 
alſo, ordinarily by them, trierh to draw out our luſts and __ - 
c God made their inward peace and joy in the Holy Ghoſt = 7 
bound in them under their trials, that tho they Were P27, > FR f 
poor) yet they abounded in the riches ot liberallcy 3 _— th. 
ro the neceſſities of their poor Brethren in proportion ra L proſe 
lities, or as might have been expetted from men under = ji poor 
ſtances, bur ſhewing themfelves rich in cher liberalicy, t oug! 

in their Eſtates, and as to what they had of chis Worlds 80 : _ 


p. VI 


Ch.2 
hil, 


hap 


partic 
hath 
ſpered 


dll 


> Gr,o0 


l, 
TH 


 Chi2, 
hill 2 
2 Thel, 


& 
Philem, 


*M 


n. 15+ 
xr. 16+ g and to take npon them the work of diſtributing ir. 


0, 1 
ID, » # 
- / 


"IF 


y 


' gave themſelves to the Lord, and unto us, by the will of 


ko, 7 that though he was rich w, yet for your ſakes he be- 


3 For to their power, I bear record, yea, and beyond 
their power they were willing of themſelves e : 

» Two things che Apoſtle commendeth in the Charity of the 
Churches of Mec2donia: Firſt, the Quantity of ther? Gift, which, he 
(aith, was to their power, yea, (on his knowledge) beyond what 
they were able. Secondly, their Freedom in the Ation; fo as 
chey did nor need the Apoſtles Exhortations and Arguments, bur 
did ir of themſelves freely and cheerfully. 

4 Praying us with much intreaty, that we would re- 
ceive the gift f, and take upon us the * fellowſhip of mi- 


niſtring to the Saints g. 
f Bringing what they had freely colleted among themſelves ro 
the Apoſtles, and importuning them to receive it ar cheir hands, 


5 And this they did, not as we hoped h, but firſt 


God 5. | 

þ We might have hoped for ſomething trom them, though they 
were in that poor afflicted condition; bur what they brought was 
much beyond what we could hope for, or expe& from them. Or 
«ſe this Phraſe may refer to what followeth: ; They did not only 
bring us their Gift, bur they alſo gave up themſelves ro us, to be 
diſpoſed of forſthe good of the Church, according to the Will of 
God 3 for they firſt gave themſelyes up to the Lord, devoting them- 
telves to his Service and Glory, and then to us, the will of God (© 
ruling and direQing them. 

6 Iniomuch that we deſired Titus, that as he had 
begun, ſo he would alſo finiſh in you the ſame grace 


alſo k. 

þ The jame Grace, 1n this place fignifieth no more than the ſame 
Gijt, or the ſame good work in colleRing in the Church of Corinth, 
It by Grace here..be underſtood the Grace of God, the Cauſe is pur 
for the Effe& (as we had it in the firſt Verſe; bur 534 ©e2 being 
not here added, poſſibly it had been bercer tranſlared Gift, or free 
Contribution 3 for how a Minifter ſhould finiſh the Grace of God, is 
hard to conceive, and the Phraſe is at beſt very hard.; bur he may 
be an inſtrument for compleating 2 good Work which is done from 


IE CORINTHIANS. 


rich in the love of God, and in the habirs of Divine Grace, which 
was all effe&ed by his poverty, by his making himſelf of nv repura- 
tion, and bumbling himſelf. If after your knowledge of this, by re- 
celving and believing rhe Goſpel, and experiencing this, in thoſe 
Riches of Spirirual Gifrs and Graces, and hopes of Glory which 
you have, you ſhall yer be found ftraic-hearted in compaſt:onating 
the poverty and atfiicted ſtare of his poor Members, or ſtraic-handed 
in miniſtring unto tnem, how w'll you in any meaſure anſiver this 
grear love, or conform to this great Example ? 

10 And hereia * I give y advice z- For * this is 
expedient for you 4, who have begun betore not only to 
co,but to - be * forward a year ago b. 

; Giving to thoſe that were in want was matrer of Prece 
( it being whar the Law of God and Nture did requice); but giving 
as the Macedonians had given, nor oniy to, tur beyond their 2bilicy 
was not ſo, Or poſlibly, the Apoſtles faying, I give my advice, 
doth nor ſuppoſe what he adviſed :obe no commanded quty ; Frienc 
may adviſe us to what is our duty to do; 4 for faith the Apoſtle, 
this is expedient ſor you 3 for your profir, or for your honour and 
reputation. A Precepr alone ought to oblige us co the doing of 
the thing commanded, bur the profit, credir, and tionour of the 
ation adds an edge to the duty, and layeth us under a double oli. 
gation ; the firſt of obedience ro God, the ſecond, of being wiſe 
ro our ſelves. b The Apoſtle proverh che expediency of ic from 
the concern of their repuration in ir ; that chey mighr not He 
thought ro have gone backward, or to become weary of welldoing, 
in rega-d they had began this charitable Work ſome rime before. 
Objeet, Bur how cometh he here ro pur doing before willing, (for fo 
It is in the Greeb, nor only to do bur alſo Seauy to will ?) Some tell 
us theſe Hyſterologies, or putting things afrer which ſhould in or- 
der be before, are uſual in holy Wric; bur poſſibly it is berter an- 
[ſwered by others, that $4Aa«y here doth not ſignify the mere incii- 
narion of the will, bur a forwaraneſs ; (thus our Trantlators under- 
ſtood ir, and therefore rranſ}:re ir ro be forward :) or a ſpontane- 
ous willingneſs withour Arguments uſed by others to perſwade 
them to ir. Soas the ſenſe 15 this, You nor only began ro do the 
thing a year ago, bur you did it of your own accord wichour our Ex- 
horrations and Arguments, of your own free Mind and Will: So as 
if you ſhould now be behind-hand, ir would be a reproach ro you, 


an habir of divine Grace, by Exhortations and Arguments which 
he may uſe to preſs the performance of ir, Titus (ir ſeemerh) had 
been diligent in ſome other places to make this ColleRion 3 going to 
Corinth, the Apoſtle prefſerh him to go on with ir there alſo, 


7 Therefore, as * ye abound in every thing /, in 
faith 7, In utterance, and in knowledge .-., and in 
all diligence o, and in your love to us p, ſee that ye 


abound in this grace alſo q. | 
! Though the Apoſtle made little uſe of Oratory in his ordinary 
Diſcourſes and Epiſtles, yer he knew how to uſe it when it mighr 
be of probable advantage for che Ends which he aimed at, iz. the 
glory of God, and the good of the Souls that were under his care, 
He did nor turn Divinity into mere words, and Rehetorical flouriſhes ; 
yer he made uſe of theſe ſomerimes, as a waiting Maid to Divinity. 
Being therefore to preſs upon theſe Corinthians this great duty of 
Charity, he inſinuateth himſelf into them, by telling them, thac 
they abounded in all other ſpirirual habits. m Faith, by which they 


This ſenſe is favoured by the next Verſe, what he here calls a willing, 
he calls a readineſs to will there. : ; 

11 Now therefore perform. the doing of it c, that as 
there was a readineſs to will, ſo there may be a perform- 
ance alſo out of that which you have 4. 

c Ye ſhewed your ſelves ſome rime fince free to will the thing 
which I am now p:eſfing you unto; you have now opportunity ro 
do ir, and the Example of other Churches going before you in the 
doing of it ; ſhew-your ſelves now conſtant by the doing of ir. 4 
That ſeeing God hath given you ſomerhing of this Worlds Goods, 
and that in proportions beyond your poor Brethren, as you pretend- 
ed a great readineſs a great while fince to relieve rhem, ſo you may 
by your performance juſtify thar it was not all a mete prerence. 

12 For * if there be firſt a willing mind, zz zs accepted 
according to whiat a man hath, and not according to 
what he hath note. _ | 

e He had before dire&ed them to give our of that which they 


had both ſteadily aflented ro the truth of Goſpel Propofitions,” and | 
alſo received Chriſt, » Utterance, by which they were inabled/ 
either to ſpeak with Tongues, or ro God in Prayer, or to men by | 
Prophecy and Exhortation. .*. Knowledge both of things Divine | 
and Humane, þ And in Love to the Miniſters of the Goſpel, which 
if it did nor appear in all, yer it did inmany of them. q And from 
hence he fercheth an Argument to preſs them ro be compleat in this 
habit of Grace, The force of the Apoſtles Argument lies in the 
duty of all Chriſtians, to ſtrive after perfeRion, and thar natural de- 
fire which is in all ingenuous people, to be perfe& in that good of 
which they have 2 taſte in leſs perte& degrees, 


8 | ſpeak not by commandment 7,but by occaſion of the 
forwardneſs of others s, and to prove the ſincerity of 
your lover. ys IO 

7 I do not ſpeak in an imperious way, as one that commandeth 
you; or rather God hath no where giver an expreſs command as 
tothe quantum of what you ſhould give : 5s Bur the forwardneſs of 
others makes me thus peak ro you, as not being willing you ſhould 
In good works come behind any Churches. t And thar I might 
prove the fincerity of your love, To God, to me, and to the pooy 
«fiifttd Saints thar are in Fudez, Tho? God hath not dire&ed the 
particular Sums we ſhould give to thoſe that are in need, yet he 
hath given us general Rules ; That we ſhould give as God hath pro- 
ſpered us, x Cor. 16, 2. And ſoas there may be ſome equality (as the 
Apoſtle ſpeaketh v., 14.) So, as the fincerity of our love to God de- 
pendeth in ſome meaſure upon the proportion of what we give ar 
his command, ſo doth alſo the ſinceriry of our loye to thoſe poor 
Members of Chriſt that are in want 3 that there may bed moderate 

upply for their want, from our abundance. 


9 For ye know the grace of our Lord Jeſus Chriſt «, 


roy poor x, that ye through his poverty might be 
TICH y, , i 

4 Call to mind the free love of your Lord and Maſter Jeſus Chriſt, 
Which you know, believing the Goſpel which gives you a true ac- 
count of it, and having in your own Souls experienced the bleſſed 
elteCts of it, w He was rich, being the Heit of all things, the Lord 
of the whole Creation, Heb. I. 2. all things were put under his feer. 
* Yet that he might accompliſhthe work of your Redemprion, and 
purchaſe his Fathers love for you, he rook upon him the form of a 
Seryanr, ſtripped himſelf of his Robes of Glory, and clothed him- 
ſelf with the Rags of Fleſh, denied himſelf in the uſe of his Crea- 
res, had not where to lay dawn his Head, . was maintained from 
Alms, People miniſtring ro him of their Subſtance. y And al! this 
Ut You might be nads richz with the Riches of Grace and Glory 


had, that is, in a proportion to what God had bleiſed them with ; 
for he tells them that ir is the willing mind which God acceprerh, 
not the quantiry of the Gifr. God doth not require of Peop'e 
things nor in their power z yer bare velletties, or prerended wil- 
lings are nor accepted : There muſt be an ating according to our 
power to juſtify rhe finceriry of our willing mind ; and men vainly 
pretend to will that towards the performance of which they never 
moye, Tho' God requirech not of us chings char are nor within 
our power, yer he requireth of us che putting forch of our power 
indoing what he hath commanded us, fo far as we are able 3 which 
indeed canalone juftifie the willingneſs of our mind to be more than 
a mere pretence, A preſent imporency, if contratted by our own 
faulr, will not excuſe us from che performance of thoſe As ro 
which it doth extend, to which we are bound by rhe juſt Laws of 
God or men: Bur ic is very unreaſonable co think, it ſhould excuſe 
as to thoſe AAs to which ic doth not exrend, and as co which it can- 
not be pleaded, 


13 For 7 mean not that other men be eaſed, and you 
burdened f. 


f I do not preſs you to ſuch proportions in giving as ſhould make 
your afflited Brethren rich, and you poor, 


14 But by an equality g - that now at this time your 
abundance may be a ſupply for their want þ, that their 
abundance may be alſo a ſupply for your want z, that 


there may be equality k.. | | 

2 But only co bring you and them ro ſome equality, that they 
mighr nor ſtarve, while you have plenty, and what you may well 
enough ſpare. h I do not urge you to make your necefſaries a ſup. 
ply for others wants. I would only have a ſupply for their wants 
our of your abundance. # That their abundance may aiſo be a jupply for 
your want : Some by their abwndence underſtand their aboundings in 
the good things of this life: They are now in diſtreſs by reaſon 
of the great Famine that is in Zudea, or by reaſon of the great 
ſtorm of. perſecution that is there raiſed againſt Chriſtians 3 yer 
God may turn the Scales, he may ſend a Famine in thoſe parts 
where you live, and there may be plenty in 7udea 3 then their 
abundance may ſupply your wancs. Orhers interprer their abundance, 
of the aboundings of their Grace, which may quicken them up to 
pray for you for the ſupply of ſuch Grace co you as you ſtand in 
need of, & Thar ſo there may be an equalicy, they being Inftru- 
ments of Spiritual Blefſings co you, as you arc Inftrumenrs of Tem- 
poral Bleſſings and good things to them, 


15 As it is written, He that had gathered much, had 


nothing over;and he that had gathered litrle,had no w_ L. 
13 


Chap. VIIL 


F x Ccr. 


7. 2 Gs 
* Proy. 


19. 17. 
PO Macth, 16, 


+ Gr. to be 
| willing. 
5 * Chap. 


* Mark 


I 2. 43» 
Luke 21, 


» 


Chap: VIII. 


! This Quotation would inclire us to think, that the abyndance 
mentioned in the Jatcer part of che former Verſe, as alſo the 1qua- 
lity mentioned 1n the end of 1t, 1s rather to be underſtood with rC- 
tererce ro the good things of this life, chan wich reference to St» 
1ita'l Bleſſings 3 or to remporal and ſpiritual put rogerher, balancing 
one another to make an equality, For certain it is, char this Quo- 
ration re{erreth to 3{a1tra, which was the Bread God afforded for 
rhe Bodies of his Peopic in the Wilderneſs, rhough conſidered ty9i- 
cally, it 1s rightly by che Apoſtle called ſpirirzal Bread, 1 Cor. 10. 3. 
ſignifying thar Bread which came down from Heaven, which Moſes 
could not give (as Chriſt tells us, Foh. 6. 50, 58.) Theſe words are 
quored from Exod. 16. 18, tho more agreeably to the Septuagint 
than to our TranſJacjon. The Hiſtory 1s this. The anna being 
fallen, the Texc ſaich v. 17, That ſome gathered more, ſome leſs; bur 
Ir {o fell our, by the Providence of God ordering it, that when they 
came, and meaſured what they had gathered, MH? tat gathered much 
had nothing over, and he that gathered little had no lack. Now of this 
the Apoſtle makes an Argument to preſs che Corinthians ro this 
charitable At, The force of which 11&s in this, as it was jn the 
cale of Manna, there were ſome thar gathered more, others thr 
gathered leſs, yer all had enough : So ic will be as to the Riches of 
the World that Men gather, though ſome gather more, and others 
gather Jeſs, yet men will find, that thoſe that have gathered litrle, 
(hve leſs Eſtates than others) uſing what they have to the glory 

of Gcd, and according tothe Divine Rule, will have no lack: And 
thoſe that have gathered much, if they do nor diſtribute ir accord- 
Ing to the will of God, will find that they have nothing over ; God 
will ſhrink cheir heap into ſome equaliry ro thoſe whom ar God's 
Command they would nor relieve, Eccl. 5. 10. He that loveth fulver 
ſhall not be ſatisfied with ſilver. The wiſdom of the Divine Provi- 
dence hath nor ordained /eze{ling, nor madeall Men equal jn their 
portions of che good things of this lite; bur he. hath wiled ſuchan 
eq alityas every one may eat (unleſs he or ſhe thar will nor work) 
either from the ſweat of their own Faces, or from the Charicy of 
others. Beſides, Nature craveth no great things, but 15 ſatisfied 
with alittle : So as he that hatch gathered little ſhall have no lack, 
if he can bur moderate the exceſſes of his Appetite. And he that 
hach gathered much hath notving over, wha 15 either neceſſury for 
himſelf and his Family, or what he ought co part with for the relief 
of others atrhe Command of God. 

16 But thanks be to God, which put the ſame ear- 


IL CORINT HIANS. 


Cha 


22 And we have ſent with them onr brother x wh 
we have oftentimes proved diligent in many th; , 
but now much more diligent upon the great confaes 
which || I have in you 7. _ 

s This Brother is uncertainly gueſſed at, nor is 
for usro know whether irwere Epenet:!s, or Apollss, -or Softher 
any other ; it is ſufficient for us ro know, that he was ap 
and one of whoſe diligence and faithfulneſs, the Apo To, 
Churches, where Paul now was, hid had experience, 
he was now very ready and forward to be imploy 
_ upon the Apoſtle's recommendation of th; 

1m, 


23 Whether any do inquire of Titus, be is my 


ner and fellow- helper concerning you : or our bre 
be inquired of, they are the mellengers of the Churc 
and the glory of Chriſt w. 

4 This Verſe contains the Apoſtles credential Letrers give 
Tits, and rhe other two perſons ſent about the buſineſ; of __— 
this Colle&ion inthe Church of Corinth. Many, in matter; = 
the drawing of their Purſes is ſolliciced and Concerned, are vi 
ſcrupulous and inquiſitive, ſeeking all advantages to excuſe then 
ſelves; one while pleading their own poverty, another while 4 
jefting againſt theſtate, or want, or qualicy of thoſe for whon they 
are ſollicited: Again, queſtioning, whether their Charity ſhaij 
ever come to thoſe perſons for whom it is deſired, objeted Wainſ 
the perſons intruſted with the conveyance or diftribution of | 
The Apoſtle having therefore before obviated ſome OnjeRions, þ, 
here obviateth the laſt mentioned, letting them know, thr - 
perſons intruſted with this Service, were unexceptionah[e erſon 
He calleth Titus his Partner and Fellow-helper concerning then, that 4 
In the buiineſs of the Goſpel, and promoting the Salvation of thei 
Souls, For the others, he tells them they were ſuch as the Churc : 
had thought fir ro make their Meſſengers; ſo had the Credit of the 
Churches whoſe Meſſengers they were, who would not have in. 
truſted them if they had nor judged them faithful. » He either 
callech the Churches, or them, the Glory of Chriſt If the wor 
be to be underſtood of the Meſſengers (which ſeemeth the faire 
application of them) the meaning is, thar they were Inſtrumen; 
of the Glory of Chriſt ; or perſons who, by their Grace, did by 


thren 
lies u, 


neſt care into the heart of, Titus for you. ; 
17 For indeed he accepted the exhortation, but 
being more forward, of his own accord he went unto 
'OU 0. 
; m The Apoſtle, by his Exhorration, pur Titys upon this employ- 
ment of making at Corinth an extraordinary Colle&ion for the poor 
Chriſti.ns chat were in Zudea; bur it ſhould ſeem, rhat when he did 
it, Titus let him know, that he was before reſolved upon it : fo as, 
t[:0ugh he wear at the entreaty of the Apoſtle, yer he went alſo of 
his own accord, having reſolved upon the work before the Apoſtle 
ipokerohim of jt. To let us know, that we are not ſufficient of our 
lelves ſo much as tothink one good though, he gives thanks to God 
tor putting this earneſt care into the heart of Titus. 
13 And we have ſent with him the brother, whoſe 


praiſe zs in the goſpel throughont all the churches », 

# Who this other Brother was, whether Zuke or Barnabas, or $i. | | 
l2s, or Apo!los, or Mark, is not. much material; it is plain, whos | ! 
ever he was, char he was a Brother, and a Miniſter, one who had a 

- good repute for preaching the Goſpel. 
19 And not rhat only, but who was alſo choſen of 


backed with an heap of Arguments, 
their love to God, to their afflited Brethren, and to the Apoſtle, 
2. Ir would be a proof of it to thoſe Meſſengers of the Churches, ad 
to the Churches whoſe Meſſengers they WETE.- 3. 
that the Apoſtle had not ro Tits and others, boaſted on their bel 


He gives the Reaſons why he ſent Tirus and thoſe other Brethyis iffort- 


much Glory ro Chriſt, Every one that excelieth in the hy; > 
exercie of Grace, is the Glory of Chriſt, becauſe withou: Chit 
he can donothing of that nature. T7live, yet not T, out Chiilt liar 
zn me. The as and exerciſes of Grace are indeed our ag;, by 
the power by which we do them, is from Chriſt ; we Blory inChrif, 
and by our holy converſations glorifie Chriſt, and Chrilt glrie 
1ncyery pious and holy perſon, as God did concerning Th, Cy, 
I. 8. and2, 3, 

24 Wherefore ſhew ye to them, and before the 
churches, the proof of your love, and of our boaſting 
on your behalf x. 

# The Chapter concludeth wich an Exhortation to their liverality, 
I, It would be an evidence of 


Fr would evidence 


n vain, 


CHAP. IX. 


hand, and by divers Reaſons taken from God's liberal Bleſſing, L1:10"d 
Grace upon them that ſow liberally, ne exhorts them to gir litvilly, 


It at al] Materia] | 


Y part. 


E x Pet. 2, 


| Or. gif the Churches to travel with us, with this | grace o 
'©* which is adwiniſtred by us ti the glory of the ſame 
Lord, and declaration of your ready mind p, 
o And that he was choſen by the Churches to go along with Paul 
and Ttzs to carry the Charity of other Churches to the diſtreſſed 
Chriſtians in Fud-az which Charity is here again called Grzce, for 
the reaicn betore mentioned, v. 1. f He declares that their end in 
this Adminiſtration, was the Glory of God, and the proof and de- 
claration of theſe Corinthizns ſincerity of brotherly Love, and ready 
Mend, to yield obedience to the Will of God declared to them. 


20 Avolding this, that no man ſhould blame us in 


this abundance which is adminiſtred by us 9. 

q I have ſent more than one as Witneſſes of what is done in this 
Service, thatnone might refle& upon thoſe truſted with the Charicy 
of divers Churches, as if they converted any part of it to their own 
private ute, and did nor diſtribute it ro thoſe for whom it was given. 
The Apoſtle here com eth to all Miniſters and Chriſtians, the 
prudent foreſight of tu ſcandalous impurations, as they may be 
expoſcd to (be their ſincerity what it will) from the men of the 
World, whohave no good will towards them ; and a proviſion againſt 
them, Paul could hive truſted Titus in the diſtribution of theſe 
Alms, bur he did not know what the World mighr ſay had he dif. 
charged the truſt alone ; hetherefore takes in one with him to be a 
witrels of his aQions, 

21 *Providing for honeſt things, not only in the 
I3. ſighr of the Lord, but alſo in the fight of menr. 

r He had faid the fame Row, 12. 17. In both placcs he inſtrufeth 
us, whar Js the grezt Duty of ali Chriſtians, but of Miniſters clpe- 
cially (whoare as Cities bujl; upon a Hill, and cannot be hid, and 
againſt whom 1 1 men are much more ready to open their mouths, 
than ag.inſt private Chriſtians of a more obſcure condition) viz. to 
Pro:iae things boneſt, not orly in the fight of God, (having an eye 
ria: in cur ations we do nothing which God hath forbidden'us, nor 
cmir any thing which God hath commanded us) bur alſo looking 
that incur converſation. we (as much as in us lies) to thoſe things 
winchhave a gocd report among men, Phil. 4+ 8. For beſides thar 
we are obliged to give no offence to Jews or Gentiles, nor any wa 
to alienace them from the ways of God; we are alſo obliged to do 
wheat in uslierh to winard gain them to Chriſt 3 to which the doing 
ot ations which they account diſhoneſt (rho? ic may be ſome are not 


| 


I——10. 2s alſo from the Thanksgiving that ſhall be mad: firit t 
God, and the Prayers which ſhall be made for them, 11 — 1s, 


I Oras touching * the miniſtring to the Sziats, it x, 
Is ſuperfluous for me to write unto yous 

a I ſhould think the Particle 3p, here tranſlated for, had heen 

better tranſlated but, as1n 1 Pet. 4. 15. 2 Pet. 1. 9. our Tranſlators 

| do render jr, So theſe words contain an elegant revocation of him- 

ſelf from the Argument he had dwelr upon in the whole former 


Chapter, and the ſenſe amounts to this: Bur ro what purpoſe do] 
mulciply words to you to perſuade you to miniſter co the Saints in 
diſtreſs? As ro you ir is ſuperfluous. By this Arr letting chem 
know, that he had, no doubr, a confident expeRation concerming 
them ; the ſuggeſting of which hath alſo the force of another Ar- 
gument, that they might not deceive the Apoſtles good opinion 
and confidence of them. 


2 For know the forwardneſs of your mind for 
which I boaſt of. you to them of Macedonis, that 
Achaia was ready a year ago b, and your zeal hath pro- 


voked very many c, n ro 
6 He gives them the reaſon why he judgeth it g_— 
wrice to them, becauſe they had a forward mind ot themle bo 
and needed not to be ſpurred on. This the Apoſtle tells chem = 
ne kntw, (he had told them of ir, Chap. 8. 10.) he knev it : _ 
from themſelves, or from ſome that came from chem uno wat 
and he had boaſted of them for this their forwardneſs in this Geir 
work to the Churches of Macedonia, c He tells them _ in 
warmth unto, and in this work, had kindled an heat ! I in 
thoſe parts where he was. Having therefore been {0 — 
this good work, and ſo good inftruments ro kindle an heat 11 _— 
he would not have them now come behind others, or 89 
in it, ſting of 
3 Yet have ſent the Brethren, leſt our b03 P 
you ſhould be in vain in this behalf 4, that, 45 ; 


ye may be ready e. = ears 

4 I did not ſend the Brethren ſo much to move you - prot 
or quicken you to ir, for you your ſelves purpoled Jed from your 
and ſhewed a forwardneſs in it ; the morion proceede 


ſo upon a ſtrict inquiry,) is no ficring mean, 


: ; ne occaſion 
ſelves, and you ſhewcd a readineſs ro jt, which gave ro 


NE 


Pare 

man 

caſts 
man | 
be mj 

ceive 
ſpirit 
he ſo1 
cordin 
Whenc 
not he 
men h 

F; 
ut.tg, lo let 
* Go 
Il. mJ 
ed b 
"12. as he 
Out an 
0g 5.Live, 
4 35.dom a 
Or upo 


hap 


= » i ILCORIN 


ro boaſt of you to the Churches of Macedonia: but 1 thought you 
might forget it, and T would not have our boafting in vain on this 
b-half. e And beſides, 1 would have the work done, that your 
Alms might not be to gather when T come, (as he had ſaid, L Core 
16. 2.) but might be in a readineſs to be taken and carried away, 
(for that is ſignified here by being ready) nor that readineſs of 
mind of which he had before ſpoken, and which he had betore men- 
tioned as what he had found in them, : 

4 Leſt haply, if they of Macedonia come with me, 
2nd find you unprepared, we (that we fay not you) 
ſhonld be aſhamed in this ſame confident boaſting f. 

” For if 1 ſhould come, and any of the Members of the Churches 
of Macedonia, who have heard me boaſting of you as a People ve- 
ry forward in this charitable work, and when they are come, they 
ſhould find you had done nothing, only talked much of your readi- 
neſs; both I ſhould be aſhamed, and you alſo might ſee ſome caule 
to bluſh, which 1, who conſult your honour and reputation equally 
with my own, would prevent. 

5 Therefore I chought it neceſſary to exhort the 
Brethren, that they would go before unto you, and 


ck make up before-hand|- your bounty, * whereof ye had 


0V.11, 


notice before g, that the ſame might be ready þ as a 


0:,which gutter of bounty 7, and not as of covetouſnels k. 
TW 
Wiz Of 


mT 
M0 
; 


g This was the cauſe why IT judg2d it reaſonable to ſend the 
three Brethren before-mentioned, unto you, that they might make 
up your bounty z &@g9-=Tzprows , not {o much to move, quicken, 
or exhort you to it, as to haſten the diſpatch, and perfetting of it, 
that your mony might be ready gathered. The word which we 
tranſlate Bounty, in the Greek fignifieth Bleſſmg, which agreeth with 
the Hebrew Dialect. Abigails Preſent to David in his diſtreſs, is 
called NINA, a Bleſſing, 1 Sam. 25. 27. SO Facob called his Prelent 
to his Brother Eſau, Ger. 33.11, Such kind of Reliefs are called 
a Bleſſing in both the #:brew and the Greek Tongue: 1. Becauſe 
they are a part of God's. bleſſing upon him that gives, - Pſal. 
24+5+ 2+. Becauſe the giving of them is a recognition or acknow- 
ledgment how far God hath blefſed Perſons, they giving as the 
Lord hath proſpercd them, 1 Cor. 16. 2. 3+. Becauſe they are an 
indication of the bleſſing or well-wiſhing of him that giveth to him 
that receiveth the gift. 4. Becauſe they are a real doing good to 
the perſon that receiveth them, an actual bleſſing of him. 5. Poſ- 
fibly they are (in him that gives) an effettual, real bleifing of God ; 
for we then bleſs God with what we have, when we ule and im- 
prove it for the ends for which he hath given it to us. Tt is very 
obſervable, That a liberal free giving to the relief of the Servants 
of God in diſtreſs, -is called 4; and »2A-3442, Grace and Bleſſing. 
An heart to it being created in us from the free Grace of God, and 
the 'work it ſelf being a real aQual blefling of God with our 
ſubſtance, and the fruit of our increaſe: which two things well 
digeſted, will be potent Arguments to Charity with every Soul 
that knoweth any thing of God, or hath any love ior God. þ That 
the ſame may be ready gathered, not to gather when I come. 7 As 
a Bleliing ; we tranſlate it 45 a marter of 501: the ſenſe is the iame. 
&. Not of Covetouſneſs: The meaning is, I have allo [-vt the Bre- 
thren, tnat they may perſwade you to a free and liberal Contribu- 
tion, a giving that may look like a Bleſſing, nor as proceeding from 
a narrow heart, in which the love of mony prevaileth above the 
lore of God. Giving to the diftreſſed Saints of God ſparingly, and 
diſproportionately to what Efrate we have, no way looks like a 
Bleſſing ; he that ſo gives, doth not, according to thz Apoſtle's 
Phraſe, give *. <20,. 4:* for heneither gives as the Lord hath ble(- 
ſed and proſpered him, nor yet according to what God requires 
of him3 for he witholds a part of what he ought to part with: 
neither doth he b1-ſs his brother 3 he doth him ſome little good ; but 
bleſſmg another ſignifies a more liberal doing good to him. * 

6 Butthis, 7 /ay, * He which ſoweth ſparingly, ſhall 


reap alſo ſparingly ; and he which ſoweth bountifully, 


" 9% hall reap alſo bountifully l, 


[ge 


1 Whereas covetous Perſons think all loft which they give to cha- 
ritable uſes, the Apoſtle corre@eth their miſrake, by letting them 
know, that it is no more loſt, than the ſeed is which the Husband- 
man caſteth into his ground, which bringeth forth thirty, fixty, or 
ſometimes an hundred fold ; tho with this difference, that whereas 
the Husbandman's Crop dependeth upon the goodneſs and pre- 
paredneſs of his ground, it is not ſo with this ſpiritual Crop 3 a 
man ſhall not reap according to the nature of the Soil in which he 
caſts his ſeed; for he that giveth to a Prophet, or to a righteous 
man in the name of a Prophet, or a righteous man, {tho he may 
be miſtaken in the Perſon to whom he ſo giveth ) yet ſhall he re- 
ceive the reward of a Prophet, and of a righteous man : But this 
ſpiritual Sower ſhall receive according, to the quantity of ſeed which 
he ſoweth. He that ſoweth niggardly and ſparingly ſhall reap ac- 
cordingly ; he which ſoweth liberally, ſhall reap liberally ; From 
whence we may be confirmed, that the rewards of another life will 
not be equal, but bear ſome proportion to the good works which 
men have done here. SE: 

7 Every man according as he purpoſeth 1n his heart, 


ut.15./0 let bin give, * not grudgingly, or of neceſlity : for 


* God loveth a cheerful giver 2. 

mA Let not any give out of any awe of us, nor as it were for- 
ced by our Authority, but as God ſhall put it into his heart, and 
a5 he hath purpoſed in himſelf, and is inclined from himſelf, with- 
out any grudging, or unwillingneſs ; not becauſe he thinks he muſt 


N25-Live, butout of choice: for God loveth one that giveth with free- 
*35-dom and cheerfulneſs, not him that giveth as it were by conftraint, 


or upon force z it is the Willand Afﬀettion of the Giver, not the quan- 
tity of the gift that God looks at. The Apoſtle, by naming God and 
his acceptance in the caſe, lets the Corinthians know, that God was 
concerned in what they thus gave; it was not givea to men only 
according to that, #2 that bath pity on the poor, lendeth 19 the Lord, 
and that which be hath groen, will be pay him again, PrOV. 19+ 17» 

S$ And God is able to make all grace to abound to- 
wards you z, that ye always having all-ſufficiency in 
all things, may abound to every good Work 0, 


1HIMX*sS 


= Having made God in the Verſe before, a Debtor to tho, 
who by giving to poor diftreffed Saints, would make him their Cre- 
ditor; he here proveth him to he no iaiblear D-btor, bur I 
do much more for them, than they in this thing ſhovld do at hi 
command out of love to him. J 2p 


- 
” 
ML 


\ "y 4 1 
_ » . * "Fw 
} 449) (os T9 12 KR f's 


ing here applied to God (who is the Author of all {if:s) ;: May 
very properly be interpreted concerning both, God is able 20 repay 
you 1n temporal thinss what you thus lend him, and fo to pay YO 
in Specie, and he is able to pay you in 7:2, by ſpiricual h2'vits 
0 that you may have a ſufficiency in a!l thinss. 

ſv as that you may abound to, and in every good work. I 
9 AS1tis written, He hath diſperied abroad : he hath 
g1ven to the poor: his rightconfiiefs remaineth for ever p. 
p Asin the former Verſe the Apoftle had aff-rted God's Suffici- 
ency to repay them what they ſhould lend him, fo he hers afferterh 
God's readineſs and willingneſs. This he confirmeth from 4 pro- 
miſe taken out-of Pſzl. 112. 9. (where alſo is further added —- ks 
horn ſhall be exalted with honour.) Concerring the mercifal man, it is 
true that Solomon ſaith, There is that ſcattereth, an4 yer increaſerh, 
The 7/almift faith, His righteouſneſs remaineth for ever: by which 
term ſome underſtand his bounty or liberality ; T had rather underſtand 
by it here his obedience to the command of God in his free diftri- 


brance for ever, God will not forget this labour of love, 26. 6. 
10. lhe friends which he maketh with his Mammon of Unrighteouſ- 
neſs, ſhall receive kim into everlaſting habitations. A mans riches can- 
not remain for ever, but his Righreonuſmeſs, in the dittribution of 
them, according to the Command of God, that ſhall remain for ever. 

10 Now he that * nuniftreth iced to the ſower 4, 
both miniſter bread for your food 7, and multiply your 
iced ſown, and increaſe the fruits of your righteouſ- 
nels 5. 

q The God, whoſe providence and bleſſing maketh rich, and who 
giveth this ſeed to the ſower, r ſupply you with whatſoever you 
frand in need of for this life, s and give you an heart to multi- 
ply that ſpiritual ſeed, by which the fruirs of your Righteouſneſs 
{hall be increaſed. Some Greek Copies read theſe words in the Fu- 
ture tenſe, according to which reading, they area formal promiſe, 
both of good things, wherebxs they might ſhew their Charity ; and 
alſo of a free and large heart, diſpoſing them to that exerciſe of 
Grace. Our Tranſlators render it in the form of a Prayer, which 
yet being the Prayer of the Apoſtle, put up in Faith, doth virtu- 
ally contain a promiſe both of a r--mporal Bi. a ſpiritual increaſe, 

11 Being inriched in every thing to all bountiful- 
aeſs t, * which cauſeth through ns thanksgiving to God r. 

t The word here tranſlated Bountifulneſs, ſignifies Simplicity,in op- 
poſition to deceit and fraud. We had it before Chap. $. 2. So Rom. 
12. 8. So Fam. 1.5. God is ſaid to give aa; limply, (we tran- 
{late it Iiberally.) We have in theſe two Chapters met with three 
words, by which the bounty of Chriſtians to perſons in diſtreſs, is 
expreſſed z Grace, Bleſſing, Simplicity, yas, tA Me, amnd rice 
The firſt lets- us know the true root of all acceptable giving to thoſe 
who are in diftreſs, that muſt be free love : the ſecond expreſſeth 
the true end, Bleſſing God and our Neighbour, ſerving the Glory and 
Commands of God, and the neceſhries of our Brethren : This third 
expreſſeth the manner, how we muſt give, that is, with fumpliciry. 
It is n0 true liberality where ſimplicity is wanting; that a Man doth 
not what he doth with a plain heart and deſign to obey God, and 
do good to his Brother. # As a further Argument to preſs then 
to this liberality, he tells them, That it would cauſe them that were 
the Apoſtles and Miniſters of Chrift, to offer thanksgiving unto God. 

12 For the adminiſtration of this ſervice not only 
ſapplieth the want of the ſaints, but is abundant alfo 
by many thankſzivings unto God w. 

w No Man ought to live to himſelf. The two great ends of 
every (.hrittian's lite ought to be the Glory of God, and the good 
of others, eſpecially ſuch as belong to the Houſhould of Faith. This 
Service (faith the Apoſtle) ſerveth both thoſe ends; r. It ſuppli- 
eth the neceſſities of the Saints : And, 2. It cauſeth Thank 
giving to God by many Perions, and upon many accounts, (which 
he further openeth in the following Verſes.) 

13 Whillt by the experiment of this miniſtration x, 
they glorifie God for your profeſſed ſthjetion unto 
the goſpel of Chriſt y, and for your liberal diſtributi- 
on nato them, and unto all Men-z. 

x Upon their receiving of what you ſent them. » They will ſee 
how ready you are to obey th2 Goſpel of Chrift, (which hath in (o 
many places called you to this dary) and this will give them occa- 
ſion of bleſſing God :; who in th2 day of his power, hath made ſuch a 
willing People, willing at God's command and in confideration of the 
Love of Chrift, to ftrip themſelves to cloath his naked Members, 
to reſtrain their own app?tites to feed them. The Grace of God 
beftowed on others, is matter of great thankſgiving to every gra- 
cious heart. 7 Another caule of thankſgiving, will be God's mo- 
ving your hearts towards them ; they will ſee reaſon to bleſs God, 
who hath raiſed them up ſuch Friends in their great ftraits, ſo as 
they will both bleſs God on your behalf, for his grace beſtowed on 
you, that out of the Gentiles he hath picked out a People ſo ſubd- 
je& to the Law of his Goſpel z and alſo on their ow b-h1f, that God 
hath ſtirred up a People to compathonate them in their deep di- 
ſcreſſes. ; 

14 And by their prayer for you, which long after 
you for the exceeding grace of God in you a. 

4 Another way, by which the glory of God will be promoted, by 
your fimple, free, and liberal Contribution, is, that by this he will 
have more Prayers, which alto will redound to your advantage, for 
it will procure Prayers for you : and not Prayers only, but a great 
deal of fervent love ; ſo as they will long after your good, and after 
your acquaintance, when they ſhall receive fach an experiment of 
the exceeding Grace of God um vo. 


15. Thantk 


{5 G] 


Chap. IX. 


bution to the poor: This remaineth in God's Book of remem- + 


_— 


TOY 
' 

; 

- 

j 
s 

| 
ſ 


' 6; 
* : 
{t : ; 
| 
[7 
} t 
j : 
{ \ 
| i 
k WG »# 
| 1 . "x : 
D 
» 
ba [4 
: T6 
; , 
g 
” 
n” | 
E i! 
1 
WA 
4 \'Þ | 
Ki if 
i 
*n2 
* 
F | U 
2.4 
4 
1 
Ii 
's 
' 
EY 4s 
+" 
AER 
Ld 
he 
; | 
>a t 
« 1 
4: 
= 5" 
# -th 
t 
£ 
| y 
a Wi 6-1, 
P $ Of 
4 * 4 w.! 
Y 
af i! 
| 
[y 
p 
o 
1 
f q; 
l F 
zh ? 
3 FAA - 
HL# 
\ 
£ 
Ly 
iy > 
YL 
M b, £ 
\ 
M : 
> 
þ j 
;: kj a IL 
"Fas o + 
i ts." 1} 
0 
3's, , 
i By j 
+4 p : ut! J + 
A : } 54 2) : 
4 TI 75 b 
' bs 4 - 
2 } 7 Fg ; Fr; A . 
+#+4. © T) 
T8 * 11) by -W21 
SAP 
: # : : 
q ty 


” 
aan 


WAS; == 


—<—.-h 
TI 


— 
_— 


WEIS 


_ IS 1 wee 
— oO —— 2 = watt IL hy 


OI ng 


——_ LEO 
2 — Sx 


- pn, 
_ ” Fa 
nn — — I _— 
bones 2 - I. an 
= 56-<_ = - - nn 0 =_ 


Id. 
Ee ee 
w——_—_ => PIE 


"AD >, . - = ——_— =-7 
n—_—— 5", as = _ 
PE Enene . .. 
V2 LCN — - = 
- - Dom . "> ERR p= 
SEIZE, 5 495” : _ a 
PEEK E323” 48S a —_—_ 
. 


CY q® _ 2 
yi - — 
- We. ode; I 
uy; - ms - op mr nt, _ * 
ISI ==; - 


Chap. X. V.CORIN 


15 Thanks be unto Go: for his unſpeakable git 6. 

b Interpreters arc not agreed what the Apottle hzze meaneth 
by God's #-:/p2akthls Gift, Some by it underſtand Chriit, who is re 
© {67 God, and th? Fountain of ail Grace and to this, the t pithet 
| {4-2þ2512)] doth bet agrez Others underitand the G:ſp-1, by 
which the hearcs of YNicn are ſubdued, effectually diſpoſed, and 1n- 
Cincd co obey the A ill of God. Others think it 1s to be underftood 
}f that habit of brotherly Love, which from the Spirit of Chriſt, 
by the Goſpel, was wrought in the hearts of theſe Corinthians. 1 
the laſt be meant, (to which the moſt incline) the Apoſtle decla- 
reth bis firm perſwation of them, that they would obey him in this 
thing, and giveth God thanks for giving them ſuch an heart. SECINS 
the Contribution was not yet made, though a year betore *Ney nad 
declared their readine(s ro ir, I ſhould rather incline tO 1NteErPret 
it concerning Chriſt; and that the Apoſtle concludeth this waole 
Liſcourie about congributing to the R-liet of thele poor Members 
of Chriſt, with a general Doxclopie, or bleſing, of God for Jeſus 
Chriſt, who is the Author and finiſher of all Grace, without ſuch 
a particular reference to the preceding Diſcourſe; yet heredy hint- 
in; to them, that without the Influence of his Grace they would, 
they could do nothing. 


CHAP. X. 


Arinſt falſe Apcfiteswbo diſyraced the weatneſs of his perſon and bodily 
pr:ſence, be declares his ſpiritual nigot and authority for Edijications 
1---9. which ke ws realy 10 ſhem, mot only by his Lerers, bit by his 
preſence : They viuted them ſelves in other mens Lavours ;, but he by this 
power had ſpread ite Ceſpe! even unto that place, where others had nor 


Luwoured befar, and te Foped to do 71 farther, 10---16. and this he 
. . . »/* . 73 *. -? IJ g 4 
ſaith ner to Glory in bimſeif, bus in the Grace of God among them,17,1 ve 


1. TO 1 Paul my felf beſeech you by the meck- 
K, and gentleneſs of Chriſt a, who Þ 1 


_ preſence an baſe among you b, bur being abſent am, 
aipearance. 10'd towards You c. 

Hitherto the Apo{tle, (who 17 Fis fermer Fpiſtle.-had biamed this Church 
for ſo many things, and dealt ſharply with them) in this Epiſtle, bath 
treated them as if they dad been a People that had no Faults, or none 
but rehat in 6b2.lience to his former Epiſtle they had reforined, and be- 
come a new Lump; which argueth, that the major part of the Members 
of it were a good and an obedient Peopg'. by whoſe prevalent Vote they 
kad reformed much that was amiſs. But in theſe four laſt Chapters, 
19 let us know that there was yet ſome of the old Leaven among them, he 
uſerb another ſtile ;, raking notice, that he underſtood rhere was among 
them another (though poſſibly the leſſ-r) Party, who bad much vilified 


bim; and juſtifying kimſelf 2gainſt their whiſperiigs, and calumies, 


0t without ſoine ſharp Reflections upon theme 

2 Meekneſs reſpeQeth the Spirit or inward Man, being a Vertue 
that moderateth inward Anger and raſh Paſhons. Geztlez:ſs more 
reſpetteth the outward Converſation. The Apoſtle mentioneth 
be:h theſe Virtues, as eminent in* Chriſt, who is our great Ex- 
am;l-, and to whom all Chriſtians are bound to be contormable. 
b He here repeateth the words of thoſe who, in this Church, re- 
pro.cned him ; they reported him a Man, who, when he was there in 
preſence With them, was lowly and humble enough $; c Bur when he 
was abſent from them, then he wrote imperiouily and confidently 
enough. The ſenſe of the works is plainly this, I Pay! (of whom 
ſome among you ſay, That when 1 ara there with you 1 am low 
and humble enough, even to ſome d2grees of baſeneſs; but waen 
1 am abſent, then IT write lik2 a Lord, beldly and confidently) 1 
beſeech you to conſider th2 temper of our common”"Lord and Sa- 
viour, to remember how free he was from rath Anger and Yalion, 
how gentle h2 was in ,his Converſation, and by the Obligation 
that is upon you, to love and practiſe thoſe Virtues which you 
ſaw, or have heard of, in him. 

2 Bur I beſcech you, thet I may not be bold when 
I am preſent 4, with that confidence wherewith | 

+ Or, zec- think to be bold againit fome, which - think of us as 
ow if we walked accordiag to the flelh e. 

d It is true (ſaith the Apoſtle) when 1 have been with you, 1 
have mad? it my buſine!> to bzhave my ſelf with all obliging iweet- 
neſs, not uſing that Authority which T might have uled 3 and ] 
beſeech you, as not to blame me for that, (remembring the meek- 
ne{s and gentlenels of Chrift) ſo by your Converſation not to force 
me to another kind of Converſation among you ; that you would 
not conſtrain me to a ſevere Behaviour towards you when 1 am 
preſent with you, e to be ſo free with ſome of you, as at preſent I 
am reſolved to be; ſuch, T1 mean, as have traduced me, as if 1 walk- 
&d according 19 the fie[1, that is, not guided by the holy Spirit of God, 
and the directions of his Word, but by ſome external, carnal con- 

—_ {iderations, reſpetting my own profit, pleaſure, or reputation, in- 
dulging my own paſions or corrupt affetions. 1Valking afrer rhe 
fleſh is oppoſed to a witlLing after the Spirit, Rom. $. 1, He walketh 
ter the jicſh, to whom the fleſhly Appetite is the Principle, Rule, 
and End of his Aﬀtions: As he, on the contrary, to whom thoſe 
habirs of Grace, which are wrought in the Soul by the holy Spirit, 
or he Spirit himſelt more immediately by his Motions or Impulſes, 
are the Principle of his Actions; and theWord dictated by the Spirit, 
is the Rule of his Actions; and the glory of God is the End of 
his Actions, is truly ſaid to walk after the Spirit. 

3 For though we walk in the fleſh, we do not war 
atrer the fleſh f. 

} There is a great difference betwixt walking i the fleſh, and 
marring ojter the fleſh. The beſt of Men in this life walk in the fleſh, 
as their £ouls are not in a ſtate of {ſeparation from, but union with 
the body ; but, they do not walk after the fleſh, as their fleſhly appe- 
oF COTE ge Þ por Attions, nor the ſatisfaction of it 
Ve Go 3 * hooks OY 1he Apoſtle, in the latter part of the 

/EriE cnangeth the V2; Tn the former part he called our Conver- 
ſation, a 1; 419g; in the latter part he calleth it a I/arringy which 
e deicriveth Negatively in this Verſe, Pofitively in the following 


will be a life of oppoſition, in which a Chriſtian wil have 
Enemies; though his hand be againft none, vor many AP" 
be againit him. But though they be Me of rife and contentis:: z 
a Paihve ſenſe, yet they are not ſo in an Active ſcenic, according ;, 
che uſual notion of Warring: For they war wut after the f-jþ þ. rig 
ther as f-2jply Mer, nor 1n a carnal fleſhiy MATE, nor Yet tor #-f.1y 
ends, the Men of the World war for their honour and FIOrv, Gn E; 
ft] a F - ” = _ ; C * FY 11 
revenze and {atisfaction of their Lufts, or for the Inarving gf than 
Terricories and Dominions ; But we dv 70t rhus war af;cy jjo #15, © 
+ (For the VWCapons Or Our Wartare are not co. 
» but Cughty | through God, * ro the pulliye G%;., , 
ok : WP IR 
f icr0Ng hoids h. 
") 
g As our End is ſpiritual, ſo ar2 our M295; the None v 
which we manage our ſpiritual Fight, are {piritual. Where 3, 
thele 1eapsrs he meaneth the Word of God, and his progtiins + 
Goſpcl, or the Cenſures of the Church duly adminittred ; ir 46G 
they are not of a carnal nature, or fitted to rhe ſubduing of Monet, 
dies, and bringing them into ſubjection ; they are of a !piritu) ,,, 
ture, and have their effedts upon the Mind and inward t arr , 
Man; yct 5 through the concurrence of Divine Grace, thr j. :- 
them a mighty force and power, to pull down ffr07g 7/91ds. By wi, 
Netaphorical exprejhon he underſtands whativever oppor} ;;,- 
Golp<l, and helpeth to defend and uphold Men in their twful 1. 
lesz q. 4. ſubduing the Will of Man, which is lo ſtrong a 14 
that all the power of Hell cannot ftorm it. 
5 Caſting down Þ imaginations z, and every hjo" 46, 
thing that exalteth ir felt againſt the knowledve $; {4 
_ I o . . 4 = - _ < 
God k, and bringing into Captivity every th 
the obedicnce of Chrilt /. 


4 


L., % 
many 


LU 


*4% 
\4 4 
wh | 


a 
HZ 
O 


” 
(tb 


£4 


3153 b\ *71 
af a LU 


7 A22194zee, Reaſoningsz & and every high thing, every heicht f 
reaſoning, which exalteth ir ſelf againſt the knowledge of God. The grey 
Troublers of the Church of Corinth, were the Heathen Philoſopher, 
and ſuch as had ſucked in their Principles, with whole Notios, 
which, were Concluſions drawn from Reaſon not ſandificd and 
ſubdued to the Will of God, divers Dottrins of Faith would ro: 
agree. S. Paul tells them, that the Go!pel (which was the great \Wezx 
pon of his warfare) through the !'owwer of God, was mighty to pu 
down the ſtrong Holds, which Unbelict had in che carnal Under 
ſtanding of Men; to overthrow cheir Reaſonings, the h-; 21S 0 
them, which exalted themſelves againft the Doctrin of Faith, / rd 
to bring 7=y yon4-, every thought or counſel into Czpiiciry 11 te 
ovedieace of Chriſt ; ſo as whatiocver was revealed by the \p- 
ſrles from the Spirit of God, Men readily agreed and yicd:d 
obcdience to; whatever their thoughts or reaſonings about i: were, 
they gave credit to it ; Not becaule it appeared rational to then, 
but upon the divine Authority of the Rev2lation ; ſubmitting thzir 
reaſon to that, and believing it the moſt rational thing in che 
World, that they ſhould believe what God atfirmed, and do ulat 
God commanded ; and this bleſſed effe& the Goſpel had in a! clue 
who heartily imbraced it ; For indeed to give an afſent to a iropu 
11tion, meerly upon a ſenſible or rational demonſtration, is 10 t2itl; | 
that 1s, no divine Faith; truly to believe, in a divine fen!e, ist ft oa 


Gr, fait! 


aiſent to a Propoſition upon the credit of the Revelation, tio b 
we cannot make it out by our Reaſon: And this it is to hare our 
thoughts brought into a Captivity to the Obedience of Chrit, tl 
Thar whereas Reaſon, as it is fince the Fall ſubj=t&ted in Nan, rictt { 
up in Arms againft ſevexal divine Propotitions; and faith, #7 Dr, 17- 41 
cm theſe things be? How. can one be three, and three one? How Ward it 
could the divine and humane Nature unite in ore Perſon! 08 C 
can the dead riſe? &c. The Believer, audit verbum Dri & ti, (> 
readeth theſe things and others of the like nature plainly ard ſe 
in Holy Writ, and chides down his Reaſon ; 'reſolving to gi rr _ 
dit to theſe things meerly becauſe God hath ſaid them, who canot wi 
lie. Thus our ;61we, Thoughts, Counſels, Reaſoning Dell ſe] 
berations, Conclutions, all the Produtt of our Underſtanding, 1 of 
brought into Captivity to the Obedience of Chrift; and 1/22/01 if Ow 
If, which is the Governeſs and* Miſtreſs of the Soul 0f Var, 3 
made a Captive to Revelation. And in this appeared rhe mignty mi 
power of the Weapons of the Apoſtle's Warfare. gw 
6s And having in readineſs to revenge all difobadt- Je 
eace, when your obedience is fulfilled 2. 
m The Apoſtle certainly means by this, Excommunicatio!.3 Sift 
which was the Rod which he had before mentioned : Asing them, 1- gor 
they would he ſhould come unto them with a Rod. {ls Ro ers 
he here threatneth them with; telling them, that he hag anon” > 
aganmueu uce 


Weapon of his warfare of a ſpiritual nature too, to be ule agalt 
ſuch as profeſſed themſelves to be Believers, but walked dilorder!Y 3 T1] 


Only he at preſent ſpared them, becauſe though a great part 0! _ thin 
were obedient, yet there were ſvme among them of whoſe 9c _ 


dience he could not yet glory ; but yet he hoped well, and MIC" 
fore ſhould wait, until by the uſe of all fair means (ſuch a5 £370” who 
tations and Arguments) he had reduced as many of thcil, ©. gre 


: . * 1 3-4 ;atruſted 
couid unto Obedience. But that being, done, God had 11Fruier hat 


— 
him with another Weapon, with which he would, in th2 027 ane of t 
dif02d0128ce You, 


by the authority of God, revenge his Glory upon th2 4109 1 
of others. Herein the Apoſtle hath ſet a Rulz and i att-r7 70 « e 


: . . ” © Fas of E 00 
Churches, where are multitudes that walk diforder!y ; my D Dt I 
haſty in Excommunicating them, but to proceed gradually; et fur 


- " 6. . . au the AV 
uling all fair means, and waiting with all patience tor Be ont noe | con 
them to their duty, who will by any gentle and fair 3.207 = tn 
duced ; and then revenging, the honuur and glory vi C06 vW?7 ©: 


on {uch as will not be reclaimed. | Fs. 
þ . 0 arurarc NNC2- « 
7 Do ye look on thiags after the outware 21re-" we 
- _ - a4alF rhar fb 15 os 
rance 2 ? * If any man rtruit co hip mat re too 
ws . . "— . Fa F157 AD Ae 7 
Chriſts o, let him of himſelf chink this agalf, 45 02; jy, bog 
ne zs Chrilts, even fo are we Chruts p. you 
. * 4 +hinss mRcerty : 
n Are ye ſo weak as to judge of Perſons and t1g5 7 ET I 
from their Faces, Pretences, or outward ApPearunee>e nh, f, M.15, 7s, ( 
magnify theſe falſe Apoſtles and Teachers, mevriy preonem el ) 


\/ rio loo : Pong 
Veries. 1 calling it a WWarrirg, he lets us know that it is, _— 


ILCORIN 


F "W.- | magnify themſelves Hecauſe they take up a great! y Faith je a h oo hots 44 | 
et forth, and magnity themielves, or becaule they taceup a great; your taith is increaſed, that we inal] be enlarged by Ft Or,map- 
[| 
i 


& Chap. X: 


breadth im the World, and live in alittle ſtate acd ſplendor ? 0 1 


any of them do judge that he 1s tne ſervant, or the Minifter of | 


Chrift, why ſhould he not think the ſame of me ? What hath he to 
ſay to prove his relation to Chrift more than I have? What hath 
he to glory in upon that account more than I have ? 
[Ch 1: BS FOr though I ſhould boaſt ſomewhar more oe-* our 
* a1thority (which the Lord hath given us for edifica- 
*C1.12-5- 7500, and not for your deſtruction q) * I ſhould not 
be aſhamed 7. 

q Here is a remarkable Maxim, a Rule by which all Eccleſia- 
ſtical Superiours ought to meaſure their actions. God hath given 19 
29 Superiours 4 power for deſtrution of the Flock, but only for Edifica- 
tion; ſoas that no ſuch can pretend to a power received from God, 
to do, or exatt any thing which may any ways hinder che Salvation 
of the Souls put under their truſt; they ought to command or ex- 
att nothing, nor to do any thing, but what may probably tend to 
the promoting of peoples Faith, and Holineſs, and Eternal Salva- 
tion. This Maxim the Apoftle puts in a parenthefis in this Verle, 
to ſweeten what he had before ſpoken, concerning his readineſs to 
revenge the diſobedience of ſuch who ſhould appear to be ſtubborn 
and contumacious. » But ne tells them, he ſhould not be aſhamed 
if he did boaſt ſomething more of a juſt and due authority than the 
falſe Apoſtles and Teachers had, who vilifed him ; for he was an 
Apoſtle, and had a more iunmediate authority than they who were 
ordinary Teachers. 

9 That 1 may not ſeem as if I would terrify you by 
ſetrers /- 

F This was one 'imputation upon the Apoſtle (as we may learn 
by the next Verſe) T tell you (faith the Apoſtle) that T have an 
Authority, and a further Authority than thoſe who vilifie me can 
pretend unto : but I alſo tell you, I have no Anthority to do any 
harm to any of you all the Authority I have is for your Fdification, 
as much as lyeth in me to promote the butineſs of your Salvation ; So 
that I need not be reported as one that went about to terrifie you by 
my Letters;yet 1 know there are ſome who ſo repreſent me unto you. 

10 For his letters (| fay thev) are weighty and 
powerful, but bzs bodily preſence i weak, and his 
ſpeech contemptible e. 

: There are {ome among you that tell you, that indeed (when 
abſent) I write ſeverely, and with authority ; but when I am there 
with you, neither my behaviour, nor my ſpeech, ſpeaks any ſuch 
Authority. 

11 Let ſuch a one think this, that ſuch as we are 
in word by letters when we are abſent, ſuch willwe be 
alſo in deed when we are preſent #. 

u T would have no ſuch perſon think ſo of me, for he ſhall find 
me the ſame in deed when 1 come, that 1 have ſpoke my ſelf to be 
by my Letters. Ido not write vainly, meerly to terrifie you, but 
what 1 truly intend to do; and when I come he ſhall find that I 
will do, ; 
©... 12 * Forwe dare not make our ſelves of the num- 
$12. ber, or compare our ſelves with ſome that commend 

themſelves : but they meaſuring themſelves by them- 
ſelves, and comparing themſelves among themſelves, 
Ir, 59- ACE *- NOL wiſe w. 
jd it w This whole Verſe is a refleion upon the falſe Teachers of the 
} Church of Corinth, from whoſe manners Pau! purgeth himſelf. 1 
(faith he) durfſt not,as ſome others,magnifie my ſelf nor compare my 
ſelf with thoſe that do ſo. Neither is it any wiſdom in them to 


0: th 


| Gr, faith 


7THIANS. Chap, XI. 


: you, according to our rule ahundantly =. nijied iz 
7 50 that although we have boatted of you, we have not boaſted 1 

of things withour our meaſur2; that is, of things that are'not, or 

(as the Apoſtle expounds himſelf) of things that wer? not done by 

him, but by other men; for his line did reach unto them, and his 

Labours had- been imployed, and made fſucceful amons them. 

And he declares his hope, that when the Goſpel ſhould have had its 

full ſucceſs among them, and their faith ſhould be increaſed ; (i- 

ther by the addition of more perſons to the Church among, them, 

or by tie perfecting of their Taith, and other Graczs;) thev who 

were Apoſtles and the Minifters of the Goſpel to them, ſhould by 

it be magnified, or made great, to wit by their means, who ufing 

much Navigation, would have opportunities to commend the Go:- 

pel, and the Miniſtry of it, to other people, among whom they 

ſhould come : Wherein yet they ſhould not exceed thoir Rules, for 

though ordinary Miniſters be fixed in particular Churches and 

places, yet the Apoftles Rule was to go and preach the Goſpel 

over the whole World, being tied tono certain pcople or places. 
16 To preach the goſpel in the reg:ous beyond you : 

2, ad not to boaſt in another mans Þ line of things T fy 


made ready to our hand 6. 

a The Apoſtle here expoundeth what he meaneth by the term 
magrified or inlarged, in the preceding Verſe, viz. to have a door op«- 
ned to preach the Goſpel in places , whither it was not yer come. 

God honoureth perſons when he maketh them inſtruments to bring 

any to an acquaintance with, and to the embracing of his Goſpe!. 

who formerly had been ignorant of it, and not acquainted with it. 

b He here ſeemeth to reflett on the falſe Teachers crept into this 
Church, who had nothing to boaſt in but a pretended building upon 

other mens foundations, and carrying on a work by others made 

ready to their hands; and ſeemeth to prefer the work of Converſi- 

on, and an inſtrumentality in that, before an inftrumentality meer- 

ly in edification, and carrying on the work of God already begun 

in peoples Souls. | * 

17 * But he that glorieth, let him glory 1n the * Tia. 65» 

Lord c. bo : 

c But we havenone of us any thing to glory in 5 neither T Paul pa wg 
who Plant, nor Apollos who Watcrethz whether God maketh uſe ,,,” 
of us as the firſt Planters of the Goſpel, or as Inſtruments to carry ? * 
on the work of the Goſpel already planted, we have nothing of our 
own to glory in. Cod gives the i:creaje z we have therefore no reaſon 
to glory in our felves, or in our own performances, bur only to 
give thanks to God, who maketh uſe of us poor earthly Veſſels to 
carry about and diftribute that Heavenly Treaſure, by which he 
maketh Souls rich in Faith and Zood Works ;_ all that we do is only 
inſtrumentally ; God is all, and in all, as to primary Efficiency. 

18 For, not he that commendeth himfelt, 1s appro- 


ved, but * whom the Lord commendeth 4. * Rom. 2. 
d Solomon, Prov. 27. 2. faith, Let another man praiſe thee, and not 99. 

thine own mouth; a ſtranger, and nct thine own lips. Selt-commendation x Cor.4. 5. 

is an ungrateful ſound to ingenuous ears; no man thinks another a 

jot the better for his commending himſelf, but always hath the wor- 

ſer opinion of him for ſuch boafting 3 but this Text ſpeaketh of an 

higher approbation, viz. from God. No man 1s approved of God 

for his ſpeaking well of himſelt; the buſineſs is, who they are who 

approve themſelves in the work which God hath committed to 

them 3 to whom the Lord will ſay, el! dove, good and faithful Ser- 

vant ; to whom the Apofrle refers both himſelf, and thofe who mag- 

nified themſelves, but vilified him. 


CHA P. XI. 


contemn and deſpiſe others,in compariton of themſclves;for obſerve, 
what meaſures they take, they only meaſure themſelves by them- 
ſelves, and compare themſelves among themſelves, that is,with Birds 
of their own Feather, ſuch as are like unto themſelves, and of their 
own Faction and Party ; which no wiſe men would do. 

13 But we wall not boaſt of things without or 
meaſure, but according to the meaſure of the + rule 
which God hath diſtributed ro us, a meaſure to reach 


even unto you. 

x The Apoſtle may be underſtood, as ſpeaking both of Spiritual 
Eifts, and alſo of his Travels to the ſeveral places whither he had 
£0ne preaching the Goſpel. He refletteth ftill upon the falſe teach- 
ers who were crept into this Church ; who (as it ſhould ſeem) had 
much boaſted of their gifts and abilities, and of their labours, and 
ſucceſſes. In oppoſition to whom (he ſaith) that he boaſted not 
withour ks meaſure, or (as it is in the Greek ww UAUET EY ) unmeaſurable 
things; but he kept himſelf within the meaſure of rhe rule 5 that is, 
according to that regular meaſure which, ſaith he, God hath ſet us. 
Which meaſure extendeth even tv you. You have thoſe among you 
who boaſt unmeaſurably of the gifts which they have, and of the 
great things which they do. I durſt not do ſo (faith the Apoſtle) God 
hath given me a meaſure and 4 rule,according to that T have acted,and 
of thoſe aQings only I will glory. And in my ſo doing I can boaſt of 
You, tor to you my meaſure and /ine hath reached. God hath made 
me an inſtrument to raiſe him up a Church among you. 

14 For we {tretch not our ſelves beyond our mea- 
ſure, as though we reached not unto you, for we arc 
come as far as to you allo, iz preaching the Goſpel of 
Chriſt y. 

Y For in our boaſting of you as our Converts, among whom T have 
preached the Goſpel, and God hath made my preaching ſucceſsful 
we do not ſtretch our lelves beyond our meaſure, and arrogate that 
to our ſelves which belongeth not to us: for the thing is true, and 
ye know that in our preaching the Golpel we have come as far 
as Unto you, and that God hath given our Labours ſucceſs among 
you, 

15 Not boaſting cf things without our meaſure, char 


| UT 


| - 


py Mts #5, of * other mens labours, bur having hope, when 
ws Vol. Il. 


The Apoſtle*s 3eal for the Corinthians, 1---3. No Apoſtles could con+ 
tribute any thing 10 them which they had not received by him, 4—6. 
He had abaſed himſelf among them, and not received maintenance a5 he 
had done of other Churches, 7 —10. And this not becauſe he did not 
love them, but becauſe of falſe Apofiles, 11—15. He was not inferi- 
our to any of theſe in any legal Prerogarive : bu in the ſervice 0 f Chriſt, 
and all kinds of ſuffering for kis Miniſtry far ſuperiour, 16 —— 27. and 
had on bim the care of all the Churches: Beſides the troubles which in 
the beginning of his Miniſtry be endured at Damaſcus, 25— 33. 


J ould to God you could bear with me a lictle 
in * my folly, and indeed Þ bear with me a. +*Ch.s. 13. 

2 That which the Apoftle here calls his Folly, was his ſpeaking + Or, you 
{ much in his own commendation; Which indeed is no better 49 ber 
than folly, unleſs there be a great reaſon : which was here ; for it with-me. 
was the falſe Teachers, vilifying his Perſon and Office, that put 
him upon it.The Verb, in the latter part of the Verſe, may be read 
either 1mperatively, (and ſo we tranſlate it) as it 1t were an 1ntreaty 
of them to excuſe him in ſpeaking ſo much good of himſelt ; or 7z- 
dicatively, you do bear with me. 

2 For | am jealous over you with godly jealouſie 5; 
for I have eſpouſed you to one husband c, * that I may # Cal. x. 
preſent you * as a chaſt virgin ro Chritt d | 23. 

b Fealoufie is a paſſion in a perion which makes him impatient of * Lev. 21. 
any Rival or Partner in the thing or pzr{on beloved. "the Apottle 13: 
tells them, that he was j-4/9us over them, and thereby lets them 
know, that he ſo paſhonately loved them, as that he was not patt- 
ent that any ſhould pretend more kindneſs to them, than he had 
for them ; and withal, that he had ſome fear of them, leſt they 
ſhould be perverted and drawn away from the tumplicity of the 
Goſpel ; upon this account he calls it 2 gs:lly Fealoujfre. c For (faith 
he) I have been inftrumental to bring you to Chriſt; this he calls 
an Eſpouſing of them, (the union of perions with Chriſt bCing CXx- 
preft in Scripture under the notion of a Varriage, Eph. 5.23, &c.) 

4 And he exprelſeth his earnett dzlre to prelent them to Chrilt 
iacorrupted, like a chaft Virgin. 


La, 


gniled Eve through 11s ſubrilty, fo your minds ſhould 
be corrupted from the ſimplicity that is 1n Chrilt e. 
\:G2] | e In 


Job: 3. 43: 


3 Bur 1 tear leſt by any means as * the ſerpent be- , ca 


tis: 11 
; »% 
bt 
Bay }4 
%, s. 
2 
Fi. b 
. -D 
&b 
© MI; 
+ [ 
1 
4 %i } 
Fl ! 
#, 
: _. 
+ 
"y 
x 
' 
t 
FR 
" * 4! 
. 4+ 
* wer, 
# -th 
z 
| 
| 
#4 
4} 5 ; . 
W's ip o&-4 
” : j 
of : 
4 : L 
af i! 
[1 
bi 
Mw $4 þ 
F o 
we F 
"T9 
Th 
| 
t 
: 
\ 
Ik : 
: 
: 
b] 
' k 
F * 
»lx :; 


Chap. XI. 


* 1 Cor. 
I5. 19. 


+ 1 Cor. 


1.17.& 2, * knowledge z; but * we have been throughly made 
manifeſt among you 11 all things k. 


flo 13» 
*Eph. 3:4. 


* Ch. 4-2. you in high Language, or in a neat Stile and Phraſe; either ha- 
& 5«IIe& yingno faculty that way, or if T have, yet chuſing rather to ſpeak 
plainly and home to your Conſciences, than floridly to tickle your 
ears With a fine ſound and chiming of words. 7 Yet I bleſs God, 1 
am not defeQtive in knowledge ; and, as God hath enlightned me 
with a large knowledge of his Will, ſo 1 have communicated to 
you the whole Counſei of God, &k And in all things, which may de- 
clare me an Apoſtle, one ſent of Chriſt about the bufineſs of the 
Goſpel, I have been made m.ifeſt amongſt you ; preaching a- 
mongſt you the whole Dottrin of the Goſpel, and having been an 
Inſtrument to convert many of you from Paganiſm to Chri- 


ſtianity. 


12. 12s 


that you might be exalted /, becauſe I have preached 
to you the goſpel of God freely m ? 


ing you cannot ſay, that either in my Call, or in my Gifts and Gra- 
ces, or in my Labours, or in the ſucceſs of my labours, I have been 
inferiour to the chiefeſt of the Apoſtles? Doth this offend you, 
that for your ſake I have veiled my Authority, and departed from 
my Right? which makes ſome of you ſay, 7 am baſe in preſence. 
m Is it for my putting you to 20 charge in my preaching the Go- 
ſpel? This was a thing wherein he gloried, and told them, 1 Cor. 
9. 6, 12, 15. that be would rather die, than have his glorying void in 
this particular. 


them to do you ſervice 7. 


taking wages of them, (which indeed js no robbery, as he had pro- 
ved 1 Co. 9.) All the robbery that was in it lay in this, That his 
maintenance, in ftrictneſs of Right, ſhould have been propor- 
tionably from this, as well as from other Churches z but for ſome 
reaſons, (which he thinks fit to conceal) he refuſed to receive 
any thing from this Church ;z but ſpared them , and lived upon 
the maintenance he had from other Churches, while he was doing | 
them ſervice. 
poor, or that there were ſome in this Church who would ſooner 
have taken advantage to reproach him for it, and ſo have hindred 
the ſucce(s of the Gotpel, 
= to do it, certainit is, that he did it, and made it a great piece 
Gt 1113 glorying, 


ftle's love to this Church, together with his earneft dehire to pre- 
ſent them in the Day of Judgment unth Chriſt pure and incorrup- 
td, cauſed him to write 3 becauſe he was afraid, left that as the 
Serpent by his ſubtilty deczeved Ev-, ſo ſome ſubtil Seducers ſhould 
corrupt them, and ſo withdraw them from the ſimplicity of their 
Faith in Chriſt, and obedience to him. 
from the Pagan Philoſophers, mixing their Philoſophical Notions 
with the plain Dodtrin of the Goſpel z and, partly, from ſome that 
were tenacious of the Judaical Rites, and would not underſtand 
the abolition of the Ceremonial Law. 
4 For if he that cometh, preacheth another Jeſus 

whom we have not preached, or if ye receive another 
*Gal. 1:7: ſpirit, which ye have not received, or * another go- 

ſpel which ye have not accepted, ye might well bear 

with him f. 


wel; bear, 1 cannot tell: the words manifeſtly are to be interpre- 
ted, you have well born, and ſo are plainly a retledtion upon ſome 
in this Church, who had patiently endured falſe Teachers, who 


e Tn all F-4lovfre there is 4 mixture of love and fear; the Apo- 


This danger was partly 


f Zow our Tranſlators have interpreted y2a9s nel 49+, you my 


I CORINTHIANS. 


9 And when I was preſent with yon, and wanteg 
I * was coargeable to.no man 0: for that which «©. 


donia, ſupplied p, and in all things I have kept my 


keep my ſelf q. 


4 


mummed in any thing, If we take it in the firſt mentioned ſznr. :. 
lets us ſee a reaſon why Paul refuſed to take wapes of the ( ho - 
of Corinth, leſt he ſhould cool and benum them as to the re 
of the Goſpel, when they ſaw it would prove chargeable tg then; 
If in the latter ſenſe, the Apoſtle ſeems to reflett upon ſuch whow 
wages only edged to their work, who preached meerly for 93;n the 
filthy lIncre. To diſtinguiſh himſelf from ſuch Hirelinss y Fell 
them, that when he was with them, and laboured amonsſt them 
in preaching the Goſpel, he put them to no charge ; yet he 2; 
not floathful in his work, but as laborious as thole who did Lake 
Wages. p As to himſelf, he had want enough whilft he waz among 
them 3 but the Providence of God ordered him a ſupply from ny, 


Chap. 1c 


. Was » 
lacking to me, the * hrethren that came from Mace- 11, 
4 l Ther J 
ſelf trom being burdenſome unto you, and j; wij j 5 
-. L {} 

0 The word which we tranſlate Chargeable, ſignifies to 4111 , by E 
T benummed no Man; Or (as others) I was not my {elf more ,,” "Phils 
| Ore 6s: 1 


ry chicteſt of the anoftles g. 

Chap. 12. 's The Apoſtle, doubtl:, mean2th thoſe that were the true 
I Ie Apoſtles of our Lord; thoſe: who wer? immediately ſ-nt out by 
Gal. 2. 6. him to preach the Goſpel, behind w..cm the Apoſtle was not, ei- 
ther in reſpe& of miniſterial Gifts 15-4 Graces, or in reſpett of 74- 
b9urs, Or in reſpect of the Succeſs which God had given him in his 
work. One Method that falſe Teachers uſed to vilify Paul, was, 
by magnifving ſome others of the Apoſtles above him, and pre- 
ferring thzm before him ; which makes him both here, and in Gal. 
2. & Kom. 11, 13. to magnifie his Office by ſhewing them, there 
was no reaſon why they ſhouid make a difference betwixt him and 
other Apoſtles : for he had the ſame immediate Call, was intru- 
ſed with the ſame Fower, furniſh?d and adorned with the ſame 
Gifts, in Laborrs (as he elſewhere ſaith) he had been more than 
they all; nor had God b=en, wanting in giving him ſucceſs in his 
labours, proportionable to the chieteft of them. So as he was not 
a whit behind them. 


had preached other Doctrin than what Paul had preached. And this 
the Apofile giveth as a reaſon of his fear, leſt they ſhould be cor- 
r::pred and drawn away from the ſimplicity of the Goſpel. This cer- 
tainly is more obvioully the ſenſe of the words, than what others 
incline to, who make the ſenſe this ; Tf any other could come to 
you, who could preach to you a better Feſus, a more excellent 
Saviour than we have done; or a more excellent Spirit than him 
whom you have received ; or a more excellent Dottrin than the 
Doin of the Goſpel, which we have preached, you might ear 
with him. For I ſee no pretence to interpret the Verb as i the 
Potential Mood; Tt is manifeſtly the Indicative Mood ; and declareth, 
not what they might do, but what they had done; which made the 
Apoſtle jealous of them, left they ſhould be perverted. Andour 
Saviour, Foh. 5. 43- hath taught us, That thoſe who with the 
moſt ditficulty receive thoſe who come to them in Gods Name, are 
always moſt eatie to receive thoſe who come in their own name, 
without any due Authority or Commiſſion from God. 


5 For | ſuppoſe * I was not a whit behind the ve- 


6 But though * 7 be rude in ſpeech h, yet not in 


hþ Admit (faith the Apoſtle) that T be no Orator, ſpeaking to 


7 Have I committed an offence in abaſing my ſelf 


I What is it that hath made you take ſuch offence at me ? ſee- 


8 1 have robbed other churches, taking wages of 


2 He interpreteth the term of Robbing other Churches, by a 


ved that he would till be. 


chaia r. 


concerning them, he faith, what he no where ſaith of the Corin;. 


bably) be the cauſe. Tt is moft likely that he either diſcerned this 
people to be more covetous, and too much lovers of their money: 
or that there was a generation among them, who, if he had taken 
Wages for his labours,would have reproached him as one that wa; 
an hireling, and who did all that he did for money. And indeeg, 
himſelf ſeemeth in the next Verſes to give this as a reaſon, 

11 Wherefore ? becauſe I love you not? God 


knoweth «5. 

s Can you poſſibly interpret my not being chargeable to you, x; 
proceeding from a want of love in me to you ? God knowerh the 
contrary. 


wherein they glory, they may be found even as we, 
t I know (faith the Apoſtle) that there are ſome among jou, 
who, out of their hatred to me, would ſeek any occaſion to ajerie 
me to juſtifie themſelves. If I had (as I might) have taken W- 
ges among you for my labours, they would either have taken o- 
caſion from it to have aſperſed me (as doing what T did froma 
mercenary ſpirit) or at leaft to have juſtified themſelves in their 
exattings upon you. TI hada mind to prevent any ſuch occaſions 
of boaſting u. It ſhould ſeem by theſe words that ſome Teathers 
in this Church, being (poſſibly) men of Eftates, required no main- 
tenance of the People; and would have taken advantage againſt 
the Apoſtle if he had taken any, or poſhbly ſome others exattcd 
upon them vnreaſonably z who, had Pau! taken Wages, would hare 
juſtified themſelves by his Example. The Apoſtle therefore #3s 
reſolved to cut off from them- any pretence or occaſion of boaſting 
and to do whatever any of them did, in ſparing the Corinthios,as 
to the buſineſs of their Purſes. 

13 For ſuch are falſe apoſtles w, deceitful work- 
ers x, transforming themſelves into the apoſtles of 
Chriſt y. 

w That is, Perſons pretending to be ſent of Chrift, »ut were 
indeed never ſent of him, x deceirful workers; Perſons whoſe work 
is but to cheat and deceive you : and that, both with r-tereuce to 
their Call and Authority which they pretend to, and alſo .o the 
Do&rin which they bring. y They werenever Apoſtles of Chriſt, 
only they put themſelves into ſuch a ſhape and form, that they 
might have more advantage to deceive. 

14 And no marvel, for Satan himſelf is transform- 


ed into an angel of light z. 

7 It isnot at all to be admired that the Emiſſaries of Satan dilſem- 
ble, and pretend themſelves to be what they are not, tor &ve1 
Satan himſelf, who is the Prince of darkneſs, in order to th? de, 
ceiving and ſeducing of Souls, transformerb himſelf into an 41g*! 0 
light; that is, puts on the appearance and form of a good Angel. 
He calls them Ang1s of light, becauſe they were wont to appear in 
a lightſome brightneſs; or becauſ> of that glory in which chey de- 
hold the Face of God ; or becauſe of thoſe great meaſures 0 - _ 
yenly knowledge which thoſe bleſſed Spirits have. All rempte! 
Souls have an Experiment of this; for none is tempted tO EV! 
under the appearance of Evil; (Evil as Evil being whata reaſonable 
Soul cannot be courted to.) The Devil therefore, in all Þ15 rem 
ptations to fin, though his end be to ruine and deſtroy, Yer *P 
peareth as an Areel of light; moving the Soul to evil under the no 
tion and appearance of good. * —__ 

15 Theretore ir z5 no great thing if h1s Miniſters 


* whoſe end ſhall be according to their works 4- _ 
«,* Tt is no wonder if there be like Servants, like Maſters: 33 


Either he ſaw the Members of this. Church were | 


Whatever 1t was that cauſed the Apo- 


as the Devil, in order to the deceiving of Souls, pretends i 4m 
what he is not, viz. a friend to them: So thoſe who __ 4 a 
own profit, not your good, ſhew themſelves to be his Min! o + Fears 
ving the ſame deſign with him, alſo do the like, and change me 

ſhapes, pretending themſelves to be Miniſters of the Gap gry * 
to aim at the good of your Souls, by teaching you the Wa) 4 bal 
r2ouſneſs; a but God will one day judge of their works, an vey" 
reward at laſt will be according 10 thejr workse 


Churches of Macedonia, and by that means he kept himſelf fg 
being burdenſome to them. q And he tells them, fo he wazragy. 


10 * As the truth of Chriſt is in me -, * no ma; *1 


ſhall ſtop me of this boaſting in the regions of 4.1 
7 The Apoſtle often repeateth this, glorying much in it, that jn 1 
this Region of 4chaia, he had preached the Goſpel without charoes,* "i 
to the hearers; he did fo alſoat Theſſuonica, 1 Thef. 2. 5, 6,9, Bar, 9, 

ta 
ans, that thy received the word in much afflition z which might ( Pro ” 


12 But what I do, that I will do *, that I may cut+o 
off occaſion from them which defire occaſion tr, thats-in 


> Leg n { > © bil Upon 
alſo be transformed as the Miniſters of right:omes +2, , 


Ch, ;, i <. 


- 


*s © 
4 


*«Uht 


- 


h 


Phil, 2, 


in Fut 
a Jew 
from 

his Po 
from 

the ſeg 
from 
count 

erenc 
lrazlit 


*+441t 


10% 
p iQ 


Chap: Xl. 


+ Ch- 12s 


'q 


HW CORIN 


16 *1 fay again, Let no man think me a fool b: if 
6, otherwiſe, yet as a fool -| receive me, that I may 
+ Or, *ſ- boalt my ſelf a little c. 

b 1 know that he, who is much in magnifying and praiſing him- 

ſelf, ordinarily 1s judged to be a Foo! ; but tho” T do ſo, Jet me 
not lie under that imputation. There is arime for al/things; a time 
for a man to ceaſe from his own praiſes, and a time for him to 
praiſe himſelf, The time for the latter, is, when the glory of 
God, or our own juſt Vindication is concerned ; both which con- 
curred here: The Apoſtle was out of meaſure vilified by theſe 
falſe Apoſtles; and the glory of God was eminently concerned , 
that ſo great an Apoſtle and inſtrument in promoting the Goſpel, 
fhould not be expoſed to contempt as a mean and deſpicable perſon, 
or as an Impoſtor and Deceiver. c But if you will judge me a Fool, 
beit ſo; Yet receive me as {uch while I boaſt a little. 

17 That which I ſpeak, I ſpeak it not after the 
Lord 4, but as it were fooliſhly in this confidence of 
boaſting e. 

d 1 do not pretend to have any ſpecial Command of God to 
ſpeak what T ſhall now ſay in my own commendation; God hath 
left that to our liberty, which we may uſe or not uſe, as circum- 
ſtances of time, place and occafion dirett. Or I do not ſpeak accord- 
ing to the ordinary prattice of Chriftians and Miniſters of the Go- 
ſpel ; whoſe ordinary prattice is to abaſe and vilify, not to exalt 
and ſet for:h themſelves, according to the more general Rules of 
the word. Yet (what the Apoſtle faith) was not contrary to the 
Lord, or to the direttions of his Word 3 which hath no where 
commanded us to vilify our ſelves, or to conceal what God hath 
wrought in us, and by us. e This my confident boaſting hath an 
appearance of fooliſhneſs in it, tho' really it be not ſo; for nothins 
can be truly called fooliſhneſs, which hath a dire& and immediate 
| endency to the glory of God, and is deſigned for that End. 

Ml.z. 18 * Seeing that many glory after the fleſh f, I will 
+ glory allo. 

f By the fleſh is meant, carnal and. external thingsz which 
tho' they be the gifts and favours of God, yet do not at all com- 
mend a man to God. The Apoſtle ſaith, there are many that glory 
after the fleſh 5 and there needs muſt be ſuch in all places, becauſe 
there are many that walk after the fleſh: now it is but natural for 
men to boaſt and glory in theſe attainments, which it hath been 
the butineſs of their lives to purſue after. Such there were doubt- 
leſs in this famous Church, who gloried that they were Native 
Jews, or in their riches, or in their knowledge and learning. Now 
tho' (faith the Apoſtle) I know there is nothing in theſe things 
truly to be gloried in, yet others glory'::s in them, I will glory 
alſo; and let them know, that if T thought theſe things worth the 
glorying in, I have as much to glory ia of that nature as any of 
them have. 


I9 For ye ſuffer fools gladly, ſeeing ye your ſelves 
are wiſe p. 


THIANS. Chap. XL. 


thing. Nor indeed have we any need to afign any differ :5ce, it 
ſeemeth to be but the ſame thing amplified in three Phraſes. But 
others diſtinguiſh more ſubtilly, and think the Sri mav fignifie a 
glorying in the Ancientne)s of their Pedigree, or in their abilics 
to ſpeak in the Fcbrew Tongue z the ſecond, way refer to the Na- 
tion of which they were the third, to the promilt made ty brgs 
ham and his Seed. > 
23 Are they miniſters of Chriſt ? I ſneak as a fool. 
* I am more s : * in Jabours more abuudaat #: ins, c, 
itripes above mealtire : 12 prifous more f equeat 2: : 15. G. 
in * deaths oft w. * .\cts g. 
s Will they glory in this, that they are Minifters of Chriſt 2 jim- 18+ and 
ployed as the Servants of Chriſt in preaching the Goſpel ? 1 ſhould 21+ I1- 
not boaft about this (in that I may ſeem to jpeak !;ke 4 tool) but 1 * 1. Cor. 
am much more a Minifter than they, both with reſpet to my Call 15+ 31+ 
to the Work, and alſo my performing, of it. 1 had a more imme- CN» 1+ 10, 
diate Call and Miſſion to the Work than what they can boaft of ; 374 4+ 13. 
and I have done more in that Work, than any of them have done. 
t I have travelted more to preach ir, IT have laboured more in rhe 
propagation of it. # I have ſuffered more for the preachins of 
It, I have been oftner whipped, oftner impriſoned, than any of 
them ever were: See Chap. 6. 4, 5- w I have been oftner in 
hazard of my life ; He calls dangers threatning death, 4-aths, (as 
2 Core Is 10.) 
24. Of the Jews five times received I forty ſtripes 
fave one x. | 
x God, to reſtrain the paſhons of his People, which might carry 
them out to cruelty in the puniſhments of Malefactors, forbad the 
Jewiſh Magiſtrates to give any MalefaQor above forty ſtripes ; 
(lo many they might give them by the Divine Law, Dent. 25. 3.) 
But they had made an Order, that none ſhould receive above thirty 
nine. This was among their Conftitutions which they called Sepi- 
menta Legis, Hedges 10 the Divine Law; which indecd was a viola- 
tion of the Law: For that did not oblige them to give every Ma- 
lefator, that had not d=ſerved dcath, fo many ſtripes; it gave 
them cnly a liberty to go {© far, but they were not to exc2ed. 
Some think, that they puniſhed every ſuch Malefattor with thirty 
nine ſtripes: Others more rationally think, that they did not ſa, 
but thirty nine was the higheſt number they laid upon apy. And 
it is moft probable, that out of their hatred to the Apoſtle, they 
laid as many ftripes upon him, as rheir Conftitution would ſuffer 
them to do. 
25 Thrice was [1 beaten with rods y, once was [ 
ſtoned z: thrice I ſuffered ſhipwrack a: a night and 
a day I have been in the deep b. 
y This was by the Pagans; for the Fews whipped MalefaQors 
with a Whip which had three Cords. We read of one of theſe 
times, As 16. 22, 22. and of a ſecond, Aﬀs 22, 24. when the 
Captain commanded he ſhould be ſo puniſhed, but he avoided it, by 
pleading he was a Citizen of Rome. #4 Of his ſtoning, read As 14. 
19. it was by a popular Tumult at Zy/tra, a We read but of one 


g Ye freely ſuffer others fooliſhly glorying and boaſting of them- time that Paul ſuffered Shipwracz, As 27. 18. (which was none of 


20 For ye ſuffer if a man bring you into bondage þ, 
if a man devour you i, if a man take of yozx k, if a man 


exalt himſelf /, if a man ſinite you on the face m. 


ſe]ves, therefore do ye ſuffer me therein z ye judge your ſclves wile, | the three times here mentioned, for it was after the writing of his 
and it belongs to the Wiſe to bear with ſuch a5 are not ſo wiſe as A 


Epiſtle.) But tho' many of the As and Sufferings of this Apoſtle 
were written, yet all were not. 5 Some by the Deep here, under- 
ſtand the inner Priſon, mentioned A#s 16. 24. or ſome deep Dun- 
geon; but more probably he means, ſome time when after a Ship- 
wrack he might be put twenty four hours to ſwim up and down the 


Sea upon fome broken part of the Ship. It refers to ſome eminent 
danger Paul was in, of which the Scripture in no other place maketh 


26 1z journeyings often c,- iz perils of waters d, 


ia perils in the ſea, iz perils among, falſe brethren k. 


c In Travellings from place to place for the Propagation of the 
Goſpel. 4 Gr. Rivers, which might many ways be dangerous in 
paſſing over. e Such as waited to rob Paſſengers by the High-way. 


f The Jews, who were mortal Enemies to Pau}, whom they looked 


files.) b In Wilderneſſes, through which he was torced to pals. 
i Storms and Shipwracks. & Falie Teachers and private Perions, 
who corrupted the Chriſtian Religion, and were as great Enemies 


27 In wearineſs and painfulneſs, in watchings of- 
ten, in hunger and thirſt, in faſtings often, in cold 


1 The Apoſtle reckons up ſeveral afflictve Evils, ordinarily in- 


the wearineſs and painfulneſs, the hunger and thirſt, the cold and 4- 
kedneſs here mentioned. He alſo mentioneth watchings and fuſrings, 
as voluntary Ads of Diſcipline, which he uſed for the end men- 
tioned, 1 Cor. 9. 27. For the keeping under bis body, aad bringing it 
in ſubje4ion, and that he might the better attend and diſcharge the 


28 Beiides thoſe things that are without m2, that 


which cometh upon me daily, * the care of all the , g., agg 
20.18, KCs 
m By the things that are without, the Apoſtle mzaneth, either 


tion to the Chriſtian Church, bur were Perions without (as the 
Phraſe is uſed, 1 Cor. 5+ 13+) or elſe ſuch kinds of 'iroubles and 
Afictions as very little influenced his mind, but only attetted his 
outward man: Such were his I4bours, 1747015, 10urat y ings, impriſon- 
ment, ftrip:s, before mentioned. » bids thele (he faith) there 
lay upon him an inward care and ſollicitude tor all the Chriſtian 
Churches; and this was a daily care. For an Apontic dittered 
from an ordinary Paſtor, not only in his immediate Call trom Cirift, 


but alſo in bis Work ; there lay an obligation upon ſuch tO g0 un 
all 


& Tf any domineer over you, as if you were their Slaves, or if 
any bring you into ſubjeQion to the Rites of the Ceremonial Law 3 : / 
| : if they dzvour and make a prey of you, & take Wages of you, and | Mention particularly. 
| do nothing without hire, if they carry themſelves proudly, exalt- | 
ing chemſelves above you, m nay if they /mite you, you will (1 uffer | iz perils of robbers e, in perils by my own COnry men f, 
and bear with ſuch z this is more than to bear with a little folly | ;,, perils in the city g, in perils in the wilderneſs h, 
; and indiſcretion in me. This is obſervable, that men of corrupt 
hearts and looſe lives, will better bear with Teachers that will hu- 
. mour and ſpare them in their Luſts, than with ſuch as are faithful 
k to their Souls in inftrutting and reproving them, tho' they carry 
0 | themſelves with the greateſt innocency and juſtice towards them. 
. F y- $01 ſpeak as concerning reproach *, as though we upon as an Apoſtate from their Religion. g in many Cities 
q | had been weak »: Howbeit, wherein ſoever any is | where he preached the Goſpel (as we find in the 4&5 of rhe Apu- 
bold, I ſpeak fooliſhly, I am bold alſo o. 
hs Re. TOO as o thoſe _ they wo -_ mes; w__ by 
them repreſented to vou as tho' IT were weak and contemptible; as 
NR indeed i pay as to my Perſin, but not as to my Dodrin, and the | the Apoſtle as any he had. 
of Miracles 1 have wrought among you. 0 And being ſome of them 
D are ſo confident in boaſting what they are, and what they have done 
if and ſuffered Let me bea little 501d as well as they, in telling you | and nakednels /. 
r what 1 am, and what I have done and ſuffered. 
i! wil... 22 Are they Hebrews? * ſo amlT Pp: Are they cident to ſuch as travel in foreign Countries. Of this nature were 
e- Iſraelites? ſoaml q: Are they the ſeed of Abraham ? 
_ foam] r: 
E] . 
vil þ This would incline us to think, that ſome (at leaſt) of thoſe 
"_ corrupt Teachers, upon whom the Apoftle hath ſo much refletted, 
m- were Jews, who had endeavoured to corrupt the Gentile Churches | 0-4; of the Miniftry. 
my with their Traditions, and impoſing on them the Ceremonial Rites 
= of the Jewiſh Church. Others think otherwiſe, and that the words 
Import no more than this; Do they glory in the antiquity of their 
oo dock and Parentage, as deſcending from Abraham ? TI have as much | C hurches 7. | 
a upon that account to glory in as they ; For altho' T was born, not ; . , : on" wy 
. 19s in Fudee, but in Tarſus, a City of Cilicia (AF. 22.3.) yet T was | thoſe Evils which happened to him from Perſons that had no rela 
, a Jew, an Hebrew of the Hebrews, Phil. 3-5. q Will they derive 
\nd trom Facob, to whom God gave the name of /ſ-ae!, from whence all 
) be his Poſterity were called /ſraelires ? So am I (faith he) I can derive 
1eIT from Facob as well as they. r Will they glory in this, that they are 
dri- the ſeed of Abraham ? (this was a great boaft of the Jews,as we learn 
heir from Math. 4. and Foh. $.) faith the Apoſtle, T have on that ac- 
and count as much to glory in as they. Some here inquire, What dif- 
righ- erence-there is in theſe three things? for to be an 27-brew, and an 
heir razlite, and of the ſeed of Abraham, ſeem all to tignifie the ſame 


by "2 
Pq! 
4+ 
#*- ey 
a 
| + 
\ MI 
| \P 
j : 
£ 
ay 
| , 
: {i 1.87 
| 114 $8575 
RE arts! 
if % 
i 
l; 
j 
bf ; 
- q; 
'N 
76th 
POET 4 


_ 
we 


- — 4 4 1.4 L3G IG = 
S ww L 
, omen ef ere won i L 
—_—_— _ - -_ _ - 5 : 
—, 5 Þ a ——_ RB - — RE _ , - 
© IS EET ry ee at a EE i TT - 20= A >. ag, + S - 


” bs - nd 
> - 

> 

= 


*Ch.12.45. 


Chap. XI. 


ILCORITN 


and down preachins the Goſpel, and they further had, both a 
power, and alſo an obligation, to ſuperintend all other Churches, 
and to dire the Aﬀairs of them relating to Order and Govern- 
ment ; And thereupon they were mightily concerned about their 
doing well or j!l. 
29 * Whois weak, and I am not weak 0? who 
is olF-nded, and I burn not p? 

0 Fo, may becither what Church? or what particulzy Criſtian in 
anv Church, is wet, e968, through outward afflictions, or n 
r-{p2& of inward ſpiritual troubles? and 1 do not ſympathize with 


that Church, or with that perſon ? p Who is offended, or ſcanda- | 


lized, under t2mptations to be ſeduced, and fall into {in, and I 
am not on fire with an holy zeal for the glory of God, and the 
good of his Soul, if poſſible to keep him upright ? By which the 
Apoſtle doth not only ſhew us what was his own holy temper, but 
what ſhould be the temper of every faithful Miniiter, as to his Pro- 
vince, or that part of the Church over which he is concerned to 
watch: viz. to have a true compaſſion to every Member of it, to 
watch over his flock, inquiring diligently into the ſtate of ir; to 
have a quick ſenſe of any evils under which they, or any of them 
labour. This is indecd the duty of every private Member, but 
more eſp2cially of him whoſe Office is to feed any part of the flock 
of Chrift, Rom. 12.15. In this the Members of the ſpiritual, my- 
ſtical Body of Chriſt ſhould anſwer to the Members of the Body 
Natural, (to which our Apoſtle before reſembled it.) 

39 If 1 muit needs: glory, * I will glory of the 


+Or,of my things which - concern my infirmities 9. 


77 fi FILILYs 


*#R.OM.1,9 me 1 
:Thel.2.5 Chriſt, which is bleſſed for evermore, knoweth that | 


q The Apoſtle here calleth the things which he had ſuffered for 
the Goſpel, and the propagation of it, his i; firmities; and faith, 
that he choſe thoie thinzs to glory in. He would not glory of the 
divers Tongues with which he ſpake, nor of the Miracles which 
he kad wrought; but being by the ill Tongues of his Adverſaries 
Put upon glorying, he chole to glory of what he had ſuffered for 
Cod. For as the mighty Power of Chrift was ſeen in ſupporting 
him, and carrying htm through ſo many hazards and dithculties 
ſo theſe things (probably) were ſuch as his Adverſaries could not 
m1 glory in. Beſides, that theſe things had not that natural 
tendency to lift up his mind above its due meaſures, as Gifts had, 
viick >metimes puff vp(as th? Apoſtle ſaith concerning Knowledg:) 
And al'o the were things which flzſh and blood commonly ftart- 
}-th at, and flieth from. Thuchis Gifts, and miraculous Opera- 
tions {pake the Power of God in him, and the kindneſs of God to 
him, in inabling him to ſuch Eftedts, rather than any goodneſs in 
him(clf; but his Patient bearing the Croſs, ſpake in him great 
meaſures of Faith, Patizace and S2If-denial, and love to God: and 
ſo really were greater and truer cauſes of boaſting, than thoſe 
things could be. 

31 * The God an41 Father of our Lord Jeſus 


lie not 7. 

7 Whether this Phraſe be the form of an Oath, or a meer aſ- 
ſertion of Gods knowledge of the heart, is a point not worth the 
arguing. If we look upon it in the former notion, it 1s no pro- 
fane Oath, becauſe made in the name of God; nor no vain Oath, 
becauſe it is uſed in a grave and ſerious matter, and for the ſatisfa- 
Qtion of thoſe who were not very eafie to believe the Apoſtle in 
this matter. But I had rather take it as a ſolemn aſſertion of 
Gods particular knowledge of the truth of his heart in what he had 
ſaid. - The Term, bleſſed for evermore, may either be applied to the 
Father, or to Feſus Chriſt. Tt is applied to the Creator, Rom. 1. 25. 
and to Fe-ſ»s Chriſt, Rom.9.5. It is here ſo uſed, as thar it 1s ap- 
plicable either to the firit, or ſecond Perſon. The uſage of it in 
tlizſe three Texts, is an undeniable Argument to prove the God- 
head of Chriſt, The Apoſtle, in theſe words, ſeemeth rather to 
refer to what he had ſaid before, of his various labours and ſuffer- 
ings, than to that which followeth : which was but a fingle thing, 
and a danger rather than a ſuffering. 

32 In Damaicus the governonr under Aretas the 


king, kept the city of the Damaſcenes with a garriſon, 


© deſirous to apprehend me. 


33 And thorow a window in a basket, was I let 
down by the wall, and eſcaped his hands s. 
s Luke hath ſhortly given us the Hiſtory of this danger, As g. 
2,24, 25. S00n atter Paul was converted from the Jewiſh to the 
Chriftian Religion, he diſputing with the Jews, which dwelt at 
"Damaſcus, contounded them by his Arguments, proving Jeſus was 
the Chrift (as we read there v. 29.) This ſo inraged them, as 
that they ſought to kill him, v.23. And (as we learn from this 
Text) to effect their deiign, they had by ſome atts or other brought 
over the Goveraor to fayour their dehign ; (which Governor was a 
Subſtitute under 4r2r.45 the King, who was Father-in-law to #-rod.) 
For (as Foſephys tells us) Herod put away his Wite, the Daughter 
of this Arcrzs, when he took Herodias. The Jews had got this 
Deputy Heathen Governour ſo much on their ſide, that he thut up 
the Gates, keeping his Soldiers in Arms. But (as S. Luke tells us, 
Adits 9.24.) Pai coming to the knowledge of this deſign, tho' they 
watched the Gates dav and night, yet he found a way of eſcape by 
the help of thoſe Chriſtians, who at that time were in Damaſcus, 
V.25. The Diſciples took him ly night, and let him down by a wall in a 
basket. Two Queſtions are ſtarted upon this paſſage of Pau!'s life ; 
t. Whether it was lanf:1l for him to flie ? But beſides the particular 
licence our Lord in this caſe, had given his firſt Minifters, Mar. 
19.23. Paul did in this caſe no more than what Divines make law- 
ful for a more ordinary Miniſter, viz. ro fiie, when the perſecu- 
tion was directed againft him in particular, leaving ſufficient ſup- 
ply behind him. The ſecond Queſtion raiſed is, 1/herher it being 
egtinſt humane Laws to go over the walls of a City or Garriſon, Paul 
did not fin in this eſcaye? But that is ealily anſwered ; For 1. This 
was lawful in ſome caſes. 2. God's glory, and the good of Souls, 
were nore concerned-in Pay7's life, than to have ir tacrificed to a 
punctilio ot obedience to an humane Law made upon a meer poli- 
tick confideration. 


of it, he would not now have mentioned 1t. 


THIANS, 


GH AP. XI. 

For commending of bis Apoſtl:ſhip, he might glovy of Fi woyde;ſy; 
lations, 1 — 4. but he chooſerh 10 plory in bis Infimi1j-, proba 
he was buffeted ;, kis Prayer and God's Anſwer ; they My Pom 
ſenſible of the true Evidences of his Apeſtleſbip, 5 © 12. : ada 
that now the third time be will come to them 5 but not to * Fay Fuca "(12S 
ro them, as neither were others ſent by bim, 14. — 19, ;, Fo Me 
them that they amend their faults, that he 10 bis (; es: Fonss Ps 
to uſe his Apoſtolical Power on ſuch, 20. 21. © © 900 Jorced 

1 JF 1 is not expedient for me, doubtleſs, to elory ,. 


Lord b. 

a It isneither comely, nor of any advantage to my ſelf tq -1 

. . . EOS - - 3 SIOrVs 
nor would I dg it but in this caſe of neceſſity, where 91org;,,- 
neceſlary for the glory of God, and for your Food, to vindicq.” 
ſelf to you from the imputations that ſome others lay upon. -, 
b Do any of them boaſt of Viſtons and Revelations from Gy; Th. 
ſomething of that nature to glory in as well as they. Some wh 
this difference betwixt Viſons and Revelarions;, that Viſto en 
Appritions, the meaning of which, thoſe that ſee them, dy _ 
derftand : Revelations fignifie the diſcoveries of the Mind ang _ 
of God to Perſons immediately, either by Dreams, or by { i 
andible Voice, which may be without any Object repreſenteg 
the Eye. Pharaohand Nebuchadnezzar ſeem to have had ſuch I 
as they did not underſtand, till interpreted by Foſeph and n..., 
But undoubtedly Pau?'s Viſions were not ſuch. The differercs 
therefore ſeems rather to be, That in al! Viſfons, Which Good ney 
Holy Men had, there wasa Revelation z but every Revelation 
not ſuppoſe a Viſion. Ta 

2 I knew a man in Chriſt c above fourteen ye; 
azo (whether in the body, I cannot tell; or whether 
out of the body, I cannot tell : God knoweth 4) ich 
an one * caught up to the third heaven e. ns 

c Some doubt, whether 5: Kees ©, in this place, be & welltr..., ** 
flated in Chriſt z ſo ſignifying, that the Perſon ſpoken of _ 
Chriftian,one that had embraced the Goſpel; )as by Chriſt (as the Þz:. 
ticle is ſometimes uſed; ) ſo ſignifying, that this Viſion Was giren 
to him by the grace and favour of Chrift. The May he ſhea}; 
of, was doubtleſs himſelf; otherwiſe it had been to him no c©v3 
or ground of glorying at all. Thus ſeveral times in Scrinme 
the Penmen thereof ſpeaking in commendation of themſelves, ther 
ſpeak in the third Perlon inftead of the firſt.In his ſaying,it was; 
rs years ago, and in that we do not read that he did ever heyro 
publiſh it, he avoids the imputation of any boafting, and #lorring- 
and ſheweth, that had he not been now conftrained, for the ow; 
of God, and the vindication of his own reputation, to have ſpoken 
4 What the circon- 
ſtances of the Apoſtle were in this Extaſie, he profeſſeth yr t9 
know ; and therefore it ſeems too bold for us curiouſly to 19ire, 
or potitively to determine about it. Tt isnot very probable, that 
his Soul was ſeparated from his body ; but whether his bod: Was, 
by ſome Angel, carried up to the {1ght of this Vition, or thinssab- 
ſent were made preſent to him, the Apoſtle himſelf, being denrired 
of the uſe of his ſenſes, could not tell. e But ſuch a one (he faith\be 
knew, caught up into the third Heaven ; by which he means the hizheſt 
Heavens, where God moſt manifeſteth his Glory, where the ble* 
ſed Angels {ee his Face, and where are the juft ſouls mate joif:8, 
1heScripture, dividing the World into the Earth and the F-rers, 
calleth all Zeavez that is not Earth or Water ; hence it mentionsth 
an Aerial Heaven (which is all that ſpace betwixt the Earth andite 
place where the Planets and fixed Stars are. hence we readof the 
Fowls of Heaven, Dan. 4.12. of the Clouds of Heaven, Gen. 7 11. 
of a ſtarry Heaven, where the Stars are ; which are therefore called 
the Stars of Heaven, Gen. 22. 17. and then the higheſt Mn ; 
which is meant in the Lords Prayer, when we pray, Our Father 
which art in Heaven z and is called the Heaven of Heavens. Thisis 
the Heaven here ſpoken of. 

3 And 1 knew ſuch a man (whether in the body, or 
out of the body, I cannot tell, God knoweth.) 

4 How that he was caught up into paradiſe f, and 
heard unſpeakable words g, which it is not * lawful *0 
for a man to utter h. "Y 
f Some by Paradiſe underſtand a place diftin& from the 16414 
Heaven before mentioned ; and think the Apoſtle here ſpeaks ot 
more Viſions than one. But they ſpeak much more proÞan!Y, 
who interpret it of the third Heaven before mentioned, callzd 7. 
diſe, in regard of tnedelight and pleaſures of it. Thus the 1m 
is uſed by our Saviour to the Thief upon the Croſs, Luk. 23: 43: 
and thus it is uſed, Rev. 2.7. g. What thele unſpectable words of 
things viere, which the Apoſtle heard in this Extati2, is vainly 
inquired ; whereas the Apofile bath told us twice, that he coild nor 
tell, whether he was in, or out of the body; and that the words or 
things were ſuch as were unſpeakable. h Such as were either mr 
poſſible to be uttered, or at leaſt which he was prohibited to utter 5 
ſo they could be made known to none but only ro him that Near 
them. If any inquirerh, for what purpoſe God ſhewed them t0 
Paul, if he might not communicate chem tor the good 07 0fcr5 
The Anſwer is ealie, That this Viſion might be for his 01 connr” 
mation, as ſent of God, and for his conſolation under all choſe Fond 
zards and dangers which he was to undergo in the Miniſtry of the 
Goſpel, to which God had called him. IT» 

5 Ot ſuch an oze 1 will glory z; * yet of my {cit tC 
will not glory &, but in mine infirmities | N 

7 The Apoſtle, as appeareth by what followeth, ſpeaker © 
himſelf; but he does it in a third Perſon. The Meaning _ 
that man who had been thus dignified of God, in ſuch RN 
and Vifions, might well glory of ſuch a favour , ut _ = 
he) of my ſelf 1 will not glory. k But how doth the Apoitie 4d > 
that of himſelf he will nor glory, if he were the Fer ſon m_— his 
Anſw. Some ſay he diſtinguiſheth concerning himſeItz a5 70 


| inward man, his Soul (which was wrapt into Þ2 t 


6) ha 
hird Heavens/c 
: 4:4 


+ I will come to vitions and revelations of tho 4 
V Tt 


Chap. X 


. 


"»| 
"rb vIit 


had Ar ans ao a oo... 


K 
thin 
eve 
favq 
Whi 
ſup 
him 
Ir 
[ ph 
Wh 
{ent 
mo 
Pow 
ack 
Will 


Citi 


4 {et 
Chi 
Thi 
POy 
SH 


ref 


\ 

nap. > 47 

84 tory; bat as to his Body or outward Mai, he would not glory 

1 any thing Which he had done; bur only in what he had ;uttercd. 

1 thould racher interpret it thus, in this che Lord greatly dignined 
m:; bur here was nothing of iny ielf; of my (elf theretore 1 will 
not Zlory in any thing, except theſe things which 1 have [attered 
for che name of God. 

& For * though I wonld detire to glory, I ſhall not 
be a fool: For I will ſiy the truth 2. Bur ow I for- 
Mar, leſt any man ſhonld think of me above that 

;ch he ſeeth me 70 be, or that he hearcth of me - 


wWhicn 
11 1f 1 ſhould have a mind to glory, 7 foul not be 4 Fool, for 1 


Nl] 


h,10.5s 


je Loo 


t Gr, would not glory in things that were not true. And tho' a Man, 1n 
”. :; ſpeaking things of himſelf which are true, may ſometimes be- 


tray folly, (viz. where he doth it mezrly to {et forth himſelf, and 
make himſelf to appear a greater Perſon than indeed he 1s) -Yet 
for a Man to 2lory of himielf, where ths honour of God 1s 
concerned in ths Vindication of himſelf from Reproaches and Ca- 
Inmnies, ſpeaks not any folly; » Bur (laith tne Apoſtle) I for- 
bear, having no defire that any ſhould think of m2 above what 
he ſeerh in me, or h-areth of me, from others Mouths and not 
mine OWN. 

7 And leſt I honld be exalted above meaſure through 
the abundance of the revclations o, there was g1ven 
| , to me * a thorn 1a the fleſh .*., 
pr" $:r2n to buffet me, lelt I ſhould be cxalred above 
”” meaſirep. 

0 The beſt of God's People have in them a root of Pride, or a 
diſpofition to be exalred above meaſure, upon their receit of ravours 
from God not common to others (of which nature extraordinary 
Revelations are none of tie meanelt, eſpecially, when they are 
multiplyed, as it ſeems they were here to Paul.) .*. lo prevent 
the breaking out of which, the Apoſtle here tells us, thar he had 
thorn in the fleſh given him. It is varioutly guetſed what this was: 
He called it @ thorn in the fleſh; but whether (ſuppoting fl-ſÞ to 
be here ftrialy taken) he meaneth ſome Dileaſe-affecting his Pody 
with pain and ſmart; and if ſo, what that ſpecial Dileaſe was, 15 
no where revealed, and very uncertainly conjectured ; Or whether 
(taking ff in a large ſenſe for his ſtate in the fleſh) he meaneth 
{ome motions ro fm made to him from the Devil; the importunity 
of which, made them very grievous and atHlictive. to him, being, 
in the fleſh: Or (as others think) morons 19 fin from his own Tufts; 
which God ſuffered to ſticr'in him, with-holding fuch influence of his 
Grace, by which he ordinarily kept them under, and in ſubje&ion ; 
is very uncertain. The laft mentioned ſem to be leaft probable. 
For altho' p the Devil hath an influence upon our Lufts, to ex- 
Lite and educe them into Ads, yet it ſeems not according to the 
Languagz of holy Writ, to call theſe Meſſengers of Satan z neither is 
it probable, that St. Paul would have reckoned theſe amongſt the 
gifts of God unto him : Nor was this an 7nfirmity which he would have 

gloried in, or which would have commended him ; nor doth the 
term buffet ſo well agree to this ſenſe. It ſeems theretore more pro- 
perly to be interpreted, either of ſome great bodily Affiition, or 
{ome Diobolical importunate Temptation, with which God after theſe 
abundant Revelations, ſuffered this great Apoſtle to be infeſted 
that he might be kept hamble, and not 1ifred up upon this great 
favour which God hath ſhewed him ; which, confidering the danger 
of Pride, might well be reckon2d among the Gifts of God to this 


ik 
AG » 


great Aggſtle. And fo he here gives another reaſon why he would 
not gloMin the abundance of his Revelations, becauſe God by 
this Providence hath let him know, that his Will was, that he 


ſhould walk kumbly notwithſtanding them ; And it had been very 
improper for him, being immediately upon this favour humbled 
by ſuch a Providence, to have lifted up himſelf by reaſon 
0: If, 

$ For this thing I beſought the Lord thrice, that ir 
might depart from me 4. 

q For the removal of this Afidtion (of what nature ſoever it 
was) for the taking, of this thorn our of my fleſh, T prayed oftznv. It is 
lawful for us to pray for the removal of bodily Evils;z tho' ſuch 
Praver muſt be always attended with a due ſubmiſſion to the wildom 
and will of God; they being not Evils in themſelves, but ſuch 
Tryals'as God intended for our gocd (as it was here in Paul's Cate) 
and which iffue in our ſpiritual advantage. 

9 And he faid unto me, My grace 1s ſufficient 
for thee r : for my ſtrength 1s made pertect in weak- 
nes 5s. . Moſt gladly therefore will I rather glory un 
my infirmities, That the power of Chriſt may reſt up- 
ON INec ft. 

# Paul prayed, and God anſwered ; not 7» fpecie (doing the very 
thing for him which he asked) but iz wvalore, giving him what was 
every whit as valuable. His Anſwer was, My pre (my love and 
favour, not that which the Apoſtle had already rec2ived, but 
which God was reſolved further to ſhew him, ftrengthening and 
ſupporting him under his 'Tryals, as alſo comforting and refrething 
him ;) ſhall be enough for thee to uphold thee under the preſent 
Tryal which is ſo burthenſome to thee. » For my divine power, in 
vpholding and ſupporting my People, 1s never ſo glorious, as 
when they are under weakneſſes in themſeives. When they are 
{en{tble of the greateſt impotency in themſelves, then IT delight 

noft to exert and put forth my power in them and for them, my 
power then is moſt evident and conſpicuous, and will be beſt 

, acknowledged by my People. r Therefore (laith the Apoſtle) 1 
a will chuſe x9 glory in my infirmities, that the Power of Chriſt may reſt 
: & «7%, Thoſe diſpenſations of Providence, in which the Souls of 


f 2 . ” 

wo Men have the greareft experiences of the power and firength of 
—_— Chriſt, are moſt to be gloricd in; but ſuch are frates of 7:-f-mities, 
__ his Text confirmeth Chriſt to be God bleſſed for ever; for by his 
= power it is that we arc ſupported under tryals, his /trezpth it is which 
4? iS made ped in the weikiicſs of poor Creatures. 

il 19 Therefore I take pleaſure. 11 inhrmites, 1 
5) reproaches, 1a neceilities, 1n Periccurions, 1n dl- 


WV. CORITMEES 
itreſios 
31M I {trons x. 


u Among other reaſons why 
ſuffer for Chriſt (Which is what he hore calleth i fi; 


the melienger of 


tor Chritts fake: for when I am weak, then 

rather cinfc to lory in. what 1 

further openeth by Reprozches, Neceſſities, Perſ.curions and Dittret]s 

tor Chrits ſake) 15 15 042; that 1 never find my felt more 17s 

in the Habits and Acts of the Grace that is in mo; than when 1 am 

thus made weat. Whar the Apoſtle here faith of bimſ-if, tho Peo- 

ple of Gnd have ever tince his time ordinarily experienced : then 

IC iS, that tney are made fron, in the exercit2s of firh; and n.;- 

tience, and love to God. A Child of God f:1dom walks fo much 

in the view of God as his God, and in the view of his own nnccrity, 

as when, as to his outward Condition and Circumſtances in the 

World, he walks in the dark and (ceth no 1izh., 

compeiied me v. For I ougitto have been commended 

oz yon y- for in * nothing am 3 behind the very chiet- *Ch.11.% 

elt Apoſtles, though * I be nothing =. : * 1 Cor. 
w 1 may among ſome of you.(who interpret all things, I ſay into +* 97 

the worlt ſenſe) gain nothing bur the reputation of a weak Man, & 15 5,9n 

wanting Underſtanding, for ipeaking ſo much in my own Common. EPP+ 3» 3* 

dation; (contrary to the Rules of Modeſty in ordinary Caſ-s.) 

x But 1t 1s not matter of choice, but of necefity ro me ; the ill will 

which ſome among you have ro my honour and reputation, and 

continual detaming me as a vile and contemptible Perſon, hath 

conſtrained me, for the honour of Chriſt (whoſe Apoſtle 1 am) 

and the vindication of my own Reputation, to boaſt in this manner :; 

At leaſt to relate what God hath done for, and in, and by me. 


5 
Cl 


Ii» 


.Y It was your Duty to have vindicated me from the Aſpertions caft 


upon m2. $0 others Mouths ſhould have praiſed me, and not my 
own; 1 muſt ſpeak, becau'e you hold your Peace, or do worie in 
Calumniating me. +7 For you cannot but ſay, that I neither in 

my Apotrelical Call and Commiſhon, nor yet in my Gifts and Graces, 

nor in my Labours, nor in my Sufferings, come behind thoſe that 

are commonly thought to be the chizf-ft of the Apeftl>s3 Tho? (in 
ſome of your Opinions) I &2 75t2ing; or indeed of or from my (elf, 

am nothing ; doiag all tha I do through Chriſt that ſtrezpthorecb 

me, and by the Grace of God being whar 1 wn. £ 

12 * Truly the ligas of an Apotitle were wrought * x Cor. 

among you 1n all paticace, 1 fig1s and wonders, aid 9 2 


, _ 

mighty deeds 4. Cl, 4. 2. 
2 T had not only a Call to my Apgſil-hip (of which indeed you C& _ 

* 1, & Lie Gs 


were no Witnelies) but I among you evidenced my Call by tuch 
Signs, as were {uihicient to declare me? to you to be a true Apoſtle, 
Among theſe, he reckons, 1. 7.ztienc?, 2. Miracles. The firſt refers 
to thole many Labours which he had, in travelling to propagate 
the Goſpel, in Preaching, Writing, &:. this manitefred kim ca!l- 
ed of God to the Work. 2. Miraculous Operations Were another 
Sign; for tho' the working of Miracles was not reftrained to the 
Apoſtolical Office, yet when they were wrouzht in confirmation of 
the Dottrin which the Apoſtle had firſt preached, and ſo were a 
Seal of his Miniſtry, they were truly Signs of his Apoftleſhip; it 
being no way probable, that the God of Truth, would have com- 
municated his power to Men for the confirmation of Lies, or of an 
employment to which he had never called them. 

13 For what is it wherela ye were inferior to other 
churches, except zt be that * I my ſelf was not burden- *Ch.1 1+9s 
ſome to you b? Forgive me this wrong. 

b Wherein have you not been uſed 2s any other Goſp<l-Churches 
were, where Peter, or Fames, or any other of the Apofiles have 
laboured ? Hath not the ſame Dottrin beep preachea to you ? Have 
not as great Miracles been wrought amorg you? Kath not the 
Holy Ghoft been as plentifully ſhed abroad among you, to inrich 
you with all ſpiritual Gifts? So as you have come behind in nv 
Goſpebenefit. T know of nothing in which it hath not fared 
with you as with other Churches, except in this; that whereas in 
other Churches the Apoſtles or their Paſtors, have been burden- 


' ſome to them, taking Stipends and Salaries for their Pains; I hare 


forborn it and have not at all charged you. If this be a wr9:;7 to 
you, I hope it is not of that nature, but T may obrain of you a 
Pardon for it. The reaſons of the Apoſtles thus fparing «he 
Church of Coriath more than ſome other Churches, we have before 
oneſicd at. | 
14 * Behold, the third time I am ready to come *Ch. 13.1. 
to you c, and I will not be burdenfom to you 4; for 
* I ſeck not yours, but you e: For the children onght , FE 
not to lay up for the parents f, but the parents for the ,,, 
children g. os 
c We read in holy Writ but of two Journies which the Apoſtle 
made to Corinth, AQts 18. 1. & 20. 3. and the latter is believed 
to have been after the writing of this Epiſtle. We muſt not think 
that all theſe morions are ſet down in Scripture. It is manifeſt, 
that 7.1 had thoughts of going oftner, 47s 19. 21. 1 Core 16. 5. 
Chap. 1. 15. Man purpoſeth, but God dilpoſeth. For which reaſon 
*ames adviſeth us to add, Jf Go will, to our Expreons, teltity- 
ins our Reſolutions. 4 He lets them know, that he was coming, to 


them, with the ſame Reſolutions he had before taken up, not 16 pur 

them to any charge. e For that, which ſhould he ith» detign of 

every faithful Minifter, was his defign, viz. the gaining, their *Chs I. 6. 
Souls to Chriſt, and perfecting of them, that in the day of [udz- Cool. 1.24. 
ment he mizht preſent them asa pure and chaſt Virgin unto Chrift, 2 Tim. 2+ 
His buiineſs was not to inrich himſelf by them; he tought the 10 _ 
good of their Souls, not their Eftates. f Ee looked upon them as F Gre for 
his Children, upon himſelf as their Parent. And tho” indeed Chil- your Soulss 
dren ought to relieve their Parents, if in want, yct it is not the *Chap. $+ 
courſe of the World for Children ro lay up for their Parents. p Put, 12, 13+ 
on the contrary, It is the courſe of Parents to maintain tNeiwr 
Children, and to lay up for them. 


is And 1 will very gladiy ſpend, aid be ſpent * + 
for you þ, tho* the * more abiiica uly 1 love you, the 
' leſs | be loved 7. h 1 


Chap. % 11. 


* Cht. To 2, 


* x Coreg. 
21. 
ChaP. 10. 
2 and 13. 
2, IC» 


þ T am & far from deſiring your mony, that if T had it, T would 
willingly ſp-nd it for you; and I do ſpend my fir&gth for you, 
willing to die in your fervic?, labouring for the good of your im- 
mortal Souls. 7 But Tam very unhappy as to ſome of you, who will 
rot rightly underſtand me, but love me the leſs, the more they ice 
my love to them. ; 

15 But be ic o: I did not burden you : neverthe- 

ek, being crafty, I canght you with guile &. 

> 7 hear what ſome fay, Tt is true, that when IT was my ſelf with 
you, Tlaid no burden upon you, did not put you upon any Colle- 
Aion for me; but, like a crafty man, I ſet others to take mony of 
you for my uſ-: <oas, what I did not by my ſelf, I did by thoſe 
whom I imployed. This appeareth to be the ſenſe, by what tollow- 
eth in the next Verſe, where he appeareth to them for his vindi- 
cation in this particular. 

17 * Did 1 make a gain of you by any of them, 
whom [ ſent unto you ? 

18 ] delired Tirus /, and with him I ſent a bro- 
ther m- Did Titns make a gain of you ? walked we 
not. in the ſame ſpirit? walked we not in the ſame 
ſteps m ? þ- | 

1 The Apoſtle, to avoid or wipe off this imputation, appealeth 
to themſelves, to name any Perſon (whom he had ſent unto them) 
that had taken any thin=z of them for his uſ?. He faith, that he 
defired Titus to come to them, of this defire we read betore Chap. $. 
6, 16, 18, 22. m With him (he faith) he ſent another Brother ; 

this is, that Brother, cf whom he had ſaid, v. 19. Thar his praiſe 
was in the Goſpz1 throughout all the Churches. Some guels it was Luke, 
but there is no certainty of that; he appeals to them whether e1- 
ther of theſe made a g4in of them? that is, took any thing of them. 
1m And whether they did not walk 77 the ſame ſpirir, and im the ſame 
fteps? Whether they did not ſhew the ſame generoſity and freedom ? 
And by their behaviour among them did not ſhew, that they did 
not ſeek what was theirs (to be inriched by their Eſtates) but them 3 
to communicate the riches of Grace to their Souls. The circum- 
ſtances of God's Providence may be ſuch towards faithful Miniſters, 
as that they may be conſtrained to make uſe of others to do their 
work ; but ſuch, ſo near as i hey can judge, will never make ule of 
any therein, but ſuch as are of the ſane Spirit with themſelves, 
and walk in the ſame ſteps. 

19 * Again, think you that we excuſe our ſelves un- 
to you » We ſpeak bete God in Chriſt o: but we ao 
all things dearly beloved, for your cditying p. 

z Some of you may think, that T ſpeak all this in my own defence, 
and ſeek only my own credit and reputation amongſt you. 1 donot 
ſo, 01 ſpzak as a Chriſtian, as one who knows that God knoweth, 
ſeeth, ard obſerveth what Ii ſay, ſearching my Heart, and trying 
my Reins. þ All that 1 fay I ſpeak for your good, that you may be 
built up in Faith and IT ove, and all other Graces; A great hin- 
drance to which, is prejudice againſt me, and ſitch as are the Mini- 
fters of the Goſpel to you ; which I therefore detire (what in me 
lieth) to prevent and obviate. The Apoſtle, not only here, but in 
ſeveral other parts of theſe, and other his Epiſtles, declares what 
ought to be the great end of his, and all other Minifters, viz. The 
Edirfication of Pecples The Converſion of the Unconverted, and the 
perfetting of thoſe in whom the foundation is laid, building them 
up in all zood ſpiritual Habits z both of theſe come under the no- 
tion of Edification. If we conlider Chrift as the Foundation, Con- 
verſion is Edification 3 the building up of Souls upon Chriſt, who is 
the Goſpel-foundation ; and other foundation can no Man lay. If we 
conſider the infuſion of the firſt Habits of Grace into the Soul, as 
the Foundation, Edification ſignifies a going on from Faith to Faith, 
a growing in Grace and in the Knowledge of the Lord Jeſus Chriſt, 
a going on to Perfection. - The true Miniſter of Chriſt ought to 
make Edification in both of theſe ſenſes his end and his great end ; 


for by this means is God glorified, the Souls of his People benefit- 


ed, and eternally ſaved. 

20 For I fear, leſt when I come, I ſhall not find 
you ſuch as I would q, and that * I ſhall be found unto 
you ſuch as ye would not 7: leſt there be debates s, 
envyings t, wraths, ſtrites, back-bitings, whiſperings, 
ſwellings, tumults. 

q A good Man, eſpecially a faithful Minifter of the Goſpel, will be 
concerned at the Sins of others, and as to their ſpiritual welfare. A 
prophane Perſon, either rejoyceth'in the Sins of others, or at leaſt is 
unconcerned for them ; but a good Man cannot be ſo, as knowing 
the Sins of others refle&t diſhonour upon God. + He alſo cannot 
delight in the Puniſhments of others, or doing any thing which 
may be ingrateful to them. Paul feareth left the miſcarriages of 
this Church ſhould inforce from him ſome Atts of Severity. s He 
inſtanceth in ſome particular diſorders in the Members of this 
Church, which he feared that he ſhould find among them not a- 
mended ; all the Effetts of Pride and Paſhon. 5s Debates, or con- 
tentions, ſuch as he had taxed them for, 1 Cor. 1. 11. and 3 Yo 
z Envyings, or heats of Paſhon;z envying of one another for their 
Gifts, Sc. The other things which he mentioneth, are all Sins a- 
Zainſt that brotherly Love which ought to be found among Chri- 
ftians, and tending to Ruptures among them ; 'and teach us how 
contrary theſe are to the duty of Chriſtians, who are one body. 

21 Azad leſt, when I come again, my God will 
humble me among you, and that I ſhall bewail many 
which have ſinned already, and have not repented of 
the uncleanneſs, and fornication, and Iaſciviouſheſs, 
which thy have committed 7. 

u From hence it appeareth, that this Church of Corinth, (tho? it 
had many in it, without doubt, who were true and ſincere Chrifti- 
ans, yet) had alſo many in it which were otherwiſe; yea, many 
that were [candalous; (for ſuch are thoſe mentioned in this Verſe.) 
Again, the Apoſtle's mentioning of 724y that had committed V1- 
elcanneſs, Fornication, and Laſciviouſneſs, and not repented ; when as 


WeEORITNTHIANS. 


1 der for the reftoring him upon his Repentance ; lets ys þ, 


he had only given order for the Excommunication of one inceſt 
ous Perſon, 1 Cor. 5. And in this Epiſtle, Chap. 7. hag viven or- 
that the Governors of Churches ought 'to uſe a great deal of = 
dence in the adminiftring of Church-cenſures. We are at arg ” 
taught, That nothing more afflicteth a godly Perſon, wh neg 
the charge of the Souls of others, than to ſee them T0 on 55 __ 
ſes of ſin without repentance, Whether bew1iling, in this _ 
implieth proceeding to Eccleſtaſtical Cerſur2s, (as ſeveral fe 
ters think) T doubt; for as the word doth not neceſſarily Iu "94 
ſo his ſparing uſe of rhar Rod, which he could (tho' abſent) 6,” 
as well uſed againſt other unclean Perſons as one incefinous Þo : 
ſon; and chuling rather that the ſentence ſhould he declared +. 
gainft him by the Church in his abſence, than by himſelf when he 
tent, inclineth me to think, that by bewail:yg here, he only = aol 
a Chriſtian affliive ſenſe of their miſcarriages; whereas, "ra 
fire was that he might have a cheerful comfortable journey to, wa 
abode with them. But yet in the next Chapter he ſeemeth tg 
threaten ſomething more againft ſome particular Offenders, © 


CH AP. XIIL 


If their former ſins be not amended, he will come withous furtker þ1, 

to puniſh the committers of them; and ſhew on them how Senſe 

Chriſt was in him, 1,---4. Wiſheth them to try themſelves, M8 

vent the puniſhment by well-doing : that he may rejoyce over they _ } 

his power tend to edification, and not wo demoliſhing, 5,----10, FE 

concludes the Epiſtle with an exhortation to divers Chriſtian winyec. 

with the accuſtomed ſalutation: And a prayer for them unto Gy tt, 

Father, Son, and Holy Ghoſt, 11,----14. 

H1s * 1s the third time I am coming to you 4:46, 
* In the mouth of two or three witneſſes ſhalt 
every word be eſtabltſhed b. * Da, 

a Not the third time when he was upon his journey, (for he wy, 
not now travelling) but the rhird rime that he had taken up thouzhr; 
of, and was preparing for ſuch a journey. Which it may be, ha 
hinteth to them, that they might be the more afraid to continye 1 
thoſe ſinful courſes, .which he had blamed them for. 5 He all 
to the Law of God, Deut. 19. 15. concerning Witneſſes in any <6, 
Gad ordered, that the Teftimony of two or three Perſons ſhould 
.determin all Queſtions in their Law, and that ſhould be taken 
certain and eftabliſhed, which ſuch a number of Perſons aſſerts, 
The Apoftle would from hence have them conclude, that he woul! 
certainly come z becauſe this was the third time that he had rey: 
ved upon it, and was preparing for it. 

2 I told you before, and foretel you, as if I wer 
preſent the ſecond time c, and being abſent, now[ 
write to them which * heretofore have ſinned, and tg 
all other 4, that if I come again, * I will not ſpare, 

c T told you in my former Epiſtle, and now (though I h: yet * Civ 
abſent) I tell you aforehand, as though 1 were preſent among you, 2 
4 1 write this for the ſake of thoſe who have already finned (car *& 
dalouſly ; and not for theirs only, but for the ſake of others, who 
may have Temptations ſo to offend, e That if I do come, and fnd 
any ſuch who walk in courſes of fin, and are hardned in them, { 
as all that I have ſaid, will not bring them to remorſe and refor- 
mation 3 T will zor ſpare them, either as to ſharp reprehenſions, or 
as to Eccleſiaſtical Cenſures, according to the truſt which Chil 
hath repoied in me. Some extend this further, to a pglſſr of 
flicting bodily Pains: But it is not clear that the Apoftles v:re 
intruſted with any ſuch power ordinarily, (tho' ſometims they 
did exert ſuch a power, as appeareth both from the inſtance ot 
Ananiasand Saphira, Atts 5. and that of Elimas, Acts 13. $,g,1%) 

3 Since ye ſeek a proof of Chrilt * ſpeaking ia ne, wy, 
which to yov-ward 1s not weak, but is mighty in youf. 26, 

f Chrift (faith the Apoſtle) hath openly fhewed his pover in 
my Miniftry, ſpeaking to you, how elſe came your hearts to be 
turned from dumb Tdols to ſerve the living God ? how came you 
to be furniſhed with thoſe excellent Gifts wherewith you abound? 
But ſeeing all this is not judged a ſufficient Proof of Ct-riſt's /p24i- 
ing in me 10 y04, but you are yet doubting whether I am an 4p0- 
{tle or no, and calling for a proof of Chriss in me, I will, if 1 come, 
and find any that have lived ſcandalouſly, and are impenitent, ſh-w 
you another proof of that Power and Authority with which Clift 
hath truſted me. Which muſt be underſtood, either of his miracu- 
lous power to infliit ſome budily Afiftions upon thein ; or (which 
is more probable) of his power as an Apoftle to cut them oft iron 
the communion of Gbſpel-Churches. | . 

4 * For though he was crucited through weakneſs, f " 
yet he liveth by the power of Godg: For we allo are 1.6 
weak | in him h, but we ſhall live with him by Ce |, © 
power of God toward you 7. 

g He had before ſaid, that Chriſt i» him was not wt, but pin, 
mighty ; here he ſheweth, that there was a time when C ri! him- 
ſelf was weak, in a low and contemptible ſtate, in whic! tate he 
was crucified; his ſtate of weakneſs ſubje&ed him to a death vpM 
the Croſs; but by the power of God he roſe again from ti? dead, 
aſcended up into Heaven, where he liveth for ever 0 make 
interceſhon for us. h TIn-conformity to Chriſt (he faith) he and 
the reſt of the Apoſtles were weak; in a low, abjett, confemper. 
ble condition, expoſed to reproaches, deaths, &r. 7 Bur 7- val 
livez which ſome underſtand of life Eternal, conſequent tO the 
Reſurrettion of Believers : but others better, of the lite and TIgnns 
of the Apoſtles Miniſtry. Through the mighty Power of God, _ 
ing from a living Chriſt, who hath aſcended up on high, and give" 
Gifts unto Men, our Miniſtry ſhall be a living, poweriul, E:aca 
cious Miniſtry towards you. 

5 * Examine your ſelves k, whet oo 
faith /: prove your own ſelves wm. Know ye Rot you 
own ſelves z, how that Jeſus Chriſt 15 12 You, except 


ye be reprobates o ? : 


her ye be 1 the 


Chap XY: 


F () "oy 


RL Ao oe. 


Xl ap: X11. 


VE” SN ID 


2 Vat, 
% 


-— 


n 


Tt 


II 
12, 


[a 


\s 


IICORIN 


: Tt is moſt commonly ſeen, that thoſe who are moſt buſie to 
defire or inquire after a proof of Chriſt in Others, are tardiefſt in 
making an inquiry after Chrift's being in themſelves. The Apoſtle 
cherefore calleth the cenlorious part of this Churc h, who deſired 
a roof of Chriſt it kim, to examin themliclves. 7 \V hether they had 
any true Faith? ſuch as works by Love, and purites the heart. For 
ho knew that they were baptized, and Chriftians in oitward pro- 
Eon 3 nor is he blaming them for any Apottaſie from tne TDocttrin 
of Faith, only fer an ill lite, which evidenceth their Faith not to be 
the Faith of God's Ele, a Faith of the Operation of God, &c. m He 
doubleth the Exhortation upon them poſſibly for chis end, To let 
ſem know, that. if they found themſelves 7 rhe Faith, they could 
not reaſonably doubt, whether he himſelf was in the Fazth, or not, 
whom God had made the Infrrument to convert them. # He com- 
mends to them the knowledge of themſelves, as being a far more dent- | 
-able piece of knowledge, than the knowledge ot other Meir, as to 
what they are, or what their ſtate is towards God. 0 In the inqui- 
ry after this, he bids them to inquire, Whether Chriſt Was in them, 
$24 0r 10? The name of Chriſt was named upon them in their Bap- 
tiſm, Chriſt had been preached to them ; this the Apoſtle knew : 
But all this might be, and yet Chrift not dwell in their hearts by 
Faith. This is the great point the Apoſtle directs them to examn 
and prove themſelves about, whether Chriſt was 77 them by a liyely 
Faith, apprehended and applicd as their Saviour, ruling and go- 
verning them as their Lord and King? He lets them know the um- 
portance of this inquiry, telling them, that Jeſus Chrift muſt be 
in therr, if they were not Reprovates. But (ſome might ſay) how 
could the Apoſtle conclude this ? though at preſent Chrift was not 
in them, and they as yet were no more than formal Profeſſors; yet 
might not God open their Eyes, and work in them afterwards a 
more full and efectual change? 1. 4Anſw. The Apoſtle might be al- 
lowed to know more than ordinary Miniſters can know. He bad 
defore aid, ?f cur Goſpel be hid, it # bid to them that periſh. 2. When 
the Goſpel! an4 the means of Grace have been for ſome coniiderable 
time in a place, ,it is much to be feared, that thoſe who have not 
in that time felt the ſaving power and etfett of it upon their Hearts, 
never ſhall. It is ordinarily obſerved, That where God bletſeth the 
Miniftry of any convert Souls, their greateft harveſt is in the firſt 
vears of their Miniftry. 3. Some think that the word > #:4401 

ould not be tranſlated Reprobates, but rather nor approved by God, 
Tf Chriſt be not 7z rhe Soul by Faith, it cannot be approv'd by God, 
becauſe without Faith, it is impoſſible? ropleaſe God. But we generally 
tranſlate the word by Reprobare, rejeted, caſt-away, 1 Cor. g. 27. 2 Tim. 
2. 8. Tit. 1. 16. Hb. 6. 8. Ttſeemeth to lignifte perſons given over 
by God to a ſtupidity of Mind, &c. <o as the Apoſtle here uſeth a 
vers cloſe Argument, to put them upon a ſearch into their own 
hearts and ftates, to ſee it they could find Chrift dwelling in them ; 
for otherwiſe, (conſidering their long profeſſion, and the revela- 
tion of Chriſt to them) it wou'!4 be a ground of fear, that they 
were ſuch as God had caſt off for ever. However, as to their pre- 
fent ſtate, they had no ground to conclude better, whatever mercy 
God might afterwards ſhew them. Mens fitting and continuing 
tons under means of Grace, and an outward proteſſion,- without a 
faving knowledge of Chriſt, and true ſavour of the Truth, and a 
reformation of their lives according, to the rules and dire&ions of 
the Goſpel, isnot indeed an infallible 112n that he who formed them 
will never ſhew them any favour ; but it is a very great preſump- 
tion that it will be ſo wich ſuch. Which ſhould cherefore ſtrongly 
ingage them to be very often and very ſeriouily proving them- 
ſelves, as to this thing, whether they be in Chriſt, and whether 
they have a true ſaving Faith ? 

6 Burt I truſt that ye ſhall know that we are not re- 
probates p. | 

p You make adoubt whether Chriſt be iz us, and you would fain 
know how it may be evidenced that he zs ſo 3 If Chrift be not in #5 we 
muſt be R-probates. But 1 truſt that ye ſhall know, either in this life, / 
by the evident ſigns of my Apoſtleſhip, (which when 1 come, I ſhall 
give you) and by the life and power of my Miniftry among you 
Or in another life, when the Sheep ſhall ſtand at God's right hand, 
and the Goats at his left, that (whatſoever you think or ſay of us) 
we are none of thoſe who-are rejected and diſapproved of God. 

7 Now [| pray to God that you do no evil qz not 
that we ſhould appear approved 7 but that ye ſhould 
do that which is honeſt, tho * we be as reprohates s. 

q I do not defire that when I come I may find Objetts for my ſe- 
verity (upon whom I may ſhew a proof of Chriſt ia me, by exerciſing 
that Authority upon them, with which Chriſt hath betrufſted me) 
no, on the contrary 1 heartily pray that ye may be holy and blame- 
leſs, without ſpot or wrinkle. r Neither do I deſire this tor my own 
ſake, that T may be approved, but I fingly detire it for your good, 
S that you may do that is Zood; and then do you, and let the 
World think of me as a Reprobate, or what they will. 

8 For we can do notning agaiult the truth, but for 


the truth 7. 

t Truth in this place notes integrity of life and converſation; truth 
in ation oppoſed to Hypocrifie, or ſcandalous living. He had be- 
fore prayed, that they might do no Evil; which if they did not, they 
need not fear his coming with 4 Rod: For though he had a power 
from Chriſt to puniſh, yet he had no power to puniſh ſuch as did 
well; his power was to be uſed for them, not againſt them. As the 
Law was n0t made for the Righteous, and the Civil Magiftrate is not 
ordained of God for the terror of thoſe that do well, . but only of 
thoſe that do Evil ; So neither did Chriſt ever ordain Eccleſiaſtical 
Cenſures for the puniſhment of good and holy Men. And indeed 
here is the juſt boundary of all Civil and Eccleſiaſtical Power: No 
Magiſtrate or Miniſter, aQing as Chriſt's Servants can (lawfully, 
Or as by any Commiſſion from him) do any thing againſt the Truth, 
or thoſe that own, defend, and practiſe it ; the power, with which 
they are betruſted, is for Edification, not Deſtrufion. 

9 For we are glad * when we are weak «, and ye are 

.frong w: and this alſo we wiſh, ever your perfection x. 

u ome by IVeakneſs here underſtand a moral Impotency; as the 

'\poſtle had ſaid, bs could not do ai'y thing opainſt the Truth; that-is, 
Vol. 13. 


THIANS. 


rightly and juſtly he could not. w And by ſirmg here, a ſpiritual 


_ 


ſtrength, a reformation, growth and proficiency in grace. Theſe 


ſhew among you my \poftolical power in puniſhing offenders, as 
that 1 thould be glad to find you fo trons, in the exerciſe of grace 

that 1 ſhould find none to puniſh ; that 1 may be made we.:! (as © 
the putting forth chat power) by your ſpiritual ftreneth. 1 incline to 
a more general Interpretation. The A poſtle by this purgeth himſelf 
from any thing of Vain-glory, or leeking himſelf; 7 Pough (Faith he) / 
be weak, (as ſome among you report me) yet if you b2 frul Y ſtrong, I 
ſhall heartily rejoyce therein. x For I with nothins more than your 
perfection; my reputation is nothing to me compared with that. 

10 * Therefore 1 write Uncſe things beige abicnt, 
:eit being preſent, I ſhould ute ſarpneK, according 9 
the power which the Lord lath 2iven me to cdifica- 
tion, and not. to deſtruction y. 

y The Apoſtle here lets them know with how much tender- 
nels he dealt with them; and whereas they might have charscd him 
with ſharpneſs in his Letters, he atſures them that ho therowore 
had ſo wrote, that he might prevent ſharper de:lings with them 
when he ſhould come to them, by their h-ark:.,g wothe admonitiong 
of his Letter. For otherwiſe he tells them, that after he came hw© 
muſt deal more ſharply with them in the execution of tha power 
with which Chriſt had intrufted him. Yet he furthor tet; them, 
that that Power was for their good, not for their harm ; for tneir 
edification, not for their d-(trution; which is the ſame with what he 
nad ſaid, Chap. 10. 8. and in the Verſe immediately prececding. 

[1 Finally, brechren, tuiewel z: Be pertett a, be 
o: good comfort b, * be: of one mind c, live in peace d; 
and the God of love and peace ſha'l be with vou e. 


ry form of Concluſions of Letters, wiſhing all happineſs to them. 
2 But he addeth ſomething as a Chriſtian, and a Miniſter of the Go- 
ſpel: be ye perfect. The word wa7«g)iCs23 ſignifies to be compact, 
or united, as members of the ſam? body, or parts of the ſame houle ; 
the perfection of a Society lying much in the union of it. The 7--- 
jection the Apoſtle prefſeth here, ſeemeth to be the Perf-Qion of 12 
body of the Church, by the reſtoring of ſuch as were ſeparated from 
its Communion, or had through a Spirit of Contention, withdrawn 
themſelves, rather than the Perſ-2:5;: of the particular Members of 
It, in the habits and exerciſes of Grace. The Greek word ſeemeth 
that way to carry the ſenſe; it properly lignifies the putting of Mem- 
bers loſed from their Joynts ipto their proper place again, and ſuch a 
Pertettion as followeth upon ſuch an Action, or any Attion Propor- 
tionable to it. 6 The word imports, Zxhorted, Comforted, Confirmed : 
Be exhorted to yield obedience to my precepts or counſ1s; be comn- 
forted in all the trials or afflictions you do meet with, or may far- 
ther meet with, for your proteſſion.of the Goſpel ; b- c0; ſirmed in 
the truths and holy ways of God. © Be cf 2 mind, if poſhble, of one 
and the ſame judgment in the Truths of God ; however, as purſuing 
the ſame ſcope and end; be one in affeftion. d Live i peace, free 
trom thoſe contentions and diviſions, thoſe debates and ftrifes, 
wraths and envyings, which I have before told -you of as faults a- 
mong you. .e This is the way for to have the preſence of God with 
you, for he is not the God of hatred and ſtrite, bur the God of / ove 
and Peace z who hath commanded Love and Peace among thole that; 
are Brethren, and will be preſent among them only who live-in obe- 
dince to his Royal Law of Love. ; 

12 * Greet one another with an holy kiſs f. 

j See the Notes on Rom. 16. 16. 1 Cor. 16. 20. * Twas an ancient 
cuſtom and of common uſe, when Friends met, for them (as a token 
of mutual Love and Friendſhip) to kiſs each other : The Chrifti- 
ans uſed it alſo at their Eccleſiaſtical Aﬀemblings ; Tt muſt not 
be look'd upon as a Precept, obliging all Chriſtians to do the like z 
but only as diretting thoſe that then did uſe it, to uſe it innocently, 
chaftly, ſincerely, and holily. 

13 All che Saints falute you g. 
. ; S 
That 1s, all about me in theſe parts of Macedonia, wiſh you ail 
happineſs; and by me ſend the remembrance of their love and re- 
ſpects to you. 

.14 The grace of the Lord Jeſus Chriſt h, and the 
love of God z, and the communion of the Holy Ghoſt 
be with you all k. Amen |. 

h The free love of our Lord Jeſus Chrift ſhewn in the applica- 
tion of his Redemption; that grace which floweth from him as the 
Fountain of Grace, or cometh by him as the Mediator between God 
and Man. 7 The actual love rf God, that good-will by which God 
the Father imbraceth Creatures in Chrift, and for his fake. t And 
all the gracious Comr; unications of the holy ſpirit of God, (by which 
he ftrengtheneth, quicknerh, or comforteth the Souls of God's 
People) be with all of you. Whether you value me or no, I heartily 
wiſh you well, and all the beſt things. In this Text is an emi- 
nent proof of the Trinity, all the perſons being diftinly named in 
it, (as in the Commiſhon about Baptiſm.) 'The Apoftle calleth the 
Father, God," the Son Lord: He attributeth Love to the Farher ; 
(moved by which he ſent his only begotten Son into the World, 
Fobn 3. 16.) Grace to the Son, who loved us treety, and dicd for us. 
Fellowſhip, or Communion to the #oly Ghoſt, by whom the Father and 
Sou communicate their love and grace to the Saints. 1 Amen is here 
uſed as a Particle of wiſhing or denring the thing beforc-mentioned 
*tis the ſame with, Tet zt jo be» Whether added by the Apoftle, 
or ſubjoined by the Church of Corinth, upon the reading, this Epi- 
ſte among them, (as ſome think) is not material. 

T The ſecond Epiltle to the Corinthians, wes written trom Piil:prta City 
of Macedonia, by Titus and L ucas, 

If the Subſcriptions to the Apoſtoiical Epililes were parts of the Tey' and holy 
Writ, we have it here determined, Wr.9 that other Brother was, meation 'd 
Ch. 8. 22, ſent along with Titus to Carry this Letter, and tlie Benevnlence of 
the Churches of Macedon'a. But 1t is obſerved, that 2v4n in this Sublcrioti- ng 
there is a certain Evidence that the Subſcriptions of rh» Fpiltles are no part of 
Canonical Writ, for in fome Greek Copies it is faid to be fent by Far l and Tis 
mothy ; whercas Paul was the Writer of it, and not the M-fIeoger, ad in Ma- 
cedoila when it was ſent, and Timothy is joined with hi.z in the wricing, Cit 1, 1, 


F« H] GAL &4 


mat: the ſenſe to be this; 1 am ſo far trom coming with a defire t6: 


{ The Apoſtle ſhuttcth up his Epiſtle according to the ordina- : 


Chap. XliL. 


* x Cor. 4- 


4 
Chap. 2. 
3. 2o all 

2” 28 
10. 2. and 
I 2:20,2 4» 


* 1 The: 
5. 25. 

I Pet. 5. 
L4. 


ww = + 


% 14 
l; 

1 ki: 3 
*þ 

% ' 

E- 6) i 

{ | 

A | | 


4 {PE <re ==y 


uo | #4! 
” Tn, 
R "Uhr 
I %, 
F 
Wei 
£ 
7:1 
. i y. 
15. 5 at 
fk L'1 L. 
i 
| 
af! 


IT'> 

LEE HT 
«88-17 
| PARTE 


bg 
Ja 


q — - 
— ——_ 


- = = : . WAALS 3 —_ 
- © 7 - pod . =" 22 
SF rt === LE —= ———— : nr L C— ' 
- - ” — x « & - "7 ? - I - 2m 
"IE 6c), - T oP = £ — 4 s = ” « ” — 
io : P —_— - _ he — = 
Ye Ea nn ng ICDL 
9G ——— nearby ow 7 CS - « ” _ = Sh 
- p x” Key F + Ta _ "a=: —_ _ S —wC _ £ Gn - 
= Iona mo HO BA IEEE TEAR en SEW: I. . ” RED = = <R_ —— 
rd me png Fogg hn Ia IK Is = pa = = - - ——= 
'Þ ps Sc, py A Cw Ive 4 > mo 


bid ne ig 


3 Tit. 1,35 


GALATIAN 


ll... G——_— 


— 


The ARG 


Alatia, (to the Churches in which Country this Epiſtle is direfted) 1s by all agr 
now under the power of the Turks, and by them called Chiangarez Geograpkers rell us it ;s boun 
Weſt by Phrygia the greater, (now called Germian) Bithynia ( now called Beckſangel.) and Aſia 
On the South with Piſidia (now called Verſacgell) and Lycaonia (now called Cogn 
Eaſt with Cappadocia, (now called Amaſia.) Ard on the North with Paphlagonia (now called Bolli.) 
Country was anciently called Gallo-Grecia, from ſome Galls, who leaving their Country, and coming to inhabit there, ra; 
it that name. It had in it ſeveral Cities, among which Geographers reckou Ancyra, Synopa, Pompeiopolis, (j;r. 
diopolis, Nicopolis, Laodicea, to which alſo ſome count Antioch. When or by whoſe miniſtry this People firſt received 
the Goſpel, we do not read. Paul Travelled thither, AAs 16. 6. but was at that. time forbidden of the Holy G 
Preach there, but AQs 18. 23. it is ſaid, that when he had ſpent ſome time at Antioch, he departed and wen 
all the Country of Galatia, and Phrygia in order, ſtrengthning all the Diſcip 


Country of Anatolia. 


UMEN T. 


that he was forbidden to Preach there, in which time, the Goſpel was planted, and Diſciples made in this Country, 


At what time Paul wrote this Epiſtle to them is very uncertain; ſome think, that it was wrote much at the ſan tin, 
when the Epiſtle to the Romans was wrote (the Argument being much the ſame with that of that Epiſtle. ) Others think 


it was written at Rome during his laſt Impriſonment, becauſe he ſaith, Ch. 6. 17. That he bare in his body the 


Marks of the Lord Jeſus. Jr is manifeft that it was written at ſome diſtance of time after the 


the Goſpel there, for the Enemy had had time to ſow Tares. 


The Occaſion of writing it, was partly to reprove the members of this Church, for their Apoſt acy from the Do@ri, 


the Goſpel, as to Juſtification ; partly to ſet them right again in it, and to vindicate himſelf from the Aſperſun; w; 
Tmputations which their falſe Teachers had caFt upon him, in order to their better ſucceſs with their new Dottrin, 
The new Dotrin brought in by theſe falſe Teachers, was the neceſſity of Circumciſion, and other works of the 
Law, as well as Faith in Chriſt, z order to the Juſtification of the Sinner before God; which they preſſed ray 
1pon a politick, than any religious conſideration, as being the way to avoid that Perſecution which at that time attent,4 
all Chriſtians : From which 1mputaution, thoſe who were Circumciſed, thongh alſo they profeſſed faith in Chriſt (1:4 
themſelves. To buoy up themſelves they vilified the Apoſtle Paul to theſe Churches, as being no Apoſtle, one that hut 
learned all which he knew from James aud Peter, and John z yet varied from them as to his Doctrin and Pradice 


yea from himſelf alſo. 


The two fir Chapters of this Epiſtle are moſtly ſpent in the Apoſile's vindication of himſelf; proving himſelf t l a 
true Apoſtle, and not to have learned what he taught, from Peter or James or John, but that he had it by Revexion 
from Jeſus Chriſt. I» the two following Chapters he proves the Dottrin of Juſtification by Faith in Chriſt, (in qy- 
ſition to the Juſtification taught by theſe falſe Teachers, by the works of the Law,) by various Arguments. In th two 
laſt Chapters, he preſſeth their ſtanding faſt in the liberty wherewith Chriſt had made them free, rogether nih 
ſeveral other things, which are the common duties of all Chriſtians. Then cloſeth his Epiſtle, with praying Grace, 
Mercy and Peace, to be their, and all true Chriſtians Portion. 


CHAP. EL 


After the Superſcription of the Epiſtle 5 the uſual ſalutation; and athankſ- 
gr wn; a f the Aooftt reproves the Churches of Galatia for 
rurning away from the Apoſtolick Dotrin, when as no other Dofrin, 
tho" Preached by an Angel, can be t0 Salvation, 6----10. This he 
learned not from Men, but from the Lord Chriſt bimſelf, which he 
proves by his firſt Zeal in Fudaiſm, 11----14. by bis wonderful Con- 
verſion and Calling to the Apoſtleſhipz and by his not conferring with 
other Apoſtles, but immediately journeyed to Arabia, and was not for 
many years known but by report to the Churches in Judea, 15---24. 


1 T JAul an Apoſtle, not of men, neither by man a, 
but * by Jeſus Chriſt, and God, the Father, 
who raiſed him from the dead b. 


4 The term Apoſtle in its native fignification ſignifieth no more 
than one ſent; in its Eccleſiaſtical uſe, it ſignifies one extraordina- 
rily ſent to Preach the Goſpel z of theſe ſome were ſent either 
more immediately by Chrift, (as the twelve were ſent, Matth. 10. 
1. Mar. 2+ 14+ Luke 9. 1.) or more mediately, as Matthias (who 


* was tent by the ſuffrage of the other Apoſtles to ſupply the place 


of Fudas, Aﬀs 1. 25, 26.) and Barnabas and Silas and others were. 
Paul faith he was ſent not of men, nor by men, that is, not meerly ; 
for he was alſo ſent by men to his particular Province, A#s 13. but 
he was b immediately ſent by Feſus Chriſt, as we read, As chap. g. 
and 26. 14, 15, 16, 17. of which alſo he gives us an account in this 
chap. ver. 15, 16, 17. (And by God the Father alſo, who (be ſaith) pu 
Chriſt from the dead. By this phraſe the Apoſtle doth not only aflert 
Chrift's ReſurreQion, and the influence of the Father upon his Re- 
{urre&ion, (though he roſe by his own power, and took up his own 
Life again, and was alſo quickned by the Spirit ;) but he alſo ſheweth 
a ſpecialty in his call to the Apoſtleſhip. As it differed from the 
call of Ordinary Miniſters, who are called by Men, (tho' their Mi- 
niſtery be not meerly of Men) ſo it differed from the call of the reft 
of the Apoſtles, being made by Chriſt not in his ſtate of humzlia- 
t/07, (as the twelve were called, Math. 10.) but in his ſtate of Ex- 


* altation; after he was raiſed from the dead, and fate down on the 


right hand of God. 


2 And all the brethren which are with me, unto 
the Churches of Galatia c. 


c He writeth not only in his own name, but in the name of all 
thoſe other Chriſtians that were with him in the place where he now 
was; whether Rome or Corinth, or ſome other place, is uncertain :) 


with whole conſent and privity probably he wrote, poſſibly at 
#heir inſtigation, and whoſe common conſent in that Doftrin of 


Faith which he handleth, (as well as in other things about which 
he writeth) he here declareth. Some think that the Apofile for- 
bears the Term Saints, or Sandified in Chriſt Feſus, &c. commonly 
uſed in his other Epiſtles, becauſe of that Apoſtacy for wich he 
deſigned to reprove them ; but it is implyed in the Term Cu:s, 
Galatia was a large Country, and had in it many famous Cities; 
it was neither wholly Chriftian, nor yet ſuch, as to the mjrpin'; 
but there were in it ſeveral particular Congregations of Chriſtians 
which he calleth Churches, (every Congregation of Chriſtians 
uſing to meet together to Worſhip God, being a Church, a parti- 
cular Church, though all ſuch Congregations make up but one Uni- 
verſal Viſible Church.) Nor, being guilty of no 1dolat:y, though 
corrupted in ſome particular points of Do&rin, and thote of mv- 
ment, doth the Apoſtle deny them the name of Churches, though 
he ſharply rebuketh them for their Errors. 


3 * Grace be to you, and peace from God the father, «yi, 
Phil. 1 
d A common, as well as Religious and Chriftian form of faluta- Col. 
tion; P:4/s mark in every Epiſtle, and uſed by him without any 1 Thi 
variation, (except in his Epiſtles to Timothy and Titus, where he on- 1,211 
ly adds Mer:y, &c.) the want of which, as alſo of his name, offers 1. 


and from our Lord Jeſus Chriſt. 


ſome grounds to doubt whether he wrote the Epiftle to the Hebrews. 
Paul had uſed it in the beginning of his Epiſtle to the Komars, and 
both the Epiſtles to the Corinthians; (ſee the Notes on _ I» 7+ 
x Cor. 1. 3. 2 Cor. 1. 2.) It teaches us in our common diſcourſes 
whether Epiſtolary or otherwiſe, to ſpeak to our Friends like Chrir 
ſtians, who underſtand and believe that Grace, Mercy and Peace 
from God, are the moſt deſirable good things. : 

4 Who gave himſelf for our tins e, that he might 
deliver us from this preſent evil world f, according 
to the will of God and our Father g. 

e Which Chriſt, though he was put to death by 711:tz and che 
—_ yet he was not compelled to die ; for Foy 10. 17. /* laid down 
is lif:, no Man took it from him. Sometimes it is {aid, Þ® died _ 
our Sins, as Kom. 5. $. ſometimes that he gave hinſef, (MEaNINg 
to death;) as in Eph. 5. 2, 25. 1 Tim. 2. 6. Tit. 2. 24. Þ& WAS Sf 
ven by his Father and he gave himſelf by his own free and ſponta” 
neous att. For our Sins, muſt be interpreted by other SCrIPLare® > 
there is the defe& of a word here, which the $9c!n7.t#15 Wor” 
have to be Remiſſim; others Expiztion (of which Remiſſun 1» ® 
conſequent.) Both doubtleſs are to be underſtood, and | ; 
thing more alſo, which is exprefſed in the following words Ol 
the Verſe. Remiſſion of Sins is granted to be the etect 9! __ 
Death of Chriſt, but not the primary and ſole cffett th-1e0' 3 
but conſequential to the propitzation mentioned, Ag 5r : 


eed to be a part of Aſia the Life; 
ded oy the 
Propria ; 
L) O77 the 

The Tiinſs 


: C Over 
les. This was about two years gi. 


fir Plantatin of 


1oMme* 


0 A, ©, Þ fon Fad yg hf og Wa LG uo 


t: 


. With 
2 8 
It, 4. any 
+32. Prea 
\ | 9 
2 Dre 
F rec 


DRL 


cr, &F-pll 
Phil.1 

uta- Col. l 

any 1 The 

ON* Jo 218 

ers Le 2s 

'MSs 

and 

» To 

rſes 

Ny 

eace 


oht 


ins 


the 
ion'n 
{ for 
ning 
S 21 
ata” 
UrCes 3 
-Q1ild 
> 2 
[ome 
ds 0! 
jf the 
x0! 5 


4 
, _ 


FE 


hap. ]. 


; that trouble you, and would pervert the goſpel] of 
"Chriſt 22. 


4. my other goſpel to you, then that which we have 
32. Preached to you, let him be accurſed. 


, Preach any other goſpel unto you *, then that you have 


The R-demption, Fpre 1. 7. The Sarific? Zh. 10. 12. both which 
Texts ſhew the abſurdity of the S:cizz7 mms, in quoting thoſe Texts 
to favour their notion of Chrift's dyivg for the R-mif}mm of our Sins, 
without Siving the Juſtice of God ſarisfation ; And though ſome 
other Texrs mention Chrift's dying for our fins, without mention 
of ſuch Expiution, Propitiation, R:d-mption or S:itisf tion; yet they 
mufr b2 interpreted by the latitude of the end of Chriſt's death (ex- 

wrefled in other Scriptures) rolating to fin. f Which is not only 
Expiation, and Remiſſon, hut the delivery of us from the lufts and 
corruptions of this preſent evil World. The Apoſtle here decy- 
phers this Worid, bv calling it preſ-zt and evil; by the firit, he 
hinteth to us, that there is a world ro come, by the latter he ſheweth 
the ſinful Practices of the greateſt part of Men, (tor by 1/7ri4 he 
means the Corruption of Perſons living in tte World, ) they are 
evil; and this was one end of Chrilt's Death to deliver his Saints 
from their evil Practices and Examples $; thus, 1 Zet. 1. 18. we are 
ſaid to be by the Blood cf Chrift redeemed from 4 vain converſation 
received by Tradition from our Firhers. This (he ſaith) was done g ac- 
cording tothe Will of God; the Greek word is !#a"n «*, not Nelizyy; 
the Will of God is his Decree, Purpoſe or good Pleaſure, fo as if 
fignifieth both his eternal purpoſe, ( accorging to Eph. 1. 4.) and 
his preſent pleaſure or conſent. I ſee no ground for the S9cinian 
criticiſm, who would have us underſtand by it, God's Teſt.1mz2mt Or 
preſent Will for things 10 be done ajrer d2ath; the word importeth no 
more than God's eternal purpoſe, as to the Redemption of Man by 
the Blood of Chriſt, and his well-pleaſedneſ with his Undertaking 
and per:ormance of that Work. This God, he calleth Our Father, 
not with refpect to Creatio: fo much as Adcption. 

5 To whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen h. 

þ To which Father (yet not exciuding the Son,) for ſo great 
benefirs beſtowed upon us, be honour, and praiſe, from ag? to 
age, and to all eternity; the Term Amen, being always uſed in 
Scripture either as a Term of aſſ-rtion to aver the truth of a thing, 
or as a t2rm of wiſhing, may here be underſtood in either, or both 
ſenſes 3 the Apoſtle uſing it either to affert the gelorifying of 
God to be our Duty, and an homage we owe to God ; or to fignifie 
his hearty deſire, that this homage may from all hands be paid 
unto him. 

6 I marvel that ye are ſo ſoon removed from him 
that called you unto the grace of Chriſt ;, unto another | 
goipel &. 

/ The Apoitle here beginneth the matter and ſubſtance of his 
Epiftle, with a reprehenſion of this Church 3 which in ſome things 
i5 much qualified, in other things much aggravated. His expreſ- 
fing his reproof by the word m:1rve1, hath in it ſomething of miti- 
gation, and tignifieth his better hopes concerning them. The term 
r2moved, alſo mollifies the reproof, the Apoſtle thereby rather charg- 
ing their Apoſtacy upon their Sedficers, than upon them who were 
ſeduced, (though they were not to he excuſed for their ſo yielding 
to the temptation, and that in ſo ſhort a time, either after their 
firft converſion, or after the firſt attempts upon them to ſeduce 
them ) and herein was the aggravation of their guilt, that they very 
little reſiſted the temptation , but were preſently overthrown by it. 
But it was a greater aggravation of their guilt, that they ſuffered 
themſelves to be removed from him that called them. Tnterpreters 
doubt whether this be to be underſtood of Go4, or of Paul; and if of 
God, whether of the firſt or of the ſecond Perſon. That which 
inclineth ſome to think that Paul meant himſelf, was his inſtrumen- 
tality in the converſion of theſe Galarions 3 and his complaints of 
them in this Epiftle, for their deſerting his Doctrin and alienation 
from him ; But then the Subſtantive to the Participle muſt be un- 
derſtood, and the ca] muſt be underftood of the external call only, 
by the Miniſtry of the Word. It therefore ſeemeth rather to be 
underſtood of Gol; the Apottls generally aſcribing calling to God. 
Chap. 5. 8. 1TE-fſ. 5. 24. 2 Theſſ. 2. 14. 1 Pet. 1. 2, 15. 2 Pet 1.3. 
Nor doth it ſeem: proper to refer the a&ion to Chriſt, becauſe the 
Apoſtles ordinarily aſcribe calliag to the firſt Perſon in the Trinity, 
calling us by Chrif, as Rom. $. 30. 2 Thefſ. 2. 12, 14, 16. 2 Tim. 1. 
9. 1 Pet-5. 10. Beſides the Grace of Christ is here made the Term 
to which they are called. And though this would ſupply the Par- 
ticiple with a Subſtantive in the Text, without underftanding one, 
yet it ſeems both too remate, and alſo to alter the ſenſe of the Text ; 
making it to run thus, from Chris that called you unto Grace, inſtead 
of him that called you to the Grace of Chrii. By which Grace the A- 
poſtle doubtleſs means not the Dorin of the Goſpel only, (though 
that be ſometimes called Grace,) but all the benefits of the Goſpel, 
Fuſtification, Reconciliation, Adoption 5 which are all properly called the 
Grace of Chriſt, as being the Purchaſe of his Blood. &k To another 
Goſpel, that is, to the imbracing of other Doctrin, differing from 
the Do&rin of the Goſpel, though it be brought to you by Seducers 
under that notion ; ſhewing you another pretended way of Salvati- 
on than by the merits of Jeſus C hriſt, whereas God hath giver 19 
Other name under Heavenneither 1s there Salvation in any other, Atts 4.12. 

7 * Which is not another /, but there be ſome * 


1 Another Dodrin it is 3 but another Dotrin or glad Tidings of 
Salvation, or another Goſpel of Chriſt, it is not; for there is no 
Other. m1 In and by the new notions they bring, they do but trou- 
ble you, and pervert the true Dodtrin of the Goſpel z though they 
uſe the Name of Chriſt, and of his Goſpel, they do it falfly; for by 
making the works of the Law, and the obſervance of them neceſ- 
fary to be by you obſerved in order to your Salvation, they quite 
deſtroy and pervert the glad Tidings of Salvation, viz. that vie are 
ſaved by Chriſt alone, and Faith in him, and by a Righteovſneſs 
vithout theſe Works. 

8 But thongh * we, or anangel from Heaven preach 


9 As we faid before, ſo ſay Inow again, If any man 


GAL ATIANYS 


Y The Apoitle, by this vehement exprefiion, doth no TOre un. 
poie 17 poſſible that an heavenly Anzel ſhould publiſh to thera 
any otner way of Salvation than what he had publiſhed, than cha 
= _—_ might ſv contradict his own Doerin, .He only By i? 
A{Cares ms certainty of the truth, which he hae delivercs to them « 
it was no to be contradifted either by Man or Ans-! and GR 
ther t-acheth us, that additions to the BoArins of the Goſhci. make 
anoth-r Gotpcl. God neither allowins us to add to, nor ro diminiſh 
trom 27cine Revelations, for of this nature were the Corruptions 
crept into this Church. Theſe Seducers owned Chriſt ang the 
Doetrin of the Goſpel; only teaching the Jewiſh Circumciſion, 


!-and other Ceremonial Rites, as neceary to-be obſerved in order 


to Peoples ſalvation z they made the pretended Goſpel (which they 
taught) to be anoti<e Goſpel than that which Pau! had okas 
and which Believers in this Church had reccived. Tn ſaying 1 vv Fs 
ge accurs'd, healſo faith that he who doth this ſhall h> accuried ; for 
the Apoſtle would neither himſelf Curſe, nor dire& others to 
Curſe, whom he did not know the Lord would Curſe, and look up- 
on as curſed. Theſe two Verſes look dreadrutly upon the Papacy 
where many Dottrins are publiſhed, and neceffary to be received. 
which Pau] never Preached, nor are to be found in any part of Di- 
vine Writ. 7 
10 * For do I now perſwade men, or God? 
* doIſeck ro pleaſe men p? For if I yet pleaſed men, 2. 4 
! ſhonld nor He the ſervant of Chriſt 4. =; 
= There is an Emphaſis in the Particle now, fince T1 became a +: 4 
Chriſtian, and was made an Apoſtle; while T was a Phariſve I did 
otherwiſe; but fince T h?came an Apoſtle of Teſus Chrift, do] per- 
ſuade you to hear what Men ſay, or what God ſaith ? Or (as others) 
do I perſuade the things of Me, their Notions and Doctrins, or 
the things of God? OrdoT in my preaching aim at the cratifyins 
or pleating of Men, or the pleating of God 9 p The laft is plainly 
ſaid in the next words, which muft not be underſtood in the full 
latitude of the Term, but reftrained!y, do ſeek to pleaſe and hu- 
mour Men in things wherein they teach and a& contrary to God ? 
It is the duty of Inferiours to pleaſe their Superiours, and of all 
good Miniſters and Chriſtians, to pleaſe their Brethren, ſo far as 
may tend to the advantage of their Sculs; or in civil things, fo as to 
maintain a friendly and peaceable Society ; but they ought not to 
do any thing in humour to them, by which God may be dilplcaſed 5 
In which ſenſe it is that the Apoſtle adds, g For if I pleaſed Mer, 
that is, in ſaying as they»lay, and doing as they do, without re- 
gard to pleafing or diſpleaſing of Chrift, 1 ſhould not ſhew my ſelf 
the Servant of Chrift ; for his Servants we are whom we obey, and 
our Lord hath taught us, that no Man can ſerve two Maſters, (that 
15, commanding contrary things.) 


11 But Icertihe you, brethren, that the goſpel which 


was preached of me, 1s not afrer man -. 

7 He calls them Brethren, though ſome of them were reyolt2d, 
becauſe they owned Chriſt ; and makes known, or d=clares to them, 
(ſo the Word is Tranſlated, Luke 2. 15. Fohn 15. 15. and 17. 25. 
that the Doctrin of the Goſpel, which he had preached unto thera, 
was no Humane Invention, or fittion, nor refted upon Humane 
Authority, but was from God, immediately revealed to him ; and 
herein he refleQeth upon the falſe Teachers that had ſeduced them, 
and in order to that, vilified him, as being but a Diſciple to ſome 
other of the Apottles, yet teaching otherwiſe than they taught. J 
would have you know (faith he) that it is otherwiſe; the Goſpel 
which I preached is not afrer May. He fully openeth his own 


meaning in this Fhraſe in the next words. 


12 For I * neither received it of man s, neither was * ; Cor. 
15-1, 3s 
s Not of mar, as my firft and ſole Inftrufor z not only at ſecond ww [. 
hand, from Peter, Fames or Fon, as the falſe Teachers had ſuggeft- * EPN-3-3- 


[ taught z#, but * by the revelation of Jefus Chriſt z. 


ed ; nor was I taught it otherwiſe than t by the immediate Reve- 
lation of Jeſus Chriſt. Revelation fignifieth the diſcovery of ſome 
thing which is ſecret 3 (as the Goſpel and Dottrin of it, is called a 
myſtery hid from ages) 1t may be objected that Paul was inftrudted 
by Ananias, Aﬀs9g. 16,17. But this prejudiceth nothing the truth 
of what the Apoſtle faith in this place, neither do we read of much 
that Ananias ſaid to him in a way of inftruction ; it is only ſaid, that 
he laid his Hands on him, and he was filled with the Huly Ghofi. 
When, or where he had theſe Revelations, the Apoſtle ſaith not, 
probably while he lay in a Trance, blind, and neither eating nor 
drinking for three days, Aﬀs 9. 9. Others think it was when he 
was caught up into the third Heaven, 2 Cor. 12.2. Certain It 15 
that St. Paul had Revelations from Chrift, As 22. 15, 16. and 26. 
17, 18. Revelation ſignifies an immediate conveying of the know- 
ledge of Divine things, to a Perſon without Humane means and 
in that Paul aſcribes the Revelation of the Goſpel to Jeſus Chrift, he 
plainly afſerts the Divine Nature of the Lord Jeſus Chrift, 


13 For ye have heard of * my coaverſation in times * Ads 22. 


paſt, in the Jews religion, how that beyond meaſure I 4- 
perſecuted the Church of God, and waſted ir x. 

1 Tt will be no difficult thing for you to believe, thatT had never 
preached the Goſpel without a Divine Revelation of the truth of 
it, if you do but refle& upon my former converſation ;. for you can- 
not but have heard, that T was born a Fer, educated in the Jewiſh 
Religion, and was a zealous defender of it, fo as I] perſecuted the 
Chriſtians beyond meaſure. This unmeaſuravle perſecution 15 ex- 
prefſed by Luke more particularly, Acts 8. 3. He mace Pauick of the 
Church, emring into every houſe, and halivg men and women, he commrt- 
red them to priſm, and g. 1- He breathed out threamings.and flughter 
againf the Diſcipies of the Lord, &c. He waſted the Church like 
an Enemy that uſeth Fire and Sword, and all means to deſtroy. 
The word here uſed is, #7zec9zr, which fignifes to make a 424277 4- 
tim; the word uſed in Aﬀs $. is, *Auwntysro : Both words tg 
nifle the moſt ruinating Hoſtile Attions, and this h2 jaith was 
his converſation, or conftant prattic?, fo as they caora- 
bly think that ſomething more than hamane had made a change 


"2 
1m iT ye 
m1g nc 

_ 


received, let him be accurſcd x. 
Vol. II. 


in him, that he ſhould row be a Preacher of that Doctrin, 
[5 H2 ] which 


Chap. I, 


0 Or * x The. 


GALL 


Chap. I. 


to root out thole that profeſt it. 


14. And profited in the Jews religion above many 
+ Gr. e- my | equals in my ow nation w, being more exceeding 


quits in 7zeglous of the traditions of my fathers x. 


$©427 Io 


iſh Religion, or of his propagating of it, and making that to g0 
on, which :emeth to be the ſenſe of the ſame word, 2. Tim. 2. 16» 


Ard it is obſerved, that AQtive Verbs in the Gr. in imitation of 


the Yb, Corn. Pihil. ſometimes hgnifie to do ones felt an action, 
ſometimes to make others too it; and Paul's waſting the Chriſtian 
Church had a rational tendency to uphold and propagate Fudaiſm, 
the pxropagation of which was the end deſign'd by it ; this he ſaith 
he did, above others of bis Countrymen, that mere bis equals it years. By 
this alſo he lets them know, that his perſecuting the Chriſtian 
Church was not a paſſionate AR, or for a Gain to himſelf, but from 
an erroneous Judgment, he verily thought that he ought to do 
what he did againft Jeſus of Nazareth, and his Diſciples, x He 
addeth, That he was more exceedingly q2alous of the Traditions of the Fa- 
thers, By which he underſtands nor only the Rites of the Ceremo- 
nil Law, but the whole body of their Conſtitutions, which the Ru- 
Icrs of that Church had made under the notion of Sepimenta Legts, 
hedges or fences to the Laws of God, to keep Men at a diſtance 
frem the violation of them; and other conftitutions alſo, of which 
they had innumerable. Paul was a Phariſee, (the Son of a Phari- 
ſee, Aﬀts 23. 6.) bred up at the feet of Gamaiiel 5 one of the Do- 
Qors of their Law) this was the ſtrifteit Seft (for Ceremonies) of 
their Religion; and this his zeal for Traditions, is that which he 
calleth a progreſs , or profiting in the Jewiſh Religion, and was a 
cauſe of the propagation of that Religion. 

I5. But when it pleaſed God, * who ſeparated me 


from my mother's womb y, and called ze by his 


race Z. 
i Y Here are two Acts predicated of God, with relation to Paul, the 
firſt is a ſeparating of kim from the Womb 5, the ſame was ſaid of two 

* of the great Prophets, {ſaiab and Feremiah, Iſa, 49. 1. Jer. 8. 5. 
The Apoſtle here is not ſpeaking of God's decree predeſtinating 
him to ternal Life, hut of his determining him to the work of 
an Apoſtle, God predeterminetk Men to the ſtations they ſhall 
take up in the World ; eſpecially ſuch wiv are to take up tations, 
wherein they are to be eminently uſeful and ſerviceable to him. 
7 The ſecond AR predicated of God is his calling of Paul: This is an 
A in time, and lyeth much in the preparing of Perſons for the 
Work alloted to them, and in inclining the Heart to it, Thus 
God called Pau, fitting him for the work of the Miniftry, and in- 
clining him to it; to which he added his immediate command from 
Heaven, that he ſhould go and preach the Goſpel, Both theſe Atts 
of God are aſcribed to his good Pleaſure, and Grace, nothing but 
his meer free Love, and Favour moving him, either to ſeparate, or 
to call Paxl to this high and great employment. ; 

16. * To reveal his Son in me, that * I might 


4.6. preach him among the heathen «a, immediately I con- 


*Eph.3.. ferred not. with fleſh and blood b. 

a When it pleaſed God to diſcover Chrift his Son (hy an Eter- 
nal Generation) to me, who neither naturally, nor from any in- 
ftruQion in my Education, was acqueinted with any thing of Chriſt ; 
but according to the common prejudices of thoſe of my own Coun- 
try, looked upon him as a meer Man, and an Impoſtor ; and alſo 
revealed to me the end of that di'coverv, not only that I my ſelf 
ſhould receive and embrace him, but that 1 ſhould publiſh him 
among the Heathens, ( where he intimates the ſpecialty of his 
Separation and Callz) I b (ſaith he) immediately adviſed with no 
mortal Man living, (for that is ſignified by Fleſh and Blood, Marr. 
16. 17. 1 Cor. 15.50.) but reſolved with my ſelf to addreſs my 
ſelf to that Work and Employment to which I had ſuch a ſpecial 
Call from God. 

17. Neither went I up to Jeruſalem, to them that 


were Apoſtles before me c, but I went into Arabia d, 


and returned again unto Damaſcus e. 

c As Feruſalem was the place for the Oracles of the Law, under 
the Old Teftament ; ſo it alſo was for the Goſpel upon the ficft 
publicationof it. There the Diſciples were, they returned thither 
after they had ſeen Chriſt aſcend to Heaven, Zuke 24. 52. from 
thence they were not to depart, but to wait there for the Promiſe of 
tbe Father, As 1, 4. There the Holy Ghoſt came down upon them, 
#þ4p. 2. there they continued till the perſecution ſcattered them ; 
there was the Colledge of the Apoſtles. Paulſaith, that upon his 
Converſion, he did not 20 up thither, nor till three years after, (as he 
rells us in the next Verſe;) but he d went into Arabia, among the 
Heathens and the moſt wild and barbarous Heathens, (for ſuch were 
the Arabiens,) Luke in the As tells us nothing of this. From hence 
it was eaſe to conclude, that Paul had not his Commiſhon from the 
other Apoſtles that were before him, for he ſaw none of them till he 
had been a Preacher of the Goſpel to the wild 4rabians three years. 
e And then he returned to Damaſcus; the word is ywtcptx2, which 
is by ſome obſerved to ſignifie his being compelled to return, (as 
they judge) by ſome perſecution raiſed among the Heathens 3 but 
of this the Scripture ſaith nothing, 


18. Then after three years, I Þ went up to Jeruſa- 
lem to ſee Peter, and abode with him fifteen days f. 

f Theſe three years were ſpent partly in Arabia, partly at Da- 
r1/cys, whither-he returned ; and his being there, was not idle, but 
as Luke informs us, he preached Chriſt ia the Synagogues, As g, 
29, 22 comfound:d the Fews, proving that this was the very Chrif, which 
made the F-rs take counſel to kill him: Here it was that he eſca- 
ped chem, by being let down over the Wall in a Basket. Then he 
went to Jeruſalem where his Converſion, and Call to preach the 
Gofoel was not heard of, (poſſibly in regard of the remoteneſs of 
Ar19i2, where he had ſpent moſt of thoſe three years; or in regard 


*Rom.1,1, 


+ Or, I re- 
$147764, 


whick he had b=fore © abominated, as that his whole buſineſs was 


_w Th: vor{ here uſed and Trantlated proficed, may be interpre- 
ted either of his own perſonal proficiency, and going on in the Few- 


TIANS. 


ſa much that the Diſciples were afraid to admit him to Joyn wit! 
them, until! Barnabes had given Teftimony cancerning him 42 Ul 
27. He tells us here that he ſtayed there but fi/reen days ; turing 
which time, Lute, Aﬀs 9. 2g. tells us, be ſpake boldly in the yam. > 
the Lord Feſus, and diſputed againd the Grecians. ©0 

19 But other oi the Apoſtles ſaw ] none, faye* Tas 


the Lord's brother g. 


Perſecution, or, for the fulfilling of the Work of their Apoftlethin - 
ſo as probably there were at this time no more of the Ap9 . 
Feruſalem, except Peter, and Fames the leſs, the Son of &)pbeus whe 
is here called rhe Brother of our Lord, (as is generally thouzht oy 
cording to the Hebrew idiom, who were wont to call near Kinſmer 
Brethren.) Upon another Journey which Paul made to Jeruſzy; 
he ſaw others, (as we ſhall hear in the next Chapter ;) byr thar 
was ſeveral years after this his firſt Journey thither, : 
20 Now the things which I write unto you, * beho1q, 


before God 1 lie not -. 

b Whether thoſe words | before Grd } make this Sentence an Oat» 
is not material to determine, they are either an Oath, or a y«ry 
ſerious Aſſeveration. 1f the Apoſtle defign'd to call God for a wir. 
neſs, to the correſpondence of his words, with the truth of the 
things he had ſpoken, they make up an aſſertory Oath, which wa; 
lawful enough (though privately taken) in ſo ſerious a matter as 
this, where the Apoftle is vindicating his Apoſtleſbip , from ſome 
Atts of which probably he had no Witneffes at hand to produce: but 
they may be underſtood (by the ſupplement of, 7/peat, or 1 ſay this ) 
only asa form of ſerious affertion, to confirm the truth of wi;2t þ« 
aſſerted. He minds them, that he was ſenſible of Ged's preſence jn 
all places, and particular taking notice of the things ſpoken, as he. 
ing ſpoken before him, who knew that what he ſpake was truth, 

21 Afterwards I came into the regions of Syria, and 
Cilicta 4. 

z: After that I came from Feruſalem, I came into the Country gf 
Syria, probably not to Damaſcus, the chief City of Syria, (where he 
had ſo narrow an eſcape in a Basket) but into the Country parts of 
Syria; (for Syria lay in the way betwixt Fudea and Siltcia.) It ap. 
peareth by Aﬀs g. 30. that Paul was defign'd for Tarſus, his Native 
place 3 where we are allo told, that the Brethren condutted him tg 
Ceſarea, which ſtood upon the Confines of Syrz2. It is probable that 
he ftayed ſome time at Tarſus ; for there Bzrnabas found him, 48; 
Ii. 25, 26. and brought him to Antioch ; ſo that Paul had but fifteen 
days at Feruſalem to converſe with the Apoſtles, and in that time h: 
ſaw none of them, but Peter, and Fames the Son of Alpheus. 

22 And was unknown by face unto the Churches of 


Judea, which were in Chriſt k. 

k To be in Chrif} ſignifieth, 1. Their being Chriſtians indeed, they 
having received Chriſt by a true and Jively Faith, -and given then- 
ſelves to the obedience of b@ Precepts. In this ſenſe the Apoltle 
faith, 1f any Man be in Chriff, be is a new Creature, 2, Their bing 
Chriſtians in Name, by Baptiſm and outward Profefion. Theſe Chur- 
ches are ſaid to be in Chrift in this latter ſenſe, We have 2 Pt 
ralle] Text, 1 The, 2. 14, They do not judge improperly, who 
think that by Judea here, is not meant the Province, but the 
whole Country of Judea ; which comprehended not Fudea only, hut 
Samaria and Galilee. Fobn Baptif and our Saviour, { who both moſ- 
ly preached in Galilee) had prepared their due matter for 60/2! 
Churches. Peter and Fobn, and Philip, preached the Goſpel in many 
villages of the Samaritans, Atts 8, 25, 40. Of all theſe Churches 2; 
ſpeaks,telling us, he was perſonally unknown unto them. So far he was 
from learning the Chriftian Doctrin from the Apoſtles, or them. 


23 But they had heard only, That he which perſe- 
cuted us in times paſt, now preacheth the faith which 


once he deſtroyed /. 

I Though thoſe Churches in the Country of Fudea, had never 
ſeen Paul's Perſon, yet they had heard of him. 1. That he had been 
a Ferſecutor of thoſe which profeſſed the Dofrin of the Goſpel, (which 
he here calleth the Faith,it being the objeA and the means of Faith.) 
2. That there was ſuch a change wrought in him, as that he wis 
now become a Preacher of that DoCtrin, for the profeſſion of which 
he had formerly waſted and deſtroyed the Churches of Chrift. 


24 And they glorified God in me 1, 
m And they praiſed God on his behalf, for working fo great 3 


change in him. 
CHAP. I 

The Apoſtle further proves bis Mifion, and DoFrin by the approbation of 
the chief Apoſtles at Jeruſalem, who admined Titus int9 F-Nomſhip 
without being circumciſed, and gave to Paul ard Barnabas the Right 
Hind of fellowſhip, with agreement that th:y ſhud preach morg ie 
Gentiles, and the other Apoſtles among rhe Jews 5 only that itt) ſhculd 
alſo take care for the por Jews, —1, 10. He declareth huw at Att 
tioch be reproved even Peter himſelf for bis ſinful compliance wiih the 
Jews, and nor uſing Chriſtian Liber:y. thereby drawing tit Gentiles 
to the Obſervance of the Law, 11— 14. by which the very Jews f0em- 
ſelves as many as believed, did not hepe to be juſtified, which che Scrt- 
Pture declayeth 10 be imprffible ; 1x DoQrin not prejudicizl 10 4 holy 
Life ; for by it we are dead to Sin and alive to God ; but by the contra} 
Dotrin, Free-grace and the Death of Cbri are rendred uſele]s, 15. 3i* 


I Hen fourteen years after, « I went up again t0 
| Jeruſalem b with Barnabas, and took Tus 


with me alſo c. ; 
4 Either fourteen years after the three years before mentioned, 
and the fifteen days or fourteen years afcer the Converſion of 74; 
or fourteen years after the death of Chriſt, This jourP<? _— 
to be that mentioned AFs 15, 2. it ſeems rather to be undernoo 

of fourteen years after the death of Chriſt, 6 Motions £0 your 
lem are uſually in Scripture called aſcendings or g0ing3 UP 5 ©t 
ther becauſe of the Mountains round about it, or in re! p-&t of war 
famouſreeſs of the place, ſee As 15. 2. and 21. 4 The occation « 


6 the troudied Rate of the Church at Feruſalem at this time,) in- 


no | *C> with the 43% 
this journey we have As 15, 2, 3. It was to adviſe with the oe 10 


+ M 2 te 


gs The Apoſtles were at this time ſcattered, either through the Z, 


Chap, fl! (Nr 


{ Or, ſep 

gt'y 

Phil. 2, 
6, 


account 
and we! 
of Circ 
them fa 
Ont that 
and uſec 
Ohtaine 
advanta 
Gentile 
Hieruſal 
a liberty 
he VGu} 
?Zain b 
Lay, 
liberty, 
al thing 
Circumf 
Offence. 
to he th 
of hic 
ence ge 
one plz 
tis tim 
Was 2 m 
the Pre 


© the G 


i] (hap. Il. 


ſites and 
that Came 


except they were circumciſed, they could noz be ſaved. c Barnabas was | of the ſet of the Phariſees, verl. 5. 


GAL ATIANMS 


anc! to vic them under that 


cholen to g0 with Paul, vert. 2. and ſome others, whom Lake | notion, was no matter of liberty, 


nameth not, but it is plain by this Text Tirus was one. : 
2 And I went up by revelation 4, and communica- 
red to them that goſpel which I preach among the 


þ 07, p4- Gentiles e, but | privately to them which were of 


reputation f, leſt by any means 1 * mould run, or had 


"* run in Vaing, |» 

4 Revelation (ignifizth God's immediate declaration of his Will to 
kim, that he would have him take this Journey 5 which is not at all 
contradited by tuke, ſaying, A#s 15. 2, 3- That their Journey 
was determined by the Chriftians at Anrroch, God, to incourage 
P:ul, had let him know it was his will ke ſhould go; and alſo put it 
into the Chriftians hearts at Aztivch, to chule him to the Journey. 
His motions from one place to another, were much by revelation, 
or immediate order and command from God, Ats 16. g, and 22. 
33, and 22. 11, eHe ſaith, he communicated, or made a report 
or relation of (in which ſenſe che word is uſed, As 25, 14.) that 
Pottrin of the Goſpel which he had preached among the Gentiles : 
He doubtleſs more particularly means, the abolition of Circum- 
ciſion, and no neceſſity of the Obſervance of the Law of Moſes 
contained in Ordinances. f But he faith that he did it privately, 
and to Men of Reputation ; by which he meaneth the Apoſtles, or 
ſome other Chriſtians of greateft eminency. g Left he ſhould 
have prejudiced himſelf, as to the courſe of the Goſpel, which he 
metaphorically compareth to a race, (1 Cor. g. 25.) Obje#, If any 
azk how this influenced Pau), ſo as to make him privately to com- 
municate the Dofrin which he had among the Gentiles preached 
publickly ? It is eaſily anſwered, x. Thar the conſent of thoſe 
who where Apoſtles before him, to the Doctrin which he preached, 
was of great moment to perſwade all Chriſtians to imbrace it: and by 
this means he obviated the ſcandal of being ſingular in the Dottrin 
which he preacht. 2. Pefides that Paul was now at Zieruſalem, which 
was the chief place of the Jews re{idence, to whom God indulged a 
greater liberty for the ceremonial Uſages, than to the Churches of 
the Gentiles who had not been educated in that Religion, And had 
Paul openly there declared the liberty of Chriftians from Circumci- 
ſion, and the ceremonial Uſages, he had both inraged thoſe who as 

' yet continued in the Jewiſh Religion, and poſſibly given no ſmall 
off-nce to thoſe who had been educated in that Religion, (tho' they 
were converted to the Faith of the Goſpel, they not fully yet un- 
certanding the liberty of Chriſtians from that Yoke, By one, 
or both of which ways, had Paul openly at Hieruſalem publiſhed the 
Dofrin which he had publickly preached in Damaſcus and Arabia, 
and other places of the Gentiles, his labours might have been ren- 
dred uſeleſs, and he might alſo have been leſs ſucceſsful in his fur- 
ther courſe of preaching it. ; 

3 But neither Titus who was with me, being a 


Greek, was compelled to be circumciſed þ. 

b The Apoftle brings this as an inftance of the Apoſtles at 
Hieruſalem, agreeing with him in his DoQrin, as to the non-neceſ 
ſity of Cireumeifion ; for tho' Titus was with him who was a Na- 
tive Gentile, being a Greek, and a Miniſter of the Goſpel ( and 
poſſibly Paul carried him with him for an inftance) yet the Apoſtles 
at Hieruſalem, did not think fit to impoſe upon him Circumciſton ; 
no, not upon a ſolemn debate of that Queftion. If any ſhall ob- 
je that Paul himſelf circumciſed Timothy, who was a Greek, Acts 
16. 1, 2, The anſwer iscafie, the ſame Text letting us know that 
his Mother was a J-weſs 3 and verſe 3, that he did it becauje of the 
Fews in thoſe quarters. AS to the Fews, It was matter of liberty 
at this time, they might, or might not be circumciſed. Now in 
matters of this nature, where Men have a liberty, they ought to 
have regard to Circumftances, and to do that which they trom a 
view of Circumftances, judge. will be moſt for the glory of God, 
the good of others, and give leaft offence, 1 Cor, 10, 28, 29, 30, 


A 


Cor, NY And that becauſe of * falſe brethren unawares 
% broughtin#, who came in privily to ſpy * out our li- 
35 herty which we have in Chriſt Jeſusk, that they mighr 


"bring us into bondage /. : 

i He gives the reaſon why Circumciſion was not urged upon Titus, 
viz. becauſe there were ſome got into that Meeting, where Paul 
debated theſe things with the Apoſtles that were at Hieruſalem ; 
who tho? they had embraced the Chriftian Religion (and upon that 
account were Brethren) yet were ſowred with the Jewiſh Leaven, 
and were very zealaus for all Chriſtians toobſerve the Jewiſh Rites 
of Circumciſion, £9, Upon which account it is that he calleth 
them falſe Brethren, k Theſe (he ſaith) came in privily, to [py 
ont that liberty which all Chriſtians had, and Paul had preached 
and uſed, as to theſe Jewiſh Ceremonies : Who, could they have 
ohtained to have had Titus circumciſed , they had had a great 
advantage to have defamed Panl, as teaching one thing to the 
Gentile Churches, and praQtifing the contrary, when he came at 
Hieruſalem to the Apoſties, and among the Jews. And this being 
a liberty which he and all Chriftians had in and from Jeſus Chrift, 
he would not part with it, 1 for they aimed at nothing, but the 
22ain bringing of Chriſtians under the bondage of the Ceremonial 
Law, Some may ſay, it being a thing wherein Chriſtians had a 
liberty, Why did not St. Paul yield to avoid their Offence ? becoming 
all things to all Men t» gain ſome. Anſw. In the uſe of our Liberty, all 
circumftances are to be conſidered, as well as that of Scandal and 
Offence, The valuable oppoſite circumftance in this caſe, ſeemeth 
to be the validity and ſucceſs of the Apoſtle's Miniſtry, the ethcacy 
of which would have been much weakened; if his Eremies had from 

ence gained an advantage to repreſent him as doing one thing in 
One place, and rhe quite contrary in another,  Feſides, tho? at 
tiis time, the uſe or not uſe of the Ceremonzal Rites by the Fews, 
W3S1 matter of Linerty, by reaſon of Gai's Indulgence to them for 
the Prejudices of their Education, vet whether they were at all ſo 
© the Genrie Churches, may be doubted, ſee chap. 5, 2, 3, Fur» 


5 lo whom we gave place by ſo\.'-*tion, ny nat for 
{ an hour #2, that the truth of the goſpel wif hr contin ge 
with you z, if 
m Tothele Fadzizing Chriſtians the Apoſtle did not think fr to 
Yield one jot ; net for the leaft time, nor in ſo m+.ch as one pre- 
ſident, an Having a deſire that tn: ſe Genrize Churches might noe 
be perverted. Or, (as others think) ro which Men of Repurasion 
we yielded not in the leaft It js very probable, that P:rer ant 
James upon the firft arguing tie caſe, to avoid the ſcandal and 
offence of the Fews, would have had Titus circumciſed : St, Paaxl 
would not yield :0 it, that he might preſerve the Doftrin of the 
Goſpel, which he had planted among the Galarians, and oth-r 
Geniles, pure, and not incumber thoſe Churches with the Mc/je 
cal Rites ; But the moft, and beſt Interpreters rather judge the 
Perſons here mentioned, to whom Paul would not yield, to be ſome 
Fudaizing Chriſtians, rather than the perſons of Repuraricon, men- 
tioned verſe 2. 
6 But of theſe who ſeemed to be ſomewhat o, what- 


ſoever they were it maketh no matter to me : * 


2 
God accepteth no man's perſon p, for they who ſeem- 
ed to be ſomewhat in conference added nothing unto 
me 9. 

o The word Tranſlated ſeem, is the ſame with that verſe 2. which 
we there Tranſlate of Reputaiion. The Apofile meaneth the ſame 
Perſons that were of the greateſt reputation, and ſo the following 
words to be ſomething, do import, Ats 5. 36, and $8. 9g, We muſt 
not underftand the Apoſtle by this Expreſſion, to detra& from 
the juft Reputation that the Apoftles, and theſe Eminent Chriſtians 
at Hierujalcm had; he only taketh notice here of them, as magnified 
by the falſe Teachers of this Church, to the lefſening of himſelf ; 
and as thoſe that ſcem 19 be ſomething, muſt be interpreced as re- 
lating to theſe Mens eftimation of them ; [that ſezm to you to be 
ſomething | tho? I ſeem nothing to you. p Whatſyever they were 
formerly, ſuppoſe (as probably ſome of theſe Galatians had ſaid) that 
they ſaw Chrt# in the fleſh, were immediately called by him, when 
I was a Phariſee, &c. God accepreth no man's perſon, hath no regard to 
what a Man hath been, but to what, he is. When L was to confer 
and diſcourſe with them about the DoErin which I and they had 
taught, I learned no new Do&trin from them, different from what I 
had before taught, neither did they reprove or corte& me, for any 
thing which I had taught amiſs; we were all of the ſame mind. 

7 But contrariwiſe, * when they ſaw r that the 


t, as the goſpel of the circumciſion was unto Peter #. 


As 15. 12. Declared in the counſe] what miracies and wonders God bad 
wrought among the Gentiles by them: ) ſ That the buſineſs of preachin g 
the Goſpel to thoſe who were no Jews, (for that is meant by ancire 
cumciſion , not ſimply thoſe that were not circumciſed (for ſome of 
the Heathens were circumciſed) yet all go in Scripture under the 
name of uncircumciſed) was committed to me. u As the preach- 
ing of the Goſpel to the Fews was committed to Pere, and not to 
him only, but to Fames and Fobn. I muſt not be ſo underſtood, 
as if Paul mi-ht not preach to the Fews, or Peter might not 


| preach to i he Gentiles (for the contrary is evident from As 5, 15, 


as to Paul, and from Peter's preaching to Cornelius, Aﬀts 10.) but 
becauſe God deſigned the Gentiles to be more eſpecially the Pro. 
vince for Paul to exerciſe his Miniſtry in, As 26. 17. (and accord- 
ingly he was eſpecially ſent out by the Church, As 13. 4.) as Pe- 
rer's chief work was among the Jews, 


3 (For he that wrought effeQully in Peter to the 
apoſtleſhip of the circumciſion, * the ſame was mighty 
in me towards the Gentiles w. ) 


Apoſtleſhip in the Province betruſted to him (which waspreaching 
to the Fews ) ſo he wrought effcEually, and mightily in me, or by 
me in the Province wherein I was employed, viz. carrying the 
Goſpel to the Gennes. This efficacious working of God both by 
Paul and Peter, was ſeen in the converſion of multitudes by their 
Miniſtry, as well as in their miraculous operations, by which they 
confirmed the Do&trin of the Guſp<l which they preached. 

9 And when James w, Cephas x, and Jobn y, who 
ſeemed to be pillars z, perceived the grace that was 
given to me a, they gave to me, and Barnabas the 
right hands of fellowſhip 6, that we ſhould go uato tic 


heathen, and they unto the circumſion c. 

w James (called the Zeſs) the Son of Alpheus (before called the 
Brother of our Lord, as is thought becauſe he was the Son-of the 
Virgin Mary's Siſter, ) whoſe naming here in the firft place 
ſpoileth the Papiſts Argument for Peter's primacy, becaule in ſome 
other places he is firft named. x That is, Perer, called here Ce- 
phas in the Syriack; poſſibly becauſe he is named with others, who 
had Syriac Names 5 in moſt places he is by t!:is Apoſtle calle Perer, 
» Fohn the Apoſtle and Evangeliſt, who is alſo known by the Name 
of the beloved Diſciple. 7 Paul in ſaying rth-y ſremed 10 be Pillars, 
doth not deny them to be ſo ; being ſuch as God made uſe of in the 
firſt founding and building of the Goſpel-Church ;, as alſo to bear 
it up (in the feme ſenſe that the Church is called rbe PiBzr and. 
ground of ruth; ) ard as by them the Goſpel was carried out into 
the World ; but he uſeth the word ſeemed, becauſe the, falſe 
Teachers had magnified their Miniftry, bur diſparaged his, When 
theſe, he ſaith, 4 underſtood the grace given to þ/m, by which, he 


either underſtands his Othce of Apoftleſtip, or the Crown 3nd 
Sea! 


Chap. II. 


Elders, about the necefrry * Circumsiſion, verl. 1. Some| ther yet, theſe Brethren urged the obſervation of theſe Rites, as 
from Fuca, having caught the Diſciples at 4n1och, that | neceflary to Saivation, (as appears from 47s 15, 1,) for they were 


* RCM, 2, 
l1. 


* Rom, 


goſpel of the uncircumciſion / was committed unto me 1. 13. 
1Tim 2.7, 


7 They were ſo far from contradifting any thing that 1 had 2 11% *» 
preached, that when they underſtood from me, and Zarnatas (who * 


* Aft. 9g. 


15. & 123, 

w AS PauPs call was equal to that of Peter, both of them being beg 22, 
Divine, ſo (ſaita the Apoſtle) my ability and ſucceſs was equal ; 21. ch. 1» 
as God wrought eff-Qually in and by Perer in the diſcharge of his 16, 


”» WOITRL 
[ : ty [ 3 | 
iy | 41 14s 4 
uu : iys i tn} f 
ttt 
5 WIR 
þ | We! | 159 Tt 
Up" 
' tk 29 
"AT. Pi 1 
"S891: 12-38 
LI We \M 
' wy” "y 
Fay {, 
#9 
Wh; +. 20 
1A. . 
” {7 1 
#: 
1 "1 w. 
if ITE | 
by 
" STE 7 ir 
Wh 4 | 
; 14 £4 
Y. bi 
by [bb ; [ 
fy ll! ar \ ' 
IF 4 4: : P 
wi " : "Wn o , 
4.1 {s | '# 
' | f 4 
Nv Bp TR3:  ! 
if | 
"RL" | 
Mt * 
A! ) | x | , 
W Z 
'" 
f ” 
f #-y 


my 
0 ooipit 
þ \Ja# © 
| 
. | 
Wit nt 
83 / 
0 
ISM! + 
| 32h 
" 1b Crt 
! & hg! 
; "| 
PW: | 
j vis f 
þ 
4 
Wi! 
44 Davgd o 
1 
$41! 


ge 
- . & _ _, 
a edudde;"s 2 ” __ 19 
Wu = p02 2% ply *n pe == "4 
=” Sag po _ 
————— Pte nt, SIO ET». ans EN me 


Zn on EDT ers. ge 


#5 -— 
a _— I ge 
-- _ p SR 
_ —_ , 
- 3” " « 3 FR 4 
4s qo ComomQmIn - 2 - G = 
— —_ x = _ = 
L _ 
4 = — - i” 
ae oo | oo On A; 4" DCAD) 


© 
_ 


"wg * 


—_— 


F 
- _ _ bd 
_ = a 
>a 4 
IS me x oy 
— I == == 


— — 


-— 
= _ 


PO IRS SITIO 


Chap. I. 


! 2 4 Fr 
bcurs amony the G2zrrler, 


In 11% 4 


F-;.<0.15.) And agreed c that it [ould be their ſpecial work to 
F7- Ti | 0; 7 Ty - als mn 
50 and preach to the cenriles, as they, (viz. Fimes, and Fol, and 


Oe | SEE. * , 
tes) would mare It il 


* Ats 24. 
7. an A. 
Rom. 15. 


C 


x Cor. 16. char22; they only defired us that we would be careful whereivever 
we went to make coll-ion for the poor Chriſtians in Fud24, who 
either by ſelling all they had to maintain the Goſpel in its firſt 
z Plantation, or by the ſharp perſecution which had waſted them, or 
bv rea/on of the Famine, were very low : nor was this any new 
thinz 4 1 had before done it, and was very forward to do 1t again, 


1k 
2 Cor. $. 
> 


had they ſaid nothing to us about Its 


11 But whea Peter was come to Antioch, I 
withitood him to the face, becauſe he was to be 


blam eq Oe 


e Of his mvtion of Peter's to Antioch, the Scripture ſaying no- 
thing of it, hath left Interpreters at 119erty to 2u2iS variouily as tO 
ime; (ome judging ir was before, ſome after the Council held 
at 7712r:1ſ 212m, of which we read As 15.) Tholz ſeem to judge beſt, 
who think ir was aftzr; for it was at Antioch, while P.rn.bas was 
with Paul; now Pt; and B:irnabis Came from Flierujalem to Antioch, 
to bring thither the Decrees of that Council; and at Antioch, Bar- 
nub parted from Pl; after which we never read of them as be- 
While Pi and Barnaby were together at Antioch, 


the tit 


a 


ws together. 


Perer Cam? thither 3 where Pal faith, he was lo far from taking 
Inſtructions from him, that he wirkſtood him to his face, Not by any 
as of viotenc? {tho the word often exprefſcth ſuch a&ts;) but by 
words reproving, and blaming him; for (faith h2) he deſerved 
| Tho! the word fgnifies he was condemned, 
(waich makes ſom> ro interpret it, as it Peter had met with ſome 
rzprehention for his fact before Paul blamed him) yet there 1s no 
ground fer ir; for tho' the Greek Participle be in the Preterp-1jct 
Terſ-, v=r it is an £7-braiſrn, and put for a Noun Verb, which fn 
{ :tin i5 ſometimes expreſſed bj” the Fururez according to which we 
tranſlat2 ir, ſes 1 Cor. 1. 18. 2 Cor. 2.15. 2 Pet. 2. 4. 10 our 
TIaterpreters have truly tranſlated ir according to the ſenſe of the 


” ' f 8 
it, 1* WH 710 be Mlamed. 


Texts 


12 For before that certain came from James 7, he 
did eat with the Gentiles g - but, when they were 
come, he withdrew þ, and ſeparated himſelf ;, fearing 


them which were of the circumcition k. 


f It ſhould ſeem that Peter had been at Antioch ſome time; while 
he was there, there came down certain Jews from Fames, who was 
efore they came g Petzr had Communion with 
thoſe Chriſtians at Antioch, which were by birth Gentiles, and at 
Meals eat as they eat, making no difference of Meats, as the Fews 
þ But as ſoon as theſe 
Zealots for the Jewiſh Rites (tho* Chriſtians) were come, Peter 
withdrew from the Communion of the Gentil? Chriſtians, and 7 was 
th- Head of a ſeparate Party, & and all through fear of the Fews ; 
left they ſhould at their return to Z#ieryſalem make ſome report 
of him to his diſadvantage, and expoſe him to the anger of the 


at Z#i-ruſalem 


did in obedience to the Ceremonial Law. 


Fews. 


hin 2, infomuch, that Barnabas alſo was carried away 
with their diſſimulation z. 


! The fatt was the worſe, becauſe thoſe Chriſtians which were 
of the Church of Antioch, having been Native Jews, m followed 
” Nay, Bars 
7.35 my Fellow-labourer, who was joined with me in bringing the 
Decrees of the Council in the caſe, was carried away with their 
Diſfimulation. So dangerous and exemplary are the warpings and 


his Example, and made a ſeparate Party with him. 


miſcarriages of thoſe that are eminent Teachers. 
14 But when I faw that they walked not uprightly, 


according to the truth of the goſpel o, I ſaid unto 


* AQts 10. Peter before them all p, * If thou being a Jew liveſt 
23, after the manner of Gentiles, and not as do the 
Jews q, why compelleſt thou the Gentiles to live as 


do the Jews r ? 

0 Upriphtly here is Oppoſed to halting. Peter halted betwixt 
two Opinions (as El:zjah lometime told the Jſrazlirzs) when he was 
with the Gentiles alone, he did as they did, uling the liberty of the 
Goſpel; but when the Jews came from Hieruſulem, he left the 
Gentile Church, and joined with the Jews; this was not according 
to that plainneſs and ſincerity which the Goſpel required ; he did 
not {according to the precept he held, Heb. 12. 13.) Make ſtrait 
paths to kis feer, le that which is I:me be turned out of th? way. Paul 
not hearing this from the report of others, but being an Eye- 
witneſs to it, doth not defer the reproof, left the ſcandal ſhould 
grow: Nor p doth he reprove him privately, becauſe the offence 
was publick, and ſuch a Flafter would not have fitted the Sore ; but 
he ſpzaketh unto Petey before them all, rebuking him openly, be- 
cauſe he iinned openly; and by this action had not offended a pri- 
vate Perſon, but the Church in the place where he was; who were 
all Eye-witneſfes of his halting and prevarication, 1 Tim. 5. 20. 
g if tou, who art a Jew, not by Religion only, but by Birth and 
Education, haſt formerly 1ivzd, eat and drank, and had commu- 
nion with the Gentiles in the omiſſion of the obſervance of Circum- 
citon, and other Jewiſh Rites, generally obſerved by thoſe of their 
SYNAgoguecs z (as Peter had done hefore the Jews came from Hieru- 
falem to Antioch.) r Why duſt thou by thy Example compel the 
Members of a Gentile Church to obſerve the Jewiſh Rites z for 


it their ſpecial work to preach the Goipel to the 


10 OuMly they worrld that we ſhould remember 
the poor 4, * the ſame which 1 alſo was forward to 


d Theſ: Pillars and Apoſtles which have among you the greateſt 
25. r-vucation, added no new Noctrin to us, gave us nothing new 1 


13 And the other Jews / difſembled likewiſe with 


GALATIANS 


G21 of his OfFc5s in the bieſing which God had given to his la- | +-mpe7ing here doth not fignifie any a& of : 
h "they looked upon him and B.rr.h45 nw wig 
much Pits as theamelves; and in token ot it gave them their 
ht Hands (a token of admitting into fellowſhip, 2 Xzps 10. 15+ 


=p 


fuch) but the example of Leaders in the Church, wh 
vf reputation _ Os IS a kind of comnul# a 
are Interiours, and who have a great vene ati "7" 
So the word here uſed Pvzoyudi Core, is uſed 0 won = 
to expreſs the force of exhortations and aroumen+« 
compuliion tie word is uſed, Znke 14. 23. Peter by 1; 
and poſſibly by ſome words and arguments he uſed, 
thoſe proſelyted Jews, who were in communion with 
of Galatiz, to obſerve the Jewiſh Rites; ſo that by 
not only contradiet himſelf, who by his former walking ; 
Gentile Church had pratically afſerted the Gofi Pel liberty P 
4. 3 


Fy. 


\C "as 
Ot! THU y 


in the liberty which Chriſt had preached for them, 
taught them 3 and alſodrew others away from the Truth t] 
owned and prattiſed. This was the cauſe of Pau!'s ſb open a 
lick reproof of him. 


ners of the Gentiles ?, 


bs) 


r Not ſinners of the Gentiles. The Gentiles were ordinari}s Called þ 


ſhip; (for whoſe ſake there Was a peculiar Court a lotted in 7) 
Temple, called, The Court of the Gentiles) Yet not beins t 
the obligation of the Jewiſh Lan, they went urider the denom) wy 
tion of tinners by the Jewsz and the mc of the Gentiles = 
really ſinners, and that eminently ; (for ſuch the word here af 
ordinarily fignifieth ) as the Apoſtle deſcribeth their manner 
Rom. 1. 29, 20, 31. Me 


bc juſtified by the faith of Chriſt, and not by the wor 
Heſh be juſtified z. 
and declared righteous in the fight of God. 


or Moral. For it is manifeſt, that altho' this Queſtion about juſti- 
fication by works began about Circumciſion and works done in obe- 
dience to the Ceremonial Law, yet the determination of it extend- 
ed further. For the Apoſtle by the Law underſtands that Lax by 
which is the knowledge of ſin, Rom. 3. 20. Now the knowledje if 
ſin, is neither only nor chiefly by the Ceremonial Law : Nor did 
ever any of thoſe againſt whom the Apoſtle argueth, think, that 
men could be juſtified by obedience only to the Law contained in 
Ordinanc?s; nor could boaſting be excluded (which the Apoſtle 
ſheweth, Rem. 3. 27. was God's deſign in fixing the way of a Sinners 
juſtification) if Men might be juſtified by works done in obedi- 
ence to the Moral Law; nor was it the Ceremonial Law only, the 
violation of which works wrath, Rom. 4. 15 or diſobedience to 
which brought Men under the curſe, chap. 3. 10. x But we are 
juſtified by believing in Chrift ; not by Faith as it is a work of ours, 
(for that was denied before ;) nor by Faith as a Principal efficient 
cauſe, for in that ſenſe it is God that juſtifieth 3 nor as a meritorious 
cauſe, for ſo we are juſtified by the blood of Chriſt ; but by [:ich, 

as an inftrument apprehending and applying Chriſt and hisrighte- 
ouſneſs. y We ( faith the Apoſtle) that are Jews, knowing this, 
have not only aſſented to the truth of the Goſpel-propolition, bur 
accepted of this way of Salvation, and received the Lord Jelus; 
that we ſo doing, not trufting to the Law, or any obedienceof ours 
toit, might be abſolyed from the guilt of fin, and declared righte- 

ous before God. 7 For no mortal Man ſhall ever be abſolved or decla- 
red righteous upon his own perſonal obedience to the Law of God,be- 
ing in the beſt imperfe&t, and much ſhort of what the Law requireth. 


17 Bur if while we ſeek to be juſtified by Chriſt, 


a Some Interpreters think, that the Apoſtle here begins his Dil 
courſe to the Gu12ri2us upon the main argument of his Epiſtle, iz- 
Juſtification by Faith in Chrift ; tho' others think it began werſ: 15: 
Tf (faith the Apoſtle) you make us grievous Offenders in our ex- 
pectation of being juſtified by Chriſt, and not by the works of the 
Law ; 6b You make Chriſt the Miniſter of fin, who hath taught 
us this. But other think that the Apoſtle het® obviateth a com- 
mon Objeetion which was then made (as it 'is alſo in our Age) a 
gainft the Dodtrin of Juſtification by Faith in Chriſt, viz. That 1 
opens a door of liberty to the fleſh, and ſo makes Chrift - 0Mini/ier 
of ſn; as if he relaxed Mens obligation to the Law of God; whic 
is the ſame Objeftion which the Apoſtle anſwered in his Epiſtle to 
the Roms, chap. 6. If while we plead for Juſtification by Chrilt, 
we live in a courſe of notorious Diſobedience to the Law of G06, 
then Chriſt muſt be to us a Miniſter of fin, and come into the 
World to purchaſe for us a poſhbility of Salvation, tho' we 11VE 
in never ſo much notorious Diſobedience to the Law of God. AS !! 
there were no obligation upon Men to keep the Lai unle!s 
by their obedience to it, they might obtain pardon of fin and ju- 
juſtification. This calumny the Apoſtle accords :; Firit, by a gene” 
ral Averſation, God forbid ! ; 

18 For if I build again the things c, which I de- 
ſtroyed 4, I make my ſelf a tranſzreſſor c. 

c By the things which he 4-ftroyed, ſome underſtand the ſtat | 
fin; and from hence conclude the mutability of a ſtate of  nr_e) 
tion ; But there is no need of that, it may well be underiivon's 
a conſtant courſe, and voluntary atts of fin. If I teach a Doctri 
that ſhall incourage a ſinful life, or if I ſhould live 11a courſe 0 


te of 


{in, theſe are the things, 4 which I as a Minitter of Chriſt, g's 


Cha 


none 
, are Perions 
pultion to thoſs +4. 
aders, 


Jo ) 3b 
as ah 


S Example, 
"otent'y moveg 
the Churches 
this fa, he dig 
1 tha 
i = s . . . . b it þ 2 
allo ſcandalized thoſe Chriſtians in theſe Churches who Acad in 
and Py} had 
Ky had 
nd pub. 
7 4 | 

15 We who are * Jews by nature 5, and not * ſp. \g 

var 514 


-; 11, 


BS Born Jews, not only proſelyted to the Jewiſh Religion (ar 4+ 
{0 under an obligation to the obſervation of the Jewiſh Law.) 12 
but of the Seed of Abraham, and ſo under the Covenant GR 0 
him and his ſeed, as he was the Father of the Jewiſh Wale 


the Jews /inrers; tho' it appeareth that there were divers of them 
worſhippers of the true God, and came up to "gps to wor: 


16 * Knowing that a man is not juſtified u, by the * a 
works of the Law w, but * by the faith of Jeſus Chris x:38. 
even we have believed in Jeſus Chriſt that we mighe *oa 
- ths tha 
ot the Law y: for, * by the works of the Law ſhall 1 rp. 
, 7 Ive Wl 
u We knowing that a man is not abſolved from the guilt of fin, 143. 2. 
w B anv ki "Rom, y 
, y any kind of \M.3 
works done in obedience to the Law of Moſ2s, whether Ceremorj199 


we our ſelves alſo are found * ſinners a, zs therefore * 1] 
Chriſt the miniſter of ſin ? God forbid. $, $ 


/ 


o. 1h 


Roms 8 


Rom Go 
Land 7+ 
1 
Rom. + 


' ( 
045» f 
i 
hefe 5 t 
x 
42+ 9 


«24+ lif 
h, 1.4» thi 


| 5+ 2s fo 
bite 5 


grace C 
thoſe w 
rejet a 
much a 
poſhble, 
arrive a 
then Ch 
ſon of t 
Chriſt's 
ſinners 
neſs, D; 
be take 
Thus t 
Yone ſhaj 
that wo 
of the L; 
Or makj 


He ſary 
recety 
cunt, 
han, 
Gentj 
All ot 
livere 
Coven 

ham a 
wargs 
Olty $cþ 
not co 
£0V17, 


F my Preaching and Doin deſtroyed, teaching you, that not 
only the guilt of your fins was removed upon your Juſtification by 
Chriſt, but the dominion of fin alſo deſtroyed ; And they are 
things which Fuſtification deftroyeth ; God never ſaying to any 
Soul, Thy ſins are forgiven thee, without adding, ſim no more. SO as 
if a juftified ſtate would admit of a going on m a ſettled courſe of 
ſin, it would build what it deſtroyed. e Now ſhould T, or any one, 
do any ſuch thing, we ſhould thereby make our ſelves great Tran(- 
refſors; So as the Apoſtle's Argument here ſeemeth to be the ſame 
with that Rom. 6. 2. How ſhall we that are dead to fin, live any longer 
therein? He ftrives at the ſame thing here, viz. to prove that the 
Doftrin of Juſtification by Faith in Chriſt, could not give a li- 
berty to any to fin, becauſe it ſhews Perſons made partakers of 
that Grace, that they are freed, not only from the Guilt, but 
alſo from the Power and Dominion of Sin, ſo as that none can 
from it receive any comtort, as to the former, nor find the latter 
wrought in thems 


19 For I * through the law f* am dead to the law 


g, that f might * live unto God h. 

Rom 6+ f Through the Jaw of Chrift (as ſome ſay) or rather through 
4,.nd 7+ the Law of Moſes (of which he had been beiore ſpeaking) that is, 
4 (ay ſome) through the death of the Law: The law it ielf being 
Rom 6+ dead, as a covenant of works, (Kom. 7.1.) Or rather, by means 


Rom» 8+ 


TIANS. Chap. II, 


from this Power of the Lam, beirg Chilir:n of God baptized into 2 
new Covenant maie with belizuing ew and Gentile, the true Seed 
of Abraham, and Zeirs according to the Promiſ:, 19----29., 


that you ſhould not obey the truth b, before 
whoſe eyes Jeſus Chriſt hath been evidently ſer forth c, 
crucihed among you d ? | 

4 The Apoſtle beginneth the further purſuit of the argument he - 

was upon, with a ſmart reprehenſion of them z as men of no under- 
ſtanding, and b-witched, The word tranſlated bewirched fignifies 
vitiating the eyes, or ſpoiling the ſight, ſo as that Men cannot 
diſcern an obvious objett in a due poſition. The meaning is, who 
hath ſeduced you, who hath ſo corrupted your underſtanding that 
your acqions are as unaccountable, as the effetts of Witchcraft ? 
6 The word tranflated obey, fignifies alſo to believe. In general, it 
ſignifies to be perſuaded; which may refer either to an affent to 
the truth, or obedience to the precepts of the Goſpel. c When as 
Chriſt hath been plainly preached before you,. and his Death, with 
the bleſſed end, and effetts of it, hath been ſo made known among; 
you, as if you had ſeen him crucified. Or elſe Chriſt may be ſaid 
to be crucified among th2m, becauſe it was in their time, fo as they 
could not but hear of it, and there was no more reaſon for them to 


Fooliſh Galatians, * who hath bewitched you «, * Ch. <-7. 


fs 5» 


Ll, 1:40 
$+2o 
414» 


1 jon 
96 


(ſte 6+ 


of the Law, giving me a knowledge of fin, and condemning me for 
fin. g Am dead to the Law, as to any expeation of being jufti- 
fed by obedience to it. h Not that T might live in diſobedience 


hel. 5» to it, as it is a rule of life, but that T may live more holily unto 


God; So as my being dead to the Law, as a covenant of works, 


k,4-2- or as f0 any expeation of being juſtified from my obedience to it, 


gives me no liberty to fin at all; for this is the end why God 
hath freed me from the bondage and rigour of the Law, that I 
might live unto him, and ſerve bim without fear, in Holineſs and 
Righteouſneſs. 

20 I am * crucified with Chriſt ;; Nevertheleſs I 
live k; yet not I, bur Chriſt liveth in me /, and the 


«24 life which I now live in the fleſh I live by the faith of 


the Son of God mz, who * loved me, and gave himſelf 


for me 7. 

i This Epiſtle is much of the ſame nature with that to the Ro- 
Mans, and the ſubſtance of what the Apoſtle ſaith in the latter part 
of this Chapter, agreeth much with the ſixth Chapter of that 
Epiſtlez where we find an expreſhon much like to this, verſe 6. 
Our old man is crucified with him, that the body of ſin might be de- 
ftroyed, that henceforth we ſhould nor ſerve ſm. T am (faith the 
Apoſtle) Crucified with Chriſt, not only by Fuſtification made par- 
taker of the benefits coming by a Chrift Crucified, but alſo as hav- 
ing Communion with the death of Chriſt, in the mortification of 
my Luſts. A figure of which (as he informeth us, Rom. 6.) we 
have in Baptiſm, verſe 4. Buried with him by Baptiſm into death. k 
Yet (faith he) I live an Holy, Spiritual Life, tho' dead to the 
Law, and tho* crucified with Chrift. 7 But I cannot ſay ſo properly 
that it is , for my motions are not according to my natural pro- 
penſions and inclinations 3 but Chriſt by his Spirit 1iverh in me, hav- 
ing renewed and changed me, made mea new creature, and begot 
new motions and inclinations in me. And tho' 7 live in the fleſh, 
un yet I live by the Faith of the Son of God: All my natural, moral 
and civil aCtions, being principled in faith, and done according to 
the guidance of the rule of Faith in Jeſus Chriſt, » Of whom I 
am perſuaded, that he loved me, and from that love gave himſelf, 
to die upon the Croſs for me. 


21 1 do not fruſtrate the grace of God o, for * if 


' righteouſneſs come by the law p, then is Chriſt dead in 


Vain 9. 

0 I dv not deſpiſe, rejet, make void, (for by all theſe words the 
word here uſed is Tranſlated, Mark 7. 9g. Fohn 12. 48. Ch. 3. 15» 
Heb. 10. 28.) the free love of God, in giving his Son to die for 
our fins: From whence is ealily gathered, that thoſe who live a 
looſe life, and take a liberty to fin from their Juſtification, or from 
the free grace of God in Chriftz they do contemn and deſpiſe the 
grace of God ; Or rather (if we refer it to the following words) 
thoſe who aſſert Juſtification by the works of the Law, they do 
reſet and deſpiſe the free grace of God in the Goſpel, and (as 
much as in them lies) make it vain and fruſtrate. p For if it be 
poſſible, that a Man by works done in obedience to the Law, ſhould 
arrive at a Righteouſeſs, in which he may ftand before God, q 
then Chrift died tono purpoſe, or without any juft cauſe; the rea- 
ſon of this muſt be, becauſe it was the main and principal end of 
Chriſt's death, to procure or purchaſe a Righteouſneſs, wherein 
ſinners might ſtand before God, to bring in an everlaſting Righteouſ- 
neſs, Dan. 9. 27- If the moſt proper cffett of the death of Chrift 
be taken away, then his death is made cauſleſs, and to no purpoſe. 
Thus the Apoſtle concludeth his Thefis, laid down, verſe 16. That 
wone ſhall be juſtified by the works of the Law, from two abſurdities 
that would follow upon the contrary, viz. Fuſtification by the works 
of the Law; the rejetion of the grace of God, and the fruſtration, 
or making void of the death of Chriſt. 


CH A P. III. 


He ſoarply reproves the Galatians, and expoſtulates with them 4 they had 
received the ſpirit and his grace by faith, and had ſuffered on this ac- 
count, and this faith was confirmed 10 them by Miracles, 1--5. Abra- 
ham's Righreonſneſs by faith, and hereby we are his Children ; the 
Gentiles proved ſuch by Scripture, and ſuch only bleſſed in bim, 6----9, 
All others are under the Curſe of the Law, from which Chriſt bath de- 
livered Believers, and procured the Bleſſmg for them, 10---14. Man's 


Covenant once confirmed cannot be annul}'d. The promiſe made to Abra- |, 


ham ard his Seed, and confirmed in Chriſt ; this the Law coming after- 
wards cannot diſannul, 15----- 13. But it may diſcover fin, and be 
our School-maſter ro lead to Chriſt, in whom is the Inheritance, and ſor 
not comrary 80 the promiſe, which remedieth its defets, and ſinners 
«nvinced by it go w Chriſt and are juſtified. by faith, and are freed 


doubt of the truth of the thing, than if he had been crucified in 
their Country. : 

2 This only would I learn of you, Received ye * + ,a., 
the ſpirit e, by the works of the law, or by the hear- +2. 
ing of faith f ? 
e By the Spirit here is underſtood the gifts of the Spirit, which S 15+ 9» 
were either ſuch as were common to all Believers (ſuch as Faith, Eph» t+12- 
Love, &c.) or elſe ſuch as were peculiar to ſome, and thoſe not 
all Believers; ſuch were thoſe abilities for miraculous operations 
given to ſome. Some underſtand this Text of the former, ſome ot 
the latter z Its beft to take in both 3 all the manifeftations of the 
Spirit then given out, either for the Sanctification and Eternal Sat- 
vation of thoſe to whom they were given, or tor the confirmation 
of the Truth of the Goſpel. f Did you receive the Spirit by the works 
of the Law? that he knew they could not ſay they did, for they were 
Heathens, Strangers to the Common-wealth of 1ſ7ael, ſo as they 
could pretend to no works of the Law : Or did you receive this Holy 
Spirit upon hearing the Goſpel (which is the Dodtrin of Faith) 
preached to you ? Men ſhould take b+ed of vilifying that Miniftry, 
or that Dofrin, which God hath bleſſed to the change of their own 
hearts, or the hearts of others: We alſo may obſerve from hence, 
That the hearing the Goſpel faithfully preached is a blefſed means 
by which Mens hearts are changed, and they receive the Holy Spi- 
rit; not inabling them (as it did ſome, and but ſome in the begin- 
ning of the Goſpel) to work ſigns and wonders, but inabling them 
to the operations of a Spiritual Life: The ftrength of the Apo- 
ſtle's Argument is this, You have the greateſt reaſon to own that 
Dodtrin as the truth which God hath blefſed to your Souls to pro- 
duce ſpiritual Effetts there. 

3 Are ye ſo fooliſh? having begun ia the Spirit, are 
ye now made perfect by the fleſh g ? 

£ The Doftrin of their falſe Teachers was, that to faith in Chriſt, 
an obedience alſo to the Law of Moſes was neceffary to Juſtification ; 
they did not deny Chrift, or the Do&rin of the Goſpel, only they 
plead for the works of the Law as neceſſary to be ſuperadded. The 
Apoſtle calls this firſt owning of Chrift, and imbracing the Do- 
&rin of Faith, 4 beginning in the Spirit, their adding the neceſſity 
of obedience to the Law of Moſes, a being made perfett in the fleſy. 
And argueth the unreaſonableneſs of it, that their Fuſt:ficari977 
ſhould be begun by a more noble, and made perfect by a more ig- 
noble cauſe. He calls the Do&rin of the Goſpel, Spirir, becaule 
(as he ſaid in the former verſe) they had received the Holy 5+pirit, 


QO,- Q 
On Ys I%s 


by'the hearing of faith; that is, by hearing and receiving the Goſpel. 


The works of the Law he calls fleſh, becauſe the Ordinances of the 
Law were (as the Apoſtle calls them, #eb. 9. 10.) Carnal 0rlinances 
impoſed on the Fews till the time of reformation. He elſewhere calls them 
the rudiments of the World, Col. 2. 8, 26. and in this Epiſtle, chap. 
4+ 9+ he calls them beggerly Elements. For tho' the Ordinances of 
the Law were 1n their ſealon ſpiritual, they being commanded by 
God yet they being but temporary Conftitutions, never intended 
by God to continue longer than the coming of Chriſt, and the 
Law being but a School-mafeter to lead to Chriſt ; Chrift being now 
come, and having died, and roſe again from the Dead, they be- 
came uſeleſs. Betides that God never intended them as other than 
Rudiments and firſt Elements, the end of which was Chrift ; and the 
obſervance of which without Faith in Chrift, was weak and inpo- 
tent, as to the noble end of Juſtification ; It ſpake great weakneſs 
therefore in the Galatians, to begin with what was more perfett, 
(the embracing of the Goſpel, and Chriſt there exhibited for the 
juſtification of tinners) and to end in what was more imperfect, 
thinking by that to be made perfett; or elſe the Apoſtle here 
chargeth them with a defettion from Chriſt, as chap. 4. 9, 10, 11. 
and chap. 5. 4. and ſo calleth them fooliſh, for beginning in the Spirit, 
(the Holy Spirit inwardly working in them the change of their 
hearts, and regenerating them ;) and then apoſtatizing from their 


| profeſſion to a carnal Life : But I had rather interpret .Spirir in 


this Text of the Do#rin of the Goſpel, dictated by the Spirit; and 
"with the receiving of which, the Holy Spirit was given. And, io 
their folly is argued from their thinking to be made perfect by the 
beggarly Elements, and worldly Rudiments of the Law, when as they 
had firſt begun their profeſhon of Chriſtianity with embracing the 
more perfeet Dodtrin of the Goſpel. 

4 * Have ye ſuffered ſo many things in vain h ? « » top, 5. 
if it be yet in vain z. | + Or, /o 
þ There is no doubt, but theſe Churches in the Regions of Ga- p22. 
latia, had their ſhare in the Sutferings of Chriftians by the Jews, 
for their adherence to, and profeſſion of the Doctrin of the Goſpel, 
which they might either wholly, or m a great meaſure have avoid- 
ed, would they have complicd with the Jews in the obſervance of 


thoſe legal Rites. Therefore (ith the Apoftle) to what pnrpoſe 


have 


Redd : _ 


20 © _ 
+<6x. "46. 2 - 
- - = - - - uy "Bay? —_— 
* + : J 4 E PS 
£ & MN _— Ps LPs hs 
w- mY DI" Wea A x =_ T 
Þ by 57 OT” haD pL AST: —_ - 5 Ce 
2 WE == GM - " — : =>0 
RC Co RT. EEE 


—_ 


' 
4 
£ 
; 
| : 
: of 
4 
FR : 
4 ) 
: ».*2 
$4 13 \ 
- 
fy dx 
i 
"o : 
3 $87 
? ; 
” 
1% 
p { 
>H4* | 
. : . &- 
p 
* 
Ws - ps 
v6 
Y by 7 
of £ 3+ 
1 
"F on. 
, 4 B $4 
: 
k q 
7 7% 


—— 
_ 
"OR 
Ee ,- 


—_ rare 
W ©" 4 
S Ds hs — a” 
=>. 


Chap. HI GALATIANS. Chap. 1 


Five you ured fo much for the owning of the Chriſtian Rel:- 

599, it 0 now bring your {clves under the bondage of Cireurn- 

cion, and ocher I-gal Oblervances? 7 \t 28 bz tn Vain, by which 

words he cither corredt<th himielt; as if he had taid, but I hope 

Hortor things of you. that 1 {hall find that you did not ſuffer them 

» > he jinteth that their ſuifering {o much would not 

h-cau.e by their Apoſtacy from the true Faith tor 

-vy ſutered, they would in effect deny it, as it it had 

nn tall, and their former ſuffering would riſe up ia Judgment 

Tain/t them. | 2 i = ; 
© He therefore that miniſtreth to you the ſpirit, and 
worketh miracles among you &, det.» be it by ne works 
of the law, or by the hearing of taith /? | 

{ Teiſ 2. He had asked them, whether they had received the 

Spirit by the works of the Law, or by hearing the Golpel 9 Some 

think what he faith here to be a Continuation of the jame Argu- 

. ment, bur it rather ſeems a new on?. i here he ſpake of their 

receivins the Spirit, here he ſpeaks of the Miniftration of the Spirit. 

Some underftand ir of God, who gives his holy >pirit to them that 

ask him, and who was the Author of thoſe miraculous: Operations 

wrought by the Spirit. 1 ſhould rather underſtand it of the Mini- 

fters of the Goſpel, to whom God hath committed the Miiftration 

of the Spiritz and to ſome of whom God in the Primitive times 

Zave a power to work Miracles. / Doth God concur with our Mr 

nifry upon our preaching the Law, or upon our preaching the Go- 

(pl: £o that tho' there be a great Cognation betwixt the Apo- 

file's arguing, verſ. 2. and Þis arguing mn this verſe, yet there 15 

ſowe differencez the Apoſtle there arguing from the ſuccels of 
preaching the Goſpel, here from the Miniftration it ſeit. 

+ Gen.1%. © Lye as * Abraham believed God m, aad it was 

E, + acconntcd to him tor rifhteonſaeſs 7, 

Rome4+ J 4 As Abrahim was juſtified, fo muſt all the Children of Abra- 

Tam. 2.3. ms but brikm believed God (that is, agreed to the truth of all 

+ Or, 7.- cj -* Promiſes which God gave him, . and trufted in God tor the 

"te. f:, 12 of them; for both thoſe atts of the mind are included in 
bu. inz God) and fo was juſtified by faith alone. # His Faith 1t 
felt was not imputed to him ; thoſe that put this ſenſe upon the 
Vords, cicher forget that jAaith it ſelf is a work, or that the Apo- 
file hore is arguing for iuſtification by Faith in oppoſition to Jultr- 
cation by Works, and cannot be imagined to have gone about t5 

prove that Juſtification is not by Works, by proving that 't 15 by 

a Work. ; he meaning 15 np. more, than that he was upon 1t ac- 

counted rightzeus; not that God ſo honoured the work of Faith, 

but that ke juſtified 4r2h4;n by ir, as the Inftrument or Means he 
had appointed for obtaining that righteouſneſs, and in the uſe of 
which he would impute, it to him. His Faith it felt was not his 
righteouſneſs, but God upon the exerciſe of his Faith, reckoned 

(or imputed) that to him which was his righteouinels, vx. (he 

righteouſneſs of him in whom he believed as revealed unto him wn 

the Promite. : : 

7 Know ye therefore that * they which are of faich 

the ſame are the children of Abraham p. 

o Thoſe who are Believers, and receive Jeſus Chriſt, as exhi- 
bited and tendred to them in the Goſpel, trufting not to any righ- 
teouſnels of their own ariſing from their Obedience to the works of 
th? Law: p They are the Children 6f Abraham, confidered as the 

ather oj the faittf:l, that is, they are juſtified as Abraham was jufti- 
fied; who was juftified not by his Circumcition, but upon his be- 
lieving in Chriſt exhibited to him in the promiſe: Not by working, 
but by 7zipuratzicy, This Argument came very cloſe to the Jews, 
whoſe great glorying was in having Abraham to their Father ; for 
It is in effect a laying, that they were no true Children of Abraham, 
non- of that yecd to whom the Promiſe was made, if they exyetted 
Juſtincation from the works of the Law, which Abraham never had, 
nor expected. 
8 And the Scripture q foreſecing that God would 
juſtihe che heathen through faith preached before the 

* Gen.12. goſpel 7 unto Abraham, ſaying, * In thee ſhall all na- 

'& 15, Lions be bleſſed 5. 

3. & 22. 4 The Holy Ghoſt in Scripture (by whoſe inſpiration the Scrip- 

g: ture was written) foreſeeing, or knowing the Councils and De- 

AQs.3.25. ſigns of God, that the Heathen (when the fiilneſs of times as to 
them ſhould come) ſhould be juſtified through Faith in Chrift ; 
preached the ſame Dottrin before unto Abraham, fo as it is no 
new Dottrin z the Goſpel which we now preach unto you, was long 
ſince revealed unto Abr2ham 5 who ſaw Chriſt's day, and rejoyced, 
Fok. $.56. £ Toprove which, he quoteth the Promiſe, Gez. 12. 3. 
where God tells Abraham, That in him all the Nations of the Earth 
ſhould be bleſed ; which quotation of it by the Apoſtle in this place 
informeth us, that it is to he underſtood of thoſe ſpiritual Bleſ- 
Iings which are in Chrift Jeſus. For all the Nations of the Earth 
were no otherwiſe bleſſed in Abraham, than as Chrift (who is called 
the defire of all Nations, and he in whom the Gentiles ſhould truſt, 
and 4 light 10 enlighten the Gentiles) deſcended from Abraham. 

9 So then they which be of ftaith z, are bleſied with 


faithful Abraham «. 

t '7hoſe that believe in Jeſus Chriſt with ſuch a faith as the 
Goſpel doth require, they, and they alone, # are bleſſed with ſpi- 
ritual bleſſings, juſtified from the guilt of Sin z with Abraham, that 
is, in the ſame manner, that Abraham, the Father of the. faithful, 
and who himſelf was a believer, was juſtified z which was not (as 
was betore ſaid) by his Circumciſion, or by any works that he did, 
but by imputation upon his belicving in the Lord Jeſus Chrift, ex- 
hibited, and held forth in the promite made to him. 

10 For as many as are of the works of the law are 
under the curſe; tor it is written, Curſed is every one 
that continueth not in all chiags which are written in 
the. book of the law to do them w. 

# The Argument is this, Thoſe that are under a curſe, cannot be 
under the blc{fing of Juſtification, But thol: that are under the 


* ROM. 4. 
I1,12,16, © 


2 
2 
3 
I 


Law arc under the curſe. This he proves out of the Law. n. 
27. 26. where thoſe are pronounced Curſed, who cont "ny = TOI 
things written in the book of the Law to do them. w To to wn. a} 
Law, is under the Covenant of works, or under the expeRati n the 
Lite and Salvation only from Obedience to the works © the 1; hg 
'iheſe (he faith) are under the curſe; the reaſon of which the rear 
ſcle gives us, Rom. 8. 3. Becauſe it js made weak throup) cur fi 

Could Man perfettly fulfill the Law, he might expett 1;f- mica 
and falvation from his obedience to itz but the Law curſeth ' ” 
thar continueth not in all that 3s written in it; If a May keon-11 ou 
whole Law, if he offends but in one point, he is guilty of als >nd x xs 
able to the wrath of God, as if he had broken it in many Ping 
Hence it neceſſarily followeth, if no Man can keep ths 1 11. 
God perfe&tly, that all under the Law muſt be under the ©. 


and conſequently cannot be bleſfed with faithful Abrabajz, 


11 But * that no man 1s juſtified by the lay jq th- ; - 
ight of God, it is evident *; for the jult ſhail live yr 1s. * 
faith x. Row, 
x The Apoſtle by another Argument proveth that finners ave 27- 
not juſtified by works. He grants, they may be: juſtified by thejr HE. 1 
good and blameleſs living before Men, fo as that they may have ng. 1%» 
thing to ſay againſt them, but he ſays they cannot by ſuch works 
be juſtified iz rhe ſight of God. His Argument is from the oppyj. 
tion that is between Fazth and I/orts. He proveth from #2. 2, . 
That we are juſtified by Faith: Where the Prophet faith, that the 
jaſt (or righteous Man) ſhall live by Faith, fetch his life from F:ich 
live his ſpiritual Lite by Faith, and obtain eternal Life by Faith, the 
life of his righteouſnels ſhall be by Faith. 

12 And * the law 1s not of faith y, but * the may +344 


that doth them, ſhall live in them =. 4, 5, 

» The Law faith nothing of Faith in the Medzazor; tho! faith 19. 5,6 
in God be commanded in the firſt Precept 3 yet Faith in Chrif i; &11.6 
not commanded by the Law as that by which the Soul ſhall ljze, * Leris 
2 For that wEich the Law ſaith, is, Do this and Itve. 7 The Manthar © 5: 
doth the things contained in the Law, ſhall live in them. LiÞ jn Ex 
the Law is promiſed to thoſe who do the things which it requireth, !t 
not to them, who having failed in their Pertormances, yt accep; 8.1 
of the Lord Jeſus Chriſt as the Redeemer which God hath (:ne, 5 
and believe in him who juftifieth the ungodly. For that by the 
Life promiſed to the obſervation of the Law, not a temporal Life 
only is to be underſtood, bat eternal Life alſo, is plain from our 
Saviour's Application of it to the young Man, inquiring about the 
way to eternal Life, Mat. 19. 16, 17, Luke 10. 23. 

13 * Chriſt hath redeemed us from the curſe of the *ton 
law a, by being made a curſe for us b; for it js writ- 3 20 
ren, Curſed zs every one that hangeth on a tree ce; 

4 If the Law curſeth all thoſe who continue not in all thing 
contained in the Law (as the Apoſtle had ſaid, verf, 15, and 
proved from Deut. 27. 26.) It might be objetted, how will Believers 
then eſcape more than others? For none of them continue in all 
that is written in tne Law; The Apoftle here obviateth this Ob- 
jection, by telling the Galatians, that as to Believers Chrift had 12- 
deemed them from this Curſe. The word generally fignifies delivering; 
here it fignihes a deliverance by a price paid. This was b by lin; 
himſelf made a Curſe for us; not only execrable to Men, but bear- 
ing the wrath and indignation of God due for Sin ; For {o it was 
written, Deut. 21. 23. c He that is bavged is accurſed of Goi; that 
is, hath born the wrath or curſe of God due to him for his $5 
The Apoſtle, applying this to Chrift, teacheth us, that Cluif allo 
hanging upon the Crols, bare the curſe of God due to the vins 0: 
Believers; in whoſe ſtead, as well as for whoſe good and benefit, 
he died. And indeed he could no other way redeem Believers from 
the Curſe of the Law, but by being made himſelf a Curſe tor 
them. Some think, that under the Law he who was hanged was 
made a Curſe, not only politically, but typically; as fignitying 
m__ Curſe which Chriſt ſhould be made on the behal: of the 
Elect. 


14 That the bleſſing of Abraham might come 0! 
the Genriles through Jeſus Chriſt 4, that we might rc- 


ceive the promiſe of the ſpirit through faith e. 

4 The Apoſtle, by the bleſſing of Abraham, here underftancs thoſe 
ſpiritual Bleſſings of Fuſtification, Reconciliation and Ado>tion, which 
came to Abraham upon his believing, and the imputation of 1igi 
teouſnels thereupon unto him. Chrift (he ſaith) was made £ 
Curſe for us, that all thoſe bleſſings through Him might come 01 the 
Gentiles; and ſo all the Nations of the Earth might be bleſſed i 
him. Particularly e that the Gentiles might receive the prom!? 
the Spirit, which promiſe is not to be interpreted ſo narrowly, 35 
only to fignifie its miraculous Gifts, but to be extended t0 al 
thoſe Gifts and Habits of Grace which are the effetts of the holy 
Spirit in the Hearts of Believers, whether ſan&ifying or [cali 
them ; which holy Spirit is received upon Perſons believing : * 
ch. 4.6. Rom. S. 13. 

15. Brethren, I ſpeak after the manner of men | p 
though it be bur a mans -+ covenant f;, yet if it be cOt- | 
firmedg, no man diſannulleth or addeth thereunto P. fant 

f The word here tranſlated Covenant, No$izn is ordinarily tral 
lated Teſtament, Matth. 26. 28. It ſignifies in the General, a1 
ordering or diſpoting of things; more eſpecially, a gi 
which 1s the diſpoſition of the Teſtators Goods after his on 
Now (ſaith the Apoſtle) T here argue according to fe ordinary 
methods and doings of Men, who have ſuch a relpect for a gi 
Teſtament, as that g if it be once confirmed, according oh 
methods of Law and civil Sanctions of Men, or rather by me 2 -5# 
of the Teſtator (for a Teſtament is of no force while the 7eſtator lis a 
Men will not alter it, nor will Men alter the Will or laft Twas 
of a. deceaſed Perſon, tho' it be not as yet confirmed acorn © 
the methods of humane Laws, h No Man, that 15, no juſt yert- 
will go about to diſannul it, or add to it, nor will any juft G0) 


. . . . » - rouem 
ment endure any ſuch violation of it. Hence the Apottlc arg _— 


haj 


1012. fore 
.. Was 
+ nul. 
effec 
7 
rily ff 
ment. 
to the 
was b 
ſels, 7 
(he fa 
God t 
titions 
by, G 
Rom. 4 
its fina 
before 
ter the 
numb 
from t 
here) 
whenct 
with | 
years, ( 
Gen, 4" 
cludes, 
430 Ve 
Promill 
mM.5, 18 
more 
pron1 
q it 
Earthly 
be obtai 
then *tis 
the Apc 
Rom. 11, 
70 More C 
Work ts ; 
Grace an 
and of t 
and the 


15, Poftle) 


iree Lov 


« / 


b 
n 


by ad 


t9 
ad 
added 


Ic 7 
come, 


a 7, * ordai 


al 


S YOM 


il, I, there COI 


! It was 


DO IITYLN; :vme 


ch:p. IL. _—_ 


bath the certainty and unalt-rablencſe of the Covenant of Grace with 
Ubrthams and until the death of Chriſt it was but a Covenant, or 
+ Teftament not fully confirmed, but yet analterable, becauſe the 
Covenant of that God who cannot liz nor repent 3 but by the 
J-ath of Chrift, it became a Teſtamenr, and a Teſtament ratified 
and confirmed by the death of the perſon that was the Teſtator 3 
therefore never to be diſannulled, never capable of any additions. 
Thoſe words, nor added ther2to, are fitly added, becauſe thele falic 

eachers, tho* they might pretend not to diſannul God's Covenant, 
holding ftill Juſtification by Chriſt ; yet they added therero, making 
Circum-iſion, and other legal obſervances neceſſary to Juſtification 3 
whereas by God's Covenant or Teſtament, confirmed now by the 
Death of Chriſt, Faith in ChriſtZonly was neceilary. 

1.17. 16 Now * to Ahraham and his ſeed were the pro- 
17.3. miſes made /; he ſaith not, and to ſeeds, as of many, 
but as of one, and to thy ſeed, which is Chriſt m2. 

] The promiſes, Gez. 12. 3. chap. 22. 18. In the one of which 
| places it is ſaid, Jn thee z in the other, in thy ſeed ſhall all the Natt- 
).1 ons of the Earth be bleſſed. He ſaith, promiſes, either becauſe of the 
repetition of the ſame promiſe, or taking in alſo other promiſes. 
m Some may objett againſt the Apoftle's concluſion that the pro- 
miſe reſpe&ed only one, and that was Chriſt, becauſe God ſaid, 
not ſeeds of many, bur ſeed; whereas the Term $S2e4 is a Noun of 
multitude, and fignifieth more than one: Behides that the Hebrew 
word which is uſed Ge7. 22. 18. admitteth not the Plyral number. 
But it is anſwered, That tho” the word tranſlated ſe24, admitteth 
not the Flural Number, yet had God intended more than oxe, he could 

have 2xprefſed it by words, fignifying Children or Generations, ©c. 

0M. 2. That the Term Seed, tho' a Noun of multitude, yet is often ap- 

ib plied to a ſingle Perſon, as Gen. 2. 15. (where it alſo fignifieth 

"0 Chriſt 3) Seth is called another ſeed, Ger. 4. 25. (and ſo in many 

y other places.) Some think that by Seed he meaneth Believers, and 

" ſo interpret it of Chriſt myſtical : And that the ſcop2 of the Apo- 

þ {tle in this place 1s to prove, that both the Fews and Gentzles were 

. to be juſtified the ſame way z becauſe they were juſtified in force, 

and by virtue of the Promiſe, which was not made to many, but 

« to one Church, which was to conſiſt both of Fews and Gentiles, for 

(according to the Propheſie of Caiaphas, Fobn 11.52.) Chrift died, 

that he might gather together in one the Children of God that were ſcatter- 

ed broad. The Promiſes made to Abraham, were but the Exhibition 

of the Eternal Covenant of Grace, made between the Father and his 

Son Chriſt Feſus, (who was in it both the Mediator and Surety ;) 

which Covenant was promulged, as to Alam and Noah, fo to Abra- 

hn; in theſe words, 1: thy Seed ſhall all the Nations of the Earth 

be bI-ſſed, that is, in Chriſt. From whence the Apoſtle proveth, 

That there is no Fuſtification by the works of the Law, but in and by 
Chrift, and the exerciſe of Faith in him. 

17 And this I fay, that the Covenant that was be- 

12. fore confirmed of God in Chriſt z, the law * which 


.. was four hundred and thirty years after, cannot diſan- 


3 f *! 
1 I A NS (LNG) 
* —— THT 


1 _— "2 0 "I - 3 PLS {* y oE mm 
that muſt be added 3 DUE either to rojrrain Sm, 7 775, Te ge. Or t5 


ſhew and diſcover Sin, to make Men ſee thar thoy Rood in need of 
Chrift, vid. Rome7.13. u Till Chrift the promiTd 5evd ond come, 
who Rom. 10s 4s 7s the end of the Law for Richton foro every oe 
that beli-veth;, upon whoſe coming the Law contained in Ordinan- 
ces ceaſed. That Chriſt js here to be underftood by the $24, is 
plain by the addition, to whom the Promiſe ww #1270 Somo hero 
underftand by the Seed, Chriſt and the Church, (which both make 
up Ciriſt myſtical;) and interpret this Text by Epr. 2. 14. till the 
Jews and Gentiles ſhould he both made one. w This Law (he 
ſaith) was ordained by Angels; that Law which Lute, 47s 7.5%. 
ſpeaks of as publiſhed by one Angel, The Apoftle, 22:6. 2. 2. calls 
it, the word ſpoken by Angels. We read of no Anzels, Exod. ge. CEAP> 
and 20. nor of any of the Saints ; yet Deur. 2 3. 2» Moſes, faith God 
came from Sinai, with Ten Thonſand Saints, The Law was given 
either by the Miniftry of an Angel, or by God attended with An- 
gels. x In th? hand, that 13, (ſay ſome) under the power of Chriſt 
the Mediator ; but by the Medzator, 15 rather to be underftcod 
Moſes, which agreeth with Deur. 5.5. where Meſs telleth the Fews 
thar he ſtood berwixt the Lord and them at that time, to ſhew rhem 
the word of the Lord. Nor is Chrift any where called the Me4:ror of 
the 014,. but of the New Teſt zment, Heb. 8.6. and 12. 24. 

20 Now a mcdiator is not a Mediator of one, but 
God is one y. 

Y This is a Text acknowledged by all Interpreters to be very ob- 
ſcure; not ſo much conſidered in it ſelf, (for all know, that a 
Mediator tpeaks one that goes in the middle, betwixt two Perſons 
that are at odds ; fo cannot he of one ;) as in regard of the Con- 
nexion of it with what went before ; where he told us, That the 
Law was given in the hand of a Mediator. There are various Senſes 
given of this Verſe, and the variety much ariſeth from Men's diffe- 
rent underftanding of the Mediator, in whoſe hand the Law was 
given. To me the Apoſtle ſeems to magnifie the Promiſe above 
the Law, in that the Promiſe was given to Abraham immediately 
by God (who 7s one in Effence) but the Law was given not imme- 
diately by God, but by Msſes as Mediator, who in that ation was 2 
Type of Chriſt, And God thereby ſhewed, That the Law would 
bring no Man to Life and Salvation without the one,” and only 
Mediator Chriſt Jeſus. Chyitt indeed is the Mediator of the New 
Teſtamznt, he mediated for it, he mediateth in it 5 but it was Men's 
Tranfgreſhon of the Law that brought them in need of a Nedia- 
tor, (Sin being the only thin, that ſeparateth between God and 
Man.) God 7s one, and there had been no need of mediating between 
him and Man, but for the Law which Man had tranſzrelſed. Thoſe 
that by the Mediator, ver. 19. underftand Chrijt, make this the 
Senſe; That as a Mediator ſuppoſeth two Parties at odds, fo Chrift's 
being Mediator, ſpeaks him to have reſpet to Jews and Gentiles. 
But this interpretation ſeems to make Chriſt the M-4:izror between 
Fews and Gemiles, whom (the Apoſtle ſaith) he made 4oth oe, 
breaking down the partition wall, Eph. 2.14. But we do not find the 
name of Mediator upon this account any where given unto Chritt. 


jJ--1,7 # 


14nul o, * that it ſhould make the promiſe of none 
” effect p. 
# The word tranſlated Covenant, is the ſame as before ; ordina- 
rily fignifying on-": Aiſpoſal of things in his laſt Will and Teſta- 
ment. W'1ich name is given to the Covenant of Grace, with reſpect 
to the death of Chriſt ; for tho Chrift as. yet had not died, yet he 
was by virtue of the Covenant of Redemption, and in God's coun- 
ſels, The Lamb ſlain from the foundation of the World, Rev. 13. $. This 
(he faith) was #2 Chrift (as Abraham's promiſed Seed) confirmed ol 
God to Abraham, by God's Oath, Hb. 6. 17, 18. by frequent Repe- 
titions of it, by ſuch ſolemn Rites as Covenants uſe to be conſirmed 
by, Gen. 15. 17, 18, By the Seals of Circumciſion, Gem. 17. It. 
Rom. 4. 11. By a long preſcription, Tc. though it received indeed 
its final and ultimate conſummation by the death of Chriſt,yet it was 
before many ways confirmed. o The Law was given 430 years af- 
ter the giving the Promiſe to Abraham, tho* Gene 15. 13. the round 
number of 400 years only be mentioned, which are to be counted 
from the Birth of /ſazc; yet Exod. 12. 40. they are reckoned (as 
here) 430 years from Abraham's going out of Haran, Gem. 12. 4. from 
whence to the Birth of ſac, were 25 years, Gen. 21.5. compared 
with chap. 12. 4. From the Birth of Jſaac till Facob was born, 60 
years, Ge. 25. 26. From thence till Facov went down into Ez ypt, 130 
Gen. 47. 9. where they abode 215 years. p Hence the Apoſtle con- 
cludes, that it was impoſſible that the Law, which was not given till 
439 years after the confirmation of the Promiſe, ſhould make the 
Promiſe confirmed of no effett. 
mM.5. 18 For * it the inheritance be of the law, :t is no 
more of promiſe q, but God gave iz to Abraham by 


promuſe 7. 

q If the Inheritance of the Heavenly Canaan, typified by the 
Earthly Canaan, the Promiſe of which was made to Abraham, be to 
be obtained by the fulfilling the Law, and yielding obedience to it, 
then "tis no more of the Promiſe. It is much the ſame with what 
the Apoſtle ſaid before, Rom. 4. 14. and with what he had faid, 
Rom. 11. Ge If by Grace, then it is n0 more of Works, otherwiſe Grace 1s 
70 more Grace : But if it be of Works, then it is 20 more Grace ;, otherwiſe 
ork is 10 more Work. He ſhews that there is an oppoſition betwixt 
Grace and 1York, the Law and the Promiſe : That which is of Grace, 
and of the Promiſe, is of free Love ; That which is of Works 
and the Law, is Wages, and a Reward of Debr. r But (ſaith the A- 

15, Poltle) God pave the Imheritance to Abraham by Promiſe 3 he of his 
iree Love ingaging himſelf thereunto. 

_  t9 Wherefore then ſerver the law 5s? * it was 
4 added becauſe of tranſgreſſions 7, till the ſeed ſhould 
_ Come, to whom the promiſe was made *, and it was 
a 7,” ordained by angels w in the kand * of a mediator x. 


/ 


EC - 5 50me might ſay, to what purpoſe was the Law given? as if 
"+ 1.012re could be no ule of it unle(s it were available to Juſtification. 
* 2 was (laith the Apoſtle) given after the Promiſe, not to ſup- 


Many other Senſes are given, but the firſt mentioned ſeemeth the 
moit probable, viz. That God made uſe of no Mediator in giving 
the Promiſe, but only in giving the Law, which evidenced that 
Juſtification was not only to be by it; nor had there been need of a 
true Mediator under the Goſpel, but for the Law ; Men's Tranſ- 
greſhon of which brought in a need of a Mediator ; which pro- 
ved that Juſtification could not be by the Law. 


21 1s the law then againſt the promiſes of God ? 
God forbid z; for if there had heen a law given which 
could have given life a, verily righteouſneſs ſhould 
have been by the law b. 

2 Tho! it be thus, yet there is no ſuch oppoſition betwixt the 
Law and the Promiſes, as that either of them make the other uſe- 
leſs. Far be it from me*{ ſaith the Apofile ) to aſſert any ſuch 


'thing ! they are not contrary to one another, but ſubſervient to 


on2 another. a Fcr if there had been « Law, which could by our 
perfect performance of it, have given us 4 Kighreouſneſs, wherein 
we might hare ftcod Righteous before God : 5 Then Zighreonſireſs 
ſhould have been by the Law ;, then Men might have hoped to have 
been juſtified and accepted of God by and tor juch Obzdience 
then indeed the Law had been againft the Promiſes, they hold- 
ing forth ancther Righteouſneſs, viz. the Righteonſhels of God 
from Faith to Faith. 


22 But the ſcripture * hath concluded all under *Rom.: 1. 
fin c, that the promiſe by faith of Jeſus Chriſt might 32: 


be given to them that believe 7. 

c It pleaſed Cod to give a Law, which if 44: had continued in 
his eſtate of Tnnocence, might have given Lite 3 God contidering 
Man in his lapſed State, that now 1s not poſſible, Rom. 3. 10. There 
is none Righteo, 10 not one, and Fpi. 2. 3. Ie are all Chillren of 
Wrath, 4d. That the promiſes of Lite and Salvation might be gi- 
ven to thoſe, who according to the new Covenant of the Goſpel, 
{hould receive and accept of the Mediator, and the terms of Salvation 
which God offers to us in the Goſpel ; where theſe Promiſes are exhi- 
bited upon condition of Believing. Tho' upon our firſt refleion 
upon it, it may ſeem ſtrange to us, that God having in his Lterral 
Counſels fixed the Salvation of Man upon a Covenant of Grace, 
and his believing in Jeſus Chrift, ſhould in time firft propound a 
Covenant of Works, do thz £4 live; yet upon our ſecond thoughts, 
this will appear neccffary ; fer till Man was a Tran'greifor by break- 
ing the Law, and viglating the firſt Covenant, there was no room 
for a Mediator ; no cauſe tor Men's applying themſelves to a Medi- 
ator. God therefore firſt gave out the Covenant of Werks, and ſuf- 
fered Man to break it; and then he revealed the Mediator to lap- 
ſed Man, that fo they who ſhould believe in him mizht obtain the 
Promiſe of Lite, to which by the tall they had torteited their 
right. : : 

23 But b2fore faith came e, we were kept under the 
law f, ſhunt up unto the faith watt ſtould atierward 
be revealed p. 


"1-17 10Mething wanting as to Juſtification, to preſcribe ſome Works | 
Vol. It. 


= x , 
ts } | - Betore 


% \h i 


i 
HT ERS 
Ls 
0 
> 41 $1 oÞ 
Eh 42% 7 
- 
$ : h 
i; 
$: PISUNRE - 
a 
5 
by: 
# ;-; 48" 
"7 + 
y W553: 
| EL 
' FE "" 
3 
v1'F 
( 
ft 
1% p 
" i 
F 
þ. 
F 
4 
ft; 
« 
| Mes 
SUTT4K: -4 f {1h 
| 
4 n 
! ” 
FT 4; 


Ghap. IV. GAL ATIANS. Chao, IVC: 


© e Before the Covenant of Grace, or the Dofrin of the Goſpel, | is uſed like a Servant ; ſo the time of the Lew heing as it Werpthe 
'br Chrit 'himlelf was revealed. f The Apoſtle either ſpeaks of | time of Believers non-age, thoſe who lived in that time were ws F 
all mazkind ; of whom it is true, that until God's Revelation of the | like Servants. | 1C 
Covenant of Grace, they had no other way of Salvation made known 2 But is under tutors : . | 
to thom than by th? Law of Works; or <lſe of the Jews, to whom, : BY - | r "a _ _ gOVErnours until the LUme 
thouzh before Chriſt there was a Revelation of the Goſpel, yet it | APPOINLEd OL UNC Lather 0. : 
was more dark and imperfett, fo as they were kept under the Law ; b The Heir (mentioned in the former Verſe,) though hs he an 
but few apprehending any other way of Juſtification, than by the Heir of a great Eſtate, yet isnot preſently poſſeſſed of It; but he ;; 
Works of the Law. But the Apoſtle ſaith they were but fhyr up u1- by his Father kept under Tutors and Governours, until the time 
der it; God never intended it, as that by the obſervance of which which he hath appointed when he will be pleaſed to releaſe Lim 
they ſhould be ſaved; but as even then to thoſe whom he intended from his Pupillage, and ſettle ſome part of his inheritance upon tim. 
oy lave, he made a more ſecret | 265 yrmy of _———_— es 3 Even {o WC, when we were cildren, Were in hon 
ig ” t Va ( in; r " , q Va 1 J ; ap : MN 4Vite 
od rot roman pf ; 4 rep wo gapaaends; the dage under the - elements of this world<. - Bi 
C NAd IT -CCmMIEY CltaDINNEAs e Sch Children were all Believers, the- See brebomie $25 
* ROM. 24 Wherefore, * the law h was our ſchool-malter d of Abrahm ; from 1, 
LO. 4. 


* Ch. 45. 


— 


—_— 


[ 
| 
: / 
uf. 
bi " 
7.34 
% d 
I-14 
: 
x > s 
F 
0 . 
*%; 
Fl ! 
ih 
7 
: 
s 


4 6. >” 
=. - a 


Eph. 2. the ſame. 


+ 6-6 hah 
ny 


- oy 
"it $63 > 


PX. 4 >: - = 4 _ 
l £ 
_ | 
_ L = WI... td 
IEAS4] 5 * 
_E— - _ n_yy 
IRE om oe 7 | - ; ES ay 
RR —__ —_ = 
> + IO - - £7 . _—<_ __— 


png the firſt deſigned to a Goſpel Liberty z but that was net ro 1. 641. 
to bring iu unto Chrilt ;, that we might be juſtified by enjoyed, until the fulneſs oo time tom come when Coins, 
L to ſend his Son into the World : And during the time of their now. 
age they were kept under theLaw, as a Tutor and Governoyr, 1... 
ding them unto Chriſt. He chiefly intendeth the Ceremonial 7 As 
which As 15. 10. Peter calleth a Toke, which neither they __ 
their Fatters were able ro bear. He calls their Ordinances the FP 
of the World; ſoalſo Col. 2. 20. he means that Diſcipline by 1, h 
God inftru&ed, and under which God by Moſes at firſt tutonred mn... 
World, that is, the Jews, who were that part of the World tg whom 
God pleaſed to make his Oracles known. He calls thoſe rity] 
ſervances, Elements, or Rudiments, becauſe they were the $:3 3. 
ſtruaions God ga" 2 Believers, leadins them to Chriſt; like th. 
firſt Elements, or ndiments in Grammer Learnins. = 
4 But * when the fulneſs of the time was come 4 ,.. 
God ſent forth his Son made ofa woman e, * madegr., 


der the Law f. | 
d The time, which anſwered the time appointed of the xathly 5417, 
Father, mention'd ver. 2. when that time came in which God had 
deſigned to. bring his People into the moſt perfect ſtate of Liberty, 
Which in this Life they are capable of : e God ſent forth is $1", who 
was exiftent before, (being brought forth before the Mountains oe 
Hills were ſetled 3 Prov. $. 25.) but not ſent forth until this fulnsſ 
of time came. And then e made of a1omas', conceived in the Wamh 
of the Virgin, by the Power of the Holy Ghoft overſhadowing her. 
f Made under the Law, to which as God he was not ſubjed, (heirg 
himſelf the Law-maker;) but he ſubjeted himſelf. He was horn 
in a Nation and of a Parent under the Law; he was Circumciſe, 
and ſubmitted to the Ceremonial Law : He in all things conformed 
his Life to the rule of the Law; and ſubjetted himſelf to the Curſe 
of the Law, being made a Curſe for us. Nothing of-this isqueſti 
oned, except the laſt z which yet appears alſo to have been neceſ- 
ſary by what followeth in the next Verſe 3 for how elſe could he 
have redeemed thofe, who were under the Law ? and*this agreeth 
with what we had, chap. 3. 13. 
5 To redeem them that were nnder the law 5, *that 


we might re.cive the adoption of ſons :. 

s This makes it appear, that Chriſt's being under rhe Liw muſt 
be underſtood as well of the Moral as of the Ceremonial La, that 
is, ſubje& to the Precepts of it, as well as to the Curſe of it; For it 
the end of this being born under the I aw, was 10 redeem thoſe thit were 
under it, that he had not reached by being meerly under the Cere- 
monial Law : For the Gentiles were not under that Law, but only 
under the Moral Law ; t and they alſo were to be redcemed, andto 
reccive the great Priviledge of A{4oprioz, or rather, the Rights ot a- 
dopted Children z which (ſome think) is to be underſtood here, ra- 
ther than what is ftriatly to be underſtood by the Term of Ado- 
ption, viz. a right to be called, and to be the Sons of God. Ofhers 
by Adoption underftand that full ſtate of liberty of which the Apo- 
ſtle had been before ſpeaking, in oppoſition to that ſtate of child- 
hood: and non-age in which Believers were until the times of the 
Goſpel; for chap. 5. 1. we ſhall find that that was a liberty where- 
with Chriſt made us free: And indeed this laft ſenſe ſeemeth beſt 
to agree with what the Apoſtle had before ſaid, ver. 1, 2,3« (t0 
the other ſenſes are not to be excluded.) 

6 And becauſe you are ſons «, God hath ſent forth 
* the Spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying, Aba, : 
Father w. 

4 Leſt the Jews ſhould claim the Adoption as peculiar to them, 1! 
the Apoſtle tells them that theſe Gentiles were alſo Sons: and 1n 
confirmation of that, he ſaith, w that God had ſent the Spirit of Mis 
Son into theirs hearts : Not that the Holy Spirit is not the Spirit of 
the Father, as well as of Chrif? ; but he calleth him the 87/7! vj 
Cri, becauſe he had made Adoption the end, and fruir of X'% 


faith k. | 

b Both'the Law contained in Ordinances, and the moral Law, 
-7 was our Schogl-maſter z ſerving us in the ſame ficad that a School- 
matter in a School doth, who only fitteth Children for higher de- 
orees of Learning at Univerfities. The Ceremonial ſhewed us 
Chriſt in all his Types and Sacrifices 3 the Moral Law, ſhewed us 
the abſolute need of a Mediator, as it ſhewed us fin, accuſed and 
condemned us for. it ; and it ſhewed us no help either tor the guilt 
iſt the power of it. & So that God's end 


of fin contracted, or again 
in givins us the'Law, was that we might be fitted for Chriſt, and 


obtain Juſtification by believing in him. 
25 Bur after that faith is come, we are no longer 


nnder a ſchool-maliter /. 

1 After that Chriſt, the obj2& of ſaving Faith, was in the ful- 
nk of time revealed ; and the Goſpel (which is the Dottrin of 
Faith) was fully revealed and publiſhed, the time of our non-age 
WAS OVCr. : 2 

- 26 For ye * are all the children of God by faith in 
Chriſt Jeſus m. = | 

mm All vou that believe, whether Native ſews or Gentiles, are 
the Children of God by Adoption through Faith in Jeſus Chriſt, 
*oh. 1. 12. ſo that you need not run back to th? Law to look for 
Helo and Salvation from that ; but only look unto Chriſt, to whom 
the Laws was but a School-maſter to lead you, who being fully and 
clearly revealed, you may have iinmediate recourſe to him by 
Faith, and need not to make uſe of the Jewiſh School-maſter, as 
hoping for Juſtification from the obſervances of the Law. 

27 For as many of you as have * been baptized into 


Chriſt zz, have put on Chrilt o. 

 Baptizing in Chrid, may either be underſtood of receiving the 
Sacrament of Baptiſm 3 which whoever receiveth , is not only 
baptized in the Name of Chriſt, and into the profeſſion of Chriſt ; 
| but is ſacramentally, or in a ſign, baptized into Chriſt; or elſe 
(which confidering what followeth, ſeemeth much more probably 
the ſenſe) it may lignifie a being not only baptized with water, but 
with the Holy Gho$t and fire. 0 Of thoſe thus baptized, he ſaith, that 
they kad put on Chrif; they had accepted of, and received Chriſt 
for their Juſtification, and for their SanQification. We have the 
like Phraic, Agm. 13. 14s 

28 * There 1s neither Jew nor Greek p, there 1s nei- 
ther bond nor free q, there is neither male nor female, 


x Cor. 12. for ye are all * one in Chrilt Jeſus 7. 


p In the buſineſs of Juſtification, the caſe of Fews and Greeks is 
This he ſaith, That the Galatians might not think them- 
ſelves diſadvantaged from their not being under the Law, as the 
School-maſter that ſhould lead them unto Chriſt. qg Neither doth 
Chriſt conſider the qualities and circumfrances of perſons, whether 
they be Servants or Free Men; for though they be Servants, Chriſt 
hath made them free, 1 Cor. 7. 22. Eph. 6. $. C9. 2.11. r Neither 
hath Chriſt any reſpet to Sexes. The Male Children under the 
Law had many Priviledges ; but it is all a caſe under the Goſpel 
whether perſons be Males or Females, Fews or Gentiles, rich or 
Poor, Servants or Maſters, Bond-men or Free-men. 

29 And * if ye be Chriſt's s, then are vou Abraham's 


ſeed t, and heirs according to the promiſe z. 

s Leſt theſe Galatians ſhould be diſcouraged, becauſe the Promiſe 
was made to Abraham and his ſeed, and they were not the ſeed of 
Abraham ; he tells them, if they were Chriſt's, that is, if they truly | 
believed in him, and were implanted into him, That t then they 
were the ſeed of Abraham ; that ſeed, to which the Promiſe was 
made; and tho' not Heirs of 4braham according to the fleſh, yet 


* oh, 
12." 
Ch.% 


lik 


* Mar 


ptionz and Redemption is every-where made the work of the o_ 
The Apoſtl2 faith Rom. g. 4. that 1he Adoption belonged to the ow” 
elites: the Jews were the firſt People whom God dignifed with © 


Heirs according to the Promilez vid. Rom. 9. 7, 8 - 
- = 4 


As the Liw ts a School-maſter, ſo the Jews were under its Bondage, or 


” on 4 
—t IE; &e's 
G's au a 


"XC 


— 


"F, 
he. Ol 
— 
* , 


as Heirs under Guardians; but ſince the fulne(s of time, and fulfilling of 
the Promiſe, all in Chri$t are redeemed from the Law, receive the Ad9- 
prion end Spirit and are Feirs, 1—7. [ reproves them that being 
Gentiles, they ſhould aft:r their Converſion take on them the Toke 
of outward Ceremonies and legal Obſeruances, $8 —— 10. It remem- 
breth their good will ro him, and his to them, and ts jealovs over them, 
by reaſon of the perverſe Zeal of falſe Teachers, 11 —20. He argues 
with them our of th? Law $ and by the Types of Taac and Tſhmael ; 
and their Mothers Sarah and Agar: as alſo of Mount Sinai and the 
City Jeruſalem, whereby the two Covenants are ſignified: He teacheth 
that the Inheritance js to b2 obtained by Promiſe, tho with perſecution, 
and that others ſhall be ca} out, 21 — 21. 
I Ow I fay, that the heir ſo long as he ts a child, 
X Hhttereth nothing from a ſervant though he be 
Lord of I 2. 
7 The Anoitle had before determined, that the whole body of 
$i! as believed in Jeſus Chriſt, were that ſeed of 4brithim to which 
the Promile was made; and fo Heirs of the Promiſes mad2 to 
Im; yer iO, that as it is among Men, though a Child be a great 
Heir, and Lord of a greai tftate, yet while be is under age, he 


name of his Sons, this firft-born, Exod. 4. 22, and ſo many 0! them 45 
believed alſo received the Spirit, Ezeb. 36. 27. but the full effuſion 
of the Spirit was reſerved to Goſpel-times; and until the Um- 
that Chrift aſcended, Fohy 7. 39. and 16. 7. After which the Spirit 
was poured out in the days of Pntecoft, Acts 2. whoſe Effetts _ 
evident, not only in power to work Miracles, and ſpeak WAIION 
tongu2s, (which were not common to all Believers;) but allo ae 
variety of ſpiritual gifts and habits, amongſt which t215 Was one, 
teaching them to cry, Abba Father. w Crying, it is expornaet ©, 
3. 15. wher2by we cry, that is, through whoſe influenc? and wor ns 
in us we cry Abba Father, that is, Father, Father : hich not —_ 
fienifieth the Spirit's influence upon Believers words in Prayer, | gy 
conceived in the heart, then uttered by the lips; but chietly —_ 
habits of Grace, by which we pray acceptably ; Fzith and Pn 
zeſs, by which we call God Father; 2eal and fervei), by v m_—_— 
are importunate with God, and ſay, Father, Father. V\ __ = 
now not the Priviledges of Jews only, but of thee 047 on 
alſo who were by nature Gentiles, and Strangers 00 God; an id 
certain evidence of their concern in the Redemption 97 Cliriit, al 

that they alſo might expett Salyation from bm. 


$49 
2 / 
un = Pljiito 


- \Where- 


in they 
them, 
no Fry 
Of this 
and We 
\ hole 
ling | 
Judgin 
Precep 


ly 


* Rot 
15 


| 
f 
j 


T% GAL ATI 4 Mi 


: py ſ 4 . | "Ws - - 
- Wherefore thou + art no more a ſervant y, but; ſuch Days, as was their Duty in Obedience to the Moral L2w to on- 


a ſon z, and it a ſon, then an heir of God through 


Chriſt a. 


+ Thou that art a believing Gentile, as well as the believing 1/r4e- 


litzs, »y- Art #0 more a Servart, not in that ſtate of ſervile ubjecti- 
on to the Law? 2 But-in a more excellent ſtate of liberty ; like 
arto that of Sons that have attained to a full, and ripe Age. Chriſt 
told his Diſciples, Fokn 15. 15. that he did not call them Servants, 
for Servants knew not what their Lord did ; but he had freely 
communicated to them what he had received from the Father. The 
Apoſtle here faith, they were Sons, Sons by Adoption 5 which is 
the higheſt notion of freedom and liberty. a And this entituled them 
to an Inheritance ;' if Sons, then Zirs, Which agreeth with Rom. 8. 
17. and as it is with Sons and Heirs, tho' the Inheritance comet} 
not fully to ther till the death of the Parent, yet while they live 
they are in a far better condition than Servarrs : So the believing 
Gentiles being made Sons and Heirs of God through Chriſt, tho' 
they were to ſtay a while for the Inheritance reſerved for the Sons 
of God in the Heavens, yet their State was much better than that 
of Servants ; for though they were obliged to ſerve the Lord, yet 
they ſerved him without ſervile fear, and were no otherwile Ser- 
vants than Sons are alſo Servants to their Father. — 
8 Howbeit then when ye knew not God b, * ye did 


| fervice unto them which by nature are no gods c. 
b When ye knew not God, as he is, or as ye ought to have known 


ſome knowledge of God, Rom. 1. 21.) c You paid Religious Homa- 
ges unto Idols; which are Gods, not by nature, and eſſence, but on- 
Iy in the opinion of Tdolaters. Which was a more miſerable Bon- 
dage and Servitude than the Jews were under, who knew the true 
God ; tho' in the time, when the Church was like the Heir un- 
der Age, it was ſubje& to the Law contained in Ordinances, and 
under the yoke of the Law. 
.9, 9 But now * after that you have known God 4, or 
+.12.rather are known of God e, * how turn ye Þ again to 
0.229 * the weak and beggarly + elements, whereunto ye de- 
Dil Gre again to be in bondage f ? 
7* 4 After that you are come to a true, and ſaving knowledge of 
. God in' Chriſt, and know God as he is. e Or rather after you are 
Jodi received of God, approved of him, made through Chrift accepta- 
W ble to him; which is mach more than a true comprehenſion of 
God in your Notion and Underſtanding. f How turn you back 
again to the legal ſervices of the Ceremonial Law, which he calleth 
Flements-or Rudiments, becauſe they were God's firſt Tnſtruetions 
given to his Church for his Worſhip, to which he intended after- 
ward a more perfe& way of Worſhip. He calls them weak, becauſe 
they brought nothing to perfettion ; and. the obſervance of them 
was impotent as to the Juſtification of a Soul, as all the Law is. 
He calls them beggerly in compariſon of the more rational, ſpiritual 
way of Worſhip under the Goſpel. f He faith, that they deſired to be 
in Bondage unto theſe, becauſe they would not ſee and make uſe of 
the liberty from them, which Chriſt had: purchaſed. 05j. Tt may 
be objected, that the Galatians were not Educated in Fu42iſm ; how 
then doth the Apoſtle charge them with turning back to them ? 
Anſw. This hath made ſome think, that, by the wetk and 52ggerly 
Flements mentioned in this Verſe, the Apoſtle meaneth their Gen- 
tile Superſtitions and Idolatries ; but this is not probable, the Apo- 
ſtle all along the Epiſtle charging them with no ſuch Apoſtacy. 
Others think, that he in this Verſe chiefly refleteth on the b2lieving 
Jews, who afterwards returned again to the uſe 5f the Law. But 
why may not we rather ſay, that he calleth their Fact a turning back, 
not ſo much with reference to their Perſonal Practice, as to the 
State of the Church 5 which was once under thoſe Elem=nts, but by 
the coming of Chriſt was brought into a more perfect State. So 
that for them who are called into the Church in the time of this its 
more perfed State, for them to return to the Bondage of the T.aw, 
that was truly to tur» back; if not to any Prattice of their own, 
which they had caſt off, yet to a State of the Church, which the 
Church of God had now out-grown. 


m14, 10 * Ye obſerve days s, and months h, and times z, 
and years k. 


F215. 8 Tf we had any evidence that theſe Galatians were relapſed to 


their Gentile Superſtitions, theſe Terms might be underſtood of 
ſuch days, Gc. as they kept in honour to their Idols. But the Apo- 
{le throughout the whole Epiſtle, not refle&ing upon them for any 
{uch groſs Apoſtacy (as returning to the Vanities of the Heathen 
in which they formerly lived ;) but only for Judaizing, and uſing 
the Ceremonies of the Jewiſh Law, as neceffary to be obſerved, 
beſides their believing in Chrift, for their Juſtification 3 it is much 
more probable that he meaneth by 4ays the Jewiſh Feſtivals, ſuck 
as their New Moons, &c. By þ Months, © the firſt and the ſeventh 
Month, when they religioutly faſted. 7 By Times, their more ſo- 
lemn times ſuch as were their Feafts of Firſt-Fruits, Tabernacles, &c. 
And by & rears, their years of Fubilee, the ſeventh and the fiftierh 
Texr, His meaning is, that they took themſelves to be under a religi- 
ous Obligation to obſerve theſe Times as ftill commanded by God. 

11 I am afraid of you, leſt I have beſtowed upon 


you labour in vain /. 

_ 1 Paul knew that with reference to himſelf, he had not laboured 
n vain z he might ſay with 1{ziah, Though Iſrael be not gathered, 
Yet 1 ſhall be glorified. He had told the Corinthians, that he knew 
lie ſhould be a ſweet ſzvour ro Ged, as well in them that periſhed as 
in them that ſhould be ſaved ; but he ſpeaks with reference to 
them. A faithful Minifter accounteth his Labour lo#{ when he ſeeth 
no Fruits of it upon the Souls of his People. Nor was Paul afraid 
ot this as to the fincerer part of the Church, - who truly believed, 
and were juſtified ; but he ſpeaketh this with reference to the 
hole Rody of this Church. That which he feared, was their fal- 
ling back from their profeſſion of Chriftianity to Fudaiſm, as 
Judging the obſervation of their Jewiſh Days neceſſary by Divine 
Precept to Chriſtians. Nor doth be ſpeak of the obſervatiqn of 

Vol. II. 


ſerve, which commandeth the obſervation cf a ſeventh Day for 
the weekly dabbath, and Þives a liverty for ſetting apart othet 
Days, and the commanding the obſervation of them, to take no- 


| tice of, and acknowledge God in emergent Provid-ncess But he 


[4 


hir1, or as fince you have known him, (for even the Heathen have | 


; only ſpeals of Days impoſed by the Ceremonial Law, and Men's R ©- 


ligious obfervation of them as tved to it by a Divine Precept, by 
which they made them a part of Worſhip. We have a liberty to 
et apart any Day for God's Worſhip, and Maziſtrates have a liberty 
to {ct apart particular Days for the acknowledgment of God inn 
emergent Providences, whether of Mcrcy or ]Judsment ; but none 
hath a power to make a Day Holy, ſo as that it ſhall bea Sin againſt 
God for all to Labour therein z much leſs hath any a liberty to 
keep Jewiſh Holy-days. ; 

12 Brethren, I beſeech you be as I am, for I am as 
ye are c, you * have not injured me at all 4. 

© Be as friendly to me as IT am to von ({-e the like Phraſe, 
1 A7ngs 22. 4.) d But how doth the Apoſtle ſay they had not injur-4 
him at all? When it is manifeſt they had defamed him. Arſm. He 
had forgiven, or was ready to forgive this to them z he had nodefire 
or defign to be reveng'd on them. Or in this particular thins of 
Fudaizing, for which he had been refle&ing upon them, they had 
done him no perſonal Injury, it was only his care for, and love to 
their Souls, which had drawn out this Diſcourſe from him; not any 
particular Prejudice to them, or any defire he had to take any Re- 
venge upon them, for any perſonal Injury done to himſelf, 

13 Ye know how * through infirmity of the fleſh { 
preached the goſpel to you at the firſt e. 

e The Scripture having not given us a particular account of 
Paui's Circumfitances, when he firſt preached the Goſpel to the G4- 
latians; we are at a loſs to determine what thoſe Infirmities were 
which Paul here ſpeaketh of, more than that he calls them Infrmi- 
ties of the Fleſh. By which may be underſtood, either the baſeneſs 
and comtemptibleneſs of his Preſence (which the falſe Teachers at 
Corinth objected to him, 2 Cor. 10. 10.) or ſome Podily Sicknels 
which Pan! had at that time (as ſome of the Ancients gueſs;) or 
his Sufferings for the Goſpel, which were thoſe Infirmities wherein 
he choſe to Glory, 2 Cor. 11. 30. 

14 And my temptation which was in my fleſh ye de- 


I 


ſpiſed not, nor rejected f, but received me * as an an- 
gel of God, even * as Chriſt Jeſus g. 


Chap. IV. 


* 2Cor: + 1971 
| 
5" if 
i 
Fl 
Wii 


2s 
; 


* Mal.2.7« 
* Mat. 10 


ft The Apoſtle faith, they were ſo far from injuring him (as he 49 FP 
had ſaid ver/. 12.) that they had expreſſed great kindneſs ro him : John 13: | 
For tho' when he firſt came among them to Preach the Goſpel, he 20» 


was a Man of no great Preſence z but, in the judgment of ſome, 
Vile and Baſe z or was full of Bodily Weakneſs and Diſeaſes; was Per- 
ſecuted by Men; yet they did not rcjet nor deſpiſe him for thoſe 
Temptations he had in the Fleſh : By which he means, the ſame things 
he before meant by Infirmities, for both Bodily Weaknefſes and Suf- 
rings for the Goſpel,are Temprarions,or as theWord fignifieth,Tria!s. 
& Nay (faith he) you were fo far from rejeting, or deſpiting me 
upon that account, that (on the contrary) you received me, as if 
T had been an Angel; yea, if Jeſus Chriſt himſelf had come among, 
you, you could not have been more kind to him than you were to 
me. This he tells them, partly to let them know, that what he 
had ſpoken he had not ſpoke ont of any ill will or prejudice to them 
but. partly to retain their good Will, that they might not ſhew them- 
ſelves uncertain and unconftant in their Judgment and Aﬀettions, 
and partly (as the following Verſe teſtifieth) to ſhew the levity of 
ſome of them, who had too much forgotten their firſt judgment 
of him, and value for him. 


15 + Where is then the bleſſedneſs you ſpake of þ? FOr, whet 
for I hear you record, that if it had beex poſſible, you 94 #hen- 


would have pluckt out your own eyes and given them 


fo me z. 

'b Some underſtand the Pleſſ-dneſs here ſpoken of in a paſkre 
Senſe ; you were then a bleſſed and happy People, receiving the 
Dottrin of the Goſpel in the Truth and Purity of it 5 what is now 
become of that Blefſedneſs ? But both the preceding, and the fol- 
lowing Words, ſeem to rule the Senſe otherwiſe, viz. where is that 
Bleſſ-dneſs which you predicated of me i? You call:d me then 
Bleffed, and ſhewed me ſuch a dear AﬀeRion that you would, if 
it would have done me good, have parted with what was deareſt 
to you. 

16 Am I therefore become your enemy becauſe I tell 
you the truth & ? 

k& What hath now alter'd your Mind, or made you hare a worſe 
Opinion of me ? Wherein have T offended you, or done you any 
harm ? IT havedone nothing but revealed to you the truth of God, 
am I therefore become your Enemy ? Or do you account me your 
Enemy upon that account ? 


17 They / * zealouſly afie& you m, brt not well » : *Rom.104 


1 
i 


yea, they would excjude - you o, that you might at- _ 
2C Or. Il, 


fect them p. 


1 The falſe Teachers that have perverted you as to the Faith of -” [ 
+ Or, %% | 


the Goſpel. m Pretend a great warmth of Aﬀettion for you; # but 
in this they do not well, nor tor a good end. o They would. ex- 
clude you from our good Opinion and Aﬀettion. p That they might 
have all your Love and Reſpet ; and fo by the ruin of our Repu- 
tation with you, they might build up their own Reputation. | 
18 But ir is good to be zealoutly attected always in 
a good thing s, and not only when I am preſent with 


you h. |: 

g The Apoſtle in the former Verſes had been ſpeaking of a great 
Zeal or warmth of Aﬀettion ( for that Zeal tignifieth) which 
theſe Galatians had for, and declared towards him, when hz 
firft preached the Goſpel amongft th2m 3 and alto of a great 
warmth and degree of Aﬀecttion which theſe talfſe Teachers had 
pretended to this Church. Theſe Words are ſo delivered that 
they are applicable to cither of theſe ; but the latter Words ſeem 

: (5 1 2] to 


Fit 


{_hap. IV. 


I'hiiem- 
} 

_, c 
Yaille 1.15. 


+ Or, 42 
+. > 4 ) > LIT 
t Co ,TXC ; 

Fi 


J ar Js 


+* Gen. 16. 


15. 
+ Heb.11. 
[1. 


* Rom. g. 
7 3. 


*Or,Teſti- 
Mets. 

4 Gr. St- 
F!. 


+ Ox, 
7:C 1 e 
eau WIS. 


to make tham moſt properly applica®le to the former ; ſothe Term 
{ Alw. is 2m pharicals, There wasa time, when you were very warm 
vo" 4vur love to me; the caule being good, your warmth of afte- 
+#i912 ouzht not to have abated, but continued always, and not h 
only while you ſaw me, and 1 was preſent with you. : 

10 * My lime children - of whom 1 travel in birth 
at tin &, uatil Chriftt be tormed in you /. 

"+ By callirg them little Childr-n, he both hints to them that he 
was their Sp'ritual Tather, and had begotten them to Chritt and 
that they were as yet weak in the Faith, not grown men, but as yer 
little Children; and alſo hints to them, the tender affetion he 
had towards them 3 which was the ſame as of a Mother to her little 
Children; though they did not own and honour him as their ſpi- 
ritual Father, yethe loved them as his little Childrewy. k FOr whom 
lam in as gr-at pain, through my earneſt defire for the good of 
vour Souls, as the Woman is that is in travel for the bringing torth 
of a Child. 1 Till Chris} be fully and perfectly forme 77 you; that 
is, till you are brought off from your 4+4.iſm, and opinion of the 
neceflity of ſuperadding the works of the Law to the Faith of Chriſt 
in order to your Juſtification, and be rooted in the Truth and eſta- 
bliſhed in the liberty of the Goſpel, with which Chriſt hath made 
you tree. I 
" 20 [deſire to be preſent with you now mz, and to 
change my voice », for I + ſtand in doubt of you o. 

1m T wiſh circumſtances ſo concurred that I could be preſent with 

you. # That I might uſe my tongue towards you as T ſaw occaſion 3 
*either commending, or reproving, or exhorting, as I ſaw Cauſe. 
0 For 1 do not knouw what to think of you; I am afraid of your 
fallins awav from the profeſſion of the Goſpel to Judaiſm. 

21 Tell me, ye that delire to be under the law p, do 


ye not hear the law q ? : 

p You that cannot be content to receive Jeſus Chrift alone for 
Tuſtification ; but have a mind to maintain a neceſſity of obedi- 
ence to the Law of Circumciſion, and other Judaical Rites. q Do 
you not bear the Lam, the Law which curieth every one who continu- 
"oth not in all that is therein written todo it? or rather the ftory 
which follows; which is taken outof one of the Pooks of the Law, 
which the Apoſtle makes a myſtical Revelation of the divine Will, 
that there ſhould come a time when Circumcition ſhould be caft 


out. 

22 For it is written, that Abraham had two ſons, 
the one * by a bondmaid, the + other by a free wo- 
man 7. 

7 The ſubſtance of this is written, Gerefis 26. where we read of 
Abraham's having /ſhmael by Hagar his bond-woman z and Gey. 21. 2. 
where we read of the birttof zac whom he had by Sarah who was 
his Wife. 

23 But he who was of the bond-women * was born 
after the fleſh /, but he of the free-woman was by 
promiſe ?. Gs 

{ They were both (in a ſenſe) born after the Fleſh, vize ina natu- 
ral way and courſe of generation 3 but after the fleſh is phinly in this 
Verſe oppoſed to by promiſe : and the meaning is, that 1ſhmael, the 
ſon of #7g4r, was not that ſan of Abraham to whom the promiſe was 
made, that in him all the Nations of the Earth ſhould be bleſſed, Gen. 
15.4. chap. 17. 19. Iſaac is ſaid to have been born after the promiſe, 
either becauſe God gave Jſaac to Abraham, in complement, or ful- 
filling of the promiſe made to him, that he ſhould havean Heir out 
of his own loins 3 or becauſe the mighty and miraculous power of 
God was ſeen in his production, inabling Abrah:m at thoſe years 
to beget, and S:rah to bear a Child, when both their bodies were 
as dead. | : 

24 Which thingsare an allegory «; For theſ> arc the 
two * covenants w, the one from the mount -| Sina, 
which gendreth to bondage x, which 1s Agar. 

z That is called an Allegory when one thing is learned out of 
another, or ſomething is myſtically ſiznified and to be underſtood 
further than is expreiſed. The Scripture hath a peculiar kind of 
Allegories, wherein one thing is ſignified by and under another 
thing. The thing here fignitying, was Abraham's Wite and Concu- 
bine, Sarah and &:gar. w The Apoftle faith, theſe ſignified the 
two Covenants (for that's the meaning of, are). So as here we have 
one Text more, where the verb ſubſtantive is put for ſipnifieth: and it 
vill be hard to aſſhgn a reaſon why it ſhould not be fo interpreted in 
the inſtitution of the Lord's Supper (notwithſtanding the Papiſts 
and Lutherans ſo earneſt contending to the contrary.) The'very word 
is here uſed, Lea, that is uſed"in the inftiturion of the Lord's 
Supper. Here it is, theſe are the two Covenants or Teſtaments; there, 
ths # the New Covenant. The Apoſtle calls them two Covenants, 
(whereas they were but oze,) with reference to the time of their 
extibition, and manner of their Adminiftration, in which they 
much differed. Nor muſt we underftand the Apoftle as fignifying 
to us by theſe words, that Moſes wrote the Hiſtory of Sarah and 
Hagar, With ſucha deſign and intention 3 but only that that Hiſto- 
ry is very epplicable to the two Covenants ; and we ſhall find verſe 
27. the Apoſtle juſtifying this application from the authority of 
the Prophet J/:7ah. And herein he complied with the general 
ſenſe of the Jews ; who judged that there was not only a literal, 
but a myſtical ſenſe alſo of thoſe Hiſtories of the Patriarchs. x The 
one Covenant was that of the Law delivered from mount $S7na:, 
this was like Hagar, for as Zagar was her ſelf a Pond-woman, and ſo 
her Child did partake of the condition of the Mother, and Hapar 
bare a Bond-man or Servant ; ſo the Law (which he calls a Covenant, 
becauſe of the ſtipulation of obedience from the people to che Will 
of God revealed, and declared,) left thoſe that were under it in a 
ſtate of bondage or ſervitude, 

25 jor this Agar 1s mount Sinat in Arabia y, and 
# anſwereth to Jeruſulem which now is z, and is in 
hondige with her children 4. 

* Agar the bondwoman fitly repreſented Mount Sinai, the 


eountain ig Arbiz, trom which ths Law was given z; And Fern | 


GB HLATIANY 


ſatem which now 1, anſwereth to Meunt Sing) \ for as 51 Manes. 
che Law was given in a terrible matiner, G now #:r4ſy,.:. 1 
. ſear of-the Scr:52s and Phariſees, who are the Doctors of = ag 
' and rigidly pres the obſervation of ir. 2 By which th. Tor Law, 

© OA! are 


= 


| kept in bondage : The Apoſile ſpeaketh not here of the Civil Pk 
i 1Þ 


| tude that the Fews were in under the Romans, to whom 
| now Tributaries, but of that Religious ſervitude 
| Scrives and Phariſees kept them to their legal ſervices. 


tiey wer 
n Which the 


26 * Bur Jeruſalem which is above, is free þ, which + 7; 
. . wil 313.9 
is the morher of us all c. He. 
b The new Covenant, or the diſpenſation of the Goſpel, or the 22 Ds 


Chriftian Church z which is above, or from «bove, "which 1 
to Sarah, and is ſaid ro be above, becaule revealed from Hear 
Chritt, ſerft out of the boſom of the Father, not as the Law 
revealed upon Farth, upon Mount $Sin2/. Hence Apoſtate; fro 
the Dottrin of the Goſpel, are ſaid to turn from him who hhetok 
rom Heaven, Feb. 12.25. Orelle it is ſaid to be abote, becauſe b 
is the aſſembly of the fir vorn written in Heaven, Ver-23. Hence t! ; 
Goſpel Church is called the Zexvenly Hieruſulem, Ver. 22. Of thi. 
Golpel Church the Apoſtle ſaith, that it is free, 2. e. free from the 
yoke and bondage of the Ceremonial Law, or from the Couenng 
and curſe of the Law. c Which Church he ſaith is the Mother of 2} 
Believers, they imbracing the ſame Faith, and walking in the ame 
ſteps, from whence was eaſfie for the Galatians to conclude, th 
freedom and liberty alſo from the Law. 


27 For it is written, Rejoyce thon barren that he. 
reſt not; break forth and cry, thou thar travaileft no: 
for the deſolate hath many mo children,then ſhe which 
hath an husband b. 


b It is written, Iſa. 54. 1. Some think that the Apoſtledoth hys 
allude to that of the Prophet, and that the ſenſe of the Prophet was 
only to comfort the Fews, whoſe City, though, it ſhould be for a 
preſent time barren, thin of Inhabitants, during the time f the 
' Babyloniſh Captivity z yet it ſhould be again repleniſhed with yeo- 

ple, and be more populous than other Cities. But the Prophet 
ſeemeth rather to interpret that Prophetie, than meerly to ailude 
to it 3 ſo that Verſe is one of thoſe Prophetical Paſſages about the 
| calling of the Gentiles, (of which are many in that Prophet.) In 
this ſenſe, the Gentzles are to be underſtood under the notion of the 
Woman that was barren and deſolate. The Church of the Fews isre- 
preſented under the notion of a Woman that had an Husband and 
Children. The Prophet, by the Spirit of Propheſie, calleth upon 
the Geziles, that brought forth no Children to God, and to hom 
God was not an Husband, to Rejoyce, and to cry our for Foy, forthere 
ſhould be more Believers, more Children brought forth to Gag, 
among, them, than were among the Fews:; So as the Church 
of the Gentiles are compared to Sarah, who was a long time barren, 
but then brought forth the Child of the Promiſe, the Seed inwhich 
all the Nations of the Earth were to be bleſſed. 


28 Now we, brethren, as Iſaac was, are the chil- 
dren of promiſe e. 


c 1ſaac was the promiſed Seed, Gen. 21. 12. Rom. g. 9. the Apo- 
ſtle tells the Galatians that the believing Gentiles were (as [(uxc) the 
Children of the promiſe. Iſazc being both, not by virtue of any pive 
creative virtue in his Parents, which was now dead in them, Fin. 4 
19. but by virtue of the promiſe, and by a power above nature, 
was a Type of the believing Gentiles, who are a Spiritual Secd, and 
that Zeed to whom the promiſe was made, being Members of Chriſt 
by Faith ; So as the Fews had no reaſon ſo much to glory as they 
did, that Abrabam was their Father, for thoſe amongft them that 
believed not, were but this carnal Seed, believers only were the 
Spiritual Seed, the Children of the Promiſe : To which the believing 
Gentiles had the ſame claim with the believing F-ws, anda much 
better than thoſe of them that believed not in Chrift. 


29 Bur as then he that was born after the feſh 4, 
perſecuted him that was born after the ſpirit e, wen 0 
it 15 NOW f. 

d As it was in Abraham's time, Jhmazl, who was horn ina meer 
carnal and ordinary way of Generation : e Perſecuted 1/zac,by mock- 
ing at him, Gey. 21. 9g, Who was born by virtue of the promile, 
and the mighty power of God, inabling Sarah at thoſe years £0 
conceive, and Abraham to beget a Child. f Even ſo it isnow, the 
carnal Seed of Abraham, the Fews perſecute the Chriſtians which are 
his Spiritual Seed, From whence we may obſerve, that the Holy 
Ghoſt accounteth mockings of good people for Religion, Perſccutt- 
on. SO Heb. 11,36. others had tryals of cruel mockin:gs, and we know 
theſe were one kind of the ſufferings of Chriſt. By this allo the 
Apoſtle doth both confirm what he had before ſaid, in making 
Hagar a Type of the Fews, and Saraha Type of the Gentiles, the Fews 
perſecuting the ſeed of Chrift, as Zagzrs ſeed perſecuted /{z- 


30 Nevertheleſs, what faith the ſcripture ? Caſt 


Wis 


ls 


Ny 


bond-woman ſhall not be heir with the ſon of che frec- ;;. 


| WOman gF, 


g Weread Gey. 21. 10. that when Sarah faw Iſhmael mocking at 
her Son 1/zac, ſhe was not able to bear it, but ſpeaketh to her Hut- 


| band Abrahamyfaying,Caſt out this bond-woman,and h2r.S1n,tor the $0n of 


this bond-woman ſhall not be heir with my $0#,2ven TAac. The principal 
delign of the Apoftle ſeems to be by that. Type of the cjettion of 
Iſhmael out of Abraham's Family, to let them know the Mind and 
Will of God. 1. Concerning the exclufion of the Law from a Part- 
nerſhip with Chriſt, and the Goſpel, in the juſtificacion of 10n-7s 
before God. 2. Concerning the rej2ction of the F-ws, Upon che 
calling of the Gentiles. 3. Concerning the toral doftruttion 0! the 
Jewiſh Church and Nation, for their perſecution of Chriſt, and 
the Chriſtian Church. Re 

31 So then brethren, we are not chuldrea of Le 
boud-woman, but of the free h. 


þ The 


nHwereth 12. & 7 
by £ 1: 


out the bond-woman and her ſon, for * the ſon of the « jj 


Chap, Iy hap 


$15- 5 


cum 
:] 
Circu 
the ( 
Chril 
doub! 
CIrcut 
durin 
Faith, 
above 
time 1 
of the 
obſery 
as nec 
indeed 
1s able 
mhom | 
neither 
the end 


were r 
were c| 
time to 
that by 
were of 
all theo 
and pro 
crament 
Goſpel, 
obſerve 
Which w; 
thing to 
another 
But did 
themſely 
ledge the 
ur? (up 
Charged f 
Who was 1 
fhe curſe 
loever 2d; 
tothe juſt 
ormer Ve 
tlie whole 


4 Chi 


VM hap: Y. 


G A L 


þ The Church of rhe Gentil-s, was not Typitizd In Hagar, but 
in S115 from whence the ſcop? or the Apottlc 15 tO conclude, 
that w2 are not under the Law oblizec to Fu aic! Objervances, but 
ire freed from them, and are juſtified by Faith in Chriſt alone, 
not by the works of the Law. By this conclution, the Apoſtle 
makzeth way for the Exhortation in the following Chapter, prel- 
fins them to ſtand fall in their liberty. 

Gt AFP. 
1h extorterh them 10 maintain their Chriſtian Liberty, elſe will Chris 
he to them of none effe1 z, and we can only by the Righteouſneſs of faith 

kope for Heaven 3” and nothing but faith working by love avails 10 


acceptance with God, 1 —-- 6. He tenderly expoſtulates withthem, 
12. He exborteth them not to uſ2 their Liberty to Licentiouſ- 
reſs or Contention, but to Love and Holineſs, 13 ——— 15. He de- 
(ribeth the contrary works of the Fl:ſv and Spirit, that they may mor=- 

tiſie the Fleſh and walk in the Spirit, 16 -—-— 26. 
5:21 CYTand faſt therefore in * the liberty wherewith 
16.49 Chriſt hath made us free 4, and be not iutangled 


again with the yoke of bondage 6. | 

2 The liberty here ſpoken of, is a right which a Perſon hath to 
aRion, that he may do, or forbear the doing of things at his plea- 
ſare, as he apprehends them ſuitable or not, without the let or hin- 
derance of another ; 'T his is exther in things of a Civil nature, or 
of a Spiritual nature.” The former is not underſtood here, for it 1s 
nane of the liberty with which Chriſt hath made us free, for Sub- 
jects to be free from the lawful commands of Princes, or Children 
ro be free from the laws of their Parents, or Servants to be free 
from the commands of Maſters. There is hardly any Book in the 
New Teftament wherein Obedience of this nature, in things that 
arelawful,is not either exemplified as our duty in Chritt and theApo® 
Ales; or urged by very ſtrong Arguments. The 1:berty here, 1s 
that freedom from the law, of which the Apoſtle hath been ſpeak- 
ing all along this Epiſtle : From the curſe of the Moral Law, and 
from the coaQion of it, and principally from the Ceremonial Law 
contained in Ordinances. This iz the liberty which Chrift hath 
purchaſed for us, and in which the Apoſtle willeth all Believers to 
{tind faſt, 5b Not being again intangled with a yoke, which God 
had taken off from their Necks. The Apoſtles in their Synod, 
AZ. 15. 10» had called it a yoke, which zeither they, nor their fathers 
mere able to bear. 

2 Behold, I Paul fay unto you, that * if ye be cir- 


cumciſed, Chriſt ſhall profit you nothiug c. 

c It is manifeſt, that the Apoſtle is ſpeaking here concerning 
circumciſion, looked upon as neceſſary to Juſtification, now under 
the Goſpel-State. For under the Old Teſtament undoubtedly 
Chriſt profited the Fathers, tho' circumciſed , yea, Chrift un- 
doubtedly profited Timothy, even under the Goſpel, tho' he was 
circumciſed, Afs 16. 3. that being done to prevent a ſcandal, and 
during a time, whilft for the gaining of the Fews to the Chriſtian 
Faith, the Jewifh Ceremonies tho' dead, were (as it were) kept 
above ground, unburied for a time. But for men, after a ſufficient 
time indulged them for their ſatisfa&ion, concerning the abolition 
of the Ceremonial Law, ſtill to adhere to it, and Religiouſly to 
obſerve the Rites of it, as in obedience to a Divine Precept, and 
as neceſſary, over and above Faith in Chriſt for Juſtification, was 
indeed to deny Chrift, and diſclaim his ſufficiency to ſave. Who 
is able to ſave ro the utmoſt them that come to God by him, and beſides 
whom there is no name piuen under Heaven, by which men can be ſaved, 
neither there ſalvation in any other, Aﬀs 4. 10, 11, 12. and who is 
the end of the Law, for righteouſneſs to every one that believeth, Rom. 
10.4. So that to join any thing with Chrift, and Faith in him, 
for the Juſtification of the - Soul before God, js plainly to deny, 
and diſclaim him, and to make him infignificant to us. This Paul] 
affirms with an Apoſtolical Authority and Gravity, 1 Paul ſay unto 
Jott | 

3 For I teſtifie again to every man that is circumct- 
ſed, that he is a dehtor to do the whole law 4. 

4 This muſt be underftood either of the Gentiles only (who 
vere never under any obligation to circumciſion,) or of ſuch as 
vere circumciſed, with an opinion that it was neceſſary at this 
time to Juſtification and Salvation. Of theſe the Apoſtle ſaith, 
that by this they made themſelves debtors ro the whole Law. If they 
were obliged to one part of the Law, they muſt alſo be obliged to 
all the other parts of it. Beſides that circumciſion was an owning 
and profeſſing ſubjeaion to the whol Law. As the receiving the Sa- 
crament of Baptiſm is a profeſſed ſubjeaing our ſelves to the whole 
Goſpel. 0bj. But (may ſome ſay) ought not then all Chriſtians to 
obſerve the Law ? Anſw. Not the Ceremonial and Political Law, 
which were peculiar to the Jewiſh Church and State. 2. It is one 
thing to be under an obligation to our utmoſt to fulfil the Law, 
another thing to acknowledge our ſelves debtors ro the Law. 0bj. 
Bur did not the Fathers then by being circumciſed, acknowledge 
themſelves debtors to the Law ? Arnſw. Yes, They did acknow- 
ledze themſelves bound to theobſervation of the Law, and to in- 
ure (upon the breaking it) the curſe of it : But they were diſ- 
Carzed from this obligation by believing in the Lord Jeſus Chriſt ; 
Who was made a curſe for them, that he might redeem them from 
the curſe of the Law: But if any diſclaimed Chrift (which, who- 


—_ 
wi 
o 


f lever added any thing to his Righteouſnels and to Faith in him, as 
1 tothe juſtification of the Soul, did, as the Apoſtle had ſaid in the 
F former Verſe) they laid themſelves under an obligation to fulfil 
1 tie whole Law of God, if they would be faved. 

- 4 Chritt is hecame of no effect unco you, whoſoever 
, of you are juftificd by the lawe; ye are fallen from 
, Erace f. 


4 * The word here tranſlated, become of no effet is uſed Kom. Je 3» 
"thoſe, who are juſtifi-d by the Law, are to be underſtood ſuch as 
<k, or defire to be juſtified by the Law, for actually none is ſo 
t JPithed, The ſenſe is, who ever ſeeketh to be juftified by the 


TITIANS. 
to him Chriſt's death fignifieth nothing, nor is of any virtue at all : 
For he had told us before; Chap. 2. 21. If rig!teneſnety wer? by ths 
Law, then Chriſt 1s dead ia wain, and Rom. $. 5. Ihr the Lim cold 
not do In that ir was weak through the fleſh, God ſending his own Son in 
the likeneſs of finful fleſh, and for fin cond:mned fin in the flefr, that 
the righteouſneſs of the 11w might be fulfilled in ns, &c. The very 
end of Chriit's coming and dying was to ſu pnly us with a righteous 
neſs, which (apprehended by Faith) ſhould bs reckoned to us 5; 
ours; wherein we might ſtand before God. Which end of Chri®; 
Death had been fruſtrated, it rho ovr f:ſh, there had not been 
ſuch a weakneſs, or impotency in the Law as to Juſtification. <0 
as if any ftill looked for Juſtification by performance of the Law 
as ſuch, made the death of Chrift in vain, becauſe if ſuch a thine 
could have been done that way, there had be2n no need of Chriſt's 
dying: So they alſo made it, which was not in vain in it (elf, 
yet in vain, and of no effett to their Souls, becauſe Chrift would 
not be a partial cauſe in the Jultification of a Soul. f And they, 
by this renounced the Grace of God exhibited in the Goſpel, and 
fell from the grace of it. For by Grace here is not to be under- 
ſtood, a ſtare of Grace (from which none can fall :6:.:7y and firally) 
but the Grace of the Gofp1 3 by which is ſignified the free love 
of God in it exhibited, offering Chrift to Sinners for Righteout- 
neſs. . 
5 For we &, through the Spirit þ, wait for * the * > Tiny 
hope of righteouſneſs 7 by faith &. 4. $ 
g We Chriſtians, who have truly imbraced Chriſt. Or (as 0- 
thers think) we that are turned from Judaiſm to Chriſtianity 
and ſo are more concerned in the Law, which was not given to the 
Gentiles, but to us Jews: Yet, þ by the guidance and direQion 
of the Spirit, or through the operation of the Spirit in us. i We 
wait for the hope of Righteouineſs; that is, We hope for Rightzonſ* 
neſs; that Righteouſneſs whereby we ſhall be made righteous be- 
fore God; or (as ſome will have it) the Crown of Righteouſneſs : 1 
had rather underſtand it of Xighieonſneſs it ſelf, that having been 
all along the Argument of the Apoſtle's Diſcourſe here. & Not by 
our obiervance cf the Law, but by Faith in Jeſus Chritt. 


worketh by love m. | 
1 Under the New Teſtament eftibliſhed in Chrift, and confirmed + x The. 

by the death of Chriſt, there is no difference betwixt F2w and 1. 2: 

Gentile; there is but one way of Juftification, one of Salvation 

for them both. m And that is, by believing in Chrift Jeſus, 

which Faith is not an idle, inattive, inoperative Faith $ bur ſuch 

a Faith as worketh by Iove, both towards God and towards men in an 

obedience to all the Commandments of God : yet is riot the Soul 

juſtified, nor ſhall it ſtand righteous before God in and for this obe- 

dience, which neither is Faith, nor gocth before it, but followeth 

it, as the true, properand neceffary effett of it. 


you ſhould not obey the truth o ? 24. 


hindred you in your courſe, or turned you out of your way, or 4/4 4/42 
given you a check in your race ? 0 And hath made you diſobedient 9 back. 
to, or to ſwerve from the truth which you formerly owned and 
profeſſed ? 


leth you 9. 

þ Thisnew Opinſon into which Seducers have miſled you, which 
by imbracing it, you have made yours; q Is not from God, who 
hath calz4 you out of darkneſs into marvellous light, unto fellow- 
ſhip with himſelf, intoa ſtate of Grace and Favour with him , and 
to the hopes of Eternal Life z and who yet calleth you by his Goſpel; 
It muſt therefore be from the Devil and his Jnftruments, who go 
about to ſeduce and pervert you. 

9 A little leaven leaveneth the wholz lump 7. 

r This is a proverbial Expreſhon, which (as others of that na- 
ture) is applicable in more caſes than one. The Apoſtle made uſe 
of it, 1 Cor. 5. 6. to perſwade that Church to purge their Com- 
munion, by cafting out the inceſtuous Perſon ; He maketh uſe of 
it here to perſuade them to take heed of admitting any Principles 
of falſe Dottrin, which he compareth to leaver (as our Saviour does, 
Mztth. 16; 6, 12.) And that very fitly, both in regard of the 
ſowre, and of the diffuſive nature of it; the latter of which is 
here chiefly intended. The truths of God having ſuch dependance 
one upon another, that he who erreth in any one Doctrin of Faith, 
ſeldom continueth long ſound as to other points. 


he be x. 
s The Apoſtle (according to his uſual method) ſweetneth his 
ſharp reproof of this Church for their deviations from the Faith of 
the Goſpel, with a declaration of his good Opinion of them ; de- 
claring that he had a confidence in them, that through. the Grace of 
God they would be reduced to the truth, or kept from wandring 
from it, and that in matters of Faith they would be all of the ſame 
mind. # And for thoſe who endeayoured to ſeduce and pervert 
them , God ſhould reward them according to their works. He 
ſeems to aim at ſome particular falie Teacher (whole Name he 
concealeth) who gave this Church this trouble. _ 
11 And | brethren, it 1 yet preach circumciſion 7, 
why do I .yet ſuffer perſecution w ? then 15 the * of- * 1 Cor. 
fence of the croſs ceaſed x. L, 23. 
u Tt ſhould ſeem by what the Apoſtle faith in this Verſe, that 
ſome of theſe falſe Teachers had quoted the Apoitle tor them, as if 
he himſelf had preached circumciltion; poſhibly taking, advantage 
from his circumciſing 7:/morthy, not diftingiiithing berwixr what was 
done by Paul as of liberty, aud tg avoid rac oficuce of the Jews, 


A -v 


"0s of the Law, he diſclaimeth - the righteovineis of Chriſt ; | 


I —_ 


. , . ; es F + « O- 
6 For * 12 Jeſus Chriſt neither circumcition availeth * ns 
any Thing, nor uncircumciſion /, but +. faith which 7" 6 1c. 
Col. 3oI1s 


7 * Ye did run well z, who did + * hinder you that * x Cor.g. 


7 This was once your Faith, your Profefſion, and according to Þ - 3+ Is 
this you direfted the courſe of your Life and Aﬀions; who hath * Or, #9 


3 This perſwalion p cometh not of him * that cal- # cy. ;, c. 


10 * ] have confidence in you throngh the Lord, * 2 Cor.2. 
that you will be none otherwiſe minded s , but | he 3-& $.22. 
that troubleth you ſhall bear hs judgment, whoſoever T ©» 5+ 7* 


Tt 


, —— "FRI 


—=_g_r tags 


wy 6s 
———o_ 


a 64.4 ” ” 
d. Fd = 
pa » - i * _ 
« RT. * 
< ES 4 Eo RE "oRIT . = 2: . 
Y Y mm —_—_— _—_ - y_ ——_ _ 2 «5 
prct v7 —_ pe : a — 10 as = = __—_ 
* - . mo <d6= p . — a K "I « a 
4 *u4 w > > IO - 4 _ -— <_ _ —_ TC. - — , __ < is 
Py - ws - £ 2 £4” _ 
+. % = # 2-4 - < " ” IT _ - be A oy 
5 . 5 FOE ae - of bog =: >. — -- ——_— PP : * 
= " Sy < . - . , k - ey ro Df ——wtt re m ; 
= hy ay . = - $ = _ =. LS! , A - — on, 
» - 7 - - m « 7 — 245-the Mai _ c ” - 
4 —<CSnoz—c PR IP = _ — 5 hr) a —- — n 
_ - wo 0 - . — n "> <> ———_—_ = 
=D LAT. ny = an an Þ Arete 
- "3 - F u » 250-54, oy * - - + . 
ma s> > 4 M A504 SD Pa - " - 7 _ n g 
HG RI Der an wry ew Ee On So — J —— — . NICE | A 
k. 5 ” "+ _ —_ « q mw —_ —— be = » "- Ny a == _ p_ - 
1G 4 p my or a—_ th © Dn v — - - — ” ——— _ PET? > . _ N => —— wo 
_— OR L g £ Der ” Y W- Nor w_ L._ > < - Cn - nd —- _ wo \/ . ID. = _y _—_ 
" —__ __ q --- - wh Ges - ANT LTD > , o -— = _ - - . "Ny 
wad » . - © I Py * = Dd _ > - _—_— 
* "= . WS 72" Th » 20>, of #4 : ay. iS - TIF 
o << TE. . © 4 x _ 


LE h; . V. 

and v har they proffed as necefſary to be done (beſides believing in 
Clit) for Jultification. Now” (faith the Apoſtle) if 1 yet Preach 
up < ircumcinon as necelſary to be obſerved, w Why am I then 
Perſecuted by the Jews, as one apoſtatijzed from their Religion ? 
x By the Croſs, he either means the Grſt of Criſt ; then the Senſe 
15, it 1s my oppoſing the obſeryance of their Law, that more of- 
fe1d2d them than my t'reaching of Chrift Crucifed. Or elſe, he 
meaneth, the #ft17/915 which he ſuffered for the ſake of Chriſt and 
the Goſpel; (in «luch Seme the Term is uſed, Marth. 16. 2:4. Luke 
9. 23. and 14 27.) Then the Senſe is, that all Sufferings for the 
owning, and preaching of Chriſt areat anend ; let us but vield the 
Jews rhar Point (that Chriſtians are obliged to the obſervance of 
the Law of Mcſes) the great Quarrel between them and us 1s at 
an end ; but their daily Perſecuting of me is a ſutficient Demon- 
{tration that I do not Preach up Circumciſion. | 


* - 
aa 7* 12 *] would they were even cut off that trouble 
1 Cor. 5. YOU v. 


y I wiſh that God would ſome way or other put an end to theſe 
that trouble you. This Paul ſpeaketh not out of hatred to their 
Perſons, but out of a Zeal to the Glory of God, and a juſt Indig- 
nation againſt theſe Men, who had ſo much hindred the Salvation of 
the Members of this Church. © And it is not improbable that the 
Apoſtle here ſpake by the Spirit of Prophecy , as knowing God 
wou!d cut them off; ſo that his, and the like Imprecations of Holy 
Men in Scripture are not to be drawn into Preſidents, or made 
Matters for our Imitation, unleſs we had the ſame diſcerning of 
Spirits which they had, or the ſame Spirit of Prophecy and Revela- 
tions from God as to future Things. But how far it is lawful or un- 
lawful for ordinary Perſons, whether Minifters, or private Chrifti- 

ns to pray againſt God, or his Churches Enemies, is a Queſtion 
for the arguing which, this Place is too narrow. 


* 1Cor.s. 13 For, brethren, ye have been called unto liber- 


"ON ty z; only * v/e not liberty for an occalion to the 


T . 
2 Pet.2.19 6elh a, bur * by love ſerve one another b. 


Jude 4. $ A liberty from the Covenant of the Law, and the curſe of the 
* 1 Cor.g. Law, as hp. 3. 13. from ſervile fear, as Luk. 1. 74. and from 
19.ch,6.2, Sin, Am. 6.7. @ Put you muſt take heed, that you do not abuſe 
this liberty by making, it an occaſion for fm; ſo as from thence to 
conclude, that you may give yer fleſh more liberty in obeying the 
laſts of it: You muft not think, that the Goſpel hath ſet you at 
liberty from the obedience of the Law ; the Goſpel liberty to 
which you are called doth not ſet you free from the duty of love, 
either to God or Men. 6 Therefore by love ſerve one another. Our 
Chriſtian liberty neither freeth us from the ſerving of God, nor 
from our mutual ſerving each other to love. According to Rom. 
13. S. Owe nothing 10 anz man, but 10 love one another. 
* Mat. 7. 14 For * all the Jaw is fulfilled in one word, even 
12. in this, - Thou ſhalt love thy neighbour as thy 
Jam. 2. 8, If c. 
9 c The whole Will of God, containing our duty towards men, is 
reducible to this one thing, Love ; for whatſoever God hath com- 
manded us to do towards men, is but a branch from this root, and 
muſt flow from Love as its principle. Or the whole will of God 
concerning man is fulfilled in this one thing of love ; where love 
to God is not excluded, but ſuppoſed, as the root of our love to 
our Neighbour ; for our Neighbour is to be loved for God. Thus 
Rom. 13. Se He that Ioveth another, hath fulfilled the Law. And 
1 Fobn 4. 20. the Apoſtle proveth, that a man cannot love God 
unleſs he loveth his Brother ; and 1 Tim. 1. 5. The end of the Com- 


= 
2, * 


GALATTANK 


Cha 


Fhraſe i- Fe Spirit, and after the Spirit, Rom. $. x. ſeem + 
the ſam? import, unlels the alteration of the Propoſition i; 0 be of 
thatChrittians arenot only to look ro the word of God Gi 
Holy Spirit as their rule, and to liften to irs ditates =O - the 
look up to the Holy Spirit for his ftrength and affiftance . .. ey to 
plicth a promiſe of ſuch aſhſtance. The ſenſe is, Let —_— Om 
converiation be according to the external rule of the Goſpel TOY 
the more inward motions, direQions and inclinations of nh _ 
of Chriſt, dwelling and working in you, and moving you wg 
obedience of that word. g This doing, tho' the fleſh he As 
and you will find the luſtings and workings of it, yet you han» 
fulfil the finful defires and luftings of it, that is, 1in, tho! it | = 
you, ſhall not be in dominion in you; it ſhall not reign in - "i 
mortal bodies, Rom. 6. 12. Let 0s ſint reign in your mort a} ba 
you ſhould obey it ia the luſts thereof. "ANTI 
17 For * the fleſh þ luiteth againſt tho ſpirit, ; 


that ye would m. 


ſenfirive and rational apperite ;, for thele two appetites are not ſo cGn- 
trary, but that in many things they agree well enough ; and So 
Enemies not only in our ſenſitive part to ſpiritual things, has 2. 
in eycia, in our mind and rational part alſo, Col. 1. 21. And 
ſome of the frurs of the fleſh, which are afterward mention'g 
verſ. 19, 20. (ſuch as 1dolatry, Herefies, &c.) cannot be referred tg 
the ſenſitive part z but by theſe Terms are either to be underſtoa, 
the unregenerate part of man ; or rather, that carna] COncu " 
ſcence which we derived from Adam, and is ſeated in ou; ratio. 
as well as ſenſitive appetite; which oppoſeth it ſelf to the divine 
Rule, and to the dictates and motions of the Spirit of God. i Thi 
concupiicence moveth ſtrongly againſt the directions of the Spirit 

k And the Holy Spirit of God dwelling in the Saints, moveth ” 
potently againſt the propenſions and inclinations of the fleſh. 1 For 

they are two contrary Principles, and work contrarily in their mo- 

tions, and inclinations, m2 So that even the beſt of Gods People 

cannot at all times do either what they ſhould do, accordins tg the 

precept of the word, or what they would do, accordigz to the 

bent of their regenerate part. 

18 Bur * it ye be led by the ſpirit, Ye Are Not un-Ron, 


der the law 7. it 
n To be led by the Spirit, and to walk in the Spirit, are tho fame $5. 
thing, and differ only as the cauſe and the effett. To be 1/5; 
Law, 1s to be under the curſe of it, or coation of it, and an oblic3- 
tion to the performance of the ceremonial Law. The reaion is, 4 


cauſe the Spirit isa Spirit of Adoption and Liberty ; and wher :- 


is, It teacheth to ſerve the Lord without fear, from a princip'e & 
freedom and ingenuity. 
I9 Now * the works of the fleſh o are manifeſt, *1Co 


which are theſe p, adultery, fornication q, uncleauneſs 7, Jn 


laſciviouſneſls s. 

o The produtts of the Natural inclinations and propenfcns in 
the heart of man: p He ſaith, theſe are marifeſ?, the filthine 
them appears by the light of Nature, by the checks of Conſtienc: 
men meet with for them ; or elle it is manifeſt, that theſe ation; 
are not from the Spirit of God (becauſe of their contrariety to 
the Divine Rule) but are from the corrupt part of man; theſe (he 
faith) are p Adultery, or the defiling of our Neighbours Bed. 7 &- 


mandment % Charity, Yet what the Papiſts would conclude from 
hence (v7. that it is poſſible for a Man to fulfil the Law, becauſe it 
is poſhble for him to love his Neighbour ; ) doth by no means fol- 
low ; for the Apoſtle, 1 7im. 1. 5. telleth us, This love muſt pro- 
ceed our of a pure heart, and of a good conſcience, and faith unfeigned. 
Mr. Calvin obſerveth well, that the Apoſtle here mentioneth love 
ro men as the fulfilling of the Law , in oppoſition to the falſe 
Teachers, who made the fulfilling of the Law to lye in the obſer- 
yance of the ceremonies of the Law, whereas the great thing which 
the Law of God requireth is love, our of a pure heart, good con- 
feience , and faith unfeigned. So that he who believeth with a 
Faith unfcigned, and our of that principle, with a pure heart, and 
a good conſcience, loveth his Naighbour as himſelf, ſhall be by 
God accounted to have fulfilled the Law; for love 5s the end of the 
Lam, 

15 But it ye bite, and devour one another 4, take 


liced ye be not conſumed one of another e. 

4 This lets us know, that there were great contentions and di- 
vinons among the Members of this Church, whether (which is 
probable) occaſioned by their differences in and about the Do&rin 
ot Fuſtification, or upon other accounts we are not told, but upon 
whatever account they were raiſed, they were contrary to that 
ſerving one another in love, to which the Apoſtle had exhorted 
them. Nor did they terminate in a meer diſlike of, and dif Plicency 
to each other, but break out into overt a&s, more becoming Dogs 
than Chriſtians, and therefore *tis expreſſed under the notion of 
biting and devouring. e The iſſue of which the Apoſtle propheſieth, 
would be a conſuming one another ; they being aCtions that had a 
natural tendency to this end. 

*Rom.13. 16 Thy | ſay then, * walk in the ſpirit f, and ye | 
74. . hall not fulfil the luſts of the fleſh o. 

4 11. f The Apoſtle having verſe, 15. cautioned them againſt turning 
FOr fulfil the grace of God into wantonneſs, by ufin g their liberty as an occaſion to 


nication, which is the uncleanneſs of ſingle Perſons each with other: 
r And all other ſpecies of uncleanneſs, or unclean conjundtions ; 
s With whatſoever wanton carriage, geſtures, or behaviourleadto 
theſe atts. 

20 [dolatry re, witchcraft z, hatred w, vaiaice , 
emulations y, wrath z, ſtrife a, ſeditions 6, here- 


ties c. 

: Either the worſhipping of the Creature for God, or the wor- 
ſhipping of God in and by the Creature, as by Images, &c. « The 
produet of compatts with the Devil ; by virtue of which, the per- 
ſons ſo contradting are affifted by the power of evil Spirits to pro- 
duce effetts beſides the ordinary courſe and order of Nature, and 
for the moſt part miſchievous to others. w And not theſe groſs 
Crimes only are the fruits of the fleſh, but alſo abiding hatrz of our 
brethren in our hearts, enmities to others (as the word fignifieth.) 

x The reſult of which, are variances, mens quarrellings, and con- 
tendings one with another for little or no cauſe. y Emulations, peo- 
ples endeavouring to. hinder others of ſuch good rhings as they ſc? 
them deſirous of; x heats, and immoderate paſſions of men one a 
gainft another, a a continual readinels and pronenels to quarrel- 
ling; 5 dividing into parties ; which in the State is called Sedition, 
in the Church Schiſm: c Hereſies, that is, differing and falle op1- 
nions 1n the grand Dodtrins of Religion. 

21 Envyings 4, murders e, drunkenneſs {, ! evel- 
lings, and ſhch likeg ; of the which I tell you before &, | 
as I have alſo told you in time paſt ;, that * chey which Cal 
do ſuch things, ſhall not inherit the kingdom of Re 
God &k. | 15 
4 Repinings at that good which is enjoy'd by our Brethren, e U- 
juft taking away the lives of others ; with any ations tending, " 
ſubſervient thereunto. f Immoderate drinkings, g immoderate car 


ings 3 all abuſes of the creatures of God beyond neczfiity - 
moderate delight. þ I tell you of it betore the day of Judgment 


79% re fleſh; here he direfteth them to the beſt means for the avoiding 
thercof, viz. walking in the Spirit. Where by Spirit he doth not 
mean our own $/7r7ts, or the guide and condudt of our own reaſon 
for the term Spirit ſet (as here) in oppoſition to the fleſh, is in 
nQ place of Scripture underſtood of any other than the holy Spirit 
or God, which dwelleth in, and influenceth Believers, guiding them 
both by a rule from wirhour (which is the word of God, given by 


irs inſ] piration) and by its inward motions and operations. Ialk- 
7g» Haas the directing of their whole converſation. The 


comes, when you will find that which 1 tell you fo be truth. F 7 
you know I have in my preaching to you in times pait told my 
that they who ordinarily do thele things, and do not only m_ 
ſuch praetices, but die without repentance for them, thall never v* 
laved, 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10. Reve 21.7, $, op 
22 Bur * the fruir of the Spirit /, is love 2 : ;#f 

peace o, long-ſutfering p, gentlencſs 9, $90Gachs 7 
taith 5. we” 


As 


Wt ® 3 and *p,,, 
the ſpirit againſt the fleſh &, and theſe :iro cOntrar: 2 a 
the one to the other /, ſo - that ye cannot do the thins, 67. 

TY 


Rom 
By the fleſh and the ſpirit, we cannot ſo much underſtand th 1115 


Tn 


of G 
Life, 

ſelves 
guida 
tOIlou 
thoſe 
cling 
will pr 
from 1 


to boaſ 
Plauſe « 
of hope 
may be 
done th 
at the 
troubte 
perly 1 
keth it) 
f1% C01 


PT Fx 
tal 
Noti 
ret 
of the 
Eſtee 
tion 1 
I1 
16, 

hi, Sy 


Conſt 


WIL 1 ſ 

5.1, 

EE of. 

4; the ſpi 
.4q In q 
Ing the 
Mcmbe 
LRez wy 
Iandalo 
ſom 
UMprat 
OY the 
07 duty 


Nap. VI. G A L A 


; Thoſe Habits, which the Holy Spirit of God produceth in thoſe 
jn whom it dwelleth and worketh, with thoſe atts which flow from 
them, as naturally as the Tree produceti its Fruit 3 are, #2 Dove 
ta God, and to our Neighbours. 7 27 3 the Souls ſatisfaction in 
its union with God, as the greateft and higheſt Good 3 with an 
attual rejoycing in Chrift, and in what is for his Honour and Glory 3 
called a rejoycing in the truth, 1 Cor. 13. 6. and in the good of our 
brethrev, ROM» 12+ 15. 0 Quietude of Conſcience, or Peace with 
God (of which Peace ot Conſcience 1s a copy) and a peaceable dif- 
potition towards Men, oppoſed to Strife, Variance, Em ulations, © C 
 Lons-{uffering, oppoſed toan haſtineſs to Revenge, aad inclining 
2s patiently to bear Injuries. q Sweetnels and kindnels of Tem- 
p2r, by which we accommodate our ſelves, and become mutually 
'eful to eath other. » A Diſpoſition in us to hurt none, but to 
do all the good we can to all. s By Faith ſeemeth here to be meant, 
11th in Words, faithfulneſs in Promiſes, and in Dealings one with 
another. ; 

23 Meckneſs e, temperance x, * againft ſuch there 


isno law w. 

; Forbearance of Paſſion, raſh Anger, and haſtineſs of Spirit. 
A ſober uſe of Meats, Drinks, Apparel, or any thing wherein our 
&nfes are delighted. Many of theſe are moral Virrues, and (uch as 
tome have attained to by moral Diſcipline, the cultivating of their 
Natures by Education, and moral Philoſophy : Yet they are alſo 
the Eruits of the Spirit of. God, ſuch as it doth always work in the 
<uls wherein it dwelleth, tho* in different Meaſures and Degrees. 
Only the moral Man, thus comporteth himſelf from Principles of 
Reaſon, ſhewing him the: beauty and comlineſs of ſuch a Converſa- 
tion, and aims no higher in it, than an happineſs of Converſe in 
this Life, his own Honour and Reputation. But the ſpiritual Man 
doing the ſame things, aimeth at an higher end: (the glorifying of 
God, and ſaving his own Soul) and doth theſe things from a Fear 
- of God, 'out of Love to him, and out of Faith, as ſeeing in them the 
Will of God. w Againſt ſuch (faith the Apoftle) there is 70 Law. 
X 1aw to accuſe or to condemn them ; for theſe are the things 
which the Law commandeth to be done, and are atts of Obedience 
to the Law. So as thoſe who do theſe things are led by the Spirit, 
and are not under the condemninz Power or Curſe of the 

Law. X 
m.6, 24. And they that arc Chriſt's x, have * crucihed the 

:. flcſh y, with the + aff-ctions and luſts z. 

x Thoſe who are ingrafted into Chriſt by Faith, united to him, 
\j- and ſo his Members 3 y By virtue of a Power derived from the 
Croſs of Chriſt, have got their unregenerate part in a great mea- 
ſure mortified. ' + With the mordirate Defires, Aﬀettions and 
Paſſions of it 3 not that they have wholly put off theſe ;, (they are 
Men Kill) but the inordinateneſs of them is corretted, mortified 
and ſubdued. OT we. 
:.% 25 * If we live in the Spirit a, Let us alſo walk in 


the Spirit 6. | 

a If (as we profeſs) there is an Union betwixt the Holy Spirit 
of God and us, ſo as that Holy Spirit is to us the principle of our 
Life, and we live more from him than from any principle in our 
ſelves. b Let us manage all our converſation according to the 
guidance and direttion of the fame Spirit. Operations naturally 
follow the principle of Life, from which they proceed, fo that as 
thoſe who only live in the Fleſh, walk in and after the Fleſh, and its 
inclination ; ſo thoſe who live in the Spirit, ought to produce, and 
will produce effetts ſuitable to the cauſe ct them, and the principle 
from which they flow. : 

\> 26 * Let us not. be deſirous of vain glory c, provo- 
* king one another 4, envying oneanother e. 

c Ambition or Vain-elory is a natural Corruption diſpoſing us 
to boaſt and commend our ſelves, and to ſeek the Honour and Ap- 
pauſe of Men. d This is an Eﬀett of the former, diſpoſing us out 
of hope of Victory to challenge others to a Conteſt with us. Or it 
may be underſtood, of provoking others by Injuries and Wrongs 
done them ; which is contrary to the Duty of Leve. e Not repining 


: at the Good of others 3 either deliring their Portic'2, or being 
i troubled that they fare ſo well. Poſſibly this Verſe might more pro- 
4 perly have been made the firſt of the nxt Chapter (as Luther ma- 
« keth it) where the Apoſtle greth on, preſiing further ſpiritual Du- 
\ {es common to all Chriſtians. 
« CHAP. VL 
-— 41 Fxlortation to divers Chriſtian Virmes reproof in Meekneſs, mu- 
a- mal Forbearance, an Examination and low Cpinion of our ſelves; a 
l- Motive thereto, 1 5. To maintaining their Miniſters, 4 mo- 
rp tre thereto; aj alſo to Liberality towards the Poor, and eſpecially thoſe 
pi” of the Faithful, 6mm 10. Fe concludeth, teſtifying bis Love and 
Efteem towards them, warning them of f.lſe Apoſtles, whoſe Ambi- 
Tf 101 and Hypocrifie he deſcribeth;, eppojeth to them his own Example, 
" L>— 14. True Chriſtianity, and its Hope and Promiſe, 15, 
WW 16, He admoniſheth that no man be further rroubleſome to him, ſince 


Cl 23 tis Sufferings did clearly evidence the truth of bis Dofrin and his 
Conſtancy therein, 17. The Apoſtolical Benedidion, 18. 


15 M14. 1 


_ Rethren *, if a man be overtaken ina fault a, 
wap I5.1, 


Fl ye * that are ſpiritual 6, reſtore ſuch a one in 
a: MW fic ſpirit of meeknels c, conſidering thy ſelf leſt thou 


or 4 Wr.2,allo be tempted 4. 

nent 4 Jn the Term [ Brethren ] there is a ſecret Argument perſuad- 
7 AS Ing the Duty which he is preſſing, becauſe Chriſtians, particularly 
u, | Mcmbers of the ſame C hurch, are all Brethren. By Perſons over- 
ve in {te with a fault, he means {uch as do not make a trade of open and 
-x be {andalous tinning (for ſuch muft be rebuked ſharply but ſuch as may 


 lometime through infirmity overborn, and run down with a 
WMptation to in. b By thoſe that are Spiritual, he means not 
4 Oy the Paſtors and Governours of the Church (though this care 
[0-0 0d duty js much incumbent upon them} but ach as have received 

0 Spirit of Chriſt; more clpecially :uch as were more know- 


TIANS. Chap. VI. 


ing in the ways of God, and had ſpiritual Habits more confirmed 
in them 3 in which ſenſe Spiritual 18 uſed in 1 Cor 2.41.) oe The 
word tranſlated [reſtore] fhgnifies to put again into joint, or into 
right order and place. Sin is an inordinate action, and putteth the 
Soul that committeth it our of its due order ard place. Hje wileth 
the Brethren that are ſþ/7irual to uſe all due moans to "ut fuch a 


Member in joint again z but not to do this roughly 21d wich "at- 
fion and ſevere correption, but meetlv, ſo as ma! be moſt pro- 
bable to win the Sinners Soul. 4 Having an Eye and Reſpect t9 
themſelves, as neither being free from {in, nor from Ter: >tati- 
ons to Sin, dealing with others as they would have others deat 
by thera. ; 

2 Bear ye one anothers burdens ce, and ſo fulfil the 
* law of Chriſt f. 

e Tt is a general Precept, and may be either underſtood with re- 34+ 
ference to what he had faid in the former Verſe, { it hints our & 15+ 12- 
Duty ; tho' we diſcern our Brethren to have fallen into ſome fin or 1 John 4- 
error, yet it we diſcern that they are ſentible of their relapſe, and 27+ 
their {in is not a pleaſure, but a burden to them ; tho* we oueoht 
not to hear with them, or connive at them in their fins. yer we 
ought to ſympathize with them when we ſee their fin is become 
their load and burden, under which they groan and are de;<&tcd. 

Or elſe more generally as a new Precept, commanding us to {vmpa- 
thize with our Brethren under ary load of "Trials and Afiaions 
whict God ſhall lay upon them. And {o it agreeth with that ire- 
copt. Rom. 12. 15, f By the Law of Chrifi; he means the Will of 
Chrift revealed in the Goſpel; particularly the Law of 19%; ſo 
much enjoined by Chrift, Fez 13. 15, 24, 35. and 15. 12. 
Which is not called the Law of Chriſt, becauſe firft given by 
him ; (for himſelf maketh it the ſum of the Ten Commandments :) 
but becauſe he received it and vindicated it from the Corrupti- 
on of the 7hariſees Interpretation, Marth. 5. 43, 44.. becauſe he 
ſo often-urg.:4 it, and ſo ſeriouſly commanded and commended it 
to his Diſciples, and ſet us the higheſt Preſident, and Exam- 
ple of it, and hath by his Spirit written it in the Hearts of his 
People. 

3 For * if a man think himſelf to he ſomething * 1.Cor. S. 

when he is nothing, he deceiverh kimſelf g. Mm 

g It is a general Maxim, and the truth of it is obvious to every 
one that readeth it ; for ſuppoting a Man to be morhinp of wit he 
thinks bimſelf to be, he muſt needs deceive himſelf in nouriſhing 
and entertaining ſuch an Opirzon of himſelf. For the depen- 
dance of it upon what the Apoſtle had ſaid before, it is obvious. 

Pride and Mens high Opinions of themſclves above what they 
ought, are the cauſe of their Cenſoriouſneſs, and moroſity in deal- 
ing with other Offenders; which modeſty would not ſuffer in them, 
if they apprehended themſelves to be as weak, and as much ex- 
poſed to Temptations as others are. Tt is Pride and OVErWecning 
Opinions of our ſelves, that make us deſpiſe or neglet others un- 
der their burdens, and fo forget the Law of Clrist; the Apoſtle 
therefore properly addeti this Precept for humility and modeſty to 
theſe former Precepts. 

4 But * let every man prove his own work b, and + x Cor; 


then ſhall he have rejoycing in himſelf alone, and not 11, 28. 


* 7 
Tot. 2 


1n another 7z. 


þ The Apottle by a Man's 6wn wort here, underſtands his own 
ations and manners, which he would have every Man to butie him- 
ſelf to ſearch, try and examine by the divine Rule, whether they 
be conformable to the Will of God yea or no; and then he laith i a 
Man ſhall (if he findeth his Work ſuch as is agreeable to the Will 
of God) have cauſe to rejoyce in himſelf 3 not in-the merit or per- 
feetion of his works, but in his own works, not in others; thaw is, 
he ſhall rejoyce in ſomething which God hath wrought in and by 
him, and not in others. This the Apoftle wiſely propounds, as a 
means to tring a Man to knuw his own Meaſures ; it being a great 
<rror for Men to meaſure themſelves by the Meaſures of other Men, 
their PerſcAions, L*' others ImperfeQions. : 

5 For cvcry man ſhall bear his 


J 
den |. 

þ That is, God will judge every Man in the laft day, accord- 
ing not to wi others have done, but to what he himlſelt hath 
done, 1 Corinth. 3. 8. Therefore every one is concerned to prov 
ks own work; for at laſt his eternal joy and rejoycing, or ſorrow 
and mourning , ſhall be according to what he himſelf hath 
wrought, not according to what 6:h>rs have wrought. - Tf ever 
they enter into the joy of Heaven, th-y ſhall rejov'ce in their own 
Work. And if eternal Sorrow be their Portion, they ſhall 
groan under their own Burdens ; they will not be the fins of 0- 
thers but their own fins which will fink them into eternal miſery. 
For. though Superiors ſhall anſwer to God tor the tins of their 1n- 
ferious, yet it ſhall not properly be for their Inferiours fins, but 
for their ewn fins, in negleQing to warn and to reprove them, 
and to do what in them lay to have hindred them in their fntul 
courſes. : 

6 * Let him that is taught in the word /, com- 
municate to him that tcacheth, in all good *1 Cor. g. 
things m. Lg ka 

1 The word here Tranſlated taught, fignifieth Catechized; and is 
the ſame word from which that word is derived; but it here t1g- 
nifieth raughr, careckiziig being, but a mode or ſpecies of teaching. 
m The Precept is concerning the maintenance ot Minifters, 
which is fitly expreſſed by the Term communicate , becaute as 
the People diftribute to their Minifters things temporal, ſo the 
Miniſters diſtribute things ſpiritual. The good things here 
mentioned, are temporal good Things; ſuch as may be uſetul to: 
the Teacher for him to uphold himſelt and Family. The 
Text teacheth us, that it is the Will of God that Miniſters ſhould 
be maintained at the Charge of the Church to which they Mint 
ſer, and it is but an a& of Juſtice, for they do but. communi- 
cate temporal things to thoſe who communicate to them much moxe 


own -bur- 


valuable things» 


7 Be 


8 WET 


_—_ FE 


— = —- 
_- "4 [ 


EN” 
—_ SABIN Gt.” 
Er oe 


P: 7 BY h 
- -, * - © 
= — wy - - 
>... Ae ——— bs . 5 - 
= IG 54 oo - _ bee 4 
on - _ AG cane - . _ 
e — -< 4 S _ — 4 ” a %* 1 - ” 
— Co wa _ wat y < >, 4 [0 2 
NI < 5 »” ” x _ R WF : b 
E Ly” 


Y 
» 3 - 's 
© = _ 
4 - _ Ft os 
_ <. my 
T 3 _ = .. - a: * — 4 — <_ 
z TE te coy”: 


<4 
* } } 


j A008 o- 


* Phil. 3. 


C/ 
Ls 


Chap. VI. 


-* 1 Cor 


» & . hand | , 
=* theinſelves, for though they might decoive Men, yet they could 


G AL A 


A , i. - _— ? S ” p 
= * Bc not deceived, God is not mocked z, for 
'4 tees p* we- ! 1-5 = £3 & p OD 
* whatſoever a man ſowerth that ſha!l he alfo reap o. 
; The Apoſtle addeth thiz, to territie thoſe who find out vain 
and falle excnivs to fave their puries ns adviſeth them not to cheat 


net deceive the All-lecing and Heart-ſearching God. 9 Further 
tt encourage them to this communicating, he mindeth them, that 
what they diftribured in this nature, was no more loft, than the 
feed is which the Husbandman caſteth into the ground, which in its 
ſeaſen ſprinzs up, and returneth into the Hushandman's hand with 
increaſe. This Metaphor of Sowizg is made uſe of alio, Proverbs 11. 
138. 2 Coriathians, 9.6. to expreſs Men's Actions, and lets us 
Enow, that-our Actions, when done, are not done with 5 but as 
our Zodics ſhall rile azain, fo what we have done in the Fleſh ſhall 
be revived and judzed z whatſoever either for quantity, or for qua- 
lity Nen ſow, the ſame ſhall they reap. As to quantity, he had laid 
in 2 Corinthians, g. 6. that he who /owerb iparingly, ſhould reap 
ſparincly, and he that ſowed bountif.cifp, ſhould reap bountijully : AS 
ro quality, he here further addeth. 

$ For he that ſoweth to his fleſn p, ſhall of the fleſh 
reap corruption 4 : but. he that ſoweth to the ſpirit 7, 
ſhall of the ſpirit reap lite everlaiting, /. 

p He that laycth out his Eſtate, or ſpendeth his time and ta- 

lens, for the gratifying of the Heſh. q Shall-or may reap ſome 
carnal Satisfattion, of a corruptible, dying, periſhing Nature. 
7 But he who layeth out his Efate, or ſpendeth his time, ſtrength, 
talents, whatſoever God hath given him, for the glory of God, 
in obedience to the commands, motions, and diftates of the ſpi- 
rit, or the Revelations of the Divine Will ; he ſhall not of merit, 
but of Grace from the Spirit rcap everlaſting Life, Reward and 
Satisfaftion. <0 that as in the World, that Man doth not ſuffer 
Iofs that laycth out his mony, time, or ſtrength, about good 
thinzs cf a valuable and induring Nature; but he only who lay- 
eth them out about thinzs periſhing, and tranſitory, and of a cor- 
ruptible Nature: <o that Man ſhall not loſe his Eſtate that lay- 
eth it out for the maintenance of the Geſpel and uphelding the 
Miniſtry of it; for he ſoweth to the Spirit, and ſhall thereof reap 
eternal Life and Salvaticn: He only 1:{eth his Eſtate, &:c. who 
ſpendeth it to gratifie his Lufts, and pleaſe his Fleſh, for all the 
return which he ſhall have, will be in poor ſenfible periſhing gc-d 
thin:zs, which periſh with the ufing, and will be of no fignincan- 
cy to hjm beyond this Life. : : 

o And let us not be weary in well doing: : for in 
due ſeaſon, we ſhall reap if we faint not . 

: We hare the ſame precept, 2 Theſſalonians, 3-13» As the not 
executing of Judgment ſpecdily imboldens Sinners, and encoura- 
£cth them to £0 on in courſes of ſin, ſo God's delaying the re- 
wards of the righteous, often proveth a temptation to good Men 
to be weary of well-doing. Againſt this the Apoſtle cautioneth us 
here. a By minding us, that there is a dye Seaſon for all things, 
(which is beſt known to the wiſe God) and afſuring us, that tho' 
as we (ce nut the Husbandman preſently reaping as ſoon as he hath 
ſown, but waiting patiently in hope, that in due Seaſon he ſhall 
reap; ſo we, tho* we be not preſently rewarded, yet in God's 
Seaſun ſhall as certainly reap as he doth. But he alſo mindeth us, 
that if we will reap, we mult not f.zzzt, but go on and perſevere 


reap, than the Husbandman that hath ſown well, but out of im- 
patience before the time cometh for him to reap, ſhall go and plow 
up again all that he hath ſuwn, Ezek. 33« 13- 

10 As we have theretore opportunity w let us do 
g90d unto all men », eſpecially unto them who are of 


the houſhold of faith y. 
mw As we have &bjeas befere us, or as God gives us time, and 
ability. x Let it be our bulineſs to harm non?, but we ſupply 
the neceſſities ct all Men; either with our ſpiritual advice and coun- 
ſels, with a!l the ahirance we can give them, that may any way 
2 of ſpiritual profit or advantaze to them, or with our worldly 
£0045 miniftrias to their neceſſities. »y But all in an order prefer- 
rig Chriitians before others; Thoſe that belong to the Church, 
(which is called the Houſe of God, 1 Tim. 3. 15. I Pet. 4. 17. and 
the Zouſhold of God, Eph. 2. 19.) before ſuchas have no relation to 
the Church. 
i1 Ye ſee how large a letter I have written to you, 


with my own hand z. 

7 Paul made uſe of the hands of others in the writing ſome [ 
others of the Epiſtles, as appears from Rom. 16. 22. and ſome- 
times he himſelf only wrote the Salutation, 1 Cor. 16. 21. But 
he tells them he wrote the Epiſtle to them wholly with his own 
hand, that he might thereby more commend his Love to them 
and care over them. 

12 AS many as deſire to. make a fair ſhew in the 
fieſh a, they conſtrain you to be circumciſed b: * on- 
ly Ie they ſhould ſuffer perſecution for the croſs of 
Chrilt c. 

a The Apoſtle here refle&eth upon thoſe falſe Teachers, who 
had perverted this Church, and diſcovereth their hypocritie under 
all their pretences of £o0d Will to them. Theſe are thoſe who (he 
laith) defired ro make a fair ſhew in the Fleſh; that is, to make a 
fair ſhev to the V/orld as Men very devout (which Formalifts and 
Perſuns cver-zealous for Rituals ordinarily do.) þ Theſe would 
conſtrain, were very urgent to perſwade theſe Believers to be cir- 
cunciled, net out of any love they had to the Law of God, or to | 4 
the £u1s cf theſe Galatians, c But only to avoid Perſecution; for as 4 
the Jews were more favourable to ſuch Chriſtians, who together with 
th2 Dcatrin of Chriſt obſerved alſo their Rites and lezal Ceremo- 
nes: Se we are told by ſome of the Ancients, that ſome of the Ro- 
mw Emperors by their Edids gave liberty to the Jews in the Provin- 
CES ſubject to them, to uſe their own Religious Rites ; now all who 
were circumcited went under that notion, and ſo had more liberty 


! 


fan thole who were not circumciſed, who were perſecuted both 


C 


O 


b 


any thing þ, nor uncircumcition, but a new 
cure 2. 


from Rome, while Paul was a Priſoner there, who are in Pats 
it from ver. 16. thinking that it was wrote at a time ven 
there ſuffering Impriſcnment. 


TIANS. 


by the Tewiſh and Heathen Magiſtrates, The Apoſtle 5; 
rhete falſe Teachers, who {© zealoutly urged Circumcij TR 
Gentile Church, did it tor no other end but for the 
danger of Periecution, which they ſaw would follow 
ing taſt in their Goſpel liberty, and not brinsins theme. 
der the Law : Which Perſecution he tacitly hinteth on 
be ſo induſtrioully ſhunned and avoided, becauſe it was on ow, 
ſake, who had indured the Croſs for them, as 
_ 13 For neither they themſelves who arc clrcumc; 
ied, keep the law d, bur delire to have you _ 
ted, that they may glory in your fleſh e. "oy 
4 In this the Hypocrifie of your falſe Teachers dif 


-- 


avoiding 4; 


Cr; 3.9 
brif; 


J 
Chap, V 
up l har 

Non upon ti; 
their ttanc 
the 


(4) 


jy 


{> 
\ 


% 


- 


ſelf, that whereas by their being circumciſed, they had dec F 
; an UQOary 


themſclves Debtors to the whole Law, and under 
entirely to keep it if they would be ſaved ; 
did not keep it, only were very zealous for this one thin 
any love they had to the Law; e but they might zlory 


Witt 


wh” 
Ol YOu, 


f For my part I have no ſuch ends, T have no Ambition to -taw 


in you as my Converts; all that T deiire to £lory. in, is in +1, & * 
art . ts ['Yith oy 
(hav, 


. ET Xs 5 Tor the propagation vf 
it, and my conformity to Chrift in ſuffering for Preachin- the 
Goſpel. g By the Croſs of Chriſt the 10-14 is Crucified to 1 be "a 
to 7t. I care no more for the World than it careth for w- On 


Lic 


10 hat! 
enabled me to it; for the Particle tranſlated by whom, may OE 


I5 For 1n Chriſt Jeſus neither circumciſion availeth 
crez- 


þ Under the Goſpel ſtate as ſettled by Chriſt, with reference to 
Salvaticn, it is of no moment whether a Man be a Jew or þ a Gentile 


"Þ , , A : 
z Put whether a Man be Regenerated or no, and bs renewed by 


the Holy Ghoſt, ſo as cld things with him be paſſed away, and al 


things be become new. He had ſaid the ſame chap. 2. 28. and 5.6, 
SEE allo 2 Cor. 5. 17, Under the Law indeed there was ſmerhins 
in Circumcifien, as it was Ged's Covenant in the Fleſh to that Peg: 
pl- to whom he gave it, and the Uncircumciſed were ſtrangers rg 
the Covenants ct Premiſe, and aliens to the Church cf God; bur 
under the Goſpel, Circumcifion and Uncircumciſion are 0f no jic- 
nificanyz Ged neither regards any for the former, nor reiterh 
any for the latter, he only looketh at the Heart and inward Van 
whether that be renewed and ſanttified, yea, Or no. | 


16 * And as many as walk according to this rule b *DC1 
peace be on them, | 
of God m. 

k He either meaneth the Rule of Scripture, the whole Word of 1% 
? God ; or the Dottrin which he had taught them throushout this © 
in our courſe of well-doing ; otherwiſe we can no more expett to | x piſtle ; or what he had ſaid in the words immediately 2cins be- + 
fore, where the Apoſtle had given them this Rule, not fo recard 
either Circumciſion or Uncircumciſion, or any thing in the Heh, but 
only the change of their Hearts. 1 To theſe he either prophetieth 
Peace and Mercy, or he prayeth Peace and Mercy for them, under 
which large terms, he comprehendeth all good things whether in- 
ternal or external. 01 
the Jſrae] of God ; hereby intimating 
of what he had ſaid, Rom. 2. 28, 29. 
ſaid of Nathaniel, Fohn 1. 47. calling him an I{-2elite i: 


and mercy /, and upon the * |{r;el«, 


m Upon the true J/razlites, whom he callzth 
and confirming the Truth 
and what our Saviour bad 
| nos 
ys Yo 


auſe in him was 70 guilez and eſtabliſhing a diſtingi.n ©=twixt 


ſuch as were ſo really, and thoſe who were cvIy J/+-121;: 5, 11 name, 
becauſe deſcended from Facob, to whom Gud gave the nams ot 
Iſrael. Herevy alſo checking the vanity of the Fews, wha ;luricd 
in the name of Jſaelires, and thought there could no water come 


ut of the Feuntains of Jſrael which God would caft away. The 


Apottle doth not promiſe, or prophefie Mercy and Veacz to all 
Jjralites, but only to the 1/72! of God ; that is, to Believers that 
received and imbraced Jeſus Chrift, offered in the Goſpe!. 


17 From hencetorth let no man truable mc 7, for 
* bear 1n my body the marks of the Lord [efis 0. 


x 


7 Let no Man trouble me, either with queſtions about circum- 4 }- 
ciſion, or with imputations as if I were a Friend to their opinion 
of the neceſſity of adding to the Dofrin cf Faith, Circumciſion an 

other Obſervances of the Law. 01 ſufficiently declare my judgment 
to the World, ſuffering for my profeſſion, and preaching the 60- 
ſpel. Theſe Sufferings he calls rhe marks of the Lord Fejus Clriſts 
becauſe he indured them in teſtimony to the Goſpel, as well a 
gainft the Jews as againſt the Gentiles. 


18 Brethren, the grace of our Lord jeſus Chritt 
e with your ſpirits p. Amen. 
? The Apoſtle cloſeth this Epiſtle with this Prayer, as he generals 


concludeth all his Epiſtles, with wiſhing them Grace, the G7. « j Oar 
Lord Feſus Chriſt : Under which he comprehendeth all the cficcts 0! 
the free Love of God upon Believers Souls, for the ſake, 
through the merits of the Lord Jeſus Chriſt : 
they might feel in their hearts, and that it might be in their 1Þirits 0 


and in and 
This he pray2t2 nat 


14.» 
1997 


uicken, ſtrenzthen, comfort, and eſtabliſh then according t0 
ifferent manifeſtations of the ſpirit of Grace. 

qe Unto the Galatians written from Rome. = mo 

It hath been ſaid before, that we are not to look upon theſe dates 0! 


Apoſtolical Epiſtles as part of Holy Writ, (tor in ſom of chem thic & 
are manifeſt miſtakes.) But moſt think that this E piitlo Was WI1--v 


{ded 10 
] Pail WS 
1's 


H E- 


But of this there is 20 CLrtAL 


Rn not OUt 05 


7 
} «, 


* Rot 


Chap, 


J 
4 
/ " 


TÞ 


"wm 


Ui 


= 


ral ; 


20 
ww, 2.7 
ther, 


I, 


2. 
Cor. 


; 3 

Teſts 

t.1.2.7 ble 

thing; C FA | 

6. 12, for, an 

vouchſ; 

ſeth us 

In a dj 

all ſor 1 

the Ca 
miled, 
ſhadow 

the [pi 

Or Ze 

be the 
Pls, 
Canayuy 
Theſe 
Teach x 
Chrift 
and 


The ARGUMENT. 


Pheſus was the moFt conſiderable City of the leſſer Aſia; famous fir for ſm, witchcraft, As 19. 19. Taolatry, 
F (eſpecially the worſhip of Diana, v. 24.) and Perſecution, 1 Cor. I5. 32. and 16. 9. then for piety having 
received the Goſpel by Paul's Preaching, AQs 18. and ſhewed great zeal, Chap. 19. 17, 18, &c. Rev. 2. 2, 3. 
But laſtly, it was noted for Coolneſs and Declining, V. 4. leaving her fir Love. The Apoſtle ſeems to have foreſee: 
this as like to come to paſs among them by means of falſe Teachers, grievous Wolves that would not ſpare the 
Flock, As 20. 29. and ſome that wonld ariſe from among themſelves ſpeaking perverſe things, ver. 30. 
Herenupon he not only admoniſhed the Elders of the Church to look to themſelves and all the Flock, v. 28. but af- 
terward when a Priſoner at Rome, out of his care of theſe Epheſians, and concern fe» them, he writes this Epiſtle to 
them, to confirm, and ſettle them in the Faith they had received, and perſuade them to an holy Converſation as be#t 
ſuited to 4 holy Goſpel. In the Epiſtle there are two principal parts. 1. Doftrinal in the three firſt Chapters, where he lays 
down and commenas to them the Dottrin of the Grace of God in Eleition, Redemption, Vocation, Juſtification, 
Adoption, Chap. 1. luſtrating it by the deplorable condition in which before their converſion they had been, Chap. -2. 
and aſfuring them of the truth of thier call, by aſſerting againſt all objefors and cavillers, - his ApoſHeſhip With To- 
foeit to thum Gentiles, and his Commiſſion from God to Preach among them the unſearchable riches of Chriit, 
Chap. 3. 2. Praftical, in which he exhorts them to walk worthy of their calling in the diligent Prattice of Chri- 
ftian duties , | whether more General and which concern all Believers, or ſpecial, ſuch as belong to them in their ſeve= 
ral relations, eſpecially Oeconomical, Chap. 5. 6. 


the account of whoſe merit, and by whoſe efficiency theſe (j piritual 
CHAP. I Bleſlings are derived from God to us. Or, in Chriſt as our head, 
eo the repoſitory, and ſeat of all divine Bleſhngs, fra whom they 

ora oy upon us as his Members, receiving all we have, out of 
; "ot, Aran, -1:7+5:,1 (11S fulneſs. He ſeems to have reipe& to the promiſe made to 

es = Es td, gr Herr fe GR : 4 — Abraham, Gen. 22. 18. That in bis ſeed all the nations of the earth 
all the Ele@ are gathered together in one ; and Believers had obtained the {magna 90 ory, rang _ as that Seed, and thoſe Ble(- 
Inheritance « and were in thoſe times to the praiſe of bis Glory for an |S © PL rf de py 4 25, 200 wh PTS 
Example to others: and ſuch were the Epheſians,and were ſealed by the | 4 According Z as he hath choſen us & in h:m /, 
ſpirit, for which be thanks God, 10, —= 16» Andprays that theymay| before the foundation of the world #2, that we 


come t0 the full knowledge and poſſeſſion of this Grace in Chriſt, who|-- ſhould be holy and without blame + before him » in 
i the Head of the Church, 17, —— 23. love 7. 


. 7 God blefſeth us with all ſpiritual Bleſſings according as he hath 


The uſual Salutation, and thanksgiving for ſpiritual Bleſſmgs in Chriſt, 


T0 AUL an Apoſtle of Jeſus Chriſt, by the| choſen us 3 Elettion being the fountain from whence thoſe Ble(- 

will of God, * to the ſaints which are at ſings OO ; ſo thy _ _ aching for ws. carrying peel 
X11, | 1 1 hriſt | fe works or our Salvation, but what he had in his eternal coun- 
E | "TY and to the faithful @ in C cil before determined. þ& Separated us in his purpole and decree 


"— | NY F from others (whom he left out of that gracious a& of his will) 

a This may be underſtood either 1. by way of Reſtridtion, 0f| 1.4 qetermined that we ſhould be holy and unblamable, &5c; 1 Ei- 
thoſe who are ſincere and conſtant to Chriſt, and fo not only | ther x; as in the former Verſe, by, and through Chriſt, for his 
Saints by profeſſion, but true to their profeſhon: Or, 2. rather | 1... 1,4 upon the account of his merit as the procuring cauſe, not 
by way of Explication. He defines thoſe Saints he ſpake of, and| 11. rieetion, but Sanftification ; q. d. God hath choſen us, 
calls them faithful in Chris here, whom he called Saints before. | 4... y,. qoud be made holy and unblamable by Chriſt. Or, 2. 
b The Author and Fountain of that holineſs which denominates| .:1... ;n Chriſt, as the foundation on which he would build us 


them Saints. (his ſpiritual houſe) and by which both we might be united to 


9.4, 2 * Grace be to you, and peace from God our Fa-| God, and he communicate his Influence and Grace to us 3 or as 


ther, and from the Lord Jeſus Chriſt. our head, by which he might convey. grace, and ftrength,; and. 


1.}- 3 * Bleſſed be c the God and Father of our Lord | life to us as Chriſt's Members. m Either before God's Decree of 


1. k | . 6 creating the World, or rather, before his executing that Decree 
nal .* . O 2 * 3 A . © 
Jeſus Chriſt, who hath bleſſed 4 us with all e ſpirit in the attual creation of it, 7. e. from Eternity, when, nor we, 


«1.3.7 bleſſings in heavenly T places g 10 Chrilt þ - -. 1... | nor the world had a being. » By inherent Grace begur! in Rege- 
things © fe, Thanked, praiſed. We bleſs God when we praiſe him| 1@.1t;gn, and carried on in Sandtification and Mortification in this 
6. 12, for, and acknowledge him in his excellencies,-or benefits. 4 Hat 


! Nag , life, tho' not perfected till the other. Holineſs in us is declared 
vouchſafed or communicated all ſpiritual bleſſings to us- God bleſ-| 1... tg he not the cauſe, but the effett of orr Ele&ion: we are 


ſth us when he doth good to us; and fo the word Bleſs is taken] cnn that we may be holy, not becauſe we are, or God foreſces 
in a different ſenſe from what it was in the former clauſe. e Of we will be holv. 0 In the tightof God who is not deceived with 
all forts 6r kinds, f In oppoſition to temporal and worldly, which 11 gyyard appearance, bur looks to the Heart. p As a principal 
the carnal Fews principally .expetted, and the Law moſtly pro- part of our Sanetifncation, and the beſt evidence of the fear of 
miſed, (Deut. 23. 1, 2- to V. 15.) and which were buttypesand| :4 ;1 us, and our obedience to the whote Law. 

ſhadows of thoſe ſpiritual Bleſſings which immediately relate to 


the ſpiritual Life and Salvation of Believers: g Gr Superceleſtial 


1w A *; 
F = 
WY 
4 oh; 
wh. 
M 
k 
b FRI 
f 
| iw 
iF? 
f "i 
* 2T1im-1; HL ; 
3. | 
+ Col. 1, 
220e 
"of 
| 
| 
t 
Þ bi 
4: 4 
it + | 
ApiLa 
5 4 


5 * Having predettinated us to - the adoption of * ror. 9. 


£ ; n hilar yr ! '7 16 + to) htmſe - Farrarding 29.27, ik: i 
or Heavenly, underſtand either 1 Things 3 and then it ſeems to chilcren q by Carift Jeſus | £0 himfelf / according to 29,3 _ 12-4 4 
4 $. ee 4 : fl d leaſ{ur J Of !115 vv 111 ſ + Rom. Wo 
be the ſame as ſpititual Bleſſings, only in other terms. Or, 2-|LnC £004 P1CALULC MS Wi S. GERD 2 PE; LY if 
Plies, in oppoſition to earthly Places, particularly the Land of | q Haviig appointed us unto a ftate of Son-ſhip and right to F2. - , 7 


Ca144, in which God had formerly promiſed to ble!s his People:| Glory; 1 his izems to be more than the former, 2 greater thing Ss 
Theſe ſpiritual Bleſhngs are in heavenly Places, becauſe tho' they| to be tie Sons of God, and Heirs of Heaven, than to be Holy. 

o 0 . y . "Io wy uy a "4 F, = Oo; © Pe 
reach us here on Eatth, yet they are derived to us from God and|r As Mcdiator and Head of the ect, and the tourdation of alt 
Chriſt in Heaven, and in Heaven only have their full perfe&ion| Spiritual Bleſſings vouchlafed them , 2nd tb of this relation into 
and conſummation hereafters þ By, or through Chrift; Upor | which tkcy zre brought; by _ =. £9 his - The —_— 
| 1-5 Þ. THOren 


Vor. IE. 


cy* 2 * 


FAD 


C hil 
<0. 
hin! 


Fath 


from which Predeftination ilſued, God being moved to it by no- 
_ thing out of hjmiclt. 


6 To the praiſe ef the glory of his grace !, where- 
* Mat. 2. in z he hath made us accepted 1a * the beloved ». 


17. 
t Glory 6f Grace, by an uſual *Febraiſm, for glorious GraCe, 7. & 

large, abundant, admirable. The praiſe of this Grace the Apo- 
{le makes the'end of God's chuting, and predeſtinating us to the 
Adoption of Children. God hath choſen us, &c. and therein ma- 
nifeted his Grace to-us, that ſuch as it is in it ſelf, ſuch it may 
be acknowledzed to bez and therefore praiſed and adored by us. 
u Ir, or through, or by the ſame Grace, out of which he choſe us. 
x Having choſen us. in Chritt, he likewiſe favours us, is well 
pleaſed with us in Chriſt, to whom we are united, whoſe Mem- 
bers we are, and in whom God looks upon us. We are hateful 
in our ſelves as Sinners, but accepted in Chriſt as Sons, 

* Afts 29. » * Ja whom y we z have redemption @ through 

= |, Ins blood b, even the forgiveneſs of 1ns c, according 

ſu to the * riches of I1s grace 4. 

1 Pet. 1- 

15. y In Chriſt God-man the immediate worker of this Redemp- 

* Ch 3-8. tion; for tho” the Father and the Spirit concurr'd to it, yet the Re- 

16. eeming work was peculiarly terminated in the ſecond Perſon. 


Thil.4.19+ The other two Perſons have a right of propriety to Redeem us3 
Chriſt only a right of propinquity, as afſuming our Nature, and 
being of Kin to us. # We ele& before-menrioned. 4 Freedom 


from 


are obnoxious, and conſequently the Power of Sin and Tyranny 
of Satan, as the effeds of the former. 
his Death upon the Croſs where h:3 Blood was ſhed. This was 
the price of Redemption paid to God for us, and wherewith his 
Tuſtice being fatisfied, we could no longer be detained under the 
cuſtody of the Devil, or the dominion of Sin. 
not formally Forgiveneſs, but caſually, Forgiveneſs being the effect 
of it; and it is mentioned not as the only or adequate, but the 
prime and principal Fruit of Redemption, and upon which the 
other depend. 
calls Riches of Grace, meaning, plentiful and ſuperabundant 
Grace, by a Phraſe frequently uſed by him elſewhere in the ſame 


ſenſe, Rom. 9. 23» Che 2. 4, 7» 


8 


Ff wiſdom and prudence g. 


e In which Grace before-mentioned he hath abounded toward 
us3 4.e. out of abundance of Grace in himſelf (called Riches of 
Grace, v. 7.) He hath beſtowed upon us wiſdom and prudence. 


The 
ther, 
wiſdo 
what 


revealed but by parts and parcels, and ſo a more ſparing meaſure 
of ſpiritual Wiſdom 3 but under the Goſpel, Believers have it 


more 


ing poured out on them. g Either the Dottrin of the Goſpel 
which contains more perfett, and higher wiſdom than that the 
Greeks ſought after, 1 Cor. 1. 22. and for lack of which, they 
counted the Goſpel fooliſhneſs; or rather, by Wiſdom is underſtood 
that Knowladge or Faith whereby we receive ſpiritual Truths 
revealed to us, and to be believed by us, ſo as to ſee their excel- 
lency, 
the knowledge of the rule of our Duty with skill to govern our 


{elves 


and Prudence the ſame in effe& with Holineſs; the former re- 
iates to the things we are to Believe, the latter to the things we 
are to Do. 
and effettual calling, which the Apoſtle mentions in this Verſe 
as he doth the outward likewiſe, by the Preaching the word of the 
Goſpel in the next. 


*Rom.i6. 9 | 
his will þ according to his good pleaſure ; which he 


hath 


£ Having revealed to us outwardly by the Preaching of the 
Goſpel; inwardly by the Tlumination of the Spirit. þ The whole 
Doctrin of Grace and Salvation by Chriſt, which is a ſecret to 
others, and had ſtill been ſo to us, had not God diſcovered it to 
us in the Goipel. 7 The good pleaſure of God is the fountain of 
all ſpiritual Bleſſings which flow out to us, as well as it is of our 


ing 


& This ſignifies a firm ſettled Will in God, either meerly of God, 
and moved by nothing out of himſelf, or his keeping this purpoſe 


yo 
Chap. I. 
dren come into that fate by the mtervention of the natural 


if for the cauſe of, and motive to his adopting them. Or, 
2. according to our Tranſlation, ro himlelt, 7. e. to God. 
thr, 2. for himſelf, (as the .S7-74c renders it) God would have the 


honour of having many adopted Children that ſhould all call him 


i Ficher, 1. in hiſt, 1. ec. looking no farther than to 


Or, ra- 


»y 


2r. $s Kis4overeign Grace and good Will as the only Spring 


the Wrath of God, and Curſe of the Law, to which we 


b i.e. By the Sacrifice of 
c Redemption 1s 


4 What he called glorious Grace, v. 6. here he 


Wherein he hath abounded e toward us in all 


like expreſhon we have, 1 Tim. 1. 14: f This denotes ei- 
the perfettions or excellency of it, being inſtead of all other 
m, and more excellent than all elſe; or AU in compariſon of 
was under the Old Teſtament. They then had Divine Truths 


fully and largely, the ſpirit of Wiſdom, and Revelation be- 


and have our hearts affeted with them; and by Prudence 


according to it; And fo Wiſdom is no other than Faith, 


In the working theſe two in the Soul, conſiſts inward 


* Raving made known g unto us the myſtery of 


purpoſed in himſelf k. 


firſt choſen and appointed to be the Subjz&s of them. 


EPFHESIANS 


at good pleaſure, and then read, he parpeſed in Limpif jt, 

dd o . . og noe TOY 2 al 
dijperjari0n, &c. but moſt read it as our Tranſlator: ae it in the 
o ip . . & \e wa; = > 
it, only _ underſtand an explicative Particle, r9 wi; Bron any 
ginning of this Verſe, To wit, that in the 4io. fri. 2 IE D&e 
£ g , » 1Þat in the dijpenſation, &. but &- 


ther way the ſcope of the w ; - gf 
\ P t words IS the ſa r) Vit. to give the ſum 


of that myſtery of God's will mentioned before. 7 Tr that admins 
ftration or diftribution of the good things of God's Aw, - rx 
CY WOIKN 


he had determined ſhould be in the fulneis of time. Tt js - 

phor taken from a Steward who diſtributes and dif venſer a Metz- 
ing, to his Mafter's Order to thoſe that are in the NG 
12. 42. The Church is the Houſe of God, God himſelf i # _ 
ſter of the Family, Chriſt the Steward that governs hes Ma- 
thoſe ſpiritual Bleſſings mention'd v. 3. are the good things 5 
gives out, Theſe Treaſures of God's Grace had. been Wa Ny 
but to a few, and diſpenſed ſparingly under the Oid 1g... 
the more tull communication of them being reſerved til} he 6? 
neſs of times when they were to be diſpenſed by Chriſt, wha 
time appointed of the Father for the appearance of Chriſt ;n 1. 
fleſh (according to former promiſes) the promulgation of the f_s 
ſpcl, and thereby the gathering together in one, a1 FN =rags 
Chriſt: It is ſpoken in oppoſition to the times and —_—— - 
Chriſt's coming, which God would have run out till the ſt tin : 
came which he had pitched upon, and Believers expetted : we: 
4. 2,4- # To recapitulate , either to ſum up, as Men do ſeveral kf: 
ſer numbers in one total ſum, which is the foot of the account, bus 


tors do the ſeveral parts of their Speeches in fewer words; Thy 
all former prophecies, promiſes, types and ſhadows center _ 
were fulfilled, and as it were ſummed up in Chriſt; Or rachir 
to unite unto, and gather together again under one head thinss 
before divided, and ſcattered. o All intelle@tual beings, or ;1 
perſons, as Gal. 3.22. p As their Head under which they might 
be united to God, and to each other. q Either Saints departed 

wha have already obtained Salvation by Chriſt, or rather the 
Holy Angels that ftill keep their firft ſtation. r The Ele@ of God 
among Men here upon earth in their ſeveral Generations, The 
meaning of the whole ſeems to be, That whereas the order and 
harmony of God's principal Workmanſhip JntelleQual Creatures, 
Angels and Men had been difturbed and broken by the entrins of 
Sin into the World ; all Mankind, and many of the Angels having 
Apoſtatiz'd from him, and the remnant of them being in their 
own nature labile and mutablez God would in his appointed tine 
give Chriſt (the Heir of all things) the honour of being the ce- 

pairer of this Breach, by gathering together again the disjinted 
Members of his Creation in and under Chrift as their Head and 
Governor, confirming the good Angels in their good eftate, and 

recovering his Ele&t among Men from their Apoſtate condition, 

Tho' it be true, that not only Believers under the Old Teſtament 

were ſaved, but the Ele& Angets confirmed before Chrift's com- 

ing, yet both the one and the other was with a reſpett to Chriſt 

as their Head, and the Foundation of their Unian with God, and 

out of whom as the one being loſt could not have been reſtored, 

ſo the fall of the other could not have been prevented, nor their 

| happinels ſecured, 


11 In whom we / alſo have obtained an ipheri- 
tance 7, being predeſtinated x according to the pur- 
poſe of him who worketh - all things after the coun- 
cil of his own will y. 


Jſ We Apoſtles and others Ele& of the Fewiſh Nation; we mb 
firſt truſted in Chriſt, v. 12. t Are called, or brought into the pat- 
ticipation of an Inheritance, or have a right given us to it as by 
lot; In alluſion to the twelve Tribes, having in the Dirviton of 
the Land of Canaan their Inheritances aſſigned them by lot. He 
ſhews that they did not firft ſeek it, much lels deſerve it, but God 
caft it upon them ; Their lot fell in the heavenly Inheritance when 
others did not. #« This, as well as the forementioned privileges, 
was deligned to us by eternal Predeftination, and tho! it be free, 
and without our procuring, yet in reſpe& of God, it is not caſual, 
but of his ordering. x Powertfully and etfectually z y 7. e. That it 
finite wiſdom of God which is always in conjunttion with his vill 
whereby he atts wiſely as well as freely, and tho' not by delibera- 
tion which falls beneath his infinite perfettion, yet with his great: 
eſt reaſon and judgment. 


12 That we ſhould be to the praiſe of his glory 


; Either, 1. Paſſively, that the excellency and greatne of 
God's Wiſdom, Power, Grace, Mercy, &c. might be ſhewn forth 
in us by our being predeſtinated, called, ſandified, ſaved: Or, 2- 
rather ARively, that we by the holineſs, obedience, and fruit- 
fulneſs of our converſations ſuitable to ſuch privileges, might Ma- 
nifeſt and ſet forth the Glory of him that vouchſated them £0 Us: 
a Who were the firſt fruits of the New Teſtament Church, the 
Goſpel having been firſt preached to the Apoſtles by Corilt him- 
ſelf, and by them to the Fews (their own Nation) and having 


been firſt believed by them. 


13 In whom ye b alfo | rrufted after ye heard the 
word of truth c the goſpel of your ſalvation #5 1N 


called by the Greeks the head of it, and ſet at the tOP; Or as Org- | 


z who firſt - truſted in Chriſt a. he 
boxed 


* Col. I. 
20. 


bo A” wake M ” a ” 
_ ” oy = - - T > ws 

TROY = . : > a war; _—— - b — ”—_ 2. - 6; 

Kok "oo ” *— —_— w * . " d F- _ 
A ® Et s —_ Fe p >” oa 
OE - dS. - RE... V _ 24 
” © Jan \ oy _— _— A o Sno F, 2 - _ cd Som, y + n * 5 
py en —_- » A ——\ 37 Q : : 
+ = uw? A . - EAN hd - 
—_ Fh——_—_—_ — ” —_ - RY 'S., = - = -4 
_ - y » " x a * _ C "= -_ 
- m—_—_ Ad 9 es - EN "__ . - —_———_— fx a oy 
———___. . —— — by ——_— — nm —_ dead __ PAID 
y _— ” OO * S— c— _ 
\ _ —— > " = by 4 $ + - - Z > 
0 - _— p - a i” a Px - 6 I yy 7, -6 WG, y _ me hn © = 
4 > ->Y w 7, "oY LR: I = 4 # . RIPE.” - ih; "* n= = + m__— ” '- «. 
# "X 4 Good of : "+ & 5% i. 22S of -y , "Sv>07 . = ” - _ —FVERE. T WS 
"a on" hoe oF 19% - 5 SITE #4 * rd! > BE SE>. A > . _ - o 
A 5 Io NET ICS + 125 _ Vo "0 * $35 > es % x" SE l ” - % ” & 
«+ - de. = 9Y - : END ng» 0 NS Th, bY Ba, 


in himſelf till the time appointed for the publication of it. 


times ”, he might gather together in one », * all 
{ + Gr.the things o 1n Chriſt p, both which are in f heaven 4, 
Z2vens. and which are on earth r, ever in him. 


this, leaving out the relative which, and concluding the ſentence 


10 * That in the diſpenſation / of the falneſs of 


* Some Copies join the laſt clauſe of the former Verſe with 


whom .*. alſo after that ye believed, * ye were {eal- + » 
ed with that holy ſpirit e of promiſe f. 1.2 


+ Here is a defeft of the Verb in the Greet, which may » 
ſupplied either from v. 11. which ſeems to be the principal Ver b 
in the ſentence, and then it muſt be read, 7 whom Ye aifo Fav? 
obrained an Inheritance: Or from v. 12. truſted, which Ro 
neareſt Verb, ſo our Tranſlation, = whom je Iſo iilic?2 
but neither way makes any difference in 2 fone of th? 


words 


( hap, | Wile 


N, 1. Hl 
1. men 


- 
44 


: 7 ] 
beſto 


things 
21veo! 
70 giv 
thar Vi 
as the 
Vers, a 
that he 
rance, 
making 
times x 
Vorks 1 
but in 
remove 
knowled 
things 
and (0 & 
conſiſts, 
all the 
that 
Chriſt, 
Drace X 
Col, I. © 


18 


neg X, 


\ Whip: þ 


wards. 6 Ye Freef.ns and orher Gorrites, ec The Goſpel, 10 called 
either by an vival Feoratjin for the tru2 word, or by way of E- 
minency, as Containing the moir excellent and neceſſary of all 
*Froths; the Dorin of Righteoulneſs and Life by Jeſus Chrilt ; or 
with reſpec to the Law and its ſhadows, the truth and fub- 
france of which, is held forth in the Goſpel, 4 both in reſpett of 
11> matter contained in ir, ths Doctrin of Salvation, and in re- 
C7} of its efficiency, as being the means whereby God works 
F1ith, and brings to Salvation, Rom. I. 16, Hebe 2.3. of 1 rom 
either is to be referred to Believers: 9g. d. after ye believed in 
Chriſt; or to Sealing, and then it ſhews by virtue of whom this 
hcnefit of Sealing is beſtowed, viz. by virtus of Chriſt. e Ye were 
cured and Aſcertained of your Right to the Inheritance z which 
w2 may underftand to be done either by the Spirit's impreſſing up- 
07 the Soul, the Image of God in the Work of Regeneration, or (be- 
cauſe that cannot ſo well be underſtood to be after believing) 
25 ſome think by his Teſtimony in Mens own Conſciences afterward, 
whether immediate by an overpowring light, ſhining into the Soul, 
and filling it with aſſurance of its Tnteretr in Chrift and Heaven 
or mediate, enabling a Man to diſcern that Tmage of God in his 
Sonl, by which the Spirit bears Witneſs to his Intereſt in the In- 
heritance, and affures him of it; ſce Chap. 4.30. Rom. 8. 16. Gal. 
2 6.  f Becauſe the Spicit's coming was before promiled, or be- 
cauſe he verifies and confirms the Promites, in and to the Hearts of 
Believers. 

(5. 14 * Which is the earneſt of our inheritance g un- 
til tae redemption pf the purchaſed poſſeſſion þ, unto 
th2 praiſe of his glory 7. 

g The Spirit given to, and dwelling in Believers by his Gifts 
and Graces is the earneſt or pledge whereby their Inheritance 15 
ſecured to them, as Men are ſecured the payment of a promiſed 
Sum, bya part given beforehand in earneſt for the reft. 5 Either 
1, the Redemption of the Poſſeſhon is put for the Poſſeſſing of the 
Redemption (by an Hypallage) viz. full and final Redemption 
from Sin, and Death, and Hell, an4 Satan; which Redemption 
though perfectly wrought by Chrift, is but in part applied in this 
Lite, and is to be fully enjoyed in the other ; or 2. rather (though 
to the ſame ſenſe) to the full and final Redemption in the end of 
the World, of all Gods People who are here called his Purchaſed 
Poſſeſhon ; . See the ſame word ſo taken, As 20. 23. and 1 Peter 2. 
9 7 The final Salvation, and complete Redemption of God's Peo- 
ple, will beeſpecially for the Glory of God, 2 Thefſ. 1. 10. 


14, 15 Wherefore] alſo, * after I heard & of your taith 
in the Lord Jeſus /, and love to all the ſaints m, 


+ He was an Eye Witneſs of their firft believing, but here he 
ſpeaks of their encreaſe and conſtancy in the Faith jince, of which 
he had heard by others : 1 z.e. not barely a Belief of Chriſt's Ex- 
cellencies, but a belief of his being their Saviour, their receiving 
and relying on him as ſuch, and ſo a Believing in him as the imme- 
diate object of their Faith, and him by whom they believed in God, 
1 Fer. 1. 21. mM This is added to ſhew the Truth of their Faith 
which works by Love. Lore to the Saints is mentioned as an E- 
vidence of their Love to God ; and to al! the Saints, to ſhew the 
ſincerity of that Love in its not being partial, but reſpetting all 
Saints, and therefore Saints as Saints. 


r.1. 16 * Ceaſe not to give thanks for you z, making 
i. 1. mention of you in my Prayers 0. 


7 For your Faith and Love, and all the ſpiritual Bleſſings God hath 
beſtowed : upon you. 0 IT not only acknowledge what ye have 
received, but pray that what is yet lacking in you may be made up. 


17 That * the God of onr Lord Jeſus Chriit p, the 
Father of glory 4 ry give vnto you the ſpirit of 
ſr wiſdom 7, and revelation / + in the knojvledge 7 of 

_ tim x. | 
'*. pHeijs the God of Chrift not according to Chriſt's Divine Nature, 
but Bis Humane, and as Mediatour, in which reſpea he was fub- 
j-& to the Father. q. The moſt glorious Father, and the Author 
of all Glory, and glorious things, and to whom all glory is due. 
7 A greater meaſure (for ſome they already had) of Faith (as 
verſe 9g, Where it is Cailed Wiſdom) or of the knowledge of the 
things of God, whereof the Spirit is the Author z God is ſaid to 
2iveor ſend the Spirit, where the Spirit works effequally, and ſo 
to give the Spirit of Wiſdom, where the Spirit effe&ually works 
thar Wiſdom. { By Revelation he means not extraordinary, ſuch 
as the Prophets had, but ordinary, ſuch as was common to Belie- 
vers, and expreſſeth the manner of the Spirit's working this Wiſdom, 
that he doth it by removing the covering or veil of natural Tgno- 
rance, (Pſal. 119. 18. Luke 24. 45+) ſhining into the mind, and 
making it ſee what before it ſaw not ; ſometimes new objetts, ſome- 
times new excellencies in objetts before known. Thus the Spirit 
works not only in the beginning; of Faith and ſpiritual Knowledge 3 
but in its farther progreſs, he lets in new Light into the mind, and 
removes ſome remaining degree of natural Darkneſs. # Or Ac- 
knowledgment,which may imply an owning,approving,and embracing 
things before known. u 7. e. God or Chrift, or God in Chrift ; 
ant 10 either he declares here wherein the Wiſdom he mentioned 
conſiſts, viz. the Knowledge of God and Chrift, in whom are hid 
all the Treaſures of Wiſdom and Knowledge ; or rather the end of 
that Wiſdom and Revelation, viz. the acknowledgment of God or 
Chriſt, when we ſo know him, as to own him as ours, to em- 
pes » and love, and wholly ſubject our ſelves to him , 
01, 1. 9, 10s 


18 The eyes of your underſtanding being enlight- 
ncdy, that ye may know what is the hope of his cal- 
132 y, and what the riches of the glory = of his a 1n- 
teritance b in the Salnts c. 


44 
440 
lol, 


ins 


. w# 


* |7:, Fy that Spirit of Revelation: ani this clauſe ex- 


EPHESTA Ne 


| 


Vol. II. 


plains the" former. What the Fye 13. to the Pody, that the Un- 
derftanding is to the Soul. He pravs for a farther devreo of itthu- 
manation tor them. y Either 1, thzobj{&t of Hope, the thing kho- 
ped for, as Col. 1.5. Gal. 5.5. and thn the meaning is; What 
it 5 to the Hope of which God hath called vo by the Goſp=l. Or 
2, the Grace vi Hope, g. 9. that ye may know how orcat, and ivr, 
and well grounded that hope is, which by the Goſpel i5 wrou1 ht 
in you. # The glorious riches, or the abundant glory ; k:cxes of 
Glory and Riches of Grace, wer, 7. and Riches of Glort, Rem. 
23. 4 becauſe he 1s the Father of it ; he gives this Glory as tho 
Father of Glory. As Men &give Inheritances ſuitable to their 
Eſtates, ſo God as the God of Glory, and Farh-r of Glory, gives 8. 
Glorious Inheritance. 6b Hearen, called an Inheritance both in 
reſpett of Believers Title to it by Virtne of their Adoption being 
Heirs of God, and in reſpett of the perpe=ruity of their enjoying, it, 
on which account it is called an Fternal Tnheritance, 27-br. 9. 15- 
c or amorg the Saints, thol? namely that are perfett, who alone 
are polieſſed of the Inheritance, which Saints on Larch have only 
in hope. | 
19 And what z the exceeding EreatneG of his po- 
wer to us-ward who believed 4 * according to the * Col. 5. 
working | of his mighty power e. | EEE 
4 He means that Tower of God which is put forth in the whole Þ, Or o 
of our Salvation, from firſt to laſt : not that abſolute power where- © Pr 
by he can do whatſoever is poſſible to be done, but his ordinate J ws: 
power, or power joined with his Will, whereby not only he will © 
Work in raifing us up at laſt, and finally ſaving us, but hath 
wrought in begetting Faith in us, and doth Work in frill preſers- 
ing that Faith (1 Fer. 1. 5.) and carrying us on in the way of 
Salvation. And this he ſpeaks for the encouragement of the Ephe- 
ſians, that they ſhould not tear falling ſhort of the Riches of the 
Glory of the Inheritance mentioned, ſeeing God who hath by his 
power brought them to Chrilt, is able likewiſe by the ſame power 
to bring them to Glory. e come point the words after »:-ward, 
and read them , 1/þo belizve according 10 the working of hs mighty 
power, &c. and then the meaning mutt be, that the working Faith 
in Believers, is an inftance of his mighty power : He hath ſh2wn 
his power in working Faith, 2nd theretore will ſhew it in the remain- 
der of Salvation which is to foilow. But our Tranſlation favours the 
former ſenſe, and then as in the pitceding Clauſe he ſhews the great- 
neſs of God's Power , fo in this latter the Efficacy of it in its 
—_ Operation, particularly the raiſing up Chrift from the 
Dead. 


20 Which he wrought in Chrift when he raiſed him 
from the dead f, and * ſer him at his own right hand *Pſ. 1103 
h 1a the heavenly places, 5. ” 
f i.e. The Power God exerciſeth towards Believers is ſuch 
as that was whereby he raiſed up Chrift from the Dead. h Hath 
inveſted him with the greateft Honour, Dignity, and Power, 
as Princes ſet the next in Honour, and Arthority to them- 
ſelves at their Right Hands : See arthew 20. 21. 7 Jn the 
higheſt Heaven, called the Third Heaven, 2 Cor. 12; 2. and 
Paradiſe, verſe 4. 


21 * Far above all principality and power, and #phi1.2.9. 
nighr, and dominion &, and every name that is na- Col.2. 1: 


med/, not oaly in this World, bur alſo in that which 
is to come m. 


þ Theſe terms are ſometimes applied to Magiſtrates, and Mn 
in Authority here in the World, 7zr. 3. 1. Fude $. ſometimes to 
Angels, Good Ones, C9. 1. 16. to Evil Ones, Chap. 6. 12. Col. 2. 
15. though with alluſion to Powers in the World, or becauſe by 
them God puts forth and exerciſeth his Power and Dominion. By 
theſe then the Apoſtle underſtands good Angels, as Chap. 2. 19. 
or comprehenfively, all ſorts of Powers both viſible and jinvifible, 
as Col. 1. 16. 1 Pets 3. 22. I Leſt any might think he had 
not named all above whom Chriſt is exalted, he adds this, to take 
all in. Every Name, that is, every Perſon, and every thing which 
hath a Name : whatever hath any Dignity or Excellency. m Be- 
cauſe though it hath a being at preſent, yet it is future to us who 
are not yer poſſeſſ:d of it. Either this Clauſe relates to Chriſt's Sit- 
ting, at his Father's Right Hand, and then it notes the perpetuity 
of his Reign; that his Kingdom is an everlaſting Kingdom, Luke 1. 
33+ or rath-r to the words immediately going before : g. d. if there 
be any Name, any Dignity or Excellency not known in this Life; 
and which ſhall be known in the other; yet be they what they 
may, Chriſt is above them all. 


22 And hath * put all things » under his feet o, «pr g, 5, 
and gave him p to be head q over all things 7 to the x Cor. 154 
Church /, 27.Heb.2. 

2 Either all his Enemies, as Pſc:lm 1c. 1. all except the Church ** 
which is ſaid to be his Pody, or all things more generally of which 
he ſpake before, Angels and Men ; all are made ſubjett to Chriſt, 

1 Pet. 3. 22. 0 put them into a perfet and full ſubj=&ion to him. 
0bj. All things are not yet put under him. Anſw. 1. All things 
are ſo put under him that he can do with them what he plea: 2, 
break all his enemies in pieces when he will, though for many 
reaſons he yet doth it not. 2. They are begun to be ſubjeted 
to him, and by degrees ſhall be farther ſubje&ed riil they be 
perfealy and abſolutely ſubjected unto him, de f:#o as already 
they are de jure, p appointed or Conftituted or made him. q A 
myſtical Head : -ſuch.a one not only as a King is to his Subjects to 
Rule them externally by his Laws, but ſuch as a natural Head 13-to 
the Body, which it governs by way of Influence, conveying Spirits 
to it, and ſo cauting and maintaining ſenie and motion in it, Char. 
4+ 16, Col. 2.19. 7 Either 1. God hath chietly, ad above all be- 


fore mentioned, given Chrift to be the [Tead of the Church ©. 4. 
though he be King and Lord of aj}, yet God hath mad: him 
the only proper Head to the- Chuich omy ; 
him above Principalities and Powers . 


- F- nA } = 
- = , © W- - aP 


God hath fer 
bur eſpecgally hack 
v0inted 


4= 
> 1% & 


« Jn. 7 O—— 
<<. - 
ae 4 


_ a 
Priya woe 
— £2 Id; "% 


= "D2Nk « 
- gs 
"I. _ q 
TIS SI=T 1 
- —M hn 0p om 
—_— oy - 
eg ia own. > —-" Pt a x 
w- 
GA 3 ow . ah, 8 PP = +— wrong mo 
"ar. + ; > : mn 
Wo oF —_— _ "Sa Conan =3 
= k - f + 
=- = TA oF 5 oy - 
w_ Þ — = > 4 


_ + 


==E Ip E == 


"I 


+ 
= ; 
Te 

_— OS. e: 
woe > 

—_ 


_— _— - 4 


oo 
26020 4 I 


Ty = 
A - P (on - - x . On <UEESES 
WW . ” + - 
—_—_—— DU _—_ 4 ng 
_ —— — ul . _ . _ —_ 
< "ER < _ 
m bi - TP >? - _- — ms - 
” . By a_ _ O——_ 
: Þ: ES 2-020 _ —— by 
- Tee q - - ” _ 
z os £ v tn MR - u —SC 4 — 
a - - _ — 
— A——————_ 1 


Chip. IN. EPHE 


S'1T1 XN» 


Chin, nfCh 


appoiated him to Þ> the Head of the Church. Or, 2. Over all } 1. 7. ſee Tſl. 51. 1. and $6.5. *{ *The fountain from whence 1: 
thinss may be meant for the Communication of all good things to | Mercies vouchſaſed to us proceed ; riches of Mercy from py 
the Church, and performing all Othces of an Head to her: An] Love: God ſhews mercy to us miſerable Creatur2s in Ks. 
Head to the Church with a Power over all things for her good. | cauie he loved us from Eternity, v7. with a love of good \i'n 
C1 h-< atholick Church, or whole Collection of Believers through- t Both Fews and Gentiles; there: being the ſame Original OY 
out th World, and in all Ages of it. OO» | oi the calvation of both, "> "INT 
* 1 Cor. 23 * Which is kis body e, the fulnefs of him * that 5 * Even when we were dead in fins, hath * qy;.4. 
g '' FF . wy . rants” QNICk- #7 
2 2.27.Che filletit all 11 ail ned # us together with Chrilt x - by prace vo ©. 
4.12. and 7+ j,e, A myſtical ons, whereof every Member is influenced by faved y. ws I ria >. win I 
5- 23,39 the Spirit of Chriit the Head, as in the natural Body che Members 4 Hath raiſed us up from the Death of Sin to the Life of 121... 4 bo 
Cel.1.13. are influenced by Spirits derived from the natural Head. « The $6 _ +44 carp lie > LIC O! RIghtes 4: 
+ 3 Cor LE CooL tntoalat hi zerfonally bot Relatively 1Ciog nor only IN Our Juſtification n Which Gud irco; Us trom $01.5, 
1 Cor. Church is called the Fulncſs of Chriſt, not Perſonally but Rela Tlowr obnoxiouſnel to eternal Deat) os as ad rom v3.1, 
12.5. Col. contidered, and as Head of the Church; The Head is incomplete fr. en: EN WML YIVCS US 2 Right to etorn, + Cr, ; 
: ) > Gy . = 134-4 w.1ld | Lite, who before were dead in Law, (though this may be jt. whon 
2» Lie without the Body ; Chriſt in his Relative Capacity as a Head would ded) b rg; - exe Sn 9 ve Mc +1 Cor. 
ww ap of . nh. x Left | 9ed) but eſpecially in our Regeneration by the infuiion of a view /1uc 
not be complete without his myſtical Body the Churct. © | orinciples Either, *, Ga ianickning Chriſt hath ati ov. Ira} £14 19. 2. 
C brit ſhould be thouzht to have any need of the Church, becauſe, En A. $04, 41, 25 M64" M __ 4110 QUickned ts ir | 1,21 
: , SIT ry. = her (lf is | 53 Chriſt's quickning or receiving his Life after Death hoo we nn þ 
of her being faid to be his Fulneſs, it is added, that ſhe her ſelt 1s only the Te WE oe foivienal Entiverins.. ome 
"led by Chrift =o En. In Ks Body and all the Members -of | ©2'Y ne 2 yPe ang Exemmar Or QUE IPILITUU EniVening or Regs. 
filed by Chriſt, Chriſt hlls all 740% Brat OR neration, but the cauſe of it, in as much as we are quiukned ag wa. 
it With the gifs and Graces of his Spirit, CPP. 4+ 10 ritorioully by his Death, ſo cftettually by his Lite: Chriſt a 
Þ I ving died and riſen again exerciſeth that Power th: Father _ 
C HIAÞP. . | | him of quickning whom he will, Fob 5. 21. Or, 2. ia « bit't a; 
Their former miſery and preſent good eſt 1e in Ctriſt, of Grdcey by Faith, our Head Virtually, and by the Power of his Reiurrection afuatiy + 
and not from works, 1 — 9+ but creatzd oj Gog 171 Chriſt unto good Or, 3. by the ſame Power whereby he raiſed up Chriſt from th. 
works: © beir 9 19 longer Gentiles, uncircumciſed, out of Covenant, | Dead, Ch, 1. 19. See the like expreihion, Cul. 2. 13. »y Some road 
and without hav? of Stheation 4 but in Chriſt Coparimers oj ets G74, | the words without a Parentheſis, ſupplying &y wiyjc, and {© rf. 
IO — 17. 4d both Jew and Gentile are called by phe Geſp-l, 2nd by] them to Chriſt, quickned us together with him by whoſe grace Jeare (te 
one and the ſane ſpirit have acceſs to Cod aid Jre biitit together upon ved ; but if the Parenthelis ſtand, yet hers ſeems tO be a conex- 
whe foundation of the Prophets and Apoſtles, Wizoſe COrner-aFoue 18S 10N with the foregoing words, at leaft a reaſon of the {\pOitle's 
Chrit, unto 4 Temple of God, 18 —- + 21- ; bringing in theſe; for having mefitioned God s great Love, 4, 
I N 1D vou hath he quickaed y that were dead & in | 2s the cauſe of their ſpiritual enlivening here, which IS the bevin. 
; fri G ning of their Salvation; he infers from thence that the whos gr FROM Jo 
Cre alles and 11S 4- --& of ; their Salvation is of Grace, 7. e. alike free, and as much i: g* | 
» This Verb quickned iS not in the Greek, but the dete C Ot = God's great Love, as the beginning of it, viz. their quicknizo 
may be ſupplied trom C _P. I. _— 4 __ pramgr hoon =] = | 
mY tO us-wird, and t0 you that were dead 111 treſpaſjeS and fuS, Wt CT f 
Et arrilat ( Ker being included = Parcnthetis, which . 6 And hath raiſed 2:5 up together XZ, and ImNaVo c 
thovzh long, yet is not unuſual. Or rather, as our Tranilators and | {it together in heavenly places in Chriſt ſeſus " 
others do from Verſe 5. of this Chapter, where we have the word + Either this may be underſtood of a farther degree of ſhirina a 
quictr24. 1t imports a reſtoring of ſpiritual Life by the RENO Lite in the progreſs of Santtification vouchſafed to Yelicvers in this £ 
of a viral principle (in the work of Regeneration) whereby Men } \yor1d, or rather of the Reſurrettion of the Body which i (1: - 
are enabled to walk with God in newn«-[s of Lite. 7 Spiritually, to be raiſed together with Chriſt, becauſe it is to be raiſed by 1; , 
nor Narurallyz 7. e. deftitute of a principle ot ſpiritual Lite, and ſame Power that raiſed him up, and by virtue of his Reſurrection, " 
fo of any ability for, or diſpoſedneſs to the Operations and Motions in which we have Fellowſhip with him as being united to him, £1; a 
of ſuch a Life. a The Prepoſition 77 is wanting in th2 Greer bY | our Head, and Repreſentative. Our ſpiritual Enlivening, «+, " 
an Flliis, but the expreſſion is Full, Co/. 2. 13. this Dative Caſe | we have not only fundamentally in Chrift when reſtorcd toi, ” 
therefore is to be taken in the ſenſe of the Ablative. By thele | but actually begun in our ſelves in our effettual calling ; buc the Fo 
words he means either all ſorts of fins, habitual and actual, lels Or | Reſurrection of our Bodies, and our titting in Heaven wz hare h; 
greater z or rather promiſcuoully and indifferently the ſame thing | nor as yet attually fulfilled in our ſelves, yet have it in Chriſt our = 
ſeveral ways expreſſed. Sin is the caule of ſpiritual Death z Where | Head, who roſe for us and we in him, and fits in Heaven for us = 
Sin reigns, there is a privation of ſpiritual Life. and we in him may be ſaid to {it there too by reaſon of ou: Union " 
*C01.3.79., 2 * Wherci: 1a time palt ye walked b according tO | with him, and being members of him. | 
*Ch.6.12. the courſe of this world c, according to * the Prince | - That in the ages to come b he might ſhe c the UN 
_ - 4 of the power e of the air f, the {pirit that NOW g | exceeding riches of his grace in his kindgefs toward Cl 
©: worketh h in * the children of diſobedience z. us through Chrilt Jeſus 4. a 
b Converſed in a continual courſe of Life. They were alive ro| 6 Inall ſucceeding Generations while the World continues, c As Ta 
Sin, when dead 7 Sin; or by Sin dead to ſpiritual good, « Either | in an inſtance or ſpecimen, 1 7im. 1. 16, q. d. God's kindne{s tos = 
according to the Age of the World that then was, or Men then in | Believers in this Age fince Chriſt's coming, 1s ſuch an inſtance of tlie hav 
the World, or according to the cuſtom and mode, the ſhape and | exceeding Riches of his Grace, as may be an encouragement to {u- _ 
faſhion of the World. The ſame word here tranſlated courſe is ren- | ture Generations 'to embrace the ſame Chriſt in whom we hare the 
dred 1/0r1d, Rom. 12. 2. be not conform?d (configured or faſhioned) | believed. 4 By and through whom God conveys all faving be- _ 
26 theIVorld, i. e. to the ways and manners of it. So here accord- | nefits to us. poet 
ing to the Courſe, is according to the ways of Men in the World, : * = Prin 
both in Manners and Religion. d The Devil, or as Mar. 12. 24, 8 For by grace e arc ye f ſaved g throngh a1 2, * Rom Ne 
25. the Prince of Devils. e Power for Powers, as they are called, and that not. of your ſelves 7, * ir zs the gift of God & ai 
Chap. 6. 12. thoſe Devils or Powers of Darkneſs are marſhalled | e The free favour of God, as v. 5. f Even ye EpheFans, Gr * Nt Bleſ 
under him as their Prince, who ſets upa Kingdom to himſelf in op- | z77-s, who had not ſuch promiſes made to you as the Fews had, 7. 12. fb 
poſition to Chriſt, f That are in the Air, this lower Region (by | g From firſt to laſt, from your calling, vey. 5. to your glorification, -* Y I 
God's permiſhon) that they may be ready and at hand to tempt | ver. 6. 0bj. How are Believers ſaid to be ſaved, when they arc one 
Men, and do miſchief in the World. Or that work ſo many etfetts | not yet glorified ? A;;ſw. 1. Becauſe Chriſt their Head is glorined, Lith 
in the Air, raiſe Storms and Tempeſts, &c. as in-the caſe of Fob | 2. Becauſe their Salvation begun in their effeual calling ſhall be ; 
and his Children. g Even at this time {ince the coming of the Go- | as certainly accompliſhed in them as it is begun in them, and pez- 2nd 
tpel ſtill continues to work. þ EffeQuually works in; rules, and | feed in their Head Chriſt. By which ye lay hold on che grace awed 
governs, and acts them, 2 Tim. 2. 26. 7 By an Hebraiſm, they | offered you in the Goſpel. Faith is not conſidered here as a worx 25, fad 
that are addicted to Diſobedience, 7. e. Obſtinate Sinners. done by us, but as an inſtrument or means applying the Grace and Ti # 
*Tit.3-3- 3 * Among whom alfo we all & had our converſati- | Salvation tendred to us. i Not for your own worth, nor by your ing 
Go the on ! in times paſt, in the luits of our fleſh 2, fulfilling _ Ned. Ba OTIS __ Go ratio 
ills. + Aft , « « y DY L . S OPPO: «a 47" eem 
*Pl. 51.5. 6 cn A—_ ; _—_— = Kan * the Sn 0, _ lates not meerly to Faith immediately preceding, but to tte whole RR 
Rom. 5. OE 7 NALULIE P CiNIUYEN OT Wrat @F aS WEU AS | Sentence. the 0 
v2: 2. 7 Q "Ss WNT ; ” ia rt Yo Ms 
t We Apoſtles and Believers of the Fews. Either Paul by al © * Not of works /, left any man ſhon1d bog *Rt ey 
Cenofis reckons himielf among them , though not guilty with I Any Works whatever, and not only works of me Corn 
them z or rather though he were not an 1dolater as the Epheſians, | £25 FOT if they only were excluded the oppotition pag I 
vet he had been a Blaſphemer, and a Perſecutor, 1 Ti. 1. 13 and | 224 Man, Grace and Works were not right, which yer we 177 © even 
though he were blamcleſs as to the Righteouſneſs of the Law, often elſewhere, (lee Rome 11. 6.) Men might not os ogg Ces þ 
Phil. 3. 6. yet that was only as to his outward converſation, and Works of the Ceremonial Law, and yet till be ſaved ref _— 260 new 
ſill he might fulfil the defires of a fleſhly Mind. 7 Walked in| Z themſelves. m Glory in their own worksor worth, 25 M270 
the fame way after the courſe of the World, &c. m Fleſh is here | 2Pf £0 do, when they think they have any thing of their 082 6m Fig 
taken more generally for depraved Nature, the whole principle of | "Er ibutes to their Salvation. See gm. 3. 27. and 4: 2: We. tior ; | 
Corruption. in Man. 7 The inferiour and ſenſitive Faculties of the 10 For we z are * his workmanſhip - crcatec 1 * 5. of => 
Soul, as appears by the oppoſition of the Fleſþ ro the Mind. | Chriſt Jeſus p to good works q which God hat! before 15% monte 
0 ihe ſuperiour and rational Powers, to denote the depravation | yt. Halned = CO Eons, Wn, L- © a 
of the whole Man even in his beft part, and which ſeems to have on __ 7 That WO ſhouid Valk _ pg k 2: Mon jou, whic 
reditude left in it; tothe former belongs the filthinels of the Fleſh, |, 7 We Believers both Fews and Gepriles. o Not on) as ed, Gor, Nh 
tothe latter that of the Spirit, 2 Cor. 7. 1. ſee Rom. 8. 7. Gal. 5. 19 but eſpecially as Saints, which is the proper meaning mit" , Cy; kg 
-" 7 iv by cu TT IOe: | | The [/raelitiſh People formerly were God's Work, #/-ur-rePonn y or, "Om 
29, 21. Þp Not meeriy by cuſtom or imitation, but by Nature as | 1 2 . Re PR, To Law 9 
now conftituted tince the Yall. q By an Hebrailm, for Obnoxious| 22: G. If1ah 43- 21. and 44. 21. fo arc þchevels _ one 95 ke 
to Vrath, as *ens of Death, 1 Sm. 26. 16. for worthy of, or lia- Goſpel, being new Creatures, CG 1142157315 Ge Th. 3 me POINT oh Don ” 
ble ro Doh, firms what he faid before, that by Graze we are fi, HA 45 #7. —_ 
"© 2" "IE 2 Burt God who * i; rich r-in mercy. for his great 0j Works, in that we are God's Workmanſhip, and are Ara Kr ls 
LL EEE, JI 8, S'3 0 by him e're we can do any good wort, and hi torming «> = ws 10 
= 46k © wh tee IEC 10% Ct 113 Fo Regeneration is a part of the Salvation mentioned, v7 2% 7 es, 
” PARICGOR LS Richen 0. NIETY RCFG, As Riches of Grace, Chrp.| Who as our Head enlivens us as Members uniced 00 £12 27 55h "0 


As the firſt Creation was by Chrift as tie Second Perſon in the, 


Trinity, Fohn 1. 2. ſo the ſecond Creation is by the ſame Chrift as 
Mediator, the Lord and Head of the new Creation, in whom we 
| live and move, and have our new being, 'and not in our (clves, 2 
Core 5-17- . qAs the immediate end for which we are now created. 


\We receive our new being, tat we may bring forth new Works, : 


and have a Carriage ſuitadle to our new Principle. r Or rather, 

_ as the Margin, prepared, 1. e. preparcd and fitted us for them, by 
| enlightning our minds to know his Will, diſpoſing and inclining 
our Wills, purging our Atﬀections, &c. f 1. e. "that we ſhould 
glorite God in an Holy Converſation agreeabie to that Divine 

Nature, whereof we are. made Partakers in our new Crea- 

t10NN, : ; Ts 

+1Cor. 11 Wherefore * remember that ye being in time 

-% paſt Gentiles in the fleſh 7 who are cailed uncircum- 

CL1-2t-cifion 4, by that whicſ 1s called the circumclion 1n 
the fleſh made by hands -. 

z Either, 1. Carnal, Unregenerate, as Rom. 8. 3, 9. Or, 2. Ra- 
ther Uncircumciſed in the Fleſh, as well as in Heart, Ezek. 44+ 7+ 
ſuch as neither had the Grace ſignified, nor the Sign repreſenting, 
it. e By way of Reproach ; to be Uncircumciſed being the Badge 
of them that were not //raelires, and ſo were not in the number ot 
God's People. x i. e. By thoſe that are Circumciſed,; The Ad- 
ftra& here, as in the former Clauſe, bcing put for the Concrete. 
He means the carnal Fzws, who had the Circumcilion of the Fleſh 
which was made with Hands, but not that of the Heart, Rome 2+ 29- 
made without Hands, Co. 2. 11. 

12 That at that time ye were without Chriſt y, be- 
ing aliens from the commonwealch of Ifrael x, and 

zone 9+ [rangers from * the covenants of promiſe 4a, having 
no hope 6, and without God c in the world 4. 

y1.e. Without knowledge of him, or intereſt in him. This 1s 
the Foundation of all other Miſeries, as Chrift is the Foundation of 
all laving good, and therefore the Apoſtle begins with rhis. +3 The 
Church of God confined formerly to the Iſraelites: Their Church 
and State was the ſame Body, and God the Founder of, and Law- 
giver to them in both reſpezts. 4 Thoſe Covenants in which the 
ercat promiſe of Chrift and Salvation by him was made, The Co- 
venants were ſeveral, as that with Abraham, and that by Moſes, 
and ditfer'd in ſome accidents, but the promiſe in them was one 
and the fame, which was the ſubſtance of each. 6b Viz. Beyond 
this Lifez as they could not but be who were without Chrift, 
and without the Yromiſes. c Not without ſome general know- 
edge of a God, but without any ſaving knowledge of him, as not 
knowing him in Chrift : Or they lived as without God, neszle&ing 
him, and being negleded by him, and ſuffer'd to walk in their 
own ways. 4 Which is the Congregation of the wicked, and is 
here oppoſed to the Church. 

:3 Burt now in Chritt Jeſus e ye who were ſome- 
times far off f are made nigh g by the blood of 
Chriſt h. | 

e Either in the Kingdom of Chrift, or Goſpel Adminiftration, 
Gal. 5.6. or, ye being in Chriſt, united to him by the Spirit and 
Faith. Being in Chrift here, is oppoſed to being in the World, 
v.12, f Far from God, from his Church, from his Promiſes, Ec. 
having no Communion with him by his Spirit. He means a ſpiri- 
tual diſtance, yet ſeems to allude to ſi. 49. 1, 12. Thole Gentiles 
there mentioned being eſtranged from God in their hearts, as well 
as removed from his People in place. g Brought into a ſrate of 
communion with God, and his People, and participation of their 
Privileges, and right to the Promiſes. hþ The merit of his 
Death expiating Sin ( which cauſed this diſtance ) and ſo mak- 
ing way for their approach to God, and enjoyment of Goſpel 
Bleſſings. 


Ci. 1.5. 14 For * hc is our peace 7, * who hath made both 
one k, and hath broken down the middle wall of par- 
Ltion between us /. 

7. e, Peace-maker, or Mediator of Peace, both between God 
and Man, and between Few and Gemile, He is called our Peace, 
..28, 38 elſewhere our Righteouſneſs, Redemption, Salvation. * God is 
* ſaid to reconcile us, 2 Cor. 5. 19. but Chrift only to be our peace. 

t1.e. One Pody, or one People, or one new Man, v. 15. 1 Hav- 
ing taken away the Ceremonial Law, which was as a Wall of Sepa- 
| ration between F:w and Gentile, as appears in the next. verſe. Tt 
; ſeems to be an alluſion to that Wall of the Temple which parted 
: between the Court of the People into which the F-ws came, and 
the outmoſt Court, that of the Gemmiles, who when they came to 
Worſhip, might not come into the other Court, and were exclud- 
&d by this Wall. 
2 15 * Having aboliſhed mz in his fleſh» the enmity o 
Cor, ©ven the law of commandments contained 11 ordinan- 
7. CSp, for to make q in himfeit 7 of twain /, one * 
6. new man #r, /o making, Pace 2. 

m Abrogated, taken away the power of binding Men. .» Not 
the fleſh of ſacrificed Beafts, but his own Fleſh: Before he men- 
tioned his Blood, and now his Fleſh, to imply the whole Sacrifice 

* of Chriſt, comprehending his Fleſh as well as Blood. The Cere- 
Leu monies had their accompliſhment in Chrift; and ſo their aboliſh- 
— ment by him. o By a Metonymy he ſo calls the Ceremonies, 
4 Which were the cauſe and the ngn of enmity between Few and 
Gentile, The Fews hated the Gentiles as Uncircumcited, and the 
= Gentites deſpiſed the Fews for being, Circumciſed. þ Either by the 
Law of Commandments, the Apoſtle means the Law of Ceromo- 
pen” nl Rites, and by the word which we render 0ri2ances, he means 
Dottrin, and then (the word contmined not being in th Gre.) the 
od ſenſe is, that Chritt by his Dectrin or Commandments abeliſh- 

& thoſe Coremonial Rites: The word Commandment ieems thus 

5 fo be uſed, Deut. 16. 12. and 1 &irgs 2. 3. Fze%. 19. 21, Or elle 
to 21H yet comes to the fame) the word renuered Ordinances tigni- 


ll 10s 


In 10, 


EPHEST4 


(hn. II 


x. 
fies ſuch Ordinances as dep2nded vron the file wilh of the T.2w 
Erver, and is, C91.2. 14. taken for Cremor.iz! on. and fo is to 
be taken here. This the Apoſtle ſeems to aid, to fhew whit 
part of the Law was Abrogated by Chrift, ©:;-. nothing of ti: 
Moral! Law, but only the Ceremonial. 4 Or 'r222e, or form, it 
oppontion to 4vlifh. r By Qnion with Bin If as the Head in 
which the ieveral Members agree. 1 wo Lodics or tro Veonle, 
Fews Or Gentiles. tr i, e New Body or new (viz. Chrittian) 
People. As the Body of a Common-wealth is one civil Fertor, 
ſo the Pody of the C hurch i; in alike (ene ons Perſon. 4 Betwern 
Few and Gentile, jiaving taken away thoſe Ceremonial Laws, 
which were the caule of the difference berween them. 
16 Aa that he might reconcile both unro God 
my one body y by the Crofs z, * having !laia the en- * Rom. 6: 
mity - thereby 4. 6, 
x Another end of Chriſt's aboliſhing, the Ceremonial T aw, <iz, -2<-18 
That he might reconcile both Few and Gentile (all the Het toge- T Or, 7 
ther) unto God: And in this reſpect eſpecially he is our Peace. hin fs 
Y Either both People united as one myſtical Vody, or rather this 
one Body here, is the Body of Chriſt oftercd up to God as the means 
of Reconciliation, Col. 1. 22. 7 7. e. By the Sacrifice of himſelf 
upon the Croſs. 4 The enmity between God and Man by ex- 
piation of Sin the cauſe of it. Of this enmity the Ceremonial 
Law was a Witneſs, Col. 2. 14. as well as a Sign of that betwesn 
Few and Gentile. 


that were aiar off c, and * to them that were 
aAgh d. 

b Partly in his own Perſon as to the Fews, and partly by his A- 
poſtles whom he appointed to Preach the Goſpel to the Grztles: 
S0 2 Core 13. 3. ©c Far from the knowledge of the truth, from 
Chriſt, and $alvation by him, as v.13. d Nigh in compariſon of 
the Gentz/es, nigh by the knowledge of God and his Law, and the 
promiles of the Meſſiah. See ſi. 57. 19. 

16 For * through him'e we both have an acccf / * Rom. 5 
by one Spirit g unto the Father. 

e As our Mediator and Peace-maker, who hath reconciled us t9 
God. f Are admitted or jntroduced. & By the Holy Ghoft who 
1s Our Guide to lead us to the Father, as Chriſt is the way by which 
wegotohim, Fchr 14. 6. As there is but one Mediator through 
whom both Fews and Gentil:s come to God, :{o bur one and the 
ſame Spirit, Chap. 4. 4. 

19 Now therefore ye arc no more frangers, and 
foreigners h but * fellow-citizens with the faints z, 
and of * the honſhold of Gcd k. * 

þ Such are they that may dwell in a City, but are not Free of it. ,.. 

He means the ſame as v. 12. they were not now Aliens from the ' 
Common-wealth of 1ſ-ael, &c, i Members of the fame fpiriczual 
Society or Corporation with other Saints, Patriarchs, Prophets, &c. 
The Church of God is compared to a City, of which every Saint 

is a Member or Free-man, Phil, 3. 20, & The Church is here 
compared to an Houſe, as 1 Tim. 3. 15. They are ſaid to be of 
the Houſhold that belong to it, but eſpecially the Children. 
Among Men, Servants are counted Domeſticks, but with God 
none but his Children, 

20 And are * built * upoa the forndatioa of the * x Cor. 
apoſtles and prophets /, Jetus Chrilt himlelt being the 32 2 =- 
chief corner fone m. POPs. 3s 

1 The foundation which the Apoſtles and Prophets laid by their *h ox, 21. 

Preaching, viz. Chriſt, whom they held forth as the only Mediator ; ,, | 
between God and Man, the only Saviour and Head of the Church ; * 
Sec 1 Cor, 3. 11. Foundation in the Singular Number, to imply the 
unity of their Do&rin centring in Chrift, Apoſtles and Prophets, 
whoſe Office was to Preach, not Kings and Patriarchs, m As both 
ſupporting the building by his ſtrength, and uniting the ſeveral 
parts of ir, F?w and Gemile: See Mat. 21. 42. Til. 11S. 22, 
They that are of chicf Authority are called the corners of a Peo- 
ple, as ſuſtaining the ggcateſt burthen, 1 Sam. 14. 33. /ſ7. 19. 13. 
Obj. If Chrift be the corner Stone, how is he the Foundation ? 
Anſw. The ſame thing may have different denominations in diffe- 
rent reſpetts; Chriſt is called a Foundation, 1 C7. 3. 11. a corner 
Stone, 1 Per. 2.6, a Temple, Fohz 2. 19. a Door, -Fobn 10. 7. a 
Builder, Mat. 16. 18. ſo here again a corner Stone, and yet laid 
for a Foundation, 1/.:. 28. 16. 

21: * In whom 7 all the building o fitly framed to- * Ch. 4. 
gether p groweth q uuto an * holy Temple 7 1n the _ 
Lord / LY 

7 Or pom whom, viz. Chriſt the Foundation. o Whatſoever * 4 Cor, 
is built on Chrift the Foundation, and 6 a!l particular Eelievers 4, js, 
as the ſeveral parts of the Building. p Joined and united both to 
Chrift the Foundation by Faith, and to each other by Love. 

q Either, 1. ariſcth; the Building goeth on till it come to be a 1 em- 

ple. Or, 2. It notes the Stones or Materials of the Houfe to bz 
living ones, receiving life from Chrift, 1 Per. 2. 5. Growth {up- 
poſeth life. The Verb is in the Preſent Tenſe, to tignifte that 

the Builders are fill at work, and this Temple not. yet finiſhed. 

7 Tn allufjon to the Temple at Ferufalem, whereas the Holy of f0- 

lies was a Type of Heaven, lo the Temple it ſelt was a Type oi 

; the Church, both as it was the place of God's Preſence, and of 

| his Worſhip. ſEither this muſt be joined to growrh, and then it 

'1i5 a Pleonalm, the Antecedent b2ing here repeated, though th= 
Relative had been expreſſed, and ict implies the Growth of Be- 
lievers (the materials of this ſpiritual Building) ro be. from 
Chrift. Or it may bg,joined with #7y, and thea It {1gnific3 that 

they have their Holineſs trom Chritr, or is may be read Huly 

13 the Lord, and then it expretſes the nature of this Templr, 

that it is undefiled, conſecrated iv the Lord, aud mect for 

him. : : ny 
22 * In whom you alf are buicted together, for ? 3 #7 


KY 


an habitation of Gol ; Laronght the SHILL ve. 


I Ei 


py. 


to 
”- _ 
B—— os 
oC 
W) 
- 


þ» md _}; 


ty CG 
[ ef 


Ml [4 
x *þ 
1 \' 
y: | ; 
"y 
i 


Chap. BI 


: A Temale whore Goll may dwell, Not only the whole Colle- 
tion of Bclizrers is called the Temple of God, bur particular 
© hurch2s, and particular Saints are ſo called, becauſe of God's 
dwolling in them by his Spirit; SEC I Cor. 3. IG, 17. and 6. 19. 
4 This may relate either to the words immediately going before, 
an Hubitation of God, and then the meaning is, an Habitation or 
Temple in which God dwells by his Spirit z or tothe Verb Builded, 
aad then they import the building of them into a Temple to be the 
Operation of the Spirit, working that Faith and Love in them 
whereby they are united to Chrift the Foundation, and to the ie- 
veral parts of the Building. 


CHABRE IM. 

The kidden Myſtery that the Gentiles ſhould be calle4 and ſaved, was 
madz known 10 Paul by Revelation, with Commiſſion ro publiſÞ this 
Dottrin, to declare the fellowſhip of th? Myſtery, and the manifold wij- 
dom of God according t0 his eternal Decree, 1 =— 12. He exhorts 


. . . TN! +7 + wk Y A FS 4 
them not 19 grow remiſs during bis Aflicatons , prJiys thas Chriſt may 


dwellin their Fearts by Faith, and thy may perceive the great Love of 
Chriſt toward them ,, with a Thankſgiving, 13 at, 


1 FOR this cauſe x I Paul * the priſoner of Jeſus 
Phil. 1. 74 briſt y * for you Gentiles z 
12,14, 16. x 1.e. That ve may be farther Confirmed in the Faith of Chriſt, 
Col. 4. 3. and more and more built up in him as an Habitation of God, c#. 2. 
* Col. 1. +. 22. » For Chriſt's ſake, for afferting his Cauſe and Honour : 
24.2 Tim. See 2 Tim. 1. $. Philem. 1. 9. #4 For your Cauſe and Salvation 
2. 10, having preached and declared the Grace of God to be Free, and to 
belong to you'Gentiies as well as to the Fews (the middle wall of par- 
tition being taken away) and ſo equalled you with them. 'there 
is no ſmall difference among Expoſitors about the connexion of 
theſe words; the faireſt and eafieit ſeems to be: Either, 1. that the 
Subſtantive Verb am be here ſupplied, and the words read, I Paul 
am the Priſoner of Jeſus Chriſt, q. 4. I have for ſome time been 
and ftill am the Priſoner of Jeſus Chrift. Or, 2. that this Verſe be 
joined ro the 14th, (all the refit from wv. 2. to the 12th, being in- 
cluded in a Parenthetis) where he begins with the ſame words as 
here, and ſo we may read it thus, verſe 1. For this cauſe Paul the 
priſoner, &c. and then verſe 14. I ſay, Fer this cauſe 1 bow my 
knees, &c. viz. praying that ye. maybe ſtrengthned with Might 
by his Spirit, &. i. e. That they might be more and more built 
up on Chriſt on whom they were founded, and had begun to be 
builr, 
2 [fye have heard 2 of the diſpenſation of the grace 
»* Ads 12. Of God b * which is given me to youward c. 
e. Gal. 1, #4 This doth not imply Doudting, but rather the Apoftle takes 
15. the thing for granted, q. d. Seeing ye have heard, and ſo ſome 
render it. See the like, 1 Pet. 2.3. bEither by Grace he means 
his Apoſtleſhip, as, Rom. 1. 5. Gal. 2. 9. or the Free Grace of 
God for Salvation revealed in the Goſpel which he was to Preach, 
and then by Diſpenſation we muſt underſtand his Commiſion, or 
Ordination of. God to that work, viz. to publiſh that Grace 
whereof the Miniſters of the Goſpel are the Ditpeniers, 1 Cor. 
4. 1. c To you Epzeſi.ms and other Gentiles for whom particularly 
I am appointed an Apoſtle, is 9g. 15. and 26. 17, 18. Gal. 
78 A 


* Ch. 4. I. 


* Ats22. 3 * How that by revelation 4 * he made known 
17.21. unto me the myſtery e (* as I wrote -þ afore fin few 
* Rom. words: 
? 
IG. 4 Þ 4 Not by Man, but immediately, As 9.15. Gal. 1. 12. e viz. 
RP * of calling the Gentiles to Salvation by Faith in Chriſt, without the 
CN. I. works of the Law, verſe 6. f In the two former Chapters of this 
by 23S]. Enftle. | ah 
+ Or, 4 A : 
Mooke bb 4 Whereby when ye read g ye may underſtand my 
fore. knowledge in the myſtery of Chriſt) 
Or unto which attendinz. 
* As 19, 5 * Waich 1n other ages þ was not made known 
29, anto the ſons of men 7, as it is now revealed unto his 
holy apolties and prophets & by the Spirit /. 
h Tn the times before Chriſt's conging in the fleſh. 7 That the 
Gentiles ſhould be called, was formerly known and foretold, but 
not as {ince, viz. as to the time and manner of it, and the means 
whercby it ſhould be effeted. k New Teftament Prophets, ch. 4. 
11. Kon. 12. 6. and 1 Core 14. 13. Either by the Spirit's being 
poured out on the Geyriles, it was known that they ſhould be Co- 
heirs with the believing Fews; or rather by the Spirit inftruing 
th Apoſtles and Prophets, and immediately acquainting them with 
tliis myſtery. 
* Gal. 3- , ©. 1 har the Gentiles * ſhould be tellow-heirs »;, and 
29. * of the ſame body z, and * partakers of his promile o 


* Ch. 2. 11 Chriſt p by the goſpel g. 
15, 16, 1m 1. e. Have an equal right to the Heavenly Inheritance with 
* Gal. 3+ the believing F2ws. 2 The ſame myſtical Body whereof Chriſt is 
T4. th2 Head. o The great promiſe of the Covenant which compre- 
hends all the reſt under it. p Jn whom all the promiſes have 
their accompliſhment, 2 Cor. 1. 20. q As the means or inſtru- 
ment by which God works Faith, whereby they are made partakers 
of the Promiſe, Fellow-heirs, 6c, 
* Rom. 11 7 Whereoft I was made a miniſter * according to the 
5. g1tt of the grace of God 7, given unto me by the * ef- 
* Ch. 1. tectual working of his power / 
Is 7 Either according to the free Gift of God, and which was given 
meerly of Gracz; or by z/fr he underſtands all thoſe ſeveral Gifts, 
{a5 0f knowledze, utterance, ©c.) which were the neceſſary quali- 
cations and furniture of an Apoſtle for the due diſcharge of his 
Ofic2, all which were freely given to him. [ Whereby God made 
1:11 2 Preacher of the Goſpel, who had been a Perſecutor of Be- 
t2vcrs, and wrought effectually by the Spirit with his Preaching for 
the Converſion of thouſands, and ſpreading the Goſpel in many 
Countrivs, and licwwile wrought Miracles for the confirmation 


EPHESIANYG 


of the Truth, and conviftion of Hearers, 45; x R 
23. 8. 
8 Unto me who am Icſ5 than the leaſt of all Saints ; 
i5 this grace given, that * I ſhould preach amons tho « 
Gentiles the unſearchable riches of Chriſt ;.. ele rw c 
: This the Apoſtle ſpeaks confiderins his former eſtar C2, 
TH earl; ? 5 x Le in lim, » 
Fudaiſm, when he perſecuted the Church of Chrift, ſo 1 Cer. 1c , LIT 
and 1 Tim. 1. 13. 15» Thus modeſt js the Apoſtle, when $40 4 kan 
ing of himſelf, and' not of his Office. « All that Grace oC Chrif = 
which he was to make known to the Gentiles in his Preaching. 
Wiſdom, Righteouſnels, Sanctification, Redemption, 1 7; EE bg 
20. Prong 
9 Andto make all men « ſee y what ;s the fellow: 
of the * myſtery z which from the beginning of +1 
world hath been hid 1a God 2, * who created all th; 
by Jeſus Chriſt b- . 
x All thoſe to whom the Apoftle was ſent, y Or ts exit, 00 1, 
them, 7. e. Miniſterially, Ads 26. 18. as to enlighten them Prin- 19. Heb, 
cipally belongs to Chriſt, Fon 1. 9. 3 Or communication gf th. * 
myltery, viz. concerning the Salvation of the Gentiles with 
Circumcition, or the works of. the Law which God now ni;d. 
known by Pauls Miniftry contrary to what the fews beli.;;4; 
a Not revealed to Men as to the circumſtances and manner gi it 
but hid in the mind and purpoſe of God; ſee the like, &, 4, 
b This may be underſtood either of the firſt Creation, or the (.. 
cond, or immediately of the firſt, and by that of the ſecond: ;; 
God created all things at firft (and fo both Fews and Gemiiiz;) arg 
gave them their Being by Chrift ( Fobn 1. 3.) ſo he recs. 
ates, regenerates, and gives them a new Being by Chrif, thr 
they may be of the ſame Body. under him ; ſee the like, 2 c;,. 
4e Oc 
io * To the intent that now unto the princ. +172, 
palities and powers in heavenly places c, might he 12. 
known by the Church 4 the manifold wiſdom of 


God ec. 


nY 


C01.2+7 
1 1 
the "Ch, x, 


j 4 \ 
a4» 
n 
%- 


c Good Anzels, Col. 1. 16. and 1 Pet. 3. 22. 4 Not effefyaly n 
as. a Teacher or inftruor of Angels preſent in Church afſemblice 
- but objeftively, as a Mirrour in which they might behold and con- v 
template the manifold Wiſdom of God. © Exceedingly, or many ar 
ways various. The Divine Wiſdom is in it ſelf one timplething, Ut 
but appearing in ſo great variety of Works, it is ſaid to be yarions, Pl 
This may be beſt underſtood of the whole Oeconomy of Yen; ne 
Redemption, and God's governing his Church in ſeveral Apes, the he 
ſeveral Forms of the Church, the various ways of reyealing the I5 
Divine Will, the different meaſures of Light ſet out in different is 
times, the different Diſpenfations of the Covenant of Grace he- 5 b 
fore the Law, under the Law, under the Goſpel, to the Few, to ” 4 
the Gentiles, &C. = Ins 
11 According to the eternal purpoſe f which he __ 
purpoſed in Chriſt Jeſus our Lord g. = 
} All that God doth in the work of our Redemption, whereby Fait 
he ſets forth his manifold Wiſdom, he doth according to what he affi 
had from Eternity purpoſed to do, and therein likewiſe ſhes his 4 
Wiſdom to which it belongs to order and determine thinss be- > 
fore the doing of them, and then to do them as they hay: bn Jeſl 
ordered. g Not only as the eternal Wiſdom of the Father, Am 
but as deſigned in God's Decree to be the Head of the Church p 
and he by whom God would in time execute his eternal pur- knoy 
pole. b: and 
12 In whom hþ we have boldneſs z, and * acce6 k* q Eit 
with conſidence | by the faith of him 2. Iv CO Us 
h Or by, or through whom, or into whom being engrafted and diatc 
incorporated. Z Or freene{s of Speech. It fignifes that liberty to G 
and ſpiritual ſecurity, whereby we come to God as to a Father, in throu 
the freedom of Children, not the fear of Slaves, X59. $. 15. G:l. 
4. 6. and 1 Foby 3. 21. k& Not only in Prayer, but all the com- 
munion we have with God by Faith in Chriſt, 1 7et. 3. 15 
I Either ſecarely without tear (as before) or with confidence 0i Mos 
acceptance with God, and obtaining what we ask. m i. &. Faitl _ 
in him, as Koms Ze 22. SEC the like, Mark 11. 22. Y af 
13 * Wherefore 1 delire z that ye faint not at wy * Ti Pri 
tribulations for you o, which is your glory p. nM; Vir 
2 T pray you. This is an Exhortation to the Epheſicns, not a, vv, call 
Prayer to God, for that follows, v. 14. o The Truth I have” Lyi; 
Preached to you being the cauſe of my Sufferings, and your caiva- Brie 
tion (to which they tend as a mean'to confirm your Faith) 92115 forg 
the end of them. p Either he means, that their not faint, Or | 
209 as 


not falling away from Chritt by reaſon of his SuFerings was tN21r 

Glory, or rather that his Sufferings were their Glory, in that Þe Il | 
did by them ſeal the Truth of the Doctrin he had Preached, b21nS "b wher 
ſtill ready to ſuffer for what he deliyered to them. MM: 


L1c 

14 For this cauſe q I bow my kaces uato the Fa- .. Lord, | 

ther of our Lord Jeſus Chrilt, 7 Ways a 

q This may be referred either to the former Verſe, for £81 1 Pet. 1 
cauſe, viz. That ye faint not, Nc. or rather to the firft Vere, the hy m 
Apoſtle here reſuming what he had been beginning there atk” 
b 


15 Of whom 7 the whole farnily / in nearcl and : 
earth # 1s named 7x. 


z-up 7 


> th Mite 
Jſa. 7. 14. Luke 1. 35. the whole Family is named of CBIUT, 7+ © _ 
of him they are, as well as are call-d Chriftians, and tz CUEron Poe 
of God. The Fews boaſted of 4%raham as their Father, Dur nov Frowar] 
all Believers even Gentiles, are one Family of God's Fcopt%, au them 
upon them the name of Chritt 1s called. Our _ 
Patieng 


15 That he would grant unto you according to the 
riches of his glory , to be ſtrengthned with might y 
1. by kis Spirit x * 1n the inner man 4: 


x 7. e. The abundance of his Power, ſee Rom. 6. 4. » Farther 
4 degrees of ſpiritual ftrength, proceeding from God's Tower as 


Daweor 


Chap. IV. 


ROMs 


the Fountain. 3 As the immediate worker of all inherent 
Grace. 4 The reaſonable Fowers of the Soul as renewed by Grace, 
the ſame as Heart in the next Verſe and Spirit, 1 Thefſ. 5. 23. See 
2 Core 4+ 16. : | 
17 That b Chriſt may dwell in your . hearts c by 
27s £alth 45 that ye, being * rooted and grounded in 
lovee; 

bþ On whom this Spirit (who muſft ſtrengthen you as being a 
Spirit of Might, 1/7. 11. 2.) reſteth, //z. 61. 1. c May intimately 
and continually poſſeſs and fill not vour Heads only with his Do- 
rin, but your affections wtih his Spirit, ſee Fohn 14.23. d Where- 
by ye not only believe Chriſt's Truth, but receive and apprehend 
himſelf, and which is the means by which ye have union and com- 
munion With him. -e Either he means, 1. Our Love to God and 
our Neighbour, ard then he prays that their Love might not be 
{light and ſuperficial, bur ſtrong and firm. Or, 2. God's Love to 
us, and then he prays that the Fpheſians, who had already taſted 
God's Love to them in Chrift, might be more fully ſtrengthned 
in the perſwation of that Love. 

18 May be able to comprehend f with all faints 
g, what zs the breadth, and length, and depth, and 
height 4. 

f More fully and perfeQly to perceive and underſtand. g Which 
are or have been. h The immenſe vaſtneſs, dignity and perfettion. 
Either 1. Of Redemption by Chrift extending both to Few and 
Gentile, and ſo the myſtery before mentioned. Or rather 2. Of the 
Love of Chriſt as follows. 

19 And to know : the love of Chriſt, which paſſeth 
knowledge k, that ye might be filled with all the ful- 
ac5 of God /. 

i Senſibly ard experimentally to perceive in your ſelves. & 
Which though it may in a greater degree than hitherto be known 
and experi-nced, yet never can be in this life fully and abſolutely 
underſtood and comprehended, ſee v. 8, and the like expreſſion, 
Phil. 4. 7. 1 All that fulneſs of Knowledge, Faith, Love, Holi- 
neſs, and whatſoever it is with which God fills Believers gradually 
here, and perfealy hereafter, when God ſhall be all in all, x Cor: 
15. 29, 

20 Now * unto him m: that is able to do exceeding 
abundantly above all that we ask or think z, accord- 


% ing to the Power that worketh in us 0. | 
mM i.e, God the Father. » And therefore is able to ftabliſh you 
to the end, and do all for you that hath been deſired. o The ex- 
ceeding greatneſs of his Power, ch. 1. 19. whereby God works 
Faith, and preſerves to Salvation, 1 Pet. I. 5. and enables to bear 
afflictions, 2 Tim. Il. $» 


21 Unto him be glory in the Church p by Chriſt 
Jeſus q, throughout all ages r, world without end, 
Amen. 

p The whole Church of F-ws and Gentiles The Church only 
knows the myſtery, and partakes of the benefits before-mentioned, 
and therefore the Church only can rightly glorifie God for them. 
q Either i Chriſt, in whom the Father hath diſplayed all his love 
tous; or rather Ly (according to our Verſion) Chriſt, as the Me- 
diator between God and us; by whom we offer up our Services 
to God, Praiſes as well as Prayers, Rom. Is $. and 7. 25. r Or 
through all Generations 


TYP 


0.1 


IN.10« 


Chu % 


CHAP. IV: 


He exborts them to a Converſation becoming their Calitng 3 to forbear- 
ance in Lovez to Peace and Unity, 1 —— 3. For that Criſt being 
aſcended gave divers gifts, and ordained divers offices of Apoſtles, 
Prophers, Teachers, but all for the Edification of the Church z ſaving 

I Virtue flowing from Chriſt iato all kis Members, 4 16. Ze 


8 calls them from the Tmpurity of the Gentiles and of Nature; from 
EI Lying, Wrath, Theft, filtky Speaking, whereby the Foly Spirit is 
S grieved, 17-— 20. And all manner of Wickedneſs; and that they 
5 forgive one another, as God in Chriſt hath forgiven us, 31, 32. 

FN 
ir ,in 1 Therefore the priſoner -þ of the Lord f, beſeech 
; . 

2 I you, that ye * walk worthy # of the vocation 
5 ** wherewith ye are called z. 

1.1, J Marg. i the Lord, an Hebraiſm: Tt is as much as for the 

I- }., Lord, ch. 3. 1. r Proceed conſtantly, and perſeveringly in ſuch 
Ways as ſuit with, and become your calling, 1 Thefſ. 4. 7. and 

72 1 Pet. 1. 15. See the like Expreſhon, Rom. 16. 2. and in the places 
- n the Margin. « Both your general calling whereby ye are called 


to be Saints, and your particular callings to which ye are ſeverally 
x called, as ch. 5. and 6. 


” 2 With all lowlinefs x and meekneſs y, with long- 
ſuffering z, forbearing one another 4 in Jove b. 

A x Or Humility ; ſubmiſneſs of Mind, whereby we efteem others 
_ better than our ſelves, Phil. 2. 2. A Virtue peculiar to Chrifſti- 
"pe ans, unknown to Philoſophers, ſee As 20. 19. Col. 3. 12, 13. 
my 7 Whereby we are not canly provoked, or offended with the infir- 
vs mities of others: This is oppoſed to peeviſhneſs as the former to 
$5 pride, 2 Whereby we bear with greater or repeated Injuries, 
_ 2 Cir, 6. 6. 4 Or ſupportizg, 1. &. bearing with the Infirmities, 
a” Frowardneſs or Moroſene{s of others, ſo as not to ceaſe to love 


them, and do them £ood. b Not out of any carnal affection, or for 
our own advantage, but out of love, which is went to make Men 
Patient and long-(uffering, 1 Cor. 13+ 4+ 


31-4 MX Chan. 1), 
| T Endeavouring to keep the unity-of the Spirit c i2 
tne bond of peace 4d. 


c Either unity of mind, or ſpiritual unity as beins wrought by 
the Spirit, and then he means that unity he ſpoke of, ch. 2. 14, 
15, 16. and 3. 6. whereby the myſtical Body of Chriſt is 0:2. 
& 7. &. In peace as the bond which keeps the Members or arts of 
the Church together, which by difſentions are diſh pated and ſcat- 
tered. The firft ſtep to this unity. is Humility, for where that: 
is not, there will be no meekneſs nor forbcarance, without which 
unity cannot be maintained. 

4 * There is Oac body e, aad * one Spirit f, even as *Rom.12. 
ye are called in one hope 7 of your caliing. 6 

e 7. e, The Church of Chrift, cþ. 1. 23. ſee Ci. 3. 15. f The CS - 10. 
ſelf-ſame Spirit of Chriſt in that Pody by which all the Members , LCOr. 32: 
live and att, 1 Cor. 12. 11, 13. & One Inheritance in Heaven, to ** 
the hope of which ye ate called, Col. 1. 12. Ze for the thins 
hoped tor, as Col. 1. 5. SEE 1 Per. 1.2, 4» 

5 * Que Lord h, one faith :, one baptiſm &. 4x 

þ Chrift, viz. as Redeemer, Head and Husband of the Church, *, agg 
to whom by God's appointment ſhe is immediately ſubjett, 1 Cor. 
8. 6. Fobn 13. 13. Ads 2. 26. 7 i, e. One object of the Faith of 
all Believers, viz. the Doctrin of Salvation, which is but one. 
k Zoth as to the outward Symbol, and the thing fignified by 
It. 

6 * One God / and Father of all , who 7s above 
all , and through all s, aad in you all p. 


I God is here taken Perſonally for the Father, the other two 1 Cor. 
Perſons being before mentioned, v. -2. 5. m Of all Believers. 12. ©: 
1 Not only in the excellencies of his Nature, but eſpecially in his 
Sovereign Nominion over the Church. 9 By his ſpecial Providence 
through ail the Members of the Church. þ By Inhabitation, and 
the conjunction of Believers with him. Though the former two 
may be applied to God's univerſal Dominion and Providence over 
all the Creatures, yet the Apoſtle ſpeaking of the conjun&ion of 
Believers in one Father, they are both to be reſtrained according 
to this laſt Clauſe, of 
7 But unto every one oh vs is given grace q accord- 
ng to the meaſure of the gift of Chrilt 7. 

q Either by Grace he means Gifts which are not common to ail 
Believers, but proper to ſome, according to their rarious funQions 
and places in the Church, Rom. 12. 6. 1 Cor. 12. 11. Or rather 
more generally it comprehends alſo thoſe Graces which are com- 
mon to all Believers as ſuch, Faith, Hope, Love, Zeal, Gr. 
which though they are of the ſame kind in all, and have the ſame 
object, yet they are received in different degrees and meaſures. 
7 In that meaſure in which it pleaſerth Chrift to give them, who 
gives to ſome one gift, to ſome another 3 to ſome one degree of 
Grace, to ſome another ; all have not the ſame, but need the help 
of thoie that have what they want. 

8 Wherefore he / ſaith, When he aſcended up on 
high #, he led + captivity captive x, and gave gifts unto 
ed? 4þ p amultitude 

J The Pſalmiſt. t Chriſt, God manifeſted in the Fleſhz and of capri';e'ss 

then what was ſpoken by the Pfalmift Prophetically in the {econd REY 
Perſon, is ſpoken by the Apoſtle Hiftorically in the third. » 
Chrift aſcended yp on high after his Death, both as to place, in his 
humane nature, into Heaven; and chietly as to his ftate in his 
being glorified. x Either led thoſe captive who had taken us 
captive, or rather led them captive, whom he had taken captive 
captivity being here put for captives, as elſewhere poverty for poor, 
2 Kings 24. 14. This Chrift did, when having conquered Sin, 
Death, Satan, he triumphed glorioutly over them in his aſcenſion, 
Col. 2. 15. It 1s ſpoken with allution to conquering Princes or Ge- 
nerals, who in their Triumphs had their Captives attending upon 
their Chariots. »y He alludes in this likewiſe to the cuſtom of 
Conquerors caſting Mony among the People that were the SpeAa- 
tors of their Triumphs, or gave Largefſes to their Soldiers, 
Chriſt upon his Aſcenſion ſent the Holy Ghoſt on the Diſciples, 
Atﬀs 2. and continues ever fince, to furniſh his Church with Gifts 
and Graces, See on Pſal. 68. 13, 


9 (Now that he aſcended, what is it but that he 
alſo deſcended z firſt into the lower parts of the 
earth? 4 | 

z The Apoftle interprets the Pſalmiſt, and concludes, That 
David when he foretold Chrift's Glorification, or Aſcending up te 
Heaven, did likewiſe foreſee his Humiliation and Deſcent to the 
Earth, q- 4. when David ſpeaks of God in the Fleſh aſcending up 
on high, he doth thereby imply, that he ſhould firſt deſcend to the 
Earth. 4 Either ſimply the Earth as the loweſt part of the viſible 
World, and fo oppoſed to Heaven from whence he canie down, 
Fokn 3.13. and 6. 33, 38, 41, 42, 50, 51+ or the Grave and ftate of 
the Dead; or both rather, implying the whole of his Humiliation 
in oppoſition to his Aſcending, taken for the wholF of his Exal- 
tation. | 

10 He that deſcended is the ſame that aſcended 
up b far above all heavens c, * that he might Þ fill all 4 a... 
things ad.) 7 33s 

b He ſaith not, he that aſcended is the ſame that de! cended, leſt + Or, fuls 
it ſhould be thoughr that Chrift brought his Body with him from 77, 
Heaven, but on the contrary, h! tha d-ſcenied is the ſrime 19.8 
aſcended, to ſhew that the Son of God did not by his d-ſcent be- 
come other than what he was, nor the aſſumption of the humane 
Nature add any thing, to his Perſon, as a Man 1s not made ano- 


+ Or, 4 


ther Perſon by the Cloaths he puts on. Chrift deſcended without 


: change of place, as bzing Goal; but aicended by changing place 


as Man, yet by communication of properti-s, whole Chriſt is 
ſaid to have aſcended. c All vitible Heavens, into the third 
Heaven or Paradiſe, A 3. 21. Heb. $9. 24. d All the Members 


| of 


' 4 
, [1 
Rey 
4 "hi. 
1 33 
Yi 
ft, 
| , gfe 
Fug hl , 
x) [ | 
C! 
: 
bf 
#4 |! 
;#? 
Ion TB La 
KT 
4! 
"4 
nf 
'Þ 
4 v4 
4: 
bt . 
Tis, 


So 
An 
a . 
EY þ 
= - 
n 
abies 


EPHE 


SIANS 


i 
2 
9 his Chzrch with Gifts and Graces. This bD2gan to be fulfilled, j and ſeems to fienifie a laying ar Ef 1 
- 5% wy rho lag be fulfilling to the end of the World, See Fob rs his Back a ſecret and mniven way Gf S Bees. Man l 
Jo 33 204 10. 7. ying wait to draw the t are We; A OO" 
*2Tim.4 11 *Andiie gavec ſome, apoſtlesf; and ſome pro- I5 Bur * he + wt — the Truth, 
EE: pnets 55. and fome, evangeliſts þ ; and ſome paſtours | grow up 6 into him, in all things c X es, * May #74, 
% | 6 « , i Bis nel Q | . head, even Chriſt 4 Jl p] w uch IS In the I6, J 
e Diſtributed ſeveral gifts (which are ſpoken of in general 2 Or | 'þ 5 F Or, 
verſe 7.) according ro his Father's abr, who 1s aid to er ced be GO — —_ 4-4. not only let us not he edu- 7%; 0 
in th? © hurch what Chrilt is here laid to give, 1 Cor. 12. 25. 0bjs | ſevere in the Belief of ane”. "gy conſtantly adhere to, and ner- 77 gs 
Nothing is here faid of Gifts, but only of Offices. An/w. Chriſt | two the ſum of Chriſtianit mal "ons; LOTE With it, in which (City 
never gave Offices without ſuitable Furniture : This diverlity there- | our growing up, and bei ity contilts; and this will be a means of 2-21, 
fore of Othces includes divertity of reſpective Gifts. f Extraor-| to being Children We —_ ng WS # This oppoled "Col, 
dinary Officers with an immediate Call, Univer{al Commiſſion, in-] turity, Aeb.6. 1 2 In by — —_ ae ata fray, but SIOW tO ma- | 
{k!libiliry in Teaching, and power of working Miracles, appointed | of the New Man. 4 © ch ._ 1 » Falth, Love, andall the Parts 
for the firſt founding the Chriſtian Church in all parts of the World, | our Head, as the end of it wo _ be with reſpect to Chrif 
Mar. 29. 19. Afﬀs 19.6. 0bj, The Apoſtles were appointed by | of him, and dependence bn, Fra 026, mag ouracknowledgmen: 
C hriſt betore his Death. Anſw. The Apoſtle here ſpeaks not ot| and from whom all our alle cog d 6s tr Influenced, 
Arilt's frit calting them, bur, 1. of his fully ſupplying them with | whatever encreaſe we ——__ es ne avt.cap proceeds , ſo thar 
R1trs neceſſary to the diſcharge of their Othce, which was after his | ſelves, but exalting our H F) pc oadihn magnitying our 
Relurrection, A?s 1. 4. Foki 7. 39. And 2. Ot their ſolemn Inau- 16 From - agg a hl , 
Zuration in their Ofhce, by the pouring out of the Holy Ghoſt up-| , her whom e the whole body f ftly joined to. 
on them in 4 vitible manner, As 2. # Extraordinary Othcers who "Un ol < and compacted þ by that waich eVery joyn: 
did by immediate Revelation Interpret the Scriptures, I Cor 1. 4, ſupplieth z, according to the effeual working f . 
5. afd not only ſich as did foretel things to come, Acts 11. 27. and | the meaſure of every part /, maketh en { wr Wh 
21. 10. h Theſe were lizewiſe extraordinary Officers for the moſt | body 12, unto the edifyi oF ſelf 3 create of the | 
part choſen by the Apoſtles as their Companions and Aſſiſtants in | + Chriſt the Head. « +4 -Saggiine Cl in love z, (0 2 
Preaching the Word, and planting Churches in the ſeveral places | Beljeyers, whe -; : —__ f TNo myktical Body, or Church, of 
where they Travelled. Such were Timothy, Titus, Apollos, Silas, &Cc. gViz. in che : Wi top true Saint is A Member » Rom. 12.4 0 Ao 
7 Either two Names of the ſame Othce implying the diftinet duties Herd and Fs. any” mrs peg w ec, x n_peſpol} of Chrift the py 
of Ruling, and Tcaching belonging to it, or two diſtin&t Othces but | Ears "fn ow G 4c embers reſpettively. Some are Eyes, "oe _ 
both ordinary, and of ftanding, uſe in the Church in all times; and | as not eo he —_ * _ Feet, 1 Cor. 12. 15,16. ÞFirmly knit, | 
then Paſtours: are they that are fixed to, and prefide over partt- | xjſtration, i. e P woe p LOOT every joynt, or Juntture of Alni. | 
cular Churches, with the care both of inftrutting and ruling them, | ment to ou Bc _ ole O end 44 adminifter SPIrits, and nouriſh}. 
1 Theſſ. 5. 12. Fb. 13, 17. called elſewhere Elders, and Biſhops, | nifies the ops y. Bandsaxe added to joints, Col. 2. ig, which fig. t 
ARs 20. 23, Phil. 1.1, and 1 Tim- 3. 1. Tits 1.5, 7. and 1 Pete 5+ 1. | as well as t apron; by which the Members are tied one to anothe; : 
2. Teachers, they whoſe work is to teach the Doctrin of Religion, | and bands - age Om ey touch. Qu. What are thoſe jints i 
and confute the contrary Errors. | vers are ad ch op _ . oy St ve Sag ble : 
"0 Ty | For the perteting of the ſaints &, for the work | the Spirit of Chriſt, wel is whe moprayronery FOO j 
EY Se the muniltry 1, for the edifying of the * body of | Members: The gifts of the Spirit, chiefly Faith, wh ey euhens . 
** Chriſt united to Chriſt: Fs Y » Whereby they are al 
wit 72. 0 Chrift; and Love, whereby they are knit to each other - b1 
t Either for the reſtoring, and bringing them into right order, the Sacraments likewiſe, Church Officers, v. 11. &c, Either C 
who had been as it were, diſhpated, and disjointed by Sin, or ra- Power of Chrift, who as an Head, influenceth and et Finke ins " 
T" ther the kiitting together and compatting them more and more Member 3 or the effetual working of every Member, in _—_ _ 
| both is nearer Union to Chriſt their Head by Faith, and to their cating to others the gifts it hath received. I According tothe Hl 
ys Feliow-merbers by Love, See 1 Cor. 1. 10, 1 Or for the work of Condition, and Exigency of every part, nouriſhment + = 
q: Diipenſ.tion, 1. e. for diſpenfing the Word, and all thoſe Ordinan- it meet for it; yet more to one, and leſs to another, according a; ” 
{es ces which it appertains to them to diſpenſe; and lo it implies their more 15 required for one and leſs for the other, and fo to all #8 be 
8 whole Work. But there may be a Trajeaion in the Words, and proportion. Orellſe as each part hath received, ſo it commands _ 
Y then this Clauſe js to b> r--d before the former, and the meaning to others: All have their ule and helpfulneſs to others but notall 
RE: plainly i, for 1h» 7ort of 22 Miniſtry, which is to perfett the alike, or in the ſame degree. m1 Either Body here redounds by aft 
"A SAINtS, ANG Edife 160 Boay of Chriſt. m The ſame in effect as an Zebraiſm, and the ſenſe is, the Body (mentioned in ern * [10] 
wth. porkecting the Saints, v2. the building up the Church both in ning of the Verſe) maketh encreaſe of it ſelf, or without that I 4 
{: bringing in new Ni-mbers to it, and ftrenthning thoſe that are dancy, encreaſe of the Body is an encreaſe meet and convenient n ; 
* brought in already, ia Faith, and Holineſs. for the Body. The Apoſtle here changeth the Metaphor From _ _ 
is + Or, into 13 Till we ail come z þ in the unity of the faith o, «2 _ y to this of an Houſe, but to the ſame ſenſe, and ſheysthe calle 
Wt re wiity. and of the knowledge p of the Son of God, unto a eatgg NOUmene they miniftred from ane Mcmbertoaw = 
lit T Or, ages perfe& man q, unto the meaſure of the - ſtature of Body ue the hos "tees good, but the good of the whole the | 
18 the falceſs of Chriſt 7. Chriſt the Head. » Either © = + 7 pan es: EI _ 
if 7 Or meet; All we Believers both Fews and Gentiles (who while the impultive cauſe, whereby the Menthen _ = _— ; wy 
FS in the World are not only diſperſed in ſeveral places, but have our | Promote the common increaſe of the Bod bg _ —_ _ 
0: —_— ay. * of Light and Knowledge) meet or come together in and each other, da We 
| the unity of, Ec. 0 Either that perfect unity whereof Faith i , . fo hs 
Ny! & bond, or rather that perfect armity of Faith in which we hal lee - - ras IIs is = ww " 
| all have the ſame thoughts and apprehenſions of Spiritual things, |.j A ICNCEFOTT | walk not as other Gentiles walk ** i 2 
[1 to which as yet, by reaſon of our remaining darkneſs, we are bo aan. of their mind p. J ws 
| arrived. p Or Acknowledgment, i. e. not a bare ſpeculative know- 0 T beſeech or adjure you by the Lord. See the like, Ron. 12. 1... Der's 
ledze, but ſuch as is joined with approbation, and affetion. q He Phil. 2. 1. p Their minds themſelves, and underſtandings, the © x , 
compares the myſtical Body of Chriſt to a Man who hath his ſeveral higheſt and nobleft faculties in them, being converſant about to tri, 
ages and degrees ot growth and ſtrength, till he come to the height things empty, tranſient, and unprofitable, and which deceive their candid 
of both, and then he is a perfe& Man, or a Maz timply in aca expettations, and therefore vain, viz. their Idols, their worldly helpft 
tion to A Child, 1 Cor. 13. 11. The Church of Chriſt rorpreliel by Enjoyments, Ur. ; 4 20 
a Man in the ſingular Number to ſhew its unity) hath its Infancy, 18 Having the underſtanding q darkaed #, * bein *C:2 MF" :7: co 
its Childhood, its Youth, and is to have hereafter its perfe& Man- | alienated / fr he lif the igno-* ; 
hood and ſtate of Contiſtency in the other Life, when being arri- hat i ip Pros tc of God Ny through the 1210- , : Ns 
$26 ac, i 1 fe paſt growing, '- Eicher aSively rance that is in them x, becauſe of the * - blinduels 40; "ogg 
that meaſl ure of Stature or Age which Chriſt fills up in it, or hath of their heart co | reſt FA | 
allotred to it, verſe 7. or rather paſſively, that meaſure which tho' it | ,. q The mind as reaſoning and diſcourſing, and fo their ratiocina- rhejnt: - G = 
do not equal, yer it ſhall reſemble, being perfe&ly conformed to tions, and diſcourſes themſelves. r As to {piritual Things. ſ Not : WY 
the fulnels of Chriſt, As in the 12th v:7/7 he ſhewed the end of only ſtrangers to it, (for ſo are thoſe Creatures which Are not ca- lj 2 
Chriſt's appointing Officers in his Church, ſo here he ſhews how pable of it) but eftranged from it; implying, that in 44. origt- TE... 
long they are to continue, Vie till their Work be done, the Saints nally they were not ſo. 7 A ſpiritual life ; that life which God 5*-and p 
pertected, which will not be till they all come to the unity of the commands and approves, and whereby God lives in Believers, an 13. 27 
Faith, &c. | they live in him, Gal.2. 19. 20. and that both as to the principle ; 2d 
*Tſa.23.9. 14 That we henceforth be no more * children /; of life, and the operations of it. # That ignorance which 15 nam” ade 
* Heb. 13. * roſied to and fr E - 2 | rally in them is the cauſe of their alienation from the Life of God, if  Whic| 
d. an tro e, and carried about with every | which begins in light, and knowledge. x Or rather hardneſs: The I _ 
wind of doctrine x, by the fleight x of men, and cun- | Gr- word tignifies a callum, or brawnineſs in the fleſh, which is uſual rY « ” [1 
ning craftineſs y, whereby they lie in wait z to de- in the Hands of Labourers. Either this is ſet down as another ELL fo 
ceive. | cauſe of their Eftrangement from the Life of God, Or 35 the 3g 5.7 
[i.e Weak in the Faith, unſtable in Judgment, Children in cauſe of their ignorance, which though in part it b* Natura! the wo 
Underſtanding, 1 Cor. 14. 20, Such as need ane and frenoth- to them, yet 1s encreaſed to farther degrees by their own hard- "F* y 
ning, See Rom. 2. 20, I Cor. 3. Ie Heb 5.13. t Light and uncon- Sq obſtinacy, ſhutting their Eyes voluntarily againſt the cried 
fant like Ships without Ballaſt, toſſed with every Wave. a Not ER ; E That 
paly _ and ftaggering as to our Faith, (as in the former | 19 Who being paſt feeling y, have given themſeives tealins 
Turn [4 gem about to ; wok for want of judgment, by falſe over unto laſcivionſneſs z, 0 work a ail ancleannels "t)s 2c 
, here compared to violent Winds. x Their Sophiftry | b with greedineſs 9 
whereby they eaftly ſeduce thoſe that are unskilful; as Men ally SR ' re Sh. 
cheat Children in playing at Dice, from whence this Metapho y | Having loſt all ſenſe and conſcience of Sin. An higher degree 5 uſe of 
taken. »y Their skilfulneſs in finding out ways of deceiving _- day bn effect ot the hardneſs before mentioned, 1 7: 4+ 2+ 7 TI heg = 
by they can make any thing of any thing. 2 Viz, asin A nbuſh pag tarily yielded themſelves up to the power of their own ſenſuality OY 
word here ud, ts tranilated 1//ites, Chap. R ; { —_— l et - e | and laſciviouſnels, ſo as to be commanded by it, without renting ite 7 Un 
Apoſtic would have th2m fenced with the Sa * : w F 1 the | a Not only to burn with inward Lufts, but to fulfill them in the Once, 
: nol: Armour of God, | outwards afts. 6 All ſorts of uncleanneſs, even the moſt — - an 
| = & it) 


1aP- IV. 


gain 5 or rather with an unſui:able deſire of ftill going on in their 

fil:hinels. ; 

| 20 But ye have not ſo 4 learned Chriſt e. 

Rs 4 <o as to walk as other Gepri12s walk, in the vanity of your 

minds, Gr. e The Dottrin of Chrift, or Rule of Lite preſcribe 

by him. | 
'21 if ſo he that ye have heard him F, and have been 

FF tzughr by him g, as the truth 1s in Jeſus +. 

f Either heard Chrift ſpeaking to you in che Goſpel, Heb. 12. 
2<, And then the ſenſe will be the tame as in the following 
Clauſe : or heard him preached ro you, and then it may refer to 
the outward hearings of the word, g Or taught iz him 7 Or »y, 
as Col. 1.16, Heb, 1.2. and then this relates to the power ot the 
word, and the impreſſion made by it upon the heart, q. 4. 1t ve 
have not only heard of him by the hearing of the Ear, but have 
been efteQually taught by the Spirit to know him and receive his 
Doarin, I/z. 54. 13. Fohz 6. 45+. þ As it really is, and hath been 
taught by Chriſt himſelf both in his Dodtrin and Example, 7+ 
What is the true way of a Chriſtian's living, as in the following 
verſes, ſee Fobn 17. 17. Tit 1. 1. ; 

22 Thar ye * pur off : concerning þ the former 

converſation & * the old man /, which 1s corrupt 2 ac- 
-.%- cording, to the deceitful luſts x; 
7 An uſual Metaphor taken from Garments (implying a total 
Rui ©» 1handoning, and cafting away, like a Garment not to be put 01 
again) it is oppoſed to putting on, v. 24. and is the lameas Morti- 
fyins, Col. 3-5- Crucifying, Gal. 6. 14. & the former Heathen- 
iſh life and manners, ch. 2. 2. He ſhews how they ſhould put oft 
their Old Man, viz. by relinquiſhing their old manners; the fame 
4s putting off the Old Man with his deeds, Col. 3. 9. 7 The 
pravity ot nature, or nature as depraved. m Or which corrupt- 
eth, 7. e. tends to deſtruction, Ga!. 6. $. or which daily grows 
worſe and more corrupt by the fulfilling of its lufts. z z. e. Which 
draw away and entice men, Fm. 1. 14. or which pur on a ſhew 
and ſemblance of ſome good, or promiſe pleaſure and happinels, 
but lurch mens hopes, and make them more miſerable. 

23 And be * renewed o 1n the ſpirit of your 
mind p. 

o Viz. moreand more, being already renewed in parts p 7. e. In 
your mind which 1s a Spirit, See 1 Thefſ. 5. 23. and 2 71m. 4. 22. 
He means the ſuperior powers of the Soul where Regeneration 
begins, and which the Philoſophers magnified ſo much , and 
thought ſo pure. : 

24 And that ye put * on q the new man 7, which 
after God / is created in righteouſueſs r, and Þ true ! 
tolinefs. 

Wy q The ſame Metaphor of a Garment as before, to ſhew the inti- 
mateneſs of the New Man with us, and its being an ornament to 
us. 7 i.e. A new diſpoſition or conſtitution of the whole man, 
called a New Creature, 2 Cor. 5.17. anda Divine Nature, 2 Per. 
I. 4 $SAfter God's Image. tEither righteouinels may relate to 
the ſecond table, and Holineſs to the firft, and ſo both contain our 
Duty to Man, and to God; or Righeouineſs may imply that di- 
vine principle in us, whereby we perigrm our whole Duty to God, 
and the Creature ; and Holinels that which denicth all mixture of 
corruption in our Duty to God and Man. u Sincere and Sound. 
Az Righteouſneſs and Holineſs are oppoled to Juſts, v. 22. lo rue 
here, to deceirful there. 


(0, > 


"os 
[0.1495 


\ 1.12% 


IN. 6, 


«1 
10s 


(7:08. 25 Wherefore putting away lying , * tpeak every 
) man truth y with his neighbour; for we are mem- 
« 00 FE bc1'5 One of another +. 

21. x All fraudulency, and diſhmulation, and whatever is contrary 
to truth. y Not only ſpeak- as things are, but att tincerely and 
candidly. 7 7. e. To or for one another, and therefore muſt be 
helpful to each other. ; 

\. 26 Be* ye angry 4 and lin not: let not the Sun 

+2 (27-20 down upon your wrath 6. 

'* Ro 4 By way of Conceſſion rather than by way of Command, q. 4. 

24s if the caſe be ſuch that ye muſt be angry , yet ſee it bz without 

 4Orf fin. 6 Tf your anger is excethve (for ſo this word ſignifies, being 
reſs 0 different from the former) yer let it not be laſting, be reconciled 

- thejn: Eer the Son go down. : 

, n.;, 27 * Neither give place to the Devil c. 

þ c Do not give advantage to the Devil to poſſeſs your hearts, 

5+5-and put you upon more and greater evilz, See Luke 22, 3. Fibi 

- J. 27, AllS 5..3s 

: A 25 Ler him that ſtole, ſteal no more @ ; but rather 

4 '* let him labour e working with þ:s hands f the thing 

, 7, Which is good g, that he may have Þ to give to him 

- [hat needeth þ. 

1 &., d Stealing is underſtood largely for fecking our own gain by 

C l, 12.87 way detrauding others, whether by taking away, or unjuſtly 

bs 4 taining what is theirs. e 7. ce. Diligently, and Induftrioutly, as 

al the word imports. Idlenels is condemned as tending to Theft. 

a- # As the only inftrument by which moſt Arts and Trades are ex- 

NC crciſed, pg Not in any unlawful way, but in an honeſt calling, 
Þ That he may have not only whereupon to live, and prevent 

es . tealing, but wherewith to help thoſe that want, Luke 21. 24 

_ cc 6 a 

15 29 * [er no corrupt communication z proceed 
72-00 of your mouth, bur that which 13 good + to the 

my /-ule of edifying, that .*. it may miniſter grace to the 

ty hearers k. 

"IL 2 Unprofitable, unfavory, not ſeaſoned with the: ſalt of pru- 

rhe acnce, Col. 4. 6. fee Mark g. 50 «*% Gr. 10 the edification of uſe, 

Jus, '' an Z:paliage for, 20 the uſe of edijyirg, (as our Tranſlators ren- 

, bo & it) implying, that the great uſe of Speech is to Edifie thoſe 


EPHESTA Ni 


"Me Ls 2.4, 26, 27, 1 C9r. 0.9, ind G21. 5.19. c Either with. cove- 
touſneſs, and then it reſpetts thote that proftituted themſelves tor 


with whom we converſe, 
nes likewiſe po 
ter Subſtantive? may be inſtead of an Adie&ive, and the words þ itt 


Dog ig £1 urls 
mult be ſuited by way of inſtruction, reprehenizon, exbortation 
or conſolation, as their caſe requires. þ By which ſome grace 
may be communicated to, or increaied in them by inſtruction, re- 
prehention, exhortation, Tc. . 

Þ ( * orov * 3,3 Tr GE FM W744 

30 And * grieve not ! the holy Spirit of God, *lia. 7.13. *R 
| wiereby ye are ſealed 2 unto the day of redemp- T Chap: i. | 
LION 72. TP 

1 Fir. by corrupt Communication. The Spirit is ſaid to be 
grieved when any thing is done by us, which were he capable of 
tuch paſſions, might be matter of sricf to kim, or when we to 

| p . ; . . - » 
oftend him as to make him withdraw his comfortable preſence 
Irom Us, <ce /{/.z. 63. 10. mSet apart or marked for, ard ſecured 
unto the day of redemption, See ch.. 1. 14. 2 Cor. 1, 22. fo Et, T1122 UF 
9. 4 they are marked that are to be delivered ; and Rev. 7. the | | 
Servants of God are ſealed that were to eſcape the followins 
Jla% ues = H py , F Il d fi 21 C1oleros; .- D (ris ® og 
PIAgUCS, ©. J- 7 2.e, Full and final Satvarion at the Reſurrection, 
See Like 4 © 29. ROM. 8. 2Jo | } » 
31 Let all bitternets, and wrath, and anger o, and , 
*I*3FYI do J — 7 _— T5 = £3 iT» A 4 I 
clamout P, anc evil ſpeaking 4 be put away irom 1 
With all malice 7, 
_ © Theſeall ſeem to relate to the inward affetion, as the two 
tollowing to the effects of it in the words. Bitternels may imply 
a {ecret lurking diſpleaſure at another, or rather a confirmed and 
permanent one z Wrath the firtt boiling up of the paſhon, which 
aftects the body in the commotion or the Blood and SPirits 3 and | 
Anger a greater height and paroxy!m of the fame paiſion, or an , 
eazer delire ot revenge, See Col. 3. 8. Þp Such inordinate loud- {f 
nels as Men in anger are wont to break out into in their words. 
q Either with reſpet to God, or Man, tho the latter ſeems Par- 
ticularly meant here, railing, roviling, reproaching, Tc. the or- 
r Maliciouſnels, or maligri- 


| id 
WY 


dinary effects of immoderate anger. 
ty of heart, in oppotition to kindneſs and tenderneſs, wv. 1 Sec 
Rom. 1.29. I Core. 5.9. and 14. 20. Tit, 
3 

hearred t, Þ forgiving one another, eve as 
Chritt's fake hath forgiven you ». 

/ Sweet, amiable, facile in words and converſation, Lute 6. 35-Mark _ {+0810 
! Merciful, quickly moved to compaſſion : fo we have bowels ij | 
Mercies, Col. 3. 12. u Be placable, and ready to forgive, therein ©?" 
reſembling God, who for Chriſt's fake hath forgiven you more 
than you.can forgive to one another, 


RAP. V; | 

Ee exhorts them to mutual love, after the example of God and Chriſt ; r9 
depart from all uncleanmeſs, Couetonſneſs which 3s Tolatry, fooliſh 
tiling, 1, —- 7. To walk as children of Light : wiſe, redeeming 
the 11me: and nor be drunk, but full of the Spirit, jiveing Pſulms aud 
Hymns to the Lord, $, — 20. Fe exports «ll in genera! 10 be ſub- 
je one ro another in the fear of God: Ives to be [ubjet to their 
Husbands, asthe Church is to Chriſt : Husbands 10 love their Wives ' 
ecen as Chriſt loved hy Church, and as a man loves his own Body, hy, Wi: 
21,—-25. And declares, that as Husband and IVife ty Go sinſti- wharf 
rution are one fleſh, jo is Chriſt and the Church, 29,2. | 


I E ye therefore followers of God +, as dear \ 

chuldren y. "8 
x Particularly in being kind, and forgiving injuries, Mat. 5. 45, b 

43. ſo that this relates to the laſt Verſe of the former Chapter. mY k 

» Vi. of God. Children ſhould imitate their Fathers, efpecially 

when beloved of them. 

2 And * walk 1n love z Þ as Chriſt alſo hath loved « jy. r-; 

us, and hath given himſelf for us a, an offering, and 34. © 

a ſacrifice b to God, fora ſweet ſmelling favour c. 1 Thefl. 4. 

; Let your whole converſation be in Love, « V7. to die for 9* 

us, Gul. 2. 20. as the greateſt argument of his love, Fobz 15. 13. © Joi 3e 

Rom. 5. 8. b Either Offering tignifies a Meat-offering, which 23+ and 4. ot 

was joined as an Appendix with the bloody Sacrificez or rather 2** 

more generally, all the oblations that were under the Law ; and F HeÞ- 9- 

the word Sacrifice either reſtrains it to thoſe eſpecially in which 1» 

blood was ſhed for expiation of Sin, or explains the meaning of it, , 

q. 4. Chrift gave himſelf an Offering, even a Sacrifice in the proper ; 

ſen, 7. e. a Bloody one. 


0” I* s 


2 And * be ye kltad / one to another, tender- *2 Cor. 2. id 


Ge - : IO, 4 T. 
ad 10 + Mat. 6s jt 


c 7.e. Acceptable to God; alluding to | 
the legal Sacrifices, See Ger. $. 21. Lev. 1.9. and intimaring 

thoſe other to have been accepted of God, only with reſpect to that 

of Chriſt ; and that as Chrift dying to reconcile Sinners to God . 
was acceptable to him, ſo our Spiritual Sacrifices are then only 

like to be accepted of him, when we are reconciled toour Brother, 

Matt. 5+ 23, 24+. 

3 Burt * fornication 4, aid all uncleanneſs ec, or « cg, ;, | 
covetouſneſs f let it not be once named 9 among you, 5. | 
as becometh Saints þ. 1 Thell. 4. - { 
d Folly committed between unmarried Perſons, eſpecially Mens 3:Sc+ 
abuſe of themſelves with common Strumpets ; a fin not owned as 

ſuch among the Heathen. e All other unlawful lutts, whereby | 
Men defile themſelves. f Either an uniatiable detire of gratifying kw 
their lufts, as cþ. 4. 19. or rather an immoderate detire of gain, 
which wes uſual in Cities of great Trade, as Ejvefus was, SEE v. 5. 
g Not heard of, or not mentioned without detetftation, See 7/1. 
16. 4. 1 Cor. 5-1. hþ Who ſhould be pure and holy, not in their 


| giving of thanks. 


bodies and minds only, but in their words too. Fo 6. IVES, 
Od a - . ; . . . ho n* x5 ; H 

4 * Neither filthineſs :, nor tfoollih talking &, nor | + 12 0 Th 
jeſting /, which are not convenient m; but rather @3;.., , | 
| S” 0 1 Loni $ 

27 74-6 1 


(«17 ; Oblcrair 


_ Ct De. DES" ae RE ——_— 
w Ry. 
as 4 2» 
- w v _ 
ma 4d 
_"_ =V 


= 
—— _. : 
þ Is eo 
TI REL © 
+ ape . 


Oo 


EPHES 


Obitenity mn diſcourſe, fliby Ecmmunication, C7. 3. S. & 
AFﬀ-:tarion of fooliſh vain ſpecch (whether jocoſe or ſerious) un- 
proficable to the Hearers. 1 Either the ſame as the former, as 
may 271 by the disjunctive particle 0, which may be by way of 
xplictxtion or (which is of Kia to it) icurrility in diſcourſe, which 
{many rimes by them that are addicted to ir, called by the name 
of Urbanity, or Jeſring: tor that all Jefting is not here con- 
downed appears by 1 Alzigs 1S. 27. Iſa. 14. 11. m Vize jor 
Caints. 7 7.2 To God for mercics received, which will better 
chear up, and recreate the mmd than fooliſh talking and jeſting 


Can. 
*  Cor.5. 5 For this ye know, that * no whoremonger, nor 
9. unclican perſon, nor covetous man - who is an idola- 


Gal.5-2?- ter o, hath any inheritance p 121 the Kingdom 0! Curiit, 
FOG 365- and of God 4. 

0 Becauſe he ſerves Mammon inſtead of God, loves his riches 
more than God, and placeth his hope in them. p Without re- 
pentance ; for he ſpeaks of thoſe that perlevere in ſuch 11ns, 
vom he calls Children of Diſobcdience, v.6. q Not two diſtin 
Kingdoms, bur one and the ſame, which belongs to God by Na- 
tare, to Chriſt as Mediator. By this Phraſe he intimates, that 
there is no coming into the Kingdom of God but by Chritt. 

4 Mat.21, 6 * Lect no man deccive you with vain words7 3 for 
Ls becauſe of theſe things + cometh the wrath of God / 
Col. 2. 4, * pHon the children of + diſobechence. 
13. 7 Falſe and deceitful, which cannot ſecure to you the impunity 
+ ROM. 1. they promiſe you, bearing you in hand, . either that thoſe things 
15. are not fins, or not ſo dangerons. f Viz. in the other 
* Ch. 2.2. World. 
+ Or, 19;- > Be not ve therefore partakers with them r. 
belicje t With thoſ> Children of Diſobedience, who continue in the 
forementioned 1ins, ſee Fob 34. 8. I ſal. 50. 19. 
*2 Cor. 3, 8 For ye were ſometimes drkneſs zu, but now * 10 
I, ye lialt in the Lord + : walk as children of lignt y. 
Tiur. 15.” vy The ſame as 7+ darkneſs, Rom. 2, 19, and 1 Thefl, 5. 4. vite 
&. tt darkref of fin, ignorance, unbeli- © The abftra:t's being put 
Joh.12.36 5, 1he concrete, Thews theo T1eatne!s. oi hat darknels in which 
x Eittcr now being in CÞhrijt ye arelight, or rather 
2 , or made light by Ch:it, being turniſhed with 
Sniritual Rrowledge, Faith, Purity ang, i oliiels. y An Eebraiſm 5 
1414-: of Egft, for thoſe that are in th- '2Þ>t, x Theff. 5.5. q. de 
your converſation be ſuitable to your -5:iition and privileges. 
9 (For the fruit of the irit :2 all goodacfhs a, 
and righteouſneſs b, and truth c. : 

2 Either the fruit or work of the new ture, or of the Holy 
Ghoft, by whom we are made light in ti; : ord: See Gal. 5. 22. 
a Either a general virtue in oppotition to wickedneſs 3 or benig- 
nity and bounty. 6 Tn oppoiition to injuſtice, by covetouſnels, 
fraud, cr, © In oppoſition to error, lics, hypocritie. He ſhews 
what it 1s t9 walk as Children of Light. 

10 Proving c what 15 5cceptable unto the Lord. 

Searching what the will of the Lord is, and approving it by 
your prattice as the rule of your walking, Rom. 12. 22, 

*;Cor.z.9 11 And* have no fellowſhip 4 with - the unfruit- 
& 109. 20. ful e works of darkneſs f, but rather reprove them -. 
F& 13-12. &@ Not only do not praQtiſe them your ſelves, but do not join 
with others in them, by conſent, advice, aiiftance, or any other 
way whereby ye may be defiled by them. e By a Metofis, for 
bringing forth evil fruit, deſtruive, pernicious, Rom. 6. 21. 
G41, 6. 8. f Wicked Works, ſo called bzcauſe they proceed from 
darkneſs in the mind, the ignorance of God, and Men are put upon 
them by the Devil the Prince of Darl:a2ſs, and becauſe they are 
afraid of the light. g Or convince them, viz. not only by your 
words, LTevit. 19. 17. Matth. 18. 13. *but eſpecially by your 
actions, which being contrary to them, will both evidence them to 
be, and reprove them as being works of darkne$. 

12 For It Ba ſhame even to ſpeak /- of thoſe things 
which are done of them in ſecret z. 

þ Much more to have fellowſhip with them, in them. 7 The 
darkneſs adding boldneſs, as if what men did not ſee, God did not 
obſerve. ; 

13 But * all things & that are + reproved are made 

-* maniteft / by the light zz, for whatſoever doth make 
eb.t.13. Nanitelt, 1s light 7. 
+ Or, diſ- Or all thoſe things, viz. thoſe unfruitful works of Darkneſs 
e6yered. which are to be reproved. 1 z. e. In the minds and conſcienczs of the 
Sinn?rs themſelves. m The lizht of Dotdtrin in verbal reproofs, 

and of an Holy Life in real and prattical ones. # Or, it 5s tte ligit 

which manifeſts every thing, viz. which was before in the dark. 

The Apoſtle argues from the nature and office of Light, q. 4. it 

15 the property of Light to diſcover and manifeſt what before was 

not ſeen, and therefore, it becomes you who are Light in the 

Lord to ſhine as Lights in the World, Pl4/. 2. 15. that ye may 

by your holy Converſation convince wicked Men of their wicked- 

nels and deeds of darkneſs, which they did not before perceive in 
themielves. 

dh 214. nerefore heſaith o, X Awake thou that ſleep- 
*Rom.13. Eſt, and | arlic from the dead p, and Chriſt ſhall give 
11, 12, LUnec light 9. 
1 Cor. 15. 0 Either: God by the Prophets of whoſe preaching this is the 
3+ lumm ; it may allude in particular to !/z. 60. 1. Or, Chrift by 
1 Thelf.5. his Miniſters in the preaching of the Goſpel, who daily calls Men 
6. T1 to arile from the Death of Sin by repentance, and encourageth 

101.5.25 them with the promiſe of Eternal Life. p The ſame thing in two 
Rom-6. 4. dit-rent Expreſſions. Sinners in ſom? reſpeats.are ſaid to be atleep, 
Ch.2.5. in othersto b- deal. They are as full of Dreams and vain Imagi- 
Col. 3.3. nations, and as unfit for any good ation as they that are ail-epare 


I A N S. Chap, 
that are dead. Here therefore they arc hid to a%aks from <s -. 
a i1:ep, and to ariſe from it as a death. The meaning ;. 11; ROW 
ſhould ariſe by Faith and Repentance out of that Stare. of Gm 
death in which they lie while in their Sins. q The Lioke Rag 
and Joy here, and Eternal Glory hereafter. The Ang. res 
mates that what is the way of-Chrift in the Goſpe?, hom 
be the pradtice of theſe Fpheſrans whom he calls Lipht jy rw 7 51 1 
to reprove the unfruitful works of darkneſs, and awaken tja..;_ © 
dead Sinners, and bring them to the Light of Chriſt, "T"00 

15 See then that ye walk * circumſpectly, - no 
fools /, bur as wiſe 7. 

7 Being, called to reprove the evil converſation of others Ce 
that ye walk exatly and accurately your {clves, avoigir« ys 
tremes and keeping cloſe to the rule. See the ſame word r: oo 
dred diligently, Matth. 2. 8. and pertedly, 17h. 5,2, | Wh, 
are deſtitute of ſpiritual Wiſdom, and through carcteſhe;. fn 
into Sin or Error though in the Light of the Gulpcl. 7 51.7. 
that are taught of God, and are endued with wiftgm from 
above. Eh 

16 Redceming the time », becauſe the days arg 
evil .x. 

u Or, buying the opportunity. A Metaphor taken from Mercl;ans. 
that diligently obſerve the time for buying and ielling, and #1. 
part with their pleaſure for gain, q. 4. deny -your {elves in vgyr 
eaſe, pleaſure, &c. to gain an opportunity of doing good, x 
Either wicked by reaſon of the wickedneſs of rhole that liye ;, 
them , or troubleſome , full of difficuities and dangers, -y 
reaſon of Mens hatred of you, and fo either depriving yey g 
the opportunity of doing good, or expoting you to hazard; i, 
doing it. 


ing y What the will of the Lord z- z. : 
» Diligently conſidering. 7 In the underſtanding of which gy; 
chief wiſdom conltifts. : 

18 And * be not drunk with wine, whercia 2j;,,.. 
exceſs b ; but be filled with the Spirit c. 3 
4 Tn which Drunkenneſs. 6 Protuſenels, Laſciviouinek, md}; 
all manner of Lewdneſs, as the effeas of Drunkennfs, P:g., 21.5, 
29, Tc. c The Holy Spirit often compared to Water ; Or, [it 
the joy of the Spirit, in oppoſition to being filled with Wire, i 
Aits 2, 12. and that carnal Mirth which is cauſed by it, q, 4, h." 
not ſatisfied with a little of the Spirit, but ſeek for a rear 
meaſure, ſo as to be filled with the Spirit. See P/z.. 35. $, 5, 
4+ 34. & 4+ Ihe : 

19 Speaking d to your ſelves e in pſalms, « 
hymns, aad ſpiriteal ſongs f, finging and making me- 
lody in your heart g to the Lord, 4. 

4 Tn oppoſition to the vain cliff, and lewd talkativenes gf 
Drunkards over their Cups, e Gr. iz your (elves, 7. e. among your 
ſelves, both in Church Aflemblies and Families. f Under thik 
names he comprehends all manner of Singing to mutual Fdifcation 
and God's Glory, the particular diſtinetion of them is uncertain, 
but moſt take Pſalms to be ſuch as anciently were ſung with Mut! 
cal Infrrumentsz Hymns ſuch as contained only matter of Praiſe; 
ſpiritual Songs ſuch as were of various matter, dodrinal, prophe- 
tical, hiſtorical, &c. See one C97. 3. 16. g Not only with your voice, 
but with inward affeQion, contrary to the guiſe of Hypocrites 
þ To the Glory of God, not for the pleaſure of the {enic, or fos 
gain, Go 

20 * Giving thanks always 7 for all things & unto; 
God and the Father !, - inthe name of our Lord [efis : Ti 
Chriſt #2. ry 
z God ftill by freſh mercies gives freſh occaſion for thankſgiv* " 
ing, and we muſt accordingly continue our thankſziving, through Pr 
the whole courſe of our lives without wearineſs. | All forts, ,, 
of mercies, among which afflictions may be reckoned as working” * 
for good to them that love God. Rom. S$. 28. }. 7. e. Unto God 
even the Father the Fountain of all our good. m In whoſe nan, 
and by whoſe merit all good things are given to us, and by whom 
we offer up all our Prayers and Praiſes, and (piritual Services that 
they may be accepted of God. : 

21 * Submitting your ſelves one to another z in the#1l 
fear of God 0. 

2 viz. To thoſe to whom ye ought to be. ſubje&t in natural, 
civil or Church Relations. o Either for fear of offending God 
the Author of all power who commands this ſabje&ion ; or 10ar 
as is confiftent with the fear of God z and fo in thoſe things whica 
are not forbidden of him. | 

22 * Wives ſubmit your ſelves to your ow ln{-* 
hands p, + as unto the I ord g. 
p Yielding honour and obedience to them. 


vl 


1 


as / Chriſt is the head of the church, and be 1s Te >, 
viour of the body x. 

7 Superiour to her by God's Ordination in Authority a! . 
nity, as the Head in the natural Body being the ſeat of Feaion, "—_ 
the fountain of ſenſe and motion, is more excellent t1an te re 
of the body. { See chap. as. Col. 3. 13 Ihe partici ay 
not equality but likeneſs, Chrift b2ing the head oi the Cure: ma 
more excellent way than the Husband is of the We. | 


id ile 


AAR 


4 NO 


7, To 


- -- en Re . <= « © "WE *.."g» = 3{22 7112 
Chrift is the Saviour of his Church, implying that fo HECW) Go 
Husband is given to the Wife to be a Saviour to her 1 Ng 

v 1:6 +5* 


ing, protecting and deiending her, and theretore the V CS 
ſhe regard her own gocd, ſhould not grudge? to 9 460;-0t 


im. 


”r Þ — 


ior aacural ; and they are as {ull of ftench and ivathſomnels as thzy 


6 
I> tC 


i” 
"g4+ 
. 


17 Wherefore be ye not unwiſe, but * underftang. ;.... 


"PUN: 


1 AY 
q For the [.ord Sq; 


ſake who hath commanded it, ſo that ye cannot be {ubje&t co km , | 
without being ſubject to them. See 1 Tim. 2. 12. iT 


23 For * the husband 1s the head 7 of che we, Co, | 


| = 
[I 
; 


/ 


£©a Tu _ a es 


tion, 
ther a1 
not co1 
before 
TIage-t 
7s 4. 
+ 
lng C] 
4 Elt 
keen ( 
his Bo 
Verſe t 
Conjun 
cret in 
Churc 
this, V6 
33 
lar, & 
fee th 
bq.o 
Exhort 
Jet not 
from Li 
Vol, 


DIRE 


* thing y. - ; | 

2.9. # Viz. with cheerfulnef, chaſtity, hamility, obedience, Tc. x 

| 11 imitation of the Churches ſubjettion to Chrift as a pattern of 
tieir ſubjection to their Husbands. y Underſtand, to which the 
Authority of the Husband extends it ſelf, 

TRE * {1sbands love your wives, even as Chriſt alſo: 

* loved the Church, = aud * gave himſelf for it 4. 
Pete 3* 2 Fire with a ſincere, pure, ardent and conſtant AﬀeRion. . As 


21 Therciore-as the church 1s ſubject to Chrilt x ſo 
kr the wives be to their own husbands x in * every 


«Ss 


they reſemble Chrift in the honour they have of being the Heads 
63 1 of their Wives, fo they muſt likewiſe in performing the Duty of 


1274 loving them, under which all Matrimonial Duties are compre- ! 


hended. a Whereby he teitifed the greatnels of his love. 


26 That he might ſanRifie b, and cleanſe it c * with 

-...- the waſhing of water 4 * by the word e. 
9 | b Purifie from its Filth, and conſecrate unto God :; Implying th? 
1. whole Tranflation of it out of a ftate of Sin and Miſery into a ſtate 
1 {08 of Grace and Life, coniiſting in the Remiſhon of Sin, and Renova- 
4 tion of Nature. c Or cleayſtp it, importing the means whereby 
In 15 he works the former effett. 4d Viz. In Baptiſm in which the ex- 
::{17- ternal Waſhing repreſents Seals, and exhibits the internal Clean- 
fing from both the Guilt and Defilement of Sin by the Blood of 


STANS 


| CHAP. VI. 


The duty of Children, and Parents, 1 4+» Of Servants and M: 
ſters, 5 —9. . 2ur lif- 4 warf.re againſt Fl:f and Blood and 
ſpirimal Enemies: Th- comnleat Armour f a Chrifian to be uſed 
with Prayer and Warckſulnezſs, 19 —— 1%. Suvplicaticn jor Sairts 
required, as alſo for kimſelf in the work cf the Coſpel. Tychicus 
commended: His Apoſtolical Bznedition, 19 24. 


* 14 Hildren obey e your parents. in the Lord f ;* Col. 3. 
for this 15 right £ O, 
e With inward Reverence and P1 >mptneſs, as well as in the out- 
ward Att. f Either becauſe the Lord commands it, - or in all 
Mings agreeable to his Will. See c<. 21. ts 5. 29. g Or juſt, 
every way ſo by the Law of Nature, of Nations ard of God. 

2 * Honour thy tather, aud 1erz (which is the » pe; 2. 
firſt commandment with promiſe 5.) 12. Dome: 
h 1.e. A ſpecial promiſe annexed to the paricular duty com- 5. 15. & 

manded. There being Promiſes added to two only Command- 27. 15. 
ments, viz. the ſecond and this fifth; that which is annexed to Mat. 15- 
the ſecond Commandment is a general one and which relates to 4. Nark 

th2 whole Law, but this is a ſpecial one aud which reſpetts this 7. 10. 
Commandment in particular. 

3 That ic may be well with thee, and that thon 
mayit live long npon the carrh z. 


Chriſt, be. 9. 14. Rev. 1.5. the _eſps 
cially the promiſe of free Juſtification and ſanfification, by Chriir, 
which ceceived by Faith is a means of this SanCtification, and | 
without which the external Waſhing is ineffe&tual; the fign, with- 
out the word whereof it is a zeal, being, no Sacrament. 


27 That he might preſent it ro hunſelf Fa glorious 
church g, * not having ſpot þ or wrinkle z, or any 
ſich thing. &, but that it ſhould be holy and without 
blemiſh /. 


fHereafrer in Heaven. That the whole Church of the Ele 
may be preſent with him, 2 Cor. 5. 6. 8. and 1 Theſ. 4.18. p Per- 
fect in knowledge and holineſs, ſhining with an Heavenly Glory, 
and fully conformed to himſelf, 1 Fohz 3. 2. þ Spot of Sin, in allu- 
fion to ſpots in Garments. # Any reli& of Old Adam, in allufion 
to wrinkles in the Body which are figns of Old Age, and imply 
deformity. &k 7iz. which is contrary to the beauty of the Church, 
and might make her unplealing to Chriſt her Husband. / Without 
any fault to be found in her. He ſeems to allude to the Sacrifices 
which were to be without blemiſh, Lev. 1. 3. See Cant. 4. 7+ 


28 So ought men to love their wives as thetr 
own bodies mz : he that loveth his wite, loveth him- 


ſelf 7. | 

# With the ſame kind of love wherewith he loves his own Body. 
The Woman at firſt was taken out of the Man, and on that ac- 
count the Wife may be ſaid to. be a part of her Husband. # Ei- 
ther this explains the former, and himſelf here is the ſame as hy 
own Body before, or it adds to it, and is as much as his own Per- 
fon, the Wife being another ſelf, one Fleſh, the ſame Perſon (in 
2 civil ſenſe) with her Husband. 


29 For no man 0 ever yet hated his own fleſh p, but 
nouriſheth and cheriſheth ir 4, even as the Lord the 
churcn 7. 

o None in his right ſenſes, or no Man hates his Fleſh abſo- 
lutely, but the Diſeaſes or Miſeries of it. p His Body. q Feeds, 
and Clothes it, and ſupplies it with Things neceſſary for it. 7 
Which he furniſheth with all Things needful to Salvation. 


2:6, 30 For * we are members of his body t, of his fleſh, 
& 12. 2nd of his bones z. 


_ r His myftical Body. # As Eve was of Adam's, Gen. 2.23. only 
that was in a carnal way, this in a ſpiritual, as by the Communi- 
cation of Chriſt's Fleſh and Blood to us by the Spirit we are unit- 
ed to him, and members of him. 


31 * For this cauſe » ſhall a man leave his father 
and mother y, and ſhall be joyned unto his wite, and 
£10. they * two ſhall be one fleſh z. | 
b x Becauſe the Womah was formed of the Fleſh and Bones of the 
* Man, Herelates to Adam's words, Gen. 2. 24. y As to cohabita- 
tion, and domeftical Converſation; or, let a Man rather leave Fa- 
ther and Mother than' not cleave to his Wife. The Apoſtle doth 
not conceal the Obligations of other Relations, but prefers this 
before them. 7 i. e- One Body or one Man, viz. by the Mar- 
riaze-bond whereby cach hath power over the others Body, 1 Cor. 
7s 4. | 

'32 This 4a is a great myſtery : but I ſpeak concern- 
1s Chriſt and the Church. 

7 Either, this that was ſpoken before of a Marriage-union be- 
treen Chriſt and the Church, and its being of his Heſh, and of 
his Bones is a great myſtery, and ſo in the latter part of the 
Verſe the Apoſtle explains himſelf. Or, this that was ſaid of the 
ConjunQion of Adam and Eve :3 a great myſtery, (i.e. a great ſe- 
cet in Religion) as being a Type of Chriſt's Marriage with his 
Church; tho' not an inſtiruted Type appointed by God to fignifie 
this, yet a kind of natural Type as having a reſemblance to it. 

33 Neverthclels b, let every one of you in particu- 
lar, & leve his wife even as himſelf c, and the wife 
ſee that ſhe reverence 4 her husband. 

b 9.4: Setting aſide this myſtery; br, to return to my former 
Exhortation: c As her that is one Fleſh with him. 4 Or fear, 


jet not with a fervilte but ingenuons fear, and fuch as proceeds 
trom Love, : 


0. le 


ati10, 


e The word of the Goſpel, eſpe- | 


Vol. It, | 


Z That thou mayefſt live long, and happily. This promiſe is ſtill 
zalfilled to believers, either in t):2 thing ir ſelf here promiſed, or 
ina bettr way, God's giving them eternal Life. 

4 And * ye fathers | rovoke not your chiidren to * Col. ;. 
wrath +, but * bring them vp 1a the nurture! and ad- 21- 
mon!ti92n 4 of the Lord z:. * Deut. 6. 

kt Viz. By unreaſonable ſeverity, moroſeneſs, unrighteous com- 5 ag Q 
mands, &c. . ] Or corretion as the word ſignifies, Heb. 12. 6, 7, 8. * " Lives 
m 7 his denotes the end of the former; inftrucion in their duty ** © _ T 
muit be as.well as Correction to drive them to it. » The Lord *7* 3?* 
Jeſus Chriit; and ſo it is either that admonition which is com- 
manded by him, or wheredy they are brought to be acquainted 
with him. = 

5 * Servants o be ob+dient to them that are 30:7 * Col. 2, 
Matters p according to we fleſh q, with fear and trem- 22-1 1im- 
bling, 7, 1n ſinglenefs of your heart ſas unto Chriſt e. $* 1+ - 

0 Theſe Fervants were generally Slaves: Chriſtian liberty doth Tit. 2. 96 

not take away civil Servitude. p Whether good or bad, as 1 Per. 2. 
15. is cxprelly ſaid. q As to your outward State, not as to your 
Souls and Conſciences. 7 Either with reverence and fear of of- 
fending them, and being punithed by them. See Rom. 13. 4. or 
rather with Humility as appears by 7/al. 2. 11. Phil. 2.12. 1 Cor. 2, 
3-and 2 Cor. 7.15, compare Rom. 11. 20, ſ Sincerity, and without: 
guile. t Who hath commanded this obedience, and whom ye 
obey in yielding it to your Maſters. 

6 Not with eye-ſervice « as men-pleaſers x, but as 
the ſervants of Chriſty, doipg the will of God = from 
the heart. | 

zz Not meerly having reſpe&@ to your Maſters Preſence, and 
looking upon you in your work. 7 Such as make it their only buſi- 
nels to pleaſe their Maſters right or wrong, and ingratiate them- 
ſelves with them though by offending God. y As becomes the <er- 
vants of Chriſt, or as thoſe that are the Servants of Chriſt and 
ſeek to pleaſe him. x Performing obedience to your Maſters nor 
barely as their Will, but God's Will who requires it, as verſe 5. 

7 With good Will 2 doing ſervice as to the Lord, 
and not to men b. | 

a Not grudgingly, or as of conſtraint, but freely, and cheerfully. 

b Not only regarding Men, your Mafters, but Chrift your great 
Mafter. That which is done for the worſt Maſters, and in the 
hardeft things 1s Service done to Chrift ; when out of love to him 
Servants bear their Maſters folly, or cruelty. 

8 * Knowing that whatſoever good thing c any man * Rom. 2: 
doth, the ſame 4 ſhall he receive of the Lord vrhether 5+ 2 Cor. 
he be bond or free e. | | yo 

cViz. As the Servant of Chriſt and as unto the Lord. 4 The 
reward of the ſame; by a Metonymy. e Chriſt regards not thoſe 
differences of Men at the preſent, nor will in the day of Judgment, 
I Cor. 7. 22. and 12, 13. Gal. 3. 2$.. C9l.3. 11. "0 

9 And ye maſters do the ſame things f' to them; _. 

+ forbearing g threatning,. knowing, that -+ your + Or, mo- 

maſter alſo 1s in heaven h, * neither is there reſpe&t CE 

of perſons with him ;. _ | - read; both 
f Not the ſame in ſpecial which belong orily to Servants, but rour and 

in general which concern you no leſs than them, viz. do your duty heir Ma- 

tothem with good will, with an Eye to God, and Chrift, &c. or ra- ger, 

ther, do your duty mutually to them according; to your condition, * pg gm; 2; 

and calling, C01. 4. 1. g Or rather (as in the margin) moderating, x ,, 

or remitting, 7. e. do not carry your ſelves angrily ro them (which 

appears in vehement, and irequent threatnings) when ye may 

otherwiſe maintain your Authority over them. þ And theretore 

too ſtrong for you, though ye may be too hard for your Servants. 

i He is juſt as well as powerful, and will neither ſpare ye becauſe 

you are Maſters nor puniſh them becaule they are Servants. See 

AtS 10. 34. Gal. 2.6. Col. 3. 25, : os 

10 Finally, my brethren, be ſtrong & in the Lerd / 
and in the power of his mizhrt »:. | 
| þ Or ſtrengthen your ſelves, i. e. be courageous, and conſtant 
in the practice of your duty againft the Devil, and all his Affaults. 

I Not in your ſelves, but im the Lord Jeſus Chriſt in whom your 
ſtrength lies, and from whom by Faith ye may obtain it. See 1 #1, 
4+ 13. and 2 Tim. 2;1. m Or mighty Power. See Ch. 1. 19. 9-4.” 


though your own ftrength be but weakneſs, yet Chriſt's Power is 
mighty, and he can communicate enough to you. 


[5L 2] 


11 * Put 


Chap. VE 


re 3 


Chap. VI. 


p «- ys, 
} Nom. 11 X Pit o12 the wile armour 7 of God 0, nat Fe 
131% may be able ro ftand p avalivit the wiles q of tne devil. 
?Cor.% _,, Get rour ſelves furniſhed with every grace, that none be 


” wanting in you, no part naked and expoſed to your Enemies. 0 
i. 2. Not carnal but (piritual, and given by God. See 2 Cor. 10. 
2, 4. and 1 76-J.5.$. p Either to fight, or rather to OVELCOMEC. 
He that los the Victory is ſaid to fall ; he that gains it, to ſtand. 
'. 4 The Devil uſeth Arts, and Stratagems, as 
well as Force and Violence and therefore if any part ot your 
ſpiritual Armour be wanting, he will affault you where he finds 
you weakeſt. 
12 For wer vreftlenot againſt + fleſh and blood /, 


- 


%,s*”'> 
& - -& &S 


< 
ce 
1 


4 Gre . 
bod ad bat agaiatt princtpalities, agaimit Powers 7, againdl 
4 {7 ' Re O " ag "a R ws Y - A G {# ”4 FILS, 2 
eb the © rulers of the darkneſs of this world zz, againft 
pl 


= OY RN 5-6 . - . - . 
#1 f ſfoiritoal wickedneſs x in Þ high places v. 
L&0%**  » Not only, or not principally. /Men, conſiſting of Fleſh and 
Blood, Mazih. 16, 17. Gal. 1. 16. t Devils, Co!. 2. 15, SEC CP. bo 


'Y . 
Sh 21. u EJHer that Rule in the dark me where God ere Irs _ 
Wtre, © £6 be tor the Puniſhment of Men. SE "nh 2. _ ow _— 
+ Or, Rule in the dark piaces of the Earth 3 te Hark minds of 1 CN, 
*& have their Rulz over them by rea!on of the Darkneſs that is mn 


aha, them, in which reſpz@& the Devil is called the God of this World, 
2 Cor. 4. 4- and the Prince of it, Fob 1.4. 30» So that the dark 
World here ſeems to be oppoled to Children of Light, Ch. 5. 8. 
x Either wicked Spirits, or emphatically, /pir1rual Wickedneſſes, for 
Wickedneſles of the hivheſt kind, implying the intentneſs of Wick- 
edneſs in thoſe Angelical Subſtances, which are lo much the more 
wicked, by how much the more excellent in themſelves their Na- 
tures are. y Or #-avenly, taking Heaven for the whole expaſum 
or ſpreading, out of the Air between the Earth and the Stars, the 
Air beins the place from whence the Devils aſſault us, as Chap. 2. 
2. Or rather # for about Heavenly places or things, in the ſame 
ſenſe 2s the word rendred Heavenly is taken four times before in 
this Epiſtle, Chap. 1. 3, 20. and 2. 6. and 3. 10. being 1n none of 
them taken for the Air; and then the ſenſe muſt be, that we wre- 
ftle 3bour Heavenly places or things, not with Fleſh and Blood, 
but with Principalities, with Powers, &c. Obj. The Gr. Prepolt- 
tion will not bear this Conſtrution. Arnſ. Let Chryſoftom and 
other Greeks anſwer for that. They underſtood their Language 
beſt, and give this interpretation. : 

13 Wherefore take unto you the whole armour of 
God, that ye may be able ro withſtand 1n the evil 


' + Or, day z, and Þþ having done all z, to ſtand 6. . 
hþvirg 7 Times of Temptation, and Satan's greateſt Rage. See Ch. 5. 
0:2r:0m2 16. a All that belongs to good Souldiers of Jeſus Chriſt, all that 
a:l. we can do being little enough to ſecure our ſtanding. & As Con- 

querours do that keep the Field not being beaten down nor giving 
way. by ; 
+]a.ir. 14 Stand c therefore * having your loins girt about 
«. Luke d with truth e, and * having on the breaſt-plate of 
12-25. © rightcouſueſs f. 
pom : | Standing here (in a different ſenſe from what it was taken in 
ip Car before) ſeems to imply watchfulneſs, readineſs for the Combate, 
6. 7. * and keeping our Places, (both as to our general and particular cal- 


lings,) If Souldiers leave their Ranks they endanger themſelves. 
4 Having exhorted to put on the whole Armour of God, he de- 
ſcends to the particular parts of it, both defenſive and offentive. We 
need not be over curious in enquiring into the reaſon of the Names 
here given to the ſeveral parts of a Chriſtian's Armour, and the 
Analogy between them and Corporal Arms, the Apoftle uſing 
theſe Terms promiſcuoully, 1 Thefſ. 5. $. and deſigning only to ſhew 
that what bodily Arms are to Souldiers, that theſe ſpiritual Arms 
might be to Chriſtians : Yet ſome reaſon may be given of theſe 
Denominations. He begins with the furniture for the Loyns, the 
ſeat of Strength, and alludes to the Belt or military Girdle, which 
was both for Ornament and Strength, and ſo is Truth. e Under- 
flood either of the Truth of Dottrin, or rather (becauſe that 
comes in afterward under the Title of the Sword of the Spirit) of 
ſoundneſs, and Sincerity of Heart, than which nothing doth more 
beautifie or adorn a Chriſtian. He alludes to J/2. 59. 17. See 
2 Cor. 1.12. and 1 Tim. 1.5, 19. f Righteouſnels of Converſation, 
conſiſting both in a reſolvedneſs for Good, and repentance for Evil 
done, which 1s as a Breaſt-plate (that piece of Armour which co- 
vers the whole Breaſt and Belly) to a Chrittian ; that reſolved- 
neſs againſt Sin fencing him againſt Temptation, and the Con- 
ſcience of well doing againſt the Accuſations of Men and Devils, 
L Core 4+ 3, 4» and 1 Fob 3.7. 
15 And your feet ſhod g with the preparation of 
the goſpel of peace h. 
g'In alluhon to the Greaves or military Shoes with which Soul- 
dicrs covered their Feet and Legs. A Chriſtian's way lies through 


EFAESL FN 


which couldiers were wont to ſhelter themſclves ava it their 7. 
mies Darts) as being a tort of univerſal Defence covering A 
whole Man, and guarding even the other parts: of our (1.7 = 
Armour. 4 It ſeems to be analluijon to the poiſoned Daccs ——_ 
barbarous Nations were Wont to uſe which enflamed the Pods 
chey hit. By them he means all thoſe violent Temptations _— 
cnttame Mens Luſts. Theſe fiery Darts of Temptations, Tai. 
ſaid to quench, when by the help of Grace, obtained 6: Chrift. . 
vercomes them. m The Devil, Mar. 13. 19. Wann 
17 And take the helmet of iulvation z, and 74 
fivord of the Spirit o which is the word of Gol , | 
n <alvation for the hope of Salvation, 1 T-f. 5.2, 7} tj. "TIRE 
faith, and is of kin to it. Souldiers dare not f7ht Withour that. 
Helmet: Deſpair, to which the Devil tempts us, makes ws go. 
our Combat; whereas hope of Salvation makes vs litr ww ©. 
Heads in the midſt of Temptations and Atflictions. '1 his 171... 
alludes to J/::. 59. 17. 0 Fither the ſpiritual *word, the way 1... 
ing ſpiritual, and the Fnemy ſpiritual, or rather the <worg v41.;.7, 
the Spirit of God furniſheth us with, and makes eX#ettua) ;n gi. 
Hands. h'The Dottrin of God in the Scripture, called a tWO-edgg 
Sword, Rev. 1.16. and 2. 12. Which enters into the Soul, 2nd 6 4 
vides between the moſt inward Aﬀe&ions, Zeb. 4. 12. and cr; 
the Sinews of the ſtrongeſt Temptations, Mar. 4. 4- 7+ 10. and _ 
quers the Devil, while it reſcues Sinners from under his logo 
'Lhis relates to J/z. 49 2. : 
109 Praying always q, with all prayer and fipplica- 1, 


4 


con 7 1n the Spirit / * and watching thereunto : with 13.5), 
all perſeverance #, and ſipplication for all ſtints x. 

q i.e. In every opportunity, ſo often as our own, or others ne. 
ceſhities call us to it, 1 Theſſ.%5. 17. 7 Prayer when oppoſed to ſan. 
plication ſeems to 1ignifie petitioning for good things, and {i;11li. 
cation the deprecating of Evil, 1 7im. 2.1. { Either our own Pirir 
with which we pray, ſo as not to draw nigh to God with our Moth 
only, as 1/2. 29. 13. Or rather the holy Spirit of God by why 
athſtance we pray, Rom. $. 26, 27. Fud? 20. 1 To Prayer, in o7- 
poſition to ſloth and ſecurity. See Mz. 26. 41. Col. 4, 2, ard 1 
Pet. 4. 7- u Conftancy and continuance in Prayer in every con- 
dition, adverſe as well as proſperous, though Prayer be not pre- 
lently aniwered, Luke 18. 1, x Not only for our ſelves, but for 
our Brethren in the World, none being in fo good a condition bu: 
they may need our Prayers. * Att: 4 

19 Aud for me, that utterance y may be given 23.0 
unto me, that I z may open my mouth boldly z to make iT 
Known the myſtery of the Goſpel. Py 

y Or Speech, viz. both the things T am to ſpeak, and the f4. 
culty ot ſpeaking as becomes the Matter I deliver. + Or, is or 
unto the opening of my Mouth, 7.e. full and free Profeſſion of the 
Truth without ſhame or fear. @ Either, freely and confidently; 
the ſame as before in other words, or, openly and plainly, in op- 
poſition to ſpeaking cloſely, and in ſecret, Mark $. 32. 11, 
14+ and ſo it may have reſpett to the removing of his Bonds 
which were the preſent impediment of his ſo ſpeaking. 

20 For which * I am an antbaſſadour * + in honds*2C 
b, that Þ therein I may ſpeak boldly c, as I ought to Y 
ſpeak. | | Nh 

6 For which Goſpel I ſtill continue, though a Priſoner, in the” ; 
Ambaſty committed to me by Chrift. c This may imply not only 4.0, 
tree ſpeaking, but free atting in all things whereby che Goſpel |. 
may be propagated. + 0s, 
21 Bur * that ye alſo 4 may know my affairs e, and jr, 
how I do f, * Tychicus a beloved brother, and faich- * Cl. 
tul miniſter & in the Lord, ſhall make known to you Fn 


all things. ſe 
d As well as other Churches. e How I am uſed by the Romans , ,, 
in my bonds. f Or, rather what I do, 7, e. how I beiave my ſelf. 
See Aﬀs 28. 20, 21. gMinifter is here taken in a large ſenſe for 
any that labour in the Goſpel, ſuch as were not only ordinary Pa- 
ſrours, but Evangeliſts, and Apoſtles themſelves. 

22 Whom | have ſent unto you for the ſame pur- 
poſe that ye might know our affairs, and that ac migit 


comfort your hearts h. 

hþ That ye might not faint at my Tribulation, Chap. 3- 13 
it might be a comfort to them to hear that Pay! was well uſed 
(ſetting aſide his bonds) and had liberty to- Preach to thoſe that 
came to him. . as 
23 Peace be to the brethren, and love with faith z 


from God the Father, and the Lord Jeſus Chrilt. 


rough Places, through Briars and Thorns, and therefore he needs 
this piece of Armour. He muſt be prepared to hold the Faith, and 
confeſs Chriſt in the moſt difficult times. hþ With that furniture 
which the Goſpel affords him, which being a Goſpel of peace, and 
bringing the glad tidings of Reconciliation to God by Chriſt, pre- 
pares Men bz to undergo the troubles of the World, Febz 16. 23. 

16 Above all ; taking the ſhield of faith k where- 
v-ith ye {hall be able to quench all the fiery darts / of 
the wicked :. | 

7 Chiefly, Col. 3. 14. this he ſets, as the principal part of 
the Chriſtian Armour, againft the greateſt Temptations, fiery 
Darts, 1 Pet.5.$,9. and 1 Fobn5.4. & Faith, as receiving Chriſt 


7 He prays for their continuance and encreaſe in theſe graces 
which already were begun in them. 

24 Grace be with all them & that love our Lord Jc- ; 
ſus Chriſt in Þ ſincerity. Amen. u Y 
Þ This is more extenſive than the former, he prays here 4 
for all true Believers every where. 1 Or, as the Margin! _— 
with I-mcorruption, i. e. ſo as that nothing can draw them 0 
from whe love of Chriſt, and ſo it implies Conſtancy as well as 
Sincerity. 


Written from Rome unto the Epheſians #» Tychucus. 


PHILIPPIANS 


and the benefits of Redemption is compared to a Shield (under | 


Cnap, YI 


MK 


hi 


intin 
well 
Mat. 
dedic 
Cliat 
Fam, 
lippr, 
dedic 
dienc; 
now | 
From 
And t 
the F: 
ſtand 
the C 
two 
the C 
of whi 
Office 
they Ci 
toreth: 
and 12, 
937. # 
Whethe 
Feedin 
tion of | 
mitted 
: ſpecial « 
and tho 
diftriby 
Eiven t 
VICe of ft 
Eres of 


YT) = 
4 . 
$*8444;Y 


Pons ' , 
Mall, t 


10+) 
Witt Rg 


buy 
FM. 


po . 


Mr p, I. 


ILIPPIANS 


em  ————_—_—__ 


The ARGUMENT. 


AUL being called of the Lord to preach the Goſpel in Macedonia, having tonch'd at Neapolis of Greece, came 
zo Philipp; chefirſt City in regard of its Situation, within that part of Macedonia, on his way from Samothrace, 
AR. 16. 11, 12. znto that Country, through Amphipolis 22d Apollonia, to Theſfalonica. 


Applan deſcribes this 


Philipp! ro be ſeated on a little Hill near the foor of the Pangzan monntain, in old time called Crenides, from the 
Fountains, and Gold-mines adjoyning, and Datus or Dathus from the Treaſure ( agreeing with the INand Thaſus near 
it ) afterwards enlarg'd, and fortified by Philip King of Macedon, who therefore gave it rhe name of Philippi as a 
Frontier Town within his Dominions.oa the confines of T hracia. Yet afterwards it fell into the hands of the Romans, 
and became memorable for the Victory which Auguſtus and Anthony obtaiz'd there over Brutus and Caſſius. And in 


Paul's tr:me was a Colony, AQ. 16. 12, 21. 


But there is no evidence from Scripture, or the moſt Authentick Civil 


Hiſtory, that it was (as a Learned 7Man would have it ) the Metropolis of Macedonia when this Epiſtle was written 
toit. For it doth not appear that it had ſo much as a Proconſul or Deputy (25 i» ſome other Golonies of Macedonia, 
A. 16. 12.) but rather that the Magiltrates and Military Officers, Verſ. 20, 22, 35, 26, 38.) ſhew themſelves to 
be of an under City, which (ſome affirm) did depend on the great Mother City Theſlalonica, in 4 civil ſenſe , and 
ſome Centuries after ({ay others ) in an Eccleſiaſtical. However it received Paul who planted the Coſpd here, who now 
beins Priſoner at Rome (probably the firſt, not ſecond time) Chap. 1. 7, 13,14, 15. with 2 Tim. 4. 6. and having 
recerved by Epaphroditus their Meſſenger, C. 2. 25. their acceptable and liberal preſent, C. 1. 18. and 1aderſtood from om” 
their conſtancy in the Dottrin they had received (though it ſeems ſome affetting prehenunencies did trouble them) he dotis 
mot Pathetically, as full of paternal affeftions towards them his dear Children, move them to perſevere in Faith and God- 
lineſs : and not to be at all diſcourag'd by his preſent ſufferings; but to live as becomes the Goſpel, in humility and unity ; 
intumating his tender love and care of them in deſigning to ſend Timothy to them, and then to come and viſit them, win 
he cautions to beware of Seducers, who might elſe pervert them in mingling the Law and Goſpel : Whereupon be quickens 
them to an Heavenly Converſation in the exerciſe of ſeveral graces, and expreſſing his thankfulneſs for this repcated bor:ity 


concludes with his Salutations and Apoſtolical Bleſſing. 


CHAP. HL 


The uſual Salutation and Thanksgiving t0 God for their Communion in 
the Goſpel z hs confidence in, and love to them, and daily Prayer for 
their increaſe in Grace, 1—=11. Fs ſufferings for the Goſpel and 

_ their Fruit, 12 —— 14. Some preached Chriſt out of Envy, to his 
Grief z yet this, he truſted, ſhould fall out for his Salvation, and for 
the magnifying of Chriſt, 15 —— 19. whether by bis Lif? or Death, 
being ready for both, becauſe both were profitable, the one for the Church, 
the other {cr himſelf, 10 — 26. 1 exhorts them to a Converſation 
becoming the Goſpel; to Unity, Courage and Patience in Tribulations, 
according 10 his Example, 27. 30s ; 

1 W RAUL and Timotheus 2 the ſervants of Je- 
ſas Chriſt b, to all the ſaints in Chriftt ]e- 
ſus c, which are at Philippi, with the bi- 

ſhops and deacons 4 : | 

4 7. & 1 Cor. 1. 1. 2 Core. 1. 1. The Author and Approver, 
intimating the good agreement 'twixt Paul and Timothy whom they 
w2ll knew, to gain their fuller atſent to what ſhould be written, 

Mat. 18. 16. 6b Ina ſpecial manner being wholly and perpetually 

dedicated to his more immediate {ervice in the Miniftry of Recon- 

ciliation, As 13. 2. Rome 1. 1. 1 Cor. 4. 1. 2 Cor. 5. 13. Gal, 1.1. 

Fam. 1. 1. c i.e All the Community of Church-members at Ph7- 

lippi, called out of the World to Chriſt, ſanctified, ſeparated and 

dedicated to him, by a credible profetion of faith in him and obe- 
dience to him, 1 Cor. 1. 2. Fph. 1. 1. Col. 1. 2. , The Apoſtle 

now being well perlwaded of their pericrerance, ve. 6, 7. d 

From the Syriac Verſion it is rendred Preshyters and Miniſters , 

And there appears no cogent reaſon why we ſhould not adhere to 

the Expoſition of Ancient and Modern Interpreters, who under- 

ſtand the Apoſtle writing in the Plural Number particularly to 
the Church and her Otkcers living in this City, as meaning, the 
mo Orders of ordinary ſtanding Othcers, which are appointed for 
the Church, and not the Church for the Officers. By the former 
of which are meant ſuch Paſtors and Teachers as did agree in Name, 

Otnce and Power with the Biſhops during the Apottle's times, as 

they colle&t from ſeveral other Scriptures betides this compar'd 

together, wiz. ARS 20. 17, 20, 25, 23. With 1t..30. I Core 4s Is 

and 12. 28, 1 Theſſ. 5. 12, 13. I'7imeJs I» tO S. and5.17. Tir. I. 

$37. Heb. 12, 17. Flite 5+ 14o I Pete 5+ 2,2. 3 Fobn 1.9. Theſe 

"iether Biſhops or Elders, having the Overtight, Rule, Guidance, 

teeding of the People, i'rcaching of the Word, and Admiaittra- 

tion of the Sacraments or Myſtical Ordinances of the Goſpel com- 

Mitted to them in common. By the latter, thoſe to whem the 


| ſpzcial care was'commitred for ſerving of Tables, the Lord's Teble 


and the Poors, together with 2 receiving and orderly diſpoting and 
diſtributing the collected Alms and other Goods of the Church 
Even to pious uſes according to their own diſcretion, taking, ad- 


Vice of the Paſtors for the iupport and benefit of the poor Mem- 


2 Cor. 9. 1, 2,12. I Tims. 3.8 With 1 Pet. 4. 11. G2l. 5: 10, Its 
Chap. 2. 1, 25, 20. With 4. 18. Fude 12. © But rwo learned 
* Doctors among us have oppos'd this and made it difficult, the oz2 
< by reſtraining the word Biſhops to Dioceſans, and the orher by 
* enlarging the word Deacons to note their Presbyters. A? would 
* have no luch order of Presbyters, as now, in the A poſtles days ; 
* Thjs would have Deacons tbe7 to be only temporary, not ſtanding 
* Othcers'in the Church, and fo they agree not. The former 
* finding Clement and Polycarp agreed with the Apoftle here, as to 
* zwo diftinet orders of Biſhops and Deacons, going upon an un- 
< proy'd Suppoſition that Philippt was then a Metropolis, he would, 
«© without any ſatisfactory evidence to one that doubted, infer the 
* Biſhops here were Dioceſans z however the forementioned <cri- 
* ptures compar'd, all prove the words Biſhop and Elder in the 
« Apoſtles days, to be uſed promiſcuouſly, only the word Elders, 
* or Presbyters, more frequently than that of Biſhops, conceiv- 
« ing that the Office of Presbyters was not in uſe till after-ages, 
* though he aſſigns not the time how and when it came in. £0 
« that in effe{ he would have Phz1ippi to be a mother Church (that 
< then had ſeveral daughter Churthes) in her infancy. Whereas 
«* the Apoſtle writes to thoſe who were Church-officers in that 
« Cityz yet he would have them none of that Order which we 
* now call Presbytersz thinking whatever the Apoſtle writes of 
&* Iaying on the hands of the Presbytery, there were then no Prel- 
« byters ordained in the Church; which is a tingular opinion of 
* holding all the places in the N. T. where Presbyters are named, 
<« preciſely to intend Dioceſan Biſhops in diſtin&ion 'trom them 
* who are only Deacons, allowing the Othce of Deacons, and tiz 
* continuance of it to be appointed therein, when that of Flders 
* (acknowledged to be Superior) is not. But if according to this 
* Novel Tenet there were not th-z Preaching Presbyters, that 
« were not Metropolitans or Diocerans, how could Diocclans have 
* Presbyters under them? And if they had none, what ſhould 
« denominate them properly Dioceſans ? When it ſeems to be of 
& the formal reaſon of a Dioceſan to be choſen out of Presbyters or 
© to have them to Govern. And if the Diocelan Biſhops were then 
« 25 the Apoſtles, who muſt the Paſtors and Teachers be ?- 1 Cor- 
&« 12. 28, 29. Fph. 4. 11,12. Exhorting, Teaching, Ruling were 
& then preſent Offices which the Apoſtles ordained in every Church, 
& Af. 14. 23» Cenchres was no Dioceſs or Metropelis, nvitner 
«© was Aquila's and Prijcill;'$ houſe, Rom. 16.3,4. 1 Cor. 15. 19- 
« yet are faid to be Churches in the Plural Number, 1 Core 14+ 


«< 22, 24. If Mctropolitical or Dioceſan, how hath not the <cri- 
« pture the name or thing ? This appears not to be agrecable to 
& the Apoftle's way , who writes particularly to Churches in Cities, 
& Towns and Countries, as to the A:6r:wms. He diftinguiſheth 
& Theſſalonica, in directions from Mzcedonicand Achata, 1 1 hetl. 1. 
« 7, 8. Colof: and Laodicea, Col. 4.13. Aud as there were Lilhogs 
© plural in this City of Philipp; fo more doing the Ottice in Thoj.tly- 
® rice, 1 Theil. 5.12. Which was wm Mcc29714 t00. & nd would it not 


'&&5 of the Church who needed as to this temporal lifz, to Or- |© look od!y rofay, ye Chriſtians ot font, are examples to all 
23%, Widows, yea and Strangers, eſpecially of the houſhold of * the Chriſtians of Mace.4oz,, In cuff. were more Biltops or 
ath, that their bodily necefiities might he ſippucd, Af. 6. 4. Ore | © Presbyters becauſe thers iz mention made of Eprphras and r- 
WICh Rom. 12. 7, $« & 15- 25, 26, 27. & 1% Ie - 1 Cor, 12, 28. | chipp:is? Cole 4. 12, 17. And world it not appear ftrang, 


thes4t 


by 


LL 


W's 


45 
- 
- —— — 


4 


Aeon 5 {Ie 
% "ps $ 


. hy _— 
þ FRO de y 5 
—_——— PP R 5 ——_— 
— — wor 4 _ 
em rr Er - 
 » ” " - d w =" — =» 
" G «EET " ho. - 
- 7% 3 —_— ood 6 
_ - >” 
n b* . g 3 6: 
- : : n = 
Wt. 2g 


R223 11H 


#*-———t LTD r 
_ = 4 
>. ; 
*, 


< EL EIS « : S 
Ky Ft 7, _ 
> 4 ”, bp an 
IS " 
—_— | —— 


——_ 


s 
% 


. ek 
— _ ” 
” "NE" 
Rex 
$9 
-"> 1 . 


- ts 


"4d Iz DEE 
MER. 4 


oak _ ) 

5 ron 
A 

—y 


cT 
=— 


* i 
_ ——_ 
wn 7+ 
So 


-_ 


» % 
OR mn 
So 


wt" 
=; 7. 
a Eons v. 
Sn . 
— — my 
IL 2 
( 


Pat. 
a 


* Eph. 1, 
15, 16. 
*Or, mei- 


#107. 


* Joh, 6+ 


29s 


+ Or, will 


finiſh it. 


EHSSLIP 


s ® - 5 1a” 4 47+ >. 4 Cn ! 4 eg Me J4% i 
&& wno1J th ow Were charg d UDO Perions OCNS SICK, to ſend for 


« (> FIJers of the Church, ro conclude the inrent of the injun- 
« ©i94 was to ſent for all the Dioceſans of the Metropolis ? Fam. 
*« <c. 14 If lo, he would lizely 
& cd the Elders of the Churches, not of the Church, of which 
© 1 the Sinoviar at Zierfalem Paul and Brriavas were received, 
*© 4nd of the Apoſtles and Flders, As 15. 4. who were all preient 
* at ivruſtlem, Aﬀs 21. 15. Which under the Roman power Was 
© pot the Metropolis of Paleſtine, but C:ſarea was chief. The 
« 144:: contradictory to the former Dottor, and to th? 0ice of rhe 
&« Church of Frgland for ordaining of Deacons, would have the term 
&« N-:c325 tonote the order of Presbyrers, looking upon Deacons on- 
« ly as temporary and occaſional Truſtees, who:?2 O:NCe Paul in 1s 
«cr piſtle did not ſo much as hint, thinking it unreaſonable by Dea- 
« con in thoſe Epiſtles to underſtand any other Office than that of 
* Pjochvrers asnow uſed. Whereas the word Deacorrs being Ana- 
< 102005 and put abſolutely here, in contradiftinaion to Biſhops, 
« ſhould according, to right reaſon be expounded in the moſt famous 
& 1nd diftinftive-Siznification, wherein, no doubt Luke a good 
& Grecian, and Paris Companion at Philipp, uſed it in the ACS, 
« 5, 9, 4, Ec. Written after this Epiftle, unto which ſpecial im- 
& port we ſhould rather underſtand Paul uſing it here, for thoſe 
& who were not mere occaſional and prudential temporary Othcers, 
& hut ſach as were to abide in the Church. Wherein upon the 
« multiplying of Diſciples, the bodily neceſſities of the Saints al- 
© ways with us, Foh. 12. $. did require f| ach who ſhould have the 
« peculiar care of theſe committed to them, As 20. 34,35. We 
&« find the Apoſtle in his Epittles evidently enough appointing and 
&« dcſttibing ſuch a ſpecial Miniſtry, yea and giving direttions about 


& i+ 25 a difrintt branch from propiiecy and teaching, if we com- | 


& pare places, Rom. 12- 6, 7, S. With 15. 26, 27. & 16. 1. & 
& 2 Cor. 8. 19 & 9. 1, 2, 12. and what is ſaid in this Epiſtle, 
&« -, 2. 25, 20. and 4 18. anſwerable to Luke's Hiſtory of rhe 
« 47s, and to what is written by Peter, 1 Pet. 4. 11. taking in 
« what Paul wrote to Timothy about this Officer in diſtinction from 
&« his who was to he apt to teach, that he ſhould be Grave, Tem- 
« perate, giving proof of Freedom from Covetouſneſs, of Con- 
« yerfation blameleſs, having a faithful Wife, and governing his 
&« Family (that he may be Hoſpitable) orderly, 1 Tim. 3. S. to 13. 
« qualified to diftribute , as in te Texts foremenitioned, &c. 
« The Church of Frgland in her 0rdination hath reference -to this 
&« ſpecial Office, when yet it calls Deacons, Miniſters, declaring 
&« there, It appertains to the Deacons Office 10 afſiſt the Presbyter in di- 
* fribution of the Elements, gladly and willingly to ſearch for the Poor, 
* Sick and Impotznt, that they may be relied. Praying that 1225 may 
* be modeſt; Lumble and conſtant in their miniftration. | 

2 Grace be unto you, and peace from God our Fa- 
ther, and from the Lord Jeſus Chrilt c. 

e i.e. The Frangelical Salutation, as Rom. I. 7. Eph. 1. 1. 
2 Pet. 1.2, praying for the free and undeſerved favour of God 
the Father to them, as the fountain, Fam. 1. 17. together with 
all inward and outward bleſſings, flowing thence through Chriſt the 
procurer of them. 

3 * I thank f my God g upon every | remembrance 
of you h. 

f i.e. As in moſt of his Epiſtles, viz. Rom. 1. $. 1 Cor. 1. 4. 
2 Cor. 1. 3. Eph. 1. 3. Col.1. 3. 1 Theſſ. 1. 2. 2 Theſſ. 1. 3. 2 Tim. 
1-3. he begins with thanks to God, and, here g My God, 7. e. 
whoſeT am, and whom I ſerve in the Goſpel of his Son, A. 27. 23» 
with Rom. 1. 9. whom the Fews and Gentiles do not ſo acknowledge. 
h Intimating that he ever bore them upon his heart to God with 
delight. 

4 (Always in every prayer of mine for you all mak- 
ing requeſt with joy z.) 

i As in praiſing of God, the Author of all that Grace they had 
received in every ſolemn Prayer , ſo in continuing his fervent 
and afſiduous requeſts unto God, 1 Thefſ. 5. 17. tor them all, 
The term al/ being uſed three times emphatically, Compare Luk. 


2. 37. ROM. 1. 9s 

5 For your fellowſhip in the goſpel, from the firſt 
Cay until now k. 

þ Your being joiried with us and other Chriſtians in the Com- 
munion of Chrift, and glad Tidings of-Salvation by him, 1 Cor. 10. 
16,17. = Foh. 1.3, 7. 1Pet. 4.13. evidenc'd by the Commu- 
nication of your bounty, Gal. 6. 6. Heb. 13. 16, Stedfaſtneſs and 
Perſeverance in all Chriſtian Duties from the firſt time of your 
recciving tlie Goſpel. 

5 Being confident of this very thing /, that he 
which hath begun * a good work in you mn, | will per- 
form zt z until the day of Jeſus Chriſt o. 


I 7. e. Having thank'd God for what he had done and did for 
them, he expreſſeth his firm perſuaſion and charitable hope of their 
perſeverance for the future. m Not from any thing in themſelves 
more than others, but becauſe God the Father (who is not weary 
of well doing) having begun the work of Faith in them, Ch, 2. 13. 
with Foh. 6. 29. whoelſe were dead in Sins, as the Epheſtans, C. 2. 1. 
he would preſerve and carry on that internal and ſpiritual work in 
the fruits of real Chriſtians, and not leave it imperfect, P/al. 138. 8. 
Iſa. 64. 8. but would make it perfe&, or perfed, ſtabliſh, ſtrengthen 
and /zrtl: them in it, thoſe words being of the ſame import in ſcri- 
pture with perform it, connoting the difficulty of it. 0 7. e. Either 
until the day of their Death, when the ſpirits of juſt Men are 
made perfe&, and Chriſt appears to their particular Judgment, 
Heb. 12. 23. not as being pertef whiles here in this State, ch. 3. 12. 
or rather until the day of Chriſt or latter day, at Judgment, 1 Cor. 
i. 5. 1 Th?fſ. 4. 15. when they ſhall be acknowledged to be 
blamele's, to the glory of Chriſt who hath carried them through all, 
and tulflled the work of Faith in them, and glorified them, 2 Theſſ. 
ts It. and Whoare his Glory, 2 Cvr- $. 23. 


have enjoyn'd them to have | 


EE % 

7 Even as Itis meet for me to think this &f You all » 
becauſe Þ I have you in my heart 9, in as mnch 4? | 
. 4 ay & K as + 

both * in my bonds, and in the defence and Wa: "I 
. | Y ile 
firmation of the goſpel, ye all are + partikers os my- 
> 


= - *<1 4 4 
I Cor. 12s To Col. 4- Io witn 2 Pet. Is L3. Tt behoyoe 195 3 


this judgment on you all, upon good grounds. q Not hawd 4s 
that he had them as it were ingraved upon his heart, 2 ny: "ut 
& 7. 3- For he could live and die with them, whom he a; 
tinually preſent unto God (as before.) +» But in thar [for = Wi 
they had gotten ſo much of his cordial affe&tion) they wers ( 
partners with him in the like precious faith, 2 7er. 1. 1, and h c 
brethren partakers of the heavenly calling, eb. 3. 1. as Chile; : 
of Light, 1 Thef. 5. 5. walking in faith and love, 2 The, = 
maintaining the Communion of Saints, in ſhewing the reality # 
the ſame Grace with him, in that as v. 29. It wx fivey _— 
07 the behalf of Chrift, not only to believe on him, bur alſo to (y8'., 1. 
kisſik2. Which he reckon'd they did in compaſſionately anq fag 
jonably ſupporting and relieving of him , in his impriſunmer- 
whereby the Goſpel was detended, and what he had Preach ;;s-:, 
was confirmed, by his becoming a real patron of it, in holdiag 1; 
the profeſſion, and ratifying the confethon of his Faith , jr oe. 
rying that he was counted worthy to ſuffer. for the Name ,* 
Chrift, As 5. 41. 1 Pet. 4. 15, 16. wherein they did by aj hone 
means ſuccour him, and ſhew'd themſelves Companions with 1; 
Ph. 4. 14. Heb. 10. 33s is 
8 For God is my record /, how greatly I long aftey, 
you all r, in the howels of Jeſus Chrilt z. 
F Confirming what he had before written, he appeals to God in 


the Heavens, who ſearcheth the Heart, and trieth the Reins az in 
ſome other Epiſtles, Rom. 1. 9. 2 Core 1. 23. With 11, 31, Gy, 
| I. 29. 1 The. 2. 5,10. and as Fob 16. 19. by making a ſolemn 
| F roteſtation or Oath to put the matter out of doubt, Z#, 6, 15, 
; and giving them aſſurance (as he lawfully might in this way fox 
God's Glory, and their good, Dent. 6. 13.) # Of the ſincerity 
and intenſneſs of his hearty affe&ions towards every one of then 
ch, 2. 26. and 4+ 1. with 2 Cor. 9. 14. # Not out of any carr}, 
ſelfiſh or worldly reſpe&s; but a really Chriſtian, ſpiritual and 
tender love, ſeated in the inward parts of this anAlified Apoſtle, 
Fer. 31.33. by the ſame Spirit that united him unto Chriſt, wig 
loves his Spouſe with no common love, but is the ſpring and pro- 
curer, and great exemplar of that afe@tionate Chriſtian tore, 
which like him they are to exert from the very root of their hearts, 
purely, unteignedly and ferveatly without diffimulation, Zn, 12, g. 
1 Pet. 1. 22. imitating God and Chriſt, as Paul here ( Luk. 1.75,) 
in the higheſt degree of deareſt affetion, did love the 7hilip;izus, 
and elſewhere the Theſſalonians, 1 Theſſ. 2. 7, $, 11. 

9 And this I pray w, that your love may abound x 
yet more and more in knowledge y, and in all+judg- 40,; 


ment. 

w Having praiſed God for their attainments, he returns (253. 4.) 
in token of his love to his great petition for them: x Viz. that 
their love both to God and Man ſhew'd in their bounty to him, 
might as a riſing ſtream from its ſpringing Fountain yet further 
flow out, and more abundantly communicate it ſelf in all Cliriſtian 
Offices, and not abate (as it ſeems it afterwards did among the 
Epheſians. Reva 2. 4.) as our Saviour foretold it would do in {ome, 
Mat. 24+ 12. 2 Time. 1. 13. & 4+ 10, but continue encreafing to 
the end, 1 Thefſ. 3. 12. » Being founded on a ſound and faring 
underſtanding of the things of God, and our ſelves, Fob. 17. 3. 
Rom. 3+ 20. Eph. 1.17. with 4. 13. 2 Pet. 2. 18. and an acknoy- 
ledgment of the truth which is after godlineſs, 7it. 1. 1. 7 Inthe 
practical judgment or internal ſenſe, and particular experience, 
taſte, and feeling the teſtimony of the Spirit in the Heart concern- 
ing the Grace of God and Adoption, Kom. 5. 1, 5. & 8. 15, 17- 
& 14. 17. when there is not only a right notion in thi. Head, but 
a true ſenſe and ſayour of ſpiritual things in the Heart, Hb. 5. 14. 
which 1s when knowledge is not only an empty cloud in the Air, 
but becomes effettual by falling down in a kindly ſhowre upon the 
Heart warmed with the love of God, and the virtue of Chriſt's Re- 
ſurreCtion, as he after gives his own experience, <>. 3. 10. (like 
David's, Tſal. 24. 8.) | 

10 That ye a may Þ approve things that are Þ ex--% 


cellent 6, that ye may be ſincere c, and without of-7% 
fence 4 till the day of Chriſt e; 


7.e. To the ends he ſubjoins, namely. 6b That upon a due ex- 
pence of circumſtances in a judicious Trial, upon rightly diſcerning 
the differences of things not obvious to every eye, {o as to chule 
and approve thoſe things that are really to be preferred, being the 
beft, Rom. 2. 18. 1 Thefſ. 5. 21. ſurpaſhng all deſirable things be- 
ſides, Eph. 3. 19. as being moſt acceptable unto God, Kom- 12+ 2: 
c And be upright, Prov. 11. 20, * Tis an emphatical word 1n the 
original here, being borrowed either from ſuch things as are (ric 
by being held up at the beams of the Sun to ſee what faults Or 
taws are in them, whether without fraud, or elſe from ſuch as are 
clarified by the heat of the Sun ; and notes here, that Paul ow 
have them to be incorrupt and impartial in heart and life, 1 1ait't 
and manners; free from prevailing, corruptions of pure mind, 
2 Pet. 3.1. purg'd from the old leaven, 1 Cor. 5+ 6, 7» 5+ 00: 
ſuffering the knowledge of Chriſt to be mix'd with traditions and 
humane inventions, but endow'd with evangelical {;mplifeity in _ 
ſight of God, 2 Cor. 1. 12. 1 Tim. 1. 5. & 5« 23, 4 Not ers 
from the main ſcope and defign of Chriſtianity, or ftumbling 'v 
as either Attively or Paſſvely to trouble and offend either them- 
ſelves or others in the heavenly courſe, but walking [0 prudeatsy 
as to give no juft occaſion of ſcandal, or laying a ſiare tor One O! 
other, Mar. 18. 7. A. 24. 16. 1 Cor. 10. 32. abiding blameies 
to the coming of Chriſt, 1 Theſſ. 5. 23. & See 0n v1). ue 
peated here to engage them unto ſerious thoughtfulneſs of £12: 


TW 


days T? 
: 


grace 7. 27. 
p 7. e. Conſonant to the Law of equity and charity, 6 i RY 


Chap ll of 


Wi 
Cert 
Ch: 
577 00 

ly fo! 1 
[OK 
Yr, Cc C 
We I 
Ur,9 CON 
154A ſpe: 


7f 
tors, 
carr] 
the £ 
9. 3. 
had | 
off c; 
Croſl: 
Salva 
bis h 
and : 
terins 
2745 


} 


ſomeu 
his Sui 
guiſhit 
VIOUs ] 
having 
head C 
tiers, 
cere al 
Chriſt 
Apoſtl 
of it. 

and et 
2 Cor, 7 


I6 
lincer 

q TI 
larly f] 
of Pre 
2 Cor, 
Paul ( 
Occaſio 
the Ac 


i” - 
$i+ id » 
$5 \"{ 


— 


vas CC». 


© fa _ cg. 


which are by Jeſus Chriſt & unto the glory and praife 
of God 4. : 

# i, e. Not only bringing forth ſome ſingle, yea, or fingular 
Fruit, but repleni!h'd plurally with the Fruits of Righteouinels, 
Cl. 1, 10. AfRs 9. 36. etlewhere call d the Fruits of the Spirit, G.l. 
6. 22, Epi. 5+9. all 200Gncis and truth, aſwell as righteouſneſs, 
Theſe are ſuch good works as are not (whatever the Papiſts con- 
ceive) cauſal of Righreouſne!s, bur are through the Spiric (who 
regenerates the Pertons and directs the internal and external acti- 
ons of thoſe who walk in the ſteps of the Faith of their Father 
Avraham, Rom. 4. 12.) wrought by ſupernatural Grace in the 
heart join'd unto the Lord, 1 Cr. 6. 17. with whom they are one 
ſpirit. g And without whom, from their own ſrock and ftrength, 
till they be engrafted into him, Fon 15. 1,5. Trees of Righteou!- 
neſs of the Lord's planting, 1/.z. 16. 3. and his Workmanſhip crea- 
ted unto good works, Eph. 2. 10. they cannot bring forth Fruits, 
and do ſuch good works as are acceptable unto God, 2 Cor. 13. 5. 
but Chriſt living and dwelling in them by Faith, Gl. 2. 20. Eph. 
2. 17. and God working in them both, to will and to do, ch. 2. 12. 
they can do all through Chriſt, <. 4. 13. ſo that they ſhall be ac- 
cepted in him. h Not being empty Vines, bringing torth Fruit to 
themſelves, of. 10. 1. but to the eternal honour of him who hath 
called them, Mat. 5. 16. I Cor. 10s ZI, Eph. 1.5, 12, 14. 1 Pet. 
2.12.& 4+ II. Reve 5. 13o 

12 Brt 7 would ye ſhould underſtand, brethren z, 
that the things which happened uiito me, have faln our 
rather unto the furtherance of the goſpel k. 

i To obviate the infinuations which falſe Teachers and others 
mizht make uſe of from Pas Sufferings, to obſtruct the cordial 
Entertainment of thoſe glad Tidings he had brought, and to dil- 
courage thoſe who did obey the Truth, he doth by this friendly 
compcllation (which he often uteth) kindly intreat them to conft- 
dov well. & That his impriſonment, and what other Troubles from 
vithout did b-fal him in his Apoſtolical Office, whereby the over- 
ruling Providence of God fo ordered, that they did (contrary 
to the intention of his Perſecutors) rather advantage than hinder 
the progreſs of the Goſpel, encrealc than decreaſe the Church, ith 
he had opportunity two Years in his own hired Houle, of teaching 
with freedom the things of Chrift, Acts 25. 30, 31. whereupon 
he would not have the Philippians diſcouraged, but rather comfort- 
ed as the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 1. 5, 6, 7. for 1. his Tron Chain in the 
cauſe of Chrift was more an honour to him even in the Emperor's 
Court, ch. 4. 22. or Guard-chamber, Ads 28.16, or Judgment- 
hall, Mat. 27, 27. Mark 15. 16. Fohn 18. 25, 33. than thole glit- 
tering golden ones which others were ambitious to wear, Acts 5. 41. 
#:1. 2.2, it being apparent there, and elſewhere, to Courtiers, 
Citizens, Jews and Foreigners, that he did not ſuffer as an evil 
Doer, 1 Pet. 2. 19, 20. & 3+ 14. only for the Lord's ſake, Eph. 3. 1. 
& 4. 1. whoſe power in his confinement did work in, and by him, 
who approv'd himſelf faithful, which when enquiry was made con- 
cerning his ſuffering, gave occafion to communicate iome notions of 
Chrift, and glad Tidings of Salvation by him. 


13 So that my bonds Þ. in Chriſt are manifeſt 1n all 


+ the palace, and - in all other places. 


14 And many of the brethren in the Lord, waxing 
confident by my bonds z, are much more bold, to 
ſpeak the word without fear 0. 

And here again, contrary to the expeQation of thoſe Perſecu- 
tors, who defign'd to make havock of the Church, his innocent 
carriage and conſtancy in bearing the Crols, . had an influence npon 
the greater part of the Brethren (not according to the fleſh, Rom. 
9. 3. Hut) in the ſervice of Chriſt. o Paſtors and Teachers, who 
had been timorous at the firſt, were greatly imboldened to ſhake 
of carnal fear, and to profes and preach Chriſt Crucified, or the 
Crols of Chriſt, 1 Cor. 1. 18, 23» Which is the power of God to 
Salvation, Rom. 1. 15, more confidently than ever, as he and Barna- 
bts had done elſewhere, Ads 13. 46. and as Foſeph of Arimathea, 
and Nicod?mus, who were but ſecret Diſciples before Chriſt's Sut- 
terings, upon his Death owned him openly for their Lord, Mar. 
27.57. With Fokn 19. 39- 

15 Some indeed preach Chriſt even of envy. and 
ſtrife, and ſome alſo of good will p. 


p He doth here tacitly anſwer an exception might be made; 7t 
were better ſome of them were ſilent, than Preach ſy boldly as to procure 
tin Hured, and leſſzn his Reputation. 1. By granting there was 
ſomewhat in the allegation, yet did not conclude againſt this, that 
his Suffering was advantagious to promote the Goſpel. 2. By diftin- 
guſhing of thoſe who are hollow-hearted and falſe, from an en- 
vious principle, deſigning to diſparage this excellent Perlon, who 
having done much in the leſſer 4.1, and Greece, did now in the 
head City of the World, when in Priſon, alſo gain Proſelytes, Cour- 
ticrs, and others, for the receiving of Chrift, and thoſe were tin- 
cere and true hearted Brethren, joining with him in the cauſe of 
Chrift, ond aſſiſting him from true love to Chrift, and him. his 
Apoſtle, to get the truth of Chriftianity entertained in the love 
of it. The former were evil workers, both as to their principle 
and end, ch. 3. 2. The latter ated ſincerely in both reſpeQs, 
2 Cor. 2, 17s 

16 The one preach Chriſt of contention, not 
iincerely, ſuppoſing to add aifiittion to my bonds 4. 

q This diſtintion he did amplifte and explain here, by particu- 
larly ſhewing the ill motive, manners, and end of the work fort 
of Preachers, from an ill attection of hatred, emulation and wrath, 
2 Cor, 12, 20, Gil, 5. 20. with an intemperate Zeal to reader 
Paul ſuſpected and deſpicable in the Eyes of the Church; and to 
occaſion in the Emperor a more ſevere Perſecution, and heighten 
the Accuſers rage againſt P.c/, and to gain applaule to themſelves, 
a vex his Soul under outward troubles, 


PHILIPPI 4AM 


| 


Upon this account, that there i; 


i | | 94 = —_— " ! -p " Ba . > : 4 - 
17 But the Gther of 1072, KnBOWIR? thatlam te 


the defence of the gofpcl 7. 
” wy Ry . . b - : Bo a . x ; : 
r then intimating the genuine principle and < 


4 \ 


J 
Z00d 


Sftoer {or 'Þ 11 £2 o u 640 . A ; 
ning) who Were mov d from a prevailing ate&ion to God. 


= CHETFIOS on the ſame detign that he did, Who 15 appointod Th 


God, As 23. 11. 1Thefſ. 3.3. both by Dofrin. and ob<Ecnce 
Active and Paſſive to defend the Goſpel unto which he was admi- 
radly called to be a Miniſter, yea and here a Patron, 2m. 1. 1, 
Epi. 3. 7. with 1 Cor. 1. 1. and asit were to tread the Devil un- 
der foot (as Tertullian (peaks) i his own Houſe, Intimatins from 
all this, that however the former did with an i!! mind in Man's 
Juds,ment as circumſtances then were with P24 ( thee af wb th 


we are 1gnorant of) the litter with a pious defirc, preach th Go& 


pel:; vert the event prov'd by the 200d hand of God, beneficial to 
promote the Goſpel ; and fo it may happen till, when ſome falſe 
Brethren mov'd by blind Ambition and intemperare Zeal, may 
[natch a Weapon out of the Goſpel to vex {09d and godly Paſtors 
in their Promulgation of it. _— 

15 Whar then /? notwithſtanding cverv way 7, 
whether in pretence, or ia truth, Chrilt is reached 
t, and : Lnerein do rejoyce w, yea, 2nd willreioyce ». 

Ma 4 4 Tt doth not follow that the'e different intentions of the 
Preach-rs, thould hinder the ſpreading of the Goſpel, and there- 
tore ſhould not ibate either your confidence or mine in the czile of 
Chriſt. f Sith '.y the over-ruling, providence of God that is car- 
ricd 07, both by the on? and the other. u Not only by thoſe who 
in truth preach the word faithfully, Fer. 23. 28. Mzr. 22. 16. 
rom a principle of !oy* (as before) to the ſame Food iptort with 
my jelt; bur alſo by tho who though they a& (as in the former 
verſe) out of envy and i wiil to me, for baſe ends under a tair 
ſhew, 1 the{[2. 5. yet they occationally and accidentally, not by 
any direct cauſality, do promote the inter of Chritt, w And 
/v goodl © Fit, as the making 
Known of Chriſt for the Salvation of fins, 1 have matter of 
prelent joy. x Yea and hereupon for the tutere (though ſome 
ſhould continue to do that in 17 rf Which might 299-3, ate his 
atiiciion, vet) it ſhould not take his joy from liim cver.;nally, hows 
ever directly and of jt ſelf it tor roir £ yet indirectly and by ac- 
cident, God dilpoting, it ſhould ifſus well for the furtherance of 
the Goſpel, - 

Ig ror 1 know thit this ſhall turn to my filvarion y 
trough your prayer z, and the {upply of tne Spirit of 
zelus Chritt z. 

Y Rendring, a reaſon of what went before (as the cauſal particle 
notes) he doth here oppoſe his knowledge to the enyious Preachers 
Opinion and his Salvation to the affliction, they did exerciſe them 
with, ſo that he was fully perſuaded, that the trouble they had 
given, or ſhould give to him (though in the nature of the thine; 
It was in a tendency to take him off from the defence of r!15 GotÞ-1l, 
and ſo to hazard his Soul, or if h? ſtood in defence of it, -*-19 
would perſecate him to Death) would upon ſure gron4 work for 
his good, Rem. 8. 23. even the great c00d, the Salvation of his 
Soul; yea and for ſome time compare v. 25.) rliz faf-ry of his 
Lite here, A#s 27.34. Heb. 11.7. His Priſon ſhould be an Arl: 
to him reſting on God's promile, to that h2 could go on boldly and 
cheertully in bearing his Teſtimony to Chrift with the helinec of 
Salvation, Eph. 6.17. 73 Having an interck in their Prayers as 2 
means of ſupport, which he intimates they would continue to help 
hm with, 2Cor. 1. 11- as much as if he had down right asked an 
intereft in them, Ab. 13. 18. a Yea inthe uſe hereof, that he 
might have a great meaſure of the Spirit promis'd ro thoſe that ask 
him, Zzbe 11. 13. he looks higher, not doubting but he ſhall have a 
renewed ſubſidy or aid of Grace continued to him from the ſame Spi- 
rit which is in Chriſt Jeſus his Head, Xom.$.9. Gl. 4.6. thereby he 
ſhould be help'd in his infirmities, Rom. $. 26. 1 Cor. 12. 11. and 
receive Grace for Grace, Foh. 1. 16, out of his fulneſs, who had 
not the Spirit by meaſure, Foh. 2. 34. whereupon whatever his 
Enemies conceited he ſhould have under ſupplies ſecretly communi- 
cated like thoſe from the Head to their Members, which would be 
eftettual and vitorious to deliver him from every evil work, and 
preſerve him to the heavenly Kingdom, 2 Tim. 4. 19. 

20 According to my carnelt expectation, and my 
hope 6 that in nothing I ſhall be aſhamed c, bar 
with all boldneſs, as always d, /o now allo Chrilt {hall 
be magnihed in my body, whether 1r be by 
death e. 


b Healledgeth and explaineth the ground and certaiary of 1:13 
knowledge and perſualion of his Fnemics diſappointment, .and alt 
ſucceeding well with him trufting in the living God, 1 7m. g. 
who in all death-threatning at#ictions hath upon his word engac'd 
himſelt to ſupport all thoſe that hope in his mercics, Pſz!. 23. 1%. 
I9. & 27. 7,9. & 147. 11. | Then be ſure when his nncere Ser- 
rants aſhfted by his Spirit wait for his deliverance with their Necks 
ſtretched out (as the word here notes) being rais'd from vaſt ex- 
perience intenſely and wiſhtly looking for his app-arance ſhall be 
able each to ſay as the Apoſile intimates. c Negtrively he ſhall 
not be left to do any thing which may jufily bring kim under re- 
proach, His well grounded hope would not make tim aſhamed, 
Rom. 5.5, With $. 25, but upon this account he {hail have where- 
with to anſwer him that ſhould reproach him, 7/. 113. 4t, 42, 45» 
Like g. 25. 2 Tim. 1. 12 d Teſiiively that n{ ſhouid continue con- 
ſtant in a couragious owning of the truth, and acknowleaging of his 
Lord every way, whether he was delivered from cr t© death. 
e ASin the former years of his Miziftry he had been tupported, rea 
and viftorious in freely fpeakiag for Chrift, -preaching and defend 
ing of his Goſpel, Atts 9.27. & 14. }- WIE as MC COLL 
any other, Acts 4. 13, 29, 3l. With 2 C5r. It. 21. Gi. 6. 17,. *O 
now he was humbly confident in is preſent fad cirommBrances, hr! 
ſhould be magnified (not that himiclt can become vrearcr? * 
before M-2, his Glory ſhould be zendred greetor and mer-::1utfri- 


p— —< 


ENGL GOT Tj: 


Þ> 5-44 » 


j l | 
{| 1 
en”! | 
"g} Ts 
þ \ 'H # | | 
b 
Ha 
bis... -q 
| fi 4 
"i 
' 
'* 4 
1) Jl it 
[ q , 
: 
74 » 
ji 1h 
Fg 
li. 
" 
| 42 *! 
Fi) 
Fi 
y 
. 
Y F4! Sy 
: 4” 
+ 
g:- ,7 
þ 
7 i 
it, 
4 
£/ 
F 
.. 3 Yi 
9 
l "TW 
i 
f 
q' 
IT 
ad 
, " 
\ 
«/ 
þ& 
$942 3 I. 
Þ $1491 
(Fe: 352 ay 
$ {11 
Aft 
Ut Fig 
HF [ 
: 
: 
F# 
+ 
4 
: L 
by . 
', 
4g 


4 3 of 43: Bi: 


Chap. I. 


*c Nap. 2. 


% # 
Fo 
4+ 


ous, and acknowledzed with praiſe, whether he lived or died, Rom. 
14.8. yea, in the earthen Veſſel of his body, 2 Cor. 4. 11. (about 
which he was not ſollicitous, having retigned it entirely to C hrilt ) 
either in his enlargement and preaching of the Doctrin of Chrit, 
or in his being, oftered up and ſealing it by his Martyrdo!N. 

21 For me to live « Chritt, and to die 7s Eull f- 
f Some read it. For Chriſt is my gain in Life 1nd is; Dea. Or. 
For Chrilt is to me both in Lifz and in Death advantage Both ac- 
knowledz2e ic to be brought in, as a reaſon of P's hope in Lite 
and Dearh; and of his indifterency in ſubmiſhon to God S my 
ſure in Lite and Death, intimating *twas all one to him 10 Chri 
was maznificd in his Body, whether it were by Lite or Þy Death. 
They who follow our Tranſlation, do expound the propolition dil- 
junctively,. The former reterring to the honour Ot Chritt, and 
the latter to the Salvation of Paul, which 1s underſtood by tle 
name of p4i7. Som2 underftand the former breach ethciently, q- 4- 
T derive my ſelf from Chriſt, unto whom I am united, he being 
the principle of it, as Gal. 2. 20. but others rathcr objeRtively 

and finally, 9. d. as 1 have hitherto made ir the buline!s 0t lite 
to ſzrve Chriſt in Preaching his Golp?l , ſo if he continues 
my Life, 1 purpoſe that ia my living Body, by Preaching his 
Goſpel, and ſuffering *for his Name, as he requireth, He {hall 
be 2lorified. Then for the latter branch, if 1 die, in bearing 1c- 
ſtimony to Chriſt, *twill be gain to my (elf, in that 1 ſhall be with 
Chrift, which is better for me, v. 23. being preſent with the 
Lord, 2 Cor. 5. $. in whom my Lite 1s hid, Cole 3. 3s v0 that 
death would not empoveriſh, but inrich him. They who chule 
the latter reading, take the propotition conjunQively, to the ſenie 
that h2 accounted gain to him, to have the honour of Chriſt magni 
ficd in his Body, whether it hapned to him to live or die, tith he 
faithfully ſerved him living or dying, and own'd himſelf to be his 
both ways, Rom. 14. $8. He was not (as he faith elſewhere) Acts 
20. 24. mov'd with accidentals; neither counted he his lite dear 
to him to teſtifie the Goſpel of the Grace of God z reckoning 
he had no Life but from Chriſt; whom he made it his bu- 
fineſs to ſerve and enjoy, fo that if he continued in the Body, 
Chrift would gain in that he delign'd to ſpend his Lite, for the 
Edification of his Church; and it he died in that cauie, Chriſt 
would gain by his Death, in that his truth would by the Blood of 
him who was a Martyr, be further ſcaled, and his intereft promo- 
ted, and his Glory advanced, and h2 himſelr would gain, th up- 
on his departure he ſhould be advanc'd to be with Chriſt, 0. 23» 
who alonz makes his faithful Seryfints happy in Life and Death. 

22 ÞBuT iti hve 1nthe fleſh, -this zs the fruit of my 
Iabour g : yet what [ ſhall chnſe, I wot not h. 

g Some from the various uſe of the Greek Particles render this 
firſt clauſe interrogativ-Iy. But whether to live in the fleſh were worth 
the while ? or more profitable ? (underſtand than to die.) Ihe 
Apoſtle having intimated the equality and indifferency of his 
mind in an entire ſubmiſhon to the will of God, whether that 
Slorifying Chriſt by his Life, or that by his Death were more 
Eligible * is upon deliberation, finding the advantage to Chritr, 
and himſelf upon expence of circumſtances either way, in an equal 
Balance, weighing on? thing with another. Living in the fleſh, 
z. e. abiding here in this mortal Body, which he thus expretieth 
by way of diminution, Gal. 2. 20. 1 Per. 4+ 1. in oppotition to, 
and compariſon of dying for and in the Lord, and ſo being with 
him, v.23. +þ He ſeems, loving the ?Philippizns as himſelf, to be 
at a loſs what to determin, if God ſhould permit him his choice, 
whether by labouring in his Miniſtry for the good of their Souls, 
he ſhould bring more fruit to Chriſt, or by ſuffering that which 
would ariſe from the Blood of a Martyr, who himſelf ſhould re- 
ceive a Crown, 2 Tims 4. $. 

23 For laman a ſtrait betwixt two z, having a de- 
fire to depart k, and to be with Chriſt, which 1s far 
better /. 

7 Becauſe he knew not what to chuſe for the beſt, he was held 
in ſuſpence, Luke 12.50. As 18. 5. as one drawn both ways With 
weighty reaſons, which he amplifies with reſpett to himſelf, and the 
Church, that Chriit might be honoured in both. His love to 
the enjoyment of Chriſt and the Edification of his Members con- 
ſtraining him on cach hand ; the former was more delightful to 
him, and the latrer more profitable for them. & Being held not 
only with a bare inclination, but an ardent and perpetually ative 
deſire, to looſe from this Clayie Tabernacle, P/zl. 42. I, 2. Ecch 
12. 7. Like 2. 29. and I2. 36, 2 Cor. 5. 1,4, 2 Tim. 4.6. Soto 
depart as to abide in a better place. 1 Upon being abſent from 
the Body to be preſ2nt with Chriſt, 2 Cor. 5. 8. in Paradiſe, Luke 
23+ 43+ 1 Theſſ.4. 17. lo to leave the Body as to live with and en- 
joy him in, Heaven 1s by far much better for me. 

24 Nevertheleſs, to abide in the fleſh, zs more necd- 
ful for you 2. | 

m However with reſpett to the Church, by his ftaying here in 
this mortal Body he perſwades himſelf, knowing the ſubtility of 
falſe Apoſtles, who would enter in as grievous Wolves, As 20. 
2g. it was necelfary, to ſtrengthen them and other Churches in 
the faith of Chriſt, 

25 And * having this confidence z, I know o that 
I ſhall abide an4 continue with .you all, for your fur- 
therance and joy of faith p. 

Viz. Being perſwaded of what went immediately before, how 
uſeful the continuance of his Life, for a further time in this 
World, would be to the Church of Chrift, and particularly to 
them z he determins (as ſhould ſeem) with more than probable! 
conjecture, (tho upon ſuppoſition it ſhould be otherwiſe, he gies 
them abundant ſatisfaction in their adhering to Chrift, v. 27. c. 2. 
: 424 by en with a well-grounded knowledge either by a prophetick 
SP1F3T Iron a particular Revelation, ſuch as he had ſometimes be- 
tore had, A-!S16. 9, 10. and 23.11. or by the ſanctifying Spirit 
witneſhng With his >Pirit, Rom. 5. 16. ftrengthning his Faith and 
perlwation, helped by their Faith and Prayer, we 19. compar'd 


FRILIPPIMAME 


with them, he might by his Miniftry further their Faith in Cho; 3 
their joy in the Holy Ghoſt, and more abundant gloryin Wins, 
power of Jeſus Chrift, for his ſafety, and being reitore3 5, mi... 
as we ſee in what follows, and Fph. 4. 12. with 2 Tim. 4. Pers 
find from his firſt Tmpriſonment at Rome, (when likely th; MP wh 
was written) he was delivered and for ſome years reftrored « (#6 
Churches which he had planted. | : 00 0 IO 

26 That * your rejoicing may be more abungarr 


in Jeſus Chriſt tor me, by my coming to you 4541 , 


with them, he expreſſeth an admirable affetion to them that 1.5 12. 
can be content for a time to be depriv'd of the glorious Pw whe 
Chriſt, that he might ſee and ſerve them, and thar under I 
tion 3 that they might upon his return to them more abyng ith 
glory together, not in themſelves, but, Chriftian-like, in Chr; 
ſus, the Author of that Do&trinhe had preached to them the 
tain of their Salvation, and the common Head of Chriſtianity. 

27 Oaly let your converſation be as it DECOMEth 
the Goſpel of Chriſt 7, that whether 1 come and {.« 
you, or elſe he abſent, 1 may hear of your Affairs [ 
that ye ſtand faſt in one ſpirit, with one mind +. "Sy 
ving together for the faith of the Goſpel v. 

7 q. 4 In the mean time whatever becomes of me, that which 
is for your part ſolely incumbent” on you, who are brought jn:q 
the fellowſhip of the Goſpel, is to demean your ſelves truly ny 
able to that ſtate. The original phrale as afterwards ek 
Epiſtle, ch. 23. 20. and 4. 8. and elſewhere, As 25, 1. import; 
that. their deportment ſhould be anſwerable to their Citizenſtin 
that they ſhould behave themſelves as might be mc to the Mw: 
lick good of the ſociety to which they do relate, not heins of 1 
World here, any more than their Head, foln 15. 19. and 1” 
16. Their courſe of life ſhould be every way anſwerable to thei: 
High Calling, Eph. 4. 1. Col. 1. 10. 1 Thefſ. 2. 12. bringins fort 
fruit meet for repentance. / Intimating that itdid behove them 
conſtantly to adorn the Goſpel, in the exerciſe of Chriſtian Gr. 
rage, unanimity and patience as well when he was diftant f:9n 
them, as when among them to overſee them : not as if he douhtcs 
of returning to them for their greater edification, but furth:; tg 
ſatisfe them as to his entire ſubmiſhon unto God's Pleaſure on his 
journey, or at home, 2 Cor. 5.6, 8. and to excite them to ſhake 
off floath, and to diſcharge their duty with all diligence, which 
would greatly cheer his heart. rt By 1. their ftedfaft endeavour 
atter a ſweet, cloſe, holy, laſting union among themſelves, tor 
one ſpirit, one ſoul or mind, here ſeem to imply one underftand- 
ing enlightned by the Santtifying Spirit, and one heart as a2 in- 
ward uniting principle, which muſt upon no temptation be chan- 
ged 3 compare ch. 2. 1. and 3. 16. and 4. 2. with Ron 12. 16, 
and 1 Cor. 1.10. 2 Cor. 13. Il. Eph. 4.2.3. 1 Per. 3. $. accord- 
ing to our Saviour's Prayer, Fohn 17.11, 20, 21, 22, 22, whit 
was heard, As 1. 14. and 2. 46. and 4. 22. and £. i nor oaly 
by their Union in heart and mind, but 2. Their mutoal hepful- 
neſs in attion, as ſpiritual Champions jining their Forces tore 
ther, for the defence of their Royal Charter, the maintenance ot 
the main principles of Chriſtianity, againſt all troublers of the 
Church, and ſubverters of the Evangelical Faith, 1 Cor. 9. 24,25» 
Gal. 1. 13. Eph. 6. 14. with 2 Tim. 4- Jo. u-2. A couravions 
Spirit under ſufferings trom their moſt malignant Gain-layers, and 
Perſecutors, who do wittingly and willingly oppoſe the 7 ruth, ard 
them profeſſing of it, as $imoz Magys and others did, Adtts $. 13, 
20, 21. 1 Tim. I. 20. 2 Tim. 1. 15. : 

28 And 1n nothing terrified by your adverſarics 
which 1s to them an evident token of perdition n, 
but * to you of ſalvation x, and that of God y. 6 
.*. The original word which the Apoſtle uſeth, imports, they 
ſhould not be appailed or affrighted, as Men and Horſes are apt ' 
to be when furioutly charg'd by their deadly enemies, bur ſtoutly 
receive them, keeping their ground, Mar. 10. 28. Lile 12. 32, 
w Conhidering on one hand their moſt pertinacious T1ge, 1S 0 0- 
ther than an evident and convincing argument, -or Cercain tore- 
runner of the adverſaries utter ruin, Exod. 22, 22, 24. AVille 2. 0, 
9. 2 Theſſ. 1.5, 6,8,9. x But on the other hand to ſound belic- 
vers who behave themſelves as becomes the Goſpel, a manr 
feſt demonſtration of their everlaſting welfare and glory, Mai. 5. 
10. and 10. 32, 39. Rom. 2. 7, 10. Eph. 2, 12. 2 Th/(ſ. 1. 6,7- 


atitly 
y - 
it lee 
Can 


»y By the diſpoſal of the all-wiſe and righteous Governor, who 


may for a time permit his or his Peoples Adverſaries co domineer, 
Fob 1. 21. Prove 16, 4. but being a rewarded of thoſe that dili- 
gently ſeek him, Zeb. 11. 6. will of his grace lenifie the ſharpne!s 

of the Croſs z enable Believers to hold out againſt all the opp0- 
tition of their Enemies, make them partakers of his Holineſs, and 
bring them to Glory, Zeb. 12. 10, 11. 2 Tim. 2; 11, 12. Which 
might abundantly comfort the Philippians as others, Gl.6. 17 

29 For unto you * it 1s given & in the beialt Os 
Chriſt a, not oaly to believe on him b, bur allo TO gu, 
ſiffer for his ſake c. : 

z He adds a further argument to move them unto that B2 
had exhorted, from God's treely beſtowing of his merc grace wat 

he had required of them. 4 Upon the account of Chritt's Merit 
and Mediation ; not that they could have either exangelical Faith, 
or Patience, by virtue of their own ftrength, c<. 4. 13%. 6 12at 
they did not only believe Chrift, but believe on him, Was not 
from any power of their own, Fobn 6. 37, 44. but of Ged's ire? 
gift, Eph. 2. 8. as they had an inftance among them in Ly4:4 
Atts 16. 14. unto her and others was this victorious Grace ol 
Faith freely given by the hearing of the Word, which was nv! 
unto many others that heard, Mat. 13. 11. 2 Thefſ. 3 2» Tits 1+ 1+ 
and as the grace it felf was given, ſo was the exXercue 0! If 
c Sith upon the account of Chriſt, patience was given, {0 that ft 
ſuffer here, doth not only import a power to ſutter, but actitis 
ſuffering ; not-only the habit of Faith, but the act of Felieving z 
even as the Fruits of Trees at the firſt Creation were proto! 


With, I Pct. ie $. p To theſe ends that by his perſonal preſence 


as well as the Frees which had a power to- bear then; Vr north 


ANNE + 


* Gr 


q Here, in confidence of being again with them, and ſtaring 142-4: 


7 


EXPI 
VINg 
then 


Vhicl 
maki 
Frien 
Folm 

thing 
I2, IC 


Chap. II 


Be 
- 


Sa 7 
- 
4 v— 


* 00. 


17 


4103 » 


0. 


Y 


vu G 


powered actually to believe, Mark 5. 24. 1 Cor. 15% 10. 2 Core ge 
12. having truſt through Chriſt God-ward, 2 Cor. 3. 4. and up- 
En the ſame account they were continually enabled to ſuffer, not 
f6mply, but in bearing teſtimony to Chrift, 4s 5. 41. 1 Pet. 3. 
1.1. and 4- 15. they might be of good comfort and courage to 
the daunting of their Adverſaries. ' 

30 Having the ſame contiict 4, which ye ſaw in me, 
and now hear ro be 11 me c. | | 

4 And be heartaed to partake with him in the like Trials he 
faſtained when among them, Aids 16. 19, 22. e And Which he 
now was enduring at Kome, V. 13. an eniampl? of ſutfering unte 
them, if they would bur await the bleſſed Iffue of his Agouy. 


CHA F. 


He exhorts them t9 Unity : to all humility and ſerviceableneſs : 6y the 
example of Chriſt's humility and its reward : to Obedience, the fear of 
God : working out their own Salvation : and exemplary lives, 1,—15., 
To kis comfort, who was their Apoſtle now reaqy to be offer 4 up to God 
#n the ſervice of their faith, 16,18. # praiſes | imethy whom 
he deſigned ro ſend to them, 19=24. andk paphroditus, whom he 
mow ſent : and exhorts them 10 recetve vim joyfully, 2530s | 

1 FF there be theretore any conſolation in Chrilt 2, 

if any comfort of love 6b, it any fellowſhip ot 

the Spirit c, if any bowels and mercies 4; 

4 The \poftle reaſſuming his exhortation in the former Chap- 
fer to unanimity, v. 27. doth here by way of inference from 
what went immediately before, preſs them in a very aftectionate 
manner, With a kind of Rhetorical Relation, and Obteſtation as 
it were adjure them. If any ſuch exhortation (as the word is ren- 
dred, ARs 12. 15. 1 Thefſ. 2. 3. Lt Tim. 4. 13.) in the name of 

Chriſt, might avail with thzm to chear him and one another by 

their loving concord and being unanimous. Or as we render it, 

conſolation (ſo Aﬀs 13. 15. Kone 15. 4+ 2 Cor. I. 4.) If he which 
may well ſuppoſe and ftrongly attirm chat he took it tor granted 
the main body of them had in ſfoine meaſure found by his mint- 

ftry, what he here moves them to compleat (compare ch. I. 6, 7, 

27.) in expeation to find more of what they had experimented, 

chatever indiſpolition might have crept upon ſome by the infinua- 
tions of the falſe Apoſtles, yet, this Cor:ſulation in Chriſt may be 
con{ider'd either (1.) AZive!y, q. d. If ye would comfort me atHi- 
fed in the concerns of Chriſt, or if you have any Chriftian com- 
fort which doth only proceed tro: thoſe that are in Chriſt, (not 
from moral Philoſophy) or which 1s wont to be in thoſe who wor- 
ſhip the ſame Chriſt, let me his Apottle be a partaker there- 
of. Or (2.) Paſſtvely, 2 Cor. 7. 4, 6. Philem. 7. It you being, in 

Chriſt, find any conſolation againſt your afflictions, toraſmuch as 

you have received it by my Miniſtry, we being both in ſuffering 

circumſtances, ſhould be farther comforted by a ſweet agreement. 

b The Syriac render it any ſpeaking to the heart, any-ſolace from 

200d and comfortable words did reach your hearts, Fob 11. 19, 

31. 1 Cor. 14. 3+ I Theff. 2. 11, and 5. 14. cheared with the love 

of God or Chrift, or the Brethren ; or refreſhed with my love to 

you, ch. 1, $, 9. or would that 1 ſhould be comforted with your 
love to me, (as he himſelf and others were with the gracious 
affeations of the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 7. 7.) which ye ought unteign- 
edly. c1f ye have ary communion with me in the graces of the 

Spirit, and ſtand fait in one Spirit, c<. 1. 27. and would ſhew 

that you do perſevere in the ſame Spirit, 1 Cor. 12. 4. which atts 

in all the Members of the Myſtical Body of Chrift, that do in him 
heir head partake of it. 4d If ye are duly affected with any real 

Sympathy and Commilſeration towards me in my bonds for Chritt, 

ſuch inward affeQions as were moving in him towards them, ch, 1. 8. 

with Luke 1. 78. 2 Cor. 7. 15. C0. 3. 12. the latter word emphatically 

expreſſing the ſenſe of the Metaphor in the tormer. 'Then he ha- 
ring thus pathetically urged theſe Arguments, and cloſely tollow'd 
them to embrace the matter .propos'd, puts them upon. 

2 Fulfil ye my joy e * that ye be like-minded ;, 


16. & having the ſame love g, be:ng of one accord þ, 0i 


one mind z. 

e Viz. The exerciſe of thoſe Graces, he had heen joyful for, 
which would be an addition to thar joy he had for them, and the 
making of it much mote abundant, contributing as much as the 
Friends of the Bridegroom here can to the compleating of -1t, 
Fohn 2. 29. f Which is when they believe and affect the fame 
things agreeable to the mind of God, ch. 3. 15. Acts 4. 32. Kom. 
12.16, 2Cor. 13. 11. g Having the ſame mutual fincere Charity, 
Eph. 4. 2. Col. 3. 14. h Being unanimous in their honeſt deſtgns, 
Fohn 17. 22.) 1 Pet. 3. 8. i Agreeing as to the main in the lame 
jdzment and opinion to promote the interelt of Chriſt, 1 Core 1. 
Io. Ol, 5. 7, 10s = ; 

3 Let nothing | be dove through fſtrite or vain-glory 
m, but in lowlinefſs of mind let each elteem othe1 
beiter than themtelves x. | 

i Here the better to engage them to embrace what he had fo 
path<tically exhorted them to, he doth diſlwade them from ani- 
molity, and affeftation of applauſe, and ſelt-leeking ; and dire 
them to modeſty and ſelt-denial. m Intimating, they ſhould by 
no means indulge an inordinate affection to ſtrive and quarrel with 

' ene another, provoking each other by an ambitious emulation to 
Crols or excel others. This arguing a carnal temper oppolite to 
tru? Chriſtianity, Ko#. 2. 5. V. 14. G4. 5, 16, 24, 26, being th2 
very bane of true Chriſtian Concord, Kon. 13. 13. Fam. Je. 16. 
and deftruQtive to Faith, Fox 5. 44. 2 Cor. 12. 20. # But che- 
riſh and exerciſe true Chriftian Modeſty and Meekneſs (which is 
0! another kind than that the Heathen Philoſophers did preſcribe) 
m a due preference of each other, Mar. 11. 29. Kom. 12. 10. 
Eph, 4. 2. and 5+ 21. 1 Pet. 5. 5. as the Apoſtle himſelf gave 
example. -1 Cor. 15. 8, 9. Q. It any fay, ow xs this conſiſtent with 
What the Apoſtle writes tv then to think of priſe and good report, Cli« 4. 
v =" o himſelf not a whit, and noting behind the very chief. ſt Apo- 
'0L. 11, 


PHILIPPIANS. 


fore, if by the grace of God, and Spirit of Faith, they were im- 


Ch 


_ * 2 Cor. 11. 5. and 12. 11. dvd firther, bow c11 ſun? theok 

others beter than themſetoes in truth, unief3 they recon £904 221 !, dd 
Fr ? SE A 4 ry R.. . . Ys y 7 ” 

evil good ? I] anſwer, (1.) Beſure Chriſtian modeity atid rea! Humi- 


lity, with prudence and mildneſs are very commendahl- Graces, 
and in the tight of God of great price, 1 Per. »- 4. And therefore 
what he doth afterwards exhort to in this F piſtle, doth very well a- 
grce with what he doth write here. Where (2.) He is treatins 
of Grace and Godlinefs, whereas in thoſe places to the Cerrarbicns. 
he writes of ſome certain gifts, which by reaſon of the intinua- 
tions of falſe Apoſtles againſt him, he was neceflitated in maoni- 
tying of his Apoftolical Office and Authority, (2 Cer. 10. $.) to 
mention, being as it were compell'd to it, by the ingratitude of 
ſome of them at Coriath who had ben infliuenc'd by the falie A po- 
ftles, 2 Cor. 12. 5, 6. yet you may fee there, he doth not g10ry 
of himſelf, or his Perſon, but acknowledge his infirmitics, 2 Co. 
11. 39. and that unfeignedly, ſpuak the truth, every where, 2 
Cor. 12. 6. Which he makes evident to th-m from the nature of 
the thing it ſ&lf, 2 Cor. 10. 12, 123, 15, 15. and 12. appeal- 
ng to God, as witnels in the caſe, 2 Cor. 11. 31. referring all the 
glorying they put him upon, ro the Grace of Ge through Chrift, 
I Cor. 15. 10s, 2 Cor, 11. 31. When they had -catt contempt on his 
Miniſtry, 2 Cor. 10. 10, 11, 12, 12, 13. <0 that -in relþÞ-& of 


TO 
4 4 


4-gtirs and external Privileges, wherein are diſtinttions of wwipert- 


ours and Inferiours, ch. 3. 4. he doth not urge that every hriftian 
ſhould prefer every othey to himſelf, wherein 'tis evidert there is 
a real difference; but in reſpet of the Perſons, the honefty and 
piety of others in God's tight (left a Man by thinking him{vlf/ome- 
thing when he isnothing, ſhould deceive himlelf, Gaz. 6. 3.) + ich in 
his judgment they might be endowed with ſome hidden quality, 
we know not of, and be accepted with him. He. ce (5.) our 
Cftimation and preference of others to our ſelves, who as © hri- 
ftian Brethren are obliged to ſerve one another, G.:. 5. 13. i 
not taken ttmply, and with an abſolute Judgment, as i: it were 
neceflary to give them the preheminerc? in all rnings ; but as t09 
this, that a Man may think there is ſome d: fe 1 himiel , which 
It may be is not in another; or with a {ut pention perha's; he is 
not beter in truthz but contidering mine heart is deceitrui, and 
poſſibly he may be more without guile, I judg-- it not meet to pre- 
ter my felt to him God-ward: bur fecing mine own black Luvs, 
and being bound in love to conteſs mine own, and cover the intir- 
mities of my Brother, who tabours to walk anſwerable to his Pro” 
teſhon ; tis ſate for me to preter him who may have ſome ZOO 
latent which 1 have not, and whereupon he is to be eſteemed by 
me. Wherefore (4.) ihe right management of the duty which 
the Apoſfile calls for to preſerve Unanimity, depends upon a righ 

and due eftimation of God's divers gifts and grace which flow from 
the ſame Spirit, 1 C97. 12.4. and an humble tenſe of our own infir- 
mities: <0 that however one Chriſtian may excel, with ſome fingu- 
lar endowments; yet he ought to think they were not beftowed 
upon him, that he ſhould be puff”*d up or value himſelf above what 
is meet upon that account before God, being he hath receiv'd 
them of God, 1 Cor. 4. 7. but judge himſelt for his own defe- 
ctiveneſs and taulcineſs; which will attord himlelf matter of abaſe- 
menc and humilityz when yet with reſped& to others, vhoſ: 
hearts he knows not, he in Charity thinketh the beſt, 1 Ce-. 136 
4, 5. and if in this caſe he ſhould be miſtaken, his modeſt appre- 
henitons would be acceptable to God, (detigning to approve rhat 
which hedoth) and profitable ro himſelf.. o To engage them fur- 
ther unto Chriſtian concord, he here diretts them as to their aim 
and ſcope (according ro the import of the word) that it ſhould 
not be their own private intereft, but th? common good of Chri- 
ſtianity, becoming thoſe who have true Chriſtian love, 1 Cor. 10. 
24. and 12.5. not as if he did diffallow providing for their own, 
x Tim. 5. 8, or ſtudying to be quiet, and doing their own buti- 
neſs, 1 Th-fſ. 4. 11. but that every member of Chriſt whiles ke 
conſiders his own Gifts, Graces, Honour, and Advantage, would 
remember thar he is not born only to ſerve himſelf or Pharitaical- 
ly to conceit well of himſelf in the contempt of others, Lutz 18. 11, 
but alſo, -and that much rather he ſhould contider his relation to the 
head, and every other member of the Body, and fo confult the 

ifts, Graces, Honour, and Edification of others, eſpecially when 
more eminently uletul, knowing that Members ſhould have the 
ſame care one for another, 1 Cor. 12. 24, to 23. 


4 Look not every man on his own things, but eve- 
ry man alſo on the things of others. 
* Let p this niind be in you q which was alfo 
* 11 Chriſt Jeſus. 


p Moſt Tranſlations do expreſs the cauſal or rather illative 
Greek Particle, which ours doth here omit as an expletive. How- 
ever the Apoftle doth urge them to the exercile of ſelf-denial, 
mutual love, and an hearty condeſceation to one another, from 
the great example of [eſus Chriſt, 2 Cor. $8. 9. q That fo the 
mind which was in Chriſt, may be perceived in us, who if ſpiri- 
tual judge all things and have the mind of Chrift, being enlight- 
en'd by the ſame Spirit, we do judg= as he coming in the fleſh did, 
0, Let the ſame attection be found in you, that was really in him, 
Mat. 11. 29, Fohn 13. 15. 


6 Who r * being / in the form of God c, thought 
ic z not robbery w to be equal with God x. 


rho, i.e. Relative to Chriſt Jeſus, the eternal Son of God by 
Nature, very God, extant with his Father before the beginning, 
Fon 1. 1. Gal. 4- 4. 1 Tim. 3. 16. and 6. 14, 15, 15. Tir. 2. 13s 
The expreſs image and Character of his Father's Perſon, which 
implies a peculiar ſubſiſtence diftintt from the ſubiiftence of his 
Father, Fokn $. 42. 2 Cir. 4. 4. Col. 1. 1%. Feb. 1. 3. concern- 
ing whom, every word that follows, by reaſon of the Socinians, 
and ſome Lutherans 15 to be well weighed. [i.e Sul fiſting in op- 
polition to taking or affuming, v. 7. and therefore doth firmiy 
prove Chrift, pre-exifting in another Nature, to his ſo doing, 
namely his actual exiſting of himſelf in tie ſame Effence and Glo- 
ry he had from Eternity with the Father, Fob» 1. 1, 2. and 17. 5. 


2 Cor. $. ge K2v. 1. 4» $,1:. 7 To underſtand which clcarlr, 
[5M] (1.) The 


nr? 


£16; I {00S 14: 
[4 }- | obs + 1 / 
ud "R10144 2 Ft 
{4 j! 
T\8- II4 . 
| 31 
4 Al! ' 
WW +I IR 
Wy. vi 
Y t 
+4 - 
Ms %1 
* 
Js 
fy. 
| 1's 
\ | | 
C71 
IF . 
| 4 
2 
ba. . _* * , bay 
F'"4 
Ts 
= 
Fo 
Wt -4 
; : . 
& $4 
ro 
\y : 77 | 
- Wn 
van 
Ut 
ff i 
Þ , 
BY - 
k 
4 
, | 
$Y' 
7 
Af 
+8 I; 
+ | 
E; v84 * 
þ4 Bak 
, I 
(} 
M4 
# 
t ; '- 
4 
* x Pet. 2, | 4; 
21s 
* 1 John 
2. Os 
Y if } 
tt c #3, 
& ' 
F it "| 
Thos Miki: ft 
4! 1." 008 
- &} 
* John 1. 
I, 2s | f 
i 
Ft 


Chap. II. PHILIP 


tho' it may ſometime note ſomewhat outward, | 
and & infer the glory of Chrift's Miracles, yet we do not find It 
any where {o uſed in Scripture; tis true, 1t 15 Once uled tnere for 
the ontward Viſage, Mark 16. 12. which had excelling ſplendor 

and b-auty, SCiving occaſion to conceive Majeſty in the Perton, 
Mat. 17. 2. 2 Pet. 1. 16. (however his re[plendent Garments 
could not be accounted rhe form of Go4) yet being, Luke faith c« 
2.4.16. th2 Eyes of the Perſons which ſaw were holden, that tor 
a time they could not acknowledge him, it argues that the ap- 
pearance, Mart ſpeaks of, noted only an accidental form. mo— 
the b2ing or ſu5ſiſting, Paul here ſpeaks of, reſpetts (what the | =_ 
Philoſophers in their moſt uſual-way of ſpeaking do call) the — 

f:rm with the Glory of it, {ith the Verbs in other SCrIPLUTEs © the 
ſame Origine, fignifie ſomewhat i#zward, and rot conſpicuous, 
Rom. 12 2. 2 Cor. 2. 18. Gal. 4. 19. eſpecially when there 15 a 


(1.) The word j9rm, 


cogent reaſon for it here, conſidering the form of Cod, in a pare 
tion to the form of a Servant afterward, and in conjunction with 
equality to God, which implies the ſame Effence and Nature, Iſs 
40. 25. and 46. 5, it being impoſhble there ſhould be any pro- 
portion or equality, *twixt infinite and finite z eternal and tempo- 
ralz increate, and create; by nature God, and by nature _ 
God, Gal. 4. 4, $. unto which the only living and true God, 
will not ſuffer his Glory to be given. Neither indeed can he deny 
himſelf who is one, and betides whom there is no other true God, 
or God by Nature, Deut. 4. 35+ and 6. 4. 2 Tim. 2. 13. WHO ON- 
Iy doth wonderous things, 7/z/. 72. 18. For toall Divine Opera- 
tions, a divine Power is requitite which 1s inſeparable from the 
moſt timple Effence rnd its Properties. Bring, or ſubſiſting in the 
form of God, imports not Chriſt's appearance in exerting of om $ 
power, but his real and actual exiſtence in the Divine Euence, 
not in Accidents, wherein nothing doth ſubſift, neither the Vul- 
gar nor Learned do uſe to ſay any one doth ſublifr, but appear 1n 
an outward habit, why then ſhonld any conceit the Apoſtle 
means ſo? The Gentiles might ſpeak of their Gods appearing 3 
but then, even they thought the Deity was one thing, and the 
habit or figure under which, or in which it appear'd was another, 
Ads 14. 11. fo that ſulfiſtivg in the form mtimates in the Nature, 
and Efſence of God, not barely, but as it were cloathed with Pro- 
perties and Glory. For the Apoſtle here treats of Chriſt's Con- 
deſcention, proceeding from his actual Exiſtence, as the term 
wherein he is Co-eternal and Coequai wo God the. Father, be- 


and eſſence, the original Phraſe connoting an exaCt. Parity AN . 
the things of Chrifr. (tho* he choſe to have ſome of them vairg 
for a time) are equal to God, ſo ſome expound the Neuter F 

ral emphatically (as uſual amongft the Greeks) to anſwer the Ma. 
{culine 1ingular foregoing, to expreſs the ineffable ſameneſ; of 
the nature and efſence of the divine ſubſiftence. ' Tt may he read 
He counted it no Robbery that thoſe things'which are his Mins 
ſhould be equal to God, 7. e. the Father z or rather, thar he 
himſelf ſhould in all things be Equal or Peer to God. Fo; had 
Chriſt been only equal by a delegated power from God, why 
ſhould the Fews have conſulted to kill tim, for making himſelf 
equal with God ? which with them was all one, as to make himſ.1F 
God, Fobn 5. 13. and 10. 33. But that he ſpake of his eternal Gene- 
ration, as owning him for his own Father, with whom he did work 
Miracles, even as the Father did in his own name, by his gn 
power, of himſelf, for his own glory: Neither will the Evange. 
liſt's ſaying, The Son can do nothing of himſelf, infer an inequality 
with the Father, when what he doth, is equally perfett in power 
and glory with the Father's, whence as Son, he hath it by m12- 
ture. For (looking lower) tho' every Son- receives from his F:- 
ther, humane nature; yet is he not leſs a Man than his lather 
or his Father more a Man than he: The Son having a Peins gr 
the ſame perfe&ion, which is naturally in both ; however, the 
Father, to whom Chrift is in ſubordination as the Son, and in 
Othice a Servant, undertaking the work of Mediation, may he 
ſaid to be greater than the Son, that can only be underſftoed 
with reſpett to the order of their working, if we compare T exts, 
Fobn 14. 28. and 16. 13, 14, 15. Neither when Chrift accounted jr 
not Robbery to be equal with God, is he faid (as the Adyerqq- 
ries urge) to be equal to himſelf, but to another Perſon, viz, God 
the Father. Things may be equal which are fo divers, that yer 
they may be one in ſome common reſpect wherein they agree; 
Wherefore when Chriſt is ſaid to be equal with the Father, he is 
diſtinguiſh'd from him in Perſon and Subſiftence, yet not in ££- 
ſence, wherein it is his due to be his equal, and therefore One, 


7 * But y made himſelf z of no reputation, and *Piat,z 
rook a upon him the form * of a ſervant, and was* 
made 1n the likeneſs of -|}- men c. 24 


7.4 
N : Ys 2 39 ve and 
y Some expound this particle as a Diſcretive, others an Ad- 52.11 6 


oy 


verſative, or Redditive. 7 i. e. Moſt wittingly emptied bmſelf, 53, 11, 


fore he abaſed himſelf with reſpect unto us. For he ſays not 
the form of God was in Chrift, (however, that might be truly 
aid) that the Adverſaries might not have occation to ſay only 
there was ſomewhat in Chriſt like unto God, but he ſpeaks ot 
that wherein Chriſt was, viz. in the form of God, and ſo that torm 
is predicated of God, as his Effence and Nature, and can be no 
other thing. None can rationally imagine that God was an exter- 
nal figure, wherein Chrift was ſublifting. For ſubſiſtence im- 
plizs ſome peculiarity relating to the ſubſtance of a certain thing, 
whence we may conclude the Son to be of the @me, (not only ot 
like) ſubftance with the Father, conſidering what ſignantly fol- 
lows. u Ze thought it m#r, eſteemed, counted, held, (ſo the word 
is uſed, V. 3+ + 3+ 7, 8. 1 Thefſ. 5. 12..and 3. I5. 1 Time. Is 12» 
and 6. 1. Heb. 10. 29. and 11. 26.) it not Robbery, it being 
his right by eternal Generation) 7. e. He did not judge it any 
wrong, or uſurpation, on that account of his being in the form 
of God, to be equal to his Father, being a /ubſiſtent in the ſame 
Nature and Effence with him. From openly ſhewing equal Ma- 
jeſty with whom he did not not for a time abſtain, in that he could 
reckon this Robbery, as if ſuch Majeſty were that which.did not 
azree to his Nature, ever preſuppoſing this inherent right to his 


sreat condeſcention, or abaſing kimſelt, which follows as the, 


rerm to which; or he reſolved for a time not to ſhew himſelf in 
that glory which was his own right, but freely condeſcended to. 
the vailing of it. He did not really forego (neither was it poſ- 
fible he ſhould) any thing of his Divine Glory, being the Son 
of God ſtill, without any Robbery or Rapine, equal to his Fa- 
ther in Power and Glory, Fohn 10. 3. and 1 Fohn 5. 7. 20. 
w Paul doth not ſay (as the Arians of old would pervert his 
ſenſe) he robbed not, or ſnatched not, held not faft equality 
with God, (or as the Socinians ſince) Chriſt thought not to do 
this Robbery to God, or commit this Rape upon God, ſo as 
that he ſhould be equal to him, but acknowledged he had it of 
the free Gift of God, chopping in the adverſative particle, {bur} 
where it really is not: Whereas we read not in the ſacred Text, 
he thought nor #0 do this robbery; but he thought it not robbery to be 
equal to God; which two are vaſtly different (even as much 
as to have the God-head by Uſurp1tio, and to have it by na- 
ture.) In the former *tis q. d. Chriſt did not rob or ſnatch a- 
way the equality; in the, latter, the equality which Chriſt had 
with God, he thought it no Robbery; he reputed not the Em- 
pire, he might have always continued in the exerciſe of, equal 
with the Father, as a thing uſurped, or taken by force, (as 
one doth hold that he hath taken by ſpoil, making ſhew of 
it.) For when he had ſaid he had ſubliſted in the Form of God, 
he could (before he condeſcended) ſay alſo he was equal to God, 
7. e. the Father, without any Robbery, Rapine, or uUſurpation. 
And if Socinus urge that it is abſurd and falſe in any ſenſe to ſay, 
God thought he had robh'd or taken by robbery the Divine E(- 
ſence; then this contradiftory, God thought not he took by 
robbery the Divine Eſſence, ' is rational and true; as when it 
is ſaid, God cannot lie, or God changeth mot, as 1 Sam. 15. 29. 
If. 55. $. Mal. 3. 6. What things are denied of God, do 
not imply the oppoſites are atfirmed of him. The Particle [But] 
which follows in its proper place before, made himſelf of no repu- 
r2ri0n, may be fairly joined with this ſenſe. For if Chriſt ſhould 
know that by Rapine and unjuſt Uſurpation he was equal to 
God, (as likely the attempt to be ſo, was the Sin of cur firſt 
Parents, which Robbery of theirs Chriſt came to expiate) he had 
not emptied himſelf, nor vouchſafed to abaſe himtel, x Neither 
is Chriſt (aid to be equal to God, only in r:{p:# of his works 
(which yet argue the ſame cauſe and principle, Fotn 5. 19, 21, 
23, 20, 29. and 10. 37.) but abſolutely he thought it not Robbery 


or abated himſelf of the all-fulneſs of glory he had equally with p2e; - 
| God the Father, that confidering the diſproportion betwixt the 2,24, 
: Creature and the Creator ; he in the Eyes of thoſe, amongſt 7x); 
whom he tabernacled, appear'd to have nothing of repuration4 0, k 
left him, Dar. 9. 26. *Tis not ſaid the Form of God was cut off, jj, 
or did empty it (elf ; But he who did ſuffer i» the Form of God, 
made himſelf of no account ; did empty, abate, or abaſe himſclf, 
(ſo the Apofile elſewhere AQively and Paſhvely uſeth the word, 
I Cor. 9. 15. With 2 Cor. 9. 3.) and that indeed whiles ſubſſting 
in the Form of God (according to agreement, Zach. 6. 12. and 
12. 7.) not by laying aſide the nature of God, but in ſome 9- 
ther way, 7. e. his own way kept ſecret till he was pleaſed to 
maniteft it, Rom. 16. 25. Col. 1. 26. by freely coming in the 
Heſh, 1 7im. 3. 16. Heb. 10. 7. which is ſuch an aſtoniſhing wonder, 
and myfterious abaſement, as gains the greateft veneration from 
his Saints. Thus for a little time laying aſide, at his own plea- 
ſure withdrawing, and going afide from his glorious Majeſty, he 
lefſen'd himſelf for the Salvation of his People. He had a li- 
berty not to ſhew his Majeſty, Fulneſs arid Glory, during his 
pleaſure, ſo that he could (as to our Eyes) contra and ſhadow 
it, Fokn 1. 14. Col. 2. 9. His condeſcention was free and uncor- 
ſtrained with the conſent of his Father, Fokn 3. 13. So that 
tho' the Scripture ſaith, The moſt high dwelleth not in Temples 
made with hands; yet the Son of the Higheſt, z Kings 8. 27. 
Iſa. 66. 1. Mark 5. 7. Ads 7. 43. can at his own plealure ſhew, 
or eclipſe his own glorious brightneſs, abate or let out his ful- 
neſs, exalt or abaſe himſelf in reſpe& of us. However, in his 
own ſimple and abſolute nature, he be without variablenels, or 
ſhadow of turning, Fam. 1. 17. being his Father's equal, and ſo 
abides moſt ſimple and immutable; yet reſpeRively to kis ſtate, 
and what he had to manage for the Redemption of loft Man; with 
regard to the diſcovery he made of himſelf in the revelation of 
his Divine Properties, the acknowledgment and celebration of 
them, by the Creatures, he emptied himſelf, not by ceaſing, to be 
what he was before, equal with his Father, or laying down the 
eſſential Form of God, according to which he was equal to God; 
but by taking the form of a Servant, wherein he was like to Men, 
7. e. alſuming ſomething to himſelf he had not before, v3. The 
humane nature; vailing himſelf, as the Sun is ſaid to þe vailed, 
not in it ſelf, but in regard of the intervening Cloud, Mar. 27. 39- 
to 45. what could hinder that he ſhould not manifeſt his excel- 
lency now more, then leſs clearly ? Men one while acknowleds- 
ing and praiſing it, another while, neither acknowledging Or 
praiſing of it, then again praiting of it yet more ſparingly- 
He by taking the form of a mean Man, might ſo obſcure the 
dignity of his Perſon, as to the acknowledgment of him to be 
the” Son of God equal with his Father, that in vouching him- 
ſelf to be ſo, he might be accounted a Blaſphemer, Fohn 10. 36- 
and during, that appearance, not ſeem to be the moſt high 
even as a King by laying afide the tokens of his Royalty, and 
putting on the habit of a Merchant, when all the while he 
ceaſeth not to be King,] or the higheſt in his own Dominions: 
Hence the moſt high may be conſider'd, either in regard of his 
nature, wherein he holdeth the higheſt degree of pertection, Or 
in regard of thoſe perſonal Aa he performs in the butinels 03 
our Salvation. In the former, Chrift is the moſt High; 
the latter, our Mediator. <o the Form of God, was the ter 
from which, and the Form of a Servant, the rerm to which, he 
mov'd in his demiſſon, or abaſement, which did not fimp!y 
lye in an aſſumption or union of the Humane Nature to the 
Divine, for this doth abide ſtill in Chriſt highly exalted, but in 
taking the form of a Servant, which with the humane nature h2 
took, by being ſent forth, made of a Woman under the Law, Gale 
4. 4+ but by his Reſurregion, and Glorification, left that 


to be altogether equal with God, as ſubſiſting in the ſame nature: 


lation 


Cl 


ll 


Chap. " 


42, 


L109, 


Heb, 


relation or Habit of a Servant (being ſuch an one who was alſo a 
Son, and a Lord, Feb. 1. 2. with 3. 6.) when yet he retains the 
humane Nature ftill. As therefore he was of the Seed of David 
according to the Fleſh, Xo. 1. 2. though before he had not Fleſh: 
<o he took the form of a Servant in the likeneſs of Man, according 
to his humane Nature, although before he took that Form, he 
could not have humane Nature: He did not annihilate any thing 
he was beforez only of his own accord, bowed down himſelf, 
and vailed his own Glory, in taking our Nature, therein to be a 
Servant unto Death. & Taking (in the Greek, without any copu- 
}ative and before it) in oppoſition to being, or ſubſiſting; he was 
in the Form of God, which he had before, and took this which he 
had not then, into the nnity of his ſubſiſtence, by a perſonal uni- 
on, Heb. 2. 16. He was the Servant of God, Ta. 42. 1. Mat. 
20. 28. in the whole work of his condeſcenfion, which was gradual, 
elſe the Apoftle's Art to engage the Philippians to condeſcenfion 
had not been cogent from Chriſt's Example. For, 1. He bein 
increate, did aflume to himſelf a Created (not Angelical, but) 
humane Nature with no reputation, in that regard taking the 
Form of 4 Servant, wherein he was like Man, as the next Clauſe 
explains this. *Twas an infinite, inconceivable condeſcenfion of 
the Son of God, to take our Nature into union with himſelf, 
whereby he who was very God in all things like unto his Father, 
became like unto as in all things, Sin only excepted, Rom. 8. 3. 
Jeb. 2. 17. Hence, 2. He did not immediately advance the Na- 
ture he took into Glory, but became a Servant in it to his Father, 
to perform the moſt difficult ſervice that ever God had to-do in 
the World ; he was not only in the likeneſs of finful Fleſh, affoon as 
a Man, Rom. $. 3. of the Seed of Abraham, Heb. 2. 11. to 15. but 
ſ{ubje& to the Law, Luke 2. 42, 51. Gal. 4. 4. ina mean condition 
from his Birth, deſpicable in the judgment of the World, his Mo- 
ther poor, Gr. 1/a. 53. 2, 3. Mat. 2. 14. & $. 20. & 13. 55. 
Mark 6. 3« Luke 2. 7, 22, 24. & 22. 27. ſo that in finiſhing his 
work he was expoſed to ſcorn, Pſul. 22. 6, 7. Iſa. 53. 1. 2. how- 
ever all the relation of his ſervice was to God the Father, as his 
Antecedent Correlate, To the farther clearing of what went 
before, .the Apoſtle adds. «© In the likeneſs or habit of Men, with- 
out any copulative particle, by appoſition, for fuller explication, 
(compare forecited parallel places) connoting his employment (ra- 
ther than condition) having, a true Body, and a reaſonable Sou! 
for this purpoſe, according to the Prophecy, to be Servant to his 
Father, J/a. 42. 1- And if the Adverſaries ſay, He only took on 
him the Form of a Servant, when be ſuffered himſelf 10 be beaten, &Cc. 
*Fis eaſily anſwered. Theſe were only Conſequents upon the 
Form of a Servant; one may be a Servant, and yet not beaten ; 
and when they ſo treated our Saviour, he accounted it deal- 
ing with him as a Malefadtor, Luke 22. 52. Chrift obeyed not 
Men, but God the Father, to whom alone he was Servant, when 
made Man, 7/al. 40. 6, 7, 8. *Tis the nature of Lord and Servant, 
to relate to each other. Every Servant (Brutes are not Servants) 
labouring in Service, accompanies the humane Nature, which 
is common to Chrift, with other Men, on whom it crept by the 
Fall; Chriſt regards none others Will, but the Will of his 
Father, how hard ſoever it was, even to the laying down of 
his Life for the reconciling of his Church to him. And be ſure 
he Died as a Man, and not only in the Habit of a Servant. 
Only in humane Nature could he (as it follows without a par- 
ticle in the Greek) be made like unto Mn, or in the likeneſs 
and habit of Men. The ##tleniſts do uſe words of ſimilitude, 
when they defign ſameneſs or the thing it ſelf, and that indeed 
eſſentially. For hower it be urg'd, that likeneſs be oppos'd to 
the ſame, and that which is true, Fohn 9. g. yet not always; as 
one Egg, is like to another, there is conveniency in quality, and 
that in ſubſtance is included. Chrift is like to other Men in 
humane Properties and an afflited State, ſo that the ſameneſs of 
Nature cannot be denied, Rom. 8. 3. Heb. 2. 16, 17. or rather 
ſameneſs of kind, though not of number, it being by a Synechdoche 
to be underfiood generally, Gen. 50. 3. Mas. 1. 15. Fohn 1. 14+ 
Heb. 4. 15. 1 John 1. 1. & 4+ 2, 3- The Properties of humane 
Nature are of the Eſſence he took, who was found in habit 
aS a Man, when yet he was ſeparate from Sinners, 2 Cor. 5. 21. 
with Zeb. 7. 26. yet the Apoſtle's buſineſs here, is not of Chriſt's 
linleſmeſs in that condition, but of his condeſcending love, in 
taking on him that condition, being ſent in the likeneſs of ſinful 
Fleſh, yet without Sin. Tis a likeneſs of Nature to all Men, and 
not a likneſs of Tnnocency only to the firft, Gey. 5. 1. that Paul 
here ſpeaks of. And as it is faid, The word was made Fleſh, 
ſo here Chrift is made in the likeneſs of Men, that we may un- 
derftand *tis the ſame numerical Perſon, who was in the Form- 
of God, that was made Man. The abaſement of God-man being 
ſo great, that he was made like to Man, 7. e. to meer and þare 
Man, though he was more. Nor only did he appear in 
many forms (as might be under the Old Teftament) or was 
Join'd to Man, but perſonally afſum'd a true Body and a reaſonable 
Soul, and ſo was very Man, as well as very God. For when *tis 
not ſaid fimply made Man, but with that addition, in the likeneſs, 
it is done to a notable limitation of his Station on each part 
on God's part it imports, Chrift did not lay afide the Divine Na- 
ture, but only (vail'd) his Majeſty and Power; on Man's, to 
excude Sin, viz. That he was true Man, yet only like to all other 
Men. But what is now the natural Aﬀettion of all Men from the 
fall of Adam, and is an infirmity and abatement as to that, he was 
vithout Sin, and only in the likeneſs of tinful Fleſh. 


8 And being found 4 in faſhion as a man e, he 


26, humbled himſelf F, and * became obedient unto death 


2, even the death of the croſs h. | 
4 To be found is a meer #ebraiſm, not unuſual in the N. T. not 
importing any queſtion of the thing, but only the thing certainly 
happening beyond expettation. It notes here not his being ap- 
prehended of the Soldiers when betray'd by F44as, being before 
his kumble obedience, but his being and really appearing to be, 
(as the Greek word is elſewhere uſed, ch. 3. 9g. Gen. 5. 24. 2 Cor. 
54.3. Gal. 2. 17: Heb. 11. 5+ With 1 Pet. 1. 7-) as a Man fimply 
conſidered among Men, which was betors his being ſcourged, ©, 
Vol. II. 


PHILIPPIANS. 


tr 


conſequent upon his apprehenſign, Now beins made Man, tot 
reſerv'd fora time(like the Angels)from Heaven it ſelf and the view 
of Angels ; neither from the Privilege of th> firſt Man (which 
Adam could not keep) did he reſerve himſelf for the inhabiting 
of Paradiſe only ; but after the manner of Men, he ſtay'd in this 
Earth, among and convers'd with them, and therefore is ſaid to 
be in the Faſhion of Men, or as Mar. e Whereby his habit 
and deportrnent is more eſpecially expre'&d, as his efſence in the 
foregoing Phraſe. Man here is contidered according, to what is 
proper unto- humane Nature, not having the Article prefix'd as if 
it connoted the firſt Man Adam, only Man as Man. The particle 
as here, not intimating only 1ikene/s without reality of Nature 
(as the Marcionites conceited) but as a confirming and afſuring 
particle, noting certainty, Fohn 1. 14. Some indeed take faſhion 
more ſtrietly as noting oMy the external Figure of Chrift's Body, 
others more largely and commodiouſly for the whole outward pe- 


g| cies of humane Nature; whence the truth of the humane Nature 


ſhined out, not only in the figure and matter of the Body with 
true Fleſh and Bones, the Habit of his Members, Mouth, Eves, &c. 
that he might be ſeen and touch'd, 1 Fohz 1. 1. as he himſelf 
alledgeth, Luke 24. 39. Fohn 20. 20, 27. .growing in ftature and 
wiſdom, Luke 2. 52. but his labouring with Hunger, Thirſt and 
Wearineſs, Eating, Drinking, Sleeping, Watching, Speaking; 
Geſtures, being moy'd with Pity, Sorrow, Joy, Weeping, in 
all which his humane Nature was evidenced of God and eaiily 
found of Men who convers'd with him, Fohn 4. 29. & 9. 11. & 
15. 22. What the Socinians urge, that this gainſays his being in- 
carnate, from Samſon's ſaying, 7 ſhall be weak and as another Man, 
Judg. 16. 7, 11. There's no ftrength in the Allegation, thac 
Samſon of Dan's Tribe, Fudg. 13- 2. ſhould be compar'd with 
Chrift coming from Heaven (as they themſelves do not deny) 
found in faſhion as a Man: Becauſe Samſon being ftronger than an 
hundred Men, if he were dealt fo and fo withal would become 
as other Men (for that's the import of the words) no ftronger 
than any other Man, t. 17. whereas here, *tis not ſaid as oe; 
any or every, but ſimply as 2 Man. And from thoſe in power dying 
45 other Men, Pſal. 82.6. When they ſcoffingly ask, yoo it evidence 
theſe 10 be incarnate? *Tis anſwered, though he who was ſtrong 
as many, became weak as any one Man; they who live in power, 
dye in weakneſs as other Men do, and are not ſaid to be incar- 
nate z yet he who being equal with God, took on him the form of 
a Servant, and was in this World a very Man, may very well be 
ſaid to be incarnate, 1 Tim. 3. 16. f He doth not ſay he was 
humbled or depreſs'd by the juſt Judgment of God, but of him- 
ſelf, voluntarily, on his own accord without any conſtraint. He 
did really ſubmit himſelf to the Will of his Father unto whom he 
was a Servant, both in regard of the Divine Nature, which he 
vail'd, and alſo the humane in his whole Life, Luks 1. 48. both 
outwardly and inwardly, wv. 5. in thoughts and afflictions, as well 


tite to God, by a patient ſubjettion to affetion, not in ſhew- 
ing humility only, but really undergoing it. For we find this 
low degree of his Humiliation, oppos'd to his Superexaltation, in 
the following verſe, and agreeing with what J/#zah propheſy'd of 
him, a. 53. 7. expounded by Philip, Ads 8. 32. g Without the 
Copulattve, and in the Greek expreſſing the manner of his Humilia- 
tion, being of his own free will, and not by any force made obe- 
dient, 7. e. to God, (n0r my will, but thy will be -done) to others, 
Parents and Magiſtrates for God, according to the preſcript of his 
Law, and will, in his life time uo death, and iz death. Unto 
being taken here, not exchiſfively but inclufively, for the further 
Amplification of the obedience, Mar. 26. 42. Fobn 4. 34. % $. 
29, 46. Heb.10. 9. Had he ftaid in his life for degrees of obedience; 
his condeſcenſjon had been admirable, but that he ſhould ſubmit 
to a penal and painful death (taking in his Burials-and abiding in 
a ſeparate ſtate till the third day) this is ſtupendious; aggravated 
by the ſhame. þ Of dying on the Croſs, willingly and meekly 
yielding himſelf though a Soy, to that ignominious curſed death, 
Deut. 21. 23. Ais5. 30. Gal. 3. 10, 13. Hebe 12. 2. far more re- 
proachful than by heading, hanging or burning, out of unſpeak- 
able love, to bring us nigh unto God, Rom. 5. 19. Col: 2. 14. I 
Pet. 2. 24. & 3. 18» Upon theſe Conſiderations how ſhould Chris 
ſtians in mutual love, condeſcend to each other ? 


9 Wheretore z: Gud alſo hath highly exalted him 


name wz: 

z Some take this particle ;/atively, connoting the conſequent of 
Chriſt's Exaltation, upon his antecedent humiliation, as elſewhere, 
Fobn 10. 17. Afs 20. 26. Heb. 3.7. 2 P:t. 1. 10. The Apoſtle 
ſhewing the ſequel of his Sufferings to be Glory according to that 
of Luke 24. 26. This the Ethiopic Verſion favours, Chriſt reſpe&ing 
not himſelf, but us, and our good, the Glory that he had eternally, 
but vailed for a time, emerging (as the Sun out of a Cloud) up- 
on his finiſhing the work his Father gave hin to do, Fobn 17. 55 
Am. 9.5. Others take the particle caſually intimating Chrift's 
meriting his own Fxaltation and our Salvation, and his accepting 
of ſuperexcellent Glory as a Reward of his unparalleFd obedience, 
though he might have challeng'd it by virtue of the perſona! 
union, Zeb. 13. 20, with 12. 2. Obedience ſuperiour to Angels, 
required a recompence ſuperiour to their Glory, and Chriſt might 
upon his exquiſite obedience, demand his own mediatory Glory 
as being our Head, and that being the beginning and cauſe of 
ours. However, whether the particle of order note that of conſe- 
quence, or cauſality, or both, there is no need of controvertie (be- 
cauſe of the: Communication of Properties) fith the Perſon of 
Chriſt, as God-man was glorified, þ The Greek elegancy imports 
ſuperexalted, or exalted with all exaltation, anſwering to his gra- 
dual humiliation above the Grave in his Reſurrettion, the Earth in 
his aſcention, and above the Heavens, at his Father's right hand, 
upon the Throne of his Glory, to judge the world, Eph. 1. 20, 2t. 
& 4. 10. 15Some take name literally reſtraining it to F. ſus, but 
thoſe Letters and Syllables are not above every name, Ezra. 2. 2+ 
& 10. 18. Hag. 1. 1. Aﬀs 7. 45. C0. 4. 11. Hb, 4. $. it being com» 


[mon to others, tho' upon a different account it was to Chrift, even 
| {5s M2] before 


Chap. II 


as aCtions and paſſions; wholly yielding his own will and appe-. 


k, and * given him a name /, which is above every * Heb. 1? 


f/ F:.11Y! js 
oh ” 
: 
bf 
'R 4, 
: 
44.44 
V3 
3 HRT , 
ir. 
' 
Fo i 
La 
i 
1 
: wu 
| L. 
C5 
7 
1 
1 
11 
7 
WW 
' x 
Th 
!/ A 
by 
' CIT | 
. o 
Get 
At: 
a: ; 
r 
= 
11.08 
: -2 
i 
C/ 
TIE 
5 
| '7 
oY 2 


tn 

—— - 

, 3* 
od 

$49% - o WH 


at; 


* Tide 45, 


Chan. iT. 


4 


» 


* John 13. 
136 


SHI1iL1P 


hos his Tncarnation, Lukt Tt. 31» Others for the Name of the 
<2 heootren Son of God the Father, FoFn 1. 14. (with Zeb, 1. 4. 
2nd <. 2.) who was more eminently manifefted in his Exaltation, 
© Anzels and to Nien, than before. Others not for any Title but 
tne thing conſequent upon his Humiliation, ſurpaiſing thar of all 
Creatures, Porentates on Earth, and Angels in Heaven, Eph. 1. 
20, 21. Name imports Power, Ads 3, 6. and 4. 7. Rv, 5 12. of the 
Chriſt, the Saviour, Mat. 12. 21. Fol 4. 42. ACS 4. 11, 12 and 
19. 42. ar God's right hand where he living to intercede makes all 
comfortable to us, who in his Name alone do belicve, pray, praiſe, 
and do all that ſhall find acceptance, Mar. 18. 20. and 28. 19. Fob 1. 
12. and 3. 18. and 14. 13. Rom. 10. 13, 14. Col. 3. 17. Power tO 
confer all for the good of his Church being given him, upon his 
Death, when with reſpect to the Creatures he receiv'd a Glory, 
not in regard of himſelf, and in it ſelf, but in regard of its pateta- 
cion to others, from which glory during the time of his Humilia- 
tion, h2 had by a voluntary dilpenſation abſtain'd; and the exer- 
ciſe of that Authority confer'd upon him as a Mediator, in that hu- 
mane Nature, he had ſo obediently ſubjz&ed himſelt to the Crols. 
Though is God, there was a manifeftarion, yet there was no in- 
trinſecal addition of Glory. He did as Man receive the Name or 
Glory he had from all Eternity as God. So that the Name or 
Glory given relates to him according to both Natures as Mediator 
God-man : Not as God, ſo he could not be exalted at all, being 
the moft high, not as meer Man, fo a Creature 1s not capable of 
Divine Worſhip, which in what follows is expreſly required to be 
given to him, who is ſuperexalted by God's right hand, above 
every Name, and every thing known by any Name, As 2. 24, 
32,36.and 5.31. 1 Core 15+ 25, Kev. 17. 14. With 19. 16, 

10 * Jhat at mz the name of jelus 7, every 
knee ſhould bow o, of thizgs in heaven p, and things 
in earth 9, and rhi7gs under the earth 7. 

1 In the Old Tranſlation by Biſhops in Queen El:3abeth's time, 
(and ſome ſay in the Manuſcripts of this) it is zz the Name. How- 
ever, in ours now, it is not appoſitively at the name Feſus, 2 but 
conftructively of Jeſus, intimating, that the Power, Glory and 
Majeſty of kim who hath that Name, unto which every knee is. 
bowed, is that name which is above every name; which would not 
hold true, if the name were took for the very word Feſus, (that as 
before) being common to others in Hebrew, Greek and Latin, yea, 
and Fngliſh. Befides, neither in Letters, nor Syllables, nor Sound, 
nor Time, hath that word any thing above other words, o Bowing 
of the knze, is meant Mero::ymically, and Metaphorically, becauſe ſome 
of thoſe hereafter named, from whom the Homage is due, have 
n2ither Knees nor Tongues, yet muſt cither willingly, or by con- 
ſtraint, yield ſubje&ion and obedience to the Sovereign Authority 


of Chriſt here, and hereafter, Mat. 11. 27. and 28. Fon 5, 22,þ 


23. As.3. 15. all Creatures being made ſubject to him, Heb. 2. 8. 
Some of the Papiſts ſearching for their Subterraneous Fittitious Pur- 
gatorr, would reftrain it to Mex, but that would ftreighten and di- 
minii te auguſt Glory of Chriſt, exalted above every Name, 
who had evea au in his Humiliation, Homage from unclean Spi- 
Tit:. Virbs, 6, $, 1G, 12. £152 8.31. Fames 2.19, How much more 
when at his Tribunal, his conſummate Glory ſhall be manifeft to 
all, which th2 Apoftle hath ultimately a reference to, according to 
the Evangelift, Mat, 16. 27. and 24. 30. Then ſhall his equality 
with his father, and his ſuperlative glory as Mediator be mani- 
feſted to all, go0d and bad ; Angels as well as Men, who ſhall be 
ſubjetted to his Sovereign Majzſty, as the Lord God Omnipotent ; 
the good willingly, and the bad by conſtraint, 1ſaiab 45. 23. As 
17-31. Rome 2. 16, and 14+ 10,11. 2 Cor. 5.10. p Good Angels 
from whom he had Homage and Service here, Pſalm 97. 7. Mart. 2. 
13. and 4. 11. Luke 1. 30, 3. and 2. 13. Heb. 1. 6. at his Reſur- 
reQion, and Aſcenſion, Mat. 28. 6. As 1. 11. much more in his 
Glory, Mat. 24. 31. ard 25. 31. Eph. 1. 21, 22. Col. I. 16. and 2. 
IO. 2 The. 1. 7. and the ©irits of juſt Men made perfe&t, Zeb. 12. 
22, 23, Revs 4.6, Tc. and 5.9, 10» q Good Men willingly, Pſalm 
110. 3. ARS 10.33. 1 F0hn5.3. and bad by force, P/am 2. g. Luke 
19. 27. Heb. 2.14. 7Either the Dead, who are hid in the Earth, 
and ſhall be raiſed by the power of Chriſt, in, or upon them, 4#s 
24. 15. Or Devils, and wicked Souls; for though Devils move in 
the Air by God's permiſſion, Eph. 2..2. yet Hell is the place pre- 
pared for them, and the wicked, Mar. 7. 23. and 25. 41. Luke 8. 
31. 2 Pet. 2. 4. Fude, ver. 6. Upon Chriſt's Exaltation, all things 
above, and in the World are ſubje&ed to his Dominion. If it be 
ſaid, on the Earth, and under it they rebel. T anſwer, They are bound 
to obey, Mar. 4. 9, 10. and will be forc'd to ſubmit to the penalty 
for diſobedience. Chrift doth at preſent exerciſe a Sovereignty 
over bad Men, and Devils, in limiting and puniſhing them as he 
pleaſeth, Fob 1. 11, 12. Luke 4+ 34. and 8. 32, and 19. 27. 2 Pet. 2, 
8. Rev. 2. 10, 

11 And * that every tongue / ſhould confeſs that 


Jeſus Chriſt ;s Lord x, to the glory of God the Fa- 


ther. 

{ By Tongue, not only every Language, People, and Nation is 
meant; becauſe *tis to be underſtood, as before particularized, of 
Angels as well as Men for tho* Angels properly and by nature want 
to1pues, (as well as kxees, which are both here joined, and muſt not 
be fever'd in the Worſhip given to Chritt) yet in their manner of 
ſpeaking to Men, under an extraordinary diſpenſation, they may 
uſe them, (or that which is equivalent) 1 Cor. 13. I. and in a way 
proper to them. t Can confeſs, or expreſs their adoration of Chriſt, 

2Ue 7+ 9, LL, 12. Either with delight, or by a forc'd ſubjettion, Kev. 
6. 16. and acknowiedge that he is Lord, 7. e. of glorv, Rom. 11. 


eyed x, not as in my preſence only, but now much. 
more 1 my abſence yz work out your own Cirai. 
z with fear, and trembling 2. "0 
w Having confirmed the Example of Chriſt's admirat; 

ſcention, and Aﬀettion from the ; va Iſſue of i be 6, nds 
reaſſume his Exhortation with a friendly Compellation. x Pe 
mending their former tincere Endeavours to obey the Galhel 16. 
Ch. 1. 5. and ver. 15. of this) in following Chrift, Mar. Ky bop 
and moving them to perſevere in obedience and love to God. Ba 
Man. » That it might be evident whether the Eye of their P: 
fror were upon them or no, a prevailing love to Chriſt, anq theie 
own Souls welfare was prevalent with them, but eſpecially being 
he was now detain'd from them, and might be jealous of ſome 2.2 
tects in them, Fames 3.2. 1 Foby 1. $. did engage them more oe 
any thing to embrace his Exhortation, which he enlargeth i: a 
words. # He moves them as Saints, ch. 1. 1. in whom God _ 
perfett his work begun, verſe 6. having given to them to believe 
and ſuffer, ver. 29. that they would ſeriouſly and earneſtly buſie 
themſelves in thoſe things, which on their parts are nec&{ry to 
Salvation, as Foby 6. 27. Heb. 6. 9. and without which it cannc: 
be had, as Ch. 1. 10, Mat. 24. 13. C01. 3. 10, 12.65. 1 Tim. 1, 13Þ5. 
and 6. 19. 2 Tim. 2.5. and 4. 7, $. 2 Per. 3. 17. yea Preſs on in the 
way to their own Salvation, (as he mov'd, 1 Tim. 4. 16.) Nor that 
they ſhould not be ſolicitous about others, (for that mutua! Care is 
imply'd as elſewhere requir'd, Zeb. 3. 13. and 10. 24.) but tha: 
every one ſhould ftrenuouſly go on towards the mark with x ſpecia ! 
regard to himſelf, and the Temptations he may meet With, know- 
ing he muſt bear his own burthen, Ga1.6. 1,3. and therefore ſhoulg 
take heed left he fall. The Papiſts arguings hence that our at- 
ons are efficient and meritorious Cauſes of Salvation, are altogether 
inconſequent. For the Apoftle doth not fay our Aions work our 
Salvation, but work ye out your own Salvation, which is much 
different. *Twere abſurd to ſay becauſe the Fews were enjoin'd to 
eat the Paſſover with Loins girt, that Loins girt were eating of 
the Paſſover. Indeed what the Papiſts urge, is contrary to this Do- 
rin of Paul, who doth elſewhere place bleſſedneſs in remiſhion of 
Sins, and ſhews eternal Life is the gift of God, Rom. 4. 6, 7. and 
6. 23. and we are ſav'd by grace not of works, Rom. 3. 20, 24, 25, 
and 4. 16, Eph. 2. 8. Tit. 3.5. and contrary to the main ſcope of the 
Apoſtle, which is to beat down pride, and conceit of delerving, 
and perſuade to humility ; He drives at this, that we ſhould not he 
idle or lazy in the buſineſs of Salvation, but work together with 
God, (yet as Inftruments in whom there is no Strength which 
is not derived from him) that we may evidence we do nor 
receive his Grace in vain, 2 Cor. 6. 1, 2. But this Co-opera- 
tion doth not reſpett the acquiring or meriting of Salvation, which 
is proper to Chriſt alone, and incommunicable to any others, 
Acts 4. 12. Who cannot be ſaid to be their own Saviours: This 
Co-operation or working out, reſpetts only the application, not the 
performing of the Payment, which Chrift hath abundantly 
pertected : But the embracing of the perfe& Payment, is not 
that which can be the cauſe and foundation of right for which 
It is deſervedly confer'd : but only the way and means by which 
we come to partake of Salvation. 4 i.e. With an holy care to do 
all acceptably ; he doth by theſe two words mean not any ſervile 
tear and laviſh deſpondence ariſing from doubting, Chap. 4. 4. but 
only a ſerious filial fear, implying a deep humility and ſubmiſſive- 
neſs of mind, with a reverential awe of the Divine Majefty, and 
a ſolicitude to avoid that Evil which is offenfive to him and ſeparates 
from him. We find theſe words uſed to the like import, Pſuln 2. 11. 
Dan. 5.19. and 6. 26, Rom. 11. 20. With 1 Cor. 2. 3. and 2 Cor. 7.5. 
Eph. 6.5. connoting that after the Example of Chrift, we ſhould be 
humble, and tho' wediftruſt in our ſelves, yet we are to truſt fole- 
ly to God (as an infant may be afraid and cling yet faft to, and de- 
pend upon, begging help of the Parent going over a dangerous 
Precipice) for the accompliſhment of our Salvation. 


13 Forb it is God c which worketh in you 4, both 


to will e, and to dof, of his good pleaſure g. 

b That they might not be negligent in working out their Salvz- 
tion with humility, from any conceit or carnal confidence any 
might have that they could believe and repent when they pleaſed, 
imagining their Wills to be as pliable to Good as Evil : The Apoſtle 
urgeth the effe&ual grace of God, as a powerful inducement 2nd 
encouragement to embrace his Exhortation. c They ſhould not 
deſpond of attaining Salvation, or think they did laborr in 
vain, in thediligent uſe of means, and ſhould altogether fall ander 
the dominion of tin, confidering tho they were free Agents, yet the 
efficiency and ſufficiency was of God, Rom. 6. 13, 14. 1 Cor. 4» 7+ 
2 Cor. 3. 5. 4 Who worketh within them powerfully and effettu- 
ally, carrying on the work through all Ditticulties and Obſtacles, 
with victorious Efhcacy till it be wrought, ch.-1. 6. Iſa. 41. 4+ 
Heb. 13. 21. God working not only by ſuaſion to gain afſent, but 
by a ſpecial energy, affecting what he would have us to do. e An 
not only in a general way, Ads 17.28. but in a ſpecial way making 
us willing, 2/21. 110.3. remotely in regard of the principle, nextly 
in regard of the a& ; circumciling the heart, Dent. 30. 6. taking 
away the heart of Stone, and giving an heart of Fleſh, Ezek. 11. 19» 
& 36. 26, 27. Caufing light to ſhine out of darkneſs, 2 Cor. 4+ 6+ 
and ſo renewing the Will to chule that which is ſavingly good, tne 
natural bent of which before the influence of this inſuperable grace 
ſtands another way, Fokn 8. 44. viz. to will, and do contrary - 
Yet he doth not neceſfitate by any compultion, but powerfully, Yer 
ſweetly and ſuitably to Man's free faculty, encline the Will to eat 
which is good, Fohn 6. 37, 44+ 1. e. to a certain effect. For Ic 


p 


36. 17.2, $, and $.6, the Son of God, 2 Cor. 4. 5. Heb. 1. 2,4. 
having only power to comniand the Soul, and Conſcience, Fames| 
4. 12. and to fave, Zeb. 7. 25. being Lord both of the Dead and of | 
the Living,- &2m. 14. 9. wv Some render zz, the glory of the Fa- 
ther. Either in that, the honour of Chriſt redoundeth to the ho- 
nour 0i the Father, 7rov. 10. 1, With Fokn 5. 22% Eph. 1. 6. or the 
Father doth moſt glorifie the Son in his Exaltation, who had moſt 
glorifed him in his 22miliarion, Fulm 12. 28, with 17. 5, 6. 

12 Wheretore, my bcioved, Þ as ye have always O- 


/ 


Will influenced to will that it doth perform, it undoubtedly wills 
ſomewhat that is certain, and fo is determined by God. f T0 
do that which js ſavingly good. Whereupon being made wa 
ling, it hath not only an inclination, and doth not only exert 
a woulding, but being moved by God's inſuperable Grace, 1 
Cor. 3. 7. that Will is effe@tual, and is the very deed, where the 
command of the Will is executed to the glory of God, as the 
Author. As in Alms, not only doth God incline the Will to 


relieve the Poor, but further contributes ſpecial gracious "_ 


p_ 


Hl 0 


lipht-be 
Gen. 1, 
not an 
Rev. 13 
W: 11> 
IF IcJoyc 
IN val 
q C: 
only hy 
1 79h, 
wo 
lay, hd 
that we 
r Quic 
hog 
When] 
reward 
bracing 
ance, 
comfort 
Mong t] 
25.21, 
*ÞOy- they we 
Nhor Co fe I 


[ 


1 Chap: il 
to perform what was deliberated, which cvinceth, that it is from 
another - Principle than our ſelves. . It. is not, that ye may be 
able to will, and may be able to do : hat he worketh both to will and 

to do: which connotes the very act.it felt; that ye will, to be- 

ji2ve, obey, pray, perſevere ; and that ye do-believe, obey, pray,Per- 

{>vere ; of unwilling he makes willing ; and further, to will, and 

ro do. *Tis true, to will, as it is an at of the will, is curs by 

Creation ; and to will well is fo far ours, we bing made eicttually 

willing by God's grace : yet not ours, as tho* of our ſelves we be- 

gin to Will, or $o on, but it is of him who worketh in us. Not 

chat we cannot will weil, but that of our ſelves we cannot vill 

well. The Precept therefore requiring our eb2dicnce docs not 

ſhew what we can or will of onr ſelves, but what we ought to 
will and todo, by Ged's ſpecial help. But thouzh God work in us 
obedience; yet we obey, we our ſelves ad, being ated of God. 

g Not for any previous diſpoſition in any of us, bur of, or accord- 

ing to his own good pleaſure, Luke 10. 21, Eph. 1. 5, 9, Lt. & 

2, 3. 2 The. 1. 11. With 2 Tim. 1. 9. In working out our own 

Salvation, the very beginning in the will, aſwell as the perfe&ion 

is aſcribed to the efhcacy of God ; his good pleaſure is the procre- 

ating and helping cauie of this work on the will, and not the 
wills good pleaſure. 
14 Do all things without murmurings þ, and diſ- 

PutINgsS z. | 

h The Apoſtie here ſubjoins to his exhortation to condeſcenſion 
and humility, a ditwaſive from the oppoſite vices, moving them 
to do all that was incumbent on them as Chriſtians without pri- 
vate mutterings , ſecret whiſperings and complaining, which 
might argue their impatience under the yoke of Chrift, whiles 
put upon doing or ſuffering ſuch things, either refle&ing on God's 

Providence, as the Iſraelites of Old, Numb. 11. 1. 5c. 1 Cor. 10. 10. 

reckoning they had hard meaſure: or (rather here contidering 

the Context) grudging at others, as the Greeks and Fews had done, 

Luk. 5. 30. Foh. 6, 41, 42. Ad. 6. 1. yea and ſome of the Dil- 

ciples were found guilty of this ill temper, againft their Maſter, 

Foh. 6. 61. Chriſtian Charity difſallows Grudgings, 1 Pers 4. 9+ 

Fud- v. 10. and alſo, 7 Hot and eager conteſts and quarrellings 

about thoſe things wherein the life and main buſineſs of Religion 1s 

not concerned, but the unity of the Spirit of Holineſs is oppoſed, 

Mat. 18. I. Mark ge 33» Luk. 9. 45s Rome 14. 1. 2 Core 12. 20 

With I Tile I. 6. & 2. 8, 


15 That ye may be blamele & and f harmleſs 7, 
the ſons of God mz without rebuke z in the midſt of 2 
fine crooked and perverſe nation 0, among whom + ye 
thine as lights in the world p : 


k That ye behave your ſelves ſo, that none can juftly reproach 
you, Lnke 1.6. and tho* you cannot altogether put to filence fool- 
iſh Men, Foh. 15. 25. 1 Pet. 2. 15, yet they cannot have any juſt 
cauſe to ftain your reputation. * } But You may be found {incere, 
fimple, void of guile, Mar. 10. 16. Fobn 1. 47. Rom. 16. 19- 
1 Pet. 2, 1, With 1. 14. # Without ſuch ſpots and blemiſhes as 
are inconſiftent with your . Adoption or Sonſhip, Eph. 5. 27. 
2 Sons of God, in regard of their Relation, ſhould be careful as 
much as may be, that they do not expoſe themſelves to the biting 
reproofs of thoſe carping Neighbours who are not of their Father's 
Family, Cant. 4. 7. Mat. 5. 48. Eph. 1. 4. Fude, v. 24. 0 But 
ſhew by their lying in wickedneſs, 1 Foh. 5. 19. and the uncured 
ſpots 3 yea, . even Plague-ſores upon them who have notoriouſly 
corrupted themſelves 3 that they are a perverſe, crooked, un- 
toward and adulterous Generation, Deut. 32. 5. Pſal. 125. 5. 
Mat. 12. 39. Aﬀs 2.4. & 13. $, 10. p In converling with ſuch a 
ſort of Men, ye either do, or ought unanimouſly to ſhew your 
ſelves to be light in the Lord, Mar. 5. 14, 16. Eph. 5: 8, 15. 
Enlightned by the Sun of Righteouſneſs, Mal. 4. 2. to give a 
more clear light; that however the uncivil wicked would belpatter 
you, and caſt reproach upon you in the neceflary exerciſes of Re- 
ligion ; yet you not ſuffering as Murtherers, Thieves, Buſibodies, 
or, &c, 1 Per. 4.4, 16. you will then, eſpecially if Chritt's faith- 
ful Embaſſadors, ſhew your ſelves to be not ſuch Lantern or Torch- 
bearers as accompanied treacherous Fudas, Foh. 18. 3. (however 
the ill Men you live among, may reckon you no better) but ſuch 
light-bearers under Chriſt (the Seventy uſe the word for Stars , 
Gen. 1. 14. Dan. 12. 3. Rev. 1. 16, 20s) as irradiate the World, 
not a! Houſe, as a Candle doth, but the World, as Stars do, 
REV. 12. Is 


16 Holding, forth the word of life q ; * that I may 


Nr, fin 


PHILIPPIANS. 


motheus ſhortly unto you b, that I alſo may be of £004 


cation of the Church thexe, to their own things. 


: « 3 
_%42Y wR. .F 7, 

(144. i 
et A WY] - _ 


r That he might further confirin and encour2ye them in their 


Duty, he doth not here conclude the c2rtainty of -his death,. ar 
his firſt Imaprifonment, having exprelied biiore fome confidenc- 


of Ins ſurviving it, c<. 1, 19, 25. but in-imitetion'of Chriſt, ths 
good $h2pherd, Fs. 19. 11. to demonttrate his conftant affection 
to them (as he doth to Others, 2 Cor. vfj. 2. 3.) he 
which micht atrer- 
terry, BOrrow- 
F I5- 5s 7- & 223 
7- Fudg. 9. 13. to ſhew that h2 cord cheerfully lay down Kis life 
covciti:g them to God, for that 
was done before by Chrift's own offering up kimelf, H-5. 7. 27. a 
Sacrihice of a ſweet ſmell unto God, Eph. 5. 2. but whereby they 
might be confirmed in the Faith ſealed wich his Blood, for bearing 
Vitneſs to Chriſt, precious to God, 7ſ:!. 116. 15. The Creek 
word he hath here, is borrowed from the why2 in Sacrificing, 
ot Pouring Wine or Oil upon the Victim, #x54. 30.9. 2 King. 
IS. 13. Jer. 19. 13. When that which was poured forth was called 
the Drink-offering, to the confirming of Covenants.  t By Sacri- 
tice, he means either ſpecially their Aims, prepared by them, 
and preſented by Eppbroditus, for ſupporting him in his Sufferings, 
and in the Perien of the Apoſtle offered up unto Got:!, ch. 4. 19. 
2 Cor. 9. 12. or more generally, the P#lippians Convertion, be- 
cauſe ſantified by a principle of Faith, and ſo made a acrifice. 
For he doth more than once write. of Believers being offered and 
reſigned to God, under the notion of a Sacrifice, Km. 12. 1. & 
15. 16, and fo doth another, 1 Per. 2. 5-- u Tobring them unto 
which by his Minifrration, was a very pleaſing ſervice to him, who 
by pouring out of his Blood in this Martyrdom, would confirm the 
Doctrin of the Geipel, or New Covenant, and fix it more ftrongly 
in the hearts of them an4 others of God's Choſen Feopile. 
w Wherenpon he expreſſeth his joy and dclizht in that, which 
upon this ſuppoſition would in the iffue be ſo much to their honour 
and adyantage, when it ſhould ſeem good to the Lord. Th-y 
would reckon it no {mall honour, to have him the Apoſtle thar 
planted the Goſpel among them ſacrificed in their vouching of the 
iruth,which therefore could not but be profitable to the eftabliſhing, 
of them in it, who had cordially embraced it. Whereupon, x he 
doth heartily congratulate with each of them; the meaneft as well 
as the greateſt of them, who would be fo privileged. 
18 For the ſame caut* ajis do ye joy y, and rejo7 
with me z. | 
Y Expecting the like affeQtion and ſympathy in every one of 
them , that upon the account of his ſufferings, they would thz 
more readily, cheerfully and covragiovſly believe in, .and {uffer tor 
Chriſt, Conſidering the difference twixt death threatned by Man, 
for our ſticking clole to God, Mar. 10. 2s. and denounced for 
ſlipping atide from God, in whole, or in part, 2 Theff. 1.5. 7 And 
that would be a congratulation of him who ſhould account their 
being eſtabliſhed in the Faith with mutual love and unity, a ful- 
filling of his Joy as before, v. 2. 
19 | Burl truit in the Lord Jeſts 2, to fend * Ti- 


7 
7 jg *v 
& #4 


- 


PR 
bk. - Cr 
Te JC £ 

_ 


Am 


"£»% 
_— 


comfort c, when I know your ſtate 4. 

4 Diverting from his former exhortation, the more to comfort 
them, he expreſſeth his good hope (which in reſpect of the object 
we tranſlate rſt) in the Lord Jeſus, exalted 'above every name, 
that he would be pleaſed ſome way or other, to aftord him ſuch 
liberty, notwithſtanding his reſtraint. þ That he ſhonld within a 
little while after the arrival of Zpaphrodit»s, now upon, his return, 
diſpatch 7:mothy to them. c Not for their further benevolence, 
but for the compoſing of their Spirits and ſetling of their Aﬀairs, 
which to him, ſolicitous of their Souls welfare (as in a like caſe 
for others, 1 Theſſ. 2. 19. with 3. 5.) would be great ſatisfaction, 
4 When he ſhould be certainly acquainted how things went with 
them 3 who might juſtly expett his ſympathy, Rom. 12.15. 1 Core 
12. 26, 2 Cor. ll. 28, 29. * 

20 For I have no Man + like-minded e, who will 
naturally care for your itare f. 

e For which purpoſe I have defigned Timothy who joins with me we. 
in this Epiſtle, and is moft of the ſame mind with my ſelf, endued 
with the ſame Spirit, Faith and Love: finding none of like Soul 
to him with my ſelf, in defiring your proſperity, and ſo have 
pitched upon him. f Who: being cordial to me and you, will 
without regard to lucre, ingenuouſly and fincerely; above all the 
reft I have here, propagate the Kingdom of Chrift amongft you, 
and promote your Salvation in watching for your Souls, as one 
that muſt give an account, that he may do it with joy, Zeb. 

13 


21s 


29- ; | 
21 For all g ſeck their own h, not the things which 
are Jeſus Chrilt's z. | | 

He doth here further commend Timothy, compared with the 
generality of thoſe, who with kim did attend the Miniftry of the 
Goſpel at Rome , where it ſeems (whatever the Papifts pretend) 
Peter did not then preſide as Metropolitav, When he faith a/), he 
doth not neceſſarily imply every individual beſides 7zmothy (tho' as 
before, he knew not one like-minded as he was) but almoſt all (as 
the univerſal fign is elſewhere Synechdochically taken, Fer. 6. 3: 
Mat. 10. 22. Mark. 1.5.) or the moſt part of thoſe then employed 
in the Miniftry, who were thenat liberty, and whoſe inclinations 
(probably) he had enquired into. . þ Did though not. /rmaply and, 
abſolutely, yet afrer a ſirt, ſeek their own profit, eaie, ſatety, plea- 
ſure and fatisfattion (called their own, in regard of th2ir civil right 
and the world's opinion ; but yet at God's diſpoſal; Zig. 2. 8.) 
Theſe they did (as Fohn and Mart in attther calc) prefer to a long; 
and tedious Journey for the ſervice of Chriſt unto Philipp?, ; 7 $0 
that they did poſtpone the glory of Chiift, the latety __ _ 

\Where- 
fore he doth not mean it abſ-lurel; ; that they did not ſeek the things 
of Chriſt, or that they did deny Chritt, tor 'tis apparent; ever 
when he penn'd this Epiſtle, <6. 1. 13, 14+. v the bs 28. 14, 15 


Of, 1. 

rejoyce in the day of Chriſt 7, * that I have not run 
-21n vain, neither laboured in vain /. | 
q Carefully bearing before you , and ftedfaftly ſhewing not 
| only by your profeſſion, but converſation, the Lord Jeſus Chriſt, 
1 Foh. 1. 1. whoſe Goſpel is the Word of Life, in that it is the 
; Power of God to Salvation, Ad. 13. 26. Rom. 1. 16. He doth not 
; ſay, holding forth carnal Inſtitutions, nor humane Traditions; but 
« that word, wherein is to be had Eternal. Life, Foh. 5. 29. & 6. 68. 
: 7 Quickning them from the conſideration of the glorious joy he 
. ſhould have in their Salvation; at the day of Chrift, See ch. 1. 6. 
_ When he and they ſhould of God's free Grace, receive an abundant 
'. reward, viz. of his Miniſtry and Exhortation, and of their em- 
t bracing it, and working out their Salvation by God's ſpecial aſhiſt- 
it ance, / For it would be evident to his, as well as their everlaſting 
\C comfort, when he ſhould ſee then , that his laborious Miniſtry a- | 
15 mong them had not. been fruſtrate or fruitleſs in the Lord, Mar. 
'0 25.21, 1 Cor. 3+ 8,9. &X 15. 59, Then in a more glorious way, | 
11- op they woutd be his Joy and Crown, than they were at preſent, 
rt hor * 4o In : 
%o © 17 Yea and if r 1 be + oftered / ttpon the ſacrifice 7 
he ty, 9nd ſervice z of your faith, *I joy , and rejoyce with 
to Jou all x. 
1d5 | 


% Fon: 1: 3, Thete vere many that.did ſerioully ſeck Chrls 
- Is 


+ ® 'E) 
HI2YC0UCYT's 
*R CN. 16: 


FT Or, It 
A24r unt9 


Chap. 1I. 


but compar.tively, and in a ſort, they did not ſeek the things of 
Chriſt ſo intenſly as they ſhould, 1 Cor. 10. 24, 33. but failed as 
others did in other caſes, Mat. 26. 58. 2 Tim. 4. 15. (not as if all 
minding, of their own things were denied to Chriſt's Minifters, 
1 Tim. 3+ 4, 5+ & 5. $, but) they did lip their necks from under 
the yoke, and did not mind the Glory of Chrift in the Church of 
Philippi, as he did. 

22 Bur ye know the proof of him &, that as a ſon 
with the father /, he hath ſerved with me in the goſ- 


Del m. 
: t However others were found in ſome reſpetts defettive to the 
ſervice of Chriſt, yet he appeals to their experience of the integ- 
rity and fidelity of Timotky in conjun&ion with himſelf, when he 
Preached the Goſpel among them, and afterwards, As 16. 1, 15. 
& 1$.5. & 19. 22. & 20. 4, 6. 1 Which he amplifhes and illu- 
ſtrates by a S7mile, when he faith, as 4 Son with the Father, q. d. 
juſt as a genuine and obedient Son is wont to retain the Spirit of 
his Father that begat him z and Pau! doth Metaphortcally call Time- 
z{y his own Son, begotten by the Goſpel, Gal. 4. 19. 1 Tim. 1s. I 
his dearly beloved Son, 2 7m. 1. 2. and faithful in the Lord, 1 Cor. 
4+ 17. like-minded with himſelf, v. 20. m With whom he had not 
only Preached, but ſerved in the Goſpel, chap. 1. 1. given him- 
ſelf wholly to the thing. He doth not ſay, ſerved me, or under me, 
but with me in the Goſpel, 7. e. to advance the glory of Chrift in 
promoting the Goſpel, by helping with Paul and labouring, work- 
ing the work of the Lord, as Paul alſo did, and _ ſometime a 
ſufferer under reſtraint for that ſervice, as Paul himſelf, Zeb. 13. 23. 
for the Goſpel, which is not a Domination, but Miniſtration, 
- 4 way this great Apoſtle owns Timothy as his Fellow Mini- 
ter. 

23 Him therefore I hope to ſend preſently », ſo 


ſoon as I ſhall ſee how 1t will go with me 0. 

7 Seeing ths matter was thus, he thought not of any other to 
employ in the ſervice of their Faith, but hoped, 7. e.- in the Lord 
.Teſus, as v. 19. in a ſhort time after his preſent Writing, to ſend 
this excellent, humble and approved young Man, who would natu- 
rally care for th-ir concerns, v. 20. 0 Even without any delay 
(tho? as yet to accompany Fpaphroditus, he could not ſpare him who 
was ſo uſeful to him in his bonds, to take care for things neceſſary 
to the propazation of the Goſpel, ir th? ample City of Rome) from 
the hour he ſhould come to a c:rtainty, what would be the iſſue of 
his preſent Impritonment, which if ic ſhould end in his being of- 
fered up, he had ſatisfied them before, as it would be for his own 
advantage, ch. 1. 21. ſo by the Providence of God, no differvice 
to their Faith, v. 17, 18. from which with ready ſubmiſhon to God's 
will, whatever occurred, it ſeems he had a greater inclination to 
conceive a good hope of freedom. 

24 Bur* I truſt in the Lord p, that I alſo my ſelf 


ſhall come ſhortly 9. 
p So he expreſſeth his ſtrong perſuaſion, as the word we tranſlate 
rruſt (being ſeldom uſed, but when the thing truſted imports the 
. obje&) ix the Lord, i. e. Jeſus, whom he doth abſolutely and emi- 
nently call Lord, being ſo highly exalted above all others, v. 9. 
not only here, but elſewhere, wv. 29. ch. 3. 1. & 4+ 1, 4, 10, On 
whom he doth wholly depend, and to whom he doth ſubmit for the 
iſſue. qg Before he had ſuggefred his perſuaſion of abiding with 
them, ch. 1. 25. and here that he might ſatisfie them he had not 
chang'd his mind, he adds for their comfort, that they might not 
be diſcouraged in their ſufferings, what apprehenſions he had after 
a while, of being ſet at liberty (if God pleas'd) and if ſo, he would 
have them conceive, ſoon after he had done what was neceſſary at 
Rome (for him who had care of all the Churches) he deſigned to 
follow Timothy to them. . 


25 Yet I ſuppoſed it neceſſary to ſend to you Epa- 
phroditusr, my brother and companion in labour /, and 
fellow-ſouldier t, but * your meſſenger «, and he that 
miniſtred to my wants w. 


r In the mean time he gives them an account why he eſteemed 
3t needful to ſend back Epphrodirus (whom ſome, but without ſuf- 
ficient warrant would have to be the ſame with Epaphras, Col. 1. 7. 
& 4. 12. Philem. v. 23.) unto them, not as if he had failed in do- 
ing what he was entruſted with, but for other weighty reaſons. 
/ He would have them to know he had nothing to blame him for, 
but all in his commendation, whom in the common Faith he owned 
to be his Chriſtian Brother and Fellow-helper, or Fellow-worker 
in the Buſineſs of the Goſpel, as he calls others in the like circum- 
ſtances, Rom. 16. 3, 21. 2 Cor. 8.23. Col. 4. 11. 1 Theſſ. 3.2. 
Philem. 24. t And a faithful and conftant Aﬀociate with him in 
the Chrittian warfare, 2 Cor. 10. 4. I Tim. 1. 18. Philem. 2. un- 
der Chriſt their Captain, againft all the aſſaults of the Devil, and 
the carnal World, which are continually warring to deſtroy real 
Chriſtianity. # But your Apoſtle, which muſt be underſtood 
largely, as it is ſometimes put for any Evangelift, Deacon, or 
Minifter of the Goſpel, Rom. 16. 7, 9. well rendred by us in this 
place, meſſenger, compared with ch. 4.18. 2 Cor. 8. 22, 23. not be- 
ins a ſpecial Apoftle of Chriſt, Mat. 10. 2. but an Officer of the 
Church at Philippi, delegated by them to carry relief to Paul. 
ww Unto whom it ſeems he did not only deliver the Preſent for his 
ſupport according to his truſt and commiſſion, wherein he faithfully 
ſerved the Church, but alſo as their publick Minifter, greatly help 
Paul the Priſoner in what he ſtood moſt in need of, which Paul 
could not but value, being the Romans were fo mild as to permit 
him a Captive ſo good attendance, and aſfiftance ; yet to declare 
his affetions to the Church at Philippz, he choſe rather to deny 
himſelf his necefſaries, than not to comfort them in remitting their 
way pes ſo greatly dehring their welfare, with this Let- 
ter to them, 


* Philem. 
22+. 


*Ch4.19s 


26 For he longed after you all x, and was full of | 


=ra pag Z, decauſe that ye had heard that he had been 
LCK 2. 


PHILIPPIANS. 


| 


Chap, | 
x He gives them the firſt reaſon of his preſent ſending not tha; b 
Epaphrodreus was unwilling to ftay longer with him, but becauſ h . 
was greatly concerned for all of them of the Church at Ph 1 : 
who had his heartas they had Pau?s, ch. 1.8. & 4. 1, Rom " IPs 
Solicitous to be with them to do their Souls good. » frog 
contidering their great affettion to him, whom they had entruſt 
in this ſervice, he was in ſuch diſtreſs for them , that hj« SH 
rits were even ready to fail him, (as Marth, 26: 37.) ay Y 
Sympathy, 2 Cor. Ile 29. { Knowing how much the = 
= pig - bi —_— po in thoſe circumſtances. 
; n : . 
= _ they could underſtand nothing of his recovery, would affe(} 
27 For indeed he was fick nigh unto death ; but 
God had mercy on him b - and not on him only 
but on me allo c, leſt I ſhould have ſorrow upon fr. 


row d. 

4 By reaſon he was really taken with ſuch a Diſeaſe, a in it 
own nature was mortal, and in its tendency brought him ca 
Death's door, as 1/a. 38. 1. b But God who is the great Phrf- 
cian, and unto whom it belongs to ſhew mercy unto tho = 
addreſs to him (without whom bodily Phyſicians can do nathir ) 
by compalfionating of him in his miſery, was pleaſed to reftore hive 
to health, as 2 K7gs 20.5, 6. But if any ſay, Would it not bays 
been great mercy #0 bave taken him from the miſcries of bic lif, which 
are here prolong:d ? . Conſider chap. 1. 21. It may be anſwered 
7. Death it ſelf, as it is a privation of life, and oppoſite to nature. 
was not deſirable by Paul any more than by our Saviour, but mizhe 
be looked upon as a kind of miſery, not to be preferred to Rl 
looked upon in it ſelf, but with reſpe& to another, ViFe AS it 4 
paſſage to eternal life, To it is deſirable, for that life into which 
it leads the Godly, and ſois to be preferred to the miſerable con- 
dition of this life: Paul ſpeaks here of mercy, reſpeRing the for- 
mer, conſidering that this life it ſelf is a favour of God, for the 
ſervice of him, and our Neighbour. Further, 2. God's mercy 
here reſpetts not only the grievous ſickneſs of Epaphroditus, but 
the joint affliftion, that the loſs of him would be both to the 74; 
lippians, and to Paul in this junture, as we may ſee from what 
follows ; what Power Paul had for working of Miractes, was chiefly 
to convince Infidels, and he could only exert it when God fy 
good for his own Glory. Theretore he magnifies God's mercy 
here in a more ordinary way, asa return to Prayer, when he 
was fo atHicted for his Collegues illneſs, being upon an Office of 
kindneſs and compaſhon, his loſs would be in its tendency a ground 
of ſo much ſorrow to the Church, as well as to himſelf. 41 Whoſe 
Chrittianity had not extinguiſhed his natural affe&ions, but if the 
Church had then been bereft of Epaphroditus, would have added 
the affliction for his loſs, to his afiion by his ſuffering for 
Chrift, it would have doubled his afflition (yet ſomewhat in 
different ſenſe from that, c<. 1. 16.) it being an ill temper not to 
be grieved for the affliftion of the Church, Amos, 6. 6. yet all 
_ attettions are to be moderated according to the yill of 
28 I ſent him therefore the more carefully e, that 
when ye ſee him again f'ye may rejoice g, and that 
may be the leſs ſorrowful h. | 

e After his recovery, without delay, denying my ſelf the com- 
fort of his Society, T havediſpatched him away to you. f-Tothe 
end that he whom you look'd upon as dead, g might ſeaſonably ap- 
pear among you in Perſon, and cheer you up in your troubles 
for him and me. h And that T, who by reaſon of your kindneſs 
to me, have occaſioned his abſence from you , might upon his 
- afe return to you have ſomewhat to alleviate my grief, 2 Cr, 

« IO. 

29 Receive him therefore in the Lord withall glad- 
neſs ;, and + hold ſuch in reputation &. 10h 

z Hereupon having given his due charadter, he chargeth them "Ge 
all, Officers and People, to entertain him as a Servant. of the 8 
Lord (as Chrift would have them receive his Servants, Mat. 10. | uy 
40, 41. even with all ſpiritual joy) as ſometimes the Galatians "9 
had received him, Gal. 4. 14. & Yea, as it becometh Saints, | Tx 
Rom. 16. 2. to have ſuch in eſteem very highly for their works , 
ſake, 1 Theſſ. 5. 13. 

30 Becauſe for the work of Chriſt he was nigh unto 
death /, not regarding his life mz, to * ſupply your #10 
lack of ſervice toward me 7. 164 1 

1 By reaſon he was ſo zealous about the work of the Miniſtry 
in the general, or in ſpecial to carry on that ſervice, as the Churches 
Meſſenger, he was entruſted with, ch. 4. 18. not only in convey” 
ing their benevolence on ſo long and hazardous a journey, for the 
reltef of the Lord's Priſoner, which Chrift would own and reward 
as his work, Mar. 25. 39, 40. but in attending him (whom 12 
was ſent to viſit) in his confinement both within doors and abroad 
as occaſion required, As 28. 30. (for it ſeems the Romars were 0 
generous as to give free egreſs and regreſs to his Viſitants) where- 
by he contradted that forementioned diſeaſe that hazarded his life. 
m The preſervation of which with reſpe& to the work he Was 
about, he did not conſult (Foh. 12. 25, 26.) but made little ac- 
count of it, (as #eft. 4. 16.) yea, did even deſpiſe it in the ſer- 
vice of Chriſt, as the original word doth import, being borrow 
from thoſe whoſe lives are hazarded in being caft to be devoured by 
Beaſts in the Theatre (which he himſelf by ſad experience ſome- 
time knew the meaning of, 1 Cor. 15. 32.) # So faithful was Þe 
to his truſt for the honour of his Lord, that to the very utmoſt 0 
his ſtrength, yea and beyond it, that which he reckoned thoſe who 
ſent would have done themſelves had they been preſent (conſider- 
ing what the Goſpel requires, Gal. 6. 2. Heb. 13. 3-) that bs 
Oniſephorns like, 2 Tim. 1, 16, according to his meaſure made ſup" 
ply of in their abſence. | 


CHAP. 


Ch: 


OS D) au HK wm YE 0m} CODER EE 


2 Kt 
ſuch, ; 
I6, 2c 
Iſa, 56, 
withft; 
Chriſt, 
See v. 
tended 
Were d 
Chriſt, 

_ them, 
Gal. 6. 
Rite the 
after th 
and req 
Paul her 
under t] 
Mating | 
In the c 
altoget 
the Aea 
the L.X) 
Apoſtle 
. VIINg ng 
any Chr 
if it wer 
now, by 
Was a m 
from it; 
ly repea 
and unit 

ations, 
Wians, 


CHAP. 1. 
E 


Againſt falle Teachers who mingled the Law 4ad Goſpel; Felievers ar 
the ſpiritual Circumciſion ; confirmed by kis own Example and Faitl? 
1— 4: For havingpreater outward Advantages than they, he re- 
garded them not , but only  Chriſts Righteoufneſs and irs Fruits , 
s — 10. Following after Perf:ftion, 11 —— 14. Hereto he ex- 
Gas the Thilippians according to this Rule and after bis Example, 
15 — 17. Ando decline the ways of carnal Chriſt; ans, having their 
Converſation in Heaven, waiting for our Lord from thence in the Re- 
ſurrettion, I$ — 21, 


[ Inally o, my brethren p rejoice in the.Lord 9. 
To write the ſame things to you r, to me 11- 


deed zs not grievous /, but for you it :s fafe r. 

0 Moreover, or as to what remains, 7. e. by way of concluſion 
to the antecedent matter, and tranſition to the general exhorta- 
tion, he here premiſeth the ſubſequent admonition. p Willing- 
ly repeating the Title of Brethren, to ſhew the reſpet he had for 
them, and to ſweeten that he was about to ſubjoin. q He moves 
them (as we, with almoſt all, do tranſlate it) not as ſaluting or 
bidding them farewel, Luke 1. 28. 2 Cor. 13.11- but to rejoice in 
the Lord, as ch. 4. 4. either connoting the obje&t matter of their 
joy, compared with v. 3. or rather the efficient, importing for, 
and according, to the will of the Lord, in a manner agreeable to 
the pleaſure of him who affords a ground of rejoicing in the midft 
of your tribulations and atflitions, confidering his mercy, ch. 2. 
18, 27, 29. they might tafte how good the Lord is, as elſewhere, 
Pſal. 37-4» F*re 9. 24. With Rom. 5. 11. 2 Core 10. 17. 1 Thefſ. 5. 
16. 1 Pet. 1. 8. and ſonot after a carnal and worldly, but Spiritual 
and Chriſtian manner, to cheer up themſelves in him, when the 
World frowns moſt, Pſal. 4. 6, 7. r Writing of the ſame things 
cannot be reterred to any other Epiftles which he wrote to the 
Philippians, but to thoſe things, which whiles preſent with them, 
he had delivered to them by word of mouth, as ch. 4. 9g. compare 
Iſa. 28. 10» Rom. 15. 15. 2 Pet. 1. 12. 1 Fobhn 2.21. f For my 
part I do not do it with regret, nor account it tedious (as ſome 
Teachers do) as if T were aſhamed of it, that I ſhould do any 
thing ſuperfluous, or not neceſſary, in Writing again the ſame 
things for the matter of them, that 1 had before Preached to pre- 
ſerve you from falling as others have done, v. 18. r Becauſe this 
repetition of the ſame Doftrin, though in another way is pertinent 
to your Edification (yea, as ſome read, it is neceſſary) 'tis greatly 
advantagious for your frability in the Faith, and to caution and 
keep you in ſafety, from the infinuations of falſe Teachers, that 
Inow give you a brief Memorial in Writing of thoſe things, that 
you may be cautioned, and they may not, eſpecially in this day of 
adverſity, ſlip out of your memories, or be loſt. 


2 Beware « of dogs w, beware of evil workers x, 
beware of the conciſion y. | 


u He cautions all, both Othcers and People: and though the 
Original Word doth fignifie to look with mind and eye, yet it is 
alſo frequently rendred to take heed, *Mark 8. 15. & 12. 38. & 12. 
9, 23, 33+ I Cor. 16. 10. 2 Fohn $. 9. w Of thoſe Dogs (with 
the Article emphatically propoſed) a Meraphor borrowed from 
thoſe voracious, fierce, impure Animals, whoſe price was not 
brought into the Lord's houſe, Deut. 23. 18. Prov. 26. 11. 1Iſz. 
66. 3- 2 Pet. 2. 22. to connote the falſe Apoſtles, who endea- 
youred to corrupt the Goſpel with Fudaiſm and Prophaneneſs , 
even Anti-Chriſtianiſm. Compare Pal. 22. 16, 20. Mat. 7. 6. 
& 15. 26. Rev. 22. 15, Some think the Apoſtle may allude unto 
the Proverbial Speech, Take heed of 4 mad Dog, foraſmuch as falſe 
Teachers, being aGed as with a certain madneſs, would bite 
Chrift and his Apoſtles, and tear his Body ; and theſe mad Dogs 
were the more dangerous, in that they did not bark ſo much as 
bite. Hence they ſay, Take heed of 2 dumb Dop, and ftill Watcher. 
There were of ſeveral ſorts, Enemies to the Croſs of Chriſt, Gal. 
5.12, 1 Thef. 2. 14, 15. ſome more ſecret, as Abſalon againft 
Amnon, 2 Sam. 13. 22. pretending contrary to their practice , 
2 King. $. 13. & 12. 22, our Saviour bid his Diſciples beware of 
ſuch, Mar. 10. 17. which he found' to be of this temper, Pſal. 22. 

I6, 20. & 55. 15, though ſome of them were but dumb Dogs, 

Iſa. 56. 10. ſome ſuch there were among the Philippians, who not- 

withſranding their fair pretext, were enemies to the Croſs of 

Chrift, did ſecretly diſparage his true Apoſtle, and tear his Flock. 

See v. 18, of this Chapter, with ch. 1. 15, 16. x Such as pre- 

tended to labour in promoting the Goſpel of Chriſt, but ſecretly 

were doing miſchief among Chriſtians, not ſerving the Glory of 

Chriſt, but their own Bellies, v. 18. 12. being as he elſewhere calls 

them, deceitful Workers, 2 Cor. 11. 13. glorying in the fleſh, 

Gal. 6.13. »y By an elegant alluſion to the name Circumciſion, which 

Rite the Fewsdid glory in, and ſome falſe Teachers of Chriftianity 

after the time of Reformation, did urge as necefary to Salvation;. 

and require it from o9thers, Ads.” 15. 1. Gal. 5. 2, 4+ & 6. 12 

Pau] here in an holy Sarcaſm charges the Philippiajss to take heed of, 

under the contemptible name of the Concifion, or cutting off, inti- 

mating that the exterior part of that typical work, which was done 

n the cutting off the fore-skin, was now from the coming of Chriſt, 

altogether made a meer cutting off the skin condemned by God in 

the Heathens, as a prophane inciiion, Lev. 19. 23. & 21. 5. where 
the LXX uſe the ſame prepoſition in the compound word, the 

Apoſtle here doth in contempt of the thing; which could now 
. dring nothing of profit, nothing of holineſs, nothing of honour to 

ay Chriſtian, could no more avail, or advantage a Man row, than 

1 1t were conferred on a Beaft, being no Seal of the Covenant 

now; but a tickling for that Rite (when aboliſhed by Chriſt) which 

Vas a meer rending of the Church, and in that effe& a cutting off 

from it; Gal. 5. 10, 12. And the Apoſtle doth rhrge times fignant- 

) repeat this word, beware of theſe enemies to Chriſtian purity 

and unity, to: ſhew how neceſſary it was' to. avoid their Infinu- 

Mars, againſt which he is more ſharp in his Epiſtle to the 

tians, 


PHILIPPIANS. 


Chap. [1]. 


4 


LY 


* T1; 
1VULC 


—_ T 
a 


| 3 For we z are tlic circumciſion -, * which wor- 
ſhip God in the ſpirit b, and rejoice in Clirift Jeſts 
and have no confidence in the fieſh d. 

7 In oppoſition to, and confutation of the Cynciſion, he ſpeaks 
of himſelf, and all true Pelicyers in the fellowſhip of the Gotpe!, 
partakers of the ſame Grace and Spirit with him, c>. 1.5, 7. & {4 
2. 1. and faith We, a Uſing a Metonymi?, are the Circymacit 7 "ig? 
now acceptable, and not diſpleaſing to God, 7. e. we are what is 
really fignified by it, and therefore as to the main intent of it are | 
the Circumciſed (it being uſual to put Circumciſion for Circumeiss, a 
AF. 11. 2. ROM. 3. 30s & 4. 12. & 15, 9. Gil. 2. 7, $, 9, 12. "MN 
C9. 4. 11. Tit. 1. 10.) he doth not mean with reſpe& to carnal 
Circumcinon, 7z. e. which isourward in the Eleth, but which is i- 
ward in the Spirit, Rom. 2. 23, 29. made withaut hands by the 
Circumciſion of Chrift, with whom we are buried in Baptiſm, CZ 
2. 11, 12. and being Chriſt's are Abrthimn's ſpiritual Seed; - an 
Heirs of the Promiſe, Gal. 23. 29. b 7. e. Who having cur off all 
carnal confidence of Salvation, in any external Services (which they . - 
of the concition contend for) and do Worſhip God not with carnal, I 
but ſpiritual Worſhip, ſuch as now under the Goſpel he doth re- | 
quire, Foh. 4. 23, 24+ Rom. 1. 9. froma renewed h-art, Fok. 2.8, w, "1 5 


d; 
FL SR 


wr 


1 Per. 2. 15. yielding peculiar adoration to the Lord our God, 
with a tincere mind, and by the aſfiftance of his Spirit in the exer- 
ciſe of Faith and Love, Rom. $. 5, 6, 26, 27. Epi. 3. 15, 17. % 
6. 18. Zeb. 1c. 22. according to the ſame rule he hath preſcribed, 
16. with Rom. 12. 1,2. Gal. 6. 16. inand through Chritt, zl. 
13. 15- c In whom alone (not in Moſes allo as falſe Teachers 
would join them) glorying we truſt for acceptance wich Ged , 
2 Cor. 5.9. Gal, 6. 14. in communion With whom is Zround of re: 
joicing through Chriſt, who is the ſubſtance or body of Meſict 
ſhadows, verſ. g. 4 And not reſt or truft, or place our hope in 
any carnal or external privilege or performance, or any 6ct!er 
beſides Jeſus Chriſtto commend us to God, Gal. 2. 2; 11, 12, 1?- 

4 1 hough | mightalfo have confidence in the ticth e. 
It any other man thinketh that he «hath wEereof he 
might truſt in the fleſh, I more f. TE 

e To prevent any cavil about what he ſaid as if hedid magnifies 
Chrifr, and forbear glorying in thoſe external privileges they did 
ſo much bear themſelves upo?, our of envy to them, for what they 
had; he here argues upon ſuppoſition (as elſewhere to cut. off oc- 
cation from Boaſters, 2 Cor. 11. 12, 18, 21, 22.) that if it were 
lawful, and would turn to any good account to confide in the fleſh; 
he had the ſame ground the Impottors had, and might bnild up 
that in himſelf which he had deftroyed in others, Gal. 2. 19. ft 
Yea, and to compare things by a juft balance, it any of thoſe he ! 
had juſtly taxed, or any other that in conceit mizht hold his head 
higher in that way, he could produce not only as much , but 
much more ground of truſt in thoſe external Rites, &c. as he that 
= mot excellent 3 only that it was in vain, and of no value; *f 
verſe 7: 

5 Circumciſed the eighth day &, of the ſtock 
of Iſrael h, of the tribe of Benjaminz, an He- 
brew of the Hebrews k : as touching the law, a 
Phariſee /. e F 

g Or there was,. or I had the eighth d:y Circumciſion ;, ſoit may by 
a uſual ſupply of the Verb be read (as alſo what follows) without p 
a M-tonymie. He begins with his Birth-privilege, intimating that A 
he was not proſelyted, but born within the pale of the Church, & 
and dedicated to God under the ſeal of the Covenant at the dzy of 
God's appointment, Ger. 17. 12. þ Not ſprung from Erhnick Pa- 
rents, not an Jſhmaelite, or Edomite, but a genuine Jſraelite, Rom. 
LI. 1. 2 Cor. 11. 22. #Z Of that more honeſt diviftion where the 
Temple ſtood, Foſ. 18.28. of the Tribe of Benjamin the Son of be- 
loved Rachel, and his Father's Darling, Gep. 44. 20. Ret. 21. 10s 
under God's ſpecial proteaion, Deut 33. 12, forward in the Re- 
formation, Ezra 1.5. &k& A true deſcendent by Facob, from Abra- Tat 
ham the Father of the faithful, called an #ebrew (Heber joined not in 
building Babel) Gen. 10. 21, 25. & t4. 13. 1 S4m. 4. 6. fignify- 
ing that he was of the truly ancient Lineage which retained the 
Hebrew Tongue, Foh. 8. 33, 29. Aﬀ..22. 2. ROM. 4. 12. 2 Core 
11.22. I By Religion and ftrifter obſervation of the Law, ac- 
cording to the preſcript moſt in vogue, of that Se? which tor 
Learning, knowledge of the Scripture, and reputation for Holi- 
neſs, was the moſt eminent, At. 26. 5. yea, and his Father was 
of this Order before him; Ad. 23. 6. | 

6 Concerning zeal mz, * perſecuting the church »- + aq.2 z; 
touching the righteouſneſs which is inthe law, blame- | 
leſs 0. | Ns f 

m Not lukewarm, but exceeding fervent in the ſtricteſt ob- it 
ſervances of the Phariſaic Order, which was miich in external De- \ | 
votion, Luk. 18. 12. very ſolicitous for Proſelyres, Mat. 23. 15, 25. 
Herein he was above his equals for years, being exceedingly zea- "re 
tous of the Traditions of the Fathers, Gal. 1. 13« (and his zeal 
had been very commendable had it been in a good matter, Gal. 4. 
18.) that which the falſe Apofiles contended much for. » Which he 
ſhewed all manner of ways in his rage againſt the Church of Chriſt, 
(conceived by the Phariſzes to be oppolite to the Law of Meſes, 
AF. 9. 1. & 22. 3, 4« & 26. 9, 10, 11, 12. Gzl. 1. 13.) 0 HE 
riſes higher yet in his perſonal Obedience; he might have been a 
Zealot in his Sect, and yet an Hypocrite, if not ef a ſcandalous 
life ; but it ſeems in the external obſervation of thoſe things which 
the Ceremonial or Moral Law did preſcribe, he was in the eye of 
Man, of a blameleſs converſation, reſembling Zeckariah and Eliza- 
beth, Luk. 1. 6. Men could not tax him, he had behaved himſelf 
ſo conſcientiouſly, A. 23. 1. yet when he had his eyes opened, he 
fo:ind here was no ſuch matter of confidence for him before God, 1 
x Sam. 16.7. 1 Cor. 4 4. This externa) performance he tound 
when enlightned, was far ſhort of internal and pertect obedicuce, 
Rom. 7 7. and therefore he ſaw it neceſſary to chang2 the groan 


9 
Vs 


— 


En 


Gar * 


| 


and foundation of his confidence, all that he betore reitzd on, 
mts' Chriſt alone, I Cor, 2. 11x 2 Cor. 5. 17. - 29% ſeeking to. 


XeuE,Ne 


7 


ol 


* Tels Go 
25, 24. 
08. 2.2. 


P. 


Chap. II. 


Pet. 3s 


receive honour from Men, but that from Chrift only, Fohn 5. 


T4 But what things p were gain to me q, thoſe 1 
counted JoG for Chrilt 

» Havins arzued how he might have had as great a plea for con- 
fdence of his acceptance with God as any, if it would have held from 
the recited particulars, he now ſhews qg how aavantagious {ocver 
they had, in the judgment of others as well as himſelf, been reck- 
oned to be, before he was effettually called, r Yet fince the 
Scales fell off his Eyes that he could diſcern the truth, he was ſo 
far from accounting them profitable, 'that indeed he accounted 
them prejudicial, fo far from an advantage, that they were a 
damage to him, looking for Salvation by Chriit alone, Mat. 21. 
3L. Roi. g. 30%. They were but as pcbles that hid the Pearl ot 
price, Mar. 13. 44. as cyphers to this hgure, that can make any 
thing valuable z therefore by Paul preferr'd to all bctore. 

8 Yea doabtic6 /{; and I account 7 all tihiugs bur loſs, 
w, for * the excellency of the knowledge of Chriit 
feſts my Lord x: for whom I have ſutlered the loſs 
of all things y, and do count them but dung z, that 
I may win Chrilt 2. 

{ He very emphatically in the Greek expreſſeth his ſtronger 
r2[clution upon further deliberation. x As he had reckon d and 
razed when he was firſt wrought upon to enteriam Chritt, ſo 
at preſent he did not alter his judgment , in the Valuation of 
any thing he had rejetted ; » he Ipeaks wuniver fy , what bc 
did but ind-#f-itely, uling the preſent tenſe with a deſcretive Far- 
tice: he diſefi--m'd, not only his Jewiſh privileges and exerciles 
before, but his Chriſtian after Cenverhon, as of any worth to com- 
nend him to God, or as any matter to he reſted on for his juſti- 
cation before Gud, ſhewing he did not alcribe'his being accept- 
ed to eternal Life, unto his own works after he was r-new'd, and 
now had © many years ſ-rved God in his Apoſtolical Mint- 
firy, performed ſuch excellent works, planted ſo many Churches, 
enin'd ſo many foulpto Chrifr, paſs'd through perils for the name 
of Chrit. Fe remarkablv pints in a, not only which he had 
before recite, but to all works as ſuch whatioever, yea and to 
2l whatſocter could be thought on beiides Chrift, w Whatever 
they be in themielvres they are Dut \p1S cr damage, of no worth to 


F. 


> 


% 


m2, as to any d=pendance on them for acceptance with God. x Com- 


par'd with the ſurpaſſing worth and excellency in the fducial ex-- 


perimental (as is plain from what tolows) knowledge of Jeſus 
Chriſt in his Perſon, Olkic=s, and Benefits wherein an eye of faith 
can diſcern tranſcendent myfteries, /{.1. 53-11. Fon 17. 2. I Fohn 
&. 20. 1 Tim. 3- 16. I Pet. 1. 12.. to be adord by the ſincere 
ſervants of ſo excellent a Lord, Mark 5. 20,33. to have an inter- 
eſt in whom, and to enjoy whom every thing beſides is deſpicable. 
y For whom (he adds) he did not only account them loſs, (as v. 7.) 
in his judgment and readineſs to loſe them, but he actually ſu- 
Rained the loſs of them, Ads 20. 23. 1 Cr. 4. 13. 2 C0r, Iles 23, 
©5:. as to any plea for his acceptance, he ſuffered them all to go 
in this caſe, which he could not do fill God of his rich and inſupe- 
rable grace, wrought this reſolution in him, by his holy Spirit, 
then he willingly did it. 2 Yea, and upon a right ſtating of the 
accounts, he reckon'd he was no loſer by the exchange, in that 
he did efteem them in a juſt balance, comparing ſpiritual things 
with ſpiritual, 1 Cor. 2. 13. in point of cruſt, thoſe excellent 
things with an excellent Chriſt, to be no better than dung (as 

e with the Syriac and others tranſlate the word) or Dogs-meat, 
refuſe caft to the Dogs, with others (and might agree with the 
ouſt of thoſe, v. 2. whom he calls Dogs, Mar. 15. 26. Mark 7. 
28.) ihoſe much converſant in Greek Authors do criticize largely 
upon the word, which is acknowledg'd on all hands to import 
things if not loathſom, yet vile, and contemptible, as Chaft, or 
©. and ſo not abſolutely, but in that reſpect, did Paul account all 
things in compariſon of Chriſt, even our good works proceeding 
from an heart ſanttified but in part ; he doth not mean of the ſub- 
ſtance, but quality of the truſt or merit placed in them, not in them- 
felves, but in regard of confidence in them, as to pardon and ac- 
ceptance with God : not in point of ſan@ification, but juſtifica- 
tion, the Apoſtle is here ſpeaking to. £0 to rely upon them would 
not only comparatively, but poſitively be greateſt loſs, as keeping 
from Chriſt, who is the greateſt gain ; for which the loſs of all be- 
{ide was to be ſuſtained. a That he might gain him, and be aſ- 
{ured of an intereſt in him, whom he had above deſcribed in his 
ſtate of humiliation and exaltation, and enjoy communion with 
him, Mat. 11. 2S. Luke 14. 26, 33. 2 Core 4+ 6. 1 Fobn 5.12, of 
whom he would receive more, and from whom he would do more, 
aiming at the making of Chrift himſelf his own, by ſome kind of 
propricty, 1 Core I« 3% 

9 And he tound in him b, not having mine own 
rizhtcouſneſs c, which 1s of the law 4, bur that which 
is through the faith of Chriſt e, the righteouſneſs 
which is of God by faith f. | 

6 A learned interpreter reads it actively, and may find or re- 
cover in him, all my loſſes. But following our own Tranſlation ; 
By winning of Chriſt, the Apoftle doth not only mean the pro- 
felon of the faith of the Goſpel, but his union with Chriſt, and 
participation of him, which in the judgment of the all-ſeeing God, 
will anfwer all damages, when a man comes to ſtand in judgment 
at his Tribunal here or hereafter, Rom. $. 1. this being the only 
courſe can be taken, to be found of him in peace at the laſt, 2 
14. for out of him is to be under the curſe, Gl. 3. 10. 
Eph. 2. 3,12, 13 Tt 1s neceſſary therefore that a man be implant- 
ed into him who in his Prieſtly Office ated in our name towards 
God, Zeb. 5. 1. and 10 7. and that he abide in him, our head, 
Foki 6. 56. and 15. 4. Eph. 5. 30. Col. 2.6, 7. 1 Fob 5 12. and” 
not be found in himſelf. © That we might more fully underftand 
his meaning of berg find 77 Chriſt, he defines it negatively, and 
pontively, by diftinguithing of a rwofoid righteouſne's, ſuppoſing 
ON? NEceHary tO. his acceprance with God, 1, Inherent within him, 
which Bs Galied 133 077, a5 being perſonally perform'd by him. 4Who 


FEMIILIFPIMAMET 


deſcribes it to be in conformity to the law, - and the ri-hteong... 
which the law requires, and thoſe. works of it, which fs me. 
loving God with all his Heart, he ſhall live in them, o_ * 
and 3. 27, 2. and 10.5. He makes no diſtin&tion of any a os 
done by him before or after converſion, but declares he Gr. 
adventure to be found in any perſonal inherent righteouſneſ; of FOX 
ow7.,as to the ſpecial end of his juſtification before God, C1 » , 
11,12. He doth not ſay not having good works, unto which A 
was created in Chriſt Jeſus to walk in them, Fph. 2. 19. bur on 
having mine own rightzouſneſs, he could not truſt to any thing _. 
in him, as to his ſtanding before God, however he was ng «. 
lightned, and atted by a b<tter principle, having a better end 11.4. 
whiles a Phariſee, he could not upon that account have confide-... 
towards God, no more than Noah, who was a Prophet and Boy 
cr of righteouſneis, and in his Zeneration, as to his mhe 
reouſnels, the moſt perfegt and juſt man, or Abraham, Ge, ©: 
6. Rom. 4+ 3. or David, Pjal. 139. 2, and 143. 3. But 2. hs fac. 
upon a righteouſnels without him, which is nor bis own, by any = 
quifition of his, but the righteouſneſs of another, Tir, 4 <, « - 
e viz. of Chrift, without which he would not be found, and {. 
which he would be found, 7Z. e. that which 7s throuph the fone of 


ra} 
DYCaCtie 


1* p57 PE 
&Cilt TIO he 
Of 


Chriſt, having him for his obje&, which he doth elſewhere Oppoſe 
to the deeds of the law, or works of righteouſneſs that he hag 
done, Rom. 3. 28. Gal. 2. 16. Tit. 3.5. as he doth believing yrs 
doing, which deſcribe theſe two ſorts of righteouſneG, in the yr.. 
of which he would be found at his Tryal for juſtification, in th; 
other he would not, ROM. Te 17 and 10. 5, 10, I1, hence, ft Th 
doth by the following exprethon , fignifie more clearly the rioh- 
teouſneſs he ſtays him{(clf upon, and wherein he-would he found at 
God's Tribunal, viz. the fame righteouſneſs which Noah had an 
Eye upon, (typified by the Ark) when by preparing an Ark, he 
became heir of the righteonſnels which 1s by faith, Zeb, 11, 7 
the righteouſneſs which is of God by Faith, not his own, but counted 
unto him for righteouſneſs, as unto - Abraham who believed God 
Rom. 4.4. as unto David, unto whom God imputed rizhteouſnek, 
without works, Ko. 4. 6. This righteouſneſs of God which he 
imputes upon believing, 1s not originally the believers own inhe- 
rent rizhteouſneis, bur the righteouſneſs of another in another 
and theirs only derivatively from him, in whom belicvers ars 
made the righteouſneſs of God, 2 Cor. 5. 21. (who are not ſaid to 
be made the mercy of God) unto them being in Chrift Jeſus, h- is 
made righteoutnels, 1 Cor. 1. 30. yea the righteouſneſs of God, 
Kom. 1. 17. (thele are ſpoken of by the Apoſtle diftinaly, as licre 


ſo elſewhere, Rom. 10. 3. With 9. 31,32.) as not only freely given, 


- 


and*imputed of God, but as being only of value in the judgment of 
God to juſtifie, becauſe performed by him, who is not only Man, bur 
God, As 20. 28. and Rom. 3. 21, 24, 25+ and 10. 3. Not that it (2n 
be meant of the eſſential righteouſneſs of God, for the righteouſe 
by the faith of Chriſt, Rom. 3. 22. or that which conſtitutes them 
righteous in God's tight, upon their receiving of Chriſt and being 
implanted into him, was that obedience which he yield?d unto 
God tor them voluntarily doing and ſuffering his will, Fon 15, 13, 
Rom. 5. 6, 7, 8. Phil. 2. $. 1 1im. 6. 13. Heb. 9. 14. For this 
obedience in their ſtead being fully performed by him who had 
the divine and human ?-atifre, . conjoined in himielf was of inf- 
nite value, ſo that his mediator :1ghteouſneſs being ſome way 
imputed to thoſe who are iound in him, they are found righteous 
before God in his juft judg.:ent, as living Members of Chriſt, 
to whom they are united by the Spirit and Faith, Foh 6. 55. and 
I5. 4. Eph. 5. 30, 22. Col. 1.27. This myſtical head and body 
making but one Chriſt, and thereupon his righteouſneſs is reputed 
theirs (and thereby they are ſet right with God) in ſuch a mea- 
ſure as is meet for it to b2 communicated from Head to Members, 
who partake of the thing imputed, the righteouſneſs which ſatis 
fied the Law, and therefore moſt proper to juſtifie againk it, 
and anſwer the demands of it. And in that it is ſaid to be th? 
righteouſneſs of God by faith, we contider faith as the means where- 
by we come to be interefſed in it. Faith it felf is not. the righte- 
ouſneſs which is «pop, not 77 the believer, Rom. 3. 22. entring, n- 
to judgment with God ; but the righteouſnel(s which belicyers find 
in.-Chrift, which was ordain'd of God to denominate them rizhtc- 
ous. The law (which requires obedience) having its end i 00- 
thing but the righteouſneſs which ſatisfied it, call'd the righteou!- 
neſs of Chrift, Rom. 10. 4. with Tit. 2. 13. 2 Pet. 1. x. Whereil 
the, law is eſtabliſhed, Rom. 3. 21. and its righteouſne(s fulniled, 
Rom. 3.31. and $. 4. inherent graces are not called the righteou!- 
neſs, but our own, Mat. 5. 20. Luke 21. 19. Rom. 10. $. 251.5 
8. Col. 1.4. 1 Per. 1.21. Chrift is fo far righteouſneſs as he 15 t'e 
end of the Law, and that he is in the ſatisfaction it ſelf, not 18 cc- 
miſſion which is an effect of it. 3, 
10 That 1 may know him g, and the power of i 
reſurreQion h, and the fellowſhip of his ſufferias : 
being made conformable to his dearh &. 
g As conſequent upon the former he had by winning of Chritt, 
he doth here inift upon Santtification, which would reſult trom 
Faith's exerting it ſelf, in a further ſaving experimental know- 
ledge of Chriſt, to be found in whom, he undervalued all belid?s 
conformity to Chriſt in holineſs, being to have communion Wit 
him in righteouſneſs, 1 Cor. 1. 30. God having, appointed tiwie 
who are found in Chrift, to be conform'd to his image in holine?1s, 
Rom. $. 29.2Cor. 3. 18. his ſaving knowledg2 is expreis'd el{2whers 
in Scripture by the ſenſes, Fob. 10.4. 2 Cor. 4. 6. 2 Cor. P14. Ephe 
1. 18, 1 Pet. 2.3. Alland only thoſe found in Chriſt, do {o £10W 
him, Fohy. 5. 20. and 6. 46, 69. Zeb. 8. 11, and deitre 10 to £00 
him, c. 1. 9. that they may have a lively ſenſe of his power, com- 
munion and conformity, hþ "the power of his Reſurrection in Us, 
;. e. from the death of the Soul, under a privation of ſpiritual tC, 
and the image of God, untonewneſs of Life by the efectual Work: 
ing of the ſame ſpirit which raiſed Chriſt himſelf from the « £29, 
Rom. 6.4, 10. Eph. 1. 20.and 2. 5, 6. called the firſt Reſ! urrection, 
When the Soul is raiſed from under th2 dominion 07 


Rev. 20 5+ d: el _ 
fin where it lay. #7 By communion of Chrift's ſufferings, 15 not 
meant of bearing a part in the merit of his perſonal ſufferings 


| but of being, partaker of his ſufferings in his M-12215, ” _— 
$4.97) 


Chap, I 


hat 


_ Mm a 1-4 coco aciic..ccicfknqkcqcqk 


Tilt 

I YyY 
} 2. ; 
Hd 12+ 


ts, hen 
thin 
thin 
r 
what 
tion, 
Teac 
of hi! 
IO. 1 
reckc 
to. } 
tent 1 
into « 
wort! 
true { 
from 
his C 
the m 
ing fo 
like a 
9. 24, 
to be 
tal tha 
n Chr 
allotm( 


I 


£5, 


ſiderins 
for mor 
more, 7 
*x Truſt 
difficu] 
be ful] 
filed f 
Chrifti: 
heaven] 
13. and 
Titual h 
®Dlatio 
Vol, 1 


Jap. III PHILIP 


ical Body, whether inward or outward (tho' this chiefly) Mat. 20. 
2», ARS 9. 4» Rom. $.17. 2 Cor. 1. 7. and 4« 10, Ie. Gal. 5. 24. 
(11, 1. 24. 2 Tim. 2. 11, 12. kSome read, whiles made conform- 
able to his death, not only in dying to Sin, Rom. 6. 5,6. but in be- 
ing conformed to his image in ſuffering, Rom. 5. 29. dying daily, 
or always living ready to be delivered to death for Jeſus ſake upon 
his call, Rom. 8. 15. 2 Cor. 4. 11. Such was his Chriftian temper 
thar he could cheertully go through ſufferings by reaſon of ſome 
Communion and Conformity he hath in them with Jeſus Chriſt. 


11 It by any means I might attain unto the reſur- 
reftion of the dead /. 

! Being found in whom after Juſtification and San@ification, he 
doubts not to be glorified (by a figure of a part, reſurre&ion of 
the Body for the whole) though he exprefſeth himſelf as one that 
muſt paſs through dithculties e're he attain not only to a ſpiritual 
Reſurrection from Sin, but a glorious one of the Body from the 
Grave, even ſuch an one as will be an elevation or aſcention of the 
Body united to the Soul, not only exempted from the Grave, but 
exalted into the Air, to be for ever with the Lord, 1 Thefſ. 4. 14, 
17. from whom he was aſſured no death ſhould ſeparate him, Rom. 
$8. 3$, 39. 2 Tim. 4. 8. who lived by faith in expeQation of the 
time and the manner of it, 1 Cor. 15; 14, 19, 30, 32. 1 Pet. 1. 6, 7. 
that he ſhould be then compleatly holy in his meaſure, as Chriſt 
himſelf 1s. 

tim- 12 Not as thongh I had already * attained, either 
2. were already * perfe& mz: but I follow after z, If 
12 that 1 may apprehend 0 that for which p alſo I am ap- 
'  prehended of Chriſt Jeſus 4. 

m By an elegant Anticipation and Corre&ion, left any ſhould 
conclude from what he had written, as if he were now arrived at 
the height he aim'd at in the excellency of the knowledge of Chriſt 
and a full and perfet&t ſtature in that Body, or almoſt at the very 
pitch, he doth here make a modeſt confeſſion of his not attain- 
ment, (whatever falſe Apoſtles might pretend to) 2 Cor. 10. 12. 
and 12.6, 7. but of his earneſt defire and utmoſt endeavour to be 
raisd to the compleat holineſs he was detign'd to in heavenly pla- 
ces in Chriſt Jeſus, Eph. 2.6. » He did purſue with all vigour 
as thoſe labouring in the Apgnoſticks with all his might and main , 
not deſponding of obtaining the Goal, 1 Cor. 9. 26. with 2 Cor. 4. 
8. with groanings and longings afrer utmoft perfettion, 2 Cor. 5. 
4, 6, 7+ 2 Pet. }. 12. as thoſe perfetted in glory, Heb. 12.23. 0 If 
bat or whether that (not as intimating any uncertainty, but his 
more earneſt contending for holineſs in the Chriſtian race) I may 
lay hold on that attainment to be as holy as Men ſhall be at the 
ReſurreQion. þ Even as, or for which (as we render it well ſo, ch, 
4+ 10,) 7. e. For which end, or for this purpoſe to be perfettly 
ſfanified and glorified at the Reſurre&ion. q He was at his et- 
feftual calling laid hold on by Chriſt, being found in whom he was 
a triving after pertedtion. This apprehended is a metaphor bor- 
rowed from thoſe that run in a race, one taking hold of another 
to draw him after to win the prize as well as himſelf. He eyed 
Chriſt, having taken him into his hand, as one that would not 
ſuffer him to be pluck'd out by any oppoſers, Fohn 10. 23, He 
knew that Chrift having brought him nigh unto God 3 and under- 
took to work ſuch a meaſure of holineſs in him, one day would 
compleatly glorifie him, ſv that whatever he paſs'd through, no- 
thing ſhould he loſt, Foky 6. 39. : 

13 Brethren, I count not my felf to have appre- 
.t5. hended 7 : but thrs one thing I do , * forgetting thoſe 
things which are behind r, and reaching unto thoſe 
'” things which are before x. , 


7 He repeats in ſomewhat a different © manner of expreſſion 
what he had written in the former verſe, with a friendly compella- 
tion, gently and kindly to infinuate a caution againft the falſe 
Teachers ſuggeſtion about perfection in this ſtate, from the inſtance 
of himſelf {5 eminently call'd to be an Apoſtle of Chriſt, 1 Cor. 
10. 12, who after all his labours and ſufferings for his fake, did 
reckon, he had not yet arriv'd to the hight of what he was callFd 
, to. /But he would have them to underſtand that he was ſo in- 
: tent upon this one thing, for which he was brought by the Spirit 
into communion with Chrift, as if there were not any thing elle 
worthy of his thoughts (as Pſal. 27. 4. Lnke 1c. 42.) 7 Like a 
true ſpiritual racer, not minding what he had received by grace 
: from him, who had took hold ot him, or how much he had run of 
> his Chriſtian race, reckoning it was much ſhort of the whole, or 
. the main intended by Chrift in taking hold of him. = But ſtrain- 

ing forward, as it were with all his force and skill, cafting himſelf 


} like a dart towards the mark, ſo running that he might obtain, 1 Cor. 
n 9. 24, all and the whole, that was his particular portion for ever, 
<q to be received from God, as the purchaſe of Chriſt, even the to- 
2 tal that God had in and and. by Jeſus Chrift, deſign'd him, and 
ry in Chrift beftow'd upon him, out of his rich grace as his ſpecia! 
e allotment. 

Sy 14 I preſs toward the mark w, for the prize of the 
k ® 3, * high calling of God in Chriſt Jeſus ». 

tk w He did not look back, Luke 9. 62. nor was lazy, but did 
_ follow hard with an eager purſuit (Mar. 11. 12.) after the per- 
_ feftion that was in his Eye, not erring from his main ſcope. Con- 
2 fidering What he had received was but in part, he did fill preſs 
"A or more, upon that Ground that Chriſt had apprehended him for 


ho. more, as if he were ſtretching out his hands to lay hold of it. 
of * Trufting he ſhould through grace, be kept all along, maugre all 

ifficulties in the hand of Chrift, till upon his account, he ſhould 
be fully poſſeſſed of all that was aim'd at; even that which is 

led the Prize, or victorions Palm of our high calling, and the 
Chriftians may well be termed an high calling, confidering their 
- heavenly birth when called, and laid hold of by Chriſt, Fob 1. 
13. and the purchaſed inheritance eternally icitled upon ſuch Tpi- 
ritual high-born- Princes, Eph. 1. 14. Rev. 1. 6. who are by one 
— perfected for ever, #6. 10. 14, Which will appear moſt 

0, Il, 


glorious, when they are raiſed up in Chriſt, who will then give 
out all the Sal;ation he hath called us unto. 


15 Let us therefore as many as be * perfe& y, be * : Cor. 
thus minded z: and if in any thing ye be otherwiſe 14 25+ 
minded 4, God ſhall reveal even this unto you b. 


A learned Man reads it from the Greek to this purpoſe; As 
many therefore as are perfet, ler us think this 3 and if ye think any thing 
otherwiſe, even this alſo, God will or may reveal 10 you, (beſides what 
w2 have attained to) to walk by the ſame rule, 10 think the fame thing : 
Conceiving it not congruous to the ſenſe, or ſyntax, but alien 
from all manner of ſpeaking, to tranllate it imperatively, Let us 
walk by the ſame rule; but following, our own Trantlation. y From 
the inſtance of himſelf imitating Chriſt, in loving condeſcention 
and lowlineſs of mind, ch. 2. 3, 5. worſhipping God in the Spirit, 
and not having confidence in the Fleſh, ch. 3. 3. in the fellowſhip 
of Chriſt's Sufferings, v. 10. preſſing forward to abſolute per- 
fetion, he here doth with himſelf encourage as many Rulers and 
Ruled who were ſettled in the fundamentals of Chriſtianity, and 
who had made progreſs in Holineſs, to mind that main butineſ; of 
Religion, for the prevention of what might enſue upon exaſ pera- 
ting differences; whereupon he ftiles them comparatively perfect in 
the way, not in the heavenly Country, 1 Cor. 13. 19. which Goth 
not diſagree with what he faid before, if we turther diſtinguiſh 
of a Perfetion. 1. Of integrity and ſincerity, which ſome call of 
Parts; as a pertett living Child that hath all the parts of the Pa- 
rent, ſo upon the new birth every real Believer receiving Grace 
for Grace. Fohn 1. 13.16, 2. Of maturity, proficiency, or degrees 
where grown to a full ſtature in Chriſt 3 here relatively and com- 
paratively to others, who are more rude, ignorant and weak Bre- 
thren, fith in regard of their progrels in godlineſs, they are not 
took up with Childiſh things, 1 Cor. 13. 9, 1c, LL. With 1 Cor. 14. 
20, but are grown more adult, and no more Children. 1 Cor. 
2.6. Eph, 4. 13, 14. Heb. 5+ 13, 14. and 6. 1. which he doth elſe- 
where in regard of their experimental knowledge call ſpiritual, 
Gal. 6. 1. who here worſhip God in the Spirit, v. 3. As many as 
are ſincere, of whatſoever ſtature (whether Biſhops, Deacons; or 
private Chriſtians.) 2 He would have to be ſo minded; as he 
himſelf was in renouncing all carnal confidence, acknowledging 
their gradual imperfe&ion, and ftill to be ſtriving and contending, 
to a fuller meaſure of holineſs, till they come to be conſummate 
in Chriſt. a And if any through ignorance of Chrift and them- 
ſelves, converſing with thoſe ready to miſlead them ſhould be of 
any other perſuaſion in ſome things only, conſidering, the differ- 
ent attainments of the ſtrong and weak, and thereupon the va- 
riety of ſentiments, whence would ſpring ſome differences not on- 
ly in opinions but prattices among them (which yet hindred not 
their agreement in what they were attain'd to.) b He hoped 
Chriſt, who had already called, or apprehended thoſe tincere ones 
would in due time reſcue them from {o dangerous an error, 1 Fob 
2. 20, 27. if th2y would attend, upon hint in the uſe of means to 
come to the knowledge of the truah, with faith and prayer, yield- 
ing up themſelves to be taught of him. | 


16 Nevertheleſs whereto we have already attain- 

ed c, let us walk by the ſame rule 4, * let us mind the *Rom. 12. 
ſame thing 6. I6. and 

c However let us, or we ought to walk in obedience to Chriſt, CER 
love fo him and each other, according to the light we have already 
received, truſting he would make known his mind more clearly 
to us. Our uting the light we have well, is the ready way to 
have more: It bchoves us then to live ſuitably to that degree of 
the knowledge of Chrift we have obtain'd, 1 Fok# 2, 3, 4, 5. but 
{till within our lines with regard to the /ame rule. 4 Whether 
in this metaphorical Alluton the Apoſtle do borrow his phraſe 
trom Architeas, Soldiers or Racers, is not much material. Be 
ſure he had an Eye to that ſame rule was well known to them, and 
by which he regulated himſelf, and therefore it was ſuch a Cz- 
non as really had a divine ftamp upon it, that-very C.79m in ex- 
att conformity whereunto, God's Jſ-ael might be ſure of the bet 
peace, Gal. 6. 16. Phil. 4. 7. The unerring word of God exem- 
plified- in the condeſcending love of Chritt, whom he had pro- 
pos'd to their imitation in whom he was found, and the fellowſhip 
of whole ſufferings, he defired to know more pertealy being hea- 
venly minded. in oppoſition to thole whom became Enemies to his 
Crols, v.19, 20. With Gal. 6. 14, 15. The rule of Faith, Love, 
and a Chriſtian life, or heavenly Converſation, Which he doth 
elſewhere call a walking in the Spirit, and according to the ſpirit 
in oppoſition to walking in and after the fldſh, Rom. $. 1. 5; Gat, 
5.16, eJn like manner all of us who are ſpiritual, grown Chri- 
ſtians, ſhould be ſo affetted, being of one accord, one mind, and 
one judgment in imitation of Chrit, ſo far that the adult, or ber- 
ter grown Chriſtians, ſhould not deſpiſe the weak or leſs grown, 
neither ſhould they judge the adult, but in the fundamental 
Articles, thoſe main 7rinciples of the Chriftian inftitution where- 
in we all agree, in that common Salvation towards which we all 
preſs, agreeable to the Analogy of Faith, we ſhould till be per- 
teing holineſs in the fear of God, by the ſame rule of faith, and 
loving and mutual condelſc2ntion, by the unity of our judgments 
in the main butineſs of Religion, the concord of our affettions, 
the concurrence of our ends, our conſent and delight in the fame 
truth 5 we ſhould declare to the Church of God, in our differen- 
ces Chriſt .is not divided, but in the variety of perſwafions in le(- 
ſer matters (not fundamental) the puricy, holineſs and peace of 
the Church is ſtill preſerved, ch. 2. 14. the main principles attain'd 
wherein diffenting parties agree, beins the meaſure "of all other 
Dottrins, to hold nothing incontiftent with the Majefty or trut'1 
of the foundation, to walk circumipectly, and in order, according 
to that whercin 15 an harmony, not to break our rank, or leave 
our ftation contrary to received preſcripts, wherein every 
Chriſtian js fo exerciſe a judgment of diſcerning for himſelt, 


Rom. 14+ 23+ and not impoſe on each other (as that ſort of 
| {5 NJ] Chriſty 


Chap. III, 


ay ws ie one de ——— ogg ee 
- 


Chap. HI. 


Chriſtian-#ws who did compel the Chrifſtian-Gentiles, Gal. 2. 14, 
is, &c.) inperadding no prerer- Evangelical Dodatrin, Gal. 1. 5, 9. 


*1Pet.3.5 


* Hoſ.4.7. 


to live godly, agreeable t0 known Truths, to ſerve God ſoberly 
and prudently (with due moderation) in our places conſonanrly 
to the meature of the Rule God hath diftributed to Us, 2 C7. 10. 
£2. holding the Truths wherein we agree 1n love, unity and 
conſtancy. It being more reaſonable that the many "Truths 
wherein we agree, ſhould cauſe us to join in love which is A 
Chriſtian duty; rather than the few Opinions wherein we dil- 
2srce ſhould cauſe a breach in affection, which 1s an humane in- 
Srmity« 

17 Brethren, be followers together of me f, and 
mark them « which walk ſo, as *. ye have us h tor an 
enſample :. 

{ He doth here not only propound his own fingle example to the 
Brethren at Philippi, as he doth to others elſewhere, L Core 4s 16. 
: ri imitati | :prefſed, viz. as he and others 
implying the hmitation there CxPpr » VR 
were followers of God and Chriſt, 1 Cor. 11. I. Eph. 5. 1. 1 Theff. 
1.6. & 2. 14. but by a word expreſſing joint conſent, he would 
have them to be Fellow-imitators or Fellow-followers of him and 
others in what he had exhorted them to, yea with one heart. 0 
they would be like other Churches (which he had planted, that 
had an-eye upon his example.) g Whom he would have them ac- 
curatcly to obſerve, following their Faith, and conſidering the 
end of their Converſation, Aeb. 13. 7. h Agrecing with his, 
and Timotky's (who joined with him in this Epiſtle) and others, n 
oppoſition to thoſe who were cauſal of diviſion, Rom. 16. 17» I Cor. 
1. 12. even ſuch as he deſcribes, v. 18, 19. i Who did not lord 
it over Cod's heritage, but were enſamples (in Faith, Love and 
Humility ro the Flock, 2 Cor. 1. 24. 1 Tims. 4. 12. Tits 2+ 77 8. 
i Pet. 5+ Je 

18 (For many walk &, of whom I have told you 
often /, and now tell you even weeping m, that they 
are the enemies of the croſs of Chrilt z. 

t He doth as in Parentheſts according to our Bibles, alledge rea- 
ſons for his propoſals. © 1. There were not a few who did at pre- 
fent walk otherwiſe, being eyil workers, verſe 2. not to be imr 
tated or followed, Mar. 7. 22. 23. 1 (Of which as a faithful 
Watchman he had again and again given them warning. # And 
now alſo by this preſent Writing out, pf great compaſhon to their 
immortal Souls, he did repeat it again with tears in his eyes.) 
72 2. They were ſuch who did in the pgexeral (whatever they might 
under a fair ſhew pretend) oppoſe the Goſpel of Chriſt, yea did 
in effe& under the cloak of profeſſion, that which was in a ten- 
dency to evert the true Chriſtian Dottrin, Diſcipline and Holineſs. 
They did go about to mingle the Law and the Goſpel, to join 
Moſes with Chrift for Juſtification, as verſe 4, &c, Gal. 2. 21. 
and ſo undervalue redemption from the curſe, Gal. 3. 13. & 5. 
2, 4. in ſpecial theſe Epicureans (as ſhould ſeem they were by the 
following chara&ter, rather than real Chriſtians) might rightly 
be called Enemies, becauſe they did ſeem by their ſenſuality to 
reſtore the Kingdom to thoſe whom Chrift had on his Croſs open- 
ly ſpoil'd of it, Cl. 2. 15. that they might gratifie the Fews in 
urging the neceſſity of Circumcilion, ſo undermining the virtue 
and. merit of Chriſt's Paſhon, detaming the end of it, as the 
Fews did him in it, and in times of Tryal avoid Perſecution, Gal. 
6. 12, 14. they ſhewed themſelves by interpretation really to be 
Enemies to Chriſt crucified, x Cor. 1. 23, 24+ & 2. 2. 

19 Whoſe end :s deſtruction o, whoſe God 75 their 
belly p, and * whoſe glory 7s in their ſhome q, who 
mind earthly things 7.) 

0 (3.) Their condition will at laſt be miſerable as he had limit- 
ed above, chap. 1. 28. of their being under the diſmal token of 
perdition, their end will be according to their works, 2 Cor. 11. 15. 
However, they may live delicately at preſent, in gratifying their 
ſenſual appetites, be free from perlecution, admired and reſpetted 
by many, and pleaſe themſelves in their preſent courſe, yet their 
fruit and wages at the laft caſt will be dreadful, Kom. 6. 21, 23. 
Gal. 6. $. Rev. 18. $. and 19, 20, 21. þp The great buſineſs of 
theſe is, their ſenſuality, their good eating and drinking, they 
mand the plealing of their carnal appetite, as if it were their God, 
2 Pet. 2. 13, 18. & 2. 3. inftead of our Lord Jeſus Chriſt, really 
they ſerve their own Belly, Rom. 16, 18. love their Pleaſures in- 
deed more than God, 2 7im. 3. 4. q Yea, they boaſt of thoſe 
things whereof they ought to be aſhamed, thinking it reputation 
they have got many to imitate them, Fohn 5. 44. & 12. 43. 
They are puffed up with that which ſhould rather make them to 
bluſh, 1 Cor.5.2, as being attended at laſt with confuſion. r How- 
ever, under the colour of Chriſtianity, they at preſent are taken up 
in the purſuit of their ſenſual and earthly enjoyments. The Greek 
word comprehends the actions and operations of the mind, will 
and afteftions, importing, they did inordinately mind, favour and 
reliſh ſublunary accommodations, Rom. S. 5. the profits, eaſe, 
bounty, pleaſure and glory of this World, preferring them in 
their hearts to the things of Chriſt. 


20 For our converſation is in heaven /, from 
whence alſo we look for the Saviour, the Lord 
Jeſus er. 


f He here adds a further reafon why he would have them to be 
Fellow-followers of him, and ſuch like as he, becauſe though they 
were not already in Heaven, yet their Citizenſhip was there, 
the Privileges of that City did belong to them, who according to 
the Municipal Laws of that Corporation (which cannot loſe its 
Charter or be diſcorporated) whereof they were free Denizens, 
made it their Bufinels ro demean themlelves with minds above the 
Farth, chap. 1. 27. 2 Cor. 4. 18. Fph. 2. 6. Col. 3. 1. accounting 
nothing inconvenient to any one of them, which was for the 
advantage of the whole community, Foka 1. 42+ 2 Cor. 12. 2. 
Heb. 13. 14. they ſet their affections on things above, t And rea- 


PHILIPPIANS 


ſon good, for from thence or from that place, in the 

Heaven, AS 1. Il. 1Cor, 1.7. 1 Theſſon. _—_ 2 Tom, ovens, or 
13. they ftedfaſtly expe@ him who is both Lord and Chr: "y % 
come, not only as their Judge, 2 7im. 4. $, but as their Sens, to 
forting Saviour, Heb. 9. 28. __ 


2: Who ſhall change our vile « body, that it m; 
be faſhioned like unto his glorious body w, accordi, 
to the working whereby he is able even to ſubdue all 
things to himſelf ». 


Who ſhall transform the Body of our Humility, or our low1;. 
nels, 2. e. our low-brought Body, the fingular for the plural, ous 
humble and mean Bodies, which depend upon and are beholden tg 
our eating and drinking, and the aQtions which follow thereupon 
that do humble and lower them, Luke 1. 48. now it may ye 
languiſhing with Pains, Sickneſs and many Infirmities, perhaps 
cooped up in a noiſome Priſon, and it may be an unclean Dungeon 
ſown in diſhonour and weakneſs in the Grave, 1 Cor, 1«, *y 
w That they may be conform'd to Chriſt's incorruptible, impaſi- 
ble and immortal Body, and fo glorious, 1 Cor. 15. 51, 52, 52, in 
their proportion agreeing with the bleſſed Body of our Lord when 
he ſhall appear, 1 Fohn 3. 1,2, 3. And they ſhall ſee him with the 
Eyes of their Bodies made like unto his, Fob 19. 26, 27. C9, 2, d 
not in equality, but only in reſpect of the ſame qualities that his 
Body hath, 1 Cor. 15. 51, 52. 1 Theſſ. 4. 17. a conformity agree- 
able to that of Head and Members, that mark as the Sun is the 
fountain of all that glory, which the Stars have, ſo ſhall our Lorg 
and Saviour Chriſt's glory be of all our glory, Dan. 12. 3. My, 
IG. 27. I Cor. 15. 4O, 4I. 2 Cor. 4e 14» Reve 21. 11, 23, But ye 
muſt not imagine that our Bodies ſhall be raiſed to the ſame height 
and degree of Slory that his is: And therefore in regard of that 
Power and Majefty which is included in the Body of Chrift from 
the hypoſtatical Union, our Bodies will not be conformable, or made 
like to his; but in glory which he obtain'd from his Reſurrettion, 
For the Body of Chrift may be confider'd either, 1. In its nature, 
and ſo there will be an agreement *twixt the Bodies of Saints and 
Chriſt's Body, or, 2. In regard of its ſubſiſtence in the Perſon of the 
Word, and fo there will be none. For it is impoſhble that thz 
Saints ſhould be rais'd up to the ſame Union with the Godhead 
which Chriſt hath. But however their Bodies may be tormented 
here, by unreaſonable Perſecutors, then they ſhall be like to hi; 
glorious Body, x How incredible ſoeyer this may appear to be 
unto carnal Reaſon, As 17. 32. & 26. 8. Yet he who though: 
it no robbery to be equal with God the Father, and therefore cn 
do what he pleaſeth, Luke 18. 27. can by the ſame divine poyer 
whereby he himſelf was raiſed from the Grave, Fohn 5. 21, 26, 2. 
Eph. 1. 19, 20. ſubjett all things to himſelf, deftroy Death and the 
Grave, 1 Cor. 15. 24, 25, 26, 27. Heb. 2. 8, 14. raiſe them upto 
the Throne of his Glory, Mat. 19. 28. and make them like tis 
Angels in Glory. 


CHAP. IV. 

He exhorts them to ſtedfaſtneſs in the Faith, 1. Two Women ani; 
them to Unity, 2, 3» Further, 10 Chriſtian Foy, Moderation, (u- 
etneſs of Mind and other Chriſtian Virtues, as they had learned frin, 
and ſeen in him; with a Promiſe of Bleſſmg, 4—— 9. #e thinks 
them for their liberal Relief, which he accepted not ous of Cover: 
neſs, but they had done their Duty 3 and this more than all the otter 
Churches, and God would recompenſe it, 10 19. A Doxdliy y, 
Salutation, and his Apoſtolical Benediftion, 20 cn=—_—_ 22, 


l Herefore, a my brethren b dearly beloved c 


1.1 


ſo ſtand faſt g in the Lord h, my dearly beloved 7. 


a This Particle connotes that which follows to be inferr'd bj 
way of concluſion from what he had premis'd in the cloſe of t.c 
former Chapter, in oppoſition to the ſhame of the earthly minded, 
concerning the glory of the heavenly minded. 6 Whom he atte- 
ctionately owns to be his Brethren in the common faith, 7ir. 1:4 
c Thoſe who not being enticed by the inſinuations of Seducers did 
adhere to him, had his fincere affeQtions, chap. 2. 12. 4 Whole 
ſafety and felicity every way he moſt heartily deſired, chap. 1. 5. 
& 2. 26. With Rom. 1. 11. 1 Theſ. 3. 6. e Intimating how the. 
Faith and Holineſs did at preſent afford matter of rejoicing to hm, 
chap. 1. 4, 7, 8 with 1 Thefſ. 2. 19, 20. f Who was not amb 
tious of Man's applauſe, but accounted them his honour and glor!, 
the great ornament of his Miniftey, whereby they were converte 
to Chriſt (as elſewhere in Scripture a Crown is taken figuratively, 
Prov. 12. 4. and 14.24. & 16.31. & 17. 6.) 1 Thef, 2. 19. The 
reward which had ſome ſimilitude, with the honour they had who 
were Victorious in a race, chap. 2. 16, 17. as Fam. 1. 12. 171+ 5+ & 
Rev. 2. 10. & 3. 11 g He exhorteth them not barely to ſtand, 
but ſo to ſtand that they did not fall, 1 Cor. 10. 12. 4 Hereupon 
he adds iz the Lord, i.e. Confidering their relation unto CÞriit, 
they would derive power and virtue from him, into whom they 
were implanted, to perſevere conformable to his will, in Chriſtian 
concord, till they were made like to him, chap. 3. 21- With chap. 
I. 27. Fohn 15.4. 7. 1 Cor. 15.58. & 16. 13. Gal. 5+ 7: Eph. Ge 
L1. 14- 7 Jn whom looking upon them (the more to Nx them. 
he pathetically and rhetorically repeats his endearing compellation 
Beloved. 


2 I beſeech Euodias, and I beſecch Syntyche k, that 


chey be of the ſame mind in the Lord /. 

t After his general perſwafive to perſeverance he doth here par- 
ticularly by name with great affe&ionateneſs importune 2 W etl 
who had been very uſeful in that Church tor the furtherance of tic 


Goſpel that they would come to a better underſtanding ma 


Chap, I 


and longed for 4d, * my joy &, and crown f,*2C 


. XX, FF _ £5 * WW OO OP OE TRI OE IE 


no by 


; 
James 5, * 1] 
2 ler 
3. 


Uh 
apPpe 
to al 
and | 
Chu 
and 
in" 
the | 
troul! 
the 0 
tion 7 
moty 
ly In 
mics, 


his ſe} 


Lic y I 


Chap. IV. 


[$1140 19 
0 


the Goſpel upon Paul's Preaching, Ads 16. 13. 1 As he had mo- 
ved all to love, unity, and amity, (2s it hzcame Diſciples of Chriſt) 
ch. 2. 2. So he doth here elpecially move them unto nnanimity 
according to the mind of the Lord, and his way, for the ſake of 
him whoſe Honour is to be prefer'd to all private concerns, Rom. 
15: 5s 

3 And1I intreat tizee alſo, true yoke-ftellow mz, help 
thoſe women which Jaboured with me in the gol- 
pel 7, with Clement alſo o, and with other my fel- 
low-labourers p, * whoſe names are in the book of 
lite 9. 

m He ſubjoins his moſt importunate Requeſt to ſome eminent 
Perfon who did faithfully and fincerely draw in the ſame Yoke of 
Chriſt with him, even ſuch another in that Church at Philipp! 
(whom they well knew from the freedom he uſed when he plant- 
ed the Goſpel amongſt them, or might more diſtinttly know from 
Epaphroditus) as he had repreſented Timothy to be, ch. 2. 20. yome 
both Ancient and Modern would have this to be PauPs own Wite, 
whom he left behind, but ſeeing it doth not appear that when he 
wrote this Epiſtle he had ever ſtaid above two Months at Philipp?, 
he elſewhere reckons himſelf, .amongft the unmarried, 1 Cor. 7. 5» 
and wiſhed thoſe who had the gift of continency to continue fo, 
under the ſharp perſecution of the Church for which he was fre- 
quent in Journeyings, Labours.and Priſons, 2 Core 11. 23+ there 
35 no cogent Argument to evince that he was then married z how- 
ever, he had liberty to have had a Wife, - as well as Peter and 
others, Mat. 19. 29. and 22. 28. with 1 Cor. 9. 5- SOMme con- 
ceive by Yoke-fellow here is meant the lawful Husband of one of 
the forenamed honourable Matrons: Others, one called by that 
proper Name in Greek, but the Epithet annex'd doth not fo well 
ſuit» It may ſuffice to ſay it was an intimate Collegue and iincere 
Companion of Pay?s who was alike affeted with him drawing 
in the ſame Yoke, for the furtherance of the Goſpel, his genuine 
helper. # Whoſe ſpecial Aid, and Advice, Prayer and otherwiſe, 
he ſolicited on the behalf of thoſe pious Women, who aforetime 
(though not by publick Preaching in the Church which he elſe- 
where diſallowed, 1 Cor. 14. 24, 25. 1 Tim. 2, 12. but privately) 
had not only wrought, but earneſtly ftriven together with him, 
by teaching Youth and other Women, good things,” 77t. 2. 3. put- 
ting themſelves in hazard with him, in that dithcult work he 
1ad amongſt them, and induring troubies with him for the pro- 
pagation of the Goſpel, Ch. 1. 27. Ads 16.13. as Phebe and Triſ- 
feilla, and Mary elſewhere, As 19. 2,3, 26. Rom. 16. 2,3- I Tim. 
5. 10. 2 Tim. 4. 19. in Offices proper to their Sex. 0 Clement 
probably was ſome Church-Officer of Roman extra in that Colony 
at Philippi, (whether he, about whoſe order in the Catalogue of 
R'man Biſhops, Hiſtorians diſpute, there 1s no certainty.) p The 
reſt whom he doth not name, only deſcribe by the affiftance they 
gave him in the Holy Work of-the Goſpel, probably were other 
Church-Otficers. q Whoſe names he did in Charity, apprehend 
to be enrollF'd in Heaven, (as our Saviour ſpeaks to the rejoycing 
of his Seventy Diſciples) Lake 10. 20» We are not to think there 
13 any Material Bovk wherein their names were written, but that 
he uſeth it as a borrow'd Speech intimarting his perſuaſion of them 
(as of the Ele@ion of others, 1 Thefſ. 1. 4+ with 1 Pet. 1.2.) that 
their Life was as certainly ſealed up with God, as if their Names 
bad been written in a Book for that purpoſe, looking upon them 
by their Fruit as truly gracious Perſons, whom God had effettually 
called according, to his purpoſe, Rom. 8. 23, 29, 33» Which is a 
Book written, Exod. 22. 32. 1ſa. 4. 3» Exeke 13.9. Diite 12. ls Rev. 
2+ 5. and 13.8. and 20. 12. and 21.27. wherein the Lord knows 
whoare his, 2 Tim. 2. 19. 


4 Rejoice 7 in the Lord alway /, and again I ſay 
Rejoyce tr. 


r He doth here, confidering, the Importance of Chriſtian 
cheerfulneſs, which he had twice before put them upon, Chap. 2. 
18. and 2. x. ſtir up them to true rejoycing, not only by repe- 
tition of the injun&tion, but by extending the duty. / To all 
times, and, t under the conditions. .For though there be Woe 
to the Enemies of Chriſt's Croſs, who laugh at his followers, Luke 
6. 25.*yet they who are really found in him, have evermore ground 
of rejoycing, for all the Benefits of God they have through him, 
and the far more excellent, they do expe to receive upon his 
account, .Fohy 16. 33. 1 Cor. 1.31. 1 Theſſ. 5. 16. 1 Pet. I. 8 


5 Let your modcration « be known unto all men. 


Janes, * The Lord 7s at hand . 


" 


va 4 Exerciling an even temper of mind, in governing the ſenſual 


appetite, with modeſty, patience, and gentlenels, in oppolition 
to all impetuouſneſs, and inordinacy of afteCtions, yea to all excels 
and exorbitances in Words and Actions. w Both in the Eye of the 
Church, and thoſe without, according to our Saviour's Sermon 
and Example, Mat. 5. 15, 39, 40, 41, and 17: 27. not rigoroully 
iniſting upon our own Rights, but with due ſelt-denial putting 
the beft conftrution upon the words and deeds of others, not 
troubling our hearts, Fobn 14. 1. baniſhing that ſolicitude about 
the good things of this life, which he doth in the next Verſe cau- 
tion againſt ſo, 1 Cor. 7+ 29, 30, Z1- x Conſidering the cogent 
motive of the Lord's approach, as Heb. 10. 25. Fames 5. $. not on- 
ly in regard of his Deity, whereby he reigns amongſt his Ene- 
mics, 2s 17. 27. Fer. 23« 29. not in regard of his ſpecial aids te 
his ſervants, Pſ. 14+ 5+ but in regard of his coming to Judgment, and 
ſetting all things right in a juſt diſtribution of Rewards and Pu- 
niſhments to comfort his Children, and confound thoſe that diſobey 
bim, Mat. 18. 24, 25+ Mark 10. 29, 30. Col. 3. 24. and 4+ 1. Heb. 
1". 27. 1 Pet. 3. 3, 9. Rev. 22. 20. But frill we muſt remember 
when we conceive of the Lord's being at handen regard of death 
end Judgment, we muit not take our own but God's meaſures, in 
Waitin;s our appointed time during iis pleaſure, Mat, 24. 36. 
fiUls I. 7. 


Vol. II. 


PAHILIFFT 4s 


other, and the intereſt of Religion amongſt them who received 


y: but 12 every thing 
2 by prayer a and {upplication 6 with thankt- 
glving c, let your requeſts be made known unto 
God 4. 


3 He diflwades not from a ſpiritual care ariſing from a vood 
principle, according, to a right rule, for a good end ; this carc of 
diligence in a due manner within our own {phere is incumber.t on 
us both for Spirituals and Temperals, as c<. 2. 20. with Rem. 12. 11s 
2 Cor. 11.29, and 12. 14. 2Thefſ. 2. 10. 1 Tim. 5. $. 2 7:3. 3 15. 
yct he earneſtly difſwades from, and prohibits all carnal ſolicitude, 
or carking dittruſtful worldly care, which doth divide and as it wer: 
{plit the heart in pieces, that anxious ſolicitude which doth torture 
the mind, with ſuch thoughts as our blefſed Lord will not allow 
lo much as one of them to be predominant in his real Diſciples, 
Mar. 6. 25. becauſe ſuch immoderate dittri&ing care, is on our 
part a diſparagement to our Heavenly Father's good Providence, 
verſe 32. with Pſalm 55. 22. and 127. 1, 2. Mar. 4.18, 19. 1 Peter 
5-7- +} Lhe remedy againſt which he doth here ſubjoin. Put in 
all things, or in every occurring neceſſity, whether proſperous or 
adverſe ; ſacred or civil; publick or private; ſome render it every 
time, in every condition, on every occation. 4 By petition or 
apprecation of good to our ſelves, or others; mercies or blefii::5s 
temporal, ſpiricual and et:rnal. 5 And by a deprecation of Evils 
felt or feared, wrath and judgments deſerved. «© With a orateful 
acknowledgment of mercies receiv'd, benefits conferr'd, and dc- 


! 
- 


6 Be carctal for notiiing 
JF 


God, without thi. 'ngredient of thankful reſentment of his fa- 
rours.) d Our affettionate deſires ſhould bz opened to God, and 
poured forth before him, not that he is 1znorant of us, or our 
wants 1n any circumſtaaces, but that he accounts himſelf glorified 
by our addrefles to him, in ſeeking to be approv'd and affifted of, 
him in every condition. 


7 And the peace of God e which paſſerch all under- 
ſtanding f ſhall keep s your hearts and minds through 
Chriſt Jeſus. 


e He adds as an encouragement to prayer, the peace of God 
who was in Chrift reconciling the World unto himſelf, to that 
upon belicving, and obeying the Goſpel; they who really do ſo are 
reconciled to him, 2 Cor. 3. 19, 20. and at peace with him, Rom- 
5. 1. through Chriſt who leaves and gives peace to his, Fobn 14. 27» 
It is then the peace of God, in that he is th2 Obje&, the Donour, 
the Author of it by his Spirit to thoſe who perſevere in the Com- 
munion of ChriRt, as in ve-ſe 9. have the God of peace with them, 
and a ſenſe thereof in their own ſpirits. f And hy it tranſcends 4 
finite underſtanding? may be anſwered, 1. Inthat he who hath per- 
ceived it, betore he had done ſo, could not ſathciently conceive in 
his own mind what at length it might be, 1 Cor. 2. 9. Hence 2. after 
it is perceiv'd it cannot. be that any one ſhould efteem and expres 
the Power and Virtue of it, according to the Worth and Excellen- 
cy of the matter. Not that the peace ſhould affett the heart, the 
will without the intervention of the underftanding ; fith *tis ſaid 
to keep the heart and mind, and Rev, 2. 7, The white ftone given tO 
believers (whereby this peace ſignified) is of that kind which no 
man knoweth, ſave he that receiveth it; And it is no new thing in 
Scripture to fay that doth exceed all underſtanding, which humane 
underftanding doth not ſo ftridtly conceive as to be able to ex- 
preſs it, as, Eph. 3. 19. So Man's mind doth receive that which 
15 taken into admiration, that it perceives ſomething always to 
remain, which it hath notice of, yet cannot ſo perceive as to ex- 
preſs the whole of it. g Wherefore they who are really interreſſed 
in this peace ſhall be kept as in a Garriſon, 1 Per. 1.5. So their 
whole Souls ſhall be in ſafety, againſt the Afaults of Satan, their 
affections and reaſoning ſhall be ſo kept in order, that through 
Chriſt they ſhall not finally fall. 


3 Finally brethren h, whatſoever things are true z, 
whatſoever things are * honeſt k, whatſoever things 


things are lovely z, whatſoever things are of good re- 
ports: If chere be any virtue p, if there be any praiſe qz 
think on theſe things r. 


þ As to what remains, he doth with the fair compellation of 
Brethren furthermore propole to their ſerious contideration living 
in the neighbourhood of the Genri/-s what h2 doch here, haſtening 
to a conclufion heap up and fold together, eſpecially wharever, i A- 
grees with truth in doctrin, in word and converſation, which ſhew 
candour and fincerity of Conſcience, both with reference to belie- 
vers and to infidels, *ſilm 15. 4+ Eph. 14, 15,25. k Venerab!z and 
grave as becometh the Goſpel, ch. 1. 27. to adorn the Goſpel of God 
our Saviour, Roe 12. 17. and 13+ 12. 7ir. 2. 10. avoiding What 
may argue levity or diſhoneſty in gefture, apparel, words and 
deeds, 2Cvr. $8. 2. I Giving what is due to every one by the law 
of Nature, or Nations, - or the Country, without guile 2nd not 
injuring any one, Kuth 3. 13 Neh. 6. 11. Mar. 22. 21. Rom. 13.7, 
8, Col. 4. 1. 1 Tim. 5. $. Tit. 1. S. and 2.12. m Keeping themlelves 
undefiled in the way, 7ſz!. 119.1. from the pollution ot Sin, 1 Fob 
3- 3- and the blemiſhes of filthy words and deeds, Eph. 4. 29. and 5. 
3,4z5- # Whatſoever may gain the real reſpect of, and be gratetul 
to good Men in an affable deportment acceptable to God, 7:7. 3. 2. 
o Whatſoever is in a tendency to maintain a good Name; hot to 
court vain glory or popular applauſe, G7. 1. 19, but that which 
may be for the honour of Chriſt, and reputation of the Golpel 
among the Gentil.s, Rom. 15. 3. 1 7er. 2. 12. 1 agreement With 
the word of God, otherwiſe we muſt pats throug|1 evil as well as 
go0d report, 1uke 16. 15. 2 Cor. 6. 5. q And upon ſuppotition 
there be really any other commendable practice among ay z 
any praiſe-worthy deportment, 7 Dilig-aziy contder and proie.ute 
thele things. 


Ln od 


Chap, LY. 


liverances vouchſafed (implving that no prayer 1s acceptable to - 


are jult /, whatſoever things are pure m, whatſoever ze 


"Sk! P, IVY. 


* 1 Tim. 
G, 8,9. 


EFRETLIP 


o Tio ihings which ye have both Icarncd /, 
received, and heard 7, and feen 1a me #, do w : 
tho God of peacc ſhali be w 


C and 
e WILN YOu x, 

te recommends to their ſerious prattice not new tings, but 
10/2 weighty Matrers which they had betore learned of lum, Woacn 
preaching among them. © 1 YEA and approv d as worthy to be kopt. 
1 And that all things might be more lively and affecting with an 
incrcaſe of words; he mores with this that his Dvctr Was EX- 
empliticd by his own pradice when amoneft them cas he had hint 
ed before, cþ!p. 3. 17.) expreſſing the ſame-thing by his lite, Which 


Ind} 


he did by his word, 1 7. 4.12. 1 Per. 5. 3- w Whereupon he 
would have them to be doers alſo of the ſame things, 1 I:oſſ. 1. 6. 
& 2.13. Heb. 13. S. Fam. 1.22, xAnd in this prattice you have 
comfort from th2 preſence of the God of peace (45 above, veſc 7.) 
«ho will embrac2 and proſper you; being reconciled to you in 
Chriſt, and at peace with you; fo Rom. 15-5 33+ & 10. 20. 2097. 
12. 11. 1 Theſſ. 54.23, 
10 But I rejovced in the Lord greatly y, that now 
, FA -> . rY —- pg . 
at the laſt your * care of me | hath flouriſhed again, 
wherein ye were allo carefu!, bur ye lack2d oppor- 
4 
LUNILY 2. 


y He ſignifies that he had been much raiſed mn true ſpiritual 
(not carna!) joy, that the Lord had by his ſpirit wrought in them 
ſach enlargedne($ of heart, as did ſhew it felt in their care of him 
for the ſake of Chriſt. + What follows, a learned Man writes, 
may be rendred, That now at laſt, ye could bring t0 maturity the care of 
mes, for whonindeed ye had been careful, bur had nor the ability. | [he 
Apoftle's I'hraſe is borrowed from Trees, which in the Wainter- 
ſeaſon keep their ſap within the Bark, in the Spring and Summer 
grow green, and vield their Fruitz fo was the Pr1//pp14s Care or 
Paul ſuffering, in Chriſt's Cauſe for the ©reck word we trantlate 
Purifhed 10117, Or r2vived is ſometime uſed actively and tranhitively. 
$0 in the LXN, Feb. 17. 24. (with the Apocryphal Writer, Eccl:}. 
1.1S. & 11. 22. & 59.11.) and ſo it may be expounded here, 
not only of reviving, growing green and budding again (which 
3s leſs than the thing is) but of brinzing forth +ruit For their 
care of Paul was in their Heart, but by reaſon of troubles it could 
nor exert it ſelf, or yield fruit, but only in the »eaſon (as Mar. 
21. 24.) which the Apoftle ſoftning his ſpzech, alledgeth as an 
Apology tor them : He doth not ſay *ther: was not any oppor- 
tunity in reſped of himſelf, but a ſeaſonabl-n2!s in reſpect of 
them. They being deftitute of a faculty of bringing forth Fruit, 
verl- 17. (which yet they always nouriſhed in their moſt intimate 
affetions towards him) till the preſent, when at length they had 
a ſeaſonableneſs and an ability given th-m of God, to the perte- 
fting of that Fruit for the Apoſtle. For what we tranſtate wiere7m, 
may. as, chap. 3. 12. be traillated for where (compare the ule of 
the particlc and article, Mar. 18. 4. with 26. 50. Kone 5+ 12+) 


11 Not that I ſpeak in reſpe&t of waut a: for | 
have learned 6 in whatſoever ſtate I am c, * tmerew:ri 
to be content 4. 


a He doth anticipate any conceit they might have, as if he had 
2 mean Soul, and his joy were ſolely for the Fruit of their care 
he had received in the ſupply of his waxt as the ſame word 1s 
elſewhere uſed, Mar. 12. 44. 6 Becauſe he knew better things, 
being inftrutted at an higher rate, he had prattically learned to 
reft tativhed with his own 1ot, 2 Cor. 11. 27. c Accounting God's 
allowance a ſufficiency to him in any condition, 1 T!m. 6. 6, 5. 
4 flow adverie focver his ſtate was, he had attained to tuch equani- 
mity that he could be content with ſuch things as he had, #7-b. 13. 5. 
and chearfully and patiently ſubmit to God's moft wiſe diſpoſal of 
him, knowing his moft righteous and tender-hearted Father, would 
n:ver leave nor forſake him, having already given him greater 
things than any of theſe ſublunary ones he could ſtand in need of, 


$1, 43% \ . 
1\VVite \) + 2 2o 
A. - 


12 1 know. both e how to be abaſed f, and I know 
tow to abound g: every where and in all things I am 
inſtructed þ, both to be fuil, and co be hungry, both 
10 abound z, and to ſuffer necd k. 


e He explains the equality of his mind he had through grace 
attain'd to, in a free ſubmiſhon to God, either in the abſence, or 
affluence of external good things. f In a mean and ignominious 
fate, he had {piritual skill to exerciſe ſuitable graces without 
murmuring, 0r repining when trampled on, 1 Cor. 4. 11. 2 Cor. 
11. 27. having entirely re{igned his Will to the Will of Ged. 

In an higher ftate had in much efteem and well accommodated. 
h Yea in all circumſtances religioutly initiated, and taught, forti- 
fied againit Temptations on all hands. 7 When fairing well, and 
having a large revenue to be temperate, 1 Cor 9.23. humble and 
communicative, 1 Tim. 6. 18, k When hungry and poor, not to 
be diftrefſed, but confident our heavenly Father will provide 
enough in his ſeaſon, Mat. 6. 32. and 7. 11. 2 Core 4+ 5. giving an 
E/ixir at preſent that will turn all into Gold. 


it 
—_— 


+3 1 can do all things through Chriſt which 
{HICA2TReneeh MC m2. 

? Having written of the great things he had learned, that it 
PEROES BY” 


M1:1t not be attribured to his proud conceit, or give occation to ' 
1 Oers vanity to boaſt gas he had recourſe before to the divine 
eh. ro will, and do, chip. 2. 13.) he refts ſolely for power 
+ being, tound in whom, when he ſaith, ke can do all 
f not 10 ungeritand it abſolutely, but reſtridively to the 


4 


' .* 
be en 1 
THNE 4 13 L3T i 


. 
4 


7 
Y 4 oy 
Drop r,p ty Vs % 


' true, Believers and their good Works are as [we=t odours, 4, 
| acceptable, but in Chrift, 1 Per. 2.5. becauie they p! 


PIX#MYE 
+þ, > Precedo TICS 


\ubje& matter he had before mentioned in the Gs 
ntimating be could by the Lord's help uſe well both. pro) 
and adveriity z or all thote things the Lord called him ©, 200 — 
11M upon. Not as the Papiſts urze, that any meer Man tincs 11... 
tail 13 alle in this lite, perfe&ly ro keep the Commardimonr. .. 
God ; bur that he by Faith being united to Chriſt, by the pov. 
o his Spirit dwelling in him, hath in the Lord rightcouind: \.. x 
[trength, .J/2. 45. 24. and thereupon hath a fincere reſp rg .n 
God's Commands, as David had, Tſul. 119.6. So alto had 7 1. 
riah and Elizab-th, Luke 1. 6. in oppolition to Phariſtical ohod:. 
ence; not by any power he had of himſelf, but through « 1... 
ſtrengthening of him, ſv that God would accept of his tr. 
pertormance {though not eyery way perica) of what was i. 
bent on him. 

14 Notwithſtanding », ye have well done 0 (1.4 


1 


* ye did communicate with mine aflliction p. 


. 
PSTLE 
Cris 

+ «a % 


ELEETEC 
4 4 


a Left any ſhould ſuſpedt from what he had fuzzcR<d gf 1; 
contentment, that he was not much affetted with their liboraticy 
but might have done as well without, as with it, and th-v mi; \. 
have ſpared their hounty and labour. 0 He doth prudeniy on. 
mend their Chriſtian commileration (as the phrale is 1:15 17, +21 
and give them to underſtand how acceptable their feaſonabl- (1/4, 
ply was to him. p Who did lo joyfully reſent their kindne(s to 11141 
in that it was well-pleating to God, Rom. 12.15. I hey did {v of 
ctually Sympathize, and take a ſhare in the oppreſſion he ſulty;1 
for the caule of Chriſt, 2 Cor. 1. 7. and remember him in 11;; 
bonds as if it were their own caſe, cb. 13. 1. Kev. 1.9. 


15 Now ye Philippians know alſo g, that in the he. 
211n1ng of the goſpel 7, when I departed from Mace. 
donia /, no * church communicated with me, as con- to (or 
cerning giving and receiving but ye only r. 15.3 


Y 


q He amplifies the preſent favour the Chriſtians at P17; had 
vouchſafed to him, by a thankful recollection of their former i;hc. 
rality. 7 Soon after he had preached and planted the good thins; 
of Salvation amongſt them, chap. 2, 22. As 16. 12, 12, +. 
/ So that comparing their firft benevolence with other Chitrchs, 
when leaving of Macedonia, Atts 18. 5. 2 COr. il. 9. tin thi 
none of the reft of the Churches had for the ſpiritual thinz; 
received of him in his miniſtration, diftributed of their carnal vr 
temporal (though that was their duty beyond diſpute, 1 C5. g. 
7, 11, 13, 14. Gal. 6. 6, 1 Time 5. 17, 18.) but they alone: 
Which might at once commend their Chriſtian libcrality, and 
evince that he in preaching of the Goſpel was not mercenary, no: 
having exatted a free reward from others, but preached the Go- 
{pel treely, 2 Cor. LL. 7, 


16 For even in Theſlalonica ye ſent once and av in 
unto my neceſlity x. 


u They for their parts were moſt commendable in this matte: 
that when he was in Theſſalonica the Mother City (not abore 
twenty five Miles diſtant) their care for his comfortable livclitood 
was more than once manifeſted, he paſſing again and again throus! 
Macedunia, 1 Cor. 16. 5. 2 Cor. 1. 16. Which argues his thanktul 
relentment of the conftant purpoſe of their mind to ſuccour him 
upon all occa(io1s. 


17 Not bzcauſe 1 delire a gift w, but I defire x 

* truit that may abound to your acconat y. * Rem. 

. : . « [% 2), 

m Neither would he have any of them to think, as if his com- 5 
mendation of them were any oblique inlinuation, with delign to 
draw ſomething more from them ; he woulf have them to under- 
ſtand he did not ſeek himſelf, or theirs for his uſe (as elſ>xherc, 
L Cor. 10..33. 2 Cor. 12. 14.) x Bur his great intent was, that 
they themſelves might be of God's Grace have the fruit of thuir c12- 
rity they had ſhewed to him, ch, 1.11. & 4. 1G, » Which in the ha- 
lancing of the accounts (being accepted of God for Chrift's 1:-, 
Prove 19. 17. Mat. 10. 42. & 25+ 34, 25, 49 Will turn to thcir bett 

advantage. | 

18 But TI haveall, andahonnd : Iam full =, having? 

received of Epaphroditus the things which were [141 

from you 4, an odour of a ſweet ſme!}, a * fri 


, 
s 4 
aut T 


; 
ſ vs 

yen-*p*2 Tie? 

till iis 


acceptable, well-plealing to God b. 312 
2 He further teſtifies his Thankfulneſs from the eftctt their 
gratuity had upon him, by three words here which declare t!: 


ww 


he could wiſh, even enough and more, io that he did nor expect 
any thing more, 4 than what he had already received by their 
faithful Meſſenger Fpaphrodirus.. b Which he, further commends 
from its great acceptableneſs to God in alluſion to the ſweet odours 
in the Sacrifices that God himſelf took pleaſure in, Lev. 2. 1, 2» 
& 3. 16. Heb. 13. 16. So that at preſent God himfelf would ac- 
cept through Chriſt, as if it had been ottered to himlelt, 1 72. 
2.5. *Tis true, the Socinians, to leſſen the meritorioutne!s 0t 
Chriſt's Sacrifice of himſelf, which the Apoſtle mentions, Eph 
5. 2. With reſpett to Ge. 8.21. would by this Text corrupe 771; 
But the truth is, it hath nothing like with that, for the benero- 
lence and gratuiry of the Philippians is ſaid by Paul to De 47 Ke r of 
a ſweet ſmell, 4 ſacriſice acceptable, &c. but ir is not faid, that the 
Philippians themſelves did give themſelves an odour of a 1We-r ſme! 
as it 15 ſaid, Chriſt gave himſelf for us an offering 4nd ſecriſice 8 

God, for a ſweet ſmelling ſavour z which being onc? oftc red for all, 
was ſuthcient to take away Sin, /zeb. 10. 10, 12+ Ard thereto! 

their reajoning is fallacious from that parity theV [ugZolt. 


ſame thing, viz. that he was abundantly fatisfhed, having all chat 


12; 
l-aſe Gud 0!) 


- 4 B $4. fp 6d \ 37 Go a A y* 1 \ÞÞ x 

for him, for his ſake and merit; but Chriit becaue he doth a} 
” . . : * 44 x13 hig COINGE, WIANKLLE 

peaſe God himſelf, who ſmells a lavour of 1-10 12 B13 DAcTIReg, Webs 


f 


4} of 1iers unaer tie Law did But fragt, 3 
from his : Chriſt did it by hunſetf, Bolieyers and 02: ir ſervices are 
anly acceptable in him. 


19 But my God c fial} fiippiy all your need d, 
according to Is riches in &iory e, by Chrilt 


Jeſus f- 


e Sec verſ. 3. he ſaith my God, becaiiſs he imputeth and own- 
et! that to be done to himſelf which is done according, to his 
mind unto any of his Embaſſadours, he having received the 
gift from their hand by Paul, d Will in a gracious return to 
PauPs Prayer abundantly anſwer, (yea, above all he could ask 
or think) all their expectations, 7/al. 41. 1, 2, 3- with 2 Cor. 

. 8, 10. e Agreeable to his own fulneſs and rich mercy, 
Fſal. 24+ 1. 1 Cor. 10, 26. Eph. 2. 4. gloriouily, or riches of 
his glory, Eph. 3. 16. and goodneſs, Row. 2. 4+ & 9. 23. fu- 
taining and defending them liberally and powerfully here, to 
his own glory, and taking them hereafter, into everlaſting glory. 
" Through the Mediation , and by virtue of their Communion 
with Chriſt Jeſus. 


20 Now unto God g and our Father bh be glory 2, 
for ever and ever k. Amen /. 


g From thanking of the Philippians, the holy Man paſleth to a 
giving of thanks unto God the firft cauſe, that they might not 
be elated. h He had My God, now Our Father, not only adoring 
him as Maker of all, but as Father of all the faithful as well as 
of Paul being born of him in Chriſt, Foh. 1. 12, 13. through 
whom he takes a Fatherly care of them, Mar. 6. 32. Foh. 20. 17. 
Chriſt ſaith, My Father, as being his only Son by eternal Genera- 


P HILITPPT 4: Chap, 15 


5 . 7A” 
,*, 24 Tye” IF Ev . aaa - . " Los - * = . 
COITH —— CH CINcacy CoOrdinely 5 CEACITING, Others to tne int:r 


< WE 1 X02 T6 an0fk i 
all which in the forecited places (as here) £17 bf er bs ad dog 
connoting ablolate Frernity, 2nd joining patt, prefe ad far | 
. % *% £44%. . SG _ - -/ Sv 8 bt : = 4 L [ j 
Ages together. I This form of Amy atfx'd in 9 2 , do: { 
% 


? 
t 11 The C 
ſignife how his heart did FIC, and rejoveicd io : © 3 wletiod- 
neſs to our Father in Chriſt, 2s rejoycing that he is {9 bleffed 2 f 
God. ; , 


21 Salute every ſaint in Cri 
thren which are with me g2reet 1 


[f Jeſus 2 * I ho 
'OU 77. 

m He doth friendly embrace and wiſh happineſs to all ana every # Y 
ſanetified one who is a Member of Chrift, hath entircly retigned up $3 1-4 
to him, and doth abide in him. # Then fhews, that moſt proba- 
bly his Collegues and Fellow-Labourers in tho krittian Church at | 
Rome (calling fuch elſewhere Brethren, 1 Cvr. 1. 1. Col. I. 1. & =, 
4+7- Philem. 1.7, 20.) ch. le 14. & 2. 25. 1 Cor, 16, 20. do © ML 
likewiſe. | 


22 All the ſaints ſalute you o, chiefly they that are 
of Czſar's houſhold p. 


0 Thereſt of the Chriſtians at Rome do the ſame. p More eſpect- 


ally they of Nero the Emperor's own Family and Court, his Domc- 
ſticks, ch. 1. 13. Tt ſeems there were ſome there truly >ivus and Ji 1, 


Chrittian: but however ſome conceit, there is no real « vidence, 


that Sexecz was of that number. "He being, not a Com tier, but 
a Senatour, who left no real token (we know of) that he was a . 
Chriſtian, 


tion, and he allows Believers to ſay Our Father, as being, his 
Children by Adoption. 7 Unto whom they are obliged to aſcribe 
praiſe, and always to give thanks in the name of our Lord ]e- 
ſus Chriſt, Eph. 5. 20. Ard this indeed hath been their pra- 
ice which ſhould be ours, Rom. 1. 25. & 9.5. & 11. 23, 26, & 
16. 25,27. Eph. 3.21. 1 Tim. 1.17.1 Pet. 4.11. & 5.11.2 Pet. 2. 13, 
Fude Ve 25. Reve 1. 5, &c, Tt intimates their hearts being full 


with the glory of God, their Per.s and Mouths were enlarg'd ac- 


. 


CEE ETC ES IE ITE OT rs IT EE OI OY 


| . . "1 
23 The * grace of our Lord Jeſus Chriſt 4 be with *2om, 
you all -, Amen /. 20, 
q He concludes this (like his other Fpiffles) much as he b-can, { - T4) 
SEC On chap. 1. 2. #r Praying the ſam: grace of the Lord mi_hit | 
abide with them, which he had pray'd to them all, ip. 1. 1. 
/ Not at all doubting, but with full confidence truſting all ſhould 
be firm, as he had prayed. 
EI 
v4 
, obtw;; 
a! 6 ; | 
il, 
- I —————— SIE AN ! 
Wk 
Ns 
4 
; 
C OLO- 
i 
17 ! 
j p 
\q ? 
af «f 
| #4 
js 
by by 5 
F 
"4 4 
L0. 


——_— F. 
[4 
. an >. 
—— ED SID 


0 
mt 


#74 
—_ —— i 


OLOSSIA 


The ARGUMENT. 


OD having a Church planted in the City of Coloſle (by ſome ſince called Chone ) ſituated at the conflux of ;!1 
Rivers Mcander and Lycus, in the Neighbourhood of Laodicea and Hierapolis, ch. 4. 13. in Phrygia of the 

leſſer Aſia, whither at firſt, only by the Preaching of Epaphras one of then who was a Servant of Chriſt and faith! 
Ainiſter, CN. 1. 7. & 4 12. Or by Paul himſelf, who (we learn from Luke that accompanied him) had gone thrown 
Phrygia, As 16. 6. and again over all the Country of Phrygla #n order, AQ 18. 23. having ſtayed for a ſean in 
Aſia, where he wrought Miracles, and was complained of for turning away much People from Idolatry almoſt throurhgy 
all Aſia, As 19. 11, 22, 26. we may leave undetermined. But whoever was God's prime inſtrument in plantins the 
Goſpel here, upon Paul's being advertized by Epaphras, Ch.-t. % & 4. 12. Philem, v. 23. that weeds ſprang up ” 
choak the good ſeed;, as he was careful for the Philippians during his impriſonment, ſo for the Coloſſians, that they 
might not be perverted by thoſe Fudaizing falſe Teachers who mingled Moſes with Chriſt, ſlickling for the neceſſity of 
abrogated Ceremonies to Salvation, Ch. 2. 4, S, &C. varniſhing their Doltrins with notions of vain or abuſed Þ hilofopiy, 
did ſeck to introduce a Superſtitions We orſhip grounded on humane Traditions, Ch. 2.8, 18, GC. but repoſing all their hoxe 
of Salvation in Chriſt alone, perſevere in that Dottrin they had received according to his mind, and in the pratiice of rea! 
holineſs with heavenly affettions, both Perſonally and Relatively in heart and life, craving help of God, unto whom havins 
bleſſed God for the grace wrought in them, he doth recommend them in his own, and Brethrens ſalutations, contrafting P 
it were the matter he had more Fully Written to the Epheſians, that Epiſtle and this, as the Evangelists explanins 


each other. 


CHAP. I. 


The uſual Salutation and Thankſgiving, v——3. For their Faith in 
Chriſt and its Fruits, Epaphras 4 faithful Teacher unto them , 
4 8. His Prayer and Thanks in their behalf, 9. I4. 

Chriſt the Image of God ; all things were created by him, and he is 

Head of the Church, and by his Blood are all things reconcil?d, and this 

in order to their Salvation, 15 —= 22. If they continued in that 

Faith for which be ſuffered, being called 10 publifh this Myſtery among 

he Gentiles, and *9 preſent all men perfet in Chriſt alone, according 

70 the working of God in him, 23 — 29. 


{ AUL 4 an apoſtle of Jeſus Chriſt, by the 
will of God b, and Timotheus our bro- 
ther c. 


a He who of a Perſecutor was became a Preacher, and that 
among the Genriles laid afide his Hebrew Name Saul, and made uſe 
of this, which was more familiar among the Gentiles, viz. Paul, 
Ads 13. 2, 2,9. b One of thoſe extraordinary Perſons immed1- 
ately deputed by the ſpecial Command of our Lord himſelf, with 
Sovereign Authority to Preach the Goſpel, and eftabliſh his Church, 
which is the higheſt charge ever God gave to Men, Mar. 10. 2. 
Luke 6. 13. 1 Cor. 12. 28. Gal. 1. 12. See on Fph. 1. 1. & 4. 11, 
c He joins Timothy as elſewhere Softhenes, 1 Cor. 1, 1. by the Title 
of Brother, as being of the ſame Faith, labouring in one and the 
famework which might be more for their ſatisfattion. 


2 To the ſaints 4 and faithful brethren in Chriſt e, 


* Gal.1 3. which are at Coloſſe f, Grace be * unto you, and 


peace from God our Father, and the Lord Jeſus 
Chriſt g. 

4 See on Phil. 1. 1. e See on Phil. 4.21. f Seethe Arguments. 
s Sce on Fph. 1. 2. and Phil, 1.2. 


2 We give thanks to God þ, and the Father 


, 


of our Lord Jeſus Chriſt ;, praying always for 
you k. 


þ See on Phil. 1. 2. He doth here take in Timothy and others, 
in acknowledging, of God's Grace to them which might expreſs his 
great good will tothem. 7 Deſcribing God to whom they render 
thanks both abſolutely and relatively as the Father of Jeſus Chriſt 
according to both natures. See on 2 Cor. 1. 3. With Eph, I. 3» 
k Always when they did addreſs themſelves to God by Prayer 
making mention of them, as he alſo wrote to the Philippians. See 
ON ch. Is 33 4» 

4. Since we heard of your faith in Chriſt Jeſus, and 
of the love which ye have to all the ſaints m. 

| He inftanceth in principal graces, as the matter of his thank(- 
2iving, beginning, with Faith deſcribed and differenced from the 
fnecial object of it, Chriſt Jeſus, implying not a bare knowledge or 
a'{-nt, but a truft in him alone for Salvation, ſo Rom. 1. 5. under- 


| 


, 


them as he heard it was in the Fpheſians and Philemon, *twas a (0: 
gent motive to engage them in ſolemn thankfulneſs to God, See 
on Eph. 1. 15. compared with Philem. v. 5, m He joins love 0r 
Charity to all the Saints, with Faith to our Saviour, becauſe they 
are in effett inſeparable, there being no real embracing of Chriſt 
without loving of him and all his Members for his ſake, Gz!. 5.6. 
2 Tim. 1. 13. not as if Believers were not to ſhew love or charity 
to others who are of the ſame nature and ſo bear the Image of 
God, for this Chrift requires of them, Mar. 5. 44, 45. but by 
how much the nearer any are brought to God by SanRification, by 
ſo much the more a ſpecial love is to be ſhewed to them, as Fellow- 
citizens of the houſhold of God, and the houſhold of Faith, Ren, 
15. 26, With Gal. 6. 10. Eph. 2. 19. 


5- For the hope which 1s laid up for you in heavens, 
whereof ye heard before in the word of the truth of 
the goſpel o. = 


2 Hope here in this deſcription of it ſeems chiefly by a Mie- 
tonymie to be put for the glorious eternal Salvation hopcd for, 
Rom. $8. 24. Eph. 1. 13. which may alſo include that lively zrace 
whereby we lay hold of eternal Life contained in the Pro- 
miſe, Tit. 1. 22 This indeed is ſet before Believers her: to et 
courage them to fly unto Chrift for refuge, Heb. 6. 18. and re- 
ſerved in the Heavens for them, 1 Pet. 1. 4. Which may well quicken 
in Chriſtian love to all the Members of Chrift in every condition: 
vet not with a mercenary affe&tion, 2 Cor. 5. 14. as if any by 
Offices of Chriſtian love to Brethren could merit what is laid up 
for thoſe who exerciſe Faith, Love and Hope, but that God 0 
his meer grace and undeſerved love is pleaſed to reward {uch 33 
diligently ſeek him , and thereby gives an exa& evidence of hs 
admirable liberality, Heb. 11. 6. which will abundantly weig! 
down thoſe light affliftions they ſuſtain here, 2 Cor. 4. 17. 0 Here- 
upon he puts them in mind of the means whereby they attained 
to this good Hope when they firft embraced the Goſp2l, i7. by 
hearing, Rom. 10. 14. the Word of Truth eminently, 2 Cr. 6.7 
Eph. 1. 13. not only becauſe it is the Word of Jeſus Chriſt, v9 
is the Truth and the Life, Foh. 14. 6. but becauſe thz- Goſp? 
(which is here put appoſitively) is the moſt excellent of all Tru 
ſurpaſſing all in Philoſophy and the Law, Foh. 1. 17. 


6 Which is come unto you, as zt zs in all the world}, 
and * bringeth forth fruirq, as zt derh alſo in yoUs\ 
ſince the day ye heard of it r, and knew the grace 0. 
God in truth /. 


p And paſſing the narrow bounds of F4./24, unto all or moſt ©: 
the regions of the World, v. 23. Mat. 24. 14. Atis 2+. 5+ Rome 1-0 
& 10. 18, So admirable was the progreſs of it Eaſt, Welt, 
North and South, well nizh over the World as it was then known 
to the Greeks and Romans, whereupon the Apoſtle might We: 
write, Chrift was believed on in the World, 1 Tim. 3. 1%. 7”. 
Chrift had ſaid he was the light of the World and by a hgure 6 
part for the whole, would upon his death draw all Men to 1! 
Foh. 12. 22, 46. yet let not th? Rhemitts or any other Roman 


o £ A . q Fd La © + oY 112! 
; think that the promulgation of the Myſteries of the Golp.1 0 


rgnding Lis Saving grace with the conſequent was wrought in Ages when by Tyranay they impoſe for Doctrins the 1 rag nun 


1 ts 
ITE! 


is any proof of th2 verity of the Romiſh Religion in the!. 


[ 


om. 12, f 


h 


unto 
migh 
Goſp, 
about 
lome 
ſhoul, 
times 
0. 2 
aright 
n all 
27. C 
ot tri 
VICE 


Worſh 


Chap. I. 


fians did. q Viz. becoming the Golpel (as the Philippians did, 
ch. 1 27.) and true repentance, Mat. 3. 8. & 13. 23. Foh. 15. 16. 
and real holinels abiding in the hearts and lives of men, and effe&tu- 
ally working in them that believe it, 1. 55.10. Aﬀs 5. 14. & 6. 7. 
& 12. 24. & 16. 17, 19, 20. 1 Thefſ. 2. 13. which the practical 
Religion of the Papiſts generally bears no proportion to, being 
contrary to that. » Which trom the firft receiving of the Goſpel, 
was found growing among the true Converts at Coloſſe, though it 
ſhould ieem falſe Teachers crept in to choke the good fruit with 
their Tares. { However they who had real experience of the 
grace of God , and the excellency of the knowledge of Chriſt, 
Pal. 3+ 8. did hold bringing forth fruit in old Age, Pſa}. 92. 
14. 

7 As ye alſolearned of * Epaphras *, our dear fel- 
low-ſervant #, who is for you a faithful miniſter of 


Chriſt w. 


t To maintain the truth it d/4 much concern them to have a 
Zood opinion of him, who was an eminent inſtrument in commu- 
nicating to them, and therefore Par! doth here very opportunely 
commend Epaphras in oppoſition to thoſe falſe Teachers, who like- 
ly might infinuate ſomewhat to his diſparagement. u The reſpet 
they bare, and relation he ſtood in to them, being dearly beloved 
of him for his Sincerity in promulging the Goſpelz and being 
engaged with them in the ſervice of the ſame Maſter, chap. 4. 7+ 
Rev. 6. 11, 12. w His office which he diſcharged with fidelity and 
atfe&tion unto them. He did with all honeſty and integrity as be- 
came one entruſted by his Maſter Chriſt, diſcharge what was in- 
cumbent on him for their good, c. 4. 13. Foh. 12. 26, 1 Cor. 4» 1, 2+ 
Fph. 4. 12. 1 Tim. 4. 6. Heb. 13. 17. 


Lb Dhilc ts 
F. 23" 


$8 Who alſo declared unto us x your love in the 
ſpirit y. 


x Having with kindneſs and delight reported to Paul and Tims" 
thy, &c:. y» What a ſpiritually fervent atfettion not moved by 
carnal Conſiderations, but inwrought by the Spirit, Gal. 5. 
6. 22. ariting from a renew'd heart, 1 Tim. 1, 5. & 2 Tim. 
I. 7. they had for Chriſt, for the Goſpel, the Apoſtle, and 
all that did love the Lord Jeſus in ſincerity, Gal. 6. 10, 1 Pet. 
22, 23» 

9 For this cauſe we alſo z, fince the day we 
| heard it, do not ceaſe to pray for you a, and to de- 
un.12, fire that ye might be filled with the * knowledge of 

- his will 6, in all wiſdom c, and ſpiritua} under- 
; | Mfanding 4. 
\ | 7 He doth here ſugzeft the Motive mentioned in the precedent 
y | Verſes, viz. their faith and love, verſe 4. 5. and their ſpecial 
u | love, verſe 8. to him, why he and his Brethren had them ſo much 
) ; upon their hearts, ſee on Epkeſ. 1. 15, 16, 17. 4 It ſeems from 
y the time they were refreſh'd with theſe Tidings they did (as he 
v- exhorts the Coleſſhuas here, ch. 4. 2.) always upon all ſolemn 
N, | occations wait upon God for the Coloſſizas ſpiritual proſperity, as 
Paul himſelf did for the Philippians, See on Luke 15. 1. Rom. 12. 12. 
Phil. 1.4, 9. with 1 Theſ{-<.-17. b And the ſubject matter of 


"1 | their inſtant Prayer was that they might attain to a more diſtinet, 
01 | clear and pradtical knowledge of the mind of God in Chrift, and 


a greater meaſure of conformity to what he requires in the Goſ- 
pel, verſe 6. Eph. 5. 15,16, 17. © In (rather than with) all ne- 


(C- ceſſary knowledge of the things of faith and manners according to 
ors | the preſcript of the Goſpel: for ſapience or wiſdom doth properly 
wn | reſpe&the moſt excellent things, and ſuch we learn moſt diftinatly 
Io | and ſatisfactorily from the revealed will of God, which we have 
ly in the Bible; This is that which Pauland other holy men ſpake as 
e * taught of God amongſt the perfe& or grown Chriſtians in oppo- 
£20 ſition both to rhe wiſdom of Man and of the World, 1 Cor. 2. 4,6. 
Jl + | being agreeable to the will of God, Fob 28. 28. Prov. 23. 7. Foh. 
by | 6.40. 1 Theſſ. 4.3. d And with this Chriſtian wiſdom ſome would 
u? | render the following words in ſpiritual prudence, but if we render 
| ol | it underſtanding or intelligence it may be expounded to the ſame 
| ſenſe, for which there may be very good reaſon, for the Phileſo- 
us | pher doth ſometime by the Greek word mean that power or habit 
Ie} * whereby men judge aright of things preſented conducing to hap- 
ore” | pineſs, ſoas upon a due expence of circumſtances to diſcern the 
ned good from the evil, the true from the falſe, and the real from 


by | the apparent; Such a* Gift as Paul prays the Lord would give 


6.7 unto Timothy, 2 Tim. 2. 7. compared with 1 Cor. 1.5. that they 
= might rightly diſtinguiſh *rwixt the ſimplicity and purity of the 
iP Goſpel, and thoſe falle glofſes and colours that falſe Teachers went 


ths, | about to ſophiſticate it with, not be without underſtanding (as 
ſome who follow'd-our Saviour, Mat. 15. 16.) what courſe they 


1dp, ſhould take in the prattice of piety 3 but be able to diſcern the 

yOu, times, 1 Chron. 12. 32. and other circumſtances, Pj]. 39. I. & 

a. 9 23. Eccleſ. 5. 1. Luke $. 18. for the ordering their actions 

'e OC, aright, fo as they may adorn the Dottrin of God our Saviour 

in all things as becomes the Goſpel, Eph. 1. 8. with Phil. 1. 10, 

© 27. Col. 4. 5. Tit. 2. 10. Tgnorance then can be no Mother 

ſt g ot true Devotion , nor the Inventions of Men acceptable Ser- 

he vice to the living God , Whoſe will alone is the rule of his 
ek worſhip. | 

- wel 10 That ye might walk worthy of the Lord e, 


WH Þito all pleating /, being fruitiu! in every good 


hin work g, and encreaſing in the knowledge of 
mart | (30d h. 
Ji tne o ; . y_ * 

arte! © They pray'd for the above-mentioned 2rac:0us habits that | 
nc "12 Colofr.ms might exerciſe them in a courſe of lite as it becomes | 
Ai: WH ve who arc cifettaally called: by the Goſpel, to be the Sons of | 


COL OSSIANS. 


Men; they do not bring forth that genuine fruit which the Coloſ- 


Chap. I, 


God and the Servants of Chriſt 5 ſuitable to the Members of ti 
Body of Chriit. See on Eph. 4. 1. Phil. 1. 27. compared with, 

Rom. 16. 2. 17Theff. 2. 12. & 2 Ihe 1.11. As the word Ged 
alone ordinarily connotes the Father, ſo Lord doth Chrift ; anſwer- 

able to whole wiſdom, holineſs and example, Chriſtians profcihng 

a relation to him, and expetting benefit by his purchaſe ſhould 

behave themſelves, ſo that the P.piſts cannot from this walkin 

worthy of the Lord juſtly infer a merit of condignity, behaving our 

ſelves as Chriſtians being ſo far from any merit, or deſert of ours * 
chat it is a devr, we being indilpenſably obliz'd to do (©, practice 

being the end of our knowledge. f And this end we are to reſpect 

unto all pleaſing, i.e deſigning and endeavouring not in one thins 

only, or in few things, but in all things whatſoever are incumbent 

on us, we may find acceptance with our Lord and Mater, chap. 2+ 

20. 1 Cor. 7. 32-& 10. 31. 1 Theſſ. 2.4: Heb. 12. 28. all ſhould 

be great and generous ſuch as may belt like our Lord, keeping 

themſelves from the defilements of the Age, R-v. 5. 4. « Par- 

ticularly frucifying,” which in the ſenſe may be joined with being 
filled, verſ. 8. being fruitful is a metaphorical Expreſſion borrow'd 
from fruit-bearing Trees unto which godly Men and real Chriftians 
are compared, P/al. 1.3. Foh. 15. $. and every good wort is the 
fruit which theſe plants of the Lord, having his lpirit as the ſeed 
remaining in them, 1 Foh. 3. 9. do brings forth of every ſort 
from a right Principle, 1 Tim. 1. 5. according to rule warranted by 
God, J/. 29. 13. GU. 6. 16. or having a call from him, for his 
glory. See 2 Cor. 9. 8. Phil. 1. 11. 2 Theſſ. 2. 17. Heb. 13, 21. 
þ The Coloſſ.ns were not yet perfe@ in knowledge, and thereforc 
they pray'd that they might go on, and grow in grace and know- 
ledge of God and Chriſt, 2 Pet. 3.15. the beft here knowing but 
n part, 1 Cor. 12. 9. therefore they detired thele Chriſtians as the 
Philippians, ch, 3. 10, 12. and the Epheſizns might come to their 
ſtature, Eph. 4.13. See on the Texts. 


11 Strengthned with all might according to his 
glorious power 7, unto all paticnce &, and long ſut- 
tering with joyfulneſs. 


z Whereunto that they might be enabled it was needtul to 
pray tor a power from above, tor the beſt Chriſtians here below 
are but infirm as well as"imperte&, not able to perform what is 
required of them for doing and ſuffering the will of God till 
enſtrengthened. See on Phil, 4. 13. compared with Rev. 7. 17+ 
we have here great need of all might, ipecial aids of God, to 
diſcharge dithcult duties, to mortity frrong, corruptions, to con- © 
temn worldly allurements, to repulſe frequent temptations, to 
bear manifold croſſes, and to improve daily mercies, derived from 
exceeding great and mighty power. See on Fph. 1. 19, 20. With 
3+ 16. an excellent glorious power, 2 Cor. 4. 7, 13. needful to 
conſummate and compleat as well as begin the work of Grace, 
2 Theſſ. 1. 11. a great reality (and not a metaphor) to tincerc 
Converts and ſound Believers. & Every way tocbear the things 
which come hard upon them or continue long : Philoſophy with all 
its Preſcriptions is ineffettual to form the Soul to true patience 
and contentment under ſufferings, it muſt be given on the behalt 
of Chriſt, Phil. 1.29. to a Believer to ſuffer patiently in tongue 
and heart without a prevailing mixture of patſion, jo that evil: 
do not make an impreſſion upon him, bur he doth poſſeſs his Soul 
with patience to the end. } Which he could not do with a becom- 
ing Chriſtian cheerfulneſs, when ſurcharg'd with a weight ot 
troubles he finds himſelf a finking, if he were not jupported with 
the hands of Heaven which relieve with preltent comfort , and 
raiſe up to believe a future reward, Mat. 5. 12. Acts 5. 41. 
Rom. 5. 3- 1 Core 11e 32. 2 Cote 1:5o Hebe 11. 27, Heb 12. 10, 12- 
Fam. 1. 2, 4 


12 Giving thanks unto the Father mz, which hath 
made us meet z To be partakers of the inheritance of 
the ſaints 1n 11ght o. 


1 He paſſeth from Petitioning, verſe 9. to Thankſgiving, td 
God the Father, upon the confideration of his Grace manifeſted 
in his Son for our Redemption ; in the Epheſi.zs, 1. 3, 4+ he be- 
gan with Ele&tion, here with eftectual vocation he acknowledgeth 
God the Father to be the object and author of what was wrought 
for us by his Son, and in us by his Spirit. » Who hath made us 
capable of Communion with himielf, or ready. and fit, which im- 
plics that by nature we are vnready and unfit ; fo that mcrit can- 
not be. drawn hence; and the Rhemiſts have done ill, contrary to 
the Tranſlation of the Syriac, to trantlate it, made us worthy : 
One Copy hath, who hath call-4 us. The original word in that 
we follow ſeems to be an idiom of the Apoitle (gs the Learned 
think) borrowed from the 4:brew , we find it ultd only in one 
other Text by the Apoſtle, 2 Cor. 3.5, 6. and there he ſhews we 
are inſufficicnt for, and incapable of ſaying good things till God do 
capacitate us by making us accepted in the beloved, Fpi. 1.6. we 
cannot underſtand things of the Spirit of God, nor ate God , 
Foh. 12.39. Rom. S. 5. 1 Cor. 2 14- £1ll God do draw and CapaCi- 
tate us, Fob. 6. 44, 45+ Phil. 2. 13. and form and worl. us by his 
Spirit unto this ſelf ſame thing, Rom. 4. 17. 2 Cor. 5.5. 0 TO 
have a part in the Lot of the purchaled Inheritance w ith them that 
are Santtified, Ads 26. 13. Ejh.1.14. the Apoſtle lcems to al- 
lude to the Land Ca, wherein a portion was athigned to every 
one by Lot for his Inheritance, that being a "Typ? of the reft which 
remaineth to the People of God, 72-6. 4.9. and this 1s here jaid to 
be of the Saints in Light, as allezorically connoting the joy and 
olory of that ſtate and place, in oppuition to the POoWer Ol 
darkneſs, 


13 Who hath delivered us from * tt: power of * tj I 
darkneſs p, and hath tranflated 2 into the kingcom 6 Grote 


F his dear SON 9g. 


— 


WS OY OO 


*Eplt.1.7. 


* 2 COr« 4 
Ls 
REV 3 
I4. 


COLOSSIANS. 


| ſcient with that omniſciency, as if the Manhood did inſtrumentany 


p The power of darkneſs, which fignifies the ſadneſs and deſpair 
vf the damned, Fph. 6. 12. Fude, verſ. $. that they who are 
made meet to walk in the Light as Children of the Light, Eph. 5. 8. 
are eternally freed from. The word which the Apoſtle uſeth to 
expreſs God's delivering, of Believers from the power of.fin and Sa- 
tan is very emphatical, tignifying a gratuitous freedom where a 
Stranger hath delivered him from flavery who did not deſerve It, 
nor then deſire it, Mark 3. 27. Luke 1. 74,79. Eph: 2+ 2, 5, 0+ 
Zeb. 2 14,15. though he was held faſt as in Fetters of Tron. An 
which is more, q He adds another word, intimating he did not 
leave us as Atam was before the Fall , but tranſport us without 
any precedent will of ours, by the etfetual Call of his inſuperable 
Grace, Foh. 6. 44. 1 Theſſc 2. 12. 1 Per. 2. 9. from the dominion 
of Satan, into that of his own Son, the Son of his love, Mat. 3. 

7.& 17.5. Eph. 1.6. amongſt his Subje&s and Servants where 
he Reigns, in his Kingdom of Grace, Mir. 13- 11- where Chriſt 
dwells in the Heart by his Spirit that is united to him by faith, Eph. 
3- 17. & 4+ 12, 13. Heb. 12. 22, 23. and of Glory indeed in our 
Head, verſe 24. With Fph. 2. 6. by right of Adoption, Rom. 8. 17. 
and hope of Salvation through him promiſed by the omnipotent 
and true God, Rom. $8. 24. 1 Theſſe 5. 23, 24+ Tit. 1. 2. who may 
well call it the Kingdom of his dear So, in that he admits none 
into it but by the mediation of his Son, who makes his Subjetts 
willing, 7/1. 110. 3. and received this Government of his Father, 
Mar. 28.18. Luke 22. 29. Eph. 1.6, 7. of whoſe dear Son Paul 
hath more to ſay, to the comfort of his faithful Subjets at Colofs, 


and every where. 


14 *In whomr we ſhave redemption 7 through his 
blood #, ever the forgiveneſs of fins w. 


7 i.e. Tn the Perſon of Chriſt alone God-man, deputed of his 
Father to die for our Salvation, As 4. 12. & 20. 25, ſ AS we 
are in him, made meet, verſe 12. t Wehave eternal deliverance, 
Heb. 9. 12. effeted by a tull ranſom paid, 1 Cor. 6. 20. & 7. 23: 
x Pet. 1. 18, 19. for the freeing us indeed out of a ſtate of fin-and 
miſery, Fokn 8.36. or eternal death the wages of fin, Rom. 6. 23- 
& 16. 20. ſo that by Redemption here is not meant barely laying 
down the price, Luke 2. 33. nor conſu nmate Redemption at the 
laſt, Fph. 1. 14- & 4. 30. but efficacious Redemption. Upon 
the account of Chriſt's offering himſelf an expiatory Sacrifice to 
God, without which is no remiſſion, Heb. g. 22. Rev 5- 9. effu-. 
fion of his Blood by a Synecdoche takes in his humiliation to the 
death of the Croſs, and the pains of the ſecond Death he under- 
went for us, Iſa. 53.5, 6. Aifts 2. 24, Cal. 3. 13. Phil. 2. 8. 
x Plenary remiſhon of offences, is by appoſition to, or follows 
redemption as a neceſſary effet , chap. 2. 13. Luke 1. 77. As 
10. 42+ by a Metonymie transferring the cauſe to the eftett. 


See more on Eph. 1. 7. 


15 Who x is * the image y of the inviſible God z. 
the * firſt-born of every creature 2. 


x Having touch'd on the Benefit of Chriſt's Sacrific* wich im-\ 


plies his humane nature, he doth here riſe higher to r forth #12 
dignity of his Perſon (which made it fatisfattory) both wth re- 
ſpe to his Father and the Creature. As to the former he irvies 
him his Image, y Which is not to be underſtood of an artificial, 
accidental or imperfet Image, as that of the King on his Coin, or 
as Man was the feeble Image of God, Gen. g. 6. 1 Cor, 11.7. ol 
3. 10. for the Apoſtle's arguing Chrift's Dignity to redeem, 
would have no force in it, if Chrift were no more than a meer 
Man ; but of a natural, ſubſtantial and perfe& Image, as Serh was 
the natural Image of his Father Adq:m, of the ſame ſubſtance with 
him, Gen. 5. 3. fo Chriſt the eternal word, the only begetten Son 
of God by nature, Foh. 1. 1,13. See on Phil. 2. 6. very God of 
very God, Fobn 17. 3, 5. doth exaaly reſemble, perfe&ly and 
adequately repreſent his Father, of whoſe Perſon he is the ex- 
preſs Charader, eb. 1. 3. or perfed Tmage; yet more diftinaly 
Chriſt is the Image of God. Either (1) as he is the ſecond Per- 
fon in the blefſed Trinity, from an intrinficat Relation to the Fa- 
ther, in regard of the ſame eſſence with him by eternal Genera- 
tion before the World was made. He heing eternally in the Fa- 
ther, and the Father in him, Fohy 14. 10. ſo he is in reſpett of his 
Father, his efſential Tmage, and in that regard to us as inviſible 
as the Father himſelt; no Creature could be the eternal Image of 
the Creator, as that Son of the only true God, the living God was, 
and is, Mair. 16. 16. Fohn 6. 69. in reſpect of his Father. (2.) 
As he is God-man in whom the fulneſs of the Godhead dwells bo- 
dily, chap. 2. 9g. whereby he doth infinitely exceed and ſurpaſs 
Angels and Wan at firſt, Zeb. 1.5. 6. & 2.5, The Apoſtle in 
this place doth not ſay ſimply Chrift the Tmage of God, but of 
the inviſible God (conſidered perſonally) 7. e. the Father 5 be- 
cauſe the Father cannot be known to us, but in his Son, as in an 
Image, in Which he would repreſent or manitelt himſelf to be 
ſen or known, Fohy 1. 14, 1$. & 14. $, 9. 2 Cor. 4.4. Andin 
this latter reſpe& (which imports the maniteſtative, not efſential 
Image) is Chriſt the Image of his invifible Father uro vs; unto 
whom in all his Offices and works of mediation, the Attributes, 
Aﬀections and Excellencies of God clearly ſhine forth, they being 
otherwiſe incompreheniible and inviſible by a Creature : but 
Chrift is the compleat Tmage of them, in a tranſcendent way 
for as they are in him, they are incommunicable to any meer 
Creature, and theretore he is the Tmage of the viſible God, 
3 In that he makes him viſible unto us. God 1s a pure Spirit, 
without Body, or bodily parts, but yet.was dearly manifeſted in 
Chriſt tabernacling amongſt us, Fohy 1. 14. 1 Tim. 3. 16. he re- 
prelents him to us in his underſtanding and wiſdom, Prov. $. 
I4, 15. almightin2ſs, and eternity, Jſz. g. 6. Fohn 1. 1. & 8. 
£3. permaneacy and unchangeableneſs, Z:b. 1. 11, 12. & 13. 8. 
onmpreience and omniſciency, Fohn 2. 24, 25. & 13. 18. Kev. 
2.13. Not (as the Luth-rans ſtrangely imagine) that Chriſt is 
OM Potent With the oinnipotency of the divine nature, or omni- 


| 


| 


| 


uſe the Attributes of the Godhead ; but ſuch Perfe&io 
really inherent in, and appettaining to the Manhood b po w_ 
of izs union with the Divine Nature in the ſecond Perſon oF. 
Trinity , that though they are vaſtly ſhort of the Ain. 4 
which are eſſential to the Godhead, yet they are the complenres 
Image of them, and ſuch as no meer Creature is cavadle of 
Hence *tis ſaid, Ie beheld his glory, the glory of the only begortes Pom 
of God, who did further repreſent and manifeſt his Father to ay 
in the Works of Creation and Preſervation which he did Fol, 
I. 3. & 5. 19. Heb. 1.195. Hence the Apoſtle in this Verſe Gr. 
ſiders the Dignity of Chriſt, with reſpe& to the Creature 
Adding to the forementioned Intrinſick, an extrinſick Royalt 
which a learned Man would render, P-gotten before all the Cn 
or Born betore every Creature, which is an Zcbrew Phraſe, The 
Greek Scholiaſt, and ſeveral of the Greek Fathers go this way _ 
as if the ineffable Generation of Chrift had any beginning = 
ſome falſly conceited Chrift to be made in time, juſt in the as. 
ning before the World, by whom as an Inſtrument all the ard 
were created ; but the Apoſtle doth not fay he was firſt made, gr 
firſt created ; but verſe 17. was, or did exift before all things belides: 
as Foha Baptiſt ſaid, Je was before me, John 1. 15.) and there- 
fore none of the rank of all them, but of another, viz. equal with 
his Father whoſe Image he was, above all that was made, or cre- 
ated z he was not created at all, though firſt-bory, or firſt beoqe. 
ten, yet not firſt created (being diſtinguiſhed here from created, 


Fl 


'as the cauſe from the effe&) as it refers to him that begets, { i 


may to only begotten, Chriſt being ſo begotten as no other wa 
or could. be, Prov. 8. 22. Mic. 5.2. Heb. 1.5, 6. even from 
Eternity. The word ft may either reſpe& what follows, and 
notes order in* the things ſpoken of, he who is firft being one gf 
them. 1 Cor. 15. 47. Or things going before, in which ſenie it de- 
nies all order or ſeries of things in the ſame kind, as God is firſ; 
before whom none, Jſ/z. 41. 4+ & 43. 11. Rev. 21. 6. fo Chriſt 
may be ſaid to be firft-born, becauſe the only begotten Son of his Fz- 
ther, Fohy 1. 14. ſo the Apoſtle may confider him here, in order 
to eſtabliſh the conſideration of him as Mediator and Head of hi; 
Church, werſe. 18. he ſpeaking before verſe 16. of thoſe thing; 
more generally whoſe Creation are aſſign'd to him in contradiſtir- 
&ion to thoſe of the Church or new creation, verſe 18. Agree- 
able to our Tranſlation, firſt-born of every Creature (note here's a 
difference in the Greek, *twixt firſt-born of, and for, verſe 18. 
we may conſider, 1. Negatively, *Tis not to be underſtood pri 
perly for the firſt in order, ſo as to be one of them in reference to 
whom he is ſaid to be the firſt-b9r7m. But 2. Poſitively, yet figw:- 
tively in a borrowed Speech, ſo primacy and: primogeniture may 
be attributed to him in regard of the Creatures {1 ] By a Meto 
nymie ot the anteceaent for the conſequent, he who hath the Pri- 
vileges of enjoying aud ditpoting of his Father's Goods and Tnheri- 
tance, .iS accounte2 th< firſt-born, Gen. 27. 29. Gal. 4. 1, io i 
Chri® teins Owner, Lord 2nd Prince, of every Creature, 4s ti 
:5 Gud-Mmar:, © 024477 & to humane Nature he hath the prehemi 
nenc* 9f4e wavie Cr:tion and is the chief, Pſul. 2. 7, g. Heb. 1, 
4.5. The Heir arini:gt the 772brews was reckoned the Prince of 
2. -amily (an 5 amongft the Romans the Heir was taken for the 
:.vrd) fo Goa aid he would make David his firft-born, Pſa. $3. 
27. Coi:'pared with Fob 18. 123. Iſa. 14. 30. Fer. 21. 9g. This 
Scvereign Empire which Chrift hath over all the Creation and the 
parts of it his Primogeniture, or that he is firſt-born, ith there 15 
left nothing that is not under him, Zeb. 2. 8. (as Adam in this 
lower World in regard of his dominion the ſtate of Innocency 
might be firſt-born of them created for him) for the Apoſtlz 
brings in the next Verſe as the fundamental Reaſon of this Aﬀer- 
tion. (2) By a conſideration of Chrift in God's eternal Decree 
and purpoſe, as thecommon Womb of him who is God-man, ard 
all Creatures; being fore-ordain'd before the foundation of the 
World, 1 Per. 1.,20, He may be look'd upon as the firi-born 
amongft thoſe who are predeftinated to be conformed to his Image, 
Rom. S. 29.. With Eph. 1. 4, 5. for upon this account he is the 
firſt-born'of the ” 6 ry Creatures or Church (but this as hinted 
before is conſidered more eſpecially, verſe 18.) Zeb. 12. 23s 
therefore the firſt horn of all others: and this may be one reſpec 
in which he is before them, verſe 17. with Prov. 8, 27. yea all of 
them of the old, as well as the new Creation. The $0:1714915 ar? 
ſo daringly bold as to reſtrain this extenſive Expreſſion of eve! 
Creature Or all the Creation to the new Creation of Men or the 
Faithful only, by perverting ſome Texts of Scripture to ſtrain thent 
that way ; when 'tis plain by what follows the Spirit of God mears 
all created Beings, either in the firſt or ſecond World, Chrift be- 
ing the principal caule both of the one and the other ; the Apoſilc 
by the general term every Creature ſimply , without any additz 
ment, doth import all created things, viz. the Heavens and th? 
Earth, with all that is made in them, neither Angels, nor inant 
mate and irrational Creatures are excluded; as in the Apoſtles 
Reaſon immediately following this Expreſſion. 


16 For b by him c were all things created 4 that are 
in heaven, and that are in earth e viſible and inv1ll- 
ble f, whether hey be g thrones, or * dominions, OT +1! 
principalities, or powers h: all things were created :: 
by him z, and for him &. 


b He proves Chriſt to be before, and Lord over every Cres 
ture , more excellent than them all with a Prerogative, oflic! 
Princes want, for none of them is a Creator of his Subject> 
who were not made by him or for him, as all Creatures withou!' 
exception were made by and for Chriſt. The Apoſtle here 1s 35 
cautious, as may be, left by ſpeaking of Chriſt as the ſirſt-born of 
every Creature he ſhould ſeem to put him in the order ol Creatures, 
which he ſhews do depend upon him for their creation and pre!” 
vation, fith he brought them out of nothing into being , 40 
therein doth ſuſtain them. «c /z whom they have their bewy- - 
live and moye, As 17. 28, Some render the particle 77, oy 


Chap, 11" 


ects , 
rho 
1545 
ora 01 
[301 
rec w_ 
21d 


thin &y. But they diſ-claim the Philoſophical Notions about 
Flatonick 1deas, only conceive all to be made in Chrift, as the 
exemplary cauſe whom God had in his eternal Decree ſet up as 
the pattern of all perfettions being his Tmage according to 
which 'twas agreed .in the Council of the Trinity, Man ſhould 
be made, Gen. 1. 26. But the moit do according to our '1ran- 
{lation, render it (as an Hebrew Phraſe) by (being of the ſame 
import with that in the end of the verſe) or through which 15 eCx- 
xethve of the principal efficient , not the inftrumental cauie 3 
for all the things made were produced out of nothing into being 
immediately by him, #2 1. 3, 10. Heb: 1. 8, 10. he might well 
be Lord over them all, who was the firſt Founder of them, Aits 
10. 36. 1 Cor. 8, 6. And whatever the Adverſarics alledge, "tis 
plain in Scripture that by 1s uſed of the principal cauſe, v. 1. 
Rome 11+ 31,36. 1 Cor. I. 1. & 12. 8, 9. 2 COr. Is 1. Gal, 1. Ts 1 Theſſ. 
4. 2. & 2 Theſ. 3. 12. 4 Creation is fimply, univerſally and 
abſolutely attributed to him, for whatever ſubtilities ſome would 
ſuggeſt, all things created by him is equivalent to he created all 
things. Compare 7ſal. 96. 5. & 102. 25. With 1/4. 44+ 24- 
& 48. 13. For. 10. 12. Aﬀs 17. 24+ With Rom. Ll. 30- like 
1 Cor. 1. 9. With 1 Thefſ. 2. 12. e The Apoſile ſpeaks exten- 
fively of all proceeding from not being into being, both gene- 
rally and diftributively agreeable to the common expretſion of 
all things that were made. at the beginning, Ads 4. 24. though 
in Scripture where mention is made of the Creation , Heaven 
and Earth be not always exprelled, Iſa. 40. 26. Mark 10. 6. 
& 13-19. Afts 17.24. Rom. 1. 20. 2 Pet. 3.4. Rev. 4+ 11. but 
here where all things in Heaven and Earth, vitible- and invilt- 
ble are expreſſed, *tis evident that Heaven and Farth-are to- 
gether comprehended. f Theſe two adjuntts of viſible and>/n- 
viſible to divide all Creatures whatſoever , there being nothing 
made that is not one or the other. An Enumeration 1s parti 
cularly made of the latter, which & their excellency (it any) 
might ſeem to be exempted (by thoſe in danger of being be- 
guiled do the worſhipping of Angels) from the ftate and condi- 
tion of being created by Jeſus Chrift, particularly. kh Thoje 
he here names as elſewhere, Rom. 8. 33. Eph. 1. 20, 21. & 3. 
10. & 6. 12.) in the Abſtratts for the Concretes, the Invitble 
Inhabitants of the World, 1 know ſome would have dignities in 
humane policy to be meant, as 7it. 3. I. 2 P-t. 2. 10. Fule Ve 10. 
But *tis more rational with the generality of ancient and modern 
Interpreters, as c. 2. 15. to expound theſe "Titles of Incorporeal 
and Angelical Creatures, whether by an Emphatical Sy7monymte, 
Angels generally by a Metorymie being Minifters of the heavenly 
ftate, or more probably as thould ſeem trom the ſcope of the 
Place by ſuch a ſubdivition of Inviſibies as the Apoſtle did con- 
ceive there was according to the properties wherein thy were 
eminent, and the offices whercunto they were delegated of God, 
which he exprefſeth disjunctively by borrow'd Titles from the 
diftintions of Men in Digaities and Offices here below, as Dukes, 
Farls, Lords, and cther Magiſtrates, the <criptures elſewhere 
intimatinz, diſtinftions among. the ſpiritual *4inifters attending 
the commands of the heavenly Xajeſty-upon his Throne, repre- 
fented ſhadow'd by the Cherubims, G2#. 2. 24, Exod. 25.18, 22. 
1 $M: fe 4o & 2 Sams Go 2+ I Chrome 25. 18. DTſal, $0. lo Iſa. 37» 
16, 35. Ezzk. 1. 13. denominated Arch-Angel and Princes, Fude 
7's 9. Dan. 10. 13, 21, I Theſſ. 4+ 16. Which imply ſome diftin- 
tions and orders among Angelical Beings, but what that is we 
know not (whatever is diſputed in the &»maz Schools from the 
fpurious Denys) and theretore having no ground from Scripture, 
account it no better than curioiity to enquire , and raſhneſs to 
determine. #Z After his enumeration and diftribution of things 
created, the Apoftle doth, for further confirmation, repeat the 
univerſal propotition or aſſumption with a prepolition exprefhive 
of the ſame abſolute efficiency of cauſality that is attributed to 
God the Father-and the Holy Ghoft, all created things being 
made by him, 7. e. by Chriſt, whoſe Works without are undi- 
vided from thoſe of the other Perſons in the Trinity z they 
were all brought out of nothing into being by him, not by 
Angels. k Which is more tully prov'd from his being the final 
(as well as efficient) -cauſ2 of them; they all had their being, in 
reſpea of him or for him, 7. e. his Glory, Rom. 11.36. to mani- 
feſt his divine power and infinite goodneſs, Fokn 5. 17, 23. & 
17. 5. he is their end as well as founder, Kev. 5.12. the Apoſtle 
afirms the ſame of him that is athrmed of the Father, Fob 9. 8. 
Prove 16. 4+ ſa. 44+ 24+ he made them all for his own ſake. 
The: Socinizns in derogation to Chriſt's Divinity would reſtrain, 
limit and narrow what Chriſt ſaith here in ths verſe to the new 
creation or reparation, but againit manifeſt reaſon. _For 1. The 
words creature and creation 1n the foregoing verſe, and this, are 
uſed abſolutely as was before ſuggeſted , and ſo creared here re- 
peated twice and joined with the word all, and therefore to be 
underſtood as elſewhere abſolutely of the 014 or firſt Creation , 
Mark 10. 6. & 13+ 19. & 16. 15, ROM. I. 20, 25, I Cor. 11s 9. 
1 Tim. 4. 2. Heb. 4. 13+ 2 Pet. 3. 4. Rev. 10. 6. for when it is 
uſed of the ſecond creation or reſtoration the reſtrictive addita- 
ment of zew is joined with it, Jfa. 65. 17, 18. 2 Cor.5.17- Gal. 
6. 15. Eph. 2. 15. & 4+ 24+ not left indefinitely as here. 2. In 
parallel places, the making and founding of the old creation is 
alcrib'd to Chriſt, both negatively and potitively, Fon 1. 3. Hebs 
1.3, 10, not one thing is excepted, and therefore ſhould not be 
Teftrained to men. 3. *'Tis moſt evident from the Context the 
Apoſtle doth in this verie diſcourſe of creation, in contradiſtin- 
&ion to what he ſpeaks of afterwards in the 1$th- and 20th 
verſes, when he comes to treat of Chriſt as Head of his Church, 
and we have no reaſon to charge the Apoſtle with a uſeleſs repeti- 
tron further. 4. The Apoſtle's ſignificant enumeration and di- 
ſtin&tion of things created doth evidence that he underſtood the 
ſub), the creation, in the moſt extentive and unlimited confide- 
ration of it. He reckors3 up mate: ialas well as immaterial things, 
and thoſe in Heaven which necded no reſtoration, as well as 
tive on earth which did, being polluted with iin. Thoſe An- 
gels who had not put of the honour of tie tit, did not belong 
0 the New Creation z having not d-velted themiclves of their 
Vol. Jl. 


COLOSSTANS 


original Integrity, they necded not to be inveſted with that 
they never loit; and Devils cannot be' ranked among New 
Creatures, neither can wicked Souls, Mat. 25. 41. Rev. 22. 15. 
neither are there new and old orders of Angels ; © that the do- 
minion Chritt 15 here (as elſewhere) aſflerted as Founder of, is 
the whole, not only new Creation, Rev. 5. 13: 


things conlilt m. 


I To obviate all exceptions to what he had ſaid before, the 
Apoſtle doth expreſly affert (what was implied before) Chriſt's 
pre-exiftence to all the things that were created, and therefore 
that he himſelf was not made, but eternally becotten, and ſo did 
exiſt, and was actually before all Creatures in cauſality, digni- 
ty and time; which proves his eternity (conſonant to other 
>CIIPEUres, Prove 8. 22. Jja. 44. 6+ Mic. 5. 2, fokn 1.1, & 17+ 
5e KV. 1. 3, Ll, 17. & 22. 13.) becauſe before all things there 
was nothing but proper eternity, P/2l; go. 22 m Then follows 
this turther argument of Chriſt's excellency and perfe&tion, that 
he 15 not only the Creator or Founder, but likewiſe the Supporter 
or Upholder of all things whatſoever are created, yea even of 
the moſt excellent and uleful of them, who in him do live and 
move, Acts 17. 23. Heb. 1. 2. he being the conſervant as well 
procreant cauſe of the Heavens and Farth, with all things 
therein, becauſe in reſpe& of God, *tis the ſame action which is 
continued in converſation and providence which was in crea- 
tion, not breaking off the ſame influence which was exerted 
in producing them out of nothing, into being, Iſt. 46+ 4» 
Fobn 5. 19. 


18 And he is the head of the body, the church »* 
who is the beginning o , the firſt-born from the 


dezd p, that - in all things he might have the pre- 
CMINENCE 4. 


2 Having ſpoken of Chrift in reference to the Creatures in 
general, or old Creation, ſhewing how he is the Creator, Pre- 
ſerver and Governor thereot, the Apoſtle doth here ſpeak ot 
him with a ſpecial reference to his Church, or the New-creation, 
whereof he ſhews here (as elſewhere, ſee on Eph. 1. 22, 23- 
with 4. 15. & 5. 23.) that he is the Head and Governour, his 
choſen and called being tne proper Subjects of his ſpecial King- 
dom, the choice Body, unto which he doth more peculiarly 
relate, v. 24. for the guiding and governing of it, he being 
that to it which the Head is to the natural Body, and more eſpe- 
cially in the two former reſpetts. (1) Of «heir union to God 
which Was chiefly deſigned and expreſſed in thoſ> words, who #s 
the begining. 0 1. e. The firſt foundation or principle of their 
union to God, whereupon the firſt corner Stone of the Churches 
happineſs is laid, he being the beginning of the ſecond Creation, 
as of the firſt, Kev. 3.14. And, (2) Of their reſtoration from 
im and death, being brought into that firft deiigned happineſs, 
which is the great intendmeat of that union, as appears from the 
following Expretſion. p The firſt-born from the dead, in a ſpecial 
diftinction from the dead, here too of rhe Creature, v. 15. The 
Apoſtle doth not Tautologize, but what he ſpoke of Chrift 
there with reſpett to the Creature, he doth here ſpeak of him 
with reſpect to his Church, as 1 Cor. 15. 20, 23. Rev. 1. 5. by 
the particle from is implied not only that he was hefore the dead, 
but that he was numbred among the dead in reſyet of that na- 
ture, wherein he was once dead; from which he was demon- 
ſtrated to be fuſt-born; his Reſurrettion with a glorious Body, 
(Phil. 3. 21.) being a kind of new-birth, whereby upon the re- 
union of his holy Soul and Body he was born from th? womb of 
the grave, the Head in regard of the Members : Reſurrection is 
called a Regeneration, Mar. 19. 28. and as there is a gracious 
Reſurrefion of the Soul upon effectual calling in converiion, ſo 
there is a glorious regeneration of the Body in the Reiurrettion, 
Litke 20+ 36+ in contradiſtintion to v. 34. Chriſt is the f»ſt- 
born of thele, in reference to God, As 26. 23. 1 Cor. 15. 20, 23 
as the frſt fruits, or firft Ear of this bleſſed Harveſt, that was 
carried up into the Santtuary, and offered in due ſeaſon to the 
eternal Father, until the xeft do become ripe; and in reference 
to the dead, 7. e. in the Lord, 1-Cor. 15. 18. 1 Theſſ, 4. 14+ 
Reve 14+ 13. from whom he fſt roſe in regard of time fully and 
perfectly; and of whom , in regard of dignity and dominion, 
Pſal. $9. 27. Gal. 4. 1. he is chief, and Lord, (hath the pre- 
eminence as it follows) and is firft in regard of C:uſaliry of thoſe 
dead in him, ſtanding in relation to him their Head, Rom. 11. 
15. With 1 Cor. 15, 20. Who ſhall be perfealy raiſed by virtue 
of his Reſurreftion. And however it be ſaid both in the Old and 
New Teftament, ſome were before raiſed: yet he was the 
cauſe of his own Reſurre&ion, as none others were, or can be. 
He properly roſe, and that by his own power, Pſal.1 10. 7. 
Fokn 10. 17, 18. others were and will be raiſed by his: in regard 
of the ſort and kind of Reſurrection, he it was firft which was 
not imperfe& as others, or Zazarzs who was raiſed , but to 
return to his former ſtate of Mortality ; but perfed&, Chriſt 
roſe to die no more, Kom. 6. 9. Heb. 9. 28, he was the firſt 
that roſe as a publick Perſon, Head 'of his Church, the ſe- 
cond Adam, repreſenting all his Members, 1 Cor. 15. 21, 22. 
who are raiſed together with him ſpiritually, virtually and 
repreſentatively, Eph. 2. 6. 1 Pet. 3. 21. thoſe attually rat- 
ſed before in another ſort were like {ingular kars of Corn , 
by occaſion more timely gathered for a ſpzcial inftance of Di- 
vine Power, but Chrift was the firſt that ever roſe in the na- 
ture and quality of the firſt fruits duly gathered, to ſanQity 
and conſecrate the whole Harveſt of the dead in him, 
who ſhall one day be raiſed to a conformity unto him , Y+::. 
3« 21. The JSocinians from this Metaphorical Expreſſion ot 
Chriſt's being the firfl-bory from the dad , and fetching 
in that Taiſage VACIC it }S iro! arg iy Sor , this 137 


iid 3 
[5 O] 


”. 


E3%S 


Chap. I, 


17 * And he is before all things 1, and by him all ; 1 Cor-%» 


Joi. 1. 3+ iS; | #4 


+ Or, &- 
mig alls 


A 
"0 |; 
W571 ; 
Lo ; 
"| 
- 
it, 
f 
£ 
[$$ 
TR 1- 
# #}:(s 
i Ok 
{ id, 
*t 
: 
[ 
F + 
oh 
«; 
\ 
'F) 
"mT 4 ; 
j, 
Ts + Ti 
#y 454 ' 
£04 4 
| WE 5 a4t 
" 30 
ne8Þ4 
ah# | 
»f it 
: rr 
Fi 
b. 
- 


king peace, Of his croſs w * by him - to reconcile all things unto 
* 2Cor-5. himſelfy; by him z, 7 ſay, whether they be things in 


COLOS 


32. do oppole Chrift's natural 


bcaotten thee, Atts 13. 
and eternal Son-ſhip, but very inconiequently, and ablurdiy ; for 
\1.] Chriſt was properly the Son of God before his Reſurrettion 
from the dead, he did not then receive that relation by it, as 
other Texts clearly prove, Pſalm 2. 7. Prove 30. 4. Mic. 5+ 2- 
Fþ7 1. 1» & 17. 5. {2,) If his Reſurre@ion had been a beget- 
ting of him, then would he have begotten himſelf, ſo been Fa- 


F 1c - £ 


ther and Son to himſelf becauſe he raiſed himſelf. As to that 
other Text they alledge, Things are ſometimes ſaid to be done 
then, when only maniteſted and declared to be done: Then was 
Chriſt the firſt of all the dead that was born, and raiſed agam in 
incorruption declared to be the Son of God with power, Kom. I. 
4. according to the prophecy, q.d. This day I have manitefted 
thee by railing of thy ſelf to be my natural Son, whom TI begat 
from everlaſting. Be ſure ke hath the Primacy and Prehemi- 
nence, as -it follows. q Which ſome expound as the exd and in- 
tention of Chriſt the agent that he might: obtain the Primacy, 
Rom. 14. 9. 2 Cors 5. 15. or hold the firft place in all things; 
whether more generally according with the common ſcope of 
the Apoſtle in the precedent Verles, compared with c<. 2. 10. 
and Fokn 5. 25, 29, Eph. 1. 22. or more ſpecially among his bre- 
thren and all the Members of his myſtical Body, - Rom. 8. 29» 
with 2 Cor. 5. 17, 18. (but this is not material, becauſe all things 
are brought under his Empire) others becauſe the Primacy doth 
belong to him by undoubted right ; and that he being head of 
his Church did ultimately deſign to fave it and fo to glorifie his 
Father, do expound it rather as the evext, conſequent, and con- 
clufion from the antecedents which is the end of the Work, ſo as 
that, or in ſuch a ſort, as he afual!y is declared to be the firft, 
or he holds the Primacy in the void or new Creation. Accord- 
ing to the agreement with {1s Father, he is ſuch an one as not 
only hath all manner of Priviledges, that any in this or the 
other World do, or may be ſuppos'd to excel in; but alſo with 
a preheminence, a Primacy in all, above what any one hath in 
any thing he may glory of. 


19 For it pleaſed the Fither r, that in him ſhould 
all fulieſs / dwell e. 


A learned Man reads it, For at! fulneſs pleaſed to dwell in him. 
Others, he liked or approved, that all fulneſs ſhould dwell in 
him, bringing inftances for that conftruttion of the word 7r 
pleaſed, » "T15 true, the Word Father is not in the Greek Text, 
nor in the Oriental Verſions, but is” well underftood and ſup- 
ply'd from the Context , verſe x2. where the Apoſtle gives 
"Thanks to the Father, and then deſcribes his dear Son in the fol- 
lowing Verfes, and here in this adds a cogent reaſon why he 
ſhould be the head of his Church, fith the Son of his Love, (in 
whom he is well . pleas'd, Mat. 3. 17.) is he alone in whom he 
likes to dwell with all fulneſs, or all fulneſs doth will to abide. 
C Here js another al! and a fulneſs added to that all: An all 
for parts, a fulneſs for degrees; a tranſcendency in all, above 
-1l. *Tis of the Father's good pleaſure that Chrift, not here 
conſidered ſimply, as the Son of God ; but reſpettively, as head 
of his Church and Mediatour, ſhould be the ſubject of this all 
fulnzſs which is not direaly that of his Body myſtical, Eph. 1. 
22. But (1.) originally the fulneſs of the Godhead, whereby 
he hath an all-ſufficiency of perfettions for his mediatory Office 
upon the myſtical union which none other hath or can have, 
ch. 2. 9. Fohn' 1. 14. (of which more diſtintly in the next 
Chapter) (Z.) Derivatively a fulneſs of the Spirit and habitual 
Grace, Luke 1. 30, with Fohn 2. 16, 33. and 3. 34. holineſs, 
wiſdom, power, perfectly eo finiſh-his Work, Fohn 17. 4. and 
19. 20. and other excellencies for the recongqling (as it fol- 
lows) and actual influencing of his Rody, Pſalm 130. 7, 8. Mat. 
2$. 18. Fon 5. 20. Rom. I. 4+ I Cor. 5. 4. With 2 Cor. 12. 9. 
Eph. 1. 20, 21. Heb. 7, 25, 26. Revage 6, 12. t And this all- 
fulneſs doth not only Lodge in him for a time, but reſideth and 
abides in him ; tis not him as the Divine Glory was a while 
in the Tabernacle of Msſes, and the Temple of Solomon, but 
dwells conftantly in him, not as a private Perſon, bur an univer- 
ſal Principlez as head of the Body (as well as reconciler) to fill 
up the emptineſs of Man with the abundant grace that. perpetu- 
ally. refideth in him. 


20 And # | having made peace through the bloud 


earth or things in heaven 4. 


2 Some from the Greek would (not have that clauſe we read in 
a Parentheſis to come next the copulative and, but) have it 
and by himſelf be ſhould reconcile unto himſelf (in or to himſelf) all 
things (having made or obtain'd peace, through the bloud of 
his Croſs) I fay, &c. But the reading of that ſentence in the 
Parenthefis, after, or before the reconciliation of all things as we 
do becaule of the next following diftribution, is not very mate- 
rial as to the ſenſe of the thing, redemption, verſe 12. or rather 
the manner or means of reconciliation unto God by Chrift in 
whom the fulneſs of all divine and humane perfettions was ſeated 
for the bringing of Heaven and Earth together. w God the Fa- 
ther for bringing enemies nigh unto himſelf in the Kingdom of 
his dear Son, ver. 13, 19, 21. was in him, 2 Cor. 5. 18, 19. 
who having took on him the ſeed of Abraham, Heb. 2. 14. and 
hecauſe withoat ſhedding of bloud there could be no remiſſion, 
or being brought nigh, Eph. 2. 13. Heb. 4. 12, 22, 23. accord- 
ing to his Father's ordination and agreement with him for the 
expiation of fin, became obedient unto death, that curſed death 
of the Croſs, J/7. 53. 5. Gal. 3. 13. Phil. 2. 8. and by that blou- 
- ly acrifice of himſelf, there once perfe&ted, Zeb. 9. 14. & 10. 
10, 14. obtained peace, That by a figure being put to expreſs 
his moſt perfe&t merit, as being the finiſhing of his obedience 
and paſſion, Rom. 3. 35. and 5. 10. ch. 2.14. Eph. 2. 16. Heb. 


3- 12, x Which alone could fatishe his offended Father's de- 


STANS. Ch 
mands; Angels could not ſhed blood which was nico .. 
make peace and reconcile Enemies; And thouzh ſome Falie ", 
poſtles might ſeduce to the worſhipping of them, their oheq; 
ence could not be meritorious. y God defignins an 2+... 
ment to himſelf. 7. e. God the Father (and by conſeatiene s. 
the whole Trinity) did it by Chriſt in whom all fulneſs dy: - 
ling, there was a proper fitneſs upon his Father's c21l Iſa _ 
I, 4, 6. with Heb. Ch. g. for ſo perfett a work as to ta. 
the enmity of thoſe alienated from God, and to bring them Br 
favour again. The great enquiry is about the extent of this 
Reconciliation, becauſe the Apoſtle mentions all thi;;rs (rather 
than all Perſons) and then having emphatically repeated by tim 
2 Viz. Chriſt as God-man, and none other, As 4, 12, Tt 
adds a diſtribution of all things, whether they be things in 32-11. 
or things in Heaven? To aniwer which all things may be unde! 
ſtood either, (1.) Reſtrigively to the Subjett, the Univerſal 
Church, of which Chriſt is the Head; fo he doth not men 1 
things whatſoever illimitedly, but with reſpet& to the enhicc 
Matter, as v. 21. All things which being alienated from Gyg. 
are reconciled to him, 7. e. whatſoever things are reconcil.a; 
are by him reconciled, all relating to the Subje& Matter of 16. 
conciliation (as all made to creation, v. 16.) all the real Shi-4; 
of his Kingdom, whether gathered and gone to Heaven b«jy;. 
in hope, of the Meſſiah to come, or now, and hereafter ſhall j.. 
gathered, Ads 15, 11. Rom. 3. 25. Eph. 3. 15. Heb. 11, 2%, 


40. and 12. 23, yet this doth not altogether ſatisfie ſome , þy 
reaſon of the ſublimity of the Apoſtle's word in the diftriny;. 
on, and ordinarily in Scripture by things in Heaven are mn: 
the Angels, whoſe natural ſeat it is (ſpirits of juſt Men made 
perfe&t being advanced thither only by God's gracious vouch. 
ſafement) or (2.) largely , as comprehending the good Anzel;, 
eſpecially if upon the foundation of reconciliation confidercd 
ſtrictly, we take Reconciliation here more generally (as the 
Apoſtle doth in his Epiſtle to the Epheſians, expatiating more 
upon this matter there, than he doth here, writing more con- 
citely and contraaly) for Recapitulation, (or analogical recon- 
ciltation) bringing all under one Head, the recompoting , or 
reuniting of Creatures terreſtrial, or celeſtial upon the attone- 
ment for Sinners'by Chriſt, ſo that all his Subjects, thoſe tha: 
divide the State of his Kingdom are. at an agreement among 
themſelves, and with each other, God did ſo by Chriſt conjoin 
miſerable Men with himſelf, that now alſo the holy Angels are 
conjoin'd, they come under the ſame Head Chriſt, <<. 2, 1, 
Eph, 1» 21. whom they worſhip as at his firſt, ſo ſecond com- 
ing, Luke 2. 13, 14. Heb. 1.9. as Men cleave to him by faith, 
ſo the Angels by viſion, (1 Tim. 3. 16.) look upon him their 
Head, yet is he not their Redeemer, v. 14. Eph. 1. 3. not par- 
taking of their Nature, they are not his Members as believers 
are, (as God is the Head of Chrift, yet is not he a Member ot 
God, 1 Cor. Il. 3.) Chriſt beareth a more ſpecial relation 
to them, than he doth unto theſe Principalities and Powers, 
Eph. 5. 23, 30, 31. However, they being under an Hypothe- 
tical poſſibility of falling, ſhould ſeem to have need of a prever- 
tive kind of Reconciliation, upon that account, if their frand- 
ing 1s otherwiſe ſecured to them, they abiding in their Purity, 
could not be friends to impure Creatures, Gen. 3. 24. but upon 
the fatisfaftion of their Lord their diſtafte and diffatisfaction is 
remov'd, they being reduced into a Corporation under Chrift, 
with thoſe whom he hath reconciled, Eph. x. 10. as they to 
the glory of the ſupreme Majefty, rejoyc'd when Chriſt came 
to ſeek theſe loſt ones, ſo theſe are Miniſters to them that he 
bath made willing, Zeb. 1. 14. they delight in the Miniftry ot 
Reconciliation, Eph. 3. 10. 1 Pet. 1. 12, attend the ſervice 
with their Brethren (in doing their Office) Kev. 19. 10. and 
22. 9. further the work, Ais 8. 26. rejoice when it takes et- 
fect, Luke 15. 10. and carry thoſe that are perftetted to the 
place of their own Refidence, Lyke 16. 22. to their own innu- 
merable Afſembly in the heavenly Feruſatem, Heb. 12. 22. wai'- 
ing on Chriſt (according to the typical Repreſentatives, £x9, 
25. 19. and 26. 1. 1 Kings 6. 23, 29.) with thoſe that 2ce 
with him, and made like to him at his Throne, Mat. 22. 30. 
Mark 12. 25. where he fits as the Son of Man, and the holy 
Angels (as he faith) are continually aſcending and deſcending 
upon him, Fohy 1.51. he fills them as the reit of his Subjects, 
all in all, Eph. 1. 21, 23. They have Grace by way of Particr 
pation, having it from him their Head, who hath it of himio!, 
Fobn 5. 26. So that upon the matter, this Reconciliation 0: 
things in Heaven, ſeems moſt to accord with, Fph. 1. 9, 1c. ad 
1s not much unlike that in, Eph. 2. 14, 15. that which is ſeparately 
ſaid there by his blood, wv. 13. and by his Croſs, v. 16. is here 
conjoin'd by the blood of his Croſs. There is making peace 11 
one ſimple word here (in the Greek) in a compound one. There 
that he might reconcile both to God: Aere that he might re- 
concile all things to himſelf, 7. e. God. There he ſpeaks only 
of Men on Farth being reconciled among themſelves, becauc 
they had alſo been reconciled to God, if we take in Angcts 4/9 
under thoſe all, we have an allowance from that forecited, #/- 
1. 10. yea and in favour of the larger acceptation of Reconciiia- 
tion here, it may be conſidered [that the whole Creation whicl! 
was put into diſorder and ſubjected unto vanity, is in earncit 
expectation of the Fruits of this gracious Reconciliation in 2ils 
brought to a perfett Harmony to the glory of him wiv 55 all 
in all, Rom. 8. 19, to 24. With 1 Cyr. 15. 59. 


21 And b you that were ſometime alienated c, and 
enemies d * in your mind by wicked works e, }l 
now hath he reconciled f. 


wherefore, leading the Colofſi.ns from the Docrins be had pro- 
pos'd to contider. c Their own eftrangement from God and 
the things that pleaſe him, before they vere effec ually Ca” 
led by the Goſpel, being then in ſuch a miſerable condition 
as others were in a ſtate of corrupted nature. ove {Jum 5+ 5 


h : 
- 


A 
' 


| 


b The particle, and by an Z2braiſn is put for therefore or v! 


_ 


Ch 


ro 
- 


£ = F FF © ow OOF CO EL Sen, 


\ | 


J 
| 
d 
) 
) 


Chap. L 


Fab. 2, 


Ron. 6. 19. 1 Cor. 6. 11. Fph. 2. 1, 3, 11, 12. d Not only 
in their outward Deportment had they no communion with the 
true God, but inwardly they hated God as an Enemy, and they 
were hated of him as his Enemies; by their willing and 
nilling that which was contrary to him and his pleaſure, in 
oppoting his revealed . Will, Fohz 15. 18, 24. Rom. Is. 29, 30» 
& 5. 10. & 8. 7. Fames 4» 4. e This enmity was predomi- 
nant in their Mind , or Cogitation, or Carnal Reaſoning, not 
receiving or comprehending the things of the Spirit of God, 
x Cor. 2. 14+ that leading power of their Souls being, darkned, 
Eph. 1. 18. there was an Enmity againſt God, ſo that they 
neither could be ſubje& to God's Law, Rom. 8. 7+ under the 
prevalency of their corrupt Reaſoning which was ſo intent upon 
their corrupt Courſes, Gen. 6. 5. that then they thought not 
of Peace with God. f Yet ſuch was the unconſtrained Com- 
paſſion of God, that zow while Sinners (in a divided Senſe) 
Rom. 5. 10. they were actually reconciled ow, not before, 
not from Eternity in his Decree, nor meritoriouſly when 
upon the Croſs, 2 Cor. 5. 19. he doth not mean ſimply the 
ation of ſuch Virtue, neceſſary and efficacious to make Re- 
conciliation, and the appeating of God's Diſpleaſure 3 but 
compriſeth the effet of it alſo when it is wrought in 
wen Fg Cor. 5. 20, and the Enmity in the Subjett is actually re- 
moved. 


22 * In the body of his fleſh through death g, to 
preſent you holy and unblameable, and unreproveable 
in his ſight h. 


> The means whereby their Reconciliation to God was pur- 
chaſed (which they had particularly applied by Faith, v. 4.) was 
the Sacrifice of that fleſhly (not Phantaſtical ) Body which 
Chriſt had aſſum'd, ſubje& to the Condition of an Animal life, 
being capable of ſuffering, and mortal; (not refhin'd and im- 
mortal, as after his Reſurrettion, Rom. 5. 10. I Cor. 15. 443 
$3.) 2 Cor. 5. 14. Eph. 2, 16. with Heb. 10. 5, 10. 1 Pet, 2. 
24. & 3+ 18, Chriſt's death was not only for our good but in 
our ftead, thereby offering himſelf to God, he fatistied divine 
Juftice, and his Sacrifice giving himſelf for us, was a Sacrifice 
of a ſweet ſmell to God, Eph. 5. 2. h Before whom Believers 
cannot make themſelves to ftand holy, but Chrift doth upon 
the account of his Sacrifice for them, ſo that through the vail 
of his fleſh, Heb. 10. 19, 20. God doth look upon as ſuch, hav- 
ing neither ſpot nor wrinkle, without blame or blemiſh; See 
Eph. 1. 4. and 5. 27. unto whom Chrift is made Righteouſneſs, 
he is alſo made SanQification, 1 Cor. 1. 30» Thoſe who are 
waſhed are ſanQified, 1 Cor. 6. 11. the end of Reconciliation is 
Reftauration or San&ification, Luke 1. 74, 75+ 2 Cor. 5. 15. 
Tit. 2. 14. 1 Pet. 1. 24+ inchoatively here with a perfe&ion of 
parts, Heb. 12. 21. and. conſummatively hereafter with a 
Perfe&tion of Degrees, 1 Cor. 13, 10. Eph. 4. 10» Phil, 3. 
Ii, 12. 


23 If ye continue in the faith grounded and ſetled :, 
and be not moved away from the hope of the Gol- 
pel k, which ye have heard /, and which was 
preached to every creature which is under heaven m, 
whereof I Paul am made a miniſter 7, 


7 This if doth not import the Believers continuance in faith 
to depend meerly upon their own Free-will, or a Carnal doubting 
of being kept to Salvation, 1 Per. 1; 5. but infers that they are 
then reconciled to God when they do indeed perſevere in the 
Faith 3 implying that by reaſon of the Seducers among them all 
and every might not really have that ſound Faith they would be 
thought to have. Wherefore the Apoſtle engageth them to 
prove their Faith, whereby onl7 they can have peace with God, 
Fon. 5, 1. to be real by taking care it be well founded and firm, 
Mar. 13. 23. as an Houſe built on a ſure Foundation, a Tree 
well rooted, Eph. 3. 17, 18. Heb. 13. 9. k And be not as 
temporary Believers which have no root, Luke $.13. or as thoſe 
who want Anchor-hold are toſs'd to and fro, Eph. 4. 14. and 
put off from that hope of Eternal Life, ſet before us in the 
Goſpel, which is ſure and certain, Heb. 6. 18, 19. upon the 
foundation of the Prophets and Apoſtles, Eph. 2. 20. the ſweet 
Promiſes of Eternal Life. 1 Not the works of vain Philoſophy 
which leave the minds of Men unſetled, but the plain and ſolid 
Dottrins of Chriſt, wherein the Believers at Colofſe had been 
wfirn&ed, verſe 7, m And which the faithful Apoſtles accord- 
wg to the Commiſhon of Chriſt, had promulg'd to every Crea- 
fure beneath the Heavens, 7. ce. every rational Creature here 

elow, 7. e. to all Men, colle&ively, or Nations in the World, 
as verſe 6, Mat. 28. 19. Mark 16. 15. Creature with the Hebrews 
doth eminently fignifie Man, by an Antonomaſie or Synecdoche 
putting the general for a particular, In the original it is 7 al 
the Creature, and ſo it may be in all the World (Creature being 
ſometimes uſed for the ſyſtem of the World, Rom. $. 19, 20, 21.) 
n oppoſition to Fudea, i. e. in thoſe other parts of the Earth 
Which the Greeks and Romans knew to be then inhabited, under 
Eexven, which is a pleonaſm, but of the greateſt Emphaſis, as 
Aits 4. 12. # And the more to confirm them. in what he had 
ſaid, he adds of this Goſpel of Reconciliation ſo ſpread, he was 
immediately called, Gal. 1. 1. and conſtituted to be a Miniſter 

or the promulgation of it among the Gentiles, it being with 
Others moſt notably committed to him, 2 Cor. 5. 19, 1 Tims Is 11s 


24 Who now rejoyce in my ſufferings for you o, 
and fill up p that which is behind of the afflitions 
of Chriſt in my fleſh 9, for his bodies ſake which is 
"= r, 

Ol. IT, 


SIANS. Chap. I | bs w7l 


o He confirms his Call to the Miniſtry of the Goſpel from 


his chearfulneſs in his preſent Sufferings, ſo that they ſhoul Wl! { $4 
not be diſcouraged, being it highly contented him to witneſs THREE 

and ſeal his Do&trin by bearing his Croſs for them, Rom. 5. 2, 3. "Mr 

2 Cor. 7. 4+ & I. 14, 20, See Phil. 2. 17. The Fews hated FT "v; 


him and perſecuted him becauſe of - his communion with the 
Greeks and other Gentiles, which occaſion'd his Impriſonment = 
at Rome, Chap. 2. 1. & 4. 3,18. Aﬀs 21. 28, 29. & 26. 17, 18. #4 
Eph. 3. 1. yet this did not deter him from his office, but he 1; 
took pleaſure in doing his duty, As 5. 41. 2 Tim. 2. 10. gladly 
ſpending himſelf and being ſpent for their Souls, 2 Cor. 12. 15. "Thy 
for their Edification and Conſolation, 2 Cor. 1. 6, 7. Phil. 1. | 
12, 13. g And the copulative is uſed as cauſal, fil up not ſim- | | 
ply, but in ones turn, implying a contradiftintion betwixt MN 
what Chriſt ſuffered for the Apoſtle, and what the Apoſtle ſuf- * io 
tered in Chriſt; Chrift in his rank ſuffered what was neceſſary 
for my Redemption; now I in my turn (by his Gift, Phil. 1. 29.) of | 
undergo what Affidions are uſeful for his Glory. He purchas'd "OO Wh 
Salvation by his Croſs, I advance his Kingdom and Cauſe by my j 
Combats. q One learned Man renders the next Clauſe (what 
remains concerning the AﬀiiQtions for Chrift in my Fleſh) however 
if we conceive of things diftinaly, we may retain our own Tran- 
ſlation, conſidering Pau!'s filling up is either (1.) with reſpe& oh B54 
to Chriſt, ſo he doth not. mean what Chrift ſuffered in his own \ 
proper Perſon during his tabernacling here; for neither Paul 
nor any other Pen-man of the N. T. doth uſe the term Affliction, {45 4g 
to expreſs the Sufferings of Chriſt whereby he appeaſed God's 26k 
Wrath and ſatisfied his Juſtice; that he finiſhed in his own Per- | 
ſon when, he gave up the Ghoſt, Fohn 19. 30. he perfetted all 
compleatly, verſe 14. 22, nothing will be required from any 
Believer upon that account, Kom. 6» 9, 10. Heb. 10. 14. there 
be no remains upon that account, all was fill'd up by Chrift him- 
ſelf, All can be imagin'd that Paul ſhould mean in this reſpe& 
would be only from Chriſt's leaving an example, 1 Pet. 2. 21. 
q 4, As Chrift hath ſuffered for my Salvation, ſo in like manner 
ollowing him, T bear his Croſs, ſuffermg for his Goſpel and 
Glory, or, (2.) with reſpe& to Paul himſelf; the ſgpſe is, q« 4+ 
As I have born a great part of AﬀiQtions for the name of Chriſt, 
and in his glorious Communion, 2 Cor. 1. 5. Gal. 6.17. 2 Tim. 1» * 444 | 
8, 10 So in like manner I fill up the remains of them aſſign'd its © 's 
to me a Member of the myſtical Body in conformity to the Image Hh. 2M 
of him who is the Head} Rom. $. 18. 1 Per. 4. 13. I do by little 
and little accompliſh in my preſent Sufferings (which makes a 
part of it) the portion allotted to me in the ſame AfMiQtions, nr 
which are accompliſhed and accompliſhing in our Brethren, that 

are in the World, 1 Pet. 5-9. in time and degree according to 

God's Council whereby the Head was proclaim'd to ſuffer, A#s *t. 
4. 23. 1 Pet. 1. 20.) which apportion'd to every Member what: | 

ſhare it is to bear, till it be perfely conform'd to Chriſt, Phit. 
3- IO, 12, 21. Theſe Sufferings as Chriftians, 1 Petr. 4. 12g, 
14, 16. (which the Members undergo in their cauſes) may be | Wb 

ſaid to be the AfMiQions of Chriſt (1.) being for his cauſe and Foad® 0 
glory, the Troubles they receive upon his account may be called | 

his, the Badges of his Family and Followers, Gal. 6. 17. #tb. 
Ii. 26, {2.) becauſe of the Union betwixt Head and Members, 
1 Cor. 12, 12. they being given to the whole Body, the Wounds 
of his Members are his, As 9. 4, 16. he doth ſympathize with 
them ; but as he finiſh'd his work of proper Sufferings, while” in WOE 46d 
the Fleſh, ſo the Apoſtle's Expreſſion intimates here, their Sut- 7 Lnthe] 
ferings ſhall not laſt longer than they are in the Body, they TTY 
need not fear any Purgatory afterwards. r And whiles Pau 4 thf 
ſuffered here, he adds another Reaſon for the ſupporting and F 
chearing of him, viz. the uſefulneſs of them for the whole 
Church, the myſtical Body of Chriſt, as verſe 18. which conti- ; 
ration might ſweeten his bittereſt Affliftions, not only becauſe LY L 
it was in their ſervice to further their Faith that he was ſo perſe- f 
cuted, but for their Edification and Conſolation z this was the 

ſcope of his patience, Phil. 1. 12, 13, 14+ to encourage thoſe 

who knew his Teſtimony to embrace the Truth, 2 Tim. 2. 10s 

What the Rhemiſts and other Papiſts infer hence that the Apoſtle 

ſatisfied for the Sins of other Believers by his Sufferings contribut- 

ing tothe Churches Treaſury of Satisfa&tions for temporary Puniſh- 

ments is altogether groundleſs. *Tis brutiſh to conclude be- | 

cauſe he ſuſtain'd Affiftions for the Edification of the Church, if 
that therefore he ſatisfied for the Sins of the Church ; becauſe he #4 if} 
was ſpent for the Corinthians, that he anſwered for their Faults, 

2 Cor. 12. 15. he was not Crucified for any, 1 Cor. 1. 13. To | 

make Paul's Sufferings ſatisfafory is to derogate from Chriſt's Mt 
Merit; none is without Sin as Chriſt was, and 'tis neceſſary for th 

him that ſatisfieth, Prov. 20. 9. Chriſt's Sacrifice became expi- 
atory being offered by the eternal Spirit, #6. 9. 14. he having 0,7 
born the Sins of Believers in his own natural Budy upon the y 
Croſs, and that by himſelf, there needs no ſupplements (could 
any be found) from others, Fob 1. 29. Heb. 1. 3, 8. 1 Pet. 2. 
24. 1 Fohn 2. 2. To conceit there is any need of humane Satif- 
factions as ſupplies to Chriſt's Sufferings, is to croſs the Apoſtle's 
main drift here, verſe 12. 13, 14, 20, 22. he was far from ſa- 
tisfying for himſelf, Phil. 3. 9, 12. and ſhews that every one 
ſhall bear his own Burden, Gal. 6. 5. however he ſhould en- | 
deavour to honour Chriſt, and edifie his Church, 2 Cor. 12. 

LO. 


4 


25 Whereof I am made a miniſter / according to UH $f 4 
the diſpenſation of God z, which is given to me tor TOOTH LANES 
you, + * to fulfil the word of God #. + Or, fully _ SH. 

to preach LIIhs of 
{See under what title he ſuffers for the Church, becauſe a mi- the word of | © 8 r n 


nifter (in the more general acceptation of the word) as v. 23. not 294 
*Rom-. L g- 


(as one of the ancients ſaith) to give the price of Redemption but ate!" 

to preach. He look'd not on his Apoſtleſhip as a domination, but 79+ WG if 

miniftration, 2 Cor, 5. 18, and tho? in regard of his call he was TORLTT bf 

an extraordinary Apoſtle, yet he (remembring his Maſters 4. | 

Injuntion, Matthew 20, 26.) no more than Peer, did aftett Me bt. 
[5 O 2] dominion TEs. 


Chap. TI. 


* 2 Cor. 


2.14. 


* Rom 9. 


27. 


+ Or, a- 
M0rg ous 


* Eph. 5. 


27» 


Pominion or a Lordſhip over Chrift's Heritage, 2 Cor. 1. 24+ 
1 Pet. 5.1, 2, 3- according to his ſingular and eminent Call to 
de a Minifter and a Witneſs, As 26. 16. as he doth elſewhere 
make mention of the Miniſter of God, 2 Cor. 6. 4.. 1 Theſſ. 3+ 2+ 
of the XN. 7. Goſpel, Word, Reconciliation, As 6. 4. 2 Cor. 
5. 13, 19. and 3. 6 Fph. 3. 7. of Jeſus Chrift and of the Lord, 
Rom. 15. $. 1 COr. fe Is Eph. 6. 17. 1 Tim. 4; 6. ſo he doth: 
here by reaſon of the union *twixt the Head and the Body, own 
Himſelf ro be conſtituted a Minifter of the Church (which ſome 
of a lower Rank, like not now to be called.) * And. that by 
divine vouchſafement and commandment being called from per- 
ſecution of the Church to this Miniſtry, 4s 9. 15, 16. I Cor. 
4, 1. 2 Cor. 5. 19. Eph. 1. 10. Yea and allo for them at Co- 
J.fſ- who being of the Gentzles were in his commilſon, according 
to the Gift of the Grace of God given to him, Eph. 3. 7. u 
Fully ro preach the word of God m—_ them, as well as to the 
Romar's and others, Rom. 15. 19- and fo to fulfil the Prophecy, 
Zech. 2. 11. for the calling of the Gentiles by the promulgation 


COLOSSIANS. 


d Here he ſhews that the ſubje& of his and other Mi": 
preaching was Chriſt (as he had Keg deſcrib'd him) Hite 
alone hope of glory was to be had, As 4. 12. 1 Cor. 2. 2. G 1 
5. 4+ 1 Fobn 1.3. e The manner of it was by admoniſhing _ 
inſtrugting all, in all the Chriftian wiſdom that Chriſt requir- 
ed, that they might avoid fin and do their duty, he means gb 
collettively, not diftributively of the generals of each not exc 
one of thoſe generals, excluding none from the communion of {© 
great a Benefit, having no acception of Nations or Perſons 
making no exception of any condition, but inviting all Men t, 
Chriſt, holding forth this Light of the Goſpel to whoſoer:x 
would receive it, whiles God did vouchſafe lite and ftrength ty 
them, in the moſt taking way, As 20. 21, 27, 31. Rom, 1, 
I4, 15, 16, I Tim. 3. 2. 2 Tim. 2.24. & 2. 16: & 4. 2. Tit, 1, c 
f And the end and aim he and others of his mind had in Preack- 
ing of this matter in ſuch a manner was the ſame with Chris 
v.22. to put them into ſuch an eftate by their labours that the; 
might through Chriſt, appear at a Throne of Grace, withou: 


of the Goſpel amongft them, 4s 22. 21. Rom. I. 5.3% Is 13, 
x Tim. 2. 7. and ſo fulfilling God's word, by fully expounding 


the whole Doctrin of Salvation among them, and promoting of 


it to the end of his Life. 


26 Even the myſtery which hath been hid from 
ages, ahd from generations w, but now is made ma- 
nifeſt to his ſints x. 


# Viz, That holy ſecret of godlineſs, chap. 2. 2, 3. & 4. 3» 
Mat. 13. 11. Rome 16. 25, 26, 1 Cor. 2. 7. Eph:ſ. 3. 3, 4, 6, 8, 
10. See 1 Tim. 3. 16. Rev. 14. 6. which doth not confift in 
| cn Elements, Gal. 4. 9. or vain Speculations, which 
theſe Co! rms are caution'd to avoid, chip. 2. 8. however 
varniſhed, but is to them who are ſaved, the-power of God, 
Rom. 1. 16. 1 C'r« 1. 18, 19. and the wiſdom of God, 1 Cor. 1. 
24. which lay hid in God before the World, 1 Cor. 2. 7. 2 Tim. 
I. 9. Tit. 1. 2. 1 Pet. 1. 20. yea and after God had to our 
firſt Parents, and ſo to his People the Fews given ſome glympſe 
of this myſtery, which yet the Genriles of ſeveral Ages were 
32norant of, and many of the Fems, yea the moſt knowing of 
them, did not for many Generations, know that the G-ztiles 
without Circumciſion, Ofc, were to, be admitted into the 
Church, Aﬀs 10, 28. the Prophets vere very inquintive to 
know the meaning of it, but yet they alſo were much in the 
dark, 1 Cor. 2. 9. 1 7-t. 1. 1x. yea the Angels did not know 
this hidden Myſtery, till revealed by the Church, Fph. 1. 10. 
x But now God that revealeth Secrets, Dan. 2. 28. hath opened 
his boſom Counſel about this Aﬀair moſt clearly, ſo that his 
Glory by thoſe that really fear him, may be ſeen with open 
Face as in a Glaſs through Chriſt, Mar. 13. 11. Mark 4. 11. 
Fohn 8. 47. and 15+ 15. As 16. 14. 1 Cor. 2. 10, 16. 2 Cor. 
3. 18. all neceſſary to Salvation being made conſpicuous and 


clear to them, 1 Pet. 2. 9. 


27 * To whom God would make known z what 
is * the riches of the glory of this myſtery among 
the Gentiles a, which is Chriſt | in you b the hope 
of glory c. 


2 He refers the Manifeſtation pnrely to God's good Will and 
Pleaſure (as Chriſt himſelf doth, Mat. 11. 26, 27. Luke 10. 21.) 
ſo in the like caſe, Rom. 9 18. that having mention'd Sainre, 
none might conceit it was for foreſeen Faith, but the Coloſſians 
might value their Privilege, reverently receive that Grace which 
was not given to all: In ſhort, to reftrain Curioſity, why God 
would not.do it otherwiſ> or ſooner, he cuts the knots of all 
Queſtions, only by ſignifying his ſovereign Pleaſure, Ze would 
make it known to them elſewhere, Eph. 1. 9g. This Myſtery of his 
will according to his good pleaſure, Eph 1. 9. which was not to be 
touched till he thought meet to make it known. a Some refer 
the glory to myſtery as glorious myſtery, becauſe it lets forth 
divine glory and promiſeth it to Believers, Luke 2. 14. others, 
and the moſt, rather to Rzches, and that either as its Epither (v. 
11.) the glorious Riches of this myſtery, or noting the Subject 
for Salvation of the Church among the Gentiles, Eph. 1. 18 & 3. 
7,3. its uſual with the Apoſtle to uſe the word Riches to ſet forth 
abundance, Rom. 2. 4. & 11. 33. Eph. 1. 7. here for the praiſe of 
the Goſpel he would ſignifie a very great and moſt abundant 
£lory far ſurpaſſing any former Miniftration, 2 Cor. 3. 8, 18. 
In the Law thoſe Riches (Eph. 2. 7.) were not only imperfe&ly 
and obſcurely diſcovered, but ſcatteredly with broken Beams, 
as the Sun in Water when the Water is diſturbed ; one Attribute 
ſhining out in one work, another in another, but now the har- 
mony of the divine Attributes in Man's redemption ſhines out moſt 
fully, clearly and gloriouſly contratted in Chrift who is the Ob- 
jet and Revealer of the myſtery by his Spirit, the glory whereof 

reaks forth with much more ſplendor amongft the Gentiles, Rom. 
15.7, 8,9. 1 Cor. 2. 10. 2 Cor. 3. 9, 18. all glory before was but 
a ſhadow to this, ch. 2, 17. 2 Cor. 3. 18. Gal. 3.1. Heb. 10. 1, 
6 Which is Chriſt, among, for, or in them, 7. e. who not only 
was preached among them, but whom they poſſeſſed, and who 
dwelt in them by Fatih, Eph. 3. 17. the Revelation being accom- 
panied with the power of the Spirit in the tranſlating them by 
his glorious power from the Kingdom of Darknels into his King- 
dom, v. 12. Luke 17. 21. Gat. 2. 20. & 4s 19. Eph. 2. S, 7s 
c S0 is not only the Object, 1 Tim. 1. 1. but the ground of their 
expectation of glory, he in whom the myſtery begins, and ends, 
1 7:1. 3.16. out of whom all are hopeleſs of being happy, Eph. 
2+ 12. and in whom all have ſtrong conſolation, Zeb. 6. 18. 


28. Whom we preach 4; warning every man and 
teaching every man in all wiſdom e, * that we may 
preſent every man perfe& in Jeſus Chriſt 


confuſion, 2 Cor. 11. 2. Phil. 3. 12, 15. Heb. 5. 14. 


29 Whereunto I alſo labour, ſtriving according 
to his working g, which worketh in me mightily. 


£ To perform which, ſaith he, T earneftly endeavour and take 
Pains to wearineſs as an Husbandman, 2 Tim. 2. 6. contendins 
as one in an agony, 1 Thefſe 5. 12. by his grace which was with 
me, 1 Cor. 15. 10. in power, not by my own ſtrength or wiſdom 
to do or ſuffer. h But ?by his effeQtual aids enabling me for 
his Service with might, c. 1. 11. Rom. 15 15. tO 21. I Cong, 
25, 26, 27+ Eph. Is 19., 20, & 3+ 7. Phil. 4. 13, 


CHAP. II. 


His care for them that they may be confirmed in Chriſt, and conſtant 1 
him ; not ſeduced, 1——$. by Philoſophy or Inſtitution of the 
Law ; for the Godhead dwells bodily in Chriſt, and we are perfet 
in him, and ſpiritually Circumciſed, of which m_—_ is a Seal; 
dead, and raiſed with Chriſt, 9g 12. Who bath aboliſhed the 
Ceremonial Law, and triumphed over Satan, and taken away the 
difference of Meats and Times, 14. 17. Againſt worſhipping 
of Angels and all ſelf-will Worſhip, 18 22, 


got 4 I would that ye knew what great | #20, 
conflict I have for you b, and for them at Lao- oi 
dicea c, and for as many as have not ſeen my face in*!ti 
the fleſh 4d. | H oF 


4 This cauſal Particle refers to what he had ſaid juſt before kn”? 
the former Chapter. 6 The certainty of which Truth for the 
Evidence of his unfeigned Aﬀettion to them, he heartily wiſhes 
they might be certified what a combate he ſuſtain'd for them, 
by reaſon of that oppoſition he met with in his minifterial Lz 
bours. This filled him with inward Fears and Cares, and en: 
compaſs'd him with outward Troubles, as 2 Cor. 11. 23. to 30 
2 Tim. 2. 10. Wherein he addreſſed himſelf to God for them by 
earneft Prayers, as ch. 4. 12. 2 The, 1. 11. deſiring the affiſtance 
of their Prayers, Kom. 15: 30. Heb. 13. 18, theſe with his Tra- 
vels, Writings, &c. might well be called a conflict, 7hz1. 1, 30. 
c Which he had not only for the Saints at Coloſſe, but for their 
Neighbours liable alſo to the imprefſion of the ſame or the like 
Seducers at Laodicea definitely, to whom he deſigned this Epi- 
ſtle might be imparted, c. 4+ 16. d And indefinitely for as many 
Chriſtians, eſpecially in Phrygia, as had not ſeen him bodiiy pre- 
ſent among them, or heard him preach with a lively voicz, whi- 
ther becauſe *tis ſaid he twice paſſed through all Phryygia where 
Coloſſe and Laodicea were ſituate, As 1. 16. & 18. 23. he had 
been perſonally at theſe Cities, is not determinable from the c0- 
pulative here (which poſſibly may be uſed as a Particle to ſeparate 
theſe from thoſe who had not converſed with him) neither is it 0 
much importance. Jt ſhould ſeem Pau} was acquainted with 
Philemon ( a Coloſſian or Laodicean ) his Wife and Family, Fl: 
I. 2, 


2 * That their hearts might be comforted e, be- #26 
ing knit together in love f, and to all riches of the* 
full aſſurance-of underſtanding g, to * the acknow- til 
ledgment h/of the myſtery of God z, and of the Fa- 
ther, and of Chriſt k. 


e Whereas falſe: Teachers did endeavour to adulterate the 
Chriſtian Inſtitution, the firiving of the Apoſtle's holy Soul 
here was as in the former Chapter, v. 28. to this end, that 
they might be compleat and eftabliſh'd Chriſtians to the laſt. 
f And as a proper means conducible to this good purpoſe he 
would have them be joined or compacted together , be all 
of a piece, in the »#=ion and exerciſe of love. 8 And to 
attain to a well-grounded powerful evangelical Faith , which 
he ſets forth lively by an elegant increaſe of words both in 
regard of the atts and the object of it which is called 2 myſtery 
to be believed, 1 7m. 3. 9. upon its being revealed, The 
ſenſe of that which he heartily detires is that they might have 
(1.) all abundance of nnderſtanding with full ſatisfaction 
theſe main Principles of the Goſpel, they are called to aſſent (0- 
Signifying faith is no blind, but a certain —_—— —_— 
fion z to diſtinguiſh it from uncertain Opinion, Fohy 6. 0g- 
Rom. 4. 21. I Theſſ. 1. 5, Heb. 6, 11. & 10. 22- h (2.) = - 
ward conſent, and vital owning, a cordial embracing OR 
fundamental Truths of the Goſpel, EpF. 4+ 13, 14+ £#ebe Os 2» 


. ; :0ns and Traditions which 
in oppoſition to thoſe vain Speculations deluded 


Chap, nc! 


Or, 


e- #21 


he 6 


N= $ſhi 


hich 
1ded 


TM Chap. 11: 


deluded many. 


jet, but revealer of it. For the Father reveals Chrift, c. 1. 27. 
Mat. 16+ 17. Eph. 3.3. as Chriſt doth the Father, Mat. 11. 27. 

obn 1. 18. k Whereas it is ſaid, and of the Father and of 
Chriſt. This firft ad here needs not be rendred as a copulative 
but as exegetical, or as expletive, and may be read even, or t0 
wit, or both, (as a learned Man obſerves) the Greeks and Latins 
uſually do when the copulative is to be repeated, the name of 
God referring commonly to the Father and the Son (as <elſe- 
where God even the Father, ch. 1. 3. 1 Cor. 15. 24. and 2 Cor. 
T1. 31. Eph. 1. 3. Phil, 4. 20) So the former and here may be 
xead q. 4d. the myſtery not of God abſtrattedly conſidered ; but 
1 would have you be united and all one, in the acknowledg- 
ment of the whole myſtery of God, z. e. both of the Father and 
of Chriſt. : 


3 | In whom are hid all the treaſures of wiſdom, 
and knowledge m. 


1 This may relate either to the divine myſtery, wherein, are 
in abundance all neceſſary do&rins to conſolation, and ſalvation 
ſtored up, reſpetting the foregoing verſe, compare 1 Cor. 2. 7+ 
Eph. 3+ 3, 4+ in oppoittion to the vain ſhew of wiſdom ſeducers 
did boaſt of, or (as the moſt ancient and modern take it) to 
Chrift the immediate antecedent in whom (as we render it) 7. e. 
in Chriſt; conſider either (1.) As the objet, which being right- 
ly known, we may have all wiſdom and perfe& knowledge to 
Salvation ; he ſpeaks not here of all that Chrift knoweth, he 
xeveals- not all that in the Goſpel to. us, but what we muſt 
Enow of him that we may be ſav'd. (2.) In the ſubje# becauſe 
all the treaſures of wiſdom in order to Salvation, are not only 
known and found out in Chriſt, m But alſo do dwell and a- 
bide in him as the fountain, what he can give to us for our con- 
ſolation and perfeftion. Tt had been little pertinent for Paul 
to have ſaid that all theſe deep things of God, 1 Cor. 2. 10. 
were known to our Lord ; but that they are found in him, Yo 
dwell in him, are all tored up, diſplayed and ſet forth in him 
to be ſeen through the veil, that is to ſay, his fleſh, Zeb. 10. 
20. or the infirmity of his Croſs. The Series of the Apoſtle's 
diſcourſe comparing, v. $. and 1. ſhews it to be thus under- 
ftood of Chritt as the ſubje& and fountain of all ſaving wiſdom, 
in oppoſition to the comments of human wiſdom which the falſe 
Dottors did boaſt of : Continuing the metaphor he ſhews from 
what fund: the treaſuxes of ſaving knowledge may be drawn: 
by treaſures intimating-the excellency and abundance thereof 3 
there was ſome ſtore in the Tabernacle of Moſes, but very ſmall 
compared to the abundance, certainly to be found in Chriſt, all 
elſe of no worth to the excellency of the knowledge of Chriſt for 
conſolation, v. 2. Phil. 3. $. things to be believed and pratti- 
fed are by way of eminency Chrittian wiſdom and knowledge. 
The treaſures of which how and when hid, is to be well contt- 
dered, becauſe in our tranſlation, and in almoſt all others the 
Greek word we render hid is by traje&ion put next to the rela- 
tive whom, whereas it is indeed in the original the laſt word in 
the verſe, and ſeems to be expreſſive rather of what was hid 
befoxe Chrift than what # hid in him. For, as a learned Man 
faith, bidden treaſures, as ſuch, ſeem to be like hidden Mulick, of 
no regard z or like the hidden talent, Luke 19. 20. it not being 
ſo eafie to think that the Apoſtle in this Epiſtle teaching that 
the ſecrets which had lain hid from the wiſe Men of the World, 
in the ages paſt, and now were made bare, brought into light, 
and made known even to Babes by Chriſt, ch. 1. 26, 27. With 
Luke 10. 21. and having juſt before, v. 2. ſpoken of the under- 
fianding and acknowledgment of the myſtery of the Father and 
the Son, what ſhould the riches of glory to the knowledge of 
the myſtery be, but the treaſures of wiſdom now revealed, - here- 
tofore hid, of which continuedly a little after he ſays that al 
the fulneſs of the God-head dwells in him bodily, 1. e. perſonally, 
not in a ſhadow, as it were hid in a cloud, but in fleſh that 
may be really ſeen and touch'd. So that it ſhould ſeem beſt to 
retain hid as it is placed in the Greek to this ſenſe, q. d, 1 
Chriſt are and dwell in the greateſt fulneſs, all the treaſures of wiſ- 
dom, hid under the law, which are therefore called a myſtery, ſecret 
or a biddew thing from Ages and Generations, ch. 1. 26, 27. noW 
made manifeſt to his Saints, they are now not hid in Chriſt, but 
made known among the Gentiles as God willed : not then hid- 

en riches, h. e. treaſures of wiſdom and knowledge of this 
myſtery as of hid treaſure, but out of Chriſt, and before 
Chriſt, amongſt the Fews : For Chrift himſelf is that myſtery, 
<. 4. 2. not hid after his appearance, but manifeſted , and 
manifeſting the Father, Fon 1. 18. however, if any will rather 
chuſe to read, as if in Chriſt were at preſent hid all trealures, 
'tis to be underſtood, ſtored up, not expoſed to the view of 
every Eye, being as in a rich cabinet, not to keep them from 
being known to men, but rather to make them more precious 
and deljrable. For Chriſt came when ſent of his Father. to 
ſpread this heavenly wealth. He is the Sun of righteouſneſs, 
Fobn 1. 9. the unbelieving muſt thank themſelves if where he 
is truly preached he be hid to them, and his arm be revealed 

but to a few, Jſ7z. 53+ 2 Cor. 4. 3, 4+ 1+» *Tis their own blind- 
ing that they do not ſavingly diſcern what is diſplay'd in 
Chriſt, Wherefore both may be true in divers reſpetts. .(1.) 
Conlider the thing in it ſelf, objetively, ſo treaſures of wiſ- 
dom are evidently laid up in Jeſus Chrift, and manifeſted 'up- 
on his appearance, 1 7:m. 3. 16. Tir. 2» It. but (2.) with 
reſpe&t to the eyes and perceptions of Men (ſubjettively) as 
naturally obſcured and corrupted by finz fo natural men, or 
meer animal men perceive not in Chrift the riches of wifdom 
and knowledge which are in him as our Mediator when they 
look upon him as having no beauty or comlinels for which they 
thould defire him, Jſa. 53+ 2. be as crucified being to the Fews 


COLOSSIANS. 


z He calls this the myſtery of God, or a di- 
vine myſtery (no humane invention) as before, ch. 1. 26, 27+ 
and ſo vindicates the dignity of faith and the excellency of the 
Goſpel, afſerting it to be a myſtery of God, not only as the ob- 


a ſtumbling-block and to the Gentiles fooliſhneſs, when he | 
thoſe of them, who are called, the power of God and whe 
dom of God, x Cor, x. 23, 24. the Lutherans inference hence 
that omniſciency agrees to Chriſt's human nature, is altoge- 
ther inconſequent; both (as before) becauſe the Apoſtile's bufi- 
neſs here 1s not to acquaint us what Chriſt himſelf knoweth , 
but that 1s to be known of us, which may be found treaſur'd 
up in him. Treaſures here in him not being conſidered abſo- 
lutely, but comparatively, to all the knowledge of Men and 
Angels. Yet from a ſuppoſal of an infinite knowledge in Chriſt, 
who is God man in one Perſon, it followeth not that the Soul of 
his Human Nature knoweth all things. 


4 And this I fay z, leſt any man ſhould beguile 
you o with inticing words p. 


» Here he ſuggeſts the ground of his inſiſting upon the ex- 
cellent treaſures of the ſaving knowledge of Chrift, and the 
ample deſcription of him. o To this end that he might forti- 
tie them againſt deluſion by paralogiſms, or ſophiſtical and falſe 
reaſonings, fallacious arguing (as the word notes Fm. 1. 22.) 
under a colourable pretence and ſhew of wiſdom, v. 8, 18, 23. 
p Set off with Rhetorical ſuaſions and imbelliſhments, intimating 
the prevalence of ſuch blandiſhments with fair words, and zood 
ſpeeches to ſeduce the ſimple (if the heart were not eftabli':,:4 
with grace, Rom. 16. 18. and Y. 14. Eph. 5. 6. Heb. 12. 8, 9.) 
and therefore eſteeming the excellent knowledge of Chrift and 
being found in him, Phil. 3. $,9. they ſhould beware of what- 
ever under a ſhew of Religion is introduced to ſeduce them from 
the ſimplicity that is in Chriſt, 2 Cor. 11. 3. 


5 For though I be abſeat in the fleſh, yet am I 
with you in the ſpirit q, joying and beholding, 
your order 7, and the ſtedfaſtneſs of your faith in 
Chriſt /. 


q To prevent any ſurmiſe that his diſtance at Rome might 
take him off from minding of them at Colofſe, he ſhews that the 
great affection he bare to them did oblige him to intereſs him- 
ſelf in all their concerns, (the care of all the Churches being in- 
cumbent on him, 2 Cor. 11. 28.) and therefore that his bodily 
confinement at Rome, did not hinder his preſence with them in ſpi- 
rit. Not that we can'zonclude by ſome extraordinary operati- 
on of the Holy Ghoſt, God gave him now and then a clear pro- 
ſpect of what they did, as he did to Eliſha of Gzhaz7's behaviour, 
2 Kings 5. 26. and of Ezekiel in Babylon, of the ſecret a&ions 
of the Fews in Feruſalemz but that he was with them as with 
the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 5.3. when diſtant in body, his thoughts 
and affeAions were exerciſed about them. » As it follows there, 
as moving of fears leſt they ſhould be enſnared, ſo of joy, un- 
derſtanding their order, 7. e. their good Eftate, conftitution 
and conſent in orderly walking and diſcipline, xz Cor. 14. 40. L 
Theſ. 4. 1. and 5. 14. { And the firmament of their faich in 
Chriſt, it being (if genuine) as firm as the firmament it ſelf ; 
ſtable as the Heavens and heavenly bodies, keeping their con- 
ſtant ſtations and regular courſes, and admitting nothing hetero- 
geneous into them 3; All heavenly truths are as fixt Stars in this 
Orb; ſeeing all grace, becauſe divine, hath an eſtabliſhing pro- 
perty, ſo faith coming from the eternal mountains, All graces 
being connected in faith, which is a kind of firmament to them 
all, it comes to pals that faith in a&uating any one grace, gives 
a ſtrength, and turther growth to every other grace. 


Lord ?, fo. walk ye in him #. 


t Having caution'd them againft ſophiſtical ſeducers, and 
commended them for that order and ſound faith he underſtood 
to be amonglt them, he here infers an exhortation to continu- 
ance in both, eſpecially in the latter with reſpe& to the perſon 
of Chriſt according as he had before deſcribed him; tor he 
doth not ſay as ye have received the do#rin of Chriſt or- con- 
cerning Chriſt, but as ye have received Chriſt himſelf, as Fohy 
I. 11, 12. and 1 Fohn 5+ 11, 12. in whom is all treaſur'd up for 
Salvation, he adds not only Feſ#s (who came to fave his People 
from their {ins) but zhe Lord, intimating they ſhould not there- 
fore ſuffer any rules of faith or life to be impoſed upon them by 
any other whatſoever. « But ſhould b- perſwaded to abide in 
him whom they had embraced and order their converſation accor- 
ding to his mind, 1 Thefſ. 4. 1. knowing that he is the way, 
the truth, and the life, Foby 14. 6. being led by his ſpirit, and 
deriving virtue to go on in this orderly walk and perſevere in 
the faith. 


w Shewing how they ſhould abide and perſevere in the faith, 
by continuing in him as branches do in the root, Foby 15. 4. and 
reſting upon him as a building upon the foundation, //:z. 28. 
16. 1 Cor. 3» 11. Eph. 2. 22. x And being firm and ſettled in 
the faith, as 1 7et. 5. 10. he adds this, not only to clear the metas 
phorical expreſſions before, but to ſhew that they ſhould be 
growing ſtronger as to the internal habit, 7/al. 92. 13, 14» 
y He repeats as it were in a parentheſis (as ye have been taught) 
upon the matter, the ſame with as ye have received Chriſt in the 
former verſe, for greater caution to them, who might be apt 
to have itching ears, that they ſhould not be liſtening to any 
novel Dodrins, but abide in the faith of Chriſt. x Sitting 
down with themſelves according to the ſuperabounding grace 
they had, Roms 5» 20» With 1 Cor. 4. $. to abound and increaſe 
therein, 1 Cor» 15+ 5$. 2 Pet. 1. $. having herein all the ſaving 
knowledge defirable, without need of the addition of ought any 
other way z being thankful to God that he had revealed ſuch a 
Chriſt, his Chriſt to them 3 for they could not have a better, 
or another. 


3 * Beware 


Chap. II, 


6 * As ye have therefore received Chriſt Jeſus the « Jude 3; 


7 * Rooted and built up in him w, and ſtabliſh- * Eph. 2. 
ed in the faith x, as ye have been taught y abound- 21, 22. & 
ing therein with thankſgiving z. 2. 17. 


Chap. I. 


KROM. 1 6» 
7. 
Heb. 12. 


Gs 
*Mat. 1 Jo 


2, 
+ Or, ete- 
#11 


2 * Beware 4 leſt any man ſpoil you b through 
philoſophy c and vain deceit 4, after the * tradi- 
tion of men e, after the - rudiments of the world f, 


and not after Chr g. 


4 The Apoſtle after his exhortation, conſidering, their dan- 
ger from ſeducing ſpirits lying in wait to deceive by their ſleight 
and craftineſs, 1 Tim. 4. 1, 2. he doth here reinforce and en- 
large his caution he had before ſuggeſted, wv. 4. to engage £0 an 
heedful avoidance of all ſeduQion from Chriſt. 5 Left their 
Souls ſhould be made a prey, and they be carried for a ſpoil by 
thoſe worſt of robbers that beſet Chriſt's fold, 2 Cor. LI. 20» 
Gal. 6.13. © Through Philoſophy, either through the abuſe of true 
Philoſophy in bringing the myſtery of Chriſt under the tribunal of 
ſhallow reaſon, or rather through erroneous, tho curious, {pecu- 
lations of ſome Philoſophers, as Plato, Pythagoras, Heſiod, Oc. 
then in vogue , which the Gnoſti-ks afterwards (who thinking 
themſelves enriched with the notions of other Hereticks, would 
be thought the only knowing perſons) dreft up Chriſt with , 
not like himſelf. Their Philoſophy being a falſely ſo called 
ſcience or knowledge, 1 Tim. 6. 2D. whatever ſhew of wiſdom 
it might ſeem to carry along with it, v. 23. *twas not real- 
ly profitable. d But a vain deceit or ſeduftion, as ſeveral take 
tlie next clauſe appoſirely and the conjunQion expoſitively , yet 
if we conſider what follows, we may underſtand another gene- 
ral impoſture, viz. ſuperſtition, ſeeing vain deceit after the tradi- 
on of Men, is ſo like that ſuperſtition our Saviour doth rebuke 
in the Phariſees, Mat. 15. 9. ſeveral branches of which the 
Apoftle doth afterward in this Chapter diſpute againſt, ve 16. 
to 23, ſuperſtition might well be called deceit from the cheat 1t 
puts upon Men, and the notation of the Greek word, which im- 
ports 2 withdrawing Men from the way, Chrift, and from hs 
way of worſhip preſcribed in his word; And wvaiy it is as well 
as a deceit, ith it is empty and unprofitable, not accompanied 
with God's bleſſing, nor conducing to the 'pleafing of him, but 
the provoking of him, 7ſal. 106.29, 43. e Being led by no 0- 
ther rule than the tradition of Men, which is the ſame with the 
precepts of Men, Mark 7. 8. which God likes not, Iſa. $. 20. 
and 28. 13. Fohn 20. 3l. Aﬀs 26. 22. 2 Tim. 3. 15, 16. he 
would not give place to human traditions in his houſe. f Nor 
to the Elements of the World (in alluſion to Grammar, wherein 
the Letters are the Elements or rudiments of all literature) 7. e. 
the Ceremonies of the Moſaical Law, containing a kind of Ele- 
mentary inſtruQion, for that ſeems to be the Apoſtle's meaning, 
comparing this verſe with the 20, and 21. of this Chapter, and 
other places, G4l. 3. 24. theſe being but corporeal, carnal and 
ſenſible ordinances ſuitable to a worldly ſan&tuary, Z##b. 9. 1, 
10. not to be impoſed in that ſpiritual one which Chriſt hath 
ſet up, Fohn 4. 23, 24. Gal. 5. 2. g Whatſoever Philoſophi- 
cal colours, or Phariſaical paint, they might appear in, they 
are not after Chriſt : We ſay, a falſe Pifture of a Man, is not 
after the Man, being not taken from, or reſembling his Perſon, 
but clean another 3 ſuch deſcriptions of him as were not taken 
from the life and truth that was in him. And therefore he 
who is head of his Church, and likes not to be miſhap'd or miſ- 
repreſented, will not accept of homage from thoſe of his own 
houſe, in a livery that he hath not given order for, Lev. 10. 1. 
Fer. 7. 31. 2 Cor. 5. 9. how ſpecious ſoever it may be in the 
wiſdom of this world, and the Princes thereof, 1 Core 2. 6, 
To 


9 For h in him : dwelleth & all the fulneſs of the 
Godhead 1 bodily m. 


þ The cauſal particle induceth this as an argument to enforce 
the caution immediately foregoing, againſt thoſe who did ſeek 
to draw from Chrift by Philoſophy, as well as urging the cere- 
monial Law, elſe the Apoſtle's reaſoning were not cogent unleſs 
againſt both. 7 *Tis evident that the Lord Jeſus Chriſt him- 
ſelf, whom he had deſcribed and but juſt now named, is the ſub- 
jea, the Perſon of whom he ſpeaks, and in whom is ſeated, and 
to whom he attributes what followeth, ch. 1. 19. Fohn 1. 14. 
1 Tim. 4. 16. he doth not ſay in hs do#rin, whatever Socinians 
cavil, as if they would render the Apoſtle abſurd and not to 
agree with himſelf in what he aſſerts of Chriſt's Perſon before 
(as hath been ſhewed) and after in the Context. *Tis plain, 
this. relative kim, reſpeas not only v. 8. but the 11th, &c. in 


whom the believing Coloſſians are ſaid to be compleat as their head, 


both in the former Chapter, and ſoon after in thiszz Would it 
not be abſurd to ſay, Chriſt's Dottrin is the head of Angels ? 
we are crucified in the Dodtrin of Chriſt , buried and quickned 
together with his Do&rin? The hand-writing of ordinances 
was nailed to the croſs of Dottrin? Is a Dottrin the head of 
principalitics and powers ? Can a DoGtrin be buried in Baptiſm, 
Ec. To ſilence all the Earth that they ſhould not reftrain it to 
Chriſt's Doarin only, what he aſſerts. of his perſon, Paul, af- 
ter Chrift had been ſeveral years in Heaven, put it in the pre- 
ſent tenſe. k Dwelleth, not dwelt (as 2 Tim. 1.5.) in regard 
of the perſon eternally the ſame, ZAeb. 13. $. for his argument 
had not been cogent, to contain Chriſtians in the faith of Chriſt, 
and their duty to him, to have alledged in the doQrin,of Chrift 
now in Heaven hath dwelt all the fulneſs of the Godhead, bodi- 
ly (could propriety of ſpeech have allowed it) but from the 0- 


ther reſpect becauſe in their very fleſh (the body of Chriſt now | 


an inhabitant of the Heavens) the very Godhead in the whole 
fulneſs thereof , perſonally from the moment of his incarnation 
doth yet dwell 3 what will not the faithful perform and work out 
with their utmoſt faith, that they may never ſuffer themſelves 
to be rent from ſpiritual and myſtical union with him, in whom 
they underſtand that even they themſelves ſhall be alſo divinely 
filled, v. 10. 7.e. in their meaſure be made partakers of the 
divine nature, 2 Pet. 1. 4. Dwelleth imports more than a tran- 
tient ſtay for a few minutes, or a little while, even abiding in 


' 


_ 


COLOSSIANS. 


him conftanitly and for ever (as dwelling moſt uſually notes, 
2 Cor. 6. 16.) 1 That which doth thus perpetually abide in his 
perſon, as denominated after the human nature, is all the fulneſs of 
the Cod-head, viz. That rich and incomprehenſible abundance of 
perfettions, whereof the ſupreme and adorable nature is ful 
ſo that indeed there is not at all any perfe&ion, or excellency in 
the divine nature, but is found abiding in him. And after ng 
common or ordinary way, but by an Hypoſtatical or perſonal 
union, of the God-head, with the Manhood in Chriſt: Which 
is not by way of mixture, confuſion, converſion, or any other 
mutation z but, m Bodily, to exclude that inhabitation which is 
only by extrinfical denomination. It being an Adverb doth de- 
note the manner as well as theſubjeF z wherefore when he ſpeaks 
of the temple of his Body, Fob 2. 21. that doth not fully 
reach the Apoſtle's meaning here ; but it muft be expounded 
perſonally, ſith in the Greek that which ſignifies with us a body, 
and ſo our Engliſh word body is put for a perſon, Rem. 12. 1, 
2 Core 5. IC» Rev, 18.13. ſome body, or no bode ; 7.e. ſomeper- 
{on or no perſon. There is a preſence of the God-head genera! 
by eſſence and power ; particular in the Prophets and Apoſtles 
working Miracles ; gracious in all ſanQified ones 3 glorious in 
Heaven ; in light which no man can approach unto, 1 Tim, 6, 
16. relative in the Church viſible and Ordinances ; rypi-ally un: 
der the Law, and Symbolically in the Sacraments ; But all theſs 
dwellings or being preſent in the Creature, fall ſhort of that in 
the Text, viz. bodily, connoting the perſonal habitation of the 
Deity in,” and union of it with the humanity of Chriſt. So cloſe 
and ftreight and intimate, that the God-head inhabiting, and 
the manhood inhabited, make but one and the ſame perſon, e- 
ven as the reaſonable Soul and Body m Man , make but ons 
Man. The way of the preſence of the Deity with the humanity 
of Chrift is above all thoſe manners of the preſence of God 
with Angels and Men. The God-head dwells in him perſonal- 
ly, in them in regard of affiſtance and energy ; God-head notes 
the truth of it, - Chrift was not only partaker of the divine na- 
ture, 2 Pet. 1. 4- but the very God-head dwells in him ; *Tis 
not only the Divinity (as the Socinians, following the vulgar 
Latin in this, would have it) but the Deity, the very nature 
afid eſſence of God. Now 'tis obſervable though in God him- 
ſelf, Divinity and Deity being indeed the ſame, Rom. 1. 20. and 
may differ only from the manner of our conception and con- 
templation. Yet here when the enemies to Chriſt's Deity , 
might by their cavelling make more uſe of the word Divinity 
(as when the Soul of Man is ſaid to bea divine thing) to inſinuate 
as if it here noted only the divine will excluſive to the 
other attributes (which excluſion the term aZ doth fignally 
prevent) the Apoſtle puts in Deity or God-head. Then 
left Chriſt might (as by the Arians) be.deemed a ſecondary God, 
or (as ſome ſince) a made God, inferior to the Father, he faith 
the fulneſs of the God-head, which ſpeaks him perfe& God ov 
equal with the Father; further connoting a numerical ſameneſ 
of eſſence betwixt the God-head of the Father and the Son ; al! 
the fulneſs of the God-head dwelleth in him. There is not one 
fulneſs of the Father, and another of the Son, but oze and the 
ſame ſingular God-head in both, Fohy 10. 30. the fulneſs of the 
Manhood in Adam and Eve, were not numerically the ſame, 
but the God-head of the Father and the Son is ; Yet is nos the 
Manhood of Chriſt co-extended and commenſurate with the God- 
head (as ſome Lutherans conceit) but where the Manhood is, 
or Chriſt as Man is, or hath his exiftence, there the fulneſs of the 
God-head dwells bodily ; ſo that this fulneſs is extended as the 
Manhood only in which it is, and not as far as the Deity in 
which this derivative fulneſs is not as in its ſeat, though it be 
all originally from it; but inherently or ſubjeQively in Chriſt. 


10 And ye # are compleat_ o in him p, which 1s 


the head of all * principality, and power 9. *(iz, 


» Te Saints and holy Brethren, ch. 1, 2. who have received 16. 
Chriſt, ch. 2. 6, 7. and ſoare myſtically united to him, in whom 
dwelleth all fulneſs (as you have heard) being in him, havirg 
one ſpirit with him as members with the head, Xom. 8. 1, 9: 
Eph. 1. 23. 0 are impleat or filled, and ſo mediately ind 
cauſally compleat, from the all-fulneſs that is in your head, yet 
not immediately and properly compleat with it (as ſome have 
been apt to think.) p But i him, ye have that compleatneſs 
and perfeCtion which is reckon'd and made over to you and ac- 
cepted for you to juſtification, ſo that of his fulneſs ye receive, 
and grace for grace, Fohbn 1. 16. x Core 1, 30. 2 Cor. 5. 21s 
Eph. 1. 6. Phil. 3.9. Derive in and from him all ſpiritual bleſ- 
ſings, Eph. 1. 23. ſo that every one hath grace ſufficient, 2 C7. 
12. 9. to do all things incumbent on him through Chrift en- 
ftrengthning him, Phil. 4. 13. It is true, there is here in this ſtate 
no being compleat or perfe& attually, as to Glorification, yet 
virtually and ſenſually, that may in a ſort be ſaid of true be- 
lievers, not only in regard of their head, but in regard of their 
certain hope of being ſaved in Chriſt, yea and indeed as to 
the earneſt, the ſeed, and root of it, having already that lite 
which ſhall never have an end, Fobn 3. 36. and 4. 14. Kon. 5 
2. «Eph. 4. 30. 2 Theſſ. 2. 13. Heb. 9. 15, and 10. 14. 17. I» 
3, 4+ I Foby5.12. q The Apoſtle for conſolation of the Saints, 
and in oppoſition to thoſe who did endeavour a withdrawing, 
from Chriſt to the worſhipping of Angels, v. 18. doth further 
infer from the perſonal union, the dignity of the human nature 
of Chriſt, in regard of the good Angels, which are here meant 
by principality and power, by reaſon ot their excellency by nature 
and grace, and their Authority delegated to them by God over 
other creatures, Mat. 24. 36. 2 Cor. 11. 14. 1 Tim. 5$e21s Chriſt ha- 
ving the fulneſs of the God-head dwelling in him bodily 15 head un- 
to the good Angels in regard of his excellency and eminency above 
them, who are far below him in perfe&ion, Eph. 1. 21. #0» 
t. 4. the beſt of them are miniftring ſpirits and ſubject to him, 
and ſo undex his authority and at his command, Mat. 13. 4t» 
and 16. 27. and 24. 31. Eph. 3. 10. Heb. 1s 14» 1 Pets 3o 27: 


Revs Ie Is and 22. 16, Dh 


Chap, I[ 


Ch 


# [cf\ 


the 
ViFs 
and 
the 
Bap 
Or | 
fign 
the 
apn 
forn 
heco 
Chr 
newr 
and 
Reſu 
Whic 
{elve 
the & 
tb, 
from 
15 N01 
but j 
the r; 
of cor 
he [Þ 
Wrou: 
kutive 
Irradi 
Point 
I1ghte 
as the 
Object, 


ll 


_ wo *”© 


CW) w VF LD iP 


Chap. I. 


# [£7, do $1 


COL OY 
11 In whom aifo r ye are 


the body of the tins of the fleſh r, by the circumcition 
of Chrilt z. - 
y He removes what they who are addited to fuperfrition 
might luggeſt, as if there were ſomewhat defective to a com- 
pleatneſs in Chriſt : by ſhewing there was no need of any addi- 
tion to what he required in the Goſpel. /{ For that they 
might moft plaulibly urge of circumcition, as being the ſeal of 
the old covenant, and an obligation to the whole Law, Gl. 5. 
3- which ſome preſſed as necetfary to Salvation, Acts 15. I, 24. 
he here ſhews was altogether needleſs now , that they were 
fanified and had the thing fignitied by it, the circumcition ot 
the heart, Rom. 2. 28, 29. Phil. 2. 3. and were compleat in 
Chrifr without it, yea that the urging of that, and other cere- 
monies now , was a pernicious error , tending to annihilate 
the Croſs of Chrift, and overthrow the whole myſtery of his grace. 
"Tis true it was appointed to the 2s a figure of a .thing av- 
ſent, they therefore who retain that figure after the coming 0t 
Chriſt, deny thar to be compleat which it doth figure, and ſo 
aboliih the preſence of the truth 3 by frickling for the thadow, 
they i-t £0 the ſubſtance, viz. the Circumcition not made by 
the operation of Man, but of God ; not with the Knife of Moſes, 
but the word of Chrift, ſharper than any two-2dged Sword, 
Heb. 4.12. And if we compare this with the verſe following, 
and Phil. 3. 2. the Apoſtle intimates that Baptiſm is the ſame 
to us Chriftians which Circumciſion was to the Fews, and that 
is often aſcribed to the external adminiſtration , that is only 
the internal operation of the Spirit, as R9m. 6. 3, 4 Gil. Je» 275 
23. Tit. 3-5. 1 Pet. 3. 21. Now though there was during the 
ſhadow of it, Zeb. 19. 1. under the old Teſtament the circum- 
cifjon of the heart as well as under the New, Deut. 19. 16. and 
20. 6. Fer. 4» 4» yet under the N., T. Chrift the ſubſtance (who 
ras only before in the promiſe) being now exhibited , ha- 
ring aboliſhed the old ſymbol, and inftitured Baptiſm in the 
room of it ; that with the hands in the fleſh, Eph. 2, 11. which 
they who received not the promiſe, 7. e. th M:fiaþ promiſed, 
uſed, Hb. 11.39. was to beno more urged, now the kenefit by 
the merit of his obedience unto the death of the Croſs, where- 
by he circumciſeth from fin, might be enjoyed, as was ſignified 
by Baptiſm appointed to this end, Mit. 28. 19. Ads 2.33. Roms 
6. 2, 4+ Gal. 5. 27. 1 Per. 2.21. t Hence he doth illuſtrate 
this ſpiritual circumciſion by deſcribing the parts of it, begin- 
ning with the mortification of the old Man,- corrupted nature, 
containing not only the body and ſenſes, but the Soul taint- 
ed with che defilements of fin, < 2.5. Rom. 6. 6. Gil, 5. 195 
20, 2.4 Eph.'4. 22. The body of fins, which do moſtly exert 
themielves in the fleſh, every member and pow2r whiles unre- 


circamciſed with the 
circumcifion made without hands , in putting off 


S 1 A Ne Chap 


{ce Eph. 2. 1,5.) were by nature ſpiritually acad 1n ſins, de- 


priv'd of the lite of grace, and ſeparated from t':-"i%2 of glory 


b And having the forestin of their fleſh i CA_ANLIN WHICH 
was true litcrally, but conſidering the intern! circumcil.vti, vs 11s 
the Apoſtle's expreſſion here is to be exyuunded of th: '- mal 
corruption of our nature, the uncircumciſed heart, 01.44! cor- 
ruption deriv'd unto all by carnal propagation- which 13 predo- 
minant in the unregenerate. Theſe bcing dead az to the life 
of Grace, Mat. 8. 22. Fohn 5.25, Rom. $.7. 1 Cor. 2« 14+ 1 Tits 

5,6. c You who were ſtrangers from the life of God, Eph. 4. 
138, hath he now quicken'd or revir'd to a ſpiritual life with 
him here, and hereafter to eternal life, 1 Cor. 15. 22. d Ha- 
ving freely pardon'd to you (the word noting a free affe&ion to 
give and forgive, 2 Cor. 2. 10. Eph. 4.32.) all your fins, after 
as well as before Baptiſm (which is the tign and ſeal of it) Pſa. 

103- 3+ fo that the ſpirit of Chritt doth nor orily infuſe a prin- 
ciple of grace, and implant a living and abiding ſeed to work 
out vitious habits, but God upon the account -of Chriſt's plenary 
fatisfaction * doth freely remove all the guilt that binds over ts 
eternal death, and doth not impute to believers any of thcit 
fins in whole or in part, but treateth them as if they had com- 
mirted nonear all, Mi. 25.2%. Adis ro. 43. Eph. 1. 7. Feb. g. 
15. and will remember them no more, fo that when they are 
tought tor they ſhall not be found, Fer. 31. 24- and 50. 25: 
£725. 10.17. what the Papiſts ſay, of the f:iult being remitted, 
when the puniſhment may be exatted cither in whole or in part, 
that they may have a pretence for human ſatisfactions (th? 
groundleſneſs of which was hinted, ch. 1. 24.) is a meer figment. 
of the >chools, againſt Scripture and rzaſon. 

14 BloiLing out the haad-writi:g of ordinances. e, 
that was again{t us f, which was contrary to us g, and 
took It out of the way h, nailing it to his croſs, z. 

_e Having juſt before manif-fted God's grace in the free for- 
glvenels of all their treſpaſles, he doth here adjoyn the foundation 
and means of this remithon, viz. 17hipize out the Bill of decrees (as 
one reads)or effacing and cancelling rhe hand-writing that was apainſt 
us, which was contrary: to v8 in traditions, as another, - pointing at- 
ter Chirograph or hand-writing ; upon the matter in the expla- 
nation there will be no difference from our reading of it. Sir 
12 Scripture is frequently accounted a debt, and the acquitting 
the pardoning of it, Mzt. 6. *2. Lute 11. 4. and 12. 4+ as the 
debtor is oblig'd to payment, lo the finner to puniſhment z only 
'tis to be remembred, that though a private creditor may for- 
give his debt, yet unleſs the conſervator of publick juſtice do 
exempt an oftender againſt the law, he is not acquitted, but is 
irill under an obligation, bond or' hand-writinz, having as they 


ol, I - . S, . 
under the Myj.z/ct law profeſſed allegiance, Exod. 24. 7. which 


— 


upon default was an evidence of this guilt to avenging juice. 


generate being active in the committing of tin, till the new man 

be put on, Eph. 4. 24. and the dominion of it be ſubdued. # Not 

by any natural power which a Man hath of himielf for that pur- 

pale, but by the circumciſion of Chriſt, not properly that whereby 

b2 kimſclf was circumciſed in the fleſh the eighth day, but that 

which he hath indiſpentably required to have admitſion into h15 

Kingdom, Fohy 3. 3. and which he himſelf is the worker of, doth 

procure by his merit, and effe& by his ſpirit, which all the 1tua-1 
1201 of the ſublimeſt Philoſophers, and devotion of fuperſtitt- 

ous ones cannot do. 


12 Buried with him in baptiſm w, wherein alſo 


b:7-ye are riſen with im x, through the * faith of the 
_ operation of God y, who harh raiſed him from the 


dead z. 

m He ſhews that in Chriſt they who are found, have not only 
the thing ſignified , but right to the outward fign and {eal, 
viz. Baptiſm in the room of Circumciſion aboliſhed : the death 
and burial of Chriſt is not only the exemplar; but the cauſe of 
the death of the old man, jfigned and ſealed in Baptiſm z or by 
Baptiſm into death, Rom. 6. 3, 4. - Analogically, or ſymbolically, 
or ſacramentaily, when the Lord, togeth2r with the external 
fin, conferrech his grace fiznified by that fignz for even then 
the fins of ſuch an one are buried with Chritt ſo as they ſhould 
appear no more, either to his eternal condemnation, or in their 
former dominion, Rom. 6. 6, 9, 14. x In or by which Baptiſm 
becoming effectual, having” mortified the body of fin, like as 
Chriſt was raifed from the dead, ye are quickn'd and rais'd to 
newneſs of life, Kom. 6. 4. Gal. 2. 27, 23, 29. Eph. 4. 23, 24 
and 5. 14, 26, 27. and Chap. 2. 10, 11, By virtue of Chriſt's 
Relurrection, a ſpiritual and myſtical one is produc'd in you, 
wiich hath a reſemblance and analozy to his. y Not of your 
ſelves, but through faithy #ph. 2. $. and that wrought in you by 
the energy or efficacy of God, Fohn 6. 29. Phil 1.29. and 2. 13- 
Feb, 12, 2. 3 Who did exert his power in raifing up Chriſt 
from the dead, comp. Rom. 4+ 24» With Eph. 1. 19, 20. This faith 
15 not only wrought by God, as the circumciſion without hands, 
but it doth reſpe& that wonderful power of God put forth in 
the raifing of Chriſt, as the ſubje, which he mentions by way 
of congruity, ſpeaking of our reſurre@ion, and of Chriſt's. And 
he ſpecifieth faith rather than love, or other graces which are 
wrought alſo by God, becaule in this grace, which is the confti- 
tuave part of the new creature , God comes in with a greater 
radiation upon the Soul, being it hath not one fragment or 
point of nature to ſtand upon; carnal reaſon and meer moral 
righteouſneſs being oppoſite to it, whereas other graces are but 
- = re&ifying of the paſſions, and ſetting them upon right 

FctS, 


' 13 And you being dc:0d in your fins a, and the un- 
circumciſion of your fielh 6, hath he quickned together 
Wit him c, havius forgiven you all treſpaiſes 4. 

.4 He farther ſhews ti2y had no need of circumciſion m the 
**N, Eph. 2. 11, having ail in Chrit for juſtification 2s well 
> andhification , ſo that thongh ihev fas well as the Epkeſizns, 


'That law preſcribed by the miniſtration of Mjzs, was appen- 
daged with many ceremonial ordinances, to the obſervation of 
all which, circumcifion did oblige ; this obligation interpreta- 
tively was an hand-writing which did publickly teſtifie a Man's 
native pollution , and was a publick confeſſion of his fin and 
miecry, as waſhings did teftifie the filth of his tins, and ſacrifices 
Capital guilc to them, who liv'd undzr it, and did not perform 
ic, that they were accuried, Gl. 5. 1c, 19. under a miniftrati- 
on ot death, 2 Cor. 3.7, 9. Whiles by laying their hands on the 
ſacrifices, f they did as it were {ign a Bill or Bond azainft them- 
ſelves, whereby conſcience of guilt was retained, 2h. 19: 2, 3- 
and a con:cience. of fin renew'd, fo that the heart could not be 
ftablithed in any ficm peace, and g. 9g. #26. 19. 2. but they did con- 
fel tin to remain, and that they did want a removal of the curſe 
by a better >acrince. Upon the offering up of this, the law of 
commandments was blotted out, cancelled or aboliſh:d (faith 
the Apoſtle eliewhere) ſee Eph. 2. 15. even that contained in 
ordinances, compared with v. 16, 20, 21. of this Chapter 3 and 
therefore there 15 no condemaation to them that are circumct- 
ſed with the circumcition of Chrift, being found in him, v. 11 
with Rome. $8. 1. and 7.4. g £0 that however the law which 
was in 1t ſelf holy, juſt and good, through fin became in ſome ſort 
contrary, or ſub-contrary to us, in that it did ſerve to convid 
and terrifie with the cure for our default, Rom. 7. 5, 9. aggra- 
vating all by its ceremonies, and ſhutting the Gate of God's 
Houle againſt the Gemtiles, of whoſe number the- Coloſſ.,ms were, 
ſtrangers to the covenants of promiſe, Eph. 2.12. yet this ob- 
ligation was abrogated -and annulled by the dcath of Chriſt: 
as the Apoſtle exprefleth it with great elegancy, having not 
only ſaid that the debt was wip'd out, defac'd by th2 blood of 
Chrift being drawn over it, as they us'd to blot out debts or 
draw red lines a-crols them 3 but he adds, þ Taken our of the 
way, as the debtor's bond or obligation is, being cancell'd and 
torn to pieces, 10 that there is no memorial or evidence of the 
debt doth remain, all matter of controverſie being aitogether 
remov'd, Yet (it it may be) to ſpeak more fully and ſatisfa&to- 
rily, heannexeth, i And faſten'd it ro Fs Croſs, What could be 
more fignifticant? implying that Chrift by once offering him- 
ſelf a Sacrifice on the Croſs, had difarm'd the law, and taken 
away its condemning power, AG. 7. 4. Gal. 3 -$3« It beings 
(cuſtomary as learned men ſay) of o!d, clpecially in Af: to pierce 
cancell'd obligations and antiquated writings with nails; Chriſt 
by his plenary -ſatisfaction, did not only diicharge from the con- 
d2mnation of the law, Rom. $. 1, 34. but h- did effettually with 
th nails with which he himlelt was crucified, by interpretation 
fatren the hand-writing of ordinances to his Croſs, and aboliſhed 
th2 ceremonial law in every regard , fince the ſubliance of is 
was come, and that which it tended to, was accompliſhed in 
giving himſelf a ranſom for all, x 7. 2. 6. to the putting 
away of tin, Zeb. 9. 25, and obtaining- eternal redemption , 
{1{iÞs 9. I2, 

15 Aad * having ſpoiled þ DI tC 
powers mz, he made a iÞþew of them 0 


i” 


YEANLY, 27, UNl- 


» 
. 
4 


{Umpinng over them o, | 31 16 p, 


* 29M<e 


MY * 0 . 
170 1;,rioq Po 
1:24:1TIES [/ anc: 2 


* Pſal. G2, 
T 9s 
112.52. 12> 


Midte 12s 
Eph. 4.8 
+ Or, 1 


, mpelf 


— 
* 
4; > 


> 95 SY De > 4 — —— 
_» IFOP®; "I 
- *; : 
Its _y- - 7 
K< - ” 


Chap 


*ROmMm.14-. 
2. IO» 13s 
+ Or, for 
eating and 
drinking. 
+ Or, 7 
parte 


. I 

+ Some render it, (25125 t2 hath ſtripped or made naked, as 
winners and racers us'd to put off their Cloaths. 1 Hence {ome 
of the Ancients read putting of his fieth (poſhbly by the care- 
leſneſs of ſome Ecribes writing, that which tignifies fleſh inſtead 
of that which ſienifies principalities in all the Authentick Copies) 
but beſides that Chriſt hath not put off the hamane nature, only 
the infirmities of the fleſh, 2 Cor. 5. 16. #2b, 5. 7. it doth not 
agree with what follows. One conceits that by prizcip.lities ard 
powers are meant th2 Ceremonies of the Law, becaule of the 
divine authority they originally had, and that Chriit uncloathed 
or unveiled them, and {hew'd them to be miſty figures that 
were accompliſhed in his own Perſon. But I ſee no reaſon thus 
co allegorize, for *tis eafie td diſcern the word 1s borrowed from 
conquering Warriers having put to flight and difarm'd their 
Enemies (as the word may well tjgnifie diſarming in oppoſition 
to arming, Rm. 13. 12. Fph. 6. 11, I4) and hgnines here, 
that Chrift diſarm'd and diſpoil'd the Devil and his Angels with 
all the powers of darkneſs; we have len by principalities and 
powers are meant Angehs, -. 1. 16. with Rom. So 2'Þ> Eph. » To 
and here he means evil 6ncs, in regard of that power they ex- 
erciſe in this World under its preſent ftate of ſubjettion to tin 
and vanity, Tube 4.6. Fon 12. 31. 2 Cor. 4: 4+. Lph. 2.2. & 
6. 12. 2 Tim. 2. 26. whom Chrift came to deitroy, 2nd effectu- 
ally did on his Croſs defeat, Luke 11. 22. Fob 35. 11. 1 Cor. 15. 
65. Heb. 2. 14. 1 Fon 3. $. delivering his ſuvjcets from the 
power of darkneſs, ©. 1- 13. according to the firſt promiſe, Gen. 
2. 15. #3 Yea, and Chriſt did as an ablolute Conqueror, ride- 
ing as it were in his triumphal Chariot, pudlickly ſhew that he 
had vanquiſh'd Satan and all the powers of darkneſs in the view 
of Heaven and Farth, Luke 10. 17, 18. 9 Even then and 
there where Satan thought he ſhould alone have had the day by 
the death of the innocent Jeſus, was he and his Adherents tri- 
umphed over by the Lord of Life, to their everlaſting ſhame and 
torment, what the Papiſt: would gather hence that Chriſt did 
in this rriumphant ſhew upon the Croſs, carry the Souls of the 
Patriarchs out of their Limbus, 1. &. their appointment to Hell 
3s a 1c mnicriptural Fiction 3 for thoſe thar he made ſhew of 
in his 1itorioqs Chariot are the very ſame that he ſpoiled to 
their eternal ignominy and confuſion. p What follows ſome 
render (as in the margin) i himſelf or by himſelf, 7. e. by his 
own pvur-r and virtue and not by the help of any other; the 
Prophet faith, Z* 10d the wine preſs Jone, and had not any of the 
pecple with him, Wa. 63. 3. vet it ſeems here better to adhere to 
our own Trantlation iz it, confiders what went before of hz 
Croſs, that he triumphed over $2ran on it or by it, becauſe the 
death that he there ſuFered was the true and only cauſe of his 
Triumphs; there he trod Satan under his Feet, there he ſet 
his Seed at liberty, and they who 22 about to bereave them ot it, 
and bring them into Bondaze do no other than reſtore tro Satan 
his ſpoils. 


16 Let no man therefore judge you q * | in meat 
or i2 drink 7, or | in reſpe&t of an holy day, or of 
the new moon, or of the ſabhath days /. 


q He infers none ſhould be condemned ; none condemns ano- 
ther for exerciling Chriſtian liberty : None hath power to judge 
and cenſure herein, q. d. ſuffgr not any on2 (he excepts none) 
to impoſ2 upon you that, as neceſſary in the uſe and practice of 
it, wh is not after Chriſt, v. 8. not warranted by his Law of 
Liberty, Rom. 14. 23, 4+ Gal. 5.1. Fin 1. 25. Paul himſelf would 
not be impos'd on, 1 Cor. 6. 12. X 7. 22. Gal. 2. 5, 11, 14. &C. 
he would not (as one of the words doth note) be domircer'd 
over by any, or ſuffer any to exercit> Authority over him, who 
held the head and own'd Chriſt to be Lor4 of the Conſcience, and 
le Dictator of what way he will be ſerved in. » He therefore 
would not have the prattice of Ceremonials obtruded, inftancing 
in ſome, as the difference of meats and drinks in the uſe or not 
uſe of which (how after Chriſt had nailed thoſe decrees to his 
Croſs) ſuperititious ones would from the antiquated Rites of the 
Jews and Pythigoriaz Philoſophers place holineſs in, and add them 
to the Chriſtian Infritution. {Or the difference of Feſtivals and 
Sabbaths whether annual, or montaly, or weekly from the Levi- 
tical Inſtitutions. 


17 Which are a ſhadow of things to come 7, but 
the body zs of Chriit z. . 


t Which as they were but obſcurer repreſentations or ſha- 
dowy reſemblances of future benefits procured by Chriſt, Zeb. 
3. 5. & 9. 11. & 10. I» Whatever temporary glory they had 
from the former infritution, till the time of reformation, #eb. 
9, 10. yet that was done away, and they now had none, in re- 
{p:& of the glory that excelleth and remaineth, 2 Cor. 3. 9, 10. 
So that this doth no way gainſay the Sacraments now of Chriſt's 
own Inftitution which may be called Figures and Shadows, not 
of things future, of Chriſt (not yet come, but) as already ex- 
hivited, whom they manifeſt to the mind and faith to be pre- 
ient, to thoſe who rightly partake of them: We cannot ſay he 
condemns all diſtinctions of Meats and Drinks, viz. Bread and 
Wine in the Lord's Supper; or of days, only the decrees and 
ordinances of Moſes or any other which the falſe Teachers cryed 
up that were nor after Chriſt. #« Who is really the Subſtance 
and Antitype of all the Old Teftament-ſhadows which have com- 
plement or accompliſhment in him, Fohn 1. 17. Rom. 10. 5. 
Gal. 4. 10, I1, 12. As all the promiſes were in him yea and 
Amen, Dan. 9. 24. 2 Cor. 1. 20, all was conſummate in him, 
Fobm 19. 30. who came in the place of all the ſhadows. He is 
Lord of the Sabbath, Mar. 27. 59 and therefore having broken 
th2 Devil's Head-plot by his propitiatory Sacrifice, and entred 
into his reſt, ceaiing from his own works of redemption by price, 
as God hid from his of creation, #75. 4. 10. he did away, 2 Cor. 
J. LI7, 15. all that was typical and ceremonial of the old Sab- 
bath {as other Types of limſelf) keeping only that which was 
ſubſtantial !or an lily xf of one day in ſeven, and appointing | 


COLOSSIANS. 


Chan, 


tnat in commemoration of the Father's work and his to be fr, 
113 Reſurrection obſerv'd: on the firft day of the Wee!: as 166 
Edification of his Church 3 which he honoured by his appear. 
ance 2mong his Apoſtles on that ay; and that day ſevenizh 
after, which proceeded originally from his inſtituting of tha 
day (to prevent diſfention) for publick Worſhip in Chriſtiaq 
Aﬀemblics. Some have obſerv'd that the Fewiſh Doftors did "Fr 
ſay, That the divine Majeſty would bz 10 Iſrael in a Fubilee, freedom 
redemption, and finiſher of Sabbaths: And that four Sabbaths giq 
meet together and ſucceed each other at the Death and the Re. 
ſurrettion of Chriſt, viz. (1.) The ſabbatical Year of 541. 
Luke 4. 19. (2.) The high Sabbath, Fsbn 19. 31. (5,) The: 
7th day Sabbath, when his Body refted in the Grave. (4.) Jþ« 
firſt day of the Week when he roſe a vidorious Conqueror q* 
the Devil, and had put all in ſubjettion-to him, unto whom a1 
the reſt did refer, and therefore they were to diſappear, upon hi 
eftating his People in a reft which the Law could not, where; 
on his People are obliged in publick adoration and praiſe to con- 
memorate him on the firſt day of the Week or the Lord's day. 
to the end of the World, 1 Cyr. 16. 1,2. Rev. Is 10, | 


- 
co 
LC 
ry 
- 


velic 


Paul and that in this Epiſtle only (and not very frequent in ., 
other Authors) hath occafion'd Interpreters here to render ir © 
variouſly, ſome joining the next following word with it, ang 
ſome (as we read it) to that which follows after. The fimple 
word is, c. 3. 15 . read ule, or judge, and it may be rendred 
mtercede, Yet Paul doth not elſewhere uſe this word fimply or 
in compoſition where he ſpeaks of judging and condemning, Rom, 
2. 1. however it is borrow'd from thoſe who were Judges or 
Umpires in their Games, the Apoſtle moſt likely alluding to 
thoſe who through favour or hatred determin'd unjuſtly, to the 
defrauding thoſe Vidtors of their prize or reward to whom it wa 
due. Hence ſome would have the import to be agreeable to 
our Tranſlation z be careful theſe unjuſt Arbiters do not defraud 
you of gaining Chriſt, and deceive you (as Mar. 24. 4. Eth. 5, 
6. 2 The]. 2. 3.) by preſcribing, falſe lifts and giving you wrong 
meaſures, and ſo judging againſt you ;z one renders it, Let 70 mar 
dzceive you with ſubtile argument who®pleaſeth or delights himſelf 
in humility 3 another, Ter zo man take your prize z Others, Let 7 
min Meftcr it or bear rule over you at pleaſure ;- let none take upon 
himſelt, or uſurp ro himſelf the parts or office of a Governor 0r Unpir? 
over you. The Apoſtle labours to fortifie the true followers 0: 
Chriſt, azainſt ſuch ſuperftitious ſubtile ones who by their arti- 
fice did affume a magiſterial authority (without any ſure war 
rant from God to impoſe their traditionary and invented ſe:- 
vices upon them, and determine of their ftate accordingly as the 
Papiſts do at this day. One learned Man thinks the Apoſtle had 
not uſed this word here, but for ſome notable advantage, «iz. 
becauſe the fimple word may fignifie to ixtercede as well as to 
judge, it made wonderfully to his purpoſe in this compoſition, 
(as he uſes conciſ.on, Phil. 3. 2.) to diſparage thoſe Seducers who 
did from ſome notions of the Platonifts, labour to gain credit to 
that opinion that the Angels were Intercefſors betwixt God and 
Man. x Covering their imperious ſpirit, by being Volunteers in 
humility, or by a pretence of voluntary uncommanded humility, 
alledging it would be preſumption in them to addreſs themſelves 
immediately to God, and therefore, y They would pay a re 
ligious Homage to Angels, as of a middle Nature betwist God 
and them, preſuming they would mediate for them, an in- 
ſtance to expreſs all that invented worſhip, which how ſpecious 
loever it may ſeem to be, hath no warrant from Chritt, who 
alone can procure acceptance of our perſons and ſervices. He 
expetts that his Diſciples ſhould affert his rights and the liberty 
with which he hath made them free againſt the Traditions oi 
ſelf-willed Men, and no more to. ſolemnize for worſhip, then 
each for dodrins the traditions of men, Mat. 15. 2, 6, 9. We Mult 
not under any pretext of humility preſume to know what Þb!- 
longs to our duty and God's ſervice better than Chrift dot!, 
ſhewing us that he alone is the true and living way, and we may 


come boldly by him, Mar. 11. 28. Foha 14+ 1, 6. Eph. 3: 12: 
Heb. 4. 16. & 10. 20, And therefore the adoring and inv0- 
cating of Angels as heavenly Courtiers, whatever the Paiſts 
out of a ſhew of humility do argue, is not after Chrift, but 2 
gainft him. 2 Yea and for any one to aflert it, and the like, 1 
to be a bold intruder upon anothers -poſſeſhon, a thruiting A 
Mans ſelf into the knowledge and determination of that which 
is above his reach, Pſa. 121. 1. and he hath no ground at all 
for, but doth pry or wade into a ſecret which a Man cannv- 
know. The Apoſtle uſeth a Platonick word againft thole wi9 
did indulge themſelves out of curioſity in the Opinions 0f Ut 
Platoniſts about Angels, the worſhippers of which among £n0- 
who were profeſſed Chriftians in Phrygia were ſo tenacious 0! 
their error that they were not rooted out after th third 
Century, when a Canon was made againſt them under the nam* 
of Angelici in the Council of Laodicea near Colof};, 4 The Art 
riſe of ſuch fooliſh preſumption was a bcing raſhly putted U? 
with the ſenſe of their Heſh, a deluded mind mov'd by 10me 
carnal Principle, ſetting out things with ſwelling words of eve 
nity, wherewith in truth they have no acquaintance, and wher?e- 
of they have no experience, 1 Tim. I. 7. 

10 And not holding, * the head b, from will, 
all the body c by joints and hands baviig Nourna 
ment miniſtred 4, and knit tozether ec CNreats 
with the increaſe of God . 


13 Let no man + bezuile you of your reward w, +0; 
| in a voluntary humility x, and worſhipping cf! 
angels y, intruding into thoſe things * which he $9) 
hath not ſeen z valaly puff'd up by his fleſtly 1... 

} beings 
mind 4. Wh 


w The original compound word peculiar in the N. 7, 5; 


| 
t, 


W” Tit, 2; 


{ 
| 
' 


Chap. TI: 


b And here, tie Apoſtle ſuggeſts that thoſe things he had 


Or. ele. 


14) 
5, 2x44 
4 


before taxed lid proceed trom hence, that they let go the Lord 
Chriſt limſelf, ch, 2, $, 9. from whom all truths are to be de- 
rived, and conkquently he is all truth it ſelf, Fobz 14. 6. 
not to adhere tohim 1s the fpring, of all Apoftacies, iie being 
the head, ſee Eph. 4.15, 16. © Whence is communicated and 
diſtributed ſuch influence to the body, the Church, as is neceſſa- 
ry toall the ſenſations and motions thereof, d Being in all 
jits members fitly framed together by the ſpirit, Eph. 2. 21, 

and united by faith, Eph. 3. 17. bath a continual ſubſily 
of life and vigour. e And faſtned together in a ſpiritual uni- 
on, which joineth all believers to their head, and each of them 
to the other in him, 1 Cor, 10. 17. and 12. 12, 20, 25, 27: 
f Whereupon to mutual edification in love it groweth with a 
divine growth and ſpiritual increaſe, ariſing, from the ethcacy 
of God, andstending to his glory, being filled with the influences 
of his grace, Cor, 3. 6. it is eftabliſhed and ftrengthned by little 
and little, in light and purity, and all graces fill it attain to the 
meaſure of its perfect ſtature in Chrift Jeſus our Lord ; whereas 
>n increaſe in the traditions of Men, and the inyentions of fleſh 
Jo only blow it up with wens and impoſthumes, to the dishgu- 
rin, deforming and deſtroying of it. 

20 Wherefore if ye be dead with Chriſt from the 
|| rudiments of the world g : why as though living 
in the world are ye ſubjeCt to ordinances h ? 

g Here the Apoftle doth further argue againſt all impoſitions 
of ſuperititious obſervances, obrruded as parts of divine wor: 
ſhip, whether in reviving thoſe abrogated, or ſetting up new 
ones : upon ſuppolition of their _union with Chrift their head, 
and their being dead in him as to all beggarly Elements from 
which he had freed them by his death, Rom. 6. 3, 5. and 7. 4, 6. 
Gal. 4. 9, 10, IT. with Gal. 2, 19. no uncommanded worſhip or 
way of worſhip being after Chriſt, v. $. in whom they were compleat, 
v.11. being buried with bim in Baptiſm, v. 12. having nailed thoſe 
ritual ordinances 10 his Croſs, as antiquated or out-dated, v, 14. 
why ſhould they who held the head, v. 19. bas if they lived in the 
old World with thoſe Children in bondage, G41, 4. 3. before 
Chrift came, be ſubject to ceremonial obſervances, qe. 4. '11s 
moft injurious that they ſhould impoſe this yoke upon yon, (Acts 
15. 10.) yeare moft fooliſh if ye ſubmit your necks : for God 
would not have ceremonial worſhip which he himſelf inſtituted 
to be abrogated, that a new one ſhould be invented by Men. 
Tf the head of rhe Church like not the reviving that worſhip he 
hath laid afide 3 be ſure he will not approve of any new one 
which he never appointed, The Apoſtle is not here ſpeaking 
of the Magiſtrates Ordinances about things indifferent in 
their uſe for the real good of the civil Government ; but of the 
way of worſhipping God by religious abſtinencies, &, 

21 (Touch not, taſte not, handle not z : 

i Which he doth here by way of imitation, upbraiding of 
them, elegantly recite in the words, phraſes, or ſenſe impoling 
TDogmatifts, whoſe ſuperſtition and luſt of dominecring over the 
Conſciences of Chriſtians is taxed in the gradation, which the 
well S&il}d in the Greek judge to be in the original,for though the 
Er and which we render touch not be ſometimes fo rendred, yet 
confidering here the Coincidency or the tautology will,lorendred, 
make with the laſt, the fenie of it, as the moſt judicious ancl 
learned have evidencd, ſeems to be, eat 7ot, as noting they dic 
forbid the eating, 7, e. uſing certain meats at their ordinary 
meals (againſt the reviving of which impoſition above, v.: 16, 
25 well ring, in a new one-of like import, the Apoſtle elſewhere 
exprefieth himſelf, Rom. 14. 17. 1 Cor, 8. Ss. 1 Tim, 4» 3.) ob: 
taining which, they proceeded to forbid the not zaſting, and then 
the not h:n41ling or touching of them with the han:!, as it that 
would defile. It beings more not to raſte than not to ear, and live- 
wiſe more; not to rouch with the finger, than not to taſte, Ex- 
prefling the ingeny of ſuch ſuperſtitious impolers, that they 
heapup one thing upon another to the burdening of conſciences, 
not knowing where to make an end in their new inyentec exter- 
nal devotions ana obſervances, which, as ſnares do firft bind 
faſt, and in tra& of time firangle. He ſpeaks of theſe as di- 
ſin from thoſe, v. 15. they being for antiquated rites which 
had been of God's appointment, thele for innovations of Man's 
invention, as is apparent from the laſt vyerle. 


H 7 


- 47 


| +7; ; 22 Which all are toperiſh with the uſing &) * after 


F 14, 


the commandments and dodrines of men /. 

þ He adds his reaſons why, under the Chriſtian inſtitution, 
acceptable worſhipping of God doth not contift in ſuch obler- 
vances, both becauſe meats, drinks, garments, &c. are Uc- 
ſigned unto the benefit of Man, for the preſerving of his tem- 
poral life, and are conſumed in their ule. They cannot in, or 
by themſelves either make a Man holy, er render him unclean, 
Mat. 15, 11, Mark 7,19, Rom. 14. 17. 1 Cor. 6.13, 1 Tim. 4. 
2. They all come to corruption and are conſuancd in doing us 
ſervice, they cannot otherwiſe be of ute, which may evince, 
that all the benefit we receive from them, doth only relpect this 
mortal life, it not being imaginable thac what perifherh in our 
uſe ſhould be of any force to the life of oar Soul, which is im- 
mortal and incorruptible. And theretore to urge the reviving 
of antiquated ordinances, or bringing in ſuch-like new ones,1s to 
corrupt or conſume the Creatures without any ſpiritual adyan- 
tage, whereupon ſuch impoſitions muſt needs be deftruttive ; 
and becauſe of che Apoftle's ſtronger argument, they are not 
after Chrift, but afrer the precepts and decrees of Mz, compare 
v. 8, which js our Lord and Maſter's argument againtr te inno- 
vations of the Phariſees, Mar. 15, 9g, agreeing, with tLe Pro- 
pher,1/:.29.13.f0 bring in additionals of uncommande.l worihtp, 
07 rites ar! wavs of iris forbidden of God, Deur, 12.32. Fobn 1g. 

(3, who according to the purporc of 


p J - > 
4 ya 14 A a i b 2 
a. © a2 GS-41 428 44 Li 


X : : b "om" ME MS —__ - 
the ſecond Commandment, muſt be worſhiped in a manner pe- 
- * 4 ' ——% 4*.> iro y* h v 
CuUiar tO nM, at! | a m0Uu1tcd DY him, and therefore w orthip,nd [if 
x a 4 - . * : : '".. A Ip 4 
LPOIECA, 7 No commanded. 1 forbutden by him, Wig will 


COLOSSIANS. 


accept of no homage from Chriſtians in the buſinef of 12c!i-io 
anleſs it be taught by him, and not by men only, 


TE) 


in wil-worſhip =, and humility o, and | neglect 


4 


ing of the fleſh 7. 
cepts and dottrins of Men abour r-lisious abſtinences, had a re 
of wiſdom; and *twas but a meer ſhew, a bare DCLnr: 2” 
cious appearance, fair colour of wiltom, which is of no wor! 
not the reality and truth of Chriſtian wiſton \ however ir m Ws 
beguile thoſe that were taken more with ſhadows than GP 1nc-. 
Ve 3, 448,17. 2(1.) In arbitrary ſupcrſtition, or t1yman i:1- 
vention, or ſelf-will d Religion rather than divine infticyrions - 
as all the Ancients and almoſt all the moderns dg intornrer tHe 
word, it having no good but an ill Characicr, Accomntin” the 
compound word here which we render wil! worſhip, wo Ke 
import, as to the ordainers of worthip, than the two fn. 
words of which it is compounded, expretfing human arbir: 7. 
neſs and worſhip, v. 18, (even as the Apofile dvth by a com- 
pound word which ſignifies peace-mating, <, 1. 25. underf-2 
the very ſame thing which he expreflec! by the two tim; !c 


of which it is compounded,in another Epiftle, Epb. 2. 1+.) t ho- 


* 4s 


ing rational toconceive, confidering the Apoſtle's drits in the 


1 {2E 


_ 


Ty”; A » 
vY JI ©! 2 


context,that by will worſhip he doth connote the ſame here, that 
by willing in worſhip, he doth aſunder there. For though a n-r- 
forming thoſe acts of worſhip willingly, which God him{@1f },.ch 
commanded, be neceſſary, and commendable in his willing Pc9- 
ple, Pal, 110. 3. and they cannot be acceptable otherwite : vc; 
when the will of Man, in contradiftinetion to the will of God i 
conſidered as conftitutive of that worſhip which is offered to 
God of a Man's own brain and deviſing without God's warranr 

then that wil-worſhip is hateful to God, and the more voluntary 
the more abominable. It being, moſt juſt, that not in what 
way we will and chuſe, but only in that way which he will and 
chuſeth we ſhould worſhip him with acceptance (which ſhould 
be our greateft care, 2 Cor. 5. g.) we know, amongſt men, 
choſe perſons of honour that give Liveries to their Servants 

would diſcard ſuch of them as ſk:At{ come to attend them in 
new ones of their own deviſing, though thoſe Servants mizht 
be fo fooliſh as to conceit thoſe of their own deviting were more 
expreſhve. of their humble reſpetts, Much more is worſhip of 
Man's deviſing diftafteful to the all-wiſe God, who ſees through 
all colours, and though he loves a willing worſhipper, yet he 
hates wil/-worſhip, o However it be palliated (z.) with a Pre- 
tended demiſhon of mind, or an attcaation of humility, as if 


' 
4 


more ſelf-abalement were deſigned in ſich an arbitrar: way of 
worſhip, like thoſe Hypocrites in their faſts, who put on mor- 
tih=d looks, and a neglected Garb, with diſguiſed Countenances 
Mai, 6, 16, ſhewing themſelves mot ſubmiffive ro the orders 
of their ſuperiors, in that way of Man's devifing. p Wherein th- 
more ſuperſtitioufly devout do labour to out-do others, ( 2.) In 
puniſhing, not ſparing, negletting, or afficting the Body, (as 
{ome Morks at this day in the Papacy) in denying it that, wii; 
wizich nature ſhould he ſupplied. q. Not in any honour, which a 
l-arned Man thinks the Apoſtle would have read as included in 
a Parentheſts, as Conceiving the ſerics of his diſcourſe require; 
theſe to be joined, viz. Negletting of rhe Byiy as to what tortit;s 
to the ſansf1ing of the fleſh, So by (nor im bonour ) is not here moat 
a {paring of the body in order to real ſanciitication, ts MPcrancc 
andl continence, in oppoſition to the dithononing, of the body 
by Luxury (as, X99, 1. 26, with 1 Cor. 6, 18, 19; 20. 1 Thr 
4. 4. Heb. 13. 4.) That honour of the boily the Apoſtle dot, 
elſewhere require, he doth here oppol” to the leducers pretend: 
ed mortifications. For their Relivious abſtinency was not tom 
that, which occation'd Luxury, only from jome certain forts ot 
meat, the uſc of whichno way denles the body, nor violates in 
any manner the holinels and honour it ought to be kept in, 
Others read zeeleing the body, which is in #9 eftecyt, » Fo P41 
ering the jlcjh, Not in any cſteem, 7. e, with Gol, or 1:6t in any 
honour to God, but ina tendency only to male proviion fur the 
fleth, (as, Rom. 13.laft) others take honour for revard, 4. de in 
no regard, to the ſupplying of nature with that which is due to 
it, Othegs take honour for having a care of, 1 1is, 5. 3.4. t, 
neglecting the body in taking no care of it, or not at all valuir 


| Vatlluind 
the things that are requiſite to the duc nouriſhment of ic ; th:is 
is ſomewhat generally received, Having nocare that the body 
may have that which will fatisfie nature ; and if the laſt phrai- 
which we tranſlate ro the ſarisfying of 1h: fol, feem not tt 
wel} to expreſs moderate fatiety, we Foul conver "tis id in 
goud tenſe God filleth the hungry with prod thevps, Luke 1. 575, 


and Chriſt filled the multitude, Fobiz 6. 12, yea the uf of t! Rf 

word 1n Authentick Greek Authors may be fuund to note a mo- 

derate as well as immoderate filling, 7. & In a $oul teri, t 

laticty (or enough) that is, not vitious, 

GHAP. HI, 

An Exhortation to heavenly mindedneſs having the begronirg s there 
of now, and expeiting wer full prjjeffion ar the mwvijeit ation of 
Chriſt, 1,--4. And to mortifie the old Man with his fe t109s ; and 
pi 07 the new Man, create dfter God's Image, 5-17, The dat 
of Wives and tusbands tewards one another « ©f Childs, 
Parents : Of Servants toward their Maſters, 1%, —2<, 

I Tf ye then be riten with Chrilt a, 

things which are above b, where * Chrilt tit 

teth at the right hand of God c. 

a Having retuced ſuperſtitions ublcrvances piaced in things 

Earthly, and periſhing, aid calle! them voi itrom fhavuws, tu 

mind th- ſubftancez he doth vpon luppoticion - of wha! 

had atferted betore, ch, 2. 12, | 
were riſen again with Chriſt, it did bcehuye them £6 
bout the duties required of Lint 


z . 


hore into ET J 
1 3s aiTle HliCls Cit, SITTER 


itt: that ntatce no! 
® x * * £ : 


t; $.vy 
v3 2+ LEED ” 


Proper Relurrection of UC ous, T1744 


m By way of confeſſion the Apoſtle here erants that the pro. 


23* Which things haveiindeed a ſhew of wiſlo me; 1 


of the body f, not in any honour q, to the ſatisfy- ' 


Cna D. Tea 


f : 
- 1 
J Heb 
&. 0 
{ 


by 
_ He 
2. 
ew» 
_ _ 
CO Fe gr 


IA 
py" VF c- Py 


Ss 
me.n . 
KRLEeEE AS. I EISAS 


TS. © OI 


%- .-+. _ .-=& 
x R 4 


— to hd orttrn tn OY Iron AA OR Pero 
PEI —— W—_ SY SS 7 


ke - 
— Ja 3 
$p* 


=. - 


mn Sr rn rn en cnt ren =o grey, - 
«A = <7 — 
L w_- _ tj 
—_— _—— 
- <— 4% 


can only he in our head by virtue of the myſtical union, as in 
re2ard of right the members of Chriſt are ſaid to fit with him 
in _neavenly places, Eph, 2. 6. fignifyed and ſealed by baptiſm: 
but the metaphorical and ſpiricual ReſurreQion from ſpiritual 
death. which is Regeneration, Rom. 9,4. Tir. 2. 5. Wrought 
by the ſame fpirit which raiſed Chriſt, and whereby renewed 
Chriſtians live in certain hope of that proper Reſurrettion of 
cheir Bodies, which Chriſt hath procured. 6 Hereupon he urg- 
eth them (in the ſame ſenſe our Saviour doth command to ſeck 
his Kinsdom, Mat. 5, 33.) with diligence to purſue Heaven and 
Happineſs as the en\l, and Holinels as the means tothe attaining 
of it. Tohave their converſation in Heaven, Phil. 3,20, c IVhere 
Chriſt ftreth at the vight hand of God, Whiles the Apoſtle ſpeaks 
of Ged after the manner of Men we mult take heed of the grofs 
error of the Anthropomor: kites, who did imagine God to fit in 
Heaven in the ſhaye of a Mn, Some indeed who abhor 
ſuch a roſs imagination, yct conceive that becauſe more gene- 
rally the Heaven is God's throne, and ſhall be ſo for ever, Fer, 
17.12, Lam. 5.19. ir, 5. 34. that he hath a particular throne 
in Heaven, whereon he doth ſhew himfelt ſpecially preſent as 
in his Temple, 1 Xizg. 22.19, 2/41, 11.4, and fo tho' Chrift 
is ſet property on the right hand of this Throne, Heb. 1. 3. & 8. 
T. & 12, 2, Kev. 3.21, but becauſe the conception of ſuch a 
particular material Throne with extenſion of parts and proper 
timentions may (beſides other inconveniences) miſguide our 
apprehenſions and occaſion adoration to the Creature, which 
ſhould be terminated on God alone who is a pure Spirit, and 
whereas ſiting is not taken properly, fith Stephen ſaw Chriſt 
ſtandings, As 7.55. and is oppos'd to the miniftration of An- 
gels, which hate no bodics or bodily parts, Heb. 1. 13. by moſt 
it is taken metaphorically, importing that Chrift hath all real power 
and dominion put into his hands, connoting his authority and 
ſecurity from his Enemies who are put under his feet, Mat, 28. 
13- 1 Cor. 15. 25. is crowned with Majeſty, Glory and Honour, 
Heb, 1;.& 2,9, enjoying all blefſednels in a moft tranſcendent 
way, al, 16, 11. & 110 1, As 2,33; 36. having the hu- 
mane nature filled with abilities to execute all when he entred 
into glory, I/a. 16. 5. Luke 22, 29, 30. & 24. 26, IC07. 15443. 
Rev, 19. 6, where he reſi” -yoſſeſſed of all in fatety, AFs 3.21. 
Rev. 3. 21, *twas above, whither Chrift aſcendeg by a local mo- 
tion from a certain where here below, intoa certain where above, 
fo that whatever the Lutherans argue from Chrift's glorious 
Aſcenſion, and Seſſion, to prove Chrift's Body an ubiquitary, or 
every where preſent, is inconſequent, fith it 1s Heaven where 
he wills that Believers ſhould be to behold the glory that his 
Father hath given him, John 17. 24. wherefore, 


| Or,nird, 2 Set your || affections on things above d, not on 


* :1Cof.15. 


43+ 


as deipicable, Fokn 1%, 2, and ſometimes they are fo in their 


things on the earth e. 


COLOSSIANS. 


own Eycs, wherein oft-times there be Tears, fo that they c; 

ſee bur as through a glaſs darkly, P/zl. 31. 22. 1 Cor, 13.1 * 
but then they ſhall ſee Chriſt face to tace, all tears ſhall be wine 
away from their eyes, Kev. 7. 17, and at the laft day they 


ſhall ſhine as the Sun in glory, Mat. 13, 43. 1 Cor, L5443, 53, 
2 Theſſ. 1, 7, 10, 12, 

5 Mortifie therefore & your members which « 
upon the earth]: fornication mm, uncleanneſ; 
inordinate affeftion o, evil concupiſcence p, and co. 
vetouſneſs 9, which is idolatry y. 

k That they might not think he who had given check to {.. 
perſtitious abſtinencies, was for the indulging of any cara; 
affeCtions, he infers here, how the exerciſe of truly Chrifiia; 
mortification was incumbent on thoſe who were dead to fin, and 
had their life hid in Chriſt, Neither is it any incongruity th:; 
they who are in a ſort already dead, ſhould-be'exhorted to ny. 
tification ; if we do but diſtin&ly conſider of mortification, and 
what they are to mortifie, or endeavour to make dead, (1 4. 
to mortification, which may be conſider'd either as to its inc... 
ation, when upon effettually calling, a mortal wound is by ++ - 
Spirit of God given to the old Man, or to the habit of {+ 
whick will in the end or conſummation be a total privation of jr. 
life, though as yet it be but partial, It is not in regard of 
inchoative mortification, which was begun upon their c;. 
ctual calling, that the Apoftle exhorts the Saints in C6/-7- ;, 
this verſe to mortifie, But mortification may be confider'd a; tg 
its continuation,and the carrying on the life of grace,in the mak. 
ing dead all that is contrary to it, even the renew'd Perſyn 
ſhould be continually folicitous to have the old Man kill out- 
right without any reprieve. This is it that the Apoſtle put 
the believing Colofans upon, not to ſpare any remaining il! dif. 
poſitions or depraved habits of the old Man, but by the affiſtance 
of the Spirit (for *tis not a natural, but ſpiritual work) Rm, $, 
13. G41, 5. 24. continually to reſiſt to the killing of ir, or 
putting it to death, Never to defift in this war (2) 1 As tv the 
earthly members of it, The Apoſtle expreſ{eth the obje& uf mor- 
tification, or what they are to mortifie, by their members upon the 
earth, not as if he defign'd to put them upon a dilmembring of 
their Bodies, or a deadning of thole bodily natural parts where» 
by the Sex is diftinguiſhed, Rom, 6, 13, (though agrecable ro 
his own practice he would have the Body keptunder and brought 
into ſubjettion, 1 Cor. 9. 27.) but upon ſubduing jnordinate 
motions and carnal concupiſcences, as is evident from the par- 
ticular vices following, which taken as colle&ed and heaped up to- 
gether, may well paſs wnder the notion of a Body, he had before 
in this Epiftle mentioned the Body of the Sins of the fleſh, cv, 
2, 11. this he might ſay only not metonymically, by reaſon (1c 
luſts do reſide in the natural Body and Members of it, Km, 6.5, 


d That the hearts of Believers here, might be where their ; 12, 19, but (and that chiefly) metaphorically, the maſs of cortup: 


treaſure is, the Apoftle here repeats his exhortation, ufing ano- 
ther word, importing they ſhould intenſly md things above, 
Rom. 8, 5. viz. the Inheritance reſerved in the Heavens for us, 
x Per. I, 4. with heart and afettions, together with all that 
God hath appointed to be a furtherance to the enjoyment of it ; 
not curiouſly to ſearch the deep things of God which cannot be 
found out, but to mind things above with ſobriety, Rom. 12. 3, 
e Taking off the mind and heart from all that is oppoſite to 
heavenly things, viz. not only thoſe humane, carnal ordinances 
and ceremonics, ch. 2. 22. with Phil. 3.18, 19, butallo from 
the eager purſuit of the pleaſures, profits and honours of this 
World, which the Men of it do inordinately defire, v. 5. with 
Mat. 6. 33. Gal. 5. 24. and are carried away with, 7zr. 2, 12, 
Fam. 4. 4. 2 Pet. 1. 4. 1 70þn 2.17, Chriſtians ſhould not be, 
to the negle& of things ſpiritual; however they are oblig'd in a 


due {ubordination to take care of themſelves and families for| 


theſe things below, ſo far as to put them into a capacity of 
raifing them more Heaven-ward. 

2 For ye are dead f, and your life is hid with 
Chriſt in God g, 

f The Apoſtle adds another reaſon why the believing Colof- 
fans ſhould not be earthly minded, becauſe they were dead, not 
abſolutely, but in a certain reſpe&, viz, of fin, and the World, 
(1) in regard of that carnal, corrupted, fin infected life, re- 
ceived from our firſt Parents by carnal generationSthe Jife of 
the 014 man altogether depraved, the real members of Chriſt are 
dead; ſeech,2. 11, 12, 20. Kom, 6, 2, 4, 6, 7, 8, 11. & 7. 9. 
2 Cor. 5.14, 17. Gal. 5.34. (2) in regard of the World by 
communion with Chriſt their Head, 7/al. 22.15. 1ſa. 26. 19. 
Gal. 6. 14. 27im, 2.11. 1 Pet. 4.1,2, g And their ſpiritual 
life (oppoſed to the life of tin) which is received by their re- 

cciving of Chriſt, the life they now live by faith, quickened to- 
gether with Chriſt, ch. 2. 13. John 11. 25, 26, & 14. 6, Gal, 
2. 20, Heb, 10.38. 1 Foby $5.11,12. this is bid with Chriſt by 
virtue of their union with him, as Chriſt is in God by union 
with the Father, Chriſt in God, and our lite in Chriſt, Fohy 17, 
21, becauſe in him lie the ſprings of our ſpiritual life, which in, 
and by our Regeneration, Renovation and SanCtification is com- 
municated to us: and its progre!ls in fruitfulneſs *till it arrive 
to perfeQtion, Phil. 3. 10, 14. 
4 * When Chriſt who is our life ſhall appear b, 
then ſhall ye alſo appear with him in glory z. 


þ Which will be according to the purpole and promiſe of 
God with whom it is laid up, cþ, 1.5. when Chriſt by whom 


1 


1 


nature dwelling in us, is compared to a perſon, the 9/4 31; vr 
old Adam, or body of fin, v. 9g. Kom. 6.6, & 7. 24, Eph. 4.22. 
and, continuing the metaphor, the parts of the corrupt Body 
are called Members, and our Members the whole Body of thc 
old Man being made up of them, which are ſaid to be upon 112 
earth, as being enclined to earthly things and employed about 
chem, taking occaſion from ſenſual Objetts here below, to zet 
ſtrength, unleſs we be continually upon our watch to aboliſh all 
chat contributes to the life of the old Man, in the particular Mem- 
bers, vi2. m Fornication, (ee the parallel place, Eph. 5. 3. with 
I Cor, 6, 5. Where he begins with this, as moſt turbulent, un- 
derftanding by it not only the outward att, but the inward at- 
feion, which the Heathens were apt to reckon no fault tho'the 
Spirit of God in the Scripture do greatly condemn it, Mat, 5,23, 
KFom, 1. 29. 1 Cor. 5,1. &6. 18. & 7,2, & 10. 8. 1 The, 4 3. 
# Impurity, ſee Epheſ. 5. 3. which is more unnatural, whereby 
they diſhonour their own Bodies, &om, 1. 24, 27. Gul. 5, 15. 
1 Theſſ. 4. 7. Kev. 17.4, 0 That paſhon whick ſome render 
ſoftneſs, or eafinels to receive any impreſſion to luſt, 7, c, the 
filthy diſpoſition of a voluptuous effeminate heart delighted with 
laſcivious objetts, P/al. 32. 9, Kom. 1. 26, 27. 1 Cor, 6. 9, Witl 
1 Theſ. 4. 3, 5+ þ lhat concupiſcence which in naturs and 
meaſure is exccftive, being an irregular appetite, and an -ndue 
motion againtt reaſon, eſpecially againft the Spirit, Gal. 5..17- 
q Andan immoderate defire after, and cleaving, to the things 0! 
this World, either in progging for them, or potleſſing of them 
to the feeding of other Lufts, and ſo eftranging the heart from 
God, Eccleſ. 5, 10. Luke 12. 18, trufting in riches rather than 
in the living God, Fob 21, 24. Mat, 6. 24, 1 7in. 5. 17. 
7 Upon which account it may paſs under the Title of 146/4try, 33 
the covetous Perſon is an Idolater, ſee Eph 5, 5, and farther, 
he might reckon Covetouſnels to be 79)urry, becanſe noting 
was more exccrable in the judgment of the Fcws than Jdolarty 
was, it being ordinary with the ZZehrews to note fins by t!. 
names of thoſe moſt detefted, as rebellion againſt God, 1 +4. 
I5. 23. by witchcraft, not that it is ſo formally, but rhat *c 
Spirit of God may ſhew how odious an incorrigible obſtinacy ot 
mind againft God is unto him, Hence confidering the o\liouticls 
of theſe Vices, the Apoltle would have us not to content our 
{elves to cut off ſome branches of them, but to grub them vp 
by the roots, 


6 * For which things ſake { the wrath of God * hiv 
{cometh on the children of diſobediencet. 15s 


ſ Eipecially remembring how the indulging or ſparing any ot 


they live ſhall lo appear that they ſhall be like him, 1 Fobr 3. 2, 
and be taken to be with him in the heavenly inheritante, 1 Per, 
1.4. then their conformity to him began here partly in holineſs 
and partly in ſufferings, Kv7:. 8. 15, {hall be compleated at laſt 
in glory and felicity, Phil. 3.21. Heb, 11. 29, 35. 7 And 
then ſhall theſe adopted Children be brought into glory with 
him, eb, 2. 10. out of whole hands none ſhall be able ro pull 
them, Fobn 1c. 28, but however the World look upon them, 


them will be of dreadful conſequence, ſee Eyh:j, 5. 6. for bow 
ever they may by carnal Men be Jooked upon as little 15111ts, 
which God will over-look on courſe, 7 Yet they do certainly - 
cur divine diſpleaſure, and will bring moft inevitabie ju cums 
upon thoſe unperſuadable, rebellious, and contumaciu!s 0105, Who 
would be thought God's Children, and yer remain inicorrigibicy 
Mar. 24. 38, 39. 1 Cor. 6.9. Gal, 5. 21. 


7 *1a the which % ye alſo walked ſometime 7," 


when ye lived in them x. 


Chap. 17 


( 


—_ M_ HE TEE EEE... 


, &@ Q => Q ww 


by fO 929 py my 


5» 
—— 
- 


Ell < —_ 


-_ 
Fr 
Vn 


L 


Chap. III. 


u Some render it «nog whom, but alas / they lived amonZ 
ſuch difobedient ones ſtill, therefore we do better render 1t 77 
which, i.e. ſins or vices, the now believing Colofſizns, w had 
heretofore praQtiſe:!, and exerciſed ; and had not only been in- 
&tted with the venom of them, in deſcending from polluted 
Parents, x but were Servants to them, Kom. 6.17, 19. whiles 
in a ſenſual courſe of life they were carried away with them, 
x Cor. 12, 2. before their converiton, when they did live and 
reign in their mortal Bodies, ch, 1. 2t, & V. 7. I Cor. C. 1, 
Eph. *. 3, 11, 12. & $. 8. 


$ But now you alſo put off all theſe y, anger z, 


wrath a, malice b, blaſphemy c, filthy communica- 


tion out of your mouth d. 

» Having minded them of their former condition under Pa- 
ganiſm in a ſtate of ſin, while they ſerved various ſenſual lufts, 
he doth here in their preſent circumſtances under Chriltianity, 
in a ftate of grace, fhew them that now they protelſed to walk as 
Children of light, Rom. 13. 12. Eph. 5. $. with 1 Th:fſ. 5. 5,8. 
they were more ſtrongly oblig'd to lay aſide thoſe inordinate 
aftetions which were more ſpiritual, Eph, 4. 22, ſome of which 
he doth inftance in, viz, 3. Anger, whereby he doth not mean 
the paſſion it ſelf, Eph, 4. 26, with 31. but the inordinacy of 
it, being a vindiQtive appetite to, hurt another unjuftly for ſome 
affront conceived to be given or occaſion'd by him. a Wrath, 
indignation, Kom. 2. 8, a ſudden haſty and vehement commotion 
of the offended mind apprehending an Injury, when it ſhews it ſelf 
in the countenance in a manner and meaſure unbecoming a Chri- 
ſtian, as in them who with rage thruſt Chrift out of the City, 
Luke 4.28, 29. with Eph. 4.31. b Malice, is. connoting both 
the evil habit and the vitious att 3 now though this word be took 
oftentimes more generally, for that miſchievous vitioſity and 
venom which runs through all the paſſions of the Soul, reach- 
ing toall ſins, 1 Cor. 5. 8. & 14, 20, yet here it ſeems to be 
taken more ſpecially for a ſecret malignity of rooted anger and 
continued wrath, remembring injuries, meditating revenge, and 
watching for an occaſion to- vent it, being much what the ſame 
with that which the Apoſtle in a parallel Epiſtle calls bitternels, 
Ephef. 4. 31. compared with other places, Gen. 45. Rom. 1. 29. 
Tit, 3.3. 1 Pet. 2. 1, c Aﬀeer he had urged the laying aſide 
of heart evils as the cauſe, he moves to the laying aſide thoſe of 
the Tongue, viz, Blaſphzmy, which in a like place we render 
evil ſpeaking, Eph. 4. 3I. the original word according to the 
notation of it doth ſignifie the hurt of any one's good name; 
which when it reſpe&ts God we do more ſtridtly call Blaſphemy. 
When it reſpe&s our Neighbour though more Jargely it be ſo, 
or defamation, Rom. 3.8. 1 Cor. 4.13, Tit, 3. 2. yet more 
firialy, if jt be done ſecretly, it is detrattion or back-biting ; 
more openly reviling or ſlandering, Mat. 15, 19. Mark 7. 22, 
1 Tim, 6. 4, d Obſcene diſcourſe, diſhoneſt talk ſhould not 
come into the Chriftian's mouth, ch, 4. 6. ſee on Eph, 4. 29, 
& 5. 4. wanton lewd and unclean Speeches ſhould not proceed 
from a Chriſtians Tongue, 1 Cor. 15.33. | 

9 Lie not one to another e, ſeeing that ye have 


Put off the old Man with his deeds f. 

e Here he puts them upon laying aſide that vice which vi- 
olates the ninth Commandment, being oppoſite to truth in 
word and work, ſee Epheſ; 4. 25, where he doth more fully 
urge the putting away lying, from the ſame Argument that fol- 
lows here, A lie being no other than that voluntary expreſſion by 
word or deed which accords not with the conception of the mind and. 
heart, on purpoſe to deceive thoſe with whom we do converſe, Con- 
trary to the principles of a new Creature, becauſe God, after 
whoſe Image he is renewed, hates it more than any vice, fith it 
3s contrary to truth, and proceeds from the father of lies, Pſal. 
I5, 2. RX 5, 6, Prov, 12, 22. Fohn. $8. 44, Kev. 21.8, 27. 
they who in converſation do moſtly Stomach to be told of it, are 
moſt ordinarily guilty of it. But the Apoſtle requires Chriſti- 
ans indeed to put away all fraud and fallacy in commerce with 
Men and one another (as well] as converſe with God) that there 
may be in a!l due circumftances a juft repreſentation of that 
without, which is conceived within, Eph, 4. 15, Fam. 3. 14. 
f The Apoſtle ſubjoins bis Reaſon from the Parts of Regenera- 
tion or SanQification, viz, (1) Mortification, which he real- 
ſumes under an elegant metaphor (intimating his ſolicitude to 
have the foregoing and the like vices to be wholly laid aſide, as 
much as was poſſible in this life) borrowed from the putting off 
old and worn Garments whichdid as it were crawl with vermine : 
intimating that if the old Man, as the cauſe, were put off with 
loathing, then thoſe inordinate afteftions and actions which did 
proceed from it, would alſo be removed ; ſee on Rom, 6. 6, 11. 
with Epheſ. 4. 22. if that which was born of the fleſh and con- 
trary to the ſpirit, Fobn 3. 6. with Gal. 5, 17. then inordinate 
affections and luſts, Gal. 5. 24, 

10 And have put on the new mang, which is re- 
newed in knowledge b, after the image of him that 
created him 7. 

g (2) Vivification or Renovation this he connexeth with the 
former, continuing the metaphor, as in natural generation the 
expulſion of the old form is attended with the intraduttion of 
the new, ſo in ſpiritual Regeneration, having put off the old 
Alam, they had put on the new, i.e. Chriſt, not only ſacramen- 
tally, ch, 2. 12, 13-G4l. 3. 27, but really, beiag new Crea- 
tures in Chrift Jelus, 2 Cor. 5. 17. Eph. 2. 16. rnewed in the 
nner man, - Kom. 7. 22. 2 Cor. 4. 16. {ce on Eph, 3. 16. & 4. 24. 
and endowed with a new frame of heart and a new ſpirit, Exe. 
Il, 19, Feb? 3. 5,6, new qualities and affetions, þ The un- 
derſtanding, being, ſavingly enlighten'd, and the will powerfully 
inclined by the victorious working of the ſpirit, Eph. 1. 18, 19, 
20, ſee on Epb. 4. 23. with Phil. 2.13. 2 Theſſ, 2. 13,14. and 
brought to more than a ſpeculative, even to a lively and effe&ual 
knowledge, 1 Fobn 2. 3, i Agreeable to the impreſs of him 
that had new framed or created them in Chriſt Jeſus, 1 Cor, 1 6 

VOL, 1. : 


\ 


COLOSSIANS. Chap. II: 4 


49. 1 Pet, , 15, 16. by the renewing of the Holy Ghoſt, Tt, Wt! Vt 

3.5. foras the natural Image of God conſifted in knowledge | 

and righteoutneſs; fo it was requifite that the ſpiritual Imaze ; ut 

reftored by grace ſhould coniift in the rettifying of the faculties ried: f! 

of the Soul, the underſtanding with ſpiritual £nowlcdge, and the 

will with a ſpiritual inclination to embrace the things thar 

pleaſe God. In communion with whom ſan&tifi* Souls do take 

in hand a new courſe of life, and moye therein, ina ſpiritually 

natural way, : ; 17 
11 Where k there 1s neither * Greek nor Jew /, * i Cor. HL" 

circumciſion nor uncircumciſion 2, Barbarian, #2 3: 

Scythian #, bond zor free o; but Chriſt 7s all, and \ | 

in all p. | | 
+ He prevents the reaſoning of thoſe, who did not negle& 

Regeneration, and place Religion in meer Externals, ſhewing 

that in the new-man, or true ſanfification, andreal Chriltianity, | 

there was ſufficient to' ſave us, in communion with Chriſt, | 

without thoſe external obſervances falſe Teachers did tickle for me" 

2s neceſſary. 1 God in effeQually calling Perſons into a Rare of | FI 

Regeneration, had no regard to thoſe known diftinttions then in | 

the World, of thoſe who were born of the Genrnles or the ſeed of 

Abrabam, Mat. 3. 9. Fokn 8. 39. Rom. 2.11, & 10.12. & 11, 

7, 11, 12, fee on Gal. 3.28, m He works upon thole who are 

not circumciſed, as well as on thoſe who are circumciſed now 

Chriſt is come, Gal, 5,6. & 6. 15. ſince which the poſterity of 

Faphetr conftituting the .greater part of the Genrile Church, do 

dwell in the Tents of Shem according to Noah's Prophecy, Gen, | 

9. 27. compared with Balaam's, Numb, 24. 24. Shem and Cham " 

are not excluded, yet (a learned Man obſerves) the faith of 

Chriſt ſrom the Ages of the Apoſtles hath flouriſhed mbft hi- 

therto in Europe and the parts of 4{4 where Fapher's Lot lay, pd 

and as of old ſome of the latter might, ſo we know of the former ba & 

many of late have paſſed into America, n Upon the Apoftles add- 

ing Barbarian, Scythian, without conjunttion either copulative 

or disjun@ive, ſome have enquired whether theſe two ſhould be 

Balanced in the like oppoſition with the former ? And jt may be 

faid there is no more neceſſity for ſuch exaQnels here, than elſe- 

where in the like form of ſpeech, Rom. 8. ulr, 1 Cor. 3. 22, and 

the moſt think here isan incteaſe'or the Oration, underftandin ; 

by Scythian (which is now more ftriftly the Tartarian) the mot 8g" 


barbarous of the Barbarians, Yet, becauſe the Grecians ſome- 1h :. 
time accounted the World; beſides themſelves { who were poliſh- "5 
ed with humane Learning and Philoſophy) Barbarians, if any « i 


think there ought to be an oppofition betwixt the Barbarian and 
Scythian, then by Barbarian (1. e. in the Philoſopher's reckoning) 
may be underſtood the Fews 3 by Scythian the Gentiles. So 
Fews, Circumciſion, Barbarian, as in a parallel, are oppoſed to 
Gentiles, Uncircumcifion, Scythian, For Scythians being nume- 
rous, whereby ſome uſed to expreſs the Nations (as Symachus | 
tranſlates, Gen. 14 9. Tidal King of the Scythians) and ſo reckon il. 
the whole World might be divided into the Fews and Scythians ATE. 
no otherwiſe, than into circumciſed, and uncircumciſed. 9 As 

to acceptance with God in Chriſt the diſtintions of People 
were aboliſhed with their obſervances and polities, becauſe, 

ſomewhere they were more free, having milder Laws ;  ſome- | 
where they were more ſervile, having more ſeyere Laws, V.i 
which was an indifferent thing now as to their being in Chrift, AaTevR 
concerned to ſubmit to certain honeſt Laws, Ordinances of Ma- | 3 
giſtrates, 1 Per. 2.13, though not Fudtaic or judicial ones, 
In every condition high or low, whether of ſervice or freedom, 
AFS 10. 34, 35» 1 Cor, 7.20, 21, 22, Whoſdever hath put on | 
the new man in Chrift is accepted. Neither the eloquence of 4 
the Philoſopher, nor the rudeneſs of him who is uncultivated ; 

neither the liberty of the free-man nor the bondage of the ſlave 

doth further or obſtrutt the work of the new Creation. þ But 

they that are truly interefſed in Chriſt, have really put him on, 

they are certainly priviledged with that which anſwers all, they 

are indeed the blefjed with faithful Abraham, whether they be of 

his ſeed according to the fleſh yea or no, P/al. 32. 2. Gal. 3. 7, 

8, 9. having put on Chriſt, Rom: 13. 14.-they are all compleat 

in him, ch. 2.10, He is all things to and in all thoſe who are 

renewed, both meritorioufly and efcoctondy, I Cor, I. 30» 

& 15,10, Gal. 2, 20, being by faith one with him who hath of 
all, they have all, Eph. 3. 17. either for their preſent ſupport, 

or their eternal happineſs, Aﬀts 4, 12, 


12 Put on therefore q as the ele& of God holy 
and beloved r bowels of mercies /, kindneſs t, hum- 
bleneſs of mind 4, meekneſs w, long ſuffering x, 

q As he had mention'd ſome particular vices of the old Man ji! (St 
they were to put off, v. 8. he doth here infer that they might METS: 
be compleat in Chrift, there be particular virtues and graces of | \ots 
the new 'man they are to put on, or being new Creatures con- 'P 
tinually to exerciſe themſelves in. r Choſen of God before all 
time, and effeually called in time,from the reft of mankind , ſee 
Fohn 15, 16, Kom. $. 29, 3% Epb. 1.4, 5. 2 Thefſ. 2. 17, 
Saints not only by obfignation, but renewed by the ſanctifying 
Spirit, ch, 1, 2, 1 Pet, x. 2. beloved with a gratuitous and (pecial "of 
love of complacency, Fohn 4. 10,11, Fobn 14.21. Kon. 1. 7, 3; 
1 Theſſ, 1. 4. {He would have us put on, 2, e. exerciſe (heing 
ſanEtitied by the Spirit) mercy, not ſimply, but according to 
the Zebrew phraſe, bowels of mercies, z. e. tendetnefſes of com- 
pathon, reſenting the miſeries of our brethren as ſharing with Wir F 
chem in their ſufferings, from our very heart, ſee Luke 6.26. 2m, 
I2. 15. G4).6. 2. Eh. 4.32. Pet. 3.8, t Cor:rtetie and good-- 
neſs, Gal. 5.22. endeavouring to ſuccour one another in alt offices 
of benignity, 2 Cor. 6.6. 1 Vet.g, 14, 1 A fincere (not an affe- 
ed) holinels of ſpirit,'ee on Eph.g.2. Phil.2.3- wGentleneſs and of) 
mildnels, receiving one another with an open heart and pleaſant 30 


countenance, ſee Gal.s.13, 23. &6. 1, 11befſ.2. 7. x Patience, iy 

bearing affronts and outrages with other vexatious affitions 

without. exaſperation, abiding ſedate after many wrongs offered, ; ak 

ch, 1. 1T, Ads 5,41, 2 Tim 2.10. & 4.2. 1 Pct. 4. 19. "16x Þ 
5 ” 2. 1] I 3 Fore 'F 7; % 


Chap. III. 


13. Forbcaring one another y, and forgiving} 


[1 Or,com-gne another, if any man have a || quarrel againſt 


17% 
f»+4iVf, 
< 


any z ; even as Chrilit torgave you, ſo alſo do 


'e 4, 
y Clemency towards cach other, not only in undergoing af- 
frents, but a ſutpending to take advantage from the infirmities 
of others, ſo, as not to irritate them to paſſion, or to take them 
tripping, , as to aggravate their failings, Prov. 16, 32, 1 Cor, 
4. 12, Gal. 6.2. Eph. 4. 2. 2Theſſ. 1.4. 3 Yea, and if one 
hath any juſt complaint againſt another, mutually paſſhng it by, 
amoneſt cur ſelves; we render forgiving ove another that which in 
1e Greek is forgiving our ſetves, and indeed he, that doth (ce the 
need he hath of pardon himſelf, will pals by the fault of his Bro- 
ther (ſocur ſelves here is put for ore another) Mar, 10. 26, Iuke 
22. 12, conſidering, «4 The exemplar caule here added as a mo- 
tive -to mutual forgiveneſs, v2. our Head, the Lord Jeſus 
Chriſt forgiving of vs whoare bound tb conform to him in for- 
giving others, See on Mat, 6. 14. & 18. 32, 32. Mark, 11. 25, 
Fcbn 13 14. Fpheſ, 4: 32+ with 1 et. 2.21, yea the ftrong to 
indul*e and gratife their weak Brethren in ſmaller matters tor 
their good, Kon. 15e 2, 3» 
14. And above all theſe things, put oz charity b, 
which is the bond of perfeQneſs c. 
b That which we render above as ſurpaſſing all, ſome read 
pon or 0-7, and ome for all theſe things, viz. the graces he 
exhorted them to be clothed with. Both agree, that mutual 
Chriftian Love or Charity is the chiefeſt Garment, the new 
Man car Put on, being the livery of Chriſt's diſciples, Fob» 
12.3%. but in profecuting the Allegory under the former No- 
tion: there is ſome danger of being over fine. And therefore 
it may bc very periinent to underftand the putting on or exEr- 
ciſing, of charity, for the performance of the other graces and 
EXErcifes, this being that which ſets them on work with refer- 
ence to their ſeveral objeAsingaging to fincerity in their altings, 
without which the motions of the new man are no way accept- 
able, this links them together, and ſo is ina ſort, as the Apoſtle 
elſewhere, Rom. 12. 9, '#>+ Gal. 5.14. a fulfilling of the 
whole Law, with Mar. 22. 39, 40. being the ſubjetts of this 
hearty and regular affection of love to God and our Neighbour. 
are enclired by it to do good continually and to avoid the in- 
juring of another in any reſpe& ; not that there is any fulfilling 
of the law perfefly in this eftate, as the Papiſts argue imperti- 
nently from what follows of charity. c That it is the bond of per- 
feineſs, or by an Hypallage or Hebraiſm, the moſt perfe&t bond, 
therefore we are juftificd by it,and ſo by the works of the law be- 
fore God. For (1) Love or Charity it ſelf is not perfe&, and 
ſo the very beſt of the new Creatures who have put it on, how- 
ever they may be perfe&, with a perfection of integrity or 
parts, yet not with a _perfeCtion of maturity or degrees abſo- 
Iutely whiles in this life, SEE ON Eccleſ. 7, 20, Rom. 7.18, 19+ 
Gal. 5.17. bil, 3. 12,15. with Fam 3.2. &c, (2) Upon ſup- 
poſition that charity in a new Creature doth in ſome ſort per- 
feQly fulfil the Law from the time he is endowed with it of God's 
grace, and a Man hath put it on; he could not by it be juſtified 
from the breach of God's law before, he being a tranſgrefſor of 
it in time paſt, 1 Fob 1. 8, 10, (3) That perfeGtion of which 
charity here is ſaid to be the bond, doth moſt likely reſpect the 
integrity and unity of the Members of the Church, holding the 
Head being knit together in one body; ſee on ch, 2, 2, 19. 
with Epheſ. 4. 16, the Greek word we tranſlate bond here, noting 
ſuch a Colle&ion and Colligation of parts whereof a Body 1s 
compoſed, and in one Greek Copy it is found written the bond of 
uniry, Asa prevailing love to God, and to thoſe who hear his 
Image, for his ſake, doth bind up the other Graces in cyery re: | 
generate Soul, ſo it doth the true Members of the body of 
Chrift, one to another, being the beſt means for the perfecting 
of them under Chrift their Head, who hath upon that account 
exprefly requir'd mutual love amongtt his followers. Fohn 15.12. 
1 Fohn 3. 223. & 4.21.and the cogent reaſon hereof is (as above 
in that Chapter of Fobr*s Epiftle, v. 10, 11.) God's loving of 
us, and then indeed when we entirely love God and his Children, 
we ſhew our love to be the bond of perfettneſs in returning 
love to him and his, when by this reciprocal affection,- both ends 
of the band of love do meet and are knit together, we become 
one withGod and in him through Chriſt as one Soul amongft our 
ſelves, walking in love according to his Commandment, A&s 


4. 32, Epheſ. + 2, I Theſſ. 4. on 


# Phil.4.7. 15 And let * the peace of God d rule in your 


hearts e, to the which alſo ye are called f in one 
body g- and be ye thankful 5. 


d He doth not ſay the peace of the World, but the jeace of 
God, or 2s ſome Copies, the peace of Chriſt ; be ſure without the 
mediation of Chrift we can have no peace with God; he alone 
hath made peace, ch. 1, 20, with ch. 2, 14. he is our peace, making 
it with God and among our ſelves to whom he hath preached it, 
£As 10. 36. Eph. 2, 14,15, 16,17. and whom he hath brought 
into the bond of it, Eph. 4. 3. the Lord of peace himſelf who al- 
ways gives it where it is enjoyed, Fohn 14. 27. 2 Thef}. 3. 16. 
*Tis then the peace of God through Chriſt, ſee Phil, 4. 7, 9. 
by faith in whom we have peace in our own hearts with God, 
Jja, 32.17. Rom.5.1. &% 14.17, and with one another, Fobn 
17. 21. Rom, 15.6, 7, 13, that the members of Chriſt may live 
in this peace, 2 Cor, 123, 11. the Apoſtle here enjoyns, as we 
render the word, let it rule in your hearts, the Greek word (both 
{imple here, and compound, ch. 2.18.) is no where elſe to be 
found in the YN, T, but in this Epiſtle, and it may fignifie either 
to arbitrate, or to mediate ; our tranſlation and the generality of 
Interpreters take it in the former notion, for to arbitrate, or to 


- COLOSSIANS. 


who ſate Juage or Umpire to adjudge the reward in the Agonj. 
ſticks. So the import of the Apoſties Tnjunction is, 1-t it regy. 
late, govern, ſuperintend, or give law to the reſt of the 28>. 
ions of the new Man; let it be Miſtreſs and Governeſz of z;1 


1 your motions to kcep them in que reſpe&, and withhold them 


from attempting any thing diſorderly, and to overſway difinci;. 
nations to the divine pleaſure or the good order of Chriftiz; 
community, The Arabick Vernon is, Ict it be as the centre 
Yet one learned man conceiving the Apoftle doth here as before. 
ch. 2,18, glance upon the falle Apoſtles, (who would infinuate 
the mediation or interceſhon of Angels) thinks becauſe the 
word fignifics alſo to medzate, intercede, or interpole, the Apo- 
ftle's meaning may be let the peace of God be to you inftead of 
all conceited Angelical Mediators or Interceffors, which wou1q 
derogate from him that made peace, ch. x. 20. nailing what 
hindred to his Crols, ch. 2. 14. let that preponderate with von 
in your hearts to over-ballance any thing that can be ſuggeſted tg 
the contrary. Conſidering, f The divine vocation or the ca1j 
of God, Rom. 12,18, 1 Cor. 7. 15. and, g The condition gr 
unity of the Body into which ye are called under Chriſt yoyr 
Head, 1 Cor 10.16, & 12. 12,13, 25, 26, Eph. 4. 4. he adds, 
þ Be ye gracious, or amiable, of an obliging temper (as ſome 
render the word pafhvely : ) or rather as we take it attiyely, hs 
ye thankful, i.e. to Ged and Chriſt and Chriſtians, be min{Ff1 
of the benefits you haye received, giving thanks to God :1yays 
for all things, Eph, 5. 20, and behaving your ſelves as becomes 
the Goſpel. 


16, Let the word of Chriſt dwell in you richly 
In all wiſdom z, teaching and admoniſhing one :no- 
ther k in Pſalms, and Hymns, and fpirituat 
_ I, ſinging with grace #2 in your hearts to the 
Lord ». | 


z One learned Man conceives Paul to have written this firſt 
clauſe of the Verſe, as in a Parentheſts, joining in the ſenſe what 
next follows to be ye thankful in the foregoing Verſe; another 
would have the Parenthefis to begin from the 14th Verſe, The 
thing here exhorted to, is the plentiful inhabitation of the Do- 
ctrin of the Bible more eſpecially of the Goſpel, that it may 
take up its reſidence and abode in our Souls, which comes from 
the (ſpiritual incorporation or mixing of it with faith, Zeb, 4. 2. 
without which it may enter in as a ſtranger, but will not abide, 
it may caſt a ray, or ſhine, but is not comprehended and doth 
not enlighten, Fob 1, 5, 2 Cor. 4. 4. it may afford ſome pre- 
ſent delight, Mark. 6. 20. but not laſting. The Apoſtle would 
hare the word to be diligently ſearched, heartily received, and 
carefully obſerved; a Child may have it in his memory, that 
hath it not in his heart, this indwelling of the word imports a 
regarding, as well as a remembring of it, Pſal. 1. 2. Jobs 
5+ 39. & 20. 31, AS 17,11. 27Tim,3.15,16-17, If all the 
Saints at Coloſſe were concerned in this Exhortation, the P:piſts 
oppoſe the ſpirit of God in excluding (thoſe they call) the laity 
trom familiarity with the Scriptures in their Mother Tongue. 
# Being that all Chriſtians are here indiſpenſably obligcd to in- 
ſtru& and warn themſelves ( according to the original word) as 
well as each other mutually ; ſee Epheſ. 5, 19, 1 Then the ue 
of the word, and the manner of expreſſing their thankfulnefto 
God amongſt themſelves is in ſinging to his praiſe PſzIms, and 
Hymns, and ſpiritual Songs, He doth not ſay teaching and admo- 
niſhing from theſe (as elſewhere) Afs 8. 35, & 28. 22. but it 
them ; implying It 1s a peculiar ordinance of Chriſt, for Chri- 
tians to be exerciſed in holy ſinging, as Fam. 5, 13. with an 
audible voice muſically, P/al. gs. 1, 2. & 100 1, Afs 16. 25. 
As foretold Iſa, 52. 8. with Rom, 10. 14. Some would diſtin- 
guiſh the three words the Apoſtle here uſeth from the manner 
of ſinging, as well as the matter ſung. Others from the #ebrew 
uſage of words expreſſed by the LXX, in the Book of 7/uns, 
yet whoever conſults the Titles of, the Pſalms and other places 
of the 0, 7, they ſhall find the words uſed ſometimes promiſcu- 
ouſly, compare Fudg. 5. 3, 1 Chron. 16.8, 9. 2 Chron, 7. 6. & 
23. 13. & 29. 30, Pſal. 29. 2. &45 1. &47.1. & 48,1. C 
G5. I, & 105, 1, 2.1/2, 12. 2, 4. & 42. 10. or conjundly to the 
ſame matter, Pſal. 30. & 48. & 65. & 66. & 74. & $3, & 87. 
Hereupon others ftand not upon any critical diftinQion of the 
thr ce words, yet are enclined here, to take Pſalms by way Of 
eminency, Luke 24. 44. or more generally as the Genus, noting 
any holy Metre, whether compoſed by the Prophets of old, or 
others ſince aflifted by the Spirit extraordinarily or ordinarily, 
Luke 24. 44. AS 16, 25, 1 Core 14» 1%, 26, Famnes 5, 13 here 
tor clearnels ſake two modes of the Pſalms, viz. Hymns whereby 
we celebrate the excellencies of God, and his benefits to Man, 
Pfal. 113. Mat. 26, 30. and Cdes or Sengs, which word thouzh 
ordinarily in its nature and uſe it be more general, yet her? 
Sinechdochically in regard of the circumſtance of the conjoyne( 
words, it may contain the reft of ſpiritual Songs of a more 
ample, artificial and elaborate compoſure, beſides Zymns, 12%. 
I4. 2,2.& 15. 2,3. Which may be called Spiritual] or holy S07g5, 

rom the efficient matter, or end, viz that they proceed 
from the holy ſpirit, or in argument may agree and ſerve thercto. 
Being convenient they be ſo called from the Argument, 25 0P- 
poſed to carnal ſenſual and worldly Ditties, & And then that 
this holy ſinging be not only harmonious and tuneable to the 
Ear, but acceptable to God, *tis requiſite it do proceed from i 
gracious ſpirit, or grace wreught in the heart by the holy ſpirit 
and the inhabitation of the word, 1/2. 29. 13. Mat. 15.8. # TO 
the honour of God through Chrift our Lord, Zke 1, 46, 47- 
Fohn 5, 22. 1 Pet, 4. 11, 


17 And whatſoever ye do o in word or deed p, 0 
all in the name of the Lord Jeſus 9, * giving thanks #*2c! 
to God and the Father » by him. 


rule, govern, ſway, or moderate by way of arbitration, as he 


Chap. 11, 


it 


k% bwlt nd ds a oy 


lin 


| MChap. IE 


o Here the Apoſtle givesan univerſal direttion how in every | 


capacity both perſonal and relative z in every motion a Chri- 
ftian may do all ſo, as to find acceptance with God. p And 
rizat 15 in his expreihons and aRings, viz. comprehending his in- 
ternal as well as external operations; his reaſonings and reſolu- 
tions within, as well as his motions without 3 the thoughts of his 
heart, as well as the words of his tongue, and the works of his 
hand, to take care as much as poſſible that all be i» the name of 
ie Lord Feſus ; elſewhere writing the ſame thing, the Apott'e 
ads Chriſt; ſee Eph. 5. 259, Plato could ſay not only every 
word, but every thonght ſhould take its beginning from God, 
vut he underftood nothing of the Mediator, of the love of him 
and the Father :; but Chriſtians know as there 1s $.1tvation an 1 
other name, As 4. 12. ſo there is no acceptance of their perſons 
and performances in any other name than in _his in whom they 
b-lieve, Phil, 2. 10. Heb. 10. 19, 29. I Fobn 5, 12, and there- 
fore in all their deſires they are to reſpett him, Fob? 14, 13, 14+ 
& 15,2, 16, & 16, 23, 26, looking tor his authority and War- 
rant, Mat, 18. 18, 19, 20. Mark 11. 9. 1 Fohn 5.14. following 
his example, Mar, 11. 29, & 16. 24. Fobn 13, IS. I Pet. 2. 
22, 24. IT Fohn 2.6, in all they ſet about; deſiring ftrength 
rom him, Pjal. 91..16, As 4. 6, 7, 10. 1 C0r. 15. 10. Phil, 4. 
i2. 2 111,2, 7, living by faith upon him, Gal. 2, 20. 2 Pet. 1. 
2, % #7:b, 10, 33. waiting apon him, worſhipping and ſerving 
of him according to his preſcription, Mzc, 4. 5. Mat. 28, 19, 20» 
Ads 2, 42, 43. 2 Tim. 2. 19. for his ſake, Mat. 19. 29, & 24» 
9. Aits 9. 16. Rev. 2. 3, 13. & 3. 8. to his honour and glory, 
Tſal, 31. 3. 1 Cor, 10. 31. Rev. 4. 9, 11. & 5. 12,13. & 11, 13» 
7 Endcavouring to render hearty thanks unto God the Father, , e. 
to God the Father ; the Syriackand Arabick do omit the Conjun- 
tion copulative, however it is to be underſtood expoſitively of 
God the Father of Chrift, and our Father, who doth embrace 
us as his Children, / By or through Chriſt, Eph. 5. 20, Heb. 13: 
15. the only Mediator, 


18 Wives, ſubmit your ſelves unto your own 
husbands ?, as it is fit in the Lord #. 


: The Apoſtle entring upon an Exhortation to Relative 
Duties, begins firſt with that which Wives owe to their Hus- 
bands to whom they are Married, by reaſon this Relation is the 
firſt in nature, and the fountain whence the reſt do flow, Gen. 2. 
22, Tjal. 127. 3. & 123, 3. Prov. 5. 15, 16, That which he 
Tequ:ires is ſe]f-ſubmiſhon in every thing, ſee Eph. 54. 22. 
Exprefiing a ſubjeRion with reverence, v. 24. 33. I Pet, 3. I 
The God of Order made the Woman inferiour, Gen. 2. 83, 22. 
& 3.16, 1 Cor, 11, 7.9. 1 Tim. 2. 13. Tit, 2. 5. yet her ſub- 
mithon is not to be ſervile, as that of an Hand-maid, but con- 
jugal, as ofa meet Companion. w Suitable to God's Inftitution 
in a becoming manner, agreeable to the mind of Chriſt, As 5. 
29. 1 Cor, 7.29. Eph. 6. tk, 5. 


19. Husbands, love your wives w, and be not bit- 
ter againſt them x, 


w The Husbands duty is Jove, which the Apoſtle doth ever 
inculcate from the moſt obliging Conſiderations when he ſpeaks 
of this Relation ; ſes Mat, 19. 6. 1 Cor. 9. 2. with Eph. 5. 
25, 32. to ſweeten on one hand the ſubjettion of the Wite, and 
to temper on the other hand the authority of the Husband, x 
Who, that upon his authority he may not grow inſolent, the 
Apoſtle forbids him frowardneſs with his Wife, thereby require- 


ing a converſation with her, full of ſweetne's and amiry : wrath | 


and bitterneſs is to be laid afide towards all others, V. 8. with 
Eph. 4. 31. much more towards his own Wife, in whom he 1s 
to joy and delight, Prov. 5, 15, 18,19, I Pet. 3. 7» 


20 Children y,obey your parents = in all things a, 
for this is well-pleaſing unto the Lord b. 


y By Children he underſtands both Males and Females. 7 
Whom he requires to yield humble ſubje&ion to thoſe that 
brought then! forth, or have juſt authority over them z lee 
Exod. 20. 12, Eph. 6. 1. paying reverence to them, Lev. 19. 3: 
Heb, 12, 9. obſerving their holy and prudent preſcriptions, 
Luke 2, $1, ſhewing piety and kindneſs to them in all grateful 
Offices, 1 Tim. 5. 4. and ſubmitting to their Parental diſcipline, 
Fer, 35. 6. Heb. 12. 9s 4 In whatſoever is agrecable to the 
mind of the Supream Governor, who is abſolute Sovereign, Acts 
4+ 19. & 5, 29. b And this upon the moſt cogent realon 1ma- 
ginable, becauſe 'tis not barely pleaſing, but well-pleaſing, or 
very acceptable 10 the Lord, who arms Parents with authority 0- 
ver their Children, Eph. 6. 1, 2, 3. 


21 Fathers, provoke not your children to angey c, 
leit they be diſcouraged 4. 


c And to moderate the Parental authority, that they may 
exerciſe it Chriſtianly, he allows not. Parents to do that which 
i> '2 adireCt tendency to irritate or move the paſſions of their 
Ciiidcen meerly for their own pleaſure, without a principal re- 
2:4 to God's glory and their Children's profit, Heb, 12, Io. 
Indeed, he ſeems here more ftriatly to guard Fathers againſt 
Mule-adminiftration of their power in this extream than he doth 
cliewhere, when writing upon the ſame ſubje&t, Eph. 6. 4. con- 
fidering the original word h2 here -puts the negative upon, to 
Eg2ge them to lay aſide rigour- in their Government (as well 
as u1warrantable indulgence) and that upon a very weighty 
rea/on drawn from the end, viz, 4 Left ſome Children who 
. might with a moderate hand be reduced to obedience, ſhould be 
(43 ;t were) diſpirited, by the roughnels of their Father's dilci- 
pline, and even pine away with grief, or grow deſperate, 


in, 22 *Servantse, obey in all things your Maſters 
according to the fleſh f; not with eye-ſervice g, 


n 
$ 
) 
2 


COLOSSIANS. 


235 men-pleaſers hþ, but in ſingleneſs of heart 7, fear- 
ing God. | | 

e The Apoſtle knowing how hard the condition of ſervitude 
was both under the Fews and Genril-s, jeſt any Believers in 
:hat mean condition ſhould diſguſt ſo ftrict a ſubjeftion, eſpeci- 
ily to unbelieving Maſters, and caſt of the yoke by breaking, 
their Covenants to the diſturbance of human Society, and the 
liſparagement of the Chriſtian Inſtitution, he takes a ſpecial 
care to ſweeten the harſhnelſs of it to all thoſe indefinitely whole 
lot it was, by recommending the duties of it to them, from the 
confideration of the acceptablenels of them to God, who of his 
unconftrained grace wotnd vouchſate to them the nobleſt reward, 
ft Wherefore Chriſtianity requires that Servants of all ſorts 
[hould readily receive, and chearfully execute a/ the commands, 
ſee v. 20. in things lawful and honeſt, of thoſe of both Sexes 
whom God in his wife Providence hath given a jt authority 
over them accordirg to the fleſh, ſee alſo Eph. 6. 5, which Ex- 
preſhon is not only for diſtinftion from the Father and after 
of Spirits, Zeb. 12, 9. but for mitigation of their ſervitude, in 
that their Earthly Maſter's power reacheth only things corporeal 
and temporal, not the conſcience and things that are eternal, 
which might be ſome comfort that the ſervitude would not laſt 
long, and in the mean time they were God's Free-men. 1 Cor. 
7. 22, Whom they might ſerve with the Spirit in the Goſpel of 
his Son, Rom. 1. 9. g Yet their Maſters after the fleſh in thoſe 
civil things wherein they had power to command, were not 
lightly to be reſpeCted or ſerved to the eye, or only to be ob- 
ſerved whiles their eye was upon them, Eph. 6. $, h As if 
regard were to be had to the pleafing of Men, and not to the 
pleaſing of God who ſearcheth the Heart, and by his Goſpel, 
(which they ſhould adorn) expett they ſhould remember his eye 
is ever upon them, 7it, 2, 9. 1 Per. 2,18, # And expetts that 
in an holy awe of him, they ſhould do all that is incumbent on 
them, in the ſincerity of their Souls, ſee Eph. 6. 5, 6. with more 
regard to God than Man, 


23 And whatſoever ye do, do it heartily, as to 
the Lord, and not unto men k. 


k Yedo couragiouſly and chearfully from the very Soul, not 
conſtrainedly and murmuringly, though they be froward and 


| their commands harſh ; making account it is Jeſus Chriſt ( who 


hath power over Soul and Body, Mat. 10. 28.) not mortal Men 
only, or in and for themſelves whom ye ſerve, ſee Eph. 6. 7. have 


an eye unto this Sovereign Lord, in the feryile office your Ma- 
ſters on Earth do employ you. 


2.4 Knowing , that of the Lord m2 ye ſhall receive 
the reward of the inheritance #: for ye ſerve the 
Lord Chriſt o. | 


1 Being fully perſuaded of this undoubted Truth, m That of 
the Lord, who ſuperintends all your ſervices (not for any merit 
of yours) Eph. 6, 8. the recompence which your Maſter -in 
Heaven hath purchaſed, Eph. 1. 14, 18. ſhall be freely ſetled 
upon you whom he hath adopted into his Family, v. 5. Kom. 8. 
17. Gal, 4. 7. for in theſe duties you Chriftianly perform to 
Maſters of the lame mold with your ſelves, he really looks upon 
you as his own Servants, ſee Eph. 6. 6. yea and Freemen, 1 Cor, 
7. 22, lo that as Onefimus, Philem, v. 10, ye may more chear- 
fully ſubmit to your Maſter's yoke, according to the command 
and for the ſake of Chriſt, who reckons what you dG upon that: 
account as done to himſelf, Mat. 25, 40. and will inftate you in 
that eternal inheritance, to which neither you nor any mortal 
Man had naturally any Right at all. 


25 But he that doth wrong gq, ſhall receive for the 
wrong which he hath done r - and * there is no re- « ; pe, x; 
ſpect of perſons /. I7, 


Þ But if the reward will not engage to a right diſcharge of 
theſe relative Duties, the injurious Perſon whether be be bond or 
free, Eph. 6. 8, an inferiour Servant, or a domineering Maſter, 
who doth violate the rules of right, agreeing with che Law 
natural and eternal. r Shall have the juſt recompence of that 
injury, whereby he wrongs his Co-relate ; the penalty appor- 
tion'd ro his fault, Kom. 2,6, 2 Cor, 5. 10, 2 Pet. 2. 13. {From 
the impartiality of divine juftice, there 7s no reſpet of perſons with 
God, Kom. 2, 11, or with Chriſt, in the place parallel to this, 
Eph. 6. 9. who is ſo righteous a Judge that he is not ſwayed by 
the outward circumftances and qualifications of Men, whether K 
potent or poor, Lev. 19. 15. fob 34. 19. he (ceth not as Man 
leeth, he looketh not on the outward appearance, but on the 
heart, I Sam, 16, 7- in the diltribution of juſtice, he will put. 
no difference betwixt the mightieft Monarch, and the moſt en- 
ſlaved Peaſant; the purloining Servant and oppeſſing Mafter 
[hall certainly receive anſwerable to their doings from his im- 
partial Hand :; the mean one who is at preſent abuſed without 
relief, and the great one who doth tyrannize without control, 
ſhall one day have right, and be reckoned with by the righteous 
ſudge, 2 Tim, 4. 8. who will ſhew to all the world that he will 
honour thoſe that honour him, and lightly efteem thoſe that de- 
ſpiſe him, 1 Sam, 2, 30. and that he is the avenger of all thoſe 
that are wronged, 1 Thef, 4. $, 2 Thefſ, 1. 6; 


CHAP, 


1 


Chap. IV. 


SAT. IV. 


The Duty of Maſters towars their Servants, 1, And of continuance 

T. 
walk and ſpeak wiſely among them which are without, 5, 6, He 
commends to them Tychicus and Oneſimus, 5 —— 9. And jalutes 
them in the name of Ariftarchus and others, zealous for them, 
14, Commands them to ſalute the Bretkrcn im Laodicea, 
and let them read this Epifile, and to bid Archippus fulfil bis 


2 Preys, 2. Alſo for him in the Work of the Goſpel, 3, 4+ 


IO 


iS, 


Miniſtry z and concludes with his $alutarion, 15 
x 


have a maſter in heaven d. 


That this Verſe doth rcfer to the foregoing Chapter, and 


that it was unadviſedly divided from it, is generally agreed, 
4 Having put Se l ] 
thoſe who have a juſt right over Servants to mind their own 
duty toward thoſe under their command. 6 Though your ex- 
tract or eftate hath advanced you above them in humane $So- 
ciety, yet vou have the ſame nature and infirmities that they 
have, and (as in the foregoing Verſe) muſt appear with them 
before the ſame Judge and Rewarder at the ſame Tribunal, 
And the Apoſtle doth elſewhere, Eph. 6. g. require of Maſters 
in their ſuperiour Relation, what he doth of Servants in their 
znferiour one, to do the ſame rhing, 1, e, not the particular offices 
of their Servants, but according to general rules of right reaſon, 
which by the Law of God, Nature and Nations, that which is 
common to, and incumbent on all Relatives, Aom. 13, 7, 8. Gal. 
5. 13. Eph.6. 8. As hedoth here require Maſters to do their 
Servants right, give to them that which is their due for Soul and 
Body, Gen. 18. 19. Exod, 12. 44. with reſpect to work, that it 
be neither too much nor too little, Prov. 12, IO. & 29, 21, to 
food, that it be convenient for nouriſhment, not luxury, P/al. 
27. 27. & 21, 15, Luk, 12, 42. & 15. 17. Wages, Exed. 2, 21, 
Fam. 5. 4. and recompence, Deut., 15.13. © Ye are likewiſe to 
give them that which is equal or equitable as well as juſt, which 
implies you fhouid not be cruel ito them, or diſcourage them ; 
as you expect they'*ihould ſerve you with good will, ſo you 
Hhould govern them wiſely, and be good and gentle to them, 
P/ai, 101.2, 1 Pet. 2.18. who are faithful, allowing them ſea- 
fonable reſt and refreſhment, Deur, 15. 14. not deſpifing their 
prudent anſwers, Fob 31. 13, 14. but ſhewing them favour in 


ſickneſs as well as in health, 2 AYE 5. 5,6. Prov. 14. 25, Mat, 
9.6. d And that upon this weighty reaſon intimated before, 


COLOSSIANS. 


Aſters a, give unto your ſervants that which 
is juſt þ and equal c, knowing that ye alſo 


rrants upon their duty, he doth here ingage all 


humane Rights, Mat, 22, 21, Rom, 12.7, 1 Pet, 2, 15, 

fidering they are not of the houſhold of faith, Gal, 6, 10. 
profeſs to be, you ſhould be more circumſpect, that von « 
give occaſion of offence to them, x Tim. 5. 14. as well 35 t4.. 
care you be not intetted with their pradtices, 1 Cor, 5. «. hy. 
endeavour to adorn the dodtrine of God our Saviour in all thi... 
Tir, 2.10, p Shewing your prudence, ſay fome learned Mer Fi 
gaining time by honeſt craft, to ſecure you from ſpiritual dancer; 
to your Souls, or divert thoſe who have power from Peri. 
tions. Taking the exprefhion proverbially, Ard for that Pur. 
poſe citea paſſage in the Prophet from the Sepmaginr, Dan, 9, 
others and the moſt import of the original words take rin- for 
opportunity, or the fitneſs it hath for ſome good; and the Pare 
ticiple, we render redeeming, to import either morally (not hs. 
tically, which is impoſſible) a recalling or recovery of time p33 
that is loſt, by a double diligence in employing what renin; . 
or a buying up the preſent time, 2, e, parting with any tij-- 
for the improvement of it to our ſpiritual advantage; oy 4 
buying it out, 2. e. a reſcuing it (as it were) out of the hai; 
of Satan, and the World, which by diftrafting cares 2, 
terapting pleaſures do occation often the miſpence of it ; ſee F;4, 


G. 16, 


6 Let your ſpeech be alway * withgrace q, ſeg-;., | 
ſoned with ſalt r, that ye may know how ye ought © 
to anſwer every man /.- 


q Becauſe Diſcourſe is the tendereft part of our converſe wit; 
Men, eſpecially thoſe without, and ought to be manag'd wit; 
the greateſt circumſpettion ; upon occaſions in every ft {eafr, 
in imitation of Chrift who entertained thoſe that did conver 
with him with gracious words, Luke 4. 22. you ſhould ende; 
vour ſo to ſpeak when called, that the Hearers may concei;: 
your Diſcourſe doth proceed from a gracious Spirit, or grace ir; 
the Heart, ch, 4. 6. teaching your Mouth, Prov. 15, 23, 24, 
with meekneſs of wiſdom, Fam. 3. 13. uſing knowledge aright. 
Prov, 15. 2. being in its tendency gracious, £ccleſ. 19, 12. 
not ungrateful (as tinur'd with gall or venom) but miniftring 
grace to the hearers, Eph. 4.25. 7 Even as meat. duly powdrc 
with ſalt, (Mat. 5. 13.) becomes - acceptable to the diſcernin; 
palate, ſo to the ear that trieth ſpeech, fitly ſpoken ww. 
(Prov, 25,11.) are of a grateful ſavour cleanſed from corruption, 
Fob 33. 2. Markg.5o. / To this purpoſe chiefly in tie m2jn 
points of Chriſtianity, that in a Goſpel becoming, m:rner, you 
may be able to giye a reaſon of the hope that is in you to thoſe 
that ask you with meeknels and fear, Mar, 9.6, 1 Pet. 3. 15, 
courteouſneſs and ſincerity, Eph f. 4.25. free from thoſe eyi!: 
of ſpeech he had hefore enjoyned them in this Epiftle to put 2: 


0 Con. 
ds Yrr1 
( Na 


Wo 


that he above whom ye ſerve, will treat you as you do them : 
this you may be aſſured of, Eph. 6. 8, 9. If you expett favour at 
his hands,when he comes to diſtribute rewards and puniſhwents, 
ſhew it now to your inferiours, who will then appear as your 
fellow fervants, when you muſt give an account of your Steward- 
ſhip, Mat. 24. 49. with Luk, 16, 2. 


2 Continue in prayer e, and watch in the ſame f 
with thanſgiving g. 


e Perſevere, or hold on ſtrongly in Prayer with fervency ; 
we are apt to grow ſluggiſh and indiſpoſed, and therefore have 
need of quickning to this duty, Luke 18, 1, Eph. 6.18. f En- 
deayouring to keep the heart in all fit ſeaſons unto this, as an 
help to the precedent and ſubſequent duties, 7/4. 5. 3» Mark 
T3. 32, &, As 12, 12, Rom, 12.12. 1 Theſſ. 5, 17, Fam, 5, 
IG, Kev. 2.2, g With acknowledgment of thanks for what we 
have already received, P/al. 116, 12, 13, I Thef]. 5.18, 


3 Withal, praying alſo for us h, -that God 
would open unto us a door of utterance z, to ſpeak 
the myſtery of Chriſt k, for which I am allo in 
bonds I. 


þ Not only putting up Petitions for themſelyes, but alſo 
interceding for Paul and others with him, eſpecially Timothy 
mentioned in the ſalutation, ch. 1. 1, 7. Rom. 15. 20. 2 Cor. 1, 
That God 


way, ch. 3.8. ; 


7 All my ſtate ſhall Tychicus declare unto you x; 
whos a beloved brother «, and a faithful miniſter », 
and fellow ſervant in the Lord x. 


t The Apoſtle drawing to . a concluſion, that he at ſo zreat 
diſtance might certifie them of his love to them, and care for 
them, doth here acquaint them that with this Epiſtle he was 
ſending two Perſons of integrity for their ſatisfa&tion and his, 
Ulz, Tychicus an Aliatick, their Country Man and his Fellow Tra 
veller, As 20. 4. whom he ſometimes ſent toother, 2 71m, 2, 
12, Tit, 3, 12. who would give them to underſtand, what cir- 
cumſtances he was in, and all his affairs ; ſee Eph, 6. 21, 22, 
u Whom he recommends to them as being a good man, a Bro- 


ther as Timothy, ch, 1.1, and Epaphroditus, Phil, 2, 25, beloved 


of the People, w And whom he had experimentally found to 
be a faithful Deacon in the larger acceptation, or Miniſter, i, -, 
of Jeſus Chriſt and his Meſſenger. x And owned as his Col- 


legue or Fellow Servant in the Lord, that they might more 
kindly receive him. 


8 Whom I have ſent unto you for the fame pur- 


pole y, that he might know your eſtate z, and com- 
fort your hearts a- 


Y Who was Pauls Meſſenger to them,as to let them know how 


Chap, 17 


= 


MW wy Fad 4 df be te BY %2. > £53 © PFrr.q 


%*y 


* x Theſh, 


11, Phil, 1. 19. 2 Theſſ, 3. 1. Philem, v. 22, 
would vouchſafe to us freedom of Speech z ſee on Eph. 6. 19 
+ EffeQtually to preach the myſtery of Chriſt; ſee ch, 1, 26, 
27. & 2. 2. Mat. 13. 11, 1 Cor, 16, 9. Eph, 1. 9g. I For 
which Tam an Ambaſſador in bonds, or in a chain, Eph. 6. 20, 
7, ce. with the Soldier that kept him in his own hired dwelling, 
Atts 28, 16, 20, 3O, 31. 


4 That I may make it manifeſt, as I ought to 
ſpeak m. | 


mM That T manifeft or open and clear it in due circumſtances, 
as becomes an able Minifter of Chriſt, Kom. 1, 14, 1 Cor, 2, 4, 
& 9. 16. with 2 Tim, 2. 15. & 4. 2, 

5s * Walk in wiſdom » toward them that are 
without o, redeeming the time p. 

7 Let your courle of life be managed with all Chriſtian pru- 
dence, that you may not any way diſparage the Chrittian Infti- 
tution, 2 Sam. 12. 14. Rom. 2. 23, 24. with 1 Tim. 6, 4. with 
your innocency be wiſe as Serpents, Mat, 10. 16. ſee Ephe 5. 15, 
yet, whiles you become all things to all to gain ſome, 1 Cor, g, 
20, 21, 22, 23. you mult take heed of ſuch a compliance, where- 
by you may wound your Conſciences, Exod. 34. 15. Eph, 5,11, 
,and, on the other fide, of ſuch a contempt of them without juſt 
—_— as may provoke them to perſecute you 5; Paul was wary in 
! his reaſoning with thoſe who were not Chriſtians, and would 
[Have others to be ſo, As 17. 24, 25, &C. with 1 Cor. 5, 12, 12, 
'not denying any of them, what's due to them by divine and 


profitable and a benefit to Philemon, whom Paul would h 


it was with Paul, ſo to this end, (1) x That he might clearly 
underſtand how their matters ſtood (as, Eph. 6. 22.) eſpecially 
with reſpe&t to ſpirituals; ch, 2, 1, 6, a And (2) chear u? 
their Spirits (as the Epheſ. 6. 22.) that under the temptations 
of Satan, and tyranny of Perſecutors abroad or at home, they 
might not be diſcouraged, 2 Cor. 4. 17. 


9 With * Oneſimus b a faithful and beloved bio-' '® 
ther, who is one of you c. They ſhall make known ** 
unto you all things which are doxe here d. 


b With Onegmus whom he adjoyns to Tychicus, Same becauie 
of his following Commendation think him to be another Perlv! 
difterent from the fugitive Servant of Philemon, but the molt 
comparing the deſcription here, with the circumſtances in the 
Epiſtle Philem, v. 10, 16, &C. conclude him to be the very (als, 
taking Philemon for a Coloſſiar. c There, as here, being exprei7 
called a beloved Brother, yea, and which may anſwer to faithſ', 
Paul's ſpiritual Som, who (whatever he had been) would Þ: 


alc v0 
receive him as his own bowels. And that which might commend 


him to the Coleſſhans was that he was one of that City, 0r tie 
ſame Birth with themſelves, d Theſe two Perſons of Cre: 


(upon the Apoſtles Teflimony) in their different circumſtance, 
might as joint Witneſſes, give them a full and certain 
how things went with the Church, and particularly v 
now a Priſoner at Rome, | 


account 
ith P.ud 


£ . 
10 A211 


-M Chap. IV: 


1 ”- 
tr [frive 
© 


COLOS 


and Marcus ſiſters ſon to Barnabas f ( couching 
whom ye received commandments ;1t he come unto 
you receive him g.) 


e Here he doth wiſh proſperity to them, Luke 10. 5, 1 the 
name of others, bceginning with thoſe of the circumciſion, VIF. 
Aiſtarchus a Theſſalonian of Macedonia who had been his fellow 
Traveller, Afs 19. 29. & 20. 4. & 27+ 2. yel and, now = 
fellow priſoner, and felow labourer, Philem. 24. ft And Fo a 
"Mark, who was Nephew to Barnabas, Aﬀs 12, 12. &, 13. 13» 
3nd having ſometime dil{pleaſed Paul by his departure and wn 
companying his Uncle Barnabas, Acts 15. 37, 39. yet after Wards 
repented, and was reconciled to Paul, Philem. 24, 2 Tim. 4. 1 z . 
being profitable to him for the minſftry as an Evanrgelift. 
g Concerning this ſame Mark, Paut had given orders to them, 
>< well 2s to other Churches (who otherwiſe, likely, might be 
prejudiced againft him, for leaving Paul and his company 1n 
Pampkitia, 48s 13, 13.) that it he came among thein, rhe) 
ſhould entertain him kindly, who as Peter s ſpiritual Son, 1 Per, 
$. 13. did clſewhere allo ſalute thoſe who were ſcattered. Some 
conceive from the Commandments here they had received that 
Birntb1ts had wrote to the ColofJians in commendation of his 
Coutin Mark, 


11 And Jeſus, which is called Juſtus, who are 
of the circumciſion h. Theſe only- are my fellow- 
workers unto the kingdom of God 7, which have 
been a comfort unto me k, 


h A third Perfon of thoſe who had heen Fews mentioned in 
ti1is ſalutation is Feſus ſirnamed Fuſtus (probably from his juſt 
converſation) whether the ſame with him mention'd in Luke's 
Hiftory of the A#s, ch. 18.7. is not evident. The Greeks uſc 
Feſus for the Z7:brew Foſhua, Heb. 4. 8. it being common with 
them, to more than one. However, the Chriſtians ſince the 
Reſurrettion of Chrift,out of reverence to their Lord and ba- 
ſter (who is God as well as Man) have foreborn to call their 
Children by the name of Jeſus. # Theſe three alone, 7. e. of 
the F-ws (as for 7imorky, his Father was a Greek or Genre, 
Ads 16, 1, 3. and others were Genrles, Aﬀs 28, 23.) were 
aſſiſtant to him at Rome (where it ſeems Peter was not) in EX- 
pounding and preaching the Goſpel, enlarging the Kingdom of 
Grace in converting of Souls, Mar. 4. 23. Mark 4. 11, k lhe 
carrying on of which work, did adminiſter matter of great con- 
ſolation to him in his bonds, ; 


12 Epaphras, who is one- of you a ſervant of 
Chriſt, faluteth you 1, always || labouring fervently 


[7.4 for you in prayers 7, That ye may ſtand perfect, and 


| complete inall the will of God 7. 


I After he had given them the good wiſhes of ſome of the 
Fes 3 he doth here give.the like from ſome of the Genrles, 
beginning with Epaphras, whom he had before commended, 
chap, 1. 7, 3, and doth here recommend him as born and bred 
among them, devoted to their ſervice, in being the Servant 
of Chriſt, as Pau] ſeparated to the preaching of the Goſpel, 
Aom. 1. 1, yea aFellow-priloner with the Apoſtle upon that 
account, Philem, v. 23, m And as it became ſuch an one 
faithful in his office, not diverted by diftance of place, or 
length of time, was night and day contending zealoufly with 


SIANS. 


Phyſick; was no more inconſiſtent with being an, Evangelift, 
thaz PauJ's Tent making with being an Apoſile, 2 Theſ. 
3- 8. xr Headds a third in this Salutation from others, and 


his fellow Labourers, Philem. 24. Though it Gould ſeem 
afterwards when the Perſecution. grew hutter, he 4d for ſome 
worldly reſpes, leave Paul, and depart unto Theſſalonica, 2 Tim, 
4» 10s | 


15 Salute the brethren which are in Lacdicea Hh, 


and Nymphas ?, znd the church which is in his 
houſe . 


F Having ſaluted the Colof.eys, in the name of others, cir- 
cumciſed , and uncircumciſed , he defires them in his own 
Name to ſalute the Chriftians-ia the Church at Laodi-ea. 
t And ſome pious Man called Nynbas, probably living either 
in the Country near the City of Zawjcea 5 or ſome eminent 
Chriſtian of ichief note in the City. The maſculine Article 
adjoyned ſhews this Perſon''to Þe a male ard not a female, as 
ome have inconfiderately reckoned. # And the company 
of believers either of his own family or neighbourhood, who 
did under his proteQion or inſpettion meet to worſhip God 
according to his appointment, Kgm., 16, 1, 5. 1 Cor. 16s 
59, 19, | 


16 And when this epiftle is read amongſt you rw, 
cauſe that it be read alſo in the Church of the Lao- 
diceans x - and that ye likewiſe read the epiltle 
from Laodicea y. 


w The Apoſtle takes it for granted, that, when this Epiſtle 
came to their Hands, *twould be publickly read in a ſolemn 
Aſſembly of the Church, or Brethren convened to that pur- 
poſe, as elſewhere uſual. For indeed he doth ftriatly enjoin 
and adjure the Theſſalonians, under the penalty of the Lord's 
diſpleaſure, that the Epiſtle or Letter which he wrote unto 
them ſhould be read unto all the Brethren, x Thefſ. 5. 27. 
It being an indiſpenſable duty of Chrift's Diſciples to ſearch 
the Scriptures, Fohn 5, 39. and there ſolemnly to read them in 
the Afﬀembly, for the edification of all Minifters and People, 
Old and Young, Deur. 17. 19. Pal. 1. 2. and 119. 9. 
| Mark 13. 37. As 13. 1g. and i7. 11, 12. and 18. 26, 27, 23, 
Rom. 15.4. 1 Tim. 4. 13, 15, x Hence (as it follow>) the 
Apoſtle (who it's likely had not an opportuaity at Rome, 
to have a Copy of it tranſcribed) chargeth them at Coloſſe, 
to ſee or take care after the reading of this fame Epiſtle a- 
mong themſelvesgathat a Copy of i: being prepared for 
that purpoſe, it might, as from him, be alſo ſolemniy read 
or rehearſed in a publick A{ſembly of the Chriſtians at 7 .79- 
dicea, y And he further chargeth thoie to whom he wrote ar 
Colofſe, that they ſhould take care, that the Epiſtle (a3 we 
rightly with the generality of Ancients an'! Moderns renter 
it) from Laodicea, be read among them, The Arbiopic 
Verſion (as we have it thence in the Latiz) reads, ſend i: to 
Laodricea, that the Laodiceans alſo may read it, in the 
Houſe or Congregation of Chriſtians there, The wvulg4r 
Latin, that ye likewiſe may read the Laodicean Epiftle, or 
the Epiſtle of the Laodiceans, Whence ſome of old, and of 
late would have it thought, that. St, Paul wrote a diftinct 
Epiftle zo the CTandiceans, In favour of this Opinion ſome 


Prayers to God for their ſpiritual, temporal and eternal; P24 Man out of this Epiſtle to the-Coloſians and that to the 


weltare, as Rom. 15. 30. 7 that they might attain a ſufhcient 
perfe&ion in all that which God would have them reach to ; 
ſee on chap. I. 28, 2g, Phil, 2}. 15, The diſtance *twixt Co- 
loſſe and Philippi, &c, render it improbable, whatever a learned 
Man Conceits, that Epaphras ſhould be the ſame with Epa- 
phroditus, 


13 For] bear him record, that he hath a great 
zeal for you 0, and them that are in Lacdicea, and 
them in Hierapolis p. 

o For, ſaith the Apoſtle, though I am not privy to his ſecret 
Prayers, yet I can bear him witneſs, and do give him mine 
own teſtimony, that he hath a moſt ardent and ſpecial affe- 
ion for you Chriſtians at Colo, p Yea, and for thoſe allo in 
your neighbour Cities, ſee the Argumens, and ch, 2. 1, viz, 
Laodicea the laſt of the ſeven Churches, to whom excellent Epi- 
ſtles are written, recorded by Fohn the Divine, Kev. 1. x1, 
& 3. 14, and H1:rapolis, or the Holy City, about itx Miles di- 
ſtant from the former, ſay Geegraphers. 


14 Luke the beloved phyſician q, and Demas 
greet you r. 


q Whether this Tuke was the ſame with him that penned 
the Goſpel and the Atts, becauſe the Apoſtle here gives him 
no higher a commendation, ſome doubt ? But others, and 
the moſt, conclude that as Matthew from a Publican be- 
came an Apofile, and others from Fiſhers of Fiſhes, .Fiſh- 
ers of Men, lo Juke from a Phyſician of the Body, he- 
came a Phyiician of Souls, and that this was the very Perſon 
who was Paul's perpetual and individual Companion in his 
Travels, 2 Tim. 4. 11. Philem. 24, conſidering from his ſtyle 
he was an excellent Grecian (very fit for a Phyſician) and 
made uſe of proper medical Terms, Aits Ig. 39. & 17. 16+ 
ard here the Apoſile calls him beloved, as he had done Tychicus, 
verf, 7, and elſewhere his fellow Labourer, who only of thoſe 
tht were not Priſoners ftuck to him, 2 Tim. 4; 11, ſome 
think it to be Zuke whoſe Praiſes are celebrated in the Gol. 
{cl or Evangclica; Churches, 2 Cor, $8. 13. the others would 


| Epheſtans, patch'd up and forg'd a ſhort, but groſs and trifting 
Epiftle, and fathered ir on the Apoſtle, though very diſenant 
from his Charadter and Style, whereupon it hath been rejc- 
ted as Spurious and Apocryphal by the learned Fathers, and 
the ſecond Council of Nice ; and fince by the learned on all 
hands; except fome few of the Papiſts, and except Quz- 
ters, who printed a Tranſlation of it, and plead for it. Some 
Papiſts urge this, to argue that the Church gives the S057. 
ptures Authority amongſt Chriſtians, Bat though ſhe is hound 
to preſerve the Books of Divine Authority, it doth not belong 
to her to Authenicate them, or preſcribe them as the rule 
of Faith; that were no lefs than to outrage the Majeſty of the 
Author ; others alledge it, as being loft, and thereupon would 
inter the Canon of Holy Scriptures to be defeFive, But ſuppotigs, 
yet not granting, that Paul had written an Epifile to the L.:9- 
diceanr, winch had not come down to us, it were altogether in- 
coniequent that the Cannon of Scriptures, we hare, doth not 
contain all things neceſſary to Salvation. Some ftill harpinz 
on the vulgar Tranſlation of the Zeodiceay Epiitie (thouzh that 
| in common »peech might argue they wrote it rather than received 
it would fancy that 'twas. the Epiſtle Paul wrote to the Epbo- 
ſians; but Tertallian did brand the Impoftour Marci:z for 
changing the Title of Paul's Epiſtle 10 the Epheſizns, Others 
conceit, it may be underſtood of Paul's Epiſtle to Philemon. 
whom Par calls his tellow-labourer, likely exercifing his Mini- 


/imus, for the ſake of Oneftmus (who was a Colo{jian} was to be 
read at Coloſſe, others becauſe Luke is mentioned, verſ; 2 4. that 
it was an Epiſtle of his, to the Laodicears, but of that there's 
no evidence. Neither is it probable that Pau} would in this 
Epiſtle to the Colors have ſaluted the Laodiceans, had þhÞ 
written a diſtin& Epiftle to them. Wherefore *tis moſt ra- 
tional to underſtand it, not of an Fpiſtte of Paul written 10 
the Laodiceans, but as our Bibles, according to an Arthentick 
Copy, have with the Greek Fathers, faithfully tranſlatee, 
and repreſented it, written from Laodicez, ome conj-eturs 
it to be the firſt Epiſtle of Fob» which they conceive was 
written from the City of Laodicezs, Others think it was the 
firſt Epiſtle to Timorky, from the inſcription or ſub{cription of 
P long tie put at the end &f it, as if written from Luodicea, 

Pat 


Chap. IV. 


| o Ariſtarchus my fellow priſoner ſaluteth you e,lhave that to be Barnab:zs, or ſome other ; his prafiifing of 


that 15S Pemas who hitherto did perſevere, and that as one of _ 


ftry in the neighbour City of Laodrceaz which was ſent by Cne- 


- FI 
N —= 
0 <—— RR CLI er po = 
- > o— 
=O OS — 
- ”y = "_ Le A 
"OE" - __ XY 


= ws mY —_— —— 
rows <2. 


2 pnrng 


je T - 
Gigs FauT.A = 
o PIR a _ _—_— < —_ x © = I b gu PIR. 
_ —_— ——— - ys ” = ” «Aa 8 . md hat "os . _ a 2 
=. f - HI <a pms _n _ -— ——— . ba i e= A 2 * = 8 _ - 7 
9 . w-_ S _— _ . © G a oo *S "IE g = x =_ d « 
bo _- A PP = wy — - - - » - al * + I » — _— ” _ - —— - P_ - 
-” TY >» ws Go > 4 4 4 < ba. = 0 . þ _ . - <7 —_—_— om = 5 OT ICANES = = 
«. 4 "_-; \ - DPS IS —_—_ prog 2 I SIR. -I2 _——_ ts A__— : O—- " FRITY : — _ 1 . By "un : 
- _ <A IE . £ by + _ *___- ee : > . b 5 nn " _— Wk =. __ Ts ES es — OZ . 4 need NT = 
: ; = _ — bh. > 4 4 —_ PICY 4 =. k 4 — : "F- . . Fo 
” wy —_ w S- - - —_— x : « , va - ———_ _ - _ . . _ 
> p . _ 4 : —_ = . = . ; "ee > Swat = ds S þ £ : Y 
- I" ho —— — _ - C, - = _—_— "A . h_ gt 7 pi M _ oo = a _ - _ - _ - TY 6 
__ * * —wwn—_— " 4 : _ . SS Par” — — - — — — —_ ” - Q - * a - C - —_— Þv 0g args = 09 ey * X - - - —_ 
wh "ns wy —_—— rw 8 RW ” £7 ee —— —_— __ * w $ g : _ _ _ ro * h * — _ SIE ter n+ <> 
- 4 3 - he C- __ ;E 4 - a» 2 RIS y TIT IETD =D . wm en _ . ' . - LS ; . _ 
a! x: ns > <> *. gt - 1 o s he_slth < *. © waxe36 A ” __— _— 6 —_ 4 =, ——_—_ - = _ - 1 « -- g 
q *% . Tet AN bv , ol ” L 45 £ WITS - - _— : hc} - » > WA + * « - N a : "> © >II" ——— - ; : —— _ my _— —_ n 7 
ap 8 - k . 9 3 on - LK. att A iy 5 wat » 62 - o. — .- - : ory —_ oo : " — - iy oY —_ FR f C - Y _ RE 
= '.—— > X xg 4 = a _ "Y =_— ITT r-+— © — = PLN = rm ow Rees 4 A - &L > - eo he —— - © —_ 
h ©: , T4 VET - 4 0 Ka . y _— CLIC ——n —_ St 4 - - a 2 4 2; 1; Oy h- "pg 2 hy 4 "$I ——_ i - =D ac oy _ IC” "YN = =. IX". -* 
I 2 — - TIDE. 38 -- — : FG LREEICES 0 % Py _ 6s 4 r a o: 'S - & ” bp. 
- & TO" , F 4 *; 3 . C . x a Y - : A £ © gh 
—_— — : IT DS —_—_ + = ' E - Wk . Ny 7 ee 9 "Woke 4 _ E =» : » — __— . * ”y pew < —_- 7 
* w FOIA tr nf - wha" i _ 5 | f S Ta Sod = * p- az > * fr, Xe : A 2 Re 
. Mo; , ——_ - « - . - . GD 199 LonA & - Ana 5 5 n -—yo=, - A S_— IX - BY _ - IT dis 
C, þ - - : y og < WV = WM” 2 — —_ + w _ ——— 
v bo - . = IV: SEE > SY > -_ : ;—_ k "> T- a 
- CEE - ” £ Pg n 7 TL ”- £2 K. : . a . -Sa- &t yi axes” 
— - I I - - 
_ : 


SE 
_—. 


— L : » . = - - 
Le Mrs __ T > b 
A .” = - 
EOS. "_ : 
=. _— ” G—_ _ 


I - "7 - "- 
Y, SL ” 
nr ie > : - bs a, 
EIT == ES 
2. L = 
$0 er tnes <e - mw nog > gs 4 


a 


_ 
Ws. 1 4. 


9 


_ 


* 


Chap. IV. 


But againft that it may be 


Pactiiana, nt ri 
times, dividing the Roman Empire into Provinces : And {sMe 


fay this was firſt mention'd in the Eccleſiaſtical Records 
Synod at Conftantineple. Further there be ſeveral 
the Epiſtlegit ſelf do intimate that it was written -** 1 
place in Macedonia, if we conſult cþ, 1, 3, with 3. 1+ 20 4+ 13» 


: Jn ne Epiſtle from 

not from Laodicea,Some think it to be meant of © EP! 
in the 'd anſwer the Colo[75,how probably 
L aodicea, wherein they wou 1 m_ - '> Epifttc 


I determine not. Wherefore 'tis moſt pro's __ 
was written from Laodzcea to Paul at Rom» either by the me _ 
there, or ſome of her Officers, whis! (likely he in Kraits 0 

time encloſed, and) he would have 7-4 


RE: Coloſſians. for the I(fET Clearing of ſome palſages 
bs this 1-19. can Dei: he had obviated ſuch errors as 


He might hear ſeducers were[tempting to diſſeminate among 


I7 And ſay t- Archippus z, Take heed to the 
miniſtry 4 whin thou haſt received, inthe Lord b, 


that thon fulf! 1t c. __ 

; > He Alſo znjoins them to adviſe or advertiſe Archippus, whom 
he doth elſewhere call his fellow-ſoldier, i, e. Miniſter in the Go- 
ſpel, Philem, 2. on his, and Timotheus his behalf, a To ſee to, 
or be mindful of the nature of that excellent miniſtry he had 
undertaken, Rom 11. 13, Eph. 3. 7. I Timhs 4. 6, yea, and tO 


 COLOSSIANS. 


excepted $ there is no' mention of [3e More heedful, Ads 20. 28, 29, 1 Per, 5, 1,2, b Conſiteri; 
:" the writers of the firſt Age : but only in aftex |the Authority of the Lord Jeſus, in whoie name he had ec; 

Called to it, and entruſted with it, Mat. g. 38. Phil, 1, ,- 
in-0eV.|T Tim. 5, 1, 21, c Having been Collegue to Epaghras, or !., 
pafages in |his abſence newly received into his ſacred charge to encore 
tom ſome |him toa faithful diſcharge of his duty therein, to fill up all th- 


d, as helpful to the Edifi-| 


S 


2 


parts of his. office, and leave none of them unperforme1, {:. 
ch, 1.25.1 Cor,g. 16, 17, 1 Tim, 4. 16. with 2 Tim, 4. 5, is 


18 The falutation by the hand of me Paul 4. 6+. 


member my bonds e. Grace be with you f. Amen Fr 
d The Apoſtle having them on his heart, and here (as SI. 
where) likely having uſed an Amanuenfis to pen the body of 1; 
Epiſtle, to prevent fraud and forgery, he doth ſubſcrits 3-;. 
Salutation and Apoftolical Benedittion with his own hand, ut; > 
was well known,Rom. 16, 22, 1 Cor. 16. 21, Gal. 6, 11, 7b; 
19. 2 Theſſ, 2,2, and 3.17, e Importuning them to he 1, 
mindful of his Tmpriſonment in their Prayers, v. 3. #c. : >. - 
imitating his conftancy and patience it called to (fer © 
Phil, 1. 14. his ſufferings being an excellent ſeal to the wah 
of his Goſpel,and his ardent affettion to them and other Gey:j;, : 
for whoſe ſake he was in Bonds. f Then earneftly. pravin that 
the ſpecial grace and fayour of God the- Father, in the Lorg |. 
ſus Chriſt, might be ever preſent with them, ſee Rom, 16. 
1 Cor, 16. 23, 24. Phil. 4.23. g In Teſtimony of the yc1j;r, 
of his defire, and afſurance to be' heard, he concludes (45 ad 
where) with Amen, TY 


I THESSA- 


Chap, 1y 


Chap. I 


I THESSALONIANS 
The ARGUMENT T; 


HE Apoſtle Paulb eing more eſpecially the Miniſter of theUncircumci/z0n,andPreacher of the Gentiles,in bis Progreſs 
through their Cities and Countries, comes t0 Theſlalonica, a chief City in Macedonia, for thither be was called 
in a Viſjon, As 16. 9. A man of Macedonia prayed him, ſaying, Comeover to Macedonia and help us. 7 
Obedience to which be looſed from Troas, and came to Samothracia, and from thence to Neapolis, from thence to Philippi, 
where he abode certain days, Verſe 12. And after paſſing through Amphipolis and Appolonia, came to Theſſalonica,where 
was a Synagogue of the Fews, Acts 17. 1. whither, as his manner Was, he went and Preached that Feſus was the Chriſt. 
WWaereupon ſome believed, and of the devour Greeks a great multitude, and of the chief Women not a few. But the 
Jews whicy believed not, raiſed a Perſecution againſt him ; whereupon the Brethren ſenr him and Silas away to Berea, 
Verſe 10. where he alſo went and preached in the Jews Synagogue. But the unbelievimng Jews of Theſſalonica following 
him to Berea, he was condudFed thence to Athens 5 and from thence, its thought by ſome, he writes this Epiſtle to the Theſla- 
lonians, as is aſſerted in the Poſtſcript , wherein he gives account of the great Succefs of his Preaching among them, for which 
be gives thunks to God, and makes an honourable mention of them in ſeveral places. But becauſe they were new Converts, 
and met with Perſecution from their own Countrey-men for the Goſpel ſake, the Apoſtle was the more ſolicitous for tyem to 
confirm them in the Faith they bad recetved, Whereupon he endeavoured once and again to come to them bimſelf, but ſome 
way or other was hindred by Satan, as he tells them, chap. 2. ver. 18. and therefore he ſends to them Timotheus in his 
room, to know their Faith, and to eſtabliſh them in it, who bringing an Account thereof to him, and of their ſtate, be 
writes this Epiſtle to them accoraing to the Account be received by Timothy, and his own Obſervation and Knowledge 
while he was amongſt them. Particularly, 

1. He: gives thanks for the Eminency and Operation of the Graces of God in them, for the ſpecial Preſence of the Holy 
Ghoſt in his Miniſtry amongſt them, for their Exemplary Faith and Converſation, Chap. 1. 

2. He puts them in mind of his Miniſterial Labours and Perſonal Converſation among them, of the malicious carriage of 
the Jews both againſt Chriſt, and his Apoſtles, and particularly againſt himſelf, wyercof ve knew they themſelves were 
Eye-witneſſes, and declares his preſent rejoicing and glorying in them, chap. 2. 

3. He next gives the Reaſon of his ſending Timotheus to them, and ſpeaks of the good Account he gave of them, and 
the great Refreſhing and Comfort he received thereby ;, and that he was greatly deſirous to ſee theiy Face, and prays that 
they might encreaſe in Love, and be eſtabliſhed in Holineſs, chap. 3. | 

4. He then proceeds to exhort them about their Perſonal walking according to the DireGlons and Commandments he a4 
given them from the Lord Jeſus. And he inſtanceth in Marriage Chaſtity, Righteouſneſs in Dealing, Brotherly Love, 
Peaceable Carriage, minding their Callings, and diligence therein, and not to mourn inordinately for them that die in F:ſus, 
as knowing that they ſhall riſe from the Dead, and meet the Lord in the Air as well, and as early as thoſe that (1.3! 
be found alive at his coming, chap. ” "un. ; 

5. He next deſcribes the manner of Chriſt's coming, that it will be ſuddain and unexpetted, whereby many will be ſur- 
prized in their Security, and therefore exhorts theſe Theſſalonians to be watchful, ſober, and armed for that day, which will 
be to them a day of Salvation which they had been appointed to, And then be exhorts them to Duties belonging to their 
Church, State and Communion, to have an high Eſteem for heir Guides and ' eachers ; to warn, ſupport, and comfort one 
another ;, n6t to retalliate evil for evil, &c. and ſo the Cloſe of the Epiſtle recommends them to God in Prayer, begging 
they would alſo pray for bim , and ſalute one another, and communicate this Epiſtle to all the Brethren, and ſo concludes 
with his uſual Salutation, 

This is the Subſtance of the Epiſtle. 

As to the Place whence it was written we need not enquire, whether it was as is expreſſed in the Poſt ſcrit, from Arhens ; 
or from Corinth, as Grotius and others imagine, | 

As to the Time ; It was ſurely not long after PauPs coming from Theſſalonica ; for indeed the preſent ſtate of the Theſ 
falonians did require 'that be ſhould not Jong delay it, as his ſecret AfﬀeQtion would not ſuffer it neither. 

And as to the Order of the Epiſtle, that that which ts called the Second Epiſtle ſhould be really the Firſt, and by ſome care- 
leſsneſs miſnamed, and miſplaced, 1s a bold groundleſs Conjefure of Grotius, and needs no Confutation. 

But this is more probable, that it was the firſt Epiſtle that the Apoſtle wrote to any Church, though other Epiſtles are 
in order ſet before it : The Goſpel was more early preached here than at Corinth or Rome, as appears in the As of the A- 
poltles, and the Succeſs of it was more ſudden and eminent than in any other City, and their Perſecutions more, whereby 
they might obtain an Epiſtle from the Apoſtle before any other Church. 


CHAP. I. 

The uſual Salutation and Thankſgiving to God for their Faith, Love, 
Hype in Chriſt, and their Ele(tion of God manifefted by the Power and 
Sptrit of God with the Goſp:I uno them, and their Obedience unto it, 
I 6, So that they were Examples 20 others, and by their means 
the Goſpel was made known in other places ; and all knew how that they 
were turned from Idols unto God, and to wait for his Son, who re- 
deemed us, from Heaven, 7 10, 

1 TI Aul and Silvanus a and Timotheus b unto the church 


of the Theſlalonians c, which is in God the father d, 


in the Jewiſh Religion, inſtrufted from a Child by his Parents in the 
Holy Scriptures of the Old Teftament, but inftrudted by Pay] in the 
Faith of Chriſt, whom therefore he calls his Son in the Faith, 1 Tim, 1.2, 
well reported of by the brethren, Ads 16. 2, whom Paul laid hands upon 
with other Elders, to ſeparate him to the Work of the Miniſtry,and the 
Office of an Evangelift, and thereby had a Gift of God beſtowed upon 
him, 2 Tim, 1,6, called by Pzul his ouysp38s, or felow-worker, K5m. 16.21. 
And particularly in the Converſion ot theſe Th:falonians, together with 
Stlvans, as appears Aﬀs 17. 14- He abode with them when Paul was 
perſecuted from them, as there we find 5 and was ſent to them fronz 
Athens afterwards by Paul to know their fiate, and ftrevgthen theic 


Chap. I. 


"TIEN 


and in the LORD Jeſus Chriſt e: Grace be to you, and 


peace from God our Father, and the LORD Jeſus Chriſt. 
a Why not Paul the Apoſtle, as in ſome other Epiſtles? Becauſe 
his Apoſtleſhip was not doubted of by them, they had ſuch an emi- 
nent ſeal of it upon their Hearts ; and there were no falſe Apoftles 
among them to queſtion or deny it. And he joins StJvanus with him, 
whom Peter calls a faithful Brother, 1 Pet, 5. 12, and was a Miniſter of 
tiz Goſpel joining with himſelf in that Work among the Corintbtans, 
2 Cor, I, 19, as alſo among theſe Theſſalonians, as appears Ads 17 4, 
though there called by contrattion of his Name, or by another Name, 
Silas, who is alſo mentioned As 15, 22, as one chief among the bre- 
thren, and ſer.t by the Church of FeruſcJem to accompany Paul and Bar- 
nabas to Antioch, And ftiled a Prophet, ver, 32, and choſen by Pau] 
to accompany him rather than Mark, As 15. go, And being an In- 
rument in converting thele Th-ſJalonzans, and being alſo in their Love 
and Efteem, he joyns his Name with his own in the Epiſtle, 6 His 
name is Greek, for his Father was a Greek, but his Mother a Feweſs, 


«ts 16. 1, whoſe name was Eunice, 2 17m, 1,5. He was brought up 


VOL, 11, 


Faith, chap, 3. 1, 2. And thereupon, that his Epiſtle mighr obtain the 
greater reſpett, he joins his name allo in it ;- as he doth allo in his (-- 
cond Eplftle to the Corinthians, in his Epiſtle to the Philip;4ans and the 
Coloſians, He being Paul's companion in his Miniftry among, the Gen- 
ries in their firſt Converſion, and a man of great name in the Church - 
es, he therefore ſo frequently joins his name with his own. Aad aiſo 
that be might ſhew their conſent in the Truth they delivered to the 
Churches, which might the more confirm their Faith in theirs. c. ihe 
Church inhabiting Theſlonica; which was a chief City in Miczdoniz, 
a M-rropolis, famous for Antiquity, larzeneſs, pleaſant Situation, and 
commerce, Plin, lib, 4, 10, Firft called Thefſalia, and bzing con- 
quer'd by King Philip, was called Theſſalonica, Philippi was allo 
another great City of Macedonia, where was planted another Church, 
to whom the Apoftle writes ; whereby we may ſee that Gud had 2 
great Work for Paul here, when he called him in a Viſion to+ go to 
Mz:uedonia, d Not as the Son of God is in the Father, to be one 
ſubſtance and effence with him 3 nor as the human Nature is in the 


| Diyine Nature of Chrift to be one Perſon with the Father, bur *t 


L$Q) 


IN '3 


* Eph. 1. 
26. Phil. 


+. 
{| Or, FE- 
9n2mbr 


fabus = 


Chap. I. 


imports either teu forfaking falſe Gods, and joining themſelves 
e.. the-Worhin of the rtrae Gol, as in the gth verſe of thi: 
124 nioned from aumb Idols to ſerv? the Iroing and true 


Cc 

: called therofore in a diſtintion from them, God rhe - Farber : 

) «1% their worfkinping God according to the revelation 112: 
kin in the Goel, where he is called Father, Eut in a fenic 
fer! om what Pla:o or Z:emer, and other Heatbens under 


fool, «hen they calld the chief God, Father z either with rel{pcct 
Meir inferior Deitics, of whom they ſtjled him Father, or the 


works of Creation proceeding from him as his Off-ſvring, And 
weir being in him may yet imply more than this; which is their 


being joined to God 1n Covenant, as their God, and Father ; and 
nm him, eftabliſh'd upon him as their Foundation, and 
entre refting in him, It may alſo further imply their 
nd Communion with God through the Spirit, whereby the 


. 
zg* * \{%® 
Linic It a 


$2.3 are ſaid to abide in God, and to dwell in him, and he in 
them, 1 Job. 2.47, 28, yea, to be, 11 him who 1s the wue God, 


t £1. 5.20. & Theſe two are -put together, becau'e there is no ac- 
c£1S to God the Fati:cr, 
omminion with him, and ſo no Being in him, but through Je- 
{ts Chrift, And by both they might ſee the bletſed ftate they were 
now brought to by the Goſpel, Being before ſtrangers to God 
the Father and Jcſus Chriſt, but now in them. And though being 
in God the Father is firſt mention'd, yet in the order of Nature 
we are firſt in Chriſt, and through him, in God the Father. And 
the Aroftle the rather atlerts this of them, becauſe the Goſpel came 
to thein not in word only, but in power. And whereby he gives 
them the Character ofa true Church of Chriſt; what it is, at 
caſt what it ought to be, For to be in God the Father, and in 
the Lord Jeſus Chrijt, import more than literal Knowledge, Dog- 
matical Faith, or outward Profefſion. f This the Apoftle calls h:s 
fulutation with his onn hand, which is my token, ſaith he, in every E- 
piſtle, ſo I write, 2 Theſe 2.17. Read 1Cor, 1.3. 2 Cor. 1.2, ©c. 
and under the Old4 Teftament the Fews uſual ſalutation was, 
Peace te ro you; under the New, it i: Grace and Peace, Peace 
comprebends ail bleffings ; and Grace or Favour, the Spring out of 
which they flow, The Grace of Gol is now ſaid to have appear- 
ed ard to ſhine forth, Tir, 2. 11, and the Church of God to be 
bleſt with all (piricual Blefſings; Eph 1. 3. fo that now the Apoſtle 
Pau! falntes the Churches with Gr...'* -»d Peace; and the Apoftle 
Peter adds, Crace and Peace be multiplied to you, 2 Pet, 1.2, Fude 
2. Mercy unto you, and peace and love be multiplied, Or if we 
take Grace, for Grace inherent in us, as ſometimes it is taken ; 
and Peace for the inward Franquility of Mind, Heart and Con- 
icieace, the Text may bear it. Yet the former rather meant To 
you, lo you that are in God the Father, and in Jeſus Chriſt : Not to 
Infdels out of the Church, Grace ta you and Peace, g Wherein 
are ſhewed Grace and Peace z in their original, from God ; and not 
trom God, ablvlutely confider'd, but as our Father; as a Father he 
conveys the Bleſſinzs of Grace and Peace to his Children. But yer 
not immediately, but through Jeſus Chrifr, as merited by his Blood, 
2nd procured by his interceinon, The Holy Ghott is not mention- 
ed, though he muft be underſtood, but he is rather conſidered as 
the attual conveyor of theſe bleſſings, than the original or procurer 
of them. -\nd the three Perſons work in the ſame order in the 
work of Redemptiou as of Creation, though more diftinaly, 
2 * We give thanks to God bþ always 7 for you all &, 
making mention || of you in our Prayers /. 
h After his alutation, he adds his Thankſgiving and Prayer for 
them. He faw in them an eminent ſeal of his Apoſtleſhip, and ef- 


27172 feet of his Miniſtry, and advantage to the Goſpel in their example, 


and fo gives thanks. And his thanks 1s to God, becaule the ſucceſs of 
the Goſpel was more from his blefſing than his own Miniſtry, 7 @&y- 
7z7z, that is, in a conſtant courſe ; or affetu, though not au, by a 
oratetul ſenſe he had of it continually upon his heart. & For he had 
a zood report of them all from 7imorky, chap. 3. 6. and we find not 
one reproof in this Firſt Epiſtle to any one, as in the Second, 
]. He adds alſo his Praycr tor them, wherein he made mention of 
them by name, as ſome underſtand the words, pyetzy voy me uerr, 
Praver and Thankſgiving ought to go together, eſpecially inthe Mini- 
fters of the Goſpel, and in the work of their Miniſtry, And thus the A- 
poſtle practiſed towards other Churches alſo, as Rom.t.8, Phil.1,3, &c, 


3 Remembring withoutcealing 2 your work of faith z, 
and labour of love o, and patience of hope p in our 
Lord Jeſus Chriſt q, in the fight of God |], and our 


Father 7. 

1m The occaſion of his conftant Thankſgivings, was his conſtant re- 
membring of that grace of God, that did ſo abouad and work pow- 
erfully in them, not as it he had always aa actual remembrance of 
it, but he did not forget it, the habitual ſenſe of it was continually in 
his mind, and was often attually in his Thoughts, eſpecially in his 
approaches to God, and that is all which is meant in the original 
word, *Afeagn]os, while the Apoſtle was with them he ſaw this in 
them, but being now abſent he remembred it: and with ſuch a 
practical remembrance as ſtirred up his heart to Thankſgiving. That 
is a good memory where is treaſured up Matter of Prayer and Thank(ſ: 
Ziving, 2 Or the work of the Faith of you, that is, their Faith and 
the work of it, whereby he intimates their Faith was true, and real, 
A Faith unteigned, 2 Tim. 1.5, The Faith of God's Elet, 777. 1, 1, 
and ſo diftinguifht from a dead Faith, Fam. 2. 26. They received the 
work in much afflition, with joy of the toly Ghoſt, they turned from I- 
dols, to the ſervice of the rue Gol, they waited for the coming of Chriſt, 
&c. Here was the work of Faith. o A labor to wearinel's as the word 
imports. Laborious Love. True Faith hath its work, but love hath 
its labour; and when Faith worketh by Love it works laborioully, 
Whereby the Apoſtle declares the reality of their Love, as well as their 
Faith; it was unteigned Lore, yea fervent Love, the labonr of it went 
forth towards that true God whom they now worihip: That Jeſus 
Chrift on whom they now Belieyed, and to the Saints that were now 
their fellow Brethren, 1 Thefſ. 4, 10. and particularly to the Apoftle 
himſelf, as ip other ways, ſo particularly in the pains and labour that 
ſome of them took to conduct and trayel along with him from Theſ- 


IL. THESS ALONIANS. 


| their Faith and Lore, -and now their Hope $ which are calle 


no true worthip of him, no Union, or] 


thre? cardinal or Theological graces ; all mention'd rogurher 3 "OY 
t Cor, 13, #lt, And by which we have a!l our Communion wi! h Gol 
on Faith, And as their Faith had its work, and Icyo OO 
beir hope had 1ts patience, as the Fruit and produet of jt, 
is a Patience with reſpect to an expected good, and with reſpect tg 
an incumbent evil; and both produc-d by hope. The former ; 
mo: properly called paxeoluuia, or length of mind 

waiting tor, and expectation of ſome deſired good, 
vm un, conliſting in patient ſuffering, or abiding under ſm Wy 
rerie of 


\ent evils their tormer patience 18 mentioned in the 19th 

this chapter, iFey watred for his Son from Heaven, The latter in +1. 
ſecoad chapter 14th verie, Te likewiſe have ſuffered like thingy {;.,., 
your own Country-men, 4s they (i, e. The Churches of Ful.r2) ;/ p Woes 
the Fews, This latter is here ſpecially meant in the Text. And 5&5 
which he gives God thanks, 2. Thefſ. 1. 4. And hope produceth th. 
former patience, as it looks upon the expected good, as that which, 
will come at laſt, and the latter patience, as it looks upon the {17 
tered evil, as that which will not always continne, And when xir1 
reſpect to both theſe the mind of man is kept ſeate and quiet, this 
is the patience of hope. q Or, of our Lord Jelus Chriſt, as «1; 
efhcient and Author of this hope, and of their Faith and its wor! 
and love, and its labour ; or iz our Lord Feſus Chriſt, as here req!) ! 
and fo he is the object of this hope, 1 Cor, 15.19. 1 in, 
And by this the Chriſtian's hope is diſtinguiſhed from all other, a 
hope worketh patience. The Husbandman's hope to receive rh« fy. 
mer and latter rain, maketh him wait for it with patience, 4s; 
5. 7. The hope of the Merchant for the return of his Adventure, the 
hope of the Heir for his Inheritance; but the Chriſtians hope wor;;. 
th patience as fixed upon Chrift; other nope reſteth upon the thins; 
of this lower viſible World, but this is as an «#chor ſure and ſte}: og. 
ring within the vail, where Chriſt is entred as a fore-1unne;, &- 
Ab, 6. ulr, Faith and Love, both have Chrift for their o5jet ; hb: 
conſidered as preſent ; but the Patience of hope in Chriit rc!p-&ct!; 
ſomething future, ſome revelation of him, and ſalvation by him, wh: 
is yet to come. If we bope for that wz ſee not, then do we with pati-n.; 
wats for it, Rom, $8.25, r Theſe words are not in the Syriack or 4- 
rabick Verſion. And they reſpett either the Apoſtles Thank{pivings 
and Prayer for them, and his remembring the grace of God in thc: 
when he ſolemnly approached God's prefence : For in all Duties 9: 
Worſhip we-come before God, and preſent our felyes in his fot 
and their Graces he before mentioned, he remembred them to Gui, 
and preſented them to his view: Or they reſet the Omnilcience 
of God, that their work of Faith, labour of love, G&c. ucre a!l in 
God's fight, and he was a delightful Spectator of them. Or 1iftly, 
They may reſpe& the ſincerity of their hearts in all the a&inos of 
their Faith, Love, and Hope; they did all as in the fight of God. 
As the Apoitle afferts his -lincerity in his Miniftry by this, I/e je: 
4s In the /ight of God, 2 Cor. 2.17, And thus the Apoſtle mc; 
ons their Graces, not as the Heathen Orators, who made orcac 
diene—pe- 3s of Virtue to the praiſe of men, but to the Honour 474 
praiſe of God, 


it Iabovr, 
l here 


vIN iS 
the latter js 


1 
na 


Cp 


wa 


_- 


God s. 


of God's Spirit, the Apoſtle knew their Ele&ion of God, 
know Election as in God's ſecret Decree, but as made manifeſt in 
Fruits and effe&ts of it. As there is a knowledge of things # privri, 
when we argue from the Cauſe to the Effect, fo 4 pn/tcriori, -whicn 
we argue from the Effeds to the Cauſe. And thus the Apottle 
came to know their Election, Not we hope it or con jecture it, hut 
we know it, and not by extraordinary Revclation, but by evileat 
outward Tokens, And if the Apoftle knew this, why ſh:u'd w2 
think they themſelves might not know it alſo? And rhe words 
may be read, Te knoving your Eletion of Gol, And Eleftion in 
ports the chuting of ſome out of others ; for Ele&ion cannot «© 1 
prehend all, Some deny all Eternal Elettion of par: ilar pert ; 
and make it a Temporal ſeparation of perſons to God in their © 11 
verſion ; but is not this Separation from a preexiſting Decree ? ©:4 
domg all things according to rhe counſel of bis own will, Egh, 1.11, OC 
they will yield an Eternal Election of perſons, but only conditional. 
One condition whereof is perſeverance to the end. But the Apolile 
aſſerts their EleQion at preſent before he ſaw their pe: {7 rerance, 


and affection to you, you might perceive that we were men | 


ſalonica to Aibens, AtS17,15+ p The Apoſtle had mention'd before, 


and our Miniftry was from Heaven, and that we [ought nor yours 


men we were among you for your ſake xz. 


: The former part of the verſe aſſerts the Reaſons on which the \- 


poſtle built the knowledge of their Ele&ion, which is the manrer 0: 
the Goſpel's coming to them, # hecan'e preached by him, and ochcrs 10 , 
them ; orintruked with them £34yiJn &s jwas w Confirmed by bi. 

racles, and had powertul Operation upon your h The Power © 

God went along with our Miniſtry, which did not with the falſe 
Ers, 1 Cor. 4.19, And the Kingdom of God is not \ort, but 
ver. 20, x Either in 2ifts of rhe Holy Ghoft which ye receive, 0rt! 
Power which ye felt from the Goſpel upon your Jicarts, 
through the Holy Ghoſt, That they might not think it was ci 
niftry, or the Word alone that had this Power upon them. 7 \ 
ving full alient co the Truth of the Goſpel without donbring v1 
parts, or preached to you with much confidence an i!tti 41ce 07 
part, The former ſenle is beſt. And there is an allo: in bc word 
to a Ship riding upon the Sea with a full Gale, and nur turned vt 
of its courſe by a contrary Wind, Your Faith "I'rinmpi 0.0 yn 
Waves of all Objeftions, Diſputes, or heſitations'of mind, For douPt- 
ings of mind do much hinder the Power of ths Vert upon ths 
heart, And this afſurance they had from the Holy Glwit. 7 \Ve did 
not carry our ſelves among you like ordinary men, Þut_»y Our a- 
borioulneſs, and zeal in preaching, or patient ſutterins tor the Gol- 
pel we preached, by our Holy Converſation, by our denyal of Our {eIVC3 


: > hk - or>Ir tentiencls 
in labouring with our hands amongſt you, and by our great £enuernel 

ent of God, 
Pp but 


AA Yto 
Cas f'S, 


ir 
& £i 
VOur 
Our 


ks y 


Chap. 1, 


4 Knowing, brethren beloved, * your || election of* 27: 

s Another ground of his thankſgiving for them. By the manner gf" or, | 
their receiving the Goſpel and the evident operation of the Graces” "oo. 
We cannoth,. 


+ T 
*. $, 


! {s 
of} " 
HW 


5 For ** our goſpel « came not unto you || in word + , Co, 
only, but alſo in power w, * and in the holy Ghct x,o1, 
and in much aſſurance y, as * ye know what manner oi! 


1: 


r_ 


Lbs 


Pl 


ſound; 
from 

al Our 
forme 
cs Or 
y'd, 

Inanin 
they ti 
Je tur 

Upon 

Was th 
Zener 


« hap. 1- 


. — I wy” QA, 1 —— L = - 4 ' = > . bas, ger) , n  4*x > ah 2 
rou ; whereby you hd an advantag2 to entertain the Goſpel preached | give to Saints or Angels, or it may Egnificetemiole Service v/ T 


by us with greater aſlurance, ; 
to your Salvation, And for the Truth of all this, he appeals to ther 
en knowledge, and that miziry preſence and afhftance of God 19 their 
Miniftry among them, as they could not bur perceive it, 10 it was all 
for their ſake. : 
6 And ye * became followers cf us a, and of the 
I. ORD b, having received the word in much affliction c, 
"with * joy of the holy Ghoſt 4. . 
"4 & As you receiv<l eur Goſpel in the Power of it into your Hearts, © 
'.- rou ſhewdit forth in your Converſation, becoming Followers or Im1- 
cators of us in our patient ani chcertul Sufferings, and our holy and 
©1fdenying Carriage. The Doctrin of the Golpel which we taught 
you, we prattitecL it before your Eyes, and you followed us therem 3 
though before you walked according to the courſe of the World, and 
were followers of the Religion and Manners of the Heathen, The Ex- 
amnles of Miniſters ought to be teaching as well as their Doctcin. 
þ We have followed the Example of Chrift, and ye followed us. SO 
chat as you believed on Chritt as your Saviour, to you followed his Com- 
maruls and Examples as your Lort and Maſter, As he exhorts the Co- 
rinihians, 1 Cor. 11.1. Be ye foiowers of me;4s 1 alſo am of Chrift. 
- Though Afittion and Perſecution attended che Word, yet you re- 
ceived it; and this receiving was not only into ycur Heads by know- 
etze of it, and into your Hearts by an effettual believing it, but into 
your practice by walking according toit, For receiving the Word, in 
the Scripture Phraſe, comprehends ali this in it, 4 Tho' attended 
you, they did nor dejett your Spirits, but you had in Affliftions. joy 
in your hearts by the Holy Ghoſt ; who ufually doth give forth his joy 
moſt to the Saints when under Suffering ; which is one inftance of the 
Goſpel's coming to them not in Vord only, but in the Holy Ghoſt, as 
was faid before. The glad tidings of the Goſpel did more comfort 
them, than all their Sufferings dil caſt them down. : . 
7 So that ye were e examples]! to all that believe in Ma- 
-: 1 cedonia and Achaia, 
e As ve followed our Example, and of the Lord, fo ye were Examples 
'.,, your ſelves, and ſuch great Examples, that influenced all the Believers 
both of Macedaozzia and Achaia, Your Example reached beyond the Con- 
fines of Theſſalonicz, unto the Believers of all Macedonia, yea farther, 
to the Believers of all Ac:h2ia, And though the Philipptans of Macelonts 
received the Goſpel before you, as appears in the Story, As 16. yet 
ve exceeded thei; and became Examples to them in your Faith and 
Patience, Gc, 
8 For from you ſounded out the word of the Lord 
k:-,1.00t only in Macedonia and Achaia, but alſo in * every 
place f your faith to Godward is ſpread || abroad g, ſo that 
4 we need not to ſpeak any thing b. 

f How could they be Examples to Perſons ſo remote, amongſt whom 
they had no Converſe ? The Apoſtle here reſolves it : It was by way of 
re>ort, Things that arc eminent,anddone in eminent places,ſuch as The/- 
{2/onica was,cafily ſpread abroad,cither by Merchants, Travellers,or cor- 

o reſpondency by Letters. And this Report is compared toa Sound Chat 1s 
b-'3 heard afzr off;that made an Eccho,as the Word implies. And that which 
4) ſounded out from you was the word of th Lord, TheWord is laid to ſound 
des. by the Voice of the Preacher, 1 Cor. 14, $, 9. G4!.6. 6. and by the 
Ry Pradtice of the Hearers. The mighty Power and' Efficacy of it was 
' made known abroad, not only in Macedonia and Acha1a, but in every 
place, nor ftrialy every where, but here and there, up and down in 

the World, As its ſaid of the Apoſiles Miniftry, Thetr found w2nt into 

«! the Farth, and their words to the ezd of the World, Rom, 10. 18, The 

report of the Goſpel went further than the Preachers of it, and their 

receiving the Goipel ſounded abroad far and near, And not only the 

Word, but your Faith to Godward is ſpread abroad, eZzanaufey. Your 

Zaith being to eminent, it was ſpoken of far and near, That ye belie- 

ved fo ſoon at our firit entrance, as v. 9. And though we had been 

ſhametully entreated at Phi}ippi a little before our coming to you, and 

Perſecution follorzed us and the Goſpel we preached to you, yet ye be- 

lieved, and your Faith was eminent in the Fruits and Operations of it 

alſo, as was mentioned before, and was afterwards in the Epiftle, And 
it was Faith God-ward, It refted not upon Men, no, nor only the Man 
Chrift Jeſus whom we preached to you, but upon God himlelt, though 
through Chriſt ye became Worſhippers of the True God, and belie- 
ved on him with an exemplary Faith, þ Either of the manner of our 


PE.” preaching the Goſpel, and of your manner of receiving it. Where 
. SY mens Deeds ſpeak and commend men, Words may be filent. And the 
_ Apoſtle might have thought it needful to have divulged theſe things 
PEE abroad for the advantage of the Goſpel, and the Examples of others, 


if he had not. been prevented by the report already ſpread abroad. 
The good examples of the People may caſe their Miniſters of ſome la- 
bour- in ſpreading the Goſpel, 

9 For they themſelves || ſhew of us, what manner of 
4% entring in we had unto you g, and how ye turned to God 


from idols h, to ſervethe living and true God z. 

g The Believers of Macedonia and Achaia do [peak of theſe things 
amy army openly, whereby it is evident the Word of the Lord 
luunded forth to them fromgzgou, and they without any Information 
trom us, declare the great entertainment you gave us and our Goſpel 
at our firſt entrance among you þ Particularly your forſaking your 
tormer Idolatry, when you worſhipt Idols, that were either the lma- 
2es or Shapes of the true God formed by Men, or Men whom they De- 
ty'd, and ſet up as Gods, and worſhipt them and their Images : Or, 
animate Creatures, as Sun, Moon, and Stars, or whatever Creature 
they tound beneficial to them, the Heathens made Idols of them. Theſe 
J:1urned from; "though it was by the Power of God and the Goſpel 
upon your Hearts, yet it was an Aﬀof your own. And though it 
was the worſhip of theſe Idols you had been trained up in, and was 
Z&eneraily prattiſed, yet you turned from it. And as to the manner of 
it, Zow ye turned trom theſe Idols, as in the Text; that 15, how rea- 
Gy, how ſincerely, how ſpzedily, with an holy indigoation of them : 
Or, ws How, that is, by what means; meaning by our entrance 
<2101g You, and the power of our Goſp21 pon your Hearts, accord- 


[)r 24) 
ty DN» 


ing tv that Prophecy, 4/2. 2. 20, 21. which reters to Goſpel-rtimes. | 


? Olerye with Religious Worſhip proper io God ; though th2 Papiſts 


I. THESS ALONIANS. 


> 

+ ? 
And jn all theſe things we had reſpe&t 1 And here the Apoſtle ſpeaks of their Religion in the potitive parr, ! 
| former being negative, The living Ged, fo calle in oppoſition to 
Idols, which were either Images without Life, cr inaximate Crearur?:, 
or Men that were dead whom they worſtipt, or livin; tr cave God 
is ſo eminently, being Life effentially, originally, eternally, immura 
bly , and derivatively to all things that live, 4s 1 Ive, faith ++ Tort, 
and as if none had Lite but himſelf, 72. 49. 18, Gr. And cat rhe 
zrue God,in oppoſition to falſe Gods, The Heathen Gods had no 3-1 
but what Men gave them by worſhipping them. They were nut Gods 
i by Natare, Gal, 4. 8. and fo not true, And as theſe things are fnoke 
to ſhew the power of the Goſpel, ſo in a way of commendation, that 
they did not only turn from Jdols, but ai ferve the true God ; none 
proteſs the true God, but ſerve him not, As alio they deagre rheic 
privilege that they ſerved a God that couid fave chem, which their 
1dols could not. : ; 
10 And * to wait for his ſon from heaven &, whom ,,. _ 
he raiſed from the dead 1, ever Jeſus m, who delivered 1»; 5 
us * from the wrath to come #, *\lat. 3-7. 


+ This is added to ſhew the further power of the &otpet won them, Roms. 9 
they had not only Faith to God-ward, as was faic! defore, but to {lhritt 
ward. They did not only turn to the true God, in onpoiition to hh 
Heathen,but to theSon of God as the true Chriſt, in opnoncion 57012 5) 
believing Jews, For tho* he was the Son of David after the Fieth, yer h. 
was the Son of God alſo, and not'by Creation, as the Angels arc catl't 
the Sons of God,nor by Adoption, as the Saints are, but by Eternal 
neration, though the Man Chrift Jeſus by his Perſonal Union is th 
of God, And their Faith reſj®&ing the Son of God, was their. wa 


OZ 
iT 
for him from Heay'n not that their Faith confiſted only in this, but i 
O 


Ge- 
*2 
ting 
2U 
ſuited their preſent ſtate of Affliction to wait for Chriſt's comin a 
Deliverer and Rewarder, therefore here mentioned by the ApoR!: 
and their Faith, Hope, Love, Patience, may all be included in it. 
They believed that he was gone to Heaven, and would come again, 
which are two great Articles of the Chriftian Faith, And though 
there was nothing in Scnſe or Reaſon, or any Tradition to perſs2:le 
them of it, yet they believed it upon the Apoſtles preaching it. .\nd 
though the time of his coming was unknown to them, yet their Faith 
preſently put them upon waiting for it, And the certain time of his 
coming is kept ſecret, that t?ZSal...s in every Age may wait for it. 
Tho! he will not come *till the end of the World, yet the Saints oughs 
to be influenced with the expeRation of it in all Generations that do. 
precede it, It is to their advantage to wait for it, though they live 
not to ſee him come, And here the Apoſtle concludes his Account of 
the glorious effeRts of the Goſpel upon theſe Theſſzlonizns + that which 
tollows in the Chapter, is by way of Dofrin concerning the Sun ot 
God, 7 He mentions his Reſurrettion from the Dead after his Son{hi' ; 
for he was there declared to be the Son of God with Powe r, Ron. 1.-4- 
And, Thou art my Sg, this day have I begonen thee, appiied to Chritt's 
Reſurreftion, A#s 13. 33. Or the Apoftle mentions is to conficmn 
their hope of his coming again. Had they heard of his Death, and nor 
ot his riting again, they could not haveexpetted his coming from Hea- 
ven, It 1s uſed as an Argument by Paul to the Atberizns, that Chrik 
will come again to judge the World by Gol{!'s raiting him from the 
Dead, As 17.31, And theſe Believers all might comfortably cx- 
pet their own Reſurrettion, ſeeing that he him{elf is already riten, at 
his coming, and ſo be ſupported under their preſent Sufteri::25, though: 
they ſhould reach to the killing of the Body, m He that was be.re 
called the Son of God, is here called Jeſus, or Saviour ; A Nams that 
might more endear him to them, than by call'ns him the Son 
And he mentions a great Aet of his Salvation in the ncxt 
therefore here properly called Saviour ;- and when he comes, he wiil 
come to his Peoples Salvation, 4Z-b, g, ulr, 7 It x 
our Tranſlation hath it, d:{7vered, it looks to what Chriit hiatts 11 


by 2 
if { q\} 
(1 C =— 
d = 


_ & *? 
5 $5.5 |. + nz | ws _ 
"I LEA vS% 3, \b 41S 


done and ſuffer'd for our Deliverance, If in the oro Gag hl ha 

Greek now hath it, it implies a continved AQ Hott [ole tng 

from the Wrath to come, either by his Intc: cethon, or oy no tics wr 
3 » d i i 


his Grace, delivering us from the power of $3 aud rFemptitions, and fo 


preſerving us ina ſtate of Salvation; or if ve real the WWordin the 
Future Tenſe, who will deltver us, as we often fin the pr oout Ione 
both in the Zebrew and Greek to have a furure fignifcation, it refers to 
his laſt coming ; and therefore thz Saints need not be atratl uf che te: 
rour of that day, but wairt for it ; For thoush tho VW ratli ro ome is 
greater than ever yet brake forth in the \V ori.l, Xo, 2. <, oe a © 

of it ſhall not fall upon chem. Though they may wvor Þ 2 Hom 


ral Atfitions and Chaſtiſements at preſent, and ma bu of, 


the Wrath of Men, yet ſhall be free from 11.2 Writ ro c 1 
this will be done by a powerful Keſeuc of Chritt, as the \V« E. 
evousyoy, notwithſtanding all the dinzer and difficulty tia : 
tend it, 

SH A:P. I. 

Th: Apoſtle declares bis Uprighinefs il Conſtany in Proact ing if 3.1 
among ſt them, ſeeking no Honour nor I: 0f't, witch þ: Wins pat domes 
as an Apoſtle of Chriſt, but carried ittowards them with 4/7 50d fie 
Fions and Holineſs, 1——19%. an how they received ts :;* ;4 


as ſuch ;, and had ſuff:red for it 5 their Counnymen ; ber: Fog vers 
of the Churches in Fudea; the Fews, as they k1od nr ford, (7 me {le 
ling up their ſins, 17 16, 41c is d-jrous ro-jee then 182177, fa 
they were his Boaſting and G/ory I the comir oof Chrijt, 17 = 20. 


1 TOR your ſfelvesa, brethren, know our entraitce in un» 

to youb, thatirt was not ja vain c. 

a*Aunt, which ſome read, They themſ-lves, Ge. And then t':2 
Words refer to the Believers in Maedo iy and dc! ] 
fore, chap. 1. V. 9, 10 Or, if we real, ye »our jclves, he anal tn 
their own Experience and Knowledge, 6b Kya, 45 not vaiy, or 1 
pty without Fruit ; our very firſt preaching lad great Succeis, |! 
the Goſpel is always either the Savour of Lite unto Life, or 6f Hot 
unto Death, yet it no good Fruit ſpring trom a Man's M::i':rr, 1: 
may be ſaid to be yain ; as the Rrophet complains, I have 114117 f 74: 
vain, Iſa. 49. 4. Or as ſome, our preaching was not about things vairi 


and unprofitable. | 
2 Bat even after that we had ſuffered before, and 


Ahatts, mentionct he - 


Pad contine the Greek Word Age to loving lower \Wo:rſhi p they 
YOL, Il. 


t 
% 
wers ſhamefully intreared, as ye know, at Phillis, 


C5Qz] we 


—_— 


of 


& gr 


3 2. 


I _- 
»* 


F - 
A . 6s PR. 0 
wi : P tb te 
og, 
RR - ; AE, 4 
woageo, .k Wore 3 44 —— 


Za. 
a—_ _ 
25%, vo Y 


S _ - 


wed 


$090 ___ 


OO KEHED 


* -5 FD 
I on 


- 


. -—] 


w - 
Fr AC aa o 
0 he 
- . > ES A a 
Hf V7 
o _ " 
— - =O 
PEO * _ gp 
—_— A. _ « ; A 


_ 
I. 


ht” 
—_ 


” a 


4 


Ta” 
LL 


Here the Apofrle bef.ins a new Diſcourſe, giving an Account more 
rparticulariy of himlelt, and of iis carriage among them, which hc 


* or the cril cxampie of Miniſters often ſpoils the ſucceſs 0 
niftrv. And what he ſpeaks would favour of vain glory, but that hc. 
bad thetein an Holy end ; as he excuſeth his boaſting tothe © 01 37rthtans 
and other Churches upon the fame account, And be nrit mentions 
11S diſthaige of his Miniftry among them. & A little 
was ſhametally en- 

chruft 4nto an In- 
ns, Ais 16. 23, 


2 


VL 


11S CAIFL122C 1 BC 
is coming to them he had ſuffered, and 
at Zkilipp!, where he and Szasy were beaten, | 
on, and fer in the ſtocks as a couple of V i411 : 

this did not damp their Spirits, nor dilcourage their com- 
10g and preaching to them, d *Empiymacrutla, We ned great Confi- 
lence and Liberty of ſpeech, we were not afraid to ipeak the Gojpel 
nel notwithſtanding our ſufferings, The ſame he allerts 2 Cor. 3.12. 
an#thi- becomes the Golpel, anl will be ro the advantage of it, and 
i: moſt commendable ina tim? of Perlecution. e Depending upon 
15 protection and help, who is our God, and who lent, and Called us 
to the work of the Goſpel, an particularly in Macedonzz. And to 
thew he was not bold beyond his Call and Duty, or the Rues of 
Truth and Sobriety. f The lad Tidings of Salvation by Jelus Chrift, 
which Goſpel, though we have called it ours becaule preached by us, 
ver it is the Goſpel of Gud, as being the Original Author and Or- 
dainer of it. g With much aporny ; Which is either to be taken attive- 
Iy for tt:cir great tameſtneſs and Zeal in ſpeaking, as Luk. 13. 24. Or 
paiively, for the perils they encountred therein, Phil, 1. 30. By 
hott the 1h-fatontans might be induced, though not enabled 


to belive, As he eliewhere calls the Minittry a Warfare, 2 Tim, 2. 4. 


ki. 
b4 
b 
: 1klcs 


= 


<? » b] L 
| 


i” 
) 3 
ex: bs bh, 4 
T* Ladd | 


7 
/ 


Anda Fight, 2 1im,4.7, (Lhe very word uled in the Text) with re- 
{yect to the dificultics and dangers attending it,. or the oppoſition 


of talſe Leachers; they contending for the Faith, Fude 3. 
2 For our exhortation þ was not of decelt #7, nor of 
uncicanncis #, nor 11 gue], 
þ Wherchy he means either the whole Goſpel he preached by a Sy- 
nechdoche, or pa: ticularly that which is hortatory, what was firft 
caught Doctrinally, was tollowed y”,y,cxhortations to Faith and Pra- 
tice, The Decrees or rhe Council at Feruſalem are called an Cx- 
bortation, AFs 15, 21. when 7iul, or others with him were deſired 
to preach in the Synagogue, the Rulers ſaid, if you bave any word of 
exportation for the People, jay on, ARS 13, 15. but taken more ſtrictly, 
- 8, ina ciſtintion from propheſic and teaching. 7 This refers 

cither tothe Doctrin taught by them, it was true, not fallacious, 


a 
-— 


" $6.4 
£\ Oills I'2 


1. THESSALONIANS. 


00d to Edification, Nanifters of t 


ed men, faith Paul, I ſrculd nor ve the Servant of Fefus Chri:t (; 


men, I Cor, 10.33, Even as Tplesje 4 

2d not men when it ſtood in competition with his ne 

ireab 108 4s pleafing men, but God, Otherwiſt tho Rn 

with all, Rom, I I» 7. [cr every 071 e of 174 p;eeſe bt; L 
Goſpel 

hey aze to Ppleatc their own Matter, 


”y' A = . yy, ,” # 
[men 111 41. eiinpe, 
Sh 


a 
% 


4 1,G3NU0 11 
are Chriſt's Ser; 


4 


- 
rf. 
SA% 


© 


4 #; 


bo 


Othce and as Servants 


10, And this made the Apoſtle have regard not only to his Do... 
and outward Converſation, but the jnward aim and intentions os ::. 
heart, as knowing God tryed his heart, , Au expetting the rey) 4 
of his Labours more from Go! than Men, he therefore iguyhr ; 
pleaſe God rather than Men, and approve his heart unto him. ad 
herein he refle&s upon thoſe falſe Apoſtles that ſought to plealc ni 
preached up the Law of Mofes to pleale the Fews, or others that 1 each 
ed and abuſed the DoQtrin of the Goſpel fo gratifie the Luſts of men, 
5 For * neither at any time uſed weflattering words hs, 
as ye know qz nor a cloak of covetouſneſs, * Gag ;;,.* 
witneſs 7. Gp 
p In the former verſes the Apoſtle aſſerted his integrity more. x 
zenerally here, and in the next verſe he inſtanceth in particulars & 12, «2 
He vindicates his Miniſtry from the. guilt of three, Vices which to, Bo, 
often attend it; Flattery, Covetouſneſs d Vain Glory, Firft, Fl. | 
tery, © Adye waartads, Or, we were not, 7. e, converſant ina wors 
of Flattery, as in the Greek; * our word was not a word ot Flattery 
as if we ſought to pleaſe men, When we aſcribe to m2n good thins; 
that they have not, or above what they have . Or vhen wa applays 
or extenuate the Evil that is in them, we fatter them : This is re. 
proved often in the falſe Proph:ts of the Old Teftament, 1/7, 35 17, 
Exek. 13. 10, 18. and the fc 


Us . 


Ji) 


A 

. 

} 

's ® 
SY, 


"ad 
ha 


- vi « We. 


171 * \ 
3 CLLLA at ” 


Teachers in the New. The flatter; 
of Minifters is, their preaching of ſmooth things, rather to pleate than 
profitz when they avoid juſt reproofs, and ſearching Truths, ang 
cloſe applications, that they may not dilpleaſe, and affedt Wiſtlom of 
words and rhetorical Diſcourſes, that they may pleaſe when they ej. 
ther conceal ſome part of truth, or pervert it ; that People may think 
their doings better than they are, or their ſtate better than "+, 


£30 


not a deviſed Fable, and did not iffue out of any errour of Judgment ; 
and fo the Apoſtle gives a reaſon why they were ſo bold in preaching 
it, becauſe they knew it was all truth, Or to their ſincerity in preach- 
ing, we did not uſe any impoſtures, we defigned not to ſeduce Men, 
as the falſe Apoſtles did, but we really ſought your Convefion and 
Salvation. E'FZ dyafarmeas, If this refers to the Dottrin preached, 
it denotes th2 purity of it, which did not tend to gratifie the Fleſh, as 
that of the Nicolaitans and Libertines, &©c, Tf we refer it to the manner 
of their preaching, it denotes the purity of their hearts ; they were not 
acted by any impure Luſts in their preaching, as Covetouſneſs, Pride, 
or vain Glory. / This ſeems to be mention'd before,and therefore ſome 
Expoſitors refer the two former expreſſions to the matter that they 
taught, and this only to the manner, which is moſt probable. They 
had no cunning defipns upon them to make Merchandiſe of them as 
the falſe Apoſtles did; but approve their hearts to God, and make 
themſelves manifeſt to every man's conjcience in the ſight of God, And 
the Apolile alledgeth all this as a further reaſon of his boldneſs in 
preaching, for ſincerity breeds boldneſs ; Or as ſome cauſe alſo of his 
great ſucceſs; tor uprizhtnels is uſually attended with a Bleſſing, or 
as an Argument to thele Theſſalonians to continue their aftettion to 
him, and to ahide in the Doetrin preached to them, For ſuſpicion 
of infincerity in the Preacher, hinders the efficacy of the word upon 
the People, 

4. But as we wereallowed of God * to be put in truſt 
with the goſpel mz, even fo we ſpeak 7, not as pleaſing 
men, but God which tryeth our hearts 0. 

7 1his Verſe gives the realons of what the Apoſtle ſpake in the 
tormer about his fincerity, The one is taken from his Trutt, God en- 
ruſted him with the Goſpel, to preſerve it from Corruption by Errour, 
theretore his Exhortation or Dottrin .was not of errour or deceit, but 
he preached the Goſpel in ſimplicity and purity ; he did not, he durft 
not adulterate, or corrupt it, for it was committed to his Truſt. As 
he calls the Goſpel his Truſt, i 7:m. 1.11, And the ſenſe of this 
great iruſt kept him alſo from uncleanneſs and guile in the diſcharge 
of his Miniftry. And he had this truſt by God's appointment or ap- 
psobation; Gol approved of him for this Iruſt, and that upon know- 
tedge and judgment, as the word ſignifies AeSziudoueds, and as he 
ſpeaks, 171m, 1. 12. be judged me faithful, putting me into the Mini- 
{iry, Not fo betore his Converſion, being a Perſecutor, Blaſphemer,&c. 
Bur God fitted him by extraordinary Revelations, Gifts, Graces, and 


q Their words in preaching being an Overt Att, they them(c] 
judge of, and therefore the Apoftle doth appeal co their own |! 
ledge in that, » In what they conld not know, which was their 
ward aims and deſigns, he appeals to God, which is a form of tn... 
ing. And in all Oaths men folemaly do concern Gol therein, {!. 
ſame in effect that is call'd Proteſting, 1 Cor, 15. my. Aid that wh (© 
in he thus appeals, is, that he had nv coyetous deſign in his Miniftr. 
which he calls a Cloak of Coverouſmſs; which lies either in v: 
withholding that we have, or inordinate defire of mure., -1 8 litter 
is here meant as the Greek word iniports, And the work Clo ', 5 
Metaphor as the wo1d is Tranſlated here, and Job”, 15. 22, As; 
covers the inner garments, ſo when bad deſigns are covercd with 17: 
cious pretexts, this we call a Cloak; The word in the Text t{ =: 
&dowu matorifiag, is often uſed, Mar, 23, 14. Mark 12, 40, Lit: 22, 
47+ and ſometimes rendred, occa''on, but for the moſt part pretcnc:, 
and fo to be underſtood here. And jn Heathen Authors fometim: 
uſed for accuſation, And-this is contrary to what is ſaid of fil: 
Prophets, z Per, 2, 3. Through Cquetouſueſs ſhall they with feigne! wi: 
make Merchandiſe of you. | Wh 

6 * Nor of men ſought we glory s, neither of you, 
nor yet of others ft, when we might have-been * burden 
ſome as the apoſtles of Chriſt «, 


s This is the third vice he vindicates his Minitry from, The wo: 
Glory firft ſignifies ſome excellency in any Subject, Secondly, 1 


excellency 1s diſplaying and manifefting it ſelf, Thirdly, 114 
and eſteem thereof in the minds of men, as the Greek wor! 1/4 
And ſo taken in the Text, we did not ſeek Mens Honour, 2g cen 
or applauſe; we ſo.ght them not in the inward bent of our $1087, 
or the ſtudies of our mind, nor in the outward courſe of 047 be 
ſtry and Converſation, to form them ſo as to gain Gloz v 
Though honour and eſteem was their due from men, yet thu yl! 
ſeek it, Honour is to follow men, men not to follow it; I'is 4. 
reproved in the Scribes and Pharijees, that in their Pravers, 
Faſting, affe&ted Habits, and Titles, they fought the praiſe or Mo, 
Marth, 6, And how can ye b-lieve, ſeeing y2 eee honour 032 of ancth'r, 
and not the bonour that comes from Gol, - Toh. «, $4. every man oh 
with reference to attions honourable, and praite worthy, a2 
Name is a bleſhng, bur to ſeek honour, that's the evil, Ani as tr 4 
poſtle did not ſeek it himſelf, fo he forbids it to others,” (4!. 5, 

Be not defirous of vain-glory,&c, And notes ſome falle'Feacters us git 
ty of it, 2 Cor, 10, 12, It 15 a vice direQly oppoſite to hunicy, Uh: 


Ri Fo 
3:1 bs 
'2 PY 
#76 


TOO 
& pv 


n 
A >4 
*Q 
J 
7 


becoming a man as man, and highly diſhonourable to Go:!, C0." 
trary to the Goſpel. The Heathens cheriiht it as the 51714 66 77e 
Atchieyements, 1t is one of Tul/ies Rules for the inflicutio!: ©; | 16 
but the Chriftian Religion that gives all Glory to God, © 4.4 

And yet we may ſeek the vindication of our Name, when 11Crc0y 


may provide for the honour of the Name of God, as the 5 poille 24% 
often did, 4 


made him faithful, and then put him into the Miniſtry, and intrufted 


him with the Goſpel, And becauſe he [peaks in the Plural Numder, | 


02 
= 


Il'e were allowed of God, G:, therefore Silvanus anl Timotheus, yea, 
and other Apoſtles and Miniſters are to be undertiood as comprehend- 
ed with him in this Truſt, » That is, as men thus approved of by 
Gud, and entruſted with che Goſpel, that we may faithtully diſcharge 
our {ruſt, and be able to give a good account of it, as Stewards of their 
Irvit, 1Ccr,4.1,2, 0 This 1s another reaſon of their faithfulneſs and 
i1tegrity mentioned in the toregoing yerſe, which was the ſenile of 
Ged's Omnilcience, knowing and trying their hearts ; trying imports 


nore than meer knowing, it i3 a knowledge upon ſearch, and proof, j 
as Gold and Silver are known by the 1 onch-ſtone. 
tryctn the hearts of all men, yet eſpecia 


the toregoing ; we ſpeak not as pleating mey, becauſe we know God 
tryeth our hearts. And this confirms what he ſaid before concerning 
his exhortation, that it was not of deceit, unc! 
had, he would have ſo preached as to pleaſe men; 'The Opinions, 


the | 
Luſts, the PraQtices of men, In ſome caſes the A Po | 


fe dit (cok to pleale | 


And though God | 
r Ily ſuch as are intrufted with the | 

—_ . . d 
Goſpe!, Or theic laſt words may have a more immediate reference to | 


eannels, or guile, If it | 


: He adds this to ihew that this was their general Practice « 
mong others as well as theſe Th-ſulomiaans, They were not pris 
of flattery, COVEtLOUS deſigns, or 1celc the Glory of men aivu'y 


any Churches, or in any place, "Thelr praQtice ;n flicir Nutr, 
was uniform, and in all places upright and fincere. © 7 me Vet 
able to be in, or for & burd:n, Hebraiſm: By burilen bMe U'e: 
ſtand Authority, q. 4d," We might have uſed our Minilictal Ati 
rity more than we did, whereby to get greater honour and re* 
lpett to our perſons among you. And indecd all Authoiity © 


Honour haye their weight and burden, Others by bu 


! 
1). 


rden, une 


ſtand maintenance, And that he means we mi,,it —_—_ © : 
chargeable to you, according to the power #2v61 by - _ 
hom Eney 0! 


s from them to w! they ot 
| hem forth in 5J#4'*, 
| be maintained 


his Apoftles, to reap carnal thing, 
ed ſpiritual things. And at the firſt jending, t 
It was ſo ordained by Chriſt, that they thou! De 445 5A; 
the Peoples charge, lee 1 Cor, 9, But they were lo Far from +” and 
nels, that they took not all that was their due, and wat CE) m_— 
their outward ſubſtance, and from ſeeking thew 0%" os 
that they did not uſe what Authority they might 62 DT. 


. 


Aien df 
— 


hap. TE 


©q 


= 


- nurſe cheriiheth her children x, 


14 ( 


++ 2:n0ns them. For they laboured with their hands night and day, 
(that they might not he chargeable, ver, 9. Though they might 
ave challenged not Only maintenance, but honourable maintenance, 
; Jim, 


Go IT | 

- But * we were gentle -| among you w, even as 4 

w Ho next gives account of their carriage morc r7olitiyely : And 
acit ti ſpeaks of their gentleneſs among, them. + gm9, the Latin 

-< it for vim infants, we were as Intantsto you, as Nurles are 
Infants with their Infants, and Children with Children. I his 1s 
one of the Fruits of the Spirit, Gat. <, 22. It ſtands oppofite to 
zor0{tne!t, aufterity, and roughneſs or temper, and is commen- 
table in all, cſpzcially Miniſters, 2 71m, 2, 24. And- was eminent in 
Chriſt, as wes Prophetied of him, ſa. 40, 11, and 42, 3. and 
the contrary he reproveth in Fames and Fobn, Luke g. 54. It ſprings 
rom Humility, Neeknefs, and Patience, as the contraries, Pride, 
Patton, and FrowardneS, In ſome calſcs ſharpnels and ſeverity may 
ful, prudence is co dirett therefore our Carriage, © The 
iz had now to do with young Converts, and under the Try- 
© Perſecution, and not Apoftates, and obſtinate Sinners, againft 


': 3 oe. 5 i © 


i” 


hom we find he was ſometimes ſevere and ſharp, as Fude requi- 
:c, ver, 22, 23. x And he repreſents this gentlenels by that of 
1 Nurle to her Children; not of an hired Nurſe, but a Mother 
Nurſe, Numb. 11, 12, who uſeth all tenderneſs towards them, 
bcareth with their frowardneſs, condeſcends to the meanett Othces 
and Employments, and draws out her Breaſts to them, and lays 
then 1a her Botom, and ' all this to cheriſh them. And ſhe 
doth: this not out of hope of gain, but out of motherly affettion, 
Thus faith the Apoftle, were we gentle among vou- As he convert- 
& them to Chriſt, he was their Spiritual Father, but his gentle- 
nels was like that of a Mother, nurſing her own Children, He 
conſulered their weakne(s in their firſt believing, and bore with it ; 
their many Infirmities, Temptations, Affitions that were upon 
them, had compaſſion over them, and ſapported them under them, 
aid cheritht them with the fincere Milk of Goſpel Truths; and 
+ &i1 all this not for gain,. but out of fincere Aﬀettion, and willing 
mal, Some extend the word, we render Nurſe, to brute Creatures 
Ciinictves, epecially Birds who hatch, and then cheriſh their young 
with the warmth of their own body, and care in feeding them ; Tpoges, 
tbo word bignihies a feeder, and fo may have a more general fignifica- 
tion, tee Fob 39. 14s 


$ So being affectionately deſirous of you y, we were 
willing to have imparted to you not the goſpel of God 
only, but alſo * our own Souls, becauſe ye were dear 


- unto us <, 


y A further account of their behaviour among them. The former 
verſe ſhewed their great gentleneſs, this their great loye; expreſt 
frſt in their affeCtionate deſire of them 3 as the Latrzz Phraſe, Cu- 
pidiſimus fut imports, love to the Perſon, And it was the = of 
their Salvation, firſt in their believing, and then perſeverance and 
progreſs in Faith, Tt was themſelves, and not their Goods they deſired, 
as Part cliewhere faich, We ſeek not yours, but you, Secondly, In the 
effec of it, which was imparting the Goſpel to them; whereby they 
might be fave ; which is amplified by two things. 1, That they dic 
this willingly, not out of meer neceffity, with a backward mind ; the 
word is evSx#wep, we were well-pleaſed to preach, and with compla- 
cence of mind, 2, That they were willing to impart their ſouls to 
them z that is, to hazard their lives for them in preaching to them, 
as Ats 16, "The ſame word fiznifieth both the Soul and Life. And hc 
that dies tor another, gives his Life to them. Or it may refer to 
cir labours and hardſhips, wherchy they endangered their Lives for 
them, labouring night and day, vr, 9, Others underftand the words 


vly as an expreſſion of their great affettion to them ; a man imparts 


11s Soul to the perſon whom he intirely loves, as 1/4. 58. 19. when a 
man gives relief to a perſon in want out of love and compaſſion, 
he imparts his Soul in what he gives, So did they in the Goſpel thus 
preached, And the word znparting is uſed to expreſs relief to the 
wants of the body, Rom. 12. 8. and the Goſpel is the Bread of Lite to 
give relief. to the Soul, and uſed in this ſenſe alſo, Rom. 1. 11. The A- 
poitle may here further allude to Mothers that are Nurſes, who im- 
yart not only other food, but their Milk, which is their blood to che- 
rith their Children, + Or ye have been beloved of us, wherein the A- 
pottle more plainly declares their love to them as the ground of all 
tir Labours and perils in preaching to them; yea, it may reach 
© all that he had ſaid betore concerning their carriage among them, 
«11 Was trom love, 


9 For ye remember brethren a our labour b and tra- 


2&, 20,VClI c - For *labouring night and day, becauſe we would 


.nI7 be chargeable to any of you d, we preached unto 
jor the goſpel of God. 

1 70 make good what he had afſerted before ahout their inte- 
gErity in preaching the Goſpel, that it was without Covetoulnels, 
and vain Glory, &c. and about their great aftztion to them there- 
in, he appeals to their own Memory, 6 Labour, in what we ſuffered, 
attended with care and folicitude of Mind; as the word imports : 
cand travel in what we did, attended with wearineſs, as ſome di- 
Ningviſh of the words. 4 This refers to ſome bodily labour thy 
ueu, which I find not mentioned in the ftory while they were 
at Th-{/a,cnica, though Paul did praQtiſe at Corinth, Ats 18, 3 To 
prevenc [canda), ard miſconſtruttion that ray arile from receiving 
maintenance, and in caſe of the Churches poverty, the Apoſtle would 
it, bur without reſpect to theſe he pleaded it as his due, 
I Cr, 0, 1, ©. Andhis refuſing was no work of ſuper-eroga- 
ten, as the Papifts plead hence; for in ſuch caſes it was a Duty 

', refpett to the honour of his Miniſtry, ſo that it ought not to 
«3 to a rule, either that Minitters in no caſe may labour with 
(ir hands to get their Bread; or that they ouzgbt foto do al- 
Vays, as {ume would conciade hence, and preach freely : How- 
"er he commends them rhat they torgot not the labour and travel 
<%Y underwent for their fake, 2n4 that both night and day, which 


\. THESSALONI $ 
4 » 
; implies aſſiinity and diligence, as P/al. 1. 2, Tute 2, 37. 1 Theſ. 
'3. 10. And fo to hetaken here, 


Chap. IT. 


| Though it may fignifie their ſpen4- 

ing part of the night as well as the day in ſome bodily labour ; the 
lame we read 2 Th:f, 23, $. yet not to be underſtood as if they ſpent 

the whole night ani day therein ; for how then could they have 
preached the Gotpel to th-m as he here addeth z and they would take 
nothing of maintenance from 41y of them, or be chargeable or bur- 
denſom to them 3 not trom tie poor to whom it might really he a 
burthen, nor from the ric: who y=t might be backward, and account 

it a hurthen, ; : | 

10 Ye are witneſſes, and God alſo, * how holily, * T:-- +, 

juſtly, and unblameably, we behaved our ſelves among 3. 7. 


you that believe e. 

e The former Verſes gave account of their carriage in the Mini- 
fry, this here of their Chriſtian Converſation, holily, with reſpe& 
to God, juſtly, with reſpe& to Duties commanded towards men, and 
unblameably, in denying themſelves in lawtul liberty to avoid al! 
occation of blame from any of them. And for the truth of this he 
appeals to themſelves ; yea, to God himſelf. There is the wirnels of 
men, and the witneſs of Conſcience greater than of men, and the 
witneſs of God greateft of all, 1 Fob 3. 20, He appeals to them 
witneffes about their external Adtions, and to God about the integri- 
ty of their hearts: And he doth this not ina way of boaſting, bir! 
to be anexample to them, and asa further reaſon ot the great ſucceſs 
of his Miniſtry, The Converſation of Minifters hath great influence 
upon the ſuccels of their labours, 

11 As you know how we exhorted and comtorted, 


and charged every one of you as a father doth his cht}- 
dren f. 


f Beſides his publick Miniftry he dealt more privately wit them, 
as AFs 20. 20, And that in a way of exhortation and comfort. By ex- 
hortation to quicken them, and by comfort to ſupport them under 
troubles, both outward and inward. And he did this as a Father to 
his Children, with much earneſtne6, Compatſhon, and Love, yea, and 
Authority alſo : He was before repreſented as a Morber, ver, 9, And 
here asa Father whoſe work and duty is to Exhort, Counſel and Com- 
fort his Children privately at home, {o did he as well as publickly, 
for he was their Spiritual Father, as he begat them to Chritt by the 
Goſpel, as he tells the Corinthians alſo, 1 Cor. 4. 15. AS before hs 
repreſented his gentleneſs, ſo here his Fatherly care, Or at their firtt 
Converſion he carried it with gentlene{5 as a Mother, but afterwards 
uſed his Fatherly Authority, And in this he appeals to their own 
knowledge alſo, calling, their own Conſciences to bear witneſs to 
an he ſpeaks, that it might leave rhe greater impreſſion upon 
tnem, 

12 * That he would walk worthy of God g, who hath * Phil, z. 


called you || unto his Kingdom and glory þ. 27. 

h In the Greek Text the word charged mentioned in the former | Or, 
verſe, begins this verſe pegſuesuev, it fignifies teſtifying ; ſome read IMG 0.6 
it, we obreſted, which is as much as beſeeching : others contetted, 
which is a ſevere charge, containing a threatning, as Exod. 19. 21. 
Charge the People, faith God to Moſes in the Margin, conteft the 
People, or wiſh the People. Tt isa charge here which the ' Apoſtle 
gives ſolemaly in the Name of God to them, calling in the witneſs 
of God to it, g That is, ſuitably to the nature of that God who is 
the true and living God, That you may walk like a people who 
belong to ſuch a God, and expreſs the virtues of this Gol in your 
&C onverſation, 1. Pet. 2, 9. or, ſuitably to the great mercy, and glo- 
rious priviledges you have received from him, which he mentions 
in the following words. þ Or, bo ts calling you ; Then by Got's King- 
dom and Glory we muft underftand the future ſtate of Heaven : 
Though they were not yet poſſeſt of it, yet by the Goſpel God 
had called them to it, as Phil, 3.14. 1 Pet. 5. 10, Or, Iho hath 47. 


? 


"oo $£* 
v ww 


{2d you, as we read it, then he means their preſent ftate tince they be- 
lieved and obeyed the Call of the Goſpel, they were brought there-- 
by into God's Kingdom and Glory, Or, his Glorzous X77gJom, where= 
in the Glory of God, eipecially the Glory of his Grace, Mercy, Love, 
and Wiſdom eminently ſhine forth, Hereupon a Chriſtians Calling is 
termed an High Calling, Phil. 3.14. an Heavenly Calling, #ev, 2,1, 
And they being called by God out of Satan's Kinglom into tas got 
ous Kinzdom ; the Apottle chargeth them to walk worthy "of Gu. 
and this Calling, by having a Converſation ſuitable thy; eunto, Epi. 4. 
t. Col. 1.10. To walk according to the Laws of this glorious King 
dom they were already brought into, and ivitably to the glury of H:ca- 
ven that they were called to the hope ot. = ; 

13 For this cauſe alſo thank we God witnout ceat- ; 
ing, becauſe when ye received the word of God whicii 4 Or , te 


ye. heard of us ||, ye received it * not as tihenrd of 
word of men ||, z but Cas it is in truth!) the word of997%%.. 
God k, which effeually worketh alſo 1n you that be- , **.* = 


lieve 1, X 
i The Apoſtle having given the reaſons on his part, and his tel-f Or, ye 

low Minifters, why the Goſpel hail luch efect upon them, he net yorerved 

proceeds to ſhew the reaſon on their part, for which he giveth Gul ;z47 tþ- 

thanks. And that is, from their manner of receivivg it, LIhougit wgr of 

this as well as the former are but ſubordinate reatons, Firit , ew, 

they heard it, ſome will not do that: and therefore te Apoſtle here!! Yr, truly. 

calls it a word of hearing, as K&9m.10.an Acrifin,t th cometh by hetr- 

ing. 2. They received it; [he word importeth a receiving with atfe- 

&ion, as Fejeph the Virgin Mary to his Wite, Mar. 1. 20, 3. they 

received it not as the word of men, which we receive lometimes douMht- 

ing,ſometimes diſputing it ; or believing it only with an lumane Faith, 

upon grounds of reaſfon,as the dittates of Fhilo!ophy,or on the reports 

of men ; and without the impreſſion of the Authority of God npon our 

minds, or when we receive the word of God becauſe of the eloquence 

or learning, of the Preacher, and the aftection we bear to him, or ac» 

miration of his Perſon, or as the Papiſts, we believe it ccauie thy 

Church believeth it, & Wich a Divine Faith, ready Subjeciion ot our 

Souls to it, and with Reverend Attention, as a word that 1; 

from Heaven z which the Apolile poſitively afferts in way ot pa- 


L 


renthefis. As it is in truth, or truly, they belicved, fo he dilperica 


ch- 


moos Lunt 


l; 


« 
C "$9 


the VWorctd to Tien, aid they rec{ivod ut, 


edue ihirks rs God, Having mentim;et before the ſubordinate Rea 
165% afthe kincacy of the Wor!, be now mentions the PrinciPal,whici 
3S G a bimclt. That any receive the Word as the Word of God, it 15 


FR, EP [r- 1 -?, «* 6 "447 
(9 reac 1C3 5 34 


Wor with a Divine Taith, which i; not done without Divine Grace : 
then they oo te tre't of their Minittry, for which they ought to give 
'Tha Lie poweridl working of Gol is ulully expretied by this 
Woiil. F5b. 1. 19, £5,:.10;. And the working of Satan allo, Epr. 


ti. 2, Men rolefed gith the Devil, Men called Frergumenr, 


n -v : Es at _— OF” hs 
Alt 0313S ETETSY, BY WOLEC 


« Adqianr* Þ»} a0, - \&. '- ' > 

\ "a - IC1:* is | 
\ LY .>4 
#3 NUITIT Nile 344 i? 


& <6. is 64) 


Laticacn ot lore, chap, rt. 5. and all from henc?, their receiving the 


MV ortesthe Word of Gail, and fu recaining It, 


14 For #2 ye, brethren, became followers of the 
churches of God, which in Judea are in Chriſt Jeſus » ; 
for ye alſo have ſuffered like things of your own coun- 


trey-rmen o, even as they hve of the Jews p. 


mm This proves the Aſſertion of the foregoing Verſe, as the Jllative 
Eor doth ſhew., They were Followers of the Churches in Fudea, which 
Though the greateſt 
part of the Fows belicied not, yer many did, and hereupon we read 
Though rhere was betore but one National 
vernow in Golpcl times the Churches were many, # And 
b-l:eving ir Chriſt they are called Churches i» hm, gathered together 


ſhewed the Word wrouulitin them cfettually, 


of Churches in Fi-a, 
Church, 


in his Name, into his Inſtitutions, and by his Spirit, and theſe Theſſa- 
tonians became jolywers, or imitators of them, or in the fame Cir- 
cumfances wich them. The Churches among the Fews were the firſt 
planted, and the Gentile Churches followed them, conforming to the 
Faith, Worſhip and Ocder that was firſt in them, yea, and imitating 
their Faith an! Patience in ſuftering, 


is uncertain, For the Periccution mentioned As 17, was chiefly from 
the Jewiſh 5yragogue, though the Gentiles might alſo join with them 
therein, p They ſuffered As the' Churches of Fudea, namely, in the 
fame kind, as Z-%. 10. 22, 33, 34. Andan the ſame Cauſe, and with 
the fame Joy, Cenftancy ana Courage : And here Chriſt's Words are 
fulfilled, that a May's Enemies ſhall be tioſe of his own Houſe, Mat, 


"Wee: 
- Dates 


15 Who both killed the Lord Jeſus q, and their own 


1 Oc, cþ:- prophets, and have || perſecuted us; and they pleaſe not 
fed us ur, God 5s, and are contrary to all men fe. 


ol Ac. Il'3, 
59. & If 
£19. & 


I 9. 9. 


q No wonder then though they have perſecuted you, and the be- 
leving Fews their Country-Mmen. | 'They Killed the Lord Jeſus by the 
hands of Pilare, crying, Crucite him, crucitie him, Though it 'was 
by God's determinate Counſel, and the Roman Power, yet by the 
Fews malice they Lied him, Mat. 21, 38, This is the Heir, let us kil 
him, r Of their own Nation, and directed and ſent particularly to 
them of God ; fo that it was no new thing in them thus todo. Not 
that theſe individual Fews who perſecuted Paxl, killed the Prophets, 
but they were of the ſame Nation, the ſame Blood, and of the ſame 
Spirit with them, and were the Children of them that killed the Pr9- 
phets, as our Saviour charged them, Mar, 23. 31, The Spirit of Per- 
{cution was natural to them; it deſcended from one Generation to 
another : Their Kings were guilty of it, their Prieſts, their Falſe 
Prophets, and the common People. And though better things might 
be expetted of the F-ws than any other People, yet thus they did, And 
it was not only becauſe of the new Doctrin or Worſhip that the Apo- 
files preached, for they killed their own Vrophets before them ; but i 
was their Love to their Luſt, Hatred of Reproof, Enmity to Holinels, 
©. that was the caule. And Chriſt himſelt chargeth them with the 
ſame things, Mat. 23. 37. 0 Ferufalem, thou which killeſt the Prophets, 


&c. and foretels it as that which they would yet practiſe, Mat, 23. 24. | 


s By the Figure called Meioits, its meant, they highly diſpleaſed God, 
and were haters of God, and hated, and now rejected of him, Though 
they had the Advantages and Reaſons to pleaſe God above all other 
People, having had the Law and Ordinances of his Worſhip among 
them, yet they plealed not God. And particularly in their Perſecutions 
of the Goſpel, and the Apoſtles, though they might think that therein 
they did God good ſervice, as Fobn 16. 2, tr Contrary in their \Vor- 
ſhip, Laws and Cuſtoms. Or rather, contrary to all Men, in hindering 
the courſe of the Golp2l appointed for Mens Salvation, And deſpifing 
all other Nations in compariſon of themſelves, they were apt to be ſe- 
ditious, and raiſe Tumults every where, and to diſdain Familiarity and 
common Friendſhip with the Gentiles, 


And for this cauſe he 


Y muck as from God. And it is a great Cau'e 
e Th oiving to Gud. whon \iinifters hnd a People receive the 
ro catsl 


Ant 
1 bo.yctan received as the Word of God, there 
oh effefially, foas to promote Love, 
12! Aorrification, Comfort and Peace, Tc, The 
mentioned before their Wor: of Faith, Labour. of Love; 


o The Fews that believed, ſuf- 
fereil.from the unbelieving, F-ws of their own Country, fo did theſe 
Th-N:lonizns. But whether the Apoſtle means only the Gentiles of 
Theſja/pric, or the Fews that dwelt there and were born among them, 


I. THESSALONIANS. 


} 


9 


Chap 


your Fathers, x Firſt they filled up their Sin, and then comes th: 
Wrath, or that Wrath foretold by Daniel, chap. 9. 27. and by Bet ts 
viour, Mat, 23.3, It was thcir laſt DeftruQtion by the Ronin, ob ws 
Wrath broke forth upon them ſeveral times before, but not to th _ 
moſt till now ; Or, 0 the end, as in the Greet, In former Puniſhin, ws 
God remored his Wrath, and reftored them again, but this TW ra 
tothe end. Or ſome by the end, underſtand only the perie&tion 2; 
conſummation of this Wrath. And its coming may be read in the "apr 
Ir bath prevented them; as bringing them to Judgment befaraiar. 
tais World, As the deſtruttion of the old World, Sodom 2nd fs : 
lem, were Figures and Forerunners of the laſt Judgment, Ang _ 
this doth not contradict what the Apoſtle ſpeaks, Rom. 11. and fb 
of the Prophets concerning their Calling into the Faith and Church 
_hrift before the-enc of the World, Alſo we muſt underſtand it ny 
a! exception of the reinnant of God's EleRion that was amongft them. 
77 Bur we, brethren, being taken from you for a ſhox; 
time {|, in preſence, not in heart, endeavoured more 4. 


bundantly to ſee your face with great deſire y. 


from them, and his continued Abſence. They were under Treat SE. 
terings for receiving the Goſpel he had preached ; and for hin there- 


tore to leave them fo ſoon as he did, (as appears in the ſtory, 43; wy 


and not preſently to return, might diſcourage their Heatcs, and ma. 
chem queſtion his Love. Firſt for his leaving them, ic tell; thom jr was 
not voluntary, but forced by the Perſecution of the F-ws, hc being Core 
away in the night by the Brethren to Berea, As 16, 10, Ang chore. 
fore he calls it a raking away, rather than a going awiy tron em 
And (as the Greek Word imports) it was, ſecondly, a thirg oricyy+, 
to him, as Children that are bereft of Father and Mother, a4 ict; (3. 
phans, are greatly troubled, And he was afflicted as a Father heref: of 
Children ; ſo were theſe Theſſalonians to him, having begotten them tg 
Chrift by the Goſpel. 3. It was but for a ſhort time, for the tins of 
an hour, when he left them, he intended but a ſhort Rtay from them 
only to avoid the preſent ftorm : Others think he means by the words 
his ſudden leaving them before he took ſolemn leave of them, 4. He 
lefc them in preſence,quoad factem, as to the outward fight,not it lieart, 
The proper Genius of true Lovers, who are preſent with each; other jn 
ſoul, when ſeparated in body. 5. He tells them of his endeavours tg 
(ce their Face ; and that the more abundantly, becauſe he cams aw 
ſo ſuddenly from them; And laftly, He did this with great delire, ti; 
endeavours herein were aGted with great AﬀeQion, 

18 Wherefore we would have come unto you, (eve : 


[| Paul z) onceand again, but * Satan hindred us a. 


13. 20, Phil, 4. 16, and that they might be aſſured it was not his Fc!- 
low Minifters defire only to come. "Therefore he expreſſeth his on 
name particularly in a Parentheſis (even I Paul.) Or by his fryins,0-4 
{ Pau}, he aſſures them concerning his own deſire to come to them ; At 
leaſt I Paul, though others did not fo ; as the French Bible reads ir 
And h@had come to them had not Satan hindred him. a Either b7 v3: 
ling up Diſputes againft the Goſpel at Athens by the Philoſophe: s thcre, 
Or ii: by fiir 


it were t0 the Sea, Aﬀs 16, 14, Or by ſowing Diffentions in cr 
Or by what way it wa:, 
Bur being thus hindred, it made his (etice tte 
more fervent by the oppoſition, 4 And hereby we ſce Satai's En 
to the Goſpel, eſpecially to Churches new planted, that they might xc; 
take rooting. 


19 For whatzs our hope b, or joy c, or crown cf 1e- 
joycing d? are noteven ye in the preſence of our Loud 


Jeſus Chriſt at his coming ? 
6 Here the Apoſtle gives the reaſon of his Defire to ſee them, He 


firſt calls them his Hope ; that 1s, the matter of his Hope,that among 
others they ſhoula be ſaved in the Day of Griſt. c Secondly, Hts i": 
He at preient rejoyced in their ready and ſincere receiving the Golpe! 
preached by him, d Thirdly, Zis crown of rejyycing which henifies he 
triumph and height of joy ; and ſeeing he mentions the Preſence and 
coming of Jeſus Chriſt, he looks to the Crown that he ſhoild receive 
at that day, which he ſpeaks of 1 Cor, g. 25, And theſe The]2ontins 
among others would help to make up this Crown of re'oycing ©0nm, 
And in the Words we may obſerve an eminent gradation, a> allo £2: 
the Crown of Miniſters will ariſe not only from Chrift, but :r9:3 
their People alſo. 


20 For yeare our glory and joy e. 
e He redoubles the expreſſion, to ſhew his great affection, an com 


placency of heart in them. Or to ſhew that they mote than vers 


(ll 


This he adds further, to fatisfie them of his real Aﬀetion to them, ''* 
that he attempted to come to them once and again,that is,often,as 2}, ** 


might be ſaved zz, to fill up their fins alway w - for the 
19. 12, & Wrath 1s come upon them to the uttermoſt x. 


16 * Forbidding us to ſpeak to the Gentiles, that they 


# Their contrariety to all Men is expreft particularly in this in- 
ſtance ; they forbad the Apoſtles to preach to the Gentzles, which were 
the greater number of Men. Though they oppoſed allo their preaching 
tothe Fewiſh Nation. For the F-ws could not endure to hear that the 
Ger1iles ſhould be received into the Church z or into ſpecial Favonr 
witi God ; as appears by Chriſt's Sermon in the Synagogue, Luk. 4.28. 
And in the Apoſtles Apology for himſelf at Feruſalem, Acts 22, 21, 22. 
And their forbidding themimplies, not an AQ of Authority, for they 
had it not, but their hindering them what they could, and ftirring up 
the i'cople and Rulers againſt them, as 4#. 17, 6. w To cauſe it to riſe 
up to tuch a meaſure and degree as will at laſt bring Deſtruftion. Tho' 
This was not their Intention, yet through the juſt Judgment of God. it 
was the Event, They killed the Prophets ; but killing Chrift, and 

xerſecutins the Apoſtles,and hindring the Salvation of Mankind there- 

y, this filled up their Sin. The Expreſſion alludes to what is aid of 
the Ameries, Gen, 15, 16, and foretold by Daniel, chap, g. 27. called 
the Conſummation ; as there is a perfe&ting of Holineſs, and filling up 
of Grace, ſo alſo uf Sin. And Sin againſt the Goſpel ripens Sin more 
than againft the Law, And becauſe they made a conftant progreſs in 
Sip, they 2c laid to fill it up, Marth, 23. 394 Fil je up the meaſure of 


He being troubled for them, had ſent Timothy to confirm them an 11 j-* 


lone : 


love to them, and care of them, that they might not do!: 
cauſe of his long abſence from them. Therefore he te!!5 
though he could not come himſelf, yet he ſent 7,m77h04s ' 


were this occaſion of rejoycing to him. And he mentions g/0ry a> Weil 
as joy, for the great ſucceſs of his Miniſtry among them, would 
+117) 


dound to his Glory in the day of Chriſt, as Da, 1 2. 2, They 11't is 
many to righteouſneſs ſhall ſhine as the ſtars for ever and evo. Of) 
were his glory at preſent, a glory to his Miniſtry, and a Sc: 19. 


Apoſtleſhip, 


CHAP. 1II, 


and comfort them under Tribulations,10 which the fatthjul are 4fp * 
I----5, 47d at the coming again of timothy, uniderſtasndin their 97:6; 
faſtneſs and Welfare, erejoyceth and thanketh God, 6----9. 377 
eth, that for the perfeFing of their Faith be might come again 19 5+" 
and that they may be abundant in Lov? and Sanfificarion 4841 © 
coming of Chriſt with all his Saints, 10---13, 


I WA F Herefore when we could no longer forbea!; 


we thought it good to be left at Athens #- 


confirm Þ'5 
bt of it, bc 
them, that 
0 them from 


a The Apoſtle proceeds upon the ſame Argument to 


1 . 
Ate N41 


Ci 


EF ROM 


40; 
tans 


» The The Apoſtle here makes his Apology,for his ſo ſoon departing &., * 
"oO vw, 


0: 4 


bal 
1 


«x v4ll 


*Phil. 2, 


l6, 


” & = 7 i OO EE 


a 


L THESSAL 


Chap. IT. 


Atheis, which we find not mentioned in the 4s by Luke; and his love 
herein is commended the more, 1. becauſe he ſent him out of a ftrong 
jimpulle of affettion, he could not forbear any Jonger, Or bear, it was 
a heavy burden to him till he had done it, as the word 1mports. 2, He 
was Content to he leit at Athens alone by parting with 7:mothy, though 


his company was ſo defirable and uſeful to him at that time, And 

- he was well pleaſed ſo to do for their ſakes, Edpxyoupey, he had a com- 

placence of mind in ſo doing, fo much he preterr d their good betore 
his own contentment. — 

2. And ſent * Timotheus our brother and miniſter of 


God, and our fellow-labourer in the goſpel of Chrilt, to 


eſtabliſh you, and to comfort you concerning your faith b. 

b 3. By the delcription he gives of him in the Text, A man dear 
to him, andas his right hand in the {ervice of the Goſpel, And his care 
ofthem is commended the more by ſending ſo eminent a perlon to 
them. 4. From his endin ſending him 3 which was tO eſtabliſh them, 
that through the tear of ſuffering,or any Temptations, they might not 
forſake the Faith they had received; and 10 comfort them CONCerning 
by th-ir Faith: The word ſometimes {1gnifies to exhort, and the ſenſe 
p is 900d if we {o read it. But becauſe the Faith they had embraced pre- 
ſented much matter of comfort to them, therefore our Tranſlation 
well renders the word. 


3 * That no man ſliould be moved || by theſe affli- 
that we are appointed 


| #R0M. 163 


FERHh,? l 


k 


i Ir f, tions c, for your ſelves know 
E;.. thcreuntod |. 

1Or, cl- The Apoſtle had mentioned before his great atflitions, and they 
j-/,[:1,49- knew well what he himſelf had ſuffered both at Theſſalontica and Berea, 
Afs 16. and therefore might fear they might hereupon be ſhaken in 
their Faith. And Timothy therefore was ſent to comfort and eftabliſh 
them : God could do this without him, but the Miniftry 1s his Or- 
dinance he works by. And when he faith that mo man ſhould be mov- 
ed; it ſhews what is a Chriſtian Duty to be unmoved by ſufferings for 
the Goſyel. c The word here uſed by the Apoſtle anſwers another 
word uſed, 2 Theſ, 2. 2. which alludes to the waves of the Sea, ſhaken 
by the Winds. Fears, and doubts, or hefitations of Mind do move and 
thake it, which the Apoſtle ſent T:morhy to prevent, or remove. 
d And belides he addeth an argument of his own to confirm them, | 
when he tells them, ye know thast we are appotnted thereunto; The word 
is uſed, Luke 2.34. 1 Tim. 1.9. But he means we ſuffer afflictions 
according to the purpoſe and -intention of God. They come not by 
chance, or meerly from mens wrath and enmity, ' but from the ap- 
pointment of God, And whether the Apoſtle ſpeaks only of his 
hh own ſufferings, and other Minifters of the Goſpel, or of all Saints in 
$1 general, as Aﬀs 14. 22, Rom. $. 17, 20. 2 Tim. 3. 12. is uncertain, we 
| may well underſtand it of both ; ſo that he would not have theſe Theſſa- 
JIonians think it ſtrange, as if ſome ſtrange thing happened to them, 
1 Per. 4. 12, whereby to be ſhaken in their Minds, 


4 For verily, when we were with you we told you 
before that we ſhould ſuffer tribulation e, even as It came 


to paſs, and ye know F. 

e The Apoftle having ſaid that they kifew they were appointed to 
ſufferings, tells them here they knew it, becauſe he had told them of 
jt. ! aul by ſome extraordinary inftin& or Revelation, often fore- 
aw his ſufferings, and God more generally told him of them at his 
fit Convertion, As 9. 16. And he told them of them that they 
might reckon upon lufferings. A faithful Minifter will not only tell 
the People of the Crown, but of the Croſs of- Chrift, f And what 
he foretold of his ſufferings, he tells thcm came to paſs, whereby 
they mizht be ſtrengthened further in their Faith about the Golpe] 
he had preached to them, and not be offended at his Sutferings, be- 
ing foretold to them, as well as appointed of God. 

5 For this cauſe when I could no longer forbear, ] 


J:) 
/ 


ONIANS. 


7 Therefore, brethren, we were comforted ever you! 


o He was comforted by this Faith of theirs ia all his own affiction, 
and diftrets, The faithfulneſs and conſtancy of a People is the grzat 
comfort of their Teachers. I have no greater joy than to ſee my Childr,n 
walking in #he ruth, 2 John 3. 4, 

8 For now we live, if ye ſtand faſt in the Lord p. 

p The comfort of their Faith was ſo great, that it would be as life t& 
him, if they ſtood faſt in it ; which he calls a ſtanding fi? in 1þ2 
Lord, Life is not oniy the Union of Soul and Body. Comfort is tho 
Life of the Soul, eſpecially that which ſprings from Divine Canſzs, 
And on the contrary the apoſtacy and :legeneracy of a i'cople doth kil! 
the hearts of their faithtul Leachers, 

9 For what thanks can we render to God again for 
you, for all the joy wherewith we joy for your ſakes & 
before our God 7, 

q This is another effe& of the melſage 7imotky brought, it cauſed ir; 
the Apoſtle great Thanſgivinzs to God. Firſt he rejoiced in their 
Faith, and then gives God thanks for that joy. The matter of his 
rejoycing - was their Faith, but the Author and upholder of chis Eaith 
was God ; and in giving thanks to God for his joy, he gives thanks alſo 
to God for their Faith trom whence it ſprang, The joy that Minifters 
have in their Peoples Faith ſhould break forth into- Thankſyivings., 
And the Apoſtles thanks to God was beyond what he could recurn or 
expreſs, as appears by the form of his ſpeech, For whas thanks can we 
render, &C, as Pſal, 116. 12, What ſhall I return unto the Lord, faid Di 
vid, &c, r And his rejoicing before God implies bot}: che nature of 
it, it was Divine and >piritual, and his reſpe& to God therein, 2 
David danced before the Lord with all his might, 2 San. 6, ig. 2. *: 
With a reſpe& to God's goodne(s then declared. Or the Apoftle may 
mean his joy was inward before God rather than before men. 

10 Night and day * praying exceedingly / that we 
might ſce your face, and might perfect that which is 
lacking in your faith t ? 

We have here the laſt effed& of Timo:h:us meſſage, upon the A- 
poſtle, it put him upon Prayer for theſe Th:Jalontns, expreft by the 
athduity of it, nizhr and day, &c. that is, in a conſtant courle; as 
we noted before, Chap. 2. 9, And by the fervency of it, exceeingly or 
excethvely. The Greek word cannot well be Engliſhed, yet often u- 
ſed by the Apoſtle when he would cypreſs any thing with an emphatis, 
as Eph. 3.20. and in this Epiſtle, chap. 5. 13, 3 And by the matter 
of it ; Tpar he might ſee their face, and perfe# that which was lacking t 
their Faith, Though his Epiſtles might avail towards it, yet his pe 
ſonal preſence would do more. There is a peculiar bleſſing attend 
oral Preaching, more than Reading, The like Prayer he made, with 
reſpect to the Romans, and upon the ſame account alſo, Rom. 1. 10, 
11. Though the Apoſtle had before commended their Faith, vea, ther 
was ſomething lacking in it. No Faith is made perfett at firſt; yea 
the bett Faith may have ſome defects. And the word is uſed elſewhere 
to fignifie ſomething that is wanting, or left hehind, x Cor. 16, 17. 


it, ſome Myſteries of Faith they might not yet underftand, as the DiC- 
ciples did not, till after Chriii's Aſcention 5 and ſome of the Corinthi- 
ans a while doubted the Dottrin of the Reſurretion, 1 Cor. 15. 12, &Cc. 
2. Asto the clearnels of it with reſpe& to the Truths they did a;rea- 
dy know and believe. 3. As to the lively operations and fruits of it, 
Lhe former defetts are removed by Dottrin, the laſt by Exhortation. 
and Comfort, and the Apoſtle defired to ſee their face on the account 
of both : And to perfet a thing, is to make it compleat both as to 
parts and degrees. 'The word here uſed we find it oft in the New 
Leftament, 2 Cor. 13. 11. Gal. 6. 1, &c. and variouſly rendred in the 
leveral tranſlations, but yet much to the ſame ſenſe ; the Avullle beins 
lo ſuddenly driven trom them, he left them as an houſe ha!f built ; 


ſent to know your Faith, leſt by ſome means the tempt- 

*Phil, 2, cr had tempted you g, and our labour * be in vain h. 

Ie, g The Apoſtle here gives a further account of the reaſon why he 
ſent Timotheus to them, which was to know their Faith, whether it 
continued ftedfaft under all their ſufferings and temptations. He 
feared Satan, whom he calls the-tempter, might have ſome way or 
other tempted them, either by falſe Teachers to ſeduce them, 
or ſufferings to affright them. He was more concerned about 
the inward State of their Souls, than their outward Condition ; 
and commonly temptations go along with perſecutions : þ And the 
Apoſtle having beſtowed great labour upon them, feared left it might 
be in vain, that the Tempter had prevailed. Satan's firft work is, 

| to keep men from believing, his next is to deftroy their Faith; young 
Converts are commonly moſt affaulted, Paul's heart was therefore 
very ſolicitous for them, ſo that (as he ſaid before) he could not any 
Jonger forbear ſending to know how it was with them, 


| 6 But now, when Timotheus came from you to us, 
and brought us good tidings of your faith z and chari- 

10- 1; 37 || &, and that ye have good remembrance of us always 

+ *4, defiring greatly to ſee vs #2, as we allo to ſee you 1. 

2 We had before an account of Timorhy's ſending, now of his re- 
turn, wherein we have the meſſage he brought, and the effect there- 
of upon the Apoſile, The meſſage may be conſidered, 1. As to its 
new coming, But now when Timotheus came, &c. ſo that this Epiſtle 

f leems to be writ preſently upon his return, 2 As to the good account 
FA it brought of them, 7t brought good tyairgs 3 (the ſame word 1s here 
| uſed that exprefeth in the Greek the glad tidings of the Goſpel) of 
their Faith, that it continued ftill ftedfaſt, k And of their Charity 
or Love, that they had love joined with their Faith, and their Faith 
working by Love, which ſhewed it was living, and of a right kind, 
I They forgot him not, though abſent ſome length of time from them ; 
and jt wzs a good remembrance joined with Love and Efteem of his 


but his affection to them was ſo great, that he longed co return to 
chem for the pertetting of their Faith, though he had met bur a while 
before with ſuch great perils at Theſſulonica. 

11 Now God himſelf, and our Father z, and our Lord 
Jeſus Chriſt w ||direct our way unto you x. 

4 Here 1s prayers expreſt, the perſon to whom hc prays, i3 God 
himſelf perlonally confidered as God the Father, and relatively, when 
he ftiles him our Father 3 ſo ought Believers to addreſs themſelves 
to God not abſolutely, bur as to their Father. So Chriſt taught 
his Diſciples to pray, Cur Father 3 and ſv the Spirit of Adoption dotly 
prompt the Saints to' pray ; we come to Ged with greater frecdom 
and confidence when we can come to him as a Father, w And = 
prays allo to Chrift, whom he ftiles, our Lorl Foſus Chrift, When 
we may have an argument that Chriſt is God, elſe 2 could not he 
the object of divine worſhip, not that we are to preſent. our Pravers 
diſtinEtly to the Son withour conſidering his Union with the Father nor 
to the Father diſtinly from the Son, but to the Father in and by r'12 
Lord Jeſus Chriſt, For to only we can contider him as our Father 
in Prayer. And he ſpeaks of Chriſt alſo in his relation to his Peonle, 
cur Lord Feſus Chriſt, x And the thing he Prays for, is, that Go mo! 
dircit his way unto th:m, that the hindrances of Satan whatſucrer they 
were mightbe removed, and the Providence of Govil open him away 
to come to them : The word dire figniftes in the Greek to mai:© 
ſtraight, and 2 Thefſ, 3. 5. is applyed to the heart. The Lord dire# your 
bearts,&c. which is ſetting the hearts ftreight towards God, anſw:r- 
ing to the Hebrew word Faſhar, which fignifies to be upright, an 


way. And hence we learn our Duty by the Apoſtles prattice, to pray 
co have our way in allcales diretted by God, 
12 And the Lord make you to increaſe and abound + 
In love one towards another y, and towards a!! men = 
even as we do towards you 4, | 
+ Lhele two words denote an increaſing and overflowing abundance. 
ſ 


pl 


y This is another thing he prays for ; the forme? reſpected him{clf,t 
reſpected them, He defired ro come to them to perfect that which was 
lacking in their Faith,and he prays now for the abounding and increaſe 
of their Love,not only to love one another, but to increate and abound 


» 


A Perſon, and of his Miniftry amongit them ; and it was always, which 

Sa inplics the conftancy of it, m And not ſatisfied with this good re- 
r.cmbrance of him being, abſent, they greatly deſired his preſence to 
ic him and his fellow lipourers. # And'to anſwer their love on his 

"ns Part, he acderh, as we alſo 10 j-- you, By all which he feeks to ſatiſ- 

_ e ihem of his continued care and remembrance of them, which was 

Jat the cttett of this meſſage. 

"Mm 

Je 4 


init, To encreaſe the habits and abound in the fruits of love, 


TL, _- 
1 4:il } 


32/20 At 
WO 


Ch: 
11}. 


OY nb SY eÞ 
in all our affliction, and diſtreis by your faith o. =” 


© Norg., 3. 


Joc bt; 


and C9), 1. 24. and their Faith might be defe&ire as to the matter of 


is often uled in the Old Teſtament. "the French read it, addrels cur . 


7 
4 


2. vr — 


we a d- = 
th Fas So 


, a, 
ex « 4 
DU 0 Beto — ————_— <A 

- S— ” _— yo - = k 

<= i -- —_— LY 


= art 
« — by 
py o— 
— 4 b- 
£8 


=> IESED 


Chap. IV. 


«ove nnder ſore Deriecutions, and their Love to one another was more 
n:cefary at lucha time, + Andnot only to one another, but to ex- 
ten their Love towards all Men, Either all Men in general ; tor Love 
is 2 £-72ral Duty we owe to all Men, Cwe ncthing to any one but to love 
e3z2 anciher, Rom. 13. 8. Ard theretore all our duty to Men 1s com- 
preherled mider it, And the Apoiile requires this Love to be added 
te Brothe: ly kindcis, 2 Tet, 1. 7. yea, love 1s required to ENCnues, 
Mar. 5. 44. thenzh not as Enemies, yer as Men ; or more Particu- 
larly, Believers : as iOmerimes all Ac is taken under that reltriction, 
Tit. 2. 11, 4&4 Arti ferieth before them his own Love to them, both 
25 a Lattern and Mct:ve Loreunto, Though the Love of Chriſt Is clpe- 
cially to be looked ar, ai :> propoſed often by the Apoftle Paul as 
the great Argument of Love to %£cn, yet he mentions his own Love 
to them here, to ſhew the Conitancy of 11 Aﬀection to them, though 
abſent from them z and to ſhews that he p-rſwaded no Duty to them but 
what he prattiſed himlelt. 
* ; Cor, 13 To the end he may * ſtabliſh your hearts unblame- 
7» 8. Phil.ablc in holineſs before God even our Father, at the co- 
tt. Ming of cur Lord Jeſns Chriſt b with all his ſaints c. | 
5 TT >, b Thele wordsſome reter only to the Verſe cn von 1273 amr; 
< *=* by increaling and abounding in Love, their Hearts would be © : 
ſ unblamable in Holineſs. W hich is true, for that Holineſs is juſtly to 
be ſuſpetted, at leaft is to be blamed, which is without Love to Men. 
And Lore ic {elf is a great part of Holineſs; and who will blame Ho- 
lincſs when it ſhines for in Love ? yea, it will be unblamable beforc 
Gog and Men, And when God doth cauſe a People to encreaſe in 
Love, he doth hereby cftabliſh them in Hoiineſs that is unblamable ; 
where Love is wanting the Heart is not eftabliſhed, The 'Hypocrite 
will fall off in an hour of Temptation, becauſe he wants Love ; and 
though he may for a while make a fair ſhew before Men, yet he is nor 
unblameable before God who ſearcheth the Heart : neither will he be 
found ſo at the appearance of Jelus Chrift ; which the Apoſtle prays 
for here with reipcQ to theſe 7heſſ2]9ntans, that they might be eftabliſhr 
in Holineſs until the coming of Chriſt ; or that they might be found 
unblawable in Holineſs at hiscoming. Whereby the Apoftle f1gnifies 
there is yet another coming of Chriftz then there will a ftridt 1rial pals 
upon Men, and therfore the Saints ſhould labour to be then found un 
blamable, or without ſpot and blemiſh, as 2 Pet. 3. 14. © Whereo! 
he gives a particular Account inthe next Chapter ; others carry thi 
Verſe as referring alſoto the 11th Verſe, where 1.e deſired to lee their 
Face to perfedt their Faith, that both by their Faith and Love they 
might be eftabliſht unblamable ia Holineſs, 
CHAP. IV, | 
And Exbortation t0 a Godly Converſation, 1—— 3. To Chaſtity, Honeſiy, 
Fuſtice in their Dealing, Brotherly Love, 4 quiet Life, and minding 
their own things, 4 12, To moderate Sorrow for the Dead : 4 
brief Deſcription of the Reſurrefion and ſecond Coming of Chriſi, 
12- 
| Or,what I 
yer rTc- 
MANS, 
fl Or, 9 
requeſt. 


3. 
adbctmore || d then we beſeech you, brethren e, 
and || exhort you by the Lord Jeſus Chrilt f, that as 
yelave received of us how you ought to walk g and pleaſe 


God, ſo ye would abound || more and more, ; 
Or, b'- {4 He deſcends to ſome particular Duties about their walking ; which 
feech, he uſh-rs in by a general Exhortation in this firſt Verſe, e Wherein 
8 Or,exc:l. we may oberve his Stile, he calls them Brethren. f And ſpeaks to 
: them with much Condeſcenfion, and Earneſtnels, and in the Name of 
Chriſt, ©. g And the Subje@ he infiſts on is their walking, the courſe 
of their Life and Converſation, which he deſcribes by the Rule of it, as 
ye he kave received of us how ye ought to walk, he refers them to the Di- 
TeRjons he had given them about it as the Rule, For he did in his 
MN. jaiſtry not only open Goſpel-Myſteries, but explain Motal Duties ; 
and not only to walk in them, but to abound more and more, to pres 
forwaid to a greater exactneſs and excellency in their Chriſtian Con- 
verſaticn, And he here ulcth Motives, 1. From the Perſon in whoſe 
Name he fpeaksto them, which is the Lord Jeſus Chrift, For he was 
but Chriſt's Miniſter and Ambaſſador, 2. From the knowledge they 
had received of their Duty, and therefore they could not plead Tgno- 
rance. 2. 1heir walking as they had been infirutted by him, would 
pleaſe God, 

2 For ye know what commandments we gave you h 
by the Lord Jeſus Chriſt z. 

þ This explains what he ſaid before, what they had received of him 
about their walking he here calls Commandments,not ſo much his own 
as the Lords, as the Word it ſelf imports here uſed, and is expreft in 
the Text. # Though the Apoſtle had Authority, yet it was but de- 
rivative from Chriſt. And therefore not to walk as the Apoſtle had 
commanded would be Diſobedience to Chrift himſelf, and he minds 
them of what they knew, that their Knowledge might be exemplified 
in PraQtice tor as Faith,ſo Knowle dge is dead which doth not influence 
the Life z and they knew that he commanded them not in his own 
Name, but inthe name of Chrift, 

3 For this is the will of God k, even your ſanRificati- 
on /, that ye ſhould abſtain from fornication 2. 

> What in the former Verſe he called Commandment from Chriſt, 
he here calls the Will of God, Or he had ſome further Duties to lay 
b<fore them, which he had not yet given Commandments about, which 
were the Will of God, There is the ſecret and revealed Will of God, 
and his revealed Will is about things to be believed or praiſed. The 
latter is here meant ; ſo that the Will of God 13 put figuratively here 
for the things he willeth, or commandeth of us. And that which the 
Apoſile firſt mentions is SanQification, which is often taken for Holj- 

es in general, which confifts in Mens Conformity to the Will of God 
both in the Heart and Life. m1 But T think not fo taken here, but for 
Chaſtity,as oppoſite to the Sin of uncleannel;, as the Apoftle explains 
It in the next Words, For toabftain from Formication is the Will of 
God. And by it is meant all unchaſtneſs either of Perſons married or 
unmarried, Ani that either in the Heart, or in Speech, or in the Eye, 
or laſcivious Gefture as well as in the very A it ſelt. It was a Sin 
common among the Gentiles, cſpecially the Grecians, and judged as no 
Sin. And therefore it is particularly mentioned and forbidden to the 
believing Gentiles by the Council of Feruſalem, left they ſhould appre- 
herd it not to be an Evil, A#. 15.20, For it is not ſo evident by the 
Light of Nature as many other mezal Eyils; and therefore the Apoſtle 


IT. THESSALONIANS. 


Chap, 1y, 
tells the Theſſalontans, that it is the WM of God they ſhould ab$ain 
from it, and that it is a ſufficient ground either of doing, or not ac. 
inz: This Will of God is expreſs'4 in the Seventh Commandmer: 
which though the Jews well knew, yet theſe new converted Gentile; 
night not yet ſo well underſtand. And therefore the Apoſtle in his «.. 
veral Epiſtles to the Gentile Churches doth dehort them from it c lhe. 
cially the Corinthians, 1 Cor, 6.9, and that by many Arguments, It i 
a Sin which corrupts and effeminates the Mind, captivates the Hear: 
conſumes the Fleſh, and waſts Mens Eſtates. So that this Wi1 of Gl 
that forbids it, is a good Will, Rom. 12. 2. as all the Commandment 
of God are ſaid to be for our good, Dext. 10, 12. MT 

4 That every one of you ſhould know how to poſleſy 
his veſſel in ſanctification # and honour o, 

# This is added as a means to prevent that Sin. By Veſt! oe 
underſtand the married Wife, who is called the Weaker Veſſel, 1 Fs 
3 7. and her Husband is to poſſeſs her in Chaſtity, as the Greek org 
may fignifie here, 0 For as Marriage is honourablr to all Men, #-; 
12+ 4. lo to live chaſtly in a married Eftate is honourable alſo. Fo 'ry 
Whoredom Man gets Diſhonour, axd bis reproach ſhall nor 5e wind 
away, Prov.6. 33. Others by Veſſet underſtand the Body, which i; the 
Vellel of the Soul; the Soul carries it up and down,uſeth it in the ſerera} 
functions of the vegetative, ſenſitive, and intelleual Life. And { ſome 
underſtand the Words of Davi4 to the Prieft, 1Sam.21.5.The Veſſels of the 
young men are boly,being kept from Women ; that is,their Bodies. Forni- 
cation is.{aid above all other fins to be a Sin againſt the Body, 1 Ctr, 
6. 18. and he that keeps his Body chaſt pofſeſſeth his Veſſel, keeps it 
under government ; whereas by Fornication we give it to an Harlor 
and that which is a Member of Chrift we make it the Member of an 
'Harlot, 1 Cor, 6, 16. and though the Words are direRed properly to 
ithe maſculine Sex, the word Zecaſton being maſculine, yet under that 
the temale is comprehended. And becauſe the pratice of this Duty 
requires Care, Skill, and much Watchfulneſs againft Temptations : 
therefore, ſaith the Apoftle, that every man may know how to poſſeſs 
his Veſſel in SanQiſication, to which is added, and in honour, for As of 
uncleanneſs diſhonour the Body, Rom. 1.24.God gave them up to uncleas.- 
n:ſs though the luſts of their own hearts to diſhonour their own bodies, &c. 
God hath beſtowed much curious Workmanſhip upon the Body, i: 
is part of Chriſts purchaſe, and with the Soul is a Member of ChriR, x 
Temple of the HolyGhoft in all true Saints,and therefore ſhould he pol. 
ſeft with Honour. Or it is to be kept to the honour and glory of God, 
as 1Cor.6,ult.and $0 be ofteredup an holy Sacrifice to him, Rom, 12, 1, 

5 Not in the luſt of concupiſcence |] p, ® even as they g; ,, 
Gentiles * which know not God q. a" the yy 

p Any violence of Aﬀettion we call Paſſton, whether of Love or An-ſ 7 4, 
ger, or Defire, becauſe the Soul is paſſive, or ſuffers thereby. There, © 
Stoicks ſaid Paſhons were not incident to a wiſe Man, and they that are * £1}, l 
Chrifts, ſaith the Apoſtle, have crucified the Fleſh with the Paſſins and 17, 1, 
Luſts, Gal. 5. 24. And Luft is uſually taken for all inordinate a#e-* I Cor, 
Qion, either with reſpect to the Objett Or Degree. Thouzh the 15.24 
Greek word doth ſignifie only Deſire, and is ſometimes taken in a Eph,y,if 
good Senſe, as Phil, 1. 23, For there are good Luftings as well as 
cvilz asGal. 5, 17. The Spiric luſteth againſt the Fleſh : But here the 
Word is taken in a bad Senſe, for the Luft of Uncicanneſs, which the 
Apoſtle here calls the Luſt of Concupiſcible, The Philolophers %i- 
ſtinguiſh of the AﬀeRions or Paſhons of the Soul, ſome arc iraſcible, 
ſome concupiſcence, The former are converſant about evil, to repel 
it, or fly from it ; the latter about good, either real or imaginary, to 
purſue it, or imbrace it. And the Lufts of Concupiſcence are either 0! 
the Mind or of the Fleſh, Eph. 2. 3. here we underſtand the latter : 
that fleſhly Concupiſcence that is converſant about Women, which it 
by Veſſel in the Tormer Verſe is underſtood man's Lawful Wite,then he 
forbids all unchaſtneſs eyen towards her ; if the Body,then he forbils all 
unchaſte ulage of the Body in any kind,or towards any Perſon whatfor- 
ver, Andto avoid Fornication he forbids Luſt that leads to it, q Which 
] the Apoſtle uſeth as an Argument to them, tho'ye are Gentiles by Na- 

It as well as others, yet not in ftate, ſuch as know not God. There is 


1 natural Knowledge of God which the Apoſtle ſpeaks of, Rom. 1. 21. 
which the Gentiles had ; and ſupernatural, which js by the Scriptu:*s ; 
to know the Mind, Will, Nature, Decrees, and Counſels of God 23 
they are there revealed, and the knowledge of God in Chriſt ; this is 
meant in the Text, and this the Gentiles had not, and therefore no 
wonder though they followed the Lutts of Concupiſcence, they wanted 
the Rule of God's Word to dire& them, and that effeRtual knowledge 
of God, and Preſence of his Grace that would have reſtrained them 
from ſuch Luſt, But theſe Theſſalonians now, fince their Converiivn 
by the Goſpel they were come to this knowledge of God which they had 
not before, and therefore were not to live as before they did. Know: 
ledge ought to influence our Hearts and Lives,and to fin againſt £now- 
ledge is the great aggravation of Sin, and will make men more in7xcu- 
ſable. But yet where knowledge is wanting, what wickedneſs will 0! 
men praiſe ? The Gentiles were alienated from the Life of 00: 
through the Ignorance that was in them, Eph. 4. 18, The J.w ru 
cited Chrift, and Saul perſecuted the Liſciples through Ignorance, 
1 Tim, 1. 13, Much more are thoſe Chriftians to be condemre:!, v9 
having more knowledge than the Gentiles, yet practiſe worle tal 
they :; as the Apoſtle upbraids the Jews upon this account, Rom. 2. ©7- 
6 * That no man go beyond and || defraud his brotnet” oY 
|| in any matter r, becauſe that the LORD 5s the avenger 1 Or, t 
of all ſuch ſ- as we alſo have forewarned you and teſtt-;,.. 
fied t. . over-relh 
r This ſome underſtand to be another part of Sanfification ment:- Ir, 3 
oned before, ver. 3. taking the Word San&ification in a more general matter, 
Senſe, And as betore he {pake of Chaſtity, ſo here of Communicative 
juftice in Commerce and Traffick; and the rather,becaule 1c(/4/0/17"4 
was a City of great Trade and Merchandiſe z and it's true, that my 
Qification doth comprehend this Righteouſneſs in it, and will rentan 
men from that which is oppoſite to it, which as the Apottle (peaks, ny 
going beyondand defrauding his Brother, To go beyond, is that which 
we call over-reaching z when in buying or telling we keep not a by 
meaſure, when we obſerve not a due proportion betwixt the price a 
the commodity, conſidering, it either in its natural Worth, or 1 ſt : 
Circumſtances as make it more or leſs yaluable'; or to take advar's. 
of anothers Ignorance or Neceſſities, to take unreaſonabte Prolit, 
to break Covenant with one another, anſwering to the ma” heh 


l p 
"IC 


07 


01 FEA 


rp 
V, 


hay 


that a 
hence 
that \ 
Perce 
Teach 
for G 
Indes [ 
the SP 


Man 1 


th, { 


tap. IV. I. THESS 


Gnabbar uſed in this ſenſe, Deut, 17. 2, the original Word ſignifies - 

"Pres, Or £0 above thedue bounds, Ant! to defraud is, when ou: 

7 R _f 1 coverous mind we exa@ upon another heyond what is meet, SOME 
les the former word to injuſtice by force, ani the latter by fraud, 
\ Cyr, 74. 2, And theEvil is the greater, becauſe done to. a Brother. 
£+.-r> 13 4 Brother by a common relation, and fo all Men nat partake 
hwnmanc Nature are Brethren, or by ſpeciat relation, Wiich 18 — 
rural, civil, or ſpiricual, We may underſtand the Word in all thelc 
<or1i.5, zpecially the laſt, that thoſe that are Brethren Chriſt, and 
*\ the Faith, ſhould not defraud one another, And when the Apoſtic 
ks. #72 any marrer, the word any not being, in the Greets, we may 2ct- 
-or read it, in dealing, or doing; the word is general, and is to D2-re- 
"rained by the fubjett matter ſpoken of, There is another ſenle of the 
vords avrecable to the former Verſes, an the Verſe that totlows ; and 
7 me naderftand the Apoftle as ftill ſpeaking of Chaſtity ; and lv 
hore he forbids the invading another's Bed, tran!greiiin:; the Bounds ol 
\irria'e, whereby Men go beyond or defraud their Brother, uturping 
+ 110 6f another Man's Wife, whom he hath no right to. And then 
w 174 inzrter, we mult read in that matter which he had bcen ſpeaking 
of bofore, or "tis a modeft Exprefſion of the Att of Adultery. The He- 
ow £9 is oft uſed in the Old Teftament for Carnal Copulation, and 
rhe the Greek Baino and Hyterbaing here uſed, and the other word 
[LL onetin Cencres exceftiveneſs in it, Fpb. 4. 13. / And the realon 
te achls is, Beca ſe the Lord is the aveniger of all ſuch, 'engeance 1 minel 
ill repty, [41th the Lord, Deut. 32. 25. Rom, 12. 19. Whether we un- 
4.;fand it of Fraud, or over-reaching in Dealings, when a Man cannot 
tighcand relieve himſelf; th? Righteous God will avenge the Unrigh- 
-eauneſs of Men; or of the Fraud of the Marriage-Bed, which is done 
in {<cret, and Man cannot avenge himſelf, #26. 13. 4. # And this the 
\roftle faith, he had for:warned them of, and reſtified. Though the 
1 j-kr of Nature told the Heathen, that God was an Avenger of Wick: 
cincs, 8s 29. 4. and the Heathen could lay, £9 0435s ex)xov 0{pLy 
Col bach a revergeful Eye, yet the Apoſtle hay in his preaching al- 
rol it, He had told them of Chrilt's coming to judge the World, 
11 Le would execute Vengeance, 7Ja.le 15, and this they were before 
vr of : Ard thongh God ſometimes takes Vengeance in this 
Wold, yerhe ſeems to refer to this laft Vengeance, becauſe he ſpeaks 
2 us that which h- had forewarned them of, and teſtified in his Mi- 
airy, an whereet they had not ſo clear a Teſtimony in natural Con- 


* 
C 
. 


rg 
lis 


- For God hath not callcd us to uncleanneſs, but * unto 


b [ #5 
(13 holineſs 1, 
hi # Thiſe two Verſes are added as further Arguinents, either to per- 


p Late to that Chaſtity he had ſpoken of, called lanEtification, Ver. 3, 4+ 
The h ris taken from their Chriſtian Calling, which is not to unclean- 
rv nc!3, but to Chattity, called HolineG ; when they were Gentiles in 
ſtate, they livei in the Luſt of Uncleanneſs, but they were now called 
by the Power of the Goſpel, and brought to ſuch a Profeſhon that did 
F forbid, and condemn it. And the Author of their Call is God him- 
nh, 4 ſ-!t, thouzh the Apoſtles and other Miniſters were the Inftruments. 
'.. 8 He therefore that || deſpiſeth, deſpiſeth not Man, but 
Cor, God, who hath alſo given unto us his holy Spirit x. 
«5 - mw iVhence he fetchcth this ſecond Argument, ver, 8. that if this 
baht © Chattity be deſpiſed or rejetted, as we may read the Text, it is not 
Man, but God that is:1.{piſed. To deſpiſe a Miniſter in a Command- 
n:ent he delivers from God, is to detpile God himſelf, Luke 10. 16, &c. 
and the Apultle tuth here intimate, not to obey the Commandment of 


ALONIANS. 


mended them, and that they were taught it of God, He gives a pra- 
ical Inftance of it in this Ver, elſe the Apoſtle might have been 
rhoug ht to tlatter, or to commend a Lore that was without Fruit: And 
herefore he ſaith not, ye profe(s it, but ye do it, fo 2 Cor, 8.11. per» 
form the doing of it, þ Which was a large Province, wherein were 
planted many Churches, Their Love was not guide by Intereſts, Opi- 
nions, Civil Relations, or Sel-Reſpetts, bur it reachet to all rat 
were Brethren, an'l that in ſume real effect of it, in tome work of Ci; 
rity, or Liherality, or otherwiie not here mericioned, but we read of it 
2 Cor. 8.1, 2. c But howover, their Love was not yec »criecdt, and 
therefore he beſeecheth them ro ahound more ant more; either meant 
41s to the extent of it, not to contne it only to Maicedonta $; or  torke 
degree of it, to excl men 1 it, .a5 the Greek word may be rentired.: 
And the ſame wor the Apuitle nieth, and upon the tame account, 
2 Cor. 8, 7. neither Love, or ay other Grace 15 made perfect at onc? ; 
cven thoſe that are taught of God, are taught by degrees. And Love 
being, a Grace fo ſuitable to tne Goipel, and their preſent fuftering 
ſtate, he therefore eſpecially cxNorts to a progre(; in if. 

11 And that ye ſtudv to be quiet d, and * to do your » 1 Per, +. 
own bulineſs e, and ro * work with || your own hands f, ITE 
Cas we commanded you) 7g. SN l. 

4 He exhorts to quietnels, and jt to be diligent; 3nd probably te þ = _ 
might fee this needtul, either by what he himſelf had obierve.l amon Res ne 
chem, or by what he had heard of them, as appears by wit he wi hes” OEM 
in his {cond Epiſtle, chap. 3. 10, 11. To be quiet 1s to be of a peacca- 
ble Temper and Carriage, as the Greek word #ejuchazein inporteth 
both + and ftands contrary to Strite, Contention, Diviſion, either ujor 
a Civil or Religious Account. And to ſtudy ro be quier, becanle the 
thing may be difhculr, eſpecially in ſome circumſtances of Times, Places 
and Perſons, And the Gr22Þ word Philorimeiſthei implies an ambitious 
>tudy. Quietne!s we {bould purſue with an. holy Ambition, as that ' 
which is honourable to our ſelves, and our Profeſſion, Prov. 20. 3. the 
fame word is wed 2 Cer. 5, 9, wher? its rendred we labour, &c, Study 
is properly the Exerciſe of the Mind, vet it here comprehends any kin{ 
of Labour. This agrees with what the Apoſtle elſewhere exhorteth to, 

Heb. 12, 14. 1 Vet, 3. 13, £ He next commendeth to them Diligence, 
and that in our own Butine*, and this he preſcribeth as a good way for 
quietnels, Contentions often ariſing from medling in the Afﬀairs of 
other Men which concerns us not, for which he rebukes ſome in this 
Church, 2 /he}.-3, 11, But yet only to ſeek our own things is a great 
fault, and lamented by the Apoftle, Phil. 2, 21, we are to concern our 
ſelves in the Afﬀeirs of others when called to it, and not otherwiſe ; 
and then we may reckon them among our own things. A Chriftian's 
Calling is either general or p44 Yi; and what falls not within the 
compals of one of theſe, is to be accounted not our own buſineſs. And 
our doing and ſuffering ought to be kept within the Sphere of our Cal- 
ling 3 for to ſuffer otherwile, is to ſuffer as Bufie-bodies, which the A- 
poftle cautions againft, 1 Per. 4. 15. as a Biſhop intruding himſelf into 
anothers Orhce z to which the Word there alludes, f This condem- 
neth Idleneſs, and living out of a Calling ; we are not oniy to keen 
within our own Sphere, bur to f{tretch forth our Hands to work, {hc 
ſame Precept he gives to the Epheſrans, chap, 4. 23- Not to te21, but to 
work with their Hands, that they may not only cat their own Bread, 
2 Theſ. 3. 12. but have to give to him that lacketh : not that there is nÞ 
other work hut that of the Hands, (the Minifters 0” {06 are 
excuſed from that, 1 Cor, 6. 9, but not from work) there is the work 


Il wt 


of the Head, and the Tongue, and the Foot, and the Lun: a3 well 


a5 


God, is ae i.tn Cd, Or, that the Apoſtle was deſpiſed by ſome ,be- 
of the © * :4 meanneſs of his Perſon, or queſtioning his Autho- 
rity. Xx 3.11: > as athird Argument , ſo that what he had preach- 
a to tht was net from himſelf, but from the Holy Spirit ; Or if by 
5 ho 5 thele Theſjul mins allo, as ſome Copies read it, be hath 
g£/:22 2, &e, then heargues trom the gift of the Holy Spirit they had 
I  avainlt living in the Sin of Uncleanneſs, This would be very 
; dizazrevahl- nor only to their Holy Calling, but the Holy Spirit God 
bad given them, Or<lſe theie Arguments of the Apoſtle are to per- 

ſwade to univerſal Holinels, taking SanCtification and Holineſs in a lar- 
cerSenſe, and Uncleanne!s for all Sin in general ſtanding oppotite 
thereunto. Sin is oft ſpoken of in Scripture under the Notion of Filth, 
Defilement, Pollution, &c, and ſo was typed forth under the Law ; 

and to be cleanſed from Sin, is a cleanting Man from Filthinels, 2 Cor. 

7. 1, ſo that to live in vin, as the Apoſtle argues, is to live in Unclean- 

nels, to contradict our Holy Calling, to deſpile God, and to walk con- 
trary tothe Natare and Dictates of his Holy Spirit, | 

9 But as touching brotherly love you need not that I 


write unto you y, for * ye your ſelves are taught of God 


5. *to love one another z. 
*'* } The Apoftle proceeds from Chaftity and Juſtice to ſpeak of Bro- 


[0 


* tzzxly Love, which is Love upon a Spiritual ground : To love the 
 dajats as ſuch, with reſpe& to God as a common Father, and ſo all his 
4 : *Ciildren are Brethren, chap, 2. 8, 9. ſo Heb, 12, 1. and he perſwadeth 
-, the prattice of it by a loving and winning Infinuationz ſure you are 
._*(oryard enough of your ſelves. As he uſeth the ſame Artifice, Ats 26, 
"27, 28, 2 Cor, g, 1, wherein the Apoftle tacitely commends them, and} 
*zreby would engage them to anſwer the Commendation and good! 
Opinion he had of them. + What need T write to teach you that | 
which you have already been taught of God ? The Saints have this | 
Promile, 1/2. 54. 13. Fer. 31. 34. fulfilled, 1 Foh. 2. 26, 27. and this | 
Divine Teaching is always efficacious, For none reacketh like God z not | 
That ali teaching of Men is to be laid aſide, as ſome Enthuſiaſts would | 
ance inter ; but that the Apoftle- thought he had leſs need to teach ' 
that which God himſelf had ſo effettually taught them. Hereby we 


i 


reacheth the AtteQions, and eſpecially enclines the Heart to love, ' 
tor God is Love ; and though they were taught other things of God be- 
nics this Love, yer he mentions only this as the moſt proper Work of . 
Me opirit of God by the Goſpel ; aad though common Love of Man to L 
Man may be found in meer Nature, ; 
10 And indeed you do lit & towards all the brethren 
Which are in all Macedonia b; but we beſeech you, bre- 
*%2] 7 __ . " j 
Len, that ye increaſe || more and more c. | 
+ AS an, Evidence of the truth of their Love, for which he com- | 
ging | 
Y (_) b- + 11, 


p*rceive that God's teaching doth not only enlighten the Mind, but ' 


of the Hands ; but either under one Species he comprehcnds ail, Or It 
may be he fitteth his Speech to the Condition of the Ieople to wiiom ke 
writes, who generally had ſuch Occupations wherein they wrouzht 
with their Hands, 1b-faloni-a being a great place of Trade. And 
the Apoſtle ſpeaks of the Churches of Mzcedgnza as a poor ſort of Peo- 
ple, 2 Cor. 8.2. and liberal beyond their Power ; though ſome amonz 
them might be tempted to Iulenels by the Charity of others to 
them, which, as ſome conceive, was the occation of the Apoftl-'s thus” 
writing, But if Men have Eſtates, and upon that account nee! not 
work, yet no Man is to be idie : Mens Time, Parts, or other | 41-45 


are to be employed, and account thereof is to be given, Matrrh. 25. 15, 
And the unprofitable Servant is caſt into utter Darknets, ver. 30. Coins 
way or other every Man is to Work, and may work for profit to him- 
{elt and others, unleſs under ſome invincible Impediment, 2 He means 
when he was with them. He might probably obſerve ſome occation for 
this Commandment : Induftry is of good report with all ; anil by med- 
ling in others Aﬀairs, and unquiet Carriage and Idleacts, they mivhe 
diſhonour their Chriſtian Profcthon among the Heathen, which might 
be the chief reaſon of this Commandment ; and the Apofile doth not 
act herein as a civil Magiſtrate, commanding about Civil Aitairs for the 
publick Welfare, but as a Miniſter of Chritt wich retpect to a [piritual 
End, as appears by what follows, 

12 Lhatye may walk honeſtly || þ towards them that | Or, de- 
are without z, and that ye may have lack || of nothing. ——_ 

h He entorceth his Commands by a two-fold Reaſon; The former is || Or, of 220 
ab honeſto, the other is ab utili, kirſt, that ye may walk honeſtly, cr man, y 
decently, as the word is rendred, 1 Cor. 14. 29. # That is, Gentiles, 

Inhidels, fo they are deſcribed, u Cor. 5. 12. C9. 4. 5. as thole tha 
were received into the Church of Chriſt, are ſaid to be withivr, i he A- 
poſtle would have them honour the Gotpel before the Heathen in ch 
moral Actions which they did approve of, and were able to judze of, 
not underſtanding the higher Myſteries of Faith and Goſpel-Holincls, 
which he calls walking in Wiſdom towards them that are without, C21. 
4+ 5. Ihe other Realon is, ab unit, Thar ye may have lack of nothing z; 
or, of no Man, Have no need to beg of any Man, It might offend, and 
bea Stumbling-block to the Gentilcs to lee Chriſtians to beg of any,and 
eſpecially of themielves, for their necelfary reliet ;or.of nothizg,cthat you 
may, by your own Labour, be able to ſubtiſt, and not depend upon 
others ; and ſo not be a burden to ti jends, or a >candal ro Strangers, 
For every Man to ſubfift by his own Labour, was the primitive Law to 
Adam, Gen. 3.19. commended often by S$o/gmon in his Proveryc, and 
enjoined by the Apoftle to believing Chriſtians, 2 1kyf, 3. 10. 

13 But | would not have you to be ignorant, bre. 
thren k, concerning them' which are atleep 1, thar ve for- 


row not * even as others that have no hope m. * 2 33m 
& The Apoſtle now proceees to a new Dilcouric, abo!t moderation: 42, 20s 
Ls R) 2! 


WW + 


4 


Mi netnt 


— ge" q 
<——_ Wo I ” 


Chap. IV. 


* 1 Cor. 


' tality of the Soul, 


be. 13, 


> 


'S W:; 7+ 


heir ſorrow for the dead, and not for all, but the dead in Chrift. He | 15 


of fl C 
Mal either uh ipvcd their forrow in this kind exceſhtve,while with them, 
or ee hy 17:49:44, or ſome other way he had hear! of 1-, 

fir, Grade deſtovs not Nature, but regulates its nor reaſun, but 
c.t;fes it 3 nor rakes away the Aﬀettions, Out moderates them ; doth 


Aﬀettions are good when ſet npon | A 


not make us Stoicks or Stocks, 
r Objtts, and Kept 
2ach.and Grace doih Ctr. 
he dead mn the F.ofd, 18 a 
Gol requireth ; and the contrary is reproved by God himſelf, J/2.57-1. 
ard to d! 
Ciily then immoderate Sorrow the Apoſtle here means. 
Vent it, or remove It, gives many Inſtructions an! Arguments. And 2 
he ſurpulth their Ignorance might be a great occaſion of it,and lo in- 
{trn&s them about the Doftrine of the Reſurrection, and Chriſt's per- 
{onal cominv again, which by the light of Nature,whye Gentiles, they 
ncw nothing of, or were very uncertain in. And the Apoſfile, be- | 1 
caule of this ſhort ſtay among them, had not hail opportunity to inftruct 
them zbout the'e things,and therefore doth it here diftin&Uy and tully, 
25 he doth the Corinthiims, 1C9r, 15, 12, hearing there were lome a- 
nonz them, even of the Church it elf, that ſaid there was 70 Keſur- 
»-dion, It 15 ſuch a Myſtery to Reaſon, that it is hard to believe it ; 
1nd the moſt learned of the Heathen doubted of it, and ſome exploded 
and ſcoffed at it,aswe find 4t517.,15,cven ſuch as yet held the Immor- 
And hereupon in this Verſe the Apoſtle doth atlert 
two things in general to relieve them againſt immoderate Sorrow. 
{ 1, He calls the death of the Saints a ſleep, Dan. 12. 2, Luke 8, 52. 


4 


ii ICT 
Fon 11, 11, I Cor. 15. 20, 21. Whether referring to tho{e that are al- 
ready dead, or do ie, or that ſhall afterwards die, and why ſhould 
they then exceſhvely mourn ? Aﬀeer ſleep, we know there is a waking, 


».- 


and by fleep Nature i revived; and fo it ſhall be with the Saints in 


cath, Hereupon the Grave is called a Bed, 1/2. 57, 2. and tne Bu- 
rying-place Cemirerium, @ place of ſleep, m And, 2. There is hope 
in their Death, as Prov. 14, 22. There is hope concerning their hap- 
py ftate after Death, and hope of their Reſurrection, and ſeeing them 
again at Chriſt's coming ; it is not an eternal Farewel, This the Apo- 
ſtile here intends, and they will be then ſeen in a more excellent ftate, 
and probably fo ſeen then, as that their Chriftian Friends may know 
them; elſe the Apoſtle's Argument would not have ſo much ftrength, 
and ſo well ſuit the preſent cale, The Heathea and Infidels buried 
their dead witiout this hope, as they are ſaid to be without hope, 
Eh. 2. 12, and ſo were excefhve in their ſorrows, which they expreſs'd 
by cutting their Fleſh, makin» -T&» &2yes bald, doleful Songs, and 
mourning Ejaculations, expreſt ſometimes upon Inſtruments ; and 
which the Jews had learned from them, as appears by God's often re- 
provingic, and Chriſt's putting out the Minſtrels, Mar. g. 23. and as 
that which he forbad them, Lev, 18. 28. Deut. 14. 1. And the Apo- 
ſtle may reter to this in the Text, as that which is not only grievous to 
Nature, but diſhonourable to a Chriſtians Faith, Hope, and Profteſh- 
on. Wearc hereby the Betrayers of our Faith and Hope, and the 
things we Preach will ſeem falſe and feigned. Cypr, de mortalitate, And 
tho? ian is ſaid to die without hope as to a return to his former ſtate 
of Life here, Fob 14. 7, $,9,10.yet not with reſpect to the Life at the 


IL THESSALONIANS. 


ground enough for Faith, to which our Judgment and Reaſon ono)... < 
£9 be captivated, : "= ONS 
Wherein| Chriſt's coming, the Miniftry of Angels, the ſound of » Trumpe: 
in cencral, he doth not condemn their ſorrow, hut the excels | the Voice of Chriſt at that day, we have it in the Evangelifts : "i . 
Method aud Order of all the >aints meeting together, ant! meeting f 
Lord in the Ajr, we find not in any expreſs words before-written, t 


within due bounds z, and this Chriftianity doth | rf 
rect, And to mourn for the dead, eſpecially | r. 


CC 
1, is a Duty that both Nature and Grace teach,and | Chrift ſooner than thoſe that were fallen aticep, an1 he canohe vo 5. 


witha ſhout s, with the voice of the Arch-anzel t, ng ;.. 
with the trump of God « - and the dead in Chriſt {þ;! 
rite firſt : 


nifies a command, or word of command, alluding to Marin: 
Soldiers ſummoned to be ready with tneir Affiltance, when calleq 
on. . And may refer to the Angels, whom Chritt now ſum; 
tend and alliſt in that day. And the Evangeliſt ſpeaks of thc \ 
Chrift, Fob» 5. 28. which is there ſaid to raiſe the dexd, Whet!«: 
thele are an Ora] Shout and Voice, from the mouth of Ch: if, or 6+! 
an expreſſion of his Divine Power, whereby he ſhall awaken tl.cr1 (17 
{leep, out of their Grave, is a Queſtion I ſhall not be curivus avoy;, 
: Chriſt is ſaid to come with all the Holy Angels, Mar, 25, 31, an! 
lend his Angels with a great Sound of a Trumpet, Mat. 24. 21, | 
here is mentioned only the Arch-angel, and his. Voice, inſtead 6f :!! 
the reit, they all coming under his Condudt, Thovgh there he 20: 
ſuch diftinet Orders of Angels as the School-men afhim, . yet :; 
Order among them, as Arch-angel implies. 
forth an audible Voice or not at that day, or whether this Arc; 
be not the ſame with Chriſt himſelf, who is the Head. of a!l Þr;- 
lity and Power, Col. 2. 15. T leave it as doubtful ; but howe: :7, 
certain the Angels ſhall be miniftring to Chriſt at that dar, ei: 04. 
in the Reſurrection of the Elect, Mar, 24, 21, and ſevering the 1ti-! 
teous from the Wicked, Mat. 13.41, u As 1 Cor. 1 Cs. 2, Md wb 
ther this 15 to be taken literally, and diſtin& from the Shour an ! Ve. 
before mentioned, or uled only to ſhew forth the Divine Pow: r of 0o/ 
chat ſhall gather all the Eleet together out of their Gray's, 0. i 
Irumper in War gathers the ſcattered Army :; or as the {i[ycr 


Chap, 


7 That which he ſaith here about the Reſurro&:n 


1 


poſtle ſpeaks it here by extraordinary Revelation, Which is the Wer 4 
the Lord, though not then written, And this Order is evny-2 
Negarvely, The Saints then living upon the Earth ſhall not hs wilt 


L 


che Air, while the others are in the Grave ; and the Apoſtic h- ye 

lic unlamented is reckoned as a Curſe, F-r. 22. 18, 19. Its] it he ſhould be one of that number ſure he could not think th 

And ro pre- | of Chrift ſhould be in the Age wherein he lived ; }2 ſpeaks othery;,* 
"Wiſe, 


The/. 2.2. Or that his Life ſhould be prolonged . » iL,at day, 


the time of his departure, he ſaith, was at hand, 2 Tim, 4, 5. 1-1 
looks upon the whole Body of Saints together, and himſelf as one c: 
that number, and fo ſpeaks, Ie which live and remain, Ge, &; ;. 


*4 
"8 194 


Cor. 15. 51. We ſpall not all die, but we ſnall all be changed, 2, /, 


frmattvely, the dead in Chriſt ſhall riſe firſt; that. is, before they tha: 
Are alive ſhall be caught up into the Air, © They ſhall ſtay till the +4 
be riſen: As 1 Cor. 15. 81, We ſhall not all die, but be charged, 11 ;., 


moment ; which the Apoſtle calls cloathing uporr, 2 Cor, 5, 2, 90.1 ww! 0 


he rather delired, than to be unclothed, v. 4. and then thvy that » 
dead in Chriſt ſhall riſe, and be united to theſe in one viſible Boy, 


16 For * the Lord himſelf ſhall deſcend from keyo- + 


* 
-. 


s The means which effed this, The word ſhout in the Gre.!: 


y 4 


And whether hs 1 


\ 


ſy! 


Refurrection, in them that die in Jeſus. : 

14 For * It, we believe that Jeſus died, and roſe a- 
gain #, even fo * them alſo which ſleep in Jeſus o, will 
God bring with him p. 

As in the former Verſe the Apoſtle made uſe of the hope of theRe:- 
ſurrection as an Argument againſt immoderate ſorrow, ſo here he 
proves the Reſurrettion by Chrift riſing again, Tc, = He ſuppoſeth 
they did bclieve that Chriſt died and roſe again: it was that which 
he had tavght them, and which they had received, as being the two 
firſt and fundamental Points of the Chriſtian Faith, without which they 
could not have been a Church of Chriſt, Queſt. But how doth Chriſt's 

geſurreQion prove the Reſurrection of the Saints ? He being the cter- 
nal Son of God might have a Priviledge aboye all, Aw, This firſt 
ſhews the thing is poſſible,God hath already done it in Chrift, 2.Chriſt 
roſe for our Juſtification, Rom. 5. laſt, and in Juſtification fin is par- 
don'd which brought in Death, and which alone by its Guilt can keep 
under the Dominion of Death, 3. Chriſt roie not as a private Perſon, 
but as the Head of the Body, his Church, #ph. 1. q. 20, G&c. and fo 
looſed the bands of Death, and conquered the Grave for all his People, 
4. As the Firſt-fraits, 1 Cor. 15. 20. which was a pledge and atſurance 
of the whole Harveſt to follow. $s, God hath predeſtinated the Elect 
whom he foreknew, tobe conformed to the Image of his Son, Rom. 8, 
29, 6, He is not complcat without them, Eph. 1. uit, Laſtly, They 
{lcep in Jeſus, as the Text ſpeaks; not only live, but die in him, Rev, 
14. 12. their Unjon remains with Chrift even in Death, 0 By which 
Words aiſo the Apoſtle diſtinguiſheth Believers from all others; its 
only they ſhall have the priviledge of this bleſſed Reſurretion who 
fleep in Jeſus» And perſeverance in Chrift to the end, is here alſo in- 
timated, p And though their Returrection 1s not expreſs'd in the 
Text, yet it is implied in this ſaying. By God is meant, as ſome un- 
derſtand here, the Son of God, who is to come from Heaven, chap. 1, 
Jift. And who will bring the ſpirits of juſt men made perfett in Hea- 
ven with him, and unite them to their Bodies, WHich cannot be done 
without their Reſurrc&ion. Whereby the Apoſtle gives another Ar- 
vument againſt cxceffive Sorrow for the Saints departed, they ſhall re- 
turn from Heaven azain with Chrift at his coming, Others under- 


ſtand it of God the Father, who will raiſe the Dead, and then bring 


them to his Son, and bring them with him to Heaven, Thoſe that 
read the Text, thoſe that ſleep or die for Feſus, and ſo confine it only to 
Martyrs, refirain it to too narrow a tenſe, 

15 For this we ſay unto you by the word of the Lord g, 
that we which are alive and remain unto the coming of 
the Lord, ſhall not prevent them which are aſleep r, 

The Apoſtle here ſets down particularly the manner of the Lords 
coming, the method and order how all the Saints ſhall then mcet with 
him, and with one another, which we find not to diſtinctly in any other 
<cripture ; ard whereby he further prolecutes the Argument he is up- 
on. q That they might not think that what he ſpeaks was either by 
ſome Iradition from others, or an Invention of his own ; and that 


pets under the Law atſembled the Congregation of ſjrae), ] thall nr | 
poſitive, And this is the Account of the Saints that are railcd, 


. 
[] 


I7 Then we which are alive, and remain, ſhall [- 
caught vp together with them * in the clouds, to mat l-* 
the Lord in the air ; and ſo ſhall we * ever be with itz,” 
Lord w. q 

w Chrift will have a Church to the end of the World, and fin? will - 
be found alive at his coming, and will be caught up, or ſnatch'd uw, 
denote its ſuddenneſs, it may be in the Arms of Angels, or by ſc 


immediate attrattive Power of Chriſt ; and it will be together vc! 


great Body, and it will be 7 the Clouds, . As Chrift himſelf afcendel 
ina Cloud, As 1,9, and ſo will return again, Mut. 24. 30, he mals 
| ing the Clouds his Chariots, Pſal. 104, 3. To meet the Lord in to 3 
1. To congratulate his coming, when others ſhall tee and tromb!s, 
2, Io put Honour upon hims as the Angels will allo atten in ! 
that end. - 3. To receive their final Diſcharge, 4, To be vii 
joined to their Head, 5, To be Affiſtants with him in judging © 
the World, and to reign with him upon#arth. And-whether the lai 
Judgment will be upon the Earth, or in the Air, J hall not « 
mine, But after this C hrift and his Saints ſhall never part, Thr 
firft meeting ſhall be in the Air, and their continuance will be wi. 
him while he is in this lower World, and after that they ſhall a" 
with him into Heaven, and (o be for ever with him, Augiltin nil 
gined that the Saints that are found alive ſhall in their Rapiuic 
and then immediately revive, becauſe it is appointed ro af en 
die ; but the Apoſtle laith exprefly, we ſhall not all dic, 6u: : 
be changed, 1 Cor. 15. 52, 


[area that are now raiſed from the dead ; they ſhall all aſcend in 0:2 


18 Wherefore, comfort || one another with £16! 
words x. | 

x 1 he Apoſtle maketh Application of all this Diſcourſe to1% © 
he deſinged, which was-to comfort them under their ſorrows 7 2: 
parted Chriſtian Friends, hit 


qi, 


And he faith not, be ye comfortcu, " 
comfort one another : To put them upon the great Duty of C/ rn 
Sympathy, tho' this is a Duty we owe to all, yet eſpecially to {115 58m 


| and more eſpecially of the ſame particular Congregation, Ai rent 


lOrrOWS are ulually moſt attlidtive, and theretore need 16 ! 
with words of comfort,and not with any words, but, but {a.t{ the A 

itle, with theſe words, or theſe things, as the 2b. the things 03 
words that he had before laid before them. T he Pliilofophers uied 
many Arguments againſt the fears of Death, and -for £om/ort 
under funeral ſorrows, but Chriſtians ſhould fetch their cam'orts 
from the Scriptures. Theſe are the beſt, moſt ſolid, moit Crave, 
and univerial, and therefore the Apoſtle comments 11:07 5 UÞ 
believing Komars, Rom, 15. 4. as here to theie Theſjaloniuns Pare 
cularly. Theſe Conſiderations, that thoſe which {{cep in Jeſs 112% 
riſe again, and that we ſhall meet them again, and ve and ty tes: 
be for ever with the Lord together, is a great relief again ow i rrovs 


o 


Ak 
*Js 


I: THESS 


i their departure hence, And the Comfort! 234mg, hence may ſerve 
«(49077 under other ſorrows as well 23 thew, whicn the Apoſtle al- 
32h iicend 1n 1h: Words, . 
GCG:HAK.-K 
"is coming of Chriſt ſhall be unawares, Lo 3. H e ſhould therefore he 
hor, and warckful, and prepared, q=—= 2, Hes exhorts them to Þ.4C 
their Rulers in #g0ur; and div'rs Chriſtian Virtues, 13 -— 22. 
1rayeth God ro keep them unblame able uno the coming of Chriſt ; and of 
this be is ofſured, 22, 24. He exbiris them to pray for him; and to [4- 
Jute ore another and adjures them thar this Epiſtle be read befure all : 
| The dprjtoltcal Benediction, 25——23, 
| 1 Ut of rhe times and the ſeaſons, brethren, ye have 
ITE B no nce( that I | write wnto you y. 
* 72 _ y But when ſhall theſe hings be, mizht ſome fay, as the Diſciples 
25ked Chriſt, Mat, 24. 3, 36. Als 1,6, He tells them, 'ris nor for you 
13 know times and. ſeaſons; Not that they knew them in particular 
already, but there was no need they ſhouid know them. It may be 


- 14L 


ye have 90 weed tar 1 write of them, The Apoſtle, . as in his: preach- 
ing, ſo his writing had reſpe& to what was moſt needtal; and profita- 
ble for the people z as when the Diſciples askt, Are there few that ſhall 
c{/2 Chrift anſwer them in that which was moſt needful to 
m, /uke 12. 24, And ſob doth the Apoſile here, inftead of acquaint» 
em with the times and ſeaſons, puts them upon watchtulnels, 
t they might not be ſurprized; as in the following Veries: and to 
improve the knowledge they had already, which was this, that Chriſt's 
coming would be iadden. 
2 For your ſelves know || perfe@ly that * the day of 
ac Lord ſo cometh as a thiet in the night <. 
Jy times and je 1/ons then before-mentioned, he meant the time of 
1: th I's coming, ; or he applies what he ſpoke in general to this par- 
11, ticular, which he here calls rh: Day of the Lord, And though they 
o... 7 fnOW not the particular time, yet they did know this, it would be ſud- 
; 0&1 and unexretted, coming as 4 thicf in the night, Rev. 16.15. the 
) comparifon 15 to be reſtrained only to the ſuddenneſs of it ; tor his co- 
. 1:0 will be welcome, and {0 not as a 1hiet to all that believe: And it 
5 Called the day of the Lord here and cl{ewhere, 1 Cor. 3. 13. Phil, 1. 
6,10, And 17.r Jiy, 2 7im 1, 18. not to be taken for a Natural Day, 
Put a Certain period of fime, Any eminent manifeſtation of God ei- 
£201 i Works of Mercy or Judgment, are called bis day in Scripture, 
Jie 2 12, ere48, 10s And fo becauſe Chrift will be more eminently 
ni Hed now than Cver before, thereforc his coming is called bis day; 
Cn EV WoUulae fiiden, they did not only know, but know per- 
IT Or accurately, Eph.g. 15, circumſpectly. There could be only 
©0115 F:re3 about the particular time: The influence hereor was pow- 
21f.l upon their Hearts, and fo they may be ſaid to know 2t perfectly, 
: Religion, knowledge is not perfect which is not operative. 
3 Fer when they ſhall ſay, Peace and ſatety a,.* then 
+ {iden b deſtruction cometh upon them, as travel upon a 
"  vOman with child c, and they ſhall not eſcape d. 
a By theie words the Apoſtle proves that the Day of the Lord will 
come unexpected, by the {ecurity that will be then found in the world, 
1 hey /ay it in their Hearts and Pradtice,if not with their 'Fongues, And 
he ulſtth two words the better to exprels the greatneſs of this {ccurity, 
YL | preſeiit Peace, aud m9 danger of ſliding, as the words unport: Ant as 
the effect of Chriſt's coming will be Deſiruciion to ſuch, which will be 
Salvation fo others, eb, g. laſt. fo. through their ſecurity 1t will be 
þ (udden dltruttion, c which he deſcribes under the timilitude of Tra- 
ve! upon a Woman with Child, which doth for the moft part come of 
a iiien, and is the moſt exquiſite pains in Nature, and is often made 
ule of in *cripture tv ler forth extremity of miſery, Iſa. 13. 8. Fer, 13. 
21, 4 Andthele pains come upon her unavoidably, fo laith the Apo- 
ca {ile of thele ens Deitruttion, and they ſhall not eſcap?, or in no wiſe 
oY e G12, OXpIett in the Greek by two Negatives, which do ftrongly af- 
on firm, 
4 But ye, brethren, are not in darkneſs e, that that 
auy ſhould overtake you as a thief. 
e Left theſe believing Theſſalonians ſhould be terrified in their Minds 


by this Dilcoule, he adds this by way of comfort to them, that they 
1n2!] 10t be ſurpriſed as others ; though they did not know the particu- 
[ 


i*, as the World would be, and the reaſon he gives is, becauſe they 
are rnot in darkneſs, Darkneſs is to be taken metaphorically, and ſo in 
cripture it's taken either for Sin, Ignorance, or Milzry, The two 
1Tmerare hers meant, eſpecially Ignorance. Theſe i heſj.lonians were 
brought into the light of the Goſpel z they had the knowiedge of Chrift, 
nl 12 way of Salvation by him; particularly they knew of his coming, 
[the manner and ends of his coming, which the Infidel World did 
| hough Chritt's coming would be to others as a Thief in the 
121, yet not to them. 


1. 5 Yeare * a!l the children of light, and the children of 
Le Gay f; we are not of the night, nor of darkneſs g. 


* 1nd} t 
\ GCTICE. Þ 


Lizht, he therefore hereby deſcribes their preſent ſtate poſirively, Te 
re a" the children of the light, and the children of the day, which is an He- 
bra11;1- Ye are Vartakers of a Spiritual Light, and this Light is not the 
darker Light of Nature, or the Lizht of Prophecy which the Jews 
val, comparedtioa Lamp, 2 7er. 1, 19, but ye are Children of the 
i7,, as ths time of the Golpel is called Day, Rom. 13. 12. 2 Cor. 6.2, 


£2 cyl 3, le are nut yy the night, nor of darkneſs ; your flate is 
exon ng uUnicrent from other Gentiles, and from what it once was, 
as Ihe Light 5 from Darknels, and Day from Night; not as if there 
Wis DOJENONTCE Temalning in them ; for the beſt men. ſee but through 


dais dartiy, 1 Co. 13. 12, but the Apoſtle compares them with 


Eno form te when they were Gentiles, and with the Jews under 
Law, anuvnithrefpect to their ſtate in Chritt, they were not Chi1- 
ITT LEt ys OF ag T0 their fate, of the Night, but Childten of 

, arid OT the Day, 
| hereFor& It n3 not ſleep, as 60 Others þ but ® let 
V% Watch z2 and he {ber k Is 
© © 3 


j And becauſe the Night 15 the time of darknels, and the Day of | 


ALONIANS, Chap. V. 


| + It2 Apoftle draws this Inference from the foregoing verſes in 2 
two-tol! Duty, 1. Negative; ſleep is not proper for the Children of 
the Day, but of the Night: And as the Night and Darkneſs are to be 
tazen metaphorically, lo the Sleep. And though it hath ſeveral accep- 
[tations in SCripture, yet it is here taken for Security. As the natural 
Sleep binds up the Senſes, and men are not aware of apyroachin= 
Danger, ſo doth the Sleep of the Soul. It darkens the Mind, ftupifies the 
Spiritnal Senſe, that Men prepare not for the coming of Chriit, nor to 
avoid the Deſtruction that will then come ſuddenly upon them ; and 
Rom. 12. 11, 12» 1s a place parallel to this, 1t 7s high time to awal en 0:5 
of ſleep, &c. Tre might is fa jpent, the day is at hand, &%&c. i 2. Po: 
farive; Watching ftands contrary to ſleep; the Senſes are then in Ex-- 
erciſe, which were bound up by Sleep. W hen the Soul is watching, the 
Faculties are in a Spiritual Exercite t9 apprehend both our Intereſt 
and our Duty, to take hold of that which is Zood, and to avoid the evil, 
the evil of fin, and the evil of ſuffering, But warching here in the 
Text eſpecially refers to the coming of Chriſt, to prepare for it, that 
we may not be ſurprized as others will, and to be in a readineſs to b. 
found of him in Peace, without ſpot, and blamelefs, '2 Per. 3. 14, 
Þ Sobriety is reckon'd to be one branch of Tem perance, and one of the 
Fruits of the Spirit, Gal, 5. 23. and one Link of the Chain of Grace, 
2 Pet, 1, 6 It hath its name in the Greek, fignitying either $917 4- 
neſs of Mind, or Contivency of Mind; a Mind kept or neld within it 
due Bounds, It is uſually taken for Moderation in Meats and Drin!:s, 
ſetting bounds to the Appetite, ' but it extends to all earthly thinss, 5 
-Honour, Riches, Pleaſures, to have our Aﬀections to them, our Car-3 
about them, our endeavours after them kept within duc Bounds; ani 
all this upon the account of Chrift's coming as a necetiary Preparation 
for it ; Vid. 1 Cor. 7. 29, 30,21. 1 Pet. 4. 7. Sobriety and watching, 
2re here joined together, and ſo 1 Pet. 4.7. and 5.8. For as In- 
temperance in Meats and Drinks makes the Body dull and fleepy, fo 
without Temperance and Sobriety the Soul will be- dilabled to 
watch, : : — 

- For * they that-ſleep, ſleep in the night 3 and they Lui 2 
that be drunken, are drunken in the night !. LETS 

1 The Apoſtle inforceth the former Duties of Iarchfulzeſs and 59 
briety from the conſideration of their preſent ffate, They that ilcp 
chooſe the Nizht to fl-ep in, and they that would be drunk chute tc 
Night for it, Drunkenneis being fo ſhameful a Vice, elpecially 11 
the Apoſtles time, that men were aſhamed to be ſeen drunk in the 
Day-time, Vid. As 2. 15. Ejh.5.12, 13. Andin ancient times they 
had their Feaſts in the Night : Ye therefore that are not in the night of 
your former Ignorance, 0ugir2 2127; to be found inthe Sleep of Secu- 
rity, nor in the Sin of Drunkennefs, whereby may be meant alſo any 
kind of Intemperance z for a man may be drunk, and n9t with !/7ne, 
Iſz. 29. 9. drunk with Pleaſure, with Cares, with ſenſual Love and 
Defires, with Paſhon, and by Spiritual Judgments upon the Soul, 
Ij2. 29. 10. 

8 Bur let ns, who are of the day, be ſober mz, putting _ 
* on the breaſt-plate of faith # and love o, and for an hel-* 114. 52. 
met the hope of falvation p., Co 
| m The Apoſtle here commands two ſpiritual Drties, and the for- 
mer is Sobriety, which he mentioned before, ver, 6. as a preparation 
for Chrift's coming : but here, as that which was ſuitable to thuir pre- 
[ent ſtate, and as ftanding oppoſite to that Drunkenne's in the fore. 
going Verſe, It is not ſutficient to abſtain from Vice, without pract:- 
10s the contrary Virtue. 4he other Duty is purtiny on their Spin 
ritual Armour, The former was to ſecure them againft the £cal 
things of the World, the latter againſt the Evil of it, that they be nor 
overcome of cither. "The Armour he mentions 1s {piritual, Soldiers 
"ave their Breaſt-plate, and Helmet for their Bodies, fo hath the Chri- 
ltian theſe for his Soul. As the Breaſt-plate and Helmet ſecures the 
principal ſeats of the Natural Life, the Head and the Heart, doc! 
the Chriſtian's Armour ſecure the Life of the Soul, and therefore theft 
two pieces are only mentioned as being moft ncceffary, His Breafts 
plate is Faith and Love, # Firſt, Fatth, in Epb. 6.1:,16, i7. it is cai- 
led a ſhield, here a breaſt-plate, Great things are aſcribed to Faith i 
Scripture; it is that whereby we are Juftified, Adopte:!, unite! to 
Chriſt, have our Hearts purified, Tc. But here it is to be contidderet 
as a defenfive Grace, and it doth defend as ir ailents to the Dottrimn: 
of the Goipel as true, particularly the Dodrine of the Reſurrection, 
and the coming of Chriſt, with the Effects and Attendants rhercof He- 
fore mentioned: And as it doth depend upon God's faichtulnels and 


Þ 
s. 24. 
I* IT? 


:rtime of Chriſt's coming, yet it would not find them unprepared for| all-ſufficiency to perform his Promiſes, andapplying; them to our (ly 


for our ſupport arttl comfort ; ſo Faith is a Breaft-plate or Deteace ; 2n.l 
as it is a Defence againſt Temptations, io particularly again that tud- 
den Deſtruction that will come upon the ſecure \World betore menti- 
oned. o Secondly, Love, and Love is joined with Faith, to thkew it fo 
be a true and lively Faith, when it worketh by Love, Gal. 5.6, and 
Love when it worketh produceth many bletied cleats, and particularly 
as Faith it will be a Breaft-plate of Defence ; It will detend againſt -t!:- 
| Perſecutions and AﬀiQtions of the World : Many Iaters cannct guei;_(n 
ops nor the floods drown 1t, Can, 8. 7 .,Sla viſh Fear will overcome us ; 
if we want Love to defend azainft it wn true Religion 15 under Dil 
| arace, and perſecuted in the World > Love will defend a24intt Apa 
ftaſic, and ſo help us to perſevere ro the coming of Chrift, which the 
| Apoſtle had been ſpeaking of ; and Love being ſeated in the [earr, 1s 
well compared to a Breaſt-plate tnat encompalicth the Heart, p >ccond- 
ly, the other piece of Armour is the Zelmer, fo called in the Greep 
from encomnaſſing the Head ; and this Helmet is faid here to be tlc 
bope of Salvation. In Evb. 5. 17, we read of the Aelmer of Sajvarion, 
but the hope of it is there to be underſtood, for Saivation is no Grace 
of the Spirir, and to ot it {elt no part of a Chriſtian's Armont, Hops 
of Salvation is of great ule toa Chriftian many ways ; Ir iz a Cordiaj 
to comfort him, a Spur to quicken him, a $:2tt to tupport him, a Bri- 
dle to refrain him, and lo alſo an Helmet to detend him ; and thers- 
fore no wonder that the Apotite calls true Hope a I:vcly Zype, 1 Per 

1.3. And asit {elf is lively, t© it isa Detencg ro the Lite of the Sou! 


25 an Helmet is to the Lite of i! lody, £ !ope deferred mit ti the hea, 
fick, faith $9.0morr, but if quice &11:ppoiatect and loft, the Hear tn; 
2nd dies, L<t Afftictions ant Dit, cies break in like 2 Ho, vet Hy 
wiil keep the tiead above \Vatcr; and if >atan ailauits tlis . oul ic 
drive it into Delpair, this hope of Salvation will be a Detence to itz, to 
thatthe Chriftian's Armoyr wcotioned 1a this yerle are £419, 0c, andt 


| I _- | £1"Pe 


Gill, 17. 


$2, 1COrT. 
{ 


? © 


Site. Pi :ncs call the three 1 helogical Graces, and placed to- 
other \\pottle, 1 Cor, 13. "I And theie the Saints who arc 
Children of Fr) e clav, are to put ON, W hereby they ſhall be Armc« tor 
the conn, of Chriſt with this Armor of light, Rm, 15. 12. and 

in (t £216 <defiudiion which will then 7} ic theChikiren oftheNight. 
o For * God hath not ap nbirced us to wrath, bur 0 


». ohtain ſalvation q by our Lord Jelvs Chrift 7. 
> q Some Expolitors make theſe words an Argument to al! the Du: 
ties of Holine's mention'd both in this and the fore gO0INg, C hapters, 
; truce, that the knowledzc of our being Elected or appointed 
to Salvation, doth not in the E e&t Encourage to {in or floth, as ſome 
atfhrm, \ but engage to all holineſs ; but 1 had rather rcſtrain the words, 
an That either to thchop? of Salvation mentioned immediately before, 
al « hen the tenle to Þe tis, we may well hove for Salvation ſeeing 
Gio! harh appointed us to 1t, or to i115 whole Di{courte about the com- 
; of Chriſt, and fo they n \a y give the reaion why the dead in Chriſt 

_- Be at e, Anc 1 muſt with the Livins Saints meet the Lord in the air, 
211} he ſow ever with him; yea, and why they need not ear the De- 
{truttion that will come upon others at that day, and why they {ſhould 
he watchtul tor 1ts coming becauic faith the Apoftle, God hath not 
app? inted us to Wrath, bes t9 chtain Salvation, &c. having ſpoken 
of two forts of Perſons, the Children of the Day, and Children ofthe 
Nizht, and the tudden  eftruetion of the one, and Salvation of the 0- 
ther at the coming, of Chriſt ; ke here aſcends to the firſt Original of 
b ot Þ, which is Gods irpointment, Which is an Act of God's Sovereign 
will, "determining mens final Eſtates, which ſeems to be more than 
oreknowledge, an Act of God's mind,as appears 


ant it 


l. THESSALONIANS. 


his dying for us implieth the greatneſs of our guilt, and eXpreſſet] 
the greatneſs of his own love,Feh! 15, 13. He love us and there 
would have us live with him, and he dyed that we an he may lips 
gether. And ſo he may be faid ro dic for our Salvation, the li ſubRtance 
whereof contifteth in our livi ing with him. To live with fo 7 lorio ors , 
perſon, and a perſon that js full of love to us, and ſhall then he perfe&t- 
ly beloved of us, and that ftands in many near Relations to us, yn 


Un ON 


"I 
Cs 


1 
\t 


whoſe preſence will hareſuch a blefſed influence upon us, and in (; 
a place as Heaven is, and that for ever, ſure carries the | ſubſtance ; 
our Salvetion in it, And if this was the end of his death , lure it 


more than to be an example of Faith, Patience, and Cnr [hon to G, 
Or to confirm to us the Dottrin he preached; It was to fatisf -divins 
Juſtice, and obtain the pardon of our fin, and merit for us the pr. 
vitedge of living with him. ; 


11 Wherefore || comfort your ſelves together #, 
edifie one another # even as alſo ye do w. 

;£ Thele words are an exhortation to the whole Church of 7h- 
nica, tO comfort and edifie one another, 1hough fic Mini ſity 1 
pointed to this by «ſpecial office, yet private C 'hriſtians are to; i 
it to one another, the former doth it in wav of - wmthortty, th = * 
a way of charity, The Apottlc had laid butore them mon comury 
ble truths 3 which they were to comfort one cher by ; and i 
read the words, exhort one another, it refers to the neceHfary « 1 
Relizion he had mentioned in this and the foregoing chapter, o ! 
this follows from both the former, as alluding *o an houſe that ishuilt 

up by degrees; and ſo is every Church the houſt e of God ; and coni;8. 
ing of living ſtones, every part is to leek the building up of the who! 


and; 


Chap, 


meer pr#(\cie nc, or 
by 63 $. 29. 1 Per. 


be ihe wtf God, this wift procceds from God's 
TprPomtipents clic Men mey fave ſomeirmay be fave, 
04; but that T am faved, 1 muſt thank my If. 
FOC NY) LAN to be ſaved; 
go tao be made fruftrate 
Wa L apparnts to Salvation, 


Apoſtle here makes Salvation ſtand oppoſite to Wrath. 


* appointed to the one, are appointed to the other, 
ud of Mc rcy are {et in. an ogyek te diſtinftion, Rom, 9g. 22, 23. 
- Text to IHlaftrate the Mercy of God the more in them 

Ani W; nercas the Apoſtle calls it the ob. uning of Sal- 


4 r Fl 
nid jo in t! 
that arc {av os 


God to it, aid {peaking 
lieving Reſdimis alſo, he hath oppointed us t9 obtain Salvation, doth 


not this alſo imply, that tome good aſſurance of Salvation may be ob- 
tained in this World £ r Ihe Decrees of Salyation are executed in him, 
faycth not only by his Do&trin and Example, as ſome have affirmed, 


but by his 
cauſe of Salvation : 


upon, wherein Mercy an.l Jufr! CC are aiimirably glorified together, 
and the hig! beſt enzgagoment imatinable laid upon men to love ſerve, 
an ! honor their Creator, 
nifeſted in his appoiſiting 
ofit in ſaving them by Felys 

| « aj to it, he rechncitin 
The former we have by 7 


men: ro S211 ration, 
S Chri iſt 
wy 3 God, 


and reforing is Image in 


thi MCTIT OY "His Blod x1, and the latter by 


the OPEe1 Farion of his Spirit 3 {6 that we have no ground for that fond 
opinion, That if men walk honeſtly 2nd Th ightly, Tlicy may beſaved 


in any REliZION» 
*Rom.i4. 15 * \Who died for ns, that whe 

| vie {hoald live together with nm /. 
fatter end of 


ther we wake or ſleep 


F ( 
"* 2 OI, $o [Some 7 efer theſe words to the he foregoing chapter, 
ih vie! rC the Apoſtle had __ the Saints ary and Retlurrection, 
['R wh & their ſleeping and waking as they are here calld. And 
[1 their r for ever with th. / wag is here called their lrvine togerber 
mith wo im. Tn left it migHt be thought that none ſhov 11d be with 
Chrift until thev owalked at - way furrection, he therefore leaks of 1j- 
1g ch Chri i} even when we {lk ep, He had ſpoke of ſleep in ang- 
thor ſerife, vor , me ant ay ecl urity, but here meant of Death, as its 
\ hap, &. 3.4. 'A 1d a Z 15 ſet oppoſite to the former lleep, 
y- $2 6 « £0 thc wing r, Whit HY Sa Reſurrection from Death. And 
= or that tle SO} doth not ſleep with the ody, bur lives 


z3 in che Grave. As the Apoſtie expected 
y.e> | : the ford men the diflolution of his Body, Pbl. 1.23, and he 
i Sit £5 es prvilzuge of other Saints as well as his own, 2 Cor, 

WW £13 with hum only 10 our Souls, when We wake 
» hot in yoly andSoul, And both thel: we have from 
Ci lyved Here: 1 had ben ſhut againſt our 


. . * » 
\ 0 Ta,2av1 ok os 
, if! 
} Iz 5 A - + 4 I Cho ks 


hett of all is by his Blood, and the 

vail of 613 Rc! ns. 48, 14 N25.an vi the Grave would have 
:£.ut IDZX | vould have w "Ell NO Refſurrettion, {0 
thai our I; | ILY ih s k n we licep and when we wake, 
$17) 7 theſe wi os further than the 
foregoing wv to Mo ati ved by Chin, faith the Apoſtle, 
be dyed {5 BYE © 3c Perſon 6 to be aye Y and Chrift to bc 
ene perfQo;.t ren yo to tobe favcd by his death ; with reſpect 

ET | is 1&1. 1 1.4 10 dearh, 1 Pet. 5, With reſpctt to 


p TY 4 I, —_ . : : \ 1 £ <- " Bs p 1 Os * 5 þ nas 2 \ mn 
s ©» : . 43 LS 4464 1k! Ai & - . . i) U\3, 4 NU 


. 2. Or MOre than appointing of the means and 


way of Salvation, hut not of perſons to be ſaved,or of perſons only ma- 
te: ry As to th © amber how many, but not formally, or individually 
who they arc that ſhall be ſaved ; wh ereas the Apoſtle writes of ſome 
A ſe mamte's ar. 557 me book of life, Phil, 4. 3. and that from the foun- 

atton of i old, Rev. 17. $, ani choſen before the foundation 
" the 1.1, Foh, 1, 4. otherwiſe every man's Salvation would 
devend more anon the uncertainty of Man's will, than the Eternal and 
amurable Will of God ; «hereas whatever God works in man's Salva- 
$1021, 15 accoriling tothe Connie] of his Will, Eph. 1. 11. And God's 
© ountelis corrain, immut2hl?, and eternal, extending not only to actz- 
e185 and mew, but parlors, Rom. 3, 23z 39. neither © 1s this appoint- 


10) £7007ded upon the tore fhoht of Man's Faith; for it Faith 
Counſe! and fore- 
I muſt thank 
And hence there is 
and ail the Counſels of God in 
« but this i3 no place for Controverſie, 
he appoints alſo to means, and 
the 1 1wans, the *© 15 no attain! ment of the end, Eph. 1, 4, 1 Pet, 


it be foro he! calld Deſtruction, Verſe 2. he here calleth Wrath, be- 
ute Goil's Wrath pod! aceth ir, and is manifeſted in it, And thoſe 
rhat beta ed, arc deliverc 4 from If, and the ſupream reaſon 1s, be- 
cane thev were ak appointed to it, but to Salvation, and none ' that 


t he Veſlels of 


vation, it implies man's endeavours for it, though he be appointed of 
poſitively not only of himſelf, but theſe be- 


and by him. And there 1s no Sulvation in any other, Ads 4,12, And te 


Blood as the meritorious, and his pirit as the efficient 
whether the Infinite Wildom of God could have 
found out another way I ſhall not enquire, but this it hath pitched 


And as the freenel(s of God's Grace is ma- 
lo the exceeding Riches 
| And whereas two things are ne- 


And by mutual exhortation and comfort the whole nay be edified 5 
Chriſtians then are to be blamed that only ſeck to eaihe themſelves,an 
much more they who pull down, and divide, and deftroy, inflea of 
building up. w And what the Apoſtle EX] orted them to, they were 
already } in the practice of ; for which he here again commentds them zz 
he had done upon ſeveral accounts before, not to flatter but to encor 
rage them to proceed, and to ſet before other Churches their Exam 


tor imitation, 


, 


which labour among you w, 
LORD x, and admoniſh you y : 
13 An d to eſteem them very highly 1n love > for the 

works ſake a. And be at peace among your ſelves 7. 

w The Apoſtle ſpake before of their private duties as © hr tia NS, f0 
one another, now of their dutics to their Paſtors and Teach ? 
by what he had ſaid they might think the Miniſtry needleſs, lt vow 
this Church was fetled under Ofthcers which is called an Cr: 
Church, And though the Apoſtle himfelt was driven from them 
perſecution, yet they were not without Minifters and Teachers, 
they owed a zreat Duty to them, to which he doth lovingly exhorr 


T4 
4124s 


them. And he deſcribes them not by the name of- their office, 25 Pa» 
ſtors, Elders, or Minifters, but by the work of to The word 1nporrs 
diligent labour cauling wearineſs, as 1 Tim. 5. 17. That labour in ti: 
word and dottrine, which ſhews both tlc nature Tf rhe \\ uk of the 
Miniſtry, it is laborious ; and the duty ot Miniſters therein,not to fe 


the honour and profit of the Office, and retuſe rhe Ws: of it + 
they have the work of "Teaching, and of overfight or Governm:; 
and admonition, and all require labour, x The fame word is 
1 7179.5. 17. and tranllated »uling, it fignitics that ſuperint*nt., 
anti precedency, which the Elders or 3Minifters have over th: 
ſpective Flocks, and 1t is fail to be 71 the Lord, either to diff 
them from civil Othcees, or to ſhew both the original Rule an. 41 
of their Ofhce ; it is ' from the Lord by Inftitution 5 an Kd To | 
managed according co his Laws, and directed to his ſervice, an! vor, 
as its end, y 'L he wi rd is often uſed in the new Teftamant, Aﬀs 25, 
2T. Rom, 15, 14. Col. 1.28. and 3, 16, and fignifies either the pur- 
ting into the mind by way of inf {trudtion, or upon the mind hy way 
of Counſel, threatning, or reproof; and that either publickly or 
privately : : 2 Now the Duty they owed to them iS, b To [7:08 AL EY 
as in = former words, that is, to own them in their Oit [1 
have regard to their Teaching, and to ſubmit to their govern! 
an Sh —_ their labours, as knowing is often taken in Ss 
to Expreſs the atts of the will and affection, and the actions ail, 
the outward men, as well as of the mind, as 7/a!. 1. 6. ani 101, 
2. To eſteem them very highly in love for their works fate v7 P33 TEENTES 
vid, Rom, 5.20. 2 Cor, 7.4 The words in the G: eck C:! LCN an 
emphaſis as cannot well be expreft in Engliſh, importing, « <2: and 
love to an hyperbole, their love was to be jorned with effec im, and 
efteem with love, and both theſe to abound an ſuperaboun rowarls 
them. We read ofa double honour, 1 7im. «<. 17. which 0821s the 
whole duty of people to their Miniſters. a Whether of Teaching, Ru 
ling, oradmonition, Their work is in it ſelf honourable,and work tr 
tends to your ealvation, and though their perſons be mean, yet t© t- 
ſtzem and love them for their work + if upon any of her account they 
deſerve it of you, yet their work is to be the chief reaton thereot ; &- 
pecially conſidering that their work more it ies cely refpettecdl them of 
this Church rather than any others ; and their labour v aS R097 ff the! '9 
or as ſome real it 777 you ; to inftr uct, edific, and com! or vour inward 
man. 6 Some copies read it, with the m, &vJois tor eau)o1s, | y a lit! 
alteration of the Greek word, and then it jtill reters to their 16 wa, 
they ſhould be at peace, or live in peace with them. For oftentimes 
ſenttons ariſe betwixt Miniſters and 1 cople, whereby their ediNcation 1 
hiadred. But I rather follow our own tranflation ; and lo it 15 9/8 
duty of the people towards one another, to preſerve mutual peat 
among themſelves ; An yet thelc ts m2y reſpect the former :; 
the people give honour and reſpect to the! ir YA ifters, 1 May | 
means t9 preſerve Peace among them Ives - among, theCo imbir: 47'S | 
applauding of iome of their Teach: TS, an.l tie « 'onte -mpt of oth: TEINY 
great Schitins and divitions _—_— them. Our Savicpr ulſcth nec 
ry words to his Diſciples, Mt g. 50. — 1m whence the Apoitle m , 
take them, And the duty of pea ce he often prefieth in bs Epiſtles. Am 
14. 19, 1 Cor. F..#S-Y Cor, 13. Ii. Ci - Fn tit, 12. 14 a he : 
t prevent Schiſm, which CReace, and may et 1 


- -@> 


< 
t/& 


' 
p0041! 


V al. "hls au; TOY 
brea'ss Ch DOINGS «J 


| TI PAPAL ©" * ' M hon 
rt 4 Now we || exhort you ;0irene, ® warn nem 


And we beſeech you, brethren, * to know thems , 
and are over you in the 15:1 


labours of their 1 cachicr; leſs luccel<tul.  - 


iy 


ok F< tos 


' 
. VMbap. V- 
=... | nnruly d, comfort the teeble-minded e, * ſupport 
the weak f, be patient towards all men g. 

- me think the Apoſtle now turns his ſpeec!; ro their Teacners\ 
whom he here calls Brethren in a more peculiar ſenſe ; an be. 10e 
bi, G& 211, JYoties here enjoined do more property belong to the Miniitry, 
| mr oChers more truly judge he continues his Diſcourſe to- rhe whole 
Chnrch, and the ſevera}] Members of it. The lame Duties are to be 

\ortormed by both, though under a different Obligation. As in the 
Civil State all are to ſeek the good of the Common-wealth, though the 
Magiftrates and Governours are more tpecially obliged by Othce, dOr 
Atmmiſh; as the ſame word 1 rendred in the- former verle, here 
meant of brotherly, there of miniſterial adlmonition, wherein great 
pru lence 15 to be uted, as to time, place, perlons, manner :; And the 
mr uly are ſuch as keep not their place, alluling to Souldiers that keep 
nc. their rank, and ſtation, and are called in the Margin d:/order- 
ly, and that, 1. In civil reſpects, when men live without a calling, or he- 
ins in it, neglett it, or intrude into other mens Hutinels, and perform 
not the Duties of their Civil Relations, 2 In aral reſpects, when 
11en follow not the lizht of Nature, and fulti} not th? Law of Natural 
J;clations. 2, In ſpiritual reſpettz, when men neglect or trangrels 
' he Rules and Order of tiicir walking in their Church-State,either with 
reſpett to their Teachers, or one another. Ad:nonition belongs to ſuch, 
and is the firſt Rep of Church-Cenlure when regularly performed.e cA- 
»&y es, Or, the puſillanimous, men of little Souls,as the word imports, 
«ich as dare not venture vpon hazardous duties,or faint under the tears 
or feeling of Atfictions, or are dejected under the ſenſe of fin, and 
rieir own unworthineſs, or fears of God's Wrath, and affaulteit by 
Temptations which endanger their falling. f Ay7ze3, an alluiton to 
{ch as lift at one end of the burden to help to bear it, aniwering to 
the word ovyasinap3dyriu, Rom. $. 26. The Spirit help:th our infirmi- 
ties : And the weak are either the weak in Knowledge,weak in Faith, 
{12t underſtand not their own Liberty in the Goſpel, Rom. 14. 1, 1 Cor. 
2. 3, And hereupon cannot prattiſe as others do, Their Conſcience is 
weak, 1 Cor, 8,12, And { were in Bondage to ſome Ceremonial 
ics, when thoſe that were ftrong ſtood faſt in their Liberty, Theſe 

to be ſupported, dealt tenderly with, and not to be deſpiſed, or 
rizoroufly uied « Or, weak in Grace, new Converts, Babes in Chriſt, 


fY % 

o v1?) 
\ 4/4zle 
> 


they 
vilcy 


wyntr 
LiELL 


3 (0 tender Plants, not weil rooted in the Goſpel. - g This Duty is univer- 
I fl, the former concerned only the Saints, The word ſignifies Longa- 
w_ ninity, of Lonp-ſufering, and is often attributed to God, Exod. 34. 


:0 wait without anger when men delay us, and to ſuffer without un- 
vac anger when they deal injurioufly with us, whether they -be goed 
mon or evil, believers or intidels, the ftrong or the weak, Minifters 
or 2copl?. | 
. 15; * See that -none - render ev1l, for evil unto any 
'24-man Þþ - but ever * follow that which is good z, both a- 
*mong your ſelves, and to all men &, 
hþ Theſe wordsſeem directed to the Guides of the Church, who are 
= alled Overlieers, Ads 20. 28. and therefore the Apoſtle requires them 
4 to ſze that none render evil, Ge, Or if to the whole Church as before, 
then it is a ſolemn charge which they ought to be all circumſpect in 
And the charge is, firſt, negative, not to render evil tur 
to revenge themlelves ; and that is forbidden by the A- 


TITRE 
1\ . ſj 


f 
o 


wfS: , 
[1 » a> , 

OCT) N=. 

* 11ch 


. 
IQ 


vil 1 3D : 
poſtle, Aom. 12.17, 19. 1 Pet. 3.9. Ant is the reſiſting of Evil, for- 
bidden by our Saviour, Mar. 5, 39. But is to be underftood of private 


revenge rifing out of malice, not of publick cenſures, either Civil or 
Eccletiaftical ; Or of {ecking reparations for injuries received in Courts 
of Juſtice according to Law an! Equity, 1 his private revenge can- 
not contliſt with that patience that he required towards all men in the 
foregoing verle, nor is it conformable to the Example of Chrif, 1Per, 
2, 25, nor to the Chriſtian calling and Profeſſion, 1 Pet. 2, 21. 2. Po- 
ſive, good in it {e1t, or that which is good to others, as the word 1s 
often taken, Mat. 7. 11, Lale 1.3, Gal. 6. 5, and fo ftands oppotite 
here to the rendring of Evil. And the word foll-w, ſignifies an earneſt 
following, which is ſometimes taken in a bad ſenſe, for perſecution, Mar, 
5. 11, and ſometimes in a good Senſe, as 1 Heb, 12. 14. Pet. 3. 11. 
and to follow good imports more than only to do good, 1 Per. 3,11, 
whicn the inward bent of the Soul, and the ontward Endeavours are to- 
wards doing good, And this ought to be ever, or always, that 15 in 
all places, times, occafions,company, Mans courſe of Life ought in this 
to be uniform, though his outward condition vary. Sometimes to do 
£00d to tt.c Souls, fometimes to the Bodies of men, and that either in 
a privative or potitive Good ; preventing Evil,or beftowing that which 
is ood, & Do g99d 19 all, and eſpecially to the Houſhold of Faith, Gal, 6. 
10, As they ſay of good, the commoner the better, but the contrary of 
evil, Chriftians ſtand in a ſyecial relation to one another, but in a com- 
mon Relation to all,and every Relation ought to be filled up with good. 
As Love is a common debt to all men, fo the Fruit of it which is doing 
good, Our doing, good ſhould not be confined among, Chriſtians only 

of one Way, Opinion,Lor Congregation, nor to men only under !0me 

limitins circumftances, but it ſhould reach all men as we have ability, 

opportunity, and call z even Enemies themſelves, as our Saviour Fe- 

quires, Mar. 5.44. This is to act like God, and may commend Relt- 

£10110 all men, and is not to be lookt upon as commended by way of 

cul, as the Fapiſts ſay, but commanded by Precept, And it is not 

enough not todo Evil, but we muſt do good ; not to ſave a Mans lite 

when we have power to do it, is to kill him, as Chrift Argues, Mark. 
*. 4, lonot to ſave a man's eltate, when we may, is to ſteal from him. 


is Rejoyce evermore /. 
. { Here the Apoffle ackls more Chriſtian duties, briefly expreft, and 
ict clv!e One to another, ani they ſeem to have a mutual connexion,but 
nt fo relative to others as thoſe before mentioned, but perſonal to 
tremiclves, He begins with the duty of Rejoycing, ; joy is an affe&tion 
011 Soul tpringing from the hope or poſlethon of ſome fuitable good, 


Ant it is either natural, which is common to blen with Beaſts, arifing 
Irom that good that is ſuitable to their ſeveral Natures. Or {piritual, 
WIC) i5 Joy Wrought by the Spirit, end exercited upon ſpiritual Ob- 
Fas, An this the Apoſtle here means, and js called rejoycing in the 


Or, 071], 4.4. and the joy of the Hoiy Ghoſt, kom. 14. 17. arifing 


"er from what ipirituai good wealready potſeſs, or hope to poflels, 


10414 © promijja, Berner, which is thereupon called a reJoyctng in 
x ; boy, » 46m 5, 2, and 12.12, Ihe Apolile ipeaks here of the duty inde- 

| Tnite | p F 4 4* + + > y* 4.2 # ib; E " % 
gall, Cty on!y Fey uircy !t 10 D& Cverimot TC, 10 4 El, 4, 4» I hovgh Go 


IL THESSALONTANS. 


$3? T7? 
its vS 


IOMCttmes calls to mourning, vet it's no where ſaid rn eVermore, 

hecaule re jovcing ought to be in a more conſtant practice, and all ip! - 

ritual mourning tenas to it, and will cal in it ; and he commend; 

as ſeatonable to thele Theſſalynians to ſupport them under thei Pretcnt 

ſufterings. The grounds of a Chriſtians Joy always abide, and he is 

not only to retain it in the habit, but co mix it with all his (Orrows,an.l 

fufferings, as 1 Pet, 1, 6, Te preazly rejoy:r, thigh for 2 ſeaſon in bo 

vines, Whereas carnal mirth is mixt with fadnets, Prov. 14. 12. So 

that a Chriitian ought to rejyce in every condition, not only in pro" 

perity, but advertity, and elpecially when called to ſuffer for righte- | 

ouineſs ſake, as Mar. 5.12, 1 Pct 4, 13. it is not only allowed but . 

commanded, his joy is one great part of God's Kingdom even in | 

this Worid, Rom. 14. 17. much morc iq the Work! to come. Anal 

therefore the Apoſtle ſpeaks of rejoycing, evermorc, whereas mourn 

ing is but for a time, and ends to the Saints in this Lite, 
17 Pray 2 without cealing 7. 

m This is a means to maintain our r2joycing, and therefore n<:! 

mentioned, Prayer is a making known our requeſts to God, Phil, 4. ; 

5, And it is cither mental in the heart only, as Hannbs was z or vG- 

-4/, expreſt with the Voice: or as ſome add, vi:al; { good works 

have a voice to bring down bleſſings, as mens fins cry for vengeance, 

2» Not as the Euchires and Meſſalians, of old, who hence thouzht no 0+ 

ther duties were required, but always Praying ; but by the word in the 

Text, is either meant a praying without fainting, as in the Paraile, 

Litz 18, 1, and which the Apoſtle calls a, perteverance in Prayer, 

Epi, 6.15, Col. 4.2. megozae]:rart, Or Praying with ftrength, 

the greek word there imports, and fo not to faint, ſo Km, 12. i2, 2: 

a praying inevery thing,as Pk), 4. 6, In every thing let 91:0 requie!t 

madz known, &c. Or, inevery ſeaſon, as Eph. 6. 18. to take {ol vi 0 

ſeaſons of Prayer. Or,in all ſeaſons and times, whether fo0.l or ha! 

yet ftill to Pray. Andall this is meant by the word in the 4 cx which 

is allo uſed, Rom, 1. 9. 1 Theff. 1. 3. and 2. 13. and implics im 2 ral ! 

no more but a conſtant courie of Prayer, fo Cul.- 4. 2. to 3.47 1419 

Prayer,as that the courſe of it b- not interrupted by any diver iions, 

ally to preferve an heart ditpoted ro pray at. al crimes; amt to ming 

ejaculatory prayers with the levera} actions of our lives; our wants ar? 

continual,and God will be acknowledged 2 all our lupphes, amt there 

for we ought to pray continually, 


tC , 


x .3 


13 * In every thing give thanks 9 - for this is the will 0! 
of God p in Chrift Jeſus q concerning, you y. 
o When we had obtained mercy by Prayer, then we are to viv? / 
thanks, and whatever we may pray for, that we 61ught to give than! | 
for, And fo by that underſtand and limit the general exprefion in the Fs 
Text, Weare not to give thanks when we fall into fin, for that we 
01ght not to pray tor, Yet if we have the pardon of it, or g<t any goott: LO 
by it, we ſhould then zive thanks : and fo may be ſaid concerning, at- {# 
aicton, we are to give thanks in every condition, cither of prolperity 
or alvyertity, And with all our ſupplications, w- are to join thanklsj- 
vings, Phil, 4.6. Col. 4. 2. and thankſgiving properly refers to ſome 
mercy received, whether privative or poſitive,temporal or ſpiritual, i- 
vate or publick, and we are in all thele to give thanks. Though prai- 
ng God may reach further, which is to adore the Excellencies of 1:is 
Being as they are glorious in themſelves, or the Excellencies of his 
works as they are in themſelves praiſe worthy. And 1 hankſziving for 
mercy received is, 1, A taking notice of it as coming from God. 
2, Setting a due value upon it. 3. A ſenſe of God's c00{tnelſs and our 
own unworthineſs, 4, Praiting him for it, p Some carry this as a mo- 
tive toall the preceding duties, but rather to this laſt mentioned : As 
if this was 1n ſpecial the Will of God ; being a duty ſo much to his own 
lory and our good, and by will we muſt by a Metonymiz underſtand ; 
the thing witled, Eph. 6.6, C91. 4. 12. It is required by the Law of 
nature nor written, which is part of God's will. - The Heathen are re- 
proved for not being thankful,. R9m. 1. 21. and they made Laws to 
auniſh it, and accounted it the greateſt reproach, meratum / #txert, 
1mla dixeris, and by the Law of God that is wrirtew, ihe moral Law 
requires it, and the Ceremonial Law required offerinzs by way 6: 
thankſgiving ; which we call gratulatory, And the Go! ol reg it 
it being one of the Goſpel Sacriticcs, Zeb. 1 3. 15. at yeaſbih the ? 
netter than the greateft of the legal Sacritices, 7/1, £5. 20. 21. 
DEINg lakl fo be the / 7of God in the Text, ir muſt 6c ods bo pleatins d 
to him. q ither meant 25 this will of his is fgnifed to 1s by lim, o ? 
only by tlie Law of nature, or of Myjes, but by Chrift Joius, and 1 
it may be of 2reater force upon Chriftians,21 her: by it 35 fo be looked 
upon as one of the Commandments of C h7ift allo. On 
ſtan it, por! the account of Chriſt, and the &: 
Though Thankigiving is due for the teaft myrey, yet Gail's will eſpe - 
cially requires it with reſpect to Chriſt, And to eſpecially of Chriſtie 
ans who partake of Chriſt, and the love of Go.! in him: as the A 
ile here adds, &5s vuas. r Or, trwirds you in frecial, the Heatien 
wcre obliged to thanktulneſs for Rain from Heaven, ant fruit 
lons, thele common bleſſings ; much mor are Clu} - 
cial blefiings they receive by Clift Jclus, ? 
19 * Quench not the ipirit /. | £114.35 

J That ye may be enah(el to pray and give thanks, as b-for?, Pin bd ke 
not the Spirit, And by the hgure Mi0ts he means cert); 
The lpirit is compared to Fi:c, Mar. 9, 11, and he camo down unon 
the Apoſlliles in the fimilitude of Tongues of Fire, Ads 2, 3. | 
ſpirit himſelf cannot he quenched, he means it therefore of lis : 
and o2erations ; which are either ordinary or cxtraortinay, Many 
had extraordinary gitts in the primitive times, of hea:: 
government, prophecy, &©c, thoſe that hail them, without guettion, | $1 


Li 


ſhould have taken care not, by any fault of th-ir own.to lulethberm, 1 
pecially that or propheſte, which the Avolitle prefers before ail others, 

1 Cor, 14. 1. and mentions here. in the following ver 

the Apoſtle exhorted Timothy to ſtic up in himivit, 2 Tim, xr. 6, As 8 

ſtir up the Fire to quicken it, lo the word &re{@rroy imports, Ih 

like is required of Minifters with reſpect toe NMinitierial gifts vic! 
are now giren, But there are or 4i7ary giits ant operations of the Spt- 

CUTS TITLES 
© Soul; men by florh ſecority, carthly incurbrane £4. : | 
Pe-t OPEFAOons of 04 TT , 314521 fly 
LBC £10; DOT the Alc: IRES ; 


Lk * {I j - ge | 
tf Lit {11H Liſe Vil 


WwaQOc 


\\ \ ally LUNG . 
PR 
C2QU 


'cat love of In him, 


LS 
'P, 


vYfri1i 2 \ Tas , »-* 
+4 LONAUCE, 


rit common to all Chriſtians, as cnlightning, « 
comforting, t! 
dinate affections, Ge, may adi [ 
the Apoſtle calls the quenchive 11. 

always burning by the care 


$1 it » bo 


WP ri . 4 . % 
A 24 [):2 TJ 1: wel 'TRS1U3 
_ A 


neglecting it, or « 


Hate. ' Divincs call the three 1 helogical Graces, and placed to- 
221 | Apoitly I * 07, 3» 4k And th Tots tine haints w hv are 


C dil er frie e LaV, Are fo put on, W hereby they ſhall be Armcd tor 


the Conn, of Chr, \ with this Armor of light, Rom, 12. 12, and 
noainkt the deftuttion which will the nf: vric theC "hildren oftheNight. 


o For * God hath not appointed us to wrath, bur to 


"1+; obtain ſalvation q by our | ord Jetus Chriſt 7. 
Some Exp {itors make theſe wor: ds an Argument to al! the Du: 
iP t 15 Ex : that the kno! pied of our « Fra FE lege 5 appointed 
re) Salvetion, doth not in the Ele&t Encourage to fin or lloth, as ſome 
ut engage to all holineſs ; but 1 had rather reſtrain the words, 
arkl :hat either to the hop? of Salvation mentioned immediately before, 
17! then the tenle to Þe this, we may well hope for Salvation ſeeing 
3 Io harh appointed us to 1t, or to 115 whole Diſcourſe about the com- 
ins of Chritt, and ſo they n "ay give the reaſon why the dead in Chrift 
Th uſt riſe, an 4 muſt with the Liv ing, Saints meet the Lord in the air, 
and be for ever with him: yea, and why they need not fear the De- 
frrittion that will come upon others at that clay, and why they ſhoulc 
bc  watchtul tor 115 COMing, becauic faith the Apoſtle, God hath not 
dn inted us to Wrath, doe t9 obtain Salvatlon, Cs having ſpoken 
© q two ſorts of Perſons, the Children of the Day, and Chil Iren ofthe 
ht, and the tfuiden  deftruction of the one, and Salvation of the 0- 
hs at the coming of Chrift; ke here aſcends to the firſt Original of 
* which is Gs arpoimems 7t, which is an Act of God's Sovereign 
will, determining me ns final Eſtates, which ſeems to be more than 
meer przſcience, or foreknowledge, an Att of God's mind,as appears 
by Km, 5. 29. 1 Per. | 1. 2, Or More than appointing of the means and 
way of $alv ation, but not of perſons to be ſaved,or of perſons only ma- 
amber how many, but not formally, or individually 
whereas the Apoſtle writes of ſome 
Phil, 4.7. and that from the foun- 
4 4h of ih. old, we 8, ant choſe before the foundation 
of the Wwri.l, Fph, t. otherwiſe every man's Sajvation would 
Ygoenend myre f!1C UN certainty of Man's will, than the Eternal and 
God ; whereas whatever Gold works in man's Salva- 
| & tothe C onnle] or his Will, Eph. 1. 11. And God's 
© ounſel is certain, immutanl?, and eternal, extending not only to actz- 
e275 and e273, but} parlons, Kom. 8. 25, 39. neither 1s this appoint- 
d@c1 1} wh the foreitht of Man's Faith : for it Faith 
be the pate 01 C oF, this-pift proceeds from God's C 'ounſe] and fore- 
ate ny £ Men may fav fomefrmay be fave, I muſt thank 
| am lay mak | muſt thank my ſelf, And nence there is 
tor Nv nan to be faveds and ail the Counſels of God in 
Co iti bemade truffrate 3 but this ij3 no place for Controverſie, 
© 0d appoints to Salvation, he appoints alſo to means, and 
neans, the! 'C 1S no attainment of the end, Eph, 1, 4. 1 Pet, 
AF poftle here makes Salvation ftand oppoſite to Wrath. 
calld Deſtruction, < Je 3. he here calleth Wrath, be- 
h produceri it, and is manifeſted init. And thoſe 
red from-it, and the ſupream reaſon 1s, be- 
- they were not appointed to it, Hut to Salvation, and none that 
Pointed to the one, Are appoi inte to the other, 't he Veſſels of 
11ard of Mc rcy are: et in an ond Ite diſtin&tion, Rom. 9. 22, 23, 
and 1b in the Text to Tluftrace the Mercy of God the more in them 
that are {ave _ Ani whereas the A} \oftle calls it the obr. uning of Sal- 
vation, it implies man's endeavours bot it, though he be appointed of 
God to it, and {peaking poſitively not only of himſelf, but theſe be- 
lievins Retomicn alſo, he hath oppointed us t9 0bt41n Salvation, doth 
not this alſo imply, tha it lome good afſurance- of Salvation may be ob- 
tained in this \w orld ?£ r '1 he Decrees of Salyation are executed in him, 
and by him. And th-re 2s no Salvation in any other, Ads 4,12. And he 
ſaveth not only by his Doetrin and Example, as ſome have athrmed, 
but by his Blood as the meritorious, and his Spirit as the efficient 
cauſe of Salvation ; whether the Infinite Wiſdom of God could have 
foun1 cut another way I ſhall not enquire, Þut this it _ —— 
upon, wherein Mercy an: Juſtic ce are aimirably glorified together, 
and the higheſt engagoment | table laid upon men to Sag, ſerve, 
and honour their Creator, Anc 1 25 the freenels of God's Grace is ma- 
nifeſted in his appointing men to Salvation, ſo the CXCeeUINEg Riches 
of it in ſaving them by jeſus Chriſt, And whereas two things are ne- 
_ to it, the reconciling vs vth God, and reſtoring his Image in 
The former we have by Uh McTitor his Blood, and the latter by 
the operation of his Spirit ; { that we haye no ground for that fond 
opinion, That if men walk honeſtly 20d unrichtly, They may be ſaved 
17 any Relig ION» 


1 * Who died for ns, t! 
vie {ſhould Ure together wi 
[Some refer theſe words to the 
where the Apoſtte bad ſpoke of the : 
which is their fleeping anc OT 
their being for ever with th: "hy { 1s here called their Hving togerb-r 
mith Hm. And Ton it migkF be thought chat none ſhould be with 
Ckriſt until thev awaked at che » ſirrijon, he thereiore {peaks . of lj- 
ring with Chrii even when we {lc ep, He had ſpoke of ſlrep in ang- 
r ſenſe, 7% MCant of | ſecurity, but here meant of Death 1, AS its 
chap, 4. 14. And a ing 2 15 ſet oppoſite to the former ſleep, 
"328104906 latte * which is a Reſurrettion from Death. And 
ther chat {fie Soul oth not ſleep with the Budy, bur lives 
| in the Grave, As the Apoſtie expetted 
"s þ 1 the Lord mien the diffolution of his Body, Pb1l. 1.23. and he 
of 5 if 23 11s phviliuge of other Saints as well as his own, 2 Cor, 
"Y are with him only 11 our Souls, when we wake 
ly andSoul. And both thcl: we have from 
lvel Heaven had been ſhut againſt our 
tieft of all is by his Blood, and the 
2%. an! the Grave would have 
been no Reſurrettion, ſo 
- £1245 « ficep and when we wake, 
IDTINGS DUE 4 carry theſe words no further than the 
| Claved by Cit, fairh the Apoſtle, 
| Perſons to be layed, and Chrift to be 
o be faved by his death 5 with reſpett 
-214 5, With reſpc*t to 


al A: mil i9 IN 


p 


terially.as to thc 
who the Y arc N21 fN 141] be ſaved 3 
Tn Ham. () To, Hhoyk of life, 


I '”7. 


TY) 


4mutable Vit of 


nd the 
23 before hc 
e GoQt's 5 - Wrat! 


= FI 


_ = _ I 
{16 I4\ Cils £21}% ( 


lElive 
11Ttl Pp horyu were 
> 4 Te: 
ft « F< 
64; © 


\Wr.: 


NG ? 


hat whether we wake or fleep 


} t im þ. 

itter end of the foregoing chapter, 
S2ints Death and Reſurrection, 
as they are here call'd. And 


+. | 
1 


iT 
', 
tl 


rail of} rar bray £5 "my 1g, 
pt $58. Wi) haye 


? . » «$5 »” 44'p» 
v . j '4 VV a: it \v< 


t I A ! f . , ' 


l THESSALONIANS. 


=» V] 


his dying for us implieth the greatneſs of our gilt, and Raj tl: 
the greatneſs of his own love,Feh! 15. 12. He lovet us ani therey; 

would have us live with him, anda he dyed that we ant he may tive +,. 
gether. And fo he may be ſaid ro dic for our Salvation, the ſi} $a 
whereof confiſteth in our livi ing with him. To live with fo glorig us 
perſon, and a perſon that is full of love to us, and ſhall then bh Perf. 
ly beloved of us, and that ſtands in many near Relations to ang Ind 
whoſe preſence will have ſuch a blefled influence upon us, anc| Fe x 
a place as Heaven is, and that for ever, fure carries the ſubſtance | 
our Salvation in it, And if this was the end of his death, 


re it v 
more than to be an example of Faith, Patience, and ſubmi ſnon to G; 

Or to confirm to us the Poarin he preached ; it was to fatisf 
Juſtice, and obtain the pardon of cur fin, and merit tor k. Lhe Pt 
viledge of living with him. : 


Fether f, 
az 1 


11 Wherefore || comfort your ſelves to 
edifie one another # even 2s alſo ye do w. 

£ Thele words are an exhortation to the whole Church 6f Th 
nica, to comfort anc edifie one another, 1lhough fic Minif ity, 
pointed to this by cſpccial office, yet pr ivate Chriſtians are tg : Drag 
it to one another, the former doth 1 It in way of zuthority, the lit 
a way of charity, The Apoftlc had laid butore them man, cont, 
ble truths : ; which they $5: to comfort one another by :; and l 
read the words, exhort one another, it refers to the neceHary « a 
Religion he had mentioned in this and the toregoing chapter, # 
this follows from both the former, asalluding to an houſe that is! wilt 

up by degrees; and ſo is every C hurch the houſe of God ; and con;h- 

ing of living ſtones, every part is to ſeek the building up of the i whole, 
Anc | by mutual exhortation and comfort the whole 1 may be elifizd ; 
Chriſtians then are to be blamed that only ſeck to-edihe themſelves,arg 
much more they who pull down, and diride, and deſtroy, inflea! of 
building up. w And what the Apoſtle EXhorted them to, they were 
already in the practice of ; for which he here again comme: nds them as 
he had done upon ſeveral accounts before, not to flatter but to er a 
rage them to proceed, and to ſet before other Churches their L: cam 
tor imitation, 


2 And we beſeech you, brethren, * to know them: , «, 
which labour among you w, and are over you 11 the 15.1, 
LORD x, and admoniſh you y : | Th 

13 And toeſteem them very highly in love x for the 
works ſake a. And be at peace among your lelves ! 

w The Apoftle ſpake before of their private duties as © hr! ſta 
one another, now of their duties to their Paſtors and Teachers, | \n 
by what he had ſaid they might think the Miniſtry needleſs, % c cms 
this Church was ſetled under Ofhcers which is called an C227: 
Church, And though the Apoftle himſelt was driven from them ty, 
perſecution, yct they were not without Minifters and Teachers, an. 
they owed a great Duty to them, to which he doth lovingly eX10rT 
them. And he deſcribes them not by the name of their ofEco, 15 Þ2. 
ftors, Elders, or Miniſters, but by the wort of it, The word 1m nnorts 
diligent labour cauting wearineſs, as 1 Tim. 5. 17. That labour int: 
ord and dottrine, which ſhews both the nature of rhe v L's 


and: 


\ , 
I'.3 
v1 [4 


of t:i2 
Miniſtry, it is laborious z and the duty of Miniſters therein,not to '£ 
the honour and profit of the Office, and refuſe rhe tbo "ar of jt; 
they have the work of Teaching, and of overfight or - Governm + ; 
ant admonition, and all require 4abour, x Thc ſame word is 14; 
| Tim, 5. 17. and cranſlited ruling, it fignities that fu; Derm ved 
ani precedency, which the Elders or Miniſters have over ths 
ſpective Hocks, and it is fail to be 7 the lord, either to diti 
them from civil Othcees, or to ſhew both the original Rule ang +1. 
of their Othce ; it is ' from the Lord by Inflitution 5 and to 
managed according to his Laws, and directed to his ſervice, an: : lore, 
25 its end, »y the word is often uſed - the new 'Feftamant, Aﬀs 27, 
2T. Rom. 15, 14. Col. 1.28. and 3, 16. and ſiznifies either the puc- 
ting into the mind by way of in{ ken, or upon the mind hy | ar 
of Counſel, threatning, or reproof; and chat either _ publickly er 
pr! vately : 7 Now the Duty they owed to them is, 1. 79 brow! toy 
as in the former words, that is, to own them in their Office ; t9 
have regard to their Teaching, and to ſubmit to their governnen:, 
an to reward their labours, as knowiyg 3s often taken in <crincur. 
to exprels the atts of the w il and affect 10n, and the actions ally ut 
"y outward men, as well as of the mind, as 7/al. 1. 6. ani 103, 
To eſteem them Very highly in Iove for their works ſuke, emea mers 
vid. Rom. 5,20. 2 Cor, 7. 4 The words in the Greck Carry fuch an 
emphaſis as cannot well be expreft in Englith. i importing <fte-m and 
love to an | hyperbole, their love was to be © jorne.i with < ſex. m, and 
efteem with love, and both theſe to abound and ſi; Deraboun! 
them, We read ofa double honour, 1 Tim. <. 17. which Contains 
whole duty of people to their Miniſters. « Whether of T cachit nz, Rus 
ling, oradmonition, Their work is in it felt honourable,and work £1125 
tends to your Salvation, and though their Hagan bY Mean, yet to-e- 
ſtzem and love them for their work ; if upon any ocher account £12 
deſerve it of you, yet their work is to be the af Y1 there Ei» 
pecially confidering that their work more in reſpettcil them v7 
this C hurch rather than any others ; and their labour was 4m lt the 6 
or as ſome read it 77 you ; to inftruct, edifice, and com! orr vour 12 War 
man, & Some copies read it, with the a, &! JTors for cagdiees by 2 1:7 . 
alteration of the Greek word, and then it jill refers to their 1 eacners 3 
they ſhould be at peace, or live in Peace with them, For "ec entimes 01! 
ſentions ariſe betwixt Miniſters and 1 cople, whereby thei: r ediNcatioN 33 
hindred. But I rather follow our own tranttation ; and io ic 5 4 NV 
duty of the people towards one another, to preſerve mutual wo 
among themſelves: And yet thele words may reſpect the former 
the people g grve honour and reſpeet to their Mini ifters, if may 9” 
means to preſerve peace among themielve S « among theCor ink" dr's the 
al plauding of tome of their Teach: rs, an«l the contempt of other 
great Schitms and divittons amoneft them, Our Saviour uicth tnele V 
ry words to his Diſciples, Mart g, 50. From whence the AP: ottle m job 
take them, And the duty of peace he or:en preficth in his Epiſtles. 
14. 19, 1 Cor. 7.18. 2 Cor.1 Jo 1. Col, TA Heb, 12. 14+ whic! \\ . 
to prevent Schilm, which breaks the bon:t; of peace, and May 1: 
labours of their 1 caciicrs leſs fucce!-tul, 


COW iS 


chief r 207 5 


. $a+4 
N1IGH re) y 


a 
{\ 


14 Now we || exhort you! {> 9:01 


Bn ; # 3 14 . | 
& 4. * b - [C1 "et dÞ, \ NC 


7 


ans, FI wot 


, V 


t 101. 


TE Kh 


ha a V. 


9 


7: Man 2 - but ever 


| nnruly d, comfort the feeble-minded e, * ſupport 


the weak f, be patient towards all men g. 

- &&me think the Apoſtle now turns his ſpeect; ro their Teachers, 
whom he here calls Br __ in a more peculia r (enſe ; and Þ: cate 
(10 Duties here enjuined do more property belong to the Mainittry. 

1t OChers More truly judge he continues kis Di! courſe to the whole 

Crch, and the ſeveral) Members of it. The lame” Duties are to be 
perto' med by both, though under a different Obligation. As in the 
Cirvi} Stare all are to ſeek the zood of the Common-wealth, though the 
Magiftrates and Governours are more {pecially obliged by "Office d4Or 

Aim iſh; as the ſame word 13 rendred in the former verſe, here 
meant of "brother Iy, there of miniſterial admonition, wherein great 
pr lence is to be uled, as to time, pla Ce, perlons, manner : And the 

/;r u1y are ſuch as keepnot their place, alluling to Souldiers that keep 
no! their rank, and a tion, and they are calle din the Margin d1Jorder- 
an! that, 1. In civil reſpects, when men live without a calling, or be- 
;inginit, neglect it, or intrude into other mens Þy tine(s, ani perform 

rat the Dur: es of their Civil Relations, 2 In natural reſpects, when 
11en follow not the light of Nature, and fultil not th: Law of Natural 
relations, , In ſpiritual reſpets, when men neglect or trangrels |: 
'he Rules anc [ Orc ler of their walking in their Church-State,either with 
reſpect to their Teachers, or one afother. Admonition belongs to ſuch, 
an |; is the firſt ſte p of Church-Cenſure when >gulariy per formed.e 2au- 
2 YU NEEs Or, the puſillanimous, men of little Souls,as the word imports, 
ach as dare ne ot Venture vpon hazardous duties,or faint under the fears 
or feeling of Atfictions, or are dejected under the ſenſe of fin, and 
4eir own uUnworthinels, or fears of God's Wrath, and atfaulted by 
Temptations wich enc langer their falling. f Av7%xe3, an alluiton to 
zuch 2s lift at one end of the burden to help to bear it, anſwering to 
e word ouvayinanBdyri, Rom. 8. 26. The Spirit helps th our infirmt- 
fo s: And the weat are either the weak in Knowledge,weak in Faith, 
{!12t underſtand not their own Liberty in the Goſpel, Rom. 14. 1. 1 Cor. 
2.5, And hereupon cannot prattiſe as others do, Their Conſcience is 
weak, 1 Cor, 3, 12. And ſO \WCre in Bondage to ome Ceremonial 
Theſe 
, dealt ten: ws with, and not to be de ſpiſed, or 
rigorouſly ned : > Ia weak in Grace, new Converts, Babes in Chriſt, 
rent: 'er Plants, not well rooted in the Goſpel. g This Duty is univer- 
fl; the former concerned only the Saints, The word ſignifies Lomgas 
nity, or Lo9p-ſuffering, and is often attributed to God, Exod. 34. 
5, / Bin So 22, It confifteth in the deferring or moderating of anger, 
it without anger when men delay us, and to ſuffer without un- 
UUe ANSET when they deal 1 1njurioufly with us, whether they be goed 
1 or evil, believers or intilels, the ſtrong or the weak, Miniſters 


Or | Pcop 7, 
i5 * See that none render evil. for evil unto any 
* follow that which is good z, both a- 
* mong your ſelves, and to all men &. 
þ Theſe wordsſee m directed to the Guidcs of the Church, who are 


iy, a 


Ly - >} 
ay & to "oh aa TL 


"called Overicers, As 20. 25. and therefore the Apoſtle requires them 


to fee that none render evil, &c, Or it to the whole Church as before, 
then 1t 1s a ſolemn charge which they ought to be all circumſpect in 
oblerv And the charge is, firſt, neg bYY 2, not to render evil tur 
: Winch 15 ty reve nee themle Ives ; ani that is forbidden by the A- 
poftle, Xom. 12. 17, 19, L Pet. 3.9. And is.the reſiſting of Evil, for- 
biden by our Saviour, Mar. $, 39. But is to be underftood of private 
reve Nge riſing = t of 11 lice, not of publick Cenſurcs, E either Civil or 
EccletiaRtical ; Or of tecking reparations or Injuries received in Courts 
of juſtice chat to Law an! Equity, 1 his private revenge can- 
not con6ſt with that patience that he required towards all men in the 
foregoing verſe, nor is it conformable to the Example of Chrift, _ 
2, 22. Nor to the Chriſtian calling and Profeſhon, 1 Pet, 2. 21. 2. 1 
frive, good in it {c]t, or that which 1 "or to others, as the a is 
often taken, Mat, 7. 11. Lute 1, 53. Gal, 6. 5. and ſo ftands oppoſite 
here to the rendring of Evil. And the word foll,w, fignifies an earneſt 
following, which is ſymetimes taken in a bad ſenſe, for pcrſecution, Mar, 
«. 11. and ſometimes in a good Senſe, as 1 Heb, 12. 14. Pet. 3. 11, 
_ to follow good imports more than only to do good, 1 Pet. 2. 11. 
cn the inward bent of the Soul, and the outward Enc leavours are t0- 
with is doing good, And this ought to be ever, or always, that 15 in 
all places, times, occaſions,company, Mans courſe of Life ought in this 
to be uniform, though his outward condition vary. Sometimes to do 
£ood to tt ec Souls, fometimes to the Bodies of men, and that either in 
a privative or pot:tive Good ; ; prevent ting Evil,or beftowing Z that which 
IS 700d. & Do 00d 11 all, and ei eclally to The Houſh old of Faith, Gal, 6. 
19, As they ſay of 00d, the commoner the better, bur the contrary of 
evil, Chriſtians ſtand in a C, cial relation to one another, but in a com- 
mon Relation to all,and every Relation ought to be filledup with good. 
As Love is a common debt to all men, ſo the Fruit of it which is doing 
good, Our doing, z00cl ſhould not be confined among, Chriftians only 
of one W ay, Opinion, for Congregation, nor to men only under ſome 
limiting circumſtances, but it ſhould reach all men as we have ability, 
opportunity, and call z even Enemies themſelves, as our Saviour re- 
qu: ires, Mat. 5.44. This is to act like God, and may commend Reli- 
LON t0 all men, and is not to be lookt upon as commended by way of 
count I, as the Vapiſts ſay, but command-d by Precept, And it 1s not 
enou, »þ not todo E vil, but we muſt do 2004 ;. not to ſave a Mans lite 
when we have Power to wy it, is to kill him, as Chriſt Argues, Mark. 
*. 4. ſonot to ſaye a man's eſtate, when we may, is to ſteal from him. 


is Rejoyce evermore /. 
: ; Hrore the Apofile adds more Chriftian duties, briefly expreft, and 
ict cloie one to ano] "er, and they ſeem to have a mutual connexion,but 
20t fo relative to others as thoſe before mentioned, but perſonal to 
: ©: -micly es, He begins with the duty of Rejoycing ; joy i5 an affection 
© Soul tpringing from the 10/e Or policition of ſome ſuitable good, 
Ant it is either racer al, winch 15 common to bien with Beal! 5, ariling 
tr rom that good that is Initable to their ſeveral Natures. Or {piritual, 
Which i y wrouz ht by the Spirit, end exerciied upon ſpiritual Ob- 


ms, 
C- 


Kets, Ani ths: the Apoſtic here means, and is called rejuycing ia the 
lord, Pj41, aad the joy of the Holy Ghoſt ACM, 14. 17. Ariſing 2 

4 from what "wy tual good we alreac y polſck, or 19pc to pottc ls, 
ind promiija, Berner, which is the ereapon called a 7cjoyetng tn 
Pope, t% ine G. 2. and & 12. Ihe Apolile ipeaks here of the duty inde- 
Fairey,” only requires If £0 be evermore, {0 Fil, 4, 44 Though God 


I. THE SS #4 0N 


IOMetimes calls to mourning, vet it's no where ſaid mourn evermore, 
becauſe rejoycing ought to be in a more conſtant practice, and all {107 - 
ritual mourning tends tg it, and will ent init; and he comme 


as ſeaiunable to thele Theſſalonians to mnyuy t them under their p1 roſe 
ſufterings. The grounds of a Chriſtians Joy alwa ant he is 
not only to retain it in the habit, but co ms it with all 1 115 ſor FOWS,Q111 
{ufferings, as I Pet. 1, 6, Te preas!y rejojer, thmgh jor p ſea fon bn; '" 
vineſs, Whereas carnal mirth is mist with fac lnels,. Prov. 14. 12. So 
that a Chriitian ought to rejyce in every Conc liion 1, not only in PE 
perity, but adveriity, _ eipecially when called to futter for right 
ouineſs ſake, 2s Mat. $. 12, 1 Pct 4. 12. It is not _— allowed es 
commanclec, This joy i 15 One great part of God's King 1 
this Worid, Rom. 14. 17. much morc in tie Work! to come. And 
therefore the :\poſtle ſpeaks of reJoycing, CVCLINOTC, whcreas Muurts 
ing is but for a time, and ends to the Saints in this Lite, 

17 Pray 72 without cealing 7. 

2 This is a means to maintain our rejoycing, and therefore n«:! 
mentioned, Prayer iS a making known our req ueſts to God, 1 Ty 1 
5s, And it is either menral in the heart only, as Fan bs was * * OF UVG- 
_ expreſt with the Voice: or as ſome add, vizal; { good works 

ave a voice to bring down blefſings, as mens fins cry for 1 'CNgEANCes 
1 Not 25 the Euchires and Meſſalians, of old, who hence thous)t no 0+ 

er duties were required, but always Praying ; but by the word in the 

Tex t, 15 cither meant a praying without fainting, as in rh2  FACaINES 
Lite 13. 1, and which the Apoſtle calls a, pericverance in Prayer, 
Eph, 6.13, Col. 4.2. Te350zag]tgare, or Praying with Px, 
che greck word there imports, and lo not to faint, ſo Saws 2 £2 Ot 

a praying in every thing,as Ph), 4. 6. In every thing Jer your requeit 
mad2 known, &c. Or, in every ſeaſon, as Eph. 6. 18. tO take | of © 
ſeaſons of Prayer. Or,in all ſeaſons and times, whether or bad 
yet ftill to Pray. Andall this is meant by the word in the 2c: ich 
is alſo uſed, Rom. 1, 9. 1 Thefſ. 1. 3. and 2. 13. and impiics in ww vat 
no more but a conftant courſe of Pr rayer, 6 
Yager as that the courſe of it be not incerrupted by any diver itons, þ; 
allo to preſerve an heart diſpoſed to pray af. ll rimes ; amnu to num: 
ejaculatory prayers with the leveral actions of our lives; Our vv 
continual,aud God will be acknowle (Jood wall our tupphes, aud tic 
fore we ought to pray continually, | 


y I ani ic 


<4 
QIN < '® V<ST til 


Col. 40 2, [0 W1!D #710 


«I1C3 IC 


15 * In every thing give thanks o - for this is the will 
of God p in Chriff Jeſs q concerning you r. 

o When we had obtained mercy by Prayer, then we are to vi? 
thanks, and whatever we may pray for, that we 6aght to gIVE (12 
for. And to by that underſtand and limit the general e xprefion in th 
1ext, Weare not to give thanks when we fall into ti n, tor that we 

0!ght not to pray tor, Yet if we have the pardon of it, or g<t an! '"Z0OC 1 
by it, we ſhould then zive thanks ; and ſo may be ſaid conc: rnung at 
A ton, We are to give thanks | in every condition, cither- of Pro! PErit y 
or adyertity. And with all our ſupplications, 'w<- are to join thankli:|- 
vings, Phtl, 4.6. Col. 4. 2. and thanklp, iving properly refers to ſomes 
mercy received, whether privative or poſitive,temporal or ſpiritual, 
vate or publick, and we are in all thele to give thanks. "Though prai- 
ng God may reach further, which is to adore the Excellencies of 1s 
Being as they are glorious in themſelves, or the EXC of his 


works as they are in | themſelves praiſe worthy. Ani 1 hankſgiving fo 
ny received is, 1. A taking notice of it as candy from God. 


2, Setting a due value upon it. 3. A ſenſe of God's goodneſs and our 

OWn unworthineſs. 4. Praiting him for it, p Some carry this as a mo- 
e toall the preceding duties, but rather to this laſt mentioned : As 

if this was 1 ſpecial the Will of God ; being a duty ſo much to his own 
lory and our 'good, and by will we muſt by a Metonymis underſtand 


nature 701 written, which 1s part of God's NOW I he Heathen are re 

proved for not being thankful, Rom. 1, 21. and they made Laws ty 
auniſh it, and accounted it the greateſt reproach, moratum * #txe12. 
mnt dixeris, anc! by the Law of (0d that is written, | he moral Law 


requires it, and the Ceremonial Law required offerings by way 


thankſgiving 3 which we call gratulatory, Ar > the Gol, ie SATINT 

it being one of the GolÞel Sacrinccs, Heb. 17. 15.1 | pleaſe Ih the Tor 
netter than the greate f of thi legal Sacrifices, PC o, 65. 3042 ts ant it 
DEINg fail fo be the 17 7of Gol inthe | ext, it "1 m KC e&us Do pleaitmns 
0 him. q Either meant 25 this will of his is fgnifed to 1 by him, o 


only by the Law of nature, or of Mifes, but by Chrift. Jcjus, ant 
it may be of preater force "POO Chriſt ins 9H beriby it 1; to belootet 
upon as one of the Cumman.iments of C h;7:ft t allo, Or we may unacr- 
ſtand it, 1p0#r the account of Chriſt, and the wn - 20 In wh 

| hous oh Thankigiving is due for the leatt myrey, yet Gatl's *vill e 

cially 1 requires It with | reſpect to Chrift. And to cfpeciaily or Chriſt i- 


at lo! re OI 


ans Who partal: C OI i Chriſt, and the love of Goii in him: as. the Apo- 
tle here adds, &5 uuas. 7 Or, rrrirds you in Tpecial, the Heathen 
were obliged to thanktulnceſs for Rain Go Heaven, at truictul ſea 
[0ns, theſecommon bleſſings ; much mo;c are Cluiftians for the f1- 
cial bletiings they receive by Chriſt Jclus, 


19 * Quench not the ipirir /. 
J That ye may be enahlel to pray and give thanks, as Þ-for?, 2 21. 
not the Spirit, Andby the figure AJ j0/s te wean che ih the opirir, 
The ſpirit is compared to Fi:e, Mar, 4. 11, and he came « 
the Apoſtles in the ftoilitude of 1 ongues of Fire, Acts 2, 2, Pi 
ſpirithimfelf cannot be quenched, he means it therefore of lis &itrs 
and operations ; which are either ordinary or cytraortinary, Many 
had extraordinary gitts n_ the primitive tim = of hea!in: ; 
government, Þ! rophecy, ©c, thoſe that ha WIENOUE quottion 
ſhould have taken care not, by any fault of th-ir own,to lole them, E1- 


4©< C 3C 1, 


pecially that ot  prophette, which the A Ol we prefers | before ail others, 
1 Cor, 14. 1. and mentions here in-the following veric, an ! 
the Apottle exhorted 74morhy to ſtir up in himivit, 2 Tim, x. 6, As ww 


ſtir up the Fire to quicken it, ſo the word &ref@ric imports, | itt 


like is required of Miniſters with reſpect toi het Minifieral gifts v 
are now giren, But there are or 4i7ary gitts and operations or-th 
rit common to all Chriſtians, as cnlightning, Guicinin::, 
comforting, the >oul; men by Mor! cority, carthly incu 

dinate afteetion > Ge, may azlic (ir Co Ont rations of thc 515; . a"; 
the Apoſtle calls the quenchive if. ihe firg upon the Altar, wa 
always burning by the care of tho Uiielts, Hiro will go out e 

nes lc{ting it, or citing water upon it, By aot (exeiiitlss 


the thing wiiled, Eph. 6.6. C91, 4. 12. It is required oy the Law or 


1 ' ' . py $- {5 


F.. 


LL. THESS A 


*© 
$ 1G. + | 
? : 8 2 p b }- y yy" +4 ® r a0 1,2 vy RAS. " 
"wh ; La —F=g '$h1 C1 RON BY 13 \' 241OW133% in In Our ſely 5g WE may C34 LED 
w ® + , » % % . _ * * % . - = 1 


- or 
TY $--19 


275.1 - R p Py f T4 
i AiW@EA > It} £/ i< il, WRri. 51, I, II, L 2, Ne! of L, C 
= oa | Lada ts outta? ifh'd in the truly T >FENPYAte, V f 
( Yace mayine Lofaliy C Kin J3vy! ICH Y TEL 1eratc, Y<* 
e ubhate? as to decrecand lively exerciſe, Yet thuſe common 

= _— _ 3» CO AS, 3.7 , T), 7 © NE an, >r5 A 

1613S, NE CONTICTGNS of the Spirit, WAaIcN Icruons uwnreaty 
___ ; . q * , 1 $7 OY \ bo 2nrl mat ie 
LIAKFY (uh (5.240 VC under f1,e GO! el, CO OTLEN Nat, NAV VE 


4 - 
\ ? - '& - O59 7 F FA To N D'S -7 = ; 7 rt 
Ty q "#9 , Ee ol and we read Of Gcd Z HY 108 (We allng LO 


; a > 44t So \» ' ' . 
TiYVEM 9 the ClINW orld, Gen. 6, 3. and the S$criFes and Phariiecs re- 
{ting the Holy Ghoſt, #5 7, 51. which werenot perions regenerate. 
H- mic orctincs firive with Men, but not overcome them. And there 
hin of the Spirit in others as well as our ſelves; Peopie may 


' 


1 a CEC tho y +) 
XR £1 .* . is . - © . » «as * ah 1 . 2 \ > 
evench i: in their 3inifters by diſcouraging them, an! in one another 


lee in them. 
254 Deſpiſe not propheſyings tk. 

: Thereby we may quench the Spirir, which uſually works upon 
mens Minds and Hearts by it. By prophete is ſometimes meant fore- 
telinz things to come, and ſpeaking by extraordinary Revelation, 
x Cor. 14. 29, 39. ſometimes the Scriptures are ſo calleil, cſnecially the 

4 


22 
1 WY” + WY = 
611 icnamen 


' q 2 p DC APiAr els t ? 
by bad Examplcs or reproaching the Zeal, and forwardnsls that they 


nt, 2 Per, n, 21, and ſomerimes the interpretation an ap: 

plying of *cripture, which 1s the ſame we now call Preaching, 1 Cor, 

14, 3. And the Duty with reſp-d& to it, is nor ro dejpiſe ir, to It it at 

raught, as a thing of no worth, Ihe word is often uied in the New- 

Tefament, 11h, 18,9. Ai 4.11, Rom, 24,3, 19 but tne Apoſtle 

uſer avain the figure Mciotts before mentioned, and means, prize, 

value, and highly eftcen it, attend upon it, have great regard to it, 
it b-ins an Ordinance of Ged for Inftruftion and Edification, yea, and 
for Converſion al'o, 1 Cor. 14. 24, 25, Some Ceſpile it becaule of the 

ourward m-anne(s of the perſons which prophefie, ſome through a 

proud conceit of their own nowledre, ſome by a contempt of Religi- 

en ir (elf, Theſe Thejjdontans had been commended tor their great pro 

Foeirncy, and yet were ftill to attend wpon propheſying in the Church. 

VWi:ich he calls proph-{yings in the plural number, referring either to 
tio fvoral Prophets that propheſied, or to the ſ{cyeral parts of their 
prophetie, or the times they prophetied, And the Prophets WETE either 
ſuch as proph-ticd only by an extraordinary gitt, and immediate re- 
violation, which fome private members of the Church had in thoſe 
times, 1 Cor, 14.29, 30, Or {ach as propheſied not only by gift, bur 
office alſo, Zj4, 4. 1T. f 

* Co 221 *Prove all things «, hoid faſt that which 1s good w. 
« this duty relates to the former ; as they were to attend upon 

rronhelyings,ſo to axercite a diſcerning julgment about what was pro- 

vheſed, lor ali rirgs 15 not to betaken here univerſally, but for Do- 

Grines and Opinons inReligion which were delivered by the Prophets. 

%lc {ome which the Apoſtle Fokn requires, believe not every ſpirit, bui 

pv the ſpirits, KC Aoviucl,eTr, and it's the ſame word there which in 

this 1ext we read prove z alluding to Gold or other Mettals which are 
trved in the Fire, or by a touch-ftone, as ſome think. And though 
there was a peculiar gift of diſcerning of SPITItS, I Cor. 12. 10, yet 
it is the Quty of every Chriftian to try Mens Spirits and DoCtrines, whe- 
ther from God or no, The Apoitle ſpeaks here to the Saints in gene- 
ral, and ſo doth the Apoſile >t, Fon, 1 Fobn 4.1. And mens Do: 

#1:jn-5 are to be judzcd of by the Scriptures as the ſtandard of Truth, 

24 the Boreas were Commended for learching the Scriptures about the 

Apoltles Dofh ine, A. 17, 11, andthe Apoſtle prays for the Philippi- 

«15, that they might dilcern things that ditter, Phil, 1,10, and if the 

bad not yet attained it as they ought, yet he prays that they might, 

and not be always babes, but ſuch as the Apoftic ſpeaks of, who hav 

their 1cnſes exercijed in the diſcerning of good and evil, Heb, g, 13, 14. 

the people are to look upon them as their guides and leaders, as they 

are called, Zeb,13.7,17.and ſuch as are to go before them in the ſearc!; 
in and diſpenſing of truth, yet becauſe the beſt are not infallible, the\ 
ought to try their Potetrine by the rule of Truth, Which is that jud; 

neat of diſcretion which Proteſtants allow to the People in their 1. 

ſputes with the Papiſts agaiuſt their Dofrine of Infallibility, and im- 

Plicit Faith, which grounls the Peoples Faith upon the Authority 

of Men, which ought to reſt upon the authority of God, As we ought 

not eatily to rejett the Authority ard Faith of the Church, ſo not to 
believe with a bhnd Faith, or obey with. a blind obedience, w The 
£00d here meant 1s Truth, which 1s an intelle&ual good, the contrary 

t which 1s Error, Which is a mental Evil, When we have proved mens 

DoGrires and Opinions, what we find agreeable to the Scriptures of 

Truth, we ought to hold falt, And thougy all truth hath a goodneſs in 

it, yet eſp<ially divine Truth, and the Dottrine of the Goſpel, which 

the Apoſtle calls, That good thing committed to Timothy, 2 Tim, 1.14. 

It i5 g06d with retpect to the Soul, and lo hetter than any bodily good, 

and good that refers to Eternity, and fo better than any temporal good. 

Now this good we are to ho} faſt, To hold it faſt againſt Adverſaries, 

and all oppoſition, as ſome underſtand tlie word, to hold it as with both 

hands, againſt ſeducing Doetrine, Satans temptations, and the Worlds 

Perlccution, Ihe fame word is uſed concerning the good ground that 

h=14 faſt the ſecd of the Word, Luk.$.15.S0 1Cor, 11.2. Wwe are to 7c 

1.29 the Truth, butnot d-r47 it, as the Heathen are ſaid to do, Kom. 

1, 18, where we tind ally the ſame word as in the 'Text, Jt isa duty 

much preſt by the Apoſtles in their Epiſtles to the Saints and Churches 

tat had received the Goſpel, that they would hold faft, 2 Tim, 1. 13, 

Tit. 1,9. Heb. 4.14. Rcv.2, 13,25, and 3. 3 Andthere is holding 

falt the I ruth, as wel] in Practice as Opinion, and which may be the 

zround of the Name formerly given to ſuch as oppoſed the Errors of 

Antichriſt before the word Proteſtant was known, call'd Faſt-men. 

22 * Abſtain from all appearance of evil x. 

« = To makethis verſe have its connexion with the former, ſome Ex- 
poſitors underſtand it of Doctrines and Opinions only. To take heed of 
Ovinions that ſeem erroneous, and not raſhly to receive them without 
cue examination. Though this ſenſe is not to be excluded, yet the verſe 
ziced not be confined to it, but to extend to prattiſe allo; as in Worſhip 
to abſtain from the ſhew of Idolatry, as to eat Meat in an Idols Tem- 
ple was not always groſs IdcJatry, but had fome appearance of itz and 


LONIANS. 


-earance of it which they ſee in our ſelves; yet we ought not y-,. 
this account to forbear the diſcharge of any neceſlary Duty, Some ;..- 
the words, Aiftain from all kind rf coil, * Ame repre dI Sus my, on! 
the Greet word is ſo uſed by Logicians ; But here to infift on yart;... 
|ars 1s infinite. And thus the Apoſtle concludes all theſe poſitive Dy:. 
with a general precept, which he leaves with them at the clyſe 6: 
Epiſtle; having dehorted them from many evils, now be exhy;-. 
chem to abſtain from the appearance of them. ; | 
23 And * the very God of peace * ſanQifie you why!. 


Lord Jeſus Chriſt a, | 

3 The Apoftle concludes all with Prayer, as knowing, all'his Ex; 
rations and Admonitions betore given would not be efteQual witty 
God, and he prays for their ſan#ification and preſervation, Ti, 
:hey were ſanctified already, yet but in part, ſo that he prays for {;; 
ther progreſs 1n it to perf: ion, which he means by wholly, A wort », 
where uted by the Apoftle, but in this place, and variouſly renr.! 
'ome render it throughout, ſome perfectly, ſome 17 every part, ſome is 1 
things, ſome fully, and the French entirely ; It may refer to oi: 
parts of holine{s, and the degrees of holine(s, and to the whole m2 : 
the ſeveral faculties of Soul and Body, expreft in the next worcs !y, 
r1t, Soul, and Body, that their whole man may be entirely (epar.. 
and conſecrated to God, offered up to him as a Sacrifice, Ks, 12, ; 
and hence we obſerve that not only the beginning, but progr. 
Grace is from Gol, The Apoftle therefore prays for It to Gol, (1:1 
he calls the God of peace, to enfore his Exhortation to peace, 2, 
which confutes the Pelagians, who thought objeftive Grace ſis: 
to ſanQifie, or that Man's Nature needs only at firſt to be excite. »; 
God, and then can go forward of it ſelf, being only maimed, nt 
rally corrupted by the fall. It's true, our faculties cooperate wit!) G 
hut not of themſelves, but as acted by his inherent Grace, and ind? 
ling Spirir, And what the Apoſtle prays for, that Chriftians ſhou!! - 
deavour after, which is a progeſs in ſanQtification to perfeAion, 
may alſo note, That true ſanQification reacheth to the whole \- 


By Bod), the out ward Man, the 'lLaberni.':: 
inſtrument of the Soul, The Fewiſh Rabbins and others thin 2. 
are expreſt in the Creation of Man, Gen. 2. 7, &04 formed 7. 
duſt of the earth, there is nis Body, 4nd breathed in man the (» : 
life, or lives, Niſhnath Chaiim, Nepheſh Chathab ; that is, the fac 
the rational Soul ; and Man became a living >oul, that 13, the 
and Senſitive Life : Neither is properly meant here the Spirit 
tor he laith, yorr Spirit, nor the ſanttified part of the Soul » tor 
tor the prelerving of their .perſvns, Only obſcrve when hc 
cheir Spirit, he calls it their whole Spirir, And by the F121 
the word whole is to be carried alſo to Soul and Boly, lo i 
prayed their whole Man might be ſanaified, fo their who!o 
whole Soul, their whole Budy might be prefierved ; and the ! 
we find james 1,4. where It is rendred perfect, alludins toi 
poſſcſſing of an Inheritance, or lot that belongs to a Man, A: 
/cr-ing, he means not ſo much the ſubſtance of the Spirit, S« 
ly, to preſerve them in Being, as to preſerve them in Holin: 
chey are preſerved, partly by being deliver from the tinful D. 
that are naturally in them ; 'as iznorance, Vanity, Impotercy. 
mity in the mind, Reludtancy and Obſtinacy in the Will, } 
and Irregularity in the Aﬀections : Difobedience to the Law 
the Regular Commands of the Soul inthe Bully, Iftheie pi 
will bring deſtruction, as Diſeales prevailing deſtroy the Nat! 
ind partly allo by being ſuppiyed with that Grace whereby 1! 
2ularly towards God, and are ſerviceable to the end of ma-:) 
\upply of Oyl preſerveth the Lamp burning : An4i where! 
underſtand, that not only the Infe: iour Yaculties arc corru; 
fall, by the ſuperiour and the ſupreme of all, elſe the Api! 
have prayed for the Spirit to be ſantified and preferved as 1 
Soul and Body, And elſewhere prays for a renewins in | 
the Mind, Eph. 4. 23. 4 Next we may conſider this preſ-r: 
reſpect to the term of it, Preſerving blameleſs uniil the £01197 1! cl 
The fame which the Apoſtle means by being preſerved rg 7 54's {t4» 
iy Kingdom, 2 Tim, 4. 18. and 2 7et. 3.14. And thoſe tht ©e Pie 
[erved to that day, are preſerved to the end,and will be foun! 110-115 
and their whole Man, Spirit, Sou! and Body being firft ſanctico!, anc 
then preſerve, ſhall be ſaved and glorified. And the Apoſtle i11:112tes 
in the word auepams blameleſs, that trift diſcovery that will 3 Me? 
of perſons at that day,wherein ſome will be blamed,and others vs iv! 
without blame, And herein the Apoſtle may have reſpect hotly Lo 19 
teachers and Miniſters in this Church, and the private Mc:Þ275 07 its 
that with reſpett to their ſeveral Duties belonging ro them, they 8 © 
found blameleſs z and though according to the ftricine(s of the Low! 
God, none can be without blame, yet thoſe that have been 0nc270,t!- 
bave their fin pardoned, and their perſons acccpted in Chrift, may 
found blamelels in the day of Chriſt, however it is that wich W2 104k 
ſtrive after, ; FTNe 
* 2.4 Faithful is he that calleth you, who alſo will 49 7 
b We had in the former verſe the Apoftle's Prayer, hicre 8 E499; 


a 


and he ſpeaks it by way of conſolation to them, that wha! © 
ed for, God would effe& ; what need he then have prave'! ? ÞEete's 
Gotl's Decrees and Promiſes though immutable, and infa!libie, Yer 0:6 
to be accompliſht in a way of Prayer. Prayer is our Duty, 2% Go 
Decrees and Promiſes are no diſpenſation from our Duty: Boots, = 
ties are more known to us than God's Decrees, And Got C2 CCS TY 

means as well as the end, Put what is it he faith ©1777! 45 7 a = 


. 
[3 

Wi ; 1 
| 1) (ith 


not here exprett, and the word, 7r, is not in the Orizii!, 


therctore the Apoſtle forbids it, 1 Cor. 10. 14. And fo in Civil Con- 
veriation,not only to abſtain trom Vice, but the appearance of it ; as of 
Pridc, Covctovinels, Drunkenneſs, Whoredom, Gc. and that both with 
rele 100 } Foes, leſt by venturing upon that which hath ſome ſhew 
or evil, we Hep into the evil it ſelf, and with reſpect to others, that 
Wo may nt ogun the raking offence, though not juſtly given ; or 


SO £30 WRAP WAY 00Y WAy ERNCOUP2Ze a rxcal evil in them by that ap- 


ml! do, God will effeet, He had prayed Got Would fanctile Do 


wnolly, and preſerve them blameleſs, Gc, And this te Woua do or ct- 


: +. 0 ollior- chow 
rect, And he grounds his confidence partly upon C0 - « ws. Nona) 
For the Apoſtle knew.that God's Gifts and calling, war 6" 


tance, Row. $, 20. and 11, 29, And whom þ: clic, We 
and glorified, And this the Apoſtle ſaw in theiw 7541999475 + 


Chayyi 


® TIAL Dias 


Ch: 


ly y: and I pray God your whole Spirit, and ſoul and ty.*- 
dy be preſerved z blameleſs unto the coming, of c,;; © 


Chap. I. 


Ec1cy of the Goſpel npon their hearts, that they were effectually callec. 
and choſen, as chap, 1, 4. whence he concluded: they ſhould be At laſt 
wholly fanctifved, and finally preſerved, which is a ftrong argument 
1cainkt final Apoſtacy from a ſtate of Grace, Though many that are 
* catwardly called are never fan@ife, much ls 1boly, But of this < all 
the Apoſtle ſpeaks nur here, aGcaft not oniv, And partly allo Upon 
God's faithfulneſs, who had called them, He doth not fay, God 15 av'E 
to do it, though that is true, but he is faithful, and will do it, Thoſe 
that are effetually called are brought into God's Covenant,where per- 
f-Qion and perſeverance are promiſed, and God's fairhtulneis obligeth 
kim to make good iis Covenant, It is an Act of Grace ang Mercy to 
call men, but when c«..led, Gotl's faithfulneſs is engaged to prelerve 
them, and perfe& the work begun, as 1 Cor. 1. $. The Apoſtle tells 
the Corinthians, God will confirm them, 10 the end they might be bla _ 
eſs in the day of Chrift, and his Argument 1s, - for God 25 faitkjul L; 
rw.0m ye were calied, ©c,wver, g. 
25 Brethren, pray for us c. ; 

c The Apoſtle a little before had pray<d for them, now h2 begs 
Prayers of them as he doth of other Churches, Ko. 15. 39. Col: 4. 3: 
Miniſters and People need each others Prayers,and it is a murual Duty 
they owe to one another. Miniftersare obliged by ſpecial Othce,People 
by Common duty ; with reſpe& to the ſucceſs of the Golpel in general, 
2 Theſ. 2. 1. and their own edification by their labours. The Apoſtle, 
as he did not think it below him to call theſe Theſſalonians, Brethren, 10 
neither to beg their Prayers. Thoſe that ſtand higheſt in the Church, 
may ſtand in need of the meaneft and loweſt, The head cannor ſay to the 
foor, 1 have no need of thee, Thoſe that preach not the Goſpel, may 
yet promote it by their Prayers ; yet this gives no warrant to beg the 
Prayers of Saints departed, for which we have no precept, promile, 0! 
example, as we have for the other. And what is without Faith is SIN. 

t 15 at. the beſt doubtful whether they know our ſtate below, or can hear 
{is when we pray, and certainly God never required us to pray upon 
tach uncertaintics, and it cannot be in Faith, 

25 Greet all the brethen d with an holy kifs c. 

z The Apoſtle concludes ſcyeral of his Epiſtles with Greezing, Or 
Salurarions, as men uſually do at this day; ſometimes with (alutations 
from himſelf alone, ſometimes from others; either particular Perſons, 
or Churches,which he ſometimes names, as Rom, 16.16, 1 C07. I6.19. 

and ſometimes commends to the Saints their faluting one another, as 

Rom. 16. 16.1 Cor. 6, 20. ſo here in the Text. The Perſons to be falu- 
ted are all the Brethren, that is, all believers incorporated into the Gol: 
pel Church under one common head, and common Father. More par- 
ticularly thoſe of this particular Church ,We call Men Brethren, ſome- 
times upon a Natural, ſometimes a Civil account, and why not much 
more npon a Spiritual account ? And as their love ſhould reach to the 
Brotherhood, 1 Pet. 2, 17. ſo their ſalntation ſhould reach all the Bre- 
thren,Poor, and Rich, High and Low, Bond and Free. e & g1anua]: & 
zi, The Right or Ceremony of Men kiſſing each other, was much ur 
ied among the Jews, and in the Eaſtern Countries, Gen 27. 26, Prov. 
24. 26, Ink, 7. 45. in their ſalutations 7 and thence it came to be pra- 
£:'d in the Churches of Chrift as an outward Symbol and token ol 
Love an! Frien!ſhip Which 1s not now praQis'd with us amongſt men, 
but is of th: ame t1gnification with joyning of hands, The uniting of the 
Lips or Hands together denoting the inward conjuntion of the Heart. 
The word in theGreek ſignifies love or friendſhip,and call'd a kifs of Cha- 
rity, 1 Pet, 5. lat, And though the Ceremony is ceaſed,yet that which 
it fignified is to be preſerved in all Churches, Places and Ages, It wa: 
practi,'d in the time of Fuſtin Martyr, Fuft, Mar. Ap 'log. 2. and Ter- 
mliian, Tertul, de Oratione z and called Ofculum pacts, A X1/s of poace; 
and uſed eſpecially ar their mceting together at the Lords Supper,thet 
Love Feaſts, and other ſolemn a{femblies. It's call'd an Zoly Xiſs ; tx 
diftinguiſh it from the Treacherous Kiſs of Fudas, or the Luftful Ki): 
of the Harlot, Prov, 7. 13. And why it is not uſed among us now, wc 

need ſay only,as concerning waſhing of Feet alſo,we have no ſuch cuſton, 
ner the Churches of Chriſt, Or, as the Apoſtle ſpeaks, Phz1, 4. 8. whatrſo- 
ever things are lovely, and whatſoever things are of good report, ©c, 
:41- 27 1] charge you by the Lord f, that this epiſtle bc 
read unto all the holy brethren g. 


—_ 


IL. THESSALONIANS. Clap 


f The Apoſtle having now.finifh'd th» En 
upor. them all, eſpecially their Elders 204 T 
publiſhed. He now being bimfelf hin: 
ſends this Epiftleto them to be read to a7”, He wrote it for public; 


and theretore would have none Ignorant of it, where! 


LS 9 : ©F 6 - = , 
nic, 1aVsS Aa HOC IS 
eachers,to have this E212 


oy ON . _ > 
4 'SEITTY! Preachin L LO Li 
P 


0 ; -By 
underſtand what he had wrote about his great love ant ce of £017, 
and the Commendations he had given of them,an the 1 St A 
monitions, Exhortations, and Comforts that were cours; hercin, of 
great uſe to them all: Ani his charge herein is in 1 way of * Vnrati 
on, OpriC® Uuds T Kyz1y, impoting it on them as by an Oath, as 4 
oraþam Gd upon his Serven: in the caſe of providing a Wife for 117%: 
Gen, 24. 3. And lo the High-Pricft faid to Chriſt, T adjure 1/-. Cy 1; » 
living God, Sc. Mar.26.62, Anfxering, to the Hebrew word, 6116.72; 

[ adjure you, Cant. 5. 8. 1 charge ycu, Oye dangh vx of Ferujulo1r, © 
It imports the requiring of a thing, in the Nawe and Ay hority of Gc:!, 


with a denunciation of Vengeance it it he not Qone,g Art all this chare 
15 amout the reading, of this Epiſtle, as he commands tne Ep:itle to the 
Col;(]:o7:5 to be read in the Church of the L4-4/c ans, Colic 3&0 
and that from Laodicea to be read to them, but nor with that Sclemn * 
% * o# 1, . . , 
Charze asthis is. Hence we may gather the D':ty of reading the Scrin- 
tures in the Church Aſſemblies; as the Law of yes was read in the 
SYNaZogues, 


Oo 


And very early in the Chriſtian Churchos there were 
ſome appointed to be Readers, Fulian the Apoſtate was a Reater in the 


Church 2t Nicomedie, And if this was the firft Epiftle Writ by the A- 
poſtle, 2s ſome ſuppoſe it, he lays this ſolemn charge firit for the rea- 
ing of this, to ſhew the duty of the ſeveral Churches to the re of the 
>Criptures, as they ſhould come to their hand. The word of God (11) ? 
awcl] richly and plentifully in the people, and therefore readin: 
neceſlary, together with expounding and applying it. And we hon 
11to may prove againſt the Papifts, it ought to be made known-to . 
People, even all the boly Erethren, and not confined to the Clersy ; 
and to be read in their own Tongue ; fur ſo without queſtion was tl::- 
Epiſtle read in a Language which the People underftood. 1 lit Apultls 
was not for confining of Knowledge, and keeping the People in 11 
rance, as thoſe are who make it the Motticr of Devotion, 


28 the grace of ourLord JeſusChrit be with you b, Amen 7. 

þ Having exhorted them to ſalute one another, he now ſens then 
his own Salutation, Not ina Lip-complement as the mode nuw is, but 
in a ſerious cxpreſhon of the defire ot his Sou! : And this, or words to 
the ſame purpole are his falutation in every Epiftle, which he maizes to 
he his Token, 2 Thep. 3.17. And by Grace here he means favour,anl 
good Will,rather than inherent Grace ; and all bleſſings which {pring 
from Grace,as ſometimes all are comprehended under the word Peace, 
Yet Grace and Peace are ſometimes in his Salutations both joyn'd toge- 
ther. And though here Chriſt is only mentioned, yer in many other 
places God the tather is mention d with him, 1 Th; 1, 2. 2 Per, 1. 2. 
Yea, and God the Holy Ghoit alſo, 2 Cor. 13. 14. and where they ar 
not mentioned, yet are all to be underftood ; tor in all works ad ex: 
they cooperate, And becauſe Grace is eminently manifeſtzd in the 
whole work of our Salyation, therefore the Apoſtle doth ſtil} mentio: 
it in all his -alutations, And with this he concludes this Eryiftle, 
with this St. Fokn concludes the whole Bible, R-v.22.ul:, 7 And the Scal 


&, a5 Lune 
_ I The firſt ep7ile unto the Theſſalonians was writte: 
trom Athens. 

1heſe Poftcripts to the Apoſtls's Epiſtles are judged to he add by 
ſome <cribes that copied them ont, and not by the Apoſtle himelf, as 
might be made evident ; and they are not found in any Eniftles but in 
St, Paul's alone, But as it is utual to date Letters from the Piaces whers 
chey are writ,{0 15 this dated from Athens, Hither he was conducted 17 
ome brethren after his Periecution at Thefalomica and Berea, /4,15,15, 
and here we read he ftay' for ſome time ; bur that from chence | 
wrote this Epiſtle, either then, or any cime after, is but 
more probable he wrote it from Coriath, becauie he ſ-nds it from 
motheus and Silvanus, as well as from himſelf, and they came to kim 
from Macedonia when he was at Corinth, as Acts 18, 5, 


"IN 42.5] 4499 —Y_ 
CULL JOULULLY 1 
. 


I THESSALONIANS. 


FIRE - =D 


The ARGUMEN T. 


M be T HE Apoſtle being yet hindred from coming to them, and underſtanding ſome miſtake of what te wrote in bis foro 
s Theſe Epiſtle about the Coming of Chriſt, he thereupon ſends this ſecond Epiſtle, where after his vita! $211tation be giv 
"uns, thanks for them, and bearing of the continuance of their Faith and Patience under all their Perſccutions, be olorios 1a them, 
Gr 5 And then comforts them by Arguments taken from the righteous Judgment of God, and the diferent manner and fe ©) 
mu; ChriſPs Coming, both to themſelves and all the Saints that Believe, and to their Adverſaries, ard al; that knew 7 
ir the 297 obeyed the Goſpel. And then prays for the perfeding of their Faith to the glorifying the name of Chriſt, Chap. 1. Brit 
"uit ror bearing they were ſhaken in their Minds about the time of ChriſPs Coming, as if it {howid be preſently in the Age wherein: 
= they lived, he doth vebemently caution them againſt ſuch a miſtake, and tells then of a great Apoſi afie, and the Reyelt- 
"tion of the man of Sin, which muſt precede that Day, which he doth particularly deſcribe in tbe manncr and effeds thercof, 
But ſpcaks of theſe Theſſalonians with thanſgiving to God as ſuch as God had chojen, ana calPd to obtain ti» Glory of the 
Lord Feſus ; and then prays for their Comfort and Eſtabliſhment, Chap. 2. He next proceeds to deſare tveir Prayers,bot9 

with reſped? to the ſucceſs of the Minijtry, and the ſafty of their Perſons who were employed there. And declared bis Corr 
fidence 1n them that God would eſtabliſh them, and that they would obey the Commandments they had received from them: 
And givesthem ſome farther Commandments about ſuch in the Church as did walk diſorderly. Ani fo :oncloides bis 


with Prayers for their Peace, and recommending them to the Grace of Feſus Chriſt, Chap. 29 
- 


CHAP. I, I 
The uſual Salutatio: and Thankſgiving : For their Gromth in Faith : 
Love : And their Patience in Iribulation, 1 ——4, Their Comfort in 
Gol's Righteous Judgment, and the Glorious coming of Chriſt : This 
gefcribed more dt large, 5 —10, He Prayeth for their further In- 
crea/s and ſtrength. That the Name of Chriſt may be the more Glari- 
Ped in them, 11, 12: 


- iY y 

Les: N 

#-. | [SLATS 
, w 


A UL, and Silvanus, and Timotheus, unto t 
Church of the Thellzlonians * ia God our Father, 
and the Lord Jeſus Chrift. 

2 Grace unto you, and peace from God our Father. 
and the Lord Jeſs Chriſt. | 


Theſe two Verſes are the lame as !n the former Epiftle, 


tharo- 
* W- 


#4 > | 
IS) 


A 
fore 1 paceed, 2 


Ch 


ap. T. 


ere j Wi <1 CIC 19, 


2 * We Ne bound to thank God always for you bre- 


thien, as 17. is meet þ, becanſe that your faith groweth 
* exceedinaly c, and the charity cf every one of you all to- 


wards cach other ahonnderh @«. | | 
re Apotile bevins this Epiſtte as the former, with Thanſgiving 3 
only, thee he gives thanks for ther Faith, Hope and Love; here he 
went ions their L21!h and Love; theic tor the efRcacy . of their 
for the orowth of it : There he ſaid only, Ie grve this; 
= bourd, ani as it is meer, AS if he was oblized 
42> thank tor them now ſomewhat more than before, perceiving 


Q7:| 17'e- 
bo Wh: 4] Bn 4 
( MH ak 4 1£ TL 


1, oet 72, 


th Grace dil not only yet abide, notwithſtanding all their Perſecu- 
tions, but increalt an grow. ©c But the Apoſtle's Thankſgiving here 
ver oedts variety the Theflaloniars growth. Not only the begin- 


no. bt £:owth of Grace 13 from God, elſe why doth the Apoſtle give 
banks for it, as Phil, 1.6 ? Rence he 1s filed rhe God of all Grace, 
2. <, 15, weak and firong, firſt or ſecond. he manner of its 
wih, whether bv infution of new degrees, as the firit Grace 15 infu- 
1 ;- or by co-operating only with it,and {o it's encrealecd by Exerciſe. 
a queſtion T leave to the School-men. However growth 1s a Duty, 
4nd commendable in Churches, And the Apoſtle mentions particular- 
ty, 2 Lhcir growth in Faith 3and that to a great degree, vaFavte vel, 
4) 


,Q 
! 
i 


3; orews exceedingly, It grows cw and above, above the ordinary 


rare of growth, or the common PItCH of Faith, Their Progreſs was 
from Faith to Faith, their Affent to the Dottrine of rhe Goſpel grew 
more firm and rooted. and the perſwation of their happy ſtate in 
Chriſt was much confirmed and ftrengthened, with a more cofident 
reliance on him. Or their Faith was extended to more Objetts by the 
Increaſe of their Knowledre, 4 2. Their increaie in Love $3 which he 
alſo expreii th by an emphatical word, EWA EH, which ſignifies in- 
ereafre to more and more; their Love yiew in the Habit, and a- 
bounde! in the Eru!'s of it : and this Love he ſcts forth by the Univer- 
{aticy of it, and the Reiprocalnets of it, it was the Igve of all to each 0- 
ther, Ther ail4;d leve, and were all beloved of one another ; there 
was no Schiſm among them, as in ſome other Churches, Faith and 
Love are two Sifter Graces,and are always more or leſs together : on- 
Iv in the Order of Nature, Faith is firft, and worketh by Love ; but 
not rft in 159me: and then afrerward when it brings forth, Love is 
Files forniate, Faith formed, as the Papifts ſpeak. Hence ſome have 
A'd. that there was not one Hypocrite or falſe Chriſtian in this whole 
Cnrb, Now the Apoltle and his Fellow Miniſters hereupon judged 
1c eives hoond to give thanks, Chriſtians are obliged to give God 
tanks for the Grace of God in others as well as in themſelves; and e- 


CO 


r 
[4 

ET EGS EELS 
I7CFC3144 x 
. 
) 


_ i 


+ 56 that * weour ſelves glory in you e 1n the churches 


e In the former Verſe the Apoſtle gare thanks for them z in this he 
iories in theme 


OL " joined with him herein. Glory7g includes in it high eſtima- 
62 of 2 thing, rejoycingin it, high commencation of it, and applau- 
din or ſires in it, And it muſt be ſome great thing either really, or 
in opinion, and in which ſome way or other we Our our ſelves are con- 

-d, And:lorving is zood or evil, according to the matter or 
obectofit. To glory in our Wiidom, Strength, Riches, Fer. $.23. 
io cory in Men, x Cor. 2. 21. In our own Works, om. 4. 2. In 


what we have received as if not received, 1 Cor. 4. 7. Aiter the fleſh, 
> Cor. 11.18, Or in our ſhame, #51. 3. 19, all this glorying 1s evil. 


But to clory in God, 7/., 41. 16. In his holy Name, 1 Chroyz, 16. 10, 
With God's Inheritance, Pal. 106. 5, In the knowledge of the Lord, 
F=:. 5. 24. In the Croſs of Chriſt, Gal, 6. 14. In Tribulation, Rom, 


5. 3. In Chriſt Jelus, 1 Cor, 1.3. In Hope, #:6.3.6., And of the 
ſucces of the Miniftry in the Churches growth, and their Faith and 
Patience, as here in the Text, all this glorying 1s good ; as elle- 
where he boaſted or gloried in the Cormmrbians Liberality, 2 Cor. g. 2. 


but his glorying in them was not to exalt himſelf, but to magnifie the 


f Where 


A 


Grace of God, and p:ovoke other Churches to :mitate thei, 


the excellency of Grace is known, and the commendation of it will 


be received, and imitated,and not amongſt carnal men who ſcoff at true 
Goodneſs, And it was the Apoſtle himſelf, and SiJuarus and Timo- 
th-ns that thus gloried in them. Tt adds to perſons commendation, 
when 1t is by men of great Knowledge, Wiſdom and Goodneſs, And 
It was by ſuch 2s well knew them, and underſtood their ftate : And be- 
inz Inftruments in their Converfion, were more concerned to glory in 
them than any other Apoſtles or Miniſters, g And their glorying in 
them, as it reſpects what he ſaid of them in the former Verſe, ſo what 
he further adds in this, which is rherr faith and patience in all their per- 


fſecutions and ribulations, Perſecutions are properly Sufferings for 


righteouſae's ſake, Tribulations any kind of Suffering, as ſome diſtin- 
Zuiſh. And it ſtems they had many of both, when he ſaith AP, &e. 
an yet they endured them, that is, not only ſuffered them, becauſe 
they could not caſt them off, but in the lenle ot the Apoſtle Fames, 
chip. 5. 11. Bebild ne count them happy which endure * Which is a ſuf- 
fering out of choice, and not meer neceſſity, as Mojes did, Zeb, 11.25, 
when ſufferings ſtand in competition with fin, or the diſhonour of the 
Chriſtian Proteſhon, Sufferings in themlelves are not defirable, and 
the Apoſtle did not glory in their ſufferings, but in their faith and 
patience, As he before join'd Faith and Love. together, ſo here Faith 
and Partence + and as Love fprings from Faith, ſo doth Chriſtian Pati- 
ence, whereby it is diſtinguiſh'd from Patience as a meer moral Vir- 
tuc found among the Heathen, either that of the Stotcs, Periparetics 
or Platoniſts, Faith and Patience are well ſtyled the two ſuffering 
Graces,and therefore here mentioned by the Apoſtle when he mentions 
their Sufferings, Faith as it depends upon God, and ſees Love under 
Atfictions, believes his Promiles, looks at the recompence of Reward, 
&e. (0 it {ſupports under ſuttering. And Patience as it keeps down 
Paſſion, and quiets the Soul under its Burden, makes it to fit lighter, 
and gives advantage to the exerciſe of that Grace and Reaſon, whereby 
a Chriſtian is ſtrengthened under his Sutferings. Now hereupon the 
Apoftle glorics in them, as men are ayt to do in the Heroick Atts of 
great Conquerors, or the Captain of ag Army in the valiant pertor- 
mances of his doldters. 


-e Miniſters of the Goſpel for the People that have been con- 
ried by them, or are committed to them, Hereby the Apoſtle's joy 


I. THESSALONIANS. 


| 


5 Which is a maniteſt token of the righteous judgment 
of God þ, that ye may be connted worthy of the kingdom 
of God 7, for which ye alſo ſvffer k. 

þ Thcie words ſeem to follow by way of Argumen*, to comr 
theſe Theflalonians nnder weir Suffering I, By what they mani 
viz, the righteous Fudgment of Ged, They are a Plain Indication 9 
it, or cemonſtration, as the word 1s uſect by Logicians:; And b. Fi! 
ment we muft not here underſtand the judgments or afflictions Q 2d { 
flidts in this World , fo that when God 42th not ſpare, but chaften h;c 
own Chiijdren, it is a token of his r:;ghteouz Judgment ; but rather 
underſtand it of the laſt Fudgment, when we ſee the righteous ſuFzr 
ſuch wrongs and injuries from wicked Men, and they go unpuniſhed 
we may argue thence that there is a Judgment to come. We cannot 
elſe well vindicate the Righteouſneſs, Wiſdom, Gocdneſs and Faith. 
tulneſs of God in his governing the World: As Solomon { rzued, 
when he ſaw ſo much unrighteouſnels in the very Seat of Jultice, 7 [it 
in my heart, God mill judge the righteous and the wicked ; for there is ; 
r1me for every purpoſe and work, Eccleſ, 3.16, 17, And this Judgment 
13 called here righteous judgment, by way of eminency : As it's exprel. 
ſed by one word, Auxgiozetoa, Rom. 2.5, 6, (for all God's Jus. 
ments are righteous.) 1, Becaule the Wicked will then meet with Ju. 
ſtice without mercy, which is not ſo in any preſent Judgments, 2, [u. 
ſtice will then he clearly manifeſted, which nov: lies obſcure, both with 
reſpect tothe righteous and the unrighteous. And in this ſenſe the 
words carry an Argument of Comfort to the Saints, under their pre- 
ſent unjuſt Sufferings from their Enemies. As to the ſame purpoſe 
the Apoſtle ſpeaks ro the Philippians, Phil, 1, 28, vid, 7 2. The other 
Argument of Comfort is from the reſult of their Sufferings, the great 
Advantage which will ariſe out of them. They will be hence account. 
ed worthy of the Kingdom of God, not by way of Merit, as the Papiſt; 
lay; the Greek word in the Text in its uſual acceptation, will nor 
tayour that Opinion ; it fignifies no more in the Active Voice, than 
the Latin word dignuri, which we Engliſh ro deigr, or vouchſafe ; Ang 
yet we may allow the Word to fiznifie more here, not only that thi; 
Kingdom may be vouchſated, but that ye may be meer, or worthy to 
receive it, not that all their Sufferings could deſerve this Kingdom; 
for the Apoſtle ſaith, Kom, 8. 18, 1 reckon the yufferings of this preſey; 
time not worthy of the glory, ©c. there is no proportion betwixt them, 
and fo they cannot merit it ; yet God may account thoſe that ſuffer for 
this Kingdom worthy of it, according to the Grace of the New Co. 
venant in Jeſus Chriſt, and as it hath a congruity with the Nature of 
God, and his faithfulneſs in his Promiſes, and ſo our Trantlation ren. 
ders the Word : Not that ye may be worthy of the Kingdom of God, 
but accounted worthy, God of his Free Grace will account them 
worthy, The Kingdom of Ged is propounded to Men in the Nz 
Covenant, upon certain Conditions, and thoſe that perform then har: 
a worthineſs of right : As, Rev. 22. 14. butnot of Merit, But © 
enables men to perterm the Conditions, ſo that there is nothin. 
our part properly meritorious ; yea, when we have performet i}; 
yet our worthineſs is to be attributed to Chriſt, and God's Gra, 3; 
not to our ſelves, elſe Man would have whereof to glory. The vc, 
tures call Eternal Life the gift of God, Rom. 6. 1ſt, and attributes *1- 
vation to Grace, Eph, 2, 8. We mult allow a Worthineſs only thi: i 
conſiftent with Grace : But when we have done all, we muſt {ay,  ; 
are unprofitable ſervants, Luke 17. 10, And after all we haye dn: 
and ſuttered for the Kingdom of God, muſt pray as Pau} for 04-/r/-- 
rus, that we may find mercy of the Lord at that day, 2 7ir, 1, 1+, 
& The ſenſe cither reſpetts their Enemies, that it was upon the :: 
count of this Kingdom, that they perſecuted them, having net 
elſe juſtly againſt them. Orellſe their own aim and intention ; 
fering, it was for the Kingdom of God : And whence we may lat 
that this Kingdom is worth ſuffering for,and that in ſvme caſes ca-147 
be obtained without ſuffering. And he that then refuſeth to {er 
will be accounted unworthy of it ; as he that doth ſuffer for it,(as tile 
Theſſalonians had,) upon the account of God's Covenant, and the \ie- 
rits of Chrift, not only the Grace and .Mercy, but the Juttice arid 
Faithfulneſs of God, engaged to beſtow it upon them. And allo that 
we may and ought in our Sufferings look ro the Reward, as M/s il, 
Heb. 11, 

6 Seeing #t zs a righteous thing with God Þ to recott- 
pence tribulation to them that trouble you m2. 

By theſe Words the Apoftle doth illuftrate his Argument for a Jul: 
ment to come, taken from the perſecutions and tribulations of ti? 
Saints, / It is of neceility that God ſhould be righteous, and recom- 
penfing is a neceſſary a& of righteouſnels, but we yet ſec it not, 112272 
fore there is a Judgment to come, And this recompence is Þ0:1170 £1? 
righteous and the wicked, the perſecurors and the perſecute.!, 1: 
former he here ſpeaks firſt of : And to recompenſe Tribulation to them 
that trouble the People of God,is a juſt recompence it i3 2CCOraing, £0 
the Law of retaliation ; whereof we have ſome Inftances in this Worit, 
as in Pharaoh, Adonibezeck, Haman, Gc. and many others, whereo: vc 
have a large account in the Hiftory of the Church, and hor Poricetty 
tors ; but this will be more fully verified in the Julgment ts come, 
called, The Revelation of the righteous Fu.\gmems of Gol, A, 2» 5s 


- i C Dam 


m And God's recompence to them is here called 7r/0u0419 7, 15 4.9% 


2. 9, And though in other Scriptures the puniſhment ot in- 

is ſet forth by other Names, yer here it's called by this name ; 707 Oh- 

ly for Elegancy of ſpeech by a Paranomaſus, but to parallc} ther ſut- 
(3.0 Wli 


tering to their ſin, they brought tribulation upon others, an (0% 
bring it upon them : And under this Word is compretien 1: 21 che 
torments of Hell, which our Saviour expretieth by weeptr'g, 40725 
and gnaſhing of Teeth, Marth, 8. 12, which is the extremity 0! Ft 
tation ; and its ſaid here, God wil? recompence, &c, Wiiich will te on US 
not to revenge our lclves, as 7/al. 94. 1. Rom. 12 19. aud ih as A 
poſtle ſets betore theſe ibej]2lonians by way of Comfort, 10t that we 
ought to rejoyce in mens Deſtruction meeriy for its (11, > M the 
Honour chat wilkthereby ariſe to God's [uftice, and 11 t- Favour, 
Honour, and Salvation, God will vouchiafe to his People 11510, 

7 And to you that arc troubled, reſt wit vs 7, 


+ mighty angels. 
#» Having ſpoken of the recompence of the tro#5:e7 CET 
troubled ; and in this we may obſerve a Parallel, a> itt 16 _— 


ne 


| 


* the Lord Jeſus ſhall be revealed from heaven 9 with bis + ( 


P 
4 ] 
Cs > 
4 
- 
J 


ange 


Chap, | 


when* 1 3-4 


# 


fi 
, 


rs, here of the his p19."4 


—-y % ks 
£3 $ XR © OB Or OC OD IE I EEE Far 1 ECOL SIRE 


' © 


Chriſt himſelf is already entred into his reſt, Zeb, 4. 10, ſo he will come 
again to take his People into the ſame reſt with him, 

8 In flaming fire, || taking vengeance p on them that 
know not God q, and that obey not the goſpel » of our 
Lord Jeſus Chriſt. 


FBut his coming will be upon another account to many others, which 
is laid here to be to rake vengeance, for which purpoſe he is ſaid to be 
revealed with his mighty Angels, or Angels of might ; and elſewhere 
with all his Holy Angels. They are ſaid to excel in ſtrength, 7/al. 
1-73. 20, or to he mighty in ſtrength, and have the name of mights, 
Eph. 1. 21. and here call'd mighty, becauſe as the Work Chriſt comes 
upon is great and difficult, ſo he will have Inftruments ſufficient for it, 
and none ſhall he able to hinder. And though he hath Power himſelt 
ſufficient, yet the Angels muſt attend him to ſolemn1ze this great day, 
and to be ſerviceable fo him in the Work thereof, which, as it will re- 
ſpe the Saints in theirReſurre&ion from the Dead,and their gathering 
from the four Winds,and ſeparating them from the Ungodly,as Tares 
from the Wheat, and Sheep from the Goats ; ſo the taking vengeance 
alſo in this day of the Lord's Wrath,which the Apoftle,eſpecially, is in 
theſe verſes ſpeaking of,as the Work they ſhall be employ'd in. As al/o 
in flaming fire, or the fire of fame, Hebraiſm, Fire is the moſt dread- 
ful of all the Elements, eſpecially flaming, to denote the great Wrath 
of that day, and its breaking forth, as fire when it flameth, God's 
Wrath is often expreſt in Scripture by fire, Deur, 32, 22. Pſal, 97. 3. 
&c. Fer. 21. 12. Heb, 10,27. and as that which attendeth the great 
Day of Chrift, Daz. 7. 10. 1 Cor. 3+ 13. 2 Per. 3. 7, 12, And whether 
this flaming Fire 15 Material, or only Meraphorical ; if Material, whe- 
ther the preſent Elementary Fire, which ſhall deſcend, ani be joined 
with that which ſhall break forth out of the Bowels of the Earth, as in 
Noah's Flood, the Waters were from above, and from beneath. Or 
whether it ſhall be ſome new-created Fire, and the action of it natural, 
or fupernatural, I ſhall leave it to the School-men; yet it's generally 
conceived, it 1S a material Fire : Elſe how can the Elements be faid to 
melt with fervent Heat, and the World, and the Works thereof, burnt 
up, as the Apoſtle Peter ſpeaks, 2 Pet. 3. 6. and parallels it with the 
Deluge in Noah's time, which was with material Water ; but yet it is 
to be 1 manifeſtation ofthe fire of God's Wrath, and an Inftrument of 
it alſo in the deſtrution of ungodly men, 2 Per. 3. 7. for it's ſaid in the 
Text, Chrift 13 revealed in it to take Vengeance, Vengeance 1s an 
A of Juſtice : 1t is a retribution of evil for evil, the evil of ſuffering 
{or the evil done : And God claims it as belonging to himſelf, P/al.94.1, 
Rom. 1.12, #7*b, 10. 27, and js mention'd in the Parable, Luke 18.7,8. 
as one great work of Chriſt at his coming to avenge the EledF. q Theſe 
arethe Perſons upon whom he will execute Vengeance : By whom ſome 
think are meant the Heathen, who had not the Goſpel. Thoſe that 


' Or, piye 


had not thz Goſpel, yet had means to know God, by the Light of Na-| 


ture, and the Works of Creation and Providence, which if they did not 
improve,but remained ignorant of Gcd,will fall under this Vengeance, 
And by Knowledge here is not meant ſo much a ſpeculative as a practi- 
cal knowledge of God, and ſo ſuch as do not fear, love, and honour 
God, may be ſajd not to know him. As the Gentiles who are faid to 
know God, Rom. 1, 21. but yet not gloryfying him as God, and living 
in Idolatry, are ſaid nor to know him, Gal. 4, 8, 1 Theſſ, 4. 5. Andas 
God tells the King of Fudah, that to do Juftice and Judgment is to 
know him, Fer, 22. 16, And Eli's Sons, though Priefts, yet are ſaid 
not to know the Lord, 1 Sam. 2,12. r Which may be taken in con- 
juntion with the former Words, and then ſuch as obey not the Goſpel 
are the ſame with them that know mor God, As God is not known 
ar1zht, but by the Goſpel, fo they only know God aright by the Goſpel 
wao obey it. Some are ignorant, and know not God, though they 
live under the Goſpel ; or, ſuch as have knowledge, yet are not obedi- 
ent, Knowledge and Obedience ought to go together : And this Obe- 


SE 2-3 

1.16 Gience is called the obeying of the Goſpel. The Goſpel hath not only 
Gr. il Promiſes to be believed, but Precepts to be obeyed, Yea, Faith it ſelf 
noel way fall under its Precepts, and then thoſe that believe not the Goſpel, 

bis 99 ao not obey it : As the ſame werd in the Greek fignihes to believe and 


0”2y, And as the Goſpel hath ſome peculiar Precepts and Inſtitutions, 

lv all the Commands of the Moral Law are comprehended in it ; and 

the equitable part of the Judiciat Law, yea, and the Ceremonial Law 

a9, where that which is Moral is figured by it 3 and fo far as the Go- 

IÞ:1 commands, Men ous ht to obey ; and Dilybedience appears to be a 
T4 fo Us 


9 Who ſhall be puniſhed with everlaſting deſtruction s, ||Or, fre, 
from || the preſence of the Lord, and from the i glory ef ny 
of his power t. = F - : 

3 — 


. —— TT - 


ry of Power may be meant only that Power which will bring Glory both 
to the Bodies and Souls of the Saints, and this the wicked ſhall have no 
experience of in that day. 

Io When he ſhall come to be glorihed in his ſaints «, 
and ro be admired w in all them that believe, (becauſe 
our teſtimony among you was believed x) in that 


day y. 

u This ſpeaks the different manner of Chriſt's coming towards the 
Saints and Believers, not in flaming Fire to deftroy them, as in the for= 
mer Verſe, but to be glorified and admired in them, © He ſaith not, to 
be glorified by them,by their adoring and praifing of him, but in them : 
He hath a p2r/onal Glory wherein he will appear glorious, and 2nother 
Myſtical in his Saints, The Head will be glorified in the Members, as 
they are glorified in and from the Head, As the >un hath a Luftre and 

Glory in the Moon and Stars, beſides what it hath In its own Poly, as 
Col. 3. 4. When Chriſt whois our Life ſhall appear, »- alſo ja appear 
with him in Glory, "The Glory God gave his Son, he hat? given it to 
his Saints, Fobn 17, 22. and will put it upon them, and be gloriti-« in 
it in the day of his appearing. As God is faid uo have glorified k:miclt 
in Iſrael, Jia, 44. 23. w And this Glory will be ſo great, that he 
ſhall be admired in it, as the word ſignifies. It will ſet the Jaints them- 
ſelves,and all the Angels of Heaven,yea,the whoie V ocli a wondtings 
ſmall things do not cauſe admiration, but what is great, an.! we cannot 
comprehend, that we admire, And Chrift will not only b- admi. cd by 
them, but in them 3 the wonderful Love, Grace, Mercy, VV iidum, and 
Faithfulneſs of Chriſt towards them wilt be adraired, to raiie up 
ſuch a number of poor, fintnl, deſpicable W orms out of the Diu. in- 
to ſuch a ſublime ſtate of Glory and Dignity; will be admirable, 
x And that theſe Theſſzlonians might have the comfort of this particu- 
larly, he having ſpoken of Saints,and thoſe that believe in general ; the 
Apoſtle applies this therefore to themſelves in- way of Parenthet1s, 
Q. 4. Chrift will be admired in all that believe, and ye are among them 
that believe, ergo, &c, And the Dottrine of the Goſpel he had preach- 
ed, he called it his Te(timony, as Foh. 3. 33. 1 Cor. 3. 6. which implies 
it was not an invention of his own, he did not ſpeak of himſelf, as the 
word implies : and this Teſtimony found different entertainment, ſome 
belived it not, others believed it, and received it, upon Which account 
the Theſſalonians are commended and comforted here by the Apofile, 
7 The Syriac read the words in the future Tenſe, without a Parentheſ1s; 


Chrift will come to be thus glorified, and admired in his Saints,becaule 
our Teſtimony among you concerning it ſhall be believed or confirmed 
in that day, he means the day of Chriſt's laſt coming, which-he calle& 
the Day of the Lord. 1 Theff. 5. 2. and becauſe it is fo great a Day, 
is therefore by way of Emphatis called that Day, 
11 Wherefore z alſo we pray always for you, that 
our God would || count you worthy of this calling a, and |j Or, 
fulfil all the good pleaſure of his goodneſs b, and the work vouchſafe; 


of faith with power c. ' 

7The Apoſtle here again mentions his praying for theſeTheſſzJonians, 
as he had ofcen mention'd it in the formerEpiftle. And the reaſon might 
be, becauſe he was abſent from them, they might the more need his 
Prayer ; and by telling them of it, thereby affures them that he forgot 
them not. And the Prayer he here makes for them, hath reference 
to the Diſcourſe he had been upon, as appears by this Word, *Ers 6, 
wherefore, or for, or in order ro which we pray, ©c, a Which is figu- 
ratively to be underſtood of the bleſſed ſtate they were called to,tor the 
calling it {elt they had receiv'd already: And ſo it is the ſame un effect 
mentioned before, wer, 5. called there the Kingdom of God, or to have 
Chriſt glorified, and admired in them, wer, lo. And elſewhere termed 


the Prize of the High Calling of God,Phil.3.14.and that God would count 
them worihy of it; as he had u'ed the lame Expreſſion betore ; only 
L5S) there 


[{ Or, 7:20 
im. 


Chap. 1. 


there it 45 menticned with reſpett to their ſufferings, here in a 
way of praver, He encourazed them under their ſufferings, that 
they mic theeupen be counted worthy of the Kingdom of God, 
and now prays thar God would count them worthy, Their worthineis 
365 imnore from the gracious account of God than their own ſutfer- 
1112, A Chriſtian's calling hath Duty annexet to it, whereupon te A- 
note! extorts the Zpbeftars ro walk worthy of it in diſcharge of thoſe 
i3:ies, 2 75. 4.1, 2. &1d it hatha Fate of blefſedneſs belonging to 1, 
which is :neant here 3 and none ſhall partake of it, but thoſe whom 
God (hall count worthy of it. But Gods account is not according to the 
Grace, but yet his Prayer implies ſuch a walking according to this 
Covenant, as whereby they might be counted worthy of the bleſſed ſtate 
they were called unto. 6 The gracious purpoſes of God towards his 
p-ople are called often his good pleaſe, as Mar, 11. 26, Luke 12, 32, 
Fohe 1.5, 9. and the ſame is meant 1/z. 53+ 10. The pleaſure of the Lord 
ſhall protper in bis hand: The Heb. word Chephers being of the lame fig- 
nifc:tion with the Greek word here uſ:d, Chrift ſhall accompliſh the 
gracions purboſes of God towards his People ;and call'd his good plea- 


fire, partly becauſe they have no reaſon out of the Soveraign Will of 


God,and they are ſuch alſo as he hath great complacence and delight in: 
And thoueh they are executed i: time, yet they were in his heart from 
Everlaſtins, ard therefore calid erernal, Eph, 3,11. And1 find pur- 
iſe and good pleaſure pur both together, Eph. I. 9. and 15 here called 
the good pleaſure of his goodneſs, which is not a tautology as it may 
ſeem to be, but to make his expreſſion of God's Grace the more em- 
Phatical ; or rather to ſhew that this good pleaſure of God towards his 
people, ariſeth out of his goodneſs. God hath purpoſes of wrath to- 
wards ſome, but ſuch cannot be call'd the good pleaſure of his good- 
neſs. Goodneſs is that excellency in God, whereby he is ready to com- 
municate gocd to his Creature z but by goodneſs here, is meant Gotl's 
ſpecial govnels which is peculiar to his people whom he hath choſen. 
T» fulfi! alt the good pleaſure of bis goodneſs, is to accompliſh all theſe 
good purpoſe; that were in his heart, Some whereof were already ful- 
filled in their Calling, Adoption, Juſtification, and SanQification be- 
gun, but the whole was not yet fulfilled, which he therefore here prays 
for, { that as their Ele&ion, and their firſt Converfion was not from 
any worthineſs, or foreſight of Faith in them, but the good pleaſure of 
his Wil, ſo the progreſs and perfe&ion of their Salvation, was alſo to 
be from the ſame good pleaſure > By the work of Faith is either meant 
Faith it ſelf, which is the work of God, or elſe the fruits of Faith; and 
ſo work is here taken for Works, or Operations of Faith, And the A- 
poſtle addeth this in his Prayer, to ſhew that we are not ſaved only 
by God's good pleaſure without Faith, ſuck a Faith that worketh, And 
to perfe the'r Salvation is a fulfi/ing the work of Faith, for perſeye- 
rance and progreſs towards perfection is from the work of Faith : Or 
it may particularly refer . to their patience and conftancy under their 
ſufferings which he had before ſpoken of, and which is a peculiar work 
of Faith 3 but becauſe Faith is not ſutficient of it ſelf, and the work of 
Faith may fail, he therefore addeth, 7 power, or with power ; that 15, 
the power of God, which is his Spirit, ſo called, Zuke 1. 35. Our Faith 
and the Power of God are here joined together, as 1 Pet. 1,5, Ihe 
ſame power that fuſt worketh Faith, afterwards co-worketh by it, and 
with it, 
12 That the Name of our Lord Jeſus Chriſt may be 
glorified in you, and ye inhimd - according to the grace 


of our God, and the Lord Jeſus Chriſt e. 

d ms, All Expoſitors agree that theſe words contain in them a f1- 
nal caule, as the Greek word imports 3 and fo underſtand them as the 
ultimate end of theApoftle's Prayer for them ; he had prayed for things 
that did concern their Salvation, but he looked further, which was, that 
thereby the Name of the Lord Jeſus may he glorified in them, The 
Glory of Chriſt, and the Saints Salvation are wrapt up together ; and 
though they are to look immediately to the latter, yet ultimately to 
the former : But whether the Apoſtle means the glorifying Chrift in 
this Life, or the life to come, is a queſtion, I rather think the words 
refer to the Life to come, when the Name of Chriſt ſhall be for ever 
2lorifged in the Salvation of his people, when all the good pleaſure of 
God's goodneſs ſhall be fulfilled upon them, they having been kept in 
the Faith by the power of God unto the end, through Jeſus Chriſt ; and 
then allo they ſhall be glorified not only by him, as we may read the 
Text, but in him, in being received into a patticipation of the ſame 
Glory with Jeſus Chriſt, and by their union with him, are glorified in 
him, Fob. 17. 22, Col. 3. 4. 2 Fob. 2,3. And when this is done then 
have they received the prize of their Calling z then is the whole good 
pleaſure of God's goodneſs fulfilled, then is the work of Faith accom- 
pliſht, which things the Apoſtle faith, he prayed for in their behalf, 
e What the Apoſtle before called the good pleaſure of God's goodneſs, 
he here calls his Grace, and he adds the grace of Chriſt, becauſe 
the Grace or Favour of both are ſo eminently manifeſted in theſe 
things, whereby not only the Name of God, but of Chrift alſo ſhal] 
be glorified, as he ſaid before, and that it may be glorified in them 
according 10 his Grace, that is greatly glorified, and they glorified in 
kim according to the Grace of God, and Jeſus Chriſt, rhat is great- 
ly glorified, as we may further underſtand the words; the Grace of 
God being exceeding, great towards them in Jeſus Chriſt, And here- 
by the Apoſtle would exclude all thoughts about their own merit, 
Ver, Lie 


EHAP.. HH. 

Tie coming of Chriſt to judgment ſhould not be ſo ſoon as ſome perſmaded 
them : But Antichriſt ſhould firſt come + His Character : And Times : 
And D:ſirution, 1 $8. The Power of ſedufFHion in them that 
geriſh by the juſt judgment of God upon the Unthankfulnejs of men, g--12 
He aſſures them of their Eletion wo Salvation in Faith and San@ifi- 
cation, 12, 14. He exhborts them to ſtand firm init; And prayeth God 
70 Comfort and Confirm them, 15 bY. 

2 TOW we beſeech you brethren f, by the coming 

of our Lord Jeſus Chriſt g, and by our gather- 

ing cogether unto him || b, 

The Apoſtle now comes to refute the opinion that ſome at leaſt of 


thele 1þ:1Jalonians had received, as if the day of Chriſt was near at 
hand, He having ſaid, 1 Theſ, 4.17, We mich are altve, and re- 


W.THESSALONIANS. 


frrianch of the Law, butthe gracious indulzence of the Covenant of 


main, ſnall be caught up to meet the Tord inthe Air, %c, Then foms« 
mizht think his coming would be in the Apoſtles time, or ſom= 0-1... 
way they might fall into this conceit, and ſome da conceive this v 
the chief reaſon of the Apoſtics writing this Epittle, And becaufe this 
miſtake might be of dangerous conſequence, therefore he is very 
hement and particular in refutiog it : For hetenpon they mig bt be 
brought to queſtion the truth of the whole Goſj5c} when this {9113 
not come to paſs: They might be nnprepared for the ſuſtcrings tha» 
were to come upon the Churci :; their patience might fail in eXpec.- 
ing this day, and their minds be doubting ahout the coming of Ch-i9 
at all, This Opinion alſo would much narrow their thoughts abou 
Chriſt's Kingdom, and the enlarging of the Goſpel among other CG; n 
tiles, And the prophane might abule it to ſenſuality, as 1 Cor, 15, »- 


ry cr e=-t 


- * 


let us eat and drink, &c, f That he might the better perſwade. *}- 
calls them brethren, and beſeeches them, Gc. g And next, cOnitres 
them, uſing the form of an Oath, by the coming of our Lord Feſus 
Chriſt, &, Weconjure men either by what they love, or by what 
they fear z as they would enjoy the one, or avoid the other, The 
coming of Chrift was what they deſired and rejoiced in, as that which 
would bring reſt to them, and Tribulation to their Adverſaries : Arq 
by this he doth therefore beſeech, or adjure them z and therefore we 
muſtunderftand this of Chriſt's laſt coming, as the word T=P43, in 
the Text, is ſtill applyed to this coming, 11h /. 2. 19. and 3, 13,5, 
and not of his coming to deſtroy the Jewiſh Thurch and State, for that 
coming was at hand, b At his laft coming, when the whole Body gf 
Chriſt ſhall be gathered to him, to meet him in the Air, 1 Theſ, 4, 
17, ard then the ſenſe is, As ye hope ever to ſee ſuch a bleſſed meetirs 
and to be of that number, ſo take heed of this Opinion. Yet ſome rea1 
the Text otherwiſe, becauſe in the Greek it is not He but UT Tis mw 
exores, and ſo the ſame with ze, not we-beſecch you by, but concery. 
zng the coming of our Lord Jeſus Chriſt,and our gathering together yr. 
to him,as denoting only the Subje& matter treated of : 1 prefer the for. 
mer, and ſo the Apoſtle conjures them not to be ſcon ſhaken in ming 
but to ftand faſt in the truth about the Doctrine of Chrift's :oming, 
which they had been taught, and very lately taught, and therety:s it 
was the greater Evil to be ſoon ſhaken ; as the Apoſtle upbraids the Gz- 
latians, Gal, 1. 6. and God the Iſraelites, Pſal, 1C6. 13+ 


7 ozacufura, It is an alluſion to the Waves of the Sea that are toſſe! + 


4. 14. Zeb, 13, 9.and to be eftabliſht in the Truth, is often command.” 
ed 1 Cor, 16. 13. Phil. g. 1. Col. 1.24, &c. And by mird here is ci- 
ther meant the faculty it ſelf, and then the Apoſtle beſecctcth them 
to keep company with their underſtanding, not to be remoys/! 50m 
their mind, As falſe Doctrine is ſaid to bewitch Men, Gal. ;, :, ard 


to make men fooliſh, ver. 3. as madneſs is called amentia c 74n-nty, 

as that whichdoth as it were diſmind men, and corrupt the ind, an! 

pervert the judgment, 2 7:m. 3. 8,9, as Fannes and Fambros lecuiyel 
\ 


the People by their Enchantments, as the Apcflle there mention; : © 
elſe, the Sentence and Judgmen: of the mind ; and then thcy ::e be. 
ſeeched to hold faſt the right Judgmeut they had entertaive! 
Chriſt's coming, and not to heſitate and waver about it, ſo t}.2 vo! 
is taken 1 Cor, 2.16, 1Hegg rm, Alluding to Souldiers oF+izþtel 
with a ſudden Allarm. We find the Word Mar. 24. 6, Mart 12, 7, 

in this allufion, And the opinion of Chriſt's coming to be | 
might occaſion this trouble in them, either leſt they might be (| 

by it, and unprepared for it, or by judging themſelves miſtaken in -1.-/; 
forme” apprehenſions about it ; and thole faiſe Teachers th: bz 
this Opinion, did alſo perhaps ſo repreſent this coming in ſuck cerrow 
as to cauſe this Trouble ; as falſe Teachers in gener! are fic}; a5 270 
ſaid to cauſe trouble, Gal, 1.7. and 5. 12. Though the coming c& 
Chriſt is in it ſelf rather the Saints Hope and Joy, than ground cf 
Trouble, as 1 Thef, 1, 10, and 4. 18, &c, And it may be ſome (id pre- 
tend for this Opinion the Spirit, or ſome Letter from the Apofle, ci- 
ther the foriner Epiftle to them, or ſome Letter that was forged, or 
ſome word he had ſpoken, or preached. And thoſe words as from us 
may rcter to all thele : The Spirit as from us; or Word, as ſr: #5; 
or Letter, as from us. ] Some extraordinary Revelation of the Spirit, 
which the falſe Teachers pretended to,eſpecially in the Primitive times, 
when they were more ordinary , as in the Church of Corinth, 1 Cor, 
14. 6, and the Churches of Galaria, Gal. 3. 2, 5, ſome would pretend 
the Spirit that called Jeſus accurſed, 1 Cor, 12. 3, and therefore the A- 
poftle bids, Try the Spirit, 1 Fob. 4. 1. Simon Magus pretended to it,and 
had his Zelene, Montanus his Paractete, Mahomet his Dove : And the 
man of ſia pretends to the Spirit, though it is in truth the Spirit of An- 
tichrift, x Fob. 4. 3. and the Spirit of Satan in the next Chapter of 
this Epiſtle, as was foretol( that in the aſt times, there would ariſe 
ſeducing Spirits, 1 Tim, 4. 1. As there was in the times of the Old 
Teſtament falſe Prophets that pretended to the Spirit ; as 1 King. 22. 
24. Micah 2, 11, And the very Heathen would pretend to Divine O- 
racles, Inſpirations, and Revelations, eſpecially their Kings and Law- 
gLVECS, as Numa, Pompilius, Licurgus, &c. and ſtill there are Enthuit- 
afts who make theſe pretences. m Are ayes, whereby ſome under- 
ſtand Calculation by Aftrological Rules, that the day of Chriſt was at 
nand; others render the word Reaſoning; and ſo from the declining 0t 
the vigour of the Earth, and the nearer approach of the Sun to it, as 
Prolomy obſerved in his time, or ſome other Natural cauſes ; they red- 
ſoned the coming of Chriſt, and the diſſolution of the World to bz 
nigh at hand; but rather we underſtand by it ſome word from the A- 
poſtles own mouth, which was pretended he had. ſpoken, or preache 
ſomewhere, though not written, As the Church of Xome pretends to 
Traditions, beſides the written word, vpon which they ground many 
of their Superfticions, and Idolatries, not warranted by Scripture. 4:5 
the Jews had a ſecond Miſhnah, and their Caboals, collecied in part 
trom the ſayings of Moſes, or ſome other of their Prophets, Wien they 
did not write, 2 Some Letter that was ſent to them from 19i7'e hancl or 
other, or elſe by ſome forged Lecrer as from the Apoſiic Nimieit, 07 
his former Epiſtle miſunderftood, 0 0bj, But is it not (ail 111. the day 0 
the Lord, er the coming of the Lord is at band ? 1 C0r. 1G Vs ! Ueda 5» 
F4n.5.7,8. 1Per-4.7, Anſr, The word uſed in thole PIRcc5,Curers from 
this in the iext;z for it tignifies either that WHICH 15 acenalsy Pre” 


{Ent, OF VETY NEAT It, as Rom, 8, 38, Gal, 1, 4. 4s that whic!) 15 /ajaw 
fi 


Chap. 1 


2 * That ye be not || ſoon ſhaken in mind z, or besy.,., 
troubled &, neither by ſpirit], nor by word #7, nor by 4.:;,, 
letter #, as from us, as that the day of Chriſt is at hand ,* 1 


with the Winds, as falſe Dottrines tend to unſettle the mind, as Et," vt 


iN. 


tac, hap AY wb wa fred fndo nfs ab Aon «© 


Is ME 
Nat, 
Way 


l 


Wchap. 11. 


done preſently, is fpoken of as done, Fohn 17, 4. 2 Tim. 4. 7. Or thoſe 
places mean,this coming 1s at hand as to Goll's account of time,though 
mor as mens. And in tlat ſenſe Chriſt ſaith, 825014 I come quickiy, 
R-v, 22, Mnt the errour the Apoſtle warns them of, is, a3 if the com- 
ing of Chriſt would be in the Age wherein they lived, The Apoſtles 
21! ſail char the coming of rhe Lord was at hand, but their right mean- 
ing was perverted to a fall» ſenſe, as ſeducers uſually do, 

Let. 30 man deceive you o by any means p - for that 
dy {hall not come, except there come a falling away 
firſt 5, and that man of {in be revealed r, the ſon of per- 
dITION FS, 

o Here tlie Apoſtle urgeth again his charge againſt t!is errour, 
thovzh in other words, and begins his arguments to retute ic. He had 
adjur'd them not to he ſhaken,and here he cautions them againſt being 
deccived, (forthe one makes way for the other 3) fo alſo #9: 10 be wrou- 
Hed, v:r, 2, for troubled minds are apt to be made a prey to ſeducers, 
And the caution in the Text proves that their ſhaking and trouble did 
ariſe from ſome deceivers that were amongſt them, rather than any 
miſunderſtanding of their own of what he wrote in the former Epiſtle 
about Chriſt's coming. To be ſhaken in mind is had, but to be deceived, 
is worſe; for it isa going out of the path,as the word ſignifies; and there- 
fore his caution againſt it is univerſal, both as to perſons and ways z Let 
29 man deceive you,though he pretend to Revelations,or 15 of the great- 
etReputation in the Church. Either of Craft, Flattery,pretendingLove, 
or plauſible Arguments, or miſrepreſenting our words, or orging of 
ctters, or miſinterpreting ourEpiſtle to you,or any other part of SCrip- 
ture,or feigned Miracles,©c.Then he enters the Arguments to contute 
ir, hich are, 1,The general \poſtatie. 2.The Revelation of the man of 
fin,neither of theſe are yet,nor will he in this Age z and yet that dy ſhall 
79: coire,till theſe Hoth firſt come,qThere is a ſupplement in ourT rantla- 


 tion,for in theGreet it is only For,except there come a falling awayfirſt,&C, 


or an Apoſtacy,a receſſion,a departing,or a flanding off,as the word im- 
purts, ſo that Apoſtatic may be either good, when it is from evil to 
good ; or evil, when it is from good to evil, It is always uſed 11 
this latter ſenſe in Scripture. Again it is either Civil or Spiritual : Ct- 
vil, as when people fall off from the Civil Goverment they were un- 
der, and ſo ſome would ſenſe the Text of the defe&tion trom the 89mar 
Empire, the Eaſt part from the Weſt,and the Ten Kingdoms that aroſe 
out of it, which was the Opinion of #ieron, Epiſt, ad Algaſiam z but the 
Apoſtle writing to the Church ſpeaks not of Civil Government,and the 
Atairs of State ; and ſpeaks of ſuch an Apoſtaſie which would give ric 
to the man of tin, and the Revelation of him. And this man of fin 
riſeth 7 in the Church, not in the Civil State ; and the conſequence of 
this Apoltacy is giving men up to ſtrong deluſions to believe alye,and 
then follows their Damnation ; and the cauſe of it is ſaid to be, , 79? 
receivivg the Truth in the Love of it ; ſo that it is not a Civil, but Spirt- 
tual Apoſtacy, as the word in Scripture is always (I ſuppoſe) ſo taken- 
An it is not of a particular perſon, or of a particular Church, but a 
general Apoſtacy of the Church, though not of every individual z that 
Church that is afterwards called the Temple of God, where the man of 
ſin iitteth, and is exalted above all that is called God, which cannot be 
in any particular Church,and would not the Apoſtle have ſpecified that 
particular Church ? ncither is it ſome lefſer Apoſtacy,which may befal 
the beſt Church; but ſuch as would be eminent, call'd » aTogzare, 
that Apoſrifie, greater than that of ſome believing Jews to Judaiſm, 
or of {ume Chriſtians to Nicolaitiſme, which ſome think is meant, 
much 1efcan it be Caizs Caxſar,as Grotius interprets,or any one perſon, 
for the Apoitle ſaith not Apoſtare, but 4poſtacy, elle a man of fin coald 
not 7ile out of it,and exalt himſelf above all that is called Gotd,and Wor- 
ſhipped, it is an Apoſtacy from ſound Doctrine, infticruted Worſhip, 
C hurch-Government, and true Holineſs of Life,as may be further con- 
ſi.1cred after wards z neither is the Apoſtacy all at once,but gradual ; tor 
out of it ariteth a man of fin, who grows up to this manhood by degrees, 
ani fin and wickedneſs are not compleated at firft as well as Holinels ; 
much le(s is 1his Apoſtacy a falling off from the Church of Romeas fume 
Papifts affirm, and make the Reformation to be the Apoſtacy, which 
wasa return from it ; doth the mu of fin riſe out of the Reformation ? 
Did any ofthe firftReformers oppoſe and exa!tthemlelves above all that 
is called God, or is Worſhipped? Or, as God fat in the Temple of 
God, &c. was any of their coming with all power, and ſigns, and lying 
wonders ? Or, did any of them forbid to Marry, and to abſtain tro 
Meats, Gc. which is the charater our Apofile gives of this Apoſtaſie, 
i Tim, 4,1, 2,7, neither is the Mahomztan Religion this Apoſtaſte, tor 
Mahomer fitteth not in theTemple of God neither is it the falling off of 
the converted Jews from the Jewiſh Church, to the Goſpel Church 
the Apoſtle would never call that an Apoſtacy. » The next Argument 
is from the revelation of the man of ſi : This is alſo to precede Chriſt's 
laſt coming ; it is an Zebrai/m, A Warlike man is ftileda Man of War ; 
a bloody man, a man of bloods ; a deceitful man, a man of deceit,V&c, 
ſoa man eminent in fin, is here called 4 man of ſin z not only perſonally 
lo, but who doth promote !in, propagate it, countenance it, command 
It, Vid. Platina, Sigebert, Blonetas, Beuno, Uſpregenſis, Mate. Pariſ, 1n 
ins of Omiſſion, forbidding what God requireth,in tins of Commiſſion, 
requiring, or allowing what God hath forbidden. In fins of the firſt 
4 able, corrupting God's Worſhip by Superſtition and Idolatry, taking 
God's Name in vain by heartleſs Devotion, difſembling Piety, diſpen-| 
fing with Perjury and talſe Oaths, taking away the ſecond Command- 
ment,and the morality of the fourth Commandment,and making mens 
Faith and Obcdience to reft upon an humane Authority, &c, In fins of 
the ſecond Tablc,to diſpenſe with Duties belonging to Superiours and 
Inferiours ; with Murder, Adultery, Fornication, Inceſt, Robbery, Ly- 
ng, Equivocation, &c. And betides all theſe, promoting a falſe Reli- 
£10n, and deftroying the true by Fines, Impriſonments, Baniſhments, 


I. THESSALONIANS. 


pheus, Moulin, And becauſe the fin of the whole Corrmunity is chicfly 
<entred in him, and ſprings ont from him ; \ wan in whom is the 
Fountain of all Sins, Aterom ad Alpafizm s And tio Sin of this State is 
called a Myſtery of Imquity, ver, 7. and fo difteri:s from rhe fin io all 
other political States : and therefore may well be dged to bs the frme 
with the Whore fitting on many Waters, that hach M-Fery written 


to be meant of a ſingle Woman, and the tru: Apoſtolick Church is 
repreſented by a Woman in [ravel, R-v, 12. 1. Why then thuald we 
take the Man of Sin to be a ſinzle Man, as the Papiſts do, Ui, a jew 
of the Trihe of Day, that ſhall erca his Sinzdom and [empie in F-rtte 


ri:1tlem, ſeduce the Jews, continue three yours and an half, make great: 
havock of the Church, to be oppo! by E295 and Elizs, and is to 
come a little before the end of the Weoril, Ridiculous! Neither-can 
this Man of Sin be Simon Magr:s and his tollowers, for l:s was revealed 


in the Apoſtle's time, ſeeing the Myſtery 0: Iniquiry helonging ro this 
Man of Sin began to work in the Apoſtie's diys, as ver, 7, and he is 
the ſame whom St. Fobz calls Antichriſt, » 506. 2. 13, and the Spirit 
of Antichriſt began to be in the World in his cime, Cp, 4.3, ant the 
Nations are to be made drunk with the Cup of his Fornication, and to 
ſerve and obey him, &c, Rev. 13. $8. and 17. 4, Ail v.hica requires 
more time than is allotted by them : Bur they ſet 1m: a great way off, 
that none may ſuſpett him to be among themlelves ; but he th.c will 
compare the Church of Rome in the Apoſtle Paul's times with what it is 
now, and the Dottrine of the Council of ren with that ad downimn 
his Epiſtle to the Romans, may ſay, How is the Faithful Ciiy become aun 
Harlot ? And this Man of Sin zs to be revealed aifo, which ſhews that h2 
is not a ſingle perſon, not yet born : Revealing relates not {o much to 
a perſon, as a thing ; in particular to the myſtery of Iniquity, mentio- 
ned ver, 7, His revealing is either quoad exiſtzntiam, or appar271titm, 
The former is meant here, and the latter, ver. 8. He grows up into. 
an exiſtence as the Apoſtacy grows, as Vermin grows out of putreta- 
ction, As the Churches Purity, Faith, Love, Holineſs declined, and 
as Pride, Ambition, Covetouſneſs, Luxury prevailed, ſo he grew up 3 
And which was che dirett point and time of his full revelation in this 
firſt ſenſe is conjeur'd by many, but determin'd by none z it is moſt 
generally refer'd to the time of Boviface'the 34.to whom Phocas granted 
the ſtile of Oecumenical Biſhop,and to the Church of Rome to b2 the Mo- 
ther Church. But as the Apoftz. hecars forth this man of fin, fo as 
he riſeth, he helps it forward, ſo that he both cauſeth it, and is cauſed 
by it. As Corruption in Doarine, Worſhip, Diſcipline, and Man- 
ners brought him forth, ſo he was ative in corrupting them more and 
more. s Another Zebrai/m, where ſometimes that which any way pro- 
ceeds from another, as its cauſe, is called its ſo, as ſparks, the jons of 
the coal, Fob 5. 7. and branches, fons of the tree, Ge7, 49. 22, and 
the Learner the Son of the Teacher, Frov. 3. 1. and ſometimes that 
which a man is addiGted to, as a wicke.! man is the fon of wickednels, 


Pſa}. 89.22. Again, that which gives torth what it hath in it ſelf, as 
the branches of the Olive Trees giving Oyl are call-d the ſons of Uyl, 
Zech. 4. ult, and in the Text, the man of fin 5s the Son of Perdition, as 
Fudas is call'd, Fohn x7. 12. and he is ſo either atively, as he brings 
others to deftruttion, and ſo may be called 4pollyon, Rev, g. 11, or ra- 
ther paſhvely, as devoted to perdition ; as Rev. 19. 20» The Baſt and 
falſe Prophet are both caſt into the lake of fire and brimſtone : And the 
beaſt that was and 5s 101, is ſaid to go into perdition, Kev. 17. 11, The 
deftroyer of others both in <oul and Body will be deftroyed himſelf : 
Firſt, Morally by the Word and Spirit, as v. 8. And then Judicially, 
by God's revenging Juftice in this World, and that to come. The A- 


Lottures, Poyſons, *laſfacre, Fire, and Fagot. And this man of fin is 
Not a tingle Perſon, but a company, order, and ſucceſſion of men, be- 
cauic all are ated by the ſame Spirit, therefore called, 2 man, as Pſal. 
Iv, 18, Ihe man of the Earth is, all men of an Earthly Spirit,and a man 
of the Field,is men whoſe minds and employments are intle kield,Gen, 
25427. Or it is a linful State, As the Civil State of the four Monar- 
Chics in Daniel js repreſented by tour fingle Beaſts,and the Anxichriſti- 
4 tate by a Beaſt riſing out of the Sea, Kev. 13. 1, lo by man of fin 
> meant a tintul State, which though it conſifteth of many People and 

auuns, yer being under the intlucnce and Government of one Man, 


poile at the very firſt mentioning him, declares his deſtiny ; at his 
ficſt riſing and revealing, mentions his fall and ruin, 


4 Who oppoleth t and * exalteth himſelf above.all x y 
that is called God #, or that is worſhipped : ſo that he, 5, 


as God w, iitteth in the temple of God x, ſhewing liim- 
{elf that he is God y. 

A turther Deſcription of this man of fin, by his Oppoſition and Ex- 
altation, r Or, 6 ay]:z41psr&>, the Cppojer, or rather oppy/.,z, expreft 
in the participle of the preſent Tenſe, denoting a continue .ict, or 
that which he bends himſelf firongly to: But againft what ? ihe 
ſame that he exalteth himſelf above, as ſome conceive, but the Gram- 
mar will not well admit that ſenſe, and we ſhould not ſo c<ftrain it ; 
and therefore we will take the word indefinitely,as expreft in the Text: 
But we may well conceive, it is Chrift himſelf, whom he oppoleth ; as 
his Name given him by the Apoſtle Fohn doth evidence when he is 
called Antichriſt, or THE Antichriſt, one that is againft Chrii: ; not 
that he openly and profeiſedly oppoleth him, but as Fadas kiſſed his 
Maſter, and betrayed him ; See thoſe that have written of Antichriſt, 
as Philip Nicholas, Whitaker, Danzus, Chamier, Moulin, Funius, &C, 
it is T9iquity in a Myſtery, He ſerveth Chriſt, but it is to ſerve him- 
ſelf upon him, He acknowledgeth him in all his Offices, and yet doth 
vertually deny and oppoſe him in them all; call'd Antichrilt, as oppo- 
ſite to the Un&ion of Chriſt, Chriſt ſignifies az0:7red, and ſo he oppo- 
ſeth him in the Offices to which he is anointed, while he owns his N2- 
tures, He profeſſeth himſelf a Servant of the Servants of God;and yet 
perſecutes, curſeth, proſcribes, and killeth them, oppoſing Chriſt in 
his Members. He maketh War with the Saints, Rev, 13, 7, He hath 
two horns like a Lamb, and ſpeaks as a Dregon, ver, 11, ſpeaks les :n 
Hypocriſie, 1 Tim, 4. 2. # And then he is deſcribed by his Exaltation, 
umexeouer©r, exalted, which is well ſupplied, he exa/teth himſelf, 
It is not from God be exalteth himſelf, or lifreth himſelf above al! rhat 
is called God, though not really and effentially God, The Apoſtle 
well knew that in the Old Teſtament Magiftrates were called Gods; 
Pſal. $2. 1, 6, and 1 Cor. 8. 5. There be that are call:4 Gods, wheth.r 
in Heaven, or in Earth, Magiſtrates and Rulers are of ſeveral Des 
grees, ſome Inferiour, ſome Superiour 3 ſome Supreme, as Kings and 
Emperours, but he exalteth himſelf above them all, and that nor oniy 
in Spirituals, by Excommunications, but in Civils, by depoling Kings, 
diſpoſing Kingdoms, yea, making Emperours to wait at tis Gate, 
hold his Stirrup, proſtrate themlelyes ro kils his Toe, and then 
to tread upon their Neck, as Alexander the 1114, did to Fre- 
derick Barbaroſſaz and this not condemned as the extravagancy 
of ſome particular Perſons, but allowed and juftined by the De- 
Arine and Doors of the Komiſh Church, And B:Parm, 4c Ken. prot. 
lib, 5. c. 8, gives it as the reaſorr why the Pope would noc cone to 
the Council of Nice, left if the Empergur ſhuuld come thither, ke 


Way be allo ftiled the Man of Sin upon that account; Jmpietates Cory- 
VOL. I; 


{| 5$2 } thoutd 


Chan. Iv - 


in her Forehead, Aev. 17. 1, 5. And as no Expoſitor takes tae '* fore. 


ns __ - —_ * : _ - 

" & Et id. - iced OL > : F 

4 — Iy4 4 "5 - = J 4 

4 ww I q RR U - _—_ ” 
wy "IE" Y *% ” — —_ - N c —_  - 
. , — "2 . 
bt A 7 OB I_- s » - a 
4> —— © : 6 - - 0 24. M Ka” ? T wy "n= 4. 
2: oy = n_— D : En III 
- G h_ _—_ 4 pa bu 4 - — 3 # ” - Ca* We. 4 Y "OY = 4 _ " —_ = - Low 
' C Co + Jn” Sv -.f - — . wo aq - «gy en 
5h» 5 A no SOIT b -- >»; ho ” a = - 
&- : x — —__-— . C » 2. 
> - G > d: d —_ Ra... - —_— — oy _ - w— RC IO YT. as T4 6 
bo ( 4 ICT: pt 4 a. - <7 <_—_ ” = — - SS, —wagi2 _ 
3 : - 4+ IJ "= _ 6 : * SITY > Phe os. 1 _ 4 Tye Tl == ; £42 
T - " d - 2 L- —_ - - 
we” no —_ _ . — _ - _ C _ 
, - « WEE IE» SS _ _ = 
> = p —_ - L 


—_ -. I 
nn ee, Ot BY 
= Ret, 

->3 a - 


= 
© ———, 


- Can 7 = 


6 . 7 
a re 
3 


Chap. TT. 


(hon atemotrofitabove him fo that by thoſe two words in the Text; 
| 201 in ho Eamity and Pride, Oppotition an 


jhe AnDDILEdECTIVGS BLM 

Fealcition,  Obtrea, ltirt, he afſumetit co himſelf an higher power 
than tie ihitore ogy called Gods; theirs 1s hnmane, his 1s Divine 3 
thews 68 the Bode. or Eſtates of men. ms over the Contcience 3 theirs 
cry to the Living, kB ro mens Souls after DNearh, mw Next, he makes 


himſelf lil;e God, ant is 2s God, as the king of old Bi5ylor fatl, 1 vill 
Flite the mati high, !/5. 14. 14. x AS God's refidencs or old was in the 
Tomnle of Feru/alem, fo be {irterh as God in the temple of God ; not that 
Venne that was built by Soiomcr, and afterwards rebuilt, and to be 
in, 23 the Vopith Doftors ſpeal; ; For it is now deſtroyed, and 


© . _ Mi, 42 i ed - : © YO 2. 5 + } . 0 _ 2 . - 
Yin by ths man Of fin, as they lay, ac as omnmeg, would 


2 TY 211;3 & 
* J--K& 614 = ate vitg 4 


if is be bniit ag2 

th Apoitle call chat the tem;le of God? 2 C97, 6.16. Ade Jo 12, 
©. Bur it 3s 2 Spicieuel Temnie, as the Church 15 called, 1 Cor. 3.16, 
12, So #5, Hzroy, £111.ry, Chryſyft, underitand it, and he is ſaid here 
to (it, to have heres Carketra, The Apoſtie ſpeaks of him as a Bi- 
ſho, Wh. Epillonal Sec is cxilzd a Seat, or Cathedra, and here ne 


fitter as Gollz The Popiſh\riters give the Pope that, and ſuch like 
Tires, Dominus Densaotbor anc, Hemeſt Dominium Dei © Pape, Tu 
'/ c1-1, Seſſeq. 7 hou art another God on Earth. 


G 5 j 
es Uter Dons 17 [err a Cen 111 At 


with Laws Natvral and Moral, pardons fin as he pleaſeth, paſt, pre- 


ail Cl.vrcl Power, y Not ſay..., 22h his mouth, as 0ecumentus ſaith, 
bus 1:3\;inz ſuch a ſkew before men. Though Belarmin interprets it of 
2n 0pzn hoafting and vaunting himſelf to be God, which faith he, the 
Vone doth nor ; but by pretended Miracles, Signs, and Wonders, by 
Voriicns, Indulgences, Canonizing Saints, Dominion over Princes and 
Kin doms, he ſhews himlelf as a God before Men,and claiming a pow- 
&r 1 he judged of no man, and to be judge of all men. A /ecu}ar? po- 
t: {cre 707 ſolvi peſſe nec ligari pmntificem,quem conſtat 4 Confſtantino De- 
un trpelratumgum nee Deun ab bomintbus judicarl manifeſlum ſit. Decret. 
diſtin, g6. C. 7. Yea, laftly, he exalteth himſelf above God himſelf, 
when he maketh the Scriptures to derive their Authority more from the 
Pope's Canonizing, than God himſelf; and without it no man is bound 
ro bulieve them. D-crer. lib. 2, Tir. 23. Again, if the Pope ſhould err 
to mmantding Vice, and forbidding Vertue, the Church was bound 
to believe Viie tobe good, and Vertue to be evil, Beliarm, lib, 4. de 
ſunne pr. £5. And it is frequent among their Divines and Canonifts 
to ſay] that the Pope can diſpenſe againſt the Apoſtles, and the Old 
Teftzmenr, and the Scriptures are interiour to his Decrees,and without 
the Authority of the Church, are a Noſe of Wax, Paper, and Parch- 
ment, ſo that upon the whole, as Fobr's Diſciples asked concerning 
Chriſt, Art thou he that ſhould come, or muſt we Jook for another ; ſo may 
we not ſay to the Pope concerning Antichriſt ? Art thou he, Tc, I 
wil! ſpeak boldly, either there is no Antichriſt, or the Biſhop of Rome 
is he, Chamter, 1. 16, C. 8. 

5 Remember you not, that when I was with you, I cold 


you theſe things z. 

7 The \\ - file facitly upbraids them for their forgetfulneſs, To for: 
get the thinz< that have been taught us, is a great evil : Solomon often 
cautions againft it, Prov. 3. 1, 4, $. and it is often reproved, 5.12.5, 
Fam, 1, 24. and the contrary required, Mal. 4. 4. Fob. 16, 4. Fuds 17. 
Rev. 2. 3. David hid the wordin his heart, P/al. 119. 11. and the Vir- 
gin Mary kept the Angels ſaying, Luk, 2. 19, the Apoftles did take 
care to tell the Churches of the Apoſtacy that would come,and of falſe 

rophets and Teachers that would ariſe, as Paul the Elders of Epheſus, 
As 20, 29, 30. and Peter 2 Per. 2, 1, and St. Fokn of the coming of 
Antichriſt, x Fohn 2, 13, and more fully, though obſcurely in the 
Book of the Revelation, and the Apoſtle here in this verſe minds theſe 
Theſſalonians that he told th>m of the coming of the Man of itn before 
the coming of Chrift, i that they ſhould not have been ſhaken in their 
minds about Chrift's coming in that preſent Age. And they told the 
Churches of theſe things that they might not be ſurpriſed by them, or 
offended at them when they came. 


| Or,k4- 6 And now ye know what || withholdeth a, that he 


*IÞ, might be revealed in his time b. 

2 The Apoſtle it ſeems had told them as of his coming, fo of what at 
preſent withheld the revealing of him, And what this was, is difficult 
to -now now, though it ſeems theſe Theſſalonians knew it, there are 
niany conjeQures about it, This I ſhall ſay in general, 1, It was ſoime- 
thing that the Apoſtle thought not ſafe openly to declare in Writing : 
elſe te would not have «vrit of it ſo obſcurely. 2. It was both a thing, 
and 2 perſon, a thing, 73 z«723ev, in this verſe, that which withbolderb; 
and a perſon, as in the next verie, 6 xa7#0y, be which letteth, 3, Tt 
was 21ſo ſuch a thing and ſuch a perſon as were to be removed out of 
the way, not totally, but as they were hindrances of this revelation, 
Expofitors both Popith and Proteſtant pitch upon the Koman Eimperour 
andEmpireas moſt probably meant here h7 theApoitle, And therefore he 
virote not plainly, Icft by writing of the taking away that Empire which 
theRomans thought to be cternal,he might ſtir up their hatred againſt 
the Chriſtians, Some underſtand it of the removing only the ſeat of the 
Empcerour from Rome to Conſtantinople,whereby the Biſhop of Rome had 
opportunity to grow up into greater power. The Popiſh Writers un- 
derſant it of the total deftruttion of the Empire, which becauſe they ſec 
act yet denethey concluce the Man of fin is not yet revealed.Our Pro- 
teſtantW riters underitand it only of{uch a weakening of the Empire and 
Imperial Dominion, as gave the Biſho p and Clergy of Kome adyantage | 


IL THESSALONIANS. 


to riſe up into power both ſpiritual and ſecular ; as ſome learned \;.. 
ters have given an account thereof, W hen the Empire was broken nro 
ten Kingdoms, the Imperial Power of the Emperours was mich weat;. 
ncd : and being afterwards united in the Pope 25 an Eccleſiaffica Mo- 
narch he grew up, and the Imverial power declined, the grandeur of 
them both could not ſtand together, And this is the Beaſt with the ten 
Horns, and ten crowns upon the Horns which is ſpoken of, Rev.to,r 
whereupon this Beaft ts worſhipped, and the voice is, who zs like LG 
te beaſt, who 1s able ts make War with bim ? ver, 4. ſome of the ancient 
Fathers had this ſenſe of the Text, See Term, 1. 4 de reſurre@, c. 24 
Chry/oft, in locum, ug. de Civ, Dei, 1. 19.c. 20. Ferom when he hea-4 
of the taking of Rome by Alariczs, expected the coming of Anticly ilk 
not far off, Whercupon the ancient Church did pray that the Roman 
Empire might continue long,that his coming might be delayed, Ter: 
Apol.c. 32. 39. but it is now evident how it is faln from what onc- i+ 
was. The Eaſtern part is under the dominion of the Turk, The Ws. 
ſtern divided into ten diftin&t Kingdoms under diftin& Government, 
And in Germaxy where it is moſt remaining, the Empire is little more 
than Titular, And 7raly and Rome wholly in the Pope's Poſſeſſion : and 
hence this man of fin hath heen long ſince revealed. 6 As God appoints 
ſeaſons tor all his works,ſo for the revealing of him,as alſo tor his ruine, 
7 For the myſtery of iniquity doth already work c, on- 
ly he who now letteth will let until he be taken out of the 
way d. 

c The way was prepared by degrees for the man of ſin, before h= 
came attually to be revealed, or conſtituted in his compleat exiſtence, 
And this was by the working cf the myſtery of iniquity, A Myſtery i 
ſomething in general which is abſtruſe, intricate,and not eaſily diſcern. 
ed, And there are myſteries in Dodrine, and in Prattice ; and there 
are myſteries of Godlineſs, and myfteries of Iniquity , myſteries of the 
Kingdom of God, and the Devil's Kingdom. So there are the deen 
things of.God, 1 Cor, 2, 10, and the depths of Satan, Kev. 2. 24, the 
myſtery ufhering in the man of fin is a myſtery of iniquity. It is no: 
open finand wickedneſs; but difſembled piety, ſpecious errors, wicked- 
nels under a form of Godlineſs cunningly managed that is here meant, 
See the Book called The myſtery of Fejurti/om;, or, The 1 rgvincial Lt 
ters, Andit is a myſtery that worketh ; it doth exert and put forth it 
ſelf, but ſecretly, as a Mole which worketh under gruund, And its 
working 1s not againſt the Being, Providence, and Atrributes of God, 
or natural Religion; but to undermine Chriſtianity in the peculiar Do- 
ctrines, Worſhip, and Prattice of it. In Do&rines are brought in pri- 
vily damnable Hereſies, 2 Pet. 2, 1. In Worſhip, inventions and com- 
mandments of Men, under pretences of greater reverence, devotion 
and humility, Co, 2, 23. In practice, diſpenſations to moral impictic3 
under colour of {cryice to the Catholick Church. And this myſtery, 
faith our Apoſtle, already worketb: In the falſe Dottrines of the falle 
Teachers of his time, in the Traditions, and Inventions of men 99trud- 
ing themſelves into the worſhip of God in his time,in the afe&ation of 
pre-eminence in the Church in his time, and making merchandife of 
[the Goſpel in his time, and gain Godline(s: And in mingling Philoſ- 
| Phical notions with the ſimplicity of the Goſpel, and gratifying the 
fleſh under a form of Godlineſs, ard pretence of Goſpel liberty, An! 
it was not among the Heathen, or the Jews, but among the Profefors 
of Chriſtianity that this myſtery was then working, as I ſunpole the 
Apoſtle meaneth, - And when the man of Sin was fully revealca, a!! 
theſe corruptions did centre in him, as finks in the comman ſhore: t1.- 
lefſer Antichriſts in the great Antichriſt, 4 The Ilolatrics and Perſc 
tions of the Heathen Emperours muſt be taken out of the way to mak? 
way for thoſe that ariſe under a Chriftiin ar rather Anti-chriftian State, 
the Dragon giving his Seat, Spirit, and Power to the Beaſt, And the 
Power that was in the Roman Emperour,whetherHeathen or Chriſtian, 
muſt be taken out of rhe way to make room for the Exaltion of this 
man of oin., For notwit:ftanding all corruptions in Do&rine, Worſhip 
or Practice, which might he introduced before, yet he is not fully re- 
vealed till he hath his juriſdiction and ſecular power alſo in his han!, 
And then this Myſtery of Iniquicy is arrived to its height; which 
St. Fobn ſaw written in the forchead of the Great Whore, &e, L7. 5o 
Myſtery, Babylon the great, &c, and which ſome have ſaid, was written 
anciently in the Pope's Mitre, 

8 And then ſhall that wicked be revealed e; whomthe 
Lord ſhall conſume f with the ſpirit of his mout yg, and 
ſhall deſtroy b with the brightneſs of his coming '; _ 

e This revealing I think differs from that mention'd before, v7/2 3» 
he is firſt reyealed as I ſaid, quoad exiſtentiam, when he comes forth in- 
to being, and then quoad apparentiam, when he comes to be 41/03/2704, 
And this I ſuppoſe is meant here, becauſe his deftruftion is mentioned 


as following upon it. For the diſcoycring of him is the firſt ſtep to 11s 
ruine, and here is called by another name. At his firſt riſing he 1s 4 
man of fin ; but after he hath violated the Laws of God, and tt: Law's 
of Chriſt, by ſetting up his own, he is well called dy2uG, 14: & 1?! 
One, and now he that pretended ſo highly for Chrift, is dilcovered f0 be 
Anti-chrift, The myſtery of Iniquity that before lay hid, comes 0 be 
revealed, God enlightning the eyes of many learned Minifters and 
Princes, yea and of multitudes of people herein ; the <criptures be- 
fore ſhut up in an unknown tongue being now tranſlated t9 fe under- 
ſtanding of the common people, thoſe that were made drunk We eee 
wine of her Fornication, Kev. 1 7. 2, now put away their Wine from 
them, as Eli ſaid to Zannah, And the Kings and Kingdoms cha: "Ibn 
their power to the Beaft, now come to hate the Whore, &c £11& Tine 
being come for the fulfilling the words of God herein, 17+ 17 And 
this Revelation is fignified and foretold when the Angel ſaid fo Fo, J 
will tell thee the myſtery of the woman and the beaſl that carrieth her, H\ZVs 
I 7.7. There is need of a divine Revelation to know the 1M) wy bo 
iniquity,as well as the myſtery of godlineſs. And theWom?! 1 the fame 
with the man of fin mentioned before, once the Spou's Of © i1ts, aur 
now by her Idolatry becomes a whore, and divorced fron it. 0! thy 
be allo that Great City which reigneth over the Kings of th: For ! by ns 
laſt ; by the underftanding theſe things this wicked ONE CONe> t0-De Te 
vealed, f Which is nor done all at once ; his con{umption g04s Og j 
his deftruttion, As Fezabel the Prophetefs wi educed the SET\ pgs 
God to commit fornication, is ſaid to'be cait 11:0 a bed of lang lNNgy 


1 ——— 111Ys 
Rev. 2. 22, as he 10ſe up by degrees, ſo ſhall he be confunec. g! ail. 4 


. . a we. dio od 
His power declines by degrees both Civil and &CCICUAIUC:, Ge 
4 tb 44s + 


Chap. 1. 


k\ Sas. 


Fn Y 


Q Any = 49 = © kw we 9) 


) I hap. IT. 


anthority he had got both in, and over the Conſciences of men. The | of Satan. 


IL THESSALONIANS 


Tt in the firſt ſenſe, it ſhews by what Spiric the Anti-chri- 


. 


ren Vials are the ſeven laſt plagues which do gradually conſume him ;| ftian Church was firſt formed, and by which it i5 Xilt in forme4 ans 


and this is faid to be done by the Lord himſelf, which is the Lord Jelus. | acted, 


As in Natural Bodies the matter is formed and informed by 


He that made war wich the Lamd is overcome by the Lamb, Rev. 17. theSpirit within ir, The trae Church hath the Holy Spirit that forr:; 


| > a. 


11. thouzh many inſtruments may be imployed herein ; for ne is (aid it into a Spiricual Temple, Eph, 2, ulr, The falſe Church hath the 5pi- 
to have thofe with him who are ca/-4,choſen,and fatrbful, ibid, and it be-] rit of tne Devil forming it into the Synagoruc: of Satan, Rev, 2, The 


2 


lonzs to him,as all power of Keaven and Earth is given to him,to fave | Dragon is {aid to give the Beaſt his Seat, Puwer, and Great Authorit';, 


his people, and to deſtroy his Aaverlaries as it's ſaid of him, Pal. 97. 


Kev, 13, 2, And this Dragon is the Devil in the Heathen Empire,wio 


2. 4 fire greth before him, and burneth up kis enemies round about, As he | being, caſt out of his Seat and Power when the Emperour became Chri- 
is a refreſhing, direfing light to his people, ſo a conſuming fire to his | ſtian, founded the Anti-chriftian Church, and here exerciſed that Pow- 


_ 
4- 


Adverfaries, The ſtone cut out of the Mountain without hands, D., | er and Authority which he did formerly in the Imperial Seat of the 


! 


2.24. lmites the Imape in the time of the fourth Monarchy when Chritt} Heathen Emperours, whence we may fee whence all that furious Zea!, 
caine into the World, and in the latter end of it under the Antt-chrt- I anil EBloudy Craelties appearing 1n the Popilt Church do ſ{yring, not- 
ſtian ſtate it is broken in pieces. g As was propheficd of him,-7/a.. 11. withitanding all their outward ihes's of Devotion. If we take the 
4. with the breath of his mour* be ſhal! flay the wicked, even this wicked words in the latter Senſe, then }:is coming is 1tke the working of Sa- 
on? here in the Text, Kev. 18. $,and 19, 15. And this as ſome in-|tan either with great Power and Energy, as the Word imports. The 
terpret h< {hall do wich eaſe as by a word ſpeaking. Or by a word of Greez word is often uſed in a good lenſe ; tor God's workin i:1 
command, ſaying, let it be done, and it ſhall be done. -Or as we may|the Heart, Phzl, 2, 13. for the working of the Word, 1 Theſe 2. 15. 


read it, with the Spirit of his lips, becaule of the power or ſpirit that 


tor the working of the Heart in Prayer, Fames 5. 17, or by the ſame 


goes along with his word. But this breath of Chriſt's mouth Cajerane | methods, by Pretences of Piety and Devotion, as Satan transforms 
and others underftand of the word of the Goſpel, which is the breath of | himſelf into an Angel of Light ; or by keeping Men in Blindneſs and 
Chritt's mouth in the mouths of his Miniſters,calld the Everlaſting Goſ-| 13norance, ſo doth Satan by ſetting before Men ſecular Grandeur, and 
pel, Rev. 14. 6, which an Angel flying through the midft of Heaven is | the Pomp of the World ; as thus Satan dealt with our Saviour, 51.7, 4, 


-. 


ſ1id to have, to preach to them that dwell upon the Earth 3 and then] or by ſuggeſting Lyes inſtead of Truth, fo he dealt with our fri} 
followed by another Angel, ſaying, B15ylon is faln, is faln, verſ. 8. the | Parents, and is called a Lyar from the beginning, m *Ey may Juys#- 


£259 


myitery of iniquity will be unvailed by the clear preaching of the word 3 | p4zz. Beſides the Energy of Satan that works inwardly in this man of 
and the primitive pure inſtiturions of Chriſt, and Do&trines of the Goſ: | tin, which was mentioned before ; he hath outward firength or power 
pe] will be vindicated from the Anti-chriftian corruptions and innova-| wherein he comes, which may be here meant, He hath the ſecular 
tions, And the Spirit of Chriſt going forth with the Goſpel will make | power to aſſiſt him, the Kings of the Earth giving their power to 
it effetual hereunto. Theſe are the rod of his ſtrzngth whereby he rules | the Beaſt z and we read of ten Horns upon his Head, which are the 
in the midſt of his Enemies, Tſal. 110. 2. And whereby he ſhall conſume | Emblems of Strength and power, Rev. 13. 1. whereupon it's ſaid ; !/ho 
thiz man of tin. Nations and People will fall off from him as they come | zs 1ike unto the Beaſt, who is able to make War with him, ver. 4. 1 Som? 
to-underftand the truth by the word Preached. b After his conſuming | by the Figure called Zendyadis read it ; by the power of figns and lying 
follows his deftruQtion, x#Ja:q454, the word deſtroy here ſignifies to | wonders z but not properly. Obſerve how Satan . is God's Ape, God 
aboliſh, enervate, to mate of no force, and fo uſed often in the New | confirmed the Goſpel with Sizns and Wonders, Rom. 25, 19. Heb. 2.4. 
Teſtament. Sometimes applyed to the Law, Kom., 3. 31. ſometimes to | God bearing them wimeſs with ſigns and wonders, &c, and Satan brings 
the body of fin, Rom. 6. 6. ſometimes to perſons to whom Chriſt will this man of fin into the World in the ſame manner ; God did it to 
not be effetual, Gal. 5. 4. here to. the Man of fin, ſo that whatever | confirm the truth, but Satan to countenance a falſehood ; But thougi: 
remains there may be of him in the World, they ſhall be without any j he comes with ſigns and wonders, yet not properly with miracles, as 
efficacy or power. His juriſliftion ſhall be aboliſht, his keys ſhall not | the Greek word is rendred in#eb. 2, becauſe thongh the Devil can work 
be able to open or ſhut, the edge of both his Swords ſhall be quite | the one, he cannot the other : He can by his great natural Knowiedze 
blunted, his tripple Crown ſhall fall off his head, his purgatory Fire | and Experience improve natural cauſ.,s to their utinoft, but he cannot 
ſhall he pur out, his lmages ſhall loſe their veneration, the ſpell of the cect things above all poſhbility of Nature, which i the ſame Power 
Cro(s ſhall be dereQed, the interceſſion of Saints ſhall be found to be a | of Creating : The Schootmen give their diftinion between wonders and 
fiction, infallibility ſhall be found to be a deceit, Supremacy of the | miracles, which is not needful here to inſert ; All Mirac! + are Won= 
Church jhall fall co the ground, the Rivers of his large Revenucs [hall | ders, but all Wonders are not Miraeles z and yet are eſteemed miracles 
be dryed up, &c. and the Beaſt thar was and is not, and yet is, ſhall now | when their cauſe is not known. The Romiſh Legends are full of to- 
utterly ceaſe to be, 7 The breath of his mouth wafted him, and he] ries of miracles wrought to confirm their falle Dott: ines of Purgatory, 
brighireſnof this coming deftroys him.Some interpret this of Chriſt's Per-| of Reliques, invocation of Saints, Gc. which might be wonders rca!ly 


ſonal coming to judgment, which will be with great brightneſs, as Mar, 


wrought by the Devil ; ſuch as were wrought by Fannes and Fainvres 


24. 27, As the lightning comirg out of the Eaſt, and ſhineth 10 the Weſt, ſo | in Egypt, and by Simon Magus, and Apolonius Tyaneus, 8&c, who ulel 


ſhall the contre of the Son of man be, Coming in'the glory of Heaven, 


Magick Arts, and the People not knowing them in their cauſes, might 


and eyery Eye ſhall ſee him ; and of this coming he ſpake, 1 Theſ.4. and [judge them miracles. And being wrought for ſuch ends, are termed 
in this chapter alſo, as that which was not ſo near at hand as ſome i- {/ig75, for a ſign is any thing that is uſed to make fignification, whether 
magined, And without queſtion this coming will deftroy him, if not it be a Natural, or Artificial ; an Ordinary, or Extraordinary fign, u- 
deftroyed before, as well as the reſt of the wicked, Chap. 1. 9, but whe- | [ed either for a good end, as thoſe ſhewn by Chrift and the ApcRtles, 
ther judgment may not. firſt proceed againſt the Anti-chrijtian ftate, | or for a bad end, as thole uſed by this man of fin. People are apt to 
and tnole that have ſin'd under the Golpel, is a queſtion, It is ſome- | be attefted with figns. The Fews, faith the Apoltle, Jeet after a fig, 
times mentioned particularly with reſpe& to them. As in the parable | 1Cor, 1, 22. as they oiten defired Chriſt to ſhew them a tign,and there- 
of the Tares and Wheat, Mar, 13, of the ten Virgins, Mar. 25. and the | fore this man of fin comes with fizns. Some ſigns are only for repre- 
Talents. And the Pcaſt and falſe Prophet are caſt into the Lake of fire, | ſentation, as the ſign of the Croſs, and the Images of Chrift, an! of 


Rev. 19. 20, betore the General Judgment mentioned, Rev, 20. 12. ſ0 


his Death and Reſurrettion, &c, and he comes in theſe : Others are tor 


that at Chriſt's perſonal coming, his judgment will,as ſome conceive,be- [confirmation, which are either real Miracles, or ſuch as fecm to ; an 


gin here, and then procecd to the reft of the World ; whereupon many 


he comes in theſe latter alſo,which are here called 7zgg)]z l:uSs, !ying 


align ſome great length of time to Chriſt's ſtay upon Earth, and judg- | wonders, or, wonders of a ye, Heb, Though the Greee word is oft utc: 
ing the Worid. Others take the briohtneſs of this coming in a ſpiritual | for a real miracle, yet not fo herez for miracles are the ettetts of 3 
ſenſe, for aclearer manifeſtation of Chrift in the World. As the King- | Divine Power only, Kom. 15, 19, Heb. 2. 4; and not Diabolical. An 
dom of Antichriſt, or of this Man of fin is founded in darkneſs, ſo the | call'd lying-wonders, either becauſe they are uſed to confirm a Lye, or 
brightneſs of this coming will deſpel and deftroy it; with reſpect to his | becauſe they are not real, but feigned Wonders ; Impolſters to clicat 


Eternal Generation, Chriſt is ſaid to be the brightneſs of his Father's 


the People, and make them wonder ; whereof we have account in Gre- 


Glory, Heb, 1,2, but this is a brightneſs with reſpect to men. And |gortes Dialogues, and in Paulus Dzaconus, and others, aud yet ſuch mi- 


though he hath come in his Spirit to enlighten his Church from the 
beginning of the World, and more eminently after his Aſcenſion, yet 


racles as theſe the Papitts boaſt of as marks of their Church to be true, 
though they are here by the Apoftle made the marics of the man of 


this will exceed all the former, and is peculiarly ftiled the brighrmeſs of | fig. And Chrift foretels of falſe Prophets that thoutd ſhew grear 
bis coming : and ſo they expett this deftruttion of this man of ſin be- | /zg715, and wonders, to deceive, if poſſible, che very Elect, Mar, 24. 
fore Chrift's coming to Judgment, for if it be the ſame wich the fall of | 24. See Deut, 13, I, Rev. 13, 13, 14, : | 
Baby/on, mentioned in the Revelation ; many things are to be done 10 And with all deceivableneſs of unrizhteoutſnels o l 1 Or 
here upon Earth after that, before Chrift's laſt coming, and they men- | ;q, * them | that periſh p, becauſe they received not the mg. : 


tion the calling of the Jews,the deſtru@ion of thoſe Enemies called Gog love of the truth q that they might be ſaved 7: | 
o Or, deceit of unrighteouſneſs, unrighteous deceit, or, deceitful ** 75 & 
unrighteouſneſs, 
naged with great ſubtilty to deceive : And ſo the ſame with the my- 
ſtery of iniquity mentioned before, or the myſtery of unrighteoutne!s, 
as we may read it, All fin is unrighteouſneſs, whether againſt God 
or man, as all yertue is comprehended in righteoutneis, '1 he \poitle 
here means unrighteouſneſs ſo cloaked and covered, that men di/- 
cern it not, but are deceived by it. As the 7harijees who devours:! 
Widows Houſes, and for pretence ger ng. FTAyC'S, Ani! fo alfy 
© ] [ - - hey tithed Mint and Cummin as exattly religious, built the Se- 
wy f5 w—_ = —_ S— [a _ Worn "oe: of the Prophets, made broad ike Philacteries, would not 
1. Of Satan 1, with all power 9, and * figns, and lying | «x: with unwaſhen hands, &:. The like wefind in the Church of 
| wonders i Rome, as I mention'd before, where Nien arc ambitious, COVELOUS, 
& The Apoſtle {till continues his Diſcourſe about this man of fin, He | cruel, ſuperſtitious, &c. and all under a pretence ot rightcoul neſs, and 

had declared whence he aroſe, and to what height cf Power, and the for honour to Chriſt, and the Church, 1.ake ule of 5 cte?”s Keys to 
open rich Mens Cofters ; and for a ſum of bioney to abſoive men in 


fo it, and alſo his deftruftion, with the means of it. But he thought | this World, or to redeem them out of Purgatory in the other Wor ; 
which is a meer cheat, &c, Thus comes this Man of fin, and by Ju; 


and Migop, the coming down of the new Feruſai/em from Heaven,which 
is ſome glorious ſtate of the Church here upon Earth, However the 
Apoſtle here mentions nothing of a deftruttion by the Material Sword ; 
what Princes may do- of different Religions upon a Civil account, I do 
not know, but as this man of fin roſe out of the Apoſtaſie of the Church, 
ſo he will not be conſumed, and deſtroyed, but by a return from it, 
which is done by the breath of Chriſt's mouth, and the brightneſs of his 
coming, But yet by ſome Inftruments or other, God will avenge the 
blood of his Servants upon this man of fin in the time and way appoin- 
ted of him. 


manner and place of his exerciſing it, and what opened him the way 


It needful to explain particularly the manner of his riſing into all 


this power, and preſcrving himſelf in it, and the perſons over whom | ways he hath advanced himſelf, p This ſhe 


And it is univerſal, A! ; It is unrighteouſne's ma- 4» 5* 


L, 
is 


ws who they are that are 


py . , by . . . . . . b- > p » 1 (*- > T4 P { v4 nN x 
he doth exerciſe it. 1 Kar #yteyeay Chriſt's coming is in Power, and| deceived by him. Reprobates are often lo deicribed, 2 © or. 2, 17. 
C . . . . . . -- of" .* o ® & bad . { ""M ' -, = c 4-0 1 - 
{d is his : Chriſt comes with the Spirit of God, and his is with a Spirit | 2 Cor. 4. 3 and it is the ſame as elſe-where ſignifies damnation. 


allo, but it is of Satan: And the 5pirit of God worketh with Chrift 
in his coming, and the Spirit of 2atan with the man of fin in his 
coming 


eþ | 


| 


þ 


The word fignifies, men that ar: loft, fo uled Marth, 18. 11. 0r, dceftroy- 
ed, 2 Cor. 4. 9, They are ſuch as have net their Names written 18 tne 

. . p* . . . 8 . FA . . A de Tg v3 4 1} a» VR9 —"_ 
which implies either the principle of this working in his| Book of Life,Kev.1 3.8. And who ſhall drink ot the Wine of the Wrath 
ming, it is the Devil, or the ſimilitude of it ; it is like the working | of God,and the fmoak of their torment alcendeth for eyer,fzv, 14-22;11- 


, 
o 


q 2m 


Chap. II- 


[ 


[' 
| 


A. 


_ 


* 2U Or. 


Chap. Il. 


| Or, judge 


C4s 


4 And the Apoſile gives the Reaſon why they are thus dece'ved, He 


faith ot, th - bad por received the Fruth, but the love of 7t, and ſo 
Þold it not faſtbrr arc carricd away with the general Apoſtaſte ; TI rut? 


i erhoy Newur ty ualich they Hoattien bad, and detain'd in Bnrighteou!- 
Fer. Rom. 1s 15, on Finernatiral from Divine Revelation. T his 15 
mean, for be fronle notor heathes, but Chriſtians ; not the World, 
Bat the Choph, rn Andihe Truth here meant is Saving Truth, as the 
Bo 5 is 9701 te Tor { of Tritth, "Eb. 1.12, Col. 1. 5. FOC had 


9 Lore, they mipht Fave ben ſed $ but for want of 
- fo that ir 1s uniatind notional Proferiors that are Car- 


5 . l - 4 { 2 {7 
T v9 Bo Wo v : 5 I IL L1l,:15 ' 


wy hy the > Þn of Sin, and deceived by him. Truth, it it be not 
eccival inioibe Heap as wel as the Herd, ic will not ſecure againft 
Arora”, or DERCIV. 20k Prevertt periſhing. And rhe amiableneſls 
that i in Gol rrohs calls for Loves the certainty of its Revelation 


calls for 1 aith, ard had chey © received the Truth, they might have 
C11 LIV Cs 

$i Aud for this cauſe God ſhall ſend them || ſtrong 
fond s, that they ſbovuld believea lie fe, 

4 Ve hae accent ir. the former Verſe of ſuch as aredeceived by the 
Man of Sin, of heir fin, and liere of their puniſhment. They were 
1 tgeluded which: was their ting and God ſends them ſtrong Deluſion, 
25: trot is their punithment. They did not receive the Truth in the 
Love Of it. which was. their in, and therefore are given up to believe 
3 Lic, which is their puniſhment. Had they received the 1 ruth aright, 
they min have been ſave:! 3 but not receiving it, they are damned, 
And they were faid to be fach as Periſh,and their periſhing is here cal- 
Ie! Da;artion. So that thoagh God is not the Author of fin, or falle- 
tot, Dons 307 off author cujus eft ultor, Fulgent, yet he may in Juſtice 
give Meg up tothem, Which the Apoſtle here calls God's ſcrding, KC 
Wii 19POUS elcher, 1, 1radino, delivering Men to Satan to tempt, 
an deccive, 2. Dejertion, with-holding, or withl| awing that Grace 
thor might preſe:vethem, 3. A Judicial permiſſor, God purpoling 
rurto hinler *ien to fall into that Sin or Deluſions which he ſecth their 
gin Hearts incline them to, God concurs to Evil, not pyſerive, but 
arivorive g not ej112-rrer, but defictenter 5 Schoolmen, God in Scripture 
ts of:cn (aid to do that which he permits to be done, as in the caſe of 
Ferns ſelling, into Erypr, Gen. 45. 7. David's numbring the Peoptie, 
2 S277, 24, Is Compar'd with 1 Chron,21. 1. And the ten Kings giving 
thiir Power to the Beaſt, by God's putting It into their Hearts, Kev.17. 
17. And it is not a bare permiſſion ; for what evil God permits,he de- 
creed to permit it ; and he decrefd the circumſtances attending it, and 
the end to which he would order and diſpoſe it,and the degree to which 
i- ſhould break forth, They were deceived into Error, and God gave 
then! up to it,and it did work with great efficacy : Which either relates 
to the 3ian of Sin that did lead them ſtrongly into it, or to them that 
were led by him 3 when Error doth vitiate the Life, and one Error be- 
ets another, and makes Men violent againft the Truth, then 1t is the 
eilicacy of Error. And thus God doth jucicially punith Sin with Sin, 
and Delaſfion with Deluſion. And then they are always moſt operative, 
and moſt incurable. But Men fall not preſently under theſe Judicial 
as ; Men firft refuſe to ſee before God ſends Blindneſs, and firft har- 
den their own Hearts before God nardens them. Theſe in the Text 
firſt refuſed to receive the Truth before they were given up to believe 
a Lies ſce Rom, 1. 24. ſo that both God, and this Man of fin,and them- 
ſelves alſo, are concerned in thele Evils z but they finfully and unrigh- 
teoutly, but God juticially and in righteoufneſs, r And the Lie they 
were given up to believe, is a Dettrinal Lie ; falſe ſpeaking is a lie in 
words, Hypocrifie is a Lie in fatt, and Error is a Lie in Do&rin, #0, 
Ii. 12, it,5. 3, Some by {tz here, ſuppoſe is meant the lying Won- 
ders before mentioned, and this ſenſe need not be excluded , but I ra- 
ther mean it of felje Dutrive, as that which ſtands oppoſite to thc 
Truti before mentioned, and again mentioned in this Verſe, Some- 
times Idols ate called Lies, 1/2, 44. 20, ſometimes the things of the 
Wortd, 7/al. 4.2, ſymetimes the great Men of the World, 7ſal.62.9. 


» 
. 


Oc 


Il. THESSALONIANS. 


demn it, See. Prov, 10. 23, Rom, 1. Jaft, By Unrighteouſreſs, ſoma 
Expoſitors underſtand fa/ſe Do&rtn, or Error, becauſe it is ſet i Opro- 
fition here ro Truth, as Sin 1s ſet in oppoſton to it, Foh. $. 45, ang that 
the Apoſtle hath peculiar reference tv the corrupt Dottrines of Sins 
Magus ar the Nicolaitans, that gave liberty to the Lufts of the Eleh, 
But why not rath<r to the Dottrins of the Mar &f Sin, which he had 
been before [peaking of ? 1 rather take the word in the largeſt enſ- 
ſo all fin is unrighteouſneſs ; and the Apoſtle St. Fobn faith, All unrigþ. 
2ouſneſs is Sin, 1 Folm 5. 17, where unrighteouſneſs is expreſs'd by 
*Ayopia, a word which imports tranſgreſſon of the Law, as in thi; 
Textby *ANxia, a word which ſignifies Injuſtice. So that we ſee here 
an erroneous Mind, and a vicious Life going together, And when fin 
is come to this height, that Men take pleaſure in it, it makes them xr; 
for Damnation. And how well theſe things agree to the Anti-chriftian 
Church, let Men confider and judge, 

13 But we are bound to give thanks alway to Ged for 
you y, brethren, beloved of the Lord z,becauſe God hath 
from the beginning choſen you to ſalvation a, throngh 
ſanRification of the Spirit b, and belief of the Truth. 

» The Apoſtle here exempts theſe Theſſalonians, out of the numher g& 
thoſe Reprobates, that he had before ſpoken of, and ſpeaks of thoy 2; 
ſuch as ſhould be preſerved from Apoſtahie in Faith or PraQice, and . 
tain Salvation. And this he mentions for comfort to them, and with 
chankſgivings to God, He had often before given thanks for they: 
1 The/. 1, 2. and 2+ 12, and 3. 9. and in the former Chapter of this t1;. 
ſile,ver. 3, and both here and there mentions it as a Debt he was bcyr! 
unto, or a Duty he owed 3 we ought to give thanks, as in the Gre:!-, 
; And here he ſtiles them, not only Brethren, as often before, hut 74. 
loved of the Lord ; ſuch as have been, and are beloved, And therefor: 
not in the number of them that ſhould be damned, mentioned in th 
former verſe, a Which words are either to give the reaſon of the Ag. 
ſtles Thankſgivings,or rather are Arguments to evidence they were 
beloved of theLord.And he inſtanceth in theirEle&ion as a proof of it, 
There is an EleQion to Office, as David to be King, 2 Sam. 6, 21, an 
Fudas to be an Apoftle, 5 oh. 6. 70. and elettion to a viſible Charch; 
and means of Salvation 4 and thus the Seed of Abrahai were choſn, 
Deut, 26. 18, Pjal. 135. 4. and 147. 19, 20, and election to Saivation, 
as in the Text ; which is either that which follows Faith, as fore :n. 
derſtand that place, Mar, 22. 14. 0r rather that which goes before ir, 
ſaid here to be from the beginning ; not from the beginning of the Go- 
ſpel, as ſome ſay ; nor from the beginning of our Preaching ts you, cr 
of your effe&tual Calling, as others ſay ; no, nor yet is it mear: ron 
the beginning of the World, which was the beginning of the time ; or 
immediately upon Adam's Fall ; but by beginning is here meant irer- 
nity it ſelf, as Ele&ion, Eph. 1. 4. 1s ſaid to be from before the fon 
tion of the World, which is from Eternity, Though beginnins ſeems 
to relate to time, yet the Scriptures often expreſs Eternity by ſuch 
Wordsas rejate to time, As when God is called the Anci:n; if Diys, 
Dan, 9. 9. it ſignities his Eternity : And Fude ſpeaks of ſome that were 
of old ordained to condemnation, TIzAa& TEHYVEZMMELN, Goll's Etcre 
nal Decrees heing compared to a Book wherein Names are written 
Fude 4.W hen was their ordaining but from Eternity ? And it is EleGi- 
on to Salvation, compleat Salvation, which is here meant, in the full 
fruition of it ; not in the Title to it by Faith, or the firſt froits of it in 
SanCification, becauſe they are here mentioned as the means that 
tend to it, 5 Elettion is to the means as well as the end, as #pb, 1. 4 
Holineſs is not the cauſe of God's Eleciion, but God hath decreed it to 
be the way to Salvation z without hulineſs none ſpall ever ſoe the Lori, 
Heb, 12, 14, c And therefore thoſe were ſpoken of as Ferſons to he 
damned, who believed not the Truth in the former Verſe. And fits 
evident, EleQion is not upon the foreſight of Faith, it is throy-h it we 
have Salvation, but not Election. Bur of this before, x Fyi(i, 4, \nd 


. 4 
[1 


the Apoſtle joins Santtification and'Fzith together,for they are not and 


ſometimes falſe Divinations, Feb. 22, 28, Zech, 10, 2. ſometimes falſe 


cannot be put aſunder, Now by all this the Apoftle proves they were 
beloved of the Lord, He faw the fruits of El:ion in their Santtilicas 


propheiyings and predicuuns, F-7. 14. 14, 23, 25, 26. and ſome- [tion and belief of the Truth, thence concludes they were elcetcil, and 


times falie Dotrines, as 1 7m. 4. 2. where we read of jalſe Prophets, 
who ſhall ariſc in the laſt time, and /peak 1es 77 byjocrt/ie, &c. and falle 
Apoſtlcs are ſail to be Liars yon that account, Rev, 2, 2. and ſuch 
are many Popiſh Dottrines which the Apoſtle here probably refers to. 
What is Tranſubftantiation but a Lie ? Purgatory, Infallibility of the 
Church, Mediation of »aints, their opus operatum, &c, Men muſt be 
ſtrongly deluded to believe ſuch Dottrins, and it is mentioned as a 
great Judgmenr of Go upon them to believe ſuch Lies,as it is a great 
mercy to bclieve the 'Iruth,eſpecially if we conſider what follows upon 
It. 

12 That they all might be |] damned 4 , who believed 


cherefore loved. 
14 Whereunto he called yon by cur Goſpel 4, to the 


obtaining of the glory of our Lord ſeſvs Chrilt e, 


d Before the Apoſtle mentioned their Election, now their Calling, 


and are often in Scipture put together, &om. 8, 30. 2 Pet. x. 10. and 
are both applied to Chriſt himſelf, 1/2. 4.2. 1, 6, They are thoſe tiw9 
Soveraign Acts of God, prerequifice to a ſtate of Salvation, ile one 
eternal, the other in time ; the one immanent in God, the other tran- 
fient upon the Creature, and it is the firft tranſient ARthat flows fron 
_ And —_ there isan outward and inward Call mentioaci 
RI . in oCripture, we mult here underſtand the Apoſtle of both « For *F:s 9 
not the truth w, but had pleature In unrighteouſneſs X, | whereunto, or to which thing, mentioned in bag, beginning of this Veries 


u That they all might be damn. d, or condemned, The Greek is judged, | refers to all that he ſaid in the former Verſe, which is Salvation, Salt- 
but often tranſlated as in. the Text, the ſimple Verb being taken for the Aification, belief of the Truth, which they could not attain with a 
Compound 3-10 Fobz 3. 17. 1 Cor. 11,29, Fude 4. It's true, a Man{ meer outward call ; though they had thatalſo : For the Apoſtle men- 
may be judged and not condemned, but the judgment of the wicked is| tions here the Goſpel, which he calls or Goſpel, becauſe preached by 
condemnation z and damnation is here mentioned, either as the event,| them, and intruſted to them, though the Original of it is from God, 
or the effett of their Þclicving Lies,or as the purpoſe of God in ſending] and the matter of it from Jeſus Chriſt : And he puts them in mind 0s 
them ſtrong Deluſtons. They are firſt juſtly puniſhed with ſpiritual | the great mercy they had received in their preaching the Golpcl 10 
Judgment, and then eternal, and God is juſt in both, Whence we ſee| them, for thereby they were called into a ſtate of Salvation ; as allo of 
that rhere are ſome Errors in Judgment which are damnable. As we] the way wherein they are to obtain this Salvation, which is throuzh San- 
rea, 2 Pet, 2, 1. of damnable Herefies, or, Herefies of Deſtruttion ; | Qification of the Spirit, and the belief of the Truth, that they might be 
fuch are many ia the Kh Church ; and the Apoſtle ſpeaks of ſuch, | careful to perſevere both in Eaith and Holineſs, and not to expect 1 


C91, 2. 19. 797 bolaing the head, &c, not meant of a total rejeQion of| from the Law, or the $peculations of Philoſophy, which ſonic fall 


{» 
\- 


Chriſt, but of voluntary Humility, and worſhiping of Angels ming-| Teachers might ſuggeit ; for as Faith comes by hearing the Goty-l, 
led with the true Worſhip of the Goſpel ; and ſuch cannot be ſaved. | Kom, 10, I7. 10 it is that only which is the Power of Go to Salvation, 
w Where we havea farther deſcription of theſe Perſons who are to be | Rom. 1. 16. And by this he confirms to them alſo their Election, bC- 


damned, which is added by the Apoſtle either to clear God's Juſtice,as | cauſe they had been thus eff=&tually called by the Goſpel : For no man 
in ſending them ſtrong delutions to believe a Lie, ſo alſo in their con- | can conclude his Salvation from EleRion, if he hath not been alle tn! 3 


OQ 


demnation, or to aſſign the caule why they believed a Lie, is becauſe called, which is by feeling the power of the Goſpel in the Bcatr, and 
they believed nct the Truth, Thoſe will cafily be brought to believe yielding obedience to it in his Liſe, e What the Apoſtle before cali'd 
a Lie, who belicye not the Truth ; and the belief here mentioned is |Salvation, he here tiles the obtaining rhe Glory of our Lord 7</'ts 
that of auent, yet ſuch an afſent as is operative and practical, . which | Chriſt, Though in the 1 The/; 5. 9. he had there allo call=d it 1Eam- 
they had not ; For it was ſaid before, th: -y receved rotithe Truth in the |ing Salvation, and by the ſame Word here uſed in the Text : Yea, the 
love of it, x 2. Becauſe th:y bad pleaſure in unrighteouſweſs, Did not | Word merminorg here rendred obtaining, ſometimes figuufies ſalvation 


only prazti'e,but had great complacence and contentment of Mind in it, [it ſelf, eb, 10. laſt, and which is equivalent, the purchaſed py 


TY" It* 
1111577, 


as the Greek word impores, and ſo had rather believe a falſe Dottrin, | Eph, 1. 14. and it may fignifie in the Text, the obtaining the £.07V = 


Which will countenance their Practice, than the Truth which doth con- 


C hit 


Chap, 11 


A Foo! , ke wand D&O > 12 4ixa. 0. ___ 


ww 1 4 A 6©1 a+ 


hap. IT. 


Þ. ll Cirift in a way of purchaſe, as alſo by diligent endeavours after it, b 
way of Acquiſicion, as the word ſeems to 11gaifte, And by the Glors 
of Cirift is not meant the Glory we give to him, as ſome would ftrain 
the Words to that ſ:nce, but rather the Glory we {hall receive from: 
him, which is the ſame which the Father hath given to him, and which 
he hath given to his People, F-2in 17.22, whereby they are Co-heirs 
with him, Kam. 8. 17. And fo the Apoſtle fets forth the greatne(s of 
this Salvation, to. which theſe Bejievers were called, it 1s to the obtain- 
ing the ſame Glory with Chrift,in kind at leaſt ; and ſhews their diffe- 
| rent Rate from thoſe that periſh, and will be damned,mentioned in the 
former Verſes, Or if we read the words, Ze are called 19 be a peculiar 
Teople, as the Greet word is ſo rendred, 1 er. 2. 9. Azis 65s Wtumi- 
yo, a peculiar People, and underftand by the Glory of Chriſt, that 
Glory of his Grace he hath manifefted herein z it fhews alſo how God 

hath dGiftinguiſhr them from thoſe before-mentioned, 
0, kd 15 Therefore, brethren, ſtand faſt f, and || hold the 
þ * traditions which ye have been taught g£, whether by 

7% word or our epiſtle þ, | 

*4*2* f The former Verſes contained Conſolatien,this is an Exhortation : 
The Apoſtle had aſſured them of their being eletted and called, yet ex- 
horts them to their Duty. Aſſurance of Salvation doth not encourage 
negligence ; the Apoſtle takes this Argument from thence to quicken 
them, Therefore, &c, And that which he exhorts them to, is, 1. To 
| ſand faft, a Miiitary Word, ſpeaking as a Captain to his Soldiers; ſo 
| 1 Cor. 16. 12, Eph. 6.14, having before foretold a great Apoftaſte that 
| | would come: Or becauſe he had told them of the great Glory they had 
been called to the obtaining of by theGoſpel: He exhorts them to ftand 
faſt, which implies a firm perſwaſjon of Mind, and conftant purpole of 
Will ; and ftands oppofite to Hetitation and Deſpondency. 2. 70 hold 
the rraditions which th:y ha4 been raught, g The word 1ra47tiof figni- 
fies any thing delivered to another ; eſpecially meant of Doctrines, 
The Phariſees Dottrine is called Traditions, Mar. 15. 3. And fo the 
true Dottrines of cheGoſpel, being ſuch as the Apoſtles delivered to the 
people : as the Doctrine of the Lord's Supper is ſaid to be delivered, 
rt Cor,11, 22, -and lo K9m, 6, 13, bþ By word of mouth in publick 
| | preaching, or private Inſtruction, The Apoſtie had both preached 
| | and written to theſe Theſſalonizns, before he wrote this ſecond Epiſtle, 
| And that the Papifts ſhould hence infer, that there are matters of ne- 
; ceſiary Conlequer.ce in Religion, not contained in the Scriptures, is 
| without ground : Theſe they call Tradirions,fome whereofare concern- 
| inz Faith, others concerning Manners, others Ritual, with reſpett to 
, the Worſhip of God, or the external Polity of the Church. But who 
can aſſure us what theſe are ? What a Door is here opened to introduce 
what Men pleaſe into the Church, under pretence of Tradition ? Who 
are the Perſons the Apoſtle intruſted to keep theſe Traditions ? Why 
ſhould he not declare the whole Syſtem of Goſpel-truths he had re- 
ceived from Chriſt in writing, as well as part ? Why ſhould he conceal 
ſome things, when he wrote others ? And doth not the Apoſtle aſſure 
Timothy, that all Scripture is by inſpiration of God, and is profitable for 
2Arine, for r wo. for correFion, for inſtrution, that the man of God 
may be perfet, throughly furniſh'd unto all good works, 2 Tim, 3,16, 17, 
Whir need then Traditions ? And how can we know that they are by 
| D: inc Inſpiration, as we are aſſured all Scripture is, Our Saviour re- 
prove the | hari/zes about their Traditions, when from hence they 
would obſerve and impoſe Ceremonies of waſhing Hands, Cups and 
Platte.s, Matt 5,2, yea,and by them make the Commandments of God 
of nun- «ff<Q, which the Apoftle cautions the Coloſſians about, 01.2.8, 
an.! whereof Paul declares his Zeal before his Converſion, G1, 1, 14. 
an! we find men's Zeal fti!} more about them than Moral Duties, and 
expreſs Inſtitutions of God's Worſhip, All the Apoſtles Dottrine, 
whether by Word vr Epiſtle, he calls by the Name of Tradition in the 
Text here, and he commends the Corinthians, 1 Cor, 11, 2, That they 
kept th? Traditions delivered ro them, But were not they all committed 
\ to WV riting in ſome place or other of his Epiſtles ? and which were, 
an4 which were not, who can be certain? And why ſhould Traditions 
be confined only to thoſe things which the Apoſtle did not write? He | 
exhorts the Theſjalomians to hold the Traditions which they had been 
taught,wherher by word or EpiſtI-, And if they hold them with ſtrength, 

as the word is, by this means they would ſtand faſt. 


16 Now 4 our Lord Jeſus Chriſt himſelf k, and God 
| even our Father 1, which hath loved us mm, and given us 
everlaſting conſolation #, and good hope o, through 


Brace Þ. 

7 The Apoſtle here addeth Prayer to his Exhortation, the Word 
and Prayer are to £0 together, whether it be written or preached ; as 
| he told the Diſciples, 4s 6. 4, We will give our ſelves:to the Word and 
| Prayer, He had planted them a Church, but he knew God gives the 
| Increaſe, 1 Cor. 3. 6. k The perſons he prays to are here, firſt, our 

Lord Feſus Chriſt, which was a good Argument in Athanaſuus's time, 
for the Dignity of Chriſt againft the Arias, and fo it is ſtill, and now 
azainſt the Socinians: For God alone is the Ohjeat of Worſhip,and the 
Beftower of thoſe Gifts which he here prays for. Only the Apoſtle 
when he mentions Chriſt delights to mention him in his relation to his 
People, ſo he doth for the moſt part in all his Epiſtles, and ſo in this 
Text, He uſeth a Pronoun Poffeſhve,our,for it is relation and intereſt 
| which commendeth and ſweetneth any good to us. 7 And the other 
Perſon is God the Father, who is the ,Father of Lights, from whom 
cometh every good and perfe& Gift, Fames 1,17, and whom in his 
Prayer he mentions,together with Chrift ; becauſe no Acceſs can be to 
God, but through Chriſt ; and no good Gift deſcends to us, but 
| throuzh him. And fo God the Father is mentioned in his relation to 
his Peop's alſo, God even our Father ; and'when Chrift is ours, in him 
God is ours alſo. And the Apoſtle thus looking, and thus ſpeaking of 
Chriſt, and of God, ftrengthens his own, and their Faith, tor the ob- 
taining of the Gifrs he prays for. m Another Argument is from 
Go!'s Love 3 our Doubts in Prayer ariſe more from Unbelief in God's 
Will than his Power, which will vaniſh when we look upon him in his 
Love to us; for the nature of Love is vele bonum,to will good to whom 
we love, » Another is, from Gifts already received, which are firſt 
ever/aſting Conſolation, whereby it appears, that God's Love is commu- 
nicative, and that it is not common, but his ſpecial Love he ſpake of. 
Outward Comforts are common Gifts,but theſe the Apoſtle means not 
| here,b<caulc they are not everlaſting; they continue not beyond Death ; 


IL THESSALONIANS Chan. 177, 


£1 > 
| they hecin | $454 2.41 7 IT YO, A ESO . * - 1 e : 
Ney DEE In time and ena witn time, But t1734.onfolition neg 
. A : L. [] : k - E F : _ b- - £ 
rme, and abides to Ererni:y ; and this Mar, « : 
cannot g1Ve, nor we gtve it Our Ieclres, Cat fig nh ani newives 
: :hc "IRR ' - Nr wa | 
it to whom he loveth, 25 every BKian {els to cnnfort tilt whem: b 
4 - ] } f + YY3 , iis =. . I'S 
loves; and though tome whom Cad loves may not feel 131 - 0 1-161] 
_ 2 ; £ . WY" iC [| 1:4 y 
4 : . 77 G F | "Ss Y h - . F «<p, - ? z . 
yet they havea Rigit, ar God hath it in reſerve for them, Lis-s is 
” * * F - = _ 
2 F175BI2eONS. aitl oloduolc {iv efo hy ior fog 1515 | i" , 
'omn for the r13hteous, aid elaivers for the uviobe in boart, 11 9, 19% 


And though ſometimes it may he interrup cd where it is its ver not 
ſo as to be deſtroyed in its foundation, and to hinder its reca; n,citler 
in the Temporal or Eternai World, where it will be everlaſtin» + { 
chat as Gcd 1s called th? God of al! Grace, 1 Pet. 5, 10. fo the Ce of 2 
Comfort, 2 Cor. 1. 3. Ani by us in the Text he means theſe Thrlſulon;- 
ms, as well as himſelf ; for he had ſ»cken before of their Toy jn tl. 
Holy Ghoff, 1 Theſ. 1. 6, o And the other Gifc is, 299.1 Thop?. Hops, 


J 


as a natural affection, is the expettaiiun uf the Soul ; and the Objef of 
it 1s bonum fururum, arduum, pojſſvite ; Goo, future good, ditfcult, 
and poifible, But as a Grace, fo it is the x%peRation of the good things; 
Gocl hath promiſed, and not yet exhibited, And it's call'd pood 224pe 3 
good by way of eminency, with reſpect tothe JUdjes of it, which 
are eminently goo ; the certainty of it, it will nut make aſhant'd, 
Rom, 5.5, compar'd to an Anchor ſure and ſicdfiir, Heb, 6, 193, I he 
regularneſs of it z things promis'4 only, and as they are promis'd « elf 
it is Preſumption and not Hope. The Fruzrs of it ; Feace, Purity, In 
duftry, and Confolation allo, and therefore joined with it here in the 
rext: as the Apoſtle ſpeaks elſewhere of rej9yctng in bope, Rom. 5, 2.4% 
12.12. Z7eb, 2, 6, Or, as ſome, it's call'd good hope, with reſpet ro 
the degree they had attained of it in their Hearts, '1 hough titey 1124 
not yet the good things promiſed, yet they had good hope of enjoy 
ing them. And by this Epithet he diftinguiſheth this hope Hh om rhe 
carnal vain hope of the Men of the World, and the falfe hope of Hypo 
crites, Fob 8. 13, 17, 18, and them(fclves allo from the ftate tiey were 
in when Gentiles, without hope, Eph, 2. 12, and this alto is Gort's vir, 
as he is called the God of hope, Rom. 15. 123, not only as the Obje, bur. 
the Author of it. p And both theſe gitts are laid to be here rhr042h 
Grace ; forelſe we could have had no ground cicher of hope, or com- 
fort. Sin had ſhut up our way to both, it is only. Grace that hath 9- 
pened it tous What weenjoy at preſent, and what we hope to enjoy, 
is all through Grace. And from theſe Gifts already received the Apo- 
ſtle ſtrengchens his Faith about the other things he here prays tor, 
17 Comfort your hearts q, and * |tabliſh you in every * Thc. 
good word and work yr. | 'EY 
q Next, we have the things pray'd for, Comfort your Hearts, Though 
he ſaid before, who hath given us evelaſting conſolation. Either the A. 
poſtle means attual poſſcſkon of what God had givenTitrle to; or a con- 
tinued ſupply and encreaſe of comfort already received. And he prays 
for this either in reſpeR of the a{fittions they ſuffered,that they might 
not faint 3; or to enable them the better to {tand faft in the Faith, and 
not fall away as others, And fv it agrees with the next Petition for 
them. 7 The word of Truth is this good Word, Prov. 4.2. as the 
Goſpel is call'd, 2 Cor. 6. 7. And the Dottrins of it are are all good, 
1 7im, 4. 6, They are good for inſtruttion, for correftion, for reproof, 
for doetrine, 2 Tim, 3.16, All truth is an intelleual good, whether 
natural, or moral ; but Evangelical Truth is by way of eminence,zood : 
It isa good word which is a word of Salvation, As 13. 26. and to be 
eſtablithed in it, is firmly to bclieve it, and to hold it faft againſt ſedy- 
cing Opinions, or Perſecutions ; and by every good word he means all 
Divine 'Iruth, eſpecially the greater Truths ; not to hold ſome Truths, 
and let others go. And to word the Apoſtle adds work, that there 
may be an harmony betwixt Faith and Praetice, As the Dottrines of 
the Goſpel are true, ſo the Works they require are good, And £004 
Works are manifold; reſpecting God, our Neighbour, and our ſclves, 
A Chriſtian ſhould nor only practiſe them all, hur be cft2bliſh'd in them, 
which implies Conitancy, Perſeverance, and Reſolution. True Religi- 
on is not word only, but work ; it 15 not only ſpeculative, but practi- 
cal. A ſound Mind ought to he join'd with an Holy Litc. And. to make 
a work good, the principle, rule, manner and end muſt all be good, 


i AP. Dk 

He exhorts them topray for kim : teftifieth his Confidence in, and prayeth 
for them, 1 5. Commands them to withilraw from every Brother 
who walks diforderly s and every one, aft:r bis Example," to Iibour to 
maintain himſelf, 6 12, Not to be weary in doing good s and w mark 
thoſe who are tor obediens herein, 12 14. Hs Prayer for them: 
Salutation : and Apoſtolical Benedidion, 16 13, 


1 Inally /;, brethren, * pray for us f, that the word of Ow ih 
the Lord may have frce courſe uv, and be glorif- || Or, 747% 
ed w, even as zt is with you x. 


[The Apoſtle now draws towards the cloſe of his Epiſtle, as appears 
by the word Finally, which healſo uſeth in the cloſe of other Epi- 
ſtles, as 2 Cor. 13. 11. Eph. 6. 10. Phil. q. 8. 9 aormy. It imports 
the adding of ſomething that remains. # And that waich he firft ad 
deth, is the defire oftheir Prayers, as he had defired them in the for- 
mer Epiſtle, chap. 5. verſe 25, And lo of the other Churches, 2 C92. 
I. 11, Eph. 6, 19, H:b. 13. 15, &c, He had prayed for them in the 
foregoing Chapter, and now he begs their Prayers. It isa mur 21 D'1- 
ty, that Miniſters and People owe to one another ; thonzh the Avoſtiz 
gave himſelf to the Word, and prayer alo, Aets 6. 4. yet the prayers of 
many may be more prevalent than of one, though an Apoſtie : And 
they being concerned for the advancing of Chriſt's Intereſt im-the 
World, as they were Chriſtians, were therefo:e ingaged to pray for 
him. And the Apoſtle was ſenſible of the greatnels of the Work 
which was in his Hand,and his own Inſatticiency, without Gui ; therce= 
fore he deſires Prayer ; and it is of them whom he here calls B--thren 
he knew the Prayers of the Wicked and Unhelicvers woull avail no- 
thing 5; and though he was a great Apoſtle, yet the greateſt ki the 
Church may ftand in need of,and be helpeit by chePrayers of tte meaty 
eft Brethren. # And their Prayers he defices are, fit, with reſpect 5 
his Miniſtry ; That the Word of the Lord may have free equrſe, or, 1:4y 
run : that the courſe of it may nor be ſtopt, it being as a River of "t!:c 
Waterof Life. The Apofile was to teach all Nations, and fo dhe; 
the Word may pa from one Nation to another, yea, and rut 20w* 
from one Generation to another, that it may ſpread, and diftuie if 


i 


elf, and Diſciples might be multiplied. T his :s Galled the incr2u/irg of 
fy 


# 


©” , — 24 8 1. ey 
< £ ys . 
- ren rn ns een eee ee 


* Rom. 
BS. 3s 


j| Or, 4b- » Their Prayers are heredefired by the Apoſtle,with reſpe& to their 


/ ur de 


Chap. III. 


ir, Aﬀs 6. 7. The growing and multiplying of it, Ats 12, 24, The grow- 
ing and rrevailing of it, As 19, 20, Which Chriſt ſets forth by the 
Parable of the Muſtard-ſeed, which grew and ſpread,and of the Leaven 
that diffuſed its vertue in the Meal, Mar. 13731, 32,33. The Apoſtle 
referring, here to the external courſe of the word, rather than its in- 
ward efficacy in the Soul, as alſo Chrift ſeems chiefly to do in thoſe pa- 
rables. There are many things that hinder the courſe of the Goſpel, 
ſometimes wicked Rulers make Laws azainſt it, ſometimes great per- 
ſecutions have heen raiſed, ſometimes falſe Teachers oppole it, ſome- 
times Profeſſors prove Apoſtates, and ſcandalize the world againſt it 
ſomerimes reproaches are thrown in the way of it. And to the free 
courſe of it is required, on the contrary, a proviſion of ſuitable help 
herein, both of Magiſtracy and Miniſtry, and the beſtowing of the 
Spirit, and the bleſſing of endeavours uſed herein. All theſeare co be 
ray'd for,as the former to be pray'd againſt. wHe means that it might 
hve honour, reputation, and high efteem in the world, and not lye 
under reproach. As the Fews accounted it Herefie, and the Gentiles 
fooliſhnels : As it's ſaid of thoſe Gentiles, Ats 13, 48, they glorified the 
word of theLord,by their honourable reſpett to it,and joy In it: As alſo 
that it might produce glorious effetts in the World, in ſubduing people 
to God, and making men new creatures, and bringing them out of 
the Devil's into Chriſt's Kingdom, &:, That it may evidence it 
felf to be from Heaven, and the power of God to mens Salvation, 
and not an invention of man: To which we may add, that it may 
be honoured in the unblameable and exemplary walking of the Profeſ- 
forsof it. x The glorious ſucceſs of it with them, he had largely 
ſhewn before in both theſe Epiſtles 3 and he would have them pray for 
the like with others. Thoſe that have felt the power of the Goſpel 
themſelves to their Converſion and Salvation, ſhould pray that others 
may partake of it with them. Herein they ſhew their charity to men, 
and love to God, which the Apoſtle here puts them upon, as that which 
would be acceptable to God ; and the rather, becauſe their own experi- 
ence might teach them, what God was able to do for others. Or elſe 
the Apoſtle in theſe words ſets forth theſe Theſſalontans, as a pattern of 
the mighty ſaccels ofthe word 2 It had its free courſe,and was glorified 
among them, They received it as the word of God, and not of men. 
As if the Apoſtle ſhould fay, they that would know the glorious ſuccels 

of the word of the Lord, let them go to Theſalonica, 
2 And * that we may bedelivered from || unreaſonable 


and wicked men y, for all men have not faith z. 


perſons, which relates to the prayer deſired before, with reſpe& to the 
word, For the Apoftle and his :ellow Labourers met with ſuch men 
that did oppoſe them, and by that means were hindred in that work of 
the Miniſtry, and the free courſe of the word obſtrued : What were 
theſe men ? were they the perſecuting Genres ? They met with ſuch , 
or the envious, malicious Fews ? They met with ſuchalſo ; and here 
at Theſſalonica in particular, and which followed Paul to Berea, Af. 17. 
Or were they falſe Brethren crept into the Church ? as he complains 0! 
his perils by them, 2 Cor, 11. 26. which ſome think moſt probable, by 
what he adds, for all mex bave not faith, even of thoſe that make pro- 
*feſſhon, Why may not we take in all theſe ? but whoever they were, 
he ftiles them, firſt, unreaſonable men, men out of place, as the word 
imports ; taken either /zrerally for vagrants, wanderers, not keep- 
ers at home : Or ſuch as follow the Apoſtle from place to place, to 
hinder his Miniſtry ; Or Logzcally, for men that argued abſurdly, and 
kept to no ſound Topics in reaſoning, Either falſe Teachers among 
the Fews, or the Heathen Philoſophers, ſuch as he met with at Athens, 
whom he diſputed with, As 27, Or Morally, for men that had corrupt 
Principles, and Practices,that kept not to the duty of their placeand fta- 
tion, Deſordonnez, French Tranſlation, and wandred out of the path of 
Righteouſneſs, We render it unreaſonable Men ; men tranſported with 
fury and paſhon againſt all reaſon, as we read of the Fews, Afs 17. 5 
Or ſuch as acted contrary to reaſon, as the Apoſtle ſpeaks of ſuch Jews 
in the former Epiſtle,who were contrary to all men, forbidding them 0 
preach to the Geniiles, that they might be ſaved, 1 Theſ. 2. 16. Or men of 
ſenſual lives, living more like brutes than reafonable Creatures. Se- 
condly, wicked men, ſo that whoeyer they were, whether Fews or Gen- 
z71es; teachers or the common people, learned or unlearned, they were 
wicked,and whatever was meant by the former word, yet this is plain; 
and the word imports either men that are laborious in wickedneſs, or 
that by their wickedneſs create labour and trouble to others. And ſuch 
the Apoſtle met with at Theſalonica, Fews who took to them certain 
lewd fellows of the baſe ſort, and drew Faſon and others before the rulers, 
aſſaulting his bouje, is 17, 5, And indeed wherever they came, they 
met with ſuch kind of men : Through the lufts of mens hearts,and the 
enmity and malice of the Devil,faithful Miniſters will meet with oppo- 
ſition,and ſuch as will hinder what they can the free courſe of the word: 
And therefore the Apottle defires prayer to be delivered from them, 
we puSpey, the word fignifies a ee by ſtrength from ſome impen- 
ding or incumbent evil, oft uſed, Luke 1, 74. C9l, 1, 13, chap, 1. ult. 
And he detires deliverance rather for the Goſpels ſake than his own, 
And though it is honourable to ſuffer for the Goſpel, yet it is deſirable 
to be kepr out of the hands of ſuch men as theſe, 7x The Apoſtle ſub- 
joyns the reaſon why men are thus, for all mex have not faith, He 
needed not ſay this of Infidels, which all men know to be without it, 
and therefore it's thought the Apoſtle here means Profeſſors. There 
may be true Faith wanting where Faith is profeſſed. Faith is ſometimes 
taken for infidelity, a moral vertue, and ſome think is meant here, be- 
coule it follows in the next verſe by way of Antitheſis, bur God is faith. 
Ful : But rather, I takeit for a Theological Grace. For that true E- 
vangelical Faith which purifies the heart, and worketh by love, and 
brings forth the As of Obedience to all God's Commandments. Had 
they this faith they would not be unreaſonable and wicked 2 But can we 
ſuppoſe ſuch to be in the Church ? as well as thoſe 2 7im. 3. 5. whom 
the Apoſtle deſcribes to have a form of Godlineſs under all that wick- 
edneſs he there mentions, But let men have Civility, Sobriety, Ex- 
ternal Devotion and Profeſſion, yet if they Oppole the Goſpel in the 
power, purity, and progrels of it, they may be ftiled unreajonable and 
wicked men ; and from ſuch men we may pray, as the Apoſtle deſired 
nere, Good Lord deliver us, And it is the duty of people with reſpet to 
their faithful Miniſters, and the work of the Goſpel in their hands, to 
pray that they may be delivered from ſuch men, 


IT. THESSALONIANS. 


G 

hap. 
3 But * the Lord is faithful, who fa! eſtabliſh you ; 

and * keep you from evil b. Ly 


L 


a Theſe words are added by way of conſolation 3 1. With reſp*A +, * Jun 


- 0 


their eſtabliſhment, which the Apoſtle had before prayed for, chi + 17 
verſe 17. and here aſſures them of it, what God hath promiſed vl | 
we may and ought to pray for. And Minifters ſhould exhort tins © 
ſeek that grace which they may be ſure before hand God wit! 30k Ang 
this eſtabliſhment relpetts either their mird,in the belief of th;- Golne 
againſt falſe DoQtrine, or their hearts againſt inordinate fears of oY 
or their practice, againſt departing from the way of Holine, The % 
poſtle well knew the Tenure of the New Covenant,which contains 51; : 
miſes of perſeverance and eſtabliſhment, as well as of pardoning Mer. 
cy,and ſanifying Grace,Fer. 32. 40, And he grounds his confidence gc 
their eſtabliſhment upon God's faithfulneſs, as upon the ſame SG 
he comforts the Corinthians, 1 Cor, Io. 13. and theſe Theſſuonizn; 
I Epiſt, 5. 24. and it may be the Apoftle hath here reference to what 
he had ſaid before z though we ſhall meet with wicked and unreaſona)js 
men, yet fear not, God will eſtabliſh you, for he is faithful, as Go , 
promiſes are according to his purpoſes, ſo his performances will he 2c, 
cording to his promiſes, which is his faithfulneſs. 6 2. As God , a 
eftabliſh them, ſo keep them from evil, There is moral and penal Evi 
of fin and ſuffering z the Greek word imports the former : Never uſs 
but for ſinful Evil, or ſometimes for the Devil, with ref pet to thej 
that dwells in him, and occaſioned by him, Zph. 6. 16. 1 Fobn 5 by 
And it's true, that God will keep his People Gon the Devil, as ſome 
read the word. But 1 ſuppoſe the Apoitle means here by evil, ezjj 
| work ; as he ſpeaks, 2 Tim. 4. 18, God will preſerve me from every evil 
work, But whether the evil work of others, or their own ? the latter I 
incline to, for he could not well aſſure them of the former, But how 
could he aſſure them of the latter ? did he think God would keep them 
from all ſin ? The Apoſtle doth not mean ſo,.nor ſay ſo; God keeps 
his People from much evil and fin which others fall into, though not 
from all. And he keeps them from falling under the power of it 
Though they may be tempted by Satan, the World, or thcir on 
hearts, yet not ſo as finally to be overcome. However the more Go 
doth eſtabliſh his People, the more will they be kept from evil, And 
ns Apoſtle doth alſo comfort them in this from the cofideration gf 
God's faithfulneſs, But theſe promiſes of God's keeping us, do not ex- 
clude our endeavours of keeping our ſelves. He that is boy of Gil 
teeperh himſelf, and the wicked one toucheth bim not, i Fo. $. 18. Hence 
choſe exhortations, .Keep thy beart with all diligence, Prov, 4. 22, and 
keep your ſelves in the love of God, Fude 21, Gr. And our keeping is 
aſcribed to our own faith with the power of God, 1 Per. x. <, 


Ve to 


. o w, 
that ye both do, and will do the things that we command 7.16, 
YOU C. 
c The Apoſtle had before declared his confidence that God would 
eſtabliſh them; and keep them from evil, and now here dec!ire; his 
confidence in them concerning their obedience, For he knew well that 
chis 1s the way of God's keeping, men, and whereby he ſhews that he 
built his confidence concerning what he had before declared abou! th:ir 
Ele&ion, Calling, Eftabliſhment and Preſeryation upon ſome 2004 
ground. And he deſcribes their obedience by doing what the Apoſtle 
and his Fellow-Labourers in the Goſpel among them commanded thern 
whether they were Commandments about the duties of the Law of the 
firſt or ſecond Tables, or the Dottrine, Order, Worſhip or Ditcinline 
of the Goſpel. So that their Commandments were no other b1;: the 
Commandments of the Eord himſelf, Mar, 28. 20. t Coy. 14. 37, Mi- 
nifters are not arbitrary Commanders in the Church. Not Lords over 
God's Heritage, 1 Pet. «, 3}. or have dominion over the Peoples Faith, 
2 Cor, 1. 24. nor may they, as the Phariſee, teach for Doetrine the 
Commandments of men, Mar. 15, 9. And he ſpeaks before of thele 
Theſſalonians that they received the word preached by them, not asthe 
word of men, but of God, 1 Theſ; 2, 13. Both our Faith and Practice in 
Religion is,to be built upon Divine Authority. Either upon what God 
hath expreſly declared, or what by clear Conſequence may be derived 
from it, So that what they command the People is from the Lord, and 
not themſelves, Their work is to ſearch out the Mind and will of Chriſt, 
as revealed in the Scripture, ſeeing they have not that immediate in- 
fallible inſpiration that the Apoſtles had, who were called to lay the 
foundation which others were to build upon. And as to thoſe things 
that are but Appendixes, and not of the ſubſtance of Religion, and for 
which no particular Rule is or can be laid down, Chriſtian prudence is 
to regulate them according to general Rules, wherein the advice, ap- 
pointment and authority of the Miniſter is to be regarded in every 
Church, Yet nothing ought to be enjoyned in theſe things that 15 un- 
comly, thatis not for edification, that is not of good report, that hath 
an a»pearance of Evil, that gives juſt occaſion of offence, and tran(- 
greffeth the general Rule of Mercy, that is a direQion of ſuperſtition, 
whereby many of the Commandments of the Romiſh Church are juſtly 
condemned, And obedience to theſes Commandments of the Apoſtle 
he deſcribes it by the univerſality of it, the thing that we command joit3 
thats all things z the indefinite being equivalent to the univerſal, And 
by theconftancy of it, that you borb do, and will do, ©c. ye will peric- 
vere to do what Commandments ye have already received, or any new 
Commandments we ſhall further give you; ſome whereof are probably 
ſuchas are mentioned in the following part of this Chapter, And their 
preſent obedience gave the Apoſtle confidence about that which was fu- 
ture, At leaſt he declares to them this confidence, as an inſinuating 
argument to perſwade them thereunto. 


God d, and into the || patient waiting for Chriſt e. 


before,chap.2. 7. and as this ſhews how much they were in his heart; (0 
the frequent mingling ofPrayers with his exhortations,ſhews they could 
not be cttettual without God, And he prays for two things, 1. 70 have 
r*eir hearts diretted into the love of God 3 which is either meant paſſiv*ly 
for God's love to them, to have their hearts, that is their whole Soul 
ingaged in the ſtudy, contemplation and admiration of this love; 
or rather attively, tor their love to God ; to have their hearts ſet 
ſtrait into the love of God, as the Gregk word imports; drawn 
out towards him as a ftrait line to its Center, or as an arrow 


diretted to the mark, *Till Man's love is (et upon God, m—_— 
| 10N 


bn i T 
3 41 


And * we have confidence in the Lord touchins YOU, *2 Cy 


5 Andthe Lord dire& your hearts into the love of 0c, 1 
mence ( 
4 Here the Apoſtle prays for them again, as he had done a little Chrj}, 


[118 h2 


44, 


Is, 


07.15, 
rerlde 
I 10, 2. | 
: tel, ls 
7 
0.2.15. 


F: Cor 
7.16, 


Pp. IIL 


tions of the heart are crooked and irregular, As the ways of men are 
calld crooked ways, P/al. 125.5, and F)bn Baptiſt's Miniftry was to 
make crooked things ftraight, //2, 4o. 4. The turning man's heart 
and ways towards God makes them ftrait, David prays, Pſal, 119. 36. 
Incline my heart to thy Teſtimonies ; 19923, Or, bend my heart, As 


we bend a crooked ftick to make it ſtraight, Or as he prays God to u- 
nite his heart to his fear, Pſal. 86, 11, ſo here Paul, to dire theirs to 
his Love,by which ſome underſtand all Religion, We learn hence,that 
to dire& mans heart to the love of God is the work of God,and beyond 
our power. And the Hearts of the beſt Saints ſtand in need of a more 
perfeR and conſtant dire&tion unto the Love of God. e Patient ſuffer- 
ings for Chriſt's ſake ; as the Apoſtle calls his ſufferings forC hriſt's ſake, 
the ſufferings of Chrift often, 2 Cor. 1. 5. Phil, 3. 10, &c, and pati- 
ence for his ſake, is call'd the patience of Chriſt,Fev. 1.9, In this ſence, 
the Apoſtle prays they may have hearts ready to ſuffer,and patiently to 
ſuffer for Chriſt's ſake, Heb. 10. 36. Fam. 5. 11, and ſuited to a ſuffer- 
ing ſtate, which the heart is naturally averſe and difinclin'd unto, And 
the word is often uſed in this ſence for patience under the Croſs, And 
ſo the Apoſtle hath his Eye in his prayer upon the ſuffering ſtate theſe 
Believers were in for Chriſt's ſake. If the ſenſe be render'd as in our 
Tranſlation, he prays for their hearts to he fixed upon the coming of 
Chriſt,to look towards it,and patiently to wait for it. The Greek word 
being often taken for the patience of expeQation as well as of ſuffering, 
Kom. $. 25. Heb, 10. 36. andſo it is the ſame as waiting for the Son of 
God from Heaven, mentioned 1 The/. 1. laſt, and looking for the Saviour, 
Phil, 3. 20. that hereby they might not faint under their ſufferings, 
nor be ſurpriſed by his coming. And becauſe the hearts of the-beft are 
apt either to be remiſs or ſecure upon the delay of Chriſt's coming,he 
therefore prays their hearts might be direted to a patient waiting for 
it, as the Apoſtle Peter upon the ſame account exhorts Believers to the 
girding up the Loyns of their Mind, 1 Per, 1. 13. 

mas, 6 Now we command you, brethren, in the name of 
14. our Lord Jeſus Chriſt f, * that you withdraw your ſelves 
.12-2-from every brother g that walketh * diforderly, and 
90 not after the tradition he received of us h. 

{ M16 f Here the Apoſtle proceeds to a diſconrſe of another kind, which is 
"** about their carriage to diſorderly.Members in the Church, And having 
before declared his confidence, ver. 4. that they did, and would do the 
things be commanded them, he now tells them what he commands; and 
becauſe either 'tis a matter of great importance, or that which they 
would be backward in,he therefore ſpeaks with the greater vehemence, 
when he ſpake in the former Epiftle, chap. 5. 14, of warning the un- 
ruly, he then ſpake with greater mildneſs, We exhort you brethren, &c. 
but now to withdraw from them is an harſher Duty ; or they having 
firſt warned them, if they reform not, next they are to proceed to 
withdraw from them, And this he now commazds as that which he 
ſuppoſeth they might be backward to. Maggyumouer. The word 
properly ſignifies a command conveighed from another, ſo the Apofile 
commands here in the Name of the Lord Jeſus, Though he had Au- 
thority to command as an Apoſtle, yet it was derived to him from 
Chrift, and therefore uſually conjoins Chriſt with his Exhortations and 
Commands ; or, to 4void as the word fignifies,and is ſo rendred, 2 Cor. 
$.20. The word is uſed alſo, Gal. 2. 12. of Peters withdrawing him- 
ſelf from eating with the Gentiles. And rendred drawing back, Zeb.1o. 
38.atluding as ſome think there to a Souldier that draws back from the 
Battle, But here in the Text to a Marriner that ſteers his Ship from 
the Rocks,and ſd it implies the danger of not withdrawing,which may 
be the reaſon of the Apoſtles ſo folemn command about it. And it is 
not from an Heathen man, but a Brother. One that is of the Church, 
and it is every Brother, let him be rich or poor, high or low, &c, As 
he writes to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 5. 11. If any man that is call'd a Bro- 
ther be a Fornicator, &c, þ Alluding as ſome think to Souldiers who keep 


I. THESSALONIANS. 


For we * behaved not our ſelves diforderiy among you i; * 27/%2- 


7 Whereby the Apoſtle intimates the aggravation of their crime who *-* 
did walk diſorderly, and ſo juſtifies the withdrawing from them. -For 
they would be reproved not only by his Doctrine, but Exaripie ; what: 
he required of others he praQiſed himſelf, and that in ſome caſes for 
this end alone,. that he might be an Example. Examples teaching 
more than Precepts, eſpecially in Miniſters, And they did not only 
know how the Apoſtle and his fellow Miniſters walked among them,but 
their end therein, whereby they knew they ought to follow them, and 
how tro follow them 3 being guided as well as excited by their Example. 
And this is expreft more generally, Firſt, Negatively, We have behaved 
our ſelves not diſorderly among you, which he ſpeaks not in a way of (c1f- 
commendation, but for their imitation ; and he uſeth here the ſame word 
to expreſs his own prattice which he did in theirs; being propcrly a mi- 
litary word, as was ſaid before. He went before them as a Captain be- 
fore the Army, and taught them Order by his own Example ; for in 
the Negative the Poſitive is included. 


8 Neither did we eat any mans bread || for nought k, jOr,f7eery 
but * wrought with labour and travel } night and day mn, * Atts 13, 
that we might not be chargeable to any of you.  3-and 20, 

k The Apoſtle here givesa particular poſitive inſtance of wliat hefore 3h ' 
he ſpeaks negatively, and in general z and brings his Diſcourſe home ? * +=? 
to the preſent caſe, and declares his orderly working, in this that he 
wrought for his own bread, and did not eat for nought, or live upon 
that which was freely given. Awesdy, The word is ſometimes tal;en 
for that which is without effe&, as Gal. 2. laſt, anſwering to the #5, 
word Cbinnam, oft uſed, Pſ21, 7.4. and 25. 3. and 69, 4. and 119. 61, 

Or, that which is without cauſe, and that either with reſpe& to injury 3 
received, as Fob. 15, 25, or benefit beſtowed, as Kom. 3. 24. when it is . 
freely given without merit, The Apoſtle means that he preached the 
Goſpel to them freely, as he tells the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 11.7, Though 
if he had received maintenance for his labour in theGoſpel among them, 
it was that which he well deſerved ; and he had not eaten their bread 
for nought; but he wrought with his own hands to maintain himſelf, as 
he did at Corinth, Aﬀs 18, 3, 1 And he wrought laborioufly with wea- 
riiom and toilſom labour, as the words import. . m2 And that 
night and day; as he had told them in the former Epiſtle, chap. 2. 9. 
only he ſpeaks of it here upon a different account ; there to clear his 
Miniſtry from ſuſpicion of CovetouſneF- and to eyidence his ſincere af- 
feftion to them, here to ſet before them ah example of induftry againſt 
ſuch who lived idly,and did eat others bread, Had he not wrought with 
his hands, he had not walked diſorderly, but left any ſhould think ſo, 
he would do it to take away all occafion of Evil. For though the labour 
of the Miniſtry in the exerciſe of the mind and ſtudy may he reckoned 
as the greateſt, yet moſt people cannot judge of it, and think it ſuch 5 
and though he had power to forbear working as he tells the Corinthians, 
: Cor, 9. 6, yet he would do it rather than any good ſhould be hindred, 
or any evil furthered thereby. 


9 * Not becauſe we have not || power #, but to make *:Cor.5.6 

* ourſelves an enſample to you to follow us o. | . 
# The Contents of this Verſe are already ſpoke to in the former, 8 OE 

only the Apoſtle aſſerts the right of maintenance due to the Miniſtry Vere. 7> 

by the name of Power. It may be claimed by Authority from Chriſt 

chough it ſhould not be commanded by any Laws from men. As the 

Priefts under the Law had their maintenance ſetled upon them by the 

Law of God; ſo hath God appointed that they which preach the Goſpel 

ſhould Iive of the Goſpel, 1 Cor. 9. 14. Gal. 6. 6, And though this 

Power may be claimed, yet in ſome cales it is to be denied, as the Apo- 

tle did, 1 Cor. 9. 12. We have nor uſed this power, leſt we ſhould binder 

the Goſpel of Chriſt, And ſo he did here, to mate hin;ſelf an example, 

Tmy, Which ſignifies any mark that is cut or engraven to ſtamp things 

into its own likenels z oft uſed in the New Teftament,and variouſly ap- 

plied. o It's defirable to follow good Examples, but more to become 

a good Example; And as the old Verſe is true, Fegzs ad exempluri, &c., 

ſo the old Proverb, lzke Prieſts, like People z and ro follow them 15 to 

imitate them, as 1 Cor. 11.1, Be ye followers of me, even as I am ai(0 

of Chriſt, He is the firft Pattern, and others are to be regulated by it 3 

and fo far, and no farther to be imitated. As Minifters ought to be 

Patterns, Tit. 2. 7. 1 Pet. g. 3, ſothe People ought to be Followers : 


and their Sin will be the greater if they follow not their Dottrine,when 


it is exemplified in their prattice, 


10 For peven when we were with yon, this we com- 
manded you q, that if any would not work, neither 


p The words contain a reaſon, as the illative for, imports ; but what 


it refers to 1s uncertain, moſt probably a turther reaſon of the Apoftles 
working with his Hands, becauſe when with them he left this com- 
mand, that he that would not work ſhou!d not eat ; he would therefore 
hu - praiſe himſelf what he commanded them, and not be thought to be 
dom, for he is ſtill to be admoniſht as a Brother, as verſe 15, And Ex-[ a5 the Phariſees, binding heavy burdens upon others, and he not touch 
communication is the exerting an Att of Church power 24S I Cor. 5. 4.|them himſelf, q And this is another of the Commandments which che 
whereof no mention is made here, or of an abſolute reje&ion which is Apoftle gave them, which he declared his Confidence that they would 
elſewhere required, Tit, 3. 10, lt ſeems then to be only a withdrawing do, ver/. 4. and this Command ſeems grounded upon the Law fiven to 
, Lhe af Adam, In the ſweat of thy Brows thou ſhalt eat Brea4,Gen,3.19. For when 
called a Brother be a Fornicator,Covet ous &c,with ſuch an one no not 10 eat, he recommends a Prattice, not dire&ly grounded upon ſome Word of 


nos 1, but the Lord; verſe 10. and calls it the comman«ment of the Lord 


and is elſewhere mentioned, as Eph, 4.28, Let nor him that ſtole ſteal 
any more, but work with his hands, &c, 1 Cor. 7. 20. God requires it of 
us as men, that we may be profitable in the Commonwealth, ſupply 
our own wants, and of thoſe that depend upon us, have wherewith al'o. 
to ſupply the wants of the poor, Eh. 4. 28. to be kept from the tein- 
ptations of idleneſs. Chriſtianity doth not extinguith the profitable 
Laws of Nature,or Nations.r Yet this general Command admits Limi- 
tations, If men have ability and opportunity to work, or if the ends of 
working are not otherwiſe ſupplied, For he that lives ont of the reaſon 
of the Law ſeems not bound by the Law ; or if the work be mentzl and 
not manual, he Law is fulfilled ; and the equity of the Law reacheth all 
men ſo far, as that nune ought to be idie and uſeleſs in the Work ; 


- 
D not their rank, not walking according to Rule, or, as he expreſſeth it, | 
1 Not according to the tradition which be received of us, What is to be 
1 meant by Tradition, is explained in the former chapter. And he can- 
1 not be underſtood to ſpeak here of Rites and Ceremonies relating to 
1 Church Worſhip, or- Order, as ſome imagine. The Apoſtle doth in the 
following Verſes explain himſelf otherwiie. But what is this withdraw- 
\- ing ? Is it Excommunication the greater or the leſs ? In a general lence 
e it may be ſo called, for it is an abſtaining from Communion, but it is 
'$ not ſo properly ; for that is called putting away a perſon, 4 purging out 
r the old leaven, 1 Cor, 5. 7. this is only a withdrawing from him, much 
is leſs it is a delivering up to Satan, which the Apoſtle required, 1 Cor. 
J- 5. and himſelf inflicted upon &#ymeneus and Alexander, 1 Tim. 1. laſt. 
y The nature of the crime here mentioned will not bear that. Tt was not | ſhould he eat y. 
N- Inceſt or Blaſphemy, as in the former Inſtances, but only diſorderly 
h walking, which he ſpecifies afterwards, And with reſpe& to ſuch the 
ie Apoſtle required in the former Epiſtle, warning only, warn the unruly, 
1, And though this is ſomething more, yet it implies nota caſting a man 
y out of the Church,which is Chriſt's viſible Kingdom, into Satan's King-| 
e 
3 
4 
>. 
W rom familiar converſe and ſociety. As 1 Cor. 5. 11. If any man that is 
ly ; ; 
IC alluding to the cuſtom of the Jews who would not eat with the Gen- God, or of Chrift, or from infallible Inſpiration, he calls it a permiffi- 
U- tiles, and by eating is expreft Communion in Scripture, and prophane on, as 1 Cor, 7. 6. but when otherwiſe, he ſaith, 1 command, and yt 
Fe OG alſo, - ſuch Communion is forbidden » ſuch a Brother, 
WICh the Apoſtle allowed them to have with ſuch ſinners that were of r. 14. 29. and this in the Text is not his alone,but the Lords 

}f "__ the World, and not of the Church, as verſe 10, which cannot be meant Jn, 5 Or: 24. ' } 

|. 6 of ſacred communion. And familiarity with ſuch a Brother would har- 
bs Griſt den him in his ſins, and refle& diſhonour upon Religion, and indanger 
"a _ infeion more than with a Pagan,or Infidel ; which therefore the 
w poſtle forbids them to a Brother. As he did the Corinthians mention- 
= ed before, as alſo the Komans, chap, 16. 17, And which may be a ſtep 
1 towards excommunication from Spiritual communion ; which is the 
= greater puniſhment,eſpecially if the brother be not hereby made aſham- 
as ed, and reform his courſe, and doth not only now and then do a diſor- 
3. "”" erly ation, but walks dijorderly, and that after warning alſo, Others 
= l _ o s$ meant of Excommunication, and judge not the reaſon againſt 

bo cogent, 

ga 7 For your ſelves know * how ye ought to follow us : 


VOL, Il 


and the Apoſtles —_— =— , in the Text iscogent from Nature 
; 


Fs 


Chap. IL 


r, Au- 


Ll, 


rg 10- 
thing. 


* :Theſ.4, 
il, 


[| Or,faint 
or, 


Chap. III. 


it ſelf, Agreeable to that of Solomon, Prov. 16. 26. He that laboureth, 


Iaboureth for himſelf, for bis mouth craveth it of kim, whereupon ſome 
judze theſe believing Theſz/ontans, to be generally a People that lived 
by ſome handicraft Trade, or ſome other manual Labour, And the eat- 
ing here intended, is meant of relief from the ftock and charge of the 
Church z ſuch ſhould not be relieved, whow!l/ not work, as it1s 1n the 
Text, who could, but would not, the fault being in the Will. 


11 For we hear s that there are ſome among you 7? 


jOr,wort- which walk diſorderly, [| not working at all z, but are 
buſie bodies w. 


s The Apofile gives the reaſon of this Diſcourſe he fell into, about 
diſorder, and commends, yea, commands a remedy againſt it, He had 
heard of this diſorderly walking, elſe his Diſcourſe might have been 


_ eſteemed vain and needleſs. Reports are to obtain credit according to 


the qualirr of the perſon that makes them, his end therein, and proba- 
hility of iruth. He took notice of reports, brought to him about the 
Diviſions that were at Corinth, x Corinth. 11. 16. t And the perſons 
that he here charged the report upon, is not all, but ſome only, and he 
nameth none, For as to the body of the Church be bad confidence they 
aid, and would do the things be commanded, vere 4. And requires them 
to withiraw from the diſorderly. And the diſorder he chargeth upon 
theſe ſome is u 1. Myd%y &g3aCoperes. That mop worked 10t at all, at 
leaft, not the work of their own place, as it follows, w 2. But are 
buſie bodies : Buſie, and yet idle, and not working. aftzze2aC opueres,Cu- 
rieufement, French Bible, as the curious Arts of Sorcerers are call'd 
Ripa, AFR, 19. 19, The work ſignifies working 4bour, and denotes 
either vain curioſity, medling in matters that they ought not, or go- 
ing round their proper work, but not falling, or fixing upon it, The 
fame Apoftle ſpeaks of younger Widows, 1 Tim. 5. 13. who learnt tobe 
jdle, and yet were buſie bodies; and ſuch are called dNoTerotmoo nl. 
x Pet, 4. 15. And the one follows from the other; for they that are 
jdleand negle& their own buſineſs will be apt to intermeddle with ano- 
thers: And they that are not keepers at home, will be gadders abroad, 
and ſo not eat their own but others bread, which the Apoſtle here re- 
proves, as diſhonourable to the Chriſtian Profeſhon ; and as a further 
remedy, doth with much earnefigels addrels his ſpeech particularly to 
them, 

12 * Now them that are ſuch we command and exhort 


by our Lord Jeſus Chrii#. x, that with quietneſs they 


work y, and eat their own bread <, 

x Be had before given command to the Church to withdraw from 
them, verſe 6, And now he lays his commandment upon themſelves, 
and that in the name of Chriſt, y Working is ſet oppoſite to their idle- 
neſs, and quietneſs to their buſte medling where they ought not, where- 
by they might occaſion ſtrife, The Apoftle here, and in many other 
places requires Chriſtians to live peaceably, as 2 Cor, 12. 11. Col. 3+ 
I5. 1 Theſſ, s. 13. Heb. 12-14. 7 Not to live as drones upon others la- 


- bours, yet he forbids not dealing their bread to the hungry ; nor re- 


quires this of the-poor that are neceſſitated to live upon alms : And by 
eating their own bread the Apoſtle means, maintaining themſelves, 
and Families, for bread is taken in Scripture for all things that maintain 
the natural Life : And the Apoſtle here inſinuates a bleſſing upon ho- 
neſt labour, that thereby men ſhall have bread of their own: and doth 
aſſert property againſt that community which ſome have pleaded for, 
the civil right that men have to what they honeſtly get and poſſeſs, 
but hereby condemn Oppreſſours, Pirats, Robbers, Cheaters, Uſurpers, 
yea, and Tyrannical Princes, who maintain themſelves upon the ſpoil 
of others, and take their bread out of others mouths: And why not 
alſo ſuch as are not quiet and contented with their own portion, but 
either envy others, or murmur againft providence, 
13 But ye, brethren 4, be not || weary in well-doing b. 
4 The Apoftle now diretts his ſpeech to thoſe of the Church, that 
were not guilty of the diſorders before mentioned, to whom he ſpeaks 
in mild and familiar Language, as if the others deſerved not to be ſo 
called. b And that which he ſpeaks to them is, ot to be weary of well 
doing. The Greek word is often uſed about ſufferings, as 2 Cor, 4. 1. 
Eph. 3. 13. and then uſually Tranſlated fatnring, and which ſeems to 
be its moſt proper uſe;to ſhrink or faint as cowards in War, Mi £xrg.- 
xiours Ne ſepneſcite, definite, defatigamini, it ſignifies a receding, or 
fainting, or tiring in our duty, becauſe of the evil that attends it, ſome=- 
times it's uſed of prayer, Luke 18, 1, and ſometimes generally of all 
Auties of Religion, which are generally call'd well-doing, Gal. 6. g, and 
ſignifies either a ſloathfulneſs in them, or wearineſs of them ; as thoſe 
whom the Prophets complain of, Amos8. 5. H141. 1. 13. the Apoſtle 
uſeth the ſame word in this ſence, Gal. 6. 9g, Be not weary of well-doing ; 
and in the Text, thoſe that did walk orderly, he exhorts them to hold 
on their courſe, cither more peculiarly to the works of Charity, which 
are called well-doing, Phil. 4. 14. Though thoſethat workt not did not 
deſerve them, or enjoy them, yet this ſhould not diſcourage them 
from praftifing them towards others 3 or the word may extend more 
generally to ail good works, we ſhould perſevere in them without faint- 
ing or wearineſs, notwithſtanding the evils that may threaten us there- 


II. THESSALO NIANS. 


ſeemeth needleſs, And he ſpeaks here of ſome greater contun acy th 
before, when his word in this ſecond Epiſtle is not obeved, We = 
ſuppoſe the Apoſtle may mean not only a withdrawing from fzmi1;a > 
with him, but expoſing his name to ſome publick notice in the Churet! 
that both his crime and his name ſhould be publikly noticed, Asthe ra 
poſtle ſpeaks of Zymeneus and Alexander, and Philetus, by name in bis 
Epiſtles that were made publick, EypeisSn, Note him by a ſign, 5 the 
word ſignifies, which cannot well be done by a meer withdrawing A F 
ſeeing heTpeaks here of one that is not only diſorderly, but obflinate 
ſome further and more ſignal att of Diſcipline is to be inflied on him, 
And what word the Apoſtle refers to in this Epiſtle as not obeyed ” 
not expreſt, neither need we limit it, but may be meant of all-hjs Ca 
mandments herein,to which obedience was required. And the word : 
writtenzis the word of God, and is to be obeyed as well as that Which © 
preached, I know there is another reading of the Text,!f any may thy 
not our word, note that man by an Epiſtle, and ſo it is in our Margins 4 
this is not probable ; by an Epiſtle ? to whom ? To the Apcftle himſelf ? 
And for what ? to know how to proceed towards ſuch an one ? What 
need that,when he here gives direction about it to them ? which follow 
e Or, be not mingled with him, which refers either to his crime 2 
the Greek word 1s ſo applyed, Eph. 5. 11. or to his perſon alſo, 0 the 
word is uſed, 1 Cor. 5.9. And yet ſome think the Apoſtle here forbias 
only Civil Communion,not Sacred, becauſe the word in the Text js 2M 
nerally ſo uſed,and fo render'd by Expoſitors,but Sacred Communian i; 
expreft in the new Teſtament by another word, x Foh. 1,3, Arq is 
meant of Sacred, it is then caſting him out of the Church, 'which i; x 
delivering him up to Satan, Vid, Eſtias in loc, And that ſeems no to 
agree with what follows, Admoniſh bim as a Brother : and ſo not to he 
accounted as an Heathen or a Publican, Matth.,18.1 7. And we knoy 24. 
monition goes before cafting out.” But to be thruſt out of the com Mar 
of the people of God in all Civil Friendly Society is a great puniſhmer: 
and affliftion. And ſome think that the noreing of him was to be done 
by the Governours of the Church, and the renouncing his company by 
all the people, let the reader judge. f The end of both is hee expreh, 
This is not added before as a reaſon of withdrawing, and therefore ſyme 
think the Apoſtle required that only, to avoid the infe&ion of fin hy f4. 
miliar ſociety; but this further proceeding hcre mentioned is to mate 
the man aſhamed that is obſtinate in diſobedience, but we need not 
limit it. 41d thx making him aſhamed is not to be out of hatred to his per- 
ſon, but for his good, as all Church cenſures ought to be fo intendedygo 
bring him to that ſhame that may be the firſt ſtep to true Repentance, 
There is a ſhamefulness in ſin z and when ſinners repent, they ſeeit, 
and are aſhamed, Iſa. 1. 29, Ezek. 16. 61. Rom. 6. 21. And God con- 
plains of finners when not aſhamed, Fer, 3, 3. Shame is a natural af. 
tection in men,and is not in the nature of Beaſts neither was it in man 
before the fall; and though in it ſelf it is no vertue, being the pro- 
per effett of fin,yet it is of uſe to reſtrain much open Wiickednefs, and 
to keepdecorum in mens outward aftions : And God makes uſe of it al. 
ſo in leading men to trne repentance. To ſhame men out of envy or 
hatred is ſinful, and againft the Law of Charity z but to do it tobring 
them to Repentance, is better than by flattery or familiar Society to 
harden them in ſin, 


15 Yet cont him not as an enemy g, but admoniſh 
him as a brother h. 


& They having thus proceeded againſt the diſorderly and diſobedient, 
the Apoſtle directs them about their after carriage,which either reſpetts 
their inward opinion of the mind, or outward a&tion. They ſhould not 
count him an enemy,putting a great difference betwixt an offending Bro: 
ther, and a profeſſed Enemy. They ought not to hate him as an Enemy, 
nor look upon himas upon ſuch who out ofenmity to theGolpel perſecute 
Chriſtianity,nor to have an unreconcileable mind towards him, þ And as 
to outward aftion, ſhould admoniſh as a Brother. It is either private 
or publick, Minifterial or Fraternal, gentle or ſevere, joyn'd with come 
mination. The Greeks expreſs it in the degrees of it by three words, 
vsYtoie. 6Hrmpia, 6rmantis, The word in the Text ſignifies a putting 
in mind, T hey were to put the offender in mind of his fin, and in mind 
of his duty. Though they were to have no cornpany with him, in a way 
of familiarity,yet to be in his company,ſo as to admoniſh him ; and the 
admonition here meant is either publick, in the Church, or private,or 
firſt private then publick, as our Saviour gives the rule, Mar.18.17. 59 
that hisRepentance js to be endeavoured,not only by abſtaining 115 com 
pany, but by admonition, And it is to be performed to him «5 4 670- 
ther, which either reſpetts the ſtate of the perſon admoniſht z Ne.15 0! 
an Enemy,or Pagan, or one out of the viſible Church, but a Brother ; 
whereby ſome conceive that the Apoſtle had not before ſpoken of 115 
Excommunication, Or it reſpe&ts the way of admonition ; it is to be 
performed with love,tenderneſs and compaſhon,as to a Brother, not to 
upbraid him, but to gain him, as Mat. x8. 15. If he bear thee rhou bat 
gained thy brother, And for that end great prudence is to be uſed. 11® 
temper of the offenders,their quality of the fin,their outward condition 
in the world, their age,yea,the circumſtances of time and place are 9 be 
conſidered, | 


Chap, II 


Col.1.,27 


*Aﬀts 16, 
1,1 Theſ, 
% 2 


x Gal.z +2. 
I Per,1.2, 


16 Now * the Lord of peace himſelf give you peace *v 


; || always by all means k. The Lord be with you all. 4 


. iT) 

i The Apoftle is now taking his leave,and cloſing his Epiſtle; and th1s ,,j,, 
he doth with prayer, and what he prays for is prace, and though tie o,, 
word peace hath various acceptations, and is of comprehenſive ſign! "we 
cation, yet here it is to be underſtood of brotherly peace and unity : 
Whether it was occafion'd by any diſſentions that were attually amons 
them, or his fears of ſuch to ariſe upon the practice of their duties, *9 
the diſorderly among them that he thus prays, is uncertain 3 and it 15 
that which he much preſſeth and prays for in his ſeveral Epiſtles 10 the 
Churches, as being that wherein the honour 'of the Goſpel, and their 
own comfort and edification, were ſo much concerned : And the 
perſon he prays to, he tiles the Zord of Peace, whereby I ſuppoiC he 
means Jeſus Chriſt, who is ſometimes called the £rince of Peace, i Le 
9.6.As God's called the God of Peace,x Theſ.5.23.1t is he that hath — 
peace betwixt God and us,betwixt Jew and Gentile,and It 15 one ”_ wh 
fruits of his Spirit in the hearts of Chriſtians, Gal.5.22, True CArvn2n 
peace is the gift of Chriſt, and therefore the Apoftie prays the emepeb : 
give it, and faith, the Lord kimſelf, as intimating none bub he can Sie 
itand that it is a ſingular bleſſing to enjoy it,9s we mull {0 juter Pn raſh 


ins 
1 Or, fiz- 14 And if any man obey not our word || by this epi- 
nifie war ſtlec, notethat man d, * and have no company with him 


man by an e_ that he may be aſhamed f. 
Epiſtle, c Here we have further Commandments given concerning the diſor- 
* 1 C0745. derly. In caſe of obſtinacy to proceed further againſt them. The A- 
9, L1. VET. poſtle had given Commandments about their walking in his firſt preach- 
, ing to them, -after that he repeats them in his firſt Epiftle, and again in 
this ſecond, And now if any man obey not our word by this Epiſtle, 
faith he,»ore that man,and he would have none excepted;either throhgh 
fear or favour, and nothing done by partiality, 1 Tim. 5. 21. d What 
Is meant by zozeing is diſputed among expoſitors, more ſeems to be 
meant than marking them, Kom. 16.17. Some take it for what we call Ex- 
communication, ſo Aug. lib, 3. Cont. Epift. Parmen. op. 4, Theophyl, in 
locum, either the caſting him out of the Church, which is the greater, 
or ſuſpenſion from the Lords Supper, which is the leſſer, As there were 
degrees of Church cenſure among the Fews, ſo as alſo we read praQtiſed 
In the Goſpel Church, as is evident in the Councils, Others think it is 
no more than a withdrawing from him, as was mentioned before, 
verſe 6, but then the Apoſtle ſaith the ſame thing over again, which | 


vp. 11” 


*Gal.z, 


Pp. on 


Phraſe when at any other time we find it, a; 1 Theſſ. 5. 23. k He ſhews 
hoth the defirableneſs and dithculty of Peace. - It is worth the uſing all 
endeavours for it, and without luch we ſhall hardly attain it, as Rom. 12. 
13, If it be paſſevle, as much as lieth in you, live peaceably with all men, 
Quite contrary to the temper and practice of ſome Men, who will live 
\-aceably with no man 3 and elſewhere we read of following Peace, 
{Jeb 12. 14. and ſeeking Peace and enſuing it, 1 Pet, 3. 1. and endea- 
wnuring #9 keep the unity of rhe Spirit in the bond of Peace, Eph. 4.3. And 
the Apoſtle prays for it in the Text with much earneftnels, and that 
they might enjay it without interruption, always, 'T hat there might be 
no Schiſm riſe up among them at any time, and if we read the next 
words in every thing, he prays that their peace might be univerſal with 
refed to Opinions, Words and Attions, and as a final farewel addeth, 


ViTHESSALONIANS. 


1 This the Apoſtle addeth after he had finiſht his Epitle, and taken 
his farewel, as a Proof that the Epiſtle was zcnuine, and care from 
himſelf, Becauſe it may be there were {ome then who did counterfeit 
his Epiſtles, as there have been many fince who have counter ited 
Creeds, Liturgies, Goſpels, Writings of the Fathers, &c. and.he knew 
it might be of dangerous conſequence to the Churches,to have his Wri- 
tings counterfeited, Hereticks in ſeveral Ages, and the Church of 
Fgme particularly, hath herein been deeply guilty, And though it's 
probable the Body of this Epiſtle was writ by ſome Amanuenfs,a; is evi. 
dent of the Epiſtle to the Romans, that it was writ by one Tertiz:, Rom, 
16. 22. and when he tells the Galatians,Gzl, 6. 11, he wrote their Epi. 
file with his own Hand, fo Phil, 1. g. it implies ſometimes he did nor 
ſo. Yet this Salutation he wrote with his uwn Hand, which he pra- 
Aiſed not only in this, but ir all his other Epiſtles, as he here aifrmed, 


Chap. FTI, 


the Lord be with jou all, which ſhews his Aﬀettion to them all, though in 1 | 
he had reproved ſharply the Diſorders that ſome were guilty of, And| And he wrote It 1 ſuch Charadt-rs whereby nis own. Hand mizht b2 
a greater thing he could not defire for them. It comprehends all ble-| known. EIſe it was an eaſte matter tor any Im poſtor to wrice the ſ:m2 
ſings in it, and the very bleſſedneſs of Heaven it ſelf, As an uſual fare, words, and the words of it are here ſet down, but cl{ewhere explained; 
well word Alteu is a recommending a Perſon to God, | and therefore nothing is further necdtul here, 


} 


17 The ſalutation of me Paul with mine own hand, 18 The grace of our Lord Jeſus Citi he with vou all, 


which is the token in every epiſtle : ſo I write /, | Amen. 


IL T I I & RE © 


The ARGUMENT T. 

Imothy is thought to have been a Native of Lyſtra in Lycaonia, AQts 16. 1. bis Mother Eunice 2vas a Jewels, ACts 1C' 
1. A Believer, 2 Tim: 1. 5. His Father a Greek, As 16. 1. but (poſſibly) proſelyted to the Fexwiſh Religion. They 
ave Timothy his Name, fignifying thereby their pious deſire that their Son ſhould Fear and Honour God, and be put im mind 

of his Duty by his Name. They bred him up in the Knowledge of the Scriptures from a Child. When it was he firſt became 

a Diſciple to Paul doth not appear, but it appears from 2 Tim. 3. 11. that he was with Paul at Antioch, and Iconium, 2»h:ch 

as before he come to Lyſtra, Acts 16. 1. where Panl circumciſed him. After this Paul made him his Companion, ſcent him 


upon ſeveral Meſſages: He was a ſickly Perſon, 1 Tim. 5. 23. but eminent in Gifts and Graces, 2 Tim. 1. 5. & 3. 15, 


1 Cor. 4.17. After this he was ordained a Minifter by Paul and the Presbytery, 2 Tim. 1.6, He became wery dear t9 
Paul for bis Faithfulneſs, Phil. 2. 19, 20, 21. ſo as he calls him his beloved Son and Faithful, 1 Cor. 4. 17. His Son in 
the Faith, 1 Tim. 1. 2. hz dearly beloved Son, his Fellow-worker, Fellow-labourer, &'c. Paul left him a time at 1 hef- 
falonica and Berea, As 17- 13, 14. then ſends for him to Athens, As 17.15. he came to him at Corinth, Ads 18. 5, 
Thence he ſent him into Macedonia, Adts 19. 22.. from thence he came to Corinth, and goes 2vith Paul into Aſia, Adts 20. 4. 
where Paul intreats him to ſtay ſome time at Epheſus, as an Evangeliſt, to ſettle the CP2+:-b»5 there, 2. Tim. 4. 5. From 
thence he ſends for him to Rome, 2 Tim. 4. 9. and ſends Tichycus in his rocm to Epheſus, 2 Tim. 4. 12. Paul having left 
Timothy a Young Man in this great Truſt, being himſelf to be abſent, writes this Epiſtle to him, to encourage him againſ# 
&1l D angers, and to dire} him in the managery of his Office. The Scope of the Epiſt e 1s to dire(t Timothy n the firſt place, 
and then all Miniſters of the Goſpel how to behave themſetues in the Miniſterial Work, as to Preaching, Praying, Govern- 
ment, oppoſing Gainſayers, &c. ſo as it is the moſt porn Direction we hare in all the Seripture for the diſcharge of the Mi- 
niſterial Office. The time when Paul wrote his Epiſtle is incertainly Judged, but gueſſed to be the One and Twentieth Year 
after Chriſt's Death, and about the Nineteenth after PauPs Converſion, it is certam it was 2hen he was in Macedonia, and 


Col.1.27 b * which 1s our hope c. 


*afts16, 2 Unto * Timothy my own ton in the faith : * Grace, 

.1Thef. mercy, 4rd peace from God our'Father, and Jeſus Chriſt 
our Lord. 

IPet,1,2, ; 


befure he returned to Epheſus, Acts 29. I. 
CHAP. L 
The uſual Salutation, 1, 2, Heleft Timothy at Epheſus, to take care that 
20 ſtrange DoQrines ſhould be broached in the Church, 1====q, The 
right Uſe and End of the Law, and for whom it is appointed, 5 -— 10, 
The Goſp:I was committed in truſt 10 him, that he mighs be an Example 
of Gracz 10 the Chief of Sinners, 11 16, A Doxology, 17. Hs 
Charge to Timothy : of Hymeneus and Atexandcr, 18 20s 
1 Aul an Apoſtle of Jeſus Chrift a, by the command- 
ment of God our Saviour,and the Lord Jeſus Chriſt, 


4 One immediately ſeat by Jeſus Chriſt, by his Voice from Heaven, 
As 9. 5. though nor by his Voice upon Earth, (as thoſe Marth, 16,) 
b Through the Will of God, 1 Cor. x. 1, not his permiſſtve, but perceptive 
Will, and this is the ſame with his being called to be an Apoſtle, Kom. 
1, 1. & x Cor. 1, 1, by our Lord Fejus Chriſt, the Father not being ex- 
cluded, but the Son only being named, to whom the Mediatory King- 
dom was committed. « Cur 4zope, there 18 no more in the (Greek) 
that is, the Object of our Hope : as when 'tis ſaid Gen,z1, 53, that Facob 
ſware by the fear of his Father Iſaac, that 1s, by the Deity whom his 
Father feared. This glorious Eulogy belongs to our Saviour, in whom 
there is a concurrence of all that is requiſite to free us from deftruQiye 
Evils, and to make us everlaſtingly happy : for he is Wiſdom, Righte- 
ouſneſs, Sanfification, and Redemption, Hence the Gentiles without 
Chriſt are ſaid to be without Hope, Eph. 2. 12, And from hence 'tis evi- 
dent, that Jeſus Chriſt is the Ecernal God for if he were only a Man, 
though in excellence above all others, he could not be our hope 3 for 
curſed is be that truſteth in man, Jer. 17. 5. 


He dignifies Timothy with the Title of bis Son in the Faith ; that is,be- 
ing converted by him to Chriſtianity, and begat to the Divine Life : 
and by ftiling Timothy bis own Sov, he tignifies his Piety and Vertue, 
that rendred him a worthy Son'6f ſuch a Father, whom he imitated and 
honoured, and with whom he correſponded in a gratefnl obedient affe- 
Qion. Having thus deſcribed the Perſon to whom he writes,he expreſ- 
les his ardent defire of his compleat Felicity ; which is included in 
Grace, M-rcy and Peace, By Grace he means the free fayour and good 
Will of God, with all the ſpiritual Gifts that proceed from it, either 
requiſite tor Salvation, or the great Work of the Evangelical Miniftry, 
By mercy, his compathonate tender Love, pardoning, relieving, ſup- 
porting, and aſkifting us in our Chriftian courſe : By Peace he ſignifies, 
Principally che Feace of God, that Divine Calm of Conſcience, that 
Tranquility and reſt of Soul which procecds from the aſſurance that God 
IS reconciled to us in Chrift,and our freedom by the Sanctifying Spirit, 
from the 1 y: anny of Carnal Luſts: This Peace can never be 10 the wick- 
ed, And be11.1cs this principal Peace, we may underftand Peace with 
Man, that 1s a quiec ftate exempt from Hatred and Perſecutions, that 
Jinuy..y might more comfortably and ſucceſsfully perform the Work of 
his Munſtry, He prays for theie Bleffings from God, who is the origi- 


44%% 4 


3 As I beſought thee to abide fill at Epheſus f, when 
I went into Macedonia z, that thou mighteſt charge ſome 
that they teach no other doctrine h. 

f Epheſ' was a great City in-4fi2 the leſs, whither Paul came, A7s 
Ig, 1. where Demetrius raiſed a tumulc againſt him ; which the 
Town-Clerk appeaſed, as we read there. From thence he went 
into Macedonia, As 20. 1.2, 3, Upon this his motion into Mzcz- 
donta {as Divines judge) he lefr Timothy at Epheirs, The end of leavin 
him at Epheſ#s, was that be might charge ſome that they preached 3:9 other 
Dottrine, that is, none contrary to what he had preached, none con- 
trary to the Dottrine of the Goſpel, Gal. x. 8, 9. What Power was 
here committed to 7:morhy is by lome queſtioned, ſppoting (which is 
very probable) there were a greater number of Dilciples than conld 
meet in one Aſſembly, his Power was more than Paſtoral, for he had a 
Power over the Teachers. Whether this Power was exir40r4inary or 
ordinary, and what God intended ever to continue in the Church, isthe 
queſtion, Thole who make it tobe ſuch, make it to be Epij:opal z thoſe 
that make it extraordinary, ſay it was the Work of an Evangelift,2 Tim, 
4+ 5+ TI hat there was ſuch an Officer in the Primitive Church appears 
from As 21,8, Epb. 4. 11. That this was Timothy's Work appears from 
2 Tim, 4. 6. noris ita new thing, but very common in the {ettlement 
of all new Governments, to author ize ſome ſpecial Commithoners, and 
to give them an extraordinary Power for a time "till the Government 
can be ſettled, and things brought into a fixed Order. If we confider 
the Words without prejudice, / befought thee to abide ſlill ax Epheſus, 
they ſeem to ſignifie that Timothy was not the eftabliſht Biſhop of Eph: 
ſu ; for to what end ſhould the Apoſtle detire a B:ſhop to reſide in his 
own Dioceſs, which he could not forfake without negiedting his 
Duty, andthe Offence of God ? This were a tacit Refe*tion, as if he 
were careleis of his Duty, And the word abide, a7227u gra, docs nut 
neceſſarily import his conſtant reſidence there ; for 'tis uted to figniis 
continuance for ſome time only ; as 'tis ſaid of the Apoſtle, that rc- 
mained mary 42ys at Corinth, Afs 18, 18, when his ftay there was only 
for ſome Months. The intention of the Apoſtle ſeems to be, rhar 7:- 
mothy ſhould continue for a while at Epheſis, and not accompany tim 
in his Voyage to Macedonzz,as he was wont to do upon other occations, 
And *cis evident by the ſacred Hiſtory, that about tix months after 7:- 
mothy was with the Apoftle in Greece, that he went with him to M.- 
cedonia and Troes, and Milerus, Acts 20, 1, 4. where the Apottle lent for 
the Elders or Biſhops of Epk-/#s, to leave his laſt ſolemn Charge witt: 
them. In ſhort, if Timothy had been appointed the Biſhop of Epb-- 
ſus, the Apoſtle would probably have given this Title of Honov: 
ro him in the Inſcription of his Epiftle, Upon the imyartial 
contidering of the whole matter, though the Palhon of irelacy is 


nal fountain of all good ; and from Feſus Chriſt as the Channel, by | 


V@®L. Ih 


ſo ingenious as to diſcover ſo many Myſteries and Myers in 
[ $ MA ; a fu 


it 


-— 


AE IC GR 423 4 
grm—_ - 


W 
rs _ Tot = " 


w 
RY _ 
m_ _ _- - Coe _ - 
QUT" ——_— x - —_ — - 
- ws - - = < . mm - = 
- : Hom onoy - oa do bo a 5. 
- * Pl, : b. y 
Cn 8 , . N ph 
© Dorm madre 2s bn —— _ new o 
= = "A = _ = ——_ _ 
= - "2716S 1228 m_ © ” » a. 
7 - "xz - of > 
— NG - > Ie 
2 j[OF-« _— OE. —_— 19. « — 
Fe —__ ay ov Sn —_ —_ - Ho 
. 1 = 


ND EN 


<awd T4 


En 
IOW 


gt Imam wo Yr oreedteery 1 ta 
Mpt——co-e , 
A [. » -_ 4 ” ® 
- , 


Chap. 


*Rom.1? 


8,10, Ga 
56.14, 


[| Or, 20 


Fa 

* Cha 1h + 
7 
4 


Li 


4 


few plain words 
ihe + 4 oy; Province, a2 Primate of all Aſia) yet *tis moſt likely that 
Timothy waz left only for ſome time with a kind of Apoftolical power 
5n the © hurch of Epheſus; of which power this was one branch, au- 
thoritatively ro commanc ſelucers not to teach another Dottrine than 


what was taught by the Apoſtles who were divinely illuminated. A di- 


vine rule, and moſt 
of che Miniitry, And this ſheweth the mighty pronenels of Men as to 
deviate in their converſations from the right ways, ſo in their judg- 
ments from the Truths of God, otherwiſe Paul had had no need to 
bave left 74noky for that end in this Church ſo newly planted. 

4 Neither * give heed to fables #, and endleſs genealo- 
gies, which minitter queſtions rather than godly edity- 
ing k, which isin faith 1 : ſo do. | 

7 By Fables he probably meaneth the Fewiſh Fables, and command- 
ments of men, mentioned Titus 1, 14. Or more generally, all vazr and 
idle (peculdtionS. R W hatſoever tendeth not to build men up in Godli- 
neſs, (which is the end of Preaching,) 1 he Jews had many unwritten 
Fables, about what Gud did detore he made the World, &c. and many 
uavritten endleſs Genealogies, which were as ſo many Labyrinths, in- 
tricate without an iffue out of them, and 'tis probable that ſome of them 
(converted to the Chriſtian Faith) ftill buſted their heads about, accord- 
ing to their Education,and the praetice of the Fewiſh Dotors, and made 
the ſubje& of their Sermons, aid diſcourſes to the Aſſemblies of Chri- 


ftians ; which is the thing the Apofile here declareth a corruption of 


> Or Jinance of Preaching, and enveigheth againſt, chap. 6. 4. 2 Tim, 2, 
DD Tha op and 3. o. and willeth Preachers to avoid, and People 
to ziveno heed to them, as nothing tending to the building Chriſtians 
up in holineſs, which he here calleth otxedb way Oze, the building up 
of God, either fo 95 je&ively, Or efjictzntly, or by his command, becaule 
it is in God, viz. in the knowledge of God, and an increa(e in the Love 
of God, and other ſpiritual habits, or fr9m God, being wrought by him, 
and ſerving for his honour and glory, or according to his Will. 7 For 
he tells vs thisedifying can be no otherwiſe than i Faith, Preaching 
the Doftrine of the Goſpel, and embracing that which 1s the Dodtrine 
of Faith, a Do&rine of Divine Revelation, to which men muſt give 


. their aſſent, becauſe of the authority of God revealing it. So as no 


diſcourſes which are not founded in a divine Revelation,and to be prov- 


ed from thence, can poſſibly tend to any building of God, which cannot 
ſtand in the 7/49" of M-, but muſt ftand #n the power of God, From 
this Text we may obſerve the vanity ao proneneſs of ſome perſons, 
even from the infancy of the Chir&,"to make up what they call Ser- 
mos of diſcourſes about Fables z Jdle Queſizons, and Sp-culartons, and 
Genealegies of which there is noend, the Teachers being able to bring 


the minds of hearers to no reft about them, nor they tending to any 


good and faving uſe, but meerly to ſhew mens tt and Parrs, And we 
may alſolearn, that this is no religious Preaching or Hearing, it being 
impoſſible men ſhould be under any religious oblizations to hear any 
but Prophets, that is, ſuch as reveal the divine Will, For other diſ- 


courſes men in their Seaſons may hear them, or let them alone, and 
credit or not credit them as they ſee reaſon, . - 

5 Now the * end of the commandment is charity # 
out of a pure heart , and of a good conſctence o, and 
of faith unfeigned p. ; | 

m The word Tranſlated Commandment here is mgzyſeaiz, which 
rather ſignifies a particular Charge given by ſuperiours as to ſome thing, 
than a general Law, As 5, 25, and 16. 24. and ſo in this chapter, ver, 


18, which inclincth me to think that though the propoſition be true of 
the whole Law of God, (for love is the fulfilling of th: Law,) and more 
eminently of the divine Dottrine in the Goſpel, (for the end and per- 
for. it aims at, and produces, is a pure ardent Love of God, and of 
men for his ſake, and of the Goſpel) yet it is rather here to be reſtrain- 
ed to the Commandment relating to Preaching, or diſcourſing the re- 
vealed Will of God, relating to mens Salvation, the end of which is 
doubtlels Charity,which ought to be fints operantys,the end of the work- 
man, what he ought to intend andaim at; and is finis operts the effect 
of the work, viz. the begetting in the Souls of people love ro God and 
their Neiphbour, neither of which can rationally be obtained by Preach- 
ers telling People idle Stories, and filling their heads with idle quefti- 
ons and ſpeculations, # W hich love to God and men muſt proceed.ftrom 
a clean, and holy, and fincere heart. o And a good and holy lite, when 
Conlcience doth not ſowrely refle& upon men for preſumptuous mil- 
carriazes. Which p muſt all be rooted in, and attended with a faith 


unfeigned ; rooted in it, as Faith ſignifies a ſteady afſent to Divine Re- 


velation ; attended with it,as it ſignifies, the Souls repoſe and reſt upon 


Chrift for the fulfilling of the promiſes annexed to him that believes, 


and liveth up to ſuch propoſitions. Theſe are the noble ends of the 
whole Law of God, and particularly of the charge, or command God 
hath given Miniſters as to Preaching,which can by no means be attain- 
ed, by Teachers diſcourſing Fables and endleſs Genealogies to people, 


nor by Peoples attendance to ſuch diſcourſes; for they can only fill 


peoples heads with notions and unprofitable queſtions which ſerve to 
gender ſtrife, and contention amongſt them, inſtead of Love either to 
God or Men, and lo to defile inſtead of purifying the Heart, and have 
no influence at a!l upon an Holy Life, all which can grow out of no root 


but an unfeigned Haith, 


t 


aimed ar, ed alide unto * vain jangling /. 


* chap. 6. 


&, 20, 


mandment, and from the end of which Commandment, from which 


pure Heart, good Conſcience, and Faith unfeigned. r a5o@4zzy]es, the 


word t1gnifieth to wander from a ſcope or mark, Some men elther pro- 
pounding to themſelves ends in their diſcourſes to people different from 


the command concerning Preaching, and the true end of that, or at 


leaſt wandring from that true end ; they have turned aſide. To doan 
action well, two things are neceflary, 1, The propounding to our 
(clves a right end, 2. A moving to it by due means and in right or- 
der ; who o faileth in either of thefe, can no more do an ation well, 
than he can ſhoot an Arrow well, that either eycth no mark, or level- 
leth his Arrow quite befides it, The Preachers refie&ed on by the A- 
poſtle, either never conlidered the true end of Preaching, or never re- 
garded It in theiraction; this made them turn atide from Theology to 
M 11e0l;gy, from Preackirg to Vain Fargiing, (ſo we tranſlate it, but) 
the word tignificth fooliſh ralkivg (fo we trantlate the adjeRive, T3110) 


I. TIMOTHY. 


(vis. that Timothy was Biſhop of that City,Metropo-| 


worthy of perpetual obſervation by all in the office |. 


6 From which q, ſome having || ſwerved r, have turn- 


q From which things for the article is plural @y.)From which Com- 


Chap. 1. Mh 


and ſo the word properly hgnifteth,any kind of fooliſh and 7np2rtimeys g; 
courſe, either ſerving to no good end,or at leaſt not that which the DAY 
ſcourle pretendeth to, And indeed all diſcourſe of Fables,and unprofitable 
iale quetrions,tending not to edifying,is no better than fooliſh raiking, 

7 Detiring to be teachers of the Jaw t, underſtanding 
neither what they ſay, nor whereof they afiirm ©, 
t Nowd)StiTygnor. This Term lets us know that the Apoſtle re. 
flefeth upon ſome who were or had been Fews, who either prefſeq the 
obſervance of the Law in order to juſtification, or pent their times in 
prefling the Traditions of the Elders, and conſtitutions of the <crihec 
as ſeptmenta L-gis, Hedges, (as they cail them) to the Divine Lay” 
though not of the Letter of it 3 upon which there aroſe a great many 
queſtions as inſignificant as their Traditions themſelyes, u Which 
theſe vain Preachers ſpent their time in ſpeaking to, neither under. 
fanding the Divine Law, nor the queſtions themſelves ſtarted and: 
ſpoke unto, yet ambitious to be accounted Teachers of the Lan, This 
vain defire of Reputation, as perſons of excellent $kill in the Law 
was. the cauſe of their erroneous idle Sermons : And their Ignorance 
1s aggravated and inexcuſable, in that they with prefumptuous bolineſ 
altert the things of which they are ignorant. 

8 But we know that the law 7s good w, if it be uſed 


lawfully x. 

w Not that I ſpeak againſt the Law of God, I know that it js holy 
and ſpiritual, and juſt, and good, Kym. 7. 12, 14. It is good though 
not for juſtification, yet for convidtion, to convince men of fin, and ag 
a Schoolmaſter to lead men unto Chriſt, and to dire us in our walk. 
ing with God; the equity and ſanctity of its precepts are evident tg 
the ſincere and purified mind, And as the Law has an intrinſick gogg. 
neſs in its nature, ſo *tis good to men when *tis uſed for the end to 
which God gave it. : : 

9 * Knowing this, that the law is not made for q*6! , 
righteous man y, but for the lawleſs z and diſobedient.g, % as 
for the ungodly b, and for ſinners c, tor unholy and pro. 
fane d, for murderers of fathers, and murdercrs of mg. 


thers e, for manſlayers f, 

3 Bythe Law is to be uaderſtood the Moral Law, (thove noſtibly 
not excluding the Law of Moſes, c fiftiig i: many Ordinances) as 
tis armed in ſtings and terrors, to reit. ain reveliious finners; bj the 
righteous man, is meant one ia whom a-principle of Divine Grace is 
planted, and who from the knowledge and love of Got, chooſes the 
chings that are pleaſing to him, and is ardent and attive to do his will, 
Now *tis true, the holineſs commanded in the Law, that conſiſts inthe 
love of God and our Neighbour, obliges every reaſonable creature in. 
diſpenſably and eternally ; but as the Law was delivered in ſo terrible 
a manner, as it has annext ſo many ſevere threatnings to the Tran 
grefſours of it, *tis evident, fhat *tis dire&ted to the wicked, who will 
only be compelled by fear from an outragious breaking of it. And this 
may be emphatically ſignified in the word here-uſed #t7zr, for it [ige 
nifies to be Jad, as well as. to be made. The Law no objicit:r is not 
laid againſt a righteous man. Thus we tranſlate it, Mz. 3. 10. The Ax 
zs Iaid to the root of the tree, there is ſome difference in the conftrudi. 
on, here it 15 immediately joyn'd with the Dative caſe, there with an 
Accuſative cale, with the Prepofition aggs betwixt the Verb and the 
Caſe, but that muſt be the ſence, It is very probable, that theſe falls 
Teachers had been terrifying the Chriſtians with the Law ; in oppoti 
tion to whom the Apoſtle ſaith, the Law was/not made for a righteous 
man, asto its condemning office, it was never intended againſta righte- 
ous man, but againſt men that committed and lived in groſs fin and widk 
edneſs, Theſe ſinners are firſt mentioned in general terms,then the A- 
poſtle proceedeth toa more particular enumeration of them, whether in 
them (as ſome think) the Apoftle hath reſpett to the ſeveral preceptsof 
the Decalogue, I cannot determine. x By the Lamleſs he meaneth pers 
ſons living without any reſpe& to the Laws of God or Men. «By the 
dijobedienr he meaneth ſuch as willlive in ſubje@ion to no Government, 
b The word by us Tranſlated ungodly, fignifieth, ſuch as live without a- 
ny Religion, having no regard to the Worſhip of God, &5:34a. c The 
word Tranſlated ſinners ſignifies infamous, ſcandalous finners, 4 Us: 
boly and prophane are alſo general terms, ſignifying perſons that have 
no piety, but lewdly talk of things ſacred, and live as lewdly, e Te 
wor ds fignifie ſich as ſtrike or beat their Parents, though they do not 
give them mortal wounds, and well exprefſeth violators of the fifth 
Commandment. f &yHeggives ſignifies ſuch as kill men, whether ma- 
litiouſly, or paſſionately, violaters of the fixth Commandment, 

10 For whoremongers g, for them that defile them- 
ſelves with mankiad b, for men-ſtealers 2, for lyars &, for 
perjured perſons J, and if there be any other thing that 


is contrary to ſound doctrine m. 

& The two next terms expreſs violators of the ſeventh Command- 
ment, whether by Fornication, Adultery, Inceſt, or any beaſtly luſts, 
þ Sodomit:s. i The word fignifieth ſuch as carry men into Captivity,or 
make ſlaves of them in the firſt place ; it ſignifies alſo any ſtealing of 
men. It 1s probable the firſt of theſe is rhe man-ftealing, principally 
intended, being the moſt common fin by Pyrates at ea, and Souldi- 
ers at Land ; yet not excluding any other ftealing of men from their 
Relations, which he inftanceth in, as one of the higheſt violations 0! 
the eighth Commandment. k By Lyars, he meaneth ſuch as knowingly 
ſpeak what is falſe, eſpecially to the prejudice of others, / By Perjur:d 
Perſons, he means ſuch as ſwear falſely, m And becauſe it would be too 
long to reckon up all kind of finners, he comprehends them all in 4 
general phraſe, and if there be any other thing, that is contrary to ſound 
Doerine, that is the holy and pure truth of God, that is not corrupted, 
but judges aright of good and evil ; for theſe he ſaith the Lew is made, 
that is, to deter from ſuch Crimes, or to condemn foy them ; but not 
to terrifie ſuch who either never we:e guilty of ſuch fagicious Crimes, 
or if they had been guilty, yet are now waſhed aud ſantified, and jufti- 
fied in the name of the Lord Jeſus, and by the Spirit of Got, as the A- 
poltle ſpeaks, 1 Cor. 6, 10, 11. 1he Law(as the Apoſtle here laith ) Was 
never made to terrifie, or to condemn, and affright theſe, tor Rom. 5. 
I. There is no condemnation 10 thoſe ybat are in Criſt Fejus, Tho walk + cha2 
not after the fleſh, but after the Spirit. : I%. 

11 According to the glorious goſpel of * the bleſſed +; rie 


F. 9s 
ſohn 5 


tt, 3.17 


God * which was commicted to my truſt, _ 
5 lc; 


—D— 


s- ws ov@”qdh Aa 2 fra ca os cap 


hap. I. 


Here the Apoſtle fpecifies the found Doftrine of which he ſpate 3 
that *tis contained in the Goſ\yel,the nerfect rule of righteouſneſs, which 
he ftiles the gloricus Goſpel of the bl:fj:4 God, it being a Dottrine reveal- 
ed from Heaven, wherein the concurrence c* the Divine Attributes, 

vViſlom, Power, Mercy, and juſtice doth 1inoit clearly ſhine to the 
Giory of God, 2 Cor. 4.6, Eph. 1.6, 12. and he gives-the Title of 
ll-fed to God, therevy to ſiznifie his tranſcendent goodneſs, in that be- 
ing infinitely happy in tlie poſſeſſion of his own excellencies, without 
any poſſible advantage and profic from any Creature, yet he was plea- 
{el to give his Son to be our raniom, and with him Grace and Glory 
to us, The Apoſtle ads which was commirred to me, to diſtinguiſh it 
f:0: the falle Dottrine which ſeducers publiſht under the name of the 
Goſpel, 
i2 And I thank Chriſt Jeſus our Lord who hath en- 
abled me, for char he counted me faithful, putting me 


into the miniſtry. 

Here St. Paul exprefies his moſt humble and ſolemn thanks to 
Chriſt for his rich favour in calling him to the High Office of an A- 
poltle : for by the miniſtry, that is to be underſtood, and 'ris ſo called 
by way of excellnce, it being the moſt glorious and Divine Miniſtry 
that ever was eſtabliſht in the Church : and he aſcribes to our Saviour 
the praiſe of all that he performed in the faithful diſcharge of it, He ſaich 
Chriſt enabled me, that is, endowed him with fidclity, Zeal,Courage,and 
all other qualifications requitite for that honourable and dithcuit Mini- 
ffry, 2 Cor. 3- 5, 6. Theend of that Sacred Minitiry was to enlighten 
ard inform the World from ſuperſtition, and that vicious and vain con- 
verſation that was ſo pleaſing to carnal men,to aboliſh thoſe corrupt cu- 
ftoms that had taken ſuch deep root, and to plant the truth that comes 
from above, and to publiſh a holy Law ſo oppoſite to corrupt nature. 
This work was oppoſed by craft and cruelty, the artifice and violence of 
the powers of darkneſs, in conjunQion with the perverted World. And 
theGlory of the 5 poſtles reſiſting ſuch Enemies is entirely due toChrift. 
He adds as a motive of his thankfulne(s, that Jeſus Chriſt counted him 
faithful, which is an evident proof that he intends that h: made him 
faithful. His faithfulneſs was not the cauſe or motive, but the fruit 
and effett of the Grace of God in calling him to the miniP®ry, This 
he expreſly declares, 1 Cor, 7. 25. Having obtained mercy to be faithful, 
If our Saviour had only diſcovered his fidelity, without beftowing that 
Grace upon him,there had not been a reaſon of ſuch affeRionate thanks- 
giving : for that always ſuppoſes ſome favour and benefit received, 

13 * Who was beforea blaſphemer q,and a perſecutor 
 Y, andinjurious s, But I obtained mercy ft, becauſe *I did 
hn 9.2 12norantly 4, in unbelief w, | 
y, q The kindneſs of God putting me into ſw noble a ſervice was the 
tt. 3-17. greater and more thank-worthy, becauſe before that time I was a blaſ- 

phemer, one who ſpake of Chrift reproachfully, (for that blaſphemy ſig- 
nifieth) Paul was a zealous 4.an in the Jewiſh Religion, his blaſphemy 
therefore only reſpected the Second Perſon in the Trinity, which the 
Jews owned not. Paul compelled others to blaſpheme,Afs 26, 11, r Ot 
his pertecution, ſee Ads 8. 3. he entered houſes, baled Men and Women 
to priſon, be breathed out threatnings and ſlaughter againſt the Diſciples of 
the Lord, 4&s 9. 2, he perſecuted Chriſtianity even unto Death, As 
22.4,5, s Thus he was injurious, for in other things he was as to the 
law blimel-(s, Phil, 2. 6, bred up a Phariſee according to the ſtriteſi 
Sed of th- F:wijh Religion ; bat he verily thought with bimſelf that he 
ought 10 do many things contrary to the Name of Feſus of Nazareth; ſo as he 
went according to his conſcience, (ſuch a one as he had) and A#,26. ver. 
10, 4ze had aljo Authority from the chief Prieſts, But neither the di- 
Qates of his own erroneous Conſcience, nor yet the Command of his 
Sy; £:10urs could (according to Pau?'s Divinity) excuſe him from being 
a per /*cutor, and injurious, t And ſtanding in need of the free par- 
C0n11g mercy of God, which he aith,he obtained of God's free Grace, 
u Beceule he did it ignoranty,we cannot reaſonably think that iznorance 
of the Divine Law (once publiſhedYſhould excule any tranſgrelſor of it, 
we ſee men will not allow it as to their Laws,after promulgation; ſo that 
although Paul perſecuted Chriftians 1gnorantly, yet he ſtood in need of 
Mercy, Tznorance excuſeth not a toro, but @ tanto, not in whole, but 
in part,and makes the {ſinners fin not to be ſo exceeding ſinful,eſpecially 
where it is not vincible, Pauls ignorance here mentioned was vincidle, 
he lived in Fudea,where the Goſpel had been preached ſome years, be- 
fore he periecuted the Profeſſors; he might have heard the Sermons 
preached, and een the miracles wrought by Chriſt and the Apoſtles, 
but he was bred up a Phariſee, and under the prejudices of that Se&t 
which are implacable Enemies to Chriſt, this kept him in 7gnorance ; 
Chriſt allows ſomething for the prejudices of mens Education, w He 
did what he did alſo while he was in a ſtate of Vnbelief, He believed one 
true and living God,(all the Jews did ſo)and worſhipped him according 
to the jewiſh manner, yet ſtiles himſelf an unbeliever, Every man is 
an unbeltever (in a Goſpel ſenſe)that receiveth not Jeſus Chriſt as the 
Son of God, and his Saviour z though he believes there is one God, &c., 
Paul addeth this circumſtance of his ignorant blaſpheming and perſecu- 
ting the truth, partly to juility the Divine Mercy that pardoned and 
preſerved him ; (for the Goſpel peremptorily exciudes from Pardon al] 
that fin againſt the Holy Ghoſt, ſuch who being enlightened by the 
knowledge of the ſaving Truth,yet for carnal reaſons deliberately and 
matlicioutly oppoſe it 5 now the ſhewing Mercy to Paul was no contra- 
diction to this moſt wile Law of God) and partly he mentions his ig- 
norarce to prevent the abuſe of the Divine mercy by men z as if from 
bis example they might ſecurely imitate his perſecuting the Saints, or 
live in 2 courſe of fin, though convinc'd of their wickedneſs, and hope 
for Mercy at the laft. | 
14 And the grace of our Lord was exceeding abundant x, 
vILh faith, and love which is in Chriſt Jeſus y. 

x The free love of God towards me, in juſtifying ſuch a guilty crea- 
ture, and ſanifying ſuch an unholy creature, and after calling me to 
tte office of an Apoſtle, fitting me for it, and truſting me with that 
great work and imployment, abounded beyond all meaſure and poſhbi- 


vyh 


| Cor, 
c, 
ſo 


1 &Is 


4 


YP 
it 


- 


Ity of Expretion. y Chriſt working Faith in me, inabling me to re- 
ceive him as the Son of God, and my Lord and Saviour,and to love hin 
whom I formerly thought ] ought rodo much againſt,and hisDiſciples 
whom [ formerly haled to Death,of whom I made havock, perſecuring 
then to death, He mentions Fatth and Love, the two principal Graces, 
1 oppoſition to the reigning, fins in his unconverted ſtate: Faith in the 
Duettrine of the Coipei,in oppoſition to his former Ignorance and Intff 


* C42! 
Is 

* [ 7:0 
o 4 


Ls] 
- 


L TIMOTHY 


Chap. I. 


delity ;3and Love to Chriſt and Pelieverz, in oppoition to his former 
Rage and Cruelty againſt them, Ant their Graces were from Chit 
the Fruits of his Merit, 2nd Holy Spirit. 

15 This zs a faithful ſaying 

ation a, * that Chriſt Jeſus came into worid- to 1a 

{inners b, of whom I am chief c. Ns 

2 The following laying, which is the great Propoſition of the Goſpel, © how : 
is a Saying that 1s in it ſelr true, and wherein God hath declared his ; 
Truth. 4 And worthy to be. with all thankfulneſs received, believed 
and accepted. b That Jeſus Chriſt b=i»g ſen: of the Father, in the ful- 
neſs of time, was incarnate, lived and Qed in the Worid ; not only to 
ſet Sinncrvan Example of a better Lite, nor only to make God placable 
towards Men, that if they would they micht be ſaved ; but to purchaſe 
a certain Salvation to Sinners, ſatistying Divine juſtice, and meriting 
all Grace neceſlary to bring them to Salvation, to carry the {ut Sheep 
home upon his Shoulders ; yea, thovgh they had been great Wande- 
reres, suapmoats. &And 1 was as great a one as any other, yea, the 
chtefeft, Paul though converted, had his iormer Sin of Perſcuticin Hee 
fore his Eyes, Perſecutors are ſome of the Chic of Sinners, Some will 
have the relative of which to refer to the ſaving mentioned, q.., Of 
which Sinners brought to Salvation I am the grear Preſident, having 
been ſo great a Sinner as I have been, and yet received to mercy, 

16 Howbeit, for this cauſe I obtained mercy 6, that in 
me firſt Jeſus Chriſt might ſhew forth all long-ſuffering e, 
for apattern to them who ſhould hereafter believe on 


him f to life everlaſting g. 
d*AMeQ?, The word we tranſlate howbeir, is as well to be tranſlated 
but, and ordinarily is ſo. For this cauſe, that is, for this end, God 
ſhewed me mercy. e That in me the firſt (ſo it is in the Greek, for it 
it is an AdjeQive) that is, as he ſaid before, the chiefeſt, or greateft 
Sinner,Chriſt might ſhew forth all long-ſuffering, bearing with me while 
I was in my rageagainft his Goſpel and Saints 3 and then changing my 
Heart to embrace hirf and to fove him. Or,That in me firſt,may reſpett 
the Deſign of our Saviour in ſending, Paul to convert the Gentiles: For 
ſuch a conſpicuousExample of hisClemensy and Grace towards ſo great 
a Sinner, whom he not only pardon'd, but preferred to the Dignity of 
an Apoftle,would be a ftrong Perſwative to them to receive the Go'pel 
with Faith and Obedience, For it follows, for 4 pattern, of God's Pa- 
tience and Free Grace to other Sinners, from whence they might learn, 
' that if they alſo ſhall receive and believe in him;their paſt Sins necd not 
be to them any reaſon to diſpair of his Mercy. g There being a certain 
Connexion betwixt true believing in Chtift, and Eternal Lite, = 
17 Now * unto the King h eternal s, immortal k, in- * Pſal, 1c: 
viſible 1, the * only wiſe God #1, be * honour and glory, : -— 


for ever and ever », Amen. 15. 27 

b The Apoſtle fallcth our of this Diſcourſe with a Doxology or Sen- 4 | Chro: 
tence, giving Glory to God, whom he calls the 27g, that is, the Mo- |, 7 
derator and Governour of all things, # Eternal, without beginning of ts 
Days, or end of Life, þ Immortal, not ſubjeQ, as Creatures, to any 
Paſſion, or determination of Being, } Inviſible, not obvious to our 
Senſes, whom no mortal Eye ever ſaw, m Only wiſe, Primitively and 
originally, and eminently, from whom all Wiſdom is derived. » Be 
given all Praiſes, Homage and Acknowledgments, by which he can be 
made glorious for ever. 

18 This charge I commit unto thee, ſon Timothy o, , c 
according to the prophefies which went before on thee p. , 
that thou by them mighteſt * war a good wartare 4. ; 

o The term Son here applied to Timothy; whom he elſewhere calls 
his Brother, is not a term of natural Religion, but of Spiritual Relati- 
on,and of affeHtionate Friendſhip and Endearment. By the charge men- 
tioned, he brobably means that before mentioned, ver. 3. to charge the 
falſe Teachers to teach no otber Yodrine, nor give heed to Fables, &c, 
p Theſe Propheſies were either the Judgments of good Men before con- 
cerning him, or (which poſſibly is more probable) ſome Divine Reve- | 
lations, Paul, or ſome Believers had received concerning this young 
Man. q That thou having heard of them, or remembring them 
(though thou meeteſt with oppoſition as a Miniſter, and as a Chriſtian, 
yet) mighteſt not be diſcouraged, but Preach and hold the Faith againſt- 
all Oppoſers. So the Apoftle expoundeth- himſelf, 

19 * Holding faith » and a good conſcience s, which « Chap, 3: 
ſome having put away t, concerning faith, have mad: g. 
ſhipwrack #; 

7 By Faith here is meant the DoRrine of Faith, and the bolding of 7t 

fignifies a Readineſs of the Mind's afſent unto it, without wavering or 
fluctuation, much leſs deſerting or denying it. $s By 4 good Conſcience 
is here to be underftood what the Scripture elſewhere, Aits 24. 16. 
calls a Conſcience void of offence both towards God and towards men,oppo- 
ſed to the Evil Conſcience, mentioned Heb. 10. 22. ſo as a good Cor- 
ſcience here ſignifies a pure Conſcience, which neceſſarily implieth 
an Holy Life ; for our AQions are preſently copied out into our Con- 
ſciences, and make either Blots or good Copies there. t Which ſome 
taking no care in, viz. tolive holily, ſo keeping a good Conſcience. 
u Have made Shipwrack concerning Faith, ſuttered loſs as to it, falling 
| from the Truths of the Goſpe]. Error ſeldom goes along, with an holy 
Life. The Truths of the Goſpel have ſuch an Influence upon Men's 
Converſation, that ordinarily Mens Holineſs is proportioned to their 
ſoundneſ in the Faith ; and uſually rhe love of ſome Luſt, is what be- 
trayeth Men into erroneous Judgments and Opinions. 


20 Of whom is Hymeneus and Alexander w ; whom 
[ have delivercd unto Satan x, that they may learn not 
to blaſpheme y. 


w Of which Men who have made ſhipwrack of a Zood Conſcience 
and concerning Faith ZHymeneus and Alexander are two Perſons. Of 
Hymeneus we read,2 Tim. 2. 17, he athrmed the ReſurreCtion was pait, 
and overthrew the Faith of many. Of Alexander we read, 2 Tim. 4.14. 
he was a great Enemy to Paul; the ſame Perſon, as fome judge, men- 
tioned Atts 19. 33. thena Friend to Part, butafrerwards one who did 
him much harm, x We meet with the ſame phraſe 1 Cor. 5. 5. See the 
notes there. Some think by it is ſignified a peculiar Power granted the 
Apoſtles, God in thoſe primitive tines confirming regular Excom- 

INUNICATIO NS, 


- af 
uy CYLis 


4 4 . & 8 F 
worthy of all accep- * Mat. ©, 
ff» | + ol be 
v w 

2.17. Luke. 


4 f 
3* 2 


” 
1 vv? 
Sb. 


it 


+5; 
Ai 


þ AR 
ijai/s 
a 


? 
F 


2 y | INe4.7> 


_ Chap. 1I. 


1! Or, d:- 


7 
ve 


| Or, emr- 
Fe#t place, 


munications, by letting Satan looſe upon perſons Excommunicated to 
torture them $ but we find nothing of this. in Scripture, I rather 


think the ſenſe is no more than whom / excommnicared and caſt out of 


the Church, making them of the world again,Cas the world is oppoſed to 
the Church, and Kingdom of Chritt) which tor the greater terror the 
Apoſtle exprefſeth by this Notion of being delivered to Satan who Is 
called the Go of this world, &c, y Not that 1 might ruine, and undo 
them, but that 1 might amend them in this exerciſe of diſcipline, tea- 
ching them to take heed of ſpreading damnable and perniciousErrours 
to the reproach of God, Or perhaps with their-perverſe opinions( which 
is very ordinary) they mingled reproachful ſpeeches concerning God, 


CHAP: IL 


A Commanl to pray for all men: But eſpecially for Rings and other 
M:nifirates: the Reaſon why, and manner how, I 8. How 
omen ſrould not be adorned © but with good works ; and recerve In- 
fRirution : out not Teach or Rule : For Man was firſt Created s and 
the Women firſt fell « their Hope, if fairkful, in Child-bearing, g---15+ 


1 F || Exhort therefore, that firſt of all, ſupplications 4, 
prayers b, interceſſions c, and giving of thanks be 


made for all men d : 

a Timothy (as was faid before) was left at Epheſus to manage the af- 
fairs of the Church there in the abſence of Paul, who in this Epiſtle di- 
res him as to this managery. Firft he exhorts him to ſee that Prayers 
ſhould be made for all men. Je194s, ſupplications for ſupply of wants, 
b Prayers, ae9TwWwyass ſignificth much the ſame 3 ſome will have it to 
fignifie Petitions" tor the conſervation or increaſe of what good things 
we have, © &feuZes Interceſſions, Prayers for others, whether for the 
averſion ofevils from them, or the collation of good things upon them, 
d And bleſſings of God for good things beſtowed upon our ſelyes, or 
others. Theſe Paul wills ſhould be made, Vp ayJoy which may be 
of all men, or, for all men, but the next verle plainly ſhews that it is 
here rightly rendred for all men, for there were at this time no Xngs 
in the Church. - Paul here eſtabliſheth Prayers as a piece of the pub- 
lick Miniſtry in the Church of God, and a primary piece; therefore 
he ſaith, he exhorts that Firſt of all; not in ſeſpett of rime ſo 
much, as principal'y ; intimating it a great piece of the publick Mini- 
ftry which he would by no means have negletted, And he would have 
theſe Prayers put up for all ocdersand ſorts of men (ſuch only excepted 
of whom St. Fobn ſpeaks, 1 Foh. 5. 16. who had finned that fin, for 
which he would not ſay Chriſtians ſhould pray. ) 

2 For kings, and for all that are in || authority e ; that 
we may lead a quiet and peaceable lite, in all goodlineſs 


and honeſty f. 

e The Kings of the Earth at that time were all Heathens, and ene- 
mies to the Chriſtian Religion, ſo (generally) were thoſe who were 1n 
2 ſubordinate authority to them,yet the Apoſtle commands that Pray- 
ers ſhould be made in the Chriſtian Congreations for them, What the 
matter of their Petitions was to be, is not expreſſed, but doubtleſs not 
to be limited by the next words, for that were not to have prayed for 
them, but for themſelves. Prayers for Magiſtrates ought to be di- 
rected by their circumſtances. If Magiſtrates were [dolaters and perſe- 
entors, they were to pray for their converfion, and the change of their 
hearts, However they were to pray for their life and health ſo far forth 
a5 might be for God's glory, and for God's guidance of them in the ad- 
miniſtration of their Government, and their ſucceſs in their lawful 
Counſels and undertakings, &c, f The latter words that we may 11ve 4 
quict and p-aceable life'"tn all godltneſs and honeſty, contains the reaſon 
why prayers ſhould be made for Governours, and the good effett 0 
chem. For *tis for this end that the ſupreme Lord hath ordained the 
office and dignity of Kings and Governours, that being arm'd with 
Authority and Power, they may preſerve Publick order and peace, by 
puniſhing evil-doers,and proteQting and encouraging thoſe that do well. 
"Thus under the Old Teſtament the Fews were commanded to pray for 
the peace of the Nation, or City whither they ſhould be carried Cap- 
tives, for in their peace they ſhould have peace, Fer. 29. 7. 

3 For this is good and acceptable in the ſight of God 
our Saviour 7. | 


Z To pray for all, as well our Enemies as our Friends, eſpecially 
for Princes, and ſuch as are in Places of Magiſtracy and Authority, is 


good, being according to the Will, and Commandment of God, and 


F2Pct. 3:5» 


acceptable to God, as all atts of obedience to his Will are, The word 
Saviour may either be underſtood with reference to the Divine Being, 
God being our Preſerver, who maketh his Sun to ſhine, and his rain to 
fall upon the juſt and unjuſt, which Mar. 5. 45. our Saviour brings as 
an argument to inforce his precept of Love to our Enemies : Or with 
a ſpecial reference to Chriſt, to whom the Title of Saviour with 
reference to Eternal Salvation more ftriftly belongs, who alſo by 
his death, when we were enemies, reconciled. us to God : ſo that 
ſuch a charitable office muſt be acceptable to God, becauſe in doing it 
we both ſhew our ſelves the children of our heavenly Father, and alſo 
the followers of Chriſt, 


4 * Who will have all men to be ſaved, and to come to 


the knowledge of the truth h. 

þ The Apoſtle produces a clear convincing reaſon, that the duty of 
Charity in praying for all men, is pleaſing to God, from his love ex- 
tended to all, iz his milling their Salvation, and their knowledge 
and belief of the Goſpel, which is the only way of Salvation, 
From hence our Saviour's Commiſſion -and Command to the A- 
Poſtles was univerſal, Go and reach all Nations, Mar, 28. 19, 
preach the Goſpel ro every creature, that is, to every man, Mark 16, 
I5. he excludes no people, no perſon, And accordingly the Apoſtles 
diſcharged their officeto their utmoſt capacity; Col. 1. 21, 23. But a 
queſtion ariſes, how can it be ſaid that God weuld have all men ſaved, 
when that the moſt of men periſh ? For the reſolving this difkculty, 
we muſt obſerve that in the ftile of Scripture the will of God fome- 
times ſignifies his eternal Counſel and Decree, that things ſhould be 
done either by his immediate efficiency, or by the intervention of 
means : Or ſecondly. his commands and invitations to men to do ſuch 
things as are pleaſing to him. The Will of God in the firft ſenſe al- 


i 


I. TIMOT HY. 


counſel ſhall ſtand, I will do all my pleaſure, 1/4, 46. 10. for other. 
wiſe there muſt hea change of God's Will and Counſel, or a defect of 
power, both which aſſertions are inipious blaſphemy. But thoſe things 
which he commands and are pleaſing to him, are often not performed 

without any reflection upon him: either as mutable or impotent, Thux 
he declares, that he wills things that are pleaſing to him z as, 1wi! no: 
the death of a ſinner, but that he ſhould turn and live, Exeb. 93, 11, and 
ſometimes that he mil! not thoſe things that are diſpleaſing to him, 2c 
contrary to holineſs, though he did not decree the hindering of them : 
thus he complains in Iſa, 65, 12, Te did evil before mine eyes, and dig 
chuſe that wherein I delighted nor. This diftin&ion of the Divine Win 
being clearly ſet down in Scripture, anſwers the objettion ; for when 


ro th: knowledge of the truth ; and in the ſame ſenſe by St. Peter,thar Gyg 
will bave none periſh, but come to repentance, we muſt underftand it, nor 
with reſpe& to his Decretive Will, but his Complacential Will, that 
is, the Repentance and Life of a Sinner is very pleaſing to his Holineſs 
and Mercy, And this love of God to Men, has been Qeclared in open- 
ing the way of ſalvation to them by the Mediator,and by all the inftry. 
ions, invitations, commands, and promiſes of the Goſpel, afſurin 
them that whoever comes to Chriſt upon the terms of the Goſp21 ſhall fn no 
wiſe be caſt off : That no Repenting Believer ſhall be excluded from 
aving Mercy, 


God and men, the man Chriſt Jeſus k. 


ſons, the unity of God, and the unity of the Mediator : though there 
are divers ſocieties and vaſt numbers of mea, yet there is but one Goe, 
the Creatour and Preſerver of all. If there were many Gods in Na- 
ture, it were conceivable that the God of Chriſtians were not the God 
of other men, and conſequently that his good Will were confin'd to his 
own portion, leaving the reſt to their ſeveral Deities. But ſince there 
is but one true God of the world, who has revealed himſelf in the Gol. 
pe}, it neceſſarily follows that he is the God of all men in the relation 
of Creator and Preſerver, And from hence he concludes, God wil! hays 
all men to be ſaved, He argues in the ſame manner that ſalvation v4 
faith in Chriſt belongs to the Gentiles as well as the Fews, Rom. 3. 22, 
29, The Apoſtle adds, for the cleareft aſſurance of this good Viil «: 
God to ſave men, that there is one mediator between God and men, the 
man Chriſt Feſus, When the fin of man had provok'd Divine Juſtice, 
and the guilt could not be expiated without fatisfattion,God appoint 
his Son incarnate to mediate between his offended Majeſty and his Ne- 


Unity of the Mediator is obſervable ; as there is one God of all Nati. 
ons, ſo there is one Mediator of all. The ftrength of the Apoſile's 
| Argument from the Unity of the Mediator is this : if there were many 
Mediators, according to the Numbers of Nations in the world, there 
might be a ſuſpition whether they were ſo worthy and ſo prevalent as to 
obtain the Grace of God, every one for thoſe in whoſe behalf they 
did meditae, But ſince there is but one, and that he is able 10 ſv: to 
the uttermoſt all that come ro God by him, *tis evident that all men have 
the ſame Mediator, and that every one may be aſſured that God is 
willing he ſhould be ſaved, and for that bleſſed end, ſhould by Faith 
and Repentance accept the Covenant of Grace. The Apoftlle for the 
ſtronger Confirmation, ſpecifies the Mediator, the man Chriſt F-ſus, to 
encourage the hopes of all men, from the Communion they have with 
him in nature, that they may partake of his Salvation, and that this 
great Mediator having come trom Heaven and aflumed the infirmity 
of our nature, Zeb, 4. 15. will be inclined compaſſionately to a 
them, and raiſe them to his heavenly Kingdom. 
6 Whom gave himſelf a ranſom for 


fied * in due time: ; 


of ones life to ſave anothers. 


dertook our reſtoring to the favour of God, and voluntarily endured 
the puniſhment due to our fins, and gave his moſt precious blood and 
life as the price of our Redemprion,Mar, 20.28. Tf it be objz(ed,LHow is 
it conſiſtent with Chriſt giving himſelf a ranſom for all, that ſo many pe- 
riſh in their fins? The anſwer is clear, we muſt diſtinguiſh between ths 
ſuthciency of his ranſom, and the efficacy of it ; he paid a ranſom wor- 
thy to obtain the Salvation of all men, and has done whatever was re- 
quiſite to reconcile God, and make men capable of Salvation : but only 
thoſe who by a lively faith depend upon him, and obey him, are actual 
partakers of Salvation ; that is, no perſon but may be ſaved in believ- 
ing ; and if men periſh,it is not from the defett of Righteouſnels in the 
Mediator, but from the love of their luſts, and their obftinate rejefting 
their own Mercies. And *tis unjuſt that the glory of his Divine Com- 
paſſion and Loye ſhould be obſcured or leflened for their ungratetul 
negle( of it, 


7 Whereunto * I am ordained a preacher 9,and an apo-*Ror 
{te p, (I ſpeak the truth in Chriſt, aud lye not q) a * tea- the - 


cher of the Gentiles in faith and verity 7. 

o For the publiſhing and making known of which Teſtimony 0 
Divine Goodneſs, and Truth, I am /et or appointed, 2 Tim, 1. 11, 
£70, apreacher, or a publick officer to proclaim and make it known. 
p And am immediately called by Chriſt, and ſent out upon that employ- 
ment. q I call Chrift to witne(s that I ſpeak nothing bur what I know 
to be true. It is a Phraſe hath, if not the form, yet tie force of an 
oath, and was neceſſary in this caſe z for it was not cate tO perſwade 
the Fews, that God had ſent any to reveal the way of valvation to ths 
Geniles, r And my ſpecial Province was to teach theC pentiles, AS 9.15. 
& 26, 17. Gal, 2,7, 8,9. and to inftirud them in the Doctrine of Faith 
and 7ruth : or I was et faithiully and truly to inſtruct the Gennes, 


* lifting up holy hands t, without wratn %, and doubt- 


ing w. 


s This is one Precept that I give thee in charge 2: to the mana- 


en meet together 


ways infallibly obtains its efteQ, 7/ul, 115. 3. thus he declares, My |gery of the affairs of the Church, that wherever !! _ 


Chap. 1 


"tis ſaid, in the Text, that God wil! have all men to be ſaved, and to come + 


5 For * there is one God, and * one mediator between , ſain 
| &Ats 
k The Apoſtle proves the univerſal love of God to men by two rea. #p 


bellious Subje&s. And the parallel between the Unity of God, and the 


F all, | fe) be teſti- " C:; 


m *Ayri\vlegv. The word here tranſlated Ranſom, is very empharical. 2 Tz, 
It ſignifies the exchanging of Condition with another, the laying dow! 1. 12, 
This our Saviour has done for ns. 1he} Or, 1 
Scripture diſcovers to us, that by Nature we are the children of wrath,an [itn 
guilty of many rebellious ſins, and devoted to Eternal Death; being in * £pl.l 
this deplorable ſtate, the Son of God moved by his Divine Love un-g, 1c, 


| Gen,3.6, 


I 5! 
f the Gal, 


. ; x Mal 
8 I will therefore that men pray * every where 5,,.., 


( 


110 


1 Cor, 


9+ 24s 
EMH. 5, 


' Gen- 1, 


1-& 2,18, 
Cor. 11, 


» 


' ia 


to worſhip God, whether in Houfes built for that purpoſe, or in more 


Chap. I. 


L TIMOTHY. 


common houſes, or any other place, (for the time is now come when 
there is no ſpecial command for one place more than another, no ſpe- 


cial promiſe made to mens prayers in one place more than another, as 
there was to and concerning the Temple of old,Fobz 4. 21.)they ſhould 

f prayer, or joining with 
him who doth ſo Minifter, # But let them take heed how they pray,for 


God heareth not ſinners, foln 9, 31. Let them therefore lift up holy 
u And let them take 
0 
bl 


pray, either miniſtring to others in the duty 0 


hands, not regarding iniquity in their hearts. 
heed of carryingmalice,or inveterate anger in their hearts when was 
to God in Prayer, for they muſt pray, Father! forgive us our treſpaſſes 


as we forgive them that treſpaſs againſt us, and Mat, 6. 15. If ye for- 
give not men their treſpaſſes, neither will your heavenly father forgive your 
ereſpaſſes. w And let them allo take heed of doubting in Prayer, of the 
Goodneſs, Truth,or Power of God to fulfil their wiſhes, but Fames 1. 6, 
let them ask in faith, nothing wavering, For 1:t not that man think, that 


be ſhall recetve any thing of the Lord. 


| ; 9 In like manner alſo, that women adorn themſelves 
| | in modeſt apparel x, with ſhamefaſtneſs and ſobriety y - 
| Oc, p7ci-not with || broidred hair, or gold, or pearls, or coltly 


xd, aray Z, 


| ; mands that they ſhould adorn thomſelves in modeſt apparel, obſerve a 
| decency, with reſpe& to the modeſty of their Sex, the purity of Reli- 
gion, the quality of their condition, and their Age: Religion has no 
other intereſts in our habits, but to regulate them according to. a mo- 
deft comelineſs ; for they are indifferent in their nature, and neither 
add nor detra& from the acceptance of our Religious ſervices. 
: : » Shamefaſtneſs and Sobriery, or modeſty a moderation of mind ſhew- 
; | ed both in the habit of the body, and the manners and behaviour, both 
| with theſe inward habits, and in an outward habit, that may ſpeak ſouls 
| poſſeſt of theſe inward habits. + Not with hair plaited or curled, not 
. adorned with ornaments of Gold, or Pearls, or coftly aray. The A- 
; | poſtle condemneth not theſe ornaments, where they are ſuited to the 
: g quality of Women, and ask not too much time to put on, and in order 
| but where they are too exceſſive, with reſpett to the purſe of thoſe that 
" : wear them, or take up more time to be ſpent in putting them on, than 
- | 3s fit to be ſo ſpent, eſpecially on a Sabbath-day, or where they are put 
a on out of pride, or to make a vain ſhew, or are of that nature and fa- 
4 , ſhion, as they ſpeak an unchaſt, or an immodeſt heart, or may cauſe 
» | ſcandal to others. The Apoſtle Peter x Pet, 3, 3. hath much the ſame 
: ; precept, where he is not ſpeaking of Womens habits, with ſuch ſpecial 
: q reference to publick Afſemblies,but to their ordinary Converſation ; but 


x The Apoftles next Precept to be urged by Timothy,is concerning the 
habits of Women, eſpecially when they come to worſhip God in the pub- 
lick Aſſemblies, (for as to ſuch Aſſemblies the Precepts in this Chapter, 
both before and after this, chiefly relate) concerning theſe, he com- 


n it ought to be more ſpecially avoided, when people come to worſhip 
| God. They ſhould not ſo habit themſelves when oy g0 to pray, as if 


J 
, 1 they were going to a Dancing-School. (As Chryſoſtome 
> | complained of- ſome that did.) 


10 But (which becometh women profeſling godlineſs) 


. with good works 4. 

0 | 4 They ought to look at the 0r714ment of good works ; for thoſe are 
h the Ornaments which beft become Women profeſſing Godlineſs, whoſe 
is q hearts ſhould deſpiſe theOrnament of the figure of excrementitious hair, 
ty | or a little yellow earth, or a ſtone, or the work of a pitiful Silkworm, 

{t | 11 Let the women learnin ſilence with all ſubjection b. 


b That is, in the publick aſſemblies for Worſhip, it is the Womans ! 
part ſilently to learn, ſhewing thereby a ſubjeftion to the man who is 


wy) the head of the Woman. 
!.2 1: Ws ; Coe, 12 But * Iſuffer nota woman to teach c,nor * touſurp! 
1.1 Wh:.:;, authority over the man d, but to be in ſilence. 
Ci Or,! Eh. 5, - © Not to teach in the publick Congregation, except ſhe be a Pro- 
EL T0 pheteſs, endued with extraordinary gifts of the Spirit, as Mary, and ' 
no ® pul Anna, and Huldab, and Deborah, and ſome Women in the Primitive 
1-9, 1. WF Church, concerning whom we read, 1 Cor. 11. 5. that they prophefied, 
a d Ordinary teaching of the Women was an Uſurpation of Authority 
i | over the Man, who is the Head, which the Apoſtle alſo forbad in x Cor. 
8 : It. 3. and here repeateth; it is probable that the ſpeaking of ſome Wo- 
Ce | men in the Church who had extraordinary Revelations, imboldned 
hs | others alſo to aim at the like, which the Apoſtle here diretts his ſpeech 
I- againſt, Nevertheleſs Women may, and it is their Duty to intiru& 
(Co ; their Children and Families at home, eſpecially in the abſence of their 
ly | Husbands, 
- FGen-z1, T2 For * Adam was firſt formed, then Eve e. 
7.&2,18, e Lhe Man had the priority of the Woman in his Creation, He was 


AS Cor, 11, not made for her, but She was made for a meet help for him, therefore 
w 19, ſhe being ſo made for him, ought to uſurp no Authority over him, 
ral Gen,z.6, 14 And * Adam was not deceived f, but the woman 
| being deceived, was in the tranſgreſlion, 

f Beſides, Adam was not firſt deceived, nor indeed at all deceived 


o- = immediately by the Serpent, but only inticed, and deceived by the wo- 
"OY man, who was the Tempters Agent, ſo as that ſhe was both firſt in the 

BY ik tranſgreſſion in order of time, and alſo principal in it, contributing to 
he Ga | the ſeduCtion or tranſgrefſion of the Man, which ought to be a contide- 
he ration to keep the Woman humble, ina low opinion of her ſelf, and 


in. ; that lower Order wherein God hath fixed her. 

| 15 Notwithſtanding b ſhe ſhall be ſaved # in child-bear- 
« | ing k, if they continue in faith and charity 1, and holineſs 
G with ſobriety . 
þ Though the Woman was unhappy as to be deceiyed by the Ser- 


he 
" pent, and co be the firft in taking the forbidden fruit, and an inftru- 
Ft ment to intice her Husband to do the like, which may give all of that 
SEX A cauſe of Humiliation, and ſhew them the reaſonableneſs of God's 
_— order in putting them in ſubje&ion to man, and prohibiting them to 
Sifu break God's order in aſurping Authority over the man ; yet through 
i” the gracious interpoſition of the Med7aror, peg” nos born of a Wo- 
man) ſhe hath no reaſon to deſpair either of a Temporal Salvation, 
oy from the peril and danger of Child-birth, or much lefs, of an Eternal 


in his time 


4 
bo 
L 
' 
1 


| 


| 


Chap. III. 


Salvation, # for ſhe ſhall be ſaved, ſhe ſtands upon equal ground with the 
man as to Eternal Salvation,who cannot be ſaved without Faith and Ho- 
lineſs,and adiſcharge of the duties incumbent upon him,and patient en- 
during the croſſes and trials God exerciſeth him with ;and the Woman 
alſo ſhall be ſaved, Þ By faithful performance of her duty,and patiently 
enduring her croſſes and trials, in the pains and peril of Child-bearin '4+ 
notwithftanding they are the ſenſible marks ofGod's diſpleaſure for fin, 
yet the ſufferings of Chriſt has taken away the ſaid bitternefs, 7 If ſhe 
alio liveth in the exerciſe of Faith in Chriſt, and Love to God,and her 
Husband, and all Saints, and in all exerciſes of Holineſs, with Sobriety. 
Some refer the Pronoun they, to the Children, becauſe the Apoſtle had 
been before ſpeaking of the Woman in the Singular number 5 but there 
1s nothing more ordinary than that change of the number, eſpecially 
where collettive words are uſcd, that ſignifie a whole Species or Sex: 
and it is unreaſonable to think the Apoſtle ſhould ſuſpend the Salvation 
of the Mother, upon the Faith and Holineſs of the Child, and to inter- 
pret it of the Mothers indeavours towards it, ſeemeth hardly a ſuffici- 
ent interpretation of the term continue, ; 


CHAP. II. 


The Office aud Qualifications of 4 Teacher, 1 —<7, Of D:acons, 8---10; 
Of their Wives and Familes, —14. The Church the Pillar of Truth, 
which is the Myſtery of Godlineſs, 15, 16. 


I His is a true ſaying a, If a man deſireth the office 

of a ® biſhop b, he deſireth a good work c. * Alts -0; 
4 Tligng, A faithful ſaying, that which none can diſpute, of which 23 
none un to doubt. 56 If a man defires any office, to which belongs 

an overtight of the Church of God, The Greek word £moxo71 ſigni- 
fies in the general any overfght of others ; here the following diſcourſe 
reftrains it to an overſight of perſons, and affairs in the Church. The 
Apoftle by this Phraſe determines this employment lawful, and under 
due circumſtances to be defired, and faith of it, that he who defireth it, 
defireth xaady te2oy c 4 good work, a noble imployment. It is'a work + 
the office of the Miniſtry in the Church is and ought to be a work, The 
Titles of Goſpel Miniſters are not meer Titles of honour ; and of all 
works or employments the Miniftry is the moſt noble employment, 
We (faith the Apoſtle) are ſtewards of the myſteries of God, Miniſters of 
Chrift, 1 Cor. 4. 1. Embaſſadors for Chriſt, in Chriſt's ftead, 2 Cor, $.20. 
God's Angels or Meſſengers to Churches, Kev, 2. 1. It being ſo good, 

ſo great and noble an employment, it is no wonder that God hath re- 
ſtrained women the weaker and more ignoble Sex from invading it,for 

all men are not fit for it, but only ſuch as are hereafter deſcribed. 


2 * A biſhop d then muſt be blameleſs e, the husband , 5;, . 
of one wifef, vigilant g, ſober b, || of good behaviour 5, 5, #5; * 


given to hoſpitality k, * apt to teach /. [| Modeſt: 
In the following deſcription, there is the compleat charaer of an * 2 Tim. 
Evangelical Biſhop, with reſpe& to the virtues wherewith he muſt be 2: 24. 
adorned, and the vices from which he muſt be exempt, and as to the 

condutt of his perſon, and the government of his Family, and his car- 

riage to the Church, and to thoſe that are without, d Whoever hath 

the office of overſight in the Church of God,muſt be e ſuch a perſon as 

none can truly blame for any notorious or conſpicuous errours in; his 

life, f None, who at the ſame time hath more Wives than one. (as 

many of the Fws had, nor was Polygamy only common amongſt th; 

Fews, but amongſt the other Eaftern Nations, but this was contrary 5 

the inftitution of Marriage.)Some interpret this of ſucceſſive Marriage, 

as if it were a ſcandalous thing for a Minifter to marry a ſecond time, 

but for this they have no pretence from Holy Writ, or reaſon, or the 


| pratice and cuftom of Nations. Many perſons loſe their firſt Wives 


ſoon after Marriage, that were not ſecond Marriages lawful, all the 
ends of Marriage muſt be fruſtrate as to them, The Apoſtle command- 
ing Minifters to be the Husbands but of one Wife, doth not oblige them 
to marry, if God hath given them the gift of continency, but it efta- 
bliſheth the lawfulneſs of their marrying againſt the Doctrine of Devils 
in this particular, which the Church of Kome teacheth. g The word 
here Tranſlated visilant fignifieth alſo ſober, but for that cwogsys is 
after uſed, He muft be one that watcheth his Flock, and is attentive to 
his work 3 one that will neither be long abſent from his flock, nor yet 
ſluggiſh while he is with them. b One that is pruderr, modeſt, tem- 
perate, that can govern his affe&ions and paſſions. # A man of a 
comely, decent behaviour, x85 wOQ@- no proud ſupertilious man, that 
deſpiſeth others, nor moroſe man, who cannot accommodate himlelt to 
others. k One that loveth ſtrangers, that is, who is ready to expreſs 
his love to ſtrangers (eſpecially ſuch as for the truth have left their 
Country) by all courteous offices. 1 One that is able to inftrutt others, 
and who hath a facility or aptneſs to it, neither an ignorant, nor yet a 
lazy man, 


3 |] Not given to wine #2, no ſtriker v, not * greedy Of, vo! 
of filthy lucre o, but patient p, * not a brayuler 9, not re:dy ro 


covetous r. | quarrel, 
and offer 


#2 The word fignifieth a common tippler, whether he drinks to the SR. an 
loſs of his reaſon or no, a Win:-bibber, that makes bibbing at a Tavern "> ? 
his Trade no fitter at Wine. » No quarreller that cannot keep his, -, ; 
fiſts off him that provoketh him. o One that abhors all filthy and diſ- 4 5 
honeſt gain, any kind of way. p 6Hrenth a fair equal man, who will ; 
not exatt the rigour of what he might, a patient, gentle, courteous g  T-; 
man, ſo far from contention, that he will rather part with what is his , . 4 ' 
right. q 4pazev, One that will not fight, whether it be with his” 

hand or tongue, 7 One that doth not love Silver ; that is, not with 

an immoderate, ſinful love, ſoas to get it any way. 


4 Onethat ruleth well his own houſe /, having his chil- 
dren in ſubje&ion with all gravity t. 


f If he be one to whom God hath given a Family, one who hath gi- 
yen an experiment of his Converſation. and Ability, to take care 
of a Church, by the caxe that he hath taken of his Family,and his ruiing 

| an 


— 


Chap. III. L TIM 


in that lefſer Socicty. t One that hath not let his Children behave 
themſelves rudely, and indecently, and rebelliouſly, but kept them in 
order by a grave demeanour towards them, 1 

& For it a man know not how to rule his own houle z, 


how ſhall he take care of the church of God w. 
4 For if a Man hath a Family, and hath ſhewed that he neither hath 
Wit nor Honeſty enovghto govern that little Society, which hath his 
conRant Preſence with it. w With what reaſon can any one preſume, 
that he ſhould be fit to he truſted with the Care of the Church of God, 
which is a larger Society, with all the Members of which he 15 not ſo 
conftantly preſent, and over whom he hath not ſuch a coercive Power, 
and as to whom a far greater Care muft be taken. : : 
Or, oze 6 Not || a novice x, leſt being lifted up with pride y, 
zewly cone he fall into the condemnation of the devil z. 
z6 the fairb x Not a young Plant, that is, one that is newly made a Member of 
the Church of Chriſt, ſuch Perſons are apt to ſwell in the opinion of 
their newly acquired knowledge, ftate, or dignity, 4 And being ſo 
lifted up, they will be in danger of ſuch a Puniſhment,as the Devil for 
his Pride met with z or to be guilty of ſome il] or indecent Behaviour, 
which may give the Devil occation to accuſe them. \Others here 1n- 
terpret Ne5ax more appellatively, and underſtand by it a man that is 
an accuſer,making the ſence this, and fa!l into the judgment,cenſure, 
or condemnation of men, accuſing them for ſuch behaviour, 
- Moreover, he muſt have a good report of them 


which are without a, leſt he fall into reproach b, and the 


ſnare of the devilc. | 

a The Apoſtle would have Miniſters Men of good Reputation a- 
moneſt ſuch as were without the Pale of the Church (for that is the 
meaning of that term, which are without, vide 1 Cor, 5, 12. 1 Theſſ. 4+ 
12.) others might be admitted as Members of the Church, but not as 
Rulers in it,becauſe the Glory of God was much concerned in the Re- 
putation of ſach Perſons z they were as Lights ſet upon a Hill, 6 Leſt 
men reproach ſuch perſons for their former infamous Life, and ſo pre- 
judice others againſt the Do&rine they bring. c And the Snare, either 
of ſome Accuſer, or ofthe Devil, who hath this Name from his accu- 
fing of the Brethren z or left he fall into ſome temptation to revenge, 
hatred, undue anger, or to be cowardly in the diſcharge of his Duty, 
leſt he ſhould by faithfulneſs provoke others to reproach him for his 
tormer courſe of Life, 

8 Likewiſe muſt the deacons, be grave d, not double- 
tongued e, not given to much wine f, not greedy of fil- 


thy Iucreg, 
4 The term Deacon ſignifies the ſame with one that miniſtreth, and 
15 applicble to any, that have any Service in the Church. But it is al- 
ſo a term peculiar to the Office of thoſe who ſerved Tables,that is, took 
care of the Poor, for which purpoſe theſe Others were firft inftituted, 
Aﬀs 6. 2. and thus the term is taken, Kom, 12. 7, 8. Pb). 1.1. and 6 
it here muſt be interpreted, being diſtintly mentioned from the other 
Officers, whoſe Qualifications were before exprefled ; nor is it required 
of theſe Officers that they ſhould be HNrx]1zo?, apt to teach. Indeed 
both Srephen and Philip did preach, but the latter was an Evangeliſt, 
and it was a time of Perſecution,when even the more private Brethren 
went every where preaching the Goſpel. Of theſe Officers, he requires 
that they ſhould be perſons, not of light aiery tempers, but ſerious and 
co:apoſed, men of a madeſt ſeemly carriage, e Not excefhive talkers, 
2r n.1en that regarded not what they ſaid, but talked any thing accord- 
1g, to the place, or company they were in, or with, f Not too much 
atending Taverns,and places where Wine was ſold, or drank, g Not 
greedy of Gain in any ſordid baſe way. | 
o * Holding the myſtery of the faith þ in a pure 


conſcience 2. 

þ Not ignorant or inconſtant Perſons, but ſuch as were acquainted 
with the Myfteries of the Goſpel,and believed them, and held to them. 
Z And men of an holy Life. 


10 And let theſe alſo firſt be proved k, then let them 


uſe the office of a deacon, being found blameleſs /. 

& The Higher Officers ought to be proved, (as well as- theſe of a 
lower Order) as by Examination or Conference ; ſo (which poſſibly 
1s here more intended) by an Obſeryation of their Lives and Conver- 
Ation, for ſome time before they were admitted into this Employment. 
} Then being found blameleſs, they were to be admitted into this Em- 
ployment. | 4748 | 

11 Evenſo muſt their wives be grave m, not fſlande- 
rers.#, ſober o, faithful in all things p. 

m Muſt their is not in the Greek, but ſupplied by our Interpreters, 
an as ſome think ill, judging that he ſpeaks here not of Deacons 
1 tves, but of ages fn of fuch Women as had the Deacons Office 
conferred on them, ſuch a one was Phehe, Rom. 16, 1, but it may be 
underſtood of either,both ought to be not light, aiery, tatling Perſons, 
but compoſed, ſerious, grave People. # Nor Devils, (fo it is in the 
Greek) that is, - Perſons given to ailing and accuſing others. o Sober, 
ſee the ſenſe of that word, verſe 2, who bave approved themſelves eye- 
Ty way honeſt, and ſuch Perſons as may be trufted. 

_ 12 Letthe deacons be the husbands of one wife, ru- 
ling their children, and their own houſes wel. 

q ee the ſenſe of theſe words, verſe 2, 4. being the qualifications al- 
ſo of a Biſhop. 


*Cla?.n, 
b9s 


probably true, and but rational, that the Primitive Church did out of 
their Deacons chule their higher Officers for the Church, yet neither 
was this done univerſally as to all Perſons choſen into thoſe higher 


Gentiles c, believed on in the world d, * received up in- 
to glory e. 


and this God thus manifeſted in the fleſh,wa*( uſt ift 
ther by his divineNature(which is here,as ſome chink,call 
vertue of which he in the fleſhwrought many miraculous 0 


[| 


OTHY. Chap. 11 


Employments, nor as to all thoſe that uſed the Office of a Decaon we. 
there doubtleſs being many who had done ſo, who yet were not, 
Szx)txot, fitted with an ability ſufficient to be Preachers, Without 
which fittingneſs the PrimitiveChurch would not chuſe any to ſuch Em. 
ployment. / By the well performance alſo of the Office of a Deacon 

many obtained a great liberty,or freedom of Speech, MUPPHNIICY, Is 6 
the Dofrine of the Faith of Chriſt : For by the exerciſe of the D , 
cons Office, they had much Converſe both with the Paſtors ang M = 
bers of the Church, which Converſe did not only improve their "98+: 
ledge in the Dottrine of Faith, bat took off that exceſſive baſkfulner 
which poſſefſeth many, till they come to be fully acquainted with 
thing of which, and the Perſons before which they are to ſpeak which 
we ſee by daily experience. Or, the Apoſtle intends that Courage that 
ariſes from a good Conſcience. Thoſe that are careleſs and unfaithfy] 
in the Diſcharge of their Duty, Guilt makes them timorous ; but th. 
good and faithful Servant of God enjoys that Liberty and Courage 
which Faith in the Lord Jeſus gives, and without fear diſcharges all the 

parts of his Office. 


14 Theſe things I write unto thee, hoping to come 


unto thee ſhortly t. 

t I being now in Macedon, or at Athens, or ſome parts thereabouts 
have wrote to thee, whom 1 left at Epbeſus, theſe precepts 2bout the 
Officers of Churches, not being ſure I ſhall, but hoping my ſelf ſoon 
to come to Epheſus unto thee, which yet he did not, as we read ; for he 
met 7imothy at Troacs, ARS 20. 5, 


I5 Butif I tarry long «, that thon mighteſt know how 
thou oughteſt to behave thy ſelf in the houſe of God, 
which is the church of the living God w, the pillar and 
|| ground of the truth x. 

u I do not know how God will diſpoſe of me, though T hope ſhortly 
to ſee thee; and therefore I have written to dire& thee how in the 
mean time thou ſhouldeft carry thy ſelf in the Aﬀairs of the C burch, 
which I have committed to thee,which is a matter of great moment; for 
the w people which conſtitute the Church of him who is not like the 
God of the Heathens,a dead man conſecrated, and made a God ; nor a 
Being without Life,like their Tmages,but one who hath Life in himſelf, 
and from himſelf, is the Houſe of God, a People in, and amongſt 
whom hedwelleth,and amongſt whom he is worſhipped,and of whom he 
hath a great care,and for which he hath a great love,Chriſt having died 
for it, That be might ſanifie and cleanſe it with the waſhing of Water ly 
the Word, Eph. s. 26. and which (as a man doth by his Houſe) he is dai. 
ly inlarging, beautifying, and adorning with the Graces of his Holy 
Spirit, that (as there) v. 27. be might preſent it to himſelf 4 gliricus 
Church without ſpot or wrinkle,or\any ſuch thing, but that ir ſhould be holy, 
2nd without blemiſh, x Which Church is the pillar and ground of truth, 
VAC 4 £Negivue; we want a goodEngliſh word whereby to tranſlite 
:5e latter of the two words in theGreek,which poſhbly hath advantaged 
'he great Conteſts about the ſenſe of this Text, Tt comes from {/4s, 
which ſignifieth a Chair and a thing to ſupport ; and a Sear, the place, 
(ay ſome) in which the 7dol was ſet in the Pagan Temples. Thence 
this word £Negiopa is tranſlated, rhe nnd:rpropper, the Eftabliſher, any 
firm Bafis upon which a thing ſtanderb, or Jeaneth ; ſo that it is much of 
che ſame ſignificancy with the former word, which we rightly tranſlate 
a Pillar, the two things fignifying in uſe the ſame thing, that which un- 
derproppeth and holdeth up another thing,as the Pillars do the Build- 
ing, and the Bafis of the Tmage or Statue doth the Statue, P:Uars allo 
were of ancient uſe to faſten upon them any publickEdits whichPrinces 
or Courts would have publiſhed,and expoſed te the yiew of all : Hence 
the Church is called, the Pillar, and Baſis, or Sear of Truth, becauſe by 
it the Truths of God are publiſht, ſupported, and defended, and in it 
they are only to be found as in their proper ſeat and place ; for to it 
the Oracle and Myſteries of God are committed, and in it they are ex- 
poſed to the notice and knowledge of all, as publick Edits are vpon 
Pillars. But neither that ſaving Truth, nor the Faith which we give to 
it, is eftabliſht upon the Authority of the Churh,(as the Romariſts vain- 
ly pretend,) but upon the Authority of God the Author of it, The 
Church diſcovers and recommends the Truth, but the Teftimony it 
gives is not the foundation of it's Credibility. The Univerſal Church, 
(of which the Church of Epheſus,over which Timothy had a Charge, was 
a genuine part) is in the Senſe before expreft, the Pillar and $Suppor- 
ter, or Seat of Truth, 


16 And without controverſie great is the myſtery of*o.1.4 
godlineſs y, * God was || manifeſt in the fleſh z, * juſti-1 gy 
fied in the ſpirit (a): ſeen of angels b, *preached unto the | f rv 

*Rom.14 
L Pet.3.1h 
y The various uſe of the particle x} in the Greek, which we tranſlate * Epi. 3+ 


Ch 


| Or, fy, 


and, maketh it doubtful what is the force of it here, whether it relates 5, 6. 
to the Truth mentioned in the latter part of th 
another reaſon why Timothy ſhould have a care 
in the Houſe of God: If to the former, it is exegetical, and opens 
what he meant by Truth, viz. The Myſtery of Godlineſs, by which 
he means the Goſpel, which is the Do&rine of Godlineſs, being that 


e former Verſe,or ſhews * Luk, 2» 
how he behaved himſelf 51, 


which teacheth how aright to worſhip God, and walk before him; this 
he firft calls, then proves to bea Myſtery, a great Myſtery, The word 
is derived from the Heathens, who had Myfteries of their Superſtition 


and Idolatrous Religion, A Myſtery ſignifies a thing ſacred and / _— 
r greater 


13 For * they that have || uſed the office of a deacon | The Meathens alſo had their greater and leſſer Gods, and their gre 
zee N ; and lefſer Myſteries. Paul c he Goſpel, the Do&rine of Godlinels, 
*5ee Mat. well, purchaſeto themſelves a good degree r, and great |; pat: Myftery,and fay oh _ Edie Ph withent Controver- 
' A by boldneſs in the faith which is in Chriſt Jeſus /. ' [fie; then he proveth it by telling us what it is, and giving us the ſum 
"1 ſtre by ' r A gooddegree of Honour; ſo that none hath reaſon to decline, [of it. 7 It teacheth us that he who was truly God, God over all, bleſſed 
«i En or to deſpiſe that Office, — This ſeems rather to be the ſenſe,than what [for ever,(as the Apoſtle ſaith) was manifeſted in the fleſh, Fob, 1. 14- The 
j pleaicth lome better, viz, That they purchaſe to themſelves. an | word was mate fleſh. How an infiniteNature could be perſonally unired £0 
bigher degree in the Miniſtry of the Church; for though it be very |a finiteNature,ſo as to make onePerſon,is a Myſtery,and 4 greatMyſtery, 


ed in the Spirit,el- 
*d the Spirit )byY 
perations,and 

when 


4 


In 


Ir, ſy, 


FToh.1,' 
x Joh.t. % 
i Or, tt 
ufeſteh. 
FROM.14 
; Pet.3.1h 
& Eph. % 
6,6. 

* Luk, 2Þ 


51. 


Chap. 1V. —_ 1. TIM 


2 Thef, 


FT; 
\ 11.30. 
pb. 3-3- yils C. 


Joh,2.1 9. 
ule 18, 


when he was huried, he roſe again from the dead, by which he was 

£:;62d, that is undoubtedly proved to be the Son of God, Or, 

ty t1:2 Zoly Spirit of Go4 (the third Perſon in the Holy Trinity) by 

whom he was conceived in the Womb of the Virgin, Luke 1. 35. 

þ Ser of 2215, who declared his Conception, Luke 1. 32,33. Sang 

-n4 glorified God when he was born, Tuke 2. 10, 11. Miniftred to 

him when h2 was temnted, Marth, 4.11. who comforted him in 

hs Patton, declared his Reſurre&ion, Matth, 28, and attended his 

Aſcenſion, Als 1, 19, c Chrift's being preached to the Gennles, was 

all a myſtery, ſo great, that Peter would not believe it to be the 

il of God, "till he was confirmed in it by a Viſion, As 10, This 

{me think is ſpoken with ſome reference to the Gentile Superſti- 

tion, who allo (as was ſaid hefore) had their greater and lefſer My- 

ſeries, and to th2 former would admit no Strangers. 4 That Chrift 
ſhould upon the Miniſtry of a few Fiſher-men, and the report the 

World had received of what Chriſt did in Fudea, be received and 

imbraced by the World as their Saviour, was as great a Myſtery as 

any other, eſpecially conſidering the Dodtrine of Chrift was as in- 
comprehenſible by Humane Reaſon, as ingrateful to the propenſt- 
ons and inclinations of Humane Nature: e The Reſurrettion of 

Chriſt is not mentioned, becauſe neceſſarily ſuppoſed to his Aſcen- 

ſion, which he mentioneth as the laſt thing whereby Chrift was de- 

clared to be God manifeſt in the fleth, 
CHAPF I, 

The Apoſtacy of ſome in the latter days foretold and deſcribed, 1 $ 
He exhorrs Timothy to propound the rue Doftrine, rejet Fables, and 
exerciſe himſelf unto Godlineſs, after bis Example, 6—— 11. To 
be a Pattern of a! Chriſtian Virtues ; continue in Reading ; and not 
to necle the Gift whi.h he hath recerved ; but to increaſe and per- 
ſevere in that which is good : that he may ſave both himſelf, and bs 
Hearers, 12 i6, 


Tow the ſpirit * ſpeaketh expreſly a, that in the 
latter times ſome ſhall depart from the faith, 
giving heed to ſeducing ſpirits b, and dodrines of de- 


It was uſual with the Prophets when they declared the Oracles of 
God, to ailert in the beginning of their Revelations, That the Lord 
hath ſpoken, 1/2, 1. 2. Fer. 1,2. Foel 1.1. The Apoftle in the 
ſame manner, in the beginning of his Prediction of things future, 
declares th2 Spirit ſpcaketh expreſly, that is, either clearly revealed 
it to me, as AﬀSs 10. 19, and 13. 2. thus, expreſly is oppoſed to 
obſcurelyz for ſometimes the Revelations given to the Prophets 
were under ſhadows and figures in divers manners, but the Spirit 
diſcovered in a moſt intelligible manner, what Seducers ſhould 
come in the Church, &c, 4 Either hath inwardly revealed it to 
my Spirit, as Afs 10, 19. and 13. 2.-0r (which 15 more probable) 
becauſe the Verh is in the preſent Tenſe aye, it ſaith it in the 
written Word, which muſt be in the Old Teftament, (for the New 
was not at this time written,) but then the queſtion is, Where the 
Holy Ghoſt hath expreſly in the Old Teftament ſpoken of the A- 


poſtacy of the latter times, Our famous Mede anſwers in Dan. 11. 


35, 36, 37, 38, 39. where from ver. 30. is a plain prophecy of 
the Roman Empirez and ver. 3s, 36,37, 38, 39+. of Antichriſt, 
where it is ſaid, Some of them of Underſtanding ſhaB fall to try them, 


and to purge them, &c, and he ſpeaks of a King, That ſhall do ac} 


cording to bis Will, and ſhall exalt himſelf, and magnifie himſelf above 
every God, and ſhall ſpeak marvelous things againſt the G9D of Gods, 
—Netther ſhall be regard the God of his Fathers, nor the deſire of 
Women, nor regard any God, but magnifie himſelf above all, Where 
that Learned Man thinks is an excellent deſcription of the Roman 
Empire, their various Victories, Succeſſes, Declinations and Muta- 
tions : and amongſt other things, ver. 36. That they ſhould caft off 
their old Pagan Jdolatry, and after that make a defe&tion from the 
Chriſtian Faith, and not regard Marriage (called there the deſire of 
Women) nor indeed truly regard any God, This the Apoſtle faith 
ſhould be in the laſt Times, The Lift rimes (faith the afore-mentio- 
ned- Famous Author) are the times of Chriſt's Kingdom, which 
began in the time of the Roman Empire ; during which time this E- 
piſtle was wrote ; where the Apoſtle ſpeaking of time yet to come, 
the latter times by him mentioned, muſt needs be the latter part of 
the Jaſt times, which he ſaith began in the ruine of the Koman Em- 
pire, upon which followed the revealing of Antichriſt, that wicked 
one, mentioned 2 Th:ſj, 2, 7.” concerning theſe times, the Spirit 
{ai1expreſly, That ſome ſhould jn them depart from the Faith, 
b Giving heed to ſeducing Spirits, by which ſome underftand the De- 
viis themſelves, others Falie Teachers, or falſe Dodctrines,which are 
afterwards mentioned, called-c Dorines of Devils z by which ſome 
underftand Dottrines ſuggefted by Devils, or publiſhed by the cun- 
ning, and art of Devils. But others think that by Dofrines of De- 
vls, here are not fo be unfderftood Dodtrines ſo publiſhed, but 
Dotrines concernivg Devils ; and that the meaning, is,that in the laſt 
times the Pagan Doctrine concerning Demons ſhould be reſtored. 
The Pagan Dxmons were an inferiour ſort of Gods,a kind of middle 
Beings between their Higheſt Gods, and Men, whoſe Office was 
to b2 advocates and Mediators between Mer, and the higheft Gods, 
becauſe they judged it was not lawful for Men to come to the high- 
er Gods immediately ; theſe they worſhipped by Images, *even as 
the Papiſts at this day make uſe of, and worſhip Angels and Saints, 
ve more fully what Mr, Meds ſaith upon this Argument in his own 
Book, and in Mr. Po3l's Latine Synopſis upon this Text,and what he 
ith ſeems very probably the ſenſe of the Text, eſpecially, conſider- 
12g the two Dottrines mentioned wer, 3, | 

2 Speaking Iyes 1a hypocritie d, having their con- 
{ciences ſeared with an hot iron e. Wo 

a The words, as Tranſlated by us, are very difficult ; for the 
word which we Tranſlate ſpeaking ly-s, being the Genitive caſe, will 
neither agree with Spirits nor Dotrines,in the former verſe they be- 
ng both the Dattve : But neither is our Tranſlation agreeable to the 
Greek, which is thus, 1n or through the bypocrifie of ſuch as ſpeak lies, 
and of ſuch as have 4 Conſcience ſeared with an bot iron,which doubtleſs 
15 the {enſe : So the words-explain the manner how they were ſedu- 
ced ty Apoſtaite, viz. Ihrough the hypocriſte, or diſhmulation of men 
that /peak 1ies, and had Contciences benummed, and mortified; as jt 
LW Ok Ih 


OTHY. a2 Chap; IV. 


were cauterized and ſear'd with anibot Iron. By their hypocrijie he 
charaQerizes Seducers, uncertain, falſe men, that regarded not what 
they ſaid, but made a ſhew and appearance of Piery, when indeed 
they had no lenle of Piety in them, © e By men, whoſe Conſciences 
were feared with an bor Iron : he means perſons ſo far from any ſenſe 
of Piety, that they were hardened to any degree of Iniquiry z and 
indeed by both terms he excellently expreffeth ſuch perſons as gene- * *P 1 
rally they are who ſeduce others to falſe Do&rine, they could not do 
it without ſome ſhew or pretence of Piety, they would not do it if 
they had any true ſenſe of it ; and by both terms too, he well ex- 
prefſeth thoſe that in our days ſeduce men to the Dottrine concern- 
ing Damons: and abſtaining from marriage and meats, which are 
thoſe Doftrines he alone inftanceth in, 

3 Forbidding to marry f, and commanding to ab- 
ſtain from meats g which God hath created, * to be*Gen.z.2, 


received * with thankſgiving of them which believe, <9: 3: 


F + 
and know the truth þ. Rom. 14 | 


f The Greek is hindring t0 marry, but that might be by forbidding yd : » __ 
itby a Law under a ſevere Penalty. There are diſputes whom the ** * MM 
Apoſtle ſpeaketh of, to find out which it is conſiderable, 1, That 
the Apoſtle ſpeaketh of a time that was then to come, 2, Of ſome 
who had it in their power to hinder it ; which will make the Pro» F 
phecy hardly applicable to any but the Romiſh Synagogue, to be ſure, it 
not ſo applicable ; for though there were ſome perſons before them | 
that condemned Marriages, yet as they were but a ſmall inconfide- 
rable Party, ſo they were Perſons that had no power to hinder Mar- 
riage by any penal Laws, nor any that did it in ſuch Hypocritie un- 
der a pretence of Piety,when he who runs may read that they do it 
to maintain the grandeur of their Ecclefiaftical Hierarchy, How ap- 
plicable therefore ſoever this might be to the Ebionzres, and thoſe 
that followed Saturnius and Marcion , and the Encratitz (which the hi 
Papiſts contend for) it certainly more nearly concerns the Papiſts 
themſelves, who more univerſally forbad them to their Clergy,and 
were the firft that had a power to hinder them, and fell into much 
later times than any of the others. g To abſtain from ſoine meats, Q 
and this alſo they ſhould teach in Hypocritie z 7, e, under a pretence r 
of Piety, . This every whit as well _ to the Romiſh Synagogue, 
as the other, whoſe Prohibitions of fleſh are ſutficiently known 
Mr. Mede is very confident that the Holy Ghoſt doth here deſcribe 
the Popiſh Monks,and thoſe that gave Ruleeto thoſe Orders.k Which 
Meats, as well as other, God hath createu'the uſe of Man,giving 
him a liberty to kill and eat, only we ought to receive them with b 
thanksgiving, which confirmeth our religious cuſtom both of begging 
a Blefling upon our Meat before we eat, and returning thanks to 
God when we have eaten,for which alſo we have our Saviour's Ex- 
ample, Marth, 14. 19. and 15. 35. I Not that ſuch as believe not, 
and are ignorant of the truth,may not eat,but they have not ſo good 
and comfortable a right to the Creatures as Believers, Titus 1. 15, 
and they know and underftand their Liberty to eat of thoſe things | 
which others deprive themſelves of, by their ſuperfticious opinions 
and conſtitutions, 
4 For * every creature of God 75 good 71, and no- *Rom,t :; 
thing to be refuſed », if it be received with thankſ- 14, 20. il 
giving 0, 1 Cor. 10; 
m Not only good in it ſelf,as all was which God made, Gey.1, but 25* 
lawful to be uſed pure, Tit, 1. 15. there is no uncleanneſs in it, 
x And therefore nothing upon that account is to be refuled, as un- . 
clean and defiling, s Only it muft be made uſe of in ſuch a manner, 
as in and by the uſe of it we may glorihie and expreſs our thankfal- 
neſs to God, _ : 
5 For it is ſanQtified p by the word of God q, and 
prayer #. | 
p Sanfified 1n this place ſignifies made pure, or lawful to be uſed; l 
q By the Goſpel which declares it ſo, As 10. 15, or by God's ordi- | 4 
nation which hath ſo determined it, r And prayer to God for a ble(- 
ſing upon it, ay. 
6 If thou put the brethren in remembrance of 
theſe things 5s, thou ſhalt be a good miniſter of 
Jeſus Chriſt 5, * nouriſhed up in the words of * 2Tin, ; 0 
faith, and good doctrine « whereunto thou haſt at- 14, 15. ; 
tained w, 
s If by thy preaching publickly, and by thy more private inftru- 
&ions of Chriftians at Epheſus, thou teacheſt them thele things, 
: Thou ſhalt faithfully diſcharge the Office of him who is a Servant 
of Jeſus Chriſt, not of Men meerly. The Miniſters of the Goſpel 
are in the firſt place Minifters or Servants to Chrift. Secondarily 
Minifters (that is Servants) of the Church; as a Nobleman's Servant 
imployed todiftribute Wages or Meat to inferiour Servants,is a Mi- J 
niſter to thoſe to whom he ſo diftributeth Food, or Wages, but in the 
firſt place a ſervant to his Lord, # Such a Miniſter of the Goſpel 
ought to be, one bred upin the true Faith, and perſevering in ir. 
w Whereto thou art not a ſtranger, only I would have thee go on 
and perſevere in it, 
7 But * refuſe prophane and old wives fables x : * c, 1.4; 
and exerciſe thy ſelf rather unto godlineſs y. 
x All impertinent Diſcourſes which tend nothing to promote ei- 
ther Faith or Holineſs, which he diſdainfully calls 014 wives fables ; 
Tales of a Tub (as we ſay) Diſcourſes having no bottom in the Word 
of God, are not fit for Pulpits. y Let thy conftant fiudy be things 
that may promote Codlinels, impart thoſe things unto People, and 
live up to them in thy Converſation, | 
8 For * bodily exerciſe” profiteth || little z, bur , bs 
: : : - Col.2.,2F 
godlineſs is profitable unto all things a, having pro- 1 Or, for 
miſe of the life that now is b, and of that which is to jirtte rimes 
COme ec, 
; Bodily Diſcipline, lying in abſtaining from certain Meats,keep- 
ing Set-faſts, Watchings, lying upon the Ground, going Bare-foot, | 
wearing oackcloth,or Haircloth,abſtaining from Wine,or Marriage, 4} 
is of little advantage, the Mind and Soul of Man is not bettered by = I 
chem. The Apoſtle doth not altogether deſpiſe cheſe things, ſome of i 


z/ 


which may be uſeful (moderately uſea) ro make us more fic for T4 |. 
THhS Prayer, : 


wherein Relicion is to be put, andalone they are of no avail, 2 But 


univerfal advantage; 6 not from any meritoriouſne!s in it, but from 


we live here upon the earth, c But alſo the Promiſes of Salvation 


the ſame words are applied to the great Propoſition of the Goſpel, 


into the World to ſave ſinners, and that ſuch ſinners as from un- 
godly will become godly, and perſevere in the praQtiſe of Godlineſs, 
ſhall be happy in this Life, and ſaved in the Life to come, are two 
faithful and remarkable ſayings, worthy the acceptation of all rea- 
ſonable Creatures, 

10 For therefore we both labour, and ſuffer re- 


*PGa1.36.6 proach, becauſe we trult in the living Gode, * who is 
& 107. 2, the Saviour of all men f, ſpecially of thoſe that be- 
10, SC. lieve g. 

e If we did not believe this as a faithful ſaying, That Godtineſs s 


reproach as we do; labouring in the work of God, ſuffering re- 
proach in the cauſe of God, and for living godly lives, worſhipping 


faQions, and ſenſible Enjoyments, that we might fulfil the Law of 


for all things ? How doth the faithfulneſs of the Promiſes for this 
Life annexed to Godlineſs appear,if thoſe that profeſs it muſt labour, 
and ſuffer reproach ? $0]. Labour for God isa reward £0 it felf ; our 
honour,not our burdenyhis Service is perfe& freedom, The promiſes 
of this Life, annexed to Godlineſs, are not promiſes of ſenſual reft 
and caſe, but of inward peace, fatisfation and ſupport ; of other 
things only with a reſerv- +1 the Divine Wiſdom and Judgment, ſo 


miſt ſpeaketh, g is in a more eſpecial manner the Saviour 7 thoſe 
that believe, Pſal. 33. 18, 19, This ſeemeth rather to be the ſenſe of 
the Text, than to underſtand it of Eternal Salvation, for ſo God. is 
not the aRtual Saviour of all ; befides that the Text ſeemeth to ſpeak 
of a work proper to the Father, rather than to the Son, 

11 Theſe things command and teach b. 

þ All the things before-mentioned in this and the former parts of 
this Epiſtle, he willeth Timothy to make the matter of his Sermons 
and other Diſcourſes, 


I. thou an example of the believers k in word }, in con- 
Tit. 2.15. yerſation#, in charity #, in ſpirit o, in faith p, in pu- 


* Tit, 2.7 " JR. 


Rau 'f\,\ WR q. 
Wi ET E- 1 Pets 5.2. # So carry thy ſelf in thy Office, as not to give occaſion to any to 
FRIk 6 deſpiſe thee, becauſe thou art but a young man 3 & which thou 


——— 


"wt - B —_—_ 1 " no Sartts " ae « - 
mm ee AZ p, oat - 2+ X « _ 
- . + 
Wren either co toon tend oct png = - ® CE. emp a _ = : A 
_ 4 _ ” is pa” cy mg me wt - = > - 
W IS } _— Rm 2 L-- OE put WE ASE, -4.. ajboay..— ts Dm Le 12 ox 
s = —z 4 Q SO. KF 
a 2 . o * _ ps I, : 
Pen £ 


gravely ; » performing alſo to all, all Offices of Charity and Brother- 


the Goſpel not to be deſpiſed. Let them uſe what other methods they 


; a Miniftry, then allo ficting and enabling thee for the diſcharge | 
of it, 


sbirgs, all 


the Free Grace of God, which bath annexed to it not only the Pro-[&rine 4 : continue in them e, for in doing this 
miſes of Health, Peace, and Proſperity, and all good things while ſhalr both fave thy ſelf and a that ws, Fog ; thou 


and Eternal Happineſs when this Life ſhall be determined. Sam 
| SY : OY xemplary. 4 And take heed alſo, both zhar thou teacheſ}, and wh 
72 9 This 55 a fairhful lay ng, and worthy of all ACCEP- | thou teacheſt, e And do both theſe things, not for a time, but a 
'q tation d. ſtantly, f Thus thou ſhalt do what in thee lyeth to ſave thine own 


d This faying about the adyantage of Godlineſs is true, and wor-| ſoul, and alſo to fave the ſouls of others to whom thou preacheſ,, or 
thy to be received of all Men, See the notes on chap. 1. 15. where | among whom thou converſeſt. 


6d * Chri , : 
That Chriſt came into the world 10 ſave ſiyners, That Chriſt came Rules to be obſerved in reproving both old and young, 1, 2, Of widows: 


profitable for all things, and rruſt in God, who liveth for ever to ſce underftandeth not a Church Officer, but an ancient man; the worg 
to the fulfilling of it, to what purpoſe ſhould we labour and ſuffer | 0.4 Rebuke is tranſlated too ſoftly, it ſhould be Rebuke 70t too 


God according to his Will, and denying our ſelves in Senſual Satis-| -.. reſpett to his age, b ſo that thy Reproofs may look more like 


Chriſt ? 05je#, But will ſome ſay, How then is Godlineſs profitable | 4 1. to the younger men; Miniſters in rebuking them ſhouldre. 


7 * but. * —_ 
*;Cor.16., 12 * Let no man deſpiſe thy youth z, * but * be quite their parents/, for that is good, and acceptablen. 
6 Uel, 


wilt do if thou ſo liveſt asto be a juft pattern unto Chriſtians imita- | any ſuch near Relations, the Apoſtle willeth that they ſhould be 
ble by them / in thy common and ordinary diſcourſe (for he ſpeaks [taught : k Toy iNoy oixoy evnrBay, word for word, to worſhip their 
not of his being a pattern only to other Minifters) but to Believers | owz houſe, or to be Religious or Godly toward their own houſe ; that 
in the generality) not talking frothily or profanely, or idly and im-| is,to ſhew a reſpe&,or pay an homage to their own houſe, For Wor- 
pertinently, but ſeriouſly and gravely, but rhings rbar are good, to the | ſhip is nothing but a reſpe&t, honour, or homage paid to another in 
uſe of edifying, that it may adminifter Grace 10 the bearers, And in all] conſideration of his or her excellency and ſuperiority:only the uſe of - 
thy converſe with men, behaving thy (elf juſtly and comelily and| this word, which is the Greek word generally uſed to expreſs Reli- 
gion and Godlineſs by, lets us know that Religion and Godlineſs is 
ly Love, oin zeal, and warmth of Spirit, truly inflamed with the] yainly pretended to by any that have of this Worlds Goods,and re- 
love of Chriſt, and for his Glory : p In a ſteady Confeſſion, and Pro-| lieve not thoſe from whom they are deſcended, (for the word Exſoya, 
felon of the Dottrine of the Goſpel, and q in all cleanneſs and holi-| it ſignifies perſons deſcended from another, whether in the fictt ge- 
neſs of Life and Converſation. This is the way for the Miniſters of | neration or no) if they be in want, and ſtand in need of their aſſ- 
ſtance, I Nor is this an A of Charity, but Juſtice, a juſt requi- 
will, they will find what God ſaid of Zophni and Phineas, will be| tal of our Parents for their care of us, and pains with us in our Edu- 
made good, 1 Sam, 2. 30. Thoſe that bonour me 1 will bonour, and| cation. m And this is good, juſt, decent, and commanded by God, 
they that deſpiſe me, ſhall be lightly eſteemed 3 nor will any Titles or| and acceptable in the fight of God ; for the Precept, Honour thy Fa- 


is Meditate on theſe things z, give thy {elf}; money in needleſs Cofts, as to Mear, Drink, or Apparel, 15 
| Or, i ay Wholly to them a, that thy profiting may appear || to|fpiritually dead, dead in fin, while ſhe liveth a temporary vo- 
|luptuous Life, in Vanity, and Luxury, and Jmpurity 


; Maire, Let theſe things be the buſineſs of thy thoughts, and SPirit. / 7 And 


Chap. IV. EL. TIMOTHTYT. Chap. v. 


Praver, eſpecially upon ſolemn occaſions ; but theſe are not things ]take care of them, 4 be in them (ſo it is in the Greet) let them be 
thy whole work, not thy work by the by, but thy chief and prin. 
Gudlineſs, which lyeth in the rrue Worſhip and Service of God, out of |cipal bufineſs. 6b That ſo as all mens gifts improve by ſtudy and ex. 
a true principle of the fear of God and faith in him ; or (more gene- |erciſe, thine alſo-may ſo improve, that all men may take notice of 
rally) Holineſs of Lite in obedience to God's Commandment is of [the improvement of them, 


16 Take heed unto thy ſelf c, and unto thy do- 


c Take heed how thou liveft, and ordereft thy life, thatit may he 


CHAP. V. 

all truly ſuch to be honoured ; which to be taken into the ſervice of 
the Church, and which not, but marry again, 2 16, Of Ej. 
ders, and what honour is due to them ; no accuſations 10 be receives 
againſt them without witneſſes ; of publick reproof,, 17===20, Hi 
charge to Timothy to deal tmparnally berein 5 and concerning ordaig. 
ing Elders,21,22, Forbids bim to uſe water without wine : ſome mens 
fins made manifeſt before thoſe of others, 23——25, 


Ebuke not an elder a, but intreat himas a father b,x1,, i 


and the younger men as brethren c. 22, 
4 It appeareth by the next verſe, that the Apoſtle by Z1!der here 


roughly, as appears by the oppoſite phraſe 3 and indeed the worg. 
properly ſignifies to bear or ſhe Rebuke him, not but with a de- 


Counſels and Exhortations than Rebukes. c Prudence alſo muſt he 


member that they are brethren, and treat them accordingly, not too 
imperioully, 

2 The elder women as mothers d, the younger as 
ſiſters e with all purity f. 

d The fame prudence alſo is to be ufed to Marrons and aged Wo- 
men. e Yea, and to younger women too conſidering our relation 


far forth, as our Heavenly Father ſhall ſee it fit for his Glory and | and inequality in Chrift, f Only as to them, (conſidering their Sex) 
our Good; yet they are not vain, for God who is f the Saviour,that |a farther gravity, and prudence is to be uſed, that we give no occa- 
is the preſerver of all Men, the preſerver of man and beaft,as the Pſa]- | fions to Luſt, or unclean Motions, 


3 Honour widows g that are widows indeed, 

g Give a reſpe& to ſuch as have loſt their Husbands with a regard 
to that honourable Eftate of Marriage in which they have been for- 
merly, and do not only pay them a due reſpect, but afford them a 
maintenance, As 6, 1- þ Who are Widows indeed, he opencth 
further, ver, 5. ſuch as are not only pious, but deſolate, as the Greek 
word for a Widow implies according to its derivation. 


4 But-if any widow have children or nephews 7, let 
them learn firſt to ſhew || piety at home k, and to * re-| ori 


before God 17. 
; By the idow indeed, mentioned by the Apoſtle, ver. 3. he here - Ill, 

ſheweth that he ment Women that not only wanted Husbands, but* al) 

Children, or Grand-children, or any near Kindred that were Chri- 

ſtians , and in a capacity to relieve them 3 but if any Widows had 


Habits, or Severities ſecure them from that Curſe, which will cleave{| ther and Mother, is the firſt Commandment with promiſe, Eph. 6. 2. By t 
to them. _ : : the way,that Precept is excellently expounded by this Text, both as | . 
I3 Till I come y give attendance to reading s, tojtothe att commanded, which this Text teacheth is t0 be extended | 

exhortation ft, to dorine «. to maintenance as well as complements ; and as to obje&t,viz.all thoſe - 

7 And after that time too, but then I will further inſiru& thee, [35 9 whom weare E£x20ve deſcended from, whether immediate Pa- : 

s Be diligent in reading the Holy Scciptures both, for thy own in-|*<2t5 Yea, Or no, K : , h 
ſtru&ion, and for the edificarion of others, 3 and to exhort others 5 * Now ſhe that is a widow indeed, and deſolate ”,* i Cor S 
to their duty there deſcribed, or to comfort others from Argu-{truſteth in God o, and * continueth in ſupplications 3% | . Alt 
ments fetched thence, u and to inftrutt others in the Principles 0 : *Lux%j Ye 

RegoC. | — * Apoſile F _ = p f 1Vidow indeed, ver. 3 one* 1% 1 $ 

a | . ds . 2 The e here opens the term of /idow indeed, wer, 3. ; 
LY L11M.1 I4 * Neglect not the gifr that —_ thee W, which that en one that is made alone,deſtitute of ſuch as ought X 
RN was glven thee * by prophecy x, with the laying on of [to help her, an Husband, or Children, o and being ſo, is a Believer, | b- 
+<Þ-:.18.the hands of the presbytery y. repoſing her truſt and confidence in God, and p who ſpendeth her | he 
$6.0. w Negle& neither the Abilities which God hath given thee for [time religioully in Prayer and a&ts of Devotion. Not that other | ww] 
the diſcharge of the Office of the Miniftry, nor the Office to which | Perſons that are poor and deſolate ſhould not be r egarded,anc taken «6 
God hath called thee,neither the improvement of them,nor the uſe, | care for, but the Church is not ſo concerned in them, at lealt 2s 1 | he: 
Exerciſe, and diſcharge of them or it. x Remember that they were | Church: the Magiftrate ought to take care of them ; and all = the 
given thee by the Revelation ofthe Divine Wil, or by the extraor- | Chriſtians,being Men as well as Chriftians, ought to confider f 5 ” the 
dinary influence of the Spirit of God, y and the laying on of | Þut in the firſt place, and principally, they are to take care Or fn aga 
hands of the Presbytery was a declaration of it. God alſo (as uſu- | Widows, ſuch deſolate perſons. . | Me 
ally when he calls any to any ſpecial work) calling thee to the work] & But ſhe thatliveth in || pleaſure, is dead while ſhe | of, 45 mat 


Iveth q. T1310 
q*H 5; and]argze, She that is wanton, Fames 5. 5. ſhe that ſpends 


of Fleſh and ſtio 


&, by 


Or, tink 
eſs, 

See Gen, 
16, 10,11, 
Mati15 


a \ A. nt. 


,v [ Cor! 
3 320 

*[Luk%}/ 
\& 1$, b 


l 2 Fime3» 


Chap. V- I. TIM 


And theſe things give in charger, that they may | 


be blameleſs s. 
7 In the diſcharge of thy Miniſtry declare theſe things, $ that all 
Chi iſtians, Women eſpecially may be blamele!s, 
$ But if any provide not for his own, and ſpecially 
107,14 for thoſe of his own-|| houſe t, he * hath denied the 
rl faiths, and is worſe than an infidel w. 
: Here is a manitcſt diſtinQtion betwixt his own i ov, and his own 
& + bouſhold elxetoy, they are diftiaguiſhed by terms in the Greek,and as 
1, 1 FY* 3 the Care which Men and Women ought to extend to them, By 
kis own he means his Relations, all of a Man's Family or Stock 3 by 
his own houſhol4, he ſeemeth to mean thoſe who cohabit with him. 
The Apoſtle ſaith, that he who is careleſs in providing for the for- 
mer (fo far as he is able) but eſpecially for the latter « hath denied 
the Chriſtian Faith, that is, in the practice of it, though in words 
he profeſſeth ir, he liveth not up to the Rule of the Goſpel which 
diretterh other things, wand is worſe than an Heathen, that belie- 
veth not, becauſe many good natur'd Heathens do this by the Light 
of Nature, and thoſe who do it not, yet are more excuſable, be- 
ing ſtrangers to the obligation of the revealed Law of God in the 
caſe, 
9 Let not a widow be || taken into the number, un- 


der threeſcore years old x,having been the wife of one 


man y. 

x What number he meaneth is very doubtful, whether he means 
the number of Deaconeſſes, or the number of ſuch as ſhould receive 
Alms from the Church : thoſe who tranſlate xg]aaz4$w here choſen, 
ſeem to favour the former. They ſay that in the Primitive Church, 
there being a want of Hoſpitals and Publick Places for the reception 
of People decayed in their Eſtates, ©&c. they choſe ſome old Wi- 
dows to take care of the poorer ſort of Women when they were 
ſick, and theſe alſo were themſelves maintained by the Church, and 
ſerved the Church in that charitable Employment. Whether this 
number, or the more general number of Widows relieved by the 
Church be meant, the caution of their age was very prudent. 1.Be- 
cauſe younger Widows could work for their living, and needed not 
to burden the Church. 2, Becauſe under thoſe years they probably 
might marry again, and ſo become uſeleſs to the Church. 3.Becauſle 
af:er thoſe years there could be no great fear of ſcandal from their 
#27:onnels and incontinency, The fecond Condition ſeems harder 
ro be underſtood ; for 1. though in former times,amongſt the Jews 
and Pagans,: men were allowed more Wives than one at the fame 
time, yet no Laws ever allowed the Women Liberty of more Huſ- 
bands. 2, To underftand it of Women that had not been twice 
married, their firſt Husband being dead, ſeems hard, no Law of God 
fo: bidding the ſecond Marriages of Men and Women ſucceffively. 
2, Some therefore rather underſtand it of ſuch Widows as were be- 
come Wives to ſecond Huſbands, the firſt not being dead, but part- 
ed from them either legally, through their own fault, or through 
ther voluntary deſertion. This the Apoſtle ſeems to forbid, to 
ayoid reproach and ſcandal to the Church, 


10 Well reported of for good works z, if ſhe hath 

t.a.o, brought up children a,if ſhe have * lodged ſtrangers b, 
n. 13, 1f ſhe have * waſhed the ſaints feet c,-if ſhe have re- 
lieved the afflited d, if ſhe have diligently followed 


1." every good work e. 
*7* 21f ſhe beaperſon of repute for ations concerning others which 
"4% areconſonant to the Will and Commandment of God. a If ſhe 
| hath brought up Children well in the nurture and admonition of 
the Lord, 6 If when perſons that are Chriftians have come from 
other places, either driven from them, or upon their occaſions, and 
could not amongſt Pagans find a convenient Inn, her houſe hath 
been open to them, «c If ſhe hath been ready to do the meaneſt 
Ofices for the Servants of God, of which this waſhing of Feet was 
one, in great uſe in thoſe hot Countries, where they had not the 
benefit of Shooes, either to cool, or refreſh, or cleanſe them. 4d If 
to her ability ſhe hath relieved ſuch as have been in any kind. of 
diſtreſs, e If though it may be ſhe hath not had ability, or oppor- 
tunity, to do all the good works ſhe would, yet ſhe'hath diligently 
followed them, doing what ſhe could : let ſuch a one be put into the 
Catalogue of thoſe whom the Church will relieve, and honour, and 
imploy, 

11 But the younger widows refuſe f, For when 
they have begun to wax wanton againſt Chriſt g, they 


will marry h. 

f By the younger Widows, the Apoftle ſeems (by the laft words 
of this Verſe) not to.mean thoſe that were under threeſcore, but 
the younger ſort of Widows not paſt Child-bearing . he would not 
have thoſe (that is, being under no extraordinary circumſtances of 
Sickneſs, or Lamenels, or the want of their Senſes) be maintained 

. atthe charge of the Church, becauſe they were able to labour ; nor 
yet to be taken into any employment relating to the Church. 
2? 19TaSeerid owe 74 Xe5s, How the Vilg. Lat. comes to tranſlate 
this,wax wanton in Chbriſt,l neither underſtand whether with reſpe& 
to Grammar or Senſe, Eraſmus Tranflates the Verb, when they have 
commited whoredom ; but Rev. 18, 9. confuteth this Senſe, where 
we tranſlate it, Jive deliciouſly, {being without the Prepofition xe) 
which certainly better expreſſeth the Senle z as alſo doth onr Tran- 
fltion, wax wanton, it properly ſignifies either the luftineſs, or the 
head-ftrong temper of Beaſts, that wax fat ; againſt Chrift, isagainſt 
the rule of the Goſpel, and their Profeſſion of Chriſt, or they difdain 
the othice of ſerving the Saints, as too mean and !aborious, and fin 
againſt Chriſt, in whoſe Name, and for whole glory, and to whoſe 
Members the Service was to be performed ; b And then they will 
marry, and ſo put themſelves into an incapacity to ſerve the Church 
i the place of Widows. _ 
12 Having damnation, becauſe they have caſt off 


their firſt faith 5. 
7 This Sentence is not without its difficulties z here are two que- 
tions, x. What is ment by ze, Which we both here and elſe- 


Orghofen 


OTHYT. Chap. V. 


where tranſlate dz, 2, How they caſt off their f»ſt Faith, 
Many think the Greek Word by us Tranſlated 42294:i0, ought to 
"ave had a ſofter ſenſe, (it being certainly capable of ir,) Some 
think it ſignifies here no more than guilt, ora blot z others a nub- 
lick Infamy ; others the Judgment of good men againſt them, But it 
may be we cannot ſo well determine this without underſtanding what 
is meant by their firſt Faith, which they are here ſaid to have caſt 


{| off: By which ſome underſtand their profeſſion of Chriſtianiry; others 


their promiſe or ingagement 10 the Church, not to marry. The Inter 
ſenſe ſuppoſeth that all thoſe Widows that were taken into the i. 
nifiry of the Church before-mentioned, premiſed that they would 
keep themſelves unmarried,(which is a moſt groundleſ(s ſuppotition) 
I do rather think that by their firſt Faith, he means their firſt, or 
former profeſſion of Chriſtianity, which was a crime didnot expoſe 
chem only to the judgment and cenſure of ſober Chriſtians, but to 
Eternal Damnation. TI ſhall offer my own Senſe of this Text thus ; 
[t is certain theſe Chriſtians were Lilies among Thorns, a ſmall 
handful amongſt a far greater number of Pagans, and it is not im- 
probable, that ſome younger Widows out of a defire to marry, 
might marry to Pagays, and be by them tempted to Apoſtafic from 
the Chriftian Profeſſion, upon which the Apoſtle orders, that none 
under ſixty years of Age ſhould be henceforch taken into the Mini- 
ſtry of the Church, leaſt doing ſuch a thing when they were under 
that character, it ſhould be a greater Scandal. This ſeems the more 
probable from verſe 15.where the Apoſtle adds, for ſome are alrealy 
turned away after Satan, 

13 And withal, they learn to be idle, wandring 
about from houſe to houſe k, and not only idle, bur 
tatlers alſo 1, and buſte-bodies mm, ſpeaking things which 
they ought not 7, ' 

& The Apoſtle here gives ſome other Reaſons why he would not 

have Widows too young taken into the Miniftry of the Church : 

They being young, and having no bulineſs at home, nor any Huſ: 

bands to conduct and govern them, are fubje& to be gadding up 

and down; 1 and to be tatling idly and impertincatly, and that not 

only of their own, but others concerns. mn Interefting themſelves 

in the matters of ocher Perſons and Families. 7 And (in the multi- 

tude of words folly being never wanting) they are prone to ſpeak 

things which they ought not, Fre 7. whence we may obſerve, That 

nothing more becometh Chriſtians than a gravity and compolednels 

of Behaviour, and Speech, a Government of their Tongues, and 
conſidering aforchand well what they ſpeak. Z 
14 * | will therefore that the younger women *:Cor.7.9 


marry 0, bear children p, guide the houſe q, * give * 11-2: S, 


none occalion to the adverſary l co ſpeak reproach- | Or, 4 
their rail 
tully y. ng, 


o 1 will, here muſt not be interpreted into an abſolite Precept, 
(for the Apoſtle would never have made that neceſſary by his t re- 
cept, which God had left indifferent) but in a limited Senle, viz. 
if they have not the gift of continency, if they cannot reſtrain 
themſelves from ſuch (candalous courles, let them marry, p and not 
only bring forth Children, but take care of their Education ; q And 
take care of the government of Families within doors, (which is the 
Womans proper Province;) » And give no occation to Fews or P4- 
gans (the adverſaries of Chriftian Religion) to ſpeak of the © hurch, 
or any particular Members of it, reproachfully, as living beneath 
the rules of morality and decency. 

15 For ſome are already turned afide after $a- 
tan /. 

{ We have Scandals enough already, we had need take as good 

heed as we can, that we have no more; ſome young Women al- 
ready are Apoſtatized ( and poſfibly for the ſake, or by the oc- 
caſion of ſuch Marriages) to Fudaiſm or Paganijm z or it may b< to 
a looſe and leud courle of life, not luiting the protethon of Chrifi- 
anity. 
16 If any man or woman that believeth have wi- 
dows t, let them relieve them «, and let not the 
church be charged w, that it may relieve * them that #*vez/+ 2:5; 
are widows indeed x. 

t If any Men or Women that are Chriftians, have any Widows 
that are nearly related to them 3 « If themſelves bz able, let them 
relieve them, w and not turn off that natural Duty which they owe 
to their Parents, or near Relations to relieve them, to the © hurch:, 
which hath others enough to look after, and upon wlom there Ilyes 
only a Moral and Chriftian Obligation, x That ſo the Alms of the 
Church may go to relieve thoſe only who are perfealy deſolate, 
having neither Husbands, nor any other near Relations to provide 
for them, 

17 * Let the elders that rule wel] y, be counted *Row.: 2. 
worthy of double honour z, eſpecially they that labour 5._ 
in the word and doctrine 4. | I n 

y Who theſe Elders are here intended; hath been a great que- 1, <. 5 
ſtion, 1, It is plain they are nor ſuch only as are Preachers, 2. 3hj1. 4 -- 
They are ſuch as are worthy of double honour, The Learned Mr. ; +; 1... 7 
Pool,in his Latin Synopſts,giveth us an account of the moſt Opinions 
about it, Some judging them, ſome of the elder fort of che Mem- 
bers of the Church, joining with the Minifters in the Government of 
the Church, but not medling with Preaching, or adminittring $a 
craments. 2, Some judging by Elders here, are meant {och as had 
been Minifters, but being Aged, were ſuperannuated, 3. Others 
underſtanding by it the Civil Magiftrates, (which ſeemeti of all 6- 
ther Opinions leaſt probable,becaule ar £j:is rime there were no ſuch 
Members of thz Chriftian Church.) 4. Others think that Deacons 
are here by that term underſtood, who being Church-Othcers; 
have the Name of Elders given to them. 5. Others uaderitind 
by Elders, the ordinary Paſtors of Churches that refided with their 
Flocks, in oppoſition to Apoſtles and Evangsliſts, (this leemerh lets 
probable, becauſe there were no ſuch in the Primitive Church, but 
did labour in the Word and Doctrine.) 6. Others think that foie 
ſuch are meant, as were not ſo fit for Preaching, but y=<t Adriini- 
ftred the Sacraments, prayed wich the Church, anal privarcly alino- 


2 kt an. © 
'} a ='g 


$2335 


VOL, Ib 


[5V2 ] =: - a 


from Scripture, or Authority, of any ſuch Officers in the Primitive 


food, either abundant honour, or elle, as ſome ſay, reipett and re- 


»* D2ut.2e- 18 For the ſcripture ſaith, * Thou ſhalr not muz- 


DE-25-4 Frine, in the firſt place: and not to them alone, but to any ſuch 
NMatth.1C. ; 
19. 
Lite 30.7. eſe Texts conclude the duty of Elders to take 
Maintenance, but the duty of thoſe who are Members of Churches 
to gire it them, which yet they may refuſe, as Paul himielf did, 
if cither the Peoples, or Minifters circumſtances Call tor, or will al- 
low fuch a thing, L : 
19 Againl{t an elder ©c recelve not an accuſation, 
[|Or,1:47 bur || * before two or three witneſſes d. 
*Deutl.l9.  , Whether an Elder in Years, Or in Office, though the latter be- 
5. ing the Perſons formerly ſpoken of, ſeem here principally intend- 
ed. 4 Thar is, not to proceed to any judicial inquiry upon it, Deut, 
17. 6. This was a Law concerning all Elders or younger Perſons, 
eſpecially in capital Caules 3 but the Apoſtle willeth this to be more 
ſpccially obſerved as to Othicers in the Church, whoſe faithful dit- 
charge of their truſts uſually more expoſeth them to Peoples queru- 
lous Tongues. 
20 Them that ſin e rebuke before all f, that others 


alſo may fear g. 

e That is, that ſin publickly, and ſcandalouſly, ſo as others have 
taken notice of it. f Kebuke, not privately by a Miniſterial Core 
reption, but by a _— Eccleſiaſtical Correption, before the 
who'e Church, g That the Salve may anſwer the Sore, and the 
-Plaifter be as broad as the Wound, and that others may be afraid to 
do the like; this end of th&, MiSiment agreeth with that menti- 
oned Deut, 13, 11, 


21 *1 charge thee before God and the Lord Jeſus 
SING. © Chriſt, and the ele& angels, that thou obſerve theſe 


3. b . . 
>Tim.4.r, things b, || without preferring one before another, do- 


} Or, pre- ing nothing by partiality z. 

J#dice, þ By theſe things may be underſtood the whole of what went be- 
fore, or what followeth, I judge it moſt proper to refer it to 
all the Precepts foregoing in this Epiſtle, which evidenceth them to 
be things which he had received from the Lord, not what he di- 
rected without any expreſs notice of the Will of God as to them. 
This is evident by his grave, and ſevere charge to Timothy to obſerve 
them, for he chai geth him to obſerve them, as in the preſence of 
God, and Chriſt, and calleth the good Angels to be Witneſſes both 
of kis Faithfulnels in giving him this charge, and of 1imothy's 
Faithtulneſs, or Unfaithtulnels, according as he ſhould obſerve or 
negl<t the things given him in charge. He calls the Angels Elee? un- 
queſtionably in oppoſition to the evil and reprobate .:ngels, # He 
requires the doing of them, without reſpect to any perſons, Rich or 
Poor, Friends or Foes ; Partiality no way becoming a Judge inany 
Cauſe, who ought to hold the Ballance even, not inclining 1t any 
way, but judging things and not perſons. Some of the things before 
mentioned, may ſeem of too minute a conſideration tor the Apoſtle 
to lay ſuch a tres upon, or God to give him particular direttion | 
in : but the things are not ſo much to be conſidered as the end of 
the Precepts, which was the upholding the true honour and reputa- 
tion of the Church, which is a very great thing, and ſuppoſing the 
things given in charge tv have any tendency of that nature, they 
muſt not be judged ſmall, : 

*A&.12.3, 22 * Lay hands ſuddenly on no man &, nei- 


2Tim.1.6. ther he partaker of other mens fins /: keep thy ſelt 


ure 77, 
P k By 1:ying on of hands on no man, is certainly to be underſtood, 
Do thou ſuddenly ſet 10 man apart to any Eccleſtaſtical Imployment, 
Laying on of hands was but an external Ceremony uled in bleſſing, 
Gen. 48. 14,15. and in the conferring of power upon perſons, Num. 
27.18. Deut., 34. 9. In the New Teſtament we find this Rite 
uled. In Prayer upon healing the Sick, Mart 16, 18, As 20.8. 
2, In Blcſſing, Mark 10. 16. -in conferring the Gitts of the Holy 
Ghoſt, 4#s 19. 6. 3.In Ordination,or ſetting Perſons apart to ſome 
Eccleſiaſtical imployment. Chap. 4. 14. Atts 6. 6, and being fo 
uſed, it is ſOmetimes put for the whole ation, This the Apoftle 
forbids Timothy to do ſuddenly, that is, without a firſt proof of the 
Perſon's fittedneſs for his wagk ; chap. 3. 10. both with relpett to 
his knowledge, and to his Holineſs of Converſation, 7 This parti- 
cipation of other Men's {in ought to be taken heed of in the whole 
courſe of our Conyerſation, but it ſeemeth here to be cſpecially for- 
bidden with reference to what was before ſpoken of, viz. the ſetting 


9.9. neither of th 


my 
CM, 
A 


— FI * - 


* FD om 


©, > = * ied = 7 
- =: < _— 
DT RET ER EIS 
4 2 —Y > 
_— A ". - * __ 
e: b Fer <4 
"IU a 


he who puts into the Miniſtry any erroneous, or ignorant Perſons, 
or any Perſons of a lewd Converſation, makes himlelt guilty of all 
the harm they do, if he hath not firft raken a due and reaſonable 
proof of them, but hath laid hands upon them ſuddenly. Amongft 
other ways by which we intereſt our ſelves in others guilr, one is, 
by not hindriug it, having power ſo to d5, Ne, or they, whom it lies 
upon to admit, or not admit hien into the Miniftry, have a power 
to refuſe them, in cale upon proof of them they do-not find them 
apt to Teach, or fit for the Mimnftration they are to undertake ; or 
ſech tor Holineſs of L:fe as God 1 equireth ; God by his word declar- 
ing what ſuch Verſons ought to be, and commanding him or them 
firſt co prove ſuch perious, and to Jay hands on none /uddenly, hath 
inveſied him or them with ſuch a power of whici; Man cannot de- 
prive them. # The purity here nicntioned, is comprehenftive of 


Chap. V. I. TIMOTHY. 


niſhed exorbitant Members; but we ſhall want a good Proof, eicher] 1s moſt reaionable to under frand it here with relation to what went 
Defore, viz. partaking of other Men's fins, if thou canft not keep 


Church. © Tſhall rot determine which of theie Opinions is righteſt,| the Church pure, hut ignorant or erroneous Perſons, or Sots will 
hut jeave the Reader to hisown Judgment. Whoever is here meant | get tato the Churcnh,yet let them not get inthrough thy hands,keey 
by Elders are declared 3 worthy of double bonour, by wiich is under- chy ſelf pure. . " 


Men aparct for, or putting them into any Eccleſiaſtical lmployment ;i/treſſes that were Chriſtians, The Apoſtle not ignorant 0 


23 Drink no longer water n, but uſe a little 


verence, and alſo maintenance; 4 but eſpecially ſuch as take pains] wing o, for * thy ſtomacks ſake p and thine often yy 
in preaching the Golpel. firmities 4. l 


71 Not wholly, as many did in thoſe Countries, and Timothy Pros 


* \14r, 10- le the ox that treadeth out the corn, *and the labourer [1;þ1y aja, not becauſe he was not able to buy Wine, but religiouſly 
pl 


TY is worthy of his reward b. asa piece of Diſcipline, to keep under the Fleſh, o But mix ſome 
* LEV. 19 4 This Verſe maketh it evident, That Maintenance is part of the| Wine with the Water, p To help thy digeſtion. q In regard of thy 
13+ double honovr that is due to ſuch as labour in the Word and Do-| weakneſs and frequent infirmities. 


24 Some mens ins are open beforehand, going 


as are imployed in the Rule and Government of the Church, The before to juedment 7: and ſome men they follo 
Apoſtle had mace uſe of Deut, 25, 4. to the ſame purpole, 1 Cor. ter /. Jus . y Toilow af 


r The Senſe of this Verſe depends upon the Term Xelav, Which 
we Tranſlate Fudgment, it being doubtful whether it is to be wn. 
derſtood of the Judgment of God, or the Fudgment of men in tc. 
clefiaſtical Judicatories. If we underſtand the words of the ſyig. 
ment of God, the Senſe is this : Same Men's ſins are puniſhed in this 
Life,before their Perſons come before God's Judgment Seat, Other; 
are more private, and concealed, the puniſhment of which folloys 
after, But this Interpretation muſt ſuppoſe Pau! here to run in. 
to another Argument, differing from what he had before ſpoken 
upon, which though it be not unuſual with the Apoſtle, yet there 
being no need we ſhould ſay he doth ſo in this place, T rather in. 
cline to think, That by Fudgment is in this place meant the Judge 
ment of the Church, as to Perſons fit to be truſted with any art 
of the Miniſtry of it ; ſome Men (ſaich the Apoſtle) are open, leud 
ſcandalous Perſons, whoſe erroneouſneſs, or ſottiſh Life, hath been 
manifeſt before they offer themſelyes to the Churches Judgment, to 
be put into the office of Elders or Deacons, concerning theſe thy 
way is plain, admit them not. / Others ditcover not the erroneoy{- 
neſs of their Principles, nor the impetuoulineſs of their Luſts, before 
they have obtained What they aim at, and are got into office; fac 
theſe they muft fall nnder thy Ju4gment, when they da dilcoyer 
what they are, and turn them out again, 

25 Likewiſe the good works of ſome are manifeſt 
before hand ft, and they that are otherwiſe cannot be 


hid «. 

t In like manner ſome Men's holy Life and Converſation hath 
been ſo evident, that there needs little Judgment concerning th:m, 
u And for others under a due Government they cannot be long 
concealed, but by thy due managery of, and vigilance in thy office, 
they will ſoon be diſcovered by their publiſhing their erroneous 
Principles, and the breaking out of their Luſts into enormous adts, 
ſo as they will ſoon fall under thy cenſure, Or elſe thus. The good 
| works of ſome whole life hath not been ſo exemplary, but yet [ich 
as in Charity thou mayeſt judge them to have the root of the mats 
ter in them, (if thou beeſt not miſtaken) cannot be long hid, ſo as 
thou ſhalt ſoon ſee what they are, and accordingly know how to he- 
have thy (elf to them. Thus I ſhould chuſe rather to interpret this 
Text then concerning the Judgment of God, who ſometimes re- 
wards good works preſently, and always rewards them certainly, 
Either in this Life, or that which is to come. 


CHAP. VI, 

The duty of Servants, 1, 2, He deſcribes ſalſe Teachers, with 4 
Command to avoid them, 9———5, He exhorts to Piety; andCon- 
rentarion, and ſhunning of Covetouſneſs, 6 10. 4d todivers 
other Chriſtian and Paſtoral Virtues ; and a charge ſo to do, 11--14, 
The Glory of God, 15, 16, His charge 10 the Rich, 179—19. 
And to Timothy, to maintain his ruſt, and avoid contentions : The 
Apoſtolical Benedifion, 20, 24. 


count their own maſters worthy of all honour 6 : 


blaſphemed c. 

a Under the yoke of ſervitude, not being manumiſed, or made 
free. b Abundant Honour; let Chriſtian Servants give their Ma- 
ſters, inſtead of leſs, double the Honour which Pagan Servants do. 
c For the Credit of the Goſpel, and for the Honour of God ; that 
none may ſay, That Religion teacheth Servants any dilobedience,op 
breaketh the bands of Civil Relations: but on the contrary, that it 
obligeth Profeſſors to a more faithful, and full diſcharge of ſuch du- 
ties, Servants to be the beſt of Servants, &'c. 

2 And they that have believing maſters, let them 


not deſpiſe them: becauſe they are brethren d, but ra- 


and exhort g. 
d Some © hriſtians were Servants to Fews or Pagans, who hoth 
came underithe Golpel Notion of Unbelievers ; as to theſe the Ap0- 
ſtle had given directions in verſe 1, Others ſerved Maſters and Mr 
f Sathan $ 
devices, foreſaw that the former would be under a temptation tO 
neglett, and deſpiie their Maſters or Mijir:jj-s, becauſe they were 
1dolarers, or of a falſe Religion, Enemies to the Goſpel: and the 
latter under a temptation not to be ſo diligent and ſerviceable as 
they ſhould be, becauſe their Gove: nours in a Spiritual Senſe were 
their Equals, their Brethren and oitters : The Apoſtle here declares, 
That the Rule of the Goipel neither allows the one nor the other ; as 
to the former he had ſpoken before ; nor, faith he, Let thole that 
have Maſters or Miſtreſjes that are Chriſtians, deſpiſe them, by _ 
he means, not be equally obedicnt or icrviceabic to them, —_ j 
there is a ſpiritual Equality, or &<latiun betwixt them. # Put tne 
rather do them lervice, iuoxing upor; this a5 a farther obligation 
apon them, f Becauſe they are Bel.evers, ſuci as 10\E our = 
monLord, and are beloved of tim, an.l ſic! as all g90d Chritian 


Chat Chaſtity which ſome would ave the Word here ſhgnifiz; but it 


| ought to love, being partakers of the Gift of Gad, Cir i Fes, wy 


—_— 


Chap. V], 


i 


Et as many * ſervants as are under the yoke 4, * fpi.64 


* that the name of God, and his doctrine be not * Tit: 


ther do them ſervice e, becauſe they are || faithful andy or, i 
beloved, partakers of the benefit 7. Theſe things teachiewing 


Malta 


*Dro1 
16, 


* Pal, 


FHeb,1 


Wrov. 
27, & 
2,&: 
20, Mat 
12, 22, 
Jam, 5, 


| Or, bee 
[tduced, 


L TIMO 


1.0 Chap. VI. 


the great benefic of Redemption through his Blood, g And he 
willeth Timothy to teach the Chriſtians at Fpheſus, that this was the 
Will of God, and accordingly to call upon them for an obedience 
to if, 

3 If any man * teach otherwiſe þ, and coffſent 
+ chap.1-3- not to wholſome words 7, even the words of our Lord 
14, ih Jeſus Chriſt, and to the doarine which 1s according 
| ro godlineſs k ; | 
h If there be any Perſon who either more publickly, or more pri- 
vately ſhall take upon him to inſtru& People otherwiſe, 2 What 
he means by wholeſume words, his next words ſhew z they are called 
wholeſome, becauſe they tend to prevent the ſickneſs of fin,or to cure 
the Soul of its Spiritual Diſtempers, k Words either ſpoken by 
Chriſt, or from Chriſt, or tending to his honour and glory, or to the 
promoting of Piety and Godlineſs, or which are according to the 

Rule of Godlineſs, 
1Or,«foo! 4 Be is || proud}, * knowing nothing #7, but 
jd, | doting about queſtions and ſtrifes of words », 
bwnup %* whereof cometh envy o, ſtrife p, railings q, evil 


Or ek ſurmilings r. 


d of 1 Terige]a, he is ſwelled, or blown up, 4. e. with Pride, ſwelling 
211.2, _— 9 . , ; x , : 
in Opinion, and conceir of himſelf ; he js a Frantick, m Xy0wing no 
rhing ſolidly, and truly, but » is brain-ſick, doting about quentions 
of no uſe, but to make a contention about words. 0 Whence cometh 
Erry,when he once comes to perceiye that others are wiſer than he; 
p Strife ; toran ignorant perſon, if proud, can never yield that a- 
nother knows more than he doth. q Railings, are commonly the 
revenges of ignorant Scioliſts, that would be thought ſomething, 
and are nothing ; when they perceive they are outdone by others, 
then they rail. r Evil ſurmiſings, Umyorae, when they can in Truth 
fay no evil of others, they will uncharitably ſurmiſe and ſuſpe& evil 
of them, 


NN 


lit. Zo on 


THY. Chap. VI, 


have pierce! their very Souls, ſuch as cares, troubles for the lofs 
of their Eſtates, Oc, 
11 * Put thou, O man of Godg, flee theſe things þ , * 2Tim.2: 
and follow after righteouſneſs 7, godlinef* b, fairh 1, 22» 
love m, patience #n, meekneſs 0. 
 & Thats, O thou diiniſter of God, uruſe Service i5 not the Ser- 
vice of the World, It is a Competlation borrowed from ths Old 
Teſtament, where we find it often appiicd to fuch whoie work was 
to reveal the Divine Will, 2 /zngs 1. g. and 4- 39, 40. ©y giving 
Timothy this Compellation, he mindeth him how much he was con- 
cerned to contemn the World. b Flee this eager purfuic 06 Riches, 
? And follow after Juftice, or the buſineſs of a righteous Life in rhy 
Converſation with Men. & And Piety rowards God. 1 The exer- 
cite and life of Fairh, m2 Love to God and thy Neighbour. » A 
quiet hearing of Injuries. 0 Anda gentleneſs of Spirit oppoſed to 
all raſh Anger. ; : 4 
12 * Fight the good fight of faith p, * lay hold * ! ©9759. 


on eternal life q, whereunto thou art alſo called Þ=+ ww 


and haſt profeſſed a good proteſſion before many 2Tim.4.7. 
witneſſes /. * Phil. 3» 
p The Fight of Faith is our encountring that oppoſition which we 12, 14+ 

meet with from the World, the Fleſh, or the Devil, for a firenn.. Vers 19» 
ous defending the Dodrine of Faith, or making, it good by a Lit 

ſuitable to the Rule of Faith, This is cal}ed a good fight, cither in 
oppoſition to the bad Fights of the Men of the World in Maine. 

nance of their Lufts, or the ludicrous Fights uſually in their puhiict 

Games, or of the intrinfick nobleneſs and exercile of it, or the 

good eyent or iflue of it ; and Timothy is bid to fight ir, by a mer. 

phor, either drawn from Souldiers, or ſuch as exerciſed themſelves 

in their Games, q By Eternal L:1j6gg meant a right and title to it, 

which he calls to him to lay told on, as is thought by a metaphor 

from thoſe that were exerciſed in their Games, and did what they 

could firſt to lay hold of the Prize propoied to Conquerors. r To 

which Eternal Life, or rather to which good Fight, thou art called, 

both by the internal Call of God's Spirit, and the more external 

Call to the Miniſtry, { And to which thou haft obliged thy ſelf by 


[Or,84-. 5 || Perverſe diſputings of * men of corrupt minds, 
m_— and deſtitute of the truths, * ſuppoſing that gain 1s 
+:Cor. 11, £odlineſs t : * From ſuch withdraw thy ſelf . _ 

16, S TIzeza]eBal, mutual tearings, and gdllings of, or enterferings 
* 1im,3- with one another, The word is applied to Horſes knocking, one foot 
g againſt another ; the word without the prepoſition wes ſignifies 


» bet. 2.3, School-conflicts by Diſputations, the Prepoſition added makes 1t to 
. . . . =—— . .” id for 

+2Tim.3 fignifie in an evil ſente, Diſputations of Sophiſters, not candid 
5 the finding out of Truth, but perverſe and litigious meerly for ma- 
-” ſeries ; which, he aith, proceeds from men corrupted as to their 
underftanding and judgment. r All whoſe Religion is gain of Riches 
or Keputation. # With ſuch men have nothing to do, avoid them 
in thy private converſe, and caft them out of the Church if their 

- faults be publick ſcandals, and they be contumacious, : 
6 But * godlineſs with contentment 1s great gain w. 
*Prove.15o mw Godlineſs. The exerciſe ofa true Faith in Chrift conjoined with 
16, an holy Life is a good Revenue of it (elf, having in it auTigxeray, 
a ſelf-ſufficiency, He doth not here ſuppoſe that Godlineſs can be 
ſeparated from a contented frame of Spirit with that lot which God 
hath choſen for us (for that cannot be) but as being always attended 
with a contentation of mind, in which alone lyeth true Riches (for 
| ſuch men never want enough.) A good man, SoJomon faith, is ſatiſ- 
fied from himſelf, Prov. 14. 14. for which reaſon alone Godlinels is 

meg uds ukas, a great annual revenue. FR : 

*Phl, 49. +7 For * we brought nothing into this world with 


h us, and it is certain we can Carry nothing out. x, 

| x This agreeth with Fob I, 21. and with experience, and' is a 
potent argument againſt immoderate defires of having much of this 
Worlds Goods, or uſing, extravagant actions to obtain them ; for 
when we have got all we can, we have got but a viarcm, ſomething 
to ſerve us in our journey, which we muſt leave when we die, and 
whether to a wile man or a fool none knoweth, Eccle/. 2, 19, 

8 And * having food and raiment, let us be there- 


with content y. 

9 If therefore God gives us any thing more than! is neceſſary for 
us, let us take it thankfully, and uſe it for God's glory : but if we 
have no more than is juſt neceflary for us, let us not repine or mur- 
mur, but be content, without murmuring againſt God, or uling any 
undue means cut of an inordinate defire to get more, 


PHeb.1345 


ls Prov.1c, 9 But z * they that will be rich a fall into temptati- 
FA 27, & 20.0n, and a ſnare b, and into many fooliſh and hurt- 


m ful luſts c, which drown men in deſtruction and per- 
12 22, "dition d. 


Jan, 5.1, + Or, for. 4 They who out of acovetous and immoderate de- 


a- fire of betng Rich in this Worlds Goods, will uſe any arts, -and do 
id 4 Or, any unlawful thing without any juſt regard to the Law of God. 
hi rvit b Fall into many temptations and ſnares, are expoſed to impetuous 
OY inclinations and motions to that which is evil, and may and will be 
ſnares to their Souls, c Kindling in them many fooliſh and perni: 
th cious deſires, contrary to the Law of God, which d have a dire& 
w tendency to the eternal ruine of their Souls, not to be prevented, 
= but by the force and powerful Grace of God, 
= Or, been 19 For the love of mony is the root of all evil d : 
re Ficd, which while ſome coveted after, they have || erred 
he from the faith e, and pierced themſelves through with 
I” many forrows f. | 
ca 4 Mony it ſelf is not evil, but the immoderate love of it, whe- 
_ ther diſcerned in an oyer-eager defire after it, or an exceſſive de- 
pat light ia it is the cauſe of much evil, both of fin and puniſhment. | 


rl | e Which Mony, while !ome too greedily thirfted ofter (for theugh 
: the Article be Femiuine, and.cannot Grammatically- agree with 


- dpwerey, which is Neurer yet that doth agree with it as tothe Senſe, 
ion being ui « £2 ':00d in grAzgpurtt, With which the Subjundtive Article 
- Gramy . i ly apreett:) ey have erred, 01 being ſeduced trom the 
woe Fairh, ri: .' - the Doctrine of the Goſpel, or Profeſſion of Chriſti- 
wo" ality, j 24d expulcd themſelves to a great many lorrows, which 


Covenant or Promile, made either in thy Baptiſm, or - when thou 
wert ſet apart to thy Miniftry, or of which thou haft given a 


| pledge, by thy profeſſion, and prattice, in the fight of the Chriſtians 


in Epheſus, : 

13 * I give thee charge in the ſight of God X "Ch. 5.21% 
who quickeneth all things # and before Chriſt Jeſus, Deut. 32s 
* who before Pontius Pilate witneſied a good {| con- 7%, 2. 6, 
tefſion 1. | * Matt.27- 

: The Apoftles care of the Church ſheweth it ſelf in theſe ſeyere 11. 
charges laid upon Timothy, though one whom he knew to be a Faith- John 18, 
tul Minifter ; he chargeth him, calling Godto witneſs, that he had 37 
fulfilled his part in laying this charge upon him, The Name he [| Or, proe 
here giveth unto God may poſſibly have a particular reterence to feſjon, 
the State of the Goſpel at that time, the DoQrine and Profeflion 
of which had many Enemies, and ſo it is made uſe of here to 
comfort and incourage Timorky, God is called h that quickeneth the 
Dead, A2m. 4. 17. here he that quickeneth all things. « He pro- 
poſeth the example of Chrift to 7:zmothy, as being the head of thoſe 
chat witneſs a good confeſhon. 

I4 That thou keep this commandment w without 
ſpot, unrebukable x, * until the appearing of our ng 
Lord Jeſus Chriſt y. 1 Theſl. 3. 
w The charge is, That he Faithfully perform'd all the Duties be- 12. X$.27s 
longing to him asa Chriſtian anda Miniſter, commiſſioned from ; 
God, in the whole courſe of his Life, x that he may not be liable to 
a juſt accuſation for the negle of any part of his Office. This is 
entorc'd by the-confideration of the. appearance of our Lord Jeſus 
Chriſt ; that is in the Day of Judgment, as the following words 
make evident; yet the Apoſtle ſeems to ſpeak of it, as if Timorhy 
ſhould continue in his miniſtry till that appearance. Bur *tis mani- 
feft by his cautioning the Theſſalonians againſt that falſe conceit, 2 
beſſ. 2. 2, 3. that the Apoſile knew the contrary : for he aſſures 
them, That that day ſhould not come, till many great things enu- 
merated by him ſhould be accompliſh'd. y The meaaing therefore 
of the words, to the appearing of Feſus Chriſt, is the ſame with our 
Saviour's command tothe Angel of the Church of Smyrna, be faith- 
ful untothe death, Rev. 2, 10, tor the whole flux of time from the 
death of any perſon till the Day of Judgment, makes no alteration 
in his Lite z and conſequently whoever is faithful unto the death, is 
ſo till the appearing of Chriſt, And there is no motive more pow- 
erful-to a zealous and faithful diſcharge of our duty, no excitation 
more rouling from the ſecurity and careleſsneſs of the Fleſh, than 
the ſerious believing confideration of the glorious reward to be dit- 
penſed by our Saviour to his faithful Servants in that Day, and the 
dreadful condemnation that ſhall paſs upon thoſe who have been 
careleſs and negligent in the Sacred Miniltry. | 


15 Which in his times he ſhall ſhew z, who is *+ q,, . 
the bleſſed and onely Potentate a, the King of kings, ix, 17. 
and Lord of lords b. 

2 3p, Which Chriſt coming the ſecond time, God in his time, his 
proper Seaſons (lo it is in the Greek) will ſhew. Or, which ap- 
paring of our Lord Jeſus, God in his time will ſhew; tor ſome 
Greek Copies read the Articles in the Feminine Lermination,to di- 
Ringuiſh the order of the Trinity's workiag, as the ficlt coming of 
Chriſt is made to be from the Father's ſending, 10 is allo the ſecond 
coming. - 4 Ged is faid to be the onely Porcntare, becauſe he hath 
only Power in,and from bimſelf,By him Kings reign; and he is called 
the bleſſed Porenrare, becauſe he is the Founcain of all Felicity and 
Happineſs. 5 That is, the moft mighty King, and Lord, to whom . 
all other Princes are Subjects, all other Loids are Vaſſals. Theſe 
Terms ſeem here to be applied to the Father, though they agree 
alſo to the Son, and the Spirit, They are applied to Cirift, &ev. 17. 


* Thil, 1.6, 


4. and 19. 16, | 
16 Who only hath immortality c, dwelling in 
the 


it 


_ _ 


Chap. I. 


*£x04.33-the light 4, which no man can approach unto c,* wncm 
© John no mn hath ſeeaf, nor can ſeeg - to whom be ho- 


_ \. , novr and power everlaſting. Amen wy ; 
12 yy ”  cOf himlelf; onr Souls, and Angels are immortai from the gift 
2©-* of Gol. cr immorta/ity ſignifies here, the ſame with Eternity Or 
Jamuability. d Continuallv incompaſſed with a Glory that is un- 
ſrealable, x Foha 1.5. EC To which no man can in this Life come 
nigh, f Nor did Moſes or Stephen, or any other, ever ſee his Glory 
ſo as to comprehend ir, or in the full perfe&tion of it, g Nor can 
the Sons of Men ſee him with their bodily eyes, or ſo as to coMPTe- 
hend him in his perfection ; though ſome have with their bodily 
_ eyes ſeen his back Parts,and Appearances,and with their Souls have, 
through his Grace, been enabled ſpiritually to behold him, h To 
which immortal, glorious, inviſible God belongs, and let there for 

evcr be given, Honour and Power. 


17 Charge them that are rich in this world z, that | 


* 10? 3?. they be not high minded &, *nor truſt in Þ uncertain 
a) 31 KN nh \ * I . . 
-5+*'% riches 1, but in the living God m, who giveth us richly 


62. 10+ 
Mark 10, all things to enjoy 2 © | 
2.4. 7 Thoſe that arerich in Grace, and the good Things of another 
+ Gr. rhe Life, need not this Charge; but there are divers at Epheſus, who 
uncertainty have great Eſtates in Goods, Or Houſes, or Lands, and but poor 
in gracious Habits, charge them, & That their Riches do not lift 
them up into an high Conceit or Opinion of themſelves, which 
\Vorldly Riches often do. 7 And that they repoſe no confidence in 
them, making them their ſtrong City, Prov. 10. 15. As if they could 
ſecure them from evil, or make them happy. m But let them re- 
pole their truſt in God, who hath Life in himſelf, giveth Life unto 
all other things, and liveth for ever. # And is he who gives us all 


we have, though it be bought with our penny, 


of riches, 


*Luke 12. 
__ > «god works, ready to diſtribute q, || willing to com- 
[| Or,/vc7.4- Municate 7. | 

ble, o That is to others, as they have opportunity. p Be plentiful in 


Alms-deeds, or more generally in all good Works of Piety or Cha- 


1). TIMOTHY. 


rity. q That they be not backward to diſtribute that of which God 
hath made them Stewards, to thoſe that want. » But give freely 
and without grudging, according to their Maſters order, as he- 
cometh thoſe who are but Stewards as to the Riches which they 
have 

19 Laying up in ſtore for themſelves a good foun- 


on eternal life t. 

s Riches in themſelves are but for the preſent, but there j; an uſe 
may be made of them for the time to come, if we imploy them for 
the better inabling us to do what God hath commanded ys to do 
Matth, 6. 20, Luke 12. 33. thoſe Atts of Obedience to the Com- 
mand of God for the uſe of our Eftates, though they can merit no- 
thing, (for what proportion can there be betwixt a few Shillings 


time to come, t That God will give us an Eternal Happineſ,not as 


| and Eternal Life *) yet will be a good ground for us to hope for the 


| a Reward of Debt but of Free Grace. 


20 O Timothy, * keep that which is committed to 


and oppoſitions of ſcience falſly ſo called x. 


Notion of Preaching, which in thy diſcharge of that Work, are the 
beſt of them but profane Bablings. x Avoid alſo all idle Specula- 
tions and Diſputations, no way ſerving to the end of Preaching, and 
falſly called Science, 


the faith y. Grace be with thee z. Amen. 


13 That they do good o, that * they be rich in| » Which kind of Science, ſome pretending and boaſting of, Rudy. '* 
| Ing to ſhew themſelves learned and ſubtil en, they have been led 


| Into Errours in Chriſtianity,apoſtatizing from the Dottrine of Faith, 
2; Vt, The Grace, Mercy, and Peace from God our Father and Jeſus 
Chriſt our Lord, mentioned 2 Tim, 1, verſe 2, 


hee 


IL T I M. 


ARGUMENT T. 


7 > 


The 


O THY. 


His ſecond Epiſtle to Timothy was moſt certainly wrote from Rome,wheyn Paul was 4 Priſoner there,2 Timothy 1. $. and 4s moſt judge 4 

very little while before his Death, (for he tells us, Chapter, 4. 7, 8. rbat he was ready to be offered, be had finiſhed his courle, the 

time of his departue was at hand,) He 7s ſaid to have died Anno Chriſti 68. and in the Five and thirtieth after his Converſion, ſo this Epi. 

file was wrote about Sixteen years after the writing of the former, The Scope of it is much the ſame as of the former, To exhort and encourage 

him to faithfulneſs in his Miniſtry, 10 keep ſtedfaſt in the Faith, to be giligent in his work. To avoid all ſtrifes of words, perverſe diſputivps, &, 

He aljo in it a4moniſheth him, that the latter times were like to be yet more dangerous, and therefore adviſeth him 10 prepare for Hardſhp and 
Perſecuticns, propounding his own example t0 him, both as to Dodtrine, and as to Suſjering, 


CHAP. I, 


The uſual ſ:lutation, and rhanksgiving, and love to him, 1 4 for 
his goalineſs from his infancy by his grandmother and mother, 5, He 
exhorts him 16 (tir up his gifts, ard not be afraid or aſhamed of the 
Goſp-1, and ſuffering for it, 6— 8. The excellency of our Calling 
and Dotrine, of which himſelf was a Preacher, and for it be ſuffer- 
ed, 12, and which was comminted 10 Timothy 10 be held faſt by 
him in its Purity, 12,14. All in Aſia had forſaken the Apoſtle but 
only Onefipherus, for whom he prays, 15 ——— 18, 


Aul an Apoſtle of Jeſus Chriſt, by the will of 
God a, according to the promiſe of life b, which 
iS in Chriſt Jeſus c. 

a See the Notes on 1 Tin, 1,1, b Tt is much the ſame with Rom, 
1,1,2. According to the Goſpel, which be had promiſed before by his 
Prophets. Theſe words either ſignifie the end of his Apoſileſhip, 
fo declare the Goſpel in which is the Promiſe of Life,or the Matter of 
his Preaching, c Which Eternal Life was promiſed of old, but is 
_ to be had but in Chritit Jeſus, and in him is the Promiſe ful- 

lled. 


2 To Timothy my dearly beloved Son d, Grace, 
mercy, and peace, irom God the Father, and Jeſus 
Chriſt our Lotd e. 


d See the Notes on 1 Tm. 1. 2. there he calls him his own Son, 
teſtifying his relation, here his beloved Son, to teſtifice his affeion 
to him. The Salutation is the ſame with that 1 7im. 1. 2, vide the 
Notes there, 

Sx * 1 thank God * whom I ſerve from my fore-fa- 
Em. 2.16, cBCrS with pure conſcience f, that * without ceaſing, 
*A&.22.3:1 have remembrance of thee in my prayers, night and 
& 23-1. day g. 

& 24. 14» f Pay} here by his forefathers, either intends his immediate Pa- 
* 1 1hefl, rents, or Abraham, Iſage and Facob z for he ſerved the ſame God 
whom they ſerved. But how did Pau} from his forefathers ſerve 
God with a pure Conſcience, who was a Native Jew, and zealous in 
that Religion in oppoſition to the Faith of the Goſpel, which alone 
purifieth the heart? A#s 15,9, Sol. A pure Conſcience ſeemeth 
here to fignifie the ſame with Phil, 3. 6. touching the righteouſneſs 
which 1s in the Law blameleſs, Paul was ftrit to the Rules of that 
Religion which he profeſſed, though that Religion was not. that 
which univerſally purificth the heart, Or elſe his meaning is,That 
he atthis time ſerved that God who was the God of his forefathers, 
with a pure Conſcience, g He either thanketh God on the behalf 
of Timothy for his Gifts and Graces, or elſe he bleſſed God, that had 
Put it into his heart daily to remember 7imorky in his Prayers, Phi- 
lem. 4.By which expreſſion he both lets us know the mutual duty of 


Nang tom ne £5 
$oboult inns ro ome £22 nr 2pather ; and allo that when we find any 


6. 2. 
& Ze. 19, 


inclinations to.do our duty, we ought to acknowledge them to God, 
being not of our ſelves ſufficient to one good thought, 

4 Greatly deſiring to ſee thee, being mindful of thy 
tears h, that I may be filled with joy z. 

h There was a great brotherly love amongſt Primitive Chriſtians, 
ſoas the. Apoſtle often expreſſeth his deſire to ſee ſuch Chrittiansas 
were at diftance from him, Kom. 1. 11. 1 Theſ, 2. 17, but he ex- 
preſſeth a particular reaſon of his deſire to ſee Timothy, remem- 
bring the tears he ſhed at his parting from him and the reſt, 4#s 
20.37, 38, # Beſides the defire he had by his preſence to fatisfie 
him, and give him occaſion of joy, with which he alſo ſhould be fit- 
led, unleſs he ſpeaketh of the joy he promiſed himſelf when he ſaw 
Timothy, upon his ſeeing the improvement he had made both of his 
Graces and Gifts in che Miniſterial Office, : 

5 When I call to remembrance the unfeigned faith 
that is in thee k, which dwelt firſt in thy grandmother 


Lois, and in thy mother Eunice, and 1 am perſwaded 


that in thee alſo /. 


& The Apoſtle expreſſeth another cauſe of his affetion to Timo- 
thy, viz. his ſincere owning and adhearing to the Profeſſion of the 
Goſpel. 1 As his Grandmother Lorzs and his Mother Eunice had done 
before him,Che faith nothing of his Father, for he was a Jew prole- 
lyted, or an Heathen, A#s 16, 1.) and though he could not infalli- 
5g determine, yet he was verily perſwaded of his ſincerity al- 
0. 


Chap. I. 


dation for the time to come 5, that they may * lay holg KVorr 
58 I 12, 


thy truſt «, * avoiding profane and vain bablings w, x 2 Tin, 
«14, 


4 Either the DoQtrine of the Goſpel, which Miniſters Ought to _ 5 Þ 
keep pure, and without mixture, or the Miniſterial Office ; be true & ; 145 
and faithful in the diſcharge of it, preaching Chrift, and the Do. 9 Tis, 
crine of Chrift, w Avoid all impertinent Diſcourſings under the 16 


213 Which ſome profeſling * have erred concerning | 


m, y 
22% 


'2Tims, 


Rom, 
26, 

Col, 1, 
*1 Co 


16.5445 
Heb, 2, 


FEph.a. 


JOrgru 


6 Wherefore I put thee in remembrance m, that, ,-;,,, 
thou * ſtirup # the gift. of God o which is in thee; ;,, 


by the putting on of my. hands p. | 

m Pauf's affetion to Timothy was ſo far from abating his faithſul- 
neſs to him, that it quickned him to admoniſh him to be faichful in 
his Miniſtry ; and to that end,. » He adviſeth him to put new Life 
unto that holy fire (the word ſignifies the recovering of fire chaakea 
with aſhes, or decaying) which God had kindled-in' him. 0 By cal- 
ly Prayer, and meditating on the things of God and uſe of his Gifts, 
improving thoſe Spiritual Abilities which God had given bim. / U- 
on the Prayers of Pau}, and the Presbytery, when he was by them 
ſet apart to the work of an Evangelift,for the end for which Gol had 
given them to him, IP 


Ch.3.14, 


7 For * God hath not given us the ſpirit of fear 9* Rom. * 


but of power 7, and of -love'f, and of a ſound 15. 


mind #, 


«#tsn 


n BwDSvs &. £# A Sh a5 «aw 


« 12, 


"m,9; 


| 1T inde 


þ Rom. pf 
TH 


Chap. I. IL TIMO 


gers and difficulties. r Love to God, and to the Souls of his Peo-| 
le, Love ſo ſtrong as to conſtrain us to be willing to lay down our 
Lives for Chriſt, and for his Church and People. / Zape5yroue, we 
Tranſlate it 4 ſound mind, others fobriety, others 4 caim and quiet 
miad, A ſound mind in the ordinary notion of it, for a Judgment 
ſound in the Faith,is requiſite to a Miniſter of the Goſpel, Sobrie- 
ty is the gift of the Spirit ; /obriery is a very general term, and fig- 
nifies the moderation and government of our Paſhons ; that which 
ſcems to be here meant is ſuch a Government, and compoſure of 
Spirit, that nothing ſhall deter us from the diſcharge of our Du- 
ty ; andthe term ſound mind, oppoſed to a weak and fickly mind, 
4: ggecring at every danger, may well enough expreſs the Apoſtles 
lene. | 
8. * Pe not thou therefore aſhamed of the * teſti- 
I Om "* mony of our Lord f, nor of me * his priſoner u, but 
+ ; Tim, be thou partaker w of the afflictions of the Goſpel x, 


2. 6, according to the power of God y. | 
| *Phil,1.7- 7zEither the Teſtimony which Chriſt himſelf gave, who before 
Pontius Pilate witneſſed a good Conſcience; or thatTeftimony which 

thou art obliged to give; for the Minifters of Chrift are to be wit- 

neſles to him, As 1. 8. u By this it appears that Pax} was a Pri- 

ſoner at Rome when he wrote this 3 he would not have Timothy a- 

ſhamed to own him, and the DoQrine he had taught becauſe of that 
circumſtance. w That is, be thou content if God calls thee to take 

a ſhare with me in thoſe afflitions which I ſuffer for preaching and 
profeſſing the Goſpel; or thoſe affliftions are inſeparable from the 

Goſpel. ,y Through the power of God, for it is given to us on 

= behalf of Chrift, as to believe, ſo to ſuffer for Chriſt's ſake, 

Phl, 1. 29. 

9 Who hath ſaved us z, and called us with an holy 

Rom. 9. Calling a, * not according to our. works 6b, but 
II, * according to his own purpoſe and grace c, which 


| "50m 5. was given us in Chriſt Jeſus 4 * before the world be- 
* £ph, 3. 520 : 
11, 2 That is, brought us into a ſtate of Salyation, and given us 


THY. Chap. IL 


Dottrine in his mind written in his heart, making his Diſcourſes 
conform to it, hþ The ſum of which form of ſonnd words he de- 
clareth to be Faith and Love, for all that the Goſpel teacheth, is 
either believing in the Lord Jeſus Chriſt,or keeping his Command- 
ments, which 1s the demonſtration of Love, Fohn 14. 15. or elſe 
the ſenſe may he this, Keep thy ſelf ſound in the Principles of Re- 
ligion, which thou haſt learned of me, b But do not think this e- 
nough without exerciſing Faith in Chriſt as thy Redeemer, and li- 
ving in obedience to his Commandments, Many an Orthodox Man 
may go to Hell, notwithſtanding his Orthodoxy. 

14 That good thing which was committed to thee #, 
keep by the holy Ghoſt which dwelleth in us k. 

# This is expounded by 1 Tim, 6. 20, he means the Nofrine of 
the Goſpel, or his Office in the publication of it ; be faithful in thy 
Minifterial Work; & To which purpoſe beg the aſſiſtance and ope- 
ration of the Holy Spirit, which dwelleth both in all Believers, and 
more particularly affifteth the Miniſters of the Goſpel, We can nei- 
ther keep our Minds ſound in the Faith, as to the Dottrine of it, 
nor our Souls ſteady in the exerciſes of Faith,'or Love, without the 
aſſiſtance of the Holy Spirit, which the Lord giveth to them that 
__ : and it abides in them, who do not vex, quench, grieve, or 
ren it. p 

15 This thou knoweſt / that * all they which are *Ch.4.16, 


in Aſia be turned away from me #7, of whom are Phy- 


gellus and Hermogenes #. 

I Probably as to ſome he had a perſonal knowledge of their Apo- 
ſtacy z as to others he knew it by information,which Pau} confirm- 
eth. m It ſeemeth unreaſonable to interpret 4 here of every indi« 
vidual, but many (as all oft ſignifieth in Holy Writ : ) Some inter- 
pret it of all the Jewiſh Proſelytes, others of thoſe of 4fz, who 
accompanied Paul to Rome, and there ſeeing his Sufferings apoſtati- 
ſed, others of many who ſtill abode in 42, where Timothy now 
was: theſe all, or many of them, deſerted Paul, either wholly caſt- 
ing off the Chriſtian Profeſſion ; or withdrawing themſelves from 
communion with Paul when they ſaw him a Priſoner, » Of theſe 
two we have no more ſaid in Holy Writ, and therefore can aflert 


| 1PEr, 1.20, 2 Tight to it, 4 And in order to our obtaining of it, hath effettu- 

| ally called, renewed, and ſanQifigd us. & Not for any Merits of 
ours, © But from his own free love purpoſing and decreeing eter- 
nal Salvation to us, with the means adequate to it, 4 To be ob- 
tained through the Merits and Mediation of Jeſus Chriſt, e Which 
purpoſe of his was before the Foundation of the World was laid, 
and therefore could not be according to our Works, but muſt be of 
his own Grace, Eph. 1. 4. Titus 3. 5. 

Rom.16. 1O But * is now made manifeft by the appearing. 

| 26, of our Saviour Jeſus Chriſt f, * who hath aboliſhed 


1-26: geath 2, and hath brought life, and immortality to 


16.54,55, light through the Goſpel h. 

Heb, 2.14. f Which purpoſe of God in Chriſt Jeſus, was in a great meaſure 
hidden under the Old Teſtament, but by the coming of Chrift is 
made evident ; g for by his death he hath taken away the ſting, 
and power of Death, delivering us from that which is the ſecond 
Death. h And through the Doftrine of the Goſpel he hath made 
the Promiſes of Eternal Life plain and clear, which though exiſtent 
under the Law, yet were very obſcurely revealed,ſo as they lay out 
of the ſight of moſt men and women, but are now brought to light, 
ſo as he who runneth may read them, , 


1x Whereunto I am appointed a preacher #, and an 


apoſtle k, and a teacher of the Gentiles /. 

Z For the publication of which gracious Councel and rae of 
God thus made manifeſt by Chrift's coming, and of that Lite and 
Immortality, thus by the Goſpel brought to light ; God hath ap- 
pointed me as his cryer, k and ſent me immediately as his Meſſenger 
to make a publication of it, 1 and hath made the inftruQting of the 
Heathen my peculiar Provice, 1 Tim, 2. 7. ; 

12 For * the which cauſe I alſo ſuffer theſe things mn, 
nevertheleſs I am not aſhamed n; for 1 know whom 1 
IOrgruli- have || believedo,and I am perſwaded thathe is able to 

. keep that which 1 have committed unto him againſt 
that day p. 

m For the preaching and publiſhing of which Goſpel, or for the 
teaching of the Gentiles, I ſuffer theſe things, baing accuſed by the 
Jews as a ſeditious Perſon, ſtirring up the People, and by them de- 
livered to the Romans, and by them impriſoned, # Yet I am not 


*Eph.3.1, 


which I have committed unto him, in this, Text underſtood the Church 
or Body of Believers, othets underſtand the fruit and reward of his 


meant, oux Eternal Salyation is in Chrift's keeping, I rather in- 
cline to the firſt notion, ſo it agreeth with 1 Per. 4. 19. God com- 
mits his/Goſpel to our Truft, who are Miniſters, x Tim. 6. 20, we 
according to the phraſe of Scripture, are ſaid to commit our Souls 
to him, Luk. 23. 46. 44s 7, 59. 1 am, faith Paul, inconcerned as to 
my Sufferings, I have intruſted God with all my Concerns in order 
to this Life, and that which is to come z and 1 know he is able to 
ſecure them, : 

13 * Hold faſt the form of ſound words which thou 
haſt heard of me g in faith h, and love, which is in, 
Chriſt Jeſus þ. 

8 By ſound words which he had heard from Paul, can be meant 
nothing but the Dotrine of the Goſpel, which as it is it ſelf pure, 
and conſiſtent with it ſelf, not rotten, one piece- of which will not 
hold with the other; ſo it tends to make Souls ſound, as to their 


Ch.3.14, 


aſhamed of my chains. 0 I have committed my ſelf to God, p and | 
I am out of doubt concerning God's ability to keep until the Day | 
of Judgment my,Soul, or my whole Concerns both tor this Life and |, 
another, which'T have by Faith committed to him. Some by that | 


Labours and Suffering, Mr, Calvin would hare Life Eternal here| 


nothing of them with any certainty. | 
16 The Lord give mercy unto the houſe of Oneſi- 


phorus o, for he oft refreſhed me p, and was not aſha- 


med of * my chain 9. * Ads 29, 
0 Whether O0nefiphorus was at this time alive, or no, is very 20, 
doubtful, for he only prays for 1.is Family in this Text, and falu- Eph. 6.20; 
reth them only, Chap. 4. 19. fp Either when he was in Afa, or 
(which is more probable, by reaſon of what followeth) at Rome, 
whither he might attend him, or- follow him, q and ſhew kinds 
neſs to. him when he was a Priſoner ; for which Pau} prayeth Mer- 
cy for his whole Family, _ 
- 17 But when he wasin Rome r, he ſought me out 
very diligently, and found me 5. 
7 Whither he might go upon his private Occaſions, and Being 
there, s he made it his buſineſs to find out Pau), and reſted not un- 
til he had found him, either at his Inn, or in the Priſon where he 
was put. 
18 The Lord grant unto him he may find mercy of 


the Lord in that day t: And in how many things 
he miniſtred unto me at Epheſus, thou knoweſt very 


well. 

t This would incline us to think that 0ne/iphorus was yet alive 
the term mercy he here prays that he may find of the Lord is com- 
prehenſive of all good, both Corporal and Spiritual,which he prays 
God the Father to grant to this good Man, to find from the Lord 
Jeſus Chrift in that day, when he ſhall come to judge the Quick 
and the Dead; for he had not only miniftred to the Apoſtle while 
he was a Priſoner at Kome, but many ways at Ephejus (where proba« 
oly this Oneſiphorus lived) which Timothy being there well knew, 


CH AP. II 


He exhorts Timothy to commit the Goſpel to others that they might teach, 
1,2. and as @ good ſouldier and busbandman to ſtrive and endure 
hardſhip for Chriſt, 3———6, and to lay his Exhortations to heart, 
and eſpecially the Article of Chriſt's Aurreliien He propoſerh to 
him his own example, and the certain recompence of ſufferirg, 
7 12. He exborts bim rightly to divide the Word of Ged, 
and oppoſe ſtrife of words and dotrines of Apoſtates, namely, of rb5ſe 
who denied the Reſurrefttion, 14. 18. Though fome fall away, 
yer the Elefion (tands ; and this ratified by our Sanitification,19=21, 
He exhorts bim to flee youthful luſts and fooliſh queſiions, and 10 en. 
deavour after divers Chriſtian and Paſtoral Vertues, 22——26, 


1 = therefore my ſon, be ſtrong in the grace 
| that is in Chriſt Jeſus a. 
 « The ſenſe is, cither ſhew thy ſelf a ſtout and valiant man, not 
being affrightedat the dangers that threaten thee in the publithing, 
and defence of the Goſpel, which brings the glad tydings of the 
:Grace of Jeſus Chriſt ; Or he thou ftrong through the gracious in- 
fluence of Chrift Jeſus, without which thoucanft do nothing. "_ 
2 And the things that thou haſt heard of me {| a-l| Or, 9 
mongſt many witneſſes b, the ſame commit thou to 
faichful men, who ſhall be * able to teach others al-* (Tim. 3, 


ſo c. 2. 
| b The Do&rine of the Goſpel which thou haſt heard from me, Tit» I. 9. 
canfirmed by the teſtimony of many of the Prophets of old, or, 
which thou heardft from me committed to thy truſt, there being 
many witneſſes preſent, when thou wert ordained,or ſet apart to thy 
Office, c Commit unto others that ſhall be ſet apart for thy Minj- 
fry ; but let them be ſuch as have an ability to communicate their 
knowledge to others, and ſuch as thou ſhalt judge will be faithful to 


Spiritual Health. This Do&trine 7imorby had been inftrufted in by 
Paul, whether he had given him a written form of it or no, 1s 
not much material z for this (if he did) was not that which he 
would have him hold taft, but to keep the /4ea, or pattern of that 


their truſt, : | 
3 * Thou therefore indure hardneſs d asa good ſoul-+ cy, x, g, 
ier of Jeſus Chriſt e, & 4+ 5+ 
d la 


+4. 4 4 


Chap. 1I. 


* 1; Cor.g. 


4 In the Greet it is ſuffer evils, [c. evils of afflition, expe& them, 
and encounter ani patiently endure them. e Remembring that the 
Life of a Miaifter is not a life of eaſe and pleaſure, but the life of a 
Sgullier, whole life is a life of hardſhip, expoled to numberleſs ha- 
Zards and dangers. : : 

4 No man that warreth, intangleth himſelf with the 


affairs of this life f, that he may pleaſe him who hath 


choſen him to he a ſouldier g. 

# Having told Timory that his Life was to be the Life of a Sou!- 
aier, in which he would be expoſed to many Difficulties, and Dan- 
gers and Hazards, he bere mindeth him of the Law and Cuſtom 
of Souldiers, who being once entred in the Muſter-Roll,uſe to ſeque- 
fier themſelves from other Imployments in Trading, Husbandry,or 
the like, 'g That thereby they might be at the Command of their 
General, or Captain, to be callzd out upon what ſervice he pleaſeth: 
So he who is a Miniſter of the Goſpel, ought not voluntarily, 
and of choice, engage himſelf in ſecular Imployments, but give 
up himſelf wholly to the Miniſterial Work, that ſo he might 
pleaſe the Lord Jeſus Chriſt, who hath choſen him to be his 
Souldier. ; : 
And * if a Man alſo ſtrive for maſteries 6, 
yet is he not crowned 7, except he ſtrive lawful- 


ly k 


where divers ſtrive by wreſtling, fighting, racing, where there is a 
Crown propoſed as the Prize for thoſe who are the Conquerors in 
the Game : e They have not that Crown ſet upon their heads ; 
+ unleſs they keep to the Laws of that Game wherein they are ex- 
erciſed, So it is in the Spiritual Warfare, or Conteſt, there is a 
far greater reward, even a Crown of Glory, propoſed for ſuch as 
overcome ; but none ſhall have it, unleſs thoſe who keep to the 
Laws which God hath'made for thoſe who exerciſe themſelves in 
that Spiritual Combate. 

6 * || The husbandman that laboureth muſt be firſt 


I. TIMOTHY. 


h And look as it is in the publick Games in uſe amongſt you, 


* 1 Cor.9. 
\ Fo 

'' Or, the 
busband- 


partaker of the fruits /. 

1 As the Apoſtle before had compared the Miniſter of the Goſ- 
pel to a Souldier, and from thence concluded his Duty, not to in- 
1:21 1, tangle himlelf unneceſſarily in ſecular Imployments : and to thoſe 
bourin that exerciſe themſelves in their publick Games, and from thence 
firſt , myſt concluded the obligation upon him to keep to the Diyine Rule in 
be partaker the managery of his Office,and of himſelf,under the oppoſition he 
of th> ſhould meet with; to here ze compares him to an Husbandman,(as 


2 o_—_ ” —_— 2 BgntZ% 


$099,003 5 ar 
oe IR : 


. ox = =_ 
o . j < S - a 
; "Y —_— ., < x Ps . —_— o GB 
=OR 4 Iz _ WL 6 # - 3 = 5: — SA - 4 hs —— ara —_ 
o ==" _ -_- C Rn 1 L, -) . 2 G s ye 1 <* = a by 
2 _ > * ==. SP or —__ > . + _ CAS 
- = _— p —— mom ” _ S -< => _—— p - - _ _ —_ J : ———_ 
. *&x — = = FOpT. A . deny hg 2 
35 a—R ISS _ EET 3-4 < OT t 4 DE p Fo gar er _——————— x HO _ þ —_— 
— - 1 _Y Fo ww << LL F s - bells > = we 
ot a! ” , x3 v1 _ - ->z —_—_— Pd oy i Wenda T, —_ Pe a Ars =_ 
; + Y oi 2 ES DB nat £7 A Vh_ke SEED - WM a > AE wc : 
= «7 o _- T s -_ p 1 - © by - " 4 
ik _ 3 * . * > & ob dad. nw < OD AG " : FY FR. S By _ 
" —— - hn En 7 AC * : pay — - on gry Ra 1 6 4 ——_ i 44 am——_— 
"* - OO nt A : x & . IR PAI. > -L PC... < 
= TI nt 4 TEAS Ce > 4.33% . - $_" a ps p .: T Ao Wis. > ; 
_ _—___ at ro »-x as. ens 


> 24 


wa" 


ear — —Ire 


ann ny 


Dv7*/ Houme rg agen ne 
ba oe 
LY 
— 


Phil. 1. 5. 
Col. 4 3. bound Ss. + 


Chriſt himſelf had done, Marth, 13. 1, &c.) either to mind him. 


of his Duty, firſt to look to ſave his own Soul, then the Souls of o-! k . 
| workman that needeth not be aſhamed k, rightly di- 


thers ; or of his advantage, it being the priviledge of an Husband- 
man, being the proprietor of the Fruits (if he will) firſt to eat 


thereof, thereby intimating the priviledge of thoſe who turn many 
Japplauſe for ſpeaking quaintly, learnedly, or ſmoothly, but to ap- 


to righteouſneſs, Dan. 12. 3. 


7 Conlider what I ſay m, and the Lord give thee 
jthou oughteſt to ſerve, k A Workman that doth his work fo well, 


underſtanding in all things ». 

m Weizh theſe things with thy ſelf in thy own thoughts, 7 But 
thou wilt not effeftually underſtand them without a Divine Influ- 
ence opening thy mind to a comprehenfion of them, and thy heart 
to a reception of all theſe things, and all other things which it 1s 
reaſonable for thee to know, and underftand, | 


3 Remember that Jeſus Chriſt of the ſeed of 


David o was raiſed from the dead p according to my 
goſpel q. 

o The Apoſtle paſſeth from his former Diſcourſes, wherein he 
had armed Timothy againft the affAiftions of the Goſpel, to a Dil- 
courſe about the Doarine of the Golpel, and here mentionerth two 
principal heads of that Dottrine ; The Incarnation of Chriſt, and 
his Keſarreftion ; which he inftanceth in, as more particularly to be 
remembred and preiſed upon Chri/1ians, in regard they were thoſe 
Two Points of the Goſpel which were either at that time denied, 
(as that of the Incarnation was by the Fews) or he knew woufd firſt 
be oppoſed ; aud the latter, that which declared Chrift to be the 
Son of God with Power, Kom. 1. 4. and upon Faith, in which 
Chriſtian's Salvation and Conſolation much depended, Rom. 4. 25. 
and 8. 24. He therefore calls to him eſpecially to remember that 
Jeſus Chriſt was the Seed of David, truly Man, and the true Meſſ5ab 
who was to be the Seed of David,(as the Fews themſelves confetſed) 
The Manhood of Chriſt ſoon after the Apoſtle times, was denyed by 
the Marcionites and Manichees, ©&c, p And that he was raiſed up 
from the Dead,deſerved [imothy's remembrance,both becauſe upon 
that depended the great evidence of Chriſt's Divine Nature,and the 
Salvation and Conlolation of Believers. q This he ſaith was ſutable 
to the Doctrine of the Goſpel, which he had Preached to them ; he 
calls it kis Goſpel, becauſe committed to his truſt to publiſh,ſo Rom, 
2, 16, and 16, 25. which he expoundeth, Gal, 1.11, the Goſpel 
preached by me; he ſpeaks in the Plural Number, 1 Theſ|. 1. 5. 
2 Th:ſſ: 2. 14. declaring that the Goſpel was no more his, than 0- 
thers alſo who were Miniſters of it. 

9 Wherein I ſuffer trouble, as an evil doer, 


* even unto bonds ry, but the word of God is not 


+ That is, for which I ſuffer afflition, as if T were an evil doer, 
to that degree that I am put in chains ; s but yet I preach the Gol: 
pel, or the Goſpel is preached, though they have reſtrained me 
-they are not able to reftrain that, 

10 Therefore * [ endure all things t for the elefts 


vs a 3 ſake #, that they may alſo obtain the ſalvation which 
Col. 1. 24s is in Chriſt Jeſus with eternal glory w. 


t That is all things which I do endure, Reproach, Impriſon- 
meat, ©&:, for he had not yet reſiſted to blood, u As for Chrift's 
ſake, to imitate his example, and teftifie my love to Him ; for the 
ſake of thoſe whom God hath choſen to Eternal Life, that they ſee- 
ing my patience and conftancy, may be confirmed in the Faith of 
the Goſpel, 2nd by that means may obtain Eternal Life, Salvation, 
with Eternal Glory, which is to be had ia Chriſt, 


x See the notes on 1 77m. 1, 15, and 4. 9, where we had the 
fame Phraſe, »y We are ſaid tobe dead with Chriſt two ways, B 
our dying to fin, as he dyed for fin, Rom. 6. 5, 2. By our fufforinh 
in reſtimony of the truth, 2 Cor, 4.10, which is that being deat with 
him, which is here mentioned. #4 There is alſo a twofold livins 
with him, by a riſing again toa newneſs of Life, Rom. 6. 4 And 
hereafter in Glory, which latter is here intended, Wings 


we deny him, he will alſo deny us b. 


ing, and adherence to his Dottrine of Faith, or diſcharge of an 
Truft He hath repoſed in us, we ſhall reign with Him in Glory 
b But if we, upon proſpett ot danger, deny his Truth, or deſert the 
Profeſhon of Him, He in the Day of Judgment will not own ys 
before his Father, and the holy Angels, Marth. to, 33. Mart $, 9 
Rom. 8, 17, - oy 
13 * If we believe not, yet he abideth faithful c. 


he cannot deny himſelf d. 


ful to our truft, or be not, yet God will ſhew himſelf faithfu], ej- 
ther to his Promiſes made to them that believe, or to his threat- 
nings denounced againſt thoſe that believe not. 4 For it is impoſſi. 
ble that He who is Truth it ſelf ſhould be otherwiſe, that were for 
him to deny himſelf. : 

14 Of theſe things put them in remembrance e, 
charging them before the Lord f * that they ſtrive» 
not about words to no profit g, but to the ſubverting 4. 

$ 


of the hearers h. 

e That is, put other Teachers in remembrance of all theſe thingy 
which I have given thee in charge. f Charging them, as in the 
ſight of God, who moſt certainly obſerveth and taketh notice of 
them, and will call them to an account, g That they ſpend not 
their time in their Pulpits in contefts about words which tend to no 
ſolid advantage of their Hearers, þ But may tend to the ſubyer. 
ſion of them, and the deftroying their fteddineſs in the Faith, 
drawing them into Parties and FaCtions, the Fruit of which is no- 
thing but Envy and Contentions,and different Opinions in matters 
of Faith; as to which it hath been always obſerved, That the 
affeation of new Phraſes hath been introduQtive of a Novelty in 
Opinion, 


15 Study to ſhew thy ſelf approved unto God 7, a 


viding the word of truth 7. 
z Let it be thy Study not to pleaſe Men, to get their humm and 


prove thy ſelf to God, who is thy Maſter in this Work, and whom 


and faithfully, that he n-ed not be aſhamed, whoever looketh and 
judgeth upon it. 2*OgSeJopsy]e, rightly cutting our, we tranſlate it 
rightly dividing ; it is not material, whether the Metaphor be drawn 
from the Prieft's right cutting out their Sacrifices,ſo as all had their 
ſhares in them z or from Carpenters cutting out their Timber,cut- | 
ting off the ſappy part, and by a right Line dividing the other 
parts ; or from Cooks, or -Carvers, or Parents, rightly dividing a 
Diſh of Meat among ſeveral Guefts, or Children; or from thoſe 
that uſe to cut out ways, or from Husbandmen cutting out Fur- 
rows, &c, The Senſe is, rightly handling the Word of God, and 
giving to all their Portion. For their Notion who would make the 
lenſe of it, cutting our a right way for others by thy example, becauſe 
the word geÞo/opay, ſometimes ſignifies to cur 4 right way, it no 
way agreeth tothe Text, for whatever the Verb ſignifies alone, he 
15 meanly skill'd in the Greek, that knows not it cannot have that 
Senſe, being joyned, (as here) with 7%p a5zov 74s dAntay, the 
Word of Truth. | 


m By theſe diſhonourable Terms the Apoſtle defameth all imper- 
tinent Diſcourſes in diſcharge of the Miniſterial Office, ſuch as 
I Tim, 1,4. he had called Fables,endleſs Genealogies, which miniſter 
queſtions, chap. 4. 7. profane and old Wives fables, here he calls 
them #1yoowrias, empty, vain, and unprofitable Diſcourſes, which 
though poſſibly not prophane in themſelves, yet-were profane, as 
uſed in the Diſcharge of the Miniſterial Office, where nothing 
ought to be diſcourſed, but the ſolid uſeful Truths of the Gol- 
_— Theſe he faith will ifue at laft in Errors, and Ungodlinels 
of Life, 


0 In the Greek it is, And their word will þhave paſture [ or, place 
#9 feed upox] as a Gangrene; we have ill tranſlated the word 4 
: Canter, for it ſignifieth a Gangrene 3 both our Engliſh word Gan- 
-grene, and the Latine Word are derived from the Greek. There 15 
a great difference between a Canker and a Gangrene, in the cauſes of 
;thoſe two Diſeaſes, and the nature of them, and the time 1n 
: which they deſtroy the Body of Man; only they both agree 1 
their infefting the parts contiguous, the Canter eating them, 
the Gangrene mortifying them,and tor this, the words ot erroneous 
;Perſons are here compared to this Diſeaſe, hecauſe eitier of 
'them will have ſomething to feed. upon ; (ſo your fignifierh, 
Fohn 10. 9.) Moſt Errors in matters of Faith are contagious and 


.infe&ious ; the reaſon is, becauſe ordinarily an Error is broached by 


'ſome, and entertained by others in ſatisfattion to ſome Luft, as fa- 
youring ſomeevil defire, and inclination of their Minds, and {0 na- 
turally pleaſeth thoſe who have the ſame evil propenfions. Þ Ot #y- 
meneus we read before, 1 Tim, 1. 20, there he is joyned with Alex- 
'ander , but not of PhiJerus, nor do we find him further mentioned :n 
Holy Writ. | 


13 Who 


Chap. 1I 


11 It is a faithful ſaying x, For if we * be deag * t 
with him y, we ſhall alſo live with bim z. cad - "Ws 6, 


12 * If we ſuffer, we ſhall alſo reign with him 4. If, 
I Per 


4 That is, 1f we ſuffer for his Name's ſake, for a conſtant Own- "> 


FRom.2., 
c Whether we believe, or believe not; or whether we he faith. * 9: h 


16 But * ſhun profane, and vain bablings m, for « ;7;", 
they will increaſe unto more ungodlineſs 7, 20, 


17 And their word will eat as doth || a canker o, of or, gx 
whom is Hymeneus and Philetus p. grene 


jIr,f 
'* [oh, 
14, 
$-2Nu 
19. 5. 


4 *Rom, 


2, 


Il, Chap. 1. 


» (Tim. bs p . 

21s ing that the reſurreQion is paſlt already r, and over- 
throw the faith of ſome s. 

4 Theſe two he faith had already erred, as to the Dof@rine of 

Faith, giving heed to profane and vain bahlings. r Their particulzr 

Error was in the buſineſs of the Reſurretiom, which they ſaid was 

aſt. That there ſhall be no &eſurretion, is a very pleating Doarine 

to Men that have lived ſenſual Lives ; thoſe whoſe Lives have been 

nothing but ea'ing and drinking,do very unwillingly think of dying, 

but ſeeing they cannot avoid that, they would gladly there ſhould 

Pets be no Reſurrettion, So that it was no wonder if ſuch an Error as 

this did ſpread and mortifie like a Gangrene, Upon what Pretence 


th-ſe Men denied the Reſurre&tion, we are neither told in Holy |ſelf unſeemly, ſecketh not ber own, 1 Cor, 13, 4, 


Writ, nor with any certainty by any other Authors. Some ſay, 
That they hel that it was paſt in the Reſurreion of Chriſt, and 
tioſe mentioned M :tth. 27. 52 Others think they confounded the 
E-ſurretion with Regeneration, and Glorification, which they allows 
e:! only to the Souls of Believers. Others ſay they maintained no 
other R-ſurretion than what Men have in th: Frocreation of Children. 
n Och-rs, That they denied any Keſurredton but that in Baptiſm, The 
M3. Rejurrefion of the Body was denied by the Sadduces, by theſe in 
a PauPs time, and afterwards by thoſe that followed Marcion, Baſili= 
des, Valeatinus and Apzlles, and otiers. Some in our times alſo 
have troden in their ſteps, and are ſtill treading, (unleſs they think 
God will be more kind to thoſe infinizentmbers of Heathens in the 
Country of the Great Mogul than to Chriſtians ; for as to them, 
they tell us they cannot believe any ſuch thing.) Two ſorts of Men 
have been guilty of this z 1. The Philoſophers of the World, that 
Tins think they muſt be able with their Reaſon to ſpan all Articles of 
__ Faith. 2, Men of ſenſual and ſottiſh Lives, who having lived like 
| Beaſts, are willing to believe they ſhall alſodie like Brutes, s Thoſe 
who are tainted with this Error do both themſelves deny the Faith, 
divers principal -irticles of which depend upon it, Such as the Re- 
ſurretion of Chriſt, 1 Cor, 15. and Eternal Life, ©c, and alſo ſub- 
vert the Faith of others; for whoſo can perſuade another that there 
ſhall be no Reſurre&ion, makes him an Infidel. Such Hereticks 
therefore were never indured to keep any Station in the Chriſtian 
Church ; it being always.judged reaſonable, that thoſe who were 
turned Infidels, ſhould be turned out of the Flock of Chrift to their 
proper Herd. 
19 Nevertheleſs, the foundation of God t ſtandeth 


17: Real | ſure, having this ſeal; * The Lord knoweth them 
[* Joh, 10, That are his u, and, Let every one that nameth the 


14 name of Chrilt depart from iniquity w. 

S::Numb. - , Notwithſtanding that theſe two Men (poſſibly of ſome note in 
19. 5. the Church of Ephe/zs) have fallen from the Faith, and have been 
ill Inſtruments to ſubvert the Faith of others, yet God hath a num- 
ber in the World, who are built upon the Rock Chriſt Jeſus, Mar. 
7. 25. theſe are founded ſurely. # Sealed, and confirmed in their | 

State by the Eternal Decree and Counſel of God, who hath fore- 

known his Ele, both as to their number and perſeverance z but 

God hath from Eternity known who are his, and therefore ſuch as 

truly are ſo, muſt be kept through Faith by his Power to Salvation, 

and it is not poſſible that theſe ſhould be totally and finally deceived. 

w Andevery one that nameth the Name of the Lord muſt depart 

from the Tents of wicked Men, who hath made ſhipwrack both of 

Faith, ,and a good Conſciencez therefore let not the Apoftacy of 

theſe Men be a Temptation to thee, to think that the Church of God 

may or ſhall fail, that cannot be; there can be no more loſt than 

the Sons of Perdition, ſuch as God never knew as his, though they 

put on a mask of Chriftianity and Godlinels, and deceived many. 

Thoſe who have God's Seal upon them, and are of his Foundation, 

| ſhall ſtand and keep themſelves from thoſe damnable Errors, Only 
| to let us know that neither the certainty of God's Decree or Pro-. 
miſe, doth excuſe our indeavours and uſing means for obtaining the 

thing decreed or promiſed, the Apoſtle puts the Verb in the Impe- 

rative Mood, Let him depart, ©c. 

20 But in a great houſe there are not only 

 1Tims, veſiels of gold, and of ſilver, but alſo of wood, 
wy L*Rom, 9, and of earth x, * and ſome to honour, and ſome to 


21, diſhonour y. 

x Look as it is in a great Houſe, there are ſeveral Veſſels made 
of ſeveral Materials, and for ſeveral ends and uſes ; ſome are made 
of Gold, ſome of Silver, ſome of Wood, ſome of Earth. y Some 
made an1 bought for more noble and honourable uſes, others for 
more vile, baſe, and diſhonourable uſes : $0 it is in the Church of 
God, which is large, and like a great Houſe, In it are many Mem- 
bers; ſome have obtained like precious Faith with us, who are as 
Gold tried in the Fire, or like Silver purified ſeyen times, by the 

RR. Word of God, and his Spirit fitting as a Retiner upon their Hearts, 
| Or, gr But all they are not Gold or Silver who gliſter in an outward Pro- 
gr feſſion 3 ſome of them have earthly or wooden Souls, favouring on- 
ly ſenſual things, having nothing of precious Faith in them, and 
are not yet purged from their Filthineſs, wanting all truth of Grace, 
or fincerity of Love : Some there are whoſe work is to Honour 
God, being created to good Works, and whoſe reward will be to be 
honoured and glorified by him : Otaers who by their Apoſtacy from 
their Faith and Profeſſion, and by their wicked Lives will diſhonour 
him, and will be eternallyTe{<ted by him as Reprobate Silver, and 
Sons of Perdition. 

21 * [fa man therefore purge himſelf from theſe z, 
| chap. 3 he ſhall be a Veſſel unto honour, ſanctified, and meet 
7, © for the maſters uſe a, and * prepared unto every good 


work b, 

2 From theſe wicked Men that ſubvert the Faith of others, or 
from their wicked Opinions and Courſes, 4 God wili honour him; 
and he will by it be (et a, and made fit for Chrit's ule in his 
Church, 6 And made fit for every good work ; which Men are not 

While they are either tainted with pernicious damnable Errors, 
relating to the Dodrine of Faith, or the Companions of thoſe 


IE. TIMOTHY. 


13 Who * concerning the truth have erred q, ſay- | 


Chap. III. 


22 Flee alſo youthful luſts c : bat * follow righte- * 1Tim,s. 


[0] 


ouſneſs d, faith e, charity f, peace, with them that call **- 


on the Lord out of a pure heart g. 

c By youthful Luſts he means ſuch finful deſires, propentions, and 
inclinations of Mind, as are moſt incident to youth, whether they 
be lufts of the fl-ſh, or Spiritual Lufts, ſuch as are the Vices of the 
Mind, Ambition, Oſtentation, Pride, Vain-glory, Contempt of 
others, ©c, 4d Follow Juſtice, or Innocency, which wrongeth none, 
but rendreth to every one his due ; or the righteouſneſs of an hoty 
Life. e Faith, which teacheth a Soul to receive Divine Revelation 
ſteadily, without perverſe Diſputings, f Charity, which is kind, 
envieth not, vaggiteth not it ſelf, is nor puffed up, doth not behave it 
5,6. £ An Union not 
with Men of corrupt Minds and Prattices, but with all ſuch as ſerve 
and worſhip God purely and ſincerely, 

23 Bur fooliſh and unlearned queſtions avoid know- 


ing that they do gender ſtrifes h. 

b It is a Precept or Caution of the ſame nature with thoſe, 
r Tim, 1, 4. and 4. 7. and ver, 16. of this Chapter, The repetition 
of this Precept of the Apoſile four times in theſe two ſhort Epiſtles, 
lets us know how important a thing he judged it, '1 hat Minifters of 
the Goſpel ſhould not ſpend their times in their Diſcourſes to their 
Congregations, in things that tend nothing to the building up of 
their Hearers in Faith or Holineſs, being either old Wives Fables, 
like the Stories in the Popiſh L-gends, or the Apochryphal Stories of 
Bell and the Dragon, Tobit and his Dog, and the Swallows dunging in 
bis Eye, Gc, or fifting out Genealogies, or vain and impertinent 
Diſcourſes, or idle fruitleſs Queſtions, which tend not to edifyirg, 
but to fatisfie curioſity, and increaſe Strife and Ungodlinefs, which 
kind of Preaching the Apoſtle alſo had defamed, 1 Tim. 6. 4. as 
the iſſue of Pride, and Ignorance, and Dotage ; and here he calls 
ſuch Queſtions unlearned in the ſame Senſe, becauſe inipertinent to 
the end of Preaching. The Vanity of Humane Nature, and their 
non-ſubje&ion to the Will of God appeareth much in this, that 
notwithſtanding the unreaſonableneſs of ſuch Preaching; and the 
dire&t oppoſition of it to the ſo often repeated Precepts of the A- 
poſtle, and to Titus, chap. 3. y. and Paul's propoſing of his own 
Example to the contrary, I Cor. 2. 1, 2, 3,4, yet for many years, 
in the times of Popery, the People were fed with little beſides theſe 
husks, and too many yet,cith-r on of Pride,to ſhew their Parts and 
Reading, Or ignorance of the Myſteries of Godlineſfs, and the true 
end of Preaching, or dorage about unprofitable Speculations and Ni- 
cities, can find little better Food than theſe Husks for poor Peoples 
Souls, 

24 And * the ſervant of the Lord 5 muſt not * Tit. 4.5: 
ſtrive k; but be gentle unto all men /, * apt to teach, * Tit. 1.9: 
|| patient m7. j Or, for- 

i He that js the Servant of the Lord in the Work of he Miniſtry, **®5 
k muſt not ydzez1, fight or ſirive; he muſt neither be a ſtriker 
nor a brauler, neither fight with his hands nor his tongue, 1 But 
ſhew himſelf to all courteous, of a ſoft temper, meek and gentle. 

m See the Notes on 1 Tim, 3. 2. : 

25 In * meckneſs inſtructing thoſe that oppoſe *Gal.s. +; 
themſelves #3 if * God peradventure will give* Att 8: 
them repentance, to the acknowledging of the ?* 


truth o. 

2 Without Paſhon, better informing ſuch as have ſuck'd in an 
Error, npt reviling them, but gently inftrufing thern, and labour- 
ing to convince them of their miſtake z for all thoſe who for a time 
may oppoſe the Truth, are not ſuch as never repent, nor do it out 
of malice or hatred they may do it out of ignorance and weakneſs. 
o And God may give them. a power, and an heart to repent, and 
to acknowledge that truth which they at preſent oppoſe; and al- 
though this muſt be God's Work, yet he doth it by Miniftersas his 
means and inſtruments, who are to uſe probable means in order to 
it 3 ſuch are not railing and reviling, but meek Inftru&ions, and 4 
kind and gentle behaviour to them. A foul-mouthed Minifter is 
ſeldom an Inftrument to cleanſe anothers heart. 

26 And that they may - recover themſelves Þ Out fGr.awate 
of the ſnare of the devil q, who are ÞÞ taken captive by + Gr.ratz# 
him yr at his will s. | alle, 

þ The Greek Word eyavinluny, properly ſignificth to awate our of 
4 drunken ſleep, A State of Sin is a kind of Drunkenneſs, in which 
Men have loſt the uſe of their reaſon. q By the Snare of th? D.= 
vil he means his Temptations, which like Snares are covertly ſer 
to catch Souls. r «G@ygnuver ſignifies Perſons taken captive in War ; 
in ſuch a miſerable < aptivity are Sinners. -s & 7 ##&ws HAnuz, 
which we tranſlate, according 10 bx will, may be as well craniiated ig 
kis will, and ſo the Will of God may be meant, and the whole re- 
ferred to the firſt ſentence, thus, may recover themſelves out of the 
ſnare of the Devil to the will of Go4, that is to imbrace, and do the 
Will of God ; and this is the Senſe ſome make of it,but it ſeems more 
proper to refer it to the Participle, being taken captive, for that is 
next it, and (vo it ſignifieth the miſerable ſtate of tinners, who are 
Captives at the Devil's Command, and Will, that if he ſairh ts 
_ Go, they go, it he ſaith Come, they come, it he faith, do this, rh:y 

0 it, 


CHAP. IIL 
The Apoſtates of the laſt times fore-told and deſcribed, 1=————=;; 
Their folly illuſtrated, 6———9g, He propounds his own Example for 
Dodrine and Sufferings ; which all the Godly are to expe, 191i 4; 
The Perfeftion, Divinity, «nd manif:14 Uſefuln js of the Scrip- 
tures, I5 17. 


His know alſo, that in the * laft days a perillous 
times ſhall come 56. 
a We meet with this term laſt days, 1 Tim. 4. 1. and there ſaid, 
that the Scripture by that term underftands all the time from Chriſt's. 
Aſcenſion to the end of the World, We meet with the term, Ger. , 


* [ude 13. 


Fools, 


t VOL. Ii 


49. I. ja. 2. 2. Micah 4.1. As 2.17, Heb, 1, 2, Far. 5.. 2. 
[5X] 2 Per; 


at 


4,25 


hy - adn 0 


Chap. IIT. I. TIMOTHY. 


1:t approved of God, or good Men, as to their Sentiments about our 


2 Þ-t. 3. 3. of thoſe days ſome are latter than other, but it appears 
by .&s 2. 17. Zeb. 1. 2. that that whole period of time is to cal- 
ied, © in the Greek it is difficult times, that is times when it will 
be Jificult for Chriftians to keep their Lives or Eftates, or any hay- 
py tation in the World with a good Conſcience, by re#:on of the 
-.2n£v of ill men that ſhould live in thoſe times, and make them ſo 
ditcult, 

2 For men ſhall be lovers of their own ſelves c, co- 
vetous d, boalters e, proud f, blaſphemers g, diſobedi- 
eat to parentsh, unthankful 7, unholy k&. 

c That is, the generality of Men fhall be perſons that will nei- 
ther love God, nor Mien, in compariſon with themſewes ; Charity, 
which ſeeketh not her own, ſhall wax cold ; Men ſhall be wholly 
for themſelves. d Lovers of Silyer immoderately, ſo as they will 
e& it any way, and when they have it, will be as ſordidly tenaci- 
ous of it. e Vaunting of themſelves, vain-glorious, boaſting of 
what they have not. f Lifted up in an Opinion of themſclves, 
z Speaking Evil of GOD and Men, h>Stubborn and Rebellious 
againſt thoſe that bare them. # Unthankful both to GOD and 
Men, tor Kindanefies received from either. k Prophane and im- 
Put &, 

3 Witheut natural affection /, truce-breakers mz 

* Or,nate-\| falſe accuſers n, incontinent o, fierce p, deſpiſers of 
batce, thoſe that are good q. 

] Having no kindneſs for ſuch as nature obligeth them to love and 
honour. m Men that will be held by no Bonds or Leagues. Or, 
rather, implacable, ſo we trantlate the ſame Greek Word, Kom.1.31. 
Men (o tull of Malice, that they will admit no Terms, or Covenants 
of Peace. # Gr, Devils, venting their Malice by informing againſt 
and accuting others without any regard to Truth. o Intemperate, 
Drunkards, Gluttons, Unclean Perſons, ©&;, p Men without any 
gentleneſs, cruel, q Men that have no kindnels for any good Men, 
haters of them, 

4 Traytors r, heady s, high-minded*, lovers of plea- 
ſures more than lovers of God «, | 

7 TIe;d7u fignifies the betraying of any Truſt, or a Falſhood to 
any Ferſon tro whom we are obliged. It is in Scripture applyed to 
Fudas, Luke 6. 16. and to the Jews that Crucified Chrift, Ads 9.52. 
the Verb whence it derives is by Authors applied to Perſons, Places, 
and Cauſes ; it ſignifies, that in the latter Times there ſhould be a 
general falſhood amoneſt Men, See Marth. 10, 21. falſhood to- 
wards their Superiours, their Relation, Profeſſion, ©c., s Raſh, in- 
confiderate. t Blown up as Bladders, with an Opinion of their own 
deſerts, i Voluptuous Men, not uſing what God hath given them 
with a moderate ſarisfa&tion and delight in them, but contrary to 
God's Commandments, and thereby ſhewing, that they have more 
love for the gratification of their ſenfitive Appetite,than the pleaſing 
of God, 

* iTim.g, 5 Having a form of godlineſs w, but * deny- 


- ing the power thereof x; * From ſuch alſo turn 
LG bo [6 away Yy. 

444 w 4 form here is the ſame with a mask, or vizor, or appearance, 
= an accidental form, oppoſed to ſubſtance and reality. Tt ſignifieth 
that in the latter times there ſhould be many ſuch as owned them- 
ſelves Chriſtians,and pretended to a right way of worſhipping God, 
to be the Church, the only Church of God, x But in prattice, 
though not in words, denying all ſubſtantial Godlineſs, which lieth 
not in aſſuming the empty Name of Chriſtians, and making a Pro- 
feſfion, but lies in Truth, Righteouſneſs, Love and Peace, Self-De- 
nial, mortifying our earthly Members, it being a thing attended 
with life and power, a Man being no more a Chriftian, than he 
atts and lives like a Chriftian- y From ſuch kind of Profeſſors as 
were before deſcribed, the Apoſtle willeth Timothy to rurn away, 
both as.to having any Church-Fellowſhip, or Communion, or any 
intimacy of converſe with them, 


* Mat,23, 6 For * of this ſort are thoſe which creep into hou- 
1 4. ſes z, and lead captive ſilly women a laden with ſinsb, 


EKI. Hs Jeq away with divers luſts c. 

z Who do not only privily enter in at the doors of Houſes, but 
pierce into the ſecrets of them, making it their buſineſs ro pry into 
all Families, and 4 take their advantages upon Women (the weaker 
fex) and not the wiſeft of them, but quyeurgert, the diminutive 
Word is uſed to vilifie the little deſpicable Women of no Judgment 
in ſound Religion, whom they, by their Tongues and pleafing Er- 
rors, make their Captives, 6 Nor do they deal with the moſt pious 
and honeſt Women, but ſuch as are laden with the guilt of much 
fin, cand who being poſſeft of divers inclinations, not only lufts of 
the Fleſh, but any other, ſuch as Pride, &c, are eaſily led away 
Luft always ſmoothing the way for ſuch Errors as will be Principles 
to juftifie it againſt the refle&ions of Conſcience, Their Vices rather 
than Sex made them eaſily ſeduced, 

7 Ever learning d, and never able to come to the 
knowledge of the truth e. 

4 Women that pretend to be ever learning the Truth, but e can- 
not obtain of their Lufts leave to acknowledge the Truth in their 
practice, The word is 6#ſywary, which rather tignities a pradtical as- 
knowledgment, than a Notional Knowledge. 

8 Now as Jannes and Jambres withſtood Moſes f, ſo 

*,Tim,6 5 dotheſe alſoreſiſt the truthe: * menof corrupt mindsf, 
1161.16. * reprobate concerning the faith g. 


f Concerning this reſiſtance of Moſes by Fannes and Fambres,the 
Holy Scripture ſaith nothing but in this Text. Ir is ſaid by Inter- 


Faith, 


9 But they ſhall proceed no further h, for their folly 
ſhall be made manifeſt unto all men 5s, as theirs alſo 


was k, 

þ God will preſerve thoſe in his Church that are ſincere + thouzh 
they may captivate a few poor ignorant Women, they ſhall have al 
great ſucceſs. 7 For God will in his Providence ſo order it, that 
their folly or madneſs ſhall appear to all, and their Party decline 
The Divine Providence that governs all things, by the invincible 
Light of Truth, diſcovers and confounds the moſt ſpecious and (ub. 
tle Seducers in his own time. And this Predifion of the Apoſtle 
was exattly fulfill'd with reſpect to thoſe primitive Seducers, þ ax 
God by his Providence laid open Fannes and Fambres, 

10 But thou haſt fully known my do@rine 1, man- 
ner of life m1, purpoſen, faith o, long-ſuffering p, cha- 


rity q, patience r. 

I Our Tranſlation here ſeemeth alittle ſtrange, for the Greet hath 
it, Thou haſt diligently followed me in doitrine, £9 N magna ua 
us 74 SSzTrania, That is, thou wert in my company, thoy werr 
a Follower of me, and ſo muſt know what Dotrine I preacheg, 
m What Life I lived. # What my whole Scope and Deſign was, 
0 What Faith I taught and profeſſed. p What Long-ſuftering I 
uſed, both towards my malicious Adverſaries, and my weaker Bre- 
thren. 4 What Love I ſhewed towards all Men, whether Friends 
or Foes. - r What Patience I ſhewed in bearing injuries, 

11 Perſecutions s, afflitions which came to me at 


Antioch t, at Iconium #«, at Lyſtra w, what perſecuti- 


vered me y. 


der. t What afflitions I met with at Aztioch in Piſudia, Aﬀs 11, 
I4, 45, 5c. u At ſcontum, Whither he went from Pifcdia ; of the 
AfMidtions he met with there allo. Read As 14. w The Ap. 
ſtle went from /conium to Lyſtra, Aﬀs 14. 6. x There alſo he was 
perſecuted, As 14. 19, Now it ſeemeth that in all theſe Motions 
Timothy was in Paul's company, and a Follower of him, o as he waz 
a witneſs to all; which afſureth us, that though we firſt read of Tj. 
morthy, As 16, 2. when he was Circumciſed, yet Paul knew him 
before. » Yet God delivered Paul from all theſe, and that Timothy, 
being all that time in company with Pau}, knew z from whence the 
Apoſtle would have him take courage, exerciſe Patience under ſut- 
fering for ſuch Preaching, and ſuch living; being afſured that God 
would deliver him alſo, preaching the ſame Truth, and living the 
ſame holy Life, though he met with the ſame Troubles, Perſecuti. 
ons and Afflictions, 


ſus ſhall ſuffer perſecution z. 


the Men of the World, that though not every iadividual Perſon 
yet *tis the uſual lot of them who will keep a pure Faith and a good 


their Perſons, or Reputation, or Eftates, Men may live prophanely, 
or may be morally honeft Men, and be ſafe enough, but if they will 
profeſs Faith in Chrift, or Love to him in keeping his Command- 
ments, they will be expoſed to troubles, The World will not indure 
Men to live in Peace, that will not live as they live, and believe as 
they believe. 

13 But evil men and ſeducers ſhall wax worſe and 


worſe a, deceiving and being deceived b. 

4 Neither do thou expett that the times ſhould mend ; for Men 
that are given up to their Luſts, and 47:5, ſuch as go about to 4c- 
 cefuve others, will grow worſe and worle, (as the World groweth 
older) both in their endeavours to deceive, and in their Maliceand 
| Hatred to thoſe that oppoſe them. b Deceiving others, and be- 
ing left by the juſt Judgment of God to deceive and ruine their own 
SOuls, 


14 But continue thou in the things which thou haſt 


whom thou haſt learned them e. 

c In the Dodtrines relating to Faith: and the Precepts relating to 
thy Life as a Minifter, or asa Chriftian, 4 and haſt aſſented to ſtea- 
dily, hitherto believing them. e Remembring that thou haft lear- 
ned them of me, the Apoſtle of our Lord Jeſus Chriſt, which is the 
ſame as from Chriſt himſelf, . 


15 And that from a child f thou haſt known the 
holy ſcriptures g, which are able to make thee wiſe 
unto Salvation þ, through faith which is in Chriſt Je- 


ſus 2. 

f Erom thy Infancy, by the inſtruftion of thy Mother Eunice, and 
thy Grandmother Low, cbap. 1. 5. g Thou haſt had a Notion of 
the Writings of Moſes ard the Prophets, the Holy Scriptures of the 
Old Teftament (for at this time no others were written,) þ Which 
holy Scriptures (without the help of the writings of Plaro £0 Dythego- 
r&s, Or any other Pagan Philoſophers) have in them a ſufnciency © 
Dodrine to make thee or any other, wiſe@nough to get to Heaven. 
# But not without Faith in Chriſt Jeſus, receiving him as thy and 
their Saviour; beſides a Faith afſenting and agreeing to thoſe Holy 
Writings, as the Revelation of the Divine Will. 


16 All ſcripture is given by inſpiration of Cod {, 
and 7s profitable for doctrine 1, for reproof mz, tor cor- 
rection #, for inſtruction in righteouſneſs 9. 


preters, that they were two Brethren, the chief of Pharaob's Magi- 
Clans, who oppoſed Moſes in the Miracles he wronght, Exod. 7. 1. | 
whoſe Names might be known in Pau?'s time by Tradition, or the | 
publick Writings of the Fews, e So will corrupt Teachers under 


the Goſpel rehft the Truth of the Goſpel publiſhed by Chriſt's , 


Minitters. f Men whoſe hearts are corrupted with ſordid Lufts, i 
E e&d32uuo, of nv ſound Judgment, as to the Dorine of Faith ; or, ' 


t Scripture ſignifies no more than writing, Some therefore tra» 
ſlate this Text thus, AU Scripture which is inſpired of God, not all 
Writings,but all the Books of the Old Teſtament 13 $84Tv2v5rs Chis 
is expounded by Peter, 2 Pet. 1. 20, 21. For the Propkcy came nor 
in old time by the wil: of Man ; but holy ven of God [paK&, as they 
were moved by the H:iy Ghoſt, 1 And it is profitable to int 


I uct us 
ot . Pq . : "Iv , D 0 5; ls 
in all Propoſutions of 1 ruth, which we need belicre in order to 54 


yatio. 


Chap. 11] 


ons I indured x ; but * out of them all the Lord deli-v 


[ 
{ What Proſecutions for the Preaching of the Goſpel I was yn. 


12 Yea, and * all that will live godly in Chriſt Je. * 2... 
I9 


z Such is the diſpoſal of Divine Providence, ſuch the Malice of nn ws 


1 The!, 2. 
Conſcience, to ſuffer Perſecution in ſome kind or other ; either in? 


learned c, and haſt been aſſured of d, knowing * of *c1;9.2. 


( 


IL Bl Chap. IV. II. 


vation, m Yas9/9ey, to convince us either of any Truth, that we 
may believe it without any heſitation, or of any fin that we may be 
humbled for it, without any extenuation, » For Reproof, or Cor- 
reftion, or Reformation ; to reprove us in what we are to be re- 
proved, tocorett us in any Error, to ſhew us the way to bring us to 
rights, and to reform us. 0 To inftrut us in the true righteouſnels 
in which we muſt appear before God ; for in it the Kighreouſneſs of 
God is revealed from Faith to Fatth, Rom, 1. 17, 


NO 
17 That the man of God may be perfect p,|| through- 


ly furniſhed unto all good works q. 

p That both Miniſters, and all godly Men may he as perfett as 
they can be in the ſtate of Mortality, fitted for the Duties of their 
ſeveral Callings and Places, q And be prepared to every work which 
is good, acceptable and well-pleafing unto God, whether it be a 
work of Piety, or Juſtice and Charity. The Scripture as to all, 15 
ſo ful] a Diretion, that Chriftians need not go down to the Philz- 
ftines to whet their Tools, nor be beholden to unwritten Traditions, 
or to the Writings of Pagan Philoſophers, for direQions what to do, 
how to Worſhip God, or manage any part of their Converſation, 
either as to their general Calling, or as to their particular Relati- 
ONs, 


Or, fer” 
--b:4. 


CHAP. IV. 


He, with great earneſtneſs, exhorts Tinmihy to confider and diſcharge| 


his Office in all its parts, becauſe of the wickedneſs of Men in future 
times, 1——5, He foretel!s bis own approaching Death; bis Hop: 
and Comfort herein, 6——$, He willeth him to come ſpeedily tc 
him, and bring Mark with bimz and certain other things which be 
| wrote fer, g 13. He warns bim of Alexander a Copper-ſmith ; 
Cori, | ani complains of Brethren who had forſaken him. ar bis firſt anſwer. 
ng ; prays for them, 14 16, But God then had been, and 
would be with him, 17, 18, He concludes with divers Salutations, 
and the Apoſtolical Benedifion, 19 =——22, 


Jeſus Chriſt, who ſhall judge the quick and the dead 
at his appearing b, and his kingdom c. 

2 Who ſeeth, and obſerveth what thou doeft, and will one day 
call thee to account for thy diſcharge of thy Miniſtry, 6 And be- 
fore the Son of God, the Lord Jeſus Chriſt, whom thou haft more 
reaſon to regard, not only becauſe he is thy Maſter, and thou his 
Servant, in a ſpecial ſenſe, but becauſe he is to be thy Judge alſo; 
tor he ſhall be the Judge, as of thoſe that are dead before his com- 
ing, ſo thoſe alſo who ſhall be alive at his _— I Cor, 15, 52. 
1 Theſſ. 4. 15, 17. c When He ſhall appear the ſecond time, and 
ſet up his Kingdom of Glory, delivering up his Mediatory Kingdom 
to his Father ; I charge thee, as in the Preſence of God, and this 
Chriſt; or as thou haſt a regard to God, and to this Chriſt, and 
feareſt the angry Face of this Judge, or believeſt his ſecond coming, 
or expefteft a ſhare in his Kingdom of Glory, A moſt ſevere ob- 
teſtatien, charge, or adjuration, What is that duty which is uſher'd 
in, in ſo ſolemn a manner ? It followeth, 5 

2 Preach d the word e, be inſtant f in ſeaſon; and 
out of ſeaſon g, reprove h, rebuke #, exhort k, with al] 
long-ſuffering 1, and dodtrine m. 

d Proclaim like an Herald, cry like a common Cryer in the hear- 
ing of a Multitude, Thus God to 1ſzzah, Chap, 58. 1, Cry aloud, 
ſpare not, lift up thy Voice like 4 Trumpzr, e The word of Truth, 
Chap. 2.15. or the Goſpel, called the word, by way of Emphaſis, 
See Max. 4. 23. and 24. 14. Mark 1. 14. and 13..10, and 16. 15, 
The Word of God, not old Wives Fables, endleſs Genealogies, per- 
verſe Diſputings, unedifying Queftions, &c. This precept refleas 
upon unpreaching Minifters, and impertinent vain Preachers, f Be 
earneft and diligent, This refle&ts upon a cold and perfun{ory 
Preaching, God bid 1ſaiah cry aloud, lift up his Voice like a Trumpet. 
Sinners are like deaf Adders, g That is at all times, not on the 
Lord's Days only, but any other time when thou haſt opportunity, 
not in times when thou mayeſt do it with ſafety, but when the 
wiſdom of the Fleſh tells thee it is out of ſeaſon. This refle(ts up- 
on ſuch as preach rarely, and conſult their Fleſh, whether they ſhould 
perform it at all, or no. þ Reprove, zasyZoy, Convince ſuch as gain- 
ſay tne Truth. 7 Kebuke all ſinners, all that live an ill Life, This 
reflects upon thoſe effeminate Preachers, againſt whom Ezekiel de- 
nounced the woe, Ezek. 13. 18. That ſow pillows to all arm-holes ; 
that propheſie ſmooth things inſtead of the right things of the word. 
k Perſuade or comfort, (the word ſignifies both). as thou. ſeeſt occaſi- 
on. I But do what thou doeft prudently, with meekneſs. God 
needeth not thy paſſhon, though He makes uſe of thy Art in Inftru- 


13s 


Ma. 34. 
ts 14, 


ſhed. 2 


chap.2. 


fle&ts upon flattering, fawning, unfaithful Preachers, and ſuch as 
vent their own paſhon, rather than purſue their dueend for Inftru- 
Ction and Reformation of Souls, F 
3 For the time will come 7, when they o will not 
indure ſound dodrine p, but after their own. luſts q ſhall 
they heap to themſelves teachers r, having itching 
ears [; | | 

7 This time always was, (as appears by the writings of the Pro- 
phets) but it will come more and more ; as the World grows older, 
it will grow more mad, o Very many that ſhall live in the World, 
yea, in the boſom of the Church, p will. not indure that Preaching 
which hath any ſoundneſs in it, or 1s of any tendency, life, power, 
or efficacy, to recover their Souls from the diſeaſes of Sin and Lufts; 
q But in fayour of their own Lufts, and to ſecure their fatisfa&ion 
in them. 7 Will be finding out Teachers, not according to God's, 
but to their own Hearts, and there will be plenty of them to be 
found, they ſhall beap them up, chuſing them without any Judg- 
ment, regarding nothing but whether they will not be ſmart upon 
their Luſts. { For their Ears itch, and they muſt have thoſe that 
will ſcratch them, The diſeaſe of Luft in their Souls brings forth 
an itch in their Ears, that they will haye a mind to hear only ſuch 
as will by ſcratching pleaſe them, 

VOL. Ih 


TIMOTHY. 


| 


; ;Tin.s. * Charge thee therefore before God a, and the Lord| 6 


Qion. m Doitſoasto join Inſtruion with thy Reproof, This re-| 


_ Chap. IV. 


4 And they ſhall turn away their cars from the 
cruth t, and * ſhall be turned unto fables «. *iTim.r, 

e Either in contempt, or ſcorn of it, as being delivered in two 4» & 4+ 7» 
plain Notions or Stile z or through Impatience, not induring their 
Luſts ſhould be touched, and the evil of their ways ſhewed them. 

u Delighting -to hear Fables, any idle Stories, or impertinent Diſ- 
courſes, provided they touch not their Luſts, Miſa non morder, the 
Maſs will not bite, was an old ſaying of the Popiſh Faition, 

5 But watch thou in all things, * endure afflicti- *chap..s. 
ons w, do the work of an evangeliſt x, || make full & 2.3. 
proof of thy miniſtry y. || Or,fulf'!, 

w Watching implyeth, 1. A negation of Sleep. 2. Aa indu- 
ſtrious keeping our ſelves awake for ſome end. Keep thy ſelf from 
all ſin, and from all idleneſs and lazineſs, and do this induftriouſly, 
that thou mayeft honour God in thy work, x For thy work is a 
great work ; the work of one who is to publiſh the Goſpel : Or, of 
one who is left by me the Apoftle of Chriſt to ſettle the Church, 
which I have laid the foundation of, 4s 21. 8. Eph, 4.1:. y Make 
a full proof unto others of thy Faithfulneſs in thy Miniſterial Office 
and Imployment, 

6 For I am now ready to be offered z, and the * Phil. :. 
time of * my departure is at hand 4. 23. | 

2 Emvuiueu, The Word properly fignifieth to be offered as a Ice 2 Pete 
Drink-Offering, which was offered by being poured out. Some ſay ** 14» 
that aviyd>par is only uſed to fignifie ſuch Offerings whereby ſome 
Covenant was confirmed z ſo as it not only ſignifieth that Paul was 
ſenſible that he ſhould die a violent Death, but that his Death 
ſhould be an Eftabliſhment and Confirmation of the Doctrine of the 
Goſpel which he had preached ; That he ſhould be offered upon the 
Sacrifice and Service of the Faith; as he ſpeaketh, Phil. 2. 17. 
where the ſame Word is uſed. A Learned Author thinks it is there 
uſed in alittle different Senſe, there as an acceſſion to the Sacrifice, 

here as a preparation to it, they being wont to prepare their Sacri- 
ce by pouring Wine upon it ; which poſſibly guided our Tran- 
ſlators to Tranſlate it here, / am ready to be offered, - a dyanyrus, 
We Tranſlate it departure, it proger?y ſignifieth KeſoJution, becaufe 
in Death we are reſolved into Duft, from whence we are, If any 
ask how Paul knew that the time of his Death was ſo near. 
Anſwer, He might know it by Revelation from God, or from 
his obſervation of Nero's temper, malice, or behaviour toward 
him, ; 

7 I* have fought a good fight b, I have finiſhed zyy * 1 Cor.g. 
courſe c, I have kept the faith. —_— 

b My Life hath been a Military Life, but I have not fought the T; mo 
evil Fights of ambitious or quarrelſome Men: My fighting hath OOO 
been tlie good and noble Fight of Faith, a Fight with the World,the 
Fleſh and the Devil, a contending for the Faith delivered to the 
Saints, a maintaining the luſtings of the Spirit againſt the Fleſh, a 
warring with Spiritual Wickednefſes in high places. c God ap- 
pointed me a Raceto run, as a Chriſtian, as an Apoſtle and Mi- 
nifter of Chrift: I have now finiſhed it, 4d I have kept the Do- 
arine of Faith, upholding and maintaining it in an4 by my 
= +" » and I have lived in the exerciſe of the Grace of 

ait Cl 


8 Henceforth there is laid vp 4 for me a *+ Jam, 1. 
crown e-of righteoufneſs f, which the Lord, the 12: 
righteous Judge g ſhall give me þ at that day z, and * F*t-5-4+ 
not to me only, but unto all them alſo that love his 
appearing k. | 

d As to what remains for me, (ſo the word aormzy ſignifies, not 
benceforth, as we Tranſlate it) there is prepared, and in ſafe keep- 
ing for me, Col. 1.5, Or there is appointed for me, vid, Heb. g. 

27. e Another kind of Crown than what the Conquerors uſed to 
have in the Grecian Games, an high and great Reward, a Glory 
with which my whole Man ſhall be encompaſſed as a Man's Head is 
with a Crown, f The purchaſe of Chrift's Righteouſne(s, and am- 
ple-Reward of mine allo, the giving out of which alſo will be the 
effe&t of God's Truth and Juftice, 1 Fob 1.9. 'g And Jeſus 
Chrift, who in this ſhall ſhew himſelf a righteous Judge ; þ Shall 
give it me of his free Mercy, for all I have done hath not merited 
it. # At the Day of Judgment z my Soul ſhall have it at my difſc- 
lution, my whole Man in the Reſurre&ion. & Nor is this Crown my 


Heb.12.t. 


particular reward, but if any Perſons ſo lead their Lives in this 


World, as that they can defire, and be pleaſed with the thovghts and 
hopes of the ſecond Coming of Chrift to Judgment, Chrift will give 
them alſo the ſame Reward, 


9 Do thy diligence to come ſhortly unto me 1. 

I To Rome, where Pau} was at this time 4 Priſoner ; _ it appear: 
from Phil. 2. 19. that Timothy did go to Paul at Rome, according 5 
this defire of his, and was with him while a Priſoner there, 


10 For * Demas hath forſaken me mm, having loved , .. 


this preſent world », and is departed unto Theſ-- '* 


ſalonica o, Creſcens to Galatia p, Titus ugto Dal- 
matla q. | 

m He ſheweth the reaſon why he defired 7imothy to come to him, 
hecauſe moſt of thoſe who were with him, were gone. Some thirik 
this Demas is Demetrius, mentioned 3 Fobn 12. (the Name being 
only ſhortned.) He was at. Kome with Paul ſome time, Col. 4. 14. 
Some make a queſtion, whether Demas wholly Apoſtatized, or only 
left Paul for a time, and went to Theſſa!onica about lome ſecula: 
Buſineſs, afterward returning. » Soine make the Senle- of this 
Phraſe no more than minding his worldly Buſineſs. Others think 
that he being frighted with Paul's Danger, wholly left him, o and 
went to Theſjalonisa, poſſibly his own Country, however, at a great 
diſtance from the danger of Nero's Court. p A Province in the leffer 
ſia, whither probably Cre/cens went to Preach the Goſpel, q D..- 
matia is in Scdavonia, Titus went thither (without all doubt; iQ 
preach the Goſpel, 


ESA 2] 12 Only 


it 


*At5s20.4 


[} Or, otr 


preachirgs 


 & Is 4 


11 Only Luke is with mer. Take Mark and bring 
him with thee /, for he is profitable to me for the m- 
niſtery t. 

r Of whom we alſo read Col. 4. 14. he was a Phyſician, Paul's 
Fellow-Labourer, Philemon 24. / Of Mark we read 4#s 12.& 15. 
37. He was Kinſman to Barnabes, Col, 4. 10, it appears by that 
Text that he was at Rome with Paul, and his Fellow-Labourer, Phil. 
24, t The Miniftry of the Goſpel, Paul's care was more for that, 
than for a Miniſtring to himſelf, though he was a Priſoner. 

12 And * Tychicus have l ſent to Epheſus «. 

z 1 have given order to Tychicus to come to Epheſus in thy ab- 


ſence, : 
I3 The cloak that I left at Troas with Carpus w, 


when thou comeſt, bring with thee x, and the books, 


but eſpecially the parchments y. 

w Troas was 4 City in Az, where we find Paul more than once, 
Afs 16. 8. and 20. 5. he preached Chriſt there, 2 Cor, 2, 12, 
There Paul left an upper Garment with one Criſp#s, which proba- 
bly (having no great Wardrobe) he might want, being a Priſoner, 
3 Interpreters idly buſie themfelves in inquiring after what they can 
never find out, what theſe Books were, or what was written in theſe 
Parchments. ; . 

14 Alexander the copper-ſmith did me much 
evil z: the LORD reward him according to his 


works 4. | 

3 We read of three Alexanders, one Merk 15, 21, the Son of 
þim that bare Chrift's Croſs,another 4s 4.6.akin to Annas the High- 
Prieſt ; a third, As 19.33.probably the perſon here meant;for he was 
an Epbefian, but he at,that time was a Diſciple of Paul's, as appears 
there ; probably, afterward he Apoftatized, and was Excommuni- 
cated by Paul, 1 Tim, 1, 20, which might poſſibly provoke him ; | 
what harm he did him, and where, whether at Epbeſus or Rome, it 
is not ſaid, 4 How far it is lawful to pray againſt our Enemies, (as 
Paul did here againft Alexander) fee the Notes on P/a}. roy. 6. &t, 
Fer, 11s 20. & 12, 3. Oc, 

15 Of whom be thou ware alſo; for he hath great- 
ly withſtood |] our words. 

16 At my firſt anſwer a no man ſtood with me b, 
but all men forſook mec: 7 pray God that it may not 
be laid to their chargg d. - 

a At my firſt appearing before Nero, and the Court of Rome, b 
none of the Chriſtians ftood by me, or owned me ; c but all dein 
frighted at my danger, left me alone to ſpeak for my felf, d Th 
ſinned through weakneſs, and humane frailty, and the Lord I hope 
will pardon it ; God grant them remiſſion, : 

17 Notwithſtanding the Lord ſtood with me e, 
and ſtrengthned me f, that by me the preaching 
might be fully known g, and that all the Gentiles 
might hear þ, and I was delivered out of the mouth of 


the lyon 7z. 


Ul S. 
and to defend my cauſe, g That all Men that heard ; 
know, by God's preſence with me, ſeen in my MN YER 
Preaching was not from my ſelf, or from Men, but from God hy 
meſſage of God by me to the Sons of Men. þ And that all the H l 
then preſent in the Court of Rome might hear and believe+ j Pray 
was for the preſent delivered out of my great danger, or poſſibly þ 
calls Nero (the Roman Emperor at that time) a Lyon for his Aa 
rous Cruelties. 4 
18 And the Lord ſhall deliver me from every 
evil work 7, and will preſerve me unto his heaven. 
ly kingdom k, to whom be glory for ever and ever. 


Amen |. ; 

7 Faith riſeth upon experience, 1 Sam. 17. 37, 46. 2 Cyr, x 
Io. By Evil work may be underſtood any tin into which Paul 
might fall through temptation ; Or, the evi works of others qe. 
ſigning miſchief to the Apoſtle 3 he exprefleth his Faith in this 
term of various fignification, to learn us how to exerciſe our Faith 
in God in an evil time, y believing that God will either deliver 
us from our danger, or from finning by reaſon of our danger s 
for we have no foundation for our Faith, to believe that GOD 
will at all times keep us from evils of ſuffering, k And that He 
will fave us, and preſerve us, if not as to a Temporal Life, yet tg 
a Cceleftial, Honourable, Glorious Inheritance, } This is an yſyaj 
_ of giving Praiſe to God, deſiring all Honour might be giyen 
to Hum. 


of Oneſiphorus ». 

m By this Priſce and Aqui} it is more than probable, he means 
that Priſcills and Aquiia mentioned 1 Cor, 16, 19, # It cannot he 
concluded from hence that 0nefiphorus was now dead, but probably 
he was. It is the ſame Man, mentioned chap. 1, 16. 


20 Eraſtus abodeat Corinth o : but Trophimus have 


L lefr at Miletus ſick p. 

0 Of this Eraſtus ſee Rom. 16. 23. He was the Chamberlain of 
Corinth, ſo he abode there 3 Paul ſent him into Macedonia, As ty, 
22. þ Trophimus was an Epheſian, Aﬀs 21. 29. one of Pau}; 
Companions, As 20, 4, he was left at Miletum, a Cityfn 4ji 
not far from Epheſus, 


21 Do thy diligence to come before winter q, Eu- 
bulus greeteth thee, and Pudens, and Linus, and Clau- 


{dia, and all the brethren y. 


q That is, to come to Rome to me before Winter ;z either becauſe 
Sailing in the Winter time would be more dangerous, or becauſe in 
the Winter time he might have more need of his aſſiftance. » We 
have no further account of theſe Perſons in Holy Writ, the firſt is a 
Greek Name, the reſt Larine,Claudia is a Womans Name, Paul ſends 
the reſpetts of theſe Perſons, and all the other Chriſtians that at 
that time were in Rome to Timothy, 


22 The Lord Jeſus Chriſt be with thy pirit /, Grace 


be with you t, Amen, 
ſ See the like Gal. 6. 18, Phikemow 25. e The Free Grace of 


e That is, did not leave me. It is opened by the next Word, 


God in its various Emanations ſuited to all your Neceſſities, B: 


f He gave me courage and inward ability, ſo as I was able to plead, with vou, Amen. 


© 


The ARGU 


T 


WA 


MEN T. 


A S a General of an Army, who bath a large Country to conquer, cannot bimſell ſtay long in a Conquered City, but 
—_ it with a Garriſon, under Commanders, himſelf ſtill goes forward in his Conqueſts, and by bis Letters di- 
refs thoſe hom he hath left Governours in his Conquered Places, how to behave themſebues: So the Apoſtle of the Gen- 


tiles having a large Field to run over, before he co 


finiſh his courſe, Atts 26. 17, 18. could not bimſelf ſtay long in 


places where he had _— People into a ſubjefFion to the he but after a time, leaving them as @ Garriſon to = 
s 


Chriſt's poſſeſſion in the phace, left them under the condutt 0 
wrote Letters direftive of ſuch Miniſter, to ſettle the Churc 
himſelf ; thus he left Timothy at Epheſus, 'Titus at Crete. 
North hath the Agean Sea, the African Sea or the South, 


_ Eminent Diſciple and Miniſter, to whom he afterwar 


in ſuch a place, what, and how to Preach, and behave 
to Grecia, which on the 


Crete 5s 4 great Iſland belongin 
Inhabitants of it were 


It was anciently called Cures, : 


called Cretians, Tir. 1. 12. or Cretes, AQts 2. 11. 7 read of the lland, Adts 27. as Paul ſailed by it to Rome. 
It had formerly in it One Hundred Cities, being in length Two Hundred Seventy Miles, in breadth Fifty, in compaſs 
Eight Hundred and Nine Miles ; Cortina, Cydon, Gnoſſus, Minois, (the Country of the Famous Geographer Strabo) 


were ſome of the Cities Famous in it. It is now called Candia : 


the Pofſ ſion of the Turks. It was a wery rich 
When the firſt Plantation of the Goſpel was made there, 
his kaving Titus there. Titus was @ Greek, Gal. 2. 


it was lately taken from the Venetians, and is now 


lace, famous for Wines, and the place where Braſs was firſt found out. 
the Scripture doth not ſay: It was made by Paul, as appears by 
3. Converted by Paul, as eppears by 1 Tit. 1. 4. afterwards made 
# Miniſter, for he was Paul's Partner, and Fellow-helper, 2 Cor. 8. 23. and m. 


ed his Brother, 2. Cor. 2.13. uſed as 


bis Meſſenger, 2 Cor. $.6., He was left by Paul in Candia, or Crete, 3o ſettle the Church there ; and to ordain Elders 
in every City, Titus 1. 5. He writes this Epiſtle to him from Nicopolis,” chap. 3. 12, There were Four Cities of that 
Name. The ſeope of it appears to any that read it, to be, to dire him, wh 

bow to deal wit 


at Perſons he ſhould ordain as Miniſters, 


falſe Teachers, and how to behave himſelf, both as to Preaching and Living, towards all ſorts of Perſons. 


Chap. 1, 


19 Salute * Priſca and Aquila #7, and the houſhold *Adsrt, 


( 


[ Or, 
* Nu 
23. I 
+#2Ti 


on 
iſet.1 


*: Th 
4 


$2 Cor 
12, 13, 
9.14, & 
6 16, 

Gal, 2, 


Chap. I. 


| 


CHAP. I. 


Paul's Salutation ; the Dignity of bis Apoſtleſhip, 1==== 4, For what 
end be left Titus in Crete ;, and what fnaif ations and Gifts are 
required in & good Paſtor, 5 He exhorts bim 10 ftop 1he 
Mouths of Seducers g who according to one of their own Poets, were 
ſuch as needed ſharp reproofs,” 1 1=——13, That they may keep tht 


Faith pure from F:wiſh Fables, and Humane Inſtitutions ; The Cha- | 


rafter of thoſe Seducers, 14 16, 


P Aul a ſervant of God a, andan apoſtle of Jeſus 
Chriſt b, according to the faith of God's elect c, 
+ Tim.z, 49d the acknowledgment of the truth * which 1s after 
i6,&6. 3, £odlineſs d. = 
- 4 That is, in the Work of the Miniſtry, 5 Who glory in this as 
my greateſt Honour and Dignity, That I was one immediately ſent 
by Jeius Chrift to Preach the Goſpel. c xamt ms according to 
what the Elect, or choſen of God from the beginning of the World, 
have believed, ſoasit is no new Doctrine which I bring, or elle 
x&7; here ſhould be Tranſlated for denoting the fin] cauſe,as fome- 
jadge it fignifieth, 2 Tim, 1. 1. and ia verſe g. of this Chapter, then 
the Senſe is, That he was ſent to be an Inſtrument to beget Faith in 
ſach as God had choſen unto Life, A#s 26, 18, for thoſe onely 0r- 
dained to eternal Life believ2, Ats 12, 48, and Paul was ſent to be an 
helper of their Faith. Some think the Apoftle by this Phraſe only 
diſtinguiſheth himſelf from the Miniſters of the Law, 4 To which 
Faith Men are brought by the knowledge of the truth, and it work- 
eth by the Owning, Profeſſion, and Acknowledgment of the Truth ; 
not all Propoſitions of Truth, but that which is produQtive of a 
godly Life, lying in the true Worſhip of God, and an univerſal 
Obedience to the Divine Wall. | : 
jor, for. 2 || In hope of eternal life e, which God * that can- 


* Numb. not lie, promiſed f * before the world began g. 
23-19. * e Which Faithalſo producing the acknowledgment, profeſſion 
+: Tim.1.and obedience to the truth, according to Godlineſs, produceth in 
the Soul an hope,or certain expettation of Eternal Salvation or Hap- 
pineſs. f Nor doth this hope grow up as a ruſh without mire, or a 
ag without water, but is bottomed in God's Declaration of his 
Will to that purpoſe, and it is impoſſible that the God of Truth 
ſhould lye, or ſpeak what he never intended to effet. *Emmy palace 
might as well here have been Tranſlated purpoſed, and mutt be ſo 
interpreted, if we interpret the next words before the beginning bf 
time z unleſs we ſay it was promiſed to the head of the EleQ, Chriſt, 
on their behalf, g before the beginning of Time, or rather, many 
epes fince, as Rom. 16. 25, Thus Eternal Life was promiſed, though 
more obſcurely, Gen. 15, 1. & 17. 7. & 22. 18. : 
3 But hath in due time hþ manifeſted his word 


through preaching ji, Þ which is committed unto 
me k, according to the commandment of God our 


Saviour }, 

h In proper time (faith the Greek,) in ſuch time-as God had eter-, 
nally purpoſed, andas ſeemed good to the Divine Wiſdom, #7 He 
hath by ſetting up theOrdinance of Preaching orPubliſhing theGol-! 
pel by Men, ſent by him, manifeſted this Promiſe of Eternal Life, 
which lay much obſcured under the Vail of Temporal Promiſes un- 
der the Old Teſtament, k Which office of Preaching or which 
Word was committed to me, by the will of God, or immediate 
command of God, as to which, ſee Aﬀs 26, 18. | 


Qs12, 


1 Þ ef, I, 20s 


+: TheſC 


TITUS. 


MN. 


Chap. I. 


But why muſt none he put into the Miniftry that have ſuch Chil- 
lren ? The Fathers may be good Men, though the Children be 
bad. $01, 1. Becauſe the honour and repute of the Church is more 
to be regarded, than the intereſt of any private Perſon, 2. Becauſe 
it is an ill ſign that the Parents of ſuch Children, have not ruled 
their own Houles well, keeping their Children in all ſubjettion and 
Sravity under Authority, and are therefore very unfit to rule the 
greater Society of a Church. 
7 For a biſhop muſt be blameleſs x, as the ſteward 
of God y, not ſelf-willed z, not ſoon angry a, F not 4rev.1s.g 
given to wine b, no ſtriker c, * not given to filthy *1Per.s.2, 


lucre d. 

x One that hath an over-ſight of the Church of God, ought to 
be one whom none can truly tax with any ſcaudalous fin. y As a 
chief Servant in God's Houſe, intruſted to diſpence his diyfteries, 
1 Cor, 4. 2, one that ſhould ſet an Example to the under Servants in 
the Heuſe of God. 7 Not avSzdy, one that pleaſeth himſelf, proud, 
ſtubborn pertinacious, confident, ©c. having an high opinion 0 
his own Perſon, Parts, Judgment or Humour 3 (for all this the 
Word ſignifies) 4 8&4a0y, not too quick, and ſubjett to paſnon, 
how then ſhall he in meekneſs inſtruF rhoſe that are without ? b See 
che Notes on 1 Tim. 3. 3. where the ſame Word is uſed. c d See 
the Notes on 1 Tim. 3. 3. where both theſe qualifications are men- 
tioned, and opened. Y 
8 But a lover of hoſpitality e, a lover of || good men jo, ,, 
f, ſoberg, juſt b, holy i, temperate &. things, 

e A Lover of Strangers. See the Notes on 1 Tim. 3.2. f One 
that hath a kindneſs for good Men, or who loves all good things. 

g See the Notes en 1 Tim. 3.2. b Juft inhis Dealings betwixt 
Man and Man, giving to all their due. 2 One that reverenceth 


if 


1 and worſhippeth God, and is Heavenly and Spiritual in his Conver- 


ation, & One that reſtraineth all his evil Inclinations and Propen- 
fions, that hath brought his Senfitive Appetite under the dominion 
and Government of his Reaſon. 

9 Holding faſt + the faithful word, { as he hath + ;Tim,:: 
been taught J, that he may be able by ſound do- 19. &s. z, 
arine, both to exhort m, and to convince the gainſay- 2 Tim. 1, 


ers-# CESS 
| __- ; x ED i Chap. 2. I, 
3 No airy uncertain Man, that is of that Opinion which his com- | Or, in 


pany is of, or his Age favours, but holding ſteady the word of Faith, 
as he hath learned it from me, and the reit of the Apoſtles, m His 
Work is to perſuade others ,to the Faith, and # by ſound argu- 
ments to convince thoſe that ſpeak contrary to it ; and if he him- 
ſelf be ignorant of, or uncertain, as to that, how can he ever dif- 
charge this employment ? F 
10 For + there are many unruly, and vain tal- $ xThs.7; 
kerso, and deceivers p, eſpecially they of the circum- 6, 
ciſton q. 

0 We have had both of theſe Words before ; the firft ſignifieth 
ftubborn, unruly Men ; the ſecond, idle, fooliſb, vain talkers ; The 
Apoſtle ſaith, That in that Age there were many of theſe, p and 
ſuch who were deceivers of other Men's Souls,or had their own Souls 
deceived; q Eſpecially (he faith) the Fews, who mixt the Law 
with the Goſpel ; preſſed the necet{ary obſervance of their Ceremo- 
nies, and taught thatall the 'Fews ſhould be ſaved : Of theſe there 
were many in Crete, they at this time being ſcattered abroad over 
the face of the whole Earth. 


+: Cor.2, 4 To Þ Titus mine own ſon aft 
12, 13. & faith m, Grace, mercy and peace, from God the Fa-! 


7.14-& 8. ther, and the Lord Jeſus Chriſt our Saviour #. 
gp m From hence we learn that Titus was converted to Chriftiani- 
Gal, 2, 3+ ty by Paul, Timothy was ſo called, 1 Tim. 1, 2, #2 The Salutation 
is the ſame with that to Timothy, x Tim, 1, 2. 2 Tim. 1,2. and 
in moſt of the Epiſiles, with ſmall variation. See the Notes there, 
and in the beginning of moſt of the Epiſtles, 

5 For this cauſe left I thee in Crete o, that thou 


ſhouldſt ſet in order the things that are || wanting p, 
1, 7 and | ordain elders in every city, as I had appointed 
Ats1 4 thee q. 
b2, 0 In Candia(as it is now called) ſee the Argument to this Epiftle, 
p Set to rights things which T left undone, being haſtened 'away to. 
other places. q In this 1/land we are told there were an Hundred 
Cities, in how many of them the __ had taken place, we are | 
not told, Paul left Titus in this place, for this end, to regulate the 

| 


Churches, and conſtitute Officers for the Holy Miniftry, toexecute 
the Otfice of an Evangeliſt ; doing what the Apoſtle ſhould have 
done there, could he have ſtayed, 


6 If any be blameleſs r, the husband of one wife /, 
having faithful children ft, not accuſed of riot «, or un- 
Tuly w. 

7 The Apoſtle now dire&s what kind of Perſons ſhould be made 
Elders or Officers in the Church, It is an Ellipttck Speech, where! 
muſt be ſomething underſtood to perfett the Senſe. Do nat make. 
every one an E1der, but if any be &y4yxanT@-, ſee the Notes on 
I Tim, 3, 10. ſuch a one, as though poſſibly he may be clamonred 
on by il] Men, yet cannot be juſtly charged with, or :accuſed of 
any notorious crime. / One that doth not take the ſinful liberty, 
taken by the Jews and Heathens, (but contrary to the rule of 
Cihrift) to have at the ſame time more than one Wife. - See the 
Notes on 1 Tim. 3. 2. # Having allo a Religious Family, Children 
that are Believers,or at leaſt honeſt in a Moral Senſe, (fo then Mi- 
nifters in thoſe Days might marry.) u The Gr. is under an accuſa- 
30% of &ownia, : We Tranſlate it by a general Word Kor, and un- 
doubtedly,our Engliſh Words, Sors and Sorti neſs, comes from this 
Word. The Word fignifieth any kind of Luxury, Drunkenneſs, 
Whoredom, Prodigality, w Unruly; Sons of Beltal, ungoverned, 

_ Uiforderly Perſons, like Souldiers that will not keep their Ranks, or 
rather, like Catcle untamed, that will not indure any Yoke, 043, 


er the common 


j ought not t, + for filthy lucre ſake «. 


1x Whoſe mouths muſt be ſtopped y, -# who ſub- _. 
vert .whole houſes s, teaching things which they 7 271m-2- 


+ 1lim.6, 
Co 


_ 7 The Word is active ; ſuch Miniſters ought to be placed in Ci 
ties, as ſhall be able and fit to ſtop ſuch Perſons Mouths, by ſound 
Dottrine and Arguments fit to convince them ; or thou oughteſt to 
ftop their Mouths by ſilencing them, (though I do not ſee how this 
was pratticable in a Pagen Country, otherwiſe than by perſuading 
Chriſtians not to hear them.) s Who as to the foundation of Faith 
and its building, overturn whole Families of Chriſtians, r Infuſing 
falſe Dodtrine into them ; « and all for filthy gain,and all gain is ſo, 
that is got by deceiving and ruining of Peoples Souls, as to their 
Faith and Salvation. 

12 Oneof themſelves,ever a prophet of their own w, 
ſaid, The Cretians are always lyars x, evil beaſts y, 

w Epimenides, a Greek Poet, thus ſpake of the People of this 
Country, whom he calls a Prophet, becauſe he was a Poer,and wrote 
ſomething about ſuch Divine Oracles as they had, x The Cretians 
were famous for Jying and flalſhood, ſoas it became a Proverb, y He 
calted them evil Braff, either for their cruelty or treachery. + A 
laſie, idle People, that had much more inclination to eat and drink, 
than they had to work in any honeſt labour. From all this the Apo- 
ftle would infer, That Titus had the more need be watchful in 
his place, and faithful in the diſcharge of his Othce, being amongtt 
ſuch a People. 


13 This witneſs is true a: Wherefore rebuke 

= fharply », that they may be ſound in the 
aith c. 

4 This Teſtimony of Epimenides is true, what I have found by 
-experience ; and thoſe of them that in profeſſion have embraced the - 
| Chriſtian Faith, may bave ſome tinure of their Nations vices : 
if thou meeteſt with any ſuch, b reprove,or convince them a7] owns, 
curtizgly, that is, ſharply, ſeverely ; the Metaphor poſſibly is fetch 
ed from Chirurgeons, who cut out dead fleſh to the quick, c that they 
may be ſound in the Do&trine of the Goſpel, or.in their Minds, nor 
infefted with any vice. | : 
|  I4 + Not giving heed to Jewifh fables 4, and + iTim:. 
+ commandments of men e, that turn from the 4 
truth f. +C01.2.22 

d By his calling them Fewiſh Fables, (not old Wives Fables, as in 
the Epiftle to 7;morby) he kts us know that he refle&s upon thoſe 


4 


1 


Jews 


Chap. II. 


Tews that ſeemed te be Profelyted, but yet had a TinQure of thei! 
Tewiſh Education, and ſpent their Diſcourſe about ſuch fabulous 
Traditions as the Jews had, e and the Traditions and Conſtitutions of 
the Scribes and Phariſees, f abhorring the Goſpel, and the Bottrine 
of Truth in it. : 

15 * Unto the pure all things are pure g, but 


;-- 40, * unto them that are defiled and unbelieving b is no- 
Ron. 14. thing pure, but even their mind #and conſcience 1s de- 


20. 1 Cor. filed k, 
6.12.& 2 By the Pure here (as appeareth by the terms oppoſed to it) are 
10. 23, 25+ meant all thoſe whoſe Hearts are purified by Fairh, working by love 
1114.3, jn an holy Life. To theſe he faith al things, that is, all the Crea- 
h. tures of God, all Meats and Drinks are pure. hat God hath clean- 
*ROM-I4* 124, none ought to cal common or impure, Aﬀs 10. Is. fo as not- 
23» withſtanding any Law of God to the contrary, any Believers under 
' the Goſpel may eat of any Meats. h But if Men be Unbelievers, and 
ſ> defiled, having not their Hearts purified by Faith, As 15, 9. 
nothing is pure to them. 7 Their Mind, their Notion and Under- 
ſtanding is defiled ; & and their Conſcience, which is the praQtical 
| Judgment they make about things, is defiled : If they forbear to 
eat, they are defiled through Superſtition ; if they do eat, they ſin 
by atting againſt the diQate of their Conſcience, which is the Pro- 
ximate Rule of Men's Actions, : 
*zTim.3.5 16 They profeſs that they know God J, but 


{[Or,voidof* in works they deny him m2, being abominable, 
jugnents tifobedient , and unto every good work || repro- 


bate 7. 

1 He is ſpeaking of the Fews who (all of them) profeſſed to 
know, and to believe one living and true God, m But they lived 
like Atheiſts, as if there were no God in the World, Rom. 2.17. t0 
ver, 24. 1 They are Perſons juſtly to be abominated of all good 
men, &mwIag, unbelievirg in the Goſpel ; diſobedient to the Rule of 
the Law, awkward toy and averſe from any good work, 


CHAP. UI. 


He exhorts Titus to ſpeak according to ſound DoArine ; and how to 1n- 
firutt old an1 young Men and Women ; and to be a pattern of good 
Works, 1=——2. The duty of Servants, g. 10. Holineſs being the 
end of the Goſpel ;, te frut. and benefit of Redemption ; and the 


*] ike 17, 


way to Life, 11———14, This muſt be Taught with Authori-' 


ty, I5. | 
BE ſpeak thou the things which become ſound do- 
cine 4. 


4 That is, preach thoſe things which agree with that DoArine 
which is ſound, and which tendeth to make others ſound in the 


Faith, and in an Holy Life. Be not thou led by the Example of h 


thoſe Triflers in preaching z but let the ſubjeRts of thy Diſcourſe be 
what may tend to edifying z nor is there any more effe&tual way to 
ſtop the Mouths of thoſe Fablers, Dagor will fall down before the 
Ark of God. ; 
2 That the aged men be || ſober b, grave c, 
temperate d, ſound in faith e, in charity f, in pati- 
ENCE F: | ! 
b By the Word eeoBunes, ſeems here to be ſignified Elders in 
Age ; he would have 7imorhy preach that theſe ſhould be yypetaror ; 
ſober both as to Body and Mind : we met with the Word before, 
1 Tim, 3.2.11. Cc Grave, of a modeſt compoſed behaviour, 'npt 
light and airy. d Temperate, that is able to govern their paikohs 
and inclinations. e We have met with the Phraſe. before, chap. 1. 
x2, ſee the Notes; neither rotten through Error, nor fick through 
Hutuation or Scepticiſm, f In chariry, that is love, g and a patient 
bearing of Evils, : 
* 1Tim.22 3 * The aged women likewiſe þ, that they be 


9. in behaviour as becometh || holineſs z, not falſe ac- 
r Pet. 3-3-cuſers k, not given to much wine 1, teachers of good 


bad bY) things m. 

f » aye ke. ., þ That is, do thou alſo teach the Women that in Age exceed 0- 

#84 thers. i "Ep xg]acyuan izeomreeras. To be in their babit becoming 

* bolinsſs. The word.is of a very large fignification, it ſignifies ſtate, 

geſture and habit ; we have well tranſlated it by as-general a Word, 

Behaviour, it ſignifies Clothes,Converſe,ones whole Carriage. kNor 

Devils ; That name is given tothe Devil, becauſe he is the Accuſer 

of the Brethren, and he was a Lyar from the beginning ; it is apply- 

ed to wy Perſons that charge others falſly. 1 Gr, Nos ſerving much 

Wine ; tor thoſe that frequent the Tap too much, are ordinarily in- 

ſlaved to it, m Privately inſtruQting others in what is good, both 
by their Diſcourſe and Example. 

4 That they may teach the young women to be 

|| ſober #, to love their husbands o, to love their chil- 


dren p. 

7 Young Women, eſpecially converſing amongft Heathens, are 
prone to be light and airy, and over frolick, following the heat of 
their youthful temper,and forming theirConverſe after the manner 
of others, which is a Behaviour, though it may ſute- their Youth, 
yet if they be Chriſtians it will' not fute their Profeſſion, which 
calls to them for more gravity; ſpeak to them that are aged to 
mind them zo be ſober, opt heing natural for young Women to 
love their Husbands and Children, theſe Precepts ſeem not ſo much 
to concern the things, as the manner of it, to love them as they 
ought to love them, | 

5 To bediſcreet q, chaſt y, keepers at home s, good, 
big * obedient to their own husbands #, * that the word 
Col. 2. 18. 0f God be not blaſphemed w. | LOT 
1 Pet. 3.1. 9 Eapera;, The Word ſignifies Temperare, and imports an abili- 
* rTim;6, fy © govern all our affeRions and. paſſions, Diſcretion is but one 
T, piece of the Fruit, r The word fignifieth pure as well as chaft, 

and chaſtity only, as it is a ſpecies of Purity, s Houſe-Wives, not 
ſpending their time in gadding abroad,but in looking to the affairs 


y Or, vigt- 
lant. 


1 Or, wiſe, 


* Eph. 5. 


TITUS. 


| tle therefore requires of Titus that he ſhould be himſelf 


[dings of Salvation » is not now hidden, and obſeurely dclivercd, 


Chap, 1 


es, Epb, A 
as being their Heaq 
God, ſo, for the credit 
arrnage contrary to the 
Religion, the Goſpel 
if from that they had learn'd their ill 


of their own Families, u The fame is required of Wir 
23. and is due from them to their Husbands 
w As for the diſcharge of their Dut towards 
and reputation of the Goſpel, that for their c 
Rules of Nature and Morality, as well as of 
may not be evil ſpoken of, as 
and indecent behaviour. 

6 Young men likewiſe exhort to be 
ed x. 

x The Word ſignifieth to be Temperate, Sober, Wiſe, Di: 
govern their Paſhons, an exhortation more S——_ — - 
young Men, whoſe natural heat inclineth them to paſſion and _ 
neſs, 

7 * In all things, ſhewing thy ſelf a pattern of good 
works y, in doQrine ſhewing uncorruptneſs z, grayj. * li 
ty a, ſincerity b. ", 

3 He is an ill Teacher of others who teacheth them no 
own Example, as well as by his Dottrine ; for that Ph 
ordinarily little valued in his Preſcriptions to his Pa 
they know to be in the ſame danger, andfick of the ſame Diſcai: 
and yet refuſeth himſelf to uſe -what he preſcribeth others, The 
Parients will furely ſay to him, Phycifian heal thy ſelf, The Apo 
a Pattern of 
vainly perſuade other; 


| ſober ming. TY 


ſcreer, 


ot by his 
ylician proves 
tients, whom 


Holineſs, and thoſe Minifters who are not ſo, 
to be ſuch, People (let Miniſters ſay what they will) will heljege 
little danger to be in thoſe courſes in which their Leader himſe1; 
walks, x Preaching not rotten, but ſound Dorine ; 4 and doings ir 
with Authority and Gravity, and 6 ſincerity ; the word is "42 Reronay 
mcorruprtibility, It is not read in many Copies, not tranſlated by 
e denle with eJapSreley, 
y our Tranſlation interpreted uncorry- 


n iT 


many Interpreters, and much of the ſame Senſe wi 
which is the firſt Word b 
neſs. 

8 Sound ſpeech that cannot be condemned c, * that+7;.. 
he that is of the contrary part may be aſhamed 9, hay. 1, ' 
ing no evil thing to ſay of you e. thetay 

Paul (as yet) ſeemeth to be direRing Titus as a Miniſter, ang "%**ih 
the reſt of the Minifters in Crete, how ro behave themlſelyes in the 
Miniftry, for the laſt word being plural [ou] ſignificth either the 
Miniſtry, or elſe is put for thee 5 he would have Titus not on| 
preach ſound Dottrine, not corrupt, and do it gravely, but ath 
preach c profitable Dofrine, tending to make the Souls of others 
ſound and healthy ; unleſs perhaps by a&9y, be here meant his tile 
and Phraſe, which he would have ſuch as none could juftly con- 
demn. What was ſaid of Caſar's Wife, that ſhe ought not only to 
be chaft, but ſo to behave her ſelf, as not to be ſuſpetted otheriſe, 
is applicable to Miniſters ; their DoQrine, and Phraſe, uſed in their 
Miniſtry, ought not only to be ſound and grave, but ſach as none 
ould judge or cenſure for other, d That the Adverſaries of the 
truth may be aſhamed of their aſperſing them, or it, eand niay 
have no evil thing to charge them with. 


9 Exhort * ſervants be obedient unto 


[2 


maſters f, and to pleaſe them well in all 
|| not anſwering again h. 

F The Apoſtle dire&eth as to Servants of all ſorts, whether bond! Or, 
or free (otherwiſe than that by Covenant they have obliged them- gina 
ſelves to Men) he willeth they ſhould be obedient to the commands 
of thoſe who were their Legal Mafters,neither thinking themſelves 
free from them by their Chriſtianity, if their Maſters were Pagans, 
nor tha: they had a greater liberty to be ſaucy with them, or le6 0: 
bedient to them, becauſe they were Chriſtians, and upon that ac- 
count brethren, x 7im. 6, 2, g That is, in all civil things wherein 
alone they were Servants. þ Not ſaucily replying when they were 
reproved, nor contraditting the commands of their Mafters, 

10 Not purloining ?, but ſhewing all good fidelity |, 
that they may adorn the doQrine of God our Saviour 
in all things I. | 

J NoogurQouincs, The Word fignifieth raking ſomething away from 
others r0 our own uſe, and it ſignifies properly the taking not the 
whole, but a part of a thing, As 5. 2, 3. it is uſed to (ignifie the 
fin of Ananias and Sapphira, who kept back part of what they ſol 
their Eftate for. & tioneſty, and Truth, and Diligence, / That 
they may not be a ſcandal, or reproach to the Goſpel, of which they 
make a profeſſion, but may be an ornament to it in all things, «s 
remembring that it is the Dofrine of God our great Treſerver, and 
of Jeftis Chriſt our bleſſed Saviour, : 

11 For.the * grace of God || that bringeth ſalvatt- *chy; 
on #1, hath appeared to all men . [ 0, ; 

m The Goſpel of our Lord Jeſus, which contain wy 


Salva 
ro lk 4 
hath 4 
pearet 


their own,..., 
things g : 1 
Peta 


F2Tim," 
126, 


1 Cor,c 


I, 

Ph, 2, 1 
ol, 3. 7 
I Pct.g.3 


eth the glad Ty- 


as in the times of the old Teſtament, but is riſen up as the Sun, or 
ſome bright Star, direQing all Men their duties in their ſeveral Sta- 
tions, that is, all ſorts of Men amongſt whom it cometh. 


12 Teaching us * that denying ungodlineſs », abd yy, 


worldly luſts p, we ſhould live ſoberly q, righreoutly 7, chap, 2, 
and godlily s in this preſent world e. : b-- 
o All Atheiſm or falſe Religion, living without regard *0 5 Or, pity, 


Divine Being, or according to our own erroneous and fupc2 ft1tious 
Conceits and opinions of it. p And ſich inclinations, and vnlawful 
defires, and luftings after ſecular things as are commonly fon 1n 
Men of the World, q We ſhould live, with reſpe& to our {elves :n 
a juſt Government of our affefions and Palfions, r And with rc 


ſpe to others, giving to every one their due, s and with reipect tom 

to God, piouſly diſcharging the Duties, and paying the Homage «* \& g 3, 
owe unto Him # ſo long aswe live in this World, where we nave 1,6 
temptations to the contrary. þ.0 4, % 


- 1a. *1C0 
' 13 * Looking for that bleſſed hope #, and the £10- N ; 
rious appearing of the great God, and our Saviour Je- 
ſus Chriſt w. 


u The. objeQ, or end of our hope, the Salvation of our $09, 


G kl, 


Chap. III. 


Gal. 5. 5. Col. 1. 5. w And in order thereunto, lookmg for the 
\ coming of the great God, and our Saviour Teſus C briſt, to the laft 
Judgment. The {ame Perſon is here meant by the great God, and 
our Saviour Jeſus Chriſt, 1. It is he whom God hath appointed to 
be the Judge of the Quick and Dead, 2. *Emgayerz, by us tranſla- 
1 ted app2aring, is attributed only to the Second Perſon in the Bleſſed 
Trinity, 2 thefſ. 2. 8. 1 Tim, 6. 14. 2 Tim, 4. 1, 8. from this 
Text the Divine Nature of. Chriſt is irrefragably concluded, He ts 


"Or not only called God, but wzzas ©e65, the Great God, which cannot 
Icreet, be underſtood of a male God, ; 
d +Gal.t.z. 24 * Whogave himfelf for us x, that he might re- 
«2.29. deem us from all iniquity y, and purifie unto himſelf 
x£x04.15-* 4 peculiar people z, * zealous of good works 4. 
Ll; | 15.X19-5* x Which great God and Saviour Jeſus Chriſt, was not only ſent 
ITin, *:pt-10-2 and given by the Father, Fohn 3. 16. but freely gave up-himſelt to 


tt, be incarnate, and todie for us, a way, in our ftead to dye. 
4 That by that price he might purchale >alvation for us; delivering 


iS v5 both from the guilt and power of fin, who were Slaves and Cap- 
- | tives to our Lufts, 2 And that he might purifie to himſelf, Au9y 
n | a&1£010y,- we Tranſlate it a peculiar People 3 ſome Tranſlate it an 
- egregious, famous, principal People ; others ſay it fignifieth /omerbing 
M got by our own labour and induſtry, and laid up for our own uſe, O- 
" | thers ſay it fignifieth ſomething we have ſet our Hearrs and Afﬀettions 
df upon, ina fpecial peculiar manner. a Studious to do, and warmly 
rs 7 purſuing all ſuch Works as are acceptable ro God, and profitable 
- ; to Cur ſelves and others, | 

li n 15 Theſe things ſpeak, and exhort b, and re- 
9 *1119-4- buke with all Authority c. * Let no man deſpiſe 
, - thee d. 

y, ' bWhatſoever T have in this Epiſtle aid unto thee, I have there- 
t- | fore ſpake, That thou mighteftt ſpeak to the ſame Senſe to others, 


and perſuade them to the praice.of them, c When thou haft oc- 


TI TU S. 


pledge and ſign of which is in Baptiſia. u The Holy Spirit changing 
and renewing our Natures, git 

6 * Which he ſhed on us + abundantly w, through *x2ek. ;6 
Jeſus Chriſt our Saviour x. 25. 

w Which Holy Spirit, as well for the renewing of us, as for the Atts 2. 32, 
collation of more common or extraordinary Gitts God poured out Rom. 5.5, 
upon us abundantly, x through the Merits and Mediation of Jeſus FGrerich!y 
Chriſt our Saviour, 

7 That being juſtified by his grace y, we ſhould 

= made-heirs & according to the hope of eternal 
life 4. 

I That we, through the free love of God, having the Suilt of 
our fins removed, and the righteouſneſs of Chriſt reckoned to us 
for Righteouſneſs, x ſhould through Adoption be made Childr2y 
then Heirs, Heirs of God, and Foint-heirs with Chriſt, Rom, 8. 17. 
2 Some think that the words ſhould be read thus, Thar we according 
ro bope ſhould be made Heirs of Eternal Life; becauſe otherwiſe, the 
Text hath no obje& to relate to Heirs. But what fhould we be 
Heirs of, but the Xingdom mentioned Mat. 25. 34. Though it be 
true,we are no more than Heirs according to hope, nor is any Man 
otherwiſe an Heir o fan Inheritance, as #eir ftands diſtinguiſhed 
from an Owner or Proprietor. 

8 This is a faithful ſaying b, and theſe things 1 
w1ll that thou affirm conſtantly c, that they which 
have believed in God d, may be careful to maintain 
good works d, Theſe things are good, and profitable 
unto men e, 

b We had this Phraſe before, 1 Tim. 1.15. & 3. 1. &4, 9, 
2 Tim. 2, 11. It may beapplicd to what went before, or to what 
follows. c This is the Doctrine I would have thee preach,maintain, 
and ftand to, 4 That thoſe who ailent to theſe things as true, and 


t * 1Tin. caſion to reprove any for their Errors, do not do it imperiouſly, but | have caft their Souls upon God and Jeſus Chrift,for the fulfilling of 
= J withgneekneſs z nor yet flightly and curſorily, but ſhewing all gra- | them, may (conſidering good works are the condition annexed to 
Peta vity and authority. 4 And do not ſo demean thy ſelf, as to ,give [the Promiſe of this Eternal Life and Salvation)be careful to prattice 
ts, bar any Perſons occaftion to deſpiſe thee, all that God hath commanded them in all their Relations, e All 
Ho theſe things are true in themlelyes, and profitable for Men to 
Ke | CHA P. IIL know and underitand, 
e He exhorts Titus to inculcate on his Hearers Obedience roMagiſtrates : 9 But avoid fooliſh queſtions f, and genealogies 2, 
y | Love and Meelneſs rowards all, 1, 2, Their former corrups State, 104 contentions b, and ſtrivings about the law #, tor 
0 and in what manner, and for what 'end they were delivered out of h frabl 2 wake 4 
'$ | ir by Chriſt, 3——7. And thar he earneſtly preſs hers 10 maintain | *NEY Are unprontable, and vain . TS | 
Ii | good Works, 8. That he reje fooliſh Queſtions and Contentions, F In the diſcharge of thy Miniftry meddle rot with idle Que- 
N- | and ſhun Heretical Perſons, g il, He appointeth bim time ſtions, 2 Tim. 2, 23. tending to no godly edifying. g And ſifting 
(0 , and place to come to bim ; and 10 provide for Zenas and Apollo, 12, | ut GeneaJogies, 1 Tim, 1. 4. and b firitcs above wor ds, or things 
e, | 1}. That Believers be taught to maintain good Works, 14. His Sa- unprofitable, Perverſe diſputings, and oppoſisions of Science falſly 
ir | lutation and Benedifion, 15. ſo called,x Tim, 6, 4, 5,20. 7 Particularly Queſtions about the Law, 
_ | : | ES the Traditions and Conftitutions of the Elders about it ; & theſe 
he Ur them in mind to be ſubje& to principalitlies, [things are to no purpoſe or advantage. 
ay | and powers a, to obey magiſtrates b, to be ready| To A man that is an heretick }, after the firſt and ,,q,. » 
to every good work c. ſecond admonition, * reje& m. | eng 
Myr; a All the ſupream ſecular Powers at this time were Pagans, and | 7 Two things make up an Heretick,according to the common ac- R om, 16 
(a2 no Friends to the Chriſtians, in their Dominions, which might be a |ceptation of the Term now. 1. An Error in ſome matters of Faith, 17. : 
my tempration to the Chriſtians to rebel againſt them, -or at leaſt not | 2. Srubborneſs and conmumacy in the holding and maintaining of it, 2 Theff, Js 
1d): Or. to yield them (o free, univerſal, and chearful an Obedience as they | whether it ſo fignified ſo early I cannot tell ; it ſeems to refer to the 6, 14. 
wand ought; therefore the Apoſtle prefſeth this Duty upon them, and [former yerſe, ſuppoſing ſome, that notwithſtanding all the endea- g Joh. 10; 
rh that nothere only, but Kom. 13. 1. 1 Pet. 2. 13. b By the for- |vours of Titus, would be ſtriving and contending tor niceties abour 
wh mer term he might underſtand the ſupreme Magiftrates ; by the Queſtions, Genealogies, &c. for ſuch (ſaith the Apoſtle) admoniſh 
ns latter, thoſe inferiour ranks, as he expreſſeth himſelf more particu- them onceand again ; if they will not have done, m Refuſe them, 
_ larly, 1 Per. 2, 13, 14. c Tobe free, and prepared to every Work [rej > them, Whether Excommunication can be certainly builded 
«Co which is acceptable to God, and honourable in it ſelf. upon this Text, may be doubred, aug rrouar fignifies no more 
in Tim. 2 To ſpeak evil of no man da. to be * no [chan to avoid, reject, or refuſe, : 
re .c brawlers, but gentle e, ſhewing all meekneſs- to all] 11: Knowing that he that is ſuch, is ſubverted », 
| © menf. and ſinneth o, being condemned of himſelf p. 
, d Gr. To blaſpheme no Man, Blaſphemy is a ſpeaking Evil, 1 "Er exmMeasy Ts turned out of the true and right way and road, 
ur whether it be applied to God or Man, though uſe hath fo ob-| oand is a tran{greflor, and p condemned of his own Conlcience z 
tained, That we only in common diſcourſe ſpeak of blaſpheming | for he who ſpends his time about Queſtions and Genealogies, and 
on God. e To be no Fighters, (dudyx;) neither with Hands, nor | ftrifes of Words, and little Queſtions about the Law, inſtead of 
he Tongues. e To be modeſt, fair, equitable Men, f Forbearing | Preaching Chrift, is told by his own Conſcience that he doth not 
ne | Wrath and Paſſion in their Converſe withall, _ : do his duty, 
Ml þ! Cor,6 3 For * we our ſelves alſo were ſometimes fooliſhg,| x13 When I ſhall ſend Artemas unto thee, or * Ty- »14,20,4, 
hat l diſobedient h, deceived 5, ſerving divers luſts, and | chicus q,be diligent to come to me to Nicopolis r, for 
fy PM. 2. T. pleaſures k, living in malice and envy /, hateful m,| I have determined there to winter s. 
= Ca '* and hating one another . q Of Artemas we read in no other place, but of Tychicus often, 
n _—_ z Without any Knowledge, Wiſdom, or Spiritual Underftand- they were gon un mw of _ _ _— to ſend to 
5. ade ing, b The word fignifieth as well unbelieving, as diſobediens ; | Ke _— hy the UNOreh 1n hors  nS ma —_ - whota 
0 [9 neither perſuaded to aſſent to the Truth, nor yet to live up to the he wou 4 aye come to him to zcopo IS, WNETE NE MENEnced to take 
_ rule of the Goſpel. i Deceived by the deceitfulneſs of fin, & be. | uP his Winter Quarters; but being very loth that the Flock at Crere 
yo 8, ing ſlaves to our ſenſitive Appetite. 1 Suffering Wrath to reſt in| {hovld fora little time be without a Shepherd, he limits the time 
d, a” our boſoms, till it boiled up to a deſire of Revenge, and ſhewed it of 77rus his ſetting out towards him, till one of them ſhould come 
or ſelf in aRions of that Nature,and pining at the good and proſperity | 19 ©72te. | % 
oa 8 of others. m Deſerving to be abominated by good men, » and ha-| 13 Bring Zenas the lawyer, * and Apollos on _ 
ou ting good men, or ſuchas were our Neighbours ; and having been| their journey diligently t, that nothing be wanting « Ads 18 
1d *Cola ſo our ſelves formerly, we ought to pity ſuch as ſtill are ſo. unto them, A Sha 
', cap, 2, 4 But after that * the kindneſs o, and || love of God | , Of this Zenas we read no more in Holy Writ, but of Apollos we » 
l, our Saviour toward man appeared Þ- read both in the Acts, and 1 Cor. 3. 4, 5, 22. It ſeemeth they were 
iy Or, pity. © Xengv7ys, The Word ſignifies ones eaſenecſs t0 do good to ano- | about to goto Paul to Nicopolis. u The Apoſtle would have Titus 
Nus ther. That native goodneſs that is in God, rendring him inclinable| take care that they might want no necefſaries- that might accom- 
ful to love, and prone to do good unto the Sons of Men. This was | modate them in their Journey. Hd 
if in God from Eternity, p but appeared in his ſending Chriſt, and] x4 And let ours w alfo learn to || maintain good 
n then his SPirit, and in the application of Chriſt's Redemption to works x for neceſſary uſes y, that they be not + un- [[Or,t77r2. 
TC particular Souls, : fruitful z. feſs honeſt 
ct Rom, 2, P 5 * Not by m_ of righteouſneſs, which mp bevy der, Miniſters of the Goſpel, or thoſe Tr 
_ Kg, Gone q, but according to his mercy r he ſaved us 5s, by | that are Chriſtians, Jearr x in the Greek it is 10 excell, or tobe in ou 
1.&11,6, the * waſhing of regeneratiorf rt, and the renewing of | the front, or to ſhew forth, or maintain, and each ſenſe hath its Pa- 
_ #xCor 244. the holy Ghoſt «. trons of Note » for the neceffary uſes of the Church, or of others, 
a" n) 13+3z q Not according to our works, 2 Tim, 1. 9. whether Ceremonial | 0r for their own neceſſary uſes, . I take their Senſe who would ex- 
© FP: 5:26. or Moral, r But from his own Bowels freely yearning upon Perſons | pound the Phraſe maintaining good works, by learn fome honeſt Trade, 
in miſery, s He hath pur us into a ſtate of, and given usa right to [£9 be foreign to the true Senſe of the Phraſe, 
1, Eternal Salvation, t Waſhing us by Regeneration, as in a Layer, the 
io, : i5 All 


Chap. III. 


it 


Chap. I. PHIL 


15 All that are with me ſalute thee. Greet them 


that love us In the faith a. Grace be with you al). 


Amen. 


E MON. _ Chap1 


4 That love vs, as we are Chriftians in,and for tie Gor 
free love of God be thy Portion, and the Portion of al wy Lang 


ſtians in Crete, 


+ Fph.4.1. 
21i1,1,8, 


*Phil.2.25 


% 


FHI1IL EM 9 N. 


The ARGUMEN T. 


mn Epiſtle is different from the other Epiſtles, becauſe it is written upon a pon Subje& of more ſpecial Cog. 


cernment, that it was wrote by Paul t #5 not doubted, it hath what he ca 


leth his token inevery Epiſtle, Thefſ 


2. 17. Who this Philemon was, 1s 10t ſo eaſily determined : Some have judged him a Phrygian, and of Coloſs ; fee 
Col 4 9. he appeareth to have been a Miniſter by Paul's calling him his Fellow-labourer, ver. 1. his Brother, ver. 9. 
his Partner, ver. 17. It is conjettured that he was one in the converſion of whom God made uſe of Paul as an 1;- 
ſtrument, from ver. 19. where Paul tells him, That he would not fay that he owed unto him his own ſelf. He ſeems 
ro have been a man of ſome Eſtate, for he kept a Servant, and refreſhed the bowels of the Saints. 7. He had a com- 
pany of Chriſtians in his Houſe, ver. 2. The time when Paul wrote this Epiſtle is not certain, it was when he was a- 
ged, and a Priſoner, ver. 9. from whence it is evident that it was wrote ſom Rome ; ſome think it was written he- 
fore the Second Epiſtle to Timothy, becauſe ver. 22. he ſpeaks of hopes that he had of being reſtored to bis liberty, ver, 
22 and in his Epiſtle to Timothy, 2 Tim. 4. 7. he ſeems to have no ſuch hopes. © He alſo here, ver. 24. ſends bim 
the Salutation of Demas, who he ſaith, 2 Tim 4. 10. had forſaken him. Others think it was wrote after that, 
when Demas was again returned to him, ( but it 1s not ſo clear that he ever returned.) It is very probable that it was 
wrote much about the ſame time with the Epiſtle to the Coloſlians, for Col. chap. 4. 9. mention is made of Oneſimus 
as a faithfu Brother ; there is alſo mention made of Marcus, Ariſtarchus,Epaphras, Lucas,avd Demas,and Archippus,who 
are all named in this Epiſtle, and no more are here named, but Apphia. The ſcope of the Epiſtle is evident to recon- 
cile Onelimus to Philemon. Onelimus had been a Servant to Philemon, and it ſhould ſeem had wronged him by pur- 
loming ſome of his Goods. He came to Rome, and was there converted by Paul, being a Priſoner, ver. 10. The 4- 
poſtle would not detain him, being another Man's Servant, but ſends him back with this Recommendatory Letter to 
bis Maſter. This Recommendation was the occaſion, and is the matter of this Epiſtle. In the Penning of which the 
Apoſtle ſhewerth himſelf as much an Orator,as he had in his Epiſtle to the Romans,and ſome other of his Epiſtles ſhewed 
his Skill at an :rguthent ; for the Epiſt ke is Penn'd with great Art, and many Topicks are uſed to perſuade Philemon 
apain to receive him into his Service, ſome ſuch, as would mcline one to think,That Paul knew this Philemon was ſome- 


thing covetous, and would be a little difficult to grant his requeſt. 


Aul, * a priſoner of Jeſus Chritt a, and Timothy 
our brother b, unto Philemon our dearly be- 


oved, and fellow labourer c. 

. « That is, for the ſake of Chriſt, for the Goſpel, and for preach- 
ing of Jcſus Chrift ; b from whence it is evident that Timothy was 
come to Paul at Rome, according to his ceſire, 2 Tim. 4. 9, 21+ 
before this Epiſtle was wrote, which manifeſteth that Second Epr- 
tle not to have heen the laſt he wrote 3 the Apoſtle uſeth to join 
ſome others with himſelf in his Salutation, Softkenes, 1 Cor. 1. I. 
Timorky 2 Cor. 1. 1. Phil. 1, 1. Col, 1.1. 1 Thefſ, 1. 1. (where Syl- 
vanus alſo is added) from whence it appeareth, that Timorky was 


Paul's ordinary Companion, and the Apoftle ſheweth his Humility 


in joining the Name of ſo young a Man with his own 3 c whence 
we gather, That Philemon was not a Chriſtian only, but a Miniſter, 
probably one of the Miniſters in Coloſs in Phrygia, for it appeareth 
Col. 4. 9. that Oneſsmus his Servant was a Colofſian. 


2 And toour beloved Apphia d, and Archippus e 
* our fellow-ſouldier f, and to the church in thy 


houſe z. : 

4 Apphia was the Roman Name of a Woman, the Naming of her 
before 4rchippus, (a Miniſter) makes it probable ſhe was Philemon's 
Wife, e It appears this Archippus was a Miniſter, from Colof}, 
4. i7. f Hecalleth him his Fellow-Souldier, becauſe he was in- 


zaged in ſome of thoſe many dangers Pau} incountred, but we are 


nor told in Scripture which, g All thoſe Chriſtians that live in 
thy Family, we have the like Expreſhon, Rom. 16. 4. 1 Cor. 16, 
ig. Col. 4. 15- The Apoſtle doth not always by the Term 
Church ſignifie a Body under Eccleſiaſtical Diſcipline, but ſome- 


| repoſing thy confidence in him for Salration, and that love which 
worketh in thee towards Chriſt, » And is ſeen in thy readineſ to 
do good to all Chriſtians, ſuch eſpecially as are Saints indeed : 
Becauſe thy goodneſs exrenderhnor 10 God, thou ſheweſt it 10 the 
_ that are in the Earth, and to the excellent; like David, Pu, 
16. 2, 


6 That the communication of thy faith o may he- 

come effeQual p, by the acknowledging of every good 
thing which is in you in Chriſt Jeſus 4. 
0 The Word ſometimes ſignifieth Communion, in all which there 
iS a mutual Communication betwixt thoſe with whom the Commu- 
nion is. That thoy mayeſt declare that thou haſt the ſame common 
Faith with us, thou communicateſt the Fruits of it. p And ſheweſt 
that it is-not a dead inoperative Faith, but the true Faith of Go#'s 
Eled, Titus 1, 1. working by Love, Gal. «, 6, and ſhewing it elf 
by good Works,-Fam. 2, 18, q That every good thing, every good 
habit of Grace, which Jeſus Chrift hath wrought in thy Soul 
might be acknowledged by others (the Servants of Chriſt) to whom 
thou declareft thy Love and Goodneſs. 

7 For we have great joy, and conſolation in thy 
love r, becauſe the bowels of the ſaints are refreſhed 
by thee, brother /. 

7 Thy Love doth not extend only to the poor diſtreſſed Saints 
helped, and relieved by thee, but it hach its effe&t upon others, to- 
gether with thy ſelf; it is a wonderful joy and comfort to us to 
hear, That God hath ſo opened and enlarged thy Heart. The fruits 
of Grace in one,are a true cauſe of Joy and Thanſgiving to all Chri- 


ſtians, becauſe God by them is glorified. The Saints, or the Bow- 


cimes calleth a Company of Chriſtians ordinarily converſing toge- | els of the Saints, dyamimww]ar, are brought ro a reſt ; as Travellers 
ther by that Name. Thoſe who think the Body of the Church 


were wont conſtantly to meet in Philemon's Houſe, ſeem not to con- 
fider how the dangers of thoſe times made ſuch a thing hardly pra- 
Cicable, 


ther, and the Lord Jeſhs Chriſt 6. 


*1Theſl.1, 
"Ne 
2Thefl.1.3 


» 
EpB.t-15 pt towards the Lord. Jeſus 99, and toward all 
ſatats n. | 


Col. 1. 4. 


- Leve. 4 Faith in Chriſt, m That kaith which thou haſt in Chrift, 


3 Grace unto you, and peace from God our Fa- 


þ The common Salutation, vid, the Notes on Kom. I. 7. I Cor, 


I, 3.2 Cor, I. 2, &C., 2] 7 
4 * I thank my God, making mention of thee al- 
waysin my Prayers 7. 
z See the Annotat. on 2 Tim, 1 


5 * Hearing of thy love k and faith 1, which thou 


k Thy love to God, ard tothe Saints, ver. 7. The Apoſtle put- 
teth Love here before Faith, contrary to the true order of thoſe ſpi- 
ritual Hahits, for Lvve muſt be the Fruit of Faith which worketh by 
dove, and to his own order in other places, 1 Tim, 2, 7. 2 Tim. 1. 
13. poſſibly to ſhew us that he ſpake of that Zove, which: 1s con- 
joined with Faith, and of that Faith, which ſheweth irs Truth Þy 


| 


after their Journey, or Labourers after their days I.abour, when 
they come to fit ſtill. | 


, 8 Wherefore, * though 1 might be much bold *:Tic 
in Chriſt # to enjoyn thee « that which is convent 5. 


Ent w 

. * In the Greek it is, wherefore having much, upptotey, boldneſs, 
liberty or freedom of Speech, or, much power and 4utbority Or right, 
as Heb, 10.19. for Chriſt's ſake, being Chrift's Apoftle,or ſpeaking 
for the ſake of Chriſt, u To command thee, authoritatively, w To 
«rnxoy, things that are expedient, or convenient, fit for thee to d0e 
My Office authorizeth me in ſuch caſes, | 

9 Yet for loves ſake x I rather beſeech thee, being 
ſuch a one as Paul the aged y, and now alſo a priſoncr 
of Jeſus Chriſt z. 

. x Writing to thee in a cauſe of Love, where ſo good, and cha- 
ritable a Man may have an opportunity to expreſs his Charity. Or, 
rather, out of my Love and Kindneſs to thee, perſuading me that I 
need not-uſe my Apoſtolical Authority to ſuch a Brother,andFrien''s 
I beſeech thee, y being ſuch a one as Paul now, much in years, and 
not like to trouble thee long with any requeſt, Or, Paul the Elder 


Priſoner 


by Office, one who is thy Brother in the vviniftry ; 7 And now 2 


* jThef2 
6, 


Chip. I: 


= 1 Cor.4 


Priſoner for Chriſt's ſake, aad ſo cannot perſonally ſpeak to _ 
and I know ſuch is thy Piety, that my being a ſufferer for the ſake 
of Chriſt will not reader my Petition to thee leſs acceptable, or to 
be regarded leſs, 

10 I beſeech thee for my ſon Oneſimus a, * whom 


[ have begotten in my bonds b. 


| Gale 4419+ & Oneſimus lately thy Servant (the ſame mentioned C0, 4.9.) but 


my Son. b Not naturally, but ſpiritually, to whom I have,been a 
ſpiritual Father, and begotten him to Chrift in my old age, and 
while I have been here ſuffering as a Priſoner. 

1x Which in time paſt was to thee unpro- 
fitable e : But now profitahle to thee and 


me d, 

c”.' *yengry, he uſeth a ſoft word, for it appears, verſe 18, he 
had wronged him; taking away ſome of his Goods, and running 
away with them, without Philemon's knowledge, which made him 
cloubly criminal. 4 But now EUN ens, profitable; one that may 
be profitable to thee having learned Chriſt, and to me, who have 
uſed him in my ſervice, and whoſe Converſion will add to my 
Crown. 

13 Whom I have ſent again e : thou therefore re- 
ceive him f, that is my own bowels g. 

e He comes not of his own head, but upon my perſuaſion, and 
upon my errand, f I therefore beſeech thee to receive .him kindly, 
and entertain him in thy Houſe, g Whom I love, as I love my own 
Soul, thou canft not therefore be unkind to him, but it will refle& 
upon me, 


13 WhomlT would have retained with me,that in thy 
ſtead, he might have miniſtred unto me inthe bonds of 
the goſpel b ; | 

þ 1 have ſuch an opinion of his fincerity, that T would willingly 
have kept him with me, that he might, while I am a Priſoner * 


the Golpel of Chriſt, have done thoſe Offices for me, which thou 
wouldft have done, hadft thou been here. 


| *Cor.g.7 14 But without thy mind I would donothing z,* that 


thy benefit ſhould not be as it were of neceflity but wil- 
lingly k. 

z But he was thy Servant, and I would not do it without thy 
knowledge and conſent, k& that it might not be thought that thou 
hadſt done mea kindneſs neceffarily, but that thou mighteft do it 
freely, which ſeems to argue that St. Paul expetted, that he being 
reconciled to Onefimus, ſhould ſend him back to Paul): Unleſs he 
means the benefic done to Oneſtmus, in not revenging the wrong he 


had done him, ſhould not be of neceſſity, becauſe he was out ot his | confidence that through the help of the Churches Prayers, he 


reach, but freely having him firſt in his power. 
* 15 For perhaps he therefore departed for a 
ſeaſon, that thou ſhouldeſt receive him for 
ever I. | 

I Oneſimus in departing deſigned no ſuch thing, but poſſibly God 
in the Wiſdom of his Providence ſuffered him to depart from thee, 
and to fall into theft, that he might upon that occation come to a 
quicker ſenſe and convietion of tin, and ſee a need of a Saviour, 
and being turned from Sin unto God, and having imbraced Chriſt 
our common Saviour, thou mighteſt receive, love, and imbrace him 
euovtop, for ever ;, thisever, In this life, that is, ſolong as you both 
ſhould live, 


16 Not now as a ſervant mm, but above a ſervant », 
a brother beloved o, ſpecially to me p, but how 
much more unto thee, both in the fleſh, and in the 
Lord 9. 

m Not now meerly as a Servant. 7» But as one that deſerv- 
eth much more kindneſs than a Servant. 6 Being a Chriftian 
deſeryedly to be loved. p Eſpecially of me, who have a Spiri- 
tual Relation to him, as the Inſtrument of his Converfion, and 
as he hath been uſeful in miniftring to me in Priſon, q But 
how much more to thee, to whom he ſtands not only in the 
Relation of a Brother, being converted to the Chriſtian Faith, 
but iz the fleſh, as thy Kinſman, or thy Servant, or one of thy 
Family, or thy Country-man, one of the ſame Town and 
Place. 


17 If thou count me therefore a Partner r, receive 
him as my ſelf /. 


HEBREWS. 


r x0tvavoy, One with whom thou haſt Communion + a Partner in the 
ſame Grace of the Goſpel, and in the ſame trials and affliftions of 
the Goſpel. / Do not only forgive him, but kindly entertain him, 
who is my Friend, as thou wouldft do my ſelf. 


18 If he hath wronged thee, or oweth thee ought t, 
put that on my account #@. 

e Tf he hath any way been unfaithful, if he hath taken any thing 
from thee, or be in thy debt, « Charge that upon me, let me be 
accountable to thee for it, 


19 1 Paul have written it with my own hand, 
[ will repay It w, albeit I do not ſay unto thee, 
how thou oweſt unto me even thy own ſelf be- 
lides x. 

w Thou haſt it here under my hand, I take upon me to fatis- 
fie thee Oreſtm#s his Debr, yet x I could tell thee, that thou oweft 
me more than it can be, even thy own felt, God having made 
uſe of me as an Inſtrument to convert, and turn thee unto God. 
Such Perſons are great Debtors to their Spiritual Fathers, Ro, 
I * 27. x ; 

20 Yea, brother y, let me have joy of thee in the 
Lord z : refreſh my bowels in the Lord 4. 

» The Particle yet is uſed in Swearing, Affirming, Perſuading, 
Intreating ; the latter ſeemerh here moſt proper, as much as of 
all love, Brother. + It will rejoice my Heart, to ſee thee Chari- 
table and Ohedient to my Monitions, let me have a Spiritual Joy, 
from thy ſatisfattion of me in what I deſire. 4 Either 0zeſt- 
m8, whom verſe 12, he had called his Bowelsz Or, my inward 
Man, | 


ſay c. 

6T bave not written this without a confidence that thou in this 
thing wilt do what I defire of thee, c But I write it out of my Aﬀe- 
Aion to poor Onefimas, and deſire to help him not doubting of thy 
readineſs to do the thing. 


truſt that * through your prayers I ſhall be given to 
you d. EE 


d This would incline one to think that this Epiſtle was written 
before the ſecond Epiftle to Timothy, for there, Chap. 4. 6,7, $. 
he ſeems to have other apprehienſions :; yet it is plain, Timorhy was 
, with Paul when he wrote this, which he was not when that Second 
Epiſtle was written, as appears from Chap. 4. 9, 21. Here —_ a 

ould 
again Come to them, he writeth to PhzJemon to prepare him a lodg- 
INg., | 
23 There ſalute thee Epaphras my fellow-priſoner 
in Chriſt Jeſus e, 

e We read of this Epaphras, Col. 1. 7. where he is called Pau]'s 
Fellow-Seruant, and a Faithful Miniſter of Chrift, he was with Paul 
at Rome, Col, 4.12, but there is no mention of him as a Priſoner, 
but now he was a Fetlow-7rijoner with Paul,either in the ſame place, 
or upon the ſame account, 


labourers f. 

f All Miniſters of the Goſpel, they are alſo-named Colo/. 4. 10, 
14, they were all at this time at Rome with Paul, fee Acts 12, 
12, 25, and 15. 37, 39. and 19. 29, and 20, 4. and 27. 2. @ Tim, 
. 10, 

25 The grace of our Lord Jeſus Chriſt be with your 
ſpirit. Amen g. | 

g See the Notes on Gal. 6.18, See alſo Rom. 16. 24. 1 Cor. 16, 
23. Phil, 4.27. 2 Theſſ. 2. 18. with your Spirit, is the ſame with 


+ 


Chriſt in all its gracious Emanations. We have his meaning fully, 2 
Cor. 13. 14. The Grace of our Lord Feſus Chriſt, and the Love of 
God, and the Communisn of the Holy Ghoſt, be with you all, Amen, 
is a Participle of Praying and Affirming, by which he declareth his 
earneſt deſire it might be ſo, and alſo his Faith that it ſhould be ſo. 
Nor doth he pray for Philemon alone, (though the Epiſtle chiefly 


concerned him) but for all thoſe who at Cosſs had with him obtain 
ed like precipus Faith, 


HEBREWS. 


The AR G 


UMEN T. 


COME few Greek Copies not having the Name of the Apoſtle P AUL prefixed to this EPISLLE, though moſt 
of them have, hath made many doubt concerning the Writer of it, as others, eſpectally Hereticks, of its Authority. 


The Conje&ures of theſe who aſcribe it to Barnabas, Luke, or Clemens, ©-c. ſeem groundleſs ; ſince the Chara&er the Ho- 


ly Ghgſt gives of its Pen- Man, and his ſtate, in Chap. 10. 34- and Chap. 13. 19, 23. is not agreeable to any of them. 


This is moſt certain, That the Apoſtle Paul did write ſuch an 
Chriſt then; that it was abuſed by Men of corrupt Minds, 
ftimony A it 13.2, Pet, 2. 15, 16. That thzs Epiſtle ſhould be 
| OL. II, 


Epiſthe ; that it was well known to the diſperſed Churches of 
as it is at this Day, fince the Spirit gives us undeniable Te- 
it, (when it is ſo like the reſt of his Writings, when it is 


you, By the Grace of our Lord Jeſus Chrift, he means the Spirit of. 


Chap. I. 


21 * Having confidence in thy obedience b, I wrote * 2 Cor.7. 
unto thee, knowing that thou wilt alſo do more than 1 16. 


22 But withal prepare me alſo a lodging, For * ahoogyta, 
QC 2. 24, 

* 2 Cor.1- 
Il, 


24 Marcus, Ariſtarchus, * Demas, Lucas my fellow *91,4,:;; 


4 
'} 


Chap. I. 


frons'y confirming the Truth the Apoſtle Peter had written to them, chap. 6. 2. and 10 26, 27. hey it 3x ſq expreſſrue 
"of bis Condition in Bonds, chap. 10 34 and 13.19. Colofl. 4 18. of his known Companion Timothy, chap. 13.23 
Cololl. x. 1. of his Love to, and concern for thoſe to whom he writes, Rom. 9. 1, 2,93. and 10.1. and of bis known 
Doerine, That Judaiſm had its completion in Chriſtianity; that the Vail was rent aſunder, that they might diſcern the 
Temple or Church to be laid open to Gentiles as ell as Jews, as at Antioch, Galatia, &c. he taught them. Beſi/tex 
that it hath the ſignol by which he declareth all his Epiſtles are to be known, chap. 13.25. compare 2. Theſl. 2. 17,18, 
and the general conſent of the Church through the ſucceſſive Ages of it, entitling of him to it.) I ſay, that this Epiſtle 
ſhould be t, ſeems not difficult to determine. It is conjectured that the reaſon why he prefixed not his Name to it, as to 
the reſt of his Epiſtles, as, leſt the great prejudice the Jews had cauſeleſsly taken up againſt him, as an Enemy to the 
Aﬀoſaical Law, would prevent their reading or weighing of it as they ought. It xs diretted by him to the dif, Perſed Tribes 
of Believing Wael, under the Name of HEBREW S, _ the common one of all the Poſterity of Heber by Abra- 
ham, borh which Patriarchs were great Separatiſts from the Idolatrous World in their reſpettive Ages, and in whoſe Fe 
miFs the Church of God was continued , a Name grateful to them, becauſe the Lord honoured it by adding it to his 
Title, Exod. 3. 18. and aſcribed to their Progenttor, Gen. 14. 13. of a natural deſcent from whom they were moſt fond, 
John $. 33. 2 Cor. 11. 22. And the Apoſtle Peter confirmeth theſe to be the Perſons, 1 Pet. 1. 1, 2. compare 2 Pet, 
1.1. and 3.15. Written this was m the Greek Language, as hz other Epiſtles, it being then the moſt diffuſrue Dialect 
713 the World, and eſpecially the common one of theſe Hebrews, Ads 6. 1. @s Joſephus himſelf teſtifieth ; though the 
Greck Idioms themſelves, and the Tranſlation of other Words in the Epiſtle, ſhew is abundantly. For the Time of his 
Writing it to them, moſt likely it was afier his appearing before the Emperor Nero at Rome, 2 Tim. 4. 16, 17. durms 
his Liberty, As 28. 30. Upon Timothy's diſmſſion to them, chap. 13. 23. and before the firſt of the Ten Bludy Pyy- 
ſecutions, Chap. 12. 4. about the ſame Year wherein he diſpatched other of his Epiſtles to the Churches, : 


The deſipn of the Apoſtle in this Epiſtle is fully to diſcover to the Believing Hebrews, that they had not Iyt by ».. 
nouncing Fudaiſm, and turning Chriſtians, ſince the whole Oeconomy of Moles was deſigned but to lead them to the Lord 
Feſus Chriſt, and to be perfetted in him; he being the Truth and Subſtance of all thoſe Shadows. To confirm them 1x 
the Faith of this, and to encourage them more chearfully zo undergo thoſe cruel Perſecutions, in boſs of Goods, Liberty, Re- 
lations, Eſtates, Country, and Life it ſelf, which their Enemies would purſue them with for it ; he ſhews them, That 
it was never God's Purpoſe to have the Earthly Moſaical Church-Frame to continue in the World , it being weak and n- 
ſufficient for Prieft-hood, Sacrifice, Ordinances, Ceremonies to purge their Conſcience, and to bring them unto God, but ty 
be a Type of, and a Guide to avetter, which he did reſolve to pitch by his own Son, even that Heavenly One, imwhich 
both Few and Gentile ſhould acquieſce, and which ſhould continue immovable to the end of the World. In handling which 
he inſtrutts them, Firlt, In the tranſcendent Excellency ;þ his Perſon and Offices. In reſpect of his Deity, Chap. 1. Of 
his Humanity exceeding Lingels, Chap. 2. As @ Prophet exceeding Moſes, Chap: 3. ver. 1. to Chap. 4. 14. As; 
Prieſt exceeding Aaron, Chap. 4. ver. 14. to Chap. 5. 10. As a King and Prueſe exceeding Melchiſedeck, Chap. 5. 19, 
70 Chap. 7. 28. Secondly, He inſtructs them in the Doftrine of the Heavenly Church-Frame pitched by Him, wh its 
Hppurtenances, whico exceeded the Earthly Moſaical One ; in reſpett of Covenant moſt excellent, Chap. 8. Of Gojel 
Sacrifice, Ordinances, and Adminiſtrations, for Efficacy, exceeding all the Levitical Ones, Chap.g. ver. 1. toChap.1o, 
ver. 19. where he proceedeth to improve and apply his former Dottrine, that they might anſwer their high Privileges by 


_ the way of Man's Salvation, which his Widom contrived, and his 


the performance of proportionable Luties, becoming this great Gopel- Miniſter and his Heavenly Church- Frame, from "B 
Chap. 10. ver. 19. to Chap. 13. ver. 20. concluding the whole with ſolemn Prayer to God, for his enabling of them to | 4oh 
the. performance of theſe Duties, ver. 20, 21. Adding his deſire of their candid acceptance of this Epiſtle from him. | Rev, 

cha 


Comforting them with Timothy's diſpatch to chem, and his own hepes of ſeeing them: Giving them the Churches uſuas 
Saluations, and his own Valedittion, whereby he diſcriminateth and cloſeth all kis Epiſtles, 


CHAP. I. 

Former Divine Manifeſtations, and this laſt by his $99, both aſſerted, 

and the Excellency of the Son ſer forth by his Perſon and Office, 1--3, 

His Glory is proved from Scripture far to excel that of Angels, 

7. He hath a Divine and Eternal Throne, and is Anointed 

above all bis Fellows: The Heaven and Earth were made by Him ; 

and be bad no Beginnivg, ſhall bave no End, $=—12, He only ſits 

at the right band of the Father ; and the Angels are Miniſ(tring Spi- 
rits for his Elc&, 13, 14. 


OD a who at ſundry times 5, and in divers man- 
G ners c, ſpake d in time palt e unto the Fathers f 


by the Prophets g. 

2 The Apoſtle deſigning the Convittion of theſe Hebrews by this 
Diſcourſe, enters on it ſolemnly ; that ifa GOD can awe them, 
the conſideration of him ſhould gain credit to his Doctrine. The 
God he ſpeaks of, is to be apprehended here Perſonally as well as Eſ- 
ſ-ntially, God the Father, the One Admirable Soveraign, Immutable 
Being, the Author of Firſt and Second Revelation ; Order is kept 
here in the Subſiſtence of the Relations, as in their Works. 6 Ilo- 
avprens, by many parts, turns and changes of Time, Seaſons and 
Opportunities, and by many parcels of Revelation 5 God's Will was 
diſcovered by Piece-meal, and not all at once, He vouchſafed one 
Promiſe to Adam, and ſo gradually opened further to Enoch, Noab, 
Abraham, David, pointing out a Chriſt to come, to come of Abra- 
bam's Seed in David's Family : He diſcovered here a little and there 
a little, 1/2. 28.13. © mavredmes, ſuitable to the manifeſt Wil- 
dom of God, in divers forms and manners was his Revelation to 
them; ſometimes by ſenſible Repreſentations to them waking,as by 
Angels, Fire in the Buſh, the Pillar of Fire, and Cloud, Terribly, 
as at Mount Sinai, Chap. 12. 18, to 22. Sometimes by Dreams 
and Viſions, Numb. 12. 6, By Urim and Thuwmim, by Voice from 
the Ark, by Types and Signs from Heaven, by Riddles, and dark 
Speeches, and Levitical Ceremonies ; ſometimes by immediate illap- 
ſes on the Soul, powerfully influencing it with a Divine Light. 


[ee the Flood, Nob, before and after Abrabam, I/avc, Facob, Fo. 
Jeph, Moſes, David, &Cc, to theſe did God infallibly declare it, ant 
they did infallibly deliver it to the Church by Word and Writin ; 
God was by gracious inhabitation in them, in their Hearts, Tongues 
and Hands, 2 Pet, 1.21, 


worlds /. 

þ The Goſpel- Day, laſt, as after the Days of the old World, and 
afrer the Law given to {ſracl by Moſes; the Days of the Fourth 
Kindom of the Roman Empire, in the heighth of which Chriſt 
came into the Word, and at the end of it ſhall accompliſh his Kings 
dom, Dan, 2, 40, 44. The laſt, becauſe the PerfeQion cf thole 
Types which went before them, when Chriſt ſettled in the Church 
thatReligion which muſt remain unalterable tothe end of theWorl, 
Chap. 12, 25, to 29, The beſt days for cleareft Light and greateft 
Mercies, #2 Revealed his Will to us once and intirely, Fob? 1.17, 
18, Fade v, 3, 4. Diſcovering the excellent things of Cod more 
clearly than they were before, Ephbeſ. 3. 3, tO11, 1 75. 1. 10, 
It, 12. & The Believing Hebrews were ſo favoured beyond their 
Fathers, to have the beſt Revelation of God in Chriſt mace to them, 
Manh, 13.16, 17. Luke 10. 23,24. 1 Our Lord Jeſus Chrilty 
who cometh out of the Father as a Son, Fob? 1. 14. and 16. 25, 
He is his Boſom-Son, neareſt his Heart, Fob 1. 18, the complete 
Word of Him creating the new World as well as the old, Fohn 1. 
1. His Wiſdom who teacheth without any miftake, declaring all o 
God, being Truth it ſelf, and exhibiting of it, what he hath ſeen 
as well as heard, Fob 3, 11. m This Son who naturally iſſucth 
from his Fatheg by a Divine and an unutterable Generation, Prove 
3. 22, to 32, and 35, 4. On him all the Father's Love doth ter- 
minate, Coloſ, 1,13. He is to be the Founder and Builder of God's 
Family, propagating Being to a Holy Seed for Him, Chap. 3. 3, f0 
7+ 1 The Father hath choſen and ordained him as God-Man, t9 
Heir-ſhip, by an inviolable Ordinance of his Decree, as 1 Per. 1.29. 


4 Revealed and declared infallibly his Mind and Will, concerning 


Will decreed. e All that time paſt, between Adam and Chriſt, a- 
bout 4000 years before, f The Holy Anceſtors of theſe Hebrews 
from Adam, down along the Old Teftament Church of Godz The 
Believers of old, ſuch as are regiftred, ch4p. 11. and all like them 
to the times of Chriſt, from Gen. 3. 15. to that time, g All thoſe 
Holy Men to whom, and by whom God revealed his Will to his 
Church throughout the ſucceſſive Ages of the Old Teſtament-Day, 
ſ\uch as were but God's Servants, cbap. 2. 4. and had his Will and 
Mind by meaſure, who as they preached God's Will, were God's 


compare Epheſ, 1,10, Giving him thereby Right and Title to all 
things, appointing to him His Nature, Cbap. 1. 16. compa- <P 
10.5. His Offices in this Nature, his Kingly, 7ſal. 2. 5, 7 His 
Prieftly, Chap. 3. 1, 2, His Prophetical, Afﬀs 3. 22. being Helr by 
Nature, as God the Son, and Heir by an irreſiſtable Ordinance, as 
God-Man Mediator : ſo as he had a ſuper-added Right from the Fa- 
ther, which Right he was able to make over to us, but his natural 
Right he could not, Kom. 8, 17. And he was by Solemn Inveſti- 
ture put in poſſeſſion of it at his Aſcenſion, when he 1ate down on 
the Father's Right-hand, cbap. 12. 2. Marth. 28. 18, Ejhe/. 1. 20g 


Mouth, as they wrote it were Ggd's Scgibes, as dhtel, Evoch, &c be» 


21,22. Phil, 2,9, 10,11, o Lord Proprietor, who hath Sove- 
reipn ang Univerſal Power over all, being We Fi ſt-Born, _ 


2 Hath * in theſe laſt days h ſpoken 7 to vs k+Gg,,, 
by his Son 4, whom #2 - he hath appointed # heir +a, 
o of all things p, by whom q alſo he made r the 37- 


4 


12, 


, I 


Gal.4.4, 
Matias 
, 


Chap. 1. | 


Core 4.4. 


+ſohn 1.4 


| REV. 4 ol Ie 
| *chaP«1 Os 


12, 


ceiving the Right of it in the whole Tnheritance, Pſa]. $5.27. Rom. 
$. 2y. Col. 1. 15,18, The Lot and Portion 1s fallen to him by 
God's Law, the Huir being Lord of all, Gal. 4. 1. Being Heir of 
his Brethren, P/. 2.8. and the Builder and Purchaſer of his Inhe- 
ritance, Revel. 5.9, to 14. comp. 1 Per. 3. 4, 13, 19. Poſſeſſing 
the Inheritance during his Father's Life, and making all his Brethren 
Heirs of it with him. p Of all rhings within the compaſs of God, 
all that God is, all that God hath, all that God can or will do. All 
Dominions of Go:l, Heaven, Earth, and Hell are his. He 1s Lord 
of Angels, and hath made them Fellow Servants with us, Ephe/. 1. 
21, C0), 1.18, to Himſelf, and Miniflring Guards to us, ver. 14. 
and's. 11. Rev, 19. 10, Of Dzvils, to over-rule them, who cannot 
90 or come, but. as he permits them, Marth, $. 31, Col. 2. 15. 0 
Saints, Fohn 17. 10. Rom\, 8. 29. Of wicked Men, his Enemies, 2 
Theſſ. 1. 8, 9. Of all Creatures, Col. 1. 15, 16, 17. Of all God's 
Works, ſpiritual, temporal, paſt, preſent, or to come 3 Pardon. 
Peace, Righteouſneſs, Life, Glory ; all Bleſſings of all ſorts, for Time 
and for Eternity. This Son-Prophet hath Right to, actual Poſſeſſion 
of, and free and full diſpoſal of them. All both in Law and Goſpel 
his, Moſes himlelf, and all his Work, to order, change, and do his 
Pleaſure with. q His Son, God-Vian, a joint cauſe, a primary and 
principal Agent with the Father, and not a meer Inftrument, ſe- 
cond in working, as in Relation : by this Word and Wiſdom of 
God, who was the Rule and Idea of all things, all things were m0- 
delled, received their ſhapes, forms, and diftin& Beings, Fob 1. 
1, 2, 3. and 5, 19, 20. Colo. 1.16. In the Works of the Trinity, 
what one Relation is ſaid to do, the other do, bur in their Order, 
an[werable ro the three Principles in every Aftion, Wiſdom, Will 
and Power, r Created and framed, giving Being where there was 
none,caufing to ſublift ; ſuggeſting herein his Ability for Redempt:- 
on Work, He who made the World can re-make it, Chap. 11. 3. 
{ *Atave, ſcaree to be met with in any part of Scripture but this E- 
piſtle, ſtrialy it ſignifieth Ages, and things meaſured by Time ; an- 
{wer it doth to the Hebrew p=59py which imports both an 4ge,and 


the 1orld : So Ages are here well Tranſlated /Yorlds, all Creatures 
and things meaſured by them. The Scriptures acquaint vs with an 
upper World,and the Inhabitants thereof, Angels and glorified Saints, 
the Heavenly World v.10. where the Morning Stars ſang together, 
Fob 3$. 7. compare Gen. 1, 1, There is a lower Earthly World, 
with its Inhabitants, Men, who live on the things in it, Pal. 24.1. 
And there is a Regemerate World, the new Heavens and new Earth, 
made by Chrift, and a nev Sabbath for them, Chap. 12. 26,29 ,28. 
comp. 2 Per. 3. 13, There's Adam's World that now is, this preſent 
World, Epheſ. 1.21. And the World to come, which as it is made 
by, ſo for the ſecond Adam, the Lord from Heaven, in which he 
eminently is to Reign, P/al. 8. 5, 6, 7, $- of which lee Chap. 
% 4s 


* Who being the brightneſs t of his glory #4, and 
the expreſs image w of his perſon x, and - upholding y 
all things z by the word a of his power, when he had 
by himſelf b purged c our fins d, * ſate down e on the 
right hand f of the Majeſty on high g. 

t The ſame Goſpel-Miniſter God's Son was, as to his Perſon, 
&mwacun, brighmeſs ſhining out; which word ſets forth the natu- 
ral cternal Generation of God the Son, diſcovering both the Riſe 
and Eux of hisBeing,and the beauteous and gloriousExcellency of it. 
It is the lame in the fight of it with the Fathers, the brightneſs of 
Glory, Light of Light, Glory of Glory to Perfettion, ſtreaming 
from his Father unceffantly, as Beams iſſue from the Sun z or the 
mental Word is the inviſible brightneſs of that Spiritual Light the 
Tntelle&, u Efential Glory, Light isa faint, viſible Reſemblance 
of God's Eſſence ; his manifeſtation of Himſelf in Glory hath been 
by Light, to Moſes, Exod. 33.18, 21, 22,23. and 34. 5, 29, 30, 
31. to Jjaiah, Chaj, 6, 1, 2, 3, 4. to Ezekiel, Chap, 1. 4, to 28. 
and 10, to Daniel, Chap,” 10. 5, 6, 8, 16, to 20, to Fobn, Revel, 
Chay, 1. Chap. 4. and 5, And fo Chriſt repreſented that of 
his Perſon at his Transfiguration , Marth, 17. 1, to 7, It 
Created Light be glorious in the Sun, in Angels 3 how much more 
God's Eſſential Glory, Purity, Beauty, Light, how pleaſant? But 
what are theſe to God 2 However the Being of G OD be conceiv- 
ed, as Wiſdom, Holineſs, Goodneſs, Juſtice, Power, the Excel- 
lency of theſe above all Created Beings is this Glory : No Being 1s 
Glory but God's ; this Fundamental Excellency ſhines no where as 
in this Son, Fobn 1. 14. By this are Father and Son declared di- 
ftin& Relations, ſubſiſting together, and Co-eternal, w As the 
Beams are with the Sun the ſame in time, yet are weaker, therefore 
the Holy Ghoſt adds, He is His very Image, yaeguTIe, is an Engra- 
ven Image of the Father, every way like Him ; the Word fignifieth 
a Sculp, Print, Engraving, or Seal ; intimating its diftinetion from 
what impreſt it, and its likeneſs or parity to it; fo is the Son's a 
diſtin Relation, yet naturally and integrally having all that might 
liken Him to his Father, Col, 1, 15, x Ths umogz7ws evils of his 
ſubſſtence : He is not the Character of the God-head, or of the Di- 
vine Eſſence, but of the Father,the Perſonal Subſiſtence in the Deity. 
He is one and the ſarne God with the Father, but his Charater, as 
Gad is a Father, ſo that who ſeeth Him, ſeeth his Father, Fohn 14. 
g9. He the viſible repreſentation of Him, Col. 2. 9g. y The whole 
Work of Providence is ſet out by upholding, 94ewy imports ſuſtaining, 
feeding, preſerving, governing, throwing down, railing up, com- 
forting and puniſhing, &c. All would have fallen in pieces on 
Man's Sin, had not He interpoſed, and ftopt the World when it 
was reeling back into nothing, Col, 1.17. And to this inftant He 
Preſerveth and Ruleth all, J/a. 9. 6. John 5.22, 3 T& myrrh, a 
full, univerſal, comprehenſive All, Perſons and Things, Angels, 
Men, Creatures good and bad, ſmall and great, with all Events, 
As 17,24, to 32. 4 Not by an articulate Voice, but his Beck, 
Will, or powerful Command, whereby he doth whatſoever he 
pleaſeth : His abſolute, powerful, irrefiftible Word ; He atts as 
eaſily as others ſpeak, there is no diftinguiſhing between this Word 
and Power, they went together in the Creation, Gey, I. 3, 6, and 
do ſb in his Providence, Pſalm 33. 9. and 148, 8 6 When this 


Gol-Man, as the great Golpel High-Prieſt, ſo ftiled, Chap. 2, 17. 
hat, by himſelf alone, being Altar ail Sacrifice, as well as Prieſt, 
V 6) | I, 


HEBREWS 
2 

che ſole Ffficient of ris Wor': wiriout any Afliftance + He, 

Eternal Spirit, offered up a Sicrince Propitiatory to Got, his Hu” 


———— 


2. | 
!}T 1115 
- 


mane Nature Hrpoſtatically un:te2:1 to his Divine, and expiring his 
Soul, he imine(liarcly entred with the Blood of the Corenant, tle 
Holy of Holteft in Heaven, ani preſenting it before the Ererna! 
Judge, mate full Satisfattion ard Expiation for Sins, Chtp. 7. 17. 
and 9. 11, 12, 14, 24, 26, and 10. 19, 12, 14. c By his Se- 
tisfaction and Merit, removing both the guilt and ftain of Sin ; t/, 
as God the injured Law-Giver could be Juſt as well as Mercif i: 
Pardoning it, and Juſtifying thoſe who Believe and plead ir fron 
the Condemnation they were able to for it, Rom. 2. 24, 25, 25, 
1 Fobn 1. 7,9. and mortitying-and killing Sin in them by his pur- 
chaſed Spirit, - Chap. 10, 10, L2,14, 15, compar'd 1 Cor. 6, 11+ 
Epheſ. 5. 25, 26, 27. 4 The Sins of Men, and not of \ngeis ; an 
the conſequents of them removing 2..it, Rain and puniſhment. 
which they would faſten on us, Chop, 2. 16. by his Self- Sacrifice, 
e After his Atoning for Sinners at the Forty Days end, THe aſccnd- 
ed in his Humane Nature, immortal in Body and Soul, and entred 
the ſecond time the Holy of Houlicſt in Heaven, and then ena 17a 
- . . . . pans. 
made himſelf to fit as High-Prieft in the moſt Honourable and 1m- 
movable State and Condition. He did not /?a::.1 as the Typical High 
Prieft before God's Ark, bur ſate z and in this co-operated with his 
Father, and obeyed Him, Pſalm 110. 1. Angels, and Men, and 
Creatures all ſubjetted to Him, Epheſ, 1. 20, 21, 22. He doth fir 
quietly, As 3. 21, and ſurely; there is no ſhaking him from his 
ever-interceding for his, Chap. 7. 25. f A Similitude expreſſing 
the height of Glory that this God-Man is advanced to ; alluding tc 
the ftate of the greateſt King on his Throne in his Majeſty, Ee. 
I. 4, 26, 27, 23. Dan. 7. 9, to 14. 1 7im. 1.17. He is exalt- 
ed by the Royal Father as his eldeft Son, inveſted with God-like 
Power, Majeſty and Glory, as Chap. 8. 1. and 10. 12. and 12. 2. 
There enjoying all that Happineſs, Bleffedneſs, all thoſe Dignities 
and Pleaſures, Pſal, 16, 11. Fulneſs of Honour and Glory, Chap.2, 
7. Of Government, Rule and Nominion, Matth, 28. 18. Of ali 
Royal and Glorious Abilities and Endowments for the managing ail 
things : He enjoyeth all thele as the Father himſelf doth, who ur- 
dercth all by Him, ſo as no Creature is capable of it, ver, 13. Ail 
the Power of doing all things in all Worlds, is lodged in his hands, 
g In the higheſt Reayen is ths pofſctied by him, and there is he to 
diſplay his Glory in ordering all, Ephe/. 4. 10. Chap. 7. 26, and 3, 
1. As in the happieſt, ſo in the higheſt place is He to Rule for 
ever; our Advantage is by it, Ephet. 2, 5, as to beſt of places ani 
ſtates. 
4 Being made fo much better þ than the angels z, 
2s he hath by inheritance obtained k a more excellenc 


name than they }. 

b 'lhis God-Man, the great Gofpel-Miniſter, is more excelent 
than Angels, and fo muſt ſurpaſs all the Prophets. He 52c2me thus 
by being ſurely conſtituted and declared, as ordained by God's De- 
cree from Eternity, in eminence above them by actual inveſtiture 
on his Aſcenſion, Epheſ. 1. 20, 21. A more excellent Perſon he is 
beyond any compariſon for his Divine Nature, and in his Humane 
tranſcending the Angelical, on the account of the Hypoſtatical Uni- 
on, ſee ver, 6, 7 Theſe were Spirits likeft God, and called E1;- 
hims, or Gods, ver. 7. Pſal. 104. 4. being moſt pure, glorious, 
powerful, and heavenly Creatures, Mark x, 33%. and 13. 32. 2 
Theſſ. 1.7. Of various ranks, orders and degrees, Epheſ. 1. 21. 
C91, 1. 16, uſed by Chriſt as his Miniſters in the delivering of hi3 
Law on Mount S174 to /ſrael, chap. 2. 2. Afs 7,53. Ga. 3. 19, 
The meaſure of his Tranſcendency over theſe for Perſon, Office 
and Name, is infinitely beyond Expreſhon. & 1 his was his PCcu- 
liar, hereditary Lot, due to him by natural Right, as the Heir and 
Firft-born of God, juſtly acquired by him, and aftuafiy polſefſed of 
him, not as a meer Title but a Name deſcriptive of Ms l'erſon, CGi- 
ſtinguiſhing him from,and ſetting him above all others,God the Sor 
incarnate, Iſa, 7. 14. andyg. 6.. Lord over all Creatures in Heayen 
and in Earth, and under it, Phil. 2. 9g, 10,11. Not a fimpic 
Meſſenger, but a Son, Matth. 17. 5. Fob# 1. 18, the Redezmer, 
Juftifier, and Saviour of his People, Lute 1. 31, 32. He is a Per- 
ſon of Name, famous for Power, Glory and Diznicy, above al! 
others, Epheſ, 1. 21. Phil. 2.9, 10, 11. I Atz3:gaorter, Differen- 
cing from,and ſetting above all the Names of Angels tor Eminency z 
The Arch- Angel himſelf a Servant and Attendant on him, 1 Th-/}. 
4. 16. His is moreditterencing and tranſcending in his kind than 
the Name of Angels is in their Kind; He is above whatever they 
can pretend to, and ſo a more exceilent Prophet than they, He 
hath in all Things, as well as Name, over them tie pre-Eminen- 
CY. 

| 5 For unto which of the Angels ſaid he at any 
time #7, Thou * art my Son -, this day have | begot- 
ten thee 0? And again, I will be to him a Father, and 
he ſhall be to me a Son p. 

m The Apoſtle here proves that Chrift hath a more excellent 
Name and Pre-eminency over Angels by Scripture-Textz owned by 
theſe Hebrews, He had the Namie of Son of God, and {vo had net 
Angels; for God the Father, who hath abſolute Power to give and 
ſtate all Excellency, never fail to any Angel, fo as to conftirute tim 
his Only Son by an Ordinance or Word of Power ; Sy2s he may file 
them, as Fob 2. 1. and 7ſal. 89. 6, As he doth Members cf 
Church, Gey, 6, 2. and Princes and Vaziftrates, Pj:1, $2, x, © 
always in the Plural Number as he dcth the Angels, Fob 25, 7, no- 
ting out theirPower, Place and Miniſtry, But S92 is tinvntar to 
Chriſt, and incommunicable to any other, » This is q0tca our 
of Pſa, 2. 7. Thou God=Man, Thou thy ſelf, Thou, and thor alone 
(that this was ſpoken of Chrift truly, and of Yauid only as a 
Type of him, the Spirit afferts, As 13. 24.) art my ora 5m, ty 
Ever-being Son, my Son by Nature, R977. 5. : 


| 
11S 
; TRIP 
(hb 


If 
T« 


S; 
2, Sivgularity [ots 
out his Eminency above all, and his propriety by Nature in 
0 At the day of his Incarnation, //a. 9. 6. LZrke 8, 31, 32, 35. bt 
eminently at the day of his Reſurrection waz ne declared 320 pub- 


- 
'TIH9 


liſhed to be his only begotten Son with Power, &+-2. 1. 4. 254, at 
his Aſcention inaugurated t!e Supream, Univeral King 2nd Price 
in Heaven and Earth, ci. 5. 5. polie't ut @ beittzs Nam, 1 !ac6 

L < A <2 1 v2 


Chap. I. wh 


at 


_ 


*C y 
A #47 7 
”y Pal.2.A 


= P32 : 
4 S - ate. wm 
_ , £ ___ A «= C 
”. <o— ao _ os 
- —— a > : 
= : & ” "— 
- OY : _ — A A 
2 - v \ als Lag 
> 2 > CES - 
Wa : &. b —_ þ 
k. : AO hy" ay 
fe, IO _—_ OD N 
» : - 
bY < wen of 
rage) _—_ . __ 


£ 44 
7 R- 
; 


= \ a wo « FT. - _ —— _ 
"3 _y i > = - " 
_ co K __ —_—_— 4 —— - 
> K " 
- — bo d a — ” _ ___ Ih 2: , 
_ i —_ " __ - 4 - © - _ nm F - " 
= "nd oof + -< " % y — 
> & Fg : > wm p T - - __ — -4 _ —_— : 
— _ ON - = P - - _ Wag iS 4 —_ — - 
n J — j = . _ w—_ _ - — 8 
—_—_ —_ 24 we x5 w 137%, 9 + - = pens ID £ me S—= III - woe 5 , - - = 
_ - ID he * => 5 —_—_ — To _ Pa p W —_— " "- =P 
$6n<L Rn GT am £0 —_ - ” - w_—_ a Nan, 543 £ Fm n > ; k.- a 8 
PW " ” *-4-% <4 ” * 8 3 A 4 ant mn _ 
£ n : 0 A <, ” " —+ m—_—_ 3 o ontinmacdies —_— _ 
oY - p - i T3 - FT k oy ” &S = Wh Ez & - _ —_ ” a, WS - —_— _ 
£ ha - - Tha att! - = & —_ _ 4 —_ _ ”_ OS. 4 Y "= CA Y 
44 - —_— p * J w— [ 4 T; > a », 2+ vx <0 - _ =_ > : wa _ _ -— Wm 
f =, - ER ws D ———» F. y 4 _ & ow - ee * Pd - pra wr rat - ———_— 
—_— be - - _ - ! Ho onmudh - - —_ CE IF. A " SIR D———_— ma —— 
EIr"ne NE II" > "FAO —_ : . " - — x =; fo Ren pa coop - = 
ol 4 * _— : Ce 4X bs If Y "a ”_ 7 > "wo = ©. m—__ 9 on 2 "EW « & » 
ER_ . A a_7 c c ——_ ” — " - 
« 


Chap. T. 


F Grunt, 


*Gr.7ight- 


cj s or 


a2: Power than Angels, Epkc/. 1. 20, 21. What Men cnjoy in this 
Lint attributed to them, is with a vaſt difproportion to this 3 B97? 
or B £:1e1 they are laid to be in reſpe& of God's Operation on 
them, infuling Divine Oualities into their Souls, but this Sor by a 
£cneration proper to a {ubſtantial Perſon, p In another Scripture, 
a3 2 Sam, 7,14. 1Chron, 17. 13, and 22. 10, It is declared, TI his 
natural Father. and he my natural Son, ſa as they are not related to 
ariy other, a5 they are to each other, This in the Type was ſpoken 
of Solo;07, but fulfilled ia Chriſt, who was Univerſal King and 
Priett over his Church for ever « ſo David underſtood it, P/al, L110, 
1. compare 83. 19, 26, to 30, He was the Firſt-born Son, born a 
King ; the Son of the univerſal and ſupream King, the Heir and 
Lord of all, ] 

6 And again, when he bringeth in the firſt begotten 
intothe world q, he ſaith, And let all the angels of God 
worſhip him r. 

4 ] his is a farther Proof of the great Goſpel-Miniſter being more 
excellent than Angels, by God's Command to them, to worſhip him. 
Tz ſome refer to God the Father's Speech, as again be /atth ; 
others think ittoo groſs a Tranſpoſition, and unuſual in the Scrip- 
ture, anc ſo read it as it ftandsin the Greet iext, 2e again, or 4 
ſecond rime bringeth, &c. This hath ſtarted a Query about what 
time it is that the Father ith this, and that he brought in the Firſt- 
Born into the World 2 Some ſay it was at his Incarnation, others 
at his coming to Judgment, Contidering the tormer Proots brought 
out of the Pſzl. 2. 7. and 2 Sam, 7, 14. it ſeems moſt fairly to be 
at his Reſurre&ion and Aſcenſion, when the Decree was proclaim- 
ed of his being the great King, and he was aQually exalted far 
above all Gods, whether Angels or Men ; compare P/al, 2, 7. with 
97. 1,9. and Ads 13.33. to which agrees Col, 1, 15,18, Then 
was the demonſtration of what a Royal Head he was to be, and 
how acknowledged by all, Pkil, 2.9, 10, 11, r He powerfully and 
ctfeQually publiſheth his Command unto his Angels, as recorded 
by his Prophet in his Word, P/al. 97. 7. Where the Senſe of the 
Hebrew Text is full, Bow down to him all ye Elohim, or Gods ; which 
the Septuagint renders Angels, and is ſo quoted by Paul here ; and 
the Spirit warrants it; ſo is it rendred Deut. 32. 43. That Tranſla- 
tion was commonly uled by the diſperſing Grecifing Zebrews, 1 his 
Title is attributed to Angels, 'Pſal, S. g. By their Worſhip they do 
obey the Father, and own their Subjection to his Son at his Reſur- 
rection, Mar 8. 2. Luke 24, 4. and Fobne. 20, 12, And at his Al- 
cenfion, 105 1. 9, 12. ev. g. 11, 12, So that the Worſhipped is more 
excellent than the /orſhippers, : 

7 And Þ of the angels he faith /, Who maketh his 
angels ſpirits f, and his miniſters a flame of fire «. 

f He adds another demonſtration of the Goſpel-Miniſter's ex- 
ceeding Angels, becauſe he hath the Name of God, and Angels are 
called only God's Miniſters : For the Creator of Angels, who beſt 
underflandeth their Nature and Otrhice, by his Spirit teſtifieth what 
they are, 7/al. 104. 4. t He created them, ſuch as they are, ſpt- 
rimal, intelfetual, and immortal Subſtances, the higheſt in this ſort 
and kind of Creatures, TIyzyemze do not here fignifie Winds, as if 
the Spirit compared Angels to them for their {wittneſs and power, 
but Spirimual 1ntelledual Beings, as the Son of Man is; and in this 
it is the Attribute, and not the Subjed, that which is predicated or 
ſpoken of Angels. u They are but Miniſters and Servants, who 
reveal or perform his Will to thoſe to whom God ſends them 3 Ho- 
nourable Officers of the great King, fulfilling his Pleaſure, v. 14. 
executing all his Commands, and going and coming at his beck, 
Fſal. 1c3. 20, 21, Though they are Seraphims, bright, glorious, 
and excellent Creatures, they are but the grand Officers of ftate in 
Heaven, encompailing God's Throne, waiting for his Commands, 
which they obey and fulfil as ſwiftly as the Winds or Flaſhes of 
Lightning c&1d diſpatch them ; though they are ſtiled by the Spi- 
rit Cherubins, Gen, 3.24. compare Exek, 1. 5. and1o, 1, to 1g. 
And Seraphims, Iſaiah 6. 6, for their Light, Glory and Excellency ; 
yet ftill are they Creatures, and below the Som, becauſe his Ser- 
vants, 


8 But unto the Son w, he ſaith, Thy throne x, O 
God y, ts forever and everz: a ſcepter of * righteouſ- 
neſs 75 the ſcepter of thy kingdom a. 


ſiraickmeſS wn the Father's Apoſtrophe to the $on, he giveth him the 


Name of God, and thereby is he proyed to have a better one than 
Angels, made by and Servants to him; and as the great Goſpel-Mi- 
nilter hath a Kingdom in which they are his Minifters and Servants, 
this Proof js quoted out of Pſa, 45, 6, 7. It was not to Solomon 
or David, but to the Son, God-Man, ſpoken by the Father. The 
whole Pſalm is written of him, and incompatible to any other is 
the matter of it, Tt repreſents him, and his Myftical Marriage to| 
the Church, compare Epheſ, 5, 23. to the end, Kev. 19. 7, 8. and 
22.17, x Some Hereticks to elude this Proof of Chriſt's Deity, 
would make God the Genitive Cale in the Propoſition, as thy Throne 
of God, exprefly contrary to the Grammar, both in #ebrew and 
Greek: Others glob it,that 6 @e85 is the Nominative Caſe gs,God x 
thy Throne for ever, $C, i. Ee. bs doth and will eſtabliſh it : Byt this 
is cavilling, ſince it is the Father's ſpeech to, and of his Son, de- 
icribing his Nature in oppoſition to the Angels before. They were 
Created Spirits, but He was Gad ; they were Miniſters and Servants 
In tis Kingdom, where he was King therefore his Name and Per- 
{on is better than theirs. Goda the ſingular, was a Name never 
pven to any Creature, but is expreſſive of his Divine Nature, and 
is relation in the Deisy being God 3þe Son. 7 His Office as God- 
Mz, nd great Goſpel-minifter, is a Royal one. He is a great 
King, Angels are Subjeats of his Kingdom, as well as Men, which 
Royalty is ſet out by the Enfigns of it 4 as here, by a Throne, which 
is an Emblem of Royal Authority, Dominion and Power, whence 
be upath himſelf in his Kingdom, It is an Heavenly one of a 
perfect Conftitution-and Adminiftration, and of Eternal Continu- 
Wnce, His it was by natural Inheritance, as God the Sor, and as Man 
#zt1ed r0 1be God-bead, he inheriteth the Priviledzes of that Perſon. 


HEBREWS. 


and in his ſpecial Work of Grace, guiding and conformins throuoh 
his Father, This Scepter is ſabjeQively Kight in it (elf, and effcy 
ently making all under its Power to be re&ified according to © | 
right and pure Mind and Will of God : compare 7/al, 110, 1. 
2 NIN 


2 3o 

9 Thou haſt loved righteouſncls, and bated- ini. 
quity b; therefore God c, even thy God & hath 
anointed thee with the oyl of gladneſs e aboye thy te. 
LOwsS f. 

b The Adminiftration of this King in bis Kingdom is ſyicatyto +. 
his Throne and Scepter, it isall Goodneſs. For he fo loved Righre. 
ouſneſs and hated Iniquity (being Righteous and Holy in himſelf 
in Life and Death, expiating Sin, and ſanifying Believers.) $g 
that he a&ts as to both of theſe properly from himſelf, perfeAty ang 
forever. © It may be a reaſon why he ſo loved Righteouſnef; be. 
ing anointed, or of his UpQion, becauſe he loved the one, and hz. 
ted the other ; therefore God the Sor is the Perſon to whom the F1- 
ther ſpeaketh this, d God the Father, his God in reſpe& of the 
Humane Nature, Luke 1, 35. formed by him, Gal 4. 4. As Media- 
tor between God and Sinners, Fobn 20. 17. The Head of the 
Church, in covenant with God, his great Goſpel-Minifter, e $g 
his Father anointed him with the Holy Ghoſt,and with Power,Fuby 
3. 34+ As 10, 38. And thereby as endowed, ſo exalted him aboye 
all Kings and Prophets who were literally anointed, and aboye at 
Angels having Divine Power and Authority ſupercminent to a1 
communicated to him, enjoying the beft and higheft Joy in all his 
Tranſactions with the Father tor us, and which may perfe& Joy in 
us, Fohn I5, 11, and 17,13. f The Coheirs of his Kingdom, he. 
yond whatever God communicated to-Saints or Angels; he hai 
not the ſpirit by meaſure, Fohn 3. 34. What others enjoy, it is 
from his fulneſs, Fohn 1, 16, Luke 4. 18, 19, 21. 

10 And, Thou Lord g in tae beginning, þ haſt laid 
the foundation of the Earth, and the Heavens are the 
works of thine hands z - 

g This conneiye Particle joyns this to the former Proof, tha 
Chriſt hada more excellent Name than Angels, even har of Gut 
That he was God, he proyed out of Pal. 45. 6,7. He ſeconds it in 
this and the two following Verſes, which he quotes of 7:1, 102, 
25, 26, 27. The firength of which lieth thus 3 He who was F-t- 
vah, and the great Creator of the World, is God ; ſuch is Chrif 
the great Goſpel Prophet. This is evident in the Prayer reeorde( 
in the Pſalm made to him, compared with the Spirit's Teftimony, 
v. 8. the very works appropriated to Febovah there, are ih: 
acknowledged works of God the Son, as Redemption, Pl, 102,20, 
21, Vocation of the Gentiles, ver. 15, 18, 22, b In the beginnir: 
of Time, when that came to be the meaſure and limit of things, 
as Gen.i.1, Before there were any ſuch Creatures as Angels, he was 
Febovab, Fohn1,1. And then manifeſted himſelf to be F-þouah, 
The Enemies of Chriſt's Deity ſay, that the Name F-bovah is n93 
in the Verſe of the Pſalm quoted by the Spirit : yet Thou, the Ree 
lative uſed in all thoſe Verſes, refers to Gol, the Antecedent prayed 
to In ver, 24, and to Febovah, the Name given him, in ver. 1, 12, 
I5, 16,18, 19, 21,22, of that Pſalm ; all importing one and tliz 
lame Perſon, And it is well known that xg2:G>, Lord, doth emi- 
nently decipher the Redeemer in the New Teftament ; he is notag 
Inſtrument of Fehovah to create by, but the Fountain of all Being, 
Jehovah bimſelf, i By Founding the Earth, and the Heavens being 
the Work of thy Hands, is meant, the whole Work of Creation 
throughout the ſpace of ſix Days ; He was the true, full, ſole and 
(elf cauſality of the Earth's Being, and all Creatures in it 5 and of 
the Heavens, and all Beings which are in them : He was the greas 
Archite@ and Founder of them all 5 they were his peculiar Work- 
manſhip, Poſſeſſion and Dominion, 1 Cor. $, 6, compare Fob 1.2. 
C01. 1.16, If the Heavens were the Works of his Hands and all 
in them, then he was the Creator of Angels, and therefore muſh 
be for Perſon, Name, and Office, more excellent than they, 


11 * They ſhallperiſh k, but thou remaineſt /: and 


they all ſhall wax old as doth a Garment #7. 

& The Heavens themſelves inftanced in, as containing the moſt 
excellent part of the Creation (ſuch as the Gentile Philoſophy 
eſteemed incorruptible) are mutable, as by the various Changes,not 
only in the Airy part of it, but in the AXtherial, doth appear ; tbe 
glorious Lights in it have their ſpots and cruſts, as the Sun it (els, 
both.increafing and diminiſhing upon them, and ſo as to their pre- 
ſent, natural Frame, are changeable, periſhable, and ditiolvable, 
Iſa, 51.6, Matth, 24. 35+ 0 But the Son Fehovah is unchangeadble, 
hath a ftedfaſt Being, ſuch as never loſeth its ſtate, no Term is | 
for the ending of him, His immutability proves his Deity. Ke- 
maineſt is an Expreſſion of preſent time, denoting conſtant abiding 
He was before, in, and after all Ages immutable, Lam. 5. 19. Che 
13. 8, Feſus Chriſt, the ſame yeſterday, this day, and for ev 
m The Antiquation of a Garment is a Metaphor borrowed, to ſhew 
the corruptibility of the Heavens: A Garment wears and decayeth 
with uſe in a tra of Time, it changeth its Faſhion, is anotuer 
thing as to its Matter and Form z ſo will the Heavens, as to t2cir 
Form and Face decay, they are gradually coming to an end as £0 
what they are now, 2 Per. 3.7, 10. That which decayeth aid 
nag old, is ready to yaniſh away ; fo theſe Heavens do, 5-4/# 

. I3, 


12 And as a veſture 1 ſhalt thou fold them pp, and 


they ſtall be changed 0; but thou art the ſame p, and 


thy years ſha!l nor fail q. — 

2 TI&e:Boaauy is an upper Garment, Cloak, or Coat, whici a an 
puts on, or caſts off at his pleaſure ; when it is of no more ule Jt 1s 
folded up and laid by : So the great Goſpel-M niſter, God the _ 
incarnaze, ſhall roll up the natural Heavens, when uſclcls, and jay 
them by, o By him they ſhall be altered, and made more zloriw!'s 
by new modelling them, changing of them into a better Stare, 44, 


This natural Dominion over all things remaineth tor ever,Col.1.16.; 
E Another Enſign of his Royal Dominion and Kingdom is hs; 
Ireprer, Which is bis Spiris put QUL 12 bis Goyernment of the World, 


34. 4, and 65.17, and 66, 22, compare 2 Per. 3. IC, 12 15s 
p ihe 1dentity of this Perſon is oppoſed to the Changeablcue's 
of excellent Creatures, and ſheweth him $0 be what ke is ATE £7 


C1148 


Chap, 1 


his Word and Ordinances, the Heatts of his Choſen to th- Will of 


f Gr, 


Git as 
We Ve 


Chap. IT. 


titled, Fehevah, chap. 13. 8. His Aſſumption of the range 
to his Perton, Made no alteration in him, being ſtill the lame 
moſt excellent Perſon as ever, Mal. 3. 1, 6, 1 Cor, 12.5. q As 
the Being of God the Son is not meaſured nor determined by Tears 
or Tine, io, in reſpett of his Humanity, the Years which were the 
Meaſure of it ſhall never fail; tor being raiſed from the Dea, he 
hall die no more, but abideth for ever, John 12. 34. and ruleth as 
fore-toid, Luke 1. 33, 1 Pet. 4. 11, How tranſcendently excel- 
lent is. He,who is immutable and eternal for State and Name above 
Angels ? ; 

13 But to which of the Angels r ſaid he at any 


+ Mz, 22-time 5, * Sit thou at my Right Hand, until I make 
44. vr. 3* chine Enemics thy Foot-ſtool t ? 


Cs 18.12 


*Pſal. 34, 
| 7.& 9. 
F-0 

| Lan,7, 10, 


f Gr. 14; at any time we ſhould let them + flip d. 


bit as Jeak- 


Wi Veſſels. 


r This introduceth the laſt Demonſtration of the Goſpel-Mini- 
ſter's Pre-eminency for State,Office,and Name,above Angels : The 


Form is thus; He that is God's Fellow and Right-hand Man,is more f 


excellent,and hath a better Name than thoſe who are only Miniſters 
to his Saints, This to be the State of Chriſt he proves here; for 
to none of the Angels did Fehovah ever ſay this, He never gave 
them that Honour by his Word. It is an Interrogatory Challenge 
to the Hebrews to produce that Text in Scripture,which doth aſſert, 
that in any Time in any Place God gave ſuch an honorary Word to 
Angels : This was impoſſible for them to do, s Though God the Fa- 
vher never {aid this to any Angel, yet did he ſay this, and Records 
it in the Scripture to the Lord Chriſt. And it was a Word to h:m 
conftiturivum Rei, fixing the very thing, This is Recorded in P/alm 
110, 1, where God's powerful Word ſetled Chriſt in the Honour, 
Glory and Dignity of Univerſal Lordſhip over Angels and Men, ſo 
as to Reign over them, 1 Cor, 15, 25. which Adminiſtration he 1s 
now in the Fleſh ſolemnly managing at the Right-Hand of his Fa- 
ther, verſe 2. ever ſince his Aſcenſion, and ſo is to continue. # Du- 
ring all the Time of this World, until by his Power he reduce, ſub- 
due, and ſub;ugate all to him, even every Thing and Perſon that 
ſhould be adverſe to his Soveraign Perſon and Kingdom, all Devils 
and Men, ſihjugating of them to the baſeſt Condition, to be trod 
under his Ecet, as Mire in the Street,utterly deſtroying them,when 


he glorifieth his Saints, 2 Theſſ, 1. 7, to 11, The term of this Work, 


until,loth nor denote the end of his Reign, as ifafter this he ſhonld 
not Reign, but is declarative of his Reign all the time before: 
Though his Enemies were many and ſtrong, yet it is ſaid, 1 Cor. 15. 
24, 28. That then he ſhall deliver up the Kingdom to his Father, AS 
to his natural Kingdom, which is his, as Gu the Son, that is,equally 
enjoy with the Father, and that for ever, there is no end of it : 
But as to his Mediatory Kingdom given him by choice,and in a ſpe- 
cial manner appropriated to him as God-Man for his ſeaſon, this, 
when his Work is done, andall his Enemies ſubdued, he will reign 
unto the Father, that God may he all in all, _ 

14 * Are they not all miniſtring Spirits #,ſent forth 
to miniſter for them w who ſhall be Heirs of Salva- 
tion x ? 

The Apoſtle here proves th Angels are but Miniſters to the 
great Goſpel-Miniſter,and to the Members of his Body the Church, 
and ſo muſt be meaner than him for State, Nature,and Name. T his 
NegativeInterrogation is a yehement Aﬀertion. The Nature Dig: 
njty and Office of Angels were well known to theſe Hebrews out of 
the Old Teftament, and which he repeats : They were for Nature 
Spirits, intelle&ual,aQive, incorporeal and incorruptible Creatures, 
yet though ſo excellent, were till Creatures ; whereas Chriſt was an 
@71created Spirit, and they were but Servants to him their Lord; and 
though there be Degrees and Orders among them from the Axch- 
angel to the loweſt Angel, they are every one of them fingle, and 
all of them together Servants to Chriſt, and ſo they own themſelves 
to be, Kev, 19, 10, and 22. 9, w And ſo they move all at his Or- 
der ;and go and come at his Command. Their Imployment dirett- 
ed by him; he ſends them forth to deliver his Errants, Aits 5. 19. 
and 12. 7, 11, to reveal his Will to them, Rev. 1. 1, Pſal, 103. 21+ 
©&:. All the parts of Miniſtry to which he appointeth them, they 
chearfully, ſwiftly, and effe&ually perform. x Such as God hath 
choſe and called to be Children to himſelf, and Joynt-heirs with his 
only Son, 2s have a Right to, are fitting for,and ſhall be at laſt poſ- 

{eſt of eternal Glory ; theſe Angels are to ſerve and help them on 
for to attain it, they themſelves being ele in and by Chrift unto 
this end, 1 Tim. 5. 21, and 2 Tim, 2,10, All which demonſtrate 
him to be a more excellent Perſon, and to have a more excellent 


Name than they. 
CHAP. IL 

Greater Reverence due to the Goſp1 of Chriſt than to the Law given by 
Moſes through Argels. 1----4. nor are Angels but Chriſt conſtituted 
Head andK3ng of this new World ; this proved fromScripture applied 
ro his ſtate both of Humiliation and Exaltation, 5 9. by other 
Scriptures and Reaſons is proved that Chriſt is partaker of the ſame 
Nature and AﬀeFions with us : not ſo with the Angels ; and that 
for this end that he might be a Captain of Salvation : to ſantlifie his 
Brethren + deſtroy their Enemies, and deliv.r them ; and be a faith- 
ful and merciful High-Prieft for us, 10=—_—_—. 


Herefore a we ought to give the more earneſt 
heed b to the things which we have heard c, leſt 


4 In this and the three following Verſs the Apoſtle applieth the 
DoQtrine of the great Goſpel-Prophet's being more excellent for 
Nature and Perſon,than any,or all the Angels in reſpett of his Dei- 
ty ; and from thence inferreth the Duty,thar ſince God {peaking by 
the Prophets,is to be heard by thoſe to whom h= ſends chem 3 how 
much more when ſpeaking to them by his Son-Prophet, who fo 
infinitely excelleth not only all Prophets, but Angels too ? 6 We be- 
lizvers who know thethings ſpoken to be good for us, whether A- 
poſtles, Miniſters, or Chriſtian-Members, by the indiſpenſable ne- 
ceſſity laid on us by God's Precept, are obliged more abundantly, ex- 
cecding abundantly,than formerly they were ; more than they gave 
to Moſes and the Legal Miniftry, exceſſiyely beyond that, 2 Cor.11. 
23, Epheſ. 2. 20, 19 gtve 22d with anattentive and intear mind, ſo 
I to bays hearts faſtged ty what was diligently gonttdered of be- 


HEBREWSYS. 


fore received, believed; heeding them ſoas to refain and praGtiie 
them ; ſo to believe, profefs, be, keep and do what he ſpeaks fron 
the Father to them, having Souls knit and cleaving to them, Fames 
I. 22, 25, c All that Mind and Will of God which his Son revea'- 


heard him m - 

# This Conſequent anſwereth the Antecedent in ver, 2. but in 
ore part of it,that which concerns the Puniſhment. of theTran{vre!t- 
ſors of the Law, thus ; If the Word by Angels, much more the I or.l by 
the Son ; and if Sins againſt that were puniſbed much more Sins 4- 
 gainſt this, The Spirit including the SanCtion of the Goſpe!'s pow 
Er in the Judgment which it prondunceth upon its Deſpiſers, whicl 
it could not do, if it were not eftabliſhed, The Interrogative, tow, 


introducing the Conſequent, is vehemently negative, By no neans 3, 
or there 1s no poſſibility of our eſcaping in the Cale propPſed, 
compare the cloſe of 1/aiah 20, 6, There isno avoiding the Righ- 
teous Puniſhment, which the juſt God doth threaten Golpel finners 
with, ſuch as is Recorded in Mar, 10. 15.and 11. 22, 24, 2 The{]; 
I «7, S, 9. Chap. 10. 28, 29, none can eſcape it, neither I nor you, 
if ſuch Tranſgreffors ; external Officers, or Church-priviledges will 
not excuſe any from the juſt Puniſhment and Retribution of God. 
& It being careleſs, ſo as to deſpiſe and make light of the Goſpel, or 
to reject it, Ch, 8.9, Mat. 22. 5. Oppoſed this is to the Sins of 
Commiſſion and Omiſſon about the Law; any denial of receiving ir, 
or of a Progreſs in the neceſſary Duties it requires, ſo to negle& 
them as to end in Apoſtacy. For the Goſpel-Law of Chrift reveal» 
ing and promiſing Salvation to Believers, oppoſed here to the Law 
given by Angels, will make ſafe all ſpiritual good, both for Time 
and Eternity, to the fincere Believers and Obeyers of it. Thz 
Goſpel, is called Satvation Metonymically,becaule the Subje&t-matter 
of it is Salvation, Eph, 1, 13. and it hath a cauſal Power an 
Vertue to ſave, Ats 13. 26. Kom. 1. 16. oppoled to the Law, which 
was the Miniftration of Death and Condemnation, 2 Cor. 2.7, 9: 


and by reaſon of the Veil on their Hearts, became killing to them. 
The Word by the Son is Salvation, becauſe a full and clear Diſco- 
very to it, This Salvation is Tranſcendenr, being not a terrene or 
temporary, but a heavenly eternal Salvation, delivering thoſe wha 
truly obey it, from the worſt of Enemies, the foreſt, an moſt laſt. 
ing puniſhment,and inftating them in eternal Happineſs and Bleffed- 
neſs in Heayen, This was great for clearneſs of Light, 2 Cor, 4. 4. 
and dikuſive Efficacy and Succeſs, } An Aggrayation of the neg- 
le of this Salvation from the Lord publiſhing it, It had its Ke 
and Beginning from the Fountain of all Truth, an was firft by 
Voice and Preaching made known to the Hebrews and ſuch Gentiles 
as came to hear the Promulgation of it, Marth, 4. 17. at Chriſt's 
ſolemn entring on his Miniftry above three years before his Death 
and Reſurre&tion, And it may refer higher ; for as it was moſt clear- 
ly, plainly, ſweetly, and eminently Preached by himſelf, b-youd 
what was taught by the Prophets in the Old 'Leftament, or Fol ; 
yet he firſt Preached it himſelt 72 the beginning to our Apoſtate Pa- 
rent in Paradiſe, Gen.2.1 and he Preached it inal! the Proptets, 


11 hlitÞla- 
pO! INS 


Chap. IJ. 


[| Luk.1.?: 


being revealed by Angels under carnal I ypes and temporalPromiles - 


Chap. IL 


publiſhing of it mc? ; yet this Priority may he in reſpect cf thc 
Miniſtry which he orlained to follow him, and not of that which 
went before. It was ſo Preach<d by the Zerd himſelf, the Mediator. 
Lora of Life and Death, Head of Angels, and all Principalities and 
Powers, the great Prophet ſwaving all things by the word of ls 
Son himſelf, Chap. 1, 2. and {o 18 preferred hefore the Law, in re- 


led it was, mace firm and authentical by himſelf, The Trinity beat 


made their Miniſtration of it effeQual, 4#s 2. 


who helieve it is fo confirmed. 


83, 0% Corilns:cttro 
7 C.1C3K SUNCTINYS, 


wrought by them, 


vins, the Goſpel Law, which they attend, Mark 16. 17. more nu- 


- -x2b# 
j-4 *s = 
Do I A - ed WA. —— a” > ew « AP I 4 
Gd rote = ESE ” . —— = IT . 
nq_—_— IIs . 
PR ” X 2 Ga _ 
; ok & © . 
>. A heady " ws 
A = 2 ; - _ 
A hn 
om < ;> * 


_ = w 

Gas 

- : b 
- 36 


Eihc/. 4. 7» : ; . 
5 For unto the Angels r hath he not put 1n ſubjecti- 
on 5s the world to come t, whereof we ſpeak 4; 


Miniſter excceding the Prophets of old, and having a more excel- 


in this Verſe, 
Demonſtration of his excel/ing Angels, having a World to come ſubje#- 
ed to him, which th:y have not ; for ſo none of theſe incorporeal, in- 
tellettual, Spiritual Subſtances ſo often diminiſhed before, have, be- 
cauſe thoſe Hebrews were more adicted to eſteem of them, and the 
Law miniſtred by them, than of God the Son incarnate, and his Go- 
ſpel. $s This God the Father, Son, and Spirit, the Creator who 
formed all things, and had right of diſpoſing all things under their 
proper Lord, hatin not pur under their Ordering or Government ; he 
never decreed, toretold, or promited that it ſhould be under their 
Authority. # The World to come, muſt be interpreted by that Scrip- 
ture, where it is aſſerted and proved that it was ſubjeed to the 
great Goſpel-Minilter, and that is in P/al. 8. 5, 6, 7,8, Itisa 
World that muſt con/iſt of Heaven and Earth ; comp. v. 3, 6, 7. 
It was a World, ot come, when Pau} wrote this Epiſtle to the He- 
brews, ſee v.8, It is a World diſtin from this preſent World, 
Epheſ, 1. 21. in which God-man muſt eminently reign. A World, 
berweer this World and a heavenly one which is to come,in reſpe&t 
of us, Inke 18, 32, 1 Tim, 4. % A World to come, which the 
Angels have nothing to do with, as they have with this, which is 
greatly under their Adminiſtration 3 ſuch as conſiſts of a new Hea- 
ven, anda new Earth in which dwelleth Righteouſneſs, 2 Per. 3. 
T3.tcr Peter aiferts, that Paul according to the Revelation given 
him of ir, had written to theſe Hebrews, andeminencly in this 
Text. And unto this do the Prophets give Witneſs, 1ſa?, 65. 17, 
15.2466. 22, and of this day of Reft and Sabbath in it, as chap, 
4+ 7, 9, 10. lo {jz, 65, 23. And for their Reftitution in this 
Werid ro come do the Creatures groan, A977. 8. 19, to 23. that 
they may be therein under the happy adminiſtration of the ſecond 
dam, the Lord trom Heaven. And of this the 8th P/alm doth af- 
furens; for it is not, a5 ſome have imagined, a Repreſentation of 
tne State of the firſt 42m, but of God-man, the jecond Adam and 
iis Worid; for Chrift applieth it to himſelf, and tefiifierh it was 
written of him, and is not compatible in it ſelf to any other, 
H:1th.21,16, this World to come isan heavenly World begun 
by Chrift to he created, when he commenced to preach the Go- 
{pe!-Corenant, which Angels were not to meddle with, as they did 
the Law, but was only to be miniſtred by Men, P/al. 8. 2. Through 
whote Miniftry of the Word by the Spirit, .is ingrafted into the 
fntul Nature of the EleQ a new Creature, whereby they are deli. 
vered from this prejent evi] World, Gal.1.4. and fitted for being In- 
habitants of this zzew oze, 2 Cor. 4. 6. and 5.17, comp. Epheſ. 4.22, 
Mt 22, 24.which hath been preparing byChriſt's caſting down Zeathen- 
WIS |! im and F«daiſm by the Gulpe), Luke 10. 18, Zeb, 12, 26. and 
"Re gringing them into a new Woxld #t Ordinances and Church-Privi- 


HEBREWS. 


Power, The Law was Preached by Angels, the Goirel by Gol the 
ſve of its Miniſtration by the Head, not of its Authority. m Set- 


witncis to it in Heaven, confirm it on Earth by Miracles, $13ns, and 
Wonders, and mighty. Dceds by Chrift, Fokn 5. 26. by his Apo- 
fles,2 Cor, 12. 17. and by the Gifts of the Holy Ghoft.in great va- 
ricty diftridured to his ApoRles and Publiſhers of this Goſpel, which 
I, 2, }J, COMPArE 
1 Cor, 12, 9, to 11, even tothe Apoſtles ant Hebrews, and to all 
Nor is Paul leſs the Writer of this 
Epiitte, for that ke joyns himlelFf with tliem, {ince he did hear both 
the Lord and the Apoſtles, and was confirming thoſe of them with 
whom he had fellowſhip, and was confirmed by them, Acts g. 17, 
19. Gd. 2.9. Chrift's Diſciples and Apoſtles heard this Goſpel from 
Fimand did witncls it by Preaching, Writing, and ſealing it with 
their Blood, Philip, 1.12. 2 Pet. 1.16, 19. which Confirmation 
Þr was inſtrumental, mediate and ſubſervient to 
tac Miracles and Gifts of the Holy Ghoſt enjoyed of them, and 


4+ * God alſo bearing them witneſs #, both with 


F\jark'I6, 

2:2, 12vs and wonderso, and with divers miracles p, and 
Ad. 1-7} gifts of the Holy Gholt according to his own will q. 
#r,i/1-4- 7 Here isa further Aggravation of the neglett of the Goſpel of 
£41195, Calvation, from God's teſtifying to it by the Works and Gifts of his 


Holy Spirit : Such fin grievoully, and will receive a proportionable 
Puniſhment z For God the Father, Son,and Holy Spirtt co-reſtifie with 
all thoſe Infiruments confirming the Goſpel of Salvation, with a 
reſtimony peculiarly fitted to it 3 yet in this joynt-witnefſing, God 
ts the hzohejt, and Auzzms © only to be believed for himſelf. o By 
torks 250ve Natures reach, fignifying God's being in, and appro- 


1210s and glorious were theſe than they which confirmed the Law, 
DA, 2,22,43. and 4. 30. ſuch ſtrarg: works as raiſed Admiration 
in all that ſaw them, and a-* pro&gi.Þus to thoſe that hear of them, 
or read them, Rom, 15. 19. p Miraculous Works ſuch as are com- 
patied only bv a Divine ſupernatural Power, and variety of theſe,as | 
healing all Dileaies, railing the Dead, cjetting Devils, Mark 16. 17, 
18, Work: of as great Mercy, as Wiſdom or Power. q As Gifts 0! 
tongues, Prophecies,Sc. Rom, 12. 6, tO 9, Compare 1 Cor, 12. 7, 
9,9, 10 iuch as Nature could not furniſh any with, but the Re- 
decmer 0d by his Spirit, communicating them to various Perſons 
of divers kinds and in different degrees : From, by, and for himſel! 
he giveth out theſe wonderful Works; his Will the only Rule for 
Time, Perſons, Manner and Meaſure of their Diſtribution, allot- 
ting all their Portion, Row, 12. 2. 1 Cor. 7. 17, and 12. 4, 7, 11. 


r The Spirit having applied the Dottrine of the great Goſpel- 


lent Name ani Office than Angels, in reſpe&@ of his Deity, purſues 
to ſhew the'e Hebrews, that he is ſo likewiſe, in reſpe& of his Zu- 
manity, the other Nature in his Perſon This he proves negatively 
The rational Particle introducing, ſhews it to be a 


Chap, ll, 


eges fittel for them, an1 ca!ſel by the Spirit the Kingdom of Hea- 
vn 3 it ſurpaſſing the Sinai Church-State as much as Heaven 0 oh 
Earth ; and he is now proceeding to caft down Papijm, or mon 
Chriſtian-Pag aniſm, and Mahometiſm, Revel. 19. 19, 20, 21, and 
to ſubdue the generality of Men, both Jews and Gentiles, to Him. 
ſelf, Zech. 14. 9g. Rom. I. 25, 26, when this Chriſtian Heavenly 
Frame ſhall be advanced to an higher degree by the deſcent of th 
New Ferufalem from God out'of Heaven, Rev, 21. r, 2, and 26 i 7 
ver, 1, to6, In the which the Kingdom of Chriſt ſhall he meg 
peaceable, glorious and proſperous. And to the rendring of it em;. 
nently ſo, Scripture ſeems to intimate, That the Bodies of the 
Martyrs of Jeſus ſhall be raiſed, and-their Souls united to then; 
and ſo be made conformable to Chrift's glorified Perſon, Phi}, % tc 
comp. Keve?. 20. 4,5, 6, Theſe will their Lord fend down "gy 
to this new World to have the ſame ftate in it, and to perform the 
ſame Offices to the Saints, as the Angels had, and did in the Wortz 
paſt, Mark 12. 25. there to be Kings, and Reign as the Angelicai 
Thornes and Principalities did before, Rev. 5. 10, and 25, 4, A; 
Prieſts help on the Saints Duties,and inſtrutt them in the Matters 
the Kingdom of God,and ſo anſwer in Conformity to their Head.zc 
he was fortyDays after his Reſurre&ion ; during whoſe reign in this 
new World the Devil ſhall be chained up, ſo as they ſhall not he i. 
teſted, nor the Nations deceived, as formerly they were by him, 
Revel, 20. 1, 2, 3» ſo as there ſhall be no need of good Ange!s tg 
oppoſe or reſtrain him. At the cloſe of which thouſand Years tha 
Devil will be looſed for a little while, as v. 3, 7, 3. and infeſt > 
World,when the great Lord and King of it ſhall in the greateſt $9. 
lemnity deſcend into the Air with all kis Hoſts of Angels, and by 
the Trumpet of God ſounded by the Arch-angel,the Dead in Chriſt 
thall firſt be raiſed, and the Living changed in the twinkling of an 
Eye ; and being openly own'd and acknowledged by the Supreme 
Judge, ſhall be Aﬀeſſors with him, when the Judgment ſhall pro. 
ceed by the Angels, bringing Devils and all impenitent Mankind tg 
the Barr of Chriſt, where the vaſt Accounts of them ſhall be caſt 
up and audited, and on the Charge againſt them they ſhall be found 
ſpeechleſs and conviet,fo as the great Judge ſhall ſolemnly ſentence 
them, and it be afſented to, and applauded by all the Saints, Revel, 
2. It, 12, 15. comp. 1 Cor, 6, 2, 3. and be as glorioully executed 
by the Miniſtring Angels, Marth. 13. 41,42, 43. And lo this 
great King and Lord having thus ſhut up the ſcene of this World, 
(hal return in Triumph into the Heaven of Heavens, and there, in 
the heighth of his Glory deliver up his Kingdom to the Father,thac 
God may beall inall, 1 Cor, 15. 22, to 29, # We deſcribe it fur- 
ther in the following Teſtimony, and in this Epiſtle, as to fom? 
part of it, 
6 But one in a Certain place teſtified w ſaying x, 
* What is man y, that thou art mindful of him = ?;:;-;, 
: F Falk 
or the ſon of man a that thou viſiteſt him b ? | 
w The Spirit proves «fjirmitively out of one of the Prophets, 
that with theſe Hebrews it might have the moreWeight and Autho. 
rity, by an Elliptical Speech, 7hat this World to come was ſujet to 
the great Goſpel-Miniſter, But to Feſus he put in Subjettion the 
World to come, as one teftifieth : This Ce was the King and Pro- 
phet David, a Lord and Son to whom was this Feſus, the Title of 
the eighth P/alm aſcribes it to him; he is not particularly 1amed, 
becaule theſe Hebrews well knew it, yet he Neuzgmerm, throuchly 
teſtified, or moſt expreſly giving a full Confirmation ot what is af: 
ſerted, that Jeſus is the Lord of the World to- come : And this 
ſomembere was a well known Place, and very ready with thoie He- 
brews, even Pſalm 8, x Making, it known by Word and Writing 


—— 


A 
v4 


tOr 
| Pact, 


\ there, beyond contradittion., y The Subjett of David's Admiration 
is not the firſt Adam, nor any meer Man, but the Goſpel-Prophet, 
God-Man, a moſt eminent one, the Meſhah of theſe Hebrews, the 
Man Chriſt Feſus, 1 Tim, 2.5, and to him only are the Priviledges 
vouchſafed agreeable, and by him only enjoyed. For Aim had 

now loſt his Dominion, when this Pſalm was penn'd, and was neves 

{9 honoured as to haye all things under his Feet, even Principalities 
and Powers, which Chriſt had, v. 6. Ephbeſ. 1, 20, 21, 22, and 
Chriſt interprets it of himſelf, Matth, 21. 16, The Expoſtulation 
is reſolvable : Man is nothing in himſelf, that ſuch Royalty ſhould be 
aſſigned ro gm. + That God ſhould reſpet him, ſhould remember 
and defign ſuch a Worm, and Man for ſo great Preferment, as Uni- 
on to the Deity and Univerlal dominion. 4 This is the peculiar 
Title of the /econd Adam. Adam was a Man, but not the Son 05 
Man, but of God by Creation, Luke 3. 38. but the Spirit teſtifietit 
this of Chrift, Day. 7. 13. Lord of the Sabbath, Luke 6. 5. C04- 
Man, John 3. 13. and 5, 27. b Emoxern 10 be pecultariy iT fpeic- 
ed; and with a ſpecial care concerned tor him, ſo in{initriouly, 
and with ſo great a Providence to afford him ſuitable Succour. 156e 
Form of it is an Expoſtulation with Admiration : Jt 75 an Amart- 
ment at the Diſcovery of ſo ſtupendous Love to Min, How em: tied BY 
himſelf for Sinners ? This Work of Chrif is the greatelt Wore: 
and Aﬀtoniſhment to Angels, 

7 Thou madeſt him c þ a little lower &d than 
angels, thou crownedſt him with Glory and 
nour e, and didſt ſet him over the works Of 
hands f. 


c *Hadmowous, So diminiſhed, as it ſuppoſed the Subje@ to bÞ in 3 
higher Condition before : this no man ever was, but the Maj: C#v:/7 
Feſus, ſee Philip. 2. 7, 8. d Begyy 71 may refer to his Conditions 
and to the duration of it, He was lower 4 little, in his Nature be- 
ing a Man and Servant, in his Condition Suffering and Dy1ng 3 
yet this was but for  1ittl? while, being about thirty three Years 
the Form of a Servant, and three days in the Grave, Fh-/. 4+ 9+ 
ſo he was leſſer than the Angels in the Pſalm filed EDITS God's 
Son, Pſal. 97. 7. to whom he is here comparet ; thovgi it be a 
Truth he is leſſer than God in the human Nature, e An Allunon ro 
the'Crowning of Kings at their Inauguration, {0 God viſhly rook 
him up to Heaven, ſet him dowr. on his Right- Hard on 14S | RTNE, 
and conferred on him the highe? RoyalDijgnity, Honour 00G v1ys 
chovgh the Hebrews diſelieemed him, Epheſe 1. £1, and 4. 5, 10: 
ind Phil, 2, g. f His Infiitutien to his Mecitory SCVETTIENS and 
Dominion, as the Suprenie Lord of all that GOd mage 3 Fi. 


'Y 
TY] 


f I 
HO- tic 
ty 193 lar ts 


P +» #5Y | 
On «(1-177 


Il Chap. IL 
e- and in Farth to order, rule, command, and diſpoſe of them as he 
wi'!. P/aIm 8. 6. compare Pbtl. 2, 10,11, : 
- $ Thou haſt put all things in ſubje&ion under his 
feet g. For in that he put all in ſubjection under him, 
| he lefc nothing that is not put under him þ ; But now 
F , 7hit, 2-® we ſee not yet all things put under him 7. 


g The impartial righteous Fehovah the Father, is the Relation in 
the Trinity, ſpoken of in the Relative Thou, throughout theſe Ver- 
ſes, He is God's King; for his Perſonal worth and excellencies pre- 
ferred before Principalities and Powers,and every Name; before all 
Perſons, Thinos, and Places, the World to come as well as this; 
all Angels as well as Men all Creatures where-ever inHeaven,Earth, 
Sea, or Hell, are under his Soveraign Dominion, they all lie at his 
Feet, to diſpoſe of as he pleaſeth ; they are all (et in Subjeftion 
to him by the Ordination of his Father ; ſee Pſa). 8. 3, 7, 8. 1 C'#7, 
15.24, t029, Epheſ. 1, 20, 21, 22. Philip. 2. 9, 10. Col. 2. 10. 
Accoriing to the Eaſtern Cuſtom, as Subjedts lie proftrate at the 
Feet of their Soveraign; ſodoall Creatures to him who is Lord 
of Lords, and King of Kings, as Exod. 11. 8, See the Margent, 1/2. 
49. 23. they bow down and werſhip him as their own Lord :; But 
as beirg under his Feet, fignifies the utmoſt Subjefion of them to him, 
and his Triumph over them, it eſpecially refers to his Enemies, Sns, 
Devils, Sinners, and Death, as Foſhua a Type of him did, Foſh. 10, 
22, 24. ſhewing thereby what God would do with all the reſt. Al- 
lufive tothis is, //4, 51. 23. eſpecially to all the Enemies of his Son, 
as Pſal. 110, 1. and 1 Cor. 15. 25, 26, As to bis Church, it is his 
Body, and though diftant from him, as Creatures, and ſo Worſhip- 
ping and Honouring of him with the Ele& Angels, yet being his 

aeen £00, ſhe loves and honoureth him as a Wife, P/alm 45. 9, 
11. Ephe/. 1.22, 23, and 5. 23, 24. ſhe hath her SubjeQtion as well 
as her Diznity ; ſhe is not a Peer to him before Marriage : But as 
Earftern Emperors Marry Slaves born or captivated, becauſe they 
acknowledge no King greater than they,or equal to them ; ſo Chriſt 
takes Sinners and makes them his Body, his Church, his Queen,who 
though forCondition are under his-Feet, vet he ſo dearly loves them, 
that he takes them thence, and ſets them at his Right Hand, þ If 
nothing is left unſubjected, then Angels and the World to come are 
ſuabje&ed to him; and it is evident they are ſo, by their miniſtring 
to him at his Conception, Birth, Danger from Herod, Temptations 
by the Devil, at his entrance on his Miniſtry, at his Paſſion, at his 
Reſurregion, Aſcenſion, and fince his Seſſion on his Throne,obey- 
ing his Commands, and performing his Errands, Pſa}, 8,8. z tis 
evident to our Senſe and Experience, that though he hath obtained 
the Soveraign Dominion over all on his Aſcenſion, yet he hath 

not exerted his Puwer in utterly ſubjetting and triumphing over 
his Enemies at preſent, nor in reducing all his own People to Sub- 
je&ion to him, yet this ſhall be gradually done in every Age, com- 
neatly when he ſhall come to be glorified in his Saints, to puniſh 
his Enemies with everlaſting DeftruRion, 1 Cor. 15, 24, 26. 2Theſ. 
I. 7, 8, 9, 10, Rev. 20. I1, 15. ; 
9 But we ſee Jeſus, who was made a little lower 
10c, by. then the Angels k, + for the ſuffering of Death, * 
24,2.23. Crowned with Glory and Honour 1, that he by the 
Grace m of God ſhould taſte #» Death for every 


Man o. 

+ This ſecond Ap7lication of the Pſalmiſts words, demonſtrates 
Feſus the Goſpel-Prophet to be the Man or Adam intended by the 
Spirit there; and his Humilation and Exaltation to be the matter 
aſſerted ofhim ; ſee v. 7. 1 The Reaſon or End of his Diminution, in 
Teſpett of Angels, for a little while z and of the neceſſity of his being 
Man, was, That he might be Crucified and Dye, Ph!l, 2. 7,8,to 12. 
and thereby merit for himſelf a Crown of Honour and Glory, This 
was given him for his giving himſelf to he a Sacrifice for Sin, and 
by hisown Blood to expiate it, m The principle determining, 
which was God's good Pleaſure ; he alone out of his free Love and 


14 $, 


l Favour to Sinners, ordered this, as Fobn 3. 16. 1 Fohn 4. 9. There- 
fore the Hebrews had no reaſon of being offended with him as they 
n were, 1 Cor, 1. 23, # A Metaphor to expreſs to dye as 4 Sacrifice, 
: making ſatisfaftion w Divine Juſtice, and expiating Sins, 1/2, 53. 
; | 1©, All his Sufferinzs in Body and Soul, which were many and bit- 
r | ter, are here intended, and their Completion by Death, Marth. 26. 
} | 39, 42. intimating by his rafte ofthis deadly Cup, his ſipping of it, 
1 but not being ſwallowed by it : And it isa Metaphor allufive to the 


Grecian Cuftoms, who put Men to death by giving them a Cup of 
Poiſon, as the Athenians executed Socrates, 0 To render Sin re- 
miſſible to all Perſons, and them ſalyable, God puniſhing man's Sin 
in him, and laying on him the Iniquities of us all, 12. 53. 4, 5, 6. 
t Fobn 2. 2, and ſo God became propitious and plauſible to all; and 
if all are not ſaved by it,it is becauſe they do not repent and believe 
in him, 2 Cor, 5. 19, 20, 21, COMP. Fob! lo. 15, This was evident 
to, and well known by theſe Hebrews, as if they ſaw it, the Work, 
Concomitants and Effects of it demonſtrating it. And this now in 
the Goſpel is evident to Faith ; It was ſo certainly viſible and evi- 
dently true, as not to he denied but by Infidels, 
Pom; 30 For it became him p, * for whom are all things, 
5s, *and by whom are all things q, in bringing many ſons 
#48,,z, unto glory r, to make + the captain of their ſalyation 
%& 5. || perfect through ſufferings 5. 
* p A further Reaſon of Chritt's Humiliation and Sufferings is ad- 
fp. 5 ded, to ſhew the neceſſity of his heing lower than the Angels for a 
2 while ; in which the Spirit prevents what theſe Hebrews were apt 
to queſtion, why God would have Chrift thus to dye, ©. by ad- 
ding, Therefore it became him ſo ro do. It was agreeable to him, 
and had a Meetnels in it to his excellent Perfe&ion ; by it diſplayin 
wether his Divine Wiſdom, Juſtice, Mercy and Power. Among 
al! his Methods, he pitch'd upon this as the beſt, and did by it what 
was beficting and becoming 4 God to do. He likewiſe revealed this 
lo becoming INecree of his by the Prophets to the Church, and it was 
meet$o, and becoming his Truth to fulfil it, J/2 ch. 53. Luke 24, 
X | 25, 25, 27. q For the Manifeftition of God the Father's Glory, 
| "whale tGrace gaveChrilt todie for us,are all things which have a Be- 
= | ing, and by him are all thiags as the Etficient and Creator of them, 


ny 3 TT TY w 


HEBREWS. 


Chap. II, 


by his powerful Word they are. This beg likewiſe attributed to 
the Goſpel-Prophet, God-Man, Joh. 1. 1. and Colof: 1, 16, By whom 3 
it ſhews he is no more an Inftrument in this Work than the Father, 
and equally Efficient with him,Rom. 3. 26. 7 A3a2/yme cannot agree 
with az T@ him, for that is the Dative Caſe, but with what follows 
Aeww3v, the Leader of their Salvation bringing many Sons to Glory : 
So that though the Father indeed Glorifie, vet it is moſt properly 
ſpoken of the Leader, to lead or bring his Company thither, and ſo 
it is written, Epbeſ. 2. 18. and 2. 12, He ſhewed and led them the 
way wherein they were to reach it, 1 Per, 43, 18, who though for 
State were Sinners, yet made fit by Regeneration and Adoption, 
and have their Title from their Leader, Fobz 1, 12, 13. He merited 
by his Sufferings both the Relation and Inheritance for them, Roms 
8. 14, to 18, 1 Per. 1.2,3,4,5-and fo as to bring them to that glori- 
ous State and Condition,for Perſons and En joyments in the heaven- 
ly Canaan prepared for them, Mar. 25. 34. 1 Per. 5, 10. 1 Fob. 3. 
I, 2, 3. 5 So their *Apgy22s a Prime Leader of many, a Perſon emi- 
nent for Priority and Dignity, direQting and ordering all under his 
Power, who is the Prime of the Creation of God, Coleſc 1. 18. ha- 
ving the Pre-eminency of all Angels and Men; he was p:feed. 
Tao lignifieth the conſecrating, or accompliſhing of a Forge 
Office by Sacrifice ; ſo Chriſt uſeth it, Luk, 13. 22. I ſhall be perfeQed, 
i.e, ſacrificed and compleated in my Office by Death, So F 0k. 19.30. 
by his ſufferings of all ſorts accompliſhed in Death,and by the Blood 
of that Sacrifice was this great Goſpel-Prophet made a perfett Me. 
diator, and fitted for his officiating and miniftring in Heaven for 
ever, herein fulfilling his Types, ch. 9. 11, 12, 14, 15, 22, 23, 24. 
comp. Exod, ch, 29. He in reſpett of ſaving his, is the Author, Pur- 
chaſer, and Perfetter of it to them ; he by his ſufferings and Death 
merited falyation for them 3 by his Word and Spirit fits for it ; by 
his Interceſhon increaſeth and applieth it, he vanquiſhes all oppo- 
ſers of it, and puts them finally into the a&ual Poſſeſhon of it in 
Glory in Heaven, 


11 For both he that ſanQifieth t, and they who 
are ſanCtified «u, * are all of onew : For which cauſe hes ag, x7; 
is not aſhamed to call them brethren x. 26, 

8 For, ſhews the Reaſon of the Son's Incarnation, viz, the nece(- 
ſity of Union in Nature between the ſanQifying Mediator and the 
ſanttified Sinner, The great Goſpel Minifter was to bring many 
7 Sons to Glory by ſuffering, which he was not capable of, but by 
being United to one and the ſame Nature with them to whom the 
Penalty was due, and ſo he muſt be Head of them. This God-mar 
is ſeparating and conſecrating of penitent believing Sinners from 
the common Maſs to God, meriting by his Death for them Remiſh- 
on of their Sins, and ſanifying their Perſons by his Spirit from 
their Pollutions by them, 1 Cor. 6. 11, Titus 3. 4, 5, 6, 7. Heb. 9. 
I4, and 19, 10, 14. «Penitent believing Sinners, fied by his 
Blood, and ſan{ified by his Spirit, Epheſ. 5. 25, 26, 27, w This is 
an Attribute of the Unity of the Principle of both theſe, ſuch art 
one, as is proper to Man with himſelf, whom he ſanCtifieth, and not 
competent to Angels, It muſt therefore be the Principle of Huma- 
nity, He took an Human Soul and Body and United them to his 
Perſon, and ſo became of one Nature with us. Compare ver. 14. of 
one Human Majs, alluding to the Firſt-fruits offered at the Paſſover, 
or the Loaves at Pentecoſt, whereby all the reft were ſan&ified : 
So Chriſt aſſumed the ſame Zuma Nature, that he might be the 
Head, and leading Repreſentative of a Body of Mankind, diffe- 
renced from them by his being Holy, and they finful, and perſonal- 
ly United to the Word. x The Unity of him and them in the Hu- 
man Nature, is the cauſe why he calls them Brethren, therefore 
they muſt be one, Conſidering him in the Z0Jineſs of his Deity,and 
chem in thefilthineſs of Sin, he might have been aſhamed of ſuch a 
Brotherhood but by his effeftual Word he adopted them into a 
State of Childſhip and Heirſhip to God with himſelf ; and in the 
Fleſh to give them that Glory, that they might be one with God, 
as he and the Father are one, Fohn 17, 22, 


12 Saying y, I will declare thy name unto my bres 
thren z : in the midſt of the church will I ſing praiſe 
unto thee 7. . 

y This brings in the Proof,that the great Goſpe}-Minifter Chrift; 
God Man, did call his ſan@ified ones, Brethren ; and was by the ſame 
Nature ſo related to them. The Proof is in P/alm 22. 22, where 
the Apoftle afſerrs,Chrift ſpoke what was ſaid by the Prophet there, 
and that this Pſalm concerneth him, is evident by the Application 
of other Paſſages in it to him, both by himſelf and the Spirit; and 
who reads it, may ſee him crucified afreſh there, 7 7, as the Goſ- 
pel- Prophet, who have ſeen thee, and am of thee, Fobn: 1, 18, and 
who only underftand thy Name, will teach, and make it to be knows 
and admired, as that wereby thou art deſcribed, diſtinguiſhed, and 
ſet above all other Beings and Relations to them. A Name ſuitable 
to their State and Relation unto thee and me. Thee inall thy gla- 
rious Attributes related to them as to Moſes, Exod, 34. 5, 6. 7. 
eſpecially thy Name of Father, whereby thou ftandeft related to me 
and them as Brethren, fulfilled. John 20, 19, My Father and your Ea- 
ther, my God and your God, \When he ſent this Meſſage by Mary 
Magdalen to his Apoſtles and Diſciples, to whom he was related as 2 
Brother in his Humanity, Sonſhip, and Heirſhip, Family and Houſ« 
hold,and amongft whom he is the Firft-begotten and Elder Brother, 
Brethren are one, and as one; and fo is he and his Sanfified Ones, 
V, Ig, Luke Jl. 31, 35. Job" 17. 22, 23. Rom. $.14. fo v. 15. 
29. Gal, 4.5, 6, 7. Epheſ. 3- 14, 15. 4 In the reſpeQive parts 
and Congregations of his Myſtical Body, implicitely his Brethren, 
Chrift and they are from one Father Divine, he by Nature, they by 
Grace, and from one humane Parent, Luke 3. 23, 3$. and both of 
one Fleſh ; he ſolemaly ſung and praiſed his Father with them at his 
Supper, Marth. 26, 30, inthat repreſentative Church; Mark 14, 
26, comp, Pal. 22. 22, 


13 And again b, [ will put my truſt in hich : And 

again c, Behold, I, and the children which God hath 

given me d. | 

b This is a further Proof,that Chriſt's ſanRified Ones ate his Bre- 

"_ » ys Exerciſing himſelf in a neceffary Work proper to that 
Brotherhood 


= 


Chap. II. 


+ Tohn 1. 


I 4. 


Phil. 2. 7. 


J-b2 55. 


\ 


Brotherhoo!! only, They ere all of the Fouſhold of Faith, Gal.6.10. 


Th-ir \u 3015S 15 20 believe in God, All who do fo, are Brethren ; 


Ehriſt doth fo, and ſo is a Brother to them; He and they rely on 
©ege an rhe ſame God and Father to both : He dia believe,conhde, 


4nd refit on Ged, that he woutd help þzs Fumantry to go through al: 


MS Works and Sufferinys to the perfetting of that of Redemption. 
Some lay he ſpake this in the Perſon of David in Pſalm 18. 2. be- 
caulc the 49th ver, of it is applied to Chrift by the Spirit, in Kom. 
15.4. But. others think that ſum is not ſo properly underſtood of 

-hriſt, and that theſe words are not found in the Septuagint, which 
the Apoſtle trequently uſeth as being moſt familiar with theſe Z2e- 
trews,---- but that theſe words of his ruſting in God,and of his Chil- 
are! are to be found near together in 1/z. $. 197, 1$. which Chapter 
js a clear prophecy of this God-Mar the Redeemer, and punttually 
fulfiled by him on Earth. This ſeems moſt rationally to be the 
Place the Apofile rete1s as to both theſe Texts. c This 1s the third 
roof, which though it be literally /aiah's Words, who complained 
how himlelf and the Children of God in his days were [corned by 
the Workl for cleaving to kim,ver herein was he a Type of Chriſt, 
and in him was it eminently fulfilled. This the Word Behold inti- 
mates, it being a matter of great weight and importance tro be at- 
tinded, to be conſidered and underſtood by the Church. d land 
my Brethren, Children of the ſame heavenly Father, Fobn 11. 52. 
and 20. 17. 1 Fobn 3. 1. which my Father of free Grace choſe and 
delivered on my Purchaſe,and whom he had fitted and wrought by 
his Spirit,to be brought home by him unto Glory,though they were 


the Wonder and Contempt of this World, Fobn 17. 2, 6, 8, 9, 11, 


19, 22, 24. 


14 Foraſmuch then as the children are partakers of 
fleſh and blood e, + healfo himſelf likewiſe took part 
of the ſame f, * that through death he might deſtroy 
*1C0r.15. him that had the power of death z, rhat is, the de- 


vil b. 


e The Spirit having proved the Children and Brethren ſan ified 
by Chrift to be Men, proceeds to prove, That the SanQifier of 


them, was of the ſame Nate with themſelves, and ſo confirms 
what he aſſerted, ver, 11. That th:y were of onz. Foraſmuch as 
thoſe were choſen, born of God, and given to him, adopted into 
his Son!hip and Heirſhip, and by this as well as by their Humanity 


derived joyntly with his own from, Adam, his Brethren, xexorveounxs, 
theje havirg it in common. I ve word imports the Reality, Integrity, 
Unicy andCommunity they all have of the Human Nature; they are 
all truly, only, and fully Men, and every individual Perſon hath this 
Humaniry. Theſe Fl:ſb and Blood, Metonymically ſet out the whole 
Human Nature, though the Body only be litterally expreſſed by it 
a Body ſubje&t to many Infirmities. f God the Son himſelf, -mez- 
2.yotw;, had the next and neareſt correſpondent Condition with thetrs, 
even the ſame as to the kind of it, as like as Blood 15s to Blood pro- 


perly and truly,only freed from qur finful Infirmities, as ver, 17, 
This Word diminiſheth him not, but ſheweth his Identity, Heb. 4. 
15. METES Took part, he became a Partner with the Children, and 
took theu Nature: It isnot the ſame Word as before, z«xo1y@p:z4,a5 
the Marciunites and Manichees corrupt it, as if he had this Narure 
only in common with them, making him only Man, Burt being God, 
beſides his Divine Nature, ©c. to it he took the Human, even their 
true and full Nature conſiſting of a Body and a Soul, and ſo United 
them, that in him they became one Perſon ; ſo that hence reſults 
2 double Union of Chrift with Man, 
one Nature with all the Human Race, and fo is the Head of them : 
And by his dying for them, all the Human Race are made falvable, 
which Angels are not ; and thoſe who repent and believe on him 
are attually ſanified and United to him as his Ele@ and choſen Bo. 
dy, and ſhall be ſaved by him. g By his dying on the Croſs as Te- 


ſtator of God's Covenant, and not by his Power as a God (which 


was moſt glorious to himſelf, but moſt ignominous to the Devil,ac- 


cording to the Promiſe,Gey. 3.15.) did he aboliſh or bring ro nought, 


and render powerleſs without any Recovery,not by taking away the 
immortal Life and Being, but the zeg76,, the Strength and Power 
to kill, For the .*Zvoza, the Authority, Right, and Command, the 
Keys of Deathare in Chriſt's Hand only, and he uſeth the Strength 
of this EXecutioner in it, as to his Enemies ; when Sinners become 
penirent Believers, then his Death ſatisfying God's Juſtice for their 


Sin, hath evacuated the Power as to Death, which the Devil had by 
Law againſt them, 1 Cor. 15. 56, 57. The Sting of Death is Sin, that 
gives him Power ; and the Strength of Sin is the Law, that unleſs 
ſatisfied for, takes part with Sin 3 but Chriſt by dying takes away 
the Laws Enmity, removes 9S1n, as to Guilt, Stain and Power, and 
ſo brings to nought this Power. þ The Prince himſelf ſet here colle- 
Qively tor all the reſt of his evil Spirits, Marth, 25, 41, whoby his 
Lies drew Man into Sin, and by Sin Stings him to Death ; having 
therefore ſuch Power to ſeduce to Sin, he powerfully renders Men |. 
obnoxivus to Death ; and then, as Executioner, having them by the 


Law delivered into his Hands,putteth forth his Strength to torment 
and deftroy them, Chriſt by his Death doth with Price and Power 


redeem them out of his Hand, and deſtroys all his Works, takes 


Poſſeſſion of them, and brings them through Death to Eternal Life 


* Rom. 8, 
Is, 


15 And deliver them 7, who * through fear k of 


death were all their life time ſubje& to bondage 1. 


7 The Effet of the former DefiruRion of the Devil is laid down 


in this Verſe,viz. the Childrens Freedom from the Fear of Death, to 


* which, being Slaves to the Devil, they were once in Bendage, He 


by breaking and diſanulling the Devils Power, doth really, fully, 
and juſtly exempt them from the concomitant Evil. 


k A painful 
and waſting Horror, working the ſaddeft Apprehenſions, and tu- 
muſtuous workings of Soul from its apprehended Danger of Death 


ſpiritual, temporal, and eternal, when the Wrath of God doth not 
only diffolve the natural Frame,btit makes an everlaſting Separation 


trom himſelf, ſhutting them up with the worſt Company, in the 
worſt Place ang State that is poſſibly for the Human Mind 'to 
imagine, and that for ever, Fob 18. 11, 14. and 24. 17, Pſal, 55. 4, 
5. and 73.19, and 88. 14,to 18, } When they come to the Ex- 


erciſe of the reaſonable Life ot Man, and under Conyidtions of fin, 
tacntheſe Terrors arile, and ever leave-affrighting,or tormenting 


HEBREWS. 


them, but makes them paſs as many Deaths as Moments, as is evi. 
dent in Cain and Fudas ; for they are inſlaved, and in ſuch a State 
of Drudgery and Vaſſalage to the Devil the moſt cruel Tyrant by 
their own Guilt,and ſo are juſtly, invincibly, and miſerably held in 
it. Chriftby his Death reſcueth them from this woful, intolerable 
Vaſialage to the Devil, and Hell, and brings them into the aloriof 
Liberty of the Children of God, Kom. 8. 21, 25. Coloſ, 1, 12, 12, : 


oam 1. 


T4 is read by tome,to take hold of, and ſo make this Work denied of 
God the Son, that he did nor rake bold of the falling Angels, to ſays 
or recover them ; but the Spirit ſpeaks not one word of lapſed Ange1s 
in either this, or the foregoing Chapter, and ſo it cannot refer to 
them ; and for good Angels they never departed or fell,that he ſhould 
ſtretch out his Hand to ſave them. And it cannot be underſtood 
otherwiſe than affirmatively here, which muſt needs have another 
Senſe, becauſe the ſame AF is denied and aftirmed. The Word 
therefore ſignifieth to aſſume, or to rake 10 one, ro aſſume or take intg 
Unzon, He United not to his Perſon the Angelical Nature,the indi- 
vidual Subſtance of an Angel, ſo as to redeem thoſe finning lapſed 
Spirits. » But he aſſumed into Union with bis Perſon the Seed of Abra- 
ham ; which Seed is not to be underftood here colle#ively, for either 
his carnal or believing Seed ; but it is the one ſingular eminent ſeed of 
Abraham, in and by whom himſelf, Seed, and all Nations were to 
be bleſſed, Gen, 22.18. compare Gal. 3. 16. th? Man Chriſt Feſus, 
This Man, God the Son, took of the Virgin Mary the Off-ſpring of 
Abraham, and united him to his Perſon, and of God and this Seed 
united into one Perſon, became our Lord Jeſus Chriſt, ſo as he 
might bring the bleſſing of Salvation to the choſen of God in all 


his own Perſon, is here aſſerted by the Spirit, and denied concern- 


By his incarnation he is of 


ing any Angels, there being no promiſe ever made to them tor it, 
Zech. 13. 7. Luke 1.31,35. Gal. 4. 4. 1 Tim, 2.5, If the Verb 
ſignifie 20 ſuch Aſſumption in Human Authors, as ſome cavil, it is be- 
cauſe the matter to which it is here applied, was never treated on 
among them ; and it is common with the Spirit ro make Words 
which are ordinary with Men, tranſcendent, when he applieth them 
co the great Myſteries of God, as Trinity, Son, Adoption, &c. 

17 Wherefore in all things it behoved o him to be 


merciful q and faithful yr high-prieſt 5, in things 
pertatning to God, to make reconciliation for the fins 


of the people tr. 

0 The laft Reaſon why God the Son aſſumed and united the Hir- 
man Nature in the Seed of Abraham, to his Perſon, and was by it 
made like his Brethren, and for a little while lower than the Aygels 
was, that he might hecapable to receive and execute the Office ot 
Prieſthood, by w hich Reconcilation of Sinners to God was to be 
effetted z for he could neither be a Sacrifice, nor Prieft without it? 
"Qgwas lignifies not only its being neceſſary, but becoming,meer,con- 
venient and right both on the account of his Mediatorſhip, Suret:- 
ſhip, Priefthood, and of his very Work, conſidering the two Parties 
whoſe Cauſe he was to manage, It was fit this Perſon ſhould be 
God,that he might be juft ro God,and ſatisfie him ; Adam had betray- 


? fed God's intereſt before,he would not therefore rely on a meer Mar: 


And May, that he might feelingly underſtand the State of that Na- 
ture, and be a compleat Saviour of it, Zech,13. 79. By this Per- 
ſon, God had no unfitneſs nor diſparagement in treating with Sin- 
ners, which in a meer Creature he would. For what Creature coul:! 
have mediated with him 2 Who durſt undertake it, but this Sor or 
his in their Nature, whoſe Heart he ingaged to it? Fer, 30. 21- 
and fitteſt for Man, he being near in Nature to us,and coming ort 
of the midft of us, and by it communicating the Benefit of his Ve- 
diation to us, The Intentions of Chriſt's Merits ariſe form his Suf- 
fictency, but the Extenſion of them from his proper perſona! ficnels, 
and ſo reacheth Men of the ſame Nature with him, and not Angels. 
p A Man having a true Body and Soul like them in every thing, 
which was necefſary to make him a compleat redeemer, agreeable to 
them in all things neceffary to their Nature, Qualities, Conditt- 
.ons, and AﬀeRtions, like them in Sorrows, Griefs, Pains, Death. 


Sin, Pain and Loſs, and ſo inwardly touched with them, as cont 
paſſionately and effeually to relieve them. How tranſcendent ar 
his Bowels of Mercy, Pity and Compaſſion to them ? Alas, Men 
and Angels cannot reach it ! 1/2. 53. 3, 4. and 63. 9. If he ſhouid be 
otherwiſe the leaſt moved, and deſert their Cauſe,or accuſe,or plead 
againſt them ; what a World of them muſt periſh tor ever ? He tells 
the Fews ſo much, Chap. 8, 12, compare Fotm 5. 45. a Moſes may 
miſcarry in his Mediatorſhip, and did ſo, Exod. 32, 19. but he cal 
neyer, he is always merciful. » He is faithful alſo to penitent Bc- 
lievers, as well as to God, They may ſafely truſt them{elves and 
their cauſe with him, and depend on him, he'l never deceive them, 
He will ſatisfie God fully, and give him his due, and dilcharge ca 
Iruſt repoſed on him. And to relying Souls on him,he'l go throug! 
bis Work, performing all, till they reach that for which the? truſted 
him, J/z. 11. 5. 1 Cor. 10. 13. 1 Theſ. 5. 23, 24. 5 An Officer that 
was to order Sacrifice, and all matters wherein God was concernee 
according to his written Law and Rule. This Prieſt muſt be 2 51an; 
and a Partnerſhip in our Conditions, both of 'Teraptation and Mir 
ſeries, muſt qualifie him for it 3 of this Othce he treats largely in 
Ch. 7.8, 9, and 10. Amongſt thes Othcers of this kind he 1s the 
Prime, Chief, and Head of all that ever God had, and hath IN his 
Perſoh performed and fulfilled what all of them in theirs did but 
weakly ſhadow forth. He was actually in the Fleſh, inſtalled init, 
of which hereafter. r The Compaſs of his Buſineſs lieth in all Dt- 
vine Matters, all thoſe wherein Sinners are concerned with God, 


Chap.s.I. SatisfaQtion, Interceſſion,and Bleſſing, are 215 _—_ _ 
Ab Mg 


Chap. 11. 


16 For verily he + took not on him the nature of 4 G. , 
angels mm, but he took on him the ſeed of Abra- 1; ,” 
hol. of 4 
m The Spirit having aſſerted the Deliverence of the Children &*s, 6: ;; 
from their Slavery to the Devil, ſhews here the means by which it #5 5:24; 
was effected, even by the Goſpel-Prophet, being a Man, and not 411m 
an Angel ; he took their Nature to himſelf, that by Death he might be 1at::; 
deliver them,s J/ms may ſignifie no where,or in 10 wiſe, Gnaau3dyg- 1H, 


Nations, The Aſſumption of this eminent Seed into the Unity of 


made like unto his brethren p, that he might be * a*C:.,;, 


q Knowing and ſenſible of the Miſeries of Sinners on the account of 


. I. 


edel, 


| Chap. III. 


flis principal Work is to bring God and Sinners together , | 


Si 
5 


Cerns. 
7x 2542 properly fignifieth to make propitions or gractaw to another by 


Sacrifice. This High Prieſt by the Sacrifice of himſelf, ſatisfied God's 
Tuſtice,removed his Wrath,procured his Pardon as to all Sins of Omil- 
fion or Commiſſion, however aggravated, for Penitent Believing 
Sinners,and ſo makes God and themFriends,and fits them for Commu- 
nion with Him here, and for the Enjoyment of Him for ever, 2 Cor. 
S. 19, 2I. 


1$ For in that he himſelf hath ſuffered being 


tempted ww, he is able to ſuccour them that are remp- | 


ted x. 
» The Reaſon foregoing, the Spirit illuſtrates in this Verſe, he 1s 


ſuch a Merciful and Faithful High-Prieſt, by being a Sufferer himſelt, 
which he could not have been teelinglv, but by his being incarnate. 
So many great and afflitive Sufferings never any endured but him- 
ſelf; He felt what Sin deſerved, and would faſten on Sinners with- 
out his interpoſing, though he were ſinleſs, what Terrors trom God 
within, what Pains in his Bcdy without, did he ſuffer and undergo ? 
ſuch as are unparallell'd, Chap. 12.3. w Not from any Corruption 
or Sin within him, Fohn 14. 30. Chap. 4. 15. but froman inveterate 
Enemy, the Devil without him, and all the Inſtruments he uſed ot 
his Affociated Spirits and Men : How early on the entrance on his 
Office did the Devil begin with him, and thought to have foiled him 
42s he did the firſt 4d. ? And how did his Children tempt him, 
with the which the Goſpel is filled in ſo many Pages ? By theſe he 
felt what Temptations were, how difficult to avoid Sin under them, 
how fearful it 'was to be exerciſed by them, Chap. 5. 7. how much 
fuch as miſcarry under them are to be pitied, what fore Evils Sin 
brings on the committers of it; what ſuccour, ſtrength, ſtabliſhing, 
fettlement his Brethren need under it, Luke 22. 43, 44- and how 
caſily without his aſſiſtance his Tempted Ones may be foiled by it 

x Now ſenſibly made fit by his own Sorrows, Temptations and Sut- 
ferings, he is powerfully inclined to help his; ſubjefted he was to a 
of them, to make him fcelingly, tenderly pittying of us. He had 

the Mercies of God before, and as 1f that were not enough, the 
Tempted Nature of a Man, to ſoften his Heart to pity his Brethren 

in their Sufferings-and Temptations. Theſe Sufferings of his had a 
purchaſing Power and Ability in them for us, He thereby buying help 
and ſuccour for us to al] ours that ſhould be correſpondent unto his ; 
fo as by is Bloody Death under Temptation he bought off ours, et- 
ther not to overtake us, .or it under them, he 1s habitually and mert- 
toriouſly able thereby to ſuccour his, moſt compaſſionately and read1- 
ly giving forth all reaſonable, ſnitable, and ſufficient ſupport under, 
and remedy againſt all theſe Temptations, which for Sin, or from it, 
his Brethren are afflicted with, and come to him for help. This 1s 
the moſt powerfuP* Preſervative againſt Deſpair, and the firmeft 
ground of Hope and Comfort, that ever Believing, Penitent Sinners 
could defire or have ; from all which theſe Hebrews might have been 
convinced what little reaſon they had to be "offended with his Hu- 
miliation or Death, who was their Meſſiah ; and though for State 
and Time, a little lower than the Angels, vet in the Human 
Nature, was thereby exalted to be the Lord and Head above them 


all. 

C HAT. 

Chrif the great Prophet and Doftor of the Church, as was Moſes, but In- 
finitely greater than He 1-———$. by the Example and Compariſon 
of their Sin who were Incredulos and Difobedient to Moſes, and their 
puniſhment, 7 11. The Hebrews are exhorte& fo Faith, Obe- 
dience and Perſeverance in the Goſpel of Christ, that they may enter 
into the promiſed Reff,, 12———19. 

* Phi en holv brethren a, partakers of * the 

Ul, 3. Ts ==T 2 M EE , : 
4, | heavenly calling 6, confider f the apoltle « 
Rom.1 s. 4nd high-prieſt of our proteffion Chriſt Jeſus d. 


a Several Uſes the Holy Ghoſt makes from verſe 1, of this Chap- 


chap. 4.14. ter, to the end of Chap. 4. Of the Goſpel Doftrine of God the Son 


and 6, 20, incarnate, ſet by the Kather in Office, to deal for Sinners towards 


' and 8. 2, God as their Great Prophet ; the Counſel he giveth, is comprehended 
' and, 11, in the fix firſt Verſes of this Chaprer ; and as dire&ing theſe Hebrews 


fo their Duty, fo further explaining and confirming his Office to 
them, by comparing ot him with ſes, and ſettitig him as above 
Angels, ſo above him, and to heſo valued, eſteemed, and preferred 
by theſe Hebrews : Sceing this great Goſpel-Prophet was for a little 
while made lower than the Anzels in his Humanity, and 1t was in- 
finitely beneficial to us upon tht account of what he ſuffered in it 
in our ſtead, and purchafed by it for our Good ; Therefire ſhould 
thoſe who are partakers of it, being related in the Fleſh to him as 
Hebrews, deſcending with them from Abraham, conſider, but much 
more as Chriſtians, Believing and Adopted itt him to be God's Chl- 
dren, and tanttified by his Spirit, 1 Pet. t. 1, 2, 3, 4- and 2 Pet. 1, 
i. b And made thus a Chriſtian Fraternity by the heavenly calling 
of them out of the World by the Goſpel; when by his Spirit he en- 
lightned their Minds, and renewed their Wills, and made them 
obedient to it, ſoas for the temper of their Souls they are made 
holy, and for their Condition happy ; the work of God's Power 
and Mercy eminently appearing in it : God therein preventing Man, 
ſo as he'influenceth him to hear him from Heaven, walk worthy bf 
Heaven, and at laft to reſt in Heaven for ever. © Keavoroere 1M- 
ports not a bare ſingle a& of the Mind to think on, or underſtand, 
but a repeated one to think, azain and again, expreſſed by that Pert- 
phraſis of laying it to-Heart, preſſing on their Spirits the due effort 
of Faith and Obedience ariſing out of this Obſervation, 1/a. 52. 1s. 
Of God's Meſſenger, his own Son ſent from Heaven to be Incarnate, 
with Authority to execute, in his Humane Nature, his Prophetical, 
45 all his Offices, and with Authority to ſend forth his Apoſtles to do 
their part, John 20: 21. which is no more than is intimated in that 
Title, the Meſſenger of the Covenant, Tſaiah 42. 19. and Mal. 3. 1. 
That was to propoſe it to, and confirm it wit! them. This was he 
by whom Moſes defired God's MeTaze might be f-nt to them, Exod. 
4. 13. and whom he foretold ſhould bring it, Deut., 18. 15. Aﬀs 3. 
22) 23. & The Son is the great Goſpel-Hiz*- Frief, to deal in all 
matters with God for them, Cha#y. 5.17%; The OF:2:£ divided thong 
other Perſons in the Old TeſtantOdt-Chiutcr wet all anited in his 


Perſon, he oth tranſcend ther? #5; 29/35 4 igft-brieft Peciliar to 
Vol: II; 


HEBREWS. 


the Called and SanRtiticd Ones of God, of which all preceding were 
faint Reſemblances and Types ; He, the moſt excellent Miaitter of 
the Chriſtian Faith and Religion profetied by them : being Anointed 
unto all theſe Offices in the Fleſh by the Father with the Holy Ghef:. 
Chap. 1. 9. and being 7ejws 2 Saviour, out Emmanuel, God on our 
fide, faving his People from their Sins, and re-unitins them to God 
Mat. 1.21, 23. oh. 17. ZTRzAF, 23% 7 ws 


e The Spirit intorceth the Duty counſeiled on them from the Fi- 


Parallel with Mo/ex whom he did exceed. 
form all he was intruſted with, according to the intention and end 
of his Commiſſion. He did mott taithfully reveal God, John 1. 18 
and his whole faving Will to whom God ſent him, 7ohn 3. 31, tc 
34. and 5. 34. and 8.28,38. As his great Prophet, 4A&s 3.22. ] He 
as faithſully diſcharged the Office of his Prieſthood in ſacrificing him- 
ſelt to atone God for Sinners, and as faithtully intercedes for all with 
him unto this diy, and will do fo for ever, with all Truth and Fide- 
lity diſcharging his Truſt, Chap. 7. 24, to 28. and 9g, 1t, x: 14 
24,25, He was taithful in fulfilling all his Types, and in chanze and 
finiſhing all the Ceremonial Conſtitutions, and filling them up with 
Goſpel ones, according to God's Will revealed to him about it. He 
was true to his Father, who afp-znted and conſtituted him to theſe 
Offices, and folcinnly 1nveſted him 1n them n:44ez9fs here not ſ1sni. 
tying the making of a Creature, but the making of an Officer, the 
Pe;jon exiſting before ; He pats him 1ato this tpecial Charge and Of- 
fice by anointIng him fer it, Ads 2.35. f Mifes was the [ewiſh 
Mediator, and brouzht them the Law Mora!, Judicial, and Ceremo- 
nial trom God ; as he was highly ctteemed by them, 1o God teſtih- 
eth of his Fidelity, Cirift was not only hke to him in Fidelity, 
but as to both the truth and degrec of it exceeding him. 3/9e, 
kept to his Pattern ſhewn him tn the Ylount, and Chriſt fultilled in- 
tirely his Fathers Will, 72bn 5.30, and £.32. and is preferred to him, 
Moſes was 1o in the whole Church of Trav, ft out by this Metaphor ot 
a F:ſe ; but Chriſt in all God's Howie and Family both in Heaven 
and in Earth ; not the leaft thing that concerned the Family, but 
Chriſt fulilled ; not the meaneft perſon in it, but he careth for 
and faveth it. A : 

3 For this man was counted worthy of more giory 
than Moſes g, inaſmuch as* he who hath builded the 
houſe hath more honour than the houſe þ. 

£ The Spirit proves to the Hebrews, that the Goſpel-Propliet was 
not only like to, but more excellent than their greateſt Prophet, and 
who hath familiarity with God beyond others, as God tcſtifieth, 
Namb. 12.6, 7, 8. This he proves by an undeniable ſuppoſition 
that God is better than Man, ſuch is Chriſt ; which he demonſtrates 
by a Work of God, Hu making the Church and all things. If he made 
the Church, then he is better than the whole Church, and worthy of 
more Honour than Mo/zs, who 1s but a Member of it. For ths, Man 
15 not in the Original : This G5ſpe/-Prophet, who was God as well as 
Man, the Apoſtle and High-Prieft of Chriſtians, was efteermed and ac- 
counted by God the Father the beſt Judge of worth, and who ap- 
pointed him to his Offices : He treated him more honourably thari 
Moſes, as he deferved it, having real Excellency and Worth in him- 
ſeit. He was God's Son, Moſes his Servant ; he lay in God's Boſom 
ſaw his Face, was his Fellow, Zech. 12. 7. Fobn 1. 14, 18, Miſes 
only heard his Voice, and faw his Back-parts, Exod. 23. 19, 20, 23, 
and 34. 5, 6,7. Moes's Face only ſhined, but Chriſt's Perfon was 
intirely glorious, ver'e 29,30. 2 Cor. 3. 7, Compare Matth. 15. 2 
to 6. 2 Pet. 1.17. h He is the cauſe Principal, Efficient and Archi- 
tet of this Building, not a Stone is laid in it without him. By this 
Metaphor of hoy/e to which it relateth, is meant God's Spiritual Buil- 
ding and Temple, 1 Cor. 3. 10, 15,17. Stiled God's Houfhold or Kx- 
mily, Ephef. 2.19, to 22. In ſum, God's Church, built by and on 
Chriſt, of which 32s was but one living Stone or Member, x Pet 
1.4, to 8. Therefore this Builder ought to be eſteemed and honour- 
ed above the Church, or 39/25 a Member of it. 

4 For every houſe is builded by ſome man z, bur * 
he that builr all things zs God &, 

z The excellency ot this Builder is evinced by his [Nature and Pre- 
ference beyond his Building, as ahy Man is beyond his; for every 
Earthly Artincial Building, a material Houſe built for Habitation 
though it may Metaphorically and Ari2logically be underſtood of 2 
Common-Wealth, or Political one, whicit 1s contrived, framed, and 
raiſed by fome Man ; vet an Efe& can't produce it ſelf, nor a Houſc 
raife it felt; both muſt havea Cauſe, both the Houſe wherein 3/5 
was faithful, and Chriſt's Houſe, h But he who built his Church 
in all Ages, whether the 74/7; or Chriſtian, and all things about 
it, of which we ſpeak, and a!l things clte, Matth. 16. 18. Fobn I 
I; 3. Col. 1,20. He # Gd eflentially; and Chriſt doing God's 
work, and building all things, is not by Name only, but by Nature, 
GOD. The whole World is his Workmanſhip, but the Church is 
the moſt rare, curious, and excellent piece of it. Chriſt is not part 
of the Houſe, as 2oſes is, but the Builder of it ; He is the Creator 
_ Builder both of the Ehurch and Him, and fo infinitely above 

im. 

5 And Moſcs verily was faithful in all his houſe as 2 
Servant /, tor a te!timony of thoſe things which were 
to be ſpoken after x. 

I The Golpel-Minifter doth not only cxcel foes as much as « 
Builder doth his Work, but as a Son doth a Servant, proved in this, 
and verſe $* Your great Legal Prophet, in whom many of You 
Hebrews truſt, John 5. 45. did truly and fully reyeal, and do what 
God charged him, 1n mimftringſis Will to his Church, Exod. 40. 
16. to 34. He did not diminiſh from, nor. add the leaſt to God's 
Charge, $2, Numb. 12.7, As a Miniiter, Miſes was as faith- 
ful as any God had, not a Slave, or a Drudge, but a fee, willing, 
ingenuaus Servant, mot ary 3s obſequiouſly addiQting himſelt 
' ir> that honourable Place | and Office of great Truft, to which God 


called him ; 4 - "0c; aae- a Prophet and a Prince,inſpeRing 
ad ordering atttinags > P God's Will; inall Chriſt's Houſc 
TEY 


vg 


2 Who Was taithtul tro him that * appo:nred him e, *C 
as alſo F Moles was fir bf) in 11 his houſe # 'F 


delity of that grand Goſpel-Minitter in his Offices z exemplitied in a ! © 
He did mott cxatily per- ** 


Chap. IF. 


Io. 


, 4 


— 
DE ORE 
—— 
_ "us 
PER. -4 
_— COT = 


_—_ 
= 


&< bo 
oy - 
—_— 36a 
of ” £ 
Ot O_o ao —_—— -. Ao ” 
7 
- w 


Chap. III. 


and Family, his Church, he is but a Servant. # His faithfulneſs was 
evident in his bearing true Witneſs to the Church, of all God made 
known tohim, that they might not be uncertain of the Truth ; even 
all that Truth, which was more fully and clearly to be ſpoken by the 
Prophets after him, and by Chriſt and his Apoſtles ; but which the 
Spirit thall ſpeak to them further concerning Chriſt and his Church in 
this Epiſtle, John 5. 45. In which is infinuated, That Chriſt was the 
Truth himſelf witneſſed to by Moſes, who was a Witneſs of an Infe- 
riour degree, though in his Work faithful, and conformed unto 
Chriſt. 

6 But Chriſt 2s a Son over his own houle 7, 


* * whoſe houſe are we o, t if we hold faſt the con- 
« fidence 7, and the rejoycing of the hope firm unto the 


T Mat. 24. 
13: 


end 7. | 

n the Anointed Goſpel-Prophet by God the Father, Chap. 1. verſe 
9. who was eminently faithful and true to his Truſt, who is Heir and 
Lord of all, and therefore by the Law of Nature and Nations 15 above 
the beſt Servant, Gal. 4. 1. Who is the Head and Lord over his 
own Church, which he purchaſed by his own Blood, Ads 20.28. 
and built for himſelf ; Moſes was in it but a Servant, fulfilling his 
Maſter's Will and Pleaſure, and ordering all. in it agreeable to 1t. 
"0 The Hebrews perſonal Priviledge, as well as the Prophets excellen- 
cy, perſuading and obliging them to know by conſideration, what 15 
repreſented to them, and to influence their Hearts to a perſeverance 
under his Teaching and Government in their Chriſtian Courſe, be- 
cauſe they are Parts of his Houſe, and Members of his Church; a 
particular Houſe and Body, and Church to Him, and Members 
of the Catholick One. A Temple wherein God doth inhabit and 
dwell by his Spirit, 1 Cor. 3. 15, 17. compare Fpheſ. 2.27. and Zo 
17. 127i. 3.15. A Howſehe will glorifie and perfe& with his own 
preſence, and which he will fill with tranſcendently more Glory, 
than he did the litera] Temple, Exod. 40. 34, 35. 2 Chron. 7. 1, 2. 
Jia. 6.1, 5. compare Haggai 2. 6. But how compleatly ſhall 1t be 
filled with his Glory in Heaven 2? Phil. 3. 21. How ſhould ſuch a 
zlorious State influence them to a ſincere perſeverance in his Religion. 
p A tenacing hr/ding, as with both hands, with our utmoſt Strength 
againſt all Infinuations and Temptations of all Adverſaries whatſoc- 
ver. which would cither intice or force them from it. Naggymnz Th: 
tm. Bo Is an ingenuors, bold, and confiacnt profeſſion of our Hope before 
all the World, without doubting, wavering, or feartul ſhaking ahout 
what is the true objet of it, let the Perſecutions or Sufferings for it 
be what they will, Ape here is a firm ExpeRation of Salvation in 
Eternal Glory by Jeſus Chriſt. It neceſſarily includes in it Fnth, 
for we cannot hopefor that we do not belreve ; And Faithrepreſent- 
inz to the Soul from the Goſpel, Chriſt purchaſing, and the Father 
in Him covenanting and promiſing to give 1t to us if we truly believe 
in, and ſincerely obey him, ſo as we may on the ſureſt and beſt 
grounds look out for it, and expe it, verſe 14. chap. 11. Ads 25. 
5, 7. compare Col. 1. 5, 23. Titus 2.13. 1 Pet. 1. 3. q This Hoje 
keeps up the Soul ina joyous and glorious Condition under all threat- 
ning Evil; it makes Chriſtians glory in Tribulation, Rom. s. 2, 3. and 
12.12. Rejoycing in want of ſenſible good, 2 Cor. 6. 10. compare 
1 Pet. $.10. Both this confidence and glorying of Hope muſt be re- 
tiined firm to the end. Perſevere they mult in the exerciſe of them, 
with ſtability and conſtancy.till they reach the Salvation of theirSouls, 
Cl. 1.23. I Pet. 1.5. to 10. which Chriſtians are not to truſt to 
their own power to compaſs, but on the continued afliſtance of God 
in the uſe of thoſe means that He hath appointed thereunto, who 
will never be wanting to ſuch who do ſo rely on Him, and conſtant- 
ly ſeek it from Him, 1 Cor. 1. 8, 9. ; 
' 7 Wherefore, as the Holy Ghoſt faith 7, * To day 
if ye will hear his voice /. | 

7 The Spirit inforceth his Counſel for theſe /7ebrews, improve- 
ment of his Dodrine about the Goſpel- Prophet, by alledgins a ſad 
example of their Fathers refuſing to hear and obey Him, trom verſe 
7. to 11. The Allegation might be beſt placed in Parentheſ1s, and 
the introduftive Ilative Particle Wherefore, may refer to verſe 12, 
Take heed, Brethren. As the Spirit, the Holy One, that third Relati- 
on in the Trinity, whoſe Eſſence is Holineſs, is the Author. of what 
the Pſalmiſt doth write, and 1s here quoted by him, Pſal. 95. 7. to 
12. ſo that the Example regiſtred is true and infallible, and ſhould 
ſuitably affe& them, reading it. / Every preſent time, wherein the 


great Builder and LORD of God's Church ſpeaketh to them; God 


would not have a hearer of his Prophet to procraſtinate a Day, but 
to be exerciting all thoſe internal As, which this Word of Senſe 
Hear doth comprehend, ſuch as reacheth the Heart as well as the 
Ear, if you will attend, intend, believe, Ive and obey ; a hearing bet- 
ter than all external Sacrifices, 1 Sam. 15.22. The Angel of the 
Covenant ſpeaking his Mind and Will to them by 27ſes and the Pro- 
phets, which was for the matter of it Faith in God's Covenant, made 
with them in and through Chriſt, Pſal. 95. 7. compare Fxod. 23. 
20, 2I, 22, 23+ ; 

'$ Harden not your hearts, 7 as in the provo- 
cation z, in the day of temptation in the wilder: 
nels w : | 

t Tohelp in the former Duty the Spirit ſubjoyns this negative 
Countel, that is ſtiled hard, which will not yield to any Impreſſion : 
Make not your Heart a Stone, ſo as not to underftand, beheve, or 
obey God's Voice. to it, Deut. 15. 7. and 1 Sam. 6.6. For God re- 
Guires them to be his Fleſhly Tables to write his Will on, 2 Cer. 3. 3, 
The hardening of this part 1s the hardening of the whole Perſon, 
and when hardened by themſelves, is provoking God's judicial har- 
dening of them to their Deſtrution. u« 't» mi mpamngaopi. In 
The bitter contention, comprehending in it both Work, Scaſon, and 
Place, Called Meribah, Numb. 20.13, 14. Names of Places and 
Perſons expreſt by Words of the ſame fſignification, though not 
of the ſame found. w In the day of Maſſah, when Tj-ael in the 
Wilderneſs did murmur and ſtrive againſt, and vexed God ( after 
He had divided the Sea for 'them ) for their want of Water, Exod. 
17. 2,7. Deut. 5.15, and 33. 8, That bitter Conteſt of | Unbe- 


HEBREWS. 


! 


| 


vet after the fight of ſo' many Miracles; when they cried 'out, Is 
the Lord among us ? Fſal.c5.8, It may alſo refer to the whole | 


derneſs. | | 

9 When your Fathers tempted me x, proved me » 
and ſaw my works forty years's. | ” 

x In the time and place forementioned, the Fathers from wh 
you derive your Being and Corruption, yet glory 'in them a 
their Traditions, whole ſtate is aggravated from your Line of "og 
ceſſive Rebellion, As 7. 61, 52, 53. They have imbittered _ 
Spirit by their Unbelief : For upon the want of Water, they i 
ſtioned his Power, Wiſdom, Truth and Providence, to the deniat 
of all, and ſometimes multiplied it, Numb. 15, G&c. y A difoon- 
tented quarrel with, and ſcrutiny of Chriſt the Redeemer, that :: 
He would not ferye their Luft, they would deny Him, and Apoſts- 
tize from Him, and return to Fgypr, notwithſtanding their havin 
ſuthicient proof of Him, yet they would contend with Him, 1 "— 
Io. 9. X\ All the Redeemers Miracles, which he wrought tor them 
in Egypt, and the -Wilderneſfs, they ſaw them plainly and preſently 
on their tempting Him ; Miracles of Mercy and of Puniſhments, þ\ 
Fire, by the Earth opening, by Fiery Serpents, by the Sword. ty 
conſuming 600000 of them; all which were Evidences ſufficicns +; 
convince any of the wickedneſs of miſtruſting Him, Dent. 29. : 2 4. 
This hardening of. their Hearts yet continued Forty Tears. "til 
all but two of them, 7oſhua and Caleb were conſumed : God 
by their Sin was ſo grieved with them, after ſuch experience 
of His Power for ſo long a time, See Fxod. 32. 19, Nump. 
I4. 22. 

10 Wherefore I was grieved with that gene ration o, 
and ſaid, They do alway err in their hearts 6, and 
they have not known my ways c. 

a Becauſe they thvs tempted and proved him by hardening their 
Hearts in Unbelicf Forty Years, God the Redeemer, 1(aiah 63. 15. 
1 Cor. 10. 9. was grieved, is attributed to him improperly, who iz 
not ſubje& to Paſſions, but as Men grown impatient with grievous 
and opprethve Burdens ; fo He exprefleth his diflike, diſdain cf them; 
and reſolution fo bear no longer, as Amvs 2. 13. They ſplit on Him, 


as a Ship on a ſharp point of a Rock, ſo as God hath loſs, offence, 


and trouble by it ; and all of them did fo carry it to Him, the whole 
Age of them, but Caleb and 7oſhua, Pſal. 95. 10. b They follow 
Deceit and Lying in their Dofrine and Worſkip with all their heart, 
ſo that it 1s diffuſed through their Perſons, and that ſeat of Truth is 
made a depth of Err, to the ſtupifving of their hearts, even to ve- 
ry madneſs, and this :vas their ſtate all their time.” c Notwithſtand- 
ins God's Works were among them and his Word, yet they would 
not know his Mind, ſo as to approve, love, and walk in God's wazy:, 
His Law, Doftrine, revcaled Truth and Commands were all caſt he- 
hind their Back, Ezehk. 23. 35. 


Chap. ] 


Forty Years time of their Murmuring and*FTewpting him in thew;! 


ll 


11 50 I ſware in my wrath d- + They ſhall not en. TITR 


tcr into my reſt e, 

d Such was their Provocations and Temptations of their Redeen- 
cr, that he determined their Puniſhment ; the certainty of which he 
axt by an irreverſible Oath, which is the higheſt confirmation of Ven- 
geance when 1t cometh from Wrath ; as of his Promiſe when it ifſu- 
cth from Grace, Numb. 14. 27, 28, to 35, Pſal. 95. 11, compard 
Chap. 6. 17, 18. And the Spring of it here is Wrath, inraged by 
their Murmurings and Unbelief. e The Puniſhment is expreſt in an 
expoſtulatory form, which 1s vehemently afferting the negative of the 
Queſtion ; They ſhall never enter into my Reſt. If they enter in, then 
[ am neither True nor God. The Reſt litera] was the Land of Cara- 
an, Deut. 12. 9. inthe Truth of that Type, Heaven. It is the Re- 
deemer who ſpeaks this, whoſe Reſt it 1s by way of Efficiency, Pur- 
chaſe, and Donation ; he gives entrance into it, and ſhuts out of it, 
Matth. 7.21, 22, 23. This is a ſhutting them out of all Peace, in- 
to Eternal Sorrow, Anguiſh, Diſtreſs and Trouble, and every other 
Evil contrary unto this Reſt. 

12 Take heed Brethren, leſt there he in any of you 
an evil heart of unbeliet- g in departing from the liv- 
ing God þ, 

f Here the Spirit applieth the former dreadful example of Sin 
and Judgment to the Hebrews, to forewarn them hoyw they ſinned 
as theſe did, leſt they partake of the like Vengeance, and ſo enters 
his Caution againſt Unbelief, Bxim: ſignifies not an a& of Sizht, 
but of the Mind, Circumſpedion, Watchfulneſs, and Heed, taking 
cxaQeſt caution of the Evil forbidden, Chap. 12. 15, 25. 1 Cor. 
8.9. Brethren they were to Paul in the Fleſh, and more ſo as 
Trae Believers in Chriſt, he cautions them particularly, one by one, 
leſt any Root of Bitterneſs ſhould be amongſt them, Chap. 12. 1 5« 
g The Heart 1s the firſt, and proper, and chiefeſt Subje& wherein 
all Sin riſeth, and from thence iflueth into Words and Works, 
Matth. 15. 18, 19. compare fames 1.14, 15. This comprehend- 
cth the Mind, Will, Aﬀedtions, the whole inward Man ; and this 
Heart in every Man 1s naturally and habitually Evil, continually 
forging and framing of it, Gen. 6, 5. fcompare Jerem. 17. 9. Al- 
mighty Grace only can change this Heart, yet it works by Counſel, 
and makes the Soul willing to uſe the means appointed to? effet it. 
UNBELIEF, though but in it ſelf, is but a denial to aflent 
to, or rely on the Will of God revealed to it, yet is the Spring and 
Fountain of all other Sin, the teeming Womb from whence all iſlu« 
eth, as. Uncleanneſs, Idolatry, Unrighteouſneſs, Superſtition, doc. 
It was the hardening Sin of their Fore-fathers, they would not ie- 
lieve, and then did Murmur and Rebel : It is the Root of Apoſtacy, 
Men breaking their Covenant. with God in Chriſt, do then deſert 


Him : Againſt this Perfidious, Impious, perverted Temper doth he 


caution them to watch, that neither for meaſure nor ſeaſon they ever 
do admit or allow it ; that there be not at all in the leaſt degree, or 
at any time ſucha baſe, malignant quality in their Hearts, Rom. 11s 
20,21. :.h, Turning away, ſtanding off, and ſeparating the Heart, 1t 
implies in it a real, total, final defe&ion ; aRual and formal Apo- 


ſtacy from him whom they had owned and received, and is atual 


Rebellion againſt their Lawful Soveraign, by turning either Jews or 
Heathens, and renouncing the Chriſlian Religion and its Author, 
who is the Living God, not only formally as oppoſed, to dead Idols, 


but efficiently the Author and Fountain of all ſorts of Life, but cſpe-. 


cally 


4 {l 4 
ſha! "ror. 


( 


| Chap. IIL. 


cially of Spiritual and Eternal Lite, John 5:. 19, 20, 21, 25, 8s: 
which Living God 15 our Lord .Jeſus Chriſt, terſe 7. whoſe Voice 
they were to hear, who was tempted, by their Unbelief in the Wil- 
derneſs, 1, Cor. 10. 9. who gave the Lawto themat Sinai, Chap. 12. 
26., So that to Apoſtatize from lym and his Religion, is to Apo- 
ſtatize from God, and to renounce Eternal Lite, andſte tubjeRt them- 
ſelves to Eternal Puniſhments, which he ever /iveth to 1aflict on 
them ; Unleſs they took heed to avoid this Unbelief, it was impotſi- 
ble for them to perſevere inChriſtianity, when threatned with Perſe- 
cutions, and the loſs of Peace, Liberty, Safety, Eſtates, Honours, 
Relztions, and Life it ſelf for.it. | . 

13 Burt exhort one another daily, whilſt it is called 
To day 7, leſt any of you be hardened through the 
deceittulneis of fin &. 

i The means to avoid the former Evil is, to Exhort which, as a prt- 
vate Duty, is an earneſt frequent calling on, ſtirring up, or perſua- 
ding, incouraging to Perſeverance in the Chriſtian Religion, and to 
put away all Heart- Evil, eſpecially Unbelief, which traineth to Apo- 
Itacy; to which are ſubſervient God's Precepts, Promiſes, Threat- 
ninzs ſuitably applied by them: And this not only privately, but ef- 
p<cially publickly, by the regular Miniftration of the Word and Or- 
dinances to the ivhole Society of Chriſtians, as they are perſonally 
obliged to it, beinz Members one of another, 1 Cor. 12. 25, 27- 
And this they are todo inſtantly, for no Man 1s fure what may be on 
the Morrov., he being but a Day's Man, living, and ſupplied, as 
working by the day ; ſatficient to the Day is the Duty as well as the 
Evil init, Matth.6.11, 34 Whilſt then the Day of Grace and Re- 
pentance laſts, in which God calls and intreats, and will hear and 
help the opportune time of exhorting, the very inſtant wherein God 
expettcth it, verſe 7. Pſal. 95.7. And every one as thus to look 
to ancther, muſt begin with himſelf, leſt any miſcarry ; Charity, 
eſpecially as to this, ſhould begin in every Chriſtian at home. h Leſt 
themſelves or others refuſe the Goſpel tendred, or Reje& and Apo- 
ſtatize from it atter profeſſing it, ſo as to become not only obſtinate, 
but rebellious by Unbelief, and an habitual hardned Heart; fuch is 
the ſinful natural habit of our Soul, James r. 12, 15. - So horrible 
vile 15 Sin in it ſelf, that were it not masked, Nature would abhor it, 
but is drawn forth by the falſe Colours which the Devil blinds Sin 
with, to delude the Underftanding, and to catch and inſnare the ma- 
!iznant Will, that it ſwalloivs it more and more, to the hardning of 
the Heart ; That Divine Promiſes, Threatnings, nor Admonitions can 
make any impreſſion : it being unmoved under the Application of all 
theſe, diſregards the Chriſtian Faith, and hath its iſſue in a total A- 
paſtzcy, Jer. 17. 9. Epheſ. 4.22. 1 Tim. 1.19. 

14 For we are made partakers of Chriſt /, if we 
hold the beginning of our confidence m ſtedfaſt unto 


the end 7. 
{ For,. ſhews this to be a rational Motive, urging home the former 


Counſel, unto which the following Condition doth agree ; for we 
Believing Chriſtians and Brethren are made wma, Partners with 
the Primitive Proprictor ſuppoſed in it, even Chriſt, who hath of his 
own, tlie fulneſs of God, Life, Grace, Glory, and all good; 1n all 
which fulnefs of his we ſhare, by virtue of our Union with him, John 
1. 15. Fpyeſl. 1.22, 23. Col. 1.19. and 2. 9,.10. And heby his Spt- 
rit will free us from the deceitfulneſs of Sin, and hardening by it. 
m If bv a Spiritual tenacixuſneſs, and firm fixing our Hearts, we hold 
«787, either the principal or fundamental Truth, as the Word figni- 
fieth in Sciences ; or, the entrance or beginning of our Courſe, as 
uſed in things, ſo as the firſt ſtep in Chriſtianity is ſtiled a be- 
ginning of Grace. n *"Tzrewoww, in perſonal Relations is, a real 
ſubſiſtence, as of the Son in the Trinity, Chap. 1. 3. Tn things, the 
Baſis and Foundation upholding others, and this in Chriſtianity 1s 
Chriſt principally, who bears up his Church, Eph. 2. 20, 21, 22. 
And Faith the Inſtrument, whereby we receive Chriſt, is fo called, 
Chap. 11. 1. That which renders preſent and ſubſiſting what is hop- 
ed for to the Soul ; ſo that here it imports the retaining firm that - 
Principle of Truth, upon which Chriſtians are bottomed and ſupport- 
ed to Life, that is, Chriſt himſelf, and the true Dofrine of him; as 
alſo, that we muſt firmly ſtand in the firſt beginnings of Faith, and 
increaſe in them, fo as they may be firmly fixed 1a our Hearts, -and 
our Hearts on them, fo as never to be removed as long as we live; 
our retaining firmly of this, makes us Partners in Chriſt ; both in- 
ſtrumentally helping in it, and evidentially ; It being the infallible 
conſequence of true Grace, holding us to this Communton with 
Chriſt. How ought theſe Conditions to quicken the Aﬀtivity of Be- 
lievers. | 

15 Whilſt it is ſaid, * To day if ye will hear 
his voice, harden not your hearts, as in the provoca- 


r10n. 

o This is another circumſtance of the Example of the Jews ap- 
plied to them : That ſince nw Chriſt is ſpeaking to you, as he did 
to your Fore-fathers then ; the ſame Voice concerneth you both, ſo, 
as not to Morrow, or when you will, but To Day, if you will be- 
lieve what God ſpeaketh to you by him, and hath recorded in his 
Word concerning his being the Meſſiah, and render not your ſelves 
deaf to God's Voice, or obdurate through Unbelief, as your Fore- 
Fathers did, when their. Unbelief and. hardneſs of Heart imbitter'd 
God's Spirit againſt them, becauſe ating in it againſt their So- 
lemn Vows and Engagements to him, ſo as to Apoſtatize from 
Him. 

16 For ſome, when they had heard, did pro- 
voke p: howbeit not all that came our of Egypt by 


Moſes 9. | h 
Þ This is a rational Enforcement of the former Duty preſſed, it 


being as poſſible for them to provoke Chriſt as others, they ſhould 
look. to it, and not harden their Hearts ; for the greater ſome, the 
moſt of the Congregation of Jfrael! imbitter'd God's Spirit by their 
Unbelicf and hardneſs of Heart, though Chriſt ſpake to them from 
Heaven, as never was before done, and daily by Moſes they were 
hearing Counſels by which they might live, yet provoked they him, 
and would not Belicye, q This rizhtly interprets the P/almiſt, and 


Vol. I. 


ſets a better Example of their Fathers, for them to follow : Let Ca- 
leb and Foſhua, Believers, and Obedicnt'to God, be your Patterns to 
imitate ; he agzravates the Diſobedience of the. one, and the Obedi- 
ence of the other. They all had equally a clear exemption and Dec - 
liverance from the place of Bondage, and that by Moſes, by whom 
God wrought ſuch Miracles as might command Faith from any ; yet 
theſe ſome, by murmuring and ſtriving with the Redeemer, provoked 
him : how great 1s their Sin ? How ſuitable and pleaſing the Obed!- 
ence of the others to him? | 
17 But with whom was he grieved forty years » 2 
70.24 71 not with them that had finned,* whoſe carcaſes 
fell in the wilderneſs. / © | 2 
r By theſe Queſtions the Spirit m1kxes a more lively repreſentation 


Q - 
UW 


of theſe unbelieving Provokers of God, that his Reaſon may have Jude 5. 


the more force with them; Do Je obſcrve with whom God was griev- 
ed ? the form puts them- on more exa& notice for their cau'ion : 
God ſuffers not by Pafſion, but theſe redeemed out of Egypt, carried 
it contrary to him, and croſt his Will, that which uſually grieveth 
us. Concerning the Word fee vey/e 10. It 1s uſed by the Septua- 
gint, Deut. 7.26. to expreſs that deteſiation and abharrence which 
Iſrael was to ſhew againſt Idols, that they ſhauld be a grizf to their 
Soul not to be indured : dels are called Grievances ; he was dif- 
pleaſed and grieved with their Covenant-breaking with him Forty 
Years together. Theſe Sinners by their Unbelief, Murmuring Ido- 
latry, Rebellion agaiuſt his Officers and Ordinances, and their other 
Lufts, ſo imbitter'd his Spirit, that he by various Judgments de- 
ſtroyed and turned them into the Grave and He!! together, 1 Cy, 
10.5. to 11. Moſes, and others of God's own, cannot be numbred 
among theſe Sinners, for their Sins were pardoned, and Perſons 
accepted ; and though they came ſhort of the litteral, had a much 
more abundant entrance adminiſtred to them into the Heavenly Cu- 
naan. 


enter into his reſt 7, 


not 

t To prevent theſe H-brews fa!ling, the Spirit repeats the direful 
Oath of God to Apoſtates in the Wilderneſs. The Form of which 
was opened, ver/e 11. compare Numb. 14. 30. The Matter ſworn 
was, that they ſhould be ſo far from polletling, that they ſhould not 
as much as enter into the [L#{1d of Promite, Canaan, which was God's 
Property, as the whole Earth is ; he promiſed it to them, could on- 
ly diſpofſefs their Enemies, did give it 1n Potletlſion to their Seed, 
and madeit a Type of Heaven, ind of his Reſt there ; he ſwore this 
in his ſevere vindi&ive Juſtice, ſo as his Sentence was irreverſible : 
which Oath ſtands good againſt all total and final Apoftates from 
him, who have thereby forfeited any Title to God's Eternal Reſt. 
u Thofe who were unbelieving under all God's Miracles of Mercies 
and Judgments, which they ſaw, and ſo became obftinately diſobedi- 
dent to God's Commands, and broke his Covenant, Chap. 8. g. Jer. 
31. 32. and Apoſtatized from him, and ſo periſhed intheir gain-ſay - 
ing. . 

19 So we ſee they could not enter in, becauſe of 
unbelief . 

w The execution of the Matter ſworn was felt by theſe Hebrews, 
which ſhould make them and all that read it, to dread both their 
Sin and Puniſhment, which the Goſpel would as juſtly infli& on them, 
if Unbelievers. It is to be ſeen in God's written Record of it, and 
the experienced downfal of ſuch, that God's Oath had ſhut the Door, 
as to their entrance there, and his Judgments conſumed them in the 
Wilderneſs ; becauſe of. their denial of reſting on God's Word, and 
the impious Practices that iſjued from it, in their reje&ing Promiles, 
rebelling againſt Precepts, and murmuring againſt Providence. © God 
1s no reſpe&er of Perſons, if we fin fo againſt his Son and Go- 
ſpel, how much forer Puniſhment will overtake us ; Chap. 10. 


27, 29. 
CHAT 16 

There # then a Promiſe of Ret into which Believers enter, and from it 
others are excluded, 1, 2. This ReF mot that of the Seventh Day, 
mr that n the Land of Canaan, but ſtill remains, 3 II. The 
Power of God's Word, 12,13. By our High-Prief# who was (ubje@ to 
A not to Sin, we mu$F go boldly to the Throne of Grace, 
I w—— . 


Et us therefore fear #, leſt a promiſe being left zs b, 
of entring into his reſt c, any of you ſhould ſeem 


to come ſhort of it d. 

a The Spirit draws this Counſel from the former ſad Event of 
Unbelief in the Progenitors of theſe 77ebrews, who were ſhut out of 
an Earthly Canaan by it, which was promiſed to them : Hereon he 
adviſeth them to avoid that Sin which wili have now as fearful a 
puniſhment, viz. the ſhutting them out of the Heavenly Canaan, 
tendred and promiſed to Believers in the Goſpel. Fear is that affe- 
Mon of the Soul, by which it avoideth and ſhunneth what is hurtful 
to it, and here carricth in it a gracious and Child-like care and jea- 
loufie of ſlighting the Father's promiſe, and coming ſhort of Heaven; 
it is a fear iſſuing from Faith, Phil. 2.12. b Leſt the promiſe of 
God to Men, who {ware ſome ſhould not enter, but promiſed others 
ſhould, as Numb. 14. 23, 24, 30, 31. A Promiſe of the moſt Ex- 
cellent, Glorious, and Heavenly Reſt made to Believers, Iſa. 11, 10; 
This was graciouſly /eft or made to them by God, but yeraamnulns 
here is an a# of Sin, left we by Sin ſhould Jeave or rejelt God's Promiſe 
of the better, as the Hebrews did of the litteral Reſt by their Unbe. 
lief and Diſobedience to God's Law, and fo is the proper obje& of 
Fear, and therefore ought to have been read, /eſt the Promiſe being 
left behind. c Of a free entrance into Heaven, and enjoying a glo- 
rious Reſt with God thete. d He would have it the Fear of all, that 
not one Soul might be indangered by it, 1o as not in any mcaſare to 
Oight ſuch a Promiſe, nor as much as to ſeem 1o, flying from the 
very appearance of Evil, 1 Tyeff. 5. 22. ;rrgmnr, 4 Metaphor ta- 
ken from Racers, where any are out-rim, and left behind, noting the 
miſcrable ſtate of ſuch Chriſtians who profeſs to run to Heaven, but 

{$2 2] never 


Chap: IV. 


Num. x 


A A X 
«444.5, - 


4 
o\ 
W 2 


18 And * to whom ſware he thar they ſhould not * Deut. x. 
bur to them that believed 34 35: 


' jy 


Chap. IV. 


never do fo as to obtain it, 1 Cor. 5. 24, 25, 26, Alas, He that fal- 
eth ſhort of iZeaven, reacheth home to Heil, 

2 For vnto us was the Goſpel preached as well as 

. The into them e - bur the word * preached did not pro- 

PF 4 - d RES "_- * > © . - gt 

ht them f, not F being mixed with taith in them taar 

heard 2? £. : 

e Thercaton inforcing the former counſe] is, their having mutuai- 

:. 1y the ſame means, the one as the other, and if they tear not, May 

be ovilty ofthe ſame fin; for the Hebrews and the whole Church 

were Ewan, eized by the outward publiſhing to them, and their pro- 

fied Reception ofthe glad tidings of Salvition by God the Son 1n- 


HEBREWS. Chap. I) 


wid's time of this Reſt, and therefore different from Moos's Refi { 
long paſt before. The Word Ref in the Rebrew is not the ſame is 
the Text 'of Moſes and David, Gen. 2. 2,3. it is YN) in Plat 
95.11, W\NTJ2 This of David noting the full eternal, comforts. 
ble Reſt of Souls in Glorv, ſworn by God to Believers in the 
Goſpel. ; 
- 6 Seeing therefore it remaineth that ſome mult ey. 
ter thereing, and they to whom Þ it was firſt Preach- F os. ;-. 
ed, entred not in becauſe of unbelief -. ofel 
q The Spirit -having demonſtrated, that God's Reſt ſworn to Be. 1! 51s. 
lievers in the Goſpel, and mentioned by David, could not be the ©. = 


EY” 


£2." 


hy erred + _—_—_— ns * 
_—_ _ 
-_—_ 8&4 ata bh 7 p &. 46 L CY X PX 4 
ny + =. : _ Log v7 « 
EY - - —— . — =_ _ _—_—_ hy 
_ . P—_ agen odio <a. = om I A 
® 2 £58 m—_ * _—_ - % ——" " 3 - c=—_ 0 - a _ 
% = 4 p * . - w 
" - % Y - = - > — — +" = - m" _ a 
4 . ” - oy OS - 
q Ws 4 44 © 69 — 2 " , a « < = . 
« Tas "W 4 * = = =—_— £ _ Ae. 
- ——_ a _ : CY YG Ia mm AL Lene Ip . 
= - B_ _ - ITE pc £ - - ——_— = Sn 6 gr <——— 
—X IS 55 ; - x = - _ "\ - _ x ne IO 
2 


— 


"Ea 


as 


*© 
vY 
fre 
$. 
, 


carnate, who was to lead them in the way to God's Eternal Reit ; 
which *f they had been truly Exxngelized and transformed by, they 
c-:1/4 never have been ſhut ouDef God's Reſt, The ſam? Go- 

though 


"oa AD 


eral and Heavenly. Canten, Fro, 23 20. ?ofh. 5. 13, 14, 15. I/a. 
$19. So that none centred into either of God's Reſt but him a- 
lone, who fo teftifieth by himſ-!f, 7obn 5. 39, 45. and by his Spirit, 
Afs 18.11. f The Goſpel was fo preached to them, that they did 
or might hear it, Rom. 10. 14,15. Compare 7/al. 92. 4. Ija. 52. 7. 
vet Gid it not prove effeRtu.il t5 many of thoſe Hebrews to bring 
them cither into the Literal or Heavenly Canaan, but came fhort of 
God's Reſt in both; they not perſorming what he required ; he by 
an irreverſible Sentence excluded them, fee chap. 3. 17, 19. 
E Suynnoxuir i. A Metaphor taken from mixing things 1n the 
SremacÞ, as meat and drink, without the Concottion of which, 
there can be no nouriſhing the Body, ſettinz forth the Sin of theſe 
Hebrews, who never received nor mixed this Goſpel which they heard 
with a fincere Faith in their Souls, ſo as being digeſted thereby, 1t 
might be united with it. Thus that which was the mighty Power 
and Wiſdom of God to Salvation to thoſe who believed, wasa Word 
of Condemnation and Eternal- Death © Unbelievers, 1 Cor. 1. 18. 
T7 3» 
3 For we which have believed do enter into reſt þ. 
as he ſaid z, As I have ſworn in? my wrath, If they 
ihall enter into my reft &, although the works were 
anifhed from the foundarion of the world /. 

h A further reaſon ſ<tting home this Counſel, was. the certain Be- 
ncfit of our care in Believing; for that the community of real Chriſtt- 
ans, Partakers and Exerciſers of the ſame precious Faith, as Paul 
himſelf, 2 Pef. x. 1, have the ſame Priviledge as believing Caleb and 
Foſhma had, Numb. 14. 24, 30. to enter into God's Reſt, initially 
having Peace with God now, and his Love ſhed abroad in their 
Hearts by the Holy Ghoſt, witneſſing their Reconciliation, Juſtifica- 
tion, Renovation, Adoption, fo as they rejoyce in Hope of the Glo- 
ry of God, Roms. 1, 2, 5. and are by Believing and Obedience 
making out to the attainment of the final and compleat Reſt of God 
in Heaven, of which they are afraid to fall ſhort. i God himſelt 
confirms this by his Oath, chap. 3. 11,18. Pſal. 95.11. At the 
ſme time that he excludeth all Unbelievers from entring in, he in- 
c/utively, and by conſequence ſweareth that all Believers do and ſhall 
enter in. & That reſt which David there ſpeaks of, was not God's 
Reſt on the Seventh Day from the Creation after the finiſhing of 
God's Works, nor the Temporal Reſt in the Land of Canaan, which 
the Fews had and were paſt, as theſe Hebrews might ſuggeſt, but 
another Reft to come, either in the World to come, chap. 2. 5. or 
n the Heavenly Reſt in Glory, which he takes occaſion furthur to ex- 
Iplain to them. { Kim ſome render as a Particle of exception al- 
though, as if it intended, a!though God's reſt is ſome where meant of 
his Reft after the finiſhinzs of the Works of Creation, yet here God 
ſpeaks of the Reſt of Canaan, a Type of the Heavenly one ; others, 
that God ſwore they ſhould not enter into his Reſt, although God's 
Works were done, and the reſt were ready, becauſe of their Unbe- 
lief. Others render it, And indeed, he ſaid and ſpake of the ſame hea- 
venly RefF, long before he ſpake of the Reſt of Canaan, ever. upon the 
finiſhing of his Works from the Foundation of the World ; which ſeems 
m oft acrceable to the Spirit's Deſign here. | 


a For he ſpake ina certain place of the ſeventh ds 
on this wiſe 7, * and God did reſt the ſeventh day 


from all his works 7. 

m The Spirit proves, that the Reſt mentioned by David, Pſal gs. 
T1. is not meant the Seventh Davs Reſt, becauſe ſpoken 2000 Years 
after that Reſt was paſt ; but this Reſt of which he ſpeaks, was to 
come, though ſpoken of and known then : For Mes had ſpoken of 
it in a well-known place to them, Gen. 2. 1, 2, 3. and this when he 
wrote of the Seventh Day, which was eminently noting the Sabbath, 
and a Type of God's moſt excellent Reſt which he ſivare unto Belic- 
vers. n God doth not here reſt as if he-were weary, 1/4. 40. 28. 
but ceaſed from the Creation of all kind of thinzs he purpoſed. to 
make, but not from their Propazation andjhis Providence about them, 
AZ, 17.25. And this he did on the Seventh Day, which he infti- 
tutcd a Sabbath for his People, Gen. 2. 3. which reſting Day may type 
out the Eternal Reſt of Ansels and Men ; when their Work of Obe- 
dience is fmſked : and yet was not God's Reft ſpoken ot inthe Pſalm, 
nor promifed in the Goſpel to Believers, for this was yet to come ; 
vhereas the Seventh Days Reſt was entred into from the Foundation 
of the World. | 

5 And in this pace again o ; If they ſhall enter into 
my reſt þ. 


2, Zo 


Seventh Days Reſt; procceds to prove likewiſe, that it could not he 
the Reſt of j/racl in the Land of Canaan, fince that was entercd into 
490 years before he wrote by the Spirit of this better Reſt, ſince 
thoſe unbelieving T/rae] that entred into Canaan, never centred int; 
this Reſt. Foraſmuch then as a Reſt to come is ſpoken of, and tr 
tome Bclievers muſt have a real and full poſlefſion of the glorious 5<{+ 
offered to them in the Goſpel, as David foretold ; ſee ver(e 9, 10, x1 
y Tne unbelieving Tfae!, who had the Glad Tidings of this Reft 
prcached unto them by Moſes and by Davis, &c. yet entered not int 
it, though they entred into, and lived in Canaan, becauſe of their 
Diſobedience and Unbelief. Then it follows Canaan's Reft ;n4 
vo cannot be all one; and the Jatter is only intended by Daviz 
cre. 


7 Again, he limiteth a certain day, ſaying in Da. 
vid s, To day, aiter fo long a time? ; as it is ſid, 


hearts z. 

s This is a further Proof, that David did not mean or intend the 
reſt of the Jews in Canaan, in the 95th Pſalm, from the determined 
timeof it ; as 1f the Spirit had ſaid, beſides what IT have proves 
take another Argument ; Again T argie. God bv the Prophet fetterh 
out and fevereth from all other Times, a certain ſtated Day, fron; 
which the Reſt ſpoken of, is cleared, and ofit teſtifieth by him, P;a, 
95. 7,8, t Atterqoo Years.paſt of Irae?!'s Reſt in Canaan, whicl 
was a long time, doth David ſay of to Day, a Time preſent, then and 
further to be extended, even the Goſpel-day, in David's time, an 
after it, not in Foſhua's, for that was paſt long before. »y Ye outs 
to dayto hear, receive and believe the Goſpel of God's Ref?, and not 
by unbelicf to turn your Hearts from the Voice of God in the 
Goſpel. 


he not afterward have ſpoken of another day -. 

w This is the improvement of the former Inſtance, verſe 7. If 
Foſbua by bringing 1ſ-ael into Canaan, had given reſt to all Believers, 
then God would not by David have ſpoken of another Day and 2: 
of Reſt to come. Foſhua was, Afs 7. 45. a Type of Jeſus bringinz 
Believers into the true Reſt of the heavenly Canaan, as he did 7+] 
into a literal one. Tf that of Canaan was the full and perfe&t Reft of 
Believers, which was given them by him. x Then God himſelf 
would not have ſpoken by David of a better and heavenly reſt prot 
miſed Believers in the Goſpel; of which ſpiritual and eternal one 
both God's Seventh-day Sabbath, and the reſt of Canaan were but 
I Shadows and Types, The Expoſtulation is vehemently deny- 
ing it, | 


God y. 


a more excellent reſt revealed to faith in the Goſpel, which is remain- 
ing, tuture, and to come, and will ſure 2nd oſt certainly do fo; 
though it be behind, yet it will be enjoyned. A Sabbatiſm which is a 
State and Seaſon of a moſt glorious Reſt, ſee verſe 10. ſhall be enjoy- 
ed by ſincere Believers, the true Jae! of God, of whom he is the 
Proprietor, and who are for their eternal State ſo excellently holy, 
and of fo divine a Nature, that he is not aſhamed to be called their 
God. They have an Entrance here into the Initials of this Sabba- 
tiſm in internal Peace, and the glorious Liberty of the Children of 
God ; and by it ſecured of the full poſſeſſion of it in the eternal In- 
heritance of the Saints in Light, Colof. 1. 12, 13. 1 P2t. 1.3, 4, 5 
Rev. 14. 13. | 

10 For hethat isentred into his reſt 2,he allo hath 


ceaſed from his own works 2, as God dd from his 6. 

7 This praveth - the foregoing Conſequence of a ReF remaining, 
from the Nature of a true Reſt, which 1s reſting from all Labours, 
which the Iſraelites did not in Canaan, therefore it is yet to come. 
For every true Believer, who hath full poſſefſion of God's Reit, wherc 
God 1s ſatisfying of them in bliſs, they reſt in his Loves, of which 
the Sabbath and Canaan were but Types. a Such true Chriſtians 
have ceaſed and reſted from all their finful Works and Labours, as 
works of callings, Miſeries, Anxieties, and Sufferings of any kind, 
reſting from them perte&ly and perpetually, having finiſhed all his 
Work of Evangelical Obedience through them. 6 They have reſted 
not in a Parity of Ref, or Work in kind, but as God from his own 7 
likeneſs of order, his Work going before Reſt, and of Reſt fitted or 
Believers by him conformable to his own. Some refer theſe Words 
and the Relative he to our Lord Jeſus Chriſt, as Head of his Body 
the Church of true Believers ; and that the Parallel runs between God 
the Father and him in the Works of the Old and New Creation, 
which Works were good and compleat in their different Kinds 11 
their Ceflation fron; them, and their Reſts in their reſpeQtive S4v- 
baths, both Days being founded thereon ; and that Believers "all b2 
conformable to their Head, treading in his Steps in doing and 1ufter- 
ing, and thenin Reſt. 


11 Letus labour therefore to enter into that reſt c,letl 


* To day. if ye will hear his voice, harden not your fQ.,... 


8 For if || Jeſus had given them reſt w, then would | Tit, 


9 There remaineth therefore a || reſt to the people of |0r, iz 


y Here the Spirit concludes from his former Proofs, that there is bat, 


any man fall after the ſame example of || unbeli-# 4, þ or, ! 
c-This is the Uſe of the former Dofrine, that finc? MANY, | .71-: 

through Unhclicf tall ' ſhort of God's Reſt, therefore !et vs Jabour. 

Emory imports Study of Mind, Earneſtneſs of Action, Pit 

gence of Endeavour, with all the Powers of Soul and Body to 10- 

tend this Work : fo is it uſed, 2 Pet. 1.10, This is the matt neceniz- 

ry, excellent. and important one to us in this Woria, our it 

gle great Buſineſs in it ; and therefore as Students our Mics mutt 00 


Ka: here is not ſo much cpulative, conneting an Inſtance of Da- 
474 to the ſame purpoſe of that of Moſes about the Seventh Days Reſt 
from the Creation, but d/cretive, joyning an Inſtance of ' another 
Reft of God, ditterent from the Seventh Days Reſt. Moſes ſpake of 
this, But Dav'd here of a further Reſt ; for in Pſalm 95. 11. David 
tpakxe not of the Seventh Day, but of God's laſt and Eternal Reſt. 
p t3 here 1s affrirative, as appears by comparing ver/e 3.and 6. 
that theie ſhall haye a real ani! full poſſeſſion in the future, after Da 


C hap. IV. 


bent on it, and our Wills fixed and reſolved about it, and the Opera- 
tions of all the executive Powers of our Pcrions put forth to the ut- 
moſt Degree, fo as Q.| the Duties necetlary thercunto, as attendance 
on a/i Ordinances, and the conſtant Exerciſe of Faith and Ovedieiice, 
muſt he fitting us for, and bringing us into the full poileffion of tne 
cternally blefled and glorious Reſt of God, 2 Pet. 1.5. to 12+ 
4 That not any particular Perton may fall into Sin, and the Cou- 
ſequents or it; the Particle & may be read into, and then it implies, 
leſt any of you prove Rebels and Apoſtates. Or, it is read by, or 
i | after, and then 1t 154 fall to Deſtrution and Hell, with all the Mue- 
_ CI>HLg j ries that thoſe teel whoare ſhut out of God's Reft, as their unbeltev- 
; ins Fore-fathers were. God ſpared neither Apoſtate Men nor An- 
els, and will not ſpare others if they fin as thoſe did. Our Judg- 
ments may. be rather ſorer, being warned by their Example, 1 Cor. 
10. I1. comp. Heb. 10. 26, 27, 29, They were contumacious, and 
diſobeyed the Goſpel! of God's Reſt, theretore he deſtroyed them 
in the Wilderne!s, and thruſt them down to Hell for ever : 
Avoid you their Sin, as you would labour to avoid their Puniſh- 


v$1421:+ * 
Aaiihts 


# * Cor. 12 For the Word of God e 7s * quick f and pow- 

+ erfu! g, and ſharper than any + two edged ſword þ 

þ + Ertul g, and ſharper than any F two edged 1word 7, 

Z e\cn to ihe dividing afunder 7 of ioul &, and 

tpirit /, and of the Joints and marrow 2, and zs a dit- 
c-rner of rhe thoughts and intents of the heart 7. 

e The Eifticacy of the Word of God is a further Inforcement of 


+... 


_- TxX1:I3E7*327) 
Jil Cl 
A 


thcreunto, even the Law and Doftrine of the Goſpel brought by the 
Incarnate Word from Heaven, preached by him to the World, ditta- 
ted and infpired into the holy Pen-men both of the Old and New 
Teſtament by the Holy Ghoſt, and written by them art his Call and 
Order ,. 2 Pet. 1. 15, 20, 21. repreſenting all thoſe Precepts and 
Prohibitions, Promiſes and Threatnings by which God will judge 
thoſe to whom this Goſpel hath been preached by that Man whem 
he hath appointed. Compare chap. 2. 1, 2. and verſe x, 2, of this. 
And this Word was written by David, Pialm.95. even a Word ot 
Exhortation, Promiſe and Threatning, as opened before, and ſhews 
the PerfeQion of this Goſpel-Law in its Adminiſtration by Chriſt, 
This Word, like the Incarnate Word, is Zr, not only a living Word, 
but a guickn:ng Word, making dead Sinners living Chriſtzans; Souls 
dead in Sins and Treſpailes, alive to God, This Word, the Breath 
of God cenveycth Spirit and Life te them, 2 Tim. 3. 16. 1 Pet. 
I. 23. fo David experienced it, preſerving the Lite it breathed 1nto 
him, Pfalm 119. $0. and the Members of the Church, r Cor. 4. 15. 
comp. 2 Cor, 3.6, 17,18, and as a Rule it guideth and diredteth 
them through Chriſt, unto eternal Life, John 6. 68. g *Evgyic, It's 
an aive Word, powerful in its Effe&s, the very miniſtration of the 
Spirit, 2 Cor. 3. 8, Moſl efficacious and energetical for convincing, 
converting, comforting; and for condemning, kilung : It adts like 
the Power of God; ſo Rom. 1. 16, 18. h T:2wrm OO ignifieth « 
cutting Sharpneſs, as becometh ſeveral Uſes, as ſearching, letting out 
Corruption, or for killing; all which agree to this Divine Word 
ſharper than any Sword with two Mouths, The Hebrews ſtile the 
Edge the Mouth, that which bites, teareth, or woundeth ; as Rev. 
I. 16. and 2. 12, The Word for ſpiritual Execution upon Souls 1s 
more ſharp, and aboveevery other Sword ; there is none ſo piercing 
for cutting the Heart, or killing Sin in it. So is it uſed, Eph. 6. 17. 
comp. Aﬀs 2. 37. and 7. 54. It is Chriſt's Weapon of Offence 
and Defence for his People, and it cuts without Reſiſtance ; with 1t 
he is defending his Truth, and ſmiting his Enemies, 1/a. 11. 4. 
comp. Rev. 19. 12, 15, 21, 7 Aux piercing or going through 
what 1s ſmitten with it, which way ſoever it is turned it forceth 
its way through all Oppoſition to a dividing into Parts, and ſe- 
parating the moſt nearly united and cloſely joyned things, laying 
open the very Entrails, the moſt inward in a Man z where the Meta- 
phors taken from the cloſeſt parts of the Perſon are applied to the 
Soul. k +404 may denote not ſo much the natural Life and the Facul- 
ties of that, but that which is ſtiled the Rational Soul as unregenerate, 
ſce 1 Cor. 2. 14. Such an animal carnal Soul as 1s purely humane, 
1 Cor. 3. 3. which wants both a Principle, Light and Faculty to dif- 
:ern the things of God, as no natural Eye can ſee a Spirit,Rom. 8, 5, 
tog. | r:vyal» the Soul of Man regenerate and ſpiritualizd, 
called Spirit, £ Theſſ. 5. 23. The Soul enlightned, renewed, and 
governed by the Holy Ghoſt, not altered as to its Subſtance, but as 
to its __—_— whoſe Underſtanding, Will and Afﬀections are ſpi- 
ritualiz'd, manifeſted in its A&ions agreeable to the ſpiritual Will 
of God, 1 Cor. 2.10, 12, 14,15. Theſe are both of them under the 
piercing Power of the Word, and the Spirit can reach them by it as 
he pleaſeth. - m-'Apugy are not,” the Members, but the Nerves, 
Membranes, Muſcles, whereby the Members or Limbs are joyned 
one to another, ſo as not without Inciſton to be. diſcovered, and 
the Marrow within the Bones, there muſt be a breaking or perfora- 
ting them'to reach it. By which-Metaphors are ſet out the hardeſt, 
compa#-(t, and msſt intimate Parts of a Sinner, the moſt ſecret -hidden 
ones, which no natural one can reach, yet the Word of God pierceth 
them, to diſcover either the evil or good of them, and to infli 
Wrath, cr communicate Comfort according to their Conditions. 
n The Word of God is a moſt nice, exaf, an1- critical Tudze, difcern- 
inz the Pravity and Reftitude of them ; it diſcovers and diſtinguiſh 
eth them as they are, or not agreeable to it ſelf, the fundamen- 
tal Truth; and is capable, as a Judge, to charge or diſcharge as 
its Author will, by it, Rom. 2. 12,15, 16. compare 1 Cor. 14. 24, 25. 
It diſcovers the moſt inward, cloſe, ſecret and conſtant Motions, 
both ſpeculative and praGtical, of the Soul of Man inſeparably united 
to the Heart, and one with another, whether they are Opinions, 
Conceptions, Reſolutions, or Decr-es, ſo ſubtile and fo ſecret, as 
who can know them, but who made the Heart, Gen. 6. 5, fer. 17.9. 


1Or. þ TEIN I 3 * Neither is there any creature that is not ma- 
Fodeorit 13.14.01 DIfeſt in- his ſight o - bur all chings are naked and 
©, 2.1nq Opened p to the eyes of him with whom we have to 

139.11,12, JO 9. 
0 Kei is not only copulative, but rationz!, ſhewing the ground of 


the former Efficacy of the Goſpe!-Word, becauſe its Author ſecth and | Soul prevalleth over us to the accumulating ot Sin and Guilt dzi! 


HEBREWVWS. 


their ſtudious Labour to enter into God's Reſt ; for that calleth us. 


('bh-q 
L- 
JoAbll 4 3 & HP. 


knoweth all Perſons 2nd things, and filleth it with rhis. Power and 
Force. For every Crexture which God the Son created, An.*cl, of 
Man, Or any Otter, irom the greateſt to tne leatt; from the Levia- 
tnan toa Mite, rd all Parts of every Creature, ctpc cially of every 
Creature to winm the Golpe] is preached, ark 16. 15. not ay 
one 15 «pare Without 10ht, invitiole, unapparent, obicuere, or potſt- 
ble to be covered or tid. or _ TY VV; Ons. 

e (9 de COVETEA Or 211d. or concealed from his View or Fire, waere 
the Relative 473 agreeth with 47 God in Chriſt, and rot with 
A.c595, Of the Ward, wiſe 12. as the following Relative cvincerh. 
To this God-Man no Spirit nor Thoueht can be Ind ;, it f-21l not be 
io from the efficacious Power of his Word, much lefs ſhall tnfid-lity 
or Hypocrifie be hid from it, or his moſt piercing Eve. p But all 
things 1n general and particular, and not anv one exceptca, ts be, 
naked, unclithed, the Covcring is removed, all Secrets are open and 
manifeſt to View, God the Sun fect? within and without, alt are 


4 * 


On 
taphor taken from the ſacrihced Beaſts, which beins $Knncd, were 
cut open from the Neck, and fo divided by the Cine to the Rump, 
or by the Throat downward, imoowelled by the Prieſts, 1o as cye- 
ry part within may be clearly feen whether clexn or vncilean. The 
Truth of which 1s, that every thing in the World, cyzn the molt 1c- 


cret and inward Thovghts of the Heart of a Sinner, which 1s a <reat 
Deep, 15 opencd and laid forth to every Scrvple vnto God i: Chritt, 
every ſecret Unbelief, Apoſtatizing Principle, or Fiypocrific he dit- 


cerneth clearly and fully, Fer. 17. 5, 16. he trat made the Eve, 
muſt ſee beſt. q His Eyes who pierceth beyond the Vuiturcs into 
things and places that no Eyc can difcern, the Sou's of Nev, 7 
28. 7, 10. Pſal. 94. 9. Prov. 20, 12, All this 1s affertcd corceriung 
the Perſon of whom Pau! «writes, Chriff God-Man, the roilt Golpei- 
Miniſter, whoſe Word is ſo powerfully piercings : Of 4 and his 
Word is all this Speech and Diſcourſe ; he it 1s who is the &ti'-'tnowe 
ing and Impartial Judge, and makes his Gofrel Word of Crunk! 
Promite and Threatnings, to cut ſo deeply, and ſearch tne 52crets < 
the Hearts of all. 


14 Secing then that we have a great high pric!t 7: 


* that 1s palſed into the Heavens £ ; Jeſus the {01 ot + 


Czod?, Þ It us hold fait or profefion z. 


r The exccllency of the great Goſpel- Mnifter beyord all others in 
reſpet& of his Prieſtly Office, eſpecially bezxond Aaron and the Levitt - 


cal Prieſthood, is ſhewn by the Holy Ghoſt from this Verſe to Chip. 
5. verſe Il, It is introduced, as the Spirits counſel to theſe He- 
brews, from the Premiſes for their ufing of this Hizh Pricſt, in order 
to their reaching home to rhe Reſt of God, to whom and whoſe Pro- 
teſfion they ought to adhere, ſince he is ſo fit, - and ſo willing to give 
them an entrance into it, comp. chap. 2. 17, 18. and 3. t, 6. Be- 
ing therefore by the Spirit through Faith not only intereſted by a 
common Relation in him, but by a real Union to, and Communion 
with him, as he deſcribed ah High Prieſt, chap. 2.11. and 3. 1. 
ſo great as none was, or can equal him, All the Hizh Prief*s on 
earth are but imperfe& Types of him ; above Aa nd all oth<rs 3 
the grand Preſider over all God's Worſhip, who had Work peculiar 
fo himſelf above all: The Supreme and Univerſal Pricſt in iieiven 


| and Earth, whoſe Title the Roman Antichriſt uſurpeth.; to him only 


due, Pontifex optimus maxim, yet officiating always for us. s He 
hath fulfilled his Type, entring into the Holy of Holieſt in Heaven, 
taking poflefſion of God's Reſt, and purchaſing an Entrance for us in- 
to it, and this after the remoyal of the Curſe, Satis*a&ion of the Di- 


vice Juſtice for our Sins, Viftory over all Enemics that would op- 


poſe his or our Entrance by him, as Sin, Wrath, Death and the De- 
vil, and keeping poſſeſſion of this Reſt for us, chap. 9. 23, 24, and 
28. ft Ze the Saviour of his People from all their Sins, their 
Emmanuel, Matth. 1. 20, 21, 23. who being God the Son by <ter- 
nal Generation, was incarnate by taking to himſelf and unitin” a true 
Body and a reaſonable Soul, being conceived miraculouſly by the Vir- 
gin Mary from the overſhadoviing of the Holy Ghoſt; in which Na- 
ture, inſeparably united to his Perſon, he fulfilled all Righteouſneſs, 
and died a Sacrifice for our Sins, and roſe in our N=ture, and af- 
cended and entred into the Holy of Holieſt in Heaven, and made 
atonement, and laid open the way to Believers to enter God's Reft 
there. u« The entire Religion of which Jeſus is the Author, as op- 


poſite to that of the Jews in its Principles and praQick part' of 


it, chap. 3. 1. is powerfully, ſtrongly, and perfeveringly to be held 
by his without Relaxation, in which if we follow him, cleave to him, 
and by him labour to cnter, we ſhall not come ſhort of God's Ref, 
chap. 7. 24, 25. where the Head is, there ſhall the Body be alfo, 
John 14. 2,3. and 19. 24. 

15 For * we have not an high prieſt, which cannot 
be touched with the feeling of our infirmities ., + but 


was in all points tempted like as we are, || yet without 1 


fin'. 


w This Duty of Perſeverance in the Chriſtian Religion, is infor- 
ced by the Conſideration of the Sympathy of this High-Prieft. 
with the States of all who will enter into God's Reſt by him, {1 
is worthy. that we ſhould hold it faſt, being without Tmpotcney, 
it 1s impoſſible he ſhould be pityleſs to penitent Sinners, thouzh he 
be glorious, there beins nothing in himſelf, or out of himſelf indiſ- 
poſing him to if, Zounrz3i-ze imports ſuch a Sympathy-or fellow- 
feeling, as makes him like affeted as if he were in the ſame cafe 
with them. He cannot but be compaſſionate, fince inward]v afett- 
ed and moved with the Sufferings of his, 4s 9. 5. comp. Ja. 
63. 9. As God, he 1s infinitely merciful ; as Mano, inwardly feel- 
ing them, even all the Miſeries they were Iyable to, but ſinful oncs. 
He wants no Bowels, but he hath as a fellow-feeling, fo a fellow- 
orieving, and fellow-caring for the redreſs of them, even al! ſuch 
as are fit for his Pity; and works on AﬀetGtions, a fence of Gui'r, 
Fears, Doubts, Tremblings, Weak-workinzs to God, the Concen;i- 
tint Infirmities of finful Souls ; all the Weaknefics of Grace in us, 
all Troubles, Diſtrefſes, Anguithes in the Fleſh, the Fruits of Sin. 
He knows theſe ſenſibly as Man, which as God (ingly he could nor. 
Theſe ſinful Weakneſſes of Scul inclining to Sin, and &iſchlins from 
reſiſting Temptations, by which the ſubtle powerful Fncmv of our 


3 
4nd 


Tr 
= V2 


* Chap. 2. 
18, 
{Luke 22, 


2. 
|, 2 Cor. 
21 


+4 


others for their god, to ſeek either temporal or ſpiritual good, a5 ; 
the Office 15, compare chap. 8. 3. By this Ordination is Power ng 


veyed to this Officer, and an Obligation laid on him by a Charge tg 
excrt it about things wherein Men are concerned with God: He is > tell. 


Chap. V: 


and ſo need this Sympathy of His to us-watd ;, ſee chap. 5. 2, 1 Cor- 
2. 3. 2 Cor, 11. 23. fo- gl. and 12.549, 40. Xx But mage) 
was pierced and tried by all forts ot Sufferings, being outwardly 


tempted by the Devil to tin ; inwardly he could not, being pertect- 
ly holy, John 14. 30. but was outwardly. with violence aſſaulted by 
lim, Matth. 4. 1. to12. and tried by Men beyond any Man, and 
tempted to the ſame Sins whereby Adam fell, and others miſcarry 
every Day. He felt the Curſe of Sin, the Wrath of God, Agonies 1n 
tris Soul, violcut pains in his Body, Sorrows to the death, trom the 
Cradle to the Crots : And in every matter of Grief and Suffering 11 
Soul, in Body, from the World; from Satan, from God, in all kind 
of Temptations Spiritual and Temporal ; experiencing the Evils of 
this Life, Hunger, Thirſt, Wearineſs, Grief, J/z. 53- 3- tO 11. 
even ſuch as weare liable to, all of them really and truly like ours, 
and more powetfully than ours ; they were for fimilitude like, but 
tor degree exceeding them ; ours for exquiſiteneſs of Senſe but a ſha- 
dow of His : Yet under all theſe Temptations He was ſinle/s, as the 
Holy One of God; never did Temptation prevail over Him, He over- 
came ail. Nothing was out of place or order by his Suffering in 
Him : All His AﬀeRicns and Paſſions under theſe, regular, ſhewing 
his Innocency under variety of Sufferings and cminency of Compatli- 
ons. Sin hardens Bowels, but He is compaſſionate without any miX- 
ture with; or hindrance by Corruption ; and His Interceſſion is the 
more effeual with God for us. What Chriſtian under his Conduct 
would not follow lis great Example, ſo to refiſt and conquer by 
Him ? 
16 * Let us therefore come boldly unto the throne 
2. of grace y, that we may obtain mercy, and find grace 
to help in time of need 3. | 

y Since our High-Prieſt hath a ſenſe of our Infirmities, hath expe- 
ricnced our Tryals, and no Sin is in Him to ſhut up His Bowels of 
Compaſſion, therefore haſte we to Him, as thoſe who defire toreach 
Favours from our Soveraign, as our poor, guilty, needy Souls want 
them. It is 4 Soul-motion by Faith and Love breathed forth in ſtrong 
Cries to His God - and Father, and ours, conſtantly approaching God 
in every Duty by Him : compare chap. 10. 19. to verſe 23. and that 
with open Face, boldneſs and aſſurance, without any ſhame or diſmay, 
coming in the Name, and with the Perſon of our great High-Prieſt, 
who takes our Duties and Perſons, and preſents them perfumed with 
the Incenſe of His Merits to Him. Away now with all Unbeltef, 


gious Officer. Te 1s imperfe&, as chap. 2.7. for & nic in things 7 » 
about things. A Sinner can undertake to manage nothing tt. ds 
God immediately, or by himſelf, but with a mediatins Prieſt wh . 
muſt know God's Mind and perform it ; and it was infinite Mercy = 
God to inſtitute ſuch an help to Sinners. The common bog of 
Mankind about it fince the Fall doth evince it. No Nation _ 
without a Religion, a Temple, a place of Workhip, a Priefi 
c Who may bring home to God the Supreme Lord and Kins of all 
Gifts, which were thoſe Free-will Offerings, as of things inanimate 
the Firſt-fruits of Corn, Wine, and Ovl, gc. or of Sacritices, ſuch 
whereby they were to attone and propitiate God for their Sins, tiiey 
being guilty, and he juſt ; thoſe were neceſlary to ſatisfie his Ju 
ſtice, remove his Wrath, and procure his Bleſſing. What thoſe 'S;. 
crifices were which would pleaſe him, God only could reveal, a: 
who ſhould offer them both for himſclt and others ; and this he did 
reveal to Adam, Noah, and Abraham, and to .Jojes tully in his Li 
given him about them on the Mount, and of which he hath writte 
in his four laſt Books. _ 


2 Who tf can have compaſſion on the ignorant 7 i « 
and on them thar are our of the way z, tor that * he rainy 


himſelf alſo is compaſled with infirmity f. 

4 The melting quality of the Typical K1;h-Prieſt is eminently tg 
be fulfilled in the Goſpel one ; each is to have an Aptneſs, Diſpoliti- 
on, and a {utficiency of it by the Inſtitution of God, for his Miniſtra- 
tions, for manner as well as for matter, Chap. 2. 18. and 4. 15 
Metecorebejr ſtriftly is to bear, ſuffer, or be affetted in meaſure, or ſuf- 
fer moderately with the failings of others, in fuch a degree as is nccef. 
ſary to incline, as far as he is able, to ſuccour, help and comfort 
thoſe who are in miſery : It notes Sympathy, Chap. 2. 18. Rom. 1 
I5. anda ſuffering with them, yet ſo regulated by the Divine Rule. 
as not to extend it unto unfit Subjets, nor 1nan undue Meaſure leſt 
it unfits him for miniſtring for them. But the great High- Pricſt ex- 
celleth in this, and 15 not bound to our meaſures, but finleſly over-a- 
bounds in it, to ſuch as fin for want of knowledge of thelr Duty, unwit- 
tingly, and without any fore-caſt, for which the Law provided a $4- 
crifice, Lev. 4. 2. Num. 15. 24, tO 30. @& Ilaarwpioc 4 Metaphor 
borrowed from Travellers gone out of their way ; by which are under- 


Douhtings, or Fears, in our approach to Him; Admiſſion to Him, 
and hearing by Him, is now certain unto the Believer, Rom. 5. 1, 2. 
Ephe/. 2. 18. and 3. 12..1 Fohn 3. 21, 22. and 5. 14,15. For his 
Throne, now the Father is propitiated by Him, 1s from a Throne of 
ſtri& Juſtice made a Throne of Grace, of which the Propitiatory 
Seat over the Ark of the Covenant in the Holy of Holieſt, both in 
the Tabernacle and Temple was a Type. All the Terror and Dread 
of it is now done away by Chriſt. Thunderings, and Lightnings, 
and Voices, and the ſound of a Trumpet, are now ceaſed ; the ſtill 
Voice of Pardon, Peace, Purging and Saving Sinners proceeds from 


ſtood ſuch Sinners as are miſ-led by their infirmity or violence of Tempt a- 
tion, and fo offend God by their Opinions or Pratices ; for the Ex- 
piation of ſach were thoſe Sacrifices appointed, Lev. Chap. s. 6, 7 
but then they were ſuch as were ſenſible of their fins, confefled them, 
and begged for pardon, of whom the High-Pricſt was to be compal- 
fionate ; but not of preſumptuous and capital Sinners, who were un- 
fit Subjefts of God's Mercy or Man's : there being no Sacrifices pro- 
vided for ſuch, but they were to die without Mercy, Numb. 1 5 30 
31. compare Exod. 22.14. God's Altar it ſelf is no Protettion to 
them, 1 Kings 2, 28, 31 Such fins of Infirmity which the Levitical 
High-Prieſt was liable to himſelf, was he to be compaſſionate of. 
f For that he was beſet with Tnfirmity, Sin, Ignorance, Error, and 
Diſobed 1ence ; infirm in reſpeR of Duty and Sacrifice, which was by 
reaſon of its weakneſs to be repeated yearly, Chap. 10. 1, 11. and of 
the ſame infirm Nature, liable to the Griefs and Miſeries of his Bre- 
thren, both in Soul and Body. All thefe did ſurround and lie about 
him; he was Sin and Weakneſs all over, and therefore ſhould be the 
more feeling of his Brethren's States, and more careful and ready to 
Sacrifice and intercede for himſelf and them. But our great High- 
Prieſt hath all the ſenſe of theſe, but no ſin, chap. 4. i 5. 


3 * And by reaſon hereof he ought as for the peo- * 1g; 
ple g, ſo alfo for himſelf to offer for fins Þ. Chap.7. 


g Tis ConneRtion demonſtrates the Infirmity of the Legal High- 
Prieſt :' For this their Infirmity, Sins of Tgnorance and Error. He 


it ; Grace in reference to Believers, ſits in all its Glory and Majeſty, 
and Power only, Rev. 5. 1,6, 13. Compare chap. 8. 1. and 12.2. 


Epheſ. 1. 20. Chriſt now takes us by the hand, brings us thither, 
and pleads by his own Blood for us, ſo as we may approach to it 
with greateſt confidence, x That we may aCtually partake of the 
Fruits of Chriſts Purchaſe and Intercefſion from the Father of Mercy, 
pity ſuitable to our miſery, Pardon for our guilty Souls, and relief 
for us under all our Aﬀiitions, 1/a. 63. 7, 8, 9. and all Grace. ne- 
celſary for us at ell times for a ſeaſonable help, but eſpecially|in 
times of greateſt need: It is mo} opportune, when mot helpful ; 
when Infirmities, Afﬀii&tions, Temptations, and the Snares of Sin 
beſet us with grievous Perſecutions , then may we by Prayer, 
through our High-Prieſt, have recourſe to this Throne of Grace 
for our ſuitable and ſufficient ſupply, without which there is no | 
holding faſt our Profeſſion, or poſſibility of Entrance into God's 


Reſt. 
HAY. V- 


Acewding to all the Properties required in an High-Prieſt, Chri# is one ; 
but after the Order of Melchiſedec, 1=——6, In the Days of his Fleſh 
He fulfilled this Office ; and being made Perfeft, became Author of 
Eternal Salvatien to thoſe who obey Him, 79 — 9, After the Order 
of Melchiſedec, of whom He would treat more at large ; but they were 
nezlizent, dull, and unexperienced, 1o——1 4- 


OR every high prieſt taken from among men «a, 
is ordained for men * in things pertarnmng to 
God b, that he may offer both gifts and ſacrifices for 


fins c. 

4- For is 4 rational Particle, enforcing the Truth of what was affert- 
ed concerning the Goſpel-High-Prieſt before, That he was the moſt 
ſenſible and tender-hearted of all other, beyond what all his Types 
were, even Aaron himſelf; how did it therefore behove thoſe He- 
brews to cleave to him and his Religion, as to deſert the Levitical 
Prieſthood which he had perfe&ed in himſelf; he being more excel- 
lent for Riſe, Qualities, Office, Call, than his preceding Types, and 
the permanent Truth of them all. For every one of that order 
in God's Inſtitution, and according to his Law, ought to be ſelefted 

ut of the Numbers of Men for whom he was to Miniſter, and 
herefore to be a Man. He was not to bean Angel, nor to miniſter 
for them; and being ſeparated from Men, is to be put into another 
and higher Rank and Order, Exod. 28. 1. than he was in before : 
No Perſon was to uſurp it, but to be deſigned to it according to the 
Divine Lav ſetled in that behalf. This was accompliſhed in Chriſt's 
Perſon, and he hath not fince ſeleted out of Men any ſuch Order 
of Prieſts properly ſo called in the Chriſtian Church. His Officers 
being ſo far from being XHigh-Prieſts, that they are not ſo much as 
in the enumeration of their Titles ſtiled *14:5c Priefts ; and as far 1s 
it from truth, that there is now as Prieſts, , ſo Altars, Sacrifices, 
Temples in the Chriſtian Church properly fo called : ſince it is expreſ- 
ly againft the New Teſtament, and 1f ſo ſpoken of by the Fathers, 
it muſt be underſtood figuratively, and Metaphorically, or elſe it is 
untrue, b Kavicure the defigned Perſon is conFitated and /et over 


was obliged to his Work by the expreſs Law of God, Lev. chap. 1. 
It1s a Rule for what the Prieſts ought to do, and ſo is the whole Book, 
to which they are to be punQually obedient, even to Sucrifice tor 
particular Sinners in the church, as they were guilty and brought their 
Sacrifice, Lev. chap. 4. and for the whole Church of Ijrael on the 
Atonement-day, Lev. 16.15. to 34. bh He had alſo his proper Sacri- 
fice for his own Sins commonly, Lev. 4. 3. extraordinarily on the Day 
of Atonement annually, Lev. 16. 1,6, to15. It is not neceſſary to 4 
Prief to be a Sinner, but it is to be merciful. Adam offered Prayers 
and Praiſes to his Creator for himſelf and Eve in Innocency ; but 
ſince the Fall our Lord Jeſus Chriſt is the only High-Prieſt without 
Sin, and yet moſt merciful, as well as moſt ſenſible of the Sins and 
Miſeries of penitent believing Sinners. He offers up the Sacrifice to 
God truly propitiatory, as his Types did the typical ones, and pro- 
_ the Pardon which God promiſed to give upon his ſo ſacrificing 
o Him. 


4 * And no man taketh this honour unto himſelf 7, *2 Ch: 


bur he that is called of God, + as was Aaron #. 


26. 18 


7 This conneteth the laſt thing, deſcribing the typical Levitical 7 


Prieſt. hood their Call to it. Not any perſon whatſoever hath, or 
can lawfully take to himſelf the honourable Office of an High-Prielt, 
ſo as to be the Author or End of it. Many have uſurped this Office, 
and others have diſtributed it contrary to God's Law, whoſe Prieſt- 
hood, Offerings and Miniſtry, are no true ones, eſpecially where 
Men are ſelf-officiating, corruptly managing of it, as E/i's Sons, and 
Jeroboam's Prieſts, or ſelf-benefiting by it, 1 Sam. 2. 13, Oc- and 
Mich. 3. 11. This was ſo honourable an Office, as it was united to 


the Princedom in Melchiſedeck and Fethro. k He that is according. 


to God's Law (the Author of its Prieſthood, its Work and Suc- 
ceſs ) qualificd in himſelf, ſeparated from others, and aRually ho- 
noured by God with it, he ought to take this Office, and execute 
his Work in it to God's Glory, depending'on him! for his Bleſſing. 
Aaron is the particular Inſtance of the Divine Call to this Office, 
God ſeparated his Tribe, Family, and Perſon for his Service 1 the 
room of the Firſt-born : God qualified him for it, intailed the High- 
Pcieſt-hood to his Seed and Off-ſpring, with the ſubordinate Prieſt- 


hood. He Solemaly conſecrated him by Moſes, confirmed Is 
Ws 


I. 
ſt, 1 ChroN. 


23. 1Þ 


 V WI Chap. V-: 


and deſtroying the 


own Call of him to it by the bloſſoming Rod, 
17. and 


Rival with him for it, Exod. 28. 29, 49. Numb. 3. 16, 


17: 5. 
5 So alſo Chriſt glorified not himſelf to be made an 
high prieſt / : but he that aid unto him 7, Thou art 


my Son 7, to day have I begotten thee o. 

1 The Spirit now draws the Parallel, and ſhews, that whatſoever 
is requiſite in God's High-Prieſt, is tranſcendently fulfilled 1n the Lord 
Jeſus Chriſt, the Infirmities of his Types which were accidental to the 
Office excepted. He begins the Parallel in his Call to it, God-Man, 
the great Goſpel-High-Prieſt anointed to this Office in the Fleſh with 
the Holy Ghoſt, was not tainted with Ambition, neither did uſurp 
this Honour and Dignity, John 8. 54. though there never was perlo1; 
qualified forit, or deſerved it like him. He never did intrude him- 
ſelf upon the Office, or take the Sacerdotal power to him, whatever 
others have done, and uſurped it. m But God the Father beſpeak- 
eth him, and calleth him to this high Office, as he did Aaron -, He 
choſe him, ſeparated, ſent and anointed him for it. No lels Perſon 
than the Eternal Jehovah could conſtitute and inveſt him 1n what was 
ſo high for Dignity, ſo glorious for Power; he did by ſpeaking com- 
miſfionate him for it, and did publiſh and teſtifie the Conſtitution, 
glorifying him in it, as. is teſtified, Pſalm 2. 7. n Thou, 15 not Da- 
vid, but Chriſt, as itis interpreted, Chap. 1. 5. and Adts 13. 33» at 
my only begotten S5n, my natural Son, Fohn 1. 14, 18. The firit-born 
of God, Pſalm 89. 27. Compare Rom. 8. 29. Coloſ,t. 18. As Jus 
Son, the Father could appoint him to what calling he pleaſed. By 
his Primogeniture he had right to the Prieſthood and Kingſhip; and 
to theſe doth the Father call him, as who would not be denicd by 
him : From Eternity he had a Right and Title to this Office, but his 
ſolemn Inveſtiture in it was 9 on the Reſurreftion-day, then was he be- 
gotten to it; not only dedicated as Hannah did Samuel to the Pricft- 
hood, but ſolemnly after his Confecration by his own Blood to 1t, 
Chap. 9, 16, 11, 12, 23, 24. Compare Rom. I. 4. was he by the Fa- 
ther proclaimed to be the Son-Mediator, King, Pricſt, and Prophet, 
and made to enter the Holy of Holieſt in Heaven, and to fit down 
there on his Father's Rizht-Hand, inveſted with Glory and Power for 
the Execution of his Offices, and this of his Prieſt-hood 1n ſpecial, 
which he is daily fulfilling with him by his Intercetſion fee Chap. 25, 
28, and 9.24. Compare Pſalm 2. 8. 

6 As he ſaith alſo in another place, ® Thou art a 
prieſt tor ever p, after the order of Melchiledec . 

þ The Spirit proves his Call and Inveſtiture into this Office, 1ts 
Confirmation to him for ever by another Teftimony of the Father 
about it, penn'd by David, Pſatm 110. 4. and ratified to be fo by the 
Lord himſelf, 1Matth. 22. 41, to 45. that he as Man was David's Son, 
as'God-Man, David's Lord, and ths grand Oficer to atone God by his 
Sacrifice for Sinners, and to intercede for him. By this Word of God 
to him was he inveſted with the moft glorious Priefthood, and ſetled 
in that which he muſt execute for ever, Chap. 7. 24. having no Suc- 
cetfour in it,” q which Order was a ſingular and moſt excellent one ; 
ſuch as Aaron's d1d but imperfeQly ſhadow to us. It -was a Royal 
Prieſt-hood God inſtalled in him, ſuch as was Ae!chijſedech's, largely 
deſcribed, chap. 7, This was by God the Father revealed to David, 
and prophefied by him to the Church, but attuilly fulalled as to Pro- 
clamation and Inauguration at his Aſcenſion into the Holy of Holieſt 
in Heaven, where he a&ually in the Flcfh doth officiate and minifter 
1n it, 

7 Who in the davs of his fleſh r, when he had * of- 
fered up pravers and ſupplications s with 1trong cry- 
ing, and tears 7, unto him that was able to ſave him 
from death z, and was heard, || f in that he Tear- 
ed 7. | 

» Here Chriſt is parallel'd in his Nature, Work and Compaſſions, 
to his Types, and 15 ſet above them: He was taken out - of Men, as 
his Type was, verſe 1. He was made Fleſh, and dwelt among us 1n 
the Humane Nature, Fobn 1. 14. He had his Days numbred, and his 
Time ſet for his Being and Miniſtry beneath, doing and ſuffering the 
Will of God here in a State of Humiliation, Frailty, and Mortality ; 
which Infirmities attending his Fleſh, are now put off for ever, chap. 
2. 14. s He performed his Service and Offering to God, as his 
Tvpes, for the Men for whom he was ordained, fuch as he delighted 
in; his Praycrs repreſented his inward Deſires to God for what he 
needed, and was necellary in our behalt to be obtained, a Sacrifice 
fit to be offered by Him, chap. 13.15, compare 1 Pet. 2, 5. "Izemgizc 
a Word but this once uſed in the New Teſtament ; its Root fignifi- 
eth an Olive Branch which Petitioners carried in their Hands; an 
Emblem of the vehement deſire of ſuch Supplicants of a peaceſul Anſwer 
or Return to their Prayzrs, Theſe of Chriſt were the moſt feryent 
Supplications flowing from a deeply afflifted Soul 1n a proftrate Body, 
when he was preparing for the effering up his Soul a Sacrifice for 


* * Chap. 7. 


E *[ohn 17. 
E 1, NC, 


Lev. 9.7 ; 
 hape7.2%  [Or, for his 
E ficty. 

- 7 John 12. 


27, 


and \when actually offering it on the Croſs, Matth. 27. 45. Theſc 
were the Prayers of Ged-Man the Goſpel High-Prieft, 8 put up by 
him unto. God the Father, who 1s eflentially good and powerful, 
willing and able to hear and anſwer his Supplications, the Fountain 
of all Mercy, Bleffing, and Help, who could deliver him from, and 
fave him in the greateſt Dangers, ſo as none of thoſe which encom- 
paſſed him ſhould hurt him, no not Death. For he was delivered 
from the Evils which were far more dreadful to him than Death it 
felf, and which were to exerciſe him both before, and at the hour of 
Death. Thoſe deadly Temptations which he underwent in his Ago- 
ny and on the Croſs, and from which he chargeth the Diſciples to 
pray, that both He and they might be kept, 2atth. 25: 37, 38. 
Thoſe deadly Stings in his Soul, verſe 41. Mark 14.38. Luke 22.40, 
46. ſuch Confli&s as his Father ſupported him under, carried him 
through, and gave him the victory over all rhat Curſe and: Power 


that might do him or his myſtical Body hurt. Tt was this Death of | 


Deaths that did terrifie him. As for the other he chearfully under- 
went it, reſigned: his Spirit to his Father, trafted his Body jn his 
Treaſury, and was ſo far from being ſwallowed ap by it; that he was 


zloriouſly 1iſen from it; # Evidefic 9s Aguby in the mighty \ God fate Him fawn on his Right Hand in th- prefence' of fi the 


his Work by Fire from Heaven at his firſt Sacrifice, and vindicates his | 


Sin, when he was in the Garden, Luke 22. 49, 45. in his Agony, 


HEBREWS. 


——— — 
— 


Groans that his Soui poured out then witei He prayed more earneſtly. 
Lake 22. 44. that which made him firear through his bleſh con- 
gealed Clots of Blood, fqueezed by his Azony out of his Body, 
which made-him weep and cre loudly ; his Voice a5 well as his Sou! 
was ſtretched out in Prayer ; the like was not exerciied by hinvin his 
Contliet on the Croſs, "Marth. 25. 45, How bitter was his Patfion 
tohim? How fervent, importunate, and loud his Prayers ? How 
did it break through the Cloud wherewith God covered his [acc 
then ? Pſalm 22. repretents in Prophefic what was now tulflled, 
Mark 15. 34, 37. {ue 23. 45. It was in making fatistattion to 
the Juſtice of God for vs that theſe were exercited to ſhew his i; 
ward Compaſſions to us, and to fecure Suſtentation tor vs in our Sut- 
fcrings by Temptations, c>ap. 2. 17, 18, and 4.15, 15. w The 
Etrcacy of theſe mighty Prayers and Supplications is evident by 
their reaching God's Ear, and procurin; hi: Help for him. He 
was helfed, delivered, ſaved, fo the Septragint uſe this Word in the 
Old Teftament, putting kearing tor helping and ſaving, as in P11 
55. 15,17, 18. and 2 Chron. 18. 31. %nm #8 »6c{a;, © iS is the ri-bt 
acception ſtrietly read ; tor as a thing is truly apprehended, it ftir- 
reth up Fear, This Word hath in Scripture-uſe two Sentes, 1. Frm 
the thing feared, by a Metonymie, Fear being put. for that which 
works it, which was not here Death ſimply, for that he ſuffered, 
but what he was more afrai4 of than Death, viz. fom the fear of 
being by his Temptatims hurried into diffidence of hu Father, jnt.4- 
tience in his Agony, or deſpair at the Eclipſe in his Death, which the 
Devil dejfiznd, As to this his Father did hear, anfwer, and help 
him, in his Agony -tent his Anzel to ftrengthen him, Luke 22. 43, 
and which he pertetted for him at the end of his Patiton, when he 
breathed out i11s Soul triumphantly incro his Fathers Hands, 3latth. 
27. 45, 50. and Mark 15.37, 29. Pohn x5. 28, 29, : Or, Sc. 
condly, From the Fear, that godly Fear and Care 1n him not to dil- 
pleaſe God in any ting he did or ſuffered ; this was a proper cauic 
of his Acceptance, and his Frazer being heard, and his Deliverance, 
which is becoming the Mediator. This is a Truth, an mav be ad- 
mitted ; but it ſeemeth eſpecially to reter to the former by his Pre- 
valency, againſt which by Praver he defeated the Devil, was made 
tcelinzly fenſtble of his Temnytations, ſhewed himſelf compatled vi ith 
Infirmitics, thouzh not with tinful ones, and as our High-Prief? 
was rendred pititul and compattionate: to us under our Tempta- 
tions, fo af fo intercede for us 2bove, as He did pray for Himlelt on 
Earth, and to procure-tor us Succour under, and Deliverance front 
them 

Ss Though he were 1 fon, vet learned he obedience 
by the things which he luffered x. 

x He fulfilled his Type in the ead+ for though he were God the 
502 1ncarnate, in 4 nearer and more exccllent Relation to the Father, 
than ans Anzel, or any Hizh-Prieft amons Men His Types, beins ati 
Scrvants to His Father and Him ; God's Son by Eternal Generation as 
to His Deity, by Conception trom the Holy Ghoſt by the Virgin as to 
His Humanity, who for Kis worth might have been exempted from 
ſuch Burdens, yet did God teach Him ( not as if He wanted it at any 
Time) by what He impoſed and Commanded Him, and He learnt 
by what He did agree and covenant to perform A&ive Obedience 
to God's Will, fultliing all Righteouſneſs, being for His Perſon, and 
doing for his Work to a Tittle what God required from Him, but 
eſpecially Paſſive Obedience, by His . experience knowing what it 
meant, freely ſuby<ting Himſelf to His State of Humiliation, Phil, 
2.6,7,8. enduring all the Indignities and Sufferings for Sinners 
from His Birth to His Death, even the moit vile and curſed. This 
the Father injoyned and commanded Him, and He did ohey it- 
read [/a. 53. He who offered Prayers for Himfelf, as an High-Prieft 
offered Himſelf a Sacrifice for us, as ours. By this 6id He finifh His 
Father's Will intirely, experimentally, feelingly, knowing how dit- 
ficult Patience under the Croſs is, and how to pity us under all cur 
ſufferings. 

9 *:And being made perte&t y, he became the 
author of eternal falvation unto all them that obey 
him >. 

y As to the powertul Execution of His Ohce, this God-Man cx- 
ceeds His Types, for having conſummated all the Work to which 
He was defigned by His doing, ſuffering, dying, rifing, and aſcen- 
ding into Heaven 1n the Humane Nature, He perteRed the Work of 
Redemption, and conſecrated Himſelf to His Office. 4x By this was 
He conſtituted, made, and declared by His Father to be, not an In- 
ſtrument as a!l His Types were, but the cauſe efficient, meritorious 
and exemplar of Salvation, by His Sacrifice ſatisfying God's Juſtice, 
meriting and effeRing Reconciliation and Juſtification for Sinners * 
and on his Aſcenſion ſends forth the Holy Ghoſt to qualifie them tor 
the Reception of his Benefits, by working in them what He requires 
and on their Application to Him, He, as their High-Prieſt pleads 
the Merit of His Blond, and intercedes for their Juſtification and 
Salvation, which is the freeing them from all Evil criminal and pe- 
nal Sin, and whatever it ſubjeteth them to in this World, or that 
which 1s to come ; and inſtating them into all the heavenly Privi- 
ledges promiſed in the Covenant of Grace; Righteouſneſs, Holineſs, 
Heirſhip to, and Life and Glory with God, and to be ſafe in the Pol- 
ſeſſion of them all, not tor Time only, but for Eternity. This effici- 
ent Cauſe produceth this only to the duly qualified Subjze& Mankind 
is rendred falyable by the Obedienceand Sacrifice of this High-Pricft- 
but it is only to penitent believing Sinners that He doth com- 


30. 


 municate this, and tor whom He effects it ; thofe who will intire- 


ly ſubmit themfelves to Chriſt as a Lord and King, and be loyal to 
Him, and obey Him, as well as to a Prieſt or a Saviour, continuing 
his faithful Subjects to the end, 7oha 3. 16, 18, 35, compare 3/atth. 
IO. 22, 

io Called of God an high prieſt after the order 0 
Melchiſedeck a: | 

a His Conſtitution by God the Father in his Office, maketh it fo 
effeual; He was ſolemnly proclaimed and declared to be what 
God had conſtituted Him. God nameth or calleth things as they ave 
and as He, hath made them ; and this was done openly, and with 
the moſt illuſtrious Solemnity at his Aſcenſion into Heaven, when 


© - 


lu 
al 


Chap. 'V. Wi 


* Chap. 2: 


; - 
= 


- 
Do 


* 6 x a © : ot —_ — #5 G 
* £5 . 
= pay _—__— - - —_— -: - _ - . —_—__ m— _ 
+ _ « » - RA 
= - hq pl —_ . - _ FM " 
7 __ by wy . bY BY by - 3-5 x _ I - 
% os BE. 4 . £5 $ > = > $$ 
Wm _———_ . _ - . - ws # - ”- - wg _—_ 3 , 
- ae pen We —_ . - M——————— 
Cr nn I TI = - — jos = = _— - 
24 = - ” h - ” 
= 2 A 7 we - __ _ ” ?P== A 
g " - Fr © 7 2 £ ir cen Im©gy w"_— dnt cvs; ug _ - - oa 7 m__ A 
” > 4: 735 rt 4, Elem. _ wy _— —_ _—_ _ - geyogmgrmen 
- p- - F per. CT b- ” : of; , Wy _ ” - p : — "gs 5 - of - 
_ -— wo cagf - ” gs - «Avi o k &. * . 4 -—— + -- 4 © Hm I . 4 bd, 4 —_ _ 
2.47 > © On . bp & x , 7p-6s - D . wot = >. A 2» 
k - > C = 6 Ee * CEE . £ ws __ —_ ting I . 


be ei warn 2 a 


® ; Cor. 


wn 


5. 1,2, 3» 


f Gr. hath 


19 experie 
ence. 


*Orporſedt. 
Mr, ff i their ſenles 17 


da'it of 
Ferfect ion, 


rounding Angels, who did all ſubmit to him as their Head and King, 
and acknowledge him as the great Royal High Prieſt of God, as was 
tforctold, Pal. x10. x, 2. which Words of the Pſalmiſt the Spirit 
further explaineth in chap. 7. where he proves this Gofpel-High- 
Pricſt to be of a more excellent Order than Aaron's, even like 
that of Melchiſedech which it exceedeth, and which muſt laſt for 


EVecr. 
11 Of whom we have many things to ſay, and 


hard to be uttered 6, ſeeing ye are dull of hearing c. 

þ The Spirit here digrefſeth from diſcourfing further of the Prieſt- 
hood ot Chriſt, that he may fit theſe Hebrews to apprehend and 1m- 
prove it when he ſhall enter to it, chap, 79. He beginneth with a 
Reproof, which takes up the remainder of the Chapter, and enters 
on it artiicially from the Dofrine delivered of Chriſt's Prieſthood, 
infinuating the Dithculty of its Reception by them : - of whom, 
ſome would make to refer to Melchiſedeck, but by what followeth in 
this and chap. 7. it can be ſpoken of none but of Chriſt the Truth of 
that Tipe, who was made an High-Prieſt after that Order. And of 
him the Apoſtle was filled by the Spirit with matter, as Elihu ſpeaks, 
7ob 32. 18. Much he had to ſay of this Myſtery, which was moſt 
excellent and weighty, and which a few words could not expreſs ; 
for it was foygunfir GO, not unutterable in 1t ſelf, or difficult for 
him to open and interpret, but for them to underſtand. c Becauſe 
the Ears of their Mind were not created nor proportioned to it : 
they were Babes and Children in Underſtanding ; the Difhculty was 
in themſ:lves, not in the Word or Myſtery : Their intelle&ive Ea- 
culty was flow to diſcern, perceive, and judge of this Dodtrine, 
and their Hearts were averſe to it, being ſo conceited concerning 
the Levitical Prieſthood ; ſuch were the Apol.les at the firſt, Fohn. 
IS, 12. 

12 For when for the time ye ought to be teachers d, 
ve have need that one teach you again which be the 
firſt principlese of the oracles of God f, and are be- 
comme ſuch as have need of * milk, and not of {trong 


meat g. 
4 The ConviRtion of this Fault in their Underſtanding and Will, 


is by the Spirit demonſtrated; for their dulneſs proceeded from 
their nevledt of God's means of Knowledge, and fo were inexcuſa- 
ble; they had time and means enough of improving in the Knowledge 
of this Gofpel-Dodrine of Chriſt's Prieſthood, and to have gained in 
them the abilities of Teachers of their Families, Fellow-Chriſtians and 
Necizhbours both from the Law of Aſes, and the other Scriptures, 
and by the teaching of Chriſt and his Apoſtles. e Yetſuch was their 
Negligence and [dlenefs, that their tinowledge was diminiſhed and 
loſt, and they faln off to the Old Moſaical Ozconomy of Prieſthood, 
Ceremonies and Services, fo as they had need again to be taught 
and inſtrufted by others, which are the 5-3;2 of God's Oracles in te 
Scriptures. Such things as are the fir$ in order, and firs to be 
taught and Jearnt, the very Fundamental Principles of Chriſtianity, 
without the Knowledge of which none can be ſaved, and on which 
all others do depend. They are ſo ſtiled by a Metaphor, ſ1gnifying 
ſuch a ſtate of this in the Scripture, as the Elements have in natural 
bodres which they compound ;, or, like Elements of Speech, which muſt 
be firſt attained, before there can be either an Underftanding, 
Speaking, or Writing of a Language ; they are the Foundation up- 
on which a Syſtem of the Chriftian Religion is raiſed, ſee chap. 6. 1, 
which Principles lye diſperſed in the New Teſtament, and are ſum- 
med up in thoſe Ancient Creeds which are agreeable to our Saviour's 
Words. f 4:3: at ©:5, Such Oracles or Revelations of God's Mind 
about the way of our Salvation, which he hath made to us by his 
Son our High-Prieſt, and which he brouzht from Heaven with him, 
and taught himſelf, as chap. 1. 1, 2. and hath by the Inſpiration 
of his Spirit of Perſons, choſen on purpoſe by him, penned them 
eminently in the Scriptures of the New Teftament, not excluding 
thoſe of the Old Teſtament which are unvailed, opened, and made 
glorious in them, Rom. 3. 2. g Theſe Hebrews had ſo greatly for- 
gotten theſe firſt Principles, that they were become meer Babes 
and Infants in Knowledge, they needed the fir and weakest Spiri- 
tual Ford, metaphorically ſtiled Milk, the moſt plain and eaſy 
Truths of the Goſpe!, ſuch as they may underſtand, and give Light 
to others ; and not the Beggerly Elements of Fudaiſm, as they are 
ſtiled, Gal. 4. 3, 9. and Col. 2.8, 20. which would keep them 1g- 
norant Babes in the Word of Righteouſneſs, and unfit them for the 
underſtanding and digeſting the ſironger Frod of the higher and 
more excellent DoArines of the Goſpel concerning Chriſt's Prieſt- 
hood ; ſuch a Babe was Nicodemw, though a Maſter in Iſrael, 7ohn 
3: 10, 12, "es I | 
13 For every one that uſeth milk þ, is + unskiltul 
in the word of righteouſneſs 7 : tor he 1s a Babe F. 

h The Spirit proves theſe Hebrews ſuch Infants by deſcribing the 
ſtate of them, and of their contrary, and tacitely applying it to 
them under a Metaphor or Allegory ſtarted by him before. For, 
ſaith he, every one of you, who take in nothing but the Elements 
and weakeſt kind of Dofrines, and can bear no other, have not di- 
geſted the firſt Principles of the Oracles of God. 7 Are 4aggtz not 
truly knowing, not proving nor experiencing, never exercifed or praRtiſ- 
e&d in the Word of Righteouſneſ?, the Goſpe!-DoFrine, which 1s 1n it ſelf 
an eternal certain Truth, the Revelation of the Righteouſneſs of 
God to Faith, Rm. 1.15, 17. And the inſtrumental conveyer of 
1t to Faith, a perfe& Rule of Righteouſneſs, making Chriſtians con- 
form exatly to the Mind and Will of God, and ſo reaching the 
ſtate of ſtrong and perfe&t ones, Col. 1. 25, to29. k He 1s but a 
»ew-born Chriſtian, a Child in Chriſt's School, one that cannot be 
experienced in the PerteQions of God's Word, becauſe he 1s weak in 
Knowled;,c, ignorant and unconſtant like an Infant, 1 Cor. 14. 20, 
compare Fe, 4. 14. 

14 But itrong meat belongeth to them that are of 
* full age/. even thoſe who by reaſon of uſe t have 
exerciſed o to diſcern both good and 


evil f. 


HEBREWS. 


1 But thoſe great deep and high Myſteries of th ; 
Chriſt's Natures, their nn nee eg = " His cn8 
fulfilling all His Types in the Old Teſtament, both Perſona] _ M 8 
ſtical, with the Propheſies of His Goſpel-Church. State, ang Hi: Me 
diatory Kingdom, @rc. theſe are the ftrong Meat and Food y 
grown Chriſtians, who have reached me Maturity in the knowled _ 
of theſe Goſpel-Myſteries, and are of a full Age in Underſtandir 
I Cor. 2.6. and 14. 20. and Phil. 3.15, Reaching on to the m2. 
ſure of the Stature of the fulneſs of Chriſt in Knowledse ſn 
Grace, Epheſ. 4.13. m Even theſe who 94 » {5, by a gracious 
habit of Wiſdom and Knowledge infuſed and perteRed by lon Stu. 
dy, Practiſe and Exercite of themſelves in the Word of Righteouſ. 
nels, by which they are able to apprehend and improve the hioheſt 
Doftrines of the Myſtery of Chrift. = T« euN.mowu Are ſtrictly Or. 
gans, or Inſtruments of Senſe, as the Eye, the Tongue, and the Hang 
by a Metonomy expreſs, Seeing, Taſting, and Feeling, and fo is hy 
Analogy applied to the inward Senfes and Faculties of the Squj 
whereby they diſcern and reliſh Goſpel-Doftrines. » re,ne-.;,. 
ſtritly notes ſuch an exerciſe as Wreſtlers uſe for a Viftory with all 
their Might and Strength, being trained up to it by long Exerciſe. The 
Spiritual Organs or Faculties of Chriſtians are well inſtruded, Pt2- 
Qiſed, made apt and ready, as the external ones are, for thei; pro- 
per work. Þ Ilege Narxemy for the diſcerning and differencing things 
ſo as the Mind difcerns what Dotrine is true, and what is falſe a4 
the Word of Righteouſneſs, and the Will chooſeth what is Good 
and refuſeth what is Evil ; the Afﬀettions love Good, and hate Evil - 
as the Senſes external can by Exerciſe diſcern what Food is puſtfu] 
pleaſing and wholeſome ſor the Perſon, and what is nauſeous and 
unwholefome, So the grown Chriſtian is improved by the exerciſe 
of his Spiritual Senſes, that he can by his enlightned Mind diſcern 
higher Goſpel-Doftrines, and by his renewed Will reliſh the ſublimer 
Myſteries of Chriſt as they are reyealed to him ; ſuch the Chriſtian 
Hebrews ought to have been, ſo able Proficients in the School of 


Chriſt. 
CHAT. YL 


An Exhortation to a full Knowledge of the Chriftian Doftrine, i=, 
Fr that from neglef and contempt they might fall into the unpardana- 
ble Sim, and a total Apoſtacy, 4——6. This iUluſlrated by a fimil:- 
tude of Fruitful and Barren Ground ; He has a better Opinion of them, 
and the reafon of it, 7=——10, But ths heeſpeaks to ſtir them up to 
Diligence and firmer Hope in God's Promiſes, which were confirmed 
by Oath ta Abraham and his Seed, 11 18, FHhpe faſtens on 
the thing promiſed, of which our High-Prieff #4 poſſeſſed for ©, 
I9, 20, 

Herefore leaving the Þ principles of the DoArine 


works d, and of faith towards God e, 

a The Spirit having reproved theſe Hebrews for their Fault, dotii 
now counſel and dire& them to amend it. Seeing ye have loft {- 
much time already, and made fo little progreſs in learning Chriſt : 
Let us nt therefore ſtay any longer in the Principles of it, but pro 
ceed to ſome higher degree ; purſuant to which he layeth down the 
Principles of Chriſtian Do&rine in which theſe Hebrews had been imi- 
tated, and the Dottrine of Perfe&tion which they were to purſue. 
Leaving, 15 an omitting or letting go, as to any ſticking or ſtanding 
in, ſo asto make no further progreſs, but to gain higher degrees ot 
Knowledge in the Dottrine of the Goſpel, which enters Novices into 
Chriſt, having attained the beginning. the matter or Work of en- 
trance into the Chriſtian Religion, now not to ſtick at this firſt and 
imperfe& incohation in this Dotrine, b A regular motion muſt ſuc- 
ceed according to the great Mover unceſſantly, for our attaining the 
Perte&ion of the Doftrine of Chriſt, this Perfe&ion, notes height of 
Knowledge, Faith, utmoſt Repentance and Spiritual Change, great- 
eſt ſtrength of Underſtanding, and the fulleſt operation according to 
the Doftrine of Chriſt, in doing and forbearing, the fulleſt perſeve- 
rance of the Mind in the Knowledge of it, and of the Will in cleaving 
toit. c That which would hinder this, was reiterating Foundation 
Work, which the Apoſtle laid with them, by initiating them into the 
firſt Principles of Chriſtianity,the Knowledge and Faith of which th:y 
profefled to recelve, I Cor. 3.11. Epheſ, 2.20. And were therefore 
obliged to proceed in the building both of Perſons and Truths on it ; 
and leſt they had forgot, or others were ignorant what thoſe Funda- 
mental Principles and DoErines of the Goſpel were, he layeth down 
ſix Heads of them in this and verſe 2. which was the common Method 
of Teaching either the Children of Chriſtians or Infidels, that they 
might be Chriſtians, at leaſt profeſſedly, or upon their lapſe to re- 
ſtore them. d The firſt Chriſtian Principle or Doftrine to be learnt, 
was that of Repentance, which 1s the Fundamental Change of a Sin- 
ners Mind, and, in that of himſelf ; it earrieth'in it, Knowledge, 
Convidion of Sin, by God's Law, bitter Sorrow for it, and full Con- 
verſion of the Soul to God from it, as it is deſcribed, 2 Cor. 7. 9, 10, 
11. As from alf ſinful Works flowing from it while lapſed from 
God; dead in Sins, which would have eaten out and deſtroyed thei: 
Souls for ever, Rom. 6. 23. and Epheſ. 2. 1x, 2. Suppoſeth the 
Knowledge of other Traths preceding it, as their Creation in God's 
Image, their Apoſtacy from it, the Mitery conſequent, (5s. Theſe 
Hebrews were to proceed and advance daily in the Exerciſe of this 
Grace. e The ſecond Chriſtian Principle or Dofrine is of Faith on 
God, comprehending the Habit and As of that Divine Grace of Ev1- 
dence, Subſiſtance, Afﬀent, and Aﬀfiance, Chap. 11. 1. allthe Effetts 
of it , and this exerciſed on God in his Efſence, Relations, eſpecially 
in his gracious Contrivance and Execution of the Work of Redemp- 
tion for Sinners; as giving Reconciliation, Righteouſneſs, Holineſs, 
Adoption, and Eternal Salvation through Chriſt, fulfilling all Righ- 
teouſneſs by his Death, as a Sacrifice ſatisfying his Juſtice, and me- 
riting, as purchaſing all theſe Bleſſings for Believers, and efteually 


from Heaven is diſpenfing them to them. 


2 Ot the Dottrine of Baptiſms } and of laying on 
of hands g, and of reſurre&ion of the dead Þ, and of 


| eternal judgment 7, 


#f The 


of Chriſta, let us go on unto perfeFtion 6b, not , 
laying again the foundation c of repentance from dead beginning 
in Cr, 


Chap. VI, 


7 Or, th 
wd fthe 


VI. 


* Or, tht 
pg fri 
egtrning 
n Crs, 


- Ba 


= wo 


Chap 


 *AQs 18, 


21, 


* Mat. 12, 
£31, 32, 

© Chap. 10, 
£1 John s, 
Þ15. 

{T John 4. 
F10, 


VI. 


f The third Fundamental Dodtrine in which theſe Hebrews were 
initiated, was tlie Dy@rin? of Baptijms ; containing in 1t the Do- 


arine which Baptihm teacheth, as, that of the Covenant of Grace, - 


of which it is a Sizn and Seal, and of their entring into it who 
partake of it, which as to its Dutics and Priviledges 1t tealed and 
confirmed ; and the Dottrine in which Bapti/rrs are taugitt, as that 
of Chriſt by Water, and by the Spirit, Matth. 3. 6. and John 3. 5. 
and containing in it the D:Xrine of the Seals of God's Teſtament, dt- 
jtin& from the other Doftrines of Faith; by the uſe of which, ſuch 
who had ſolemnly profeiled their Repentance, and Faith and Ovedt- 
ence to the Goſpel, were ſealed and confirmed, B.pti71ms 1n the Plu- 
ral raiſeth the Doubt, whether it immediately concern the initial 
Seal of the Covenant, which fome ſav is ſo ftiled as an Rebraifm, 
the Plural Number beins put for the Singular ; or, from the nume- 
rous Partakers of it at Set-times, which were called Days 0f Baptilms, 
or from divers Adminiſtrators, and the Baptiſms of Beltevers and 
their Seed, and that ſo they were many. Others would make theſe 
to be Jewiſh Baptiſms, trequently uſed by theſe Hebrews, as Ele- 
ments "to teach Faith and Repentance, and leading them to the 
further Knowledae of Chriſt. And the more they tutpect this, be- 
cauſe theſe Brptiſms are uſed but four times in the New Tettament, 
and always fignifyinz 7ewiſh ones, as chap. 9, 19. and Mark 7. 4,8. 
2 The Fourth Fundamental Dottrine, or Principle was, the [mmpo- 
fition of Hands, which by Chrift and his Apoitles, were uſed either 
for healinz Diſeaſes, Mark 6. 5. Luke q. 40. Ls 23. 8. or com- 
munication of Blefſins, Matth. 19. 13, 15. or for the communica- 
tion of the extriordinary Gifts of the Holy Ghott, to fuch who 
were ſeparated for Chriſt's Service in his Church, Acts 6. 6. and 
8.17. and 13. 3. and 19. 5, 6. and fo take in all the ſaving Fruits 
of the Holy Ghoſt, by which they are renewed, increaſed, ſtrength- 
ened, and built up into cverlaſting Life. Others woud make this a 
Primitive Rite of confirming the Eaptized grown up, on the Confel- 
ſion of their Faith, and renewing their Covenant with God, which 
was made tor, and with them in their Infancy, and fo was a prepa- 
ratory Admiſſion of them to communicate with the Church in the 
Lord's Supper. If other places of Scripture did concur with it, 
it would bz more clear and fatista&ory : Some louk on them as 
Baptiſm before to be Jewiſh Rites, which ſhould here lead them to 
Chriit ; but, on their negle&t of him, became beggarly Elements, 
and ſuch as they arc called from here unto higher Attainments 1n 
Chriit, þ The fifth Fundamental Principle and Dottrine of Chri- 
ſtiznity, in which they were initiated, is, the Doctrine of Reſurredtion 
from the Dead, This, as to the propriety and fulneſs ot it, 15 at the 
laſt Day, yet the entrance into tis is begun 1n a nevwv Lite, effett- 
ed by the Reſurre&iovn of Jeſus Chriſt, 7bn $. 25, to 39. - Rom. 
6. 3,to 13. From this entrance are they called to maxe out to 
the tull Reſurrection of the Juſt, as the Apoſite did himfelt, Pl. 
3. 19, tl, 12. This Article of the Goſpel-D5trine all Chriſtians 
were to be founded in, and eſpeciz!ly theſe Hebrews, becauſe it 
was denied by the Saduces among them, Matth. 22. 23. Acts 23. 
6, 7, 8. derided by the Athenian Philoſophers, Acts 17. 18, 31, 
22. And perverted by Hereticks, 2 Tim, 2. 17, 18. and 1s there- 
tore particulzrly aſſerted, as Ceſcribed by this Apoſtle, 1 Cor. 15. 
7 The fixth Fundamental Do&rine and Principle of Chriſtianity, 
iato which they were fo be initiated, was that of the general Fulg- 
ment, finaily determining the Belicvers of 1t to their Rewards, the 
Deniers of it to their Efcrnal Puniſhment, becauſe the one hath oh- 
ſerved, the other violated the Covenant of Grace, Theſe Hebrews 
had begun to reach: this Truth, by beinz reconciled to their Judge, 
and therefore arc to proceed to perfect their Work to the Lord's 
glorious appearance, Chip. 9.27, 23. Ads 17. ZI. 2 Pet. 3. 7, 10, 
Is. Zudev. 5, 14, 13%. Aev. 20. 11, tO 15. ; 
3 And this will we do &, * if God permit. 

þ This conneRs the prime cauſe promoting this progreſs, and by 
whom alone it can be effeted, as well as his Reſolution of finiſh- 
ins his Diſcourſe of the Myſtery of Chriſt's Prieſthood, We will 
really, certainly and conſtantly I-ave our entrance into theſe Chri- 
ſtian, Fundaincntil Principles, and proceed unto perfetion in them, 
all of us real Chriſtians will do this. Others make it a purpoſe of 
the Apoſtle to handle theſe Doftrines at another Seaſon, and that he 
will nov proceed to inſtru& them in the hizher Myſteries of Chriſt 
and the Goſpel, and fo finiſk his deſigned Diſcourſe about them. / If 
God permit, whether it refers to their proceeding from the Know- 
ledge of the Chriſtian Principles, to the Perfettion of Knowledge or 
of growth in Chriſtian Graces, or of the Apoſtle's proceeding to open 
to them the higher Myſteries of the Goſpel ; it 1s not a kind of Pa/- 
free letting things to be done, or giving leave only ; God 1s not ſuh- 
jet to ſo weak a Condition : but 7t 7s all 4, noting God's Aﬀi- 
ſtance as well as Permiffian ; for all Perſons and Things are 1n his 
Power, who worketh to will and todo, Phil. 2. 13, But as to a pro- 
greſs in Chriſtianity, and reaching the perte& Min, 7c. Fpheſ.q.13. 
It he, the Lord of all Knowledze and Grace, hath delight in us, and 
will work this Grace in us, then we ſhall do this, even g9 on unto 


Perfeftion, H9/.1 4-5. Mal.q.2. 1 Cor.3.6, Chap.1 242. 

4 For* it is impoſſible for thoſe whowere once en- 
lightned mw, and have taſted of + the heavenly git z, 
and were made partakers of the Holy Ghoſt -. 

m The foregoing Counſel the Spirit enforceth on theſe Hebrews, 
from the dinyzer of Apoſtacy, to which the negle& of it doth diſpoſe 
them,and the terrifying conſequence of it from wer. 4, to 9. We muſt 
g£0 on to Pertettion, unleſs we will draw back to Perdition; ſo that 
he beſpeaks them, You have been tluggiſh and dull, and going back- 
ward already ; leſt you grow worſe, ſtir up your ſelves ; 1f you 
negled it,_ you are in danger of utter falling away : for it is imp"ſſt- 
ble, not in reſpe& of God's Abſolute and Almighty Power, but in 
reſpe& of any created Power in others or themſelves, juſtly, and 
by right, it is impoſſible, becauſe contrary to God's declared W1ll, 
and Reſolution 1n his Church, bv which his Power 1s limited, fo as 
he will never do it, nor ſuffer it tobe done ; in this he will not, 
cannot deny himſclt, ver. 18. and chap. I1. 6. compare Matth. 7. 
i8, and 19. 24, 25. 27im. 2.13, GonSwme, ſeveral Interpreters 
render the Bartilzd who vere i;uminated with the Beams of Di- 
it, other, the Penitent, fach who had been initiated into 


——” 
Hs. 
_— 
— 
N 
power 
ws 
$4 


EBEBREW sS 


Repentance, as v. 1. and think the term once may be limited to Bap- 
t1/ms, whereas it refers to all the other Particulars.  Thete are ſucit 
who are inflrutted in the Principles of the Chriſtian Religion, and 
brought out of the Darkneſs and Ignorance of 7u7ai/'n and Honth2n- 
i/m, fothat they were other Perſons for the Know'edze of Gofpel- 
Truths than before ;, they ſee with a new Light ſpirituil Thinss,and 
have the Mind raifed up to ſuch Objeds, as they kneiy not tefore. 
but they have no new Eyes or Linderſtandings given them, and {> arc 
but as Devils likeAngels of Light, whereas the 1 {zht of a real Chrifti wn 
is the Light of Life, Fohn 8. 12, tee 2 Tim. 1.10. and 2 Pet.t.ig. foch 
ſome Hebrews proteſt themſelves to be, Rom.2.17,18,19. 4nd as Bu- 
laam was, Numb.24.2,3, n An At of Seiife in the Body, but Meta- 
phorically for an A& of the Mind. 7afing in the Soul, is an atp;open- 
fron and reception by it, and but meerly ſuch,and no more. A Taſtc,and 
not a Digeſtion of Chriſt, and his Benchts, as revealed to them im the 
Goſpel, 7oh.4.39.40. tollowed by the ſuperiicial Relifhes of their Joy 
and Peace on their Temporary Bcheving in them, as it was witi the 
Stony Ground, Matth. 13. 2c. A Sinner cnlizhtened, fo as to ſ-2 
Chriſt and the glorious Promifes made to Believers in him ; it being 
agreeable to his natural Principles, and beings not mucit humbled, 
runs away with them with Joy, having good Detires and AﬀeRions, 
but a Stony Heart ſtill, ſuch was Herod, Mark 5. 20. »9 Not by an 
inhabitation of his Perſon in them, but by his Operations in them, 
whereby he js trying how far a natural Man mzy be r:ifee, and 
not have his Nature chanzed ,, as 1s evident in a Socrates, win 
Dicd for owning the Unity of the Deity ; and as the Soritzo, non 
the Kinzdom of Heaven, Murt 12. 24. He 1s proving by {11s 1357 
to them, how much ſupernatual good, and workings toward: © 
vation they are capable of, without the putting forth of the | 
ceeding greatneſs oi his Power to make thei new Creatures,as Gon, 
6. 3. compare 1 Cor. I. 2t. and 1 Pet. 3. 18, 19, 20. Theſe dit 
partake of fron the Holy Ghoſt the Lizht of Naturc, of the Lav, 
of the Goſpel, with fome ſpiritual Power accompanying ail theic ; 
which as they are trials of Japſed Nature, fo arc leileninz miny Pui- 
niſhments by keeping Men off from many Sins, 25 2 Pet. 2. 20. 
Theſe Profeſſors had eicaped; the groſs and outward Pollutios, ans 
Deftlements, that many were drenched with in their Lives, but have 
Luſts abiding unmortificd, from whence thete would arifc in them 
ſtill ; but here 1s no pure Heart or Divine Niture wrouzht jn them, 
and the Luſting Principle is unmortiticd flill; this God accepts 
according to 1ts kind, compare Mari? ro. 21, 22, 

5 And have taſted the good word of God p, an 
the powers of the world to come 9. 

þ So as to reliſh Comfort and Sweetneſs in the Doftrine and” Pro- 
miſes of the Goſpel throuzh Selt-fattery : for thefe hearing of Par- 
don of Sin, and crediting 1t, are filled with Joy by it; as a con- 
demned MalefaQor, hearinz of a General Pardon, believeth him- 
ſelf to be one of the Pardoned, and rejoyceth in it ; fee 2atth. 
13. 20, 2I. and Luke 8.13. Sodid many of the Jews rejoyce in 
John's Doftrine, John 5.35. g Thus ſome of them were affected 
with the powertul Dottrines of the Goſpel, concerning the- final 
Judgment, as their Natural Conſcience was wrought on by the 5Spi- 
rit in the Word, that they feel it as it were begun in them, the 
Sparks of the wrath of God having fet their Conſciences in a liht 
flame for their Sins, as in a Felix, Ads 24. 25. As on the other 
hand, being acquainted by the Spirit in the Word, of Chriſt's being 
a Redeemer, to fave them from the Wrath to come, and to inftate 
them into Happineſs hevond what is attainable on Earth ; Self. love 
doth externally cloſe with the Revelation, and apply it to it fe!f, as 
Balaam did, Numb. 23. 10. All theſe five inftances ace the Work- 
ings of the Holy Spirit on Corrupt Nature for its Improvement, and 
1a their falling from the ſupernatural Operations, they do fin {x f,z»t5 
againſt the Holy Ghoſt, 


6 If they ſhall fall awav to renew them again unto 
repentance / : ſceing they crucity to themſelves the So: 
of God afreth 7, ain pur hz to an open ſhame -. 


r A falling away, or apoſtatizing in proportion like Adam, ſuci 
a rzexTTous as Nis was, Rom. $.15, 15, 17. whereby they are to- 
tally Unchriſtian'd, as he was turned into a2 Sinner; perfidicully re- 
volting trom all thoſe ſupernatural workin» of the Holy Ghoſt, 
whereby their natural Spirit- was elevated, but not changed unto 
their old Swiniſh and Canine temper of Sp:rit, and couriz of Life, 
that they led before they protefied themſclves Cliriftians, as 2 Pet. 2. 
18, 19,20, 21, 22. They freely forſike their proteiled Chrittian 
State, and make Shipwrack of all, Jude 4. 10,16, 18, 19. whether 
12a again ought to be referred to fulling away, fo as todenomi- 
nate the Apoſtate no Chriſtian, as he was at frit becore his Proteſf- 
ſion, or to renewing followin:;, it makes no difficulty, tor it 1s a real 
Truth in both parts, only Interpreters generally refer it to the 
latter, as do ours, and fo we ſhall confider it. { They cannot 
renew and bring themſclves to the ſame State they enjoyed, and 
trom which they fell; nor can the Chriſtian Miniſtry do it by their 
Exhortations or Counſels, Thunders or Comtorts, the offended, 
wronged Spirit withdraws, and will not affiit or elevate theirs to 
at above Nature again, Ger. 5. 33. Iſa. 63. 10. but leaves them 
juſtly to themſelves, ſo as he will neither by himſelf, nor by others, 
ſuffer it to be done, having limited his Power by his Wil! in it, 
They ſhall neither have a new Principle infuſed into them, nor their 


Minds or Hearts chanzed by him to Repentance, becauſe they have 


undervalued his lower Operations and Motions on their Souls, re- 
vealing Chriſt to them through the Goſpel; and have by their 
Sinful Nezlizence not improved them to ſeek from h1m the better 
and higher ones which he mentions, vey. 9, 19. and were to be ef- 
feted by the exceeding greatneſs of his Power. «ft That which 
renders this Renovation of them impoſlible, is their ill treatment, 
by their Apoſtacy, of their Redeemer, who was to bring them as 
Children to Glory, which they by the Goſpel knew, and by Pro- 
feſſion owned him aſcended and ſat down on the Richt Hand of 
God, and who had hy the Opcratian of his Spirit, elevated their 
Natura! Prigctples ſo to difcern him, and to confeſs him; by this 
their Apoſtacy, they look 'on kim as an Impoſtor :nd Decciver, as 
2 Pet. 2. 1. Jude 4. and deny him to be a Saviour i them, re- 


L 


16A] jE9:ng 


Chap. VL 


pA 


Sa E 


-—- 


n n 
I IE: wy I $: 
- ee ee me im ans ” 
27 % . 
- F ” 
Re -4 
7 


HEBREW S, 


; 3's Sacrifice, and would 2s mucit as in them Jieth, detiiron? 
i” H2 were within their reach, wouid cructie him again,and 
1:der their fect, as cha. 10, 29, and aftually do it to 

embers; {as itite Fulran did-in former Ages,and 

at tins dav. Maeahoy vorniirac, Making 111 a pub- 
zamile, az the 7ews did by the moſt cruel and 1gno- 
| Ir reproachiui carriages to him tnen, 
and 1n which his are to imitate 

| Apoſtates verbally and praftically 
2nd ciſcrace him; in their eſteem viliſying him, and 
&apriticy put him to an open and publick Ignominy, and 
aim « ſocAacie of the vilet reproach, as it the could tind no 
47, and thereiore renuunced him, and this to the conagem- 

4 deftroving of themſelves, ſince they cannot Repent, Chrilt 
purchated it for, nor God promiſed it to any tuch ; io 

ww of his Rinzdom their fin is irremiffible, the Blood of 

2ul only remove it, beins profancd and trampled on 

| {o their anal -DeftruQion unavoidable. : 
the earth which drinketh in the rain that 
"on it 7, and bringerh forth herbs meet 
iverth bleſhing 


. 
CLP 
EF: 
is 
, + + & 


. 
F 
' 


FRISd ofr 17 

ww Eic.kS+ »# 1 

k x _ — 4 * - E F 4» AW..1 LW 
Y [2 Z1OIN Ir I5 CiS&LICU v5 


- 


F 
' 
y 
( > 


* is narr.tive here, and not rational, introducing a Parabolical 
iuftration of the ſtates and ends of truly rezenerate Chriitians, 
id unrezencrate Apoltates ; as if he ſaid, You have heard the 
| of true perTa Chrittians, -and the evil of Apoſtates, you necd 

rot to be offended at it, or wonder, for it is with them even as with 
 Exrth, which is the good ground in Chriſt's Parable, Matth. 13. 
2.8, and which he interpreteth to be a god and ho- 

be 2.-15. renewed in a Sinner by the Holy Ghoſt, na- 

- {me Mould with all others, Ezeh. 11. 19. and 36. 
the Earth diinks up the ſhowers moiſtoning and fruttt- 

0,12. fo this Food and honeſt Heart receiveth 

the Iriritual Dews and Rains deſcending from Heaven on it 1n the 
Word and Ordinan es, as Dent. 32.2. x It bringeth forth all 
; > who dreſs it, according to Go!'s Inftitution, 
S9 theſe good Souls bring forth 


N = - I i 
5 &#K * \ | EELEEW, ”. ES * 
ON FIUELE iON L1G 


er, 1.17, 12, and. 5s, 6. 
Tut which God relifheth and delighretiy in, as ſuitable to his Huſ- 
compare 2 Pet. 1. 5, 5, 7, &. and 2 Cyr. 
3. 22, 23, And ſpci as the great Manurer of Souls 
x them, 1 Cor. 3. 6, 7, 9. y This good Ground 15 
made frvit'ul by God's Eleffins, and the more fruitiul it 1s, the more 
Bleſſing it recciveth, Gen. 27. 27, This Fruitfulneſs js not the me- 
itorious cauſe of tits Bleſſing, for that 1jueth from Grace, but 1t 
gualifeth theſe good Hearts for it, 7. e. the continuance to ſuch 
Souls of the means of Grace, and their increaſe in ſpiritual com- 
forts, tif] they reach the poriecttion of Elcffing from God in Eternal 
Life, v. 9. ; 
S Bur that which berreth thorns and briars -, zs 
Hed e, aid is nigh unto curing 6, whole end 7zs to 

be burned. 
7 4: but, introduceth the ſtate an1 cnq of a finful Apoſtate, 
that i! Earth, frowered upon as well as the good, the unregene- 


! 
> 


- 
” - 
2 


A 2 
- 49 


F<EjT 


[ 5 8 
ritc Soul that had Goſpel Dews, and Spiritual Rain, by. the Word 
er out of it, not Herbs or Fruits ft for its owner or drefler, but 
Briars, Thorns and Thille:; io Apoſtates under all enhightnings 
and taiting of thoſe ſupernatural Dews of the Spirit, bring forth 


% 


ind Ordinances eroptdown on it from Heaven ; yet bringeth torth, 
: 


2nv, unrezencrate Soul, nothing but Corruptions and Evils, 
ther rooted Lofts thruſt out and fprunz together with their com- 
mon Gifts, Luke 8. 7, 13, 14. The words and deeds of whom 
KY USH ApoSitioy, dC CA 2 

by the Owner, 

\ a Reprobate Mind, approving Evil, rejeding Good, and 
are fo rcjeted of God, who with-draws his, Spiritual Dews and Or- 
dinznces, and the corcurrence of his Spirit with them, as unworthy 
of them. and uſeleſs as to any food Fruit to be produced there, 
6 Such are look'd vpon as the Mountains of Gilboa, accurſed,2 Sam. 
1. 2x. and to be dealt with by the Owner, as the fruitleſs Fig-tree 
by Chriit, Matth, 21. 19. MHarh 11,21. So theſe Apoſtates are 
under the Curſe, 2 Pet. 2. 14. Delivered up Judicially by Chriſt, 
to blindneſs of Mind, . and hardneſs of Heart, and even to Satan 
tymicit, as the Unbelieviag 7ews were, John 12. 40, and thoſe 
A poſtites. T1 Tim. 1.19, 20. c The end of Briars and Thorns 1s 

2 bire, they are fo be burnt up by it, and this will be the final 
we wt Apottates, to be deitroyed by a Chriit whom they have 
rejeftcd, with eternal Fire, Chap. 10. 27. and 12. 29, Matth. 3, 
12. and 25. 4I. 2 Tief]. 1. 7, 8, 9» 

g Bur beloved, we are.perſuaded better things of 
vou d. and things that accompany ſalvation e, though 
we thus ſneak. 

4 ior preventing of the Application of this Diſcourſe unto them- 
ſelves, the &Apoſtle ſubjoins his Judgment concerning theſe Hebrews 
in this Veriz, and his reaſon tor it in the next; although we have 
ipoken of the attainments, ſtates, and ends of Apoſtates, we retlett 
nt on you by it 3 But, or, notwithſtanding we are perſuaded : 
whici Word imports not a timple conjefure, for he had the gift of 
diſcerning of Spirits, and the Holy Ghoſt, who indites 1t, did very 
well know them, ſo as he was con/went of their good ſtate and con- 
o1t7090 'n Chrigtianity, and the Spirit teſtified ſo of them by the E- 
piſtics of theother Apoſtles direQed to them; they were well afſu- 
red of tins, and certain, not only becauſe they were fuch whom 
bc Carly loved, B it it were only a good or charitable Opinion in him, 
but becauſe of their Pelation to him as true Chriſtians, and Members 
of tne One Eody of Chriſt, and fo they were very dear to him, 


x s before, v. 4, 5. even -- the ſaving 
new $S2ls, not by giving them Lizht only, or 
but Ly giving them a new Eye of Under- 


CI? 


Chap. 


; their Min 

a | | \ 
: TT 's befter, more « 
lent, and of another kind than that of Apottatcs, evincec 
e Such things as have Salvation in them, even the Spiritual wi; 
which hath Eternal Life in the Root of it, A298. 6, 1c, 1x; x4 
17. That Divine Nature which the Apoſtic ſiith was in the tn. 
Perſons, 1 Pe. 1.1, 2,3, 4,$- and 2 Pet. 1.1, to 4 
the ſtate of their Spirits to be a State of Grace, which had <7 

in it, ſecured by Promiſes to it, fo 25 they ; 
Union not to be dittolved, 

10 * For + God zs not unrighteo.s f. rs tort + 
work 2, and labour of love, which vo fiye 
towards his Name, in that ye hue min 
Saints, and do miniſter fb. 

f Fr introduceth the reaſon of the Apoſtie's form: 
concerning them, which was the real Gracts of Faith'an 
God wrought in their Hearts, 4nd ſhown in their Work, which 
better than all En/ightrings. The Affirmative is Kupiicd, God 5; ; 
and faithful, and true, in perioranng what he promfetr, 
not unrighteos ;, the certain Truth is aflerted ir ris Empinatt 
Pative, COMmpare 2 Theſ}. 1.6, 7. with 1 7eln 1. 9. fi: 
perform he would be unjuit. £ God always reme. hors all 
becauſe his Knowledge 1s periect, and he will take noiticu ot! 4 
in theſe Febrews manifeſted by their Works, to as tg rc: 
and reward them {or it, by pertetting his gracious Work 41 7: 
winch having; promiſed, the Apoſile 1s confident of ttc 009 ol! 
of them through Grace, Phil, 1. 6. He will never forget 2! 
of your Faith in his Name, your courasious Profeffi a of ti: coin, 
Gal. 5.6. Col. 1. 4. 1 Theſſ. 1.3. A Grace of God in them vihich 
made tneir Souls delizht in him, ſuch as was purely Divine, þ >. 
n:ng and ending in God, carried out in the labour and exerciſs 0; it 
to his Glory, fhewing it in all the ſupplies they ;.ive his {a iis Nam 
to Chriſtians as they are his, 3/ark g. 41. Þ Their labour of |: 
was evidenced by what they had done, and were doing for Chr:!!. 
in their ufing all effetual means for ſupplyins, comtortinz, pr. 
ſerving, and delivering his Members, giving their Gods to tl: 
and their Lives tor them, 1 7ohn 3. 10. to 18, So the i. 
ſerts theſe did, Chap. 10. 32, 33, 34. So did Aquila and Priſcilla 
love Paul, Rom. 16. 3, 4 And this they did ſhew to ſuch is ery 
Gad's Children, and bore his Name, the preſent ſufferins Cliriflians, 
who endured Rifling, Plundering, Buſhing,  Irapriſonment and 
Death, for their Faith in Chriſt's Name : Thoſe Brethren who bei; 
loved 1n and for God, do eviderce to theſe F2brews, That they arc 
paſſed from Death to Life, 1 Fobn 3. 14. 

11 And we defire that every one of you do 
the lame diligence 7, to the full aſſurance of 
unto the end &. 

z Having thus commended them, to fhew he did not flatter them 
in it, he diſcovercth what was wanting in them, and introduccth it 
with the Particle, But, we defire you; 677290 (45 1451, properly fi-nineth 
the inward Afﬀeitimm and flrong defire of Heart that the Apoſtle had 
of their further Profit, The Spirit Juſted in him for this, Gal. 5. 
17. winch was not only convenient for them, but neceilary for ther 
Perfettion. And this Deſire of his was not for all promifcuou!!y, 
but that each finsle Perſon, who ras a Lover of God ard his $.nts, 
ſhould uſe all means diligently, as they had in degree done 
to have this perfe&cd to the end of their Life, 2 Pet. 1. 5, / 
[t 15 an earneſt agitation and haſtening of Spirit within, and a dc- 
monſtrative Diſcovery of the ſame without to the utmoit, Ro. 2. 
7. k Their Souls with full Sails conſtantly making out after this 
moſt certain and tull Afurance of Faith, to the excluding of every 
doubtful Thought of the Truth of God and his Promiſes, and q 
Hope, ſhutting out all Wavering, Unſcttledneſs, or Impoticrce n 
waiting tor the Accompliſhment of the Good, which is {ccured y 
the Merit and Interceſſion of Chriſt, the Purpoſe, Promite and O.it' 
of God to them, Chap. 10. 22, 23. COMP. Rom. 4. 21. Colof. 1. 24+ 
Hope here 1s not ſynonimous with Faith, yet its certain concomt: 
tant, and 1s a vehement defire and longin/z after, with a piticnt 
expe@ation of what is poſſible, and ſure to be enjoyed, vecaule 
God hath promiſed and ſwore it, though it be at never fo {-reat a 
diſtance, yet to be communicated by kim to his in his 4cft time, 
Chap. 11. 1- comp. Rom. 4. 13. Tit. 1. 2. 1 Pet. 1. 3,13, 21 This 
Chriſtian Dilizence muſt continue to the end of their own Days, 
and the PerteGtion of their Grace in Glory, until they come unto tne 
intire Poſleſſion of what they believed, hoped for, and were tully 
ailured of, 1 Pet. 1. 9, 13. Rom. 6. 22, : | 

i2 That ye be not flothtul / but folMwers 0: 
them 7, who through taith and patience inhuiit ts 
promiles 77. | ; 

1 Tf you will be diligent, away with f2th, you are inclined to it, 
Chap. 5. 11. and though you be guick in Aﬀettion, yet flow in un- 
derſtanding the Myſteries of God ; and though you have [2oured, 
yet not with that intenſe Labour to which he here prefſeth them, 
even to an utter Abolition of all the degrees of Sloth, m Mmm 
ſtritly Imitators in Diligence and Pains-taking of the Believers, who 
have performed this Duty before you, n In their Graces imifate 
them, as in Faith, by which they reſted on, as credited God's Pro- 
miſes revealed to them of things inviſible, excellent, and diftant,and 
which by no Creature-power, but only God's, could be attained, 
Chap. 11. 1, 9, 10, 15. and 13. 7. In Patience, becauſe the tings 
promiſed are future, and at 4 great diſtance from them, waiting 10r 
them, ſuffering many Evils from many, paſſing through Fire and 
Water, Iſa. 43. 2. and ſtaying God's leiſure to obtain them, C247. 

d1i2.1. Rom. 18%. 4,8. James 1.3, Thoſe they were 


Ll 
oe 


rA 119014 1” HT. > 4 - 
iC MaC)ATG FA% _ LL . 


4 fY y 
HT) Jt } 
- I v4 S 4 + 


] 
} 


IC WW 


[4 
hone 


" . 
D@;Qre 
JA 9 
-_- 
LO 


' 
z 


Al 


were to be blc{i-d; Gen. 22, 18, rt Qt 


£ IV 1 


| ham inherit the Promiſes, when he did got revive them, 45 15 Ie 


Chap. VI. 


fixd, Chav. 1t. 12 ? This is certain as to the Promiſes of ſpiritual | 


| *Exod.22, 


HEBRETWS'S. 


ntly to ihevw 


17 Wherein God willing more aband 


bv 2 
"HL 14 nniver > Ne { iacation, | i rnos #: = x . ER | 


Siantincation, Aloption, and Salvation by Jefus Chriſt ; thete they 
received, as is evident, chap. 1. 10, 14, 16. and Rom. 4.2. to 26. 
ſuch Promiſes as were of ſpecial Conſideration, and reſerved to a 1ct 
time, as the Pofleflion of Canarn, and Chriſt's Incarnation, John 8. 
55, Theſe they did not receive, tho' they ſaw them ſure to their 
Seed by Faith; but for Salvation, and Glory, and Heaven, carried 
in the Covenant of Grace, they did perſonally enjoy; of the others 
they were Heirs, as given by God to them. | 

13 For when God made promiſe to Abraham 0o, 
becauſe he could ſwear by no greater p, he ilware by 
himſelf g. 

9 Fr is a confirmation by inftance, thar Faith and Patience had 
made ſome to inherit the Promiſes, as Abraham, and what was 1n- 
fluencins of him in the exerciting them, viz. God's Promiſe and 
Oath. Gid Almighty, who was as able to perform, as to make a 
Promiſe, Gen. 17. 1. having made a Promiſe to Abraham the Fa- 
ther of Believers, that he would communicate ſome Temporal and 
Spiritual Good, which by it He gave him a right to, and bound 
hinfelf to perform, which ſummarily was Chriſt the Redeemer to 
lhe of his Seed, and J/aac his immediate Seed to be a Type of Him; 
this * Promiſe at the Offering up of his Son T/aac God confirms to 
him by Oath. þp An Oath is to be made by the-greateſt, who 1s 
able to make good all, and to judge after his Will ; by nothing un- 
der or beneath God muſt there be any Swearing. -q As the belt 
and greateſt, Jehovah Himſelf confirming that which was evident | 
and certain, by that which was moſt fo: A ſtrange condeſcention 
ot God the Son, the Angel of the Covenant, to a Creature, to litt 
up his Hand to Eternity, and to lay it on the Altar of his Infinite 
and Unchangeable Being, to pawn and pledge His Deity, That He 
might give the higheſt Afﬀfurance ; and tis willing that 1t ſhall be 
forteited and loft, if Abraham tall ſhort of what. He hath pro- 
miſed to him ; ſee the Oath, Gen. 22. 15, to 19. An Oath con- 
firming the Covenant of Grace to all Believers, as firmly as to 
Abraham. 

14 Saving, Surely, bleffing I will bleſs thee, and 


ſr q 
mulriplying 1 will multiply thee 7. 

r Here 1s laid down the form and matter of God's Oath, the form 
in Gen. 22, 16.-is implied in the Particle 1 in this Text well ren- 
cred ſurely, chap. 3. 11, The other defettive Expretfions are forms 
of Swearing, as if, except, unleſs ; but here it is poſitive, ſurely, or , 
verily, which Chriſt frequently uſeth ; it is a vehement Afertion 
of what He faith ; the whole matter of God's Oath 1s not repeated, 
but the ſubſtance and comprehenſive part of it, which made for the 
Apoſtle's purpoſe here. By Bleſſing, in the Hebrew manner of ex- 
preſſing, 15 carried the abundance and certainty of all that Tempo- 
ral and Spiritual Good, which He would convey unto him in and 
through the Bleſſed and Promiſed Seed, our Lord Jeſus Chriſt, with 
the multiplicity, abundance, and certainty of theSeed natural, and 
believing, to whom he ſhould be related as a Father through Chriſt, 
as is evident, Gen. 22.16, 17, 18. and all this fo uttered, as if God 
could not expreſs how much He loved him. 

i5 And lo after he had patiently endured /, he ob- 
tained the promiſe ?. 

# Abraham's Carriage was ſuitable to this Sworn Promiſe, his Soul 
did patiently wait for ir full Thirty Years, enduring and ſuffering 
many Temptations about it; yet he overcame all, and continued 
firm in the Covenant to the end ; his Faith extended- his Soul in 
a patient expe&ation of its accompliſhment, without doubting, or 
murmuring, knowing God would fulfil it in the beſt time ; he was 
a long-breathed Believer, John 8. 56. Rom. 4. 20, 21. and fames 
1. 2, 3. © He did not fall ſhort of any piece of the Promiſe, but 
fully. pofleſſed it at laſt, both in 7/aac, the Type of the bleſſed Seed, 
and the Meſſiah himſelf, as to all the Spiritual and Eternal Good 
promiſed in Him, and by Him, in the Heavenly Canaan, Matth. 


22. 32. 

16 For men verily {wear by the greater z, and 
* an oath for confirmation zs to them an end of all 
{trite . | 

u For here is only Narrative, introducing the amplification of the 
Argument drawn from God's Promiſe and Oath, for the quickning 
thoſe and all Believers to make out after the full Affurance of Hope, 
the Promiſe and Oath of God concerning them as well as Abraham. 
That fince Men's Oaths procure Credit, and put an end to Doubts, 
Strife and Contradidtion amongſt them, much more ſhould God's 
Oath put an end to Doubts, and Gain-fayings of Creatures, and 
make them to pive Faith to Him: Men are not Inventors and Au- 
thors of this Ordinance of Swearing, but ſubje& to God's Precept, 
requiring this trom them, and in this ſpecial part of God's Worſhip 
inſtituted by Him, they ought to ſwear juſtly, and according to His 
Will; and ſwear they muſt by God only, who knows the intentions 
and ſecrets of the Heart, and who 1s abſolutely greater than all ; the 
Omniſcient, Omnipreſent, Omnipotent and Sovereign Lord of all 
Perſons, who knows falſe Swearers, and inflifts on them not only 
Temporal, but Eternal Puniſhments. The ſwearing by any other, 
God rebukes, Deut. 6. 13. Fo. 4- 2. w And in this ſpecial part 
of God's Worſhip, God 1s called in as a Co-witneſs of the Truth of 
what is ſworn, and as 2 Judge and Avenger of it, if it be other- 
wiſe; and ſo the Oath becomes a confirmation of Faith and Confi- 
dence of Men one in another, and of Love accompanying the ſame; 
ſo that if Strife, Doubt, Suſpicion, or Jealouſie, ariſe among them 
about either Words or Deeds, which are not knovn to thoſe who 
doubt, and cannot be cleared by Senſe or Reaſon, or any other way, 
but a Teſtimony of ſome Perſon who knows them, whoſe being in- 
ſufficient of it ſelf, calls in God by an Oath as Co-witneſs, with 
whom it is ſuppoſed he would not break his Intereſt, nor invocate 
Him againſt himſelf, by declaring what is falſe : On this all Strife 
and Contradiction is to be decided among Men, and to ceaſe, and fo 
the Controveriie to be determined, 


Vol. Il, 


counſel s, + confirmed 77 by an oarh 72. 
x The Apoſtle having tated the Nature of an Oath in the Ant: 
cedent, fubjoins and applics it in a Conſequent, 1n which he f:c1vs 


ilC back tv 


which matter or caſe, viz. God's a& of Promiſe and Oath t9 4tr.:- 
ham, 1t was not limited to his Perſon, but to all his Believing Sred, 
Rom. 4. 23, 24 Out of his own mecr Grace and free Will, his 
Goodneſs and Atcthion to them, without any coni:deration 1n them 
moving Him, but his tree, unexpected, as undeſerved Mercy, dic 
farſt Reveal, then Promiſe, then Swear : What more could He Go ? 
How liberal and abundant 1s His Love in theſe over-tlowing dilcoye- 
ries of 1t? So to reveal and make known His gracious Thouzitz, 
making them manifeſt, perſpicuous and glorious, when none was 
privy to them, nor could reveal them but Himſelf. y The Seed ot 
Abraham's Faith, all true Believers, whom God had made Children 
and Heirs by Promiſe, as Taac, Gal. 3. 22,26, 25. and 4. 25, 27, 
28. Joint-Heirs with Chriſt, Rom. 8. 17. Theſe alone. did God in- 
tend to fecure, and make certain of their Salvation, x God's 
unchangeableneſs in his Will and Decree, as in himſelf excludes ail 
hefitancy, alteration or tranſpofition of what it was from Eternity ; 
God &1d never, will never change one Tota or Title of his Eterns! 
Will and Decree of ſaving, perfetting, and gathering into one, p: 

nitent Behtevers by the Promiſed Seed Jeſus Chrift, which He 9: 
reveal to the World, any without which maniteſtation, a Bciicv. ; 
could have no comfort, and without its Immutability, rotany latt- 
ing and permanent comfort. a 'Eu:nmaw is proper for a Media- 
tor, one who cometh im between twa Parties as a Surety ; and fo 1+ 
juſtly applicable to God the Son, who interpoſeth betwixt God t!1c 
Father promifing, and Believers to whom the Promiſe is made, 12 
Heirs, as a Surety engagin;z to ſee his Father's Promiſe made £00. 
to his Seed ; and therefore confirms it to them with an Oath, tht 
they might know the Promife was immutable,and ſhould be punttu- 
ally fulfilled ; by which means he removes a!l doubts, fears, and jea- 
louſtes about it from them. If they will believe Men who twear, 
how much more ought they to do fo, and reſt ſatisfied with the Oath 
of the Mediator. 

18 Thar hy two immutable things b, in which 7 
wx Impoſſible for God ro lie c, we might have a 
{trong conſolation d, who have fled for retuge to lay 
hold upon the.hope ſer before us e. 

b Another end of the Mediator's Oath is here added, God's Oath, 
and Promiſe, ſpoken to before, which are firm and itedfaſt to Eter- 
mty ; Heaven and Earth may paſs away, but they cannot. c 1. e. 
To ceaſe to be himſelf, for effential Truth to become a Lie, is im- 
poſſible, its utterly inconſiſtent with His Nature. He is uncapable 
to deceive, or ſpeak againſt His Mind, Numb. 23. 19. 1 Sar. 15. 
29. Pſalm 89.35. Titus 1.2, and it isas impoſſible for Him to 
violate His Promiſe or Oath. d Such as will vaniſh all Dounts, 
Fears, Jealouftes, Sorrows, Diſtrations, putting the Heart into a 
quiet, peaceful, ſettled frame, and ſtablithing it in it, whatſoever 
Temptations, Trials, or Perſecutions, it may meet with from with- 
out, or within, to perplex it. e But it is the Heart only of a per- 


ſettled and comforted by them ; ſuch who fly to take hold of them, 
having cleared their Right to them, and poſleffing their Souls of 
them by Faith, ſo to hold taſt, as who would no more leave, than 
Foab would the Horns of the Altar, being a far greater ſecurity 
than 1t, or any City of Retuge whatſoever ; retreating to, and keep- 
ing 1n this ſtrong hold, nothing can interrupt their Comfort, or 


' hurt them, Fob 13. 15, £5. Prov. 18. 10. The, Hope ſet before them 


:s that Eternal Good and Blefled State, which is reſerved in Heaven 
tor Believers, the Obje& of their Hope, ſet out to their view and 
proſecution, as a Prize in the Promiſe, 1 Pet. 1. 3, 4. by 2 Meto- 
nomy of the Effe& for the Caviſe, are Hope, and Good hyped for, join- 
ed together for our purſuit, | 

19 Which Þope we have as an anchor of the ſoul, 
both ſure and ſtedfait f, and which entreth into thar 
within the veil g. 

f Which, taketh in both the Good hoped for, and the Grace and 
A it ſelf of Hope exerciſed about it ; which Grace is by a Meta- 
phor ſet out to be to the Soul, what an Anchor 1s to Ships 1n a 
Tempeſt, when toſſed with Guſts, and Storms, and Billows of 
Thoughts rouling one upon another, to the over-ſetting of it; this 
Hope ſtayeth, ſtrengthens, ſettlcth it, even the Hope and Certainty 
of Eternal Reſt and Happineſs, ſecured to them by the Promiſe and 
Oath of God. This Hope is fate and firm etficiently, and niakes the 
Soul in the midſt of all the threatning Temptations from a tem- 
peſtuous W orld, ſafe, becauſe faſtned on God's Promiſe ; and firm, 
becauſe ſtrengthened by God's Oath, which will hold out all Tem- 
peſts. g This Hope, like an Anchvr, 1s firmly placed, hath wrought 
it ſelf into the beſt Hold-faſt, even the innermoſt part of the Veil. 
The Veil was that in the Tabernacle and Temple, which ſeparated the 
Holy Place from the Holy of Holieft. This Typical Veil was rent at 
the Death of Chriſt, and the Holy of Holieſt in Heaven ; the Truth 
of that Type was then laid open unto all Believers, whether 7ews 
or Gentiles ; comp. 9. 24. and chap. 10. 19, 20, 21. Here it 15 
that the Anchor of tne Chriſtians Hope is faſtned ; this ſure Har- 
bour, where no Tempeſt can reach or looſen it,but into which their 
Souls, after all their toffings in the tempeſtuous Ocean of this 
World, by the Hurricanes of Temptations, which made them quiver 
again, ſhall be over, will enter with a full Gale, and injoy thatReſt 
and Blefſedneſs for ever, which they had by God's Promiſe and Oath 
on which they relied, ſecured to them. Sce Colo. 1. 5. and 1 Per. 
I, 3, 4, 0 19. 

20 Whither the forerunner is for us entred Þ, ever 


Jeſus, * made an high-prieſt for ever after the order of 
Melchilſedec 7, 


[642] þ This 


that God fware to this end, that His own counſel might appear to 0; 


ſevering Believer, not of common Profetiors, which is fo ſtronuly 


7 


" i ® G-< On FT 


* Chap. 3-T 


Fr 


C hap. VII. HEBREW S. Chap.VII 


bh This Heaven is aQually poſſeſſed for us already by a Harbinger, | the Holy Ghoſt nuw opens to them. His name is a compound of 


who came at his Father's Word to fit and prepare us for it, and tnen 
azain returned in our Nature, and as our Head and Repretentative 
he hath entred, made the way open, and paved the Coaſt tor us 
thither, and made it plain and ſafe; and having taken real and tul! 
poiletTion, is making ready our Manfions ; and when he hath com- 
pleated his Work in us, will comeand take, and carry us thither,and 
put us into the full potleſſion of 1t 1n our Perſons, Ch.g.24.0b.14-2, 
2, 4. 7 Ke deicribeth the Forerunner to be God the Son incarnate, 
tie Seviour of Believers, he that will keep them ſafe for it, and ct 
them ſafe in it. Their 7eſiss, who as to his Otfice is the great Go/pel- 
Hizb-Priejt,nad fulfilled his Type, and putan end to it by his catring 
w:t1in the Veil into the Holy of Holieſt in Heaven, being conſtituted 
by his Father a Royal High-Pirieft, ſuperior to all other Orders and 
Per/ons, an High-Prieft ſor ever after the Order of Melchiſeaec, men- 
tioned before, Chap. 5. 10. where the Spirit begun a Digrefſion, and 
having here ended it, repeats the Deſcription ot him again, as the 
thing to be immediately handled and purſued, as he doth in the next 


6G apt Wy 
CHAP. VU. 

The Hiſtory of Melchiſedec ; his Name and Dignity, ſpeaks bim the Type 
of the Son of God : he is prefered to Abraham, and jo to Leu, 1——10, 
PerfeStion was not in the Priejthood of Leui,for that another PrieSt muſt 
aiiſe after the Order of Melchijedec, viz. our Lord, who is not of the 
Tribe of Levi,but of Fudah,and after the Order of Melohiſedec, 11-15. 
made ſa mt by a poſitive will and ceremonial Law, but by the Power 
and Aminting of the Holy Spirit, and ſhould live always, and hs 
Prieſthood endure for ever, it being more excellent, and conf med by an 
Oath. Wherefore he is pe: fectly able to ſave his, 16=—=25, Our High- 
Prieft was perſetly boly, Sacrificed not for himſelf but the People,and 
that once which laſts for ever, 25 —= 28. _ 
DOR this Melchiledec a, king of Salem 6, prieſt of 

F the moſt high God c, who met Abraham rerurn- 

ing from the ſlaughter of rhe kings d and blefled him c. 
a The Spirit now proceedcth to prove, that the Goſpel-High-Prieſt 


is of a far more excellent Order, than that of Aaron's, by hs being of 


the Order of Melchiſedec, of whom they had read, and whom they 
had in great eſteem, and after whoſe Order they were atiured by 
the Prophet David, another Prieſt was to riſe up in the Church, 
rendring Aaron's Prieſthood uſeleſs, and continuing the only means 
of reconcilins Sinners, and bringing them to eternaÞLife, to whom 
they muſt cleave : Ke initiates it with a Deſcription of the State of 
*{elchifed>c's Order, from ver. 1. to 17. and then proceeds to apply 
it to Chriſt, from ver. 37. to 28, Having aflerted, Chap. 6.20. That 
Feſus was made from eternity an High-Prieſt after the Order of Melchi- 
tedec, and declarcd to be ſo by his entrance within the Veil in Hea- 
ven at his Aſcenſion : He reaſoneth it out, by ſhewing what this 
Melchiſedec was. The Perſon pointed at by this Name, 15 mention- 
ed only once by Xfo/es, and that in Gen. 34. 18, 19, 20, It is cer- 
tain he was a Han who lived by Bread and Wine as well as Abraham, 
and received Tythes from him becoming a Man. His place of Ref1- 
derice was Salem, afterwards called Jeruſalem, in the Land of Ca- 
nan, Joſh. 10.1. The 7ews conceived him to be Shem the ſecond 
Son of Nah, which this Scripture denieth, for his Genealogy 1s 
well known in it; that he deſcended from Cham, third Son of Noah, 
becauſe an Inhabitant in Canaan, and that his Name Melchiſedec was 
the common Name of the Princes of that Country, whoſe Metro- 
polis was firſt called Tedcc, then Salem, then Feruſalem ; becauſe 
the King of it in 70/Þya's time was named 4doni-zedec, which is 
tynonmous with this, 1s all conjeQural ; this 1s certain he was, 
6 Indowed with Royal Power, ſuch as the other Kings in Canaan had: 
The capital Seat in his Kirsdom was Salem, the name likely of both 
his City and Territory ; not that Salem of the Sichemites, Gen. 33. 
18. afterwards cailed Schechem, demoliſhed and ſown with Salt by 
4bimelech, Judg. 9. 34, 45. In Fohn the Baptiſt's time, raiſed 
again and called Salem, Folhn 3. 23, But Salem mentioned Pſalm 
75. 2. more known by its famous Appellation, Jeruſalem. This 
ſhevs him to be a Man, as doti -his next Title. c His Authority 
in matters of Religion, as a prime Miniſter about holy things between 
God and Men, and therefore a Man, as Chap. 5. 1. fet up by the moſt 
high God for himſelf, and Conſecrated in his Order of Prieſthood by 
him, which ſhould moſt ilJuſtrioutly fet out that of his own Son. He 
managed all as a Prieft betwixt his own People and the great God, 
ruling of them in all matters civil, and teaching and ordering them 
in all ſacred things. d He went from 7eruſalem with neceſſary Re- 
freſhings ta meet Abraham, the Friend of God, the Father of Be- 
lievers, a Prince and a Prieſt himſelf, and of whoſe Poſterity was 
to come thz Meſſiah, now returning from his ViRory over Keder- 
lzomer and his Confederate Kings, with the reſcue of his Nephenv, 
and all his, to his Tents at Mamre. As he was paſſing near Salem, 
Melchijedec meets him, and entertains him, Gen. 14. 13, to 21. et 
was an att of his Szcerdotal Othce, ſuch as God enjoined on ſuch 
Othcers afterwards in Numb. 6.23,to 27. and not a common Wiſh 
and Detire only. The matter of Bleſſing is laid down, Gen. 14. 19. 
It was 11. God's Name, by his Commiſſion effeGually denounced on 
Abraham by Vertue of his Office, and God's Inſtitution, the height 
of 200d, and all the good in Heaven and in Earth within God's Poſ- 
:cffion 1s conveyed to him, Gen. 15. 1. 


2 To whom alſo Abraham gave a tenth part of 
all f : firſt being by interpretation King of righteouſ: 
nels g, and after that alſo King of Salem, which is 
King of peace #. 

f By which Tything to him, Abraham owns him to be God's 
Prieſt. As he had received blefling from God by him, ſo he returns 
to God, through him, his Acknowledgments, he divided, ſhared, 
and gave out his part to him, even the tenth part of all the Spoils, 
vr. 4 This ts the 4rit Scripture, Gen. 14. 20. that GIVES Us any Ac- 
count 0! paying the 71:55 of Goods to God in his Prieſts; which 
Cuſtom aiterwards obtzined among moſt Nations, to give the 
Tenths of the 5poils after Vitory to God. And this Abraham 
did, 2s due to the Ohce by Divine Inſtitution, having received a 
Eiciſing.trom it. g The Myftcry of his Name, T1:t!e and Deſcent, 


«- 


177 or 1991 which ſngnifieth a Xing or Governour, or my King 
and "1% Righteouſneſs. A ſupream Governour, not only formal. 
ly righteous in his own Diſpotition, bu* efficiently by juſt and ex- 
ceilent Laws making his Subjets righteous ; a King workinz Ki he 
tcouſneſs in a Canaun, and in ſuch a time of univerſal De-enerzcy 
from It, This God ordered tor ſome ſpecial uſe, (DG ws Type 
out his own Son, God-Man, the great Goſpel-Miniſter, to be the 
King of Righteouſneſs, who purchaſed it for, iniputeth it to, and in- 
fuſeth 1t into Sinners; who 1s fo fully, the Lord ov Righnt emuſne: 
that we are made the Righteouſneſs of God in him, Tn. 22. 1. For. 
23.6. and 33. 15. Zech. 9. 9. and 2 Cor. 5. 21. þ The Myſtery ot 
his Title of Office, King of Salem : The due order of this is 0%ſer- 
vable : he 1s firſt King of Righteovineſs, and atter that he is King of 
Salem, that 1s, of Peace; the Fruit of whoſe Righteous Govern. 
ment was Peace. He. kept thts among his People, and round about 
him, while others were wafting and deſtroying their Kinzdoms by 
Luſts and Wars, This is eminently true of Chriſt The Prince «f 
Peace, Iſa. g. 6, 7. who gave ſome fignal of his Government, and 
begun his Prieftþood in the ſame Salem or Jeruſalem, where Me!chi- 
ſedec Reigned, Matth. 21.5, 9, 10. He 1s eminently the Koyal Pur. 
chaſer, Maker, and Dittributer of Peace, reconciling all things to 
God, Angels and Men, in Heaven and in Earth, and all Perſons, 
7ews and Gentiles, and the Creation it ſelf to recovered Man, Colef, 
1. 20,21, compare-Epheſ. 2. 13, to 18. The Prince and Price of 
our Peace, ſetting Peace within Souls, giving it to them withour, 
Peace, ſpiritual, temporal, and eternal ; his Kingdom aboundeth in 
it, Pſal.72.1,3,7. Iſa. 54-10,13. John 14.27. 7ames 3.18. 

3 Without tarher z, without mother 4, + withour 
deſcent /, having neicher beginning of days, nor end * 
of life m, but made like unto the Son of God 7, ** 
abiderh a prieft continually 0. | 

7 In this Verſe is a Myſtical Deſcription of the Eternity of Chriſt's 
Perſon an1 Prieſthood, ſet out by the Spirit 1n the Silcnce and Omnil- 
11on of things that concerned Melchiſedec and his Glory ; ſothat what 
here 15 repreſented to be typically and in ſhadow, that was Chriſt real- 
ly and ſubjtantrially; for he gives no account of his Father, Mother, 
Genealogy, Birth, or Death ; the Spirit either not revealing 1t to 
him, or ordering him to leave it out, that he might appear the more 
lively and perfe& Type of. Chriſt, being repreſented in all things. 
different from all the Men that ever were, or ſhall be ; ſuch 4 
Prieſt therefore as he was, was Chriſt to be: Not deriving his Prieſt- 
-hood from any Ly Birth, nor leavin 1t to any after him. As Me!- 
chiſedec was without Father, that was a Prieſt before him, or 15 re- 
corded from whom he ſhould derive, as the Levitical Prieſthood had; 
ſo Chriſt as fo his Humanity, was without any Humane Father, con- 
ceived only by the Power of the Holy Ghoſt. þ As to any Scrip- 
ture-Records of it, or to any Title of the Prieſthood by her, as thoſe 
of Aaron's Family had ; So Chriſt, as to his Derty, was without a 
Mother, benz the eternal Son of the Father only, and without any 
Title in his Humanity to the Prieſthood from the Vir:'in, ſhe being 
of David's Family, and not of Aaron's. / There is no Line of him 
deſcribed in the Scripture, mentioning from whence he deſcended, 
or by what Genealogy he came to the Prieſthood, as the 4aromtes 
did clear their Right, Nehem. 7. 64. As to Chriſt, who ſhall declare 
his Generation, or produce the linea] Rule by which he claimeth the 
Prieſthood ? Tſa. 53. 8. compare ter. 12.15. m There 1s no Re- 
cord of his Birth or Death, though he had a Father or Mother, as 
there is of Adam's beginning and end, who had neither : So Chrift 
as to his Prieſthood had no Predecefior,nor ſhall have any Succcllor, 
v.16, 24, 28. As a Sacrihce and the Lamb of God, he had his time 
of entrance into the World, and of his leaving it; yet as God's 
Prieſt, he had neither beginning nor end of days. Pure Eternity 1s 1ts 
riſe, and its end ſhall not be till God be all in all. n 'arwunup I, 
he was in theſe things the Shadow, Pifture, and Reſemb/ance of 
what Chriſt ſhould be in his Royal Prieſthood. In theſe fingular 
Prerogativcs a viſible Type of God-Man; he was the Sign likening, 
and Chriſt was the Truth and Subſtance of it. o Theſe Words, the 
Key to all the Deſcription before. God made many other Perſons 
eminent Types of his Son, but Melchiſedec was the only Type of the 
Eternity of his Royal Prieſthood; for which the Holy Ghoſt ſingled 
him out, dropt him down, as it were, from above, and then took 
him up again, without any further account of him in the 5cripture, 
that he might convey this Myſtery to us. That which hath no be- 
ginning nor end of it Recorded, is as abiding for ever ; which this 
Type had not; and fo fully ſets out the Truth deſigned to be con- 
veyed by it. 


4 Now confider how great this man was p, * unto * Gen.1. 


whom even the patriarch Abraham gave the tenth of 25. 
the ſpoils g. 

p The Spirit compares with, and prefers Melchiſedec before Abra- 
ham, as he was God's High-Prieſt; he introduces it with preſfing 
theſe Hebrews to exerciſe an a& of Judgment under the Metaphor 
of ſeeing, denoting it to be ſuch a ſerious and intent aft, as Calls tor 
the utmoſt Exerciſe of the diſcerning Faculty ; a Careletnels 10 1f, 
or an Overſight might make the Propoſal to be to no purpole. The 
Greatneſs of this High-Prieſt is what he ſets in their view, and that 
indefinitely, How great is this Officer ? Intimating him to be ſome- 
what exceſſive to other great ones; and how much grearer then muſt 
be Chriſt, if his Type be ſo great beyond, not only Abraham, £9, 
and his Poſterity, but this great Melchiſedec, as to his Sacerdotal 
Power and Dignity, q This Greatneſs is evinced by Abraham's(the 
Patriarch, chief of all the Fathers of Jael, whom the Hebrews 
eſteemed above all others, Fohn 8. 53. and God owns as h15 tricnd, 
and ſets all Believers under his Fatherhood) gtving, 4s a duc to 
Melchiſedec, being the greater Perſon in Office, the Tenth of all the 
Spoils, that which was due to God, and paid to him as G9 s High- 
Prieſt ; «xc9Iiov notes either the firſt or choiceſt of the P2aps of 
Grains, eſpecially the firſt Fruits dedicated to God ; but here {1gnt- 
fcth that part of the Spoils, which, according t0 the cuſtom ot! 
War in moſt Nations after the Victory, were offered to God 3: I!» 
part; whether they did contiſt cf Perſons or Things; the tentt mY 


4 


VII 


SLRS} 


Chap VII. 


of theſe were civen by him to Melchiſedec, as the greateſt Prieſt of | 


| Or, with- 
out ped!- 
grees 

* ROM, 4. 
13. 

Gal. 3. 15, 


God in the Worid, and ſuperior to i1mlelt. ; | 

5 Ard verily tney that are of the ſons of Levi, 
who :c.cive the office of the prieftthood 7, have -a 
command :ment to tike rithes of the people according 
to the law s, that 1s, of their brethren, though they 
come out of the loins of Abraham 7. 

y This is a proof, by inſtance out of the Levitical Law, That he 
viho rcceiveth is greater than he who giveth. This Sced of Lev! tne 
Son of 7acb, Son of T/aac, Son of Abraham, Numb. 1. 48,50. and 
3.1, to 5. and not all of them neither, but the Sons of Lewi deſcen- 
dins from Aaron, were' ſeparated and contecrated 1n the Prietthood 
by God's Precept, and vindicated from thoſe who would uſurp 1t, 
Numb. ch. 16, and 17. and confirmed in it by Miracles. s God him- 
ſelf gave them a Law from Heaven #9 Tithe by, and a Charge to ub- 
ſerve this Law, as to all parts of Tithes, ſuch as were due to all Le- 
vites, Numb. 18, 24. to the High-Pricſt only as God's Subſtitute, 
Numb. 18.8, to 19,and 25. to 30 to the Levites Widows and Poor 
together, Deut. 14. 22,t0 29. Theſe the ſame Law obliged all the 
1ſraelites to pay to theſe Levites,as a Homage due from them to God, 
and fo dclivercd to his Subſtitutes ſuperior unto them as his Prieſts 
and JMinifters, and due to them by his own Conſtitution, being 
the Firſt-truits of his own Bleſſing. #& Yet theſe Iraelites who 
were © pay thole Tithes, to thele as ſuperior to them in Office, were 
their own Brethren by Nature, of the ſame Rank, coming out of the 
ſame Loins of Abraham, but ſubje&ted to theſe Prieſts, who, by 
God's Ordinauce, were ſet above them in their Otfice ; and their re- 
celving 7thes, was att inſeparable Property of that Superiority. 

6 Bur he whole || deſcent is nor counted trom them 
7, Teccived tithes of Abraham, and blefied *him rhar 
had the promiſes . 

4 The Proof 1s here applied, ſhewing Melchiſedec to be greater, 
not than the Levitical Prieſts only, but than Abraham himſcif. He 
drew not his Genealogy from any Prieſts before him, but 1s greater 
than thoſe Pricſts, who by Genealogy and Succeffion were made ſuch, 
and ſet above their Brethren by God himſelf : He being indepen- 
dent, having no Progenitor, Prieft, or Succefſor, is greater than 
whom he decimateth. w He decimated Abraham the Father of the 
Levitical Prieſts, and by the moſt High's Order bleffed him, by aſ- 
ſuring him of his peace with God, Grace continually from him, and 
multiplying temporal and ſpiritual Bleſſings to him, according as 
God promiſed, Gen. 15. 1, Fc. And this he did to him, though 
Abraham was a Patriarch, and priviledged with Promiſes above any 
other, yet though God were made over to him in all his fulneſs, the 
Blefſing given him of Fatherhood to a numerous Nation, even the 
viſible Church of God among T1/ael as to all believing Gentiles, who 
had Canaan literally promiſed to- his Poſterity, and even this $4- 
Iem, among the reſt, of which Melchiſedec was King, and the 
heavenly Canaan to himſelf ; and above all, the promiſed Meſſith 
te deſcend from him, in whom himſelf and all Nations were to be 
blefled ; he fo great in Promiſes, is tithed and blefled by a greater 
Melchiſedec. | 

7 And without all contradiCtion, the leſs is bleſſed 


Or tne better x. 

x This Principle is commonly acknowledged it 15 a moſt apparent 
Truth, you Hebrews cannot deny 1t; it is your common Judgment, 
That a Prieſt bleſſing, as God's Officer, is greater than thoſe bleſſed by 
him. He that 1s in a lower ſtate in God's Church, 1s bleſſed by one 
ſet above him in Office by God himſelt, better and greater than he 
for his Place and Dignity in Office. He muſt have the pre-eminency 
for his Bleſſing, which he authoritatively, poweriully and effe&u-' 
ally, conveyeth frum God to thoſe he bleſſeth, repreſenting therein 
God communicating by him the good he wanteth in his Bene- 
diction. 

S And here men thar die y, receive tithes : but 
there he recerveth them, of whom it is witneſſed that 
he liveth 5. 

y His greatneſs as to his Prieſthood above the Levitical, is proved 
from its Immortaltty. Immortal 15 greater and better than Mortal ; 
ſuch is his Order of Prieſthood. This Argument he brings in to 
heighten the former, and ſo conneQts it to it. The Particle «9 here, 
if referred to time, notes during Mojes's Oeconomy, while the Levi- 
tical Law laſted ; if it refer to place, it notes Zeruſalem 1n the Land 
of Canaan, where the Temple was, 1n that Habitation of the 1/rae!;- 
tiſh Church, the Levitical Prieſts were not only as to their Nature 
and Perſons, withering and decaying, ceafing to be on Earth,though 
they had the honour to decimate their Brethren, but as to their Or- 
der and Office 4frtal, they were no better than the tithed and bleſ- 
ſed by them, in reipec&# of Death. Aaron himſelf the firſt of the Or- 
der died, and ſo did all his Succeflors as well as Irael, 7 But 
how much better is Melchiſedec and his Order ? iz« there, may re- 
fer either to the place where his Buſineſs was tranſated with A4bra- 
ham near Salem; or to the place of Scripture-record concerning 
him ; either Gen. 14. -8, 19, 20. where there 1s no account of his 
Death ; or in Pſal. 110. 4. By the Prophet Darwid is the Teſtimony 
born, that his Order is for ever; That Melchiſedec as to his Order 
and Office of Prieſthood, now liveth and ſubiiſteth in the Son of 
God incarnate, and continueth tor ever. It is ſuggeſted by a great 
Light in the Church, as if Melchiſedec was tranſlated as Ennch was, 
and ſo continued a Prieſt to the very moment of his tranſlation ; 
and that neither his Perſon nor Prieſthood died, but liveth for 
ever : but in this the Scripture 1s filent . Another refers it imme- 
diately fo Chriſt, reading it thus; Here, i.e. in this World, they 
receive Tenths, or are Prizfts ; but there, i.e. within the innermoſt 
of the 'eil, wheth-r the Forerunner is for us entred, 7eſus * ſupplying 
this out of Chap. 6.19, 20. Here, 1s tobe und.rtond, not who re- 
ceiveth T*ties, but who is, of whyn rt 1s witneſſed that he liveth. He 
ſaitit this Senſe 1s tobe found in ſo many words, 1n ver. 23, 24, 
25. where 14+» who receive Tenths, and die, ver. 8. are no other 
Men than 7/1je its who were rot juffered to continue by rea- 


many Pie 
z » , * ' - ® © ta . 
27h, ver. 23. Nor he 54 whom 't ts witneſſed that be liveth, 


R Wes 
Hi 07 Fy4 


ver. 8. can be any other than 7ejize, who, wr, 24. 
continueth for ever ; and ver. 25. is ever-living. 

9 Andas | may ſo tay a, Levi altob,. whoreceived 
tithes, paid tithes in Anraham c. 

a The Spirit uo ſets this Prieithood above the Levitical by In- 
ſtance, which Inſtance being not fo proper or dirctt, ht: Form Of 
1ntroducing 1t 1s confiderable, as ws I> Ov» car, as t0 jay the it 078, 
which 1s a Greek Elegancy of Speech, when that is uttercd which 1s 
remarkadle, and yet hard to be undcrftood ; and it is not only 
conclufrue to what was tpoken before : T'l! (reab a word mare, and 
then end the Dilcourte, but interpretative of what hs was about to 
lay concerning Levi, born 152 years after this tranſation ; as I may 
jo ſay, or in ſome ſenje it may be juid, þb Levi, not ſo much taken 
perjonully as colledively ; tor the Tribe that ſprung ot him, who were 
Prieſts or Minifters to 7{jrae/, which Levi perionally was no*f. He 
was the third Son of Faco5, and his Seed God ſeparated for, and 
conſecrated to his Service, ſetling the Prieſthood in Aaron's Family, 
winch was a Branch of that Tribe, ard making all the reſt Servants 
to them. c Theſe did receive theſe Tentiis by God's Law from thei: 
Bretliren, and thefe paid Tenths by, or in Abrcham, and ſo ſheer 
them to be inferior in Oifice to Me!chiſedec, who received this H%- 
maze trom them as due to God, and to him as his High Priet. 
This was not properly, but figuratively ; true Pareats and Chilercn 
being accounted here as one Perſon betore they exift. as well as af- 
ter, Levi, not actually exiſting then, but vertualiy 1n his Parer*. 
Chriſt was in his Loins vertually too, as to his Humanity, but not 2 
deſcend of him by natural Propagation, but by Miracle ;, and in 
as an Anti-type to this Helchifſedec, and one to be ſet above him, 1:1 
whom elchiſedec himſelf was to be bleiſed, and therefore could us? 
pay Tenths to him in Abraharn. 

10 For he was yet in the loins of his father when 
Melchiſedec mer him d. 

d For, introduceth the proof, that Lev! tithed in Abraam, betus 
vertually in him, as his produftive Cauſe z fo near 1s the Unity atid 
Identity of Parents and deſcending Children ; and as truly were the 
Poſterity of Adam in him when he ate, ſinned, and feil, Rom. 5. 12. 
To remove all queſtion of the rruth of it, the time 15 annexed t© 
it when Melchiſedec mer A4br.cham, and blctied him, then did Lew! 
pay Teaths in him, fo as 3felchiſedec was greater ahan the Levitical 
Prieſt; Chriſt typified by him being greater than Iumſelf muſt be 
greater than them alſo. EEE 

11 * If therefore perfeAion were by the Levitical 
prieſthood e (for under ir the people received the law 
f ) what further need way there g that anorher prieſt 
ſhould ariſe after the order of Melchiſedec, and notbe 
called after the order of Aaron ? 

e Now the Spirit infers trom the Dofrine of Meichiſedec's Prieft- 
hood, the dignity and perpetuity of Chri8F's typified by it. So that 1t 18 
not Aaron's Prieſthood, but Chriſt's, which the Hebrews were to utc 
for their Salvation after Aaron's was expired. For Perfeftion was nof 
to be had by Aaron's Prieſthood or Law, but by a better, of ano- 
ther Order, even Chriſt and his Law. The form of theſe words are 
mnterrogative, implying a vehement denial of what is queried in 
them. A perfe&ing of perſons to Life eternal by Expiation, Juſti- 
fication, Renovation, 7c. See Chap.g.g. and 10. I. trecing Sinners 
from Guilt, Stain, Filth, and Conſcquents of their Sins, by an expta- 
tory ſatisfaQtory Sacrifice to God, and fitting of the!: for an eternal 
enjoying him : A Self-effictency to theſe thinzs without Chritt, 1 25 
to the Aaronical Prieſthood vehemently denied ; as to this, that 15 
defe&tive. f For with the Prieſthood, about the time of its Infti- 
tution by God, the I[ſraelitiſh Church, God's covenanted people, 7e- 
ceived the Law; by which, as well as by its Prieſthood, there is no 
Expiation, Remiſſion, nor cternal Life to be obtained, Gal.3.17,18, 
19. compare Ma!.2.4, to 8. This Law and Prieſihond beins Types of 
far better to ſucceed them, they were but leading to them, which 
in the fulneſs of Time were to be revealed, and which ſhould pertect 
what they could not, Gal.3.23,24. and 4. 3, 4, 5- g If was needful 
fince the Levitical Prieſth»9d and Law could not periect Sinners, that 
another ſhould take place which could perfe& them. Dad there- 
fore, who lived above 4oo years after their Inſtitution, and teeling 
their Imperfe@ion, did by the Spirit foreſee and tell of a Roy.:/ 
Priefthozd and Law to take place after this, that ſhould perfe& Sin- 
ners, which could not .be done by any called aiter Aaron's imperfect 
Order. This was the Lord Ch:iſt the Meſtah, who muſt be after the 
Order of Melchiſedec, Plal. 110.4, and who by his Priefthozd and 
Law ſhould abundantly effe& it ; which was far more exceilent for 
both, than any of the Levitical Family can pretend to. 

12 For the prieithood being changed-h, there 1s 
made of necefſity a change alſo of the law 7. 

h For, refers to the Expiration of the Aaronical Order, to whici1 
theſe Hebrews now are not bound, for that a better Prieſthood and 
Law were to fill up their room in the Church. The Levitical Prie/t- 
hond was changed and aboliſhed to make way for this; God detign- 
ing that to continue for a time, and then to expire, 'when the truth 
perfe&ting it ſhould take place. 7 The mutation of the Priefthood 
indiſpenſibly requirech the change of the Law, i. e. the legal Diſpen- 
ſation of the Covenant of Grace, and the bringing in with another 
Prieſthood a hetter Hope, Gal. 3. 17, to 27. compare ver. 18, 19. of 
this Chapter, even the Covenant of Grace in the Goſpel-Ditpenſa- 
tion of it. This was made neceſſary by the Decree of God, who de- 
termined, thit both Priefthood and Law ſhould expire together, and 
accordingly hath fulfilled it. For when Chriſt the Goſpel-High- 
Prieſt had in his Perſon and Work perſetted all of it in Heaven, hz 
roots out that Order of Prieſthood, aboliſheth the Law, ſcatters the 
people which would cleave to it; demoliſheth the Temple and City 
to which he confined the Adminiſtration, fo as all Detizns and En- 
deavours of Fews, or of apoſtate Chriſtians, to repair, or to reſtore 
it, hath been 1neffeQual to this day. 


13 For he of whom thele things are ſpoken, per- 
caineth to another tribe &, of which ro man gave ar- 
rendance ar the altar /, 


H EB R E nz hap. VI; 


- y 
1s the Man th; 


*GCal.2.21. 


Chap. VII, 


þ That this Prieflþozd was fo altered, he proves by Chriſt's being 
f another Tribe than Levis This 15 a Periphrajts deſcribing the 
Pric't after Melchiſed»c's Order. Of whom was thu {id in PſU. 110. 
4. but of Clift, God-37an, the Royal High Prieft of, God, Met. 21. 
42. He, as to his Humane Nature, deſcended of the Trive of 7u- 
au', and not of Lev? ; and fo the 4rontc:! Pitefthnod was ended by 
tim, Chay. 2. 14. Gen. 49. 10. f{ Of which Tribe none was a Prieft 
whoſe work was to afteud the Altar, and offer Sacrifnce ; it any of 
another 7;be pretended to, or would uſurp it, God c:ther ſmote 
them, as Vz77an, 2 Chrin. 25,18, or deſtroyed them as thoſe Re- 
bels, N15. 15. 1, 2, 4, 22, to 36, neither was the Prieſthood hereby 
aade tr1b44), or continued in any ſuch Tribe as in Levi, but conft- 
ned to our Lord only, not becauſe he deſcended of Judah, but ex- 
traordinarily: feleted of God out or it to dilcharge it. 


HEBREWS. 


dience or Penalty ; and this is ſo diſannulled of the Law-maker 
God himſelf, by ſetting up the Goſpel by his Son Prieſt, which is 
moſt certainly true. y For the Moſaical Covenant and Law wanted 
ſtrength to bring about what the Jews ſought by it, and wanted 
g-od Fruit to them who made their boaſt of it, both which weak. 
neſs and unprofitableneſs aroſe from the Hebrews abuſe of it, expe- 
&ing Expiation and Sandifcation by it, without minding the Pro- 
miſe which preceded it, 430 years, to which it ſhould have led then; 
and by 1ts neglect proved ſo fatal to them. For they would be ju- 
ſtified and ſaved by an external Obedience to this Law, without any 
regard to Chriſt and his Sacrifice, by whom alone it could be attain- 
ed,Gal.3.17. to 27. It was ſtrong and profitable to the end for which 
God made it to lead to Chriſt, but weak and unprofitable to juſtife 
or ſanftifie them without him, which was the end they uſe it for, or 


Chap. VI, 


* Mat.1.3. rather abuſed it, 
19 For * the law made nothing perteCt 2, + but * ag, 


the bringing in of a better hope d:d 42 : by the which 35. 


14 For zt rs evident that * vur Lord iprang out of 
Judah 7, of which tribe Moles ipake nothuig Con- 
cerning priefthood 7. | 


\N, E, 2 
., 4» 


1m The proof of this chanze of the Tribe, and of what Tribe he 
was, was undeniably evident to theſe Hebrews from their own Ge- 
ncalozies, and the Roman Cenſe and Enrolment of him. The Pro- 
vidence of God ordering this, that it might be univerſally known 
that he was David's Seed, as well as Abraham's, and as called by his 
Name, Ez:k, 34.23,24. and 37. 24, 25- Our Lord was God-Man, 
Lord Mediator, Pſal. 110. 1, 4. Hatth. 22. 42,45. He was, as to 
his Humanity, born of the Trive of Zudah, as his Genealogy by his 
Mother doth evince, Lube 3. 33. and the concomitant evidence of 
the Roman Rolls, in which his Name was Regiftred and kept in their 
Archives above an Ace after his Aſcenſion. = No Man of which 
Tribe was ſo deiizned by God, or fo revealed to have the Royal 
Pricſthood, hut himielt. None of them having any Right to it, 
as they could prove out of nſec's Writing ;, and the Rule of Prictt- 
hood is to be found there, and no where elſe : So that a Negative 


Tis 


ther vrielt 7, 

0 The Chanze and Abolicion of the Levitical Prieſthood, and Law, 
that the perietiaz one of Chriſt might ſucceed, 1s not only clearly 
repreſented to the underſtanding of all, that they aflent to it, but 
it ;s far more evident from the Eternity of this Prieſthood's Conſtt- 
tution, as is proved ver. 16, Et: if 184 Particle vehemently ailerting, 
as in torm of ſwearing, and not doubting, and theretore rendered 


we draw nigh unto God 6. 


"Bd <7 

7 The proof of this weakneſs and unprofitableneſs of the La is —_ » 
its Imperfe&ion ; it had no ſupernatural moral power to juſtifie cr FOr, tu i 
neither did it}? 


ſanQife any perſon, or to bring them to pertection ; 


[4 


perfect any perſon of it ſelf, fo as to reconcile it to God, or bring jt ©'s" 


to Salvation whatever was expetted by it, Chap. 9. 9. and 10. 1, 2. 
a & But, ſhewsthe oppoſition of Hope to the Law, though the Law 
could not ferfe& any, yet the better Hope, the Goſpel-Law, promul- 
gated to, and received by them, could perfe& them. "Eraorzr,,y 
Superindudfion, 1. e. 1t was brought in, and put in force aſter the le- 
gal Covenant expired, and brought in to abohſh that, fo as by it, it 
was repealed and abrozated. The Goſpel-Law 1s filed better Hype, 
becauſe 1t 1s conveying better Promiſes, Chap. 8. 6. which give firm 
and certain Hope of Sinners perfettion by it, viz. their Injoyment 
of Juſtification, SanCification, and eternal Life. This Hope wrought 
by the Holy Ghoſt in their Hearts, enableth them to obey the Got. 
pel, and ſeals the Promiſes to them. And by this they b have free 
acceſs to God, as Chap. 4. 14, 16. compare Chap. 10. ig. to 23. and 
Rom, 5. 1, 2. not only to Worſtip him, bur to receive the Bleiſing: 
of the Covenant from him, without fear of diſpleating him, or be- 
ing conſumed by him, as under the Law, but in the greateſt conn. 
dence of pleaſing him in Jeſus Chrift, of having Communion with 
him, and of being bleſſed in the Enjoyment of him tor ever . Sec 
Chap. 12.18, to 22. and compare vey. 22, to 25. with them. 


20 And in as much as not without an oath be wﬆ&2: 
made prieſt c. | ; 
c This is a further proof of the Excellency of Chriſt's Prieſthood 


for that. q Like and Parallel 1n order to him, and in all the pro- 
p-rties forctold, which make him a moſt excellent Prieſt ; a Prieſt- 
hood f:r above that of Aaron, upon the account of the Law and Co- 


ww 


above Aaron's, taken from his Conſtitution in it by Oath, He who 1 
made a Prieſt by Oath, is a better, and a greater Prieſt than any made 
ſo without it, but ſo is Chriſt, KaS* 5 is a comparative, anſwered 


-— i Wo. - 
AE On In anna 
I © 


Da mp SLuAdSPI:-422.- 


ye 
= 4 - 


»— om 


wes of n REY - s - _— 
MY —_ 8 4&4- » , + . x 
Rm evgo_—G rr wrt Ie . — ES g - 
G : <4 _- Bo » Fe as 
_ X + » 259 Gaet 
*,, at Wir hx FS 4 4 m—_—_— OOO ET, nts 
wy H_ 4 ___—_ Pa oa gy - oy” LS —— - 


Rs oro 
- Ge — wa 
> a 4 


* G —— 
» - ye * -» py - 
tn” ade - 
: BY 
Rs ; 90-5 
Oo: 2; LOR tn Fa RTE 
So 4 a q 4-4 = 


bl ” 
, "7 , 
: 
[ T2 
” } 
- S 4 
F TIF 
ff 
of 
"x 
: k 
ms T1 
y ” F 
4: a 
[*I0) : 
; * A 
« F } - j 
4 , 
Fg & , 
k , p 
% 4 
»P; "wo \- 
j £ q 
X "© 1 
; jk % ? 
£ u I» 4 
&LY #4 
s 7 45 0 
O *. _S 
EY T3 
[ p : « 
* A * + 
' 
T% [ : 
p ' 
op. : ” 
8 , *; 3% . 
4 IS | ; q 
" : , \ 
4 : "781 , 
: TE _ 
if 5 i: 
- ' C 
c 1 
j0 
[] 's . p 4 
| C's ” ; X 
q . , 
' f 
++ 
hed 
tl 
1 1 
” ? 2 
- L 
; w 
; 
C 
'r 
[5 
vt 
[# 
S 
- 4-4 : 
4 0 
$3 r 
#4 
£ 
'/# LS 
T7! E 
j q % 
TL 
; , F; 
FO. | BL 
18 
o , 
E, 
" i 
; { 
: : . 
4 1 5% 
& 7 
{ . 
t $ 
> ;F- 
[ 
4 
a 
; L 
» 
s 1 
4 $4 
£ # 
0 
- S 
i 
' py 
by 
; 


x 


A __ . mi 
<1 TE tern rey 


venant to which it is related, which was nct only the Law of Na- 
ture. ſerving Ged as Creator, but the Law of Grace as he was Re- 
GC 11 wn, who with the Patriarchs Worſhipped God by, - as 
believed in a Chriſt tocome. r Not only of another Tribe than Aaron, 
but of a different Order from his, 1s conſtituted, manifeſted, and be- 
ginneth the Exerciſe of his Oitice with the Abolition of Aaron's, 

16 Who is made, not after the law of a carnal 
commandment:s, bur after the power of an endleſs 
life 7. 

s The Goſpel-Hizh-Piieft the Lord Jeſus Chriſt, was not conſti- 
tuted, nor contecrated aſter that Order and Rule of God, which did 
Hind the Aaronical Prieftliood, and regulate 1t as to their Conſe- 
crations and Miniltrations, obliging them by annexed temporal Pro- 
miſcs and Comminations, which could not reach an immortal Soul. 
The Moſaical Rights and Ceremonies were bodily, fleſhly, only ex- 
ternal. He was not made a Prieſt by Legal purifying with Water, 
nor anointed with Oyl, nor ſprinkled with Blood, nor cloathed 
with Prieitly Garments, as Aaron and his Order was, Exod. chap. 35. 
and 40. 13, 14, 15, 31, 32. nor initiated with ſacrifices of Bulls, 
Goats, gc. He was not to miniſter in a Tabernacle or Temple as 
they did, which was carnal, and reached only the Fleſh, could not 
explate 13ns, nor procure ſpiritual and eternal Bleſſings, Heb. 9. 1, 
to I1, 12, 1%, 19, to 27. # But was conſtituted and conſecra- 
ted by God according to his powerful Law. He was anointed with 
the Holy Ghoſt and Power, A&s 10, 38. which mighty influence 
cnabled him to execute his Office effefually for ſaving Sinners ; 
and by it he receiveth Life peculiar to his Prieſthood, oppoſed to 
the dead Letter of the Commandment, by which, and under which, 
Souls periſhed by multitudes. But this 'High-Prieſt hath by this 
Law, life in himſelf, and the beſt of life to give out to thoſe who 
wait on his Miniſtry, John 5. 21, 24, '25, 256. and ſuch life as is 
ind:jſlub/e, oppotite to carnal and bodily, which corrupts and pe- 
riſzeth ; but the powerful life of this Prieſt 1s not to be deſtroyed, 
neither in himſelt, nor his People. - He by his Death and Life makes 
eternal Erpiation, and procureth eternal Bleflings for them ; ſee 
ver. 25, and chap. 9. 11, 12, 28. 

17 For he teſtifierh zz, Thou art a prieſt for ever, 


after the order of Melchiſedec tv. 

u This is proved by infallible Teſtimony in Pſal. 110. 4. God the 
Father Fimfelf folemnly declared him to be ſo before the Angels in 
Heaven, and revealed it to Men on Earth -by the Prophet David. 
w That as elchiſedec had no end of Days Recorded, fo this is re- 
peated again to prove, that the Prieſt after his fimilitude, i.e. after 
his Ordcr (the words beinz here Synonimcus) muſt continue for 
ever. Cirift was not a temporary Prieft by a carnal Law, but was 
made a Prieſt for ever, with everlaſting power endowed to ſave all 
his peop!e ; ſee wer. 24, 25,28. and Matth. 1. 21, 

15 ror there 1s verily a diſannulling of the com- 
KmMent g0ing before x, for * the weakneſs and un- 
wontablenets thereof y. 

x The Spirit having proved the diſannulling of the 4aronical 
Prieft ior 1ts ImperſcRtion, procceds to prove the Aboliſhins of the 
L:wv. Or Covenunt annexed to 1t, ike it for weakneſs and unprofita- 
2nels 5 45mm 15 a d1placing, depoſing or laying it aſide, as to its 
Lnding force, 12 as there is no Obligation from it on 20y as to Obe- 


ver. 22, inſinuating by how much the Cauſe conſtituting or confirm- 
ing an Office of Prieſthood ws more excellent, by ſo much the Efett 
and Othce muſt excel, receiving greater Power for ſome more ex- 
cellent end. This - #x4eac001z 1s as mucn as a double Oath, Xm 1; 
o/avuer oprev, By the ſwearing of an Oath by God the Father was the 
Goſpel-High-Prieft conſtituted an eternal one after Melchiſedec's Or- 
der; and it addeth ſo much the. more ſtrengih- and glory to the 
Sanion. This 1s teſtified by David, Pſal. 110. 4 The Levitical 
Prieſts were made by a Divine Deſignation, and with external Rites 
were conſecrated ; but Chriſt was conſtituted a Prieſt by Oath, as 
our Tranſlators well ſupply it out of the following Verſe, 


21 (For thoſe prieſts were made + withour an oath 
4 : but this with an oath, by him that ſaid unto him, 
the Lord ſware e, and will not repent, thou a7 a9 


prieſt for ever after-the order of Melchiſedec.) 

d Thoſe Prieſts of Aaron's Order were ſele&ted, inſtituted, con- 
ſecrated without any Oath mentioned by Moſes, who did all exacily 
as the Lord commanded him, Exod. 40. 16. God gave only com- 
mand for it, and made their Prieſthood but a temporary and pat- 
ſing Honour and Office, which he might alter when he would: 
e But he or eſis, was made a Prieſt after Melchiſedec's Order, by an 
Oath of God his Father, ſpeaking to him, as is Recorded by Dai, 
P/al. 110.4. The Lord Fehwah the Father, ſware unto his Son the 
Lord Meſah, lifting his Hand, and ſaying, I live for ever, Deut. 32- 
40. when he aſcended and fate down on the Right-Hand of thc 
Majeſty in the Heavens, ſolemnly by this Oath ratifying and con- 
firming him in this Office, and that he would not repent, 1. &. change, 
or alter, or retra& what he ſwore to him, there being no need of 
any other, he ſo effetually performing the work of it, that all that 
God beſtows upon his by him, are Gifts not to be repented of, even 
eternal Life and Salvation. That which the Oath ratified, was, 
That Chriſt ſhould be God's only and eternal Prieſt, who was to 
have no ſhare with him in the Prieſthood, and no end of it ; taking 
away from himſelf by Oath any Power to make Chriſt no Priett, 
or take away his Office at will and pleaſure, as he did Aaron's ; here- 
by honouring his Son, and highly gratifying Sinners by giving them 
ſuch a Royal High-Prieſt, who ſhould effeftually manage all their 
Concernments with him for ever. 

22 By ſo much was Jeſus made a ſurety f of a. bet- 
ter teſtament g. ; 

f This brings in the Conſequent on wer. 20. As much Excellency 
as was in God's Oath conſtituting, ſo much there muſt be 1 the 
Ofhce conſtituted. The Aaronical Prieſthood by God's Conſtitution, 
was excellent; bur. Chriſt's is much more ſo, being by God's Oatn 
made perſonal and everlaſting, relating to the beſt Covenant ; { 
as the Hebrews had the greateſt reaſon to renounce Aa7 5, and 
to cleave to Chriſt's for Salvation. He being Gcd-Man, is 2S#7ery, 
one that bindeth himſelf for another, to ſee ſomething paid or per "nin 
ed, to give ſecurity for another ;, and 5 vroper to him as 4 P riett, 
7ob 17. 3. Pal. x19. 122. Priv.6 1. In the Moſaicai Oeconory 
the Prieſts were typical Sureties, or Undertakers for the Pcople OY 
Aaron as a Surety, was ſent by Moſvs to ftand between te Lt- 
ving and the Dead, when God was cutting off thoe Sinners, 2” "” 
15.45, 48. The Spirit interprets this Surety, to be a MEGIato, 
Chap. 2.5, which is the general compreheniye Mme ©: all h's 


1. 
V1»: ob 


7 Ui,ntti- 


- as he ?ives ail iro? 
is by 2r fultilinz trem, c2.89% 

God tor us, a4 returns our Duty 
bis Merits Hoe 1s our Surzfy ; which Met 
& O01: difence to the whole Law and 
atis 


tation he made to God by Its 


Hces 
O. I 5 19. 
peri ormed wi! 
jo wm 


ch tne Inc: 
—_ 


e | 
” «-- 49 


< C23 13. 6s 
IO, 18, 12; 


rf 'B $ 
Freenels, Fulncfs, Spiritualicy, and the Spirit promited in it for 1ts 
Ratiication bv the Death of Cliriit, and its Perpetutty. See ci2Þþ. &. 
þ p 


7) 5 1 ry tr J ” TY P-2 4 y 11 (} % Fr. % caule 

& 'Z 4kLI1v\i L LT, WE7 vv oo 1 111 v }-- SW TLI / 5 WP LEE WW 

l 1 1 : 1 | by —tþ 
4- 7 I F ) "do W332 283 vir f} 

Lil \ Ve Ly ! L L 4 Ga TS; VILLE kA we 13 Iga O11 Oz 


9 This further demonſtrates the excellency of Chriſt's Prie 
hood above the 4armmica!, for 1t5 Singularity and SeJf-Tuftficiency ; 
WAcrews tarirs was for the multipiicity of 1t, Weak, vaniſhing, and 
mortal, _ tnemieives: Toney nad 7n1ititude of Priests togetner un- 

| fo m.:nicetinc Service, and above Soneml ty [{igh- 


1-Pricit, 


irieits wy” c ther Sagans, luch as were to oibciate for them, if at 
anv time they were levaliv diſibled trom the Inſtitution of the 
Anron:icalt Order, to tir ruGon of tie Temp! ind were made 
accordins to the Liw fuccetfirely, 2 Death cut them off one after 
no:her, they were a!! Mortal, and could not abide neither in thair 


"ge 4 7 Regt I 7c Wn ects Seco root 
Prie{thoogd or Lite, Exmd. 58.4%. Death tranſinitted that 
oy * . xs 1. 


} 
Sno 2p 1 4 4 x on At ; Tg ; 0 23! a ps) 
] C301 IT GN / IC U3tioO dd nt 168 fo oe Tt15 t: ” i F!CILOQM bg aC3 JV tie SuUcC- 
EE et. Hattie: inc. eo BASS Wy OP © + 
CEillLii Orff! Co, WWD © V.14 8: i125 (L164 CADIIEC, 12 trail, palin f9 
- I q >» 1 4% > J 6 d] «4 a 
4:d 1133P: rl bs RT] "11 Li 6 ICI Th: Ati! O;t 6 . 
a ' i . . » ! + F 
1 } ; ; 711 >? > 
- T Ji [Y po 4 fl | & ww / ne { }IiCHBL wi.itk ww os L Y 
; 
Ep = / 
1} 1th 1] #4 4 w 4 - - il fi o 
ey 3 . ' oh . A . 
k This Prix WI, Ve 25 oppoied fo the 4.micel multt- 
= ? +! "ns, go . in Ro Cipwalyy: let } 
LUGO, viilo C COLL & tics | MN Þ TR e | 1115 IMC LUTFOLTLON ib1det | 


a a tb-» b >, She: RY SEE ELIT CIT ONS. a PEPIN RY I, ff <9 p 
LNMOrfau 218 EFOENAL Ana POO Nanent 197 Prion and Ojrce, lee 


V. 258. Rome 0. 9. They are vamihed, but he continues for ever, Ret. 
I. 17,18, | 'amz23:7.v, a Priefthond that cannot pays from h:m to 
any other, as Aai 31d to his Suceohiors: No Portion 1s tobe a fharer 
init, nor a faccelior tart ; it 1s rec > orocal w it t limic Ir bis indt- 
V ual Perſon terminateth it tor ever ; he harh no Vicars, aor Suc- 
ceicrs of is Prieftieod, whatever the Pope vretis to 'N it, 
Cr o p 4 4 hag 
5. \Wh: r2 hc 1s able : allo to iave them to the 
T UEterimg!. 1 come unco God by him x, ſeeing he 
LILLE RE ) L A) NAVAL i) al121 77, BE ut, W 
ever H\ = 5 make interceithon tor them o 
m1 Tins Inference proves his "Eminency in Once avove Aajon's 


7 


EMcacy of it ; for ke 1s 1 
rich is ab. 'e 71 (rv? ro Pertettion, to 
in its Guilt, Stain and Poiver ; 


njjeſſar of a ſupern tural Di- 
the full, to all 
from its Conte- 


beer þ 0Y the 
UINe Power. ww 
ends from Sin, 
quents 
our ſelves, nor could do for us, he 1s on7y able, and as willinz 
as able, to ſet us in a ſafe, hapvy, bleifed and glorious State for 
ever, Rom, 8. G, 19,11, 17, # All juch who will come to God by him, 
2h Prieft, anc ln o other, praying for Reiniffion of Sins for 
his ſaze and merit, by Faitn 1n {its Blood, renOuncing Selt, ex pour 
| God to flow mn him to them, Thy - themſc lve 


othe rs 


11 
it UD3EC £10 


& , . . - ? 3 

entirety to ſim, and dependins on him to preſent the mm unto God 
1 "0 . _ _ oo i « 4 : 8 4 TS a -Y 
UICIL It! WW 1t:10ut SPpCH OF Mun, OT any {uch Mz, and to mare 

. . . 3 k "'y EE . ! X -p ! vc UE? « | 
them ti:ijed in the enjor ment of hun for ever. Tis 15 Nis vW OI Ny 
n M Fa 0 » Ty x *C {i - 7 f ' . 
#0); 5. 2 34 CO]. 1 Pet * 4s 12, 0 Ol } c ifs alvw a\ S OCX7 [ts anda if L I) 
7 - : Fr ? ” , Wﬀ E Py LL + — . ——— -” | Sp get 
an Hizh-Prieli for the good of tile who wait on b1m, having hte 
- . — , . . . Oe > 4 EF Px. 4 = 
1n hin! tf, NU QUCKNMINZ Them; mp. OR 2. 6. And as tie 


& 
t' In 2, l, 2. anſivcreth pot cs 22ainft them, ſuing 
cenitent = _ and plerdiag fc * all promiſed them by 
- fitteth at | God's | i1ght Ha nd mutt ever be 
'encral Repreſentative of his, and 


vcr, fu dge - and 'Efor" 


Aawncate, 1 
for thoſe 1 

the Father in es 
in his Preſence, and as ff 
uleth ail Long Intereſt with tie Supreme Laiv-s 


vernour, for thein. See cp. 9. oo as 1f was jorctold he ſhould, 
J'z $3. 12, even fo” them who cannot = w_ new own Caule through 
Suiltineſs, or wetknefs ; He v1 mana for all of tem who Be- 
ſieve in him , and apply tnemicive %g Fo by him, atoning him 
for their Sins by his Sacrifice, per Duties and Perſon by the 
Incenſe of his Merits, and preſenting them to God, anfivering 1n 


Heaven his Type on Earth, Exod. 30. I, 9.10, COMPAUre Rev. 8. 3, 


'S] F 
4. Rom. 0.31, f0 39. 


eo 1s holy p> 


nners s. and 


7/7 
as 


For {uch an h 1Fh- pPric} [T bec; ants US, 7 
harinlels 9, 1 | 7, ſenarate 1rom 1 
_—_ higher than the heavens 7. 
> The lait Fs CCLICNCY $4 the Goſpel-High-Prieit, preferring him 
to. Alarms Order, is the Qualification of his Aves by winch he 15s 
deſcribed in himiclt, diſtin-uiſhed from, and ſet above all others, 
and is that which remained out of David's Proof to be cleared, who 
tins Perfon was, who was different from Melchiſedec, though after 
his Order, to take place after Aaron's Was expired, who was UNmor- 
tal, and cunititured an everlaſting Prictt ! - Ge 24's Oatit, This Was 
God-Man, the Weftah, and G: oſpel- lieh-Prieft, who was conventent, 
cngrums, ſuiteble, u;eful and nceſſury fir us guilty, filthy, miſerable 
SIRNCTS, 1 a2 { of ourſelves hopelefs, and helplefs, and cannot 
ayvroach God without Conſumption ; and unlels we have a Perlon 
cur Cauſe with God, are loſt for ever. To ſuch 1s 
Kc acrolable and neceffary, veho can. only help and fave us. This 
h Titles given Al, evince, ſhe Abs all the Perfecions of a 
Prieft, of wh 2ws and Types. As he was 


\OTh '0f Cd 41] IN:1 H490C 


a " ER RIS P 
ch OfNners WCere Carr Shad 


notonly extcram'y and relatively by Office, but internally and mo- 
rally /Zaly. 13:: ENCE as God, was Folineſs ; as Man his Nature 


titirely rc > to Go d < WW il] : Ho was that holy thing, Luke 
1.28, nt av! inch en.raven on a Mitre, a; Aaron, Ex01.39. 


227. but..in "ron; 272y in Is Concept! 5100), Birth, Life and 
Death : Dec vi 'd 1nd nothing but Holiacts 12 hum, Zobn 14. 
Pure i 13's Sou] - mn 1:s Bodvt anſcengontly beyond ns TYPE, 

Vis. 21, 17,023, not a Creature, Angel or Man, 10 toly as he, 
tn 5t hize to God of aar, jobn 1, 1 , < At nod, word 0 of al! 
tin al Evil in bu Stir ani Flick , nv Lit, no Biſpcfition to 


i God to us in and by his Promiſes, He 
As he g1ves ſatisfa tion 
enſe of 
bes reſulted trom his 
,—_ from wn 


[1 
h, hat the pes fore told: of Fit. 
Fer. 31« 33, 34. . which is better t than the 2721.1 on tor Perſpicuity, 


Pricft- 


HEBREW S 


Evil, 
yond a Coonck, of wy 2 molt tiimpic, 
e Was good, and ail his Work was 
without any ſpar, not hotties or ftain 
gels, and Hoivens, are not fo clean 
his, he WiS NCver ated WItil tio 


'0}1 !nmrious 


Converſe with the m; pers 2 
never been with them ; CO 


SPTE p : © 4 
1, noſe \ ith 0 


JC64k% 


of Rignteouinels, mak: 1 Swhors Ry ht 
from them. # By the coniticurion 0: ©; 


tioned Vs 2 _ To He Ended 1 T3 ye TI 


= F . » 26 Ho =, FX, 
15 ſettled On God 's hronce aL 11!S 13; itt $9,000 
NL ING 2 OE FR: 7 
, Powers, Might and LDINmmNio! 


tin, and all tnings put under fect, 
ere he 1:5 :. this 1 Th 
Il. 


Pricft can reach whe 
C2UPe 4. 14. and 8, L and « 


"_ i471 JE. I [ 
6-4 \V 110 Not TS4 i } Ni CLkhi A 
[2 IP os %ap® i os - 
[D) OVNFEr UD JAcrtiice 2, firfe. ro! 
. n nal =p" Po « | kk 
0] te DCU] 1TH CL tO! LLILS I1T 


1 % 
1 , 
Icred un himictt -». 
uv In tis Verie tlie Spirit Frews the 
Work 1n Heaven, and hy he dot ” Bot 


there ; tiercin f{ettins his fir above the 


, the Curſe, and Wrath, and Ercrnal Death. . What neither 


| had no nec ety, beinz fo holy as he w 
ther for himſelt, bin” fin! 

as the Aur! _y Pri ict: ; Sin 
ment d1d offer Sacri ce for 
Pardon as wan as thc Pcop! 6, Levits 9.9 
nually - a Day to vitcr tor the Peoplcs 
ceflors had, and did continue to do, till 
al Dolihed them; Be havins once offere: 


them !elves, 


the People; which out-weiched all thumr mult 


tins he did once wiica he himſe'f died a 


oticred up the Humane Nature by the Sadie : 


Propitiatory Sacritce to God,, when 
and his Soul alce ded and centred 1 
Holy of Holiett in Heaven, wit] 
atoned him for all his Pea. 
to all the 4aron al mes, whierchy Sinners « 
{or ever, C/a/, 9.11, 12,14, 24, 25, 29, 0; 
exalted by God far above all Heaviciis, C21 
fice, and his _ ctti; MM became T3 nowes! 
11s People 1 from their fins, and the Confrg 
28 .For the law inakerh * tm 
have infhrmity x, 
was lince the law y., zz. RE !Þ the 
ſecrated for evermure -. 

This 1s the Reaſon why 
fice tor themſelves, and the Goſpel-H 
naily deſcribin-q him who is fo. For the 
AMojes, the Ceremonal Lav, conftituterh 

to bodily mics, BUT fo moral 
h.q tis ir j1 l 
which tney were to oifer their Prop: 
well as tor thoic of tic People, they we: 
y But God the Father's Promile to his Son, 
That he ſhould be the Great | 
God, 
and tnis 400 Years atte 
Aaronical Priefſt-hoo 
the Oath made 1t irreverſible ; vt 
formed to him till his Afcention in ti 
the Heavens, Pſalm 119. t. 
Chriit, God's Fellow, th e glorious | 
of the _ 
this ratified Word the only iinsle 
not only compleatly and perfettly Holy, ; 
ties of the Aaronica! Pricits, 
ſucceſsful in it. Who 
Prieſthood, aud cleave to 


CHAT a 

Our High-prieft heaven!y and tru'y 11: 1 
and a figure of Thu, and mnsr cea 
the who le Old Covenant yierdt. {9 the AV 
diato;, Tre Irfiifutton an 
rant reh, arſed out of the Scilft 


p] "_= 
this Aaronical Order and « Oific of Prieft-hnod. 


I; 45 'yle 
11! his Sons, 


r the Law 1 
The b4 A 


F 


WAsS * 


t this 


only | 


this which mutt 


cad & 


OW of rhe thinvs which we 


; 2 is the fiim 2: WW; 

who 15 {: - ; 
Majeſty in n thy Raven 5 Þ, 

a The Spirit Þ. cleared the 
the great Gs ſpel- Mini +a now proceeds 
that Office; and that therein as. he far £ 
lued and uicd betore the Aaronical Priefts. 
42 reflection on ins forezoing Difcourte, 
ſpoken, 1s eee, ſome read the /7-.:d, 
courſe ditven at, others, the civet of 
Prieſthood hitherto Iictd forth: as 1. IT 


ON Tie TI 


tum, tlie higheit anc C199 10 Coil f ail that] 
and it 15 p! roportionably true. [ 
But it mult neceif. rel! gs the iorefo! 
together, and ſo it nate: 4 yr, Contr. 


rd 


2 pA Cork | ts 6 LS 
the Heaids CHICCUTIOU ON allG 11 


Fg - 
OrINCTL) 


$1 1.0m ve hoo rn: ns nc _——__ , 
kb ilys tidVvi > 8D IHC 


BLOG 
ed with 
171 _ 24'S 115} 


IT 
3H 
be ſo pure, what muſi _ If by "Epbeſ. 
VICIOUS habit, qQuUA tt py. it iti by vwhat was 1 


4 $a OOIN Gl TI 


fs, and had n9 "tl 
1:d, whoannuliy on 


Den: P 


p1rit Fithout es. 
ES 
ti1S Go i 
FO tho 6 Tit I GD 
EY [9 JC 1d of t 


x # . *x% * £3 »% « — 
i11:3:v Cabos \.15 


but t 11C word O 


the Auranical Pris _ ty 
1191- Prict 


-——o— 


| H1izh-Prieft, 
as David tefti.ucti, P/alm 110, 4. to 
'1ven, 
reveaied 

Promil- 
: Humane Þ 
> God the Son 


Zech. 3. 7. Jon rx. It, 2. l 
ever! ata nz 


but ever 2) 
Would not therefore 


e Dodtrinc 


DR | 3 
LACTYEL 


Chap. II. 


before, when many things are ſummed up in a few words, As 7 


l Or,,f h3- 
lr things. 

* Clap. G. 
x2. 42. 
+ Chap. 2. 

i1. 


Chrift's Prieſthood, Jargely open'd before from Pſalm 110, 4. 15, 
as t5 the Subſtance of it, briefly handled 1n this Verſe. 6 We 
P!, and believing Hebrews, oppoicd to the Infidel Fews, have 
not only a right to, and Intereſt in, but actual peiletfion of Chriit, 
God-Matn, as our High Prieſt, winle their Inndel Brethren had only 
a finitui Man: He who hath eminent Power above, and thouzh cru- 
cined by Men, vert thereby became viQorious over Sin, Death, and 
ic}, and the Lori or them the Devil, led Principalities and Powers 
30 Triumph, when he pais'd through their Kingdom in the Air, Col. 
2. 15. eatred into the Heaven of Heavens, and there ſa? him down 
and /etled himiclt, as was his Right, on the Rizht Hand of God, as 
he ſat on his 75-rone, inveited with all Power and Dignity, as God's 
Royal Prieſt, near to him, and the great Manager ot all our Con- 
cerns with him, while the finful Prieſt at Fers/alem ftood trembling 
betore the ſhadow of this heavenly Temple on Earth, ch. 1. 3. _ 

2 Aminiſter c || of * the Sanctuary d, and of the 
7 true tabernacle 'e, which the Lord pitched f, and 
31OT Man 2. k 

c This is ſpoken of the High-Prieſt ſat down on the Right Hand 
of the Majeſty in the Heavens, and relates to that Work of his 
whereby he was conſtituted ><7»:3%, which according to Suidas, 
is compounded of two Words, 7275 Mir vel Mime tpyor, publick 
Work, toas it might be rendred 4dniniftrator; and notes any pub- 
lick officer from the higheſt to the 'oweſt. The Spirit of God in 
the New-Teſtament hath applicd it to the higheſt and ſubrdmate 
Ainiſt;y, in this Verſe to Chriſt himfelt in his exalted State, and 
ſo notes a Ruley, as he was now God's publiſhed ſeticd King, the 
Lond 4dminiſtrator ot all things in his Kingdom, agreeable to what 
he foretold, Pſal. 2.5, 7. and 110.1. compare Acts 13. 33. and 
here properly it notes him 1n all his Offices, his Royal, Sacercotal, 
and Prophetical Miniſtry in the Heavens and Earth, adiiniſtring 
and governing all tiiags in them. The things about which his Ad- 
miniſtration 15 concerned, are d i ey of Holies, Some refer 
this to Perſn1, Was noting Saints, of whom he is the Ruler and Go- 
vernour, Rev. 15. Z- Others to Things, Graces and Endowments 
beſtowed by him upon his, but moſt properly here in the Neuter Gen- 
der, it notes the Place, the Sanfuary in Heaven, the Hily of Ho- 
lieſ!, where he is adminiſtring and governinz all, thouch it may be 
applied to a!l of theſe. For Heaven 1s the Place, the Sanftuary 
wherein, Sajiits the Perſons for whom, and all holy Endowments, 
the matters about which he adminiſters. But the holy Z»yſe or 
S,n#rary, 1s the proper 1mport of it; and ſo, though expreſt in the 
Plura! Number, to all tte holy parts of 1ts Types, the Temple and 
Tabcrnacie. e And of the 7abernacle, Some, becauſe of the con- 
nection ot ths to the former word Sanfuary, would have it 1m- 
port the ſame thing, even Heaven ; but the Spirit diſtinguiſheth 
theſe from each other, chap. 9. Some would underſtand it 
ot the Body of Chriſt, but here not ſo properly, and yet agreeably to 
what the ſpirit 15 ſpeaking of. But by Tabernacle, here is meant 
Chrift Myſtical, the true Temple, Church and Habitation of God on 
Erth. For as Chriſt was the Body of Truth of all the Shadows 
and Typcs of the Tabernacle, Colof. 2. 17. ſo not all one way. 
Some of the Types were ſin;/e, and terminated on his Perſon, as 
Prictthocod, Sacriice, Altar, Shew-bread, Incenſe, Ark of the Co- 
venant, gc. Other Types were aggregate and compounded of many 
things, as Tent, Sanduary, and Tabernacle here, parallel to this, 
there muſt be a Truth in Chriit complex, that 1s, Chrift the Church, 
to framed and pitched a Houſe by God, that he may dwell in 1t. 
Tie Apoſtle ſo interprets it, 1 Cor. 3. 15, 17. 2 Cor. 6.16, com- 
pare Epheſ. 2. 20,21. 1 Pet. 2. 4, 5, Chriſt in Perſon is its Foun- 
dation ; Saints are the ſeveral livinz materials, of which the Houſe 
and Tabernacle 1s made ; their Diſpotitions, Graces, and Endow- 
ments, the Ornaments ot 1t : The Laws, Rules, Orders, Ordinances, 
are the Cement, tie Cords and Stakes that jovns them together ; 
and the Glory of God fills it, as it did the Tabernacle and Temple, 
Hag 2. 7, 9. Revel, 21.23, Tt is ſtiled, The true one, the Taber- 
nacle of God, becauſe of it, the litera] Tabernacle was but an im- 
pertett Shadow and Type ; in this God dwells truly and perſonally, 
theretore to be entred into by the Hebrews ; the old one, the Type 
being aboliſhed and vamiſhed by the appearance of this the Truth. 
For now was that Word ftulhlled, 7er. 3.16. The Days were come 
tht Men frould mention no mwre the Arkh of the Covenant of the Lord, 
(- no mire the Tabernacle of the Witneſs; but the truth of God in Chriſt 
frould be acknowledged by them. The Reaſon of this Interpretation 1s 
evident. A Tabernacle 1s God's Habitation z the Chriſtian Church 
15 ſuch, it anſwers 1n all parts, and bears its proportion to the com- 
plex Type, and cannot fully be matched by any other things : It is 
congru-us to Chriſt's Seffion in Glory; for thence he doth, as the ho- 
nourabic and glorious Adminiſtrator of God's Church, ordcr and 
manaze all in 1t according to his Will, having ſetled in this true Ta- 
bernacle a Miniftry, Epheſ.4.8, to 14. Covenant, as below, v. 6,to 13. 
Service, 43,5. and Priviledges far exceeding its Type. All which this 
grand Officer, as the only Royal High-Prieſt and Head of his Church, 
Prophet of his People, orders by his Spirit, the only Vicar he uſeth 
in it. Of this true Tabernacle, Church, or Houſe of God, the Sove- 
ra1zn, independent, omnipotent, infinitely wiſe and hol-, the eternal 
Lord, was the Author ; and ſuch as his Work, as no other can que- 
{tion 1t, can add to, or alter it, can reach it, ſo proportioned is it to 
its Framer. f "E7ngz» he framed and prepared every piece that con- 
ftituteth this Tabernacle himſelf, as the materials of the firſt were 
wrought by his Pattern and Order. He c:mpa&ed and joyned all 
the parts of it together, to make it his Tahernacle ; and eſpecially 
reared, pitched, and firmly conſtituted this his own Habitation. This 
he doth tor ever fo pitch, as Hell and Earth with all their Arts and 
Force can never remove it, Matth.15. 15,18 It js his Reſt for 
cver, here he will dwell, for he hath defired it, and will make it 
810r7ous, chap. 12, 25, 27, 28. Pſal. 132. 14. Iſa. 11. 19, Rev. 
C22. 21, £ This is denied becauſe 3/an is weak, ſinful, and mor- 
Tal, NO ſuch Hands iatermeddle with the Work of God's Tabernaele, 
tor his Work would be like him, weak, faulty, and periſhing, which 
could not long ſurvive its Author. L 5 


2 For every high priet js ordained to offer gifts 


ba) 
oo 


_— 


HEBREW Ss. 


| 


Chap. Vin 


and ſacrifices þ : wherefore * 77 js of neceſſity that this * 1. 


man have ſomewhar allo to offer 7. 

h In Chriſt's Adminiſtration for his in Heaven ; as he is a Kino 
| . . . - . Ds 2) 
ſo he 15 a High-Prieſt ; and ſuch as muſt have Service, and Mini(t;,. 
tion ſuitable to himſelt there, as the Aaronical High-Prieſts had on 
Earth : Every of which was conſtituted to ſtand and Miniſter 1: 
God's Aitar, and were to offer Sacrifices and Gifts, as cleared bc 


JELOre 
chap. 5. I, 7 Sceing thele Earthly Prieſts had ſuch Service, it would 
tollow thence, it he were carthly and of their Order, he ſhou'd noc4 
ſuch too, *arayx#i:v having no Verb expretly jovncd to it, is var;. 
oully ſupplied : Some, by it zs ;, but thoſe who would make the 7 .:- 
bernacle his Body, do not allow it, that being oftcred bctore tits, aid 
theretore add, 7t was, or hath been : but it 1s beſt ſupplicd potent} 
ally, it would be neceſſary tor this Hizh-Prieſt, 1f he were fo low 4: 
thoſe Prieſts, to have ſomething ot the like nature or kind of Giite 
and Sacrifices, that he might offer as they did. Now ſuch he need: 
eq not, as being utterly inconſiſtent with his Pricſthood, as is proved 
atter. 

4 For if he were on earth he ſhould nor he 1 
prielt &, ſeeing that || there are prieſts that otter pitt; 
according to the law /, | 

k This gives the reaſon why the Levitical Gifts and Offerinvs were 
inconfiſtent with Chriſt's Prieſthoed : for if he were earthly tor Per- 
ſon or Office, or was exiſting on Earth, or in an earthly Sanftuiry 
or Tabernacle proper to the Law, he could not by Divine Ordi:11- 
tion be an Offering-Prieſt, being not of Aaron's Family, nor of the 
Tribe of Levi, nor ſucha Prieſt as he was made by God's Oath, cr 
Melchiſedec's Order, if he were tor Temper, Office, or Place of t::. 
niftry earthly, 1 This earthly Office, State and Work, was by th 
Law ſetled on Aaron's Family, and none could legally offer Sacrifice 
or Gitts in God's earthly Tabernacle or Temple, but his Sons alone, 
Chriſt as he was not of that Tribe, fo he never was cithcr in the 
Court of the Pricſts, or in the holy place in the Temple, neither 61d 
miniſter in them as a Prieſt at all ; this was proper and peculiar on- 
ly to his Types. 


5 Who ſerve unto the example and * ſhalow of 


heavenly things 2, as Moles was admonithed of Gol « 


7, when he was about to make the tabernacle. For lee, 
{ith he, o 7Þa7 thou make all things according to the 
pattern p ſhewed to thee in rhe mount. 

1m Theſe Aarnnical Pricfts, and their Service 1m the literal Tabey- 
nacle, were only ſubſervient, as the Model in the Mt:d, to repre- 
ſent the Truth, as the Platform of a Tabernacle ſerves toward the 
making and pitching of it. 'Yz:dei1 uamn 1s an of/cure and underhund 
Reſemblance, the firſt Draught, that which 1s thc rough part ot 
what is to be repreſented, chap. g. 23. ſuch as the fhadow 1s to the 
natural Body, a dark reſemblance of it ; ſuch were theſe of Chrilt's 
Perſon, Miniſtry, and thoſe heavenly things performed by him. 
They were leading them to, and inſtructing them in Chriſt and his 
Work, though the Veil on their Mind and Hearts hindred them from 
diſcerning it. So true 1s that, John 1. 17. Moſes's Law was the 
ſhadow, Chriſt the Truth of all, compare chap. 9. 6, 23. and 1%, 
Ils And it is not unlikely that both the literal Tabernacle and Tem:- 
ple-Oeconomy are but groſſer and obſcurer Diſcoveries of that Firm 
and Manner of the Manifeſtation of God in Glory, and the nnft ex- 
cellently regulated Service and Miniſtry in the Oeconomy there, 
n Keycrugmem, Moſes was in the Mount, from God's own Moutit, 
the beſt of Oracles, charged and admoniſhed about, and intallibly 
guided in his Duty, Exod. 25. 1, to 40. confirmed by the Spirit 
in Aﬀs 7. 44. when he had his Commiſhon tor the Work, rcf6]- 
ved to enter on, and perfett it according to God's Charge, then was 
this Oracle given out about the Earthly Tabernacle, Prieſthood, and 
Service. 0 Lk you to it, obſerve this, take heed and beware, /a'th 
he, who 1s Fehovah, the Soveraign Lord of him and I/ac!, a Bc- 
ing of Power to enjoyn, and command, and to require any nez,'et, 
Exod. 25.1,to 40. p Thou ſhalt make, trame, and work, by e&r- 
joyning I/-ael what they are to make, and.pertett what thou art 10 
do, all thoſe things of the Veſlels, Parts, and Strufture of the Ta- 
bernacle tor Ofticers and Service, for con-joyning, rearing, and 
pitching of it, Exod. chap. 25, to chap. 40. All after the Type, 
Copy, Pattern, Exemplar ſhewed thee by me, and ſeen and vioiv- 
ed by thee, when thou wert with me in the top of the Mount <7nar 
forty Days and forty Nights. This Tabernacle was tramed by its 
Type, and was to be an Ordinance reſembling, fizuring, and 'yping 
a Spiritual Tabernacle and Miniſtry of Chriſt that was to ſucceed and 
fulfil it, being different in the whole kind from this Type ; it be- 
ing Spiritual and Heavenly, this a groſs material earthly Fabrick. 
Moſes was moſt exa& in framing all as God commanded, atter his 
own pattern : He did not add, diminiſh, nor alter any thing 1n it, 
Exod. chap. 40. 


6 But now * hath he obtained a more excellent * 2 Cir 


miniſtry 9, by how much alſo he is the mediator  * 
of a hetter || covenant s, which -was eſtabliſhed upon |,,; 


better promiſes 7. THE a j 

9 But, is here adverſative ſetting this High-Prieft over-againft 
and above the Aronical, on the account both of his Miniſtry and Co- 
venant, of which theirs were but Types and Shadows. The Lord 
Chriſt hath now really and fully obtained, and doth poſlels as the 
Goſpel-High- Prieſt, a Publick Miniſtration, which as to its glorious 
Effets, tranſcendently excels the Levitical, chap. 5. 11, 12, 14: 
chad. to. 12, 14, 18. r By how much he is Mediator ot 4 better 
Covenant, by ſo much he hath a more excellent Miniſtry, ſo ti1at 
this is a Progt of the former. Menrnc is a Medler, one that 1n- 
terpoſeth, not only between Perſons at di/tance, but at enmty 3 = 
parlying between God and Sinners, could profit little, God being wd 
highly injured by, and offended with them ; and therefore he "2 
diates here, as a Surety, as chap. 7.22. and fo undertakes for S1N- 


ners to ſatisfie God, wronged by them, by Sacrificing himſeir to: 
them, and ſo ſecure the performance of h1s Cov 
them. By which Sacrifce he purchaſcth and merits the Ho 


Covenant-Mercy TO 
Iy Spi- 


[Sb 
SY 


Or, Teſts 


Chap. VIII. 


rit, to enable Man to perform the Conditions which God requireth 
from him, to repent, and helieve, and obey the Redeemer, ard 
wholly to rely upon his Sacrifice for God's Favourzas by his Interceſſion 
hc ſecures to them a't the Bletfings of God's Covenant for Time and 
Eternitv, as proved chap. 9, s The Goſpe! Covenant, which was. a 
'Tmemn Agreement between an offended God and Sinners, whercin 
ne binds himfelt to give forth Pardon and Lite to them upon Cer- 
ain Conditions ; and they bind themſelves to perform, in;order to 
he ohtaining theſe. 
intercetfion of Chriſt the Mediator between them, who became 4 
<urety for the performance of it, and folemnly ratited and con- 
tirmed it by the Sacritice of himſelf; as other Covenants were by the 
Biovd of tedera! Sarrinces, of which we have frequent mention 1n 
tie Scripture, called b2rter then the Moſaical Covenant not tor 
che matter of it, but for the manner of exhibifion, chap. 7. 22. be- 
ing comparatively a greater Good than that which vas leis, Ga/. 3+ 


. 
z 

. 
d 


HEBREW S. 


. © "A | 
Which Covenant was brought about by the | 


£ Winch Goſpel Covenant Was revs uc3rrre:, 45 the Moſaical one. | 


emtirmed, ratified, and eſtabliſhed by the Blood ot the Sacrince, ac- 
-ording fo the {.zp, chap. 0.18, to21. This was its Santion, 1f 
was hy it ſetled unchangeable, attended with, and founded on the 
bit Promiſes, ſuch as were more ſpiritual, clear, extenfive and un!- 
verial than thote in tae Moſuical Covenant were, : 

2 For if rhar fhrit covenant had been faultlels z. 
then ſhoul4 no place have been fought tor the 1-- 
cond ww. | 

u This proves the Goſpel-Covenant better than the Moſatcal ; 
tor it it had not, there would have been no fecond. That firft 
Covenant of which Moſes was the Mediator, as to its Adminittration 
of it (as to the matter of it, it was the ſame trom Adam, through- 
out all Ages) was fau!ty, not becauſe God made it, though 1t was 
a leſs perfet Good, that what ſucceeded it. It was able to lave 
thoſe who would rightly uſe it, and come unto Chriſt by it, G/. 
3. 24. but acc:dentally\zy reaſon, of the Prieſts Faults, and Peoples 
finfulneſs, it became wholly ineff=ual to them for ſaving them, 
theretore the blame and fant ot 1t is charged on them, ver. 8. 
w The quettion here 1s. vehemently aflertive, if that Covenant in 
its Moſaical Adminittration had reached effettually its end, brouyht 


all that were under it to Chriſt, to be 1aved by him, noplace nor | 


room was there, that then being to perrett, for an other to ſucceed 
it, God would have refted there; but his excellent Wildom and 
Countel determined to put in being the /econd, and to ſet 1t in the 


place of the fir that was f.ulty, and which was*to be abrogated by 


W. Gai. 3. 28. 


| 1,7 mo "MA "BIEN 4 ©. - fs K 
| Negtoct them toy the: Fi elcners fo Num m0 fr.) 


CC 


$ For finding fiulr with them x, he faith, Behold, 
the days come y, {1irh the Lord z, when will make 


I 


2 new covenant with the houle of Iirae], and rhe 
houſe of Judah : E 

x This is the proof ot the faultineſs of the Moſaical Covenant, 
from the right caute of it, thoſe who did abute it; The Lord by 
the Prophet Jerem:ah, being diſtaſted and offended, accuſeth, and 


with Complaints and Aggravations chargeth the Houtes of Frael and. 


Judih, both Prietts and People for truſtrating God's Covenant with 
them by their Unbeliet, mittaking God's Mind in it, anc uting 17 to 
##/Iiftie them, and not bring them unto Chriſt, who juſtiteth the 
ungodly. That the Covenant . was not faulty 11 1t ſelt, but only 
accidentally, is evident; for it was given to change Hearts, though 
its ſpiritual efficacy was not fo fully revealed, Devt. 10. 15. and 
30.6, For Mes, Foſhur, Samuel, David, were ſaved by the right 
uſe of 1t. It id not bind them y "rk; to obtain Fuſfrfcation, 
for it was delivered with B!oad, which taught them it was to be had 
only by Fait!) in Ch11ſi's Blood, But when they would not be led to 
Chriſt by it, they were fay/ty, and not the Covenant, and lo they 
periſhed in their gainfaying. The Admiſtration of th1> Covenant 


by Men being fo defettive, he finds fault with them, and reſolves | 

> = T wy 4 As 3. , 5 , Dots t y PTC AQ "Hy - J . - _ 2 s F* fi 
on the Change ct the Adminiftration. y Beho!d, 1mports Atfentt- | uvvn the fulnefs of tiwe for the Mefftuh's Revelation is come, GQ!. 
on to, and Obſervation ot the rare, excellent, and important thing | : 


propoſed in the Word to the Eye and Mind of thofe for whom 1t 


was written, and to whom it is ſent : fo is this here in Ferem? th, | 
The days of the Meſſiah s coming in the Fleſh, when a Wo- | 


Sh 48: 


| ITE nanifieth the breaking and making vurd the Covenant 


| whic't by the Prophet 1s expretied 


man ſhall compar? a Man, as Fer. 31. 22. the known times of Grace, , 


Fer. 23.5, 6. A time to come when the Prophet wrote it, palt 
when the Apoſtle quotes it here ; fo ordered by God to teach thole 
there the Impertetion of that Covenant- Admiſtration, fo as they 
might make out to Chriſt byit, and not reft in it, as he had revea]- 
ed to them in the Prophecy; and to ſtrengthen Believers 10 their 
Faith in Chriſt when coine, and to convince and leave incxcaſable 
ſuch Jews as would not believe in him, and further to confirm his 
Prieſt-hood. x This 1s not an invention of the Prophet, but a 
Revelation of the Supream Lord to him. It is his certain, true, 
and infallible Speech, illuminating his Mind by it, and directing him 
in his Words and Writinzs for to convey it tothoſe to whom he 
ſent him, ſo that the Word 15 firm, and worthy of all acceptation ; 
and the more of the Hebr-2ws, becauſe ſent by Feremiah a Levitical 
Prieft to. them, a #/ will make perfe# and compleat. In the Pro- 
phet it 1s (W119 I will Ririks or cut 4 becauſe in Covenant-making 
the Sacrifices were cut aſunder; and thenceis it transferred figura- 
tively, to ſignifie Covenant-maling. A Covenant for form and man- 
ner of Adminiſtration ſecond, later, better, ſtronger and more ex- 
cellent than the Moſaical ; tuch as ſhould be effettual - to God's ſa- 
ving ends in the Miniſtry of Chriſt, with the whole Seed of ]acob, 
the viſible Church of God, when the rrophet wrought this, divided 
into two Kingdoms, of 17.e! and Jud.th, and that of Tae! removed 
a far off by the Aſſerian, and ſeemins]y loſt, but by this Covenant to 
be made one People again, and to be ſaved by Chrit-David their 
King, Jer. 23. 5, 5. Etek. 37. 21, to 28. 

9 Not according to the Covenant that I niade with 


their Fathers 5, in the day when I tcok them by the | 
, ' Author of all Good, Gen. 15. and 17,1, 7. what he is, hath, or 


hand c, ro lead them our of the land of Egypr, be- 
caule they continued nct d in my covenant, and þ re- 
garded them note, ſaith rhe Logd #. 


| 


| 


nied, not the fame Covenant for habit or torm, ncr 2ny {ke unto 
the ſme tor the manner of its Adminittration, 25 vz4s mage by the 
Lord with the Hebrews their Pro emtors, when th. y *WETe Stranocr: 
in Egypt, and under great Bondage there. c The Cy that L laid 7»; 
Hand on them, and took hoid of theirs, cven the {it day of thi 
430 Tears forctold to 4branym, Gen, I 5. 12. 15, comp. Fad, 
I2. 40, 4. AS 4 Father takes hold of ti5 Ciild to pluck it 0 
of Danger. It 13 a Metaphor tettinz out God's etpecial At 
vidence, 1n their miracuious Ecliverance out Of Foy; 
them in his Hand, while ne-was fipitns their enemies, {£555 
them at Liberty, and then itrikin; Covenant wills them 2: 
vinding them by 1t to be his obudient People, as fec'r Redemry*: 
mercy 61d deſerve. At which tune the Covenint vas untkeo ! 
Promiſe or Goſpeone for estcrnal Hal;it and form only, as carricc 
on by * a Ceremonial Law and Priefthood, over which Ciariti's wa: 
to have the Preeminency for Power and Ericacy of Adminiſter. 
on, de Theſe unhelieving Hebrews under that Adminittrut on of 
the Covenant, continued not taithful to if, as by ticir own VWord 
and Conſent they bound themſelves to :*7, but apottatized trom 
God and his Truth, ea. 4. 2%: The Word wcid by tne Pro p:2ct 
Tho 


FRY a. £2 } - 
vie to God, but the 


Adminiitration ot it did nut hold them 11 
truſtrated all God's Ordinances, turned Idolaitcr:, torfock the 1 ord, 
and worthipped the God: of the Nations round about, 
I tle no care of them, 1 did neither eftcem nor regard them, b 
caii them off, from being my People, tor their Jeud freachor 
ous Covenant-breaking with ime ; they would not return unto me,anc 
[ re;zeted them from bcing my People, or a People as they were 
before. Who knows where the Nine Tribes and the haltare ; and 
in what a diſpertcd ſhattered Condition are the remaimn.,; |-ws to 
this day? The Apottie in this follows the Septuagint, who read the 
effet ot their Sin, their Rejection, for what was their S1o 1t tel: 
YI Mya, fould IT &» 4 
{rd or Huso.md ty thim ? which ws an Aygravation of their 5111 from 
Gods Dominion over them, or Marriayc kelation to them ; yet 
did they break his Marriage-covenant with them, according to thers 
leud and. whoriſh-Heart. See Exch. cheep. 16. and bp. 23, But in 
this Quotation by the Apoftle, and Trantlation of the Septuagint 
It is a Metonymy of the EffcF for the Cauſe, to reve, onft off, © 
F f AMarrtage-Covenant, 
which was the true Cao of it, The Verb it ſelf ZYA may tign! 
fie to n-glef or defite and fo Keamcni reads it, Jr. 2. 1. and 151 
rendred in this place by other Ribhies, and fo it figmificth in ous 
Lanzuyies, f This 16 Gd trrcvocabie Word, utcd four times by 
the Prophet, Jer. 31. 31, 32, 33, 34- and thirce times repeated 
the Apoſtle here, as propcr only to the Lord, none can ſpeak {2 tru 
ly, certunty, infallioly, as He, 

Io For ths iS tie Coveilint g thatk will make with 
the houſe of Itracl » atrer thoſe days z, faith rhe Lord : 
2X 
them | in their hearts / 
/1, and they thall b2 ro me a people 7. 

g For, fheweth -1t fhouid not be ſuch. a Covenant-form as was g1- 
ven on Mount Siny, it beins wholly different, and that denied be- 
fore, being carnal and ceremontous, full of Types and Shadows, 
and through their Sin incftefual to them, this is the firm Admini- 
firation of the 'Covenant which IT will $;ibe. To which three words 


| an{iwer, in this Scripture, L will perfe&r, make, and diſpoſe , which 
laſt 1s the Root from whence the Notion of a Covenant tin the G; ooh 


is derived, f2camua h Tiracl t> the compreheniive Name of al! 
the twelve Tribes, as ver, 8, compare Exod. 16. 3. and 49. 32.:nd 
is {9 uſed by the Lord lnmlclt, 3f.:rth., 10. $. and by Peter, 4%; 2: 
35, 7 In the Prophet it is, after t45/s days of their Delivery from 
Babylon, Jer. 31. 1, 8, 11, 15, 21. but eſpecially when thoſe days 
of the firſt Adminiftration of the Covenant are accompliſhed. 


4. 4 Tothis God again puts his Seal, he ſaith it, þ The great 
God, the Redeemer himſcl:i, the infinitely wiſe, and good, and 
powerful Spirit, who can only reach the Soul, wil! mabe Tnpreſſe. 
-ns and write clear Charafers of Divine T;uth on it; 2 Cor. 3. 2. 
None can alter, new mould, frame and temper a Spirit, but him 
who hath a rruc Original Right of all the Good he promiſeth, which 
he will treely, gracioully diſpenſe from himſelf, ]-hn 4. 10, 1.4 
All tie Dottrincs of the Goſpel which include in them the Moral 
Law, as now managed by Chriſt, all the Wilt of God concerning 
our Salvation, Promites, and Commands; and theſe in their Spirit 
and Power, which God, not onlv ratified in, but conveyed to the 
World by jetus Chritt, and efpectally into the mind. &:zrzay ren. 


ders the Hebrew RAPDA theiward parts, in the Prophet's Text, 


The Mind or Underitanding veing the innermoſt part of the Soul, 
15 capable of receiving [ipreties of Divine Truth, and its Chara 
&ers are by it made [ca1vle to the Soul ; which as promiſed here, 13 
ſo prayed for by the &aroſtle, Fpheſ. 1. 17, 18. | "Emyez3z 1s 2 
Metaphor fettinz out a rca!, actual, powerful Work of the Spirit 
of Chriſt, which leaveth the expreſs CharaRters of all God's faving 
Mind and will upon the Heart or Soul, as plain as Writing upon 
Paper, or Engraving upon Stones ; ſuch an operation of the Spirit 
of Chriſt on the Souls of them, as whereby is conveyed into them 
a New Light, Ie, Power, fo that they are made by it Partakers 
of a Divinc Nature ; and thouzh they are not other Facultics, yet 
they are quite other Thinzs, than they were for Qualities and Opera- 
tions, ſo as they are enabled to know, obſerve, and keep his Laws, 
which arc ict up in Authority and Domimon in their Souls, rulins 
and ordering all there, Erzeb. 11. 15,*'20. and3S. 25, 27. 2 Cor. 
3. 3, &, 9, 10,18. m As in the former Word, was the projiſe 
of Convertion, Regeneration, and Renovation, fo joyned with, it is 
the Promiſe of Adoption. In which God ingageth in Chrift tc 
be to pemtent Eclevers, Rom. 9.6, &. A Gol, i.e. the Cauſe and 


| can do do for themof Good, 1s all theirs, and himfe!f terminatins 


all the t.nowledge, Faith, and Worſhip of them, He will exercife 


; a/l[his Wiſdom, Fower, and Goodneſs to deliver them from al! 


þ The Spirit, proceedeth to fhew the rorm of the, Corenant do - Evil, and to make them eternally happy and bleiled in himfelf 
Vol. II. (SB F 


* \ x d- 
? Fa) N, : 


FI will pur my Laws into their mind &, and write 
: and I will be to them a God 


JET. 57, 
ul 
7 
(GT, TH 
3 
| Or 4| A" 


Chap. VIII. 


- 


—_—— 


rn Rr w 


= 


. 
24 " Fc 
Ly —_ =p Rn 
a p _— Dk 0 rs = mY h ® , L = 
ARE 
wk _ my . - : woe by o* ray Q ” 
_— , @ 4 - MY a or FIRE 
*,- ” x95 «SS oth. am 2 : bo * y 0 L 
4 OOO. RE 4 oO _ 7 " F%9 Tie Eo Z oo $ - 
—- - . .. - py pry = . ” 


n And to him this true 7/7 ae! ſhall be a true, ſpiritual, eternal 


adopted Seed and People,- Partakers of all that he hath promiſed to | 


them, or can defire of liim; ſo as their Name 1s better tian the 
N:me of Sons or Daughters, an everlattiing one not to be cut oft, 
1. $5.5, They, as his People, attend on, witneſs to, and contend 
ror him and his Glory, are always at his Beck, being purchaſed, 
made, and covenanted fo for his Uſe and Service, that they arc not 
their own, but wholly at his diipoſal, 7er. 23. 7. and 32. 20. Ezek 
it. 20. and 37. 23,27. Zech. 8. 8.) 2/Cor. 6. 16. 

11 And * they thall not teach » every man his 
neighbour 77, and every man his brother, laying, 9 
Know the Lord : For all ſhall know » me, from the 
leatt ro the greateſt. 

5 The ſubjiett implycd in the Plural Verb, and by a partitive Par- 
tickle expreticd they and every one, 13 in Feremial's Text W'R a Man, 
even every truly covenanted one who hath the knowledge of the 
Lord. They f.4'l nat teach any more, in Fer. 317 34. A double Ne- 
ative ſupplicth it in this Verſe - ur, denying that weak and truit- 
lets kind oc Teachinz, which was under the 31/aica! Covenant-Ad- 
miniſtration, whereby Souls were not lavingly cd:hed 1n the Rnow- 
ledze of God ; there was imperfettion both in their Knowledge 
and Teachinz which ſhou!4 not be under the Goſpel. p Such 
a$ are nearer fo each other in Soriety or Commerce, a tellow-Citt- 
zen; Or are 4 near Relation, by Nature or Alliance, by Conſan- 
guinity or Affinity, one near at hand, ignorant of the Lord, and 
that nceds inſtruttion, one cap.ible and poffible to be tapyht. 
7 This intimates the nianner of Teaching denyed, a formal cuito- 
mary way of teachin?, /ying, it was proverbjal with them, and fo 
vas the matter of it, Knw the Laid, as they uſed to fay, the Tem- 
ple of the Lord, Fer. 7. 4. The Baden of the Lord, er. 23. 34- 
Tie day of ti:2 Lord, Amos 5. 18. or otherwiſe not to teach them 
to krow the L rd wtional'y only, without any 1nfluence on their 
Heart, without believing, loving, fearing or obeying him, 1 John 2. 
3, 4. orto teach them to know the Lord, as redeeming and del1- 
v-ring of them out of Egypt, or out of the Land of the North, 
that is, bringing them back irom their Captivity in Babylon, as they 
were taught, Excd. and Jer. 23.7, 8. But as dejiverin,, 
them from Sin, the Curſe, Wrath and Hell. Or, they ſhall not 
teach one ancther fo darkly, flenderk and imperfe&tly in the mean- 
inz of Types, Shidowvs and Ceremonice, tlat they might know the 
Lord in Truth, and Worſhip him according to his Mind ; or to take 
ſo much pains to inſtru&t then; concerning the Lord and his Wor- 
ſp, as they took with the Gentiles when they proſelyted them, 
r For under the Goſfpel-Admimiſtration all the Covenanted-Ones, 
the Intaat in the Church, and the Aged, Iſai. 65. 20. All Ages, 
12 Chriſt, Children, Fathers and Young Men, as 1 oh. 2. 12, 13. 
14. Young and Old ſhall have his Laws put into their Minds, and 
written on their Hearts,the true ſaving Knowledge of him in Chriſt 
in the fulneſs of it, as 7a. 11. 9. they ſhall fo perfettly know him, 
{5 as not to depart from him; he ſhallbe theirs, and they his by 
an everlaſting Covenant, ordered in all things and ſure ; by the 
plentiful effuſion of his Spirit in all the Gifts and Giaces of 1t 
throngh his Goſpel-Inſtitutions on thein ; they ſhall be ſo enlight- 
ned in the Goipel-Truths, that they know their Duties, and per- 
form them, as -1t they were immediately enlightned from above, ra- 
ther than by the common methods of teaching by his Word, that 
tney ſhall not need fo much cautionimg, threatning, correfting as 
they did under the Law ; but ſhall intirely cleave to him, without a 
diipoiztion to revolt. 

12 For will be merciful to their unrighteouſnel- 
ies /7 and their fins and their iniquites will 1 remem- 
ber no more 2. 

{ This. Fry Rates the c1uic of a!l the former As promited 1n the 
Goſpe!-Covenant, as Repencrating, I!luminating, Adopting, . and 
God's gractous removing all Sins that might hinder the communica- 
tion of theſe, and all otizer Good to his Covenanted-ones, God 1n 
and by the Adminiſtration of this Covenant, ratified by his Blood, 
propitiating him, will of his free Mercy pardon, blot out, and 
take awas, chap. 2. 17. and thereby free them from the Guilt, 
Power, a:d Puniſhment of their original and actual Unrighteout- 
ncfs, in;plying his Reconciliation to, and free acceptance of their 
Perſons in Jeſus Chriſt, on whoſe account it 1s, he dealeth ſo graci- 
cully with them in all things, 1 John 4. 9. Ja. 55. 7, 8, 3. t All 
the Breaches of God's Law by Commiſſions or Omifſions, whatever 
they may be for Number” or for Aggravation ; he willalways through 
Chriſt ſave his Covenanted-ones trom them ail, Matth. 1. 21. Rom. 
3. 21,70 27. Allof theſe ſhall not only be for the preſent blotted 
out, but his Merey will be ſo great and certzin, through Chriſt, that 
he vill neither puniſh them for them, nor ch.urge them to tiiem, he 
will abundantly pardon, and for ever take them a vay, fo as it they 
be tfouzht for, they ſhall not be found, chap. 10. 3. 14. Jfz. 43- 
25, Micah. 7. 18, 19. And when he forget: their Sins, he will have 
their Perſons in everlaſting remembrance, Pſal.112. 6. 

12 In that he faith, A new covenant, he hath made 
the tirft old 7 ; Now that which decayeth ard wazetn 
Id, z5 ready to vanitn away tv. 


A A i, 
<4 4+ 


CO1Qgq, 
 Thie Infercice 1rOm il. 15 befcre ſaid, wer. 8. (in the Lord's 
ſayin; this by the Prophet 7erc... * 


even the laſt *and belt he willmake, and in v. ich he will have pe- 
nitent, beizevins Sinners to acquieſce) 45 this, c2% tne Moſaical 
one, thuuch firſt in reſpect of the Goſpel, hatu i#t its power 
ſtrenzth and vigour, its b:nding torc?, and {o by God: 

ancther, is abrogated as uſeleſs, necdlcls, and imperice, 
Moſzica! one, thus grown old, weak and devicp:d, and by the . 
tation of the New Golpel-Covenant, abrogated, may continue 1 
2 WW] : and 10 graduatiy 


vs 


This 


{]y. 


z &lnle ; but 11 no force 
FRY . t:eet, 43 Wt _ 2140; ty Its, pits » T3” 0 
tte ant Iitthe 6 till it at laſt vaniſh and rotaily ceaſe ; It was near 


to it upon finudhing of the Miniftry of the Goſpel-[1;2h. Prieft on 


Earth, when by lis Death he fulfilled the Truth of this Typical oe, 
vertually nulled 1t; and as to its bindins force, vaniihed 
- Get?) gas publiſhed throuct:out the Wort 


—_— 8% 
2 144 LF 

* { P: 
HIS | 4s \ 


! nN - 


on, 1©, I Os 


bow Ad. tf % 


HEBREWS. 


; 17, 18, compare 2 Cox. 5. 


that he would make a nevy OR | «> bis tid 
Cuvenant for form and manner of Admu.'-2tion, litter and Letter, | xi OL ya Ie ft, IO the Court by another, had 1n 1t tic 1G 
ewins facrec Utintils. 


\tituting | 


| not unuſaily ſt cut by Lamps, Rev. 4. 5. and by realon of that 
r | Light is the Church ſet out by the Emblem of Condlefſticks, FU 
moulder and decay by | 


' by their Uubchef and Prophanenefs, mice come; 


7- 4s 15 owned by the Apoftviical Sy. 
nod, Acts chap. 15. It was high time for theſe Hebrews to ceaf- 
trom that yaniſhing Moſaical One; and effettually to cloſe with the 
Gype!-Prieſthoad and Covenant, which muſt remain and continue fos 
ever; ſec Dan. g. 24, 26, 27. which if they did not, muſt end in the 
total Deſtruction of them, their Temple and City ; Which came tO 
pal! not many years after the Apoſtle wrote this Epiſtle, 


CC RAE 1A. 


The fm of the outward Tabernacle, and what was therein; and the 
HHmiliry of its Priefls : Theſe were Shadows and Types , as ali9 
the Purifications made therein, 1 ——10. Chrift by his Sacyifice and 
entrance into the true Sanfuary hath fulfilled all this, ard by ought 
to paſs an eternal Redemption, 11 14. By hs Death the New 
Teſtament is confirtned, even as the Death of 4 Teſtatw confirms all 
Teſtaments, even as in the Old Teſtament all things were ſprint! 
with Blwd , But the Heavenly things muſt be purified by better $4- 
crtſices, 15 23. Therefore is Chriſt gone into Heaven, after he 
had once offered up himſelf upon Earth, from whence he ſhall cone t; 
de/rver them that wait for him, 24 — 28. 

Hen @ verily the firſt Covenant b had allo || or. 
4 dinances c of divine ſervice d, and a worldly e 

ſanctuary. . 

a The Holy Spirit from vey. 1. of this Chapter, to ver. 15. of 
chap. 10. 1s 1uſtrating his two laſt Arguments taken from tie Ty 
bernacles and Covenant- Adminiſtrations, about which, both the 4axo- 
nical Prieſts, and the Goſpel High-Prieft did miniſter ; in both whicl 
Chriſt hath beyond all Compariſon the preher juence, which the 
Spirit proves by an Argument drawn a comparatis, of the Ther: 
nicle and Service of the*Aaronical Prieſts, and tiie Tabernacle ang 
work of Chriſt. He beginneth with a Propotition ot the adjunct: 
of the firſt Covenant from wer. 1. to ver. 11, The three Parti: 
introducing 1t, wy. &» and z, agree, the one in conn: ing, the othe; 
{4emonſtrating, and the laſt in afferting that which followeth, to de- 
pend on what went before, as, and then zruly the firſt. b '7 +... 
is an Ellipfis, nothing is in the Greek Text joyned with it, th: uv. ! 
ſome Greeb Copies add 4m the fit Tabernacle, but this is to 
inake the fame thing 4 property of it lelt, ard iS ablurd to reac 
The firſt Tabernacle had a Tabernacle ; it is therefore better ſup. 
plied from that which #jr/? relates to in ter. 7. 13. of cap. 8. viz 
The My.ical Crvenant- Admmiſtration which had or poflctied as its pro- 
per Adjundts even thoſe three Giſtin& ones following. c Aotwe.ygte, 
we read Ordinances, others Ceremonies or Rites. It is derived 
from a Paffive Verb, and may fignifte a righteous Sentence ov 0-di- 
nanc? of God, or a rizhteous Event that anſiers that Law or De- 
cree, as Rom. 8. 4. In the Plural it notes, Jura, the Laws of GJ, 
but eſpecially here the Ceremonial Laws, thole jult Conſlitutinns ©; 
Miniſtry which God gave by Moſes to the Aaronical Prieſith1;d. d 
STgiecs Which our Tranflators makes of the Genitize Caſe Singular, 
but this 15 repugnant to the next Words connetted to it, which 
ſhouid ſtrictly be of the ſame Caſe ;, it 1s therefore beſt rendred in 
the Accuſative Caſe Plural, and by oppoſition to Ordinances, and t© 
1s read Services or Worſhig, which becauſe it refers to God, our 
Tranllators have added to it the Word Divine. How various th:s 
Worſhip was in the Miniſtry of the High-Prieſt and ordinary Prieſts, 
the Apoſtle ſheweth afterward, and therefore moſt properly to be 
rendred Services. e T? 434;y was the Sanftuiry where thelc Servi- 
ces were performed, called the Holy, from its relation to God 4nd 
his Service, it conſiſted of two Tabernacles as is deſcribed, w. 2, 3: 
It 1s Calied xo:winey, being externally decent, beautiful and glorins, 
as 1s evident by its deſcription, Exod. 25, Made it was, after God's 
own Model, and a Myſtical Structure, and a Type of a better ; yet 
though that were ſo pleaſing to the Eye of the World, its Miteri.:!s 
were hke it, frail, brittle, and paſſing away, as things mace with 
Hands make way for better, v. 24. j 

2 For there was a tabernacle f mate, the firl! s, 
wherein tes the candleſtick þ, and the table z, an 
the ſhew-bread 4, which is called the j| lanctuary / 


” 


f The Spirit deſcends to a particular account of the three t0r- 
mer Adjuntts to the Covenant, beginning with the laſt, rhe 50Leue 
ary; which being glorious, he advanceth the GJory of Chri'? {rom 
the place of his Miniſtry above it. For, is demunſtrative of wit 
was wer. 2. aſſerted, the firſt viſible Habitation that God had amongſt 
Men, 2 Sam. 7, 6. asa Token of his gracious Preſence with them - 
This Tabernacle conſiſted of three parts, of the Court, where ſtood 
the Braſen Altar of Burnt-Offerinz, the Braſen Laver for the Pricfts 
to was the Sacrifices in, and to purify themſelves when they carne 
and offered them upon the Altar, Exod. Chap. 27. 1, 0c 2nd 30. 
17, to 22. and 38. 1, to 21. and 4o. 28, to 34. is Court 
the Holy-Ghcſt here leaves out : Separated from 7111s Court by a 
Vail, was thefirſt Tent or Tabernacle, called rhe S.indtucry, of Ho! 
Pace, where the Prieſt did the daily Servicc, which is called the 
Kirli, Eand. chap. 26. 36. and go. 22, to 29. Inward of tins and 
{: pirated bv a Vail, was the Holy of Holteſt, where the Ark was, and 
where the Hi, h-Priefi only entred once a Year, Exod. 25. 10, 22e 
2nd 45.0, 21 This Tabernacle was according to God's Patterti 
and Command, pic pared, fiſhed, and reared up by Moſes, Exod. ch. 
40. g The Sari vary or Holy Place, ſeparated by one Vail from the 
h For Matter and Form anſwering God's 
Pattern, aS Faod. 24%. 37, 40 and 37. 4, 2%. and 40. 24, 25. i 
was of pure Gold, and of tix Branches artificially virought,0y wWhaCT 
was Typifhcd tliat . Spirit of Light which Chriſt giveth to the FO 
Taberrzcle, bis Bidy Miſtical, the Church wherein God dweiicth, 


? G 
ai-8 


i The Tab!e, for Watter, of platcs jo Eq 
. , oo . . 1 ey WSOryY LL 
Gold coverin> the Schittimwood, and a crawning Verge Of faves 
round 1f, Excl. 25. 23, tO 13r. Io, tO I7. _— yy 
23. « Mcit exc.iilewt for 1ts ſpir Cul vie, ſerring Gur COitt 10 A 
his Er-ccliencios, well ſh red and furnitiied for ns; 


y 8 4 } 
— Gs 
130 xt ik, 4fa5>bo 
Li JK 


er 


I. 4, I2, 13, 


5”, me 


uy +, A T,> X- > 
ve HN1CN THI fOTVWWI 


4 


Chap. Iy, 


p. 1'. 


k Was Twelve Cakes made and fer ow the Table, new every Sab- 
bath Day in the Mormns, and when taken away, were to be eaten 
by tie Prieſts only, Exod. 25, 30, and 40. 22, Levit. 24. 5, tO 
10, However, oh David's necetfity God dilpented with that Law, 
and allowed lim to eat of it, Mark. 2, 25. This was an Emblem 
of God's provition tor the Twelve Tribes, the Type of his Church 3; 
aad the beftowing on them the Bread of Life from Heaven, the All- 
ſuiticient Food for them, 7ohn 5. 32, to 59. compare Col. 2. 16, 17+ 
1 Which Firſt Tabernacle was called the Holy Place or Sun&uary, 
being relatively fo, as God's Tent, and no otherwiſc, 1o 1s it tiled 
by the Spirit, Exod. 26. 33. 

3 And 2 aftcr the tecond veil,the Tabernacle which 
is called th- Holieſt of - all 7. 

m This diſtinguiſheth the ſecond Tabernacle from the firſt ; for 


1s, Þ Cha 


patfing trough 1t to the end of it, there hung up a curious Vail | 
made of Elue, Purple, Scarlet, and tine twined Linnen, with Figures | 
of Cherubims, Excd. 26. 31,32. and 35S: 35, 35. and 4o. 21. The 
Myſtery of which 15 interpreted aſtcr, v. 8. Sce chap. 5. 19. A Vell 
notcth diftance and obfcurity ; or, covering, oppofite to that which 
1s open and tree; behind this Veil was the tecond Tabernacle, n cal 
led the H ly of Rblieft, Exod. 25. 33. by God himſelf, which did re- 
ally, though typically hold out the plice of God's ſpecizi Appear- 
rance for Propitiaticon and gracious Anſwers of Peace to the detires of 
i115 People 10 the Lord Jeius, applied afterwards to. Heaven it ſelf, 
the Holieit of all, where the High-Prieſt is entred for us, and fits at 
the Right. naad of Þ1s Father, making Intercetfion forms, chp. 6. 
19, 20. and 7. 25. and 9. 24, and 19. 19. 

4 Which had the golden cenfor o, and * th 
ot the covenant, overiatd round abour with gold, 
where l char had Manna 9, and 
Aaron's rod 7 bles of the co- 
Venant. 

o Inthe Holy of Holieſt was referved the Golden Cenſer, on wiiich 
the High-Prieft put the Incenie, when annually he entred there ; ſee 
Levit. 15. 12, 13. that the Cloud of it might cover the Mercy- 
Seat, and ſo was kept for that Service in it, ſee Joſeph. Antiq. lib. 

Many would refer this tothe Gclden Altar of Incenic that 
tiood before the Veil, Exod. 30. 6, 7, 8, In the Holy Place, and 
lo they red it, having the Golden Altar of Incenſe before it for its 
Sejvice, ard not withn :t ; fignifyins the God-head, by which 
Chriſt razkKeti! his InterceMMion, ſanditying and perfuming his own, 


PP 


K Pp 


2» ED 
G Oak 


! 
f 
1 


1 
iT.23 
a ik 


9:34.17 0 Jv 
COTT ES J\JL 


1 
1 
a 


1 . 
ded. 
. 


! 
i 
1 ) 4 

Cr [1 S 4.24 
SIDITVLSY [ 

i 1 

+} LS 1 -4 o_ 
LLIAL DUQ & \ [4 


p_ _ 
2  / 


HEBAKk &WS. 


and all Oferings made in his Name, p It was a Coffer or Cheſt of 
ittim-wood, plated ail over with Gold, Exod. 25. lo, to 23. 
t, 6. and 20. 29,21. This Cheſt had for its Cover a Mer- 
lifted or verged with a Crown of Gold roundit ; and 1s 
called the 47h of the Covenznt, becauſe the Tables of Teſtimony were 
Ivid up in it, Frd, 25. 16, and 40. 20, Thoſe two Stone Tables 
wrought by Mojes, and carried up into the Mount (after he had on 
the Idolatry of J/rar} broken thoſe of God's own making, and on 
which God had written the Ten Laws, the Terms of his Covenant 
with them) on which God wrote afreſh his Laws, and renewed his 
Covenant with them, Exod. 34. 1, 2, 28, 29. compare chap. 31. 
18. This Ark was a Tyre of Chriſt interpoſing bet ween God and us, 
who had broken the Covenant of his Laws. q Wherein refers not 
tothe Ark mentioned juſt before, for in it was nothing put but the 
Tivo Tables of the Covenant, but to the Tabernacle called the Holy 
of Fhlicit, in which was referved the Golden Cenſer, Pot of Manna, 
provided by God's Charge before the giving of the Law, and laid up 
afterwards in that Archive by God's Order, Exod. 15.32, 33, 34- 
This Manna was the Bread God fed Jrael his Church with Forty 
Years in the Wilderneſs, and is called Angels Food, Pſal. 78. 25. 
a Type of Chriſt the true Bread, that God gave from Heaven to his 
Church, John 6.31, 32,33, to 59. r Which was by God's Or- 
der put befsre the Teſtimony in the Holy of. Holieſt, and not into 
the Ark, for 1t was to be in ' view there as a token of the true Prieſt- 
hood the Type of Chriſt's againſt all Atter-Murmurers amd Uſurp- 
ers, See Numb. 17. 1, to 11. and as theſe the Urn of Manna and 
Rod of Aron were in the Holy of Holieſt ; ſo eſpecially { the Two 
Tables of the Covenant were there too, but laid up in the Ark which 
was in that place ; ſee 1 Kings 8. 9. and 2 Chron, 5. 10, Others 
think the Prepofition « is to be read, by which, or about, near 
which Ark, as 'tis uſed of Chriſt's fitting i :#:« Chap. x. 3. and 
fo notes as to the Potof Manna and Aaron's Rod, an appoſition of 
them to or by the Ark, when the Tables of the Covenant were unde- 
n1able put into it, 

5 And over it the cheruhims 7 of glory ſhadowing 
the mercy-leat; of which we cannot now ſpeak par- 
ticularly . 

? On the cover of the Arkat each end was a Cheruhb of beaten Gold; 
tnefe, and the cover of the Ark, were all of one picce, they had 
their Feet on theledze of the Cover,or its Crown at each end ; their 
Faces looked towards each other, and their Wings touched each o- 
ther in the extieam part of them, and ſo on the Cover furmed the 
Nercy-Seat , fce Exod. 25. 17, to 23. and 37. 6, to 1o. and 4o. 
20, Their form js deſcribed by Ezekiel, chap. 1. and 10. They 
were givrious for Matter and Service, God in his Glory manifeſting 
Himlelt over them, gave propittous Anſwers unto Moſes about his 
Church, Exod. 25. Levit, 2. 61, Thefe Cherubs tvped the 
Miniſtry of Angels to our Lord Feſus, eſpecially in his great Work of 
rendering God propitious to his Church, and faving it, chap. 1. 14. 
#fanding on the two ends of the Ark's Cover, they ſhewed Chriſt to he 
the Batis of their own tanding,when others fell : they ſpread ofit their 
F7ngs, to ſhew their readineſs for ſerving Him in 111; with their 
Faces oppotite to each other, and looking down on tne Mercy-Seat, 
and Ark, typing what the Apoſtle ſaith of them, 1 Fet. 1. 10, 11, 
12. dcticous to pr” into the Myſtery of this great Proitiator, the 
Surety and Mediator of God's Teſtament, and on his Propitiation 
and its effetts, which 1s admirable and aſtoniſhing, not to Sinners 
only, but to Angels, Epre/. 3. 10, u The Apoſtle apologiſeth for | 
hi but mentioning theſe myſterious tnings now, that 1t was not to 


m_ 
144 


m1! 
Iv 
vILkl 


and 37. 


cy-Seat. 


&s | 
<a <0 


£:11ipe the Glory of that Admiſiration, but becauſe the Matters 


S 6 
Vol. I, 


; but all the common Prictts, 


- 4 x 


6 bag 
rn A 


# 
'<: 
£E 
Mme; vere SC? 
: - —_— Y. G 4 
t the Truta and Wwhitance of 
+ + P*. & » treat 


> 


6 
ic 


fQNG > WETE Ti Ca AUIEW TE "I 
* thepriefſts went alwars juro th: 
accompliſhing the ſervic: of Co 7 

w The Spirit: now procecds to the fecend 264 
cal Adminiſtration, havinz {:teq 
Aaronical Priefts fervices in tham- «, 
and © reared, and the Ut-nii's 
things fet in God's own Oracr por, * fo the ir 
ary within the firſt Veil, dir 


- 
* 
” 
*. 


n the Tabecaicles we 
1zct,; 
» 
ned 
Work, every one in his 6a! 7 
compleatly ating all the Services enjus to 
done there, as to put on tne Shew-br24, a: 
took off, Exod. 25. 30. Leuit. 24. 5, to 10. to reep: 
the Candleſtick, ſuppiping it with Ou, and clcar:n, 
Ex:4. 25. 37, 38. and 27 1. and 3o. 7,C 
To bura Incenle on the G--Iden Altar betore *!: 
took a Cenfer, and filled it with Fire trom the Altir © 
criiice, and then came to the Altar of Incenſ- bc: or: #! © | 
rare put the Incenſe on the ire in- the Center ; eur 7 iy | 
porting of which, the People in the Court were: put 
their Prayers for Pardon, each Perſon by himſelf, tee £1 
WO 7, & 9, 34, 35, 35. and 49. 25, 27, Luke 1. 6, 1<. 
the Ordinances ot Worſhip couunanded by God, did the | 


) 5 


AC 
. «ty _ 


+ 


. 

” 
a | Y 
GS FLSIk © 


J 


tormin it; all which Scrvices in the Holy Place, do but 'p: ; 
true Services in the Goſpel Church, of all made Prietts by tne tt 4 
ot Chriſt, 1 Pef. 2. 5, 9. and Revel. 1. <, 5. and 5. 

Prayers and Prailes to God continually in the Name of Chir!tt, } 
tumed with the Incenſe of his Merits, Mil. 1. 11. compare /t.7. 
obtaining thereby the Lizht of his Grace through his Spirit, 211 t 
Bread of Lite, till they are perfeced by their great High-Prict:, wt 
carried into the Holy of Holieft, there to be prailing and cn) 174 
Gol in Him forever, as }:e hath prayed for tnem, and promitce te 
them, 7ohn 14. 2, 3. and 17. 20, 21. RE 

7 Bur into the ſecond rent the High-Prielt atone 
once every year y, not without blood 2, which te 0: 
fered for himſelf, and tor the errors of the people 2. 

y This Verſe contains the 1pecial Anniverſary-Service of the Higi- 
Prieft alone in the inward Tabernacle, the Holy of Holieft, of whici 
you have the Law, Exod. 3v. 14. Levit. 16. 2, Gc. Into this 
place the Hizh-Pricft was to enter vnce a Year only, and every Y eat 
to repeat it, as Exod. 3o. 10: upon the Atonement-day being the 
tenth Day of the Month T1j71, the ſeventh Month in their Ecclet:- 
aſtical Year, and the firſt ot their Civil ; that Davy was he to enter 
ſeveral times into that place, firſt for himſelf, Levir. 15. 11, 12; 
13, 14. and then for the People, ver. 15, 15, (9c. carrying in the 
Blood firſt within the Veil, and then coming out ag:in, and carryins 
in the Incenſe on the Golden Center; none of the other Prieſts were 
to enter into the Holy Place while he was Miniſtring, but him alcne, 
as Levit. 16. 17. 2 when he firſt entced into the Holteſt of all, as vas 
with the Blood of a young Bull, of a Ram, Zee. 5. 3. 14. with 
the Blood of the He-Goat, v. 15, 27. Atter he had offered the 1n- 
cenſe on Ins Golden Cenſfer, v. 4. he muit fprinkle the Blood upon 
the Mercy-Seat, and before it, by which expiarory Blood there was 
made an Atonement, ver. 12, 13, 14. 4a Firli, for his finiut Sc!t 
and Family, ver. 11. and then for the T2norances, Incogitancics, £Er- 
rors, and all forts of Sins comnutted by the People, v. 15- Chap. 7 
27. all of them being committed with ſforne Error of the Under- 
ſtanding, which Type in all its parts, was perfe&ly fuifilled 10 Chritt 
the Goſpel-High-Prieft, as is ſhewn in the following Verſes, whereby 
not only his Office, but his Services are tranſcendently fect aboye, aud 
preferred to all the Aaronical ones, 

8 The Holy Ghoſt 6 this fignifying, That * the way 
into the holieſt of all c was not yer made manitett, 
while as the firſt tabernacle was yet Nanding d. 

b God the Spirit himſelt, the thicd Relation in the Deity, the 
Author of all the Myſaical Inſtitutions, who commanded all thete 
ritual Ceremonial Services in this Tabernacle to be performed, WO 
revealed all this to Moſes, and who inſpired him with it, Lever. 15: 
I, 2. The moſt infallible Interpreter of his own Inſtitutions, de- 
clared by theſe Signals and Types, and demonſtrated by the frame 
of Ordinances, thengiven to the Church in theſe expretſions, Ex22. 
30. 10. Levit. 16. 2, 12, 13,14, 15, 17: The Veil ever covering 
the Holy of Holieſt, but only in the Day of Expiation, when it was 
drawn aſide and that laid open. c The true and very means to God*: 
Preſence in Heaven it ſelf, which 1s only by Chriſt the great High- 
Prieſt, through whoſe Blood we can come to the Throne of 11:5 
Grace there boldly, chap. 10. 19, 20, 21, 22. and by the per:ect 
work of his Spirit on us, can enter with Him into the Holy ot Hc 
lieſt in Heaven. This was not fo plainly, clearly, fully, umverſiily 
known as afterwards by the ſhedding of Chriſt's Blood, and the Re- 
velation of it in the Goſpel to all the world. Chriſt was-revealed 
to the Hebrews, and all theſe Ceremonial Ordinances did hold Him 
out, and by Him only the Saints under that Covenant Adminittra- 
tion got to Heaven, yet the manifeſtation of it was obſcure in com- 
pariſon of what it 15 ſince. d While the Atoſaica! Covenant-Adrni- 
niſtration was to continue till the coming of Chriſt in the Fleſh, and 
perfeting the work by his death, for the ſpace of near 1 Vears, 
was the true, right, and proper way-for entering into Heaven, dark 
ly, and obſcurely, and typically revealed unto the Church, when by 
the death of Chriſt the Veil of the Holy of Holieft was rent alunder, 
Heaven laid open to be ſeen, and entred into by all peritent belicy- 
ing Sinners through Chriſt, eyery day 1n their Duties, and then in 
their Perſons; Matth. 27. 51. 


o Which «as a Figure for the time then picſent e ;"o 
in which were oftered both gifts and ſacrifices f, * thar | jt 
1 could - ; 


9, 10. 


»+4 yo. . 
CIa3\ £ Ins 
k 


=Y 


>” 
—Y 


- 


Vo 


& 0 


5 & 


3 
-_ 


a: 
» I'3! 
. 


could nor make him that did the ſervice perfect g, as 
pertaining to the conſcience, 
e The Tabernacle in all its parts, and the whole Occonomy of it 


was 222244, Which tizniteth the Trantlation of a Word or Thing 


from its own natural fieniacation, to tignine another ; which thing 


{9 ti2nificd by it, is commonly more excellent than it ſelf, as the tud- 
{tance excoeuas 


per.c?t ſh:do.vs of them, ſerving only for that Infant State of the 


1 


Tent it was, ſuitable to his Perfon, and agreeable to his WH, even 


with Him, nor bring them to Hippinels 11 Him, C4þ. 10.3, 4+ no 
pateft juiiifying, fanRifying could be had by any ot them though 
never fo often repeated. They mizht do all to tne Letter whicl 
God required, a>ſolviaz the Worſhipper as to the external part, but 
not at all according to the Conſcience ; or they could not take the 
g611t of SIN ;rom the Conſicnce as to themicives, but it would cry 
guilty ſtill; neither could they remove the power of 1t, for it 
was under Bondace to it {ti}! ; neither could they take away the fears 
and terrors of it, but left jt ſhaking under them and unguiet ſtil] 
being abuſed by them 2s a Vail to keep them from Chriſt the true 
Prieſt and Sacrifice, when as Types and Shadows they fhould have 
led theſe Worſhippers to him. 

} Y A O a 4c Pe By 15S POS. , 

Jt) [4 hich [1-194 only in Meats na Q11KS D. and At- 
vers waſhings z, and || carnal ordinances # impoicd 07: 
them /,unnl the time m of reformation 722. 

h Havinz ſhewn the typicalneſs, weakneſs of the Moſzical Cove- 
nant-Adminiſtration, in reſpett of the Tabernacles, Services and 
Ordinances. he cloſeth his Deſcription of them 1n this Verfe,by ſhew- 
no their Carnality and Mortality. As they were external things, 
they could reach no further than the Fleſ}i only, as appears by par- 
ticular Inftances, and therefore could not, quiet the Conſcience, con- 
ſidered without Chriſt, nor juſtine, ſanQife, or ſave the Sinner. 
For Meat and Drink-Cfſerings, and Meats clean and unclean, and 
Prinks prohibited by Godin which the Jews placed much of their Re- 
11:10n, which ſeparate from what they f1gnified, commended no Man 
unto God, I Cir. 8. 8, As to Meats, ſee Lev.ch. rt. and Deut. 14. 3, 
to 21. As to Drinks torbidden the Prieſts, Lev. 10, 9. and the Na- 
z2arites, Numb. 5, 2,3. The Jealouite-Water, Numb. 5. 24, and the 
Paſchal-Cup, Pſalm 116. 13. and Cup of Thank-offerings ; ſee Lev. 
hep. 1. and 2. i Which were many for the Prieſts in their Services, 
and for others in perferming theirs by them, fome by ſprinkling 
with Blood, Ex-d. 29. 20, 21. with Water, Numb. 8. 7. and 19. 9, 
to 15. Some by waſhing at the brazen Laver, as the Prieſts, Zxod. 
25. 4. and 30. 17. to 22. ſo the ſprinkling of healed Leapers, Lev, 
14. 4, to 9. and the Purification of the unclean. All theſe were of 
God's own inſtituting, but ſtill reach no further than the Fleſh or 
Body of the Sinner.See ver/e 13. & Other carnal Rites ard Ceremonies, 
ſuch as could not reach the Conſcience, as they uſed them, yet were 
to be uſed by them in obedience to God's Will, and to diſcriminate 
them from others, which were various in the Ceremonial Law. 
Emer impoſed, may agree with wee, wer. g. Gifts impeſed; or 
may have the whole Sentence for its Subſtantive, as being matters 
impoſed or ſettled in Meats and Drinks. All theſe things were 
not the Inventions of JAſes, but God's own Inſtitutions 
injoyned by his own Authority on the Jewiſh Church, to lead 
them by a regular Uſe of them to Life by Chriſt, but by their own 
Corruptions were made Burdens to them. The Divine Precept ob- 
lized them to an obſervation of them, and to the ſerving God in, 
by, and through them. 7m As they were outward bodily, and car- 
nal things, ſo they were mortal ; as to their Being and Continuance 
enjovaed by God, they were wiyce yagi, until, is a Term ſettled and 
limited, and not indefinite, and its limit is a fmgular time, even that 
point of Time, wherein Chriſt having finiſhed the Work of Redempti- 
on, aſcended and fate down on the Right Hand of God, and power- 
fully thence breathed forth the Spirit of Infallibility on his Apoſtles, 
for guiding them 1n laying the foundation of his Church, by Preach- 


| 1ng the Goſpel throughout the World, and perfetting of it,and no 0- 


ther. This the Jews and others expetted from the Meſſiah, John 4. 
25.11 his time. All the New Teſtament pertetting was by them, and 
therefore they give a Charge againſt the leaſt aſteration of the Goſpel, 
truth,and law,which they left as a Rule for ordering of Chriſt's Church 
to h115 laſt coming. See Matth. 28. 20. n Auyarow; of putting things 
to right by the Law, Rule, and Ordinance of Chriſt, the Work of 
this ſpecial point of Time. He the great Church Reformer, through - 
ly rizghteth things to God-ward, by removing and taking away what 
was faulty, not 1n 1t ſelf, but by Man's abuſe of it, even all the Moſii- 
cal Occonomy, and Church- Frame, which carried Men about toGod, 
ojening and making that to be ſeen with open Face, which was veiled 
and ſo miſtaken, ' even the Myſtery of Chriſt hid from Ages, by 
manifeſting and eſtabliſhing that which was the Truth it ſelf,inſtead of 
the Shadows that did but repreſent it, even that true Church-Frame 
1ntended firſt by God, and now fully revealed and ſettled by his Son, 
as a ſtanding Rule and Pattern to all for ever; which unmoveable 
Kingdom of His, 15 deſcribed further, Chap. 12, 22, to 29. 


11 But o Chriſt being come * an high prieſt of 


good things to comep, by a greater and more per: 
fect 4 tabernacle,” not made with hands 7, thar is to 


lay, nor of this building, 


o The Spirit by this adverſative But, oppoſeth and applieth the 
Truth tothe Type, and brings in view the Antitype, the Office, Ta- 
bernacle, Sacrifice and miniſtration of Chriſt, which vaſtly exceed- 
eth the Mofatcal one. p The High-Prieſt preferred, is no le Per- 
fon than God the Son manifefted inthe Fleſh, and anointed to his 


HEBREW S. 


x 


Office with the Holy Ghoſt and Power, 4#s ro, 38, Inthe 
oi time before the Antiquating and removing the former Order 
he exhibited and Conſecrated the true tigh-Prieft, of which at] the 
other were but Types, and bringing with him all thoſe £099 thin-- 
witch were figured and promiſed under that Occonamy, all Pant 
Reconciliation, Righteouſneſs, Holineſs, Adoption and oloriou: I 
vation,- which were under that diſpenſation to come, beins px; Gs 
and exhibited with, as effected by this High Prieſt at his firſt com. 
but to be compleated and perfetted at his fecond, which is rm © 
ted ver. 26. 28, g TheAnti-type of the Moſaical SanQtuary a: 6 Th. 
bernacle, where there was the Holy Place, and the Holy of 119jic(} 
correſpondent to, and fizured out by thete, was the more 5/.;:..,. 
SanFuary of this High-Prictt ; he paſicth through the Tabern.;c! Cod 
his Church on Earth, of which he is the Miniſter, as hath !. - 
cleared, ver. 10, and Chap, 8. 2, and ſo cnters into the Heaven .. 
Heavens, the Holieſt of all, ver. 24. where God fits on his Throat, 

of Grace. Tabernacle here cannot ignite the Body of Chrift, 4; 


Inc 


5 i 45 


that 1s the Sacrince that anſwercth to the legal ones offcred th 
Court, and without the Gate, Chap. 13.11, 12, 13. and with the 
Blood of which he enters the Holy of Holieft as the Hih - vr; 
did, ana. he doth not paſs through his Fleſh there, but carricti; i 
with him. The Word #z4rwow oh.l. 14. May not only reler to the 
God-licads Tabernacling 1n Fleſh; but that God the Son incarnate Tybcy. 
nacled in his Church; thoſe with whom Chrift dwelt while on Tart: 
for his Human Nature dwelt, or had a T:hernacle in this Wer'd 4 
well as. kig Deity; and this 1s ſuch a Tabernacle where te in ti. 
whole Perton and his Church may mcet and Communicate to-cth.r- 
This Tabernacle 1s greater than the Moſaical for quantity, s jt re 
fers to Earth the place, even the whole World, where his Church i; 
diſperſed, beyond all compariſon larger than its Type, whiah was a 
little limited and confined place, and more perjeft than that which was 
only made of Boards, Gold, Silver, Erafs, Sik, Lionen, Skins, gc. 
This being a Spiritual Temple and Tent in witich God will ink: 
and dweil forever, 1 Cor. 3. 5, 15, 17, and 2 Cor. 6, 6. 16, £13," 
2, 12.20, 21, 22, 1 Pet. 2. 5. It is far more $lorious than thy Te. 
bernacle, Hap. 2. 7, 8,9, r Whit 1s hand wrought or mide by 3c: 
1s at the beſt mouldering and decaying ; but this was wrovght Ly ec 
Spirit of God himſelf; moſt excellent for the quality, perinancycy 
of the Materials and Work, Epheſ. 2. 22, Man had nertther Pc, 
nor Skill to form, poliſh, frame, or pitch this, Chap. 8. 2. Croats. 
Work 1s God's Work, as to the Old and New Creation. Hands may 
frame and pitch the other, and pluck it up, but he that worwet! 
frameth, raiſeth, createth, this 15 God, 2 Cor. 5. 5. Ephe/. 2, :0 


12 Neither / by the blood of goats and calves. ©. 
bur by his own blood 7 he entered inf once into the ho. 


ly place, having obtained z eternal redemption for js. je, 1, 
f From his Otiice and Sanctuary, he proceeds to cicar up his Ser- % 5+. 
vice; it was not about weak, typical vaniſhing Sacrifices, the Elogd" © 


of Goats or young Bulls, that he was concerned as the Aaronica! 
Prieſts were, Lev. 16. 14, 15. opened before, ver. 7. And this anny- 
ally on the expiatory day, Lev. 16. 29, 34. which could not ſltisfc 
injured Juſtice, nor exptate Sin, nor purge, nor quict the Conſci- 
ence of the Offender, Chap. 10. 1, to 5. #t But with his own pure, 
precious and unſpotted Blood, 1 Pet. 1.19, Nota drop, or feiv Drop:. 
muſt go for it, then what dropped from his Body in his Avony, 
from his Head pierced by Thorns, from his Back when Whip't, from 
his Hands and « Feet when Nailed on the Crofs might have done ; 
but it mauſt be his own Life, Blood, the Blood of the ſecond 4d: 
dying by it for the firſt, Rom. 5. 8, to 20. Phil. 2.6, 8. And as it 
is the Blood of Adam, that it may have value enough and vw. rth : 1; 
muſt be the Blood of him who 1s God too, with his own Blood, 4: 
20.28, This price ſurmounts all Treaſures, John 5. 51.and, 10,11,15. 
With this Blood of the Covenant he entred inmediitely upon tlic 
breathing out of his Soul on the Croſs (the Vail of the Temple bein: 
rent aſunder, and room made for the great Hiph-Prieſt to full: 
Type) into the Holy of Holieft in Heaven, where never Angcl came 
nor any but himſelf, till his now piercing through, rending the Vai), 
and laying it open, Chap. 10. 19. compare T/a. 57. i5. and came witli 
it to Gods' Throne of Juſtice there ; and made the everiaſting At- 
tonement for Sin, and ſo turned it into a Throne of Grace, tv!- 
filing his T\ pe, and as the High-Prieſt did before the Sacritice was 
burnt or conſumed, Lev. 156. For the expiation of Sin was not dc- 
ferred by Chriſt to his Aſcention, 45 dayes after his Death ; but was 
immediately on his giving up the Ghoſt by him performed, and i: 
this fulfilled all righteouſneſs, Matth, 3. 15. This is the once that 
he entred Heaven for expiation, ſatisfying the injured Juſtice 
of God by Sin, fulfilled the Law, and then publickly appearcd at 
God's Throne, to ſhew all was compleat, Luk. 23. 43, 45,45. 70” 
19. 320. This once he did that which the High-Pricit did annually 
typife, but could never accompliſh for ſo many 100 years together, 
er. 26, 28. Chap. 10. To, II, 14. By which it 1s evident, that nz 


and one, refers to the ſhedding of his Blood as a Sacrifice, and prc- 
 ſenting of it to the;Father, as compleating Propitiation - Work at 


that once for ever, # When he with the Incenſe of his Merit and 
Prayer to the Juſt and Mercitul Judge, even God his bather, ſued 
tor, found, obtained, and fully received Eternal Redemption tor 
Sinners, 7. e, Deliverance of their guilty Perſons from Eterna! 
Death, full remiſſion of all their Sins, Rom. 3.25, 26. Full recon 
cilation to God, 2 Cor. 5. 18, 19, 21, withan inſtating them 1nto 
all Spiritual good. This work is ſtiſed Eternal, becauſe its Vertue 1: 
of perpetual continuance, which freeth the duly qualified Subjects, 
Col. 1. 21. 23. from the Guilt and puniſtment of all Sins for ever. 


« 


13 Forif 7 the blood of Bulls and ot goars, and 
the aſhes z of an heifer ſprinkling the unclean, lanctt 
fieth w to the purifying of the fleſh. | 

t This Service of Chriſt in kis SanRuary exceeds the Aaronical 
not onlv for reconciling Souls to God, but purifying of them, «s gp] 
ed in this and 14 ver. The Blood js the ſame as ſpoken of ny I 
Bulls here put for Calves, are but to diſtiaguiſh the 5ex Fraps 
it 1s to be noted where our Tranſlators read Oxen, as tO Sacritces 
in the Old Tettament, as particularly, Numb. 7. 87. they mean 54.45; 


- Vs 
PREZ 


sf Chap. IX. HEBREWS 


ofcred to God at all, as Sacri- Samuel, Nvid, ard the Saints, believer 


for nd Oxen were by the Lyw to be | 
fices, fre Levit. 22-17, 18,19, 24, 22, 3% T | 
be true Types 57 the true Sacriice, which was to perfe& them. This | 
Bload was ſpringled on the Mercy-Seat, and betore it, and on the | 
Altar, £2v. 15. 14, 19, &-. expiting Sins, and taking away. the | 
guilt and lezal puniſhment. « Che rite of preparing it, read 1 | 
Numb. 19.1, toll. 4 red FHeifer was by the People given to the 
Prie{t , he was to briaz her without the Camp, and order her to ve 
flain, and then take tine Bloyd with his Finger, and ſprinkle 1t to- 
wards the Tabernacle ſeven times ; after whiciz he was to be wholly 
burnt in his fizht, with Ceder Wood, Hyſop and Scarlet. The 
Aſhes of which were reſerved ; when they uted them, they took 
them in a Veil], and put running Water to them, and then ſprink- 
led them with a bunch of Hyſop on Perſons legally unclean, wer. 18, 
19, 20. and ſo they purified them from that Ceremonial Filth and 
Pollution ; but none of thele cou!d purine an unclean Soul, that was 
left unholy and unclean ſtill, w Theſe ſprinklings did Santtine thoſe 
who were lezally unclean, and did procure a legal purity and ac- 
ceptance of them in the ſervice of the Santtuary, trom which elte 
they were excluded ; by this they were lookt on as externally Holy 
with the Congregation, tneir Fleſh and outward Man being made 
pure by it for their external Worſhip, | ; 

14 Row much more * thall the blood of Chriſt 7, 
who through the eternal ſpirit y offered himfelt with 
ice Iron 


F I Pet. ! . 
? »f 6 


F® = 
C12 
\4iw 


(0.1.7. OUT |} ipor to God 2, Purge a your Con 
"Ep dead works b to  ſcrve the living God c. 

Apt pl —_ x The queſtion ſuppoſeth an unexpretfible difference between 

ns Ehciſt's purifying, and the legal Sacritices. The td with which 

ES Is - pierced within thc Vail to the Throne 1n the hizheft Heavens, on 

which ſate the Juti God, the proper, precious, powerful Blood ot 

God the Son incarnate. y hs in his Immortal Soul obeying all 

God's Will in ſuffering, did through hrs own Eternal God-head, to 

which both Body and Soul were united, and which fanetiticd the 

Body offered, as the Altar, the Sacrifice, Matth. 23. 19. WICCA 15 

called the Spirit of Holineſs, Rom. 1. 4. and gave value and vertue 

ro the Sacrifice, offer up his Body a Sacrifice tor fin, when he d1ed 

on the Croſs, not Sheep, Bulls, Goats, Turtles, Pidgeons gyc, Not 

Man, nor the lite of Angels were his Sacrifice, but himlelt, pure, 

holy aad unpolluted, an innocent, harmlefs Perion, 2 Cor. 5. 21. 

How muc!': beyond his Types for Innocency and Purity, Levit. 22» 

20, 21, Numb. 19. 2. 7 The offended injured Creator and Judge 

| of Sinners, who conſtituted him to this whole Work; and was bY 

this moſt perfett Sacrifice propitiated ; his Juſtice was ſatisfied, his 


" ICT I Laiv obeyed, and himſelf ſet fully free to pardon and forgive Sin- 
* ners without Injuſftice ; and to be juſt, as well as gracious and mer- 
Ries, 8. 5, ciful, in doing of it, Rom. 3. 25, 26, and they might be put in pol- 
,&%5, | ſetfion of his Favour, preſence and perſonagain, as their own God, 


4 T5346 i Pet. 3. 18. a Though the Sacrifice be over, the vertue and ex- 
| cellent cauſuality of it doth abide, purging now as ever, not only 
juſtifying and abſolving of a penitent believing Sinner,but purtfying 
and ſandifying the Soul, procuring the Holy Spirit to renew 1t, and 
take away inherent Corruption, and infuſe Holineſs into it, Ephel. 


; 4. 24. and making willing in the beauties of it, Pſal. 110. 3. 1 Cor. 
: 6. 11. Titus. 3. 5, 6. Making Body, Soul, and Spirit one frame 0 
; Holineſs to God ; 1 Theſ. 5. 23. So as the moſt quick, lively, and 
k | ſenſible part of the Immortal Soul, conſcious of Sin, is freed from the 


guilt, filth and fears of fin that did cleave to it ; this thus purg- 
a | ed, no conſcioutne(s of guilt remains, nor fear of puniſhment, but | 
a | itis filled, from the intereſt it hath inthis Blood, and rhe work on 
. it of this Spirit fall of Joy and Peace and Righteouſneſs by belie- 
ving, Rom. 5. 1, 2, 5, 11. b All operations of Sin, wiich come 
from ſpiritually dead Souls, and work. Eternal Death, Epheſ. 2+ 1. 
of which they are as inſenſible as dead Men; all forts of Sin which 
do taint, pollute, and defile the Soul, much more Contagious, Pe- 
- ſtilent, . and Polluting the Soul than any of thoſe things forbid- 
| den to be touched by Mojes's Law, could the Fleſh, Namb. 159.18. 
they are as offenſive to God, and more than Carcafles are to us, and 
Peſtilential things themſelves, keeping Souls from any Commumien 
with him. c As under the Law there was no coming to the Con- 
! gregation of the Tabernacle without legal purifying, Numb. 19.13, 
20, So by this purifying correſpondent to the Type, Souls are quick- 


_ enced, have boldneſs and confidence Godward in point of Duty, 
_ preſent themſelves living Sacrifices, Rom. 12. I. Aimat him through 
ny their whole Life, that he delights to keep up Communion with them 
- proportioned to himſelf, till he fit them tor their compleat ſerving 
Fa L and enjoying of him in the Holy of Holieſt in Heaven. 

at JOS 15 And. for thiscaule he is the 4 Mediator of the 
þ | >" rew teſtament, e * that by means of death : tor the 
ly redemption of f the tranſgreſhons that were under 
We the fr{t tettament, they which are called g might re- 
_ ceive the promiſe of eternal inheritance. 

4t d As Chrift's Prieſthood and Service, his Sacritice and purifying, 
1d ſo the Teſtamental Covenant, and his Adminiſtrition of it, did in- 
ed comparably exceed all thoſe of Aaron's ; ſo that for what was ſpo- 
Or ken, vey. 14. Even the effetts of his Sacrifice, the Juſtification and 


Becauſe they could not | trangreilion, 


1al Sanification of Sinners, 1s he the great Goſpel-High-Prieſt, the 
, mediating Perſ9n between God and Sinners, confirming and ma- 


Jn: 

ito king effettual by his Death, God's Teftamenial Covenant to them, | 

> 1 which 1s for the adminiſtration of it the very beſt and laſt, in | 
As, which God bequeatheth Pardon, Reconciliation, Righteouſneſs, 
| Holineſs, Adoption and Heirſhip to aneternal Inheritance to pen1- 
4 tent believing Sinners, e The Death of Chriſt himſelf God-Man, 
oj | the moſt excellent Sacrifice, without which there could be no re- 
£4” | miſſion, ver. 22. nor the Teſtament of God about 1t put in force, 
for which cauſe he was the Medtator of it, that they ſhould value 
of him ſo much the more for his Death, fulfilling therein all his Types, 
_ and reac! that wich was unattainable by theſe, bott. for their Fa- 
an thers and themiciyc*. f For the ſatisfying the Juſtice of God for 
04 thic v ron? thutr Sins nad done vt, Paying that price without which 
=_ 1 fney could not be expiated, by which they were remiffible, and 
Its , touph duly quaiited, actually fozpiven, even the Sins of thoſe who 
Fo | vere unecr the Moluncal-admniftratio:: of the Coyenant; 4.zor, 


z 1n that time, had their 
y Parluned by Vertue of the Death of Chritt to come. 


ſhadowed by thute Sacricices ty pi:ying him and his Dcath in their 


own times : What tie Death of Beaſts or Birds could not do for 
them, he did, delivering them from the guilt and puniſkment of 
their Tranſgreſſions, under which othcriviſe they mult have periſted 
tor ever; this Peter publiſheth, 4&s x5. 11, This Veriue of Chritt's 
Death 15 not mentioned exclutive of New-Teſtament-tins, tins re- 
mitted by 1t ; but it itdid expiate thoſe old ones. reaehin? js 
much backward, even to 4aromn, - it will much more expiate thoſe 
under the New Teſtament to Penitent, Belicvins, Pravins Sinner: 
tor it, as thoſe Old-Tetftament-trantsreof-:rs Kere. F Suck 35 '@ 
God's call repent and beiirve on the Lord Jefus, that Anzel of the 
Covenant, then revealed to them, and enter into Covenant witi: 
him, Exod, 23. 20, to 24. compare 1 CF, 10.3, 4, 5. and 

45, 45,47. Such as by 1t have Sins exyated, -Conſcicncces nuroud 
to as to have a titic to, and titnets by the. work of thc Soirit tor the 
Heavenly Canaan, Rom. 4. 16,24, 25. May be put jnto the paeffi- 
on of that eternal Inheritance made over to tiie,n by Promiſ>, and 
which the Spirit gave them an earneft of here, Chap. 12, 1 


- F 

# #7 5; = 
J; # 

Ji $5. 


—_ 

4 T, : | Py. 2 

16. compare Ephe/. 1. 13, 14. and 1 Pet. 1,3, 4, Ailti.s is con 
farmed to theſe by Chriit's Death, 

16 ror where a - teftament 25s. there muſt 37 5 


neceſfity || be the death of the tetlator 7. 

h For, gives the reaton of the Mediator's Death, even th put- 
ting the Called into the poſleifion of the bequeathed Inheritiice, 
demonſtrated by a common natural Law in all Nations of the 7 e{.; - 
ments effect on the Teilators Death : A Teſt.ment beins a diip2otition 
by W1ll nuncupative, or written, of either Gocds or Lands, which 


are the Perions own, to be the Rizht and Poilcffion of others 2555p 
his Death, whom he nominateth in it : Such in proportion 15 7; 

New Covenant, where God pives freely all ſpiritual zood thin « 1th 
an Heavenly Inheritance, as Legacicsto all his Called Ones in Crit _ 
by this laſt and beſt Will and Teſtament of his, writton in bis Scr5; « 


ture Inſtrument, witneficd by the Prophets and Apouftles, 1-alcs! he 
the two Sacraments, cipecially the Lord's Supper, Lule 2 
He who maketh a Teſtament by the Law of N:ture as of Nitions, 
mult dye before the Legatees have any profit by the Will, the Su 
an Heir inherits not but on the Fathe;”s then 15 tne Teſt 2- 
ment firm and valid, the time being come for the ticirs inheriting, 
nd tor the Wills execution, it being now unalterabic ; the neee tits 
of which 1s cleared, ver. 17. | ; 


17 Fora * Teſtament is of 4 force 2ftzr men arc 
dead : otherwiic it is of no ftrenzth ar all / whillt th. 
Teſtator liverh. 

k The Teſtator bcing. by Death diffeiſed of his Goods and Ions, 
the Right takes place of the Lepgatees, and the time of thor ch.:3- 
lenginz it ; ſuch a ſacred Tye there is upon the ſurvivins, tlat gore 
can of right add to it, alter, or ditſanul it. * / It js of no force xwiiile 
the maker of it liveth, becauſe they have need of the thin:« he- 
queathed; they can alter and change it, and by the Will ir {15 
it 15 declared none ſhall have any right to the thin + beg 
11 1t til] the Teſtator be dead. The contcquent of all this js, 7has 
the Teſtator of the New Teſlament mull Pur 7t in force 51 [.catn : 
and his Death is of zreater force -to confirm his Teftimer: than 
that of Men, becauſe his Will can never be violited, it ki 2 
Divine Conſtitution, but tne Human Teſtament mav. Chuilt God- 
Man theretore dieth as Teitator, and puts the Teſtawent in force ; 
and by breaking the Bonds of Drcath, doth gloriouily ©: rot 


» .x C1:GYhS 


C3 
a. 


[| 
eafh ; 


Vertue of it tothe Legatees under the Old-Teſtiment, 4s wel! as the 


'TAG 


from the beginning of the World. 

15 Whereupon 2»: neither the firſt 7e/lamert was 
dedicated 7 without blood. 

m For, as much as all Teftaments are put in force by the Death 
of the Tettator, and all Covenants are moſt ſtronzly confirmed by 
Death and Blood 1n God's own Judgment, thence 1! is that the Mo- 
ſaical Covenant was confirmed by them. -n "Eyz<:2irimi ftrifiy 
taken ftgnifieth made new, or renewed, It is not ufed in the New 
Teſtament, but in this place, and Chap. 16. 20. the S1r. tranilate it 
here confirmed, or ratified. In the Old Teſtament the Septuagint ute 
1s toexpreſs the Hebrew JI2T Chanocho Devt. 20.5, In which Law 
for a Man, who had built an Houſe,and. was called out to the Wars, to 
return and Dedicate it, was to take Poſſeſſion of it, and (eeute it from 
the claim of another. Here 1t 1s properly uſed to make ſure, firm, 
and inviolable;, and that by B/od, typical of Chriſt's, which i: tc 
higheſt and moſt folemn r.tiication. So were the Covenants Letors 
ratified, but eſpecially under the Law, and the Moſaical Coveni.: 
it ſelf, as appear by inſtance, Gen. 15. 9, Io, 17, 18. and 21, 
54. compare Exod. 24. 5, 7, 8- 

I9 For when Moles had ſpoken 0 every Prec2nt ts 


all the people according to the Law, * he took rh. 


-y 
2 


blood p of calves and ot goats, with water and || + * 
ſcarlet wool, and hyiop, and ſprinkled both the book .,, * 


and all the people. 

o That the Old Teſtament was ratified by Blazd, the Spirit pro- 
verh by inſtance, ſes as Mediator havins fpoaken every Commanc,, 
Promiſe and Article of the Covenant to-all Tfrae!, who came out of 
Egypt according to God's Charge, reading all to them out of the 
Book, wherein by God's Order he had written 1t ; and the People 
declaring their aflent and conſent unto this Covenant, as Ex. 
3, 4, 7. 45 God Covenanted and bound himiſcit to his part of 17. 
The Mediator then took, accordins to the common Rite in ſaci ra 
tifyinz ats, a ſprinklinz buſh made of Scariet Woo!, Cedar- nocd 
and Hyſop, Levit. 14. 4,6. Numb. 19. 6, ; 


* 4 
a 


1 
” 


ICH 


18. to which Dawid a] 


» . y- 6 , 6 "0 I 3, 9 >» F:I--4 7 
lIadeth, Plal. 51. 7. and with this bunch ſprinkies the Blood a 
” P F-aSs : _—_ £4 2 Dy = _ 1 "IS O v 15 C hs 

Water (wich tie had recerved into Eitons from tne Sactiaces, Kii- 
oy L #5. Vl i i TY n va « ar 1 —T Y] — cx jp _——_ — = 
| Jed JAG F1t-vDOCil, tor Burnt-Oiertn, 2 and Poace-Oucrin?., _ 
y + » 
%S- —_ 


ng , 
£ , 
QI: 

- 


Abo * 


Chap. IX. | 


! 
| of 
| 
eo 
£2 
ſ 
Fi fi - 
h- 
\ 
gl 
4+ 
Fi 
if 
i 


Chap. Lx. 


there mixed, Ex:d. 24.5, 6. Levit. c. 2, 4, and 14,51,)on the Al- 
tar, Eook of the Covenant, and all Iracl, Exod. 24. 6, 7, 8. con- 
tirming and ratilying the Covenant on God's part and theirs, as the 
words annexed, wr. 22. aud Exod. 24. 8. aifirm, behold the Blond 
' ty which this Covenant is made firm and imutlable, Al this 1s but 
a ſhadoiv and Type of the ratincation of the New Covenant with 
Sinners by the Death of Chriſt :; He is the Mediator that brin2s 
! Covenant to them ; he dycth ard putgit in force; 
by his Blood ratineth it on God's part and theirs, by his Spirit ap- 
plyinz 1t to them, and ſprinkling it on them ; he brings home the 
Tcftamenta] Lleiſinzs to them, Chap. 10. and 11. 28. and 12, 
. Fa. 52. 15, Exch. 36-25. 1 Pets 1. 2. | 
o Saving, * This 7s the blood of the teſtament, 
which God hath enmoyned unto you 7. 
9g Mis after his ſprinkling the Altar, Book of tic Covenant, and 
all Irae!, tauzht them the meaning of it; ſaying, Tos that 1: the 
Blnod wherewith FT have ſprinkied you, is a Sign cr Seal of the Te- 
ftament. the Blozd by which it is ratified and conirmed : the Blood 
ypified and repreſented bv it, was that of Chriſt the Teftator, by 
which all the New Teitament :: ratified to all penitent believing Sin- 
ners that look to it, without which 1t could never have been made 
00d. The Blood of Chritt i- the immovable foundation of this 
Teſtament, Exod. 24. 8. compare 1 Cor. 11. 25. Even the Te- 
ſtamental Covenant which Feh1vah had made with them, and which 
he enjayned them, by ſuch a rite as this to ratifie and confirm, 
21 Morcover © he {foriikled likewite with blood 
both the rakernacle. and all rhe vettels of the mt- 
niltry 7. | | 

r Moſes did not_only tprinkic the Bookof the Covenant with 
Blood, but the Tabenacte it ſelf, vearly, on the Atonement day, as 
is charged, Levit. 16. 14, 16, 17. Foras the Altar and Perſons were 
to be Attoned for, ſo was the Tabernacle it telf, ver. 18, 20. Firſt, 
they were ſprinkled, and then anointed, Levit. 8. 10, 11. as the 
Goipcl-Tabernacle was in the truth of it, ys Cor. 6.11, Allthe Gar- 
mentsand Veilels of that Prieſthood were thus to be purified, Ty- 
pitying how unclean all the Perfons miniſiring with them, and Ato- 
ned tor in and by them were; and how polluting all things, 
and polluted by them, till they were purihed by the Blood of 
Churiit, © 
22 And almoſt all things / are by the Law pureg- 
<d with blood : and * withour ſhedding of blood 1s 
nc remiliion. 

{ All ſuch things as are capable of- purifying, and which were not 
to be ſo by the Water of Separation, or by Fire, as Levitt. 16. 28. Numb. 
21. 22. were ceremonially purged by Blood. # And without the 
Pz.ith of ſome living Creature as a Sacrifice, and the Blood of it not 
only ſhed, but ſprinkled, there could be neither legal Pardon of 
Guilt, nor purging of Ccremonial Filth. By this God fignified to 
TI ae!. that without the' Blovd of Chriſt kis Son, and the Teſtator of 
Is Teſtament, fhed asa Sacrifice, to purchaſe and procure both re- 
mifſon and the Spirit, there could be neither pardon of the guilt 
of Sin. and the removal of the puniſhment, nor purging the filth, or 
renewing the nature of the Sinner, his Blood being the 1ineſtimable 
price purchating both fer them, 

25 Ir eas neceltary rhetefore x, that the patterns 
of the things in the Heavens t ſhould be purified 
with rheſe, tut the heavenly x things themlcelves 
with better {acri! c:s than thele. 

u This concluſion the Spirit draweth from the antecedent, wer. 
12, proved in the following Verſes, therefore 1s it here rehearſed, 
the iilative Particle thereforc,is but to ſum up the uſe of Blood about 
the firſt Tabernacle, and that Teſtament-diſpenſation. It 1s pofi- 
tively neceſſary by the Will of God, expreſly enjoining them, to 
point out better, and that there might be an agreement of the. 
Type with the Truth. w The Tabernacles in all their parts, the 
Bcok of the Covenant, Veflels, Services, Fc. Being Types, Signs, Ex- 
amples and Snadows of things in Heaven, muſt be ceremonially purg- 
c{ and ſeparated from common uſe to Divine, by thoſe external, 
ritua! ſprinkling and Illuſtrations, eſpecially with Beaſts Blood, myſti- 
cally repreſenting better blood and Purifications of Perſons and 
things than theſe. x But things more excellent and glorious than 
carthly ones, the Goſpel-Tabernacle in its parts, Teſtament, Services, 
about which Chriſt miniſtreth, which are Heavenly for their decent, 
agreeableneſs with, and tendency to it ; they are ſpiritual and in- 
corruptable, wer. In, 12. chap. 8. 2. and 12. 22. Gal. 4. 26. Rev.21. 
are to be dedicated, ſet a part, put in force, and ſanQificd to God 
by the one Sacrifice of Chriſt, of more value, worth, and vertue, 
than all the legal Sacrifices together. It 15 expreſſed plurally, to 
anſwer the oppoſite term, and to ſet out 1ts excellency, being far a- 
bove all others ; the Blood of it being that of God, by perſonal Uni- 
on,and which 1s only efficacious for eternal good, and availgble with 
him ; ſo ought it to be eſteemed as it was 1n Truth and not quarrel- 
lcd with by theſe Hebrews. 

24 For Chriſt is not entred y into holy places made 
with hands, which are the figures z of the true, but 
into heaven a it ſelf, now to appearb in the preſence 
of God tor us. 

y Fr, ſherwvs this to be a rational proof of the tranſcendency of 
Chriſts Death and Sacrifice; and this he demonſtrates from the 
plice of his Miniftry, far excecding that of this Type. The Goſ- 
ipel Hioh-Prieft did not like Aaron, enter with his Blood into the 
Holy of Roheft of an earthy Tabernacle, frail and moveable, and 
appear before the Mercy-Seat on the Ark there, ver. 9. z All theſe 

were but like, and correſpondent figures and refemblances of the 
true, holv, and glorious place of Ged's reſidence. a But he, as our 
Heh-Prictt, did enter with his Atoning-Blood ; after the Sacrificing 
of himſelf on the Crofs, into the Heaven of Heavens,and approached 
th: Throne of Juſtice, and propitiated it, making it a Mercy-Seat 
and true Throne of Grace unto penitent believing Sinners ; and 
then perfeted the work of Propitiation and Redemption : After- 


N71 
<< 4+ 


NAN 


HEBREWS. 


; wards at his triumphant Aſcenſion heentred 1m his whole P 


Chan, iN 


by \ 4M 


mortal, and laid open a way tor our entring there, þ Wherehe; iy 
appears as our Advocating Mediator, pleading his Merit fr tt. r 
miſfion of our Sins, and rendring of God's Face-ſmiling on. - 4 
fivouring his Clients, which was terrifying and ati ightnins Cu 
Ad.im before, See Chap. 7. 25. and 10. 19. and Ron. 8, 54. 
2.1, 2. Rev. 5, 6. Here he repreſents our Perfons to Gao | 
hitting in the mean while us beneath for our ſecins him Face t 
and being blefied in the enjoyment of that profpe't for cyer, 

25 Nor c yetthat he ſhould ofier hinſl city 
* the high-prieft entreth into the Holy plc: 
with the blood of others. 

c The excellency of Chriſt's Sacrifice bevond the 2 2cncey; 
argued here from its ſingularity; it needs no repetition. 25 thc 1- 
plied Sacrifices did. Ovd” introducing it, is but inferrins + 
cetlency of Chriſt's Sacrifice, by denying in it that Kin 
was annexed to the legal Ones; there was no need ["e 
dye yearly, to fulfil the Type of the often yearly Sacrifcrs 41 
Legal High-Prictt, who entred with the Blood of Bulls and © 
firange Blood tohim, and not his own, into the Holy of E446! 
in the Tabernacle, ajid entred ſo every year once, to ew ths 
tue of his Sacrifice to be only f1gnal, typica!, and pitſin;, 


room for a better, that fingle individual one of Chriit in voy 


| Sacrifice and Oblation. 


26 For then d muſt he oicen have tutfere: ' 
the foundation of the world : bur nouw / * 
the end of the world hath heg appeared iv | 
way fin by the ſacrifice of himlclt: 

d Emi, The conſequent is drawn 2b impoſſibili ; if he had @{-n 
oftered himſelf, he muſt have often ſuffered, but he could wor ful. 
ter often, For where there was Oitcring, there muſt be a S:rifce, 
and fo Suffering. Now that Chriſt thould do fo in his own Porfun 
was impoſſible and abſurd, for God to have put his Sn on ſufterin» 
fo cruel a Death ſo often. e From the Fall of 44am at the bein- 
ning of the World, ever fince Sin needed a Sacrifice ; but his on. 
ſuffering as a Sacrifice for it, was of Eternal Vertue in God's py: 
poſe, anſwering and ſatisfyinz God's juſtice ; one Death of the {- 
cond Adam for the Sin and Penalty of the firft; in the efticacy any 
vertue of his Death which was everlaſting. The often and annua! 
Sacrificing of the Aaronical Prieſts, and entring of the Holy of Ho- 
lieſt with the Blood of Beaſts, was to ſhew the 7ews their Weaknei., 
and to inſtru& them in, and lead them to this one Sacrifice once ty 
be offered, of eternal Avail, as is ſubjoyned. f But Chriſt ti: 
Goſpel-High-Prieſt was not only God-Man, manifeſtcd to be to, and 

KG 


} 


exhibited as ſuch an Officer by his Work, but was manifeſted to | 
ſuch by Promiſe, and in Types and Figures from Adam's Fall; by! 
now ſhewed it clearly in his Suffering-work, x Tim. 3. 15, Thedu; 
of Chriſt's Miniſtry on Earth under the fourth Monarchv, called the 
laſt Days and Times, 1 Fohn 2. 18. The end of the World, 1 Cor. 16, 
Il. The fulneſs of time, Gal. 4. 4. God's ſet and beſt time tor hi: 
appearance, and it was but once that he appeared in theſe days, pcr- 
forming this Work, g Then he facrificed himſelf, offered up hi: 
Blood to God within the Vail, taking away by his own Biol 
which God required, the Guilt, Stain, and Power of all Sin, juſtifying 
Believers from all Condemnation by it, by what he did and ſuftercd 
in their ſtead for their good, who tlie from it for refuge to him, 1. 
53. Dan. 9. 24. Rom. 7. 24, 25. 1 7oh. 3.5, 

27 And as it is appointed þ unto men once to dyc. 
but after this the Judgmear z. 


h The proof of the neceſſity of Chriſt's ſuffering Death hut once, 
1s introduced 1n this Verſe by the Conjun&ion And. It was according 
to God's decree and publiſhed Starute of Men's but once dying ; 
for God the Supream Lord, Governour and Judge of them, ter, 
conſtituted, and appointed by an unalterable and irrevocable Decree, 
as Law-giver, and Sentence, as Judge to all of the finſul Fama 
Race, the corrupt Seed of Apoſtate 4dam, their grand Reprclent1- 
tive, whom God threatned with this Penalty upon his finning aud 
tranſgreffing his Law, Gen. 2. 17. which Sentence was denounced 
upon him, Gen. 3. 19, compare Rom. 5. 12,14. and 6. 23, Tits 
Sentence was but once to be undergone by himſelfand all his fintul 
Off-ſpring, and by their Surety, and no more ; fo that the ſecond 
Adam needed but once to dye by this Statute. No Man can kcep 
himſelf from this, it being the genera] Rule of God's procecding 
with all Perſons. The ſupream Legiſlator may make what Excep- 
tions and Proniſo's to his Law he pleaſeth. Thoſe that were tran{la- 
ted by him, did ſuffer a Change proportionable to Death, as Enoch, 
Chap. 11. 5. Gen. 5. 24. and Elias 2 Kings 2. 11, 12. and thoſe that 
ſhall be changed at Chriſt's coming, muſt undergo the like, as 1 C7. 
15. $1, to 55. and 1 Theſſ. 4.17. Thoſe that were Raiſed from 
Death by Chriſt, Peter and Paul, &c. God might glorihe h1s Name 
by reiterating it; but whether they did dye again, 15 not cer- 
tain. This is to be the general ſettled Law and Rule of God. 
7 In order, after Souls by Death are ſeparated from their Bodies, 
they come to Fa and thus every particular one is handed 
over by Death - to the Bar of God, the great Judge, and {o 15 dil- 
patched by his Sentence to its particular State and Place with 1ts re- 
tpeRive People, Rom. 14. 12. At the great and general Aﬀize, the 
Day of Judgment, ſhall the General and Uniyerſal One take place, 
Ads 17. 31. when all Sinners in their intire Perſons, Bodies and 
Souls United, ſhall be adjudged to their final unalterable and eter- 
nal State, Rem. 14. 10. and 2 Cor. 5. 10. Jude ver. 6. Rev. 20+ TT, 
to 15. . 
28 * } So Chriſt was once offered to bearthe fins 
of many, and unto them that look for him / ſhall he , 


appear the 2 ſecond time with fin 7 unto falvation. x pet. 
1s an illative Connetion between the mg n of TOY I 
27, and this Conſequent, as it was appornte.l ta Men once t) ws m_ os 
was appointed to Chriſt once to offer himielf. God's Statute __ R070. 54 
mineth both of theſe ;. Chriſt the High-Prieſt oppoſcd t9 _ a 

27. having Djed once as a Sacriace tor $105, and oftercd his Blace 


þ One u, 


to God to expiate them, bearing their Puniſhment which God laid 
on him, I/z. 53.5. and fo took away Sins, Guilt, Filth, Power, and 
Condemnation from many, whom the Father gave to him,and ne un- 
dertook for, in it, Matth, 20. 28, and 26. 28. Fohn 10. 15, 19. / 
And to his believing penitent Expe&ants, tuch as long tor tits com- 
ing, Phil. 3. 20. Tit. 2. 13. ſtretching out their Heads as the Mo- 
cher of Sijer.z, Judg. 5. 28. with an holy Impatience of ſeeing him, 
{uch as by Faith and Prayer are haſtning it, 8. 23. 2 Cor. 5, I, tO 10. 
i Pet. I. 3, to 10, ſhall he once more viſibly appear to them and the 
World, 4&s 1. 11. Rev. 1. 7. glorioufly, without need to ſuffer or 
dic a2ain for them, having at his departure after his firſt coming, 


PAY 
* 4 


iN | Chap. X. HEBREW S, CIP. X,. 


| Aarin was to remember and tn confeſs over the Head 
laying his Hands on it, all the Churches Sins of 
Life, notwithitanding former Expiatory-Sacricnces 
Lev. 16, 22, For as ſoon as that was done, their cx itin 
vaniſhed, and to they rencwed Sacrifices without 3 

hit by them, the guilt of paſt and preſent Sins rem. i! 
whereas Chriſtians now renewinz, do renew their baith : 
pentance, but not their Sacrifice for it; tie Virtne of which in : 
tull and final Abſolution, applicd to them by the Spirit, makes them 
to have, upon their final Accounts, no Conſcietce of Sin for ever 


4 For * & zt rs / not Doll !t che tlood of. bul 


C3, 


s L] 
\ "vx +37 
\/, 


2I 44 


carricd all their Sins into the Land of Forgettulneſs; m and to their 
Perſons” will he bring intire and compleat Salvation, riting and unit- | 
inz Bodies and Souls together, Phil. 3. 21. and then take them as Al- 
fiſtants to himſelt in the Judgment Work on Men and Angels in the | 
Air ; and having dilpatched that Work, return with them to the 
Holy Holieft in Heaven, there to be compleatly blefled, 1n 
priihng, ſerving, gloritying, and enjoying God in Chriſt, and the 
Biciiedncls that attends that State for ever, and eycr, as 1 Cor. 6. 2, 
3. 1 Thejje q+ 27» 


ak: 
Ih 


go 


CHA-F 


The 4\nciont Sacrifices bo:h annual and daily were inſufficient to purge the 
Saul, and rec:ncile Men to God, 1 —4. Therefore it was that 
the Drvine Wi'l, as us proved from Scripture, required Chriſt's one Sa- 
ertfice of himjelf, by which we are ſanftiftied for ever, 5 I 4+ 
Without which, the new Covenant andits Promiſes of Remiſſun mad: 

d, cannot land, 15 18. By this way which Chriſt hath 

emſecrated for us we muſt go unt» God with Confidence and Faith, 

19 22, And muſt be ſiedfaſt in our Profeſſion, Hope, and Love, 

and mutual Aſſrinblies, 23 25. The fearful Tudginent of God, 

which Apoftates are to expe&, 25 21. Thrir fo,mer Patience and 

Comp.:ſſim on the Aﬀtided, on himſelf alſo, 32 35. Promijes 

which thiſe that are conſtant ſhall receive, proved out of Scripture, 

35 —— 39. 


O R a thelaw © having aſhadow c of good things 
to come, exd notrhe very image d of the things, 
can never with thoſe ſacrifices which they otiered 
year by year continually,makeethe commers thereunto 
pertect : | 
a This For is conneGting this to the foregoing Diſcourſe, and 15 
a further Improvement of thc Argument laid down, ch. 9, proving 
the Neceſſity and Excellency of the one Sacrffice offered by Chriſt 
for Sinners unto God, from the weakneſs of all the legal ones. For 
if all the Multitude of them were not able to take away Sins, and 
Chritt's one Offering is mighty to aboliſh them, and to pertet all 
who uſe it, then not theſe legal- ones, but his is neceffary to be va - 
lued by the Hebrews, and preferred to that end ; the Demoſtrat1- 
on of which takes up from v. x, to 19. of this Chapter. b The 
whole Moſaical Oectnomy given from God to Tſrael by him in the Wil- 
derneſs of Sina, Prieſthood, Covenant, Sacrifices and Services 
which that did contain. c Chap. 8. 5. A Shadow is lower than an 
Tmage, and of another kind from the reality or Subſtance ; a dark, 
obſcure Repreſentation of what was to fulfil them, viz. of Chriſt, 
with all his Miniſtry and Priviledges attending his Covenant, both 
for Time and Eternity ; this the Mofaical Law reaily comprehended, 
but all in Shadow-1/o;h, d They are not the very Eflence and Sub- 
ſtance themſelves of thoſe things, the Pattern, or real Samplar, but 
| a ſhadowy Repreſentation ; they lead their Utcrs to Chriſt and his 
matters, which they repreſented, but were not the ſubſtantial good 
things themſelves. So Image is read, 1 Cor. 15. 49. we have car- 
ried the Image of the earthly Adarn, that is, his Nature. e The 
Legal S.xcrifices are not only impotent in reſpe& of their Conſtitut!- 
on, but of thcir very Nature, being only Shadows, fo as they can- 
| not render a Soul compleat, either in reſpe& of Juſtihcation or 
| SanQification, it could not free any either from the Guilt or Puniſh- 
ment of Sin at prefent, much lets eternally, with all the Renovation 
of them, either on the Day of Atonement yearly, or thoſedaily 
offered by them, though they ſhould continue tobe offered tor ever, 
vet could they not perfe& either the Prieſts Miniſtring, or thoſe 
for whom they miniſtred, who were externally humbling themſelves 
on the Expiation-day. They being defigned only to point the People 
to tins better Sacrince of Chriſt, which was to perfe& them,that Work 

being ſo noble, and above the power of Shadows to pertorm, 
© a; 7 For then || would they not have ceaſed to be of- 
Dn tered f, becauſe the worſhippers once purged g, 

cad to be {ſhould have had no more conſcience of {ins : 

fered, be- F Fir, proves the weakneſs of that ſhadowy Service under the 
eaſe, &e, Law, becauſe it never ceafed, which it would it it had perictted its 
Uſers; and having reached its end, and done that Work, have 
ceaſed; for theſe Sacrihces would not of right have been repeated, 
neither needed they, 1f they could have juſtifyed, and fanttified Souls 
for ever. z For then this Effet would have followed, tne Worſhip- 
pers wao were to be attoned for, or expiated by theſe Scriaces, if 
they had perfc&ed them, 7. e, pirconed, juſtified, and acquitted 
them from guilt of fla and Puniſhment, there would have nothing 
remained to have troubled, vexed, or tormented their Souls, they 
being no further accuſed or condemned by their Conſcience about 


ol 


nf 
4 


FF we % 


\ matter as could not have any caſua) 


& Fr, gives a Reaſon of the precedent Proof, That the 
Sacrifices' did heep Sins in Remcunirance ; fr tiey were 05 tuct: 
Power to tuke them away. 
{ This 15 equivalent to an Univerſul Nevative, the Jmprſſiotlits ie 
ing abtojure as to the things themſelves in their very Nature, ticy 
bBcing corporeal, can have no Fniluence upon a Hirituul Evil in te 
Soul, Mich. 5.6, 7. and by God's Conſiitution they v 
them to better things, God being not plated with riclh and Blood, 
Pſal. 5c. 13. Iſa. 1. x1. m The Blood of theft were on!y 
into the Holy of Holieft on the Attonement-day, yearly, 4 -: 
to which this 15 chietly applied; nor could the Blood of ail 
Sacrifices by Expiation, pardon their Odlerers, nor ly Sandtrr, 
cleanſe them, nor by removing the ſenſe of them, 
Soul ; they could neither pacific God, nor the. Sinners Conliient 
having no Virtue or Power to fatisfie God's Juſtice, or mr 
Grace, only it had by his Conſtitution a Power to type cut tha: 
which could do both, : 

5 Wheretore 7 when he cometh into the i 
he ſaith, o Sacrihce and oftering thou | 
but a # body || haft thou pr 

nai introduceth tie Proof of the Invalidity of ts 
ces, and the Efficacy cf the' one Sucrifice of C 
Teſtimony aboutboth of theni. » God the Son, who exiſted be- 
tore his Incarnation, beſfeahers God the Father, when he was 
coming ito tits World, to become a part of it, by unitins an 
Holy Human Nature to the Divine, 2s-David voucheth by the Spi- 
rit of God, Pſal. qo. $5. The bloody atommins Sacrifices of Bulls 
Goats, the Peace-oiferinzs and Thuank-oftcrings, Levit. 7. 1 
Oſjerings of every fort without Elood, required by the Luw of M5- 
ſes, God did ncither deſire require, nor delight 1n, as 1n themſclves 
propitiatory; for he never intended them to take away Sins, or 
perte&t the Worſhippers; ſee 1 S.1m:; 15. 22. Jſam. 11, to 15, 
Feremiak 6. 20, Amos 5. 21, 22, p But'the Hebrew Texts read, The 
ears haſt thou bored for me. The Apoſtle makes uſe here of the 
Greek Paraphrafe, 4 Body haſt thou fitted me , as ;iving in proper 
Terms the ſenſe of the former figurative Expreſſion, diſcoverins 
thereby Chriſt's entire willingneſs t9 become God's Servant for evir, 
Exod. 21. 6. and that he might be ſo, which he could not, as Go./ 
the Son, 11mply, the Father by his Spirit did articulate him, and 
formed him pynt by joynt a Body ,, that is, furniſhed him with an Hu- 
man Nature, ſo as that he my,lit perform that piece of Services 
which God required, offerinz up himicF a bloody Sacrifice for Sin, 
to which he was obedient, Phil. 2. 8, Thus were his Exrs ho. 
red, which could not be, if he had not been cloath& with 
Body. ' 

6 In burnt-ofterings a 
-had no pleaſure : 

q Two other ſorts of Sacrifices are added to the former, =: 
Purnt-Offerings, which were all devoured by Fire on God's Altar. 
and no part of them came to the Prieſts, Levit. I, 3, 9, 10, 1 
I7., And Peacc-cflerinzgs, which vere not totally conſumed; but 
part of them was the Prieſts Portion, Ex:d. 29. 27, Theſe 
tour ſorts of Sacrifices comprehended 21] the Aurgnical Offerings for 
Expiation : God did not require or detire any of theſe for them- 
ſelves, or for the perfecting of Sinners : He did not as to ſuch an 
end approve them, or takeany pleaſure in them. 

7 Then ſaid I, r Lo, I come ( in the volume s 
of the book it is written of me) to do 7 thy will, O 
God. 

r When the Father declared the Saicrinces of Beafts and Birds 
would not pleaſe him, nor be excepted tor expiating Sins,then I (id, 
[ appeared in Perſon, and declared, 2, I come with a fit and proper 
Sacrifice, T approach my felt with my Human Nature, fully reſolved 
to otter that to thee as a Propitiators Sacrifice, 7oh. 12. 27, comp. 


ING th f 
and ot gbars, ſhould rike away fins 


; 
SAT v2 
«ts 


rErG to lea 


% 7 my 24 
CIHLI3CW 
4* 7 


* 


JA 713i 
> y 1 » 


A. Eh 
2 ” Yn 
DAICU NIC . 
y ail 
At 


#: 


- 


Iz 1-3 


hrift, LOR UIVIIIC 


» 
% 


_— 


| 


py 


id fc Ft 


14 


lt 


p 1 


4 | P- 8 


5 2 
CET 


P\. go1 7 s Keez> i; the Head; our Trantlators keep to the Hebrew 
"DU RI?IMD5 Bimgillath Sepher, the Volume of the Book, Plals 40. 


7. Books with the Hebrews, were Rolls of Parchment, ſtitched at the 
Top, and fo rolled up. In this Book was Chrilt every where writ- 
ten and ſpoken of, as he teſtiieth himſelf before his Death, 70/1 
s. 39, after his Reſurre@ion, Luk. 24, 44, 45, 45. The Septuz- 
zint render it the Had, as betngin the top and beginning ot the 
whole Roll, to wit, in the Books of Myes. Compare Lube 24. 
27. and in the entrance of them the Spirit teſti5cth of his Deity, 
and of his Union to the Humanity, being to he conceived and 
born of a Virzin, and offering e to expiate Str. 


, himſelt a Sacritic 
and reconcile Siganers, Gen. 3.15, compare John $5.45, 47. t To 


obey his Fathers Command, of dying an Expiatory Sacrifice fer 


Sin, God having juſtihed and fancined them, chap. 0. 14, 26, 28. 
COMP. Rom. 5.1, 2,11. 

3- But h in zhoje Sacrifices there 1s 4 7 remembrance 
again wade of fins every year. 

h If the leval Sacrifces could have perfetted their Qferers, there 
wouid have been no Remembrance of Sins ; bat there 15 a Remem- 


+ Rom. © 


ty 


- 
I'© 
J.4 ? 
4 x 
1 Fer. ly 
4 v4, 3 


" 


Sinners. It was his Father's Will that he ſhould fo offer himfſc!s 
for ſatisfyinz his Juitice, making way for his Mercy, and fo re- 
deemins aud recovering loſt Souls, This will of God was 1n his 
Heart, he delizhted to obey it, Pal. yo. 8. and his own natural Wil 
that-ſhould regret 1t, he would deny, and wouid not uſe his Divine 
Poiver to deliver himfelt from it, Matth. 3, 4%» - 


II, : 
{1ic 


—_ ; 
4 1 bs 


Yr ” 
f Jt 
- 


a \/* 4 
- 


1 


ani 
i 1y 


[1 
= 4 A 


oe” 
o Fer) aldy 
WL a AA 


= 


I S&. 
& *bove # when he 


brance of Sins veails, therefore thy 27e wear and cannot per- 
tet, 7 Theſe ſhadowy Sacritices yearly retterated,. itil] Jett Stns in 
tneir Guilt ard killins Power, loediii- 30172 tae Conſcience 
by Accuſition and Condemnation {or them, a well as ſettinz them 

in the Light of God's ESPLTIOR Uy | 


% . 

þL.57% WE» Ln 

tall = oY 
s a) 


* x» 


» PW 3 
A ? +> \ \i7 FS. 
its OUANTED. LF £134 


= * 


and burnt-ofterings, and ofering for tn thou woutd- | 

elt nor, neither hadtt pleature 19r277, OWEN are C3 j 

tered by the Law : } | 
4 Is 


— - —_ % - ” ” 
=. TE a : ot” banc 
= a Ind - 
- _ I ba IC 
- - - Fa 4 _ 
: -_- _ 6 


- «x @ « - 
. "TD. a2 £ or ER c——_ 
-— COLEDS- cept nm i 
7 o 
> © £ 
baſ —_ 4 W « "I - ” 


- "on Mp —dsr< oy 
JH—_—y 


= 


Chap. X. 


* Chap. 9. 
12, 


* Chap.10» 
18, 


duced out of the Pſalm only with a ſpecification in a Parentheſis ; 
which are offered by the Law, viz. ſuch Sacrifices againſt which the 
Apoſtle argueth, which could not purge away Sin, nor procure 
Righteouſneſs, nor make no more Conſcience of Sins. He obſerves 
from the Pſaim, that the Will of God was plainly fgnified by Þ1s 
Spirit to David under the Law, about the Nature, State, and De- 
gn of his Inſtitution of Sacritices, that they were Typical of, and 
leading to a hetter Sacrifice than themſelves; and that for their own 
ſake only, they were no way acceptable to God, and fo rejected by 
him. 

9 Then  faid he, Lo, I come to Jo thy will, O. 
fd. He taketh away thefirſt, x that he may ejtab- 
!:{h thefecond, ' 

» In this Verſe the Apoſtle collefts the Pſalmiſts Afertion of God, 
ne Fathers accepting his Sacrifice, the offering whereof was 10 
exaQly agreeable to his Wil!, when he was difpleafed with the legal 
ones, and this revealed to David when he was punally uſing them 
according to the Law, x God therefore aboliſhed all the legal S2- 
critces, Which he commanded to be uſed as Types of the better 
Sacrifice he had proyided, becauſe of their Inſufficiency and Weak- 
neſs as to expiate Sjn, or pacifie Conſciznce, that he might efta- 
bliſh that Sacrifice of the Body of Chriſt ſor aboliſhing Sin,and bring- 
Ing 1n everlaſtinz Righteouſneſs, which was effettual, and an attual 
Obedience agrecable to his Will and Command, Phil, 2, 7, 8. This 
being thus proved, he concludes trom it, wr. 10. : 

to By the which y will we are ſantihed 2 7 
through the offering a of the body 6b of Jeſus Chritt 
once for a! 

y That ſpoken of, P/al. 49. 8. that Will and Command of God 
given to Chriſt, God-Man, that he would once offer up his Body 
a Sacritice for Sin. which he willingly and heartily obeyed, Ph!/. 
2. 8. x Sandined is to be taken largely for a Communication to us 
of all the Benefits of Redemption, as Pardon, Reconciliation, Ab 
ſolution from Puniſhment, Renovation of God's Image, and ſuch 
a Diſcharge of $in at laſt as'never to be guilty of it more, Per- 
fet;on of Grace in Glory. a The voluntary and heartily yielding 
:f up, and preſenting the Blood of it to the Father within the Vell 
in Heaven, to atone him according to his own Command and Will, 
without which it wou!ld not have been accepted by him, Luke 23. 
45. comp. John 20. 15, 17, 18. and 19, 28. 30. b It was that 
part of Chriſt's Perſon that was to dye a Sacrifice, and the Blood of 
it that was to be ſhed for purchaſing the Remiſſion of Sins,as appears 
in the Memorial of it, Luke 22. 19, 20. The very Body of God 
Mn, AQs 26. 28. The once Offering of which was eternally av.aila- 
Hleto take away Sin from Sinners, and perfe& them to Glory. So 
that God's end being once reached init, it is of perpetual Virtue to 
apply its Fruits to believing Penitents, and needs not any Repe- 
tition. RR 

11 And c every prieſt ſtandeth daily miniſtring, 
and offering oftentimes the ſame Sacrifices, which can 
d never take away lins. ; 

c Having proved, that not the yearly repeated Legal Sacrinces 
could pertect a Sinner, but only the Sacrifice of Chriſt the Sparit, 
proceeds to prove, that the daily Legal Sacrifices can do as little for 
this Work as the annua! ; and therefore theſe Hebrews ought to de- 
ſert all theſe, and depend only upon Chriſt's. From ver. 11, to 19. 
Every Prieſt in Aaron's Family 1n his courſe daily miniſtring, /{ood 
at the Altar, and performed the Service appointed him by God, of- 
fering often the ſame bloody Sacrifices to God, of Bulls, Goats, 
Sheep, Foul, many times in one day, and for many days together, 
cap. 7. 27. d Theſe were not available either to the Prieſts Offer- 
ing, or thoſe who brought them to be offered for the ſpiritual and 
etcrnal Expiation of their Sins, as to their Guilt, Stain, Power or 
Puniſhment, not any, nor all of theſe, none could do 1t at any time. 
See ver. 4. © RN 

12 But e this man after he had ottered one tacrifice 
for fins, f for ever fat down on the right hand of 
God F 

© Oppoſed to the Legal Prieſts 1s ths Prieſt, God-Man, an Al- 
mizhty Miniſter, having once offered, and no more, one Sacrifice 
of his Body for the Stus of others (he had none of his own, as e- 
very other Pricſt had) that they might be pardoned and remembred 
no more, it being of eternal Virtu= and Efficacy. f For ever muſt 
be joyned to the Sacrifice to compleat the Oppoſition, v. 11. The 
Legal one could never take away Sins, but his one Sacrifice could take 
them themaway for ever. g He ceaſed from ſactificing any more, 
and aſcended up to Heaven, and there he ſat himſelf down (having 
aboliſhed Sin, and finiſhed his Work as a Servant for ever inthe 
higheſt place of Dominion and Power at God's Right hand while the 
Aaronites ſtood trembling and waiting,at God's Foot-ſtool and'thence 
he powerfully and efficaciouſly commands the blotting out of Sins, 
applieth his Merits,and diſpenſeth to his Servants the Covenant-Mer- 
cies which he purchaſed by his own Blood for them, chap. 1. 3. and 
2. 9,.4nd 8. 2. . 

13 From henceforth þ expeCting * till his enemies 
be made his foot-{tool. | 

þ That which remaineth he expe@eth, even the fulfilling of his 
Father's Promiſe to him, P/al. 110. 1. patiently waiting, earneſtly 
looking ſor what is moſt certain, and wherein he cannot be diſap- 
pointed; for in reſpe@ of himſelf, his enemies cannot infeſt him 
more, being entirely. vaniſhed already, but in reſpe& of his Ad- 
miniſtration, he waits till all that oppoſe his royal Prieſthood, as 
the Devil and his Angels, Sin, the Curſe, Death, and the World, 
with which he conflis as a Prieſt to deſtroy them with his own 
Blood, as his Members do by it, Rev. 12. 11. having given them 
their Deaths Wound by his own Death, he fits downand waits in 
the ſucceffive Axes of his Church, until upon his Ele& it be made 
good, putting all under his own and Churches Feet, ſo to over- 
come and tramp!ec on them, as Men on their Foot-ſtools, See ch. 2. 8. 
1} Cor. 15.26. 


HEBREWS, 


# In this Verſe the Apoftle repeats the whole Teſtimony, pro- [ 


14 For by one 7 offering he hath & perfiftcd for © ot 
them that are / ſanCtified. 

. 7 For, here gives the Reaſon of the precedent ef, and it is on 
poſed to the Reaſon of the legal Offerings detedt ; their Sgcy: 5. 
multiplied could not perfe& Sinners, but this one doth it fuljx $ 
by one, &c. k Chriſt God-Man, the Golpel-High-Prict! by Mn 
Offering of himſelf a Sacrifice for Sin to God his Father. anc ... 
pertormed by him, hath ſecured Perfe&ion of Juſtification Sant: 
cation, and Blefſednefs, perpetually to be continued, where, +. 
Perſons 1ntereſted in it, are qualiaed and Conſecrated to be Prict;. 
to God and his Father, (as the Aaronical Prieſts were by the <._;; 
fice of the Ram of Conſecraticn, Exod. 29. 22, 24.) to ſs :,, 
their proportion here, but eſpecially after the Completiou of i; 14 
their RelurreRion, they ſhall perfettly ſerve him before js Throw, 
in the Holy of Hojielt tor ever, 1 Pet. 2. G9. Rev. 1. 5.:1d 5, x- 
and 20. 6, { The renewed Souls by the Holy. Ghotft, fucy who. 
Conſciences he hath 1prinkled with the Blood of Jus, ang by jr 
treed them from the Guilt of Sin and its Puniſkment, and « !;of} 
Natures he regenerates and ſan&itieth, frecing them jrom thor (441 
Havits,” and making them inherently Holineſs unto the Lord, P; ;1 
3. 10-6 3 : 

15 IWhereof the holy Ghoſt 2 alfo is a witncſ; t, 
us: for after that he had aid betore. 

m The Aflumption cleared betore, the Apuſtle now proceedet; 
to prove out of the O!4 Teſtament, viz. That God s purpoſe wi: 
by Chriſt's one Sacrifice to take away all Sins for ever ; therefc;o 
there was no need of the Repetition of the Legal Sacriices. The 
Authority avouched, 1s the Teſtimony of the Holy Spirit of T4ch 
that cannot deceive, nor be deceived in what it witneffeth, hut cor. 
firms the Truth beyond all juſt ground of doubting, by his -'meny. 
enſis the Prophet Jeremiah, ch. 31.31, 33, 34. where the Perſon 
that the Prophet ſizileth Jehovah, is by the Apoſtle declared tohe 
the Holy Ghoſt ; arid by it 1s proved to be the Eternal God. Heteſti- 
fhieth to us the Church of God in the Prophet's time, and to vs 4!] 
called to be Members of it to this day. n This contains the Pretace 
of the Spirit's Teſtimony, that which he ſpake betore, the Covenant 
which 1s his Evidence, and this Preface 1s laid down, Jer. 31. 31, 
Here they are all the Apoſtle's Words. 

16 This o zs the covenant that I will make with 
them afrer thoſe days, ſaith the Lord : I will put my 
laws into their hearts, and in their minds will I write 
them: 

o God promiſeth his true Ijae! his entring with them into a new 
Teſtamental Covenant, after the days that the Covenant-Atlminittra. 
tion at Sinai was expired, then the Lord [uith, Jer. 31. 33. That 
he will renew Minds and Hearts by his Spirit, and confirm them 
to his W1ll, that they ſhall be living, walking Exemplers of his 
Law, of both which ſee chap. 8. 10. This work of San tiTcation 
of Souls 1s properly inferred here, to prove that ſuch as evjoy itare 
perfe&ted by Chriſt, becauſe the Promile of Holineſs is joymned with 
tht of perfe# Righteouſneſs, Formerly it was urged from the Text 
to another purpoſe, to prove God's Will of chinging the Aaroni- 
cal Adminiſtration of the Covenant, becauſe this was better ; Here 
it 15 urged to prove the perfed effect of the Sacrifice of Chrift once 
offered to Sod, without which theſe Promiſes of the Ceycnant of 
Juttifying and San&itying Sinners had neither been made nor ef- 
tected. 

17 And p theirfins and iniquities will I remember 
0 MOTIC, 

p God covenanteth to give not only SanRtification, but Tuſtifics- 
tion to his believing Tjae!, ſo as their Sins ſhall be remitted, and 
God will ſolemnly abſolve them from the Pumſhment they merit, 
ſee Chap. 8. 12.-promiſed Jer. 31. 34. In which Proof, though 
there be no expreſs mention of the Sacrifice of Chriſt, yet 1s it 1m- 
plyed, for it 1s urged by the Spirit to that purpoſe ; and 1n other 
Scriptures, ſpeaking of the ſame thing here promiſed, i* is exprel- 
ſed, as hath been ſh ewn, chap. 8. 6. compare Iſa. 52. That the 
Death of Chriſt confirms this Covenant, of which he is Mediator, 
and ſecures Remiſfion of Sin for ever, to the duly qualified ſubje for 
if, 

18 Now 9g where remiſſion of theſe zs, here 1s n9 
more oftering for ſin. 

g The Spirit having cleared his Aflumption before, now cott- 
cludes ; whereas perfe& Forgiveneſs of Sins is from God's Grace 
by the one Sacrifice of his Son once offered, acquired and effetted 
for penitcnt Felievers for ever, as the Promiſe voucheth, Jer. 31. 
32, For he will in no wiſe remember their Sins, but will forgive then 
for ever ; therefore there needs no Rep-tition of that Sacrifice again, 
or of any other for Sin. But the Hebrews had the higheſt reaton 
now to deſert the Legal Sacrifices, and to reſt upon, and to cleave to 
his alone, any Being, Uſe or conſiſtency of ſuch, after the Effect of 
Chriſt's one Sacrifice, being vain : For all being compleated in h1:, 
it is but juſt they ſhould ceaſe from them. 

19 Having 7 therefore, brerhren 5, * || boldneſs 7 


to enter || into the holieſt » + by the blood of Je1us, 


refers to the whole of his dofrinal Diſcourſe before of the Excellen- 
cy of the Goſpel-High-Prieſt, for his Perſon, as to both his Natures 
being God-Man, and his Sacrifice wit! it's Effedts. Seeing, thelc 
things are ſo, therefore s ſee chap. 3. 1, 12. inviting them with tis 
indearing Term of Relation, tc receive what his brotherly Love wap 
parted to them for their Salvation. # Freedom granted of God 
for this Motion, and Confidence, and Freeneſs Sp it, mn om 
ſelves to move,ſo as not to look into only the Holy of Holieſt, _—_ 
ſpiritual and real acceſs for Supplication and Converſation, W ” 
we are perſonally upon earth ; and others arc denied ſuch an en 


trance and approach to him on his Throne of Grace there, _ 


r At this Verſe the Spirit applicth and maketh uſe of the Do- 10 
Arine of the great Goſpel-High-Prieft, and his own All-ſufficient 54 ; 
crifice, and continueth it through part of the thirteenth Chapter. 2 
The Tranſition to it is made by the Particle &r, therefore, which *? 


Chap. x 


Ciap.; 


Chap. &- 


they have thcir Petitions received, Epheſ, 3. 12. and thence their) 


Or, new | conſecr ated .x for US, 


G 


Perſons blefled, ch. 4.85. n And this only vouckſated them by the | 
Blood of Teſus, which atoned him, who ſets on the Throne for us, 
and made it acccffivle tous. How much greater is this Goſpel- priv1- 
ledge, than that under the Law ? Aaron alone, and not the Iſraelites 
could enter into the Holy of Holieſt, and that but once a Year, and 
then with the Blood of Beaſts ſacrificed tor himſelf and them ; where- 
as every penitent belicving Sinner can now by faith 1n Chriſt's Blood 
and Prayer, enter into the  Holieſt of all in Heaven, and there converle 
with God every day, whilſt Sin hath made him inacceſſible to others. 

20 By a new and living rw way which he hath 
through the veil y, that 1s to 
ade. fay, his Fleſh ; 

w Which way 1s 7 :aratively ſetting out the means of entring into 
the: Holictt in Heaven by the Blood of Chriſt. By way 15 underſtood 
that, by which approach to God in Heaven 1s made, and wherein we 
muſt huve our acccls to him, even Chri# himſelf, john 14. 5. 
T3201», a Way nexely made manife!t by Chrift's Sacrifice newly 112in 
and « ed, rending the Vail that hid Heaven from them, lo as they 
could not to clearly diſcern the Throne of Grace then, as now ; 
and the Way is not only new, but (ow, a quickning Way, giving Liſe 
and ability for Motion and Retreſſm: ar coals who walk 1n it, 70h. 
14. 6. ſuch as is everlaſting, and 1s cpcncd not as the legal way, 
only to the High-Pricft, but to all true Jjr.e/rtes to enter into it, 
and that not once a Year, but continually. This is the way ot Lte 
permanent and ſafe, Iz. 35. 2, 9, 10. x This Way Chriit him- 
tel! hath new!y made. finiſhed and opened unto them, that they 
might walk therein, aud reach home-to God; nothinz could ob- 
ſtruct or hinder thein in it, he haviuz perfee ed it unt this end. 

y The inncy Vail that {eparated the Folicſt of all from the Hol 
place was 4 a T5pe of the F left of Chrift, LO ns Deity, throu:h 
reakinz and rending of which by Death, he opens the way to 
the Throne "of Grace in the Holy of Holte {i 1 in Heaven, and 10 made 
God accciliyle to Believers there, C8; 0. 12. comp. Matth. 
Paving * an high oeictt.: Z over the houlc 


the t 


27. 5b. 


have not only a 7 iherty of coming, but a IW:y 
w herein, and a ep whereby to reicit home to God ; winch help 
i= a (rrpaſfing Pri {1 to all others, the creat and eminent one tor re- 
a] Wc rth and Diznitv, Cl iſt h:intelf, God man, exalted to the 
right hand of - the Majeſty on high, after he had infalled his Work 


7 Cl wage 


HEBREWS Chan, x 


| 4! —_ nes * $ _ "if . ” 
ts unbiaſſed retention of 1t, win'c others declined, 


; 5 = G = TETT 
covenanted with them what he will be to, and do for then), 1: ny 
prumnvo,7, eminently, and reciprocally faithful and unchanzeable 7: 
his Perion and purpole , all 1s ſure on God's de, Nymb. 22. 19. and 
nts Power is irreſiſtible. He hath promiſed to reward thoſe who'perle-, 
vere anc. continue to the end true to the Redeemer, and to give them ' 
Grace and Aifiſtance, that they may fo continue, ſo as they need not 
tear the Power of their Enemics, nur their own W eaknels, i tor ie will 
enable them to perform the Duty, dare the Aﬀictions tor ie, and Sas >" 
fo reach the Bletiing, 1 Cor. 1 - t Theſ). 5. 23, 24. and 2 7%}. 2.3 
24 And ler us / conkider one another, to provoke / 
to love, and to good works : 
k Having urged irom the Goſpel Do&rine of cur Hizh-Prieft. 
our Outy to God, the Spirit pro \ceeds to ſhew what Influence 1t 
ſhould have on Chriſtians for per: ,orming therr Duty one to another. 
in thetr Inſpettion and Obſervation of the whole Body of Cri! 
com:fting of Few and Gentile, who have equally ſhared in Chrifi” 
Sacriiice, and are intcreſted in, and related to his Perfon ; and by | 
fhe apprehenſive and judicial Faculty fo to diſcern the ſp: ;rituul Stare 
and condition of each other, and the whole, as every particolar 
Member of 1t may Þe _ —_ to animadvert, exhort, reprove, 
countc} or comtort, and att iutably and ſeafonahly in the diſcharge 
of their mutual ah Rom, 14: 15. and I 5.7, 14 >, 3. 13. Col! 
3- 16. I Theſſ. 5. 15. Þ} Fic reecguower, 1t IS a Word 
rowee from Pepficians? who uſe 1t to ſet out the violent Incurſi1: | 
ot a Fever, when the Fit is jo Siromg as to make the Brily tr21 
_ Bed ſhake with the Horrour and Rigor of it, In this gs 
t 15 uſed to ſet out the vehemency of A4fﬀettion, to which the 5 :crt- 
foo oi Chriſt obligeth Chrijit..ns, as thoſe, who had their whoic 
Perions atted by 7 to cach. other, with all _—_ ncy to- tite 
utzheft and fulleſt pitch of it, as who frould exceed in Benevolenc: 
Beneficence, and Complacency in each other, ſuch as is confeien- 
tious, pure, and exteni;ve to the very end, ch. 13. t. 


\ 707% - 


Jv? t. 
#1, . 


D - $+ F2 
4 4 # . - 4 


20, 1 {eſſe 4. 9. 1 F>f. 1. 22. and manifeſting it f-!; tm gf 
Works ta them, efpeciaily merciful ones, pityinz, counte! tint, fu 

courms, fu PPlyIng, and conorting them, - 7ames 2. 15, 15, 15. 
rt John 2. 4, 15, 17; 18. and this treelv, Cincariully, and con: 
ſtantiy, Epheſ. 2, I Tim. 5. 18. 


—_ 4 2 5 4 
F, / _ 

25 | Not m Let Kins tne ailembling z of our {olvcs 

together, as.o the iman-er of forme 15 | 


J 
OE 1) « $3433 go go - —_—_ . F 
"En OP?! COL 64 io mi [ch Lizmw - RLiOTTS ", 
£ 


I T7 , 
yp Ti. G 


hcre, where he was inveſted with all Authority and Power, and {ct T thc day aPPro!Cnrg. 
over the Church cf the livin; « Cod, confifting both of Helrew and mM FHe ips to tre nurforinunce of both the former Dutics to God, 7-0 
Gentile Tiraviites, ch, 3. 6. 4c, 28. whoie Sacririces of Praiſe | and Fellow-Chri! als, v.ith tnerr reſpettive Motives, are latd down Fy E000 
ent Praver ottered up tot ;od, he prefenteth, pertumed witit tlic | in the follo-3i2- part of the Chapter. The tirit 15 couched in t!115 
Incen{. of his oven Merits befcre the Throne, repretenting their Per- | Verſe, neither tlichting in Thought, nor villifiing in Word, nor ic 
{ons Ni les their” Cauſe, and continuary mtercecinsg for their paratin 'T, nor le wing by D Diolſociation. "F/T 64791TE; imports ſuch 
Good, making 2)! they are, and periorm, acceptabie to his Father by } a De/errion, as leaves deititute in deep Trouble wv Diſtreſs, when they 
E: own Blood, ch. 8. 2. ; 5 IT ins) be he Iting. n EnT49-349, ftrietly notes an Add:tion to this S1- 
* Eph. 3. 22 «7 : vS @ draw near yvith 2 true : þ heart. ' 0 fill | nagigne of the Zews ; an Accetfion of new Members to the former 
12, 1 T117-1BCE GE t;irh Fo h 1} ng Our he: ITS Fl ſprinkled Cinurch- Ai! {embly » CVCN the Gentiles becomi: | $24 Abraham's Seed by 
+0 an evil confcicnce, aid our e bodies waſhed with ad = 01 ns and Conteſſiva of the Earth of Chriſt This 
; ome of the 7-ws from the Self conceit of their being the only 
prre water. - | Pcople of God, dildained, and continaed in a Separation from them, 
"i: contains the Duty groun «cd on, and encouraged to by the | an4 all Communion with the 2. 31s te Sprrit reproves, and ad- 
forms Priviledocs, wit. the (riritral mution of his Church, uſing viſcth not to leave the Ailtm'ily thus auzmented, It in doino it 
Cir! thictr coming home t6 God, In Prayer, and all parts of Wor: they foriook God and Chrifi 45 fell as Ordi: i of f Wor I 
ſip ano Converſation; ſee ch. 4. 15. and 7. 25, b With S'ncerity and | and Duties attendins ſuch Church-r racetinzs, and prom *inz their 
Integr) f Heart, both as it 1s the Subjett of Actions, and exerct- | Salvation. » Such Defertion of thoſe At. ties I the norſhip- 
finz them as ſuch in all Afts of Worſhip and Service unto God, | ing and ſerving of God, was the comr11n CrSiam amon': f © of 
When the ey d ud Heart is tixcd to pertorm all firictly, accordin; | theſe Hebrews; an uſual frequent mode of them to do ir; m2 
to God's Will, for m:tter anc d 1 manner, fo as to reach him Glory, | idolizing their own Nation, others of their own felyes Uiinlins 
" { to oh ain Tom him : | BY fTi:2c7, PF). $7. 3%, C Peljeving in, and | them holier than others, Gal. 2. 12, 3, 14. of::ers that valued 
'p ful nd confident of Chiiit's Merits and God: Promie, | Honours, Riches, and Eaſe more than Chritt, or their Souls 5 fame 
mw = *; Kat Kit ul. and nmwtah le fo: WW, wno pertorm the for fear 'of Perſecution, as forctold, Luke 8. 13, x1. ililled, Gl. 
Duty required by ch. 6 0. II (olol. 2, 2, and James 1.5, © - 12, þ TIzexrniuvr, ſuppoſeth afſemblins, in opp2i !tion to tic 
having the Sou! - olf us rattimal Faities, the inward Man the | former Defertion, and the Duty of the Afﬀembled - and . fr7mifeti, 
prime Emncient of @!! Acons, and here under Bond to the Law of | counſelling, reproving, encouraging, and comfurtinz one anvtlicr, fo 2: 
God, Pirge in; ed, Mult t the Aroniced Right of purity- they ngight perſevere in performing the Duties for whic' they 
ing by {prit.” 113; p of Blond, as 50 ul are fo be now by the Blood of | atlemb ed, according to Chritt's Mind and Wi!l, to 2s to firen; Then W 
Chriſt when they arc -ultified, 2M. Ze 23, 24, 25, 26. that God | each othiers Hearts and Hands in the Faith, 2nd in the other Dut! 
may ac m= them 1nto his Preſctn nce, hear them when they worſhip | inſtanced in before. q They have ſ much the mo;2 reaton to do it if, 
him, v. 15, 20. ſo as they may be free from an accufing or con- | and intend the Work as they did nor conjefture:, but certain! know, 
demnin; = ſcience, on the Account of the Guilt of Sin gnawins | that the day of their own Death and particular Account to he given 
them, and making them obnoxious to Puniſhment ; as alſo of the | of themſelves to God ; the Day of God's executing his Judgment X 
Stain and Pollution of Sin making them unft tor any Communion | on 7-ruſalem, as Chriſt foretold, Mat. 24. 1. to 23. propheficd | by 
with God, ci. 9. 14. © The Bray 7a the Prieſts were under the Law | Dane! before, ch. 9. 26, 27. when _ Temple ſhould be Murnt. 
waſhed before their Service) is the outward Man, which is, as well | the City defiroyed, and the Pcople diſperted through the World - 
as the Soul to be ſanaifed by the Holy Spirit, and cleanſed from | Or, the Day ef the Genera! Judgment teſtified by the Gotpel t5 
all filthinefs of Fleſh : Theſe corrupt Mcmbers of the Old Man muſt | the W orld, Aﬀs 17. 31. All theſe were every day nearer ty them 
be put off, and mortified by the Spirit of God, before they can be |} than other, "and they bclteved them to approach; therefore ouzlr 
16 t0 approach to worſhip him, 1 Cor. 6. 11, I9, 20. 2 2 Cor. 7.1. they to be more exerciſed in genying Evil and doins Good, not 
Exek. 35.25, 1 Joh. 3 $3 : forlakins Church-Communion, but keepins clote to Chritt and h 
23 L.ct us E hold {xt the profefh 2n of $g Our _ Afemblies, that they miuht better ftand tozether in that day 
* 1 Cor. - without h wavering. For * he zs faithful 7 that p 26 For r * if we [11 wiltully s atter f thar we have *huin. 2 « 
5 miſed : received 7? the knowlede? of the truth, there remainerh 3*: 
f This Duty is inferred from the DoQrine of the Goſpel-High- | no more x ſacrifice fo {ins, So Gs 
71ſt, and the perfect Work he wrought in taking away Sin, and The ſevere exattion which God will take upon ſuch as apoſtatize . ET EO 
br inging 1n everiaſting Ripateouſneſs ; Tet us therefore perſevere i in frow him, 1s further entorcing the former Duty, and 1s introduced FY 
the Faith and Hope of "him, really, atually, ſtedfaftly retain- | by the Particle For, to that end ; if we by a free and ſportunayrs 
ing with ail our M 1ght and Power, whatſoever Infinuations may be | Deſertion of Chriſt, and his Ordinances, without a Coertion ky #4 
uſed to entice us, or Violence by Perſecutions, to force us irom 1t, | Threats and Perſecutic ns, and this after we had protciledly ia our 
retaining fill in Mind, Will, AﬀeRtion and Operation. £ An mte Tudgments, Wiils, and AﬀedGons, vith Faith ad Revert nce ar- 
ward Exhil itin to the World both in Word and Deed, e have Knowledged a Love and SubjcQion to the true Golpel-Doftrine cf ; 
it fincercly n our Hearts, ſolemnly owninz 11 the es ot | the way of bringing Sinners to God by Chrilt our orc t Ui: he Prie? 
God 1n hi: rh of the Hope wehave in Chriſt our High-Pricitiand 70h. 8.31. and 14. 6. which was made known to them by Chrift 
of all that hat he purchaſed for us, and promiſed to periorm 11 us, | 3nd his Apoſtles, and confirmed by Miracles and the Giits ol we 
ad t9 us, "oh 3. I, 6, and 4. 14. and 6, 11. Rom. 10. 5, 10. | Holy Ghoſt, fo as to profeſs a full Conviction of this Truth, ” 
 Fet. 2, 21, h "Axim, Ry any declining from it, either fo | ajfent and conſent to it. #t Afﬀter all this to renounce the Pr: feſion 
the ri»ht or leſt, from the frft and due it ite of 1f ; not warping or of it, and to forſike the Aftemblies where it 1s kc forth ; | 
wavering from the Revelation of God about it, vhen others weak- | this is the ſpontancous and wilul finning : See chzp, 4.5. au This | 
ly made a DefeRion fron it, ch, 5. 6, 9. Aid good reaſon for | 1 unpardonable by the uti Conitit ation ot God in the Goſpel. uh 
| *% DE HAT + 


Chap. x. 


becauſe no Sacrifice can atone God for them ; without which they !' the Lord /; 


excn9t be pardoned, and the Sacrifice of Chriſt, which could only do | 
if, t2cy renounce and defert; and fo this, nor any other they can 
hrinz, can procure pardon for them, ſo that their Sins remain in Guilt 
and Power on them, and between them and God's Wrath are they 
Ike irrecoverabiy to be ground to Perdition. 

27 Bur a certain feartul wlooking for of judgment 
and ery x indignation, which y ſhall devour the ad- 
\ CLILaTICES. 

w Bt. 1s introducing the terrible Evil aflerted: to be expeRed when 
Sacritice cannct help tuch Sinners, eſpecial and certain terrible and 
dreadfil ( ſuch as fills the Soul with Fears and Horrors ) Expectat7on of 
Fud.ment by their awakened Conſciences, not knowing how ſoon 1t 
may come ; as a Malefattor under Sentence, in daily expeRation of 
Exccuticn, how doth he ſuffer it over and over ? So wil] this Worm 
gnav: them : to which is ſynonymous, Mark 9. 44. How muſt the exe- 
cution of the ſentence of the juſt Judge terriftie them? x When 1t muſt 
te by burning, or heat of fire, wrath of Fire proceeding trom an injured 
and wronged God, Ezeh, 36. s.and 38. 19. Zeph. 1.18. and 3.8. As 
in exccution of juſt Vengeance, which like Fire devours and eateth 
them up, not putting an end to their being by Conſumption, but 
perpetual, piercing, ſearching, torturing , and this for Eternity. 
y Theſis underhand Adverſaries, vmrerzzc, who are the moſt bitter 
Encmics of Chrift and his Church, becauſe ſecret ones, and ſeem to 
be by Profctiion otherwiſe, Mat. 25. 41. Mark 9,43, 44. 2 Thefſ. 
1.8, 0. | ; 

2S He = that * deſpiſed Moſes law, died a without 
mercy, under two or three witneſſes. _ | 

7 The Puniſhment threatned on ſuch Sinners, is illuſtrated by an 
Inſtance proper to the Hebrews ; for if the lefler fin againſt Moſes's 
Law was puniſhed by Death, the greater fin againſt the Goſpel of 
Chriſt ſhall be more puniſhed. Any Perfon whoever he were, none 
excepted, contemning, rejeting, nullifying, or making to have no 
place or force ( ſuitable to forſaking before prohibited ) the Law of 
God, given by the Mediation of Moſes, ſo as to have no power on 
the Conſcience by Apoſtacy from it, and to do 1t openly, proudly, 
and preſumptuoully in the {face of the Church, Numb. 1 5. 3o, 31. 
a Was to be ſentenced to death without any Compaſſion or Mercy, 
and indiſpentibly executed without any; Pity, by ſtoning of the Of- 
fender by two or three Witnefſes, which did evidence the Fatt, and 
convitt him of it, according to the Law, as Deut. 13.6, to 22. and 
17-2, 0 8. | 

29 Of how much þ ſorer puniſhment, ſuppoſe ye c, 
ſhall he be thought 4 worthy, who hath e trodden 
under foot the Son of God, and * hath counted f the 
blood of the covenant wherewith he was ſanctified g, 
an unholy thing, and hath þ done deſpite unto the 
{ipirit ot grace * 2 | 
"© b The Expoſtulation aggravates both the Sin and the Puniſhment 
in the Conſequent on the former Afertion ; a Puniſhment heavier, 
bitterer , ſforer, more grievous, and unexprefſibly greater than 

eath, c You your ſelves being Judges, to whom I appeal about 
it ; what can you ſuppoſe, think, or determine of it ? d Doth he 
fully deſerve, and is liable to, by the Judgment of Man, but much 
m2re by the righteous and inexorable Judgment of God. e Who 
fianeth at an higher rate than a Few againſt Moſes Law, being an 
Apoſtate from the Goſpel, a Revolter from, and a Rebel againſt it, 
diſcovering it by as much as in him lieth, tearing from his Throne 
God the Son incarnate, and treading Him under his Feet, - wickedly 
undervaluing, and horribly villifying Him, treating Him with the 
greateſt Contempt that can be expreſſed by ſuch an AQtion, as if He 
were the vileſt Malefactor. A Perſon ſo much greater and excel- 
lenter than Moſes, to be ſo uſed; fo as 1t He were here on Earth, 
he would tread Him (who 1s higher than the Heavens, and had done 
and ſuffered ſo much for him) as the Duſt and Dirt under his Feet ; 
and this by a contemptuous forſaking his Church-Afſemblies, wherein 
He was ſet out in all his Excellencies. f Accounting and ſo dgſerting 
the Blood of Chriſt (which ratified the everlaſting Covenant of Grace, 
by whoſe Virtue it was made unalterable, firm, and effecual in all 
the Promiſes of it, of Pardon, Righteouſneſs, Holineſs, Grace and 
G!ory, unto penitent believing Sinners) as either the common Blood 
of Men, or the Blood of a MalefaQor, to have not ſo much Excel- 
lency in it as in the Blood of Bulls or Goats, or Rams, or Birds under 
the Law, as not tanQifying Souls, but polluted. g 'E» & 1444Sn, in, 
or by which he was ſan@ified, is by moſt Interpreters referred to the 
Apoſtate, as aggravating his Sin, to deſpiſe that Blood by which he 
thought he was ſo, and boaſted of 1t, and was ſo reputed by the 
Church upon his Baptiſm and Profeſſion of his Faith, and as a Mem- 
ber of the Church, had a viſible Relation to it, partaking of thoſe 
Ordinances wherein its Fruits were conveyed, and enjoying the ex- 
ternal Privileges purchaſed by it. Others refer 1t unto Chriſt Him- 
cif, the Blood whereby he was conſecrated to God as a Holy Sacrifice, 
7:6n 17. 19. All this was diſcovered by his: forſaking the Church- 
Afiembly, wherein this was declared to be the only way and means 
to Tuſtification of Life and Salvation. h Injuring, wronging, defpifing, 
zreatly grieving, not a Creature, but God the Sprrit, the quickning Spi- 
rit of dead Sinners, who fits them for Union to God, and in order to 
it, uniteth him to Chriſt and his Body, and animaterh it; who gra- 
ciovily communicated to theſe Apoſtates the Knowledge natural and 
ſupernatural, which they had and abuſed, Chap. 6. 5. by the defertion 
of the Aﬀemblies, where he manifeſted his Gifts and Graces. They 
reje&t Him with them, and treat his Gifts and Motions, as1f they were 
the Dclufions and Impoſtures ofan Evil Spirit; and this wilfully done 
out cf Malice to Chriſt, and abhorrence of his Church and Religion, 
A Sin hike the Devils, for them to forſake God loving, Chriſt re- 
deeming, his Blood juſtifying, his Spirit renewing, and ſo wilfully 
refulcd to be ſaved, and expoſe themſelves to the ſevereſt Puniſh- 
ment God can inflit on ſuch Sinners, and they do deſerve. 


20 For 7 we know him that hath aid, 4 Ven- 
geance belongetÞ unto me, TI will recompence, ſaith 


| 


HEBREWVSYS. 


'So 1s he deſcribed, Ja. 33. 14. Matth. 1o. 28, 


Cha 


his people. 
1 For, brings in the Proof of the ſoreneſs of God's Puniſkment tc; 
be inflited on Apoſtates, from God's own Teſtimony about it 
which we who are converſant with the Scriptures, are well acouain. 
ted with, we know, what God hath ſpoken, and by whom he w_ 
ſpoken it, 7ohn g. 29, Their Knowledge of it was clear 2nd certain, 
it being ſpoken to them by Moſes, and written for them, Do1;, >. 
35, 36. kh To me is Vengeance and Recompence ; which are the word 
of the Hebrew Text. To me,. the Soveraign Being, the Supreme 
and Univerſal Law-giver and Judge, doth belong the Uniyer(s! 
Right and Power of vindiQtive Juſtice. It is his Propricty, s He wy; 
avenge all Injuries againſt his People, He will much more avence t/... 
Sins and Injuries againſt his Son ; and will actually return to 641 
Doers, as a Recompence for their Sins, the evil of Puniſhment, He 
15 not only juſt and powertu!, but attually maniteſting both in h; 
Retribution on them, Deut. 32. 41, 43. Pal. 04. 1 Row, 15, 1: 
2 Theſſ. 1.8. | Fehwoah ſaith it, who is faithful and true, Power. 
ful and conſtant to his Threatnings, as weil as his Promiſes, Thi. 
he ſaith to, and threatens Apoſtate Fein with, who revolted {r = 
God and ſerved Idols, Deut. 32.15, 15, 19. m A further Tellin; » 
is urged from God's Vindication of his People, when hc hath puniihcd 
Apoſtates, taken from Dent. 32. 6. and Yſ:/m 12 5. 14, The Sove. 
raien Being of Rizhteoutneſs, the ſame Jehovah as before will ry. 
juſtifie, ſave, deliver, and vindicate his Covenant-Peop!c from 
contempt and villitying of his Son and them, by puniſhing tvvere!, 
ſuch, wlio by their Apoſtacy from him and them are puwlty of it 
He will certainly take Vengeance on them, and ther:by cl; the j;;. 


_ 


nocency, Truth and Goodneſs of his, who are trampled on by th: 
31 r:s7 a tearful thing to fall into the bn 
the living God. 

n The Puniſhment of theſe Apoſtates is further aggravate tron 
the Intlitor of it, the knowledge of which ſhould make tl:em tre. 
ble; the Thoughts of it might affe&t them, as the Haind-writin ©; 
the Wall did Belfhazzar, Dan. 5. 6. It thould firike horror int.) 
their Heart, trembling into their Perſons, Deut. 28. 55, 56. by A- 
poſtacy trom Him as a Father, to be ſubjeted to Him as a Jud-e, 
and as obnoxious to his ſevereſt Judgment. Him in whoſe Haud is 
Power 1nexpreffſible, 1 Chron. 29. 12. to avenge himſelf on his E- 
nemies, Pſal. go. 11. who have renounced Him as their God, and 
provoked Him to fury by it. A God that will not repent of Ver- 
geance, and who liveth ever to infiitt it; who lifts up his Hand to 
Heaven, and faith, 7 live for ever, Deut. 32. 39, 4%. to puniſh 2: 
everlaſting Burning, and a devouring Fire, ſuch Traitors to Incl! 
ed, His Vengeance 02 
theſe Apoſtates is like Himſelf, everlaſting. 

32 But o * call to remembrance the former dr 
in which after ye þ were illuminated, ye indurcd + 1 
great fight of afflictions g. 


q By their tufferings for him with Patience, and divine Fortitud 
willingly, cheartully, valiantly ; ye have borne, and overcom:. 
bearing, preſerving your Integrity, fo as your Faith wasimmove.! c 
and ſtrengthened you to endure the many, and moſt violent antun't- 
of the Devil and his Inſtruments, both within and without tc 
Church, who thought to force them from the Faith, by the many 
Evils which they inflited. If they were thus enduring theſe at thc 
firſt, hov! much more now, after fo long a continuance in it ? Am, 
8. 18. 2Cor. 1. 6,7, 2 Tim. 1. 8. 1 Pet, 5. 9. 

33 Partly whileſt ye were made » 4 gazing: 
ſtock, both by reproaches, and aiftictions, and 
ly whilſt * ye became s companions of them that were 
{o uſed. 


7 Their Sufferings perſonal in this famous Inſtance, $2787: p3't, 
They were ſo publickly expoſed as on a Stage or Theatre, 10 +5 
multitudes might ſport themſelves with them, 1 Coy. 4. 5. As m4- 
ny were expoſed to be devoured by Beaſts in their publick Shes, 
I Cor. 15. 32. Or, to deſtroy them, expoſed in their pubIick 
Courts of Juſtice, and there taunted and reviled, as Chri!t tore- 
told them, Matth. 10. 17, 18. They were ſuffering Keproache: 
and Afﬀictions publickly both in Word and Deed. What Nick- 


”y\ 4» 
qt 4 . 


| Names impoſed on them ? what Crimes imputed to them, which they 


abhorred ? what buffeting, ſcourging, rormenting, ſhackhng, TIM 
priſoning, baniſhing, were they not exerciſed with, as their Fcllo- 
Chriſtians are- to this day? +s Their Sufferings by Participation i 
preſence, and Sympathy with their Fellow-Chriſtjans, This 1s 4807 
ther kind of it ; they were Conſorts and Sharers of :!| thote Me- 
bers of Chriſt, who were ſo«abuſed by the Devil and his Inſtruments, 
and they bore their Burdens with them, were inwardly grievcd 10r 
them, publickly owned and comforted them, ſupplied and ſupported 
them as they could, as v. 34. 2 Cor. 11.25, 26. 


34 For ye had z compaſſhon of me in my honds, 


and * took joyfully x the ſpoiling of your goods, know 7 jan: 
ing || in your ſelves that + ye have in heaven 4 bet | 


ter and an induring ſubſtance. 
t For ye /[ympathized in my Bonds, 


thers, he inſtanceth in himſelf, as a Witneſs of it : for when it 


in Bonds for preaching the Goſpel, both-at Feruſz/em, As 21+ 33 ., 


37. and 22. 24, 25. at Ceſarea, Afs 23, and 24 if Zo _ 
n wit Min, 


28* they fore-warned him of his Danger, bore hits Eurcc! 


ſupplied, relieved him, and endeavoured what in them Jav,” his wo 


7oc. 15 4 Proof of both kinds - ral 


. . ; ; . 
of their Sufferings fore-mentioned. As to their ſuffering vo! go to 
VI< j 


BE 


And again, 3 + The Lord ſhall Judo *1 


MC. 2 
1G 1 


«17 
14s 
'L 


. k. © a 

| Chap. Ls 

leaſe. # And in their own Sufferings, by being rifled for the Gol: | 

p21 ; their Goods, Eſtates, and Means of Sub\1ſtance, was either by 

Fines, Condſcations, or Violence, raviſhed from them ; their Ene- 

mies, like lo many Harpeys, preying on them, 1 7heſſ. 2.14 v0 

as theſe Chriſtian Hebrews at this time had their reſpective Proper- 

ties, and all was not levell'd among them. Though they were 10 

impoveriſhed to make them comply with the Gentile Superſtition 

and Idolatry,' yet they chearfully bore it, eſteeming 1t ther Honour 

and Privilege thus to ſuffer tor Chriſt, and herein obeyed him, as 

Matth. 3.11, and,1s the Apoſtles did before them in Acts 5+ 

41. w They were fully afſured of this by Faith in God's Promite, 

and by Gad's Work on their own Hearts, qualifying and ftting them 

for it, Rom. 8.15, 15, 17. That they have by Promiſe given them 

as theirs, as fitted for them a ſpiritual Subſtance and Eſtate, be- 

vond what this World could afford them, Riches, Honours, and 

Pleaſures, better for their quality than all terrene ones, ſpiritual 

ones proper for their Souls, 1 Per. 1. 3, 4. The Sum of which 

is, God in Chriſt, their exceeding great Reward, Gen. 15, I. and 

a!l he can be to, or do for them. He is their Portion, and their 

Inheritance, the moſt excellent in it ſelf, and the moſt 1nduring, 

out of the reach of Men or Devils, who can neither take 1t trom 

them, nor them trom it, it is ſafe enough in the Heavens, Matth, 

6. 19, and 19. 28, 29. Pſalm 16. 5. 2 Cor. 5. I, 2 Theſſ. 1. 

4 5+ 

35 Caſt not away x therefore your conhdence , 
which hath great y recompence of reward. 

x This introduceth the laſt DireQion for helping on their Perſeve 
rence in Chriſtianity, Ms S727 denieth all degrecs of Apoſta- 
cy, from ſecret undervaluing, to an utter renouncing, not to 111zht, 
deſpiſe, or rejett ; they had endured already ſo much as might ſteel 
and fortitie them againſt what remained, and implieth the bold, re- 
ſolute, and couragious Retention, &pbe/. 5. 10, 16.. of the boldneſs of 
their Confeſſion of the Chriftian Faith, Ir is an ingenuous, free, 
vold, and darins Profctfion of it, which no Brow-beating, nor V1o- 
lence can daſh out of Countenance, the Frvit of a mighty invincible 
Faith. and Hope of Eternal Life. This makes them perſevere cou- 
ragioutly 1n their Religion, notwithſtanding their being laden with 
Reproaches and Sufferings for it, as Chriſt Himſelf gave them a Pat- 
tern, Mark 8.31, 32. Ads 4.13, £9, 31. y What greater Incou- 
razement can there be to the retaining this Confidence, than the 
gr2.ut Remuneration ſecured in the New Teſtament to them. God 
Himſelf in all his fulneſs to be their excceding ' great Reward, feen 
and enjoyed by them; and which for quality and quantity 1s unex- 
preſſible; Gen. 15. 1. Aatth. 5. 12. and 10.32, | 

36 For £ ye have need of patience, that after ye a 
have done the will of God, ye might b receive the pro- 
miſe. 

V3, z Fir ſherxs this to be an Inforcement of the former Dirc&ion: 
P:iik.2g Caſt not away vour Confidence, for you have necd of Grace, which 
that muſt maintain in order to carry back your Reward. Tt 1s there- 
ſore abſolutely neceflary, as well as ufetul to you, for the bearing of 
vour Burdens, perſevering in all Duty, and waiting for your Re- 
ward, notwithſtanding your Reproaches, AfﬀiRtions, and hery Try - 
als, that you preferve your Confidence in maintaining this Patience, 
chap. 5. 12, Rom. 2. 7. Jules Il. 4. @ That having believed God's 
Promites, oteyed his Precepts, endured his Tryals, and perſevered 
in al}, according to the good, acceptuble, and perfe& Will of God, 
and fo exerciſed our Patience,. and evidenced our Conidence, and 
finiſhed our work. þ You may carry back, as your tull Prize, after 
your Race. It is a neceffury ard true Reportation trom God, 
atter his Will is done, 1 Pet. x.9. and 5. 4. the Reward promiſed, 
metonymically expretlcd by the Promiſe, chap, 5. I5. and 9. 15. all 
that Life ard glorious Inheritance in the Reality and Fulneſs of it, 
called a Crown of Glory, which fadeth not away, 1 Tim. 4+. 8. and 
2 Tim. I. lt, 
37 For c * yet a little while, and he that & ſhall 


come, will come, and e will not tarry: 

c The,Reaſon of their rctaining their Confidence to the end, 15 
the ſhorkneſs of his coming, who will reward them for 1ft, proved 
out of God's Promiſe written to, and for the Church, by Habakbuhk , 
| chaÞ. 2. 3. A Truth ſufficiently known to theſe Hebrews, as brought 
FIND 0 them by their own Prophet, and though tpoken for the Comfort of 

PIP the C:ptives in Baby/on then, yet it is extended to the 1luffering 
Church in all Ages, and ſo to theſe Hebrews, and to us alſo, upen 
whom the Ends of the World are come. And though the Prophet 
ſpeaks it of a Viſton of Grace, in Promiſe to be diſpatched, yet the Sep- 
trazint refersit toa Perſon ; and in this the Apoſtle follow them, be- 
cauſe the Promiſe cannot be made good, without the coming of its 
Author fo fulfil if, d In«which Promiſe there is the celerity or 
ſpced of it, as little, little as it may be, as is fit for Chriſt and 
them. How little 1s this Time ? a very ſhort Moment, as He ſpeaks 
himſelf, Rev. 22. 7, 12, 20, He that hath promiſed to come and 
ſave you, and reckon with your Perſecutors, He will certainly come, 
He and his Promiſe together, will diſpatch and put an end to the ſut- 
fering of his, and put on their Crowns. Metonymically his coming 15 
his Saving, full refreſhing, and rewarding his believing and patient 
Satferers. e He will not ſpin out time to delay Deliverance, be- 
vond the ſet Point ; He will not come behind the leaſt Moment, the 
Hour fixed and appointed, which is pitched in infinite Wiſdom and 
Goodneſs, for the beſ: Comfort of Chriſt's ſuffering Members, I/a. 
45. 13, Ds 

38 Now / the juſt ſhall live by faith: but if ay 


"Y 
_— 


TNA 


COLE 


= 


*Luke-18., 
2, 


> Do 
* Pet, J+9s 


HEBREWS. 


a5 here, The juſtified, according to the Terms of the New Lovenant, 


Chap. 


who hath obtained the Righteouinets of Cod in Chriit, by ko: 


and 1s renewed and fanftified by the Spirit, fall rovlv, ſpiritually, 
happily, eternally live; and no end fhail-be to ther ie of 
it be perfetted by Chriſt in Glory, And this he ſh.!! live by a rea! 
and ſpiritual Aﬀent to the Goſpel, and reliance 0n God's Promites 1 
it, eſpecially by an Aifance to Chritt, God-Man, 4: tc Ford Ther 
Righteouſnets, by which we have him ours, ani fo we Fre, Th 
Faith increaſed, continued in, and held faft amicit all Keproact: 

Sufferings and Perſecutions; by this only is the Life due 19 812! 
ouſneſs, made lure to Sinners, drawinz from Chritt dai'v, and 22 
ing realand preſent the Fulneſs of it promited to, and hoped 11 
it, Mark 13. I'2, Fohn 5, 47. Gat. 5, 5 and Co! 3.4 £ S-e 
2. 4, where ND trantlited here VISA naar, 1s variouily rendrcd- 
as elated ihe a bubble, lifted up, wakins Pride and Unbeliet to be the 
S1ns threatned there , and the proper ſenſe of the word here uſes, is 
f-r fear, or ſl th to withdraw, or leave their ſtandings; fo that tis 
meaning in both amounts to this, If any, 2ut of the Pride of their Hoare, 
will nt depend an Chriſt's Rightenuineſt, as the Jews would not, vr out «{ 
« Sluzgifhnefte, will mt hold out, but with-draw themſelves, in 


©V: In: 


- " 
»<3 


Lie vi; 
thing T1. 


» 
TT) 


—_ » 
. i”P 


4 
T7. 


4 4+> 


- 
; ! 

» 
248 


Fear ana in 
time of Perſecution, from their Faith and Confidence in Chriſt, P1 0- 
feiled ; ſhrinking through Fear, or lofing it through Sloth, or fortak- 
1ng it by Treachery, either gradually or totally, conftiding in them- 
ſelves, and fo deſpitins God, reje& Him, and draw away from tin, 
þ God himfclf will be ſo far from taking any pleature or celtz};t 17 


ſucha Soul, or vouchſafe it any Joy or Lite, that his very Sov! ablzors 
it, 1s highly difpleaſed with its Sin, and abominates its Perfon. in 
his Difpleaſure 1s Miſery, Death, and Eternal Perdition. Toe Dev. 


32. 15,18, to 21. | ; 

39 But we 7 are nbdt of them who draw bac 
perdition, but of them 4 that bwliere, to the {:1ins 
of the foul. 

i The Conclufion 1s an hopeful Aﬀertion of their Condition, or 
ſweet Intimation of what they ought to be, even like | 
and fo the Apoſtle removes all Jealouite of his refleing on them. 
as chap. 6, 9, The Adverſative, but, is an Exception of them to 
whom he writes from the Apoſtate-State, and fo jouns himiceir v.ith 
them, hoping they were ſuch de fo, as he was, and as tliey ought 
5 be de jure, and fo intimates their Duty, and that of ail Chrittians, 
we arg nt Sons of Defe&iom, Perſons with-drawing and back-lliding 
from"Chriſt, his Goſpel, or Luties; Apoſtates from the Truth , 
whole end is deſtrudt;on, an utter Separation from ail Good, Lite and 
Glory, and full SubzeQion of Lody and Soul to Eterna] Torments 12 
Hell, by the righteous Sentence of God ; who are Sons of Detection, 
are Sons of Perdition, Matth. 10. 28. Jon 17. 12. 2 Theſſ. 2. 3. 
Þ Sons of Faith,” true and ſincere Believers, cle.ving to Chrift and 
his Body, rooted in his Faith, and perſeverins in it to the end, Feb, 
2. 17. Cole. 2. 7. which Faith acquiring, purchatinz, or obtaining, 
accordir to the Goſpel-Covenant, the Soul tor Salvation, and Glo- 
ry for the” Soul, 7ohn 3. 15, 16, 3s. and 5. 4o. 2 Theſſ. I 2. 
Faith realizing, applving, and kceping faft the Price which Chri't 
—_ paid to God for the purchaſing of theſe for them on their 
Souls, 


EEE Ke 


iN 


I 


Ts 9 SoC 
THINIC; = 


5 
« * 


CHAF' XL 


The nature and virtues of Faith, 1=—2, 
old were acceptable to G:d, and bleſſed by Him: This fraved in Abel 
and Emch, 4 6. Noah, Abraham and Sarah, "12. iths 
by Faith embraced the Promiſes of Canaan, but obtained it mt here but 
in Heaven, 13—16. A4braham's Fatth in Offering up Tau, t7—1 3. 
and of Tlaac in bleſſing Faeob ; of Facob in bleſſing the Sons of Fo op > 
of Joſeph on his Death-bed, 20 Of the Parents of 
and of Moſes -himſelf in deſpiſing. the honour and eſtate 
Court ; in departing out of Egypt; heeping the P ifſercer, ard £12 

throwgh the Red Sea, 23 Of Fofhia and Rahab in the tab 

ing of Fericho : of the Judges and Kings who performed gieat thin: 
by Faith, 30 34- Of Women who herewith unde; went great 4f 
flictions as alſo, divers Prophets and Martyrs, 3 © 
theſe died in Faith, and obtained not the thirg promited, nay were per- 
fect without us, 39, 49. 


A 


» 
: es 5 
Y ry A b 

ir hy ao) is 


AF 


Ts 
dy 


# 


& i, 
oy _ c-_—_— < & 


OW a faith is the|| ſubſtance 6 of things hoped 
for, the evidence c * of things not ſeen. 

a The Holy Spirit proceeds in thi; Chapter to fſtren=then the 
Counſe! he had given theſe Hebrews to continue ſiedfat in the Faith 
of Chri8t, to the end that they may receive their reward, the Saluatim 
of their Souls, chap. 10. 39. and 1 Pet. I. 9. 
a deſcription of that Faith, and proves 1t to b» effectual to this end. 
by inſtances out of all Aves of the World before them, wherein the 
Old Feſtament Believers had found it to be fo : The deſcription of it 
islaid down terſe 1. the proof ofit in both parts, verſe 2, 3. and the 
i![uſtration of its power by Examples from wer/e 4, to 45, The Par- 
ticle 43 ſhews this is inferred as a diſcovery of that Faith, which is 
ſaving or purchaſing the Soul ; which that none. of theſe Hebrews 
may be miſtaken in, he deſcribeth from its Fffe&, and not from its 
Form and Eflence. Faith 15 here a Divine Fruit of the $jirit, giver 
and wrought by it in his Elect, and 15 juſtifying and purchaſing the 
Soul to Glory, 7ohn 12.38. Rein. 5. 1. 2 Cor. 12. 9. Epheſ. x. 16, 
20, and 2.8, b Trcunc in 2 Cor. g, 4. notes confidence of boalt- 
inz, Heb, 1. 3. Perſonal ſubhſtence; and chap. 3. 14. confidence 
of Faith, Here it 154 reat, prefent, confident aſſent of the Soul of a 
Believer to the Premiſe of God ( which 1s the Bafis or Foundation of 


X man g draw back, my ſoul þ ſhall have no pleaſure in 
OY : him. | 
| f Theſe are, as the former, the Words of the Prophet Habakiuk , 
chap. 2. 4. inforcing the former Duty pretſed from the Gain of Per- 


Ow 


ſeverance. and the loſs by with-drawing, rhen Chrift ſhall come. 
They arc utcd by this Apoſtle Paul to ſeveral! purpoſes, as to prove, 
That Righte meſs is onis 2btained by Faith from God, and not by Man's 
Pg own Wohs, Rom. 1. 17. and Gal. 3. 11. 
ous by Faith, fall !ive j- ever, by holding tht R 


Yol. 1}. 


T'vat whoever is vightes 
gkteauſneſs ip Fatth, 


FILE A 


| is 
4 


it ) by which the ſpiritual god things to come, and which fall not undcy 
ſenſe, yet with a mo8# vehement and intenſe defire linged for, ar? made 
to have a mental intelle&ual exiſtence and ſubſi/tence in the Soul which 
exerciſeth it, Rom. 8. 18, 25. john 3: 36. WA 
monſtrative diſcrvery of that which falleth wt under (ene, ſuch us is 
ſcientifical, and puts matters out of queſtion to a Man, and thereforc 
is ſtiled by Logicians # Demon!ir.:timm : here it notes Faith to be that 
Spiritual Senfe which by Gods Fevelation demonſtrates or makes 
evident all things not ſeen by Sent, or natural Reaſon withovt it. 
a5 Matters of Spiritual Truth, Good and Evil in their ſeveral kinds, 


*J 


4- 


c Freud 3s 


= 


| 


By which all the Stints of 


XL. 


and fo bezinneth with 


[ 
\Or£741 
CY, C01 te 
gorce, 
* Bom. £ 
22. 25 
14 
i 
} $ 
i 
| 
"= 


Chap. XI. HEB 
both paſt, preſent, and to come, 7»bn 17. 6, &. Fpneſe 1. 17, 
12 


* Ver. 2. | 2 For d* by it the elicrs obrained a good re: 
JOTt 

d This is a proof of the firſt part of Faith's deſcription, that it 1s 
the ſubſtance of thinzs hoped for: For all the Fathers were tcſtined 
of to have this work of Faith in realizing their Hopes 11::;Surrest 
were the Fatler- and Anceftors of theſe Hebrews run up through their 
Genzalovics to 4.1.,n, the ſpecial Inftances of whom toitow. Theſe 
received a Tettingny or Witneſs, truly and fully trom God bimielt 
in femc f17nal Acceptance of them, eminent Appearances and Frovi- 
dences to tem, with a Scripture-Record of them, that throuzh this 
pleated God, and were faved by Kim, cven as theſe Chritftians, and 
ail this by the ſame Grace of Faith, A&s 15.17. which wrought kind- 


Grace &f our Lord Jeſus Chriſt they walked with, worſhipped and | 
PT 


/ » 
ly in them, 2nd made the inviſible things of God to ſubtiſt with 
then, | 
br Tials x Y © LEW ww , p * £> i "7? FR 
* Jot.1.3. 23 By faith & we underſtand that the * worlds 
\ )., #7 40 Fa a 0 x oy ip 4 ; - 6 ; "WM FX . 8 
2 Felt. 3-59 wer {framed ty the word of God, ſo that tings 


which are {cen, were not 194des of things wich do 
DINE « 

2 This proves the fecond part of Faith's Deſcription, 1cj/e 1. That 
it is the evidence o things not (een, for:5y it only we underſtand the Cre- 
@tim which ny Fyo aw. It is the fame Divine Faith as deſcribed be- 
tors, but us cvidencin? invifible Truths, 1t communicates a marvel- 
lous Lizht to the underflandins, and Icaves real imprefſions of 1t 
from the Word of God, whereby it arriveth unto a moft certain 
knowledo2e of what is +bove the poiver of natural Reaſon to convey, 
and gives a Bivine Ajlent to it, ſuch as is rea}, clear, ſure, anc truit- 
fr!, different rom that of the Gentiles, Rrm.l.1g, tO23. f Tiicaionus 
the word noteth ſome” times Ages, Lube 15. 8. the Garb and corrupt 
halit of Men who live in them, Eprel. 2. 2. Eternity, Erhe!, 3. 21. 
But here, as chap. 1.2. it 1s a word of aggrazation, figmfying all 
kinds of Creatures, with their ſeveral places, times and periods ; 
things Cocleſtial, Terreſtrial, and Subterrefirial, Angels, Men, and 
all forrs of Creatures, tovether with all the ſtates and conditions 11 
which they were made, Heaven, Earth, and Seas, with ali their 
Hoſts of Creatures ; the viſible Creation and the inviſible 4 orld were put 
into Being and Exiſtznce ;, placed in their proper order, dilpoted, and 
fitted to their end by the mighty Ward of God, Trinity in Unity the 
Creator ; his Powerful Fiat, without any pain, or trouble, or atfitt 
ing Cauſes, inftantly efleted tiis miraculous, glorious Work . 
laid, und it was dane, Gen. 1. 3,6, 9, 11,14, Cc. Pjal. 33. 6,9. 
g The vifible World, and all vitible in it, were made all of nothing ; 
this Rezfon could never digeſt : All was produced of thit formicls, 
01d, dark Chis, which was inviſible, Gen. 1. 2. which void, tform- 
leſs, dark Wafs it ſelf, was made of no przx-exiſtent Stuff, Matter or 
Atoms, but of aothing, which differenceth the operative Power of 
God from that of all other Agents. Sce Gen. I. 1. Pal. 85. 11, 12. 
and 148. 5, 6, &c. Iſa. 42.5. and 45. 12.18. 2 

4 By taith Þ Abel offered / unto 'God a more 
excellent ſacrifice than Cain, by which he obtained 
& wimets that he was righteous, God / teſtitying of 

Or, s »t his gifrs : and by it 2 he being dead, || yet ſpeak: 
rjoken of. eth, 

*Uei4.t.- þ The Spirit beginneth here to iNuſtrate his Deſcription of Faith 
by induRion of inflances throughout the former Ages of the Church 
to the time of theſe Hebrews ;and he begins with Believers in the Old 
World betore the Flood, Faith is the fame Divine Grace as deſcrib- 
ed before, only here to he confidered ys fully recerving of God"s Will in 
Ch11# as to Saciificing-work, and remitting ſuch affettions and operations 
toGrd in it as was agreeable thereunto, it Abel the younger Son of 
Adm, an eminent Believer, whoſe Faith orders him and his Wor- 
ſhip, the firſt Martyr for Religion in the World, Luke 11. 51. who 
ſealed the Truth of God with his Blood. He 1n the end of days, that 
is, the Sabbath, Gen. 4. 3, 4- brought a Bloody Sacrifice of the fat- 
teſt and beſt of the Flock, and offered up to the Divine Majeſty, the 
trucand living God, his Creator and Redeemer, to Atone him for his 
Sin ; having a regard to, and Faith 1n the great Sacrifice of the Seed 
of the Woman for him in tulneſs of Time to he offered up, and of 
which his was but a Type. This Sacrifice was fuller of what God re- 
ouired in Offerings, than Catn his elder Brothers, not, it may be, ior 
external price, but internal worth; Cain offered the Fruits of the 
Ground, ſuch as God afterwards required in the Ceremonial Law, but 
he was not ſenſible of the guilt and filth of Sin, and of its demerits, 
nor delirous to remove it in the due way and order appointed, as ap- 
pears by his Murdering of his Brother after ; A/el's Sacrifice was bet- 
ter, cxcellenter ; becauſe more fully agreeable to God's Will forgpurg- 
inzz and pardoning Sin, full of Self-denial and Abaſement for Sin, and 
Faith in Chriſt's Sacrifice. & By which Sacrifice of Faith he had Te- 
ſlimony that heacknowledged himſelf a Sinner, that had need of the 
Elozd oi Chriſt to fpriakle him, yet he was righteous by the r1zhte- 
ouſncis of Faith, Rom. 3. 22, 25, 26. Which 1s upon Abe!, as alljother 
Believers, Phil. 3. 9. And this teſtified to his Soul by God's Spirit, 
that he was Juſtified and SanRified, and ſo eminently riphteous, and 
1: was manifeſted to others, Chriſt himſelf God-Man witneſlinz of 1t, 
PMatth, 23.35. 1 God himſelf witneſſed fem Heaven to the Truth of 
his State by accepting of his Perſon and Sacrifice, and giving a viti- 
ble $izn of it, fo as Cain could obſerve it, and be diſpleaſed at the 
Gifference God made between him and his Brother, Gen. 4. 4, 5, 7- 
likely it was by ſending Fire from Heaven, and conſuming Abel's Sa- 
crince, as he did others afterwards, Levit. 9. 24. Fudges 6. 19, 21. 
1 Kinzs 16. 38. and 2 Chron. 7, 1. andby it teſtified h;m t» be righte- 
om. m By bus Faith, tho murdered oat of this World, and his place 
here knows him no more, and with a- d:G&n that he ſhould never 
fpeak nor be ſp>k2n of more; yet he now (peakerh, 1. e. liveth, Mat. 
22. 32, and teftineth to God that ke is True, and the only True God 
to mike Souls happy. Ze in his example, and his Record tn Scrip- 
ture, beſpeaket!; all that read his Story to imitate him in his Faith 
and Worſhip,pins of God, and his patient Martyrdom for God, and 
his Goſpel-worf:ip throuh Chriit : And by his Blood he crieth for 
Juſtice againtt his Murderer, as Gen. 4, 19. ice Chap. 12, 24. and as 


R EW S Chap. 5 
- hap. Al 
joyned with thereſt of the Martyrs of Jeſus, impleads God's Rj-3r... : 
ous Vengeance to be executcd on their Bloody Perfecutors, Lul., h: 

51. Revel. 6.10, 11. Byreafonof his Faith he is lpoken of throy "% 

out all Generations, recorded among the excellent Sons. of Ge 

and renounced in the Church to this day. Such a force hath Faith "iy 
eternize the Perſons of Believers in acceptance with God thro Dos 
Chriſt, their Wronzs, Injuries, and Blood, on GogJ's remembrane.. 
and their Names in Heaven and the Church below. I 


5 By faith Enoch was tranflated that he thay 
not ſee death, and was not o found, becauſe Goq | 
had trantlated him : For betore his trantlation  h; 
had this teſitmony that he pleaſed God. EY 

n By the Divine Faith before deſcribed, that wiich reacheth homo 
to God by Chrift; Eno the ſeventh Patriarch in a deſcent (ron) , 
Adam of the Churches Line, Gen. 5. 21. An eminent Prophet and 
Boanerges, denouncing Judgment againſt the uffgcdly ones of his 
time, ſo 2s to awaken them to Repentance, Zude terſe 14, 15, w.; 
taken by God, Gen. 5. 24. The Apoſtle kceps to the Septuacin: 

Tranſlation of the Text. He was miraculouſly changed in his BG, 
from a mortal to an immort.l. State, and this without any ſeparati1 
of his Soul from it. God out of an extraordinary Grace 1nd Favour 
to him, diſpenſed with the commen Sentence pift on the Human 
Seed in 4dam, as he did many Accs after this to £/j1h, He. Died 
not ; All the reſt of the Fathers of the Church, Cer. s. s, 8. 27, the 
longeſt liver of them Died. -9 Gen. 5. 24. neither among Men, n\; 
in their Sepulchres, as others were, but had chanved hs Aubitation 
and Society. It any went to ſeek him as cr'-rs did Elhith, he os 
far out of their finding, 2 Kings 2.17. p Fr Grd bad taken tim t 
himſelf in Heaven, the place of his refidence, ::d in the very Att 
chanzed his Eody into a Spiritual, Powerful, Glorious and Incorru;:- 
tithle one, as all ours, who arc true Bciirvers {þ2!] be at Jatt. ww 
15. 51, and 1 Theſſ. 4.15. and ſo miQc ft tor the place to which ls 
was taken, wade like an Anrvel in Perſon, and fo be with thote + Þt- 
rits in Company ; now did he tully fee and enioy him whom |» 
Faith he walked vith beneath. 9g In the time of his Lite, and wt. 
'n: with God in ths jinful World, all the time of his witneſfins tc. 
God In it, God witn?Med hy his Work on Ins Soul to hindelf. by þi: 
Miniſtry and Life to the World, and by the Prophet Moſes's Record 
of it to all Geperations to come jn the Church once and a24jn, Go 
S. 22, 24. that in his walkins with God he pleaſed him, He was yr 
only juſtified, graciouſly accepted, and beloved of "tm, but he 111 
that winch was plearin; to God, putting out in Thought, Wor? 
and Deed, all the Porver of Grace to at for God ; prefervins con. 
ſtant Converſe and Commun!on with ttm ; and had no Fellows in 
with the unfruitfu! Works of Darkneſs, but reproved them. By tl: 
he pleaſed God, and God teſtified to all the World he did fo. b» ; 
miraculous tranVation of him from the World to himſelf; God crc 
not for, nor will take to himſuch who pleaſe him not. 

6 But without » faith, 77 2s impoſſible to plea! 
him, for he that / cometh to God, muſt 7 believe ith: 
he 1s, and zh2t he is z a rewarder of them thar dil: 
gently ſeck him. 

7 The Spirit here proveth, that Enxch pleaſed God by Faith, thoush 
it was not expretly written in his Text by Moſes, becauſe of the im- 
poſſibility of pleaſing God without Faith; but without Faith up m G1.! 
in Chris, whom Each pleaſed ; it is abſolutely impoſſible to do an! 
thing acceptable to God, fo as to be juſtified by kim; for infticlity 0; 
ant of Faith makes God a Liar, r 7-hn 5.40. Chriſt is a Vanics, 
7obn 5. 40. and God's Will a Deceit, which peremptocrily ſ:ith,ti:cre 
is no pleaſing of him but by Faith in Chriſt, 7»bn 14. 6, The cited 
catinot exiſt without its Cauſe, as is proved in the next word:, 
ſ For whoever he be, every particular Soul that cometh off from Sin 
to God, fo as to be under his condu& and influence, makes out |, 
ſpiritual motions of his Mind, Will, Aﬀections and Members, in 
Thouglits, Defires, Reſolutions and Operations to enjoy God, fo as 
to he accepted with, juſtified by, and blefſed of him; and at pretent 
makes his acceſs to him with liberty and boldneſs in Prayery or any 
other Duty through Chriſt. # He muſt really, fully, and ſupernatu- 
rally receive all that which God revealeth in his Word is pleatin to 
him, eſpecially concerning himſelf ; as, that he #s the prim:tive jei'- 
felt Being, and the Cauſe of all ; thit he is three in Relatims, ant 
one in Fiſence, mo excellent in al! hs Attributes, Infinitely Wiſe, 
Powerful, Juſt, Good and Eternal, &c. The Supream Creator and 
Governour of, and Law-giver to all. « And that he will recompence al 
Men according to their Works, but will eminently and freely give 
1imſelf to he the reward of his, and whatever he can be to, or do 
for them for their good, Gen, 15. 1. But to thoſe onlv, who with 
an intent Heart and Spirit purſue him by Faith, Love, and longing 
after him as their ſupreameſt Good, I/a. 45. 22. Rom. 2. 6, 12. Rev. 


22. I'2, 


7 By w faith Noah being warned of God of thing? 


% » 
YUUY 


. A } 

not ſcen as yer, || moved x with fear prepared an Ark 
. "14 » i” WO } 

to the ſaving of his houſe, by the which he y condem-. 


ned the world, and became heir £ of * the righteout- ::. 
nels which is by faith. Phi. 3-3 
w By the ſame Divine Faith, Noah the laſt example of it in the 
Old World, and the Father of the New World, being warned ( by 
an immediate revelation from God, Gen. 6. 13, 21. larzely rehearſed 
by Moſes ; ) fo thit God's Word is the ground or foundation of Dt- 
mine Faith in all Ages of the World; of things not yet ſcen, but on- 
ly by Faith on God's Revelation : which things were the periſhing 
of the World by a Deluge of Waters above 100 vear: ater ; and 
that himſclf and Familv, with ſome Creatures ſhould be fived from 
tht Deluge, to repeople the World, and to repleniſh the Atr and 


Earth, none of which things did #2i! under Noah's ferfe Then. X 
EunaſenFac 1mports nita right receptim of God's revelation, whicit 
made him afraid, and carctul 'not to offend God, aid to a Godly | . 
carriage to him who had revealed the jimnir 1 danger cf the in- | 
ful World, aint his own deliverance iro”, nr: 7 AP. 5 Jo BETE: 


on he obeyeth God's Precept, and j-eparea wnd peifocied the Vii” 
bath for matter and form ac.ording tf Cid s rrud, 16 35 10.00 TE 


\ > 
Af! 


A,*', 


Chap. XL. 


*Chap.3.4- 
Rev. 21.2. 


* Gen. 17, 
19.2 . $23 
TL uxe I, 
35, 


H E 


a71inſt the time of the Deluge for the preſervation of himſelf and Fa- | 
mily from 1t, Gen. 6. 14, 15, 15, 22, compare 1 Pet. 3 3. 20. Oy. ver- 
tacrf F116 Art, that water which drowned the [rd javed ther. SG | 
that #/o9d vas a Tull Type oy the 4 urer of Biptiln, his 4h, oi | 
Chri$t or Ar: ils Fami'y, of Ch r:ft's ſmall Fun iy in comperiton 0! 
the World : Their Salvation rom Water, of a Etern.l Saiv.ition 0, 
theſe from the Deluge or dire, 2 Pet.3.6,7, 11,14 Thee fame Dr: 
wins Faith 10 Noth, and 1n Chriſtians, mnaketh them to obey God's 
Precept, retire to, and entcr God's ark, and ſo enjoy his Salvation. 
, oY this Faith diſcovered 1 11 his work about tne fro he tettiftied 

20!t the tinfu! World of Mankind for their Unbelicf and Diſobedt- 
enc « ho tor above 120 Years together, being by AGON Preaciiing 
and Bu « the Ark, called to Re pertince, 2 Pef. 2.5. ana to pre- 
37 God threatned on ti CM, and fo ne pag tem 
vertuily by its Word and Doctrine, judictally by decliriny God » 
Sentence cn them : See Matth. 12.41, 42. and Jobn 12. 43. x B) 
this Fart! he received the Promiſe of Ric Lhteouſncſs, which mage him 
an iicir of 1t,and of that eternal Life and Salvition tor which 1t nttud 
him, as well asto which it entitled him, and by 1t ha {cnt our all the 
Emits of Rightcouinels that are to the Praiſe and Glory of God, Am. 
$5. fo 709, I. 12. 

S$ By iaith Abrihim @ when he was cattcd to 80 
out into a place which he ſhould after receive for a: 
Inheritance, obeved ; ana he þ went out, not knorw- 
ing whether he went. 

a Here begins inſtances of this Divine Faith after the Flood from ! 
Abraham to 41/es time, verſe8. to 23, Thefirit 1s the Fath-r of Be- | 
hevers fo entitled by God, eminent inthe exerciſe'of this Grace, of 
wioſe anceſtry and their deſcent trom him theſe Febrews did great- 
ly lory. He had an expreſs Diſcovery of the Will of God unto 
him, that he ſhould leave the | 


this Jud, * Mi©: 


4 24 2D ie 21> A SE ES 


(dolatrous place where he lived, Gen. 
11.31. and 12, 1, 2, 3, compare 7ofh. 24. 2. and Afts 7. 2, 3. and 
vith his b amily thould travel to a Land which God would ſhew him, 
and which he would give him as an Inheritance for him and his, 
which was the Land of Canaan, as deſcribed, Gen. 13. 14, t9 17, 
and 25. 12, 19, 21. Tins Command of God, ftrengthencd tv a Pro- 
miſe, he obeyed, Gen. 12. 4- As 7. 4. through Faith realy, free- 
Iy, and fully retigninz up himſelt and his to God's diſpoie, 5 He 
went forgh with Mis Father Terah from his Country, Kindred, and 
Friends, in Ur of the Chaldees to Charran, and there they divclt 
till Terah died, Gen. 11. 31. and Ags. 7. 4 Atter which, he 
purſued God's Orders in motion from place te place, thou»h he 
knew, neither the way, nor the place in which, and whether he was 
ro move, reſting himſelf on God's Word and Guidance, and relying 
wholly on his Provifion for him, and Protettion of him i in all his 
Way's. 
9 By faith he c ſojourned in the land of promiſe as 


71 4 ſtrange country, dwelling in tabernacles with d I- 
14ac and Jacob, the heirs with him of the ſame pro 


mile. 
c By the ſame Divine Faith. he paſſed from Tent to Tent, moving 


it from Place to _—_ as God ordercd ; ſo as he rather fojourned 
than dwelt in any. His Journal 1s Icgible in Mojes's Hiſtory, moving 
from Charran to Shechem, from thence to Beth-el, and then more 
Southward, and thence to Egypt; See Gen. Chap. 12. ſo that he ſojourn- 
ed in Canaan, and the adjoyning Countries, which God had Cove- 
nanted to give for an Inheritance to him and his Secd, Cen. 15. 18, 

to 21,yct by Faith he would ſtay God's time for it, but lived in it as a 
Stranger, not havinz in Poflefſion one Foot of Ground, but- what he 
bouzht for a Buryinz- place,Gen. 25.9,10. Ads 7.5. d Here h ie with his 
_ Tſaac, and Grandſon, and their Seed, Coheirs with him of C.ima- 

, built no Houſes, bur lived 1n Tents, which they might pitch or 
remove at God's Pleaſure, and as he called them, as who were Strans 
ers to this Country, and to the Inhabifants of it, and with wor 
they were to have no ſpiritual Society, as travelling to a better, be- 
inz in this World, but neither Citizens nor [nhabitants ot it, but 
as Denizons of a mire excellent one, Gen. 26. 3. and 28. 13, 14. 

10 For he looked for ea City which hath toundati- 
on, * wioſe builder f/ and maker 4s God. 

e The reaſon of this contented Pilgrimage was the excellent end of 
it, the Place, and State ro which it brought him ; he did realy dif- 
cern by the Spirit's work 1n him, and pronule to him his Title to 
it, and vehemently did defire and long for, and yet patiently waited 
for a better Place and State than this earthly ; and was daily making 
his Approaches tot, Rrm. 8. 19. 2 Cor. 5.1,2, 8,0, Iu notes 
both a Place niade up and conſtituted of Building and Houſes, ſuch 
was the earthly Feruſalem; and a State, Politv, or Community. 
Here it muſt be underſtood ſpiritually for ſuch a Place and State as is 
not to be ſhadowed out by any mn this World; it being for Nature, 
Manſion, Society, Conditicn, ſuch as no earthly one can decipher, 
or ſet out. Th City is #leaven it felt, often ſo tiled in this Epiſtle, 
as verſe 15. chap. 12.22, and 13. 14 'Rev. 3. 12, It 1s not movea- 
ble, as a Tent taſtned by Stakes and Cords, nor as ; Creature- buildings, 
periſhable. Hiſtories tell us of the riſe and fall of the beſt earthly Ci- 
ties ; this City is built on the Rock of Ages, as well as by him, 
whoſe Immutability, Almightinets, and Eternity hath laid and ſetled 
its Foundations, the Bats and ground-Work firm and incorruptibie, 
x Pet. 1. 4 The happy Fabrick with Perſons and State endures for 
ever. f Becauſe of its Raiſer and Founder. The great Archite#, 
that caſt the Plot and Model of it in his own Mind, and the publick- 
ly declared Operator and Riifer of it, wholaid the Found-ti ons, reared 
the Manfions, and fnithed the whole, 1s no lefs Perſon than the Infi- 
nitely wiſe, Almi2hty and Eternal God. It a!l became him alone, 
and dof as fir exceed other Citics, as God foth Men. No Hu- 


man Art or Power was fit or capable of ſuch a Work but only 


God. = | 
11 Through taith alſo g * Sarah her 


. ſtrength tO CONCET) Ve [c ced, 


wh FEce by ed 
1nd + vas delivered Þ of 1 


1 
$ \W - I} x Cn %F 
- Js Lick [$/ EC I © 
=o 
'crth the Child of Fromiſc. For tloag't tlie lnſtance 52 Fans fy in 
Pry page _ ot Abrabu ON OY GiU!DNCNT tor r 1115 
ther of Bel, Gas 5» aCQU! rec ae CO TIICO) 1”, EVEN O! the t | 
C:ICVETS, As the Apt ſtic dec [Ta rei, atm, 4 *; fo Z ae Al: 
_ joyntly to be conſidered with Sur, mA; the, wil firit throus!? 
n! ns! Jau: -ht a at th! IC Promile, 1 ot bin r.nroyed BY £ 4 F. T2 " 
Angel, of the Covenant, for it, belizved. on the F: P-HION Of It, 
Gen. 18. 5, to 16. and KAVC Teſitronv cf it Ly ner Waiting For 
the promiſed Merc 'Y. AS Bren as to Wis. wet K ir mide nie 
fruies when 1t was impoſſile of her fel!” to exnott it for Nature G04 
| Years, \et received ſhe Power and Strerz=th ff: Gd by believiin2, 
CONcetve Seed, tit iS, Laying the FH vndat a, of 27 CO)j 1 c1vii1” 16 Þ 
| dead Womb, and be arin: 2 Jn h Size * 3 ao one nuturgh 
| Dirrcn, but of xt Tears 0f Ave, af this time, whan the < mot 
'riitfhl were paſt ſuch work ; vet was fhe dolino od £1 Son, and 
c1:;n8 the Mother of Tj.:ac by b :tit, is he was. ti 6 g-05 Prey; 
Gen. 15. 4. and 18. 1t. compare Row. 1; 17, 19 1h. 4 Sh | 
Givry to God by a fem and hearty Cloſure with $1 Promie, p.7 « 
in:G 7 faithful ty [13s _ and abie to-prriorm 17, and fo roitct « 
it, ond waited for him, as 4G aham dig RI. 4. by 
Promite which he madc, was \That thev 1 t9.45 1! 
= Gen.l 2.2. made it) SEnera!, Chap. 3-15. 1:5. th pt 
; 4:5. to both, Ch.c2.17. 15, 15.17, Clap, i2, 10. 2. n+. 
: I2. 
12 Therefore # PEO there oven ofuna, 2.) . | 
as goud as dead, * {© many us the itn: I 
mulzicude, and as the ſand which is &7 th.c40 
mnunerable, 
þ Becauſe of this Faith of Abraham and Surah, and the Fruit of it 
in concciving and brin-in> forth I, Le, Was tatd the Foun Q ion of 
numerous Seed by God's Promiſe, from Abraham, an hunioed, ai 
Sarzh nincty years old, and Barren, and both dead as to Fr 
Rom. 4. 19, there were begotten a vat and uyboundel Int 5-30 
Stars inthe tirmamen”, or the Sand cn the Sex. ſhore ; ana amon "1 
them the teeming Bleffin.z, the one emmnient 3d of Alratam, if 
Heftzh, in whom all Nations were to be vlefled, W a 4059 Year: 
rom tie Birth of Tjuuc, th I <d 1ncreafs d to above Socces fi eITHAG 
Men, bulides Worm EN 27 d £ Children, in1 aitcs iacrcalid to; 4 frupoti- 
dous greatneſs #accordinz to, the Promile, Gen. 13. 16. aid 15. 5, 
Ex14, #2 37. © Chron. 21. 5, 5. PO. 
13 Thele all /die: 7 in faith, not having received ',2! = 
7 the proiwiles, bur having fern them atir of, and jc jro, 
end aa ons I -& 2] MES AS 7 - WES 
ven operiwaded of 1h-;z; 2nd tmvoraced 7h nd fGen.y7.5 
* confelicd p that they wer2 {irangers ant pilgrims on 2 E209. «5. 
un Cal th. io, 

[ All theſe, Abraham, Sar 1, Tſaar, and fFeco), 3c. who w "OY 
Heirs of the ſame promiſes, and who had orortunity to -eturn to { FREEER 
ſame Country from which they came forth, as wo ns. Ti h 
not only live according to Faith, walkin with, wont 
waiting on God, teftifyin: r a&a1m{t Str, md 
dying accyding to Futth j Evichy, »sthe infirm . 
mn Faith, as the regu! ain 5 Cmiſo of it ; 

{tate of hchteving. Faith was 1nmortal in tie 
ing thetr Death a Covenant-DUiliobition, / he 2. 2% ay! 
hopeful blefled Death, as 2 ©:7 5.5. 1 7hell 4. 13. an N 
actuallv, and in ſ[en{e, = tins T5emted, winch were a 1 
Oif-ſpring, the litteril Can wn, thee 3 fr. in the Hieth, and ; 
ous Reſurretion, but Sh d rump!:tn7, and in the Fitch of at 
and that they would be. made rod to ther: an this they dif 
ed by the Blcffings they tft on each ofthor, is four on Font, 1d 
Zacob on the Patriarch. n But Faith brougitt ai theſe Pronifls wn. 
their view though to far af; {o did Abraham ſecby it the TJ; 7 
John 8.58 They all had a re»!, clear, and {iron ch Of tim 
the Inheritance temporal 11 1fs time to come, and the heavenly t 
beyond the Grave, ſcetnz the PeſurreRtion, Heaven, and Glor. by 
Faith when they died, Ger. 43. 18. 0 Eva powertul tmpreffion of 
Faith on their Souls, cf the Truth, Goodnetfs, and cortainty of the 
thins 'S promiſed, on toeir Minds, with a mizhty &Anprehention of. 


and Afent to them on their Wills, to the chuiinz of, and clof:ns 
with them on their Atiecions ; eleavin rn tofhenia Love, Defire and 
Dclizht, as ſurely to be accompliſ cd, hiv 1: ther Souls thankt(u!! 

receivins them, gractoutly returning to God for them, with the 
areatcſt Satisiaftion imbracing them, as are welcome Friends or Re- 
lations long abſent from us, huv 1h nes {xlutins Heaven, an 
imbracing Glory in the Promiſes by Fitch, wi en dvinze Þ In Word 
and Deed; while they lived they pi with d if to the Worid, as 4- 
braham, Gen. 23. 4. and ac", Gen keep!r 5 oy miclves free 
from all Intanglements cf th1+ earth, : as = ime fhofe who are Stran- 

scrs, having no poſlcifion of, nr intimicy ith this earth; 1ncor- 
porating with no other P« ople, but as Pil-rims wandred f from 1ce 
to place, took up anil pit! their Tents when and wh re God 
would have them unpcovplcd as to tis World, and defirins to be nen- 
pled with the Lord, 7/7. 35. 12. and 105. 12, 13. compare 2 Cor, 
the famie Mind, lo IJ irom, and 3ho ve 


5. 6, 8 They were es of 
this World, and longing to remove to their own Country, 2:1 te 
with GOD. 


14 For 9 thcy thar fay ſuch things, declare plainly 
thar they ſeck a country. 

q The Reaſon of Faiths Effe& in their dying, 
view a better Life, State, and Place, than any carthlv one: rc; * 
theſe Believers by Word and Life proteſſing wr ne © fo he Strangers 
and Pilgrims on this Earth, and fectnz God's Promntes, and unbr.:- 

Cinz them, declare and fhew plainly t0 al who fee them, or convo; 
with them, that thev /-ught a Country, and a place of Rett, wich 


is the bring: 02 1n 


child when ſhe was p2:il 170, becauſe the juc ky 2d i him 


tiichful who had 
£ By the fame Drvuine 1 


mromill b 
ith in Ab aham and Sarh was brov; -ht 1 


they were not pofleſt of. For no pe rfon is a Stran: er or Vih-iim 

in his own Country ; but thcte inquired the wav and watlud in tt, 

which led thein to a better than any this cart! afte did tio: 

and ſo the Apoſtle brings us hick to that whic!: be 1.4 coli. d 

"before, verſe Io. and immcciatelv prevents the Go #tHor, that this ſ! 

C "oy ſhould _ be their tormer Country, aud clcais it to ber 1: x- | 
__ if 
I5 nd 


Chap. xL. 


AC. 7.2. 


HEBREWSYS. 


15 And» truly if they had been mindful of that ; 


e177 trom whence they came 


our, they might have 
hb 4onDorm untty to have returned : 


w 


» Thouzh they were Strangers ih Canaan, yet they might ſeck an | 


earthly Country, ever U-z of the Chaldees, from whence they came 
torth, and which was their native Country, and ſo might be dearer 
) them than anv other; but it was not that, but a better Country 
14 were mindful of, which they viewed by Faith; whereas the 0- 
er they might have ſeen with their Eves ; if that had been all they 
detired, they wanted neither means nor opportunity of returning to 
It, but they remained tixed in Obedience to the Heavenly Call: and 
when 7.95 returned to it for a Wife, yet he left it again when God 
ſummoned Him, as appears, Sen. ch. 29, and 39, and 31. They 
did willingly leave it, and kept trom it, and never Jookt back there, 
but lookt tor a better. : 
16 Bur « now they :dcfire a hetter co, that 15, 
an heavenly : Wherefore God 7 is not aſhamed * robe 
called their God : For he harh s prepared tor them a 
C!LV, | 
s Havins deſerted this Worle, as Strangers in it, they ſought, de- 
ſired and hoped tor with the greateſt earneſtneſs and fervency, a C1- 
ti in the Country of Keaven, te-/? 10, in comparifon with which 
they contemned and defpited all others; a Country where there 15 
pericetion of Lite, and tulnefs of Glory : It excelleth all others as far 
ac Heaven doth Earth, 2 T:m. 4. 18. 1 Pet. 1. 4 The State, So- 
ciety, Enjovments and Place, they longed for, were all heavenly, 
Phil, 2. 2.21, nothins lower than this World would fatishe them. 
t Faith havinz carried them thus eſtranged from this World to the 
Grave, indearin;z to them the Fromiſes and engaging of them for 
Heaven only, therefore God did nyt diſdain them, he did not think 1t 
anv diſrepute to him to own them his, but eſteemed it an Honour 
and Reputation to him, took up his Joy and Delight in them; fee 
him owning them when dead, Exod. 3.6.15. Matth. 22. 31, 32. 
tirnaming himſelfby them, and adopting them as his own, as Facob 


did Foſeph's Sons, Gen. 48, 55. ſo that though they are dead, as to 
their Bodies, vet they are alive as to their Souls, and are owned by 
God in his Nime and Title, and are affured, as to their Duſt, of a 
Reſurrection ; for he will do it, giving them that rgft that they ne- 
ver had in their Pilgrimaze. «u That heavenly State and Place 
v. hich they ſouzht for, terſe 10. which infinitely tranſcended Canaan, 
and the 7erizlem 1n it, of which they were Denizens while here, 
Fobel, 2. 10. Phil. 3. 20. the pleaſant, peaceful, rich, and glorious 
BMeotropols of the living God, Chap. 12. 22. and 13. 14. which ſhall 
make abundant amends for all their Sorrows, Sufferings, and reſtlets 
\Wandrings on Earth, where they ſhall enjoy Pleaſures, Riches, Ho- 
nours, and Reſt for ever more, 1 Pet. I. 4. ; 

17 By faith Abraham when he w was tried, oftered 
up Iſtac : And he that had x received the promites, 
otiered up his only begotten /o-7. 

w By the ſame excellent Faith Abraham alone, and by himſelf 
contidered, being trved by God, in a rare way, to give proof of 
the Truth of his Faith in, and love to him above all, was to take 
his only Son, his Darling, and to offer him for a whole Burnt-Of- 
ferins on Mount JMfriah, to himſelf, Gen. Which Com- 
mand of God was not unjuſt, he having abfolute Soveraignty and 
Pominion over ail Perſons and their Lives, having Power to kill, 
and to make alive, Devt. 32.25. This Son of his x he offered up 
as God Commanded ; for 1n his Heart he hae fully parted with him 
to God, and proceeded ſo far in Executfon, as if God had not 
diſpenſed with it, it had been aftually done, he wou!d have killed 
him and burnt him to Aſhes on the Altar, Gen, 6, 7, tO 13. 
This mighty Faith inabled him to do this, though he was h13 on- 
Iv begotten Son by promiſe, and in the Churches Line, concerning 
whom he had received fo many Promifes, and in whom only they 
were to be fulilled, as that a numerous Seed ſhould deſcend from 
him, who ſhould inherit Can”, and through whom Chriſt was to 
deſcend into the World, in whom himfelt and all Nations were to 
be blefled. Yet Faith filenceth Reaſon, and natural Aﬀection, aſ- 
fureth him, God could tulfill his Promiſes by him, though he ſhould 
offer him : As he raiſed him from a dead Body and Womb at firſt, 
and gave him to him: So he oveyeth God's Word, and offereth 
him. 

1S || Of whom it was ſaid y, * Thatin Iſaac ſhall 
thy ſeed he called : 

y This did greaten Abraham's Tryal, that unto him it was promi- 


- 
L 
k 
» 
C 


4 as 
<2 20 


22, d] 


fed by God himſelt, That in this only begotten Son Tſaac, the emi- 


nently bletied, and bleffing Seed, with all his myſtical Body ſhould 
be called; that is, put in being, propagated and made known as by 


' Name in 1/zac, Gal. 4. 28. This God revealed to Abraham, Gen. 17, 


19, 21. and hereby was his Faith put to it to reconcile Contradidi- 
ons, as to believe this ſpecial Promiſe, and yet execute this ſpecial 
Command to ſacrifice 1/aac, yet to believe 1n him his Seed ſhould be 
called, : 

19 Accounting = that God was able to araiſe hi: 
up. even from the dead : From whence alſo b he re- 
ceived him ina hgure. 

2 Faith puts this into 46-aham's Thoughts in his Reaſonings about 
this Trval between the Temptation and God's Power, and intlu- 
enced him to conclude and determine under it, That ſince God could 
raiſe him from the dead to perform his Promiſes, he would Sacrifice 
him to obey God's Command. This Faith grew from what God had 
done, in giving . him Tſaac from his own dead Body, and Sarah's 
dead Womb, Rom. 4.17, to 22, a God's Almighty Power to raiſe 
trom the dead, anſwered all the Difticultics in the Tryal. If God 
command it, who can raiſe trom the dead, this can be no Murder : 
For he can neither prevent or recover. Promiſes ſhould not fail, 
though 7/.:ac was ſacrificed ; for God would raiſe them up and ac- 
compliſh them. As to Arguments from natural Aﬀection ; ſhall a 
Child be dearer to me than a God, who quickens me. and can raiſe 


hs 
Www. 


him trom the Dead ? Since God can do this, what Difticy'ties can he | 


—— 


'S 
IN 
4147, FY 
not oyercome?henceis this Principle fo often revea'ed and repeated * 
be a fure Prop to a Chriſtian's kaith throughout the Goſpci, + 
Generation was a kind of ReturreGtion trom the Dead, and fv. 
Reſtitution to Abraham ;, for in Abraham s account he was Boad 1-, 
Hand being lifted up to kill him, when the Angel ſtops the Exe, .- 
on, Gen. 22. 11,12. From the Altar he carricth him back as a 7... 
pity and Reward of the Vidory of his Faith, in fuch a manner, 2+ Frag 
riſen from the Dead, and an eminent Signal of his Vidory over = 
Temptation , Abraham had a Figure of the Reſurrection in j;;- 
Son , and an Earneſt ot a far more glorious Relurrettion 
Chriſt. 

20 By c faith Iſaac bleſſed Jacob and Eſiu concery. 
ing things to Come. 

c Tizac 1s the next Example inſtanced in of the ſame Djivire #11 
deſcribed, vere 1, only here exerciſed on the ſpecial Revelatin of (; & ; 
kim concerning his Seed, By this Faith he did not only wifh and Pra; 
Bleffings, but prophetically applied them to his two Sons, to *.;.}; 
and Jjrae! his Seed, the Covenant-Bletſings ; and to Fiz and tt: 
Edmites his Seed, the Temporary Bleſſings God deſigned thei, ©. 
27. 27, 39. Both theſe, were things to come, and to be cominyn; 
cated to their Seeds hundreds of years after. As the thinss tr 


concerned ach, to come, which were not ſeen, but h« ped ror 
from Gud's Revelation of them, were Plenty, Dominion over 5re. 
thren, BletTings above the Poiver of a Curtc, even the tpirituz] 2ng 
covenanted ones of Abraham and Tiauc with him, Gen. 25, 22, 25, 
The things to come concerning F/au and his Sced, were only cart! 
temporal Bleffings, eſcape out of Servitude in time, common £-04 
tings at the higheſt, Gen. 27. 39, 49. By Faith Tac torcfhy, 4 
theſe tuture Events, toretold them, and fapplied their fever! Porri. 
ons to them from the Mouth of God, and they were to a tittle 4. 
filled, 2 S.m, 8.14. and2 Kings 8. 20. asto the Fdomites, as in the 
whole Old Teſtament unto 7.c5h, and to his Seed literal and tpir;- 
tual. 

21 Þy faith d Jacob when he was a dring. blefic! 
both of the tons of Joſeph,and ce worthipped, /ea17 
upon the top ot his {taft. 

d Facob did not degenerate from his Progenitors, but by the [ln 
excellent Faith (being Heir to the Birth-right and P!lctTing, by Goe', 
Appointment, and his Father's Confirmation, as Gen. 28. 1, ,...\ 
doth, as a Grand-father and a Prophet near expiring, weak in Body 
but ſtrong in Faith, b/e/$ 7oſeph, and each of his Sons, Gen. 48, 15 
to 21. prefering Ephraim the younger before Manaſſeth the elder 
by laying his Rizht-Hand on his Head, and his Left on the others, 
and ſo adopts them to be his Children, gives them the Bleifing of t! « 
Covenant, as to their Perſons, and the Inheritance of twg Tribcs 4- 
mongſt his Sons, as belonging to Fo/eph, as his Birth-right; Gen. 4, 

to 27. Theſe by Faith he forctold, and applyed particularly ty 

each of them trom God Himſelt through Prayer. e Another Et 
of his Faith, is his worſhipping God, having bequeathed his Bodv to 
the Burial in a firm Expe&ation of the promiſed Inheritance, as tc 
Hiſtory clears, Gen. 47. 29, 3o, 3I. and 48. 2 For having 
ſent tor 7o/eph, heraiſeth up himſelf on the Pillow at the Bed's-Head, 
and for his Support uſed his Staff, leaning on the head of it, when 
in Faith he declares his Will to his Son 7e/eph, and binds him by an 
Oath to bury him in Machpelah in Canaan, with Abraham and [.uc, 
Heirs of the ſame Promiſe, as an Earneſt and Handſel of the Twelye 
Tribes pofleffing it ; which 7-/eph having ſolemnly ſivorn to him, 
Jacob bywed himſelt and worſhipped, lifting up his Heart to God in 
Thankfuſlneſs for his Dntinual Providence in the gradual Accomplith- 
ment of his Promiſeto the Seed of Abraham, Iſaac and Jacob. This 
he did by Faith, adoring his Soveraign Lord and Saviour by his hum- 
vly bowing before him. There was no need Of F:ith to bow fo 7: 
ſeph, who was inferjour to 7acob, and blefſed by him. | 

22 By faith f Joſeph when he died, || made menti | 0c.” 
on of the departing of the children of Iracl: And g gave 17-* 
commandment concerning his bones. 

f Jiſeph the firſt Son of 7acob by Rackel, whom God preferred 

betore his Brethren, envied and ſold by them, but advanced by him 
to be Lord of Egypt, and a Saviour to them, Hcir of the Birth-right, 
and of his Father's Grace, a Patriarch and Prophet like him, drawing 
near to the end ot his Pilgrimage on Earth ; and dying, he made 
mention, and brought to the Mind of the Jſraelites his Children, Bre- 
thren, and Nephews; and, likely, with a charge to convey it down 
to their Poſterity, as if might be remembred by them, that though 
he died with willingneſs and choice, looking for a better Place and 
State than any in Egypt, and that his Death ſhould not obſtruct the 
Itlues of Providence to them for good; for God /ived, and would 
ſurely viſit them in their Poſterity, 7jrael living where he ſent M/s 
to them, and would make them go up gloriouſly out of Egypt, and 
bring them into the Land- of Promiſe, and give it to them for their 
Inheritance. This Teſtimony he gives them of it by E:jth, Gen. 50. 
24 And God fulfilled it 15G years fafter his Death, as he had 
ſworn to Abraham, Tjaac and Facob. g By Faith likewiſe he chargcd 
them about carrying his imbalmed Body with them, and burying it 1n 
Canaan, and obliged the Tſraelites to it by an Oath, Gen. $0. 25 
making an Earneſt and Signal to them of the Promiſe and Oath oi 
God for their Deliverance, that as he defired his Bones might be bu- 
ried in Canaan, being Heir together with 7acob of the ſame promited 
Inheritance, it might be a viſible token of and Incouragement, 11 
the appointed time, to their Return. And this 1#ae! fulfilled, 
Exod. 13. 19. carrying them away with them, and afterwards 
burying of them in Shechem, the Lot of Ephraim, 7oſh. 24. 32- 

23 By faith þ Moſes when he was born was hid 
three months of his parents, becauſe they 7 ſaw he w.2y = 
4 proper child, and they were & not afraid of the * * Ex.» 
Kings commandment. Oy 

h The Parents of Moſes were as eminent in this Faith as their 
Progenitors ; for by it Amram and Fochebed both of them of tne 
Tribe of Levi, Fxod 6. 20. Nartear here put by a Metaphraſe t0r 
ze, and thou;h in the Hiſtory aſcribed to the Mother ouiy, Vet 

Ty 


4 


bl 
, 


} 


An5 
ns | 


Ls) 
3 « 4a 


S 


\\, | Chap. XI 


it was by the Father's direQtion, as Exzd. 2. 2. comp. Ads 7. 2» 
They hid 30jes, bn under the bloody Edit of a Tyrant for drown- 
19.5 all the //c5r2w-males in Nile : (he was born three years atter 
A.cron, and 65 after 7ojeph's Death) they kept him three Months 
trom the Deſtroyers, and they adventured the Penalties threatned 
by the Edit, Exod. 2. 2, 3. Faith overcoming their bears and 
Diiiculties about it, and in all probability, ordered their fitting the 
ark, and diſpoſe of 1t for his Preſervation with the other Adts at- 
tending it. 7 The Reaſon of Faith's Work, was their ſeeing of 
him to be 4=<-», fr, beautiful, proper, and this not in himſelt on- 
lv, but as Stephen interprets It, 454-1 ww ©:s, Ads 7. 20. Farr to 
G14, Some glorious Aipett was by God put upon him as a Signal 
of tome great Perſon, and of great uſe in God's Deſign to Ins 
Church; tome extraordinary Stamp of God on his Countenance, 
which Faith could diſcern there, and ſo influence them to conceal 
and preſerve him. + Fiith made them fearleſs; for they were 
not atraid that the King's Edit ſhould truttrate God's purpoſe con- 
cerning the Child, or keep hin: from its Service to the Church, 
wherein God would imploy him, and of which he had given them 
a Signal in that Luſtre caſt on his Perion, and therefore they uſed 
means to preſerve him, even when they expoſed him, and which 
had a ſuitable ſuccels, Exc. 2. 3, to 10. 

24 Þy taith / * Moſes when he was come to years, 
refuted to be called the ſon of Pharaoh's daughrer, 

| WYnics himſelf was as eminent a Beljevey as his Parents, and a 
mi..hty Inſtance of D:vine Faith. He who-was fo named and ſaved 
by the Enemies of tte Church, and adopted as a Son to a notor1- 
ous one of ticm, vet being great in Age and Stature, tull forty, 
Fe4.3.11. .*&s 7, 23, paſt the Folly of Childhood and Raſhneſs 
of Youth, upon manly Deliberation, and a rationa Exerciſe ot 
Faith, notwuhfianding he was by Eith a poor T{-aelite, and ſaved 
trom periſhing by a Princeſs, the Daughter of a Potent King, 
nouriſhed through her Indulgence by his on Mother, adopted as 
her own Son, educated by her in all the Wiſdom of the Egyptians, 


alid renounceth ths Relition, 
witli, and a vrciter Good in God, and this he manifeſted by Word 
ang vecd, 1n h:< after Tranſlations, v. 25. 

25 * Chuſing 7 rather to futier atnictions with the 
people of God. than 7: to enjoy the pleatures of- fin 
$OT a icaton 


7 The ſame Faith influenced his Wil, the caufe of his former Re- 
nunciation, for being in the pretent Fruition ot all Court-Favours, 
4nd under the Offers. of all worldiy Deitghts by Egypt, and of all 
worldly Diſcontents by God: Kith determined his Choice, made 
him a F2!{orv-/i.fferer in all the Opprethons, AtiiiQions, Perfecutions 
of his natural Brethren the People of God, the moſt priviledged 
Society in the World for Hope, as the moſt exercifed by Tryals for 
God's fike ; he knev; there would be eternal Reft and Glory into 
which they would ifſue him, beſide glorious Effetts they would have 
on his Seul while he was enduring them; and that they were but 
paſſinz, and would quickly have an end, Roz. 8. 18. 2 Cor. 4. 17, 
13, n The ſame Faith made him to rejet the enticing Pleaſures of 
Sin, which could not be avoided by his continuance 1n Pharaoh's 
Couirt,- cither in ditiembling himſelf to be no Jraelite, profeiling 
himſelf to be an F21ptian, taking part with them 1n their cruel Car- 
riage to his Brethren, living after their vicions Courſe, in all manner 
of Voluptuouſnefs, and the Pleaſures which he was to enjoy, were 
{inful, tranſitory, and momentanious, neither ſatisfying, nor endu- 
ring, and muſt be attended with a Sting in the end of them, even 
eternal Anguiſh and Torment, whereas his Aﬀidtions would end in 
etcrnal Joys and Pleaſures, ark 9. 43, 44, 47 Luke 15. 2 

26 FEſteeming o rhe reproach || of Chriſt greater 
riches then the treaſures in Egypt - For he p had re- 
ſpec unto the recompence of the reward. 

0 Faith influenced and determined his former Choice from the 
mott excel/ent Ground of it, the Repreſentation of theſe by the di- 
vine inſpired Truth to him : It made him weigh and deliberate 
about the matters propoſed, and then to judge, and potitively de- 
termine about them, that the reproachful Suffering of all ſorts of 
Afﬀiitions, Poverty, Diſtrefſes, Tortures moſt ignominioutly inflict- 
ed on them by their Enemies for their Faith in Chriſt, and Ex- 
peation of him according to God's Promiſe, and who was now the 
Anzcl of the Covenant that protefted them, as well as their An- 
ceſtor 7:coh, Gen. 48. 15, 16, Theſe Moſes choſe, to ſuffer pati- 
ently out ot Faith in, and Love to Chriſt : theſe with what excel- 
lent things were to follow by vertue of God's Promiſe, he prefer- 
red 2s a better and richer Eſtate, and infinitely more defirable than 
21 the 77e.14-s of Honours and Riches, which cither Ezypt or its 
Kins could oblige him with, tne whole of them founded in the 
Duſt, difpoſed by Flcth, fading 11 Enzoviment, and ending 1n Vanit+, 
\Wh:it are theſe Treaſures, compared. to thoſe Jad up in ſtore by 
Chriit for his in Heaven? p Theſe were the things ſes had 1n 
his Eve, the end of Chriſt's Reproach, and Ezypt's Glory ; this 
made hum torn his Eye and Heart away from Zzyw, and intently to 
took on the excellent Iflue of his reproachtal Sufterings for Chriſt, 
even Chrift r-ndiring to him Is unexprefſibly glorious and eternal 
Reward for it. 2 Cor. 4! 7, 18, This God had promiſed to, 
Chriſt had purchaſed for tach, who were by Faith bearing his Re- 
id gualied for the enjoying of 1t, Rem. 8. 17, 18, 
4 


— 


roach, an 

.. 3 Pets. 13; Fs 
y {ich * he 9g forfook Egypt, not fearing the 
of For he » endured as ſceing him 


th of the king: 

he ſame excellent F'th, after his demand from Pharach of 
{ior y for Iirael fo leave Egypt, and had brought on him and his" 
Feauic the Ten Plagues God threatned them with, then he broke the 
Ends of Captivity, and took up Trazl, and left Egypt fibdued 


HEBREWS 


\ 


waſted by Plagues, and a ptace to be abttoried ; friemphing over it 
he torſakes it as a Conqueror, and carrieth away the Spoils of it- 
The Wrath and Rage of Pharaoh at him and his Work tor 1/rue! 
did not apale him; he was not afraid of his threatn 12 to ki!l him. 
Exod. 10. 28, 22. yet he defied him, even when {1's Rage made 
him to purſue. him and 7/.e! with his Hoſt, to deftroy them. 
r Engpreqnar, he wa: of bo/d undaunted Sprrit, fo 2s nothing was toy 
hard for him, either to ſatter or do : Magnanimity expelled his Fo: 
fo as he would ſtand or march according to God's Order, Faith pre: 
ſenting to his View at 2!l times the greac Anvze! of the Coverane, 
God the Son, the Redeemer of him and 7/-v!, the only Potentate 
the imifible IKing of b:nzs, and Lord oi lords, 1 Tim. 5. $4; 39 
15. with hum, and tor lim 4zatntt Phar ach, ieeding, COVETtaY, nQ 
guarding him and Jſrael in all the way, and tulniine his Promia 
of delivering of his Church from &2y;7 ; tis makes him to mat; 
undaunted!y with God's Hott. 

2S Through fairh s he kepr the naſſorer, and the 
{[prinkling of blood, left he 7 thi | 
born, ſhould touch them. 


y 


s This Divire Erith intluenced him 1h all his Work 2 
Ordinances, receiving the Law abour them from God s Mou 
obeying it : By it he made the Patiover, 2. c. as Gods lifiructient, 
ie 1n{tituted if, and put 1t into being, £aod. t 2 
and ſolemnly managed in each particular, and tit 
the end of 1t accordins to God's Law 1n that beta!!, x £51 
Here he ſaw Chritt, and teitined of him, the true Pachat Lap 
God; by wiom God's Wratit vated over the Children ot 7 racl, wht. © 
it reſted upon the Fz1rtians, Exod. 12. 21, Nc, By Eith he took 
a4 bunch of Hp and d:ipt tin the Blogd of the Paicksi 1.7%, aud 
ſtriked the Lintel 2nd tho Side poſits of the Doors with the £1298: 
Exod. 12. 22, He uſcd it as a Signal of Ged's ſparinzs {1 ard 
paſſing over their Houtcs by his Angel, vt. 22. ind he law in it ft 
true Bland of fprinbline, of Chitit our Pailover, which favecth Sow! 
trom the Deftrover, 7obn 5. 45. and brings then | 
of this Worid, 1nto the heavenly CuNX&ite ft lie end of born 
theſe, was, That the deftrovins Angel, who flew -all the $11 
born of the Egyptians, might not touch an Hraelite, Exod. 12, 20, 
30. Under all this Keith evidenced fo 3/cs Gol's Faiitiitulneſs in 
his Promiſe, 1t ordered all his Duty, and it realized to their Hope 
in that time of Danger, that Gol would tive them, who were un- 
der that Blood, working their Ailurance of It. 

29 By faith z they pailed through the red-l[ea, as 
by dry /ard : which the Egyprians aitiving w ro do. 
were drowned. 

1 The ſame Kiith enabled 37-/es eminently, and thoſe off 
vers, 45 Aaron, Caleb, Foſhna, &c. for all Tre! believed nor, 1 Cor. 
1-2. 5. yet for the Faithtul's lake were thev kept trom drownins., 
after Moſes had, at God's Command, (when the [j.o!ites were rea- 
dy to be fallen on by the Egyptians) lifted up his Rod, and ftretct: 
ed his Hand over rhe Red-Sea, when God imiediatelv by an Ett- 
wind, divided it, made the Waters to ſtand up on cach tide !ike 
Wails of Chryſtal, and the bottom of it to be drv; then entree 
If:ſes and Trae! into the empty and dry fpace, and walked throush 
It on dry Gro:ird, and not a Soul of 7 rac! mifcarryed, but mile 


, > oof ryy 3©...% 
. - | # tic LAKES vo . 0 
1il "_- 
"TDI, *y | 


z 


= - » -— T5 r ; — 


z 64 % CLIC 


. 


ſce aſtoniſhing Power and: Mercy in it, Fx2!. ch. 14. 22, w th 


the mean time the Fg yptizrs, with their King, purtuins 71:7 fo; 
their Ruine, find their own, for prefirpouontly afpopturins 75 
purſue them throuzh this miracutons fu, muided by Soak and ngt 
by Faith, and thinking to p.fs a5 fate as Fro! alien they had x: 
for it, God troubles them by his Anve!s i" * mot1or, makes Ui 


drive heavily ; and havinz brovoht them 1oto fins Pie un the miigdts 


of the Channel, the Chryital Walis difoive, and the: Waters ; 

turning to their tiud Nature, ovickly overivhedn'd and iwall | 

up all that Hoſt, fo as not one of thei: vnbeliovins, profiiqryr 

ous, perſecuting Wretches cſciped. God's great Work in this, a: 

to Iſrael, had a double meantn:s ;, zrcval, their Salvriion from tho 
om p 


Egyptians ; myſtical, their bap? {1m Tritiattn int) the Crenaunt of 
God by Moſes ; though all of ticm hid not Uaith wnferunce, yet 
profefſed Faith in God ; and the Dotrine 35/25 brouzht from him 
was accounted ſuthcient to attain both, 1 Cr, 10. 2 

zo By taith x the walls of Joricho Jell down, af 
ter they were compalied avour foven davs: 

x This Divine Faith exercited by 7oſhwa and rue! after their en- 
trance into the Land of Promiſe (woo did on God's Word and Con- 
mand, compaſs the impregnable Wall: ot 7er:ch2 once every day for 
fix days together, and on the ſeventh day teven tines, ſounding with 
Trumpets of Rams-Horns, and at lift giving a ſhout) brouzht down 
theſe Walls flat to the Ground by the Aimighty Power of Gee, to 
whom they were as nothing, 7. 5. 20, Faith in all this realized 
God's Promiſe to them, reached forth t!teir Love to him and O':coi- 
ence in all Particulars reouired by him, elorifving God, as the gre! 
Captain of their Hoſts, as he revealed himfelf, 7ofh. <, 12. 14,15 
committing the Work and Event to him, who, by the Breatit ©; 
Faith, doth crumble down thete Walls before them. 


31 By faith the harlot y- Rahab periſhed nor ' with | 


them || that believed not, when © the had received the 
{pies with peace. 

y By the ſame Goſpe!-Faith Rahab, who as the 7ews read- the 
Word, 7oſh. 2. 1. "IN was an AReſs, and kept an Houſe of 
Entertainment, and fo came to lodge the Spies: Or, 2s the S-ttr.z- 
zint read it, and the Holy Ghoſt confirms it here, and 7am-s 
25. was a publick Harlot, who gate her Livelthood by the Proftitu- 
tion of her Body, as well as the ſale of Meat .and Drink; fo no- 
torious a Sinner as ſhe, and a Canzanite too, was preſerved tram the 
Deſtruction that was inflicted by the Iſraelites on the unb-licying. 


CT 
' 


and diſobedrent Inhabitants of 7erichs,, being, after her exclufion 
out of the Camp, in order to a l:val Purityiann, admitted into 
God's Church, and honoured by him to be a Mother in 7%,.0/, from 
whom the Mefſtth ſhould deſcend, Fiſh. $. 22,25. » The toll Proof 
of her being a Believer was, her entertaining; of the Spi-s fe 
| toſhua to Ferichs, preſerving them when ſought for, 40d dim tlin 


Chap. XI. 


*£ 
7 
15 
w 
* F : 8 
2.7 401 38 
\ B. + 
0} gt 
ai Log 1 
) 'R \þ 
ov { He : 
j UI > 7 
01) TUES 1 
1716s 50 þ- 
'F b 
þ F-22 b} 
£4 
L 
{ 
E 
"3: 
| y 4 
J 4 
- 
: 
> 
' 
it! 
: 
, 
T} 
: 
' 
* 3h 
oy : 
\ 91 
#" 17E 
[ Wl 
2 
Wer. L, 
q ft 
' 
ND 
a + 
"TS * 
WM... 
I7 
a] xz 
- 'T 
WE» 
' 
-% 


= : 
& . + 
os) ile 
| 
TD 
ate . 
” 
a © 
n:.6 
q>* 
1\ 1 
& 
"FA - 
- 4 * 


tom, ad viſin; 3 Z them wit thev were to do in order to their ſafe- 
ty, Joſh. 2: 3, log to the end. Thic ground of all this, was her 
Faith in God's Promitc of giving Canaan to Iſrael, confirmed bY 


me -reat Works ſhe heard God had done for them, and her own 
Exnettation of Good oniy 1n the Portion of God's People, to whom 
ſhe defired to be united, which was afterwards accompliſh cd. Net- 
ther doth Par! and Tames contradi& each other concerning her 
Faith and Works, 7ames 2.25, For ſhe was e:: empted from De- 
ſtru*t1on by the fime Faith by which ſhe was juſtitied 3; and her 
Faith «was juſtified to be ſound and true, by ker carriaze to the Spies, 
for it was a full Demonſtration of her Faith in Ged. 

-2 Ard eo what ſhall I more ſay ? for b the time 
would tail me © tell of Gideon, Klub of Barak, and of 
Samfon, and of jeprhe, and of * David alto, and Sa 
mue!., and-of the Prophets. 

a Here the Spirit puts a Pericd to the Indy&cm, by an Expoſtu- 
lation, as it he had ſaid, Why do I ſpcak of ſo many Examples of 
Faith ? te Old Tettament rs full of tom ; but here's Prot enouzh, 
Vil ſay no more. b Fr time if 1ito and Wiiting would be ſooner 
gore, than a fv!i Account can be given © al] the notable Eftetts of 
Faith by all thcte Worthics who might ht te named; vet he would 
ive ſome gencral hints of Perſcts ard of the Works of Faith, which 
he judzcth ſuificic elit, and {0 rameth pronifcucutiv, and not 1n or- 
der of time wherein the exiſiee. He nameth Fcur ſudges, one 
kinz, and one Proper, 20 extraordinary Prophets .1n a bu! k, whoſe 
Hiſtories vou have, ©: Giavmm, Judz. c9. 5. 11, &e. Barah, ] udg, 4+ 
5, O0O, Sambr, Tudo. 13.14.15, 15. Jeptha, Juds, It, Da- 

41d's Hiſtory anc a $.rre! R 1a the farit 293d ſfecon d Boksof Samuel, 
and the firit of Chr! los, Tie whoſe Faith, 


[ 2, 


; oa; CO 
exceiient KxApO1tS ON 


are. as their Names, enumerated promiſcucutly ; fome of tem a- 
grccing fo particulir Porfons, others to them: all. 

33 Who thfo:gh faith c ilubdued + 10m5,mvrought 
rightzouln eſs &, obtaited & promites, opp 24 f the 
INGUITIS Or 1JVGNS. 

c Theie, by tis lime Grte!- Fart fued Kirgd-ins, deteating 
tie mi-hty Encancs of the Church :; . aud emines tiv amonzſt them, 
David, who conquered Edom, Mad, 19m, and the S$3rian King- 
doms, and extended his C: OnGu «ſts to Euphr ites. This he and they 
did in Oicdience to God's Call, in dependance on God's Promite 
both of Condudt and Vidorv. All was done by God's Arm, at the 
Inſtance of Faith and Prayer, Pj 18. 29, to 42. and 20. 5, 9. 
d They were all of tiem eninently rizhteous in. their Perſons, 
and in their Aditi iyution T 7ufice to others , the utmoſt of the! 
Abilitics were id out 1n 3t, p | became ioklocus Judzcs as to all 
matters of God amd Men, 7ruag, ch. 6. 1 Sam. 7.15, I 7. and 12. 
© CA JC $ard c7t al {on nj all thoje 8 1nd. ti tn; fS, rhich 
God ſecured t rk, Promiſe, eſpectully as to Gideon and Bay, ch, 
V1 ary and Srereſ nver the Canamites and Idianites, Fudg. >. 

. » 2nd Ss. 5, mien Vitor) over the Put! iINeS 1 Dawa's Victory over 
. e Churches EFnemis. All which af farſt o>tained in the Pro- 
n45 and then in the Execution, F7rh ſecured al, piving a real 
Enjov! zent of all the Good made theirs 1n tie Promiſe, and then in 


t Kyent; and x1} Ive the fuincis or 211} Good mn general Pro- 
oY mad to the Church aud them in the end. f Dane! an emi- 
nent Propiict of God beiteved 12 Jum, att :d for his Teitimony to lim, 
Was Caft 1 into the Pen of Lvons to be devoured, wiere God Mops 
the : +ths of them on his 03:5 and Prayer, and opens them to de- 
ſtror th cir Acvarſirics, Den, cf, 5, 22, By the Power and Strength 
of God, bot: Sub)! 7 and Dowd lov thoſe Lyons which would have 


' US | 7 «| vv GT —_ 
014 + hot TIHAH, I 1, ' M and I Tam. I'7. 34, 


' ' 
» A" from "#125 
' \ $3 * £ a +. 2+. 


1. FRE 
TIF ; 2 y Lo > 
vweikneis 7 WS. 


- turned 
mics DT THE HK! 

g Gy th. th other: 

- . . ' _ . 

ToOunnted with Gnd. and © 


- - 
- ! rearmnzs '. } 4 \ - 
E 


of the Proprets. v. 32, .eminentiy 
rtajcors of his Secret, who detying 
ſ bec:me Confeflors of the 
is Worſhin, and wy md; ed to the fiery Furnace 

2-and by Faith were ſecured from being aſe 
ics, Witch 117 47 12ttant deſtroyed thoſe winch threw 
. 22, to:8, How did This fetch down the Son of God 


* 4+ ; f 


1. 


ere an! 


himſe!f to accompany them, and to ſuſpend the conſuming Power 
Gf the Fire, foas itdid not tmze cither their Perſons, or Garments, 
or to leave any 5c<at of it upon them? and how cid A479es and 
Arms Praver:  extinzuiſa the Fire at Krbroth-hbaita.vuh, and at 
abberah, Nan. 13.1, 3. 2nd 15. 22, t9 45.  þ By Faith theſe 
Worthic, forement! med, UV. B2. Were aeiivired, when others fell 
>» the devourin=*$yord, and ail thoſe Initruments of War which 
were defiruttive to others, Thc Enemics tell by thcir Swords in 
thoſe wary Bifttels wherein they were cngacwH, fulnlling at that 
time God's Will, _ fruiting .on Ins Promile. _ how many 
f the Propiiets hath Gol delivered from the Swords of thoſe who 
would nave killed them? 71 By _- many ol rhote who had ma 


ny nafurs Tmarmties, both of I 224 Mind, hid their Tremblings 
and Faintin's of pirit, and «were, in rcfpet of their Enemies, 
wear, fer 17 yur ſhort 67 4] 31, as £5 Force, Poiver, and Po- 
lov. vet by aſl in God, were matte bold as {1ons, and had won- 
doit Koainſt numere: { Potent Enemies, 7udg. 4. 8 
and 6. x 58 and 7. 5, 7,41% and 13.269. and 15. Is, 18, 19. 
r S417 I3, 7c. +F+ reattn made thoſe who were called to the 
War m1zhty for that Sc; 2 Sm. 22, 3o, to 38. ſo 

17 } Gaunt them, no Survice was too hard for them 
0 OV 28 12 tre moituciperite Attempts, as to Tente, did 
Lt me tam? PL 27, 1, 3. { They overthrew the Camps of 
duveriarcs þ not a fin-le Caffle or Fower, As 21. 34, 
Of.2 WR3:2 Cainp of Place where an Army is pitched, ch2p.* 13. 
IT, 15. 3 2 Pura, puny ſuch Fewer where Souldicrs lie ; and '$ 
I! [2 | 5 117740Ss Ts #Xi16; attively tiken 15 tn m. be 
{ ty 0p COWN, 2s ed | \ Tents an; © 11þs, to 
put to: ft apniiet towudranics; all wh were thole of the 
; - 


= the Chur ch, Stra 1-ers to thei Country, and 


/ F® : 
@ eizaped þ the 


HEBREW S 


NSN 


*Fln:h, 2 IKmp. 


Fs ac 
to 23. winch were overturned, routed, and dceltroyed by them, © 


35 Women 2 received their dead raiſed ro lit; 
again: and * others 2 were tortured, nor acc cpting 
deliverance, thar o they might obtain a bettcr reſur 2 
rection. 


m Through this Divine Ezith, both the Prophets. Elijah and 7 
frat, did raife and reſtore, the one to the Widow of Sereput 
17. 22, 23. the nther to the Shunamite, 2 King. 4. 25, 2 
bo trom the Dead; and theſe Women and Mother: ; did b 
receive them from the Prophets alive acain, who by Faith and } 
procured this Mercy from the quicknin: x Lord, for them. In the »c- 
rcral Reſurrettion al) ſ:all be raiſed ! by the Power of God, and t: 
ctictt of Faith therein 1s only receptive ; we ſhall enjoy Life 
and receive others from the dead alſo. n Others alto, hefides 
Prophets tore-mentioned, wv. 32. Fen Te io):o!, WCOre tv1:1f anifed: 
manner of torturins Death this ws s, 15 not In certain, whether by 
Excoriation, and making Drum- Heads of their "Skins, extending 
them on the Rack, as the 5kin or Parchment 1s on the 1 Drum-Headg 
and then with Clubs. or other Inſtruments, beating them to Death? 
of which fort of Sufferers ſeems Elcazar to he = Antixchugs £5. 
phares, 2 Mac. 6. 15, 30. for Iis not turning Heathen, when ur-c9 
to it by that Torture; and though his lefiverance trom Torture and 
Death were offered to him by his Tormentors on his Compl ance with 
them, and renouncing his Religion, vet he refuſed it, as others did, 
2 Mac. 7 7. 24. reſolving to endure the utmoſt extremity, rather than 
turn Idolator, and diſobey God. o That which influenced them to 
ſuffer, was their Faith in God's Promiſe of obtaining thereby a Re- 
ſurre@tion ton incomparable better [ite than they could have enjoyed 
on Earth ; for though they might have been ſpared from Death now 
threatned them, which was a Lind of | ReſurreFion, yet was it not to 
be compared with the Reſurretion to Eternal Life, Glory, Bliſs, 
and Pleaſure, to be enjoyed by them with God in Heaven ; ſee what 
influenced them, 2 Cor. 4. 17, 18. 


36 And others p had trial of c:2e/ mockings,- an 
J {courgings, yea, moreover of bonds and impri 


{oninent. 

p The ſame Goſpel-Faith in1bled others, than thoſe mentioned 
before, Prophets and Saints, as Micarah, 1 King. 22. 24, Fliſh\, 
2 King. 2.23. Jja.8. 18. Amos ch. 7. 10. readily, chearfully, ad 
patiently to accept and receive the Experience and Trials of m./ 
ing, from the intulting, cruel enemies of Ged and his Church, tb! 
national and Aliens, beinz expoſed and made 2 Lau ching-ſto k 
Reproaches, Sarcaſins, and Nick-names, to aggra vate their; Afr; 
ons, and theſe inflicted on them by Words and external Signs, } 
als, which to an inzgenucus Spirit bears harder than external 7 
ments, and which tney more deeply ſenſe ang reſc ent; yet Eris 
mANgh them to receive all hum) 1y, and carrieth them above them, 

; Pſ. 31. 20. and '52. 1, to 5. and 120.. 3, 4. atd 14c. 3. 
p | They felt the Scourges and Whips yf their Enzmies Smart on tlic 
ſuch as were exceſſively ſhametul and painful, being inflitted on t 
vilcſt Perſons, as Sſaves; ſuch as was the matter ' of theſe Soour- 
ges, ſuch their ſmartinss, whether of Thongs, Cords, or Wirc:, 
Fer. 20. 2. atid 37, 15. This Torment was comment, ind:G&d 
on them, not in Antiochus's time only, and thoſe before, but con: 
monly in Chriſt's and the Apoſtles days, 2 Cor. 6. 8. and 11. 

- They cheartully and patiently fubmitted to the _ treatir 
of their Perſ-cutors, wio put them in the Stocks, p t It 


od 5 ] King, 
39, 
y 
/ 
Þ 


3 
TWIN 3 
Wat 


lac ES OJ -311 
Faſe, Drngeons, loacing them with Tron Shackels and . which 
the Wic kednelſs of Man nad invented to torment then with . {TT 
ind cru-l ufi..e by ther Goalers, reſtraining Society om the 
ind of comfortable Relief, feeding them with the Bread and Wat 

of Afﬀtiftion, 2 Chron. 18. 26. Ads. 15. 24. 


37 * They s were ſtoned, they were 7 ſawa all 


IRA "#& We. Te. " AN Tn 
der; were x tempted. werz 1141 ww WIN the word. : 


they x+ wandred abour in {ncep-SKins, and godt-SKIi!s 


being deſtitute y, aMiced, rormented : 

D By the ſame Faith WCre ſeveral of the Prophets and belicyins 
Worthies of Old carried through cruel! Deaths. the juſt Puniſhment 
of MalefaQtors, but the wicked Tortures of theſe innocent Saints, 
ſome being {toned to Dcath, as Zacharias the Son of Jehoiada, 

2 Chron. 24. 21. and others, Matth, 21. 35. and 23. 37- Lube 

13. 34. ft As Taiah was, is a known Tradition among the Hebrews, 
4 Puniſhment common among the bordering Nations on th __ 
2 Sum. 12. ZI. Amos I. 3. and exerciſed on theſe Innocents, 
which Chriſt himſelf alludeth, Afatth. 24. 51. u W ww Has 
traex gyms ſhould not be "TOA RE is much doubted, Temptat 01 
being no manner of Death; and the Spirit had inſtanced in it be- 
fore, v. 35. It may therefore be a flip of the Tranſcriber, and 
that Burning was the cruel Death that ſhould fill this Place Among 
tne reſt, a common puniſhment with them, Jer. 29. . Mace 
cab, 7. 5. Or, it may note a Death with ſeveral Trials of *CKs 
and Torments gradually intlited, with a Defton to tempt th. m BY 
their Pains, to renounce their Reli- ion w Others were ki! 


* Wo 


«a «+ 


the Sivord, either by beheading, or cutting in pies, Mark 5, ' [7 
a kind ”e Death foretold to be attending the Ma rtyrs of Jeius Cirit, 


Oy ©. 4 Al] theſe ſorts of Deaths were mot! unjulth ang Cr 
cliy inflited on them by ' their Perſecutors, nd as paticatly vece? 
ved and chearfully TL FEONC by the: : AS i 
Belicvers th ;roOuz ;h Vir © £ Deatins, | io CRE Hep r = T EC a! 
f.hiy under their 3: Sn '1r;5 and Hir 2 ; St Ferings 
pr Portion as Crutl 25 Death it lf; "ys y Circ 
'0 preierve themſe!res from tiicir 
"U Ieing themfeives into dofolate plices 
or were unjuftly and violently baniſied 2nd 
"in Habitats Ins, to ive 25 Vagabunds, cloth: 
kins and S1cep ins, the commen Ar 
Zech. I2. 4: V Wc 


IF, Q. 
rom the Bog 
ſtate, /i it of Nonz 
others 10 


its [? ACK, WW ithout « & rene. y 
Yo and NEC! 


$1 ee O_- 
Povort V. [1 $\ {if!/fo | / 3 


CINCIX 


Chap. 


more to their God, as the Army and Camp of Mid, m, Tuds, 7 


. A! Chap.XII. 


| or, fore- 
in {een. 


rY 
ROM Yy 


* 1 Put 23 


pained without, and affliaed beyond what can be ſenſed- by any, but 
1n the like States, and evilly intreated by all ; many Miſeries atten- 
ding them by their Purtuers, hardſhip 1n Travels, and all forts of 
Evils, which multiplied their Griefs : Through all this Faith carried 
them comfortably, and kept God with them. 

35 Ot whom Zz the world was not worthy they 
wandred in a deſerts, and z2 mountains, and zx dens 
and caves of the earth. 

2 The Spirit intermixeth an Account of what theſe Perſons were, 
who were 10 treated,leſt the Reader or Hearer of theſe things might 
be miſtaken of them, judging them to be ſome heinous Malefa&ors, 
who were thus hurricd in, and deſtroyed by the World. Would you 
know what manner of Perſons they were; he .it known to you 1n 
the Judgment of God, the beſt Judge of their Perſons and States ; 
they were ſuch as the World did not deſerve they ſhould live among 
them, but were unworthy of their Socicty, and the Bleffings which 
did attend it; and were it not for their ſakes, God would quickly 
put an end to the finrul World, and burn it up. Such were theſe 
as did more for the Preſervation of the World, when thus brutiſhly 
treated by it, than it would or could do for it ſelf, a Yet were 
they wandring over the deſolate parts of this Earth, being forced 
from all Society with Men, to the retirements ot wild Beaſts in De- 
ſerts, and climbing up Mountains and Rocks from their Perſecutors, 
lodging themſelves in the natural or artificial Dens and Caves of the 
Earth, the only Receptacles for theſe Worthies, Faith giving them 
1e bett company, God and his comforts there z; ſee 1 Sam. 22. 23, 
24. 1 Kings 17. 3. and 18.13. 1 Macab. 1. 53. and 2. 28, 29, 30. 

39 And 6 theſe all having obtained - a gool re- 
port through faith, received not the promile 4. 

b The Apoſtle returns 1n this Verfe to the Propofition laid down 
in the ſecond Veric, winch he had been proving by all theſe Exam- 
pics, and with it ſhuts. up the Hiſtory of them; al! theſe Elders 
mentioned from tc, 2. fo this Verſe, c Maprogndz:7e ftriftly 1s 
kaving been marty;:d, or made Maityrs, ſpecially witneffing to the 
Death for Chriſt, have a Tejlimony given to them, by way of Emi- 
nency, by God tnmielt in his Scripture-Record, that through Faith 
tney pleaſed him in their glorious Atchievements and Sufferings, and 
vere God's faithful Witneifſes to the World, glorifying him 1n it, 
though ceproachcd and ruined by the World, yet they were too 
good to live 111t, and were fit to live with him 1n Heaven, as v. 2, 
5, 15,25. d< Yet thelc Worthies, as Abraham, and his believing 
Secd, did not policſs the Land of Canaan, though they had the 
Promife of it in their time, v. 13. others did obtain the Grace and 
g00d things promiſed for their time, v. 33. but none of theſe had 
fulfilled to them in their Day, the maniteſtation of the Meſſiah in 
the Fleſh ; though they ſaw his Day and Coming by Faith, and 
did rejoice i11 it, yet none ſaw him ſo come as Szmeon did, Luke 2, 
25, 29. though as to the Eternal Benefits by Chriſt, they did as 
a'/tually 1ccetve them, as thoſe fince his perfe&ting the Work of 
Redemption have received them, even Eternal Blefledneſs and Glo- 
ry by him, As 15. II. 

ao God c having || provided ſome berter thing 
for us, that they- / without us ſhould not be made 
perfect g. 

e The cauſes of their not receiving the Promiſe, are ſummed up 
in this Verſe; the efficient of it is God's Providence unto Believers 
before and after the Incarnation of the Meſſiah, God having from 
Eternity fore-knjwledge of thoſe who would believe in God the Son 
ncarnate, Rom. 8. 29. predeſtinated them to be called to the Faith 
in him, and provided better for New-Teſtament-Bclievers than for 
the Old ones, that what they had of Chriſt in Types and Vails, theſe 
ſhould have in Truth; what theſe had in Promiſe, they ſhould have 
in Sight and Poflefſſion ; what theſe had in Hope, as tohis firſt co- 
ming, they ſhould have it paſt, and it 1s as an earneſt of his ſecond 
Coming ; what they had by meaſure of his Spirit and Grace, theſe 
ſhould have in fulneſs, Luke 15. 23, 24. Fohn 1. 14, 16. and 7. 39. 
2 Cor. 3. 8. Epheſ. 3. 8, 9, 10, 11. Titus 2. 13. T1 Pet. I. 12. 

f The final cauſe of this Gracious Providence was, that the former 
and later Believers mizht be c:mpleared together, they ſball not reach 
that perfett ſtate of Grace and Glory by a re-umon of their Bodies 
and Souls unto the General Reſurre&ion, when they ſhall not pre- 
vent us, nor we them ; but as foon as the Trumpet alarms the 
Dead to riſe, in the ſame moment, and twinkling 9; an Eye, ſhall 
the Living be changcd, and all be cauznt up together in the Clouds, 
to meet the Lord in the Air, and fo - ſhall be ever with the Lord, 
i Theſſ. 4. 15, to 18. The ground of ihich Perfe&ion of all Be- 
lievers in all Apes being in the laſt time, is from his chuſing them 
all to he but one Body of Chrift, and him their Head ; fo as one 
Member cannot be perfeted but in the perfe&ion of the whole, 
Blatth, 8. 11. Epheſ. 4. 44 In which perfettion of it, God 15 re- 
ſolved to be all in all; not in one, or in ſome, but when Chriſt 
hath ſubdued all his Enemies, and gathered all his Members, then 
ſhall his Body and Kingdom be perfected, and God be all in all, 
CEP Fy. 23% | 


CHAF XL 


1he Examples of the former Chapter provokes us to conſtaucyin the Chri- 
tian Hope, and to Patience in Aﬀiifions ; to thoſe he ad1s the Ex- 
ample of Chriſt, who through Sufferings entred into Glory, 1——4. 
Sufferings ave Fatherly Corrections, and have bleſſed Fruits, $——11. 
He exhorts them to quicken one another to Peace and Holineſs, againſt 
Apoſtacy, Whnwedom, and Prophaneneſs, by the Example of Eſau, 
I 2:——17. The terror of Mount Sinai, and the giving of the 
Law, 12---—21. The dignity of the Aſſembly ir Heaven and Earth 
whe, eunt? Be/i-vers come, 22=—24. None muſt dare to reject our 
Lord now {peaking fiom Iteuven, but muſt hold faſt to the Grace of 


God, &% ——- oo 


out with fo gre 1 cloud of witnelles, * ler 


WW Hereforc 2, ſeeins we allo are compatied þ a- 
/ l 
{ay : ery weirghr, and rac > fin which doth 


| 


(4; 9 
4 \A4 » we \ 


us . 


V ol: Hl. 


«L11T 


HEBREW S. Chas. 
: | | : L 
fo eafily beſer ts, and & let us run 7 with patience the 
race thatis ſet betore us: 
a The Spirit in this Chapter proceeds 1n his Exhortation or Coun» 
ſe], unto Duties worthy of the former Dodrine of Chriſt, and tuit- 
able to the foregoing Examples, enumerated chap. 11. He intro: 


duceth it with an !llative Particle, 7434241, jpving all thoſe Worthies 
finiſhed their courſe through Faith, and received not the Promite 
fince made good to us, Therefore is there ſomething to be inferred. 
b We, I Paul, and you Het;ews, having cnjoyed the better thin«* 
provided by God tor us, we are fo much the more obitye&l ; as 4:to 
having ſuch a multitude of Witneſſes of fo vatt worth and diznity, 
as all the Old-Teſtament-Believers were, diltilling, like a C!/oud, a- 
bundant iniJuences, from their Example, 1 doing and ſuffering for 
God, through Faith, on our Souls, to make us perfeverins in thi 
Faith to the end, das they d1d ; and 19 empaſſtne us 4Haut, Qt We ct! 
not want ether direction or encouragement tt it, whenever we 
look into their Hiltories- for it. c Like the Grecian and Romun 2 

cers, who Iud afide their cumberſome Garments, fo 25 they mio! 
mere eaſily and lizhtly run their Race; in alluſion to which, 1t is ti 
concern of every Chriſtian to /ay afide, _ or put away all its worldly 
cumbrances, which would clog it in its Race, its erupt (elf), rhe 
World, Sc. Matth. 16. 24. Luke 21. 34. 1Tim.s. g, io, 1. 
2 Tim. 2. 4. d The evil weight inward 1s the 01d Ian, ths & 1 rump? 
Niture, which remaineth in every Chriſtian, ſtiled by Paw, t+ 

dy of Death, Rom. 7. 24. but eſpecially each Chriſtian's 071; //e; 

ſonal mmiquity, which ſticks and cleaves nearer to him than his Ga: 

ments, and which made David fo caretui! about it, in Pu, 18. 23. 
that which is ſo compaſſing and clifping him about, that !;- is $5 {ir 
rom running, he cannot move for it, 1 C9. 9. 27, Col. 3, 5. this 
tney are to mortife in them. e That how Gdittant ſocver the Goa! 
1s, which finiſheth the Race of a Chriſtian's Life, yet the way paſſing 
to it, though it be troubleſome and long, and being ſet to us by Gud 
himſclt, muſt be patiently, ſtrenuouſlv, and conffantly run, tt. 
tiey may obtain it, P/al. 119. 32, 33 Luke 13. 24. 1 C14. $. 24, to 
27. Gal. 5. 7. Phil. 3. 13,14. 2 Tim. 4. 7. Thy Cloud of Witnef- 
les have 19 run it before them tor their direQtion and an encoura;- 
ment, - d 


2 Looking f unto Jeſus the || author and nnither | 07, 52" 
of -017 Faith, who g tor the joy that was fer botore © 


him, þ endured the croſs, deſpifing 7 the ſhame, and 


« 


Dr 


* 15fer down #at the right hand of the throne ot Cul. © ©hy. 


j As if all the former Witnefles were not enough, he adds a 5: 


more excel[cut onc than them all, even our Lord clus Chritt, who 
1s not only a Pattern to them in their Race and running of it, but 
4 help, and for which end they were lking to him, the word 
2P%9Y7*7 1s Only licre uſed in all the New-Teftament, and fi2niticth 
4 lishing off from whatever would diftratt us jrom earneſily lorking on 
the propoſed Obje#t alone ; and though a word ot Senſe, yet here no- 
ting an at of the mind. It 1s borrowed from acers, «the finn- 
litude of whom the Apoſtle further improves; they tixedly eye 
their Guides or Leaders, to help them on in their courte ; fo muſt « 
Chriſtian in his Race look off from all things elſe, and ſingly and in- 
tently look on Jelus to help hinrthrough it ; #54239, fee chip. 2. 
to, here it denotes Jeſus io be the great Inftituter of, and chict 
Leader in the Chriftian Race, and PerfeRter of them in running it. 
The diſpolition, grace, ability, and ſucceſs which they have tor 
running, it 1s all from him ; trom the beginning -of the work of 
Faith unto the end ot it, to tlic taiſhing of the courſe, he doth in- 
fuſe, affiſt, ſtrengthen and accompliſh the work of it to the laſt, 
Fobn 6. 29, 30. Phil. 4. 13. 2 Tim. 4.7. 1 Johns. 4, 5. g Who 
for that joyful and glorinus flate which was clearly repreſented, and 
faithfully promiſed to him by his Father to ſucceed his Sufferings, 
that he ſhould immediately attain himſelf, and ſuccetfively commu- 
nicate to all who believe in him, Luke 24. 26. John 17. 1. 5, 24. 
1 Pet. 1.11. This did ſo chear and ſtrengthen him, b that with 
unexpreſſible Patience he chearfully endured his Criſs with all the 
concomitants of it, the Sorrows in his Soul, the torturing pains in 
his Body, of Buffetings, Smitings, Piercings of Thorns, tearing his 
Fleſh with Scourges, boring of his Hands and Feet with Nails, with 
all the Evils that either the malice or rage of Devils or Men could 
inflit on him ; He was neither weary of his Burden, nor ſhrinking 
trom, nor fainting under it. With what invincible Meekneſs, and 
Paſſive Fortitude, did he undergo all was toretold ot him ! J/z. ch. 
53- 7 At the ſame time ſlighting and caſting out of his thoughts all 
the diſgrace poured on him by his Enemies, both 1n his Mind and 
Aion, contemning all the Blaſphemies, Taunts, Reproaches, and 
ſhameful carriages of Sinners to him, ſuffering without any emotion 
all their Indignities, even in the moſt ſhametul Death it telt, Phi!, 
2.6, 7, 8. though he were the moſt innocent, an excelient Perton 
inall the World. kh The iflue of all which, was his Exhatraition by 
God for bis abaſement by Man ; He riſeth from the Dead, atcendet! 
to Heaven, ſets him/z!f down as a triumphing Conquerour over Sin, 
the Prince of the Powers in the Air, Death and Hell, at the 47 
hand of the Throne of Gd, and thence diſcovers himſelf in hs State 
and Glory, as the great Ruler of the World, king of kings, and 
Lord of Lords, hi. 2. 5, 10. fee chap. 8. 1. And the giortous Re- 
warder of thole who ſerve h1im, and ſuffer tor htm. 


3 For / confider him that endureth » ivch conra- 
diction of Sinners againſt himfelt, leit ye be -2 weart- 
ed and faint in your minds. 

1 The conneQion is rational, that they ought to regard this ec: 
ample, for that there were greater Sufferings behind, thin any \ 
they had endured, which would inforce 1t; as ver. 4- 212agrs 2, 
ſignifietl the ule of a Proportiomnable conſideration, think:wg 07. 3 ;ea- 
ſonmg about this Exarsple within a Man's tclf, fuch as may 114. e tie 
Contiderer bear a proportion to the Subjoet contidercd , ors J2- 


4 
L 


ſus ſpoken of before, who moſt patiently fubniitted fo, ind per: 
veringly ire up under ſuch oppoſition and contra lim the Wore: 
and Works of the moſt wicked and viltt Mon 4 int ft nfelt, whe! 
' was the moſt innocent and bett of Mew, atways r. r doin 
good to them, fo as their Sin and Ns Patience way without Paral 
Eo 37-1 | 


12. 


AlL 


T7 


Row Y ” 


Chap. XxI1. 


tel; none was ever ſo Scorned, Tatnted, Reviled, Blaſphemed, ſpit 
on, and ignomimoutly treated like Him ; and never any fo inviact- 
bly endured it, Rom. 15. 3. » The reaſon of this conſideration 15, 
{ett taintneſs, languiſhing, or deficiency of Soul, that is, ot vigour, 
ſtrength and aQivity of heart in Grace ſhould befal them, and ſo they 
ſhou!d lie down and ceaſe to run the Chriitian Race, which UE 
Devil deſigned to oblige them to, as he would Chriſt, by the mul*1- 
tude and ſoreneſs of the contradictions, they ſhould ſuffer from 510- 
ners 1a it, ſo great as would not end - 3 by broaching their Life 
Ciocd, as they did Chrifts, and as theſe muſt expe trom them. 

4 Ye o have not yet refilted unto blood, firiving 4- 
&Init 711. 

0 Ye have ſuffered much for Chriſt already, but there 1s more that 
He requires from you, and is yet behind, chap. 10.32,33,34 The 
condition he fixt with you as his Diſciples, in Luke 14. 25, to lay 
down your Life as well as your Relations and Goods tor Him. You 
may yet be called to teſtite to Him, by ſuffering a violent and 
blocdy Death from his and your Enemies, as other Martyrs had 
done for Him ; contider Him who hath ſuffercd a worſe Death tor 
7701, to ſweeten yours to you, that you do not faint, tail, or turn 
Apoſtates from Him and his Truth ; refiſting with Agonies whatſo- 
ever Men or Devils uſe to entice, or force us to Apoſtatize from 
Chriſt, ſince there will be neither Arts nor Powers wanting to tt ; 
Watch you, Pray, and ſtrive to the utmoſt againſt them, Luke 22. 
$1,232. 1 Pet, 5. 9: : 

5 And ye p have forgotten the 7 exhortation,which 
pezketh to 7 you as to Cliliren, * My ton, deſpiſe 
* 1or thou / the chaſtening of «the Lord, nor z faint 
when thou art rebuked of him. | 

p +217 r G;, whether rendred viterrogatively, have ye forgotten ? 
or poſitively, ve have forgotten, ter way 1t carrietn a check upon 
ter tor: effulncls of what was of the greateſt nmportance for them 
to remember 10 the time of Perſecutious, and 1np!icth a direftion 
C: tom to their Duty, tht they ouzit to remember the Counlc] 
or CG ommnmnd given Sy God to them, how to interpret theſe Perte- 
£ 


i inrroduccth a further help to their running of the Race of God 


be hi.hly fuch to them, and a Dehortatimn from an Evil which 
would greatly prejudice them ; when 1t 15 1a1d, to ſpeak, it 1s a Me- 
tonomy of the Ette& for the Efficient ; the Lord in the Exhor- 
tation tpcaking this to them. »- Theſe Words were written by 
S-:!:mon, from God unto his Children 1n that time ; and God ſpeaks 
no lcfs by him to theſe Hebrews, who were his Children now, as to 
all others who are ſuch, or ſhould be ſuch Children to Him. And 
whereas it is ſpoken ſingularly, My Son, 1t 15 to every Child of God 
in Chriſt Jefus, and fo collettively includeth all of them. / The 
Dehortation is written in Prv. 3. 11, that not one of theſe Chil- 
dren ſhould care /ittle for, or ſet light by, denying all regardleſneſs, 
ſ-nileſneſs of, and incorriziblencſs under ſuch ſmart corredion as a 


Parent gives to a Child, cither by Himſelf, or by any other to 


whoſe carc it is committed ; but this Chaſtening 1s from the Lord, 
te moſt gracious and tender Father, who can do them no Evil, 
and will profit and bencht them by it. As they come from their 
Perfecutors for the ſake or Chriſt, they are Injuries, but as ordered 
by God their Father, they are ſo many Favours to them, preventing 
Sin, preſerving in Duty, and preparing them for Blefledneſs, # Nor 
to nauſeate his Rcbukes, or to faint under them ; neither to let our 
Faith or Hope in our Father fail, nor to fink jn our Love to Him, 
his Way, or Truth, or Religion; nor to be weary, and give over 
our Courſe, becauſe of Perlecutions, vut continuing Faithful to Him 
to the end, ver. 14, 15. Matth. 10, 22. Luke 22. 28, 29, 


6s For whom the Lord loveth he chaſteneth, and 


 {courgerh every Son whom he receiveth. 

u For, ſheweth this to be a ſuaſory Reaſon againſt fainting under 
God's rebukes, and enforcing the foregoing Duty.; ſince whomſoever, 
Son or Daughter, every Cluld that God the Father choicely loveth, 
taketh into his Boſome, tendereth as a Parent doth a Child, Ephe/. 
5. 1. He nurrureth, inſtru&s, corre&s by his Word and Rod in its 
reſpeive meaſure, for their ſpiritual profit and advantage, 1 Cor, 
LM. 32. w Scorgeth, noteth the higheſt degree of Chaſtening, 
cven with the ſharpeth and moſt fmarting puniſhment, wherein God 
proceedeth with all and every Son or Child, not any excepted, 
whom he hath adopted and received 1ato his Boſome with compla- 
cency and delight, chap. 5. 8. compare Prov. 3. 12. Matth, 17, &, 
Rev. 3.19. where, tho' the words do vary, yet the ſenſe is one 
and the fame; God ccrrefting as a Father, the Son in whom he de- 
11 hteth. 

7 If ye x endure chaſtening, God dealeth with 
you 42S with ſons : for y what fon is he whom the fa- 
tncr chattenerth not e 

x His reaſon he illuſtrateth from the convertibility of ſuffering 
Aﬀ\tion and Chaſtening from God the Father, and being his Child, 
it ye have a child-like ſenſe of Chaſtening, ſuch Afﬀidttons and Suf- 
ferings from him, as the Father ordereth to you ; ſo as quietly and 
patiently to bear them, and by Faith expecting a ſaving flue from 
tems God the Father in Love chaſtening you, beareth, carricth, 
and ofereth himfelf to you as a Father to his Son, full ot Grace 
and Love, Levit. 25. 41. 7eb 13.15. Pal. 89.30. Micah 7.9. 
» No Son or Child of Gofl can he initanced 10, who was capable of 
enattcmng, but more or Icfs hath telt it, even God's only and beft 
bcloved one, chap. 5. 8. for our ſakes felt it, Ja. 53. 5. The Inter- 
r274ti6n 13 4 vchement Afecrtion, and fo to be reſolved. 


> But - if ye be without chaſtiſement, whereof all 
are partakers, then are ve baſtards, and not ſons. 

7 But 11 God chaſten ye not, or if he do, and ye have nt Grace, 
& ay not rightly endure it, are not managins your ſelves well under 
f, nv are profited by it, when all, azd every one of his Children 
are palaxers of 1t,* then are ye a falſe and ſpurious Serd, and not 


HEBREW S. 


Chap." | 


God's genuine Off-ſpring, Baffurds in his account ; and indecd fo 
the molt forlorn, wretched perſons of all others, lett under the 
Power and Dominion of Sin, hurrying them on to their utter De. 
ttcuciion, Zorn, 41. Thele viſible Church-Members have a bafiarg. 
ly diipolition, Hearts alienated trom God and his Law, and inclined 
to the W Il and Works of the Fleſh, exprefling it in their converſ: 
t10n, running into the exceſs of Sin, having no chaſtning to reſirain 
them, and are deſerted by God for it, 1ſa.1.4,5,6. H/. 4. 14,17. 

9 furthermore a we have had tathers of our &:ſh 
who corrected us, and we b gave ther reverence, ſhall 
we not much rather be c in ſubjection unto * the {1 
ther of ſpirits d and live? 


a He entorceth the Duty of not deſpiſing nor fainting under the iſ1,-> | 


Lord's chaſtening, from the conſideration of his being our Father 
and better than any Earthly one, and from his Gocdnefs in that Re- 
lation, and therefore we ought to ſubmit to it: We have tad our 
natural Parents, as we are Children, and who were the ſubordinztc 
cauſe of our Being as to our Bodies, chap. 7. 5, 10. and they werc 
Inſtructors and CorreRors of us; made uſe of the Rod as well as thic 
Word for our nurture; they have whipt and chaſtiſed us, putting 
us to Smart and Pain, 2 Sam. 7. 14. Prov. 22.15. b Erire:m wine; 
1mports a turning of Bywels and Spirits within thens towards their 64- 
thers, covered with ſhame and bluſhing for thezr faults, and airaid 
to look them, when offended, in the Face ; reverencinz then. 
chaſtening and ſubmitting to the Penalty, fo as to retorm and cur 
from the taults for which they were corredted. c The Fxpr'tu! cri/n 
ſhews the vehemency of the Arzument more than a fimple Þ-tition, 
It 1s the higheſt reaſon, of all right we muft and ought (cn as 
well our Priviledge as Dury) to deny our ſelves, and he in that iu 

;<&on, the free and willinz ſubordination of our Snirits to God, as 
tic Rod calls for it, receiving th= correction, refurming under 1t 
and r<{1gning our Soul, to him who 1s the Creator of them o: to the: 
n.tural and ſpiritual Being, and the Soveraign, Guardian, Protetto;, 
266 Diſpoſer of t1em \, Men nor Anzels have any power over them, 
but this Father of them only, and his creat Work and Concern 1; 
bout them, Gen. 2. 7. Numb. 27. 16. Eccleſ. 12.7, Zech. 12.1. 
d By his chaſtening of our Spirits, our Immortal Souls, 79hn 2, 6. 
Rom, 8, 5, 5. he is furniſhing them with more Spiritual Life, where- 
by they are enabled to live and move wholly to God, from Grace 
to Glory. He makes them live more the life of God, which God 
in Fleſh lived on Earth, Gal.'2. 20. Epheſ. 4. 18; Phil. 1.21. 1 Pet. 
4-5. 1 John. g. This chaſtening promotes this Honourable Lite 
as an Inſtrument and Means in God's hand, and advanceth it daily, 
till1t is pertetted in Eternal Life, A&s 14. 22. Rom. 5.3, 1, 5. and 
8.18. 2 Cor. 4.17, 18. Fames 1. 12. Fude v, 22. 

10 For they e verily for a few days chaſtenel ::. 
after their own pleaſure ; but he / for our profit, rhir 
we might be partakers of his holineſs. 

e As God hath his Prerogative in Paternity, 1ſo he hath the tran 
ſcendency in the end of chaftening his Children ; tor our natural 
Parents, Fathers of our Bodies, nurtured us by the Word aud Rot 
for a little time, the days of Childhood and Youth, as they would 
and thought good, as they apprehended their Power over them, .\r- 
bitrarily, Paſſionately, without reachins what 15 beft for they by 
it ; their own thoughts, whether 800d or bad, were the Rule of 
their chaſtening, and ſuch as their thoughts are, ſuch is their ent, 
how 1mperfe& and deteftive muſt that be ? IT, but God, the Fathe: 
of our Spirits, corre&s us, #7: mT onugzier, which ſtriftly note: 
comportation, 1intimating, That in his chaſtening his Children, 
brings 1n his help, puts as it were his Shoulder to it, brings in / 
ſtock of Grace, and ſo bears together with them unto their adyan- 
tage and profit 1n Spiritual Life, and this during our whole lives, 
That whichhe bears home to them, and puts in them by his cl: 
ſtening, 1s his holineſs ; of which being made partakers, they thrive 
mightily as to their Spiritual Life, and increaſe in the Divine Nature, 
with all the increaſes of God, Epheſ. 3. 13, 19. Col. 2.19. 


11 Now g no chaſtening for the preſent ſeemech to 
be joyous, but grievous : nevertheleſs, afterwards / it 
yieldeth the peaceable fruit of righteouſneſs unto rhum 


which are exerciſed thereby. 

2 A further Argument to perſuade Chriſtians not to deſpiſe nor 
faint under the Lord's Chaſtenings, 1s the good iſſue of them, ſub- 
joined to fortifie them againſt the ſuggeſtions of Fleſh a:1d Blood, 
as if they could not be from Love, nor for good, becauſe they are 
ſmarting and grievous ; therefore the Spirit atlerts the Truth as to 
both : All theſe Chaſtenings and Rebukes that the Father of Spirits 
inflids on his Children, not one excepted, are for all the time tnev 
are ſo inflited, ſenſed by his Children to be as they are ; they 1c! 
them to have no Foy in them, but a great deal of Grief, Pain, anc 
Smart, are not pleaſing of themſelves ; and God would not have them 
to be ſo, but His to feel the ſmart of his Rod, when he corretts thei 
with it. h Yet have not his Children any reaſon to deſpond or t-!7! 
under them ; for they are not always to continue, and there acc! 
eth after them a Benefit to them, that will make amends tor t1c: 
all the aiter-ward following to Eternity ; this chaſtening rendret: 
and brinzeth forth to all the correfed Chil{ren, who labour fo 11m- 
prove the Smart, under God's DireQion and Bleiling, a righteous 
compliance with the whole Will of Sod, and a purging out Of all 
Sin, Ja. 27. 9. filling the Soul full of Joy and Peace, and ſecuring 
to the Chaſtened a confluence of all that Good that iv1ll aPhune 
dantly reward them tor their Sufferines, ſetting them auove tem, 
and making them blefſed, Iſa. 32.17. Rom. 5.1, to 5. Zames 1: 
2, 3>i0- 

12 Wherefore lift up 7: the hands which hang 
down. and rhe fechle knees. 

i This introduceth the uſe of the Doftrine of God's ci if 
Providences, ſtated before ; Therefore concludes the Ration ity, _ 
Neceflity of the Duty ſubjoyned, as confequent iron; IC Trut!; 
aſſerted before. *aro55m:z notes the making, or ſ:11t7 oxight ti 10 


. 5 0 _ # 4 NN 1 _ 1 - q, * 
which was out of its proper place and poſture, as diſoracren © 


on:wn rL 
s as . 


KF. | xz 

A i] Chap.X ] 8 
bers, into their right ſrame and compoſure, that there be not any 
Let in our Chriſtian Race, nor fainting by our Courſe in 1t, By 
h.nging down Hands, and Palſie Knees, are Metaphorically repreſent- 
ed the Hearts, Spirits, and Souls ot theſe Children, fuch as droop, 
deſpond, and are ready to faint and die away under chaſtening, 
Iſa. 35. 3, 4, 5, 6. The Sum of the Counſel, is rightly to compoſe 
our Thoughts, AﬀeRions, and Members, under Trials from notori- 
ous Enemies, and unbelieving Brethren, ſo as to perfe& our Chri- 
{tian Courſe in the tear and ſtrength of God, continuing ſtedtaſt in 
Prayer, I Tim. 2. 8. walking conſtantly 4n God's Ways, and obey- 
ing all his Commandments, Pſ.l. 1 19. 48, 100. patiently bearing all 


" Num,1 God's Correftions, and bringing forth the peaceful Fruit of them. 
22, Fins 1s the Truth of the Metaphor. 


13 And & make || {traighr paths for your feet, leſt 
thar which is lame be turned our of tae way, bur let 
It rather be healed. 

k Make ſtraizht, ſmooth Ways, ſuch as have Stones of ſtumbling, 
and Rocks of offence removed, to as themſelves may be ſet right in 
Comfort, and Duty, and Walking, leſt being lame or halting in 
their Minds. between 7udai/m and Chriſtianity, becaute of the violent 
Perſecution of them by their Inadel Brethren, they ſhould be turn- 
ed aſide out of God's way, erring, and deviating from the Truth 
ot the Goſpel, but that they be reſtored to it, to as ro lufferings 
upon that account, under God's Hand, might make them ſupprel: 
tie Truth, or expoſe them, to Apoſtacy, or to walk as Stumbiing- 
blocks, to others, wounding their own Souls, A&s 15. 1. Gal. 2. 
11, to 25.and 5s. 12. 

*Rom. 12. 14 * Follow / peace with all men, and holineſs zz, 
18. without which no man 7 ſhall ſee the Lord : 

2Tim.2.22 [ Here begins the ſecond Head of Counſel in this Chapter. That 
ſeeing the Goſpel-Cirurch-Officer, the great Reconciler of Sinners to, 
and Santifier of them for God, was fully revealed to them ; 1t did 
now concern them to promote Peace with Men, and perfett Holineſs 
towards God : This 1s purſued to the end of the Chapter. aiwers 
imports ſuch a fierce, unwearted, unſatisfied Purſuit, as Perjecutors 
make-after the innocent Servants of Chriſt, .till they have their Purpo- 
fes on them ; arid ſo ſets out the real, earneſt, violent, unwearied, 
con'tant Purſuit and Labour after Peace, 1. e. Concord, Unanimity, 
and comfortable Confociation in all things, good and lawful to all 
ſorts of Perfons, in Thouzht, Word, and Deed, as far as it 1s 
poMſinle for us, Pſal. 34. 14. 1 Cor. 10. 32. and 13. 4, 5, 7. and 
1 Pet. 3.10, 11. 7m 'AMz;puy 1s all that Habit and Frame of Heart, 
which becameth Souls to have towards God, enjoying all Purity trom 
ſpiritual Uncleanneſs, and a conformity to the Holineſs peculiar to 
God, Fpheſ. 4. 24. The Reſult and Quinteſcence of all the Graces 
of the Spirit is Holineſs, 1 Pet. I. 15, 16. 1 John 3. 2, 3. labouring 


| Or, even. 


HEBREWS 


to the Perte&ion of this, within our kind, Pſal. 110. 3. 2 Cor. 7.1. 
n A Soul deſtitute of Holineſs, is in no capacity, either of Faith, 
or Sight to ſee the Lord; they can have no Union to, Communion 
with, or Fruition of God in Chriſt, neither in Grace or Glory, im- 
plying and affuring them with Holineſs they may ſee and enjoy him, 
Matth. 5. 8. 1Cor.6 9, 10. and 12, 13. Gal. 5. 21. I Fohn 3. 2,3. 
{ Or, fall 15 Looking o diligently, leſt any p man || fail of 
from. the grace of God, lett any q root of bitterneſs ſpring- 
ins up, troubl: yo, and thereby 7 many be defiled : 

» To further their Purſuit of Peace and Holineſs, he Metaphor1- 
cally propoſeth a Caution againſt what might ſtop them in it, which 
he properly ſpecifieth and exemplifieth in Eſau, from ver. 15, to 
18, 'Emzor&Tes notes a very ftrief and ſevere inſpefing themſelves : 


its Primitive. -z&, fignificth ſuch a looking to a thing, as thoſe, | 


who in ſhooting, aim at the Mark; and the Prepoſition adds inten- 
tion to the Aion, fiznifying, a myſt earneſt Care in Chriſtians over 
themſclves, in them over others, and in Miniſters over them all. 
Pp Leſt any Perſon among them ſhould fail of-Grace offered 1n the 
Goſpel to it, and never have it, Tit. 2. 11, 12. or apoſtatize from 
the Profeſſion of it, by Seduion and Perſecution, Chap. 4. 1. and 
10. 38, 2 Cor. 6.1. compare Gal, 1.6. and 3. 3- 9g A Metaphor | 
borrowed from Plants, to which Roots are proper, and which was | 
uſed by Moſes before, Deut. 29. 18. A Root bearing a poiſonful Herb ; 
intending oy it ſuch Perſons, whoſe Nature, Words, and Works, 
are ſo bitter unto God, as Gall and Wormwood are to Men, ſuch 
as apoſtatized trom God to Idols. The Apoſtle intending hereby 
the hindring the ſpringing up, and growing of Errors, Kerefies, or 
Immoralitics, as Protaneneſs, Filthineſs, gc. which are apt to in- 
fe& Churches, and as they ſpread, to moleſt, trouble, and diſturb 
them, and to keep them from purſuing Holineſs, Chap. 3. 8. Hoſea 
12. 14. Galat. 1. 7. James 3. 14. r Leſt by but one ſuch poiſon- 
ous Root, a-whole Church of Chriſtians may be infe&ed and poiſon- 
cd, their Sin being as apt to ſpread and diffuſe 1t ſelf, as Leaven, 
1 Cor, 5. 6. to taint the whole Lump, Gal. 5. 9g. and how early, 
even in the Apoſtles time, for want of obeying tis caution, were 
the Primitive Churches corrupted, both in Dodrine and Morals, by 
loole, filthy Hereticks among them. 


16 * Leſt s there be any fornicator, or 7 profang 
* perſon as Efiu y, who for one morſel of mear fold 
his birrh-righr. 

s This properly interprets the Roof of Bitterneſs, before, by two 
ſpecial Fruits of it, Uncleanne(s, Tpr1&> is not to be taken ſo ſtrift- 
ly, as only to note Fynicati2n, Uncleanneſs committed by unmarried 
Perſons,but all ſorts ot Pollution and Filthineſs, as it 15 uſed in the ge- 
neral Decree, A&s 15.29.fuch Defilements as had crept in among them 
already, to which many were propenſe and inclined, whence warn- 
ed of, and charzed againſt it by Zames, Peter, and Fude, in their 
Epiſtles. # B{*»>. 9» imports one who had a bitt*r frame of Spirit 
againſt the firſt Table, one of an impure Mind to Godward, oppoſite 
to Godlinef., who neglects and ſpurns at Holy things, rolling 1t ſelf 
in its own Pleaſures, Riches, Honours, with a deſpiſing of God, his 
Grace, and Glory, 1 Tim. 1. 9. and 4. 7. and 20. 2 Tim. 2. 16. 
u Eſau the beſt Example to theſe Hebrews, he being Facob's Bro 
ther, who was moſt notori-ufly profane, who irreligiouflv ander- 


rr nr run en rn I Ie nr rn er 


vained and deſp//ed the Bleiſtng of the Birth-right, to which was 


Vol. IE 


Chap. XII 


entuiied by God the doubie Portion, the Fri-{thood and Pominior 
over tne Fanuly, the Bletfings of the Covenant, and the being 4 
Type of Chriſt ; hebaſely and impioutly gave it away to his younger 
Brother, !liyhting it, and treely and iully making it over to him, al 
tor one eating, the baſe gratifying of his ſenſual Appetite but once, 
Gen.25.32,34- Like to whom were thoſe, Phil. 3.18. 2 Pet.2.10,to 2:4, 
Jude ver 4, to 20. In theſe is his filthy, profane Spirit iinproved. 

17 For @ ye know how that afterwards whe ls 
would have inherited the bleffing, . he was rejected 
tor he x found no || place of repertance, though h 
ſoughr it carefully with rears. 

w As Eſau's Sin was, ſuch was his Penalty ; for they knew, an! 
were well acquainted with this in 311;zs's Hittory of Im, That attcr 
he had deſpiſed his Birth-right, and told it, being at Man's Eftate, 
Gen. 27. and was deſirous to inherit that Bletſing, he was rejinded by 
his Father, as well as by God, and could not obtain it, beige u:- 
altcrably fetled on Jacob by both. x He found n9 place of Repent anc * 
as fo the giving it, with God who gave 1t, and would not alter 1t, 
Rom. 11. 29. nor with his Fither, who did not repent of givins it 
to Zacob, but confirmed it, Gen. 27. 33, 49. and 23.1, 2,4. and 
this, although he ſought the Bleſſing trom his Father with Cries and 
Tears, Gen.27.34,38, How therefore ſhould t'.efe Hebrews, know- 
ng all this, root out ſuch a Root ſpringin; up in theinlelves, or 0*Þ1- 1+, 
that they might not be guilty of ſuch Sin, leſt having defpiic? Gui 5 
Blefſing for their own Eafe, Honours, or Profits 1a this World, 
when they may defire to ſ-ek with Tears the Bleffing ot the <tern:! 
Inheritance trom God, and he ſhould irrevertibly rejett them. Sce 
Matth. 7. 22, 23. 

18 For y ye are not come £5 unto * the mount thar *Excd.ts, 
might be rouched, and @ that burned with tire, nor 15-15" >: 
unto þ blackneſs, and darkneſs and tempeſt ; 

Fir, ſheweth trom this Verſe to the 25th, the Apoſtle inforcing 

on theſe Hebews, and with them on all Chriſtians the Pu/ wt of Hoe 
lineſs and Peace, by ſubjoyning the great helps they have ſor it, be- 
yond what the Old Teſtament-Church had, they heing freed trom 
the Legal Diſpenſation, which was leſs helpfyl to it, and admitted 
to that of the Goſpel, moſt promoting it, The firſt he lazeth down 
trom ver. 18, to 22. and the other from wer. 22, to 15, They are 
treed from the Covenant Diſpenſation 2t Mount Sing?, x You have 
not been called, as to your Body, to journey it to Sinzz, or as to 
your Faith to cloſe with that Covenant-Adminiſtration, to depend 
on, or have any Expectation trom it, as delivered by 7ſrs at 
Mount Smai 1n_Arabia, a Mountain viſible, taftible, fenfible on 
Earth; ſignifying the Covenant-Diſpenſition from this Mount to 
be low and earthy, occafioning earthy Thovg|:ts of . God, and car- 
riage to him, ſticking in an earthy Altar-Sacritce, and carnal, and 
ſenſual Religion, to the Law written in Stones, without minding 
the Spirituality of it, or havin? it in Hearts waikins wildly in this 
Wilderneſs-ſtate, yet by the Charge of God, not touch«ble by 7;rae! 
at that time, though they came near to him in the third Month at- 
ter their coming out of Egypt, Exod. 19. I, 112,13, 24. a To the 
Fire, in the which the Lord deſcended on the Mount, Exod. 19.12, 
which burnt unto the midſt of Heaven, Dent. 4.11. and 5. 23, 24. 
and would conſume them that broke that Laiv, which he [pake to 
them out of it, Deut. 33. 2. 65 To the black, thick $-7þ that af 
cended as the Smoak of a Furnice, Exod. 19. 18. to Darbneſs, occa- 
tioned by the thick Clouds enveloping the Mount, Peut. 4. 11. and - 
5. 23. to Tempeſt, the ſtorm of Thunderins, and Li-htnings, and 
Earthquake, the terrible Attendants of this Solemnity, Fx, 15. 
15,18. and 20. 18. - All theſe ſhadowing forth the fiery and terri- 
ble Storms of Wrath and Indignation which ſhould purſuc the 
breakers of this Covenant, to the loweſt Hell ; giving them in this 
Delivery of the Law, a vifible Type of what ſhould he the iflue of 
their breaking it, Exod. 19.22, 24. Theſe Terrors of the Almi-hty 
did fo fright them, that they run from God, and ſet not themſely:s 
to the ſerious purſuit of Holincfs, 1a. 33. 14, 


19 And c the ſound of a truinpet, and the voice of 
words, which vorce they that heard, * intreated that *Exod. 2 » 
the word ſhould not be ſpoken to them any more : 19: 

c Which was moſt ſhrill and dreadful, it ſounded long, and wax- 
cd louder and louder, giving a fearful Alarum unto J/reel to draw 
near to the Lord to hear his Law to them, and covenant with them, 
and to ſee a Type of their Doom, if they tranſgretied it, in an oh- 
ſcure Repentance of the General Judsment, Exod. 19.15, 19. and 
20, 18, compare 1 Theſſ 4.165. 2 Thej]. 1. 7, 8, 9. d After which 
Alarm, the Angel of the Covenant uttered his Voice out of the fire 
moſt majeſtically, diſtin&ly, and loudly, ſpake fo 7/rae! in their 
own Language, the Ten Words, or Commandments, that they 
might hear and underſtand them, ſo as they ſenſed them to ve 
dreadful for their ſound and matter, Exod. 20. 1, to 29. Dent. 4. 
10, 12, 13. and 5. 1, to 28. e The People being overwhelmed 
with the Majeſty and Dreadfulneſs of that Voice, deprecated any 
more ſuch for matter or manifeſtation to them, Exod. 20. 19. Deur. 
5.23, 24, 25, 26. and Chap. 18.15, And therefore defired 3,e- 
to ſpeak to them God's Law, and that God mizht ſpeak no more. 


. 
Fs ; 
ts, MW ft 
£0 hr; = 


C 


; 
k1 *x* 
fy Tr, 


20 For f they could not endure that which was 
commanded. And it ſo much as a beaſt touch: the 
mountain, it ſhall be ſtoned, or thra!t through with 
a datt. 

f The Reaſon of the foregoing Deprecation, and which adds to 
the Terriblencſs of this Covenant-Diſpenſation ; for the Voice fur- 
paſſed their Strength and Capacity, that they muſt die, 1f they 
heard of any more ; ſo dreadful! was the found and matter of it - 
For the Commandment and Threatning was, That if any Man or 
Beaſt did but as much as touelit the Mountain, they ſhould dic for it, 
Exod. 15. 12, 13, 21, 23, 24. Therefore was Myes ſtriatly charged 
to look toit, and to provide agaiiit it, ſhewing the Dreadtuineſs 
of that Covenant-Diſpenſation, that if Men dz4 not keep their 
Beaſts from coming near, they ſhould be fioned, or darted to death ; 
how much more them{c!res, ft they ſhould tranſgreſs the Law, 


__— 
SW 


_ 


þ ” , whi:h 
2 «> aA o 


-— 


Chap. +11. 


[| Or, enrol- 
ted. 


which, though it was defigned to lead them unto Chriſt, yet was not 
gcarraliv ſo dilcerned or uſed by them. So that if the Publication 
ot it be fo terrible, now much more the Puniſtnnent for breaking it; 
Exod. 20.20. : 

21 Andeg fo terrible was the tight, z7hat Moſes ſaid, 
ingly tear and quake. 

2 It muſt needs he a dreadful, fearful, horrid, and aſtomſhing 
Apparition, and Exhibition of the great Law-giver here, that ſuch 
4 Perion as 3174s, te fanttifed by him, fo favoured with bamihiart- 
ty with him, fo conftituted Medi.:tor between the Peoplc and God 
ji this Work tor their Good and Comfort, fo called and ordered 
by God to manage It, yet ſhould cry to God to ſuccour him, while 
he &d guaike and trembie at it; 
red by God's voice to him again, Exod. 19. 19. Chriſtians now 
ive 19 Call, nor Accels to fo terrible a Diſpenſation of the Cove- 
nant, but have Immunity, Exemption, and Freedom {from it, which 
was not fo helpful to Holineſs, as the Gofpel-Dilpenſation, to which 
row they have actual Admiſſion, having freed them trom all the Ter- 
ror and Curies of the Moſaical one. ; 

22 Bur Þþ ye are come unto 7 mount Sion, and 
& unto the city of the living God, the heavenly Jeru- 
{f;1om., and to / an innumerable company of angels. 

h Tie Spirit now adds the Priviledge of Chriſtians in the better 
ſtate, to which they have acceſs by the Goſpel-Difpentation from 
the 22d, to tle 25thVer/e; ye have left thoſe Einderances and 
Diſadvantazes inftanced in before, but are come to theſe Helps tor 
Your furtherance in Holineſs ; ye have an Acceſs to all thoſe moſt 
excellent, tho' inviſible things, by Faith, and by it attain them, 
and are incorporated into them, as they follow. - j This 1s not I1- 
tcrally to be underſtood for the Mount, on which the City of David 
was built, for that was as viſible, and touchable as Mount Sima!, 
to which it is oppoſed ; but that Mount which is higher than the 
Þi>ncit, as high as Heaven it ſelf, wer. 25. chap. 9. 24. Fon 3. 13. 

Viere is the molt orderly Government of God for Holineſs, Mich. 
. 7. whence all good Gifts, and Goſpel-Blefſings are conveyed to 
tit: Church, of which theſe Believers were Members, J/a. 8. 18. and 
28.15. and $9.20. Rerel. 14. 1. hþ Of which the 1iving God 15 
the Puilder and Maker and wherein he divelleth, where nothing 
but Liic is, and whence Chriſt's voice giveth Liſe to dead Souls, 
inabling thein to hive a Life of Holineſs to God, as Pſal. 46. 4, 5: 
and 48. 1,8. and 87. 3. Iſa. So. 14, John 5.25. to diſtinguiſh this 
from any earthly City or Corporation, it 1s ſaid to be the Heavenly 
Feruialem, 1ts Orizinal Nature and End being all heavenly ; a fruit- 
tul place, whence Believers are made Partakers of the moſt ſpiritual 
Influences for Hojineſs ; where there is nothing carnal, terrible, 
deadly, barren, but all cauſal and produttive of Holineſs iJueth 
thence. T/a. 52. and 65. 17, 18,19. and $5. 10. fohn 17. 24. Gal. 
4.25. Rev. 3. 12. and 21. 2,10. { In which Cityare many excel- 
lent Inhabitants with which Believers are Incorporated, and to 
whom they have relation, as Myriads of Angels, who are miniſtring 
Spirits under the Goſpel, as under the Lai, full of Holineſs, Power, 
Apility and Indowments, fit tor their Work and End ;, who, though 
tor number, are thouſands and millions of them, Plal. 68. 17. and 
153. 20, and 104. 4, Ads 7.53. Gal. 3.19. Rev. 5.11. yet are all 
fulniting their Lord's Pleaſure in every place, as ordered by him. 
Their Miniſtration of the Law was terrible in flaming Fire, but 
of the Goſpel, moſt ſweet and gracious, Luke 2. 13,14. At Sinat 
they miniſtred externally, and ſenſibly, affeting Senſes ; but from 
Sn they miniſter ſpiritually, to Hearts, Matth. 4. 11. Luke 22443. 
P al. 1.11. reſiſting evil Spirits miniſtring wickedly. Their Mi- 
mitry little effe&ual under the Law, but under the Goſpel, ſaving, 
AHs 7.53. Heb. 1.14. Rev. 19.10. Their former Mimiſtration 
temporary and ceafinz, but this everlaſting, til] they bring all their 
Truft into Abraham's Boſom, Luke 165. 22, They are promoting 
Holin=ſs by God's ſending things to us by them, and by their obſer- 
ving the goings and doings of Chriſtians, whether holy, or not, 
1 Cor. 11, 10, and giving an Account of the Succeſs of their Mini- 
{tiry towards them, as to this end, Matth. 18. 1c. And the neg- 
let of this means to help our purſuing Holineſs, will God require, 
Heb. 2.2. 

23 To m the general aſſembly and church 7 of rhe 
fir{t-born which o are || written in heaven, and to 
p God the judge of all, and to 9 the ſpirits of juſt 
men made perfect, 

m Other Inhabitants of this heavenly City and Polity with whom 
Believers are incorporated, as ſuch.into whoſe Communion they have 
admittance here below, viz. to the Catholick Aſſembly of Chriſt, his 
whole Budy, the Fulneſs oft him who filleth all 1n all; an Aſſembly 
eathered out of all Nations, Rev. 5. 9. and 7. 9g. throughout the 
Worid, extended to all Times and Ages, eſpecially to that part of 
1: which 1s on-Earth, ſojourning here, fitting for Heaven; the 
other part 1s triumphing in 1t. They are not called, or incorpo- 
rated only 1nto a particular Church, a ſtraitned Society, as the Old- 
Teftament-Church was, the General Aſſembly of Saints are more 
helpful to Holineſs, than a lefler, Pſal. 22. 27, 28. Gal. 4. 25, 26, 
27. # This General Aﬀembly is not a Rout, but a Church, ſuch as 


are called out of the World with a holy Calling, ſubje&ing them- 


ſeives to Chriſt 2s their Head, and are, as quickned, ſo ordered and 
ruled by him : It 1s not a weak, or an Infant-Church, but ſtrong 
and perfect, come unto maturity, in reſpe&t of the great Diſcove- 
ries'of the Myſteries of God, made by Chriſt to them, Chap. s. 12, 
13. and 6, 3. Gal. 4.1, 3, 4+ This choſen, called, and well-order- 
derced Society, were only of ſuch Perſons, who were the Firſt-Born 
of God, and Partners of Chriſt's Sonſhip and Primogeniture, beins 
regenerated by him, and dignified with his Birth-right-priviledges, 
Rom. 8. 17, 29. They are the Might and Excellency of Chriſt, 
whereas the Church at Sinat, for the Body of them, were but ty- 
pically, hterally, and externally fo, Exed. 4.22, Col. 1. 15, 18. and 
d1d not univerſally enjoy, as thoſe do, the ſtrength and fulnefs of 
Grace from God, Fohn 1.16. Gal. 3. 26, 29, are Jovnt-heirs with 
Chriſt, Rom. 8.17. and made by him Kings and Prieſts to God and 
his Father, 1 Pet. 2. 5. Rev. 1.6, 5 Thev were not, as the Church 


HEBREW S. 


; at Sinai, of an earthly Enrolement, regiſtred here to know their F1- 


and was comforted and fſtrength- 


miſics and Deſcent, whether right Jews and Prieſts or no, whoſs 
Genealogy was preſerved to that end, Ezra 2. 43, &c. but had their 
Regijier in Heaven, were written in the Lambs Book of Life, to he 
of heavenly defcent, Born of God, partakers of the Divine Natyrc 
and who had Right and Title by Faith in Chriſt to the Heavenly [n- 
heritance, and were free Denizens of it, Lyhe 19, 20. and have vt 
Heavenly Priviledges derived to them, Rev. 20. 12, 16. and 21. 2» 
How obiiging, influencing, and promoting are tizefe Priviledpes of 
every Chriſtians purſuit of Holineſs. p They were as Chriſtians pri. 
viledged with an acceſs, not as Trae! had at Sinai with Fear and 


Chap. XR 


Terror, and Trembling, fo as to tly from the great Author, Lord © 


and Judge of the Covenant, leſt they died, as Exod. 20. 18, hyt 
with Liberty and Boldnefs of Faith, in tie ſtrength of Love,and with 
firmneſs of Hope, they come now in $7on, T/a. 33. 22, and 50, 20, 
Heb. 10. 19. unto God in his Being and Soveratzaty, who rulcth all, 
and who givetit to all according to their Works, and in a moſt em! 
nent manner ruleth them, who as he 1s their 7udge, hath not as ar 
Stnai any Bars to keep them trom him, Exod. 19. 12. Ephel, 2, 
18, nor is Terrifying and Conſuming, as then, Dezr. 5. 24, 25, but 
Juſtifying them ; fuil of Grace and Love to a!! approaching him in 
Chriſt ; his Throne is a Throne of Grace to them, he comforting 
and encouraging them to make home to him, 7obn 5.22. 4s 19.242, 
Rem.3.6, So as they have boldneſs in the day of Judement,and {! 1nd 


- 


unſhiken before their Judge, and are ſtrenethned by him, Row. ?, r 


33,34- 1 John 4. 17. He rewards them glorioufly, 2 T;m.4.8. Pcr- 
tecting Holineſs 1n them beneath, and Crowning them with Glory 


above ; what a help is this to purſue Holincſs? q The perf: {tate 
to which the Goſpel-Covenant leadeth, is promoting F(-lincfe, tor 
they have an acceſs to the ſzme Lot, and are come into the ſame way 
of being perfeeted in Hilineſs with the Spirits of the Rightens, ſepa. 
rated trom their Bodies. enjoy in Heaven, and have a rizht unto, and 
ſhall have the certain enjoyment of the ſame Priviledge, which car- 
rieth through all difficulties in the purfuit of it, expetting them- 
ſelves by Death to be put 1n poſlefſion with them of the ſame ſtate, 
Rom.8. 22,23. 2 Cor. 5.1,2,8. compare Phil.3.12,13,14. 

24 And tor * Jeſus the Mediaror of the new || co- 
venant, and / tot the blood of ſprinkling, that ſpeak- 
eth better things than 7hat of Abel. 

# The Mediator of the .$79n-Covenant is better than the Mediitor 
at Sinai, and more able to promote the Holineſs required by it. 
Believers have not now acceis unto, or dependance on a es, a 
meer Man, and a Servant, declaring God's Will only, a Simmer |11m- 
ſelf, trembling in his own Office, and weary of his Clients, and 
whoſe Miniſtry is vaniſhing, as his Perſon dying; but unto God the 
Son himſelf incarnate, a Son-Mediator, making Sons, and brinzing 
them nearer to God, ſatisfying the Law for them, and writing it on 
their Hearts ; above all Sin himſelf, though a Sacrifice for it, who is 
able to ſave to the uttermoſt, for that he ever liveth ta intercede 
for them, Chap. x. 1, 2, 3. and 3.6. and 7. 26. Rev. 1.13. He 
is the Mediator, not of a literal, dark, terrible, charging and con- 
demning, temporary and vaniſhing Covenant, bvt of the moſt ſpi- 
ritual, lightfome, gracious, juſtifying, ſan&iſying, and everlaſting 
Teſtamental-Diſpenſation of God, more effettually influencing Souls 
to Holineſs than the Old, Chap. 8.10,11, 2 Cor.3.5. and 5. 19. / The 
Sacrifice ratifying the S!on-Covenant is unexprefſibly better than all 
the Typical Sacrifices confirming that at Sinaj, it eminently purcha- 
{1ng and ſecuring Holineſs to thoſe intereſted in it. 
the immaculate Lamb of God, ſprinkled on penitent, believing Sin- 
ners, which hath purchaſed Pardon for them, and as follows, the 
Spirit to ſanifie them throughout, and perfet Holineſs in them, 
Chap. 9.12. 1 Pet. 1.18. 1 John1. 7, 9. and fo are freed from ac- 
ceſs to the ſprinkling of the Blood of Sacrificcd Beaſts, which was 
only typical and weak to purge the Conſcience, calling Sin to re- 
membrance yearly and daily, which was now forbidden and rcje&ted 
as of no worth, and which, Iike Abel's, crieth for Revenge and 
Condemnation, Gen. 4. go. Since their Blogd row offered rrhen 
Chriſt hath ſpilt his, was accounted of God as the Blood of Inno- 
cents ſlain, as. Iſa, 66. 3, Others render the B/ood of Ahel for the 
Blood of ſprinkling of the Sacrifice that Abel, offered unto God, Gen.q.4. 
which was ſprinkled upon him ; and fo prefer Chriſt's Sacrifice, not 
only to the Moſaical Sacrificers, but to all that have been from the 
beginning of the World, which though accepted by God, vet not 
like Chriſt, of which they were the Types. The Sum of all theſe 
compariſons, 1s to ſhew the greater helps, motives and encouraze- 
ments that Chriſtians have to purſue and - perfe& Holineſs, than all 
the Old-Teſtament-Church had before them. 


25 See 7 thit ye refuſe not him that ſpeaketh : Fos 
if z they eſcaped not who refuſed him that ſpake on 
earth, w much more /ha// not we eſcape, if we tum 


away from him that fpeaterth trom heaven. 

t Here the Spirit cloſely applieth his former Arguments for their 
purſuit of Holineſs, eſpecially that of Chriſt's ſpeaking by his Blood 
to them, by Caution, wer. 25, 25, 27. by Counſel, wer. 28, 29. He 
introduceth this Gaution with /ooþ ye, or take ye heed, a term ex- 
preſſing the things ſaid to be great and weighty, intimating that 
fear, ſolicitude, and watchfulneſs, about this great and important 
concernment of their Souls, Luke 12. 15. that they ſee to it there 
be no averſion in their Spirits to, no undervaluing or deſpiſing of, 
no diſlike or Apoſtacy from, but a hearing, believing, and obeying, 
Jeſus ſpeaking by his Blood all the Goſpel-Covenant to us, convin- 
cing them of Sin and Guilt, that needed his Blood, calling them fo 
Repentance and Faith in his Blood and Satisfa&tion, declaring h1s 
Interceffion with God for Pardon, Holineſs and Glory by it, and fo 
importunes them to follow Holineſs which would evidence all this 
to them. # He inforceth his caution by a rational motive of the 
danger of their refuſal, arguing from the leſs to the greater ; that 
is, their Anceſtors eſcaped not the Vengeance of God when they 
refuſed to hear, Lelieve and obey the Legal Covenant which he 
ſpake on Earth from Mount Sina, and writ on Tables of Stones, 
and delivered to Moſes on the Mount, and by him communicated it 
to them, Chap. 2, 2. and 10, 28, 30,31, Deut. 33. I, 4 AC&s 7. 5H» 


$3. 1 Cor, 1c, 1, toll. w Much more and greater Sinners ae - 
IC 


The Blond of 


x Clin ; 
Try! 4 
4. P 


14, 
' 


\ Or,Tef;. 


19 + 
te Vids 


Co 


TY, 
| | cf [.l, 


2} 
TEx06,:1, 


XM. Þ Chap. XI. 


ah 


flag. 2.5. 


* Pſa] 152. 


Mat.24-35 
2Pct.3.10. 
Rev.21.1. 
| Or, 772.7y 
be / haben, 


: *Dcut. 9. Jo 


ſuc who turn afide fornfully from Jeſus, and not receive his Voice 
and che Revelation of God's Goſpel-Covenant by it, who is Gods 
only begotten Son, and brought down from the Father's Bofam 1n 
Heaven, Chap. 1.2. Fohn 1. 14, 15,17, 18. and 3. 13. ratized if 
with his own Blood on Earth; and as the Sin 1s beyond compare 
greater, fo will the puniſhment be, and the certainty of its inflictt- 
on both for Time and Eternity, Aatth. 12.24. 2 Theſl. 1. 7, 8, 9- 
Heb. 10. 25, to 32, There remainins no more Sacriice for ſuch 
Sin and Sinners. 

26 Wholz x voice then ſhook the earth, but now 
y he hath promiſed, ſtying, * Yer once more I ſhake 
not the earth only, bur alto heaven. 

x The Sin and Puniſhment of Goſpel -defpifers and rejeRers, 15 
azoravatcd by the Perfon concerned in both. It is that Jeſus, the 
preat Anzel of the Covenant, ſpeaking now by his Blood, whyz 
{ "ice at the delivery of La:y on Mount Sinai, and fſetling Ire! 1n a 
Church-State under that Covenant-Diſpenſation, Exod.20.1,1g. Deaf. 
4. 12. and 5. 2, 4, 22. did ſhake the Mount, Exod.19.18. Pſal.68.7, 
2. and 114. 4, 7. and not only the literal Sinai, but that /my eart yy 
condition, and ſtate of 1/rae! coming out of Egypt, and bearing its 
reproach as a common People of the Earth, tozether with other N4- 
tions, 7oſh. 5.39. This he removed away, and brought them then 
11to a Church-ſtate wich himſelf by Covenant, which Church-ſLate 05- 
tinned the name or title of Heaven, Matrth.2 1.43. and is by the Pro- 
pact ftiled the Old Heaven, Tia. 65.17, which was to be ſhaken and 
removed allo, y But now the ſame Jeſus fo ſhaking them, had prc- 
miled, and ha4 at this time 1 part fulflled what he ſpaks, Hg. 2. 
s, 7. even aitcr the Prophet's little while was expired, and Chriſt the 
deſire of all Nations-was come ; that vet once more, he would ſhale 
the Ifraclitiſh Church-Nate, pitcned till the time of Retormation , 
not the earthy one only, as he did at Mount S'naz, which yet Jeſus 
li-erally did at his D-ath and Retarrettion, Watth. 27. 51, 54. and 
28. 2. and the Heavens alſo by his Star, {atth. 2.2. Li-ht to the 
Shepiterds, Libe 2. 9, His Baptiſm, atth, 3. 17. Transf:ura- 
tion, Mutth, 17. 5. His Prayer, 7chn 82. 28, 29, 30. His Paiſion, 
AMatth. 27. 51. Lhe 23. 44,45. Effufion of the Holy Ghoſt, 4#s 
2, 2,3, 4, But tis is allo a powerful, moral (hiking, foas to change 
and remove that Heavenly Church: frame pitched 1n the jewith Ta- 
berna-Je, that he mizht pitch a Tabernacle himlelt more Heavenly 
and Spiritual, witereof jelus Thould be the Lord High-Prieft and Ru- 
ler, as well as Miniſter, Chap. 8. 1, 2. 

27 And p this word, Yer once more ſignifteth * the 
removing of thoſe things thit}] are thaken,as of things 
that are made, that = thoſe things which cannot be 
{haken may remain. 

y The Interpretation of the former Matter in this Verſe, is intro- 
duced by re-afluming, And this yet once more, as it he ſaid, I told you 
that God promiſed, yet once more, &c. what he meaneth by 1t Inow 
declare to you ; this ſhaking of God, intends not a ſmall alteration, 
but a total removal and abolition of the 7/-aelitiſh Heaven and Earth 
forementioned, an alteration of their Church, Religion, and Admi- 
niſtration, and a total abrozating of them, becauſe they are Hand- 
work, Chap. 9. 24. Such as were at God's direftion made by Men, 
as Tabernacle, Altar, and that Typical Service, not reaching the 
Spiritual deſign of God,and but Types of far better to ſucceed them; 
and which ſetled, did make the others to be finiſhed, paſt, and ne- 
ver to return azain. 2 Theſe better thinzs are the Adminiſtration 
of C'1:1/t's Kingdom unſhakeable, his Church-ſtate, which is Heavenly, 
ſeti-1 by his own Evanselical Laws and Ordinances, which he hath 
fo fixed by Promiſe, as never to be removed till the whole Church of 
Chriit be compleated with him in Heaven, Haggat 2. 7. Matth, 17. 
5. and 28.18, 19, 20. 

23 Wheretore a we receiving 4 - kingdom which 
cannot be moved, || let us have grace 6b, whereby 
we may ſerve God acceptably, with reverence and 
godiy tear. | 

a In this Verſe the Apoſtle follows his Dorine with Counſel to 
ſeveral Dutics, ſuch as concern the firſt Table, and terminate on 
God in this 22 and 29 Verſes; ſuch as concern the ſecond Ta- 
ble, Chap. 13. 1, &. In this Verſe he begins with the Chriſtians 
Priviledze, and then direds their Duty. Theſe Hebrews having re- 
ceived by Faith the Priviledges, and ſubmitted themſelves unto the 
Laws and Government of the unmoveable Kingdom of Chrift, that Gof- 
pel-Church-State, of which God is the Author, Chriſt the King, his 
Spiritual Under- Oificers, Miniſters, Penitent Believing Sinners the 
Subject, the Goſpel-Laws by which the Government 1s adminiſtred, 
Perfectly Holy, Juſt and Good; the Priviledzes of it all Grace here, 
and Glory above, the deſcent of all from Heaven : All which are to 
endure for ever unſhaken, and azainſt them the Gates ot Hell ſhall 
not prevail, Zach.9.9. 1 Cor 15424,tO 29. Epne/.4.11,tO 16. Coloſc 1.13. 
and 2.3%. 6 Let us get and hold faſt that gracto temper of Soul, 
whereby they are made True, Wiſe, Believing, Loving, Humble 
and Obedient Subjects to the Laws of this Kinzdom, and manifeſt it 
by worſhipping and ſerving of, and walking with God in this World, 
fo 45 9ur Perſons and Duties may be all well-pleating to him in 
Chriſt, Epheſ.1.5. and conſtantly conformable to his Holy Will, chap. 
11.4,5. and out of a ſenſe of their own lowlineſs, witha ſelf-abafing 
heart, and a reverential carriage, Gen.18.27, Luke 18.13. approaching 
God in ail his Service, with a holy jealoutite over it felf, that it do not 
offend him in what it is or doth, but rightly receiving Law from him 
for all his Service, and rightly returning all conformable thereunto 


to him again, '/99n 12. 49, 50. 


20 For * our God zs a conſuming fr -. 

c The motive inforcing this Duty, is no leſs terrible than that 
given to 7a2! under the Law, obliging their obedience to that Co- 
venant-Dilpent lon, Devt. 4.23, 24. The Lord thy God 1s a conſuming 

even 2 Feats God, He that was ſo reſpeGing the Tranfſ- 
uroſfon of the Leal, wil much more be fo as to this Gofpel-Co- 
Grd Alnubty the moſt Gracious, and vet the moſt Juſt Be- 
, \et will be to them if 

10t tlironh Chriſt, acceptably 


3 '7 j Ta 


VEN AN" 
. 1 P F'Y 
in-. tncir own God by 


te m & p A 4 
C9UY; mans, 716 GY 


_ I EP 
Cover tAt-Ore er af.,0N 


En eos ets Swe 
they break ins 


HEBREW S. 
ſerve him with reverence and godiy tear, as Fire conſuming them. 1: 


Golpel-Laiy inthe contempt of it, will be as the Fiery Liw at Sirar, 


adjudging fuch Sinners unto Fire unquenchable, Chap. 1c. 27, to 22- 
C $6. FTOYY Rp ; Q : 
compare 37th. :.12, and 25. 41. 2 Theſſ. 1.7,8, © 
4A | ' 2 
4 H 1 P. NT. 
He exhnrts ther to Brotherly Lowe, to Hofpitality, and rememtr.nce of 


thoje in Prij.n, 1 3» To Chiſlity, in Marriage, againji C:we- 
rouſne(s, and t9 Content ment, 4—=5, And t5 follow the Example 
and Kath of their Guides, to perſevere herein, ard not to obierue d:fte- 
rence of Meats, but be ejtabliſhzed 'n Grace, eo 2 ticipate of Corit ard 
his Bleſſings, of which the Altar and its Sactitices of which $: je 
Prieſts ate was but a Type, 7 —1 4. Our Sacit tees of Thank jt 
nejs and Liberality, 15,16. We mutt obey ou7 Spiritual Rulers, and 
why, 17. Hedefires them to pray for him, f3r his Releaſe, on it) 
eth God to per felt them in all grid Works, 18<— 22, His Suit - 
tron, and Bened:&ti9n, 23 —- 25. | 


- a -Y | \ 21 UF £3 *1") N11, 
[ E F © brotherly love continue 77. 
a The Apoſtle in this chapter purſueth his counſel to the Suy- 


luitable Duties to ſuch a Priviled?e, and efpecially fach = 
unmeditely terminate on their Nei2thbour, and are confaii cd in 
the ſecond Tatle of the Redeemers Lavs ; as the chict , and fun'.: 
mental one, i-otherly Love; let Love, a fruit of the Spirit, fc. 
torth its ſc]t and its ex1itence in you, 11 pre-eminencs, 4nd in 
ration, by diſpoting always the inward Man, Mind, Will, ai ac 
tettions to feek the Good, to ſpeak all the Good tov, and of, aud 
to do all Good to their Chriſtian Brethren, to all true Chiriitians, 
eminently ſt1!ed by the Spirit the Brotherhood, Matth. 12. 50. and 
28.40, fohn 13.34, 35. and 20.17. 1 Cor.ch. 13. Epher 4.32. 
1 Theſſ. 4+ 9. 1 Joon 3. 14, 15. 

2 * Be not torgctiul þ. to entertzin Stran? <5 : 
tor c thereby lome have entertained angels unawares. 

b The next Duty ſuitable to Chriſt's Kingdom, is X{pit.1lity to 
Chriſtian Strangers, Be neither ignorant my unmindful, by «ich 
charge they are bound ſtronaly, and always not to have this out of 
mind, though 1t may -be out of hand ; and the negative confirms 
the potitive Duty, removing hindrances, and enjoying it itrictty, 
that they have a love and deſire to the Duty, bearing affe&ion to 
the Perſon of a Chriſtian Brother thouzh a Stranzer, unknown and 
brought by Providence to them, - Matth. 22. 209. 
and to the Work of being an Holt, of entertaininz tach Ch i- 
|tians , E*»% 11gnifying an Ht as well as 2 Strang? or Gro? ;, It 
154 love to be an //pitable Perion, that is here required, Tits 1. 
8. Such was Gai/zs to Pay! and the Church, Rom. 15. 23. im- 
porting a kind, courteous reception of C/rj/tins into Their Houſes, 
being harbourleſs, which Chr/j? promiteth them, Lube 18.29. 1 Tim. 
5.10, 4 free and chearful provitton for their necetiiry retreſting, 
Gen. 18. 4, 5, 6. with a careful furtherance and aifiitance v! 
them in the Work: of God, and heiping them to perf:vere in 
the ſame, 3 7ohn 6. 7,,8. c The advantage that accrucs to ful 
Hoſts of the Chrittian Church aud its Members, is great; fr in 
the exerciſe of this Duty, A5r.1h,mm and Lot, beinz Stransers, ard 
waiting to entertain ſuch, rece-ved Angels into their Tat ernacle and 
Houle, Ger. 18. 2, 3. and had fret diſcoveries of God in the 3c 
/1ah made to them ; were dclivered bv-them trom Judoment, as 
Lot, Gen. 19. 10, 15,156, 17. : | 


-* v5 4 A - -» - 
$ilns «+ Yo y Y* 


And now the veneral Guard of An- 
gels gocth along with the Stints, and are eitertained in them wha 
never come without a Blefſins,and they attendins them in their way. 
detending them 2gainft evil Spirits, and offentive ones, and plice: 
where titey are, thouzh their Mimnittry be little obſerved or «c- 
knowJedged as it ought, Chap. 1. 14. Not only Ange's, but Ct+;/7 
himſelf accompanieth hiz Pilprim-Members, and is entertgined, fed, 
comforted and lodged in and with them, Matth. 10. 40, 41, 42. 


| and 25.34,35,35- And tor this will he reward them ta both Worlds. 


3 Kemember them 4 which are in bonds, as hound 
with them ; ord them which fatter adverticy e, as 
being your ſelves allo in the body. 

a A turther Duty of the Subje&s of Chriſt's Kingdom , is S37pas 
thy with their Chriſtian Brethren, to- remember to pray fer, vitit 
and miniſter all neceflary Refreſhment to thoſe in Bonds, fettered, 
manacled, and impriſoned for Chriſt's ſalt and the Goſpel, being 
ſtraitned for them, and partakins of th-ir Bonds, bearing them with 
them, and ſeeking their Dcliverance out of them by all juſt means, 
Matth. 25. 36. Epheſ. 6. 19, 20. Col. 4.18. 2 Tim. 1. 15, 17, 18. 
e Be mindful of thoſe ſufferinz any Evil for Chriſt's ſake and the 
Goſpel, perſecuted, opprefled or affiifted, who have not deſerved 
any of this trom Man, ſo as to carry it ſuitably to them in theſe 


Perſons in their conditions, carefully knowing we are in Bodies capa- 
ble and liable to the ſame, and are 12norant how ſoon it mav be out 
own caſe; conſcientionſlz, as knowing we are Members in thc ſ:me 
Body of Chriſt with them, and of them in particular, 1 Coy. 12. 
25, 26, 27. 

4 Marriage f :zs honourable in all, and the bed g 
undefiled : bur whore-mongers þ and adulrerers God 
will judge. 

f The next Duty charged on the SubjeRs of Chriſt's Kingdom, 
is Chaſtity, The commendation of it 1s a Precept to it. , Marrivge 
is that ſtate, which God inſtituted at the beginning, after the Crea- 
tion of Adam and Eve, which was by his Law, the making of tem 
two become one Fleſh, Gen. 2. 24. conitrmed by Chrift, Matth. 19. 
s. And this ſtate God the Fmuntain of all Hhmur hath ſtampt his 
own Nameand Excellence, and hath made it by an irreverfthle Law, 
1 glorious and honourable ftite. The conne@ion is prefent, real, and 
neceflary ; Gods ſaith it, theretore it is fo, and wall be fo; and this 


aſter God's Inftifution 19 al its concommtants every where, and 11 
* al! times; but eſpecially in a!! Perſons in the Rinztum of 


Hy tft, 


L&& 
23*{rq'7 ' 
valeiang, 4 


tive Chriſtians of all ſortz and degrees,” of winat fate cr c 


ee? 


jets of the unmoveable Kinzdom of Cprift, for their perf yrning 


conditions, Chap. 11. 35, 37, 38. So feelingly, as if we were the - 


Chap. XI. 


ma _— i 
ag O28 wy ten we oe => 2x 


” - _ 
© SA) 4 TuSoans ASIDE 
_—_ yy =P 
of MAT LE” 


Chap. XIII. 


|. (Or. ne 


f; bi: oy 


HED RETMAS 


ever, 'qualincd tor and called to it, whether Magiſtrates, Miniſters, ' 
or Church Memvers ; Gud by it preventing Stn, preſzrving holy and | 


pur: Commumion between tne Married, propazating his Church, and 
accompliſiing the Numver of his Cholen by it. Pſal. 111. 3. Ma! 
a5 1c 7 5 1 To. 4- &, &- 1 Pet.g. 1,7. o A good 
moral uſe of the Marriape-Bed, the natural and lawful uſe of the 
Vile by the Huchand, and-of the Husband by the Wife, according 
to the Law of God, which 1s ſo far. from being unclean, filthy and 
inconfiſtenc with the Purity of Chriſt, as Papiſts, Apoſtates from 
the Faitin, aflert, 1 Tim. 4 1, 2, 3, 4. that it is Holy, - Pure, and 
Chaſte in it felt, and a moſt excellent means for preſerving Chaſtity 
amonz the Subjzas of Chriſt's Kingdog), 1 Theſ]. 4. 4. Titus 2. 5. 
1 Per. 3. 2. By this they are kept in their Bodics trom being pol- 
lu-ed or dittonoured by Fornication or Adultery : Marriage 15 thus 
honourable in all Husbands and Wives, of what degree or order ſo- 
ever winlſt they are ſuch; and muſt be undezled 1n all, becauſe 
their Bodies are the Members of Chritt, and Templcs of the Holy 
Glioſt, 1 Cor. 6.15, 17, 18, 19,20. þ But God hates unclean So- 
crcties of all Men and Women, but eſpecially of Chriſtians ; and as 
he will certainly judge to, and 1nilitt eternal Puniſhment upon all 
kind of unclean Perſens, fo eſpecta'ily upon Whore-mongers and 
AGulterers, who profeſs themſclves Subjetts of Chriſt's pure King- 
Pet. 2. 6. Jude v. 4,7. Rev. 2. 21. 

5 Let your Conver{ation be 7 without covetouſneſs ; 
an bo Content 4 with ſich things as ve have: For he 
/ hath faid ; F I will never leave thez, nor forſake 
TH. 
! Contentation with our State and Condition 1s a fifth Duty char- 


FeOrſ\ » i) 
COIN, -_ 


5 

1s beit fupphcd by an Imperative. 
tirnirs, but here it fets out the matron or Fuining 0 
wn nm the Adis of this Life, which in common Speech 1s called 
Cormoylotiing not any motion of the Reart, nor turn of the Eye, 
nor action of any Member after Money or Riches, with a fintul, in- 
ordinate fove to them, or purſuit of them forbidden, Matth.5.25,31. 
1 7171.5 2,10. 7anes 4.13. 1 Fohn 2. 15. The fſtudious endeavour 
ang labour ni:zht and day, turning and winding every way, to be 
ſcraping togetrer, and hording up Worldly Wealth,and lading them- 
felves with thick Clay, Eccleſ.4.7,8. Habah.2.4,9. muſt not be the caſe 
or condition of any Chriſtian, Fphe/.5.3,5. C0l.3-5. 2 Pet.2.3, tO 15. 
k But having an heart-acquicſcence and ſatisfattion with that Portion 
or Pittzance ot earthly thinzs which God at preſent doth allot us, 
whether more or leſs, and not with that only which we may think 
enou-h to ſerve our turn, Phil. 4.11, 12. 1 Tim.6.8. [ The reaſon 
inforcinsg it, is God's giving by Promiſe a ſpecial Ingagement to pro- 
vide tor them. This God ſolemnly made to Facob, Gen. 28.15, then to 
Iac!, Dert.31.6,8. then to Joſhua, chap. 1. 5. and to all Believers as 
well as them ; for God will not let any ſuch ſee the Miſeries of his Ab- 
ſence, but will vouchſafe to them his Preſence, with all the Bleſſings 
(hich attend it, P/al.45.1,5. T/a.41.10. and 43.2. and 63.9. 

6 So 7 that we may boldly fav, The Lord z 7s my 
helper, and 0 I will not fear what man ſhall do unto 
NC. 

m Upon the account of which Promiſe of God, all the true Sub- 
jet 2; Chrift's Kingdom, together with the Apoſtle, may with an 
undauatcd holdnels of Heart above all tears and doubtings, and with 
a dering conndence, protetling that which they believe, nor ſtag- 
£cring nor ſhrinking, nor being aſhamed of their Faith, but openly 
owning it, to all the World, own n that the Lord in the infinitenelſs 
of his P-v..r, Wiſdom and Goodneſs, is 2 real, preſent,univerſal and 
perm:nen* Holp againit all Tron, and forall Supplies in all caſes, 
and 2t ali timc.," vevery one 0; tn, Thewmay fay as Moſes, Exod. 
12.4. as David, Pj.27,9. and 40. 19. and 56.4,11.and 118.6. o And 
theretore Faith expelleth feartulneſs of, and introduceth fearlcſneſs 
of any created Evils incident to a Believer ; and of which Man may 
be an Infirament inflicting, /.45.2,3. Implying in it an unſhaken ſet- 
lſedneſs ot Mind, fudgment and Thoughts on God's Help,a fixed frame 
of Heart, without tumultuous PaſMons or Perturbations, with an un- 
moyecable Reſolution to keep clofe to God and his Word;both in Word 
and D:ed, amidſt all Oppoſitions and Perſecutions of Men for it, 

7 Remember p them which || have the rule over 


vou, who have ſpoken to you the word of God : 


whoſe qg taith follow, conſidering 7 the end of their 
converſion. 

p Inmitatin of their Godly Miniſters, is another Duty that Chriſt's 
Liw charzeth on his Subjefts, both here and v. 17. Be mindful of 
our ſpiritual Guides and Rulers, firmly and conſtantly to retain their 
Exccilencies in Memory, efteeming of them, and thanking God for 
them, which were ſent to them, and ſet over them by the Holy 
Gio0it, who were guidins of them by Chriſt to God, and enjoy- 
ment of Eternal Life with him, which they did by preaching to 
them, and writing to them the Goſpel of Chriſt for their Edifica- 
tion, by the Inſpiration of the Spirit. Some of which Guides 
v'cre removed by Death, ſlain and martyred for the Truti of Jeſus, 
and aſcended unto Heaven, and others were alive among them ; 
tiey were to remember all of them, but eſpecially their Spiritual 
Fathers that had begotten them to God by the Goſpel, 1 Cor.4.15. 
2 Cor, 2. 17. I Tim. 5. 17. and 2 Tim. 3. 14,15, 15,17. 1 Pet. 4. 
ti.and 5. 2, 3. 9g The beſt way of remembring ſuch, 1s by iniria- 
ting them, to beheve the Dottrine which they taught and-pradtiſed, 
and to be as ftedfaſt in the Faith as were they, and holding of it 
out tootners, how eminent Believers they were, 1 Tim.4.12. and 6. 
TI. 2 Tim. 2.22, Yr Suchas their Doctrine was, ſuch was their Life, 
con:ormable to Chriſts, 1 Cor. 11.1. It was honeſt, upright, and 
blamelcis, much in Heaven, 2 Cor. 10. 3. Phil.3.20. All their turn- 
ings and motions in the World, their very Life was hid with Chriſt 
in God ; all agreeable to; as ordered by his Will, and ſuch was the 
Iifrze an4 Egreſs of this Life, which it is their concernment to re- 
view, they having by it an out-let from the remainders of Sin and 


## 
$ 


bliery, which did defile and opprefs them, Rev. 14. 12, and a Vitto- | is written, Lev. 5, 


ry over the World and all its Oppoſitions to them, ſealing 'he 
Truth with their Blood, which they had preached and praiſed 
aniong them, and were more than Conquerours over all by beart 
having an 1n-let into Life, and Peace, and Eternal Glory, in the In. 
heritance 1ncorruptible, undefiled, and which fadeth not away. rc. 
ſerved for them in Heaven, Rom. 8.37. 2 Tim.4.8. 1 Pet.1.4-and 2... 

$ Jeſus Chrift / * the ſame yeſterday, and ro diy. 
and for ever. o” 

/ Though this hath no term of conneQion, yet it may he refer- 
red either to what precedeth or followeth it; tor the Apoſtle 1 
not here dropping Aphoriſms, but prefſing on the Subjects of 
Chriit's Kinzdom known Dutics. It is here interpoſed as a weighty 
Reaton of the Duty foregoing, to remember their Guides, imitate 
their Faith, and confider the end of their Converſation, tor they 
taught, belzeved in, converſed with, and at laſt were perfetted by Jeſus 
Chriſt; fo that they might be ſaved by him as their Guides were 
there being no other way to Blefledneſs, but ty Jeſus Chil the 
ſame, SC, John 14. 6. Or a Reaſon inforcing what tolloweth, That 
ſince 7eſus Chriſt is the ſame, as in his Perſon, fo in his De@rine, Faith 
and Converſation, which he enjoineth on his Subjefts, they ſhould n1; 
be carried about with ſlrange Dofrines. Jeſus Chriſt Perfmal is im- 
mutable in his care and love to his myſtica! Body, and all the Mem- 
bers of it, throughout all Times and Ages ; he never leaves nor 
forſakes them ; ſo Chriſt's Do&rinal in his Fiith, Law, and Rule of 
Converſation, Fpheſ. 4. 20, 21 The pure, full, and intire Reli}jon 
ot Chriſt .is unchangeable, being ſimply, indivifibly and conttant!y 
the ſame throughout-all meaſures of Time, Matth.5.18. 2 Cor.t.g, 
4. Gal.1.6,7. Epheſ.4.4,5. 1 Pet.1.23,25. | 


9 * Be 7 not carried about with divers and ſtrange 
Doctrines : For x 77 zs a good thing thar the heart be 
eſtabliſhed with grace, + not with ow meats, which 


have not - prohted them that have been occupiz ! 


therein. 

t The Dottrine of Chriſt being immutable, it 1s but neceflary to 
dehort his SubjeRts from exatting it, which the Apoſtle doth here ; 
that they ſhould not be whecling or whirling about with an vnſta- 
ble and 1nconſtant motion of Judgment, Faith, and Prattice about 
ſuch Humane Doftrines, which are vain Rules to lead to God, ſuch 
as are different in nature from Chriſt's one and the ſame Rule, and 
thoſe very numerous and various, ſtrange and untrue, taupht by 
falſe Apoſtles and Teachers, taken out of Gertiliim and Jud a'/m, 
and added to the Goſpel by them, as neceilary, together with Chrilt 
to Juſtification and Salvation, Matth.15.9. 2 Cor.11.3. Epheſ. 4. 14. 
2 Theſ]. 2. 10, 12. 1 Tim.4.1,2,3. 2 Tim.q.3,q- 2 Pet.2.1,18,19. Jud? 
Vv. 12, #4 For the gondneſs of heart-eftabliſhment unto God, 1s no lef: 
than full and compleat Salvation of the Soul, 1 Cor.15.58. 2 Pet. : 
17, 18. And this 15 only wrought by Grace, the free Love of God 
put out 1n Chriſt, for Regeneration and Preſervation of Souls unto 
Life Eternal, carried in the ſimple Dodrine of Chriſt, which 15 al- 
ways the ſame, 2 Theſſ. 2. 16,17. and 1 Pet. 5. 10. w Dodltines * 
Meats, and'Ceremonies, which are divers, and ſtrange from Chriſt +, 
cannot make the Heart agreeable to God, but only diſtra& and di- 
vide it from him, for whatſoever is not in and from Chrift,is ttrange 
to God, and abhorred by him, Gal.s.2. Col. 2.18, 19, 23. 2 Tin. 2. 
16. James 1.8. x Thoſe why did conve;ſe in theſe various and ſtrange 
Dottrines, profeſſing and conſtantly prattifing them,obſerved Timez, 
and Meats, and Ceremonies, have not been frofitted by them,for bein? 
carnal and earthly, they could not jufiity them as to their ſtate God- 
ward, nor could they renew or ſan&ify their Souls, nor yield any 
Advantage to their Spiritual Life, and being periſhing, couid no! 
profit to the attaining of Eternal Life, Rom. 14. 17, 18. compare 
1 Cor. 6. 13, 


10 We y havean altar, whereof they have no rigut 
to eat, 2 which ſerve the tabernacle. 

y Theſe ſtrange Dodrines are not only unprofitable, but pcriloiss 
Chriſtians, fince they diſ-intereſt a!l that entertain them, as to any 
participation of Chriſt; fince his SubjeRs adhering to his ſimple and 
immutable Dofrine, have a right and juſt claim to, and an aual ule 
of Chriſt, as their Altar, in oppoſition to the Moſaical ; and from 
whom they have Altar-ſuſtenance for their Souls, in oppoſition to 
the Jewiſh Meats, while they attend on him ; all the quickning Be- 
nefits iſſuing from the Sacrifice of his Humane Nature on ti: Altar 
of his. God-head, as Reconciliation and Adoption to God, Juſtinca- 
tion of our Perſons, Renovation of our Nature, growth 1a Grace, 
and Perſeverance therein, to the perfe&ting of it in Glory, 7o/in 6. 
$5, 56, $7. 1 Cor. 9. 13, and 10.16, 17, 18, We have Altar- 
San#ification of our Perſons, and Offerings in our acceſs to God 
from him, wer. 15. Matth. 23. 19. Epheſ. 5. 20. Col. 3.17. v0 
as all is accepted with the Father, we have Altar- Prote&7on and Sal- 
vation, keeping us who attend on him unto the Revelation of God 
in Glory, Exod. 21. 14. Rev. 6. 9,11. This is Altar-Individua- 
tion toall Chriſtians ; God had but one Altar under the Law, and he 
prohibited all others; and complained of, and threatned the 1n- 
creaſe of them, Exod. 20. 24, 25, 26. and 27, I, 2. 2 Chron. 4 
1. Hoſ. 8.11. andio.1i. This one Altar did Type out that tric 
one of Chriſt, by which only Sinners can come to God, and find 
acceptance. x Of this Altar-Priviledges, all Jews or Judaifing 
Chriſtians, who adhered to the Moſaical Adminiſtration of the Co- 
venant in Meats and Ceremonies, have no lawful Right, or Title to 
partake ;, they cannot have this Honour, while they cleave t0 them, 
becauſe they thereby deny*this Altar, reje& the Son of God, and 
are 1n it rejected by him. 

11 * For the hodies « of thoſe Beaſts, whoſe blood 
is brought into the ſanQtuary by the high priclt tor tin, 
are burnt withour the camp. | 


, . . 4 3 
a The Illuſtration of the Legal and Gojpel- Altar-Service 15 added 
as a Typical Proof of the foregoing Reafon ; for annes10y, If 00 


, ' of wt \ . 0 inc > 'Y | P 
1t, that the jews and Jugdaifing Chriſtians had no right to eat Oz Ine 


* Os i . ys * . Y F- i 1 i + f P\, 
ChriSian-A'tar, For a Law of thei own excludes tiem 3rom iti 
T-at tho Prdies of th b, 2 [1 [4 ing C re4 


-” 
Ss A 
* $818: I'D , 


Chap.X11] 


F Bey, I, f 


*Fxod.:% 
Gp 


l Y, bo Il, 
] 2, 
Mum, 127 


HL 


| Chap. X11. 


People, both of the Ball and the He-Goat with their Skins, @c. Were 
burat wholly without che Camp; fo as neither the Prieſts, nor any 
of the People,. had any part of this Bull or Goat allowed them to 
eat, having no right to it by the Law of God, wincit otherwile or- 
dered it. This is the Literal Senſe, yet the ute of 1t 15 anag?./ca!, 
leading us to higher things, as that the High-Prieft ſigniaed Chritt, 
God-Man, the Altar his Godhead, the Sanctuary Heaven it ſelf, the 
Sacrifice his Humane Nature, the true Sin-Oftering, of which, net- 
ther Prieſt, nor People ſerving the Tabernacle, ought to cat. _ 
| 12 Wheretore þ Jeſus alfo, thar he might fanctitg 
ic, the people with his own blood, * ſuitered wichour the 
| T1tC. 
| Becauſe that Sacrifice for Sin was burnt without the Camp,there- 
fore [cfus to fulfil the Type, ſuffered without the Gate z and as they 
mizhr not eat of that Exptatory Sacrifice, ſo neither or this. Jeius 
, therefore, to {ulfl this Typz, ſuffered without theGates of Jeruſa- 
| | lM upon Mount Calvary, where Sculls and Bones of curſed Cre- 
: cures were ſcattcred. As the Expiatory Sacrinces were burnt with- 
: | out the Camp, when Jae! was tabernacling within it ; without the 
Gates, when Iſrael dwelt in Cities. As the High Prieſt carried the 
a Expiatory Blood into the Hlolieſt of all, on the day of Atonement ; 
fo Chriſt with his own Blood entred the Holieſt in Heaven. and by 
l it obtained Pardon of Sin, Peace of Conſcience, and renewing by 
y | the Holy Ghoſt, for all Pcople who repent, believe, and will come 
D uito God by him. Therefore thoſe wito will ſtil] Judaize, Imave no 
r12ht to eat of his Sacrince, no more than of the Expiatory one, 
which was wholly burnt ; fo that they were not to be juſtined by 


q ſohn 


5 7 "ROE , - . ; 
: Epl.s.5, Meats and Ceremonies, but by the Blood of Chriſt alone, the truth 
: L Join, f of all the Sacrifices, Rom. 3. 25. and 5. 9. Fohn 1. 29. 

5 OY 13 Ler c us go forth rheretore unto him without 


the camp. bearing his reproach. 

c Therefore ſhews this to be a necceilary Duty, inferred from. the 
J former Pi1viledge, That fince we have ſuch an Altar and Sacriji e as 
Feſs, ſanilfying us by his own Blood, which he entrcd with to 


4 God, when he ſuffered without the Gate; we ought, and muſt 2» | 
l forth ( from Tubernacle-Service, conſiſting of Meats and Ceremonies, 
from Judaiſm in all its parts aboliſhed, and all erroneous Dottrings 
{ how numerous and ſtrange ſoever, and all worldly things) unto Fe- 
y ſus, who was curſed for us, that we might be bletſed, Gal. 3. 13. 


in Faith and Love, not aſhamed of, but glorying in his Sutferinzs, 
and following, and imitating of him, patiently and boldly bearing 
3  Mockings, Revilings, Scourgings, Crucifyings, and all other Perſe- 
1 | cutions, which are parts of his Croſs, for his ſake, chap. 11. 9g. Rom. 
| 6.5,6. 1 Cor. I. 30. Gal. 2.20. Phil. 3. 8, 9, 10, making him in 
| all, our Example, 1 Pet. 2. 21. and 4.12, folg. _ : 

, « Mich, 2 14 * For here have we 4 no continuing city, but 

we ſeek one to come. X 


— 


10, 
t d This is an inforcement of the foregoing Duty, as the Particle 
; for, cleareth, that they have no reaſon to be diſcouraged from going 
1 | forth from Judaiſm, and thoſe erroneous Dottrines, and the World 
8 to him, tho' it ſhould coft them their Lives for it. For at the beſt, 
this World is not a Place fit for us, nor can our State 1n 1t be defira- 
5 ble, ſince it is imperte& fleeting, and vaniſhing, and we muſt die 
out of it; we may well then go forth, and die with him, and tor 
- | him. And we have reaſon to go forth aud ſuffer with him, fince it 
X will inſtantly bring us to that heavenly City, which we profeſs that 
. we only live to fit our ſelves for, and then to enter in and poſleſs it, 
f chap. 11.10, 16, and 12. 22. Phil. 3, 20, 21. Eh ; 
c 15 By him therefore e ler us offer the ſacrihce of | 
r1iſe ro God continually, that is, the fruit of ozr lips, 

l ' Gr. n= giving || thanks to his name. - - 

fefing 9. © e Therefore, introducing this Duty, ſhews it not only to 1lue from 
S the former Priviledze of having Chriſt our Altar and Sacrifce, there- 
fore we ſhould uſe him, and Sacrifice by him ; and 1t 1s interred as 
1 anticipating an ObjeQion of theſe Hebrews, That. if the Tabernacle- 
Service ceaſed, then they ſhould have no Sacrifice to offer unto God 
n yea, ſaith the Apoſtle, Let us offer , which 1s not Hand-work, but 
4 Heart-work, b' a Spirit of Faith on this Altar, the Sacrifice of Praiſe, 
4 1 Pet. 2. 5. ſuch as God requireth and accepts above all the Sacri- 
# fices of Beaſts, (yc. P/. 50.23. Praiſe tor the Grace-Priviledge and 
p Honour of being Denizens of his City, and of being brought home 
i to it by ſuffering, Col. 1.11, 12. And this always throughout our 
' Life, to the God that is the Author and Diſtributer oft all theſe 
- Bleſſings to us. f This Sacrifice of Praiſe the Spirit interprets to 
. | be the Fruit of our Lips, which the Prophet ſtileth, Calves of the 
R | Lips, in Hiſea 14. 2. By both theſe muſt Synecdochically be under- 
4 ſtood the Spirit and Heart, guiding the whole Man 1n this matter, 
N Rom, 12, 1, confeſſing that all it is capable of rendring, 1s due from 
d it to God, even all of Love, Praiſe, Thankſz1iving, Honour, for its 
a Redemption through Jeſus Chriſt, whether continually exprefled 
s either by Lip or Life, as P/al. $0. 23. 1 Cor. 6. 20. Epheſ. 5. 20. 
q Phil. 4. 6, 7. Col. 3.17. 1 Theſſ. 5. 17, 18. 
| 16 Burg to do good, and to communicate forget 


C 
a | *2Cxr.5, not, for Þ with * ſuch ſacrifices God is well pleaſed. 


> 12, ; The laft Duty which Chriſt's Sufferings without the Gate for 
E Mhit4.12, his SubfeRts, oblizeth them to, is Liberality and Beneficence to others. 
In which explicitely 15 denied any carcleſneſs of Mind, Averſation 
ly | of Aﬀcction, or Omiffion of the Duty ; in which 1s implicitly 1n- 
d joyned, Inclination to, Retention in Memory of, and conſtant Pra- 


&ice of Beneicence and Liberality, both as to ſp.ritual and tempo- 
ral Good, vizoroufly and chearſully edifying the Souls, and cheriſh- 


HE B RK BEES. 


. . ® bd ' p "A > : of a 4 h bo a 
| | tures, which were yearly ſacrificed as a Sin-Offering tor Prieſts and above other Sacrifices, and holy Things given to him, and whic, 


| 


——— 


Chap. AIII 


as he commands, he will at preſent greatly Reward witli temporal 
and ſpiritual BiefTings, and with cverlaſtins Riches and Glory 
Heaven, Prov. 15.17. Micah $. 5, 7, 8. Matth. 9. 12. and 25. 34, 
to 40, 2 Cor. 3. 12, 

17 * Obey 7 them thar have the rule over vou,and *Phil.2.- - 
ſubmit your {elves : For + + they watch for vour Outs. 4 Thl. « 
as they that mult give account : that they / may dv 
It with joy, and not with grief : for that 7 7s unpro- , -, 
titable tor you. | Or. grid 

/ The farther Duty required by Chriit from the Subjecs of his T Eck. - 
Kingdom, 1s their due Lemeanour to their preſent Pattor:, and 
Church-guides or Rulers. He ciargeth them to eſteem and account 2. 7: 
of them as they are, and he hath conſiituted them in his Churcn, 
to attend on their Miniſtry and Teachinz, yicldin full Obedient 
of Faith tq the Dottrine which they dchivered trom Chritt, and tc 
be ſubject to the Power and Authority Chriti hath piven them ove! 
them for their Edification, and not for Dettruciion , and that rhe: 
inutate them in their believing and holy converſation, 4s : | 
and this, as to all of them, fet over then; by the Holy Ghott, 
whether ordinary or extraordinary Apoſtles, Evan..clifts, Elderc. 
Paſtors, Teachers, doing a!l as commithioned by Chriſt, and in hi: 
Name exercitinz their Power and Authority, accordins to his cx- 
preſs written Laiv about it, Zf{eje 4. 110, 12. knowinz with receiver!:, 
or defpifeth t!tem, Ccalcth to with Chriſt and God, who tear them 
Jatth, 15. 40. Lite 10.16, þ Good Reaſon they h've to pu- 
torm this Duty, becauſe of their concern in, and care tor tiw:, 
SyUu's, How great, by Chriſt's Law, are the right Watchinzs, and 
Day-Cares aud Tears, Studies, Exhortations, Reproos, Comtor- 
ings, ther Preici:1ngs, and Prayers with Tears, and ſtrong cries to 
God for their Sou!s ? Will you pay Duty to thoſe, who watch to 


« #4; 


Exod ing the Bodics of all neceſfitous oncs, but eſpecially of thete poor 

$ 1+ Brethren of the Houſhold of Faith, Gal. 6. 10. 1 on g. 17, glo- 
Lev. 41h ' rifying God by obeying his Law and Rule about it, Math. 6.1, to 

d 12, | 5s. h Such doing of good, and communicating to che Necetlities 
o Num!" Wi 0 poor Saints, are part of our Evangelical Sacrifices which God 
© r-Quireth of us, inſtead of the numerous lezal ones, and are attend- 
yl = 1n2 941, concomitant with, and ſinRtined by the one frve S:crince 
; | ot! Cliriit ; and being duiy terminated on him, 2coordme to his Law, 
thov are hichiy pleatinz, and acveptali'e to Gr, vet fomerimes 


preſerve and protec yeur Natural Life, and not unto thoſe ſpiritual 
Watchers; lee God's Charge ziven to them, 4&s 20. 28, to 32, 
2 Tim. 4.5. Rev. 3.2, 3. And God will exa& an Account of 
them for your Souls; and they muſt render it at a dear rate, Fz-b, 
3. 17, to 22. and 33.*7,9. It 1s at their Peril if they are Faith- 


| lets and neglect their Duty, an4 your Souls miſcarry, Matth. 13. 


23. and 25. 14, 30. / That they may do not only their Work 
cheartully and comfortably among You, but that they may give up 
their Account joytully about you to God, when they have brouvht 
you home to him, 1 Theſ]. 2.- 15, 20. And which will be an eter- 
nal comfort unto you, 2 Thej. r. 7, 19. If you be difohediciit to 
them, though they will have their Reward for their Fidelity trom 
their Lord, vet with what Sizhs, Tears, Groans, Scrrow, and hea- 
vinels of Heart muſt they ſee their Labours, and your Souls lott. and 
to charge you before God with it? 2 Cor. 3. 15, 15. and 12, 21. 
m And what Damaze will both your Diſohedience to the Word o; 
God and them, and their Account of it to God, bring on your 
ſelves ? Will it then quit the Coſt to find your Puniſhment more in- 
tolerable than that of Sodom and Gomorrah, Matth. 10.18. and 11. 
22, 24. when he will give you your Portion with Hypocrites, at th. 
24. 51. and puniſh you with everlaſting DeſtruQion ? 2 Theſſ.1.7,8,5, 


18 Pray 7x for us: For weo truſt we have a good 
Conſcience, in all things willing to live honeltly. 

n The cloſing Duty becoming the Subjects of the Kinzdom of 
Chriſt, 1s Prayer, upon ſome ſpecial accounts, ver. 18, 15. that they 
would with their renewed Souls, influenced and affiited by the 
Spirit of Grace and Supplication, pour forth their Defires to Gal 
with Faith, Fervency, and Importunity for his vouchſafing to tie 
Apoſtle himſelf, for their ſpiritual Guides and Rulers, that ' tlie 
things tliey need, and God hath promiſed to them, «is to th-ir 
ſucceſsful courſe of their Miniſtry, may be beſtowed on them, 
which the Spirit ſpecineth elſewhere, 2 Cor. 3. 5,5. Ephe.. 5. 1e, 
I9, 20. Col. 4. 3, 4. 2 Theſſ. 3.1, 2. 6 He urpeth this on them, 
for that he was a fit Subjz& to be prayed for, whatever any miphkt 
accuſe, or charge him for rejefting 7udaiſm out of Sincularicy, 
Prejudice, or ſome evil Deſign; he aflures them frum the Spirit of 
God, that he had a rightly informed Confcicace, by Go@'s Word, 
and which teſtified his Innocency and Sincerity, and which did di- 
Rate and influence him to be communicating and prometins with 
all, and to all the Truth of the Goſpel ; and that his own Life and 
Converſation in the World, was agrecable to the Goſpel-Rule, in all 
Godlineſs and Honeſty, 4A&s 23. 1. and 24. 14. compare 1 Cv. 4. 
4+ 2 Cor. I. I2, 

19 But I beſeech you the rather p to do this, tha: 
[ may be reſtored to you the ſooner. | 

p He is the more urging and preffing them to the Exerciſe of thi 
Duty more fervently, 1nſtantly, and abundantly at this time. tt 
they might prevail with God to remove Hindrances, by his Fri: 
mies freeing him from his Chain and Reſtraint at Rowe, and to tp. ©.) 
his Liberty tor a Return to them, that it might be in tie ful:ic:s 
the Bleffing of the Goſpel. So the Church prayed for Peres, nd 
prevailed, As 12.12. and h2 had hopes, that God nou! hoy 
them for him alſo, Philemon 7. 22. 


20 Now 4 the God of peace thar brought ag ati! 


from the dead our Lord Jeſus*, thar great thepher. 
of the ſheep *, t through the blood of ihe overliiiins 


|| covenant. : rs 

q As the Apoſile detires the Churches Prayers tor himtelf, fo he 
poureth out his tor them ; with the winch he introduceth the con- 
cluſion of this Epiſtle, v. 20, 21. Ay God the jather, the God ind 11 
Author of Peace, and Reconciliation oi Sinners fo himielt, the Pro- TX 
pagator, 4s Lover of Peace amon;: 2!] the Subjects of tt Kin cors, : 
the Diipenſer of the tulnck of Gooo, Bletfing, and i7:pprct., om, $ 
I. 3% Po. 9. 1 7h!f}. $23. wnao e|crioufly nv: . 
Power by the Rejurredinn of our Lo 7ejurs from the Q 


/ _— TIT, - FR Yy % 4 
I'&, L\ . RM. = TO Fx, Y þ& «- 0 Brea 


—_— o—_ = 
4 m_ 


to this Chee becaule he - rw 


I, {> [ , 3 1 AITECS a * 4-30 » a r 
\ - ! by , | og TD 1 4 ' , i "F305 . 
MYTC!NQH £111, zU1t: lk wet,h TYTLYSTY +a! «& $1.4 LET 
7 »- 3 - ig F . 3 > ha A 4 1 . % , | " 4 : 
"4 o N k - en: I;4 ST?1LY f; » % y % k . a « 1) 


$3iel TE | FE e211 2+ \ 


: 


44 


Chap. XI © HEBREW S. Chap.Xlij 


Him, and in Him with, and for Sinners, who ſhould repent and be- | at libert with whom. if he 1C6.. 
lieve in him, 7obn 10. 9, to 30, 1 Cor. 6. 11. Phil. 2. 7, 19. Tit. 2. you J 3 : RY thortly I will ſee 


14. 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19. and to perfe& them with himſelf above, 1 Pet. 


| : w He accuaints them with the good News of his diſmiſſins Tims. 
FA E ' 4 wg Power wherewith he was raiſed, perfeft you, &c. thy to thin: to acquaint them hon it fared with him, as he Sent 


k ſed, and ſent Tychicus to the Coloſſians, Coloſ. 4. , 8. Epaphrodit 

Ss. 5. * Make 4 bad perfect in every good work to do to the Philippians, Philip. 2. ws as he SS to poo, hos 
to. his will, | working s in you that which is well-pleaſing | Timuthy with them, v. 19, 23, 24. but he ſtopt him to ſec the iflue 
{Or, ding. in his light,chrough Jeſus Chriſt ; towhom 7 be glory of his appearance before Nero Ceſar , which being over, he diſpatch- 
tor ever and ever. Amen. eth him with an Account of it to theſe Hebrews ; and the reſt of the 

7 May this God diſpoſe, incline, and fit you for, may he finiſh — and fignifieth his purpoſe, Fhat if he guickly returns from 
and perſe8 in you Grace to perform all the fore-mentioned Duties, | © = again, then he would viſit them together with him. That the 
and every other good Work which he enjoyneth on you towards en ay” cg noteth, or fignifieth the diſmiſſi-n of a Perſon abou 
God, one another, and all Men, 2 Cor. 13. 9. Ephe. 4. 12. Tit. 3. 14+ Buſineſs, is ſeen, Aﬀs 13.3, To which Interpretation the Subſcrip- 
1 Pet. 4. 2. and $. 10. according to his written Will and Law, _ of the Epiſtle inclines ; and the Scripture is ſilent of any Trou- 
Epheſ. 2. 10. s Working in you by his Spirit continually, that all les or Reſtraint of 7:mothy at all, Phil. 2. 19, 20. . 
theſe good Works may fatisfie his ExpeCation, be a ſweet ſavour in 2 Salute Xx all them that have rhe rule over YOU. 
his Noſtril, and fo pleafing in hisſight, that his Soul mays delight in | and all the ſaints. They of Italy ſalute you. 
them, Phil, 2. 13. Col. 1.9, 10. that God's Good-will may return x He ſends his Salutations, which were good Wiſhes and Prayer: 
unto them, and he may reward them according to their Works, ch. | for the Peace; Proſperity, Health and Happineſs of their Souls and 
IT. 5,6. while all is rendred by 7eſis Chriſt, ſprinkled with his | Bodies, and ſucceſs 1n all their Concernments, firſt unto their excel- 
Blood, and perfumed with his Incenſe, chap. 10. 19, to23. As | lent Guides and Rwlers, v. 7, 17. that they may proſper and ſucceed 
they are to have all done through Chriſt, ſo through his Merit and | in their work among the Saints; and then unto the Saints them- 
Interceſſion, the Apcſtle begs all this from the Father for them. | ſelves, conveying the. Goſpel-peace, according to Chriſt's command, 
# To this God the Father inthe Son, and by the Spirit working all | Matth. 10.12. Luke 10.5. Which Saints were all of thoſe Hebrew; 
this good in them, and for them, be really, truly, heartily, and per- | diſperſt in ſeveral places, and there convening, and maintaining 
petually, throughout all Ages, aſcribed the Honour and Glory due to | Churel>Society ; and to whoſe Hand the Epiſtle firſt came they were 
him for the glorious Manifeſtation of his Perteftions in them, Epheſ. | to receive the Salutations themſelves, and tranſmit them to others , 
Z- 21. Phil. 4. 20, 2 Pet. 3. 18. Rev. 4. 11. and 5. 13, The firm | with his own he tranſmits the Salutations of ll that part of the 
Seal of this, from his believing Heart, is his Amen, longing for the | Church of Chriſt, which was in 7taly, to them. Which Salutations, 
Addition of God's Amen, fo be it in Heaven, to his on Earth. | though commonly abuſed, yet are of great weight and worth where 

22 And 4 I beſeech you, brethren, ſufter-the word communicated, and received by the Churches, in which the Holy 
of exhortation ; for I have written a letter to you in | SP!Fit abideth., : 
tew words. 25 Grace be with you all. Amen. 


u The Apoſtle now drawing to a cloſe, detires them eandidly to he pobonorhgr yr Epiſtles a 4 6 ThE as apy 
accept his Epiſtle , that, conſidering por Relation to him as Chriſti- He, like an Apoſtle influenced by he Divine Spirit, admiring > ce, 
ans, oy nes: he —ooHuggens "he Er A _—_ them, that they vouchſafed to himſelf, and heartily, and fervently wiſhing it doin 
Wwou y receive, entertain, and hold Tait, as well as bear with,or upon all, to whom he writeth, even all the Spiritual Fruits of God's 
ſuffer, all the Dottrine, Reproof, Exhortation, and Conſolation, | 27 vein Jeſus Chriſt, from EleRion to Salvation. And 
even his whole Diſcourſe to thems in this Epiſtle, which the Word he ſealeth up his Deſire Prayer and Declaration of this, upon 
implies. lic had 1o compriſed, ſummed up, and delivered the Re- |, all, who were the true Subjedts of it, with his Amen. Even 
velation of the Doftine of Chriſt, teſtified by Moſes and the Pro- fo let the whole Earth be filled with the Glory of thy Grace, O 
phets, in a very few words, and ſent them kindly and affe&ionately, Trinity of Relations in Unity of Eſſence, from heneeforth and for 
in the Form of an Epiſtle, or Letter to them, that it might not he E a p 
burthenſome, either for its | Matter or Length : Though how | =V<T* 77- 


> 64 bo moſt profeſſing Chriſtians of the Qhorteſt heavenly Written to the Hebrews from Italy, by Timothy 


23 Know ye t that our brother Timothy is ſet 


The GENERAL EPISTLE 


TAME S. 


: The ARGUMENT. 


HAT the Authorit 'y of this Epiſtle hath been queſt:oned by ſome anciently, appears plainly by Euſebius and Je- 
rom,who /j mor ſuſpiciouſly of it , and that it bath been denied by ſome more lately.is no leſs clear(to ſay nothing 


of Cajetan and Eraſmus) in Luther, who, (zho' in his after-writings he was more modeſt ) at firſt ſpoke ſlightly of 
1t ;, and ſome of bis more early Followers were of his Mind. But arfor the Ancients, (admitting tbe two foremen-. 
zioned Authors, writ their own Senſe, and not as ſome think, and their Words cited by Brochmand, and others, 
may well mp7. the Opinion of other Men ) why ſhould not this Epiſtle, being unqueſtionably recerved by moſt of the 
Fathers,and primitrve Chriſtians before Euſebius or Jerom were born,and many Councils, be more effettual to prove 
its being Canonical. than the doubts of a few to perſuade us to the contrary ? What do we find in it diſagreeable ts the 
Dottrine of the Goſpel, unbecoming _ of an Apoſtle, or the Holy Ghoſ?s enditing ? Hath it not the ſame Ma- 
jeftp,Purity,Spirituality, Efficacy and Power on Men's Conſciences that other Scriptures have ? To Cajetan and 
Eraſmus we oppoſe the Univerſality, not only of Proteſtants, but of Papiſts themſelves , and to Luther,al! the Mo- 
dern Lutherans,zoho now generally receive it. That which drew Luther himſelf to rejef (to ſpeak a little of that as 
heing of weight was,partly the ſeeming difference between James and Paul 7 the Point of Fuſtification, which will 
be ſpoken to in the y audi o Chapter , and partly his ſpeaking nothing (tho be wrote to Chriftians) of the Death,or 
Merits,or Reſurrettion of Chriſt &c.Whereas,mndeed ho! he is more ſparing in handling Evangelical Dottrines,yet 
Several he roueheth upon : What doth he mean but the Goſpel of Chriſt by the engraffed Word,chap. 1.21. and Law 
of Liberty,v.25. And who doth he underſtand by the Judge, chap.5,9. but Chriſt ? and whoſe coming doth he ſpeak 
of, v. 7. but Chriſt's ? And how expreſly doth he mention the Faith of our Lord Jeſus Chriſt, chap. 2. 1 © But the 
truth is, the Perſons for whom this Epiſtle ſeems deſigned, and the Scope of the Writer, calls for ſuch a toay of 
Writing as here we have. He bends himſelf mainly againſt a licentions,ſenſual ſort of Profeſſors,uho boaſted of 1 be 
Name of Faith, but wanted the Thing, and (berng rather Libertines than Saints ) blemiſbed the Chriſtian Profeſfuon 
with unſuitable Prattice. Theſe be takes upon him to corrett,and evinceth their Faith and Religion ( being barren of 
good Works) to be vain. It was not therefore neceſſary he ſhould ſo largely inſiſt upon the Dottrine of Faith,when Þ1s 
chief Deſign was 10 reform Manners. Paul having many times to do with Men of Pharaſaical Spirits, or ſuch as 
were difficultly weaned fromJudaiſm and an Opinion of Self-righteouſneſs.makes it his buſineſs to ſettle the Dottrine 
of Grace,and Fuſtification by Faith. And why may not James having to do with thoſe,who ( probably, and as Auſtin 
thinks,niſunderſtanding Paul) abuſed the Doffrine of Grace, and turned it into an Occaſion of Licentiou/, neſs, be 
allowed to tax that abuſe,and inſiſt the more fully on matters of Praftice,and preſs them to live up to their Faith,and 


bring forth Fruiis anſwerable tothat holy Truth they had recerved?Remedies muſt be ſuited ro Diſeaſes * There ' m 
, bs | HE 


iii 


. 6. I Bu. 0%. 6. i. 3%. Fi... 3. Ye Ya. Be ai. Pe Ho. 


Chap. 1. 


* Matth. 5. 


Aﬀts 5. 41s 
Heb.10.34* he calls them, that the kindneſs of his Compellation might ſweeten 


Pet. 1.6, 


FUMES. 


little need to urge a Solifidian to rely on Grace of which he already preſumes, as to perſwade a Phariſce of the ne: 
ceffity of good Works.yupon which of FA elf he lays but too much Pref. 4 perf 4 

But as the Authority of this Epiſtle hath been queſtioned formerly.though with little reaſon,ſo the Penman of it is 
full doubted of,perbaps with more : However this Queſtion ts leſs material, we need not be over-ſollicitons to know 
what Amanuenſis the Spirit of God made uſe of in pennimg it, fo long as we find the Impreſs of God upon it. 
It 1s certain, that this James was not the Son of Zebedee, whom Herod had beheaded (if Chronolog y fail not) 
before the writing of this Epiſtle, AQs 12. 1. It is not certain, that there were three Jame's, two of them Apo: 
files, and the third (called blias, and James the Juſt) ONe of the Seventy Diſciples , the Scripture mentioning 
but two, on the Son of Ziebedeeghe other of Alpheus, ca/led the Brother of the Lord, G7. i. 19. as being of kin 
ro bis Family, and ſaid- ro be a Pillar, Gal.-2. 9. and joyned with Peter and John. And though ſome have 
thought the James there mentioned, to have been the third ſames'called Oblias, and one of the Seventy ; yet it is 
more. probable, thet be was indeed. no other than the Son of Aalpheus,and one of the Twelve : Nor is it likely, that 
one of the Seventy: Diſciples ſhould be numberedgas one of the three Pillars, and therein preferred above fo many 
Apoſtles. This Gomes therefore, == the whole, Itake to be the Pen-man of this Epiſtle; and his not calling 


himſelf an A 


oftle, need not be objetted agaih/t his being ſo,” when he doth no more in- omitting it than Paul doth in 


Jour of bis Boles viz. to the Phillipians, both ro the Theſſalonians, and that ro Philemon. 

Why this Epiſtle rs called General, 1s much queſtioned, and a ſatisfattory Reaſon not eaſily given. Some think, 
becauſe it ' is not inſcribed to tiny particular Church,or Perſon, as Payls are. But then why are the two latter Epr- 
files of, John reckoned among. the Catholigk, or general ones, though diretted to particular. Perſons,and that to the 
Hebrews not counted among them, though it: have no ſuch particular Inſcription £ Others think, that this, and. the 
{ix other were called Catholick upon their cathotick,or general Reception,and Approbation aniong the Churches, in 

oppoſition to the Epiſtles of Barnabas, Jgnarius, Clemens, '&c. which never were received as any part of the Ca- 
non. Theſe are the beſt Reaſons of this Title 1.meet with ; which is the more probable, let the, Reader judge. 
\The matter of this Epiſt/e is, in amanner, wholly pradical, but very variows ; though: chiefly.either correfive 
of the Vices and Abuſes.robich bad crept imo the Converſations of Profeſſers ; or Monnory and Hortatory , partly 
ro awaken the drowzy among them out of their Stupidneſs and Security, and ſtir them up to the prattice of their 


neglefted Duty (70 which be points them particularly, by minding them of pt vacying Ju 
fewade fincere and humble Believers to Patience under 1ribwlatzons and 


F/ 
ſoment) and partly to per- 
pprefftonsby propounding unto them ſui- 


table Encouragements ſor their Support and Confolation in ſuch a Condition! Many excellent and ujeful Truths are 
promiſcuouſly laid down throughout the whole, which cannot eaſily be reduced to any certain Method, but will be 
ſeverally ſpokento in the reſpettroe places: where they occur. | 


The Superſcription... He exhorts the Believing Jews patiently to. bear their 
Sufferings, becauſe of their Fruits, and for this to as Wiſdam of God 
, in Faith, 1-8. The lowly Comforted, and the Rich tanght to be 
bumble, 9 ———13. , We are not in our Trials, to. impuge our We 
.neſs or Sins to him, but to our ſelves, for God js the; Author of all Goo ; 
eſpecially of Regeneration, 1418: . He-exhorts; to, MeeRne/s, an 
not only to hear the word whichis inaain, but alſo to do It, this il- 
luftrated, 19—— as. The exerciſe of true Religion conſiſts in,bridling 
one's Tongue, in Charity, and Purity of Life, 26 —=27., 1; + - 


TFAmes « a ſervant bof God/and' of - the Lord Jeſus - 


 J Chriſt c, to the twelvetribes which are * ſcattered 
abroad d, greeting e. BEARER 3152 


. 


As 8.1. & The Son of Alpheus Brother of Fude, called likewiſe the Bro- 
1 Pet,1.1. ther of the Lord, Gal. 1. 19. b Not only by Creation, as all the 


Creatures are, Pſal: '119.'91, of by Redemption as/all'Behevers are,' 
- but by ſpecial Commiſſion in the Office of an Apoſile ; -See Gal. 1. 
10. Phil. 1. 1. and 2 Pet. 1.1. compare likewiſe, Rom. 1. 9. c 
. The Members , of this clauſe may be taken, either joyntly, and then 


. the. Conjuntion, and, hath the power only of an Explicative, 9.4. 


the Servant. of God, even the Lord Jeſus Chriſt, as Tit. .2- 13.,and the 


Senſe muſt be, the Servant of Jeſus Chriſt, who is Gad : Or, ſe- 


- parately (which our Tranſlation, ſeems, to favour): to let his Country- 
men know, that in ſerving Chriſt, he-ſeryed the God of his Fathers , 
* and by the Authority both of God, and of Chriſt, wrote this to 
them. & Being one of the Apoſtles 'of the Circumciſion, Gal. 2. 
9. he writes to. all his believing Country-men whereeyer diſperſed,as 
they were upon ſeveral Occafions, and at ſeveral times, into divers 
Countries, Ads 2. 9, 10, 11. e A Salutation. uſual, not.only among 
the Heathen, but the Zews, A#s 21. 3. 26. and uſed by the Chriſti- 
"ans, Afts 15.23. It ſeems to anſwer to the Hebrew, Salutation, 
Peace, which was-comprehenfive of all Happineſs ;, and. ſo is this 
here to be underſtood. ; 

2 My brethren £,* count g it all þ joy when ye fall 

7 into divers'temptations #&. - 40464 
f Both as being of the ſame Nation, and the ſame Religion; ſo 


-his Exhortations. -£ Eſteem it ſo by a ſpiritual Judgment, though 
'the Fleſh judge otherwiſe. þ Matter of the chiefeſt Joy, wiz. ſpiri- 
tual. So all is taken, '1 Tim. 1. 15. 'When you are ſo beſet, and 
circumvented by them, that there is no eſcaping them, but they 
come upon you, though by the Dire&ion of God's Providence, yet 
not by your-own, ſeeking. þ So he calls Aﬀfiitions, from God's 
end in them, which is to try and difcover what is in Men, and whe- 
ther they will cleave to him 'or not. The Fews were hated by 
other Nations,” and 'the Chriſtian Jews even by their own, and 
therefore were expoſed to divers Afﬀitions, and of divers kinds, 1 
Pet. 1. 6. | | | 

2 * Knowing ?his /, that trying m of your faith 
7 worketh patience 0. 

1 Conſidering. m The reaſon why he called afflitions, Temp- 
tations, as well as. why Believers. ſhould cout it all Joy to fall into 
them, viz. becauſe they are Tryals of their Faith, and ſuch Trials 
as tend to Approbation, as the word (different from ;that in the 
former Verſe) imports. n Both of the Truth of the Grace it ſelf, 
and of your Conftancy in 'the Profeſfion'of it. o Not of it ſelf, 
but as a means in the Hand of God, made effeQual to that end. 
©Obj. Rom. 5. 3. it is ſaid, Tribulation worketh' Patience, and Patience 
Experience, ar Trial; whereas here it 1s ſaid, that Trial works Pa- 
tience. Anſ, The: Words uſed here, are Rcen.'s; ard different : 


Vol. IL 


—_— 


SE $57 c | oY : 
here it is Jxiwor, which fiznities afively, the trying it ſelf, and 


the Experiment following upon the Tryat; or, as we read it, the 
Experience, v:z. of our Sinccrity, as well as of God's Conlolation, 
winch may well be the Effet of Patience wrought by, and undet 
Tryals, And fo bath. are true, that Tribulation, as Paul ſpeaks; 
and Trial, as James, work Patience, and patience not a further Trial, 
but rather Diſcovery, or Experiment,or Approbation of what we are 
by nc more, than by Patience under Sufferings. 


CE i ITE In 
|. 4 Burt ler patience have her perfe& work p, that ye 


may. be .perte&t and entire g, wanting nothing 7. 

Þ. 1». EffeR, q., o. let it have its full in you, both in 
making you abſolutely ſubjeR to God's Will, -and conſtant to the 
end:;undep all your Sufferings, 4 That you may grow perfet in 
this Grace, as.well as in others, and have the Image of Chriſt (to 
| whom we a6 = be Fonbormgent) Fpmenten in you. r Either not fait- 
ing, n inting in Iryais, or not detettive in any thing which i 
needful part of Chriſtianity. . hn. 29 


of God # that giveth roall men x liberally y, and up- 
braideth not z, and || ir ſhall be given him 7: 

[.1f, doth not imply, a Doubt, but ſuppoſeth ſomething which 
they, themſelves would grant; viz. That theydid lack Witdom ei- 
ther in whole, or in part... It is, as if he: had ſaid, Since, or ſee- 
ing ye lack, gc. See the like, Mal. 1. 6. t Though this hold 
true of Wiſdom taken more generally, yet Wiſdom here is to be 
reſtrained according to the Circumſtances of the Text, and taken 
for Wiſdom or Skill to bear Afﬀiitions, ſo as to rejoyce in them. 
u By. believing, fervent + Prayer. x Either to all ſorts of Men, 
Jew or Gentile, bond or free, gc. or to. all that ſo ask, as appears 

y. the next Verle.. y Or, ſimply, Rom. 12.8, i. e, with-an open, 
free, large Heart, in oppolition to the contradted, narrow Spirits 
of covetous Miſers. Our Tranſlation readers it well liberally, atid 
ſo the word is.. uſed, 2 Cor. 8.2. x Doth not twit them with 
their Importunity, or Frequency -in asking (as Men often do) 
however he may upbraid'them with their Unthankfulneſs for, or 
abuſe of what they have received. a Matth. 7. 7, 8. Fohn 16. 
23. The Promiſc-is here added to cncourape Faith in asking. 


6 But let' hiny-askin faith 6, nothing wavering c : 
For he that wayereth, is like a wave '6f the ſea, driven 


with the wind, and* roiſed d. 


Attributes and. Promiſes, Mark 11. 24, and'1,Fohn 5. 14. c Either 
not diſputing God's Power or Promiſe ; + or rather not -douttins. 
not ſtaggering through Unbelief, Rom: 4. 20, where the ſame Greeb 
word is uſed : So As 10. 20. nothing doubting; and Mark 11. 23. 
where it is oppoſed to believing, d - This notes cither the- Empti- 
neſs, and Unprofitableneſs of faithlefs Prayer, when Men's Minds are 
thus at uncertainties, toſſed to and fro ; the; Confidence they ſome- 
times ſeem to have,' like Waves, fall down.. and fails, and their 
Prayers come to nothing.- - Or, the Diſquiet, and Torment” Diſtruſt 
works in the Minds of, fuch Waverers, which are neyer. ſetted, till 
Faith - come, and fix\them, Ja. 57. 20. 11521 T9 

7 | For let not that man e think f'that he ſhall re- 
ceive any thing g of the Lord. Oo | 

e He that wavers, ih oppoſition to him that asks in Faith : all 
doubting doth not hinder the hearing' of Prayer, bat. that which 
excludes Faith, Mark 9g. 23, 24. f Vainly 'coyceit, or- perfwade 
—_— g Even the leaſt Mercy, mich kth; Wiſdom mea- 
GoaA St | > 2 ng7 Yor: 


[SE] | f A 


b With Confidence of God's hearing,” grounded on the Divine | 


Chap, I 


this works patience, there it is Nz«wi, which is taken paſſively for . 


5 *If any of you lack wiſdom 7, + let him ask Pharma 
Mat. 31, 


22 


Mark 11. 


24. 


Luke I 1.9. 


John 14. 
I3. 


&-15. 7.& 


16. 26. 

|| Jer. 29. 
12. 

1 jchn 5. 
14. 


> - as 4 N 
COT 0% Wn ot > earns, 4. 
: 


52” ©3-.5 1. 4x. 
+> *xf - 
PIE 0 .: 

xEY L cms. <<... - "rw 


PR RURETTOERTTTYYOOTOOTOO__—T RU —_w 


by 


F ' 
4A wy 


—— 4 S- 


TE 


<a."'% d 
- —, 


= 8 — 
OTE "ns. 


Chap 


i Or, glo'y. 


LL jON.2.17. 


*Job <.17. 
F 1 Cor. 9. 
25. 

Chap. :. 
[| Matt. 10. 
22.0 13, 


28, 29. 


WL 
o 


gy 


$8 A double minded man b 7s unſtable z in all his 
ways K. 

þ Either, 1. an Hypocrite, who 1s ſaid to have a double Heart, 
Pſizl. 12. 2, Or, 2ly, rather he that js of a doubtful Mind, waver- 
inz, and fluQuating with contrary Motions, ſometimes of one Mind, 
ſometimes of another ; ſometimes hoping, ſometimes deſponding. 
7 Either unconſtant, without any fixedneſs, or Confiſtancy of Spl- 
rit; as ready to dep.rt trom God, as to cleave to him ; or unquiet, 
troubled, full of inward Tumults. k By an Hebraiſm, Ways, for 
Counſels, Purpoſes, AMons, gyc. EE 

9 Ler the brother / of low degree m: || TeJO1Ce 1n 
thar he is exalted K. 

1 5. e. The Believer, ( for to ſuch he writes ) all Believers, or 
Saints, being Brethren in Chriſt, 1 Cor. 15. 20. and 1 Thef], 5, 25. 
and 4 Tim, 6. 2, m The Greek word fignities both lowlineſs of 
Mind, and Jowneſs of Condition (as the Hebrew word doth, to 
which it anſwers ) but here is to be underſtood of the latter ( as 
Like 1. 48.) but eſpecially of ſuch a low eſtate, as a Man 1s 
brouzht into for Chriſt's ſake and the Goſpels. n Either exalted 
to be a Eroth-r, a Member of Chriſt, a Child of God, and Heir 
of Glorv, which is the greateſt Preferment, or exalted to the Ho- 
nour of ſuffering for Chriſt. See Acts 5. 41. Rom. 5. 3» 

10 Bur the rich » in that he is made low p, becauſe 
* as the fower of the graſs he ſhall paſs away 9. 

0 Viz. Brother, he that is in an hizh, honourable, or plentiful 
Condition in the Werld. f Supp!'y from the former Verie, lct him 
rejovce im that he is n-ade low ;, not as to his outward ſtate ( for 
he is ſuppoſed to be rich ſtill ) but his inward Diſpoſition ard 
frame of Mind, God having given him a lowly Heart in an high 
Condition, and therchy prepared him for tlie Croſs, though as yet 
he be not under it, q The Reaſon why the rich Brother ſhould 
be humble in his greateſt Abundance, viz. becauſe of the uncer- 
tainty of his enjoying what at preient he poſſetleth; he 1s neither 
ſecure of his Life, ner his Wealth; he, and his enjoyments paſs 
away, and kis Pomp vaniſhcth as catily as the Flower of the Grals, 
which fades as ſoon as it louriſheth = | | 

11 For the ſun is zo ſcorer riſen with a burning heat 
r, bat it withereth the grais, and rhe flower thereof 
tallerh, and me grace of the*faſhion of it periſherh : fo 
alto ſhall the rich man <s fad2 away in his ways 7. 

r Or, the ſcorching Eaſt-wind, which in thoſe Countries was wont 
to riſe with the Sun, John 4. 8. s Either ſhail is here put for may, 
the Future Tenſe for the Potential Mood, and then the Apoſtle doth 
not ſo much declare what always certainly ſhall be, as what eafaly 
may be, and frequently is, the Profperity of rich Men, not being al- 
ways of {© ſhort continuance. Or, ſhal!, may be taken properly, as 
we read it, and then this is a gener] Propoſition, ſhewing the mu- 
table Nature, and ſhort continuance of rich Men, and their Riches, 
whoſe longeit Life is but ſhort, and Death when it comes ſtrips them 
of their Enjoyments; and though this Frailty be commen to all, yet 
be ſpeaks of the Rich eſpecially, becauſe they are ſo apt to bear 
themielves high vpon their Wealth, and put Confidence 1 it, 
t 7.717, 6.17. t Either in his Journyings and Travels for his Riches, 
or rather ia his Counſels, Purpoſes, ARions, P/al. 146. 4. 

12 * ÞBictked 1s the man that endurerth x tempta- 
tation x, for when he is tried y, he ſhall receive t the 
crown of lite 2, || which the Lord hath promiſed a to 
them rar love him 6. 

1 {4-1ds out apainſt the Afﬀaults and Impreſſions of Temptations 
vir Patience and Conſtancy, Chap. $. 11. Heb. 12.5, 7. x Afﬀ- 
as ver. 2. ,y Approved, and found upon the Trial to be 


FE WIR 
i975, 


found in the Faith: A Metaphor taken from Metals tried by Fire, and 


found pure. 


z So the heavenly Glory is called, Rev. 2. 10. either 


becauſe it is not to be had, but in eternal Life; or becauſe of its 


Duration, and not fading away, 1 Pet. 5. 4. 


a This ſhews on 


what ground it is to be expeted, viz, on the account of the Pro- 


miſe, and how ſure we may be of it. 


b i.e. All true Believers, 


whoſe Faith, and thereby Title to the Cro:vn 1s evidenced by Love, 


which 1s the fulfilling of the Law. 


Objef, Why not promiſed to 


them that ſuffer for Chri!t, of whom he here ſpeaks? Anſ. That 
is implicd, for none love him more, or evidence their Love to him 
more than they that ſuffer for him. 


Or, Evils. 


13 Lz=r no man ſay c when he is tempted d, I am 


tempted of God e: For God cannot be tempted 
with || evil f, neither tempteth he any man g. 


FAMES. 


c Neither with his Mouth, nor fo much as in his Heart, blaſphe- 
moutly cait the blame of his Sins upon God, to clear himſelf. 4 So 
ſtirred up to Sin, as to be drawn to it. e Either follicited by 
God to Sin, or enforced to it. f Cannot be drawn afide to any 
thinz that is unrighteous, by any Motion from within, or Impreſ: 
fion trom without. g Doth no way ſeduce, or enforce to Sin, 
ſo as to be juſtly chargeable as the Author of it. Obje&f. God 
15 ſaid to be tempted, Exod. 17. 2, 7. Deut. 6. 16. Pſal. 18. qr, 
and to tempt, Gen.22. 1, Deur. 8. 2, and 13. 3- Anſw. Botin are to 
be underſtood of Temptations of Exploration, or for the diſcovery 
of ſomethinz that was before hidden, Men tempt God, that they 
may know what he will do: God tempts Men, that they ( not he, 
for he knows 1t already ) may know. what themſelves will do, which 
then appears, when the Temptation draws it out; but neither 1s to 
be underſtood of the Temptation here ſpoken of, viz. of Sedudi- 
on, or drawing into Sin. Gecd tempts by giving hard Commands, 
Gen, 22. 1. by affiiQting, as in Job's cafe, by letting looſe Satan, or 
other wicked Inſtruments to tempt, 1 Kings 22. 22, by with-hold- 
inz his Grace, and deſerting Men, 1 Sam. 28. 15. by preſenting 
Occations, which Corruption within improves unto Sin, and by or- 
dering and 2overning the evil Wills of Men, as that a Thief ſhould. 
ſtea] out of this Flock, rather than that; that Nebuchadnezzar ſhould 
ratiier come againſt Jeruſalem, than Rabbah, Ezek. 21. 21, 22. But 
God doth not tempt by commanding, ſuggeſting, ſolliciting, or 
perſvading to Sin, 


14 But every man is tempted þ when he is draw: 
away 2 of his own luſt &, and enticed /. 

h He ſhews the great cauſe of Sin; that Luſt hath a 
in it, than either the Devil, or his Inſtruments, who cannot make 
us fin without our ſelves : They ſometimes tempt, and do not yrs. 
vail; but when Luſt tempts, it always prevails, either in whole. or 
in part, it being a Degree of Sin, to be our own Tempters, i Fi. 
ther this notes a Degree of Sin, the Hearts being drawn off from 
God, or the way whereby Luſt brings into Sin, wiz. the [mpety- 
ouſnefs and Violence of its motions in us. +þ Original Corruption 
in 1ts whole Latitude, though chiefly with reſpe& to the appeticive 
Faculties, / Either a farther degree of Sin, enticed by the pleaſant. 
nets of the Objett, as repreſented by our own Corruption ; or ano. 
; ther way of Luſts workiag in us to Sin, viz. by the Dclightfulnef: 
| and Pleaſure of its motions: In the former it works by a kind of 
force, 1a this by Flattery and Deceit. It is either a Metaphor taken 
from a Fiſh enticed by a Bait, and drawn after it, or rather from 
an Harlot drawing a young Man out of the right Way, and ally. 
ring him with the Eait of Pleaſure, to commit Fclly with her, 

15 Then when luſt hath conceived ww, it bringerh 
torth 77 fin, and fin » when it is finiſhed p, bringeth 
forth death g. 

m Laſt (compared to an Harlot ) may be ſaid to conceive, when 
the Heart 1s pleaſed with the motion, and yields ſome conſent to it. 
n The Birth ot Sin may be the compleat conlent of the Will to jr 
or the outward a& of it. os Actual Sia the Fruit and Produd of 
Original. p Sin is finiſhed, when it is not only committed, but 
continued in, as the Way and Courie of a Man's Life. q Not on- 
ly temporal, but eternal: Or we may thus take the Order aud Pro- 
greſs of Sin: The firſt indeliberate mction of Luſt, is the Temptz- 
tion or Bait, which by its Pleaſantnefs enticerh, and by its Vehe. 
mency draws the Heart after it ( as the Harlot, Prov. 7. 21, with 
the flattering of her Lips forced the young Man, telling him of the 
Pleaſure he ſhould enjoy, ver. 14, 16, 17, 18. and then he goes af. 
ter her, ver. 22. ) the Hearts I:nzring about, and being entangled 
with the delightſul motion of Luſt, is its committing Folly with it 
when the full conſent is joyned, Luſt hath conceived; when the out. 
ward Act is performed, Sin 15s brought forth; and when Sin is finiſh. 
cd in a ſettled Courſe, it brings forth Death; which, though every 
Sin do in the merit of jt, yet Sin ony finiſhed, doth in the Event, 
043. Doth not this imply Luft, and its firſt motions not to be Sin ? 
Anſw. No: for, 1. The leaſt motions of it are forbidden, Matth. 5, 
28. Rom. 7. 7. 2ly, It is contrary to the Law and Spirit of God, 
| Rem. 7. 23, 25. Gal. 5.16, 17. 3ly. It 1s the Fountzein of Impuri- 
ty, and therefore 1s it ſelf impure, 7ob 14. 4. Matth. 7. 15, 15. 
Fames 3.11, gly. Evil Thoughts defile a Man, Matth. 15, 19, 
Atts 8.22, Objeet. How 1s Luſt faid here to bring forth Sin, when 
Rom. 7. 8. Sin is ſaid to work Luſt? Anfw. Fames calls the corrupt 
Principle it ſelf, Luſt, and ' the a&tings of it, Sins ; whereas Pu! 
calls the ſame Principle, Sms, and the aQinz of it Luſts. And to 
both are true, Luſt, as a Roof, brings forth the ads of Sin is its 
Fruits ; and Sin, as a Root, brings forth actual Luſts, as its Fruits. 

16 -Do not err 7 my beloved Brethren. 

r Viz. In imputing your Sins to God, and ſaying, that when you 
are tempted, you are tempted of him. 


greater hang 


x of lights y, F with whom is no variablenets, neither 


ſhadow of rurning 5. | 

s Gr. grving, and ſo it may be diſtin&t from Gift in the next 
Clauſe ; to ſhew, that whereas Men ſometimes give good Gifts in an 
evil Way, and with an evil Mind, God's giving, as well as Gift, is al- 
ways good; and therefore when we receive any thing of him, we 
ſhould look not only to the thing it ſelf, but to his Bounty and Good- 
neſs in giving it: Or, it may be rendred as our Tranilators do, Gift, 
and ſo the word 15 ſometimes uſed by profane Writers themſclvcs ; 
and then though it may be implied, that all good Gifts, anc of all 
kinds of Nature, and of Grace, are from God, yet ( the Apotiic's 
Deſign in this place being to prove, that God is not the Autl:or of 
Sin, ) Good Gifts may moſt fairly be underſtood the beſt Gifts, thote 
of Grace (ſpiritual Bleflings, Fpheſ. r. 3.) ſuch being contrary to 1in, 
and deſtructive of it, in one of which he inſtanceth, viz. Regene- 
ration, ver. 18. # The higheſt degree of good Gifts, thoſe that per- 
fe& us moſt ; to intimate, that all the Parts and Steps o! ſpiritual 
Life, from the firſt beginning of Grace in Regeneration, to the Coti- 
ſummation of it in Glory, are of God. u 1. e. From Heaven, 9bn 3. 
27, 31. and Heaven is put for God that dwells there, Luke 15, 21. 
x The Creator, Author, or firſt Cauſe, as Jeb. 12. 9. It is ſpoken 
after the manner of the Hebrews; Sce Gen. 4. 20, 21. y God 1s 
the Author of all Perfe&tion, and ſo of corporal Light; but here 
we are to underſtand ſpiritual] Light, the Light of Rnowled-ze, 
Faith, Holineſs, as oppoſed to the Darkneſs of Ignorance, Unbeiict, 
Sin, of which he cannot be the Auther. 2 He here ſets forth God 
as efſentially and immutably Good; and the Father of Li_hts, by 
alluſion to the Sun the Fountain of corporeal light, and makes ule 
of terms borrowed from Aſtronomy. The Sun though If 1-atteretil 
its Beams every where, yet is not without its Changes, Parallaxe*, 
and diverſities of the Aſpe&s, not only ſometimes clear, and ſome- 


times Eclipſed, but one while in the Eaſt, another in the South, 
then in the Weſt; nor without its turninss in its annual courſe from 
Tropick to Tropick ( to which the Grzeb word here uſed ſeems fo 
allude ) its various acceſſes and receſſes, by reaſon of whici it caſts 
different ſhadows; but God is always the ſame, like himf-I! con- 
ſtant in the emanations of his goodneſs, without caſting 43) dark 
ſhadow of evil which might infer a change in him. 


Dy e . od 7 rot all 
18 * Of his own will 2 begar6 he us with the word 3 


of-truth c, that we ſhould be a kind of firſt fruits d of 


his creatures 2. 
4 Out of his meer good pleaſure as the Original Cauſe, and nof 
moved to it by any dignity or merit in us, Eph. 1. 9- 409 2 Tim. lo 


9. b Bya ſpiritual generation, whereby we are New-born, and arc 
m:44!% 


Cha 


P.] 


17 * s Every good gltt, and every perfect gift 7, "G4, 
is from above x, and cometh down from the Father T%%3* 


ON. 4% 


— "— =) GY 


*iCor.g7, 
7 Mal 3.6 


Chap. I:. 


A 
& 74 


v.17. 


az of? - 
F LCCiCio /0 


bw 


” Mat. 7: 


$4; 22, 


Rome2.13- 


* Luke 6. 
£7. as 


_ 
* a 


cnap. 


2. Ihe OCs 


i. 13, di.e. Moitexccilent Creatures, being finzled out and {epari- 
red trom the rett, and confecrated to God, as under the Law the 
tirſt-Fruits were, Rev. 14. 4. e viz. reaſonable Creatures; the 
word Creature being clſe-where reſtrained to Men. See Hark 16. 
15. Col, 1. 15, 

19 Wherefore, my beloved brethren, * let every 
man be iwiit to hear f, F flow to ſpeak &, || flow to 
wrath þ. 

f Prompt and ready to hear God {ſpeaking in the, Word of Truth 
betore mentioned. gz Either filently and ſubmitfively hear the Word, 
or, ſpeak not raſkly. and precipitately of the things of Faith, but be 
well turniſhed your ſelves with, ſpiritual Knowle1ge, creyou take 
upon you to teach otherg, h Either be not angry at the Word,or tne 
Diſpenters of it, though it come cloſe to your Conſciences, and 
diſcover your ſecret Sins ; the word is Salt, do not quarrel it it make 
your Sores 1mart, being it will keep them from feſtering : or, be not 
angrily prejudiced againſt thoſe that diflent from you. . 

20 For the wrath of man 7 worketh not the righ- 
teouſneſs of God #. 

i That Anger which is meerly humane, and generally finful inor 
dinate Paſſion, and carnal Zeal þ will not accompliſh the ends of the 
Word in you, viz. to work that righteouſneſs, which in the Word God 
preſcribes you. But here is withal a Meiofts in the Words, lefs being 
ſpoken than is intended , it 1s implied therefore, that the wrath of 
Man hinders the operation of 'the Word, and diipoſeth to that un- 
righteouſneſs which 15 forbidden by it. 

21 Wherefore lay apart / all 7 filthineſs 7 and ſuper 
fluiry o of naughrinels,and receive p with mecknels q the 
engrafted » word which /isable ro fave 7 your 1ouls zz. 

/ Not only reſtrain it, and keep it in; but put off, and throw 
it away as a filthy rag, Iſa. 3o. 22. ſee Epheſ. 4. 22. Col. 3. 8. 
and 1 Pet. 2. 1. m Of every kind. n Or, /odidneſs; a Meta- 
phor borrowed from the filth of the Body, 1 Pet. 3.21. and 
thence transferred to the Soul; and it here ſeems to 1mply not 
only Senfuality or Covetouſneſs, but all ſorts of Luſts, whereby men 
arc defiled, 2 Cor. 7. 1. and 2 Pet. 2. 20.07, e, That naughtineſs 
which is ſuperfluous: That is ſaid to be ſuperfluous or redun- 
dant, which 1s more than ſhould be in a thing ; in which re- 
{pe& all fin is ſuperfluous in the Soul, as being that which ſhould 
z0t be init; and fo this intimates that we are not only to lay apart 
more groſs pollutions, but all the Lufts of the Fleſh, and relids of 
old 4dam, as being all ſupertJuities which may well be ſpared, or 
cxcrements {as ſome render the word agrecably to the former 
Metaphor) which ſhould be caft away. p Not only into your heads 
by knowledge, but into your hearts by faith. q With humility , 
modeſty and gentleneſs, which makes Men ſubmitfive to the truth 
of the Word, and ready to learn of God even thoſe things which 
are above their natural capacity, Pſal. 25. 9. 1/a. 65. 2. Matth. 11.5, 
27. -this is oppoſed to Wrath, which makes men unteachable. r Ej- 


ther which 1s engrafted or implanted, viz. Miniſterially by the Prea- |} 
chers of the Goſpel, 1 Cor. 3. 6, 7. principally by the Spirit of God, | 


who writes it in the heart, Fer. 31.33. And thus it may be taken 
particularly for the Word of the Goſpel, in oppoſition to the Lai 
which came to Mens ears from without, and admoniſhed them of 
their Duty, but was not writ in their hearts, or engratted there, to 
form them unto obedience to it. Or, that it may be engraffed, j. e. 
Intimately united to, or rooted in the heart by a vital union, or 
madenatural to it (as ſome render the word) the heart being tranſ- 
formed by the power of it, and conformed to the Precepts of if, 
2 Cor. 3.18. Rom. 6. 17. { viz. when received by Faith. #- In- 
ſtrumentally, as being the means wherein God puts forth his power 
in ſaving them, Roy. 1. 16.4 Your ſelves, the Soul as the nobleſt part, 
15 by a Synecdoche, put for the whole Perſon, ſee 1 Pet. 1. 9. 

22 * Put be ye doers of the word x and not hear- 
ers only y deceiving your own ſelves 2. 

x The ſame as doers of theWork, v. 25. namely,which the Word 
preſcribes, g..d. receive the Word by faith into your Hearts, and bring 
forth the fruit of it in your Lives; ſee Luke 11. 28. 7ohn 13. 17. 
.y Not contenting your felyes with a bare hearing the Word, though 
1t have no intluence upon you. xz Playing the Sophiſters with, or 
putting a tallacy upon your ſelves, particularly,perſwading your ſelves 
into a good opinion of your ſtate, mcerly becauſe of your being 
hearers of the Word, Matth. 7. 21. 

23 For * if any man be a hearer of the word, and 
not a doer, he is like untoa man a beholding his na- 
tural faceb ina glals c : 

a The Greek word here uſed, properly figninnes the Sex, not the 
Species, but is indifferently uſed by this Apoſtle with the other, as 
v. 12, and 20. fo that by a Man looking his Face 1n a Glaſs, is meant 
any Man or Woman. b Or, the face of his Nativity by an Hebraiſm, 
for natural Face, as we tranſlate it, 7. e. his own Face, that which 
Nature gave him, or he was born with. c The Word 1s here com- 
pared to 4 Looking-Glaſs; as the Glaſs repreſents to us the Features 
and Complexions of our Faces, whether beautiful or deformed ; fo 
the Word ſhews us the true tace of our Souls, the beaut;; of God's 
{mage when reſtored to them, and the Spots of Sin which ſo greatly 
disfigure them, | 

24 For he beholdeth himſelf, and gocth his way, 
and ftraightway forgetteth what mannzr o! man he 
was d. 

d The remembrance of what his Face is, vaniſhcth as ſoon as his 
Eye is off the Glaſs ; he remembers not the Spots he ſaw in his Face 
to wipe them off. So he that ſees the Blemiſhes of his Soul, in the 
Giats of the Word, and doth not remembcr them to do them May, 
looks in that Glaſs (7.v, hears the Word) in vain. 


25 But whoſo looketh e to the perfect * law of 1 


\ ol. [T. 


FUMES. 


mad partakers of a Divine Nature, John tr. 13. and 1 Pet. 1. 3, 23+ { 


c #. ©, The Word of the Golpcl, as the Inſtrument or Mcans whcrc- 
by we are regenerated: Why it is called the Word of Truth, fee FP. 


he hears into pratiice, P/azl. 103. 


ſeems, 1s otten taken, 1 Cor. 3. 


1n2,and ſpeaking evil of others 


1? ” 
by : ; 1 ms OF TY ALI 
berry /. aUnagG CONTIiuyeth TPEFOM 


getiul here: 
fhall be bletR-1 


' . . 
4 Sn beta bf mn IF + 
ULS!LC L J? 11S it %F# \ 1 RR 
! 


er Þ bur 


into a thing); ind is utrd of the Diſciples looking tato Crit?” » 
pulcher, Luke 24. 12. 7:n 20.5, ſee 1 Pet. t. 12. and 

oppoied to looking into a Gli, which is more thzhit, a! 
ſuch prying and 1nquifitivensf,, f The whole DUittrioc of the Scrty 
tare, or eſpecially the Guipe! calied a Law, 7 . 27 any 
is a Rule, and by reaſon co! the yowerit hith over the !icurt;; aid 
Law of Liberty, becaulc 1t ſhows the way to the butt Z55+ 5, treedoin 
from Sin, the Bondage of tie C: ro. onal Law, the rizour of tac 
Moral, and from the Wrath 9: Gud; 


) 
and hkewiſe the way of for 
ving Good freely and in-enuoully as - Children; and becauſe beins 
received into the Heart, 1t 15 acco:npanied with the Spirit or Adyr:- 
tion who works th:s Liberty, 2 Cor. 3.17. It 5 called a perfed Law, 
not only as kcing intire and without any detcet, bur as directing vs 
to the greateſt Perfeftion, full contorinity to God, and enjoyment 
of him, 2 Tim, 3.15, 17. g Perſeveres 1n the ſtudy, bulict, and o- 
bedience of this DoQrine, (Pſal. 1. 2.) 1n all conditions, and under a!! 
temptations and affittions. This ſeems to be oppoict to him, 
when he hath looked in a Glaſs,goes away v2.4.5! 


Wile are let forth 
2ht, ſuperficial hearers, who do not continue in Chriſt's W 
7obn8.31. hGr. heaver of forgetfulneſs, by an lehratn 157 4 
getful Hearer ; it anſwers to him in the former Veric, thit ! 
what manner of man he was, and impiics. not only, not roms 
the Truths we have heard, but a not pro*tifing them, +: 
the next Clauſe. i Viz. which the Word diretts hum to <Q: 
gular Number 1s put tor the Plural; he meatehe tat reduuy ts 
i8. þ Tins is oppoſed to hire Troy 
inz, and the doer of the Work tis faid tobe blotite 1 4, of by tis 2 
as the evidence of his preſent begun bletledrett, and re 4 
future perfect Happincis. 

26 If any man among you fee /to he rl 
ind * bridlech nor his toncoue x, but decetrert iis wi 
heart z, that man's region 75 Vain -, | : 

1 Seems to others, or rather to himſelf ; thinks himfelt reli 1908, 
becauſe of his heariny and outward Worthip ; thus the word rendr. 0 * 
3. 12.and 8.2, and 14. 37. G.t. 6. 3: 
Here he ſhews who arc not ders of the Work, as in the next Vert-, 
whoare. m Reftrains 1t not trom the common Vices of the Tongur, 
reviling, r:iling, cenſuring, &c. n Either decetveth his own heart mn 
thinking himſelf Religious, when indulging himfelr in thinss fo cen- 
trary to Religicn, or deceives his own heart, being blinded with felt - 
loye, and liſted up with ſelf-conceit, which is the cauſe of his cenſur- 

o Empty ard to ro purpoſe, hs 
ving noreality in it ſelf, and bringing no te netit to him. 

27 Pure p religion and undefiled q betore God » ard 
the Father {is this, To vifit 7 the fatherleis and wi- 
dows z in their affliction x, ard tro keep himfelt un 
ſpotted ob the world y. 

Þ True, fincere, genuine, Matth. 5. 8. 7:kn 15.3. gq This ſeem: 
to retle& upon the Hypocritical ZFews, whoſe Relicion contificd {7 
much in external obſervances, and keepins themſ-lves from Ceremn- 
mial Defilements, when yet they were ſullicd with fo many mor. 
ones, Matth. 23. 14, 23. John 18. 28. devoured Widows Houſe: 
They thought their Rel121on pure and undefled ; the Apoitlc fhews 
here which 15 really for in the f1zht of God, and accordins to His 
Judgment. //. e. God who 1s the Father, znd being only expiicu- 
tive, as Eph, 1. 3. and 5. 20. yet this Title may be given hore ro 
God with reſpe& to what follows ; and to ſhew that tuch ats of 
Charity are acceptable to him that 1s called the Fudge of WH idon s, .1n-/ 
the Father of the Fatherleſs, Pal. 58. 5. t This includes all oti:-r 
atts- of Charity to them, comforting, counſelling; relieving them,z+c. 
u He doth not exclude others from being the obj<&ts of our Charity 
and Compaſſion, but inftanceth in Fatherleſs and Widows, as beins 
uſually moſt miſerable, beciuſe deſtitute of thcſe relations whic!: 
might be moſt helpful to them, and potlivly tn thoſe times Perfecu- 
tion might encreate the number of Widows and Orphans, x Whe: 
they had moſt need ; leſt any ſhould think it turicicar to vitit thei: 
that were rich, or 1n a proſperous condition. y Uutzinted by the ev: 
example of Men in the World, and tree trom the Lults of the World, 
moral Pollutions. The Apoſile doth not herc define Religion, but only 
inſtanceth in theſe two things, ood works, and holinefs of conver- 
ſation, as teſtimonies and arguments of tne truth of it, 


CHAP. Il. | 
The accepting the Perſons of 'th? Rich, and deſpifing the poop 1erv;4 £7 

I 4. From the digit) of Believers with God and the xc 

edneſs of many Rich, 5——-7. It is contrary to the Le of our 

Neighbour, and it ſelf alone renders a Man tranigreſſor of the whois 

Law, and ſuch an - one muſt eape& unmerc ful judgment, Cam: ;, 

Faith without Works is not ſaving , no move then Live im words on; 

H true, 1 ——15. Such a Faith is dead; # no 1170 then the 

wvils have ;, and juſtifieth nat ; unlike that of Abraham and Rahab . 

and libe to a body without a Soul, 179—=25. 

| Y brethren, have nor @ the faith of our Lord Ie 

ſus Chriſt b zÞe Lord of glory c, with * ro: + 
pect of perſons d. 

a Profcis not your ſelves, and regard not, or eftcem not - in 
thets. b i.e. Faith in our Lord Jefus Chrift, rot the Aiwithor, but & : 5 
the obje&t of Faith is meant, as Gal. 2. 20. and 3. 22. Phil. 3.G. ir, : 
c Lord not being in the Gr. Glory, may be joyned with Faith (ad 
mitting only a trajze&ion in the Words fo frequent inthe Sacred Mit; 
Writers) and then the Words will run thus, the Faith: of the g!51 ; 5 


TYP 
WO, 


Fe 
Dn 
| 0. 
- 191 


SH” - 0 
of our Lord Feſus Chriſt, i. e. the Faith of his being Glorificd, which 
by a Synecdoche may be put for the whole work of Redemptio 
wreught by him, which was compicated Ly his Glorihcation, as the 
laſt partof it; or, by an Kebrazim, the Faith of the Glory, may | 


' Words 1s {as our Tranſlators do) by fuppliaz the word iordgnt 
p "= = = 
\ 3 2 ; 


be for the Glorious Faith : But the pjaineft way of reading 


CAC «= tr CG 


4 W - 
l 


Or, SUE 


Or, wel / 


Chap. II. 


er /cemts, 


20. 


Prov.8.17. 


"things of this World, and inthe eſteem of Worldly Men; they are 


* 121 x oppreſs you y, and draw you before the judg- 


before mentioned, Lord of Glory (Chriſt being elſewhere ſo called 
1 Cor. 2. 8.) 1.e. the Glorious Lord, as the Father js called the 
Father of Glory, Epheſ. 1. 17. 7. e. the Glorious Father ; and then it 
may be an Argument to ſecond what the Apoſtle is ſpeaking of 
Chriſt being the Lord of Glory; a relation to him by Faith, 
puts an honour upon Believers, though poor and deſpicable in the 
Worid; and therefore they are not to be contemned. d The word 
rendred Perſon, fignifies the Face or Countenance, and Synecdochi- 
cally the whoſe Perſon ; and by conſequence all thoſe parts or qua- 
litics we take notice of 1n the Perſon. To reſpect a Perſon 1s 
ſometimes taken in a good ſenſe, Gen. 19. 21. and 1 Sam. 25. 35. 
Moſtly in an evi!, when either the Perſon is oppoſed to the caule, 
we give more or lets to a Man upon the account of tomething we 
ice 18 him which 1s altogether foreign to his Cauſe, Lev. 19. 15. or 
when we accept one with injury to, or contempt of another. To 
have then the Faith of Chriſt with reſpe& of Perſons, 15 to eſteem 
the Projeilors of Religion, not for their faith, or relation to Chriſt, 
2ut according to their Worldly condition, their being great, or mean, 
ric or poor; this the Apoſtle taxeth in the Mebrews to whom 
hz Wrotc, that whereas in the things of God, all Believers are equal, 
they reſpected the greater and richer ſort of Profeflors, becauſe 
great: or rich ; fo as to deſpiſe thoſe that were poor or low. The 
Gr, hath the Word Plurally , reſpe&s, which may intimate the ſeve- 
ral ways of reſpe&ing Perſons in Judgment or out of Judgment. 
This doth not exclude the civil reſpe& we owe to Magiſtrates and 
Superiours upon the account of their Places or Gifts, but only a re- 
ip=tinz Men in the things of Religion upon ſach accounts as are 
extrintical to Religion ; or, with prejudice to others as conſidera- 
ble 19 Religion as themſcives, though inferiour to them in the 


2 For if there come unto your || aſſembly e a man 
with a gold ring, in goodly apparel f, and there 
come in alto a poor, man g in vile raiment þ. 

e Either Church-Aflemblies for Worſhip, Heb. 10. 25. and in 
theſe we find ſome reſpe& of Mens Pertons, which may here be 
blamed; fee 1 Cnr. 11. 20, 21, 22. Or their Afﬀemblies for diſ- 
ping Church-Oces, and deciding Church Controverſies, gc. For 
hc ipeaks of ſuch reſpetting Mens Perſons as is condemned by the 
Law, ver. 9. which was eſpecially in Judgment. f The uſual En- 
{11:ns of honourable or rich Perſons, Gen. 38. 18, 25. and 41, 42. 
Z ike 18.22, and 15, 19. g The word fe;nines one very poor, even 
to Beggarlineſs, h Filthy and ſordid, Zech. 3. 3,4. the fign of ex- 
trem Poverty. 

3 And ye have reſpe& 7 to him that weareth the 
gay cloathing, and ſay to him, Sit thou || here in a 
good place #, and ſay to the poor, Stand thou there, 
or kt here under my foor-ſtool /. 

{ Gr. lob upon, viz. with reſpe& and veneration, or 4 care and 
concern to pleaſe "him. þ% An honourable place, either contrary to 
the uſual orders of the Churches, according to which (as ſome ay ) 
the Elders ſat in Chairs, the next to them on: Benches ; and the 
Novices on the Pavement at their Feet; the Apoſtle taxing the car- 
-pal partiality in diſpoſing theſe places to the People as Rich, not as 
Chriftians ; or, it may note their diſpoſing Church-Offices to them 
that were rich, or favouring them in their Cauſes rather than the 
Poor. [The meaneſt places, and belonging to the youngeſt Diſci- 
ples ; both are expreſſions of contempt. 

4 Are ye not then partial in your ſelves mr, and are 
become judges of evil thoughts 7 ? 

m Either, are ye mt judged in your ſelves, convitted by your own 
Conſciences of partiality, and accepting Mens Perſons, or, have ye 
nt made a difſerence ? viz. out of a corrupt affeaion rather than a 
ri;ht judgment; and then it falls in with our Tranſlation, are ye not 
partial 2 The Greek word is uſed in this ſenſe, Ads 15. 9. 7ude 
22. 7 1, e. Judges that have evil Thoughts,or are evil affected, g. d. 
vou evidence the corruptneſs of your affef&ions by your thus per- 
verily judging. | 

5 Hearken, my beloved brethren, * Hath not God 
choſen the poor » of. this World p, rich q in faith 7, 
and heirs of || the kingdom / + which he hath pro- 
niſed to them that love him 7 ? 

» Not that God hath choſen all the Poor in the World, but his 
choice 15 chiefly of them, 1 Cor. T. 26, 28, Poor he means in the 


orpoſed to thoſe that Paul call rich in this World, 1 Tim. 6.17, 18. 
7 Some inſert the Verb Subſtantive #9 be between this and the for- 
mer cauſe, and read, hath nor God choſen the por of this World to be 
rich, &c. So Rom. £. 29. Predeſtinate to be conformed; the like de- 
feitive ſpzeches we find 7ohn 12. 46. and 2 Cir. 3.6. And the 
Verb underſtood here is exprefled, Ephe/. 1. 4. after the ſame word 
we have in this Text ; and yet if we read the words as they ſtand 
in our Tranlation, they do not prove that fore-{ight of Faith is pre- 
vicus to El:&ion, any more than that being Heirs of the Kingdom 
is ſo*o0. »r Either in the greatneſs and abundance of the Faith, 
Maith. 15. 28. Rom. 4. 20. or, rather Rich in thoſe Priviledges and 
Hopes to which by Faith they have a Title. / An inftance of their 
heins rich in that they are to inherit a Kingdom. # See Chap. I. 12. 
where the fame words occur, only that whichis here a Kingdom 1s 


fliere a Crown. : 
6 But * ye have deſpiſed the poor z. Do not rich+ 


ment ſear 5. 

u God's Poor, viz. By your reſpe&ing Perſons. x Either thoſe 
taat werdanbelieving Jews or Heathens ; or ſuch as made a Profel- 
!50n of Chriſtianity, but were not cordinal friends to it; or, both 
may be included. y Inſolently abuſe you, and unrighteoutly, ei- 
their uſurping a Power over you which” belongs not to them, or a- 
buſing the Power they have. .z Eſpecially before unvelieving Judges, 
1 Cor. 5. 1,6, they would colovr their Opprefſion with a pretence 


FAMES. 


of Law, and therefore drew the poor Saints beforc the Judgment 
Seat. ages 

7 Do not they blaſpheme a that worthy b nams %. 
which ye are called c? = 

a If the Rich here ſpoken of, were Chriſtians ; then they may 
be ſaid to Blaſpheme Chriſt's Name, when by their wicked carciao. 
they cauſed it to be blaſphemed by others, Unbelievers amon.- wh 
they were, Rom. 2. 24. 1 Tim. 6.1, but if rich Unbelievers be here 
meant, the Rich Men of theſe times being generally great Ene- 
mies to Chriſtianity ; he would from thence ſhew how mean a con. 
ſideration Riches were, to encline the Profeſſors of Reli»ion tn 
ſuch partiality as he taxeth them for. - þ Or, good or honourable (;- 
good 'place, ver. 3. for honourable) Name of Chriſt ; they B1zc. 
pneme what they ſhould adore. c Or, which 7s called upon 194, < 
| ther, which was called upon over you, when you were baptiſed 
| 1nto 1t, or rather it is an Hebrew phrale, and implies no more than 
(as we read it) their being called by it, ag Children are after their 
Fathers, and Wives after their Husbands, "Gen. 48. 16. JI. 4, x. 
For ſo God's People are called by his Name, Dent. 28.10, / Phe, 
3 1's. 

s It ye tulfl « the royal law e according to the * 


ſelf, ye do well g. 

d Or, perfe#, the Word ſignifies to accompliſh perfetly, but ng 
more 1s meant by it than the ſincerity in obſerving the Dutics ofth- 
Law in an indifferent reſpet& to one-as well as another, which je 
ſeems to oppoſe to their partiality 1n the Law, by reſpe&ins ſan; 


and neglefting others. e Either the Law of God the great inp, or 
Chriſt the Ring of Saints, or rather the Royal Law is the Kin»'s 
Law, 7. e. the great Law which 1s the ſame to all, Rich and Poor.the 
common Rule by which all are to a&, as, the King's way, Numb. 21, 
22. 7, e, the great plain Way in which all are to travel. Her: 
may hikewiſe be a tacit refleion on the ſervile diſpotition of 
theſe accepters of Men's Perſons, evil becoming them that pretend- 
ed to be governed by the Royal Law, which was to be obſerved 
with a more free and King-like ſpirit. f See Matth. 22. 39. Gal, 
5. I4. g Ye are not to be blamed but commended ; the Apolt!c 
ſeems here to anſwer an objeQion they might make in their own 
defence ; that in the reſpe& they gave to Rich Men, they did but 
att according to the Law which commands us to love our Neizh- 
bour as our ſelves; to this he replies partly in this Verſe by way of 
conceſſion, or on ſuppolition, that if the refped they gave to Rich 
Men were indeed in obedience to the Law of Charity, which com- 
mands us to love our Neighbour as our ſelves, then they did well, and 
he —_ no fault with them, but the contrary he ſhews in the next 
Verſe. 


fin, and are convinced of thelaw 7 as & tranſgreliors. 


h The fecond part of the Apoſtle's anſwer, in which he ſor; 
Perſons in oppoſition to Neighbour, q. d. it you inſtead of loving 
your Neighbour, which excludes no ſort of Men, poor no more 
than rich, chuſe and 1ingle out (as ye do) only ſome few (viz. Rich 
Men) to whom ye give reſpett, deſpiſing others ; ye are ſo far from 
fulfilling the Royal Law, that ye fin againſt it, 7 Either by the par- 
ticular Law againſt reſpe&ting Perſons, Lev. 19. 15. or rather by 
that very Law you urge ; your thus partially reſpe&ing the rich to 
the excluding of the poor, being fo contrary to the command of 
loving your Netghbour, which excludes none. þ To be Trant- 
greflors, viz. of the whole Law, as follows, 


10 For whoſoever ſhall / keep the whole law z», 


* / This1is not an Afertion,that any Man doth keep the whole Law 
ſo as-to offend but in one point, but a Suppoſition that if, or ad- 
mitting ſuch a one were. m All the reſt of the Law, that one 
point only of the whole being excepted. - n Slip, or trip, or ſtum- 
ble at; it ſeems to fignihe the leaſt failing in any point of the Law, 
o Guilty of the Breach, and obnoxious to the Puniſhment of all ; 
not diſtributively, or ſeparately, as if he tranſgrefled every Precept 
diſtin&ly ; but 1. conjunRtively or comparatively, he is guilty of nct 
keeping the whole Law, though not of breaking each particular 
Command ; he breaks the whole Law, though not the whole of the 
Law; as he that wounds a Man's Arm, wounds the whoſe Man, 
though not the whole of the Man ; he that breaks one Link, breaks 
the whole Chain, and he that fails in one Mufical Note, ſpoils the 
whole Harmony. 2. He fins againſt Charity, which is the tumm ot 
the Law, and upon which all the Commands depend ; and fo though 
he keep moſt of them, as to the Subſtance, yet he keeps none of 
them in a right manner, becauſe none out of Love, which ſhouid 
be the Principle out of which he obſerves all of them. 3. He ins 
azainſt the Authority of the whole Law, which is the ſame in cve- 
ry Command. 4. He is liable to the ſame Puniſhment, though not 
the ſame degree of it, as if he had broke all the Commandments, 
Gal. 3. 10. and his keeping moſt, cannot exempt- him from the 
Puniſhment due for the Breach of that one ; This he ſpeaks either 
in oppoſition to the Phariſees among the Fews, who thought them- 
ſelves righteous if they kept moſt of the Law, though in ſome 
things they came ſhort ; or rather againſt Hypocrites among Chrt- 
ſlians, who would pick and chuſe Duties, obey ſome Commands, 
and neglet others ; whereas no Obedience to God is right, but that 
which is impartial, and reſpets all the Commands, Pf. 119. 6, #147. 
5. 19. 

11 For\| he that ſaid p * Do not commit adultery, 


þ A Proof ] ; x 
ſtancing in theſe two Commands, there being the fame reaſon of al 


| thereſt, the ſame Sovereignty and Righteouſnels of God appearing 


in them; and it being the Will of God to try our Obedience n _ 
25 well as- another. qViz. by contemnins the Authority m 


1 « 


S$34t% * 


ſcripture f, * Thou ſhalr love thy neighbour 4s thy 1. 


. 9 But if ye * havereſpeQ to perſons h, ye commit, ... 


Chap. 11 


and yet oftend z-in one p2i7t, * he is guilty of all o. + q,y..- 


ſaid alſo, Do not kill : Now if thou commit no adul- j mm 
tery,yet if thou kill thou art become a tranſgreffor of |; 
the Law g. no 


of what he laid down in the former Verſe by 1nt- 14. 


l, 


Ede Fen 


Fn CEOs EF age: 


af A 
AUL-v' 


he dnt DEA, 
gr SO SY; 
_—_ 6 
- 37> \ EY IDS 


IT Eg 


fie 


| Or, that 
[aw which 
aid, 

fFy00,20 


4 > 


I4. 


NM 2p 


Sa 


FILES 
- bt 2 


FEE Ennlg ts 


Hts SO Er 


DOR Pas Nocer 


DI a a ns. Ad Ry 
- W CEDGIRIOS. 27 GT dr 2 
TE AN IO TNT, 


ns FR oo” EVR 
"> 8 Dk. IN 


* Ip 
< 


Sf CLE 0 rar 


AL Ws 


Mt Ad br Se IR 


os er 


WE 7s Kh 
LP Os In 


ie 
or Et 


Chap. 1. 


+ C!1.1P- 1 
25. 


* Matth.5. 


lineſs of God, which appears in the whole Law, and every Com- 
mand of it. 


12 So ſpeak ye, and ſo do 7, as they that ſhall be 


' Judged / by the* lawgof liberty 7. 


ry The Apoſtle concluding his Diſcourſe about reſpe&ing Perſons, 

' which contiſted both in their Words and Atons ; he direfts them 
how to govern themſelves in both. { Viz, For both your Words 
and Ations, and that, not only in your own Conſciences at preſent, 
but at God's Tribunal hereafter. # The Goſpel ; of the Liberty of 
which it is one Branch, that theſe differences among Men, jof Jew 
and Gentile, Bond and Free, Circymciſed, and Uncircumciled, gyc. 
are taken awav, As 10. 28, Gal. 3. 28. Col. 3. 11. againſt this 
Law of Liberty you fin, if you reſpe& Perfons, and then may well' 
fear to be judged by it; asit takes away differences of Perſons now, 
ſo it will make none at laſt, but will be as impartial in its Judgment 

as 1t 15 1n 1ts Commands, 

13 For * he ſhall have judgment without mercy x 


1<.2nd 18. thar hath ſhewed no mercy x -; + and mercy || rejoiceth 
33and 25. again{t judgment y. | 


41, 42. 


1 Shall be judged according to the rigour of the Law by pure Ju- 


# 1 Joh. 4+ ſtice, without any mixture of Mercy. x That hath been cruel and 


17, I8. 


unmerciful to his Neighbour here. y Either, 1. the Mercy-oi God 


|| Or, glort- rejoyceth and glorieth over Judgment, being as it were ſuperior and 


e ſ h » 


* Matth.'7 


25. 
Chap. I, 
23, 


* See Luk. 


þ. #5. 


victorious in relation to thoſe that ſhew Mercy, to whom the Pre 
miſe of obtaining Mercy is made, Matth. 5. 79. Or rathcr, 2. The 
Mercy of Men, #. e. of thole that deal mercifully with others ;- their 
Mercy having the Mercy and Promiſe of God on its fice, need not 
fear, but rather may rejoyce, and as it were glory againſt Judg- 
ment, as not being like to go againſt chem. Otje&. Is not this to 
make ſome ground ot glorying to be in Men themlclyes, contrary to 
Pſal. 143. 2 Rom. 4. 2? Anſw. Mercy in Believers 15 an Evidence of 
their Intereſt in God's Mercy, which prevails on their behalf againſt 
his Juſtice; and fo its. rejoycing againit Judgment 1s not againit it, 
as overcome by it ſelf, but by God's Mercy, Thus both Senſes are 
included. _ : 

14 * What doth zt profit, a my brethren, though a 
man lay 6 he hath faith c, and have nor works d © can 
faith lave hime ? 

a Viz. As to his eternal Salvation ; wherein are the ends of Reli- 
gion - promoted by it? The Apoſtle had jutt before declared, that 
thev who are unmerciful to Men, ſhall find God ſevere to them- 
ſelves, and have Judgment without Mercy : but Siypocritical Proteſ- 
ſors boaſted of their Faith as ſufficient to ſecure them againſt that 
Judzment, though they negletted the Pra&ice of Holineſs and 
Righteouſneſs. Hence he ſeems to take occation for the following 
Diſcourſe, to beat down their vain Boaſting of an empty unfruittul 
Faith ; and poſſibly, leſt they ſhould abule or miſunderſtand what 
he had ſaid about the Law of Liberty, as it that inferred a Licenſe of 
finning, and living as they pleaſed. b Whether boaſtingly with 
his Mouth to others, or flatteringly in his Heart to himſelf, The 
Apoſtle doth not ſay, that a Man's having Faith ſimply 1s unproff- 
table, but either that Faith he pretends to- without Works, or his 
boaſting he hath Faith, when the contrary 1s evident by his not ha- 
ving Works. cSuch as he pretends to be good, and ſound and ſa- 
ving, but is really empty and dead, v. 26. and untruitful. dj, e. 
Good Works, ſuch as are not only Aﬀs of Charity, to which the 
Papiſts would reſtrain it, but all the Fruits of Righteouſneſs and Ho- 
lincſs proceeding from Faith, and appearing both in Heart and Life. 
e The In errogation is a vehement negation, g. d, it cannot fave 
him, viz. ſuch a Faith az a Man may have (as well as boaſt he hath) 
without works. This James calls Faith only by way of Conceſſion 
for the preſent, though -it be but equivocally called Faith, and no 
more really ſo, than the Carcaſe of a Man is,a Man, 

15 * If a brother or fifter f be naked g, and deſti- 
ture of daily food þ - 

f A Chriſtian Man or Woman, who hath frequently thus called, 
ſee x Cor. 7, 12, 15. g Badly cloathed, or deſtitute of ſuch cloa- 
thing as is fit for them, Fob 22. 6. 1 Cor. 4. 11. h Matth, 6. 11. That 
which is neceffary for the ſuſtaining of Lite a Day to an end ; un- 
der theſe two of Nakedneſsand Hunger he comprehends all the Ca- 
lamities of Human Life, which may be relieved by the Help of 
others; as Food and Raiment contain all the ordinary Supports 
and Comforts of Life, Gen. 28. 20. Matth. 6. 25.and x Tim. 6.8. 


16 And * one of you ſay unto them, Depart in 


* r Joh.3. k 


18, 


peace 7, be ye warmed &, and be yehilled /, notwith- 
{tanding ye give them not thoſe things which are 
needful to the Body m7 - what doth 7t profit 72 ? 

; An uſual Form of Salutation, wherein, under the Name of Peace, 
they wiſhed all Proſperity, and Happineſs to them they greeted, 
Mark 5. 34. Luke 7. 50. and 8. 48. k i.e. Beyecloathed ; the 
Warmth here mentioned being ſuch as is procured by Cloaths, 7ob 


31. 20. | Or, ſatisfied with Food ; a Metaphor from the fatting of 


Cattel with Graſs or Hay, The fame Word is uſed, Matth. 14. 20, 
Marh 6. 42. Phil. 4. 12. Theſe two good Wiſhes anſwer the two 
former great Wants, wm Underſtand , when ye are able to relieve 
them; tor he ſpeaks to the Rich, or ſuch as were in a Capacity of be- 
ing helpful to others. n Either what do your good Words, and 
charitable Wiſhes profit them, without charitable Deeds? Or, what 
do they prot your ſelves? Or both may be included : As your fair 
Specches convey no real Good to them, ſo they bring in no Reward 
to you from God. 


17 Even fo faith o, if it hath not works, is dead p, 


7 Gr. by it heing Falone 9. 
felf. 7 f 


o That winch they boaſted of, and called Faith. p Void of that 
Life, in which the very Effence of Faith conſiſts, and which always 


Ciſcovers it ſelf in vital A&jngs, and good Fruits, where it is not ' 


hindred by ſome forceable Impediment ; in Alluiion to a Corps 
which plainly appears to have no vital Principle1a it, all vital Ope- 
rations being, ccaled. It reſemles a Man's Body, and 1s called ſo, 
but in reality 15 not fo, but a dead Carcate, 4q Margin, by it (e/f 


FUMES. 


, or zn it felf, be it what it wil, it is but dead ; Or, as we render it 


PF 


being alone, i, e, not in ConjunRtion with Works, which always 4' 
ſhould be, : 

15 Yea, a man 7 may fay s Thou haſt faith 7, and 
[ have works x : ſhew n 
works x, and I will ſhew thee my faith by nj 
works y. Eee: 

r Any true Believer. 5s To any ſuch boaſtins Hypocrite, * Thon 
pretendeſt to have Faith, or admit thou haft Faith ; and an Bifts- 
rical Faith he night have, 5 4, 19, #4 1 do not boatt of my Kitt, 
or do ſay nothing of my raith, yet works 1 do projets to have. 
x There be two readings of theſe Words, but in both, the 
agrees with the reſt of tie Apoſtle's Dilcourſe. But if we take ti 
marginal reading, ſhew me thy Faith by thy Works, the Sore is, 
Evidence the tazth thou pretendeft to, by thy Works, as the Fruits 
of it ; let thy Attions vouch tor thy- Profeſſion. But it we take tho 
Reading in the Text withour thy Works, it is-a kind of Ironic! 
Expreſſion, 9. d. make it appear by convincing Arguments, that 
thou haſt true Faith, when yet thou wanteſt Works, the only Ar- 
gument of the Truth of it; underſtand here, but this tha can't nts 
y I will eaftly prove my Faith to be true and genuin, by thofe 200d 
Works it brings forth in me. Demonſtrate the Caute to me with- 
out the Effect, if thou canſt ; but I will eatily demonttrats the. 
Cauſe by the Effet, and prove the Root of Faith to be in ins, by 
my bringing forth that Fruit which is proper to it. It cannot 12nco 
Leinterred, that wherever fuch Works are, as Men count wad cal 
good, there muſt needs be Faith : The Apoſtle's meatitnz only | 
That wherever true Faith is, there good Works will certain!y be. 

19 Thou believeſt thar there is one God >. thou 
dolt well a : * The devilsalfo believe b, and trem- 
ole ' ag 

7 Thou g veſt thy Afent to this Truth, that there is one God, 
This may likewiſe 1mpty other Articles of the Creed, to which the 
like Atfent may be given. a Either this kind of Faith hathits good- 
nets, though 1t be not ſaving,or ironically, q. d, a great matter thou 
doſt, when thou goett almoit as high as the Devils. 6 Yield the 
like Afeent to the ſame Truth, c The Word fiznifes extreme |car 
and Horror, viz. fuch as the Thoughts of their Judge ſtrikes into 
them. This ſhews the Faith the Apoſtle ſpeaks of in this Place, not 
to be the Faith of God's Ele&t, which begets in Be.icvers an holv 
Confidence in God, and frees them from ſlaviſh Fears; whereas the 
Faith here ſpoken of, if it have any Efe& upon Men,it is but to nil 
them with Horror. 

20 Bur wilt thou know d O vain man e, that faith 
without works f is dead ? 

4 Either this Queſtion is in order to teachinz, as Joh, 13. 12. 
Rom. 13. 3. and then the Senſe is, If thou haft a Mind to know, I 
ſhall inſtrutF thee : Or, it is a Teaching by way of Queſtion, as 
more emphatical and preſſing ; and then it is, as if- he had laid, 
know O vain Man. e An Allution to an empty Veflel, which ſounds 
more than one that 15 full. The carnal Profetfor to whom he ſpeaks, 
1s vain, becauſe empty of true Faith, and good Works, though fuil 
of Noite and Boaſting. . 05j. Doth not the Apoſtle tin againit 
Chriſt's Command, Matth. 5. 22 ? Anſ. 1. He ſpeaks not of anv 
particular Man, but to all in general, of ſuch a fort. v7, who 
boaſted of their Faith, and yetdid not evidence it by their Works, 
2, It is not ſpoken in raſh Anger, or by way of Contempt, but by 
way of Corre&tion and juſt reproof ; ſee the. like ſpoken by Chrift 
himſelf, Matth. 23.:17, 19. Luke 24. 25. and by Paul, Gat. 3. 1. 
and 1 Cor. 15. 3s. f A defettive Speech, Faith without Works ; 
for that Faith which is without Works, or Faith, if it be without Works 
He doth not ſay, Faith is dead without Wiihs, leſt it ſhould be 
thought that Works were the cauſe of the Life of Faith ; but Faith 
without Works is dead, as v. 17, and 26. implying that Works ar- 
the EffeRts and Signs of the Life of Faith. 

21 Was not Abraham our father g juſtified Þ by 
works when he had offered ; Iſaac his ſon upon the 
altar &? - 


£ Not only the Father of us, as Fews (for to them he wrote) and 
according to the Fleſh, but as Believers, and according to the Pro- 
mile; ſo all Believers are called 4brahan;'s Children, Kom. 4. 11; 
Gal. 3. 7. h Found, or declared fo he juſtihed, not enly before 
God, but in the Face of the World ; and his Faith (by which he had 
been juſtified above thirty years before, in the ſight of God) now 
approved as a true, lively, juititying Faith, by this Proof he gave 
ot 1t,upon God's trying himin the offering up his Son, Genr.22. 9. 12. 
Now T know that thou feareſt Grd, &c. Abraham did fear God, 
and believe him before, and was juſtified before in the f12ht of Ged, 
but by the working of his Faith in fo eminent an A@ ot Obedicnce, 
the ſincerity of all his Graces, and fo of his Faith, was manifeſted, 
and made known, and fo his Faith it ſelf juſtified, as his Perton 
was before, and he obtained this ample Teſtimony from the Mouti: 
of God *himſelf. So that 4b-aham's Juſtification here, was not ti: 
Abſolution of a Sinner, but the ſolemn Approbation of a Believer, 
not a juſtifying him as ungodly, but commending him for his Ged- 
lineſs. He was by his Works juſtified as a righteous Perſon, but 
not made righteous, conſtituted in a juſtified State, by his Works 
The Defign of the Apoſtie 1s not to ſhew how Sinners are juſtined 
in God's Court, but only what kind of Faith it is whereby they are 
juſtified, viz. ſuch a one as purifies the Heart, 4s 15. 9. and looks 
to Chriſt, not only as made Righteouſneſs, but Sanftincotion to 
them, 1 Cor. x. 30. and conſequently not only refts on him for Ju- 
ſtification, but ſtirs them up to yield obedience to him. 3 Viz. In 
his firm [purpoſe and Reſolution, and w2s about to do it actually, 
had not God hindred him. It wis no Favlt in 4brabim, that it 
was not actually done, and theretore it was counted to him, as if it 
had been really donegſGen. 22.12. Heb. 11. 17. 8 This ſhevis the 
ſetled purpoſe of Abraham to ſacrifice T/aauc, when he proceeded fo 
far as to bind him, and lay him upon the Altar ; for tiat argues 
that he expected and intended nothin but his Death, which £e- 
nerally wis wont to follow i: Sactthces, when once Jaid upon the Altar 


22 || Seeft 


Arey 
> 13 


os 


- thy taith | VWittout ry pies ; 


YL AE 


Y A 
«> £0 


FF 


ap. 1 


ct $. 


W- 25 & 
AS 
wha 


CR ES 


— 
_ 
= 
T7 
NA. 
RE 


Chap 


| Or, thou 
{eeſt. 

* Heb. 11. 
17. 


* Gen. 1 5. 
6. 
Rom. 4. 3: 
Gal. 3. 6. 
+ 2 Chron. 
0.7. 


Iſa. 41. 8. 


Il. 


22 || Seeſt thou * how faith wrought with his works 
/ and by works was faith made pertect 2 ? 

{ He doth not ſay, works wrought with his Faith, as he ſhould 
have ſaid, if he had intended their concurrence in Juſtification ; but 
Ezith wrought with his Works, 1. e. his Faith was not idle, but effeQu- 
al in producing good Works, it being the Office and Bufineſs of 
baith to reſpect Chritt for SanQtification, as well as Righteouſneſs, 
Acts 26. 18. m Either, 1. Faith by producing good Works 15 1t 
ſe!t encouraged, heightned, improved ; and ſo not made perfett by 
any Communication of the Perfe&tion of Works to it, but by being 
ſtirred up, and cxerciſed as to the internal Strength and Power 
of it. Or, 2ly, rather, Faith is made Perfe&t by Works declara- 
tively, in as much as Works evidence and manifeſt the Perfettion 
and Strength of Faith. Faith is the Cauſe, and Works are the Effects, 
but the Cauſe 1s not perfeted by the Effet ; only its Perfe&ton 1s 
demonſtrated by it, as good Fruit doth not makea Tree good, but 
theiv that 1t 15 ſo. See 2 Cor. 12. 9. 

23 And the ſcripture was fulfilled 7, which faith, 
+ Abraham believed God, and it was imputed to him 
for righteouſneſs o ; and he was called the + Friend of 
ot God P. 

n This illuſtrious inſtance of 4braham's Obedience did fo clearly e- 
vicence the Sincerity of his Faith, that it did moſt plainly appear, 
that what the Scripture ſaid of him, it ſpoke moſt truly, vzz. that 
he did indeed believe Gad, and it was counted to him for Righteouſ- 
neſs. Things are ſaid to be fulfilled when they are moſt clearly ma- 
nifeſted. As thoſe words, Pſalm 2. 7. This day have I begotten thee, 
are ſaid to be fulfilled: at Chriſt's Reſurrettion, 4s 13. 32, 33. not 
that he was then firſt begotten of the Father, but that he was then 
10 a glorious manner declared to be the Son of God by: the Reſur- 
re&ion from the dead, Rom. 1. 4. So here Abraham's offering up 
his Son being the evident Diſcovery of his Faith, it did by that ap- 
pear, that the Scripture-report of him was true, that he belzeved 
God, &c, he did believe before, and his Faith was imputed to him 
betore, but it was never fo fully made known, as by this ſo high an 
at of Obedience. o Viz. as apprehending Chriſt in the Promiſe , 
Faith is ſaid to be imputed for Rightcoutneſs, Rom. 4. 3, 5, 6 4s 
being the Inſtrument or means of applying Chriſt's Righteouſneſs, 
by which elſewhere weare faid to be juſtified, Rom. 3. 24, 25. and 
5. 19. 2 Cor. 5. 21. Phil. 3. 9. p Either he was the Friend of God ; to 
be called, ſometimes implies as much as to be, T/a. 48. 8. or proper- 
ly he was called, 2 Chron. 20. 7. Iſa. 41. 8. and that not only on the 
account of God's frequent Appearances to him, converſing with 
him, revealing Secrets to him, Gen. 18. 17, 18. John 15. 15. and 
entring into Covenant with him, but eſpecially his renewing the 
Covenant with him, upon the ſacrificing of his Son, and confirming 
it by Oath, and thereby, as it were admitting him into a nearer de- 
gree of Friendſhip, Gen. 22. 16. &Cc. bs 

24 Ye ſce then g how that by works 7 a Manis 


juſtified s, and not by faith only z. 

" q An Inference either from the Inſtance of Abraham, or from 
the whole preceding Diſcourſe. r Works of new Obedience. s De- 
clared to be righteous, or approved as ſuch, and acquitted from the 
Guilt of Hypocriſie. # Not by a meer Profeſſion of Faith, or a bare 
aſſent to the Truth, without the Fruit of good Works. Queſt. How doth 
this general Conclution follow from the particular Caſe of Abraham's? 
Anſ. Abraham's Faith and Juſtification both before God, and the World 
are ſet forth as the Exemplars of ours, to which the Faith and Juſtifi- 
cation of all Believers, both Fews and Gentiles,is to be conformed, Rom. 
4. 11, 12, 23, 24. 2. Doth not James here contradi& Paul's Dodrine 
in the matter of Juſtification, Rom. 4? Anſ. The contradition 1s but 
ſeeming, not real, as will appear,if four things be conſidered : 1. The 
occaſion of theſe Apoſtles Writing,and their ſcope in it: Having to 
do with different ſorts of Perſons,they had likewiſe different Deſigns. 
As Chriſt ſpeaks one way when he dealt with proud Phariſees, whom 
he would humble ; another way, when with humble Hearers whom 
he would encourage : And Paul carried it one: way when among 
weak Brethren, in Condeſcention to whoſe Infirmities he circumci- 
fed Timothy, Ads 16. 2, 3. and another, when he was among falſe 
Brethren, and Men of Contention, who oppoſed Chriſtian Liberty, 
ſecking to bring Believers into Bondage, and then would not ſuffer 
Titizs to be circumciſed, Gal. 2. 3,4, 5. So in the preſent Aﬀair, 
Paul's Buſineſs lay with falſe Apoſtles and Judaizing Chriſtians, ſuch 
as did in the matter of Juſtification, either ſubſtitute a Selt-righte- 
ouſneſs inſtead of Geds Grace, or ſet it up in {Conjun&ion with it ; 
and therefore his Scope is (eſpecully in his Epiſtles to the Rowans 
and Galatians) to ſhew the true cauſe and manner of Juſtification , 
and vindicate the freeneſs of Grace in it, by the Excluſion of Man's 
Works of what kind foever, to which purpoſe he propounds the 
Examples of Abraham and David, in their. Juſtification, Rome. 4. 
Whereas Zames having to do with carnal Profeſſors, and ſuch as abu- 
ſed the Dofrine of Grace to encourage themſelves in Sin, and 
thought it ſufficient that they had Faith, (ſuch as it was) tho 
they did not live like Believers, reſting in an empty Profeffion, 
with the negleft of Holineſs ; his Defign plainly is to ſhew the EffeRs 
and Fruits of Juſtification, viz. Holineſs and good Works ; there- 
by to check the Vanity and Folly of them, who did thus divorce 
Faith from an holy Life, (which God hath joyned to it) and fan- 
fied themſelves ſafe in the Profeſſion of the one, without any re- 
ſpe to, or care of the other, as appears in this Chapter, v. 14, 17, 
26. And becauſe they might bear themſelves high in this falſe Con- 
fidence, by the Example of Abraham their Father accord- 
ing to the Fleſh, and whom Paul had ſet forth, Rom. 4. as juſtifi- 
ed by Faith, without the concurrence of Works to his Juſtification ; 
Zames makes uſe of the ſame Example of Abraham, as one eminent 
tor Holineſs, as well as Faith; and who made his Faith famous by 
the higheſt A& of Obedience that ever a Saint did, to ſhew, that 
Faith and Holineſs ought not to be ſeparateg; 4raham's Faith being 
ſo hizhly commended, eſpecially as produftive of -it. To the ſame 
purpoſe he makes uſe of the Inſtance of Rahab, who tho a young 
Saint, and newly come to the Knowledge of God; yet ſhewed the 


truth of her Faith by fo confiderab!2 an Exerciſe of her Loye and 


 ® 
FAM 


E S. Chi 


Mercy to Gods People, as her receiving the Spies in Peace was Thi 
therefore helps not a little to reconcile the difference between th fe 
two Apoſtles. Paul deals with thoſe that magnified Works too maker , 
it they were juſtified by them,and ſlighted Faith and Grace:and thiere- 
tore tho he frequently ſhews the neceifity aMi uſefulneſs of good Works 
unto Salvation,and prefleth Men every where to the Praftice of them. 
yet he proves,that they have no Intereſt in the Juſtification of a Sin- 
ner before God's Tribunal, which he afferts to be wholly and ſolely of 
Grace, and by Faith. But James, in dealing with looſe Chriſtians 
who magnified Faith,and ſhghted good Works,not only as having no 
Influence on Juſtification, but as not neceſſary at all to Salvation : he 
takes upon him to maintain good Works, not as neceſfary to Juſtifica- 
tion, but as the Effe&s, Signs, and Evidences of it,and ſuch as with- 
out which their Faith was vain, and themſelves ina an unjuſtified 
ſtate. 2ly. Paul and Fames take Faith in different ſenſes ; Pau! {peaks 
of a true, lively Faith, which purifies the Heart, and works by loyc 
Gal. 5. 6. Whereas James ſpeaks of a Profeſſion, or Prefumption 
of Faith, barren and deſtitute of good Fruits,tuch a Faith as is dead 
v. 17. ſuchas the Devils may have, v. 19. which is but Hiſtorical.and 
conſiſts only in a Belief of God's Being, not a conſent to his Offer,or 
relying on his Promiſes, What Contradiction then is there here be- 
tween theſe two Apoſtles, if Paul aflert Jultification to be by Faith 
viz, a lively, working Faith, and 7ames deny it to be by baith, viz. an 
idle, unaQtive, barren Faith, and which hath only the Name, but not 
the Nature of that Grace,and is rather the Image of Faith than Faith 
it ſelf? 3ly. But becauſe James not only denies Juſtification to the 
Faith he ſpeaks of, but aſcribes it to Work in this Verſe ; therefore 
it 15 to be conſidered, that Juſtification is taken one way by him 
and another by Paul:Paul takes it for the Abſolution,and Acceptation 
of a Sinner at God's Bar, by the Imputation of Chriſt's Righteouſneſs, 
which is the primary and proper Notion of Juſtification ; but James 
takes it for the Manifeſtation and Declaration of that Juſtification - 
and the Word 1s taken in the like ſenſe in other Scriptures, Luke 7. 
29. the People juſtzfied God, 3. e. owned and declared his Righteouf- 
neſs by Conteſfion of their Sins,and Submiſfion to John's Baptiſm; and 
v.- 35. Wiſdomis juſtified, i. e. declared to be juſt and right; Rom, 3. 
4+ juſtified in thy Sayings, i. e. acknowledged and declared to be true 
in thy Word. And what 1s Chriſt's being juſtified in the Spirit, 1 Tim, 
3- 16. but his being declared to be the Son of God ? Rom. 1. 4. And 
that James takes Juſtification in this ſenſe, appears, 1. by the Hiſtory 
of Abraham here mentioned : he. was (as hath been ſaid) juſtified by 
Faith long before his offering up his Son, Gen. 15. but here is ſaid 
to be juſtified, 7, e. declared and proved to be ſo by this Teftino- 
ny which he gave to the Truth of his Faith, and conſequently to his 
Juſtification by it; and the Lord therefore tells him, Gen. 22, 12, 
Now I know that thou feareſt me, &c. q. d. by this Obedience thou 
haſt abundantly ſhewed the Sincerity of thy Graces. 2. Becauſe if 
James doth not here ſpeak of Abraham's being juſtified declaratively, 
how can it be true which he ſpeaks, v. 23. that the Scripture was ſul- 
filled (in his ſacrificing his Son) which faith, he believed God, and it 
was imputed to him for Righteouſneſs ? For if James intends Juſtifica- 
tion 1n the proper ſenſe,how was Abraham's being Juſtified by Works, 
a fulfilling of theScripture, which aſſerts him to be juſtified by Faith? 
Here therefore again there is no Contradition between theſe 4- 
poſtles. For it 1s true, that Abraham was juſtified, j. e. accepted of 
God,and abſolved from Guilt, by Faith only : And it is as true, that 
he was Juſtified, 7. e. manifeſted and declared to be a Believer, and a 
juſtified Perſon by his Works. 4ly. Laſtly, we may diſtinguiſh of the 
Perſon that is faid to be juſtified, either he is a Sinner, in the ſtate 
of Nature; ora Believer in a ſtate of Grace ; whence ariſeth the 
two-fold Juſtification here mentioned. The Juſtification of a Sinner 
in the Remiffion of his Sins through the Imputation of Chriſt's Righ- 
teouſneſs, and acquitting him from the Condemnation of the Law, is 
the Juſtification properly ſo called,and which Paul ſpeaks ſo much of, 
and this 1s by Faith only. The Juſtification of a Believer, is his 
Abſolution from Condemnation by the Goſpel, and the charge of 
Infidelity, or Hypocrifie, and is no other, than that declarative Juſti- 
fication Fames ſpeaks of, or an aſſerting, and clearing up the ruth 
and reality of the former Juſtification, which is done by good 
Works, as the Signs and Fruits of the Faith, by which that tormes 
is obtained ; and this is but improperly called Juſtification. The 
former is an Abſolution from the general Charge of Sin, this from 
the ſpecial charge of Hypocrifie,or Infidelity. A Sinner's great fear 
(when firſt awakened to a ſenſe of his Sin and Miſery) is of an Þoly 
Law, and a righteous Judge ready to condemn him for the Viclati- 
on of that Law; and ſo his firſt Buſineſs is to look to Chriſt by Faith 
for Righteouſneſs, and Remiſfion of Sin. But when he is juftitied by 
that Righteouſneſs, Men may charge him with Hypocrifie, or Unbc- 
lief; and ſo may the Devil and Conſcience too, when Faith is weak, 
or a Temptation ſtrong ; and therefore his next Work is to clear 
himſelf of this Imputation, and to evidence the truth and reality of 
his Faith and Juſtification in God's fight, which muſt be done by 
producing his Obedience and good Works, as the Indications of his 
Faith; and hereby he proves, that he hath indeed cloſed with the 
Promiſe of the Goſpel, and fo is clear of the Charge of not begieving 
it, which was falſe ; as well as (by Conſequence) is juſtified from the 
Charge of Sin againſt the Law, which was true. To conclude,there- 
fore, here is no oppoſition between Paul and James. Paul ſpeaks of 
Abraham's being juſtified asa Sinner, and properlv, and fo by Faith 
only : Zames Tpeaks of his being juſtified as a Believer, improperly, 
and ſo by Works; by which not his Perſon was juſtified, but rather 
his Faith declared to be juſtifying; nor he conſtituted righteous, 
but approved as righteous. In a Word, what God hath joyned, 
muſt not be divided ; and what he hath divided, muſt not be 
joyned. He hath ſeparated - Faith and Works in the Buſineſs of 
Juſtification, and therefore we muſt not joyn them in it, as Paul 
diſputes ; and he hath jovned them in the. Lives of juſtified Per- 
ſons, and there we muſt not ſeparate them; as Fs teaches. 
Paul aflures us, they have not a co-efficiency in Juſtification it {e!f ; 
and 7ames aſſures us, they may, and ought to have a co-exiſtence 
in them that are juſtified. If the Reader defire further S4- 
tisfaction yet, let him conſult Turrerine de Concordia Pauli & a- 
cobi, where he may find much more to the ſame purpoſe, as hath 


been here ſaid. 
25 Like- 


Chap. III. 


25 Likewiſe alſo was not Rahab z the harlot x 
juſtified by works y, when ſhe had received the mel- 


{engers, and had ſent them out another way = ? 

u This Inſtance of Rahab is joyned to that of Abraham, either 
to ſhew, that none of any Condition, Degree, or Nation, was ever 
numbred among true Believers, without good Works, or elſe to 
prove, that Faith, where-ever it is fincere and genuine, is likewiſe 
operative, and fruitful, not enly in older Diſciples and ſtronger, ſuch 
as Abraham was, but even proportionably in thoſe that are weaker, 
and but newly converted to the Faith, which was Rahab's caſe. 
x Really and properly ſo, Joſh. 2.1, Heb. 11. 31. tho' poſſibly ſhe 
might keep an Inn, and that might occaſion the Spies going to her 
Houſe, not knowing her to be one of ſo ſcandalous a Life ; which 
yet the Holy Ghoſt takes ſpecial notice of, that by the Infamouſ 
neſs of her former Converſation, the Grace of God in her Conver- 
ſion might be more conſpicuous. - y. In the ſame ſence as Abraham 
was, 7. e. declared to be righteous, and her Sincerity approved 1n 
the Face of the Congregation of J/rael, when, upon her hiding the 
Spies, God gave a Commandment to fave her alive, though the reſt 
of her People were to be deſtroyed. ' xz Her receiving them implies 
likewiſe her hiding them; both which, together with her ſending 
them forth another way, were As of Love to the Pcople of God, 
of Mercy to the Spies, and of great Self-denial in reſpe(t of her own 
Safety, which ſhe hazarded by thas expofing her ſelf to the Fury 0! 
the King of Fericho, and her Countrymen ; but all this proceeded 
from her Faith in the God of J/rae/, of whoſe great Works ſhe had 
heard, and whom ſhe had now taken to be her God, and under 
whoſe Wings ſhe was now come to truſt. . 

© 26 For as the body without the|| ſpirit * is dead, ſo 


faith + without works is dead alſo. 

* This may be underſtood, either, according to the marginal 
reading, of the Breath, and then the ſenſe is, that Life and Breath 
being 1nſeparable Companions, as the want of Breath argues want 
of Life in the Body; fo lively Faith and Works beins as inſeparable, 
want of Works argues want of Life in Fa1th: Or, according to the 
reading in the Text, Spirit, taking it for that Subſtance which ani- 
mates the Body, and 15 the cauſe of vital FunGtions in it, which is 
ſometimes called Spirit, Pſalm' 21. 5. Eccl. 12.7. and 1 Cor. 2.11. 
and then the ſenſe 1s, that as a Body is without a Soul, fo Faith is 
without Works, 7. e. both are dead. As a Body without the Soul 
hath the Shape aad Lineaments of a Man, but nothing that may dif- 
cover Life in it, fo Faith without Works may be like true Faith, 
have ſome reſemblance of it, but hath nothing to diſcover the Truth 
and Life of it. F Not true Faith, for that cannot be dead, but an 
empty Profeſfion of Faith, which is rather called Faith, by way of 
| '$ Conceſſion, or becauſe of ſome likeneſs it hath to it, than really is 
q ſo; as a dead Body, tho' called a Body, is really but a Carkale. 

CH A P.+-IIL 
We are not rafhly or arrogantly to reprove others, when as we our ſelves 
« often do amiſs. ' The difficultyof bridling the Tongue move then that of 
the other members,” this illuſtrated, 1 — $. - The Tongue is as a 
Fire, Or wild beaſt, 5 8. With this Man ought to bleſs Gad ; 
and not to curſe his Neighbour made after the Image of God : This 
illuſtrated, 9 —--.- 12. The different Nature, Properties, and 
Fruits 5f Earthly and Heavenly Wiſdom, 13-———18. 


Y brethren, be not many maſters -a, , knowing 
that we ſhall receive: the || greater condemna- 


with 


# | Or, 
breath. 


i| Or, judg- 4 
ment, tions. 
a Let not every Man make himſelf a Maſter of other Mens Faith 
and Manners, a Cenſor, or ſupercilious Reprover. of their Failings 
and Infirmities, Matth. 7. 1. All Reproof is not here torbidden, net- 
ther Authoritative by Church Officers, nor Charitative by private 
Brethren, but that which is irregular either in the gone of it, 
when that is falſe, or the manner of it, when it is maſterly and 1m- 
perious, or prepoſterous (as when we reprehend others, and are 
no leſs. reprehenſible our ſelves, Rom. 2. 21.) or in the end of it, 
when we ſeck to advance our own Reputation by obſerving or ag- 
grayating others Faults, &c. b By how much the more ſevere and 
reid we are in judging others, the greater will be our Judgment, 
hot only from Men,. who will be apt to retaliate, but from God him- 
ſelf, Matth. 7. 1, 2, 3. Luke 6. 38. Rom. 2.2, 3. See the like Ex- 
preſſion, Mat. 23. 8, 14.  . 
+> Chron, 2 For * in many things we offend all c. T If any 
6.36. man offend notin word d, the || ſame 7a perte&tman 


+ Pal. 34.'e, ard able alſo to bridle the whole body . 


: 13. c There is no Man abſolutely free from Sin, 1 Iing 8. 46. Fob 14. 
| Chap. 1. 4. Prov. 20. 9. Eccleſ. 7.20. and 1 Fohn 1. 8, 10. And therefore we 
26, muſt not be too critical inother Mens' Ations, having fo many Fail- 


= {{ Mat. 12. ings our ſelves, Gal. 6. 1. d Knows how to govern his Tongue atight, 
| 37. ſpeaks what, and when, as he ought. _ e Eitherfincere in oppoſition 
Plal. 32.5. to the Hypocriſie of thoſe that pretend to great Zeal in correting 
others, when they are alike, or more guilty themſelves: Or rather, 

we may underſtand it comparatively, and with reſpe& to others, of 

: one that hath made good Proficiency in Religion, and 1s. of greater 
| Attainments than others. See 1 Cor. 2.6. f To govern all the other 

| parts ( Eyes, Ears, Hands, gc.) as to thoſe Aﬀtions which are per- 
formed by them. No Member of the Body being more ready to 

offend than the Tongue ; he that can rule that, may rule all elſe. 
| 3 Behold we put bits in the horſes mouths that 


| they may obey us, and we turn abour their whole 
| body 2. 
g He illuſtrates the former Propoſition, that he that can rule his 
| Tongue, may rule his whole Body, by two Similitudes; the firſt of 
an unruly Horſe, which yet, as. wanton as he is, being curbed in 
with a Bit, may be eafily managed; intimating, that even ſo, if a 
Man's Tongue be well governed, the reſt of the Men will be under 
command, 


4 Behold alſo the ſhips which, though they be ſo 
great, and driven of fierce winds, yet are they turn- 


FUMES. 


Chap. I1L. 


ed about with a very ſinall helm whicherſvever the 
governour liſteth h. 
h The other Similitude in which a Man is compared to a Ship, 
the Tongne to the Rudder, the governing the whole Body to the 
- turning about the Ship, As the Rudder is but a ſmall thin, in Com- 
pariſon of the much greater Bulk of a Ship, and yet beinz it ſeif 
turned, turns the whole Ship ( tho' ſo great, and driven of fo fierce 
Winds) which way foever the Steerſman pleaſeth : So likewiſe the 
Tongue, tho' little to the whole Man ( which may withal be driver, 
and ated by Storms of furious Paſſions} yet it it be 1t ſelf pndcr 
Government, the reſt of the Man will be fo too. _ 
5 Even fo the * tongue is a little member 7, and *Prov. 12. 
} boaſterh great things &, Behold how great /a || nzar- '% 2nd 
ter m4 little fire kindleth 7. lee 
7 The Accomodation of the former Similitudes : The Tonzue is a ly _ a 
little Member, j. e. one of the leffer, in Compariſon of the Body. y OEM 
k The Greek Word fignifies, according to its Derivation, the lifting ; 7" 
: » ©, *, © ji Or, word: 
up of the Neck ( as Horſes, mentioned, v. 3. are wont to do inthcir 
Pride) in a way of Bravery and Triumph; and hence it is uſed to 
expreſs boaſting and glorying, but here ſeems to imply ſomething 
more, viz. not only the uttering big Words, but doing great things, 
whether good and uſeful, as in the former Similitudes, or evil, as in 
what follows; or its boaſting how great things it can do, 4. d. the 
Tongue, tho' little, is of great force and efficacy, and it will tel! you 
ſo it ſelf; it not only boaſts what its fellow-members can do, but 
eſpecially what it ſelf can. / Another Similitude, in which he ſet; 
forth the evil, the Tongue, as little as it is, doth, where it- is not 
well-governed, as in the former he had ſhewn the good it may do, 
when kept under Rule. mm The word fipnifies either any combuſti- 
ble Stuff, or, as in the Margin, Word, that being the ordinary Fuel 
then in uſe. n Even as a Spark, the ſmalleſt Quantity or Particle, 
which may do great Miſchtet, when lightning ia ſutable matter. 
6 And the tongue zs a fire o, a world p of iniquity : 
So is the tonguz amongſt our members, that * it de- * wy, x6. 
fileth the whole body 9, and ſertgth on fire the courte 11,13, 19. 
of nature 7; aud it 1s ſer on fire of hell. Mark 7 
o The Application of the Similitude ia the foregoing Words. 15 22+ 23» 
The Tongue is a Fire, 1. e. hath the force of Fire, and reſembles 
it in the Miſchief it doth. p Aa Heap, or Azgregation of Evils 
( as the natural World is an Aggregation of many teveral Beings ) 
as we ſay, an Ocean, or a World of Troubles, meaning, a great Mu!- 
titude of them. And the Words may be under1iod, cither with 
an Ellipſis of the word matter, expreſied juſt before, and ſupplied 
here, and the pointing a little altered, they may be thus read: 4nd * 
the Tongue is a Fire, a World of Iniquity (or an unrizhteous World, 
viz. which lies in Wickedneſs, 1 John 5. 19.) is the matter, narhe- 


1 1y, which it inflames. A wicked World is fit Fuel for a wicked 


Tongue, and ſoon catcheth the Fire which it kindlzs : Or, rataet 
as they ſtand plainly without any ſuch Defe& : The Tongue is a 
World of Iniquity, 7. e. an Heap or Maſs of various ſorts of Sins ; 
tho” it be but a little piece of Fleſh, yet it contains a whole World 
of Wickedneſs in it, or is as full of Evils, as the World is of Bodies. 
q Infefteth the whole Man with Sin, Fccleſ. 5. 6. as being the cauſe 
of Sin corhmitted by all the Members of the Body, for tho” Sin be- 
gin in the Soul, yet it is executed by the Body, which therefore 
ſeems here put (as v. 2.) for the Man. r Or, ſetteth on Fire the 
Wheel of Geniture, or Nativity, ( in alluſion to a_Wheel ſet on fire by 
a violent rapid motion ) meaning the Courſe. of Nativity, 7. e. the 
-natural Courſe of Life, as the Face of Nativity or Geniture, ch.1.23. 
for the natural Face; the ſenſe is, it inflames-with various Luſts, 
Wrath, Malice, Wantonneſs, Pride, ggc. the whole Courſe of Man's 
Life, ſo that there is no State, nor Age free from the Evils of it. 
* Whereas other Vices either do not extend to the whole man, or.are 
abated with Age, or worn away with length of time; the vices of 
the Tongue reach the whole Man, and the whole time of his life. 
ſ 1. e. By the Devil, the Father of Lyes and Slanders, and other 
Tongue-fins, ob 1. 10. 7ohn 8. 44. Rev. 12. 10, the Tongue be- 
ing the Fire, the Devil, by the Bellows of Temptations, inflames it 
yet more, and thereby kindles the Fire of all miſchiefs in the World. 


7 For every || kind 7 of beaſts z, and of birds x ard || Gr. Ne- 
of ſerpents y, and things in the ſea 2, is tamed, and 


hath been tamed 2 of + mankind. Ar ; _ 
t Some of every xind. | « Wild Beaſts, fuch as are moſt fierce ,,... J 

and untratable. x Tho' ſo moveable ard wardring, the very Va-* © * 

gabonds of Nature, y which -are ſuch Encemics to mankind. 7 The 

Inhabitants, as1t were, of another World, really of another Elc- 

ment. 4 Either made gentle, or at leaſt, brought into Sabjeftion to 

man by one means or other. He ufeth both Tenfes, the Preſent, 

and the Preterperfe&, to note that ſuch thines, not only have been, 

but ſtill are; and that not as the Effetts of ſome miraculovs Provi- 

dence, as in the Caſe of Daniel, ch. 6. and Paul, Ads 28. but as 

that which 1s uſually experienced, and in Man's Power ſti! to do. 


8 b But the tongue can no man tame c : z7 zs an 


unruly evil d, full of deadly poiſon e. 

b Not only other men's Tongues, but not his own. c No marr 
of himſelf, and without the Aſſittance of Divine Grace, czn- bring 
his Tongue into Subjettion, and keep it in order; nor can any man 
by the Afiſtance of any Grace promited in this Liſe, fo keep it, as 
that it ſhall never at all offend. & Or, which cannot be reſtrained, 
and kept within Bounds : Wild Beafts are kept in by Grates and 
Barrs,. but this by no Reſtraint. e The Wickedneſs of the Ton;ue 
is compared to Poiſon, in reſpett of the miſchief it doth to others. 
It ſeems to allude to thoſe kind of Serpents which have Poiſon, un- 
der their Tongues, Pſalm 140. 3. with which they kill thoſe they 
bite. The Poiſon of the Tongue 1s no leſs deadly, it murders men's 
Reputations by the Slanders it utters, their Souls by the Luſts and 
Paſfions it ſtirs up in them, and many times their Bodies too by the 
Contentions and Quarrels it raifeth againſt them. 


9 Therewith bleſs we God f even the Father g, and 


| x © 
| therewith curſe we men h, * which are made after the , &> x- 


ſimilitude of God #. {Praiſe ©* 


- 


= "A we 
aa... 
EI - . = I _ _ : : = 
EIT «at ocs 106 17, Ednne OD 2s _ S 


—*s- = 
_—— 


Or, bs! 
4272 
Has P3.2, 


* ROM. 13. 


I 
yo 


©, and ſpeak well of God. g Of Chriſt, and in him of all 

211-vers. þ Rail on, revile, ſpeak evil of, as well as wiſh 
evil to. 7 Either, 1. Saints in whom God's Image 1s anew reſtored ; 
or, 2iv, rather Men more generally, who, though they have loſt 
that imiritull Knowledge, Righteouſneſs, and true Holinets, in which 
thit iniaye of God, after which Man was created, -principally con- 
tilts; yet ſtill have ſome Reliques of his Image continuing in them. 
Tins 1s added to aggravate the Sin, ſpeaking evil of Men made af- 
rer God's Image, 1s {peaking evil of God obliquely, and by Retlie- 
et: 02. 

1c Qut of the ſame mouth proceedeth bleſſing 
and cuzhng 4 My brethren, theſe things ought not 
{ſo to be /. 

+ Ke repeats here, by way of Exaggeration, what he had ſaid, 
22%, 3, to ſkew how exceedingly abſurd it is, that two ſuch contrary 
Actions ſh. uid proceed from the fame Agent. 
{1 the words; he means, things ſhould be quite contrary. 
ike expreflion, 1 Tim. 5.13. Tit. 1.11. 

Lad 4 Ho > E Eg - " PT > | Ao 

11 Dorh a fountain ſend torth at thc ſame || place 
1m {weer water and bitter ? 

m Ordinarily and naturally; if any ſuch be, it 1s looked upon as 
uncouth and prodigious, : 

12 Can the tig-tree, my brethren, bear olive ber- 
ries, either a vine gs 7? So can no fountain yield 
both falt water, and treih o. 

n The ſame Tree cannot ordinarily bring forth Fruit of different 
kinds ( on the ſame Branch, whatever it may on different, by en- 
zgraiting ) much les of contrary Natures. See Matth. 7. 16, 17, 18. 
Or, neither can a ſalt Fountain yield freſh Water ; but the Scope 15 
ttil! the ſame, as in our reading. The Apoſtle argues trom what 15 


FAMES. 


/ There 1s a Meroſes fufion &, and every evil work þ. GN, $2; 
See the | 


Chap. Jy. 


of the ſenſual Appetite; this Wiſdom may well be called fo i 
Or, 2ly. according to the Margin, Natural, in opp: fition rs 7 

tual, The natural Man ( 1 Cor, 2. 14. where the fame word Sg 

Greek 1s uſed as here) 15 one that lives under the Condue cf his 
own carnal Reaſon, not enlightned, nor regenerated by the $ gs 
God: 4 Man of Soul (as the word imports ) or that hath Id by 
n- higher Principle in him, than his own Soul. Accordinots. "I 
Wildom here mentioned, is ſuch as proceeds meerly ors Man's 
own Soul in its natural ſtate, deſtitute of the Light and Gy ogg 
God's Spirit, and therefore may be termed natural. e Becauſe it js 
of the Devi}, or ſuch as is in him, and makes Men like him ga 
a proud Spirit, and envious, a Lier, and Slarderer, 7ohn 2 BY 
and who obſerves Mens Faults, not to amend them but accuſe the, 
tor them. ; DEE: 


16 For * where envy and ſtrife zs f, there is * con. *iCer 


2ſual. 


f The uſual Companions of this deviliſh Wifom. g Or, Incon- "OT, 
fiftency, viz. both with Man's ſelf, and others; Envy makes him 
unquiet 1n himſelf, and troubleſome to others, by cauſins Conten. 7 
tions and Seditions among them, and breaking their Peace, 25 well 
as his own. h Ail manner of Wickedaeſs is uſhered in by this Con. 
tufion and Sedition. | 

17 * Burt the wiſdom that is from above 7. is tirft * 15. 
pure #, then peaceable /, gentle zy, azd calic to he © 7 
entreared z, full of mercy ov, and good truits p, | with: 
our partiality q, and withour hypocrike 7. ' Ori 

7 True Wiſdom, which is of God, oppolcd to that which deſcent. 9 11.4, 
eth not from abve, ver. 15. k& Either excluding mixture, and then #-- 
It 15 oppoted to Hipocritical, or rather excluding F:lthinefs, and 
then it 1s oppoſed to ſenſual, ver. 15. and implies Freedom trom the 


in potiible, cr monſtrous in Naturals, to what 1s abſurd 1n Manners, 
. a. it is as abſurd in Religion, for the Tongue of a regenerate Man, 
which is ute to bleſs God, to take a liberty at other times to curic 
Man, as it would be ſtrange in Nature for the ſame Tree, on the 
{ime Branch, to bear Fruits of different kinds; or the ſame Foun- 
tain at the ſame place to ſend forth bitter Water and ſweet. 

13 Whois p a wiſe man, and endued with know- 
Iedg; 4 among you? ler him ſhew, out of a good 
convertation, his works 7 with meekneſs of wil- 
aom /. 

p i. e. If there be a Wiſe Man, &c. See Pjal. 2. 3,4, 5, 12. and 
1 Pet. 3. 10. where what David ſpeaks by way ot Interrogation, 
Peter explains by way of Aﬀertion. The Apoſtle having ſhewn the. 
Diſcaſe of the Tongue, comes now to remove the Cauſe, viz. Mens 
Opinion of their own Wiſdom; (they cenſure others, becauſe they 
cake themſelves to be wiſer than others) and to point out the Re- 
medy, godly Meckneſs, which is the trueſt Wiſdom. 9q By Wiſdom 
and Knowledge the ſame thing may be meant; or if they be taken 
for ſeveral things ( as fometimes there may be great Knowledge 
where there is but little Wiſdom ) yet theſe maſterly Cenſors he 
ſpcaks of, pretended to both, and were ſo rigid toward others, be- 
cauſe ſo well conceited of themſelves: The ſenſe is, You pretend to 
be wiſe and knowing, but if you would approve your ſelves as ſuch 
indeed, fhew out of a g19d Converſation, &c. »r Let him ſhew as the, 
Teſtimony of his Witdom, not his words in hard Cenſures, but his 
Works, viz. good ones, and thoſe not done now and then, or on 
the by, but in the conſtant Courſe; and Tenor of his Life ; or ſhew 
his Works to be good, by their being not caſual, but conſtant, and 
his ordinary Praftice in his whole Converſation. / z. e. Meek and 
ventle Wiſdom, which can hear, and anſwer, and teach, and admo- 
niſb, and rebuke mildly, and ſweetly, with long-ſuftering, as well 
as DoQrine, 2 Tim. 4. 2, and then it nctes the Quality of this Wit- 
dom, or iuch Meckneſs as proceeds from Wiſdom, or is joyned with 
it, there being ſome which 1s fooliſh, affetted, carnal, v7. that 
which is oppoſed to Zeal; whereas true Meeknels is only oppoſed to 
Fierceneſs and Raſhncſs;, and thus it notes the cauſe of Mecknels, 


14 Bur yet ye have * hitter envying 7, and {trite 
z in your hearts x, glory not y, and lie not againſt 


s& 


Defilement of Sin and Error, it being the property of true 7i!do;y 
to make Men adhere both to Truth and Holineſs. / Diſpoſeth Mey, 
to Peace, both as to the making and keeping it, in oppoiition to 
Strife and Contention, which 1s a Fruit of the earthly Witdum. 
Peaceableneſs, which relates to Man, is ſet after Purity, which re- 
ſped God in the firſt place, to intimate, that Purity muſt have tt. 
Preference to Peace. Our Pcace with Men muſt always be «ith 4 
Salvo to our Reſpetts to God, and Holineſs. m Or, equal, or myde- 
rate, Phil. 4.5. 1 Tim. 3.3. Tit. 3. 2, It implies, that Getitlencts 
( as we tranſlate it ) whereby we bear with others Inirmities, {or- 
glve Injuries, interpret all things for the teſt, recede from our own 
right for Peace-ſake; and is oppoſed to that Auſteritv and Rigidne/ 
In cur Prattices, and Cenſures, which will bear with nothing iq 
weak, diſſenting, or offending Brethren, n Eafily perſwada!lc, 
True Wiſdom makes Men yield to good Admonitions, good Counſel, 
good Reaſon. This 1s oppoſed to Implacableneſs, Row. 1. 31. Pride 
and Obſtinacy in evil, Prov. 12. 1. and 13. 1. 0 A Grace wherchy 
we pitty others that are afflicted, or that offend, and is oppoſed 
to Inhumanity, and Incxorableneſs. p Beneficence, Liberality, and 
all other Othces of Humanity, which proceed from Mercs. 40s, 
without judging, 1. e. either a curious inquiring into the Faults of 
others, to find matter for Cenſures, which many times infers Wranz- 
livg, as our Margin renders it; or a diſcerning between Perſcn ani 
Perſon, upon carnal Accounts, which 1s Partiality, as it is hcre 
tranſlated, *and Chap. 2. 4. r Or, Counterfeiting, as they do that 
judge others, being guilty of the ſame things, or as bad theinſelve: - 
or Hypocrtifie may be here added, to ſhew that Sincerity is the Pcr- 
{eRton of all the reſt before named'; Purity, Peace, and Gentlcne(, 
@c. may be counterfeit; Hypocriſie ſpoils all, and therefore the 
Wiſdom that is from above, 1s fincere, and without Hypocrihe. 

13 And the fruit / of righreouſnets 7 is fown » in 
peace x of them thar make peace y. 

/ Either the Fruit we bring forth, which is Righteouſneſs 1t ſelf, Wb 
Luke 3. 8, 9. Rem. 6. 22. Phil, 1. 11, or the Fruit we reap, which 
1s the Reward of Righteouſneſs, viz. eternal Life. tf Metonymircal- 
ly here put for the heavenly Wiſdom, before deſcribed, whereot 
It 1s the inſeparable Companion, or the Effet, Job 28.28, » Ei- 
ther Righteouſneſs, as the good Fruit, is wrought or exerciicd, 
Hy. 10. 12. (as Wickedneſs 1s ſaid to be ſown when it is ated, 


the truth 2. 

t Gr. Zeal, which he calls bitter, partly te diftinguiſh it from 
that Zeal which is good; whereas this he ſpeaks of is evil; and 
though it pretends to be Zeal, yet is really no other than Envy; and 
partly becauſe it commonly proceeds from an imbittered Spirit, and 
rends to the imbittering it more. u Strife, the uſual Effet of bit- 
ter Zeal, or Envy. x The Fountain whence it proceeds; or Strife 
in the Heart implies a Heart propenſe, and inclined to Strife. » 
Glory not of your Zeal, or rather, of your Witdom, as if you were 
ſo well able to reprehend others, but rather be humbled; what 
You make the matter of your Glorying, being reaily juſt cauſe of 
Shame. 2 Viz. By profefſing your ſelves wiſe, or zealous, when ye 
are really neither. 


Fohn 4.8.) or it relates to the Reward, which is the Fruit, of which 
Righteouſneſs 1s the Seed, Pſzl. 97. 11. and then it implies, cither 
the ſureneſs of that Reward, that it is as certain as Harvett after 
Secd. time, or the non-enjoyment of it for the preſent; as they that 
ſow their Seed, receive not the Crop till long after. x Either in 
a mild, peaceable, amicable way, -or 7n Peace, is as much as with 
Peace, wiz. ſpiritual Peace and Comfort of Conſcience. y That 
follow after, and are ſtudious of Peace; and ſo the Words may 
have a two-fold ſenſe, either, 1. the meaning is, That they th! 
exerciſe Righteouſneſs, muſt do it in a ſweet and. peaccable way ; 
in particular, Men may reprehend others, ſo they do it with Mo- 
deration and Gentleneſs, not as Executioners, to torment them, 
but as Phyſicians, to heal them. As on the other fide, they that 


15 This wiſdom 2 deſcended not from above 6, 
but 7s earthly c, |\| ſenſual d, deviliſh e. 

2 This Wiſdom which they pretended ſo much to, who fo criticized 
on other Men's A&ions, and inveighed againſt them, and which 
was accompanied with Strife and Envy. b 7. e. From God the Au- 
thor of Wiſdom, from whom, though every good and perfe(t Gift 
defeends, Chap. 1. 17- and even Knowledge, and Skill in natural 
things, 1/a. 28. 26, 29. yet this Wiſdom being finful, 1s not from 
him, c becauſe it is of the Earth, of no higher Original than from 
the firſt Adam, who was of the Earth, and earthly, 1 Cor. 15. 47. 
and likewiſe hecauſe it 1s employed, and fixeth Mens Minds on 
earthly things. d This may be underitood, either, x. according to 
the reading in the Text, the word here uſed, being ſo rendred, 
Fude 1.9. agreeable to 1 Theſſ. 5. 23. where Soul, from whence 
the word 1s derived, is oppoſed to Spirit, and taken for the ſenfi- 
tive Powers, which Men have in common with Brutes in Diſtini- 
on from the intelle&ual, which under the name of Spirit, and are 
proper to Men: Meer Reaſon, without a Divine Grace, being apt 


are moſt peaceably diſpoſed, yet muſt not make Peace, without 
ſowing Righteouſneſs with it, which includes juſt Reprehenfion 
whereby Righteouſneſs is promoted : Or, 21y, that they who tow 
Righteouſneſs in Peace, 7. e. joyn Righteouſneſs with their Endet- 
vours after Peace, ſhall reap the Reward, not only in Comfort liere, 


but in Glory hereafter. 
CHAT, Iv. 


Luſts, Covetouſmeſs, Wantonneſs and Envy, byeeds Strifes, hinders the 
ſucceſs of our P rayers, and are Enmity to 'God;, contrary to hrs Spt- 
rit in us, 1—5. We muſt be humble and ſubmiſſive towards Goa, 
reſiſt the Devil, draw nigh to God, and repent : the Bleſſing belong- 
ing t' theſe Graces, 6 10. We muſt not condemn our Neighbour, 
which belongs only to God, 11, 12. They are reproved who in that 
which they purpoſe to dv, have m reſpec} to the providence of God, 
nor to the frailty of this Life, but rejnyce in their Pride, 13 -— 16 
He who knowingly Sinneth 1s moſſ guilty, 17. |: Or, fra 
Rom whence come wars, and || fightings « among ings - 
you ? come they not hence, ever of + vous iuſts 6, SEP 


to degenerate into Brutiſhneſs, and eaſily brought to ſerye the ends 


that war c in your members d £ lo ver. 
- r 


« Either! 


; Or, bras 
(78 
, Or, pit” 
er 4. 

O ve. 5 


' Or, ENVY. 


. with the context, 


* Job 27. 

9.and 35. 
2, 

Pl. 18. 41. 
"WW. 
Jer. 11.11. 
Zech.7.13s 
fP1.65.18, 
1 John 3. 

22, 


* tJoh.15. 
19. and 
17. I4. 
Gal.I.10, 


* See Gen. 
$.5, and 
S.- 230. 

| Or, envi- 
ly, 


\ bb mg 


V 


ge, or rather Strite and Contention about outward things, Wrang- 
haz among themſclyes, and going to Lai, eſpecially before undbe- 
lizvin, judges, 1 Cor, $9.1. bGr. Pleaſures, 1, ce. thote Luſts where- 
o: Ple:ture 15 the end, which is therefore put tor the Luſts them- 
2!\ves : He means the over-eager Defire of Riches, worldly Great- 
neis, Carnal Dlizhts, Tit. 3. 3. where Luſts and Pleaſures go to- 
gether. c Oppole and tumultuate avainft Reaſon, Conſcience,Grace, 
Rom. 7. 23, and 1 Pet. 2,11. d Not only the Members of the Body, 
but Faculties of the Soul, exerciſed by them : All the Parts of Man 
unrenewed, C9, 3. 5. wich are.uicd as Weapons of Unrighteout- 
ucls, Rom. 6. 13. f 

2 Yelutt e and have nor f, ye || kill g, and defire 
to have þ, and cannot obtain 2; ye tgar and war #, 
yet ve have not /, becauſe ye ask not ». 

e Paiſionately and zreedily deiire, f Either loon looſe, or ra- 
ther, cannot get what ye fo luſt atter, g ſome Copies have 1t, ye en- 
ty, and many ſuppoie that to be the better rcading, as agreeing 
and with ver. 14. of chap. 3. Envy being the 
ciuſe of Strite there, and joyned with Emulation, or a Deire ot 
having here, We read it according to otiter Copies, ye kill, which, 
it he ſpeaketh of Wars in a proper ſenſe, ver. 1. was, no doubt, 
the effe& of them ; and it he ſpeak only of Strife and Contentions, 
yet they might proceed ſo far, that the Death of ſome (though 
tiot intended) might be the Bnſcquent of them, and occaſioned 
oy thein, or he may mean their murderous Deſires, killing Men 1n 
their Hearts, wiſhing for, and gaping after their Death, that they 
mizht gain by it ; and this agrees with what he ſpeaks of, the Fru- 
itration of their greedy Defires, none being more frequently dif- 
appointed of their Hopes, than they that hope to be Gainers by 
other Mens Deaths. h Or, emulate, 1. e. ambitioully affect to have 
what ye ſee others have, gricving that they ſhould have more than 
you. i Viz. That which ye envy others having. k You wrangle 
and quarrel with your Neighbours for what they have, that ye may 
get it for your ſelves. 1 Ye are ſtill needy, though {till craving ; 
your Luſts are infinite, and inſatiable in themſelves,and no way help- 
ful to you. m Viz. Of God by Prayer, who hath promiſed to give 
to them that ask, Matth. 7. 7. not to them that war and fizht. In- 
ſtead of humble ſeeking to God tor what ye want, ye would extort 
1t by force or fraud, from one another. 

3 Ye* ask and -receive not, + becauſe ye ask 
amiſs o, that ye may conſume it upon your || luſts p. 

n He prevents. an Objettion, 4. d. admit you do pray for the 
good things ye want; or, though you pray for them. o Though 
you pray tor good things, yet you do nat pray well, or in a right 
manner, not according to God's Will, 1 John 5. 14. and therefore 
ye are not to complain of not being heard. p You pray for the 
things of this Life only, that you may have wherewith to pleaſe the 
Fleſh, and gratifie your carnal Appetites, and fo an evil end ſpoils 
good means ; and while you would have God ſerve your Luſts, you 
loſe your Prayers. 

4 Ye adulterers, and adultreſles g, know ye not 7, 
that the friendſhip of the world s, 1s enmity with 
God 7? * whoſoever therefore # will be a friend of 
the world, is the enemy of God x. 

7 He means Adulterers and Adulterefles in a ſpiritual ſenſe, 7. e, 
worldly-minded Chriſtians, who being, by Protetſion, married to 
the Lord, yet gave up thoſe AﬀeQions to the things of the World, 
which were due to God only. The like Expreſſion is uſed, Matth. 
12.39. and 16.4. r Ye ought to know, and cannot but know. 
s Inordinate Aﬀe&ion to the World, addi&tedneſs or devotednefs 
to the Things, or Men of the World, # Alienates the Soul from 
God, and God from it, 1 John 2.15. u If it be the purpoſe and 
reſolution of a Man's Heart to get in with the World, though per- 
haps he cannot obtain its Favour ; he courts it, though 1t be coy to 
him. x Exerciſeth hoſtility againſt God, by adhering to aa Inte- 
reft ſo contrary to him. 


5 Do ve think that the ſcripture 1aith in vain y, 
* the ſpirit = that dwelleth in us, Iuſteth a to || en- 
vy b ? 

y Gr Emptily, or vainly, i. e. to no purpoſe. This Queſtion hath 
the force of a Negation, 9. d. it doth not ſpeak in vain. Queſt. 
What 1s it which the Scripture doth not ſpeak in vain ? Anſw. Et- 
ther thoſe Truths he had been ſpeaking of before, particularly in 
the former Verfe, That the Friendſhip of the World, is Enmity with 
God : Or, that which follows in this Verſe, the Spirit that dwelleth in 
us, &c. 2 Either the Spirit of God, who is ſaid to dwell in Belie- 
vers,- 1 Cor.3.15,17. or the Spirit of Men, viz. as defiled by Sin, and 
ated by the Devil, who works in Men, while Children of Diſobe- 
dience, and then it is the fame as corrupt Nature. a Either 1s 
vehemently carried out to Envy, or makes us luſt, and carrieth us 
out to it, or {ufteth azainſt Envy. S9 the Greek Prepoſttion 1s often 
uſed, as Luke 20.15. Eph. 6, 11. Heb. 12.4. b- Under Envy he 
compretends all other tlcſhly Luſts, but inftanceth in this particular- 
ly, as having been ſpeaking of it before, ch. 3. v. 14,16. and becauſe 
it hath ſo near a conneftion with other Luſts, whereof 1t is the 
Cauſe, or Concomitant, and ſo is a principal Member of the Old 
Man. This latter clauſe may either be read 1nterrogatively or athr- 
matively; and then according as we take Spirit, either for the 
Spirit of God, or the Humane Spirit, the ſenſe of the words may 
be, either, 1. Dot't the Spirit of God, thar diwelleth in us, luſt un- 
to Fiivy, 7. & 114ne 2nd difpoſe us to fo baſe an AﬀeRtion ? The 
Anſwer is undecitood, 2, and confirmed by the next words, He 
giverh mere Grace, jives freelv, liberally, and therefore doth not 
make 1s envy ofhers any Gool1 they have. Nothing 1s more con- 


tfrary to the Swirit of God, who abuunds -n his Gifts to us, than to 
make v eoavy others, theirs. Or, 2lv, we may underſtand 1t with- 
et any NLrropuhuon, tikin? the Prepoſition to fiznife againſt, and 


then the {eat is, Tot rood, Spirit which 15 in (us, teacheth us bet- 
| an Soul ce and Favy, (5: tos It luiteth agaiait Envy, 


FAMES. 


2 Either, it m1y be utidertood properly of Inſurrettions, and 
Tuinults, in which, potfibly, fome carnal Profeiiors might be enga- | 


_—_ 


7. e. MARcs us Juſt 252inſt it, carries out our Fiearts to Hate, and 1 
tit it, And ci! agrees with what folloivs ; the Spirit, & 
lutts againft Envy, but he gives more Grace, viz. than to F.nvy the 
i11C 
, 


MM 
tits 


Good of others. Or, 3. If Spirit here be underſtood of the Spi- 
rit of Min, corrupt Nature, the ſenle is plain, 25 the words {te ; 
Mans Spirit, (+pccially by the Inſtization of the Devil) juttz; ot 
ſtrongly incli.es to Envy, and conſey ently to other Wickedaciles, 
bur be (that 1s, God, v. 4.) gives more Grace. Quoit, Wire js 
any ſuch Sentence to be tound in the Scripture? Anjw. No where 
1n 1o many worcs: bur which ſoever of theſe ways we take the 
words, we find theſenie in tleScripture. Foſkual's cavyins Edad, 
and Medad's Prophely ing, for Mcfes's fake, teems to be an Lattance 
ot this Lait, An. 11.29. (Compared with Gen.5.5, and 8.21. Wehcrs 
the general Inclination of Man's Heart by Nature, is ſiid to be 
and .3:9ſes ns not eavying them, an Inſtance of 

5 Bur he - giveth more orice d : 


+» 
on 


evi!) 
Le ro tormer. 
BY whoretore be 
laith e, * God reiiiicrh f the proud g. but giveth grace 
to the humble þ. | 
c Either the Spirit of God, if Spirit in thu former Verſe he uns 
derſtood of the Spirit of God ; or God, it Spirit be there taken 
for the Spirit of Main, d Either, though we, accordias to gur ua- 
tural Inclination, be envious, yet God (or his Spirit) 13 bountiful 
and liberal; or God Fivcs tv thoſe that arc rencived, more Grzce 
than to-be hurried on by their on old Spirit, to Envy, Stiite, and 
{uc}1 like Lufts. e God ſaith, viz. in the Scripture : Or it may be 
taken indeanitely, and imperſoually, for it is {aid ; The particula; 
place he refers to, is Frov. 3. 34. according to the Trantiation of 
the LXX, which, not only James, but other New-TePument Wr: 


og 


ters frequently follow. f lr is a military Term. God ſets hin. 

as in Battcl, againit the Proud, defying, beating down, opoln 
to contempt, and deſtroying them. He 1s fo far from giving then 
more Giits, that he rather ſpoils them, as ſworn Enemies, 6: v1:at 


they have. g Thoſe that by reaſon of the Gifts God hath {iven 
them, lifts themſelves above others : Sofomon, in the parallel place, 
calls them Scorners ; it being the uſual Guiſe of thoſe that think 
over-well of themſelves, to deſpiſe others, and even contemn the 
Warmnzs and Judyments of God himſelf, which may well draw 
him out to ftzht a;cainft them. h Not only gives Favour and Ho- 
nour in the i1zht oi Mcn, to thoſe that are lowly in their own Eycs, 
but eſpecially furniſheth them with Grace for the overcoming, ard 
mortitying their carnal Defircs, and remaining Corruptions. 


7 Submir your ſelves 7 therictore & ro God : * Rehit 


/ the devil 2, and he will fly from you 7. 

7 Viz, Voluntarily and freely, and that not only in a way of Ove- 
dience to all his Commands, but (which is chictly meant herc) in a 
way of Humility, and ſenſe of your Weakneſs, and Emprtineſs, and 
need of his Grace. k Both becauſe of the Danger of Pride, (oppe- 
ſed, in the former Verſe, to Humility) he rejijfts the Proud ; and 
becauſe of the Benefit that comes by Humility, he gives Grace t9 the 
Humble. 1 By Faith, and the reft of the ſpiritual Armour, Ephe:. 
6. 13, 14, &c. Or, reſiſt, 7. e. comply not with his motions and 
temptations. mm The Head and Leader of fleſhly Luſts. Theſe /ike- 
wife are military Terms. Having ſpoken before of Strife and Con- 
tention, he direfts here with whom we may, and with whom wa 
may *not contend. He had commended model! y Men ; 
they are our cquals, we muſt not lift our felvos alove nor Ett- 
vy nor ſtrive with them ; here he advifeth to ſubmit ts God ws 
our ſupreme Governour, we muſt not contend with Vim, ati to 
open War with the Devil as our preat Encniv, our Contention muſt 
be with him. n As to that particular Afſavit in which you ref 
him; and though he rcturn again, and tempt you a-4in, vet vou 
{till refiſting, he will ſtill be overcome ; ye are never concucred fo 
long as you do not conſent. ; 

s * Draw nigh to God o, and he will draw nigh to 
you p : T Cleante your hands g, ye finners 7, and pu- 
rifie yozrr hearts s ye || double-minded 7. 

o By Faith, which 1s a coming to God, Heb. 7. 25. by true Re- 
pentance which is a returning to God, Af. 14. 1. Wal. 3. 7. and 
by fervent Prayer to him for the Kelp of his Grace, P/z/. 25. 1. 
þ By the manifeſtation of his Grace, and Favour to you, particular- 
ly giving you ſtrength againft the Devil and your Luſts. q Reform 
your Acttons, amend your Lives. Hands, the principal Inſtruments 
cf bodily A&ions, being but for the Actions themſelves; cleanne 
of Hands fignines the innocency of the outward Converſation, 7:5 
22. 30. Pſal. 26.6. and 24. 4. 1/4.33.15,15. r Youthatare open- 
ly and notorioutly viſcious, whoſe wickedneſs appears in your or- 
dinary Pra&ices : So ſuch are called, Matth. 11. 19. Mark 2.15. 
Luke 7. 37. and 15.2. Johng. 31. s Your thoughts and inward 
Aﬀc&ions, from whence the Evils of your outivard Actions procees, 
Iſa. 55. 7. See 1 Pet. 1.22, and 1 Fohn3. 2. # Either by the for- 
mer he underſtands the Prophane, and by theſe, Hypocrites, or tie 
ſame by both, viz. ſuch as had wicked Hearts, and led wicked Live: ; 
only he ſhews wherein true reyentance confifts, viz. in the Reto:- 
mation both of the inward and outward Man, 

9 * Be afflicted i, and mourn x, and weep y : 
your laughter 2 be turned into mourning a, - and 
Joy b into heavinels c. 

u Humble your ſelves for your fins (betore-mentioned) and in the 
ſenſe of wrath approaching, if you do not x with inward forro« 
of Heart. y Shew your inward griefs by weeping, the uſua! cx- 
preſſion, and ſign of it. x Your carnal Rejoycing in what you get 
by finful Courſes, v. 1, 2: luſting, warring, fighting. a Exchange 
your carnal Joy for godly Sorrow. # To the ſame purpoſe as Luezt- 
ter, before : by it he means their pleaſing themſelves in the ſuccet: 
of thcir Unrighteouſneſs, the gain of their Rapinz and Viotency 
c The ſame as Mourning, or an outivard Exprettion of it inti:2 
Dejetion of the Countenance, which utually proceeds fron Shams 
or Sorrow, (and the Gieef word figmitnes both) whereas Joy ar:« 
Confidence make Men litt up their Heads or Faces, Era ,, f. 7,5 


Ly 


toi, arc! 


*LPLOI7FP 
% L.11s 


lzt 
VO2t7 


- 


to. 15. and 11, 15. and 22, 25. Lute 21. 23. 


[ nd 8 _ IJ —_ * 
4 _ ny L3 * 4 9" (4 d- : 
þ < F h - > +. ©" *; Ve + 


[ 
; 
a 0 


® 2 Chron, 


I 
+ [11.1.15, 
|: Cit, |  ( 


* Mat 5.2 


"4 

k 4 = 
© TS. 4 
1 : 
- © RUM 
yl * i V 


[3:00 
F M4 
ih .16 
7% 

| » 


(1 'Y 
" 


po 
1% 
l 
41 
Ll 


2 
— 


= Xx . - —_ Y 
- . > > -# j an 
- - o - 
p=1 <FEL E e 
: ow = = *w P — 4 ps” 
_— "gee y_—_—— Þ: -_- = Ee Pr Fn "=> 
1 © . . IJ eng = 
—_ x ” 4 _, 


: 
bY _— 
CAS 
- —_ = "ut : __ _ 
ns be a 3.4%; : ” ade pry fm 
R———— yy mm. 2 Eo. 
4 -» 6,59 : . - & Q- nr. Fa _—_— « ra "y 4 
"_—_— ” pu $a a, . - 4 
ER __ T__ e. n a "EIA 
BS ”" 4 nowendut es 4 4 =P 
« _ > — xx Po ” C mo "i % 4 
Ne, SS od  - ns - - ey, 
- pL? 7 —_ » 
: <= "IH*-4 -* un. _ e — X = r - —_ 
» Po 6 aki, A Prney” v7; en, Tyre = _—_ 
8 = _— = - —W 4 DS Af "= ” 
_— om 3» 7 Ie p - _ a + 
EE  . > IT TIO OE 


rm F et %s 
TIES, a 


ry £ 
” _ 
bo 


bo ITT” 


9a — 
i; SP 49 Y : 
Fg > wo ” 
2 om" 'S At ris BY 4 £25 
al Rs « XY S.- , tay 
yy as If ch - Ts - : 1 ſe. > 
LP a, — FE. XY 1 Te gre << nk 
_—_ OIOER BT ala” 
fo. m _— Ct _ oc ale a O'S 
—- —_ a a \ «4 
42.4 + o *4 ms 2.9 "2 ” Sees — 


Chap. IV. 


* Luke 18, 
IL 4. 


vx. £ 
3 KCl. 8s. 3. 


10 * Humble your ſelves d in the fight of the | 
Lord e, and he ſhall Tift you up . 

d The ſime Duty preſſed again only with reſped& to the more in- 
ternal part of it, the Debaſement of the Heart, left they ſhould 
2it too mich in the outward Exerciſes before-mentioned. They 
did {i;t un themſelves through Pride and Emulation, and he ſhews 
tem the beſt way to the trucſt Exaltation, viz. Humility, Matth. 
23.12, P;ov. 15.33- and 18. 12. e Sincerely, as in the Preſence 
©: the Searcher of Hearts. Ff As to your outward State and Enjoy- 
ments ſo fir as God ſees good for you ; but however, in Grace here, 
and Glory hereatter, Dzhe 14. 1. 

11 Speak nor evil one of another g, brethren: He 
thar ſpeaketh evil of his brother, and * Judgeth þ his 
brother, {peaketh evil of the law, and judgeth the 
Live 7: but if rhou judge the law, thou art not a do- 
cr of the law. but a Judge #. ; 

7 |'iz. Unleſs in the way of an Ordinance, by Reproof, Admo- 
nition, &5c. Lev. 5.1. I Cor. 1. IT. and 11. 18. and 2 Cor. II. 13. 
and 2 Tim. 4. 14, 15. He forbids all Detration, rigid Centuring, 
and raſh judging the Hearts and Lives of others when Men con- 
d-mn whatever doth not ſuit with their Notions, or Humours, and 
make their own Moroſencſs the Rule of ether Men's Manners. 
h Finds fault with, and condemns him for thoſe things, which the 
Law doth not condemn in him, or forbid to hum, Rom. 14. 3, 4+ 
7 Viz. either, 1. By his praQtifing and approving what the Law con- 
demns, 2. e. this very Cenforiouſneſs and Detrattion ; or, 2. By 

_ condemning that which the Law allows, he condemns the Law for 
allowing it, taxing it as too ſhort and imperfett. & It thou not 
oaly judgett thy Brother, and therein invadeſt the Law's Office, 
(whote part it 1s to judge him) but judgeſt him for what the Law 
doth not forbid him, and therein judgeſt the Law it felt, as inſuf- 
ficient, and not ſtrict enough ; Thou doſt caſt off the Law's Go- 
vernment, difown its Superiority, exempt thy ſelf from any Sub- 
jetion to it, and make thy ſelf mecrly a Judge of it. 

12 There is one law-giver /, who is able to ſave, 
* Rom.14. and to deſtroy 2 : * Whoarrt thou z thar judgeſt ano- 
«<0 thcr o © 

1 One Abſolute, Supreme, Univerſal and Spiritual Law-giver, 
and who can fimply, and direQtly bind Mens Conſctences, and make 
Laws for their Souls, Prov. 3.15, 16g Iſa. 33. 22. Atts 4. 19. By 
this he intimates, that they d1d invade God's Right, who took upon 
them a Legitlative Power in preſcribing to other Mens Conſciences, 
and making their own Will the Rule of the others Duty. m Both 
remporally and eternally, Deut. 32. 39. I Sam.2.6. and Ta. 43.13. 
vhereas other Law-givers cannot fave or deſtroy Mens Souls, nor fo 
much as their Lives, without God's concurrence, n What a ſorry 
Creature, a Man, a Worm, that thou ſhouldſt lift up thy ſelf into 
God's Place, and make thy ſelf a Judge of One not ſubje& to thee? 
0 The Servant of another Maſter, Rom. 14. 4+ It 1s a fond thin 
for thee to take upon thee the Power of a Judge, when thou ha 
no Power of ſaving or deſtroying, rewarding or puniſhing, 

13 * Goto p now, ye that ſay 9, Today, or to 
morrow 7 we will go into ſuch a city, and continue 
there a year, and buy, and ſell, and get gain £. 

p Either this is a Note of Tranſition, or of Command to Inferi- 
ors, or rather of Admonition to ſuch as are ſtupid or raſh, and tends 
ro the awakening theirAttention,and ſtirring them up to theContide- 
ration of their Duty, Þanger, gc. 9g Either with your Mouths, 
or in your Hearts, #7 Nor let us go, but we will go, in the Indica- 
tive Mood ; aoting the Peremptorineſs of their Purpoſes, and their 
preſuming upon future times, and things, which were not in their 
Power. $s He doth not condemn Merchants travelling into other 
Countries, nor trading there, nor deſigning Gain by their Trade, 
nor forccaſting their Buſineſs, but their promifing themſelves the 
continuance of their Life, the accompliſhing their Deſigns, and the 
ſucceſs of their Labours, without reſpe&t to God's Providence and 
DireQion, as if their Times, and their Works were in their own 
Hands, not in his. 


7 + Whereas ye know not what /ha// be on the mor- 
i Or. f, 34 OW 7 : or what 7zs your lifez? || it * is even a va- 
-,2-* pour x that appeareth for a little time and then va- 
nitheth away. 

t Whether ye your ſelves ſhall continue till then, or what elſe 
ſhall then be, or not be. In vain do ve boaſt of whole Years, when 
ye cannot command the Events of one Day. u This Queſtion im- 
plies Contempt, as 1 Sam. 25. 10. Pſal. 144. 3, 4. x Like a Va- 
pour, . frail, uncertain, and of ſhort continuance, and then how vain 
are thoſe Counſels and Purpoſes that are built upon no more ſure a 
Foundation, tian your own lives ? 


15 For thatye ozght to ſay y, * If the Lord will >, 
we ihall live @, and do this, or that. 

y It is the real Acknowledgment of God's Providence, and the 
Dependance of ail our Afﬀairs upon him, which 1s here required ; 
and this is to be done, cither exprefly with the Mouth in ſuch like 
Forms of Speech as this is, ſo tar as 1s needful for our glorifying 
God, and diſtinguiſhing our ſelves from thoſe that are prophane, as 
hath been cuſtomary with the Saints in Scripture, Ads 18.21. Rom. 
I. 19. and cther Places, but always inwardly, and in the Heart. 
2 7.e, With his providential, or direQive Will, which as yet we 
do not know, and therctore we ſay, If the Lord will : For all our 
C:unicls and Determinations muſt be regulated by his preceptive, 
or diretiive Will, which we do know ; and therefore with reſpe&t 
to that Will, we are not to ſay, We will do this, or that, if God 
will, 7.c. commands it, but we muſt firſt ſee that it be commanded, 
and then retolve to do it, if God will, that is, if in his Providence 
te ſha permit us. a Some read the words, if the Lord will, and 
we ſral! le, we will & this, or that; and then the latter Copula- 


* Mat. 7.1. 
Luke 5.37. 
R 0m.2.1. 
t CUI 3.5 


+ Prov.27. 
3.Luke 12. 
18%, 


* Job 7. 7. 
See ch. 1. 
IO 


T 1 Coreg. 


19, 


FUMES. 


permit us to live, and yet not permit us to do this or that. Bus ;c 
we take the words according to our reading, if the Lord will _ 
ſhall live, and ds this, or that ; the meaning is, That both our Life 
and Attions depend upon the Will of God, not the one, nor the 
other, is in our Power. And ſo here is a double Check to the vain 
Boaſts of thoſe that were ſo peremptory in their Reſolutions, wit). 
out conſidering the frailty of their own Lives, or the Dependance 
of their Ations upon God's Will, when both the one, and the other 
are at his diſpoſe, ; 

16 But now ye rejoice þ in your hoaſtings- : 
{ſuch rejoicing is evil d. 

b Or, Glory, Ye pleaſe your ſelves with them. c Vj-, 0: vour 
carnal Proje&ts, and Hopes of what you intend to do, and cp<& to 
get, 9. d. you vainly boaſt of your Defigns and Succefles, without 
taking notice of God's Providence, under the Government of whic! 
you and your Aﬀeairs all are. d Both as being contrary to the Word: 
which afſures us ſo often, that it is vain to promiſe our ſelves 
long Lite or Proſperity in our worldly Bufineſs, without God's leave 
and bleſſing, P/al. 127. 1. Prov. 16. 9, 33. and likewiſe as proceed- 
ing from Pride and Security. | 


and doth it not, to him it is fin f. 


you know what you are to do ; and therefore it you do it not, jt 
will be your fin : Or, it may refer t# what he was immediatcly ye- 
fore diſcourſing of, and may be ſpoken'to prevent an Objection. 
They might ſay, he taught them no more than what they knew al- 
ready, and that they acknowledged God's Providence in all thinzs, 
To this he replies, That it they knew their Duty, they ou: hit t9 
pradtiſe it, and ſo aftually ſubmit themſelves, and their Atfairs to 
the Condutt of that Providence ; aud their not doing it, now that 
they knew it, would the rather be their fin. f 2. e. Sin indeed, 0: 
(as we ſay) Sin with a Witneſs, a greater Sin, and which hath 
more of the nature of fin in it, or is more highly aggravated by be- 
ing againſt Knowledge, and fo is puniſhable with the feverer Ven: 
geance than if done out of Ignorance, Luke 12. 47, See the lik: 
expreſſion, Fohn 9. 41. and 15. 22, 24. 


CHAT. V- 

Dreadful Judgments will come on thoſe Rich who ave unjuſt, volupts- 
ous, oppreſſive, I=——6, The Oppreſſed are admimniſhed to Patience 
by the coming of Chriſt, and the Examples of an Husbandman, 
Prophets, and eſpecially of Job, 59-—12. Againſt Swearing : 


Prayer in Faith, and Duty of Confeſſimm ; and of reducing thoſe wh! 
are gone aſtray, 13—20, 


your miſcries that ſhall come upon you /. 


only wallowing in Wealth, but abuſing it to Pride, Luxury, Op- 
prefſion and Cruelty, Againſt theſe, either as looking on them as 
incurable, or upon ſuppoſition of their Impenitency, he denoun- 
ceth God's Judgments; and that whether they were unconvertc1 
Jews vexing the believing Fews; or Gentiles, oppreſſinz the Chri- 
ſtian Fews ; or Chriſtians 1n Profeſſion and Name, who yet were 
ſo vile in their PraRice, as to condemn, ard kill the Fuft ; and that 
they might more ſpeciouſly do it, to draw them before the 
Judgment-Seats, @&c. 17 To denot? the extremity of the Calam!- 
ties coming upon them, in which they ſhould not only weep like 
Men, but how! like wild Beaſts. See Fer. 4. 8. Mic, 1. 8. 7! 
I. 10, 13. k Or, are coming upon you ; to fignifie the certainty and 
nearneſs of them. The Miſeries he means, may be both temporz! 
and eternal. 


7 are moth-caten. 

| Either by Riches, he means the general, and by Garments, 
Gold and Silver, the Particulars in which their Riches confiſted ; 
and then being corrupted, is to be taken generally, as comprehend- 
ing the ſeveral ways whereby the ſeveral kinds of their Riches were 
ſpoiled : Or elſe, by Riches he underſtands ſuch things as were liable 
to Corruption or Putreta&ion, as Corn, Wine, Oyl, which were 2 
great part of their Riches. m Coſtly Garments, in which Rich 
Men are wont to pride themſelves ; and under them may be com- 
prehended all ſuch Cloaths as may be eaten by Worms, or Moths. 


3 7 Your gold and filver is cankred, and the ruit 
of them ſhall be a witneſs againſt you o,and ſhall eat 
your fleſh pas it were fire 9: Ye have heaped trealure 
together for the laſt days 7. | 

n The moſt precious and laſting Metals, yet even they with lonz 
diſuſe, canker, and go to decay. Under theſe, other Metals 
eſteem among them, may be underſtood. o By a Proſopoperia, that 
which properly belongs to living Perſons, is aſcribed to dead thing: 
as Hab. 2. 11. Luke 19. qo. it is as much as if he had ſaid, 1c 
Ruft ſhall bea certain Evidence againſt you, and which will as et- 
teQually convie you, as any living Witzeſs could do, of your Folly 
in putting your truſt in periſhing things, your greedineſs in hoard- 
ing them up, your unmercifuineſs in not ſupplying the wants of 
others, and your unreaſonableneſs in denying the uſe of them to 
your ſelves, when you had rather let them lie by and periſft, than 
enjoy the Comforts of them, or do good with them. The like Ex- 
prefſion we have, Mark 6.11, p The Ruſt (the Witneſs 9: + and 
Covyetouſneſs and Cruelty) which now eats your Monev, ſhall 1cre- 
after devour your ſelves, Soul and Body (which he mcans Þy F-0" 
wuz. by procuring and kindling the Wrath of God upon you, 69” 
pared to Fire) and likewiſe by-galling your Conſciences wit 4 vVex- 
atious Remembrance of” your Sin, and Folly ; and ſo what vi 506 
Judgment is a Witnets againſt you, in Hell will be a Tormentcr 


} 


, 
WEL 


tive, «nd, 15s redundant, and the ſenſe is, That all our Afions de- 
pend got 0kYy vpun Cur liying, but upon God's 3H7/ting. God may 


. » / " -# 2 ' _ EY IR = | < v POLE _— ans a $48 
to you. 9g As 1t vou had reſerved Firc 1n your Ircoure, #: 
as T PH | 2 q "af. . $52 +! Mo 5 v3% | > "7 "—_ Js mt 3 
aQ rea!i1ie tn VOUTr Cheirc, WF CTHCT 3375S IT» © VEE 7. 


? a 


Our Duty in Adverſity, Proſperity, and Sickneſs : The Power 


Chap.y 


* All *1Cg; oy 


17 Therefore to * him that knoweth to do good o, + gy, . 


20,21 55 


e Either this may relate to all that the Apoſtle had been before, and 2,1- 
ſpeaking of, g.d. I have admoniſhed you of your Duty, and now 1?,:; 


Br * tonowg, ye rich men h, weep and howl# fr * 1. 


N 
< 
7 
- 


3% +1 
t, 


— 


2 Trans 
& 


'& Sce ch. 4.13. h He ſpeaks to them not imply, as rich, (for 24-1 7'n. 
Riches and Grace ſometimes may go fogether) but as wicked, not 5. :. 


2 Your riches are corrupted 7, and * your garments *.: 


Chap. V. 


phorically, ve have heaped a Trealurc 
Rom, 2. 5. or literally, 
{ift, and fatal days, in which God 15 bringing thoſe 
on you winch will contuine all, : 
>hold s, the hire of your Jabourers which have 
reaped down your fields 7, which is of you kept back 
. by traud . cricth x, and * the cries of them waich 
ave reaped, 41re entred into the 
{ubbaoth y. 

S This is cit her a Note of Demonſtration, as 7ohn 1. 25. q. d. the 
caſe is plat ” and cannot be denied ; or of Excitation, q. d. ſeri- 
outly confid ſer it; or rather, of Conirmation, to intimate, 
Threatnis he cre den "I ſhou!d certainly be made good upon 
them. Sec Tude 1, T.þ. The Wazes of thoe, 
and Sweat ye your ſelves he and are nouriſhed, Either who!ly 
denied the Mm, Or detained from them, when due to them, contrary 
to the Law, Levit. 15. 13. Deit. 24.14, 15» Deterring Payment 
13 4 fort oi defrauding, as 1t bereaves the Creditor of the Benctit 
ot Improvement ; and fo they are taxed liere with Injuſtice, as 
well as Covetouſnefs, in that they lived upon other Men's Labours, 
and ſtarved the Poor to enrich themſeives, x Viz. to God for 
Venzeance, as ſuch Sins are ſaid to do, which cither arc ſo openly 
and boldly committcd, as to dare tne Juſtice of God ; or lo fecret- 
Iv, or ſccurely, that they are like to cfcape the Jufttce of Men, Gen. 


[ydgments up- 


4.15, and 18. 20, 21. Among ofhers, Oppreifion of the Poor 15 4 
_ crying. Sin, Ex1. 2. 23. 0 b 24« 88, 32«. MS 2-0, 2, 02. 
T 5s 0 The Lord ot Hoſis, as having all the Creatures above and be- 
Bag of all ſorts, ranked under him as their great Commander, whoſe 


Will they are ready to execute, He mentions God by tins Title, not 
only tor the encourazeme nt of the poor opprelied, whoſe Patron and 
Protcettor he avows himſ-lf to be, Exod. 22. 23, 24,2 » Prov. 23. 
11. But for terror to the powerful Oppretiors, who think them- 
leives out of the reach of Mens Judzments, 


5 Ye have lived in pleature Z on the earth @, and | 
been wanton F, YC have nouriſhed vour hearts c as 1m + 


a d: v of laughter ll. 

\ Luxuriouſly and TIO 6 
"I Appetites, Amos 6. 4, 5,5. Luke 15. 19, 25 a Where you 
place vour happineſs without looking higher, and from whence you 
tetcit your deltghts, Phil. 3. 19, b The ſame ward 15 uſed, 1 7/5. 
5, 1t feems to imply effeminate laſcivious behaviour, as the effect o! 
their riotous living, c Either by an Hebrew phraſe, ye have nou- 
rilh nk your hearts, for ye have nouriſhed your ſelves, Eſth. 5. 6. 
Fob 10. 13. : or, ye have cheared up, and encouraged your hearts 
112 your r Laxary, by pampering your Fleſh (Luke 12.19.) and teed- 
inz not to the {atisfaRion of Nature, but the enflamfhs of your Luſts, 
& Either ſecurely, and without fear of the Deſtruttion coming upon 
you, as Sheep graze quietly, tho' by and by to be brought to the 
Shambles; or, rather in a day of laughter, i.e. ina day of ſolemn 
Feaſting, when many Beaſts were killed in Sacrifice, on which they 
were wont to Feaſt, Prov. 7. 1.4. and 17. 1, They made every day 
a keaſting day, and that too, laviſhing out other Men's dues upon 
cheir own tf! h, and ſparing trom their Labourers, that they might 
ſpend upon their Luſts. Thus he brings to a2EUne their fin, 

6 -\e have conde! mned. and killed e the Juit ; 
ho doth nor refilt you g. 

? f, e. Procured by your cdl and Power the para s unrigh:- 
Senten WES, 2nd thereby the deſtrution of the Jait. 'f Inde- 
nnitely and collectively, the jt for any juft Man, viz. fuch as 
innocent and juft in comp ariſon of their Perſecutors. g This notes 
nor only the patience of ſuch in bearing injuries, but their weak- 
nets too, and being deſtitute ot humane help againſt their 
rics POWEr. 


and 


feous 


B2 ve patiznt therefore, brethren, unto the 
Coining / of the Lord. BÞeb old the husbandman wait 
eth tor the precious truit z of the earth, and n as long 
patience for it, until. lie receive the early, and latter 
rain | 

h I'rr, To Judzment, and that cither particular to avenze the 
quarrels of innocent ſufferers upon their Tyrannical Perſecutors ; or, 
rather to the General Judzment, 1n vw hich a full retribution is to be 
made botn to thc Juit and Unjuit, Rm. 2. 5,5, &c. To which 


ſudyment the Scripture calls all t 
under Oppretſioa and Perſecution, 2 Theff. 1.5, 7, XC. 1 Whic! 
ſuſtentation of his Life. + The Rain ſoon after the Sowing, which 
cauled the Corn to ſpring up ; and that before the Harveſt whic! 
plamped it, and made 1t nt tor Reaping, -Dext, IT. 14. Ter. 5. ſy 
Hil. 5.3. Joe 

$ Bu ye alto patient /. ſtabliſh vour 
the coming of the Lord ar aweth nigh 7. 

] liz. in cxpetation of your Harveſt, and the truit of your La- 
as the Husb:nd-Man 1s in looking tor his. m Let your hearts 
and conſtant in ; Holineſs, encouraging vour 
telves to both by the coming of the Lord. As before, his coming 
to. the General Judg ment, which is ſaid to be nigh, becauſe of the 
certainty of its coming, and the uncertainty of the time when 1t 
will come, and becauſe it is continually drawing on, and the whole 
time of the Worlds duration till then, 1s but ſhort 1 in compariſon of 
the Eternity following, and likewiſe becauſe the particular Judg- 


2. 23, 


hearts , for 


VOUrs, 
he ſiedtaſt in Faith, 


ment of every Man is nigh at hand. See Phil. q. 5. #9; 10, 
37. 
o || Grudge o not one againſt another p, brethsen, 


2 condemned 9; behold the judge {tandeth be- 
fore the Ugo0T r. | 

Gr. ce ſenſe may be, either, envy not one ano- 
ther, {or as we trantlatc if, £ TrFud. e not )it being the nature of Envy 
11n at another Mans 00d Or groan not by way of acculat- 


*/ , 
3117 NOT 1 


01 or comylaint to God againſt others; detining him fo avcn «© | 
rrels, 4s 1f You were 29 roO0d co !uiter infurics : ob GUO.] 


' y 
' 
| ? 

Mr 44, 


FUMES. 


of Wrath fer the laſt days, | were unjuft or + 
ve have hoarded up your Wealth againft the 


cars of the Lord of 


that the 


by whoſe: Labour | 


| hnghett ſervices in the Church, 


| lack — £ 


giving up your ſelves to your fen- | 
| ftzns ot impatience be ſheived, 


were |} 


o look, cſpccially thoſe that are : 
, the like kind. 
cot him hard LaDour, and by which he receives great beneht, the | 


Cha! 
FB TY Y, 
YL - E mae *% - $3. AS,» OD Yo #* P, v1 C 
n Þ ag OIECLU cohting 1 VGU., / BYOUIICS II 1.1 {4 IC \ 
111 qr __— Bn C1] _ Nm EY ; 
Cirittiun « L iT CHhri it! an; the: 1 \ C1 "C unured nn 0:21) " 3 [ 


T7 -! {7+ +1 Ws ** | 1 y .- . yo % ] 
Y OFIQUILIGES, a Cpen Oppretlors, hut DY TAICKF Feil0iy-i FOLSHOT:, 


Talk 


and gave one another mutual cauſe of ti2 hin and x XUUR A th 
God punifh vou al Lug ty £ 

} N YOu Ul; the re DEN; none ot you Jt 24G Ven othurs 
cauſe ot grier and comply: ne, 4 well 45 others have giv21 you, Var 

O - 

7.1. r The Lord Jeſus Crit, the ſudze of you Ut. 5 x7 hand, 
"Ph; ) an: _ + : 5” = 
(Phil. 4. 5.) tina readineſs cith: rto briv; thoſe evils upon you, wit? 
you with may fall upon others; or to give you your rewars, 
through patient continuance in —_ d:inz, vou feck for it, Ram. 2. 7 


The like Phraſe we have; auth, 2. 


4+.33- Math 13. 26. of tt may 
allude to Gen. 4. 7. 


: 1TE 1 "> }, © * + Yo ; . on | I S.-- R - 
I © Tak my OTCLE Fei SF $65 DT: F > (ie 6. / SL LICH h-j\ Kb 
Ki x & "y al 
#3 A q- 1 | 1 | . "TT ” vw» 1,4 3 s 
[poken | IN fe name of the Lo 7 For an eXammie of 
| luttering atfiction x, and of patience x. 


j es heing met! eminent ainon2 God s Yeople, and Leaders ot 
them ; he intimates: that it 15 an honour ro ſurfer amon? tie Heit. 
t By lis Commind aud, Authority, and lo were emploved in the 
ind tlicre' Iy appeared to he Jippro- 


ved of God, and mott dear to him. #4 As wich as God honoured 


and loved them, yet they were not exempted irom A3itions, but 
were maitgncd, traduced and perſccuted by Men, 7: Kirgs 2.13. ind 


a3; a the ref re e214 
LOT YOu LO iu tur c! 


[9. 14. and 2 [C'ngs 6. 21. 4mos 7. 10. Heb. 11 
ficy luffered ſuch ha irc things, it 1s n9 ſhane 'C 
Itke, Mutth, 5. 12. x A: the example of their tutter! ny ſho Ty 
Yrevent your Ditcourtzement, fo the example of ther patien'o frowld 
Frovoke your mmitaton; God having tet thein | 

both, ti14t it you ſuiter the ſaine thin;;s, you may lufter 135tlt Tie 
fume minds. : 

11 Þenold * we y count then h 1pDy Which - 
LM p have heard "of the + patienc2 @ of Job, 
{een þ the j| end of the Lord <, thar * the Lord 
ly Ver\ pititul d. T1 nd Of render IVCICV @, . 

y We our felves count them happy that endure, : ind therefore 
ſhould be patient, and not count our ſelves miferable if w2 js 
Viz. patiently and conftantly, Matth. 5. 1, 11. 
which he was as emineat as for his Sufferin2s - and thouzh fone 
yet his paticace and ſu! bmiifion £0 
God being prevalent, and moit remark1hle to him, that only 5 fu- 
ken notice of, and his tailings overlooked. + Job's patience 1- heard 
of, but God's end ſeen :. Srerng being a clearer way of Perc:ption 


zOrfit © TRUNMPTS OZ 


It \ & 


FIC 


than Hearing, 1s put in this lattze clauſe, bcciuſe God” + bounty and 
recompence ws more evident thin 7ab's Patience. c The good Hive 


in eſte Wing him to Ins | former ftato, 
_ doubling hrs Projtpurity, & EF nels, Gr. the Bowc!s be- 

7 the ſeat of « compitfion (in which we feel a ft! wie when ftrons 
iff-Qion are working 11 15) are frequently put, t-2 (1 nite the moſt 
tender and moveable aifettions, ſuch as 


God gave to all 75s Sutlerin,, 


Mothers have tow .ird oy 
Children, Ger.43.30. and 1 Kings 3.25.and 12.4 3.15. and 
this ſeems to _ _ atfeion it ſelf, or God's retdinct; to Sa 2W 
Mercy, Luke 1 » Tins may impl- atts of Mercy fuitaile t0-2 
mercitul nature, i hg: Mercy within, and tis 
out, 

12 But above all thin 33 my brethren * five: 
neither by heaven, neither by the earch Þ, n-ither by 
any other Vath 7, bur ler vour = be Yea; ang ron 
Nay, Nay +, left ve fall into condemr weeds 1 a 

f Becauſe it is a great tin to ſear up NEST 1 i1T OCC i707, 204 
it was very uſuil amony the jews, and 1t was "the 


5 V 
« * 


| BY 
BMCICY d] VIC 1k. 


mee (\ 


bring them off from it wh ) Were 10 mucn accuſtome a to _ YIRerc- 


K- | tore the Apoſtle commands then, that ab: 
Advertla- 


e MH thin,” IrS nou 
not Swear, 7.e. ſhould tare tpectil care tncy did 
diligently againſt a Sin fo many were addicted to, and -ato which 


x 
a ry ELIE) 
IivVt, iti 11008 


they might 1o eatily fall. g All Swearin? is not forb{dcen any more 
than JMatth. 5. 34. (for Oaths are made uſe of by Hoiy Men hoth in 
the Old and New Teſtament, Gen. 21. 23, 24. 4nd 2.4. 3- prone 36. 
283.and 1 Kings 17. 1,2. and 2 Cor. 1. 23. and Gal. 1. 25. and tac 
ule ot an Oath is permitted, and approved ot vy God himielt, Pu! 


- 
\\ TI'S 1- 
\ILLHLOURL 


5. 4. Heb. 5. 15.) but fuch Oaths are as taſſe, raſh, vin 
Wy, Caute, or cuftomary and frequent in ord! nary Diſcourſe, 1 K7rz. 
go 2. Cos Yo 2, Ztih. 9. 37s h By which the Feiys thou! 


10 tie 
p - 

nerentl 
Ort 


by other Creatures, 
tha \\ 


they make lawtully Swear, as Itkewiſe 
Name *of God were not interpotcd; not confiderins 
is not expreſſed yet it is implied, 3atth. 23. 20, 21. 7 Vir. 
þ Either, 1. Let vour Speccit be Tra, . 7c.t. and Naz, 
N.iy, 1.e. by plain athr! nations and nezations, without the addition 
ot any Oath, for contirmatio! Or, =. Let your Tea 
Yea, and your Nay, Nay, 1. Ce. Lot vour words be in Truth and Since- 
rity, Your Speech feconded !y your Actions ; et vour telves 
to truth and plainnef; in |peaking, and that will take away tie oc- 
caſion of Swearinz. Se the like, 2 Cr. 1. 17, 18, 19. { Iz. for 
takins the Name of God 1a vain, Exod. 29. 7. which ts always done in 
an 454; crap Oath, | 

3 IS any among vou u althcted m2? let him 
x any merry ? ler. him ting o plalms. 

: Either troubled or affiited in mind, as appears by the oppotite 
Ws merry, Or more generally aftiietcd any way : No that we need 
not Pray at other times, but when under Affitions God ca!ls us more 
eſpecially to it, and our own neccifitics puts us upon it. n For Sup- 
port, Paticnce, San&itication of Afﬀfittions, gc. 0 Exprets his Mirt! 
in an holy manner, by praiting God wit! lms and Spiritual Song: 
for Mercies received trom him, x Cor. 14.15. EP. $ 19. and £ 
keep Tp [1!s ſpiritu. i mirth by a ſpiritual excrete, Jett his Cl ICCrIM» 
neſs devenerate into vanity and trothinels, 

1+ Is any fick p among you? let him call for the Ft: 
ders q'of the C hurch. ard let them pray- oVer nia 7 
uninting him with « 


T# , be - =_ 
#1 ATi) > I .* 


DIAY 22. 


2 
» 


- 
of! / in the name 04 


jp Or :ntirm, though not detper. telv aud 12? So uy. g Empectia'ly 
teaching Elders, they being utualiy beſt fturnmſted with £1775 wh 
ſour in the Word and Dottrine, 1 TO s. 17. - It $37 the Fiore 
N mt cithcr tv an Fnalla,: for the Singular, ©;  !ct ni feng 
- p- - Wo; $0; 


C hap. V. 


. being prayed to in Faith. 


* ke coniciicd. 


, Y ry 
HH 
w 


tor ſome or otker of the Elders; or, bccauſe there were in thoſe 
time willy ſeveral Elders; an Eccleilatiical Senate) mn each Church. 
- 4,11 wee fettins him becore God, and preſeating him. to him, 
which mit boamemns to fiir up tae greater affettion and warmth 
4 Praver, fec 1 Kings 17, 21. and 2. Kirgs 4. 33, 34, Fon 11. 41. 
*; 2.24 JO, and Gs 40. Or laying on their harids, as Ads 8.8. 
noch act Tecms to be for the ſame end. / An outward ritc uted 
1 tow times, 12 miraculous healing fick Perſons, which might then 
oe kopt up, vine the Giit whereof 1t was the Symbol continucd ; 
he G1: it is vainly uſed. Theſe Cures were lome- 
incs wronuht only with a Word, Aﬀs 5g. 34. and 14. 10. and 16. 
t2, Somctimes by taking by the hand, or embracing, Ads 3.7. 
tit 22.1 Sometimes by liying on of Hands, Mark 15. 18. ds 


hate woelinkd 
. ' IK. TV1k Tis L111 Sos 


""@ & 

195 an Inftitution of a S2crament, but a Command, that thoſe El- 
&-15 That had the Gutt of Realing, (as many in thoſe Days had {being 
ealled by the Sick to come to them, ſhould (the Spirit of the Lord 
them) exerciſe that Giit, as well as Pray over them, 
; upon the Lord, and fo joyning Prayer with their 


aired THE 
E Either, calling 
Anoimtin:; cr, in the Name, 15s by the authority of the Lord, from 
vom they had rccerved that Git. : 

15 And the prayer of Faith Z {hall tave x the 1ick, 
and the Lord y! ſhall raiſe him up 2, and .1t he have 
{halt be forgiven him 6. 

z 7. e. Procecding from Faith ; the Cure 15 aſcribed to Prayer, the 
ral means, and ſtanding Ordin.ice, not to tne Anointing, which 


» 


. " id ' 
"4343953 ++.5014 23 23S. A &: Ir 
CO HILLEL 1::15D CC LHLC 


_ 4 15H 4 
wr but ceremonial and temporary; and to Faith in Prayer, to ſhe 
tht this remedy was efettually only, when Faith (requitite to the 


Ys 
workin of Miracles) was ative, viz. In a certain periwafion that 
the tick Pericn ſhould be healed. x Reftore to health (it God ſee 
;© 5, and the health of the Body be good tor the Soul) Mark 10. 52, 
{hs 7.590. and 18.42, y The Elders pray, but the Lord raiſeth up, 
z The ſamic as ſaving betore, only the 
VWurd ſeems to reſpet the fick Man's lying upon his Bed, trom which 
he rifeth when he 1s healed, Mark 1.31. a It he have by his Sins 
procured his Sickneſs; or thoſe Sins, tor which particularly God vi- 
{:t: him with Sickneſs; Sin being often the cauſe of Sicknels, Matth. 
D. 2. 14. and 1 Cor. 11. 30. thc. not always, 7ohn 9g. 2. 
b Gou will take away the cauſe as well as the effet; heal the Soul as 
well as the Body, and Prayer is the means ot obtaining both. 

16 Contcls your faults c one to anocher d,and pray 
cne for another c, that ye may be healed f. The 
* eitectual fervent.s prayer of a righteous man Þþ 2vail- 


70N 5%. 


- eth much 7. 


© Some Copies have the illative particle, therefore, in the Text, 
hut even without that here ſeems to be a connexion between this 
and the former Verſe : He had faid, the Sick Man's Sins ſhould be 
forgiven upon the Elders praying; and here he adds, that they muſt 
| d4 Either, that ye may be reconciled to one another 
wizen offended, or rather confeſs when admoniſhed or reproved tor 
Sin, or wounded in your Conſciences with the ſenſe © it ; and ſo 
*Jiis 1s not meant of Auricular Confeſſion made to a Prieft, but ſuch 
2s ſhould be made, though eſpecially to Miniſters, yet, when need 
even to Godly, experienced Chriſtians, for the eaſing and diſ- 
burdcening Men's Confcicnces, and getting the help ot others 
Pravers, & Both in other ordinary cafes, and chictly upon occafion 
2! xour mutual Confetfions, and thoſe Soul-troubles that prompted 
<4 £2 them. f Not cenly recover bodily health when fick, but 
wititual, when weakned or wounded by Sin. Healing 1s often ap- 
lied to the Soul as well as the Body, Matth.13.15. Luke 4.18. Heb. 
12:13. and 1 Pet. 2.24 g Our Tranilators uſe two words (and 


is 


place : Some trantlate it znwrought, 1t ſeems to be a Prayer wrought 


TI 


Sometimes by anointing with Oil, Mark 6. 15. and fo this | 


FAMES. 


—__——w___ 


EENEDPMUCIOCITOCIY MPAA . 2 WOT EETIAC . .  Þ  9 EIT. 


OO —E—  — 


| Hed. 22. 24; 7ade ds 


Chap.) 


vchemency of Holy AfﬀeRtions cauted by him in Prayer, Rom. 8. :5 
hþ One tincerely righteous, and in a Golpel-ſenſe; the follow ins i; 
ſtance of Elias ſnews that it 1s not to be underſtoug of a Mii, 4's 
tolutely righteous. i Is very powerful with God tor obtainins wh 7 
1s dejired, 1 John 5. 14. whereas God heareth not Sinners, Pr; . 


- > & 
Cil 


8, 29. 
17 Elias was a man * ſubject to like paſhons 25 1. 
are #, and he prayed || earnettly / thar ir might; nog 45 


rain zz, and It rained not on the earth by the fc 
of three years and fix months 0. 

k Both of Body and Mind, Natural and Moral ; and fo ti, !: 
were righteous, yet he was not perte&, though an emincnt Prophe: 
yet buta Man. / With that eflectual, fervent Prayer before-menti. 
oned. It 15 an Aebrew phraſe, and notes vehemency, as Luke 55, 

15. m This is not expreſly mentioned in the Hiltory, but this 
Apoliile might have 1t by Revelation, or by certain Tradition wel] 
known 1n his Age. Other paflages of the like nature we micer with 
in the New Teſtament, which are not in the Old. See 2 1:19, 2.8 
; n Or, the Land, wiz. of the Ten T: ibes. and 
the places bordering on them, as Sarepra, n Kings 17. 9. Luke g. 25. 
25. 0 So Luke 4. 25. 2. How doth this azree-with 1 Kings 12. 1 
wherc it 1s ſaid, the Word of the Lord came to El:jah about the this 
year ? A. Moſt probably it was in the midſt ot the third your trom 
His connng to Sarepta; and he was by the Brook Cheirtha your, jp, 
17. 7. Where the Marzin reads it according to the /elren, ar te 
end of days, 1. e. the days of a year, as the phraſe is oiten uled, Gy 
4. 3. Judges 17.10. So that his time ſpent in both places may we!; 
make up the three years and fix months. 

19 And * he prayed again p.,and thz heaven 9 gaye ©: k- 
rain, and rhe earth broughr torth her fruit. 6.424 

þ After the deſtroying the Prophets of Baal, Bal worſhip «ſp: 
cially gave occafion to his former Prayer , which he puts up out ©: 
his Zeal to God's Glory, then laid low by the Tiraelites Tdolatiy: and 
a defire to have them, by ſome exemplary puniſhment. fer t! 
Sin, awakened to Repentance. And the deſtruction of the Id0!.rc 
and retormation of the People, who now acknowledged th: Lo 
to be God, might give occaſion to this. þ z. e. The Air or Cl...) 
which had not been for thrce years before. 

19 Brerhren * if any of you do err from the whih © 
7; and one / convert him 7. 

7 The Truth of God revealed 1n the Goſpel, as the complicit it 
of Faith and Lite ; ſee the Goſpel called the Tuth by way © « 
nency, Gal. 2.5, 14. and 3. i. and 5.7. Eph. 1. 13. chap 
and 1 Pet. 1. 22. { Any one, Miniſter or private Belicyc:. 
may be an Inftrument in the Converſion of others ; tho' 61 
by way of Autftority, the other by way of Charity, yet bot}: 
duty. * Viz. Miniſterially or Inſtrumentally, in ſubordinatin 
God.. The Work 1s his, Eph. 2. 10. but often is aſcribed to tio 1: 
ſtruments a&ing under him, and uſing means appointed by him, an. 
by which he works, A&s 26.18. ; 

20 Let him know that he which converts a !!:n. 
from the errour of his way z ſhall five x a iv! » 
from death 2, and + ſhall hide a multitude of {ir-. 

4 Of his Life and Aﬀons, which 1s contrary to the way ih! | 
God hath preſcribed. x Men are faid to fave in the ſame war © fe 
as to convert, viz. Inſtrumentally. y The Soul of him that 1s t!. 
converted, 1 77m. 4.15, Soul for perſons, as chap. 1.21, 7 Erci 
nal Death unto which he was haſtening while he continued 1n tic ©: 
ror of his way, which led him toward deftruttion. F In the ':m 


nt 


—_ 


: ſenſe as before he is ſaid to convert and ſave his Soul, viz. in cir 
little enouzh) to expreſs the ſhgmificancy of the Greek word in this | 


Inſtrumental to bring him to Faith and Repentance, upon win, 


; God pardons, 7. e. hides his Sins (P/al.32.1.) tho' not from the cv. 
in the Soul by the Holy Spirit, and ſo may 1mply both the efficiency | 


of God's Spirit (the Spirit of Supplications, Zech. 12.10) and the | 
| 


of his Omniſcience, yet trom the eye of his vindictive Juſtice, 41 
ſo as not to bring them forth in Judgment againſt him. 


|= > ——— _ 


SeEvINST EPISTLE GENERAL 


OF 


PETER. 


The ARGUMENT. 


() the Pen-Man of this Epiſite there 1s no doubt , ond of the time of his writing it.no certaint 'y ; whether avout 
HI the year of our T.ord 45, or rather 65. the occaſion of it (not 1mprobably ) be thought to be the ſame 11.1! 
was of James rs writing bis, viz. the folly and perverſeneſs of ſome in thoſe times, and among the Fetiſh C111 


trans to whom he wrotetn ſeparating Faith from Holineſs, and their doubting whether Peter and Paul augh: 7: 
me Poctrins s, His feope therefore is, partly to confirm theſe Saints in the behef of the Goſpel, and to teſti/ir 


that i [ & Dot!rine of the grace of God throueh Fes Chriſt, which they had embraced and did profe S, WAY indeed 


, - 11 3 
þ nt alli! 


1146, chap.5.12. being the fame that had been preached by the Prophets to the Fathers of the Old 1 eſt- 


710117 Chap. 1.ver.10,11,12. fairly mplying it 10 be the ſame that Paul preached.by bis ſending this Epiſi/r 10 7 Dei 
bot were of the Gretmeafion by Sylvanus a Minſter of the Uncircumciſion,and Paul's ordinary OY in the 


/ 


07% of the Geſpel: (as likereiſe be doth by that ample teſtimony he gives toPaul and his writings.2 


W 
- Py 4) -3 3*.7F & 3 
(A545 6at #t# 84 Y 
z of 
, - , 


e201 M4 6 ine Part 
! 


el.3.15,1 0.) 


j# 


to exbort 1hem to the prattice of Godlineſs, and a converſation ſuitable 10 the Goſpel : Ac _ 
dt. btn a5 io the general Duties incumbent on all Belic 


ers, 1n the firſt chapter, from ver. 13. 20 chap.2.VT-1; 


rear Putres which concerned them in their ſeverel relations Subjedts to MagNrotos,007 04719 


'7 {? - 3 —-_ ; . h " Es gy If SIO 
LO {3 aijie? £ £15hands and IWroes mitually to each aber. Munfters T0 People. Younger People to thelrt LES, 
7 7 f $1,277 WA, TS « a . = ” Tg MP: ej” 7 F "Me Ee of ; x FE 5 : oY n By — 71, 
end <jpecially Stfferers toward their Oppreſſors and Perſecutors , but withal intermixing ſeveral general Dd 
boS-. is '"{ 1 E j "IT "F111C72T fl , atl. and conclitd; H8 all WH a Praye; : and 3; lit at 192, 


C1 


p.s 


Y 


FYY 


CALL 


pp an Apoſtle of jet: 
* John 7. a * ſcattered þ throughout 


a I? q m 
IEC SoS» 


ap.l. 


CHAE + 
£00 54 aut ation, and Thanksgivi nz, for their Regeneration unt9 Eternal 
Lit e, and preſerving them for it, 1 gs. In the hopes whereof 
they repyced even in Tribulatio ns, and loved him whom they ſaw 
aot, 6 op _ this Grace by Chriſt, the Spirit of Chriſt in the 
Pjophets foretold « And the Angels deſire to pry intoit, 10 2, 
In it we muſt hope, and be Holy, laying aſide all vain Converſation 
from whence we are Redeemed by the Blood of Chriſt, 13 I'9. 
Who was choſe Mediator from Eternity, and is now revealed for our 
Jake, by whoſe unperiſhing wird through the Spirit we are Biyn again, 


I, 3 on 
GY ena 2 Is 


4oLUS Chrilt. to the {trang &I5 
Pontus' c, Galaria d.17 
Cappadocia e, Aſia f, and” Bythynia g. 

# Not only Metaphorically Strang! Fs as all Believers are in the 
World, Chap. 2. 11. but properly a as being out of their ova Land, 
and fo really ſtrangers 1n the places here mentioned. þ $9 7umes 
t.I, c A Country of the lcilcr . Go bordering upon the Euxzne 
Sea, and reaciting as far as Colchis, d Which borders upon Pontus, 
and lies South: yard of it. To the Gentile Churches inha! biting here 
P. ” wrote his Epiſtle 1nfcribed to the Galatians. e I 11s like: Wie 
borders upon Pontus, and 1s joyncd with 1t, As 2.9. ® : That part 
of Afi the leſs, which was eſpecially called Aſia, viz. the whoic 
Country of T5nia which contained in 1T Tio.rs, Phrygia, Lydia, Caila, 

<0. See 4#s 15. 6,9.4nd 19.10, 31. £ Another Province of the Leſſer 
Afro bordering upon Pontius, and Ga'atiz, and oppotite to Thracla. 
2. Who were the Stranzers to whom this Epiſtle were written ? 
A. Citeily the Chriſtian Jews ſcattered in thele Countrics,a5 appears 
by Chap. 2. 12, and 1. 18. where he mentions the Trad!tions ot the 

Fathers, of which the Fews were fo fond, Matth. 15. 2. Gul. [. 
but ſecondarily fo the converted Gentiles, As Paul, thc Avoftle © of 
the Uncircumcition, writ principally to the converted Gentiles, at 
Rome, Corinth, Epieſus, &c, but doth not exclude thoſe Jews that 
Were amos them, who being converted to the Faith, were of the 
ſame myſtical Body wi ith them ; ſo Peter, tho' he firſtly writ to con- 
verted Jews, as being an Apoſtle of the Circumcition, yet includes 
the Gentiles that were mingled among them, and jo; 'ned 11 Faith 
and Worſhip with them. 

2 Elect Þ according to the foreknowledge 7 of God 

be Father #, through lanctincation / of the ſpirit 7, 
unto obedience 7, and {ſprinkling of the blood of Jeſus 


Chriſt o, * Grace unto your and peace be multiplied p. 
h By E!e& he means, cither, 1. fingled out of the world, and 
ſeparated unto God in their *ffectual calling, as 1 Cor. 1. thoſe 
that are ſ:jd to be called, wer. 25. are ſaid to be cholen, wer. 27, 
28, and ſo the word ſeems to be taken, Zames 2. 5. or, 2. Choſen 
to-S qe and the means ot it in God's Eternal Decree, Eph.1.4. 
and, 2 Theſſ. 2. 13. #j Either, 1. The Divige Preordination, or 
Decree of Elet Hon, as the word 15 taken, ver. 20, and then we 
may take Ele& in the firſt fence ; Men are choſen out of the World, 
or call:d in time, according as they were choſen from Eternity, 
Rom. 8. 30. or, 2, Frebnowledge-here 1s as much as approvation 
or love, Matth. 7. 2:3. Rom. 11. 2. and fo fignifes the free favour, 
and good-will of "God, which is the Fountain from whence the De - 
cree of Elettion oraceeds - and then we are to take Fleet 1n oo lat- 
ter lence, and iv elect according to the fore-knowledge of God, 15 etcr- 
nally deiizned unto life, according to, or out of that free orac 'e and 
love God did trom Eternity bear to them, which was the only mo- 
tive he had for his chooiinz them ; winch comes to tie fame,) 
by fore knwwl-dge we may underſtand pf bows it ſelr,as if 15in God , 


I. P & ER. 


{ 


| ſome reſpet to the languiſhing condition of the Hope ot 
| the other Dit ciples, 


and by Eledim! the ſame as terminated in the Creature, :nd exec uted | 


in effeual Calling. þ This doth not exclude the Son or Spirit 
from their intereſt in, and concurrence to the Divine Decree, but 
only notes the order of working among the Three Perſons in the 
affair of Man's Salvation ; EleRion is aſcribed to the Father, Renon- 
Clitation to the Son, and San&tification to the Spirit. 1 Sandificg- 
tion ſeems tobe taken in a large ſenſe, for the whole change of our 
{p.ritual ſtate, both as to real Grace in Regeneration, and relative 
in Juſtification, ſo that God may then be ſaid to ſandtihe us when in 
our effectual callinz he juſtifies us trom our Sins, and renews us un- 
to Obedience, fo it is taken, Heb. 10.10. m This 1s to be under- 
{tood rather of the Spirit of God, the eificient of Sandtification, 
than the Spirit or Soul of Man the ſubjze&ot it. = Either, 1. The 
obedience of Chriſt to God, and then the ſence 1s, Ele&, or ordain- 
ed to be by the SanRification of the Spirit made partakers ot the 
henefits of Chriſt's Obedience ; or, 2. The obedience of Believers 
to Chriſt, and that cither in their Believing ; Faith being a giving 
ohedience to the great command ot the Goſpel, 7-hn 5. 29. and 
particularly called Obedtence, Rom. 1. 5. and then the ſ:nfe runs thus, 
Eledt unto Futh, which was to be wrought in you by the Sanfrfication 
of th: Spirit Or elfe in the Exerciſe of Holineſs, which 1s the Fruit 
of Faith, and then it {iznifies the ſame as Eph.1.4. choſen, that you 
might be ma: ic, by the Sandification of the Spirit, holy and un- 
Llamcable, and might accordingly demein your ſelves. 9 Anallufi- 
on to tine ſprinkling of the Blood of the Sacrifices under the Law 
(Heb. 9.13, 14, 20, 21, 22. and 12. 24.) it fignifies the Application 
of the Blood of Chriſt for the purzing of the Conſcience, (which 
was typified by thoſe legal ſprinklin2s) eſpecially from the Guilt 
of Sin ; which Srrinkling, or Application of the Blood of Chriſt 
to our Cuniciences, 15 pertormed on our part by Faith, on God's 
part by his Spirit working that Faith in us (as well as enablins us 
unto Obedience) in our effeftual Calling, as likewife by God's im- 
Chriſt's 8 tghteouſneſs to us ; and lo the ſenſe of the whole, 
1s. E'edt according to t the fore e-bnow edgo 'f God, to be by the San@ifica- 
tin of the Stivit, brought into the Particivatimn of ail the Brneits of 
Chriſt's Redemption ; ths Sum, of which we in the Renwatiin of” 
trncation of your Perſons. 
and ſeveral kinds 
them all kinds of cach ; 


: P a # of _ SITY _ ' 903 
3:4} Natures un! : (WDearerce, ara th 
* @ * +4 
P | CTC bc: 
+ Peg *C% reals co IR 96% Al 
O01 CCC, OULTVWard, eThikk LLL Natl 


"7 
"an =" ” 9 * 0 
iT Y >» 4 j TEELTaT: A poo ( tv 4 . \ 
I: 4a. » « ba ? | az 'P Th «Ci apo 4 -. 


mg My > «1, 
NC Hell 


' reſerved for them, but they preſerved unto'it, kept fecurely, 
; carefully, as with a Garifon 
| the Atlaults, 


1 


ard there heins ſeveral de 
an encreaſe of 
Good, both « 


2rccs and meaſures oi bot, ; 
. . . i1 


tnele dezrees n them, C nd {0 811% atm 1CatIQI OL uti 


temporal and ſpiritual fo tliem, 
'S 1 T 
3 B Ivtfhd © Wale God, 3nd F1ther q Of 'o1 F ord ie 
ſus Chril t, which according to his T [ 4Þ! undani McIcy 7. 


harh © begotten us a51in / unto a lively hope 2, 17 the 


re: {urreCtion 1 of Ti.15 Cnrilt from the ger. 
7 Either the Conjunttion, and, is here but an Explicative Part- 


cle, and ſo werendcr it, > Cor, 1.3. God even the Fatiier, (7c. 
or 1t we take it for a Copy _— as Epbeſ. 1. 3. | Ged is called 5.1 
God of Jeſus Chriſt, accortin, to Chrift's Humane Nature, 48d bib 
Father accordins to h13 Divir 7 This ſhews the Fountain from 
WHRence Repencration, and - 4}! other ſpiritua! Eleffings flow, and 
excludes all Merit and 'Di; gnity 11 us, as the cauſe of t9 great 5 

nefits. Abundant Mercy 15 the fame with Riches of Mercy, E7 
2. + J Trantated us out of i ſtate of Sin and Mifery into a ttt 


of Grace and Lite : And ſo Ge; 
landtifying in the former Verſe 
; Oi Liie ; or rather, a lively hype 1s a trucoand eft<ttual 


'ttem a7ain Here, 15. the | 
t Eitncr, 2 lively hope, 
nope, wil 


as bene Ph trom a lively Faith, and 15 it kit produttive of Ve 

anc Purity, AAm, 5.2. atid 1 Fon Jo. 3. in oOnpohitiion tg tC Vatli 
Hope of Worldly Men, which neither comes Bom Faith, nor tends 
to Holineſs, u Thijs may be” reterred either, 1. to Goa s v-;2tting 
us 4z.2zm, and tiien it 1mplt s$ the ReturreAion of Chriſt t be the 


cans, or our Regeneration, we being raiſed to a ſpirity.; 
the Power of Chrift's Reſurres tion, aad our Vivi!!: CATION BC CITE 
alcribed to it, Rom. 4. 25 ands. 4, 5. and C: S 
Ephej.2.5. Or, 2, to the lively Hope to waich he be.cts us, whit 
depends upon, and ariſeth from the Faith of Chrift's ilurrection, 
Rom. 8. 11. and 1 Cor. 15. 17, 19. and I Thef]. 4- [3,1 Chrilt's 
Refurrettion being the Cauſe 'and Plicdge of ours, as the CENT! nty 
of ours depencis upon [:is. fo the Livelineſs of our hope loliows up- 
on tie Faith of it. Pofſibly the Apoſtle may have 1n the wes. 
vm, on 
which was then readv fo: 


his Be 2 


: ; 
SY -4 


Lube 24-26 
but was again revived by their being well aftured of. 
—_ VOY. 33, 34+ 

On an Ie TIE > 
TE and thuac fadet! 
heaven þ || for you 


x incorcuptible y., and un.ic- 
not away 2, Telerved @ 1 


x So eternal Lite is cath d, Ethe/. x. 13. and elfevhere, 5 5212; 
a not as Wazes to Hirelin ><, but 45 40 Inheritance to Cit et 
born of God, and adopted to him. y Immortal, everlitiing, winca 


"yl _ 
Over is Of 11G 
A eh - 
t4i. wit 


beinz once pofſeticd, cannot te taken awav, nor pats 
* Both as beings pure in it ſelt, and havins nothin: to offc 
that enjoy it; and ltxewile as bens \ncap i! Vit” 4 any Poljution, ©: 
Defilement, contrary to witat is ſaid of the Land of Canacn, tine 
earthly Inheritance of the Jſraelites, Fer. 2. 7. Exch. 35. 17. 
7; Always retains its Vigour, and Gratefuliieſs, ne ver cauſes weirinets 
or ſatiety in them that poileſs it. It ſeems tobe a Metaphor tak Cr 
from Flowers, provably the Amarantus (the very word here ui- 

which ſtill keeps its Freſhneſs and Verdure, without any decav cr 
withering. a Laid up, Col. 1. 5. and 2" Tim. 4. 8. ſecured for the 

Heirs, though not yet poſlefle q by them. 6b Ard 


thereto TC {a 1iC, 


and out of the reach of Enemics, This 1s on at d to the uncert:in 
aqua of earthly Poileffions, ſuch as Canzan was. co MN rein, 
for us, viz. whom God hath be-: often acain : Or tt. we read it, a5 


in the Tes :t, fory-n, the Apoſtle may chan;;« the Perſon in order tc; 


his Exhortation. 
I = & * PICY 8” EY YR, 

J W ho arc _w_ "01 by the PC VEL Ol God | COL TOLD] 
fiith / unto ftlvation g. Ft 
; + 
the Jait time #4. 

d Leſt it ſhould be ol bjeQed , that, though the Inheritance bc 
in Heaven, yet the Heirs are in danzer here upon Erth, by rezjon 
of the Peer, and Stratizems of Enemies, and tnew own Impru- 
dence and Weakneſs ;, te adds, that not only their nahedange: - 


ance 


221.iw Hh + L. q T4 
retdy 7” (OO DS ICY SUIU 


(tor fo the word 1; WO azaintt acl 
Incurſions and Devices of the Devil, and the Worle. 


! £ ' + 
ie, and therefore able to 
a» on. 


e Which Pow Cr 15 wo and Invincth 


woes them, Zohn 10. 22, 29, Rom. &.31, 38, 35, 2 Tm. I. 12. 
f Which reſting on the Power ct G Pod overcomes all their Enemies, 
the Fleſh, 1 7ohn 3.5. the Devil, Ep4. 5. 16. Chap. $. 9. and the 


World, 1 Fohn 5.4. It implics, 5 at not only they themſelves are 
kept throu! zh Faith, whereby they rcly on the Power of their geey- 
er, and his Promiſes - keopi nz them, but that they and their bait! 
too, are kept by the Power of God. 2 177. Full and compleat 11 
Glory, and not only b_ and imperte&t here. þ As beings al- 
ready purchaſed, prepared, and !11d vp tor them; aud fo he 

mates, that their not as ye" poiictfing it, 1s not becauſe it is no 
ready tor them, but bcceautc the time of their hola 7 = in Pot- 
ſeſſion of it, is nat vet come. 7 It was laid to be xc) 
ven, ver. 4. kept fate; but ciofe too, as a rich Treaſure, the z 
ncts os it 1s not vet kno'+n, even to them on are the H [eus Of 


mc - 


Col. 4. 3, 4. and 1 79&n 2. 2. Here he adds, 
ed, 2d made known to them to foonas the on 2 01 11S Mamfeitation 
ſhall come. + Simply, and abſolutely the lait,. _ the Day ©: 


Judgment, which 1s called the laſt Day, Fobn 5. 39,40. and 11. 2 
and 12. 49. 

6 Wherein + ve greatly rejoyce /, though now tc; 
2 ſeaſon m2 (if need need be 2) ye are in Ieavincls o, 
through manifold temptations p 

þ This refers to the whole tOorezoing Sentence, ye 
your beins kept by the Power of God unto Salvation. - / 
word fi »nifies tomethinsz more than a bare Rejoycing, and theretore 
is added to a word that tiz-nifcs to repyee, MHateh. 5, I2. an 
pies = outward Expreffon of the 1nward Gladnefs ot the Heart. 
by Looks, Words, Ge<ftures, 7rc. Some read the word 1n the im- 
perative Mood by *: iv of mY, but the Indicative, accorid- 
ins to cur Tranflition, feers mott 2-rceable to Contcs _ in 


= T., _ S's. $4 A > 5} - * - oe G 
Vet, OS CONMCNG he Sain S_ IQ WAN 


the 


Ki. 15 . 
WiliCil, «: 


hat it 1s ITS] '\c revear 


1d 1n- 


wt 


EPL >. 


—_ 


—_— 
PR PEy> rm ogg 


Som 
—_— 


—I=> = _ -» bes 
Gnas Þ - = : 
= - -— DEF Poza 144 2, - 


Chap.1. 


Keb.13.1, 


% 


23 


the Grace of God in them; defending to his Exhortation after- 
wards, ver. 12. m Viz. while this lite afts, 
time, 2 C1. 4.17, n If God fee it fit, needtul tor your good, and 
conducing to his Glory ; intimating, that God doth not always af- 
flict Belicvers, but when ke ſees juſt cauſe, and never doth it with- 
out cauſe. 6 Queſt. How could they be in Heavineſs, and yet re- 
ce? Anſw, Their Grief and jov were 2lout difterent Objetts, 
they might be in Heavinels by reaton of preſent Amﬀlietions, and 
rezoyce 1n hope of future Glory ; they mit grieve as Men, and re- 
javc? as Saints; Senſe of Suffering might aifet them, and yet the 
Faith of better thinzs coming, reheve them. If their Heavineſs did 
in any degree abate tiivir Joy, yet it did not wholly hindcr 1t; and 
though their Joy did overcoametherr Heavinets, yet it dd not whol- 
Iy exclude it, þ Ie fo calls Afiidtions from the cnd and effec of 
them, the Trial of their Faith, Cuke 22. 28. 4%, 29. 10. Gal. 4. I4. 
James 1.2. 2 Pet. 2. 9. he calls-them manifoid, as being not only 
gunicrous, but various, and of divers kinds. 

= Thar the * ria} of your ftairhg being much more 
Yeciovs than of gold 7 that perithet /, T though 
2 Ned with fire, might be found unto pratte, and 
our. and glory 7.2t the appraring of Jelus Chrilt. 

4 7.6, Your Faith when tried. He compares the Faith of the 
Saints with Gold, and argues from the leſs to the greater ; q-d. it 
Men do fo tur eſtcem their Gold, that they w1ll make the excellency 
and precioulnets of it appear by trying 1t m the Fire, which purgeth 
4% the Drofs, and ditcovers the goodneſs of the Metal ; no won- 
dcr 1f God will have the Faith of the Saints (more precious to him 
than Gold is to Men) tried by Affiitions, that the excellency of 1t 
may more fully be diſcovered. r 1.e. Than the Trial of Gold; 
or Gold tried, compared with . Faith tried. / Is worn away, and 
conſumed by uſe, as many Particles of it hikewite may be 1n the 
very Trial of it, ver. 12. whereas Faith is not conſumed nor watt- 
ed, but encreaſed by being uſed, and made more conſpicuous by 
being tried. f i.e, May be found to be, or to have turned to 
praiſe, gc. the Diznity of it being by that means evidenced. 
Thetz ſeveral words ſhew whither preſent Trials tend, and in what 
they flue; they may be reproachful and 12nominious now { Heb. 
12.2.) but they end in Glory. We need not be critical about 
the difference of theſe three words, Prarſe, H:mur, and Glory, which 
may be Synonymous Expretſions (by way of Amplification) of the 
ſame thing, yct they arc mentioned diſtintly with relation to Be- 
lievers ellewhere, Praiie, 1 Cor. 4. 5. Honour, 1 Sam. 2. 30. John 
12.25, Glory as well as Honour, Rom. 2.10. 4 1.e. At the Day 
of Judgment frequently fo called, as ver. 13, and Colo/. 3. 4.- 2 Theſ]. 
L. 7. and Chap. $. 4. Chriſt's Glory is at preſent hid and obſcured, 
while he is Inſtrufting his Ele, and training them up unto Patience, 
and defers his Judzing of his Enemies; but at laſt it will he fully 
manifeſted in the Face of the World, when he comes with Clouds, 
and every Eye ſhall (ee him, Xc. Rev. I. 7. : 

S * Whom .x having not feen y, ve Tove F, in 
whom though now ve lee bm not 2, yer believing. 
ye refoyce a with Joy 
rlorv c. 

x Which Chriſt. » With your bodily Eyes. Moſt of theſe Fews 
lived out of their own Country, and fo had not ſeen Chriſt in the 
Fleſh ; and this was the Commendation of their Love, that they 
loved him whom they had not feen, though fight doth ordinarily 
contribute roward the ſtirring up ot Aftcttion. 7 Neither as others 
have done in the days of his Flefh, nor as vou vour ſelves hereafter 
fhall in his Gloryz ye walk by faith, and nat by ſeght, 2 Cor. 5. 7: 
2 In hope of ſeeing and enjoving him. © þ Which cannot be ex- 
prefied with Words. See the hike Phrate, Rom. 8. 25, and 2 Cor. 9. 
15. c Both in reſpect of the Object about wich this Joy 18s con- 
vcrlant, the heavenly Glory ; the Degree, 1t 1> tne higheſt here in 
the World, thc duration of it, it 1s moſt fold ; as hkewiſe in com- 
pariſon ot the Joy ot this World which 15 vain and trantitory, and 
whereof many times Men are afterward: aſhained. 

o Receiving f the end & of your faith, ever the 
{\lvation / oft your louls g. 

d Either this word 15 to be taken improperly, and by an Enal- 
l2e. the Future heing put for the Preſent Tenſe, q.d. being about 
toreccive; or rather properly in the Preſent Tenſe, and then it 
intimates the certainty of the thing ſpoken of. e 1. e. The Scope 
to which Faith tends, or the Reward of Faith, f Either. 1. Salva- 
tion more cenerally taken, which 15 hezun In this Lite, Epheſ. - Bp 
Tit. 3. 5. or rather, 2. complcat final Salvation 1n the other, as ver, 
2. an then the ſenſe is, cither ye rcjoyce that ve ſhall certainly re- 
ceive the tull Salvation oi your Souls, or ye rejovce that ve do re- 
ccive that Salvation, viz. in the Promiſes of it, in thoſe Graces of 
the "1t wrought 1n you, which begin this Salvation, and are the 
” ' .of it, and in the certain Afurance of it. g 1.e. (By an 

i Synecdoche) the Salvation of your Perſons. 


10 * Of which {alvation þ the Prophets 7 have en- 


JC 1? 


quired, and ſearched diligently &, who propheficd of 


tire grace / that ſhould come unto you. | 
) Either, 1. The more full and clear Manifeſtation of Salvation 


promited to be at the comin of Chrift, when Life and Immortal:ty 


| ſhould be brought to light through the Gojpel, 2 Tim. 1. 19. and then 


this place 1s paralle] to Luhe 1042 Or, 2. The Salvation of the 
diſperſed 7ewwps, 1. C their publick Convertion by the Goſpel, and 
Eternal Lite following upon 1t ; winch {as well as the Calling of 
the Gentiles) was reſerved tor the Times and Glory ot the Meſſiah. 
z Viz. Thoſe under the Old-Teſtament, out ot whoſe Writings the 
Faith of New-Teſtament-Bclievers 1s to be confirmed, 7obn 5. 3g. 
Aﬀs 15.11. and whom this Apoftle therefore mentions. thathe might 
ſtcen»then the Faith of the Chriſtian Fews, by atluring them that 
the DoFrine he had delivered to them was no new Invention, 
very Truth of God revealed oz Old to the Prophets. % The 
at &1- 


iS >. 
OuUEELTIC 


words wmply their vehement defire of knowing, as well as gr 


. o w. WP = . E ' E ® 4 - * ] WEE _ — 
once in fceking, 1 What. he called Sa/tauiton before, he calls 
Grate here, to imiumate their Salyation to be meeriv vf Grace, This 


unſpeakable b, and full of 


LT ET &5 


which 1s but a little | 


i 


Grace revealed under the Goſpel, the Prophets forctold, but in a | 
more dark way , the Sun of Righteouſneſs not being yer riſen, ti. 
Shadows were not gone, and the Light was but obſcure. Wall 

11 Searching what zz, or what manner of time 
7 the * ſpirit of Chriſt o which was in ther did 4; 
nitzz, when ir p teſtihed before hand rhe ſufferins; ..; 
Chritt, and the glory 9 that ſhould follow, 2 

m Whether near or turther off, or what particular part ot tmc 
This may relate particularly to Danzel's Weeks, Chap. 9. n Whe- 
ther peaceable or troubleſome, when the People were free, or when 
in bondage ; what were the Qualities of the time, or $i n+ by 
which 1t might be known, 7acob foretels Chriſt's cominz, when 
the Scepter was departed from Judah, Gen. 49. 10. Iſaiah, in a 
time of Univertal Peace, Chap. 2. 4. and 11.6. This dili-ent* c1- 
quiring atrer the tune of Chritt's coming, ſhewed their earneſt long- 
ing for it. 0 Softtiled, as being of the Son, no lefs than of the b4- 
ther, both by eternal Procciſion, and temporal Million, 7ohn 14. 
16, 26, and 15. 25. This ſhews, that not only Chriſt had a Beins 
under the Old Teſtament before his coming 1n the Fleſh, (ror it 
Chrift were not, there could be no Spirit of Chriſt) and likewiſe 
that Chriſt 15 God, becauſe of his inſpiring the Prophets with the 
knowledge of future things, which none but God can do. p What 
the Prophets did toretel concerning Chrift, was not their own Cui 
jeture, but what the Spirit did diftate to them. q Gr, 67/25, in 


the Pjural Number, 4. e. the manifold Glory which was to Coll, 
upon h1z many. Sufferings, the Glory of his Reſurrection, &-<niion 
fitting at the Right Hand of God, ſending the Spirit, 7c. Chiri tt 
Sufterings and Glory are often joyned together, Yſul. 110, 7, Ta. 5: 
3, JO, I, 12. Inte $4. 26. Phd. 2: 8, 9. Heb. 2.9, 10. to ſhew 
that there is the ſame way ſand no other) tor the Salvation cf the 
Members, as for the Glory oi. the Head, wiz. by Sufferinzs, 

12 * Unto whom 7 it was revealed s that not wv 
to themſelves 7, bur unto us they did minitter x the - 
things y which are now reported £ unto vou by thy 
a that have preached the goſpel unto-you, with 
Holy Ghoſt tent down from heaven &, which t 
c the angels deflire ro look into d. 

7 Unto which Prophets. s Viz. by the Spirit of Chitift that ca 
in them, e who lived before Chriſt's coming in the klcſh. »« Not 
only Apoſtles, but Believers, who live ſince Chriſt came. x Þ: 
clare and toretel. The Preaching of the Word is called a Miuiltr, 
Adts 6.4. and 2 Cor. 4. 1.and $.18, y The whole Dodtrine oi th: 
Goſpel concerning Chriſt's Perſon, Offices, Benefits, Kingdom, and 
the whole New Teſtament-ſtate. z Viz. as fulfilled, and actually cx 
hibited now, which were only foretold by the Prophets. a Thc 
Apoſtles, and other Goſpel-Miniſtersaffiſtamtto them. The ſenſc is, 
The Prophets under the Old Teftament did, by the Spirit forcice, 
and foretel Chriſt's Paiſion, Reſurrettion, Aſcenſion, the Effuſion 
of the Spirit, the Enlargement of the Church, by the Calling ot 
the Gentiles, gc. but did not live to ſee their o;vn Prophecies, and 
God's Promiles fulfilled, Heb. 11. 13. as you now do. They di2 
ſpread the Table that you might feed at it ; they had but a taſte}; 
Faith, and at a diſtance, of thoſe things you teatt upon in their Ac 
compliſhment ; yet they did nor grudge to declare theſe things, bc. 
Ing inſtrutted by the Spirit, that what they ſpake of, ſhould not 
be fulriiled 10 their time, but in the Generations to come ; ite! 1: 
ye, by comparing what they ſaid ſhould come to- paſs; with what 
you now have been aſſured 1s come to paſs, may be confirmed and 
eſtabliſhed in the Bclicf of the Truth, being the ſame held forth by 
the Prophets formerly, and Goſpel-Miniſters at prefent. 6 Chri!? 
promiſcd to ſend the Spirit, Lube 24. 49. John 14. 25. and 15 
26, and 16. 17, and aQually ſent him, A4&s 2. the Apoſiles, not 03 
themſelves, but a&ed by this Spirit, have declared unto you the 
fulfilling of thoſe things, which the former Prophets, by the ip!iintt 
and power of the ſame Spirit (the Spirit of Chriſt, which was 2 
them) did foretel, would in their proper ſeaſon come to pil, 
c The things betore ſaid to be reported by them that preached tc 
Golpel. & It ſeems to be an Alluſion to the Citerubims that ſtood 
above the Ark, with their faces toward the Mercy-ſeat, whicit was 
a Type of Chriſt. The word fignifies a bowing down the Head, and 
ſtooping to look into a thing, Lube 24. 12. Fohn 20. 5. and impiics 
a prying, or looking narrowly into it ; which argues an eapneit 
detire to know it. The Angels thus look into the Mylterics vi 
the Goſpel, as defirous to ſee the accompliſhment of thero, adn 
ring the manifold Grace and Wiſdom of God in them, #þ/ e/. 3. i 
and rejo\ cing in the Salvation of Sinners, which is the cnd, and 
eftctt ot God's revealing them. 

13 Wherefore e * gird up theloins of your tn /. * 
he lober g, and hope || ro the end þ tor the grice - Mat 
is © ve brought unto you at the revelation 4 of jt. 
Chin:. 

e The tollowing Exhortation may be conneQted, either with 12 
4. being ſo glorious an Inheritance 1s reſerved In Heaven tor you 
gird up, &c. or with ver. 12. ſeeing ye know thoſe things, whicn tNe 
Prophets that foretold them, did nor tully 1ce, and the Angct> 
themſelves deſire to look into ; the Grace of God vouchſafed to you, 
1s ſo excellent and admirable, gird up, &c. f 7.e. Let your hincs 
He attent, prompt, ready, prepared for your Spiritual Wore, re 
ſtrained from all thoſe Thoughts, Cares, Aﬀections, and Lults, 
which may entangle, detaiga, hinder them, or make thei unit 101 
it. Itis a Metaphor taken from the Cuſtom of the Oriental Nations, 
who wearing long looſe Garments, were wont to gird them about 
their Loins, that they might not hinder them in their travelling, 
or workinsz, 1 Kings 18. 45. and 2 Kings 4.25. Lhe 17. 6. Sc On 
Luke 12.35,37. Pcrhaps it may have a ſpecial retpee to the like Eite 
uſed at the Paſſover, Exod. 12.11. when fhe Tract! Were 
ready to enter upon their Journey, and go out of EzYÞ?. £ l; i 
may relate, either, 1, to the Body, and then the ſenile Jgrece Wie 
Luke 21. 34. where the Cares of ths Life ſeem f9 be oppoice to 
the girding up the Loins of the Mind, and 5-f- 
nels, to Sobricty here. Or rather, 2. To the 598, and 


wut 


4 . FY [4 os 
irirg and Drunken 
Jorg! 


{1% 


Chap. ; 


Chap.1. 


girding up the Loins of the Mind, may reter to the Underſtanding 
and Thougits; and Sobricty, to the Will and Aﬀetiions and may 
ftisnifie that Moderation whici bulot,;s to thei, 1n oppot:tion to 
ticir Inordinateneſs, witich is a fort of Drunkeanels, Or, 1t may 
be rendred, be watchful, as it is trantlated, 2 Tm. 4. 5. and with 
which it is joyned, 1 Theſſ. 5.6, 8. and ſo it agrees well with the 
former clauſe; they chat have the Loins of their Mind girt up, be- 
ing of a vigilant, preſent Mind, and ready for any Work, they 
are to undertake. 5 Gr. perfe#ly, as in the Margin, 7. e. fincerely, 
entirely, with a firm confidence ; but the following words tavour 
our Trantlation, which tignifes Perſeverance in hope. See #6. 3. 
6, i Final Salvation, which is the Gitt of Grace, Rom. 6.23. and 
1s called the Grace of Life, i Pet. 3. 7. k Called the appearing of 
Jeſus Chriſt, ver. 7. 

14 As obedient Children /, not faſhioning #2 your 


ſelves according to the former luſts x in your 1gno- 


T4ance 0. 

! Gr. Children of Obedience, by an uſual Hebraiſm for obedient 
Children. So Children of Diſohedience, Eph. 2. 2. Col. 3. 6. and 
this we may underſtand either abſolutely, Children of Obedience tor 
obedient Perſons ; or with relation to God, obedient Children of 
God; and then the Apoſtle perſwades them to their Duty by ani 
Argument taken from their Adoption ; being the Children of God, 
he would have them behave themſelves obediently, as becomes them 
in that Relation, mm Not accommodating, not conforming your 
{.lves, not ſhaping, or ordering your Converſation. See the fame 
word, Rom. 12.2. n The Luſts you formerly indulged your ſelves 
in. See Epheſ. 4.22. 0 Your ignorance of Chriſt and the Goſpel, 
4. 4. not faſhioning your ſelves according to thoſe Lufts you lived 
in, when you were ignorant of Chriſt. He diſtinzuiſheth between 
the time of their Ignorance and of their Illumination. Another 
Age requires other Manners. They formerly lived according to the 
DiRates of their Luſts, but now ought to live according to the 
Will of Chriſt, See ver. 18. Ads 17. 30. Epheſ. 4. 17, 18. 

15 Burt as he p that hath called q you, is ho- 
'v 7, ſo be ye holy in all manner of converſa- 
tion S, 

þ God the Father, to whom, as the firſt Cauſe, our Calling is 
frequently aſcribed, Rom. 9.11, 24, and 1 Cor. 7.15, Gal. 1. 
15, It may be rendred, according to the Holy One that called you, 
i. e, according to his Example ; you are Children, and ſhouid 
therefore imitate your Father, Zh. 5. 1. q Viz. Effeftually, to 
the Knowledge and Faith of Chriſt. r So God is often ftiled by 
Tſaiah, and other Pen-men of the Scripture, as the Fountain and Ex- 
emplar of Holineſs. s Either through the whole Courſe, and in the 
ſeveral parts of your Converſation, or in all manner of Converſation, 
as we read it, 7.e. with whomſoever ye converſe, Believers or Inft- 
dels, Friends or Enemies, Relations or Strangers ;. and in whatſo- 
ever condition ye are in, Peace or Trouble, Proſperity or Advyer- 


ſity. 

16 Becauſe it is written, * Be ye holy, for I z am 
holy. 
5 your Father, and therefore you ought to imitate, and obey 


me : Or, I that have ſerved you from other People, that you ſhould 
be mine, Levit. 20. 25. to which place particularly this ſeems to 
reter. 

17 Andif z ye call on x the father, * who, with 
out reſpeQ of perſons y, Judgeth 5 according to eve- 
ry mans work a, + paſs the time of your ſojourning 
b here in tear c. 

uv This Particle is 'uſed here, and frequently elſewhere, not as a 
Note of doubting, but by way of Afertion, and ſuppoſition of a 
thing known. x Either this is to be meant of Invocation, their 
calling on God in Prayer ; and then the ſenſe is, If you be Servants, 
and Worſhippers of the Father : Prayer being many times put tor the 
whole Worſhip of God, I/z. 43.22. Ads 9. 11. or of their calling 
God, Father, as Matty. 6. 9. and then the ſenfe js, If you would 
be counted God's Children, James 2. 7. y And fo will no more 
excuſe you that are 7ews, and deſcended from Abraham, than thoſe 
that are born of Gentile Parents, Job 34. 19. Ads 1c. 34. Epbeſ. 6. 
9. x And ſo isnot a Father only, but a Judge, and that a moſt 
rizhteous one. 4a 7.e. Works, the Singular Number put for the 
Plural, as James 1. 25. See Rom. 2.6, Job 34-11. b The word 
ſignifies the temporary abode of a Man in a place where he was not 
born, or doth not ordinarily refide ; ſuch being the condition of 
Believers in the World, that they are Sojourners, not Citizens of it; 
they are travelling through it to their Father's Houſe, and heaven- 
ly Country, Heb. 11. $, 10, I3, 15, they are here exhorted to a 
ſuitable carriage exprefled in the next words, c Which 1s due to 
him as a Father, and a Judge. It may imply the greateſt Reverence, 
and the deepeſt Humility, Phil. 2. 12. and 1 Cor. 2, 3. and 1 Pet, 3. 
2, U'S- 

13 For as much as ye know d4'* that ye were not 
redeemed e with corruptible things, as filver.,and gold, 
+ from your vain f converſation g recezved by tradi- 
tions þ from your farhers 7. 

d Conſidering that ye were, &c. e See Tit. 2. 14. This implies 
them to have been in a ſervile condition, and in Eondage to their 
own Errors, til they were converted to Chriſt. + The moſt pre- 
cious things, of zreateſt eſteem among Men. f Becauſe unprofita- 
ble to, and inſufficient for Righteouſneſs and Salvation. g Viz. in 
your Judaiſm, wherein you were ſo much addited to uncommanded 
Rites and Ceremonies, as to have little reſpe& for God's Law. þ And 
ſo not enlv by their Example and Praftice, but by their Dorine and 
Precinte, Matih. 15. 2, Rc. Mark, 7. 7, &c. Sec likewiſe Gal. 1. 14. 
3 Firher, vour Anceſtors, as Ezeb. 20, 18, or DoQors and In- 
who are fometimes cal'zd Fathers, 1 Cor. 4 15. 


* Llool of Chriſt, 


ſtructors, 
- b ® A - 4a PT. _ ® / 
9 Bur * with the P72c1OuS 


4 
- 


L P E ER. _ 


4 . = ; p ! 4. $4. 7 1 9 , 
;aS / of a + Lainb # without blemith x, and withour t 
{pot 0. 

& Becauſe the Blood not only of an innocent Perton, but of tf:c 


F4 
$ 


22 


4 


Son of God, A4d&s 22, { i.e. Who was 4 Lamb, m The Lao 
of God that takes away the fins of the orld, Yohn rn. 25 | 
like a Lamb tor his Innocence and Gentlenct3; I. $2. 7. but the 
Antitype of the Lambs, which under the Law were offered in the 
daily Sacritces, and more clpecially of the Paſchal Lam : whatever 
was ſhadowed out in that, and thoſe other Sacrifices haviisz ! 
compliſhment 1n Chriſt. » Without Fault, withont Perl, 
which nothing was wantinz that was requitite to its Pertection ; 
or, in which nothing could be blamed. The Gree wear! feems to 
be derived irom tie H-brero Mum, 10 often nicd y 
Levit. 24. 19, 20. 0 Without any othce « The Lamo 
might have no Defc, but. yet might hve ſome vu. , 217 it was 
to be pertedt, (Exo7. 12. 5.) which impiicd its having not the one, 
nor the other, Chiitt was ſuch 2 Lamb, pertc& in Holine&, and 
tree trom all Sin, Fohn8. 29, 45. ani {eo 7. 25. 1 Pet. 2. 22, 

20 * Who verily was tviordiined p before the 


11S 14Ce 


, x | - 
[ pP wa fn fg Ivy. 4» 
LOT 4 BiCNMNiI1 . icy 


foundation of the world g, but was manifetted » in 77 


T thele laſt times / tor you 7. 
Þ By God's Decree appointed to the work of Redemprion, ard + 
to be that Lam that ſhouid take away the Sins of the Worid, £71, 


1.4 q From Etermty : there being nothing before the World te. 


gan, but what was Eternal, Fohn 17. 24 r Not only by jo; [iivar- Ro: 


. r 
LETS) 14D - 
ww ww C112 


nation, 1 Tim. 3. 16. but by the preaching of tlic Goſpel, 
Scriptures in the Marzent. /{ Lait, in compariſon of the Tis of. 10, 
the Old Teſtament. The ſame as the fulneſs of Tim?, Gal. 4. 4. Tat He 
you with other Belicvcis might partake of Salvation by {im Th: 
truit of Chriſt's kedemption reacheth all Ages, but muc't more 4 un 
dantly the Times atter his coming in the Fleſh, The ſum of the Ar- 
gument 1s, Chritt was ordained from Eternity, promiſed to the ta- 
thers, but manifetted to you : Your Priviledge therefore bcin - -reat- 
er than theirs, 3/:t.13.17. //c5.11.39,40. you fhould be the more holy. 

21 Who by him z &o believe in God, char raiſed 
him from the de2d, and gave him glory x, that vour 
taith and hope might be in God y. 

u Both as revealing God to you, Matth. 11. 27. 7m x. 14. and 
making way tor you to God, who, out of Chriſt, is a conſumins 
Fire, fo that there is no con{ing to him, but by Chriſt, 7ohn 14. 5, 
Epheſ. 2.18. and 3. 12, Heb. 7, 25. x Viz. in his ReſurreQion, AC 
cenſ1on, fitting at the Right Hand of God, gc. Ph. 2. 9,10, 1:. 
Heb. 2. 9, 10. y That ſeeing Chriſt raiſed and glorified, ye mjght 
be fully confirmed in the Belief of a throuzh Satisfaction made 
to Divine Juſtice tor Sin, and perfe& Reconciliation wrought 
(for had not Chriſt fully paid the Price of Redemption, his Father 
would never have let him out of the Prifon of the Grave, in which 
his Juſtice had ſhut him up) from which Faith ariſeth an Hope 
which looks to the Reſurre&tion of Chriſt your Head, as the certzin 
Pledge and Earneſt of your Reſurretion to Lite, and Glory : Chriſt's 
Reſurre@on and Glory are the great Grounds of Faith, 45; 2. 
32, 33- and 5. 31. and 10. 40. Rom. 4. 24, 25. and 1 Cor. 15. 17 
17. and Chap. 3. 21, 2 
22 Seeing ye have purified your ſeuls > in ohey- 
ing the truth a chrough the ſpiric þ,unto * unteigned c * 
love of the brethren 4, /ee ihat ye love one another ! 
with a pure de heart fervently 0. , 

7 7.e. Your ſelves: the whole Perſon is implied, the Soul beings 
the Principal Part. a In ſubjeRing -your- ſelves to the Truth of 
the Goſpel by Faith, to which the Purification of the Heart tx 
aſcribed, As 15. 9. not only as to Juſtification, and purging 
away the Guilt of Sin, hut as to SanRification, and cleanſing from 
the Defilement of it ; q. d. Seeing ye have bezun to purifie vour 
Hearts by Faith in Chriſt, ſet torth in the Goſpe), and made Santti- 
fication to them that believe, 1 Cor. 1.30, b By the Operation of 
the Spirit working Faith in you. c Without Hypocritic, and which 
1s not in word only, but in Deed and in Truth, 1 7-bn 3. 12. 
a Love to the Brethren in Chriſt, and tor Chritt's ſake. This notes 
one great end ot cur San&ification, viz. the Exercile of Brotherly 
Love, whereby our Love to God is likewiſe maniteſted, when we 
love them upon his account. The whole clauſe may likewiſe be un- 
derftood, as an Exhortation to purific themfelves more and more 
by Faith, that ſo they might (being purged from carnal AﬀeRions) 
be the better able, and more diſpoſed to love one another. d As 
the Source and Fountain of your Love to each other, and from: 
whence it proceeds, 1 Tim. 1.5, and 2 Tim. 2.22. e Or, vebs- 
mently, and intenſely, and ſtrongly. The word ſcems to he a Me- 
taphor taken from a Bow, which the more 1t is bent, with the 
greater force it ſends forth the A\rrow; fo Love, tie more ferven: 
and ſtrong it is, the more abundantly it puts torth it ſelf for the 
Benefit of others. 


23 * Being born again / not or corruptible foe 7. 
but of incorruptible þ, f by the word : ef G 


which liveth + and abideth tor ever. 


f This may cefer either, 1. To the general Exhortation to Holi- © © 


neſs, v. 14, 15. and then the Arzument runs thus : Y- are i your 
Regeneration becoming the Children of God, and therctore ou4}t-to 
walk holily, as become his Children : Or, 2. Tothe more particular 
Exhortation to brotherly Love, v. 22. yg. d. Ye are 16 your Regene- 
ration become the Children of God, and therefore ov{/lt fo walk 
holily, as becoming Is Children : Or, 2, T9. the more particula: 
Exhortation to brotherly Love, v. 22. 4. 4. You are+y your Rege- 
neration become ſpiritual Brethren, and therefore ouzht to Love 
like Brethren. g Which 1s it {-!f corrapted ere any thins cn 
be generated out of 1t, or our of winch nothin 15 begottcn 
but what 15s corruptible ; ſo that ail ſacl) Generations tend but ro 4 
mortal Life. þ So the I/ord 1s fail ro by, becrtufe continuins Ri 
the ſame, and being immura}!so in it ſetf, it «© { - renews 


1 


12nTJes, ant? 
the Hearts of theſe that by Faiti) recetve it, Or, it may be under- 


if 
I% 
OY - g C q © ” 4 . > pF *> 73-4 MEH ON y _— F; 
ſtood ot its bernz incorruptible effectively, beeanke it loads, or tends 
A 


A 


. '% yo 
God,52 
4 \% J + 


© — 


—— 


þ "> Rz 553 1 
A 


AT © Sor. 
4 _ I — : —_ = a ge.” > F » 
nt ee en RE nn > En: — 
__ > = - 
el 


— 


wy 2 


| Or, for 
7.4. 
P 1.40.5. 


THeb.12.1 


fo an immortal Lite. 1 The fame which he called incorruptidle \ 
Secd, Winch is the Inftrument in Regencration, as 1s implied in the 
Prepultion, ly, going butore it, þ This, and the following: Verb 
may be joiacd, cither, 1. To God, the Word of God, who liveth, 
G73. or rather, 2, To the Wd, fo our Tranilition reads it, whics 
WXad {tth, and abideth, gyc. and this a>recs beſt with the Tetti- 
mony of {a1 15 the next Veric. ihe Word of God is ſaid to be 
a living Word, owuſe it cnliveneth the Hearts of thoſe that enter- 
Ln 17, 

24 For * all tefh / 52s grais, and all the glory 
17 Of Man as the Rower of grats : The graſs withereth, 
and the flower thereot tallerh away 7. 

1 A!] Men as born of the Fleſh, and in thcir natural ſtate, in op- 
potition fo regenerate Men, v.23. m Whatever 15 moſt excellent 


in Man naturally, and which they are moſt apt to glory in. n See4 


James 1, 10, 

25 Bur the word of the Lord endureth for ever o : 
And this p is the word, which by the Goſpel 1s 
preached anto Vvou. | 

2 Not only abſolately in it ſelf, and in reſpe& of its perpetual 
Verity, Pſal. 119. 16c. Matth, 2.4. 25. but relatively, as received 
by, and dwelling in Believers, (1 70/n 3.9.) who always expert- 
ence the ctfes of it in themſelves, 19 their Regeneration recelving 
a ſolid, and laſting Being from it (the New Nature) which is Iike- 
wiſe preſerved by 1t, in oppoſition to that tlux and mutable Being 
they had by their firſt Birth. p This or, of which Iſaiah ſpeaks, 
and which he to much magmnes, 1s the very ſame Word ot the 
Goſpel, winch is preached unto you by us Apoltles, 


CHAP.| 1. | 

I'ice muſt be thrown 37, that we may deſire the Word, and by it grow in 

Lirtue, and taſte God's govaneſs, I=——3. And as living Members 0 

Chrift, hu prieſts, and chiſen of God live Holily : And Glorify God, 

4—— 12. in obedience to Magiltyates, 13 -— 16. Servants, to their 

Maſlers though hard ones : Remembring the ſuſfeings of Chniſt and 
his patience, 147 —25. 


Herefore a * laying afide þ all malice c, and all 
ouile 4, and hypocrifies ce, and envies f, and 
all evil 1peakings g. 

a Having in the former Chapter mentioned the new Birth, v. 23- 
and exhorted to brotherly Love, as agreeable to it, v. 22, he be- 
ins this Chapter with a Dehortation, wherein he diflwades them 
trom thoſe Vices which are contrary to the ſtate of regenerate Men 
in the general, and brotherly Love in particular. 6 Or, putting off ; 
a Metaphor from an old over-worn Garment, fit only to be thrown 
away ; ſee Epheſ. 4.22. Col. 3. 8, 9. Fames 1. 21. c Malignity, 
when Men do evil to others voluntarily, and induſtriouſly, or delight 
in other Mens harms ; ſee Rom. 1. 29. Epheſ, 4.31. d All Fraudu- 
lence and Impoſtures, and circumventing ot others in any kind. 
e All flatterring and counterfeiting Friendthip, and ſhewing love 
in words, and outward Carriage, when the Heart is otherwiſe at- 
feed. So Matth. 22. Chriſt calls them Hypocritcs that flattered 
him, v. 16, 18, f Grieving at other Mens Welfare. g All kind 
ot DetraQion. 


2 As new-born babes þ defire 7 the fincere milk of 


tne word &, that ye may grow thereby /. 

h Purſuant to his Diſcourſe, chap. 1. 23. where he ſpeaks of their 
new Birth, he here calls them new-born Babes; but that not in op- 
poſition to thoſe that are adult, or of full Age, as Heb. 5.14. and 
I Cor. 3. x. butin oppoſition to their former corrupt and unrege- 
nerate ſtate, in which they were deſtitute of all ſpiritual Life ; and 
ſo this agrees, not only to young Converts, but generally to all re- 
generate Perſons. 71 Being new-born Babes, a& as ſuch in carneſtly 
denrins, aad longing for that ſpiritual Nouriſhment, which 1s ſo 
needrul tor you, even as Children as foon as they come into the 
World, are lingring atter the Breaſt. þ The Greek may be rendred 
(aud 1s by ſome) re.zſonable Mk, viz. ſach as is for the. Soul, not for 
the Body ; that whereby the Mind is nouriſhed and ſtrengthened, or 
wody Miik, the Subſtantive from which it 1s derived properly, and 
firft 1i4mtying rd, or Specch, and bcing uſed for the Word of God, 
Heb. 4. 12. But this not being proper Engliſh, our Tranſlation 
renders it beſt, the M1h of the Word, i. e. the Word which is Milk. 
The Apoitle uſcth an Adjcfive for a Subſtantive, but that AdjeRtive 
duth not f13nife the quality of the Subjett 7.1þ) as the other (Sin- 
6&0) doth, but the Subje& of it felt, The like Phraſe we have, ch.3. 
7. Gr. Female, of winſh weeker Veſſe!, which we turn by the Sub- 
Stantive, [#rfe, who 15 ſaid there to he the weaker Veilel, So that 
the Dottrine of the Goſpel is here to be underſtood, as 1/z.55.1. and 
Beitovers arc to he nouriſhed by the ſame Word, as their Food, by 
which, as the Secd, they are ſaid ro be begotten, ch.1.23. This Milk 
ot the Word is faid to be fircere, 1. 6. pure, without mixture, or 
adulteration, not blended, or diluted (as Vintners do by their Wine, 
fo whoſe Prattice P.wi! alludes, when he ſpeaks of Mens corrupting 
tte Word, 2 C7. 2. 17. and 4. 2.) with Humane Fittions or Tradi- 
tions. Intants love the ſweetneſs of their Mother's Milk, and defire 
2t pure, as 1t 1S ; Belicvers ſhould defire the Word pure, as it is in 
1t {elf not mixed with any thing that may Iefſen its focetneſs, and 
Innder its efficacy. { That by the Word, as your ſpiriteal nouriſh- 
ment, ye may grow more 1n ſpiritual Life and Strength, till ye come 
to be pertet Men, Fpheſ. 4.12. 


3 it fo bem ye have taſted », that the Lord o zs 
Pracious 

m This doth not unply a doubting, but a ſuppoſition, as was be- 
iore obterved, c<.1. 17, n Not lightly tailed by a bare incffeRtual 
Kn>wicdge, as Heb. 5, 4. but experienced and perceived by the taſte 
&f xour tpiritual Prelate ? your ſpiritual ſenſe, and ability to judge 
vi {piritual things being reſtored to you, with your new Nature in 
your new Pirth, He refers to Pſalm 34. 8. and potfibly to Iſa. 66. 
I « Tre Lord Joſus Chriſt, as appears by the next Verſe. p Good, 


EY & 


. ba 
Cliap. 1 
kind, or rather ſweet ; The fame word is applied to VVine Itkeo s 
35. The fenſe ot the whole is, If ye have by Faith received the 
Goulpel as glad Tidings, and worthy of all Acceptation, 1 Tim. 1.1% 
and therein perceived, and experienced the lweetneſs of thoſe co. 
folations which are in Chriſt Jeſus, Phil. 2. 1. Or, {which is the 
ſame) how ſweet he.is, who, in the preaching of tiic Goſpel,exkibit. 
himſelt to your ſpiritual ſenſes, to be ted upon, and tatted by 
YOu. 

4 To whom 9 coming 7 as wnto a living / ftone 7 
* diſallowed indeed of men , bur choſen » of G: xl, "5.7 
and precious y. $0 

q To which Chriſt. r By Faith, 9.4. in whom believins, 7/1 
6. 35, 44,45. The word 1s in the Preſent Tenſe, the Apottle Qe- 
{cribing. here not their firſt Converſion to Chriſt, but their preicnt 
te, that they being in Chriſt, were daily coming to him in the 
ntinued Exerciſe of their Faith. / Not only having Life in 
himſelf, but cnlivening thoſe that by Faith adhere to him. : iz, 
A Corner-ſtone, as v. 6. Being about to ſect forth the Church, as ; 
ſpiritual Building, he firſt mentions Chriſt as tne Foundation, and 
Corner-ſtone. u Kejefted, not only by the unbelieving Jews, 
and their Rulers formerly, bur ſtill by the unbelicving VYortd. 
x Either choſen to be the Foundation of the Building, and then ir 
15 the ſame as tore-ordained, ch. 1. 20. Or, choſen 1s the ſame a; 
choice, excellent, y A different Expreffion of the ſame thing. tiere 
ſeems to be an Allufion to thoſe Stones which Men count precious, 
and have in great Eſteem ; and Chriſt's being precious in the tis ht 
of God, 1s ſet in Oppotition to his being diſallowed of Men ; to j1- 
timate, that their Unbelict, and rejeQting Chriſt, doth not m:ke 
him leſs valuable in himfelf, when his Father fo much honours him, 


5 Ye allo as lively - ſtones a, || are built up 6 4% tx 
{pirirual * houſe c, an holy + prietthood d, to otter UP » 11... 
|| ſpirirual ſacrifices e acceptable unto God by Jeſus + jr,.?; 
Chriſt /. and 5,2, 

z Viz. as being enlivened by Chriſt. The word here tranſlated, V- 5. 
lively, and living, in the former Verſe, 1s the ſame, but being tiicre | Hol ty, 
ſpoken of Chriff, it is to be underſtood actively, and here being Ml. 11, 
applicd to Believers, who receive their Spiritual Life from Ckriit, 1800.12, 
it muſt be taken paſfively. a Each particular Believer is here calicd 
a Stone, as altogether an Houſe or Temple, 2 Cor. 6. 16. Ephe!, 2, 
21. and in reſpect of their Union among themſelves, and with their 
Foundation ; tho' elſewhere in reſpe&t of God's Inhabitation ; even 
particular Believers are-called his Temple, 1 cor. 3. 16, 17. and 6, 
I9, b Viz, Upon Chriſt the priacipal Corner-ſtone, Ephef. 2. 2c. 
This may be underſtood, either, 1. Imperatively, q. d. Be ye built 
up, and then it is an Exhortation, and relates not only to thc 
continuing in Chriſt, but their being further built up on him by 
Faith, and is of the ſame Import, as v. 2. that ye may grow : Or ra- 
ther, 2. Indicatively ;, the Apoſtle as yet being engaged in ſhewing 
the Dignity and Priviledges of Believers, and not entring upon 
his Exhortation, till v. 11. The words being in the Preſent Tenſe, 
implies the Building to be ſtill but going on, and not yet finiſhed, 
c In diftinton from the material one, relating to thoſe Scriptures 
where the Tabernacle or Temple is called God's Houſe, Exod. 23. 15. 
and 34. 26. Deut. 23.18, The material Houſe built of dead Stones, 
was but a Type of the ſpiritual Houſe made up of lively Stones, and 
built upon Chriſt the living Stone ; and this he brings (the Truth 
being always more excellent than the Type) to heighten the Privi- 
ledges of the Goſpel-Church. d Either the Abſtra& is put tor the 
Concrete, an holy Prieſthood for holy Prieſts; or it may note the 
whole Colledge or Society of Evangelical Prieſts, conſiſting of all 
particular Saints, to whom, in the New-Teſtament, this Title 1s 
given, but never appropriated to Goſpel-Miniſters : Chriſt being a 
Prieſt for ever after the Order of Melchiſedec, had no Partner with 
him in his Prieſthood, but was himſelf only to offer a Propitiatory 
Sacrifice to God for Sin. e The immediate end of Goſpel-Prieits, 
to offer, not bodily, but ſpiritual Sacrifices; in general themſelves, 
whom they are to conſecrate to God, Rom. 12. 1. particularly Priv- 
er, Thankſgivings, Alms, and other Duties of Religion, Phyl. 4. 12. 
Heb. 13. 15, 16, f By, and through whom alone, as the Perſons, io 
the Performances of Believers (tho' in themſelves 1mperfett) are plea- 
ſing to God, Chriſt preſenting themto his Father by his Interceiſion, 
and covering their Defetts by his own moſt perfe& Righteoutnct:, 
Some refer this clauſe, by Jeſs Chriſt, to the foregoing Verb, fo 
offer up, and then the words run thus, To offer up Spiritual Sacrt- 
fices by Feſius Chriſt, acceptable to God; but the former ſeems moſt 
proper, and includes this latter : we are therefore to offer up ſpir1- 
tual Sacrifices to God by Chriſt, becauſe they are acceptable only >y 
him, Heb. 13.21. compared with 15, 16. 

6 Wherefore alſo it is contained g in the ſcripture. 
* Behold I þ lay 7 in Sion # a chief corner-itone 7, 
elect, precious x + and he that believerh on him, thall j* . 
not be confounded 7. £ 

£ The Greek word being of an ative form, makes great difle- 
rence among Expoſitors about theſe words ; not to troubic tt 
Reader with variety, the plaineſt way of underſtanding thei, 


* (11, 2%, 


, 


| ſeems to be, either, 1. That God be underſtood here, and ſupplied 


out of the former Verſe, Wherefore God contains it in the Scriptur? 
Or, 2ly. That the word, tho' of an ative Termination, be yet ta- 
ken in a paſſive ſignification, contains, for 5s contained, ſo our Tran- 
flators do; and this way of ſpeaking is not unuſual with other 
VVriters. h I the Lord, not Man, Pſalm 118. 23. # Viz. By the 
Preaching of the Goſpel, wherein Chriſt was declared to be the oN- 
ly Foundation of the Church, and whereby Faith was wrought 10 
the Hearts of Men, who were thereby aQually built «on Chriſt as 
their Foundation, and ſo the ſpiritual Houſe, v. 5. erected, +k E1- 
ther by Synechdoche, Feryſalem, (whereof Sim was 4 PUT) 
where by the preaching of Chriſt firſt, and the Apoſiles after h13 
Aſcenſion, and ſending the Spirit, this Foundation-ſtone Was 7: 
laid, and God's Temple begun to be built, Pja/m 110, 2. 1/4 2. 3: 
Mich. 4. 2. Like 24. 47. Or rather Sion here is to be underſiooa ©: 
the Goſpel-Church, whereof Zi was a Typc. / OF. Fead of F-.f 


i -2 E . FP 1d: ir 4 + | 
Correr, Plalin 118, 22. that which both ſupports tis Eu1.d Ng, 3Y 


#3 y * 


TE 
* aan 
ſp a=ax 


F Plil,1 1 


Chap. It: 


unites the Parts; Chriſt be:nz the Foundation nor of a part only, | Exinbition in Chritt, of choſe good Things whereof their 


f 


— 
a 
BY 
- 
. 
— 


CY 
— 

wo V 
— - 
- . 
$4 ® 
>——- 
_ 

— 

® 


A 

— 

Li b ® 
£ 

— 

DP 


« Exod. 9. 
1%, 
kom. 9.22, 


jade » 


TRey. 1.5. 
and «, 10, 


|Or, 4 pur- 


chaſed pe9- 


- 
”* 


ple. 
THCS. 


* Ir, | 
Eph. 5.8. 
Col. x. 13. 


but of the whole Church; all the parts of which, Gentile, as well 
as Jew, are jointly built on him, and upheld by him, Ephe/. 2. 20. 
77 See v. 5. nShall not be diſappointed of his expected Salvation, 
and fo ſhall have no cauſe to be aſhamed of his Hope. This 1s ac- 
cording to the LXX, the Hebrew hath it, ſhall nxt make haſte, 1. e. 
he that believes in Chriſt ſhill not through hafte, or Diftruſt, or 
Unwillinzneſs to wait Gn's time and way, ſeek after any other way 
f Salvation than by Girift ; and fo {as before) not being dilap- 
pointed, ſhall have no cauſe to be aſhamed; whereas they that do 
not helieve, but make haſl*, coming ſhort of their. ExpeRation, 
are at laſt filld with Contui:on. See the places in the Margin. 
7 Unto you therefore which believe he 7s} precious 
-: bur unto them which be ditobedient p, * the Itone 


' which the builders g dilatſowed 7, the ſame is made 


the head of the corner: /. | 
» The Margin reads it according to the Greek, an Honour, E1- 


| tlier the Abſtract is put for the Concrete, an hong for honow- 


rable or precious (a5 the Text hath it) and then the ſenſe is plain 
that Chriſt, as he is precious in himltclt, and to his Father, fo he 
is to them that believe : Or, /mur may be put for the cauſe of Ho- 
nour, and then jt is oppoſed to ſhame and Confuſion before-men- 
tioned, and the ſenſe is, Ye that believe, ſhall be fo tar from be- 
ing aſhamed, or having your Faith fruſtrated, that ye ſhall be ho- 
noured, and ſaved by Chriſt. And this agrees well with what fol- 
I-wws in this and v. 8. p Unbelievers, who were diſobedient to the 
grert Command of the (Goſpel concerning Faith in the Lord Jeſus 
Chrift. 4 The High Prieſts, Scrihes, Pharifees, and Rulers of the 
Zews, whoſe Duty it was to build vp the Church, as having not 
only the Name, but the Power then refiding in them. » Rezeted 
him, and would not acknowledze him for the promiſed Meſſtah, 
and the preat Foundation vpon which the Church of God was fo 
be built. / Qnefl. How is Chriſt ſaid to be made the Head of the 
Comer to them that rejett him? Anf. Either, 1. ſomething 1s here to 
be underſtood, iz. tis is fatd, or ſpoken, which follows, the Stone 
which the Builrs, &c. q. 4. they deſpited him, but God hath ho- 
noured him ; they would allow him no place in the Building, but 
God hath given him the beſt, made him the Head-ſtone of the Cor- 
ner : Or, 2, Chriſt may be ſaid to be made to the Diſobedient in 
ſpite of their reietins and oppoting him, the Head of the Corner; 
i. e. 4 King and a Judz. to icftrain, and curb them-1n, ſeeing they 
would nct be ruled by him. : 

$ * And tone of ſtumbling; and a + rock of offence 


.t, een 19 them which ſtumble ar the word, being dilo- 


bedientn, || wherennto x allo rhey were appointed. 

t i. e. A Stone at which they fhumble, a Rock at which they are 
offended ; and ſo it implies Clnitt not to be "the caule of their 
flumblinz, but the Object of it ; thicy of their own accord, and 
through tite pravity of their 'Noture, without any juſt occation gl- 
ven by him, being offended, cither hecaufc the; find not that in 
him, which they exp- ted, 12, outivard Encouragements ; or find that 
in him which they do not like, the Holinels of his Law, and Purity 
of his DoQrine, contrary to their Corruptions and Lufts, and eſpe- 
cially his requiring of them Faith. in him for the Juſtification of 
their Perſons, which was fo contrary to the Pride of their Hearts, 
and which was one vreat reaſon of the Jews ſtumbling at him, as 
ſeeking to eſtabliſh their own Kighteuutncls, and therefore not 
tbmitting to the Bi-hteautnyſe of God, Rom. 9. 32. 33. com. with 
WW. 2 This ſhimblins includes not only their falling into Sin, but 
into Deſtruction tov, the Puniſhment ot Sin, 012. 8. 14, 15. where- 
of Chriſt can be no wore thn the tnculpabie occation, but their 
awn Unbelicf the proper Cruſe, » Thefe words may have a double 
reading, one accordin? to our Trantlation, and then the ſenſe js, 
that ſtumble at the Word of the Goſpel, 7. e are difobedtent to 
if, in rejectins Chriſt theretn offered to them: Or, that ſlumble, 
being dinbedient to tho {md 1. e. ftumble at Chritt preached to 
them in the Ward, and theretore will not obey it : they ſhew 
that they are offended at Chritt, by their not receiving his Dodtrine, 
nor accepting his offers. x Fither this may reter, 1. fo wv. 5. 
where Chriſt is ſaid to be /aid (the ſame word 1n the Greeb, with 
that which is here trantlated, by appointed ) /n Zion, as a chief Cor- 
ner-flone, ele and precious, on whom wholoever belreveth, ſhall not 
be confounded + The Apoſtle then ads, that even theſe Unbelievers 
were appninted (viz. in their external Vocation, 4s being taken in- 
to Covenant with God) to be built on Chrift by Faith, but they 
ſtumbled, by their Unbelief, at the Word of tlic Goſpel, and con- 
ſzquently at this ſtumbling-Stone. And then it is an high agerava- 
ting the Unbelief of the Jews, that they being God's peculiar 
People, ſhould reieet that Salvation which was ſent to them, and 
to the firit offer of which they were det1gned, As 13. 25, 46, 47. 
Or, 2ly, to the words immed1atcly going before, that ſtumbleth at 
the Word, teing d'(obedient, and then the ſenſe 1s (ſpeaking con- 
cerning the reprobate Jews that God appointed them to this ſtumb- 
ling, in his decrecing not to give them Faith jn Chriſt, but to 
leave them to their Unbeliet, and to puniſh them juſtly for it : See 
Rom. 9. 17, and 1 Theſſ. 5. 9. Fude 4. The Scope of the Apo- 
ſile in this whole Verſe teems to be, to keep weak Chriſtians from 
beins offended at the multitude of Unbelievers, and eſpecially at 
their ſecing Chriſt rejeted by the Jewilh Rulers and Dottors ; and 
this he doth by pointing them to the Scripture, where all this was 
long fince foretold, and theretore not to be wondred at now, nor 
be any occation of offence to them. See the like, John 16. t, 4. 


9 But ye y are a choſen generation 2, a tf, royal 
priefthool a, an holy nation b, \| a peculiar people 
- thar / ve ſhould ſhew forth e the || praiſes f of 
him who hath called g you * our of darknels þ into 


ir. his marvellous light 7 - 


y Ye Believers, in oppoſition to thoſe Reprobates that are diſo- 
bedient to the Word, He ſhews that thoſe Dignities and Privi- 
ledges, which were mentioned by Moſes; as belonging to their Fore- 
{athers, did much more beforig {6 ffieri; add Fat they had the real 

\ ol. [T; 


i 


m— —— 


Kather 
nad but 4 taite, and which the rett of the Jews hid loft by thei: 
Undelitef. xz A People choſen of God, not onlv out of t*% 
World, but from among tie reſt of your own Nation, and nc 9 
ly toan External Adoption, and outward Privileges, {as the who's 
Body of the Nation was) but to eternal Salvation, a Or, Kingd mn 
of Priefls. He cailed them an holy Prieſih»:d, wv. 5, now he calls 
them a Ryjal Prietthi:d, to ſkew that they were /made nvt only 
ſpiritual Pricfts, but fpiritua! Kings; which Priviledze they hid 
not as 7ews, but as Belicyers, who are all of them as Priefts in tc 
ſpe&t of God to whom thev .are conſecrated, and to whom titcy 
offer up ſpiritual Sacrinces , fo Kings in reſpett both of their En- 
mies over them they are victorious, and of the Kingdom they arc 
hereafter to inherit, + W/,05 calls your Fathers an holy Nation, 
Deut. 7.6. in repeat of the'r Separation from the lnpurittes of the 
Gentiles, their Dedication to God, and the muny Laws God gave 
them, ohitziag them to external avid ceremonial Purity, whereby 
they were admoniſhed of internal or coal Holinefs ; but ye are a! 
holy Nation in reipe&t of that true and inward Holinets it felt, 
whereof that ceremoti1al Holineſs was but 4 $t2nifoation, He ſeem: 
particularly to allude to 1/4. 62. 12, © Zaod, 19. 5. it 15 4 feckltur 
Treaſure; and fo the ſame word 1s rendred, Fc/*7 2, 2. and a /fo- 
cial People, Deut. 7. 5. a peculizy People, and 14. 2, The word uſcd 
by the LXX implying as much: but al. 3. it. where we rende: 
it, Jewels ; the LXX utcd the fame word which Peter doth here 
which 1s as much as a i-ople of Acquiſition, or Which God hath acau 
red to himſelf for his pecultir Potieffion or Treafure, God had r.t- 
cued the I/rae!//tes from their Fyyptian Bondage, and taken them 12 
be his peculiar People above 411 others, and claimed x Rizlit 5 
them, and counted them prectous, as hiving redeemed them with 
4 ſtrong Hand, and got Pofletſion ot them at the expence of fc 
much Power, and to many Miracles. This Peliverance of their-, 
was the Type of Chriſt's delivering the Church trom the Tyransy 
of Satan, the ſpiritual Ph.:ru9h, and the-World, the ſpiritual £zre, 
and a ſtate of Sin, the wort] Bondage; upon tic account where- 
of, God's People are called a +eculiar P2opiz, or a Pcople thus ac- 
quired, Tf. 2. 1. and a prchated Pyſeſſioon, Ephel. 1, 14. where 
the ſame word ts Iikewite uſed. d This notes the end of all the; 
Priviledges vouchtifed them, wiz. That they ſhould gloritie God 11 
the enjoyment of them. He ſeems to refer to ].2. 43. 7, 21, Th», 
People h.vve I f 1me.t for my (e!f, Cor acquired, as the LXX hath it; 
they ſhall frew forth my Prate, e Publiſh, and declare bot 
Words and Dceds, th.t others may be excited to gloritie God m thc 
like manner. f Or, I'irtues, that Wildom, Power, Goodnet:, Ric!:- 
tcouſnets, Truth, gc. which God hatit -manifelted 1h his Vouctt- 
ſafements to you, and in the Acknowledgment of which he may 


be glorified. g By an eff:*tuz} Callins, accordins to his purpoſe, 
Rem. 8. 28, h The Darknets of Ignorance, Unhelief, Sin, and 
Miſery. The time before the Publication of the Gotpel, was 4 


time of Darkneſs, faith. 4. 15. Lube 1. 55. i The Light of Know- 
ledge, Faith, Holineſs, Comtort. See Ephe/. 5. 8. - It 1s called 
marvellous, becauſe Men ſce what they never ſaw before ; wonderful 
Things out of God's Law, Pſulm 119. 18, and becauſe it is a marye* 
lous thing that they who ſite in fo groſs Darkne!s, ſhould be trantla- 
ted into ſo glorious a Light. | 

10 * Which in time paſt were not a people 4, bur 
are now the people of God /, which hai not obtained 
mercy, bur now hare obtained mercy ;-. 

þ Either were not a People, i. ce. a Formed State, or Common 
wealth, being diſperſed in teveral Countries ainong other People, 
and not worth the Name of a People : Or, were nat the Feople ot 
God (ſupplying G14 out of the oppotite claute) tince he had given 
them a Eill of Divorce, and faid, /o 4rmmz, and 1 Rubuman to 
them, Mof. 2. Theſe were the Fews of the Diſperſion, and ſuch as 
had not returned out of the 8«53{aniſh Captivity, together with 
many of other Trives mixed with them, who, before their Conver- 
fon to Chriſt, ſeemed to cut of trom tie Body of that People, 
had no folemn Worfhip of God among them, and were tainted 
with the Corruptions of tlie Reathen, with whom they converted 
[ Really Gods People reſtored to their ol4 Covenant-State, and 
Church-Priviledges, by their betteving in Chritt, » The Mercy of 
being God's People and enjoving their Priviiedses, being juftified, 
at peace with God, gc. Left they might anv way abuſe what he 
had faid in the former Verite concerning their great Dignity and 
Priviledges, fo as to aſcribe any thing to theintelves, the Apoſtle 1n- 
timates here, that all they entoved was mecrly oat of God's 
Mercy. 

11 Dearly beloved | beſeect or as ſtrangers and 
pilgrims z, * abſtain trom tlethly lutts » which war # 
againſt rhe ſoul q ; 

n Not only Strangers in the tevera! Countries where. ve inhabit, 
(being out of your own Land) but Strangers in the World, as ail 
Believers are, 7. 39. 12. and 119. 19. and 1 Chron, 25. 15. Heb, 
IT. 13, 14. 0 Not only ſenſual Dctires, but all the Works of the 
Fleſh, Gal. 5. 19, 20, 21. the carnal Mind it ſclt being Ermity 
againſt God, Rem. 8. 7. þ As Enemies oppoſe, and tight againſt, 
Rom. 7. 23. Jumes 4. i. 4 The inner Man, or rczenerate part, 
or Spirit, which is oppoſed to tlefhly Lufts. See Gl, 5, 17, 

12 * Having your converfation honeſt » among the 
Gentiles /- that || wheicas they ipeak againſt you as 
evil doers, * they may by your good works which they 
{hall behold, glorihe God 7 in the day of vititation x. 

r Irreprehenſible, fruitful, fuch as may gain Mens Love, and 
commend the kel1z1on you protels, { Who, by reaton of their dif- 
fering from your kelipion, are the more like to oblerve You. This 
proves this Epiſtle to be written to the Fews. t Not only think 
more favourable of you, but of your Religion ; acknowledge the 
Grace of Gcd in you, and more readily ſubject themſelves to him, 
(the beſt way of glorifying hem) it being uſual with God to make 
way for the Converſion of Sinners by the Poly Converſation of Saints, 


uViz.a gracious Viſitation when God calls them by the Gotpel to the 
knowledge of Chriſt, Luke 1. 67, 78. and 7. 16. and 19. 44- 
6G } 13 * Sub+ 


I; P.E 7 Chap. F:. 


* xf.C 
Rot, ! 
> I 4 


Rom, 2. 2 © 


i 4. 
Gll, <. 16; 


F2Cor.s 
3 £ 
Chap. 2. 


= 


| Or, 
TY/Is if 

+ Mat. ©, 
| $a 


Dy 


wr 


. 
] 
i 
14 
& 
; 
. - bl 
R 
f'1 
: z : 
i | ; 
1 \4.H 
i 
'Y. 
in 
oh” 0 
;k 
i 
3 
»iH 
| z 
' il; 
[d 
| 
£ { , 3 
; | , 
z;F hy 14% 
| 14 
£ ' ” 
1 _ bi 
: p 4 
bi 2 [ 
{ 1 * ns 
i i jy "e 
Lo ' 214. +2 :, 
: ; $4 +Y 
, . \ 
: ZY? 
I Þ 
: b 
: ' EJS 
{ f 
'$. 
' { i 
v : * 
j 4 
} | 148) 
| a k 
4 £ 'Fa 4; 
: f ' 7 { 
1-8 - (51 j 
? F 1 . of 
: 
1 ** 
F : 8» 
47% 
' {- £3 y 
| j [ & : 
£5 j 
| "$1 
Y © 
'S: F . 
> ” : . 
; z «#. 
y ” 
F231 ' f 
. ; 
% 
y ; . 
+4 
0 « 
, 
k Y {+ 
A 
wE) 
' #1 2 
, £ " 
V4 W 4 
4 : 
rs < 
i ? : © ibs 
3 Þ Þ ft 
* iÞ 
. i 
: ; : 
*F 4+ 3 + 
= : as J. "7 
' 4 ; 
ws 737 28 
+ Hs 1 t 
4 *- 1, 
Fs 
0 ET z : 
*.- , BEL 
4 . ; : 
# 3 Ky _+ 
: : : 
14 {4 FP 
$49 > 
v1 2146 4 

ITE SS 
5 9, \,535; 3108 

i 74 
$8 " $54 

x; n Fl 

' F-4 

' 03 4 ” 

a « \ +» \bHy 
p fq 'W. }: 
: LOS A 2 

LT Fl 55 
: > 1 3, 1198 
$/ of d 

' 3 0 Ft * 

| bcd q 6:5 

| HEE zz 1 : 

4-34.78 
' FE i 
4711 - 
'N.. £ 
; 4 : y + 
{% þ iy 
is 
* J a v 
[1 ” £5 - 
F Ll - : 
8 [1 . 
j 
m ol 2 
Nr Ti. 277 : 
#*F 1h 
ih . 4 be 
TC% 'S* d 
0.5 
4H oy, ©. 
; j 
4 
1 + 4% 
” 5 1 
\ 
- : £ 4 
: WY 
4s 1 
1 > $ 
$ Z : 
j £ k 
"> | 
ih 
F1 "© 
; £ ks 
s « x 
. , 
4 
I b.; 4 PP. 42 
5 p 'F® 
1. WT 
a KY 
#4 i 
We 1" { 3% 
wk © .06 
, 4 A 
+4 % £ 164 
C74 , 
” 2 
: 
: M 1-13 
bd / 
, \ » 

4, 64 2 

Fo "T * 

fl (1 K C 

1 

x US. : o 

F: 1-4 7 
; - £3 
14S *: p m2 4 
: m7 

4 84 13% 1365 
i vQ i 5 

TH - F.5 & 

'TÞ £F.« 

iy * *W: 

; d Pp, 
« *L'Þ: : 

ben : Ri» F 

1 WW - A Po 
4 iq 67 
' ”, + 
1 * I "74 
*© wy 75 P! 1 
Po F 
4 y 4( 
2” od A} 
k "2% F 
7 A $ bo 
by . i £ v 

j 3% <4 H +: 
y? © a » 

þ dz : 7 

: ; 8 - * WS 
© hho Re) ' 
4 + Wit 
"% : 5. 0; 
: IP 
- £2 
By ER tt 
33 * 43 s 
: : "Ray 
4 - gt 
4:8: * 83] 
i FL IN #0 | 
i» , bo. 
&Þx 7 of 
1 19, WET” . 
i 
- pl \ 
W-, 4 of 
*Þ/ Id £ 
þ. a9 La : : 
p he F 4 
Lf 
is " - wn 
by k 35K - 77 
b 1% T% 1 
, 3-4 x «MA 
8 - bY -/ ' Q 
I + & hl 
3 p 
4 wal 25 #5 
b Q 
# 1 bt 
if ; | : 
FE 8 2 2 * 
LW. if + 
THE » 
_ : 
py EN 
a ST, Js" 7 : 
4 :, * 
+ 1 
A "28 y . 
6 1 2: 18- 
£ » 7] 4 
"$330 
vll 81 
" "_” 
. : 
4% ” 
% v5 2 b 
: . : 
hs J oo »* ! 
o F , 
| 
Ls 1 : 
; : 4 
! 4 y 
$74 W311; 
. : Sg: 
FT IT. . 
: . bt, Y, 
+3 v8. (28 
45 A | $37) 
<0 x" J ., 

WW © l k 
; T- S. 
= rf . 

: \ 4 
7 
4 : *F * 
F WEE |; +, TE; 
"T7 LS | 
6 : : 
4 : l WW 
SE; o +30 : 
. TH 1 ze 
37% : FF J Þ F 
* ag 
4 a7 : _ 
by. = _- b "67? 
* F 7-ve 
"3 = S 
tH i "i. 1» 
« . 5: 
" Gf <0 iT 
\ 4 " 
. . 4 
5 # 76 ! 
'©S \ IT + 
o 4 3 4 
"4 4 * 1 La 
ce 4 . 4 4 
[4 = , . 

+. 7 » 2 ? 

bY oo - I 
9" I 

q, »x 

y : 4 - 

czar 4 $2.90 - 

- n"y 9 : 

84 Ry +3 
"5 7 [ 
Rn . * 
= 4 #4 
v] F + 5443 
* wiki * \ b 
[ 0 
i KS - 4 e 
. 597 i 
t + > WE 
[1483+ 7 
"4 dit - ws "2 
- 4 *_> } 
% p 
z CY } 
[3 197 TS 
b 1 TCL By s 
7; T2 
© * b 
_—_— *- TEK} 
[i | LY 
by f 7 6 
4 a 4. n 

: . V 4 

4 got *: 

7 a -»'+T 

x - "7 of P # > 

; q EL. , 
1 - vo - 
Ls $1.0 N 4+ 
24 
#7 = : 
: 2 "&+ % 
i TP" © af 

, L p: 

? A $35 For 

1 748 & 

£ by 4 $ 
$A 4 G 
K-42 : | 
y ' ; * 
oy 
{ 
* 7 ' 1 
' Z 1 
i 3s * 
©. "<1 ' 
: . 3 F< 
* i} 5, *. 
' : | , 
£4 \ C428 

F 88S +2 : 

% wt > 4 TEE 

4 LY ol 

4 4 4 & 

; ET 
” 4 ay Hr 
: 1, 35 w©t,Þ 
bn ; i 7 
4 £ Tx 8 
#4 - u +: 3 
” - ws, & 
"+ nx 
3% 
x * o ] 
, * S 
YL 4 
s 1.5 0 
SS 7 [4 - i 
| [ " 
. - t p 
2 Pg +3F; 
' 
bo; 5 F Z 
7 - 
| $ 4 ; 
Fe 0 3.08 
#5; £15 5; PN 
Fi 19 © , 
- - 4 : 
n j " a 
n : + 7 
©Y: 1 "4 : : 
LU - " 4 | 
MG *. 
: a> 
: : 
1 : 
« £ 
I 1 *] 
£410 : 
F "H 
: 
, 
£ 


my p; 
eds ©. 


= 


CTRL ; 
jo A v1 OW 
a LH 
p - We 


121 y ror the Lord's: ſake a: wherher it be ro the 
kins 7 35 ſupreme c 
x Of all kind, whether Supreme, or ſubordinate, y Gr. {man 
Creatures Which may be underſtood, either as Mark 16. 15. every 
Human Creatur? for every Man, only reſtraining it to the preſent 
Subject whereof he treats, viz. Magiſtrates, and the Senſe is, to cve- 
ry Magiſtrate: Or rather, (though to the ſame Effet) to every Hu- 
mm Ordinance , or, as we tranſlate it, Ordinance of Man ;, the word 
Creature, being taken for an Ordinance, or Gonſtitution, and crea- 
ting for or daining, or appointing ;, ſo Oecumenius will have the Word 
to ſignitie, Ephel, 2.15. to make of twain, one new Man. But 
this Creature, or Ordinance here is to be underſtood of the Magi- 
ſtrate (as appears by the following Words) which 15 called Human, 
not as 1f- Mayiitracy were not an Ordinance of God, (for Rom. 13. 
5. the Powers that are, are ſaid to be ordained of God) but, either 
vecaute iT is only among men, and proper to them ; or becauſe 1t 
is of Man ſecondarily, and inſtrumentally, though of God prima- 
riiv, and originally ; God making uſe of the Miniſtry of Men 1n 
bringing them into the Magiſtracy ; as though Church-Ofticers are 
God's Ordinance, yet he makes uſe of men to put them into Office. 
a For God's Sake, who commands this Obedience, and gave them 
their Authority, and is repreſented by them, and honoured by that 
Obedience which is yielded to them 1n all things agreeable to his 
Will, The Phraſe ſeems to be of the ſame import with that of 
being obedient in the Lord, Epheſ. 5. 1. b To Ceſar the then Su- 
preme Magittrate, under whoſe ſuriſdi&ion the Jewiſh Chriſtians 
were ; and this being a general Command extending to all Chri- 
ſtians. it tollows, that Obedience is due from them to thoſe Chiet 
Magiſtrates, whoſe Subjedts reſpedively they are. c Not only above 
the People, but above other Magiſtrates. 

14 Or unto governours d, as unto them that are lent 
by him e * for the puniſhment of evil doers and Þ for 


the praile f of them that do well. 

d He ſeems immediately to intend the Governours of Provinces 
under the Roman Emperors, ſuch as Pilate, Felix, Feſtus, were 1n 
Fudca ;, Sergins Paulus in Cyprus, Ads 13. 7. and others Places : See 
inke 3. tr. but ſo as to imply, under the Name of Governours, all 
inferior Magiſtrates, as under the Nan 2 of King, he doth all Su- 
preme. e Either, 1. by the King, or Supreme Magiſtrate, and then 
the next Words ſhew what ſhould be his end in ſending or appoint- 
inp Officers, or ſubordinate Rulers under him : Or, 2. rather ſent 
by God, from whom all Rulers Subordinate, as well as Supreme, 
hive their Authority, and which is the great Motive on which they 
are to be obeyed ; and then the following Words ſhew what 15 
God's end in appointing them, and another Reaſon for yielding Obe- 
dience to them, viz. their being ſet up for the common Good of 
the Societies which they rule. f Praiſe is a kind of Reward, and 
15 here to be taken by a Synechdoche for all ſorts of Rewards given 
to thoſe that do well, and are obedient to the Laws. See Rom. 
13. 3, 4- 

15 For ſo is the will of God g, that with * well- 
doing þ ye may put to filence 7 the ignorance # of 


fooliſh men /. | 

g His Command. h All manner of Offices of Humanity, whereof 
Obedience to Magiſtrates is a principal one, #7 Gr. muxxle, ſtop 
the mouths, Tit. 1. 11. v2. by taking away all occaſion of evil- 
ſpeakinz. k Either their ſgnorance of the State, and Converſation 
of Believers, which may ve the Occaſion of their ſpeakin;; evil of 
them ; or their Tgnorance of God and his ways, to which Chriſt im- 
putes the Fury of Perſecutors, 7ohn 16. 3. They that know not 
God themſelves, are moſt ready to reproach and ſlander thoſe that 
do. I True Wiſdom conſiſting in the. Knowledge of God ; they 
that are deſtitute of that Knowledge, as Unbelievers are, are called 
focith. 

1s * As free »n, and not! uſing your liberty for a 
cloke of maliciouſncls 7. + but as the ſervants of God o. 

2 Je prevents an Objettion :; they mg ht pretend they were a 
free Peopie, as Jews, and thereiore were not t3 obey Strangers, 
Deut. 17. 15. 729n8, 33. and mace free by Chrift. He aniwers, 
That they were tree indeed, but it was from Sin, and nor from 
Rightcouſneſs, not from Obedience to God's Law, which requires 
81! j2ftion to Magiſtrates, for they were ſti!l the Servants of God. 
» Not ufn» your Liberty to cover, or palliate your Wickedneſs, 
cxcuſn; vour f'ves from Obedience to your Superiors by a pretence 
of Chriit:an Liberty, when, though ye be tree from Sin, vet ye 
are not from Duty. 0 And fo {till bound to obey him, and your Ru- 
ers 1n him. | 


17 || Honour all men p: Love the brotherhood g - 


ſtew what is the true Spring and Fountain from which all the Du- 
ties we perform to men are to proceed, viz. The Fear of God, be- 
cauſe where that doth not prevail, no Duty to men can be rightly 
performed, (they love the Brotherhood beſt, and Honour the Kings 
moſt, that truly fear God) or to ſheiv the due Bounds of all the Of- 
fices we perform to men, that nothing is to be done for them 
which 1s incontiſtent with the Fear of God. f With that Honour 
which 1s peculiarly due to him above all others. 

1S * Servants 7 be ſubject to yo»wr Maſters with all 
fear z, not only to the good x and gentle, but alſo to 
the froward y. 

£ The Word is not the ſame which Par! uſeth, Col. 3. 22. but 
may well comprehend the Servants he ſpeaks of, as implying rot on- 
ly Slaves, but thoſe that were made free, vet continued till in the { 
Famsly, and ſo fignifies Servants of whatſoever Condition u Not 


CL PET AR 


z: * Submit your ſelves to every x ordinance of 


only Reverence of Maſters, and {car of off:ndins them is to hex 
deritood, but Fear of God, as appcars by the Parallel Plzce #.. 
22. See Ephe/. 6.5,6, 7. x By Gord he means not Graciny: 
ly, bur, as the next Word EX Plytn: 't, Gentle, 7uft, Equal, + Me 
rote, Crabbed, Unjuſt, Unmercitul. te 

I9 For this 7s | * thank-worthy 2, if a man 4; 
conicience toward Uod endure grief; luttering wronm. 
fully. he, 

{ In the Greek (as in the Margin) the Subſtantive is Put for the 
Adjettive ; the Senſe 1+ ertter, this is acceptable to God. and wil 
be gracioufly rewarded by him; Or, this 1s praife-worthy, and x31] 
be your Glory, as v. 20, 4a Out of retpet to Gody and Ceſire 
pleaſing him. 


20 For * what glory 6 7s it if when ye be byffr1 » 


Qr: i 


4, 


af 
»2 


tor your Faults, ye ſhall take it patiently ? bur if whe 
ye do well and ſuffer for 77, ye take ir patiently. this 14.1 
7s || acceptable with God c. oz 

b What Praiſe or Glory do ye get by it? Or, what great matter 
do you do? This Interrogation hath the force of a Negation bach, 
to be underſtood .comparatively ; it is worthy of Praiſe to ſuffer pa- 
tiently, even when men luffer juſtly, but worthy of little. jn AY 
pariſon of ſuffering patiently when unjuſtly. c This ſhews ates ©. 
meant by thank-worthy, v. 19. ahd the Apoſtle adds what kizs -« 
Thanks or Praile he intends, viz. not that which is of Man, Cinhrick 
many times may fail, even when men patiently ſuffer Injurie:\ <p 
that which is of God, to which Bclievers thould eſpecially have reſpect, 

21 For* even hereunto d were ye called e hecauic +, 
# Chriſt alſo ſuffered for || us £ leaving us an ev in. 1; 
ple þ that ye ſhould follow his tteps. L Th: 

d Viz. To patient hearing of Sufferings, even for wel! doin- 4 
e Viz, to Chriſt and the tellowthip of his Kingdom ; 9. 4. yuur vo. © 
ry Calling and Profeſſion, as Chriſtians, requires this of yo, 

f There is an Emphaſis in this Particle, it is as much a+ if he hi ons 
ſad, even Chriſt our Lord and Head hath ſuffered for us, and there Teal * 
fore we that are but his Servants and Members muſt not think tc 3% 
eſcape Sufferings. g Or, as in the Margin, for you, which avrce; 
with the Beginning and end of the Verſe, where the fecond Prin 

is uſed; but moſt read it as we do in the firſt Perſon, and the: %n:, 

is ftill the fame; only the Apoſtle from a general Propofition «i 44 

a particular Exhortation ; Chriſt ſuffered for us (therein he comy; 
hends the Saints to whom he writes) and left an Example for u: all. 

do ye therefore to whom, as well as to others, he left this Examy.. 
follow his Steps, John 13. 15.and 1 John 2,5. þ As ot other Gr, 

ces, ſo eſpecially of Patience. 

22 * Who did no fin, neither was guile found 
his mouth &#. wn 

7 7. e. There was no Guile in his Mouth, it js an Hebraifm. ty 
be found 1s the ſame as to be, and not to be ſ1und, the ſame as wt th 
be, Gen, 2. 20, Tia. 39. 2. See Rem. 7. 10. h This fignific; 
Chriſt's abſolute PerteGtion, in that he did not offend ſo much xx 
with his Mouth, 7am. 3. 2. The Senſe is, Chriſt was free from a!l 
manner of Sin, and yer he ſuffercd patiently; and therefore ell 
may ye be content to ſuffer too, though wrongfully ; ſeeing thouzh 
ye-may be innocent in your Sufferings, yet you come fo far ſhort of 
Chriſt's Perfe&1on, 

23 * Who when he was reviled / reviſed not a51in 
7, when he ſuftered z he threatned nor » but |} con: :-.;; 
mitted h/m/eff p to him that judgeth righteouſly, 156.4. 

/ By Chriſt's being reviſed, we are to underſtand all thoſe injuri- 4* 
ous Words, Reproaches, Slanders, Blaſphemies, which his Perfecy |." 


TR? 


y 1 
V b 


t Md 


% 
*% 
I 

_ 


tors caſt out againſt him. m Therefore when he told the Jews they /* *? 
were of their Father the Devil, John 8. 44. that was not a rovi- © 
ling them, but a juſt Accuſation of them, or Reproof of their 1 
viliſh Behaviour. n When he was affetted not only with verha;, 
but real Injurics, buffeted, ſpit upon, crowned with Thorns, couch. 
ed. 0 He was lo far from avenging himſelf, or recompenciag «vi! 
for evil, that he did not fo much as threaten what he wou!ld aicer- 
ward do to them. þ Or, his cauſe, as in the Margin ; neither ': in 
the Greeh, but cither may be well ſupplied, and to the ſame purpote. 
The Senſe is, Chriſt did not retaliate, nor a& any thing out of pri- 
vate Revenge, but ſo referr'd himſelf, and the judgment of 115 
Cauſe to his Father's good Pleaſure, as rather to defire Parcon tur 
his Perſecutors, than Vengeance on them, Lube 23. 34. The 4Apo- 
ſtle adds this of God's judging rizhteoully, for the comfort of Ser- 
vants to whom he ſpeaks, as Eph. 6. 8, 9. Col. 3. 25. and 4. 1. and 
for the terror of Maſters, that the former might learn Paticnce, and 
the latter Moderation. | 

24 * Who his own ſelf q bare our fins 7 in his own , 
body / || on the tree 7. f that we being dead unto bn g,1., 
ſhould live z unto righteouſneſs, by whole 1tripes ye | or, 
were healed x. | 2 6 
q Not by offering any other Sacrifice ( as the Levitical Prictis 2 
did ) but Ly that of himſelf. » Or, took up, or lifted up, in atlu- 7: 
fion to the Sacrifices of the Old Teitament, the ſame Word being 
uſed of them, Heb. 7. 27. Jam. 2. 21. As the Sins of the Offcrer 
were typically laid upon the Sacrifice, which, being ſubſtituted 1n 
his place, was likewiſe ſlain in his ſtead ; fo Chriſt ſtanding in our 
room, took upon him the guilt of our Sins, and bare their Puniſh- 
ment, Ia. 53. 4 dc. The Lord laid on him our Inquities, and 
he willingly took them up; and by bearing their Curſe, took away 
our Guilt. Or, it may have reſpe& to the Croſs, on win! Chriſt 
being lifted up, (7obn 3. 14, 15- and 12. 32.) took up our 0M 
with him, and expiated their Guilt by undergoing that De ath which 
was due te us for them, / This doth not exclude his Soul, but 15 
rather to be underſtood by a $; ncchdoche, of his whoite Punan 
Nature, and we have the Sufferings of his Soul mentioned, Ft 53: 
10, 12. John 12, 27.) but mention is mode of his Rody, 2ecauie 
the Sufferings of that were moſt vitible. * On the Crof. # Aller 
ther end of Cliriſt's Death, the Mortiioat ion of 519, ate © 


ur be- 


A 


$4955 


Chap. I1!: 
ing freed from the Dominion of it, Rom. 6. 2, 6. and being retorm- 
ed to a Life of Holineſs. x |I'iz. Of the Wound made 1n your 

Souls by Sin. This ſeems to relate to the Biows that Servants 

might receive of Cruel Maſters, againſt which the Apoſtle comtorts 

them, and to the patient bearing of which he exhorts them, becaule 

Chriſt by bearing Stripes (a ſervile Puniſhment) under which may 

be comprehendcd all the Sufferings of his Death, had healed them 

of much worſe Wounds, and ſpiritual Diſeaſes, the Guilt of their 

Conlciences, and the Defilement of their Souls. 

| 25 For ye were y as ſheep going aſtray 2, but are 
. 4+ now * returned to the Shepherd «, and Biſhop 5 of 

; vour Souls. 

 y While ye continued in your Judaiſm, and had not yet received 

the Gofpel.” xz From Chriſt the great Shepherd, and the Church 

of Belicvers his Flock, and the way of Rizhteouſnels in which he 

leads them. Ye were alienated trom the Life of God, bewildred 

and loft in the way of Sin, Jſz. $3.6... 4-In your Convertion to 
the Faith, 5 Chriſt the good Shepherd, 75h. 1c. that takes Care Of 

Souls, as a Shepherd doth of his Sheep. © Superint-ndent, Inſpettor, 

or, as the Hebrews pliraſe it, Viſitor, 7, e. He that with Care looks 

to, inipetts, and vifits the Flock. This he adds tor the Comfort (as 

of all Believers, ſo) particularly of Servants, that even they, as mean 

as they were, and as much expoſed to Injuries, yet were under the 

Carc and Tuition of Chrift, 


C:H AF 


Vives muſt be (ubje® to Husbant's ; and adorn mt the outward but the 
hidden Man, after the Fxem:ple of holy Wemen of Old, efpectally Sa- 
rh, LS, Haslands mult dive!l with ther Wives wit h Under- 
Santi, > He eatnts t1 mitual Live, Forbearance, and Peace- 
ablenc;s, with a Pron.iſe of Ged's Bleſſings Not to fear when they 
ſuffer inncently, but be always re rdy to give a Reaſon of their Hope, 
1 3--— 17, This urged, by the Example of Chrift's Sufferings and 
their iſe; and the contrary Exumple of the Puniſhment of the D:jo- 
bedience oj the jirlt World *n the times of Noah; his Deliver.znce by 
the Ark , whereof Baptiſm *is an Antitype, which direds us to the 
Reſurretim and Glory of Chiilt, 18 ———-22, 


* Fph. 5. Ikew:!:7 ye wives, be in Tubjection to your own a 

2. _— husbands, har it any obey not the word 56, 

os 3:18. f they allo may wichour the word © be won d by the 
: 1 Gor, 7, Converſation of the coves s = ws 

p a This he add+ oth to nitti;ate the Diczculty of the Duty, SubjeFon, 

in that they were their own Huchands to whom they were to be ſub- 

ject, and likewiic to bound and circumlcrioe their Obedience, that 


I. P E Tl 


. Beauty and adorning of Womens Souls cont:{1- 


it was to be only to their o#n Hushands, not to others; and 1c 
while he pc:{wades them to Subjection, he cautions them againſt 
Lnchaſtity. þ The Word of the Goſpel. He exhorts not only 
them that had believing Husbands, but ubelieving Ones, to be in 
ſubjc&ion to them. c Not that they could be carverted to Chriſt 
without the Knowledse of the Word, when Faith cometh by Hear- 
ins. Ram, 10. 17. but that they who cither would not endure 
ticir Wives inſtruſting them, or, who had before rejetted the 
Word, yef by ſeeing the Effetts and Fruits of it in their Wives, 
might be brouzht to have good Thoughts of 1t, and thereby be 
the mor? prepared for the hearing of it, whereby Faith might be 
wrour ht in them. d Or, gaired, viz. to Chriſt and His Church; 
the ſame Metaphor Paul uſeth, 1 Cor. 9. 19, 20, 21, Phil. 3.8, 

2 While they behold your chatt e converſation covp- 
{ed with fear ft. 

e Frce from all manner of Impurities, and any thing contrary to 
the Marriaze-Covenant. f Such a Fear or Reverence of your Hus- 
bands, whereby out of the Fear of God, and Conſcience of his 
Command, you pive them all due ReſpeR, and do not willingly dif. 
pleaſe them, Eph. 5. SubjeQton 1s required, v. 22. and Fear, 33, 

3 * Whoſe adorning let it not be g that outward 
adorning of plaiting the hair, or of wearing of gold. 
or of putring on of apparel. 

g Lt it not be chiefly, or not ſo much the adorning of the out- 
ward man as the inward; the Negative here is to be taken as a Com- 
parative, as Exod. 16.8. and Luke 14. 12. The Apoſtle doth not ab- 
ſolutely condemn all kind of Ornaments, or rich Attire, (which we 

- find uſed ſometimes by the Godly themſelves in the Scripture, Gen, 
24. 22, 30. Eſth. 5, 1. compard-with P/. 45. 9, 13. where the ſpi- 
ritual Ornaments of Chriſt's Spouſe are ſet forth by terms taken 
from the external Ornaments of Solomon's Wife, and Ezek. 16. 
t2. theſe thinzs are ſpoken of as God's Gifts) but he taxeth all 
Vanity, Levity, immoderate Sumptuouſveſs, or Luxury in Apparel, 
2nd bodily Ornaments in Women (or Men) whatſoever 1: above 
their Place and Condition in the World, or above their Eſtate and 
Ability, ſuch as proceeds from any Luſt, (Pride, Wantonneſs, gc.) 
or tends to the provoking or cheriſhing any, or is accompanied with 
the ne2leung or {lighting of inward Beauty, and ſpiritual Orna- 
ments. 

+ Rut ler z7 be the * hidden man of the heart F in 
3+ thac which is not corruptible z, cover the ornament of a 

Rom. 2. meek and quiet ſpirit 4 which / is in the fight of God 
72 Of great Price 7. 

h The inward Man, Rom. 7. 22, and Cor, 4. 16. either the Soul 
in oppoſition to the Eody, or the Image of God, and Gfaces of 
his Spirit in the Soul, called cifewhere the New-man, and oppoſed 
to natural Corruption, or the Old-Man, Eph. 4. 24. Lol. 3. 9, 10. 
# This relates to what follows, the Ornament of a Meek, &c. and 
is cppofed to thoſe external Ornaments before mentioned, which 
arc of 4 fadins. periſhing Nature ; whereas this 1s conſtant and du- 
rable. Ard therefore Women who are more apt to be over-much 
pleaſed with external Lrefies aud bodily Ornaments, are exhorted 
rather to enrich and beautity their Souls with Divine Graces, than 
their Bodies with gawdy Cloaths, + This notes the particular 

Vol. Il. | 


Grace or Graces (parts oi the New-Min) 15 winch the Spiritua! 


. and either tacle 
we Py dc OY 6 . FOI - _ - 
tio Words, meehb, and quiet, are but different F <pretficns of 0 


and Sweetnels of Spirit; in oppoſition to Morotenefs, krowardoet: 
) - jy #; ; * y wha = dr 
Pride, Patfion, gy. And Dy quietni/s, a Pceaceabic, Stijt, Mode!* 


Temper ; 11 oppotition to Pra;zmaticeinets, Valkitivenct., Clameo 
rouſneſs. Theſe two uſually zo in Connmttion to-ether, ard th 
latter is the Effect of the former ; ſec i 771m. 2 SE 


4 * @ "ag _ k Gs © "2 REC bu * 9 
/ Either this reters to $pir!f, or to the whole Senterce, the 0: 44 
ment of a meek, &c. but the Sente it ftill the ſame... m Who can 
bett judge, as looking to the inner Man, which is not obvious 
the Eyes of others) and whoſe ſudemoat is mott to 


4 


& OV Z 
- 


1 = 
2 ; b , E VC VaUTU 
Here God's Judgment 1s oppoſed to the Judgment of vain Women, 
who think to commend themielves to others by outward Eraverv. 
and of a vain World which cfteems tuch thin, 1x The Exccilon- 
cy of Grace and Spiritual Ornaments, 1 {c? tin ornotition fo Gold 
F i p \y *x1 4 ues os 
and coitly Apparel, g. d. It Women 1! be fine that they may ap» 
pear Beautiful, ler them chule the Left Ornameats, thote cf the 
Mind and Heart, a meek and quict Spirit, which are precious in 
che fight of G-d himſelf, rather than theſe extern ones. vhich 
ſerve only to draw mens eycs toward them. | 


5 For after this manner in the old time the holy . 
women allo who rrafted P in God adorncd. rum 
{elves, being in fubjcction to their own huShands 7 


in God, and therctore their Care to pleaſe him. ©» } 75, WH 


6 Even as Sarah » obeyed Abraham + calling him 


U 


Lord { whoſe + daughters 7 ye are # 25 lons as va do 


; b | 4 Fs » . . X 
weil x, and are not afraid with anv amazemunt. 
r After her Name was chanz<d 'trom Sara, my Lidy, to Sarah, 


{imply a Lady or Princeſs, (beciuſe Kings were to come ot her, Get 
17. 15, 15, yet even then ſhe obeyed A4tbrahim;, ind this is fpoker 


in Commendation of hcr Obedience, {Not meerly in Complement 
but in reality, hereby acknowledgins his Authority and her __ 
Subjettion. 7 Not only according to the Fleſh, but SpirituZlly ac 
cording to the Pronuſe. » Either ye .ro mate or become, v7, 
imitation of her Faith and Holineſs, as v <ll-t ye are by Kindred and 
Succeſſion ; or, ye are declared, and ÞFryzn to be, as the Pur 7 
elſewhere uſed, 7ohn 15.8. x Follow her in Good Works, « To” 
2.109. y Or, afraid of any Amazemon?t, 2nv thins frightſul; er, whict 
might terrifie you, taking Amazemeit-tor the Objuct or Cruſe vo! 
Fear, as v. 14. Pſ. 53. 5. Prot. 3. 25. and the Senfe may be, ether 
ſo-long as ye perform your Duty with a rsfolute min, ant keep 
from that which is contrary to your Faith, or, as 'F 

your ſelves to your Hushands willinpIv, chcertully, and withour (la. 
viſh fear of being loſers by your Obedicnce, and farins the worſe 
for your Patience and Submiſſion. : 

7 * Likewiſe ye husbands dwell = wirh them ac 
cording to knowledge o, giving honour b to the witl, 
as unto the weaker c Veſſel 4, and as being heirs e to- 
gether of the grace of lite f, that your prayers be not 
hindred g. : 

7 Perform all Matrimonial Duties to them ; by a Synechdoche all 
the Duties of that Relation arc contained under this once of cohabi- 
tition. a Either, accordinz to that Rnowled-e of the Divine Will 
which by the Goſpel ye have obtained ; or, prudently and wiſely, 
and as becomes thoſe that underſtand their Dury, þ Not &-foiiins 
them, becauſe of their weakneſs, or ufinz them as Sliy-s but _ 
ſpetting them, caring tor them, (as /atth. 15. 6. and 1 7m. 5. 
3.) uiing them gently, covering their Infirmities. c Than the Hufe 
bands, aad that both in Body and Mind, as Women uſually are 
4 In Scripture any Inſtrument is called a Veſſel, and the Wie is 
here called fo, as being not only an Ornament, but an Help to the 
Husband and Family, Ger. 2. 18, This he adds as 2 Keaton why 
the Husband ſhould give Honour to the Wife, wiz. her bcoinz the 
weaker veſſel; weak Veſlels muſt be gently handled ; the Infirmi- 
ties of Children befpeak their Pardon when they offend ; and th 
Members of the Body which we think leſs hynwrable, on them we be- 
Now more bundant Honour, 1 Cor. 12. 23, It 154 part of that pru- 
dence according, to which men ſhould dwell with their Wives, to 
have thc more regard to them becauſe of their Infirmities (in bear- 
nz with them and hiding them) left thev ſhould he difincourazed, if 
thev fied their Weakneſs makes them cont<mptible. e Annther 
reaton why Husbands ſhould give Honour to their Wives, viz. Becauſe 
though bv Nature they are weir and uncqual fo their Husbands, vet 
they are equal to them in retpect of their beinz called to the Lrac 
Grace and Glory, their being neither ” Female in- Chriſt 

* - a 4 : —__ J 
Gal. 3. 28, f 1.e. Eternal Life which 1s the Gift of Grace; or, is 
to be given out of Grace. g Either that ye be not diverted and 
hindred from prayine ; or, that the Eficacy of your Pravers be not 
hindred, iz. by thoſe Contentions and Differences which are Ike to 
ariſe, if you do not dwell with your own Wives accordins t© kno 
l:dge, and give them the Honour that belonzs ro tt;em. 

$ Finally * be ye all of one mind 7, having conipil 
fion one of another, 2 || love as brethren £, be piritil 
be courteous 2. 

h Either, be of one mind in the things of Faith ; and ther 


4 » 


"TETET 


* 1 Cor: 
7. 3 
Eph. 5.25- 
'0l, Zo 1 S- 


4 3 


this implics the confent of the Undcrſtinding ; a the newt that* 
of the Aﬀetions; or, be united both in Faith and Atom foo 
Rom. 12. 15. and 2 Cor. 13. Ir. and P:il. 4.2. i Mutuaily af 
ed with each others Good or Ev:ii, Row. 2. rs Hh, xo, 


and 13. 3. This he joyns with the other as vie conſequent 
they that are united in Faith and Love ire of the Fre Body 
where one Member ſuffers, the rett tutter, 1 C7, 12, 2 F:2 
in Chriſt; ſee chap. 2. 17. / Ready to fhew Mercy, of 4 mrrciful 

m Rind, Afuthlo, Human, of 


Ban S424 


Xs 28. 7. the ame Word 1s uſed. 
| 6G2 ] 9 7 Not: 


Chap. IIl. 


* Prov. 9 * Not rendring evil for evil, or railing for railing | 
4 12 », but contrariwile bleſſing o, knowing that ye are 
20s - Is 4 þ a 
* Ti. < thereuntopcalled g,t that yethould inherit 7 a bleſling /. 
18 =” n Not recompencing Eyv1l either in Words or Deeds, Prov. 24. 
+ Matth, 25+ Sce on chap, 2. 3. of this Epiſtle, Rom. 12. 14, 17, 19, 21- 
25. 34 o Praving for, and 2s ye can, doing Good to thoſe that do Evil to 


* Plal. 34. 


"LE 4,9 
FE, AC 


Bak 37 


yp 
—- ,+ 


Ila. 1. 15. 
3 Joh. 11 


| Or, un. 


* Chap. 4. 
4 

+ iſa. 8, 
2, 13s 
Fer. 1.8. 


* Pal. 
TIG. 45. 
Arts 4. 8. 
|| Or, reve- 
Felice. 


* ſelf in all Well-doing, (as the Prophets meaning cited in the Mar- 


you, or ſpeak Evil of you, Matth. 5. 39, 44. Luke 6. 27, 28. 


p Eitkcr, 1. To bc thoſe that do Evil to you, that ſo by patient 


bearing of Iujurics, forbcaring private Revenge, g9c. ye might ob- 
tain a Bletfing. Or, 2. 7e are called hereunto, viz. to inherit a 
Blefſing. 4 In your Converſion to the Faith of Chriſt. r This 
cither ſhews how Believers came to partake of the Bleffing, viz. by 


way of Inheritance. Or, It implies the perpetuity of it, that. 


whereas they can exercite their Patience in ſuffering Injuries but a 
little while, their Reconpence ſhall be for ever. / Either, 1. Eter- 
nal Life, as the greateft Bleſſing; or, 2. The good things of both 
Lives temporal, Spiritual and Eterna! Mercics, which are all promi- 


id to the Godly, 1 Tim. 4. 8. and which they have by right of 


inheritance, P/. 37. 11.+ MHatth, 5, 5. and this ſeems to agree 
with, 4. 1c, 1, 12, Z 
10 For * he that will love life z. and ſee good z 
days, let him retrain his tongue from evil , and his 
lips that they ſpeak no guile y. 
t Ke that carneſily defircs to cad a quiet and comfortable Life 
here, and to enjoy eternal Life hereafter. « Pcaceable and proſpe- 
rous; as evil d.iys are ſuch as are grievous and calamitaus, Gen. 47. 
x From Evil-ipeaking, Railing, Reviſing, open DetraQon. 
» Tell no Lies of his Neighbour: Or, this may imply Whiſpering, 
Back-biting, or any way, ſecretly and cloſely ſpeaking evil of him. 
Under thcfe two, all the Vices of | the Tongue, whereby our 
Ncizhbour may be wronged, are contained, and the contrary Vir- 
tucs commanded under the Name of Bleſſing. ; 
. 11 Let him* eſchew evil and do good -, let him 
ſeck peace 2, and enſue b it. : 
7 Let him not only in general avoid all Sin, and exercife him- 


2in, ſeems to be) but particularly, let him avoid all Sin againſt his 
Neighbour, not recompencing Evil to him, and doing him all the 
Good he can, and overcoming Evil with Guod ; and to this the 
Apoſtle accommodates the Prophet's Words. 4 Not only with 
God and his own Conſcience, but with his Neighbours, which is 
here eſpecially meant. 6b Either ſcehing and enſuing 1ignifie the 
ſame thing, viz. an earneſt defire of Peace, and uſe of all Jawtu! 
means to obtain it; or, enſuing it may fignifie the difhculty of ob- 
taining it ; when we ſeek it, it may ſeem to fly from us, Men may 
197 Jet us have Peace when we would have Peace, P/al. 120. 7. 
and therefore we muſt follow it, Heb. 12. 14- : 

32 For the eves of the Lord are over the righteous, 
and his ears are oper unto their prayers c : but the face d 
ot the Lord 7s || againft them that do evil. 

c God watchcth over them, looks favourably on them and hears 
their Prayers, fee P{. 34. 15, This he lays down as a motive fo Pa- 
tience under Injuries, and to keep us from tumultuating Paſſions, 
and Defires of Kevenge ; that God ſees all we ſuffer, hath a care of 
us, and is ready to hear, and in due time to help us. d His Anger or 
Indiznation ; Face being here taken not for God's Favour (as many 
times it is) but in the contrary Senſe, 2s Lev. 17.10.and 20. 5. P/.68. 
i, 2. Men ſtew by their Countenances whether they be angry or 
pleaſed; and hence it is, that God's Face is taken for Is Favour, 
tometimes for His Diſpleaſure. A farther Argument to perſwade us 
to Patience, that God undertakes to plead our Cauſe againſt our Ene- 
mics, and avenge us on them; whereas, if 'we think to ſecure our 
felves againſt them by undue means, we make God an Enemy to us. 

13 And who zs he e that will harm you, if ye be 
followers of taat which is good f * 

e i, e. None, or few will harm you, as being convinced and over- « 
come by your good Deeds, whereby even they are many times mo]- 
fifcd and meltcd, that are of themſelves moſt wicked and hard- 
hearted, x Sam. 24. 16, 17. f Either Followers of God, who 
doth Goof, to the Evil and Unkind; but then it ſhould be rendred 
Followers of him who 1s Good, or rather, Followers of thoſe things 
that are Good, 4. d. if you be diligent in doing good to others, none 
will have the Heart to do you hurt. 

14 * But and if ye ſufter for righteouſneſs ſake g 
happy Þ are yor, and ÞF be not afraid of their terror z, 


neither be troubled #. 

g If ye ſuffer unjuſtly, whether it be for the true Profeſſion of 
the Goſpel, or in the Exerciſe of Righteouſneſs, being Followers of 
that which is Good, and walking in the Prattice of the Duties be- 
fore-mentioned, h Both in the ſpiritual Benefit ye gain by Suffer- 
ings, viz. your edification in Faith, Patience, Humility, &5c. the 
Glory which redounds to God who ſupports you under, and car- 
ries you through them, and the Reward you your ſelves expe after 
them, Matth. 5. 10, gc. - i Either be not afraid after the manner 
of carnal Men (as the Prophet's meaning is, T/a. 8.) or, rather (the 
Apoſtle accommodating the Words of the Prophet to his preſent 
purpoſe) be not afraid of thoſe formidable things wherewith they 
threaten you; or, be not afraid of themſelves and their Threat- 
nimzs, whereby they would ſtrike Terror into you ; and fo here is 
a Metonymy in the Words; fear, the Effet being put for the 
Cauſe; thus Fear 1s taken, P/. 64. I. and 91. 5. and Prov. I. 26. 
& Viz. Inordinately, with ſuch a Fear as is contrary to Faith, and 
hinders you from doing your Duty, John 14. 1. 

15 ButfanQtity / the Lord God in your Hearts, and 
* be ready always m1 to g7ve an anſwer 7 to every 
man o that a$keth you a reaſon of the hope p thar is 


in you, with meckneſs and || fear. | 
 Exalt Him 1n your Hearts, and give Him the Honour of all His 


L PETEMK 


Chap. [1] 


by believing them, and depending apon His Promites for Defon-. 
-and Affiſtance againſt all the Evils your Enemies mav threiten you 
with. 7 Prepared to anſwer when duly called to it. n Or. +: pe _ 
an Apclogy or Defence, viz. of the Faith ye profeſs ; the word. i ufo 
Ads 22.1. and 1 Cor. $. 3. 6 Either that hath Authority to examine 
you, arid take an account of your Religion; or, that asks with Mo 
deſty and a defire to be ſatished, and learn of you. Þ 5. e. Faith for 
which Hope is frequently uſed in Scripture, which is bui/t upon Faith 
The Senſe is, whereas, Unbelievers, your Perſecutors eſpecially _ kh 
ſcoff at your Hope of future Glory, as vain and groundleſs, and ar 
your ſelves as mad, or fooliſh, for venturing the loſs of all in thi- 
World, and expofing your ſelves to ſo many Sufferings in expetta- 
tion of ye know not what Uncertainties in the other ; do ye there 
fore be always ready to defend and juſtifie your Faith againit all Ol. 
jetors, and to ſhew how reaſonable your Hope of Salvation is. ang 
on how ſure a Foundation it is built. q Either, with Meebne(s in 
relation to Men, in oppoſition to Patſion and intemperate 7c 
(your Confeſſion of the Faith muſt be with Courage, but yet with 
Spirit of Meekneſs and Modeſty) and Fear or Reverence 1n relation 
to God, which, where it prevails, overcomes the fiercenet: of Men: 
Spirits, and makes them ſpeak modeſtly of the things of God, and 
gLve que reſpect to men ; Or, Fear may be ſet in oppoſition to pride, 
and preſumption of a Man's own Wiſdom or firength, q. d. Make 
conteffion of your Faith humbly, with Fear and Trembling not 11 
confidence of your own ſtrength, or gifts, or abilities. 


16 * Having a good conſcience - that whereas they Tu 
ſpeak evil of you, as of cvil-doers, they mav beathamed 1» * 
/ that falſely accuſe your good converſation it; Chritl 1 
7 This may be read either, 1. Indicative/y, and joined (as b, 
ſome it is) to the former Verſe; and then the ſence is, it ve v1 
always ready to anſiver every one that asketh vou a rexhn of the 
hope that is in you, ye ſhall have 2 good Conſcience : Or, rather. 
2. Imperatively (which our Tranilation favours) g. d. not only he 
ready to make Confeifion of your Faith ; but let vour Life and 
Practice be correſpondent to it, in keeping your telves pure trom $iy. 
and exercifting your ſelves unto Godlineſs, from whence a 90099 
Conſcience proceeds; here therefore the effect is put for the cauſe. ' 
a good Conſcience for a good Life, 4&4. 23. 1. / The ſence ic, 
that whereas they ſpeak evil of you, -as of evil-doers, your 00d 
Converſation may - bear Witneſs for you, confute their Calumnice. 
and make them aſhamed, when it appears that thcir accuſations arc 
falſe, and that they have nothing to charge upon you but you h+- 
ing followers of Chriſt. * 7. e. That good Converſatton, whic! vr 
lead as being in Chriſt; wiz. according to his Doctrine and Exam: 
and by the influence of his Spirit. 
17 For zt zs better, if the will of God be fo 7, i}; 
ye ſufter for well-doing than for evil-doing. 
t Viz. That ye muſt ſuffer ; intimating that this js av argun'c: 
for their patience and ſubmiſſion in their Sufferings, and a eruun: 
of Comfort to them, that they are led into them by the Providence 
of God { not by their own folly or raſhneſs ) and have him fc: 2 
Witneſs and Judge both of their Cauſe and beportment. 
18 For Chriſt alſo hath * once # ſuffered for fins: . 
x, the juſt for the unjuſt y, thar he might bring us 5, 
to God £; Þ being put to death in the fleſh @, but ties; 
quickned by the Spirit 6. 4 
u In oppoſition to the legal Sacritices which were offered from da: 
today, and from year to year, Heb. 5.27. and 9.25. and 10.1 2, and tl: Ed 
ſhews, as the perfettion of Chriſt's Sufferings, (in that they need- * YE 
ed not to be repeated) ſo our Conformity to him in deliverance *' 
from ours ; that as Chrift underwent Death (the principal part of 
his Sufferings) not often, but once only, and then his Glory #c!- 
lowed ; fo likewiſe it in this Life we ſuffer for righteouſneis ſake, 
according to Chriit's example, there remains no more ſuffering tor 
us, but we ſhall be glorified with him, 2 Tim. 2. 12. x2.e, For 
the expiation of Sin. This 15 another argument for Patience under 
Sufferings, that Chriſt by His Sufferings hath taken away the Gui!r, 
and freed us from the Puniſhment of Sin; ſo that our Sufferiny:, 
though they may be not only by way of Trial, but of Corre@ion; yct 
are nof properly Penal or Vindiive. y And therefore well may we 
who are in our ſelves unrighteous, be content to ſuffer, efpectully 10: 
His Cauſe and Truth. 77. e. Reconcile us to God, and procure for us 
acceſs to Him with freedom and boldneſs, Rom. 5. 2. Eph. 3. 12. a Hts 
human Nature, frequently in Scripture called Fleſh, as ch. 4. 1. Joh: 
I. 14. and though His Soul, as being Immortal did not die, yet He 
ſaffered moſt grievous Torments in it, and His Body died, by *1 
real Separation of His Soul from it. 6 7.e. His own Godhead, o”:: 
2. 19, and 10. 17, 18, The former Member of this Sentcnc« 
ſpeaks of the Subjet of His Death, His Fleſh which was JIikew!ic 
the Subje& of His Death, His Fleſh, which was likewiſe the Subj. 
of his Life in His Reſurre&ion : this latter ſpeaks of the efticten! 
Cauſe of His Life, His own eternal Spirit. 
19 By which c alſo he d went & and * preached / * ©. 
unts the ſpirits g in priſon h. | 
c By which Spirit mentioned in the end of the former Verte. 
7, e., by, or in His Divine Nature, the ſame by which He was quic%- 
ned. d Chriſt. This notes the Perſon that went and preached, 45 
the former doth the Nature in which, and fo ſheivs that what 1s here 
ſpoken of the Perſon of Chriſt, is to be underſtood of Him accord- 
ing to His Divine Nature, e Or, came, viz. from Heaven, by \'t- 
thropopathy, by which Figure God is often in Scripture 1aid 10 £5 
forth, Iſa. 26. 21. to come down, Micah 1, 3. and go down, Gen. 1” 
21. Exod. 3. 8. which two latter places arc beſt underftood of ©: 
Second Perſon. This therefore here notes in Chrift not 4 £11408. 
of Place, but a ſpecial Operation, and Teſtification of His Pretetive- 
f Viz. By Noah inſpired by Him, that he nught be a Precianny £2 
Righteouſneſs to warn a wicked Generation of approdchins, } got-(f 
ment, and exhort them to Repentance. g Souls of Men Qepartes 
which are frequentiy' called Spirits, Fce/e/. 12. 7. 4 


Ti Wd 


glorious Perfettions, For, Wiſdom, GoodnefF, Faithfulneſs, 77c. 


i 


'f Fo $9. FI6 
2. 23 #hc HL TERS taken, 7. £7 5 CmY 


. [I], Chap. NI: I. 


with Matth, 5. 25. Luke 12. 58, where Priſon is mentioned as a | 


Type, or Repreſentation of Hell; and the Syriach renders the word 
by Sheol, which fignifies ſometimes the Grave, and ſometimes Hell. 
Sce the like expreſſion, 2 Pet. 2. 4, 5. and 7ude 6. 

20 * Which 7 ſometime 4+ were diſobedient /, when 
once m7 the long ſuftering of God x waited 9 in the days 
ot Noah p, while the ark was a preparing, F wherein 
tew. that 1s, eight ſouls q were ſaved by water 7. 

z Which Spirits in Priſon. Que. When were theſe Spirits, to 
whom Chriſt preached by Noah, in Priſon ? Anſw. Then when Peter 
writ this Epiſtle. The Greek Participle of the Preſent Tenſe 1s here 
to be tupplied, and the words thus read, preached to the 5 pirits, which 
are in Pri/»n, viz. now at this time; and fo the time of their being 
in Priſoo, is oppoſed to the time of their being Diſobedient ; their 
Diſobedience going before their Impriſonment, g. d. they were cil- 
obedient then, they are in Priſon now. + Viz. In the days of Noah, 
when they were upon Earth. / Would not believe what Noah told 
them in God's Name, nor be brought to Repentance by his Preach- 
1Ng. m Not always, but for a determinate time, iz. 120. Fears ; 
tr hich term being expired, there was no hope left tor them that 
they ſhould be ſpared. 'n z. e. God in his Patience, and long-ſutfer- 
ing. 0 For the Repentance and Reformation of their rebellious Ge- 
neration, þ Till the 120 years were run out, and, the Ark, which 
wa: a preparing for the Security of him, and his Family, were fin1ſ1- 
ed. qt. e. Eight Perſons, Noah, and his Wite, iis three Sons, and 
their Wives. r Either, 1. by Water, is here put for in, as Rom. 4. 
tr. that believe, though they be not circumciſed, The ſame Greek 
Prepotition is uſed as here, and the words may be read, by, or through, 
Or rather in Uncircumcifion ; for Uncircumciſion was not the cauſe 
or means of their believing. Sce the like uſe of this Particle, .2 
Pet. 3. 5. Thus ſaved in the Water, is as much as notwithſtanding 
the Water, or the Water not hindring; ſo 1 Tim. 2. 15. ſaved in 
Child-vearing, where the ſame Prepoſition is uſed : Or, 2. by Wa- 
ter; the Water, which drowned the World, lifting up the Ark and 
laving Noah and his Houſhold, Queſt. Doth not this Place counte- 
nance the Papiſt's Limbus, or the place where the Souls of the Old- 
Teftament Fathers were reſerved (as they pretend ) till Chriſt's 
coming-in the Fleſh ? Anſw. No: For, 1. The Spirits here ment!1- 
oned were diſbedient, which' cannot be ſaid of the Fathers of the 
Old-Teſtament, who were true Believers. 2. The Spirits here imen- 
tioned, are not ſaid to be delivered out of Priſon, but only that 
Chriſt by his Spirit Preached to them, and to his preaching to 
them, their diſobedience is oppoſed. 3. According to the Papiſts, 
Nah and his Family muſt he in their Limbus, whereas they are op- 
poſed to thoſe diſobedient Spirits ro whom Chriſt 1s ſaid to 
Preach. 

21 * The like figure / whereunto 7 ever baptilm, 
doth alſo now ſave us x, (not the putting away of 

the filth of the fleſh x, but the anſwer y of a good 
conſcience = towards God a) by the reſurrection of 


Teſus Chriſt b. 
\ Gr. the Antitype. Twice this word occurs in Scripture, once 
Heb. 9. 24. where it ſignifies ſimply a Type, er Exemplar, or Re- 
preſentation ; and here, where it implies either the likeneſs or co- 
reſpondence of one Type with another in ſignifying the ſame thing ; 
ſo that here may be two Types, the Deliverance of Noah and his 
Houſhold in the Flood, and Baptiſm, whereof the former was a 
Type of the latter, yet ſo as both repreſent the Salvation of the 
Church, in that as the Waters of the Flood lifting up the Ark, and 
ſaving Noah's Family ſhut up in it, ſignified the Saivation of the 
Church : So likewiſe Baptiſm ſignifies the Salvation of thoſe 
tiat are in the Church (as in an Ark) from that common Deſtrudti- 
on which involves the reft of the World : Or, it ſignifies the Truth 
it ſelf, as anſwering the Type or Figure ; and thus the temporal 
Salvation of Noah, &c. from the Flood, in the Ark, was the Type, 
and the Eternal Salvation &f Believers by Baptiſm, is the Antitype, 
or Truth figured by it. Our Tranſlation ſeems to favour the for- 
mer. # ji. e. The ſaving eight Perſons by Water, q. d. the Salvati- 
on of Believers now by Baptiſm, anſwers to the Deliverance of Nouh 
then; and ſo this Relative, whereunto, anſwers to the foregoing 
Sentence, as its Antecedent. « Viz. with an Eternal Salvation, in 
anſwer to the temporal Deliverance of Nah by Water; and that 
not only as.it is a Sign, but a Seal whereby the Spirit of God con- 
firms in the Hearts of Believers the Faith of their Juſtification pur- 
chaſed by Chriſt's Death, and witnefſed by his Reſurre&tion, Rom. 
4. 25. x Not meerly the waſhing of the Body with Water, or the 
external part of Baptiſm, which can of it ſelf have no further et- 
fe, than other bodily Wafhings have, viz. to cleanſe the Fleſh. 
And ſo he anſivers an Obje&tion which might be made, How Eap- 
tiſm can be ſaid to ſave us, when ſo many periſh who are baptized, 
by declaring, as follows, what it is in Baptiſm which 1s ſo effectual, 
y The Greeh word here uſed, is ſeveral ways rendred, and fo this 
place differently interpreted : The beſt Tranſlation ſeems to be, 
either, 1. The Petition of a good Conſcience, and then 1t notes the 
effe of Baptiſm, viz. that holy Confidence and Security wherewith 
a Conſcience, ſprinkled with the Blood of Chriſt, addrefles it ſelf 
to God in Prayer, as a Father, Thus the word is taken, Matth. 15. 
23. and 16. I. Rom, 10. 20. Or rather, 2. the Stipulation, which 
by a Metonymy is taken for the Anſwer, Promiſe, or Reſtipulation 
required, and this agrees with our Tranſlation. In Baptiſm there 
is a ſalemn Covenant, or mutual Agreement between God and the 
Party baptized, wherein God offers, applies, and ſeals his Grace, 
ſtipulating or requiring the Party's acceptance of that Grace, and 
devoting himſelf to his Service; and when he out of a good Con- 
ſcience doth engage, and promiſe this, which is to come up to the 
terms of the Covenant, that may properly be called the Anſwer of 
a god Conſcience. It ſeems to be an Alluſion to the manner of Bap- 
tizing, where the Minter ask'd the Party to be baptized, con- 
cerning his Faith in Chriſt, and he accordingly anſwered him ; Doſt 
thou believe ? I believe. Doft thou renounce the Devil, Xc? TI renounce, 
See Ads 8.37. x A Conſcience purified by Faith from internal and 
ſpiritual Defilements (in oppoſition to putting away the filth of the 


\ GEN. Jo7s 


3nd 8. 18. 


*EPh. 5.26 


PETER | (Nats | 


Fleſh) which only tinccrely anfwers to vil God pagures iN ht, 
tiilm. 4 7.e, In the pretence of God, with whe: Comorot fant 
to do 1n Baptiſm, and who alone i© the fudoc ot Content, and 
knows whether it be good and fincer, Or not Cr, fiir fs God 1 
to God ; and then it relates to ano, and wintics thy ant er | 
Engagement of Conſcience to be made to God. 6 = 
words are to be joyned to the Verb {no and the rot he We rd 
to be read in a Parcenthefis, according? to ove V7an! let fon 
the ſenſe is, That Baytiſm ſaves vs by the Faith or Ul Leh 
rection, or by Virtue derived from Chriitt's lojuroolth nr, wi 
which is comprehended his Death and Sutferings; or the fe 7 
joyned to anſwer, ſupplying wich is, and then without w Parcin 
fis, the Text runs thus, the Ariner of 2 ood Oar cen nn ich 


by the Relurre&ion of Chriſt, and the meaning is, That #4 Afr: 
a £ood Conſcience towards God, 15 by tlic Refi in of tt; 
as the Foundation of our believing the Promiſe 09 1 on nete ane 
Free-Grace, in as much as it teſtifics God to br ©i; {rite tos 


Sm, and Chriſt to have tully overcome 5.n, the Devil, 7c. For 
\\ hcre this Faith is not, there can be ng 396 Conſcience, nor any 
fincere anſwering what God requircs Oi us in Baptiſm: If Men do 
not believe the Satisfattion of Divine Juſtice by Chriſt's Death 
which 1s evidenced by his ReſurreRion, they will not cloſe with 
the Offers of his Grace, nor engage themſelyes to ke the Lord's, Sec 
I Cor. 15, 17, and this Epiſtle, Chap. 1. 3. 

22 \Vho is gcie into heaven, and 
hand. v! God, * angels, and authorirics, 
c, beinz made d tubject unto kim. 

* Sec Rom. 8. 34. /leb. 1.3. This 1s added as another ground cf 
Faith, and 4 good Conſcience. © Sce Rom. 8. 338. Fjb. 
Col. 1. 16. and 2. 10. d Iz. By his Father, to whom tn: wwe! 
ing all things to Chriſt 1; cliewhere aſcribed, 1 Cor. i 5, 20. 7 


22, Heb. 2. 8. 
CHAT FF. 


The Sufferings of Chriſt, and the future Judgment aunt End of all this: 
mull teach us tn ceale from Sin and l19e to God, in $2 foty, P;uy9 
Love, and a right imploying the Gift s avd Ann ioations which ewry 
one hath received, i=——1ii. Th {ot of > jaith;! 7 to Golf: 
Afiidion, and this is hc ps for £# m, int thin tw 37% ,* mof (5 ; 
as evil-doers but as Chiiſtians, ; 
ment now begins from his own 6/44 Jt os aa Seroutt 
pee an heavier Judgment, 17 -—--— 1... 


-, RE. SJ 
iS.0N the right 


aw} 5 Os, 
and power: 


+ 3-2 a». - f 


x 
Ld "2 F % ” . < 
4 Cr ———— * # $7, F; j E [ 
z _ P 


Oraſmuch then e as Chrilt hath fi:ftores 

in the fleſh g, arm your ſolves 
ſame mind þ.; 1o : he thai hath iuttercd in 
&, hath ceaſed from i; 7. 

e The Apoſtle having in the former Chapter exhorted Belicyers 
to patient bearing oft Atriictions by the Example of Chrift, «er. 
18. proceeds in this to perſwade them to improve the Crofles they 
bore outwardly to inward Mortification. Chriſt's Death 1s propoted 
to us in Scripture as an Exemplar both of eternu! Mortrfication in 
bearing Reproaches, Perſecutions, g&rc. this the Arofih protecute: 
in the former Chapter ; and of internal in the defitovin> the Boo « 
of Sin; this he exhorts to in this Chapter, and indeed dr.1%% < 1 5 
Argument from Chrift's Death, not only as the exemplar. ut 
ficient and meritorious Cauſe of our Mortification, and which hat: 
a real Influence upon it, in that Chriſt by his Death did rot only 
merit the Pardon of Sin, but the giving the Spirit, wherchy Corrun- 
tion might be deſtroyed, and our Natures renewed. f iz. not Ji. 
ly as an Exemplar of Patience and Submiſſion tc the Will of God 
but for the taking away of Sin, both in the Guilt and Power of > 
and that he might be the Procurer as well as Pattern of our Morti. 
fication. g In his Human Nature, as Chap. 3.18. þ Streyosthen 
and fortifie your ſelves againſt all Temptations, and unto the Morti- 
fication of your Luſ}s with the Conſideration of theſe Ends. 2nd 
the mighty Efhcacy of Chriſt's Death, He ſufferinz in his Fleſh, 3. e. 
in his Human Nature, that you might fuffer in our Fleſh, 7, e. in 
your ſinful corrupt Nature : Or, (which comes to the fame) with 
the ſame Mind which Chriſt had, who, in his Death, aimed not on- 
ly at the Pardon of your Sin, but the Deftruction of it, and the 
Renovation of your Natures : Or, arm your [elves with the ſame Mind. 
viz. a purpoſe of ſuffering in the Fleſh, z. e. ot dving {piritually with 
Chriſt in the Mortification of your Fleth, K-77. 5. 5, 5. as Chriſt diced 
and ſuffered in the Fleſh, fo reckon that you, by the Virtue of hi: 
Death, muſt dic to Sin, and crucifie veur beth, with its Aﬀection: 
and Lufts, Gal. 5. 24.or elſe what the /are Mind 1s, he declares in 
the following clauſe. 7 Or rather, t/.4t the Greeb word here ſeems 
rather to be explicative than caſual. #4 7. 2, The Old Man, his cor- 
rupt Fleſh (Fleſh being taken here in a different ſenſe from what it 
was in the former part of the Verſe) he that 15s tpiritually dead wit!; 
Chriſt, whoſe Old Man is crucified with hum. / From finnins willins!y 
and delightfully, and yiclding himſelf up to the Power of Sin: com- 
pare Rom. 6. which explains this : what Peter here call> 'uffering 
the Fleſh, Pauls there calls a being dead to Sin, ver. 2, 11. and what 
Peter calls a ceaſing from Sin, Paul calls a living no longer in Sin, ver. 2. 
and a being free from it, ver.7. And this may be the Mind, or Thought 
with which they were to be armed, that they being dead with Chritt 
to Sin, ſhould not live any longer in it; having their Fleſh crucified 
ſhould not indulge its Aﬀettions and Luſfts. : 


2 * That he no longer ſhould live the relt of }ys 
time in the fleſh 7, to the luſts oft men », bur to the - 
will of God o. 


m i. e. In the Body, meaning his natural. Life. Fleſh is here ta 
ken, in a third ſenſe different trom the two formet ; fo Gal. 2. 20, 
Phil. 1. 22. n By the Luſts of Men, he means the corrupt Defires 
and ſinful ways of carnal Men, to which they were not to conform 
themſelves, or make them the Rule of their living, Rom. 12. 2. 
1 Cor. 3. 3. and Col. 2. 8. Tit. 1. 14. o The holy Will of God re- 
vealed fo us in his Law (which is the Rule by which we are to walk) 
in oppoſition to the Luſts of Men; we are to live not as Mcn wou'ld 
have us, but as God commands us, 


| Hot . 
IKxcwile w 
1 t 


. FO) 


* Rom. 


* Ak 10 


42. 
1 COr. 15. 
Sl, 52, 


han. LV. k. 


to have * 
" | 


> For the time paſt of our lives may ſuſtice p us 9 
wrought the will of the Gentiles 7, when we 
walked /inlatdvioutnels z, lufts, excels of wine. revel- 
lines z. 7querings x, and ahominadble I[dolatries y. 

þ The Apoſtle doth notmmcan by this Exprefſion meerly that they 
ſhould forbear their former Luſts, out of a Saciety * and Wearineſs, 
as having had their fill of them, but ſtir them up to Holineſs by 
minding them of their former finful Lite, g. d. ye are concerned 
to run well now, when ve have for fo great a part of your time run 
Kron. It is a figure whereby he mitigates and Jenifics the ſhafp- 
neſs &1 his Reproot tor their tormer {inful Life : See the like, Faek. 
44-5, and 45. & Mark 14.41. g Some Copies read ye, and that 
aurecs with the following Verſe, where the ſecond Perion is made 
ule of, Or if we read according to our Tranſlation, #4, 1t 1s 4 b1- 
cue called 4noacencfrs, whereby Perer afiumes to himſelf 1n com- 
mon with them what vet in his own Perſon he was never guilty of, 
as Tia. 6.4. 6, 7 Dan. 9. 5, tc. or elſe it may be an Enallagy of 
the Perion, whereby the firſ? is put for the ſecond. r Viz. thoſe 
that were profane and ipznorant oi God and Chriſt, and fo 1t 1s the 
ſame as the Luſts of Men, Ter. 2. / Had our Converſation, as Fph. 
2. 3. walking being taken for the Courſe of Man's Lite ; and ſome- 
t1mCes in an evi} way, as 2 Pet. 2, 10. and 3. 3- Jude 16.18. and 
{ometimes in a good, as Lube 1. 5, t Eſpecially outward Acts, here 
fet in diſtintion from Lafls, which fignite thoſe inward motions 
Tom which thoſe outward Defilements procced.. u Unſeatonable 
and Juvuricus featiin?, Rom. 13, 13. Gal, $5. 2, x Compotations, 
or mcetin's for Drinkings, Prov. 23. 3O. Tia. 5. 11. 22. y Neſt. 
Why doth Peter charge the 72ws with Idolatrv, who generally 
kopt themſelves from it aiter the B.:by/oniſh Captivity ? Anjw. 1. 
Thougli mot did, ict all might not. 21y, It is a fort of Idolatry 
to cat things ſacrificed to Idols, which many of the 7ews being 
diſperied amdnz the Idolatrous Gentiics, and being invited by them 
to their Idol-Featts, m1ziit poffihly do ; and, being under the Temp- 
tation of Poverty, mi. ht too tar conform themſelves to the Cu- 
ſtoms of the Nations amonz v hich they were. 3ly, Probably this 
Idolatry mi-ht be the Worthip of Angels, frequent among the Gen- 
tiles, panicularly the Co/riftans tnhabiting a City of Phrygia, which 
was a part of Aj: where many 7ews were, Chap. t.1. 4ly, The 
Churches to which he vwrote might be mgde up of Fews and Gentiles, 
and the Apotiic may, by a Synechdoche, aſcribe that to all in com- 
mon, winch vet 1> to be underitood only of a part. 

+ \Wherein they think it. ſtrange 5, that you run 
o not with them to the ſame excels þ of rior, {ſpeak- 
ing ev c of you. 

7 Gr. Are Strangers, 1. e, carry themſelves as Strangers, wondring 
{as at ſome new thing) at the c:1ange the Goſpel hath made in you, 
and your no more conforming your ſelves to their wicked Courſes ; 
they ſeem to be in anotncer World, when among you. @ This ſeems 
to ſiznine the eagerneſs and vehemency of theſe Gentiles in pur- 
ſuing their Luſts, and may perhaps have ſome reſpect to the Feaſts 
of Bacchys, to which they were wont madly to run, and there 
commit the Ahominations mentioned, vey. 3. b Or, Profuſeneſs, or 
Confif19n of Riot of Luxury, and then it ſuits well with that heap 
of Sins before-mention<d, whereof this ſeems to be comprehenſive. 
c Gr. Bliſpheming, or ſpeaking evil, of you is added by the Tranſla- 
tors : This may therefore he underitood, not only of their ſpeaking 
cvil of Believers, as void of Humanity, and Enemies to civil Soct- 
ety, but of God and the Chriſtian Religion, as a dull, moroſe, ſower 
wav, and which they could not embrace without renouncing al! 
Mirth and Cheartulncls. 

5 Who ſhall give account 4 to him that is ready 
e to * Judee the quick and the dead f. 

a Of their evil-ſpeaking as well as of other Sins, Jude 15. Tt 1s 
a Metaphor taken from Stewards giving account to their Maſters, 
Matth. 18.23. Luke 16. 2. e Not only prepared for it, but at 
nand to do it, Fames s. o. f Thoſe that ſhall be alive at Chriſt's 
comins, rnd thoſe that diced betore, but then ſhall be raiſed, and 
brought to Judgment, Hereby he intimates, for their Comfort, 
that though their Enemies, and 11]-Willers might out-live them, yet 
they ſha!l not eſcape God's Judgment, 

6 For, tor this cauſe * was the Goſpel preached al- 
{ ro them rhar are dead 2. that they might be judg- 
ed according ro men in the fizcfh þ, but live according 
to God in the ſpirit z. | 

2 Either, x. ſpiritually dead, i. e. dead in Sin, viz. then when the 
Goſpel was preached to them: Or 21y, naturally dead, wiz. when the 
Apoſtle wrote this Epiſtle. The Verb are, not being in the Greek, 
the words may be underſtood cither way, by ſupplying were, ac- 
cording to the former Expoſition, or are, according to the latter, 
which our Tranilators favour. Sec the ike, Ruth. 1. 8. þ Either, 
I. that they might be judged or condemned in the Flelh, 7. e. that 
their Old Man, and carnal Converſation according to Men walking 
in their carnal Luſts, might *e deſtroyed and aboliſhed ; and then 
to be judged in the Fleſh is of the ſame import as to ſuffer in the 
Fleſh, wer, 1. to be dead to Sin, Rom. 6. 1, 2. Or, 2. That they 
might be judzed or condemned in the Fleſh according t9 Men, 
and fo far as they could reach, not only by Cenſures, Reproaches, 
and cvil-ſpeeches, but even death it ſelf, as it had fallen out already 
to Stephen, Fames, &c. i That they might live a fpiritual life in 
their Souls according to the Will of God, and an eternal Lite with 
him. To live in the Stirit, to the Will of Gad, to walk in newneſs 
of T.ife, &c. are Phraſes of a hke import in the Language of the 
Apoitles. According to the latter E::poſition of the former clauſe, 
the Apoitle ſzems in the whole to remove the Scandal of theſe 
Comiitians being reproach2d, and condemned by Unbelievers for 
Moir firikncG in Religion, and Non-conformity to the World, by 
feliing them. that their Condition was not fingular, but fo it had 
fared with others before them (though now dead) to whom the 
Golpei was prexched, with the ſame Event as to the Judsment of 
worldly men wi» cenſured and condemned them, and yet with the 
Yn;c liope of Fruit and BeneSt, 4jz, that though they were condemed 


PET EM 


S 


Cha 
by Men in the Fleſh, or as to their outward Man, yet as to their 
Souls {meant here by Spirits) they might live a holy ſpiritual Lite : 


Life to God 1n this World, endingin a Life with him in the as. s 


I, 


. 7 But * the end of all things # isat hand 7: + Bc» 


ye therefore lober », and watch 7 unto prayer 0, 
k The laſt Judgment which will put an end to all the Eyil: a 


* 


well as good things -of this Worid. 1 Sce Fames 5. 8, 9. m Both 2 | 
in mind, prudent, n.oderate, 2 Cor. 5. 13. Tit. 2.6. and in Bog + 

7 n The word fignities both $0: Ma 
briety, in oppoſition to Drunkenneſs, 1 Theſſ. 5. 6, 8. and Witch. « 


temperate 1n meats and drinks, gc. 


fulneſs, 2 Tim. 4. 5. and this ſignification agrees beſt with this Plire 
the former being implied in the word /»ber. o The end tor whic!; 
they ſhould be fober and vigilant, viz. that they might obſerve ever! 
ſeafon fit tor Prayer, and might ſtill keep themlelves in a pravins 
frame. = 


s And above all things p have fervent charity ,; 
among your ſelves, for * charity || hall cover the mul- 
titude of fins 7. 

þ See the like exprefſion, Fam. 5. 12, and on the ſame occaſion 
Col. 3.14. q Not only labour after Charity &ligently and carey). 
ly, but let it be fervent, intenſe, ſtrong. r Partly by preventin- 
Anger, Railings, Revellings, Contentions, that they break not out. 
and partly by repreffing, concealing, pardoning them when they dg 
break out, 1 Cor. 13. 7. ſee Jum. 5. 20. : 


9 * Uk holpiraliry / one to another F withouz + + 


grudging 7. | 

/ Chriftian Hoſpitality in entertaining Strangers, thoſe eſpecizlly 
that are brought to necd your kindnets by ſuffering for the Goſpel, 
t Or murmuring, either at the expence you make, or the carriate 
of thoſe ye entertain, q. d. ule Hoſpitality willingly, freely, checr- 
fullv, Rom. 12. 8. and 2 Cor. 9. 7. 

10 * As every man hath received the gift z, ev 
/o miniſter x the ſame one to another, as f good tier 
ards y of the manifold grace £ of God. 

u Any pitt, office, faculty, or ability, whereby he may be ſervice- 
able to the good of others, all which are received of God, 1 C97. 12, 
11. Eph. 4.7. 
not liſting himſelf up above others upon the account of his Gifts, 
but remembring he hath received them, and is a Steward to dit- 
penſe them. y And therefore faithful in diſtributins his Lord's 
Goods, 7 By Grace, he means the ſame as by Gifrs before, and 
ſo by manifold Grace, the various gifts given to them of God, 1 C:r, 
I2. 4, 5, 6. 

11 *It any man ſpeak «@, /et him ſpeak as the ora- 
cles of God b, if any man miniſter c, /et him do it 
4s of the ability 4 which God giveth ; that God in 
all things e may be glorified. through Jeſus Chriſt f; 
To whom be praiſe and dominion for ever, and 
ever, Amen: 

a Viz. Authoritatively, and by way of Office, as a publick Teacher 
in the Church; though this may be accommodated to private Chri- 
ſtzans in their charitative Inſtruftions of others, yet it ſeems eſpe- 
ciaily meant of teaching Officers. 6 This relates not only to the 
manner of ſpeaking, that it be with Faith in that Word the Preach- 
er ſpeaketh, and a due reverence of it, but to the matter likewiſe, 
that he Preach nothing but the pure Word of God, and do not 
obtrude upon the Hearers, the Fancies, Figments, or Traditions of 
Men inſtead of the Oracles of God, c This may be underſtood ei- 
ther, 1. More particularly of the work of Deacons, A&s 5. who 
were to ſerve Tables, ver. 2. diſtribute the Alms of the Church, 
and take Care of the Poor; Or, 2. More generally of any Miniſtry 
in the Church diſtin& from that of Teaching (of which he ſpake be- 
fore) as the diſpenſing of Sacraments, exerciſe of Diſcipline, 09. 
d i. e. Not remiſly and coldly, but diligghtly and ſtrenuouſly, and 
with his might (as far as God enable him) this being to do it faith- 


'tully, which 1s eſpecially required in a Steward, 1 Cor. 4, 2. e In all 


your Gifts, and the Communications of them, q. 4d, God doth not 
adorn you with his Gitts ſo as to bereave himſelf of his Glory, but 
that you ſhould give him the honour of them. f From whom ye 
tave received the Giffs, Eph. 4. 8. and by whom you are enabled to 
slorifie God, and by whom alone what ye do, can be accented of 
God. See Eph. 3. 21. 


12 Beloved, think it not ſtrange g concerning the 
* fiery trials þ which is to try you z, as though tome 
{trange thing had happened unto you. 

2 Be not offended or troubled at- Perſecution, as at 2 thing un- 
uſual or never heard of; it-implies that they thould reckon upon 1t 
before-hand, that they might not be ſurpriſed with it when it comes. 
The ſame word is uſed vey. 4. h The heat or burning, whereby he 
means great afflitions, eſpecially thoſe that are for right-outnels lake, 
as appears ver, 14. Which are often compared to Fire, as being alike 
painful and grievous to them, as Fire is to Mens Bodics ; and bec.vle 
men are tried by them as Metals are by Fire, P/z/. 65. 10. 1/4. 48. 19. 
; This he adds as the reaſon why they ſhould! not think firinze 0! 
Perſecutions, viz. Becauſe they were ſent by Gcd, not for their De- 
{tru&tion, but tor the trial and exercite of therr Grace:, 


13 But rejoice # inaſmuch as * ye are partakers of 


[ 


Chriſts ſufterings /, that when his glory {hall 55 


a 4 . SF > 
revealed 7, ye may be glad alſo with cxceculng } 


OV 7. 
] Þ Be ſo far from being offended at your Suferinge, 45 ratner ©0 
reckon that there is great matter of rejovcing in them ; ter onthe, 
trya/s makes them tolerable, but your being jt them parraners of 
Chrift's Sufferings, makes them comfortable. / z. e. Ye lunci, i. 
Chriſt did, for the Confeſfion of the Truth, and fs ye are fuch 
kind of Sufferers as Chriſt was. 2. As Members cf Cirift, VC WNET 
thoſe evils which are laid out for thoſe that b0tviz 5o ey 
keg. 


\c 
AC 


x Diſpenſe and Communicate modeſtly and humbly, * 


P. LY, 


5% &, 


k N) 1 
$1 


[ J 


' , 

+ uy 

i Ot} » 
vil + 


[_ 
2 

pl 
- 


1 Cor, 4 


Þ 
% +. 
' "I 


Ive is ' 


F Rom.12, 
6.78, 
1 Cor, 4, 


I% 


+1 Cor. 
15+ 
Chap. 1 


' 
o 


F 2 COfe 4 


2 +1 Cot. 3: 
13. 


. Chap. 1" 


— 
_- 
— 
— 
cc 
ad 
- 
Lon 
A, 


Chap. LV: I. 


Thefſ. 2- 3. - 3. Ye arc hereby conformed to Chriſt your Head. 4- 


Ye partake ot the influence of what Chritt ſuffered, for the Sau | 


Aification »f your Sufferings, ſee Phil. 3. 10. mViz. Athis fecond 
5 8 coming, Chap. 1. 7. Col. 3. 4. and 2 7iejf. 1.7. n A Joy without 
any the lea!t mixture of Pain or Gricf. The rejoycing of the Saints 
here is mixed with pai and heavinels, but fhall be pure hereafter 3 
they rejoyce in hope now, but in cnjoyment then. 

14 * If ye be reproached tor the name of Chriſt, 
I. happy arc ye 0: for rhe ſpirit of glory and of God 
Chap: 3 þ reſteth q upon you : On their part he 71 evil ſpo- 
bs "7 ken of /, but on your part he is glorified 7. _ 

2 V:z. Becauſe of the Spirit's dwelling 1n you, which 1s both the 
means and evidence of your Happinels, - p 7. 2. The glorious Spirit 
of God, or that Spirit of God which is likewiſe a Spirit of Glory ; 
as heins not only glorious in himſelf, but a glory to them in whom 
he dwellz, and the cauſe of their future Glorifcation. This he adds 
in counter ballance to the reproaches they ſuffered tor the Name of 
Chriſt, 4. d. it isa greater Glory to you to have the Spirit of Chriſt 
divelling in you (whereof your patient bearing Reproaches and Per- 
ſ:cutions is an Arzument) then all the Calumnies and Obioquics 
wherewith your Enemies load you, can be a ſhame to you, 9 In al- 
lufion to Ju. 11, 2. dwells in you, and fhall abide with you for ever. 
John 14. 15. Not leaving you in your ſufferings. r Either Chrift, or 
rather the Spirit, {The Reproaches your Enemies cait upon you, 
reach that Spirit himſelf . that dwells in you, when they revile that 
£04 Confeſſion into which the Spirit led you, deride the Conloia- 
t12n5 he gives you, and ſpeak evil of your perſons, who are the Tem- 
ples in which he dwells. # Viz. by your patience and conſtancy 1n 
your Suffcrings, which ſhews forth the power of that Spirit which reſt- 
cth upon you, in that he works ſo mightily in you, as to enable you 
to bear what without the aſſiſtance of his Grace were intolcrable. 

* Chap. 22 15 But * let none of you ſuffer « as a murderer, or 
29, 2s 4 thict; or as an evil doer x, or as 4 buly body 1n 
other mens matters y. 

u Keep clear of thoſe Crimes which may expoſe you to ſuffering 
»y the hand of Juſtice, and carry your ſelves fo innocently, that 
you may never ſuffer from men but unjuſtly. x Either this 1s a 
general term, denoting them that offend againſt any publick Law ; 
or, it may ſignify thoſe that are guilty of any offence againſt the 
Laws, tho lefs than Murder or Thett. y Either a covetous Perfon 
that looks with an evil eye upon what others have, and is ready to 
catch it as he can; or, rather, one that goes beyond the bounds of 
is own Calling, and invades the Callings of others, pragmarically 
intrudins into their buſineſs, and making himſelt a Judge of thoſe 
things which belong not to him. Some Nations are ſaid to have 
puniſhed thoſe that were buſy through Idleneſs, impertinently d1li- 
gent in other mens matters, and negligent of their own. Howe- 
ver, if this pragmaticalneſs did not expoſe the Chriſtians to the 

Laws of the Gentiles, yet it might make them odious, and expole 
them to their reproaches, ; : 

16 Yer if any man ſuffer 2s a Chriſtian 2, let him 

not be aſhamed a, but let him glorify God on this 
behalt b. 
- If his Chriſtianity be his only Crime ; and the cauſe of his 
Sut!:rings. a See 2: Tim. 2. 12, b j.e. On the account of his 
Sufferinss ; let him bleſs God for keeping him from ſuffering as an 
Evi!-docr, and for counting him worthy to ſuffer for Chriſt's ſake, 
AF; 5.41. as well as for giving him Patience and Courage under 
Sufferi1n”s. 
* Mal. 2.5. 17 For the time © zs come * that judgment d muſt 
+Luke 23. begin ar the houſe of God e; and Þ if zz firſt begin at 
31. us, || what ſhall the end he f of them that obey not 
| Luke 19. the goſpel of God ? 
yo c Or Seaſn; viz. that which is fixed by God : The AfiiQtions 
that befals God's People, come in the time appointed, and ſo are 
never unſe:ſonable. Or, this may imply, that what the Prophets 
ſpoke in their time, Ta. 10. 12. Jer. 25. 29. doth eſpecially agree 
to Goſpel-times, viz. that Judgment begins at the Houſe of Gog. 
4 Viz. Temporary, and for £o0d, in oppoſition to the deſtrutive 
Judgment he implies in the latter part of the Verſe. He means all 
thoſe Afﬀfiictions God brings upon his Children for their Corre&ion, 
Trial. Inſtruction, Martification, 1 Cor. 11.31, 32. & The Church 
of God, and the Members of it, called here his Houſe, as 1 Tm. 3. 


»T,++! 
y 4 aH%SY 


15. leh. 3. 5. and typified by the material Houſe or Temple ot 


God under the Old Teſtament. f How miſerable ? how dreadful 
will be the end of all thoſe that would not obey the Goſpel ? 1m- 
p!yinz, that they ſhall be in a much worſe condition if God take 
th-im in hand. If he ſpare not his Children, much leſs will he his 
Encmics, If the one tip of the Cup of God's Wrath, the other 
ſhall wring out the Dregs and drink them, Plal. 75.8. 

*Prov ic, 15 * And if the righteous ſcarcely g be ſaved, 

Y wher: fall rhe ungodly and the finner þ appear z © 

g Vith inuch Jaboui and difficulty, through many Tribulations, 
AT. 14. 22. a3 going in the Narrow way, and entring 1n at the 
Strait Gate, Matth. 7.i3, 14. þ Unbelicvers and 1mpenitent S1n- 
ners of all ſorts ; both words fiznity the ſme, in oppoſition to the 
R-btons betore mentioned. 7 He ſhall not be able to ſtand in God's 
tndvimnent acainft the S-ntence of Condemnation then to be pro- 
nounced, Pſal. x. <. 4.4, If the Righteous ſcarcely be ſaved, the 
Wicked ſhall certainly periſh. 

ro Wherefore let them that ſuffer & according to 
thumill of God /,* commit m2 the keeping of rheir fouls 
210 biz in well-doing o, as unto a fairhul Creator p. 

L | ;-, An manner of Afﬀition or Perſecution for Righteouſneſs 
(ils, | accoriing to that Will of God, whereby he hath appoint- 
ed them to forer ſuch things, chap. 3. 17. and 1 Treſſ. 3. 3. mM 
©mmond info his hands, or lay up, or entruſt with him as a De 
fofitum, Pal. 31. 5. and Tim. i. 12, #n As the moſt precious 


*7 . >. = * $-£. « *pY 2 ay” _ li. 
inz5 while they live, 21:4 mall to be cared lor when they die; fiat 


 — e— __ of tm. p R — 
c [? Va > Y H =4 f: = NTFfYy oY 
% * *a LA #2 We 


[1 m4 4 _—— Tr ' » 1-5 OI” > Ga e ES A . = — . 
ney may OC FepcArom 591 unter AﬀrtiGtions, ha trom per: ing in 


Death ; or, rather their S27s hege inciudes thur Bod; -. and fo 
committing their Souls, 15 committing their whole telves to God 
0 Not betng deterred trom weii-doing by the ev1i:- ther, {ter but 
by pertevering in flolinels notwithftanding their Aﬀiictions, makin: 


it appear to the 1att, that they do not tuffer. as evii-door:, p O; . 
who 4. Creater, 15 abl: to RCEp wWi't they commet fo hin. andthe 
ing taithtul in his Pronutes certainty will do:. == 
' S {£ \ J 
CHEF Y: 
' . f. p » 1 o Fo ” - 
Flacys muſt auly fred the fock of G f, to fwch a Cromn of Glary is pre- 
mijed, Im}. The ) lg mus} he {lt iut % ot; Ht and £71 "71, V a! a C<t " 


ry one muſt caſt his care on od, 5-7, The (ubiiity and proces of 
Satan we muſt waTrc againjt, His piayer, for them, and Doxolo: y, 
Mutual Salutations, and the Anrgito(:cal Benedidion, 8 1 4. 
; "11 EF elders q that are ams 5 vou-T exhort, who 
£ am allo * an elder 7, anJ.4 witneſs / of the ſut- *Phi'em: 
rerings of Chriſt, and allo + x partaker of the glory T5* 6 
- c _ _ - Iw y 
that ſhall he revealetd 7. 
q Viz. Thofe that were ſuch, not ſo much by Ace as by Oe 
as appears by his exhorting them to f-ed the Flock, t, 2. he Meds 
the ordinary Minifters of the Churches among the Felicvin, Yon 
r Elder is a gencral Name compreheading under it even & fg{1 ic; 
tiemſelves, who were © Elders, thouvh cvery Eſter were not i 
Apoſtle. { Either, 1. In his Do#trine, in which ho held for! 
Chriſt's Sufferinzs whereat he had been an Ever. itnofe, i v "TI 
reſpeR the Apoſtics are often called iy{trefſes, Duke 24. 32. 1 110 
22. and 2. 32. Or, 2. In his Example, in that he by 13: vr 
much for Chriſt, did pive an ample Teitimony to the reality 0 
Chriſt's Sufferinzs, and that Chriſt had indeed ſufercd ; or, both 
may well be comprehended. * Viz. at Chrift's laft comin, (9:2. 1. 
5. and 4. 13. and Rom: 8. 17, 18. fo - 
2 Feed # the flock x of Gol || which is amons vo: 
y, taking the overfigat 2 zherecf rot by contra) 
2, but willingly 'b; not for filthy lucre ©, bur of a 3-2 5 
ready mind &. | 
# Teach and Rule, atth. 2. 6. Foh. 21. 15, 16, 7. AF. 25 
28. x The Church, » Which is with you, or committed to ve uz 
Charge; intimating that the Flock, not being their own, they 
were to g1ve an account of it to him-that had f-t them over it. 
{ Or, Being Biſhops ; or a&mg as b:ſÞ»ps over ir, i. e. ſuperintend- 
ing, inſpe&ing, and watching over it with all care, 4A. 20. 28, 25. 
a Not meerly becauſe ye mutt : what men do out of compultion 
they do more {lightly and perfunttorily, as thote that would not 
do it 1f they could help it; fee the like cxpreifion, 2 Cer. g. 7. 
b Chearfully and freely, as Exod. 36. 2. Pal. 54. 5, compare 1 Cor, 
9. 17. ' c Not out of Covetouſneſs, or a defizn of makin- 2 94imn 
of the Work; it being a ſhameful thing tor a Shepherd to feed 
the Sheep our of love to the Fleece, fec Tit 1, 7. and x 7 3 2: 
8. d Out of a good affeftion to the Welfare of the Flock, in op- 
poſition to the private gain before mentioned. He doth not do h's 
Work freely, and of a ready mind, who is cither-driven to it by 
Neceſſity, or drawn by Covetoutne is. Eng 
3 Neither as ||being * lords e over Ga {'s her”. mo £ 
bur + being enſamples - to the flock. ws 
e Not exerciſing any ſuc!: Lord!Iip or Dominion over the Pec- * 8 Cor. 


- 
\3 Wy 


f by 


ple, as Temporal Lords aid Maviftrates exerciſe over theirs Sub- 5 
jets, Matth. 20. 25, 26. 4c. Luke 22. 25, compare 2 Cor, 1. 2 


1 
—_ + * 


f The Lord's Clergy, the ſame as F':ch before ; the Grevb word 5c 
Plural, and ſo it fignifies the ſeveril Churches or Flocks which were 
under the charge of the ſeveral Elders or Paſtorss The Church 
of Iſrael is often called God's Inheritance, which as it were tell to 
him by lot (as the Greeb word fignites) and which was as dear to 
him as mens Inheritances are to them: See Dent. 4. 20. and 9. 29, 
and 3 2+ 9. Pal. 33. 12. and 74. 2. and 78. 71. Accordingly now « 
the Chriſtian Church ſucceeding it, is called God's Inheritance 

and the word Clerus is no where in the New-Teſtzment peculiarly 

aſcribed to Miniſters of the Goſpel. This Title given here to the 

Lord's People, implies a reaſon why the Elders ſhould not lord it 

over them, 77. Becauſe they are fti!l the Lord's Inheritance, and 

not their own ; God having not given them a Eingdom but a Care. 

and ſtill retaining his Right to his People. 2 In HolineG of Life, 
practiſing before their eyes what vou preach to their eais, Phil. 2 
17. and 2 Theſſ. 3. 9. Tit. 2. 7. E 

4 And when the chief Shtepnerd þ ſhall anpnea; 
7, ye ſhall receive & a crown ct gory / that | : 
not awav 2. 

þ The Lord Jeſus Chriſt, the only Prince of Paſtoure, calied th 

great Shepherd of the Sheep, Heb. 13. 20. as here the chief Shovherd 
not only for his ſuper-eminent Dignity over 2?! other Paltor-. 
becauſe of the Power he hath over them, they being ai of ©; 
ſubje& to his Authority, receiving their Charge from him, ; 
erciſing their Office in his Name, and being accountable to him for 
their Adminiſtrations. 7 Sec chup. 1, 7, 12. and 
carry away, viz. from Chrift, who, as the Judge, ſhill award it to 
you. / Either, 4 glorious Crown , or, that Glory which fhall he as 
a Crown to you. It 1s called a Crown of Riprro uy neſs, 275m 6, 
a Crown of Life, Jam. 1. 12. m In oppoiition. fo thoſ C-owns 
which were given to Conquerors in War, and in mublick Game: 
which were made of periſhable Flowers or iferbs. Sec ; 
and x Cr. 9. 25» 


371 41% - Py 
: Z — 
208) 2.0 % 


; p " HY 
44. [ 3. 6 \u A 


s Likewiſe ye younger 7 fabmit Clos ae - 
the elder p, Yea * all of you be fubjeQ one to another 
9, and be clothe] »7 with humility : tor God rofifterh £20 27 


Cs nah erin REO 
the proud, and al elf = > Ik Py tho 499 826) wy 
| cre iferiour to the Cirure 
cers, and then he here pre{criv2s 120 People their Duty, as ne ©2d 


a * 


a tl, Mn (t *. a aw i: WO. _—_ - -- 
done the Miniſters :- oz, rather 035; Hat were younzer in Tears : 
- — 


Chap. V. T. 


* lam. 4. 
IC, 

* P,! 2- 
$. and 5 
2. 
Maifth. s 
25. 

* Luke 27, 
26, 


your Brethren are filling up the meaſure of Suffcrinzs God hath 


and then he pzTeth from the more ſpecial to the general. 
ſujecion he comprehends all tkoſe Ofices which the Younger owe 
fo the Eider; as, to reverence them, take their advice, be guided 
by them, 7/7c. Or, it 7» meer be taken in the former ſenſe, this 
Precept falls in with that of the Apoſtle, Heb. 13. 17.” þ Either 
Elders by Office, who were hikewiſe uſually Elders in Years ; the 
younger ſort heinz more rarely choſen to be Officgrs; or, rather 
Eller in Age. q 1.7. In thoſe mutual Duties which they owe to 
eh other, as Hu ands to Wives, Parents to Children, gc. Thoſe 
that are "upcri-ur to others, yet are not ſo "exempt trom fubjettt- 
on, as rot fy oc ſomes Duty, fee Phil. 2.-3. r Or, raft up, 
or covered with Humility, as with a Grment which 1s put on over 
other Garments, 4. d. Adgrn your ſelves with Humility as with a 
heautitul Garment or Robe. The Mctaphor ot pufting on is fre- 
quent, where mention 1s made of any Grace or Vertuc, AM, 13. 12. 
Eph. 4. 24. Col. 3. 10, 12, 

6 * Eiumble vour ſelves therefore under the migh- 
tv : hand of God, that he may exalt you in due 
time z. 

ft By this he means God's Omnipotence, which ſometimes 1s cal- 
Ied a ſtrong-hand, Ervod. Ze 19. 4 mighty hand, chap. 32, Il. Deut. 3. 
24. the right hand of Power, Matth. 25. 54. By which he 1s able to 
beat down thoſe that are proud and hizh, and to defend or exalt 
thoſe that are humble and lowly. # Gr. in Sean, 4iz, That which 
God ſec: molt it and conducing to his own Glory, and your real 
Well-fare. 

GP © 2 


i 


{ing x all your care y upon him, for he 


* careth for vo 


Az%2 Burden. 1 Your Care for all forts of things, even 
ve ich corre this Life, that Care which wil otherwite cit and 
adr1ine your hears tas the Gre word lire and in FHatth. unports) 
an} he pre ong an tor nenting fo jou 
the aff irs of! his S-rvants, and jn whattoever h-fals them, and takes 
Gil ent ware that no pood thing be wanting to them, Pjal, 84. 11. 
Fl. 4. 6. 

$ * RB» {ober 7, be vizilant 6, becauſe your adver- 
fre c the devil of, as areming Jyon e walketh abour 
{ feekins whom he may devour 2. 

2 Ser chop. 1.13, 40d 4. 7. 4.d. Ye have to do with a mad Ene- 
mv, 4 raving D<vil; ye had need your fſclycs he 1ober;, not only 1n 
Meats and Drinks, G7 but as to the carcs of this Lite, and what- 
foever it is that is apt to infoxicate your minds, and expoic you to 
him. 6 Spiritually watchiul, and circumipeR, careful ot your Sal- 
vation, and aware of Satan's Snares and Temptations, Matth. 24. 
42. and 25.13. and 26. 41. and 1 Theſſ. 5. 6. c Or, that Adverſary 
of vours ; he that contends with you, is Plaintiff againſt you, 
Matth. ©. 24%, Inuke 12. 58, It anſwers to the Reb1ew word Satan, 
Zach. 3.1, d Your Accuſer, he that maligns you, calumniate: 
vou, inforirs againſt you, he is ſo called, Matth. 4. 1. and 13. 39. 
and cl{ewhere, becauſe of his accuſing God to men, Gen. 3. 4, 5. 
and men to Gori. Job 1. 7. and 2, 2. Rev. 12. 10. as well as each 
to other, 7b 8. 44. 7. e. Strong, Fierce, Cruel, eſpecially when 
hunzry, and fecking Fits Prey, and roaring atter it. f Is diligent 
and retiloſe in his attempts, either by circumventing or affaulting 
g Nor Thohtly hurt, but ſwallow up, and utterly 
dc ttrov. by Hale Tr or Ins Infiraments. 

& Whom roll Hed Lit in the faith 7 knowing that 
the time allliftions + are accompliſhed / in your bre- 
thren which are in the world m. 

h By not viding fo his Temntations, Eph, 4. 27. and by em- 
ploying your Spiritual Armour az.inſt him, Eph. 6.11, 12, 13, fc. 
fam. 7. 7 Either, 1. Hold your Faith, perſevering 1n 1t, 
which the Devil would fain bereave you ©, (as Soldiers uſed in 
War to look to their Shields, it being diſkonourable to loſe them) 
and without which yc will never be able to ſtand out againſt the 
Devi!; or, 2. Stedtaft or ſtrong by Faith ; intimating, that Faith 1s 
a Chriſtians greateſt ſtrength, it being by Faith that he engageth the 
Power of God, and Grace of Chrifi on his fide, whereby he comes 


Voir Toe 71h ny. 5, 


. 
Sec Jam. q- 7- 


to be Viorious over all his Enemies, 1 Joh. 5. 4. & Either, 1. The | 


Devil's Temptations, which here he calls Afﬀi:&:ons, becauſe Belie-. come 
' he that had been ſo hold before, to be ſo timerous now? Did this 


vers are Paſſive in them, and count them the greateſt Afﬀidtions ; 
or, rather, 2. Perſecution, which though they come upon them 
immediately from the men of the World, yet it is by the Inſtiga- 
tion of the Devil, the Prince of the World, who hath a principal 
hand in them, and a&ts by men as hs Infiruments: fo that when 
men opprels them, they are to refiſt the Devil, who therchy tempts 
them. They have a Spiritual Enemy to deal with even in Tempo- 
ral Afﬀidions. / Or, fulflled, or perfefed, Either, 1. Others of 


alotted them, for the mortifying of the Fleſh, and conforming 
them to Chriſt their head, as well as you are filling up vours, Col. 
1. 24. Or, 2. He ſpeaks of the community of their Sufferings, 4. d. 
what Afﬀitons ye endure, others endure too, and therefore ye 
ſhould not grudge to ſutter, when ye have fo good Company in 
your Sufferings. m Either tins notes the Sufferings of the Saints to 
be tniverſal, fo as to reach them all, whereſoever they are diſper- 
icd throughout the World ; or, to be ſhort, as being conkned to the 
tmc oy of their abode 1h the World. 


PETE4K 


0 Uinder 


. 


10 But the God of all grace 7 who hath called us 
unto his eternal Glory o by Chriſt Jeſus p, after that 
ye have uttered a while 9g, * make ye perfect, ſta- 
bliſh, ſtrengthen, ſettle you 7. 

n 1,e. The Author and Giver of all Grace, from whom ve have 
received what you have, and expe&t What you want. Thar 
Eternal Glory whereof Believers at the laſt Day ſhall be made par- 
takers, which is called God's Glory, becaule it is that which he hart!; 
promiled to them, and will at laſt put then in pofleffion of, ſee 
ver. I. Rom. 5. 2, and becauſe they ſhall, after a ſort, partake oO 
the Divine Glory which they behold. p For Chriſt's ſake, as the meri. 
tortous caufe of our effettual calling, and by him as the great 4 po- 
ſile ot our Profeſſion, Heb. 3. 1. Or, by Chriſt Feſzs may reter to 
Glory, Chrift being the caute of rheir Glorification as well as Callins, 
q This he adds for their encouragement, that whatſoever they ſut- 
tered would be but ſhort, as Chap 1. ver. 6. and 2 Cor, 4, I7. r 
Either, 1. Perfe# that which is begun, Heb. 13. 20, 21. Stabliſh 


that which 1s right, 2 Thejſ. 2. 6, Strengthen that which is weak, 


ſettle or tound (by a firm union and conjunRion unto Chriſt) that 
which 1s already built, Eph. 3. 17, 18. Col. 1.23. Or, 2. Theſe four 
words may be but different expreffions whereby the Apoſlle ſets 
forth the ſame thing, viz. God's confirming and eſtabliſhing 
thoſe Saints unto their final perſeverance ; and his uſing ſo much va- 
ricty of expreſſions may imply, that it 1s a matter of very great 6+. 
ficulty to hold on our Chriſtian courſe, without failing or coming 
ſhort of the Goal ; and therefore we need ſingular affiſtance fron; 
God to enable us to it. 


11 To him / be glory and Dominion 7 for ever and 


| 


z God concerns himſelf 1n ; 


ever, Amen. 

{ To God. f chap. 4. 11. The Verb be in the Text is not in the 
Greek, and ſo it may be read with a ſupply of a Verb either of tlic 
Imperative Mood, and then it is a Doxology, as we render it; or, 
of the Indicative, he hath Glory and Dominion, or, to him belongs 
Glory and Dominion, or, glorious Dominion or Power; and then 
it tends to encourage theſe Saints, in that he, whom the Apottle 
prays to ſtabliſh and ſtrengthen them, 15 of power ſufficient to 
do it, 


12 By Sylvanus z a faithful brother unto you (as 


'T ſuppoſe x) I have * written briefly, exhorting y 


and teſtifying £ that this 1s the true grace 2 of God 
wherein ye ſtand. | 

u Either Silas, AF, 15. and 15. ch. whom Peter therefore here 
calls a taithtul Brother to them, that they misht the more readily 
receive him, though a Miniſter oi , the Uncircumciſion ; or, elſe 
this Sylvan:s was ſome other that had Preached to them, and is 
theretore ſaid to be a faithful Brother to them ; the former is more 
probable. x This doth not ſignify any doubt, but rather a firm 
perſuation of Syl[vanus his faithfulneſs, 9. d. I reckon hin faithful, 
having hitherto found him ſo: Or, it may relate to the briefnels 
of the Epiſtle, q. 4. I ſuppoſe it will ſeem brief to you, as being 
from one that loves you, and about matters that ſo much concern 
you. » V7z. to conſtancy in the Faith, and diligence in Duty, 
7 Bearing my Teſtimony to the Truth ye have received ; this 
the Apoſtle witnefleth, that being more tully convinced of it, they 
might more conſtantly adhere to it. See the like Phraſe, Neh. 9. 
29, 30. and 13. 15. a The true Doftrine of God; wherein he 
ſets forth the Grace of Chriſt, q. d. ye are in the right way; the 
Dodrine ye have embraced 1s indeed the Truth of God. | 


13 The Church thar is at Babylon 6 eleCted tope- 
ther with you c laluteth you, and ſo doth Marcus my 


{on d. 

b Babylon in Chaldea, where it 1s moſt probable the Apoſtle was 
at the writing of this Epiſtle; the 7ews being very numerous in 
thoſe parts, as having ſettled themſelves there ever fince t1e Cap- 
tivity ; and Peter being an Apoſtle of the Circumciſion, Fis work 
lay much thereabout. The Papifts would have Babylon here to he 
Rome as Rev. 17. and that Peter gives it that Name rather than its 
own, becauſe being eſcaped out of Prifon at Feruſalem, AC. 12. 
12, he would not have it known where he was. But how comes 


become the Head of the Church, the Vicar of Chriſt, and Prince of 
the Apoſtles? And is it probable he ſhould live 25 years at R:me (as 
they pretend he did) and yet not be known to be there? Where-ever 
le was he had Mark now with him, who 1s ſaid to have died at Alex- 
andria the eighth year of Nero, and Peter not till fix years after : "If 
Mark then did firſt conſtitute the Church of Alexandria, and govern 
it (as they ſay he did) for many years, it will be hard to find him and 
Peter at Rome together. But if they will needs have Rome be meant 


{ by Babylon, let them enjoy their Zeal, who rather than not find Pe- 


ter's Chair would go to Hell to ſeck it; and are more concerned to 
have Rome be the Seat of Peter, than the Church of Chriſt. 


x3 


Chap. y, 


* Hebe 13, 
a]. 


* Heb, 13, 


14 * Greet one another with a kiſs of Charity e. *Rom, is 
Peace be with you all that are in Chriſt Jeſus, / 15: 


Amen. 
e See, beſide the place in the Margin, 1 Cor, 16. 20. and 2 C9 
I3. 12, f United to him by Faith, and Members of him. 


Y, 


tb. 13, 


| Chap. L 


| Or, St- 
men. 


f Gr. of 
our God 
and Sa- 


Viour, 


* 1Pet.1.2, 


Jude 2, 


The SECOND EPISTLE GENERAL 


OF 


P E I MR. 


The ARGUMENT. 

T cannot be denied, but that ſome Queſtion there hath been, both about the Pen-men ant the Authority of ths 
Epiſtle. The former bath been queſtioned, becauſe of the difference of the Stile of this from that of the former 
Epiſtle. But, 1o ſay nothing of agreat likeneſs of St1le 1n both, obſerved by ſome, why might not the fame Perſon 
[ee fit on different occaſions. and according t0 the different things be wrote about, to change his way of Writing © Or 
why may not the Holy Ghoſt uſe his Inſtruments in what way he pleaſe, and not only dittate 10 them the matter they 
are 10 write, but the Expreſhon and Phraſe > Why muſt an Infinite and Soveraign Agent be bound up, and confined 
to the Parts and Pualfications of the Men be inſpired © And if we ſet a/ide the Fulgment of ſeveral Councils 
and Fathers (which yet might go far) two great ArgumentsWay be drawn from this firſt Chapter,to prove Peter to 
be the Pen man of this Epiſtle. One from the inſcription of it, where we have both bis Names, Simon an! Perct 
frefixed to it. Another from v. 16. where he affirms himſelf to have been freſent with Chrift at biz 1rans\4.s 

ration ; from whence we may well argue, that none Þaving ever aſcribed it to John, and James being dead beter; 
(:bough if be had been alive, it cannot be imagined that he ſhould put Peter's Name 10 any Epiſtle 0! ts 00001 ts, 
ting) and there being none but they two preſent with our Lord at that time, beſide Peter, Marth, 17. 1. noe 517 
he could be the Writer of it. And indeed, as ſome obſerve, if this Epiſtle be not Peter's, teben bs i\ume 1s jt 
19 it, it is ſofar from being Canonical, that it 1s not fit ſo much as to be reckoned among the Apoerypral L ts, 
having ſo great a Lye in the Front of it. As for the Authority of it, there can be no doavt of that, if Peer wore 
the Wrier, when nothing occurs in it repugnant to other parts of Scripture, or unbecoming the Grace and Stile of 
an Apoſtle. And thy ſome of the Ancients have queſtioned tt, yet Many more have acknowledged it , nor was it 
ever numbred among Apocryphal Writings. And ts not being found in the firſt Syriack Verſion, can bat argues 
being queſtioned by ſome, not its being rejefted by all. It ſeems to be writ 10 the Jews of the Diſperſion, as 1he 
ormer was, which appears by Chap. 3. V. 1,2. where he mentions the former written tothem ;, and this waz wWr1t- 
ten not lone before his Death, v. 14. The Scope of it ts, partly 10 call to their remembrance ibe Iruths be Dad 
preached among them, that ſo when they ſhould be deſtitute of the Apoſtles preaching to them, yet they might re: 
member the pure Dofrine they had learned of them, chap. 1. 12, 15. and might thereby be fortified ogainſt the 
Errors of falſe Teachers, chap. 2. 1. and partly to perſwoade and ſtir them up to Diligence 1 Holineſs, and Con 
ftancy in the Frith. As in his firſt Epiſtle he had exborted them to Patience under the 1yranny of Perſecit ors, 
left they ſhould yield to them , ſo in this he exhorts them to perſeverance in the Truth of the Goſpel, againſt 174 
Dezepions of the Hereticks, left they ſhould be ſeduced by them, Chap. 2. 3. and continue in Holineſs, notwitth- 


fRtanding the Proſaneneſs of Sceffers, chap. 3. 


CHAT K 


The uſual Salutation; the Grace of God to them and in them, I=—4- 
This their Calling and Elefijn they muſt prove by increaſe in good 
Works : An Advantage hereof, $—1t. Seeing he ſhould ſhortly 
die, according to Chriſt's Predidtion, he would ſtir them up to this by 
exhortation, that they might remember it after his Death, 12——1 5+ 
He teſtifieth that the Doftrine of Chriſt preached to them was no Fa- 
ble : but himſelf and two other Diſciples beheld his Glory en the 
Mount ; heard a Voice from Heaven giving Teſtimony to him ; and 
the ſame was witneſſed by the Prophets, who were inſpired by the 
Spirtt of God, 16 ==n—21I, 


| Qimen Peter, a Servant and an Apoſtle a of Jeſus 

Chriſt, to them that have obtained like precious 
faith b wich us c, through the righteouſneſs 4 of God, 
f and our Saviour Jeſus Chrilt e : 


a 7,e. Such a Servant as is likewiſe an Apoſtle. The former 
agrees to all Goſpel-miniſters generally, the latter is a Title of a 
greater Eminency, and ſo he intimates, that he writ to them not 
meerly as an ordinary Miniſter, but in the Authority of an Apo- 
{tle, an Oificer of the higheſt degree in the Church. 6 Not 1n re- 
ſpe& of the Degree or Strength of it, but in reſpe& of the Object. 
Chriſt, and the Benefits that come by it, Juſtification, Sandtificatt- 
on, Adoption, gc. in which reſpe& the Faith of the weakeſt Be- 
liever is as precious as that of the ſtrongeſt. c Either with us Apo- 
ſtles, or with us Jewiſh Chriſtians born, or Inhabiting in 7udea. 
4 The Greek Prepofition which we render through, may likewiſe be 
rendred, with, as v. 5. and 4s 7. 38. in the Church, that is, with 
the Church ; and fo the Senſe is, either, 1. Through the Righte- 
ouſneſs, 7. e. Truth and Faithfulneſs of Chriſt 10 his Promiſes, 
whereof the Faith of the Saints was an Effe& : Or, 2. Through 
the Righteouſneſs of Chriſt, as the meritorious Cauſe of their 
Faith : Or, 3. With the Righteouſneſs of Chriſt 1mputed to them, 
and made theirs upon their believing. They had obtained like 
precious Faith as the Apoſtles themſclves and others had, toge- 
ther with the Righteouſneſs of Chriſt, an Intereſt 1n which always 
accompanies Faith, Rom. 4. 22. e There being but one Article in 
tie Greeb, theſe words are to be underſtood conjunttly, the Parti- 
cle, and, being but an Explicative, and the Senſe 1s, Through the 
Righteouſneſs of our God, even our Saviour Jeſus Chriſt, who 1s 
God : See the like, ver. 11. and chap. 3. 18. John 20, 28. Tit. 


2. 14. 
2 * Grace and peace be muitiplied unto you, 
through rhe knowledge f of God, and of Jeſus g our 


Lord : 
'{mwledeement, 1. e. Faith, whereby we are made Parta- 


j Or, 
kers of all the favins; Grzces 5: the Spirit; and whereby being 
juſtined, we are at Pcice with God, Rom. 5. 1. g There bein: no 


ſaving Known ledge of Gud, or Fatti: in him, but by Chriſt. 
VY 1 +7 


' 
Mo 3 


3 According as h his divine power / hath given un- 
to us all things &# that pertain unto lite / and godli- 
neſs, * through the knowledge of him that hath called 
us || to glory and vertue 2 ; 

hþ This may reter either, 1. To what goes before, Grace and Peace 
be multiplied unto you, &c. according as his divine Power hath given 
unto us, &c. and then in thefe words the Apoltle ſhews what Rea- 
ſon there was to hope, that Grace and Peace ſhould be multiplicd 
to them, and perfected in them, viz. becauſe God hath already gi- 
ven them all things pertaining to Lite and Godlineſs, q. 4. He ti;at 
hath done thus much for you, will do more, and finiſh his Work in 
you. Or, 2ly, to what follows, and then the Greek Phraſe rendered 
according as, is not a Note of Similitude, but of Illation, and may 
be rendred, ſince, or ſeeing that, and fo the Words are not a part 
of the Salutation, but the beginning of the Body of the Epiſtle, and 
relate to ver. 5. Seeing that his Divine Power hath green unto us all 
things that pertain, &c. add to your Faith, Virtue, &c. as God hath 
done his part, ſo do you yours in the diligent Performance of what 
he hath enabled you unto. ij Divine Power may relate either to God, 
or rather to Chriſt, immediately going before, and then it tends to 
the confirming their Hope of the multiplication of Grace and 
Peace to them, not only from God, but from Chriſt, in that they 
had already experienced his Divine Power in giving them þ all thirgs 
pertaining to Life and Godlineſs, i. e, whatever may be helpful to ir, 
the Spirit, Faith, Repentance, gc. 7oh. 7. 39. and 2 Cor. 4.6, 
and 2 Tim. 2.25, | Either, 1. Spiritual Life, agd then God!ineſs 
may be added by way of Explication, that Life which confiſts 11 
Godlineſs, or a godly Life ; or, by Life, may be meant the inward 
permanent Principle of ſpiritua> As, and the exerciſe of them 
may be called Godlineſs, as the PerfeQion of that Principle is cal- 
led Glory, Or, 2ly. Eternal Life, to which we attain through God- 
lincſs, as the way ; and then likewiſe they are underſtood diitiudatly, 
Life as the end, and Godlineſs as the means ; and ſo Life in this Verſe 
is the ſame as Peace it the tormer, and Godlineſs the ſame as Grace. 
m According to our Tranſlation, Glory may be the ſame as Life, be- 
fore, and Vertue the ſame with Godlineſs, and then the words ſet 
forth the end of God's calling us, viz. unto Glory, or Life hereafter, 
as well as Virtue or Godlineſs now. But the Greek Prepot:tion 4te, 
1s no where (as ſome obſerve) in the New-Teftament tound to 11g - 
nifie #9, Rom. 6. 4- (which ſome alledge) it is beſt rendred by; G/ory 
being there put tor God's Power, and therefore our Margin here 
reads it by Glory and Virtue ; which may either be, by an Hend!.:. 
dis, tor gloriows Virtue, taking Virtue for Power, that glorious Pore 
erof God, which 1s put forth 1n calling us, Epheſ. 1. 18, 19. or his 
Goodneſs and Mercy which appears in the ſame calling, in which 
Senſe the word may be underſtood, fee Tt. 3. 4,5. 1 Pet. 2. $ 
or (which comes to the ſame) Glory being often taken for Puwer. 
7ohn 2.11. by Glory and Virtue may be meant God's Power and 


»Goodneis, or Mercy, 


6H] + Whers- 


Chap. 1. 


FjFON.17 2» 


| Or, by 7 


Chap.l. 


* Heb. 12. 


10. 
1 John 3.2. 


and precious promiſes o, that by theſe ye might be 
* partakers of rhe divine nature p, having eſcaped 
the corruption 9 that is in the World through luſt. 

n This Word may be rendred, in that, for that, in as much as, 
and then this is an Explication of the things that pertain to Lite 
and Godlineſs, to Glory and Virtue, all thoſe things being contain- 
ed'in the Promites; or, whereby may be underſtood of the Glory 
and Virtue laſt mentioned, taking them in the latter Senſe, explain- 
ed v. 3. q. d, By which glorious Goodneſs and Mercy to us. 0 By 
Promiſes we may underſtand either the Matter of the Promiſes, the 
things promiſed, Heb. 10. 3s. ſuch as Redemption by. Chriſt, Re; 
conciliation, Adoption, gc. and then they are called exceeding 
great and precious, 1n compariſon of all Temporal and Worldly 
things ; or elſe the Promiſes themlelyes, which are called great, be- 
cauſe of the Excellency of the things contained in them, and pre- 
cious in relation to us ; great things being not only contained in the 
Promiſes, but by them ſecured to us. p We are ſaid to be Parta- 
kers of the Divine Nature, not by any Communication of the Di- 
vine Eſſence to us, but by God's unprefſing upon us, and infuſing 
into us thoſe Divine Qualities and Diſpotitions (Knowledge, Righte- 
ouſneſs, and true Holineſs) which do expreſs and reſemble the Per- 
fetions of God, and are called his Image, Fphe/. 4. 24. Sy: 
to. And we are ſaid to be made Partakers of this Divine Natiffe 
by the Promiſes of the Goſpel, becauſe they are the effeual means 
of our Regeneration (in which that Divine Nature is communicated 
to us) by reaſon of that quickning Spirit which accompanieth them, 
2 Cor. 3. 6. works by them, and forms in us the Image of that 
Wiſdom, Righteovſueſs, and Holineſs of God, which appears in 
them ; or of that Glory of the Lord, which, when by Faith we be- 
hold in the Glaſs of Goſpel-Promiſes, we are changed into the ſame 
Image, even as by the Spirit of the Lord, 2 Cor. 3. 18. Or, the Di- 


vine Nature may be underſtood of the Glory and Immortality of 


the other Life, whercin we ſhall be conformed to God, and where- 
of by the Promiſes we are made Partakers. q Either by Corruption 
here we are to underſtand, 1. Deſtru&ion, to which the greateſt 
part. of the World is obnoxious through Luſt, and then Corruption 
muſt be oppoſed to Life, and Peace before, and Luft to Virtue and 
Godlineſs : Or, 2. Rather all the Pr.vity or Wickedneſs of Humane 
Nature, which is here ſaid to be, 1.e. to reign and prevail in the 
World, or worldly Men through Luft, or habitual Concupiſence, 
which 1s the Spring and Root trom which it proceeds, and then the 
Senſe is the ſame as Gal. 5. 24. This Corruption through Luſt is op- 
poſed to the Divine Nature before, and eſcaping this Corruption 
agrees with being Partaker, of that Divine Nature. See Eph. 4. 22, 
23,24. Col. 3. 9, 10, 2B 

5 And beſides this 7, giving all diligence, add / to 


your faith 7 vertue; and to verrue knowledge x ; 

r Here the Apoſtle begins his Exhortation, that ſince God had 
done ſo much for them, ver. 3, 4. they would likewiſe do their Du- 
ty ; and that their care and diligence in improving the Grace they 
had received, might be added to his Bounty in- giving 1t them. 
ſ Or, Miniſter unto ; or it may be a Metaphor taken from the an- 
cient wav of Dancing, in which they joined Hands one with ano- 
ther, thereby helping, and holding up one another. Fa/th 1s here 
ſet forth as the firit Grace, and which {as 1t were) leads up the 
reſt following it and attendiag upon it, yet all in Conjundtion 
one with another. # Faith is ſet in the firſt place as the prime 
Grace of a Chriſtian, the Foundation and Root of all other, as being 
that without which nothing elſe can be pleaſing to God, Zeb. 11.6. 
u By Vertue he ſeems to underſtand Univerſal Righteouſneſs, or a 
Complication of all thoſe Graces' by which Faith is wont to work ; 
and this being more general, he proceeds from it to others that are 
more ſpecial. x By this may be meant ſpiritual Prudence, which 
governs and direGts other Vertues in their Actings, and it is called 
Knowledge, becauſe it conſiſts in the praftical Knowledge of the W1ll 
of God. See 2 Cor. 6.6. and 1 Pet. 3. 7. 


6 And to knowledge, temperance y ; and to tem- 


perance, patience = ; and to patience, godlinels 2 ; 

y A Grace which reprefleth, and curbs in, not only ſenſual Luſts, 
but all inordinate Appetites, Gal. 5. 22. Tit. 1.8. x7 That Chriſtian 
Fortitude whereby we bear Afﬀittions and Injuries, fo as to perſe- 
vere in our Duty without being moved by the Evils that attend us in 
the doing of it. a4 Which reſpe&s our immediate Duty to God, and 
comprehends all the Duties of the firſt Table. This is joined to Pati- 
ence, as being that which teacheth us, in all we ſuffer, to acknow- 
ledge God's Providence,and Promiſes of Deliverance,and Recompence. 


7 And to godlineſs, brotherly kindneſs b; and to 


brotherly kindneſs, charity c. 

b A Love to thoſe that are of the Houſhold of Faith. This is 
joined to Godlineſs, to ſhew that it is in vain to pretend to true Re- 
ligion, and yet be deſtitute of Brotherly- Love. c This is more ge- 
neral than the former, and relates to all Men, even our Enemies 
themſelves. 


$ For it theſe things be in you and abound dq, 


+cr. idle, they make e you that ye ſhall neither be + barren , 


+*J:l.3.I4, 


* xJoha 2, 
9,LT. 


* nor unfruitful g in the knowledge þ of our Lord 
Jeſus Chrilt. 

d If ye not only have theſe Graces in you, but abound, or grow 
in them, both as to the inward degree, and outward exerciſe of 
them. Either, they make you, or declare you not to be barren, 
or both; they will be both the Cauſes and Evidences of your not 
being barren. f Or, ſlothful, idle, unaFive. g Void of Good 
Works, which are frequently compared to Fruits, Matth. 3. 10. 
and 7. 17,18, 19. Gal. 5. 22. þ 7.e. The Faith of Chriſt. But 
more is imp:ic4 here, than exprefled, g. d. They will make you be 
ative and fruitful in the Knowledge of Chriſt, and declare you to 
be ſo, and thereby make it appear, that ye have not in vain learned 
Chritt. 


9 But he that lacketh theſe things z, * is blind #, 


ll PETER. 


4 Whereby 7 are given unto us exceeding great | 


was purged from his old fins m:. 

7 He that doth not live in the Exerciſe of the fore-mentioned 
Graces. k Spiritually Blind, as bing deſtitute of ſaving Know- 
ledge. 1 The Greek word is varſoully tranſlated ; the moſt proba- 
ble Account of it is, either, 1. That it ſignifies to feel the way, or 
grop? as blind Men do; and then the meaning is, He that lacketh 
theſe things is blind, and as a blind Man, gropes, not knowing 
which way to go ; he is really deſtitute of the Knowledge he pre- 
tends to : Or, 2ly, To be pore-blind, or ſhort-ſighted, ſo as to ſee 
things near hand, but not afar off, as our Tranſlation hath it ; and 
then the Senſe is, That ſuch a one ſees only the things of the World, 
but cannot look ſo far as Heaven, to diſcern things there, which if 
he did, he would walk in the way that leads thither, viz. in the 
Prattice of the Duties before preſcribed. m He is judged in the 
ſight of God, to forget a Benefit received, that is not effeQually 
mindtul of it, in living ſuitably to it. And ſo here, he that pro- 
feſleth himſelf to have been purged from his old Sins, in Juſtifica- 
tion and SanRification, by the Blood and Spirit of Chriſt, 1 Cor.6.17. 
Epheſ. 5. 25,26, 27, and yet ſtill lives in Sin, and in the negle& 
of the Duty he is engaged to, praQtically declares his Forgetfulneſs 
of the Mercy he profeſſeth to have been vouchſafed him ; and ac- 
cordingly may be interpreted, to have forgotten it, in that he ads 
like one that had. Or, if this be underſtood of one that is really 
purged from his old Sins, yet he may be ſaid to forget that ſo far 
as he returns again to them, or lives not up to the ends of his Pur- 
gation, Luke 1. 74, 75. ; 

10 Wherefore the rather, brethren, give diligence 7 


Chap. I 


and cannot ice afar off /, and hath forgotten that he - 


to * make your calling o, and eleQion p ſure q : tor if * John 3. 


ye do theſe things 7, ye ſhall never fall /. 

n Viz. In the Exerciſe of the forementioned Graces. o Your 
effefual Calling to the Faith of Chriſt. p Your eternal EleQion 
to Grace and Glory. q Not in reſpe& of God, whoſe Counſel is 
1A it ſelf ſure and ſtable, Rom, 11. 29. 2 Tim. 2. 19. but in reſpe& 
of your ſelves, who may beſt diſcern the Cauſe by its Effe&ts, and 
ſo your Ele&ion by your good Works, to which you were choſen, 
Epheſ. 1. 4. and which prove your Calling, (as being the proper ge- 
nuine Fruits of it, Epheſ. 4. 1, 2, Q9c.) as that doth Election from 
whence it proceeds, As 13.48. Rom. 8. 30. r The things pre- 
ſcribed, v. 5,6,7. { Not wholly apoſtatize from God's ways, nor fo 
tall through Temptation into any Sin, as not to recover out of it. 

11 For fo anentrance ſhall be miniſtred to you a 
bundantly 7 into the everlaſting kingdom of our 
Lord and Saviour Jeſus Chriſt. 

t Or, richly ; while ye miniſter, or add one Grace to another, one 
good Work to another, ver. 5, &c. God likewiſe will miniſter (the 
ſame word is here uſed, as v. 5.) or add largely, or richly the Sup- 
plies of the Spirit, in Grace, and Strength, and Conſolation, and 
whatſoever is needful for you in the way, whereby your Faith may 
be increaſed, your Joy promoted, and your Perſeverance ſecured till 
ye come into the Poſſeffion of the everlaſting Kingdom. 

12 Wherefore I will nor be negligent z to put you 
always in remembrance of theſe things, though you 


know them -,and be eſtabliſhed in the preſent truth y. 
u 7.e, I will be diligent and careful. x He prevents ah Objetti- 


great moment, and you being beſet with temptations, encompaſſed 
about with infirmities, and while you are on the Earth, being in a 
Land of Forgetfulneſs, it 1s necefſary to put you in mind of what 


| you know, that ye may remember to do it. See the like Rom. 15. - 


14,15. and 1 John2.21. y The truthof the Goſpel now revealed 
to you; that which was the great Subje& of the Apoſtle's Preaching 
and Writings that Jeſus was the Chriſt; that Redemption was 
wrought by him ; that he was riſen from the dead ; That whoſoever 
believed on him, ſhould receive Remiſſion of Sins, gyc. the Promiſe 
made to the Fathers being now fulfilled, 4#s 13. 32, 33. and what 
was future under the Old-Teſtament, being preſent under the 
New. 


.13 Yea, I think it meet as long as I am in this 


membrance. 

z In the Body; 9.d. having not long to live, I would live to the 
beſt purpoſe, and ſo as I may do the moſt Good. He calls his Body 
a Tabernacle, both in reſpe& of its ſhort continuance, its mean 
ſtructure, and his labarious life in it. 4 To awaken and rouze 
you- up, as ye have need, the Fleſh being ſlothful ; and leſt ye 
ſhould by ſecurity and ſlightneſs loſe the Benefit of what ye have 
- : where Knowledge is not wanting, yet Admonitions may be 
uſeful. 


14 * Knowing that ſhortly 


b A Metaphor taken from Garments ; the Soul while in the Body, 


off their Clothes, and going to Bed, Iſa. 57. 2. c See 2 Cor. 5s I. 
d 7obn 21, Chriſt tells Peter of the kind of his Death, that it ſhould 
be violent, but ſpeaks nothing there of the circumſtance of the 
time; and therefore either this Apoſtle had a twoſold Revelation 
of his Death, the former as to the manner of it, and this latter con- 
cerning the time : Or, if this here wereno other Revelation but that, 
Fohn 21. it may be ſaid, that v. 18,22, Chriſt intimates that Pe- 
ter's Death ſhould bz before Fohn's, who ſhould live till he came, 
viz. in, Judgment againſt Jeruſalem to deſtroy it, which Peter now 
(obſerving the Aﬀairs of the Fews, and conſidering his Maſters 
words, Matth. 24.) perceived to 'be nigh at hand ; and thence in- 
fers, that his own Death was not far off. 


15 Moreover, I will endeavour that ye may beable 


after my deceaſe, to have theſe things e always f in 


remembrance g. 
e The. 


on, g. d. tho' ye know theſe things already, yet being things of + 


Ig. 


tabernacle 2, to * ſtir you up «, by putting you in re- * Ch.z.1. 


I muſt put off b zhzs my * Sec 
rabernacle c, even as + our Lord Jeſus Chriſt hath P42 


ſhewed me d. 2 Tim.4.6. 


ohn 21 


is clothed with Fleſh, and Death to the Godly is but the puttitig jg 15, 


hn 3. 


21, 


6. 


21 


Chap. I. - 


F 1 Cor.I. 
17. Of 2-0 
+ Mat. 17. 
I, 2, 

1 ſoh. 1.1, 
and 4. 14. 


*Mat,17.5 


* Joh. 5. 
45s 

T Rev. 2, 
2% Af. 22 
I 5, 


- 


Praice of good Works, and their continuance in both. f This 
may be joyned either to endeavour, and fo relate to the Apoſtle 
himſelf ; he would always be diligent, and do his part, that they 
might have theſe things in remembrance : or rather, (according to 
our Tranſlation) to having in remembrance, Peter being now near his 
end; and therefore this always, may better refer to them that 
were to live after him, than to himſelf that was ſo ſoon to die. g Or, 
fo commemorate them, viz. to the Benefit, and Edification of the 
Church, and this includes their having them in remembrance, but 
implies ſomething more. 

16 For we have not followed * cunningly deviſed 
fables hb, when we made known unto you the power 
7, and coming #& of our Lord Jeſus Chriltt, but were 
T eye-witnefles of his m_ /. 

h Humane Figments artificially contrived, either to pleaſe and 
gratifle Mens Fancies, or to deceive and pervert their Judgment ; 
q. d. The things we have preached unto you (the Sum of which 
15 the Power and Coming of our Lord Jeſus Chriſt) are the true 
Saying$ of God, not the Fi&ions .of Men ; and ſo he may have re- 
ſpe both to Heatheniſh and Jewiſh Fables. See 1 Tim. I. 4, 6 4+ 7: 
2 Tim. 4.4. Tit. 1.14. i This relates to the Divine Nature of 
Chriſt with its glorious Effe&ts, the Ethcacy of hy Dodrine, the 
Miracles whereby he confirmed it, and eſpecially his Reſurre&ion 
from the Dead, Rom. 1. 4. & This reſpe&s his Humane Nature, 
his coming in the Fleſh, in which he manifeſted the Power betfore- 
mentioned ; both together contain the Sum of the whole Goſpel, 
viz. That Chriſt, the promiſed Meſſiah, is come in the Fleſh, and 
that he was furniſhed with Power ſufficient, and Ability to ſave 
Sinners to the utmoſt. Or, Chriſt's coming here may be his ſecond 
coming, to which the word here uſed is for. the moſt part applied 
in the New-Teſtament, and whereot his Transfiguration in the fol- 
lowing Verſe was a Repreſentation, and a Fore-runner ; and in the 
Belief of which the Apoſtle would confirm theſe Saints againſt thoſe 
that ſcoffed at it, ch. 3. v. 3,4. 1 By Chriſt's Majeſty may be un- 
derſtood all that Glory which did ſhine out in him during the whole 
time of his abode upon Earth, 7ohn 1. 14. but eſpecially that more 
eminent manifeſtation of it in his Transfiguration in the next Verſe. 

17 For he received troin God the Father honour, 
and glory m, when there came ſuch a voice to him 
from the excellent glory z, * This is o my beloved 
Son, in whom p I am well pleaſed. 

m Either Hmur and Glory, for glorious Honour ; or Glory may 
relate to that Luſtre which appeared in the Body of Chriſt at his 
Transfizuration, Mat th. 17. 2. and Hur to the Voice which came 
to him from his Father, and the honourable Teſtimony thereby gt- 
ven him. n Either from Heaven, or from the glorious Ged the 
Father of Chriſt, who, by this Voice, did in a ſpecial . manner 
manifeſt his glorious Preſence. 9 #. e. This is the Meſſiah ſo often 
promiſed, and therefore all that was ſpoken of the Meſſiah in the 
Law and the Prophets, centers in him. p This 1mplies not only 
that Chriſt is peculiarly the Beloved of the Father, but that all they 
that are adopted to God by Faith in Chriſt, are beloved, and graci- 
ouſly accepted in and through him, Matth, 3.17. Fohn 17. 26. 
Ephel. 1.6. 

13 And this voice which came from Heaven we 
7 heard 7, when we were with him in the holy / 
mount. 

q 1, and James, and John. The Apoſtle avoucheth himſelf to 

have been an Fr-» itne(s, as well as Eye-witneſs of Chriſt's Glory, 
hereby intimating that there was as much certainty of the Gof- 
pel, even in an Humane way, as could poſſibly be obtained of any 
thing that is done in the World, fecing Men can be humanely cer- 
tain of nothing more, than of what they perceive by their Senſes : 
compare 1 John 1. 1,3. / So called, not becauſe of any inherent 
Holineſs in it, but becauſe of the extraordinary manifeſtation of 
God's Preſence there, in the ſame ſenſe as the Ground is called hv- 
ly, where God appeared to Moſes and Joſhua, Exod. 3. 5. Toſh. 
$ 4. 
19 We have allo 24 more ſure word of prophe- 
cy 7, whereunto, ye do well that ye take heed z, as 
unto * alight x thar ſhineth in a dark place y, un- 
til the + day dawn, and the day-ſtar 5 ariſe in your 
hearts. 

t Peter having proved the certainty of the Evangelical Doftrine, 
by their Teſtimony that had ſeen Chriſt's Glory in his Transfigura- 
tion, and heard the Father's Teſtimony of him, now proves the 
fame by the Teſtimony of the Prophets under the Old-Teſtament, 
and calls the word of Prophecy a more ſure Word, comparing 1t e1- 


ther, 1. with the Voice from Heaven, then which he calls the word . 


of Prophecy more firn or ſure, not in reſpe& of Truth (which 
vas equal in both) but in reſpe& of the manner of its Revelation, 
the Voice from Heaven beinz tranſient, and heard only by three 
Apoſtles; whereas the Word of Prophecy was not only received 
by the Prophets from God, but by his Command committed to 
Writing, confirmed by a Succeſſion of their tellow-Prophets 1n 
their ſeveral Generations, and approved ' by Chrift himſelf, and by 
him preferred before Miracles themſelves, Luke 16. 29, 31. Or, 
2. with the Teſtimony of Peter, and the other two Apoſtles, con- 
cerning that Voice which came to Chriſt, than which Teſtimony the 


Word of Prophecy is Ml: more ſure; not ſimply and in it 


ſelf, but in reſp2& of t to whom the &4poſtle writ ; 1t was 
more firm in their minds who had received it; or, more fure as 
to them that were Fews, and had ſo fully enterrained the writings 
of the Prophets, and had th-m in ſo great Veneration, being con- 
firmed by the conſenr of ſo miny Ages ; whereas the Teſtimony of 
theſe Apoſtles did not ſo filly appear ro them to be Divine, as not 
being heretofore exprefſed RF. Scripture. u ip of That ye ſearch and 
ſtudy it, ſubje& your Conſciences to the Power of it, and order 
your Converſations according to it, . » Or, Lamp,. to which the 


Word is often compared, Pſal. £7g; 2057 Poo; 65235 Becauſe; 


Vol. IE. 


1, ?>7£E3E7T EK 


e The Dodtrine before delivered concerning Faith in Chriſt, the 


{ 


as 4 Lamp, or Candle lighted, diſpeis the Darkneſs, and gives 
Light to thoſe that are in the Houſe, or Room where it is; ſo *the 
Word gives Light to all them thatare in God's Houſe, as the Churct: 
15 called, 1 Tim. 3-15. y Or dirty, ſqualid, becauſe places that have 
no Light, are uſually filthy ; the Dirt which is not ſeen is not re- 
moved, 7 Either, 1. The laſt day called the Day by way of ex- 
cellency, becauſe when it once beyins, it will never end, and will 
be all Light without any Darkneſs; and then what is faid of the 
Word of Prophecy, is to be underſtood of the whote Scripture : 
and the ſence 1s, That whereas the whole time of this Lite is but 2 
kind of Night of Error and IT>norance, God hath fet up his Catt- 
dle, given us the Light of the Scripture to guide us, and lead us 
til we come to th« glorious Lizhr or the future Lite, in which we 
ſhall haye no need of" the Lizht of the Scripture to dirett us, but 
ſhall fee God as he is, and Face to Face, 1 Cor. 13. 12. According 
to this Expoſition, the dawning of the Day, and the Day-5t ar arts 


ſing, do not fignity different parts of the ſame Day, but rather the 


whole Day as oppoſed to that Darkneſs which would totally aver- 
ſpread us, were it not for the Light the Word affords us : Our minds 
of themſelves are dark, in them the Lizht of the Word ſhines, and 
diſpels the Darkneſs by degrees, according as the Spirit gives us 


more underſtanding of it ; but yet the Darkneſs will not be wholly 


removed, till the Day of Eternal Lite dazvn upon us, and the Day- 
Star of the perte&t Knowledge of God in the Beatifical Viſion arife 
in our hearts. Or, 2. By the Day-dawning, and the Day-Star 
ariſing, may be underſtood a more tull, clear, and explicit Know- 
ledge of Chrift, and the Myfteries of the Goſpel; and then this 
relates particularly to the Prophecies of the Old-Teſtament ; and, 
as Paul calls the times of the Old-Teſtament, a Night, Ron, 15.42. 
as bcing a time of Darkneſs and Shadows, in compariſon of the 
Light and Knoivledge of Chriſt under the New-Teſtament ; fo 
Petey here compares the Writings of the Prophets to a Candle, 
which gives ſome, but leſs Light, and the Preaching of the Got- 
pel to the Day-dawning, and Day-Star ariſing; and commends theſe 
Chriſtian Jews to whom he writ, for making uſe of, and attending 
to, even this letfer Lizht, till they attained to greater degrees of 
Hlumination, and the. Day-Star of a more full and clear knowledsc 
of. Chriſt, as revealed in the Goſpel, dd ariſe in their hearts, This 
Expotition 1s tavoured by 4&s 17. 11. they there,and ſo the Fewi// 
Converts here, did ſearch the Scriptures, to ſee 1f the things ſpoken 
by the Apoſtles did agree with what was before written by the 
Propncts ; and as they there, ſo theſe here, are commended tor 
tne1r d1i1zence 11 fo doing, and intimation given them, that they 
mutt attend to the Light of the Old-Teſtament-Prophecies, till 
they were thereby led into a greater knowledge and underſtanding 
of the Goſpel-revelation. £ 


Chap.II. 


20 Knowing this firſt a that * no prophecy of the * Rom. :2: 


Scripture is of any private interpretarion 6. 

4 Either, principally and above other thinzs, as being moſt 
worthy to be known ; or, knowing this as the firſt Principle of 
Faith, or the firſt thing to be Believed. b The Greeh word here 
uſed, may be rendred, either, 1. As our Tranſlators do Interpreta- 
tronor Explication, and then the meaning is, not that private men 


4 


are not to interpret the Scripture, only refer all to the Church ;- 


but that no Man, nor Company of Men, no Church nor publick 
Officers, are to interpret the Scripture of their own Heads, accord- 
ing to their own minds, ſo as to make their private ſence be the 
lence of the Scripture, but to ſeek the underſtanding of it from 
God, who ſhews them the meaning of the Word in the Word it ſelf 
(the, more obſcure places being expounded by the more clear) and by 
his Spirit leads Believers in their ſearching the Scripture, into the un- 
derſtanding of his mind in it. God himſelf being the Author of the 
Word, as v. 21. 1s the beſt Interpreter of it: Or, 2. Mifſin or Di- 
miſſion, a metaphor taken from Races, where they that-ran; were let 
looſe trom the Stage where the Race began, that they might rin their 
Courſe. The Prophets in the Old-Teſtainent are faid to Run, as 
being God's Meſiengers, Fer. 23. 21. and God is ſaid to ſend them, 
Exek, 13.6, 7. and then this doth not immediately concern the In- 
terpretation of the Scripture, but the firſt Revelation of it, ſpoken 
of in the next Verſe ; and the queſtion is not, Who hath Authori- 
ty to Interpret the Scripture now written ? but, VVhat Authority 
the Pen-men had to write 1t? and confequently, what reſpe& is due 
to it? and, why Believers are fo carefully to take heed to it. And 
then the meaning 15, that 1t 1s the firft Principle of our Faith, that 
the Scripture 4s not of Humane Invention, . but Divine Inſpiration ; 
that the Prophets writ not their own private Sence in it, but the 
Mind of God ; and at his Command, not their own Pleaſure, 

21 For * the prophecy c came not || in old time by 
the will of man 4, bur holy men of God e ſpake as 
they were moved f by the Holy Ghoſt. 

c The Prophetical VVritings, or VVord of Prophecy, v. 19. 
a The Prophets ſpake not of themſelyes what and when they plea- 
ſed. e Prophets, called Jen of God, 1 Sam. 2. 27, and 9.6. and 
1 Kings 17. 18. and elſewhere. They are here called Xhly, not only 
becauſe of their Lives wherein they were examples to others, but be- 
cauſe they were the ſpecial Inſtruments of the Holy Ghoſt, who 
ſan&ified them t2 the work of Preaching, and Penning what he 
DiRated to them. f Or, carried out, or aFed, 7. e. elevated above 
their own natural abilities, This may imply the illumination of 
their Minds with the knowledge of Divine Myſteries, the gift of In- 
fallibility, that they might not err, of Prophecy to foretel! things to 
come, and a peculiar inſtin& of the Holy Ghoſt, whereby they 
were moved to Preach or Write, 


CHATS M 

Falſe teachers, ſuch as had been in the Church of o!d, ſhould ariſe and 
ſeduce many, their charafter , and judgment, x --= 3. this confirm 
ed by the example of the fullen Angels, of the old World, and of S0- 
dim and Gomorrha, #where Lot was preſerved, q——8 for God 
will ſave his, but puniſh the anclean, diſobedient, proud, Sc. who 
are as brute Beaſts made to be deſtroyed, g9-——12, for thew 
Unrighteouſneſs, Deceit, Adultery, Covetouſmeſs, they are like 
Balaam, or as Clouds without water, 13-18. they promiſe 
EE 6H2 | liberty 


a4 


Þ » Tom-o>* 
2 T1m-2; 

I9. 

i Pet. I, 

II, 

4 Or, at 

any me. 


api. 


L 
ord 
po 
Ladd 

- 


oO1, ” 
w 130 © Yo 


ht bat - + » 
— P 
> | 
- 
»_md 
- 
> 


—y 
$ 
—_ 
_ 


246 


II. 


ts them is warſe than if they had never known Chriſt, this i/luſtrated, 
I 9 ——22, 


B* T * there were falſe prophets alſo g among 
the people h, even as there + ſhall be falſe reach- 
e1S 7 among you &, who ſhall privily bring in / dam- 


* na4ble herefties zz, even denying 7 the Lord o chat 
. boughr p them, and bring upon themſelves {witt 9 
. deitruction. 


y Or, laſct- 
VIOUS WAYS, 


as ſome 
Copics 
read. 


FTif.L.IT. 


*Tob 4.18. 
f Joh. 8.44 


2 The Apoſtle having been exhorting them to continuance and 
prozrets in Faith, admoniſheth thers here of ſuch as might labour 
fo draw them from it ; and having made mention of the Old-Teſta- 
ment Prophets, Holy Men of God, he hereby takes occaſion to tell 
them of, and caution them againſt falſe Teachers which would be 
among themſelves. This alſo in the Text, plainly relates to what 
went berore, 4. 4, together with thoſe Prophets which were ſent 
by God ; there were likewiſe falſe Prophets, ſuch as were not ſent 
or him. h The People of Iſrael. i Teachers of falſe Dodrine, 
Fatth. 7. 15. Adtts 20.29. k Among you Jewiſh, as well as a- 
mong the Gentiſe Chriſtians ; or, among you as Chriſtians and God's 
People under the New- Teſtament, in- oppoſition to the People of 
God under the Old. { The Greeh word figniftes either, ro bring in 
ſii'y and craftily under ſpecious pretences, and without being ob- 
lerved, G:z!. 2.4. Jude 4. or, to bring. in over and abyve, or beſide 
tne Dodtrine of the Goſpel, which they did not renounce ; or, 
both may be implied. m Gr. Fereſjes of Deſtru&ion, 1. e. De- 
firudFive, fuch as lead to Deſtruftion, viz. Eternal, or Damnation. 
n Either 1n their Words or their Praices, either direaly, or by 
conſequence of their Dofrines or Attions : They that profeſs thev 
know God, but contradi& that Profeſſion in their Lives, are ſaid 
to deny him, Tit. I. 16. 
Luke 2. 29. Aﬀs 4. 24, &c. and probably Rev. 6. 10, Nor 1s there 
any neceſſity, but Fude 4. the word may be underſtood of God 
the Father ; or, rather, 2. Chriſt, p If we underſtand it of God 
the Father, the ſence is either, 1. Denying God that bought them, 
or acquired them and made them his, viz. By calling them out of 
tie darkneſs and groſs wickedneſs of the World, to the knowledge 
ot Chriſt and the Goſpel, and the fellowſhip of his Church. In this 
general ſence the word Buying 1s ſometimes taken, T/a. 55. I. Rev. 3 
18, or, 2. Denying God that bought the People of Iſrael! (where- 
of theſe talſe Teachers that ſhould b@among the Chriſtian Jews 
were to bea part) out of Fgypt to make them his peculiar People, 
whereof they would boaſt themſelyes, and yet by their wicked 
prattices, deny that God that bought them; the words ſeem to 
be taken out of Deut. 32. 6. Is not he thy Father that hath bought 
thee ? as likewiſe from wv. 5. of that Chapter, Peter calls them 
Spots, v. 13, of this Chapter : but if we underſtand it of Chriſt, 
which ſeems moſt probable, the ſence is, either, 1. That Chriſt 
bought or redeemed them (in which ſence the word is ſometimes 


taken) in that by his Death he purchaſed the continuance of their 


lives, and the ſtaying of their execution, and reſcued them from 
that preſent Deſtru&tion, which, without Chriſt's interpoſition had 
ſeiſed on them. as it had likewiſe on the whole viſible Creation, 
immediately upon the Apoſtacy of Mankind. Or, 2. This 1s ſpo- 
ken not only of their pretences, that they ſhould profeſs themſelves 
redeemed by Chriſt, but in the ſtile of the viſible Church, which 
fhould judge them to be ſo till they declared the contrary by their 
wicked ations; and it likewiſe holds true in a forenfſical and judi- 
cial ſtile, according to which whoſoever protefſeth himſelf to be 
redeemed” by Chriſt, and yet denies him in his deeds, is faid to deny 
the Lord that bought him ; it being alike as to the greatneſs of the 
Crime, whether he be really Redeemed, or profefſing himſelf to be 
ſo, denies his Redeemer. q Shall haſten their own Deſtruction, it 
may be Temporal in this World, to be ſure, Eternal in the other. 
It may be called ſwift, as coming upon them unawares, and when 
they think leaft of it, as 1 Theſſ. 5. 3. 


2 And many ſhall follow their || pernicious ways 
7, by reaſon of whom / the way of truth 7 ſhall be 


evil ſpoken of z. 


r Gr. Their Deſftrudions, 1. e. thoſe ways of Error which are at- 
tended with Deſtru&ion, (the Effe& being put for the Cauſe, by a 
Metonymy) and the ſence is, that as theſe falſe Teachers ſhall vring 
Deſtrution upon themſelves by their Herefies, ſo others, running 
with them into the ſame Errors, ſhall fall into the ſame DeſtruQien. 
{ Or, by whim, viz. theſe Falſe Teachers, or their Followers, or 
both. t The Goſpel, ſo called, as being the Doqrine of ſaving 
Truth. It is called the Way, Ads 9. 2. and19.9. and 22. 4. the 
way of Salvatior, Ads 16. 17. the way of the Lord, Adts 18. 26. 
x Blaſphemed, whether by falſe Teachers themſelves, and their Fol- 
lowers, or by others taking occaſion by them, ſee Rom. 2. 24. and 
1 Tim. 6. 1. Tit. 2. 5. \ : 

3 And * through covetouſneſs ſhall they with 
fcigned words x make merchandiſe with you y,whoſe 
judgment 5 now of a long rime a lingreth not 6, and 


their damnation c {lumbereth not 4. | : 

x Deceitful Speeches, which have a ſhew of Truth toliide their Er- 
rors. y As of Slaves or Beaſts; it ſeems to be a Metaphor taken from 
Merchants that ſpeak great things of bad Wares, the better to vend 
them : the ſence is, with ſpecious words, and pious pretences, they 
ſhall deceive you, to make a gain of you. x Or, Condemnation. 
a Being of old determined by God, and foretold in the Scripture, 
and fo nearer than they themſelves 1magine. b 7. e. Goes on apace, 
and haſtens on them. c Or, DeſtruFton. d 7, e. Watcheth, as rea- 
dy fo overtake them in its time; 1t may be a Metaphor taken from 
a Traveller, as Prov. 6.11. or the Apoſtle alludes to Deut. 32. 35. 
where the like expreſſion is found ; ſee v. 1. of this Chapter. 


a Ft * if God ſpared not + the Angels that finned, 
but caſt them down to Hell e, and delivered them in- 
to chains of darknels f,to be reſerved g unto judgment þ. 


FETER, 


*beyty bat are themſelves ſlaves to ſin: their flate who are ſeduced | 


o Either, 1. God the Father, ſo called, 


e Elſewhere called the Deep, Luke 8. 31. and the bottomleſs Pit, 
Rev. 9.1. and 11.7. and 17. 8. and 20. 1, 3. This implies a 
change, 1. Ot the ſtate of thoſe finning Angels, that whereas before 
it was the nigheſt among the Creatures, now it is the loweſt 2. Of 
their place, that whereas they were betore the Throne of God with 
the reſt of the Angels, they are now thruſt down into a lower place, 
agreeable to their Sin and Miſery. . What place that is we find not 
expretled in Scripture; and therefore we are not to be over-curious 
in our enquiries after it; but may reſt ſatisfied, that they are ex- 
cluded from the place of their Primitive Happineſs ; and are in a 
place, where they are afflifted with the pain both of loſs and ſence. 
f Either to be bound, or held with Darkneſs as with Chains; or 
kept in Chains under Darkneſs, as Jude 6. where Darkneſs may im- 
ply the miſery and horrour of their condition, and Chains, their 
obduration in their wickedneſs, their deſpiir of Deliverance, their 
expeRation of future Judgment, (Heb. 10. 27) toget"-er with the 
Providence and Power of God, watching over, and holding them 
in that condition, till final Vengeance come upon. them. It is a 
Metaphor taken trom Malefa&ors condemned, who are bound in 
Chains, and kept in the Dungeon till Execution. g So kept that 
they cannot eſcape. h Viz. That of the Laſt Day, the time of 
their tull Torment, in which the wrath of God, which they feel 
in a great meaſure now, will come upon them to the utmoſt. 

5 And 1paggd,not the old world z, but ſaved * Noah 
the cighth #& perſon, a preacher / of righteouſneſs , 
bringing in the loud upon the world of the ungodly 7. 

! The World, for Men 1n the World, viz. thoſe that lived in 
it before the Flood. þ Viz. together with the other Seven, his 
Wite, three Sons and their Wives, '1 Pet. 3. zo. Noah may be par- 
ticularly named, becauſe God had a ſpecial reſpe& to him, and for 
his ſake ſpared others. / Conſtituted to be ſo by Divine Authority 


and Commiſfion. m 7.e. Not only, 1, Of the Righteouſneſs of 


God, who had threatned to deſtroy the World for its wickedneſs, 
but, 2. Of the Righteouſneſs of Chriſt upon all them that ſhould 
Believe. It js not to be doubted but he preached the ſame Righte- 
ouſneſs whereof he himſelf was Heir, and that was the Righteouſ- 
neſs of Faith, Heb. 11. 7. and this he did not in Words only, but 
in his Aﬀions ; in that he built the Ark for the ſaving himſelf and 
his Houſhold, which was a Type of the Salvation of Believers by 
Chriſt; and, 3. Of the Righteouſneſs of Sandification, in his cx- 
horting the Men that then were, to Repentance and Holinets, if poſ- 
fibly thereby they might prevent the approaching Deluge. n The 
whole multitude of wicked Men then living in the World. 


6 And * turning the cities of Sodom and Gomor- * Gen. rg. 


rah o into aſhes, condemned them with. an overthrow 


f, T making zhem an enſample q unto thoſe that after 
ſhould live ungodly. 

o Which being the chief of the Five, include Admah, and Zeboim, 
Zoar, the fifth being ſpared for Lot's ſake, Gen. 14. compared with 
I9. 25. þ i.e. Puniſhed them with a total Subverſion, or brought 
that Deſtrution upon them to which he had condemned them. 
q Of his Wrath and Vengeance ready to be poured out upon others 


Chap. IL 


* Gen.7.1, 
9, 23. 


24. 


Jude 7. I. 
F Num.26. 


I Os 


that ſhould live ungodly, to deter them from the imitation of the . 


Sins of thoſe that had ſo miſerably periſhed. The word may be 
rendred a Tjpe, (as it is Heb. 8.5. and 9. 23.) viz, Of Hell Fire, 
which 1s to be the puniſhment of wicked Men at the -laſt Day; 
Fude 7. implies as much. As the deliverance of the 17aelites out 
,of Egypt, was 4 kind of Type. of the deliverance of all God's Peo- 
ple to the end of the VVorld, ſo the ſubverfion of theſe Cities was 
ſo memorable an inſtance of Divine Vengeance, that the Scripture 
frequently alludes to it, as a Type or Pattern, when it ſpeaks of 
the general Deſtruction of the VVicked of the VVorld. 


7 And * delivered juſt Lot, vexed 7 with the filthy 


converſation of the wicked /. 

ry. Grievouſly afflited or wearied. { Unjuſt, Lawleſs, (under- 
ſtand Men) ſuch as had no reſpe& to Law or Juſtice; in oppoſition 
to Lot, whom he calls juſt and righteous. 

8 (For that righteous man dwelling among them, 
in * ſeeing and hearing 7, vexed z his righteous ſoul 
from day to day with heir unlawful deeds.) 

# Their wickedneſs was ſo open and ſhameleſs, that he not only 
heard the report of it, but ſaw them commit it, J/a. 3. 9. u Gr. 
Tormented, 7. e. extreamly afflicted and troubled his own Soul, pro- 
voking himſelf to godly Sorrow at the fight and fame of their un- 
lawful deeds. His Grief was .voluntary, and he ative in it ; the 
like 1s faid of Chriſt, on occafion of Lazarus his Death, Fob 11. 33. 
where the Margin reads, he troubled himſelf. 


9 * The Lord knoweth x how to deliver the godly 
y out of temptations =, and to reſerve a the unjuſt un- 
to the day of judgment to be puniſhed. 


x According to the common Rule, that words of Knowledge in 
Scripture can note affe&ions, as Pſal. 1. ult. God's knowing here 
implies not only his Infinite Wiſdom, whereby he is never at a loſs, 
but knows all the various ways whereby the Godly may be deliver- 
ed ; but likewiſe his love and good-will to them, whereby he 1s 
ready to do it, hath a Heart for it; ſo the words taken, Eccl.4.13. 
Am. 3. 10. the Text reads, will no more be admoniſhed, the Mar- 
gin, knows not, (9c. y Thoſe that walk in the Steps of Juſt Lot and 
Noah, who was perfe in his Generation ; this concludes what the 
Apoſtle began, v. 4. The ſum is, If God ſpared neither wicked 
Angels, nor wicked Men, deſtroying the,old World and Sodom, but 
delivercd Lot and Noah, righteous rf: he ſtill hath Wiſdom, 
Power and Will, to deliver other g Men, and puniſh other 
wicked Men. xz AfﬀiQtions, James I. 2, 12. a The Greek, word 
is in the Preſent Tenſe, which may be underftood, either, 1. AS 
put for the Future, and then the ſence is as in our Tranſlation, that 
though God many times lets the wicked alone in this World, ſo 
that they eſcape preſent Puniſhmment, yet they ſhall not eſcape fu- 
ture Torment; they are a while ſpared, but never pardoned ; and 
when free from Temporal Evils, are reſerved for Eternal Ven- 


geance. Or, 2, It may be underſtood as in the Preſent v_ 
whic 


* Gen. 15, 
I6. 


*Plal. 119. 
158, 
Ezek. 9.4» 


F 1Cor.10. 
13s 


ui 
Ls 
bh 

1>0 
i! 

LS a 
5 


I Ds > at 
—_ 


_ or ITS " RO WS OR 
re tron es RI PIR 


IL T1 Chap. 11. 


which agrees well with the inſtances of God's Vengeance before- 
mentioned, which was executed on wicked Men in tins World; and 
then the ſenſe is, The Lord knows how to deliver the Godly out of 
Temptations when he ſees fit, even in thisLife, and how to reſerve 
- thoſe wicked Men, whom he puniſheth with Temporal Judzments 
or here, to a much more ſevere and dreadful puniſhment at the Day of 
E Judgment hereafter, 
_ * Jude + 10 Butchicfly 6 * them c that walk after the fleſh 
E oe d in the luſt e of uncleannels f, and deſpiſe || govern- 
"injan. - Ment g. Preſumptuous þ are they, ſelf-willed 7, they 
are not afraid to ſpeak evil of dignities #. 
b The Apoſtle here applies the general Dottrine delivered, to falſe 
Teachers, whoſe Charatter he gives in ſeveral particulars ; the ſenſe 
is, That God reſerves all wicked Men to the Day of Judgment, but 
4 thoſe eſpecially that ſecond their corrupt Doctrine with a wicked 
4 Converſation. c The Verb reſerve is to be repeated from the tormer 
4 Verſe. d To walk after Phe Weſh, is, Either, 1. To follow the 
ſ Condutt of the ſenſual Appetite, like brute Beaſts, which are led 
A by Senſe, not by Reaſon or Judgment : Or, 2. More eſpecially 1t 
'N implies their giving up themſelves to filthy Luſts, probably unnatu- 
Fe ral ones, Jude 7. going after ſlrange Fleſh. e i. e. Through, or out 
I of, implying the Cauſe, or Spring irom whence their actual Unclean: 
ut, # neſs came, viz. their own Luſt. f Or, Pollution, q. d. 1n the Luſt, 
[; whereby they are polluted, or in their impure Luft. g 7. e. Gover- 
nours, or Magiſtrates ; as Brotherhood for Brethren, 1 Pet. 2. 17- 
h Gr. Bold, or daring, viz. becauſe they are not afraid to ſpeak evil 
of Dignities. 7 Stubborn, refraRory, addiQed to their own Ways, 
and therefore will not be ruled by others. k Or, Glories, viz. Ru- 
lers and Magiſtrates, whom God hath made glorious, or on whom 
he hath put the Honour of being above others, and made then his 
j own Lieutenants and Vicezerents upon Earth. : | 
it Whereas angels / which are greater #2 1n Power 
1 Some and might z, bring not a railing accuſation o || agalall 
read, them p before the Lord. ; 
again/t 1 Good Angels, Jude 9g. m Either, greater than theſe audac1 
p. themſelves. Ous, falſe Teachers, or elſe greater than the. fore mentioned D1gnt- 
ties. n 7,e. Greater in their natural Strength, and in their Dignity. 
o Uſe not reviling, reproachful Languaze ; the ſame with ſpeaking 
evil in the former Verſe. p Either, 1. Againſt Dignities, ver. 10. 
and then the meaning is, That good Angels, great and qpowerful as 
they are, yet bring not a railing Accuſation before the Lord againſt 
Magiſtrates and Princes, but when they have had any thing againſt 
them, yet have carried themſelves with Modeſty, and due reſpect 
| to that Dignity in which God had placed ſuch, having a regard to 
A : Civil Government as God's Conſtitution, and being themſelves at 
26. ; God's Appointment, Guardians, and Keepers, even of wicked King- 
doms, as Dan. 10, and 11. Or, 2ly. Againſt themſelves, as in the 
7 Margin, and then the ſenſe is, That Angels do not reproach, nor 
7 revile each other, nay, not the Devil himſelf, as appears ud? 9. 
(which place may explain this) and therefore it did ill-become theſe 
- falſe Teachers, who were ſo much below Angels, to contemn, re- 
1 vile, or rail on Princes, and Civil Magiſtrates, who were ſo much 
above themſelyes ; and had their Authority from God. | 
12 But theſe 9 * as natural brute beaſts *, made 
to bstaken and deſtroyed /, ſpeak evil of the things 
that they underſtand not 7, and ſhall utterly perith 


in their own corruption z. 2 | 
* q The falſe Teachers before-mentioned. r Beaſts which are void 
of Reaſon, and follow only their ſenſual Inclination. / Being made 
"7 for Mens uſe, and ſo to be a Prey to them, while they haſten after 
£ their Food, they are taken in Nets and Snares; and being taken, 
* $ ar2 deſtroyed. | # Either the great Myſteries of Religion, whereof 
F: they are ſtupidly ignorant ; or rather, Dignities before-mentioned 
j which they (not knowing, or not conſidering them to be of God, 
P and of fo great Uſe to Men) following the Inclination of their own 
7 corrupt Natures, ſpeak againſt. # Or, ſhall be corrupted in their 
own Corruption, 1.e. ſhall be utterly deſtroyed by their own Fault 
£ and Folly ; penal Corruption (or Perdition) following upon ſinful. 
9s 4 The ſum is, That as brute Beaſts which have no Reaſon, follow their 
7 brutiſh Appet'te, fil] it lead them into Deſtruftion ; and where they 
{ X ſought their Meat, they find their Death, Prov. 7. 23. fo thele falſe 
Teachers, not being guided by Reaſon, much leſs by the Light of 
the Spirit, but meerly by ſway of their natural Inclinations, in 
ſpeaking evil of that Ordinance which God hath honoured, ſhall bring 
upon themſelves that Deſtruction they have deſerved. 


13 And ſhall receive the reward of unrighteouſneſs 
x, as they that count it pleaſure to riot in the day- 
time y : Spots zhey are, and blemiſhes 2, ſporting 
themſ:lves wirh their own deceivings a, while they 


feaſt with you 6. 

x Under this general Term,: all the ſeveral Sins they are charged 
with are comprehended, y This is ſaid to aggravate their Sin, and 
ſignifies either their Tmpudence in it, that they had caſt off all 
Shame, and practiſed their Luxury by Day-light, whereas ordinary 
Sinners are wont to chuſe the Night for ſuch Works of Darkneſs, 

| Rom. 13. 12, 13, and 1 Theſſ. 5. 7. Or their Security, that they 
| ſpent the Day of their Life .in their Pleaſures, placing their Happi- 
neſs in preſent Enjoyments, unmindful of a future Reckoning, and 
an eternal State. x Not only altogether polluted themſelves, but 
ſuch as defile others, and are Blemiſhes to the Church whereof they 
profeſs themſelves Members. a Some read Agapais inſtead of Apa- 
tais, leaving out the Pronoun, rendred, their own ; underſtand 
this of the' Love-Feaſts, in which they luxuriouſly gorged them- 
ſelves, This mizht well agree with Fude 12. but that the genera- 
lity of Greek Copies read Apatajs, which we turn Deceruings, 1. e. 
Either Errors, tzking the word paſſively, g. d. they do but make a 
Sport of Sin, and pleaſe themſelves with it. And this agrees too 
with * om 12. feeding themſe/v*s without fear : Or Cheatings, or 
Impofings upan others (taking Deceivings attively) 9. d. they ſport 


* Jer. 1243s 
Jude 10. 


W OWE WO . 08 8 EI heed 
IR ee oe EE IE 


3 P3. 


EL ere Laney 


1 OTE. 


tixnſelves while they ſo finely deceive you, pretendinf love 1n their | 


Feaſting with you,when they do it only to gratife their Appetites ; 
or ſporting themſelves, and making merry with whiat they have 
cheated you of. 6 Viz. In your Feaſts of Charity, with the ſpecious 
Pretence of which they covered their Nauzhtineſfs. 

I14 Having eyes c full of || adultery 4, and that” 
Cannot cealz trom {11 e, beguiling * unſtable touts f : 
an heare taey have exerciſed g with coverous practi- 
ces h: curſed Children 7. 

c He ment'o1s tie Eyes, both becauſe they fet in the Obie of 
Luſts into the Heart, 7ob 31. 1. Matt. 5. 28. and becaute the Sins 
of Luſt in the Heart appear eſpecially in the Eyes, Gen. 29. 7. 
Prov. 6. 25. d Fall of an Adwlter?ſs,which either may be an Hebra:fmm, 
the Concrete being put tor the Abficat, as drunken for Drunken- 
neſs, and thirſty for Thirſt, Dent. 2g. 19. or it may be a ppoverti.! 
Expreſſion of the wretchedneſs of ſuch Mens Hearts, when they 
ſtill carried an Adquliterefs in their Eyes. e Never fatisfed with 
looking upon, or {till looking about for ſuch Objetts as might en- 
Hame their Luſts, or ſtill ſeeking with wanton Looks to entice others 
to Folly. * Either alluring them by their Wantonnefs to embrace 
their falſe Do@rines, promifing them Pleaſures and carnal Liberties, 
wer, 18. Or enticing them to Lewdnefs, by inftilling talſe Doctrines 
into th:m, which tend to Licentiouſnefs. f Thole that were not 
well-grounded in the Faith and Dottrine of Holineſs, who might 
therctore eaſily be drawn atide. g An Heart wholly intent upon 
getting Gato, accuſtomed to it, and skilſul in it. þ The word is in 
the Plural Number, to ſhew, that theſe Seducers had feveral Arts 
and Ways of exerciſing their Covetouſneſs. 7; Gr. Children of the 
Curſe, It may be taken either atively, for ſuch as were Cauſes of 
4 Curſe, brouzht a Curſe with them ; or paſſively, for ſuch as we re 
worthy of a Curſe,or obnoxious to it ; as Children of Wrath, Epheſ. 2.2. 

15 Which have forſaken the right way 4, and are 


gone aſtray /, following the way of * Baliam z the + 


Jon of Boſor 7, who loved the wages of unrighteouſ: 
nels 0. 
k The way of Truth, ver. 2. 7. e. the way of Faith and Holineſs, 


which is the only right way to Happineſs, / Into the By-paths of 


Error. There is but one rizat way, and many wrong, in which 
they wander that leave the rizht. He ſeems to allude to Balaam, 
Numb, 22. who left the way of God, which was to be obedient to 
God, and not go beyond his Word, ver. 18. and ran into the way 
of Sin, when he went with Balak's Meſſengers to curſe God's Peo- 
ple; and therefore his way is ſaid to be perverſe, ver. 32. m &. In 
reſpett of their wicked lives : For, as Balaam was Diſobedient 
to God, and againſt his Command, went to Balah ; ſo thcfe Mea 
forſook the way of Truth preſcribed by God in his Word. 2. In 
reſpe& of their falſe Doftrine, Balaam taught Balub to entice the 
Children of Jae! to commit Fornication, and eat things ſacrificed 
unto Idols, Rev. 2.14. and theſe tauzht Men to commit Lewd- 
neſs, and indulge themſelves in their Senſualities; 3. Clietly in 
reſpett of their Covetouſneſs, as follows. n Either this is the Name 
of his Country called Pethor, Numb. 22. 5. and by change of two 
Letters, P into B, and Th into /, (frequent in the Syriach Language) 
Beſor, or Boſoy : Or, the Name of his Father, called Ber, in Numb. 
having two ' Names, unleſs the Apoſtle call him 87 in alluſion to 
Baſar, Fleſh, as being of a fleſhly Mind, as the falſe «- herc 
were. Thus Bethel was called Beta, i. 4.15. al Beelzet;b 
called Beelzebul, the God of Dung. Matth. 19. 25. 9 The Reward 
which Balak offered him for an uprighteous att, viz. the curſing of 
God's People. 

16 But was rebuked * for his iniquity, The dumb 
als ſpeaking with mans voice, forbad p the madneſs 
q of the propher 7. 

* Not only by the Anzel's ſpeaking to him, but by the Afs's, as 
follows. p Not in expreſs words that we read of, but the Afs's 
ſpeaking with humane Voice, diſcerninz the Angel before Baluam 
did, and going back, when he, carried out by the power of his 
Covetouſneſs, would needs go forward, were fo prodipious things 
as might ſuificiently convince him of his Sin, in going to Balak, 
contrary to God's Command at firſt given him; and it was-no ſmall 
Diſhonour put upon him, that he wiio would not hearken to God, 
ſhould have an Afs for his Teacher. q In going againſt God's Com- 
mand, and to curſe thoſe who, God had told him, were bleſled. 
O-jeet. Balaam had leave given him to go with Balak's Meſſengers, 
Num. 22. 20. and refuſed Balak's Offers, ver. 18. Anſw. Rplaam 
did not contemn the Gifts offered, but had a Defire after them, as 
appears by his enquiring of God the ſecond time, ver. 19. though 
God had fally revealed his Will to him before, ver. 12. 2ſy. God 
bad him go, that he might bleſs the People, wer. 12, compare with 
20, whereas he went not out of a reſpe& to God's Anſwer, but 
out of a covetous Mind, and a Defire to curſe 7rae!, as appears by 
Fofh. 24. 9, 19. and by the curſed Counſel he gave, Numb. 25. 1. 


. compare with 31. 16. and Rev. 2. 14. r Balaam is called a Pro- 


phet here, either, 1. Becauſe he pretended to be ſo: Thus the falſe 
Prophets are ſometimes called abfolutely Prophets, Fey. 6. 13. and 
26. 7,8, 11, Or, 2ly. Becauſe he really was a Prophet, though a 
wicked and covetous one; for he enquired of God, and had An- 
ſwers from him, Numb. 22. 8,9, 10, 18, 19. and Moſes favs ex- 
preſly, that the Lord put a word in Balaam's Mouth, Chap. 23. 5s, 
16. and that Prophecy concerning the Meſſiah, Xumb. 24. 17. could 
not but be of God ; yet it 1s probable, that Ba/aam, out of Cove- 
touſneſs, might ſometimes uſe Divination ; nay, it is plain in ſome 
caſes he did, Numb. 24. I. 


17 * Theſe are wells without water /, clouds that * ſude 1. 


are carried with a tempeſt 7, to whom the milt of 


darkneſs z is referved for ever. 

{ He compares Seducers, 1. To Well without Water + Pecauſe a3 2 
Well invites a Traveller to it, 1:1 hope of quenching his Thirft, but 
begng without Water, mocks his Expettation 5 fo faife Teachers 
making a ſhew of true Wiſdom, and faving Knowledge, driw Men 
to them, bat being deſtitute of ir, delude them, and make them 
no wiſer than they were. t 2, To Clos, &c, becauic az Clouds 

many 


 Gr.nn 4+ 


' J ” , - 
EATEN] 45> 


T2. 


Chap, H. 


hb ae, OW TT 


* Tude 15. 


> Acts = 


þ - 
Hebd.5.4. 
& 10. 25 


* Luke 12, 
$7, 48. 


* Prov. 25. 


many times promiſing Rain and- Refreſhment, either are ſcattered | 
by the Wind, or break out into a Tempeſt; ſo theſe when they 
promile to retreſh their Hearers Souls with the Truth of God, being 
themſelves deſtitute of it, do them no good, or with their pernicious 
Errors, or corrupt Manners, do them much harm. By this compa- 
riion he lets torth, 1. Their Inconſtancy, that like Clouds driven 
with the Wind, they are tofled to and fro, from one Dofrine to 
anofner, Epte/, 4. 14. And, 2. Their Deceitfulneſs, that they 
mike a ſhew of what they have not, as Clouds do of Rain, when 
ver they are ſcattered without yielding any. » j.e. The darkeſt 
Darkncfs, called utter Darkneſs, Matth, 8. 12. and 22.13. and 25. 
30. by which the Torments of Hell are ſometimes ſet forth, as well 
as fometimes by Fire. : 
15 For when they * ſpeak great ſwelling words of 
vanity x, they allure y through the luſts ot the fleſh 


p] 


s, through much wantonneſs a, thoſe that F were | 


| clean 5 eſcaped from them who live in error c. 
x 5. e. Big words, full of ſound, and void of ſenſe, at leaſt of 
Trut!), He tcems to tax the affeRted, vain Speech of Seducers, who 
were wont to clothe their erroneous Dottrines (it not diſguiſe the 
Truths of God) with ſtrange uncouth Phraſes, which made a ſhew 
of ſome rare Diſcoveries, or deep Myſteries, whereas indeed they 
were empty of any thing ſolid, or tending to Edification. y As 
with a Bait; a Metaphor taken from the manner of taking Fiſh. 
7 To which they give liberty, as a Bait to draw men after them, 
a This explains the former, and ſhews what Luſts they indulge men 
in, v5. Wantonneſs, and Uncleanneſs, þ 7;u!ly, or rea!ly, which 
1-ems the better reading than that in the Margin: And tins 15 ſajd 
© them, 1. Inreipet of the Proiettion they made of a real Con- 
verion. 2iv. In reſpedt ot the Aﬀent they gave to the Word by 
which they were called. 3Iv. In reſped of the change that appear- 
cd in their cutward Converſation. c Whether the Error of Judaiſm, 
or Heathenitm, wherein they had been formerly involved, and others 
{it!l were. This might be the cate 1n ſome whom yet there was no 
ſavino chan-e wrought, that they might be brought off from thoſe 
more toul wavs of Sin and Error in which they had walked, and yet 
mizht atterwards return to the ſame, or as bad, Mat.12.43.and 13.21. 
1s While they promiſe chem * liberty d, they 
them{lves are + the ſervants of *corruption e : for of 
whom 2 man 1s overcome, of the ſame he is brought 


' 
*+3 tw Fs. } TE 
Lil \/ LONIIS had / # 
_ 


2 Liberty for their Luſts, and fo from the Yoke of the Divine 
Law. They abuſed the Name of Chriſtian Liberty, and extended 
it to Licentiouſneſs. e Under the Power and Dominion of Sin. 
f tle alludes to the Law of War, according to which, he that 15 
overcome, and taken captive, by his Enemy, becomes his Servant. 
Theſe falſe Teachers that talked ſo much of Chriſtian Liberty, yet 
h-inz overcome by their own Luſts, and kept under by them, were 
the worſt of Slaves. ; Y 20 

20 For * if after they have eſcaped the pollurions 
of rhe world g. through rhe knowledge Þ of the Lord 
and Saviour ]-tus Chrift, they are again intangled 
therein. and overcome 7, the latter end is worſe with 

" o 


tem rh the beginning. 
e ThoſEMore groſs Wickeſſefſes in which moſt of the World 
ill lieth, rt Jobn 5.42. bþ Such a Knowledge of Chrift as brings 
with it an outward Retormation of Lite, though 1t do not puritte 


Chap.1I. Il P ET E R, Chap. HI 


the Heart. For that th2 Apoſtle doth not here ſpeak ot thoſe that 
were rovutcd in Chrift by a ſaving, and Heart-puritying Faith, ap- 


to their o!d Sins, yield up themſelves to them, and continue in 
them. D 

21 For * it had been betrer for them not to have 
known 4 the way of righteouſiels /, then atter they 
have known 77, to turn trom the holy commandment 
7: delivered unto them. 

þ Their Sin had been lefs, if they had not known the Truth, but 
now they fin againſt Knowledge, and therein their Apoltacy 15 
much worſe than their Ignorance would have been. / The way of 
obtaining Righteouſneſs by Chtiſt, and of /iving godly in C hrift, 2 Tim. 
2:12. preſcribed in the Goſpel : The ſame which 1s called the right 
way. vcr. 15, and the way of Truth, ver. 2. m The ſame 1n other 
words. It is called Holy, not only as proceeding from God, who 
is Holy, but as teaching nothing but what is holy, and being the 
means God uſcth in making Men holy, and as being oppoſed to 
the Pollntions of the World, before-mentioned. : 

22 Bur it is happened unto them according to the 
trug proverb /z, * The dog zs rurned to his own vomit 
434in o, and, The fow that was walihed, to her wal- 
I-wing in the mire p. | | þ 

n This is added, to prevent the Scandal that might ariſe from 
their Apoſtacy, 4. d. It is not to be wondred at, that they areagain 
entanaled in, and overcome by their former Pollutions, when there 
never was a throuzh change wrought in their Hearts. Dogs and 
Swine (Beaſts unclean by the Law) they ſtill were under the greateſt 
appearances of Reformation, and ſuch they now ſhew themſelves to 
be by their viſe apoſtacy. o As Dogs vomit up what is burthen- 
ſome to them, bat ſtill being Dogs, and not having changed their 
Natures by cating their Stomachs, lick up their own vomit again; 
ſo theſe under a Fit of Convittion through the Power ot the Word, 
diſ-orze thoſe Sins which burdened their Conſciences, but having 
thereby gotten ſome eaſe, and their old Niture, and love to their 
former Lutts fill remaining, they again return to the ſame Sins 
they had tor a time forſaken. p As Swine that naturally love the 
Dirt and Mire, if ſometimes they be waſhed trom it, yet {till re- 
taining their former Diſpotitions, return again to it : So likewiſe 
thcle here mentioned, however they may be waſhed from the Pol- 
Jutions of the World, and by the preaching ot the Goſpel brought 
it trom their former ways of Sin, and brought on to a Protetfion 


— 


— —— 


| coming f ? tor {inte the fathers g fell aſleep þ all Jer-17-15- 


. | p 1 YO» 0 
pears by er. 12, where he calls them unſtable Souls, 7 Return | things CONTNGE iS they were Irom the beginning of 22, 


of Holineſs, yet ſtill retaining their old Nature, and corrupt Diſpo- 
fitions, they are eaſily prevailed over by them, and ſo relapſed into 
their former Abominations. 


CHAT 


The deſign of this Epiſtle, 1, 2. Scoffers ſhould ariſe in the laſt time 
denying the coming of Chriſt to judgment and the end of the Weyld, 
3, 4+ Theſe the Creation and Prejervation of the World refuies, 
as alſo the Flood, for as the firſt World periſhed by Water, { ſhall 
this by Fire, $——7. The coming of Chriſt is deferred fir the 
Eleet's [ake, but it ſhall come unawares, and this a Motive to the 
practice of true Godlineſs, 8 I2. There ſhall be a new Heaven 
and a new Faith, confirmed by the Teſtimony of the Apoſtle Paul, 
whoſe Epiſtles ſome wreſted, of whom they muſt tabe heed, and £98 
in Chriſt a doxology to him, 43 —— 18. 


His ſecond epiſtle g, beleved, I now write unto 
you, in 6/4 which 1 tir up your pure minds 7 

by way ot remembrance /. | 
2 This confirms what hath been ſaid, That this Epiſtle was writ 
by Feter, as well as the former, r Or, ſincere mind ; the ſenſe is 
either, 1. I ſtir up your Minds, that they may be pure, and fin- 
cere ; and then he doth not ſo much commend them for what fey 
were, as dire& and exhort them to what they ſhould be, that they 
might receive Benefit by what he writ, there being nothing that 
contributes more to the fruitful entertaining of the Word, than 
Sincerit', and honeſty of Heart, when men lay aſide thoſe things 
which are contrary tot, and might hinder its efficacy, 1, Pet.2.1,2. 
Or, 21v. I ſtir up your minds, tho' pure and ſincere, to continuance 


- 


and conſtancy in that pure Doftrine ye have received, /See ch. 1:13. 

2 'That ye may be mindful of the words which | 
were ſpoken before by the holy prophets 7, 'and of 
the commandment x of us the Apoſtles of the Lord 
and Saviour .x. No 

t The Word of Prophecy, Chap. Ii. 19. he joyns the Prophets 
and Apoſtles together as concurring in their Dottrine, and ſo uſeth 
It as an Argument to perſiwade them to Conttancy in the Faith of 
the Goſpel, that what the Apoſtles Preached to them, was confirm- 
ed by what the Prophets under the the OldsTeſtament had taught be- 
fore, As 26. 2a. Fpheſ. 2,20. u By this he means the whole Do- 
Ctrine of the Goſpel Preached by him, and the other Apoſtles. See 
Chap. 2. 21. and 1 7ohn 3. 23. x VVho was the Author of this 
Commandment, and the Principal in giving it, and from whom the 
Apoſtles received it, who were but Miniſters, and Inſtruments in 
delivering 1t to others. 

3 * Knowing this firſt y, that there ſhall come in *1Tim.z.1 
the laſt days s 1cofters a, walking after their own b 
luſts c. ; 

3 Eſpecially, as being very neceſliry to be known. The Apo- 
ſtle having in the tormer Chapter cautioned theſe Saints againſt the 
more cloſe Enemies' of the Goſpel, Seducers, and falſe Teachers, 
here he foretels them- of more open Enemies, profane Scoffers. 
7 SEE I Cor. 10, 11, and 2 Tim. 3.1, a Profane Contemners of 
God, and Deriders of his Truth, P/al. 1.1, and 119. 5 Jt. 
28.14, 22. b Such as are natural to them. c Zude 18, Luſts of 
Ungodlineſs. : 


4 And ſaying, * Where d is the promiſe of his e * Iſa.gas: 
I 2: 


the creation 7. | 

4 Queſtioning, or denying the great Truths of the Goſpel, there- 
by to encourage themſelves in walking after their own Luſts. e Viz. 
Chriſt mentioned, ver. 2. Poſfibly theſe Scoffers might drop the 
Name of Chriſt by way of Contempt, not vouchſafing to mention 
it, as the Fews did, Fohn 9g. 29. g. 4. VVhere is the Promiſe of 
his coming whom you expett ? f His coming to Judge the VVorld, 
4. d. His Promiſed coming doth not appear, the Promiſe of it is 
not tulnlled. g VVho died in the Faith of Chriſt's coming, and 
had the Promiſe of it. þ 7.e. Died ; the uſual Phraſe of Scrip- 
ture which theſe Scoffers ſeem to ſpeak in derifion ; 9.d. itis ſo long 
ſince the Fathers fell afleep (as you call it) that it were more than 
time for them to be awakened, whereas we ſee the contrary. 
7 7,e, The VVorld continues to be the ſame it was, and hath the 
ſame Parts it had ; we fee nothing changed, nothing aboliſhed, but 
ſtill Nature keeps its old Courſe. Thus they argue; That becauſe 
there had been no ſuch great Change, therefore there ſhould be 
none ; becauſe Chriſt was not yet come to Judgment, therefore he 
ſhould not come at all ; not conſidering the Power of God, who 
is as able to deftroy the VVorld, as to make it; nor the VVill of God 
revealed in his VVord concerning the end of it. 


5 For this they willingly are ignorant of /, that 
by the word of God #2 the heavens were # of old o, 
and the earth p || * ſtanding out of the water, and || Gr. cor- 


in the water g. | fofrongs F 
| They will not know what they ought to knovw, and if they : Pla), by "I 
would ſearch the Scripture, might know. m The Command of 2. 130.0- Re 
God, or Word of his Power, as it is called, Heb. 1. 3. See Gen. I. 6, | t 
9. Pſalm 33.6. and 148. 5. n VVere created, or had a Being gt- 26 
ven them, Gen. 1.6. o From the beginning of the VVorld, p The If 
Globe of the Earth, which comprehends likewiſe the Seas, and R1- M 
vers, as part of the whole. q According to our Tranflation, the | 35 
ſenſe of theſe words may be plainly this, That the Earth ſtand- Rc 
ing partly out of the water (as all the dry Land doth, whoſe Re 
Surface is higher than the water) and partly in the water (as 1 
thoſe parts do which are under ic) or in the midſt of the water, 
as being covered, and encompaſled by Seas and Rivers. But mo 
Expoſitors follow the marinal Reading, and render the Greek, word 
by conſiing ; and then the meaning may be, either, 1. That the 


Earth conſiſting of Water, as the matter out of which 16 was Wy 


3-1 


« C0F- 
ge 
1, 24+ 


126.6. 


Chap. 111. 


med, (Moſes calling the Chaos, which was that matter, Water, Gen. 


© Ver, BC 


f 2 Theſl. 
1.8. 


* Pl.90.4, 


F Hab. 2.3. 
Heb. 10. 


5 


18, 
| Ezek.18. 


33 4325 


6 $53 ye 
X 33. IIs 


F 1 Theff. 
$ 2, 


_ of God Almighty, Rev. 15. 14- 


ul. P E 


—_—__ 


1. 2.) and by Water, from which it hath its Compa&neſs and Solt- 
dity, and without which it would be wholly dry, meer uſeleſs Duſt, 
unfit tor the Generation, and ProduQion of natural Things. If we 
underſtand the Words thus, the Argument lies againſt the Scof- 
fers; for the Earth thus conſiſts of, and by Water, yet God made 
uſe of the Water for the deſtroying of the World ; and fo natural 
Cauſes are not ſuthcient for its Preſervation, without the Power ot 
God ſuſtaining it in its Being ; and whenever he withdraws that 
Power, in ſpite of all inferior Cauſes, it muſt periſh. Or, 2ly, The 
words may be thus read, The Heavens were of old, and the Earth (ſup- 
ply from the former Clauſe) was out of the Water, and conſiſting by, 
or in the Water ;, and the meaning is, That the Earth did emerge, 
Or 4pPear out of, or above the Water, viz. when God gathered the 
Waters together, and made the dry Land appear; and doth conſiſt by, 
or among, Or in the midit of the Waters, as was before explained, 

6 Whereby 7 the world / that then was, being 0- 
verflowed with water, periſhed. 

r By which Heavens, and Water mentioned in the former Verſe, 
the Foundations of the great Deep being broken up, and the Win- 
dows of Heaven opened, Gen. 7. 11. Or, by the Word of God, as 
the principle Cauſe, and the Water as the inſtrumental, which, at 
his Command, was poured out upon the Earth, both from above 
and below. / The Earth, with all the Inhabitants of it, Eight 
Perſons excepted. This the Apoſtle alledgeth againſt the fore-men- 
tioned Scoffters, who ſaid, that all things continued as they were, 
when yet the tlood had made fo great a change in the Face of the 
lower Creation. 

> Bur * the heavens 7, and the earth which are 
now, by the ſame word are kept in ſtore x, reſer- 
ved unto Þ fire y againſt the day of judgment -, and 
perdition of ungodly men 9. 

t The Etherial or Starry Heaven, as well as Aerial ; for ver. 10, 
12. he diſtinguiſheth the Heavens that are to periſh by Fire, trom 
the Elements ; and ver. 13. he oppoſeth a new Heaven, to that 
Heaven which is to be conſumed ; but the new Heaven 1s not meant 
meerly of the Aerial Heaven. And why ſhould not this be meant 
ot the ſame Heavens, which elſewhere in Scripture are ſaid to periſh ? 
Fob 14. 12. Fſal, 102. 26, All of them ſhall wax old, &c. u The 
lame as v2r. 5. x Are kept fate as in a Treatury, and untouched 
tor a time, ti1at they may be deſtroyed at laſt. y That they may 
be conſumed by it. The Deftruction of the World: by Fire at the 
laſt day, is oppoſed to the Deſtruction of it by Water in the Flood. 
7 The General Judgment. @ This the Apoſtle ſpeaks with an Em- 
phatis, becauſe they were ungodly, againtt whom he here bends his 
Diſcourſe, ; IS 

$ Bur, beloved, be not ignorant 6 of this one thing, 


that one day 7s with the Lord c as a thouſand years d, 


and a * thouſand years as one day. 

b i. e. Be ſure of it : The ſame Word is here uſed, as v. 5. and fo 
he cautions them againſt the Ignorance of Scoffers, and to prevent 
if, would have them certainly know this one thing, which is extant 
in the Scripture, which toretels Chriſt's coming. c The Lord Je- 
ſus Chriſt, of whoſe coming he ſpeaks. d By a Synechdoche, a 
thou/and years is put for any, even the longeſt Revolution of time, 
and the Senſe is, That though there be great difference of time, 
Jong and ſhort, with us who are ſubje& to time, and are meaſured 
by 1t ; yet with him who is Eternal, without Succeſſion, to whom 
nothing is paſt, nothing future, but all things preſent ; there is no 
difference of time, none long, none ſhort, but a thouſand Years, 
nay, all the time that hath run out ſince the Creation of the World | 
is but as a Day; and we are not to judge of the Lord's delay 1n co- 
ming, by our own Senfe, but by God's Eternity. : BE: 

9 * The Lord is nor ſlack e concerning his promile, 
as ſome men f count flackneſs, bur is + long-ſutfering 
to us-ward g, not || willing that any þ ſhould perith, 
but that all : ſhould come to repentance. 

e i.e. Doth not deter the fulfilling of it beyond the appointed 
time, 1/z. 60. ult, f Either the Scofters here mentioned, who, 
becauſe of Chriſt's not yet coming, queſtioned whether he would come 
at all; as if God had changed his purpoſe, or would not fulfil it ; 
Or Believers themſelves, who, through the weaknels of their Faith, 
and greatneſs of their Sufferings, might grow into ſome degree of 
Impatience, and think Chriſt ſlow in coming to avenge their Cauſe, 
and give them their Reward. So much may be gathered trom Rev. 
5.10, g To usBzlievers, or us Ele&t. h Any that he hath ordain- 
ed to Life, though not yet called. j All whom he hath elefted : he 
would have the whole number of them filled up, and deters the Day 
of judgment till it be ſo : Or, this may be meant not of God's ſecret 
and effetual Will, but of his r-vealed Will, whereby he calls all to 
Repentance promiftuouſly that hear the Goſpel preached, hath made 
it their Dutv, approves of it, hath preſcribed it as the way of Salva- 
tion, commanded them to ſeek Salvation in that way, and is ready 
to receive, and fave them upon their repenting. Sce I Tim. 2. 4. 

10 But * the day of the Lord & will come as a thief 


in the night /: in the which + the heavens 22 ſhall 
paſs.away 7 with a great noiſe o, and rhe elements p 
{hall melt with fervent hear 9, rhe earth 7 alſo and 


the works / that are therein thall be burnt up. 

k The Day of Judgment, is here called the Day of the Lord 
by way of Eminence, as the great Day, Jude 6. and the great Day 
and the Day of the Lord Jeſus, 
x Cor. 1. 8. and 5. 5. and 2 C9. 1. 14. and Phil. 1. 6, 1o. 
1 As a Thief comes ſuddenly and unexpetedly, when he thinks 
all in the Houſe are moſt ſecure. m Viz. Thoſe that are vilible, 
in diſtin&tion from the Empyreal Heaven, or place of glorified 
Spirits. n Either wholly, fo as to ceaſe to be; or rather, as 
to their preſent Being and Condition, ſo as to ceale to be what they 
now are, and to give place to the new Heaven, Rev. 21. r. The 
ſame word is uſed, Matth. 24. 35, Luke 15, 17. . 9 Either fiftly 


T ER. 
and violently, or with ſuch a Noiſe as is uſually cauſed by ſuch vio- 
lent and ſpeedy motions. p The Elements, in a natural Senſe, as 
integral parts of the Univerſe, Air, Water, Earth. q So ver. 12. 
where another Word is uſed in the Greeb, which properly f1gnifies 
melting, or being on fire, or burning, ſhall be Giflolved or deſtroyed. 
So the word fignifies, John 2. 19. and 1 Fohn 3. 8. r The habita- 
ble part of the World, though the Earth, as a part of the World, 
be included in the Elements Lefore-mentioned, yet here it may be 
taken with reſpedt to its Inhabitants, and the thinzs contained in it. 
/ Not only artificial, Mens Works but natural, all that variety of 
Creatures, animate and inanimate, wherewith God hath ſtored this 
lower World for the preſent uſe ot Man; and fo all thoſe deleQtable 
things in which carnal Men ſeck their Happineſs. 

11 Seeing then thar all theſe chings ſhall be diffol- 
ved, * what manner of perſons ? ought ye to be in a!! 
holy converſation and godlineſs » 2 

'* Seeing the coming of the Lord will be ſo terrible, as to bring 
with it the Conſumption of the World, and the deſtruttion of thele 
things here below, upon which we are ſo apt to ſet our AﬀeRions. 
# How prudent, accurate, diligent, zealous, and every way excel- 
lent Perſons ? The Greek, word is often uſed by way of Admiration 
ot ſome ſingular Excellency in Perſons or Things, Marth. 8. 27. 
and Mark 13. 1. Luke 1. 29, « The words in theGreek are both 
1n the Plural Number, and may imply not only a continued courſe of 
holy walking throughout our whole time, but likewiſe Diligence in 
the performance of all ſorts of Duties, and exerciſe of all thole ya- 
r!ous Graces wherewith the Spirit of God turniſheth Believers, in 
order thereto. 


Chap. II]: 


12 Looking for x, and || haſting unt» y the co- 4 Or, kzt- 
ming of the day of God >, wherein the heavens being "s the. 
on fire, ſhall be diſſolved, and the elements ſhall melc © 


with fervent hear. 

x Pariently waiting tor, and expeRting. y By fervent Dctire of 

it, and diligent Preparation for it. x The Day of the Lord, v. 10, 
13 Nevertheleſs we, according to his promiſe «, 


look for + new heavens, and a new earth b, wherein + 1tz. 5+. 


dwelleth righteouſneſs c. 


17.& 65, 


a The places cited in the Margin, to which this Text ſeems to 22- 


refer, ſpeak of a new ſtate of the Church here in the World, yet 
by way of allufion to the Renovation of the World, which 1s ul- 
timately there promiſed, and the Perpetuity of the Goſpei-Thurch 
till then, 1s thereby atſured. - b Inſtead of the prefent Worid which 
1s to be conſumed by Fire, ver. 10. 12. or the firtt Heaven and 
Earth which paſs away, Rev. 21. 1. Theſe will be new Heavens, 
and a new Earth, either as to their Subſtance, or as to their Qua- 
lities, retined and purified from all Defilement, and free - trom all 
that Vanity to which the Creature was made ſubje& by the Sin of 
Man, Rom. 8, 20, 21, * 7.e. Perpetually abideth, and not on!y 
tor a time, Rom. 8. 11, and 2 Cor. 6. 15, and 2 7im. 1.14. 
c Either this may be underſtood of Righteouſneſs in the Abſtract, 
that together with the Deſtrucion of the World, the Kingdom of 
Sin ſhall be deſtroyed, and God's Ele&, the Inhabitants of the 
new VVorld ſhall be filled with Righteouſneſs, whereas before Sin 
had dwelt in them: Or elſe the Abſtract may he put for the Con- 
crete, and by Righteouſneſs may be meant righteous Perſons, who 
only ſhall be the Inhabitants of the new VVorld, the wicked being 
turned into Hell, Rev. 21. 27. And by this way of expreſſing it, 
may be implied the Perfe&ion of the Righteouſneſs ot tuch. Not 
only the new Heaven is mentioned, but the new Earth, becauſe the 


| whole VVorld will then be the Pofieſſion and Kingdom of the Saints 


who follow Chriſt wherever he goes. 


14 Wherefore, beloved, ſeeing ye look for ſuch 


things d, be diligent, * that ye may be found of him * x Cor. x. 


e 1n peace f, without ſport, and blamelef g. 

d Chriſt's coming to Judgment ; the Deſtrufion ot this VVorld ; 
4 new Heaven, and a new Earth, in which dwells Righteouſneſs. 
e Chriſt the Judge. f At Peace with God, trom whence proceeds 
Peace of Conſcience, and an amicable, peaceable Ditpoſition toward 
others ; all which may here be comprehended. z Either, 1. By 
theſe words he means abſolute Perfe&ion ; and then he ſhews what 
we are to deſign and aim at in this Life, though we attain 1t not 
till we come into the other : Or, 2ly, A through SanRtification 
through Faith in Chriſt, a being got above fleſhly Luſts, and the 
Pollutions of the VVorld, and any ſuch Carriage as our Hearts may 
reproach us for, 1 Tim. 6.14. If it be objefted, That ſuch, ha- 
ving Sin ſtill in them, cannot be ſaid to be without ſpot, and blame- 
leſs, in the fizht of God. It may be anſwered, That though thev 
have Sin in them, yet being, through the Righteouſneſs of Chritt 
1mputed to them juſtified in the ſight of God, and accepted 1n the 
Beloved, Eph. r. 6. he over-looks their Infirmities, and 1mputes no 
ſin to them, ſees no Spot in them ſo as to condemn them tor 1t. 
The Apoſtle ſeems here to retle& on the Seducers betore-mentioned, 
whom, ch. 2. 13. he had called Spots and Blemifhes ; and he per- 
ſwades theſe Saints to look to themſelves, that they mit be found 
of Chriſt (not ſuch as the other were, but) withwr por, and blame- 
leſs ; or, as it is Trantlated, Eph. 5. 27. without Blemiſh, 1, e, in a 
State of Sandtification, as well as Juſtification. 

15 And account þ hat the long-ſuftering of our 
Lord z zs ſalvation &; even as our beloved brother / 
Paul alſo, according to the wiſdom 2 given unto him, 


hath written unto you 7. 
h Reckon with your ſelves, and be confidently perſwaded ; or 
take for granted. 7 Viz. In his not yet coming to Judgment, and 
bearing with ſo much fin in the VVorld, without preſently punifh- 
ing it. & 7. e. Tends, or conduceth to Salvation, in that hereby 
he gives ſpace for Repentance to the Elett unconvertied, and allow- 
eth time tor the building up, and perte&ing thoſe that are convert- 
ed, ver. 9. 1 Not only Brother in Chriſt, as a Sint, but in Othce 
as an Apoſtle. m That eminent and- profound Knowledge 1n the 


Myſteries of the Goſpel in which Pau! did excel, 1 Cor. SY 7. 
phe!. 


8, 

Phil. 1.10» 
1 Thel\. 2. 
13.X 5s 


3” 
- Js 


* Rom. 8. 
19. 


24» 
1 The. 4. 
I 5s 


Toe Pet. Io 
I6. 


Chap. I. 


Epheſ. 3. 2, 4. Peter makes ſuch honourable mention of Paul, 1, That 
he might commend to the Jewiſh Chriſtians the Doftrine Paul had 
preached, though a Miniſter of the Uncircumcifion. 2ly, To ſhew 
that he had nothing the worſe Thoughts of him for being ſo ſharply 
reproved by him, Gal 2. And 3ly, /That he might arm the Saints 
againſt thoſe Hereticks that abuſed Paul's Writings, and wreſted 
them to their own meaning (probably) to Patronize their Errors. 
n Unto you Jewiſh Believers, viz. Either, 1. In his Epiſtle to the 
Romans, chap. 2. 4. where 15 a Paſſage very like this : Or, 2ly, In 
his Epiſtle to the Hebrews, which, though-t were not Entitled to 
the Jews of the Diſperſion, yet was written to their Nation ; and 
in that Epiſtle ſeveral places there are of the ſame purpoſe with 
this here. See Heb. 9. 28. and 10, 23, 25, 35, 37- and other 
Epiſtles of Paul to the Fews we have none; and in this he ſhews 
much of that Wiſdom God gave him in the Myſtery of the Goſpel ; 
and in this likewiſe are many things hard to be underſtood, 


16 Asalfo in all hz epiſtles o, * ſpeaking in them 
of theſe things p : In which q are ſome things hard 


3 Cor. 15: to be underſtood, which they that are unlearned 7, 


and unſtable /,, wreſt z, as they do alſo the other 1crip 
tures to their own deſtruction z. | ; 


0 To make the Senſe compleat, we muſt ſupply here from the 
former Verſe, he hath written. p Viz. concerning the ſecond co- 
ming of Chriſt, and end of the World, the Patience that ſhould 
be exerciſed in waiting for it ; about avoiding Scoffers that deny 
theſe Truths and the other Inſtruions, contained in theſe two Epi- 
itles, but eſpecially in the two latter Chapters of this ſecond Epiſtle. 
q In which Epiſtle, or rather, in which things contained in Paul's 
Epittles, (for the Greek Relative is of a different Gender, and can- 
not agree with Epiſtles) 9. d. Some of the Dofrines delivered by 
Paul in his Epiſtles, are hard to be underſtood. And fo this doth 
not prove Paul's Epiſtles, much leſs the whole Scripture, to be ob- 
ſcure, and dark. The Stile and Expreffion may be as clear as the 
Nature of the things will bear, and yet the things themſelves. ſo ex- 


LL FOUN 


preſſed may be hard to be underſtood, either b; reaſon of their 
own obſcurity, as Prophecies, the Excellency and Sublimenefs of 
them, as ſome myſterious Dottrines, or the weakneſs of Mens minds 
and their Incapacity of apprehending Spiritual things, 1 Cor. 2. 
14. compared with chap. 13. 9, 10. r They that are ignorant of 
the Scripture, unskilful in the Word of Righteouſneſs, Heb. 5. 13. 
or indocile, that will not be Inftrued. / Such as are ill-groundea, 
and therefore unſtedfaſt, and eafily deceived, ch. 2. 14. See Eph. 
4-14. £ Pervert the Scripture, and offer violence to it, and, as it 
were, wrack and torture 1t to-make jt confeſs what it never meant. 
4u Eternal Deſtruftion, viz. while they uſe the Scripture to coun- 
tenance their Errors : or ſtumble at ſome things in them, which 
are obſcure, thereby taking occaſion to deny the Truth of God, and 
ſo make the Scripture the Inſtrument of their Perdition, which God 
appointed to be the means of Salvation. 


17 Ye therefore, beloved, * ſeeing ye know zhe/e 
things x before-hand, beware lelt ye alſo y being led 
away by the error of the wicked, fall from your own 
ſtedfaſtneſs 2. 


x Which I have been now writing unto you of, viz. That the 
Judge will certainly come ; or, that Hereticks, Deccivers and Scof- 
ters will come ; or both may be comprehended. y As well as others 
have been. #7 The ſtedfaſtneſs of your Faith. This Admonition 
he gives them not to diſcourage them with Fear of Apoſtacy, but 
to awaken them to that holy care, which would be a means to pre- 
vent it ; and ſo to keep them from fecurity, and truſt in themſelves, 
not to weaken their Faith, and Reliance on the Promiſe, 


18 But grow in grace a, and 27 the knowledge 6 
of our Lord and Saviour Jeſus Chriſt : To him be glo- 


ry c both now and for ever. Amen. 

a In all thoſe ſpiritual Gifts ye have received from Chrift, efpe- 
cially ſanQifying. 6 In Faith whereby ye are ſanftified, and made 
Partakers of that Grace. c Which velongs only to God ; and there- 
fore this proves Chrift to be God, 


The FIRST EPISTLE- 


 & JOHN 


The 


ARGUMENT. 


grant the Pen-Man of zhe firſt Epiſtle, 27 doth not «rok there hath been any doubt ; the Ancients ge- 


nerally aſcribing it to the Apoſtle St. 


John. The time o 


his writing it is uncertain ; ſome aſfigning to it an 


earlier, others a later date. It is thought to have been written diredly to the Chriſtian Jews, not /1rving in Judea, 
but remote in Parthia, (where :t appears great numbers of them xejided) being ſtiled by a noted Father, The Epi- 


{tle ro the Parthians : The deſign of it 3s to confirm them in the great fundamental Doftrine of Chriſtianity, That. 


our Lord Jeſus was the Meſſiah, agarnft the attempts of divers apoſtate or degenerate Chriſtians , who (whether 
this Epiſtle were of the former or later date)did in his 1me deny, or eſſentially deprave that moſt important Ar- 
ticle. And not only to induce them almoſt ſtedfaſtly to believe '1t, but to impreſs it more deeply upon their Souls, 
ro reduce the more licentious, to raiſe and quicken the dead and carnal to a more ſtrif, lively, vigorous Chriſtia- 
nity; and (which 1s greatly inculcated) to excite and enflame mutual Chriſtian Love among them, as that which 
would more ſtrongly fortify them againſt the Endeavours of Seducers, and render their Communion more pleaſant 
among themſelves. The other two Epiſtles are very much of the fame Argument (zbo* the latter hath ſomewhat 
of a different and peculiar concernment,) but doubted by ſome, whether by the ſame Pen-man, upon very inſuffi- 
cient grounds, the matter and ſtyle, plainly enough ſhewing them to be this Apoſtle's. 


CAT L 


The certainty and excellency of the Do&rine and Perſon of Chriſt, in 
whom we have eternal Life and Communion with God, 
This cannot be without Holineſs ; nor is the Blood of Chriſt applied to 
us, $=—7. Not that we can be without Sin ; but we muſt confeſs 
our Sins before God, and they ſhall be forgiven us, $10. 


— 


Hat which was from the beginning a, which 


we have ſeen with our eyes, * which we have 
looked upon, and our hands have handled 6 of the 


word of lite c. | 

a The Order of Diſcourſe requires we begin with the laſt thing 
in this Verſe, ths Word of Life.” This phraſe [the Word] is, by this 
Apoſtle (not here to enquire in what Notion, ſome, both Zemws and 
Pagans before took it) familiarty uſed, to ſignifie the Ererna! Son 
of Gol : And whereas this is his uſual Stile in ſpeaking of 'rhis $a- 
cred Perſon, as in the entrance of his Geſpel (fo very like that of this 
Epiſtle) ſo often over in his Revelation, chap. 19. 13. and that af- 


terwards in this Epiſtle it ſelf, chap. 5. 7. he ſo readily falls into | 
; of him frequent in Scripture, Prov.' 8. and elſewhere) comprehend- 


| ing all 7deas of things to be created or done ; tous, the immediate 


the mention of him by this Name (as not doubting to be under- 
ſtood) it is ſcarce to be ſuppoſed, that being ſo conſtant to him- 
ſelf herein, he ſhould uſe the ſame form of Speech, without any 
ſuch Intendment in this place, where the Circumſtances do both al- 
low and invite us ſo to underſtand him. Nor doth the addition to 
it ' here [the Word of Life] render it the /efs fit to be- applied to 
this purpoſe, but rather the more ; as ſerving to denote the peculiar 
Excellency of this word, that he 1s the living and vivifyins Word ; 
whereupon he alfo ſtiles him in the following Verſe, ſimply, the 
Liſe; and that eternal Life {which is fit to be noted here, v;x. that 


theſe three Expreſſions, the Word of Life, the Life, and that eternal 
Life ; do by the contexture of the Diſcourſe, plainly mean the fame 
thing, and ſeem in their principle Intendment, to be ſet down as 
ſo many Titles of the Son of God) deſigning to repreſent him as the 
original and radical Life, the root of the holy divine Life, to all who 
partake-thereof agreeably to his own words concerning him in the 
Goſpel, Fohn 1. 4. In him (viz. the Word) was Life, and the Life 


was the Light of Men, (i. e. the Word was a vital enlivening Light) 


and chap. 5. 20. of this Epiſtle, He (viz. the Sohn of God) is Eter- 
nal Life: And to our Lord's Words of himſelf, I am the Life, John 
11.25. chap. 14.6, and that the Father had given him to have Life 
in himſelf, chap. 5. 26. (and conſequently, to be capable of being 
to others, an Original, or Fountain of Life.) Yet whereas by | the 
Word) and [ the Word of Hed is often fhgnified the Goſpel, (chap. 2. 
5. Phil. 2.16. and elſewhere) it ſeems not incongruous or diſagree- 
able to this Context, to underſtand the Apoſtle, as defigning to 
comprehend both the meanings together, in one Expreſſion apt enough 
to include them both. { See Dr. Hammond in loco.) Nor are they of 
ſo remote an Import, conſidered in their relation t0, 1s, as not fitly to 


' admit of being both intended at once. The Son of God being his 


interngl Word, the Word of his Mind, his Wiſdom (another appellation 


Original of Light and Life, and by whoſe vivitying Beams we arc, 
eſpecially 'to be transformed into the Divine Likeneſs ; © the Goſpel 
being his external Word, the Word of his Mouth, the Radiation of 


thoſe Beams themſelves. As wedo our ſelves firſt conceive, and form 


in our Minds, . what we afterwards utter.and expreſs : Only where- 
as our thought, or, the Word of our Mind, *is fluid and ſoon vaniſhes ; 


God's (in whom is no change) is permanent,” con-ſubſtantial and 


co-eternal with himſelf, The Word was with God, and. the Word wa 


God * 


Chap. L. 


*Mark 1 J. 
23, 


, Chan. I. 


* John 1, 
I, 2, 


that one Expretfion, thatin common Diſcourſe, ſpeaking of the Sun, 
in reference to our ſelves; we often coniprehend together 1n our mean- 
ing, both the Boxy of the Sun it ſelf, and its Beams, as when we ſay 
it enlightens us, revives us, ſhines in at this Window, or upon that 
Dial, wedo not intend ( as reaſonably we cannot ) to exclude either, 
but mean the Sun doth it by its Beams. And now the Notion being 
ſetled of { the iVord of Life ] which was neceſſary firſt to be done, and 
which required a larger Diſcourſe) we may the more eaſily perceive, 
how what is here ſaid of it, may inthe one Senſe or the other be ap- 
plied thereto. b So the Living Word, in the fir$ ſenſe was, viz. when 
all things elfe began ; which is not ſaid z# ſelf then to have begun, as 
Fohn 1. 1. In the Beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, 
and, at the next ſtep, the Word was God. And with what is ſaid by 
this Word himſelf ( then taking another, but an equivalent Name, the 
Wiſdom of God ) Prov. 8. 22, 23, to 30. The Lord poſſeſſed me in the 
beginning of his way before his Works of old. T was ſet up from Ever- 
laſting, from the Beginning, or ever the Earth was, when, &C.m— 
Then was I by :m, as one brought up with him, &c. were | from the 
Bezinning ] and | from Everlaſting ] we ſee is all one. See of this 
Epiſtle chap. 2. 13, 14. c Theſe are all Expreffions indifferently ap- 
plicable both, 1. To the Perſon of the S5n of God, primarily meant by 
the Word of Life ;, for that ſame glorious Perſon who was from the Begin- 
niag with the Father, viz. being now incarnate, became the Obje& 
of theſe their very Senſes, to this, and the other Apoſtles, who had ſo 
frequent opportunity to hear, and ſee, and behold him, and even 
to handle him with their Hands, Luke 24. 39. fohn 20. 25. 
And: 2. To the Goſpel Revelation, a ſecondary ( not unintended ) No- 
tion of the Word of Life ; and whereof theſe latter Expreſſions ſeem 
more ſpecially meant ; they denote the perfed certainty the Apo- 
ſtles had ( the reſt of whom his manner of ſpeaking 'feems pur- 
poſely to comprehend with himſelf) af that Truth, which ( as he 
after ſpeaks ) they teſti/f2d. It being their Office and Buſineſs as 
Apoftles fo to do, fee Join n5.27. Afs 1.21, 22. Chap. 4. 20, 
And it was neceſſary they ſhould be able to do it with ſuch allwance 
as theſe Expreſſions import. Therefore having ſaid what wehve 
heard, which imports a more overly Notice, 'tis added, which, we 
have ſeen, a much more certain way of knowing, as 2 Pet. I. 16, \7, 
and with our Eyes, a more lively Expreſſion of that Certainty, ys 
Fob expreſſes his expetted fight of his Redeemer, chap. 19. 27. All 
to ſiznifie it was not a caſual, tranſient Glance, 'tis farther ſaid, | 


hy 


I FOHN, 
God, Fobn 1, 1. Neither are theſe two Senſes of [" the Word of Life } 
lefs ntiy ( or with more impropriety ) comprehended together under | 


which we have loohed upon, i. e. i320 u4tn, 1. &. ſtudiouſly, and of ſet 
purpoſe bent our (elves to contemplate, Unto all which 1t 15 moreover 
added, which our hands have handled, &\m4enozwv, which though [te- 
rally, not otherwiſe applicable than #9 the pzrſon of our Lord incar- 
nate, vet is a moſt emphatical Metaphor, elegantly repreſenting their 
moſt certain Knowledze and lively Senfe of his excellent Dodtrine ; 
as the Expreſſion is uſual of a palpable Truth, to fignifie a moſt evi- 
dent one. So is that implied to be a Truth that may be felt, that 
this World hath a mighty and bountiful Suſtai,ccand Lord, Ads 17, 
27. "{1.a.phTer. 


2 (For the life was manifeſted , and we have ſeen 
it, and hear witneſs, and ſhew unto you that eternal 
life, * which was with the father, and was maniteſted 


uUNTro us. } — : 
4 He interrupts the ſtream of his Diſcourſe by this ſeaſonable Pa- 


rentheſis, while he therein gives an account how { the Word of 


Life { the Life ] that eternal Lite ] ( already noted to be here all on 
and chiefly to mean the Son of God) which being with the Father 

muſt be to 5 inviſible, came to be ſo ſenſibly known to mortal Men on 
Earth; which he doth by telling us he was manifefied, and that was 
ſufficiently done, both who he was, and what he deſigned, in his par- 

taking with us of Fleſh and Blood, and being found in faſhion as a Man, 
whereby he ſubje&ed himſelf to the Notice of our Senſes ; and 
was hereupon ſaid to have been manifeſted in the Fleſh, chap. 3. 5. 
1 Tim. 3. 15. The glory of his Divinity alſo ſhining forth moſt con- 
ſpicuouily in his Godlike Converſation, and wonderful works tarough 
this Vail, and confirming the Truth of his Heavenly Dodrine, 
which more diſtin&ly declared both that it was the Son of God, 
who was come down into this wretched World of ours, and what 
the bind deſign was, of his diſcent hither. So that what here the 
Apoſtle fays more briefly, that he was manifeſted, well admits the 
larger account which he gives of 'it in his Goſpel, chap. 1.14. And 
the Ward was made Fleſh, and dwelt amnng us ( and we beheld his Glory, 
the Glory as of the only begotten of the Father ) full of Grace and Truth, 
Whereupon ( as he adds ) he bears witneſ?, and ſhews forth what 
he had ſeen ſo manifeſted, as it belonged to his Apoſtolical Office to 


do. 
| 3 That which we have ſeen and heard, declare we 


unto you, that ye alſo may have fellowſhip with us e, 
and truly our fellowſhip 7s with the Father, and with 
his Son Jeſus Chriſt f. . 


e He now proceeds with what he intended, not only profeſſing 
to teftiie mojt certainly known things ( which he further with great 
earneſtneſs inculcates ) but declaring alſo the end of this Teſtimony, 
viz. Not meerly that they to whom he writes might know them too, 
( as if the being a Chriſtian, did only ſtand in having ſome peculiar 
Ntions from other Men, and that they were only to know for 
knowings ſake ) but that they*might have fellowſhip, 2. e. partake 
and communicate with them ( viz. the Apoſtles, and the whole 
community of living Chriſtians ) in all the vital Influences, holy 
Pratice, the Dignities, Pleaſures, and Conſolations belonging to the 
Chriſtian State 3 whereupon he adds, and truly, *&c. f q- 4. Nor 
are the advantages of that State, in their hind and nature, Terrene, 
Senſual, Secular, but Divine and Heavenly, ſuch as are imparted to 
us by the Father and his Son Feſws Chr1$, or, wherein we are truly 
ſaid to participate, and have a Communion with them. That Bleſſed 
Spirit, who is the immediate Author to us' of all gracious Commu- 
nication ( whence this is alſo ſtiled the Communion of the Holy GhoF, 
2 Cor. 13, 14. ) being in reality, the Spicit of the Father and the 
SON. E 


Yol, IT. 


. 4+ And theſe things write we unto you *, that your 
Joy may be full g. 

g Not infipid, ſpiritleſs, empty, as carnal Foy is, apt through 
the deficiency of its cauſe to admit of intermingling Qualms ; . but 
lively and vigorous, 2 Fobn 12. well-grounded, Foln 15. 24. Such 
an 2 fneBar jo” _ _ _ grow up into the perfet plenitude 


5 * This then is the meſſage þ which we have heard + Jobs iN 
oh. 1.9. 


? and 8. 12. 


of him, and declare unto you that + God is light 7 
and in him is no darkneſs ar all. 

h It being the profeſſed Scope and Defign of his Writing, 
Men to a final participation and communion with God in his own 
Blefledneſs, he reckons nothinz more neceſſary to it, than to ſettle 
in their Minds 2 right notion of God, Which, that it might be the 
more regarded, he introduces with a ſolemn Preface ; This then is the 
Meſſage, 8c. (though the word alſo ſignifies Promiſe, it here more 
fitly bears this tendring ) to notifie, 1, That this which follows was 
not an 7magination of hs own concerning God, but his true repreſenta- 
tin of himſelf. 2. That it was given him in Charge to be delivered 
and communicated to others ; a Meflage a Man neither hath of him- 
ſelf, nor is to reſerve to himſelf, we have heard it of him, and declar? 
it to you, as ( conſonantly hereto ) he ſpeaks. 'Tis the Divine Plea- 
ſure it ſhould be publiſhed to the World, and that all Men fhouls 
know that as fom him, i. e. that he is not a Being of meer Power, as 
ſome, or of meer Mercy, as others are apt to fancy of him, either 
whereof were a very maimed, and moſt difapreeable Notion of the 
Deity ; Power without Goodneſs were apt to run into Fury ; Goodnef 
without Wiſdom and Righteouſneſs would as naturally turn to a Supine 
Indifferency, and negle& of diſtinguiſhing judicially between Good 
and Bad ; things neither ſutable to the Grwernor of the 19-14, nor 
poſſible to the abſolute perfe Being. In God, all true PerfeQtions and 
Excellencies muſt be underſtood eminently to concur; and of them 
more could not haye been comprehended under one Word ( efpecia!- 
ly that belong to him conſidered relatively to his Creatures, of which 
PerfeCtions it concerns us to have more diſtin, formed, poſitive 
conceptions in all our Applications to him ) than are here ſ»me w..v 
repreſented or reſembled by Light, viz. That he is a Reing of moſt 
lively penetrative Vigour, abſolute Simplicity, Immutzbility, Know- 
ledge, Witdom, Sincerity, Righteouſneſs, Serenity, Benionity, Toy 
and Felicity, and eſpeciallv,of moſt brizht and glorious Holineſs and 
Purity; and in whom js no darkheſs at al , nothing contrary or repu; - 


| nant hereto, 


þ 


6 * It we fay that we have fellowſhip with him, 
= "_ in darkneſs &, we lic, and do not the 
rr L 

R.Tight and Darkeſt are frequently 7 7 

; y put for Hlineſs and Hiched- 
neſs, lube 16. 8. Rom. 13. 12. Eph. 5.8. 1 Theſ. 5,5, The ſum 
then 15, That if any pretend to Friendſhip with God, or to have re- 
—_ ly and ons influences from him, and do yet lead wick- 

they are Liars, even guilty of a praFical Lie. doins fvh 
makes t Ir Profeſſion falſe and inſincere. d hg 
_ 7 Bit if we walk / in the light »», as he is in the 
light, have fellowthip one with another zz; and the 
"oy - Jeſus Chriſt his Son cleanſeth us from all 
in 0, 


Which is a continued and progreſſive motion, i. e. do 


| erſetere 
and 7mprove in Holineſs, i 


m Being transformed into the Holy Image 


and Likeneſs of God, and ſhewing themſelves the Children of Light 
as he is Light, and the Father of Lights. n Have fellowſhip w ith 
him, were»; ( as one Copy reads.) However, we muſt comprehend 
God, and this the Contexture of Diſcourſe ſheivs, . 


- 0 KzTweite, leit 
ur Purity and Holineſs ſhould be thought to have deſerved ſuch a 
riviledge, 'tis cautiouſly added, and the Blood, &c. is that which 
one explateth, or makes atonement for our Sins, { The proper 
otton of cleanſing here) Our former ſinfulneſs and preſent impertet 
lines, render it impoſſible God ſhould admit us to Communion 
Wh him for our own ſakes, or without ſuch an intervening Sacrifice; 

tare uſually ſignifying Expiations, And if we farther extend 
tih Notion of cleanſing, ſo as to comprehend internal ſubjeFive pu- 
ration, ( which alſo the Word may admit ) the farther mean- 
ingis, that even that purifying Influence, whereby we are qua- 
lifid for preſent holy walking with God, and for final Blefſednefs 
in \m, we owe to the Merit and Procurement of the Redeemer's 


our Ives, and the truth 7 is not in us /. 
 Þ purſuance of which Scope, he fitly adds, 

1. e. Cher profeſs it as a Principle, or think in our Minds, or not 
bear ihur Hearts a penitential remorſeful Senſe correſpondent to 


ra&tice, Fob 21. 14. Jer. 22. 21.) q viz. That we are 
ſo 1nnocq Creatures as not to nezd ſuch an expiatory Sacrifice as 
that abovggentioned, and ſuch purifying influence thereupon, but 
that we ty be admitted to Communion with God upon our 0:7 
Account, 4{ for our Worthineſs ſake, without being beholden to 
the Blood 0Chriff; we deceive our ſelves, delude our own Sou!s. 
r 7.e, The tem and Frame of Goſpel-Dofrine (as 2 7oh. 1. 2. 4.) 
{ Cannot be \ly entertained, lies not evenly and agreeably with its 
ſelf in our Mds, or hath no place with effe&t in us, as 7:n 8, 


righteouſneſy, 

# But on theyntrary, if we apply our ſelves to him ſutably to 
the Condition of \nners, confeſſing our ſelves ſuch, with that ſelf- 
abafing Senſe of A which may diſpoſe vs to accept and apply his 
offered Remedy, (pon which it is implied we will doit. ) « Hes 
faithful, ſo true this Promiſe, and'j88, Fidelity being a part of 


Juſtice ; or there 1s fk; him that Equity and Righteouſneſs, ( which 
s 1] {ometines 


Chap. 1. 


* 2 John 
12. 


and 5. 5. 


to draw and 12.2 $. 


Py 
- 


F Cit. 2. = 


If we ſay p that we have'no fin g, we deceive * 1 King, 
| 8. 46. 


if we ſhould /ay } 2 Chron.s. 


Prov. 2 *Þ 9, 
Eccia7.20% 


the co ry Apprehenfion ; ſuch as is implied in confeſſing, verſe g. 
(tor ſag uſually ſignifies the habitual bent and d:ſpoſition of the James 342- 


7: | 
= if weonfeſs our fins z, he is faittifut and juſt z *prf.q2.5. 
to forgive Uour fins z, and to cleanſe us from all un- Prov. 28. 


I2., 


© CERSRG 


- 


Ee 
= 


Er 


a. 


7 [> ——_” — aan our; AE. _—Y 


Chap. II. 


os 


ſmetimes fignifie Goodnefs, *or Clemency, 1 Sam, 12.7. Pſal. 112: 
5. and which, more ſtrialy taken, permit him not to exa& from us 
the Satisfa&tion which he hath accepted in the Atonement made by 
his Son, in his own way __ and upon his own terms to be 
reckned unto us )thathe will not fail to forgive xs our ſins. w Which 
may either be added as a further Exprefſion of the ſame thing ; or 
may, moreover, ſignifie his vouchſafing that purifying influence of 
the Spirit of Chriſt ( obtained alſo by his Blood ) which ſhall both 
purge away, and prevent the. Defilements that would render us unca- 
pable of his own holy Communion. : 
10 If we ſay we have not ſinned x, we make him a 

Hary, and his word isnpt inus 2. : . 

x See verſe 8, 9. y Which they make him that believe not his 
Word, chap. 5. 10. expreſly charging all Men with Sin, Rom. 3. 19, 
23. 2 And conſequently bis Word, or Truth, as verſe 8. which we 
contradi&, is not in #5. The Sum is, That we are not to be receiv- 
ed into God's holy Society and Communion under the Notion of a/- 
ways innocent, and unoffending Perſons, but-as pardoned and purified 
Sinners. | 


CHAP. IL 


Forgiveneſs of ſin, no encouragement thereto; but a Comfort to Sinners : 
If we know Chriſt, we muſt keep his Commandments, and follow his 
Example, 1 8. And Love our Neighbour, 9 I2, This 
applied to Fathers, Young Men, and Children : that they love not the 
World, and that which 4s therein; and to take heed of Antichriſts , 
from both whichthe anointing of the Holy Ghoſt, which they had receiv- 
ed, would keep them, 13=mp—2I. Antichriſt deſcribed; to be a- 
woided in hope of eternal Life, 22 26, The Amonting of the 
Holy Ghoft, and its Power *: We muſt abide in Chriſt, that we may 
land toldly at his Appearance; and exerciſe Righteouſneſs to ſhew that 
we are regenerated, 27 —29. % 


that yefin nor. * And if any man fin, * we have 


OY M' little children a,theſe things write I unto you, 
& 


34. n.2.%. an Advocate þ with the Father, Jeſus Chriſt the righ- 
Heb. 7. 25. teOUS C. | 


& 5. 24s 


* ving made Atonement for them before 


* and attains its end in Obedience, 


* walk, even as he walked 7. 


a He endeayours in this to ſteer them a middle Courſe, that they 
might neither preſume to ſin, nor deſpair, if they did. And beſpeaks 
them with a Compellation, importing both Authority and Love ; 
well-becoming him as then an aged Perſca, and Apoſtle, their Teach- 
er, and who was their moſt affe&ionate ſpiritual Father. And lets 
them know the firſt Deſign of what he was now writing ( had hither 
to written, and was farther t6 write ) was, that they might to thar 
uttermoſt avoid inning at all But adds, if, through human Fraity, 
they did fin, we have an Advocate, &c. b Implying our ned of 
Chriſt for renewed, as well as firſt pardon; and not of his Dath on- 
ly, but continual Interceffion ; and repreſents the Adantages 
Chriſt hath for ſucceſs inhis interpoſing for us; in Reſpeg both of 
hs Relation to God as his Father, which is put indefinitely #he Fa- 
ther, that the Confideration might not be excluded of his 2e1ng our 
Father alſo. c And his Rizhteouſnefs, by which he could ot but be 
acceptable to him. A 

2 And * he is the propitiation for our firs 4: and 


- not for ours only, but alſo + for zhe Sins of the whole 


world c. | | 
d The adding of theſe Words, ſhews that our Lod grounds his 


Interceſſion for Pardon of Sin unto penitent Believes, upon his ha- 
: And therefore that he doth 
not herein meerly ſupplicate for Favour, but ( whick is the proper bu- 
fineſs of an Advocate ) plead Law and Right, agreeable to what is ſaid 
above, chap. 1. 9. e Nor is his undertaking herein limited to an) 
ſele& Perſons among Believers, but he muſt be underſtood to be a! 
Advocate for all, for whom he is effeually a Propitzation, 1. 6 
for all that truly believe in him ( Rom. 3+ 25.) all the Worl 


"; And hereby we do know that we know him f, F 


we keep his commandments. : 

f This Faith is often in the Holy Scripture ſignified by the Nne 
of Knowledze, Tſe. $3. 11. John 17, 3. viz, an appropriative, tn 
formative Knowledge, by which we own and accept God 1n Cit, 
as ours, ( expreſſed alſo by Acknowledgment, &1y1wnc, Eph. 117. 
Col. 2.2.) and are changed into his likeneſs, 2 Cor. 3. 18. The 
meaning then is, That we perceive, or diſcern our ſelves to | ſin- 
cere Bzlievers, and conſequently that Chriſt is both our Prop?arzon 
and Advocate, when it is become habitual and cafie to us to EY his 


Commandment. : | : 
4 * He thatfaith, I know him, and keepeth ot his 


" commandments, is a liar g, and the truth is .ot in 


him. | 
g A falſe hypocritical Pretender, as chap. 1. 6. _ "IRE 
5 But * whoſo keepeth his word T, 1n hinverily is 


the love of God perfeQted þ : * hereby knovwe that 
*we are in him. 


h Hy Faith worbeth by Love, Gal. 5.6. His Love | perfeRted, 
whereof it is the Vi! Principle, 
chap. 5. 3. John 14. 15. ſuch an efficacious governing powledge of 
him; therefore, as by the Power of the Love which! produces, 
ſubdues our Souls to the Obedience of him, 1s a certairIFoof to us of 
our Union with him, chap. 5. 20. and Relation to him / 


6 He that faith he abideth in him, * aght alſo to 


i And this Proof we ought to give. For where fur Lord Jeſus 
Chriſt was not only our Lawgiver, but our Patt and practifed 
himſelf what he commanded us; if indeed we hrgan abiding, real 
Union with him, we partake of his Spirit, Rom. ' }- Which muſt be 
underſtood to work Uniformly, and enable us twa!k, (in the main 
of our Courſe, according to our meaſure of tha#pirit ) as be walk: 
ed, 


I FOHN 


which ye have heard trom the beginning. 

k This Commandment muſt be that which he inſiſts en, verſe 9 
to, Ix. and which in different reſpetts he calleth both o/d and new. 
Net new, he ſays, in oppoſition to their Gnoftich Seducers, to inti- 
mate he was not about toentertain them with vain Novelties, as they 
did; all whoſe peculiar Do&rines were no other than Innovations upon 
true Chriſtianity. / But old, viz. a part of original Chriſtianity, as it 


or Word which they had, or had heard from the beginning. This Phraſe 
from the beginning, being here put in ConjunRion with ſome a& of 
theirs, ye had, or have heard, as alſo Eph. 2. 5, 6. ſhews it to intend 
a much later Term of Commencement than chap.. 1. 1. Though alſo 
conſidering them as Fews, whom he here writes to, it mightrun up 
as high as the Law given by Moſes ; or, even as Men, to the Creation, 
and the firſt Impreſſion of the Law of Nature ( whereof this was a very 
noble part ) upon the Heart of Man. 

s Again,* a new zcommandmentI write unto you, 
which thing is true in o him, and in you p : Þ becauſe 
the darkneſs is paſt *, and the 
eth 9. 

n Yet alſo he calls it a new Commandment, as our Saviour did, 
John 13. 34. upon the ſubjoyned accounts; which thing is true, i.e. 
evident, or verified, fulfilled, exemplified., o Viz. In that new and 
high Demonſtration he had given of the ſincerity and greatneſs of 
his own Love, laying down his Life for us, as Fohn 15.13. þ Or, us 
( as ſome read ) 7. e. the mind of God herein is by a new and freſh 
_ moſt evidently and gloriouſly ſignified in, or among you ( the 
Subjett being here colleRive and plural, admits this varied, and very 
uſual Senſe of the Particle $1) in as much as the Darkneſs is paſt *, 
1. e. the heatheniſh Ignorance that made the World barbarous; a Dark- 
neſs jn which the furious Luſts, and Paſſions of Men were wont to 
rage, turning this Earth inte another Hell, Pſal.74. 20. isin a great 
meaſure vaniſhed ; and alſo the dark Umbrage of the Fudaich Diſpen- 
ſ#ton, ( ſome read oxia for oxen'z, not Darkneſs, but Shadow) in 
vhich the Love of God to Men was more obſcurely repreſented, is 
paſt away and gone ; q and the true Light now ſhineth, the Love and 


Grace of God towards Sinners, (the Pattern and Argument of our 
mutual Love to one another) ſhines with true light, that is evident 
in oppoſition to Darkneſs, or, immediately Subſtantial, in oppoſition 
to Type or Shadow, as John 1. 9, 14, 17. repreſenting the gracious 
Deſign of God, and his very Nature who 1s Love, chap. 4. 8, 16. 
with ſo bright and glorious Beams as ought to transform us into his 
Likeneſs ; and which therefore render the mutual Hatred of one ano- 
ther, the moſt incongruous thing to us in all the World. Where- 
upon he adds, : RA 

9 * He that faith he is in the light, and hateth his 


brother, is in darkneſs until now /. 

_ r Tobeinthe Light, ſignifies to be under the transforming govern- 
ing Power of it, as the Phraſes import of being in the Fleſh, and in 
the Spirit, Rom. 8. 9. being expounded by walking after the Fleſh, 
and after the Spirit, verſe 1. He therefore that hateth his Brother, a 
thing ſo contrary to the Deſign of the Goſpel, whatever he pretends 
is ſtill in darkneſs, ſ-under the Power of the unregenerate Principle 
of impure and malignant Darkneſs, The Goſpel hath done him no 


good, 1s to himbutan impotent, and ineffetual Light, in the midſt 

whereof, by {tiff winking, and an obſtinate refiſtance and excluſion 

- = = and holy Light, he creates to himſelf a dark and an hel- 
ight. 

_ To * He that loveth his brother z abideth in the 

light z, and Þ there is no occafion of ſtumbling in 


him z. 

_ & Hs Brother, put indefinitely, muſt be underſtood univerſally, 
7. e, He that loveth not this or that Fellow-Chriſtian, upon ſome 
perſonal or private Reaſon, but all upon one and the fame common 
and truly Chriſtian Account. # Shews or doth demonſtrate the ſet- 
led, conſtant Power, the regenerate Divine Principle hath over him. 
And there is u Gr, no Scandal, or occaſion of ſtumbling in him, no incon- 
ſiſtent thing that ought to occaſion him to judge otherwiſe of himſelf, 
or others to think otherwiſe of him. 


11 But he thathaterh his brother,is in darkneſs,and 
* walketh in darkneſs,and knoweth not whither he go- 


eth, becauſe that darkneſs hath blinded his eyes w. 

w Hath no Principle to guide or govern him, but what is common 
to the unregenerate World, ſo that his whole Life is a continual Er- 
ror; nor doth he underſtand or conſider the tendency of his Courſe, 
being ſtill under the Power of an effeQual Darkneſs that makes his 
Eyes, or Underſtanding, of no more uſe than if he were quite blind, 
or had none at all. So weighty and important is the Precept which 
he had to Iay down, verſe 15. of not loving the World, &c. that he 
introduces it with the Solemnity of a moſt pathetick Preface contain- 
ed in theſe three following Verſes, wherein he applies himſelfſeveral- 
ly to the diſtin& Orders and Ranks into which Chriſtians were capable 
of being reduced, the matter being of common and equal Concern- 
ment to all of them. And he ſpeaks ſutable to the Condition and 
State of each, ſuch things as whereby,he might moſt effeually infi- 
nuate with them, and oblige them deeply to conſider what he had to 
fay ; doubling alſo his Application to each of them, out of the ear- 
neſtneſs of his Intention and Endeavour to faſten the Exhortation 
upon them which was to follow. 


Chap. II. 


| 7 Brethren, I write no & new commandment unto 
you, but an old /commandment * which ye had from * Ch.z.r1, 
the beginning : the old commandment is the word 2 Jot. s. 


came pure firſt from our Lord Chriſt himſelf. mz The Commandment, 


* oh, 13, 


34+ 
| true light now ſhin- F Rom.13, 
I2, 


I The, 5: 


|| Joh. 1.9, 
« I2, 


F x Cor. 


I3. 2. 

2 Pet. 1.9, 
Ch. 3. 14, 
I 5. 


*Ch.3. 14. 


T 2 Pet. r; © 


IO, 
|| Gr. ſcan- 
dal. 


Y Joh. 12, 


350 


12 I write untg you, little children x, becauſe *-, take as. 


your fins are forgiven you, for his names ſake y. 


. 47+ 
x He here uſes an Appellation before, verſe 1. applied to all in } (0 4 12. 
common, being put alone ; but being now ſet in coptradiſiin&ion to && 13, 38. 


others, muſt be underftood to intend a diſtin Rank, of Chriſtians, 
viz. thoſe more newly entred into the Chriſtian State; and to 


them he ſuggeſts the free remiſſion of their Sins for his = 
abe 


« 13, 
N.13, 
f. 5: 


1.9, 
I2, 


14. 


+ I, 


AN- 


. 


Chap. II. 


ſake. y i.g For his own ſake, as the Reaſon why they ſhould out of 
Ingenuity, and a new recent ſenſe of God's Mercy towards them, 
comply with his holy Pleaſure in the following Precept. The Remiſ- 
ſion of their Sins, being a firſt, and myſt early Priviledge with them 
that commenced from the beginning of their fincere Chriſtianity, 
and which was ſealed to them in their late Baptiſm ; 'tis the more fit- 
ly mention'd to this firſt Rank of Chriſtians. 

13 [ write unto you.fathers,becaulſe ye have known 
him zbat zs from the beginning 2. TI write unto you, 
young men, becaule ye have overcome the wicked one 
a. 1 write unto you, little children, becauſe ye have 
known the Father b. ” 

7 Unto Fathers, becadlfe to ſuch belongeth much Experience, and 
the Knewwledye of ancient. Things, he aſcribeth the Knowledge of him 
who is the Ancient of Days, from the beginning, and than whom none 
15 more angient, and whom they ſhould be ſuppoſed ſo well gp know 
by their long continued Courſe in Religion, as fully to underſtand his 
good and acceptable W:ll, what would be pleaſing, and what dit- 
pleaſing to him. a To ſuch as were inthe Flower of their Strength 
and Age in Chriſtianity, he attributeth Victory; to whom therefore 
it would be inglorious to ſlur the Honour of that noble Conqueſt 
they had gained over the wicked one, the God of this World, as he is 
elſewhere called, 2 Cor. 4. 4. by ſuffering themſelves again to be en- 
rangled in 1ts Snares and Bands. His Method is, we ſee, to place 
this Order of Chriſtians laſt, as a middle State, which he would have 
us conceive afterwards to be interpoſed between the other two ; 
wiich Method we find he obſerves in going over them again the ſe- 
cond time. 7.e. He firſt again begins with his little Children, whom 
he now beſpeaks by another Compellation in the Greek { before 721, 
now 7zdz ) importing no material difference, except this latter fig- 
nifite more Capacity of Inſtru&ion ; and he now gives them another 
CharaFer, which implies ſo much, that he not only conſiders them as 
'the paſſive SubjeFs of a priviledge, Remiſſion of Sins, which they 
were capable of in the firſt jyoment of their being born into the Chri- 
ftian State ( as the word --w;z, above, ſeems to intimate ) but as be- 
ing able to uſe their Underſtanding, and conſider whoſe Children 
they were, becauſe ye have known the Father ; before ſaid alſo of the 
elde$F fort of Chriſtians ; but he is there mention'd by a Deſcription 
more ſuitable to their more aged State; and therefore the Knowledge 
aſcribed to the one, and to the other, though the ſame in kind, mult, 
inreſpe& of degrees, be accommodately underſtood. 

14 I have written unto you, farhers, becauſe ye 

have known him that is from the beginning. I have 

* Eph. 5. Written unto you, young men, becauſe * ye are ſtrong 

F9. and the word of God abideth in you c, and ye have 
overcome the wicked one. | 

c To the former ſort he only repeateth what he had ſaid before ; 

ſuppoſing their greater Wiſdom to need no more. { See L.yBrugenſ, 

Not. in Bibl. ſacr. of the Inſertion of this clauſe 5 ] only the Repe- 

tition importeth his earneſt Defire they would again and again confi- 

der it. The other he allo puts in mind of their afive Strength and 

Vigor, and of the Rootedneſs which the Goſpel muſt now be ſuppoſed 

to have in them, whereby they were enabled to overcome the wicked 

one. And by all which Endowments they were all both enabled and 

obliged to comport the better with the tollowinggPrecept, and its 

Enforcements. | 
15 Love not the world, neither the things that are 
in the world. It * any man love the world, the love 


of the Father is-not in him d. 

d What he here means by the forbidden 05jef of our Love, muſt 
be gathered trom his own Explication, verſe 16. the Love it ſelf for- 
bidden, in reference thereto, is that exceſs thereof, whereby any 
adhere to terrene things, as their beſt good ; wherewith as he adds, 
any ſincere Love to God 1s inconſiſtent, as Matth. 6. 24. Luk, 14. 
33. A Conſideration fo awful and tremendous, that it is not ſtrange 
the Precept it enforces, ſhould have ſo ſolemn and urgent an Intro. 
duftion. | 

16 For all that is in the world, the luſt of the fleſh e, 
and the luſt of the eyes f, and the pride of lite g, is 
not of the father, bur is of the world þ. 

e Here he explains his meaning,what under the Name of this World, 


and the things of it, we are not to love, or under what Notion we 
ought not to love 1t, viz. the World as it contains the Objetts and 


* Jam-4-4- 


Nutriment of theſe mentioned Luſts, either more groſely ſenſual, cal- | 


led the Luſt of the Fleſh, viz. of Gluttony, Drunkenneſs, Whore- 
dom, gc. Rom. 13. 13, 14.: f Or that which i excited more imme- 
diately by the Fancy, unto which the Eye eſpecially miniſtreth, the ex- 
ceſſive Appetite of much Wealth, and great Pofleſſions. © Which the 
Eye is therefore ſaid to deſires and not to be ſatisfied with, Eccleſ. 2. 
8, 9,10. and 4.8. called therefore the Luſt of the Eye. g And again, 
the ambitious Aﬀecion of the Pomp and Glory of the World, vain 
Applauſe, the unmerited and overvalued Praiſe and Obſervance of 
other Men, with Power over them, affetted for undue ends; or on- 
ly with a ſelf-exalting Deſign, meant by the Pride of Life, forbidden 
by our Saviour to his Diſciples, Matth. 20. 25, 26. This triple Di- 
ſtribution, ſome obſerve to have been before ufed by ſome ofthe an- 
cient learned Fews, and imitated by certain of the more refin'd Hea- 
thens; whence, as being formerly known, and underſtood, the Apo- 
ſtle might be induced to make uſe of it. þ And theſe Zuſts are 
therefore argued to be inconſiſtent with the Love of the Father, as not 
being of him, but of the World; not from the Divine Spirit, but the 
Spirit of the World, 


* x Corn. , 17 And * the world paſſeth away, and the luſts 
31, thereof ; but he that doth the will of God, abideth 
Jam. 1.10, for ever z. | 
; He ſets the difference in view, of living according to the common 
Genius, Will, or Inclination of the World ( which is Luſt Jand according 
to the Divine Will, that he who unites himſelf in his Will and Defire 
with the former, which vaniſhes (Objets and Appetite all together) 
Vol, II, ; 


IFOHN 


Chap. it. 


muſt ( which is implied ) periſh therewirh ; but he that unites him- 
ſelf with the ſupream eternal Good, by a Will that is 2uided by, and 
conformed to the Divine Will, abideth for ever, partakes a Felicity 
coeternal with the Obje& and Rule upon which his Heart was fet, 
and which it was guided by. 

13 Little children, ir is the laſt time &, and as we 5 T's 
have heard that * Antichriſt / ſhall come, even now p —_ 
are there many Antichriſts ; whereby we know it is * 
the latt rime. | 

& The time here referr'd to, ſeems to be the deſtruction of 7eru- 
ſalem, and the finiſhing ot the Jewiſh State, both Civil and Eccleſia- 
ſtical. In the Greek, the aſt haur, the approaching Period of Dani- 
e's 70 Weeks, as Mr. Mede underſtands it ( Apoſtacy of the Latter 


' times.) 1 Whereas therefore it was now a known and expetted 


thing among Chriſtians, that the eminent Antichriſt, or Antichriſtian 
State ( exxrelly foretold, 2 Thefſ. 2. ) was to come, or take place ; 
therefore the Apoſtle ſays, we, 1. e. the Generality of Chriſtians. 
have heard ſo much. So he ſays, m even nw, as the Fore-runners of 
that eminent one, There are many Antichriſts ( foretold alſo by our 
Saviour, Matth. 24.) viz. noted Heretichs, and Seducers then in be- 
ing ; not ſuch falſly afſuming vicariozs Chriſts, as only pretended to 
do that part which the Zews expected from their Meftah, the deli- 
vering them from the Roman Tjraany, and fo ſet up to be meer!y Ci- 
ul, or ſecular Chriſts, having themſelves never been Chriſtians ; but 
ſuch as had revolted from Chriſtianity, and now laboured tundamen- 
tally to ſubvert it, denying ChriS# to be come in the Fleſh, verſe 22. 2 
Epif. 7. having been betore profeſſed Chriſtians, as appears by the 
tollowing words. whe 
19 * They went out from us, but they were not * Deut.13. 
ot us : for if they had been of us, they would, no jF 
doubr, have continued with us 7 : but zhey wen? out, pp et gr 
that they might be made manitett that they were not + 1Cor.12. 
all ot us o. 19% 
n Sincere and living Chriſtians are fo ſtrongly held in with Chritt, 
and the truly Chriſtian Community, by an Union, and Bond of Lite, 
and by ſenſe of Pleaſures, which thereupon they find 1n that holy 
Communion, with the ExpeRation which their lively Faith gives * 
them of eternal Life at laſt, that there is+no doubt of their continu- 
gnce. 0 Others that are Chriſtians, upon external Inducements al- 
ter as theſe do, and arc permitted to do fo, that the diffecence may 
appear between true and counterieit ones, 1 Cor. II. 19. on | 
20 But * ye have gn unQtion from the holy one, 2 ©0r7- 
and t ye know all things. Heb. 1. 9. 
SeeNote on Verſe 27. + Joh. 14. 
21 | have not written unto you becauſe ye know 25. & 15. 
not the truth : bur becauſe ye know ir, and that no 23- _ 
lie is of the truth p. ata 
þ He prudently intimates his Confidence concerning them, toge- 
ther with the Pleaſure he himſelf took { as any one would ) in com- 
municating the Sentiments of holy Truth to prepared receptive 
Minds ; implying alſo, that any part of falſs Dud@rine doth ſo 1ll 
matci and ſquare with the frame of Divine Truth, that judicious Chri- 
ſttans may diſcern they are not of a piece, 


22 * Whois alter, but he rhart denieth that Jeſus *Chap.g.3* 


is the Chriſt f? he is Antichriſt, that denieth rhe 9 2 Job 7- 
Father and the Son. 
f Eſpecially may the ill accord be diſcerned between Divine Truth, 
and a Lie, wheu the Lie 1s ſo diredly levell'd againſt the _ 
tions upon which the whole Fabrick 15s built, as the denying Feſus 
to be the Chriſt, ſtrikes . at all. q And though he that doth fo, 
ſeems only an Antichriſt, as direQing his Oppoſition but againſt 
Chriſt, he really as much denies the Father , who teftifid of 
him. 

23 * Whoſoerver denieth the Sons the ſame hath 7 * Joh. 15. 
not the Father ; + bt be that acknowledgeth the Son, : 3 
hath the Father alſo, - 

r To have the Father and the Son, is by Faith, Love, and Obedi- 
ence, vitally, to adhere to the one and the other, The latter part of 
this Verſe, though it be notin the ordinary Greek Copres, 1510 ſome of 
the Verſions, and ſaid to be in ſome Greeh Manuſcripts alſo, whence 
it is ſupply'd very agreeably to the Apoſtle's Scope, and uſual way 
of writing. - | 

24 Let that therefore abide in you, * which ye +,qupn 6. 
have heard from the beginning. It that which ye | 
have heard from the beginning ſhall remain in you, 
ye alſo ſhall continue 'in the Son, and in the Fa- 
ther /. | 

{ He only exhorts them to perſevere in that Faith which they at 
firſt received, whereby their Union with God in Chriſt would be pre- 
ſerved entire, _ : : 

25 And this is the premiſe that he hath promiſed 
us, ever eternal lite 7. | | | 

t Which Perſeverance they are highly encouraged to, by the Pro- 


miſe of ſo great a Thing as eternal Life at length. 
26 Theſe things have I written unto you concerning 
them that ſeduce you *. 
* So much he thought requiſite to be ſaid, in reſpe& of their 
danger by Seducers, though their Safety was principally to depend 
upon what he next mentions. 


27 But the anointing # which ye have received , "OREN 


of him, abideth in you - and * ye need not that any ,, 24. 
man teach you w : bur, as the ſame anointing t teach- Heb. 8.x0, 
eth you of all x things, and 1s truth, and is no lie : 1. 
and even as it hath taught you, ye ſhall abide in || Y L__ "pp 


him, Ver. 20. 


f6l2] 


% [t ji Or, 76 


Chap. 4- 


F Ir, knw. 


yo. 
* Chap. 3» 


'T 
£ 


*Chap. 3.2, 


. * becauſe ir knew him not. 


p FT, my O 


# It is evident, that the ancient anointing cf Perſons to fome 
eminent Omce, was not a meer cmpty Rite of Inveſtiture, or Au- 
thuriz:tion, but alto a Symbol of their Qualtacation by another Spir 
Mt then coming up.,n them. Whereupon our Lord Feſus was egi1- 
nently rhe ChriF, or anointed one, not only as denoting his (olemn In- 
2 itwre With the ſacred Othces of King, Priest, and Prophet, whicn 

were all wont to be entred into by Un&rn; but as fignifyinz alto 
his receivinz tte Spirit (not by meaſure ) by which he was moſt per- 
fectly ouatifed for them And whereas he is alſo ſaid to have made 
thoſe that bclieve on him, in a far inferiour ſenſe, Kings and 
Prieſte to hu Father ;, to them alſo' he imparts of the ſame Spirit, 
Rom. 3. 5. whence they are fard to be anointed too, 2 Cor. I. 21, 22. 
Ani hence, as is here ſaid, and werſe 27. they do not need, &c. 
i Not as it they had al/ lutely no need at all of Human teaching ; tor 


the 4poitle ſuppoſes not nimſclfto be now doing a vain, or needleſs 


thinz ; but that theyhad Yet need, having the internal Prigciples of 
Light and Life in them,they were ina great meaſure capable of ſteer- 
ing their own Courſe. They had in themſelves a living, engrafted 
Word, enabling them to teach, and commune with themſelves, as 
Det. 30. 11,12. Ron. 10. 7,8, 9. Here upon the'r Reins could in- 
rut them, Pal. 15. 7. 
as that mav be read, Col. 3. 16. The Word of Christ dwelling richly in 

27. Therefore they did not ſo need to be taught, as thoſe that 
know not the firſt Principles of the Oracles of God. x 7. e. All ſuch 
neceſſary and eſſential things to the Life and Being of Chriſtianity; of 
which ſort that Dodrine concerning the Meſſiah was, which he was now 
ſpeakinz of, not all things ſimply ; for that had been to attribute to 
them far higher Knowledge than he cculd pretend to himſelf, even 
that witich was peculiar to God only. Nor was that Knowledge 
vw hich they had of thoſe necefiary things to be thought the effect of 
an {'mmcdiate Inſpiration, but ſuch 2s by ordinary external means 
they had already learn'd, but made vital and efficacious by the ſpec*- 
a! lanQtifying Influence and Operation of the Holy Ghoſt ; who 
heving bezotten 1n them a correſpondent Impreſs to thoſe great 
Truths which are after Goglinefs, tormed the new Creature in them, 
winch 1s begotten -of the Word of Truth, had made then capa- 
ble of Dijudication, or of diſtinguiſhing by a ſpiritual Senſe, Phil. 
1. 6. 10. between things that were erateful, ſutable and nutritive 
to the Lite of the new Creature in them, and ſuch things as were 
nox10us and offenſive, Whereas, in reference to things more re- 
mote from the Vitals of Religion and Godlineſs, none can afſure 
themſelves of ſuch a Priviledge. And ar to theſe, they are to expe@ 
itin a way of their own fincere and diligent Endeavours and Pray- 
ers, as the effeRt of the habit of Grace, maintain'd and kept up in 
Life, and Vizor; and a Reward of theigfincere Refignation and Sub- 
zeftion of Heart and Soul to the governing Power of Truth, ſo far as 
it ſhould be underſtood and known of them, according to that of our 
Saviour, Fobn 7. 17. If any man will ds his Will, he ſhall know of the 
DoErine whether it be of God, &c. And thus they might certainly 
keep their Station, and abide in him; unto which they are therefore 
exhorted. 

28 And now, little children, abide in him : rhat 
* when he ſhall appear, we y may have confidence, and 
not be aſhamel before him at his coming. 

x He condeſcendingly excludes himſelf with them, that we may have 
comm fadence ; intimating, for their Encouragement, the common mu- 
tual Joy they ſhould have together at Chriſt's appearance ; he, that 
he had not been wanting in his Endeavours that they might perſe- 
vere; and they, that they had perſevered ; which 1s impli'd in the 
menace of the contrary, upon the contrary Suppoſition. 

29 If ye know that he 1s righteous, ye || know 
tt * every one that doth righteouſneſs, is born of 
him Z2. 

z Left he ſhould be thought only ſollicitous to preſerve the right 
Notions among them, of the Chriſtian - Dofrine, as if that alone 
would ſufice them for their Salvation and Blefledneſs ( which was 
the Concvit of the Gnoftichs, touching their own Notions, that the 
enertaining of them, would ſave Men, whatſoever Men they' were, 
or -howſoever they hy'd ) he ſubjoyns this ſerious Monition, if ye 
mw, &c. intiqating, that wiatſoever they had of the Knowledge 
of God, would avail them nothing, 1 whereas he 3s righteous, they 
were not transform'd by it into his- likeneſs, and enabled thereby to 
do Righteouſneſt, which alone would evidence their Divine Birth, ſince 
God hith no Children deſtitute of his Image, or who reſemble him 


nct. 
(3-H A P4101 
The Love of God to Believers in their Adrptiom, this their Glory not now 
fully underſtood, this a motive to Purity, 1 3. Sm u a tranſ- 
greſſin of the Law, and Chri# came to take it away, and hereby the 
Children of God and of Satan are diſtinguiſhed, 4 Io. Our chief 
duty, Love to one another, contrary herein to Cain, his Sin, and the 
cauſe of it, the World will hate us, 11 ——13. Lovess a true evi- 
dence of a Divine Life ; he that loveth not his Brother, is dead, and a 
Merderer before God, 14, 15. The Love of Chri8t to us muſt be ini- 
tated by 1s, mt with Words only, but in Deed and in Truth, 15—18. 
Then are we of the Truth, and may have Confidence towards God, 
tht cur Prayers ſhall be heard 5y Him, x G=——=22. This # the ſumm 
& Chrilt's Commandments to Believe in Him, and Love one another, 
by rich we have Communion with him, and are aſſured thereof by his 
Spirit, 23; 24- 

Ehold, what manner of t love the Father hath be- 
ſtowed upon us, that we ſhould be called a the 
{ons of God : therefore the world knoweth þ us not, 


ghom 


f So lite mention having been made of that greaf Thing in the 
Cloſe of the foregoing Chapter, being born of God ;, the Holy Apo- 
ſtle is here in a Tranſport, in the contemplation of the gJorious con- 
ſ-quent Priviledge, to be called hu Sons ;, and of that admirable 
Love, from whence the whole hath proceeded, mzmww, or how 


Or, they cculd inſtru& themſelves, tare, 


H N 

ol 
| Rom. 4. 17, He confers not the Nzme without the Thing ; the new, 
even a Divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. in Regeneration ; the re@ Advanta- 
zes and Dignity of the Relation by Adoption; and all of meer ( and 
the greateſt ) Kindneſs and Good-will, Tt. 3. 5,5, 7. Hence he 
intimates, it ought not to be counted grievous, that the World knoweth 
75 nt, 1.6. doth not own or acknowledge us for its own, 1s not kind 
tous, yea, hates and perfecutes us. b Knowing, often ( after the 
Hebrew Phraſe ) ſignitying AﬀeCtion, 1 Cor. 8.3. 2 Tim. 2. 19. and 
accordingly, nt knowing, Diſaffe&ion, and the conſequent Effet, 
Matth. 7. 23. Nor ſhould it-be thought ſtrange, becauſe 7t hnew 
not hm. The Father, and the whole Family are to 1t an 7nviſum Ge- 
ng, hated alike. | 


' doth not yet appear c what we ſhgll be: but we know, 
that when he thall appear d, we || {hall be like him 2; 
for we ſhall ſee him as he is f. 

c Ouggpreſent State he affirms to be unqueſtionably that of Sons ; 


our Father, we muſt for a while undergo. But for our future State, 


doth not appear, *tis yet an unrevealed Thing, Rom. 8. 18. A Vail 1s 


in the general know oft ( ſocertain are the Apprehentions of Faith ) 
that when he ſhall appear, or diſplay, his own Glory 1n the appearance 


27. 1 Tim. 6, 14, 15,16. e As it befits Children to be unto their 
Father, 3. e. His Image ſhall then be perfetted in us, which was de- 
faced to greatly in the Apoſtacy, is reſtored imperte&ly in Repene- 
ration, Eph. 4. 24. Col. 3.10. muſt be daily improved 1n progr-iſive 
San&fcation : So that as God was above ſaid- to be Lizht, Chrifti- 
ans are to ſhine as Lights, as the Sons "of God without rebuke, repreſent- 
ing and gloritying their Father, Matth. 5. 16. Phil. 2. 16. 1 Pet. 2. 
9. But is then to be advanced in us to a far higher pitch than 
ever, in reſpe@ both of Holineſs and Blefledneſs. f 7. e. So far as 
the limited Capacity of our Natures can admit; and are therefore by 
that Likeneſs to be qualifiet for ſuch Viſion : which eternal, efficaci- 
ous Viſion doth alſo continue that Likeneſs, the cauſal Particle, for, 
admitting both thoſe References, Pſal. 17. 1 5. 


3 And every man that hath this hope in him, purt- 


fheth himſelf, g even as he is pure. 

Z i.e. Not only is obliged hereto, but by the efficacious Influence 
of this Hope, if it be of the ſame kind { that /ively Hope, unto 
which Chriſtians are ſaid to be begotten, x Pet. 1. 3.) 1s daily more 
and more transform'd, through a continual Intention of Mind to- 
wards the Holy Ghoſt, upon whom that Hope is ſet ( for it is ſaid to 
be Hop? in him, or rather upon him, iz" ewny ) into the Image of the 
Divine Purity : Knowing alſo( which muſt be a potent Inducement 
to very earneſt Endeavour this way ) that our future Conformity 
to God in Glory and Blefſedneſs hereafter, depends upon our preſent 
vigorous and effetual Purſuit of Conformity to him in Holineſs 
woes Matth, 5.8. Heb. 12.14. And it 1s enforced by what fol- 
OWS. 


4 Whoſoever committeth fin, tranſgreſſeth alſo the 
law ; * for fin is the tranſgreſhon of the law þ. 

h Which 1s added, to fiznifie nothing can be more unreaſonable, 
than the Expe Mon of partaking with Ged in the Glory and Bleſ- 
ſedneſs of the future State, if we now allow our ſelves in a Courſe of 


Sin; and 1s again further enforced from the Deſign of our Redeem- 
er 


him #. 

h By ſinning he meaneth the ſame thing as afterwards by commit- 
ting Sin; ſee verſe 8, 9. Seeing and knowing intend inward Uni- 
on, Acquaintance, and Converſe ; ſuch as Abode in him implies. See 


Join 5. 37. 3 John 11. 


reous /. 

1 This Caution implies the zealous Endeavour of the Scducers of 
that Time, to inſtil their poiſonous Do@rine and Principles of Licen- 
tiouſneſs , and his own Solicitude, leſt theſe Chriſtians ſhould re- 
ceive them, and be miſchiev'd by them. Whereas therefore they were 
wont to ſuggeſt, that a meerly notional Knowledge was enough to re- 
commend Men, and make them acceptable to God, though they liv'd 
never f impure Lives, he inculcates, That only they that did Rightes 
ouſneſs, viz. in a continued Courſe, living conformably to the Rules 
of the Goſpel, were righteous : and that they muſt aim to be ſo, even 
as he is righteeus ; not only making the Righteouſneſs and Holy Life 
of Chriſt, the 0bje& of their Tru, but the Pattern of their Walking 
and Practice, 


$ * He that committeth zz fin, is of the devil z 3 
for the devil finneth from the beginning. For this 


deſtroy the works of the devil. 

m The Apoſile's Notion of committing Sin, may be interpreted 
by his own Phraſe, 3d Epiff. terſe 11, © xzzominr, a Dyer of Ewvll ; 
and by that uſed in both Teſtaments, a Worker of Tniquity : Which 
is not every one that doth any one fingle A of Sin ; as his 5 :m.wr 


£reat / a Called there ( as often referring to God as the Author _) 
LEgnifies to be made, or to be, Mitth. 5.5 45. John 1, 12. 


Nairn, verſe 7. a Dog of Righteauſmeſ, and « 45:227ei@r, 3d Ep. 
A Deer of Good, is not every ene that doth any one righteous or 
good 


7 Little children, let no man deceive you : * He , 
that doth righteouſneſs, is righteous, even as he is righ- , 


Rom, 
_ 
ls 
bs 
Sa 
-- 7; 


=_y 


45. 


+ ÞCr 


IF, 


of his Son, who 1s then to come in the Glory of the Father, Matth. 15. 1 Cor. 1 


I 2, 


” 
- 


* Chap. 5. 


17. 


Sin, or of tranſgrefſing his holy Law, which is the very Notion of 


8 
 # 
7 i DJ 

'L) 
& - a” 
Q 4. 5, 


T 2 Cor.g. 


2 Beloved, * ngw are we the ſons of Goa, and t it *Ift.;-., 
I's, 


whatſoever Hardſhips from the World, or ſeverer Diſcipline from || Row, 2 
it is much above us to comprehend diſftin?/y the Glory of it : 7et 1 Cor, 1 
drawn before it, which is to be drawn afide at the appointed Seaſon Phil, 4.2 ;, 


of the Manifeſtation of the Sons of Ged, verſe 19, d But ſo mich we Col. z, 4 


- ' 
{al. [4 5 


3 
yo 


Cor. 5.7, 


* Iſa. 53. 


6, &c. 


I Tiff; 1, 


*4a-* a 


ſoever ſinneth, « hath not ſeen him, neither known * = > 
4. & 4. 8. 


9. 


Chap. 2. 


* Mat. 13. 
purpoſe the Son of God was maniſeſted, that he might *oh.. 44. 


race] 
Lo" 
” 


"Chap.4.3. 


g92% AFR; NY more than we call him 2 Worker or Maker of any 
tlio, (45 tigniytng a manual Occupation) who only makes a fingle 
Attempt, but him who hath acquird the habitual Skill, and doth or- 
dinarily employ himfelf accordingly. AWorber or Maker of Sin, ( as 
Ve may ty reader this 6 TTLev THY 4 2pmey ) 15 an Habitual or Cult o- 
mary S:nner ; one that {inneth with deliberation, not by ſurprize, 
irom a preva!11ng Habit, that either continueth him in a Courſe -of 
actua! knwn $'1, or that with-holds him from repenting ſincerely, 
and furning to God trom the Sin which he hath committed ; by 
which Repentance he ſhould not only refrain from further groſs Ads 
of Sin ( which an impenitent Perſon upen other Inducemepts my 
do ) but mortifie and prevail againſt all finful Habits and Inclina- 
trons. In the ſame ſence he uſcth the Expreiſion of SirMing, terſe 6. 
and verſe g, n And ſuch a Sinner he ſ1ys, is of the Dev! ;, as if he 
were born of him, were his Child, really conform'd to him, and ha- 
ving his ianing Nature. As our Saviour tells the Jews, having ap- 
pited to them the fame Phraſe before of committing Sin, John 8.34. 
that they were of their Father the Devil, ver/e 44. As alſo this Apo- 
ſtle, 3 Fobn 1, fays, The Doer of Good i« of God, 1. e. born of God, 
or his Child, as wefind he uſes the Expreſſions of being born of God, 
and being of God, promiſcuouſly, and with indifference, verſe 9, 10. 
and Chap.'s. 18, 19.. the latter being elliptical in reference to the 
former. Whereas Sin was therefore orizinally the Devil's Work, 
he adds (as a further Engagement again(t it) that the Son of 

;0d was manifcited (as werſe 5. ) appeared in the Fleſh, ſhew- 
ed fimtelf in this World of ours, on purpoſe to deſtroy, or { as 
the Word ftyniaes ) that he might diſſolve the Frame of all ſuch 
Works. | 

9 * Whoſoever is born of God o, doth not commir 
ſin p, for his ſeed 9 remaineth in him : and he cannot 
{in 7, becauſe he is born of God. 

9 To be born of God, is ( in the Words of a very Learned Annota- 
tor, Dr. Hammond )< to have received ſome ſpecial Influence from 
God, and by the help and power of that, to be raiſed to a pious 
Life. . Agreeably, 54301114 3» & at 28, he that .hathbeen born of God, 
is ſ1tterally he that hath had ſuch a bleſſed Change wrought 1n him, 
by the Operation of God's Spirit in his Heart, as to be trantlated 
from the Power of Darkneſs into the Kingdom of his own dear Son; 
transformed in the Spirit of his Mind, j. e. ſincerely changed from 
all Evil to all Good ; from an Obedience to the Fleſh, gc. to an 
Obedience to God. . Only it is here to be noted, that the Phraſe 1s 
not ſo to be taken, as to denote on/y the Ad of this Change; the 
brit Impreſſion of this Virtue on the Paticnt, the fingle tranſient 
AR of Regeneration, or Reformation ; and that, as in the Praeter- 
Tenſe, no:v paſt, but rather a continued Courſe, a permanent State: 
So as a Regenerate Man, ahd a Child of God are all one, and figni- 
© fies him that lives a pious and godly Life, and continues to do ſo, 
© &*c. Tothe ſame purpoſe this Author alſo ſpeaks, Nate on 7ohn 1. 
12. andin his Paraphraſe on that Verſe : * Thoſe which live accor- 
« ding to the Will of God, and neither the natural, nor carnal, nor 
© bare moral Principle. This Change introducing the conſequent Courſe, 
divers Texts of Scripture explain; 7ohn 3. 3,5, 6. 2 Cor. 5. 17. Eph. 
2, 10, & 4. 24+ Fam. 1. 18. gyc. p Now of one thus born of God, 
"tis ſaid, he doth not commit Sin, as verſe 8. and for the reaſon here 
alledged. q The Principles ob enlivened holy Truth, as 1 Pet. I. 23. 

am. 1.8, r Which is not to be underſtood ſimply, as 1f he could 
not tin at all, which were to contradit what he had faid before, 
Chap. 1.8. and ſuppoſed, Chap. 2. r. But he cannot commit 5'n. 
verſe 8. And *tis plain, the Apoſtle intends by theſe two Expre ffi 
ons the ſame thing. He cannot ſin, i.e. do an AR of known, grols 
Sin, deliberately, eafily, remorſleſly, maliciouily, as Cain, verſe 12 
out of an hatred of Goodneſs : Or, do not ſuch As cuſtomarily, cr 
not ſo unto Death, ( as Chap. 5. 16.) but that throuzh the Advantage 
of inlaid Principles, or the remaining Seed, by dependence upon the 
Grace, Spirit, and Covenant of God in Chriſt, he may timouſly re- 
cover. Becauſe he is born of God, i.e. in as much as it belongs to his 
Temper and Inclination, in reſpect of the holy new Nature receigy 
in Regeneration, to abhor from the grofſer Aﬀs, much more from 
Courſe of Sin, { Gen. 39.9. Aﬀs 4. 20. 2 Cor. 13. 8. Gal. 5. 17.) 
And to his Rate, as he is a Child of God, to have that Intereſt 1n the 
Grace of Chrift, thit he may jmplore, truſt, obtain, and improve it, 
to his beinz kept from ſuch deſtructive ſinning. And it being evi- 


TE NM od  & Mm” 


dent by his deep and thorough Change, that he 1s born of God, and 


choſen tobe an Heir of eternal Lite, { as his Children are Heirs ) he 
may and ought { not in a way of preſumptuous Negligence, but of 
Vi-ilance and humhle Depcndance ) certainly to expe being fo kept. 
Noris it ſtrange ſo much ſhould beatfirm'd, upon ſo unſpeakably bet- 
ter Grounds of the Chriftian State, when ſuch Boaſts are to be read 
concernin? ſome among the Pagans, that one might as ſoon divert the 
Sun from its Courſe, as turn ſuch a one from the Courſe of Righte- 
ouſneſs. Though we may alſo ſuppoſe this Form of Speech, might 
be intended by the Apoſtle to be underſtood by the more ſuperficial 
Profcifors of Chriſtianity, { who night be generally apt enough fo 
look upon themſelves as born of God, and his Children ) as parene- 
tical, and more enforcinzly hortatogg, 1n purſuance of his former 
Scope, to keep them off from the liecntious Courſes of their Sedu- 
cers; 9. d. It carrot be, that you who avow your ſelves born of 
God, thould do like them. So we uſually fv, that cannot byt be, 
or c:mmt be, which we apprehend more highty and clearly reaſonable 
ſhould be, or not he. Nom potes avelli, &. Such Rhetorick the 
Apoſtles uſes with Agrippa, 1 know thou believe, as 1t it were 1mpoſ- 
ib!che ſhouid not. 

10 In this the children of God are manifeſt, and 
the children of the devil : Whoſvever doth not righte- 
ouſneſs, is not of God, * neither he that loveth not 
his brother £. 

s Upon what was fad, he redyces alt Men each to their own Fa- 
mily and Father, concluding it manifeſt whither they belonged, 7.e. 
He ſtews upon the Grounds before expreſſed, who do not belong to 
Gol and his Family, leavinz it thence to be collefted, ſince two Fa- 
thers and Families divide the W - ©, to which tney muſt be reckon- 
e4, i.e. They belong not to God, 2nd conſequently to that worit of 
Eithers, whofirſt in the general do not Righteouineſs , the Devil 


1 FOHN 


being the firſt Sinner, they are his Deſcendents ; 2nd next, who var- 


ticularly love not their Brethren, which moſt ex reſly demonitrates 
4 Diabolical Nature. | 


11 For * this is the || meſſage that ye heard from the * 


beginning, ? + that we ſhould love one another. 


t See Chap. 2, 5, 8. 9. d. They cannot be of G4, therefore, tht ” 


croſs ſo fundamental a Precept, fo expretſiveof his Nztu;e and 4/7. 
12 Not as * Cain, who was of that wicked cn2 x. 

and {Jew his brother : And wherefore {lew- he him 7 
Sccauſle his own works were evil, and his brothers 
righteous. | 

4 And what again, on the other hand, ( 4. 4.) can be more Pe- 
vil like than ſuch a Temper as C4in's was, whoſe Hatred of this Bro- 
thes brake out into aftual Murder, upon no other account but becauſe 
his Brother was better than he ? which ſhewed him to be of tl:zt 
wicked One, of the Serpent's Seed : $9 early was ſuch Secd ſown, and 
lo ancient the Enmity between Seed and Sced. 


13 Marvel not, my brethren, it F the world hate + 7 


YOu tv. 

w This beiny fo devilliſh a quality, and the World fo generally 
under his Power, as the God of it, 2 Cor. 4. 4. it is aot to be thovs!;t 
ſtrange, that good Men ſhould be the Marks and detigned Objctt. Ut 


the World's Hatred. 


14 * We know that we have paſſe] from death unto 


life, becauſe we love the brethren : + he that love: 
not his brother, 2bilerh in death. 

x The Notion of Brother muſt not be underſtood © nyrawly, 25 
only to fignifie ſuch 2s we have particular inclination to, 1s buthtf ot 
our own Party and Opinion,orKkindred,or who hive obli-e us by 
cial Kindnets ; For to confine our Love within ſuch Limits, wore no 
Argument of our having paſſed trom Death ro Life, or more: £11.01 
to ve found with the worſt of Men, atth. 5. 45, 47. _ Nor mutt it 
be underſtood excluſively, of the Regenerate only ; but mutt be © 
ken, fir$, more generally, in the Natural Senſe, for all Mankind, in 
the ſame Latitude as Neighbous in that Summary of the ſecond Tulle, 
Thou ſhalt love thy Neighbour as thy ſelf; originally intended nor to 
Jews, as ſuch, but Men; and therefore exclude not our Enemies, 
by our Saviour's interpretation, Matth. 5. 43, 44. Second'y, in a 
more ſpecial (viz. the Spiritual ) Senſe, for fucit as are our Breth-en 
by Regeneration, ſo the Children with us of the ſame Father ; i. e. 
Whereas the Blefſed God himſelf is the Primum 4mabile, the firft 
Object of Love, of all other ( Perſons or Things ) ouzht to he lov'd 
proportionably to what Prints or Characters of the Divine "Excellency 
we find impreft upon them. Human Nature hath Refſ-mblancies in 
it of his ſpiritual, intelligent, immortal N:ture; Repeneracy of his 
FlinefS. And ſo he loves his Creatures himſelf, ſevering their Ma- 
lignity ( where that is to he found ) that is of themſelves, from what 
of real Good there is in them, which is from him. When therefore 
4 correſpondent frame of Love is impreſt upon us, and inwrouzlit in- 
fo our Temper, his Image, who #-Z2ve, is renewed in us, which i: 
this noble part of it, the Devil had ſocminently defic'd in the Woils, 
poſſeſſing the Souls of Men with mutual Animeſitics and Enmitics 
againft one another, but eſpecia!ly ſuch as ſhould be found to have up- 
on them any Impreſs of the moſt excellent kind of Goodneſs, 7.6. of 
true Prety and Holineſs. And by this Renovation of his Imaye in vs, 
whereby weare enabled tc love others ſor his ſie, and proportion: 
bly to «what Chara&ers of him arc upon them, we appe.r to be 5: 
Chi/dren, Matth. 5. 45. begotten of him int» a Pate of Life, out of 
the Death which is upon the reft of the World, Ephe!. 2.1. and 
wherein every one ſtill abides, that thus loves not kis Brother, * 

15 * Whoſoever haterh his brother, is a murderer, 
and ye know that no murlerer hath eternal lite | 
ding in him. 

y That Life into which the Regcnerate are bezottcn, is notitins 
elſe than the Beginning or firſt Principles of Eternl Lite, 7obr g. 14 
whereof they cannot but ' be deſtitute, who hate tiicir Brethren ;.4 
thing ſo contrary to the Divine Life, Nature, and Imave, and which 
makes the Perſon affe&ted with it, in the temper and habrt of his 
Mind, a very Murderer. 

16 * Hereby perceive we the love of God, becauſe 
he 2 laid down his life for us : and we ought to Jay 
down our lives. for the brethren. 


py 


7 The intimate Union between the Divine Nature and the Humane , 


in ChriF, gives ground for the callinz Chriſt's Life as Man, the Life 
of God; as As 20. 28, his Blood is ſaid tobe God's own Blood. And 
this Teſtimony of God's Love to us, his laying down his Life for us, 


ought ſo to transform us into his Likeneſs, that out of the Power of 


that Divine Principle, the Love of God in us, ( ſo that implanted 
Love is called, verſe 17. the Love of God.) a We ſhould never hetj- 
tate or make a difficulty to lay down our Lives for the Chriſtian, Com- 
munity, or even for the common Good and Welfare of Men, being 
duly called thereto. . 

17 * But whoſo hath this worlds good, and leet 
his brother hatch need, and ſhutreth up his bowe!s © 
compaſhon from him. b | how dwellerh the love of Go: 
in him ? » | 

b i.e. If the Love of God ingyes ſhould make us !ay down cur Lives 
for the Brethren, and we be not wiiting in their Neceflity.and our 
own Ability, toreiieve them, how plain is the Cafe, that 1t is not 10 
us ? 

13 My little children, || let us not Iove in word, ot 
in tongue, but in deed and in truth c. 

c 9.4. 'Tis a vain thing to make verbal Pretences of Love, withent 
any real proof of it. | 

19 And hereby we know that we are of the irnth &, 
and ſhall * afſure our hearts beiore hime. 

d i. e. This ſtall demonſtrate to us, that we are the Chiicre 
the Truth, Leootten by it, James 1. x9. when we reſemble 1t, 


ly 


3 
- 
Y 


W - 


C 


TRE 
4D} - 


p 

oy 
'& £ 
L z 
y 7 
< 


ba OT - 
_ 


Chan, jI1 


* fol, vp.10 
& 15. 23 
Rem. 5.8 
E o!:cf.5.2. 


1 AM-2.2 3- 


Wc ww. 


$- 


+ Jer. 29.8. 


Chap. IV. IFfO 


the correſpondent Impreſs of the Goſpel, (that great Repreſentation 
of the Love of God) upon us. e So ſhall our hearts be quieted, and 
well fatished, concerning our ſtates God-ward. 


20 For if our heart condemn usf, God is greater 


than our heart, and knoweth all things. 

f If our Heart, or our Conſcience condemn us, vi. in plain Things» 
( as this of loving our Brother is ) and wherein the Mind of God 15 
evidently the fame with our own Conſcience ; his eSuperiority to 
whom our Conſcience 15 but an under Judge, ought much more to 
azwe us, eſpecially conſidering how much more he knows of us, than 
we do of our ſelves ; as 1 Cor. 4. 4. 


21 Beloved, if our heart condemn us not g, then 


have we confidence towards God. 
£ But for their net condemning 1s, though the Expreſſion be meer- 
ly negative, it muſt imply ſomewhat poſitive : For there are Many 
whoſe Hearts condemn them not, through Ignorance of their Rule, 
or Oicitancy, Self-indulgency, or Negle& of themſelves. But if at- 
. ter thcrow ſearch with Sincerity in the ſight of God, our Hearts do 
not condemn, but acquit us as upright towards him, not willing to 
allow our ſelves in any ill Temper or PraQtice, (ſuch as, for inſtance, 
this of not loving or negleing our Brother ) then we have Confidence 
C Liberty of Speech the word litterally ſignifies, which well ſuits with 
what follows) t2wards God; we have nothing to hinder or lye as a 
* Matth. Par 2gainſt us in our recourſe to him, 
21, 22. 22 And * whatſoever þ we ask, we receive of him, 
Joh.14.13- becauſe 7; we keep his commandments, and do thole 
&15.7- things that are pleaſing in his fight. | x 
& 15. 33- þ It is ſuppoſed, where there is that Accord with God, that what 
Jam. 5.16. was laſt, and is next after ſaid, implies there will be no diſpoſition to 
ask any thing diſagreeable to his Will, or otherwiſe than as he hath 
expreſt his Will about the matter of Prayer. And then, whatſoever 
we #sþ, we receive, 1. Ce. are as ſure to receive it, in the kind or in 
equivalence, as if we had it, Chap. 5.14. 71 7. e. This 1s the Cauſe 
of our Certainty, being the Evidence of our ſtate Godward, Pſal. 66. 
18,19.not of our receiving the Things prayed for,which we only owe 
to his free promiſed Mercy 1n Chriſt, 
*Toh.6.29. 


2 - 23 And* this is his commandment, that we ſhould 
n ver. 77, believe on the name of his Son Jeſus Chriſt #, and love 


Chap.4.21. One another #, as he gave us commandment. 
& Thus briefly 1s comprehended tlie Whole of our Duty towards 
God iv Chriſt, and one another, i'a like Summary as that, Eccleſ. 
[34 


4 | 
: _ 24 And* he that keepeth his commandments /, 
T5 Ii0. 


Chana 12, Iwelleth in him, and he in him : and tf hereby we 
m4 know that he abideth in us, by the Spirit which he 


Chap.4.13. hath given us. 
L ;. e. He whoſe whole Soul is thus formed to obediential Compli- 
ance with the Divine Will, hath moſt intimate Union with God 1n 
Chriſt ; which is evident by that Spirit given to us, which hath ef 
fefted both that-h1/y Frame, and-that Union. See John 14. 23. 


CHAP. IV. 
Falſe Teachers ſhould braſt of the Spirit ; but muſt be tried by the Rules 
of the Catholick Faith, and overcame by the Principles of the Spiritual 
Life in 145, 1 6. of which Love is an Evidence ,, for God 4 
Love : he firſt loved us, and ſent his Son to die fir us, 7 II, 
Hereby we are aſſured by his Spirit that we have Communion with 
God ; as alſo if we confeſs that Jeſius is the Saviour of the World and 
the Son of God, 12——15. By Love we abidein God, and ſhall have 
boldneſs in the Day of Fudgment : this drives away fear of damnation, 
and trouble of mind, 16——19. We cannot love God if we love not 
our Neighbour : ſeeing both theſe Commandments are given us together, 
20, 21, 


Nat. 24. 4. Rio * believe not every ſpirit 2, but f try 7: 
+ Rev. 2.2. the ſpirits whether they are of God, becauſe || ma- 


| Matth. ny falſe prophets are gone out into the world. 

24+ 5» 24+ 71 j,e, Not every one pretending to Inſpiration, or a Revelation 

2 Pet. 2:1. Spirit, whether good or bad , beinz put tor the Perſon ated there- 

2 John 7. by. n There being a Fudgment of Diſcretion or . Diſcerning, common 
to Chriſtians, de Fure, and which they ought to endeavour for, and to 
uſe upon ſuch occafions, Aﬀs 17. 11. Phil. 1.9, 10. 1 Theſſ. 5. 21. 
And the Attainment and Exerciſe whereof is, in reterence to the great 
Eſſentials of Religion, more facile and ſure: As when heretofore a- 
mong the Jews, any ſhould attempt the drawing them off from the 
true God, as Deut. 13. I, 2. and ſo when with Chriſtians it ſhould be 
endeavoured to tempt them away from Chriſt, as the falſe Prophets 
or Teachers did, now gone out into the World. 


2 Hereby know ye the Spirit of God ; Every ſpirit 
that confeſieth o that Jeſus Chriſt is come in the fleſh, 
is of God. 


o He here gives them the general Rule, both affirmative and nega- 
tive, which would ſuffice them to judge by in their preſent Caſe. 
This being the great Controverfie of that Time with the 7ews, 
Whether 7eſus were the Meſſiah ? and whether the Meſiah were as 
yet come or no ? And with the Gnoſtichs, Whether he were really 
come in the Fleſh, in true Human Nature ? or were not, as to that 
appearance, a meer Phaytaſm ? And he affirms, They that confeſt him 
fo come, were of God , 1.e. thus far they, were in the right, this Truth 
was of God. Of the two litigating Parties, this was of God, the 0- 
ther not of God; this took his Side, that was againſt him. Yea, 
and they that not only made this true Confeſſion, but did alfo truly 
confeſs him, 1, e. ſincerely, cordially, praftically, ſo as accordingly to 
truſt in him, ſubje& and devote themſelves to him, were born of God, 
his very Children, a&ed and "influenced hereunto by his own holy 
Spirit, as Chap. 5, 1, 5. Mat. 16. 16, 17. 1 Cor. 12.3, 


3 And * every fpirit that confeſſeth not that Jeſus 
Chriſt is comein the fleſh, is not of God : and this is 
that {7777 of antichriſt, whereof ye have heard that 


Ch 2.22. 
d Jobn 7. 


H N. » Chap. IV. 


it ſhould come, and|| even now already is it in the || 2 Theſf, 
world p. ot fy 

þ Buton the contrary, concerning them who againſt ſo plain Evi- Chap. _ 
dence denied him to be ſo come,the Caſe was plain, as with the Jews, 3%* 22: 
Fohn 8. 24. And with the preſent Hereticks, who denying the true 

Manner, could not but deny the true End of his coming; and who 

alſo liv'd fo impure Lives, as imported the moſt open Oppoſition 

and Hoſtility thereto, and ſo diſcovered moſt evidently that An- 
tichriſtian Spirit, which it was foreknown would ſhevw it {elf in the 

world. 


4 Ye are of God, little children, and have over- 
come thgm 9g - becaule greater is he zhat zs in you,than 
he zhat zs in the world. | 
q Their being born of God, and their participation of a direive 
and ſtrengthening Influence from him, kept them from being over- 
come by the plauſible Notions, the alluring Blandiſhments of the Fleſh 
and Senſe, the Terrour of Perſecution uſed fowards them by theſe 
Antichriſtian or Pſeudo-chriſtian Tempters; and enabled them to 
overcome, becauſe the Divine Spirit in them, was ſtronger than the 
others lying, 1mpure Spirit. 
5 * They are of the world : therefore ſpeak they of *oh.3.31. 
the world, and the world heareth them. E 
6 We are of God: *He that knoweth God, hear- * John 
eth us ; he that is not of God, heareth not us. Here- 19: 27- 
by know we the Spirit of truth, and the ſpirit of er- 


ror r. 
. r Hegiveth here a further Rule whereby to judge of Do&rines and 
Teachers, viz. what they ſeverally ſayour of, and tend to. The Do- 
&rines and Teachers whereby theſe Chriſtians were aflaulted and temp- 
ted, were of an earthly ſavour and. guſt, tending only to gratifie 
worldly Luſts and Inclinations, and to ſerve ſecular Intereſts and De- 
ſigns; and therefore Men only ofa Worldly Spirit and Temper,were 
apt to liſten and give entertainment to them, On the other hand, 
ſays he, ( in the Name of the Aferters and Followers of true and 
pure Chriſtianity, comprehended with himſelf ) We are of God, 1. e, 
Our Do&rine and Way proceed from God, and tend only to ſerve, 
pleaſe and glorifie him, and draw all to him ; therefore ſuch as know 
God, 1.e. are his Friends, and converſe much with him, hear us; the 
Things we propoſe and offer, are grateful and ſavoury to them, ( as 
Fohn 8. 37, 47. ) having manifeſtly no other Aim than to promote 
ſerious Godlineſs. And hereby may the Spirit of Truth and Errour 
in Matters of this Nature be diſtinguiſhed : The one being next of 
kinto Purity, and Holineſs, and a godly Life ; the other to Senſual:- 
ty, anda Def1gn only of gratifying the animal Life. 
7 Beloved, letus love one another «5, for love is of 
God 7, and every one that loveth, is born of God, and 
knoweth God. 
s In oppoſition to the Malice and Cruelty of theſe Enemies to true 
and pure Chriſtianity, he exhorteth to mutual Love, not limited to 
themſelves,as undoubtedly he did not intend; ſee Note on chap. 3.14. 
but that they ſhould do their parts towards all others, letting it le 
upon them, 1f 1t were not reciprocated and mutual. # This he preſ- 
ſes as a further Diſcrimination ; nothing being more evidential of 
— and Alliance to God, than a duly regulated Love, which is 
of him. 
8 He that loveth not, * knowetn not God ||; for Ma ug 
God is love z. 7 : hg” 
u Yea, lince Love is his very Nature, and that God is Love, thoſe "7 
that love ( upon the account and in the way above expreſt ) are born 
of h:m, partake from him that excellent and moſt deleRtable Nature, 
know him by a transformative knowledge : But they that love not, 
they are meer Strangers to him, and never had to do withhim. _ 
9* In this was manifeſted the love of God towards 
ww" becauſe that God ſent his only begotten Son into 
1e world, that we might live by him t. 

+ There could be no higher demonſtration of his Love; Fohn 3.16. * 
10 Herein is love , * not that we loved God, but * J9" 
that he loved us, and ſent his Son Þ zo be the propitiati- gom. 5.8, 

en. for our fins. | 10, 

w In compariſon of this wonderful Love of his, in ſending his Son F Ch. 2. 2. 
to be a Sacrifice for our Sins, our Love to him 15 not worthy the Name 
ot Love. 


11 Beloved, * if God ſo loved us, we ought alſo to * Mat. 18. 


love one another t. 33- 
+ We diſcover little ſenſe of this Love of his to us, if we do not m—_ 
ſo. bl 4 


*Toh.3.16. 
Ch. 3. 16: 


12 * No man hath ſeen x God at any time : if we "JOE 
love one another, God dwelleth inus, and his Þ love is : 5 _— 


perfeCted in us. + Ch, 2.5. 
x The Eſſence. of God is to offf Eyes inviſible, incomprehenſible to _. 
our Minds. » But by yielding our ſelves to the power of his Love, 
ſo as to be transform'd by it, and habituated to the Exerciſe of mu- 
tual Love, we come to know him by the moſt pleaſant and moſt ap- 
prehenfible Effe&ts, experiencing his in-dwelling, vital, operative 
Preſence and Influences, whereby he is daily perfe@ing this his own 
Likeneſs and Image in us. This is the moſt deſirable way of know- 
ing God, when though we cannot behold him at a diſtance, we may 
ſeeingly apprehend him nigh us, and in us. | 
13 Hereby know we that we dwell in him, and he 
in us, be@uſe he hath giren us of his Spirit *. 
* The near inward Union between him and us, is beſt to be dif- 
cern'd by the Operations of his Spirit, which is the Spirit of all Love 
and Goodneſs, Chap. 3. 24. Epheſ. 5. 9. : 
14 And *we have ſeen and do teſtify 2,that the Fa- * Cl. 17: 
ther ſent the Son to be the Saviour of the world, 


; He here ſignifies we are not left at any uncertainties, touching 
; that 


heſf, 


h, 1.1: 


Chap. V. 


that matter of Fa, wherein lies this mighty Argument for the Ex- 
erciſe of mutual Love among Chriſtians, God having ſent his Son to be 
the Saviour of the World : For, as he again inculcates, We teſtify upon 
Eye-ſight, having beheld him, and converſt with higp, living and dy- 
ing. 

15 Whoſoever ſhall confeſs that Jeſus is the Son of 
God, God dwelleth in him, and he in God *. 

* This Diſcourſe is moſt ſtudiouſly and obſeryably interwoven, of 
theſe two great Things mentioned, chap. 3. 23. Faith in the Meſſiah, 
and the Love of one ansther, as being the principal Antidotes againſt 
the poyſonous Infinuations of the Apoſtates, Of Confeſſing, ſee Note 
on verſe 2, ; 

16 And we have known and believed the love that 


* Ver. 12, God hath to us. God is love; and * he that dwelleth 


in love, dwelleth in God, and God in him a. 

a Inaſmuchas the transformative Efficacy of God's Love upon us 
depends upon our certain Apprehenſion of it, he doubles the Ex- 
preſſion of that Certainty : we have known and believed, 1. e. we are 
aflured of it, both by experimented Effet, and by Faith; implying, 
that by having this Conception of God throughly ſetled in our Souls, 
that He 3s Love ( as was alfo ſaid, verſe8. ) we ſhall be ſo throughly 
changed into this very Nature and Image, as to dwell in Love, as 10 
our own Element, or a thing now become wholly con-natural to us. 
Which will indeed be( by Conſequence ) to be ſo intimately united 
with God, that he and we may truly ( though in a Senſe moſt re- 
mote from 7dentification, or being made the ſame, and horrid Notion ! 
not only not inferred by what is here ſaid, but incenſiſtent with it, 
and refuſed by it, for Things united, are thereby implyed to be d1- 
ſtin&) be ſaid to indwell one another. 


17 Herein is * our love made perfe&t, that || we 
* Gr. love may have boldneſs in the day of Judgment 6b, becauſe 


with #. 2s he is, ſo are we in this world. 

[| Jam, 2. b And by this means, ( viz. of our inwardneſs with God ) doth 
i our Love grow to that perfe&ion, that we ſhall have the moſt fear- 
leſs Freedom and Liberty of Spirit in the Judgment-Day 3 our 
Hearts no way miſ-giving to appear before him as a Judge, whoſe 
very Image we find upon our ſelves, he having before-hand made us 
ſuch even in this World, though in an infinitely inferior degree, as 
he is, Compoſitions of Leve and Goodneſs. Or if the Day of Judg- 
ment ſhould mean, as ſome conceive, of our appearance before human 
Tribunals for his ſake ; ſuch a Temper of Spirit muſt give us the ſame 
Boldneſs in that Caſe alſo. 

13 There is no fear in love, but perfeCQt love caſteth 
out fear c ; becauſe fear hath rorinent : hz that fe ar- 
eth is not made perfect in love. | 

c That he proveth from the contrary Natures of . Fear and Love. 
The Fear which is of the baſer kind, viz. that is ſervile, and depreſ- 
ſes the Spirit, hath no place with Love, but is excluded by it, by the 
ſame degrees by which that Love grows up to Perfe&tion, and ſhall be 
quite excluded by that Love fully perfe&ted , Inaſmuch as Love is a 
pleaſant, Fear a tormenting Paſſion, which as ſuck, while 1t remains, 
ſhews the Tmperfe&ion of Love. 

19 We love him, d becauſe he firſt loved us. 

d His is the Fountain-Love, ours but the Stream : His Love the 
Inducement, the Pattern, and the effeftive Cauſe of ours. He that 
is firſt in Love, loves freely ; the other therefore Joves under Oligati- 
on 


* Ch. 2.4. 20 * If aman ſay, I love God, and hateth his brs- 


ther, he is a liar. Forhethat loveth not his brother 
whom he hath ſeen, how can he love God whom he 


hath not-ſeen e © 

e Thegreater Difficulty here is implyed, through our preſent de- 
pendence upon Senſe, of loving the inviſible God, than Men that 
we daily ſee and converſe familiarly with, Hence conſidering the 
Comprehenſiveneſs of theſe two things, the Love of God and our Bro- 
ther, that they are the Roots of all that Duty we owe to God and 
Man, the fulfilling of the whole Law, Matth. 22. 37,938, 39. he 
lets us ſee the Falſhood and Abſurdity of their Pretence to eminent 
Piety and Sanity, who negle& the Duties of the ſecond Ta- 
ble. . 

21 And * this commandment have we from him, 


37, 39. that he who loveth God, loveth his brother alſo ||. 
John 13, | Bothought to be conjoined, being required both by the ſame Au- 


.& 15. thority. 

TH I CHAP. V. 

Ch. 3-23. 7» that loveth God, loveth his Children and keepeth his Commandments, 
and by Faith in Chri$t overcometh the World, I—s5. Chris 
proved to be the Son of God and our Redeemer by the Teſtimony of the 
Holy Trinity in Heaven, and of the Spirit, Water and Blood on 
Earth, 6——8. If we refuſe theſe, we make God a Lyar: but if 
we receive them, we have eternal Life by Chriſt, 9——13. And 
a Confidence that by their Prayers they ſhall obtain all things from 
God that are neceſſary to their Salvation; and that not only for them- 
ſelves, but alſo for their Brother who ſinneth not unto Death , 
14=—17. Into which Sin the Regenerate fall not : being in him 
who is true, even Feſus Chrift, who is the true God and eternal Life, 
i18-——20., He finally exhorts believers to keep themſelves from 
Idols, 21. 


-Hoſoever believeth / that Jeſus is the Chriſt, 

vv is* born of God: and every one that loveth 

*Ch.2.22, him that begat, loveth him alſo that is begotten of 
23 © 4+ him. | : 
2, 15. f This is not meant of a meer profeſſed, orof a ſlight and ſuperfici- 
al. bat of a lively, efficacious, unitive, Soul-transforming, and” obedien- 

tial Faith in Feſus as the Chriſt, which is elſewhere made the Effe&t 

. of the regenerating Power and Grace of God, John 1. 12, 13. And 

as nothing can be more con-natural to ſuch an Heaven-born Faith, than 


* Mat. 22. 


IFO AHN | Chap. V. |" 


the loving of him that hath begotten us to it : So nothing can be | 
more certainly confequent and agreeable, than the loving of them tos, 
who are begotten allo of the ſame Father, viz. with a correſpondent 
Love to the more excellent CharaQters and Image of God upon them, 
than are upon other Men. ; 
2 By * this we know that we love the children of + ;, 
God, when we love God g, and keep his Command- x5, 21,2. 
ments. 2 - 


g It is not otherwiſe to be known that we truly Love the Children | | 
of God, ax ſuch : For if we do, we muſt love them upon God's account, : $4 
in conformity to him, and obedience to his Commandments ; where- [ 


fore our true Love to them, ſuppoſes our Love to him, and is to be 
evinced by it. 
3 For this is the love of God þ that we keep his com 
mandments, and his commandments are not grievous. 
h 1.e, This is the moſt lively, certain Expreffion and Ertect of 
our Love to God, our keeping his Commandments, which are fo lit- 
tle grievous, that true Love can make no difficulty of doins ſo, Mat. 
II. 30. Pſal. 19.11. 
4 For whatſoever is born of God 7, overcometh the 
world, and this is the victory & that overcometh rhe 
world, even our faith. 
i Heexplains himſelf, viz. that to onewho is born of God, His Com- 
mandments are not grieyous, becauſe ſucha one in that Divine Birth, 
hath received a Life and Nature, that makes him far ſuperior to this 
World, exalts him above it, makes him yiRorious ouer the world. 
ly Spirit ( as chap. 4+ 4. ) over all worldly Deſires, and Fears, and 
Hopes, and Joys, which are the great Hindrances of our Obedience 
to God, k. i. e. The Inſtrument, the Weapon by which they over- ' 
come, and which virtually includes in it ſelf this Victory over the | 
World, as Effects are included in the Power of their Cauſe, i thcir tf 
Faith, that Principle which in their Regeneration (as ab5ie \ is im- | 
planted in them. 
5 Who is he that overcometh the world, but * he + <. 4.157 


that believeth that Jeſus is the Son of God / 2 

1 For that Faith, viz. that Feſiss is the Son of God, ( or the Chriſt, 
as verſe 1. ) fills the Soul with ſo great things concerning him, and 
the Deſign of his coming among us, and what weare to expett there- 
upon, as eafily turn this Worid into a contemptible Shadow, and 
deprive 1t of all its former Power over us. 

6 This is he thatcame by waterand blood x, ever 
Jeſus Chriſt ; not by water o:ly, but by warcr and 
blood : and it Is the ſpirit that beareth witneſs, becaulc 
the {pirir 1s truth. 


—_— 


m For the explaining of this obſcure Place we muſt procecd by de- 
grees. It is, 1. evident, that Water and Blood cannot he here meant 
literally. 2. It is therefore conſequent, that they muſt be intended 
to ſignifie ſomewhat or other by way of Symbolical Repreſontation, 
or that they muſt have ſome myſtical Meaning. 3. They ouzht to 
have ſuch a meaning aſſigned them, as will both be agreeable to 
the Expreſſions themſelves, and to the Apoſtle's preſent Scope and 
Defign. It will, 4. be very agrecable to the Expreſſions, to un- 
derſtand by Water the Purity of our blefſed Lord, and by Blood his 
Sufferings. 5. His maniteſt Scope and Deſign is, to ſhew the abun- 
dantly ſufficient Credibility of the Witneſſes and Teſtimony we have, to 
aſſure us that Feſus was the ChriF, or the Meſſiah, and to induce us 
to believe this of him, with ſo efficacious and transforming a Faith, 
as ſhould evidence our being born of God, and make us fo viRori- 
ous over the World, as conſtantly to adhere to this Jeſus by Truf 
and Obedience againſt all the Allurements and Terrors of it. 5. This 
being his Scope, it ſuppoſeth that the mentioned Coming of 7eſus, as 
the Meſſiah, was for ſome known End, unto his Accomplij}1ment where- 
of theſe two, his Purity and his Sufferings, were apt and certain 
Means, as that they were to be conſidered under the Notion of 
Means, his being ſaid to have come he, by them, doth intimate. 
And in purſuance of this Scope, he muſt be underſtood to fignifie, 
that his Coming ſo remarkably by theſe two, did carry with it ſome ve- 
ry convietive Proof and Evidence of his being the $1n of God, and the 
Meſſiah, ſufficient to recommend him as the moſt deſerving Obje& 
of ſuch a Faith, and render it highly reaſonable we ſhould hereupon 
ſo truſt and obey him, and intirely reſign our ſelves to his Mercy 
and Government. Wherefore alſo, 7. This his C:ming muſt here be 
underſtood in a Senſe accommodate hereunto, and is therefore in no 
reaſon to be taken for the very 4 or Inſtant, preciſely, of his En- 
trance into this World, but to figaifie his whole Courſe in it, from 
firſt to laſt, a continued Motion and Agency, correſpondent to the In- ; 
tendment of his Miſſion. To the clearing of which Notion of hzs Corr- , 
ing, ſome Light may be gained, by conſidering the Account which j 
is given, 2 Theſſ. 2.9, 10. of the Coming of Antichriſt, which is ſaid 
to be after Satan, (as it were by his impulſion, and in purſuance 
of his Ends and Purpoſes ) with all Power, and Signs, and lying q 
Wonders, and all deceivableneſi of Unrighteouſneſs ; where it is mani- 4 
feſt, Coming muſt ſignify a continued Courſe of doing Buſine/l. So ; 
here, our Lord's Commg muſt fignify his continual Employment for 
the diſpatch of the Bufineſs about which he was ſent. 8. The 
known Buſineſs and End for which he was ſent, was to reduce and 
bring back Sinners to God. 9g. How apt and neceſſary means theſe 
two, his Purity and Sufferings, were to this End, the whole Frame 
of the Goſpel ſhews. © His Sacrifice of himſelf, in his Sufferings, 
was neceſſary to our Reconciliation ; ſo he - was to come and effe&t gf 
his Work by Blood : His Purity was requiſite to the Acceptableneſs 
of his Sacrifice; fo it was to be done by Water : without which, as 
was wont to be proverbially ſaid among the Hebrews, there could be 
no Sacrifice, 10, For the Evidence his coming /o remarkably by 
theſe two carried with it, for the inducing of us to belicve him to 
be the Meſſiah, with ſuch a Faith, as whereby we ſhould imitate 


his Purity, and rely upon the Value of his Sufferings; we may ſee it | 4 
in the Note upon verſe 8. where the Teſtimony of theſe two Wit- Ty 
nefles; the Water and the Blood, comes to be given in its own Place | 


| and Order. 11, Nor is it ſtrange the Apoſtle ſhould uſe _ | 
mMVINC a: 1 


Ch 


T Joh, 1.1. 


* Rom. 8. 
FE. 
Gil. 4 6. 


» 


an. V, 


the ſpirit, and the water and the blood: and theſe 


im ſtical Expreſſions to this purpoſe, if we conſider what might lead | 
him thereto : For we muſt remember, Firſt, That he was a SpeQa- 
for of our Lord's Crucifixion, and then beheld, upon the piercing of 
his Side, the ſtreaming forth of the Water and Blood; which it ap- 
ears at that time made a very deep Impreffion upon his Mind, as 
his Vords about it in his writing his Goſpel import : There came out 
B:n1d and Water, and he that ſaw it, bare Record, and his Record »s 
tru? : and he knoweth that he ſaith true, that ye might believe, John 19. 
34,35. That he there lays fo great a weight on it, imports that he 
apprehended fome great Myſtery, 1f not intended, yet very apt to 
be tignitied by it. And, 2. That he wasa Few, and ( as is probable) 
wrote this Epiſtle to Fews, among whom the ſo frequent Ablutions 
withi\/ater, as well as the ſhedding the”Blgod of Sacrifices were moſt 
known things, and intended to typifie { what they ought to have 
underitood, and he now intimates ) theſe very things, the Purityand 
Dying of the Meſſiah. -Not to infiſt upon what he had long ere now 
cccation to obſerve in the Chriſtian Church, Baptiſm, and the Supper 
of 047 Lord, repreſenting in effet feverally the ſame things Neither 
w.:s this way of Teaching unuſual, nor theſe Expreſſions leſs intelligi- 
ble, than our Lord's calling himſelf( as this Evangeliſt alſo records) a 
Shepherd, a Door, a Vine, &c. 
That the Spirit is ſaid to bear witneſs, ſee verſe 7, 8. 
= For there are three rhat bear record in heaven, the 
Father, the F Word, and the huly Ghoſt : and theſe 
threeare one 7. | 
2 Having mentioned the Spirit's teſlifying in the cloſe of werſe 6. 
he returns to give us in order, in theſe two verſes, the whole Teſti-' 
mony of the Truth of Chriſtianity, which he reduces to tivo Terna- 
1:es of Witneſſes, The Matter of their Teſtimony is the ſame with that 
ot their Faith, who are born of God, that Feſus s the Son of God, 
end the Meſſiah, as may be colle&Fed from what was ſaid before, 
verſe 1. and 5, and what 1s ſaid afterwards,. verſe 9, What they be- 
l1ere, 1s no other thing than what the/e teſtify. For the fir8 Three 
in Heaven, that 1s not ſaid to fignifie Heaven to be the p/1ce of their 
teſtifying : for though the ſame thing concerning Feſws be alſo no 
dou>t teſtified to the Glorious Inhabitants: of that World; yet that 
1s not the Apoſtle's preſent Scope, but to ſhew what reaſon we 
hive, who inhabit this World, to belicve Jeſus to be Chriff, and the 
Son of G14, In Heaven therefore is to be referred to | Three, ] not 
to | bear record or witneſs } as if the Text were read, - which it may 
as well, There are Three in Heaven, why bear witneſs ; the Defign be- 
ing to repreſent their immediate teſtifring from thence unto us, or 
the Glorious, Heavenly, Majeſtick manner of their teſtifying. So 
tne Father teſtifyed of the Man Feſws by immediate Voice from 
Heaven, at his Baptiſm and Transfiguratiom, This is my Son, &c. The 
Eternal Word owned its Union with him, in that Glory with which 
it ſo eminently. cloathed his Humanity, and which viſibly ſhone 
through it in the holy Mount, whereof this Apoſtle was a SpeQator, 
and whereto he ſeems to refer in his Goſpel, chap. 1. 14. We beheld 
his Glory, the Glory as of the only begotten Son of the Father, 1. e. 
Such as ſufficiently teſtified him to be ſo, even the very Son of God. 
And the Holy Ghoſt teſtified, deſcending as a Dove in a viſible glo- 
rious Appearance upon him, at his Bapt ſm alſo. And theſe three are 
one, viz. not only agreeing Teſtimony, as verſe 8. but in Unity of 
Nature, an expreſs Teſtimony of the Triune Deity, by whatſoever 
careleſneſs or 1ll deſign left out of ſome Copies, but ſufficiently de- 
monſtrated by many moſt ancient ones, to belong to the Sacred Text : 
Of which L. Brug. Not. in Loc. with the other Criticks, and at large 
Dr. Hammond, 


IFO HN 


Chap. V. 


Teſtimony on his own Soul ; if not, he gives God the Lie, as we do 
to any one whoſe Teſtimony we believe not. See John 3. 33- 
11 And this is the record, that God gath given to. 
us eternal lite || : and * this life is in his Son. * Joh. 1.4. 
|| His Teſtimony, that this is his Son and the Chriſt, imports fo 
much that eternal Life is in him, as the Source and Fountain of it : 
ſothat he gives it to us no other way than in and by him. 


12 * He that hath the Son, hath lite; and he that 


hath nor the Son of God. hath not lite ||. 
|| And therefore that we partake this Life, or partake 1t not, as by 
Faith we are united with him, or not united. 


13 || Theſe things have I written unto you rhat be- {| John 23, 
lieve on the name of the Son of God ; that ye may * * 
know q that ye haveeternal life, and that ye may be- 
lieve on the name of the Son of God, 

9 That diſcerning their own Faith, they might be in no doubt 
concerning their Title to Eternal Life, and might be thereby encou- 
raged to perſevere in the ſame Faith. 

14 And this is the confidence that we have|| in him, 
that * jf we ask any thing according to his will 7, he 
heareth us, + ; 

7 Viz. According to his Will, not negatively, as it only doth not for- 
5:4 our praying for, or enjoving ſuch, and ſuch things, but poſitive- 
ly, i. e. accorcing to his Will ſignified, 1. By bs Commands, 1. E- 
when the matter of our Pray##s is ſome ſpiritual good thing, which was 
before the matter of our Duty ; as when we pray for Grace to enable us 
to be, and to ad» what he requires us, as far as our preſent ſtate will ad- 
mit. 2.” By his Promiſes, which are more abſlute and particular, 1N 
reference to things of that Nature, Matth. 5.5. Luke 11.13. Inre- 
ference to things of an inferior Nature, of a conditional Tenor Or move 
general, the things promiſed coming under the common Notion of good 
things, not in themſelves only, but for ws, in preſent Circumſtances 3 
which, whether they be or no, he reſerves to himſelf the liberty of 
determining, and doth only promiſe them, if they be ; and ſo we are 
only to pray for them ; for that is prayins, according to what ſignifi- 
cation he hath given us of his Will, in ſaci caſes. And fo we are al- 
ways ſure to be heard in the former Caſe, in the very particular kind, 
about which his Will is exprefly made kftown before-hand. 


15 And it we know that he hears us, whatſoever 
we ask, we know that we have the petitions that we 
defired of him /. 


ſ In the latter, in that, or ſomewhat equivalent, or better ;” for if 
he determine that thing to be beſt for us, all Circumſtances confider- 
ed, we ſhall have it, if he determine otherwiſe ( ſuppoſing we pray 
according to: his Will ) we defire it not : For every one intends 
Good to himſelf, when he prays for any thing, not hurt. And God 
anſwers his Children according to that general meaning of their Pray- 
ers, not always according to the particular ( which may be often a 
much miſtaken ) meaning. According whereto ſuppoſing the thing 
would be really and in truth hurtful, ( and God's Judgment is always 
according to Truth ) they conſtrufively pray to be denied it ; and the De- 
mial is the Equivalent, -nay, the better thing than what they particu- 
larly prayed for; and fo they truly have their Petitions, See chap. 3.22. 
Nor'can any be underſteod to pray according to God'sWill as the Rule, 
it it be not to his Glory as the End, as the Order and ConneRion of 
Petitions ſhews in that admirble Platform preſcribed by our Lord 


* John 2, 
36.C5.24, 


jj Or, cn- 
cerningh'm, 
” Ch43. 22, 


$ And there are three that bear witneſs in earth, 


three agree 1n one 0. 

o And for the-three that are ſaid to bear Witneſs on Earth ; there 1s 
firlt the Spirit, who though the Holy Ghoſt were in the former Triad, 
needs not here to be taken for another Spirit, but may be the ſame 
conſidered under another Notion, and as teſtifying in anther manner , 
not tranſiently and immediately from Heaven, as there, but ſlatedly, 
and as inating Inſtruments here on E.:rth: Extraordinarily, the Man 
Chriſt Jeſus, all his Apoſtles and firſt Diſciples, in all the wonderful 
Works which they did for the Confirmation of the Chriſtian Dofrine; 
and ordinarily the whole Church of true Chriſtians; for 1t animates 
the whole living Body of Chriſt, and makes it, though in an imper- 
fe& meaſure, by an uniform Courſe of Ations, tending to God and 
Heaven, an extant viſible Proof to the World of the Truth of that 
Religion which obtains in it, and of his Divine Power and Nature, who 
is the Head of it. Next, the Water, 1. e. the continual untainted, 
God-like Purity of our Lord Jeſus through the whole courfe of his 
terreſtrial State, manifeſtly ſhewed him to be the Son of God, an in- 
carnate Deity, inhabiting our World. And laſtly, the Blood, his ſuf- 
fering of Death, conſidered in the Circumſtances, was a moſt con- 
ſpicuous, clear Teſtimony and Indication who he was; ſo exaQtly ac- 
cording to the Predi&tion of the Prophets, attended with wonderful 
amazing concomitants, ending in ſo gforious a Reſurre&ion. And in 
and with both theſe the Spirit, complicating his Teſtimony, did bear 
witneſs too, as is intimated {after the former mention of them both) 
in the latter part of verſe 6, It teſtified all along, both in his clear 
1amaculate Life, and in the bloody Death in which it affiſted him, 
which it accompanied with ſo marvellous EffeQs, and out of whic! at 
leathit tetcht him, Rom. 1. 44 And that part it took, as being the 
Spirit of Truth, and as it's there expreſt, in the ( more emphatical ) 
Abſtract, Truth it ſelf. 

9 It we receive the witneſs of men, the witneſs of 
God is greater : for this is the witneſs of God, which 


he hath reſtified of his ſon *. 
* A Teſtimony above exception, heing wholly divine, as he him- 
ſelf argued, 7ohn 5, 36, 37.1and 8.13, 14,17, 18. 

10 He that believeth on the Son of God *, hath the 
witneſs in himſelf p - he that believeth not God, hath 
made him a liar, becauſe he belizveth not the record 
that God gave of his Son. 


himſelf. And is it poſſible to be the Senſe of any one that hath a ſin- 
cere Heart in Prayer, that God would gratifie him againſt himſelf? 
therefore that Latitude allowed the Apoſtles, Fohn 14. 13, 14. and 
15.15, and 16. 23, &c. muſt be underſtood to reſpe& the Service 
of the Chriſtian intereſt, and is to be- limited thereby, as ſome of 
the Expreffions ſhew. 


16 If any man ſee his brother fin a fin which is not 
unto death 7, he ſhall ask, and || he ſhall give him life, |". 5 
for them that ſin not unto death + : there is a' fin unto + wat. 12. 


death, I do not ſay z he ſhall pray for it. 31, 32. 

t Viz. That appears not obſtinate an incurable : he ſhall aþ, i e. Mark 3+ 
with confidence, as verſe 14. But there 5s a Sin unto death, j, e. which 29+ Heb. 6. 
doth not barely deſerve Death, as all Sin doth, nor which argues a 4+ & 19. 
Perſon to be probably in a preſent State of Death, or Unregeneracy, 29+ 
which the ſinful ways may do of many that never made Profeſſion ; 
but of ſuch as have apoſtatized from a former ſpecious Profeſſion in 
to Hereſy and Debauchery, and continue obſtinate therein, againſt all 
methods of Recovery; that are, as Fude 12. even twice dead, &Cc. 
u 7.e. I do not give that encouragement to pray for ſuch, with that 
Hope and ExpeRation of Succeſs as for others ; though he doth not 
ſimply forbid praying for them neither, | 

17 * All unrighteouſneſs is fin ||, and there is a fin 
not unto death. 

|| He intimates they ſhould be cautious of all Sin, eſpecially more 
deliberate ( which the «dz ſeems to import) but would not have 
them account that every Sin would make their Caſe-fo hopeleſs, as 
ſuch Sin, which he called Sinning unto Death, would do, 


18 We know that whoſoever is born of God, fin- 
neth not w ; but he that is begotten of ,God, keep 
eth himſelf, and that wicked one toucheth him 
nor. 

w The great Advantage is here ſignified of the Regenerate, who 
by the ſeed remaining in them ( as Chap, z 9.) are furniſhed with a 
ſelf-preſerving Principle, with the exerciſe whereof they may expe& 
that Co-operation of a gracious Divine Influence by which they ſhall 
be kept, ſo as that wicked Ore, the great Deſtroyer of Souls, ſhall 
not mortally touch them, to make them fin unto Death. 

19 And we'know that we are of God x, and the 


whole World lieth in wickedneſs y. 
x And this he doth not excluſively afſume to himſelf, but ex- 


* Ch. 3. + 


Þ 7. e. If be truly believe, he hath the cffeQual Impreſs of this 


prefles his:charitable Confidence of tzwem to whom he writes, that 
it 


un 25, 


} CN - 


neh'm, 


5 17 


dyo << «es 


* v$*-57c yY 8 WY — Ao 1; SOLE 3; _—_ ON aan >}. er” yu ? A as bd 

IX was the Privile:e in common with nm, t© be tlius of Goa, a 
b m0 wn, » Notwitaſtandins the Generality of Men were un- 
Ger Tie LOWer of tut before-mcationed wicked one, (as that | 


Praic muy bs read) or in the midit of all Impurity and Ma- | 


DJ \ ., K7,> I-; Tx - 6 - th h- 
oO and we Know that the Son of God is come. 
dy to bao! SITIO wow © A 2441+ p 

nat FIVeN 15 An underſtanding that we may 
Tre os SHOW Ni TAK IS tae and we are in him thar Is 


T 112 Þ . . 

& 44.6, Ye, e077 10 his Oi Jeſus Chriſt. + This is the true 

& <4.5, God, and cernal lite 2, | 

#00.20.208 7 Tt: here fignited how ſatisfying a Knowledze and Certainty 

Ron. 9. 5. HEcere Chilitans had, that Chriit was indeed come, by that bleffed 
Tim, 3. Eric they found upon themſelves; wiz. a clear and lively Light, 

16, It:1umg by his procurement ard Communication, juto their Minds, 


II FORN, 


. ſa = % : "RA : = «-- 
Tit 2. 13. Wnereby they had other Apprehenſions more vivid and powerful 


tan ever before, of the tfuc God, as Jehn 17. 3. ſo as thereby to | 


Cha pF. 


be drawn into Union with him, and to be ir him - Gr, which in 
eitecit 15 the ſame thinz (fo entire 15 the Oneneſs between the Fa- 
ther and the Son) we are in his Son Feſus Chriſt, who alfo is the 
true God, as Fohn 1, 1, and eternal Life, as he is called, Chap . 
$5.3 

21 Little children, keep your ſelves from idols ”. 
Amen. 

7.6. From thoſe idolatrous Communions with the Gentiles in their 
Worſhip and Feſtivals jn their Temples, which theſe Pſeumo-Chrifti- 
ans had Latitude enough for, as appears by the Apoſtle Saint Paul's 
Diſcourſes, 1 Cor. 8. and 10, 14. (cipecially if any danzer did urze) 
wherein, inſtead of that Communion wit! the Father and the Sr. 
which, Chap. 1. 3. he was inviting them to, they ſhould have Fel. 
lowſhip with Devi!s, as that other Apoſtle tells his Corinthians, 1 Cor. 
10. 20, 21, And he might alſo have reference to the peculiar Tdo- 
latries, which this ſort of Men are noted to have been guilty of tor 
ward their great Set-maſler, 


The SECOND EPISTLE 


Tt. 


\HL E elder @ unto the ele& lady b and her chil-| 
dren, * whom | love in the truth; and not I only, 


but alfo all c they that have known the truth. | 

a A general Name of Office fitly appropriated with Eminency here, 
he being the only Apoſtle, probably, now ſurviving on Earth. 6 This 
appears to have been ſome noted Perſon, whom both her ſingu- 
lar Piety, and Rank in the World, made eminent, and capable of 
having great Intluence for the ſupport of the Chriſtian Intereſt, 
c Which her general Value with all that had known the Truth, (i. e. 
the Chriſtians in thoſe parts) ſhews. The Opinion that a Church is 
intended by this Appellation, had its greater probability, 1s of no 


Pl 


great Importance 3 and needs not be diſputed. 
2 For the truths ſake which dwelleth in us 4, and 
ſhall be with us for ever. 
d The indwelling of Evangelical Truth, which 1s here meant, 
ſignifies its deep Radication, and powerful transforming Efficacy 
in the Soul, ſo as to be produQtive of Holineſs, as Zohn 17. 17. 
than which can be a greater Inducement among Chriſtians of 
+ Gr. ſhall mutual Love, 
be, 3 Grace + be with you, mercy, and peace from 
God the Father, and from the Lord Jeſus Chriſt the 


Son of the Father, in truth and love e. 
e Such Salutations ſee explained, where they have formerly oc- 
curr'd: | 
4 I rejoyce greatly that I found f of thy children 
* walking in the truth, as we have recetved a com- 
2ndment from the Father. | 
f Some of her Sons, its probably conjeftured, he had met with, 
upon their Occaſions, at Epheſus, where, 'tis thought, he now reſided, 
and found them to haye a good Savyour of Religion, and to walk 
according to Rule, which was matter of great Joy to him. 
*xJoh.3- 5 And now I beſeech thee, lady, * not as though 
he 1 wrote a new commandment unto thee, but that 
+ Joh. 13. : py . 
24.8 15, Which we had from the beginning, T that we love one 
12. another g. 
Eph. 5. 2. g He inculcates that great Precept, of which ſee 1 7ohn 2. 


1 Pet. 4.8. 7, 8, = 
rJoh.3.23. 56 And this is * love, that we walk after his com- 


X . . 
Joh. 15: q1ndments þ. This is the commandment, that + 
IO, > . . 
+1 Joh. 2. 4$ ye have heard from the beginning , ye ſhould 
24s walk 1n it. 
h From this particular Command, he paſſes to what is more ge- 
neral; requiring in all things a ftrit and unanimous adherence to 


* 3 jch. 1, 


* 3 Joh. 3. 


Vol. II. [ 


F 


} O BB. N 


the pure, and primitive Dofrine -of the Gofpel which would be the 
beſt Exprefſiou of Love to God, and the true Center and Bond of 
Love to one another, as 1*7ohn 5. 1, 3. | 

7 For * many deceivers are entred into the world, *:Jot. 4.7. 
who + confeſs not Jcſus Chrift is come in the fleſh : T 1% 4- 
this is a deceiver, and an anrithriſt z- Tos 

7 See 1 Joh, 2.18, 22. and 4. 3. 

Ss Look to your ſelves * that we loſe not thoſe * Gal. 3 4. 
things which we & || have wrought, but that we re- | vr, gain- 
ceive a full reward /. - A 

k Such Changes of the Perſon, as we here find, are neither un- pos prot 
uſual, nor in Exhortation, inelegant; but ſome Copies read in the 7,;.:., ., ? 
two letter Clauſes [ y2.] He prefles to conſtancy in the true incor- j; Foy 7h 
rupt Chriſtian Profeffion. / That the expetted Recompence be not ws rug 
loſt in the wnole, or in any part, as. Gal. 3. 3, 4. - ae ory 

9 * Whoſoever tranſgreſſeth, and abideth not in %. © 
the doctrine of Chriſt, hath not God ; he that a- * 1 Joh. a- 
bideth in the doctrine of Chriſt, hath both the Father 22: 
and the Son. 

See I fohn 2, 23. 

10 If there come any unto you, and bring not , 
this doctrine, receive him not into your houſe, * nei. , —— 
ther bid him, God ſpeed. | x: 

11 For he that biddeth him God-ſpeed m, is par- 11 & 16. 
taker of his evil deeds. pe 

m Such as bring any contrary Doftrine (as Gal. 1. 8.) opzht Tit. 3. 10, 
not to be harbour'd, og; countenanced by any encouraging Salutati- 
on, leſt we inyolye our ſelves in the Participation of their Guilt, 
I Tit. 5. 22» . | 

12 * Having many things to write unto you, I *3 Joh-:3. 
would not wr:te x with paper and ink; bur I truſt to | new gy 
come unto you, and ſpeak Þ face to face, * that || our + Joh. n7: 
joy may be full. | | = 

n The latter, write, is not in the Greek Text; but the words 1 Joh. 1.2, 
bear this ſenſe, that having many things to write, I weuld not by Pas || Or, your. 
per and Ink , impart them to you (the Expreſſion being elliptical) 
but hope to come, (9c. 


13 The children of thy eleCt fiſter 0 greet thee. 


Amen þ. Og 

0 They were, 'tis probable, with him at Epheſivs, and took the oc- 
caſion by him now writing, to tranſmit their Salutations. p This 
concluding Amen imports his Sincerity in what he had written: 


THE 


Il FOAHN. 


The THIRD EPISTLE 
'O F 


St. JOHN. 


HE elder unto the well-beloved Gaius, * whom 
[ love in the truth. 

2 Beloved, I || wiſh above all things that thou 
mayſt proſper and be in health, even as thy ſoul prol: | 
pereth 7g. 

q This Gains was well known by the Apoſtle, not only to be a 
Nedfaſt Profeſſor of the truly Chriſtian uncorrupted Faith (which 
is implied in his avowing his Love to him in the .Truth, or upon the | 
Chriſitan account) but to be ſo improv'd and well-grown a Chriſtt- | 

' an, that he reckons he might weil make the proſperous State of | 
his Soul, the meaſure of all the other Proſperity he could wiſh un- 


to him. . 
3 For I rejoyced greatly, when the brethren came 
and teſtified of the truth rhat is in thee, even as * thou 
walkeſt in the truth 7. h : 
4 TI have no greater joy then to hear tht! !ny chil- 
dren / walk in truth. | | 
r The truth is familiarly uſed to ſignifie the pure Dodrine of Chri- 
ſlianity, which in its principal Deſign, aiming at correſpondent Pra: 
tice ; that his Children, ſ i. e. Such as had been converted to Chriſt 


9 I wrote unto the church: but Diotrephes y, who 
loveth to have the preeminence among them, recei- 
veth us not. 

10 Wherefore if I come, I will remember his deeds 
which he doth, prating againſt us with malicious 
| woras: and not content therewith, neither doth he 
himſelt receive the brethren, and forbiddeth them that 
would, and caſteth them our of the church. 

» This was probably ſome Church of which Gaius was. Diotrephes, 
one who had received, or uſurped ſome Office or Authority in it, 
to ſo 1ll a purpoſe, as when he had no Inclination to be hoſpitable 
himſelf to fellow-Chriſtians, prevented others from being ſo; and 


upon pretence of the little difference of theje Fewiſh, from the Gentile 
Chriſtians, excluded them their Communion.” 


11 Beloved, * follow nor = that which isevil, but * pxy, 35, 


that which is good. He that doth good a, is of God 27. 


b - but he that doth evil hath nor ſeen God c. Iſa. t. 15, 
7 Ms aups ; By following here he means Imitation, i. e. the De. * ***- 3+ 
formity of evil appearing in the PraQtice of ſome, and the Beauty *'* 


* 2 Jo'lr. 


; Or, pray. 


by his Miniſtry (as 1 Cor. 4. 15.) of whom. it appears Gatus was one, 
did wall» in the Truth; (an apt Expreſſion of ſuch correſpondent 


| PraQtice) was greateſt matter of Joy to this holy Apoſtle, eſpecially 


when the godly Lives of ſuch, to whoſe Converſion he had been 
inſtrumental, were ſo obſervable, as to gain them a Teſtimony 
from all others that knew them, as it was 1n the preſent in- 


ſt | 
v5 Beloved, thou doſt faithfully # whatſoever thou 


doſt. to the brethren, and to ſtrangers. = 

t Charity to Chriſtians is reckon'd Fidelity to Chriſt, being ſhown 
to them upon the Chriſtian Account, Fhich is intimated to have 
been done by this pious Perſon, who ſo kindly treated the Brethren, 
and Strangers, i, e. even though they were Strangers. 


5 Which have born witneſs of thy charity before 
the church: whom if thou bring forward on their 
journey after a godly ſort z, thou ſhalt do well. 

” 4 5.e. After a manner (as the Greeh Expreſſion is) worthy of God, 
vVIz. 45 becomes them who bear the Name of God, as thou doſt, or 


are intent upon his Work, as they are, which latter Notion is con- 


firmed by what follows. 

7 Becauſe that for his name ſake they went forth, 
talking nothing of the Gentiles x. 

8 We therefore ought to receive ſuch, that we 
might be fellow-helpers of the truth. 

x It thence appears theſe were Fews, who went out from their 
own Country to ſerve the Intereſt of the Goſpel, which therefore 


he ſhould ſerve in helping them. 


of true Goodneſs in others (Examples being given in both ſorts, 
ver. 9, and 12.) he exhorts to decline the former, and imitate the 
other ; and enforces the Exhortation by the weizhtieſt Arguments. 
a A Doer of good, one made up of Kindneſs and Beni-nity ( as the 
Context draws the ſenſe to that ſpecial kind of Goodneſs, «:2wmig 
& 0 x#nomur fignifie doing well or ill, trom a fixed prevailing ha- 
bit, 1 Fohn 3. 7,8. 6 Isallyd to Heaven, born of God, his Off- 
ſpring. c An evil Doey on the other hand, ſuch a one as is a Com- 
poſition of Spite, Envy, and Malice, is a meer Stranger to him, 
hath not been, or known, or had to do with him. 

12 Demetrius hath good report of all men, and 
of the truth it ſelf: yea, and we alſo bear record, and 
ye know that our record is true. 

4 Some eminent Chriſtian, whom he could with confidence recom- 
mend as a Pattern. 

13 I had many things to write, but I will not with 
ink and pen write e unto thee. h 

e Having much more to ſay, as 2 Fohn 12. he reſolved on a 
more immediate, grateful, and effeftual way of imparting, and even 
impreſſing his Senſe, as the term, Writing, 1s uſed in a greater Lati« 
tude, Prov. 3. 3. and elſewhere. 


14 But I truſt I ſhall ſhortly ſee thee, and we ſhall 


ſpeak Þ face to face f, Peace be to thee. Our friends _ _ 
0 Mout 3, 


ſalute thee. Greet the friends by name. 

f Enus wepc us, viz. by oral Conference, which he hoped ere 
long to have opportunity for. He concludes with the uſual Chri- 
ſtian Salutations, 


I em —L_—_—— 


LE 


The GENERAL EPISTLE 


TJUDE. 


The ARGUMENT. 


OME Qneſtion 
> tle way not the Man, whoever were ; 
jetted againſt James 700, 
as coming aſter the A poſt 
becauſe he doth in time © 3| 
which are no where to be found 


and hath been already anſwered. | | of | | 
les, ver. 17. But what neceſſity #5 there for his coming behind them 1n Office and Authority, 


zly. Becauſe he mentions the Contention about the body of Moſes, and the Prophecy of Enoch, 
in $cripti,re. But when there were drivers Traditions among the Jews (whereof 17s 


there hath been concerning the Penman of this Epiſtle, and ſome have thought that Jude the Afo- 
1 I. Becauſe he doth not ep himſelf the Title of Apoſtle; but that is 0b- 


21y. Becauſe the Writer of this Epiſtle ſpeaks of himſelf, 


ſes*s Body ſeems to be one ) why might not the Holy Ghoſt afjert ſome that were true (though before doubt ful) 
alas Apts, oof make them certain, as well as be doth by Paul, the Names of Jannes and Jambres, 2 Tim. 3. 


$. which were known only by Tradition, and Moles 
mention bad been made in the Scripture ? As for the 


ard and fearing at Mount Sinai, Heb. 12. 21. whereof no 


rophecy of Enoch, it ſeems to have been a Tradition 100 (for he 


mentions no Writing ) and then the ſame may be ſaid as to the other. Tet if it were a Book, and an Apocryphal one 


100 (bis citing of it doth not make it to he Canonical ) for Jude might as 
Writer. as Paul doth ſeveral out of Heathen Authors, AQ 17. 28. and 1 Cor. I 5- 33- 4G Ih. 
70 be tranſcribed out of 2 Pet. 2, and therefore not to be diftated by the Spirit. Bat 


Becauſe much of this Epiſtle ſeems 


well cite a Paſſage out of an Apocrypral 
2. and Tit. 1. 12. Ard 4ly. 


ig 


37. 


hh) may 
”- 


uth 
h, 


a 


Chap. I. 


much difference in the whole, that it 1s plain they are not tranſcribed thence. 


F UDE. Chap: x d 


to this it may be ſaid, that though many Paſſages in this Epiſtle agree with what Peter Jpeaks, yet there 15 7 


And yet why might not tio $74 


rit diftate the fame Truths 10 ſeveral Penmen, either 10 be publiſhed to ſeveral Perſons, or the ſame Perſons ot 
different times ? Moſt of Obadiah's Prophecy 1s 10 be found in Jeremiah's, Pfal. 60. is in a great part the ſaurr 
with 108. and Pal. 14. the ſame with 53. And Paul by the ſame Spirit writ many of the ſome things 19 ths 
Epheſians, rd zo the Colofhans. And what is alledged of the Ancients queſtioning the Antbority of this F/niſt ic, 
1s not ſo conſiderable, as what it might be alledged, even out of them, ſor the Confirmation of it. Sure we 1201 
ſay, the Spirit of an Apeſtle breaths in this, as well as in others; the ſame Majeſty, Purity, and Efficacy 


appear 1n it, and whatever may evidence its Droie Authority. It 1s written to the Chriſtian Jews. 


- The 


matter of it Agrees Very much with Per. 26 To and the Scope 1s moſtly the fame. VIZ. to 0M them ag itt thoje. 
who by their wicked Errors, and wicked Manners, ſecretly and ſliely brought im, might infett them, an ſod: 
es 


them into the fame Wickedneſs with themſelves, whereby they might be expoſed 19 the {ume Fudoment 5. 


he pronounceth, were like to come upon ſuch. 


CHART. 4 


+Luk.6.16, FUDE @ a ſervant b of Jeſus Chriſt, and * bro- 
Att. 1.13. J ther of James c, to them that are ſanQified by 
7 a. !7- God the Father d, and þ preſerved e in Jeſus Chrilt, 
" i n ant called f. 
a Called alſo Labbeus, and Thaddews, Matth. 10. 3. b Not only 
in the general Notion, as a Believer, but in a more ſpecial, as an 
Apoſtle. Prieſts and Prophets in the Old-Teſtament are peculiarly 
called God's Servants, Pſ. 134. Amos 3. 7. and ſo are Miniſters in 
the New, 2 Tim. 2.24. c That Fames who was the Son'ot Alpheus, 
Matth. 10. He mentions his Brother to diſtinguiſh himſelf from 
Judas Wariot, and his Brother rather than his Father, becauſe Zames 
vias moſt famous in the Church, A4&s 15. Gal. 2. 9. and I Cor. 9. 5. 
as likewiſe to ſhew his Conſent with his Brother in his DoGtrine, 
and to make his Epiſtle the more acceptable. d Viz. As the prime 
efficient Cauſc of SanRification, which he works in Believers by the 
Son, through the Spirit. e Their Salvation and Perſeverance, and 
Deliverance from Dangers, not being in their own Power ; he inti- 
mates that Chriſt was appointed to be their King, and Head, and 
Keeper, the Author and Finiſher of their Faith, Heb. 12. 2. and fi- 
niſhed with Power tor their Prote&ion, and Security, and that by 
him they were kept unto the Salvation purchaſed tor them, viz. by 
his powerſul Operation, and gracious Influence maintaining their 
Faith, and Union with himſelf. f With an effe@tual Calling, the be- 
ginning of their Sanification, before-mentioned. The Copulative, 
and, is not in the Greek; and the words may be read, ſan&ified by God 
the Father, preſerved in Jeſus Chriſt, as being called; and fo called 
may be underſtcod as going before the other two; and then the 
Senſe is, to the called, ſan&ified by God the Father, and preſe;wved in 
Teſus Chriſt ;, or to them who being called, are ſantified, Kc. 
2 Mercy g unto you, and peace, and love h, be 
multiplied 7. | 
2 Which is the Fountain of Reconciliation, and all the Grace 
youchlafed you. See 1 Tim. 1. 2. and 2 Tim. 1.2. and Ti. I. 4. 
h Either he r.cans God's Love to them, or their Love to God, and 
eaci! other, 7 Mercy in the Effe@ts of it, Peace in the Senſe of it ; 
and either the Love of God in the Manifeſtation of it, or their Love 
*0 God and their Neighbours in the Degrees, and Exerciſe of 1t. 


3 Beloved, when TI gave all diligence to write unto 


ycu + of the common ſalvation, / it was needful » for | 


*Phil 1.27, N10 write unto you, and exhort you, that ye * ſhould 
r Tim. 1. earneſtly contend 2: for the faith o which was once 


r8, and 6. + de{jvered || unto the Saints. 

12; h The Apoſtle here declares the firſt Cauſe of his writing to them 
2 Tim. 4+ 4jz, his own Inclination and Readineſs, according to the Duty of his 
J Place (as an Apoſtle) ſo to do; 49. d. Being of my ſelf willing, 
and earneſtly deſirous to promote your Welfare, when abſent from 
you, by writing unto you. / 7. e. Thoſe things which concern the 
Salvation of us all in common, or that Salvation which is com- 
mon to all; there being but one Salvation for all Believers, and 
one way to it. m The ſecond Reaſon of his writing, viz. the ne- 
ceſſity of it, in reſpe& of the Danger they were in, as follows v. 4, 
» By Conſtancy in the Faith, Zeal for the Truth, Holineſs of Life, 
mutua) Exhortation, Prayer, Suffering for the Goſpel, gc. againſt 
thoſe that would pervert the Goſpel. o The Doftrine of the Gol- 
pel; Faith is taken for the Obje&t of Faith. + Either, once for all, 
becauſe it was delivered by all the Apoſtles as the only unchange- 
. able Rule of governing their Lives, and obtaining Salvation, to 
which nothing 15 to be added, and from which nothing is to be ta- 
ken away ; Or, it implies, that it was therefore delivered to them 
that they might never forſake it, and that if they do, they miſs of 
their Salyation, as being never like to have another way made 

known to them. , || Viz. by God, not invented by Men. 
4 For there are certain men crept 1n unawares, 
» Rom. 9. * who were before of old ordained p to this condem- 
nation 9, ungodly men, + turning the grace of God 
x Vet. o * into laſciviouſneſs 7, and denving / the only Lord 


T2 Pet. 2. God 7, and our Lord Jeſus Chriſt. k 
p Gr. Fore-written, i. e. of whom it was formerly written, of 
* fore-told, viz. by Chriſt and his Apoſtles: or rather, it is to be un- 


derftood according to our Tranſlation, before-ordained, wiz. in the 


eternal Counſe! of God; Gud's Decree being con.pared to a Book, 

in which things to be done, are written down. This the Apoſtle 
adds to prevent any Offence that might be taken at the Wickedneſs 

of theſe Seducers; and therefore lets theſe Saints know, that though 

7 ſuch Men crept in unawares to them, yet it was not without the 
” Providence of God fo ordering it. 4 Or, Zudgment, and it may be 
5 underſtood, either of a reprobate ſenſe, to which they who thus 
; perverted the Goſpel, were given up by God, according to his 
Pre-ordination ; or of that Damnation he decreed ſhould follow 
upon their Wickedneſs, in making Shipwrack of the Faith them- 
ſelves, and ſubverting others. This feems beſt to agree with'2 Pet. 


Vol, II 


—_— 


WOE CT, 


2. 3- 7 Abuſing the Doftrine of the Grate of God, ind Benefits 
of Chriſt revealed in the Goſpel, eſpecially the Do&rine of Chri.- 
itian Liberty, to the encouraging themſelyes and others in ti:e vileſt 
Luſts, 2 Pet. 2. 1. t Either this may be underſtood- of the Fer 
diſtin&ly from Chriſt, exprefied in the following clauſe ; and 5n!; 
1s put in not to exclude either of the other Perſons of the Trinits 
from being God, but to exclude Idols and falſe Gods: Or, it may 
be underſtood of Chriſt, as well as the words follo-vinz ; not only 
becauſe there is but one Article in the Greeb relating to the whole 
Sentence, but becauſe it ſeems beſt to agree with the maalle! race, 
2 Pet. 2. 1. which is moſt generally underſtood of Cirilt - and he 
cauſe the Herefies of thoſe times, which ade cautions thoſe Saints 

againſt, ſtruck «ſpecially at the Godhead of Chriit, v hich he there- 

fore the more exprelly aſſerts. 

5 | will therefore pur you in remembrance, thous! 
ye once knew this, how that the Lord having ftvel 
the people x out of the land of Egypr, afterward * de- * Num. 1 4: 
[troyed y them that believed not 3. 

#4 This may be joyned either with the Verb following, 2 knew, *- 4 
according to our Trantlation, and the Senſe is, though ye knew this 
certainly, as the word once is taken, Pſal. 89. 35. or perfettly 2nd 
throughly,.or once tor all : Or rather, with what goes before, and 
the words may be read, I ll .yet once (viz. while I am in this Ta- 
bernacle) put you in remembrance of this, though you hnow it ;, as 2 Pt. 
I. 12. x The People of Jrael. y Viz. In the Wilderneſs by Plague. 
fiery Serpents, gc. 7x He ſets forth the 17atlites Unbelief, as the 
original of all their Difobedichce, and Rebellions, and the great Cauſe 
of their Deſtru@tion. See Heb. 3. 17, 18, 19. and 4.2. 

s And * the Angels which kepr not their || firſt *job.2.c1. 
eſtate a, but left his own habitation b, he hat! re- | Or. 7 
ſerved in everlaſting chains c under darkneſs unto the 2%" 
judgment of the great day. | 

a In which they were created, their original Excellency, Truth, 

Holinets, Purity, Zohn 8. 44% as welt as Dignity. b Viz. An heaven- 
ly one, from whence, though they were righteoutly thruſt out by 
God, 2 Pet. 2. 4. yet they may be truly ſaid to have left it them- 
ſelyes, in that they voluntarily Rebelled againſt the Law of their 
Creation, and committed that Sin which they knew would certainly 
be puniſhed with ſuch a DejeQion. c Into which, Peter favs, they 
were delivered. | : ; 

7 Even as * Sodom and Gomorrah, and the cities « ger. ; 
about them d in like manner e giving themſelves over 24. © 
to fornication, and going after + ſtrange fleſh /, are ter Deut. 29. 
forth as an example, fuffering the vengeance of cter- FP 
nal fire g. 2 

d Admah and Zeboim, Jer. 49. 18. Hoſ. 11.8; & As Sodim and © 
Gomorrah did, likeneſs of Sin inferring likenefs of Puniſhment. f 
Margin, other Fleſh, he means Male-fleſh, which is other than what 
God appointed for that uſe they made of it; or, as we render it, 
ſtrange Fleſh, i. e. that which is ſtrange, improper, and unfit for 
ſuch an end. It is the Deſcription of the unnatural Filthineſs of 
the Sodomites, Gen. 19. 5. See Rom. I. 26, 27, g Eternal Fire may 
be joyned either, I. with Example, and the words thus placed, are 
ſet forth for an Example of eternal Fire, /uffering Vengeance, and the 
meaning is, That the Vengeance they ſuffered, 1n being deſtroyed 
by Fire, is an Example, or Type of eternal Fire, that of Hell : Or, 


29. 27. 


) 2. with Vengeance, according to our Reading, aud then the ſenſe is, 


They are ſet forth for an Example (viz. to thoſe that after ſhould 
live ungodly, 1 Pet. 2.6.) ſuffering the Vengeance of eternal Fire : | 
The Vengeance they ſuffer, is an Example to deter others from { 
the like Wickedneſs. This Fire is called eternal, either becauſe of | 
the ſtill continuing Effects of it, of rather, becauſe it was a Type 
or Repreſentation of the Fire of Hell, and to thoſe milerable $59- 
mites the very beginning of it, they being brought by thefe tempo- ; 
ral Flames into everlaſting Burnings. | | - Ml 
$ * Likewiſe alfo þ thefe falthy dreamers 7 defil> the *Excd.-7 bs 
fleſh k, deſpiſe dominion /, and ſpeak evil ofdignities ||. 25: 1 
h Notwithſtanding ſo many Judgments of God upon others, 
which ſhould have kept them from the like Sins. 7 Either this may 
be taken properly, and joyned to the next Clauſe, defile the Fleſh, 
and then it may note the Impurity of thefe Wretches, whodreamed 
of what they loved, and afted over that Filthineſs in their Sleep, 
to which they were ſo much addifed when awake : Or metaphorical- 


ly, and ſo they are called Dreamers, a5 having the Senſe of their 


Minds overcome, and laid afleep by their ſenſual Pleaſures; or be- #4 
ing like men in a Dream, deluded by their abſurd, thougi pleafing 
Imaginations. & This notes all thoſe laſcivious Pra&tices, to which, 


like the Sedorrites; they had given themfelves over, and wheteby F 


they defile themſelves and others ; the Luſt of Uncleanneſs, as it 13 
in Peter. Þ In their Minds; Judzments, Defires, they rejeft, mike 
void, and abrogate Civil-goverament, as a thins not fit to be, 
Not only Governours; but Government it felt. "| Either ſyiritua? 


Goyernonr; or rather Civii, called Dignities, becauſe of the hon5y” h! | 
FL 6R 2 } r ob it's 

; | *4 

#3. 

(CAE 

"2 | fy 

+- 

thay? 


* Chap.l. FUDE. 


rable Titles given them, and Gifts beſtorycd on them. Sce 2 
Pets 2. 10. 

9 * Yer Michael the Archangel zz, when contend- 
i:z 7 with the devil, he diſputed abour the body of 
Moſes o, durit nor p bring againſt him a railing accu- 
{1rion q, bur ſaid, The Lord rebuke thee 7. 

m Either this is underſtood of Chriſt the Prince of Angels, who 
is often in Scripture called an Angel, or of a created Angel; and 
tht either, r. one of the Archangels, Dan. 10. 13. Michael is cal- 
led one of the chief Princes, which, though the word Archangel be 
not found in the Plural Number in Scripture, may well imply a Plu- 
rality of them; for what is one of the chief Princes among the 
Anzels, but an Archangel ? Or, 2ly. a principal Angel, or one that 
is chief among others. # It may be meant either cf Chriſt contend- 
ing with the Devil, as Matth. 4. in his Temptation, and Zech 3. 
1, 2. and Rev. 12. 7. Or rather, of Michael a created Angel, o If 
Michael the Archangel be meant of Chriſt, then the Body of Moſes 


Chap. ]. 
| own ſhame /: wandring ſtars #, to whom is reſerved 
the blacknels of darkneſs 7 for ever. 

k Not only 1nconſtant as Water, but unquiet, turbulent, reſtle{ 
that cannot ceaſe from Sin. / Thar wickedneſs whereof they ſhould 
be aſhamed : /ike a troubled Sea, when it cannot reſt, whiſe Waves caſt 
out Mire and Dirt, Iſa. 57. 20. m Either Planets properly called, or 
rather Meteors called running Stars, inconſtant in their motion, un- 
certain in their ſhining, making a little ſkew, but preſently vaniſh- 
ing; ſuch was the Dottrine of theſe, which had a ſhew 05 Li-ht 
but a deceitful and unconſtant one. n The thickeſt Darkneſs, viz. 
that of Hell; they would be counted Lights, but are themſelves cali 
into utter Darkneſs, 2. Pet. 2.17. As blackneſs of Darkneſs ſhew: 
the horrour of their Puniſhment, ſo. its being reſerved for then: 
ſhews the certainty of it. 


14 And Enoch alſo, the * ſeventh from Adam Pro- 
phecied oof theſe p, ſaying, Behold the Lord 4 cometh 
with ten thouſands 9 of his Saints 7. 


*Dan.12.1. 


*Gen. 5.12 
7 Matth, 
26. 301 


| EGen. 4.5. 
+ Num.22. 
I. 20. 


may be taken figuratively for that Body whereof the Moſaical Ce- 
remonies were Shadows, Col. 2. 17. i. e. the Truth and Accompliſh- 
ment of the Law given by Moſes, that Accompliſhment was to be 1n 
Chriſt, who is repreſented by 7-ſþua, Zech. 3. him Satan refiſts 1n 
the Execution of his Office, and by him ſtrikes at Chriſt, whoſe 
T: pc: he was, and whom he was, and whom he afterward oppoſerh 
in the Executicn of his Office, when he was come 1n the Fleſh : Or, 
2iv. If we take Michael for a created Angel, which agrees beſt with 
th- parallel place in Peter, then the Body of Moſes mult be taken 
properlv (as moſt take it) and the Diſpute feems to be, Whether 
Ales his body ſhould be ſo buried as to be concealed from the I/- 
raelites 2 Deut. 34. 6. it is ſaid God buried him (which might be by 
the Miniſtry of Michael the Archangel) and that no Man knew of 
hs Serulchre. The Devil oppoſeth the Angel, deſiring to have the 
place of his Burial known, that 1n after-times it might be a Snare 
to that People, and a means to bring them to ſdolatry. And this 
ſeems very probable, if we confider what Work the Devil hath 
made in the” World with the Bodies of Saints and Martyrs, and 
how much Idolatry he hath brought in thereby. This Paſſage Fude, 
moſt probably, had (as was obſerved in the Argument) from ſome 
known Tradition among the Jews, the Truth of which we are now 
ſure of, becauſe certified here concerning it. p Or, could not endure 
(as the Gre:h word 1s often taken among Prophane Writers) or 
find in his Heart, not from fear of Puniſhment, but by reaſon of the 
Holineſs of his own Nature, and to give an Example to us. And 
this Senſe agrees to the Scope of the place, whether we underſtand 
it of Chriſt, or of a created Angel, Heb. 12. 3. and 1 Pet. 2. 23. 
ql/id. 2 Pet. 2.11. 7 4. e. Put thee to filence, reſtrain thy Inſolence, 
hinder thy Deſign, gc. hereby the Angel refers the- Cauſe to God. 
10 But theſe ſpeak evil of thoſe things which they 
know not /: but what they know naturally z, as 
brute beaſts, in thoſe things they corrupt themſelves z. 
{ The ſame as 2 Pet. 2. 12. unleſs this be more generally to be 
underſtood of all thoſe Spiritual things, whereof they were Igno- 
rant. t Without Reaſon or Judgment. «4 Debauch and degrade 
their Natures by extream Senſualities, whereby they bring Deſtru&ti- 
on upon themſelves. See 2 Pet. 2.12. 
ir Wo unto them x, for they have gone in the 
way y of * Cain 2, and Þ ran greedily after the error 
a of Balaam., and periſhed in the gain-ſaying of Core 6. 


x This is either a lamenting the miſery- that was to come upon 
them, or a foretelling it would come, not a wiſhing that it might, 
Matth. 11.21. and 1 Cor. 9.16. y Followed his manners, and fal- 
len under his Puniſhment. Their likeneſs to Cain, both as to their 
ations and the event of them, ſeems to be implied 1n this and the 


following clauſe, as well as it is plainly in the laſt. 7x Cain hated his 


T}i4.57.20 


Brother and ſlew him ; they hate their Brethren, and by their per- 
nicious Dofrines and Deceits, murder their Souls, and probably ſtir 
up Perſecution againſt their Perſons, @ Covetouſneſs, to which be- 
ing exceſſively addited, or, (as the Greek implies) poured out, they 
did for the ſake of filthy lucre corrupt the Doftrine of Chriſt; See 
2 Pet. 2.15. b Corah (whom he here names alone, as being the 
Rinz-leader of the Rebellion, in which others joyned with him, 
Numb. 16. 1.) afﬀfefting the Prieſthood, roſe up ſeditiouſly againſt 
Moſes and Aaron, and periſhed in the attempt. Theſe imitate him 
in their Rebellicn againſt Chriſt himſelf, the ſtate and order of whoſe 
Church they ſeditiouſly diſturb, as well as that of the Civil State, in 
deſpiling Dominion, and ſpeaking evil of Dignities, and that to their 
o'vn Deſtruttion, 

12 Theſe are ſpots c in your feaſts of charity d 
when they feaſt with you, feeding themſelves without 
fear e. * clouds they are without water carried about 
of winds f, trees whoſe fruit withereth g, without 
fruit þ, twice dead 7, plucked up by the roots f. 

© See 2 Pet. 2.13. d Feaſts uſed among the Primitive Chriſti. 
ans, to ſhew their Unity among themſelves, and promote and main- 
tain mutual Charity, and for relief of the Poor among them. e Un- 
reaſonably cramming themſclves, without reſpe& to God or the 
Church. f Empty, making a ſhew of what they have not, Prov. 
25. 14. and inconſtant; See 2 Pet. 2.17, g He compares them to 
Trees, which having Leaves and Bloſſoms, make a ſhew of Fruit, 
but caſt it, or never bring it to maturity, or it rots inſtead of ri- 
pening ; ſo theſe here make a ſhew of Truth and Holineſs, but all 
comes to nothing. h Without any good fruit, ( which only deſerves 
to be called Fruit) brought forth b 
Followers, who never get any real benefit by them. 7 Wholly 
Dead ; Dead over and over ; Dead by Nature, and+ Dead by that 
hardneſs of Heart they have contracted ; or, that reprobate ſenſe to 
which God hath given them up. + And ſo never like to bear Fruit, 
and fit only for the Fire; it notes the incurableneſs of their Apoſta- 
cy, and their nearneſs to Deſtrufion. 


13 * Raging waves of the ſea & foaming out their | 


y them, either in themſelves or. 


|| Either to diſtinguiſh him from Enoch the ſon of Cain, or, to ſhew 
the antiquity of the Prophecy. »s He doth ' not ſay writ, and there- 
fore from hence it cannot be proved that there was any ſuch Book as 
Enoch's Prophecies received by the Jews as Canonical Scripture, bat 
rather, tome Prophecy of kis delivercd to themby Tradition, to which 
here the Apoſtle refers, as a thing known among them; and fo ar- 
gues againſt theſe Hereticks from their own Conceſſion, as v. 9. So 
here, 9. d. theſe Men own the Prophecy of En:ch, that the Lird 
comes to Judgment, &c. and they themſelves arc in the number of 
thoſe ungodly ones, and they to whom the Propticcy is to be ap- 
plied. p Not that he did direfly and exprefly prophetie of them 
in particular ; but that his Prophecy of the Deſtruttion of thgWorld 
for the ſame kind of Crimes whereof they were ;,uilty, did reach 


chem, and ſo he foretold what ſhould betal .them as well as others. 


q Innumerable multitudes, a definite for an indefinite. y Holy An- 
gels, Matth. 16. 27. Dan. 7. 10. Zach. 14. 5. and 2 Theſſ. 1. 7. and 
Rev. 5. 1. Believers hkewife may be here included, as attendants 
upon Chriſt when he comes to Judgment. 


15 To execute judgment upon all /; and to con- 
vince all that are ungodly among them 7. of 21l their 
ungodly deeds which they have ungodly * commirted, 
and of all their hard ſpeeches z which ungodly » fin- 


ners have ſpoken againſt him: 

/ Either upon all the wicked in general, who afterwards may ſeem 
to be diſtinguiſhed into different ſorts, or elſe the GreeÞ Prepofition 
Kata 1s put tor Peri, and the word all is to beunderſtood of all uni- 
verſally, good and bad; and the words may be read to execute judg- 
ment over all, 1. e. to judge all. # If we take the words in the lat- 
ter ſenſe mentioned, then he diſtinguiſheth thoſe that are to be 
judged into good and bad, and the Lord comes to execute Judgment 
over all, having convinced the wicked among them ; but if in the 
former, the ungodly here may he taken for thoſe that are more no- 
torjouſly ſo, thoſe that have obſtinately rejeRed the Goſpel, or wick- 
edly perverted it, ,or perſecuted the Saints, gc. * ;, e. With 2n 
ungodly Mind, willingly, delightfully, perſeveringly. « 3. e. Blaſ- 
phemous, Irreverent againſt God, his Truth. and Ways. x He ex- 
ecutes Judgment, though upon all the wicked, yet eſpecially upon 
theſe ungodly Sinners, 7. e. that are ſuch both in their Werds and 
Deeds againſt him, in his Truths, Ways, Ordinances, People, gc 
and therefore are the worſt of Sinners. OY. 

16 Theſe are murmurers, complainers y, walking 
after their own luſt z; and their mouth ſpeaketh great 
ſwelling words a of vanity, having mens perſons in ad- 
miration þ becauſe of advantage. 

y Either theſe two words ſignifie the ſame thing; or murmureys 
may be meant with relation to God's Decrees, Laws, Providences, 
and his Qrdinations in the Church or State, x Cor. 10. 10. and comm- 
plainers with reſpe@ to their own Condition with which they were 
diſcontented. x Minding neither the Law of Gnd nor Man, but ma- 
king their Luſts their Law, and being wholly ſubje& to them, led by 
them, 2 Pet. 2. 10. a Though they were meer Slaves to their 
own Luſts, yet they would ſpeak big, and uſe high and exotick ſtrains 
in their Language, that they might be applauded and admired ; Sce 
2 Pet. 2.18, b Flaftering and magnifying the greater and richer 
ſort of Men, not conſidering what they were, ſo they could gain 
them to their Party, or ger Gain by them. 

17 But beloved, remember ye the words that were 


ſpoken before of the Apoftles c of our Lord Jeſus Chriſt; 
c Eſpecially Paul and Peter ; See As 20. 29. beſide the places in 

the Margin. From this paſlage it appears that this Epiſtle was writ 

late, and, likely after the other Apoſtles, except Fohn, were dead. 


18 How that they told 4 you * there ſhould be *:Tim.4.1 


mockers in the laſt time who ſhould walk after their hg 
2 Pet. 3.3» 


ungodly e luſts. - 
Whether in their Preaching or Writing. 
lineſs. An Hebraiſm, the vileſt Luſts. 
19 Theſe be they who * —_— themſelves f, 
ſual g, having not the Spirit h. 


e Gr. Luſts of ungod- 


Love with their carnal Liberties, and loth to come under the Yoke 
of Chriſt's Diſcipline. g Or carnal, or animal, 1 Cor. 2. 14. Such 
as are meer Men, and have no higher Principle in them than Human 
Nature, which left to it ſelf, and being deſtitute of the SanRifying 
Spirit, is generally over-powzed by ſenſe, and inclines to Fleſhly 
Luſts. h The Spirit of God, by which they ſhould be led, and to 
which they ſo much pretend; having neither the Light, nor Grace, 
nor Comfort of the Spirit. 


20 But ye beloved, building up your ſelves z on your 
moſt holy * faith #, praying in the holy Ghoſt /. 


7 He compares them to an Houſe, which is to be built up, where- 
O. 


\ 


ſen- © Pr. 18,1. 


« : Ezck.14.7 
f Viz. From the true Dofrine and Church of Chriſt, as being in and 9. 10. 


[. 


Chap. I. FUDE Chaps [ 


of Faith 1s the Foundation, the fame Mctaphor 15 uſed 1 Cor.'4, 9. 23 And others - ſave / with fear 7, puiline them out 
Epir, 2. 20, 21, 22.& 1 Pet. 2. 5. * So he calls Fazth, as being the | of the fire. having even the * 82 Ms FI hy rh- 
means of purifying their hearts, and worxing holineſs in them ; and Aeſh TY S & * garment Ipourteu by Ing 
in oppoſition to the falſe Faith of the Hereticks he warns them a- | T1541 x. | ENT | | 
gainft, which did conſiſt with ſo much impurity. kþ This may be | 7 Thoſe that are further gone, not ſo eaſily reducible, and in 
underſtood cither, x. Of the Grace of Faith, and then that is com- | 8rcater danger. / 7. e. Labour to fave them, as intiruments under 
pared to tie Foundation, as being the firſt and principal Grace in 2 God. # By more ſevere Courſes, ſharper repreheniions, fecting bc- 
Chriſtian, and of greateſt neceſſity and uſe; and then they are here fore them God's Judgments againſt obſtinate Sinners, 1 Cor, 5. 5- 
bid to build themſelves up in other Graces which follow upon Faith, | # It 15 2 Provervial Speech, Zech. 3. 2. the ſenſe is, that as they 
as 2 Pet. 1.5. Or, 2. Of the Doftriae of Faith, that on which | *fat are 10 the-ire, and like to be deſtroyed by it, mutt not be 
their Faith it ſelf is founded; and then the meaning is, that they gently exhor ted to come out of it of themſelves, but ſpeedily and 
ſhould not reft ſatisfied in what meaſure of Faith they had already | forcibly pull'd out in conſideration of their eminent danger ; fo they 
attained, but {till be improving it, and making further progreſs in | *Pat are more ſtubborn Sinners, being in apparent danger of being 
it, not only hold faſt the Truth of the Goſpel, the right foundation | 4<ſtroyed by the Fire of their Luſts, and being, as it were in tic 
on which they had begun to be built, but get themſelves, by the due | Mouth of Hell, muſt be more harſhly and ſeverely dealt with, by 
ſtudy and meditation of the Wore, more and more confirmed in | ſetting the Lord's Terrors before them, (2 Cor. 5. 11.) and inflicting 
the Belief of it. 15. e. By the aſſiſtance of the Spirit, who teacheth } Church Cenſures on them. x It is an alluſion to that Ceremonial 
what'to pray for, and how ; from whom Faith, Fervency, and all | Law, Lev. 15. 4, 17. where he that touched a defiled Garment, was 
Praying Graces do proceed, Rem. 8. 26, 27. the Spirit makes inter- himſelf detiled. The ſence 15, either, 7. That where there 15 dan- 
ceſſim (prays) in us, to note the excitations of his Grace z here we | 87 of infettion from Hereticks, and obſtinate Sinners, all converſe 


are ſaid to pray in the Holy Ghoſt, to note the concurrence of our Fa- with them, and any thing whereby the Contagion of their Doftcine 
ufdios. or Manners may reach us, 1s to be avoided : Or, 2. That when we 


2 er {e ; 7 -_ | reprehend others, we ſhould do it with ſutable affe&tions and though 
Bp of rage elves in the love of God _ look we would fave themſelves, we ſhould hate their Vices, and any thing 


ing tor 7 the mercy o of our Lord Jeſus Chriſt unto | t,t promotes them, or favours of them. 


eternal life. | 24 * Now unto him thar is able to keep you from *rom. 15, 


m i. e. In Love to God, or that Love whereby ye love God ; : Lolo : els» hofreccihe as 
this implies Love to each other, as the Cauſe doth the Effet. n Viz. falling y , and to preſent you faultleſs = betore the yer 


By Hope; and ſo in theſe two Verſes we have the three Cardinal ſence of his cn = with exceeding Joy. 

Graces, Faith, Hope and Charity. o The merciful or gracious Sen- | J From ſtumbling in your Spiritual Courſe, and fo able to make 
tence of Chriſt the Judge, . whereby he puts Believers in poſſeſſion | YOu Per ſevere unto the end. x Or, His Glorious Preſence, i.e. betore 
of Eternal Life, Matth. 25. 34. This reward of Eternal Life is pro- | himſelf, Eph. 5. 27. Having exhorted thele Saints to perſ-veratice 
miſed, but being promiſed freely, and out of Mercy, it is called | the Faith, he now tells them in whoſe ſtrength they inuit ftand, 
Mercy, 2 Tim. 1. 18. the Effect being put for the Cauſe. and to whom they are to give the Glory of it. 


22 And of ſome have compaſſhon p making a dif | 25 To the only wiſe a Ged our Saviour 5, be glo- 
ference g -: | | ry <, and majeſty d, dominion and power e, both now 
þ Uſe them gently, mildly, reproving and admoniſhing them, and for ever, Amen. - 
that thereby ye may gain them. q He makes two forts of Offen- a Only wiſe infinitely, and of himſelf. 5 Either Ged, who- 15 
ders, or miſled Brethren, who might be reſtored ; and that they | ſometimes called by this T1 le, Tit. 1. 3. and 3. 4-and 1 Tm. 2. 3: 
might, they ſhould be dealt with. in different ways, and ſutably to | Or rather Chrift, c See 1 Pet. 4. 11. & 5. 11. d Or, Mognificent, 
their reſpe&tive conditions and circumſtances ; the former, who | Heb. 1. 3. and 8. 1. it ſeems to fignifie the height and excellency of 


might be diſcouraged with roughneſs, ſhould be handled with more | God's Glory. e Authority, and Right to Govern, which here is aſ- 
tenderneſs and compaſſion. : cribed to God, as well as ſtrength or ſufficiency for it. . 


The REVELATION 


O F 


St. JOAN the Divine. 


The Preface to the AnnoTations upon the Reverations. 


Ate ſome particular Hereticks, ſuch as Cerdon and Mercion, have doubted the Divine Authority of thzs 

myſterious piece of Holy Writ, and ſome better Men in the Primitive times doubted of it, the Manu{cri Wo 
Copy of 1t having been at firſt reſerved in few hands, and (as ſome think) in the fewer, becauſe of the Afirs and 
Fate -of the Roman Empire revealed mn it; yet beſides it general "ns as ſuch, by the Church in all late Ages 
there is in it ſuch an Harmony, both with Daniel's Prophecy in the Old Teſtament, and with the Types made uſe of 
by the Holy Prophets, ſuch manifeſt alluſions to the whole Order and Oeconomy of the Fewiſh Church, ſuch an jNc4 
ment of the Dottrine contained in it, with the Doftrine of the Old and New Teſtament, concerning God and Chriff the 
Reſurrettion from the Dead, and the Day of Fudgment ;, and of the Promiſes and Thyeatnings contained in it. with 
the Promiſes and Threatnings in other parts of Holy Writ, that none who bath not aVanity toquarrel with the whole 
Canon of Scripture, can reaſonably diſpute the Droine Authority of this part of it. 

It appeareth from ver. 1. that Fohn was the Penman of it ;, and that this John was the beloved Diſciple, he that tw, 
the Penman of the Goſpels, hath been doubted by very few, and with very little reaſon, as will appear to him that 
will but wiſely conſider the terms and phraſes uſed m it almoſt peculiar to this Apoſtle, and hardly to be found in 
Scripture any: where, but in this Book and the Goſpel of John, ſuch as calling Chriſt The Word, of which be 
bare Record, Ec. Nor rs their Objettion of any validity, who objeff, That in the Goſpel he ordinarily conceatet h 
his Name, which this Author doth not ; conſidering that in that he wrote a Relation or Hiftory of things paſt, 19 
be proved by many Eye and Ear Witneſſes ; but here a Revelation or Prephecy of things to come, to which his 
Name was neceſſary, that Men might judge by what Authority he thus wrote. + 

For the time of his writing it, himſelf tells xs, chap. 1. 9. That he received this Revelation from God, white 
he was in Patmys, for the Word of God, and the Teſtimony of Jeſus Chriſt, zh:s was (if we may believe Hi- 
ſtory, and we have nothing elſe to inform 1s) in the time of Domitian the Roman Emperor, about the 94th, or 


 '95th year after the Natrony of Chriſt, ſo as this Book pleads a preſcription of near ſixteen hundred years, in 


which very few ever queſtioned its Divine Amthorty. | 

For the Scope of :t, it 7s plainly told ws, chap. 1. 1. Ita mis Sins duri & $5 avi & rye, Toſhew his 
Servants what ſhould ſhortly come to paſs. The [ike we have repeated, Chap. 22. 6. pon which account it is 
called 4 Revelation, and a Prophecy, neither of which terms agree to a Narration or Hiſtory, the 0/2 of which 
is ſome thing cr things that are already paſt. 

1 will not undertake to give the certain and infallible ſenſe of the ſeveral paſſages of this myſterious Prophecy. 
1n magnis volwſle fat eſt, But I have proceeded upon theſe few Poſtulata, | 


1. That 


* Rev, 3-4 - 


24, 37. 
Eph. 3.20- 
1 (im 1. 


” 
I 7: 


Chap. 1. REVELATION. Chap. 1. 


i. That the whole of this Book is no Hiſtorical Relation of things that were palſled before the year 95 or 96, 
-or ar leaſt not long before, but of things to come, which Þas made me wholly rejcet the Notions of Grotius 
and Dr. Hammond, ſo far as they concerned the Siege or Deſiruttion of Jeruſalem, which way paſt 26 or 27 
years before John heard of this Revelation. I cannot underſtand how his can agree with Chap. 1. 1, or Chap. 22. 6, 
2. That it contains a Prophecy of the moſt remarkable things that happened enther tothe Roman Empire ; o7 
76 the Church, (all which was within the Latitude of that in St. John's time) during the whole time of that ; or. 
hich ſhould happen after the decay of that, throughout the Church to the End of the World. 

3.Thar this time is reaſonably divided into three Periods; zbe firſt determining with the Roman Empires contin: 
ing Pagan, 310 07 325 years after Chriſt : the ſecond with the total ruine of Antichriſt, when that ſhall be I cannot 
tell, "The thirdwith Chriſt's coming 10 the laſt Judgment. The firſt zs by ſome called Regnum, Draconis Erhnicum ; 
tbe ſecond Vicariatus Draconis Antichriſtianus z- tbe zh77d Regnum Chriſti; or, Status Fcclefiz tranquillus. 

4. 1 ſee no reaſon to diſſent from thoſe eminent Men, who think that part of the Revelation which relates to 
the firſt period, and zs prediftive of what happened to the Church of God until the time of Conſtantine the Grear, 
3IO 07 325 years after Chriſt, beginneth with chap. 4. and endeth with chap. 7. and ihat the Silence in Heaven 
tor halt an Hour, mentioned chap. 8. v. 1. relateth to the reſt which the Church bad from Conttantine's time 7il/ 
the end of Theodofius's Rejgn, about 70 or 75 years: _ 

5. Where to fix the Epoca, or beginning of the 1260 years, or 42 Months, I cannot tell. That the Myſtery of 
Iniquity began to work in the Apoſtles time, is evident from 1 Thell. 2. 7. and reaſon will 1e/1 77s, that Rome, 
as 11 now ſtands, or as it was in: the year 606, was not built up in a Day; the great Corruptions then in it, 
came in and grew up by degrees ; but 1 cannot tell how to count Antichriſt's Reign, but from the time Phocas 
humoured the Pope with the Title and Stile of Supream or Univerſal Biſhop ; from which time 1 ſhould rather 
reckon the 1260 years, than from any time before. | | 

6. I do agree with thoſe who think the 11 firſt Chapters contain the ſumm of whatſoever is prophecied concerning 
the 37e0 firſt Periods, though many things falling within them, are more particularly and fully opened,chap. 12,1 3,14, 
15.16,17,18.19..The 1te/fth Chapter giving ws a particular account of the Church during 1 be 1 wo firſt Periods; the 
132Þ giving 7 a more particular account of Antichriſt, both in the Secular Power, and in hzs Eccleſtaſtical Furijditti. 
on - the 15th and 16th Chapter more fully open to ws what ſhould be done under the fixth Trumpet. In the 171h Chap- 
rer we bave a more full deſcription of the Beaſt with two Horns, mentioned chap. 13. 11. which ſignified Antichriit 
23 ſitting inthe Temple of God. The 18th more fully deſcribes his fall, ſummarily before mentioned, Chap. 14. 
1be 19th, ſo far as it concerneth the Praiſe given 10 God for this, relates to that great Diſpenſation of Providence. 

7. 1 take the third ſtate of the Church (to which I cannot concerve we are yet come, which I called its ſerene 
ond quiet flate) to be foretold and deſcribed chap. 20. after which ſhall be the Battel with all the Wicked of the 
Earth, which ſhall end in Chriſt's coming to Fudge the World, and the General Reſurrettion in order 19 it. 

s [iake ibe two laſt Chapters to deſcribe a ſtate of the Church, agreeing to none but the Church Triumphant, 
ond bave accordingly interpreted them. ve © | | 2 | | | 

If any differ from me in any of theſe things, it will be no wonder if be diſagreeth with me in the Explication 
&f the Chapters and Verſes relating to them. 2 

[ dare not be poſitive as 19 the ſenſe Thave given, but ſhall only ſay it 7s what 5 at to me moſt probable. There 
have been found ſome in the Tents of Proteſtants, that have taken much pains to free the Papacy from the imputation 
of Antichriſtianiſm. This I conceive was Grotius his Deſign, in his Imerpretation of this Book, as if it had been 
an Hiſtory rather than a Prophecy, and if a Prophecy, fulfilled in leſs than 250 years afier it was pabliſhed. As to 


the Papacy being Antichriſt, I think that the great perſon ſpake well, who would not be peremptory in the caſe ; but 


ſaid, it had fo many of bis Marks,that upon an Hue and Cry for Antichriſt, he ſhould apprehend him. I ſhall add,that 
if be were fo apprehended and tried, be could never acquit himſelf enther at the Bar of Scripture or Reaſon. 


CHAP. I Though therefore we may allow this Verſe to be the Key to open 
1 t PIN | . 1: | the whole Apocalyps, yet we muſt judge th 

John direfeth the Revelations to the ſeven Churches in Aſia, wiſhing op it + oy. Chriſt hath | nhares* 1.19 iran = — 
them grace from 59, from the ſeven Spirits, 1=——4. and 94 ruſalem, Matth. 24. nor was it now the matter of a Prophecy, but 
Zeſus Chriſt, whoſe Per/on, Titles, and 9x. 4 of Coming "a fu G Hiſtory. The fix firſt Seals plainly ſhew the ſtate of the Chriſtian 
ment are deſcribed, $5——8. He declares his Name, Place, an | op + under Rome Bagan ; what ſhall we ſay to all things repreſent- 
Time when he received this Revelation, 9, 10. The Voice that ſpake ed under the ſeventh Seal, gc. e Firſt by one Angel, then by ano- 
to him, the Viſion of the ſeven Candleſticks, and the glorious appear- | ty ©; (poſſibly) conſtantly by the ſame. f Who this John was, we 
ance of Chriſt's Perſm, 11————16, John being terrified at the ſhall declare further, v. 2, 4; | . 


3zht, is comforted, 17, 18. A Charge to write the things he had | 
_ which aro, and are to come, 19. The Myltery of the ſeven Stars 2 Who bare record of the word of God g , and of 


and Cand/e tichs explained, 26. $ the teſtimony of Teſus Chriſt h, and of all things char 
= Revelation of Jeſus Chriſt a, which God gave he ſaw 7. | 


: | : 2 £ This Phraſe determines the Controverſie. about the Penman of 
unto him 6, to ſhews unto his ſervants c things | this part of holy Writ, and puts it out of doubt, that it was Fohn 
-kich muſt ſhortly come to paſs 4; and he ſent and | the Apoſtle and Evangelift, The Phraſe fo agrees to Fohn 1. 19, 32, 
hgnified zz by his angel c unto his ſervant John . 34- and 19. 35. The word in the Greek ſignifies, bare Teſlimony to, 
# The Apocalyps, (as this Book is ſometimes called) that is, the | Or of the Word of God. Some underſtand Chrift fo called, x Fobn x. 2. 
diſcovering, or unveiling of ſome hidden things ; (fo the word Re- Some would have the Goſpel meant by it; and if any think this the 
welation ſignifieth.) The Greek word is often uſed in the New Te- | More probable ſenſe, becauſe, though Chriſt be elſewhere called the 
ſtament, and is ordinarily tranſlated ſo. It is called the Revelation Word, yet he 1s not called the Word of God ; and it is not here in the 
of Jeſus Chriſt, becauſe Chriſt received it from his Father, as the Dative, but the Accuſative Caſe; I {ee no reaſon to contradift them. 
next words thew. b Which God gave unto him, as he was Media- | Þ By the Teſtimony of Chriſt, 15 to be -underſtood- the Doftrine of 
tor ; By God, here is to be underſtood the Father, not excluſruely to Chriſt, called ſo, becauſe it isa T eſtimony concerning him : Or ra- 
the Son as it he were nor God, but to ſhew the order of working | fÞ<r, that which he teſtified, who is elſewhere called the rue and 
in the Holy Trinity, 7oþn 7. 16; and 14. 10. Chriſt in his ſtate of faithful Witneſs. 7 This may be underſtood with reference to what 
Humiliation is ſaid to /earn of the Father ; in his ſtate of Exaltation | Went before; ſoit agreeth with T John 1, or to what followeth in 
to receive frm the Futher. c To John, and by him to all Saints that this Revelation, made to him in Viſions, in a great meaſure. 


_—_—— 


will be ſtudious of things revealed. d *a #6 Wm odxe, This | 3 * Bleſſed 7s he that readeth &, and they that hear »cy, 22.7. 
Phraſe put out of doubr, that this Book is not a Relation, or Nar- | the words of this prophecy /, and keep thoſe things *Rom. 13. 
wy by > LCL ; » o 4 . by . 4 . - ſn A _ _ 

native 01 things pait, but a Revelation, or Predifion of things to which 1re written therein WM : T For the time 1s at _ 


come. See alfo chap. 22. 6, 16, which makes me wonder at the 


Confidence of a Learned Annotator of our own, That all things here | Band 77. : BD I Pet; 4. 7- 
rate cither to the Siege of Hieruſalem, (which was paſt more than k From hence is well concluded, That. this is a Portion of holy Wi 


Writ, to be read publickly and privately, otherwiſe no Bleſſing 
would have been pronounced to the Readers, or the Hearers of it. 
I It is alſo well from hence concluded, That this Book is no Hiſtory 
of things done, but a Predition of things to come to paſs; for 
though Prophecy in ſome Scriptures ſignifieth more largely the Reve- 
lation of the Divine Will, yet here it muſt fignifie ſtrictly. 7: That 
keeps it in Memory, and liveth in view of it, and as a Perſon that 
believes it ; they are bleſſed, as they will from it be comforted ; con- 
cerning all the Sufferings of the Church, and People of God. n The 
Seaſon for the Accompliſhment of theſe things is nigh, not paſled, but 


20 years before this Revelation to St. Fohn) or to Pagan Rome, which, 
indeed, continued-200 and odd years after this. But his Notion is 
contrary to the general Senſe of all Interpreters, whether the anci- 
ent Fathers, - or modern Writers. The Phraſe, indeed, fignifies 
ſhortly, but never what was paſt; nor always, What ſhalk-in a few days 
come to paſs. See Luke 18. 8. Rom. 16. 20, though indeed ſometimes 
it ſignifies the time immediately following a Command, as As 12. 7. 
and 22. 18. and confidering it is God's Phraſe, to whom a thonſand 
years are but as yeſterday, Pſalm go. 4. and who calls the things 
that are not, as if they were; and who manifeſtly calls all thoſe 


years betwixt Chriſt's coming, and the end of the World, (almoſt the time when they ſhall begin to happen, 1s not very far ct. 


1700 of which are paſt already) the /aft Days, we may allow him | $ WR Set” or "op 
to ſay, Thoſe things ſhould beſhorely, which ſoon after ſhould begin | ©" Fe HN » to the ſeven Churches which are in Afia, 
k 


to be effected, though not finiſhed till Chriſt's ſecond coming, 


(race be unto you, and peace p from him which 


I, 


*" + A 2 X 


Chap.I. 


Fjom1.t. js, and F which was 9, and which is to come, and from 
the ſeven ſpirits which are before his throne Fr: 

0 7obn the Apoſtle and Evangeliſt writes either to all the Churches 

of 4fia under the Notion of ſeven, ( which is the number of PerteCti- 

on) or to thoſe ſeven Churches mentioned, v. 11. Epheſus, Smyrna, 
Pergatmus, Thyatira, Sardis, Philadelphia, and Laodicea, (ſeven fa- 

mous Places in Aſia the leſs, where the Goſpel was planted) which 

being the meſt famous Churches in that part of the World, Fohn is 


REVELATION 


commanded to depoſite this Prophecy in their Hands, by them to be 
communicated unto other Churches. Theſe Churches were in the 
moſt famous Cities of the leſſer Aſia: ſome think 7ohn was the Apo- 
ftle that preached moſt in Aſia, and founded theſe Churches ; 
others, that though they were founded by Peter and Paul, yet after 
their Death John took upon him the charge of them. It is the opi- 
nion of ſome Learned Men, that the Apoſtle did not, in the Epiſtle 
fo the Churches in Aſia, deſign only to tell them of their Errour, and 
preſcribe to their Cure, but that in writing to them, he aſſigns both 
a Prophetical Inſiru&ion of us all concerning the ſtate of the Church 
in all Periods from that time to the Day of Judgment, and alſo to 
reprove and-counfel all prefent and ſucceeding Churches ; but of this 
we may poſſibly ſpeak more afterward. þ Grace and Peace 1s the 
common Apoſtolical Salutation, as to the ſenſe of which, we have 
often ſpoke ; the Apoſtle wiſheth them the free Love of God, that is, 
Grace, and the Seal of it, Rom. 5. 1. Peace with God and their own 
Conſctences, and each with other. q Theſe words are a deſcription 
of Gd, particularly of Jeſus Chriſt in his Eternity and Immutability. 
He was from Eternity ; he 15 now, and he ſhall be for ever. Or, (as 
fome) he was in his Promiſes before his Incarnation; he is now God 
manifeſled-in the Fleſh, and he is to come as a Judge to judge the quick 
and the dead, This was an ancient Name of God, Exod. 3. 14. 1 am 
that I am.——-I am hath ſent me unto you. Theſe words interpret 
the Name Fehovah. r It is very difficult to determine what is meant 
by the ſeven Spirits here before the Throne, we read of them alſo chap. 
3-1.& 4.5. & 5.6, Chriſt is defcribed, chap. 3. 1. as having the 
ſeven Spirits of God. Tt is ſaid, chap. 4. 5. that the ſeven Lamps o 
Fin burning before the Throne, are the (even Spirits of God 2 and chap. 
s. 6, That the Lamb's ſeven Eyes, were the ſeven Spirits of God. 
This is all the Light we have from Scripture : Some think they are 
ſeven Angels that are here meant. We read chap. 8. 2. of ſeven An- 
gels that ſtood before God; and in chap. 15. 16, 17. there 1s alike men- 
tion of ſeven Angels; and Zech. 4. 2, 10. Zechariah had a Viſion of 
ſeven Lamps, and ſeven Pipes, which ver. Io. are ſaid to be the Eyes 
of the Lord which run to and fro through the whole Earth. But John 
faluting the Churches with Grace and Peace from theſe ſeveh Spirits, 
and joyning them with Chrift, they do not ſeem to be Creatures, 4An- 
gels, that are here meant, but ſuch a Being from whom Grace and 


Peace cometh. Others therefore underſtand by them, the ſeven 
Workings of Divine Providence in his managery of the Aﬀairs of the 
World, with relation to the Church, of which we ſhall read after, 
but this alſo ſeems hard. The ſenſe ſeems to be, and from the Holy 
Ghoſt, who, though but one Spiritual Being, yet exerteth his Influ- 
ence many ways, arid by various Manifeſtations, called here ſeven 
Spirits, becauſe all flow from the ſame Spirit. They are therefore 
called, chap. 4. 5. burning Lamps. The Holy Ghoft deſcending in 
the appearance of Fire, Ads 2, and being compared to Fire, Matth, 
3. 11, they are called the Lamb's ſeven Eyes, and ſeven Horns, chap. 5.6. 
Chriſt had the Spirit without meaſure ; and the Holy Spirit is oft 
called the Spirit of Chriſt. This ſeemeth the beſt ſenſe ; the Rea- 
der may find the ObjeRions to it anſwered in Mr. Pool's Synopſis Cri- 
ticorum upon this Verſe. : : 

5 And from Jeſus Chriſt, * who zs the faithful wit- 
neſs /; and the Þ firſt-begotten of the dead 7, and the 
|| Prince of the kings of the earth # + Unto him that 


loved us, and waſhed us from our fins in his own 
blood- iv. 


/ Here is an expreſs mention of Jeſus Chriſt, becauſe he was the 
Procurer of our Redemption, and our Mediator, to whom the Father 
committed all Power, as to the Church, Heis called the faithful and 
true Witneſs, 1 Tim. 6. 13. he witneſſed a good Confeſſion before Pontius 
Pilate; he bare record of himſelf, on 8.13, 14. Sealfo 1/2. 43.10, 
& $5.4+ John 18. 37. # That is, who firſt roſe from the dead, viz. by 
his own Power, John 10. 18. and to die no more. See Ads 13. 34. 
1 Cor. 15.20. u The King of Kings, chap. 17. 14. and 19. 16. 1 Tim, 
6.15. Thefirſt Name here given to Chriſt ſpeaketh his Prophetical 
Office, the ſecond his Prieſtly Office, this laſt his Ringly Office. 
w Here begins a Doxology, or giving Glory to Chriſt, (ſuch Forms are 
frequent in the Epiſtles) firſt, as he that waſhed us from our ſins, both 
from the guilt, and from the pollution and dominion of our Sins, 
with his Blond, paying a Price, and ſatisfying God's Juſtice for, and 
meriting our Sanification. See Heb. 9. 14. 1 John 1. 7. 


6 And hath * made us kings and prieſts unto God 
and his Father x :. To him be glory and dominion for 


ever and ever. Amen. 

x Kings, to rule over our own Appetite, and govern our ſelyes 
by the:Law of his Word, to fight and conquer the World, the Fleſh, 
and the Devil, Kings in a Spiritual ſenſe, for our Kingdom 1s like 
his from whom we derive it, nof of this World; therefore he adds, 
unto God, to the Honour and Glory of God, for his Service, who 1s 
the Father of Chriſt: Prieſts to offer up Spiritual Sacrifices, accepta- 
ble to God, through the Beloved, 1 Pef. 2, 5. our Bodies as a /7- 

- wing Sacrifice, Rom. 12. 1. part of our Eſtates, Phil. 4. 18. The Sa- 
crifices of Praiſe, the Fruit of our Lips, Heb. 13.15. So as all the Pri- 
viledges of the Jews, Exod. 19. 6. belong to us, and that 1n a more 
eminent manner. Through Chriſt we alſo are a Royal Prieſthood, a 
peculiar People. y Let all Praiſe, and Honour, and Acknowledgments 

*Dan.7.13 be paid, and all Power aſcribed to him for ever. 


Matth. 26, * Behold 2, he cometh with clouds 9, and every 


*Ch. 3-14. 
}1 Cor.1 5. 
20. 
[|Ch.17.14- 
& 19. 16. 


YCh. 5.10, 
& 20. 6. 


, eye ſhall ſee him b, and+they a//o which pierced him c: 
12.10. and all kindreds of the earth ſhall wail becauſe of him d: | 


Joh.19.37. Even ſo, Amen, 


7 St. 7obn being to ſpeak of the various Aﬀtictions of the Chiircl 
of God, which ſhould immediately begin, and hold on during the _ 
wnole time that Rome ſhould continue heather, and 1260 vears af- 
ter, during the whole Reign of the Bea/?; prepareth Chriſtians tcr 
It, by calling them by the Eye of Faith to fee (though at a great 
diſtance) Chriſt coming to Judgment, whom a he tpeaks of as a1- 
ready coming, (according to the uſual ſtile of Prophets, who uſe t5 
ſpeak of thoſe things that ſhall ſhortly be done, or certainly, as if 
they were already done) he deſcribes the manner of Chriſt's coming 
to Judgment, and faith, he cometh with Clouds, that is, in a glors- 
ous manner, 7n the Clouds with great power and glory, Matth. 24. 2%. 
and 25. 31. in his glory, and all the holy Angels with him, with ten 
thouſands of his Saints, Jude 14. with 4 ſhout, the woice of the Arc%- 
angel, and the Trump of God, 1 Thefl. 4. 16. here, with the Cloud's. 
bright and glorious Clouds, not obſcuring him, but making his Ap- By 
pearance more glorious and terrible. þ He ſhall come vit;hly : for 
Acts x. 11. he ſhall ſo coine, as he was ſeen poing up to Heaven, 

Tja. 40. 5. e& They alſo which pierced him ſhall look on him, Z2c+. | 
12. 10, yea, not thoſe only which pierced him with their Spears, but | 
every Sinner who hath prerced him with his Sins, 7h, 4, 5. From | 
whence we may obſerve, that the ReſurreQion wil! be veveral ; and 

thoſe in the great Mogul's Country are like fo awave out of their 

ſleep in the Grave, as well as others. d All the Nitions of the Earth ; 

Gr. the Tribes of the Earth, ſhall wail, not with a mournins of Re- 

pertance, the time for that will be paſt, but with a wailins of Deſpary 

and Forrour, c The laſt words are either a Prophetical Afertion, 

confirming the Truth of what he had faid,: or a pious Prayer or 

Deſire, or rather both together. yy 

s *1am Alpha, and Omega, the beginning and the «,-, 
ending, faith the Lord d, + which is, and which was. 
and which is to come, the Almighty e. Chap. 21.£ 

d Alpha and Omega are the firſt and laſt Letters in the Greeb 41-N 23. 13. i 
{habet, as Aleph and Tu are in the Hebrew Alphabet ; the meanins of + Ver. 4. 
tneſe 1s expounded, the Beginning, and the End. He who was before Chip. 4.2. 
all, and ſhall continue to exiſt, when all Creatures ſhall ceafe to he ;X 11. 17. 
the firſt and the laſt, as the ſame terms are expounded, chav. 22. 14. X 15. 5: 
ſo [/a. 41.4. and 43. 10. See ver. 4. e He addeth the 4/m:yhty, to 
ſhery that he was able to make his words good. Thus in this V erfe, 
Ommnipotency, Eternity, and i::mutability, are all applied to God, and | 
particularly predicated of our Lord and Saviour Jeſus Chritt. | 


9 I John who alſo am your brother f and * com *Phil 1. 7, 
panion in tribulation g, and + in the kingdom and & 4- 14. 
patience of Jeſus Chriſt Þ, was in the ifle that is cal- Sn 
led Patmos z, \| for the word of God, and for rhe re- {OO 
{timony of Jeſus Chriſt &. 2 lim. 2. 

£ The ſame mentioned, vey. 4. the Apoſtle of Jeſus Chrift ; yet 1 2. 
he diſdaineth not to call thoſe kijs Brethren, whom bis Lord fo cal- "Chap 5.55 
led. h The Pagan Perſecutions were now begun. Xero firſt began © | 
them about 23 years after Chriſt was aſcended into Heaven, bur he 
died within three years time after he had began that Courſe. Then 
the Chriſtians had ſome reſt for 12 years, by reaſon of the ſhort 
Reigns of Galba, Otho, and Vite!l!us, and the Kindneſs of FElavins, 
and Titus Veſpaſianus, but about 82 years after Chriſt, bezan Domi- 
tian to reign, and to perſecute the Chriſtians about the year 50. He 
lived not long, for he was ſlain Anno 97. but in thoſe ſeven vears he 
put to death, impriſoned, and baniſhed many. 7ohn is ſaid to have 
been baniſhed by him Anno 91. and to have had this Revelation 54, 
and 95. Doritian lived but four or five years after this. After his 
death 79hn is ſaid to have come back to Epheſus, and to have died 
there three years after, about the year 98. But for five years 7obn 
was the Chriſtians Companion in Tribulation. h Either the King- 
dom of Chriſt, a Member of the Chriſtian Church, or the Kingdom 
of Glory, which is to be arrived at, both by patient waiting, and by 
patient Suffering for Jeſus Chriſt, or waiting for the ſecond Appear. 
ance of Chriſt, in order to his glorious Kingdom. 7 This Iſland, 
Geographers tell us, was an Iſand in the Tcarizmm, or F#gean Sea, a- 
bout 35 Miles in compaſs, (one of thoſe 53 Iſlands called the Cycla- 
des.) k He tell us how he came to be in Patmos, viz. for preacli- 
ing the Word of God, and thoſe Truths to which Chriſt had given 
Teſtimony : He did not voluntarily go thither to preach the Goſpel 
(for thoſe Ifles have in them few Inhabitants) but. he was baniſhed 
thither by the Emperour Domitian's Officers, Baniſhment was -a 
very ordinary Puniſhment amongſt the Romans, in caſe of what they 
would call Sedition. Euſebius tells us, that one Flavia Dometilla, 
tho' ſhe was Neece to the Conſul, was baniſhed upon the fame account | 
at this time. | | 

10 *I was in the Spirit / on the Lords day 1, and *Chap-4-2: 


heard behind me a great voice, as of 4 trumpet N. 

] Not only in Spiritual . Imployment, ſuppoſe Meditatina, and 
Prayer, but in an Extaſie; my Soul was (asit were) ſeparated from . 
my Body, and under the more than ord:vary Influence and Com- 
munications of the Spirit, as A&s 10. 19. and 11. 5.and 15, 9. and 
18, 9, m#: Upon the Chriſtian Sabbach, called the Lord's Day, (as 
the Euchariſt, or breaking of Breod, is called the Lord's Suppey, 
x Cor. 11. 20.) becauſe Chriſt infiituted it ; or, becauſe the end of 
its Inſtitution was the Remembrance of Chriſt's Reſurre&ion, ( as 
the end of the Lord's Supper was the Commemoration of Chriſt's 
Death ) or becauſe it wa inſtituted for the Honour of Chriſt, 
n 7ohn in the Iſle of Patms was keeping the Chriſtian Sabbath in 
Spiritual Services, Mediation and Prayer, and fell into a Trance, 
wherein he had a more1mmediate Communion with the Holy Spirit, 
which begun with hj- hearing a loud Voice, as it were, behind him; 
as loud as the ſoun« of a Trumpet, 

11 Saying, I am Alpha and Omega, the firſt ,and 
the laſt 9: and, What thou ſeeſt, write in a book p, 
and ſend #r unto the ſeven Churehes which are in A- 
fia qz vuito Epheſus 7, and unto Smyrna /, and unto 
Pergarios 7, and unto Thyatira z, and unto Sardis , 


and znto Philadelphia x, and unto Laodicea y. 
o 1, who ſpake unto thee, am the Eternal, Immutable God. ; 
Þ WhaſC 


"F304 


" _YEPESY 


&X 48. 12. 


_ 


Ch. 


n 
CES, 


© Chap.I. 


Ez. 1.26. - 
Dan. 7.13. Ment down to 
Ch. 14-14- with a golden girdle e. 
T Dan. 10, 
$, 0. 


| Ch. 15.6. 


YC. I 4. 2. burned in a turnace : 41nd * his voice as the ſound of 


* Iſa. 45.2; * out of his mouth went a tharp two-edget ſword 7, 
Ch. 2.16. and his countenance was as the ſun ſhining in his 
S 19-15, ſtrength 2. 


A 
mY 


REVELATION. 


Þ What thou halt preſently ſee, write in a Book, not in looſe Pa- ! Stars are expounded, wer, 29. to be the Minifters of the Gofpeh, his 


P<i>. 
ve/ation of the Will of Chriſt, but writtea by his Dire&ion. gq Not 
to all that Tived within the Juriſdiction, or Compal of theſe Cities, 
but only to thoſe Chriſtians who lived in or near theſe places which, 
are all Cities in the Jefler Afia. r Epheſizs was the moſt tamous 
wire Pai! preached, Acts 19. 10. &c. and ſtayed-three years, chap. 
- 21. it wes 3 noble City 1n that part of Greece, which was cal- 
ded Ina. { Styina was a Sea-Port City in the ſame Country. 
* Pergarrss was a City of Troas, or Phiyg'a. u Thyatira was a Ci- 
tyia Lyd'a, or Iyſiz. wEardis allo was a City in Lydia, near the 
Mountain 7:17lus. x Philadelphia was a City in Lydia, next Myſ1a. 
y La1dcea was a City in Aſra near the River Lycos, In all theſe Ct- 
ties thcre were Congregations of Chriſtians tormed into Churches, 
to whom Sod here ordereth St. John to fend theſe Vittons, when he 
had wrote them in a Book. Our Country-man, Mr. Brightman asks, 
Where Kome was all this while ? and how it came to paſs God d1- 
reed nor thele Myſteries to be ſent, aud kept in their Archives, 
eipeciuly 17 (as the Papifts) the Biſhop there be Chriſt's ſuccet- 
five Ficar? and conſidering too, how great Friends Peter and Fohn 


A 
#- \.- 


were wont to be ? But the forementioned Author tartly replies to 
his own Qreſtion, That that Church, it ſeems, could never err, and' 


tncrefore-needed not any Correptory, or Monitory Epiſtle. 

12 And I turned to ſee the voice that fpake with 
me 2. And being turned, 1 faw ſeven golden candle- 
[tics 0. 

z That 1s, to fee the Perſen, whoſe Voice I heard ſpeaking to me ; 
or ciſe by ſeeing, 1s meant Underſtanding ; (but that he might have 
done withour turning) he therefore turned, hoping to ſee the Per- 
ſn that ſpake. @ By theſe ſeven Candleſticks which he ſaw, are 
meait the ſeven Churches; fo we find it infallivly expounded, ver. 
20, we ſhall find in this Book frequent 4 lluftons to the Jewiſh Tem- 
ple. Here they bevin : Tn the Jewiſh Tabernacle there was one Gol- 
den Candleflich, and ſeven Lamps, to give light againſt it ; ſo Numb. 
8. 2. Zech. 4. 2. 7ohn here ſeeth ſeven. God had but one Church of 
the Jews, but many amongſt the Gentiles. This Notion or Compa- 
rifon cf Churches to Golden Candleſlichs, both ſheweth us the Nature 
and ©.H:e of the Churches of Chriſt, they do not give Light of them- 
ſelves, only hold Lights ; and it is their Duty to keep in them the 
pure Word of God, which 1s a Light to our Feet, and a godly Mt 
niitry; and it alſo lets us know, that they ought fo keep themſelves 
pure {as beaten Golden) from all Corruption, as to Doftrine, and 
their Nicinbers from all ſcandalous Converſation. 

13 And in the midſt of the ſeven candleſticks 6, 
* one like unto the Son of man e, F clothed with a gar- 
the foot d, and || girt about the paps 


b That 1s, of the Churches, reſembled by the Golden Candleſticks. 
c One like to the Son of Man. We fay, no like is the ſame ; but 
Chrift who was the $91 of 2m, and who ordinarily calls hinaſelf ſo 
throu:zhout the Goſpel, is undoubtedly here meanr, as appeareth by 
w2rl, 17, 18, which Deſcription can agre- to him alone. He 1s ſaid 
to have come in the likeneſs of ſinful Fleſh, though he came 1n true 
Human Fleth; and Phil. 2. 8. He was made in the likeneſs of Men. 
John ſaw one who appeared to him, as a Man, in the midſt of ſe- 
yen Golden Candleſticks, which was Chriſt in the midſt of his 
Churches ; placed in the inidſt, partly to let us know his Obſerva- 
vation of them all, and partly to let us know his being at hand to 
them all, to help, prote&t, and defend them. d Il«&vpr, the word 
fiznificth a long Garment reaching to the Feet, whether of Linen 
or Ifollen, or what other material is not exprefied; fo as 1t ſeemeth 
to me hard to determine, Whether it was to fignifie his Prieftly, or 
Kingly Office, or neither. It is an Habit of Gravity. e Nor dare 1 
determine the fignificancy of the Golden Girdle about his Loins. 
It was an Habit like that in Daniel's Viſion, Dan. 10. 5. They 
were both Symbols of Majeſty, Authority, and Dignity, and the Ap- 
pearance agreed very well to him, who was both an High Prieſt, 
atid a Ring, Sf 

- 14 His head and his hairs were white like wooll, as 
white as ſnow f;, and his eyes were as a flame of tire g. 

f Whitenefs ſignifies Purity ; whiteneſs of Hair ſignines Old age 
erdinarily, which commonly is attended with more Prudence, as 
havinz moſt Experience : hence this Appearatice of Chriſt may 
both denote his Purity, and Wiſdom, and that he is the Ancient of 
Bays; See Dan. 7. 9, 13, though there the term of Ancient of 
Days belon2s to God the Father, yet it alſo agrezth to Chriſt, who 
is eQu1l with the Father, as to his Divine Nature. g Such an Ap- 
p-arance is applica to God, Zzek. 1.27. Dan. 10. 6. and to Chriſt 
Rev. 15. 12. to dencte either Chriſt's Knowledge, Wiſdom, and Om- 
n*/cience ; or his Grace in purifying Souls, as Fire doth Metals; or 
his Wrath and Anger azunfit his Enemies. 


15: And his tcet Ike unto fine braſs g, as if they |; 


in) 
2 2o 


many Waters 7. 

Z There are nice Di{quifitions what this Chalcoltbamim ( which 
we trantlite, fine Braſs) was : vid. Poli Synopſin. I underſtand not 
of what profit the Determination wif. be to us. By the Feet of 
Chr: (probably) are ſignified his Way: Counſels, and Methods in 
orecring and governing his Church, wtich are compared to fine 
Bra(s, for the Beauty and Glory of them, 4nd for their Firmitude, 
Stren; th, and Steadineſs. h They appearcd like Braſs filled with 
Fire, as if it- were burning, and red hot 1n + Furnace. 7 Loud, 
and terrible, like the noiſe-of rhe Sea daſhing uyon a Rock, or the 
Shorg 

16 And he had in his right hand ſevenſtars +, and 


þ The Kizht Hand is the. Hand of Power, Pſalm 21. 8, anagq. 3. 


Wrneace we may obſerve, that tins Book 1s not only the Re- 


Metſengers to his Churches, who having ia all times been moſt ex- 
poſcd to the Malice and Rage of Enemies; Chriſt is ſaid to ho!d 
them in his Right Hand, as to ſignifie the Dignity he hath put upon 
them, and the Favour he hath ſhewed them ; fo alſo to ſhew his Re- 
ſolution to protet them, according to his Promiſe, Matth. 28. 20. 
{ Either his Goſpel and Word comparcd to a two-edged Sword 
Heb. 4. 12. or a Sword of Juſtice, witich he will uſe till he hath per- 
fettly overcome, and vanquiſhed his Enemies, m That is, vas very 
glorious, ſo as the Apoſtle was not able to behold him, 


17 And when I ſaw him, [ fell at his feet as dead 7. 


Fear not o, +I am the firſt; and thelaſt p. 


me no harm." p See ver{. 8. 11. 


the keys of hell and of death /. 

q The living God, who had Life in my ſelf, and gave Life to the 
World, but aſſumed the Human Nature, and was made Man, and in 
that Nature died, but I roſe again from the dead, and ſhall die no 
more, but ever live to make Interceſſion for my People. r This is 
a great Truth. / And have power to kill, and caſt into Hell ; or I 
have the power over Death, and the ſtate of the Dead, ſo as I can 
raiſe thoſe that are dead, to life again; I have the command of 
Death, whether Temporal or Eternal ; as he who hath the Keys of 
an Houſe can let in, and ſhut out of it whom he pleaſcth, ſo I-bring 
to Heaven, and throw to Hell whom I pleaſe, 

19 Write the things which thou haſt ſeen 7, and the 
things which are z, and the things which ſhall be here- 
atter ww. bh 

t Either the things which thou haſt ſeen from the beginning of 
the Goſpel; for 7ohn, Matth. 4. 21. was a Companion of Chriſt from 
the time preſently following his Baptiſm and Temptations; Or, the 
Viſion of me, which thou haſt now had; which T judze moſt pro- 
bably the ſenſe : not underſtanding why our Lerd ſhould ſet Fohn to 
write that (though they were not then written, yer) Chriſt knew, 
ſhould be written in another Book by Fobn himſelf, viz. in his Goſpel, 
and by Matthew, Mark, and Luke, in their Hiſtories of the Goſpel, 
and in the A&s of the Apoſtles, efpecially confidering they were to be 
wrote plainly, fo as he who runs may read them; and what 7ohn was 
to write here, was to be written Enigmatically, and darkly repreſent- 


ed in Viſions: and 1t 15 againſt reaſon to think the ſame things ſhould 
be firſt revealed plainly, and then more darkly, and both by Dire&t- 
on from God. u The preſent Aﬀairs of the Church; we have the 
Hiſtory till Paul was carried Priſoner to Rome, (which was about the 
f1xtieth year after Chriſt) in the As of the Apoſtles ; fo that I-con- 
ceive the furtheſt that Zohn lookt back, was but 35 years; for he was 
in Patmos about the year 93, and is conceived to have wrote this 
Book, 96. Hence the matter of the Revelation is eafily concluded. 
I. The things which were the preſent Afﬀairs of the Church, Anno 
96. or looking back only to 60, which things are ſuppoſed tobe writ- 
ten by 7obn in chap. 2. 3. w And the Things which ſhall be hereafter, 
to the end of the World, under the reign of the Dragon [the Pagan 
Reman Empire ] and the reign of Antichriſt, or the Beaſt, for 1250 
years, and from thence until Chriſt ſhall come to Judgment, 


20 The myſtery of the ſeven ſtars which thou faw- 
eſt in my right hand, and the ſeven golden candle- 


churches y; and the ſeven candleſticks which thou 
ſaweſt, are the ſeven churches *. 

x See ver. 12, 16. y That is, they ſignifie the Angels of the ſeven 
Churches. By Angels, he means God's Meſſengers and Ambaſſadours 
to the ſeven Churches, called Angels, both in reſpe& of their Office, 
being the Ambaſſadours of Chriſt, 2 Cor. 5. 20. and of that lineſs 
which they ſhould ſhew forth in their Do&tine and Life. To inter- 
pret the term of Angels by Nature, ſeems not agreeable to what we 
ſhall hereafter meet with ſaid to ſome of them; Chriſt would never 
have ordered fohn to have charged them with a loſs of their firſt 
love, or to admoniſh them to be faithful unto Death, or to Repert. 
Whether the term, Angel, denoteth any particular Superiour Mini- 
ſter, or Biſhp in thoſe Churches, or is to be taken co!/efively for 
all the Miniſters in thoſe Churches, I-ſhall not diſpute. Certain it 
is, *A*a©- fignifieth no more than 1s common to all Miniſters, viz. 
to be God's Meſſengers, and move upon his Errand, * The ſeven 
Churches mentioned ver. 11. Or elſe, ſeven being the Number of 
Perfe&ion, all the Churches, which are fitly repreſented by Candle 
ticks, in the ſame ſenſe as they are called Pillars of Truth in Paul's 
Epiſtle to Timothy, becauſe they have not the Light they ſhew from 
tiemſelves, only hold it forth from Chriſt. But it is the opinion 
of very Learned Writers upon this Book, That our Lord, by theſe 
ſeven Churches, ſignifies all the Churches of Chriſt to the end of the 
World ; and by what he faith to them, defigns to ſhew what ſhall 
be the ſtate of the Churches in all Ages, and what their Duty is. 
That by the Church of Epheſus, was repreſented the pureſt ſtate of 
all the Chriſtian Churches, which determined 3o' years before this 
Book was wrote. By the Church of Smyrna, the ſtate of all Chri- 
ſtian Churches till the year 300. By the Church of Pergamos, all 
the Chriſtian Churches, till Antichriſt got up into the Saddle, and 
the Albigenſes, and Waldenſes were'ſo perſecuted. 4. By the Church 
of Thyatira, the ſtate of the Churches from that time, till our Re- 
formation, 5. By the other three, the ſtate of all Churches for 150 
years laſt paſt, and which ſhall be ro the end of the World. See 
Dr. More, Mr. Mede, Cocceius, and Forbes, who (as learned and dilt- 
gent Enquirers into the Senſe of this Book, as any have been) 21ve 
many reaſons for this: 1. Becauſe no reaſon elſe can be given why 
Epiſtles ſhould not be wrote to other Churches, as well as theſe. 
2. Ke doth not call them the fevcn @rurches of 4fra, but ſeven 


and of Favour, Pal. 119.1, and of Honour and Dignity, The pycn | 


Churct:es. 


ſticks x. The ſeven ſtars are * the angels of the ſeven + 


Chap. T, 


And he * laid his right hand upon me, ſaying unto me, * pzn, x4, 


l0, 


n Aſtoniſhed at the Majeſty and Glory of the Appearance ; Sce Þ 1.45.9, 
7oſh. 5. 14. Dan. 8. 17, 18. Matth. 17.6. A#s 9.4. 0 To comfort & 44. 5. 
me, and let me know, that I had no reaſon to be afraid, he would do Chap. 2.2. 

1s *1 om he that liveth, and was dead; and be- «gms. 
hold, I am alive for evermore 9g, Amen; and t fave +p1.58 25. 
Chap.20.1, 


Mal, 2. 7. 


Chap. IL. 


x Joh.4.1, are Apoſtles, and are not f ; 


ly. 5s. His calling Miniſters, Angels, ſpeaks this a Prophecy, for 
that is a Prophetical Stile. 6. The mentioning the ſame Number 
of Churches and Miniſters, as of the Seals, ſpeaks this part of the 
Revelation as comprehenfive, with reſpe& to time, as the other. 
7. It is not probable, that theſe Epiſtles would have been uſhered 
in with ſuch a Viſion, if they had been meerly Hiſtorical, and Di- 
daQtick, « not Prophetical alſe6. 8. They argue from chap. 1. 19. 
where Fohn is bid to write not only what is, but what ſhall come to 
paſs. 9. They argue from the matter of the Epiſtles ——Let the 
curious Reader ſee more of this in the Authors themfelyes, as alſo in 


Mr. Bi/ightman, 
CHAF KK 


John is charged to write firſt to the Angel of the Church of Epheſus, 
I. His works commended, 2, 3. Tet reproved for a decay of firſt 
Love, 4. An Exhortation to Repentance, 5. The Tree of Life pro- 
miſed to them that overcome, 7. Secondly, to him of Smyrna, his 
Afﬀlidtions known, 8. Perſeverance encouraged by - comfortable Pro- 
miſes, 9——11. Thirdly, to him of Pergamus, ftedfaſineſs in 
Afﬀition commended, 12, 13. Tet a few things againſt him, 14. 
Repentance preſſed by a threatning, 16, And by a Promiſe, 17+ 
Fourth!y, to him of Thyatyre, who is commended for his Faithful- 
neſs and Growth in Grace, 18, 19. His fin rebuked and threat- 
ned, 20-———23. They that were kept pure, exhorted to ſledfaſt- 
neſs, 24,25, Glorious Promiſes made unto them, 26 —=—=—29. 


Some things are to be obſerved of all the Epiſtles 
before we come to the particular Epiſtles. 

I. God's writing in this form (as a Man to his Friend) 
ſpeaks Chriffs Love to the Church, his Spouſe. 

2, There were not ſeven Books wrote, but one Book in 
zobich theſe ſeven Epiſtles were, out of which each 
Church, or the Church in its ſeveral Periods, might 
learn what concerned it. 

3. Theſe Epiſtles concerning matters of Faith and Man- 
ners.are wrote plainly,not in myſterious Expreſſions. 

4- The Scope of them all is, to inſtrutt, reprove, com- 
mend, and comfort. 

5. They are all diretted tothe Miniſters of the Churches, 
as their Heads, but the matter concerns the whole 
Church. 

6. It is alſo obſerved, That Chriſt, in the beginning © 
every Epiſtle, notifieth himſelf by ſome one of thoſe 
things mentioned intheViſion inthe former Chapter. 

Chap. 2. 1» Theſe things, ſaith he, zhat holds the ſeven 
Stars, Chap. 1. 16. : 

Verſe 8. The firſt and the laſt, which was dead, 
and is alive, chap. 1. 17, 18. 

Verſe 12. Theſe things (faith he) which hath the 
ſharp Sword with two edges, Chap. 1. 16. | 

Chap 2.18. The Sonof God who bath his Eyes like unto 
a flame of Fire, and his Feet like fine Braſs, Chap. 1. 
14, 15. L 

we 1. He that hath the ſeven Spirits of God, and 
the ſeven Stars, Ch. t. 4, 16. : _ 
3. 7. He that hath the Key of David, that ts boly 
and true, that openeth, &c. Ch. 1. 5, 18. 
Verle 14. The faithful and true Witneſs, Ch 1.5. 


Nto the angel of the church of Epheſus write a, 
u Theſe things, faith he rhat holdeth the ſeven 
ſtars in his right hand 6, who walketh in the midſt 
of the ſeven golden candleſticks c : - 

a Epheſus was the Principal City of Aſia the Leſs, it lay in the 
Weſtern parts of it upon the Jonian Sea, a City of great Riches and 


Trade, but much given to 1do/atry and Superſlition, tamous for the 
Temple of Diana ; Paul was there twice, at his ſecond coming he 


ſtaid thereabouts three years, As 18. ch. 19. ch. 20. He was by a | 


Tumult driven thence into Macedonia, and left Timothy there, 1 7im. 
1. 3. It appears from As 20. 17. that there were more Miniſters 
there than one ; but they were all Angels, and from the oneneſs of 
their Bufineſs all are called an Angel. 6 That 15, Chriſt, ch. I. 16, 20, 
who hath put an Honour on his Miniſters, ſheweth ſpecial fayour to 
them, and will prote& them. c Who hath a ſpecial Eye to his 
Church, being not an idle SpeRator, but preſent with his Church, 
to obſerve how all in it walk, and perform their ſeveral parts, and 
is at hand, either to reward or puniſh them. 

' 2 *T know thy works d, and thy labour, and thy 
13, patience e, and how thou canit not bear them which 
8 are evil +: and thou * haſt tried them which ſay they 
and haſt found them 

liars g : 

d Theſe words being in the Front of all the ſeven Epiſtles, can- 
not be interpreted, as ſignifying a Knowledge of Approbation, as 
Pſal.1.6, but of a Comprehenſion in the Underſtanding, and as fignify- 
ing Chriſt's Omniciency 3 though it be true, that the Lord both un- 
derſto2d and approved of ſome of the Wprks of this Church, par- 
ticularly. e Their Labour in- propagating the Knowledge of Chriſt, 
and Doftrine of the Goſpel, and their patient taking up, and bear- 
ing th Cros, F And. their Zeal and Warmth, that they would 


Vol. IT. 


R EV ELATION. 


Churches. 3. The Number, Seven, is the Number -uſed to fignifte 
Perfeftion. 4. What is ſaid of Chriſt's walking in the midſt of the 
Golden Candleſticks, having the Stars in his Right Hand, &c. agreeth 
to him, with reference to all Churches, not to theſe ſeven on- 


paſſtvely in the Furnace 


of 


not endure either Perſons erroneous in Judgment, or lewd in their 
Lives, in their Communion. f In the Primitive Church there were 
ſome that falfly- pretended an immediate Call, or Miſſion from 
Chriſt, to preach what they did, but this Church would not indure 
them. It appears from Pax/'s Epiſtle to Timothy, that there were 
then falſe Teachers very bufie in that Church; poſſibly Zbion and 
Cerinthus, (who both lived in this time, and Cerinthus preached in 
Aſa) or their Diſciples, might be ſome of them. They tried them, 
poſſibly by the Word of God, according to the Rules given in it to 
try the Spirits. £ And found that they had no ſuch 1mmediate 
Miſſion, no Authority from Chriſt. 

3 And haſt born þ, and haſt patience 7, and for 
= names ſake haſt laboured &, and haſt not faint- 
Ea 4. 

h The contradiion of falfe Teachers, and the Perſecutions of 
Fews and Pagans, (for at this time the ſecond Perſecution was be- 
gan by Domitian). i Grace (with Quietneſs and Submiſſion) to 
bear the Will of God in any fort of Evils. k And for me haſt 12- 
boured actively in propagating the Truths of my Goſpel, as well as 

Trials and Perſecutions. 1 And haſt per- 
ſevered fo as thou haſt neither been ſeduced to other Doftrine by 
falſe Teachers, nor loſt thy Integrity, and Holinefs of Converſation. 


4 Nevertheleſs I have ſomewhat againſt thee m, be- 


cauſe thou haft left thy firſt love 7:. 

m Something to accuſe thee of, and blame thee for. n Of late 
thou haſt not been ſo warm in the Propagation of my Goſpel, and 
maintaining my Truth. The love of many in this Church, both to- 
ward God and their Brethren, probably was cooled, tho'not wholly 
extinguiſhed. 

5 Remember therefore from whence thou art fal- 
len o, and repent p, and do thy: firſt works g ; or elſe 
I will come unto thee quickly 7, and will remove thy 


candleſtick out of his place /;, except thou repent. 

o That 1s, in what degree thy Love was formerly; and compare 
it with what it is now. p Repentance in Man, fignifieth both the 
change of the Heart, and of the Ations. - q Recover thy former 
warmth of Love, and zeal for good Works. r If thou doſt not, 
I that know thee, and walk in the midſt of thee, will ſhew my ſelf 


| an Enemy to thee, / and un-church thee, and ſay unto thee, Loam- 


mt, you are not my People. Which threatning is long fince made 
good.; for where is now the famous Church of Epheſus 2 


6 But this thou haſt z, that thou hateſt the deeds 


of * the Nicolaitans z, which I alſo hate wv. 

# Thou haſt yet thus much tocommend thee. # Thou hateſt the 
Deeds of thoſe who teach the Lawfulneſs of a common uſe of 
Wives, and cat tnings offered to Idols; for theſe, they ſay, were 
the Tenets of the Nicolaitans, ſo called from one Nicholas ; but 
whether he were one of the firſt Deacons named, A#s 6. 5. (who, 
they fay, to avoid the Imputation of Jealouſie, brought forth his 
wie, being a beautiful Woman, and proſtituted her) or from ſome 
other of that Name, I cannot determine. w God, as a lover of his 
own Order, and of Humane Society, hateth ſuch DoGrines and- 
Practices, as are cotltrary to the Rule of his Word, and tend to the 
confuſion of Humane Societies, 


' 7 * He that hath an ear, let him hear x what the * V ©: 


Spirit y faith unto the churches s : To him that over- 


cometh a, will I give to eat of the tree of life b, 13, 22. 


which 1s in the midſt of the paradiſe of God c. 

x To whom God hath given an Ability, and Power to under- 
ſtand what I ſay. It is a Form of Speech which Chriſt often uſed, 
when he would quicken up Peoples Attention, Matth. 11. 15. 
and 13. 9,43. Mark 4. 9, 23. and 7. 15. we ſhail find it again 
in theſe two Chapters fix times; from which ſome would conclude, 
that in theſe Epiſtles there is ſomething Myſterious, Parabolical, 
and Prophetical, it being a Form of Speech affixed to many 7a- 
rables. y The Holy Spirit of God, from whoſe Inſpiration all Scrip- 
ture 15. x Not only at Epheſus, but elſewhere in 4/za, or any other 
part of the World, @ That is a Conqueror in fighting the good 
fight of Faith, againſt the World, the Fleſh, and the Devil, b I 
will give him a ſhare in my Merits, and eternal Life ; which bleſſed 
Enjoyments are ſet out unto us under the Notion of Eating, Luke 
12, 37. and 22. 28, &c. This is the Promiſe he hath made, Fohn 10. 
28. 1 Fohn 2. 25, Heaven is exprefled to us under this Notion, 
with reference to the Tree of Lite mentioned, Gen. 2. 9. which 
was in the Old Paradiſe; for it is added, c which is in the mid$ of 
the Paradiſe cf God, or, which is the ſame, Chriſt himſelf is here 
intended, who is the Tree of Life, mentioned chap. 22. 2. and 
the Happineſs of Heaven is thus expreſt, 1 Thefſ. 4. 17. We ſhall 
be ever with the Lord : This is the ſum of the Epiſtle to the firſt 
mentioned Church, by which thoſe that judge theſe Epiſtles Prophe- 
tical, underſtand all the Primitive Churches, during the Apoſtles 
Age, or the moſt of their Ages, for Fohn himſelf lived under the 
ſecond Perſecution. 


$ And unto the angel of the church in Smyrna, 
write d, Theſe things faith the firſt and the laſt, which 


was dead, and is alive e. 

d Smyrna was a City in Jonia, we read not when, or by whom 
the Goſpel was i'-ſt planted, and a Church gathered there ; nor 
can we tell who ::2 meant by the Angel of this Church, ſee chap. 1, 
20, That it was no ſingle Perſon, is probable, for he ſpeaks plura/ly, 
v. 10. the Devil ſhall caſt ſome of you i v,wsr, into Priſon,” e For 
the meaning of this Phraſe, ſee Annotat. on chap. 1. 8, 17, 18. on- 
ly it is obſervable how Chriſt ſpeaking to this Church, under great 
Tribulation and Perſecution, fits a Name proper to comfort them, 
for he himſelf was dead, and yet now alive, and, he living, thoſe 
that believe in him, becauſe he lives, ſhall live alſo, Fobn 14. 19. 
and as he was the firſt, ſo he will be the laſt, ſurviving all his.Ene- 
mies, and be at laſt a Conqueror over them. 


9 *I know thy works and tribulation f, and pover- * yer, z, 


[ 6L}] | iy 8, 


Chap. II. 


Cha 
*A &% 


m5. II. 


Ro 


* ch.13.9. 


f ch.21.3. 


* ch.1.16. 


ty £, but thou art rich þ ;and I &zow'the blaſphemy | 


of them which ſay they are Jews 7, and are nor, bur 
are the ſynagogue of Satan #. 

f Thouzh the term hn, doth not neceſlarily ſignifie approbation, 
yet both as to the Church of Epheſus and Smyrna, the particular 
works mentioned, aflure us, that God approved their paticnt ſut- 
tcring Aﬀiiction tor his Name, g and the poor condition (as to out- 
ward things) into which they had brought themſelves, for their 
owning and profeifion of the Goſpel of Chriſt, having their Eſtates 
reat from them, ec. hþ But yet they were rich, both rcally in the 
Love and Favour ©: God, and -'ſo in the efteerz of God, who ac- 
counteth them rich who abound in ſpiritual Habits, and good 
Works, the exerciſe of thoſe Habits. 7 God alſo knows the evil 
Speeches of his Church's Enemies, whether native Zews, glorying in 
Cir umcifion and the Law, and that they were deſcended from Abra- 
ham; or, falſe Chriſtians, who may-be here meant (called Fews by 
a Fi.ure, the Fews being once the only Church of God.) & But 
are indeed a colletionof Devils, or the Children of the Devil, whoſe 
works they do, continually reviling true Chriſtians, and murdering 
the Saints, after the manner of their Father, who was a Murderer 
from the Beginning. 

10 Fear none of thoſe things which thou ſhalt ſuf: 
fer /: behold, the devil ſhall caſt ſome of you into 
priſon 2y, that you may be tried zz, and ye ſhall have 
tribulation ten days o, Be thou taithtul unto death p, 
and I will give thee a crown of life 

{ Thou art like to ſuffer yet ſharper things than thou haſt ſuffer- 
ed, the Perſecutions are but begun ; but pluck up a good courage, 
tear not your Enemies, Matth. 10. 28. m You ſhall be caſt into 
Prifon, by Jews and Pagans, who are the Devils Inſtruments, and 
execute his Malice againſt you ; which ſhould both encourage you 
t1at your fizht is with the common Enemy of Mankind, and teach 
you to pity and pray for your Perſecutors, who are but the Devil's 
Inſtruments, whoſe Hearts he hath filled with malice againſt you. 
n That your Faith, Love, Patience, Obedience may be tried. 90 In- 
terpreters are divided about theſe ten days, what ſpace of time 1s 
meant by them ; ſome think the whole time of the Ten Perſecu- 
tions, but they laſted above 209 years ; others will have them the 
ter years of Trajan's Perſecution from 99, to 109. Others obſerve, 
that 1a ten Days are 240 Hours, which make up the number of Years 


from 85, when the ſecond Perſecution began (under which 7ohn at 


fnis time was) to 325, when all the Perſecutions ceaſed. . But to let 
theſe Fancics go ; it is either a certain Number put for an uncer- 
tain ; or, it ſignifies many days; as in Gen. ZI. 4I. Thou ha# 
changed my wageF ten times, that is, many times, ſo 2 Sam. 19. 43. 
Fob 19.3. Or, elſe it ſignifies a little time, as in Gen. 24.55. Amos 
5. 3. and 6. 9, If we underſtand this Epiſtle, as only concerning 
the Charch of Smyrna at that time, it may fignifie a ſmall time, If 
we underſtand it Prophetically, deſcribing the ſtate of all Churches, 
till the Pagan Perſecution ceaſed (which was more than 240 Years) 
ten Days ſignifies a long time. p Hold faſt to thy Profeflion of 
Faith and Holineſs to the end of thy Life here. g And I will give 
thee Eterna! Life and Salvation, which ſhall be a great Reward, It 
is called a Crown of Righteouſneſs, 2 Tim. 4. 8. 

11 * He that hath an ear, let him hear what the 


Syirit ſaith unto the Churches, He that overcometh 7, 


ſhall not be hurt of the + ſecond death. /. 

ry For the opening of theſe paſſages; ſee the Notes on ver. 7. 
{ We read of the ſecond Death, ch. 20. 6, 14. the meaning 1s, 
that he ſhall eſcape the Eternal Damnation of Soul and Body in the 
Day of Judgment. Thoſe that make theſe Epiſtles Prophetical 
ſay, That the Church of Smyrna was a Type of all the Churches 
of Chriſt, to the Year 325, (when Conſtantine overcame Licinus, 


and gave reſt and peace to the Churches of Chriſt) which was all a 


time of ſevere Perſecution under the Roman Emperors, who to that 
time were all Heathens : it is very obſervable, that Chriſt blameth 
nothing in this Church; the Church of God keeps always its Purity 
beſt in the Fire ; but doubtleſs thcre were in this time many Apo- 
ſtacics, and other Errors, but God allows much to his Peoples 
Temptations ; hence, though 7ob ſhewed much Impatience, yet 
we are called to behold him as 2 Pattern of Patience. | 

12 And to the aigel of the church in Pergamos 
write 7, Theſe things faith he * which hath the ſharp 
{word with two edges z. 

t Pergamos was a famous City of Troas, we read of Pergamos no 
where elſe in Scripture, but of 7roas we read of Paul's being there, 
AFs 15.8, 11. and 20, 5, 6. and preaching Chriſt there, 2 Cor. 2. 
12, u See tie Notes on chap. 1. v. 16. 

13 * I know thy works, and where thou dwelleſt , 
even where Satans ſeat zs x, and thou holdeſt faſt my 
name y, and haſt not denied my faith Z, even in 
thoſe days wherein Antipas was my fairhful martyr a, 
who was flain 2mong(t you where Satan dwelleth. 

w God knows all his Peoples circumſtances, where they dwell, 
as well as what they do, and how they behave themſelves in their 
Habitations. x Where the Devil rules by his Pagan Deputies, and 
Antichiiſt's Officers. y The Word -of my Truth, by which I am 
known, as. a Man by his Name. z Neither by the Words of thy 
Mouth, nor by any Apoſtacy from this Profeſſion, notwithſtanding 
the Temptations thou haſt had from Seducers, ard from Perſecutors, 
and the ſightof thoſe who haye been put to Death for their Proteſſi- 
on. a It is much no Ecclefiaftical Hiſtory makes mention of this 
Martyr Antipas, which argueth him to hav > been a Perſon but of an 
o\-{cure note 1n the World ; but Chriſt ſeeth and taketh notice of thoſe 
little ones who belong to him, though the World overlooks them. 
Our being able trom no Hiſtory to give an account of this Martyr, 
hath inclined ſome to think this Epiſtle wholly Prophetical, and that 
Antias fiznifieth not any particular Perſon, but all thoſe that have 
oppoſed the Pope, as if it were Antipapa. But certainly there was 
fuch a Martyr as Antipas belonging to the Church at S$mzzna, at 


REVELATION. 


(Cha 


that time, who ſuffered for the Truth, though we do allow this 
Church to have -been Typical of all the Goſpel-Churches for many 
Years, y 


14 But I have a few things againſt thee b, becauſe 


thou hait there them that hold the doctrine of * By. 


laam c, who taught Balak to caſt a ſtumbling-block 
before the children of Iſrael d, to eat things ſacrificed 


unto Idols, and to commit fornication e. 

6 Though I have much to commend thee for, yet I have ſome 
things to accuſe thee of, and to complain of thee for. By the 
Dofrine of Balaam, he means the Dofrine of the N:colaitans (as 
he expounds himſelf, v. 15.) which was like the DoQtrine of Balaarm, 
d That Balaam of whom we read, Numb. chap. 24. chap. 25. who be- 
ing ſent for by Balak the King of Moab, to come and curſe 7ſraet, 
and finding that God reſtrained him, and turned his Tongue from 
curſing them, to pronounce Bleffings to them, inſtructed Balah at 
laſt, how to lay a Stumbling-Block before them, to make them to 
tall, viz. to ſet the Moabitiſh Women to tempt them to commit Un- 
cleanneſs with them, and fo to feaſt with them in their Idols Tem- 
ples, and eat of their Meat firſt offered unto their Idols. 

15 S0 haſt thou alſo them thar hold che doQtrine of 
the Nicolaitans f, which thing I hare g. 

f So faith he, thou ſuffereſt in thy Communion filthy Perſons, 
who maintain Fornication lawful, and the [awfulneſs of eating Meat 
ottered to Idols, which exafly correſponds with Balaam's Dottrine, 
or Counſel given to Balak, in order to his weakning the [jraelires, 
by ſeparating them from God. g His Countel took place, to the 
Deſtruction of 24000 Jſraelites, IT am the fame God 1till, and hate 
luch DoQtrines, as much as ever Idid in the time of Batab. 

16 KRepent Þ, or elſe I will come unto rhee quick- 
ly z, and * will fight againſt them with the {word of 
my mouth #. 

þ Thou that art guilty of conniving at ſuch things, change thy 
Mind and PraQtice, and let thoſe who have entertained theſe Op1- 
nions, and run into thoſe filthy Pratices, change their Hearts and 
Practices, orelle j I will quickly come againſt thee, and puniſh thee, 
ſee the Notes on wer. 5. k And fight againſt them by my Word ; 
either convincing them, or pronouncing Sentence againſt them ; 
or, by raiſing up other Teachers, who ſhall preach my Word more 
taith:ully, and whoſe Dodtrine ſhall be ike a Sword to devour and 
to deſtroy them. 

17 He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spi- 
rit {aith unto the churches : To him that overcometh / 
will I give to eat of the hidden Manna mz, and will 
give him a white ſtone z, and in the ſtone * a new 
name written o, which no man knoweth ſaving he 
that receiveth 1t p. 

1 See the Annotation, on v. 7, 11. m Here js a manifeſt alluſion 
to that Bread from Heaven, with which God fed his People in the 
Wilderneſs, called Angels Food, Pſal. 78. 25. The Story of it we 
have, Exod. 16, 31, 32. a Pot of which God ordained to Le kept 
in the Ark, tor a memorial of God's Mercy, Heb. 9.4. It was a 
Type of Chriſt, who was the true Bread that came down from 
Heaven, John 6. 32, 33. it here ſignifies Chriſt himſelf with all the 
Influences of his Grace, whether for Strength or Comfort. As a 
Feaſt was wont to follow a ViRory ; ſo Chriſt promiſeth to thoſe 
that fought, and overcame in the ſpiritual Fight, to feaſt them with 
himſelf, and the Influences of his Spirit. = The uſe of Stones an- 
ciently was fo various, that it hath giver; a great Liberty to [nter- 
preters to vary in their Senſes of the White-Stone here mentioned. 
They made uſe of them {as we fince of Counters) to compt : They 
uſed them alſo in Judgments, acquitting Perſons by White-Stones, in 
which their Names were wrote; as they condemned others by 


Þ. I}, 


*Num, 2 +; 
I6, 


* Ha.ll.g. 
2Thelſ.2.2., 
ch. 1. 16, 
AX 19. 15, 
21s 


* ch.3.12. 


Black-Stones : They alſo uſed them in giving Suffrages in EleQions, _ 


7c. They. alſo uſed them to mark happy or lucky days, and they 
uſed other Stones to mark ſuch Days as they counted unlucky; and 
finally, they uſed them as Rewards to thoſe who. conquered in their 
Games. Hence Interpreters vary in their Opinions, whether this be 
a general Promiſe of a Reward, or a more particular Promiſe of 
Pardon and Abſolution ; or, of the affurance of their Ele&ion to 
Life. It ſeems moſt properly to be interpreted of Pardon, or the 
notification of Pardon of Sins, or more generally of a Reward. 
o By the new name which þ no Man knoweth but he that hath it, 
the ſame thing ſeemeth to be ſignified, the Spirit witneſſing with 
their Spirits, that they are the Children of God. They ſay, that 
in thoſe White-Stones (uſed in Abſolutions of Perſons, or in giving 
Suffrages) the Name of the Perſon abſolved or choſen, was wont 
to be written, and none kneiy 1t but thoſe that had it, unleſs they 
imparted it, to which cuſtom this alluſion is. Thoſe that make this 
Church Typical ſay, 1t typified the Churches of the Goſpel during 
the times of Popery, to the end of the Perſecutions of the Walden- 
ſes and Albigenſes, when about 100000 of them were deſtroyed by 
8000 Papiſts ; or, the time when. Antichrift firſt ſat in the Temple 
of God, as chap. 13. and the Women fled into the Wilderneſs, 
chap. 12. 


18 And unto the angel of the church in Thyatira, 
write 9, Theſe things ſaith the Son of God, who hath 
his eyes like unto a flame of fire 7, and his feet are 
like fine Braſs /. _ mY 

q Thyatira was a City of Myſia or Lydia, not far from Philipp: 
the chief City of Macedonia ; for Lydia, who traded in Purple, and 
was of this City, went to Philipp! to Trade, as we read Adts 16, 
12, 14. Y Seechap. 1. 14,15. it fignifies either anzry Eyes, or 
quick and piercing Eyes. / The comparing of his beet to fine 
Braſs, ſeemeth to fignifie both the Purity and Holineſs of his Ways 
and Methods of Providence, and alſo his firmneſs and ſteadinels 11 
them, 


19 I know. thy wo.ks 7 and chatity , 


VICE WW, 


and 1cr- 


2. 


Char. [l. 


vice w, and faich x, and thy patience y, and thy | 


works 2 ; and the lait zo be more than the tirlt a. ... 
t The Works of the Miniſtry of this Church were ſuch as Chriſt 
knew, not only with a Knowledge of Comprehenſion, but Approba- 
tion alſo, « Such were his Charity to Chriſtians that were in d1- 
ſtreſs. -w His Diligence in his Miniſtration. x His Faith and Ad- 
herence to Chriſt, and the Dofrine of the Goſpel: y His meek 
bearing of his Crofſles and Trials, and x his other Works, the Fruit 
ot Faith and Love: a And his proficiency both in ſpiritual Habits, 
and good Works, the Fruits of them. - 

20 Notwithitanding I have a few things againſt 
thee 6, becauſe thou ſuffereſt thar woman * Jezebel c, 
which calleth her ſelf a propheteſs 4, to teach, and to 
tExod.34. ſeduce my ſervants to commit fornication e, and to 


I5. 7 eat things ſacrificed to idols f. | 
Atts15-20% þ See the Notes upon ver. 4. 14. c The Doftrine of the Nicolai- 
7 Cor. 10. tans mentioned wer. 6. 14. is fo plainly expreſſed in the latter part 
13, 20 ofthe Verſe, viz. maintaining the lawfulneſs of eating things offer- 
ed to Idols, and of Fornication; that whoſoever this Woman was, 
It is plain ſhe was one of that filthy Se : It isalſo plain, that ſhe is 
called Fezebel, with alluſion to that wicked Woman of that Namie, 
who was the Wife of Ahab, of whom- we read, 1 Kings 16. 31. 
She was an Inſtrument to bring Ahab_ her Husband to ſerve and 
worſhip Baal. It is alſo plain, that ſhe was one d that pretended 
to Divine Revelations ; ſhe called her ſelf a Propheteſs, e and that 
taught in publick, which no Woman but Propheteſſes might do, 
I Cor. 14. 34. 1 Tim. 2. 11, 12. e And that ſhe taught a commu- 
nity of Women, and f the lawfulneſs as of Fornication, ſo of eat- 
ing things offered t> Idols, dire&tly contrary to the Apdtle's Do- 
Qtrine, 1 Cor.9.10. But what ſhe was cannot be determined : For tho' 
we allow this Church to be Typical of the Church in the times of 
Popery, and the Popiſh Synagogue, (which maintaineth both theſe 
things) to be the Antitype ; yet certainly, there was ſome famous He- 
retical Strumpet in this Church, which the Governours did not re- 
ſtrain and caſt out of their Communion, which is the thing Chriſt 
had againſt this C!1urch, and the Officers in it who ought to have re- 
ſtrained her extravagancies both in teaching ſuch Dofrines (being 
contrary to the Apoſtle's DoGrine in the places before-mentioned,) 
and from teaching at all,being no Propheteſs tho' ſhe pretended to it, 
21 And I gave her ſpace to repent of her fornica- 
tion g, and ſhe repented not þ. 
£ I was not quick with her, but gave her a time of Patience, and 
did not cut her off at firſt; þ But ſhe was incorrigible,' and went 
on 1n her ſinful courſes. 5 | 
22 Behold, I will caſt her into a bed z, and them 
that commit adultery with her into great tribulation 
k, except they repent of their deeds /. 
i Another kind of Bed than ſhe hath ſinned in arid by, not a Bed 
of Eaſe and Pleaſure, but of Pain and Torment, & Nor ſhall the 


* 2 Kings 


Seduced eſcape, they ſhall be alſo caſt into great Tribulation, Pain, 


and Torments of Conſcience, or Afﬀif@tions more corporal, either 
from the more immediate hand of God, or the hands of Men. / This 
is to be ſuppoſed to all God's Threatnings of Judgments, the execu- 
tion of them ordinarily may be prevented by Repentance, and fuch 
is the Patience of God, that he -gives the vileſt Sinners ſpace to 
Repent. < Los ; > 
23. And I will kill her children »: with death z : 


and all the churches ſhall know that * Iam he which 
* x Sam. ſp2rcheth the reins and hearts, and I + will give unto 


TO. 7. \ . k 
every one of you according to your works 0. 
= m_ m Thoſe who _ ſeduced by <4 n I will deſtroy them; unleſs 
29, 17. ſome ſpecial Death, ſach as the Plague, be here threatned. 0 So 
+ Rom. 2. ſhall all the Churches near Thyatira know, that I am a God who 
6.8 14-12, do not only take notice of overt, ſcandalous a&ts, but of the ſecret 
2 Cor. 5. thoughts, motions, counſels, and deſigns of Mens hearts, -Pſal. 7. 
Io, - 10. Fer. 11, 20, and 17. 10. and that I am a Juſt God, who will 
Gal. 6. $5, fecal with all according to their works. ; 
Chap. 20. 24 But unto you p I ſay, and unto the reſt in Thya- 
I2. tira, As many as have not this doQrine 9g, and which 
have not known the depths of Satan (as they ſpeak 7) 


I will put upon you none other burden £. 

p You that are the Miniſters,for they are diſtinguiſhed from zhe reſt 
in Thyatira. The word again is Plural, which lets us know theſe 
Epiſtles were diredted to no ſingle Perſons. q The reſt of the Mem- 
bers of the Church in Thyatira who have not embraced this Do@rine 
of the Nicolaitans publiſhed by Fezebel, &c. r Thoſe Seducers call 
their Dofrine Deep things, great Myſteries revealed to them ; as 
there are the deep things of God, 1 Cor. 2. 10, So theſe Seducers 
would pretend their Dotrines alſo were deep things. Chriſt calls 
them the Devils Myſteries, deep things of Satan. s I will lay no 
other Burden of Trials and Afﬀivtions. 


25 But* that which you have /ready /\ hold faſt 


till I come 7. 

{ Then you already groan under. Or no other Precepts than 
what. you have had from the Apoſtles; The Precepts of God are 
called Burdens, Matth. 11. 29. As 15. 28. t Hold faſt your Pro- 
feſſion, your Faith and Holineſs till I come to Judgmeut. 


: 26 And he that overcometh, and keepeth my 
works to the end #, * to him will I give power over 


* Luke 22, the parions wo. 

_ u Sce the Notes on ver. 11, 17. Overcoming is here expounded 

G bm by keeping Chriſt's Works; that is, either the Works by him com- 
manded, or walking as he walked, and perſevering therein to the 
end of his or their Lives. w Either to judge thoſe who live Hea- 
thenifh Lives; or to convert Nations to the Faith ; or which 1s moſt 
proballe, Matt. 19.28. he ſhall fit with me upon a Throne 1n the 
day of Judgment, and Fudge the Worid, 1 Cor. 6. 2. 


Vol. IJ. 


*Ch. 3.11. 


REVELATION 


Chap. IJ. 
27 And he ſhall rule them with a rod of -iron & : 
as the veſſels of a potter ſhall they he broken to ſhi- 
VeIsS y, even as I received of my Father z. | 
x AN Tron Rod, either ſignifies a right Rod, that will not be eafily 

bent, and made crooked, or a ſevere Rod (which is moſt probably 
the ſenfe.) Sce Pſal. 2. 9. Chap. 12. 5. The words by the P/almft 
are applied to Chriſt, and to the Church, Rev. 12.5. To particu- 
lar Saints here, who rule the Nations either. in Chriſt their Head, of 
with Chriſt as their Chieftain, with the Word of God powerfully 
convincing the World of Sin and Righteouſneſs. y And all Pagan- 
1/m and Heathen Idolatries, ſhall be broken in pieces. Orin the day 
of Judgment the Saints that perſevere ſhall fit with Chriſt, and judge 
and condemn the World ſeverely, and then they ſhall be broken 1n 
pieces, never again to be ſodered or cemented. z For ſuch a Power 
= Authority my Father hath given me, and I will give it to all 

em: 

28 And 1 will give him the morning Star 4. 

a Either the Light of Glory, the Blefſed Viſion of God ; Or 4 cer- 
tain Hope of Eternal Life, or the Holy Spirit, called ſo, 2 Pet.1.19. 
or rather of my ſelf, Chriſt himſelf is not only called the Sun of Righ- 
teouſneſs, Mal. 4. 2. but the Momning-Star, Chap. 22. 16. becauſe he 
excelleth all other Stars in Glory, and ſcattereth the darkneſs of 
Ignorance and Error, by the Light of his Goſpel; I will make him 
partaker of my ſelf, 

_ 29 He that hath an ear, ler him hear what the Spi- 
rit 1aith unto the churches b. _ | LC” 

b Here the ſame concluſion of this Epiſtle, as of all the reſt, ver. 
7- 11,17, See the Notes on ver. 7. Thoſe who make this Epiſtle 
Typical and Prophetical, make it a Type of all the Churches of Chit, 
from about 1260, or the end of the Perſecution of the Walderſes, un- 
til the Proteſtant Religion ſo far obtained, that whole Nations own- 
ed it, which was about 1560, by which time England and Scotland 
had made it the Religion of thoſe Nations ; it had before this pre- 
vailed in Germany, Helvetia, France, and many other places, where 
it was the Religion of whole Cities, and particular Juriſdictions, gc. 


3 AT. MM | 
The fifth Letter to him of Sardis, who hath a name to Live, but is 
Dead, 1. Watchfulneſs exhorted unto, 2. A promiſe ty the few 
that keep themſelves pure, 4_ 6. The fixth to him of Phila- 
delphia, 7. His Faithfulneſs commended, 8. A threatning againſt 
Hypocrites, 9. Promiſes,to them that overcome, 1to——= 12. The 
ſeventh to him of Laddicea, 14. His Luhewarmneſs Reproved, 15. 
And threatned, 16. His Tgnorance and i%retchedneſs diſcover- 
ed, 17. Chriſt's Counſel to get true Happineſs, 18, An Exhorta- 
tion to Repentance, 19. Chriſt's Invitation and Promiſes to the 
Obedient, 20 22, 


| A ND unto the angel of the church « in Sardis, 
write þ6, Theſe things ſaith he * that hath the * Elap. r- 


ſeven Spirits of God c, and the ſeven ſtars d; I know + **: 
thy works e, that thou haſt a name that thou liveſt f, 
and art dead g. . 

4 See the Notes on Chap. 2.12. b See the Notes on Chap. r. 
IT. c See the Notes on Chap. 1.3. d And upon Chap. tr. 20, 
e This Phraſe here (as appears from what follows) can fignifie no- 
thing but Chriſt's comprehenſion of the works of this Church in 
his Underſtanding, not his approbation of them. f The Miniſtry 
of this Church had a Name, that is, were reported as famous for 
their Faith, Diligence and Holineſs ; but their Faith without ſuitable 
works was dead, and they were no better than Hypocrites. g Spi- 
ritually dead. 


2 Be watchful þ, and ſtrengthen the things which 


 temain, that are ready to die : z for I have not found 


thy works petfect before God F. 

Apainſt Sin, and unto thy _ to perform it in a better 
manner than formerly. j Improve thoſe Gifts and good Habits 
which are left thee as yet, but are faint and ready to die, if thou 
doſt not look after the improvement, and ſtrengthening of them. 
k For I haye not found thy works before God (whether thy works 
in thy Miniſtry, or in thy Converſation) ſuch as they ought ro be ; 
thou mighteſt have done me more ſervice, and thou mighteſt 
have done what thou haſt done with more uprightneſs and fin- 
cerity. . | | 

3 Remember therefore how thou haſt received and 

heard /, and hold faſt mz, and repent 7. * If therefore * ver. 19. 
thou ſhalt not watch, I will come upon thee as a thief f Mat. 24- 


2, and thou ſhalt not know what + hour I will come {7743 | 


upon thee p. : 39, 40. 

| To wit, from the Apoſtles of the Lord: Jeſus Chriſt. All true 7 T1,.1;5.2. 
reformation either of Dottrine or Manners, lies inthe reduGion of : per, 2.10, 
it to the Doctrine delivered, and the Rules of Life given by them. Cþ,16. 15. 
m Wherein our judgment or pradtice 1s conform to theirs, it is to 
be held faſt, wherein it hath varied, it is to be repented of. n If 
thou ſhalt not keep thy ſelf free from grofs Sins or Errors, and give 
diligence to do it, I will come to thee o, not as a Friend to comfort 
and refreſh thee, but as a Thief to rob and deſtroy thee, and p that 
ſuddenly. So as I will ſurprize thee with my Judgments, and thou 
ſhalt not know when my Judgments ſhall overtake thee. 2s 

Thou haſt a few names p, even in Sardis, which 

have not defiled their garments 9 ; and they ſhall walk _ 
with me * in white 7 : for they are worthy / | * Ch. 4. 4+ 

p A few Perſons q even in that potluted place, who have kept & 6. 11. 
their Integrity ahd Innocency. There is a Garment of Chriſt's & 79,13» 
Righteouſneſs, which once put on, is never loſt, nor can be defiled, 
but there are Garments of Holineſs alſo : hence the Apoſtle calls to 
Chriſtians to be cloathed with Humility. As Sin 1s exprefied under 
the notion of nabedneſs ; ſo Holineſs is exprefled under the notion 


of a Garment, Ezeh.16;10#1 Pet. 5: 5. Thoſe who have not defiled 
[6L2}] their 


Chan TI] 


their Garments, are thoſe that have kept a pure Conſcience, 
Romans uſed to cloath their Nobles, and tuch as were competitors 
for Honours, in white Garments; the Priefs and Levites alſo a- 
monztt the Jews, when they Miniſtred, were cloathed in White, 
2 Chron. 5.12. God and his Holy Angels are in Scripture ſet out 
fo vs as cGoathed 1n White, Dan. 7. 6, Matth, 17. 2. 
Theſe thas triumphed upon Victories obtained, were cloathed 1n 
Vine amonztt the Romans. To theſe uſages, or ſome of them, the 
lution is, and the meaning is, they ſhall be to me as Kings and 
Friciis, and Nobles, they ſhall be made partakers of my Glory : 
For { tho” they have not merited it, yet I have judged them worthy ; 
they ere worthy, though not with reſpe@ to their merit, yet with 
retpet to my Promiſe, and my Sons Righteouſneſs. As Believers 
arc righteous in Chriſt, ſo they are worthy in Chrift. 

5 He that overcometh, the ſame ſhall be clothed 
in white raiment zZ, and I will not blot out his name 


2 * out of the book of lite c, but I will confeſs his name 


*Chap.2.7. 


+ Ver. 14. 
Chi.12. 


* Ver. I. 


*Chap.2.9. 


betore my Father, and before his Angels d. 

# He that overcometh in the Spiritual Fight, ſhall be honoured 
as a Triumpher, c that is, I will give him everlaſting Life : The 
Phraſe is an alluſion to Men who uſe to keep Books, and in them 
the Names of Perſons to whom they will ſhew kindneſs. The Book 


of Lye, applied to God, fignifieth his Eternal Predeſtination, or. 


purpoſe to bring ſome to Heaven; out of which Book, though none 
can be blotted, whoſe Name is once wrote in, yet thoſe whoſe Names 
are in this Book, may be under ſome fears and apprehenfions of it. 
Chriſt aſlures them to the contrary, that they ſhall certainly be ſa- 
ved, but lets them know that this afſurance depends upon their per- 
ſeverance ; of which alſo ſome make this Phraſe a Promiſe. d In 
the day of Judgment I will own them, and acknowledge them as 
mine before my Father and all the Angels, Mat. 10. 32. Luke 12.8. 


6 * He that hath an ear, let him hear what the 


Spirit ſaith unto the churches e. | 

e The common concluſion of all the Epiſtles. See the Notes on 
Chap. 2. ver. 7, 11,17, 29. Thoſe who make theſe Churches Thpi- 
cal, and the Epiſtles Prophetical, of the complexion of all the Churches 
of Chriſt, which ſhall be to the end of the World, ſay the Church 
of Sards typifieth thoſe Reformed Churches after the Year 1560, 
that ſhould caſt of Antichriſt, but continue in a more imperfe& 
ſtate, contenting themſelves with a bare diſclaiming Antichriſt, but 
not raiſing up to a perfe& Reformatior. 


7 And to the angel of the church in Philadelphia, 
wrice f, Theſe things faith he that is holy g, he that 
Is true h, he that hath + the key of -David z, he that 
openeth, and no man ſhutteth &#, and ſhutteth, and 


no man openeth /, | 

f See the Notes on Chap.1.20. and 2, 1. of this Philadelphia we 
read no more in Holy Writ. We are told there were three Cities 
of that Name, one in Egypt, one in Syria, another in Phyygia, or in 
Myſia or Lydia, which is that here intended. g That is, the Holy 
One, Aﬀs 3. 14. h True to his Word of Promiſe or Threatning. 
7 That is, the Key of the Houſe of David, mentioned T/a: 22. 22. 
the Keyof the Church which anſwered the Temple, the Houſe of Da- 
vid deſigned for God ; the uſe of the Key is to open and ſhut, or 
make faſt ; who admits into the Kingdom of Heaven whom he plea- 
ſeth, and none can hinder him, / and ſhutterh out of Heaven whom 
he pleaſeth. The Houſe of David typified the Church ; the Church 
containeth the number of thoſe that ſhall be ſaved ; Chriſt is here 
deſcribed as he who hath the ſole and abſolute power of ſaving and 
condemning whom he pleaſcth. 


$ * I] know thy works : behold I have ſet before 
thee an open door, and no man can ſhut it z : for 
thou haſt a little ſtrength o, and haſt kept my word p, 


and haſt not denied my name 9g. - 

m It is very probable, that our Lord by theſe Minifters Works, 
underſtands the Works proper to them in their Fun&ion, their La- 
bour in Preaching and Propagating the Goſpel, which Chriſt did not 
only know and obſerve, but alſo approve of, m and promiſeth them 
a liberty to go on, and ſucceſs in their Labours under the notion of 
an open Deor, ſee 1 Cor.I6.9. 2 Cor.2.12. Col. 4. 3. n Soas itſhould 
not be in the Power of Adverſaries to hinder their ſucceſs. o Both 
inward ſtrength,and outward helps and advantages. p The Doctrine 
of Faith is by thee kept pure, as alſo my Precepts for an Holy Life. 
q9 And thou haſt not been by any Temptation preyailed upon to 
Apoſtatize from the Profeflion of the Goſpel. 

9 Behold, I will make * them of the ſynagogue of 
Satan 7, which ſay they are Jews, and are not, but 
do lie /, behold, 1 will make them to come and wor- 
{hip betore thy feet 7, and to know that I have loved 
thee z. . 

ry So he calleth all Fews that oppoſed Chriſtianity, or all pretend- 
ed, but not real Profeflors. ſ For heis not rt; that is a Jew out- 
wardly, neither is that Circumciſion which is of the Fleſh; but he is a 
m_ that is one inwardly, &c. Rom. 2. 28, 29. By this term alfo 

3e may mean all falſe and hypocritical Profeflors, who would make 
themſelves the Church, the only Church of God, but are far enough 
from it, hating, maligning, and oppoſing thoſe who would keep 
ſtricter to the Rule of the Goſpel. # I will by my Providence ſo 
order it, that theſe Men ſhall come and honour thee, paying a civil 
Reſpe& and Homage to thee. # And to know that I have a greater 
kindneſs for thee, than for them. ; 


10 Becauſe thou haſt kept the word of my patience 
z, I alſo will keep thee from the hour of temptation 
x, which ſhall come upon all the world y, to try them 
that dwell upon the earth =. 


w The Doftrine of the Goſpel is, unqueſtionably, the Word 
here called the Word of the Lord's Patience, becauſe it was that 
Word, that Doftrine, which (as thoſe times went) could not be 


REVELATION. 


7 The | 


and 28. 3. 


adiered to, and obſerved without much Patierce in thoſe.that adhe- 
red to it, both actvely waiting for the Promiſes revealed in it, and 
paſſively induring all manner of Trials and Croffes, To keep this 
Word, was to keep cloſe, not only to the matters of Faith revealed 
in it, but to the Duty impoſed by it upon Miniſters and others in 
the preaching, and propagating of the Goſpel, and all the Duties of 
an holy Life. x For this Faithfulneſs, God has promiſed to keep 
the Miniſters of this Church from thoſe Perſecutions which raged 
elſewhere, and were further in Trajan's time, to come upon all 
Chriſtians living under the Roman Empire. x To try thoſe Chriſti- 
ans that lived within that Empire, how well they would adhere to 
Chriſt, and the Profeffion of the Goſpel. This I take to be a more 


Chap. il 


proper Senſe, than theirs who would interpret this Hour of Tempta- | 


tion, of the Day of ro non which 15 never fo called. 
11 Behold, I * come quickly a : + hold faſt that 


which thou haſt b, that no man take thy Crown c. 

a Tzz4, which certainly is the ſame with & zz; and it might 
be as well concluded, that the Day of Judgment ſhould come by 
that time Rome- Pagan ſhould ceaſe ; as that all things wrote in this 
Book had their Accompliſhment in that time, becauſe Chriſt told 
Fohn they ſhould come to paſs & rzix«, Chap. 1. 3. and 22.6. No 
other coming of Chriſt, but his coming ro the laſt Judgment, can 
be here meant. b Keg're, hold with a ſtrong Hand the Doctrine of 
Faith, which thou yet haſt, pure, and thy pure VVorſhip, and Diſ- 
cipline, and a pure Conſcience. c That thou mayſt not loſe that 
Reward, which fhall be the Portion of thoſe that perſevere to the 
end, and of thoſe only. | 


12 Him that overcometh, will I make a * pillar in 
the temple of my God d, and he. ſhall go no more 
out e: And + I will write up6n him the name of my 
God f, and the name of the city of my God, || which 
:s new Hieruſalem, which cometh down out of hea- 
ven from my God g - and I will write upon him my 
new name þ. 

d Though by the Temple of God in this place ſome underſtand 


the Church of Chriſt on Earth, where thoſe always were, and are, 
and always ſhall be moſt famous, who have overcome Temptations 


*-Phil.4 5, 
f Ch.2.25 


*1Kings 7, 
21. 

7 Chap. 2, 
I7.0022.4, 
|| Gal. 4.26. 
Heb. 12.22 


beſt, from the VVorld, the Fleſh, and the Devil ; yet conſidering - 


that all the Promiſes before made to thoſe who overcome, are of 
anotherILife; it ſeems beſt rather to interpret this ſo, That God 
would make ſuch an one of Fame and Renown in Heaven, great in 
the Kingdom of Heaven, Matth. 5. 19. to fit upon a Throne there, 
Matth. 19. 28. He ſhall haye an higher Degree in Glory (for 
Stars differ from one another in Glory, 1 Cor. 15. 41.) Pillars being 
not only for Support, but Ornament, and principal parts in Build- 
ings. e He ſhall have an Eternal Inheritance of which he ſhall not 
be diſpoſleſt. F As Men. uſe upon Pillars and Monuments ere&ted 


for their own Uſe and Honour, to write their Names ; fo I will pe- 


culiarly own, and challenge ſuch an one for my ſelf. g And I will 
write upon him, This Man is an Inhabitant of the new Hieruſalem., 
þ 1 will glorifte him with that Glory of which my ſelf was made 
partaker, upon my Aſcenſion after my Reſurreftion, Fohn 17.22,24. 

13 He * that hath an ear, let him hear what the 
Spirit ſaith unto the churches 7z. | 

3 This we have met with at the Cloſe of every Epiſtle. See the 
Notes on ver. 7. Thoſe who think theſe Churches were typical, and 
the matter of the Epiſtles not only DidaQick and CorreRive, but 


} Prophetical, ſay, this Church of Philadelphia was a Type of all Goſ- 


pel-Churches which were to be in the VVorld, upon the Reformation, 
which more perfe&ly caſt off Antichriſt, and would allow no Key,but 


that of the Houſe of David,reforming themſelves ſtri&ly,according to 


the Rule of the VVord, not according to State-Policy and Prudence. 
14 And unto the angel of the church | 


diceans, write &, Theſe things ſaith the Amen /, * the 


faithful and true witneſs 2,7 the beginning of the cre- , 


ation of God z : 
VVe read of this Church, Colof. 4. 16. Laodicea was a City in 
Lyaia, by the River Lycus, vid. Chap. 1, 11. I Amen, as we have 


oft noted, is a Particle uſed in aſſerting, and in wiſhing, or pray- 
ing ; here it hath the uſe of a Noun, and is affertive ; he that is true, 


as it followeth. He may be conceived thus to preface his Epiſtle, 
to aſcertain to the Miniſters of this Church the Truth of what he 
blames in them; or of the Threataings, or Promiſes contained in 
it ; to which purpoſe he alſo calls himſelf. m The faithful and true 
Witneſs ; ſee the Notes on Chap. 1. 5. Thoſe that deny the Divi- 
nity of Chriſt, are deceived in their Thoughts, that this Text will 
afford them any Defence for their Error; for «g;4 the word here 


\uſed, doth not oaly ſignifie the Cauſe, but Principality, or the Chief, 


or Prince, Eph. 3. 10. Co/.1.16. Hence Chriſt is ſaid to be age, 
which we tranſlate, the beginning; becauſe he was the Creator, the 
Efficient Cauſe of the Creation; or hath a Lordſhip over the whole 
Creation : All Power both in Heaven and Earth being committed to 
him, and all Knees both in Heaven and Earth bowing down to him, 
Phil. 2.10. Unleſs we had rather interpret it of the New Creation, 
either in the World, ſo he was the beginning of the Goſpel; or in 
particular Souls, ſo he is the beginning of Regeneration and Sandifi- 
cation. But though this be a Truth, and confiſtent enough with 
the Greek Phraſe, Gal. 6.15. yet I ſee no reaſon why we ſhould 
fly to it againſt the Arrians, or- their ſpurious Off-ſprings ; for ta- 
king the Creation, as ordinarily it fignifies, for the giving all Crea- 
tures their firſt Being. Chriſt was the Efficient Cauſe of it, and ſo 
the beginning of it, (without him was nothing made) and he hath a 
Lordſhip and Dominion over it. | 


15 * I know thy works o, that thou art neither 


cold nor hot p, T would thou wert cold or hot 9. 
0 I know and obſerve thy Behaviour, thy Miniſterial Fun&tion. 
þ Thou art neither openly profane, and groſly ſcandalous, like Hea- 
thens, or ſuch as make no Profeſſion ; nor yet haſt thou any true 
Zeal or VVarmth, either for the Faith once delivered to the Saints, 
or in Love to God, ſeen in keeping his Commandments, "_— the 
ower 


* Ch.2.7. 


of the Lao- || In Las- 
dicea, 
*+ 


Ch.1.5. 
x Col. 1. 


I 5» 


RIP 


2 


Power and Emicacy of Godlinefs, teaching thee to deny all Lingodli- 
n{!: and Woridly Luſts, Tf. 2.12. Thou haſt a form of Godli- 
nels, but denieft the Life and Power thereof, q We muſt not 
think Chrift witheth any Perſons could abſolutely, but comparitively, 
ntmatng to us, that the condition of a downright Atheiſt, ar 
projane Perſon, 1s more hopeful, than that of a cloſe formal Hypo- 
Crite, Fhelatter is in the Road to Hell as well as the other, and no 
more picateth God than the other. It is better not to have known 
tnc Truth, thin knowing it, to live contrary to it, Luke 12, 48. 

2 Pet. 2, 21. Commonly ſuch Men alſo are proud, and ſelf-con- 
celted, -havinz ſomething to ſtop the Mouth of their natural Con- 
{ctence, narder to be convinced of their evil State, Matth.21.32,33- 

20 Io then becauſe thou art luke warm, and nei- 
tner coll nor hot 7, I will ſpue thee out of my 
Mourni /. 

r Partly good, partly bad, having ſomething of Profeſſion, no- 
thing of the Life and Power of Religion, contenting thy ſetf, that 
thou art nota Few, nor a Pagan, not a ſuperſtitious idolatrous Per- 
fon, but .a Chriſtian, a Proteſtant, a Miniſter, or Member of the 
Ketormed Church, yet negle@ing thy Duty both as a Miniſter, and 
as 2 Chriſtian, living in a ſenſual Satisfa&tion of thy Luſts, / I will 
cait thee off, as Men vomit up luke-warm things. 

17 Becauſe thou ſayeſt, * I am rich 6, and increa- 
ſed with goods c, and have need of nothing d : and 
Knowelt not that thou art wretched, and miſerable, 
and poor, and blind, and naked e. 

b It was laid betore, that one reaſon why the condition of a 
Formaliſt is worſe than that of 'an Atheiſt, or more openly pro- 
tane Perſon, 1s, becauſe the former is ordinarily proud, and felt- 
conceired, and hath ſomething to ſtop the Mouth of his natural 
Conſcience witi, which the other wanteth. This is made good in 
tie inſtance of this /uke-warm Angel ; he faid he was rich in a [pt- 
ritual ſenſe, in his ſtate as .a Chriſtian, in ſpiritual Gifts and In- 
dowments. c And every day increafing and growing richer, d And 
needed nothing to make him happy and bleſſed. e In the mean time 
he was as miſerable as one could be. Theſe words uſed, are ſeve- 
ral words fignitying Perſons under various bodily affliftions, and ap- 
plied to fignitie this Angel's forlorn ſpiritualState, which in the ge- 
neral, was wretched and miſerable, and ſuch as had need of Mercy, 
wanting the true Rightcouſneſs, wherein any {could appear betore 
God not naked, and wanting all true Riches ; and to compleat his 
Miſery, he was ſpiritually blind, and knew not the ſad circumſtan- 
ces he was under. 

18 I connſel thee to buy of me f gold tried in the 
— fire, that thou mayeſt be rich, and * white raiment, 
: > Ln thar thou mayelſt be clothed.and 7har the ſhame of thy 
15.&19, 8, Nakedneſs do not appear, and anoint thine eyes with 

eye-ſalve, that thou mayelt {ce g. 

F Buying being the uſual way amongſt Men to procure what they 
want, it is not to be wondred at, that the procuring of that ſpiritual 
Bleſſing here mentioned, is expreſſed under this Notion ; though 
our buying of God ſpiritual good things, be (as the Prophet exprel- 
ſeth it, Iſa. 55-1.) without Money, and without Price. It 15 not to be 
doubted, but- that which is here propounded to be bought, (that is, 
obtained, and procured by ſuch ways and means as God hath di- 
re&ed) is Chriſt himſelf, with all his Benefits, in whom there is a 
ſufficient ſpiritual Supply for all our ſpiritual Wants, that which to 
the Soul will anſwer whatever Gold ſerveth the Body for ; and 
which to the Soul anſwereth what clothing is to the Body, viz, 
Righteouſneſs, wherein a Soul may ſtand before God ; and that 
which will anſwer what Slaves are to the Body for the cure of its 
Wounds, viz. Conſolation, and healing of all ſpiritual Wounds and 
Infirmities. In ſhort, whatever thou haſt need of, conſidered ei- 

| ther as poor, wretched, and miſcrable, or as blind, and aaked. 
* Prov. 3, 19 * AS many as I love, I rebuke and chaſten þ : 


11,12. he zealous therefore and repent 7z, | 
Jam.1.12. þ rxiyyo % rude, the words may be tranſlated, I convince and 
inſtru&, or deal with them as Children ; but it alſo ſignifies to cha- 
ſeen, and iis ſo tranſlated, 1 Cor. 11. 32. Heb. 12. 7. we tranſlate it 
learn, 1 Tim. 1. 20. By theſe words Chriſt lets this Arge! know, 
that a!though he had in this Epiſtle dealt ſmartly with him, yet he 
had done it froma Principle of Loye, asa Father to a Child, Zeb.12, 
7. i Headviſeth him therefore to quit himſelf of his Juke-warmneſs, 
and to recover a warmth, and zeal for God, repenting of his former 
coldneſs, and negligence in his Duty. 

20 Behold.I land at the door h,and knock z: if any 
* Cant.$.2. man hear my voice,and open the door &,* I will come 


Joh. 14-23: jn to him 7, and will ſup with him,and he with me 7. 
h There is a double Interpretation of this Text, each of them 
claiming under very valuable Interpreters; ſome making it a Decla- 
ration of Chriſt's readineſs to come into Souls, and to give them a 
ſpiritual Fellowſhip and Communion with himſelf. Others interpret- 
ing it of Chriſt's readineſs to come to the laſt Judgment, and to 
take his Saints into an eternal joyful Fellowſhip and Communion 
with himſelf: Hence there is a different Interpretation of every 
Sentence in the Text, I ſtand at the Door ; either in my Goſpel- 
diſpenſations, I ſtand at the Door of Sinners Hearts, or, I am ready 
to come to Judze the World, 7 And knock by- the inward Mont- 
tions and Imprefſions of my Spirit, or my Miniſters more externally: 
Or, I am about to knock, that is, I am ready to have the laſt 
Trump ſounded. & That is, If any Man will hearken to the Coun- 
ſels, and Exhortations of my Miniſters, and to the Momitions of my 
Spirit, and not reſiſt my Holy Spirit: Or, If any Man hath heard 
my Voice, and opened his Heart to me, / 1 will come 1n by my Spt- 
rit, and all the ſaving-influences of my Grace: Or, I will come to 
him as a Judge to acquithim. m And I will have Communion with 
him in this Life, he ſhall eat my Fleſh and drink my Blood : Or, I 
will have an eternal Fellowſhip and Communion with him 1n my 
Glory. The Phraſe ſeems rather to favour the firſt ſenſe, the ſo fre- 
quent mention before of Chriſt's coming to Judgment, and the Re- 


Y;Cor.4.8. 


REVELATION 


Chap. IV. 


; ward of another Life, as Arguments to perſade the Anzel!s of the 


Churches to their Duty, favours the latter Senle. 


a 21 To him that overcometh * will 1 grant to * Luke 22, 
it with me in my throne z, even as I ai{o overcame, 3*: 


and am fate.down with my Father in iis throne o. 220 
n I will give him great Honour, Diznity, 4:0 Fower ; he Gal 46 þ 
BS. | : » Digmty, ana Power; he [1:3il 5 25 
Judge the World in the Day of Judgment, 1 Cor. 6. 2. the Twelve * * 
Tribes of Iſrael, 31:tth. 19. 28, he ſhall be made Purraker of my 
Glory, Fohn 17. 22, 24. 6 But they muſt come to mv Tirooe, 2s 1 
came to it. I overcame the VVorld, Sin, Death, tc Devil, and 
then aſcended, and fate down with my Father in his T 'rone. So 
they that will fit down with me in my Throne of Glory, mutt 1215 
the ſame fight, and overcome, and then be crowned, littins with 
me 1n my Throne. : 
_ 22 He that hath ancar, let him hear what ths Spi- 
rit faith ro the Churches p. | ; 
þ VVe have had this in the concluſion of every Epiſtle before, vid. 
Chap. 2. 7,11, 17, 29. and in this Chapter, wer.6,-13. 
Thoſe who make theſe Churches typical of all Chriftian Churches, 
from the time John had this Revelation, and prophetical of the Com- 
plex1on of the Chriſtian Churches in all Ages, fay, That the Church 
of . Laodicea typifieth the Churches towards the' end of the VVorld 
till Chriſt cometh; but this neceſſitateth them to think there ſhall 
be no ſuch pure, and glorious ſtate of the Church, juſt before the 
end of the VVorld, as many believe there ſhall be, but that the ſtate 
thereof ſhall grow yet worſe and worſe, of a Lardicean temyer ; 
ſo as when Chriſt cometh, he ſhall hardly find Faith on the 
Earth, 
For my part, I could allow the ſeven Epiſtles to be t1picz! ind 
Prophetical, but can by no means judge them to be purcly Propheti- 
cal, believing there was ſuch Churches when 7ohn virote © and that 
their Complexion is in the firſt place deſcribed in theſe Epiſties, 
though poffibly, as Face anſwers Face in a Glais, fo ſucceeding 
Churches have anſwered, and ſhall anſwer the Face of theſe Churches, 
even to the laſt day. 
This Chapter concludes John's firſt Viſion, In the following 
Chapters we have a Repreſentation in Vifions of what 115 to hap- 
pen 1n the World more remarkably, with reterence to tie Church 
of God, from the year 95, to the end of the World. 
There are very different Opinions about the Fpocha, or the time 
when the Viſions began to be fulfilled. My Opinion is, it began 


ſoon after John had the Viſion, for it is twice ſaid, Chap. I. 1. and 


22.6, That theViſi5ms were to be about things that ſhall come t9 
paſs, (not that were come to paſs) and that ſhortly ; but we 
cannot fix the certain year, which maketh the Interpretation 
difficult. 

_ Thereare alſo divers Opinions how far in this Book the Revela- 
trons go, that concern the ſtate of the Church under Rome-Pagan, 
and where they begin, that foretel the ſtate of the Church under 
Antichriſt, But of theſe we ſhall ſpeak more particularly as we go 
along with the ſeveral Chapters. 


. GCHAF. IV 


A Revelation of what ſhall be hereafter, rt. A Throne in Hegven, 


with the Glory of God ſitting on it, 2, 3. Round about it, 24, El- 
ders, with Thundrings and Lightnings, 4, 5. Before it a Sea of 
Glaſs. Ih the midſt, and round about it four living Creatures, 6, 
with many Eyes and Wings, 8. Rendring Praiſe and Glory to Gol, 
Y=—IT | 


Fter this a I looked b, and behold, a door was 
k. opened c in heaven d - * and the fr{t yoice » (15; 
which I heard, waz, as it were, of a trumpet talking 19. © 
with me e ; which ſaid, Come up hither f, and I will 
ſhew thee things which muſt be hereafter g. 
; & After I had the firſt Viſion mentioned, chap. 1. and h:d writ- 
ten, what it was the Pleaſure of God I ſhould write to the Churches, 
19 a Book, perceiving the way God deſigned to reveal himſelf to 
me, was by Viſion : þ I looked again, hoping, and being delirous 
to ſee ſomething further, as to the Mind of God. c I ſaw the Hea- 
vens opened, as Matth. 3. 16. 4s 7. 56. d He, doubtleſs, mean- 
eth the third Heavens. Such a Viſion, as to this particular, 70/n had 
at Chriſt's Baptiſm, Matth. 3. and Stephen when he was ſtoned. 
e He alſoheard the Voice of one ſpeaking aloud to him, like the 
Voice he heard, ch. 1. 10. f Which ſaid, Come up hither into Hea- 
ven, the new Hieruſalem which is above; as the old Hieruſalem 
ſtood upon an Hill, or riſing, Ground, ſo as they who went thither, 
are conſtantly ſaid to go up, Ifa. 2. 3. 4&s 11. 2. Gal. 1.17,18. and 
2.1. g Not which have been, (for to what purpoſe had that been ?) 
but which ſhall happen hereafter both to my Church, and to her Ene- 
mies : from which appears, that God did not here ſhew his Prophet 
the DeſtruRion of AHteru/alem, (for that was already paſt in the time 
of -7itus Veſpaſian the Roman Emperour, about the Year 69, or 70, 
after the Incarnation) this (as all confeſs) was in Domitian's time, 
about the 11th or 12th Year of his Reign, about 25 or 27 Years 
after that was paſt, which makes the Notion of two late Annota- 
tors very ſtrange. | > 
2 And immediately I was in the ſpirit h, f and + #-« 5, 
behold, a throne was ſet in the heaven,and oze fate on 25.519. 
the throne 7. | 
h-In an Extafie, as Paul, 2 Cor.'12. 2. and Peter, Aﬀs 10. 10, 
and Ezeb. chap, 3. 12. and himſelf was both before and after this, 
chap. 1. 10. and 17. 3. and 21.10, j God ts conſtantly deſcribed 1n 
the Prophetical Viſions, as ſitting upon a Throne, to denote his Power 
and Dominion, that he is the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. Sex 
Dan. 7. 9, &c. | 
3 And he that ſite, was, to 160k upon, like a jaiper 
and ſardine ſtone &; and there way 4 riinbow round 
4bour the throne, in ſight like unto an emerauld 7. 
b Tis 


ET It. + —£ —*. ne poem 


np ” 
PREY” Sd. +. th ot. oo etc —_—_ 4 


Chap. IV, 


* Ch.5.18. 


+ Ch. 1. 4. - 
& 5. 6. 


REVEL 


& This is all but a Deſcription of the Glory of God, as he appear- 
ed to 7ohn in this Vitzon ; the 7alper-ſlone is famous for its/Tranſpa- 
rency, and variety” of colours it offereth to the Eye, and may figni- 
fie the various, and infinite PerteQions of God. The Sardine-ſtone 
is red, and of a bloody colour, which may fignife the Power, Ju- 
iiice, and Terror of God, ! The Rainbow was the Sign of God's 
Covenant with Noah, ftgnifying his being ſo far reconciled to the 
World, as that he would not again deſtroy it by V Vater, Gen. 9. 13- 
The Emerauld is green, and pleaſant to the Eye, fo as this Viſion of 
G:a repreſents God powerful, juſt, and good, and of various and 
jaanite PerteR&ions, 

4 And round about the throne were four and twen- 
ty {eats : and upon the ſeats I ſaw four and twenty el- 
ders fitting m7, clothed in white raiment z ; and they 
had on their heads crowns of Gold 0. 

m Some think (and not improbably) that here is an Allufion to 
the twenty tour Courſes of the Priefl and Levites, eſtabliſhed by 
God for his Service in the Sanuary and Temple of old, 1 Chron, 
24. 18. chap.25.31. and that theſe twenty four Elders either typifi- 
ed the whole Church under the New Teſtament, the Number of the 
Tribes of Iſrael, (which made up the Church under the Old Tefta- 
ment) being doubled, to ſhew the Increaſe of the Churches Terr1- 
forics under the Goſpel, or the Heads of the Ghurch, either under 
t:e Old Teſtament, or New (there being twelve Patriarchs, and 
tivelve Apoſtles.) They are repreſented ſitting, to denote their 
{tate of Reſt and Eaſe. n And clotiied in white Raiment, to denote 
their Purity and Holineſs; or being clothed with Chriſt's Righteouſ- 
neſs. o And having Crowns of Gold on their Heads, to denote that 
{tate or dignity of Glory to which God had advanced them. 


5 And out of the throne - proceeded * lightnings, 
and thunderings, and voices p. And zhere were ſeven 
lamps of fire burning before the throne 9, which are 
the ſeven Spirits of God 7. 

þ Theſe words denote a very glorious, and terrible Appearance 


of God, ſignifying his Majeſty, and Power over his Enemies. There 
is, poſſibly, an Allufion to God's Appeararce at the giving of the 


Law, Exod. 19.16. only we read there but of one Voice, and that of | 


a Trumpet inarticulate. q The Lamps of Fire before the Throne, 
have a correſpondence with the ſeven Lamps of the Tabernacle,which 
gave Light to the whole Houſe of God, Exod. 27. 20. and are here cx- 
pounded to de, r the ſeven Spirits of God, that is,the Holy Spirit in his 
ſeven fold (that is, manifold ) Diſpenſations of Grace, 1 Cor. r2.4,5. by 
which he enlighteneth, quickneth, healeth, and comforteth the ſeve- 
ral Souls that are the true Members @f his Church. See the Notes on 


chap. 1. 4. 
*Ch.15-22 56 And before the throne / zhere was * a ſea of glaſs 


like unto chryſtal z, and in the midſt of the throne, 
and round about the throne, were four beaſts full of 


eyes, befote and behind z. | 
{ The Throne mentioned before, vey. 2, 3. upen which one fate, 
&c. t Another Alluſion to the Tabernacle or Temple, in which 
was a Sea, that is, a large Veſlel full of VVater; it was for Aaron and 
his Sons to waſh their Hands, and Feet, and Sacrifices in, Exod. 30. 
19. 1 Kings 7. 23. it was 1o Cubits broad, $5 Cubits high, and 30 
Cubits about. Here it is ſaid to have been of Glaſs, this, probably, 
fignified the Blood of Chriſt, in which all thoſe Souls and Services 
muſt be waſhed, which are accepted of, and acceptable unto God. 
Its being fepreſented here, as of Glaſs, may _ the Purity, and 
Spotleſneſs of him, whoſe Blood it was. Other gueſſes there are 
many at the ſignificancy of this Sea of Glaſs,but this ſeems to be moſt 
probable, becauſe the uſe of the Sea in the Temple is made good in 
Chriſt. « Fohn in this Viſion alſo ſaw four Beaſts, which Beaſts are 
ſaid, 1. To be in the midſt of, and round about the Throne. 2. To 
be full of Eyes, before and behinds 3. They are, ver. 7. faid to 
have reſembled a Lion, a Calf, a Mann the PA 
wer. 8. each of them had fix Wings, arid they were full of Eyes with- 
in, and inceflantly glorified God. Que. VVhom did theſe Beaſts 
ſignifie? Sol. There are various Notions about them. Some judge 
them the tour Evangelifts ; (but John himſelf was one of theſe, and 
yet alive); ſome will have them four Apoſtles that were moſtly at 
Hieruſa/em ;, {but I ſee no ground for that) ; ſome will have them 
Angels ;, others glorified Saints, (but we ſhall afterwards find them 
diſtinguiſhed from both theſe) : others will have them the whole 
Church. But the-moſt probable Senſe is, that they repreſented the 
Miniſters of the Church, who are living Creatures, whoſe place is be- 
twixt God and his Church, as thoſe Beaſts are placed betwixt the 
Throne and the Elders; and who are but four to the twenty four 
Elders, being but tew in compariſon with the multitude of Believers, 
and yet have Eyes on all fides, being enough to ſee to the Afﬀairs 
of the whole Church of Chriſt on the Earth. In this Senſe I reſt, 
only here remains a Queſtion : Naeſf. How theſe are ſaid to be in 
the midſt of the Throne, and yet round about the Throne 2 To which va- 
rious Anſwers are given ; that which pleaſeth me beft, is & win, in 
the middle, is not to be ſtrained to ſipnifie a place at equal diſtance 
from two Extreams, but more largely and proverbially for near the 
Throne, or near him who ſate upon the Throne. See the ſeveral No- 
tions about this Phraſe in Mr. Pool's Latin Synopſes. 


7 And the firſt beaſt was like a lion, and the ſecond 
beaſt like a calf, and the third beaſt had a face as a 


man, and the fourth beaſt was like a flying eagle wv. 
w It is obſerved concerning theſe four living Creatures, (tor ſo 
they were not Beaſts in a ſtri& Senſe, as it 1s oppoſed to flying 
things ; for the fourth was a Fowl) that - they were the ſame men- 
tioned in EzekiePs Viſion, Ezek. 1. 10. only each one there is ſaid 
to have had the four Faces of theſe Creatures; here each one had a 


_ fngle Face proper to it. 2. That theſe were the four Creatures/ 


whoſe Pourtraitures were in the four Enſigns of the Taelites as they 
were marſhalled into four Companies, allotting the Men of three 
Tribes to each Company. 7udah's Standard had a Lion in its Co- 
lours, according to Facob's Prophecy of that Tribe, Gen. 49. 9. E- 
phraim had an Ox, Reuben-had a Man, Dan an Eagle. This the 


ce, and a Flying Eagle, |. 


ATTON, 


Learned Mede proves from the Rabbins, who (though Fabulous 
enough) yet in ſuch a thing may be credited. It is alſo thought rkey 
anſwered the four Cherub;ims in the Temple. Queſt. But what is 
ſignified by theſe four living Creatures thus deſcribed ? Sol, Some ſay 
the four Evangeliſts ; others, four Apoſtles, &c." But certainly they 
judge beſt who ſay, That by them is fignificd the various Gitts with 
which God blefſeth his Miniſters, giving ſome more Courage and 
Fortitude, that they are like Lins; to others more Mildnefs and 
Meekneſs, that they are like Oxen or Calves; others have more 
Wiſdom and Prudence, which moſt adorn a Man ; others a more 
piercing infight into the Myſteries of God's Kingdom, rendring 
them like Eagles, s 

s And the four beaſts hal each of them ſix wings 
about him », and zhey were full of eyes within y, and 
T they reſt not day and night, ſaying, Holy, holy, 
holy, Lord God Almighty 2, || which was,and is,and 
IS tO COME 72. 

x The Seraphims 1n Tſaiah's Viſion, chap. 6. 2. had ſo; there their 
uſe is declared, ——with twain they covered their Faces, with twain 
their feet, and with twain they did fly, If we underſtand all the 
Wi1ngs here for flight, they fignifie the Readineſs of God's Mini- 
ſters to move every way that God will 11d them: if we underſtand 
them as interpreted by Taiah, 6. 2. they ſignifie their various Gra- 
ces, their Fear, Dre2d, and Reverence of God ; their Humility, and 
Modeſty, their Agility or Readineſs to obey all the Commands of 
God. y This denotes that large meaſure of Knowledge, and Dili- 
gence, and Watchfulneſs, which ſhould be in a Miniſter of Chriſt. 
z This was the Song of the Seraphims, Iſa. 6. 3. and ſhews how 
much it ſhould be the care of Miniſters to make God known in all his 
Attributes, his Holineſs eſpecially, and his Power. a And his Eter- 
nity and Simplicity, as he is the ſame yeſterday, to day, and for 
ever, without variableneſs, or ſhadow of change. 


9 And when thoſe beaſts b give glory, and honour, 
and thanks to him that fate on the throne, who liverh 
for ever and ever c. 

b The living Creatures before expreſſed, ſignifying the Miniſters 
of the Geſpel. c When they praiſe God who is Eternal. 

10 The four and twenty elders fall down before 
him that fare on the throne, and worſhip him that 
liveth for ever and ever d, and caſt their crowns be- 
fore the throne, ſaying e, 

d The whole Church alſo paid an Homage of Reverence and Ado- 
ration to the ſame God. . e Acknowledging all the Good done to 
them, or wrought in them, to proceed from God, and the Glory of 
it to be duc unto God alone. The Miniſters of the Goſpel are, by 
their preaching unto People their Duty, an Occaſion, or Inſtruments 
of that Homage and Adoration, which he hath from all his People. 

11 Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory, 
and honour, and power f : for thou haſt created all 


things g, and for thy pleaſure they are and were ctea- 
ted þ. | : 

f All the Praiſes, Homages, and Acknowledgments of. all the 
Creatures is thy due. g As thou art he who gaveſt the firſt Being 
to all Creatures. h And therefore gaveſt it them, that they might 
praiſe, honour, ſerve, and obey thee. 


CHAP. V. 


A Book, written within and ſealed with ſeven Seals in the right hand of 
him that ſate on the Throne, x. No Creature able to open the Book, 
or look on it, 2, 3» The Lion of the Tribe of Judah prevails to open 
it, 5. Inthe midft of the Throne, of the 24 Elders, and of the four 
living Creatures, ſtood a Lamb, 6. and took the Book, 7, The 24 El-- 
ders, and four living Creatures, fall down before the Lamb, and fing 
a new Song, praiſing him for being worthy, and confeſs he had redeem- 
ed them with hjs Blood, $==—lo, The angels alſo praiſe him, 
I Ione I 2, 


The ſame Viſion yet proceedeth. Hitherto John had only 
ſeen a Throne, with a Perſon ſitting upon it in a very 
glorious Habit and Appearance, 24 grave Perſons,and 
4 living Creatures in the ſhape of a Lion,a Cali,o Man, 


Eyes. about the Throne ; and heard the 4 Irving Crea- 
tures conſtantly giving glory to God,and the 24 Elders 
harmonizing with them, and joyning likewiſe in the 


high Praiſes of God. Now the Vifion proceedeth. _ 
A NDI faw in the right hand of him that fate on 


back-fide b, ſealed with ſeven ſeals c. EO 

4 The Diſputes what this Book was, are very idle ; for it was 
certainly the Book of which we read hereafter, that it was opened, 
and to which the ſeven Seals mentioned in the following Chapters 
were annexed, of the opening of all which we read ; and this could 
be no other than Codex fatidicus (as Mr. Mede calls it) the Book of 
the Counſels, Decrees, and Purpoſes of God relating to his Church, 
as to what more remarkable things ſhould happen to it to the end 
of the World; which Book was ia the Hand of the Father. 5 Very 
full of Matter, ſo as it was written on all ſides. c But hitherto 
concealed from the Werld, and to be revealed by parts, as to the 
bringing to paſs of thoſe things decreed in it, though all at once by 
God, here revealed in a degree, by Viſions unto John. 


2 AndI faw a ſtrong angel d proclaiming with a 
loud voice e, Who is worthy to open the book; and to 
looſe the ſeals thereof f? | 


4 There 


Chap. V. 


TGr.t hey 
have no 
reſt. 


| Ch. 1. 4. 


and an Eagle, each of them with fix Wings, and full of. 


*X 


the throne, * a book a written within,and on the + x; 2.10. 


I, 


Cnap. V. 


* VCT. 13s 


* T{2. 11.1. 
10. 
ch.22,16. 


YZech. 3.9. 


& 4+ 10. 


. > There were no weak Angeis, but poſſibly this Angel mi;ht, 
1n appearance to 795m, look as if he were ſtronger than otiiers ; or 
rather 1o judged e from tne great, and loud Voice he uſed. f Not 
that he thought any was able, or worthy: We can only conclude 
from hence the Impotency of Man to ſearch, and find out, and ex- 
pound the deep Things of God, and conſequently the Unlawfulneſs 
of too narrow a prying into his ſecret Myſteries. 

3 And no man * in heaven g, or in earth h, neither 

under the earth 7, was able ro open the book, nei- 
ther to look thereon k. 
_ 8 Noneof the Angels in Heaven, h nor any Man upon the Earth, 
7 nor any of them whoſe Bodies are under the Earth,and their Souls 
in Heaven, nor any Infernal Spirits. k None was found ſufficient to 
open the Book, and to lock on it. There was none who replied to 
the Angel's Queſtion, ver. 2. 

4 And I wept much, becauſe no man was found 
worthy to open, and to read the book, neither to 


look thereon /. En 

I As it is the nature of Man todefire to know ſecret and hidden 
things, eſpecially ſuchas we apprehend of concernment to our ſelves, 
or thoſe whom we love, or are intereſted in; and to be troubled, it 
we know they may be known,and are at a loſs for a due mean where- 
by to come to the knowledge of them. 


5 And one of theeldeis faith unto me, Weep not 
mM : * Behold, the lion of the tribe of Judah, the 
root of David x, hath prevailed o to open the book, 


and to looſe the ſeven ſeals thereof. 

m We muſt remember that John is here deſcribing a Viſzm, and 
that part of it which is but introduttive to the matertal parts of 1t. 
He had in his Viſion ſeen a Book in the right Hand of God the Fa- 
ther, titting upon his Throne of Glory ; he had heard an Angel pro- 
claiming, If any were worthy, he ſhould open the Book, and looſe 
the Seals. None appeared to anſwer that Voice, he was troubled ; 
he thought he heard one ſaying to him, Be not troubled, the Book 
ſhall be opened. n Chriſt ſhall open the Book, and loole the Seals 
of it, who is here expreſſed under a double Charatter; 1. The Lion 
of the Tribe of Fudah, he is ſo called, undoubtedly, with Allufion to 
Facob's Prophecy, Gen. 49. 9, 10, wherein Judah was compared to 
a Lion's Whelp, becauſe he ſhould be vitorious. Chriſt was to be 
born of this Tribe, and was to be a great Conquerour. 2. He 1s 
called the Root of David ; he was a Branch of David, as he was Man, 
but the Root of David, as he was God ; therefore David, Pſal. 110.1, 
c2lled him Lord, though he was his Son. o Hath prevailed with his 
Father p for leave to open the Book, and looſe the Seals thereof, 
7. e. to reveal thoſe things that are the Counſels,and Purpoſes of God 
relating to his Church, and the Afﬀeairs thereof to the Worlds end. 
I do not think we are at all concerned to enquire who is here meant 
by the one of the twenty four Elders. As 1n Parables there are ſome 
things put in meerly to compleat the feigned Hiſtory ; ſo in the 
Relation of Viſions ſome things of that Nature are put in, which 
need not a particular Explication. - The Sum 1s, That while 7ohn 
was troubled for fear he ſhould not know what was in the Book, he 
was told by one of thoſe who attended the Throne, That he need not 
be troubled, for Chriſt had obtained a Liberty from his Father (in 
whoſe Power only Times and Seaſons for future things were) to reveal 
theſe Counſels of God as to things to come. 


6 And 1 beheld g, and lo, in the midſt of the 
throne, and of the four beaſts, and of the elders, ſtood 
2 Lamb 7 as it had been ſlain /; having ſeven horns z, 
and * ſeven eyes, which are the ſeven Spirits of God , 


ſent forth into all the earrh . | 

q Hearing the mention of a Lion of the Tribe of Zudah, he looks 
about wiſtly to ſee if he could ſee any juſtifying that Repreſentation. 
7 Inſtead of a Lion he ſeeth a Lamb. Chriſt Jeſus called a Lamb 
by this Apoſtle, John 1. 29, 36. and very often 1n this Book, a Lamb, 
for Whiteneſs and Innocency, 1 Pet. x. 19. for Meekneſs and Pati- 
ence, Aﬀs 8.32. but here with reference to the Paſchal Lamb, 
f For he appears wounded and pierced, as if it had been ſlain ; and 
to ſhew that he was equal with the Father, he appears in the midſt 
of the Throne, and in the midſt of the Elders, and of the four 
living Creatures, to ſhew his Preſence with his Churchand Miniſters, 
Matth. 28. 20, and his walking (as was ſaid chap. 2.) in the midſt 
of his Churches, which were the Golden Candleſticks there menti- 
oned. t He appeareth now with ſeven Horns, which are Members 
in which the Beaſts Strength, Power, and Beauty 15 much ſeen, to 
denote his Glory, and Beauty, and the Power he had now received, 
to offend, and conquer all his Enemies, # And with ſeven Eyes 
which we;e the ſeven Spirits of God, mentioned chap. I. 4. and 4. 5. 
endued with the Spirit of God, (which is alſo called his Spirit) not 
given to him by meaſure. w Which Spiritual Gitts and Perfe&ions 
he exerciſeth over all the Earth, both with Relation to his Church, 


and to his Churches Enemies. 
7 And hecame and took the book x out of the right 
hand of him that fate upon the throne y. 


x This Lamb with ſeven Horns and ſeven Eyes having been lain, . 


and having prevailed with his Father to open this Book, mentioned 
wer. 1. of all the Secrets, Counſels, and Purpoſes of God relating to 
his Church, he came and took ft of his Father, y in whoſe right 
hand it was, as ver. 1. * From hence to the end of his Chapter, 
© ire nothing but Songs ſang by the living Creatures which Zohn 


« ſaw, and the twenty four Elders which he ſaw, and an innume-- 


© rable Company of Angels, to the Honour and Glory ot Jeſus 
« Chriſt, as the Redeemer of Man, and the Head of the Church, 
« ypon this taking of the Book from the right hand of his Fa- 


© ther. 
$ And when he had taken the book >, the four 
beaſts. a, and tour x4 twenty elders b tell down be- 


* Ch.14.2. {ore the Lamb, having every one of them * harps d, 


R EVEL ATION. 


and golden vials full of || ofors f, which are the prov. 
crS Of the Saints e. : 

{ When the Lamb that had been ſlain had obtained of him that 
fat on the Throne to open the Book of God's ſecret Counſels relz- 
ting to his Church, mentioned ver. r. and had taken it out of [:i: 
right hand, Fohn ſaw a the four living Creatures mentioned char. + 
6, 7, 8. by which ſeemed to be repreſented the Miniſters of tite 
Goſpel, or the whole Church of Chriſt ; and the b four ond twenty 
Elders had that on their Heads Crowns of Gold, mentioned CHAD. 4. 
ter, 4. by which, we faid, were repreſented either the Mini%%rs 
of the Church, or the whole Church. &d He alludeth to the Wor- 
ſhip of God under the Old Teſtament, where in the Temple they 
were wont to praiſe God with Inſtruments of Mufick, an. cfferin- 
up of F Frankincenſe : See 1 Chron. 13. & and 15,16, 2 Chron. _ 
12, Nehem. 12. 27. Pſal. 33. 2. and 141. 2. and 159. 3. e Thel? 
Viols of Odours, he tells us, ſignified the Prayers of the Saints. 
The whole Verſe ſignifizs the Prayers and Praiſes, even all tha: 
Adoration which God, under the Goſpel, ſhould have from is M:- 
niſters and People, for conſtituting his Son the Head of his Church, 
and making him their Prophet, Prieſt, and King, 

9 And * they lung a new ſong f, ſaving, + Thou 
art worthy to take the book, and to open the { 


4 
WE. 


the Old Teſtament, could not bleſs God for the actual Redemprion 
of Man, by the Blood of Chriſt, but only rejoyce in hope, imra- 
cing the Promiſes ſeen afar off by the Eye of vaith. g They ac- 
knowledge Chriſt worthy to be intruſted with his Church, and the 
Revelations of the Counſels of God, with relation to it, to oper 
them. þ_ Becauſe he had redeemed his Church, tfcattered over 41! 
the World, from Sin, Death, and Hell, unto God, to terve kim, 4nd 
to live for ever with him, and that with no leficr Price, than his own 
Blood ; Wherefore (as the Apoſtle tells us, Phil. 2. 9.) God had hg.!» 
exalted him. | 
10 * And haſt made us unto our God, Kings an + 1. 

prieſts 7 : and we ſhall reign on the earth #. 

7 The four living Creatures, and four and twenty El lers (by 
which are repreſented the Miniſters and Membcrs of the Churci ot 
Chriſt) go on 1n ſhewing why they had reaſon to proclaim Chr f(t 
worthy to be the Prophet to his Church, to open the Countc's ot 
God to them, viz. becauſe of the great love he had ſhewed to 
them, not only in redeeming them with his Blood from the Guilt 
and Power of Sin, but in making them Kings and Prieſts, giving 
them the ſame Priviledges that the Jewiſh Church had, who were 


called a Royal Prieſthood, Exod. 19. 6. grving them a Power (as 


Prieſts) to offer up (not ſuch blo94y fleſhly Sacrifices as they offered, 
but) ſpiritual Sacrifices, acceptable to God through the Beloved, 
1 Pet. 2.5, 9. and alſo Kings to rule over their Lufts, and ſenſ1- 
tive Appetite ; k and to reign hereafter on the Earth, judeing 
the World, 1 Cor. 6. 3. at the great Day, with the grext Fudge of 
the quick and the dead, 

11 And [I beheld 7, and I heard the voice of ma- 


ny angels round about the throne, and the beaſts, 


and the elders 7, and the number of them vas **ren * Heb. 12. 


thouſand times ten thouſand, and thouſands of thou 22 
ſands 7 ; 

/ I ſill attended diligently, m and I heard many Anzels, with 
the /:ving Creatures, and the Elders, (from whence we gather, that 
we mult not, by the living Creatures, or Elders, underſtand Ange's, 
for tney are mentioned apart by themſelves, neither could they ſay 
as v. 9, 10. that Chriſt had redeemed them with his Blood) theſe An- 
gels joyned in this Harmony with the Church to give glory to 
Chriſt. n Their number was infinite, not to be numbred. See the 
like, Dan. 7. 10. 


12 Saying with a loud voice, * Worthy is the 
Lamb that was {lain o, to receive power, and riches p, 
and wiſdom q, and ſtrength, and honour, and glory, 
and blefting 7. | 


o The Lamb mentioned ver. 6. with ſeven Horns, and ſeven Fres, 
viz. Jeſus Chriſt, p He is worthy of thoſe Horns he weareth, Em- 
blems of Power, and Strength given unto him ; for all Power was 
given him in Heaven and Earth. And q of thoſe ſeven Eyes he 
hath, 7. e. .of the Spiritiof Wiſdom, T/z. 11. 2. the Riches of Grace 
and Wiſdom, and r of all the Homage, Glory, Praiſe, Bleiſins, 
and Obedience, which People can give him. I know not whether * 
there be any thing in the Obſervation made by ſome, that the nuwm- 
ber of things here mentioned, of which the Lamb is worthy, «n- 
ſwereth the number of the ſeven Spirits of God, before-men- 
tioned. 


13 And * every creature which is in heaven, and + yer ;, 


on the earth, and under the earth, and ſuch as are in 


the ſea, and all that are in them heard I ſaying, T Bl-l- + 1 C:ron, 
ſing, and honour, and glory, and power be unto him 25+ 1+: 


that ſitreth on the throne, and unto the Lamb tor ever 


and ever. | 
14 And the four beaſts ſaid, Amen. And the four 


and twenty elders fell down and worſhipped him thar 
liverth for ever and ever /. 

{ The meaning of. the ſeveral Phraſes here uſed, 1s not fo te 
ſtrialy and particularly examined ; the ſenſe of th-m all in general. 
is to ſhew the conſent of -all the Angels and glorified Saints, and of 
the whole Church, in giving Praiſe unto God, and particul-r1y to 
the Lord Jeſus C!:riſt (the Lamb) for the work of Man's Redemptt 

on 5 


Chap. Y. 


| _ Ty Ch.q.1 i, 
thereof g : for thon waſt ſlain þ, and halt || redeemed LFLISS 
us to God by the blood 7, out of . every kindred, and Eph. 1. 5. 
tongue, and people, and nation # , Col. 1. 14- 
f By a new Song, 1s either to be underſtood an cxcellent S;ng, 1 Pct. 1. 
(tor new Songs are uſually moſt valued) cr (which picateth me 18, 1%. 
beſt) new, as to the matter of it ; for the Servants of God vnder 1 Jol.t.”. 


* Ch.4.1T. 


v| 


i 


——  ——— —— 4 — 


Chap. VI. 


on ; and their particular conſent, that Chriſt is to be worſhipped as 


| the Father; and the conſent and acquieſcence of the whole Crea- 


tion in the Counſel and Purpoſe of God, and in the Work of his 
Providence, conſtituting Chriſt as the King, Prieſt, and Prophet of 
his Church. And though inanimate Creatures, or ſenſitive Crea- 
tures cannot ſpeak, yet they are alſo faid to join in theſe Praiſes, as 
the glory of God ſhineth in them, and they, by him, ſhall be freed 
from that Vanity under which they groan, Rom. 8, 19, 20, 21. and 
enjoy ſomething of the Liberty of the Sons of God, and ſhall all 
be ſubje& and obedient unto Chriſt in their reſpe@ive Stations and 
Orders, Phil. 2. 9, 10. and fulfil his Will in the Execution of his 
Counſels, and Purpoſes in the Government of the World, in order 
to the Preſervation of his Church, 


CHA P.j VL 


The firſt Seal opened, and a White Horſe with a Conqueror on it, 1, 2. 
The ſecond opened, and one on a Red Horſe, taking away Peace 
from the Earth, 3, 4. On the opening of the Third, one appeareth 
on a Black Horſe with a Balance in his Hand, 5, 6. Death cometh 
forth on a pale Horſe to deſtroy, at the opening the fourth Seal, 
7, 8. The fifth Seal opened, the Souls under the Altar cry and 
are comforted, 5 ——11. On the opening the ſixth a great Earth- 
guake, and other terrifying Signs are obſerved, and all ſorts of Men 
cry to the Rocks, &c. to hide them jrom the Wrath of the Lamb, 
I 2—I7, 


We are now come to the Prophetical, and therefore the moſt difficult 
Part of this myſterious Book ; as to which I judge it reaſonable, 
before we come to open the myſterious Text (after Mr. Pool's me- 
thod in his Latin Sympſis) to premiſe ſome things, which may 
both inſtru& the Reader of theſe Notes, of the things wherein the 
Difficulties lyze, and of the faireſt way to find out the Senſe of 
them. Hitherto we have met with no great Difficulties; what 
hath been, hath been chiefly, 1. concerning the ſeven Spirits of 
God. 2. Concerning the ſeven Churches, and the Epiſtles to 
them ; whether the Churches be to be conſidered typically, and 
what was wrote in them, be to be underſtood in a Prophetich, as 
well as a Diada#ich, or a Corre#ive Senſe?* But 1n what follows 
we ſhall find great (if not ſome inextricable) Difficulties, To pre- 
pare a way for the Explication of which, 

I. I ſhall firſt take it for granted, that from this Chapter to the end 
of the Book, is revealed to the moſt remarkable things which 
have happened, or ſhall happen to the Church of God over all 
the Earth, from the time of this Revelation firſt made to Fohn, to 
the end of the World. | 

II. Hence it followeth, That many of the things Propheſied, are ful- 
filled ; but how many, is hard to determine, becauſe the time 1s 
not ſet when theſe Revelations ſhould take place ; whether (as 
ſome would have it) from the beginning of Chriſtianity, which, 
to me, ſeemeth nat probable ; becauſe at this time 95 Years were 
elapſed fince that time, and this Prophecy was concerning the 
things that were to be after the time of ohn's being 1n 
ch, 1,1. ch. 22. 6. Or from the beginning of the time when 
the Jewiſh Church and State ceaſed, which was 26, or 27 Years 
before this, or from the time when this Revelation was, which was 
An.95.0r thereabouts,in the time when Domitijan was the Roman Em- 
peror, and had began his Perſecution of the Chriſtians, which (as 
Hiſtorians tell us) was but 5 Years before he was ſlain (for he was 
ſlain in September 97.) And for thoſe that are fulfilled, the things 
ſpoken of are ſo applicable to various Accidents happening 1n that 
period of time, that it is very difficult oft-times to aſſert the Senſe 
of the Prophecy. | 

HI. I take it for grahted alſo, That things hapned in the ſame order, 
as is here deſcribed; ſo as the things under the ſecond Seal came 
not to paſs till thoſe prophefied of under the firſt Seal, were 1n a 

_ great meaſure accompliſhed, gFc. 

IV. I agree with thoſe who think, that what we have, chap. 12, 13, 
17, 18. are but a Prophecy of other things that happened to the 
Church at the ſame times ſpoken of, ch. 6, 7,8, 9, 10. 

V. I do believe the Viſions of the Seals, Trumpets, and Vtols, chap. 
6, 8, 15, 16. the principal Prophecies, and contain the Revelat- 
on of things in order as they were to happen, and of theſe, that 
of the Seals is the principal. | | 

VI. I agrce with thoſe who think that God, by the firſt ſ:x Seals, 
intends the whole ſpace from the time when the things wrote 1n 
this Book, began to be fulfilled, unto the time when Paganiſm was 
rooted out of the - Roman Empire, which ſome make the Year 
310,” ſome 325. In which time (counting the beginning from 
the time when John was in Patmos, which was in Domitian's time) 
the Emperors of Rome were Nerva, Trajan, Adrianus, Antonius 
Pius, Antonius Philoſophus, Antonius Venus, Commodus, Severns, 
Caracalla. Macrims, Heltogabalus, Alexander Severus, Maximi- 
my, Gordianss, Philippus, Decins, Valerianus, Gallienus, Claudiug, 
Aurelianus, Tacitus, Probus, Carus, Numertanus, Diocleſianus with 
Maximinianss, Conſtantins Chlorus, with Galerius, ConStantinus ; in 
all, Twenty ſeven, in about 200 Years. They were moſt of 
them Perſecutors, and God allowed them ſhort Reigns: So as 
what we have revealed in, and under the firſt fix Seals, happened 
all within the Space of the 3oo, or 325 firſt Years after Chriſt. 
Theſe things being premiſed, Ict us now come to conſider the 


Text. 


N D I ſaw when the Lamb opened one of the 
: ſeals 2, and I heard, as it were, the noiſe of 
thunder, one of the four beaſts ſaying b6, Come and 
lee c. 

a John's Viſion continueth ftill ; by the Lamb he means Chriſt, 
the Lamb oft mentioned, chap. 5. and by one of the Seals, one of 
the ſeven Seals mentioned chap. 5. 1. that were ſet upon the Book 
which 7chn taw in the Right-hand of God the Father, given to 
Chriſt, v. 7. Chriſt began to diſcover the Counſels of God, rela- 
ting to that firſt period of his Church. þ And Fohn heard one of 


the four living Creatures ſpeaking to him with a great and terrible | 


REVELATION. 


Voice like the noiſe of Thunder. c Inviting him to come near, or 
to attend and ſee. 


Chap. VI. 


2 And I ſaw, and behold, *a white horſe 4, and + Chap, 


he that ſat on him had a bow e, and a crown was gi- 
ven unto him f, and he went forth conquering, and 


to conquer g. 

a Some, by this white Horſe, underſtand the Goſpel, others, the 
Roman Empire. e And by him that fat thereon with a Bow, fome 
underſtand Chriſt going forth with Power to convert the Nations - 
others (and in my Opinion more probably) the Roman Emperors ar- 
med with Power. f And having the Imperial Crown, g carrying 
all before them. So as that which God intended by this to reveal 
to St. Fohn, was, That the Roman Emperors ſhould yet continue, 
and uſe their Power againſt his Church. Thoſe that underſtand by 
the white Horſe, the Goſpel, or God's Diſpenſations to his Church 
under the firſt period, and by the Rider Chriſt, (amongſt whom is 
our famous Mede) think, that hereby all the time is fignified from- 
Chriſt's Aſcenſion, which was in the 34th Year after his Incarna- 
tion, till the time that all the Apoſtles were dead ; that is, the firſt 
Ioo Years after Chriſt, for ſo long Hiſtories tell us Fohn lived. It 
was the Age then current, and ſo may make up part of the Viſion 
of things that were to come. The Hiſtory of all but forty of thoſe 
Years we have in the A&s, till Paul was carried Priſoner to Rome. 
In this Period ruled Auguſizes Ceſar, (in whoſe time Chriſt was born 
Luke 2. 1.) Tiberius Claudius, and Nero, Galba, Otho, F. Veſpaſianus 
Titus and Domitian, Nerva, and Trajan, 10, or 11 in all, The 
went on conquering, and to conquer the World. But till Nero's time, 
about the Year 66, they did not begin to perſecute the Chriſtians: 
nor did +, Rana and Titus much rage, nor Domitian, till he had 
reigned 8 Years; fo as I leave it indifferent to the Reader, whe- 
ther to underſtand by the white Horſe and its Rider, God's Diſpen- 


3 
3 


I9. IL, 


ſations of Providence to: his Church theſe firſt years, cauſing his 


Goſpel to prevail muth, and conquering many. to the Profeſſion of 
* - ug Roman Empire with thoſe that ruled it : what is ſaid is true 
(6) tn. 

3 And when he had opened the ſecond ſeal þ, I 


heard the ſecond beaſt 7 ſay, Come, and ſee. 


h The ſecond of thoſe two Seals, with which the Book mentien- 


ed, chap. 5. I. was ſealed. 7 The Beaſt like a Calf, chap. 4. 7. 


hþ Inviting John to attend. 

4 And there went out another horſe zhat waz red 7: 
and power was given to him that fat thereon, to take 
peace from the earth zz, and that they ſhould kill ons 
another x : and there was given unto him a greas 


{word 0. | 

I Signitying Blood and Slaughter. m Either to Chriſt, (as 
ſay) or, to thoſe that Ruled the Afﬀairs of the Roman © ome 
that time, to diſturb the Peace of the Church.” = This was a time 
of much Blood. o And therefore a Sword is given to him that rode 
upon this Horſe. Some think that this Period began with Nero, 34 


Years before the other ended (according to what was ſaid before 3) 


others make it to begin with Trajan, and to comprehend 80 Year 
until the time of Comodus, in which time Trajan and Hadrian, _ 
the three Antonius's, ſucceſfively ruled the Roman Empire; the Reign 
of Trajan and Hadrian took up near half the time, in which time 
this Prophecy was moſt eminently fulfilled ; for in Trajan's time the 
Jews rebelling, and killing many SubjeRs of the Roman Empire, to 
the number of 22000 in one place, and 240000-in another place 
themſelves were as miſerably handled by the Roman Forces ſent by 
Trajan and Hadrian, who ſlew of them, (as Hiſtories tell us) five. 
hundred and fourſcore thouſand : Nay, the Zews themſelves ſay 
they loſt double the number of thoſe who came out of Zzypt, an 
more than they loſt by Nebuchadnezzar, or by Titus, when theig 
City was taken ; on the other fide the Romans loſt very many. Many 
Chriſtians alſo were put to death during this period, during which 
was the third and fourth Perſecution. 


5 And when he had opened the third ſea}, I heard 
the third heaſt ſay, Come, and ſee p. And I beheld, 
and lo, a black horſe 9, and he that ſat on him had a 


pair of ballances in his hand 7. 

þ The third Beaſt was he who had the Face of a Man, who alſo 
inviteth 7ohn to come and ſee what came forth upon his opening 
the third Seal. q He ſeeth a Black Horſe, and a Rider upon him, 
with a pair of Ballances. There is a difference amongſt Interpre- 
ters what ſhould be ſignified by this Black Horſe ; ſome by it under- 
ſtand Famine, becauſea ſcarcity of Vicuals bringeth Men to a black 
and ſwarthy colour ; ſome underſtand by it Fuſtice, becauſe the Ri- 
der is ſaid to have a pair of Ballances in his Hand ; others underſtand 
by it Hereſies and great Sufferings of the Church by Hereticks and 0- 
thers. r Either to give Men their Bread by weight (as is uſual in 
times of great ſcarcity; ) or to meaſure out every one their 
due. | 

6 And TI heard a voice in the midſt of the four 


beaſts ſay, || A meaſure of wheat for a penny, and 


- 


| The word 


three meaſures of barley for a penny /, And * ſee thou Choenix 


hurt not the oil and the wine 7. 


fignifieth 4 


/ Interpreters are at ſo great a loſs, here to fix the Senſe, that meaſure 


ſome of them think this Phraſe ſignifies Famine and Scarcity : 
Others think it ſignifies great plenty. The Greek, word here uſed, 


containing 
one Wine 


ſignifieth (ſay ſome) half a Buſhel ; others ſay it fignifieth ſo much Quart, and 
Bread-Corn as is ſufficient for four Loaves ; others ſay ſomething ##e ? welfth 
more than a Quart ; others, ſo much as was allowed Servants for part of a 

maintenance for a Day : let it be which it will, is ſignifies no great Quart. 


Scarcity ; for the word ſignifying a Penny,fignificd but as much in our 
Money as came to Seven-pence-half-penny.I think therefore Mr.Mede 
judgeth well, that by the Jack Horſe was ſignified not a time of 
Famine and Scarcity, but of Plenty ; # and the rather, becauſe 1t 
is added, Hurt not the Oyl and the (ine. And that the Ballances in 
the Riders Hands, ſignified not Scales to give Men their Bread by 


| weight (as ina time of Scarcity) but the Ballance of Juſtice; nor 


wt 


F Ch. Oe 4: 


Chap. VI. 


will the colour of the Horſe conclude the contraty. The whole ; 


|| Or, him. 


* Chap. 

8. 3, & 5. 
I3. & 14+ 
18. 
+FCh.20.4. 


| Ch. 1. 9. 
Ch. 19.10, 


*SeeZech. * 


I. I2, 


* Ch.3.4, 
$.4nd-7. 
9, I4. 


theretore of this Prophecy ſeemeth to foretel that this Period, from 
the tune of Commodus the Roman Emperor, who ruled the Empire 
from the Year 180, to 197; and was followed by Severus, Caracal- 
la, Macriuus, and Heliogabalzs, and Alexander Severus the Son of 
Mammea, who came to the Empire in 222, and reizned to 237, 
ſhould be a tine of great Plenty and. Civil Juſtice. Hiſtories tell us 
of no Famine in that time, but latge Stories of the great Care of two 
of thoſe Emperors eſpecially, for ſupplying their Countties with Corn, 
and for the adminiſtring of Civil Juſtice. The things foretold by the 


- opening of this Seal, our famous Mede makes to have had their Ac- 


compliſhment with the Determination of the Reign of Alexander Se- 
Vers. 


7 And when he had opened the fourth ſeal, I 


heard rhe voice of the fourth beaſt ſay, Come and ſee. 
u The Beaſt mentioned, chap. 4. 7. that had the Face of a Flying 
Eagle, inviteth Fohn to attend to the opening of the fourth Seal, 
that is, the Revelation of the Counſels of God, as to what ſhould 
happen to the Church (within the Roman Empire ) in-the Fourth Pe- 
riod, which is .conceived to have begun with Mazimins, about the 
Year 237, and to have ended with the Reign of Diccleſian, 294+ 


s And Ilooked,and behold, a pale horſe w,and his 
name that fate on him was Death x, and Hell follow- 
ed with him y - And power was given unto them over 
the fourth part of the earth 2, to kill with the ſword, 
and with hunger, and with death, and with the beaſts 


of theearth a. | 

 w An Horſe of the Colour of his Rider. x Death, which makes 
Men look Pale, y and bringeth them into the State of the- Dead, 
C here tranſlated Hell ) whether Heaven or Hell, as they have lived. 
2 Over a great part of the Earth. a To kill Men all manner of 
ways, with the Sword, Famine, Peſtilence, and by throwing them 
to wild Beaſts. Interpreters judge that here was propheſied what 
ſhould happen to the Roman Empire, and the Church within it from 
the time when Maximinus was made Emperour, which was about 
237, to the time of Aurelianus, which was about 294. Some extend 
it to Diocleſian's time, which ended about 224 ; but Mr. Mede ra- 
ther reſerveth that for the 5th Seat; if the former time only be 
taken in, there was within it the 7th, 8th, and 9th Perſecutions, 
Diocleſian began the Tenth and greateſt of all. Within this time 
this Prophecy was eminently fulfilled, Maximinus deſtroyed all the 
Towns in Germany, for. 3 or 4oo Miles. There was a Plague laſted 
15 Yeats together in the time of Gallus, who had the Empire, 
Anno 255, Three hundred and twenty thouſand Goths were ſlain 
by Flavius Clauding. Maximims and Galliemss were both great 
Butchers both toi their own Subje&s that were Heathens, and to 
Chriſtians. Gallienus is ſaid to have killed -3 or 4000 every day : 
ſach Wars and Devaſtations could not but be followed with Famine: 
Beſides that we are confirmed in - 1t both by the Teſtimony of 
Euſebius and Cyprian; the latter of which lived within this Peri- 


od. | | | 

- 9 And when he had opened the fifth ſeal b, I ſaw 
* under the altar c + the ſouls. of them that were ſlain 
for the word of God, and for the || teftimony which 
they held d. BREE; | 

-þ This and the- next Seals opening, is not prefaced with any 
living Creatures calling to John to.come and ſee. . We muſt confider 
1. the number ofthe Beaſts was but four, who all had their Courſes. 
2. Some have thought that it is, becauſe here is no mention-of any 
new Perſecution, ' but a conſequent of the former. - .3.- But this Viſt- 
on was ſo plain, it-needed no Expoſitor. . c Still” he fpeaks in the 
Diale& of the Old Teſtament, wherein the Temple was the Altar 
of Burnt-Offering;” and the Altar. of Incenſe ; the' alluſion here is 
judged to be to the latter. - 4 From whence we may not conclude, 
that the Souls of: Men and Women when they die do' ſleep, as ſome 
Dreamers have thought. Theſeare ſaid to be the Souls of them that 
were ſlain for the Word of God, &c; for preaching the ' Word, and 
their profeſſion of 'the Goſpel, ' bearing a Teſtimony to Chriſt and 
his Truths. Mr. Mede thinks that under this Seal is comprehended 
the ten bloody -Years' of Diocleſian's Perſecution, which of all others 
was moſt ſevere y Paganiſm at that time ( as dying things are - wont ) 
moſt ſtruggling to keep it ſelf alive, This Tyrant 1s ſaid in the Be- 
inning of his Reign within thirty Days to have ſlin feventeen 
thouſand, and in'Egypt alone during his Ten Years, 144000, He 
thinks that the Souls of thoſe which this Wretch had ſlain through- 
out all his Dominions, within his ſhort Period of teti Years, were 
thoſe principally which were ſhewed Fohn upon the opening of this 
Seal. 


ro And they cryed 'with® aloud voice ſaying, 4* 
How long, O: Lord, holy eand true f, doſt thou not 
judge and avenge our blood on them that dwell on the 


earth g * : 
- 4 Their Blood cried, or their Souls cried to God. . e*How long 


0 Lord, holy, and therefore that canſt not abide iniquity, and of'all 


Iniquity, can feaſt abide thedding innocent Blood, which is the | 


Blood of thy Saints, whoſe Blood is precious in thy fight; f And 
who art true to thy Word of Threatnings againſt Bloog-thirſty Men, 
and to thy Promiſes for - the "deliverance of thy People. g Def 
thou not judge our Cauſe, and avenge us who have committ2d Ven- 
geance to thee, not daring to avenge our ſelves upon wicked Men, 
who dwelling upon the Earth are ſeen, and their Praftices known to, 
and by thee, and are under thy Power, ſo as thou canſt at pleaſure 
do it. : 
11 And * white robes þ were given to_every one of 
them, and it wasfaid unto them, thar they ſhould reſt 
et for a little ſeaſon 7, until their tetlow-lervants al- 
ſo and their brethren that ſhould be Killed, as they 
were þ, and ſhould be tulhilled /. 


Vol. II. 


REVELATION. 


h White Robes of Glory ; for the white Robes 6f Cluiſt's Ripghte- 
ouſneſs, and of an Holy Life were by them put on betore they were 
at. 7 That they ſhould be ſatisfied and acquieſce in God's Diſpen- 
iattons. k For God had yet more Faithful Witneſſes to be mar- 
tyr'd ( though not in ſuch Flocks as before ) who ſhould die for t-6 


—— 


Chap. 


ſame Faith and Profeſſion. 1 When the number of thoſe his Mar- 
tyrs ſhould be compleated, he would avenge their Blood upon thei 
Enemies. . 

12 And I beheld when he had opened the ſixth 
ſeal zz, and Io there wasa greatearthquake 7, aud the 
* ſun became black as ſackclorh of hair o, and rhe 
moon became as blood p. 

m The f1xth of thoſe Seals with which the Book was ſealed» 
mentioned, chap. 5. 1. this ſignifieth the revelation of ſome things 
which ſhould happen in ſome certain Period of time, but what pe- 
riod 15 the queſtion, as to which Interpreters differ ; ſome thiak th2 
time when Feruſalem was taken ; but this was a time paſt 26 or 27 
Years before Fohn was in Patmos, where he had this Viſion abcut 
things that ſhall be, chap. 1. r. and 22. 6, Some think that period 
of time which ſhall be immediately befere the Day of Judzment ; 
but that Gueſs ſeemeth worſe, for after this there was a event! Seal 
to be cpened. Some think the period of the Churches Confli& 
with Antichriſt; but Mr. Mede's Judgment ( followed bymany other 
famous Men ) ſeems beſt, that.it denotes that period when Contan- 
tine the firſt Chriſtian Emperour reſtored Peace to the Church, by 
overturning the whole Pagan State, and making Chriſtianity the 
Religion of the greateſt part of the World. This was about the 
year 311, and perfefted upon his Vitory over Licinizs $25; mn 
this I acquieſce. Let us now ſee how what is ſaid in tiiis and 1he 
following Verſes about this pericd will agree to that time. » The 
great Queſtion is here, what is meant by this great Zartharcke, tha 
darkning of the Sun, the Moon becomin; as Blood, &c. No #i- 
ſtory. recording any fuch Prodigies, hath made many ( takin; tlicſe 
things in the natural literal Senſe) to ſay the Period under the fixth 
Seal, f13miftes cither the time when Feruſalem was taken, or the Day 
of Judgment : but there is a metaphorical ſenſe of thefe #5. pr. fMi- 
ons, very uſual in the  Prophetical Writings, to ſkew ere:t chanes 
in States; and in this ſenſe it is to be taken here. Thus tic Pro 
phet- deſcribeth the great Change God' would make in 7er/..lrrr, 
Iſa. 29. 6. Thou ſhalt be viſited of the Lord of Hoſts with Thunder, 


' and with Earthquake , and great Noiſe, with Stoym and with Tem- 
: peſt, and the Flame of devouring Fire; and Fer. 15. 9. Hr Sun 3s 


gone down while it is yet Day. And Exeh. 32. 7. the Change God 


: would work in the ruine of Fgypt, is thus expreſt : When 7 hal! 
. put thee out I will cover the Heavens, and make the Stars theresf 


dark, and the Moon ſhall not give her light: All the bright Lights 


. of Heaven will I make dark over thee. So Feel 2. 10. 31, and chap. 
'3- 15» What is an Earthquake, but the ſhaking of the Earth ? 


And under this Notion God exprefſeth the Changes he makes in 
States and Kingdoms, J/. 2. 19, 21. and 24.18. Haz. 2. 6, 7. 
Thus by. Earthquake here, is to be underſtood a great change in the 


, Roman Empire. o The Sun ſignifies thoſe that are in the hi-keſt 
' Power. þ The Moon, thoſe that are next to them in Place an ? Di-- 


nity. 
13 Andthe ſtars of heaven f-l1 unto the earth, even 


as 4 fig-tree caſteth her || untimely figs when the is ſhak. 
en of a mighty wind g. 


V1 


q This is but another Phraſe ſignifying a great change ; the whole 


Verſe is much the ſame with Iſa. 34. 4. litterally theſe things were 
never yet fulfilled. It is a Phraſe fignifying the Fall of great and 
mighty Men. 

.'14 And the heavens departed as a ſcrowl when it is 
rolled together 7 ; and * every mountain and iſland 
were moved out of their places F}. 

+ x Two Expreſſions more ſignifying the ſame thing, the firſt is uſed 
by the Prophet to ſignifie the Change God would make in the State 
of the Edomites, Iſa. 34- 4. as will appear by comparing what that 
Prophet faith, with what eremiah, Exzekie!, and Obediah ſay, upon 
the ſame a—_ 49. from verſe 7, to 22. and Zzeb. 25. 
f All forts of People ſhall be deſtroyed, or all the Paganiſh Relision 
ſhall be rooted out. | 

15 And the kings of the earth, and the great men, 
and the rich men, and the chief captains, and the 
mighty men, and every bond-man, and every free-man /; 
hid themſelves in the'dens, and the rocks of the moun- 
tains 7. = Ap 

{ A Terror ſhall fall upon all ſorts of Men, high and low, # Sec 
Ia. 2. 19. and, like Men affrighted, they ſhall ſeek for themſelves 
hiding-places, where they can think themſelves moſt ſecure. See 
Ta. 2. 19. | 

16* And faid to the mountains and rocks, Fall or 
us and hide us « from the face of him thar fitrzth on 
the throne 6, and from the wrath of the Lamb c : 

a' See Hoſea. 10. 8.” Luke 23. 30. They ſhall be in a great con- 
ſternation, and be ready to take any courſe for ſecurity þ from the 
Wrath of God, and of c Jeſus Chriſt. 


-17 For the great day of his wrath is come d; and 


who ſhall be able to ſtand e 2 ; 
- d For this judgment that is upon us, is the effeft of his Wrath 


| for our abuſing and perſecuting his Members; e and we with all our 


Courage, Might and Power, are not able to abide his Wrath. Theſe 


| Words import, that in this great change, as the greateſt Perfors 
| ſhould 'be at a loſs what to'do, ſo they ſhould periſh under a con- 


viction, that the great Vengeance of God was come upon them for 
their oppoſing the Goſpel, and provoking Chriſt by perſecuting of 
his Members. There are other more particular Explications of 
the Sun, Moon, Stars, Heaven, &c, but they all center in this ge= 
neral, That here is prophecicd a great and univerſal change of 
the Religion of the World, which ſhould ſtrike a great Tezror _ 
1% 


(5 M\ 


|Or, g ca 
t 
L 
*Ch.15, 
jt # © 
: s 
OE 'T 
*C:.g. 6 , 
v} 
i*#-: 


- = of 
” = Pts 
rg 


Chap. VIL 


the Pagan Rulers, and iſſue in the overturning. al their Altars, and 
Temples, and the Ruine of the great Mei, relating either to their Ci- 
vil, or Eccteſtaſtical State; and that they at laſt ſhould know that 
God w.s God , and that theſe Judgments came upon them for 
their uppotition to. Chriſt, And { which addeth Strength to. this 
Interpretation } Mr. Durham hath obſerved, that no ſo ſhort a 
Period of time hata produced lo many remarkable Judgments, and 
extorted fo many. ingenuous confeffions from Encmies, that what 
came upon them was for their Perſecutions; a Catalogue of which 
may be found in Mr. JMede, and in Mr. Durhzm. Mr. Mede 
reckoneth Galerinvs, Maximins, and Ficinins. Galerius was eaten 
up of Worms, being before he died ſenfible of his Guilt, ceaſing 
trom his Perſecution, and begging the Chriſtians Prayers. Maxi- 
minis, another Roman Empero:r ( or Partner in the Empire with the 
former ) being beaten by Licinis, fled to Tar, and there tell up- 
on his Pagan Prieſts, who had deceived him by their lying Oracles, 
and m:@> a decree for the Chriſtians Liberty ; but God would not ſuf- 
fer ſo bloody a Wretch to dye after the ordinary Death of Man ; 
he died miſerably through intollerable Pain, . his Eyes dropping out 
of his Head. Licinius was a Chriſtian, aud joined a while with 
Conſtantine, but apoſtatized ; was overcome in two Battels, taken, 
and by him put to death. All theſe three were within the ſpace of 
18 Years. Mr. Durham to theſe adds the Inſtances of Drocleſizn and 
AMaximinian, little above 20 Years before, in the heat of their Per- 
ſecution making a ſtop, and throuzh an Horror of Conſcience, 


lJaving down their Imperial Dignity ; and Maxentius drowned in the. 


River Tber; and he ſays Licinius before-mentioned, before. he died, 


revenzed himſelf upon his Idolatrous Prieſts, that had perſwaded | 


him to forſake Conflantine's God. The change was fo great in the 
Empire, upon Con'tantine the Great his coming to the Throne, by 
the Death of ſome great Perſons, turning others out of place, de- 
ſtrovins the whole Frame and PraQtice of the Pagans Religion, that 
it mizht well be expreſſed by . Earthquakes, the Sun turning black, 
the Moon as Blood, the Stars falling from Heaven to Earth, the 
He:vens departing like a Scrowl, and the removing of Iſlands and 
Mointains, and by the conſternation 1t would bring all the Pagzn 
ereat Men into, gc. And this time, which was a Period of about 
25 or 27 Years, is thought to be underſtood to be the time pre- 
dicted upon the opening of the ſixth Seal. Thus we ſee the Dra- 
gon's Reiyn at an end in about 321, or 325 Years aiter Chriſt. 
The Empire, as Pagan, perſecuting the Church of Chriſt, and fol- 
lowing it with Ten ſucceffive Perſecutions, - quite overturned, and a 
Chriſtian Emperor, Conſtantine the Great, ruling it, But we muft 
underſtand theſe great things were not perfefted in a few Months, 
ſome Relifts of Paganiſm remained; for though Conſtantine ſhut up 
the Pagan Temples, yet all the Idols in them were not deſtroyed un- 
til the time of Theodoſnus, who began to rule in the Empire 379, 
and reizned 6 Years. Betwixt Conſtantine and him were Con/tantius 
and Conſtans, Julian the Apoſlate, and Zoviam, Valentinianss, a 
lens, and Gratian : During ſome of whoſe Reigns ( Zulian's eſpeci- 
ally ) the Chriſtians ſuffercd much both from Pagans and Arrians, 
ſo that the Chriſtians had not a full and perfe& quiet till after 


350. 
CHAP. VII. 


ohn ſeeth four Angels, who had Power given them to hurt the Earth, 1. 


Anather Angel with the Seal of God crieth to them not to hurt, till the 


Servants of God were ſealed, 2, 3. The number of them that were 
ſealed, 4 8. Multitudes of all Nations fland before the 
Throne and the Lamb, ſinging Praiſe to God and the Lamb, 10. The 
Angels, the 4 living Creatures, and the 24 Elders, do worſhip and 
praiſe God, 11, 12. One of the Elders ſheweth John, that they who 
were cloathed in white, came out of much Tribulation, 13, 14. 


Bleſſedrefs, 15 17: 
ND after theſe things a, I ſaw four angels ſtand- 


the four winds of the earth e,- that the wind ſhould 


not blow. d on the earth, nor on the 1ca, nor on any | 


tree d. 
a The firſt Sufferings of the Church under the Reman Emperors 


that were Pagans, were foretold under the firft fix Seals, as hath 
been ſhewed, but they had yet more, 11 not greater things to ſuf- 
fer, which are diſcovered to Fobn, as we ſhall fee when we come to 
the opening of the Seventh and /aF Seal- in the next chapter; only 
it pleaſeth God by a Viſion in this chapter to. comfort his Church; 
ſo as thou_h this Viſion relateth to the ſixth Seal, and was before. the 
openins of the ſeventh, yet it hatha relation to that, to ſhew the 
Care tht God would take of his Church ander thoſe great Evils that 
ſhould happen upon the opening of the ſeventh Seal;- or when the 
thin,s fore-told upon the opening of 1t, ſhould come to be: accom- 
pliſhed. b Four good Angels, God 1s called their God, verſe 3. 
c Thit is, to whom God hath given it in charge, that they ſhould in- 
fli!t his [udements upon all the parts of theEarth ; for God often uſeth 
by his Prophets, the Metap'tor of Winds, to expreſs ſtormy, trouble- 
ſome Diſperſations, as Jer. 49. 36. and 18. 17. and chap. 51. 1. 
d This. Phraſe is interpreted variouſly, Gad making uſe of the Winds 
in a way of Tudzment , to throw down-Buildings and Trees. 2. In 


a way of Mercy, to purifie the Air, and by their gentle Breathings | 


to cheriſh things. Some interpret this Command to the Angels, 
into a Command to theſe Angels to forbear a while thoſe Storms 
of Judgments which were coming , till the Servants of God ſhould 
be ſealed. Others interpret them into a Command to bring . Judg- 
ments, either corporal or ſpiritual, which they think is ſignified by 
the Winds not blowing. The firſt ſeemeth-to.be favoured by the 
next verſe, To whom it was given to burt; the Earth, and the Sea; 
* which ſcemeth to me to interpret the blowing mentioned jn- this 
Verſe, of an hurtſul blowing. d The Earth, the Sea, and the 
Trees, ſeem to ſignifie all the ſublunary Werld , eſpecially the 
Church. 

2 And I faw another angel aſcending from the 


REVELATION. 


Their | 


' 2, That 
: 22 | certain Number, which yet was very great. _ 
ing on the- four corners of the earth b, holding | - Y ſy 8 


Chap. 


eaſt e, having theſeal of the living God : And hecri- 
ed with a loud voice'to the four angels f, ro whom it 


was glven to hurt the earth and the ſea. 

e By this other Angel, ſome underſtand an Angel by Naturez 
ſoine, a Man, Elias, or Conſtantine; others, Chrif himſelf called an 
Angel, Exod. 24. 29. it.is not much material whether we by this An- 
- underſtand Chri$, or ſome Angel, which he made his Inſtrument. 

He gives a command to thoſe four Angels, whom God had made the 
ore » or Executioners . of | his Wrath and Juſtice ia the 

orld. | | 


trees, until we haye + ſealed the ſervants of our God 


In the foreheadsg. 
£ A manifeſt Alluſjon to Ezek. 9g. 4. and, as ſome think, to the 
uſage of ſome Eaſtern Countries, for Maſters to ſet their Names up- 


theirs, as we mark our Sheepor other Beaſts, Men as vainly diſpute 
what this Scal, ſhould be, as what the T\ meant in. Ezck. 9. ( the 
Mark ſet ugon thoſe that mourned for the Abominations of Fer»ſ- 
lem.) The place where they were to be ſealed ſignified the end; of 
their ſealing, not ſo much for confirmation, for which Seals are uſed, 
as Notification, to fignifie to others they belonged to God, ſo as 
it was of the ſame uſe as the [Blood upon the two Side-poſts, 
and the upper Door-poſts of the Iaelites in Egypt, Exod. 12. 
03. | 

4 And I heard the number of them which were 
ſealed : and there were ſealed an hundred, and forty 
and tour thouſand” of all the tribes of the children of 
{{rae]. 

5 Of the tribe of Judah were ſealed twelve thou- 
ſand. Of the tribe of Reuben were ſealed twelve 
c-houſand. . Of the tribe of Gad were ſcaled twelve 
chouſand. 0 

6 Ot the tribe of Aſer were ſealed twelve thouſang.. 
Of the tribe of Nephthali were ſealed twelve thouſand. 
Of the tribe of Manafles were ſealed twelve thou- 
ſand. . T0; this 
7 Of the tribe of Simeon were ſealed twelve thou- 
ſand. Of the tribe of Levi were ſealed rwelve thou- 
ſand. Of the tribe of Ii{lachar were ſealed twelve thou- 


ſand. 
3 Of the tribe of Zebulon were ſealed twelve thou- 


ſand. Of the tribe of Joſeph were ſealed twelve rhou- 
ſand. Of the tribe of Benjamin were ſealed twelve 


thouſand h- | 

h For the underſtanding of theſe five Verſes, ſeveral things are 
to be noted. | | 

1. That the whole Number is 244000, which is the produ@t of 
I2, as the original Number, ( ſetting aſide the Cyphers ) for 12 times 
12 makes 144. The Number of 144, chap. 21. 17.” was the mea- 
ſure of the Wall of the new Feruſalem : Twelve, which is the root 
of this Number 144, ſeemeth to be God's Number, and uſed in 
Scripture about - 144 times, and almoſt generally- in things -belong- 
1ng to the Church, which: had 12 Patriarchs, 12' Tribes under. the 
Old Teſtament, 12 Apoſtles { as its Heads ) under the New Teſta» 
. ment, and the new Jeruſalem: from Heaven, chap. 21. 12. is ſaid to 
have 12 Gates, and at the Gates 12 Angels, verſe 14. the Wall had 
{0 Foundations, the length of it, werſe [-16, twelve thouſand Fur 
: longs. | 


| 


we muſt not by 14400e underſtand a certain, but an un- 


f& +14 
3.. That by the Tribes of Jf-4el mentioned here, are to be under- 
; flood the ſeveral Goſpel-Churthes of the Gentiles, who are now God's 
' Trae! ingrafted into the true Olive." | 
4- That the Tribe of Dan'1s::here left out, and Epbraim is not 
named, ( though included in Zojeph.).of the Tribe of.Dan there were 
none ſealed. Dan was a great Ring-leader to-Iddlatry, fo, was E- 
phraim; Sec the 17, and 18, Chapter of Judges 3and-at Dan it was 
that Jeroboam .ſet up his Calves. Lew is put inſtead of Dep, 
and Joſeph inſtead of Ephraim, by which means here,are yet twelve 
Tribes which teacheth us this, That Chriſtians, if Idolaters, muſt 
__ look for./ aty ſpecial Prateftion or Favour from God in a day of 
evil, f $55; 7 7 hea] | 
5 Theſe Tribes are not'ſet |in order, according to. their Birth- 
rignt. 
ys Judah was Leah's fourth. Sop, Gen.29.35. put firſt becauſe Chriſt 
deſcended from him. | | : ” 
2. Reuben her eldeſt Son is 
Meſfiah's Tribe, } | 
3. Gad, JacoÞ's Son by Zilpah, Gen, 3o. 11. is put next. . 
4- Ajbea, Jacob's. Son; by Zilpab, .in the fourth + place, Gen. 30- 


13 ES | 
's Son by Bilbah, RacheF's 


put next, giving place only to the 


\ 


5. Nepthalim is put next, who.was:7aceb 
' Maid, Gen. 2o. 8, bins 1g HH 
6. Manaſſe« is put next, who was Fo/eph's Son.. 1, _ . 
7. Simeon, Facob's ſecond Son by. Leab, Gen. 29. 33+ is put in the 
ſeventh place. = , | 
8. Levi, Leab's third Scn, in the.cizhth place, Gen. 29. 34- 
Hh Iſachar, Leah's fitth Son, Gen. 30..18..3s put in the ninth 
PCs 


10. Zebulon, Leah's f1xth Son, is put in the tenth place, Gen. 39. 
2 


oN 
11. 7-feþh is" put in the eleventh place for Ephraim his Son. 
12. Benjamin, Rachel's ſecond Son, is put in the laſt place. 
If there be any Myſtery in this O«der, differmg from all other 
Scriptures, where there is a mention made of the twelve Patrijarchs, 


it is probab'e that Mr. Mede - hath hit upon it, 'in regard of the 
gccd 


on the Forecheads of their Slaves, by which they were known to be 


VII 


3 Saying,* Hurt not the earth, nor the ſea, nor the * C5. 5, 


9. 4. 


t Ch14, 


Chap. VII. 


good or ill Deſerts of theſe Tribes, ſome of which are mentioned by 
him, all may be learned from the Hiſtory of the Jews recorded in 
Holy Writ. Hence we may learn, that the ſummary Senſe of all 


theſe Verſes, is this, Thatalthough within the Period of Time, wich |' 
is fignified under the ſeventh Seal, there ſhould be great Perſecati- | 


ons of the Church, yet God would preſerve unto himſelf a great 
Number in all his Churches, which ſhould not Apoſtatize, and who in 
the Perſecutions ſhould not be hurt, ſo as his Church ſhould not fail, 
though the Archers ſhould ſhoot ſore at it; for though Men raged, 
yet it was by God's Permiſſion; and his Angels over-ruled it, who 
ſhould take notice of thoſe Numbers that he had ſealed, and marked 
in their Forcheads, Rn 
9 Atrer this I beheld, and lo, a great multitude, 
which no man could number, of all nations, and Kin- 
dreds, and people, and tongues 7, ſtood before the 
* Chap, 3. t1:01::2, and before the lamb &, * clothed with white 


5, 18. & robes /, and palms in their hands . 

6.11.0 7. # If ze enquire who theſe were, we are told verſe 14. by the beſt 

I 4 Interpreters, Theſe are they which come out of great Tribulation, and 
have waſhed their Robes, &c. So that they do not ſeem to be the 
144000 mentioned for Preſervation in, and from the Evil, werſe 4. 
but ſuch as had eſcaped, or were not in, or going into Tribulation, 
but come out. The Number of the former was determined, it is faid 
of theſe, it could not be numbred. kh Theſe were glorified ones, 
not militant; they ſtood before the Throne, and the Lamb. / Cloth- 
ed in the Habits offuch as amongſt the Romans had fought, and con- 
quered, and triumphed. m And to this end they are ſaid to have 
carried Palms, the Enfigns of Vidory, in their Hands, 

* Pfal. 3.8. 

114. 43-11: on to our God 7 which fitteth upon the throne, and 


= TH unto the Lamb o. | 2b | 
" n They acknowledge their temporal, ſpiritual, and eternal Salya- 
tion to the gift, and free Mercy of God in whom they had truſted. 
o And to the Lord Jeſus Chriſt, by whoſe Merits and Spirit they had 
got the Vidtory. , 

11 And all the : angels p ſtood round about the 
throne, and about the elders 9, and the four beaſts 7, 
and fell before the throne on their faces /; and wor- 
ſhipped God 7. 

þ The good Angels, who always in Heaven behold the face of 
their, and our heavenly Father. q And about the twenty four El- 
ders mentioned chap. 4.4. r And the living Creatures mentioned, 
chap. 4.6. { The Angels, Elders, and living Creatures, all fall 
down on their Faces in a reverend Senſe of the infinite diſtance 
between them and their Creator. # Thus paying an Homage to 
God fitted to their glorified ſtate, in confideration of his Excellen- 


CY. ; 
: 12 Saying, Amen : Bleſſing, and glory, and wil: 
dom, and thankſgiving, and honour, and power, 
and might be- unto our God for ever and ever. 


Amen 2. 
u Theſe words only fignifie the Union and Harmony of the Angels 


and Saints in praifing God : See the Notes on Chap. 5. 12. 
13: And oneof theelders anſwered, ſaying unto me, 
What are theſe which are arrayed in white robes? and 


whence came they w * % 
w Not that he did not know, but to try whether Zohn knew, or 
rather to ſet Fohn upon enquiring. | 
14 And I ſaid unto him, Sir, thgu knoweſt x. 
And he ſaid to me, Theſe are they which came 
* 141.18, out of great tribulation y, and have * waſhed their 
Heb. 9. 14. robes, and made them white in the blood of the 
1 Joh. 1.7. Lamb Z. Oo : 

Chap. 1.6. * , ng confeſfing his own Ignorance, applies himſelf to this El- 
Zech. 3-3, der for Inſtruction, who tells him, y Theſe were the Souls of 
4, 5- - i them that 'came out of great Sufferings and Perſecution. x But 
5"; he addeth,that they were ſuch as were waſhed in the Blood of Chriſt. 
Suffering'will not bring us to Heaven, without having our Souls waſh- 

ed with the Blood of Chriſt. | 
15 Therefore are they before the throne of God a, 


and ſerve him day and night in his temple þ ; and 
*If.4.5,5. he that fitteth on the throne ſhall -* dwell among 


Chap.21.3- them c. : 
a Not that they by their Sufferings have merited Heaven, but be- 


cauſe it pleaſeth God of his free Grace ſo to reward them ; therefore 
it was ſaid, not only that they were ſuch as came out of Tribulation, 
but that they had waſhed their Garments in the Blood of the Lamb, 
whoſe Blond had paid the Price of their Salvation. b By the Temple, 
ſome underſtand the Church in this Life ; but it is foreign to the 
true Senſe of the Text ; for John ſaw only their Souls before the 
Throne, their Bodies were in their Graves. By the Temple is meant 
Heaven where God dwelleth, and is worſhipped more gloriouſly and 
conſtantly than he was in the Jewiſh Temple, or in any part of the 
militant Church. c As God by his gracious Preſence dwelt in the 
urs Temple ; ſo God by his glorious Preſence ſhall dwell amongſt 
is glorified Saints. : 
16 They ſhall hunger no more, neither thirſt any 


*;Pfal.121, 12OTe, * neither ſhall the ſun light on them, nor any 
6. hear d. 


d This is taken out of Ja. 49. 10. They arz all Metaphorical Ex- 
pre{Hons, all fjgnifying the perfe&t ſtate of glorified Saints. They 
- ſhall have no Wants, nor be expoſed to any affliftive Providen- 


CCS. 


r7 For the Lamb which is in the midſt of the 
Yol. II. 


REVELATION. 


10 And cried with a loud voice, laying, * Salvati- | 


Chap. Vili 


; throne e * ſhall feed them f and ſhall lead them unto *Pſul. 23-r- 


Joh.10.1 1. 


living fountains of waters ; + and God ſhall wipe away {7 
all tears from their eyes g. | j 
e Chriſt, the Lamb mentioned, Chap. 5. 5. f Shall take care of 
.them to fatisfie; and to protect them, and give them the beſt Sup- 
plies, and-both make them to forget their former Sorrows, and pre- 
vent any further cauſe of Sorrow and Aflidion to them. A perfett 
Deſcription of the glorious and happy ſtate of Saints in Heaven. 
For wherein lieth the Happineſs of Heaven, but in a freedom from 
all the Evils that incumber us in this Life, and the Enjoyment of all 
Happineſs we are capable of, and being ever with the Lord Jeſus 
Chtiſt under his Influence and Condu& ? So as I cannot agree with 
Mr. Mede, or any of thoſe who think this Viſion, and theſe Phraſes 
deſcribe any happy, peaceable ſtate of the Church in this Life, af- 
ter the throwing down of Antichriſt ; but do think that Fohn was 
ſhewed this great Reward of Martyrs, to encourage the Church of 
God under all thoſe Evils they were to ſuffer under Antichriſt and 
the Beaſt, in that Period of Time which is deſcribed myſtically upon 
= _— of the ſeven Seals, which we now come to in the next 
apter. 


{a. 25.8. 
hap.21.4- 


CHAP. VIIL 


The ſeventh Seal opened, filence in Heaven, ſeven Angels with (even Trum- 
pets appear, 1, 2. Another Angel putteth Incenſe to the Prayers of 
the Saints on the Golden Altar, 3. Then he filleth his Cenſer with Fire 
from the Altar, caſting it upom the Earth, 5. The fir$ Angel ſound- 
eth, which is followed with Hail and Fire, mingled with Blood, 7. 
The caſting a great burning Mountain into the Sea, followed the ſecond, 
8, 9. And the fall of a great Star, called Wormwood, followed on 
the third Angel's Soundjng, 10, 11. The fourth Angel bloweth the 
Trumpet, and the third part of the Sun, Moon, and Stars ſmitten with 
Darkneſs, 12. Anther Angel crieth woe, becauſe of the three follow- 
ing Trumpets, 13. 


A N D when he had opened a the ſeventh ſeal 5, 
there was filenc? in heaven c about the ſpace of 


haltan hour g. | 

a That is, the Lamb mentioned, chap. $. 7. who took the Book 
out of the Hand of him who ſate upon the Throne, the Book ot 
God's Counſels, and had now revealed myſteriouſly to John what 
ſhould come to paſs ( under all the Pagan Emperours ) to the Church 
of Chriſt, until the time of Conſtantine the Great, who ( as was faid ) 
about the year 325. had ſettled the Chriſtian Religion, and ſhut up 
all the Idols Temples, having conquered the Apoſtate Zicinns. 


b He cometh now to open the ſeventh Seal, that is, to reveal to Zohn 
what ſhould be in the ſucceeding time of the Church to the end of the 
World, But before the great Evils ſhould break out, which were to 
come {to paſs'in this time, there was in the Church a Reſt d for a 
ſmall time; for from the year 317 ( when Conſtantine bare the great- 
eſt ſway in the Empire ) or 325, when he had got a full Victory over 
Licinus, the Church had a great Peace for a little time, till 339, 
when the Empire being divided, and Conftantius having the Eaſtern 
part, and Conſtans the Weſtern ( both Sons of Conflentiey FOE 
being an Arrian ( whodenicd the Go?-h2id of Chriſt ) began azain 
to perſecute the Chriſrjans ; and after him Fulian, who apoſtatized 
to Paganiſm. But after him they had a little further reſpite to the 
year 395, when Thendoſaes died, and the Chriſtians quite Died with 
him. I rather chuſe to interpret this thus, than with thoſe who uns 
derftand the Silence in Heaven, of a Silence in the third Heavens, in 
Allufion to the Jewiſh Order 3 who, though they ſung during the 
time of the Sacrifice, and played upon Inſtruments of Muſick all 
that time, yet kept filence while the Incenſe was offering. For 
(as divers have noted ) it ſeemeth hard to judge, that in this 
Revelation there ſhould be no mention of that ſhort Truce which the 
_—_ had during the Reign of Conſtantine, and for a ſmall time af- 
ter. | 


2 And I ſaw the ſeven angels which ſtood be- 


fore Po e, and to them were given ſeven trum- 
pets f. 
e The ſeven mentioned hereafter, which blew with the Trumpets. 
f For we preſently read, that ſeven 75umpets were given to them. 
Trumpets were uſed to call the People together, to proclaim Feſti- 
vals, and in War, The uſe of theſe Trumpets we ſhall hereafter 
read, which was to proclaim the Will and Counſels of God, as to 
things to come. : = 
3 And another angel came g and ſtood at the altar, 
having a golden cenſer h, and there was given unto 
him much incenſe z, that he ſhould || ofter 7t with the || or, add 
* prayers of all ſaints, upon the golden altar &, which # to the 


was before the throne. hong 
g By this Ange! I underſtand Chi ; ( as do many very valuable Chap. 5.8.” 
Authors ) nor, indeed, can what is faid of this Angel agree to any 
other but him, who is called an Angel, Gen. 48. 16. and the Ange! 
of the Covenant, Mal. 3. 1. h Here is a manifeſt Alluſion to the Or- 
derin the Jewiſh Worſhip, they had an Altar of Incenſe, Exod. 3o.r. 
upon which the High-Prieſt was to burn Incenſe every Morning and 
Evening, verſe 7, 8. Whilſt the Prieſt was burning Incenſe, as ap- 
rs, Luke 1. 10. the People were without, Praying. Chriſt 1s 
here repreſented as having a Golden Cenſer. The High-Prieſt's Cen- 
ſer amongſt the Jews was of Brafi, but he was a more excellent High- 
Prief#. 1 By which is meant the infinite Merit of his Death, þ to he 
offered up by himſelf ( who is the Golden Altar ) with the Prayers of 
all his Saints. By all this Chriſt is repreſented to us, as interceding 
for his Saints that were to live after this time, during all the Troubles 
that were immediately to begin, and to follow on, duzing the Reign 
of Antichriſt, | 
4 And the ſmoke of the incenſe which came with 


{ 6M 2] the 


\&! 


Chap. VIII. 


the prayers of the ſaints, aſcended up before God, out 


_ of the angels hand /. 

1 This only denotes the Acceptableneſs of Chriſts Interceſſion, and 
God's Peoples Prayers, through the Vertue of that Interceſſion unto 
God 


5 And the angel took the cenſer, and filled it with 
fire of the altar, and caſt it into the earth zz : and * 
there were voices, and thunderings, and lightnings, 


and an earthquake 0. 

n I doubt not but by Fire here, is to be underſtood the Wrath 
of God, often in Holy Writ compared to Fire, poured out upon the 
Roman Empire, or the viſible Church. o Upon which followed great 
Judgments, and Confuſions, and Tumults, expreſſed here, or uſher- 
ed in as before, Chap. 6.1. with Thunderings ; which being here 
="ug generally mentioned, are by and by more particularly expref- 

ed 


6 And the ſeven angels which had the ſeven trum- 


pets, prepared themſelves to ſound p. 

þ The Angels are God's Miniſters by which he bringeth his Coun- 
ſeis to paſs in the World: they hearing the Thunders and Voices, 
knew the time was come when they were to begin the Execution of 
God's Judgments upon the Earth, intruſted to them, and are there- 
fore ſet out (though they be always ready ) after the manner of 
Men, preparing themſelves to execute what God had intruſted them 
with the Execution of. 

7 And the firſt angel ſounded 9, and there follow- 
ed hail and fire mingled with Blood, and they were 
caſt upon the earth 7, and the third part of trees 
were burnt up /, and all green graſs was burnt 
UP. | 
A The firſt of the ſeven Angels to whom the ſeyen Trumpets were 
grven, verſe 2, began to execute his Commiſſion. x The conſequent 
of which were Xailand Fire mingled with Blood caſt upon the Earth: 
By which ſome underſtand the PrimitiveChurches Perſecutions by the 
Jews, and the Heathen Emperors ( but theſe were over.) Some un- 
derſtand God's Revenge upon the jews, but this alſo was taken ſome 
Hundreds of years ſince, Some underſtand unſeaſonable Weather in 
many parts of the World ( but we read nothing like this in Hiſtory. ) 
Some underſtand Conteſts happening in the Church; others under- 
ſtand Hereſies : But I cannot but rather agree with the Reverend Mr. 
Mede, who expounds it of great Troubles, and Blood, and Slaughter 
which ſhould happen ; and think that this Prophecy began to be ful- 
filled about the Death of Theodoſius, 395. For in this very year ( aith 
he) Alaricus the King of the Goths brake into Macedonia, with a 
great Army, went into Theſſalia, and ſo into Achaia, Pelyponeſiuus, Co- 
rinth, Argos, Sparta, burning, waſting, and ruining all places; and 
ſo went on till the year 400, they fell upon the Weſtern Empire, and 
committed the ſame Outrages in Dalmatia and Hungary ; then went 
into Stiria and Carinthia, thence into T7taly, and to Venice. Afﬀter 
this, in the year 404 theſe barbarous Nations invaded Taly, and took 
divers Places. In the year 405 the Vandals and Alans, with many 
others, invaded France, Spain, and Africa ; all which he proveth 
from the Teſtimony of Hierom, Ep. 3. 11. This he judgeth the Ef- 
fe& of the firſt Angel's ſounding, and to have been fignified by the 
Hail and Fire mingled with Blood, conſonant to other Scriptures, 
Iſa. chap. 28. 2. compareth Salmanaſſar to a Storm of Hail : And Iſa. 
30. 30. he ſo likeneth the Ruin to come upon the Aſſyrians. ſ By 
the Trees burnt up, are ( faith he ) the great and rich Men to be un- 
derſtood ordinaryy in Scripture compared to Trees, 1/a. 2. 13. and 
14.8, Zech. 11.2. And by the green Herbs, the ordinary com- 
mon People. Thus he judgeth the Effe&s of this firft Trumpet's 
ſounding, to have been determined in 15 years, viz. from 395 to 
419, 


$ And. the ſecond angel ſounded, and as it were 
a great mountain burning with fire was caſt into 
the” ſea 7, and the third part of the ſex became 
blood z. 


t There is a great variety of Senſes alſo about this Mountain of 
Fire caſt into the Sea. Some by it underſtand things happening in 
Fudea; but this had been not to have ſhewed Zohn the Tings which 
ſhould be, but which had been. Others will have the Devil under- 
ſtgod : Others, the Power of the Roman Empire : Others, ſome 
great War ſtirred up amongſt People :-Others, ſome notable Hereſie 
or Heretick: Others, ſome famous Perſons in the Church : But I moſt 
like Mr. Mede's Notion again here, who underſtands by this Moun- 
tain Rome, the Seat of the Weſtera Empire; great Cities being cal- 
led Mountains in Scripture-Phraſe, Iſa. 37. 24. Fer. $I. 25. u This 
Phraſe ſpeaks only the great Effuſion of Blood upon the taking of 
Rome by its Enemies. . 7 } 

9 And the third part of the creatures which were in 
the ſea, and had lite, died; and the third parr of the 


{hips were deſtroyed wv. 


w Phraſes, all ſignifying the miſerable Cataſtrophe that ſhould | 


follow the Deſtruction of this City by the: Slaughter of Men, the 
Ruin of Houſes and Towns in Ttaly, &. Hiſtory (as Mr. Mede 
ſheweth ) excellently agreeth with this. In the year 410, Rome. 
was taken by Alaricus ; this was followed with great Devaſtation both 
in France and Spain. Hnorius, to recover the Empire, was glad to 
give the Goths a Seat and Government in France, and the Burgundians 
and Vandals a Place near unto the River Rhoan ; and 415, to the 
» Vandals a Place in Spain; and 455, Rome was again taken by Gen- 
Jericits the Vandal, who divided the whole Empire into Ten King- 
doms; That of the Britains, ruled by Vortimer, 2 The Saxons, 
ruled by FRenzi8t, 3. The Franks, ruled by Childerich. 4. The 
Burgundian, ruled by Gundericus, $. The Wiſogoths, ruled by Theo- 
aorics It. 6. The Alans and Syev!, ruled by Riciarius. 4. The 
Fandals, ruled by Gen{ericzs, 8. The Germans, ruled by Sumanus. 


REVELATION. 


| was given the key of * the bottomleſs pit.c. 


9. The Oftrogoths, ruled by Theodemerics. 10. The Grecians, ruled 
by Marciams. This is the Sum of what MrMede ſaith, and to this 
_— - Time betwixt 410, and 455, the ſecond Trumpet ſeemeth 
o relate. 

io And the third angel ſounded, and there fell a 
great ſtar from heaven x, burning as it were a lamp y, 
and it fell upon the third part of the rivers, and upon 
the fountains of waters }. 

x Stars, in their metaphorical Notion, fignifie ſome eminent 
Perſons in the State, or in the Church ; accordingly Interpreters 
are divided in their Senſes ; ſoine thinking that it is meant of a 
Political Star, ſome eminent civil Governour, an apply it to Ceſar 
Auguſtulis, who, about the year 480, was forced to give over the 
Empire, by Odeacer ; of him Mr. Mede underſtands this Prophecy. 
Others underſtand it of ſome Eccleſiaſtical Star, who apoſtatized, 
and apply it to Pelagius;, I do rather incline to thoſe, who apply 
it to ſome Eccleſiaſtical Star ; and Pelagius might be pointed at, as 
probably as any other in theſe times; y for he was a great Profeſſor, 


- - Bs as a Lamp ; and he did corrupt a great part of the 
wrch. 


11 And the name of theſtar is called Wormwood =, 
and the third part of the waters became Wormwood ; 
and many men died of the waters becauſe they were 
made bitter *, 

z His Dodtrine was as bitter as Wormwood ; * and he was the 
Ruin of many Souls. But if any do rather chuſe to underſtand it 
of a Political Star, Mr. Mede's Notion bids as fair for the Senſe as 
any, becauſe the Weſtern Empire determined in Auguſtulus, and he 
Reigned but a very ſhort time; and he was a Prince of many Sor- 
rows and Afﬀiitions, and many perifhed with him in thoſe Sorrows 
and Aﬀidtions, which he underwent. Whether we underſtand 
it of ſome eminent Political Magiſtrate ( ſuch was Auguſtulus ;) or 
ſome eminent Light in the Church ( ſuch was Pelagizs ;_) they both 
fell about this time, the one from his terrene Dignity, the other 
ſpiritually from the Honour he had in the Church ; and many fell 
with them, either in a civil or ſpiritual Senſe, 


12 And the fourth angel ſounded. and the third part 
of the ſun was ſmitten, and the third part of the moon, 
and the third part of the ſtars, ſo as the third part of 
them was darkned ; and the day ſhone not for a third. 


part of it, and the night likewiſe a. | 

a Interpreters (ſetting afide one or two, who conceit the Revelati- 
on is nothing but a Repetition of things that hapned in Zudea before 
Fohn's time ) generally agree, that the Period of time to which this 
Prophecy relates, is from the year 480, when the Weſtern Empire 
ceaſed, The Hiſtory ofthe Age next following, both relating to Ci- 
vil apd Ecclefiaſtical Things, doth fo fit this Prophecy, that Interpre- 
ters are much divided about the Senſe of it, whether it be to be un- 
derſtood of the Miſeries befalling the Reman Empire, or the Church in 
that time : For, as great Princes in the former, ſo great Lights in the 
latter are metaphorically expreſſed in Scripture, under the Notions 
of the Sun, Moon, and Stars, in regard of the great Influence they 
have upon Men, as thoſe Luminaries of Heaven have upon theyEarth. 
Mr. Mede ynderſtands it of Political Magiſtrates here expreſſed ( as in 
Foſeph's Dream ) by the Sun, Moon, and Stars : and to ſhew us how 
the Event fitted the Prophecy, he tells us out of the beſt Authors. 
That when Odoacer had routed AuguFulus, and turned him out of the 
Empire, himſelfruled Rome under the Title of a King 16 years, and 
deſtroyed all their old Magiſtracy, but after two years reſtored it. 
That Theodoricus following him in the Government of Ttaly, reſtored 
all their Rights again, which ſo continued under three Kings (all Goths) 
for near 50 years. Wut after the year $46, Rome was taken and 
burnt once again, and a third part of it demoliſhed by Totilas, O- 
thers underſtand it of Pelagins, or ſome famous Heretick in that time. 
But to ſpeak freely, the words of the Prophecy, and the Hiſtories we 
have, rather agree to Mr. Mede's Senſe ; for ( except Pelagius, who 
began about 406 ) we read of none in this Age to whom the words 
of this Prophecy will agree in any good Senſe. 


13 AndI beheld, and heard anangel flying through 
the midſt of heaven, ſaying with a loud voice, Wo, wo, 
wo to the inhabitants of the earth, by reaſon of the o- 
ther voices of the trumpet of the three angels which 
are yet to ſound 6. 

b This Verſe is but an IntroduQion to the other three Angels ſound- 


ing, declaring that the times which were to follow, would be much 
more full of Miſeries and Woes to the Inhabitants of the Earth + By 


which IT underſtand all thoſe Countries which lately were ſubje& to the 


Roman Empire. Others underſtand the more earthy, unſound, hy- 
pocritical part of the Church. The Wo is thrice repeated, either to 
ſhew the greatneſs of the Calamities, or rather correſpondently to the 
Number of the Angels yet to ſound. 


CHAP. IX. 


On the ſounding of the fifth Angel, a Star falleth from Heaven, to 
whom 4 given the Key of the Bottomleſs Pit, 1. Out of this Ptt 
iſſueth a terrible Smoak, 2. Out of this Smoakh cometh Locuſts 
like Scorpions, ſtinging them that have not the Seal of God, one 
Wo paſſeth away, 3 13: The ſixth Angel ſoundeth, and 
the four Angels bound in the River Euphrates are looſed, who 
with a multitude of Horſe-men, ſlay the third part of Men. 

I4. 19. Tet they that eſcaped, Repent not of their Wickedneſs, 

20, . 


AR the fifth angel ſounded 2, and I faw a ſtar 


fall from heaven unto the earth þb: and to him * Luke 8. 


Chap. IX 


3T. 
a The Chapa7.8. 


ma 


Chap. IX. 


a The fifth of the feven Angels mentioned, chap. 8. 2. to whom 
were given ſeven Trumpets, It denoteth the beginning of a new 
Period of Calamities and Miſeries to the Earth, or to the Church. 
b What this Star falling from Heaven means, is not eafje to reſolve. 
Thoſe who think it the Devil, once a Star, but fallen, forget that 
John is not here told a Story of what was in the beginning of the 
World, but what ſhould. be, and that 500 years after Chriſt's coming. 
And the ſame reaſon holds againſt thoſe who think thoſe ſeditious 
Perſons are meant, who did ſo much Miſchief in and about He- 
ruſalem during the Siege. This had been to have reyealed to Zobn 
thoſe things which he knew were done many years before. Amongſt 
thoſe who think ſome particular eminent Miniſter of the Church 
who apoſtatized, is meant ; thoſe ſeem to me to judge better, who 
think that Boniface the third is meant, who, in the year 606, ob- 
tained the Priviledge of the Pope's Supremacy, than thoſe who un- 
derſtnd it of Arrizs or Pelagizs, who both of them fell two hun- 
dred years before this. It ſeems very harſh to interpret it of Chri#, 
or_any good Angel's deſcending from Heaven, becauſe the word 
mrToure 15 rightly by us tranſlated, falling, and not to be interpre- 
ted ſo ſoftly as deſcending. In all probability, therefore, the firſt 4- 
pſtacy of the Biſhop of Rome was here propheſied. c But how to him 


was given the Key of the bottomleſs Pit ,, (by which Hell 15: 


meant here, as often in Scripture ) is hard to ſay; unleſs we un- 
derſtand it of his Inftrumentality, to ſend many thouſands to Hell 
by that corrupt Dofrine and Worſhip, which by him then began 
to obtain ? But this Key was borrowed, ( if God had not permitted 
him, he could not have done it ) and it turned but one way ; he 
had only a power to open it, not (as Chriſt) both to open and ſhut 7t. 


2 And he opened the bottomleſs pir &, and there a- 
role a ſmoke out of the pit, as the ſmoke of a great 
fornace /, and the ſun and the air were darkned, by 


reaſon of the ſmoke of the pit 7. 

k He was a means of Hells breaking looſe, by looſing Satan. | I 
had rather interpret this generally of the great Influence upon the 
World, that the Devil, being looſed, had, in filling the World with 
Ignorance, Errour, and Wickedneſs, (for which this and the follow- 
ing Age are infamous in all Hiſtories) then particularly of the Errours 
this time abounded with. m This Influence of the Devil darkned the 
Sun of the Goſpel, and the whole Church of that Age with Ignorance, 
Errour, and abominable Superſtition in the Worſhip of God, attend- 
ed with the Lewdneſs and Debauchery of Men in their Lives, which 
uſually go altogether. 

3 And there came out of the ſmoke locuſts upon the 
earth z7, and untothem was given power,. as the icor- 
P1ons of theg earth have power 0. 

n From the Influence which the Devil thus let looſe, had upon 
the World, came forth a Generation of Men, that in their Pra&i- 
ces reſembled Locuſts. Who are to be underſtood by theſe Locuſts, 
is not eafily to reſolve. The Locufts were an Infe& with which 
God ſometimes plagued the Egyptians z. they are much in the Ea- 
ſtern' Countries, It was an Eaſt-wind which brought them upon 
Ezybt, Exod. 10, 12, 13- God often hath puniſhed People with 
them ; they are therefore threatned, or mentioned as a Judgment 
in cafe- of Diſobedience, Deut. 28. 38, 42. 1 Kings 8. 37. Joel I. 4. 
& 2.25, Two things are to be remarked of them: 1, They were 
wont to go in infinite Numbers, Prov. 30. 27. They go out by bands, 
Nahum. 3. 15. Make thy ſelf many as the Locuſts : without number, 
Pſal. 105. 24. 2, The Miſchief they do is expreſſed there, verſe 35. 
to eat up the Herbs of. the Land, and to devour the Fruit of the Ground: 
So they did in Egypt. We have a little Specimen of them in our Ca- 
terpillars in times of drought, uſually cauſed from the Wind hang- 
ing long in the Eaſt. The Pſa/miS, Pſalm 105. 34. joyneth the Lo- 
cuits and the Caterpillars together. By the following Deſcription of 
theſe Locuſts, and the Miſchief which they did, verſe 4. 7, 8, 9, 10. 
it appeareth plainly, that theſe were no natural but metaphorical 
Locuſts. Men that for their Numbers, and the Miſchief they did 
in the World, did reſemble Locuſts; but who theſe were, is the 
Queſtion. I find but two Opinions that have any probability : The 
one is a late learned Writer, who judgeth them the Popiſh 
Clergy, to whom, indeed, many things agree. 1. They come out of 
the Smoke, that is, the great Influence which the Devil hath upon 
the World. 2. They are numerous. - 3. Their King is Abaddon, 
they deſtroy every green Herb, nipping Religion, in al! places, in 
the Bud. But I cannot ſee how two or three things can agree to 
them: 1. That they do no hurt to the Lord's Sealed Ones, when 
as their particular Malice is againſt the pureſt and ftridteſt Profeſ- 
ſion. 2. That they do not kill, but only torment Men, verſe 5. 
3. And (which is the greateſt ) I cannot ſee how the Period of 
time agreeth tothem. For this Prophecy ſeemeth to reſpe&@ the 
fixth and ſeventh Age : And though all theſe things agree to the Ro- 
miſh Clergy in later Ages, eſpecially fince the Jeſuits grew nume- 
rous, which is not much above 120 years fince, yet theſe three did 
not ſo agree to the Romiſh Clergy in the ſixth and ſeventh Age, 
Their BenediFine Orders began but $30, and their Orders of Domi- 
nicans, much more miſchievous, not till upward of the year 1200. 
the Zeſuits after the year 1500. I therefore rather agree with the 
Learned and Judicious Mr. Mede, with whom I alſo find Fohn Na- 
pier and others agreeing, that by theſe Zocuſts are meant the Turks 
and Saracens. 1. Their time agreeth ; for they firſt appeared for- 
midably to the World about the year 622, 2. They were always 

very numerous. 3. They came the Locuſts Road from Arabia, and 
the Eaſtern parts, The Arabians ( which the Saracens are) are 
called the Children of the Ea#, and faid to be like Grafhoppers for 
multitude, Two things are objefted : 1. That theſe Locuſts are 
commanded not to hurt the Lord's ſealed Ones. 2. That their Com- 
miſſion is but for five Months. As to the latter we ſhall ſpeak to 
it, when we come to that clauſe. As to the former, Why may it 
not denote the Liberty that in their Conqueſts tney generaly give 
to all Religions; ſo as they put none to death upoa that Account ? 
How far other things will agree *to them, I leave to be further 
conſidered in the next Verſes, o That is, Such a Power as Scorpi- 


REVELATION 


a bave: We ſhall have a more particular Account of this; verſe 


4 And it was commanded them p, * that they * - 6.6: 
þ 7:2. 
See Exod; 


ſhould not hurr the graſs of the earth, neither any 
green thing, neither any tree g, bur only thoſe men 


which have not + the ſeal of God in their fore- Ezck, 9.4- 


heads 7. 

þ That is, theſe Locuſts ; God fo ordered it by his Providence. 
4 This makes it appear, that theſe Locuſts were no Inſetts ſo called, 
but #ypical; for natural Locuſts live upon green things. r They 
were only to hurt profane Men, and Hypocrites. It is a ſure Rule, 
that when things are attributed to living Creatures which do not 
agree to their Natures, the terms are to be underſtood typically, not 
literally. Locuſts uſe not to kill Men; we may therefore be afſured, 
that the Zocyſts here intended,were Men, not inſe&ts. r Sce on chaps 


I» 3o 

5 And to them it was given that they ſhould not 
Kill them , but that they ſhould be tormented five 
months : and their torment was as the torment of. a 


{corpion, when he ſtriketh a man /. 

/ Suppoſing the Saracens and Turks here meant by the Locuſts, 
here ariſe two Difficulties : x7. How it can be ſaid of them, That 
they had no Power to kill, but only torment Men. 2. How their 
time is ſet for five Months, whereas they have already tormented 
the World more than a thouſand years; and how long they ſhall 
yet continue to do fo, God only knows : they are both great Dith- 
culties. Alſted tells us, That Mahomet began 622, and the Saracens 
centred Spain 714, where they were called Moors, and kept Poſlet- 
fion of that Kingdom 800 years, and that 719 they beſieged Con- 
Stantinople with a Navy of 3000 Ships, and 300000 Land Soldiers ; 
that before this time they had made themſelves Maſters of Arabia, 
Paleſtina, Syrla, Perſia, Egypt, Africa, and Spain; and in 726, car- 
ried into France an Army confiſting of 375000, where they were 
beaten by Charles Martell, Father to King Pepin. Mr. Mede teJleth 
us, That the Saracens grievouſly vexed the Countries ſubjef to the 
Roman Empire, but could not take either Rome or Conſtantinople. 
The latter was taken by the Turks, 1454. commanded by Sultan 
Mahomet, This 1s but a hard Interpretation of thoſe words, that 
they ſhould not kill themp which, it may be, hath made ſome other 
Interpreters chuſe;to interpret theſe Locyfts to fignitie the Roman 
Clergy, who indeed did not kill Men for Religion, of many years. 
But both the one and the other tormented the World enough, and 
that like a Scorpion, which pierceth a Man with a venomo:#s ſting, and 
puts him to a great Pain : For the five Months, we ſhall again meet 


with them, verſe 10, 

6s And in thoſe days * ſhall men ſeek death, and 
ſhall not find it, and ſhall defire to die, and death ſhall 
flee from them 7. | 

# The calamities of thoſe days ſhall be ſo great, that Men ſhall be 
weary of their Lives, 

7 And the ſhape of the locuſts were like unto Hor- 
ſes prepared unto the barrel z ; and upon their heads 
were as 1t were crowns like gold #, and their faces 


were as the faces of men -x. 

# This whole Deſcription of theſe Locuſts ſpeaks them no Inſet, 
but to be miſchievous Men ; they were very terrible to look uvons 
like Horſes harneſſed ready to fight; fo eel 2. 44 w This fignified 
_y ſhould be great and rich, Conquerours. x Yet theſe were 

en. 

s And they had hair as the hair of women y, and 


their teeth were as zhe teeth of lions 3. 

y Diſhevelled, or hanging looſe; the Arabians were wont to 0 ſo; 
or this may ſignifie, that they were beautiful as well as terrible to look 
upon. x Sharp and ſtrong, ſee 7oel 1.6. | 

9 And they had breaft-plates, as it were breaſt- 
plates of iron a, and the ſound of their wings was 
as the found of chariots, of many horſes running to 


battel b. 

a Armed with the beſt Armour of Defence. b Like Locuſts,they 
moved very ſwiftly. This agreeth to the Saracens, who made ſuch 
haſte in their ery rh that ( faith Mr. Xfede ) in little more than 
80 years they had ſubdued Paleſtine, Syria, both the Armenia's, al- 
moſt all the lefſer Aſia, Perſia, India, Egypt, Numidia, all Barbary, 
Portugal, Spain, and within a few more, Sicily, Candia, Cyprus, and 
were come to the very Gates of Rome, ſo as they had many Crowns 
on their Heads, and moved 2s with Wings. 

10 And they had tails like unto ſcorpions c, and 
there were ſtings in their tails 4, and their power was 
to hurt men five months 2. 

c A kind of venomous Serpents 4 that have their Stings in 
their Tails, with which they preſently kill both Men and Beaſts. 
e What theſe five months mean, is very hard to ſay; certainly it is 
a certain number for an uncertain, and mentioned rather than any 
other times, becauſe it is ( as they ſay ) the uſual time of the, Life 
of Licuſts, though ſome obſerve, that five months have in them 
( counting as the Hebrews, 3o days to the month ) x50 davs, and a 
day ſtanding fora year, as in Prophetical Writings, it denoteth the 
juft time the Saracens raged in Italy, from the year 83o, to the 
year 980; as to which I refer my Reader to ſearch Hiſto- 
ries. 

11 And they had a king over them which 7s * the 
angel of the bottomleſs pit f, whoſe name in the He- 


brew tongue zs Abaddon g, but in the Greek tongue j 7hat isro 
ſay, a des 
ſtoyer. 


hath h:zs name || Apollyon h. 


f Solomon 


Chap. IX. 


12. 25. 


*Tob 3.21. 
Iide 2. 19. 
Chap.5.16. 


* Yer. I. 


| Chap. IX. 


*Ch.8.13. 


| Or, as. 


*Pſ. 68.17 
Dan. 7.10 


f Solomon, Prov. 30. 27. ſaith, The Locuſts hove no King over them, 
yet they go forth by Bands ;, according to which theſe Locuſts cannot 
be underſtood of InſeRts fo called, or, if they have a King, yet it is 
certain the Devil 15 not their King, who is here called the Angel of 
the bettomleſs Pit. g From TAR he hath deſtroyed. h That is, a 
Deſtroyer ; intimating that the whole buſineſs of this barbarous Ene- 
my, ſhould be to ruine and deſtroy Nations. 

12 * One wo is: paſt, and behold there come two 


more woes hereafter 7. 

7 One period of time is over, in which God hath plagued the 
World with a very great Judgment ; but there are two more to 
come, which will be equally, if not more calamitous. 

13 And the fixth angel ſounded, and I heard a voice 
from the four horns of the golden altar which is before 


God 7 


? That is, from God ; I heard him give a Command, which 


Voice is aid to have proceeded from the Golden Altar ( in allufion 


to Exod. 30.3. ) becauſe there God received the Prayers of his Peo- 
ple ; and this Voice proceeding from that place, might ſignifie the 
following Judgment to come in anſwer to the Prayers of his Ser- 
vants Souls from thence crying to him for Vengeance. See chap. 6. 
9, IO, ; 


14 Saying to the fixth angel which had the trum- 
pet, Looſe the four angels which are bound in the 


great river Euphrates &. 

k By theſe four Angels or Inſtruments of God to execute his 
Vengeance, I find the moſt valuable Interpreters underſtanding the 
Turks, conſidered as diſtin& from the Sayacens, and ſucceeding of 
them, whoſe Empire began in Ottoman 1296, or thereabouts. Mr. 
Mede ſaith theſe four Angels denote ſo many Sultanies or Kingdoms, 
into which the Turks were diſperſed, having paſſed the River Eu- 
phrates, which River is famous for four things : 1. It was the boun- 
dary of David and Solomon's Kingdom, Deut. 11. 24. Foſh. 1. 4. 
2. It was that River by which Babylon ſtood, Fer. 13. 4, 5, 6. 3. It 
was the boundary of the Roman Empire, beyound which it could ne- 
ver extend it ſelf. 4. And it alſo was the ſeat of the 7iwks, who 
having ſome years before come over Euphrates, firſt divided them- 
ſelves into a Tetrarchy; of which one in Aſia, another at Aleppo, 
another at Damaſcus, a fourth at Antioch. Mr. Mede gives us a Ta- 
ble or Diagram of it, Clav. Apoc. 40. p. 102. where they were 
bounded for a while, but about the year 1300 they were looſed, and 
began further to invade Europe, which is the ſevere Providence of 
God, conceived to be here foretold as the conſequent of this ſixth 
Angel's ſounding. The Turks, who though come over the River Eu- 
Phrates, had hitherto by the Providence of God been bounded near 
unto it, not much contending to inlarge their Territories, now join- 
ed together with the Saracens under the Ottoman, and went further 
into Europe, and'could by no means be ſtopt till they had got the Em- 
pire of Conſtantinople. ; 

15 And the four angels were looſed which were 
prepared || for an hour, and a day, and a month, and 


a year /, for io ſlay the third part of men m7. 

That is ( ſay ſome) for any time whatſoever God would 
have them move; or for that certain time which God had deter- 
mined; but Mr. Mede hath here a peculiar Notion ; he obſeryeth 
that an hour, and a day, and a month, and a year, make juft 396 
years. Ina year are 365 days, in a month 3o, which makes 395, 
to which add the odd day, then make 396. The Turks begun their 
Empire under Ottoman, who began his Reign 1296 : But their Lea- 
der Tangrolipix upon the taking of Bagdat was inaugurated, and 
put on the Imperial Rohe, Anno 1057. Conſtantinople was taken by 
them 1453, betveen which are juſt 396 years. m In which time 
they ſlew :a numberleſs number of Men, called here the third 
part. 

16 And* the number of the army of the horſe-men, 
were two hundred thouſand thouſand, and I heard the 


number of them 7:. | 

n He ſaith nothing of the Infantry, but leaves us to conjecture 
how great that muſt be, from the number of the Horſe ; we muſt 
not think there was preciſely this number, but the meaning is, that 
the Armies ſhould be vaſtly great, as we know all the Turkiſh Ar- 
mies are. Magog's Army 1s deſcribed from the Cavalry, Ezek. 38. 


4, 15. 
17 And thus I ſaw the horſes in the viſion, and 


them that ſare on them, having breaſt-plates of fire, 
and of Jacinth, and brimſtone ; and the heads of the 
horſes were as the heads of lions, and out of their 


mouths iſſued fire, and ſmoke, and brimſtone 0. 

o We have no ſuch Deſcription or Repreſentation as this in 
any other place of Holy Writ. Some underſtand it of the ſeyeral 
coloured Breaſt-plates that the Soldiers wore ; ſome of a red and 
flaming colcur hke Fire ; others blew like the Jacinth ; ſome pale ; 
all ſuch as wear them look terribly. Mr. Mede hath here again a 
peculiar Notion ; thinking that the Holy Ghoſt doth here ſignifie 
their fighting with great Guns, ( not known before the Siege of Con 
fRtantinople ) which throw out Fire and Smoke, &c. and ſo alter the 
Air, the Medium by which we ſee, that the oppoſite party in fight- 
ing appear to thoſe that uſe theſe Arms, as if they were covered 
with Breaſt-plates that were red, and blue, and pale. To confirm 
this, he tells us of Chalcondylas his report of this Siege, who men- 
tioneth great Guns uſed at it of that vaſt bigneſs, that one of them 
required threeſcore and ten yoke of Oxen, and two thouſand Men to 
draw it, &c. It is at leaft a very ingenious conjeQure, and I 
could not but mention it in honour to the Learned Author ; lea- 
ving it to my Readers liberty, whether he will with Mr. Mede, 
judge this litteral ſenſe of the Text-is beſt, or interpret all theſe 
Phraſes more generally, only of a terrible appearance of thoſe Ar- 
mics. 


REVELATION. 


18 By theſe three were the third part of men kil- | 
led, by the fire, and by the ſmoke, and by the brim- 


ſtone which iſſued out of their mouths p. 

Þ That is, a great part of Men were killed by theſe numerous 
Armies, No ſuch Devaſtations ' were ever made by any Enemies 
that ever appeared in the World, as by the Turks have been, nor 
ever were there ſuch vaſt great Guns made, out of which came Fire 
and Smoke, and Brimſtone. 

19 For their power zs in their mouth, and in their 
tails g, for their tails were like unto ſerpents, and had 


heads ; and with them they do hurt 7. 

q By their Tails ſome underſtand their Infantry or Foot-Soldie- 
ry ; others their Serpentine Craft and Subtilty. As the Locuſts verſe 10. 
are compared to Scorprons, whoſe Sting was in their Tails, anc who 
were ſaid to hurt with their Tails ; ſo the fame thing is ſaid of 
theſe Armies, intimating that the Tirks ſhould be miſchieyou; by 
the ſame Arts and Means as their Predecefſors the Saracens. r Theſe 
are ſaid to have had Heads in their Tails, which was not ſaid of - 
the Locuſis; the reaſon of which Interpreters judge to * have 
_ from the different Animals by which they are repreſent- , 
ed. 


20 And the reſt of the men which wers not kil- 
led by theſe plagues /; yet repented not of the works 
of their hands, that they ſhould not worſhip devils 7, 


* and idols of gold, andfilver, and brafs, and ſtore, »1,y.11,,, 
and of wood ; which neither can ſee, nor hear, nor Deur. 32. 


walk z: | 
J The two thirds of Men that ſhould be left, for we read 


this ſide of Euphrates. This leaves this applicable to none but 
Papiſts ; for there are none elſe but them who worſhip Demons, 
Gr. azz, or Idols of Gold and Silver. ft By Devils are meant 
Demons, that 1s, perſons that are Dead, whom the Heathens made 
their Petty Gods, and worſhipped as middle Beings betwixt them 
and the Supreme Gods (according to their Notion ) which is the 
ſame thing the Papiſts are guilty of, with this only - difference ( as 
Mr, Mede excellently obſerveth ) that the Heathens made many Su- 
preme Gods, and theſe Modern Idolaters own -but one in that No- 
tion ; but as many Deaſtri or Demons, as they did, which are all 
thoſe Saints to whom they pay an Adoration, as to thoſe who 
ſhould preſent their deſires to God, which, as Mr. Mede ſufficient- 
ly proves from Writers, was the very work the Pagans alotted for 
thoſe whom they Canoniz'd after Death. From whence came the 
Names of Baal and Bell, &c. but from Belus, who is faid to have 
been the firſt Prince, whom being dead, they made a God, and 
adored ? which Demons God in Scripture calleth Devils : Nor do 
any but they, now worſhip Images, the works of Men's hands, 
made of Gold, Silver, Braſs and Wood, who are here deſcribed in 
the ſame words as by the Pſalmif, Pſal. 115.4. & 135. 15. Not- 
withſtanding God's great Judgment executed upon the Grecian 
Churches, yet they repented not of their Idolatry and Superſtition; 
ſo as God hath brought them wholly under the power of thoſe 
Barbarous Enemies ; and though the Romiſh party ſeeth this, yet 
neither do they repent, which may give them cauſe to fear that 
God ſhould make uſe of the ſame Adverſary to deſtroy them like. 
wiſe; eſpecially confidering that neither to this day do they re- 
nt 


21 Neither repented they of their murders w,nor of 
their ſorceries, nor of their fornications, nor of their 
thefts. 

w Of their murdering of the Sains of God, but go on in that pra- 
Rice; nor of their Fornications, which are publickly allowed amongſt 
them; nor of their Theft and Sacriledge, and other Wickednelſs ; 
but are as infamous for their Debaucheries as for their Superſtition 
and Idolatry. How long this great Judgment of the Turk ſhall con- 
tinue upon Chriſtians, we cannot tell ; it is Mr. Brightman's Opinion 
that it ſhall determine 1696 ; but of that the Scripture hath not in- 
formed us, and gueſſing is a Vanity, where we have no ſure Founda- . 
tion, and ſo many have appeared to have been miſtaken in ſuch par- 
ticular Determinations, that he lightly expoſeth his Reputation that 
willadventure further upon ſuch Rocks. 


CHAP, X 


A mighty ſtrong Angel ſent from Heaven in great glory with a little Book. 
opened, x, 2. This Angel crieth, and ſeven Thunder follow, 3. What 
the ſeven Thunders uttered is (ealed up, 4. He ſweareth by him that 
liveth for ever, that - time ſhall be no more, 6, 7. ” ary commanded 
to eat the little Book, 8. He doth ſo, and findeth it ſweet in 
his mouth, but bitter in his belly, 9, 10. Me muſt propheſie again, 
II. 


We have had in the former Chapters Chriſt's Revelation 
to St. John of what ſhould happen in the Roman 
Empire #nder the fix firſt Seals, that 7s, during their 
Pagan State, ( which determined in Conſtantine's 
zime, Anno 310, or 325.) Under the ſeventh Seal 
( that 1s from chap. 8. ver. 1. ) he hath revealed to 
him what ſhould happen after that time to the Roman 
Empire by tne Goths and Vandals wnder the four jirſt 
Trumpets,and by the Saracens under the fifth Trumpet, 
and the Turks under the ſixth Trumpet, who are yet 
rampant and going on in their Outrages, The ſeventh 
Trumpet #72 courſe ſhould ſound next hut we come not 
to that ill chap. 11. 15. In this Chapter, and to the 

157th 


Chap. X. 


of one Pl195.37. 


third part deftroyed ; and this alſo muſt be underſtood of Men ' Cor. 10, 
awelling in Countries ſubje& formerly to the Reman Empire on ©®- 


Cha 


* Ch.1.15. 


*Dan.8.26 
& 12. 4,9. 


n, X. 


15th ver/e of the next Chapter, ſeems ant interruption 
of the Hiſtory that Chriſt might reveal to his Prophet 
the main things that ſhould concern his Church. About 
the ſenſe of this Interpreters are divided; ſome think- 
ing this'a diitinct Prophecy re/ating to the affairs of 
the Church, yet not in a continued ſtory, but made up 
of ſeveral Viſions, ſome contemporary with the times 
before mentioned, ſome continuing to the time afier 
rhe ſixth Trumpet, which Prophecy as they judge be- 
ginneth at the eleventh Chapter, io which what we 
have in this Chapter 7s IntroduCtive. Of this mind 
are our Dr. More, Mr. Mede, and other very valu- 
able Interpreters, whoſe Reaſons may be read in Mr. 
Pool's Latin Synoplis por this Chapter, and ſome of 
them may be noted by 1s as we go through this Chap- 
ter. Others think 1t 1s no diſtinft Prophecy. 


Nd 1 ſaw another mighty angel « come down 
from heaven b, cloathed with a cloud c, and a 
rainbow was upon his head d, and his face was as it 


were the ſun e, and * his feet as pillars of fire f , 

a The moſt and beſt Interpreters underitand by this Angel, ChriF, 
formerly repreſented to us as a Lamb, here as an Angel; none but he 
could call the two Witneſſes, chap. 11. 3. his Witneſſes ; beſides the 
glorious appearance of this Angel, ſpeaketh him no ordinary Angel. 
6 God being about to do or ſpeak ſome great thing, is oft thus ſet 
out as coming down from Heaven. c Chriſt is deſcribed as coming 
with Clouds,Rev.1.7. The Lord hatb ſaid he will dwell in thick darkneſs, 
2 Chron. 6. 1. d Anda Rainbow upon his head, which was the fign 
of 'the Covenant made with Noah, Gen. 9. 16. and fitted Chriſt's 
head, as he that brought Peace to the World, and to his Church in 
ſpecial. See Matth. 17. 2. f Signifying the fteadineſs and efficacy 
of his ations. 


,2 And he had in his hand a little book open g : 
And he ſer his right foot upon the ſea, and hzs left foot 


on the earth h, 

g The ſame Book with that mentioned, chap. 5. 1. (though ſome 
by it underſtand the Scriptures) . There-it was repreſented to John 
FE; ſealed with ſeven Seals ; here open, to let us know that all the 
Counſels of God, however ſcaled as to us, are open to Chriſt, and 
that he would open to John what ſhould come to paſs in his Church to 
the end of the World. h To let us xnow the Dominion he had over 
the whole World, as well the more unquiet as quieter parts of 
it. | | 
3 And cried with a loud voice, as whez a lion roar- 
eth 7 ; and when he had cried, ſeven thunders uttered 


their voices. &. : 

7 This voice ſuited him who is the Lioh of the Tribe of 7udah; 
the Lions voice is both loud and terrible. & Interpreters judge theſe 
ſeven Thunders to ſignifie thoſe Judgments of God which ſhould be 
executed in the World upon the ſounding of the ſeventh Trumpet, 
and precedaneous to the Day of Judgment, which we :ſhall find more 
fully opened. under the ſeventh Trumpet by the feyen Vials poured 
out, which ſignifie the ſame thing : Yet ſome underſtand by. theſe 
ſeven Thunders, the powerful preaching the Goſpel; but the other 
ſeemeth more probable. : 

..4 And when the ſeven thunders had uttered their 
voices, I was about 'to write /: and I heard a voice 
fron heaven, ſaying unto'me, * Seal up thoſe things 
which the ſeven thunders uttered, and write 'them 


not 7. 
1 To write what he underſtood of the Voices of theſe Thunders. 


7 But he was forbidden the publication of ' them, becauſe they con- | 


cerned things tobe fulfilled at ſome diftance of time, and ſhould be 
afterward more fully revealed, 


5 And the angel which IT ſaw ſtand upon the ſea, 
and upon the ..earth z, lifteq,-up his hand to hea- 
Ven 0, ut x 4 I '»W*4.*?} | 

rn. See verſe 2. which Angel was Chrift, o as Dan. 12. 7. with 
which Prophecy thisagreeth. It is anordinary geſture uſed in Swear- 


"_ . 1: 

6 And ſware by him that fiveth for ever and ever, 
who created heayen, and the. things that-therein are, 
and the earth;and: the things'that theretn: are, and the 
ſea, and the: things which” ate" therein p, that. there 
ſhould be timeno longer 9. © | 

p That is, by God; for this Deſcription can, agree.to, no other, 
neither is it Jawful to Swear by any other, ſee Dan. 12,7. _ q There 
ſhall be an end of the World ( ſo ſome, but this 7ohn-knew well e- 
nough. It is rather to be underſtood ofthe time of the fourtb 2/o- 


| narchy, the Roman \Empire ſhould come' to 'an end.': Or the time of 


' Hants the prophets z. 


mies, ſhould be no more. | 


7 But in the days of the voice of the ſeventh an- 
el 7, when. he ſhall begin to.ſound /;, the. myſtery of 
od ſhould be-fniſhed-z, ashe bath declared'to his ſer: 


EIS | 


the Aﬀiitions of the Church, whether by Pagan or Antichriſtian Ene- 


y Of whom, and his ſounding, we ſhall read , chap. 11. 15. 
From that time that he beginneth to ſound ſhall begin # the my- 
ftery of Ged to be finiſhed; either the myſtery mentioned, chap. 11. 
15. when the Kingdoms of the World (hall become the Kingdoms of 


REVELATION. 


our Lord ard his Chrisk. Or more generally, Whatſoeycr God hath 


_» 


* Antichriſt, and the end of the World. 
declared by his Servants and Prophets about theſe thinzs (as to 


revealed concerning the propagation of the Goſpel, the ruine of 


u Whatioever God hath 


which ſee the 24, 26, 27, 65 Chapters of Iſaiah, Dat. 7. It, 12. 


Zech. chap. 14. Mal. 3. 4. ) it ſhall be tulfilied; and begin to be ful51- 


ted when the ſeventh Angel ſhall begin to blow, within which period 
- time moſt Interpreters judge we are, as bcing begun ſome time 
Ince. | 

8 And the voice which I heard from heaven w, ſpuke 
unto me again, and faid, Go, ard take the little book 
which is open in the hand of the angel which ſtanderh 
upon the 1a, and upon the earth . 

w The voice mentioned, verſe 4, x The little Book mentioned, 
verſe 2. Fohn is bid to take this Book, by which ſome underftand the 
Scriptures ; but it is moſt probable the Book mentioned, cl..7p. 5. 1. 
before ſealed, now open. 

9 And1 went unto the angel, and ſaid unto him, 


Give me the little book. And he ſaid unto me, 


Chap. XI], 


* Take zt, and eat it up y, and it ſhall make thy *Ezek.2.2. 


belly bitter, but it ſhall be in thy mouth ſweet 2s ho- 
ney 2. : 

y Thus Ezekiel was bidden to eat the Roll ; and it was in his 
Mouth as (weet as Honey, Ezek. 2.8. and 3.3. Theeating of a Book 
ſignifies the due reading of it, dizeſting it, and meditating uyon the 
matters 1n if. x It ſhould be ſweet in his Mouth, as it was the Re- 
velation of the Mind and Will of God ( which is ſiveet to all pious 
Souls ; ſee er. 15. 16._) but inhis belly it ſhou!d be bitter, being 
the Revelation of the Divine Will, as to the bringing ſuch terrible 
Judgments upon an impenitent” People. | 

10 And I took the little book out of the angels 
hand, and ate it up a, gand it was in my mouth ſweet 
as honey 6b, and affvonas I had eaten it, my belly was 
bitrer c.-_ 

4 According tothe Command, verſe 9. b. As it was the Revelation 
of God's Will,  c But wien he came to think upon it, it was cither 
ſo myſterious, that he could not comprehend it, or the matter of it 
was fo ſad, that it gave him great trouble. 

11 And he ſaid unto- me; Thou muſt propheſie a- 
gain d before many people, and nations, and tongues, 
and kings e. 

d Theſe words 3. many think ) evince this a Prophecy diſtin&t 
from the former, he muſt prophefte azain. e Who ſhall Le concern- 


& 3.1,2,3- 


ed to hear what ſhall now be revealed to thee concerning the Riſe of 


Antichriſt, his Rule and Tyranny, and his Fall and Ruine, which are 
things began long before, during the Periods of time, when the ſix 
before-mentioned Trumpets founded, but were net there clearly re- 
vealed ; which things I will reveal unto thee, that thou, and aſter 
thee, the Miniſters of the Goſpel may in their ſeycra! Periods reveal 
them in the hearifig of many People and N.tions, gc. fo that there- 
by 7ohn ( as ſome think ) was conſtituted a Prophet to reveal the 
ſtate of the Church under 4ntichriF, and his Tyranny, and fina!ly his 
Ruine, which began at the ſoundin; of the ſeventh Trumpet, chap. 11. 
15. but when it ſhall be finiſhed, God alone muſt inform the Warld 
by the Ifſues of his Providence. | 


CHAP. XL 


The Temple, Altar, and them that worſhip therein are meaſured, x. 
' The outward Court not meaſured, but given to the Gentiles, 2. 2. The 
two Witneſſes propheſie in Sackeloth, yet. have power t1 infli& Plagues up- 
on their Enemies, 3 6. The Lea$t ſhall fight again them, and 
Þjll them, and 'ye unburied, 7, 8. The Nations rejice hereat, 9,10, 
After three days and a half they riſe again, to the terrour of them that 
behold them, 11. They are called up to Heaven, 12. A great 
Earthquake, and the fall of the tenth part of the City followeth : 
The ſecond Woe is paſt. 13, 14. The ſeventh Angel ſoundeth, the King- 
doms of this world made the Lords, 15. The 24 Elders praiſe the 
Lord, 16, 17. The Nations are angry, 18. The Temple of G:d open- 
ed, 19. 


.Nd there was given to me a * reed like a rod a, 
A And the angel ſtood; faying, Riſe, and meaſure 
the temple of God 6, and the altar, and them that wor- 


{hip therein c. 

a- The next words tell us the uſe of this Reed. It was a meaſu- 
ring Reed, ſuch a one as Ezekiel in his Viſien, ( Ezek. 4o. 3.) ſaw in 
the Man's Hand. There, the meaſuring was in order to a Rebuild- 
ing, here,.in order to preſerving. b We cannot well underſtand 
what followeth, without underſtanding the StruQure of the Tem- 
ple. The 7ews, for the place.of their Worſkip, had firſt a Taber- 
nacle, then a Temple. The. Tabernacle was a moveable houſe, which 
they took down and carried about with them in their Journyings, 
and: pitched down when in any place they pitched their Tents, We 
read of it, Exod. 40. we read but of one Court in that, into which 
only -the Prieſts and Levites entred ; the People were without it, 
pitehing their Tents round about it. It had in it an Altar of Gold 
for Incenſe, Exod. 40. 5. which ſtood before the Ark, verſe 26, 27, 
and verſe 29.: and an Altar:for Burnt-offering, which ſtood by the 
Door of. the Tahernacle.' The Temple was built by Solomon, 1 Rings 
6. and afterwards rebuilded by Zerobabel, upon their return out of 
Captivity: That was: builded with two Courts, #n inner Court, 
1 Kings 6.36, in which. was: the A/tar; and an outward Court, 
which is. called the great Court, 2 Chron. 4. 9. and in Ezekiel many 
times the outward Court. This is called the Houſe, in the firſt Book 
of Kings, \chap. 6. 17. It was in lenzth forty Cubits; the Oracle 
was within it, verſe 19. where ſtood the Ark covered with the 
Cherubims.. Into the inward Court the Priefts and Levites only 

Came ; 


* Ezek.40, 
3, Xc. 


Chan. XI. 


| Or, ca$t 
Out. 


Y Ch. 13-5. 


} Or,T 81! 
gruve unto 
my tw9 
witneſſes, 
that they 
may pro- 
th:iy. 


came ;z into the outward Court caine any of the J/raelites. Herod, 
upon the additional Building to the Tempie, added another large 
Court, called the Court of the Gentiles; but that not being of God's 
Direction, nor in Solomon's Temple, or Zerobabel's 1s not here menti- 
oned. This Temple was a Type of the Church underthe New Teſta- 
ment, 1 Cor. 3, 17. 2 Cor. 6. 16. and is fo to be interpreted general- 
iy in this Book. For the material Temple at Hieruſalem was deſtroyed 
by the Romans more than twenty years betore this Prophecy,. never 
to be builded more ; not one ſtone was left upon another ;, ſo. that 
Fohn here was bid to meaſure the Church. c Yet not the whole 
Church, but that part of it. which the inner Court typified ; the Al- 
tar, and thoſe that worſhipped within that ſpace where that was, 
which of old were only the Prieſts and Levites ; and under the New 
Teſtament ſignified thoſe who were to be an: Holy Prieſthood, 'a Spirt- 
taal Houſe, thoſe that ſhould offer up ſpiritual Sacrifices acceptable 
through Teſis Chrilt, v Pet. 2. 5. who could indure a meaſuring by 
God's Reed, the Word of God. 

2 But, the court which is without the temple || leave 
out, and, meaſure it not d: for it is. given unto rhe 
Gentiles z ; and rhe holy city ſhall they tread under 


toor f * torty and two months g. | 

d There is no great doubt, but the ſame Perſons are here to be 
underſtood by the Court which is without the Temple, ( that 1s, with» 
out the inward Court ) and the holy City, and by them, both the 
generality of thoſe People, who come under the Name of the Chri- 
ftimn Church, who are all of them, in ſome' ſenſe, an holy People, 
1 Cor. 7. 14. ( asall the Jews were) yet for the greateſt part of 
them John 1s commanded to omit or negle& them, as thoſe who 
would not indurea meafure by the Reed, and of whoſe Preſervation 
God would take no ſuch care, ( e. f. ) but give them up to. the Gen- 
tiles to be trodden under foot. By which, many learned and good 
Men underſtznd God's ſuffering Antichri$f to have a Power over 
and againſt them. I find ſome, underſtanding by the Altar, and 
thoſe that worſhipped therein, the 5g) qpakgs Church, that for ſome 
hundreds of years after Chriſt kept cloſe to the Divine Rule, whom 
God preſerved, though in the midſt of the Ten firſt Perſecutions : 
and by the outward Court, the Church after that time which God ſuf- 
fcred to fall under the Power of the Beaft, and Antichrift, that is, 
the Papacy, which are well enough called the Gentiles, as bringing 
in Gentiliſm again into the Church, and hardly differing in any thing, 
{.ving that the old Heathens owned matiy Supreme Gods, and thee 
new Gentiles but one. - God ſheweth Fohn here, that he would 
ive up the outward Court, or this holy City, the generality of Chri- 
{tians, to theſe Gentiles, that they ſhould rule, and domineer over 
them g for forty and two Months , the: meaning of which, we fhall 
by and by ſtew. A hte pious and learned Writer differs alittle in 
his ſenſe, as thinking that God here ſheweth Fohn ſomething further, 
viz. That under this ſixth Trumpet, he would give the generality of 
thoſe called Chriſtians, that will not indure the meaſure of the Reed, 
fo over to Antichriſt, that they ſhall turn Papiſts,, and help to kill the 
Lord's Witneſſes; of which we ſhall ſpeak, verſe 3. So as this 1s 
not a new Prophecy, but a continuation of what ſhall happen after 
the ſounding of the fixth, and before the ſoundmg- of the ſeventh 
Trumpet : if ſo, I conceive that thoſe words | ſhall they tread un- 
der fort forty and two Months ) muſt be underſtood, until the end of 
the 42 Months ; for the 42 Months being the whole time of An- 
zichriſt, or the Beaſt, muſt be in a great meaſure ſpent before the 
ſounding of the ſixth Angel.” But it ſeems to. be the Opinion of this 
learned Man, that a very great part of thoſe who' pretend to con- 
fitute the reformed Proteſtant Church at this day, but are but as the 
outward Court, not ſuch 'as worſhip within the Oracle, ſhall, before 
the ſounding of the ſeventh Trumpet, apoſtatize, and fall.off to. Po- 
pery, until Antichriſ's 1260 days ſhall expire, and joyn with .Pa- 
piſts in the killing of the Witneſſes. The truth of which we muſt leave 
to the Providence of God in time to diſcover ; aſthough who ſo con- 
fidereth the face of things this day inEurope(within which the greateſt 
part of the Chriſtian Church is) will jadge there is too great a probabi- 
lity of what this learned Man ſaith,but I dare'qetermine nothing in it. 
3 And ||I wilF give nee unto my. two witnelles 7, 
and they ſhall propheſie a thouſand wo hundred: :;:4 

threeſcore days clothed in ſackcloth #. * ow wn 
i There hath been a.great Diſpute amongſt . godly and earned 
Men, who theſe two Witneſles ſhould be : Some have thought them 
to be Enoch and Elias, who, though long fince glorified, they have 
thought ( with no great probability, as. I ſuppoſe any indifferent 
Perſon will judge ) ſhall come again, and. be killed on the Earth; 
yet this is the general Notion of the Popifh Writers, Others would 
have them the tio forts of Goſpel-Churches, *one of which was 
made up of Native Fews, the other\ of Gentiles proſelyted to the 
Ciirifiian Faith, Others have interpreted it-bf the Ola Teftarnent 
and the New : Others, of ſome two eminemt"Divines ; and as to- them 
there have. been, various gueſſes : Others,.:of the Miniſters whom 
God imployed upon the Reformation: Others of a- Chriſtian Magi- 
firacy and Miniſtry. For my own part, ths name of Witneſſes 1s fo 
often applied to the firſt Miniſters of the Goſpel, Aﬀs 1. 18, 22; & 
4+ 33. & 22. 15. & 26:16. 1 Pet. 5.1. Aﬀs 2.22. \&'3:15. & 5.32. 
& 10. 41. that Icannot but underſtand | it -of that faithful” parf of 
the Miniſtry, who preach the Goſpel: faithfully” duting the” Whole 
Reizn of Antichriſt, Neither do I think that the Number -#w7-at all 

relates to their Number, but to their Witneſs-hearing : Two bein 

the Number which God ordained as: ſufficient to eſtabliſh :all'Civi 
Things, Deut. 17.6. & 19.15. Matth. 18.16. Heb, yo. 28. "unleſs 
there be a regard had: to. thoſe pairs, which all'along the Old 'Tefia- 
ment bare Teſtimony for God ; Moſes and” Aaron,” Caleb arid Foſhua, 
Elnah a1d Eliſha; and after the Captivity of Zcrobabet and Foſhva, 
and the two Olive-trees mentioned, Zech. q. 11, 14. to which plain- 
ly this Text hath Relation, verſe 4 To which ſome alſo add: Abraham 
and Lot, Ezra and Nehemiah, Haegai and Zechariah, Paul and Bar- 
rabas, Peter and 7ohn : And note, that when Chriſt firſt ſent 'out 
his Apoſtles, Matth. 10. He ſent them out 2woby two, þ- We read 
before, that the holv Ciry, that 1s, the true Church, fhould be trod- 
den under foot by the Gentiles forty and two Months ; we read here 


REVELATION. 


——_—_— 


that 1s, 1260 years. 
( that 1s, the Church ) was in the Wilderneſs juſt this time, 1240 


that the Witneſſes ſhould prophefie in Sachcloth 1260 days ; it 1s ap- 
parent, that in the Prophetical ſtyle- a Day fignities a Year. Num. 


' T4. 34. forty Days, each Day for a Tear ſhall ye bear your Iniquities, 


even forty Tears. So Exeh, 4.6. T have appointed thee each Day for a 
Tear; ſo Dan. 9.24, the 70 Weeks muſt fignifie 490 years, ( for 
in 70 Weeks there are 490 days) or elſe the Promiſe as to the 
Coming of the Meſſiah, failed. So the Prophetical Year contains 
360 Years, 'and the Prophetical Month 3o Years ( tor they did 
count 30 Days to each Month ) ſo 42 Months are juſt 1260 Days, 
We ſhall find, chap. 12. 6, that the Woman 


Days, and in chap. 13. 5. This was alſo the time of the Beaſt that 
roſe up out of the Sea, having ſeven Heads, and ten Horns, and upon 
his horns ten Crowns : By which it appeareth, that theſe four things 
ran all parallel at the ſame time ; the Beaſt ariſing, and exerciſing 
his Power, the New Gentiles trampling upon the Church, the holy 
City ; the Woman's abiding in the Wilderneſs, and the Witneſſes 
propheſying in Sackcloth. | If we could'find out where any one of 
theſe began, we ſhould find out the time of all the reſt. Thoſe who 
tix the riſe of the Beaſt in or about 400, muſt add to this 1260. 
Then in 1560, Antichriſt's Reign ſhould have determined, and a!- 
ſo the time of the Churches Perſecution, and the time when faith- 
ful Miniſters ſhould prophefie in Sackcloth' : but if tlie Riſe of the 
Beaſt were in the Year $500, the Expiration muſt be 'in 1769; if 
it be fixed jn 600, all theſe things will determine 1860; for the 
ſame Number of Days being affigned to all the four, it is manifeſt 
that all four began together, and ſhall end together, and that at the 
end of Twelve hundred and ſixty Years after the beginning of 
them. For my own part, I look upon it as very hard to determine; 
but the Difficulty Iyes in finding out the time when . the B-aF firit 
aroſe; for that being once found out, it is eafic. to-conclude from 
Scripture, when both the Popedom! ſhall have an. cnd, and the calarni- 
tous time'for the Church, eſpecially the Miniſtry of it, ſhall ceaſe. 
That which God ſheweth Fobn in this Verſe, is only, That his faith- 
ful Miniſtersthat ſhould truly reveal his Will, ({ which. is here called 
Propheſying ) ſhould have a mournful time. for. 7welve hundred ard 
threeſcore Tears. ; | 

4 Th#ſe are the two olive-ttees /, and the two can- 
dleſticks ſtanding before the God of the earth m7. 

{ Here is a manifeſt Alluſion to Zechariah's Viſion; Z ech. 43,11, 
14. though with ſome little difference. He faw a Candleſtick all of 
Gold, with a Bowl upon the top of it, and his ſeven Lamps thereon, 
and ſeven Pipes.to. the ſeven Lamps which were upon the top thereof < 
and two Olive-trees by. 1t, one upon the right fide of the Bowl, and ano+ 
ther upon the left ſide thereof, verſe 12. The Anpel-tells him, that. 
theſe two Olrve-branches , 'which through the two- Golden Pipes did 
empty. the Golden Oyl out 'of themſelves, were the "two anointed ones 
{ or the two'Sons of - Oyl ] that : ſtood by the Lord of the whole Earth. 
By which ſome underftand Zerobabel and Foſhna ; ſome; thoſe god- 
ly Magiftrates and Prieſts, which after the Captivity the Jewiſh 
Church ſhould have, and prefigured a Goſpel-Miniſtry, who being 
filled with Knowledge and Grace, ſhould feed' the Lord's Church ( as, 
Paſtors after his own heart ) with Wiſdom and Underſtanding, from 
the Gifts and Graces of God's Holy Spirit, which they ſhould re- 
ceivez. which further confirmeth me, thatby the #wo Witneſſes, verſe 
3. we are to underſtand a godly Magiſtracy and Miniſtry ;” ( or rather 
the latter only, to whom Propheſying moſt ſtrifly agreeth ) and 
who have a- more ſpecial Relatton to the Candlefticks here mention- 
ed, by-which' Churches are meant, chap. 1. 20, m' In Zechariah's 
Viſion''was but-0ne Candleſtick,” How comes: here'a mention to be 
made of two'? Mr. Mede' confefſeth himſelf at a loſs here unleſs 
here -anothey Candleſtick be added to ſignifie the, Gentiles Conver- 
ſion to Chriſt, Others think that it denoteth "the ſmall number of 
Goſpel Churches that ſhould be left; | They | were reckoned ſeven, 
chap. 1. 20. here they are reduced to two. Poſſibly. it: may denote 
the different . ſtate of God's Church : In: the Old Teſtament 
God had but one Church, viz.” that of the Jews ; but now he hath 
many ' Churches, -and they are'i all fed | from faithful Miniſters, as 
ects pouring out their Oyl of Grace and Knowledge upon 
nem. .-i7 os Go tals Gs ! Bonnet E979 9! 

5 And-if any -maty witthurt "them 7, fire proceed- 
eth out of” their mouth; -and devoureth their ene- 
mies 0, and if any man .will hurt them, he muſt in 
this manner be killed; ©. ting | 

n_ "That is; my faithful Miniſters, ' the two Olive-branches before- 


accord1 a to Zecharieh's Viſion before-mentioned; and the Revelation 
of the Willof God in it, chap. 4. 6. Not by, Might, nor by Power, but 


It is certain, the Apoſtles had a miraculous Power, but they rare- 
ty 


Chap. Xl, 


Chap. þ + I: 


2F, 
Zech.14.2. 


* Ch. 17. 
I, 5. 


REVELATION 


ly uſd it, but in doing Goodl fo Men ; Anantas and Saphira indeed 
were ſtruck dead upon their Word, As 5. and Elymas the Sor- 
ccrer was ſtruch blind by them ; but this Power is long ſince ceaſed. 
Mr. Mede underſtands this Power of the Keys of Do&rine, and 
Church-cenjures the Miniſters of the Goſpel ſhould be intruſted wth; 
fo as they ſhould not preach the Goſpel unto ſuch as contemned 
their Miniſtry, by the with-holding of which means of Grace; alſo 
they would be deprived of the Dew of heavenly Grace. And, in- 
deed, this ſeemeth more proper than to underſtand it of the Keys 
of Diſcipline; for what Power of this Nature have Miniſters over 
thoſe who are without? I take a general Explication to be the beſt. 
If any hurt them, God ſhall revenge their Cauſe, not only by ſpi- 
ritual, but by temporal Judgments, bringing all manner of Eyvils 
upon their Adverſaries. They are ſaid to have Power to do it, 
nM God will do it in the Revenge of the Injuries done unto 
tnem, 


7 And when they ſhall have finiſhed their teſtimo- 


. ny /; * the beatt that aſcendeth out of the bottomlels 


pit z, F ſhall make war againſt them z, and ſhall over- 


come them, and kill them «. 

{ *Oray r9fawnr;, Mr. Mede notes, that this is ill tranſlated by the 
Preterperſe& Tenſe : The true Engliſh of it is, when they ſhall be 
abrut to finiſh their Teſtimony: When they have prophefied 1n 
Sackcloth the moit of their twelve hundred and fixty Years, they 
ſhall niect with u/timum conatam Antichriſti, the laſt ſtruggle of the 
Beaſt for life. t That is, the Beaſt mentioned, chap. 13. 1, 4+ (by 
which the Papacy is meant, whom they have plagued all the time of 
their Prophecy, though continual Sufferers from it) « ſhall get 
Life again, and make one Puſh more, poſſibly the ſharpeſt yet 
made, w and be too hard for them, and kill them. It 1s a great 
Queſtion, Whether this be to be underſtood of taking away their 
natural Lives, or of a civil Death relating to them as Witneſſes, ma- 
king them as if they were naturally dead. - The latter of theſe 
ſeemeth to me much the more probable, for theſe reaſons ; 1. Sup- 
poſing the godly Magiſtracy, or Miniſtry, or the latter alone, to 
be the two Witneſſes, it doth not ſeem probable that ever the Pa- 
pacy ſhall fo far prevail, as to kill all ſuch over the Face of the 
whole Church. 2. Neither is the Holy Ghoſt here ſpeaking of them 
as Men, but as Witneſſes. 3. Nor would either Friends or Ene- 
mies ſuffer dead Bodies to be unburied three Days and an half, in 
the Street of a great City, as v. 8, 9. 4 Neither is their Reſur- 
retion mentioned, v. 11. to be underſtood of a corporal Reſur- 
reftion. I take therefore the killing here mentioned, to be under- 
ſtood of a deſtroying them as Witnefles, turning magiſtrates out 
of their Places, and Miniſters out of their Places; thouzh it be 
not probable that ſach a Malice and Hatred as ſhould cauſe this, 
ſhould terminate without the Blood of fome of them ; but that 
ſurely is not the thing principally here intended. | 

$ And their dead bodies /h4// //e mm the ſtreet of 
* the great city, which ſpiritually is called Sodom and 


Egypt x, where alſo our Lord was crucifed y. 

x Their Bodies dead, in the ſenſe before-mentioned, ſhall con- 
tinue ſo for three days and an half (of which we ſhall ſpeak, v. 11.) 
But what is here meant, 1. by the great City? 2. By the Street 
of the great City ? Some, by the great City, would have Hieruſa- 
lem underſtood ; but that was now far from a great City, nor do 
the Addition of thoſe Words in the latter end of the . Verſe prove 
it ; for Chriſt was not crucified in that City, but without the Gates, 
Moſt judicious Interpreters, by the great City, here underſtand 
Rome, which is ſeven or eight times (under the Name of Babylon) 
ſo called in this Book, chap. 14. 8. and chap. I6, 19. and 18, Io, 
16, 18, 19, 21, nor is any other City but that ſo called. This 
oreat City is here ſaid in a ſpiritual Senſe, to be Sodom and Egypt ; 
Sodom for Whoredom and Filthineſs, Egypt for Oppreſſion of the 
Lord's Iſrael. As to the ſecond Queſtion, what is here meant by 
the Street of the great City 2 Mr. Mede hath irrefragably proved, 
that it cannot be meant of any Pariſh or ſuch place in this City, 
2s we call a Street. 1. Becauſe our Lord was crucified neither in any 
Street, or Pariſh, or any other Place within the-Walls of Zieruſa- 
lem. 2. Both Hieruſalem and Rome had many more than one 
Street. 3. Becauſe the Bodies being dead, doubtleſs lay in the 
place where they were ſlain; but Men do not uſe to fight in the 
Streets of Cities. 4 Nor was there a place for all People, Kindred, 
Tongues and Nations, to ſee them in. He therefore- rightly judg- 
eth, that the Greek, Word which we tranſlate a Street, ſignifies the 
Territories and Juriſdi&tion of this City. See what he ſays to ju- 
ſtifie this in his Clavis Apocal. 40. þ. 138. y And this makes the 
laft Clauſe plain; for though our Lord was not crucified within any 
City, or in the Street of any City, yet he was crucified in a place 
belonging to the Juriſdition of the Roman Emperor z and 1t 15 very 
likely that it is in Europe that the Witneſſes ſhall be ſlain, which, 
in this Senſe, was all of it Street belonging to the City of Rome. 

9 And they of the people, and kindreds, and tongues, 
and nations 2, ſhall ſee their dead bodies three days 


and an half a, and ſhall not ſuffer their dead bodies 


to be put in graves b. 

z That is, a Multitude of People of all ſorts ſhall take notice of 
this Suppreſſion of theſe two witneſſes in their bearing Witneſs 
for God, and all the cruel dealings with them. a There are great 
Diſputes what time theſe three Days and an half Denote; it cannot 
be underſtood of three natural, or artificial Days: for (as it 1s noted 
by the moſt judicious Interpreters) this is much tco ſhort a time 
for all People to ſee their dead Bodies; to rejoice over them, and 
to make merry, and to ſend preſents one to another in Teſhfication 
of the Satisfattion of their Luſts, upon the Victory got over them. 
1 find ſome underſtand theſe three Days and an half, of the 12606 
Years, wherein they propheſied in Sackeloth, ver. 3. which they thus 
make out ; they firſt conclude that theſe are prophetical Days, and 
ſo ſignifie three Years and an half ; then they reſolve each of thoſe 
Years into Days, and count 3 times 360 Days; (for in thoſe Coun- 


tries they ſay the Year was counted to contain but 350 Days) to 


Vol. Il 


| 


to which they add 180, the half of 360, for the half Day, which 

make up 1260 Days, or 42 Months; which is the juſt time both of 
the Beaſts Reign, and of the Woman's abode in the Wilderneſs, and 

of the Witneſſes propheſying in Sackcloth, and of the Gentiles 
treading down the outward Court ;, but it feems very hard; thus 

firſt to make the three Days three Years in a prophetical Senſe, and 

then again to reſolve thoſe three Years into Days, and make thoſe 

Days ſo many more Years; this looks as much like Oppreſſion to 

the Text, as the counting Intereſt upon Intereſt to a Debtor. 2. It 

plainly confounds the time of the propheſying of the Witneſſes 

in'Sackcloth, with the time of their lying dead. Now although the 

time of their lying dead muſt be within the 1260 Days, in the lat- 

ter end thereof, (for it muſt be within the Beaſts 42 Months, men- 

tioned cap. 13. 5.) yet it ſeems hard to make it as long as the Beaſts 

Reign. It certainly ſignifies a time towards the end of the Beaſts 

Retgn, when there ſhall be a more eminent and univerſal Suppreſ- 

f1on of the faithful Witneſſes of Chriſt, than ever was before, It 

ſeemeth therefore rather to be underſtood more generally for a 

ſhort time; as much ſuch a Phraſe or way of ſpeaking is uſed, 

Hiſea 6.2. orelſe for a determinate time of ſuch three Years and 

an half as we ordinarily count. I muſt confeſs the half day being 

added, makes me more incline to the latter ; for though it be uſu- 

al with us to expreſs a ſhort time by tw or three days, and this 
ſeems by that Text of AHo/ea to have been an ancient way of ſpeak- 
ing, yet we do not uſe to put in half days when we ſo ſpeak. I 

do therefore agree with thoſe who think the time here ſpecified, is 
to be underſtood of three ordinary Years and an half; and the ra- 
ther, becauſe this is the very time that Chriſt was under the Pow- 
er of the Phariſees, As three Days (that is part of them) was the 
time of his being under the Power of Death ; ſo three years and 
an half was the juſt time of all the Indignity that he ſuffered from 
his manifeſtation to the World, to his Death. And \as we read in 
the 1 Machab.) it was the juſt time of Anticchus his opprefſinz of 
the Jews, whom Divines judge that Dante! in his 11th Chapter 
makes a Type of Antichriſt. 6 Divines are divided whether theſe 
Words be to be underſtood of Enemies or Fricnds, if it be to be un- 
derſtood of Friends, the Death being a civil Death, principally 
that was ſpoken of, it fignifieth the Providence of God ſo work- 
ing for his Witneſſes, by the -adherance of a party to them, that 
their Adverſaries the Popiſh Party ſhould not wholly extinguiſh 
them, which hath been feen all along the Story of the Church ; 
though their Adverfaries have been warring againſt them, overcome 
and killed them, yet they have not been able to bury them; nor 
ſhall they be able to do it at this laſt pinch, when they ſhall have 
4 greater Vitory over them, than ever before, and bill them to a 
further Degree. But methinks the Phraſe rather ſignifies an a& of 
Enemies, who to ſhe their further Malice to them, and contempt 
and ſcorn cf them, are ſaid to be fo inhumane, as not to ſuffer 
their Dead Bodies to be buried, 

| To And rhey that dwell upon the earth c ſhall re- 
Joice over them, and make merry, and ſhall ſend gifts 
one to another d, becauſe theſe two Prophets tor- 


mented them thar dwelt upon the earth e. 


c It is plain by the repeating of the ſame Words in the cloſe 
of the Verſe, that by thoſe that dwell up the Earth, are meant 


earthly carnal Men, whether Papiſts or Atheifs ; Men that are mad 
upon their Luſts; for theſe are thoſe in whoſe Conſciences f.ithful 
and powerful Preaching breeds a torment and uneaſinefs, ſo as th 
always count godly Miniſters their Enemies (as 4hab told Elijah) 
and are not able to bear their Words (as the Iſraelites could not 
bear the Words of Amos.) Theſe therefore ſhall keep Holiday, 
when they ſee theſe their Enemies conquered, and ſhew all Signs 
and Expreſſions of Joy. Theſe Preachers were they that hindred 
them from a quiet ſleep in their Beds of Luſts. 'e And thouvh 
they fought againſt them only with a Fire out of their Mouths, as 
Prophets declaring the Will of God to be contrary to their lewd 
Praftices, and denouncing God's Wrath againſi thoſe that did ſuch 
things ; yet their Preaching made their Heads ake, partly by al- 
larming their Conſciences, ſo as they often flew in their Faces ; 
and partly becauſe by it they were expoſed to the reproach of Peo- 
ple, as living direaly contrary to the Divine Rule, and in defiance 
of his Law; thus they torment wicked Men, who therefore always 
did, and always will triumph in their Suppreſſion, or in any Evil 
that ſhall betide them. And as they ſee their Suppreſſion greater 
than ever before, (as it will be undoubtedly during theſe three 
Years and an half) fo the Triumph of lewd and wicked Men will 
be porportionably more, though it will be but like a Hypocrites 
Joy, for a ſhort time; for it will appear that their dead bodies 
were not put into the Grave. 


11 And after three days and an half f, the ſpirit of 
life from God entred into them, and they ſtood up- 
on their feet g, and great fear fell upon them which 


ſaw them hþ. | 

F After that ſhort time which God had determined for Anrchrift 
( juſt before his time ſhould be expired) or after the preciſe time of 
forty two Months, or three Years and an half was expired, when 
the Gentiles thought they had fully prevailed , and ſhould be 
no more troubled with Chris Witneſſes. g God who alone can 
quicken the dead, reviveth them, and reſtoreth them again to theit 
Employment as his Prophets ; for it is plain, this cannot be an- 
derſtood of a corporal Refurre&ion; for 1. Their Death was 
not of that nature; nor 2. Doth the Scripture give us any hints of 
any ſuch ReſurreQion before the coming of Chriſt to the laſt Judg- 
ment. + This ſtrikes a great fear into all their Enemies, amazed 
to think what God was about to do, and rightly preſaging this would 
be their ruine. | St IT = 

It is a great Queſtion now, whether the time here ſpoken of fot 
ſaying the Witnefles, and their tiſing again, be paſt, or yet to 


"come. TI muft confeſs the Papacy. had got fuch a Victory over the 


faithful Witnefles of Chriſt, for ſome” Ages before the Refirmation 
began in Germany about 1517; arid there was fo ſudden a Reſtf- 
re&ion of them in the firſt ———_— brought to paſs, and carried 


Chap Xl 


#8 


— _— 


Chap. XI. 


+ Gr. 
Names of 
Men. 


*Ch. 8.13. 
& 9.12, & 
I5. I. 


Ch. 10.7. 
+ Ch. 12. 
IO. 


on by ſuch a ſtupendious Series of Providences, that I cannot 
wonder that ſome did think the time paſt : But we who have out- 
lived that time more than 150 Years, ſeeing the Turks (whom all 
judicious Interpreters make the four Angels bound by the River Eu- 
phrates looſed) ſtill ſo rampant, and the Papacy ſtill fo predomi- 
nant, and daily treading down the outward Court, have no reaſon 
to judge the ſlaying of the Witneſſes yet over, at leaſt that they are 
yet riſen, and ſtanding upon their Feet ; or that the ſeventh Angel 
hath yet ſounded ; but that we are as yet under the period of time 
ſ1gniaed by the ſounding of the ſixth Trumpet, and to expet a fur- 
ther degree of this Evening, before it will be Light over the Um- 
verſal Church, (for we muſt not think any particular Church intend- 
ed here) and this appears moſt probable alſo from what followeth 
before the ſounding of the ſeventh Angel, v. 15. 

12 And they 7 heard a great voice from heaven, 
ying unto them, Come up hither #, And they al- 
cerded up to heaven ina cloud, and their enemies be- 


held them 27. | 

i That is the two-Witneſſes ſo often before ſpoken of. k Heard 
God by a fingular Providence calling them again to their former 
work and ſtation in his Church ; or (as ſome) to an higher, and 
more famous place in his Church than they formerly enjoyed ; tor 
by Heaven the moſt and beſt Interpreters underſtand the Church, 
2+ it often ſignifies in this Book. m And this was done in the Face 
of their Enemies. In this Senſe of this Verſe I find the generality 
ot judicious Interpreters agreed. 

13 And the ſame hour 7 was there a great earth- 
quake o, and the tenth part of the city fell p, and in 
the earthquake were flain + of men ſeven thouſand 93 


and the remnant were affrighted 7, and gave glory to 


the God of heaven /. 


n That is, about the ſame time, when the Spirit of Life from 
God entred into' the Witnefles, and they were again reſtored. 0 By 
Earthquake doubtleſs is here meant a great confuſion in the Werld, 
and ſhaking of Nations by differences one with another, and Wars ; 
ſee the Notes on chap. 6. 12. þ By the City doubtleſs is meant the 
grcat City before named, ſpiritually called Sodom and Egypt, elfe- 
where Babylon; by which Rome is to be underſtood. What 15 
meant by the tenth part of it falling, is not ſo well agreed ; ſome 
by it underſtanding many Kingdoms falleti off from its Juriſdition - 
Others a great part of its Tribute or Dominion. q Theſe Words 
ſeem to intimate, that the Reſtauration of the Witnefles ſhall not 
be without Oppoſition, and that the Oppoſition ſhall not be great, 
7000 is a ſmall number to fall in ſuch a great Quarrel: But the Pa- 
pal party fhall appear to have cheated the World fo with their Im- 
poſtures, and ſo to have impoſed upon them, that the World ſhall 
grow fick of them, and when the time comes for God to put a final 
period to them, the number ſhall be but few that adventure for 
them. » Others ſhall be affrighted, either from their own Conlſci- 
ences, or from the ſtupendious Diſpenſations of Divine Providence 
in the fall of the great City. / And give Glory to God by con- 
feſſing their Errors, and turning to an 1ngenious and fincere Ac- 
knowledgment of the Truth, inſtead of worſhipping Saints and An- 
gels and Images, worſhipping the true and living God of Heaven and 
Earth only. ; ; 

14 * The ſecond wo is paſt 7, ard behold, the third 


wo cometh quickly z. _ Ls 
t That is, here endeth the miſery that is like to come upon the 
World in that period of time which ſhall follow the ſounding of the 
ſixth Trumpet. « The third Woe ſignifies thoſe Calamities which 
ſhould come in that period of time prophefied of by the ſounding 
of the ſeventh Trumpet. This makes a late learned Author think 
that all that which went before, viz. The Gentiles treading down 
the outward Court, the ſlaying of the Witnefles, and their reſuſci- 
tation muſt be under the ſixth Trumpet, which Period endeth not 
until the Churches Enemies be ready to be deſtroyed ; whoſe De- 
ſtruction is afterwards opened to us in the Angels pouring out 
their Viols. 
15 And the * ſeventh angel ſounded w, and there 
were great voices in heaven, ſaying x, The kingdoms 
of this world are become F 7b? kingdoms of our Lord, 


and of his Chriſt, and he ſhall reign for ever and 
ever Y. 

w The laſt of thoſe Angels mentioned chap. 8. 2. x St. Fohn in 
his Vifon heard great Acclamations and Shoutings for the Victory 
which Chriſt and his Goſpel had got over the Beaf:. y So that a 
great part of the World, caſting off the Papacy (that new Gen- 
tilijm ) together with all their abominable Idolatries and Super- 
ſtitions, embraced the Truth of the Goſpel, Here ariſeth a great 
Queſtion, whether the ſeven Vials, of which we ſhall find the fix- 
teenth Chapter treating, do belong all to the ſeventh Trumpet, or 
ſome of them belong to the fixth Trumpet, of which mention hath 
been before made. Great Divines are on both fides as to this Que- 
ſtion, Mr. Pool in his Latin Synopſis hath colle&ed together their 
Reaſons, of which I ſhall give a ſhort account, leaving my Reader 
for a fuller ſatisfaRtion to the Latin Synopſes. 

Thoſe who think that the ſeven Vials do all relate to the ſeventh 
Trumpet, and contemporize with it, in defence of their Opi- 
nion ſay, 

1.- That the Seven Seals, and the ſeven Trumpets, and the ſeven 
Vials are all mentioned in the ſame form of Speech, and therefore 
the ſeven Vials are not to be divided, ſome to one Trumpet, ſome 
to another. 

2. Becauſe the feventh Trumpet and the ſeven Vials are one and 
the ſame thing, nothing being revealed under the ſeven Vials 
which doth not belong to the ſeventh Trumpet ; they agree in 
their Titles of Woes, in the nature of the Revelations, in their Oh- 
jeas, both the one and the other declaring the ruine of Antichriſt, 

both of them are mentioned as the laft Plagues to come upon the 
World before the laſt Day. 


REVELATION. 


3- All the Vials are of the ſame nature, declaring but the Judg- 
ments by which God, ſetting. up the Kingdom of Chriſt, would 
ruine Antichriſt, they only differ in the degrees of the Plagues, 
each one riſing higher than' the other. 

4- The ſeyenth Trumpet cannot declare the ruine of Antichriſt, 
unleſs the ſeven Vials be poured out under it, for they ſhew the 
means by which he muſt be deſtroyed. 

5. The ſeventh Trumpet ſoundeth imniediately upon the 11a ing 
of the Witneſſes, and contemporiſeth with the whole courſe of 
their renewed Liberty, and therefore the period ſignified by it, 
wa be before the fall of Antichriſt declared by the ſixth 

'al, 

- 6, The ſeventh Trumpet ſoundeth immediately after the expira- 
tion of the 1260 Days; before the end of which, none of the Vials 
were poured out. 

Thoſe who think that divers of the Vials were poured out, or 
— poured out before the ſounding of this ſeventh Trum- 
pet lay, 

That the Beaſts Kingdoms beginning to fall under the ſixth Trum- 
pet, ſeveral of the Vials declaring the degrees of his falling, muſt 
belong to that. It appeareth by all we have in this Chapter from 
ver, 7, to 15. that Antichriſts Kingdom was in a great meaſure 
weakned under the fixth Trumpet, particularly from wer. 11. to 
13. to which thoſe who think that all the Vials related to the ſe- 
venth Trumper ſay, That they grant that there were ſome prepara- 
tions to the final ruine of Antichriſt, during the period of the 
frxth Trumpet, but the ſeven Vials fignifie the farther progreſs and ' 
perfettion of his Ruine, which falls under the Period fignified by 
the ſeventh Trumpet ; this being premiſed, I proceed with the 
Text. y It 1s doubted here, whether thoſe Words, are become 
the Kingdoms of the Lord and his Chriſt, be to be underſtood as being 
aQtually ſo, or now being to be ſo. Thoſe who make the Senſe 
that they now aCtually were ſo, muſt underftand the time to be the 
Day of Judgment, or ſome time next to it, and conſequently muſt 
think that five at leaſt of the ſeven Vials, mentioned chap. 16. be- 
longed to the fixth Trumpet. Thoſe who make the Senſe, are be- 
ginning to become the Kingdoms of the Loyd, or ſhall ſhortly be ſo, 
may make all the ſeven Vials to belong to the ſeventh Trumpet. 
By becoming the Kingdoms of the Lord Chriſt, he means ſuch in 
outward profeſſion; ſo as Antichriſt ſhall reign no more, but they 
ſhall be ruled by the Officers of the Lord Chrift, until they be taken 
up to reign with him in Glory. 


worſhipped God 2. * 

7 I fake this to ſfignifie no more than the Triumph of the Saint 
and Angels in Heaven upon this Viory of the Lord over Antichriſt 
and the promoval of Chriſt's Kingdom; and certainly if there be 
Joy in Heaven _ the SEEN of one Sinner, as we are told, 
Luke 15. 7. we muſt imagine a much greater Joy upon th is 
ſion of Nations and Kingdoms unto Chriſt. LIN Dover 

17 Saying, we give thee thanks, O Lord God Al- 
mighty, which art, and waſft, and art to come 7 ; 
becauſe thou haſt taken to thee thy great power, and 
haſt reigned 6. 

a It 1s a phraſe denoting God's Eternity, and Immutability, we 
met with it before, chap. 4. 8, b Thoſe Cceleſtial Beings bleſs 
God for exerting his Power, and recovering the Kingdom of Chriſt 
_ _ the Hands of Antichriſt, and ſetting his King upon his holy 
Hill of Zzon. 


13 And the nations were angry c, and thy wrath 
is come d, and the time of the dead that they ſhould 
be judged ec, and that thou ſhouldſt give reward unto 
thy ſervants the Prophets f, and to the ſaints g, and 
them that fear thy name, ſmall and great h, and 
ſhouldſt deſtroy them which || deſtroy the earth z. 


dern Gentiles, they have heen angry long enough. d Now it is 
time for thee to ſhew thy ſelf angry, and thou haſt begun to do it. 
e The time is come for thee to judge the Cauſe of thy faithful 
Witnefles, and all thoſe who have died in teſtimony to thy Truth. 
f And for thee to reward ſuch as have faithfully revealed thy Will. 
g And not only them, but all thy Holy Ones. þ Without reſpe& 
to their Quality in the World, be they little or great. 7 The time 
alſo is come, when thou haſt' deſtroyed, or wilt deſtroy that Anti- 
chriſtian Brood, which ſo long hath plagued the Earth, and deſtroy- 
ed thy People in it. | 


great hail mr, 

k Some here by the Temple of God, underſtand the Repreſenta- 
tion of the Temple in MHieruſalem; others underſtand the Church 
Triumphant ; others the Church of Chriſt militant here upon Earth. 
[ Accordingly by Heaven they underſtand either the natural Heavens, 
or the Chriſtian Church. It ſeemeth to be a plain allufion to the 
Fewiſh Church, whoſe Temple, was ordinarily ſhut up in the time of 
wicked and idolatrous Princes, who regarded not the true Worſhip 
of God; ſo as all the time of Saul's Reign the Ark abode in the 
private Houſe of 2bed Edom; and when Foſtah came to Reign, he 
found the Temple negleRted all the Days of his Father Amon, and 
Grandfather Manaſſes, and the Book of the Law in the Rubbiſh. 
But when good Princes came to the Throne, ſuch as Hezekiah and 
Foſiah, they opened the Temple, reſtoring the true Worſhip of 
God : So under the New-Teſtament, during the whole Reign of 4n- 
tichris, where he prevails, Idolatry and Superſtition obtain, and the 
true Worſhip of God 1s ſuppreft ; but his time being now expi- 
ring God ſheweth John that there ſhail be a reſtoring of the true 


| Worſhip of God, and a Liberty both to Miniſters and People to 
worſhip 


16 And the * four and twenty elderswhich fat be- + 1, FR 
fore God on their ſeats, fell upon their faces, and and 5. 8 


Chap. XI. 


Or, cor - 
c Thoſe who have not been of thy true 7/ael ; but old or mo- =_ 


19 And * the temple of God & was opened in *ch, 15.5. 
heaven /, and there was een in his temple the ark of * Ch. 16. 
his teſtament /- and * there were lightnings, and 1 
voices, and thundrings, and an earthquake, and * OS "_ 


Chap. XII. 


| Or, ſign. 


|| Or, ſign. 


worſhip God according to his Will. For though Antichri was not 
yet wholly deſtroyed, nor his Party extinguiſhed, yet he had loſt 
his Power and Dominion, and God was now beginning to reckon 
with him for the Blood of his Saints, which was all to be done be- 
fore all the Kingdoms of the World ſhould become the Kingdoms of 
the Lord Chriſt. / In the Temple of old, the Ark of the . Cove- 
nant was the great Symbol of God's Preſence ; hence God is ſaid to 
have dwelt betwixt the Cherubims; in the Ark where the two tables 
of the Law; ſo as this Phraſe may either note the pure, free, and 
ordinary expounding of the Law of God, which ſhould be upon 
the Down- fall of Antichiiſt; or the Preſence of God with his Church 
in that more and pure reformed State. m But ſuch a work of Pro- 
vidence being not like to be effefted without the Ruine of Anti- 
chriſt, God ſheweth it ſhall be uſhered in with Lightnizgs, and Voices, 
and Thurdrings, and great Hail ;, by terrible things in Righteouſneſs 
(as the P/almiſt ſpeaketh.) The Conſequents of which, the ſeven 
Via's, of which we ſhall read, chap. 15. pouring out Plagues upon 
the Antichriſtian Party, until they ſhould be wholly rooted out, and 
Chriſt alone ſhould be exalted in his Church, and rule as King upon 


. his Holy hill of Zton. 


From this myſterious Portion of holy Writ thus opened, it ap- 
peareth that God in theſe foregoipg Chapters, hath (though more 
luimnmarily) inſtrufed his Prophet in what ſhuuld come to paſs to 
the final Ruine of the Roman Empire, (confidered as Pagan, that is, 
till Cenftantine's Time) and alſo of the Reign of Antichriſt. From 
whence 1t muſt needs follow, that whatſoever followeth this Chap- 
ter, and cannot be applied to the time of Chriſt's Kingdom, muſt 
contemporize with ſomerhing which went before, and belong to 
ſome period comprehended under the Viſion of the Seals, or of the 
Trumpets. . The three next Chapters are judged to relate wholly to 
things now paſt, God therein repreſenting to his Prophet the ſtate 
of his Church (as ſome think) from the Nativity of Chriſt, however, 
from his time, during the whole time that Rome continued Pagan, or 
ſhould continue Antichriian; the following Chapters ſhewing the 
gradual Deſtruftion of Antichris by the ſeven laſt Plagues. 


CHAP. XI. 


A Woman cloathed with the Sun is in Travail, 1, 2. A great red Dra- 
gon ſtandeth before her ready to devour her Child, 3, 4. A Man 
Child 1s born, and caught up 'to God, 5, The Weman fleeth into the 
Wilderneſs, 6. War in Heaven between Michael and the Dragon, 
and the Dragon is caſt out 5 A Song of Praiſe for the 
Vifdory, 1o, 11, 12. The Dragon perſecuteth the Woman, who 5n 
Eagles Wings fleeth into the Wilderneſs. 13, 14. The Serpent caſt 
out a Flood of Water after her, 15. The Earth helps the Woman, 
16, The Dragon makes War with the Remnant of her Seed, 17. 


N D there appeared a great || wonder in heaven 
2, a woman cloathed with the Sun 5, and the 
moon under her feet c, and upon her head a crown of 


twelve ſtars d. 

a I ſee no reaſon to doubt, but that John was all this while in 
Heaven, whither he was taken up, chap. 4. 2. where he ſaw in a 
Viſion a great Wonder, or a moſt remarkable thing. 6b I find all 
valuable Interpreters agreeing, that this Woman repreſented the 
Church, well enough compared to a Woman ; 1. As ſhe is the Spoule 
of Chriſt, (though here exprefled as his Mother.) - 2. As the Wo- 
man is the weaker Sex, and the Church hath always been the weak. 
eſt part of the World, (I look upon the Interpretation of it by Po- 
piſh Authors, with reference to the Virgin Mary, as very idle; for 
when did ſhe flie into the Wilderneſs ? When was ſhe with Child, and 
pained to be delivered ?) Interpreters alfo are as well agreed, that 
by the Sun, with which fhe is ſaid to be cloathed, 15 meant Chriſt, 
called the Sun of Righteouſneſs, Mal. 4. 2. and he who giveth Light, 
Eph. $. 14. "And Believers (of whom the Church conſiſts) are faid 
to have put on Chriſt, Rom, 13. 14+ Gal. 3. 27. c By the Moon, 
moſt underſtand the World, by reaſon of its mutability and uncer- 
tainty, which the Church of Chrift deſpiſeth, and hath under her 
Feet, minding Heaven and beavenly things. But Mr. Mede rather 
underſtands it of the Jewiſh Worſhip, which as to its times, was 
much directed by the Moon ; which Hand-writing which was againſt 
45 (the Apoſtle tells us, Col. 2. 14.) Chrift took, away, nailing it to 
his Croſs ; ſo as the Goſpel-Church hath 1t under her Feet. The 
Apoſtle calls them carnal Ordinances, Heb. 9. 10. and the Rudiments 
of the World, Col. 2. 20. yea, beggerly Elements, Gal. 4. 9. d The 
Miniſtry of the Goſpel, preaching and building upon the true Foun- 
dation, the Dodrine of the Prophets, and twelve Apoſtles, which 
is the Honour of any Church. : Ee: 

2 And ſhe being with child, cried *, travailing in 
birth, and pained to be delivered e. | 

* Not with Chriſt conſidered perſonally, who was long before 
brought forth by the Virgin Mary, but with the Truth, and Goſpel 
of Chriſt, or with Chrit myical, defiring to bring many Children 
to the Kingdom of Chriſt; or to bring forth Chriſt in the Souls of 
others ;, of this Burden and Labour ſhe defired to be delivered. The 
Phraſe is judged to ſignifie both the Primitive Churches earneſt de- 
ſire to propagate the Goſpel, and alſo her many Sufferings for that 
Endeavour. . : 

3 -And there appeared another || wonder in hea- 
ven {; and behold, a' great red dragon g, having ſe- 
ven heads þ. and tenhorns z, and ſeven crowns upon 
his heads #. We APE 

f There appeared to Fohn, being yet in his Viſion, another ama- 
zing Sizht, which was a Sign or Type of ſomething differing from 
what it appeared like. _ g See ch. 17. 9, 10. Moſt judicious Inter- 


reters, by the great red Dragon 
That firſt HEE the» Chriſtian Church, of which Nero was the 
firſt; yet ſome underſtand it -f the Dewz/, the old Serpent; but 


the moſt, and beſt Intcrpreters underſtand it of the Pagan Empe-|: 


yrs, by whom the Devil did this Work, called a great dragon, be- 


Vol . I, s 


underſtand the Roman Emperors, | 


REVELATION 


| 


cauſe of the vaſineſs of that Empire ; and a red Dragon, for their Cru- 
elty againſt the Chriſtians. h The Holy . Ghoſt, chap. 17. 9. hath 
expounded theſe ſeven Heads, by ſeven Mountains. . i The ter 
Horns are thought to fignifie the ten Provinces belonging to that 
Empire; the Governors of which ruled like ten Kings, It 15 ex- 
pounded by ten Rings, chap. 17. 12. Strabo teils us, That Auguſtus 
Ceſar divided the whole Empire into 20 Provinces, ten of which 
eng more quiet, he gave to the People to govern, the other ten 
he reſerved to his own Government. þ The ſeven Crowns are ex- 
pounded by ſeven Kings, chap. 17. 10, of which we ſhall ſpeak more 
when we come lo far. . : 
4 And his tail / drew the third part of the ſtars 
of heaven 22, and did caſt them ro the earth 7: And 
the dragon {ſtood before the woman which was ready 
to be delivered, for to devour her child as {von as it 
was born o. 

4 The tail of the red Dragon fignifies his Followers, his civil and 
military Officers, whoſoever were by him imployed to execute his 
Commands. m By the Stars here, are either meant the Miniſters 
of the Chriſtian Church, or the Profeſſors of it. n Turning them 
ont of their places and fiations, making them as uſeleſs as he could. 
0 That is, before the Church that was ready to propagate it ſelf, 
watching upon her Increaſe to devour them. 1 take this to be a 
much more probable Senſe than theirs, who underſtand it of Con- 
ſtantine; for I know not, with reference to him, who ſhould be un- 
derſtood by the red Dragon. Mr. Mede hath inzeniouſly obſerved, 
that Pharaoh was a Typ* of this read Dragon. He is rcſembled by -a 
Dragon, Pſal. 74. 13, 14. Tja. 51.9. Exeh.'29. 3. and watched up- 
on God's ancient Chftrch to deſtroy it, as tie Pugan Emperors did 
upon the Chriſtian Church. 


child was canght up unto God, and zo his throne 7. 

Þ By this Man-child, ſome underſtand Conftantine the great ; others 
underſtand Chriſt myſtical, or many Children. brought forth unto 
God. As the Jews multiplied, do Pharavh what he could to de- 
ſtroy them, ſo the Church increaſed notwithſtanding all the Ma- 
lice and Rage of her Enemies. q Interpreters accordingly are di- 


rule all Nations with a Rod of Tron. It was prophefied of Chrift, 
Pſal. 2. 9. That he ſhould break the Nations with a Rod of Tron. 
It 1s applied to the Servants of Chriſt, who overcome, and keep 
Chriſt's Words to the end, ch. 2. 27. So as it is here applicable to 
Believers, whom the Church ſhould bring forth, who ſhall judge the 
World, (as the Apoſtle tells us) and I had rather thus interpret it, 
than concerning Conſtantine the Great. r Theſe Words are ſomething 
hard to be interpreted. To interpret it of Chriſt's being taken up 
into Heaven, 1s to turn a myſterious Prophecy into a plain Relati- 
on, or Hiſtory of things paſt. To interpret it concerning ConFan- 
tine the Great, ſeemeth very hard ; for how was he more than any 
other Chriſtians, caught up to God, and to his Throne? if we av. 
when he died, ſo are they; if we ſay the Imperial Thone is herc 
underſtood by God's Throne, it ſeemeth to me very hard ; for al- 
though of Magiſtrates God ſaith, 7 have ſaid ye are Gods, yet their 
Thrones are never called God's Throne; I had. rather give this 
Phraſe a more general Interpretation, viz. God took this Off ſpring 
of the Woman into his Royal Prote&ion, fo as the Drazon could not 
devour it, 1t was out of his reach. 


where ſhe had a place prepared of God 7, that they 


threeſcore days. 

{ As the Iſraelites, when they fled from Pharaoh, went into the 
Wilderneſs; and Foſeph watched upon by Zerod, fled into Egypt ; 
ſo the Church did hide her ſelf during the Antichriſtian Perſecutions, 
every one ſhifting for themſelyes as well as they could; # God pro- 
viding for them in ſome more obſcure places. 

7 And there was war in Heaven w ; Michael and 
his angels fought againſt the dragon, and the dragon 
fought and his angels x; 

x By Heaven in this Place, doubtleſs is meant the Church of 
God ; and ſuppoſing that the Pagan Emperors are to be underſtood 
by the Drago, (which is pretty generally agreed} there can be no 
great doubt, but by this War in Heaven, 15 to be underſtood thoſe 


| Perſecutions which the primitive Church indured betwixt the Years 


'64 and 310. x The two parties were the Pagan Emperors, and 
their Officers, and Party, and Michael and his Angels : But who is 
here meant by Michael and his Angels ? Some, by this Michael, un- 
derſtand a principal Angel cailed the Archangel, Jude 9. one of the 
chief Princes, Dan. 10. 13. Others, by 2ichael here underſtand Chrift 
himſelf, who, they think, is underſtood by Michael, Dan. 12. 1. 
The matter is not much ; it is moſt certain that the Battel is not 
ours, but Chriff's. It is as certain that Chriſt exerciſeth his Power 
by his Angels, and that they have a Mimiſtration about his Church. 
The meaning is no more than this, That Chriſt and his Party, op- 
poſed the Pagan Perſecutors and their Party. : 

$ And prevailed not y, neither was their place 
found any more in heaven 2. - 

y The Pagans were at length routed in this Bzttel; the Chriſtians 
overcame them by. the preaching of the Goſpel, and by their Faith 
and Patience. 2 And Paganiſm found no place within the fame 
Territories where the Church was. This was fulfilled in the time of 
Conſtantine the Great, who altered the Face of the Ryman Empire; and 
more eminently in the time of Theodoſ745, about the Year 380. . 


,6N2} 4 The 


Chap. X1t: 


5 And ſhe brought forth a man-child p, * who was + cy, ; * 
to rule all nations with a rod of iron q - and her 1s. 


vided concerning the Perſon or Perſons here ſpoken of, that ſkould ' 


6s And * the woman fled into the wilderneſs J;, « yer. 74 


ſhould feed her there * a thouſand two hundred ard +ch. 11.3 


9 And * the great dragon was caſt out a, Þ that »*1yxe x0; 
old ſerpent, called the devil and Satan 6, which de- 18. 
ceiveth the whole world c : he was caſt out into the T Gen. 3- 


. . . ; 4 6 I 8 
earth d, and his angels wete caſt out with him e. —” - 


'_nap. AI. 


*Ch.11.15 
F Job 1. 9: 
& 2. 5. 

Zech. 3. 1. 


* Rom. 8. 


33,34,37» 
& 16. 20. 


a The Dragon mentioned, ver. 3. which typified the Pagan Em- 
perours. b In caſting them out, the Devi! who influenced them, 
was caſt out ; who 1s here called the 0!d Serpent, with reference to 
the Form in which he ſeduced Eve, as well as in Malignity to Man. 
The Devil, that is, the Accuſer of the Brethren, (of which we 
have an Inſtance in Fob, chap. 1.) and Satan, which Name he hath 
from his Oppoſition to Chriſt and all Chriſtians. c By ſeducing 
them to Idolatry and Superſtition. 4 Caſt down from his former 
ſtate. e The Inſtruments he uſed in perſecuting the Church, were 
put out of Power. Mr. Mege underſtands it of the Demons which 
the Heathens worſhipped as Inferiour Gods. Fohn being in his 
Trance ſtill, thcught he ſaw a great red Dragon, (which he judged 
to be the Devil) and Chriſt, and the good Angels fighting with, 
and overcoming him; and that he ſaw the Devil, and thoſe evil 
Angels aſſiſting him, thrown down to the Earth. This propheti- 
cally and typically fignified, that though the Roman Emperours, be- 
ing Pagans, ſhould perſecute the Church upward of 300 years, yet 
they ſhould be overthrown, and Paganiſm, with all its Idolatry and 
Superſtition, ſhould be rooted out ; which occaſioned a great deal of 
Glory to God from the Praiſes and Thankſgivings of his People, ex- 
prefled in the three next Verſes. 


10 And I heard a loud voice ſaying in heaven F, 
* Now is come ſalvation g, and ſtrength Þþ, and the 
kingdom of our God z, and the power of his Chriſt &: 
for the accuſer of our brethren is caſt down, t who 


accuſed them before our God day and night /. 

f John undoubtedly heard this Voice as in the third Heaven, 
whither he was caught; but it is not only expreffive of the Joy and 
Satisfation which the glorious Angels, and glorified Saints had, 
upon their knowledge of what was done upon the Earth, but pro- 
phetical of the great Joy ſhould be over all the Church, upon 
Comſtantine's ſtopping the Perſecution, and reſtoring Peace to the 
Church, by caſting out all Pagan Idolatries and Superſtitions. 
£ Temporal Salvation, and Deliverance from Perſecutors. h Now 
God hath ſhewed himſelf a ſtrong and mighty God. 7 And the 
King of Kings, who reigneth over all the Earth. k Now Chriſt 
hath ſhewn his Power. / For the Devil, who inceſſantly accuſeth 
the Saints, is overcome. Two things are here obſervable, 1. That 
the holy Angels call the Saints Brethren. 2. That the Accuſers of 
Chriſtians, for their Piety towards God, are of their Father the 
Devil, for his Works they do. Informers ſhow who is their Father 
by accuſing others, by murthering the Servants of God. They differ 
to more than as elder and younger Brethren; both are Children of 
the ſame Father. 

11 * And they overcame him 9: by the blood 
of the Lamb z, and by the word of their teſti 
mony 9; and they loved not their lives unto the 


death 
m Michael and his Angels, mentioned v. 7. overcame the Dragon 
and his Angels: The Chriſtians overcame the Pagans. n= Some 


. tranſlate here, propter, becauſe of, as denoting the meritorious 


*Pſ.96.11. 
Iſa. 49. 13. 


, 
45 


5 . . . 
Haar & 


Cauſe, which is true; for Chriſt's Blood was both the meritorious 
and exemplary cauſe of their Victory. But this will not agree with 
the uſage of the term in the next words. Others therefore rather 
chuſe to tranſlate it, by, as denoting the efficient Cauſe, whether 
principal, (as was the Blood of the Lamb) or inſtrumental, o as 
was their preaching, and profeſſing the Goſpel ; p and by their 
patient bearing the Croſs, not ſhunning the danger of Death, that 
they might _ Chriſt, and own his Truths, and live up to the 
holy Rule of his Goſpel, —_ 

12 Therefore * rejoice ye heavens, and ye that 
dwell in them 9g. Wo to the inhabiters of the earth, 
and of the ſea 7: for the devil is come down unto you, 
having great wrath /; becauſe he knoweth that he hath 


but a ſhort time 7. 

q He calls to the Angels and Saints again to rejoice ; ſome think 
to the Church alſo. r Theſe tells us, that the Inhabitants of the 
Earth, and the Sea, in St. John's Writitigs, always ſignifies the E- 


* nemies of the Church, earthly, carnal Men. ſ The Devil now be- 


ing deveſted of the Power he exerciſed againſt the Church, will 
fall upon you ; for though he principally hateth the Saints, as moſt 
oppoſite to him, yet he is the common Hater of Mankind ; # and 
he hath but a little time to execute his Malice, he ſhall ſhortly be 
confined to the bottomleſs Pit. It is hard to ſay whether here be 
intended all in general, or the worſer part of the World only ; 
for great Judgments, after this, came upon the whole Roman Em- 
pire by the Goths and Vandals, and upon the Church by the Ar- 
rians, and by Antichriſt, of whoſe Riſe we ſhall read in the next 
Chapter. 

13 And when the dragon ſaw that he was caſt un- 


to the earth z, he perſecuted the woman. which 


brought forth the man-ch/d w. . 

u When the Devil ſaw that he could not uphold his Kingdom 
by Paganiſm, nor further execute his Malice by Pagen Emperours, 
but was wholly routed and overcome, as to that Power. w To 
let us know, that he retained his Malice, though he had loſt his for- 
mer Power; - he goes on in purſuing the Church of God to its ru- 
ine, only doth 1t in another Form ; heretofore in the Form of a 
Pagan, now under the pretence of a Chriſtian ; by Hereticks, the 
Spawn of Arrius and Photinus, (who were before this time) and by 
 Pelagius, Neſtorius, and Eutyches, who all were betwixt 4oo and 
500, and by Antichriſt the Beaſt we ſhall read of chap. 13. 1. with 
ſeven Heads and ten Horns. 


14 And to the woman x were given two wings 


of 2 great eagle a, that ſhe might flie into the wilder- 
neſs b into her place c : where ſhe is nouriſhed d for 


2 time, and times, and half a time from the face of | 


the icrpent. 


REVELATION. 
| 


x To the ſincerer part of Chriſtians (repreſented by the Wo-: 
man, vey. 1.) and by the Temple, and Altar, and thoſe that wor- 
ſhipped therem, wiz. 19 the Oracle where the Altar ſtood chap. 11.1 
a The Eagle being the Enfign of the Roman Empire, and Ti heodafiion 


Chap. XI]. 


having two Sons, Honorius and Arcadivs, betwixt which he divided . 


the Empire, making Honorius the Emperor of the Weſt, and 4r 
. - Ca . _ Ca- 
dis of the Eaft, leadeth fome very judicious Interpreters to ex- 


pound this Paſſage of the Providence of God- (by this Diviſion of 


the Empire about the year 390) in ſome meaſure ſecuri 

Church from the great Trouble: that preſently enſued. For ir = 
year 411, Alaricus King of the Goths took Rome, and continual 
Troubles ſo enſued, that by the year 480, the Weſtern Empire was 
quite extinguiſhed, ending in Augyſtulus, who becauſe of his mani- 


fold Afﬀiiatons, is ſuppoſed to be the Star mentioned chap. 8.10,11. 


called Wormwood, who fell upon the ſounding of the third Trum- 
pet. b By the Wilderneſs is undoubtedly meant in ſome places which 
were like a Wilderneſs for Solitarineſs, where the Church might 


have ſome reſt. ' c The place ſaid to be by God prepared for the - 


Church, ver. 6. d where God hid, and prote&ed, and provided for 
his People a certain time, expreſſed in the next words. I know 
not whether we need be ſo critical or no, or whether it be not (a- 
fer to expound all the foregoing words more generally, viz. That 
God graciouſly provided for his People hiding-places againſt the 
Storm now coming upon the whole Roman Empire, bearing them, 
as it were, upon Eagles wings, as he did his old [raelites when he 
brought them out of Egypt. It 1s the very Phraſe uſed by God, 
Exad. 19. 4. e For a time, and times, and a half time. It is appa- 
rent, that the ſame ſpace of time 1s here meant, that is mentioned 
ver. 6. and called Twelve hundred and threeſcore days. Moſt Inter- 
preters agree, that it ſignifieth three years and a half, conſiſting 
each of them of 35o prophetical days, that is, years; for although 
we count 365 days to the year, (and there are ſtrialy ſo many, 
beſides ſome odd hours) yet anciently they counted but 360, 1ta- 
ving out the five odd days (as we do now the odd Hours and Mi- 


* nutes, which in four years make up an odd day, which makes eve- 


ry fourth year Leap-year.) Now three times 360 make up 1080, 
to which add 180: for the half year, it makes juſt 1280, the num- 
ber of days mentioned, ver. 6. If any enquire why, what was 
expreſſed by 1260 days there, is thus expreſſed here ? 1t is anſwer- 
ed, To make this comport with the Prophecy of Danjel, chap. 7. 25 
and 12. 7. where it is thus expreſſed. | 

15 And the ſerpent f caſt out of his month g wa- 
ter as a flood, after the woman : that he might cauſe 


her to be carried away of the flood z. 
f The Devil, the old Serpent, mentioned ver. 9, being able no 
longer to execute his Malice as a Dragon, by the Civil Power of the 


Heathen Emperours, tearing Chriſtians in pieces, but diſcerning the 


Church ſecured by the ſpecial Providence of God, went to work 
another way, g corrupting the Judgments of ſeveral Perſons. who 
out of the abundance of Errour 1n their Hearts, preached corrupt 
Dodtrine. . Such were the Followers of Arrius, Neſtorius, Eutychus 
Pelagius, &c. Prov. 18. 4. The words of a Mans mouth are as deep 
waters. Prov. 15. 28, The Mouth of the wicked poureth out evil 
things. 3 On purpoſe to ruine the Church : And, indeed, ſuch 


were the 1]! Effedts of theſe Herefies, thar he who is but meanly verſed - 


in the Hiſtory of the fifth Age, will ſee reaſon to adore the Pro- 

vidence of God, that the Roman Emperours, upon the fight of 

them, did not again turn Pagans; and add their force to the 

_ of theſe pretended Chriſtians agafnſt the fincerer part of the 
urch. 


16 And the earth helped the woman &, and the 
earth opened her mouth, and ſwallowed up the flood 
which the dragon caſt out of his mouth /. 


hk There are divers Notions here of the Earth; to me theirs 
ſeemeth moſt probable, who underſtand by the Earth the Goths and 
Vandals, &c. who, Ann 410, invaded the Roman Empire, and gave 
it continual Trouble, till they had-put an end to.the Weſtern Empire, 
480. By whoſe continual Conteſts with the SubjeAts-of the Roman 
Empire, the Church enjoyed ſome quiet in the Exerciſes of Religi- 
on; and though all this while they were troubled by the Broods of 
Arrians, Pelagians, Neſtorians, and Eutychians, yet they could do 
them no great hurt; and the Church had a Liberty to condemn 
them by the ſecond and third General Councils ; in which, it is pro- 
bable, there were many too that deſerved no better Name than the 
Earth. | But yet they ſerved, in a great meaſure, to ſwallow up 
that Flood of Herefies which the Devi! threw out of his Mouth by 
theſe Hereticks. 

17 And the dragon was wrath with the woman »7, 


and went to make war with the remnant of her ſeed z, 


the teſtimony of Jeſus Chriſt 9. 

m The Devil hath been defeated in two Deſigns againſt the 
whole Church; he could not wholly root it out by the Ten Per- 
ſecutions under the Roman Emperours, nor by the Water thrown out 
of his Mouth, Peſtilent Do@rines which he influenced ſome to 
broach; but he was angry ſtill, his* Rage was not extinguiſhed. 
n He gives over his Deſign to ruine the whole Church, as not pra- 
Aicable, but reſolves to do all the Miſchief he could to the Remnant 
of her Seed, to particular Chriſtians ; o thoſe eſpecially, which kept 
cloſeſt to the Dofrine of Faith called here the Teſtimony of Feſus 
Chriſt ; and to the Rule of an holy Life, which is meant by keeping 
the Commandments of God. Hence AntichriF's Rage hath not been 
againſt Chriſtians in general, as was the Pagans, but only againſt 
ſuch Chriſtians as he hath not been able to bring over to him, in 
CEE with his Corruptions' in Dofrine, Worſhip, and Diſ- 
cipline. | 


CHAP. 


which keep the commandments of God, and * have *Cor. 2. r. 


1 Joh. 5.10. 


| On 


% 


| Chap. XIII. 


| CHAP. XIIL 

A Beaſt ariſeth out of the Sea, with ſeven Heads and ten Horns, 1, 2: 
One of the Heads being wounded, is healed, 3. The whole World 
worſhip the Bea$t and the Dragon, 4, 5. The Beaſt blaſphemeth 
God, makes war with the Saints and overcome them, 6, 7. They 
whoſe Names are not written in the Book of the Lamb, worſhip him, 8. 
Another Beaſt cometh out of the Earth with two Horns like a Lamb 
I. and exerciſing the Power of the firſt Beaſt, 12. doth wonders, 13+ 
Seduceth the Inhabitants of the Earth, and makes an Image of the 
firſt Beaſt, 14. All killed that deſpiſe to worſhip the Image, 1 5- 
None may buy or ſell, but ſuch as have the mark, of name, or num- 
ber of the name of the Beaſt, 16, 17. 


God 7s now coming to ſhew his Prophet that grand Ene- 
my of his Church, who is emphatically called Anti- 
chriſt ; after the Determination of whoſe time of 
1260 years, the Kingdom of Chriſt ſhall begin, whe- 
ther in the Day of Fudement, or in ſome Period of 
time before that, and here upon the Earth, I dare no! 
determine ? 

The Riſe, Power, and Prevalency of this Adverſary, is 
deſcribed in this Chapter , the Oppoſition made to him 
by Chriſt and his followers, Chap. 14. His Fall, 
chap. 15, 16, 17, 18. for which, Praiſe is groen to 
God, chap. 19. 

The Enemy of the Church is ſhewed to John by the Sym- 
bol, or Repreſentation of two Beaſts ; the one having 
the Body of a Leopard, the Feet of a Bear, and th: 
Mouth of a Lion : the other having two Horns like a 
Lamb, but ſpeaking like a Dragon, V. 11. 

The Reader muſt underſtand, that the Riſe of theſe Beaſts, 
their Rage, and Prevalency, was contemporaneous with 

ſome of the fix Trumpets, mentioned Chap. 8. and 9. 
For chap. 9.15. upon the ſounding of the ſeventh Trum- 
pet Antichriſt began to fall; whoſe gradual Fall we 
ſhall find more fully deſcribed in chap. 16. by pouring 
out of the Vials; only (as was ſaid before) there 1s 
from chap. 12. a more particular Deſcription of what 
ſhould happen to, and in the Church under the ſix firſt 
Trumpets. | 

The beſt Interpreter, by theſe two Beaſts, underſtand 
the Antichriſt; (for :n a larger Senſe there are more 
Antichriſts than one) and by the Antichriſt zhey wn: 
derſtand the Pope, as armed both with a Secular and 
Eccleſiaſtical Power ; yet I durſt not exclude from that 
Notion, the Civil Magiſtracy of the Roman Empire, 
who either help'd the Pope into his Chair, or held him 
there, to be Antichriſt. ; ; 

The greateſt loſs we are at, is to determine the time when 
the Papacy began : It could not be before the Pagan 
Empire was thrown down, that was about 325, nor 
before the Silence in Heaven for half an bour vas over, 
which ( if that by it the reſt be meant, which the 
Church enjoyed in the time of Conſtantine and Theo- 
dofius) tvas about 390 or 400 ; bid if we fix the 
Riſe of the Papacy there, TI know no ground for 1t ; 
and it would, Lites. have been determined in 1660, 
or thereabouts. I think, therefore, we muſt diſtinguiſh 
berwixt the Riſe and Reign of Antichriſt. It doth 
not ſeem to me reaſonable to make his Reign to com- 
mence higher than 600 or 606, when be arrogated to 
himſelf the Primacy; and that was confirm'd to Boni- 
face the Third by Phocas, in requital of Boniface Þ1s 
Kindneſs to him, who had got the Empire by the baſe 
murder of Mauritius his Maſter, and of all his Chil- 
dren, and ſtood in need of the Pope's belp to ſupport 
him. From that time, I judge, the 1260 years ſhould 
be counted; but Nemo repente fit peſſimus, we muft 
allow the Papacy ſome time to come to this virile E- 


Rate from bis Cradle. And I ſee no great harm of 


wing the 200 years, from 400 to 600, for this : 
_— do think "6 in Jos Chapter zs ſhortly reveal- 
ed what ſhould happen to the Church from about the 
year 400, for the ſpace of 42 Months, 1260 Tears, 
the time of the Beaſt's Reign. 


N D I ſtood upon the ſand of the ſea a, and 
ſaw * a beaſt riſe up out of the ſea b, t having 
Kt - {even heads, and ten horns, and upon his horns 


hap. 17. 
BE P-'7* ten crowns c, and upon his head the || name of 


hOr,names. blaſphemy d. 


; | hich 

The place of John's preſent Reſidence was Patios, W 
a an Nat, chap. a He was yet in a Viſhon ;, but thought he 
was upon the Sea-ſhore, either 1n Patmos, Or elſewhere; b and ſaw 


a Beaſt Yiſe up out of the Sea; that " (as I ſhould think) _ 


REVELATION 


pettedly ? for who would expe to ſee a Leopard rife from therce? 
"r out of the bottomleſs Pit; as chap. 9. 2, 3. or out of the Com- 
makions of a troubled World, the many Shakings' and Changes 
chat were in the. Empire. And both theſe may well ſtand toge- 
ther, for he riſeth originally out of the bottomleſs Pit, but by the 
ſubſerviency and help of ſuch Concuffions and Troubles. c This 
Baſt is deſcribed like the Dragon, chap. 12. 3. (only that 15 defcri- 
b2d with but ſeven Crowns) by which we underſtand the Devi! in 
the Heathen Emperours of Rome ; and we ſhall find it, wer. 2. fo 
anſwering Daniels Vifion of the four Monarchies, that I cannot 
but think the Roman Emperours, after the time of The:doſius, are 
meant, ſeveral of which were Arrizns, as alſo were the Goths and 
Vandals (many of them) who from 402, invaded the Empire, 
and were not beaten out till 564, little above 4o years before Boni- 


face was confirmed in his Primacy. Others take this Beaſt to be 


Rome Papal, or the Roman-Empire as Antichriſtian, or headed by 
Antichriſt. d The Arrians denying the eternal Exiſtence of Chriſt, 
as God, may well be ſaid to have the Names of Blaſphemy upon 
them, or upon their Heads. And ſo may Rome Papal. in aicribing 
that to the Creature which particularly belongs to God, as is evi- 
dent in Popiſh Idolatry. There are other Notions about this Beaſt : 
ſome would have it to be the Devil, but he is plainly diſtinguiſhed, 
ver. 2, and 4. from the Dragon: Some would have it to be the Turk, 
but we read of the worſhipping of this Beaſt, which is what we 
read not done to the Turkiſh Emperours, who alſo began not ti!l 
above the year 1200, (though indeed the Saracens began 500 years 
before) and Rome, which never was the 7irhs Seat, is made the 
Seat of this Beaſt. Some would have it to be Idolatry it ſelf ; this 
was Grotius his Notion ; ſee the Reaſons againſt it in Mr. Pool's Sy- 
nopſis Latina. Some would have it the Pagan Empire of Rome, but 
John never ſaw the firſt Riſe of that. This is a Beaſt that roſe after 
the Dragon was caſt down; which muſt be the Roman Empire under the 
Dominion of the Papacy, in which reſpe@ only it is nov one Beaſt 
again ; for otherwiſe in Civil Reſpetts it is divided into ten crowned 
Horns, 7. e. diſtin, independent Kingdoms or Principalities. 


2 And the beaſt which I ſaw was like unto a leopard 
e,and his feet were as zhe feet of a bear f, and his mouth 
as the mouth of a lion g : * and the dragon gave him 


his power þ, and his ſeat z, and great authority &. 

e Daniel in his Viſion of the Chaldaick, Perſian, Grecian, and R9- 
man Monarchies by which the World was ſucceffively ruled from his 
time to St, Fohn's; and many years after; had the firſt repreſent- 
ed to him by a Lion, for its Nobleneſfs and Fierceneſs. The ſecond, 
by a Bear, for his Cruelty. The third, by a Leopard, for the ſmall- 
neſs of its Bulk, the ſwiftneſs of its Conqueſts, its Strength, g5c. 
The fourth, by a Beaſt (not named) ſtrong, and exceedingly terri- 
ble, that had great Iron Teeth, that devoured, and brake in pieces, 
and ſtamped the reſidue under its Feet. This Beaſt is certainly here 
deſcribed, which had ſeveral forms ; Fohn ſaw it at firſt under the 
repreſentation of a red Dragon, which ſignified that Empire, while 
Pagan, for 300 years after Chriſt ; in which time the "Old Serpent 
could prevail nothing againſt the Church. Then (after a Reſt to 
the Church of a few years, which ended with Theodoſius about 380 
or 400) he ſaw it under the form of a Leopard, ruled by Arrian 
Emperours till near 600. This Beaſt had f. g. the Feet of a Bear, 
and the Mouth of a Lim. Theſe Emperours, with the Goths and 
Vandals that were Arrians, were as.cruel to true Chriſtians, as the 
Pagan Emperours had been. Gilimer King of the Vandals, Am. 530. 
and the Goths under Totrila, 540. made miſerable havock amongſt 


'the Chriſtians. + Theſe together inherited both the Power of the 


Heathen Emperours, 7 and Rome, which was their Seat, or Throne, 
hþ and exerciſed their great Authority. All this was done in the 
form of a Leopard, not ſo terrible as that of a Dragon; for the Ar- 
rians diſclaimed Paganiſm, and the worſhipping of Pagan Idols. 
All this while the Papacy was creeping up, but till 552, or there- 
abouts the Goths and Vandals, and other barbarous Nations were 
not driven out of Italy. Totilas (who took Rome 547,) was then 
killed, and Thejas ſucceeded him, who was the laſt King of the Goths 
in taly, who about twenty years after, was beaten by Nayſetes, and 
driven out, after the Goths and Vandals had reigned in [taly about 
ſeventy feven years. Others think that this Beaſt, under the Form 
of a Leopard, ſtill is Antichriſt, or Rome Papal, but that he is ſet 
forth under the likeneſs of a Leopard to ſhew his ſwiftneſs, his cru- 
elty, and his ſubtilty ; of a Bear to expreſs not only his cruelty; 
but his ſtrength in exerciſing it; and of a Lion (fo is his mouth) 
to ſet forth his rapaciouſneſs as to others, and his audaciouſneſs a- 
gainſt God, in his wicked, bold Decrees. And fo this one Beaſt 
1s deſcribed by Allufion to all three, to ſhew what a congregation of 
Evil Qualities there was in him, one Beaſt not being ſufficient to' 
ſet forth him, in whom were met the cruel Diſpoſition of all other 
Tyrants. See Durh. in loc. 


Chap. XI. 


F. 


*Ch. 12:9. 


3 And Law one of his heads /, as it were + wound- + Gr. ain. 


ed to death mm; and his deadly wound was healed 7 - 


and * all the world wondred after the beaſt o. *Ch.17.18 


1 That is, the Leopard's Head. mn The ſeven Heads of this Beaſt 
are interpreted by the Spirit of God himſelf, to be ſeven Kings, 
chap, 17. 10. i.e. ſeven Forms of Sovereign Government in the Ro- 
man State, and theſe ſucceſſive one to another ; for it's ſaid there, 
Five are fallen, and one is, and the other 3s yet to come ; ſo that this 
Head muſt be either that then in being, or that 70 come; it cannot be 
that to come, becauſe that does not receive its fatal Blow and dead- 
ly Wound, till the final Diſſolution of the Roman (as the fourth Me- 
tal) Monarchy; therefore it muſt be that Mead then in being, viz. 
that of the Pagan Eniperours : and the wounding of his Head to 
death, is the conquering the Pagan Emperours, and the aboliſhing 
of Paganiſm and Idolatry, and putting a ſtop to Perſecution by the 
Chriſtian Emperours; and conſecuently n this Wound was healed 
when Idolatry ( for Subſtance the ſame with the Heatheniſh, though 
in a new dreſs) and Perſecution was reſtored (gfadually J by the 
Dodtrine and Praftice of the Romiſh Church. 0» The generality of the 
Roman Empire became Admirers and followers of theBeaſt thus cus 
red, in his Idolatry and Perſecution: | 

4 Aud 


\< —_—— - Q 
\ 1 : bl 
WIEWY EDIT) 


12; 


; * Dan. 7,2, 


I1 SI. 
36. 
|| Or, fo 

| make war. 
_ Chap. 11. 
| \ 2, 


* Datt. 7. 
I 2. 
| Chap. II. 
q y 


TEL. REVEL 


+ And they worſhipped the dragon p which gave 
mower unto the beaſt 9: and they worſhipped the 
beaſt, ſaying 7, * Who 7s like unto the beaſt /* who 
is able to make war with him ? 1 

þ By the Dragon here, is to be underſtood the Devil, q who gave 
power to theſe Emperours; not that they did ſo dire@ly, bnt inter- 
pretatively ; they worſhipped Idols, which ordinarily 1n Scriptures 


are called Devils. q Poſſibly worſhipping in this latter Clauſe 1s |. 


not to be underſtood of a Divine Adoration, but a Civil Subjettion ; 
People, upon the driving out of theſe their Enemics, generally 
gave themſelves up to the Obedience of their Emperours and Bt- 
ſhops of Rome, commanding them Idolatrons Worſhip, / And ad- 
mired theſe two, and thoſe by whom they had been delivered from 
thoſe Enemies who had plagued them fo long. 


5 And there was given unto him * a mouth ſpeak- 
ing great things 7, and blaſphemies 2; and power was 
given unto him || to continue + forty ad two months w. 

t By him here muſt be meant Antichriſt (as appears by the 42 
Months his Period, being the ſame with 1260 days) both the ſecular 
Power of the Emperors of Rome at this time, and the Ecclefiaſtical 
Power of the Biſhops of Rome concurred to make one Antichriſt. 
God permitted, and the Devil influenced this Beaſt to ſpeak great 
things, as Dan. 7. 11. which is interpreted by the term Blaſphenries. 
u Blaſphemies againſt God fignific ſtriftly any reproachful Speeches 


againit him, whether attributing to him the Creature's Imperfettt- ' 


ons, or denying him the Perfeftion proper to him, or giving to 
the Creature what belongs to God only, which Blaſphemy muſt be 
in all Idolatry; for Adoration is due unto God alone, and when this 
is given to any Creature, there is both Blaſphemy in the Dofrine 
which teacheth the Lawfulneſs of it, and' 1dolatry in the Prattice 
of it. w Theſe 42 Months are (as hath been before ſhewed_) the 
the ſame term of time with 1260 days, and muſt be the term of 
Antichriſt, which was given him to tread doryn the outward Court 
in, ſo as the Beaſt here ſpoken of, muſt be the Antichriſt who began 
in the civil Power of the R:man Empire, but was quickly metamor- 
phoſed into the Eccleſiaſtical Power @f the Biſhop of Rome ; 1n com- 
pariſon of wheſe Power (after he had obtained the Primacy) in- 
aeed the Emperors Power was very ſmall. 


6 And he opened his mouth in blaſphemy againſt 
God, to blaſpheme his name z, and his tabernacle zo, 


and them that dwell in heaven -x. 

4 That 1s, Antichriſt opened his Mouth to Blaſpteme God. Mr. 
Mede noteth well, that Antichriff's time muſt not be counted from 
his beginning to perſecute, but from his beginning to blaſpheme, 
either by maintaining pernicious Do&rine, or ſetting up 1dolatrous 
Worſhip, for till the year 1260, when the Inquiſition was ſet up 
(the Doftrine of Tranſubſtantiation having been about that time de- 
creed by Innocent the Third, and confirmed by the Counctl of Lateran) 
the Perſecution was not great. It is alſo the Obſervation of the 
ſame Learned Author, that the threefold Idolatry of the Church of 
Rome is here deſcribed to us ; their blaſpheming the Lord's Name, by 
giving Divine Adoration to Images; w their blaſpheming the Humun 
Nature of Chriſt (which he thinks is here to be underſtood by the 
Lord's Tabernacle) by their Dofrine of Tranſub$antiation, giving 
every Maſs-Prieſt power to make it of a piece of Bread; x and their 
putting the glorified Saints in the place of the Pagan Demons, by 
their Invocation of Saints, The Obſervation's very ingenious, but 
whether the Senſe of this Text, I doubt; for we are how about the 
Period when Antichriſt began to'*reign, which we ſuppoſe to be 
ſoon after the year 600. The Blaſphemies here mentioned, were 
his firſt Fruits : But the Dofrine of Tranſubſtantiation, though it 
might be broached 100 years before, yet was made no Doftine of 
their Church of Six Hundred years after the firſt beginning of the 
Papacy; and therefore cannot well be reckoned amongſt Antichrift's 
firſt Blaſphemies. But whoſo is acquainted with 'the Hiſtory of the 
Church after 606, will find enough to juſtifie this Text, though, we 
do not reſtrain their Blaſphemy to theſe three things. | 


7 And it was given unto him.y * to make war with 
the ſaints, and to overcome them a: and power was gt- 


ven him over all kindreds, and tongues, and nations 6. 

. y God ſheweth John, that after Antichriſt had gone on Blaſphe- 
ming the Name, and Tabernacle, and Saints of God, ſome years, 
the Devil ſhould influence him alſo 2 to make War againſt God's 
Holy Ones, and he would ſuffer him. to overcome them; b and he 
ſhould have a Power over all the Nations of that part of the World, 
where God had his Church. This was eminently tulfilled. after the 
year 1200, when the DoRrine of TranſubFantiatim was eſtabliſhed ; 
the Inquiſition was ſet up in Spain 1206; the number of thoſe Mur- 
dered by it, was exceeding great. But yet this was too ſlow a 
Work, the Pope quickly raiſed vaſt Armies againſt the Albigenſes, 
firſt under the Condu& of his Legate, then of Simon de Montford. 
Permius (one of their own) ſaith, That more than a Milion were 
ſlain in the Wars of theſe poor People, meerly for not complying 
with the Church of Rome in their Apoſtacy. But what were theſe 
to thoſe ſlain in the Valleys of Piedmont, Province, Calabria, Aiſatia, 
B-hemia, before the year 1517, when the Reformation; began in Ger- 
many 2 What Slaughters have been tince- made in Germany, Hungary, 
Flanders, Treland,$c. every one knows, The latter clauſe was eminent- 
ly verified until the year 1517, there being no Nation in Europe but 
was ſubje&t to the Pope of Rome, ſo as he had a Power over all 
Kindreds, and Tongues, and Nations. The poor Albigenſes thought 
themſelves concerned in this Prophecy ; for when the Popiſh Gene- 
ral, Simon de Montford had made a vaſt Slaughter of them,-and the 
Archbiftop of Tholouſe interceded for thoſe that ſurvived, upon-Con- 
dition that they would 1mbrace the Romiſh Faith ; they boldly. refu- 
ſed, ſending the Archbiſhop word, That they were the Overcome-Ser- 
vants of Jeſus Chriſt; and all died comforting themſelves with the 
Prophecy of this Text, | 

'8 And all that dwell upon the earth ſhall wor- 


ATION. - Chap. XIIL. 


ſhip him, * whole names ate not written in the Book *Exod.32. 
of life of the Lamb ſlain, t from the foundation of 3* 


the world c. + * - 

: Cc God here ſhewed his Prophet the general SubjeQion that would & $4 ag 

'be of all People to the Papacy, except ſome few, whom he had cho- & 2 6 2% 

ſen to eternal Life and Salvation, whom Chriſt had redeemed with +Chap. 17 
8 


his Blood, and would preſerve frotn this Pollution. 


9 * If any man hath an ear to hear, let him *Chap-2.7. 
hear d. 

d Either let him hear what hath been already ſaid, and take heed 
that he be not one of thoſe that worſhip the Beaſt ; or let him 
hear what followeth concerning the Ruine of Antichriſt and his &d- 
herents : But from the uſage of this Phraſe in other Scriptures, 
' where it is oft made uſe of to ſtir up Attention to ſome remark- 
able thing ; it ſeemeth rather to be applied to what went before. 
: The Phraſe alſo further lets us know, that (comparatively) the num- 
ber of thoſe who ſhould refuſe to worſhip the Beaſt, would be very 
ſmall, as indeed it proved. W 


10 He that leadeth 7nto captivity, ſhall go into 
captivity : * He that killeth with the ſword, muſt *Gen. 9.5. 
be killed with the {word e. + Here is the patience ——=opF4 


and. the faith of the ſaints f. 2: 
e As it was God's manner by the Prophets of old, when he had cup 

denounced Judgments againſt his People, to comfort them by a 
PrediCtion of the Ruin of their Enemies ; ſo here, by this his New- 
Teſlament-Prophet, he affureth his Church, that Antichriſt alſo 
ſhould have his Period, and have the ſame Meaſure meeted to him, 
which he had meeted out to others by leading into. Captivity, and 
killing with the Sword; and indeed there are no Sins which God 
doth ſo ordinarily puniſh by Retaliation, as Sins againſt Zuſtice and 
Mercy, (of which nature Perſecutions are the moſt eminent,) 7/a. 
33- 1,2. f That is, there is a time for God's People to exerciſe 
their Faith and Patience. Patience, becauſe they are like to: wait 
tor deliverance a long time, and to ſuffer many ſharp things in the 
mean time; and Faith, becauſe their deliverance will be a thing out 

" hight, of which they will have no ſecurity but from the Promiſe 

of God, 


11 And I beheld another beaſt * coming up out of *Chap. 11. 
the earth. g, and he had two horns like a lamb þ, and 7: 


he ſIpake as a dragon 2. 

£ There are great Diſputes about this other Beaſt, whois repre- 
ſented or ſignified by it: The Popiſh Writers ſay it is ſome emi- 
nent Impoſtor, who ſhall appear in the World before the coming 
of Antichriſt. - Others would have it to be Magick praftiſed by 
Apollenius Thyaneus (the vanity of which Notion Dr. Moor . hath 
ſufficiently demonſtrated,) the generality of Prote#ant Writers agree 
it to be Antichriſt himſelf, the ſame Beaſt which was before ſpoken 
of, only in another form, The deſign, and time, and power of 
both 15 the ſame ; neither hath this other Beaſt any other figure. 
aſſigned to him; and in the end of this Chapter we ſhall find men- 
tion but of one Beaſt, the Marh, Name, and Number of the Beaſt 
mentjoned, ver. 16, 18. is but of one Beaſt; and we ſhall find the 
power of both to be the ſame; only he is called another, becauſe 
appearing 1n another form, or under another Type. The former 
| Beaſt typified the civil power of Antichriſt ; this his FccleſiaSical 
power. He 1s faid to have come up out of the Farth , either, be- 
' cauſe he was of a meaner extration than the other; or, becauſe 
he ſtole upon the World inſenſibly. The Pope and his Clergy are 
judged by the beſt Interpreters to be here meant. þ He pretends to 
the Power .of Chriſt as his Vicar, and therefore is ſaid to have 
Horns as a Lamb. 7 But he ſhould ſpeak terribly; or his Doftrines 
ſhould be ſuch as the Apoſtle calls Do&#rines of Devils. Or his 
words and prattice ſhould be like thoſe of the great Red Dra- 
gON. 


12 And he exerciſeth all. the power of the firſt 
beaſt before him &, and cauſtth the earth, and all that -. 
dwell therein, to worſhip the firſt beaſt, * whoſe + ver. 3. 


deadly wound was healed 7. 
kþ The powet of the firſt Beaſt, was to ſpeak great Words and 
Blaſphemies, and to make War with, and overcome the Saints, ver. 6, 
7. This power alſo ſhould be exerciſed by the Papacy (accard- 
ing to this Prophecy) and time hath witnefled the truth of it. 2 
And as before he arrived at the heighth of Power, he had per- 
ſwaded the latter Emperors to eſtabliſh ſdolatry and Superſtition ; ' 
ſo having now tne power in his own hands, and 'being by the firſt 
Beaſt made Head of the Church, he now vigorouſly cauſeth all un- 
der his power to obey the Edits, Decrees and Commands of that 
Nature, which thoſe Emperors had publiſhed ; chufing tather to do 
this in the Name of others, than from himſelf; that in caſe of 
non-compliance of any, he might- charge them with Sedition or 
Diſobedience to the Imperial Laws, or. diffenting from Antiquity, 
Gr. Hence he cauſeth them to. worſhip the firſt Beaſt rather than 
himſelt. | 
13 And * he doth great wonders », ſo that he, 
maketh fire come down from heaven on the earth in 2,, 
the ſight of men 7; | Chap. 16. 
m Lying Wonders, 2 Theſſ.-2. 9. ſuch as by God's permiſſion falſe 14. 
Prophets might do, Dent. 10, 1,-2. Prophets were to be judged true 
or falſe not from any -Signs\,or Wonders which they did, but from 
the Doftrine they taught, and would by thoſe / ſigns eſtabliſh. 7 
Wonders as great as thoſe which '#/ia3 wrought. / 
14 And * deceiveth them"that dwell on the earth, * chap. r. 
by the'mreans of thoſe miracles which he had power to 
do in the ſight of the beaſt o, ſaying to them that 
dwell of the earth, that they ſhould'make an Image 


to the beaſt, which had a wound by a ſword, and 


did live p. 
o The 


t, 24 
. 16. 


4p. I, 


C hap. X11. 


fTGrBreath 


+ Gr. To «and poor, free and bond, Þ to receive a mark in their 


give. 


*Chap.14. 
I I, 


*Chap.1 7. 
9. 
+Chap.1 5. 


' Which the Old Beaſt again lived ; he gave life to it by his Decrees 


o The Lord ſheweth his Prophet by what nieans the Papacy ſhould | 
cheat the World, viz. by pretences of Miracles, which it had a pow- | 
er to work { the Dodtrines of the Church of Rome to this afe 
ſufficiently known,) all which are done in the fight of the Beaſt, 
that 1s, to his Honour, and to gain him a Reputation. As God gave 
his Prophets and Apoſtles a Power to work true Miracles for the 
confirmation of their Miſſion from him, and of the Do&rines which 
they brought; ſo he pertnitted. others to work Lying Wonders for 
the Confirmation of their falſe Dofrine. - The Apoſtle therefore 
deſcribeth the coming of Antichrift to be with all Power and Signs, 
and Lying Wonders, and with all decervableneſs of unrighteouſneſs, 2 
Theſſ. 2. 9, 10. þ Theſe words ſhew the deſign of this laſt men- 
tioned Beaſt, viz. To make an Image to the Beaſt which had a 
wound by the Sword; Mr. Mede's notion here ſeemeth beſt to me, 
that by the Beaſt which had a wound by the Sword, 1s to be un- 
derſtood the Dragon, of whoſe Wound we read, Chap. 6. He was 
the Type of the Pagan Emperors, whom God rooted out. Anti- 
chriſt's Defign was to make an Image of that Old Beaſt, in which 
it might again live; which he did by his ſetting up the Venera- 
tion of Images, and the Invocation of Saints; the Pagan Idolatry ly- 
ing chiefly in their adoration of Perſons (who had been famous 
amongſt them) when they were dead, making them their Mediators 
to their Supream Gods; and in the Veneration of their Images 
and Statues ; The making the Image of this Beaſt, was the reſto- 
ring of the ſame Idolatry, changing only the Names of Princes. 
and great Soldiers, whom the Pagans worſhipped after their Death, 
into the Names of Saints ; in which Image the Dragon lived again; 
and it is ſufficiently known how the Romiſh Clergy deceiveth Peo- 
= into this Idolatry by their Stories of Miracles done by ſuch 

aints, 


15 And he had power to give + life unto the 
image of the beaſt 9, that the image of the beaſt 
ſhould both ſpeak, and cauſe that as many as 
would not worſhip the image of the beaſt, ſhould 
be killed 7. 


9 The Beaſt mentioned ver. 11- had a power to give life unto 
this new formed Idolatry, conformable to that of the Pagans, in 


and Bulls, and Cation Laws. 7 And by his Excommunications and 
Cenſures of thoſe that would not comply with his Idolatry as He- 
reticks ; after which the Perſons ſo adjudged, were delivered up to 
the ſecular Power to be put to Death. 


16 And he cauſeth all, both ſmall and great, rich 


right hand, or in their foreheads / : 

f No particular CharaQer is here to be underſtood, but only 
the general impoſition of the Romiſh Faith upon all ſorts of Per- 
ſons. His marh was nothing elſe but either the Profeflion of his 
Faith and Religion, or a vowed fubjeftion to his commands, which 
we know is the praQtice of the Papacy where it obtaineth in any 
Country. ; 

17 And that no man ſhould either buy or ſell, fave 


he that had the * mark, or the name of the beaſt, or 


the number of his name . WEE 
t This the Popiſh Church .effe&ts by its Excommunications , 1t was 
begun in the Councel of Lateran, anathematizing all who enter- 
tained any of the Waldenſes, or traded with them ; and the late 
Learned Biſhop of Armugh, in his Book de Succeſfione Eccleſie, hath 
iven us an account of ſuch a Canon of a Synod in France, which 
in expreſs terms forbad any Commerce with Hereticks in buying or 
felling. Pareus tells us Pope Martin the Fifth, hath beſt inter- 
preted this Prophecy, in his Bull added to the Council of Conſtance, 
where he prohibits Roman Catholicks, to ſuffer any Hereticks to have 
any Dwellings in their Countries, or to make any Bargains, or uſe 
any Trades, or to perform to them any Civil Offices. u There have 
been great diſputes about the Name and Number of the Beaſt. T 
muſt profeſs my ſelf not able to diſtinguiſh betwixt the Mark, 
Name, and Number of the Beaſt, they may all fignifie the ſame thing, 
viz. the Profeſſion of the Romiſh Religion. Some think the Num- 
ber is contained in the Name, and that the Name is AATEINOZ, 
in which the Number 665 is contained ; of which we ſhall ſpeak 
more by and by. : 
138 * Here is wiſdom w. Let him that hath un- 


derſtanding x count the F number of the beaſt : For 
it is the number of a man y-: and his number is Six 


hundred threeſcore and fix x. | 
w That is, herein is the Wiſdom, the unſearchable Wiſdom of, 
God ſeen in the tryal of his Church. Or (which is more probably 
the ſenſe) this is a point will exerciſe the Wiſdom of Men. x Let 
him that is ſpiritually wiſe, count the number of the Beaſt. » It 
is ſuch as may be numbred after the way Men ufe to Number. x 
What this meaneth hath exerciſed the Wits of the greateſt Divines 
in all Ages. A late Learned and valuable Writer thinks that 666 
doth not fignifie a certain definite number, but an indefinite number, 
and that not of years, but of pernicious Errors, by the broaching 
and upkolding of which Antichriſt may be known. But the mo 
Interpreters think a number, and that a definite certain number of 
years is to be underſteod here: But they are again divided ; 
ſome thinking them determining the time of the fall of this Beaſt; 
others judzing them to determine or define the year or time of his | 
beginning to reign, the time from whence his period and term of 
42 months or 1260 years, commenceth : Moſt of thoſe who think 
this number determinative of the time when he ſhould fall, under- 
ſtood by it 16655, which raiſed the expeRation of marry good and 
ſome Learned Men (though we ſee in this thing they were decei- 
ved) upon that year. A Countryman of our own, who hath wrote 


an Eng/iſh Diſſertation about the Natne, Number, and Chatadter of the 
Beal}, hath with much more probability judged this number deti- 
nitive cf the time when he began to Reign ander the Title of Vn:- 


REFELATION. 


verſal Biſhop, which was abcut the year 606; but there ſeemeth to: | 
( 


OW ae; £4 ? 
Chap. A k Y > 


be a want then of 60 years ; to anſwer which objeftion, the afore- 
faid Author (XN. Stephens) undertaketh to make out, that the year 
which according to our account was 606, was according to Daniel's 
Chronology 666; for it is the fix hundred fixty fixth year of the 
Roman Monarchy, which, faith he, is to be counted from the time 
when that Empire firſt Invaded the Church, which was when C:c#10 
and Antonius were Conſuls, about 60 years before Chriſt ; for ther 
the Romans firſt ſubdued the Fews (the ancient Church of God. 
As to this notion, there is nothing to be proved, but that £55 mu 
be counted from that Epocha ; and admitting that the time of the 
Beaſt's Reign as to the beginning of it, fell much about 545, I ſhai! 
only ſay of it, that 1 do not judge it a contemp ible notion. This 
makes this Prophecy a prediction of the time when this Beaft ſhould 
begin to ſhew his Power, and therefore it is called the Number of 
his Name; (Name in Holy Scripture often fiznifyinz Dominion 
and Power :) But there is yet another notion, which is the moſt , 
Learned Mr. Potter, 1n his Book, called The Interpretation of the 

Number 666 ;, a Book juſtly valuable both for the preat Wit and , 
Learning in it, and much magnified both by Dr. Mc, and Mr. 
Mede, whoſe Judgment of it, is prefixed to it : in which je ſaith, 
It is the happieſt Traf# that ever came into the Wor '1, and 
though at firſt he read the Book with much prejudice, yet when he had 
done it, it left him poſſeſt with as much admiration. The joundation 
on which he goeth is, that this number 1s to be interpreted bv the cp- 
poſite number of 144, Chad. 21. 17. as the meaſure of the Wall of the 
new Feruſalem ;, which is to be underſtood of ſquare meature, as he 
proveth Chap. 6. for the Wall could not be 144 Cubits hi-h, nor 
144 Cubits broad; but in ſquare meaſure ſo mu-h, that is 12 Cubits 
high, and 12 Cubits broad (for the length cannot be underſtocd) 
it being impoſſible that a Wall 144 Cubits long, ſhould encompats 
a City 91 Furlongs about: In like manner he think- 555 ouht to 
be counted by the ſquare root of that number, which is 25 2) 
Hence he concludeth, that as 12, the ſquare root of 144 is God's 
number, ſo 25 is the ſquare root of Antichriſt's number 545 : and 
by .this enigmatical expreſſion, we are tauzht that 4nrichrift ſhould 
he a Political Body that ſhould as much affet the number of 25, as # 
God ſeemeth to have in his Church affeted the number of 12. : 
Under the Old Teſtament God built his Church upon 12 Patriarct's, 
it was made up of 12 Tribes; H'eruſalem mentioned by Ezeb. cha. 

48. 31. and in this Book, Chap. 21. 12. had twelve Gates, wer. 21. 

theſe were 12 Pearles; at the Gates ver 12. were 12 Angels; the 

Wall, ver. 14. had 12 Foundations, in them the names of twelve 

Apoſtles ; ver. 16. the meaſure of the City was 12009 Furlonzs, 

Chap. 22. 2, the Tree of Life had 12 manner of Fruits ; by all 

which 1t appears that 12 was the number God affe&ted to uſe with 

reference to his Church, and the ſquare root, both of the 144 Cu- 

bits, which were the meaſure of the Wall, Chap. 21. 17. and like- 

wiſe of the 144 thouſands, mentioned in the next Chapter as the 

number of Chriſt's retinue. On the contrary 25 is the ſquare root 

of 656 (adding the Fraftion) which is the Beaſt's Number : ang 

that Learned Author proves, That the Pope and his Clersy as much 

affefted the number of 25 in their firſt forming their Church, 3+ 

God did the number of 12 : They at firſt divided Rome into 25 

Pariſhes (inſtead of the old 35 Tribes,) over which they {ct 25 

Cardinals (which were their firſt number) who had 25 Churches : 

They made 25 Gates to the City ; at laſt they alſo bron>kt the 

Articles of their Creed to 25; this that Learned Auth-r abun- 

dantly proveth, Chap. 17, 18, 19, 20, 22. He alfo Chap. 24, 25, 

26. ſheweth how in a multitude of things of lefſer moment they 

affefted this number of 25 : This ſeemeth a very probable notion. 


| I further refer my Reader to the Learned Author's Book, where he 


enlargeth npon theſe things with great Wit and Learning : In this 
variety I ſhall poſitively. determine nothing, but have ſhortly men- 
tioned the ſenſes I think moſt probable, as to this myſterious num- 


ber 666, | 
CHAP. - XIV, 


The Lamb ſtandeth on Mount Sion with his marbed one, I, A New 
Song is Sung before the Throne, 2, 3. None underſlandeth the Song 
but the Virgins that follow the Lamb, whitherſnever he poeth, 4, 5. 
Amther Angel Preacheth the everlaSting Goſpel; 5, 7. This Angel | 
followed by another, foretelling the Deſtru#tion of Babylon, 8. 4 | 
third Angel threatneth eternal puniſhment to the Worſhippers of the 
Beaſt, 9 IT. The Patience of the Saints, 12. The Bleſſing 
of them that Dye in the Lord, 13. One like unto the Son of - ſm 
ſitteth on a white Cloud with a Sickle in his hand, 14. An Angel 
coming out of the Temple, cryeth to him on the Cloud to thruſt in 
the Sickle into the Ripe larveſt, 15. It is done, 16, Another 
Angel from the Altar, cryeth to him that hath the Sickle, to Gather 
the Cluſters of the Vine, 18. This is done, and the Grapes caſt in- 
to theWine-preſs of God's Wrath, 19, 20. 


ND I looked, and loa lamb ſtood on the mount 
Sion a, and with him *, an hundred forty and *Ch:p.7.4- 
four thouſand b, having his Fathers name written in 
their foreheads c. | 


- made up the Church under Antichriſt's Peri-cutioh; but if ftgnt- 
 fles, 1. A ſmall ndimber in compariſon of ſuch as ſ-ovld Ge of anc 


ther ſtamp. 2. It 1s a namber made up of twelve times frelve, 


| by which is fignified thaf they were z Feople that ſhould anfoet 


the [raelites indeed of the Oid Teſtament; that remnant of the 
CVE 


Chap. XIV. 


REVELATION. 


Chap. XIV, 


twelves Tribes whom God had choſen, who adhere to the Doftrine \ about 710, but it was aboliſhed by a Synod at Conſlantinople, 71 2. 


and Precepts of the twelve Apoſtles. c Making an open Profeffion 

of being the Children and Servants of God ; as thoſe Servants and 

Soldiers did that had anciently the Names of their Ma$ters and Ge- 

| nerals in their forcheads (it being an ancient Cuſtom for Maſters 

| to Brand their Servants, and Captains their Soldiers, as we do our 
| Bcaits at this day.) | 

W *Chap. 1. 2 And | hearda voice from heaven, * as the voice 

[i 15-X 19:5. of many waters, and as the voice of a great thunder 

WW: tChap.5.2. 4 : and I heard the voice of + harpers, harping with 

| /'F their harps e. 

d A loud Voice, and terrible alſo to the followers of Antichriſt. 

e A Muſical melodious Voice, as of Perſons rejoycing. Mr. Mede 

rather thinks, that the vice as of many waters, fignifies no more 

than a great multitude, and indeed it is ſo expounded, Chap. 

| 19, 6. | 

| *Chap.s.9. 3 And * they ſung as it were a new ſong before 

the throne f, and betore the four beaſts and the el- 

ders g : and no man could learn that ſong, but the 

hundred and forty ard four thouſand which were re- 


j deemed from the earth h\. 
| ſ f By the Throne here is meant the Throne of God in Glory. 
1 The new Song here ſpoken of, is probably the ſame with that we 
! met.with before, Chap. 5.11, 12. ſang by the voice of many Angels 
| round about the Throne, and the BeaSits and the Elders: called new, 
either for the excellency of it; or, becauſe ſung unto God after 
Chriſt was manifeſted in the Fleſh; the defign of 1t was to declare 
"19 the worthineſs of Chriſt, to recerve Power, and Riches and Wiſdom, 
(hay and Strength, and Henour, and Glory, and Bleſſing; ſee chap. 5. 12. 
x Mr. Mede ſaith thus of it =— If God ſhall at any time make me ful- 
ly to underſtand it, I will happily more largely explain it, for it is deep- 
| ly ſettled in my mind, that the whole myſtery of Evangelical Worſhip is 
in it contained, And quite through the Scripture generally, a new 
Song tignifies a Song which praiſeth God;for ſome new benefits re- 
ceived from him. g The Throne, Beaſts, and Elders, deſcribed be- 
fore Chap. 4. h During the Reign of Antichriſt, none could learn 
this new Song, viz To give Glory to Jeſus Chrift alone, aſcribing 
to him Power, Riches, Wiſdom, Strength, Honour, Glory, and Bleſ- 
ſing ; but a ſmall number redeemed through the Bl-od of Chriſt, 
from that vain converſation received by Tradition from their Fathers, 
1 Pet. 1. 18. All the other part of the World gave Chriſt's Honour 
and Glory to the Virgin Mary, Angels and Saints, Sc. 
4 Theſe are they which were not defiled with wo- 
men *; for they are virgins 7; Theſe are they || which 
ae follow the Lamb whitherſoever he goeth & - Theſe 
trght. Were + redeemed from among men /, * being the firſt 
Chap. 5. 9. fruits unto God, and to the Lamb 7. _ 
* Jam. xt. _ 7 Thatis, that would not comply with Antichrifftan Iaolatry and 
18, Superſtition ; for [delatry is all along in Holy-Writ, compared to 
Whoredome and Fornication. & That follow the Lord Chriſt fully, in 
l all things keeping cloſe to the rules of Worſhip and Life which 
he hath given. ! That ſhew themſelyes to be redeemed by the 
| Blood of Chriſt from the vain converſation of Men, whether to- 
wards God, in matters of Worſhip, or towards Men. m That are 
conſecrated to, and accepted of God, as the Firſt-fruits were, being 
the only part of the World that are not profane. 


epſal.32.2. 5 And * in their mouth was found no guile : 
+ Eph. 5s. for + they are without fault before the throne of 


27: God 7. : 
n Not that any liveth, and ſinneth not againſt God, but it is to 
: be underſtood comparatively; they are without Fault, in compariſon 
| of the reſt of the World; they have not in them the Guile of Hy- 
_- pocriſie; they are ſincere. Or, poſſibly by Guile, is here underſtood, 
| 2 Lie, All Tdolators are Liers, Rom. 1. 25. and Idols are called 
| Lies, Fer. 16. 19. Amos 2. 4. Mr. Mede expoundeth this Text by 
Zeph. 3. 13- The words may either more generally ſignifie the 
Holineſs of theſe Perſons, in oppoſition to Profaneneſs and Hypocri- 
fie : Or more particularly their Freedom and Purity from Antichri- 


ſian Superſtitions, and Idolatry. 

6 And I ſaw another angel flie o in the midſt of 
heaven, having the everlaſting goſpel to preach unto 
them that dwell on the earth, and to every nation, 


and kindred, and tongue, and people p. 

o God having in a Viſion ſhewed unto his Servant Fohn the Reign 
and Rage of Antichriſt, chap. 13. and in this Chapter the care he 
would extend towards his Church for the Preſervation of a godly 
Seed during his Reign, he now cometh by further Viſions to in- 

f ſtru& him in what ſhould be done during Antichriſt's Reign of 42 

Months. 1. The Goſpel ſhould be preached: This I take to be the 

1 Subſtance of this Verſe. This Angel ſeems to me to repreſent faith- 

ful Miniſters, Speed and Diligence to preach the Goſpel p in all 

parts of the World, It is called the everlaſting Goſpel, either with 

Reference to the time paſt, as much as to ſay, the old Goſpel ; or 

to the time ft come, it being that Dofrine of Salvation, beſides 

which, there acither 1s, nor ever ſhall be revealed any other while 

the World endureth, Ads 4. 12. | 

7 Saying with a loud voice, Fear Ged, and give 

glory to him, for the hour of his judgment is come : 

* Plal.145. * worſhip him that made heaven and earth, and the 
wk ſea, and the fountains of waters 9. 

AR.14i5 9g Theſe Angels, or Miniſters of God, whether Civil or Ecclefiaſti- 

& 17. 24+ cal Witneſſes, cried aloud againſt the Papal Idolatry, in Worſhip- 

ping Saints and Images, 2dmoniſhing all Men to give divine Ado- 

ration only to the true and living God, who was the Creator of al] 

things, The worſhipping of Images began ſoon after Antichriſt 

bezan to Reign, We nnd it decreed in a Synod held at London 


Y2Cor. 11s 


2 
'!Chap.3.4- 


In 723. 1t was again eſtabliſhed by a Synod at Mentz. By a Sy- 
nod” in Syria it was defended, Anno 525, and the Emperor L0 
Taurus was excommmunicated for oppoſing it, but in 730, a Synod 
at Conſtantinople decreed for Leo againſt it : another Synod held there 
755, under the Emperor ConStantinus Copronymus decreed avainſ} it: 
but two other Synods held in Bavaria, 765, 766, again decreed for 
it. In 786, the ſecond Synod of Nice eſtabliſhed it ; fince which 
time 1t hath conſtantly obtained amongſt the Papiſts : but as from 
the firſt broaching of this Idolatry, it was oppoſed by five Empe= 
rors of Conſtantinople, ſo it hath all along been declaimed againſt , 
by the faithful Miniſters of Chriſt, preaching the everlaſting Goſpel ; 
and calling upon Men to perform Divine Adoration only to him who 
made Heaven and Earth. 


$ And there followed another angel, ſaying », * *chap. 12 
Babylon is fallen, is fallen, that great city /; becauſe 2. wo 
ſhe made all nations drink of the wine of the wrath 
of her fornication 7. 

7 The Apoſtle is ſhewn, that other Meſſengers of God ſhould 
come forth, during the Reign of Antichriſt, that ſhould declare 


his ruin as certainly as if it were already effeted. / Theſe words a 
. re 
taken from J/a. 21. 9. Babylon is fallen, Babylon is fallen, and all 


the graven Images of her Gods he hath brohen unte the ground, So 


Fer. 51. 8. Babylm is ſuddenly fallen and deſtroyed, There is 
doubt,- but both the Prophets ſpake of that rh into which the 
Jews were carried captive; but that Babylon was typical of another 
Babylon, called here the great City, and great Babylon, Chap. 16. 19. 
and 17. 5. and 18. 10, 21. and the Mother of Harlots, Chap. 17. 5. 
There neither 1s, nor ever was any City in the World, to whom 
theſe things could agree, but to Rome, rightly enough called the 
Mother of Harlots, and the Abominations of the Earth, Chap. 1 7. s. 
both in reſpe& of carnal Filthineſs there tolerated to make the Br- 
ſhop of Rome a Revenue, and ſpiritual Whoredom, which is Idolatry : 
called alſo Sodom and Egypt, chap. 11. 8. the former of which was 
famous tor beaſtly Luſts, the latter for Idolatry, and Oppreſſion of 
God's Iſrael. The Ruin of old Babylon is denounced by the Pro- 
phet, 1/2. 21. 9. becauſe of her Idolatry in Image-worſhip, for 
which the new Babylon is every whit as famous. The word tran- 
ſlated, Wrath (though it oft ſo ſignifies) yet ſhould rather be 
here tranſlated, Poiſon, as we tranſlate it, Deut. 32, 33. 7oh. 20. 16. 
The LXX in thoſe Texts uſe the ſame word that is here uſed, vw: : 
ſo the Senſe is [with the poiſonous Wine of her Idolatry] intimating 
to us the yenemous Condition of Remiſh Superſtitions and Idolatries 
to intice 1gnorant People to be in love with them, as Harlots uſe 
with their Philters, or poiſoned Cups, to make Men in love with 
them. If we better approve of our Tranſlation of the term 
iVrath, The Wine of the Wrath of her Fornication, ſignifieth her 
Fornication which brings Wrath upon them that zoyn with her 
in it. : 

9 And the third angel followed them, faying with 
a loud voice, It any man worſhip the beaſt and his 
image, and receive his mark in his forehead, or in 
his hand z. 

# God letteth his Servant Fohn know, That during the Rei 
and Rage of Antichriſt, as he to. have Miniſters of the Goſgel 
that ſhould preach the Truth, and mind Men to keep themſelves 
from Idols, worſhipping God alone ; and others that ſhould aflure 
them the Papacy ſhould go down, myſtical Babylon ſhould fall ; ſo 
he would have others that ſhould give warning to Men and Women 
of thoſe dreadful Plagues that ſhould come upon them that entred 
themſelves in this great City, either worſhipping the Devil after 
the Pagan manner, or the Image of the Beaſt, i. e. committing Ido- 
latry after the Antichrifian Popiſh Faſhion, or that Chould either be 
ſubje& to this Idolatrous Head, or be Soldiers to fight for it. What 
thoſe Judgments ſhould be, God ſheweth in ver. 10. and poſſibly 
there 15 not a more ſevere Denunciatioh of Judgment in the whole 
Book of God. 


10 The ſame ſhall drink of the wine of the wrath 
of God w, which is f poured out without mixture +Ch: 
into the || cup of his indignation x ; and * he ſhall ; "n 
be tormented with f fire and brimſtone in the pre: || Chap. 16. 
ſence of his holy angels, and in the preſence of the 15- 


Lamb y. *Chap. 20 
w Thoſe that do yield Subjetion to him, and profeſs his Faith, 40 

ſhall drink of the Wine of the Wrath of God; that is, ſhall feel the Se- TChap. 19: 
verity of God's judicial Diſpenſations, which in Scripture are expreſ- ra 
ſed by the Wine Cup of his Fury, Fer. 25, 15. See alſo Job 21. 20. Pſ. 
78. 8. Iſa. 51. 17. either from the intoxicating quality of Wine, or 
the ſtupifying quality of it, when mixed with Myrrh, or other ſtu- 
pifying things. x But here it is faid without Mixture, which figni- 
fies their ſenfible feeling of the Effe&ts of Divine Wrath, or the 
greatneſs of the Wrath; as Wine is ſtrongeſt when not mixed 
with Water. y That is, in ſhort, he ſhall go to Hell at laſt ; the 
exquiſiteneſs of which Torments, as to the Pain of ſenſe, is ſet 
out by Fire and BrimStone ; Brimſtone being a material in which 
Fire holds longeſt to torment any Fleſh put into it. | 


11 * And the ſmoke of their torment aſcendeth up , Ia. 24 
for ever and ever 2; And they have no reſt day nor ,,, | 
night a, who worſhip the beaſt and his image, and Chap. 19 


whoſoever receiveth the mark of his name 6. 3 
z That is, their Torments ſhall be everlaſting, as well as moſt 
exquiſite, and cauſing the moſt acute Pain. a This 1s but the 
ſame thing in other words: their Torments ſhall be ſuch as ſhall 
give them no reſt at any time. b The Senſe of theſe two Verſes, 
15 no more than this, That all Idolaters ſhall fall under the Venge- 
ance of God in this Life, and at laft ſhall be thrown to Hell; not 
only ſuch as worſhip the Beaſt, committing Paganiſh Idolatry, wor- 
ſhipping Stocks and Stones, and Devils, as the term of their Wor- 
ſhip, but ſuch as worſhip the Image of that Beaſt ſet up by __ 
; chri 8 


NM. 


\ 1% 


Cha 


*Ch.13.10 


* 1Cor.I 5. 
18. 

1 Thel. 4, 
17. 

1 Or, from 
henceforth 
ſaith the 
Spirtt, yea. 


+ Ch.1.13+ 


*To: :01q Zo 
Mat.1 ..39 
| Or, a ied, 


XIV 
P. j 4 | - 
chriſt, worſhipping of Ange!s and Saints, or their Images. From 
hence an eafie Anſwer may be given to that —_— Whether a 
Man can be ſaved in that which at this day is called the Roman Ca- 
tiolick Religion ? If they either worſhip the Beaſt, or the Image of 
the Beaſt, they cannor:: whether they do or no, let the Reader 
judge from what hath been before ſaid. 

12 * Here Is the patience of the ſaints c : here are 
they that keep the commandments of God and: the 
faith of Jelus. d. | 

c God having in the former Chapter ſhewn his Servant John the 
Reign and Rage of Antichriſt in his time of 42 Months, and in this 
Chapter, what ſhall be the end both of him, and all his Adherents, 
here concludeth with telling him, This is a Period of time wherein 
the Patience ef his Holy Ones will be tried, buth in waiting for t'eir 
Deliverance, and alſo in their patient induring Antichriſt's Opprefſi- 
on and Tyranny. d And here will be the trial of Men, whether 
they will keep to the Faith of Chriſt, and Obedience of God's Com- 
mandments, by cominp out, or keeping in this Spiritual Babylon 7 
Thoſe that come out of her will ſhew both , thoſe that keep in that 
Idolitrous Communion, wil! fheiv neither, 

13 And 1 heard a voice from heaven, ſaying unto 
me, Write e, Ble{led- are the dead which * diz in the 
Lord f, || from henceforth g : Yea, ſaith rhe Spirit þ, 


tht they may reſt from their labours ; and rheir wo: ks | 


do tollow them #. 

e Theſe words denote the Excellency of the following Saying. 
it 1s a Voice from Heaven, therefore worthy of our Attention. 
Fohn is commanded to write it, to be kept in Memory tor the 
Comfort and Encouragement of God's People, who might be dif- 
couraged at the hearing of thoſe calamitous Times which they were 
lixe to mect with, during the Reign of Antich;ift, in which many 
of them were like to be put to death. f This Phraſe of dying in 
the Lord, is applicable to any Perſons that die united to Chriſt by a 
true and hvely Faith; all ſuch die in the Lord. But if we confider 
the Scriptural uſage of. it, it ſeems rather to fignifie Martyrs, ſuch 
as die for the Lord ; for & oiten in Scripture ſiznifieth for, Rom. 16. 
2,8,12. 1 Pet. 4. 14, (9c. If any ſhall be put to Death for Adhe- 
rence to Chriſt, they ſhall be no Loſers; for they ſhall be bleſſed, 
and that not only upon the account of that Glory into which they 
ſhall paſs, but upon the account of that Reft which their Death will 
give them from the Troubles of the calamitous Times before,or here- 
after mentioned. g There is ſome little difference amongſt Inter- 
preters about the ſenſe of this Particular : certain iris,” it 15 not to 
be underſtood of the time following this Revelation excluſively, as 
to thoſe who before died for Chriſt ; for they alſo were bleſſed, 
they alſo reſted from their Labours, (5c. yet tae Particle ſeems to 
refer to the time to come. The Emphaſis of the Particle ſeems to 
be, to obviate the Doubts of thoſe who ſhould happen to die under 
Antichriſt's Rage, becauſe they died not by the Hands of Pagans, 
and ayowed Enemies of the Goſpe), but of ſuch as ſhould call them- 
ſelves Chriſtians ; ſuch, ſaith God, die for the Lord, and are bſeſ- 
ſed, and ſhall be bleſſed. h The Spirit of Truth affirms it. . 7 They 
ſhall be at reſt from the Troubles of this Life, & and their good 
Deeds, and patient Sufferings, ſhall follow them as Witneſſes for 
them, before the Judge of the quick and the dead, 

14 And I looked, and behold, a white cloud, and 
upon the cloud ore fate, * like unto the Son of man, 
having on his head a golden crown, and in his hand a 


ſharp fickle /. | | 

{ The Deſcription here can agree to none but Chriſt, fitting, as 
it were, upon Clouds, and coming out in his Judicial Diſpenſations 
of Providence, to execute Judgment upon his Enemies, to which 
purpoſe he is ſaid to have in his Hand a ſharp Sickle, 


Here follow two I iſtons, the one of an Harveſt, theother of a Vintage; 
there is no great Difficulty in determining, that they both frgnifie ſome 
judicial Diſpenſations of God, that he would bring upon the World, or 
ſome part of it ; the latter of which ſhould be greater than the former : 
Tet Dr. Moor, and Mr. Mede, have another Notion of them. But there 
is ſome doubt amongſt Interpreters, whether they ſignifie God's general 
Fudgment in the laſt day, or ſome particular Fudgments before that day, 
mentioned chap. 15, and 16. and belong to the Vials which we there 
reed of. Thoſe who think that the laſt Judgment is here ſhewed i 
are led to it from the Repreſentation of the Day of Fudgment, under the 
Notion of an Harveſt, Matt. 3.12. and 13. 39. But I rather agree 
with them who think that the Harveſt here mentioned, is a Repreſenta- 

-tion of ſome judicial Diſpenſations of God before that time, particularly 
God's Vengeance upon the Beaſt, more fully expreſt chap. 15. For, 1, 
The laſt Judgment is fully deſcribed afterwards, chap. 19.20. 24 To 
expreſs that, there needed not two Types, the one of an Harveſt, the 
ether of alintage. 3+ Here is no mention of the Reſurrection, which 
muſt go before the laſt Judgment. Mr. Mede hath noted, that 
there are three rhings belonging to an Harveſt ; 1. Cutting down of 
Corn. {.;"Gathering 1t into the Bajn. 3. Threſhing it. Whence, in 
Scripture, - it ſignifieth either cutting and deflroying, or ſafety and 
preſerving (which is the end of gathering Corn into the Barn). We 
have Examples of the former, Iſa, 17. 3, 5- Jer. $1. 33. but of the 
latter, we have only Examples in the New-Teftament, Luke 10.2. It 
3s his Opinion, that the Converſim of the Jews, going before the great 
Slaughter mentioned chap. 19. « that which is here meant ; but I ra- 
ther azree with thoſe who think, that by this Parable is ſignified God's 
Fudgments uhm Antichriſt, and that the general Scope of both the Pa- 
rables is to declare, That God would grievouſly puniſh Antichriſt, firſt 
by leſſer, then by greater Tudgments, as is more particularly expreſſed 
3n the two next Chapters, to which this, to me, ſeemeth Prefatory: Let 
us now come to the Text it ſelf. 


1s And another angel came out of the temple, 
crying with a loud voice ro him thar fate on the clond, 


* Thruſt in thy {ickle and reap : tor the time iscome tor | 


thee to reap ; for the harvelt of rhe earth 1s Þ ripe #, 
Vol. 3L. 


REVELATION 


Chap, 

m Moſt Interpreters underſtand this of the Prayers of Gcd's Pea- 
ple, from the Church, ſoliciting the Lord Jeſus Chriſt (ay ſome) ty 
gather in the Fews, or the number of his EleR, the Fields beins now 
white to that Harveſt, (as Chriſt uſeth the Metaphor of the Sama- 
ritans, John 4. 35.) or, (as others fay, with whom 1 rather agree) 
to EXKECute Vengeance on Antichrift and his Adherents. 

16 And he that fare on the cloud, thruſt in his 

tickle on the earth, and the carth was reaped 7. 

n According to the afore-mentioned different Notion of the Har- 
veſt, there is amongſt them a different Interpretation of this 
Verſe; ſome interpreting it of God's Calling in the 72s, or his 
Ele&, by the Preaching of the Goſpel : others, of his Vengeance 
upon Antichriſt and his Adherents more fully exprefled, chap. 1 5: 
and 16, 

17 And another angel came out of the temple 
whichis in 2 :aven, he a!fo havins a ſharp fickle o. 

o This Ar -<! fome will hav? to be fore Inſtrument Ged viouid 
make uſe o1 :5 ut down Antichy'it : Others would have it to be the 
Word of Gud 1a the Mouth of hi: Miniſters, wich, Zeb. 4. 12. 4s 
ſharper than z two-edged Sword, prercing to the dividing alunder of Soul 
and Spirit ; and thus they judge this Angel to be the ſame with the 
Rider upon the 14'te Horſe, chap. 19. out of whoſe Mouth went a 
ſharp Sword, vez. 1 5. | 

13 And another angel cam2 our from the altar p. 
which had power over fire gz and cried with a4 loud 
cry to him that had the ſharp fickle, laying 7, thruft 
in thy ſharp fickle, and gather the cla{ters of the vine 
of the earth /*: for her grapes re: tully ripe 7. 

þ The place of Sacrifices and Burnt-offerinzs. q Which had 
Commiſſion to execute God's Judgments compared to tire, Pſalm 
1.6, and 21.9, and 50. 3. r God's Holy Ones cry unto him 
who hath a Power to execute Vengeance. / To put an end to the 
Rage of Antichriſt, and gather thoſe Cluſters which grew upon this 
Vine of Sodom, and were as the Cluſters of Gomorrah; # tor their 
Iniquities were come to the full, and they were now ripe for Juds- 
ment. Our Learned Dr. Moor expounds this Ripeneſs, of a Readineſs 
for Converſion, as well as for Deſtru&ion, and thinks the firit is here 
rather intended : the laſt words of the next Verſe incline me to judse 
otherwiſe, 


19 And the angel thruſt in his fickle into the 
earth, and gathered the vine of the earth, and 
caſt ze into the * great wine-preſs of the wrath of 


God x. ; 
4 Dr. Mor thinks the ſenſe of this is, That Men were preſſed 
in Conſcience, upon the ſharp Convi&tion of Chriſt's powerful Mt- 
niſters, with ſorrow for their Sins, and ſo felt the Wrath of God 
in them. But Mr. Mede, with whom (as to the ſenſe of this 
Text) I rather agree, tells us, That the treading of the Vintage, in 
parabolical Scripture, conſtantly ſignifies a cruel, bloody, and dead!y 
Slaughter; he thinks that it is the ſame Slaughter mentioned ch. I 9. 
Ver. I9, 20, 21. as to which, wer. 15. much the ſame Metaphor is 
uſed, he treadeth the Wine-preſs of the Fierceneſs and iVrath of Almizi- 
ty God. 

20 And the * wine-preſs was trodden without the 
city w, and blood came ont of the wine-preſs, even 
unto the horſe-bridles x, by the ſpace of a thoutand 


and fix hundred furlongs. 

w By the City, ' Dr. Moor thinks Babylon is here meant, and that 
the meaning 1s, That the powerful Conviftions of the Word betore- 
mentioned, ſhall not reach Babylon, the Romiſh Hierarchy and Polity, 
as being hardned againſt any ſuch thing. But Mr. Mede and others 
think, that the City of MHieruſalem 1s here meant, or the Holy Land, 
which comprehends exaQly 1600 Furlongs, that is, two hungdred 
Italian Miles, or one hundred fixty Grecian Miles. But what 
that place ſtail be, where this Slaughter ſhall be, is a great Secret. 
x It is plain, it ſhall be a great Slaughter, by the depth of the Blood 
mentioned, and the length of the Ground which it ſhould to that 
depth overflow. It is very probable, that great Battel 1s meant, 
mentioned chap. 19, 20, 21. in the place called Armageddon, upon 
the pouring out of the fixth Vial, chap. 16. 16. In fo difficult 2 
buſineſs, nothing can be poſitively determined. 


CHAP; XY. 


Seven Angels with the ſeven laſt Plagues appear, 1. The Conguerturs 
of the Beaſt being on a Sea of Glaſs ſing the Song of Moſes, 2 4. 
The Temple in Heaven is opened, 5. The ſeven Angels come out of 
the Temple with the ſeven Plagues, 6. One of the four living Crea- 
tures gives unto the ſeven Angels ſeven golden Vials of God's Wrath, 7. 
The Temple filled with ſmoke, 8: 


ND I faw another fign in heaven, great and mar- 
\ vellous fa, ſeven Angels b having the feven 
laſt plagues c, for in them is filled up the wrath of 
God d. | 
a That is, a Repreſentation which appeared to Fohn great 2nd 
wonderful. þ Miniſters of God, uſed by him in the Difpeniations 
of his Providence, c having a Commiſſion to execute the ſeven latt 
Judgments of God, by which he defigned to deſtroy Antichriſt, 
4 For by them the Wrath of God was to be executed upon him to 
the uttermoſt, 
> And I ſaw as it wete a ſea of glaſs « mingied 
with fire f, and them that had gorren rhe victory over 
the beaſt, and over his image, and over his marX, and 


s # 


*Ch.19-15 


* 7 Rn 7 
if2, £ << 4" 
Lai. 1.2 55 


over the number of his name, ſtanding on the jea of , {9 


-|1ſs 8. * having the harps of God 4. 
glaſs g, * having 7 07 \ This 


& 14. 2: 


CGE SS 


> a=. A - 


Char 


'Aliurion to the Sea of Glaſs like unto Chryſtal, retle&ed upon by the 
Lamps of Fire burning before the Throne; chap. 4. 5, 6. or fo the 
YVaters of the Red-Sea congealed (while the 1/raelites paſſed over) 


*Pſ17 2.2. 
& 135.14- 
Ch. 15. To 


” 08-107. 
v IL.65.23. 


*Ch.11.19 
Num.1.5c. 


*Ex0d., 40. 


FE 
F> P, 


><. 'M 


e his Sea of Glaſs (as our Learned Moor thinks) hath either an 


retlected upon by the Pillar of Fire. Others make it the Church ga- 
thered cut of all Nations, ſaid to be of Glaſs, becauſe of its Splen- 
dor and Glory. Others make it to fignifie th VVorld, which is ſaid 
to be ov; Glaſs, to let us underſtand, God ſeeth through it. It ſeem- 
ti ro me to fignific Heaven ; g for it is mentioned as the place of 
the glorified Saints, who had overcome all Temptations to Idolatry, 
either from Pagans (which were the Beaſt) or from Antichriſt and 
his Party, _ are called the Image of the Beaſt) and had avoided 
all kind of Compliance with them in Profeſſion of the Religion 
which he would endeavour to impoſe upon them. þ Harps of God 
{ignifie either the moſt excellent Harps, or holy Harps. Mr. Forbes 
ſaith well, they fignifie Hearts tempered with Joy, and Love, and a 
gratetul Senſe of the Mercies of God towards them. 


3 And they fing the ſong of Moſes the ſervant of 
God z, and the ſong of the Lamh, ſaying &, Great and 
marvellous are thy works, Lord God Almighty / ; 


* juſt and rrue are thy ways, thou King of ſaints 22. 
7 TheSong which Myſes ſang upon God's Delivery of the Iſraelttes 
trom the Danger of Pharaoh, which we have, Exod. 15. I, &c. not 
that they ſang thoſe words, but to the ſame ſenſe. &k A Son to the 
Honour of Chriſt, to the ſame ſenſe that 27yes ſang, and upon a 
much like occaſion. { Admiring the greatneſs and marvelouſneſs of 
what God had done in their Deliverance, and giving him the Glory 
of his Almighty Power, m acknowledping, that all the Atts of his 
Providence were both juſt (God, in them, giving to every one their 
due) and true, God by them but juſtitying his Promiſes and Threat- 
nings. Theſe words are taken out of Pjalm 145. 17. 


4 * Who ſhall not tear thee, O Lord, and glorifie 
thy name 7 ? for zhou only art holy o : for} all nations 
{hall come and worſhip before thee p ; for thy judg- 


ments are made manitelt 9. 

n Acknowledging, that for this God deſerved to be worſhipped 
and ſerved by all the VVorld ; 0 becauſe of his Holineſs much ſeen 
in the Juſtice and Truth af his VVays ; p Geclaring their Faith and 
Hope that now all Nationsſhould own and acknowledge Chriſt, and 
be ſubje& unto him. qg Now that his Judgments upon Antichriſt, 
_ _ Juſtice in all his Diſpenſations, was made ſo evident to the 

'Vorld. 

5 And after that 1 looked, and behold, the * tem- 
ple of the tabernacle of the teſtimony in heaven was 
opened 7 - 

7 Here is a plain Alluſion to the Jewiſh Tabernacle or Temple, 
in which was the holy Place, and the Holy of Hlies : into the latter 
the High-Prieft only entered. There were kept in the Ark the two 
Tables of God's Law, often called the Teſtimonies of God. From 
this Tabernacle of Teſtimony proceeded God's Oracles; there God 
aye Anſwers from the Mercy-ſeat,and therefore in the Book of Kings 
it is called the Oracle. The Senſe ſome put upon this, 15s, That 
God here ſhewed unto his Prophet the Liberty that ſhould be after 
the downfal of Antichriſt, to preach the Goſpel. But in this ſenſe 
it muſt bean Anticipation of what orderly ſhould have come 1n 
after the pouring out of the Vials : I had rather underſtand it of 
God's being now about to give out an Anſwer to his Peoples 
Prayers for a Deliverance from the Tyranny of Antichriſt, as the 
place called the Oracle in the Jewiſh Temple was opened when the 
High-Prieſt had been inquiring of God, to give an Account of the 
Anſwer he had. 

6 And the ſeven angels / came out of the temple 7z, 


having the ſeven plagues z, cloathed in pure and 


* Ch.1.x3, White linaen, and * having their breaſts girded with 


golden girdles o, 

{ The ſeven Miniſters of God's Vengeance on Antichriſt, to whom 
the Vials were given. #t That is, out of the Tabernacle of the Teſti- 
many; for in Moſes his Tabernacle, there was only this inward Court 
for the Prieſts, (the People worſhipped without) They came (as the 
High-Prieſt was wont) out of the Orac!/e, to bring God's Anſwer to 
all his Saints Prayers, u The Anſwer was, ſeven Plagues, that 15, 
thit God had imploycd them to bring ſeyen Plagues ſucceffively up- 
on the Antichriſtian Party, and all the Enemies of his Church, till 
by them they ſhould be conſumed. w Theſe Angels came in the 
habit of High-Pricſts, when they went 1n to inquire of God, or came 
out with an Anſwer from God. 

7 And one of the four beaſts x gave unto the ſeven 
angels y, ſeven golden vials full of the wrath of God, 
who liverh tor ever and ever 2. 

x One of thoſe four Beaſts round about the Throne, ch. 4. 6. 
y The ſeven Angels mentioned, ver.6. 2 A Vial 1s a plain Pot or 
G!ak with a wide Mouth, uſed to drink in ; theſe were full of the 
Wrath of God, who liveth for ever. The meaning is no more than 
that the ſeven Anzels before-mentioned, were commitonated from 
God, by one Plague after another, to bring Antichriſt to his ruine, 


8 And * the temple a was filled with ſmoke b from 
the glory of God, and from his power c, and no man 
was able to enter into the temple, rill the ſeven 


plagues of the ſeven angels were fulfilled d. . 

a That is, the Church (as Temple moſt ordinarily fignifieth in 
this Book.) b By Smoke, doubtleſs, is meant Confuſjons and Trou- 
bles, c cauſed by God's glorious. Manifeſtation of his Power, 1n 
bringing Antichriſt to ruine, who had fo twiſted his Intereſt with 
that of the Civil Magiſtracy in ſeveral Kingdoms, that there was no 
rootinz'him out, without a terrible ſhaking of all thoſe parts of the 
Earth, where he ſet his Foot ; d ſo as no part of the Church could 
be at reſt until God had fulfilled his Ruine by theſe Plagues : ner 
muſt any quiet ſtate of the Church be expeRted, until this great 
VVork be effeRed. 


REVELATION. 


CHAT. av 


The Angels pour out the Vials of God's Wresth, t. The firſt upon the 
Earth, followed with a grievous Sore upon them that had the Mark 
of the Beaſt, 2,3. The ſecond upon the Sea, and every ltving Soul 
therein died, 3. The third upon the Rivers, which become Blood 4 
The Righteouſneſs of God is praiſed, $——8. The fourth poured into 
the Sun, and ſ.orching Blaſphemers, 8, 9. The fifth upm the Seat 
of the Beaſt, filling his Kingdom with Darkneſs, 10, 11. The ſixth 
upon the great River Euphrates, drying up the Waters thereof, 12. 
Three unclean Spirits like Frogs appear, 13. Chriſt cometh as a 
Thief, and every one exhorted to watch, 15. The ſeventh Vial Pour- 
ed into the Air, it is finiſhed, 179. Thunders and Lightnings, the 
great City drvided, Babylon cometh into remembrance, 18, 19. Men 
blaſpheme God becauſe of the Plagues, 21. 


God having ſhewed unto his Servant John in the Viſion 
of the firſt ſix Seals, the Fate of the Church under 
the Pagan Emperors of Rome, chap. 5, 5. and its 
Fate under Antichriſt, 7 the Viſion of the ſix firſt 
1rumpets under the ſeventh Seal;ch.8.9. and diverted 
him by the Viſion of the little Book opened,ch.10. and 
by the Contents of it, ch. 12, 13, 14. and inſtruited 
him concerning the Afﬀairs of the Church, during all 
the time of the Reign of the Dragon and Antichriſt 
who waz the image of the Dragon, comes now 10 in:- 
ftrutt him particularly, how and by what means he 
would rume Antichritt,and reſtore peace to bisChurch, 


N D I heard a great voice out of the temple a, 

[ \ ſaying to the ſeven angels, Go your ways, and 

pour out the vials of the wrath of God upon the 
earth b. 

a Either out of the Church Triumphant, Chriſt the Head of it, 
commanding the Executioners of his Juſtice to go and do their 
Office : Or out of the Church Militant, by their Prayers ſoliciting 
God te execute Vengeance upon the Beaſt. b All the Beaſts Ter- 


ritories, or the ſeveral parts of his Kingdom, are expreſſed in this 


Chapter, under the Notions of the Earth, the Sea, the Rivers, and 
Fountains, the Sun, and the Seat of the Bea#F. The firſt Command 
to the Executioners of God's Juſtice, 1s, to pour out his Wrath on 
the Earth. By the Earth, Parexms underſtands ſome parts of the 
Earth ; others, the common People ; others, the Roman Empire ; but 
others, conſidering the Earth as the firmeſt part of the Univerſe 
ſay, That by the Earth is meant the Popiſh Clergy, the Baſis of the 
Papacy; and I am very much inclined to judge, that the moſt Prg- 
bable Senſe of it, not only becauſe there is little of Heaven in th&m 
and their whole Frame and Model is the Produd of Earthly Phlicy, 
but becauſe Experience hath told us, that the Pope here received his 
firſt Wound, in the Diminution of their Power, and Authority 
and a Contempt of them. God hath uſed many Inſtruments fo 
pour out this Vial, even ſo many (whether Princes or Miniſters) 
as he hath made uſe of to root out Monafteries and Abbeys, and 
to expoſe Maſs-Prieſts to Scorn and Contempt. Mr. Mede ſeem- 
eth to be of another Mind, thinking, that by Zarth is meant the 
Commonalty of the People, whoſe Defe&ion from the Pope was 
his firſt Plague : but that which is to be underſtood by the Earth, 
being the affected part of Antichriſt, I cannot agree with that learn- 
ed Man; for though the Beaſt ſuifered by the DefeQion of the Com- 
monalty, yet I cannot ſee how thoſe that made the DefeQion, ſuf- 
fered at all by it. 


2 And the firſt went, and poured out his vial upon 
the earth, and * there fell a noiſome and grievous ſore 
upon the men + which had the mark of the beaſt,and 


upon them which worſhipped his image c. 

c Here isa plain Allufion to the Plagues which God brought upon 
Pharaoh King of Egypt, for his Oppreſſion of his ancient Jſael ; 
God hereby ſhewing us, that he would deal by this Romiſh Beaſt for 
his Perſecutions of his Goſpel-Churches, as he dealt by Pharaoh ; 
as he turned the Egyptian Rivers into Blood, fo as the Fiſh died, 
and the Waters ſtunk, Exod. 7. 20. and as he plagued the Fgyj- 
tians with Biles and Blains, Exod. 9. 9. fo he would plague the 
Papacy by proportionable Judgments, until, as Pharagh with his 
whole Party was at laſt drowned in the Red-Sea, ſo all the Anti- 
chriſtian Party ſhall be rooted out, Here are two of the Egyptian 
Plagues mentioned, but this Vifion begins with the ſixth of the 
Egyptian Plagues, viz. that of Biles breaking out in Blains. What is 
meant by this grievous Sore, I muſt profeſs my ſelf not to under- 
ſtand, but think Dr. Moor ſpeaks very probably, interpreting it of 
Trouble and Vexation, which the Popiſh Party ſhould have upon the 
firſt Proſpe& of their Kingdom's going down ; 1t being of the Na- 
ture of Sores, to vex and diſturb thoſe that are affe&ed with them, 
ſo as they are very uneafie ſo long as they are affe&ted with them. 
And indeed I find many Interpreters agree in this Notion. 


3 And the ſecond angel poured our his vial upon 
the ſea d, and it * became as the blood of a dead 


man e : and every living ſoul died in the ſea f. 

d This anſwered the firſt Plague upon Pharaoh, Exod. 7. 20. All 
the Waters that were in the River were turned to Blood ; and the 
Fiſh that were in the River died. By the Sea here, Dr. Moor under- 
ſtands the Furiſaiion and Dominion of the Papacy, wherein he agrees 
with Mr. Mede., I rather agree with thoſe who underſtand the 
whole Syſtem of the Popiſh Religion, their Rites and Ceremonies, 
their Dotrines of Indulgences and Purgatory, gc. e God ſheweth 
his Prophet, and inftructeth us, that he will bring the Papacy to ru- 
ine firſt by bringing his Clergy, (which are the Earth upon which 


he ſtands) into Scorn and Contempt ; diſcovering their Frauds and 
Cheats. 2. By &diſcoyering the Folly and Vanity of their Ro 
0 an 


Chap. XV1. 


* Ch. 13- 
IS, 17. 


TCh.13.14 


* Exod. 7- 
te 


ENS RL 


« Kg] 


| 
[1 

i 
4g! 
* a" 
6944 4 
IF 
120M 
3 

7 , 
{g6 
* $.. 
Ho 
(f 
*+ pe 
*' of 
$59.5. 
KAY 
4 /- 


— _ _ OI Oy tes a AD Aa ty 
I RET he 3g OA OO PIE nte 350 Yu 300 k EO hots Core tans EE 4d ror wes SELGY 
PR, Pr ad 3a ut, ot wo we be, = OW i, C4 4 5 X eY, R172 End.” 5 
LT RT ED OE Re Gyn Bed ns ets a= pos LREL Ne ER qu TY, 


x 
DE Bob 2 


y- 


« So 1g LIB 25 
3s 6 LI Bp 6h 3 Baa 
OE 0 of EEE: 


YA I I SON HGH! AI > 8 
« q CO IREY ih 
=; > XFLED Yet cf 5 Ne ES” RL av 


Ie He 62 
. 4 df <4 © z Oe'vy 


bt { 5 
E444 
Ec” 
hh 
Py 
-Y 
<8 
.% by” 


FEY 


LED 
3p 
EI 
x: he 
S 
$4 "£0 
60 
Ts 
BY 
F 
3 


= 


= 

Chap. XVI. 
and Theatrica! Religion, conſiſting only in vain Shews, and idle Rites 
and Ceremonies, without any regard to that Religion which is ſpi- 
ritual, and pure, and undefiled before God ; diſcovering the Cheats 
ot their Conteffions and Abfolutions, their Maſſes, Pardons and Indul- 
gences , making them appear to be not only idle, but pernicious and 
damnable; fo as f Chriſtians could not live in the Communion of 
their Church, but it muſt be damnable to thoſe who kept in the Com» 
munion of it. 


4 And the third angel poured out his vial upon 
the rivers, and tountains of waters g, and they be- 
came blood þ. 

g Mr. Mede and Dr. Mor both agree in interpreting this of the 
Feſuits and other Popiſh Emiſſaries.  þ And the Laws made for the 
Execution of them in England, in the time of Queen Elizabeth, not 
excluding thoſe Civil Powers, which are the Upholders and Main- 
tainers of Antichriſt, as the Spaniard, who alſo within theſe laſt 
one hundred Years, hath had Blood enough given him to drink, 
both in 1588, and in the Low-Countries. It ſeemeth a little hard 
to interpret a Prophecy relating to the whole Church, by what 1s 
done in ſo ſmall a part of it, We know in what credit theſe Emiſla- 
ries are at this Day, both in the Empire, and in Spain, and in France, 
and Venice, (from whence they ſometimes were expelled.) We have 
indeed, Laws againſt them in England, but principally relating to 
thoſe of them, who, being native Subje&s of England, . have Apo- 
ſtatized, So as [ had rather think this Vial is not yet poured out, 

or that Interpreters miſtake the meaning of theſe Fountains and 
Rivers, than agree with them in that interpretation of this Prophe- 
Cy. I am much diſpoſed to believe that we are not farther than 
the pouring out of the ſecond Vial. God, indeed, hath made the 
Romiſh Clergy contemptible enough, and hath vexed and enraged 
them ſufficiently. He hath alſo made their Scenical Reitzion as con- 
temptible to, - and juſtly abhorred by a great part of the Chriſtian 
World ; but how tar he hath proceeded farther to the Ruine of An- 
tichriſt, I do not underſtand. 


5 AndT heard the angels of the waters ſay ;, Thou 
*Ch.1.4,8. art righteous, O Lord, which * art, waſt,and ſhalt be, 
becaule thou haſt judged thus # : 

{ All theſe three Verſes do but expreſs the Honour and Glory 
that ſhall be given unto God, when he ſhall have accompliſhed his 
great Work 1n deſtroying thoſe who feed, and uphold, and main- 
tain the Beaſt, partly by thoſe Inſtruments he ſhall uſe in that 
VVork, exprefled here by the Angel of the VVaters, partly by others. 
£ -+ oe the Lord's Juſtice and Righteouſneſs in ſuch De- 

rution. 


» Mat,23, 6G For * they have ſhed rhe blood of ſaints and pro- 


34- phets, and thou haſt given them blood to drink ; for | 


they are worthy /. 
{ Becauſe of their Perſecutions of, and cruelty towards God's 


faithful Miniſters and People, which rendred the ſpilling of their 
Blood but a condign Puniſhment ſuited to their Sin, 


7 And I heard another out of the altar, ſay mz, 
* Ch.15.3- Even * ſo, Lord God almighty, true and righteous 
are thy judgments 7. 

m Others alſo, either Members of the Church Triumphant or 
Militant, or both, ſhall in that Day give Glory to God, n as a God 
of Power, able to do ſuch things; of Righteouſneſs, thus giving 
theſe bloody Men their due ; and of Truth, this fulfilling both his 
Promiſes to his People, and his Threatnings againſt his Enemies, 
But is is caſter to determine who ſhall thus rejoyce, than the time 
when this Joy ſhall be. This certainly is God's Work, but in fieri, 
now doing, but not yet done. 


8 And the fourth angel poured out his vial upon 
the ſuno; and power was given unto him to ſcorch 


men with fre p. 

0 Here we have no Hiſtory to guide us in the Government of our 
Fancies and Judgments, but their Opinion ſeems moſt probable to 
me, who, by the Sun, underſtand ſome great Prince or Potentate, 
or the whole Civil Power in the Antichriſtian Heaven ; ſuppoſe the 
Spamard, or the Emperor, It ſeems to figmfie either ſome De-+ 
ſtruction of fuch Civil Powers, or ſome Defe&tion of them from the 
Papacy, þ which will vex and inrage Antichriſt and his Party, as 
if they were ſcorched with Fire. This I look upon as much more 
probable than theirs, who interpret 1t of the natural Sun, or the 
Word of God. | 

9 And men were.!|| ſcorched with great heat g, and 
* blaſphemed the name of God, which hath power 
* V.11,12. oyer theſe plagues 7” : and they repented not to give 

him glory /. 

q What the damned do in Hell, where the Wrath of God is 
poured out vpon Men to the utmoſt, that Reprobates do upon 
Earth, they are ſcorched with great Heat ; the Vengeance of God 
cometh upon them, they are mad and inraged, r and ſpeak evil 
of a juſt and righteous God, who bringeth ſuch Plagues on them; 
{ But they have no ſenſe of their Sins, nor any Thoughts of turn- 
ing to God, confefſing their Sins and giving him Glory. This will 
be the Upſhot of God's lefler ſudgments upon the Papacy : They 
will be mad at them, and rage, and reproach God's Juſtice, but 
prove an hardned Generation, given over to Ruine, , that will never 
be ſenſible that theſe Judgments come upon them for their Idola- 
tries and Superſtitions, and for their Perſecutions, and the ſhed- 
ding the Blood of God's Holy Ones; not that all adhering to that 
Church will be ſo {many, probably, will convert, and be brought 
to acknowledge the Truth) but there will be a great Party of them, 
whom nothing but the Wrath of God come upon them in the bot- 
tomleſs Pit to the utmoſt, will ever make ſenſible that they have 
done amiſs being given up to ſtrong Deluſrons, to a blind Mind, and 
an hard Heart, and a reprobate Fudgment. : 

10 And the fifth augel 2 poured out his vial upon 

Vol. UL. 


| Or, burn- 
ed. 


REVELATION. 


þ 


+a . - —” 
the ſeat of the beaſt z; and his kingdom was full of 
darkneſs w, and they gnawed their tongues for 
pain , 

# The fifth of the ſeven Angels mentioned, v. x. by which, as 
was faid, is to be underſtood the Inſtruments which God will uſe 
gradually to deſtroy the Papacy, the fifth rank of Perſons, whonz 
God will imploy in the Execution of this his Purpoſe, by his Adts of 
Providence. u Shall execute God's wrath upon the Ciry of Rome 
it ſelf, wholly deſtroying the Papacy in their Power. w Upon 
which his whole Kingdom ſhall be full of the darknefs of miſery, 
trouble,and afflietion(Darkneſs was one of the Plagues of Egypt.)x Aud 
they ſhall be full of Calamities, like Men in ſo much Pain, that they 
bite their own Tongues for Pain. When this ſhall be, God alone 
knows, I think, and Experience hath proved, that they were much 
too hatty in their Speculations, that prophefied it ſhould be 1555: 
or 1660, or 1666. For my own part, [ do not believe it will ze 
before 1866, or betwixt that and the Year 1509. The determina- 
tion of it depends upon the right fixing of the Epocha, or begin- 
ning of the 42 Months, or 1260 Prophetical Days, which I think 
moſt probably fixed upon the Year 605, or (accordinz to Mr. Sre- 
þhen's Notion) 666, which, according to the Fulian Account, 'is the 
ſame (fee the Notes on ch. 13. 18.) 

11 And * blaſphemed the Gol of heaven, becauſe * v.s,2: 
of their pains, and their ſores, and repentecl nor of 
their deeds p. | 

y This 1s the ſame that was ſaid ver. 9. of a former Party be- 
longing to the Beaſt, and doth but fiznifie, that there will be tound 
the ſame Vein of blindneſs of Mind, ha; dneſs of Heart, and Repro- 
bacy of Senſe, running through that whole Party, until they be 
wholly ruined. 


12 And the fixth angel poured out his vial upon 
the great river Euphrates z ; and the water thereof 
was dried up , that the way of the kings of the catt 
might be prepared 6. 

z Upon the Turkiſh Empire, See the Notes on Chap. 9. 14. 
a Their Force, Power, and Strength ſhall be deſtroyed, 5 that a 
way may be prepared for the Convertion of the Fews. This I find 
to be the Senſe of the moſt Learned and Judictous Interpreters of 
this Myſterious Book, amongſt whom I count Mr. Mede, Dr. Mor, 
Pareus, Mr. Durham, &c. But it will be reaſonable to fay ſome- 
thing farther, to ſhew the probability of this Senſe. Euphrates was 
a great River that ran by Babylon, the Depth of it was (as Hiltort- 
ans tell us) about two Mens height. Waen Cyrus and Darius came 
to conquer Babylon, they diverted this River, 7er. $1. 32. 35. Here 


is an Allufion to that Hiſtory. The Turks firſt took up their Habi- 
| kation about this great River, as was id in our Notes on chap. 9. 
14. where the Providence of God reſtrained them ſor many Years, 
till the ſixth Trumpet ſounded. The Jews who are obſerved to 
be in great Numbers in the Eaſtern Countries, having had a Pro- 
miſe, Exod. 19. 6. to be a Kingdim of Priefts, may well be called 
here the Kings of the Eaſt. Two things hinder their embracing the 
Chriſtian Faith: 1. The Image-worſhip and Idolatry of the Papiſts. 
2. The Power of tie 7iks, with the Succeſs they have had againſt 
Chriſtians ; but both theſe being taken away by the Full of Babylon, 
and the Ruine of the Turks, the way ſeems to be prepared for the 
Fews receivins of the Chriſtian Faith: In a caſe where nothing 
can be certainly determined, this ſeemeth a very probable Opi- 
nion, To which it contributes a little, that its probable; that 
the ſixth Vial anſwereth the fixth Trumpet; and that as they 
were the People firſt let looſe by Euphrates, where they were bcund, 
ſo they are the People to be deſtroyed under the Notion of drying 
up the Waters of Euphrates: and this ſeemeth to be a Work of 
Providence, brought forth atter the ruine of Rome, and the total 
breaking of the Power and Dominion of the Papacy. Thus we 
have foretold the breaking both of Pope and Turk, and all rheir 
Upholders ; but we muſt not imagine them ſo ruined, but that Par- 
ties of both ſhould be lett in the World, which combining, made 
up the Army to fight the Devil's laſt Battel in Armageddon, of which 
we ſhall read, v. 16. 


13 And I ſaw three unclean ſpirits like frogs come 


+ falſe prophet. 20, & 20, 
c God here ſheweth John, that after the Power and Strength both 10. 

of the Pope and Turks ſhould be broken, the Devil would yet make 

one puſh more ; to which purpoſe, he would intluence ſome, on the 

behalf of the Antichriſtian Secular Power, others on the behait of 

the Beaſt with two Horns, or the falſe Prophet. 

14 For they are the ſpirits of devils * working mi- * 2 Thefl, 
racles d, which go forth unto the kings of the earth, 2 96 
and of the whole world to gather them to the F batre! = 3el'JÞ 

_ 8 ic. 20s 

of that great day of God Almighty e. 2 + Gl tn 
d Which from the Influence of the Devil, e ſhould folicite the ja 
Kings of the Earth to join together in a Battel azzinit the Church, i9. & 20, 


This is, undoubtedly, the Battel in Armageddon, v. 16, Y 
15 Behold, I come as a thiet f. Blf{cd 75 he that 
watcheth g. and keepeth his garments Þ, * lett he walk *2Cor.s.3. 


naked and they ſee his ſhame 7. | Ch. 3-4,18% 
f That is, I come ſuddenly and unexpeftedly. See Iatth. 24. 

43, 44» Luke 12. 39. 1 Theſſ. 5. 2. Rev. 3.3. It may be_under- 

ſtood either of Chriſt's coming to the laſt Judgment, or ot his co- 

ming in his Vindicative Providence, to be revenged on his Enemies, 

2 He is an happy Man that maketh it his butineſs to keep himſelf 

trom Sin, in proſpe& of any ſuch Comings, þ and that perſevereth 

in my VVays and Truth ; i for if he doth not, he will be found one 

of thoſe that are not cloathed with my Righteouſneſs ; and his Hypo- 

criſfie will appear to a!l Men. 


F602: 16 And 


out of the mouth * of the dragon, and our of the , 
. on ” *Ch.12.9, 
mouth of the beaſt c, and out of the mouth of rhe + c. 1g. 


rd 


Chap. XVII. 


16 And he & gathered rhem together into a place, 


called in the Hebrew-rongue Armageddon /. 

k Either the Devil brought them together, or God by his Pro- 
vidence ordered, that they ſhould be gathered together into the 
place where God deſigned to deſtroy them and theig Armies (tor 10 
the word Armageddon fignifieth, ſay ſome ; ) but others make it to 
fignifie che Mountain of the Goſpel, or to the Mountain of Apples, 0Y 
Fruits ; but the firſt Etimology in this place ſeems beſt. The word 
doth not ſignifie any particular place ; but here is an Allution, as 
ſome think, to that Megiddo, mentioned Fudges 5. 19. where Barac 
overcame Siſera with his great Army, and where Joſiah was flain, 
2 Kings 23. 30. Of the iflue of this laſt Battel with the Enemies of 
the Church of Chriſt, we ſhall read more, chap. 19. 


17 And the ſeventh angel poured out his vial into 
the air 7, and there came a voice our of the temple 


* Ch.21.5. of heaven from the throne, ſaying, * It is done 7. 

m 1 take this to be beſt interpreted as Mr. Mede doth it by the 
pouring into the Air, (of which Satan is called the Prince, Eph. 2.2.) 
that is, upon all the Children of the Devil, that had ſo long given 
diſturbance to the Church of Chriſt. n= That is, the Work of God 
is done, his Counſels for the Deſtrution of his Enemies, and the 
Deliverance of his People, are brought forth in the Ifſue of his 
Providence, not fully yet brought to an ifſue, but accompliſhing. 

18 And there were voices, and thunders, and light- 
nings; and there was a great earthquake, ſuch as was 
por fince men were upon the earth, fo mighty an 


earthquake, ard 1o great 0. : : 

0 See ch. 4. 5. ch. 6, 12, ch. 11. 13, 19. cither declarative of the 
Majeſty and Power of God (as Exod. 19. 16. when God came torth 
to give his Law, the violation of which God here was coming out 
to puniſh) or of the great Stirs and Confuſions in that part of the 
World, where the Beaſts greateſt Intereſt lay, or the Voices, Thun- 
ders and Lightnings, may be underſtood as declarative of the former, 
and the great Earthquake, of the latter. 62 : 

19 And * the great city p was divided into three 
parts 9, and the cities of the nations fell : and great 
Babylon * came in remembrance þefore God, || to g1ve 


unto her the cup of the wine of the fiercenels ot his 


* Ch.14.8. 


* Ch.18. 5. 
\[Iſa.51.23. 


Jer.25.15, 
I6, wrath. 
Ch.14.10. þ Rome, afterwards called great Babylon in this Verſe. g The 


Pagan part, the Evangelical part, and the Antichriſtian part, (faith 
Dr. Moor) the three Parties that made up the Armies that fought 1n 
Armageddon : Or elſe this added as the Effet of-the great Earth- 
quake. 7 God now took Vengeance on the Papacy,and all their Ad-. 
herents, though he had for 1260 years ſpared them, notwithſtanding 
their Idolatries and Perſecutions, and behaved himſelf toward them 
as if he had forgot them. 


20 And every ifland fled away, and the mountains 


ere not found /. 
M \ Theſe are the -M of great Earthquakes, ſee chap. 6. 14. 
Some, by Iſlands and Mountains, underſtand the Inhabitants of both, 
I know not whether thoſe Reycrend Authors, who by this term un- 
derſtand their 1dol-worſhip and Superſtition, (I ſuppoſe becauſe the 
Heathens, and Fews in imitation of them, committed Idolatry on 
Mountains, and high Hills) or Eccleſiaſtical Dignities be not here 


too critical. 

21 * And there fell upon men a great hail out 
of heaven 7, every ſtone about the weight of a ta- 
+ver..11. lent: and F men blaſphemed God becauſe of the 

plague of the hail ; for the plague thereof was ex- 


ceeding great z. 

t The Hail was another of the Egyptian Plagues, Exod. 9g. 22, 
23, 24, 25- The Allufion alſo may be to the Hail-ſtones, 7oſh, 
10. 11. by which God fought againſt the five Canaanitiſh Kings. 
It ſignifies only further great Judgments with which God will pur- 
ſue the Beaſt and his Party, until they all be deſtroyed. « The 
latter words only ſhew the continued Hardneſs of the Heart of the 
Beaſt, and all his Party; wherein alſo they anſwered Pharaoh and 
the Egyptians (their Type) who would relent with no ſteadineſs 
and certainty, until they were all ruined by the Waters of the Red- 
Sea. In all this Predi&ion of the final Ruine of the Papacy, Pha- 
ravh and the Egyptians are apparently made the Type of the Pope 
and all his Party: 1. As to their Sins, which vere Idolatry, and 
the Oppreſſion of God's 1/rael. 2. In the Plagues by which they 
were deſtroyed gradually ; turning Waters into Blood, Biles and 
Blans, Darkneſs, Hail. 3. In their Impenitency, and Hardneſs of 
Heart; only with theſe two Differences by which the Antitype ex- 
ceeded the Type in Wickedneſs, 1, We read of Pharaoh oft re- 
lenting, though his goodneſs was like a Morning-Dew, and he re- 
turned to his former Stubbornneſs, 2. We read nothing of the 
E-:yptians Blaſpheming God, becauſe of their Plagues, which is of- 
ten ſaid of theſe Fgyptians. 


*ch.11.19. 


CHAP. XVIL 


One of the jeven Angels ſheweth John the Great Whore, 1, 2, 3. Her 
Apparel, Ornament, Titles, and Blood-thirſtineſs deſcribed, q———6, 
The Angel ſheweth unto John the MyKery of the Woman, and Beaſt, 
8c. 7——13-. The ten Kings make War with the Lamb, -but are 
overcome, 14. What the Waters are on which the Whore ſitteth, 
15. The ten Kings ſhall hate the Whore, and burn her with Fire, 
16,17. TheWoman ts the Great City, 18. 


N D there came one of the ſeven angels which 
had the ſeven vials,and talked with me, ſaying 
unto me, Come hither, I will ſhew unto thee the judg- 


REVELATION. 


— — 


WATCETS a. 


had ; tho' not new, -as to the matter revealed in it ;»for it pjain- 
ly revealeth matters relating to Antichriſt ; and the matter of it con- 
temporizeth with the three laſt Vials, about the final ruine of A4ntj- 
chriſt, who was betore deſcribed under the Notion of a Beaſt,here un- 
der the Notion of a great Whore. A Whore properly fignities one that 
15 married, and is falſe to her Husband's Bed ; and ſo very well ſuits 
the Church of Rome, (it they yet deſerve that Name) whoſe Faith was 
formerly ſpoken of throughout the World, Rom. 1. 8. but is long ſince 
turned Idolatrous (7dolatry in the Prophetick ſtile, being quite 
through the Scripture called Whoredom.) She is faid to fit upon many 
Waters, either becauſe ſhe exerciſeth a Juriſdition over much Peo- 
ple, or with Alluſion unto old Babylon (which gave her her Name): 
which was ſcituated near Euphrates, a River in which there was 2 
great colle&ion of Waters. Fohn 15 called to hear the Counſels of 
God concerning her Deſtruftion, which tho' more generaliy and 
ſhortly revealed before, yet God here detigns to reveal to Fohn more 
fully, particularly and plainly, 


2 * With whom the kings of the earth have com- * ce... 
mitted fornication 6, and the inhabitants of the earth Jer.s1.7. 
T have been made drunk with the wine of her forni- + Ch.14.8, 


Cation c. 

b With which great Whore, ſeveral Princes of the World have 
committed Spiritual Fornication, receiving her Idolatrous Worſhip, 
yielding to her Authority, and following her Example. c And not 
the Kings only of the Earth, but the generality of the People, have 
been intluenced with a mad heat, and with the Wine of her Fornica- 
tion ; that 1s, with that Wine by which ſhe enticed them to commit 
Idolatry with her : By this Wine are meant Honours, Riches, Pre- 
terments, Pleaſure, the gaudry of her Worſhip, the magnificence of 
the Apoitolick See, their pretended Antiquity, Unity ; in ſhort, 
whatſoever ſpecious Arguments Papiſts uſe to entice Perſons into 
the Idolatrous Communion of their Church. 


3 vo he carried me away in the Spirit d into the 
wilderneſs e : and I ſaw a woman fir upon a ſcarlet co- 
loured beaſt f, tull of names of blaſphemy, having 
ſeven heads and ten horns g. 

d That is, being in an extafie; fee chap. 4. 2. whether in the 
Body or cat of the Bocy, he could not tell, as Paul expreflcth it, 
2 Cor, 12.2, e A place not, or not much inhabited, either as fit- 
teſt for Contemplation ; or to ſignifie that this great Whore which 
had driven the Spouſe of Chriſt into the Wilderneſs, ſhould ſhortly 
her 1elf come into her State ; according to the fate of old Babylon, 
Fer. 50.13. f The great Whore mentioned, ver. 1. upheld by the 
Roman Emperors. g The ſame which is mentioned, chap. 13. I. 
ſee the Notes there. Here is a great Queſtion ariſeth who this Wo- 
man 15, or {which is the ſame, as appeareth by ver. 5.) what City 
1s meant by Babylon mentioned wer. 5 ? a Queſtion, (as Mr. Pool 
noteth) of high concernment ; for whoever this Woman is, or what- 
ſoever this Baby/on fignificth, the People of God are upon pain of 
Damnation admoniſhed, to avoid any Communion with her, and to 
come out of her, chap. 14. 9, 10. Mr. Pool hath diligently colle&ted 
into his Latin Synopſis all Opinions about it, and ſheiwved what it is 
to be ſaid for or againſt them ; I will give my Reader the ſum of 
what he ſaith. 

I. Some would have it to be the whole World of wicked Men. Againſt 
this 1t 15 ſaid, 1. That Fohn ſpeaks here of a certain great City which 
reigneth over the Kings of the Earth, wer. 18. This cannot be meant 
of the wicked World. 2. The World of wicked Men are theſe In- 
habitants of the Earth, whom this Woman made Drunk with the 
Wine of her Fornications : Now ſhe that made them drunk, 21d 
thoſe that were made drunk cannot be the ſame. 3. This Woman, 
ver. 9. fitteth on ſeven Mountains, and fo do not all the wicked of 
the World, 4. We are commanded to come out of this Baby/5n, but 
we are not obliged to go out of the World. 

2, Others would have this Woman, or this Babyl-m, to be the od 
Chaldean Babylon. But, 1. Where then is the Myſtery mentioned, 
ver. 5 ? 2. The Babylon here mentioned, 1s by all agreed to be the 
ſeat of Antichriſt; ſo was that never. 

3- The generality agree it to be Rome. Amongſt the Ancients, 
Tertullian, Hierome, Ambroſe, Oecumenius, Auguſtine, Erſebins, Of 
latter writers Beda, Aquinas, Salmeron, Pererius, Bellarmine, Lapide, 
Ribera (all Papiſts,) beſides a multitude of Proteſtant VVriters ; 
that City 1s alſo like old Babylon for Power and Greatneſs, for Oppreſ- 
ſion of, and Tyranny over God's Iſrael ; beſides the City here men- 
tioned 1s deſcribed by two Charatters, agreeing to none but Rome, 
ver. 9. dwelling upon ſeven Hills. 2. Reigning over the Kings of 
the Earth : For the firſt Rome is the only City in the VVorld, founded 
upon ſeven Hills, and famed for it by its old Pcets, Ovid, Virgil, 
Horace, Propertins, &c, It is atteſted to be fo founded by Plutarch, 
Pliny, Dioryſius, Halicarnaſſeus; the names of theſe Hills are known, 
Palatimus, Quirinalis, Aventinus, Celius, Viminalis, Elquilinus, Ca- 
pitolinus, Both Papiſt and Proteſtant VVriters agree, that here, by 
Babylon, Rome 1s meant. But they are divided, whether it be to be 
underſtood of Rome, in its old Pagan-ſtate, or in its preſent ſtate, 
or 1n a ſtate yet to come. 


4- Some would have it to be Rome in its Pagan-ſtate ; of this 
mind are Grotius and Dr, Hammond, and ſome others; but againſt 
this many things are ſaid. 1. It is manifeſt that God here deſcribes 
Rome not as under its ſixth Head, viz. the Pagan Emperors, but as 
it was under its laſt Head, the Eighth King, ver. 11. as it ſhould 
aſcend out of the bottomleſs Pit, ver. 8. 2. VVhat John ſaw here, 
1s mentioned as a Secret, about the Blood of the Saints, which he 
wondred at ; now the Pagan Emperors fpilling the Blood of Saints, 
was a thing long ſince done. 3. The Deſolation of the Babylon 
here mentioned, was to be final, never to be repaireg, as appears by 
chap. 18. 21, 22, 23. but Pagan Rome was never made fo deſolate. 
4. If Rome Pagan be here meant, thea after its fall, Rome Chriſtian 
was the habitation of Devils, chap, 18.2, 5, Rome Pagat fell —_ 

rae 


| 7 N7;1 
Chap. %YY 1 ]. 
ment of rhe * great whore Þ that fitteth upon many > 55S 
! ICT» SL. 
a This whole Verſe is but a Preface to a new Viſion which Fohn L 3 


Chap. X VII. 


the Saints with down-rigtit blows, not with allurements, making 
them drunk with the Wine of her Fornication, as ver. 2. 

5- The Papi/t, who grant that by Babylon, Rome is meant, would 
have it to be Rome toward the end of the VVorld, when they ſay 
Rome ſhall apoſtatize from the Pope to Paganiſm again z but for this 


| Opinion there is no foundation in Scripture, nor the judgment of 


the Ancients, and ſome of the Papiſt themſelves reje& it as impro- 
bable and deteſtable. 

6. The Generality and beſt of Proteſtant VVriters, underſtand by 
Babylon and by this VVoman, Rome as it is at this day under the 
condutt of the Pope, for which they give theſe Reaſons. 

I Becauſe it cannot-be underſtood of Rome in either of the other 
Notions, as hath been proved. 

2. Becauſe Antichriſt is to ſit in the Temple of God, 2 Theſl. 2. 4. 
as God, therefore not in any Pagan City, The Myſtery of Iniquity 
was working in the Apoſtle's time, but ver. 7. the Roman Emperors 
hindred the appearance of Antichriſt ti:|the Popes had wrung Rome 
out of their hands, and were the ſole Rulers there; then Antichriſt 
ſhewed himſelf. 

3- Becauſe there is nothing ſaid of this great Whore, or this Ba- 
bylon, but admirably agreeth to Rome in its preſent ſtate. 


4 And the woman was arayed in purple, and ſcar- 


*Ch.18.15 1et colour þ, and * decked with gold, and precious 
+ Gr.Gild- ſtones, and pearls z, having a golden cup in her hand, 


ed, 


* 2 Thel.2, 


7. 
| Or, Foy- 
nications. 


full of abominarions and filthineſs ; of her fornica- 
tion &, 

h Purple was the colour of Kings and Princes. This VVoman, 
ch. 18, 7. ſaid ſhe was _ Scarlet alſo was a rich and noble co- 
lour, anciently moſt uſed in a time of VVar. How much it is in uſe 
with the Pope and his Cardinals, is ſufficiently known, i This ſhews 
the VVorldly Ri:hes of the Papacy. & Alluring and tempting Per- 
ſons to Idolatry, as VVhores uſe, with their Phi/ters or Inchanted 
Cups, to allure and provoke Men to ſenſual fatisfation. 


5 and upon her forehead was a naine written /, 
* MYSTERY #: BABYLON THE GY*EAT x THE 
MOTHEx OF || HAKLOTS o AND ABOMINA- 
TIONS OF THE EARTH p. 


1 As Publick Harlots were wont to write their Names, ſome upon 
the Fronts of their Houſe, ſome upon their Foreheads ; it denotes 
the open Guilt, and Impudence of this Spiritual Harlot. m That 
1s, there 1s a Myſtery in what follows in her Name. n Babylon the 
Great, not to be underſtood of the Chaldean Babylon, but of a City 
or Polity under the Goſpel, as chap. 11. 8. ſhe was called Spiritually 
Sodom and Egypt, ſo alſo in a Spiritual or Myſtical ſenſe ſhe is cal- 
led Babylon, becauſe a City like to Babylon for Idolatry and Perſecu- 
tion of God's Iſrael. o Not a meer #arlf, but one that bred up 
Harlots, and nurſcd up Idolatry, communicating 1t to others. This 
js the true Name of Rome inſtead of Holy Mother Church. p A place 
in which aot only Idolatry reigneth, but all abominable things com- 
mitted in the VYorld ; Carnal VVhoredom noted by them, and 


Sodomy, &C. 


6 And I ſaw * the woman 9 drunken with the 


*Cn.18:24 100d of the Saints, and with the blood of the Mar- 


*Ch.13.1. 
.FCh.13.10 
i Ch.1343. 


FCh.13-18» 


tyrs of Jeſus : and when I ſaw her, I wondred with 
great admiration f. | | 

q The Papacy filled with the Blood of thoſe Holy Ones, which 
ſhe cauſed to be ſlain for bearing Teſtimony to Jeſus Chriſt. / VVhich 
he would not havedone, had it been Pagan Rome he had ſeen in this 
Viſion. But that any that owned Chriſt, and called themſelyes 
the Holy Church, ſhould kill Men for bearing Teſtimony to Chriſt, 
and adherence to his Rule of Faith and Life, this cauſed in Fohn a 


juſt wonderment. 

7 And the angel ſaid unto me, Wherefore didft 
thou marvel ? I will tell thee the myſtery of the wo- 
man, and of the beaſt that carrieth her, which hath 
the {even heads and ten horns z. 

t The Angel promiſeth to open this Viſion, it being the Key of 
the former Viſion, and is the only Viſion expounded throughout 
this whole Book. 

$ The beaſt that thou {weſt #, was w, and is not 
x ; and * ſhall aſcend out of the bottomleſs pit a, and 

go into perdition 6: and they that dwell on the earth 
|| {hall wonder, whoſe names are not written in the 
book of life from the foundation of the world, when 


they beheld the beaſt that was, and is not, and yer 
1SI C. 

yu This Beaft was the Roman Empire, the Scarlet-coloured Beaſt 
which carried the Whore, wer. 3. w Was of old, in Rome's Pagan 
ſtate, x and 7s not, not in that form, not now Pagan; and yer 5s 
(as is aid in the cloſe of the Verſe) the ſame in another form, Idola- 
trous and Perſecuting. a Either out of the Sea, which ſignifies a 
multitude of People ; or from Hell (the word ſignifies both.) 6 And 
ſhall certainly be deſtroyed. c But before he goes into Perdition 
he ſhall ſo cheat the World, that the generality of the People ſhall 
wonder at the Beaſt, (ſee chap. 13. 8.) ſetting aſide thoſe who are 
choſen of God to Eternal Salvation : the 144000 mentioned chap. 
14, I conceive that which hath made Interpreters ſo divided in 
their Notions about this Beaſt is, becauſe thoſe words, and yet 5, 
are not added in the beginning of the Verſe, which being under- 
ſtood, there appears no difficulty conſiderable ; for it is certain the 
Roman Empire was from before Chriſt, and continued Pagan till 310; 
then was not Pagan but Chrittzan ; yet after ſome years, was again 
as Idolatrous and Bloody againſt Chriſtians, as the old Pagan Empire 
was ; eſpecially when ſwallowed up by the Pope, the Beaſt with two 
Horns like a Lamb. This 1s the Beaft with ſeven Heads and ten 


Horns, chap, 13. 2» 
5 And * here zs the mind which hath wiſdom d. 


_ 


R EV ELATION. 


* The ſeven heads are ſeven mountains 5n which rhe 
woman fitteth e. 

_ 4 That is, here is that which requireth a Mind endued with Spi- 
ritual Wiſdom. e The ſeven Heads which he ſaw the Beaſt with. 
ſignified ſeven Mountains or Hills, upon which Rome is ſcituated, they 
were named betore (ſee the Notes on ver. 3.) They tell us now 
Rome 1s ſcituated in Camp» Martio : Reſp. Whatever it now is, cer- 
tain it 15, that in St. Fobn's time it was ſcituated upon them, and 
they are now within the compaſs of Rome. 


10 And there are ſeven kings f, five are fallen 2, 
and one is h, and the other is not yet come 4, and 


when he cometh he mult continus a ſhort ſpace #. 

F The ſeven Heads do not only fignifie ſeven Hills, or Mcun- 
fains, but alſo ſeven Kings, that is (according to the beſt Interpre- 
tation I meet with) /even forms of Government which ruled Rome (the 
term Kings, in Scripture ſignitying Rulers, whether the Govern- 
ment was in ſingle Perſons, or more, as Dent. 33. $.) Rome was 
Governed, 1. By Kings. 2. By Conſuls. 3» Tribunes, 4. Decerhi- 
VIS. 5. Dietators. 6. Emperors that were Pagans. 7. Emperors 
that were Chriſtians. g Five of theſe were fallen, extinguiſhed be- 
fore Fohn's time, viz. The Government by Kings, Con/uls, Tritunes, 
Decemuirs, Diftators, þ The Government by Pagan Emperors was 
at that time in being. # The Government by Chriſtian Emperors 
was not yet in being ; and when it came, 1t held but a little time 
betore the Biſhups of Rome wreſted the Government of Ttaly out of 
their hands: This to me ſeemeth the moſt probable Interpretation 
of this difficult Text. 


11 And the beaſt that was, and is not, even he is 
the eighth 7, and is of the ſeven x, and goeth into 
perdition 9. 

m This made the eighth ſucceſſion of Governments in the Roman 
Empire. n This was the ſeventh lead ; for although this w:s the 
eighth Governinent in order as we have counted them, yet one of 
theſe, viz. the ſeventh (which was that of true Chriſtian Emperor:) 
muſt not be counted as c.1e of the ſeven Heads, which were all 1do- 
latrous : So . though this was the eizhth Government, yet he was 
one of the ſeven Heads, 7. e. Idolatrous Governments, and 0 to be 
deſtroyed as they were. 

12 And the * ten horns which thou ſaweſt are 
ten kings p, which have received no kingdom as vet 
a, =- receive power as kings one hour with the 
beaſt 7. 


r ! 7 
 Ci.14,f 


YDatl. 7.26 
Ch. 12. 7- 


Þ Poſſibly by ten Kings here are not meant Monarchs but Govern- 


ments. q Which were not in being in Fohn's time, nor in many 

ears after, ry But ſhould, during ſome time of the Beaſt's Reizn, 

ave Power with the Papacy, employing their Power with his, to 
eſtabliſh his Idolatry. But who theſe Ten Monarchs be, or what 
theſe Ten Governments are, I muſt confeſs my ſelf at a loſs to de- 
termine : It 1s plain they ſhould be, 1. Such as ſhould be contem- 
poraneous with the Reign of the Beaſt. 2. Such as employ their 
Power 1n conjun&ion with his. 3. Such as ſhould afterwards be In- 
ſtruments to ruine the Papacy, wer. 15, 17. The Beaſts Reiznbeing 
1260 years, there hath been, and will be ſuch a variety of Princes 
and Governments, as it is very hard to determine who they ſhall be. 
But their being contemporaneous with the Beaſt, makes me think 
it cannot be underſtood either of any that were in the World be- 
fore the year 605, when the Beaſts Reign began (though the My- 
ſtery of Iniquity was working, and the Image of the Beaſt was 
making long betore ; ) as alſo that the Ten Barbarous Nations that 
diſturbed [taly from 410, till near 600, could not be meant; . being 
all before Antich,/t came to any Reign, nor did they ever ſhew any 
great love or hatred to the Pope; ſometimes ſerving, ſometimes op- 
poſing him, as tuited their refpe@ive Civil intereſts. _ I am very in- 
clinable to think the Propheey to concern ſome Kings nearer the end 
of Antichriſt's Reign, who tho' for a while they ſerve the Papacy, yet 
ſhall at laſt be Inftrume:.:s to ruine him; but who they are ſhall do 
this, or when it ſhall be, I cannot determine. 


13 Theſe have one mind, and ſhall give their pow- 
er and ſtrength to the beaſt /. 


S They ſhall al! be Papi/ts, and for a while ſhall employ all their 
Power and Strength to uphold the Popiſh Religion. 


14 * Theſe ſhall make war with the Lamb 7z, and *ch.1£.14 
the Lamb ſhall overcome them x, tor he + is Lord of fDeat. 10. 


Lords, and King of Kings, and they that are with him 
are called, and choſen and fairhtul . 

t Theſe Ten Kings ſhall a while oppoſe themſclves to the Goſpel, 
taking part with Antichriſt. # But Chriſt ſhall overcome them by 
the Power of his Goſpel, or ſome of them that way ; others that 
will not be Converted ſhall be confounded, ſome way or other 
brought to ruine. w For he hath a power above others, and knows 
how to fit Inſtruments for his purpoſe; ſo as thoſe whom he ſhall 
make uſe of in this work, ſhall be choſen Perſons, and taithiul in 
diſcharge of the Truſt committed to them. 


15 And he ſaith unto me,The * waters which ttiou 
faweſt, where the whore fitteth x, are people, aud 
multirudes, and nations, and tongues. LED 

x John ſaw the great Whore ſitting upon ſeven Mountains, ver.g- 
and upon many Waters, ver. 1. theſe ſignified her Dominion and 
Juriſdi&ion over many People. = 

16 And the ten horns which thou ſaweſt upon the 
beaſt x, theſe ſhall hate the whore, and ſhall make 
her deſolate and naked, and ſhall eat her fleſh, and 
* burn her with fire y. : : 

x See wer. 3. and ver. 12. The ten Kings y ſhall Apoſtatize 
from the Papacy, and be great Inſtruments of God to rue !t 
When we ſee ſome other Kingdoms now in Vaſſalage to the Pope, 


17. 
1Tim6.rs 
Ch. 19.15. 


* 1f4.7 & 


do as much as hath been done in England and Scotland, aud — : 


7 NI 
Chap. RJ VII. 
and ſome other places, we may poſſibly underſtand this Prophecy 
better than we yet do. 


17 For God hath put in their hearts to fulfil his 
will x, and to agree and give their kingdom ro the 
beait y, until the words of God ſhall be fultil- 
"i ted >. 

1, x That is, what he hath determined fhall be done z not what he 
commandeth Men to do, or approveth their doing of ; his permiſ- 
I five VVill. y For God puts Malice againſt himſelf and his Son into 
the hearts of none, which is the cauſe of any Perſons affiſting the 
Beaſt. x Nor ſhall they do this any longer than till the 42 Months 
be expired, which he by his word hath declared, he hath allowed to 
| theſe mungrel Gentiles, to tread down the outward Court: But till 
I that time be expired, theſe Kingdoms will agree to give their power 
S to the Beaſt, whom about the expiration of that time they ſhall 
hate, and help to deſtroy. : 

1s And the woman which thou ſaweſt y, * is that 
| great City 5 which reigneth over the Kings of the 
; earth 7. | 

y See ver. 3. 7 That is, ſignifieth that great City, ſee ver. 5. Ba- 
bylon the Great. a Commanding and puniſhing them as ſhe plea- 
ſeth. To what Perſon or Power that either now is, or ever was 
: upon the Earth, is this applicable, but to the Pope who makes Em- 

f perors hold his Stirrop, ſends his Edits to Princes to execute, Ex- 

© communicates them, and interdi&s their Subje&s, and arms them 

againſt them if they refuſe ? So that if the Pope fits upon ſeven 
Hills, or Rome be built upon them ;| if the Papacy hath allured the 
Inhabitants of the Earth to Idolatry; if in her Idolatries ſhe be 
the Image of the old Pagan [dolaters; if to her many Princes have 

x grven their Power and Strength ; if ſhe reigneth over the Kings of 

} rhe Earth; and theſe things be applicable to no other Perſon or Go- 
f vernment; there is no more doubt, whether the Pope be Antichriſt, 
and Rome myſtical Babylon, which ſhall certainly be deſtroyed for her 
Idolatries, and ſhedding the Blood of God's Holy Ones, than there 
is of what we have, chap. 1.1, 2. That this Book contains the 
Revelation of Feſus Chriſt, to ſhew unto his $.ruants things which muſt 
ſhortly come to paſs, which he ſent and ſigntfied by his Angel, to his Ser- 
vant John, who bare Record of the Word of God, and of the Teſtimony 
of | Zejus Chriſt, and of all things that he ſaw. 


Ci AP. 2AVUL 


Babylon 7s Fallen, 1, 2. The People of God Commanded to come out 
of her, 4. The reaſon of the Command, $. Plagues- come ſuddenly 
vfon Babylon, 8. The Kings and Merchants bewail her Ruin, and 
the MaSters of Ships, 919. The Holy Prophets exhorted to Re- 
Joyce, 20. The Angel ſheweth how Babylon ſhall be Deſtroyed, by 
caſting a great Store into the Sea, 21. No Inſfirument of oy any 
more in her, 22, 23. The Reaſon why, 24- 


*Ch.16.19 


=. SE nn Sg 


N D atier theſe things I ſaw another angel 

come down from heaven a, having great 
power 6b, and the earth was lightned with his 
olory c. ; 

a ic is a matter of no great moment, whether by this Ange! 
we underſtand Chriſt, or a Created Angel; the deſcription agreeth 
to Chriſt, and may agree to a Created Angel. b To whom God had 
Y given Power and Authority to declare the Ruine of Babylon, c and 
+ had communicated to him a great Glory ſuited to his Splendor and 
vj Greatneſs, whoſe Meſſenger he was. ; 

HA 2 And he cried mightily, wirh a ſtrong voice, ſay- 
| * 134.14. ing d, * Babylon the grear zs fallen, is fallen e, and 1s 
{ Jer.50.39. + become the habitation of Devils, and the hold of 
| Ss 37. every foul ſpirit, and a || cage of every unclean and 
5541” hateful bird e. 

d Whoever was meant by the Angel, ver. 1. whom John ſaw, 
his Buſineſs was to give warning to the whole World, (therefore 
he crieth with a ſtrong voice,) e That Rome the great City, the Meo- 
ther of ſpiritual Harlots, ſhould fall, This Angel was a Prophet, and 
a Mefienger of him who calls the things that are not, as if they 
were; and therefore he ſpeaks in- a Divine Prophetick ſtile : the 
Prophets (ordinarily) ſpeaking of things to come, as paſt, or pre- 
ſent, or denote the certain tuturity of them, and doubling their 
words to aflure us of it; for this, is fallen, ver. 21. is expound- 
&d by, ſhall be thrown down. We read of this Angel, chap. 14+ 
2, but it is ordinary with Prophets to repeat the ſame things ; and 

| it is done as to the Chaldean Babylon, the Type to this Antitype : 
Both Iſuiah and Feremiah declared in more than one Sermon 1ts 
certain approaching Ruine. Theſe words are taken from J/a. 21. 
9. where the word fallen is doubled, as here. They are found al- 
ſo, Fer. 51. 8. God here explaineth what he had ſaid before, 
chap. 14. 8. The words are ſuch as might ſignifie a_finful Fall, 
or Apoſtacy; and wiat is here, is'true of it in that Tenſe; Jdo/s 
in Scripture being ordinarily called Devils : but they ſeem rather 
to be underſtood of a Penal Fall, for ſuch is that ſpoken of, 7/a. 
21. 6. after which it ſhould become an e Habitation of Devils, and 
a Cage of unclean Birds. Sec the like ſpoken of literal Babylon, Ta. 
13.16, 20, 2I, Wil Peaits, and hateful Birds uſually frequenting 
delolate Places. 
3 For all naticns * have drunk of the wine of the 
vrath of her fornication f, and the kings of theearth 
| nave committed fornication wirh her, and the mer- 
{ Or.4.9% Chants of the earth are waxed rich through the || abun- 
dance of her delicacies g. 

f Thats, her Fornications whicis haye brought this Wrath upon 

her. g She hai not only her ſelf committed 1dolatry, bus allu- 
; r-d others to 1, tanning them to break the Commandments of God, 
2nd hath influcaced Princes to eſtabliſh, and propagate, and ſo up- 


FLORES 25 


REVELATION. 


Chap. XVi1I. 


hold, and maintain it; and all ſorts of Men have been bewitched by 
her, growing rich by her Abundance, and being drenched in her 
Luxury. 


4 And I heard another voice from heaven h,ſaying, 
* Come out of her my people 7, that ye be nor par- 
takers of her fins &, and that ye receive not of her 
plagues / : 

h A Command from God. 7 They are the words of God by his 
Prophet, Fer. 50.8. and 51. 6. calling to his People, that, the years 
of their Captivity being now expired, and they having a Liberty to 
g0 back to Hieruſalem, they would not linger longer in Babylon, k 
nor partake of her Sins; 1 for God was about to deſtroy that place; 
and 1t they were found in it, they would be in danger- of being de- 
ſtroyed with it, eſpecially if they were found Partakers of its Sins, 
But they are alſo a general Warning to all to take heed of any Fel- 
lowfhip with Idolaters ; and fo the Apoſtle applieth part of theſe 
words, 2 Cor. 6.17, Here they are applied to myſtical Babylon, 
which is Rome Antichriftian. God calls to all that either love him, 
or their on Souls, to forſake the Communion of it ; for while 
they continue in it, they muſt partake of its Sins, worſhipping the 
Beaſt, by paying at his Command, a Divine Homage to Saints and 
Angels, to the Virgin Mary, to Images and Statues ; nay, to a piece 
of Bakers-Bread ; and doing fo, they will be involved in her Plagues. 
This Text looks terribly upon thoſe who apoſtatize to that Idolatry ; 
and inſtead of coming our (in obedience to the Command of God) 
being come out, go in again, and that not by compulſion, but out 
of choice, and voluntarily. 


5 For her fins have reached unto heaven 7, and * *Ch.16.19 
God hath remembred her iniquities 
m That is, the cry of her Sins; according to what is ſaid of S- 
dom (one of the Types of Antichriſt,) Gen. 18. 20,21. n The 
time js come when God will puniſh her for her Idolatry, and 
%- 5+ "pan and all the abominable things done and committed 
y her. 


6 * Reward her even as ſhe rewarded you, and , "IO 
double unto her double, according to her works : ks 


T in the cup which ſhe hath filled, fill to her — wg 


double o. 
o This Verſe ſoundeth in mine Ears, as if God had reſerved the 


* Il.48.20, 
& 52.11, 


| Ruine of the Papacy to be effected by ſome Proteſtant Hands, ſome 


of thoſe whom they had Perſecuted ; if not ſome of their Perſons, 
yet ſome of the ſame Faith. 


7 How much ſhe hath glorified her ſelf, and lived 
deliciouſly, 1o much torment and ſorrow give her p : 
for ſhe faith in her heart, * I fit a queen, and am *I1fa. 47:7; 
no widow, and ſhall ſee no ſorrow g. 
þ This ſpeaketh thus much : That when ever God's time cometh 
for the Ruine of the Papacy, the Condition of all that Party ſhall 
appear as miſerable, as it appears now ſplendid and happy. q And 
one great reaſon of this ſo great Aﬀiaion, will be the Pride, Pre- 
ſumption, and Security of that FaRtion, much after the rate of old 
Babylon, Iſa. 47. 8. Old Babylon thought it ſelf impregnable ; and 
new myſtical Babylon thinks her ſelf infallible and impregnable too ; 
the only Church (if we will believe her) againſt whom the Gates of 
Hell ſhall not prevail. 
8 Therefore ſhall her plagues come in one day 7, 
death, and mourning, and famine ; and ſhe * ſhall *c.17.16 
be utterly burnt with fire /; For ſtrong zs the Lord 
God who judgeth her z. 
r As was threatned to old Babylon, Iſa. 47. 9. In one day, that 
1s, 10 4 ſhort time. / All manner of Judgments, till ſhe be fully 
conſumed. :# For ſhe hath to do with a ſtrong Lord : She thinks 
ſhe hath ſecured her ſelf from Man, * by: anterefting Kings and 
Princes in her Quarrel; but it is the Lord that judgeth her, and 
ſhe will find him ſtrong enough to accompliſh his Word upon 
her. 
9 And the kings of the earth, who have commit- 
ted fornication, and lived deliciouſly with her * «g.,,.26. 
ſha!l bewail. her, and lament for her, when Þ they 17. 
ſhall ſee ihe ſmoke of her burning z :- Ver. 3. . 
# Not all of them, for ſome of them ſhall help to burn her,ch.19, F Ver. 1% 
I, 2,16. but ſuch as God had left to their Hardneſs of Heart, that 
they ſtill live in her Fellowſhip and Communion : Or, if others alſo, 
it muſt proceed from-their Humanity, not being able to ſee ſo ſplen- 
did a City as that of Ryme ruined, and ſo many ruined as will periſh 
by her Fall, withoutthe moving of their Bowels by ſome Pity and 
Commiſeration, { 


R 
10 Standing Jafar off for fear of her torment, 
ſlaying, * Alas, alas, that great city Babylon, that * 15,21. 
mighty city ! for in one hour is thy judgment Ch. 14. 8. 
COINC TW. 
 w As well as they loved her, they will not come nigh her in the 
time of her Torments : The Fire will be too hot for them, they will 
only ſtand aloof off, and pity her, That fo great and brave a Ci- 
ty ſhould be ſo ſuddenly Ruined; ſuch a gay and ſplendid Church, 
ſo politickly founded and put together, ſhould be in a ſudden ſo 
broke to pieces. 
11 And the merchants of the earth ſhall weep and 
mourn over her, for no man buyeth her merchandiſe 
any more x : 
x As the Merchants, Ezeh. 27. 27. lamented for Tyus, that 
that they could barter and truck no more there, becauſe all the Trade 
thereof was deſtroyed : So thoſe EcclefraStical Merchants, that were 
wont to trade with Rome for Indulgences, and Pardons, and Diſpen- 


| ſations, and Faculties, for Cardinals Caps, and Biſhoprichs, and Pre- 
bendaries, 


k 


l!Or,Bodies 


þ 
7 
72 
* Ch.17.4. 
6 
* If.23.14. 
Ezek. 27. 
29. 
* Ver. 9. 
f Ch.13.4. 
YJob 2.12. 
5, 
Gs, 
% 
8, 


* 11.44.23, 
& 45. 13. 
ſer 41.48. 
7 Cih.19.2. 


Chap. XViIL 


KE The merchandize of gold, and filver, and pre- 
ctous tone, and of pearls, and fine linen, and purple, 


J Or, ſweet and ik, and ſearler, and all || thyine wood, and all 


manner vellels of ivory, and all manner veſſels of 
molt precious wood, and of braſs, and of iron, and 
marble, 

13 And cinnamon, and odours, and ointments, 
and trankincenſe, and wine, and oyl, and fine flour, 
and wheat, and - beaſts, and ſheep, and horſes, and 
chariots, and || flaves, and ſouls of men. 

14 And the fruits thar thy ſoul luſted after, are de- 
parted trom thee, and all things which were dainty 
and goodly, are departed from thee, and thou ſhalt 


find them no more art all. 

y Here 15 a large Enumeration of ſeveral ſort of Wares, ſuch as 
were moſt precious, Gold, Silver, precinss Stones ; ſuch-as' were moſt 
uſeful for Ornament, fine Linnen, Purple, Silk, Scarlet ; moſt gra- 
titying the exterior Senſes, Thyine Wood, Odours, Ointments, &c. 
moſt nece!ſ.ry, Beaſts, Sheep, Horſes, Chariots ; all which, as is 
Prophefied, ſhall depart from Rome ; that is, whatſoever ſhe had, 
which allured Men 1nto her Idolatrous Communion : All their Idols 
and Images, Cardinals Caps, Prieſts Copes, all their Preferments 
and Dipnitites, whatſoever ſerved the Luſts of the Eye, the Luſt of 
the Fleſh, or the Pride of Life ; whatſoever their own carnal and 
ambitious Minds, or the carnal and ambitious Minds of others that 
courted this Whore, thirſted after, which brought them to ſeek her 
Communion, they ſhould all periſh, and ſhe be deſpoiled of them. 
It is very remarkable, that here is one piece of Merchandiſe to-be 
had no where but at Rome, viz. The Souls of Men; which lets us 
know they are no earthly Merchants that are here underſtood : As 
Souls are to be ſold a thouſand ways, ſo they are to be bought 
by pay ing for Pardons, Indulgences, Diſpenſations ; ſo the filly Chap- 
men think they buy their own Souls by purchaſing Cardinal Caps, 
Biſhypricks, great Livings,all manner of Eccleſiaſtical Dignities and Pre- 
ferments ({o they really buy the Souls of others) but when the Pa- 
PROT be wholly deſtroyed, none of theſe things ſhall any more 


15 The merchants of theſe things which were 
made rich by her, ſhall ſtand afar oft, for the fear of 
her torment y, weeping and wailing S. 

y Not knewing how to help her, and fearing leſt the Buyers and 
Sellers ſhould be puniſhed both alike; x yet bewailing themſelves 
that their Trading is deſtroyed, and they are like to buy ſuch Penni- 
wortlis no more. 

16 And ſaying, Alas, alas, that great city, * that 
was clothed in fine linen, and purple and ſcarlet, 
and decked with gold, and precious ſtones, and 
pearls a; For in one hour b ſo great riches is come to 
nought. 

a The Church of Rome that was ſo gay, and ſplendid, and rich, 


and glorious. 
b That is, ſuddenly. The term denotes rather the ſurpriſal of 


this Jud;:ment, than the ſhort ſpace of time within which 1t ſhould 
be etfeQted. 


17 And every * ſhip-maſter, and all the company - 


of ſhips, and ſailers, and as many as trade by ſea, ltood 
afar oft, 
18 And cried * when they ſaw the ſmoke of her 
burning,faying, + What city z5 like unto this great City ? 
19 And * they caſt duſt on their heads, and cried, 
weeping and wailing, ſaying, Alas. alas,thar great city, 
wherein were made rich all that had ſhips in the ſea, 


by reaſon of her coſtlineſs c : for in one hour 1s ſhe 
made deſolate. 

c We all -know Ship-maſters and Sailers are Perſons that live by 
carrying Merchants Goods ; and therefore properly the terms ſ1gni- 
fie all ſuch Perſons (of what Rank and Order ſoever) who get their 
Livings by ſerving this myſtical Babylon, whether Silver-ſmiths that 
make Shrines for Diana, or Clerks, or Notaries, Or any Officers in 
that Church, imployed in gathering 1ts Revenues, of Annats and 
Firſt-fruits, ſettling of Officers, gathering of Peter-Pence, drawing of 
Pardons and Indulgences, or Diſperſations, or ſuch as 1n that Syna- 
gogue hold any Offices of Pront. All theſe will be highly concern- 
ed in the Ruine of the Papacy, as that by the upholding of which 
they live, by reaſon of the great Riches thus coming in: The 
whole Rabble of their Eccleſiaſtical Hierarchy, with all their petty 
Officers, ſeem to be here meant. 


20 *Refjoyce over her d,thou heaven e,and ye holy 


- apoſtles and prophets, tor F God hath avenged you on 


her f. 


d That is, over her Ruine, which is not a more proper Obje for. 


the Sorrow and Mourning of all her Adhererits and Dependents, than 
of the Joy e of all ſpiritual, heavenly Perſcns, which are the true 
Church, who oppoſe this Antichriſtian Synagogue. F You alſo that 
were Apoſtles of our Lord Jeſus Chriſt, and ſuch as have been ex- 
erciſed as Prophets, in revealing to Men God's Mind and Will,do you 
tor God hath revenged you upon her, for your Dodtrine 
, Your Rulcs of Worſhip violated, and fome of your 
and fcr ail the Indiznities you have 1ut- 


rej0\ Ce, 
coriupted by her iy 
Elood that hath been {pilt, 
fered from her. 


REVELATION 
bendaries, and other Church-Preferments, ſhall lament when the Pa- 


Þacy falls ; that there will be no more ſuch Merchandi g 
or ſold there. INN 


— 


21 And a mighty angel took up a {tons like 2 great 


milttone 2, and calt it into the ſea, laying þ, * Thus * Jer. 51. 
with violence ſhall that great city Babylon be thrown 54+ 


ouy and ſhall be found no more ar 411 ;. 

.$ FOraoignor Symbol þ of the irreparable Ruine of Rome fig- 
— that great Milſtone which had grounded to Powder fo _ 
ny - God's Holy Ones. 2 By this Sign God ſhews his Prophet, 

- Inat Rome ſhall be Ruined. 2. That it ſhall be done with vio- 


22 * Andthe voice of harpers, and muſicians, and * iſt.24.8. 
of pipers, and rrumpeters ſhall be heard no more at Jr-7-34- 
all in the&; and no craftman, of whatſoever cratt © **: 
be be, thall be found any more in thee : andthe - Src 
lound of a milſtone ſhall be heard no more ar all in 13. 


thee ; 

23 And the light of a candle ſhall ſhine no more 
at all in thee z and the voice of the bridegroom, and 
of the bride, ſhall be heard no more at all in thee 


& : * For thy merchants were the great men of * 164.23.8. 


the earth /: for by thy ſorceries were all nations 


deceived m : 

k All theſe ſeem to me but the Expreſſion of an utter Ruine 
and Deſolation, by various Phraſcs and Epreifions ; they ſhould 
have no more Occation of Mirth, nor any more Bufinefs cone in 
their City. If any will underſtand theſe Exprefſions, of the ir Cr- 
gans, and other muſical Inftruments uted in Worſhip, and of $6: 7- 
tal Crafts-men, I ſhall not contradi@ it ; but 1 think it more pro- 
per to underſtand the words more largely, 1 Though thou hift 
had a Trade with great Men, and m by thy inchanted Cups of the 
Wine of thy Formcation hatt intoxicated many in all Nations, yet 
thou ſhalt uſe that Trade no more; the Nations ſhall be deceived 
no more by thee ; here ſhall be an end of thee. And one tiing 
that brings thee to thy ruine, ſhall be thy ſeducing others to Idola- 
Ys ſo as they have ſeemed to reaſonable Men, to be bewitched by 

ICC, 


24 And * in her 7 was found the hlood of pzo- * ch x15.5, 


phers, and of ſaints, 2nd of all that were flain upon 


the earth o. 

n In the Rubbiſh of Rome, when deſtroyed, o will be found the 
Blood of al! thoſe holy Servants of God, whether Miniſters ot the 
Goſpel, or Pro!effors of it, who ever fince the year 606; when the 


Pope came firſt to his Power, have been put to death for the Telti- _ * 


mony of Chriſt, and a faithful Adherence to the Purity of Dottrine 
by him delivered, the Purity of Worſhip by him preſcribed and di- 
retted, or the Purity of Diſcipline by his Dire&tion ſet up. As it 
ls ſtoried, that upon the Diſolution of Abbeys, and Monaſteries, and - 
Nunneries here in England, there were found in Holes of Walls, and 
Ponds, the Sculls and Bones of many Iofants, the ſuppoſed Baſtards 
of thoſe Fathers : So thou:h Men cannot, or will not not ſee it 
now, yet when the Papacy ſhall have its Period, Men ſhall under- 
ſtand, that no Prophet, nor righteous Man, hath violently been pur 
to death for the truth out of Rome, that is, out of the 7uri/di&ion 
and Influence of Rome ; but though it may be they have been no 
proteiled Papiſts that have been the cauſe or inſtruments of their 
death, yet ti:cy have done it as influenced from that Bloodv City; 
and the Principles have been perfe&ly Popiſh and 4ntichriftian. which 
madly hurried them on to ſuch Cruelties. ' It was one of luther”s 
reaſons why he would have none -put to death for Hereſie (as they 
call it) becauſe he would have this particular Character reſerved 
for that Anticliriſtian Synagogue. But ah, Lo-d Jeing, 
when ſhall theſe things be * Or who ſhall live when the wiſe Providence 
of G:d ſhall eff: them, to joyn with the whote Church, both Trium- 
phant and Militant, in the Song which we have prophefied of upon this 
Occaſion in the next Chapter. As 1.7. It is mt forus to brow the 
times, or the ſeaſons, which the Father hath put in his own Power. 


CHAP: XEL 


God is Praiſed in Heaven for Judging the Great Whire, 1——4, 
The Marriage of the Lamb, 7. Joha would have worſhipped the 
Angel, but the Angel forbiddeth him, 10. John ſeeth ome ſitting 
on a white Horſe, whoſe Fuſtice and Truth, Fyes, Garments, hidaen 
Name, Train, Sword, and Iron Red, are Dejcribed, 11 16. 
Another Angel calls the Fiwls of the Air to the Great S!aughter, 
I7—21, | 


A N D after theſe things 2 I heard a great voice 
of much people in heaven, ſaving b Alleluja c , 


+ Salvation and glory, and honour, and power, Unto + Ch -.10, 
& 12. 19, 


the Lord our God d : | 
4 Afﬀeer the pouring out of the fifth Vial upon the Seat of the 


Beaſt, chap. 16. 10. (for chap. 17, and 18. as we have formerly 
hinted, is but a Parenthefis.to the Hiſtory) God in this Chapter 
more fully deſcribes the Effe&ts of the pouring out that Vial. 6 It 
may be underſtood either of the third Heavens, or the Heayen 
upon Earth, the Church of God ; for the Church Triumphant and 
Militant both will concur in praifing God for the ruine of Antichrilt's 
Power. c Allalujah is an Hebrew word, and ſignifies, Praiſe ye the 
Lord, & All theſe are but terms of Honour and Praiſe given unto 
God, acknowledging that the Churches Salvation is from him, the 
Effet of his Power ; and that to him upon that account, ail Ho- 
nour and Glory imaginable is due, as having ſewn himſelf his Peo- 
ples God. 


2 For * true and righteous are his Judgments Cc, * ch, 
for he hath judged the great whore f which did Cor- & 16. F 


IUPTE 


Chap. XIX, 


Chap. XIX. 


+ Deut.32. rupt the earth with her fornication g, and F hath 

- +08 avenged the blood of his ſervants at her hand þ. 

Cli-10-20 e The Lord's Judgments in hol; Writ, ſometimes ſipnifie his Pre- 
cepts, ſometimes his Diſpenſation. of Providence, either more ge- 
nerally, or more ſpecially ; in which Jaſt ſenſe it ſ1gnifies {as here) 
his puniſhment of Sinners. Theſe are juſt and rignteous, and 
theretore called Judgments ; f For he hath puniſhed the Papacy, 
g whach corrupted a great part of the Earth with its Idolatry. 
h And by theſe judicial Diſpenſations God hath alſo taken Vengeance 
on them for the Blood of his Saints ſhed by them. It is remarkable 
that all along this Book, 1d9/atry and Perſecutionare made the Bealt's 
provoking Sins. 

* 11.34.20. 3 Andagain they ſaid, Allelujah. And her * ſmoke 

Ch.14-17. roſe up for ever and ever 7. 

&X 18.c,18% 5 As the Church proceeded in her Praiſes, ſo God proceeded in 

his Judgments upon the great Whore, until ſhe was ruined paſt re- 

cozery, 

4 And * the four ind twenty elders, and the four 
beaſts fell down and worſhipped God that fat on the 


throne, ſaving, Amen ; Allelujah #. | | 

þ See the Notes on chap. 4. All the heavenly Quire praiſe God 
upon this account, deſiring that the Lord would tulfil what he had 
begun. 

5. And 4 voice came ont of the throne, ſaying /, 
Praiſe our God, all ye his ſervants, and ye that tear 
him, both ſmall and great . | 

| From Chriit. m Declaring it the Will of God, that all holy 
Ones ſhould praife him upon this account, : 

6 find I heard as it were the voice of a great multi- 
tude, and as the voice of many waters, and as the 
voice of mighty thundrings, ſaying Allelujah : for 

*C.11.15 the * Lord God omnipotent reignerth 7z:. 

& 12.1% mn By this Multitude moſt underſtand the Church ; ſome under- 
ſtand the Jews as well as the Gentiles, ſuppoſing that they ſhall be 
before this time converted and added to the Church. Others think 
their Converſion is the Marriage ſpoken of in the next Verſe, The 
Saints do not rejoice in the Ruine of their Adverſaries, but 1n the 
Glory of God advanced by it, and as by it his Kingdom 1s pro- 
moted. 

7 Let us be glad and rejoice, and give honour to 

* Mat. >», 1M : for the * marriage of the Lamb is come, and 


2.X25.10, NIS wife hath made her ſelf ready p. 
p A late Reverend Author tells us, That as there is a threefold 
| Reſurreftion mentioned in Scripture, 1. A nfing to a Newneſs of 
Life, Epheſ. 5. 14. 2. The Converſion of the Jews, called Life 
from the Dead, Rom. 11.15. 3. In the end of the World : So 
there is a threefold Marriage of the Lamb, 1. To particular Souls, 
when by Faith they are united to Chriſt. 2. To his Church com- 
pleated, when the Jews ſhall be called. 3. When all his Ele& ſhall 
be made one with him in Glory, after the General Reſurreftion. 
He ſeemeth to underſtand it of all theſe. Probably the Converſion 
of the Jews ſtayeth for the Fall of the Papacy, whoſe Worſhip and 
Perſecution are great Scandals to them. Probably alſo upen the 
Fall of it, many will be converted beſides the Jews, and the gene- 
ral ReſurreRion will not be far off, . The learned Dr. Moor ſeems to 
reſtrain it to the Jews Converſion; I had rather underſtand it more 
generally, 


$ And * to her q was granted, that ſhe ſhould be 
* Plal. 45- arrayed in fine linnen, clean, and + white 7 : For 


131+ the fine linnen is the righteouſneſs of the ſaints /. 
Ezck. 16, : bn . h 

9 That is to the Lamb's Wife, whether Jews or Gentiles, or both. 
oo y That ſhe ſhould be cloathed with the Righteouſneſs of Chriſt, 
reckoned to her for Righteouſneſs, { This is the Righteouſneſs of 
the Saints, called the Righteouſneſs of God, Rom: 1. 17. a Righteouſ- 
neſs through the Faith of Chriſt, Phil. 3. 9. called Righteouſneſſes in 
the Greek, becauſe there are many Saints to be cloathed with it, and 
becauſe it is imputed for our Juſtification, ſo as to be the cauſe alſo 
of our San&ification, whoſe DeteRs it covers, but doth not excuſe 
us from its Duties. 


*Mat.22.2 © And he faith unto me, Write 7, * Bleſſed are they 
Luk.14.15 Which are called to the marriage-ſupper of the 
+ Ch.2t.5. Lamb z : And he faith unto me, + theſe are the true 
K 22.6. ſ1yings of God w. 
t Write it, as a Buſineſs of Moment, of which a Record is fit to 
be kept. « That is, (ſay thoſe who underſtand by the Marriage of 
the Lamb the Jews Converſion) who live in this happy Period of 
Time when the Jews ſhall be converted, and with the Gentiles 
make one Goſpel-Church. But this ſeems to me not ſufficient. 
The Marriage is one thinz, the Supper anpther, and (ordinarily) 
couſequential to the Mazriage it felf. The Kingdom of Glory ſeems 
to me rather intended, and thoſe are called to it, who are made 
meet for the Inheritance of the Saints in Light. w That 1s, theſe are 
the undoubred Truths of God, and theretore to be called into que- 
ſtion by none. 

10 An 1 fell ar his feet to worſhip him x. And 
1 at 10. he faid unto me, || See tho do zt not y: Iam thy fel- 
25. & 14. low ſervant 2, and of thy brethren F that have the 
13 teſtimony of Jeſus: Worſhip God a, for the teſtimo- 

: 4 ou ny of Jeſus is the ſpirit of prophecy 5b. | 
Ch.12.175, * Proſtration, or falling at the Feet of Superiors, to pay them 
an Homaze in Confideration of their Superiority, was ordinarily 
uſed in thoſe Eaſtern Countries, Gen. 44. 14. 1 Sam. 25. 24, 2 Kings 
4.37. Ether 8. 3. To: worſhip. him therefore, here muſt be under- 
ſtood of Prajzer or Praiſe, which are pieces of Divine Adoration, 
_ which it 15 not probable this great Apoitle would have offered, had 
he not miſtaken him, and thouzht him an uncreated Angel. y But 


*Ch.4-4,6. 


Lb 


1A 


REVELATION. 


Chap. XIX, 


the Angel doth not only refuſe it, but with ſome Indignation, 
ex wn, have a care you dv it not. From whence we may obſerve, 
what a Fig-leaf they have made to cover the Papiſts Idolatry, in 
worlhipping the Bread in the Euchariſt, who (to ſhew us their great 
Skill in Divinity) think they may be excuſed from Idolatry in it 
becauſe they think the Bread is turned into the Body of Chriſt - 
idolatry is not to be excuſed by Think ſo's. x The Angel gives him 4 
reaſon why there was no Adoration due to him, becauſe he was 
Equal 1n Office, though not in Nature ; he was both his and all their 
Brethren's Fellow-Servant, who by preaching the Goſpel give a Te- 
ſtimony to Chriſt, Well therefore, chap. 2. and chap. 3. may the 
Miniſters of Churches be called Angels. a There is no Prayer, no 
Pratſe due but to the Creator. b There are divers Senſes given of 
the laſt Phraſe; but of all given, there are two which ſeem to me 
moſt probable : Either, 1. The Spirit of this Prophecy, by which I 
have revealed theſe things to thee, is not mine, it is the Teſtimony 
of Jeſus ; ke therefore 1s to be adored, not IT. Or, 2. The preach- 
ing the Goſpel, which is thy Teſtimony to Chriſt, is as much from 
the Spirit of God, as my Spirit of Prophecy : We are therefore 
Equals, and I am not to be Worſhipped more than thou art. 
We have the ſame, chap. 22. 8, 9. to let us know that even good 
Men may twice run into. the ſame Error ; and to let us knoiy, that 
by the Mouth of theſe two Witneſſes this Truth ought to have been 
eſtabſſhed, ſo that Papiſts ſhould not after this have paid any Di- 
vine Adoration to Angels, much lefs to Saints; and if Invocation 
be no Divine Adoration, nothing is, This deſerveth the Confide- 
ration of them, who think it ſo eafie to excuſe the Popiſh Religi;n 
from 1dolatry. 

11 And I ſaw heaven opened c, and behold a white 
horſe d, and he that fat upon him waz called * Faith- * C319, 
ful and True, and in righteouſneſs he doth judge and 
make war. 

c The remaining part of this Chapter is conceived more fully to 
open . what ſhall come to paſs under the Sixth and Seventh Vials, 
mentioned chap. 16. 12. more eſpecially the Battel in Armageddon, 
mentioned there v. 16. There mention was made only of the Ar- 
mies being gathered together ; here it is more fully deſcribed. At 
the beginning of the Goſpel, (faith a late learned Annotator) 7ohn 
ſaw only a Door opened, chap. 4. 1. At the Reſurre&tion of the Wit- 
neſſes, he ſaw the Temple opened, chap. 11.19. Here after the Ru- 
ine of Babylon, he ſeeth Heaven opened. Fohn ſaw ſuch an Horſe, 
chap. 6. 2. Dr. Moor obſerves, that the Horſe with his Rider figni« 
fies Rule; and the white Colour, Proſperity and Succeſs. d It ap- 
pears that the Rider was Chrift, becauſe he is called Faithful and 
True, which agrees with chap. I. 5. and by the Names in the follow- 
ing v. 13, and 16. given tohim. 


12 His eyes were as a Hame of fire e, and on his 
head were many crowns f, and he had a name written 
that no man knew but he himſelf g. 

e See chap. 1.14. chap. 2.18. This denoted either his piercing 
Knowledge, or his infinite Wiſdom and Underſtanding. f And 
there needs muſt be fo; for, ver. 16. he is ſaid to be the King of 
Kings, and the Lord of Lords. g This denoted the Incomprehenfi- 
bleneſs of his Divine Eflence and PerfeCtions. 


13 * And he way cloathed with a veſture dipt in , ;, 63.2 


blood h, and his name is called the + Word of God z. . 
h Either to denote that he was he who redeemed us by his Blood, +1 Toh. 5.7 
or rather to ſignifie that he was now coming forth to ſhed the Blood * 
of his Enemies, both in Vindication of his own Honour and Glory, 
and of his People ; in which Notion it alſo agrees with Tſaiah's Vi- 
ſion of him, chap. 63. 1, 2, 3. ver. 3» Their Blood ſhall be ſprinkled 
upon my. Garments, and TI will ſtain all my Raiment. i See the Notes 
on Fohn 1. z. He is alſo called the Word, chap. 1. 2, a Name given 
him hardly by any except this Apoſtle. 


' 14 And the Armies which were in heaven followed 
him & upon white horſes /, * cloathed in fine linnen, +144. 28. 
white, and clean 7. 4 4: 

k The glorious Angels, 2 Theſſ. 1. 7. and ten thouſands of his & 7. g. 
Saints, Fude 14. who follow the Lamb whitherſoever he goeth. 
/ To Prophefie Succeſs and Viftory. m To denote their Glory, Pu- 
rity and Holineſs. 

15 And * out of his mouth goeth a ſharp ſword 7, « <,, ;5 

that with it he ſhould {mite the nations o : and Þ he verſe 21. 
ſhall rule them with a rod of iron : and he || treadeth Þ Pr. 2. 9. 


the wine-preſs of the fierceneſs and wrath of Almighty - 
God 9. | th. I4 

n I can eaſily agree that this two-edged Sword is the Word of | 9, 20. 
Chriſt coming out of his Mouth, but not the Goſpel, (the time was *? 
paſt for that, it was the time of the Sacrifice in Bozrah) but his Word 
of Command, calling out his People to take - Vengeance upon the 
Remainder of his Enemies. The Sword, was both the Sword of 
the Lord, commanding it to be drawn, and the Sword of his People 
whoſe hands were to wield it. o With this he now ſmites the Re- 
mainder of his Enemies, and þ breaks them to pieces. q His Ene- 
mies were the Grapes, that now were put into the Wine-freſs of 
God's fierce Wrath ; Chriſt trod them there. See Iſa. 63. 3. 

16 And he hath on his veſture and on his thigh a - 

name written, KING OF KINGS AND LORD 


OF LORDS -. | 
r The ſame Name as in chap. 17. 14. 1 Tim. 6. 15. (See the Notes 


2 27. 
- ſl 


-on thoſe two Texts) denoting the Sovereign Power and Au'hority 


which he had. This he always had, but he now comes forth open- 
ly to manifeſt it ; therctore this Name 1s ſaid to be written upon 
his Veſture, and upon his Thigh, that all might take Notice of 
it, 


i7 And I ſaw an angel ſtanding in the ſun, and he 
cried with a loud voice 2, ſaying to all the fowis that 
== 


4: ib 


A . 


Chap. XIX. 


fic in the midſt of heaven z, Come, -and 
ſelves togerher to the ſupper of the great God «». 

# The beſt conjeure I can find at the ſenſe of theſe words, is, 
That they fignifie the Preachers of the Goſpel bold and clear foretel- 
ling the Ruine of Antichriſt, « There are divers kinds of Fowls, 
amongſt others ſome that feed on Fleſh. Theſe are thoſe Fowls 
here mentioned, ſuch as feed upon dead Carcaſes. w They are 1n- 
vited to the Supper of the great God ; called fo, becauſe it is made 
and prepared by the Power of him who is the great God; or becauſe 
it 15 2 Sacrifice to the Juſtice of God. See 1 Sam. 17. 46. Iſa.18.6. 
fer. 12. 9. Exek. 39.17. God's Juſtice upon his Enemies, is called 
4 Sacrifice, Iſa. 34. 6. Jer. 46. 10. Exek. 39. 17. Idolaters were 
wout upon their Sacrificing to have a Feaſt ; God hath alſo a Feaſt 
upon tius his Sacrifice , but it is for the Fowls and Beaſts, that feed 
on dead Carcaſes, 


13 That ye may eat the fleſh of Kings, and the 
fleſh of captains, and the fleſh of mighty men, and 
the tieth of horſes, and of them that fit on them, and 
the fleth of all men both free and bond, both ſmall and 


great .x. 

x In the former Verſe God invited all the rayenous Fowls to a 
Supper, he here ſheweth their Chear. The meaning is no more 
than this, That in the great Battel of Armageddon, which was for 
the Deſtruftion of all the Remainder of the Enemies of the Church, 
whether Papiſis, or Atheiſts, or Turks, Men of all ſorts and orders 
ſhould be tlain, and their dead Bodies made meat for the Fowwls of 
Heaven, that feed on dead Fleſh. 

19 And I ſaw the beaſt, and the kings of theearth 
and their armies gathered together ro make war 
again{t him thar far on the horſe, and againſt his ar: 
my y. 

y The Beaſt, whether by it be underſtood the Dragon, or the 
Beaſt with ſeven Heads, and ten Horns, or the Beaſt with two Horns, 
or all of them, fhall- before this time be all deſtroyed, (that is, as 
to their Power and Dominion) but there will be Relidts left, both 
of Pazans, and Turks, and Papits, of whom it is probable, that 
this is to be underſtood, viz. That after God, upon the pouring 
out of the fifth Vial, ſhall have deprived the Papacy of their Domi- 
non, and by the pouring out of the ſixth Via!, ſhall have deprived 
the Turk of his Dominion ; that yet ſuch Pagans, Turks, and Pa- 
?iſts, as ſhall be left, ſhall be gathered together, and make one or 

. ! £ S 
more great Armies, with whom the Jews and Gentiles (now united 
in one Church) ſhall fight under the Condu& of Chriſt, as the 
Captain-General of his Church, by whom they ſhall be overcome : 
and that this ſhall be the great Battle in Armageddon, mentioned 
chap. 16. 16. : 

FCh.161 4 hy . . 

falſe prophet that wrought miracles before him, with 
which he deceived them that had received the mark of 

+ch.15-15. the beaſt, and + them thar worſhipped his image 4. 

Theſe both were caſt alive into the lake of fire,* burn- 


'Ch.20.10. | . 6 
5a Dan, ing with brimſtone b6. ; 
7.1. z The Iflue of this great Battel will be the total ruine of all the 


YCh.14.10 Enemies of the Church, their Bodies being made meat for the Fowls 
of the Heaven, their Souls caſt into the Bottomleſs Pit of Hell. 
The Secular part of Antichriſt 1s here meant by the Beaſt, a The 
Eccleſiaſtical Antichriſt by the falſe Prophet, that had cheated cre- 
dulous Princes, and credulous People, with his pretended Miracles, 
into an Idolatry, that was but the Image of the old Idolatry of the 
Eeathens, in worſhipping Demons, and the Images of ſuch as were 
in great Eſtimation amongſt them while they were alive. 5 Both 
theſe, the Laick and Secular Popiſh Party, and all their Church-Party, 
that ſhould be left to this Day, ſhall all now be deſtroyed. In a 
matter of Fa&, not likely to appear in the World yet of two hun- 
dred Years or more, and thus darkly foretold, who can be poſitive 
and particular? But this ſcemeth the ſenſe of it upon the former Zy- 
potheſes : That the Beaſt with the ſeven Heads, and ten Horns, men- 
tioned chap. 13. 1. and the Beaſt with two Horns, alſo there men- 
tioned v. 11. are Antichriſt, beginning with thoſe Roman Emperors, 
that favoured the Idolatry introduced by the Biſhops of Rome, and 
ending in the Univerſal Biſhop, or Popes of Rome, and their Clergy, 
who quickly wormed out the Emperor's Power, and for 1260 Years 
reizned, ſetting up Idolatry and Superſtition, and corrupting the 
Dottrine of Faith, and for the latter ſix hundred Years of time, 
perſecuting the true Church of Chriſt more notorioully. After 
which God will begin to reckon with him, gradually. pouring out 
five Vials upon him. I am very inclinable to think, that we 1n this 
Age are yet under the pouring out of the ſecond of theſe Vials, 
ſceing little yet effe&ed towards the ruine of the Papacy, more than 
the expoſing of their Idolatries and Cheats to ſeveral Princes and 
States, and to the generality of thinking People ; nor hath the 
Providence of God proceeded far in that as yet. The three other 
Vials are yet fo be poured out upon the Papacy, beſides that upon 
Euphrates, and then this laſt upon all the Enemies of the Church 
together : And who ſhall live when God ſhall do theſe things ? 


21 And the remnant were flain with the ſword of 
him that fat upon the horſe, which ſword proceeded 
out of his mouth c, and all the fowls were filled with 


their fleſh d. 


c In a!l Armies there are common Souldiers, as well as Officers. 
What the Iflue of this Batte! ſhall be, as to the Leaders in 1t, the 
former Verſe told us : This tells us how it ſhali fare with thoſe 

* under the Command of them. ft ſeems they ſhall not be excuſed 
becauſe they followed their Leaders, and did only what they bad 
them ; Chriſt commands that they alſo ſhould be {lain. 4 And thus 
bloody Day (whenever it comes) will be a Day of great [laughter ; 
for the dead Bodies will be enough to ſup and fill all the Fols of 


Heaven. 


Vol. II. 


ather your | 


R EVELATION 


20 And the beaſt was taken 2, and with him the * | 


od 


Chap. 04 


CHA MM 

An Angel cometh djwn from Heaven, and bindeth the Devil fr 
Thouſard Tears ; then to be lovjed for a little ſeaſon, 
They that were beheaded for the Witneſs of Jeſis and worſhipped 
nor the Beaft, lived and reigned with Chriſt a thouſand Vears, þo 
Others alide in Death, 5. They who have pare in she firft Reſur- 
reetion are bleſſed, 6. Satan let love again, 7. Seluceth the Na- 
tons, and ſtirreth up Magog to the War, 8. Fire from Heaven d- 
voureth them, 9, The Devil caſt into the Lake of Fire, to. Tix 
Throne eretted, the Dead ariſe, and whoever was not fourd writ - 
ten in the Book of Life thrown into the Lake, Lows t 


] — 3, 


We are not» come tothe darkeſt part of the tehole Recs 
lation, what is meant by the thouſand Years, and 1! 
firſt and ſecond Reſurreition,and by Gog and Mag»; 
ch. 20. or the new Heavens and new Earth. and the 
Jeruſalem coming down from Heaven, diſcourſed on 
ch.21.22. zs very hard to ſay, and joiſibly much mor + 
cannot with any probability be conjedtured as to they. 
than hath heen already faid. I hill on:y tell my 
reader that, leaving him, to judge that is moſt p10 
bable, and leaving it tothe Divine Providence : 
grve us a certain and infallible Expoſition of © 141t 
rs contained in theſe three laſt Chapters. 


\ N D I ſaw an angel coming down from heaven. 
having the key of the bottomleſs pir, and a row 
Chain in his hand @. 
a The Deſcription of this Angel can agree to noo but Cliritt, 
or one that exerciſeth a power by deligation trom him ; for, c!/. 
I. 18. it 1s he who hath the Power of Hell and Death; and it is hic 
who alone is ſtronger than the Devil, which muſt be ſuppolcd t: 
h1m that binds him, or we muſt think the Devil much tamer thin 
he 1s. | 
2 And he laid hold on the * dragon, that old fer- + £1 5.5. 
pent, which is, the devil and tartan þ, and bound him © See 2 Per, 
4 thouſand years d. TEM 
b There can be no queſtion who is meant by the Dragon here, 
and the old Serpent, for the Holy Ghoſt interpreteth it the  Dev1), 
the Enemy of Mankind. c By binding alſo 15 meant the Rettraint 
of the Devil in the Exerciſe of his natural Power, or the Power 
God had before allowed him to exerciſe for the Trial of his Saints 
waith and Patience. The Devil is reſtrained in tie reſtraint of hrs 
Inſtruments, It 15 expounded, v. 3. That he ſhould deceive the Na- 
Hons no more. 4 Whether thele thwſand Tears ſignifie that certain 
ſpace of time, or a long time, I can't ſay ; only it is probable, 
that if it ſignifies an uncertain indefinite time, it is a much lonzer 
time, than any other Period of time ſpoken of, which have all hi- 
therto been expretſed by Days, or Months, or a leſſer number «# 
Years by far. But what the Complexion of the World ſhall be du- 
ring this long time, or when the Epocha or Beginning of theſe thou- 
ſand Years ſhall be, are both of them very hard Queſtions, It was 
the Opinion of the old Chiliaſts or Millenaries, That 6000 Years of 
the World ſhould paſs, then Antichriſt with all wicked Men ſhould 
be deſtroyed : That in the next thouſand Years Chriſt ſhould apyear 
and be upon the Earth, ruling it with his Saints; after which there 
would oe another time of ſharp Perſecution, according to winat 1s 
ſaid, v. 7. to which Chriſt ſhould put a Period by coming to the 
laſt Judgment. Divers very good and learned Men, (leaving out 
the Age of the World when theſe thouſand Years ſhould begin) | 
have judged, that after the great Battel in 4rmageddon, {iwhich, 
as was faid before, ſhall be after the Ruine both cf Tiwh und Pore 3 
the Church of Chriſt ſhall for a thouſand Years enjoy a great Quier N 
under the Condu@ of Chriſt, (as ſome think) who in thefte 1004 - 
Years ſhall perſonally be upon the Earth ; or of ſuch a Godlv Magt- 
ſtracy in all Places of the Church, as ſhall do and execute what 


Chriſt would have done and executed. After wiiich, the Encmics F 
of the Church {mentioned here ver. 8. under the Notions Gr Goz 
and Magog) ſhall rally again, but be deftroved by Ciriit appearin;,; 
to the laſt Judgment. This Opinion hath hat, and tatn many, : 
learned and grave Patrons, I ſhall only fiy this, That I Co not 
underſtand what theſe Thouſand Years mean, 11 they do not denote , 


a ſerene and calm time for the Church of Gol, of long continu- 
ance, before the Day of Judgment. Whether Chrift thall be here 
Perſonally, or Rone but Saints ſhall be in Places of Power, or the 
Power of Chriſt only ſhall be ſcen in to ruling and governing ail 
Magiſtrates, that they ſhall not, as before, impoſe Superjtition and 
Idolatry, and kill or ruine Men for not complying with them ; but 
the Servants of God that worſhip him in Spirit and Truth, ſhall un- 
der Magiſtrates live quiet and peaceable Lives in all Godlineſs and 
Honeſty : I cannot determine, but do in my own Thoughts molt 
incline to the laſt, that the thouſand Years only denote a Jarze 
ſpace of time, (as yet a great diſtance) when the Church of God p 
ſhall freely enjoy their Liberty, without ſuch Temptations to Ido1s- 

try, Superſtition, or other Wickedneſs, as they have yet all along 2 
had, either from Jews, Pagans, or Antichrift's Party. 


6 © 2 

3 And caft him into the bottomleſs pir c, and ſhut 

. >. X. 1 - *»4 on 6 - 5 
him up, and ſer a ſeal upon him f, * that he thould «4, 

deceive the nations no more, till th2 thouſand yours verſe 2 

7 c > ' Loa ARtifA 5 

ſhould be fulfilled g ; and after that he mult be Looied Ix. 

4 little ſeaſon Þ. 

e That is, into Hell, his proper place : He ſhall no longer, or 3 ls 

leaſt not till theſe thouſand Years be expired, cxerciſe his Po CF, 1: 

Prince of the Power of the Air, Eph. 2. 2. or compaſſing be 1 art, FP 

and walking up and down in it, as 755 1. 7, f But fall be ze: | k 

{trained as much as one {hut up in Priſon, whoſe Doors are tated F# 


SIS ap 


Chap. XX, 


up. £ That till this time of -Gog's Counſel for the quiet of his 
Ciurch be run out, he ſhall not deceive People by his old Arts. 
{> But after that he ſhall have a Liberty again, (as ver. 7.) for a little 
time. 
© Pa0.7.9, 4 And I faw * thrones z, and they fat upon thein #, 
22:27 , and judgment was given unto them / - and I ſao the T 
jouls of them that were beheaded for the witneſs of 


[Ch 3-12. worihipped rhe beail, * nor his image, neither had re- 
L 12. 
IS, 19. 

T Roin. 2, > 
17. thouſand years. 


þ Thofe mentioned afterwards in this Text ſat upon them. / That 
is a Power of Judgment, 1 Cr. 6. 2, 3. to be executed afterward. 
m The Perſons ittinz upon theſe Thrones are deſcribed to be, 
x. Sucit as had kept themſelves from Idolatry, or any compliance 
with Antichriſt, either in the Form of the Beaſt, or of the Imaze 

- of the Beaſt. 2. And for that Non-compliance had ſuffered Death, 

* and for witneſſing to the Truths of Chriſt contained in his Word. 
Theſe n are deſcribed as livins with Chriit in Honour and Dignity, 
all that ſpace of the Churches Reſt and Tranquility before expreſt. 
Our learned Dr. Moor interprets the Thrones and Zudgment, Concern- 
inz thoſe Thrones or places of Judicature, upon which the Dra- 
2o0n's Oficers ſat to condemn the Saints of God, from whence 1ſtued 
the putting to death of many of the Saints of God, and thinks that 
in this Viſion there is a recourſe to, the ſecond Thunder. Now theſe 
Saints are ſaid to . live and reign with Chriſt a thouſand Tears ; that 
is, (ſay ſome) in H-aven, in a blefſed ſtate of Glory, while the M1- 
licant Church upon the Earth, enjoyed great reſt and quiet on 
Earth, Others have thought, that theſe ſhould be raiſed from the 
dead, and live with Chrift on Earth theſe thouſand Years. Which 
Notion (if truc) will ſolve a great Phenomenon, and render it not 
improbable that the Number of the Saints on Earth will, during 
theſe thouſand Years, be enou-h to rule the World, and overbal- 
lance the Number of all the Wicked of the Earth. Thoſe who 
think thus, judge there will be two Reſurre&ions; the firſt, of Mar- 
tyrs, which ſhall antedate the general Reſurre&ion a thouſand Years, 
but the Scripture no where elſe mentions more than one ReſurreQti- 
on. For my own part, I ſhall freely confeſs that I do not under- 
ſtand this and the two next Verſes, nor ſhall I Le poſitive as to any 

enſe of them : For the ſpiritual Reſurretion, as to the Martyrs, It 
was lons fince paſt, or elſe they had died in their Sins. But of this, 
ice more 1n the next Verſe, 


5 But the reſt of the dead o lived not again until 
the thouſand years were finiſhed p. This zs the tirit 
reſurrection g. 

0 By the reſt of the Dead, ſome underſtand all except Mar £4 
others, only that Party who adhered to Antichriſt. Thoſe who by 
the reſt underſtand all the Dead, both good and bad, (the Martyrs 
alone excepted) judge that there will be two Reſurreions : The 
firſt more particular, of thoſe that have ſuffered Death for Chriſt : 
the ſecond general, of all the reſt of the Dead. I muſt confeſs, I 
find a Difficulty to all>v this ; it is too great a Point to found upon 
a finzle Text, in a Portion of Holy Writ, fo clouded with Meta- 
phors as this, and I know no ſuffragan Text. Thoſe who under- 
ſtand by the reſt of the Dead, only the Wicked, underſtand by this 
living again, a pol'tick Life ; that is, recovered not their former 
Power, continued as dead Men, able to do no Miſchief, till the 
thouſand Years of the Churches Peace and Tranquility were exp1- 
red. May this Senſe of living, and living again, be allowed, 1t will 
deliver us from almoſt all our Ditficulties about the ſenſe of theſe 
Verſes; for then by living in the foregoing Verſe, is ſignified a poli- 
tical living, not a ReſurreQion from a natural Death. But then art- 
ſeth a Queſtion, If theſe beheaded Saints did not riſe from their 
natural Death, how could they be reſtored to places of Dignity 
with Chritt in the Church 2 To which they Anſwer, That thoſe for- 
merly ſuffering for the Name of Chriſt, and all the Saints upon the 
Earth, are to be conſidered as one Church ; and ſo thoſe formerly 
beheaded, lived and reigned with Chriſt in their Succeſfors in the 
ſame Faith ; That is, thoſe alive at that time, being reſtored to 
their Peace, and Liberty, and Reputation in the World, the Mar- 
tyrs, who are Members of the ſame Body, are alſo ſaid ro [1ve. 
Lis appears to me the moſt probable ſenſe : For that the glorified 
Saints ſhould leave Heaven (as to their Souls) to be again cloathed 
with Fleſh, and in it to live a Thouſand Years, and be concerned in 
the following Troubles the Church ſhould meet with after theſe 
thouſand Years, feems to me to be utterly improbable, and to lay a 
Foundation for ſo many difficult Queſtions, as will poſe the wiſeſt 
Man to anſwer to reaſonable Satisfation. But yet there remains a 
dificalty, q How this reftorin;z God's Holy Ones to a better State, 
can be called the firſt Reſurrefron ? That it may be called a Reſur- 
rettion, 1s plain, as the Converſion of the Jews, and reſtoring them 
to their former State as the Church of God, 1s called Life from the 
Ped, Rom. 11.15, And the Reſtzuration of the Witneſles, chap. 
TI. it. is called fo, though neither the one nor the other were na- 
turally dead, Nor 1s it unuſual in Scripture and prophetical Wri- 
tings, to ſpeak of People recovercd to their former and better ſtate, 
as being riſen from the Dead. It may be called the firſt, with re- 
ference to that far more excellent ſtate which they ſhall be put in 
atrer the laſt Judgment, when they ſhall live and reign with Chriſt 
11 4 more happy and glorious manner. If this may not be allowed 
a: the ſenſe of theſe two Verſes, I muſt confeſs this ſuch a Sorenny, 
o: dithculty of Scripture, as I do not underſtand. I ſhall proceed 
with the following Verſcs upon this Hypotheſis, that this is the ſenſe, 
though I dare not be poſitive in it. 


6 Bleffed and holy 7s he that hath part in the firſt- 
reſurrection 7 : on ſuch the * ſecond death harh no 


* Ch. 2.11. 
f }f Mk a) [ OE 
x3 Pet.2.9. 


R EVELATION. 


Chap. XX 
of Chriſt 7, and ſhall reign with him a thouſand 
years Zz. 
#7 That 1s, they are only holy Ones, -that ſhall be thus reſtored to 
ſhare in the Churches happineſs, / and ſuch as ſhall not periſh eter- 
nally, # but they ſhall be as Priefts to God and Chriſt, plorifiing 
him with the ſpiritual Sacrifices of Prayer and Praiſe. u- And ſhall 
enjoy a quiet and honourable. Station with Chritt upon the Earth 
tor a long time, 


7 And when the thouſand years are expired w, Sa- 


tan {hall be looſed out of his-priſon +. 

:1.,,9 When the long time exprefled under the Notion of a thouſand 
;Xears ſhall be expired, x God ſhall take off his Reſttaint from the 
Devil, ſo as he ſhall influence the Wicked of the Earth once more 
*to make Oppoſition to his Church. 

8 And ſhall go out to deceive the nations, which 
are in the tour quarters of the earth y, Gog and Ma- 
gog 2, to * gather them together to battel : the num- * Ch. 15. 
ber of whom 7zs as the ſand of the ſea: a. 14. 

y That 15, the Devil being got from under the Reſtraint of Divine 
Providence, ſhall tall upon his old Work, going about to deceive 
Men over all the World, either tempting them to Idolatry, or He- 
refie, or Lewdneſs of Life, or (which ſeemeth moſt probable) ſtir- 
ring them up to one Attempt more to ruine the Church. 7 Theſe 
People are.called Gog and Magog, about the meaning of which there 
are various Opinions. VVe read of Magog, Gen. 1o. 2. he was one 
of the Sons of Faphet, ſee alfo 1 Chron. 1. 5, he inhabited that Coun- 
try called Syria, and from thence, his Poſterity being multiplicd, 
{as ſome think) tranſplanted ſome Colonies into America. V Ve read 
of Gog no where in Scripture, but in Ezekel, ch. 38. 39. where bot 
Gog and Magog are mentioned as the great Enemies of God's ancient 
Tjrael. Gog there, ch. 38. 2. 1s named as the chief Prince of Meſhech 
and Tubal. There are Diſputes who are meant by Gog and Magog in 
thoſe two Chapters. * The Fewiſh Rabbies apply the Terms to ſome 
Nations whom the Meſtah (expetted by them) ſhall encounter and 
overcome ; but if we confider that Prophecy, as made in Baby/n, 
and to comfort the People in that Captivity, we can hardly think 
the Enemies there intended, were to appear at ſuch a diſtance of 
time, as more than 2000 Years (for ſo many and more are elapſed 
already, fince Ezekie!'s Prophecy.) The beſt Interpreters therefore 
rather think, that Antzochus, and the Race of Selucrs, (a King of 
*Syzria, who in thoſe Quarters of the VVorld ſucceeded Alexander, of 
whom we read in the Book of Maccabees) is there intended, whoſe 
ruine 15 there forctold, as being a great Enemy to the 7ews, after 
their return trom Babylon; yet ſome think that in both theſe Chap- 
ters, Ezekiel propheſieth of the ſame Gog and Magog here intended, 
which ſhould be the laſt Enemies of the Church. The Pajiſts, who 
{according to their Intereſt) contend for Antichriſt as yet to come, 
make Gog and Magog here to ſignifte ſome King or Kings that ſhell 


join with Antichriſt when he appeareth. Others think that Gog 


and agog 1n this place, ſignifies more generally, a Colluties or mixt 
Company of all wicked Men, a very great Multitude who ſhall come 
trom 21 Parts, only typified by the Gog and Magrg in Ezebiel, as 
being like them, 1. For Number. 2. In their defign to ruine the 
C:1urch, upon 1ts Reſtauration to a. more quiet peaceable State. 
3- Ard who ſhall be ruined like them, by the more than ordinary 
Providence of God : For the Gog and Magog mentioned in Ezehiel,are 
deſcribed 1n three Texts of that Prophecy as coming from the Worth 
but theſe are deſcribed as coming from the four Quarters of the 
Vvorld, This ſeemeth a much more probable Opinion than theirs 
who will have them ſome particular Nations, whether Americans, 
Turks, or Indians. a Theſe Enemies ſhall make a vaſt number, there- 
fore compared to the Sand of the Sea ; and in this they hold a pro- 
portion alfo with the Gog and Magrg mentioned in Ezekiel,who were a 
great Company, <<. 38. 4. many People, v.6. covering the Land, v. 9. 


9 And they went up on the hreadth of the earth 5, 
and compalled the camp of the ſaints about, and the 
beloved city c, and fire came down from God out of 


heaven, and devoured them d. 
b That is, in all parts of it, where the Church of Chriſt was. 
c The Church of God (typified by old Hieruſalem, which was God's 
beloved City) they encompaſſed 1n a Military order and manner, de- 
ſigning to deſtroy it, or make it ſubject to their Luſts. d But Fire 
came down, &c. Thus Ezek/el prophetied of the iſſue of the Gag 
and Magng by him mentioned, Zzek. 38. 18, 19, 20,21, 22, v. 22, 
And I will plead againſt him with Peſtilence, and with Blood, and I will 
rain upmn him, and upon his hands, and upon the many People that are 
with h'm, an overflowing rain, and great hailſtones, fire, and brimS$one, 
The meaning is, that God would deſtroy them with a quick and 
terrible Deſtru&ion ; ſuch as 1s that Deſtruion of Perſons and Pla- 
ces which 1s by Fire. 
10 And the devil that deceived them. was caſt into 
the lake of fire and brimſtone, * where the heaſt and *Ch.15.20 
the falſe prophet are, and Þ ſhall be tormented day T1419 


and night, for ever and ever e. | 

e After this ſhall be the end of the VVorld, when the Devil ſhall 
be reſtrained to Hell the place of Torments, where he ſhall have a!l 
Heathens, and all the Rabble of Antichriſt, who ſhall be there tor- 
mented conſtantly, and for ever and ever, 


11 And I ſaw a great white throne f, and him 
thar ſat on it g, from whole face the earth and rhe 
heaven fled away, and there was found no place for 
them h. 

f God now giveth his Prophet a Viſion of the laft Day, [the Day 
of Judgment.) He ſecth a Throne, a place of Judicature ; ſaid to 
be great, to denote its Gloriouſneſs ; wh:te, to ſignifie Chriſt's Pu- 
rity and Holineſs in his Judging the VVorld. g And he fav 
Chriſt ſitting upon it. þ And all old things pafſiing away. Peter 
thus deſcribes this flying away of the Earth and Heavens, 2 Pet, 3. 


Ch. 1.5, Power /, but they ſhall be || prieſts of God, and 
& <.19. 


10. The Heavens ſhall paſs away with a greet noi':, and the Ele- 
ments 


4 
bead 
þ 
FR 
ys 
2445 
Feds 
EN -- 
BL. 
3: S 
Ta 
(8 
Eg 
KEY 
A 
- 


Chap. XXI. 


ments ſhall melt with fervent heat, the Earth al 0, and he war 
in __ be burnt Up, -—— ver. k 1, I2, All Vie Frm ſhall ul 
12 AndI faw the dead, ſmall and great, ſtanding 
*Dan.7.10 fore God 7 *; and the hooks were opened +, and + 
+ Ch.3.5. another book was opened, which is the book of life / : 
& 13. 8. and the dead were judged out of thoſe things which 
& 21: 27- were written in the books mm, * according to their 


ng works 
2. I9. . , 
neck. 16.27 Dþ The former Verſes gave us an account of Chriſt the great Judge 


of the Quick and the Dead in the laſt Day ; the Lord Jeſus Chriſt 
ſat upon a Throne of Glory, about to execute his laſt holy and 
righteous Judgment. Now he deſcribes the Perſons to be Judged, 
viz, all, both ſmall and great. k To ſhew the Juſtice and Righte- 
ouſneſs according to which this Judge would proceed, Books are ſaid 
to be opened ; what Books ? The Book of God's Law, the Book of 
God's Omniſcience, the Book of Mens Conſciences. In the former 
15 contained what all Men ſhould have done ; the two latter will 
diſcover what they have thought, ſpake, or done in the Fleſh. 
{| The Book of Life, mentioned chap. 3. 5. by which is to be under- 
ftood the Book of God's Eletion, wherein are the Names of all 
thoſe who being from Eternity choſen to Life, were redeemed with 
the Blood of Chriſt, and afterwards effeRually called, juſtified, and 
{andtitied. According to theſe Books ſhall the laſt Judgment be, 
Rom. 2. 16. with reſpe@ had unto every ones Work. 


' 13 And the ſea gave up the dead which were in 
| Or, zhbe ir, and death and || hell 7 delivered up the dead which 
grave. were mMthem: and they were Judged every man ac- 


cording to their works o. 

n By Hell is meant all places where the Dead are ; whoſoever 
ſhall be at that Day in the ſtate of* the Dead ; the Bodies of Men, 
whether Buried 1n the Earth or Sea; and the Souls of Men, whe- 
ther they be in the place of Torments or Happineſs, ſhall all be re- 
united to their Bodies, that they may both in Soul and Body receive 
their final Doom of eternal Happineſs, or eternal Miſery, .accord- 
ingly as they have lived inthe World ; and thoſe who ſhall be alive 
at that Day, who ſhall be Changed (as the Apoſtle ſpeaks 1 Cor. 15. 
51.) are to be counted dead in the Senſe of this Text (their Change 
being inſtead of Death to them.) o It is not ſaid they ſhall be 
judged for their Works (though that as to the Wicked is true) but ac- 
cording to their Works); which is true, as to the Ele&t ; who, tho' 
their Names be written in the Book of Life, yet muſt work Righte- 
ouſneſs, and they ſhall have Judgment of Abſolution, not according 
to the Perfe&ion, but the Sincerity of their Works done, in Obedi- 


Rom. 2. 6, 
Ch. 2. 23. 


R EVELATION 


ence to the Will of God. 
* 1Cor.1s, 14 And * death, and hell were caſt into the lake of 


26. fire p. This is the ſecond death 7. 

þ There ſhall be no more natural Death, nor any more ſeparate 
ſtate of Souls = Jvc ſignifies) they ſhall all be ſwallowed up in 
the Ifſue of the laſt Judgment, where ſome ſhall go into Life, ſome 
into eternal Condemnation. Dr. Moor expoundeth it of the whole 
Region of Mortality, being ſet on Fire at the laſt Thunder. q This, 
as to the wicked of the Earth, is the ſecond Death, mentioned 


Rev. 2. Ile 
15 And whoſoever was not found written in the 


book of life », was caſt into the lake of fire. 
r See the Note / on Verſe the 12th. 


CHAF MAL 


A new Heaven and anew Earth, 1. New Jeruſalem cometh down from 
Heaven as a Bride, 2. The Tabernacle of God is with Men, 3. 
All Tears wiped away, 4. He that overcometh ſhall inherit all 
things, 7. The DeſtruFion of the Fearful and Unbelieving, 8. One 
of the ſeven Angels that carrieth John into a high Mountain and ſhew- 
eth him the holy Feruſalem, 11. Her Glory, 12. Her Wall and 
Gates, Foundation, 13——21. God and the Lamb, the Temple, 22, 
The Kings of the Earth bring their Glory into it, 24. Nothing that 
defileth ſhall enter into it, 27. 


Thzs Chopter begins with the Viſion of the New Hea- 
vens and the New Earth, by which all underſtand a 
new ſtate of the Church,but are divided in their Opt- 
nions, whether what is ſpoken be to be underſtood of 
the Church Militant upon the Earth or of the Church 
Triumphant in Heaven. Thoſe who underſtand it of 
the Church Militant here upon Earth, are droided mn 
their Opinions,as tothat period of the Church which zs 
bere ſpoken of ; fome underflanding it of the thouſand 
Tears after the time of Conſtantine, for which T ſee no 
reaſon, (nor I believe will any that wiſely conſider the 
ſtate of the Church in that time.) Others underſtand it 
of the thouſand years,mentioned chap.20.) in which (as 
was ſaid)the Church ſhould enjoy great quiet and peace. 
I muſt confeſs I chuſe much rather to agree withthem 
who judge it ſignifieth the Church Triumphant, being 
overcome with the reaſons. given by thoſe Reverend 
Authors, a ſummary of which may be found in 
Mr. PooPs Latin Synopfis. - 1. That Interpretation 
carrieth on the Hiſtory in order ; whereas according 
to the other, we muſt ſay the Hiſtory, ch.20.1,2,3,4,5. 
was interrupted by the Battel with Gog and Magog, 
oy the account of the Day of Fudgment, from v.7. 10 
the end of the laſt Chapter. 2, In reaſon, as the cloſe 


Vol. II 


bo 

Chap. X XI. 
of the former Chapter gave ns an account of the iſſue 

of the Day of Fudgment, as to wicked Men, ſo this 

Jhould groe us ſome account how it ſhould fare with 

the Saints. 3. We ſhall find ſome things in the new 
Hierufalem here de/:ribed, which will agree to no 

ſtate of the Church upon Earth. Jes v.22, 233; 


; ND I faw * a new heaven, and.a newearth , * if.55.2:. 
for the firſt heaven and the firſt earth were pal: 


ſed away, and there was no more ſea þ. 

a A new and glorious ſtate of things relating to the Church. 
b For now there was an end of the World, and all the Troubles 
that the People of God had met with ia it, as well as the ma- 
terial Earth, Heaven, and Sea, were paſſed away : this new Heaven 
was propheſied of old by T/aizh, and more lately by Peter, 2 Pet. 
3+ 13. | 
2 And I John * ſaw the holy city, new Jeruſalem c, *Gal.4. 25. 
coming down from God out of_ heaven d, + prepared Feb. 2: 
as a bride adorned for her husband. _ ha 
c That is, the whole Chorus or Number of the Eleft of God, an- |, SN OR 
ſwering God's choſen People in Jeruſalem, d Not locally coming "EOS: 
down, but who had their Original from Heaven, and were all Per- + 2Cor-11, 
ſons of Heavenly Minds. e In their beſt Robes of Glory, ſuch as ans 
Brides uſe to wear, when on their Wedding-day, they adorn them- 
ſelves for their Bridegrooms. 

3 AndI heard a great voice out of heaven, ſaying, 
Behold the * tabernacle of God is with men, and he * Lev. 24. | 
will dwell with them, and they ſhall be his people, $0% 
and God himſelf ſhaft be with them, azd be their ZZ 33-7 
God f. 2 2Cor. 5.15 

_F What is ſaid here, is applicable to the Church of God in this 
Life, yea, to every true Believer, whoſe Body is faid to be the 
Temple of the Lord, and in whom the Lord dwells, according to the 
Phraſe of the Holy Ghoſt, in many Places of the New-Teſtament ; 
of whom it is alſo true, that God is with them, and will be their 
God ; but more” eſpecially applicable to the Church-Triumphant, as ' 
dwelling ſignifies conſtancy of abode, and more tull maniteſtation 
of a Perſon. The ſtate of the Saints in Glory, is thus deſcribed by 
a being every with the Lord, 1 Theſſ. 4. 17. 

4 And * God ſhall wipe away all rears from their * Ch.7.17. 
cyes, and Þ there ſhall be no more death, * neither | penbig 
ſorrow, nor crying, neither thall there be any more + 26-000 
pain, for the former things are paſled away g. 

g Scarce any of the Paſlages in this Verſe, taken in the plain li- 
teral ſenſe, are applicable to any State of the Church in this Lite : 
for though 1n the thouſand Years, mentioned v. 20. the ſtate of the 
Church (as 'tis preſumed) will be very happy comparatively to what 
1t ever was before, and tree from its Enemies Moleſtations and Per- 
ſecutions ; yet I think none hath aflerted that in that time no Mem- 
bers of it ſhall die, or be fick, or have any ſorrow or pain. There 
muſt be a great allowance of Figures, if we will apply this to any 
State of the Militant Church ; but all will be literally true as to 
the Church in Heaven. 


5 And * he that fate upon the throne h, ſaid +, * Ch. 4. 2. 
Behold, I make all things new 2. « And he fiid un- £20 11- 


24, 


- wo... * o » 
ro me Write &, * for theſe words are true and faith- os - 4 | 
ful /. * Ch.19.9, | 


h That is, Chriſt ſaid, ? Behold I will put a new Face upon al! 
things ; the ſtate of my People ſhall not for ever be a troubled and 
afflited ſtate, þ Becauſe the Viſion is to be for an appointed time, 
and what I now tell thee will not be accompliſhed of many years, and 
yet the knowledye and proſpect of it, and meditations upon it, is 
of higheſt importance to keep up the Spirits of my People under t 
all their Sufferings, during that time of the Dragon (the Romiſh Hea- 


then Emperors) not yet run out, and the 1260 years of Antichriſt, Y 
G3. therefore write it, that all my People in all Ages, may know n 
it, believe it, and ſuffer patiently in the Hopes of it. / For what T 
tell thee, is, what comes from the true and faithful Witneſs, and 5 
ſhall have a certain Being 1n its time, 1 
6 And he ſaid unto me *, It is done», FI am Al *<h.16.17, 3 
pha and Omega, the beginning and the end z:. || I ng rc 
will give unto him that is a thirſt, of the fountain of If 45.0. f 
the water of life freely 0. | X ſoh.4.10. 
m The World is at an end, and all my Threatnings againft my 7 4.8 7-37: un 


Enemies, and Promiſes to my People, are now fulfilled in the Eter- ch,22.15. 
nal Damnation of the one, and Deliverance and Salvation ot the | 
other. n I firſt made the VVorld, and I have put a period toit. L 
firſt gave out thoſe Promiſes and Threatnings, and 1 have now tul- . 
filled them. o And my People who have thirſted after my Righte- a 
ouſneſs and Salyation, now have it freely, and ſhall drink, and drink 
abundantly. : : : 

7 He that overcomcih, ſhall inherir all chingsp, and 
*.] will be his God, and he ſhall be my ſon. 

God revealed this to John alneſt 1600 years ſince ; and how 
long it ſhall be before this Glorious time ſhall come, God alone 
knows: The moſt of this time hath been, and will be a time 0: S, 
Fighting with the VVorld, the Fleſh and the Devil z but whoeve: 
he be that ſhall fight this good Fight, and come out of it a Conque- 
ror, ſhall inherit all the Joys and Happineſs of Heaven. q I will 
be tohim ALL in ALL; 1 will bz his God to love, and glorine 
him ; and he ſhall be with me as my Son, to live with me tor ever 


and ever. 


*Heb. 3.10 Gy 


$ But the * fearful 7, and unbelieving /; and the , @.__ p ay 
abominable z, and murderers z, and whoremongels G1, 24. 
w, and ſorcerers x, and idolaters y. and all liars 2, Exh. .5- 4 
[ 6 r 2 1 ſhall » 
Im .C 


Ver 


Y Ezck.42. 
3! 


a 4 S! 
3 ” A {| @ 
< {hall have their parts in the * lake which - burn- ; 
eh with fire and brimitone, which is the ſecond 


LCL Hs 

7 All thoſe who are without the Church inviſible, whether Pro- 
fane Perſons (ſuch are Murderers, Whore-mongers, Sorcerers, L1- 
ars) or Idolaters, or Unbelievers and Hypocrites, ſhall all be call 
to f2oil, Tie fearful, who through fear of lofing their Reputatlon, 
F.itates, Bonours, or Lives, deny me, or ſhall not dare to own me. 
' Such as will not agrec to the Propoſition of my Goſpel, or will 
not come to me that they might have Life. # Sogdomrtes, and ſuch 
as live in Beaſtly Luſts. « Such as without any warrant from God, 
take away Mens lives wilfully. w Such as defile their Neighbours 
Wives. © x Such as exerciſe Witchcratt, conſult the Devil, and trade 
with Familiar Spirits. » Whether they commit the Idolatry of 
Ahab, fivins Divine Adoration to the Creatures, as the term of 
their Worſhip : or the Idolatry of Jeroboam, worſhipping the true 
God by Images. z And all ſuch as are Liars with their Tongues, 
ſpeaking what they know to be falſe, or Liars in praftice, that 15, 
Hvpocrites, ſeeming to be what they are not. « All theſe, and all 
ſuch ike, ſhall be Eternally Damncg. 


9 And there came unto me one * of the ſeven ain- 
gels, which had the ſeven vials tull of the ſeven laſt 
plagues 6, and talked with me, ſaying, Come hither, 
| will ſhew thee the + bride, the Lamb's wite c. 

bþ One of thoſe mentioned chap. 15. 6+ c I will ſhew thee the 
whole Church (inviſible heretofore) the glorious ſtate of the Church 
Triumphant, under the repreſentation of a great City. 

19. And he carried me away * in the ſpirit d, to a 
grew and high mountain e, and ſhewed me Þ+ that 
great City, the holy Jeruſalem, deſcending our of hea- 
ven from God /. 

4 In a Trance or Extatie (as before,) e From whence Men uſe 
to have the beſt Proſpett of Cities, or other places. f There he 
cauſed me to ſee the whole Triumphant Church, anſwering as the 
Antitype to Hreruſalem, but more Holy ; being not of the Earth, 


Earthly, but from Heaven, Heavenly ; founded, built up, and 
adorned by God. | 


11 Having the glory of God g, and her light cas 
like unto a [tone molt precious h, even like a jaſper 
itone. clear as cryſtal þ ; 

£ A moſt excellent Glory received from God. h And her Light, 
that is (as fome interpret it) that which gave her Light (as the Sun 
is called the Light of the Earth) or her inlightner. þ Was Chriſt® 
himſeli, who 1s a Stone moſt precious, wer. 23. The Lamb is the 
Tight thereof. h Libe a Faſper Stone, ſee chap. 4. 3. God is there 
compared to a 7aſper Stone, here to a Faſper Stone, clear as Cryſtal. 
They ſay of the Zaſper Stone, that it is very glorious to the Eye, pre- 
ci-5 and pure, fo it 15 very fit to reſemble in part, a pure and glo- 
r10us God. 


12 And 7 had a wall great and high &, and had * 
teclve gates 7, and at the gates twelve angels 2, and 
names written thereon, which are the names of the 


rwelve tribes of the children of Hrael 7. 

; That is, this City, by which is meant the Church of God, had 
h a Wall, great and high ; Walls are for the Prote&ion end De- 
tence of a place, the higher and greater they are, the greater De- 
fence and ProteGtion they gave. By this God is meant, who 1s of- 
ten called his Peoples Rock and Defence, / The uſe of the Gates 
of a City, are to let Perſons in and out ; the Church is ſaid to have 
twe/ve Gates, becauſe of the free liberty of acceſs to the Church 
while it was Mihtant, and to fignifie that the Church in Heaven, 
will be made up of Perſons, come into it from all Parts; or tor 
the greater ſtate and glory of it. Some think, becauſe of the twelve 
Apoitles, who were the firſt Miniſters of the Goſpel who admitted 
Men into this Church. 7 Denoting the Guard of Angels about the 
Church ; unieſs by Angels, Miniſters be to be underſtood, propor- 
tioned to the ſeveral parts of the Church. » Becauſe as of old, only 
the twelve Tribes of God's choſen People Trae!l, made up the 
Church in that Period; fo only God's Ele& and peculiar People, 
typified by that 7/rael, come in at the Gates of this Church. It 15 
very obſervable, how God affedts the number of twelve in the affairs 
of hs Church. | | 

13 On the eaſt three gates, on the north three gates, 
© the touth three gates, on the welt three gates 0. 

2 To figmfie it was made up of Perſons from all parts of the 
World. This agreeth with Ezekzel's Viſion, Ezek. 48. 31, 32, 33, 
24. The Triumphant Church will be a colle&ion of Believers, who 
from all Nations have come into 1t. 


14 And the wall of the city had twelve foundations 


5. 7, and * in them the names of the twelve Apoſtles of 


the lamb 5. 

Þ The ancient Church of God was founded in twelve Patriarchs, 
and twelve Tribes; the Goſpel Church in twelve Apoſtles; Chritt is 
the only Foundation of both, 1 Cor. 3. 11. but he 1s the Foundation 
pon which the Church 1s built. The Twelve Apoſtles are called the 
Foundations per que, Or per qurs, by which the Goſpel Church had its 
be:mmnmng. q As Work-men ſometimes ſet their Names upon Foun- 
c.tion-Stones, by which 1t 15 made known who were they that build- 
ed the Wall. 

15 And he thar talked with me *, had a golden 
reed to meaſure the city, and the gates thereot, and 
the wal: thereof 7. 

r Tins leemeth to ſignifte the tranſcendency of the ſtate of the 
Church now, to what 1t was before : It was then meaſured by a 
Man, chap. 11. now by an Ange! ; then by an ordinary Reed, now 
by a Go/den Reed. 


REFELATION. 


% > 
Chap. XX[, 
16 And the city lieth fourſquare, and the length 
iS as large as the breadth; And he meaſured _ the ci- 
ty With the reed, twelve thouſand furlongs The 
length, and the breadth and the heighth of it are 
equal /. | | 
/ The Church Militant, meaſured by the Reed of the Word, is 
unequal 1n its parts; ſome parts of it are purer than others ; but in 


the New Feruſalem all parts ſhall be equal in perfection and purity, 
as all the 1ides of a thing fourſquare, are equal. 


17 And he mealured the wall thereof an hundred 
and forty ard four cubits h, according to the meaſure 


of a man, that is, of the angel &. | 

h This could not. be the meaſure of the compaſs (it was for that 
much too little) nor of the height or breadth (for either of them 
it was much too great) from whence Mr. Potter concludes, it muſt 
be the ſquare meaſure; ſoas the height and breadth of it was twelve 
Cubits, for 12 times 12 makes 144. # As Men uſe to meaſure þ, 
and as this Angel meaſured, who appeared as a Man in this 
ACtion. 

18 And the building of the wall of it was of Ja- 
ſper /, and the city was pyre gold #7, like unto clear 
laſs 7. | 

4 Strong and Impregnable, not ſubje& to Impreſſions from Ene- 
mies, as it 1s ſaid of the Faſper, that no Hammer will break it. 
m All that make up this City are perfe& and noble, n and purc 
without ſpots. 


I9 And the foundations of the wall of the city 
o were garniſhed with all manner of precious ſtones 
/- The firſt toundation was a jaſper ; the ſecond, a 
{apphice; the third, a chalcedonie ; the fourth, an 
emerauld. 

o By which we noted before, are to be underſtood the Apoſtles, 
who building upon the one Foundation Chriſt Jeſus, by their Holy 
Dofrine laid the beginnings of the Goſpel-Churches, the firſt 
Stones (upon the Rock Chriſt) which were afterwards puultiplied, 
others being builded upon' them, till the whole Church was per- 
tected, 


20 Thefifth a ſardonix ; the fixth, a ſardius; the 
ſeventh, a chryſolite ; the eighth, a berill ; the ninth, 
a topaz; the tenth, a chryſopraſus ; the eleventh, a 


Jacinth ; the twelfth, an amethyſt p. ; 

þ I cannot tell what to make of theſe precious Stones, with which 
they are ſaid to be garniſhed, unleſs it be their Spiritual gifts and 
habits of Grace, the various manifeſtations of the Holy Spirit gt- 
ven to the Apoltles to profit the Church withal, with which they 
adorned the Doftrine of the Goſpel, and won upon the Pagan 
World, making themſelves admirable in the Eyes of Men and Wo- 
men. Nor were it hard to diſcant upon theſe ſeyeral ſorts of Stones, 
and to ſhew of what Graces they may be Types ; the Jaſper, of 
Steadineſs and Conſtancy : The Saphire, of Heavenly-mindeaneſs ; 
(it being a Stone of the colour of the Heavens: ) The Chalcedony, 
of Zeal : The Emerald, of Vigour and Livelineſs : The Sardonix, 
(a ſtone of various colours) of various Gifts and Graces : The Sar- 
dius, of Courage and Fortitude, and a readineſs to ſhed their Blood 
for Chriſt : The Chryſolite, of Love, or Wiſdom, and Knowledge : 
The Berilf, of a quickneſs of ſight and underſtanding : The Topaz, 
of ſearching out Divine Myſteries: The Chryſophraſus, of Gravity 
and Severity : The Facinth, of Spiritual Foy, Calmneſs, and Sere- 
nity of Mind : The Amethyſt, of Sobriety and Temperance : But 
it ſeems to me too great curioſity to Philoſophize ſo far upon the 
nature of theſe Stones ; take them together, they probably fignifie 
all the Gifts and Graces of the Bleſſed Apoſtles, by which the Reli- 
gion of the Goſpel was firſt commended, and made to appear lovely 
to the World. 


21 And the twelve gates were twelve pearls ; every 
ſeveral gate was of one pearl, and the ſtreet of the 


city was pure gold, as it were tranſparent glals g. 

9 I am not willing to deſcant further in particulars, conjecturing 
(for it is no more) what each Metaphorical term fignifies in this 
unuſual Deſcription of a City, I do think the ſcope of the whole, 
15 no more, than to let us know, that the Manfions of Heaven will | 
be moſt glorious places, giving the Souls of thoſe to whom God | 
ſhall give to enter into them, an infinite ſatisfation, beyond what 
>" rich and glorious things in the World can give our outward 
enſes, 


22 And I ſaw no Temple therein 7, for the Lord 
God Almighty, and the Lamb are the temple of 
it /. | 


7 I cannot take Temple ſo ſirifly here, as thoſe who underſtand 
all this but as a deſcription of, the Bleſſed ſtate of the Militant 
Church, during the Thouſand years, but underſtand it of. all ſuch 
Worſhip and Ordinances as we ſerve God in, and by, in this Lite. 
{ The immediate fruition of God ſhall there ſupply all, God ſhall 
be all in all, 1 Cor. 15. 28. Ordinances are but Perſpe&ives, of uſe 
in this Life to ſee God at a diſtance; means, whereby we know 
in part: There we ſhall ſee God face to face, and know him as 
we are known, The Saints there ſhall want nothing, and therefore 
ſhal! not need an Houſe of Prayer ; they ſhall know perteRly, and 
therefore will not need any to teach them; they ſhall always 
e Chriſt, and ſo will need no Sacraments whereby to remember 
1m, . | 


23 * And the city had no need of the ſun, neither * I.60.19. 
ot the moon to ſhine in it 7, + tor the glory of God T Ch.22.5. 
did lighten it, and the Lamb z: rhe light there- 
ot "A 


© 1f1.50.11 

© ” wk day y, for + there ſhall be no night there 2. 
ch.14-7, 

Ch.22.5. 


# The Sun and the Mon are the two great Luminaries ot the 
World, which God hath made, the one to rule the Day, the other 
fo rule the Night ; in Heaven there will be no need of any of theſe. 
Light in Scripture (in its Metaphorical Notion) ſignifies knowledge 
or comfort , there will in Heaven be no need of any created Beings, 
to help us to either of theſe; God and Chriſt ſhall there fill the 
-—_ of his Saints with Knowledge and Joy not to be exprel- 
cd, 


* 1.60.3. 24 * And the nations of them that are ſaved, ſhall 


& 55. 12: walk in the light of it w,and the kings of the earth do 


bring their glory and honour into it . 
w» Allthat go to Heaven ſhall be thus happy. «x And ſuch Kings 
of. the Earth, as ſhall come ihto Heaven, ſhall ſee all their Honour 


REVELATION 


and Glory ſwallowed up in the Glory and Honour of that place | 


and ſtate; and confefs that all their Crowns are infinitely ſhort of 
this Blefſed and Glorious Crown, all their Thrones nothing to theſe 
Thrones, 


25 And the gates of it ſhall not be * ſhut at all by 


y The reaſon of ſhutting a Cities Gates, is either to ſhut out Ene- 
mies, or to keep in ſuch as axe within ; There will be no need of 
ſhutting theſe Gates on either of theſe accounts ; there will be no 
Enemes to fear, and thoſe that are within this City will have no 
need nor defire to go out. x We do not ordinarily ſhut our City 
Gates by day, but there ſhall be nothing but Day, no Night in a Na- 
tural or Metaphorical ſenſe, 


26 And they ſhall bring the glory and honour of | 


tne nations Into 1t 7. 

a Whatſoever 1s. excellent. or deſirable in the World, ſhall be 
ſupplied to the Souls of thoſe that are in Heaven, by Good of ano- 
ther make, but waich ſhall be equally (nay infinitely more) fatif- 
tactory to the Soul. 

* 1ſ1.35.9, 27 And there * ſhall bin no wiſe enter into it, any 
focl 3. 17. thing thar defileth c, neither whatſoever worketh abo- 


on 


SOT mination d, or maketh a lie e; but they which are writ- 
- ten in the Lambs book of life | 
b In the Greek there are two Negative Particles, which though 1n 
the Latin they make an affirmative, yet in the Greek make a ſtronger 
Negative, which-we tranſlate in no wiſe, or by no means. c This 
{trongly denying Particle is brought to make the Bar, excluding all 
unclean Perſons from Heaven, evident. And alas ! How often had 
this need be denied, to make Men and Women, mad of their Luſts, 
believe it ? The word tranſlated, that defileth, ſignifieth, what 15 
common ; nothing, no Perſon that hath not by an Holy Life ſepa- 
rated himſelf from the World and all Sin, and Wickedneſs, and de- 
dicated himſelf to God. &d No profane, or lewd Perſon. e Nor 
any falſe or lying Hypocrites, nor any 1dolaters, for Idols are Lies. 
f None but thoſe whoſe Names are written in . the Book of Life, 
predetermined to Salvation, and redeemed with the Blood of Chriſt. 
, are not pleaſed with this Senſe ; but what other thing can be 
meant ? This 1s, at leaſt, the fixth time we have met with this 
Phraſe in this Book, chap. 3. 5. and 13. 8. and 17. 8. and 20. 12,15. 
It is alſo mentioned, Phil. 4. 3. and what elſecan be meant in Moſes 
his Prayer, Exod. 32.32. Itis twice, chap. 13. 8. and 17. 8. aid, 
that Names were written in it from the Foundation of the World. God 
hath a particular, certain, infallible Knowledge who are his, and 
had it from Eternity ; and whence he ſhould know it, without wil- 
ling of it, is very hard to conceive. It 1s called the Lamb's Book, 
tolet us know, that the 4 of Redemption by Chriſt bears proportion 
to the Councils of EleRtion. 


CHAP. XA 


The River of the Water of Life, 1. The Properties of the Inhabitants 
of New Jeruſalem Deſcribed, 3, 4. God himſelf the Light of it, 
5. John would have worſhipped the Angel, but the Angel forbiddeth 
him, 8, 6. This Booh mot to be- Sealed, though ſome would abuſe it, 
IO, II. - They that heep God's Commandments are Bleſſed, 14. 
The Wicked are Curſed, 15, A Threatning againſt them that add 
unto the words of thjs Propheſte, 18, 19. 


NO” "INE ND he g ſhewed me a * pure river of water of 
7CPKR AT. 5 6 . 
OY ay life, clear as cryſtal h, proceeding out of the 
Zech.14.2. throne of God, and of the Lamb z. _ : 
2 The Angel who ſhewed him all before-mentioned, ſhewed him 
a pure River. h No place can be happy without the Accommodation 
ot Water : Thoſe places have the beſt Accommodation of .t that 
are near a River, eſpecially a pure River; to let us know, that in 
Heaven there ſhall be no want of any thing that can make the Saints 
happy. It is deſcribed as having by it, or running through it, a 
pure River, whoſe Water is clear, and no ordinary Water, but ſuch 
as civeth, and preſerveth Life: What could this fjgnifie, but the 
pure and unmixed Joys of Heaven, 7 flowing from the Saints there 
injoying of God, and Jeſus Chrift ? : . 
v4 2 In * the midſt of the ſtreet of it, and of either 
' EMP-21: Ge of the river, was there the + tres of life þ, which 
+ Gen.2:g, hare twelve manner of truits /, and yielded her iruit 
:ap-2.7. every month zz ; and the leaves of the tree were for 
the healing of the nations 7. | | 
þ Trees, eipecially Fruit-Trees, and thoſe laden with Fruit, and 
variety of Fruit, and ſuch as inftead of being prejudicial to Life, 
are wholſome, and give Life, are very beautiful, eſpecially 1n, or 


rear a Citv. The City in Ezekiel's Viſion, chap. 47. 7. 15 thus de- 


ſcribed. This exprefſion further ſhews the infinite Pleaſure, and 
Sa]-ſaticfaction the Saints ſhall have in Heaven. But we are tur- 
ther told here, that the Tree here was the Tice of Life ; a mani- 
{it Allufion to a Tree fo called in Old Paradiſe, Gen. 2. 9. and 
who can this agrce to, but Caritt, / in whom all Fulaeſs divelt, 


£% 
_ 


Chap. XXII 
| aP. L x . 
the Fulneſs of the Godhead, and who was anointed, and received 
the Spirit without meaſure, m and is. daily diſtributing of his Ful- 
ncſs to his People; n and in whom there is nothing uſeleſs, but 


what tends either to the Life or healing of his People out of all Na- 
tions, 


3 And * there ſhall be no more curſe o : bur the 
throne of God and of the Lamb ſhall be in it f,and his 
lervants ſhall ſerve him g. 

0 Nothing that is devoted to the Devil, »em43%us, no accurſed 
Perſon, or Thing. p The preſence of an Holy and Pure God will 
prevent and forbid that. q It is a place in which God alone ſhall be 
teryed by his own Servants. . 


4 And they ſhall ſee his face 7, and* his name hall * Ch.3.12. 


* ZecC, Ihe 
F. 


LR 


| be in their toreheads / 


 r It1s a Phraſe by which the Happineſs of the gloritted Saints 

1s oft exprefled, Matth. 5.8. 1 Coy. 13. 12. Heb. 12.14. 1 John 

3+ 2. they ſhall enjoy him immediately. * / There ſhall be none that 

have the Name of the Beaſt in their Foreheads ; they ſhall have God's 

_ on their Forcheads, and be ſo maniteſted to be the Sons of 
od. 


5 And there ſhall be no night there, and they need 
no candle, neither light of the fun : * for the Lord *£71.55.- 
God giveth them light, and they ſhall reign tor ever 
and ever 7. 
t Sec the Notes on Chap. 21. 23. - 8 
s And he ſaid unto me, * Thefo ſavings ove Faith- * Ch.19.5. 
ful and true x. And the Lord God of the holy pro- & t 5: 
phets ſent his + angel to ſhew unto his Servants the + Chi. x. 7. 
things which mult ſhortly be done . 
» All the words of this Book, particularly the things of this lat 
Vitton, are ſuch as proceed trom him who 1s the taithful Wirnets, 
chap. 1. 5, and 3. 14s from him who was called Faithtul, chap. 1 9. 
11. and which God will ſhe himſelt true and faithful ja bringing 
to paſs; and w ſuch things as God hath revealed to his Prophets un- 
der the Old Teſtament in part, and now to me his Prophet, to ſhew 
to his People tge things that ſhall come to paſs, and ſh:ll ſhortly be- 
gin to be accompliſhed. See chap. 1. 1. 
7 * Behold I come quickly x, F blefId 7s he that + <1, 
keepeth the ſayings of the prophecy of this book y. + ct. 
x I come quickly to the laſt Judgmcat. y He is an happy Man 
that obſerveth and keepeth in memory, that underſtandeth, belie- 
veth, and liveth up to the Prophecy of this Book. 


8 And I John ſaw theſe things 2, and heard zh 
a. And when | had heard and ſeen, I fell down to 
worſhip before the feet of the angel, which {hewed 
me theſe things. 

z I ſaw the Viſton. 4 I heard the words ſpoken to me relatinz - 
to them. 


9 Then faith he unto me, Sze zhou do iz not b ;, fer 
I am thy tellow-ſervant, and of thy brethren the pro- 
phets c, and of them which keep the ſayings of this 
book, Worſhip God 7. 

b See the Notes on chap. 19. 10. c Whoſe Imployment is the 
ſame with thine, to reveal the Will of God ; 4 yea, and a Brather 
to all the Servants of God, thou miſtakeſt the Obje& of thine 
Adoration, I am a created Being, and can accept no ſuch Ho- 
mage 


 \» 
Py ” 


of the Prophecy of this book Ff, Þ tor the time is at & 12. 4. 
hand g. 

e This, He, 1s Chriſt, as appeareth from ver. 12, 13.- f Let theſe 
things be opened to be promulged, and publiſhed to the whole Church, 
2 for it will not be long before they ſhall begin to be fulalled. 

11 * He that is unjuſt, let him be unjuſt {till ; and « 
he which is filthy, ler him be filthy {till > ; and he 1 
thar is righteous, ler him be righreous {till ; and he 
that is holy, let him be holy {till z. 

h It may be, the keeping of this Book open, and the Publication 
of it, will diſpleaſe wicked and filthy Men ; but let them be ditplea- 
ſed, the Truths of God muſt not be concealed. 7 It will on the 
other fide, copfirm the Servants of God in their Faith, Patience; and 
Holineſs, and all the Fruits of Righteouſneſs, 

12 And behold, I come quickly 4, and * my reward 
is with me /, to give every man according as his work 
ſhall be *. — 

k To the laſt Judgment (as before, ver. 7.) { I bring with me 10 & 62, 
a Power and Authority to recompence every Man accorging to whit 71, 
he hath done, Dan. 12, 2. Rom. 2. 6. chap. 20. 15. HHatth, 25, * ROM, I 4. 
34z 355 SC. ; RE 2. 

13 *I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning; and 
the end, the firſt and the laſt 7. 

m Sce the Notes on Chap. 1. 8. and 21.6. 

14 Blefied are they that do his commandment F, 
that they may have right to the tree ot lite, and may 
enter in through the gares into the city 0. 

+ That believeth in the Lord Jeſus Chrifc {for that 15 the great 
Commandment of the Goſpel) and live in conformity to the L2w oz 
God. n ToChrift, called before, thc 7ree of Life, wer. 2. by vertue 
of the Promiſe, Rev. 2. 7, for nv Wortks of ours wi give us a Ngnt 
of Purchaſe to it. o That they may enter into Heaven ,, the Joys 
and Pleaſures of which have becn defertbed under the Metzphor of a 
great and glorious City. 


® Ha. 41.4- 
A 44. 6. 


_ X : 
10 And * he ſaith unto me e, Seal not the Sayings *pan 2.24 


Chap. XXII. 


* x Cor. 6. 
©, IO. 


Gol. 3. 6. whoremongers, and murderers, and idolaters, and 


whoſoever loveth, and maketh a lye. 

Þ VVithout Heaven ; that is, in Hell ſhall be all Dogs that bark at, 

and bite, and devour the Church of God, all Profane Perſons, Idola- 
ters, and Hypocrites, vid. chap. 21. 8,27. 1 Cor, 6. 9, 10, See the 
Notes there. 
*Ch.r.z, 25 * I Jeſus have ſenr mine angel to teſtifie unto 
+Chap.s.5 You theſe things in the churches 9: 1 + am the root, 
[Numb.24. and the oft-ſpring of David 7, ard the || bright and 
"_ morning ſtar /. 

q In theſe words Chriſt owneth the Revelation as his ; the An- 
gel did but tzſtifie, John did but hear, and write it. r David's Lord, 
and yet his Son : His Root, as I am God, and gave a Being to his 
Family, as to all the Families of the Earth ; and yet his Son, a Branch 
out of the Root of Jeſſe. { VVho, as the Morning-Star, firſt brings, 
or prognoſticates Light to the V Vorld ; ſo have my ſelf firſt publiſh- 
ed my Goſpel, or this Revelation, to give Light to my People, 
concerning the Fate of my People to the laſt day. ; 

17 And the ſpirit z, and the bride ſay, Come z. 

* Ch.21.6. And let him that heareth, ſay, Come w. * And let 
him that is a thirſt, come x ; And whoſoever will, let 


him take the water of lite freely. 
# The Spirit in the Hearts of Believers, or rather the Holy Spirit. 
# Becauſe the Bride, that is, the Church 1s alſo mentioned, to de- 
fire the ſecond coming of Chriſt to Judgment. w And every one 
that heareth of, and believeth theſe things, ſhould alſo defire the 
ſame thing. x And in order to that, every one that wanteth, and 
15 ſenſible of his want of Righteouſneſs, or any Habit of Grace, 1s 
alſo invited unto Chriſt, under the Notion of the V Vater of Life, to 
take him freely, as T/a. 55. 1. 
18 For 1 teſtifie unto every man that heareth the 
words of the Prophecy of this book F, * If any man 
ſhall add unto theſe things y, God ſhall add unto him 


the prope that are written in this book 2. 
T 


FDeut. 4-2. 
Pr [0] V, 4 O, 6. 


Chriſt, or I John, teſtifie to every one to whoſe Hands or 


by 


R EV EL ATION. 


15 For * without p are dogs, and ſorcerers, and | Ears the words of this Book ſhall come. y That if any Man ſhall 
| Invent new Prophecies contrary to the Propheſies contained in this 


; Book. x God ſhall ſeverely puniſh him, by-adding to the Plagues 
threatned againſt Sinners, in this Book. 


19 And if any man ſhall take away from the words 
of the book of this prophecy a, * God ſhall take away 
his part out of the book of life,and out of the holy city, 
and from the things that are written in this book 6. 


Verſes, conſidering this as the laſt Portion of Holy VVrit, not only 
placed laſt in our Bibles, but revealed and written laſt. They con- 
celve theſe Verſes the Seal of all Canonical Scripture, and that God 
here denounceth a Curſe to thoſe who ſhall pretend any new Revela- 
tions of his VVill, other than what are to be found in the Books of 
the Old and New Teſtament; as alſo againſt all thoſe who ſhall de- 
ny, corrupt, or deprave any part of them. þ God as to ſuch Per- 
ſons, faith, they ſhall not have any ſuch Part or Portion in Heaven, 
as they would pretend a Right to, or ſeemed to have. 


20 He which teſtifieth theſe things, ſaith, Surely 
I come quickly c, Amen d. Even ſo, come Lord 


Jeſus-e. 

c Thatis, Chriſt, who publiſheth theſe things by his Angel, or 
by his Servant Fohn, faith he is quickly coming to Judgment. 
d John replies, Lord, let jt beſo. e This expounds Amen uſed here 
as a Particle of wiſhing and deſiring, though it may be interpre- 
can as an afſertive Particle, and joyned to the former part of the 

entence. | 


21 * The grace of our Lord Jeſus Chriſt be with 


you all. Amen. 

f This is a Salutation uſed by the Apoſtles in all their Epiſtles 
containing a defire of the fulneſs and increaſe of all Grace, very pro- 
per here upon the Proſpe& which "gon in this Revelation had, of the 
long, and great Trials the Church would meet with, before the 


glorious Appearance of our Blefled Lord and Savieur. 


To God the Author of this, and all the other Books of 
Holy Writ, be Honour and Glory. 


a But Divines generally de further extend the ſenſe of theſe two 


Chap. XXII 


* Rom.1s, 
20, 
2 Thell, 3. 
18. 


\ TaBLE of ſome Principal-Matters in the Annotations on | 
gecond Volume. 


The Annotations on the three firſt Goſpels, not being diſlingniſhed by Letters of Reference, 7 could only expreſs the Cl 


A. 
Dmiration 1s twofold, Joh. 3.7. r 
A Adullam, Mic..1. 15. & 
Advocate, H. G. why fo called, 
Joh. 14-16. k | 
Afiittion; why called the Croſs, Mat. 10, 
38. 
why called Trial, 2 Cor. 8. 2, b Jam. 
L. 2, & 
their benefit, Heb.12.9. d. 
Allegory, what, -Gal. 4. 24. « 
Almes, what, Mat. 6. 1. 
Amaſis his Expedition, Ezek. 29. 4. # 
Ambition, what, Gal. 5.25, c 
Amen, what it fiznifes, Joh. 1. 51. w 
ROM. 16. 27. 7 
Anzcls, how they arc concerned in the 
work of Reconciliation, Col.1.20. y 
Anointing, why utcd, Amos 6. 6. g. 
Antichriſt, why to ca'led, 2Thefl. 2.4. t 
Hppis forum : the Appian Way, what, 
Aﬀts 28. I 5. a 
Apoftles, who, Mat. 10.4. Eph.4.11. f 
Col. 1. 1. þ 
Appointment to Salvation, what, 1 Theſ. 
5. ©. q 
Ark ot Teittmony, what, Heb. 4. b 
why 1 call.d, Jer. 3. 16. x 
Armies, their motions are at God's ap- 
pointment, Jer. 34-22. 7 
Armor ot a Chriſtian, what, 1Theſ. 5.8, n 
Arvad, Eck. 27. 8. c 
Aftdod, Amos 1.8. / 
Aſhbelin, Amos 1. 8. n 
Aftroloy judicial and condemn'd, Jer. 
bO. 2. F 
Atouiite* Roman Emperors, why fo 
! ed. Acts 25. 21s / 
| B 
£5 /al,aho,Jer.11.13. x and 19. 5. k 
D Baptiſm, whether a new Rite, Mat. 
3 
beln 


> Os 
nzs to Infants, Mat. 28. 9. _. 

not neceſſary to he by D1pplng) bid, 

not neceſlary to Salvation, Joh.3.5.M 

of John and Chriſt, the ſame, AQts 19. 

Barrenneſs,a reproach, why, Luke I. 25+ 


Beelzebub, Mat.10.25- ; 
to Believe the Goſpel, and believe 1n 
the Goſpel, what, Mar. I. 15. 
Believers,hovw they are inGod,1Th.1,1.c 

Belial, 2 Cor. 6. 15.7 

Bethaven, Hoſ. 4- 15. f : 

Bctrothing, what, and the convenience 
thereof, Mat. I. 18. 

Birth-day kept, Mat. 14+ 7+ 

Birth-right, Priviledges thereof, Heb. 
I2, IG, UH 

Biſhops, who, Phil. 1.1. & | : 

ſame with Presbyters in Scripture, 76. 

Books, their faſhion of old, Ezek.2.9. 0 

Book of Life, what, Luke 10. 20. 

Bozrah, Amos 1. 12. 0 

Burden, what it ſignifies, EzeK. 9. I. 4 


C 

Allings,the meaneſt owned by God, 

C Mat. 4. 19. 

Calling of Gentiles, how a Myſtery, Col, 
I. 26. w 

Capernaum, Joh. 2. 12+ Y 

Carmel, Nahum. 1.4. & 

Cz(ar, Roman Emperors, why ſo called, 
Ads 25,21.t 

Ceſarea, Aﬀts 20. 8. q 

Charit:,why called a Bleſſing,2Cor.9.5-g 

Cherethites, who, Zeph. 2: 5+ þ 

Cherubims, what z and what they f1gnt- 
fied, Heb. 9.5. F _ 

Children, taken for Inhabitants, Jer. 2. 


O, C 
offer to Maloch and Baal, how, Jer. 
19. 5. k 
a great bleffing, Luke I. 7. 
Chriſt : the true Ark of his Church; 
wherein, Jer. 3. 16. _ 
appearazces of him before his Incar- 
nation, Dan. 3-25. ſ 
haw the Anointed, Dan.9.24» 
difiicultics about his Genealogy, no 
eround to doubt the truth of his 
Hrſtory, Mat. I. 2. 
zptized, Mt.3.13.15. 
s, Mat.12.19. - 
aces were wrought with vart- 
ety of circumfitances, Mat. 9. 26. 


SY wal 1, of "RR 5 1991 Na.” 
colitei on of h1ymwily required, IR 


! 


is Nu 


- 


” * Las 5. 
CV. $90 
"= \q - "In - 
it of God, Neat. 12.16. 


} TY YEEy F'a'Y 4 
4 $5 07d LLBTP Þ i, A D 


®* + | 
- 3 
15 Lie Ce . 
R \ 
r % PR» +75 
\ +3 %& wid a\ 1 3 


not the Inſtrumental, but Efficient 
cauſe of all things, Joh. 1. 3. f 
who are given to him, Joh.6.37. 7 
why called Light, Joh. 8. 12. # 
difference betwixt his trouble and 
ours,” Joh. 12. 27. 
why called a Corner-ſtone,Aa.q.11.e 
his Righteouſneſs aftive and paſſive 
15 imputed to us, Rom. 8. 4. p 
typified by the Rock, why,1Cor.10.4.f 
his Kingdom is twotold, 1Cor.15.24-n 
his coming, how called, 2Thefl. 1.7. 0 
how the Image of God, Col.1.15.y 7 
he ſuffered in our ſtead, Col. 1. 22. g 
how he fits at God's right-hand, Col. 
4 8 
his Reſurrection, a proof our ours, 
how, 1 Theſl.4.14. n 
priviledges we have by him as our 
Altar, Heb. 13. 10. y 
Church, has never wanted Teachers, 
BS... 
Circumcif1on, what it fignifies, Jer.q.4. y 
how a Seal, Rom. 4. 11. t 
Community of goods,not requir'd now, 
Acts 2. 44.t and 4.32. b 
Conditions, performance of them gives 
worthineſs of Light, not of Me- 
rit, 2 Thefl. 1: 5. 7 
Conf-{fton of fin muſt be full, Dan. 9.5. f 
Contetſion of Chriſt requir'd, Mat. 10.33. 
Conſecration of places for Worſhip, 
how far lawful, Joh. 10. 22. k 
Conſubſtantiation, what, Joh. 5. 15. m 
Covenant, Goſpel covenant, why called 
New, Jer. 31. 31. { 
Covenant of Grace, how a Teſtament, 
Gal. 3.15. h 
Covenants muſt be exactly kept, Nl. 
2.14. þ 
Covenant-breaking, a great iin againſt 
God, Ezek. 17. 20. 7 


Cov<luuſn fo, 1.z+ and where in it CONes 
fiſts, Luke 12.15, Co). z. <, 


Creatures are nothing without God, 
Dan. 4. 35. f : 
Crucifying the manner of it, Mat.27.35. 
D 


Amaſcus, Amos 1.3. b 
D Daniel; why he abſtain'd from the 


King's proviſion, Dan. 1. 8. 0 
Day, divided by Jews into tour parts, 
Joh. 19. 14. x 
Lord's day,duties thereof, 1 Cor.16. 2. c 
Darkneſs, what it ſignifies, Joel 2. 2. g 
Deacons, who, Phil. r. 1. d 
Death, why compared to ſleep, 1Thefl. 
13. 7 
Dedication of places for Worſhip, whe- 
ther lawful, Joh. 10. 22. k 
feaſt of Dedication,what, Joh.10.22.k 
Delaying payment 1s a ſort of defraud- 
ing, Jam.5.4. 4 
Demomiacs, Mat. 4. 24+ 
Dipping, not neceflary to Baptiſm, 
Mat.3.6. and 28. 19. Ads 8.38. 9 
Diſciple, what, Joh. 9. 28. k 
Diſciples, why called Saints, As 9.13 7 
Diſtintion between Dulia and Latria 
15 vain, Mat.4.10. 
Divel, his Armor, what, Mat. x2. 29. 
Divination, ſeveral ſorts, Ezek.21.21. # 
Divorce. whether lawful in any caſe, but 
adultery, Mat. 5. 32. and 19. 9. 
1 Cor.7.15. f 
whether ſuch may marry again, Mat, 
19.9. Mar.10.12. 
Dreams, their ſorts, Mat. 1. 20. 
Drawing to Chriſt, what, Joh. 5.44.1T. 
Duties extraordinary, not to be made 
ordinary, Luke 18. 12, 
E 


| 75 uncircumciſed, what, Jer.16.10. g 
Earthquake, what they f12nifie, Mat, 


27-48% 
Ecclcſ1aſtical perſons, the great cauſe of 
miſery in molt places, Lam. 4 13. w 
Election, what, Theſ.1.4,5. 2Th.2.13. 4 
Exron, Amos 1. 8. þ 
Eliſha; a place, where, Ezek. 27. 7. 2 
Epieſis, Rev. 2. I. 4 
Eſpouting, what, and 1ts convenience, 
Mat. 1. 18. V 
Eſtabliſhment, whence 1t proceeds, 
Rom.15.258. w 
Eterral puniſhment, the juſt reward of 


MES es Coda 1 OE 
4 «bs 3T. PV [:05, Mat. 2 Yo 4 5. 
- "0 R 10g Kan! 
Evanzeiitis, wonat, Epit. 4. 11.8. 
| FENG _ "A 
LEYC:N2, Wat, zvi.ike I 4. I5, 220 
- of 
" PORES: r. - 
- be . 1 ILSS [FANS *, 90 
4 - 


and Verſe, but the Flead belongs to the Notes, not the Text. 


Excommunication muſt be by conſent 

of the Church, Mat.18.17. 
nature of it, x Cor. s. 5s. m 

Exorciſts, what, As 15. 13. 4 

Exhort, what, Heb. 3. 13. 7 

Experience of mercy, ſhould beget 
confidence, Lam. 3. $5. x 

External torce and compulſion, no pro- 
per means to make converts, Luke 
I4. 23, 

Ezekiel, why called Son of man, ch, 2, 
I.0 and wer. 3. b 


y 
Aith in Chriſt as the Son of God, a 
very valuable at, Mat. 9. 22. 
the condition of healing, Luke 18.4 2. 
ſaving, juſtifying, what, Joh.2.23. / 
the inſtrumental cauſc ot juſtificy i- 
on and ſalvation, Joh. 3.15, h 
divine, what, 1 Cor. 2.5. g 
how it juſtifies, Gal.2.16.x & 3. 5. n 
how imputed for righteouſneſs, jam. 
L2% 9 
Famine ſpiritual, Amos 8. 11. s 
Faſt, how to be kept, Jocl 1. 14. s't 
Faſting and Feaſting, incoat:itent, Dan, 
10.3. N 
A Fathom, what, Aqs 27. 28. 7 
Feaſt of Tabernacles, what, Joh.5.r s. 
Feaſts of Charity, what, Jude 1 2. d 
Fire of laſt day, what, 2 The. 1. 8. p 
Flattery, what, 1 Thel. 2. 5. þ 
Forgiving of wronzs, requires great 
faith, Luke T7. 5. 
Forgiveneſs of fin, how far in man's 
power, Joh. 20, 23. h 
Fruitfulneſs in good, tends to God's 
glory, Joh.15.8. q 
G 


4rmad'ms, who, Ezek. 27. IT, 2. 
Gentiles, their Call how a Myſte- 
ry, Col.1.25. w 

Gentleneſs, what, 1 Thefl. 2. 7. w 


Ghaſt Holy Ghoſt wify called Advo- 
cate, JONh.Iq.io. x 


his proceffion from the Son Provca 
Joh.15.26.þ 20. 22. : 
why not ſent rill after Chriſt's Aſcen- 
tion, John 16.7, m 
Gifts are of ſeveral ſorts, 1 Cor. 12. 4. g 
Gifts of Tongues, and the like, was ha- 
bitual, 1 Cor.r 4.27. þ 
Gilgal, Hoſ.q. 15. e 
Glorying, what, 2 Theſ.1.4. e 
when good or evil, 2 The. x. 4. c 
Glory of God ſhould be the end of all 
our Actions, 1Cor.10.3 1. / 
God alone is true obje& of truſt, Jer. 
I7.5.7 
how ſaid to be near or far off, Lam. 
3-57» $ 
how he forſakes, Mat.27.46. 
how the Father of Chriſt, Rom. 1 5.5. 4 
how Believers are in God, ITheſ.1.1.c 
a twofold Will in God, 1 Tim.2.4. h 
how he tempts and is tempted, Jam. 
1.13. Z 
Goſpel cauſes Diviſions accidentally, 
Mat*10 35. ] 
what the Word ſignifies, Mark 1. r. 
why called the Word of Grace, Ads 
14.3.0 
it has Precepts, as well as Promiſes, 
2 Thel. 1.8. r 
what things hinder.its courſe,2 The, 
3. I. 4 
why called ſalvation, Heb. 2. 3. k 
Goats, what they ſignifie, Ezek. 10.3. n 
Governors, andGovernment,though bad, 
are by- God's appointment, Ezek. 


34-8. m 
Grace, whether ſufficient be given to all 
to whom Goſpel 15 preach'd, Mat. 

$222. 
ſpecial Grace juſtly denied to thoſe 
that abuſe common, Luke 16. 12. 
manner of its growth, 2 The. 1. 3. c 
Grece, whence cailed Acaja, 2Cor.1.1. b 
Greek Tongue uſed in Rome, Rom. 1. 7.7 

H 


Eart, it isdeceitful, Jer. 17. 5. 7 
its hardneſs, what, Mat. 12. 13. 
Judicial, what,Mat. g3.15.Rom.g.18.9 
how God hardens- 1t, Joh. 12. 40. 
whence it proceeds, Rom. 9. 18. g 
Heathen, whether damncd for Unbelict, 
John 3. 18. 5 
Heaven, its Kinzdom, whzt, Mat, 3. 2, 
Herefte, what, 1 Cor. 31. 19. m 


Þ- +. . " + ——— p 
Hereticks, what, Tit. 3.10. 4 


Herod, ſeveral of them, Aﬀts 1: 
Herodtans, who, Mat. 22 16. 
High Hills, why Idolatcrs facrif 
them, Jer. 2. 20. þ 
Holy Ghoſt, his Proccffion fr: 
proved, Joh.15.26. b & 2 
why called Advocate, Joh.14 
why not ſent till after Chriſt's 
tton, Joh. 15, 7. mm 
his Godhead proved, 1 Cor.3 
Holineſs,the effe& of EleRion, Ex 
twofold, internal and federal,R 
169. Þ 
Hhprra, (Pharach) his overtiirow, 
29. 8. : 
Horn, notes beauty and ftrength 
2.3: b 
Humility exalts* in Chriſt's ac 
Mark 6. 35. 
Hypocritical Retormation 


[ 


RY 0118 what, BC. Is g } 
Idicenct- Eondemned. 1 The. 
Idol: and {114 os coniomy 
Idolates- ufed the £:ma 6iftucs 2s v 
Cod > Wort: 
heathen Ido!: 


; ER 
4! P, ICT. 7-41 S. 38 


LE 
+ . 

» v 4 > 35 ” 
hat, jCis 1 I. 4 
*7 - » > 

bd 


and Jewtſt, i977. 

why called Vanity, Ter. 18. 1< 
Idolatrou:Geftures, ty 0ul D. 
Jealoutie, what, Zck.2. 2. d 1 C 


4 2 Cor.11.2. Þ 
how 2pplicd to God, 1 Cor. 1: 
Jerichh, Luke 19. 1. 
Jewsa promiſe of their cailinz, 7- 
when converted ſha!l dwell ir 
an, Ezck. 37. 20. t 
are not to return again to ow 
Jer.30.3. d 
yet the contrary 15 afferted. » 
their 3Courts of ſudicature,M: 
whetnier they might puniſh ca 
Mat.27.11. 
how reckoned 12 Tribes 1i:!l, 
26.7%. 1 
their Calling a Myſtery. Rom. 1 
why offended at Chritt, i Pct, 
7exreel, Hof. 1.5. u & v.7. hib 
Iznorance no Motiter of Deyctic 
I. 9. 
I!lumination of Spirit, what,Eph. 
Impoſition of hands when uted. 
6. 6. 4 
Imaze-worttip nnlnyful, 1 Cor, 
Imprecations how f:r Riful, 7 
21:7 Lam. 1. 22. g8& 2.3, 
Indwelling of Spirit in B-lic 
Rom.8.0, 4 
Infants to be Bzptized, Mat, 29. 


A 
a a * 


' 
Wy 


X by 
VETS 


Intention, though good does nc 


rant a bad action, Bof.8.1 7. 


Interceffion 15 twofold, Rom.8. 2; 
Fonah, wherein a Tipe of Chriſt 


16 


. 4» 
Jobn, why calicd the Baptiſt, 
Zudasfinncd more heinouſly than 


er.2.11i. C 


why cncſen an Apoſtle, Mar.3 
Judging, how far condemned, M 


lid 
7 Iſing is twofold, Luke 7. 3 


>. Rnowledge,if ſaving, is incre 


Hol. 6. 3. 9 


Fruits of the Encwielge of 


Hof. 5.6. g 
it. 1s twotold, natura! and fy 
tural, r Theſ.4.5. 9 
Koa, Ezck. 23.23. 
k 


| apron cs Mic. 1. 13. q 


| 
- 


Law, its impotency tr £'v 
Rom. 8.2. 7 . 
going to Law,how tar unlan gy! 


6 3$ Bo : 
humaneLaws may he ft hoyegd 
times, 2 Cor. 11.53. /. 


F 
? 
z 


Lazarus Soul, wire it was, Joh. z 1 


Learning humane, not nc=d!. is, 
7. 16. b 
Lebanon, Hoſ.12.6, 1 Nev. r. 4. ? 
a Lie, what, Col. 2. 9. e 
Life 1s a feed time, Holi. 3 

time thereof is axt, 12h. i217. 


Lots not to be ufed upon Tris, 
bs. 4 

Love tobe ſhewed chicily to Saints, 
1.4 7 

! aca PP)... 

Protherly-iore, ww at, Þ £14 q. Fa 

Love-tcafts, what, 1 Coi.17.20. þ 

Loyelinefs, a Ciriithinn Yiitre, 

-— —_—_ 


known to Heathens, Eph. 4. 2.n 
M 


Meine may appoint annual days 
of Thankſgiving, Joh.10.22. k 
Magee, Ezek.3 8.2. c 
Manna,why __ ſpiritual meat, 1 Cor. 

| IO. 3. 

Means lawful muſt be uſed to fulfil God's 

Will, Mat.2.13. AQs 27.31. q 

Men are puniſh'd in their Cattel, Jer. 

21.6. k 
Mercy, what, Lam.3.22.c * 
remembred by God in midſt of Judg- 
ment, Jer.6.8. 7 
remembrance of former begets hope 
of future, Jer. 21.2, 4 
Miniſters corrupt,a ſign of Wrath, Jer. 
23.11.h 
are a Fountain of Wickedneſs, v. 
IS. 4 
none can expe a Bleſſing, but thoſe 
that are called by God, Jer.23.32.f 
muſt drive men from their vain Con- 
ftidences, Mat. 3.9. 
Whether they may flie in time of 
Perſecution, Mat. 10.23. 
ſhould not be unſettled, Mat.11.9. 
muſi do their Duty,and not be too ſo- 
licitous of the event, Mark 4. 29. 
muſt have no ſecular employment, 
Luke 9. 62. 
muſt be maintained by People, Luke 
10. 8. 
people muſt not divide into partics 
upon their account, i Cor. 1.12. c & 
$. 4 # | : 
are under a neceffity of preaching 
now, as well as Apoſtles were tor- 
 merly, 1 Cor. 9.16.2. 
what ought to be their great end, 
1 Cor. 14.5.4 &v. Is. 4 
are fellow Workers with Chrift, 
2 Cor.s.1. a- 
how far their Commands are to be 
obeyed, 2 Thel. 3.4 c 
Miracles wrought by Chriſt upon three 
occaſions, Luke 9. 15. 
real, can be wrought only by a Di- 
vine Power, John 3. 2. g 
a twofold uſe of them, Joh.11.45. f 
done by Chriſt in a peculiar manner, 
Joh.10.24. x 
Miraculous Cures, how wrought, Jam. 
5. I, S 
Moab, a = Enemy to Iſrael, Amos 
2. 1, 4 

Moderation, what, Phil. 4. 5. #4 
Moloch, who, Amos 5. 26. 7 
Monarchy,the 5 not probable, 1Cor.s.2.c 
Moral ſation not ſufficient to prevail 

upon the Will, Luke 24. 24. | 

Mortification twofold, begun, and con- 

tinued, Col. 3- 5. k _ 

Motion, firſt motions to evil are fin, 

Jam.1.15. 9 AS 

Mountains, what they ſignifie,Mic.1.4. 4 

Mourning, deepeſt, how expreſt, Jer. 6 
26, a 
for dead muſt be regular,1Thef.4.13k 

Mourning Women, who, Jer. 9.17.7 
Murder of ſelf,a heinous fin, AQs16.27. g 
Myſtery,what,&which are ſo, 1Cor. 4.1.6 

2 Theſ. 2.7. z 1Tim. 3-16. y 
N 


Ames changed, Dan. 1.7. 7! 
ſignificant ones uſed to be g1- 
ven,Mat.1.21. Luke 4.61. 

Nazarites, Noble Perſons, ſo called, 
why, Lam. 4.7. / : 
Negatives often put for Comparatives, 
Jer. 7. 22. þ 
Niniveh, its greatneſs, Jona 3.3. o Na- 
lum. 1. 1. 6 BE4 
No, Ezek.30.14.p & 15.x 
XNoph, Ezck.30.1g, k & 16.0 
Notions of God in all men by Nature, 
Rom.1.18. k 
O 
oy. requiſites of a religious Oath, 
Jer. 4. 2. þ 


by creatures did oblige, Mat. 23. 22. 
what kind are forbidden, Jam. 5.12. £ 
Ofended, what it fignifies, Mat. 26. 31, 
Oycr-reaching, what, 1 Theſ. 4. 6. r 
P 


Arable, what, Mat. 13. I. 
Pulcs for underſtanding thereof, 
thid, 
its uſe and advantage, 1bid. 
Pardon may be granted as to temporal, 
and not eternal puniſiment, Jer, 
SO. 23, X LAM. 3. 42.7 
Parents, how far their Power over their 
Chileren reaches, Jer.2 5-19. 


The 
Paſſover, the geſture, or manner of re- 
ceiving it, John 13.23. þ 
Pateros, Ezck.29.14. mm | 
Patient Chriſtian, what, 2 Theſ.1.4. g 
Paul's Travels, Rom. 15.19. w 
his CharaRer, 1Cor.1.1. 4 
why he changed his Name, Col.1.1.-4 
Pekod, Ezek. 23.23. 
Penticoſt, Ads 2. 1. 4 
PerfeRion, twofold, of parts and de- 
grees, Phil. 3. 15. y ; 
Perſecutors, their laſting Ignominy, 
Jer.20.11. g 
Perſons in Trinity proved, Mat.3.17- 
Peter's Primacy diſproved, Mark 8. 30. 
avhether at Rome, Rom. 16.15. £ 
Phariſees, who, Mat.3.7. 
PhylaQeries, what, Mat.23.5. 
Places ſet apart for Publick Worſhip, 
ſhould be decent, Joh. 2. 16. n 
Pleading twofold, Real or Verbal, Jer. 


2.9. / 
Polygamy condemned, Mal. 2. 15. n 
Power natural, what, Mat.25.27. 
how far it extends, Jer. 18. 18. & 
and 22. 4, f 
Praying always, what, Luke 18. 1. 
Time of Prayer, Dan. 6. wk 
why towards Jeſus, ibid. h 
why not forborn by Daniel, / 
how far heard by God, Luke 11. 13. 
not to be made diſtinly to Father, 
without confideration of Son, nor 
vice verſa, 1 Theſ. 3.11. «4 
Preaching ſtill neceflary, Mat. I 1. 1. 
a great work, Mark 1. 39. 
it'sa Miniſters chief work, Luke 8.1. 
what it 15 to preach ones ſelt, 2 Cor. 


4+ 5» 
Prieſts and Levites were the ordinary 
Teachers, Jer. 2. 8. 0 
Preparatory Diſpoſitions not neceſſary 
to the firſt Grace, Luke 19. 5. 
Pride, its puniſhment, Luke 14. 11. 
what, and how it ſhews it ſelf, Jer. 
3.2. b 


4 
Preſence, of God, what, Jona. 1. 3. 9 


Promiſes and threatnings are conditio- 
nal, Jer.18.10, and 28, g. / 
Prophets, how to know true and falſe, 


. 28.9.4 —_ 
: BE uot po tne prophetick Spirit, ma- 


; ny times very ſtrong, Jer. 6. 11. m 
and 20. 9. x | 
it came but at certain times, Ezek. 
3.16. & 8. 1. & 1. 5. 
Proſelytes of two ſorts, Mat. 23. 15. 
Ad 2. 10. 


a4 | 
Proſperity of Wicked'a great Tempta-. 


tion to the Godly, Jer. 12.1. c 
Providence, the Works thereof ſhould 
be remembred, Mark 8. 21. 

Publicans, who, Mat. 5. 47. 
Puniſhment anſwerable to the fin, Jer. 
8.2.c Ezek.24. 5.7 32.32.71 & 33. 
22.& 35.9.4 & v.11. 1 & 15. y Hol. 
4. 6. a c Hab.2.16, d Mal. 2.9.4 
Difference between puniſhment of 
Godly and Wicked, Jer. 3o. 11. 
wx& 46.28.7 
of the damned is everlaſting, 2 Theſ. 
I. IO. ſ 


R | 
Ain is God's gift only, Jer.14.22. 
God's: Providence about it, Jcr. 
Se 24» 


< 
age | what it ſignifies, Ezek, x, 
28 


Reaſon, how far to be excuſed in preach- 
ing, 1 Cor.2.4. : 
Reformation, hypocritical, Jer.34-11. 3 
its the firſt Fruit of true Humilation, 
er.44+10. 
it's God's end in affliting, Ezek.14. 
HI.mY 
Religion the beſt bond of Peace, Zech. 
II, I4. C 
Fil bs th of former mercies begets 
hope of future, Jer.21.2. 4 
Remiſſion of Sins, how far in Man's 
Power, Joh. 20. 22. h 
Rending of Clothes when uſed, Mat. 
26, 65, 
A*Reconciliation, how it belongs to An- 
gels, Col. 1, 20. y 
Rejoycite, holy, what, x Theſl, 5. 
_ 


410, 
Repentance, true, what, Jer. 4. 2. k 
Mat.3.2. Heb.6.1. d 
. how aſcribed to God, Jer.18.8. 7 

& 26. 3. 0 Joel 2.13. h 

how it ſhows it ſelf, Joel 2. 13. ab 
c& vv. 16.4 

fruits of it, Luke 13. 14. 


T11DE 


43 LE 


the firſt fruits of it are Ads of Cha- 
rity, Luke 19.8. 
Repetitions in Prayer, when unlawful, 
Mat. 6. 8. | 
Reſped& of Perſons, 'what, Efa. 2; 1. 4 
ag or is credible to reaſon, As 
26, 8. 
of Righteous, is by Vertue of their 
Union with Chriſt, Rom.8.11. r 
of Chriſt is a Proof of ours, x The. 


4+ I. n 
Reviling to be judged of by the deſign, 
(not words) of eons. oh.9.28.k 
Reward at laſt will be according to our 
Works, Mat. 25. 40. 
Rhetoric, how far to be uſed in preach- 
_ _ 2ng, 1 Core2.4. 
Riblaſh, Ezek. 11.11. c 
Riches, a great hindrance in way to Hea- 
_ ven, Mat.rg.24. 
Righteous, what kind of Righteous 
ones may fall away, Ezek. 18. 
24. & 
are raiſed by vertue of their Union 
with Chriſt, Rom. 8. 11, r 
Righteouſneſs of God, what, Rom. 1. 


17. 6b 
of Chriſt, both ARive and Paſſive, 
15 1mputed to us, Rom. 8. 4. p 
S 


_—_— what Works may be done 
on it, Mat.12.4,5. 
why Chriſt wrought many Miracles 
on that day, Joh. 9. 14. r 
ChriſtianSabbath inſtituted byChrift, 
Col.2.17. u | 
Sabeans, why, Joel 3.8. 5. 

Salram, why called Seals, Rom. 4. 11. t 
exhibit 1nward grace, Eph. 5.26. d 
Sadducees, who, Mat.3.7. Mark 12.18. 

Adts 23.8, gr 
SanRitfication thereof a great part of re- 
ligion, Joh. 9.16. s 
Saints are Temples of H.G. 1 Cor. 3. 
16, e 
Samaritans, who, Mal.10.6. Luke 9g. 52. 
SanRification, how taken in Scripture, 
I Cor, 7. 14. C 
to ſanifie the Lord. what. » Pet. 2. 


IS. £ 
RE >, to who, Mat.1 0.2. 


Satan, ——_— to him, what, 2 Cor. 


S. 5 
Scandal,what, Luke 17.1. Rom,14,13. 4 
it is twofold, Rom. 14. 13. a 
reaſons againſt it, Rom. 14. 15, ef 
A Scribe, who, Jer. 8. 8. b 
three ſorts of them, Joh.8.3. e 
Scriptures; ſeeming contradictions re- 
conciled, and cavils of Atheiſts an- 
ſwered, Mat. 1. 2,6, 9, 12, 23. & 
2.6,23.& 4.16, Luk.3.38.& 5.11. 
how far ſaid to be fulfilled, Mat.2.1 5, 
and 27. 5. 


its uſefulneſs in all its parts, Rom.1 5. 


4+ 
Scythians, their exploits, Ezek.3 2.26.6 
Seal is for confirmation, Rom.4.11. # 
Sending 1s twofold, extraordinary and 
ordinary, Jon.10.2. c 
Shame, what, 2 Theſſ.3.14. 
Self-conceit, reaſons againſt it, Rom. 
12.8. ft 
Self-murder, a heinous ſin, As 16.27. þ 
Shepherds political, their duty, Ezek, 
34. 4.0 &Ce | 
what, Zech, II. 3. 2 
Shoa, Ezek.23.23. # 
Sin againſt H. G, what, Mat. 12 32. 
whether it can be committed now, 
ibid, 
all fin and ſinners not equal, Luke 7. 
8, | 
_ ſinner is beſides himſelf, Luke 
I + I'7. 
owes fin may be forgiven by man, 
Joh.20.23. þ 
it may be pardoned temporally, and 
not eternally, Jer. 50.20, x 
when grown epidemical, 1t provcs 
fatal, Dan. 9.11. 7 
Sorcery, a great ſin, Mal. 3. 5. 0 
Soul, is a diſtin& ſubſiſtence, Mat.9. 26. 
it neither ſleeps nor dies with the 
body, Mat.27.44-. 
where Lazarw's Soul was when par- 
ted from his body, -Joh. 11. 44. c 
Spirit, what it ſignifies, Zech. 4. 6. 7 | 
how he dwells 1n believers,Rom.@.5. 7 
how he leads us, Rom. 8. 14. 6 
of Bondage, what, Rom.8.25. d 
of Adoption, what, Rom.8.15. e 
how he witneſſes our Adoption, Rom, 
8.16. g 


E N D. 


how he helps to pray, and makes in- 
 terceſſion, Rom. 8. 25. gh 
his Teſtimony is either immediate'gr 
_ mediate, Eph.1.13. e 
his Ylumination, Eph. 1. 17. £ 
Stoning to death, the manner, jotin 8, 
5+ 8 . 
Sufferings, their advantage, 2 Titef, 
I. 5.7 
Sufficiency to good is from God, 2 Cor, 


3.5-£ 
Sun, what it ſignifies, Amos 8. g. -b 
Superfluities, what, Jam. r! 21. 9 
Suaſton moral, not ſufficient to preya;j 
upon the Will, Luke 24. 24. 
Swearing, Jewiſh Form of it, ſer. 4. 2. þ 
Syene, Ezck. 29. 10. bc 
Synagogues, when they began, and theix 
uſe, Mat. g. 23. 
what, Mark 1.22. A&s6, 9. f 
Ruler of Syn. what, As 11, 8. z 
T 


Abernacles, Feaſt of Tabern, what, 
Joh. 6.15. m 
Tappanes, Ezck. 30.18- / 
Tarftriſh, Ezek.27.12. 4 
Teachers falſe,a great plague toa Nation; 
Jer. 29.8. 7 F 
Temple, its parts, Jer. 7.4. k 
a type of Chriſt's Body, John 2.21. þ 
called God's Footſtool, Lam.2.x. c 
a Market there; why, Mat. 21.14. 


on Gerizzzm, why built, John 4. 20. g 


Temptation, what, Mat. 6, 1 3. 


Tempting God, what, Mat. 4. 7. 1 Cor. 
IO. 9. þ 
how God tempts,and is tempted, Jam. 
I.I3.2 
Tempters never make good Comfarters, 
Mat. 27.4- 

Teſtimony ef Spirit, is either-immedi- 
ate pr mediate, Eph.1.13. e 
Thankſgiving, Magiſtrates may appoint 

annual days for it, John 10. 22. þ 
Theater, what, Ads 19. 29. n 
Thovghtfulneſs, arguments againſt it, 

Luke 12. 22. 

Threatnings and Promiſes are all con- 

dittonal, Jer.18.10. and 28. 9. 2 


, Wheu peremptory, Dal. 9. 3. S | 
Timothy, an account 'o1 nim, Theſf, 1, 
n | 


not Biſhop of Epheſus, 1 Tim. x, 2. 
Tophet, what, rh I : 5. k p L. 
Traditions, what, Mat. 15. 2. Mark To 
I3. 2 Theſl. 2. 15, g 
how far allowable, 2 Thefl, 2.1 5s. h 
A Trance, what, As 10. to. x 


'Tranſubſtantiation, what, Joh.6.15. m 


Trinity, proved, Mat. 3. 17. 

Trufting in _ what it implies, Jer. 
17. 7. , 

Twelye a ſacred Number, Mat. 16. I. 
V 


Ain-glory, Gal. 5.26. c 
_ and condemned, 1 Theſl. 2, 
» S 7 
Viſions, how, Aﬀs 2. 17. s | 
Viſiting is either in Mercy or in Judg- 
ment, Jer. 6.6. s 
Unbelief, a Mother-fiv, Heb.3.12. g 
Unburied, a great curſe, Jer. 7. 32. x 
Union myſtical, Rom, 8. 1. c 
of Judgment to be endeavour'd, 
I COr. 1.10. y 
Vows,a =_ of natural Religion, Jona 
I.16. s 
are twofold, Afts 21. 23. b 


Uſury, how far unlawful, Ezek. 18, 8. y 
Luke 6.35. 
Akes, their original, Dan. 3.2. 

\ Walking after the Spirit, what, 
Rom, 8.1. 4 

Watchfulneſs, what, Luke 12. 37. and 


21. 36. 2 Tim. 4. 5. w 
Whirl-wind, what it ſignifies, Ezek. 1. 
h 


q+ DENG 
Wilderneſs, what it ſignifies, Hol. 2. 


I4. 4 

Witneſs of Spirit, what, Rom.8.16. g 

Women not to ſpeak publickly without. 
extraordinary Inſpiration, x Cor. 


I4+3I. S 
Word of God, where that works not, 
nothing elſe will, Luke 16. 31. 
World to come, what, Heb. 2. 5. s 
Worſhip religious muſt have a warrant 
from God, Jer. 19. 5.1 
Z 


_ Ezck, 28. 22. 


Jo 


IT 


Þ 


els 


